GOVERNMENT OF INDIA

ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA

Central Archaeological Library

NEW DELHI

ACC. NO.

CALL

O.G.A. 79

BIBLIOTHECA INDICA.

WoBK No. 97.

MUNTAKHABU-’T-TAWIRIKH.

ENGLISH TRANSLATION.

CAD ORIENTAL SERIES No 21

MUNTAKHABU-T-TAWARIKH

By

ABDU-L-OADIR IBN I MULUK SHAH

KNOWN AS

A L - B A D A^O

A GENERAL HISTORY OF INDIA
MOHAMMEDAN CONQUEST TO THE
YEAR OF AKBAR’S REIGN, 1595 A.D.

TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL PERSIAN

I

n/r
/ ^

L ■ \ f 4

AND EDITED
By

Lieut. Colonel T. WOLSELEY HAIG, i-.sc,. M.R.A.S.

VOL. III.

IDARAH-I-ADABIYAT-I-DELLI

2009 QASIMJAN STREET

DELHI-110006 (in-DIa)

IDARAH-I ADABIYAT-I DELLI

2009, QASIMJAN ST.. DELHl.110008
(INDIA)

^ C\ ‘

-v — Y *“\ \

FIRST EDITION 159^^
REPRINT 1973

PRICE Rs. 175.00 Per Set

PRINTED IN INDIA

PUfILISHED BY MOHAMMAD AHMAD FOR IDARAH 1
ADABIYAT-I DELLI. 2009, QASIMJAN ST., DELHI-110006 AND
PRINTED AT JAYYED PRESS, BALLIMARAN. DEI HI 110006

n f

^‘■Ix HIE Xame of God, the Merciful, the Compassionat^'^jIHX^'

CHAPTER I,

I will state at the outset'^ that as the author of the Tarlkh-i-

Air(7)<!i® has g'iren an account of tlie nobles of the lealm
^^ruificdiateiy after liis history of the empire, and as most of
0 them are now dead, aud gone to perdition, ^

[In no one liaue I seen fidelity.

If thou hast found one tvho possesses it convey to hint my

blessing,]

.1^

i,

^ I will refrain from polluting the nib of my pen with a deserip-
^tiou of such worthless wretches, and will ew'urnence witli the
- ^eimmerariou of some of the holy men of the tor an .account
/^of noble men whe liave chosen the way of Cod is in every way
Jtf' he preferred to an account of scoundrels and debauehee.--. Ami
u^so will I not he a mark for threits and commiuations.* C’ I’hrow
^ dust on the faces of those who praise without stint,” aud again.
f' may God protect us from the wickednoss of tyrants." C An
account of the base acts of the followers (of the Uiviue Faith j.'

<n

V , -I •

1 0,1*! literallj, “ lot it not bo eoucealL-i,” a coaimon ferrn ol coin-

^ menciiat a iiisiory.

^ S A'i-aruc-’.i-ijiu Ahm.'.d, vide .to.-t-A '.I"!--; e-ii-.-vi. His history i;- ceiieraliy
^kz;‘),vi. lis t};a T’jba iii-i-Akhai\.

^ ^ ISucli expressions as this explain Ba.liioei'e reason fi'r keeping thrs histury

^ secret. Tu-j literal translation is “ aud h.ive not b,.cn pard._>ned.

* t.e., “ were I to mention these men at ail 1 ..ouM only meiitnm them in
saoh a manner as would lead to my beiai? jicrsectited, for I will not give
^ praise where it is not due. I will therefore keep silence regarding them.''
ft “ Two pious ejaculations in Arabic, the former, whicu is one of tiio
.1

or traiiiiiunal Haying's of lluhanimad, dGnouaciii^ iiattfrers. while
t-iie iatcer prayis fm nrotecLion from tyriint^>.

^ ' Tlieso are evidently the ])ei'Son3 nitcudod by the word IhiGuoni

a good iloshm wab uiucu scaudulized b} the oiiaugc ficaks Oi cue followers
xor liih new rehgiou of Akbar’e.

nr

•7

with whose unclean existence the age is polluted may he thn?*
described : —

Their letters do not spell sense, i

Xff do their thoughts tend in the direction of sense;

Think meanly of the base, and of those whose faith is weak.
Form the same estimate of the latter as of the forme r,
o’};, -11 one can c.'li to mind one’.s friends,
mnJ so make the iieart a garden of sweet memories
Piry were it to mention one's enemies
For that were to rjnit the sweet garden for the miJileii,'^

T’ne holy men hy whose nohie existence the reign of Akhar
2 . >^iah ri-as adorned have now, for the most pmrt, withdrawn, as
ti.e ■ :uqa ° retires to the mountains of Qiif, to the iieighboiuhood
or Tie <!i'eat God. It is as tiiough they had all conspired toarether
to roll Lip and remove tlie baggage of life from this dwelling of
care and deceit and to take up their abode in the home of joy
and bliss. And now of that caravan not one remains to encourage
stragglers.

‘‘ The mansions are deserted, temporary and permanent
dw’eiling ahke.

■■ Mottling remains but owls and rubbish.” *

I shall begin with that class of men who were regularly
employed in the Imperial service until ^ their fame reached such
a pitch that it was as mardfest as the sun at midday.

t The reference to the iLliomatio nse <if the word (^m/) “ a letter of

the alphabet ” as in the phrase to talk,” is hard to reproduce

in a translation. The meaninir of the line is : — “ The letters (or sounds; of
which thpir talk is CDinposeu (h) hod spell 'or make] sctise.”

C [it, ‘ diislion,' otlicrwiise ‘the furnace used for heating a barh.*

The uusavonrincss of the latter wouhl be due to the nature of the fuel Uc-ed.

3 A fubulous bird, do'tcrib^d as being krtowu as to name, but. unknown
as to body.” Its abode is in Q^f, a mountain encircling the -^'orhl, which
mny be descrii.ed in much the same terniw as is the bird. In practical, as
oupo'-ed to mythical geography, the name is giren to the I'aucasus.

** This Arabic couplet is clearly a parody on the opening couulet of the
fourth ga^jdah of the In the second hemistich the word

appears in the text, and also in 31SS. (A) and (B). This does not make
sense. I prefer to read

^ ^ in the text, despite the dear meaning of the passage and ths
authority of both MjSS.

3

1. Miyais Hatzm op Sambital.*

(May God sanctify his tomb.)

Aliyia Hatim * was a profound sage who passed very many
years in teaching. He was endowed AA'ith both inward and out-
ward peifection. While he was erigaa^ed in acquifiny kuov.dedge
he was overcome by religiou.s ecstasy,® auJ, forsaking se’nolastic
di.spntations, attached himself as a disciple to his teacher, Shaikh
Azizu-’llah, a learned man of Talamba-,^ who was of those wh.o
are truly wise in the way of God, and was one of the most
highh' reyarded of the holy men of his time. Ho also spent
some time in the service of .Shaii^ ‘Alau-’d-Diii Ci.shti ® of Dihli,
(may God sanctify hi.s soul ! ) following his rule, and obtained
from both of these holj- men permission to perfect their students
and disciples. At the time when he was first drawn towards
God he wandered about fo" ten years, bareheaded and baiefootod,
in the wa.ste country round about Sambhal and Amrolia,® and
during all this time his head touched not bed or bolster. He
was a man who took keen pleasure in conteinplatiug God and
whom the singing of God’s praises threw into an ecstasy of delight,
and ever, as he spoke and smiled, the name of God wa.s on his
tongue. In his last years the intoxication of joy which he
experienced in his love for God so overpowered him that to.
listen bat for a short space to the chanting of God's praises

1 Sambhal was then the principal town of the Sarliur of the same name
in the Snha of Dihli. It is now a Tah?!! tovvn and .Municipuhty in the
Municlabad District. N.-W. P.

5 Vide Vol. I (trans, Rankiii«r), p. -128.

3 I e., the ecstasy of the Sdjls, or mystics of Ishira. '^vhich will be des-
cribed hereafter.

■» Now a municipal town in the Sarai Sidhu To{ifd of the Multan District,
Panjab. (Hunter’s “Imperial Gazetteer of India,” xiii., 103 ) Vide BuUaoni
I. (trana. Runkin^^), p. 3S9 n 2.

^ A fanxiiy and order of ascetics. Vide Aln’i-Akhait., Tol. JII. trans.
Jarretr. pp. 35-1,357,361, 369, 370, 422. Also Tf ‘Aligarh,
edition (1864), p. 1, and preface, pp. 3, 4. Aht-i-Akoa.l, Vol. I ( tiar.s Bluet. -
mdnn), p. 309, Qaiiun^x-Islutn (Ja'far Sharif and Dr. HerkiotS/ cd.. p532,
p. 2&9, and Akharndinci text, p. 151.

6 A town in the Sarkdr of Sambhal, Siiha of Dihli. Vide Vol.

I. (trans. JarretC/, p. 289.

4

•placeu him beside liimself. He had not the strength to listen to
hymns.

^Vheii T, in the year 960 A.H. (A.D. 1553), being then in ni}
twelfth yeo.r, arrived in company with my father at SambltJ,
3- and there entei ed the service of the Shaiyj, I learnt by heai t.
in hi.s hospice, the Qanda-yi-burda,^ and thus gained admission
(to the rai'ik.i of lii.s disciples), and there I also read, to my great
spiritual advantage and profit, part of the book Kanz-i-fiqh-i-
Hanaf'td The ^.aiWi then enrolling me among his direct
disciples said to my father, “ I have bestowed upon your son tlie
cap and th j tree ^ which descend from my spiritual teacher
iliyaii .Ah'dhJi ‘Azizu-Tlah for this reason, that he may aciinire
also .some exoteric knowledge ” {i.c , beyond the esoteric knowledge
tvhich he xas to ac()uire). And foi this praise be to God. In
the year 90y A.H. (A.D. 1561-2) the holy Shaikh went into
God's Pre.^eiice. and the words “the wise darvi^” ^ give the
date of his death, ilay God make his dust fragrant ! And it so
happened that my father too received the summons of God’s
mercy in. tho sa.mo year. One might say that the position in

1 There ar.; two Qnsi'hih' wliich go by this r.arae. The former, the oritrinal

-u wiswrittoa bv Ka'ija-'haa-Zuhair, in praise of lluliammal,

tiauug cLe citter's lifetime. Jialiaraniad besrou'ed upon the poet as a reward
iii-s own or cloak of striped elota of Yaman. Ilciiee the name given

to the pot'.-.. The latter was written by .^aikh Sharafu-’d-Din Abu
•Abdii-’llY’i jluli.),iiiraad bin Su h.l Busiri, who in .'J 111 ti94 A.U. 11291 A.D.),
'c. 1 was ar :.i-t named JJ. Ka j.akibu- d-dqi-'iyah or “ glirtei'iiig stars.'’
. a; I'jas .e is iijb -ae given fur tSie bestowal on it of the name Qnsidatu-'l-
le - .'ii,*!. .’.I'lS bitter poeiii was also written m pr.iise of lluhaniniad. (Vide

lY.-,' A'l } f , .-gel, I'bl.o, V'.'l. iV., 523— .533.) The latter poem is the better
li I'.wii 01 tii.j t and it ivas probably thi.-. that Badaonl learnt.

2 This 'j V,' IS pr.ibibly zlieKan,zii-'d-d!j^i,iqfifii,iu'i-'l.J/ar.afyii(mhv
Aaikh a! iLiliin Abu-'l-Baiaik’ic •Abdu-Tlibi inii- Ahmad, known as Hah-'u-’.i-
C.iii 'n-Xas ill ’■ Hf/ji Khi /■/. Yol. V. (ed. 1350), pp. 2i9-2o3. The author
mod m 71 A It. ;i31u A.D.).

3 dye . or (Shaiar-iiL~’i,.a) a list of .saints, or holy

preJeee'.'i i'. .vim ii is diawn up in the form of a geuealogieal tree, and
should c ' o.io'h to the time of Muhammad. It is delivered into the hands
. 1 ' a staii-n.t v; .,11 he 1,1 m ido either a //ruiid ' disciple) or Khai^jan (deputy)
.is evideuc-i .1 i.is spilitual descent. Y’ide '^iaadn-i-lUdm by Ja'far Sharif
iiid Dr. li.rhlr.ts ;l.S32), pp 2S3, 300.

cAdJj'i {darnsh-t-d'jnishmand) giving the figures
1 + JiJij -b 6 + lo + 3UJ + l+ l-bo0 + 3WJ + 40 + 50 + 4 = 9d9.

o

wliicli he stood to the Shaikh as his disciple made it necessary
that he should so follow him.

II. SHAijOf Jalalc’-d-Din op Thanesae.

He was the ^alifah ^ or deputy of Shaikh ‘Abdii-l-Quddus
of Gangoh 2 (may God sanctify their tombs!) Hi.s attainments,
both in exoteric and in esoteric learning, were great, and he
employed himself in imparting instruction in divinity and in the
spreading abroad of those branches of knowledge which are,
as the snbject of divine revelation, certainly proved. In his
last years he abandoned the pursuit of secular knowledge and,
choosing privacy rather than publicity, spent his valuable time
in reading through the blessed Qiir'an. in performing works of
supererogation, and in praise and prayer. 'When he was ninety-
three years of age he was exceedingly weak and feeble, so that
there seemed to be nothing remaining of him but skin and bone.

Couplet.

When the veins of an aged man. in consequence of his
abandonment of worldly desires, stand out on his skin.

Then it is that he becomes, as it were, a ruler to guide
disciples in the way of righteou.sness.®

And although he had not so mucli strength left as enabled
him to sit down and rise up * and to move about, and used, in 4
consequence of his feebleness and w'eakness, to lie all day long
in a reclining position, yet no sooner did he liear the call to
prayer than he would, without the assi.stance of anybody, rise

1 ride snpra, note 1.

2 Tide Ain-i-Akbari, Vol. I. (trans. Blochmann), pp. 53.S, 540, and Tol. III.
(traus. Jarrett), p. 374. ‘Abdu-’I-Quddus asserted that he was descended
from Abu Hanifah. He died in A.H. 95t* (A.D. 1343) and was buried at
(iaiigoh, where iie had lived. Gangoh is a town now in the Sahjraiipur
Hist. X AV. P.

i The translation may not perhaps rentier the meaning of this couplet
clear, owing to a confusion of terms. The word means ‘'a

ru'er,” the inscruiueut for ruling lines. In the original Pci-.-.i.oi a CMni|rirh(m
is Ji'.nv u between the prominent veins of an enuu-haed old miu' uroun old
in the way of holiness, anil the rnler which diiects the pen, or rather iiw
h.iiiti ot 'him wlio holds the pen. in a siiaight line.

+ Thi !c\i vmiw the word.s fi,n tA-hfan) " to rise up/' as I.

amo ils. fB). l.n inserting ti.cm I folkw MS. (A).

G

pp^ p’jt 011 Ills rIiop^. i lilvp Ills stiifp 111 Ills Iitiiiil, pcrfoini liis
i-i renionial ablutions by liiiiiself aud without any help, and stand
up for iiis prajersd This done he would again recline in his
yonted position on his couch. I twice had the honour of
utteiidiui, on him. ouct in tlie year H. 969 (A.D. loGl-2), in
Aura, wlu-n he had come-tbere to settle the matter of his aima^
Imlding in TbuuesarS aud to have the subject represented, and
ayain in tiie year A,H. 9^1 (A.D. 1576-4) when I was accom-
panying Has o',! KJirhi in his pursuit of Ulugh Mirza.* He seemed
to me to be a quantity of (div'inei light in bodily form. He
b.nJe farewou to this transitory world in the year A.H. 9&9
(A.D. loti , May God remember him to his good !

HI. Sjt.'.iKH McH.i;.ni.A.D Gii.tcs of Gw-ii4Y.lR.^

He wa.s the disuiple of Shaikh Zuhur and H5ji liuzar, othcr-

’ The miracnlous part of this fact is that; the ceremonial prayers of
I'luslitas cpi.min vaiMous geiuitle.vion3 and prostrations, in addition to iho
s; Hiding poaiiion. The ceremonial prayers are recited live times every day.
TI i, was no iiipan performance for an old man cf 93 who had no strength
To rise or sr-ii d on ordinary occasions. It what Bndaoni says is true me
pro'nahilirv i- tiu.t ghaikh J,iir.lii-'d-DTn ‘inding that the regular cereiiioiiial
ju'.uei.s .'O . '! .iiiste.i hiin that he conld not undergo any e.xeriiu:i in addition
t ' them, ken. lus hrd escept at prayer times, reserving all his strengtn for

Ills religio..^ 3.

Lands la hi on ci.na tenure were rent-free grants given as tnmhid-i-
■/ lOT-h, or -. 1 .' -'..'i.ee allowanc'-, to deservitig individuals. For an aceonnt

1 ! lie iroa'o’ii-s ti.e-i .i-eil to befall p.-i'aons w'.io came to Cour, on Ijinin-
i.( I i.t.e-.fd V.itl .. 1 . Luldings . 'e Badaun., Vol. 11. te.vt up. kOl-o, train.
l\) anf-s.

2 A ; h. the .'U’to’ of Su-h-nl^ of Tllhli and a pit'’.- of

P’'_'ri'!’. -ve anr eg tlie Ilindui I-ioi-'-.Utu'i (tiaus.), Vul. II. 3bl}. It i- now
a s’lia'ii t .. n iti tne Amh.da d;-’., c. I'anjrb.

■t I’iiis re. po.pi,.,] ( !--t, re B ulh r It ti.e -orvire of Husaii. |^\e f-n fat

r-f ihe K: , ' 1 . H i-.iii. Kh in -.o c, oued 7 't , i. or " ilie pato- ; o j-

i.'s hioii.v ' ’ 1 -"' . llindiis, as tin i v* is In v-*.,.; t ’'.teti on rn--'r o no i ^

1 ‘ 111 - 'i.o -i o-.o , n,,s ■■ th B.ii.ir-l a-id rlo U.n. . ..on- of r.-- ’’

a oc.o.t- 1 " i.o vine .i - .-m--.-,- j f,

: .:i 'i t.n o or 1 .n i, H,

' 'U 1 1 ' ; . . o-la iui

■a ,11 ll

wise known as Haji Hamid, and hi.s spiritnal descent c'lnid be
traced back, tliroiigli the line of the order of ascetics

t-o Shaikh Bayazid of'Enstfun.^ the pi-inco of knowers . 1 ; Hod.
(May God sanctify his soul I) When Ltiterint' on tiie ie'ieiou.s
life he spent tvvelve years on the lower slopes of the bills of
Canar ^ and the adjoining country. Tiracti.siuir ti-.e rno.-t -e’.'-.r..
austerities, having his dwelling in caves and sni - *'o'

leaves of trees. He was an acknowledged niuster in tn : . nj;

of exorcism,^ he possessed supernatural power, and wa-s .o;,-, r.
in a mysterious manner towards He obtained \o'e ' ‘

practise this science (sci7. exorcism') froni hi.s t-lber f et
^laikh Buhlul,^ who was a woiker of miracles iit.d 1 -

1 Shaikh Biyaaicl of Bustam fa STuali town in the hiHs of T ' . 'i

between the ancient city of Uiii and wa-, oi.fr. n .11 \ unn.' . .

and founded the Tai.lV/ ijei/i order of usceties. Lie is =..iu to !;..ve ■ .

in A.H. 130 (A.U. 7o3-4j and to have died at f]aK..iii. ti e o.ce 01 .hi- ’
being variously given ns A.H. 231. 23 1. 201, 2i'.2 and Z'la Ice i;
“spiritniil descend, mts ” was Shaikh -;•<■. 'n p f, . ,

S'/mtAi. ' order. Ho came from Persia to Inuia ami die . in i.

is buried, in A.H. SUO (.A D. llOti). .Inii'iii.ir eiact' il a mau.sole.ii-. . . •.
his tomb in llandu. The word is derived from ;

Arabic root jU. (^atcirn) tEieauin;' *' he truvt-iitd lu the (Hrectiori oi '
Its meaning as applieu to ‘Abdu- IlaJi and hig followers is **one who oiu«rr r.?
and is quick in attaining nearness to God/' In the ian'jfnfH^e tif cn^MHGt.r
(‘iJ jn-i-i^fiftraran) means “ tlie working and aspirttii-us if rh^
S Hil.” From tiie facts of Bad'ionl appivmg tile titie c-’n ' to Si aikii
Ba}a 2 id, and of !Mnii \nit»iad'-^ f»^n in*--* of r, (•■’re vtaiin it :» preuy

cl‘^ar that their conceptions of Jh**y:.'/id ntio coi-iuictl hy tne ridicnloiLs
Indbiii logonds cuocer: iiiir liiui. — ui '^.ivixiry stoiu^ shcwHig- a sci-A'iic bhis
towHids Hinda sujjci’stitions. and couit-d by v.aidoin'ir ./'jd’s in cider to
invest with a sptirions sanriiiy a cenotaj»h wliich they liad erected in
Buyrizid's n.nno at Cafginv irinttagonkTj

2 The Kurious fort on the Ganircb, nineteen miles above Banuras.

3 Vnie Qdhuii-i-I^’.'lht iJa‘t‘ar ^arif and Dr. Itorklnts.

c XXiX. ^.iikdi Muhammad wiote a b.atk under the tab; of I ^

( A!jaii:d],n u-'> -) the -hve j* wt-]-.. ’ It m «hvi«Jed into l,\e parts . — i 1)

on tiie 'Worship of (uA, (2} on tiio n«:eetie hfo. i3) on ovorei^m, 4: on ti e
recit.d of (.ir.d’'= pr.d-os, 5; on t.ie act? oi inosc lo^c,^crs of the tiue patii
wiio have attii’Tuai lu ktiiovliMlixo.

i rt'i-. art. 111 yprtrii^'.i's eviaiou of the

K .

^ (A) h’kI (Hi h.ive a waa.' ■( i> l-)i»Us Uki r'."'; but JA-

f B'Ot ) 1:5 'ludoat'LcuU Liic '''rrcel ic<.i'..HL.

His late Majesty, tlie Emperor Humayfm. on whom God's mcrcj,
has descended, had the greatest faith in and attachment to these
two saints, so much so that there were very few that ranked with
them in his estimation. From these venerable men he learnt
the science of exorcism. After the rebellion in India, when Shir
5 . Shah began to oppress Shaikh Muhamma.d, he betook himself
to Gujarat where also he brought princes and rulers uiidei- the
yoke of subiectior to him and ' belief in his teaching, so that
all alike were ready to do him service. Shaikh Wajihn-’d-Din
too, a knower and a * doer of the things that belong to God, a
profound thinker and a teacher, drew upon his shoulders the
saddle-cloth of obedience to Shaikh Muhammad. All these things
are an indication of the Shaildj’s perfections and of his power of
working miracles. Many other great and famous holy men in
Dihli, Gujarat, and Bangui have risen from the fringe of his robe,®
and memorials of his perfection still remain in Hindustan. One
clay in the year H. 966 ( A.D. 1558-y) I saw him from afar off,
riding along in the market place at Agra, a throng of the common
people surrounding and preceding him. so that no one could pass
through the crowd. In his courteous humility his head was
never for one moment still, as he returned the salutations of the
people on either side of him, bowing continually down to hi.s
saddle-bow. It was in this year that he came from Gujarat to
Atrru. and witli much exhortation and persuasion, availing him-
self of the intlnenee of tho.se about the Court, enrolled tlie
Kmpeior Akhar, then a youth, among his di.-elpks, hut the
hnipeior .>0011 rejected hi.s teaching, and since Shaikh Muham-
mad'.-, compaiiioU'hip was disrastefui to the Khan-i-IClriuan,
llairam Khan.* and to .Shaildi Gadal,’ he withdrew, ill pleased.

• T)io text omits the words _} after althor.cli thuv ajipear in

both MSS.

S The text omits the word after although it aopeai’s in both

MSS V>'ajihn-'d-DTn is meiitioiifid in tlie rj./c also

,4/:’. o-i X. ftraus Blochnianu) and AVoaniuma (text;, HI. 63-7-i-l.

S t.p., i iwc “ S'lt at his feet ”

* The famous Bairam Kh ap, Kh lri-i-Khanap. also entitled Xhau Babi

H*- was Akbtir’s ff' or tutor. He a-iSasMiiatt-rl hv in Ai^iu narred

Muh-iak Of the 14Lii Jauiadi 1. A U. (A D. 1361 ..

^ (l.tG'ii >v<l 2 a Siu'uii ■v\ ho hatl bet-r. api.ninLts.1 '•b ?/ '/ - s-i’-, a • on

the iccummvndatiOu Ot Baiium Khiu. who-n he h,.rt loiued in Gipsrrt lie

9

to Gwaliyar, where he spent his time iu perfecting his disciples,
and. having built an hospice, occupied himself with the ecstatic
dances of darm^es,^ chanting, and giving way to transports of
Religious ecstasy.* He himself also wrote hooks on these subjects.
Clad in the garments of poverty he held a high and majestic
position, and possessed a subsistence allowance of a karor of
tankas.^ Whomsoever he saw, were he a beggar even, he treated
with great honour, standing before him. For this reason some
few from among those who were vowed to poverty blamed him,
and denied (that he was a true ascetic).* But God alone knows
what his motives were in this matter.

Couplet.

Since God in His omniscience alone knows whether a soul is
to be rejected or accepted,

“ Judge not lest thou be judged.”*’

*In the year H. 970 (A.D. 1562-3), after completing his eightieth

was Sadr till A.H. 968. Tide Baclaoni, Tol. II, text, pp. 29, 30, trans., pp.
22, 23, 24. For the disappointment of Shai]^ MnbaTninad ^tans at Court
ride Badiioni, Vol. II, text, pp. 34, 33, trans., pp. 28, 29.

1 {samd'). * (rojd).

* The tan'ka was worth about 4d. Badaoni’s statement means that Shaikh

Muhammad Ghaus had a yearly allowance of £166,666. 13.-. 4d., or its
equivalent in land. It is hardly possible that he can have possesseu such a
grant, either in land or money. Badaoni probably uses the word indefi-

nitely, to signify “ a large sum,” or it may be that the tanka referred to was

the tania-ri-st!/ah, a copper coin, worth only — of the silver tanka, {i-ule

bt

Badaoni, Tol. I, trans. Ranking, p. 87, n. 1.) This would bring Shaikh
Mnhammad’a annual allowance to £15,625 sterling, still an incredibly large

sum.

* The objection of other “ holy men ” to the manners of Muhammad
Ghana will be understood by those who have any experience of the manners,
or rather lack of them, displayed by most “ holy men ” in India. Affecting
coiuplfte indifference to .all worldly matters, they too frequently attempt
to establish a claim to .superior sanctity by means of a demeanour of insult-
ing indifference towards all with whom they are brought in contact.
Nnmerons instances of this occur in history, the eccentricities of ‘‘holy
men ’’being generally tolerated, just as the qnips of professional jesters
were foimetly tolerated in Europe

6 Literally “ Beware of bringing forward the fanlts of others, for to do so
is a fault in thee.”

2

19

T^:ii, he 4ird in Agrn. lyriN ! Ins \u.i-ld fm tl.e nt'\l, and was
buried in Gwalij’ar. He was generous to a degree, and it is said
that tlic- word ‘-I” never passed his Itjts, and that he always
referred to himself as “ this humble one.” So particular wms he-
in this matter that even when givincf away corn in ciiarity he
would say " Mha and 2s un,^ gifc tuis much corn to such an one,”
in order to avoid the nece.ssity of saying " I.” May God shower
his mercy plentoously upon him !

IV. Shaikh BunKik.

Burliaii was an ascetic of great resignation and piety, and a
very piince among tho.se who have chosen a life of religious
.scclu.siou and retirement, and of independence of worldly con-
cerns. It i.s said that he wa.s once for throe days in company
with lliySn Ilahdad of Bari,* of tlie spiritual line of the famons
Mir Sayvid Jiuhammad of Juutipur,^ (may God sanctify his
soul), there being only one intermediary between them, and tliat
it was on that occasion that he acquired this excellence, and
attained to perfection. He had subjected himself to severe dis-
cipline and possessed great self-control. For nearly fifty years
(before his death) he had ah.siiiined from fle.sh-meat and from
nio.st other articles of food and diiiilc, contenting himself with a
little milk and some sweet-meats ; atid at the end of his life he
abstained also from drinking water, so that to ont'Aard appearance
he wa.s an incorporeal spiritual form, superuaturally illuminated.
He had in Kalpi a very small and dark cell in which he constantly

Ilf. j» and 11). the letters of which the word is composed. Tliis
I'l'icticc may appear to be an ahsiud attcctariori of iiumility, but it must lie
jumembered iliat too free a use of the first porsoii, whether in writing or in

convpt satidJi is, t-ven at the present day, and among men who lay no special

ciaini to sanctity, considered a hroacii of ctiip.icrte among Orientals.

S There arc three jjlaces of this naim- gi\ on hy .“Sii W. W. Hunter in lii.s

J.iiyr', .„•) Gnz:‘ttccr Ilf Jiiiiii. One is a toivn in TnA'd Sidhauii, Dist, Sitapfir,

I indh ; .'iioflier is a village in the Garhw.il .St.ite, N.-W’. P. ; and the tliird is a
ton 11 in tlie IJholpiir St.ate, liajpnt.ina. I rannot id-nr:fv the JIiv.in’,s .abode.
Ilari V, as also tlie name given liy .tk'bar to the Oii.ih henieen the ISitih and
Inc Ihui. Four woithies of the name of IHIidid me cotumpinci.ited hi
th - Vol , fi: . Nos Xlli. .X.X.XV, L.Xlll and lAX, el., ii

S .\t one time the capital of a Muhammadan kingdom. Now the chief
loun of the nisfiici of the same n.inie in the N.-W. P. iPi ifuliam-

mnh, the J/i/. ioii niJi be subseijnenil} n-teircd to.

11

sat, engaged iu leoitiiig God's piaises and in meditation and
contemplation. Ho used also to retain Ids breath, t after the
fashion of the Mahdavis, and althougli he had never studied any
of the sciences treated of in Arabic literature he used to give most
eloquent dissertations on the Quran. He was a reader of the
secrets of human hearts. When I was returning from Canar
(Clmnar) in A.H. 9G7 (A.D. 1.559-60) during the rule of
‘Abfiu-’llah i^an the Uzbak * I spent a night in attendance cn the
Shaikh, whose conversation was sublime. He recited, appositely 7.
to the occasion, some of his own Hindi poetry of which the
subjects were exhortation, admonition, mysticism,® the longing
of the human soul for God,^ the Unity of God, and withdi awal
from the world. The next day ilihr ‘Ali Silduz,’ who, in spite
of his friendship towards holy men, was to some extent a 'I un e
to his own Turkisli nature, and was something of a bully and a
tyrant,

[I have been the slave of that man of perfect nature, tioin
the day on which lie said,

“■ The Turk, though ho become a mulla, can never hceouic a
mau.”]

was honoured, by means of an introduction from me, with an
interview with the Shaikh. How it so happened that about an

•anfds) lit. “guardinp, or lioUli'iig, tlio iuRfiuatioiiH laui
respirations.” HiadPh^tuni (rf-iw 6ar/iuntf) ainl atiti/itii).

A practice borrowed from Hindu asc'^iics.

2 \itle Ahi-t-Akbaa, Vol, I, (trails. Blocliniann), pp. 320-1, He was a
noble of Humayun’s Court. Having: been by Akbar appointed to the Lroveni-
inent of ilalwa, he re-con([uered that province and reigned in Mandu like a
king, whence the expression iu the text. Akbar moved against him and he
Ib^d. After many wanderings and vicissitudes he made his way to .biunpur,
where he died a natural death during the rebellion of Khau-i-Zaman (A.H.
974- A.D. 1507),

S (ta^awicuf) the mysticism of the Sufie.

i Vide Istild^utii-’s-SiijiyijaJi (Dr. Sprengh-r, p. 102.

0 ill the previous year (A.H. 906:- A.D. 1 .j5S-0) Milir ‘All ^iin t^lld o
bad boon st nc to Caruir l.j treat ■with J. lin'd Kh.ui. ilic Af^dn cuminrirMl.iJii.

%\hv wished to liaiid over tiie fort to the 31tpghals for a _* .ur.deraticu. J u'V
n )\Ycver, d.id not deem AkUir’s olTor of w/ti' near Tog’. ‘M'

cjUiIh’Ii'LiL a' d the iicguUat-oiid fell lliruugh, w hcrouiani .U' iGliia' i

.i-h wlu' Ii.'ul acciiinjtauicd him t«* .'a » \\ :hr

12

hour before this time he had severely beaten and kicked some of
his servants and attendants, and had abused them in most un-
hecomiuCT language before mounting his horse to go for a ride.
When we sat down together the hrst words the SJiaikh uttered
were, “ The prophet (may God bless and save him!) srdd, ‘The
(true) Muslim is he who (courteously) salutes (other ) Muslims
both with his hand and with his tongue.’” The ^aiMi uttered
this precious aphorism and sublime truth with special reference
to the occasion, and Mihr ‘Ali rose to his feet for the purpose of
excusing himself, and, after expressing his contrition and shame*
he begged the ShaiMl to recite the fdtihah 1 on his behalf, offering
to him, at the same time, something by way of a present, which
was not accepted.

The Shaikh reached the age of nearly one hundred years and
departed this life in the year A.H. 970 (A.D. 1562-3). I have
made the following chronogi'am on his death : —

My heart said he was the chief of Saints.®

In accordance with the terms of his will he was buried in the
cell to which he had retired — may God shed light upon his
resting-place !

V. Shaikb MuHiHsuB-i-KAJiBO,® OP Sahbhal.

He belonged to the QSdiri* order. On first entering the reli-
8. gions life he subjected himself to a most rigorous discipline. He
was a man who was mysterionsly drawn towards God ® and was
subject to fits of religious ecstasy. He had a sweet voice and
when he was in one of his fits of ecstasy he would chant so

was at this time a Beg was afterwards created Khan and Governor of Citor
(Chitor). For an acoonnt; of Mihr ‘All’s mission ctde BadaoiiT. Vol. II., text,
pp. 32—31 ; trans., pp. 26—23. Mihr ‘All had evidently a great regard for
Badaoni. Sddiii is the name of a Caghatai clan.

1 The opening chapter of the Qur’an. Its recital, in combination with a
gifs made to a holy man, forms an offering to God.

® giving 300-HO + 600 + 1 +6 + 30 + 104- H-2-f6-H = 970.

3 The name tjf a tribe to which the famous Shahbitz Khan, Commander of
two thousand in Akbar's reign, belonged. Vide Ain-i-Ahbini, Vol. I (traas.
Biochmann), pp. 399-402.

A A religious order founded by Shaikh Muliiyvu-’J-irin ‘Aliiln-T.Qadir-i-Jili,
a Sayyid of the race of Husain. Jil la a village near Baghd.id. Vide .i/n-i-
Akr.ajt, text II,, 212.

^ hJjA G'uiij vide (Sprenger) silt tec,.

J3

sweetly as to touch the hearts of all who heard him ; the flavour
of that ecstatic song still lingers on the palate of my soul. In
his earlier years he acquired exoteric knowledge and was engaged
in teaching. He had an ardent love for such forms as di.splay,
in their beauty, the power of the Creator, nor was he ever at
any time free from the bonds of that love w-Lich is transferred
from the Creator to the creature.^ and when in these bonds he
lost all self-control, and, putting aside all dissimulation and
re.straiut took no account of the praise or blame of others, careless
alike of their disapprobation and their approval. For this reason
was he known as Shaikh Mnhammad-i-'Ashiq, or “■ the lover,”
In A.H. 9So (A.D. 1579) he transferred the baggage of his
existence to that land where the soul is united to God.* The
words '• the sixth of Shavval”^ give the date of his death. May
God make his soul fragrant !

YI. Su-^iiai Fakhru-’d-Din.

He was an old man in whom shone the Divine Liaht. ascitic
in his habits, having complete trust in God, and uncontrollable
religious enthusiasm. He lived a retired and solitary life, keeping
the doer of ingress and egress shut to himself. Every Friday

1 Vtsh<l-t~’najdzj), This Sii/i-istio expression requires some

explanation. is adjective formed from the Arabic word

which mc.ins literally “ a thing transferred from one place to another,'’ and
hence “ a metaphor,” or trope.” ft was a belief among ti'.e that the

love of a C!X-atare for the Creator, a love which they named I 'lsh;),

might be manifested in that cre.inire's iove for otiier creatures. Tlie word

means “ sexual love,” and was no doubt originally used by pions .S’ 'f7s
to denote the love of a creature for the Creator in consequence or the ecsi itic
nature of that love. Setting asitie the profanity of placing love for God, .'lud
a passion (not necessarily iove) for a creature on tiio same, or nearly the same
fooling, it may easdy be conceived that the idea that the latter differed but
slightly in merit from the former furnished an excuse for the vilest sensuality,
the nature of which need not be toucheil upon here

2 The expression used hero ( daru-'l-wlHii) is a further

reference to the Sdfl-istic notion described in note 1. The mention of ‘ blame’
and ‘ disapprobation’ is sufficient to indicate the nature of ilohammad Kambu's
-■ love” for the creature.

' j*"-" (jhi'iiiiini az Shavt it), giving 300 + 300 -b 40 -rl + 7

300 + d + l +30«=985. This is a neat chronogr.am, the words themselves giving
'he day of the montli and the letters of which they ar- vein posed the year In

14

ho hold in Ids hospico a meeting of Sufis, ^ and would insist njion
the assembly joining in ecstatic songs and dances, and, how much
soever one might excuse himself from this, the Shaikh would
work himself up into a state of religions ecstasy, and his phrensy
would extend, in its full power, to the rest. On the conclusion
of t.his religious exercise food was served. The Shaikh made no
ilistincrion between king and beggar. Bairain Khan, the Kliati-i-
Klifu-au,"^ used generally to recite his Friday prayers ui tbo
Sfaikh's ini'sjul, and the effects of his eompanionsliip with the
Sh^'ikh v'Ci'e seen in his increased tenderness of heart. In sitting
down Hud lising, in taking food, and in all other observances of
etif| Uftte no difference was made by tbe Shaikh between him aud
any body else.

9- VII. SHAIKh' ‘AzIZU-’lLAH.

He w.is a conspicuous example of the degree of divine know-
ledge which is within the reach of man. He was a very crucible
of lo\e for God, in which the pure gold of hi.s being was ever at
melting heat, until it reached the extreme limit of refinement
and parity. This being his condition he was constantly weeping
in his ardent desire for God, to sncli an extent that the world
lias never seen his equal. No sooner did the sound of a holy
song or chant fall upon his ear than one would say that a violent
wind had arisen, and was blowing through a fiery tempest. Praise
be to God ! What love and affection for God were seen in the
noble nature of that great man ! In the phrensied dance (of
darvi^es) and when he was vying with other mystics in working

which the ^aiih died. A similar chronogram has been composed for the
date of Babar Shah's birth, viz ; — (the sixth of Muharram)

giving A.H. 888.

1 The mystics of Islam. Some reference to their extraordinary doctrines
lias already been made. Tlieir mysticism is “ a hypertropliy of the religious
feelings,” a monomania in which man blasphemously attempts to fathom the
depths of the essence of God.” (Spreiiger. Preface to “ litduhutu-'g-S'sjiyyah ”
1S45}.

2 Bairam Khan was a SJu'ah by religion. lie was a pious Muslim, and

hnig desired to mahe the pilgrimage to the Hijaz. iJfrhad no opportunity
of doing so until after Akbar^s estrmgemnnt from him (CadaonI II (text),
P- 3^, { traiibhicifiri), p. 32). Ue was aspassinated in (Iiii;ut1t on his way to
Makkah, in A II 1188 ^A.D. 1500), vide (ti\ina. Blochniarn) 11

p. 315

him^elt lip iiitii a s(ute ot oosiasv,' necupatKms ivliich fcjiincd
the iiioi’inng- and eveiiin" exercises of his blessed condition, a
iliut. could it liave looked upon his face, would have become
softer than wax.

rdiaikh ‘Azizu- Ilali had been the di.sciple of hi.s own res-
pected father. Shaikh Hasan, and acquired some of his excel-
lence from his own elder brother. Shaikh Muhammad Hasan,
the spiritual guide and master of Shaikh iMan of Panipat.
His life was governed by the rales of poverty, indigence, and
humility. To champion the cause of the poor and helpless who
came to him with their complaints he would travel long di.stancc.s
on foot, even though lie had at the time entered into a fortv davs’
retreat.^ and though ho had to visit the house of one who was
•without the pale of the faith in order to gain his object. After
successfully fultiliiiig the wants of the applicant he would return
to the cell of retirement and engage in his religious exercises
as thongii no break had occurred in his retreat. He used to
give to this worship, which benefited others, precedence and place
before that worship the rewards of -which are confined to the
worshipper.* And it would sometimes happen that an unbeliever
or an oppressor would pay no heed to his interce.ssion on the
first occasion, or, (knowinsr tliat the Shaikh was without), tvould
pnrpo.sely remain within door.s, and the Shaikh would sit the
livelong day expectant iit his door, without being able to see
his face. But on successive days* the Shaikh would go again and

1 Vide Kucrlio®, Dictionary of Islam” a. v. zikr.

2 (i/ri'kdf-i-arha^'fna]. Sometimes a Khahratl enters n Knli-
tary cel!, and remains in it for forty days and nights, fasting from daybreak
Till snnset the whole of this period.” They “ employ their rime in repeating
the testimony of tne f.arli, iinploriiic forgiveness, praising God, etc.” fLane’s
” Modem E^'vptians,” ed. ISdn. p. 2-14-). This was the nature of the retreats
observed by ^ai]^ ‘ Azl.'u-M-Din. and that he allowed them to be rbns
interrupted says much for bis practical piety. He continued his period of
retreat as thoucrh it bad nor been interrnpted.

2 The translation of rliis pass.itre is unavoidably ponderous. The original
is exceedingly neat, and, translated literally, runs, “He gave place and pre-
ference to this frar/iiViit’ ^^«n•''hlp over lufnmsibrc worship.” 'J’he terms are
borrowed from grammar. The trope is Siunexvliat obs'^iiie in English.

4 Lit. ‘‘The next day;” !mt fr-mi the nse of the word 1 m uknrrav)

“frequently,’’ it is clear that the Shaihh did not con lino liimstdf to a .second
tbiv's atri'iulancL-

16

nu:i,i] ' to liis door and would sit in silence, nor W'oiilJ this
sliLditiiio- treatment produce on the clear mirror of his heart,
10 uhich letlected the hidden knowledge of God, the rust of reseiit-
meut. He would thus sit until the person to whom the interces-
sion was to he made fell, sliamed and remorseful, at his feet, aud
promptly and obediently fultilled the desire of the beggar.

Une day the SAtti'M "’as present at a meeting of the mystics
eiis-agcd in ecstatic songs and dances, as their custom is,^ held b 3 r
that prince of holv men Shaikh Xizam-i-Auliya, (mat" God sanctify
Ins niD^r pure tomb !), when a wretched maniac, uttering a yell,
seized the ^nikh by the knees, and. lifting him up, tamed him
lu cls m er head on the flixir, so that his turban was (lisarrauged,
and he was hint, but in outward appearance^ he was in no way
disrujhed. At the time this act of tlie maniac *vas attributed to
relijtioiis ecstU'V aud he was held to be excused, but the demented
f.'ol 'encated liis abominable trick on a subsf..juent oceision, when
the maoistrale o[ the city proposed to recall his scattered senses
hv means of a severe caution, ti heating, aud threats of what .vould
n'Jppeti to him m the future. The m.ade much interression

toy him. and. kisMuer his hand- and feet, kejit him under hi.s own
pi tc 'ioTi. and did not sulfer rii.'iu i" mole.-r him in anx- wax'. In
K-.o-.x Ic.j-e he xva- imo^t hii istd".* .to] u^ed to perfect

I Tl.c '.>\t ' .'ro the wore- ^ } ' to Ids In-:',:,"

v' I r. o'cr.r la ''.'l-r MS, .an' ii ■ I .' an a.t. ri rd ■ d r, Thnj conveT
r •r'.nrn-si’C'. t- ‘ ttc C'lCtcx ' .-■■■' I*:'.: t’."^ -gt !_[ , ,r

- ~--v I; : I' l.x.l t ' a- h- p-.i ,,,,

•; •! .sn-. ■n-’.j: ti Hni. v..'. I: •.-t- ar,- fcM : - ' imril the

- ■. : . • ,“d f'.li c. i-.,c i.yti'-i .

' ..t! r I'tocro

♦ :j^ j". 1 .

j • ' * r*-' -..ar

' Iti ?XA’'firic
• ty'.iable

u as
ill*: tin’s

k'.'c *.

■-n actife anu

17

others, arid he used to instruct his pupils in the expounding of the
and of the ‘Awarif* and of the Fususu-'l-Rikam^ and its
commentary. He was also the author of some well-known works,
among them being the liisala-yi-'Ainiyiiah written as a reply to
the Ghaiyiyii'ih * of Shaikh Man of Panipat. Many obscure ques-
tions relating to the unity of essence ^ are thtreiu treated of,®
in accordance with the interpretation of perfect knowers of Gud.^

not as a passive partioipls. No diacriiieu- point is given, either in tiia text
C’r in the ilSS.

1 There are live well-known works leaving the word ( ‘fTPrt’is) as part

of their title. The work iiere ineiitnmed i-> without any «i»’uhr the ^ Avd' l~
Baydn (“ Bri'ies of explanation”) by tiiiaikh Abii MuliamiJi'i.d Ruzbihan Ibn
Abi-T'na«iri-’I-Ba(,pli of Shiraz, the Sitft (died A }I.600 = A B I-OJ^-lOi. Thig
book is a couimentary on the Qai'dn, from the point of view of the S'b
(Hiiji Khaif.i IV. 105).

2 The woi k here refer'*e(.l to is the ‘A >■ ■!' f'u -'l-Ma'd' <f — ■ bounty fin d;f.

fusing) the knowledge of God”—, a h- ok on the mv-ticism of the
written by Shaikh Shihaba-’d-din Abu *l.'mar Jhn Mulmrninad Ibn

‘Abdi-’ilaiii Sahravardi, wiio died in A.li. b'i2 (A.D. 1234-30^. (Haji Khalifa

IV. 275),

^ The Fufufu^'l'H'kam, (artionlation.s of the Bcienpo’s). is a work by
Mahiyrn-’d-diri Aba *Abdi-’]lih Muhamnind Ibn 'Ali, known os Ibn ‘Atohivi-
VTi’i-I'Hatimi-’l.Andalusi (died A.H. 638 == A.D. 1240-41;. The book riiviird
into twenty-seven “articulation#” or “ joints,” each coiua'iiina’ the s'ly.

i^gs of some prophet or sage, comoieocinc’ with Adam, and going r.n to Ah
(Seth), Kuh (Xoati), Idna (Enoch), Ibrahim fAbraham>, I'slipq (Jsnac and
other#. TneCrepnted) s dyings of oar S^vi .ur nppear in tuc sixteenth ’ ani-
calatdon.*’ (Hajl IV. 425 et Beqj }■

♦ I cannot 6nd any mention of these tr* ati^es elsewnPf',. bat it i* r oar
that they were poUraicHl works on the theology, or rather myeticigin. ^.f lije
Sifu*

* I.e., the e9«-eiitial unity of all thing*. The doctrine of ibe on th;a

poiat is practically panlreism. “AH things being of G'd, u fdIow= thf.t
thera if Dochii'g that is not a portion of God.” — is their argumf'ist, S'-iie
have foliowpd this aigument toils logical conclusion by dojlinng tlia^ tn^v
themselves are God.

• In tiiis place the icx’- inserts the particle j ■«) ' a.od ” The w-.rd

i# found in r.eitner of the and des-^r -* - the sense.

“ The e<pr«---?«icn here u-ed i« or 'T

we. they wro have C'xn-'rie:,ce i » ocnlir r ;< •pti'it ' * This i= a

istic term the meaning -f wt.j.’h is s-.tb ''v wfll repj- .. ‘"'I 1 y the tfaiis-

lation V- jo /#/•'«• » ' --

o

18

At the time of the Khati-i-Khanan’s disgrace,’ and also for some
Tears afterwards, 1 studied under ttat master of perfection, and
listened to the recital of several books and treatises on mysticism,*
and digested their contents — praise be to God. In the year H. 975
(A.D. 1567-68) the falcon of his soul w'inged its flight to the
pinnacle of eternity, and the words “ the pole-star of the path is
gone,” ® were found to give the date of his death. He always wrote
himself in his treatises, writings, and letters “ the worthless atom,’
and it was found that the word.s *• the woi-thless atom ” ’’ also gave
the date of his death,

11, VIII. Shaikh SALiM-i-CisHii.®

He was one of the descendants of the venerable Shaikh Farid-i-

i A.H. 967 (A,D. 1559-60) fide Badaoni II (text), pp. 35 et seq'-j.
i (taanuu-uf) the mysticism of the Sifii-

3 (iiUj kjJai 100-19-12-19 + 200 + 10-1100-1400-1-50-140+1-150

+ 4 = 975.

4 Not quite exactly. give 700 + 200 + 5 + 50+1 +3 + 10 + 7 = 976

vide Badaoni II. text, pp. 105-106.

5 Shaikh Salim-i-Cishti was highly honoured by Aibar. When tbe emperor

desired a son he had recourse, by the advice of his courtiers, to Shaitt Salim,
who assured him that his prayers would be answered. Akbar promised to
place the son, when he should be born, under the tutorship of Shaikh Salim,
and the Shaikh stipulated that he should be named after him. This was
agreed to. When Jodh Bai, the Jodhpur princess who was married to
Akbar, became pregnant, she was si^nt, when the time of her confinement
drew near, to Shaikh Salim’s house, wliere she was delivered of a son, who
in accordance with the Shaikh’s stipulation was named Sulfan Salim, and
who afterwards succeeded to the throne as the Emperor Jahangir. In
giatitude fur the gift of a son Akbar performed a pilgrimage on foot to the
tomb of Khajt llu‘inu-'d Din Cishti in .4jinir, distant rather more than 200
miles from .Agra. He travelled twelve kuriih or kos a day, reaching Ajmir
on the 17th day filter leaving Agra, (he must have rested several days on
the way). Jahangir says that he iipvgr heard i.is father, drank or sober,
call him either iluhaniUiad Salim or Saltfn Salim, but that he always called
him Shaikhu bib;. •' in hononr of the Shin kh). Shaikh Salim lived at Sikri,
t village twelv- b, distant +r,-.,ni Agra. The birth of Jahangir at Sikri
'.iidiT these firc-.-ustau' • .s ca.-.sed Akhar to believe that the place was a
particularly fortu-, e oim for hi ii. and led to the founding of the town of
Fathpur Slur. .i*’-. .‘iwr,- 1 the i.ivourite residence of Akbar (.Jin-t-.dicbaif,
A ol I pa.'-i a et-'A ' ' 7' . , 'Aligarh e.tltio'i, p. 1 and preface, pp. 2~a
also Bu.-lari.i - V- ■> : 1 I'a ' 'chan.-.: _ = 7cs tlm disianne froni Agra to

A jmii as 1 p ’ V M

jy

Shakargaiij ' (may God sanctify Lis soul), and liis native place
was Dihli. He stood in the lelatioii of a disciple to Khajali
Ibrahim (who was spiritually descended through five intermediaries
from the most bountiful Khoja, the ascetic Fuzail Ibn ‘lyaz* —
may the mercy of God be upon him !) through whose instrument-
ality also he was first turned towards God. He twice travelled by
land and sea from India to the two most holy places of pilgrim-
age,® there to perform the duties of the pilgrimage.* He set

1 One of che most famous and popular of Indian saints, possessing cenotapti
shrines in various places in Hindustan and the Dakhan. His father,
Karaalu-’d-Din Salaiman, was a descendant of Fanaikb Shah, rnler of Kabul.
He was born in A.H. 584 (A.D. 1183) “ in the Qashah \pargana town) of
Khotwal,” near Multan whither his father had come from Kabul, and where
he had married. By the advice of his spiritn.il guide (Khaja Qntbu-’d-Diu
Bakhtvar-i-Kaki i, he went through the ordinary course of studies, “ for a
devotee without learning is the Devil’s jester.” He studied for five years in
Qandahar, and then went to Dihli to see Qatbn-’d-Din. There he remained
as his disciple until his fame was so much noised abroad that ho was pestered
by the numbers of people who came to see him, when he retired to Hansl. On
Qatbu-’d-Din’a death Faridu-’d-Din came to Dihli to succeed him, again
retiring to Hansi at the earnest request of the people of that place and in
search of peace. Being still annoyed by visitors at Hansi he made Shaikh
Jamiln-’d-DIu of that place his deputy there, and set out in search of some
secluded spot, at last selecting as his residence Ajudhan. since called Pattan
of Shai^ Farid, or Pak Pattan. There he lived and married and had a
family. His principal troubles there were due to the jealousy of the local
Q«fi. For the various stories accounting for his name of Shakarganj or
6anj-i-Sha1car (treasure house of sweets), vide Fariehta. Bombay text. Vol. II,
in the account of his life, also Aln-i- Akbari (crans. Jarrett) HI. 363, 364
note. Fai-ishta gives the date of his death as A.H. 760 (A.D. 1358), a
manifest error, as his age is given as 95, which would make the 3ear of his
death A.H. 679 (A D. 1280).

* A1 Fuzail Ibnn ‘lyazi-’t-Talakani. A famous ascetic, born at either
Abiward or Samarqand. He was called At-Tilakaui from the town of Talakan
in Khurasan. He began life as a highway robber but was miraculously
converted to God. He died at Makkah in the month of Mnbarram A.H. 187
(Jan. A.D, 803). Vide Ibn Khallikaii ftrans. de Slane) 11. 478-480. Fu?air8
name is given in the text as Fazl, though both MSS. have Fnzail.

{haru7naim-*th-shartfatn), i.e., Makkah and Madinah.

* {tawaf} circnmambulation. Alfchuugh the word is used here in

connection with both Makkah and Madinah, the only orcum iinbnlation
enjoined {Qur'an xxii. -7) is that of 'he at Makkah, which is per-

formed seven times. The ceremony is, however, commonly performed by
Indian Muslims, at any rate, ut any holy place, sue!* as the grave of a Shaikh.

20

forth 00 his travels, journeying to A-sia Minor, Ba gh dad, Syria,
Najaf,‘ (that holy spot), and other countries of tlie western regions,
spending the wliole year in travelling, returning to the glorious
city of Makkah at the time of the pilgrimage, and then again
setting out on his ti-avels. In this manner he performed the
pilgrimage twenty-two limes, fourteen times during his first
period of absence from India, and eight times during hjs second
period of absence. On this latter occasion he spent four years in
the glorious city of ivlakkah and four years in the delightful city of
Madinah, and during his sojourn in Makkah he used to spend the
period during which Muhammad’s birthday occniTed in Madinah,
and the period of the pilgrimage at Makkali. Shaikh Ta‘qub or
Kashmir who accompanied Shaikh Salim gave the date of his
latter visit to Makkah in the foilowisig couplets ; —

Thanks be to God, of whose mere bounty
The holy region became our halting-place.

If any one ask the date of this event

We answer him, •“ We entered the holy region.” *

And in that country he was ’mown as Shaikhu-’lSind, or
the holy man of India. He reached the age of ninety-five and
travelled always in tlie path of the holy law delivered by the
piophet (may God bless and save him !), always observing the
most severe austerities and tlie most austere discipline, to a degree
which can have been attained by but few of tlie holy men of this
age. He observed, as a religious duty, the ceremonial purification
and bathing before each of the five daily recitals of prayers, nor
did he omit this duty before the weekly public prayers.

12. When Shaikh Man of Panipat, (may God sanctify his tomb!;,
enjoyed companionship with .Shaikh .Salim he put to him this
question;- — ■' Wa.s it inriuction or rei elution that was the means
of your attaining to your goal ? ” .^laikh Salim replied, “ Our
means is ’heart to he.art.’ Very many holy men who have

1 Nujnf, or Mn^hhfiri 'AIT, Tthe sl-rine of ‘AliJ a town in ‘Iraq-i-‘Arab, on
the B.ilir-i-Najat (Lake of Xajafi and near the rnins of Kufa. Hero ‘All,
the nephew an.J son-in-law of ^luhainniad, is buried.

1 lihia giving 4 + tX)04- 30 + 50+ 1 + 1 + 30 + 8 + 200 + 40 C

The method of the Sufis. They are “the elect/’ those to whom God
f'tore especially reveuls Himself, drawing them to Himself with m. sterioua

21

reached perfection received their training in his service and
companionship, and became his deputies and successors. Among
them was the Shaikh^ who after being perfected received authority
to impart religious instruction to other disciples, and whose
history is weilknown. Another was Shaikh Kamal of Alwar, an
old man inflamed and enwrapped with zeal, resembling in dis-
position the leaders among holy men. Another was Shaitt Piyara
of Bangah a man distmet-ed with the grief of longing after Grod.
His fame is great in the country of Bangal* Another was Shaikh
Fathn-’ilah Tarm of Sainbhal Another was Shaikh Buknn-’d-din
of Ajudhan,^ and another was Husain the Khadim, who was the
best of Shai'^ Salim’s deputies, and the midmost pearl in the
string (of his disciples). He was the chief decider of abstruse
questions in the hospice at Fathpur. When Shaikh Salim return-
ed a second time to India ttis writer of these lines heard that he
had attained to an exteosive knowledge of, and pre-eminent profi-
ciency in the Arabic language. I therefore sent him a letter
containing two chronograms’ of his two auspicious arrivals, which
have been mentioned above. A verbatim copy of the letter is
set forth below.

bor.ds, aod ttieir hearts ^ith aa srdsijt lo^e for Him* > ide toy

liOte on thoi’’ docrrines,

1 The nc-nid of this giren either :n ilS. fA) or in ilS. (B).

The general sense of the passage indicates that cne name has been omitted,
probaciy tj a coprisL^s error. As cha passage siaiias it is impossible to
idantlfj the Sh. 2 ..!^.

S '* Tho origin-il nerce of Bongil Bang.' .■iiTi-i-Akhafi

tcnr.. I. 3^3.

•' Or Patta-., whers is sha tomb •>f ?ha'gh Far:dn-’d-din Shah t;, vide

auvra, p, 1? n. 1.

^ Poi the cvro ciirjn'Ogr.tm= nere rerd’'rei to r. le Dai-oni il, 'teAi' p. 73-

[ f'r£^ bonnd t'j here, in -vder *"0 i'lTC id' l?-5 >Tbo cc.rr.rc •-v.-i.t them-

c? the oriijiiial te'it some tmi "ho p''.3?e-re i:itt ’'r-foired to

has been crtnp'ieieiv niisri’H’ishtie i Iv oir. Lowe, fiis makes

3 ’.'ini rrrire an Arabic leiier to BadSoni. whereas it was Ihi’u rv.l that
wru.e thij Aiabio ioirt-r t-o 3baikh .Sviiim. Ti.cs- i-am.arks are, I r?cr:: :o say,
-jcjolaialv aioejsai'v. as cbe passagB In >-h IZ. i^feried to a lefer-

ren.'s'i Id Arabic letter aere tra 'elated, a reference -vh*oh tcno.: neccsHarilf
be uni/'re'iligjbie LO readers who tound to rely on the transLiti'-'n, and

who -annot; be expected, to ,lD£v-iy the list oi .’r/Mto s,t -he end of

the Tolnmo.

tcpy of the Arabic Letter written by the Author to Shaikh
Salhn-i-Cishti.

Verilj the religion wbicli is approved by God is Islam.

T’isrse.

Salutations to those who walk round the Ka‘hah,

By the oircamambalation of which the pilgrimage of noble
men i.s consummated,

Salutation.s tc those who dwell in a place,

In which he who surpas.sed all men lodgeth.*

I present the duties of prayers, the breezes of the sweet odours
13 . of which perfume the cells of the gathering places of holiness,
and I send pages of greetings, the sweet odours of the waftings
of which scent the meetings of the caravans of kindly fellowship.
(These I send) to that high presence and to that exalted throne,
the place of prostration for the foreheads of the great kings of
the age — the spot to be kissed by the lips of the emperors of the
cycle — rthe titles of which the imagination cannot comprehend by

its intelligence, before the door of which titles are cast down

the high presence of the sun, which stands in need of neither
praise nor description — that is, to the presence of the pattern for
men, of him who is followed at this time, the Shaikkii-’l-Islam,
may his shadow be ever extended over the heads of all creatures
in general, and over the foreheads of the bands of feeble seekers
after knowledge in particular. And since they {scil. my prayers
and greetings) spring from eincerity of intention and proceed
from singlene.ss of heart, I hope that they will meet with the
honour of acceptance, and the attainment of everything that is
hoped for ana prayed for is from God. After the performance of

I In both jISS, and in the test the second hemistichs of these two couplets
ai-e transposed, i.e , the second aetnistich of the jirat couplet appears as the
second hemistich of the second couplet and vice ver^ii. Both the sense and
the gramnij.- shew that this transposition has been made. I have restored
the hemisnchs to their proper places. The translation of this letter will

appear very ^.ihed. but t’ue substance being worthless, I have judged it best

M make the translation as literal as possible, for the letter itself has no place
m th-.s history excep- as an example of the anthor’s Arabic style, with which
ne, &t a.ny rate, seems to have beee well pleased.

23

■wtat is incumbent on the neck of one of your slaves^ and on the
conscience of my soul may it become clear to your erdightened
mind, the mirror of what is hidden, aye, to your great heart, the
mirror of certainty, that not the half of a line of the hardship of
separation from you and of the violence of the pain of longing
after you can he contained in vessels of letters,* should all the
trees in the earth become pens, and should the sea ( become ink)
with seven more seas® to swell its tide, in the passage of time
and its changes. And the heart is the most faithful witness, as
is well affirmed.

T’^erse.

“ God knows that my soul has peri.shed
“• With desire of thee, but thou revivest it
“ And a sight of thee, Oh, object of my desire, and my hope '
“ Is more pleasant to me than the world and all that it
contains.”

And your slave, distracted with love, has striven with an utter
striving and has endeavoured with a supreme eii’ort to obtain the

1 The text has **^1. MS. (A) has which makes better sense and

which is the reading adopted by me.

i,e.y in the vessels (or receptacles) of letters of the
alphabet. The simile is clear.

S This text from the Qur'un (xxxi, 26) is not quite fnllv quoted. The text
rnns : —

c' c ..‘"a ^ ^

“ Even though all the trees on the earth should become peon, and the sea (ink)
with seven more seas to swell its tide, the words of God would not be spent ;
verily God is mighty, wise 1”

The misapplication of it is apparent. Bar aoni sabstirare= fi'r “ the -r/ord^
of God the affection which he bears to the Shaikh. Thid savours soniewhr.f
of irreverence, and reminds us of the way in which Sjrii;turo was quoted in
the days of Praise-God Barebone.

^ This Hemistich appears, both in the irvt, and in rhd rwo in r’ o

following form: —

L— 4^1 j

The lieM^stirh, rhn.s wiicten will neithei .-‘‘ai. nur make -•'t '« Ftp text i ".s

24

felicity* of enjoying youi’ noble company, and of hearing some
of your polished discourse, but Fate assists not my designs, and
ascent to the heaven of eminence is no easy matter.

Verse.

It is not everything that man de.sires that he obtains,

The wind blows in the direction vrhicli the ships do not
desire.

14. In spite of this my reliance on the noble beneficence® of God is
iirm, and my hope in His gracious and boundle.sa favours is
since'. e. (nij' Lope being) that my eye ma)' be sufi'ased with light
or the siglit of your beauty, even as my heart is filled with the
•: jutemplatioo of the idea of you. Veiily, God answereth cur
;;; . lyers and doth wot disappoint us.

Verse.

I place my hope in God for the attainment of gifts.

And my Lord is the g-ivei' of what his slave desires.

And it is not far from your wonderful beneficence that yon should
i -“ me to read an odour-dilf\;sing epistle and ss'id forme with
kiiid invitation. It is not iitiiug that the footsteps of my pec
= . tulu wander more than ti.is over the carpet of familiarity, and
..t the do- c of composition should (any longei) sing on tlie
c;.)i of the tree of gle?. .tnd it is itest to scop .shoi i at ti^.L
- .o ;. iiLiu tneet an-.i u-.ii.g to curtail (mv letceij at

I'le,;.-. yor youL Iday your e.valced natuie not cease

. 1 . all ih.T ‘•'f'lesj a woig i a-s ovideii:!-;

omitted

ti. r., F. • -W-Vi.i.; IiiS-'-s.-'-.r 10 the Bo,!-: of Examinr-r^ irifunns n,,,

. ■ ’• unite..:- t-oiigh he cannot roinc.)!t,. fiom where"

; ■■ !.:■ : . . - ■- ;e..di’ i- ■ i ; emistich ; —

C! . ••

' " I'ten rh’ s ■

ir, and have

Jvisri arr.-.-i

r --f

I . \ f '

- ' S? 1 f

whit:

*1 do -s H’lt n 'i -

• -- '■

-' -

*" \‘.iril’d7n) ifi

a «\ord not l-.i

11 lA' I

1- . ■” It U

' 1 a< the pliua

: of 1*^ 't,

’ J’

ci:.* Arabic, it

If. t

25

to be protected from the casualties of ill-hap, and secured from
the lightaing-like mishaps of Jiight and day.

Yerm.

May you last as long as time, O refuge of the people of the
time !

This is the prayer of all creatures.

May God answer the prayer of his servant, by the right of him
after whom there comes no one.”^

This letter was dated in the course of the years mentioned
above. When I paid my respects to the Shaikh in the year H. 976
(A.D. 1568-69) having been introdnced by Shaikh A‘zam of
Badaon, who was both son-in-law and cousin to S]jaikh Salim, he
asked me “Eow has the position of the tomb of the prophet*
(may God bless and save him) been determined in the books of
‘ the sayings ’ with regard to the tombs of the two Shaikhs ? ®

1 The tsxt rightiy reads instead of the of the MSS. “He

after whom there comes no one ” is Muhammad, " rhelaat of the prophets ” or

O'* ^

the “ seal of the prophets,’' Muhammad said of himself “ 't-era

is no orophet aft?-’ r.ie

slij izJLmj -hr., '' the resort of apostlsship.” The word used rere is t.
compo’and adjective forir.ed from this exprossicii. and is iinpossibia cf trans-
lation. 1 have trausVited tha vrord {Surat) ‘‘form,’’ by the wevd

nooitiori/’ for that word best jonvexs the true meaning cf the ra^sage.
Vide nex? note.

3 T\\ ^ tsTo Sha' ! Abl BaVr and ^TTmnr, •who are buried, in q-rares

adjoiirii-'j: id ohatiiiuad’-, wichi.u rko precincts of tho ’Maf-v-iu-' : -X i''‘' o 'ir
'■ rhe pr- p'Ejt's ? ’’ at Maduteb. The three tombs are, or are sol; '‘sed

to be 'T'lhiii the V'/'-ot (chamber), oo called bocanso it the r ra ef

-duhaTr. favourite w'fe. Th--' hu/i ih is separo.rcd or. clI les

iroui loj walls :f th*^ leo-sqa'-* bv u piseage iibout ft. br.iad c-*i -he ---’ih
siae, arm '20 on the ea?’ era. Tho *va ='- .1 -.f this ivolatlon r:us
txpl'dced, and there '5 a sayirg of fdan .cm.id’s, 0 Ail.ifi :ansr' ' my
torab tj hecouie e--b of idol'itroui adoration! Hd y i.h'e wrath i ul

Zieary a^cn the r'^‘''pe whu mahe the tombs or their pioniiots Xi'-.jiof
prav;-i 1 ' Insidi’ are, or are sup’icsed to be, three tombs mciar the

so'.vti., c.u’i'cund'- -i by 'Wmie walls with :ar. an}' aperture, or. as othf'/s bv

str^i'g ulcakin':’-. '-vh<.tever this m.atm*’ d may bs. it is hung oatsi.lc , 1 ,

Cu’’^ain. S’.'m.ewha: lihe a largo '* f r-ar-pos^ bed." , r-d-" Burten’s " TiigAaicge
to El-hicdhiah ai’d Aieccc-h, ed. x II. e. xvi).” The g'.aosticii y:t by
'iiiV.m to Ba'Jioib. was pub nc detib: w'tli a view to testing the rSitor's

h

26

(may God regard them both with favour!)” I said “ In such a
way, and others have said ‘ in such another way.’ ” He said,
“ Sahrawardi, in the ‘ Waqi‘a-yi-$aHqa,’^ where he verifies the
forms of the three tombs, gives preference to the former state-
ment of the case.” In accordance with the SkaiJch’s exalted com-
mand I remained for two days with Shaiyj A'zam, who has been
15- already mentioned, in a cell in the old hospice, and enjoyed
detailed conversations with the Shaikh. Then I obtained leave
to depart for Basawar.^ Subsequently, in the year H. 978 (A.D.
1570-71) I repeatedly had the honour of paying my respects
to the Shaikh, and one of his extraordinary acts^ which I observed
was that in the cold wintry air of the highlands of Fathpur he
never wore anything on the upper part of his body but a shirt of
a single thickness of fine cotton cloth,* woven thin, and an upper
garment of muslin, ^ and this in spite of the duty that he imposed
upon himself of bathing twice daily. His daily food in the

knowledge of controversial works. There are few more fruitful subjects of
controversy among Muslima than the relative positions of the tombs of
Muljaramad, Abu Bakr and ‘Umar. This is necessarily so, as the question is
utterly indeterminable, unless the hujrah should be violated, an act of which
ho Muslim would be capable. The utility of the controversy is not apparent.
From what Muhammad himself is reported to have said (vide tupra) it was
clearly his wish that his tonib shcald be ignored. Such a wish is little
likely to be respected by Indian Mnslims, who are only too ready to perform
the ceremony of taicaf, which should be restricted to the Ka'bah, at the
shrine of any petty saint. Vide Barton's strictures on the conduct of Indian
pilgrims at Makkah and Madinah, ■passim.

1 This work is not mentioned by Haji Kh alifah. It was possibly a contro-
versial work on the uuedifying subject mentioned in the last note.

S The test hasjjl«.j with a footnote variant, MS. (A) hasjjIA)

and MS. (B). jy!— o. which last is the reading that I have adopted.

S ' miraclos.” There are, pace BadaonT, no “highlands” ( *^ )

in Fathpur Sikri, and it is not tarprising that a man who had travelled for
years in colder countries than India, unde-going the liardships which w-ere,
in those days, inseparable from travel, ( ), should have felt the

cold, even in the cold weather, at Fathpur Sikri, very much less than stay-at-
hrnie Indiana did.

* AeA {IQ'Jssa ’ ), fine cotton cloth of a close testare. Its price in tiie reign
of Akbar was from three rupees to fifteen muhrs per piece (oiXs udjcZ). Fiife
A.'t-i-.ltha’-i text, I. lOS,

' Price Es 4 fotherwise. from Es. 4 to five per piece (tlid,).

27

quadragesimal fasts of union with God* was half a water-melon,
or even less than that. He passed away to the next world in the
year H. 979 ( A.D. 1571-72) and the words “ the Indian Shaikh” >
were found to give the date of his death.

IX, Sh.«kh Xizamc-'d-dis of Ambetui.

Amhethi is the chief village of a pargana in the District of
Lakhnau ® Shaikh Xizam was the disciple and pupil of Shaikh
Ma‘ruf-i-Ci.shti. the line of whose spiritual descent goes back to
Shaikh Xur Quth-i-‘Alam. He followed the ordinary rule of life
(of an orthodox Muslim) hut was at the same time drawn towards
God in a mysterious manner.'* Although he was at first one of
the students of remunerative branches of knowledge ® his exalted
disposition yet led him to turn much towards the things of the
next world. His eyes were ever fixed on the page and his heart
fixed on God, nor was he neglectful of the service of iikr,^ and
the employment of the soul (in God’s service).

* Special fasts observed by devotees, vide note on supra. The only

fast inontubenc on all iluslims is the fasc of Ramazan, lasting for one lunar
month.

> giving300-HO + 600-h5-t50-!-4-flC = 979.

2 Vide Atn-i-ATcban (text) I. 438, where the name is spelt (Aieihi).

* tAyLa means an intense longing after God, the

result of special attraction exercised by God over the subject of the sensation.
Here the rule of life of a Sufi (or rather the absence of any such rule) is in-
structively contrasted with the rale binding on an orthodox iluslim. The Sufi
considers himself above all ceremonial rules, and may observe them or not, as
he likes. If he does observe them, it is more for the benefit of the weaker
brethren, the followers of the ‘‘holy law,” than for any advantage that might
accrue to himself from such observance. He is “one with God," ''converted,”

“ saved,” and nothing he does or leaves undone can possibly affect him.

^ Aa-Jo-c the branches of knowledge by means of 'which one gains a

livelihood.

S '' remembrance ” and “ recital.” A form of religious exercise adopt-

ed by da/'i'i.'kes. It may be a physical as well as a mental exercise, being the
recital of God’s praises, attributes, etc., either with the tongue of the f.esh,
f ) or with the ‘’tongue of the heart” ( ) ; a detailed

account of the various forms cf the exercise -^iU be found in Eug'nea'

“ Dictionary of Islam ” (ed, 1885; pp. 70S et seqq.

28

Couplet.

Ifot for OEC moment do I turn my attention from that moon,t^

I fear lest it should glance towards me and I should not be
on the watch.

In a short time he obtained from his spiritual guide permission
to impart religious instruction and to perfect disciples, and in the
village of Amhethi drew his foot within the skirt of contentment
and withheld his footsteps from the doors of high and low, going
nowhere except to the principal masjid of the Living God (in that
16= place) and sometimes to Ehairabad " to walk round the illustrions
tomb of tbe venerable SbaiUi Sa‘d, (may his tomb be sanctified 1)
and to see Shaikhu-’l-Hidyah,^ the successor of Shaikh Sufi, (may
God sanctify his most pure tomb i), or to Gopamau, in consequence
of the friendship which be bad for Qazi Mubarak of Gopamau^
who was one cf his faithfnl disciples, a master of peifection,
skilled in the holy law, and abstinent, and a very wealthy man.
The Shaiih in the early days of his student life had first been
attracted to God in the hospice of the Qazi' i father. At long
intervals he would take the trouble to go to FsrhjMn, by way of
making a tour, to see Shaikh 'Ab'lu-d-Gha'-!:.^ v.-lio 'iLo ji.e

"jf the greatest among famous eiders, and wa.s held in the higherit
respect, WheneTer he visited the hospice of Shaikhu ■' i-Hidrah
and ■>'he other pla^<^'S as would give of hi, ^ '-v.ree,

' .'■lea. nr some other cifesing, i i v'-zo -vi-ii :h? ‘^avi-. '
• S.nd p>resencs to e.och other and you will rove- cacL ova;?..,'' ^ and

> T.te word “ mao.-- ' U gen-’T'.Hy c.ao'i ir, Fersinn ooeWv i? r. s’fiW'nrri f
’-'.o be' 07 P,t cne,” •' 0 obje-'t t;.- , ...vr'o -7 -.ti’Ca. lie.: r\ S'C-k ,j

/ ' is iissii for S . i, as tb.? B -lovt-j n

29

then would fall into an ecstasy of delight. I have heard that he
once snatched the book “ Fusiisu-’l-Htiam”^ from the hand of
Shaikh Abu-’l-Fath, the son of Shaikhn-’l-Hidyah, who is now
his great father’s representative and sits on his prayer-carpet of
^ai’M-dom, and, taking it from him, gave him another book,
saying, “ Read this.” He made the books “

“^Atcarif,” “ Sisala-in-ilakkii/ya,” ^ “ Adabin^’l-Muridln,” * [and
other books of the same sort, the pivot on which his doctrine and
practice turned, both in hia religions duties and in the daily busi-
ness of life. He always first recited the midday prayers with the
congregation on Friday and afterwards recited the regular Friday
praj’ers. In the khutbah ^ he altogether omitted the praises of
kings. I saw him reciting the Friday prayers with his shoes on
his feet, and he said “His holiness, the re.sort of apostleship, fmay
God bless and save him !) recited his prayers with his shoes on.”
On one occasion one of his pupils desired to learn a lesson from
the boob known as Eajiynh,^ asking for the Shaikh’s blessing on

“ Articulations of the Sciences.”

Vide note on this work,

iupra.

8 The “ Ihyd’u-'ulunti-’d-diti” by the ShafVt Imam, Rujjatn-’l-Islam Abu
Hamid Mnhammad Ibn Muhammad ^azili, who died at Tug, A.H. 505
(A.D. 1111-12). Of this book it has been said “ If all books on Islam were
lost, and the Ihyd only remained, the loss of the others would not be felt.”
It is divided into four parts; (1) on ritual, and matters of faith, (2) on man-
ners and morals, (3) on the lasts of the world, the flesh, and the Devil, and
( t) on the virtues of a reifatiuus life. (Hdji KhaVfah I. 180-182),

3 Ar-risulatu-’l-ilakkiyyah, by Shaikh Imam Qutbu-’d-din ‘Abdn-’ilah Ibn
Mnharnmad Ibn Aimani-’l-Asbihldi. Hiiji Khnl/fah III, 445.

4 Adahu-’l-iluridm, by .^haikh Abu-’n-Najib ‘Abdn-’I-Qahir Ibn ‘Abdi-
’i-lahi-’s-Sahrawardi, (d. A. H. 563 = A.D. 1167-68). Hdj'i Khallfah I. 214.

t The oration or sermon delivered in the masjid every Friday.

* (Sdnyat-fi-’n-KaAwi) a, work on Arabic Grammar, by

ShaiHi Jamiilu-’d-din, commonly known as Ibnn-’l-Hijib, (d. A.H. 646=
A.D. 1248). An edition of it was published by Capt. John Bailiie, (Calcutta,
1805). Shaikh Xizamu-’d-din objected to the use of it by his pupil on the
si'o’" f its having- no (‘unu-dn), here called a/ jafc), setting

f b fne praises of God. The pupil’s argument was that he must learn Arabic
grammar before be could read Arabic works on divinity, and that Grammar
was therefore, in a sense, the fonndation of a sound knowledge of divinity.
The Kdfiydh commences, without the nsnal ‘umcdn or preface, thns ;

Ibnu-’l-Hajib has been defended against the charge of impiety on the plea of

80

17- his lesson. The Shaihh pretended not to hear him. After much
insistence and persistence on the part of the pupil the ShaiMk
said " Read some divinity.” He said, " This work too is on
divinity, inasmuch as divinity depends upon it.” The Shaileh, in
the warmth of his love for God, said, " How can divinity depend
upon a book on which the first argument that has been advanced
is that the author has omitted the praises of God, (may He be
honoured and glorified [ ) from the introduction on account of his
humility? ” He rarely accepted a disciple, and (when he had one)
he did not appoint his tasks for him or give him instruction. ^
Among his chosen disciples was .Shaikh H atim of Gopamau whom
he had removed from the class of students who read in the hospice
of Qazi Mubarak and kept with himself. To please the hoy he
would sometimes read lessons to him, and would sometimes give
him a book, and set tasks for him, until he completely won his
heart, and sometimes be would give him a turban, or shoes, or
clothes. The Qazl and the other students, when they saw these
favours (bestowed upon Shaikh Hatim) were envious* of him.
The holy Shaikh Hizamu-’d-din. perceiving signs of this jealousy,
said, What can be done ? God the Most High has willed to
bestow upon Hatim a portion of prosperity by means of these un-
satisfactory gifts, a few clothes and old shoes.” ShaiWi Nizam
obtained such complete power and utter influence over Hatim
that in a short time he (Hatim) attained a great reputation, and
Shaikh Nizamn-’d-din in expounding Divine truths and the mystic
knowledge of God used to restrict the title of ShaiMi to him alone.
In the meanwhile® Shaikh Hatim experienced many ups and
downs, and he was troubled with asthma, and various sicknesses,
and just as he had acquired the right to be Shaikh Nizamu-’d-din’s

his humility, which led him to believe that his hook was not worthy of an
'unudn. Nizama-’d-din was evidently too much of a precisian to admit
this plea.

1 Vide infra, p . 39, where the ShflM gives his reason for neglecting this
duty.

* Tlie word used here is (shMa), Its usual meaning is “ nngTQdg-

ing emalation.” Badaoni, however, habitually uses it in the sense of “ envy.”
Vide vol. I (Dr, Ranking’s translation), p. 395 and p. 513, n. d.

® Cdi! The word is inserted in the text, though it appears

in neither M.S. It appears, however, necessary to the sense, and the textual
reading is therefore probably the correct one.

31

deputy and successor he chose the path to the next world. The
Shflikh would often say, “ There was a servant of God to whom I
used sometimes to teach the word of God, and he used to under-
stand it. Now that he is gone to whom shall I speak of it y ”
When I, the compiler of these historical selections, paid my
respects to the Shaikh, Shaikh ‘Abdu-’z-Razzaq, who was both 18 .
brother-in-law and father-in-law ^ to him, was generally in con-
versation with him, and sometimes, but i-arely, the Shaikh would
go to see (or would go out walking with) Shaikh Muhammad also,
his true deputy (or successor), ^ who now adorns the prayer-carpet
of the ^aikh with his presence, sitting as his successor. Since
the late Muhammad Husain Khan,® some account of whom has
already been recorded by my chronicling pen, and who was a man
to whom I was bound by the bond of regard more closely than
can be expressed in writing, entertained a desire to become a
disciple of the holy ^aikh, he was privileged to pay his respects
to him by the co-operation of Sayyid As gh ar of Badaon^and Qazi
Ahmad, the brother of Qazi Mubarak of Gopaman;* and this hap-

1 J Both wife’s brother and wife’s father. Shaikh

Nizlmu-’d-din muse therefore have married an aunt and a niece. This U
allowable by Muliammadan law, provided that the two are not at the same
time wives of one hasband. The Shaikh probably married the aunt first,
and, after her death, the niece.

2 The text has here villA. giving which is the reading of HS3.

( A) and (B) as a footnote vtiriant. The reading in the text has probably been
adopted because vAlA is a much commoner phrase than d jjJA.

The sense is not a.fiected. is a substantive but must be translated as

though ic were an adjective.

t The name ‘ Muhammad ’ is prefixed to Husain in both MSS. The Amir
referred to is generally known as Husain Khan simply, and is thus called in
the subsequent passages of this narrative. He was Badaoni’s first patron, vide
note 4, on p. 6. He held Lakhnau in jagir for about a year only, during
which time Badaoni was iu his service. Kant u Gola was subsequently given
to him in jdglr. For the account of Hnsain Khan, here mentioned, vide
Badaoni, vol. II

* I can find no notice either of Sayyid As gh ar or of Qazi Ahmad, though
an account of the latter’s brother. Qazi Mubarak, is gi'cn subsequently in this
volume (c. II, No. XLVII). In the text the words are very

carelessly omitted, so as to make it appear that l,ia/i Mr.l- -tak hinself, ai. i
not his brother, introdutv- l Husain Kh an to the jShaf’.i. uiest- words ate
nevertheless cQarly v, ritteii in ouch MS.

32

pened at the time when Lakhnau was settled on Husain Khan in
jagir, in A.H. 976 (A.D. j568-69). I observed' that the Shaikh at
the beginning of the interview addressed to everybody a few
words appropriate to his condition, contenting himself with saying
“ Praise be to God ” with the utterance of prayers, or restricting
himself to such remarks as, “Glory be to God,” “there is no god
but God,” “We seek protection of God,” 2 “ In the name of God,”

“ there is no power or strength but with God,” or to the recitation
cf a verse from the glorious word (of God), or from the haditk,^ or
from the sayings of noted saints. And every moment he glanced
to his left, so that it seemed as though he were seeking from the
master of the assembly* permission and leave to say something.
On receiving leave from one of the company,^ at the time when
we were shaking hands with one another, he gave the Sayyid,
mentioned above,® his blessing, saying to Qazi Ahmad “ Glory be
to God,” and to me, “In the name of God,” using similar (pions)
expressions to everybody present. At this very moment, before
he could commence a conversation, a miserable worthless wretch
of a student came up and recognized’ the Shaikh, who, saying to
him “ I seek protection of God from the Devil, the execrable one,” *
aAnitted him to the interview. He then began to expound ® the
verse of the Qur’an, “ Everything shall perish, except His face,”*"

1 The author's mention of himself in the third person, as is usual, is often
apt to be confasing. It might appear from the structure of this long pa8s.ige
that it was Husain ^an that ‘ observed,’ but the subsequent context shews
that Badaoni is referring to himself in the words Joi The whole of

this passage is very involved, and I have been obliged to break it up into
periods and transpose portions of it, in order to render its meaning into
passable English

5 The text has, wrongly, for o^iu.

i the recorded buyings of iluhamraad, which form the ground-work

of ilnhammadan tradition and are venerated equally with the Qur^dii.

* {hazrad-i-}um,‘ah) lit. “the presence which had collected
ns together.” Presumablj Hnsain Khan is meant.

® 3' jciitfci) lit. ‘from a certain direction.’

6 Scxl. .Sayyid A ^ghar of Badaon.

7 iiAb jO i.hir.yaft}. perhaps “ singled ont,” or “button-holed.”

* (*^^1 (Ash-shaiiujii-’r-rajlm] lit. “ tl e Devil, the stoned one.”

* The text has a misprint here, for j >— o*

I" Q’lr'dR XXVHI, bb. The Kcth.^df txpiuiLS that -‘faco" means the

33

addressing his discourse to Shai^ ‘Abdu-’r-Razzaq who contented
himself with saying “ It is indeed so,” and “Yes,” (at intervals),
occasionally pointing out some allusion. Xobody else had power 19 .
to utter a word, awe and reverence preventing them. As for me,

I was as though I was not,^ and. reviewing my sins, sat in fear lest
they should have been revealed to the Shaikh, and lest my inmost
being should be laid bare to the light of day,® secretly watching
al! the while for an opportunity to escape from the assembly. At
that moment that student asked, “ Why should not the (|3ossessive)
pronoun affixed to the word ivajh ® (face) be referred to some thing,
as masters of the secret knowledge of God have said ?” The
Shaikh, the moment he heard this speech, became much aaritated,
and the colour of his blessed countenance'* turned to red and
yellow, and he said, “ Did I not, when I first set eyes on this
devil, repeat the formula “ We seek protection, etc.,” and now, in
the manner which we have just iieard, his deviliy has become
apparent ?” And when he discovered what the student’s design
was he repeated several times the formula, “ There is no power or
strength but with God,” and quoted the following couplet from
the Qasida-yi-Burda ° : —

“ 0 thou who blamest me for my pure affection, excused
“ Thou art by me therefor, but had’st thou done justice thou
would’st not have blamed me.” ®

whole Person of God. This is the fiprore of speech called in Persian
sJS” io[j| “ Completely effaced.”

* Something was evidently weiguing heavily on Badaoni’s conscience. He
has not told ns what it was. His disgraceful ” love” affair did not cake place
nnti! four years after this time. ( Vol. II ce.xt, pp. 136-371.

® The text of the Qur’an runs, in the oiigii*al Vl i_SdliS iSS.

The translation has just been given. The student's question meant ’■ Can we
not refer the possessive pronoun (“ his” or “ its”) attached to the word
to some person or thing other than God ?” It is but fair to remark that the
question appears absnrd, but still the Shaikh need not have substituted abuse
for argument. Perhaps the sting of the student's question lav in his refer-
ence to the “masters of the secret knowledge of God,” ( oJy*.* Juki )

which seems to convey a hint that the and his companions conld not

be classed in that category. The reference below to the student’s “ design ”
seems to bear ont this view.

* ijiti “ the epidermis, or cuticle." Vide supra, p. 16, n. 3.

^ Vide suprdy p. 4, n. 1.

* In the text the article has been carelessly omitted before the word

0

34

Intense love for God overpowered the Shaikh and he ordered the
student to be turned out of the assembly, but afterwards, calling
him back again, he appeased him, and the contemplation of this
matter was a great warninsr to us who were present. Thar iiiglit
passed very uncomfortably for me in the hospice, and I watched
for the morning in order that I might escape. The early morning
prayers t were recited with the Shaikh at the moEneat the true
dawn began to appear, when we cr.uld not see one anot'ner s faces
without a lamp, I indeed thinking that it was yet niglit. At
sunrise the Shaikh came oar ot hi.s cell and stood at the door of
the j.iaijid, ordeiing Jliyan ^hatkh Muhammad '^ to bring for u.s
three whatever food might be ready, and I was in gre.at agitat.on
of rrir.d. ever and again enuenvouricg to get iliyah Shaik]}
Mub.'anmad to obtain leave ironi Ins master for me to depart, Ilie
holy Shaikh, v. ith his Qn/rin in one hand and salt lu the other
20 . was a’i ^u.sitTy expounding the blessed verse, ‘‘ Make reafty tnen
againit .-liem what force ye c.sn. and souadrons of horse, ’ = and so
on to the ei^ i or the verse, ignoring my application for leave to
depart Ayma'Ca of what he was saying he then lueiitioned, ;n a
most agcC'ticrr.te manner. Husain Khan, who was at that time in
the of Isauli, * and said, ‘‘ He is my son.” ® Tlien, follow-

in TfiG ^drsi- iicnj istiGli of tliis coQpl^t. it appears in both and

ie correct reerUiig.

1

JJi commonly called in PerMan

_ ^ dan Arabic

The first of the five obligatory fierieds of pidver. These prayers
shooiti te m-eited between dawn and sunrise.

* This seems to have been Badioni's youauer t rather
3 Qu‘ va VHL 62.

i-sS-'. - '' ' ‘‘“'l

o 'O'' '

^ l, f ^ r ‘''-Z ' ^ O 'O' ' '

1

,o ' o »

The Arabic is very badly pointed in the text.

* A j?organa town in the sarkar of Lakhnan, Suha Awadh fOndh). Mo«t
likely oiift of Husain Khan’s jdgir villages, whither lie had returned after the
interview mentioned above.

* The text has here which means “ parrot.” Both MSS. read

35

ing the dictates of his generous nature, which led him to bestow
on every one, rich or poor, a piece of gold, or salt, or some e^her
gift, he gave to me a tanka.

Of the miracles which I saw him perform, when I made ihf-t
journey to visit him, this was one. As we throe ‘ were on ■'he
road to Ambethi, journeying to pay oar respects to the 8a
(the road-police) had arrested a man dressed a; hesgar cn o
charge of theft and highway robbery, and had .se.ztd him bv . -
olothes.s He in some way managed to effect his escar-e. and in -
very hour came begging to the holy Shaikh : but _;G!.withstat..h_:a’
all his persistence and lamentation the Shaikh gave him not r':.:-.
We who were present were much astonished, a-- -ve iiad
witne.=sed instances of the Shaikh's sre .erosity. Th; Sh likh at o. lo
opposed and objected to ^ (our expres.sions of surprise ' sajirst.
“ Look at the^ thief, who both robs on the highway and poses as a
beggar,” and he diove him out of our assembly. This cansel
great astonishment, and when w'e looked closely at the man we re-
cognized him as the same person whom the road-police had laid
hands on.

On the same day another occurrence, similar to this, took place,
but an account of it would occupy much space.

On the last day of Ramazan, in the year ali’eady mentioned, we
were travelling rapidly at night ^ with ^nsaiu Sian, from his

which means ■' the young of man or of any animal,” and is a far more aonrc-
priate term than I have, of coarse. lAlowed the JlSb,

* That IS. Qiizl Ahmad of Gopamau, Saj^d Asgcar, and Badioci himself,
or perhaps Husain Khan is included, in which case one of the ocher two ninsc
be left out.

* 00 , 3 ^ SAjjAS” tj j\ This seems to mean rather. “ had palled o5

his clothes,” the thief leaving his clothes iu the hands of the police and so
escaping, but as Badaoni says immediately afterwards that the thief escaped

(m some way or other] I have translated the phrase by ” seized him

by his clothes,” in order to preserve the ambiguity regaiding the thief’s
means of escape.

» j The words j are carelessly omitted from the

text, though they occur in both MSS.

* The text has the word (“this”] here, though it occurs in neither MS.

I have omitted it in the translation.

t The year was H. 976 (A.D. 1568). It must be borne in mind that the
Muslims, like the Jews, reckon their day from sunset. Thus " the last day of
Buniazan, at night," would be, according to cur reckoning “the night of the

36

pargana to Ambethi, and ail our efforts were centred on reaching
tha'c place in time to recite the early morning prayers t in company
vviii! the Bhaikh. The dawn had already appeared when, at three
kuriih * distance from Ambethi. we put spurs to our horses, and
regretted that we were not in time for the public prayers.' We
reached the Shaikh’s masjid in Ambethi as the sun was about to
rise. At that moment the holy Shaikh, having come, cut of his
house, was just commencing his prayers with the "'Allahu Akbar’ *
21. and he broke off, and we thought that we were just too late, but
we nevertheless attained the great honour (which we sought).

this act of the Shaikh was contrary to his usual custom, for
he always recited the early morning prayers at a time when we
thought that the true dawn had hardly appeared.

It chanced that towards the close of the same day ,the Shatkji
was explaining the mysticism of the Sfiifis ^ in the masjid, and he
read some ° verses from the Divan of Khaja Hafiz. ^ One of the

last day bat one of Ramadan” or, in this case, as they trarelled through the
night *‘ the early morning of the last day of Ramazan.” The necessity for
this explanation will be apparent hereafter, where it is stated that ^usain
Khan returned to Lakhiiau to keep the ‘id there.

1 Vide supra p. 34, n. 1.

S The kos of Hindustan. Vide Ain-i-Akbari, Vol. 11. (trans. Jarrett), p. 414
and n. 2.

2 0 . 1 : U.m. These prayers were hardly, in this instance, public. They
were rather common to two or more,” Their merit lay in the “gathering
of two or three together,” as S. Chrysostom, quoting the Holy Scriptures,

Sit

Triis is the repetition, at the conunencetnent of the ritual
pravers. of the mu'azzin's call to prsyfer, which oommencea with the
“God is great*’) repeated three times.

6 Eeference has already been made to the doctrineb of the

Sufi-t .

^ Tiie word (“ some,”) which appears in the text, is in neither MS.

I bav 3 , nevertheless, retained it, for -r-e context cle-irlv shews that the
SXaikh read more than - couplet.

* Tee prii.ee of Persian poets, the “interpreter of secrets,” and “the
tongue of that which is hidden.’ He is too well-known to stand in need of
any desciiptior/ her.. Be is k-own even in England, whore, as a rule, no
one '5 known who hiS not hoen, ao ‘ sweet bnlly Bottom ” waq, translated.
Hafiz has ’.-'v: 'ra'~h'.‘ed irto Engl’-b, but the Enghsa equivalents of

the Persian wc.^cs o;* hhn *.av8 been giver, by Colontl Wilberforce

Clarke, R. R.

37

companions of the late Husain Khan asked whose disciple Khaja
Hafiz was, and the Shaikh said, ‘‘He was the disciple of Khaja
JiTaqshband,” 1 (may God sanctify hLs soul !) Another, apropos of
the same subject, asked “ How was horse-flesh regarded in the
religion of the greatest of the Imams ? ” * (t.e., ■was it lawful food
or not?) The iS^aiM replied that the greatest of the I™i7»s him-
self ate horse-flesh, and when he reached this couplet ; —

“The i^ufis celebrate in one moment two ‘ids (great feasts)
“Spiders make pemmican of a fl}’.” ®

then I too, trusting in my own singleness of heart, thoughtlessly
a,sked, “ What is meant by the ‘ two ‘ids ? ’ ” This question annoyed
the ShailiK and he angrily said, “ Let Bayazid ’ and Junaid,® or
Shibli ® and Mansur ask such a question as this. What have yen
to do -with such a question? ” And falling into this vein he spoke

1 Kha^a Baha’u-’d-DIn Naqshband. Vtde Ain-i-AJehan. text, II, 212.
Rizi Qali, acoordiag to Col. Wilberforco Clarke, states, that the ptr who
ioatruoted Hafiz was MaulanS Shaman-’d-Dln-i-Shlrazi.

2 Aba Hanifah, the founder of one of the four orthodox sects or theolo-
gical schools of Islam.

* I cannot find this couplet in any edition of Hafiz to which I have access.
I know of no one English word which will translate the word iWAi, so I
have nsed “ pemmican ” as the word which most conveniently translates it.

* The person meant is Bayazid-i-An?ari, the apostle of the Afghans, who
is styled Pir-i-Raushan, and founded the Sufi sect called Raushaniyya'h,, or
“ the enlightened.” He established amid the mountains of Afghanistan a
temporal power upon the aothority of his spiritaal character, and his
snccessors disturbed the tranquillity of the Dihli empire daring the rei^n
of Akhar. Vide Beale's “ Oriental Biographical Dictionarv.”

5 Shaito Jnnaid-i-Baghdadi, a famous ascetic, born at Baghdad, -where
he died in A.H. 298 (A.D. 911). (Beale O.B.D.)

S Shaikh Abu Bakri-’sh-Shibli a celebrated doctor of divinity, bom and
brought np at Baghdad, wiiere he died A.H. .331 (A.D. 946;. Shaikh Jnnaia,
mentioned in the last note, was one of his spiritual masters. (Beale O.B.D.).

^ Mansur-i-Hallij, the surname of Shaikh Hasain-i-Haliaj, a celebrated
Siifi and ascetic. Musalmans differed in their ouinion cf his character. By
some he was believed to he a saint and a worker of miracles, by others
a juggler and impostor, deceiving the people with his tricks. He was in the

habit of proclaiming ” Ana-'l Haqq,” “ I am the Troth,” or " I am G-od ”

the logical conclnsion of his Sufi doctrines. For this blasphemy he was put
to death wiih great torture by the dOMlifah ilnqtadir in A.H 306 (A.D. 919)
or. according to Xbn-n-Khailikan in A.H. 309 (A.D. 922.) He is considered
by the Sufis to be one of their most spiritaal leaders, and to have attained

3S

iiriich on the subjecfc, and I. hanging mj head with shame, repented
a-v indiscretion. Husain Khan, biting his finger with consterna-
looked ever and anon towards me, and his friends ere all
bewildered. Suddenly mv lot was lightened oy the rising oi the
i]'yiul) clamour which is heard on the appearance of the new
li-oou of the 'idh and all rose and busied themselves in mutual
coui-iatiilations and hand-shakings. I rose, and on the plea of
be±u? fatigued went to recite mj evening praters in a tent wnich
■v:,i pitched in a garden beside the raasjid, feeling sicu or lire.
1 ' :.-:Cx the nolv going indoors, set food before his guests,

sked ■■ bv'hei’e is such aa one?”® (t.e., Badaoni), shaikh
: .mmad, hici orthy successor,® answered, By reason of the
:u-'. rViinetice cr vhich he was guilty he could not appear in
r.'.zsjid. and he absented himself also from the public prayers
- - 'S't.iijhi then .ssr.t me some food from his cwn table, with nis
and I was somewhat consoled, and entertained copes or
i t.vwtno.s.s. L'ai'iy the next morning Husain Kiin wont to
.. '.ruiinj., TO ioin in celebrating the ‘id there, and 1 aione reniainea
- boetli!. Tim holy ShaxlA recited the prayers of tlie testival
, . i-m. masjld and afterwards occupied himself in giving instruc-
ir. the Dock known as the ' Awdrifd Meanwhile .^aikh
... ' tammad rc=e up to intercede for me, and asked that my lault
1 - /b ; be fui'gis’en. The sent for me, and breaking off

n ■ teaching larned to me with great kindness, and when I, my
;• full of tears, placed my head on his foot, he embraced me
.-aid ■■ I bear no enmity or malice in my heart against
.juy. Whatever I say is in the way of advice and spiritual

;:;r'h, or 'as' utas-e of Sii/>-isai. An ingpired Siifi is said to have
. . •..’.lied of tho Almighty why he permitted Jlausar to suffer. The reply
, ' This is the Danishment for the revealer of secrets,” xe., his offence
■'Us not blasphemy, bat indiscretion in altering a great troth to ears unfit
; i-or.r it. (Beale 0 B.D,). It seems that the Shaikh was vexed with
u -111 for inqaiiing into matters which were beyond him (Badaonii but it
, 11 ' " be that the Shaikh was not ready with an answer and took advantage
.T,tdaon?8 known servility to •’ saints” to escape, by this means, the
-tcess'.cy of owning himself to be at a loss.

i i i, the new moon had been sighted and the ‘idu-’i fitr had begun.

The use of this word is due to modesty, as the author by its use
avoids incrodacing bis owa name.

Vide supra, p. 17, n. 2.

instruction to the slaves of God, and abuse from me, as was the
ease with abase from the prophet of God, (inaj God bless and
save him), has on its object the same effect as praise (from
another), and even if I utter a curse on anybody it has the same
effect as a blessing.^ Then, in affection, taking his cap from his
blessed head, he gave it to me, and took me apart into the cell
which was in the gate-house, and said “ Perform your ceremonial
ablutions in my presence, and recite your prayers.” 1 recited
them vronderingly. He said to me, “ Men say of me that I do
not instruct students. What instruction can I give ? My instruc-
tion and religious teaching are inst this much, a tongue never
weary of praising God and a thankful heart” Then he became
agitated like a stormy surging sea and said “ My life is instruc-
tion sufficient for seekers after God, and walkers in His way.” *

Just then two _ dnrviskes from Sindh, breaking tV.e Sh'iikh's
custom, began to sing outside an Indian nielr-dr in mournful
and grating tones, and my spiritual condition underwent a change*
by means of the influence brought to bear on me at that time.
Aprypos oi this (influence') the Shaikh said that the great
companions (of Muhammad).* (may God be gratified with
them'), when they saw that the desert ‘Arabs newly converted
to Islam were much affected by hearing the glorious Qur'an read, 23 .
regretted their own state, and the leader of the faithful, Abu-
Bakr, the faithful witness of the truth, ( inav God be gratified
with him ! said. “ We were like you. but aiterwavvis oar hearts
became hard ; that is to say, they became firmly Sxed and immove-
abie. so that they were like stones for lack of .ability to be

i The §hrn]^ was evidently ashamed of himself, bnt. rather than confess
himself in the wrong, adroitiy mansged to porsnade Badaoni, by a. line of
reasoning that wonld be deemed irreverent by any Mnsiim who was not a
slavish admirer, that he had received a blessing rather than an innnlt.

3 Fide supra, p. 30, n. 1 The text inserts between the words
and ctUii the conj unction J, which is in neither JfS. and destroys the
sense-

B AwjAiU! OJj y This sentence is somewhat obsonre,

as may be taken to mean either *' condition,*^ simply, or ** ecatasv.**

Nor is it clear whether Badaoni means that the monmfal and harsh “ mnsic*^
combined with the s discoarse made him. a changred nan, or that th»

" music *’ broke the spell under which the Skate's discoarse had laid him.

t Abd Bakr, *Cinar, ‘Usman, and ’AU.

40

softened.” - Then the Shaikh read some sentences which were
quite unfamiliar to my ear, and gave me permission to use the
following prayer constantly ; — “ O God, I seek protection of
Thee against deafness, dumbness, madness, leprosy, and leuco-
derma.” ® When I took my leave and came to Lakhnan I made a
stay of some days there, and the Shaikh would sometimes send
me a piece of salt, which he used generally to hold in his hand
and lick when in an assembly, reciting this saying of Muhammad,
“ Salt is a cure for seventv diseases, except death.” ® And he
would sometimes also send me some uncooked * rice, and some-
times an earthenware jar, and other presents, and he received
my younger brother, the late ShailA Muhammad, into the
company of his disciples and pupils, and in a short time, being
blessed ^ with the holy Shaikh’s regard he acquired angelic
qualities and a love for the practice of ascetism. He generally
observed the continued fast,® and spent his time in reading the
glorious Qw-’o/i, in recitiug God's praises, in exorcism, and in

t I have not been able to find another quotation of this saying. The text
and both IISS. have the word whioh means ( in this context) “ ability

to receive cotonr.” The sense is not apparent, as a stone can receive colour
as well as can any other object. Bat if we read with a difference of

one letter only, the meaning wili be that which X have given in my transla-
tion, which is in every -way more appropriate.

S and i_r=gj. The first is the true leprosy,, in whioh the fingers and

other extremities graduallv rot away, and the face assames the “ leonine ”
appearance. The second is leucoderma, or white leprosy, which itself affects
only the colcnring matter of the skin, bat is commonly said {itufiitu-’l-MuAit
sub voce utyl ) to end in true leprooy. It is this disease with which Gehazi
was amit-en — “ Ei egressus est ah eo leprosus quasi nias.”

2 Kings V. 27.

5 There are many “ sayings” of iinhammad on the virtues of salt. Some
specify salt as a care for some of the diseases for protection from which
BadaonI had just been directed to pray.

* (“hi. ;n both MSS. The text has vjriA, T,rith as a footnote variant.
1 have, of course, adopted the read.ng of the MSS.

6 the reading of both MSS. The text has which destroys the

sense.

* This consists in fasting daring the six days following the
‘idu-’l-fitr, ie., from the 2nd to the 7th of Shawwal, inclnsive. Aba Ayub
relates that Muhammad said “ The person who fasts the month of Bamazan
and follows it ap with six days of the month of Shawwal, will obtain the
rewards of a continued fast ’ (Hughes, Diet, of Islam, sui voce “ Fasting.”)

41

works of supererog:.tioD, so that not one hour of his precious
life was wasted, or was passed iu idleness, as mine has been.

“ In respect of rose-water and the rose the decree of fate
from time witliout beginning has been this,

“ That the former is a courtesan of the mai’ket-place, and
the latter a chaste and curtained dame.”

And at that time he left the world, and it is certain that,
preserving his faith iutaot, he retired to the garden of Rizwan.t
The venerable age .f the holy Shaikh extended to more than
eighty years, and even at that great age he begat children, and
his departure from this abode of decay took place in the year
H. 979 (A.D. 1571-72).

X. Shaikj} Bhik.an op Kakoki.®

Kakori* is a •parguna town in the Sarkar of Lakhnau. The
Shaikh was rlie most learned of the learned men of bis time,
abstemious and well versed in the holy law, while in devout
piety even the greatest of the Imams ^ (Abu Hanifah) was his
inferior, For many years he was engaged in teaching and in
instructing the people. He had committed the whole of the
glorious word (of God) to memory, according to each of the
seven methods of reading it. He used also to give instruction
in Shntiht.^ He reckoned bis spiritual succession from Mir
Sayyid Ibrahim of Iiij,^ (may God sanctify his soul !) who was

1 Rizwan is the keeper of tbe garden of Paradise.

* The text omits the Shnif^'s territorial designation in the head-liae.
following 3IS. (B). X follow MS. {Aj and insert it.

S Kukdrl, given in the text, for some reason or for no reason as
(ICakari). Both MSS. have KukorL X'tde also (text) I.

^ This is the reading of the text, and is nudoubtedly the correct reading.
The word is somewhat indistinct in both MSS. Perhaps the copyists

considered BadSoni's comparison irreverent, and compounded with their
consciences by writing the word as indistinctly as possible.

5 This reference is to a poem named Hirzu-l-amdni wa wojh.u-’t-tahfzm,
the subject of which is the seven methods of reading the Qur^dn. The author
was Abu-'i-Muhammadi-’i-Qlsimi-'sh-Shitibi, from whom the poem is known
as Aih-^diibiyyah. Tbe author died in H, 590 (A.D. 1194). Shatib is
said by Ibn Kliallikan to be a town in Eastern Spain. I cannot identify it.
Vide HajI Khaifa III. 43, and Ibn Kballikan ; B. v. Ash shohhi.

® Irij was tbe chief town of a sarkdr of tbe same name in the Suba of
4gra. Vide Ain-i-Akbari. text, Vol. I., p. 448.

6

24 .

42

himself the most learned of the learned men of his time. The
ShaiMk would never mention the Sufi mysteries in a pnblic
as.sembly, but only in private, to those who had been initiated
in their secrets and one of his sayiiig.s was " If the mystical
profession of the Unity of God ‘ he umde in public it turns again
solely to him who uttered it, or to the learned men (present).”

fie would not listen to singing, and outwardly reprobated it.
He left numerous children who attained perfection, all of whom
were adorned with the embellishmeut cf rectitude, piety, wisdom,
knowledge, and excellence.

The compiler cf these historical selections was honoured, in
company with the late Muhammad Husain Ehan,^ by being
permitted ic pay his respects to the Shaikh in Lakhnau. It was
the blessed month .of Ramazan, and a certain one biought ,to .the
Shaikh, a work on logic, asking him to set him a task in that
book. The Shaikh, said •' Ton should read some book on divinity.”

Tbs Shaikh's death occurred in the year H. 981 (A.D, l.:'73-4}.
XL Shaiich Sa-nl,

He also was one of the more esteemed among holy men. His
line of spiritual descent came through his own revered father.
Shaikh Muhammad I may God render his soul fragrant). .S.hadth
Muhammad wrote a commentary iu Persian on Shctil'i,^ which
covered nearly seventy quires of paper. His true successor,
25. Shaikh Sa’di, was subject to fits of overpowering religious ecstasy,
and was pure both in body and soul. Ke was ever cheerful and
light cf heart, and lived happy and free from care. To one of
h's friends he wrote in a letter, when saying farewell to him ; —
‘‘Thy Sa’di’s eyes and heart are with thee on thy wav,

So deem not that thou goest alone, tliey bide with thee
alway.”

His death occurred in the year H. 1002 (A.D. 1593-4).

1 iiij. This means really the confession of the unity of everythinp

with God and of God with everything, the erpraasion of belief in the pan-
theism of the Sufis. The meaning of this somewhat enigmatical “ saving ” is
that such a statement made iu public cannot pos.sibiy edify the uninitiated
and is confined in its results to the speaker and the initiated present. The
text wrongly following MS. (B) has U*l “ men of the world,” for
1 *^ ( MS. A ) ” men of knowledge.”

* BadionFs first patron, vide euprd^ p. 5, n. 4,

* Vkde supra in the life of Shsihh Bhikam, the last mentioned holy man.

XII. Saytid Taju-’d-DIs, of Lakhnac.*

He was one of the successors of ShaiUi Mu^iammad Ghaus,*
and was a master of the art of exorcism. He had a great reputa-
tion for asceticism, holy poverty, and resignation, and was
generous and open-handed. He came to Lakhnau, where very
many were honoured by converse with him, and received from
him permission to give instruction in religious matters. There
he died.

XIII. Shaikh Muhammad Qalandas of Lakhsau.®

In his youth he served in the army, in the reign of Sultan
Ibrahim Lodi,* but ^ when the Emperor Babar conquered India
he gave up that profession for a life of holy poverty, sacrificing
all his ambition thereto.® He became a disciple of .Shaikh Bnhlui,
devoting himself to the service of God and to asceticism. From
his spiritual instructor he learnt the proper use of some of the
names of God in exorcism, and lived the life of a recluse in a
gamden, most of the trees of which had been planted by himself,
.shutting in his own face the door of entry into and exit from the
houses of other men. They used to say that for more than thirty
years his food had been nothing but milk alone, and that ho
never used pulse or any sort of food other than (milk). One
day when Muhammad Husain Ehan, accompanied by me, went
to visit him, a cat came up to the Shaikh mewing piteouslv. The
Shaikh said “ This cat has cause of complaint, for you have
wasted both her time and the time of the master of the house,
causing it to be passed in frivolity, and distracting my heart."

1 In M3. (A) the life which here follows is headed with the name of ghaikh
Mahammad Qalandar of Lakhnan, biography No. XIII being given as che life
of this saint, I follow the text and MS, (B) in the arrangement of the names,
bnt follow the two MSS, in the designation of Sajyid Tsjn-’d-dm — “ of Lakh-
nan” — which is omitted in the text.

5 So. III.

3 Tide note on the heading of biography No. XIL

* The third and last sovereign of the Lodi dynasty, grandson of BnhiQl
Lodi, the iirst of the line. Saltan Ibrahim was conquered and slain by Sabar
on tbe field of Panipat in A.D. 1525.

6 MS. (Aj has j here— correctly as it Beams to me. The text and MS.
(B) omit it,

* A cnmbroaa translation of bat one which expl^ns its meanmg

fnlly.

44

XIV. Shaikh N:zamu-’d-DIn ‘ of NaesOl.

Xamol * is one of the famous cities of India. Although the
Shaikh was the disciple of Shaikh Khanun of the Cimti * order,
who was settled in the fort of Gwaliyar, he always declared that
he acquired most of his excellence, and education, as well
as the spiritual succession, from his own elder brother, Shaikh
Isma'il by name, fle was a Sufi who had attained the first
stage of recognition of God,* had overcome his desires, and had
acquired complete hope in Gcd’s mercy. He was thoroughly
acquainted with the (spiritual) condition of those who bad retired
from the world and had chosen the religious life, and possessed
great influence over them. I have heard that he used to order
the darvi^es of his hospice, during eclipses of the moon, to take
oil of the Golastrusf (a medicine well-known in India, on which
treatises, describing its virtues, have been written, and of the
properties of which the author has had some small experience),
and that under its influence the truth about the next world ®
was revealed to them, and that he nsed to recount to them 7 other
wonderful matters — but God knows the truth.

He remained seated on the throne of religions guidance for
nearly, forty years, and from early youth to the end of his life

1 The tex*- and MS. (B) have -‘Shai^ Nigam” only, but MS. (A), which
I follovvj g"Ive8 the Shaikh’s full name.

S The chief town of a sarhdr in fche Siiba of Agra (vide Ain’i-Akhariy Tol. 11.
trans. JarreLt, pp. 97, 182, 193,

3 Vid 0 iuprd, passim.

* vide Jfiild^dtU’’s-SuJiyyah (Sprenger) b. t.

S (rau^an-i-mdl-kangni). JUdl-kangm is the Bindi name

of celastrus or staff*tree. The oil is extracted from “ the aromatic bitter seed ”
of this tree, and is “ held in much repute for diseases of the' stomach and
bowels.” V^de I'allon, s. v.

« oXm OjAJj* This is not one of the properties attributed

to the drag by Fallon. It is pretty evident, from what Badaoni says, that
the drag, whatever it may have been, was an intoxicant, nsed by Nizamn-’d-
dia’a orders for the purpose of indacing a trance, or mock state of religions
ecstasy. The ordering of the use of the drug on the particular occasions
mentioned points to a debased superstition which has but little connection
with pure Muhammadanism.

1 The text inserts ^ here, although the word appears in neither MS. and
is pleonastic. 1 follow the readings of the MSS.

45

there were very few years in which he did * not make a pilgrim-
ag-e on foot, inflamed with strong desire and fervour, losing no
time on the way, to the shrine of that holy pole-star of the world,
^aja Qutbn-’d-din Bakhtyar of tJsh,* (may God sanctify his
tomb '). Towards the end of his life, owing to old age, and other
things which hindered him (from performing this pilgrimage), he
nsed to celebrate the festival ^ of the sainted Kkaja in Ufarnol.
In ahandoning all outward show he followed the footsteps of his
spiritual guide, and in his freedom from eeremonionsness and
formality he regarded rich and poor alike, observing the same
impartiality also in admitting disciples. I saw him when he was
surrounded by a crowd, and so did not attain to the honour of
conversing with him. His death took place in tbe year H. 907,
(A.D. 15S8-9,) and the words “ Alas for Xizam were found to
give the date.

XV. ShAIKHC-’l-HiDTA of KHAiRABin.^

He was profoundly learned and in early life spent many years
in teaching and giving instruction. He was a disciple of Shaikh
Safi, the spiritual successor of Shai^ Sa‘id, and held from him
a diploma, authorizing him to give religious instruction. In early
life he employed ® himself to such an extent in the acquisition of
exoteric knowledge that there are now living many wise men,

t MS. (A) has here which is wrongly substituted for

I have followed the reading of the text and MS. (B) which ia correct.

5 MS. (B) has (wrongly) for tJsh is in Transoiiana and was

the birthplace of the Khaja, who died on the 1-tth Rabi‘n-’1-Awwal A.H. 634
(A.D. 1236). He was offered by Saltau Shamsn-’d-din lyaltamish the post of
Shaikha-’l-Islfim. which he declined. The Khaja’s full name and titles were
Khaja Qutba-’d-diu Mnhammad Bakhtyar-i-Cshi-yi-Kakl. Vide Farishta, Bo.
text, II. 717-725 and Ain-i-Akbari 11. trans. Jarrett, 303 and note 2.

* uv® The term usually applied to the festival of a Masalman saint in
India. The word means “ nuptials,” and ia used to signify the saint’s union
with God, the festival usually commemorating his death.

i j.tAi jf . 1 + 5 + 50 + 900 + 1 + 40 - 997.

6 The chief town of a sarkdr of the same name in the Stiba of Awadh
(Ondh). The unnsaal name of this saint recurs in the Padishahnama, as tne
name of one of Shah Jahan’s officers.

« MS. (A) has wrongly, for jjfyiiws here. I fob.iw the text,

which is supported by ?dS. (Bj.

27 .

46

masters of perfection, ivho owe their wisdom to his teachinij. ‘
Latterly he devoted® himself wholly to the ^il/z-istic rule, fonnd-
in? an order of devotees, vowed to personal poverty, whose rnle
was resignation to God, retirement from the world, and the giving
of alms. A keen appreciation of the ecstatic songs and dances (of
d'lrviilies) and an overpowering relio-ious ecscacv were comprised
in his daily system of rel'-gious exercises,' and were never omitted.
He restrained his steps from wandering to the doors of men,
especially of worldly men, and those of position and rank, and on
these grounds he never accepted an invitation to a feast. All his
oSspring and followers secured the good fortune of the assistance
of the example of his practice in enduring poverty and want. One
of them wr.s his true successov^ .Shaikh Ahu-’l-Fath, who succeeded
to his prayer-mat, and is one of the most pre-eminent = among
tile learned men of this time. In his rules of conduct, both
outward and inward, he follow.s, wholly and completely. Lis-
veneratile father and he is the author of many standard works
on most branches of knowledge. Never did a beggar tro away
di.satjpointed from the Shaikh.

L'ne day hlahammad Husain I^an asked the Shaikh.. " What
£01 c of a man wa.s Salar Mas’iid, ° whom the common jieople of

1 L T. are hii heirs.”

2 liie ten has while both MSS. have which is correct.

t Tiie tejit has here Cjii which is a very nEsatisfartor’,- readioo-

Tnr*® ''we ^ which is uodoubtedly correct.

•' ,/• of LiteraUr males.” The force of tue e^pressica

wil: t o ■’ir.' .ir-i-oocl when the Oriencal view of tna-scalme su.-erioriiy ig
i'‘:c;iPuu"‘'re'L

® ? 0 Q :o “^ultan MahniiicI of GhaMl. He was slain bv HirdQg at

Bihruie. in AwaJh ( Oudh) oa his wedding-day, which thus became, in a doable
sense, his < ude -npra). The point of the question, put to a rir-egnm.

ably orthodox Masalman, will be appreciated only by tliose who are acquaint-
ed with the laticudinarian cult of this “ saint.” Want of space compels

roc- to forego an account of this cult, but those who are interested in the

popular religion of Indian peoples and in the peculiar devplopments of

l^Tuhammadanism in India will do well to study “ Heroes Five ” by ilr. B.

Greeven of the Indian Civil Service Curiously enough this Northern
Indian cult finds its counterpart in the DakLan in the cult of ‘J.bdu-V-
Rabman. a close relation of Salar Mas'ud, which however is not nearly so
popular tui 13 the cult of the latter.

47

India woralnp r ” The Shaiih replied, “ He was an Afghan who
met his death by martyrdom

Towards the end of bis life, in accordance with an Imperial
summons, he came to Fa’-hpur and there saw the Khnlifa * (rice- 28 .
gereut) of the age. When the Emperor heard that the Shaiih,
when the messenger conveyed the summons to him, set out from
his hospice on toot, without allowing anything to detain him,
travelling thus until his servants sent his baggage and travelling
litter after him, he was much pleased. When he asked the
Skaikk a question the Shaikh would make a sign to signify that
he was hard of hearing, and the Emperor would give him a piece
ot gold. He also ordered t„at a subsistence allowance ^ should
be assigned to the ShaUdL, and then immediately gave him
permission to depart.

The '-lerith occurred in the year H. 993 (A.D. 1585).

ilay the mercy of God be upon him !

XVI. Sh.ufh D.t'vr of CH.tii,

( J/ay God sanctify his soh-l

Ch.ati * is the chief town of a pargan i in the District of Lahor.

The ^aikh'i r..,L'le ancestor.s came first from the land of the
•.\r;i!)s - to Sttpur,* whicii is in the Multan country, and the holy
Sfiikh was himself born in that place. His noble father proeeed-
t 1 from this world to eternity before his biith, and his mother
died ' very shortly after it. and he, left alone, as an incomparable

I The Ttry of this r-mly shews the uawilMcgress to

Cniintenan.'c in n-y the deh -ei! cult of Salar lliis'ud

s iV I. Akb,;r.

® Either a buhs’stenoo allowance in mcoey, or, mere pro-

lands Held on anna teuare.

{A) and the text have 'tS. {B) has The descrip-

tion of this town given in the text enables as to identity it with Chat. Chat
and Atnbala (not to be confounded with the well-known military cantonment,
wnich was in the Sirhind Sa,k ir of the Suha of Dihii), together formed a
mahall in the Sarkur of the Bari Duab in the S«6a of Lahor. Vide Aln-i-
Akbart Vol II. (trans. Jarrett), p, 31S.

b A vagae term including both Turkish Arabia and Arabia

Proper.

^ A ^argana town in the district “ Slrun-i-PanjnadP’ (beyond the five
■rivers,) opposite the Sind SSgar Duab Sarkdr of the Siiha of Multan. A, A. II.
(Jarrett), 331. 7

48

penil,* was brought np nuder the guardianship of his elder
brother. Miyan Rahmatn-’llah. When they set him tasks in
the reading of the Qura’n, tears would sometimes flow over the
surface of bis blessed cheeks, and he -would say, “ Tiouhle me not
in respect of this matter, but leave me unto God the ilost High.’’
From this time they knew that he had no need of any acquired
learning.

Couplet.

“ What need had he of instruction in polite learning,

“ Who was himself from the first well learned therein ? ”

They say that ore of the two princes of both -worlds, either
Imam Hasan or Imam Husain,* (may God he gratified .with
i.heni !l, it cannot be decided which, taught the holy' Shaikh in
29. a dream some verses from the first chapter of the Qur'an, and
sometimes when he went, to refresh his heart, to watch the
play of children, s he would dejectedly and perplexedly watch
them from afar, and would say, *• 1 see their faces scratched,
their bodies* covered with blood, and their skin torn off, and
some of them appear to me as though they had lost their heads.” ^

When, after many temporal vicissitudes and various hai-dships,
he came to the pargana town of Satearah.^ and from there to
Labor, he commenced to study under IMauliina Isma'il of Uoh,^
who had received instruction from his highness the lord Manlavi

' ‘‘an orphan pearl.” i.e.,, a pearl rrhieh hag no peer. The

-I'^uble meauine of the word cannot be reproduced in Entrlish.

• Tut' siancrlitprert s>ns of ‘Ab and Ffitimab, and crandsona of llnhammad.

f The te-tt has but both MSS. have

which is evidontlT the correct reading. I

follow the MSS.

* The text here has -with the though the word is thus

written in neither MS. The mistake does nut alter the sense, but it destroys
the sitruGtiiral uniformity of the eentence.

6 This phrase is here used in its literal sense. The Persian has

° This must be Sadkhara or Sadkara, as it is written in the Ain-i-Akbari
( both text and traoslation) in the Bari Duib Sarkdr of the Siiba of Multan.

■! The well-known town in the Sarkdr Birin-i-Panjnad {beyond the five
rivers) in the Sato of Multan. Vide .iin-r-Akhari. Vol. 11 ( trans. Jarrett),
p. 331 Kaverty - The Mihran of Stnd,” J. A. S. Pt. I , 1802 passim.

49

‘Ai"f-i-Jami, (may God sanctify his tomb i), and in early youth
he read the commentary of Isfahan! ‘ -ivith such crUica!
acumen,® that the best students from amoii«' the natives of the
country, who were reading that hock ia class with him, stood
astonished at the perspicuous quickness of his apprehension auJ
the clearness of his intellect, and his tutor said, “ Frieiids. lust
,a3 we, in our time, used to rejoice and contend for siiperioriiv
ill the sight of our respected ruaster, so too will this la<!, bel'oie
long, attain to such a degree of respect that the peopie v-i!l>
look towards him with blessing and benediction, aniL irom ids
.noble and profitable words will gam advantage and esctiletice.” ‘
At last he became a living witness (ot the truth of ■ and (oiie
might say) the source of (the saying), ■' Blessed is he who hath
seen me or hath seen one who hath seen me.”®

“ My love, though he went not to school, nor wrote a line,
“By means of one glance instructed a hundi-ed teacheis iii
(difficult) problems.” ’’

And, having attained the po.sition of a most learned ^age he
was rejoiced with the good pews of the sacred text, “ O David,
vei ily have we made thee a vicegerent.”^ And at the very time
when he was employed in the exercise of harsh and severe

I

“ El-Sharli El-Mokammel, comtnentariiis ab^olaius oe

genealogi^ H^sani neglecta, auctore Imam Hafitz Abu, Mum Mnhammed hen
Omar Ifedinj Is/akani, [anno 581 (inc. 4 Apr. 1185) mortnoj. In hor com-
pendioj quod ita incipit : Lans Deo. qui ex cultoribus -Buia cos qdog vult
praeter ceteros distinxit, etc., auctoritatem Humni Ben Modem in trudiiiune
‘ Modim de potionibna ’ describit.” Haji Khalfa. iv. 41.

1 tSU^-

3 MS. (B) has Tne text rightly follows MS. (A.) with

* MS. (B) has The text rightly follows (A) with

^ The text, following MS. ( A) has There is nu such wor.i

SIS (B) has which is correct.

* One of the traditionary sayings of Muhammad, iu which he refers to
himself.

A. couplet from Ilafiz. Ode 2-11 ‘'Colonel Jarrptt’*; Ti.e te\t aui

MS. (A) have for MS. (Bj has t-

e AfldA .AiW b| ijiib. xxxvin,:;5.

r.o

austerities, having’ eoticeived, by means of the attractions of
God. — “ which are c-qaal to the acts of bcth men and jinn .” — a
30 . strong craving alter feod, his spiritual holiness Gliaasa-’s-Saqalain
{mav God be phrased with him !) evinced, in all circumstances,
great interest in his progress, and became bis helper, assister,
and guardian, keening his regard always fixel upon him, openly
lis'tniag to and returniag -ravourahle answers to his petitions,
until be nerforce drew him, after the manner of beloved ones
who are attracted, and attracted cuts who are beloved,* to the
Cl .^aintship. Divine guid..’ice, and perfection, to the closet’,
of p.’opiuqrdct' (to God', to '.tie ei.amber of the grasideur of Goa,
and 10 the resting-place of the rioliness of theLcrdof Majesty.
When under the irduence of tiiis strong craving after God he
u«cd to wander bare-headed uiia bare-foot iu the desert about
Dibalpdr.s the dwelling-place of beasts of prey, vrild animals,
aii’I birds, iu a spot now kuo'.vu as ^hirgafli ; —

JZeiad.'h'/i.

•' We arc lovers w and’cring in the jiiains of Damascus.”^

Aua soirictimcs tvhen he went to circirmainbulate the blessed
shiiue oi tlmt holy Saint, obeyed of all the v.-orld, Ganj-i-Shakar,^
(m/r,- God sanctify his to.mb Ij he would there receive signs, and
txpf’ience happy vi..,ions, and engage in conversation and iuter-
coui’.se (with the saint's spirit), a detailed account of which is
beyond tiie limits of this hastily compiled history. They are
iccounted in detail in the book (known as) Na^mat-i-Da'udi,^
which was written by that cream of saints and fruit of the pure

1 The pleonasm is unavoidable.

3 Or Oipalpur. The chief town of a Sartar of tlie same name in the Siiba
of Mnltiin, now the headquarters of the Dipalpur Tahfil in the Montgomery
District, Paiijab. Dirie Hunter’s “ Impe, i<d Gaiettevr" iv. 30'i. Alii-i-Akbari
(trans, Jarrett,', Vol. II. 331 et jMsaiin, and Kaverty’s ilihrdn of Sind,"
J. A. S. B., Ft. I., 1S9£ pai^ini.

5 MS. (A) has, wrongly, j for j.

♦ Another instance of the use by Indian Muslima of the practice of
circumambulatioD, which should be restricted to the Ka‘hah, at the tombs of
saints.

3 Vide .-Kprii, p. 19, n. 1,

* The title of this Look, written in honour of kLaikh Da’ud, evidently
beats teiereuc'.. the psalnis of David.

51

at liearf, Sliaikli ALa-'l-Ma'ali, the son of Shaijdi
already mentioned, the date of whose most fortanut-: birth mar
be deduced from the words " the beggar of Shaibh ita’ud,” ' cr
from the words “ ^bu-’l-ila'ali. the worshippe: ;t the true
(God),”® and who is now the successor of Sh'^'-ib -’-h'au Ga n..'.

(may God sanctify his soul !). When he had spec., .. tmrii.d
twenty years, or thereabouts, in ecsnitic longinc’ God .

wandering orer plains p.rd desei:-. im was insni-.e . r tevfr; -
a regular mode of life'-- and to tb • /’gions or; oi

people, but since he ioaa had nc ornard re'-i ■ ris'ru., ,
and guide be hesitated to untlertaii charg;. he

initiated and appointed by his snirG-o'' . j^olines-i -G ■ r--i-A‘?.rr. '
for the following duty, namely, to as^i -t tor the si £ preservii g
the spiritual succession, the rorercrd Shaiku 3L

(may God sanctify Ins tomb I) who was the -'u ot Sheika
‘Abdu-’i-Qadir the second, and the fatb.er of Srt-ikjt ‘Abdu- i-
Qadir,® v/ho at the time of writing is occupyi’.ig iiis venerable
father’s place in Uech, by drawing him (more closely) to God.

And the late saint, (may God have mercy upon nlni .) since ho
had .already many times asked for assistance from. ■ his disciple,
who was after his own heart, and turned to him it; every impo’"-
tant business, and had asked ^ that a. j'atihah • miylit be oifered
up on his (the late saint's) behalf, delayed to draw up his
blessed tree of spiritual successioa and to issue a permit for

1 ij!i 20 + 4 + 1 + 10 + 800+10 + 800 + 4 + 1 + 6 + 4 - 960.

i 1 + 2 + 6 + 1 + 30 + 40 + 70+1 + 30 + 10 + 8 + 100 +

2 + 200 + 60 + 400 = 961. The totals of the two chronograms differ by one.
This letter chronogram is given in Abu-T-Ma’ali’s life, on p. 103 of the text
of this volume as the date of his birth, and therefore presumably gives
the correct date.

5

* An instance of the belief among ilnsiims leading the religious life that
something which seems, according to their ideas, to correspond to the Sacra-
ment of Orders in the Christian Church, is necessary to enable a man to
start as a religious instructor of the people.

t His life is given on p. 91 ( text) of this volume. (Chapter II, Xo. XTI.)

6 The word is omitted in IIS. (B) probably by an oversight of the

copyist.

1 Prayers offered up for thejwelfare of any person. Vide
Ja’far ^arlf and Herklots, s v. “ Faceeha neeut khyr kee. ‘

ill—

VT) V y

52

perfeociri:.'^ or Jisoiples he himselt Tent oroc J .7 to the tovro

jf Satkaia.' '.vliere ti.r; -.aial (may God have meivy opoii iiioi :)
;i:k 1 rar.r-- times pi'evi usly lodgeJ, on wiiich oooision, wiiuo
ioide:- i.ie iatinenee '. 0 ; ois ecstatic longing atter tjo-u, lie said,

■ Here ii pL-ikii Giiaus-i. k'zam (may God be pleased '.>1111 him ' >
,,c, Lo: fonib and sign'.o '-3 that he earrasts to rue his pirayer-
iii r', iu lr,, ti'L-e 01 rjodr.aal sacceseion, horse, oorerod litter.

-f d lO.i re ap 111 ten'll; -1 of Shai kh-d jtzi and spintaai leadc!-
'.Lp,. ' 7, -lea ti.e iali 1 (may God- sanctify his tomb!)

'to' liner, ir^iri on roe', -i/i that occui'i- -ace, and tviien b.i5 Iciiu -v-
'ji 11 aner.-..''..:S completely confirmed, he eatra.it£J.

the diune ■ aarga coramitied to him to him whom his soul desii-r-d,
bat who 'appeared a.s though !ie were the seeker (not the songnt
liter), returning from fcis soaring flight (of ecstasy) to ordinai'y
interoonrse ( with his fellow creat'ares ), -and spread the mat of
joorning in the newly-built town of Shirgarh, near to Ciiati,^
aud half-ttay between Multan and Pattan, started a new order,
ii.e QudhhjynJi,* which is midway between the two exalted orders,
i^airoAvardiji/ah and Ciskfiyyah,^ (blessings on them, all tlnee,
hum God 1) aud in the Divine power aud by means of close

■ ••■'liiicction with the true God, be so carried forward® the work
ciuic ti-e sound issuing therefrom will not die away ^ until the
,j >andir.g of the last trump.

'.Vuen Mulla 'Abdu-’llah of Sultanpur, who was known.
M'lklidumn-'l-Mulk, girded his loins to stienuous efforts

r I : s'lprh p. n,

• 'i’ho word is omitted in JIS. (B). As vowel points ra-e n.jt usedtliR
■‘•atiRo of MS. (B) is to the same purport as tliafc of tlie text and MS. (Aj,
..,i‘ wo'uij bs bter-dly translated, ‘'May his tomb be saactifird."

" MS. IB). Ttiu text and MS. (A; have Vide -'ji" i. p. (7, n. G.

’ T' ii 'A- ’ T niiisc not be ooni' 'anded with u,!. oid.^r order bea.-ii' i the saniO
■ iiJ... i- -.:,tnt*-d i'i A M. otil (A il. 1 Ittt-C) ty S..*--! i 'Aljuii- 1- .'1.1 :

1 - ; n .i F; - whose shrine it at B3di.i:i.! 'flm oi io, .i ' r is ' ■ .'

f . li,; a. "rJer ..-i.iouo the S'l.'.'.isof Asia.

*1 ’ '-i h.iV'3 h?. alrtaay roiertod ro. i'oii tii.‘ rrio**- i!

-vron^ly has ^ c - dt,;!'

53

iu uprooting the men of God,‘ beconiiiig the lueans of
the death of several of them, he sent an imperial order
in the name of, Salim * Shah Sur, the Afghan, from h walijar,
summoning the holy among otlieis, in ohediene-- to ivhich 3:

order the Miifln set out in haste with cne or tvv’o atteniraits, and.
meeting h[akhdumu-’l-Mulk, outside G^aliyar, witn raarks oi
the greatest ® respect,* alighted in a sr.ot where he sst down
with him, and where a beneficial conversation took piaoe- The
pernicious mischief-makers, as soon as they witues-^eo this con-
versatioii, tied away to eteiv corner, so ths.t they con-J itot bo
discovered even by search being made, hiaididumii- i-hltLlk said.

Their report is not on this ground ialoiioj falsified, ' ^ After
much talk and conversaricn the ShaiiA asked *• itu": vers tu-i
real motive for summoning us religious mondicarits f ' hi a kit -
damu-'l-Muik replied, “ I heard that your disciples, rehen pc-iiorm
ing tr>e religious exercise of ~ikr, said • O Da’ud, O iJa fid ! ’ "

Ths Shaikh replied “ There has probably been seme mstake in
hearing, owing to a simiiaiity of sounds, or else my follov ers must
have said ‘O WadM, O Wadudl’”^ In connection vrirh this
matter the Shaikh remained for a whole day, or a whole night.’

>■ Vide Badaonl, Vol. I. {trans. Eankmg), pp. ol3-525. The •‘men of Got”'
referred to seem to have been the Mahdaicis,

® ilS. (A), The text has the corrupted form

S jrUj omitted in MS. (B). The text rightly follows MS. (A).

* The text has J erroneously. Both MSS. read

J-

* tSJ) trijl- MS. (A) has The text ricLdy follows

MS. (B).

* Makhdoran-’l-Mnlk accused Shaikh Da’iid of permitting ni; disciples to

address tueir riAr (vide Hughes’ ‘‘Diet, oi Islam,’’ s. v.), Jncctlv to him
(Da'id) instead of to God. Da'ud rebuts the aceusadon by asserting that the
■rvords actually used, which might conceivably have been ni;£ti.’.,eu Ar 0.
Da’ud 1” were “ O, Wadud 1 ” i.e,, .‘‘O, God!” mearis “ loviuu’ ’’

Cji J. ..• the ioring King " is one of the titles of God.

7 }i^jj b (.ilWi editor of htxt appears

to be doubtful as to the meauiiig of the words ^ be dfids it

necessary to explain in an apologetic footnote that this is the rtiv -lug of eacii
of the three ilSS. to which he had access. It seems i.> r..e rhat the
anchor means to sav that Da'ud spent about twelve hours with ?; .^hdunm-'l*
ilulkj and that he (the author) cannot say whether the coufer:ncc began in
the morning or in the evening.

54

jostowinj aim subiicie txljortatiouj anu aJvm'e, Rji i iL-ipariu: r
I him preeijUb knowledge and facts relatiug to GonJ Maitli-
ti.nn-’l-ilulk ~as much Ltfccted and dismissed the Ska'kk from
:i:at placb ticuour.

Ou one occasion the austerity and pie*y of Miyah Eiskmu-’d-dic
m' Talariihn ” may God have mercy npoc him! (some of wiiO-..
..iorious 'Attxi'ouLes are mentioned in the Najntii-’r-B.i^-d) h.v;>-
i'led to le the subject of couversati ju in the noble as>eiiib]}' .v
rtf- Maihh -and he srdu ” Ah, what a pity was it that tlm
- .ilr-1 in pemrmal desiie oi ai.i love for God, and was the slave r
, - rre merely' V - — ■

Ueniistich.

" Tht'i ' a*r kept one tr.inir, and ( nianyj things are lost to thee. '
Eew-, ■ at the lasty from whom thou, remaiiiest apart. ”*

The iihfrihiiy and charity of the Skulkli-^ disposition were saca
■■ a: on cemriin fixed occa-ttons,^ either once or twice in the year,
h - ''Catters'! abroad in promiscuons chiar;':y“ all the money arid
..o.ls that ne had receive], gratuitcusiy, and he and his chaste
••-ife kfcji; nothing in the cell that was their dwelling hut an
■t.rthen pot and r. piece of old mattin". and when he saw that lii.s
i:ea,sure-cLbSt was full he would again in the same manner
h'burs.b its contents in promiscuous cha ■ity,’^ and notwithstanding
tnis (protasion ). on the birth-clay and foa-st-rlay of the holy Ghaus-i-
'■gzani fmay jod be pleased vith him !j all the needs’ of the pil-
g- mis. whether of high cr low degree, whe, to the number of nearly
h.iTid.’^ed taoasand souls, raoie or less, were gathered t.ogether,
• ere met hy disbursemenis from the airus-chest of his hospice,

? Vide t'. 3, n. 4.

- MS. I'A't L'dsj^'- ilie tez'-, rightly folio^ving MS. (Bj,

^ MS. (B) ciAirsJ^

^ Tbc ttiiL i-e'ids lls" Both IfSS. read 513.

'7,; adds a,-t.n This may or may aob be an interpolation. It

.'.vilifies Ojly tliat the occasions ’.rore fixed by the Shaikh himself.

t ^;,Uj li jje relinquished to rapine.” Both MSS. read, for

I prefer the reading of the te.xt.

’■•■’V. “ he ordered a raid (to be made j.”
i tJ\ iTg_ (g_) aJ|,

55

auil tliafc profasioii, praise be to God, is still contliined, nay rather,
iS increased many fold. Some of the auspicious utterances of his
inspired tongue, the interpreter of divine truths, are as follows t ; —
*• lu the name of God, the Uirector and Guide in the darkness
of oceans and deserts.” I have many times .seen and experienced
the efficiency of this holy saying iu positions of fear* and danuer.
Another is : —

Praised be He in respect of Whose Essence our thoughts are
bewildered,

“ Praised be He in respect of the understanding of Whom our
understanding- soars.” -

And there- are many other e.xaniples of such prayers, nraises
~ikTs and choice phrases, and the sicuct-ring posy cf that holv' mac,
composed by himsr If, was as foliot\i ; —

" Da’ad has been eifaced in name and tracw
For poverty otiaces all traces.”

hen I, the author of those pages, iu the time cf Bairarn Ivhh’-i!
( cliiit best of times, when India was as a briiie,’,! was a stu.lenc in
Agra, I heard fi'om certniu aurv^^Ji-.s great ret-ort-s of the Shaikh’s
noble and majestic attributes, and from that time forward 1 sowed
the seed of attachment to and trust it him in the ground of pre-
paration (for meeting him) and was in secret a slave to thi.s desire
(of meeting him).

Hemistich.

'■ Aye, verily ^ doth the ear, ’u true lovers, outstrip® the eye.”

1 omitted in IIS. (A).

"■ ■ AIS. (B) iins which docs not miihe .'cnse.

* Both MSS. read arid there is a fooinote in the cevt t:iviT;a- this

IS the reading of the MSS. It is, l.ov.cver, wong. T!ie reading of the
text ) i.i prohabiy correct, tliougli it is not vert' good Arabic.

^ Baduoni's abl.orrence of tiio ndidehty of Aba-‘i-t'a/I and Akbar’s later
ad risers cauaes him to forget hib abuorrouce of the Shs.'ah tenets o' Bairani
Khan.

6 LSi\ its. (B) has iSb <JSb> which is nonsonse.

« text. MS. (A) has (.Airf. which reading I prefer, .as it

seems to me that would accompany more fatly than

J ha’C'e nev'ertheleaa translated the phrase by ’ outstrip" rather ihaa by
‘‘excel.’' The meaning does not snft’er. The reading of iXo. (B) ia not
distinct.

34 .

56

And ai that very lime I repeatedly made attempts to sfid
pay my respects to t'hat lioly mae. cicthing myself in tlie pilgrim’s
gwmeiii meet for the circutnaEibukition of that threshold around
which the angels do gc. ana set oac * for Shirgarh (with this object).
3 iit sometinies my fathc:’. whu has now obtained pardon and
iov. iv-nfss C'" his sins. T-rithsiood me and turned me back in the
'■<1; . and iomecii>';e.s I was let be other hindrance.s, which were the
v<ie,>..s or disappcintir.g r.-S cf tfie fruition of that good fortane.
r. f-e'-ir,.] of Tv.elr^ y ears rassed ever me, thus expectant, before one
■. 1 hue ,ser>r-.:i:s of th'it ccurtj Shailm Kaln by name, a solitary
travehmo -'.'iio had himself^ formerly been the means of my sernet
-iaov, '.iU.h'd of the ffi.tfM. h-ke the hunia, from hidden regions cast
his shadow on iBaUaon and Its environs, and said to me, “ Is it not a
poor hat tee holy Mi’, fin (Shaikh Da’nd) should be in the land of
tti.' i '.-inj: and that you should (fee content to) rest with hope
unfuldiicd and should not even once see him r” This soui-subduer
kindled a fire in rny perplexed soul, and the Most High God
firovidfcd the means (of the fultilment of my des're), for Muham-
mad Hnsain lilAn, in whose = personal service I was, went in
pursuit of Ibrahim Husain Mlrza from Kant u Gula * towards the
Panjab. and the means of attaining that happiness were thus pre-
pared for me. so that, as has been already mentioned,'’ I went to
Shirgarh from La’ior, and saw with my own eyes a portion of tlis
(spiritnr.l) beauty of the holy man — and what possessor of beauty
can be compared *0 liini f As he smiled and spoke light sparkled
from bis teeth, 'i a light which illuminated the dart abode ot the

1 The verb 13 cniitted in both MSS. and rightly inserted in the text.

* The test h.as Botii MSS. read which is correct.

5 if wrongiy omitted in MS. t.A 1.

* Vile Bauaoni. Vol. II ..text, p. 1.53. These events i.anpeiisd in the

year H. 081 1573-4}. hint u Giila (Shabjahanpur) was Mtinaramad

Husain Khan’s

6 MS. { 3 ) hr. i

i (textj. Both M&S< have ISa Ui. Tj,,; cenie

is not aSecie.d

7 viJiK-e j! The literal translation of this

<“a li.rht sparkled tr„m his anspicious incisors ”) reads so Very grote.squtlj
in English that I have sortenei the expression of Badioui'.<! almost idolatrous
veneration for the In plain Encilsh the phrase means no tnoie

than tir.u tbs holy n.u:i iiio.vru his teeth when lie siiuied.

67

heart, and fi’om -n'ldeli tlie secret of the Coanrenance of God was
manifested. In short for the space of three or four days 1 acquired
some advantage from this trans'torv life.

Few days passed on which Hindus, to the number of fifty or a
hundred, more or less (on each day), did not come with their
families and kindred to pay .i:eir respects to that holy man,
receiving the high lionoar of conversion to Islam, and obtaii.ing
lascrnetion in the faith.' I loc.nd the gates and waiLs and trees
and dwedings cf that deieftehle town filled with tiie sound of
the telling of rosaries and the reciting of God's praises, and tl;e

Shaikh bestowed

on

me Lis

dhspiciods C-ip.

sa vintr.- Pe -

tliou my deputy

to

thiue C'.vii

people, for (t!;

us to appoint a

deputy) is my wo;

,.,i. :>

.. L 5

and he Sent

, A kerchief and a

veil t'rcTii bis

chaste wife ^ to

mr

wives ^ a:

ltd children, aac

1 when I made a

representutiou to him, saying’. " If you bestow on me the g-dt
of a shirt, it will be light upon ligiit.'’ After some refieciior.
he said That also will an ive in due time’’ Having disclosed
to him some of the secieis of niy heart and iiiy de.'igns and
intentions, I endeavoured to o'utaia leave to depart. At this
point ^ that holy man left his masjid in lbs closed travelling
litter, owing to his great -weakness, and set out for my tiiost
halting-place. I. taking the pole of the litter on my shoulder,
walked for some paces with it. Wiule I was thus emploved a
powerful fit of vreeping oveicacie 'oie, and the Shaikh, stopping
the litter, said, "Put me down.” He alig'uted, and sat do>vn.
and spoke so much of the kncv-'leJge and love of God, the Most
High., that my agitation re-doubled. One day, at the time of

^ Badaofii’s enthusiasm probao'v him iutiO son.e exaggerntlori here,

Ta-kiug the iiuni'dcr ‘’fifty or a i.midrtd " to be about seTeiicv-tive, nnd
supposing that these conversioiis ■*. c.s Uiude on l.aedred davs in each

year — a Tery mild reucleriuG: or : e author's statement — we sdouM imtc a
result of 15. eW converts per ufi/tiv .

- The text rightly foliou'S ilS. (Ci with IIS. (A) has

v.'iiith u iucorrect.

- MS. (B) incorrectly omits tl e v"ird

* Lit. ■' me folic of the <-•: punty/’ a circunuocnticn in r-r.-i'et

accordance with Muslim etiqneLt-;,

^ Che test leads p . 'iSS. have ivSdch I nteidi.

e MS. ,B} ha- a mis spe'dhig due to the trHe.o}-

tneni. iu ipeakiuAg of trie

35.

oS

ieave-takino-, I represented, through Miyah ‘Abdu-'l- Walihab,
one of the ^aikk's sincere comparion=, (to whom is applicable
the text), ‘‘Blessedness awaiteth them and a goodly home, ’ ‘
tha: a report was current among the holy men of Hindustan
that tiie time for the rising of a religious leader was at hand,
that, most of that body, {i.e., the hoi 7 men.,) concurred in fixing
on one of the Sayyid,s of that country, whose anc-e.sEors had
formerly been seated on the throne of empire in Dihli and
Badtion tor some time.* that they were engaged in making pre-
parations for a holy war and in collecting arms,’* that they
pi'jiessed to have received direetioii.s ^ from the- b'-iy 'dhaug-i-
^ iinay Ct.<d b-.. pleased witii him I) to etiLrage in this
axtuir, ai;.l that they had implicated with themselves some ot the
ou the frontier, and that some of them professo.i to b.ave
received supernatural encour.ageraeiiD during theit as.semblies
end wiien they were iu dirScultieS- nii.l purposed to bring tlae
object .^f their desit-.-^ to an issue. I'he Shaikh a.-.ked. me, “What
36 is tinit iiiyytd's mode of life, and oond.tion 1' ” I said •• He h miin
W"f. lives it retiied life, in holy poverty,® conformaLijy to the sacred
law, a reclusc ainl an ascetic wlio h.ts resigned hintsc-if to God,
p:is''h g most of hi,' day.s anioiiL'' ti.e tombs {of holy men) and iiis
uiglds in his cell in w.'rship and s.ibnursi-..:; to Gou, bat he is a

(^U^'Uh XIIl 'J'i.

« Tb’s \s;is a de^cendanc of ‘AiVn-d-DTu ib'.-i- iJt.:l»r»nnnad

rrt!j-i*Mao"rak KhI ! tb<.' liisi r.'rror r.f t^e .SiiTvid

ch.ii.aiv, i'l.'ip li'An'i 1 i. Vul. 1. (iraris. iwi'-lvirtcj. no. kf2 Ihi': dvi-asty
VM5 rji-.: e::: :r'r.if’cvrc«l -*5 was tho u*.: tl r .-ruru witon an Qjtirnijt’Ga -a lie
T’ ''if,.' t'-ii: buf rite last T-jtmjH tor iv-,';, i:i accot'‘’.iQce with l.is owa

r- >,.a >r, j.fri ; t.y IkJil'il Lo.ii, c. rptire to Bidpu-i. Ii

St -a- s Mi.tr ...1 f, di-crnsce.:! 'a.*.. imo fat-dtionablt; iaudeiity, favoared

ri c'aMn': ,ir ri'w ni '''vuded Muinh,

S j fjTTj.t:- ■] ii. M.S i 1’)-

* ^ ' ’b* bas V ! icii ib

^ [ 1 .w, , .M'.ir the i-iugraphy of A'/am. (U) has the Arabic

form Mhaii^u-'l AMhatn.

The here iiag= liic puiticlo J, which id lu liuithcr its interpola-

ti'Gi Id uiiKh-iinatlc,

59

man of good farailyd unrivalled and incomparable in his know-
ledge of the military art, of excellent moral character and follow-
ing a most worthy mode of life.” The Shaikh said " The members
of that body [i.e., the holy men), are no true damsjvis, in that they
so traduce the holy Ghaus,^ and do him violence now that he can
no longer help himself,* and those spiritual encouragements and
signs are all part of the delusions of Satan, for ho%v could the liolj'
Ghaus n:ay God be pleased with him 1) countenance s ich matters
as this, he whose rule it always was that the people should expel
the love of tlie world from their hearts, and. in all candour and
sincerity, should set their faces towards the love or God, the Most
High, ahandoning vain desires and lusts, and not that one should
tar.', aside from the path of worship, asceticism and holy endeavour
to full again into the net of the world, which is the enemy of God?
tiay to that Sayyid from me. ‘‘ May God the Most High vouchsafe
to you grace to stand fast in the path wliich you hold. If the least
suspicion of any desire for evanescent delighr.s reicains ijn your
heart), it behoves you to strive to overcome it, and not to be
beguiled by the impo.stures andi mi.srepresontation.s of a bewildered
band of know-nothings.’ thereby straying from the path. Though
the Igver of the world should attain to kingship. — the supreme
object of worldly men, and the seeker after the (sensual) joys of
paradise should reach the rewards liescowed by the Everlasting
God, that is, the maidens and mansions'* of the ne.xt world, and

1 jIg ihej. Possibly '' a unarrio.'i mar with a family,’' but I prefer t'te

translitioi; which 1 have given, on ace Hint of wiiat I'cl'uw.s. 'llie as.sertion
that the religious Snyyid was .i m-irrir.'l man woahl rr. .i.e the st-veruent taut
lie w.is acqusiiitoj with the art of w.ir ^ no'i Tiie assertion that

he 13 of imperial descent gives a ivi^on for h.s knowledge of that art.

2 The te.vt here inserts ih: These words are in neither MS.

and I Itavc omitted them,

^ c^T Jl; ^ Jit. “ conimiT higi'way robbery on that holpiesa

one.'’ iJe hnjrtuLs 7nl 7act bonum.

i The paradox contained in t'ue expiession cannot

•weh be expressec iu English.

t, V-J'-t. (B) has evidently a cucyist’a error. The context

clearly shews that this expression is used here for one wiio is religious solely
for the purpose of attaining to the sensual jo^s promised to good Muslinis in
the next world.

^ The text has Both MSS. have the conjunction j, which the

sense requires.

60

tne lover of Gocl ^ should die of grief from the utter liopelessness
of ritraicing his object, yet is the disappointment of this last a
thonsand-fcld^ better and more happy than the fruirion and
37. attc.iameut of desire experienced bv the former two clashes of
poor-s 7 iriied men.’’ And the Skaikh- speaking on this snbiect,
scatteied amongst us so manv jewels of piofitable advice th.at
pearl-libe ieais began to fall trom the et-es of those that heaid
him, upon the skirts of their robes, and. that (vvorldly) object
being forgotten, we were thrown into quite a different frame of
mind, one above description, and* in that state of burning
anguisli j ;v.de the Shaikh adieu, uttering cries of grief.

hl v heart, in the h.ope that one cry might perchance reach
’'her.

'■ lias urrerc'd in this mountain lameiitaticns such as vveio
never uttered by Farhad.”

And since the roads between Labor and rihirgarh were, in
consequence of the rebellion* of the TTluak Bairji Mirzas,^ closed,
both at the time of icy going to Shirgarh and at the time of mv
return, and as I was alone, the Shaikh gave me an attendant as a
guide, who was to take me to Shaikh Abu Ishaq-i-jlihrang in
Labor, “ one of the most noted of the holy man’s deputie.s, in
order that he might arrange to send me with a caravan to the
army cf Husain IG-Sn, which had come to Labor from Talamha,
and was to proceed thence to Kant-u-Ga!a. ” Vhhen I reached
Labor I set out for Hiudustan with. Husain Elan's men.” I was

1 1 he wt.o loves Oo.i for His own sake, irrespective cf ary hope of
rew.'.ri. Cf. S. Francis Xavier’s hymn, “ 0 Hsus, ego amo te ! ’’

s Both MSa. have jjySk The reading of the test appears

to roc Vi be preferable.

' The text omits thongh both H.S3, have it.

* iB) has ctivl;.?, rvhic'n makes nonsense.

6 1 underitand tins pnir =e to mean the ili.r7.5.s who were, with their
relative Ui ’.gh Itlrzi I'not Clurh B:.;g Mirza, who was a younger brother o.f
'Uti'-a'' Ht'Chb jiirzi. and nticie of Baharj in rebellion.

H. 5 biography i.s given or. p. 4*5 (text) of this volume, but no referfn-ce
.o, ate to ti;e title In the re<iLiing T follow Tl.'t lA'i. The text a:,d

ii.s I 1; ; b .ve The -L'K-iAitari ( C.ilcutta text 1. h 33) reads

61

sitting" one d-ay at our lialting-place at Sailiaranpur * in a garden,
coasiiineci with giief at my separation from that holy "man, when
a traveller brought to me a Qadiri^ sMit. which he had in his
hand, saving, Take this, which I received from the hand of a
venerable saint, and give me something to help me on my way.’’*
Wise;! I qiiestioned him as to the truth oi the matter he said,
‘■Ty'hen hlirza Ibrahim Husain met with tirit inischanet' I, with
a party or his troops, overwhelmed with misfortune and a pt oy to
:'-'ur;c.ciers, a'. ri’.'ed stripped and naked at ^irgnrii. wh.-re we
att.aened ourselves to the holy saint, our h -Iper, and he gave some-
tiling ::i each of ns. When my tu'rn c'^me round he to;'.; this
shirt off his blessed body, and bestowed it upon me. 1, thin’sing
that it would be irreverent to wear it, deposited it in safe eustodtg
with a view to taking it away to some place as a rare gift ; and
now I leave it with you.” I received from him that mysteriously
conveyed gift, that treasure wafted to me by tbe viiud, as though
it had been a blessing and benediction.

Verses.

Tbe perfume of thy shirt has reached me.

My soul was ravished by that sweet odour.

I had offered afafihah ^ for union with thee,

Praise be to God that mj fati hah was accepted.

And, remembering the word that hi had spoken, I regarded
this occurrence as a miracle,® and I now preserve that Joseph’s
coat 7 as I preserve my life — and praise he to God for all this !

t The chief town of the Sarkdr of the same name in the Suha tf Dilhi.
Kow the headquarters of the District of the same iiame in the M.-W. P.

2 This expression seems to have puzzled ti'e editor of the text, for he
appends a footnote stating that it. occurs in all the three ilSS. to which he
had access. The Q.idiri shirt was probably a shirt of a distinctive pattern or
cut. worn hy the Qdd n-'iyiali order of ascetics, founded by ^ai^ Da’iid.
v'v- Both 3ISS, have, wrongly,

* .Ici; when his army was defeated at TaUu.Ta. TT.ie Badaoni, text,
to). II., pp. lo7. 1 j'3.

® A pi.is^r for the rirti.iiiH’cnt of an ■ jeoitation of the

le h'.-' cni-pLcr ol the Out'crt heii c p..:l ,jf the t ; r.ise

V ii ;s quite pr-.s,ole that ti.e so! i.ei Piay 1 ...V. . e; .' .-a t"d h;, 'uaikh

ud t', lelivui .i.e shirt to Ba ivoui. Witha :c luei.t ■■ _ t'u v ' . was nef -.v
fc " 'iCb-i' ".C’-r.

i' ". "Joi ih'i . u"t.'* Th“. I ’ >rciiee iS obvi :..b.

38 .

i ers^s.

Auii as I have br-en the companion of desire for his excellency

Fi'om the cradle, I hope that (that desire) will continue to
the grave

Verse,.

JDesire for thee within mv mind, and love for thee within nij
heart.

Did enter me with mother’s milk, and with my life will leave

Eie

rhe ftilowirg is a brief account of that lioly man. He was me
cjnosuiet of his time, an inspired prophet, and a worker of
wondei's and manifest miracles, giving clear proofs of his sanctity.^
Hf Lad nudorgoiio severe discipline “ and in holy endeavour had
sti'iveu much. In early life * he acquired e.xoteric knowledge
and Lad also been engaged in teaching. He had resigned himself
to Gc-d and lived an eremite, going never to the houses of worldly
men but once, wlien in obedience to the (I'oyal) command he
went fiom Shirgarh to Gwaliyar to see Salim Shah,^ and
although, the ^Dialijah of the age,^ wiien lie was proceeding to
Fatan «ent Shahbaz Khan t to summon the SkaiJ^ to bestow
rn iiim the honour of a visit, the Shaikh made his excuses, saying,
39. '■ 3Iy secret prayers are snfiEcient.” He avoided to the utmost
of Lis power the companionship of the lords of the earth,

1 literally “ the pole-star,” “ the pivot on which everything tarns, or

the poiiit of attractiou.” “Cynosure,’’ as used by Miltoo, fairly represents
the sense in English.

The text has

. SIS. (3) has and MS. (A) has

which has

been altered to

is without doubt the true reading.

8 The text follows SIS. (A) with (B) has

4 — Text and MS. (A). MS. (B) has ^hich is wrong.

8 Vide huprd, p. 53, n. 2. The text haa the corrupted form also

the MSS.

® 6ci7. the Emperor Akbar, who went to Gujarat in A.H. 981 (A.D.

1573-4J.

7 >hos}!bnz ^an-i-Kambu. Fide Ain-t-Alfcan I. ftrans. Blochmann’sj ayy.
Shahbdz ^an was probably selected for the mission as being, himself, of a
holy family.

investing liimself with the cloak of “ Povertv is my glory.” ’
He was constant in almsH'iving. and in pointing out io searchers
after tiuth the path of holi>;ep.s, and whosoever was so aided by
fi:.)-tuiie as to be led to tiie received great profit from the

piecious utterances of that blessing of tlie age and cvnosure ®
cr the woi id. In the year H. 9c2 (A D. Ihr-t-o) his tent was
pitclied urider the curtain of the Majesty of God the Most High,
and in the Conit oi unior virh Him, may His glory be esaited !
Tt'.e wjrd.s "All, Shailm Da'ud the Saint;”® were found to
give tl.e date (of h-.s de.it ■ > May God bestow upon him His
bo’Jiidless niercv. and utise as with him in that hour when all
shall be gathered together'

X^'IL .tiif'iuJ- Aba.s- of A.MRoH.t.®

He was a traveller in the path (of righteousness^ and
wa.s mystetionsly attracted ‘by tiie love of God), but notwith-
standing tills he neglected l ot one jot of the observances of the
pure Law.' Many Tiiu’acles a-e related as having been performed

t A b''yi' g ef ll'il-a'iiniiiii. I; is rt-lrreJ rh.it a beggar eame !(■ hTnljaniriad
emnplaiii'] „ w.is ponr luiit tihu h! replied ■' Pe Terry is my glory.”

Si.oitiy at:r‘i ivar is a ^ec -ud i.'-ggir .tppuiaciied witb rre same ci-'inpldimi.

iinm.iii r* ;iiit-d. ' Purerry ib .i -'rri re t.'rh m this wcrkl ai.d the next.”
U;i lei"g a.-se.i by eoa.p •O', -i- iiow t'-r-se two appaieii'l} eontrfidictorv
sayings eould be reeeiu'fifd. 'he sr.ii, " Di.! ye not see that the first man had
fors.r.Keii the world, wiule the second had been forsaken by the world ? ”

: ilG, the point towards which all face in prayer. '‘Cynosure” does
not literally tianslate cither A.ys or tide t'.jirdj but it is t’ne nearest

ivoid we have in Engli.sh to these words in the sense in which they occur in
the text.

® tj'j .SjG ^ Ij. 10+l+3(lO + 10 + 600 + 4 + l+6 + 4 + 6-h30 + 10 = 9S3.

^ For another account of Ga'iaoni’s visit to this saint vide BadiionT, vol. IT.
(text), pp. 156, 157. Hnsain Kh an, Badaoni’s patron, also visited him abonfc
the same time, vide Badaoni II., 156.

^ A footnote iu the text gives *‘5aj/yid’* as a variant, but both MSS. have

Sh atkkJ’

® A pargaiia tovrn in the ‘farhar of Sambhal, Suha Dilhi. Vide
At5an, voi. II. (trans, Jarrett), 289.

T That to say that the Shnikh, though a Siip, observed the ceremonial
and litual law This is mentioned as somethaug uncommon, for SufU believe
that their Hupposed close union with God absolves them fiom the obligation
of such observances.

64

br him. He lived and received disciples without pomp or cere-
rj!Oi'-v When I after waitine urion the holy j[i\a7i Shaikh
i.a au‘ (may his honoured tomb he sanerififil !) was retin-nini'
; I T ie Panjab and travelled to- Badaon by vvay cf Ainroria, :
.' b • r. y respects to the alieadv meiitionel ^ He read a

■ -:rse r'roru the o-l'iriotis w.ord io* Goa-, and deiivere.l an address,
i-.'t -jn £ur d.ved clierae.^ tut n.; v- and asain he vrould tuir; to
n-- an-i make some rema ks -.-r. txcel-ence of the reward and
r=c- iniriense - resei ved for the I • i r-e-.iiteic.ijr. and he cuoted tiie
bocsss:! text "But good woiics. which me lastinir. and so
on :o the end or the vei-se. An i it afterwards became rn.anife.''t
that this was an indication of the uccun-ence of a calamity which
happened to me. The facts weie biiefiy thus : I had a daughter,

1 Tide supi'j, in the account of .Hiaikij Da’iid's life ('No. XVI).
s Scii. Phai^ .than. Hia being Uvre scvled "the Sayyid” may account
for the variant referred tc in note 5 on the preceding p 'ge.

may be translated eitiier as above, br by “ not by
appointment,” which would mean that the disconi-se was not one of a regular
series or delivered at a time when the ShatkA was in the habit of delivering
an address. The text aud MS. (B) have MS U ) has which

Is better.

* 5I.S. (B) has evident'y a copyist’s error.

S These words, olar Utl| ol*sUli j occur twice in the Qu>-’dn, once in
Sirah XVIII. 4t.

VU( ^ j

“ Bnt good works, which are lasting, arc better in the sight of thy Lord as
to recompeiisv, yud better as to hope/’

And in ^inari XIX- 79.

^ •'.•s' '5' ^o-*-

j 4>iLP j

‘‘Aitdgoi- ’. .. irks, ^bich iro lasting, are better in the sight of thy Lord
as to re,..a';f',- so, ai-d Dettcr in tlit' issue {than ali wt.rldly pa^sessions)/’
i: wt5 {H •: ^v,'y the sec'>:..i of t le'^c two rexiv t:,e quoted, for

i:;f‘ ioriH- ■- but a pjrii ui of a \trsf. wtiiic tif laUt-r i> a cumplete ver>e.
lji*rrc 1 i w' v.-r, no real ddiV/tiice beiw-ea r'l.; uioanings of the two
i':-re ns i*. tlifft-: uf one w..ni of/\ la the Arabic and thia
diift-reiic’ mi r.m v.ay elicia nu* •'eufc in either

u)T> MA (A) h; £ jl

whom I dearly loved, and while I was on this journey * che
passed awaj" in Badaon from this deceitful vvorld. Pro’-ahiv
those coijsoliii!^’ subjects were (mentioned) for the comfort c: or.'
heart — but God knows all !

The Shaikh's death occurred in the year H. t‘t7 (A.D. ISTf* _

XTIII. Khaja ’'Ai'UU-’sh-ShahI^.

He was the orthodox successor of iO^ajagau - IHjajaw-,.
the true successor of the holy lyjaia-yi-Ahrar (may God sro -
their souls!). When Khaja •Abdu-’.sh-^ialild was born I-.- -‘i-i
taken to the holy Khaja-yi-Ahrar, who took him in his arms i:n l
said “He will be wise man.’’ The revered Khaja was
both in outward appearance and in irsward qufu;;;?j.s He pn-,.- , --,i
severe au.sterities,* .striving much in the path of u; .

was a compendium of all such perfection as inaa can uA.i... : j.
The people acquired grace from the precious uttorai.ces ,;if 'i a:
model of virtuous men, being directed thereby in the i-i-.tb ct
righteousness and godly living." He walked in the footstep. s
the holy Khaja-yi-Ahrar (may God sanctify his tomb ! ).

Cuming from Saraarqaud to India he remained here for .se-.-e.',t-.- 'U
years, and in the year H. 982 (A.D. 1.S74-5) be .said, " The :'me
of my departure draws nigh, and I have been commanded to
convey thi.s handful of bones, of which I am composed, to t'>.e
burying place of niy ancestors in Samarqand.’’ He then se" out
for .8uuiaiqand, and on hi.s arrival at Kabul it happened that
Hi rza Shall Rukh had just taken the people of Kabul captive,
and was returning with them to Buda^.shaii.” By lueatis rf the
intercc.s.sion of the Khaja nearly ten thousand person.s obtained
deliverance from the bonds of tyrants and oppressors. Two oi

• Tlic particle H is wrongly omitted from the text, 'niiich follows JIS. (B).
The reading of ilS. (A) is correct.

2 The text and (B) have which makes no sense .as a name, nnlesa

t, .

we t.ake it to be a corruption consequent on the use of the
is the correct reading, as in AJS, (A).

5 Or, perhaps, “ in exoteric and esoteric knowledge.”

+ The text follows 313. (A) with (u) l,„s

The text and MS. (B) have i-iyK. 313. (-3.) lias j

The difference doe.s not affect the .sen-.,’.

^ \ ide “ -bu-i-Jitto /,'■ vul. [. ftiaus. BloLhinunn), p>. 31:1.

0

66

three dajs after Lis arrival in Samarqand he bade farewell to
ihis evanescent world, ^ and was buried beside his noble ancestors.
The Khaja’s dignity is so high * that there is no necessity to
Rttempt to establish it by a recital of the wonders and miracles
41, worked by that essence of perfect qualities. The writer of these
lioes saw from afar the couiliness of the holy Ehaja when he
came to bid iarewell to the JDialtfah of the age, on the occasion
when the Lmnerial Camp, at the time of its return from Patna ^
had arrived* in the district of Bhuiigaofi and Patiyali ^ but
I did not attain to the happiness of attending ® on him, or to the
good fortune of approaching^ him. The p^ace of God be upon
him and upon = his noble ancestors.

XIX. Shaikh Adhan of Jaunphe.®

( On him be God’s mercij and acceptance.)

He was the disciple of his own venerable father, Shaikh
Baha'u-’d-diu, of the Oishti order, who was, in his time, deferred

1 MS. (B) has for which is correct, which is

altogether incorrect.

5 MS. (B) has, for which does not make sense.

^ This is spelt in both MSS. a spelling which is quite correct in
Persian, in which Unsnaee the letter & does not exist. The editor of the
text has Indianizsd it into

* MS. (A) has j. The text and MS. (B) omit the auxiliary. The

reading of MS. fA) is preferable.

t Two pargana towns in the sarkdr of Kanauj, Siiba Agra. Vide a. A.
II. (trans. Jarrett), pp. 184, 185.

6 ^^ropgly omitted from MS. { B),

1 Cxyl^. IvlS. { E) has, insteati; whivili would mean '‘'holding'

converse wich.'* ^ have adopted toe reading of (A), followed in the
text, (A) being, in r.tj opinion, a better authority to -• I ■.''v than ( B). Apart
from the quo''::- -• of authority I see no reason to prei’« r

^ These 'vor- s j) =-re omitted from. MS. (E;. Tho^r Oiiissio^i

destroys the ae’ e.

9 The pi i. . cov a t»f th i^arkir of the same nTi.o ■» in the Sitha
Ilah^bas 'i: i-- »b' ” ' ‘oi u ihe capital jf a Muhamm -ihin

h' 'M'\\ I’ 0 *1'' ■ ot tho.]:iui)| ■” Districi, i\

iC Ih.'. . U — r

to • bj the holy men of the age. He reached the fall period of
man’s natural life,* nay, he exceeded it, for hi.s sons, being seventy
or eighty years of age, attended him, likewise hie grandsons, in
their degrees.® He spent the best part of his life wholly and
completely in worship and in acquiring the knowledge of God.

Although he had acquired much exoteric knowledge, yet he
never gave instruction therein. He po.sseased to the highest
degp’ee perception of God, a keen longing after ecstatic songs
and dances, and the faculty of being overcome by religions
ecstasy.* In spite of his bodily feebleness, and constitutional
weakne.ss, and the languor which prevailed over all his limbs,
which were such that he conld hardly arise from his couch * to
perform the cei-emonial ablntions, the piayers and other® neces-
sary acts without the assistance of his attendants, yet, whenever
he heard the strains of holy sou,g he would arise in ecstasy and
would involuntarily ® join in the dance, with such violenee and
strength that several persons could not, by their bodily power,
restrain him.® Similarly in the ease of the i-itual prayers, he
would jjerform the recitation of the sayings of Muhammad and
the supererogatory prayers in a sitting posture, and after he

1 Lit. “ He who is followed.” MS. (B) wrongly omits the verb

JSjyJ.

* MS. (A) has, wrongly,

* A free translation of ijm^ Urf! the meaning of which is clear,

♦ These Sw/t-istic terms have already been explained
Vide litildhdtit-’f-Sifiyyah (Sprenger). It is possible that the word : «» >
may be used here in its ordinary sense, in which case the words “ perception
of God” wonid be omitted from the translation.

6 |.|,f “ The place where he took his ease.

• MS. (B) wrongly inserts the conjimction j here, destroyizig the sense
of the passage.

which (B) has, incorrectly,

8 a most clumsy phrase, which I cannot believe to be the

correct reading, though both MSS., followed by the text, hare it. The
expression, clnmsy and nnidiomatic as it is, may hare been used ironically,
in which ease the meaning of the passage would he “ di^solayed sach
weakness in his caperings that. ..etc.”

^ MS. (A) omits jt-

10 j

Exercises not enjoined on a:’ 'foi oractiaeJ hv c.jrh

lay claim to sanctity.

: ‘ . .-Ln ! '.'-lI i'’* ii u i.i.ii u-i I’i til'-- p-)>tur«,‘ v C'-iti*

7, j Th£. .ir'.v.l M*;:Vi/is * !_t' Tiv-ni >raiiaiTi:;. uirhou*:

.j-iir-C natdr -luj to iii!- -^s t-ntii.c ainl tin 'kmc,

42. Wcm 7). . f. -I .'.ic-i ':■ / km; ni--;.:!' anv He lelt ,i

Laa. e.e - 1 ' pHijd.- and ];i£ v»ese eea.';.

, -e.i." led j-.e:,. . ^,r i ii eic .a side ot Lim lu li'-.s

il'usU'Le; t Tiure-.-Sc ef leotiviiig' in.straction,

ii ~ dC , lie 'tdj i litel’ea i-'Olii'd Lc 111 ClOuLt jl~ tO

-'..v U'j--'- ^ti.ih 'm'i ' .c:i ’vere Lib offspring, lie

e.iTapi-e.s ■ t; V far;.'t- cf ed be;, in-cs regarding the di\ii;L-
itm', ri.e ; , t iiOiiin and t..e 1’; nth riiut they are ueyonJ tiie
i'e, tmn.e^*' /I dii.iLi pi-e,, p.e. t', ■',£ n.t.- r 'ii thobe who are .speeiauy
tr.d'- e.;.* eai; t',6 ;ia.' I m f.’-y i-njierfect and lewd peibuu
e’, -n ;ou i. 1 .',; bitirt the 'i.te: M’eter oi c’uose divine secrets.

Tl, , iLiij'vii _■ tact I 'tK-:. ; gLive I'i'c Mispicioii, namely, ihat
w',-.': the S...Lh/4 of the Ace led hie loicCb ou tile second occjt.bi<'ii
ac; icbt .Jatrchi'.-' with -a view t'j repeiling and overthro wine
iii.b enruki." ma there yer i-eraaiue i a three days’ journey between
the Imp---’ ’inip and Jar.;'.t).';i’, tin f^-dkh died in the cit;,’
;;’i ”, . i .'i.-e raee of -.-.xibieii.,. ; ,t veil of eonoealment ft' 'in
t‘.is tr i.";i w :!d. an 1 i.'e.-m.ai-.;' c!ie.'‘ei.y the teMtier of (the
un’. ' ; — ■ dui'. tv.ti.er. the; ii'.'i-.; i.i tli*. .bicht ot lueii' Lord.’' ^
"h.'. '..I’tt' 1 ' '01 these neVei hu.i tlio Ovuour of w’aiting

upon that pattern for the norl'd.'

idectlv

referring to tnose learned in tbeoloL'-ical

I’lb.H'zr .f

^ The cspediiion Jaaupur in 068 A.H. (A.D. lobi) must be the one

referred to heie Tie date does not coincide ^vith the date of the Shuik/:':,
<ieHth. and I art unable to account, for the discrepancy. I can 6nd no mention
<1 -ill expedition against Jaunpur in A.H. 970. Vide Badioui II, (text),
48 49.

^ MS. (A) has which is more elegant.

5 Qur'an iii. 163. The whole verse : —

’-/y * ' ^ ^ *

‘‘ And repute not those olain on God’s path to bo dead ; Nay, rather, aliTo
with their lord they are provided for. ’

8 (3^^* hit. “ horizons.”

Bis .It-.ith v; e-l in il.r ten: iJ. :-'7m (A.D. ].' j2-o' and the
V, tJs ■“ Si_mi!di iiliiai; " * \ve>-j lonnd to eive tbe date of Iiis

doat [i.

XX. Shaikii •Ablt-’i.-Ghafl'r of A'ZAMrfR.

A’zampur 2 is a paroan-i tovrn in tlie ."sii. tar of Sarabai. The
f^aikk, was the disciple of SHaihh ■Ahdu-’i-i.jaJdLis. of th.e Cisfefz
Ol der s He was perfect b'-rii ia i, irni and in inwar ! qualities.
Hr uiKlerwent severe di.scipiine ai.d strove* njueii in the way
it holy endeavour. Divine eiuce '•vas his conipariion in the
following of the footsteps of ’'he holy seal of prapiieey.’' — may
God bless and give peace to Irn'i aul i.!‘= family! tie nsei veiy
soon to obtain influence over any ope who was thrown iiito his
eonipany, and how little nrlapT.ible 'oever a .-tucl.-i.c micl.r be,
tlie attractions of the ^ai.cA v.ouM cany iiirn beyond himself
and would make him, even against liis wil',^ inciin-.l to the
Sh'iitk's service.

The Shdikh Silent most of ids time in giving instruction in
religious knowledge. His eloquent words were peace to the
turbulent heart, and his wonder working toiigao balm to the
longing soul. In beauty of form and .sweetness of dispo.sitiou
lie was chief among Ids couremr.oraue.s He r-, , eived di.seiples
and e.vhoried and advised tl;e peonle He wrote treatLses on tho
mysticism of the In tiuth there can be no manner of

doubt as to the Shaikh's perftclious of body and mind. After
])]antiug his footsteps witliin the circumteience of (what is
uuder.-itood by the saying) Octogenarian.s arc il'-lA .iwn freed
nicn, ■ ■ he took his departure, in iLe cour.so of ti’c year H.

1 SOO + lO + eOij + l +4 + 5 + ,50 = o'''.

® Vide Airi - i - Akba}t II. jtrans. Jarrett), 2Sg.

8 A short accr-uiic of this ordi’i- h.-is thv.adv been ^-iren.

^ MS. (B) wropirly omits ihe \voi\l hew.

° I.r., Mnhaminad, styled “tho se.il .,f the pro!.;., tA'

to vthora a divine revelation is to be eidru'We.:. Ti„ .-xr
cannot be literally translated into Earlish. It .-tirn.::--s •• n:
sealing, or coinpletion of pr.ipbecy finds its len.re i
English but very concise and expressive bn Persian

’■ -1 C ti'.' l.-.st

^'ion 5 'Xj
‘ Hi U Km D lliy

iumc.\ pliPaso in

1 That IS, freed fiom sin. This is one of the “ sayiiiiis’' of ilul.unima

43 .

70

(A. I). ]o77-8) for the eternal raaiisions, and was buried in
A'zanipur. May God magnify his dignity !

XXL MitaA Yajtho-’d-dIx o» AhmababIdA

He wa^s descended 2 of the line of ‘Alt, bat he was not wont to
prociaiiU his descent, on account of his being a foreigner.* He
was one of l-he greatest cf the learned men of the age, excelling
ill devotion, T'’eiy, aiid holy endeavour,'^ taming not aside from
the p-arh r.f rhe law, and, firni’y .seated in the comer of content-
ineiic. vus coastantly occr.pit:! in giving religions^ instruction.
His 'j.i ; p of ull branci cs of knotv ledge, both of tho.se which
deniaiid riie exerci-se 0 +' the reasoning faculty and of those which
depend unen !he ?nc-roory.= vns such that there was hardly a
standanl work, from light L’eafises on accidence t to books of law
and raedteine and the comnieiitary on the Mijtah ® and the ^Azudi ^

1 The capita! of Gujarat.

^ Both liSS. bare b-jj the emendation in the text appears

to be correct, if the reading of the MSS. be correct then we nave an
additional reiison for the refusal to claim descent from 'All.- Yide

tho follotvin^ note

S So I [inderst lud The meaning seems to be that the

ancestors had so long ago I-'ft -irabia that he wisely refrained from
elaimiiiij a de.sceni which was perhaps not borne out by doenmentary evidence
and was not likely to be generally accepted. It may be that the Miydn's
descent was in the female line, in wtiieb case he would not rank as a
Sav’jtd.

* MS. fB) has for This is clearly a copyist’s error.

* LsHi, in neither ifS. 1 am noo aware of the aathoritj for its insertica
in the text, but it seems to me to be correct.

The Persian phrase cannot be neatly and concisely

translated into Bnglisfa.

1 This expression has puzzled me and the translation is

conjectural. I hare consulted learned Persians and natives of India on the
subject.- Shamsu-'I-^Ulama Shaikh Mahraud-i-GTiiini so^^ests
but I can leam of no book with this title. I am of opinion that the reading
of the text and MSS. is certainly wrong.

^ Mtftdhu-l-'UIum (clavis doctrinarum). Vide Vol. I. (trans. Ranking),
438, note 3

^ EPAdhodi. liber Adkodt gmmmaticas, quern Imam Ahu Alt (Hasan Ben
Ahmed) Farisi Grammaticus, anno [3'i’7 (inc. 3. Mai. 987)] mortnus, principi
Adhod-ed-dewlet compoenit. H.K. 8158.

71

which he had not either written a commentary ort or annotated.,
and the people were continually profited by his auspicious sayings,
God, may He he praised, is known by his epithet, “‘tiie Healer,”
and He made the Aliyan a manifestation of that name, so that
every day the sick and afflicted, in countless nuniberi,* used to
wait upon him and beseech him to pray for them, and would
speedily experience the effects of that prayer. He never went i.f
his own accord to the houses cf worldly men, but only once or
twice in the course of his life, and then in obedience to a
summons, and unwillingly.* He did not even leave*' bis house
and private masjid for the Friday congregational fo-ayers.

His house was the resort of the greatest and oest men cf the
age. In his dress and mode of life he was in no '.vaj irstinetii^hed
from the common people, and contented himself with coarse raiment,
distributing in charity whatever he received by way alms.

He received his religious instruction from Muhaniiaad

Ghaus * and followed his rule, although he had been the accredit-
ed disciple of another. He completed his studies with the Sh,.t.
drinking deeply and with relish of the fount of ^S/f-Lsm.

When ^aikh Muhammad Ghaus went from Hindustan to
Gujarat, in the reign of Sultan Mahmud of Gujarat,^ Shaikh
‘All Mutaqqi,® one of the greatest Shaikhs, most influential
religious leaders and greatest sages of that time, wrote a faticd

t The text has H, making feminine. The readintr of

the MSS. ^ is correct.

MS. (A) has j after lSt.^1. The text (B.i omit it.

3 KAsUi ,J| !S«>jUj ia the recdiDg of both MSS. and of ..he

text. It does not make sense, and seems to me to be a copyist’s error for
As such I have treated it. MS. (B) has foj- The ia.rer

is correct. The fact here stated U mentioned to shew the iliyun’a creat
dislike of publicity. According to the Muhammadan ritual lair the Fridav
prayers should be recited in the congregation, i.e., in the public ’na^jid.

* No. III. supra.

6 I.e , during the reign of Shir Shih in Dihli. It was in consequence of
Shir Shah’s ill-treatment of him that Mnhammad Ghaus fled to Gujarat. Vide
supra, in the account of Muhammad Ghaus, Mo. III.

* MS. (B) wrongly reads for

I A legal decision delivered by a recognized doctor of the law on anv
point of the Muhammadan ritual or religions law. The in tliis case

would probably declare that Muhammad Gh au.s was worthv of de;vh as a
heretic, the execution of the sentence being left to the secular power.

14.

icj ibe execution of Shaikh Jliihamniad Ghaus, and tp“ Snitan
abroc'atea it * at the instance* of ilijau Vajihu-’d-Dlu, When
di-’raa Yajihu-’d-Din went on the first occasion to ti.e Shaikfi'.i
hojse he was powenullj attracted hy his face, and tore up tlie
and i^aikh ‘Ali came, beside himself (with ragej, to the
-ITo/oA’s house, ana rent his clothes and said, Vriiy do \-ou assent
to the spread of heresy, and to a schism in the faith r ” He
answered, “We follow the letter and the Shaikh the sidi it.° i)ur
ntel erscanding cannot reach his perfections and (even), as tar as
the letter of the law® goes, no exception, by which he cosM he
pronounced blameworthy, can be taken ^ to him.” And tiii.s
was the cause of the great faith which the Sultans and rnleis ot
Gujarat had in Shaikh Muhammad Ghaug, and of his dt-iivoxance
f'.ont that position oipeiil. ('Hue iliyanj front that time repeatoiily
sai-iiii assembiie.5, “one ousht to obey the letter of the law
utter the manner of Shaikh ‘Ali Mutaqqi,* and the spirit® after
tl.e manner of my spiritual guide ” {■i.e., Shaikh Muhammad
Ghait?.) Miyan Vaiihu-'d-Din passed away from this abode of
g'.com in the year H. 998 (A.D. l.jS9-90) atid the words ■“ Shaikh

; 7 refnsed to carry it out.

i L't. ‘'on tlie Signature of.” Tajihu-’d-din prooaDiy delivered hi.s

'■! licativo opinion or /atu'O, under his signature, deolaruig that Mid •.mirjiad
tvas not worthy of death.

j ihis seems to be the meaning of as here used, br.t the word

.'i.e^ias literally “applying fora /nt?! i?,” or “ asking for legal opinion. ” The
'e.'O'.ial reading is evidently correct, though the readings of the MS. are not
very clear.

■I ,M.S. (B) iuseris after erroneoasly, as it seems to me.

■ Ln. “ We are masters of speech (scil. religious discussion, or more
probaiily recitation of the ritual prayers) and he is master of relio-ious
ecs!:a.sy.” The translation well expresses the meaning of the puraaa.

' ^^aLJo,

( B) has, erroneously

^ MS. (BJ OTuits and substitutes for ^ 5 ^. My opinion of this

JiIS. coincliles with that expressed by Colonel Ranking in some of the notes
i j) ins translation of yul. I. It is evidently the work of an ignorant and
carrlpss scribe and is of very littic value for purposes of comparison.

'5

73

Vajihu-’d-Din " * were found to gi’.’e the date of his death :
may Ctod turn him towards acceptance !

I may explain that I never had an opportunity of waitinsr on
these four honourable men, and that what I have wtitteii of
them is only what I have been able to learn incidentally

XXII. iliYAX ‘Abdu-'llah Xiyazi of Sikhind.s

TheXiyazi.s* are a tribe of Af gh ans. Mivaii "Abdu-’llah was
at first the disciple of Shaikh Salim-i-Cishti ^ of FaUmnr. He
u.sed to remain always engaged in his religious dutie.s in the cell
close to the Shaikh's new hospice, which is now known as the
royal place of worship.® When Shaikh Salim* retained from
his fir.st pilgrimage to the holy places, which he had made by
land, iliyaii ‘Abdn-’llah asked his leave to make a pilgrimage
to the glorious city of Makkah, and the Shaikh wrote and gave
to him a memorandum containing an account of the Shaikhs
and men of God whom, he had met in the countries of Arabia,
Persia, and India, and the Miydh. travelling through most of
.those regions, sought out those various classes of holy men.

1 This vould be an exceedingly neat chronogram were it correct, but
be sum of the letters is 999, one too many. IIS. (AJ inserts after the
hronogram pi/

2 the meaning of which is given by Steingass as ‘'aiming at
one thing and getting another,'’ “ incident.”

* The chief town of the .'-arkdr of the same name, in tne Sub i of Di'ihi.
Vide Aln-i-Akbari II. (tr«.n3. Jarrett), p. 231 and u. 4, and p. 295. fide ai'O
Hunter’s Imp. Gazetteer,

* The Xiyazis are a cl.an of the Ghilzais or Ghiijis. They are princioaiiy
engaged in the carrying trade between India and Afghfuiisciiu and the
Norttiern States of Central Asia, and have' beea so for centuries, frie
Beilew 3 “ Kaces of Afghanistan,” p. 103, Ain-i-Akbtirl I. ttrans. Blaeiimann,!,
483, 484, II. (trans. Jarrett), 393 (n.) and 402 (n.).

6 Tide supra No. Till. The text and both ilSS. have for

The reading is wrong, for the references in the text clearly sliew that it
is Shaitt Salim that is referred to. is (*^1, corrupted by the figure

called

S Yide ^ai^ Salim’s life, and the notes thereon, for

Akbar’s reverence for him, and the reason of it. Yale also vol. H. (text),
109, 255. fide also Tabaqdt-i-A/cbarl, Lucknow edition, pp. 317, 328.

"i The text has a misprint for which is itself wrong. Vide

note 1.

45.

10

74

In comps, cy with the friends of Mir Sayyid Muhammad (may
God sanctify his soul who had ^ set up a claim to being the
Mahdi and ^ had travelled to Gujarat and the Dakhan, the
Miydh at last adopted those opinions,® and In the reign of Salim
Shah, spent his time, in the manner already mentiotied,® in
Bit ana, in the corner of obscurity' and retirement, living without
■pretensions and ■without ceremony, being, like ordinary men, free
from encumbranceB and attachments. And when Isletn (Salim)
SlAh, as has been mentioned in the ease of Shaikh ‘Ala’i of
Biyaua — may God have mercy ■upon him ! — bitterly persecuted
him, being nrompted thereto by Makhdumu-’l-Mulk, and had
hjci seveieiy beaten, ■with a vie'w to preventing him (from preach-
i'.ig his doctrines ■‘.■* hs again set forth on his wanderings, travel-
i'.rig in vatious narts of the ■world, and in the latter years of his
Jifo he ab-auctoned (his belief in Mir Sayyid Muhammad's) claim
to being the Mahl'c, and, retreating ^ into a corner o^f retirement
in Sirhind, loiiowed the same mode of life as other holy men.
When the Emperor rebuilt that cell ■which was near the Imperial
palace he iiamed it the ‘ ihadat-khana (place of worship), and,
the name or Miyari. ‘Abdn-’llah being mentioned in connection,
■with it, he was summoned from Sirhind, and had a personal
interview with the Emperoi, no other person being present, and
46 . His Majesty put questions to him,® The Miyan, disavowing
(any belief in) the ATahdaitl doctrines, said, “At first the
companionship of that sect seemed good to me, and I accordingly
inclined to their doctrines, but after that the truth concerning

1 The vfoids j are wiongiy omitted from MS. (B). This MS. also has
yO for

® I <?., cue opinions of those who belie-ed Mir Sayyid Muhammad to be the
Mnhdi, The words are for which MS. (B) has

which is pure nonsense.

* Vide vol. I. (trans. Ranking), pp. 518-520 for an account of the perse-
futioD of Miyin (cr Shaikh, ac he is thete called) ‘Abdn-Tlah by Salim
Shan, at the instigation of Makhdumu-’l-Mnlk.

* Vtde tlie reference in the last note for an account of the persecution of
the Mahdauis by Salim Shah.

* Lit, ■* choosing.”

S JIS. (B) has The dots in MS. (A) are placed at

random, but the word there seema to bs

the True G(xi was revealed to uie, and I recanted.” His Majesty
sent him back with honour, and in the year H. 993 (A.D. 1585)
at the time of the expedition to Atak,* when His Majesty
reached Sirhind, he agrin sent for the Miyan, and offered him
some land as madad-i-ma'a.^,^ but he, making contentment his title-
deed, ^ woaid not accept it, but the Emperor had the grant made
out, whether the Miyar, wouid or no, and had it delivered to him,
and he, obeying the Emperor's order, received the farnian, hut
nevertheless forsook not Lis habit of reiving on God alone, and
did not in any wav concern himself with the grant throughout
his life. He made the books Ikya * and K'lraiyU. “ the guides of his
actions. In the year in which Dla^ Mirza’s rebellion took
place I was with ilnharrmiad Husain Khan. I saw the Miyan
in Sirhiud, and ha gave ms some profita'oia lessons from “ the
Ihyd, which 'he had with him.* A friend of his. named ilahniud
Khan, who had been inamute with him since the days of Lslein
(Salim) Shah, and to whom Shaikh Mubarak, at the time of the
persecution of Shaikh ‘Aia’t had given the title of Saifn-’llah
(“ the sword of God as'ked him, “ What is the heart ? ” *

1 Tide Toi. II. (text), pp, 347 et se.qq. Also Aiiar:>ama (text), HI. 465
ei seqq,

* I,e., land to be held in aima tanare, for his subsistence.

S I.e., '■ to what he had,” and no more.

* This book was the lAyd’u. ’ ilwiit-’d-din. “Ihyl otum ed-din, doctrinamm
religionis vivificatio, anotere Imam Shafiita Eojjat el-isiam Abu Earned
Mohammed Sen Mohammed Ghazdh, mortao in nrbe '£ue anno 5^15 (inc. 10
Jnl. 1111).*’ H.K. No. 171, where a fall account of the book is given.

The Klmiya'uAs-sa^ddat. Kioaiya ebseadet, alchymia beatitadinis.
Opns Persicnm paraeneticam et sthicnm, qncd Imam Hojjet el-islam Afan
Hamid Mobammed Ben ilohammed Gnazali, anno 505 (inc. 10 Jnh 1111)
mortnas, cumposnit, et in qn.itnor titulos et qnataor fnleimenta, at in
praefationo dicit, in usnm mauitndinis bominam qui talia desiderant,
distnbuit.” H.K.. No. 10,998. where a foil account of the book is given.

* MS. (B) wrongly omits jl.

7 The text here bas^, which is in neither M8. Ira insertion dees not
aEect the sense.

8 “attraction” or “disturbance.’ “Persecution” is the beet
translation in this {.assage.

S Mahmud Khan was asking for enlightenment on one of the subtleties of
the Ss/ia. In order that his question may be understood it is necessary to
know how the Sifit defined the Persian word iji, cf which the Arabic
synonym is The (Sprenger) gives the following

76

He rep’ier], " Betvroer. ns and the heart lie a thousand stages,
Whv do Ton ask ahont this matter r Sav something on ethics.”
Afteiovards, a -proros of the mention of Mir Sayyid Muhammad
of Jannphr (may God sanctify his soul !) he brought forward an
old Mughal and asked liim to saj what he knew of the Sayyi'd.^
He said, “At the time of the death of the holy Mir S.'iyyid
Muhammad of Jaunpiir I was present in Farah,* when he

definition, s. r. “ The heart is an enliehtened incorporeal essencf^,

the mean het^veen the ruh and the itafs " The TTords (ruh) and
(nofid] both mean sonl, and are sometimes considered synonymous one with
the ocher. Bat according to other authorities signifies '‘that whereby

is life ” and ^ ■■ that whereby is intellect, or reason.” e.t;., when one
sleeps God Ukea away hi(= but not his ^ j), which is not taken save

at death ; and the is thus called because of its connection with the

or •* breath.” ( Fide Lane, Arabic Leiicon, snl uocitt^s). But it ia not

ciear that the connection between and is very close, for, if it

were, one conM hardly he deprived of his during sleep Bur see also

the Isiild^dtu**9~Sffjiyyah su6 vrcihus and The former is thus

defined «' —

‘‘ A7i-na/<> is the fine ethereal essence which supports life, sensation, and
volunta’’y motion. And the philosopher \scU. Aristotle) has called it the
animal soul, and it is the Tceau between the heart, which is the reasoning
faculty, and thi= body, wViieh is referred to in the Qnr*dn as '* the ulivo tieo, ’
which is described as being ‘‘ blessed, neither of -the east nor of the we.st,''
on accoaTit of the increase of dignity and hle«:«fedne'^5 which it confers on
man, and because it is neither from the east, the world, of diseinbodied spirits,
nov from the west, the world of gross bodies.’^
is thus describe! —

■ Ar-rnk in the technical langnage of the S'rf’' is ^he fine and incorporeal
part of man ; and in th- technical language of physicians it is the fine
v.Tp.yur br-vl in the heau wi.ich receives the effect of life, sensation, and
motion, and these cobecrivcly are called, in their technical language an-nafs,
an! the mean between thrni is the heart, which conceives general conceptions
and their details. Philosiipljers make no distinction between na’h and ruku^'l-
’n'-.'cal first soul ”) which they describe as the reasoning facnluy.” It is
easy to UMdersrand ili)'-!! ‘A.jdu-llah"s anxiety to avoid the discussion of a
question of this sort, and to take refuge in some ethical, or indeed, any other
qur.'Sti 'n. ill order to esc.ipe from it.

I .i— .|,A j\. Lit. '-asked him for his fo.stimony.”

* A town in Sijista.i, vide I. (traas. Bloohmann), 41a. IX.

(trans. Jorrettj, 393, anti note.

witlidiew his claim to being the il.ildi, and said. ‘ I am not the
promised Mahdi.’ ” ^ God knows (tlie truth). In the meantime
Jlahmiid IGjin said softly " Miyaa ’Abdu-’llah did woridert’ally
tfell in sending the unfortunate Shaikh ‘Ala'i to his death, while
he himself retraced his steps. ’ *

Mivan ‘Abdu-’llah retaored the baggage (of existence) from
this borrowed - lodging to the neighbourhood of Divine Pro-
vidence (may his dignitv be honoured!) at the age of 90, in the
year H. 1000 (A.D. 1591-2'. May God grant him a dwelling in
the highest heaven !

XXIII gHt'FH Aeu-'l-Fath of Octasat.

He was the son-in-law of the reverend Mtr Sayyid Muhammad*
of Jaunpur (may God sanctify hi.s honoured tomb!), bat ha
never saw the d/ir- and his connection with him by marriage
did nut occur uutil aHer the Mir's death. He was a man of
very high pusiticri and dignity, endowed with perfections. He
was firm and unshaken iu his adht-renee to the doctrines of tr.e
M.ihdawi sect. 'holding to Them resol.iteiy. since, when he was in
the honoured city of Makkah and iu Gujarat, the closest bond of
frictidsiiip existed between him cmd Shaikh Gada’i.' In the
time of Bairam IGian, the Khan-i-Khanan,'^ be came to Agra in

1 dliyfn ‘A' lla-'IIali fevidently brcnght UTward this old ilughai, ■nith his
“ testimony, ’ to justify his secession from the dfaTinairl sect, by proviint that
Mir Sayyid Muhammad himself before bis death relinquished his prpter..sion 3
to being the 3Ia/td7, Butidonl, who inclined towards the Mvitdcxl doctrines,
seems by his use of tlie expression J to have disbelieved the

Mngh.al 8 testimony, or, ut any rate, to have regarded it as ilouhtfni Ti;e
necessity for some justidcation of Miyah ‘Abdu-ilah’a change of views is
shewn by Mahmud Khan’s comment on his conduct, which immediately
follows,

* Lit. “ withdrew hie steps from the circle,”

® I e., this lodging which is given ns only for a time, or. as it were,
on loan.

* Here both MSS. have “ Mahmud.” The textual emendation is correct.

6 The text follows MS. (B) with Tfie reading of MS. (A) which

T have followed, is correct. “ df/r ” was one of M. Muhammad’s titles as a
Sayyid. The title Mirzd is in India almost exclusively bestowed upon
iluyhals.

0 Shaikh Gada’i-yi-Kambu of Dilhi, the Sadru-’§-Sudur, vide vol. II. text,
pp. 29, 30, et infra chapter ii.. No. IV.

* Vide vol, II. text, Ain’i-Akbat'ij and Akbarndnti passim.

78

connection trith some important business, but in a short time that
teiTible disaster ^ occci-red, and the Shaikh returned to Gujarat.
Wberi I was a student I waited on the Sha'ikh for half a night
in the quarter of .^ijai]^ Baha’u-’d-dia Mnfti (may God have
mercy on him !}, on the far side* of the river at .Sgra, on the
introduction of MauJana ‘Abdn-’llah of Qandahar, the relative
of Haji Mahdi ct Labor. He was sitting alone in a bare
room, busily empi.ired in reading * this tradition of the prophet,
( may God bless him and save hici !) : — “No number of people
shall sit together to .mention God but that angeis shall surround
them, and the mercy of God cover them, and tranquillity * coma
upon them ; and God remembers them as men who are with
Him.” He translated that saying and I received instruction in
the ecstatic worship of the and was employed for some

time therein, and experienced a wonderful and ® strange accession
of divine grace, and the (inner) meaning of the Qur'an was
disclosed to me, and for some time ^ my condition was such that
I believed every sound and voice which fell upon my ears to be
the mystic chanting of the Sufis. I saw some of the Shaikh’s

I Bairam ^an’s dismissal, his estrangement firom the Emperor,
rebellion, and violent death.

* I.e., the east side of the river, the far side from the city of Agra.

® MS. (A) omits

* The word used here is from the root (“ it was, or became

still, motiotUess or stationary”). The meaning of is giyen Lane

{Ar. Let, s. r.) as “caltonesa or tranquillity, grayity, staidness, steadiness, or
sedateneas,” and, “ a quality inepiring reverence or veneration.*’ Its meaning
in Arabic is thos quite clear. But its etymology calls to mind the Hebrew
HTpIP (praesens Dei llajesfcas, as Gesenins gives it). This Hebrew word

is Kabbinical, not Biblical. The Arabic word is used to translate the

Hebrew hut has not, in Arabic, the same meaning. It is possible

that Muhammad, in using the word, if he did so, may have had some
Kabbinical tradition in his mind.

^ Vide Hughes’ Diet, of Islam, a v. rikr-

6 MS. (B) h^ y between V and The text and MS. (A)

omit it. The sense not affected either way.

7 (MS. (A' and text). MS, (B).

disciples -who, to guard themselves from talking foo'ishly,' had
(literaliy) glued their lips together, some of them ^for the same
reason) had pebbles in their mouths.

The Tear of the ShaiMl'^ death, and where and when it occur-
red, are not kuown. (May God remember him to his good !)

XXIY. iShaikh Abu Ishaq of L.ahop.

He was one of the spiritual sucee.ssors of Mijaft Shaikh Da’ud,*
(may God sanctify his tomb !) In his actitdty (in traver.sing the
path of righteousness) he .surpassed all his contemporaries, p.nd
he was one of the most wonderful works of God ^ { be He praised
In his love for hi.s spiritual guide he was beside himself, and
attained to such an intimate relationship with his holy personality
that one might say that the two persons were one clear truth
expressed * in two well turned phrases. Neither the dust of
dependent existence nor the soil of potential existence ^ besmirch-
ed the skirt of his robe, and at the mere sight of him thoughts
of God (may He he honoured and glorified!) cast their rays on
each black anu thoughtless heart, and the pain of searching after
God infected all who saw him. He called no ® one to his presence
with the exception of two or three friends who had been intimate
associates of the holy Miyan (may God sanctify his soul ; ) and

S i’lde Xo. XVII. supra.

® Lit. “ he was a miracle (or sign) of the miracles (or signs) of God.”

i Aiilj text, and MS. (B). AiibjCi MS. (A).

^ The two words in the text are and Lane [.irahic-Enghsh

Lezicorif s. v.) thus defines of two kinds

tM ^ ^ y C

which is A. thing’s being preceded by no7i~existencs : and which is

A thing’s being dependent on another for tt* exti>rence ” The word in this
passage has the latter meaning. means “ A'oru-ngent. or potential

existence,” {.e., as opposed either to ” n''’C'>si‘a;y exisif'nce ’ or

” actual exi.-,icnce.” The m^^ii-ing of tlie T)assa„%' is that the Sh<u^ employed
himself tMth none hut God, the sclf-ci:-''tt ut and necess.irily existent
Being.

8 ("gj wronn'*’ omits

‘ J (tex:j. The omit

irbo liad their dwelling in Lalior ; nor wns he solicitous to receive
(lisciples. He always lived in privacy in a dark ctdl, wliieli was
situated in a garden, and at times, when an intense longing for
the holy ITitni: overcame iiini he would go on foot in one day
from Lahrir to .^hirgarh. a c:^taaoe of over forty hutuJi,^ and
after mereiv kissing the Mi’jan's threshold lie would return,
without breaking his jourrmy. unable to endure the effulgence of
the Miij'itis luminous presence.®

lu the } ear alreadv mentioned * I was honoured by being enabled
ic pay mv respects to that venerable and mo.st worthy man, and
tvas his gneot for a day and a night. On the next day, I set out
aiune, save for one attendant on foot,* when the disturbances were
at their height, for I wa.s stopped by Jafs~ and higii-

jWaymen, who suri’ounded me on every side, and tliey were
astonished fat my raslines.s) and asked me whither I wr..s going,
alone in this perilous dese;t. So soon as I said that I Lad just
taken my ieave of Miyari .;^ialkh Abii Ishaq with a view of paying
-ly respects to ray reverend spiritual guide, the Miijarl (may Gcd
have mercy on them both!) they, immediately they heard the
aurpicicus names of those two holy men, submitted themselves to
me. and biougiit me milk and curds and .suchlike refreshments,
and Se' me ou my way. and warned me tu be caution: and warv.

i I . abcii: ^0 aiilf-s.

- In :'u-‘ thi^ passage runs follow? : —

j\ Jl^i iS j

j U- .JO 0.^1 ^ O

( uV

Toe pnrtiuii between ti.e brackets has been carelessly omitted from ilS. (B)

t'r.e ccp; 1 st having evidently mistaken the words just before the

bravk. ;s for t! e same words repeated at the end of the bracketed portion.

An al)5..r.! non is the result of this careless error.

s lb.;, -'.piri in ti.e life of Skaikh Daud (XVi.) p. 56, n, 4.

* Lit. ■■ Adniie with one .attendant on foot." Tliej|.^itx ran beside the

horse of the p. rson wiiom he attended,
i

6 text, (f) MS lAi. MS Bl The t rite referred to

must, I think, be the Jaf! whose name would be properly spelt oU.

ipl in the rersiuu character. Tide Shernne, '• Hindu Tribes and

Castes” II 73.

81

urging me to make frequent mention of the name of the holy
MiySn in my religious exercises,* as he had endeared himself to
all the people of that country, both gentle and simple. Thus, at
last, I returned in safety * to the place whither A 'f\ 5,3 bound, as
has been already stated.^

In the year in which the holy iliijafi removci ti.e parilion
(of his existence) from this transitory world and pitched it m
the kingdom of eternity, and very shortly after ii-h coach, tiit-i’e
v,'as a plague in the Panjab ; and all his associates.* his famiiv-
and his most noted spiritual successor; tnd re.orescntotives, who
numbered fifty or^ sixty souls, per: -;: and eeteci. amon^
whom was '‘the interpreter of secrets." I/iiyah ' Abdn-'l- Vl'ahhab-
also known as Miyari Babu, with one accora. ...s tnougli hy
appointment, successively and each iir his due tu; :!. joined the
holy Miyan (in the next world) in the space of three or four
months, as it pleased God. (This was the case of those intimately
connected with him), but what shall I say of his sincere pupiis
disciples, and attendants at large? Miyah Shai'^ Abu Ishaj,
too, owing to the greater intimacy of his connectioa with the

1 Zikr has beea already txescribed. Tje

highwaymen apparently urged Badaoni to lerice the name of Shaikh D5\‘.d
in his zikr, an exercise in which only the uarnes and attributes of tiod slcu'i
be recited. The passage exemplifies the superstitious venerat.oa with Wi.ich
ignorant Indian Muslima regard their pir.-, aud gives some colour to the
charge brought against Shaikh Da’ud by 'M.ikhdumu- 1-lIulk, tht.t he permitted
his disciples to introdnce his name into their ciir, they cr; iuc ..ut ■ I'.: 1) ‘
yiDd’iid!" Shaikh Da’ud very dexteronslv repelled the .•li.e..re 'idr
p. 53), but from the request heie made by the robbers It :? almost oorriviu
that the practice was common among the followers, even if it was

-ijt approved by him. Tl'ird is a portion of the Qur'dii set or imposed

for recital on a particular occasion, or at a particular time. It seems ti nt
the name of the ShailA was to be introduced into these passages from tiio
Qur’an, or it may be that they were to be recited in the Sha-M'^ name.

* wrongly omitted from IIS. ( B ).

* Vide supra, in the life of Shaikh Da'ud (No. XVI), pp. 56-tiO.

^ "y (text). The JISS. insert j between and

oqo The careless omission of tha conjunction in the text would give

the passage a very unpleasant sound to an Eastern ear.

6 MS. (B) wiongly inserts J here.

11

82

50 .

Miyan, sp3d from the desert of separation to the true Ka'hah ^
of union and propinquity. “ Some of them have fain lied their
vow and others of them await its fulfilment.” * Ah, Khaja. it
may be

“ That thou preparest a eup ^ for them.”

He who afterwards continued the exalted line of the Qadiriy-
yah * order was Shaikh "Abdu-’llah, the most orthodox and noble
son of the holy Miyan, who, since the latter removed the baggage
(of his existeceet to the garden of Bizican,^ remains at present
the compendium of all the perfections ^ and the successor to all
the exalted qualities of iliya.h Shaiyi Abu-T-Ma‘ali.^

The peace of God, so long as nights succeed one another,

Be on the pure Shaikh, A bu-T-Ma‘ali.

It is to be hoped that this garden of good fortune will aye
remain fruitful — through the prophet and his honoured family.

XXV. Shaikh Ruknu-’d-DIn.

{May God have mercy on him !)

He is the orthodox son of Shaikh ‘Abdn-’l-Qnddus of Ganga,
whose distinguished virtues and perfections are beyond the need
of any comment or exposition, being sufficiently indicated and

* “ The cube. like building in the centre of the mosque at JIakkah, which
contains the HaJaru-’l-Anwad, or black stone.” Hughes’ Diet, of Islam. The
word is frequently used metaphorioally, as in this passage, for any object of
desire, or reward at a journey’s end, the simile being the toilsome desert
journey of the Makkah pilgrims, with the Ka'bak for its object.

Qur’an xxxiii 23.

iijxA U Jsf.j

o'"- I ' ' k f '

iy.Aa U j jJiixj j

“ Some there were among the faithfal who made good what t}iey have
promised to G'ld. Some hare fulfilled their vow and others await julJiU
ment, and hare in no way changed.”

8 Of the wine cf paradise.

♦ The orri^^ f by Da’ud and described (p, 52), as being

midway between .he >uhrav'ir<!i and Cishti orders

^ I e., “ parad'-f.- ” Kizwan ihp keeper of the ganlen of paradise.
^ i.iK -J gatacre- together of all the perfections.”

" Shaikh

83

signified by the holy writings which he has compiled. Glangu
is a pargana town t in * the confines of Thanesar.

The Shaikh was a man greatly respected, whose ontwaru
appearauije bore witness to his perfections. He was a man of
great authority in the mysticism of the Safis, and followed the
religions rule of the holy men of his own order, and ® was one of
those who are overcome by a mysterious longing after God and
are subject to fits of religious ecstasy.*

He went ® occasionally, but very seldom, to the bouses of men
of worldly position and rank, and never but when in need.
Otherwise he remained constantly ia the corner of retirement
and abstraction. I, the compiler of these pages, paid my respects
to him in Dihli, at the time of Bairam irh an''s rebellion,® ia one
of the assemblies of Shaikh ‘Abdu-l-‘Aziz (may God have mercy
on him!). Praise be to (^od (therefor).

XXVI. MiviSr MoSTicFA of Gcjaba'^.

His descent was from the Bobaras,'^ a tribe in Gujarat whose
occupation ia trading. By means of one of the intimate friends
of Mir Say y id Muhammad of Jaunpur (may God sanctify his
soul .) he constantly followed the path of poverty and self-
effacement, walking steadfastly in that way to the end of
his life. When the Khalifah of the age, after the conquest
of the country of Bang,® reached Ajmir on his return from

^ Badaonl means “near Thanesar.** Thanesar was & pargana town in the
Strhind sariar, while GangSh was a pargana town in the adjoining sarkir of
Saharanpur. lia-i-Akbari II, (trans. Jarrett), 290.

* text and MS. (B). MS. (A) has jt.

® ^ is omitted from the MSS. bat seems to be rightly supplied in the text.

♦ iSyJ (Jta-y jl- The Sw/i-istic technical terms and Jha

have already been explained.

carelessly omitted from MS. (B).

• c/A (‘jH Olyi* labcjjj. Vide vol. II. text, pp. 35 et seqq., and AHmr-
nama (textj II., 91-121.

1 The Boharas are a tribe of Mnsalmans in the Bombay Presidency, Berar,
and parts of the Panjab. They are Shi*ahs by religion. Sir George Campbell
is of opinion that they are a cross between immigrants from the Persian Gulf
and “ Hindu Borahs.’* Vtde Sherriug, “ Hindu Castes and Tribes ’* II, 183,
184 . The Boharas thronghont India numbered 129,473 in 1881.

• Bengal.

S4

Patna,* Isaf Kl'an II. the Mir Baklishi. in obedience to the Imperial
order, brought him with him from Gujarat. The Emperor, calling
the ‘Er/arna together one night in the courtyard of the Hall of
Audience, questioned Shaikh Mustafa on the truth about the
Mdkdaiul Question, and ho readilv answered, and the discussion
51 . was prolonged ; and Haji Ibrahim of Sirhind,® in accordance with
his file di.spcsiticn. wa.s overbearing in the argument, and vetted
the Shaikh ; and I also related circumstantially and at length
what I had found in the commentary on the Gul^an-i-Haz,^ a
work by Shaikh Muhammad-al-Ahji, who was the immediate *
disciple of Mir Sayyid Mnhammad-i-Nur Bakhshi,^ who also, in
his time, had set up a claim to being the Mahdi, and had brought
various troubles on himself thereby. Since what I said was
opposed TO the Shaikh’s contention it was evidently the cause of

t Vol. IT. (text), 185. AVoarnamc (text) II., '79. Badaoni places this
event in y&2 (A.D. 1574-5). Abii-’l-Fazi places it in A.H. 981 (A.D.

1573-4). The IISS. spell Patna, after the Persian style. In the text
it is Indianized into

S Vide vol. II. (text), pp. 172, 173. The passage is reproduced in the short
life of Badaoni prefixed to this volume.

S Galsheni raz, rosarium arcauoram. Carmen persienm, qnod iia incipit :

Nomine ejns, qni animam cogitare docnit —
et quaestiones et responsa continet secundum terminologinm theosophienm.
Ad ejns similiiu.dinem carmen Az)"i,-.i‘t-r,'ihhen compositum eat. Auctor
Bosarii est Mahrnnd Telnzi qui in vico Sfcebister natus et senultus est,

qui locus c.'to parasangas a Tebriz dista: Ccrimencariog in carmen scrip-
sernnt -ed-Vln Ah S> irazi — dr --Ak Satms-ed-dm Bc'i

Tahya Ben .l;i Ahji JUdni Kurlak'i.sh.i, anno mortans, cujas commer-

tarios persire scriptus textnin admixtum habet, et ilefatih el-i'jaz inscriptns
est. Nitide earn exscripsit mense Dza-'lhijjet auni 877 (inc. 8. Jun, 1472).
Hdjl Khallfah, 10839.

The commentary of Shaikh rujamsu-’d-din is the book referred to. He is
described in the text and JISS. as 1.5?^ ^ (hahji), an error for 45^3/1
(Al-Ahji).

The Gulshan-i-Rdz has been translated into English by Mr. Whinfield.

* The text has which, as explained in a footnote to the text, is the

reading of both MSS. I think that we shonld substitute and have

translated accordingly. If, however, the reading of the MSS. be correct we
might translate “ he was the disciple, with one intermediary, of, &c.,” but the
expression is awkward and nnidiomatic.

6 Of Badakhshan. A disciple of Abu Ishaq-i-^atlani wno gained
Dumerous adheients and created such disturbances that troops were sent

Ilia being vexed with me. The Emperor ordered tlie Shaijif
after his arrival at FathpBr, ro stay for some days in the house
of ©aja ‘Abdu-’s-Samad the painter, of sweet pea.‘ To make
amends for my fault I waited on him with my apologies, and
a.sked him for forgiveness. He was very feeble, and in that very
assembly a basin was brought to him, and he brought up a great
quantity of blood. It seems that after he received leave to
depart for Gujarat he removed the baggage (of existence) from
this transitory lodging to the eternal abode, either on his way
to his native land or immediately after his arrival there.

This event took place in the year H. 9S3 (A.D. i575-6). He is
the author of works which bear witness to his separation from
the w'orld and self-effacement.^ Hay God deal with him accord-
ing to His graeiousness.

XXVII. IsHAQ-r-K-lKu OF L-iaoR.®

His father's name was ^aikh Kaku, and the people of Labor
believe him to have been a saint.* He (Sbai'^ Is’naq) was a
profoundly learned man, resigned to God and abstinent. He
never went to the houses of worldly men or begged from them.

He was always teaching, and was a compendium of all branches
of knowledge. He was a Su/S by religion and was ever employed
with the Truth (God).* He would not speak unless questions 52 .
were put to him. One day he met in the road a contemptible
wretch who gave to him an earthen pot full of rice and milk,
saying, “ Take this and come with mf.” Without any objection
or refusal be took it on his head and passed through the market-
place until he came to the place where the man lodged, and from

agaiast him. He was defeated and fled to ‘Iraq, in the moantainons districts
of which country he is said to have gained thirty thousand followers. He
had often to fight with the governors bat defied them all, Ain-i-Aibari I.

(trans. Blochmana) introduction, p. iv. note.

- Uiiri**. Tide Am-i-Aiban vol. I. ( trans. Bloohmavin), p. 107.

S Lit. “ From which arises the odour of evile and effaoement,” the “ exile”
referring to the Shaikh’s belief that he was bat a sojourner in this world.

5 Ain-i-Akiari I. (trans. Blochmann), p. 54.5

* Lit. ‘‘Have a belief in his saintship ” ( ). A iraV ( tjl; ) is

“ one who is vary near, ” t.e., to God, Hughes’ Diet, of Islam s. v. Both MSS.
have q)tiS for The emendation in the tsit is correct.

6

a Sif/i-istic term for God.

86

that day forth his heart was washed clean f 2 X)m the guile of
pride, and he was also distinguished among those learned in
profane knowledge,* In the coarse of the year H. 995 (A.D.
1587) I had the honour of waiting on that reverend man, and
one day I told this story, in some connection or another, to Shaikh
Faizl,* who shortly afterwards received the title of Maliku-’A-
Shu'ara ® and he, according to his habit, which was to decry * all
holy men,” past and present, and to exalt himself, began scofiingiy
to belittle the while I remained silent. I cannot say

whether it was that night or some other night that I saw in a
dream that Shai^ Abu.-‘1-Fazl had alighted in a plain, in an old
min wiiieh had no more than two or three ® walls standing.
Shaikli Ishaq was standing in the company of gnnners, with a
mnsket in his hand, just as thongh it were the night of the new
moon and the usual custom in the Royal Court of firing off guns
on the occasion were being observed. He took aim at me and
fired, and tbe sparks fell all round me and in front of me, and ’ I
awoke, terrified. The next day 1 took an offering to the Shaikh
and it was honoured with his acceptance, and I told him what
had happened to me.®

Owing to his great age he had lost the power of speech, but he
used to raise his hand and recite the Fatihah, praise be to God !
He was the instructor of most of the famous learned men of
Labor, such as Shaikh Sa‘da-’llah, who had no rival ® in his time,
and Shaikh Munavvar and others.

* Or perliapE, “ he was distinguished from those learned *m secular
knowledge,” t e., by his humility.

* Tbe brother of Abii-’l-Fazl.

5 “ King of Poets,” the title commonly given to the poet laureate in
Huhammadan Courts.

* 4 *®^- The text wrongly has with the hamzah.

6 The MSS. have "phe text omits

* MS. (B) has which is nonsense.

7 j, supplied in the text, though it appears in neither M3.

8 Badioni evidently regarded the vision as a punishment for not having
defended the Shaikh when he was attacked by Faixi. In this passage MS.
(B) wrongly omits pii?. I have already expressed my opinion of this MS.

® lit. “ an analogy,” something which be»?8 a resemblance to some-

thing else.

87

In liis yoiitli the Shaikh -was incHtied mostly to sport,’ and took
his delig-ht therein, so that ivhenever he bad leisure from studr
he -would take his falcon and hawk and would go oat hawking,
traversing the ground on foot.

His -venerable age exceeded one hundred years when, in the
year H. 996 ( A.D. 1588), he hastened away to the close com-
panionship * of God.

XXYIII. Shaikh SA'nr-’i.LAH Baxi IsrI’il.

One of the orthodox, noble, and boautiful pupils of Ishat,
Kaku, He has followed various rules of life. At first he w'as
a strict observer of the holy law, but suddenly. th>'owing oil all
restraint, he committed all manner of unlawful acts, and forming
an attachment to a singing girl used to roam ^ about the market-
place, for all his gray beard.

Though people heretofore did learn ot me
Now love has come, my teaching days are gone.

Men used, from their firm faith in him, to apply the dust of
his feet as tutty,* and held him to be a saint, ° and in that
capacity he used to give instruction, in the open cattle market.®
He disposed of all the moveable property ’ of his toll'
which he had with him (to satisfy the demands) of his ' stress,
through love of her. One night when he was drinking v with

‘ fiarelesal/ omitted from MS. (B).

* I it. “ the neighbourhood of the propinquity.”

S (text). Both MSS. have

* a crude zinc oxide, applied to the eyes as a collyrivm.

i J*X***. “ Believed him to be a wall," i.e., one near to

God.

* The text and MSS. have tri® means “ a seller ot

beasts.” The expression is elliptical and obscure, but I cake it to be equi-

^ •

valent to and have so translated ifc, might be

suggested as a variant for in which case the sense of the pnraae

would be, “all polluted as he was,” seiL by his intercourse with the singing
girl

1 carelessly omitted from MS. (B).

53

88

iier, a party of muhtasihs,^ together with the students who were
his disciples, banded together and entered his house by climbing
over the wall, with a view of bringing him to a proper frame
of mind,® and, breaking all the appurtenauees of unlawful and
forbidden amusements^ (which they found), wished to subject
him to punishment.'^ He repeated what was said (on one occa-
sion) to the second true Khalifah,'^ the Prince of the true
belie'vers, ‘Urtiar (may God be gratified with him I). If I have
committed cue unlawful act you have been guilty of three
unlawful acts, and are the more deserving of punishment, for
that, in order to spy upon me, and without my permtssiori, you
entered my liouse by climbing over the wall.” ® The party, ashamed
ar.d abashed, left him. Afterwards, being enabled by God’s
srace to repent sincerely, lie modelled his life on the hook
and passed his time in worship and austerities, and composed
34. many profitable and sublime books, among them beicg a com-
mentary on the Jawahiru-’l-Qur’an^ by Imam Ghazzali (may
God have mercy upon him !).

t Police oSicer.s nppcicted to prevent drinking, gambling and other offences
against the inoral l.-iw.

? Jte». “• for the purpose of remedying bis condition.”

8 j ojlf “ ilie instruments of wanton amusements and of

pastimes prohibited by the sacred law, i. e., such things as dice, drinking-
cnps, wdne vessels, and iustruiiients of music.

i “ Tg^gm-ing,” or ” inflictiog stripes below the full number allowed

by law.” It does not appear whether the Shuif^ was to have peen flogged
or merely rebaked,

6 ^i lo^ . f^lL) Here Badaoni stoutly asserts himself as a Sunni.

o The three unlawful acts were (1) spying upon a Mnslim, (2) entering the
house without asking the owner's permission, and ( 3) entering the honse as
thieves, by climbing over the wa.l. The privacy of dwelling is established
cv the teaching of Muhammad, and it is unlawful to enter a house without
ki)|«5Xiu«j, or asking permission. Vide Qtt'rau xiiv. 27-29.

7 >1*^1 ride supra, p. 29, n. 2.

8 Jmcihir El-Coran, gemmae Ccrani, anctore Imam Eojjet-el-Islam, Alu
Hamid Mohammed Ben Mohammed Ghaidli Tiisi, anno 505 (inc. 10 Jul. 1111)
mortuo. Librum divisnm esse coraraemorat in dootrinas et actiones, has
esse extcriores et interiores, interiores antem distribntas esse in pnrifica-
tionem et sni ipsius alienationem, nt qnatuor slnt genera doctrinarnm, ex-
teriores dioo et interiores, et vituperatione et luv.de dignas. Singula genera

89

When the KhaBfah of the a^e summoned him to a private
interview he asked him, “of what race are you ? ” and he replied,
“• of the tribe of the scribes, who are called in the Hindi tonene,
Kdyats.” ^ The Emperor was much pleased with this unassuming
answer and held a long conversation with him. I waited on him
for the first time in Labor and in some connection or another he
made mention of the question of the decay of Multan and the
prosperity of Labor, and the matter of the Sultans of the Langah
family, especially Sultan Husain,' speaking on these subjects in
snob a manner that I was astonished :at the manner in which he
acquitted himself, and at the elegance and polish of his style.
Rarely liave I heard such sweetness of diction.

He never left a beggar disappointed, and although he had no
concern with commerce or husbandry, and was not in enjoyment
of a subsistence allowance from the Emperor, bis resources and
expenditure on alms and charity were such that nobody knew

ad deoem principia rodennc, totum aateir. selectissimam Coratii partem
continer.” ILtji Khaltfa!i So. 421;;i. No mention is made of the commentary
composed by the Shaii.'/,

1 The Edyats or Kdyastks. the great carte among the Hindns whose occnpa-
iion is wTiting. They numbered in 18S1 two and a quarter millions. From
the Shaikh’s cognomen it might be supposed that he was of Jewish or
Afghan descent, as was perhaps the case. His forbears may have been
employed as scribes, and it is possible that the Shaikh, wici.out being a
HiD,lu by descent, was sntficieutly politic to humour Akbar’s predilection
for Hindus, by naively confessing to a Hindu ancestry, and to refrain from
proudly claiming a foreign descent, as a bi^.-ited Mnslim would probably
have done. It is for this reason that Badaoni describes his answer as
“ unassuming.” Or the ShailA may, perhaps, have been descended from
KiynsSis on the mother’s side, and made the most of the fact in order to
hamonr the Emperor.

* The Langah dynasty reigned in Multan from A.D. 1443 to A.P. 1524.
Shaikh TQsaf, the first of the line, established an independent monarchy
in Multan in the former year. In the latter year Saltan Husain Lang.th II.,
the iasc of the line was overcome by Shah Husain .■irjhan, the rnlar of
Sindh, who acknowledged the suzerainty of Babar, aud afterwards of
Humayiin, from whom, however, he withdrew his allegip-nee when Sher
Shah overcame him. When Humayiin fled to Sindh Shah Husain received
his amba.osadors not liiscouiteonsly, bat refused to assist him in any way.
He subsequently drove Humayiin from Sindh. Ain-i-Akbart II. (traus.
Jarrert), 334-336, and “ The Indus Delta Country,” by Major-General M. B.
Haig, 89-92.

12

90

whence he derived his means,’ and the people were perplexed on
this subject.*

On reaching the age of abont eighty years he passed away
from this illusory world, and great and small, in their thousands,
nay more, accompanied * his funeral, taking up his pure bier on
their heads and sbonldei-s, with a view to obtaining blessingrs hy
so doing, (and the crowd was so great that) there was not room to
plant one’s foot.

XXIX. Mitas Shaikh ‘Abpc-‘llah of Badaos.

He was one of the benefits of the age and the blessings of the
epoch. In early youth be was learning a lesson from the BUstan,
and came to this couplet ; —

“In the way of purity it is impossible, O Sa'di,

To travel, except by following the Chosen One,” ^

(may God bless and save him !). He asked bis teacher, “What
is the meaning of this couplet ? Explain it to me in Hindi.” His
56- teacher said “ What business have you with this story ® ? ”
He replied “ Until you thoroughly explain it to me I will not
learn another lesson.” When the meaning of it had been ex-
plained he said “ Give me an account of Muhammad, “ the
Chosen ” (may God bless and save him !) and tell me who he is.”
The teacher described to him some of the noble qualities and
wondrous works of his holiness ( may God bless him and save
him), and, as soon as he heard the description, the mystic attrac-

1 Lit. “ Nobixiy knew whence all these reacurces, expenditure, and dis-
buTsemeEts were.”

^ MS. (B) carelessly omits

S MSS. The word should oe

reading in the text is nonsense, and is dae apparently to the unaccountable
antipathy of Indian scholars to the repetition of the letter is in words of
this measure, such as Jrir*> and which they write and

* iJjU Aj,

5 The concluding couplet of the introduction to the Bustdn. The couplet
com^nces here — >1*". The better leading is The chosen one

\ ) is, of course, Muhammad.

* in neither MS.

’ w the text. Both MSS. have, correctly, aud so 1 have

translated.

91

tion of the Lord seized on him, and, rending his shirt, he nttered
the creed of Islam.* When his parents heard of this they recog-
nized that he had declared himself free of them and renounced
them,* and coaid not properly return to their care, so that they,
of necessity, relinquished all claim to him, and he, jonrneying
from Samana,* the home of his ancestors, employed himself in
reading the Quran, in making himself acquainted with God’s
commands, and in the pursuit of knowledge. At last, joining
himself to a band of famous sages and great saints he became one
of the greatest ^ iges of the age, and placing his hand in the
Land of Mijah Shaikh ‘Abdu-’l-Baqi-yi-Cishti of Badaon (may
God give rest to his soal !) he became. his disciple, and received
instruction from him in the mvstic worship of the Sufis. Subse-
quently he attended upon Shaikh Safi of Ehairabad * (may God
sanctify his honoured tomb ’ } and others, and, employing himself
in austerities and in strifing after holiness, attained perfection.
He acquired the blessing of knowledge from most of the noted
masters ‘ of his time, especially from Miyah Shaikh Ladan ^ of
Dihli and from Mir Sayyid Jalai of Badaon, and after the death
cf the latter, whose sins are foi^Ten, he became his successor
and taught and imparted instruction for many years in Badaon,
and many well-known sages, who have become famous, sat at his
feet. People from, the surrounding country and from the utmost
pai’ts of (other) countries by waiting upon him attain eternal
felicity.

Latterly the mysterious attraction of God has overpowered
him, and he appears at meetings for ecstatic singing and dancing,^

* ^**5 “ the delectable speech.” a*** j ^(3/,

“ there is no god bnt God, and Mohammad is the apostle of God.”

2 jl J Ipl • Md. (B) omits jf- The meaning of this
passage is that as the boy had devoted himself to the religions life his
parents relinquished their control over him and handed him over to his
religions instructors.

3 A pargciTia town in the sarkar of Sirhind, Biba of Dihli.

* Chief town of a Sarkar of the same name in the Saba of Awadh.

i lit, “ those who are followed.” • MS. (B) has ijf.

7 Xhe ecstatic “ worship ” of the Sufis has already been

briefiy described. Some of the performances are here described.

9-2

and from, tlie excessive inSnenee of his longing and desire after
56. God ^ he utters sonl-melting cries and heart-searing shrieks ard
falls''* a-trerahling, and advances some paces, though there he at
the time no ecstatic dance in progress, and crt'ing out, at the same
time, the la haul ^ he returns to his place and remains standing
there.

His nnceremonionsness and anpretentionsness artf sncH that
he goes on foot, like his predecessors and snecessors, to the shop
and to the market to buy household goods, whether in small or
large quantities, and to purchase all necessary supplies for his
kitchen, which he may need, an.d carries them back to where he
dwells. On the way, too, he teaclies a mimber of his scndents,
and howsoever much they may say “ Master, there is no need for
you to trouble yourself in this way, we will perform this duty,"*’
he does not consent thereto. His auspicious appeal ance bears
witness to his poverty and self-effacement, and, notwithstanding
his having received permission to impart religious instruction,
and documents appointing him a recognized deputy from (various)
holy men, he is not devoted to the usual system of Shaikh';
and their disoipies,^ hut on the contrary, carefully avoids it.
Clad in the garb of holy men and the vesture of religions leaders
he remained cloaked and concealed in his robe.“

When I was reading, under his instruction, tlie com-
mentary on the Saha'if fi-'l-KaJam'^ and the Tahqiq fi nsuli-'l

1 iiii j) . Both MSS. add (3^0 j_ The words have l/o.-n
carelfcsslj omitted from the tf^xt.

2 Both MSS. have the respecifu! plural. The text has the

singular.

8 The formula ^ ^ “ there is ao power or strength but

ia 4 /.c , the day's markecinrr.

3 j ^ hi. “ he is not cevoced to ^aiH-ship and

discipleship,” i.e., ti.e system by which a reo.n 2 :iii:;ed Shiikh authorized ids
discipie.s to teach, and constituted them iia bpiritnal successors.

5 “a kin.T of tunic, pieneraily reaching to the middle of the shank,
tdivided down the front and made to lap over the chest.” Lane, Arabic
Lexicim s. v. vida' also Dozy, Dichom.aire tie.s noms des vetements chez les
Arahes, pp. 352-362.

i “El-Sahaif fi el- Ea'iam, folia de metaphysics, qnm ita incipinnt ; laus
Deo ezutentia et unitaie dzgno, etc., et in praefationem sex folia, et concln-

93

fiqji,^ notwitbstanding tbaf a class of pupils * of copious attainments
and students of clear intellect were also engaged in stndj, and
brought subtil difficaities for his elucidation, I never saw him, in
the course of his teaching, to he under the necessity of referring to
a book for the purpose of solving those questions and obscure
subtilties, for wbatever he had once seen he had on the tip of his
tongue, and he had acquired 3 the habit of great readiness, being
assisted thereto by God* He is now in his ninetieth year, and
will, please God, who is honoured, attain to the natural limit
of man’s age.

XXX. Shaikh JALAir-’D-Di.N’ of Qakkauj.®

He was a man mysteriously attracted to God and walking
in the way of the law.® His ancestors came from Hnltan,
and settled iu Qannauj, an old and famous city of Hindustan.
After devoting himself to the carrying out of the religious
obligations imposed on devout Muslims he expeiienced a

sionem distributa sane. In ejus coramentariis numer.atnr liber EWyUari}'
fi Sharh El-Sahdif inscriptus, qui ita incipic ; Laus D^c Chj'is
nvllus est terminus, etc. Auctor, qaem Sar/icjrr.’nni esse piuo, iorinula usus
esi. “ dicit auctor.” et, ‘‘ dico eqo.” Pariter comtiientarunii ed'dit."

Hdjl Khiillfn, 771S. Ic was probably one of ibe two coinrr.eiitaries referred
to that Badaoiii read.

1 The book referred to was probably that described l>y Hdl'i Khalifa,
No. 2715 EI-Tahckic. espositio accuraia. Cummectarias opens IMunteKiab
de principiia, de quo licer.a -If, .a videatur It may. how. ver, i'are been
ttie foUowiiig (H. K. No. 2,1'C’ ‘ El-Tat.t,kic, acociata •.xpoaUi;. ioietore
Imam Ifohji-t’iJ-.fic. Tanya Ben She-ef Xeicai..’’ B.adaoni givrs t.oe names of
these books in Persian. For '■'^’■vonieiice’ sake 1 hare gi\ en them their
original .Arabic titles.

* lit, •' those who seek for religions gnidanca or instruction.”

ilS, (B) has Probably the word ciIaA was too much for

tiie copyist.

3 cU'ja.. MS. (AJ has cloLs*..

4 MS. (B) omits AjJ|,

^ The ancient cifcv of Qannanj, (Sans. Kunya-tculija), in early Hindu times
one of the principal centres of Aryan civilization in India. It was in
BadaonI s tim"- the chief town of the sarkar oT the same name in the SP.ha
of Agra. It is now a Tahsil town in the Farrnkhabad District. N.-W.P-
Tide Conningham, •* Ancient Geography of India,” 376-382.

t It has already been observed that the fact of a Sup, one who

has experienced i.e., has been mysteriously drawn to God, condescend-

94

57. mysterious attraction to God, Lnt none tlie less i left no jot or
tittle of the pure law unobserved. At times, when overcome by
leligions ecstasy, be would blacken bis face and, hanging the
string of a bedstead round his neck, and would wander through
the market-places uttering doleful and mournful cries ; and he
had many unusual observances such as these. One day, when
he had completed the Friday prayers in the Mosjid-i-Hayy, I
waited on him. He got up and went to visit the old obliterated
tombs of his noble ancestors, wiiich were in the courtyard of
the masjid, and at each * grave he recited the fdtihah,^ and told ^
one of his attendants who conversed with him the story of the
life cf the occiipunt of the grave, and after telling separately
the stories of each of those holy men, he fell into a reverie, and
^hen his reverie wus over he out to that attendant a question
from the Fura'i:.'- The attendant replied, If a man dies, and
leaves as his heirs one son and one daughter, the son receives
two-thirds of the property left by tbe deceased, and tbe daughter
C’lft-tbird.” The Shaikh listened to him with approval aud then,
without saying another word,® left the place. It afterwards
became known ^ that the Shaikh observed that practice in ac-

ic" to observe any of tbe ordinary restrictions of religion and morality, is
always regarded by Badioni, and by a!I Muslims of Sw/i-istic tendencies,
as worthy of special remiirk. The Siifi holds himself to be absolved from
all such observances. He is above such trivial matters, which have been
ordained for the common herd. He is, in short, an antinomian. Fide supra
p. 27 n. 4.

t ot '!• MS. (A) has ob, wrongly. Here wo have another instance of
fact of a Sifi observing the religions and moral law being considered extra-
ordinary.

omitted from the text in spite of the authority of both MSS.

S The opening chapter of the Qur'an, recited either in behalf of one’s self
or of others. Here evidently used as a prayer for the dead.

* The text here destroys the whole sense of this passage with
omittiug the preposition. The MSS. have the preposition ^
before shewing that it was the SK 'it^ who spoke to the attendant, not

the attendant to the Shaikh.

t The Muslim law of inheritance and the division of property left by a
deceased person.

« tias U M.s, (B) has for

1 MS. (B) has for bat with

anperacribed.

95

cordapce with that tradition, pregnant with meaning, the Knb-
stance of which is that if a question from the Fara’iz be recited
over a tomb, and a statement of the shares of inheritance be
made, all the people lying buried there are, by virtue of the
recitation of that portion of the law, forgiven their sins.^ The
ShaiMi never failed to observe this practice on Fridays.

XXXI. SgAiiCH Kappr-i-Majzub * of Gwaliyak.

{May God have merey vpon him .') ^

He was a Hustani * Sayjn'd, and in early life followed the
military profession. ^ Suddenly, leaving the service, he adopted
the occupation of a water-carrier, and at night used to carry
water to the houses of chaste and secluded widows,® and used
to take water to the people free of charge, until he experienced
a mysterious attraction towards God, when ho gave up all employ-
ment, and, abandoning his own free-will, no longer spoke at all,
in the way of conversation, but was ever longing for dissolution.

I passed from Thy street supporting myself in my weakness
with my hand against the wall.

Thou earnest in Thy glory, and I was struck motionless as a
picture on the wall ’

He chose for his dwelling a ho,.se in the lower market of
Gwaliyar, ® and always remained there, and passed all his time
with his head drooping in meditation. If any question occurred
to the minds of those who were present with him he would
answer it, after the manner of those who are mysteriously drawn
to God, as though he were raving in a delirium, ^ and would solve

1 Apparently by the vicarious merit of the reciter.

5 Affected by the mysterione attraction towards God.

8 This benediction occurs in AIS. (A) oniy.

* I.e., a Sayyid descended from Hnsain.

6 text, and MS. (B). MS. (A) has

« The use of the word in the sense of “ woman,” clearly

shews the author to have been a native of India. The word does not mean
“ woman ” in Arabic or Persian.

A very common simile iu Persian poetry for a person who is suddenly
struck morioniess by surprise, terror, admiration, or any other emotion.

- Ur perhaps, “ below the market plttce at Gwaliyar.

Thi" passage shews us tiio frame of mind expected in men who claim
to have been “ mystenousiy attracted'^ towards God. It is on this accoont
that ’liaUntss is regarded in the Past w'ith rcspi.ct, fer the i.'riental commonly

53 .

06

the difficulty, and lie would recount what was passing at a distance, ■
He always passed the night in a standing posture, sometimes
weeping and sometimes laughing.

I have heard from his confidants* that on one occasion a
Sayyid came fiom a foreign country and asked the Shaikh to
prove his ciaim to being a Sayyid? The Shaikh ordered firewood
to be brought, and a large lire to be lighted, and then, taking
the man hy the hand, said, “ Come, iet ns both enter the fire,

“ That his face may be blackened* who is lying.”

The Sayyid held aloof, but Shai^. Kapur, entering the fire,
came out of it without hurt ; and many other similar miracles
are related of him. All accounts of him agree in this respect.
For the sake of brevity I have related only this much.

f In the course of the year H. 979 (A.D. 1571-2) he ran out
one night shouting “ Strike, strike ! ” ® and fell from over the
door of his house, and surrendered his life to God. Shaikh
Faizi found tSie date of his death in the words “ Kapur-i-

XXXII. SfJilKH AlL.IH ’ B.\KH1U of Crll:iIlKXES.tE.^

Garmaktesar is a pargana town on the banks of the Ganges,
in the Sarkar of Sambal. He lived for forty years in poverty

belierns t’.iat the riaaiac is as liVslr to be possessed by Gnd as by an evil
sylii'- The of traveK < f toe eccentric Tom Coryate supplies us

I example of tbie vie^' of madness.

I 'I'-.- V oi'd Las been coo much for the sciibe of MS. (Bj,

^vhose Tcrsiuu is

s oUi. yi.S. iB) ha.s

3 ^ The MSS. omit JL

* r.c., '* that, he may be put to shame,” the usual idiom in Persian and
Urdu. It is peculiarly appropriate here, from the nature of the ordeal.-

& MS. (A) has j here.

6 jLc ^U. These words are probably Hindustani, which the ^aikh most
likely spoke, at any rate in moments of excitement, and I have translated
them accordingly. If we suppose them to be Persian they will mean ‘‘ A
snake, a snake ! '*

20 + 2 + 6 + 200 -P 40 + 3 -t-COO + 6 + 2 — 879, the sum being just a hundred
short.

3 The text has Ai| (^Uih) though both MSS. have {Allah).

9 Garmaktesar, or more properly Garhmakhtesar, is now an interesting
old town in the Mirath District, X.-W. P., pictuiesquely situated on the

97

and contentment, employed in imparting religions instruction to
students. He was noted for his resignation, and eompanionsliip
with him caused one to think of God.

In his seventieth^ year he jocrneyed to Sambal ’ for pleasure, 59.
and an old woman, the widow of the late Shaikh Banj u of Samhal,
she being devout and given to fasting, the fonrtli (perfect
woman) * of her age, having lived for thirty-five years without
a husband, never breaking her fast save with milk, privately
sought to become his disciple, and asked him to shew her the
way of God. He sent an answer to her to this effect, “Until
thou obey the law of his holiness the best of men,* (on him
and on his family be blessing and salutation from God), and
enter the bonds of matrimony,* it is in vain for thee to ask
concerning this path,* and to apeak of it ” She at once entered
her travelling litter and waited on him, and was married to him,
and shortly afterwards both of them journeyed to the ne.vt world.®

I waited on that reverend man in company with one of my
frmnds, by name Sayyid Qasiin, who was one of the noblest of the
Sayyids of Bihli, and found him pleasant in companionship and
likewise in speech. When a basin and ewer were brought for ns to
wash our hands he said, “ Begin with that Sayyid, for ‘ One who
is of the family of Ha.shim'' ha.s a better right to precedence.’”

right bank ofthe Ganges. It takes it.s name from the ancient fort and
from the temple of Mnkhteshwara Mahadeva.

I cImm (text). The reading of the MSS. ( ULcuu ) is correct.

® The reference here is to the tradition that Mnhammad said, “ Among
men there have been many perfect, bnt among women only four, ‘ Asiyah,
the wife of Firann (Pharaoh), Mariyam, the daughter of Amran, Khadijah.
the daughter of Khawailid. and Fatimah, daughter of Maliatnraad.’’ In
the Qvr’dn, and probably, therefore, in thi.s tradition, Miriam, the daughter
of Amran, and sister of Moses and Aaron, is confounded witli the Blessed
Firgin. Badsoni means to say that this old lady was entitled to rank with
the four perfect women of the tradition, but it would have been more
logical to call her the dfth, not the fourth perfect woman.

3 Mnhammad.

* Celibacy is frequently condemned by Mnhammad, for “when a Muslim
marries he perfects half his religion” Pile Hughes, “Diet, of Islam ” -at
lociiti.s “ Celibacy ” anu “ Marriage ”

* llj, in neither MS. but rightly SHpriied in the text.

® MS. (B) has which is nonsense.

" The great-graudfather of Muhammad, from wbotn the latter's family,
representeil now’ by the are called Hdskirnh.

13

53

XXXIIT. Shax^ ‘1p.if-i-HcsaisI.i

He is one of the grandsons of Shah Isma‘il-i-Safavi.* He is
a great master of exorcism, practises many ansterities and strives
much in the path of holiness, breating his fast always with
some coarse birni t barley bread and bitter herbs, which none hut
himself can her r to eat. He walk.s steadfastly in the straight
path of the holy law. and recites the nztJre ® at the five times of
prayer, in the verv portico * of Shaikh Ahn-‘I-Fazl, at the Imperial
Court, fearing nobody. Many miracles are related of him, one
of them being as follows. He wiil throw a round piece of paper
into a chafing-dish, with the fire bnming therein, and v, ill
take out of the chafing-dish coined ashrofis^ and distribute them
to the company, how many soever they be. They say that he
60 . will come out of a locked room, just as bodie.s are transported
from place to place, and will appear elsewhere. On one occasion
he came from Gujarat so the city of Lahbr and gave to the people
winter fruits in the .summer time and summer fruits in the
winter time. The ‘ulamd of the Piiujah, tlie chief of whom w.as
Makhduniu-T-Mulk.°. raised objections to what he was doing, and
said, ‘‘It is evident that thi.s finit come.s from some people’s
orchards, and that he has possessed himself of it witliont the

t l.e., a Sayyid descended from Hnsain.

^ The word Safavi occurs in neither MS. Shah Isma’II was the founder
of the Safain dynasty in Persia. He was descended of a long line of pious
Sayy'di. His reign commenced in A.D. 1500 according to Mnsalman
historians, but according to Malcolm (Hist. Persia I. 500) he was not re-
cognized as sovereign of the whole Persian Empire until A.D. 1502 in which
year he overcame Saltan Mnrad, in a battle fought near Hamadan in Iraq
(Vide Malcolm, Hist, of Persia, and Beale, O.’iental Biographicai Dictionary,
183, 184).

3 Tlie call to prayer.

4 The teat and MSS. have AjlstAJb which has no meaning. I read
■*<!■», with the meaning here given. Another reading suggested is
AjlsULruJ^ “wardrobe,” ‘store-room for clothes,” or for basins, ewers, 4c.
The two variants were snggested to me by Shamsn-l-'Ulama Shaitt Mahmud
Jilini. He prefers the latter.

5 The gold coin commonly known as a “ gold mohur.”

® Makhdiimn-‘1-Malk has already been mentioned more than once. He
was ciiief ot the ‘Glama or orthodox doctors during the reigns of the Afghan
Emperors, Shir Shah, Salim Shah, Firuz Shah, and ‘Adli, during which
period he held the title of Maiiddmu.'l-M'ulk which bad been given him by

91 )

owners' permission, and to eat it * is ntilawfiil. ’ As he was not
well received in that country, lie went to Kaslimir, and ‘Ali
Kjhan,® the ruler of that land believed firmly in him. and gave
him his daughter in marriage, bat, when he c.iscovered tiiat
ShaiHi ‘Arif was setting up some claim or another,- he demanded
his daughter’s dowry back again, and took a deed of diTcrc-e
from her husband: and the Shah ^ went tlienoe to rihat, pnd
there also, they sav, he performed many miraci-s. one of ti’em
being that he shook a tree, and quantities of dir.'n and dia-i'--
fell from it. In this manner he exhibited great sapernr.i.iicii
power, in Gujarat, Hindustan,® Ka^jimlr, and and wherever

he went attempts were made on bis life, and lie tia,velied iri.m
country to country.

On the first occasion on which the Emperor maae a tour fiTin
Kashmir to Kabul the Shah came to see him io the course ot
that journey, and the Emperor appointed persons to have charge
of him, who should not let him go out of their sight.^ And
sometimes, when he came into the Emperor’s presence, his
Majesty would place musk, and camphor, and otJiev perfunie.s
,iu a golden cup, and present it to the Skaiidi its a gift, but

Huniayiin, His name was llanlini ‘Abdallah Ansaii, of Sulianpur. Ho did
not die until II. 990 (A.D. 1582) being then. like the rose ot‘ ctie Inma, in
disgrace, ride Vol. 11,, text, 202-204, and Ain-i-Akbarll. (trar.s, Biochmann)
introduction vii., 544 et passim,

1 carelessly omitted from MS (B).

2 This was ‘AIT Khan Cak, King of Kashmir, who reigned from A.H. 9<1
to A.R 986 (A.D. 1563-1578) in which latter year he died from ininri^s
received during a game of caugdn (polo), and was succeeded by his sorij
Yusuf ^iTn (or ^ah) Cak, in whose time Kashmir was conquered by
Shabrukh Mirza and annexed to the empire. Vide Am-i-Akhari I. (trans.
Biochmann), 478, 479 and IT. (trans. Jarrett), 380.

2 This vague statement may mean shat the Shaikh was following the
fashion of the time and setting up as Mahdl.

I.e , the Shaikh . This ia the usuaT title of courtesy applied in India
and especially in the Panjab to Sayyids,

^ Small silver and gold coins. Vide Ahi i-Akbai'2 I. (tr.ins. Biochmann)
35, 36.

^ The word is (Kind), but from its juTtaposition witii Gnjiirat and
Kashmir it is evident that it means only Hindustan proper.

1 The Sh aikh though lionoured on account of his reputation for sanctity
was evidently regarded as a dangerous character. His royal descent would
have served to increase the suspicion ^Mth which he was regarded.

100

however much ne said “Accept from* me some gold, or some
and,” the Shaikh would reply, “Bestow® the geld upon your
Ahadis,^ for they are in sorry case. What should I do with it ? ”
'A hen I saw the Shah in company with Qalij Khan, in the portico ■*
of Shaikh Abu^‘l-FazI, under whose protection the Shah was,® I
standing on the parapet of a roof which overlooked his cell, he
had his faee covered with a veil, and was writing, and w'as saying
61. ta one who was with him, “It was this Qalij ^^an who said, ‘I
an* Qalij, your slave and servant.’”® It is probable that the
"'yiaikh had been accustomed to veil his face for a long time, and
.T was said that he possibly did so to avoid being recognized
vhen he travelled from place to place — but God knows the
truth. I heard from a trusted and intimate associate of the
Shaikh that one day in Kashmir the Emperor sent Shaikh Abh-‘i-
Fazl and Hakim Abu-‘1-Fatt^ to wait upon the Shah, and one of
them,^ agreeably to the Emneror’s order, said, “ Shah how would
it ’oe if you were to raise your veil, so that I miglit see your
comeliness ? ” He would not comply and said, " I am a poor
beggar ; let me alone, and vex me no more.” ® The IRaleim, with

1 jyw. Both MSS. have

^ MS. (A) has olii'.

® A co/'ps d'elite. AbO-’l-FazI says, in his stilted and obsenre style, “ They
are called Atiadis because they are fit for a harmonious unity.” They were
employed in the Civil Departments of Uje Administration as well as in the
Army. From the Ain-i-Akban we learn that their pay was Rs. 25 per merise'n
in the case of Tiiranis and Persians, and Eg. 20 in the case of Hindustanis.
If employed to collect the revenno they received Rs, 15 pe; mensem, and
were called hardwardi, which we may translate by “ seconded.” The lower
pay of those employed in collecting the revenue is simply a recognition of the
invariable Asiatic rule that, all those concerned in collecting what is due to
Government will also collect what is not due to themselves. Vide- Ain-i-
Akhnri, passim. '

Vide ^itpra.

^ Gr. perhaps mors, probably, “ 'n whose custody ir-. ^ah was ”

5 The &nikh et :.:_-ntIy had c luse of complaint against Qalij Khan. Tr e
CEp’-escion seems *. j mc.aa that Qalij Khan hacf at first pryfe-sed devotion to
htra as a holyri n, at i hah -.fterwards treated him with r-nolness and
ir.Jitlere'ice- : -smg hi.- ■■•ie fro... his Bup'rior at Conjrt.

" Vile 1,.' I <1 ipLi,. ''IT, :To. VIII, also Vol. II pa,sim, and Ain-i-
Akbii 1 II (trant, Blochmani. ;, '.2i 12.5 et r.-..- --iin.
li'.oier l 1'. Ahii"T-i'at -Vl.-

^ jiAij ( tev-). Loth '-I' ■ h ie clearly t'o correct reading.

101

his usual impudence and insolence,' streteiiea lorth his hand,
and endeavoured to pull off the veil. The ^ah objected, and
becoming* angry said, “ God forbid ! I am not. leprous or de-
formed ; behold ! See ray face ! ” and he rent the collar of his
garment and threw the veil from his face on to the ground, and
said, “ Hakim, yon have now seen my face, but, please God, the
honoured One, yon shall, in the space of a fortnight,* see what the
ontcome of this matter will be.” Fifteen davs had not passed
when the Hakim, in the course of shat very journey, died of the
complaint of hepatic diarrhcea.* And countless other miracles
of this sort are related of the Shaikh.

One day the Emperor said to him, “ Shah, either become like
me, or make me like yourself.” He answered, “ How can we, who
hare abandoned worldly objects,^ become like you r If you will
come and sit beside ns, in order th.it von may become even as ns.”

MIB SiTTID ‘ALi’u-’D-Dtir OF AV.’aDH.*

{May God have mercy ufon him !)

He possessed sublime perfections ^ of nature and manifested
miraculous powers, and gave clear proofs (^of his sanctity).* He
was one of God’s most wondrous works, and many miracles are 02.
related of him. Notwithstanding the glorious position and
exalted degree (as a saint) to which he attained he would some-
times declare holy mysteries and sacred truths in ver.se,* and this
opening couplet by him is the admiration of the world : — ■

I know not what colour and scent that smiling rose hath,

With which the biyds of every meadow hold converse.”

' Badaoixi had no liking for Abn-’l-Fatb, who had great indaence oyer the
Emperor, and was one of those who led him astray in religious matters.

* *.X«f ja, MS. (A) has
^ iJjbt carelessly omitted from MS. (B).

* 4 /*^

^ Ajudhya, near the modern Faizabad.

■ The text here has tliongh both MSS. have which is the

reading which I hare followed.

^ ** plural of that which convinces.”

9 Strictly orthodox Hnslims are inclined to regard poetry with suspicion.

10 Lit. “ laughing.” A. ** laughing rose ” is a rose with its mouth open,

a full-blown rose. MS. (B) reads which means “self-growing.”

he Las composed a :aj-Jl‘-hand - of which this i' ilir
3 if: ain : —

” View with the eyes of thy heart nothing except the f’neini.
'■ Whatsoever thou seest regard as a manifesta'ioa of Him

_i. id Shaikh 'Iraqi (may God- sanctify his soul ! i aas said on
..ij same sabieot ; —

Refrain

•• The world outward show ; its reality is the Friead,

■■ If thou loohesT to reality. He is everything ’ ®

1 auothsr '.a.-, said : —

Her rain.

■■ The 'corld is a ray from the Face of the Friend,

■ All thing'5 existing are tiie shadow of Him,

.'_r:l I have w.itten the foilowing ; —

Refrain.

'■ He is the kernel of the world, the world is nought out tlm
shell,

"Bat what of kernel and of shell, when all things ate He P " •

ilany of the holy men of the time have sat at the difr’s fei-t.’
of them being his ov/.i wortUy son, Alir SayyicI Mihiu wlm
Wilks in ti'e footsteps of his illustrious father. Another was
Aiir Sayyid 'Ali-yi-Naliairid w;io was subject to overpowei'ing

'il.e text follows this reading but gives the reidmg of IIS (A) n

lojtiiott' vnr’aTft. I foilov/ 3XS. (A).

‘ The tarji'^und opens wiili a m tfhi' like the (^'’zal and consists of stroph^K
.-stanzMs, each containing frota rive to eleven C’OUplets. Between each
Hoinza is inserted the b^ind or refrain, a couplet which is of tae same nieti'-
w.cb the stanza, but which has a different rhyme.

- Ihe word aJd* is not in .MS. ( \ ). If it be omitted the verb Becomes
passive and the benediction is, m-iy his soul be snnccified!”

.MS. ( R) omits before and reads f^j. ^IS, tw'o very

careless errors.

■' Tlie purport of all these refrains is the same. They Voice the pantheism

-)i the

^ Lit. have risen fiom his skirt.

'Ihe reading is clear in both MSS. and in the text. I cannot identify
tne place. It may very likely be Bilehri much resembles

" NaUiari” ( ) in the Persian character. Bilehri is a par^rann town

in the sarkdr of Awadh. Ain’i-Akha^i 1 1. (trans. Jarrett), 174.

10;]

fits of religious ecstasy, aad al'.Tays remained secluded, and in,
vvliom a wonderful degree of religious poverty and separation
from the world * was apparent. He spoke w.tnderfally well on
the Diysticisjn of the Sufis. I. in company wirii Husain Khan,* 63.
waited on iiimS in Kant u GralcH in the .‘or/:, of Samba!, and
received much profit from his pre -ions utterances ; — pr-aise be to
God therefor!

Mir Sa^/vid ‘Ali used ahvays to say in ins prayers, “O God I
malie me a martyr i " Accordingly on one occasion some of the
robbers of that town, whicii i.s a noted den of t'deves. entered the
Mtrs house at midnight, aiid an outcry wa^ lai.sed. The Mir,
uotwit iistanding his ninety year.- of age and his bodiiy feebleness,
.seized m iron mace, and .shouting .'.nt " .lllah. .\liah!’' followed
the th leve.s, wonnding and sending to hell one or two fd them.

At last an arrow struck him in a vital .spot, and he attained the
lank i>: a martyr. This event .iccurred in the rev.' H. 99.5 { A.D.
l,o89-90), and the words, '• v^hat h,t.s happened to that perfect
■spiritual guide were ‘bund to give tlie date.

XXXT. .Shaikii Hamzah of Lakh-nau.

{May the mercy of God be upon him !)

lie is the grandson of Malik Adam, the Kakar.^ rtho was one
of the nobles of Saltan Sikaridar. and Ibrahim Lodi,^ He lived

^ The word used is which means “exile,” “ 3.i],iarnir g in a strange

land.” just as s-aJjj: means “a stranger” or “foreisr.er” I take the
meaning of the passage to be that Mir Sayyid ‘.Aii regarded this world
merely as a pliioe in which he sojourned for a time. looking tor a better
country. It may be though, that as •~^jc has come to mean in Hindustani,
and in Indian Persian, “poor,” Badaonl, whose style is characteristically
Indian. n.ses in the sense of “poverty.”

2 Badaoni’s first patron. Vide .-.iipni passim.

3 Evidently Mir Sayyid ‘All.

* HiisaiiiKhau’s jdgir. The modern Shah jahaiipur. in Rohilkhand

3 3 + . 5 + 300 + 4+ 1 + 50 + 40-+ 200 + 300 + 4 + 20+1+40 + 30 -998.

* MS. (.A; has jic aHj The text and (B) have AiJt A

1 An Afghan tribe. "Tbe Kakar country on the Indus frontier is about
a hundred miles sqmire, and extends from the Waziri border on the north to
the Baloch border on the south.” Bellew’s “ Races of Afghanistan, * 91-94.
.VttiA-Akbari I. {traps. Blochmann), 377.

3 The second and third (and last) Sultans of the Lodi dynasty. Ibraiiira
was conquered by Babar at Panipat, and slain.

104

64.

always by the tomb of his grandfather. The tomb of Malik
.idam is of the length of two ordinary tombs, or more.

Shaikh Hamzah was powerfully affected by a mysterious attrac-
tion towards God. He was of commanding presence and great
stature, and from time to time he took walks in the city,
striding along like a tiger, and carrying stones in his hand, which
be would throw around him in all directions, never, however,
hitting anybody with them. He recited very sweetly, and was
always reading the glorious Qurnn. He paid great attention to
any person whom he considered to be well disposed, summoning
such to his presence. God be praised that I was one of them.
He used to read omens. For the rest, most people were terrified
by his behaviour. * and would not frequent his society, lest some
evil should happen to them.

XXXVI. Shaikh PIrak.

(May God have mercy upon him !)

He was also a native of Lakbnau. He, used to live secluded in
a cave in the forest, in the banks of the river Kudi,* remote from
any habitation and so concealed that nobody could find the way
thither. He broke his fast (no oftener than) once in every week,
after the Friday prayers. In his boose there was a decrepit old
man who used to hiing to him for his meal a fragment of dry
bread and some of the fruit of a plantain tree, which (the
SAai'M) had planted with his own hand. If anyone had em-
barked on an arduous enterprise he would come at that appointed
time* and sit at the door of the Shaikh's cell, but the Shaikh
would never speak,*

When Husain Khan was governor of Lakhnau I went with a
friend named ‘Abdu-’r-Rahman, who was Husain Kh an’s deputy,
to endeavour to obtain an interview with the Shaikh. We found

1 iliC. j lit. “ his movements and restings.”

2 I think the Gamti river, on which Lakhnaa is sitaated, must here be
meant. I can find no river or scream in Awadh bearing the name of Kadi
or Gudi.

3 /.e., the time when the ShaM broke his fast.

* This may mean that the visitor woold never speak, bat the statement
refers more probably to the Shai^. The visitor’s idea apparently was that
he had made a pilgrimage, the merit of which would benefit him, without
aoy advice or consolation from the Shaikh.

105

him nothing but skin, as it were, stretched over bones, and great
snakes darted their heads ont of their lioles both within and
without the cave. One of those present was terrified and wonld
have struck at them with his staff, but the Shaikh forbad him by
a sign, and said, “ What have they taken from yon ? ”

WJien we asked the little old man concerning him he told ns
that he had d welt in that desolate spot for moi-e than thirty years
and that the snakes had become qnite tame from being with him
and never injured anybody. When we were bidding him
farewell he made a sign to all of those present to take some
fragments of bread, several days old, and some dried fruit, which
he had before him, and my friend offered him a piece of gold
which he would not accept. These two • holy men died very
shortly after that time.

XXXVII. Shaikh Muhammad Husain of Sikandea.

Sikandra ^ is a town in the Doab. The Shaikh was one who
was mysteriously drawn to God and was subject to fits of
religions ecstasy. For fifty years after leaving the public service
he lived as a recluse, withdrawn from all people, ever and persist- 65.
ently seated ia devotional seclusion, and visited nobody. When I
waited on him in the year 974 (A.D. 1566-67) he asked me the
meaning of this couplet of !Qyaja Hafiz : —

“ God’s forgiveness is greater than our sin.

Why utterest thou obscure sayings ? Hold thy peace.”

I asked him where the difficulty was and he said, “ As it was
he himself that uttered the obscure saying why did he command
silence ? ” I asked him to explain the couplet and he said, “ It
occurs to me that the obscure saying may be this, that even our
sins are part of His creation, and to say this is to transgress.”

I remained silent, and he then in like manner commented on the
following verse : —

“And serve thy Lord till the certainty overtake thee.” *

i Shaitt Firak and his old attendant.

* Sikandra Kao, headquarters of the tahtil of the same name in the
Aligarh District of the U.P.

C

® 3 Qur’aa xv. 99. ‘ The certainty * is death.

I'e.'-rii.l, '‘Ibe "svoid tiii ) .-sienine? fiie extreme limit,

bur ti.ere can be r.o question of an extreme limit here, bat
apji .rently this iirnir might have reference to the second person
'll >1 liar, to 'Thicii it would be possible to apply it.” God knows
wiidi his meaning was ; and that was the la.st conveisation that we
lute ogetLer.

XX.V’\’ll[. WaHIP ok BlLOn.AM.

Tblgj-um • i.-, ii dependency of Qaiinauj. He is a nio.st learned
arid .acconiiiii.'il'.ed man, much cfiveu to austerities and devotions.
He has a .'ublime ■slr'position and attiactive qualities, and he
tsliir.vs it siihlime relioi-ms rule. He nsod lorinei-ly to indulge in
'r. .'tiitic exercises and .sing ecstatic .soeg.s in Hindi and fall into
tidiice.s, bat he is now past all thi.s. He I'a.s written an apprecia-
tive cominetitary on the Suzhatti-'l-arivak^^. and many treati.se.s on
tire technical terms i)f the ^ufis, one of them named canaliil. ^
and many other .able- compositions besides Althongh he is the
discijile of another he has profited muci, by the company of
.^liiikh Husain of Hikaudr.'. and used to come every year from
Biigrani for the Shaikh’s annual festival, but now that he suffers
from defective sight he cannot «ro tlr ere and is .settled in t^aunauj.

In the year 977 (7i..D. 15t)9-70;, when I arrived in Bilgram
,'roi'i Lucknow, the Shaikh came to visit me. on my .sick bed, *
and his was the first visit that had on my wounds the effect of
ointmeat, and he .said, ’’These wounds aie the roses of love.”
It so liaispened tint, at the same time Hie venerable Phaikli
•Xb'lii’llril’. Badaoin came there, like an invisible spirit, from
Baddon, and 1 am convinced that if ever in mv life I e.vpt-i ienceu
a ■' night of power” ' it was that night. The Mir has a genius

I '(tie well-kno%yn mniU town in the Hard, i District, famous for its
.*?Hyyids and learned men

i •• Die j.'V (or parity! of souls,” evidently a 6V,(i.istic treatise.

' Cars corn.’'

■i Itdlaoni had been severely wounded by the relatives ot a bov whom be
had assanlteu.

& A mysterioas night in the month of Ramazan, the precise date of which
is said to have been know n only to Muhammad and u few of the companions.
See Qur’an xcvii. The excellences of this night are said to be innumerable,
and it o believed that during its solemn hours the whole animal and
vegetable creation bow down in hnmble adoration to the Almighty. Hughes,
i|itt. of inldm^ c r. Lailutii^i-i^adr.

107

for poetry and he wrote of a witty, beloved and. acceptable friend
named Raia the following couplet :

Thono-hts of thee have made my heart their throne,

^^ever will mv lieart have looiu for any out cnct?.

Do not depait in augei (lit, quarrel; as tiiou cemest fust
in peace.

For a moment clo thou sit with kiudnes-^;, so that I may get
out of my own self.

CHAPTER II.

An account of the learned men, most of whom the auteoe

HAS MET, OH FROM WHOM HE HAS RECEIVED INSTRUCTION.

Besides those learned men whom the author has met. the laro'e

' e

ntuaber of those whom he has not seen, but who are well known
in all parts of the land, exceeds the bounds of computation and
the limits of enumeration. Of those whom the author has
known one is that master of masters, Shaikh Hatim of Sambhal.

i. Shaikh Hatim op Sambhal.^

He was the pupil of Miyan ‘Azizn-’Uab of Talamba.2 Taking
him in aU he had no equal in this generation as a sage versed both
in those branches of knowledge which demand the exercise of the
reasoning faculty, and in those which demand the exercise of the
memory, but especially in scholastic theology, (Quranic) exegesis,
practical theology, and Arabic literature. It used to be said that
he had, in the conrse of teaching, gone through the commentary g7
on the Miftah * and the Mutawvoal* from the ha of Bismi-'Uah to
the ta of “ tammata,'” nearly forty times, and that he had gone
through all other advanced works (on theology) as often. He
used to tell IVtakhdumu- 1-AIulk that .he had no rival in dis-
putation. W hen Mulla ‘Ala’u-’d-din Lari took to the Miyfln,
with the greatest assurance, his notes on the commentary on the
‘Aqa id-i-hiasaji,^ the Miyan, after perusing them, discussed the
matter with such minuteness of detail that Mulla ‘Ala’u-’d-din
was unable to answer him.

'de Vijl. i, trfins. Rankio" p 428. 2 Yiae paue 3, nott i

i’v a t.i>rk on gramniai and rht^Toric. The corninen-

^ -written hv i Hisamu-d-diu at MpAva77ir.i. r.iie vlJ. 1
'■ 1 . X'.’ liking, p. 428, r!'>vc 2.

' ’■ th.e book called t"" ■,

11 i ik I). 428. note 1.

110

In scholastic theology the greatest of the Imams ^ (on him be
the mercy of God !) was interior to the MiySn. The MiySA was
an ascetic and sirove much in the way of holiness, and was pions
and devont, although he sat in the seat of hononr and dignity,
exercising absolute antbority.

When I, in the time of Bairam ^^an,® the i^an-Khanan, re-
entered the service of the Miyita in Agra,, after an interval of
five years, I delivered to him a request for a decision on a point
of theology from Shaikh Mubarak ^ of Ifagor, from whom I was
at that time receiving instrnctioru After inquiring of me how I
had done during the time of my separation from him, the MiyaA
said, “ What sort of a religions teacher is Shaikh Mubarak ? ” I
told him what I knew of the Shaikh's conduct as a Mulls, of his
piety, his poverty, his striving in the path of holiness, and his
commands and prohibitions in religions matters which in those
days he took upon himself to issue, declaring them to be binding.
He replied, “ Yes, indeed. I also have heard him well spoken
of, but they say that he holds the Mahdawi doctrines. Is this
true ? I said, “ He believes Mir Sayyid Muhammad of Jaun-
pur'* (may his tomb be sanctified!) to have been a great saint,
but does not believe him to have been the Mahdi." He replied,
“ What doubt can there be regarding the perfections of the Mir ? ”
Mir Sayyid Muhammad, Mtr-i~‘Adl,^ now deceased and pardoned,
who was a pupil of the Miyan, was also present ; and be said,
“ Why do they call Mir Sayyid Muhammad of Jannpur the
Mahdi ? ” I told him that it was on account of his assumption
of the authority to issue authoritative orders and prohibitions in
religious matters. Mir Sayyid Muhammad again questioned me,
saying, “ Mir ‘Abdn-T-Hayy of Shorasan,^ who held the title of
Sadr for some time, one day spoke ill of the Shaikh to the KhSn-

1 Sell, the Imam Abu Hanifab, founder of the Hanafi school of inriaprn-
denoe. * Vide page 8, note 4.

3 The father of Staito Abu-l-Faiz Faizi and Shai^ Abu-l-Fazl. Vide
infra, No. III.

* Vide vol i, trans. Ranking, page 420, note 8, and Ain-i-Aibari, i (biog.),
p. V. 6 Tide infra. No. IV.

’ Vide .lin-i-Akbari, i, 468, 471, 480. In the Taoaqat he is called Kh/iji

Ill

i-^ffnSn. Do you know the reason of this ? ” I said, “ The 68
Shaikh wrote him a note, giving him advice on Tarions religions
matters, and among other things advised him to attend prayers
with the Snnni congregation in the Masjid-i-Hayy} This offended
‘Abda-’l-Hayy, and he attributed this advice to the Shaikh being
a Mahdawi, and supposed that he was reproaching him with
heresy.” Mir Sayyid Muhammad said, ’• This deduction of the
Mir with recratd to his own heresy depends upon this syllogism,

‘ Ycm do nor jofn in the congregational prayers : everybody who
does not join in the congregational prayers is a schismatic : there-
fore yon are a schismatic.’ Bnt the major proposition is in-
admissible. And likewise the syllogism, ‘ The ShaiWi assumes the
power sf issning authoritative commands : anybody who issues
anthoritanve commands is the Mahdi, etc., is nnsotmd.’ ” The
Miy&n then said, “ I will seal this application for a decision,* bnt
I will retain it in the satue manner ^ as I have retained another
application fot a decision which was sent to me nnder the seal of
some on the elders of this place, and in respect of which I hsv'e
sotod doubts. Now do you take this to Shaikh Baha’u-’d-din,

‘Abdu-l-Hayy, and is said to have been an dmir. He was for some time
ov chief jastice of the empire. He was a jndge, and on one

OGcasi^** with Wiran Sadr*i-Jahan. the chief ecclesiastical authority of the
empire, etceeded the boonds of temperance at a drinking party. Akbar was
mnch amused by the sight of his high digtntaries in their cups, and quoted
the verse of HSfii,

ddy hiu • Jijj Ikt »LiiU jji

‘ Iti the reign of the Kicg who pardons faults and cloaks sins, the reciter
of the h^ become a tosspot, and the jodge a tippler.’

^ * The Hosqae of the Living God.*

* fc a f an application for an authoritative decision on a point

of doctrine or ecclesiastical law, made to a muf&, or ecclesiastical judge
having power to issue such decisiocs. The decision itself is a faticS,

3 A word occurs here in the text, which has puzzled the editor.

He says in a note that in some USS. it is written ^.5^0 , and it is thus
written in MS. (B). I think that there is very little doubt that the ex-
pression is ‘ as it were in pledge.’ The omission of the second

stroke of the gdf^ thongb cotntnon enough in MSS. and almost universal in
Peraia at the present day, sometimes does puzzle Indian Muu(avh

112

wbo is an accepted miiftt, and say to him that my excuse of lack
of hooks of reference, owing to my being on a journey, is perfectly
comprehensible, but that, as to the tradition on which he has
authenticated that (other) fatwa, it will he well if he sends me
his original authenticated fatwa ” : and say to him further, “ The
long and the short of the matter is that yon have delivered a
fatwa authorizing men to sell their children, v.-hcn impelled
thereto by hunger. In the first place thL tradition is solely an
Ihrahli'i ShaJit tradition, i and is not in accordance with any other
standard theological works, and it is well known that the IhraJittn
Shard tiaditions are not accepted by the learned as of sufficient
authority to support a fatwa, and if you maintain that -ahmufH
is competent to give the preference to a .superseded * tradition,
I reply without hesitation that the expression used in the
C9 Ibrahim Shahi tradition is that it is Ijftv'ful for fathers ( ),^

in time of distress, to sell their offspring, and it is well known
that the word includes both father and grandfather, as we
find in the book on marriage : — “ Any person whose fathers (
were Muslims is equal to him whose ancestors attained tc the
honour of (accepting) Islam," and it is agreed that the word
here means “ father and grandfather,” not “ father and
mother.” On the assumption that thi.s much is granted why
should it not be (ruled) that the authority to sell children vests
in both grandfather and father, a-cting jointly ; and what proof
is there that such authority should be assigned to the single
iralividual ? He then retained rfhaikh Mubarak’s application
for a decision, and gave the former application to me. When
I brought it to Shaikh Mubarak he was loud in his praises of

t These words cleariy refer to some collection of faticds compiled in the
r"ign of a king of the name of Ihrahins ghiih, bnc I have been unable to
t-ice the coileetioA or to ascert.iin who the Ibrahim Shah was in whose

Tt-.p. it wri5 coiHpiie-'j.

' (o - ’ - is aH'.ther worr^ which has puzzled tho

• 1 ,. : ot th-' t‘ ’ “f which thi» word is the feminino

f. , ii”' le'cn-j.-' ' hr .jiTht h\?k, or ‘ sent back,’ and maj- be used

. I a ni -r de isi wi which is s'-nt back for revision.

■' This word ia an Arabia dn d. and signifies, literally, ' the two fathers.*

113

Miyan Hatim's knowledge of theology and said. '• Tell him, after
conveying my salutations, that I did not affix ray seal to the ap-
plication for a decision as I expected that this occasion would
arise.” When I showed the document to Shaikh Baha’n-’d-Jin
he said, “ As other ■mie/tfs had confirmed the cension I trusted
to what they said, and did not go deeply into the question, and
there certainly was negligence or. iny part.” .ce leadine,-,' :r'
Shaikh Baha’u-’d-dln, the mufti, who was a mar. of high pc- .tt
and great virtue, to acknowledge his fault, wto evidence-:: fiis
perception and love of truth, and of his rectitnae and justice —

“ At the head of that letter which Asaf wrote
He wrote, ‘ God had mercy on the most just.’ ”

Miyah Hatim, after enjoying the blessing of the opportunity of
teaching and imparting instruction for a period of seventy years,
passed away from this transitory world in the ye.ar H. 963 (.4..D.
1560-61). The chronogram of his death has been already given ;
the words, “With the King he is powerful,” ^ were found to give
the date of his death. He left his son, Shaikh Abdn-’l-Hatim
by name, as his successor as a religions leader and Shaifch, but 70
not as MuUa. He too rejoined his venerable father in the year
H. 989 (A.D. 1581) and left some degenerate sons as his heirs.

“ How long shall I cherish by blandishments the complaisance
of stony-hearted mistresses (idols) ?

“ These ilegenerate sons do not call to mind their father.”

II. MaPLAX-I ‘AsDr-’LLAH OF SuLTAN’PUE.^

He was of the Ansar ® tribe. His ancestors came to Snltanpur
and settled there. He was one of the greatest sages of his Lime,

- These words, which may also be translated, ‘ He is

with the mighty King,’ give the date 968. The chronogram has already
been given on p. 47 of vol. ii (text).

® Manlana ’Abdu-'Ilah, Atakhdumu-]-iI.i!k. waa the famona leader of the
Orthodox party in the reign of Abbar, ar.d the persecutor of Shaikh 5Iub5-
rak, father of Abu-l-FazI. Tide vol. fi. text, pp 19. 44. S4, 151, 154, 19S,

202, 203, 204, 209, 255. 263, 267, 270, 2':’,, 277, 311. In his later yeai^ he
advanced some heterodox opinions. ’■ ..t they were not of the kind that
gained favonr at court Tide also " i. trans. Eankir-g, pp, 506 513-
519, 521, 523, 525, 534. Lv-parently an Afghan tribe.

114

and had not liis equal in this age, especially in his knowledge of
Arabic, Quranic exegesis, scholastic theology, history, and all
those branches of learning which depend upon the exercise of the
memory. He has left wonderful compositions, worthy of himself,
the best known among them being the books known as ‘Ismat-f-
Ai’uhiyS^ and Sharhu Sharm''ili- n-Nahi * (may God bless and
S5ve him!). From the Emperor who now has his resting
j'idce in paradise {scil. Humayiin) he receired the title of
ilikhdUwu-’l-MalJc, and also that of Shaikhu-’l-IslSm. He
always sirennonsly exerted himself to enforce the holy law,
and was a bigoted Sunni. Owing to his exertions many
heretics and schismatics went to the place prepared for
them. He nsed, owing to his extreme bigotry, to aver of
the third rolnme of the Raiczatii-’l-AhbSh^ that it was not the
work of Mir"^ Jam&lu-’d-din ^ the traditionist. In the year® in
which Gujarat was conquered and While ManlanS ‘Abdn-’llsh
possessed great honour and dignity as agent of the exalted Gcmrt
in Fathptir, I, who had just then returned from my journey to
the Panjab, went in company with Shaikh Abft-'l-Fazl, who had
not yet entered the Imperial service, and Hsji Sultan of ThSne-
sar to see Makhdfttnu-i-Mnlk. We saw that he had before him
the third volume (of the Bawzatu-l-Al^biib), and he said tons,
71 See, what mischief those who are followed in this land have
wrought in the faith,” and thus saying he showed ns that couplet
which occurs in the encomium : —

“ This alone is sufficient to prove his resemblance to God,'^
That it has been doubted that be himself was God.”

1 ‘ The protection (or continence^ of the prophets ’

2 ‘ An exposition of the qualities of the prophet i.c , Muhammatl, hence

the benedictory which follov, b-

S A work by ' _---.i’u-’Uab, known as Janial-i-it .io-ini, on the history of
Islam.

* The te "~ ti 1 h we followed the reading of Ixith lliS.

i Vide vol. i '-'•■iEB. iianki. ■ p. ii().

8 A.D I ■ : ■ i'lJo --.•i. ii, ■ -At, p. i-r?.

-oj’- a, t’kich will e:* scan, and may be

taken as:: . ics.- c- ' ’ -.•.a 'sed by t: attribatioa of the

Godt:a'l : . '

115

8nd said, “ He has passed beyond mere schism here, and has
placed the question of his misbelief in quite another category,
avouching his belief in the doctrine of incamaiions. I a-m firmly
resolved to bum this book in the presence of a Shvcui” I, not-
withstanding that I was nnknown to any present,! and had
never met Makhdumu-’l-Mnlk before, made bold to say, *• This
couplet is a translation of those verses which are attributed to
the Imam 8^Sfi‘t * (may God have mercy upon him !).

He looked towards me sharply and asked, “ From what are you
quoting?'” I said, “From the commentary on Amir's divan.'’
He said, “ The commentator, Qazi Mir Husain-i-Midi,® has also
been accused of schism.” I said, This is wandering from the
point.” Shaikh Abu-T-Fazi and Haji Snitan,! with their fingers
on their lips, were every now and then signing to me to be silent.
Again I said, “ I have heard from some trustworthy men that
the third volume is not the work Mir Jamalu-’d-din, but is the
work of his son Sayyid Mirak Shah, or some other person, and
that it is for this reason that its style differs from the stj'le of
ihe first two volumes, being poetical, and not ihe style peculiar to
traditionists.” He answered me, saying, ‘‘ My child, in the
second volume also I have found passages which cleai’ly piove
the heresy and misbelief of the author, and I have written notes
on them. One of these passages is the statement by the author
that ‘All, the leader of the faithful (may God be gratified with
him !),* on the occasion when Talhah (may God be gratified
with him !) was the first to swear allegiance to him, said, “ My hand
'3 withered and thine allegiance is worthless,” tli.a,t i.s to say, that
‘All Murtaza, the leader of the faithful, actually took a.s a bad
omen the fact that Talfiah’s arm was withered — that am which

1 This translation is conjectural. The reading of the text and the MSS.
is lso.«f UA jt .Xf I cannot ascertain the meaning of the

word

The Imam Abu “Abdn-MIah MuJ^ammad bin Idria Shafi'i, founder of
one of the four principal Sunni schools of jarisprudence.

^ Sic in both ilSS. the lext has * Ih.ie No. XXXVII.

- The words ‘ •AU’ and the benedictory 'mrase are oKiicced from the teit,
but are to be found In both .MS.’S

116

in the battle of U hnd ^ ^vas the shield of his holiness the prophet
72 (may God bless and save him and his family !), and was pierced
with eleven wounds, — a presumption expressly forbidden by the
holy law. God forbid that snch should he the case ! It is im-
possible that ‘All should have followed snch a custom, and it is
impossible to believe that he did so.” I said, “ There is manifest-
ly a distinction between foreboding and angnry.” Shaikh Abu-T-
Fazl secretly pressed my hand and warned me to be silent.
‘Akdu-’Uah said to him, “ Tell me something about this
person (seil. Badaoni) ; who is he ? ” He and Haji Sultan then
told him something of my affairs, and cur meeting passed off
quietly. After we had left him my friends said to me, “ Tou
have passed through a great danger, but (fortunately) he did not
set himself to persecute you. Had he done so who could have
saved you ? ” Maulana 'Abdu-’llah, wheu he first set eyes on
Shai^ Abu-T-Pazl, in the early years of the Emperor's reign,
said to his pupils, “What injury will this man not do to the
faith ?

“ When I saw him in his childhood I showed him to those of
the faith,

“ (Saying) ‘ He will work mi.schief among the souls of men,
to your guardianship I entrust him.’ ”

Maulana ‘Abdn-’llah departed to eternity in Gujarat in the
year H. 990 (A.D. 15821, after his return from the pilgrimage to
the glorious city of Makkah, and the chronogram in the follow-
ing verses was found to give the date of his death : —

Makhdum-i-Mulk departed and took with him,

As a sign on his forehead> (the words) “ the mercy of
God.”

1 TJhnd is a mountain about four miles to the north of Madinah, where
Muhammad, at the head of 1,000 men, was defeated by the Qoraish, who
had marched against him to avenge their defeat at Badr. Of the Muslims
seventy men were slain, among them Hamzah, the uncle of Muhammad,
and of the infidels twenty-two. Muhammad was struck down by a shower
of stores and wounded in the face with two arrows, on pulling out which
nis two front teeth dropped out. Vide Q'ti dn, c. iii.

11 ?

When I sought of my besrt the date of his death,

It replied to me, “Beckon the second hemistich (of
these verses.) ” ^

He left behind him some degenerate sons vrho are nnworthy of
mention ; and here I msy remark that all the rising generation
give cause of complaint to their piogenitors, for indeed it seems
that the climate of this age will cherish, nay will produce, none
better than such fellows : —

I see no good in the world.

This seems to be the age of impotence.

This state of aSairs remmds us of the story that a certain
king who was a bigoted Sunn: led an army against Sabzawar,
which is a hotbed of schism, its inhabitants being all fanatics.
The chief men of the place came out and made their representa- 73
tioES to the king, saying, “ We are Mnsalmans ; what faplt
have we committed that yon should have brought au army
against us ? ” The king replied, “ Your fault is your zeal for
schism.” They replied, “ This is a false accusation that has
been brought against us. “ The king said, “ Produce from your
city in support of your allegawon a man of the name of Abu
Bakr,® and I will swerve from my intention of slaying you and
of plundering your city.” After much search and with much
difficulty they produced before the king an unknown pauper,
saying, “ This man is called by the name which you desired.”
After observing the man’s old garments and despicable condition,
the king asked, “ Had you nobody better than this to produce
before me ? ” They said, “ 0 king, ceremony apart, the climate

1 There is something wrong with this chronogram. The values of the
letters of the words composing the second hemistich give either 14S8 or
1093, according to the value, 5 or 400, given to tbs letter g in the word
. The words C second hemistich ’) give the date 961.

There may, perheps, be an enigma concealed in the verses, though none is
indicated.

* The name of the first ^alifah. The 3hi‘ahs- do not give to their sons
the names of Abu-Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘Uthman, which were those of the first
three Khalifahs,. whom they execrate as usurpers.

16

118

of Sabzawar cherishes an Abu Bakr no better than this.” And
the Maulavl-yi-ma‘navi ^ (may his tomb be hallowed) refers to
this story in his Masnavl as follows ; —

This unstable world is a Sabzawar to us,

We, like Bu-Bakrs, live in it mean and despised.”

III. SgAira MUBiRiK OF HiGOE.'^

He was one of the great sages of the age and was distin-
guished among the men of his time and his contemporaries for his
piety, devotion, and trust in God. In early life he observed
many austerities and strove much in the way of holiness, and
was so zealous in enforcing the commands and prohibitions of
the holy law that if anybody was present while he was
giving religious instruction wearing a golden ring, or silk cloth-
ing, or red hose, or red or yellow garments, he at once made
him remove them, and if anyone appeared with long breeches,
descending below the heel, he immediately had them torn to the
proper length. If, while walking through the streets, he heard
the noise of any singing he would start violently. In his zeal
for God he was so devoted to singing that he was scarcely for a
moment of the day at ease without being employed in listening
to the chanting of hymns, psalms, mystic melodies, and music.

74 In short he followed many and various rules of life. For some
time during the reigns of the Afghan Emperors he used to keep

1 Manlana Jalalu-d-dln EumT, author of the Ma»navi-yi-ma'navi.

2 ShaiVh Mubarak of Nagor was the father of ShaiWi Faizi and Sbaitt
Abu-l-Fazl. At one time he held the Mabdavi doctriues and was per-
secuted by Ms^dumu-l-Mulk, but when Abu-l-Faal attained a high
position at court the orthodox were, in their turn, harassed and persecuted.
Shai^ Mubarak was the composer and chief signatory of the instrument
which declared the emperor to be che highest authority on religious and
ecclesiastical as well as in secular matters, an instrument which utterly
broke the power of the ‘XUamd. Shaitt Mubarak afterwards joined
Akbar’s new religion, ‘ the divine faith.’ Fide vol. li, text, pp. 32, 198, 204,
270, 312, 34S ; also Ain-i-Akbari, i, 490. Rhaitt Mubarak often changed his
religions opinions, having first become a Mahdawi, then a Naqshbandi, then
a Hamadini, and then a Shi'ah, before he joined the ‘ divine faith.’

119

nompany 'witli Shaikh ‘Ala’i,* and in the beginning of the Em-
peror’s reign, when the Naq^bandi order were in great esteem
he adapted himself to their rnle, and for some time he .was
attached to the Hamadani ^aikhs, and at last when the ‘Iraqis
were in great favour at Court he spoke as one of their religion.'-
“ Converse with men according to their understanding,” was his
practice, and so he continued to do. He was always employed in
giving religious instruction, and was well-versed in poetry,
enigmas, and in all other arts and branches of learning, hnt
especiall}’ in lue theology of the Sufis, and, unlike most other
learned men of India, he practised their system thoroughly.
He also had ShStihi hy heart, and used to give instruction in the
law of inheritance. He also had by heart the glorious Qur’an,
according to each of the ten methods of reading it.

He never went to the houses of nobles, but was a very pleasant
companion, and had a great stock of wonderful anecdotes.. To-
wards the end of his life, when his sight failed him and he was
unable to read, he went into retirement and wrote a commentary
similar to the Tafsir-i-Kahir,^ contained in four large volumes, and
named it the Mamha‘u-Nafd’isi-’l-’Uyun.* The strange thing is
that in the exordium to that commentary he wrote certain
passages which seem to contain pretensions to the establishment
of new principles in religion, and the innovations contained
therein are those which are well known. At the time when he
was enabled, by God’s grace, to complete that commentary h_
used constantly to recite, with a view to reminding himself of
what he owed to God, the Qasida-yi-Fariziyya in ta,^ which con-
tains seven hundred couplets, the Qasida-yi-Burda, by Ka‘b bin
Zuhair,® and other epodes which he had committed to memory,

1 Shaikh ‘Ala’i of Biyana, son of Shaikh Hasan of Bengal, for an account
of whom vide Ain-i-Akbari, i (biog.), p. v ; also Badaoni.vol. i, trans. Banking,
507-524.

® ».e., as one of the Shi' ah sect. 3 ‘ The great commentary ’ on the Qur’an.

* ‘ The source of excellent fountains.'

® That is to say, a qafidah of which the rhyming words end in the letter
<a» ftt).

« Vide page 4, note 1. The text runs jUbj J

120

antil, on tne seventeentii of Zi-Qa‘da, A.H. 1001 (Ang. 15, 1593),
he passed away irom this world in Labor. flewasamMlZo whose
like, as regar i=: the scope of his attainments, has never been seen,
and the pity is that his love of the world with its pomps, con-
cealed Tinder the garment of holy povei-ty, left no room for the
love of tne faith of Islam. The author, in hi,s youth, spent some
75 years in Agra under his tuition, and owes him much, bnt can no
longer feel himself fettered by his indebtedness to him, owing
to his numerous acts of worldliness and impiety, his devotion
to wealth and pomp, his time serving, his deceit and double-
dealing, and his zeal for innovations in the faith. “ Answer,
God ; and either we, or ye, follow the direction, or are in a mani-
fest error.”

la short, the saying of the commou people, that the son brings
curses on his father, is exemplified in his case, just as it hap-
neued in the case of Yazid,* in respect of whom some impudently
and presumptuously say, “ Curses be on Yazid and on his
father ! ”

IV. Mta Sated Muhammad, Adl .^ oi Ameobca.

Amroha * is a parguna town in the Sarkar of Sambhal. Mir
Sayyid Muhammad was exceedingly pious, devout, and abstemi-

S.T taongli two separate qafidak wore indicated. MS. (A) reads • •-< .f.-;

and MS. (B) reads^^^j The editor has insert-

ed both readings, which are -dlternatiTe. For mention of this qafidah, vide
p. 4 and note 1.

- ^ k] }\ b| j aJLif (Ji Qit’ran xxxiv, 24 .

The answer is to the question, “ Who provideth food for you from hesven
and earth ? "

Yazid, the son of Mu'awiyah, the second Khalifah of the honae of
Ummaiyah. He is celebrated in Muhammadan history as the opponent of
Hcsain, the son of ‘All, who was killed at Karbala in A.H. 61 (A.D.
6S0-81).

^ t.e , Chief justice. For mention of Mir jSayyid Muhammad, who was
one of the ‘Ulamd, vide toI. ii, text, pp. 220, 222, 245.

* Now the headquarters of the to/^l of the same name in the Muradabad

121

ous. He and the author’s father were in their jouth fellow-
students under various teachers in the city of Sambhal, and also
in Badaon under Mir Sayyid Jalal, a sage who had studied the
traditional sayings of the prophet under Mir Sayyid Rafi'u ’d-din.
Mir Sayyid Muljammad, after completing his course of studies,
employed him self in teaching, and towards the end of his life at-
tained to a high position in the Imperial Court, receiving the ap-
pointment of Mir-i-^Adl. In this high post he showed h ims elf to
be scrupulously just, straightforward and trust worthy, so that
even the Qazi’u-l-Quzzlit^ of the time, out of respect to Mir
Sayyid Mu^mmad’s age, refrained from his customaiy donble-
deahag and base behaviour, and during the Mir’s tenure of
his nost no heretic or schismatic had an opportunity of
damaging the faith of Islam.

After the death of Mir Sayyid Muhammad the title of Mir-i-
'Adi was applied to and assumed by many persons.

The Mir, owing to his hereditary connection with me and the
long-standing affection which he had for me, advised me, when
I first appeared at court, to have nothing to do with any madad-i- 76
ma'a^, and to refrain from subjecting myself to the base actions
of the $adrs, recommending me to enter the Imperial service
in any post I could obtain, for that the ^adrs were tyrannical
egotists. Owing to my disregard of his advice I naturally experi-
enced what I have experienced, and|suff3red what I have suffered.
The Mir was appointed to the government of Bakkar * in the
year H, 984 (A.D. 1576-77), and in that city departed this life
in the year H. 986 (A.D. 1578-79).^

Distriofc of the United Provinces. Vide Imperial Gatetteer (new series), t,
330, and im-i-Akhari, ii, 289.

1 Badioni apparently uses this title as equivalent to that of Sadr-i.
Jaha-i who was chief of the gfans. If this be so, the person referred to is
probably Shai^ ‘Abdu-’n-SUbi. Vide infra. No. X, or perhaps Qizi
Ta‘qab, No. IX.

* He was sent to Bakkar on the dispersal of the ’Ulama from court.

s According to the 'ririkA-i-Ma.'iumi Mir Sayyid MohEmmad arrived at
Bakkar on Eamazan 11, A.H. 983 (Deo. Itth, 1575) and died there
gha'bin 8, A H. 984 (Oct Slat. 1578).

V. Shaikh Gada’i op DihlI, the Kaubu.i

He was the son and saccessor of Shaikh Jamal i, the famous
poet. He perfected himself in exoteric learning and enjoyed the
society of the learned men of the age, being much benefited by
their companionship. By means of the claim which intimate
friendship gave him on Bairam fflian he obtained the appoint-
ment of Sadrti-’s-'^iidur^ in India, and was for several years
resorted to, as an anthority on religions questions, by the sages
and principal men of Hindustan, Khurasan, Transoxiana, and
‘Iraq. He was a born poet, and used to compose and sing hymns
and religious songs after the Indian manner,® to which pursuits
he was passionately addicted.

'After he had dis.sociated himself from Bairam TTh STi. the
Khan-i-Khanan, and returned from the neighbourhood of Bikanlr
to Dihli,* he was honoured and esteemed at Couft as before.
When in Dibli be always used to attend the shrines of the
saints there (may God sanctify their souls !) ou their anniver-
saries, and used to hold assemblies with great pomp and circum-
stance. He left this world for the next either in the year H. 976

1 Kambu (spelt Kambili in vol. ii, 'pagsim) is the name of a tribe.
According to a provex-b the Afghans are the first, the Kambus the second,
and the Kashmiris the third sets of sconynirels. Shaikh Gadi’i was one of
those who attempted to persuade Akbar to butcher Hemii in cold blood.
Vide vol, ii, text, p. 16.

2 Shaikh Gada’i was Akbar’.s first Sadru-s-Sudiir or Sadr-i-Jahdn, a very
important post. The dignity of the Sadr, especially before the advent of the
Mughul dynasty, hsid been very great. ‘ It was he who legalized the accea-
sion of a new king. During the reign of Akbar also he ranked as the fourth
officer of the empire. His power was immense. He was the highest law
officer and had the powers which Administrators-General have among ns ;
he was in charge of all lauds devoted to ecclesiastical and benevolent
purposes and possessed an almost unlimited authority of conferring such
lands independently of the king. He was also the highest ecclesiastical law
officer, and might exercise the powers of a High Inquisitor.’ Vide Ain-i-
Akbari, i, 270. §haia Gadi’i was, like his patron, a Shi‘ah. Tide vol. ii,
text, passim.

3 >£))yo MS. (B) has, wrongly, for Cy.«.

* lu A.D. 1560. Tide vol. ii, text, p. 38.

123

(A.D. 1568-69) or in the year H, 979 (A.D. 1571-72),^ leaving
behind him sons no better than the sons of most men in this
degenerate age, “ as has been decreed for these days, and in
accordance with the decree of God the aU-wise.”

The following verses are an extract from the poems of Shaikh
Gada'i : —

“ At times my sonl, at times my heart became the abode of 7
grief,

“ I ever grieve after thee, as I travel, stage by stage.

“ Be not forgetful of my grief and pain,

“ For there is no moment of my life which is not occupied
with thoughts of thee.

“ I have bound my frenzied heart in thy tresses,

“ Myself am bound in those musky chains.

“ If desires could be easily accomplished by the surrender of
life

“ No difficulties would remain to true lovers.

“ Gada’i, thou hast lost thy life in unsuccessful endeavour !

“ I have not obtained my desire from the lips of my
friend.'’

I have copied these verses from the memoir of Mir ‘Ala’u-’d-
daulah, which is not to be trusted. I suspect that they are not
Gada’i's. But God knows the truth !

■yT. MitaN JamIl i^AN, Mpfti of DjhlL"

Be was the pupil of his own worthy father. Shaikh Nasiru-
’d-din, and the brother of Miyaii Ladan. He was of the Kambu
tribe. He was one of the most learned men of his time both
in those branches of knowledge which depend on the reasoning

1 In the formerly ear, according to vol. ii (text, p. 119) where the chrono-
gram jjllf {‘Yon are dead, you great hog ’), giving the date 976,

confirms the statement in the text.

2 -Vide Azn~iAJcharif i, 544. He is classed by Abu-’l-Fazl as one of those
who understand sciences resting on testimony only, t e., as a mere theolo-
gian.

124

faeultyi and in those which depend on the memory, but especially
in practical and scholastic theology, knowledge of Arabic, and
exponnding the Qur'Bn, in which studies he was tineqnalled. He
used to speak authoritatively on the commentaries on the Miftah}
and it is said that he had, in the coarse of teaching, gone
throcgh the book ^Azdi. one of the most advanced woj-ks, forty
times. He used to impart religious instruction, and never went
to the houses of kings or nobles, but always affected the company
of magistrates who were honoured aud respected. Most of his
pupils have become wise men. He passed away to the next
world in the year H. 984 (A.D. 1576-.77) at the age of more than
ninety years.

78 Vn. Qizi Jalalu-'d-dIn of Multan.*

He came originally from the neighbourhood of the fortress of
Bakkar.* He was a profound sage, ever speaking the truth
and loving it. lu early life he was a merchant, and in middle
age he employed himself in teaching. He taught in Agra for
some years, and then, in consequence of certain events which
have been narrated in the detailed account of Akbar’s reign, was
employed in the high post of after the dismissal of Qflzl

Ya'qub. In respect of bis integrity and trustworthiness he was
the best of Qazis, but, owing to tbe misfortune of his having a
corrupt son, a handsome blockhead, .and in consequence of tbe
machinations of all the base pimps about the Court, his own lack
of worldly wisdom, and his inability to appreciate the spirit of
the age and the ideas of his contemporaries, he was banished to

i Vide vo!. i, trans. Ranking, p. 428, note 2.

* Qazi Jalaln-d-din is olasaed by Abu-1-Fazl in the same category as
Jamal Khan, vide Ain-i-Akbari, i, 546. He was appointed Qdzi’u-l-Quzedt on
the degradation of Shaitt Ya'qub for refnsing lo pronounce mut‘ah
marriagea to be legal. He was one of tbe aignatoriea of tiie deed which
recognised Akbar as the chief ecclesiaetical anthority in the empire. Vide
vol. ii, text, pp. 209, 270.

3 Bhakkar, formerly headquarters of the Bhafckar Sarkdr of the Suho of
Mnttan, vide Ain-i-Akhari, ii, 333. Now headquarters of the fah^l of the
same name in the Miyanwali District, Panjib ; rtde Imperial Grazetteer of
India (new series), viii. 44.

125

the DiikanJ the luler^ of which land, having heard of
staunchness to Islam and his preacliiaif of the word of God,
honoured him to the utmost extent of their power. From the
Dakan he was privileged to perform the pilgrimage to the holy
house of God, and there replied, "‘Here am I,” to tlie summons
of God

\ III. QazI TawI’isT.

Tawa’is - is a dependency of Khurasan. He was a most
trnstworflsv man, but. as ho nas devoid of ie.arning, .some .if his
decisions were wrii g. He had sujfeied inuch at the liands of
the wealthy men of hi.s time.s and was thei’efore aiwavs much
prejudiced agrdnsr them, .md would, as far as possible, show
favoitr to the poorer party, even though he were in the wrong.

He did not understand that in these days it is generally the
wrong-doer that ei’ie.> for justice, in which connection ShaiUi 79
Abu-’l-Fazl has .said, "If the greate.-t of the /mams * had lived
ill our time lie would have wiittcn on practical theology other-
wise than as ho did."

When the Kiian-i-Zama.i hivke out into rebellion he gave a
eleci.siou to the efiiect that tiie seizure of the effects of a rebel was
unlawful," and this decision led to his deposition and the appoiiit-
liient of Qazi Ya’qilb in his place. Very shortly after his tie-
position lie passed away from thi.s world.

1 Badaoni here makes it appear that Jalalu-d-tlln‘s b mishment was the
result of underiiaud machinations, but as a matter of fact he was banished
for forging a draft on the treasury for 50O,0OJ tankas. He was banished to
the Dakan in the 'nope that tlie Muhammadan kings in Sonthern India, being
bigoted would iuive him put to death as a bigoted Sunk/. I ide vol.

ii, text, 313.

^ Probably tiie same as Tawawis, ‘a dependency of Bu^ara, seven
parasangs from Bakhara.’ vide Ain-i-Akba>i, iii, 97.

^ MS. (A) haSiijUjy L^t and MS. ( B) . Both of

those readings ate wrong.

A Abu Hanifah, one of the four great Sanni doctors of the law, aud
founder of the Hanafi school of jurisprudence.

5 Vide vol. ii, text, p. 100. Qa?i I’awa’isi, whom I find nowhere described
by name, was at the time Akbar’s camp Qurh Ihe Lakhnan edition of the
Tahaqdt calls him ‘ Qszi Tawahsh.^

17

126

IX. QizT Ya'qub of MixiKPun.*

He was related to Qazi Fazllat,® and was well .skilled in prac-
tical theology and in the principles of that science. He was of
e. cheerful and open disposition, and used to compose Arabic
vcises in Indif.ii inettr-;. They say that while he was, for
.'uveral ye,-.i>. the h-i-iiazzat of India, he used to take

Mj>hrod’'iac electuaries in laige tpaaiitities. One day when he wa.s

resent at a party D-;e-n iw the Emperor, sereral intoxicating
and .stini tlutiria drai-- were handed round, and were oitered to
r].e airn'ijg' at hn’ s He refused them, and when he wa--

a'.ced ii or nags he took, one of the Emperor's Hindu

Tuvoarires ininiediatelv replied, •"The Qnzi takes mercury."^

After his dismissal ironi the post of Qn:/' u-’l-Quzzat he was
appointed to he Ll'Tzi of Bangai, and was sent oif to that
province,^ and while th.ri-e insed to u.se aphrodisiacs to excess, a
slave tn the violence of hi.- liist.s. He was a confederate of
Ala'sum-i-Kabali in h>s rebellion - and was inconsequence recalled
irom that province and sentenced to be imprisoned in the fortress
of Gwaliyai, and on his way to that place removed the baggage

1 Mauikjjut was the heAdquai-cers of a sarkdi in the sHhn of ‘ Ilahabiid, ridt
Aii>.-i‘Akhai~', ii, it>4.

S QazI Ya'qu'o was sun-in-law to QazI Fazliat. Qizi of the army under
Shir .Shah. ‘ who was popniarly known by the more appropriate title of Qa/T
Fa/.Ihat.’ rids to!, i, trans. Hanking, p. 474 and note 4, and rol ii, te.vt,
p, lol.

- or rU a Hindi word. Mercury was apparently used as an
aplirodisiuc

* Aceoid.nu tu Tol u text, p liil, Ya'qub superseded Taw.i’isi as ohiel
id: lu A U 074 (.A.L) !5i-,j and w.is degraded ten years later, .so that iu

must h.ive gone lo Bengal in A H. 9a4 (A D. 157«-7r).

r. ee vol ii, t.wt, p 270 The rebellion was first preached at Jaunpur
by Mulii ilulmmrii.i! of Yaz !, -who gav- a f.it-j i or formal decision to the
iffect tha', rebellion agunst Akbar. as an enemy to 1-lani, was lawful It
broke out in A D 1579, ih ■ lingleaders being Jluhammad JIa sum of Kabul
Mnoammad. JIa'-um |^iu Faiankhldl, Mir Mu izzu-l-AIulk Niykbat Khan,
‘Arab Bahidsr. and otue.r-. .Mu izzu-l-llulk and MuIH Muhammad Ynzdi
were . uled to the capita! and ou their w.iy thithej weie put to death bv
'.-■■I.c d- asr.C'i ii, the Jnmna.

127

of his existence from this world, and joined Mir Mirizzu-1-Mnlk
and Mulla Muhammad of Yazd.*

X. ShxiKH 'AnDr-'N-XAiii,- the SADia'-s-SfjiC'Ji.=

He was the sou of ShaiJA Ahmad, the son of Shaikh 'Abdu-'l-
Quddus of Kango. He journeyed several times to the glorious
city of Makkah and the delectable city of Madiiiah, and there
studied ^he traditional sayings of ilnhainntad, and after his
return he abandoned tbe mode of life of his forefathers, and, 80
objecting to the ecstatics and vocal music (ot tiie followed

the rule of the traditionists, and busied himself in ceremonial
and outward piety, cleanliness, purification and devotion. V\ hen
he was appointed ^adi-H-'’s-Sadur he distributed enormous areas
of land to the people as niadad-i-ina'n^, pensions, and religious
endowments, and never was there in the reign of any monarch a
Saili'u-’s-^udur so powerful as Shai^ ‘ Abdu-’n-Nabi, or one who
alienated the tenth part of what he did in religions endow-
mentsd For some time the Emperor had so great faith in him
as a religious leader that he would bring him his shoes and place
them before Ids feet. At last, owing to the disagreements ^ of
Mayidumu-’l-Mulk and all the other ill-dispositioned ‘UlamS
the Emperor’s opinion of him changed completely.

Gouplet.

All those who seek for pride of place are fools,

Aye, those who style themselves the ‘TJlama.

The chief cause of his fall was as follows : — When the
Emperor, after his journey to Baiiswala,® halted at Fathpur,

t It would appear from this passage that Ya'qub died a natural death on
his way to Gwaiiyar, but from vol. ii, text, p. 277, it is evident that he was
executed by drowning, as were Mn'izzu-l-MuIk and 51 illa Muhammad of
Yazd. This event happened in A.l), I57y.

* Vida vol. ji, text, jpaasuv. and -Itn-i-AKh'irt, i, 490, 546.

" For a definitioD of the powers and duties of tu,' or

Sadr.-i-jahdn, vide auiiru p. 122, note 2.

■* ('lit- voh i:. text, p. 71. 5 J'lde.vol. ir. text, p. 2'.i

■> Ir A.D. 1577, cida ii, text, l 42, Akoa returns'- tu

128

Qazi •Abdu-’r-Hah'iii), the ^^>21 of Mathura, laid a eoinplaiut
before the Shaikh, to the.eitect that a wealthy and stiff-necked
Brahman of that place had caiTied off the materials which he,
the Qdfh had collected for the construction of a masjiJ. and had
built of them an idol-temple, and that, when the Qazi had
attempted to prevent him, he had, in the presence of witnesses,
ODened his fonl month to curse the prophet (on whom be peace),
and had shovu his c.mterQpt for "Muslims in various other ways.
M’hen the Brahman wa.=^ called upon to appear, he disobeyed the
Sh'ilkh'i summciis. The Bmperor sent Bir Bar and Shaikh
Abu- 1 -Fazl TO fetch him, and they broiigiit him, and Shaikh
Abu-'l-Fazl represented to the Emperor wh.it he had heard of
the case from the people, ai.d stated that it was certainly proved
that he had uttered abu.se of the propliet. Some of the ‘/’Tama
were of opinion that lie .should suffer death, while others were in
favour of his being publicly paraded on the back of an ass and
heavily fined. The 'JJlamn were thus divided into two parties
and the question was argued at length. The Shaikh required the
81 Emperor's sanction to the execution of the Brahman, hut,
notuitlistandins his importunity, no open sanction was given,
and the Einperoi' .said in private, " Punislimcnts for offences
Against the holy law are in the hands 01 you, the ^JJlaian ; what
do you require of me ‘r ’’ The Brahman remained for some time
ill custody on the charge, and the ladies of the Imperial
hi I inn busied themselves in interceding for his release, but the
known opinions stood in the nay. At last, when the
Shaikh'^ liiipoi t unity exceeded itU bound.s, the Empeior said,
•’You have received your answer, it is that which I have already
given you.’’ No sooner had the Shaikh reached his lodging than
he issued orders for the execution of the Brahman. 'When thi.s

May 12th of mat year. ibid. 2 i 8 . .Although the slaying of the Brahman is
here mentioned as the chief cause of ' Alxln-n-Mabi’s fall, Akb.ar had for
some time been displeased with nim Tide vol. ii, text, p. 209, wl'.ere the
incident of the di-eassion on the marriage-law of Islam is related, Akbar
then accased the .Shaikh of having at one time interpreted that law very
liberally, and of having subsequently retracted this interpretation to his
I Akbar' h) detriment. It would appear that Akbar never forgot this.

129

matter was reported to the Emperor he was exceedingly wroth.
The ladies of his hanini complained in private and the Hindo
courtiers in public, saying, “You have pampered these MuUas till
their insolence has reached such a pitch that they pay no heed to
yonr wi.shes, and, merely to di.splay their own poster and authori-
ty, put men to death without your orders." They plied liis
Majesty with arguments to such an extent that he could endure it
no longer, and the leaven of designs which had 'ong been work-
ing in Ids mind at lengrth fermented and overflowed. One might,
at the tank known as Aiiup Tn^n'C.' he set forth the whole case,
and asked certain time serving and stirrer.? up of strife for

a decisioii on the question. One of them s.aid. •’ The witnesses
w'ho have been produced prove that he has committed an oft’ence
against the person under, cover of the law." Another said,
The strange thing is that Shai]A ‘Abdu-’n-Xahi .should claim
to be a descendant of the greatest of the i may God

uave mercy upon him!) according to whose school of theology
the cursing of the prophet by unbelievers who have submitted
to the rule of Islam gives no ground for any breach of agree-
ment by M islims, and in no way absolves Muslims from their
obligation to safeguard infidel subjects. Tliis qnestiop has been
discursively treated in theological works, and ir is hard to
understand how the Shaikh can have so opposed himself to the
principles of his ancestor." All at once the Emperor's glance fell
on the author of these historical selections, standing afar off, and,
taming to me he samnioned me to him, saying, '■ Come forward.”

I advanced, and he put to me a question, saying, '• Have you heard 82
that, supposing there are ninety-nine traditions awarding the
[.iinishment of death for a certain offence, and one tradition in
iiccordance with which the accused person may be .set at libeity,

• <uftif should give the preference to that one tradition ? ” I said,

■■ Yes, u IS just as your ilajesty has said; but this question turn.s
on tile maxim " Verily legal punishments and inflictions are set
aside i.y .i'.ubts ' ; iiii I translated the maxim into Persian. The

lie, the ■ ■ jr ' halt of worship.’ TiWe voi ii, text, p. 201,

■t Abu Haultali.

130

Bniperoi' said, i\ itli evident sor; i .v. " Perhaps ^inikh ‘Ahdu-'u-Nabi
vva.s not aware of thi^ ruling' “hat he pat th.e unfortunate Brahman
to death. Yet lie.v onuid it h- -^o ? " 1 rephed. '• The Shaikh is.

beyond all doubt, learned jflctii, but lie mr.st have liarl some wi.9P
r)iu’po~e in view, in Knowingiv trov ins' an ordei- eontrarv to rliis tra-
diti.ji, " The Empeior said, " lYhat purpose can he have had in
view ■■ 1 said, ' The closing' v .^edition and tb.e upioonr, g t/f the

a■errn.■^ of insolence from the min i- of the common people." 1 aLso
broustht to his Maiestv's notice ’'ue tradition rjf ’Avvaz on

the remedies of evils, wli>ch rr.adition liad been laid before him
ir. eounection with this case i ertain lewd fellows of the basei
sort said, " Qnzi -Ayyaz was a MalikiJ raid his decisions have no
weia'ht in a land of the H"nafl?." The Emperor said to me,
"What do you say to thi.s f " 1 said, “Although he was a
ilriliki. it is yet permissible, by the sacred law, for a recognized
■mufti to pass sentence in accordance with his decisions.” The
question was argued at length, and the bystauder.s observed that
the Emperor’s moustache, during the discussion, bristled like the
whiskers of a tiger, and tliosc who were .standing behind him
.signed to me to desist fiom argument. All at once the Emperor,
opposing my decision, said, “ What you say is nonsense ! ’’ I
immediately made my submis.siou. and retired and took my jiluce
in the circle or courtier.', and have ever since eschewed forward-
ness and the company of disputants, preferring rttirenient, and
saluting the Emperor tvom afai

Prom thi.s time lo; tn the fortunes of Hhaikfa 'Abdu-’j-Xabi
began to decline. He wdthdrew himselt from company and
avoided it, coucorning himself priu 'ipalW with lii.s own cliuni'
to .sujieiiority and the repudiation o' former deci.sioim in leifi. I
matters, whetiier mode.' ! or ancie.i! He iicvei went lo Court.

83 About tlii.s time Mubari ; ii-ie from h.u, to Fatiqiur to

offer his felicit • > t’ne Eini>ej'r,i ,m .-ome s-.,!.,; ,,>■ acjilur.

and the Einpc-, . ■' h.’i.; ■ ■ t’ na i happen'-.i t'ld r.skt i him

tor hi-, -.pinio- ^ ' e i ■ o.'i.'.iou an ■•..iimriv i\. -a, ire.

I .r,, a f .Ujw -; ■' .1 ..I I .,y It V . i.... .1 ..

- ■ t ir a., ■ .... A . m

131

Your Jlajesty is the Imam and Mvjtahid of the age. What
need have you of these 'Ulanin for assistance in issuing your
commands, whether religious or secular. They have uo lot or pai't
in true knowledge, beyond a groundless reputation therefor.”
The Emperoi- said, " Since you are my teacher and I am I'ead}' to
learn fioni you why do you not free me from dependence on
these MuHas ? ” Shaikh Mubarak made a supreme effort to gain
his end, and, aflame with rancour and contumacy, said, " Do \-oii
make a claim to religious supremacy, and demand from them an
attestation of your claim.” He ultimately wrote a decree affirm-
ing the religious supremacy of the Empei-or and his superiority
to all ecclesiastical dignitariesd Shaikh ‘Abdu-’u-Nabi and
Makhdumu-T-Mulk were forcibly seized and compelled, as though
they had been mere iiobodies, to attend that assembly of base
fellows. Xo one saluted them, and they took their seats iu the
Saf-i-nldl,^ and "hey were forced, much against their will, to
.attest that decree, whether they would or no,® as has been men-
tioned in the detailed history of the Emperor’s reign ; and at
last they both received permission t.i make the ]>ilgrimage to
Makkah.

Sbaikh 'Abdu-’u-Xabi died in tlie \eai- H '.lit] (.Ji.l>. 15831.^

IX. AHiiAhi Faiyaz, of Ambethi.®

He was among the first of the greatest sage.s of the time. He
was devout, follewing a severe rule and striving much iu the

t Vide rol. ii, text, 270.

•2 ‘ The row of shoes,’ i.e., at the place where the courtier's left their shoes
when entering the emperor’s presence

3 The nature of the compulsion used is not mentioiied. ISadaonl, in col.
ii, text, p. 270, says that some signed willingly and otiier.-^ iinwil!iugl_y.

* In vol. ii, text, p. 312, the date of the Shaikh’s deatii is given as 002
(A.D. 15841, and the chronogram there giver ) gives t' e sait.,- date.

He returned to Fathnur from Hakkan appareniiy in A H 90'.i (.1.0. 1.582)*
■On his using some har.sh Ungnage the en.peror struck him a la avy blow
in the face with his list. The Si.ai kh s ,id. 1 y d >-t thu.i nor stiike me
with a knife ‘r ” ’ ‘Abdu-a-Nabi was then rnlle.! i ^ ..i .-omit foi tlie sum of
Ra. 70,000 which had been advanced f*-.r l.is i.mii.ey to Makkah, and v, as
thrown into prison, wuei't he was stranglei jii'i night ny a gang of men,
t Fide p. 27, note 3.

132

path .if holiness. In the leeoienes.s of old age, •w hen he had no
loiigei- the power to walk, and was completely bedridden, he
leal UT the glorious by heart. He had by heart the con-

tem.s of most ot the books generally read, and if one of his pupils
Liadfc a mistake in reading he would correct him without refer-
I'ing to the 'ext. He was well skilled in expounding the Qur'an,
iu the ti-adit!oriai saying.s and hios’i-anhy of Muhammad, and in
hrstfiiv He wa.s a fellow-ciiizeu and cunteuiporary of Shaikh
gl XizaniLi-'iI'diii * i..f AinbSthi, and lie used to .say uf him that he
•.v.i- -ti.'ioigly i'ppo.se<l to the recital by the cougreoation of the
.ittei' the iiiiain i during piihlic prayers iu the ui iijid'.

1 M ■ aatii'.'r mid the honijur of jiaXtug iiis re-yect.'' to the
" kJj ■•■ ii l... i'e ' ’a.s employed in gi'. ; m ■ ...--iructiou ;,i th.e SJiarh-
't the s ei.ii b,- h ■I'pened t!) be I'eiuiing tbe

<ojh.' \ i . ' e.-: ul Ha.zul . —

' .Vi.'ri-bakr, the .son of the elu.i.sen (.me.

Rcsolvwl on a f'.uTtv ni connection with a strange luutte.c.
And he ''id, ’ Wrily I rcsolced on ,i foitu

Agamst i\ a i r ' I in v, h o f.v.Iu-i'' iic'cl; '

Ai.d 1 said, ' A'il’- t i- i '...arki-!!. {,) m_\ s. .u.

To the p 2 .jhi!,ir]u’i .(gain-c a--uci.itiiig with the ba.se ‘t ’

and a discu.s.sion aro.se whether the reading should be or

»■ S' f

gjUti 2 which latter is the fernuuue intensive fiinn of the >•, oi'd
"an unbeliever.'’ He .said that the true reading was gjUAf

^ f '

and that no other reading avould make .sen.se, for that IjUit a
Persian word. My contention was that tlie meaning of »jli) was
more obvious than that of iijliin — but God know.s the truth '

I Vide p. 27.

* gjLftf means ' an ungrateful woman’ or -an intensely unbeUeviiw
woman,’ appears to ’ue an Arabicized feminine form of the Peisian word

jUi>v ‘ a hyaena,' and, us applied to a woman, miglit be translated ‘ ghoul ’
or varapiif.’ The diseassiou betiveen Badaoiii and Shaikh Ahmaili is of no
prretical interest.

133

XII. QizT Sadeo-’d-dIx/ some time of Jalandak, afteewahds of

Lahor.

He was a profound sage, and was regarded as a leader in
religious matters. both by $uft.^ and by orthodox Muslims.® He
was a cheerful and pleasant companion. Although he was for a
Time, as is well known, the pupil of Shaikh ‘Abdu-’llah Makbdu-
nui-'l-Mulk, I certainly found him to be far superior to Makhdu-
mu-’i-Mulk. So broad-minded wa.< he in religious matters that
be wa.s commonly suspected of being a heretic. But the fact is
that he was so credulous that he would implicitlT trust any
person, even a manifest heretic, wiir was inclined to asceticism,
and would stand before uim with joiiied iiands. anci regard any,
tiling he might say a« an authoritative utterance.

They say that a heretic who pretc-nded to be mysterioii.sjv
attracted to God one day came upon the Q'uU and that the Qiizi
uttei his custom, stood before him ^ith hi.s hands joined in 85
reverence. The heretic, deluded %vrete'i. said, i» aj,\ay.s

with me.’ The Qa.rj fell at his feet .'iiyine-, Show him to me.'>
The heretic replied. “I am a! present in great auxietv lOc-r tlie
marriage of my daugiiter. an aifair which will cost me seven
li'iudred tj.nkas ; when my an-xiei v i> temoved I will effect a
meeting between you and Knlzr.'' The Qr,zi at once gave him
sfieii hundred tankas. Two later the titan came ic. him

and .s.aid. ‘‘Come that 1 mas siiu'.v ...a K/.Gr." and took him
■aith him to the river, TTo.v ine 'leivtic was a terr t.dii man,
v\ bile the (ilo;; was low of .•it.uure. Ti.e heretic walked into the
river until the water ieacho..l ids ..ecsc, ,ii'.d theti stouj .still, and
s.i'.d to the ■'Cotue to me. for i.s here.” The Qazi

t"- plied, I cannot swim ; how e.in i coine to vou f ” The heretic
reidied, “Well, I have sIicvml you tin- place where Kjxizr is. it vou
cannot come to it it is no fault of ni-it, ' Maiiv other stories,

t Vide Ain-i-Ai'- art, i, o4.a. where I. - i.s styled ‘ Qurai.jhI ' r mi ' ‘Abbisl
The Tahaqdt save that he was for sorue ve.tra i/azl of Lahor

Literaliy, ‘folk of the path,’ le, tiiose who follow the ceremonial
orainance!!, as opposed to the Sufis, who discard then-.

•r Fide Hughes’ Did. of leldm, p 272,

18

134

even more laughable than this, are told of the Qad, and to detail
tliem would be to show the weakness of his intellect. Hi'
extreme simplicity can be estimated from the example cited.

When the Emperor be-stowed^ on the chief men of Labor
appointments in various parts of the Empire, and sent each one
ot them to fill some post in one city or another, Sadrn-’d-din wa.^
appointed to be Qa:i of the seaport town of Bahroc. in the prov-
ince of Gujarat, and was despatched thither in that capacity.
There he died, leaving behind him a son possessed of ability,
named .jvhaikh Muhammad, who now holds in that city the
appointment held by his late father.

XIII. MiYAX li.tHOAK OK LaKHVAI .

He Avas one of those sages uhose knowledge is ahvays at com-
mand and ready for use. He possessed a naturally acute intellect
and intuitive intelligence. In knowledge of practical theology
and the first principles of that science, and of Arabic, he had no
equal. He wrote a treatise on synta.x which he named after one
of tiie nobles, Quthi by name.’ and which contained .some evidence
of its author's industry.

I went to Lakhnau at the time when Husain IQian was gover-
86 nor of that place,* and met the Among his works there

were two books which struck me as being w'onderful. One wa.s
a treatise, written in column.s. which covered a piece of paper
capable of containing fourteen lines of ordinary writing, and a.s
bi-oad as it was long. In this treatise the leading principles and

t On the dispersal of the ('iamd.

i A passage occars here which I am unable i6 translate. It rung as
follows .

Both MSS. substitute tor and MS. (A) substitutes 0.^1^ I’oi

OjUc, but eren with these variants the passage is obscure and the text
appears to m" ro be corrupt

3 Fide p. 0 , note 4. Husain ^an was appointed to Lakhnau in A.H. i)7i
(A.D. 1.566-07 j and was tracsfeired thence to Kint-n-Gfda in A.H 975 (A.D.

. 1567-68).

135

problems of fourteen different branches of knowledge were suc-
cinctly set forth. The other consisted of four Maqartiahs from
a treatise in which tfie style of the Maqumcdii-'l-Hanri^ was
imitated, which treatise he entitled Qitun} He told me that he
had composed other works besides these. His cousins, however,
said that the treatise on fourteen <iilferent branc’!i,:s of knowledge
and the Qitun were written by Hakim Zibriqi.'' who. having come
to Jaunpur, employed himself in ci Hating books, together with
the well-known Qazi Sdiihabu-M-din. The-e works, they said,
found tlieir way, in the course of tiroe, to the library of Shaikh
A'zam uf Lakfmau. who obtained tbe title ot S-lni-yi-Iridrii-i-
and thence came into the hands of Miyari Ilahdad. who
was a descendant of Shaikh A'zam ; — and Gc i knows the truth
of the matter !

AIV. MIR StTYlE' Jil.iLl'-'D-DiN-I-QiDIRi.’ OF AGRA.

He was one of the greatest of the Say’iids of Agra, and wa.s pre-
eminent in his piety and resignation to the Divine will. From
his youth to the end of his life he lived in secUt.sion. avoiding the
society of the wealthy t and all pomps and ceieinony. and in his
capacity as deputy of his holiness, the Ghaus of the Everlasting
God. the , pole-star (of religionl tixed by the Lord, the inhabitant
of that place which is beyond locality, Sliaikh Aluhiyyu-'d-din

1 ■ The assemblies of Hariri one of the .Arabian classits.

t .A Tavkish word, signifvins; ‘ a border ' ' an edging of s,ilk ' ; and hence, in
analogy of the .Arabic word 'a s-ipolement or cotr.mentarv. The

•.iptnes> of the title will be understood ii it be remembered chat (haii, )

in Aiabio means ‘silk.’

•’ MS. (.A) has (Ziraql). I have not beeti ahie end any mein. jn of

Zibriqi elsewhere.

* IIS. (B) ha.s ' above-meriticned.’

I ‘ .Second (only; to the greatest of the Iinui.i^ A'ri Hauifahj.'

•i The Qidiiis are an order of dnrv'i fhr^: , I'uie p. Id, note 4.

1 US. (A)hasjl.^t ('strangers’) tvi-'n Uvc| (‘the v''a:thv')as a i ertee-
lion in the margin.

- ighaus) means ' defender ' or ' helper ’ and is i common tit'e of

Aluhammadan saints

136

‘^Abdn-’l-Qadir-i-Jilani (may God be gratified with him and
cause him to be gratified with us !), he received pupils up to tlie
time when he bade farewell to this fleeting world. At this time
his son. strong in the faith, Allr Sayyid Da’ud, is the representa-
live of his reverend father, and spends his life in holy poverty,
indigence, and peregrination. As the anspiciovi.s splendour of ins
dread Majesty the Emperor and the pomp of the greatne.s.-- of lii'
glorious progeny shone with ever-increasing hrillian.oy ovei- tiie
horizon of the imperial domain of Agra, the elfulgenee of tins
87 unf-ortunate family has abated in splendoor, and the families i.r
other deceased saints too have declined in like manner.

Ci.nplet.

■■ Hnndi'eds of thousands of children were beheaded
Before he who spake with God' saw the light.’’

XV. HlSAIX or A.Ji£Eil.

li i.s commoniy reported that he was a de.scendant of that pole
star of holy men, and king of true lovers of God !^aja Mu'5n-u-
d-din-i-.Sanjaii-yi-Ci.ihti - (may God hallow his soul)' Since
the Emperor, in the day.s when he first began especially to
vs.-rfite hi.-i h uiness the Kh^yu of Ajmer, happened to slight the
cUi.n.s of file SiuGrh (to de.scent from him) .«ome perverse felloiv-,,
,.o.pt =J to-.re'o by ceitaiii gc'u'M-'f of Fathpur, me?, vwio have

r.ju 2 'ed :!.e nrmost o. depose anil discredit those of their

'ia.-ts i'rna.- God revai-1 them therefor I), gave evidence
w!i;,! his liai.j. to (Js'-ceut from the Khaja. saying that his

I b lett ir. descendant.', and tlie and Qfejs also issued

to tliuT ■itfect. being guided by their time-serving disTio.si-
iti-iiii-tiLh.

■‘Tlie f.gi. hath it.s raiment. Be ttinii .-lad therein! ’

Ilid.s the be; editary tru-iecship of the shrine which had come

■ 1 c , Moses. Tlie ailasioa is ro the alaugiiter of the children of the
!=-a-f'lites by Pi!:ir i'/h*s order

*' The great of Ajmer IT.,'.? vol i, teans., Eanking, p. 70, and note 2

137

down to him tlirougli so many yeai-s was transferred to others.
Tlie Shaikh, who was a man of great estate, lived in that province
like ii king, and the Emperor’s regal jealousy, both on thi.s
account and on account of certain other events which happened,
i-onld nor endure the Shaikh’s ]X)sition, so he ordered him to
leave India and to journey to jiakkah, and the Shaikh according-
ly took foi-mal leave of his Majesty during the march to Bans-
wala.' and. after successfully performing the pilgrimage to
Makkah. returned. Having accomplished hi.s journey to the
Hi'ui/:. he ;)aid hi.s respects at Court, on his return, on the very
<hiv on w hich the Emperor had marched from h’athpnr toward-
Kabul against Muhammad Hakim Mirza ; but he would not
coro''-rn! to t-he ceremonies which have in these days been estab-
iisl'.ed by tlio^e who have accepted a new faith and have been
’■ecenrly converted to I.slam. new followers of a new oider of 88
tiung.=

- The Emperor, after .studying the page of the life

and 1 he liae.s of his forehead read there the signs of disaffection
' I himself, and commanded that the Shaikh should be imprisoned
in '■’lie fortress of Bakkar.* There lie spent some years, and at
last, in the year K. 1002 (_A.D. 1593-94), owing to the efforts
■made on bis behalf by certain courtiers who-had hi.s Majesty's
conlidence, he was summoned from Bakkar to the Imperial pres-
ence. and, in compamy with some other prisoners, .sneh as Shaikh
Karaal-i-Biyabani, the impostor, some mention of whom ha>
already been made.^ and the QSzis ofPathpur. who inid been nn-
pii.soned in Bakkar for fourteen years, owing to the machinations
of Shaikh Jbrahim-i-Ci.shti,* and whose release had been ordered

• III A !). 1577.

^ Bli.-ikkar, Vide roi. ii, text, p. 30O

t vol. ii, text, pp, 300, 366.

^ .Snai^ Ibrahim was the son cf Shai^ Musa and elder breti.er of Shaikh
.Sa!ira-i-Ci^ti of Fathpur SIkri, to whose intercessions the birth of Sultan
.Salim (Jahangir) was attributed. In A.H. 986 (A.D. 1578-79) ho was made
governor of Fathpur SIkri, and it was apparently while he held that post that
ha had the qdzls of the town imprisoned. Hs died in A H. 999 (A.D. 1590-
91). Vide Sin-i-Aihari, i, 402, and lladaoni, vol. ii, text, p. 374 et parsin’.

138

by means of the intercession of Mirza Nizamn-’d-din Ahmad,'
he arrived at Court, and there they all paid their respects to his
Majesty, and all, with the exception of the Shai]^, prostrated
themselves. He. an old man of seventy years of age, atterly
unaccustomed to the ceremonial of kingly courts and the correct
fashion of waiting upon royal personages, made a slight inclina-
tion and a mere bow, after the old custom. The Emperor's
displeasure with him was renewed, and the MtrzS, was ordered to
(lave a grant of three hundred higas of land in Bakkar made out
to him, as riiadad-i-ma^a^,^ and to despatch the Shaikh thither
once more. Begum Pad^ah, the mother of his Majesty, busied
herself in the ladies’ apartments of the palace in interceding for
the Shaikh, and said to the Emperor, *• My son, he has an aged
and decrepit mother in Ajmer, whose heart yearns to see her son
again. How would it be if you were to give him leave to depart
to Ajmer 't He desires no madad-i-ma'a^ from you." The
Emperor would not accede to her request, and said, “ Mother,
he will start business afresh in the place to which he is now
going, and people will present to him alms, presents, and compli-
mentary gifts in plenty. He leads a number of men astray. In
fine, let him summon his mother hither.” ' This treatment of his
mother was much bitterer to the Shaikh than was the mere going
to Bakkar.

On the night on which the summoned the com-

piler of these historical selections to the Imperial presence in
connection with the Shaikh s resignation of his trusteeship of the
89 shrine in Ajmer, as has already been mentioned, the Emperor was
perturbed in respect of that case, which he had himself brought
forward, and refused to ratify the decree (with regard to the
resignation), and retained the Shaikh in his service. He said to
the SaJr-i-.T.ikan, “Where is tint simple-hearted old man'r”
(meaning Shaikh Hnsain). I reminded him that he was in
Labor, and urged the Sadr-i-Jahaii. since I myself was unworthy
to hold such a ble.ssed position, to have him appointed as the

I .ALUtiior of the Tataqat-i-Akhari.

- ^rant in aitl of livelihood.

139

trustee of tlie shrine in that protected ' city, and so restore to mm
his just due. But, since it is not in the nature of natives of
India to work in the interests of their own brethren, or to tnist
one another, the efforts of the Sadr-i-Jahan availed neither in my
case, unfortunate wretch that I am, nor in the case of Shaikh
Husain. That aged man, whose sin.s have surely been forgiven
by God, now lives in affliction and disti-ess, in per turbation of
spirit and in perplexity, seated in the nook of obscurity, unable to
haunt the doors of the great ones of this world, or to obtain their
influence and interest on his behalf ; while at the same time the
road of representation is closed to him, and all hopes ® of the
intercession of others in his behalf are ruined.

But, to continue : the ^aikh's existence is a blessing and a
boon to be highly prized by his contemporaries. I was not
personally acquainted with him till recently, but now that he
has returned from his pilgrimage to the Hijaz, and has suffered
bonds, he appears to me to be a quantity of (heavenly) light, and
an angel in bodily form. Never have I known him to speak of
worldly matters, either in public or in private. He is ever
employed in austerities, in worship, and in striving in the wav
of holiness, fasting continually and always watching at nitjht.
It is my hope that God (may He be praised and glorified !) wil!
open to liim the door of his desire, in aecoi'dance, with the text,
■'Veril}- a, difficulty shall be attended with ease,' aye. verily a
difficulty shall be attended with ease.” It is my hope, too, that God

ill speedily recotapense him for his afflictions with the blessing
described in the couplet : —

CoHpUt.

When hardships press upon thee, think on the chapter " Have
we not opened ’

And the word difficult} " lies betneer, two repetitions of the
word “ ease,”

When thou thinkest on tbi.'- rejoice.

I protected, that is to say, from evil by the presence

therein of Mn'inu-d-din Cishti’s shrine

Literally, ‘ the house of intercession is mined.’

The uinocy-fouith chapter of the Qur'an, from which the test is quoted.

140

T pray, too, that I, bondsman of this world as I am, may by
90 the blessing of that leader of all the pious, attain salvation, that,
being delivered from my purposeless pursuits, my wild talk,
levity, folly, and futile scribbling, I may reach my “ true native
laud ’■ and abiding city, to meet there my departed wife, children,
and relatives, and, above all my son, and that T may be enabled
lu employ what remains to me of life in some occupation that
shall serve me hereafter.

Oauplet.

My purpose is, if it be possible,

So to employ myself as to dissipate my irrief

And since these lines were written just as the scroll of felicity
was unfolding itself, and the blessed bree.^e of morn was begin-
lang to blow, and the true dawn was just hr-raking, what tvonder
if the arrow of my disinterested pi^yei .-trikes the target of
.i.-ceptauce through the bounty of the Lotch on wno.'ie boundless
n'.en'T I have alw'ays trained my.se'f oi helie\e, unu ly who-e free
grace I liave been nourished f

Couplet.

91 He niuy well unfold the de.«ire ot my forr;uie, to- which

last night

•• I prayed, aiol tlie 'TUf- dawti lu'oke." ^

Tiiest- complaixtitig.s are out ol place here, but wiiai f.ii. I do r
I'L .-,c Ltl .aid heart are .-o oppre— ed with weakne.ss and un-
.ci-ine-s that these few bittei lamentation.- have e^eaped from
the pipe oi mv tongu.olGss pen. Plea-o God 1 shall be excused
mil forgiven.

I Ti.15 couplet is fi-om an ode of Hsti/, Xu. 2.‘?6 isi Gulune! Jafett’s edicion
jf Firl/ For in the second hotnisuch f oionei Jarrett’s edition

reads without any variant. A fine MS. of Hafiz in my possession

r.-arii, , The same MS reads or rather, as it is written.

for Wti iu the first hemistich. This reading does not commend itself to me
the Cawnpore edition of Hatiz ( 1902) reads for or

141

Couplet.

“■ 1 am not one to weep from grief of heart,

Bnt this load of grief heavily oppresses my lieart.’'

XVI. Shaim ‘Abdc-’l-Qadie.*

He was an inhabitant of Ucch, and was the delight of the
heart and the apple of the eye of his holiness Shaikh Hamid-i-
Qadiri ; may God make his soul fragrant!

At the time when that holy man (may God the most High
have mercy upon him I) was in JSgra in the days when Bairana
Khan, the KhankhanSn. was in power, I was a student, bnt I
iiad not the good fortune of waiting on him. When Bairam
Ivban. owing to the machinations of malevolent and perverse
jiei'sons. tlie chief of whom was Shaikh Gada'i,^ became putfed npi
with pride on account of his transient high position, he began to
regard the holy Shaikh with disfavour, and summoned him from
1,'cch The Shaikh was much displeased, and declared that the
1)1 del augured ill for his persecutor, and there happened’ to
Baii arn Klian what did happen. ^ But Shaikh Muijammad Ghaus
used to attribute the subsequent confusion in .the affairs of
Btiiram Khan to his own journey to Court ( in obedience to a

'iimmf'ii.s ),

IVhen the holy ^aikh Hamid returned to Multan his soul,
■ioiv re tine on high, conveyed itself in the sacred shriiic to the
’.'ihghbuurhood of the attendants of the sublime court of heaven
:• .-i hi.s pui'e body was committed to the ground in the village
r't Hamiflpur, a dependency of Multan,

There had been for many years a dispute betw-eer. idbaikh
■Abdu-'l-(^adir and hi.s younger brother. Shaikh Musa, regarding
the title to the Shaikli-dom. and Shaikh Muss, consequently,

I Vide Ain-i-Akbari, i, 544.

’ Vide supra -No. V

Scil. his removril from his position by Afcbar. Fide eol. ii, text, p. ;J6.
•Asa matter of fact many things contribated to Bairam’s fall. He was
unfortunate in having the whole interest of the family of Akbar’s foster-
uicther arrayed ^ 28 iust him
19

spent most ttf hi.s time at Court. One nigiit wlien the Shaikh
■ Abctu-’l-Qadir was at Fathpur oil of poppies was offered to him,
and he declared the use of it to he unlawful. The Emperor was
displeased with him on account of what he said on this occasion’
and one d:iv in the hall of audience at Fathpur, after the congre-
gatamal prayers Irad been recited, the Shaikh busied himself with
hi- -upeierogatorv devotions. The Emperor ’■aid. *' Shaikh, per-
torni \uur supererogatory devotions in your own house." The
92 Shai'kh replied, *' Sire, in this kingdom your commands have no
fori'e " The Emperor was much displeased and said, •' What an
ignorant fellow i.s thi.s Shaikh." He then said. Since you do
not desire what my power can give you, remain no longer in mv
kingdom ’’ The Shaikh immediately left the assembly, resigned
his ma.lad-i-ma‘nsh. and ceased to prosecute his case against his
younger brother. He retired to Ucch, the burial place of his
levered predecessors, and, in ^aikh Musa's absence, removed
the hones of the holy Shaikh Hamid to Ucch, and followed the
sublime and laudable rule of his predecessors. He now walks,
with the footsteps of resignation, in the way of lioly poverty, and
receives so much in the way of alms that he has no need of any
madihl-i-ina'a^. Now Shaikh Musa, after all the years wliich
he has spent in piety, devotion, holy endeavour, and saintliness,
lias become a secular follower of the Emperor, has adopted the
protessiou of arms, and, having resigned his former service, has
now become a commandei’ of five hundred horse. This is similar
tn the .story of a mau who became a Musalnian, to whom one said,
” You have done well, there were too few Mu.salmans without you !

Si) long as Shaikh Musa was with the Emperor he would, at
the stated time.s for prayer, whether he were in the public or the
private hall of audience, himself utter the call to prayer, and
wiMild then lead the congregational prayers in the presence of
the Khalifiih of the age. and none could gainsay him.

i H app-.irentlj mt'ans to be sarcastic, insinuating that there were

pletity of r^. ievaitt lioly men whi» had relinquished the service of God for
the service .h Akbar Witii refeience to what foliowcsj however, he luav
meau that the iuqteria) service was benefited by ri»e accession of at leust one
true Muslim.

143

When news was. [brought to Shaikh ‘Abdu-’l-Qadir of his
lirother's new rank at Court, lie .said, '* He well deserves ihe
conmiand of a thousand horse. Why did he not enter the im-
perial service before, .and receive a jnyir iii Multan, instead of
causeles-sly quarrelling for so long b ’’

Shaikh C\bdu-'1-Qadir. well content with the honour and higli
place which he has gained throua'h I10I3' poverty, follow.- the rule
of his noble anee.stors and, .sitting as their succe,s.soi', emplovs
himself in guiding and teaching the jieople, and -pends lii.s
precious time in worship, in the practice of severe austerities,
and in holv endeavour, so that hi- leadei’sliip in the religion.-
world is e.stablished."

Couplet.

W^e will not deprive our.selves of the honor." of holy poverty 93
and contentment :

Tell the king that our daily bread has been appointed tor u-
by God.

XVII. Shaikh KakTr.

He was the spiritual .successor of his holines.s Shaikh Baha'u-
'd-din Zakariya * (may God sanctify his .soul !!. The people of
Multan gave him the title of Vult (saintk and so great was
their faith in him that lie could, if he chose, assemble a thousand
horsemen in one day. He employed his time so busily that he
took his meals at variable times, as it were, and owing to rhe
redness of his eyes, caused really by hi.s night watches, tlie
common people believed him to be a drunkard.

‘‘ So much is my own blood my drink that all night long I
am beside myself.

“ And for this leason men charge me with wine- bibbing. "

Xevertheless. Shaikh Musa-i-Qadiri. who has been mentioned
above, always attributed the redness of Shaikh Kabir’s eyes to
acfua! dninkennes.s, and he would continu.nllv -ay. “ I fear that

- Lucrally. ‘ has beni stainppil a.s ouiv nt com.'

- I'l ; viii. i, trans Rankiu,-. li'h arc i aii.l .i i,-i-Akba) ‘ iii,

and >ce p Badiioiii does nia. nf course, o:ecii tliat Kabir was the iuune-
diat." sQcrcs^or of this saint, wlio .tied in A.D 1267-6-. In thf Tiiboi'c'
Kabir is s..ii; . been ,in .ictiial descendant ct BvI'j .i’-> 'Za.S:i!''’. ■

144

94

the saints of old, too. wlio.se morals we read of in liooks. were like
Shaikh Kabir. who is well known as a ’• Saint, " aiul that rlie
old poets, -also, were like Shaikh Faizi and the rest of riieni."
God forbid I

I saw Shaikh Kabir once at Fathpur. when 1 was with Hnsaiii
Kian. and observed his dig-nity of appearance, and I firmly
Ijelieve that inwardly he was a knower of hidden secrets
'"A fragment-^ from Sa‘di.)

■■ Whomsoever thou seest clad in tuc garments ut h.oIine>'.

■' Believe him to be holy, and a pious man
■’ If thou Knowest not his actual state.

■■ W'hat business has the police ottieer within tiio hov.^e '

His death took place in the year H. 995 (A.D i aru h" i-
tmried in the burial place of his venerable fnitfHti.er-, n’sr
bies.sinsr and peace be ntaui them Ik

XVIII. iliR Saytid ‘AlI of Luc'Hia.va.

He is one of the faithful men of this age, and is armnig ;i.t
greatest oi ’•he spiritual representatives of Shaildi ‘ .\bda-’-i’-
Kazzai; or Jh.inihana. a noted ShaikJ'. 'who was widely vin. r.ucil
by ecstatic niy&tlcs, and followed by those who had .o'qi’h'cd
A-arning and perfection.

The Mir passed his eightieth year, and advanced well into ins
oiiith decade, and thTOUghout his precious life he never set fm.t
o.iisicle his house once he had received authoritative perr.rs^ ,.>•
to give religions instruction. He was resorted to by the ■’.•tt
lud by all. both rich and poor. Many miracles are relatu' t
him, and whosoever was honoured by the Mir's companionsL ; ^
and in all sincerity enrolled himself among his disciples, obtain, d
grace to avoid all forbidden things and wanton pastiriit. -
to ally him.self to the Fount of all grace, and to attain bi.s ti , ..
object. Among such was Muhammad .Ja‘far, the relative t
Mirza Ni^mu-’d-din Ahmad, an orthodo.v youth, bur po!l,’.,,,|
with debauchery. When he ti-avelled from Labor to take !;i »he

' ihe test does DOt give the source of the quotation. I have

• iiserteil it from 5^. (A). The verses are well known

145

fiiiijdari ' of the paygatu of Shamsabiid,* which was in the
Mlrzd,'i! jilgir. and reached Ludhiana, he enrolled himself among-
hlir Sayyid ‘All’s disciples, and, by Giod'.s grace, repented of his
sins, and, leaying aside all ^ things that should be shunned,^ and
eyerything that is forbidden, frequently begged the ^Lir to offer
up a prayer® that he might attain to the dignity of martyrdom.
The Mir offered up prayers in accordance with his request, and in
rhe course of three or four months Muhammad Ja‘far became so
well known for bis piety, abstinence, a.sceticism, and devotion,
iliat be became an obiect of envy “ to many of the pious,
and he, who used with much jn-ide and pomp, and with many
attendants, to recite his night p)'ayers, now drew water for his
cei-enionial ablutions without the help of unv servant, and
aroused nobody

In a short time the Mir'< prayer was answered, and in a village 95
'n the pargana of Sbamsai.iad iMuhainmad Ja'far attained to the
dignity of mai-tyrdom.' Hghtiiig inanfnllj^ against rhe warlike
utHdeL

In thatjsame year I waited on .Mir Sayyid 'Ali, on the occasion
on which 1. in company with llirza Hfizamu-'d-diii Ahmad,
obtained leave to visit my beloved home. The conversation
turned on the martyrdom of .la'far, and llir Sayyid ‘.leli said.

“ It is admissible for martyrs to satisfy their love of plea.sure in

1 The ii}ujda> was the chiot military and police oHicer ->f u pargana^ or
• hundred/

2 Headquarters of a parg'ina in the <aihir of QaDuauj in the -irba of
Agra, i*ide A/n-i-Akbar'^, ii. 185. Now a town in the (^iiiinganj fahftl oi
the FarrukhSbid District in the IT. P., ride Imp. Gazetteer (new' series),
xxii, 229.

. omitted from the text, though botli MSS. have it.

^ MS. (A) has which is not so good a reading.

■' the opening chapter of the which is recited as a prayti,

with intention.

Badaoni always used the word in this wrong sense, snp>'i

p. 3(), note 2, also vol. i. trans. Ranking, 395 and 543. note 4

in A.H* 999 (A.D. 1590-91). *‘ide vol. ii, text, p. 37fi Muhammad
Ja'far was the son of Niz.imu-d-din’s materna* aunt.

148

tills world as well las in the next), as is certain from the follow-
ing text which occurs in the glorious woi’d of God : — ‘ I^ay, rather,
-alive with their Lord they are provided for. rejoicing.’ He
then said, in this connection, “ There was a newly maiTied yoiitli
who met his death by martyrdom in this neighbourhood, and
after his death he used to return alway.s on Friday nights, in
appearance the same as when he was alive, and pass the nig-ht
with his wife in conjugal intercourse.” T said, ‘‘They say too
that deceased martyrs are capable of begetting children in these
circum.stances, and it is well known that this is a fact. In the
panjana toiin of Basawar, wliich was my birthplace, an .Afghan
named Ishaq suffered inartyi-doni but used to consort with his
newly-married ivife after his death, visiting her every Friday
night. He ordered her to keep the matter secret, but shortly-
afterward.s, when the woman became pregnant, she wa.s accused
of misconducting herself. On being much pressed she revealed
the whole matter to her mother-in-law. Ishaq's mother, and one
Friday night showed her the form of her son. The mother cried
out, calling her son by name, and tried to embrace him. Tim
shape vani.-5hed. and from that day forth Ishaq appeared no more.
His mother dug a well and named it after him, and the v\ell
e.vists to this day. How can these things be 't ” Mir Suyyid
•All .inswered. ■■ Tliey ai-e po.^sible. and they are not contrary -o
reason. ’ Miiza Xizamu-’d-diu Ahmad said, ■' It may be that
a Jinn appeai’ed in the oiirwaid form of the Martyr.'' 'The
Mir -said. "A jinti has not the power to appear in tlie
.semblance of the hodie.s of jn others, .saijits. pious men. anti
maityrs.'

The death of the Mir occurred in the year H. 1002 ( A.l)
l.i9d-94 5, or H. lOOd lA.D. l.iyi-y.b). One of the learned men
96 of the time found that the words, I'he religious leader of man-
kind,” ^ gave the date ot hL death. The iJirii worthy son, Mir
■Sayyid Mahmud, has sn(;ceeded him.

! cJo- Qio’afi iii, pan of vene.- 163, Ifit

' This ehronoinam gives th- .late A D. 1002 (A t>

1503 - 041 ^

147

XIX. Shaikh Mi”ix.

He was the grandson of Matdana. Mu‘in the pi-eacher, a well-
known man, the author of the ila'anju-n-niibuiraii.^ Shaikh
irii‘in (of whom I am writing) was an angel in human form.
He was employed for some time, under the fannan of the
Khalifnh of the age, as QSzi of Lahoi. They say that he ne% ei-
deeided a case, and that if a plaintiff pressed for the decision of
his suit he would with much insistence and lamentation and with
protestations of his own incompetence, say, “ For God’s sake
compromise the matter between you, so that I may aroid respon-
sibility, and have no cause for repentance or shame. " He would
also say, “ You both know' all about the ease ; it is my misfortune
that I, who know nothing of it, am left alone to decide between
two who knew all about it. Do not, then, give me cause to be
ashamed before the Court of God, the Most High ! ” If a woman
prayed for a separation from her husband on the ground of his
absence from her he would provide her with means of livelihood
to the extent of his ability, and would say, “ Take this much for
your subsistence and await your husband’s return : do not
.separate from him.”

He devoted his subsistence allowance, over which he had exclu-
sive rights, to the pay of scribes, whom he used to employ to copy
valuable books, and he used to collate the copies and have
them hound, and would then present them to students. This w'as
his principal occupation and employment throughout liis life, and
he must have distributed thousands of such volumes to the
people.

In the year H. 995 (A.D. 1587) he took his departure from
iiis world, the sojourning place of toil, for the garden of eternity,
leaving tw'o sons, one of whom is famous in all riots and combats
for his skill in wrestling, while the other is a noted pigeon-flier.

On account of these accomplishments their names were mentioned
the Emperor, and he was a spectator of their performances. 97

1 The text has Mi'rdj, bat both MSS. have JIa'urij, which remling I have
adopted. The title of the book, which I have not foaad mentioned else-
where means “■ Steps to prophet-hood.”

148

“ The liviiig comes forth from the dead amt the dead comes forth
from the livino- ’’ ■

XX. iliK ‘Abi'l-’i.-Lat!f of Qiijv'Ix.

He was a Saifi Sayyid descended from Hasan. He was well-
\ ersed both in those branches of knowledge which depend upon
tlie exercise of the reasoning faculties and in those which depend
upon the exercise of the memory. Every step in his pedigree is
historical, as Hairati, the famous poet, wrote in an ode in praise
■li Yahya, the venerable father of the Mir : —

Tales of history should be heard from his lips,

I'or no one has seen his like in history.’’
lie or one of his relations found the date of the perversion of
.:ihah. Isma'il in the words, "the untrue religion.’’ When he was
arrested in conseq^uence he said. " I said ‘ the religion ' wrongly,’’ *
and obtained his freedom bj'- this artifice. The Saifl Sai/yid--
wei-e all bigoted SunnU, and Shah Tahmasp deprived them of
their families and estates on this charge, and this was the cause
ot Mir Abdu-’l-Latif’s coming to India. I heard this from
.Vlirza Ghiyasu-’d-diu ‘Ali,’^ who is entitled A§at’ Hian. When
ilir ‘Abdu-’l-Latii and his family fell into disfavour with the
( Persian) king, ilir 'Ala’u-’d-daulah, the writer of the Tazkirah,
wbu was the younger brother of ‘Abdu-’l-Latif and had been
brought up by him. and who used to call him Hazrat-i-Aqa, with
Some object of his own in view wrote an ode, declaring his com-
plete separation and estrangement from his brother. Oue of the
heiaistichs of that ode is as follows ; —

“ I utter curses ou Yahya and ou Hazrat-i-Aqa.”’

98 Pcr.ple said to him. "The Mir brought you up by his side, why

1 That ia to say, the dead Shaikh lives in his work- while from hie living
proceed? nothla^; but dead works.

> i.e. ‘I WAS . iu ‘-ailing it a religion at all.’ Shiih Israa'il’s ‘per-
version ’ was to i‘ - faith-

The text onYtH 'Ab, chougs both MSS. have it, and ii is correct. Vide

A/ n - i-^AkhUf" , : -i.Jij.

i Mir ‘Ala’u- J'dan. ” Tad " tparently become a ShV'''-

149

have you insulted him!''’' He ausweied, "Do you not see that
I have shown my gratitude to him by mentioning him by the
title of Hazrat-i~Aqa, while I have mentioned my father by his
name only, without any honorific title ? ” To be brief, the
depraved heretics worked on the mind of Shah Tahmasp, and
completely alienated him from Mir Yahya, and the Shah sent a
royal messenger, a man of devilish aspect, and in appearance like
the guardians of hell, from Azarba’ijan with a written order
which ran as follows: — “Since Mir Yahya and his son Mir
•Abdu-’l-Latif are full of zeal for the Sunni persuasion, and are
the chief cause of the staunchness of the Sunnis of Qazvin, there-
fore take both these men, and collect all the Sunni books which can
be found within the limits of their jurisdiction, and send them to
me, and take their wives and families to Isfahan.’’ Thereupon
Mir ‘Ala’u-’d-daulah who was then in Azarbaijan sent a swift
messenger with a letter to this effect, and the royal messengers
arrested Mir Yahya who was known as “ Yahya the innocent,” *
and he was kept in Isfahan in bonds for eighteen months, until
he was released at once from those bonds and from the bonds of
this world of vexation and anguish. Mir ‘Abdu-’l-Latif sought
safety in flight and withdrew himself for a time to the mountains,
and, relying on the promise of his late Majesty, came to India
where he was honoured by being received into the imperial
service and was gladdened by the emoluments which he received
through the boundless liberality and generosity of the emperor.
His present majesty also took some lessons from him in various
passages of the Divan of Khaja Hafiz and other books.

On the 5th iJq/a6 in the year H. 9SI (Oct. 31, 1573) in the
new town of Fathpur Mir ‘Abdu-’l-Latif took his departure for
paradise, the abode of bliss, and obtained the everlasting blessings
of the heavenly damsels and mansions, and was buried on the
ramparts of the fortress of Ajmer close to Mii' Sayyid Hus-
sain, “ Khma-sawar.” ^ Qasim-i- Arsalan found the chronogram

t Or ‘ the divinely protected from error.'

* ‘ The rider of the grey horse.’ Mir Sayyid Husain is a saint who has a
shrine at Ajmer.

20

150

99 “ The glory of the race of Yas ” ' foi' the date of his
death.

Mir ‘Abdu-’l-Litif’s fcrtvmate, noble, and orthodox son Mirza
Ghiyasn-’d-din ‘Ali-yi-Akhund, entitled Naqib ^an,* who is
endowed with angelic qualities and adorned with the graces and
perfection of learning, has no equal either in Arabia or in Persia
in his knowledge of works on travel, of history, and of chronicles,
as has been said before. The author is more intimate with him
than with any of the courtiers, and was his schoolfellow from
childhood. He is now strenuously employed, night and day, in
the imperial service, and for a whole generation past has been
engaged in reading works on history, books of story, and anec-
dotes, and legends, both in Persian and in Hindi, which latter
works have in these days been translated. One may say indeed
that he has become a part of the life of the Kbalifah of the age.
who never dreams of losing his companionship for a moment.
Of late he has been suffering from slight fever, but it is hcred
that he will be blessed with a rapid recovery and complete res-
toration to health. Since the good are everywhere acceptable
may they live long ! As for the evil ones of the age, what need
is there to utter prayers for them ? The evil that they do brings
its own reward and evil befalls the tongue which poUutes itself
by the mention of these nameless scoundrels.

XXI. ^ijA Mohammad Yahya.

He was a descendant in the fourth generation of the holy
Khaja Ahrar^ (may God sanctify his soul!). He was well
acquainted with the seven styles of penmanship, and was a
professor of that art. He had great practice and wonderful skill
in medicine and therapeutics. His excellent qualities and dis-

‘ The chronogram gives the date 981.

2 Vide Ain-i-Akiari, i, <141. Akhund means ‘theologian,’ ‘ preacher,’ or
‘ tutor.’ Naqib Khan was made a commander of fifteen hundred at the
beginning of Jahangir's reign, and died in A.D. 1614. He was buried at
-Ajmer, beside his wife, in the enclosnre of Mu‘ina-d-din Cishti’s tomb.

3 The renowed saint Khaia Ns?iru-d-din ‘Ubaidu-’llah Ahrar. Vidff aiiw-
i-Akbari, i, 322.

151

position were an inheritance which he had received from his
forbeai'S, and although he was little given to discourse he exer-
cised hospitality, aiid whatever he received from his jagir was 100
spent in furnishing the table of friendship. He was the bene-
factor both of high and low. When the new heresy was intro-
duced and the influence of the vilest of men waxed great he
witlidrew from this society and obtained leave to perform the
pilgrimage to the Hijaz. He was made “ leader of "the pilgrim-
age” and was sent on his tvay to the holy plaee.s with ample
store for the journey. When he had attained the felicity of com-
pleting the pilgrimage he returned, and passed his precious time
in Jigra, in devotion and the service of the Most High God,
which alone is the object for which man was created, until the
importunate messenger of doom seized the garment of his holy
life, and invited him to the abode of nearness to God and the
threshold of His greatne.ss, so that having obtained his release
from this abode of distraction and darkness he entered into close
fellowship with the faithful, the martyrs, and the pious.

Couplet.

They call to thee from the highest heaven,

I know not what more chou hast to do with this world
of suarc.s.

XXII. ^ATKK HUiilN OF

He was one of the spiritual successors of the lord Shaikh
^usain of Kh’arazm (may God sanctify his soul!). Religions
ecstasy, overpowering him, used to reduce him to a state like
inebriety. Daily, after early morning prayei-s, the MisbSh,
written by Shaikh Rashid (may God sanctify his soul !), used to
be read in his venerable assembly, after the rule of the Kihrawi
order, and he would then fall into a religiou.s ecstasy, and in like
manner he was assiduous in reading the Masnavi of the Maulavi-
yi-3Ia^n<ivi,* His feet were firm in the path of the most pure
law, and his speech sprang over from spiritual knowledge, and

i Jlaiilana .latiln-d-ilm-i-ltumi.

152

affected the hearts of his hearers. If at times one would praise
him he would say, It is yourself that you are regarding.”

He stayed some time in Badaon for the purpose of seeing some
101 Turks who had attached themselves to him as their spiritual
leader, and made that place resplendent with the light of his
presence, and the bounty of his blessed companionship reached
the inhabitants of that district. Eeturning thence he came to
Agra, and thence hastened to the court of the great God

XXIII. ►^AIKUt ‘AHDr-’L-Q.4DIE.

He is one of the descendants of Shaikh ‘Abdu-’l-Qadir the
second, of Ucch, who was entitled liis holiness Ghaus-i-Rabbani
(may God be graciously pleased with them!). Shaikh ‘Abdu-’l-
Qadir and his younger brother, Shaikh Ilah Bakhsh, were both
educated in piety, devotion, and temperance, and were distin-
guished for their mental perfections. They lived for some time
in Fathpiir, and the emperor, at the time when religious contro-
versy waxed warm, extended his patronage to Shaikh Ilah
Bakhsh, and appointed him to Gujarat with the title of $adr,
and sent him to Shahbaz Khan.i This was, in fact, banishment.
The Shaikh, however, rendered good service to the state, and
constantly * sent express messengers with representations contain-
ing full news 3 of the rebels, and other matters, so that a commis-
sion was issued, granting him the rank of commander of three
hundred. But just then the messenger of death delivered in his
ear the joyful message, “Return thou to thy Lord,” and he
responded cheerfully to the messenger of God. His elder brother.
Shaikh ‘Abdu-’l-Qadir, was then banished to the glorious city
of Makkah, and at the time when the Irfiankhanan, son of
Bairam Khan,^ and Mirza Nizamn-’d-din Ahmad had the control

I Shahbiiz Khan Kambu ; vide Ain-i- Albari i, 399. .Shaitt Ilah Battsh
was apparently sent to Gujarat in lo78-i9, at which time Shahbaz Kh an was
in Western Eajputana.

as in both MSS. The text has

3 jUAl as in both MSS, The text has

* llirza ‘Abdn-r-Kahim : vide Ain-i-Akbari i, 331. It was probably in 1583
that Shaitt ‘Abdul-T-Qiidir was sent to Makk.ali,

153

of affaiis iu Gujarat, lie went thither, and liaviug obtained from
them provisions for his journey and attached himself to a com-
pany of pilgrims he obtained the glory of performing the
pilgrimage of the Hajj. Thence he returned to his own native
place, Labor, where he now lives,* engaged in the service of God
and in devotion, and remaining steadfast in the same.

XXIV. Shuioi AbC-’l-^IaGlI.

He is the nephew, the son-in-law and the spiritual snccessor
of his holiness the true spiritual guide, the abode of saintship,
him who is seated in the chair of unity, lord of the sword of
might and the troop of power of the Eternal One, the manifesta-
tion of the perfections of Muhammad, Miyau Shaikh Da’ud * (may
God sanctify liis soullj. He is, iu the swift pursuit of righteous-
neso, the phoenix of the age, a pattern in all states and assemblies
of holy poverty and self-effacement. If mention be made of
those favoured by God it is his name which is most appropriately
mentioned, and if the talk be of those who excel their fellows it
is his name which is first spoken. He is a man of lofty soul who
has completely effaced himself in the love which he bears to his
spiritual guide, a man of noble mind who knows no other occupa-
tion than the adoration of his saintly preceptor. He has himself
written verses to that purport : —

Couplets.

“ I am ever inebriated with the cup of love ;

What should I know of ‘ this ’ and ‘ that ’ —

I who worship Da’nd P ”

“ How can this frozen heart be warmed by the speech
of aU?

Nay, it requires the breath of Da’ud, which can soften
even iron.”

102

1 In A.H. 1004 (A.D. 1595-9<>).

2 Yide p. 47.

154

103

“ I sit ou the throne of poverty, now that I hare attained
my desire,

I reign like Snlaiman, for I am heart and sonl the
slave of Da’ud.”

Quatrain.

“ Lord, grant to me one glance of the eye which I
desire,'

Grant to me freedom alike from being and non-exis-
i«nee.

And although I be not worthy of this high fortune.

Grant to me one atom of the love of Shaikh Da’ud.” "
One of his sayings is this : — Oh, Abu-'1-Ma‘ali, be the slave
of the Lord, the Most High, and be not the slave of money and
jewels!” It is said that in the year of his auspicious -birth he
was taken to his holiness, the universally respected ® Miyan
ShaiKi Da’nd (may God sanctify his tomb! ) and that his worthy
father asked the Miyan to give a name to his auspicious offspring.
His holiness the Miyan said, Let his name be Shah * Abu-’l-
Ma'ali." As this name was very uncommon in India the bes-
towal of it has been regarded as a pi’ophecy of the return of the
Mn gh uls.^ and of the appearance of the army of the emperor
HumaySn (may his grave be fragrant !! and a year had not
passed when that emperor, who has now obtained forgiveness
of his sins, returned to India, and (the spiritual influence of)
Abu-’1-Ma‘ali placed him who had thus conformed to that in-
fluence in possession of the country of the Panjab. The words
“ Abu-’1-Ma‘ali, the Worshipper of God ” were found to give the
date of his birth. The few flowing verses quoted below, which
are to be interpreted mystically and not literally, are some of the
products of his bright genius.

I Or ‘ of my true object of desire.’

5 In both MSS. the second and fourth hemistiohg of this quatrain are
transposed.

s Literally, ‘the pole-star of pole-stars.’

♦ Svr.

^ Bec^ose it was more common among them .

155

^ fragment.

Ghurhati ‘ speaks in his religions ecstasy,

An ecstasy which is indeed altercation without speech.
It were impossible to describe the condition of bis love,
Yet to refrain from doing so is another impossibility.

Ghurhati ! Make thy life a sacrifice to Him,

For the felicity of union with Him is not bes-
towed as a worthless gift.

Keep the mention of love in thine heart, and open not
thy lips.

Keep the mouth of this flask well closed, lest (cold)
air should enter it.

Ghurhati ! Raise the cry of ‘ I am God ! ’ ^ and fear 104
not the stake.

For rope and stake are the means of ascent in this path.

That which we have seen and known of that Soul of
Souls

(We learnt) not to repeat, but to see and to know.

The following copy of a letter is one of his wonderful epistles
which he sent to me in Labor ; —

Verses.

I iiicieased niy desire and my heart is in grief
And within my bowels a fire is kindled.

When will the absent, return from their long journey ? *
* * » ♦

1 The taj^allus or poetical name of Aba-T-Ha'ali.

* The reference is to Mansur, vide p. 37, note 7.

3 These verses should be completed by a fourth hemistich, which is want-
ing in the text and the MSS.

136

105

“My dear one, — At this time of dejection in my separation
from every friend and stranger I had come to regard the news
even of those who * asked after the well-being of all as a letter-
carrier and messenger, and used to hope for greetings and a
message, when suddenly your affectionate letter took the place of
a prescription for the restoration to health of those cast down
with melancholy at separation from their friends, apd redoubled
my desire to see you, and my affection. Now' the veTrses of that
holy man of the Qadirl order, the seething of w'hose waves of
eloquence astonishes and bewilders the soul, expel the anguish
of my heai*t, and I beg that you will excuse me (for quoting
them) : —

Ho, ye ( who hearken) ! I wonder at all men.

And in my drunkenness I see neither that which is
before me nor that which is behind.

And there is nothing, I swear by God, in my bowels but
desire for you,

My heart seeth yon, as thougli I saw from your
eyes.

From my grave whisper in tiie ears of my absent friends

That they are the objects of mv regard both in life and
death.

When Munkir and Nakir shall come to me

I shall answer to Nakir at the time of his coming,
and to Munkir.

And will say ‘Question not me, but another’ concern-
ing them, for I am verily their friend,

And the bond of my love for them has suffered no
change.

We all convey salutations to all of you.

-Written by the humble Abu-'1-Ma‘ali.”

And in another letter he wrote the following couplet ; —

“ As for that dear one who nightly moveth near me,
Blest will be the day when he appears clearly before
me.”

1 Both MSS. insert {‘ and ’) here.

U,7

*■ Salutations blended with the desire of seeing yon and flaunted
like the banners of the Da iidiyyah branch of the Qddiriyynh
order are sent to you. Know that your friend has important
business with Maulana ‘Abdu-'l-GKafur and Shaikh ‘Umar,
which can be settled by a moment’s attention from you. If you
can spare any of your precious time to bring it about it will, in
truth, be most fruitful in benefits. My blessing."

XXV. Maulan-I Jalal op T.ala.

Tala is a famous quarter of Labor. The Maulana is a relative
of Haji Malidi, who was one of the most famous Shaikhs. He is
now one of the most learned men of the time, and has been
appointed as a teacher at Labor. He is a pupil of Mulla
lsma‘il of Ucch, and has also received instruction from other
teachers. He is a most expert lapidary, possesses great acumen,
and has much store of learning in all branches of know-
ledge, Itoth those which call for the exercise of the reasoning
faculty and those wliich depend on the memory. They say that
he has been engaged in teaching since he was eight years old.

He has a good delivery and speaks unambiguously .so that he is
able readily to convey to the understanding of his pupils the
sense of arguments on knotty points of speculative and traditional
science. He is kind-hearted, pious .and religious, and has the
Qur'cln by heart. He is endowed with noble qualities. The
correction and arrangement of the Quranic exegesis l of Shaikh
Faizi is principally his work. His age is between fifty .and
sixty.

Couplet.

What of .ai-gnment regarding knowledge? Though it ti-avel as 106
far .as Farqad,^

The mention of the name of Maulana .lamalu-’d-dln Mnham-
m.ad will accompany it.

XXVI. MAt r.ANA ‘ABDu-’.^r-SflAKCu ot Lahor.

He is a most eminent and distinguished sage, and well known

< The inspiration

One of two britfht stars near the North Vole.

21

158

for the vigour of his understanding and his natural acumen.
His belief in the ^aikhs is unshaken, and the fii-mne.ss of hi.s
confidence in these men i.s wonderful. Most of his precious time
is expended in perusing the works of this class of men, and he
employs his life in the recitation of supererogatory prayers and
petitions and in the perusal of the Q^tirfin^ and whatever comes to
his board is at the disposal of the poor and needy. At the time
when the controversy with the 'Ulamn and ihe ^aikhs took place
he was banished,! and having been appointed to be Qazi of
Jaunpur he was sent thither. When he joined the imperial
Court at the time when it was at Ilahabad '^ the §o^'-ship of
Jaunpur was bestowed on the Ottoman Qazi-:nda. an accomplished
man of pleasant disposition and adorned w’ith manj- mental
perfections. Since that time Manlana ‘Abdu-’sh-Shakhr has re-
mained theie in retirement, engaged in Teaching and impartintr
knowledge, contenting himself with what is sufficient for subsis-
tence, averse from covetousne.ss, far removed from worldly perils
and fears, and near to the salvation of faith,

XXVIT. Shaikh KabIr, son of Shaii^ MnNAWWAE.®

He is the successor of his respected father. He is a young
man who in childhood attained to perfection and excelled holy
men If in these latter days there he a .son who is better than
was his father it may be said that it is he who has attained this
107 condition. He prosecuted his .studies in most of those branches
of knowledge which are included in the ordinary curriculum
under his father, and hi.s respected father-in-law, Miyan Sa'dn-
llah Bani Isra'il. and subsequently made the society and
companionship nf his fellows the rule of his life, and became a

1 In A.D. 1579. Vide vol. ii, text, p. 277, where ‘Abdu sh.Shakur ia called
Cauldar, i.e , wearer of a darvish'^ robe.

1 III A.D. 1.583. I'lde vol. ii, text, p. 33-t.

■' Shaihli Miinawwar n.vs born at Libor .and was noted for his memory
and learning When the ‘Vhtma of Labor were banished in 1.579 he was
made Sadt of Mahva Ho nas afterwards impii.soned in Gwiliyar, where
he died in A.D. 1GO2-03. ^laikh Kahir himself died at Alimadiibad in Guja-
rat in A.D. 1617

159

courtier. May the most Holy God (be He exalted!) grant him
repentance for his indulgence in opium, his pride, and his lying
anil boasting. At the time when, in accordance with the impe-
rial order, he accompanied his father to the pargana of Bajwara '
and the spurs of the northern mountains, and was employed
in the administration of that district, he wrote a letter to me
from which the degree of perfection to which he, as a man. had
attained may be inferred. That letter was as follows : —

Por-ti'y.

1 had a heart by means of which 1 enjoyed life, but my heart
perished from me owing to the change which it suft'ered.

May the attendant.-, of that posses.sor of a sublime disposition,
that resort of excellence, be in good health. Oh, niy lord ! The
concerns of my heart and soul, that is to say' the only true con-
cerns of a man, are firmly established on the threshold of sincere
affection : but my earthly body (may the dust of the world be on
its head !) consorts with the birds and beasts of the tvilderuess of
superfluity,* nay. by God I it consorts with a multitude from the
sight of which the very birds and beasts could not choose but
flee. Glory be to God! 1 know not where I may find a remedy.
My vile spirit now knows what a blessing health is. From
the time when I first came to years of discietion' to this day.
when I have reached my- fortieth year, all my endeavours
have been directed towards the companionship of the most spiri-
tually-miuded men, wherein I might seek a remedy for my spiri-
tual imperfections and the diseases of my soul, and now zeal for
the Supreme aud jealous God (may His majesty be exalted I )
having affected me ha.s brought on me a sore affliction, which

^ There were two pargaiias of this name, line was in the Agra Mrkir of
the Siiha of Agra {.lin, ii, 182 1 aud the other was in the Beth Jalandhar
Duab sarkdr of the »uba of Labor {Ain, ii, 31H). The latter is the town
mentioned here. It is now a town in the District aud tahsil of Hoshiyar-
pur in the Panjab, Vide ‘Imperial Gazetteer of India’ (new series', vi, 220.

* ibjis The writer perhaps means the wilderness of the vulgar
crowd.

160

none but He can cure. Clieei’fuluetjM,' couteiitmeiit, and the quiet
enjoyment of health have all been snatched fiom me. You,
0 Maulavi, will surely have experienced the magnanimous and
affectionate solicitude of the Navvwab Fayyazq* that most learned
and most wise man, unique in this age (may God enrich us from
his perfection, and may He bestow on us the profitable honour of
108 his discoui’se ! ), and you must have recognized it as one of the
greatest of the Lord's benefits, and have returned thanks for this
great gift. .Vt the time when prayers are answered (pu^ up a
petition for the needs of j'our slave. Salutations to you. May the
attendants of the sympathetic Miyan Ahmad, the marvel of
the age, be in good health, and believe me to be desirous of
reunion.”

XXVHII. .'^.riKu S.vnt-'i.iAii, Tin: G liAUMAuiAN.®

Biyana'* is one of the districts in the eastern portion of India.
The Shaikh from his childhood was in the service of Shaikh
Muljammad Ghaus,^ and passed his time with him in fasts of forty
days* and in e.xorcism, and subseipiently himself continued these
practices. He built a hospice in the district of Biyana and was for
many years resorted to by students and followers of the religious
life. He employed himself in the instruction and spiritual guid-
ance of such men. In knowledge of syntax he had no equal in
his time. For seventy years he never broke his fast save on

I ^ in both MSS. Tlie text has ‘ runu-Hv for my

days.’ I have followed the MSS.

* The poet Shaikh Abu-l-Fab. Fai/.i, Fayyazi, elder brother of ShaiWi
Abii-l-FazI. Vide infra chap, iv, No. evii.

•5 Fide Ain-i-Akbiiri. i, 545, where he is called • Maulaoa Sa'du-’llili ’

4 Thou a parijana town in the sarkar and snba of Agra {Ain-i-Akbnrt, ii, l5j2),
now the headquartersof a taAjit in the Bharatpir State in Eastern Eajputana
{Imperial Gatellecr of India (new series), vii, 637. s.v. Bayana) In the Ain
(ii, 180) Biyana, which is a very ancient city, is mentioned as having been
formerly the capital of a province of which Agra was a dependent village.

t Fide p. 6.

* MS. (.4) has olu«} jb by trausjMsition of dots. The
leading of the text and MS. (B; is correct.

161

milk, green vegetables,' and wild fruits. His liberality was
profuse and open-handed. In the reign of Salim Shah ® I went,
in company with my maternal grandfather, to pay my respects
to the Shaikh and took some lessons in the Kdfiyyoh “ from him.
At last the Shaikh, withdrawing himself from ail worldly con-
cerns was overcome by stupor. He secluded hiuiseif alone i!i a
room and would not admit even his .sons to his presence, until in
the year H. 9S9 (A.D. l.oSl) he departed trom this '■vorld. He i.-
buried in the hospice which he built. On the day of iiis deatJi a
sparrow fell tlown from the air on to the liead of the corpse, and
this was a matter of wonder to ail who beheld it.

XXIX. SHAiKui N-\3inf-'L.-DiN.

He was a native of tliiiUaun.* and liad the reiiutatioii of being
skilled in alchemy. It is said that the Shailth wa.- constantly in
attendance on the emperor Huiuayun. who has obtained forgive-
ness of his sins, both m court and in camp, anil that when the
emperor arrived at .Agra after being defeated at Jausa® the 109
i^aikh said,*^ “ Something will be re(|uired for tlie maintenance
of a fresh army. " and accordingly collected all the copper pots,
dishes, aiid other vessels which could be found and, in the late
emperor's presence, converted them into pure gold. This matter
was noised abroad, but when I inquired into the trutli of it from

* literally ' grass.'

^ Son .and successor of Faridu-d-diii .^hir ,^ah, reigned A.U 1545 —
1552.

■’ A famous work on .Arabic grammar, vide vul. i, trims. Kaiiknig, 128 aud
note 6

Then a paryana town in the and taea of Agr.i {Ain-t-Akbari, ii.

183). Now the headquai tors of a /nA'-'tl and ntzdiiud of the same name in the
State of Jaipur in Eastern Kaipntina. Vide Imperiul Gazctfcei India,
new series, .tiii, 135.

^ Where Humiyun was defeated by ^ir Shah in A.H. Dili (A.D. 1.539).
Vide Tol. i, trails. Banking, p. 480,

'' Aiijxiji Both MSS. have Ciy^>i ‘ he said to the ^aikh.’

In spite of the authority of the JISS. the eontext shows the reading of the
text to be correct.

162

his sons, with whom I am connected by marriage, they told me
that a darvi^ of gi-eat attainments ' had given their father a
basket, full of the ingredients necessary for the transmutation of
the baser metals, and that to whatever copper this was applied
the alchemist's object was attained, but that after their father
had once mixed these ingredients with the copper he had no
further power of manufacturing gold, as he was unacqaainfed
with the science of alchemy, — but God knows the truth !

I saw the Shaikh in Agra in the days when Bairam Khan was
in power in the house of Sayyid Shah llir.* the nephew of Mir
Sayyid Rafru-'d-din the traditionist. He was an old man of
enlightened appearance and of a good disposition. He died in
those days, and is buried in Hiudaun.

XXX. ^AIKH Mfu.AK.tK OK Alwak.2

Salim Shah used to call him Shah Mubarak, and used to place
his shoes before his teet 'I’he Shaikh generally claimed to be a
Sayyid. and w'as in great repute amonu the Af gh ans. Thus
when their power was on the wane and they were fleeing before
the Mughuls some of the Afghans seized ShaiUi Islam * of Fath-
pur suspecting him of being a wealthy man, and, having con-
fined him in a strange manner, carried him off to the fort of
Rantambhor. ^aikh Mubarak went thither from Alwar by way
of Basawar, and was the means of Shaikh Ishm’s * liberation.

Shaikh Mubarak twice attained the honour of performing a
pilgrimage to the glorious ka'Lah.

I was sixteen years of age at that time when, in company with
my venerated father, I paid my respects to the Shaikh in Basa-
war, and aftei that, in the year H. 987 I'A.D. 1579), when tin
110 emperor was leturning from his pilgrimage to Ajmir at which

t ) '■« exj.'. essioii nnsilii •aIco be leiidereij. ' full of kiiiivcrv '

■2 Via, nil- - No. .vtxviii.

'5 Tli-'i! tin l eac’j-iarie!' 'f .mkiii of the same i.a'iu- iu the tuba of Agra.
Now the- ■■'Lpcal •. ■ .e w State >■ Kastern Rajpnta-ia

t Sen', Sal'iii-i' ' stu .f t’l i- Sikri. is soinetimcB called

■ Sbaildi islaoi aii.- . i Tslcm;,

163

the whole of the Qur'iin was read, and was journeying to Fath-
piir by way of Alwar, I was again honoured by an interview with
the He had, in truth, reached perfection and was most

liberal and open-handed. It is now ' reported that he has recently,
at the age of ninety years, bidden farewell to this transitory
world.

XXXI. Shaikh Cay.an Ladh of Sohna.

(Ladh) ksohna ^ is a pargana town of Mewat, eighteen kiwuh ®
distant from Dihli. There is there a hot spring, rising from a
mine of sulphur. The water is green in colour and smells of
sulphur. Even in the winter time the water is so hot that it is
impossible to bear it on the hody. Bathing at that spring is a
remedy for scald-head and itch. The smell and colour of the
water are clear proof that it springs from sulphur. On summer
nights, too, small flashes of fire may be seen on the hills sur-
rounding the town, though nobody kindle a 6re there.

The Shaikh was one of the most famous successors of Shaikh
‘Abdu-’l-A/.i/. of Dihli * and travelled resolutely in the path of
'poverty. He used to give instruction in Sufi -istic books, such as
the Fufus 6 and the Nagd-i-fusu?.^ to his pupils, who were seekers
after the truth The emperor, towards the end of the ShaiKh’s
life, placed great confidence in him and sought the help of his
auspices in several important m.atters of state. He appointed
quarters for him in the ‘ibadatkhana close to the imperial palace and

1 A.H. 1004 (A D, 1595-96).

* Then in the BewirT sarkir of the f/ibn of Dihli [ Ain-i-Akiari, ii, 293,

where it is called Suhiiahj. Now a town in the District .and of (Inr-

gaon, Panjab. (imperial Gazetteer t>) Indti, new serie.s, \lii, 72). 'the tevt
has ‘Ladh Suhni,’ and the MSS 'Ladh S'dini.’ Neither MS preliies
‘ Ladh ’ to ■ Sohiia' in the account of the Shaikh's, life.

3 In reality about twenty-five nn'Ie.i.

* Vide .-i/n-l'Akhaiij i, 53S.

t Vide p 17 and note S.

‘The coin of the Funet’ Probably the cinnmentary eii the
Hikam mentioned on p 17 Both MSS read (i.i no) for the

meaning of tlie book’s title bcimr according to rhetn. ’ Th,- coin of tlemon-
strations.

164

used To admit him to private interviews at night, and the inverted
prayers of the recitation of which the emperor was a witness
became inverted in their effects.*

In the year H. 998 ( A..D. 1590j when the fell sick of

the complaint of which he died he sent for the worthy son of
Shaikh •Abdn-’l-'Azlz Q’atb-i--Alam, who was then employed in
the armv, from Dihli, and.- placing before him the patched robe,
the staff, and the other insignia of jgfeniM-dom. said to hin;,
“These were :i trust which f received from yonr venerable
father. Yon are more worthy of them than I.” He then .set
out on his journey to the next world. 'I'he words “ the truth of
poverty ’’ * were found to srive the date of his death.

.Shaikh Q.nth-i-‘Ilain, guided by God’s grace, retired from the
111 imperial service, and. obeying the call to follow in his venerable
father’s footsteps, guided his life thereby. He is settled in Dihli,
and is employed, by the emperor’s order, in the guardianship of
the footprint of his holiness the resort of apostleship * fthe
blessing and peace of God be njton him !), rendering service to
all wlio visit it If it please God. wlio is honoured, he will be
endowed witli the noble {jiuilities of his honoured father.

XXXII. SLf'tliff •.-Vimr-’t-GHANT of Bad.aox.

He' also is one of t lie sncees.sors of Shaikh ‘Abdn-’l-‘Aziz. In
asceticism he has no equal in these days, and in seeking solitude,

J Vide vol. ii. text, p. 286. ShA'Ml Cfijaii Ladh (there called Shaitt
Cinlld.a. or ‘ Shaildj .T.'inllda ’) ventured to prophesy that one of the ladies
of the imperial hanim would bear .a son. She, bore a daughter, and the
.Shaikh was somewhat discredited.

■t The text, while giving the correct date in words, gives it in figures,
wrouglv, a.s 989. Vide vol. ii, text, p. 373. The Shaikh is there called
Shaikh Jandadh ’ with ‘ Shaikh Cayanl&dma ’ as a variant.

i ^ This chronogr.im. which gives the date 998, is quoted in

vol. ii, text, p. 374, also.

■* A large stone bearing a footprint said to he that of Mnhammad,
brought from Makkah by -Shati Abu Tiir.ih in .A.D. 1.582. I'liie vol. ii,
p. 310.

6 MS. (.4) gives the ghaikh's name here

' 'I'h? text has here. Some word has apparently been omitted.

165

he is the “ Shibli ' of the age. At the beginning of hi.s career,
when he was a student in Badaon, he used to be overcome bj re-
ligious ecstasy, and sometimes even in the midst of his studies
on hearing the chanting of a mystical song he would remain in-
sensible for a whole watch of the day, more or less. When his
intimate friends asked him what he had seen to bring this ecsta-
tic trance upon him he would reply, " I know nothing of it.”

In consequence of the responsibilities which he incuried bv his
marriage, which is ^ a pitfall for enlightened .seeker.s after
knowledge,—

<'oupld.

Who are the robbers whom we encounter on our road to
God?

Those robbers are no other than women —

he came to Dihli in search of a livelihood, and there entered
the service of Tatar Khan.^ the governor of the city, who, though
clad in the habiliments of the great ones of the earth, was one
^f the godly. 'The Shaikh attached liimself as a di.sciple to
Shaikh ‘ Abdu-’l-‘Aziz. and under him he studied all those books
which are generally current and are included in the ordinary
curriculum. He then spent several years iu teaching, and was
then suddenly drawn mysteriously hy God’s grace, and. abandon-
ing all his occupations, he joined the circle of e^^ci tie dan'/^es
in the Shaikh’s hospice, and employed him.self in stiiving in the
path of holiness and in self-inortiScation. After attaining per-
fection he left human habitations .and took up bi.s dwelling near 112
tke footprint of las holiness the resort of apostleship f may the
blessing and peaee of God be upon hiinlh in a mcisjid known as

but the MSS give no help. The jneaning of the passage is, r.ov\ever.
clear.

1 A famous Muhammadan saint. Vide vol i, trans. Hanking, p. 59 and
note 1

2 MS. (A) which is equaPy "ood and MS. (B)

which is wrong.

3 Vide Ain-i-Akhari, i, Tatar Khfm died at Dihli in A.H. 986 (A.D

1578-79) or, fkccording to the Tahnqdtj in A.H, 985 (A.D. 1577-78).

166

the masjid of Khan-i-Jahan. There he dwells iu religious seclu-
sion, and, in spite of his having a large family, he follows a reli-
gious rule, with a firm trust in God. He had not taken one
step from the corner of retirement when in the year H. 1003
( A.D. l.o94-9.5) the Khan-i-Khanan i waited upon him, and asked
liim for his advice. He said, “ Deem the following of the holy
law * of Muhammad ( may the blessing and peace of God be upon
him !) to he of the first importance.” At the time when this
hastily compiled history was written Ahmad-i-Sufiyak ® and Hisa-
rnak ^ of Banaras. men newly converted to Islam, who in the reli-
gious strife of the.se latter days are branded the mark of

eternal execration —

MasnawL

Stand aloof from the Stifts of the city and the country.

All of them are unmanly wretches, devourers of men.
Whatever one gives to them that they devour-.

Whatever lies in their power that they do.

They have no occupation but sleeping and eating,

They take no thought on the day on which they shall die —

for the purpose of averting from themselves their evil i>eputation
and concealing their gross immorality, formed the design of dis-
patching a farinan summoning from Dibit to Labor Shaikh
‘ Abdu-’l-Ghant with one or two of his surviving children, whose
names will be mentioned hereafter, for the purpose of urging
him to submit to the new orders,® which they themselves had
most readily and cheerfully accepted. The Shaikh wi-ote a
letter to me setting forth his helplessness and asking to be ex-
cused, and accordingly, after many repre.sentations Ahmad-i-
Sufiyak was appeased, and abandoned his design, and he caused

5 M irza ' Abda-r-RahTm,

® witli as a variant.

Ahmad, the wretched little S/lfl. Vide vol. ii, text, p. 405.

* ‘ The wretched little Hisam.’ Possibly Manlaui Hisama-d-din of
Labor, who differed from the other itlamd of Labor. Vide lin-i-Akbar/, i,
538. The designation “ of BanaritS ’ may be given iij^contempt.

i i.e., regarding the ‘ divine faith/ the manner of salutation at court, etc.

167

a letter to be written and sent to the Shaikh excusing him from
attending in obedience to the summons and asking forgiveness
for what be had done. Please God. the matter will end satis-
factorily.

XXXIII. Shaim Buhujl of Dihu.

He is very learned in the traditional sayings of the prophet. 113
Having associated much with men who are devoted to a life of
poverty and self-effacement he has now, for some time past,
recognized the delights of such a life, and, the grace of God help-
ing him, has set himself to follow it for good, and has no longei
any dealings with the worldly, but is busied in teaching and
instructing his pupils.

XXXIV, Shai^ ‘ ABDU-'n-^AQy OF DihlI.

He has taken Haqql as his poetical name. He is a compen-
dium of perfect qualities and a source of excellence. He gives
instruction in all branches of knowledge, both in those in which
the reasoiHng faculty is called into play and in those which
depend on the memory. He has attained a high degree in Sufi-
ism, and among his works are the History of Madinah the Tran-
quil, and a book bn the modern Shaikhs of India, the date of the
writing of which is given by the words zikru-'l-AuliyaJ From
his earliest youth he ha.s sought eagerly after God, and, on
account of his long-standing friendship with them, he was for
some time the companion, in Fathpar, of Shaikh Faizi and Mirza
Nizamu-’d-din Ahmad, ’ and by means of them I also had the
honour of being permitted to wait on him, and continually
enjoyed the advantages of his society. When a change came over
the spirit of the time and vhe men of the time, all of whom are
corrupters of what is good and compounded of the abomination.s
of their own natures, and it was no longer safe to trust the di.s-
positions of one’s friends, the companionship of such a one and

1 The ohi'onogram givee the date A.H. 999 (A.D. 1590-91). I have not
been able to find any mention elaewhere of Shaikh 'Abdn-i-Haqq’s works.

J68

such a one * became disagreeable to him, and, the grace of God
influencing him. he was impelled to journey to the most noble
Ka'bah. and he left Dihli for Gujarat, in the condition of one who
is mysteriously attracted by God, and cut off from ail worldly
concerns. Tr.anks to the good offices and assistance of Mirza
biizamu-'d-din Ahmad he theie obtained a passage on a ship
iiound for the Hijaz, but. being hindered by physical difficulties,
he was unahlfc to reach Madlnah the Tranquil (on its inhabitants
be peace and salutation I), and he spent some time in Makkah the
glorious with Shaikh •Abdn-’l-Wahiiab of India, the follower of
114 Shaikh Haho f.tu-Tlah the traditionist (may the mercy of God
be upon him i ). who. haviag returned from the pilgrimage to
Makkah with Haji Begam.* came to Ag’-a. where I drank some of
the ’water oi Zarnzam® from his auspicious hands, and took some
■esson.s from him in the traditional sayings of Muhammad, by
way of a good augury, and from him. Shaikh • A bdu-'l-Wabhab.
that is, he received permission to., give instruction in the tradi-
tional savings, and then returned to his well-loved native land.
Here he cloaks his ^ufi-ism by giving instruction in those
branches of knowledge which are included in the ordinary course
of education His aspirations are so high that he will not, if
Grud the most High please, be ensnared on his heavenly wav,
and fail of attaining his object.

At ihe tini" when tie returned from Makkah the glorious to
Dihli, and 1, perplexed and troubled in pursuit of my object, was
cn my way to the imperial camp, I had the opportunity of
paying my respects to him for a few minutes, and after I had
arrived at Labor 1 wrote him a letter. I place a copy of it on
record by way of invoking a blessing .and as a memento ; —

•• After expressing ..ny subjection to you, and the obligations
which I owe you, 1 would represent that the affairs of this dis-
appointed exile are, so far as is compatible with exile and dis-

1 The.se e-xpre-ssions ate evidently a snbterfage to avoid mentioning the
names of the emperor and iiia favonritee, such as Abu-1-Fazl and Faizi.

2 Daughter of the brother of Kumayun’s mother. She returned from the
pilgrimage in A.D. 1574 and died in A.D 1581. Vide vo). ii, text, p. 299.

3 Hagar's well, at Makkah.

1G9

appointment, matter for thankfulness, and it is my hope that you
too are constantly surrounded by God’s protection. When you
returned to Dihli and honoured me for one delightful hour, that
interview did nothing but excite my thirst and vehement desire
for your society, and so much remained unsaid and unheard that
I cannot express it. ‘ A year of companionship is but an hour ’ '
as has been said, and I myself experienced the truth of the say-
ing. Indeed, the same might be said even of lifelong companion-
ship I between friends). They said, ‘ We have tarried for a day,
or pai t of a day.’ * This world does not allow us sufficient time for
companionship, or the delights of the society of friends, if their
friendship be true and its bonds strong: it may be that on the
morrow, beyond the grave, we shall enjoy this companionship,
‘seated face to face on thrones’^ please God. To-day we must
devote our efforts to strengthening the bonds and to directing 115
our aims aright. The time for true companionship will be the
morrow, when presence and absence will ’oe alike, and what we
here call separation and union will be the same. May God
(be He glorified and exalted! ) grant to us some kind of affinity,
even though it should be common to all, so that we may under-
stand truly what sincerity realty means. I pray you to keep
your heart tow'ards me, as mine is towards you. I have ascer-
tained with the eye of certainty that the real meaning of affection
and the true signification of friendship have implanted themselves
in your nature, ‘and praise be to God therefor.’ May he increase
them and not diminish them.' There was an honoured man,
one of the dwellers in the two holy places, who used constantly to
recite thi.s prayer ; — ‘ 0 God ! as Thon hast favoured so do Thou
increase Thy favours, and as Thou hast increased them so do
Thou continue them, and as Thou hast continued them, so do
Thon bless tliem to us.’ May God (be He glorified and exalted !)

t 4 cL-< Both MSS. and the text have, wrongly,

ex' ^ < -'x “'O''.

2 fjJis Qur’Jn, xviii, 18.

xX- 0 ^ ^ ■X' ,

8 ^^JLc Qur’an, xv, 4P

170

increase, continae, and bless to ns the gift of true knowledge and
love, by the dignity of the chief of the first and the last of men,
Muhammad, and his family, and his companions, all of them! If
you should ever honour your friend with a kind letter I hope that
you mil also honour and delight me with whatever holy news
you may have of his holiness the Shai^, him to whom aU men
turn, and who is named Kalimu-'llah (may God bless and pre-
serve him !), and that you will convey to his noble presence a few
words from me, so that I may not disappear from his memory.
Much as I wished to write something on this subject mj pen
refused its office. Nov was there any need tbat I should write any-
thing, for when the time came for me to make my requests of the
Mirza * I composed some verses on this subject, moreover I wrote
plainly that there was no occasion for ceremony. I hope that
you will be diligent in delivering that letter. Farewell.”

Shaikh Faizi, after bis return from the Dakan, following his
old 'custom of ingeniously tormenting his friends, was very
desirous of gathering them round him in order to increase the
attractions of his social circle and to indulge in conversation with
them and was constantly annoying and troubling them (to come
to him);

Hemistich.

Our friend has this, and also that.

116 He sent several letters from Labor to express the strong desire
which he had of summoning Shaikh ‘Abdu-’l-Haqq to him. The
Shaikh, however, was exceedingly vexed, and would not come, but
sentletters containing excuses, and made his seclusion from the
world his pretext for not coming. Shaikh Faizi then sent in
reply the letter of which a copy appears below, and this is the
last letter which he wrote, and what is written in it is written.

*• My strong desire of seeing you. tny spiritual friend, dear to
the Lord (may He long preserve you 1) was not of the nature of
official or formal matters, tbat it should have been reduced to
writing. At first I was not av/are that you were sick at heart —

I Mirza Nizimu-d-din Ahmad.

171

that heart which displays bounty — and it is probable that I may
have expressed my desire (somewhat too strongly). After I
became aware that you had closed this way of access I gave your
wishes precedence over my owm, and I trust that the odour (of
this action) will be agreeable to you. My request now is that
you should not give yourself over to melancholy in your place of
retirement. Two or three days ago that choicest of saints. Miyan
Shaikh Musa,' honoured my poor dwelling with a visit, and said
that it was not improbable that you would be coming hither
about this time. 1 pressed him to tell me what grounds he had
for saying this, but he left the matter uncertain and undeter-
mined. I swear by God, the Supreme Object of worship, that I
gave him Tin hint of my own wishes, nor shall I do so.

When the time comes for speech what need is there of a letter f

If you remain at home, it is light, and if 3'ou come it will be
light upon light. I swear by God that I have constrained myself
to forego this wish and that I have not of mt'own accord given any
intimation of my desire, nor shall I do so. I hope that you will
not vex yourself further regarding this matter. But if I bad wings
I would sit daily on the roof of your chamber and would gather Uy
the grains of your affectionate discourse, trilling fortli the song
of my desire. What more shall I wj-ite f Your pearl-like * petitions
are few and far between. I pra^' 3 011 for God's sake clo.se not the
road against the caravan of my' secrets. If it is closed fi-om 3 0ur
side it shall not be from mine. Greetings. 1 send .supplications
to the Alexander of the throne of holy povert3', Miyan Bublnl.
In,tbe past two davs what is expre.s.sed in the following quatrain
has come to pass in a certain connection —

I Probably Sba.yi Musi of FatliDiir Sikri, elder brother of Sbaikii
Salim-i-Cishti, but perbap.s ^ai^ Musa of Labor {.hn-t-Albrir/, i, *539) 01
§baikh Musa, younger brother of Maalina 'Abda-l'Qid,i

3,5 eitlier /ittrr-dJun ‘ seed-pearls ’ or tiniddwi, ‘ s\ rnpathetio,’ or, ‘ grief

laden.’

172

Quatrain.

*■ Faizi ! Old age is upoa thee, walk circumspectly,

Let each step that thou takest be such as may be
approved.

Through spectacles ot glass thou wilt perceive naught,
Tear a bit from thy Iieart and place it on thine eyes.”

Glory be to God ! That Shaikh Faizi has passed away and
become a by-word, and as for these, the mention of "whom is still
among us for a few days, or i-ather for a few houi-s, who are they
that we should waste time in addressing them where preparation
is even now being made for cnr departure hence ? All that re-
mains to them is the wind of speech. How long shall we waste
our time in measuring it ? •

Gouplet.

it will not be long before no trace of us remains,
You have broken the flask and spilt the wine, there is no
cupbearer (to replace if.

XXXV. MiCLANA Ilahdad^ 0? Scltanpdr.

He originally came from Banoda. a village in Sind. He was a
pupil of Makhdumu-’l-Mulk. He is distinguished foi the nobility
of his descent. Although lie was formerly much puffed up wdth
the pride of learning and youth he has now' gained experience,
and his former pride has been changed for poverty and hnmihty.
For some time he held the appointment of Sadr of the S«ba of the
Paniab* but has now for a long time pa.st held that of Qa:i of the
new settlement of the Ilahabad.® and remains in the imperial ser-
■v'ice, contenting himseK with the small allowance which has been
allotted to him in that city, and refraining from constantly visit-
ing the houses of the worldly. He is endowed with probity and
is zealous in devotion to God.

1 In vol. ii, text, p. 295, he is called Mulla IlShdad Nabawl of Saltanpnr,
and is said to be notorioas for his evil disposition.

2 According to vol. ii (loc. cit.), he was sadr ot one of the Duabs in the
Panjab, probably of the Jec Duab, between the Jihlam and the Cinab.

3 Probably in 1583, vide vol. ii, text, p. 335.

173

XXXVI. MaulanI ‘Usman op Samaxa.'

In those branches of tnowiedge which call for the exercise of
the reasoning faculty he was a pupil of Hakimu-l-Mulk.- and he
acquired those which depend on the memory from other teachers.
He i.s a capable and ready divine, and very liable to fit.s of reli-
gious ecstasy. He is now in attendance on the imperial court*
His understauding is good. He is inclined to religion.s retire-
ment, and most of hi.s time is spent in devotion. He was
employed for .some years, by the interest of Qilij KhSn,^ in the
administration of some paii/uiiaf. iii the Du-ab. He has now come
to court and i.s ranked among the innn^iihdara.*

XXXVIJ. Ha.iI Slltan op Th.asesar.

He has acquired the honour of performing the pilgrimage to
ilakkah the glorious and Madinah the delectable. He is ■well-
versed in those branclies of learning which depend on the
luemory and was for a long time in the imperial service. He was
employed for four years, alone and without any co-adjutor, on the
translation of the Mahahhdrala, which is known as the Bazm-
nSmn,^ and what was begun by Naqib Khin was finished by
liim. On account of an accusation of the crime of cow-killing
which Was brought against him by the Hindus of that ^anjana*
an order was issued for his banishment to Bhakkar, and the
THtati-i-Khanan, who was in those days in charge of the Suba (of
Multan), treated him witli great consideration and kindness, and

1 Then a pttrgaiia town in the SirhiuJ tartar of tlio *«i>a of Dilhl. Now a
town in the Bhawiinigarh tahnl and Karaagarh nizimat of the Patiala State,
in the Pan(ab. Vide Imp. Gazetteer of India, new series, xxii, 1.

2 Vide infra, c. iii, no. i.

Vide A. A., vol. i (trans. Blochmann), p. 354, also infra, c. iv, no. xiv.

* Ifis name does not appear in the Ain-t-Akbari among the manfabddrs.

^ Vide A. A. , vol. i (tran.s. Blochmann, pp. 104, 105(or), also Baddonl II, 302
(le.vt). Haji Snltan seems to have translated two parts of the
besides some portions of other parts omitted by. the other translators, who
were, besides the Haji and Naqib ]^an, Badaoni himself, who was much dis-
gusted with his task, and Fai?i, the elder brother of Abu-’I-Fazl,

'' Thiinesar.

23

U8

174

119

applied ointment to the wonnds of his sonl. After that land had
been completely subjugated the Khan-i-Khanan took HajI Sultan
with iiim thence, Hiid promised to procure the reversal of the sen-
tence of lianishment which had been passed against him. Haji
Sultan r. turned secretly to his native place, and the TTh an-i-
Khanan, after conquering the province of Asirgarh and Burhan-
pur, prayed in one of his petitions for the reversal of the sentence
against liim. His request was granted, and Providence watched
over the Hnjfs affairs, so that the emperor privately ordered
Shaikh Abil-l-Fazl to appoint \AmKarori of Thanesar and Karnal,*
so that he was freed from the fear that had beset him. He still
holds the appointment of Kardri.

Poetry.

“ How many mysterious favours are bestowed by God,
The mystery of which is great to the intelligent *
understanding ! ”

These events were, as one might say, comfort ® after adversity.

At the time when H aji Sultan was translating the MahShhdrata
one asked him what it was that he was writing. He replied, “ I
am translating what was well known ten thousand years ago into
the modern tongue.”

XXXVIII. Sattii) Shah MIr op Samaka.

He is a Sayyid of authentic descent, adorned with the excel-
lence of learning and decked with the jewel of piety. His
hand is drawn within the skirt of contentment, and he passes
his time in instructing students, having his dwelling on the far
side of the river at Agra, near to wliere the late Shaikh Baha-’u-’d-

1 Ti.anesar was a pargana in the Sirhiud sarltdr of the tuba of Dihli, and
Kamil was a pargana in the aaikdr and s«6a of Dihli. Karnal is now the
ht-adqnartprs of a District in the Panjab, and Thanesar ia the headquarters of
a tahxil in the Karnal District.

i The text has, wrongly, for .

c The text has but both MSS, have Whichever reading be

.adopted the nieanir-g will be the same.

175

din, the Mufti, used to live. Students and ^ufis are gathered
together in his hospice and profit by his companionship. He had
one pupil, a one-eyed man named Maulana Farid, of whom it was
said that, although * he had not studied deeply, as soon as a difii-
cult question or subtle and obscure argument was propounded to
him from any advanced * book whatsoever, he would at once call
for pen and inkstand, and, having reduced it to writing, would
solve it immediately, although he could not give the solution
orally, or even read what he had himself written. Shaikh
Ziya’u-’llah ^ and the whole of the Ghausiyyah order submitted
themselves entirely to the authotity of this {Fai-id), so that
their subjection to the Sayyid may be imagined. I have also
heard that the same Farid would in one night relate to Sayyid
Shah Mir events that had just happened in the farthest parts of
the world, east or west. Some attributed this power to the
possession of a jinn, and others to other causes. In the year in
which the emperor summoned Shaikh Ziya'u-’llah from Agra,
with great favour and kindness and assigned a place to him in
the ‘ Ibadat-khSna on an occasion when there was a gathering of the
Shaikhs and 'JJlamd, I one night in private questioned the Shaikh
concerning the matter of Faiid the scribe, and, after relating
what was spread abroad concerning him, I said, “ Are these
things really so ? ” The Shaikh first of all enumerated his own
fragmentary writings and the works of which he was the author,
detailed his own accomplishments and acquirements, and gave
me a fall account of himself, and then said, “In spite of all these
favours which God (may His Majesty be exalted !) has bestowed
upon me I cannot call myself so much us a gleaner (in the field
of knowledge) after Shaikh Farid, and all that you have heard of
him does not amount to one hundredth part of the truth. His

f atJofb MS. (B1 has. wrongly, AJob

* This is the reading of the text. Both MSS. have ajUia*

“ of or relating to one who is authorized to deliver a fativa. The textual
emendation appears to me to be correct, and I have accordingly adopted it.

Vide infra. No, XL Both MSS. wrongly insert the name as a headline

176

dignity is above it ail, and lie lias attained this great good for-
tane by means ot sweeping the threshold of the holy Sayyid Shah
Mir. Now 1 had seen Sayyid Shah Mir before this at Badaon,
whither he bad gone on business connected with his subsistence
allowance. A copy of tbe Ma^ariqu-'l-Anicnr ' was between us,
and we had much learned discourse. He certainly had the medi-
tative faculty strongly developed, a pleasant disposition, a
ready understanding and a good stock of knowledge, but I did
not tind him such a prodigy as .Shaikh Ziya’u-'llah and other
men had represented. A.s for the rest, God the most High
knows the truth. It may be that he purposely concealed his
abilities from me, but indeed what need is there to suppose that
lie might not have displayed to others those abilities of the
display of which * lie allowed me to be disappointed Y

XXXIX.— .'fAYYii. Yasi.n.

He is one of the cousins of Sayyid Shah Mir. He studied
nio.st of the books usually current, and acquired all such know-
ledge as is included in the ordinary cour.se of education under
Miyaii Vajihu-’d-diu,* in Gujarat, and also becamfe hi.s disciple
in spiritual matters. He acquired the honour of performing
the pilgrimage of Islam, aud studied the traditions in the Hijaz,
and there received authority to give instruction therein. Thence
he returned to India, and spent some time in Labor in the com-
pany of wealthy and powerful men, who were concerned with
the affairs of the .state. He then broke off his companionship
with these men, aud lived in Sirhind, clad in the garb of Shaikht:
and the raiment of those who follow a life of holy poverty, and
for some time gave instruction there to his followers, who
were clad in blue, and he also claimed to be a religious leader.
Since he was ever desirous of going again to Gujarat, and thence

1 A work on tlie Ahudi^, or traditiooa) sayings of Muhammad.

^ The text has, carelessly, for Both MSS. have the correct

reading.

3 Vide sapra, p. 70.

177

to the two holy places, he could not rest in the district of Sirhina,
and, went to Bangal, where he is now travelling. It remains to
be seen whither his destiny will lead him and in what land he
will at last find the happiness of retirement,

XL. — Shaikh Ziya’u-'llIh.

He is tne successor of Shaikh MnhammaJ G-haiis.'^ Few of
the Shaikhs of this age can be his equals in Sil/J-istic converse.
In his assembly the talk was ever of “ true knowledge, and
nothing was spoken of save the contemplation of unitj and
the asceticism of the Sufis, but who knows what his private
opinions may be,^ or to what extent he will carry his claims f
At the beginning of his career, when the report of him was
spread abroad in all the sttrrounding country, I heard that
the Shaikh had succeeded his father in the throne cf holy
poverty and religious leadership and that in some accomplish-
ments 2 he excelled him, for instance, that he could explain the
meaning of the Qur'an in such a manner that there was no need
of a commentary,* besides having committed the Qur'Rn to
memory, so that he had it on the tip of his tongue. Accordingly
in the year h. i#70 (a.d. i562-63) I went to visit him in igra.
and that without ^ the intervention of any person to introduce
me and to act as a mentor, and in the character of one who was
altogether free from ceremony and had been long disappointed
of his object, a character to which I had accustomed myself.
Indeed, in visiting holy men worldly means and the intervention
of men interested in externals only are disturbing elements in
tbe attainment of one’s object. I made tbe usual salutation and
I had a conversation with him face to face. The Shaikh himself,
from the high consideration in which he wns beH, was probably

1 Fide p. 6.

^ sift y j MS. i B) has owjj *1^ y.

which IB nonsense.

^ MS. (A) has

MS. iB) has ^ which ia wrong.

178

A sinve to those cei'emouiai observances deai- to Shaikhs’ sons,
and my tmceremonial manner of visiting him displeased him.
Those who were present in his assembly said to me, Where do
you come from ? ” 1 said, “ From Sahsaram.” t When they

asked me whether I had made any advance in the study of the
'cisnces, I said that I had, at one time or another, studied a
little of each one of them. Since Sahsawan is an inconsiderable
town and at that time Qilij Khan , 2 Caugan Begi, the disciple of
the Shaikh’s father, was jagirdar of that place, I was of small
account in his eyes, and he esteemed me lightly and began to
jest with me and mock me, and made a sign to a jester who was
present, prompting him to scare me and turn me out of my
place, hue 1, becoming aware of these proceedings, the like of
which I had ofteu witnessed, pretended that I had noticed noth-
ing and posed as an innocent fool. The jester then began his
pranks, saying, “ the odour of some sweet scent has reached my
nostrils, and my brain is becoming disordered, let those who are
present in the assembly have a care, lest I do some one a mis-
chief." He then began to foam at the mouth and one of the
Shaikh's companions, who posed as a asked me whether

1 had applied the scent to myself. I said, “ Yes ; but what is the
r iatterf ” He said, ‘’This person whom you see in this state of
uuconsciousne.'S was once bitten by a mad dog, and now, when-
ever he smells a sweet scent he falls to foaming at the mouth,
howling like 11 dog, and trie.s to bite people. Have a care for
yourself." Those who were present there began to flee and the
Shaikh too, inaugurating this new custom, joined with them in
setting himself knowingly to teiTify me, and became the accom-
plice ° ot those devili.sh men At that moment I said, “ It is
strange that men ti-avel txoni distant lends to this exalted

I Then a 1 ;'i'V town in t!../ Ruhrae iurkar ot the fub,' of Bihar, now

I'ue head ruan rs of a snhdivisioii in the Shahabad District of Bergal
Ti-u’ I-'f. f'' ' .. Ini • ew series, xxii. 111. ^;r ^ah of Diiili and

his father, ..-an Lc '.h SI; are bur'?d at Sahsarim.

■2 rtd -,’ .1 --.i-:;.. .it '54

•i Thet- x, liu.' i.iie, wr.. a-fe o-iil-e. The rcidui.' . i tin; MSS.

ih corr.'.’t.

179

threshold in order to obtain the fnlhlment of their desires when,
as a matter of fact, one who has been bitten by a mad dog cannot
find a remedy here.” The Shaikh asked me whether I knew of
a remedy, and, on my replying that I did, asked me what it was.
I replied, “ This man should be beaten on the head with shoes
and clods, as Shaikh Sa’di (may God have mercy upon him ! )
said : —

Hemistich.

“ The care for a rabid dog is a clod ! ”

They were all astonished, and I continued, “The strange
thing is,” I said, “ that kulukh Is also the name of a vegetable
drag, which is a remedy for the bite of a dog.” The Shaikh
then became uneasy,^ fearing that his jest had fallen flat, and
said, “ Come, let ns go and busy ourselves with the study of the
words of God and His prophet.” Then, taking a copy of the
glorious Qur'an he proceeded to expound a verse from the
chapter of “ The Cow,” * and in doing so exercised the right of
private judgment very freely •'* His pupils, blockheads that they
were, assented to every absurdity that he concocted, saydng, “ We
believe it, we accept it ! ” I, since my heart was full (of indigna-
tion) said, “ Perhaps this interpretation which is given by the
Shaikh is to be found in the commentary.” He replied, “ I am
speaking of the secondary meaning * of the text and what may
be inferred from it, and this is a common practice and by no
means a peculiarity of my own.” 1 said, “ Taking this for granted,
is your interpretation literal or the metaphorical meaning of the
text F ” He replied, “ The metaphorical meaning.” I replied,
“ Pray then e.xplain the connection between the two interpreta-
tions,” and led him on into an argument regarding the meanings

1 is the reading of both MSS. and is correct, Tlie editor of the

text, apparently not understanding the idiom, has altered it to .

2 The second chapter of the Qjir’dn.

3 means ' from mo ’ It is here expres-

sirely used as a substantive ‘ from me-ism,’ ‘invention.’

* The word signifies ‘ turning language from it.s obvious meaning.’

‘ CyUl ‘ a sign,’ i.e. what the text indicates by implication

180

of the text. He replied disconnectedly and glanced, in an agi-
tated manner, in all directions. When I held him firmly to the
point he lost his temper, and said, shutting up the Qur'an,
“ I have not studied dialectics.” I said, “ Yon have presumed
8(j far as to interpret a text of the Qur’an in a manner unsup-
ported by tradition, and it is necessary that the connection
between the literal interpretation and (your) metaphorical inter-
pretation should be investigated.” He then turned the subject
and began to ask me about myself. In the meantime I produced
a portion of a commentary which I had written on the Qasidatu’l-
JBnrdah,^ and called his attention to the expressions in the open-
ing couplet of that qafidah whicli had struck me. He praised
my work, and himself also said something on the same subject,
and our interview came to an end in that manner. This was all
I saw of him until the time when I entered the imperial service
when the Shaikh in obedience to a summons from the Court
came alone and helpless to the ‘Ibadat-khdna, where he took his
place, it was on a Friday when the ^aikh with one or two
of his intimate companions first entered the 'Ibudat-khana and
Mir;:a ( ihiyasu-’cl-din ‘Ali tlie theologian,” ilirza .5kh’und, and
Mirza ‘Ali A.«af 'Qian ^ had been ordered to examine the Shaiidi
tboroughly and to question him on his Sufi-ism, in order to .see
what lie would let fall. Asaf Khan introduced into the conversa-
tion the folloWiiiar quatrain from the

If thoughts of the ro.se pass in thy heart, thou becompsr a
rose,

If thoughts of the passionate nightingale pass, thou
becomest a nightingale,

Thou art only an atom, God is all,

If thou accustom thyself to meditate on Him who is all in
all, thou wilt become all."’

1 Vide p. 4, note 1.

^ Probably Naqlb Kban. Vide Ain-i-Akbaii, i, 447.

3 Asaf Khan’s name was Mirza Gbiyasg-d-din ‘All also, and both MSS.
insert his full name. Vide Ain-i-Akbari, i, 433.

* The Lita^ih is a mystical poem by the great poet Mulli ‘Abdu-r-Bah-
ihan-i-Jami.

181

He then asked, “How can God the most Holy be described as
“ all ” 01 ’ “ the whole,'’ since He is above being defined as a part
or the whole ? ” The Shaikh who had undergone ninch tribula-
tion before coming to Court, and whose pride, haughtiness and
self-conceit were completely broken, since he had endured much
trouble, was ' very mmlest and indistinctly muttered a few words
which nobody understood. At last 1, growing bold, ventured to
say, “Although the Maulavi Jaiui (may bis tomb be sanctified!)
has in this quatrain applied the e.xpi’ession “ the whole ’’ to God
the most Holy and most High, yet he has in another quatrain
spoken of Him as being divi.sible into parts, and far be that from
the most High !

Quatiai-i.

“ As for this love which i.s a part of the Indissoluble One
1 whom) we ( love I

God forbid that it siiouid be compreheuded of our intelli-
gence.

Happy will it be for us if tliere flash a ray from the light
of certainty

Which will free us from the darkness of oui’ doubts.”

The meaning of these passages is that whatever can be con-
ceived, whether it be the whole or a part, is nothing but God,
and that besides Him there is no true existence. In short, since
words fail to express the writer’s meaning adequately he uses
them in various senses, explaining (God’s existence) sometimes as
a whole and sometimes as (possessing) parts.” I then adduced
sevoral propositions regarding the inherent unity of essence, a
principle which had at that time become ingrained, in me, and
called upon the Shaikh to corroborate my arguments, and both 125
the emperor and the Shaikh were well pleased with my disconi-se.
About this time Shaikh Isma'il, the half-brother of the
Shaikh, near whom I lived in the quarter of the Kh.’aja-yi-
•Tahan in Fathpur, and with whom I was on terms of intimate

1 The text has, wronsly, Both MSS. have

24

182

coiiipaiiinusliii), took me. in obedience to Shaikh Ziya u-'llah’s
wish, to the Tbnddtkhnna, and there introduced me to him, and
related to him the .story of my meeting with him eleveii years
befoie. whicli he had heard from me. Shaikh Ziya’n- ilah was
much Dfai tuibed and .said that he did not remember that any such
thing liad happened. The Shnifi . altliongh he pietends to
refraiji from company, which i.s leally .self-advertisement, now
live.s in .Agra, in outward appeai’anee, like his father, ojie of the
hdlv men. while on the contrary he spends his time in .self-indul-
gence and idlenes.s, clad in the raiment of men of rank, and
retains his old habits, many .stiaiii<e utterances, calculated to
deceive the vulgar, and delivered with apparent .simplicity, being
reported. I have not .space to record them.

Mir Abu’l-Ghais of Bukhaia ^ (may the mercy of God be upon
him !) used to say, “ Let him he what he may, with his devotee’s
raiment, his assemblies of those vowed to holy poverty, and his
di.scourser, on mysticism. We fteliete in him with our whole
heart ! ”

In tiie year in which the Khac-i-Zamaii was defeated* Shaikh
&ya’n-’llah accompanied the army to Ambethi, and bad an
interview with his holiness Miyan Shaikh Nizamu-’d-din (may
his tomb be sanctified !). When the Miyan was commenting on
the blessed verse, “ And therein shall they be given to drink of a
cup of wine, mixed with the water of Zanjabil, a fountain in
paradise named Salsabil,” ^ Shaikh Ziya’n- ’Uah, with a view of
displaying his ability, interrupted the discourse, and said, " There
is a discrepancy between this verse and another v'eise of the
Qur’an.’’ The Miyan was moved to anger and said, “ Holy is
God ! I he farher dived in that (sea of doubt 1 and must now
be feeling tiie utmost need of intercession, and the son Iiere sets
himself to 'prove discrepancies between the words of God (bo He
honoured and glorified !)”

1 Vide infra. No. XLI.

£ A.D. 1567. Vide vol. ii, text, p. 100.

3 lUxO-, lixc ILAsdj Wii-o wk l4^ ^ Quran

l.ixvi, 17,

183

Hemistich. 126

Everything that is in the heart is not iustraction 1

XTjI. j\riK ABU’L-GflA!5 OF BCKJIAF.A.

He Avas a high-minded man and a follower of the pure religion
who had so acquired angelic qualities that they became, as it
were, ingrafted in his noble nature. Though clad in the outward
garb of wealth he possessed the inward attributes of holy
poverty. From association with many of the great ShaiMls oz
his time he had profited much, and had inherited rauch of the
cu.stoms of his noble ancestor.s. In good hreedine. but e.specially
in liberal disbursenn nt of his .substance.' in i; dependence of
character, good fellow .-hip. and uprightness in hi.s dealings. Le
was one of the noblest of God’s works. He folli wed the cere-
monial observances of the law and imitated the laudable
qualities of the ancients and their successors so closely that he
omitted net the observance of one tittle of the holy law. ^ Such
were his endeavours to fulfil all the requirements of the law of
the congregation " that even in the time of his mortal sickness,
when he was suffeiing from a painful chronic disorder he did not
omit the recital of the “ All&hu Akbar " at the commencement
of bis prayers. The conversation in his assemblies consisted
always bf texts from the Qur'an, traditional sayings of the
prophet, and the words of holy men. He died in tlio y ear k. 995
f.A.n. 1587),^ apd The words “The Mir of laudable qualities’’'’
were found to give the date of his death.

i jjlit j Jiij Mb. (A) nas, wrongly, j Jjy

5 The text here has evidently a misprint for the reading

of both MSS.

3 liJws the law as interpreted by the Sunnis.

* Vide supra, p. 36, n. 4.

6 These words “ He died* * 995 ” are omitted from the text, though
they appear in both MSS.

40 + 10 + 200 + 60 + 4(K) + 6 + 4 + 5 + 60+U) + 200=a95.

184

XLII. Miyan Kamalu-d-dIiV Husain of ShTkaz.

Wlien the heart in calling loved ones to remembrance blossoms
like the rose it is not becoming that the dust of vexation should
retudi or settle upon the hearts of friends even tliough the
account of their lives be somewhat prolonged.

-Miyan Kamala-d-din Husain is the worthy son of Maulana
Haa.in of Shiraz who at the time when Shah Tsma'il was ex-
pelled from Shiraz went to Makkah the glorious, and on his
return thence came to Gujarat in the reign of Sultan Sikaudar
Lodi,' and, accompanying the caravan of Sayyid Rafi-u-d-din
the traditionist,* and Miyan Abn-’l-Path of l^urasan, the father
of Miyan 3udh, he took up Ids residence in Agra. The famoti.s
and well-known Shaikh Zainu-d-din® praises him as follows : —

127 My verse is of both reason and tradition, therefore I would

that it should be hearkened to
By him who combines the knowledge of sciences both of
reason and tradition, Maulana Hasan.”

Miyan Kamalu-d-din Husain is an angel in the form of a man,
wlio.se laudable qualities and praiseworthy attributes are more
than can be either written or related. The emperor, recognizing
that he was distinguished for his greatness and loftiness (of
mind), was exceedingly desirous that he Should enter the imperial
service. At last he abandoned everything, and contenting him-
ielf with a small grant of hand for his subsistence found complete
liappiness in the exile of poverty and the honour of good faitli,
and spends his time in continual devotion. He lives, free from
care, sometimes in Dihli ar.d sometimes in Agra. From earliest
youth till old age he ha.s walked unintermittently in the path of
devotion, leciting the praises of God. giving alms, reciting set
poitions of the word of God, and reading the Qur’an, knowing
no other liaoit of life ; but with all this excellence and perfection

‘ Reigtted from Dec. 1488 to .Jan 1317.

2 Vide to). trans. Ranking, p 476, and note 5.

3 Probably Shaikh Zainn-d-PTn Tide vol. i, trans. Ranking, p. 609,

aud note 5

185

in religious matters he has the highest ability, and perfect
eloquence, excellent penmanship, skill in orthography and a
masterly style are his by inheritance.

When I first came to Agra in my youth, in the time of Bairam
San, the first place where I lodged was his maejid, where bounty
was bestowed upon me, and his dwelling, where my soul was
cherished, and there, in my opinion, the gates of happiness wfere
first opened to me.

From that time till the time of writing tiiis hasty memoir a
period of full forty years has elapsed, duting which time I have
observed that his kind, .ess, sympathy, and regard for my friend-
ship ha\e increased daily, althougii (I could) not (have believed
that ) there was room for any increase ; —

Poetry .

Enough of love, for that grows less, enough of beauty, for
that decays.

But my love for thee and thy beauty remain undiininished
— nay, have increased.

“What now follows is a few drops distilled from his musk-
diffusing pen, now incorporated by me in this record of friend-
ship, They are as follows : —

“• In 1 the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate ! 128
We bless his prophet, the gracious oae, and love for thee
has not waned but its strength is increased towards
thee,

and my de.sire towards thee is as it is.

1 This is a letter from Kamaiu-’d-diii Hus.iin to Badaoni The style is
stilted and bombastic in the original and mast neces.saiily appear more so
in the translation, bat as the substance of the letter is of no importance
I have preferred to render it literally. As is asnal in epistles of this nature,
the writer refers both to himself and to the person whom he addresses in
the third person, using in the latter case the plural of respect. As this
plural cannot be used in English the continued use of the third person is
apt to be confusing. I have, therefore, retained it in the oxordinra only,
except wiiere honorific titles appear in the body of the letter.

186

This atom of dast, inconsiderable and fall of defects and
blemishes, Kamsln-d-din Husain, after convej-ing to yon the
greetings of an exile and the salntations of one who longs to see
yon, with the tongue of abridgment and brevity, of supplication
and poverty, conveys to the enlightened mind, coruscating with
benignity, namely, the mind of my worshipful master, the resort
of clemency (may God save and preserve him ami bestow on him
all that pertains to matters both of religion and of the world ! )'
the intelligence that since in these mournful days the hardships
of loneliness and the gri“f of separation, the enxiety of religions
duties and the absence of all traces of love and friendship have
become my lot, I have sometimes in my restlessness travelled to
the imperial city of Dibli and have there acquired the honour of
visiting the blessed tombs (of the Saints), and at other times have
gone to Agra to see my friendless children (may God guax'd them
with his power !) who dwell there in retirement, and I was much
disturbed in mind, when those kind letters from my lord ' began
to arrive at irregular intervals. I swear by God that they con-
veyed very much consolation and comfort to my mournful heart*
and for some days I took delight in studying and repeating them,
and morning and evening I raised and still raise my hands in
prayer to the All-Wise, praying Him to grant length of life to my
lord ' ; —

Hemistich.

(I pray to; God that tiiou mayest live till the day of
resurrection.

But I will not dilate farther on this subject, and will commit
it to the care of the All-Wise God who knows the truth, and
passing to my ulterior (outward) objectj will bring it to your
consideration,* informing you that for a long time I endured

I The word used here is ‘ ''my lord’s) servants’ The writer

affects, as is nsnal in the language of oriental compliujent, to be unworthy
to mention the name of the person whom he addresses, and therefore speaks
of his ‘ servants.’ The best-known example of this idiom is the phrase
{ ‘ the exalted slaves ’ ) for ‘ his majesty,’ or ‘ your majesty.’
t literaljy ‘ I become the means of giving yon a headache

187

great grief and sorrow fiom hearing of the death of that reposi-
tory of humanity, inseparably connected with liberality, him who
had acquired all perfections, Miiza 2fizamn-d-din Ahmad, and
from the passing away of all tiie excellence of that phoenix of the
age and of his love and faithful affection tor j'ou, my lord.*

“ Verily we are God’s, and to Him do we retnm ! " What can
I say, and to wliotn can I confide these griefs, which assail me 129
incessantly and repeatedly ? At all evenis we are awaiting oui’
own death, and vve have no re.souive but the favour of the bounti-
ful God. My tongue is now ever chanting this prayer, " 0 God
have mercy upon us, behold the sweat of our biows and the uinlti-
tnde of our groans ! May tlie jiliysician be disappointed of us,
and may our friends weep for us ! O God, have mercy upon us
when the earth surrounds us, and our friends love us ! Scatter
Thy favours among us, and may the wind cease to blow upon us ! ”

I hope that our end will be good and that we shall preserve our
faith unblemished. Since the bearer of this letter was in great
haste to depart I have written it hurriedly at night, and have not
been able to explain one thousandth part of the desire which
I have towards your service. You will be able to conceive it in
j'our pure heart, for veiily hearts have irtercourse one with
another Salutations and lio-iour be njioii you and on him who
is with you, both first and last, both inwardly and outwardly.”

XLIII. Shaikh Abu-’l-Path of Thanesar.

He is one of the foremost among the wise men of the age and
one of the chief among profound and eminent scholars. He ac-
quired a thorough knowledge of Islamic tradition under Sayyid
Rafi’u-d-diii the traditiouist, and ha.s now dwelt for about fifty
years in the quarter named after the above-mentioned Mir in
Agra, engaged in teaching tho.se branches of 'knowledge which
call for the exercise of che reasoning faculty as well as those which
depend upon the memoiy- Many able and ready scholai-s have
sat at his feet and have gone out into the world ( with the fruits

* Vide footnote 1 of p. 78.

® Literally ‘ males,’ ‘ virile ineu.’

188

of his teaching). Both 1 and Mijan Kamalu-d-din Husain, just
tnentioned, shared tlie benefits of being taught by this great man.
His mast noble and orthodox son. Shaikh ' Isa, is now, bv the em-
peror's appointment, the authorized deiivei er of fatwds^ in Agra.

XLIV, MacLASi ’Usman op Bangal.

130 He was an old Shaikh who took up his residence in Sambhal.
Miyan Hatim of Sambhal* was his pupil, and used sometimes to
visit him and reqiie.st him to put up a fatihuh on his behalf. On
one occasion I. when 1 was in attendance on fhe late Miyan Hatim
in my childhood, had the honour of waiting upon the Maulana.

XLY Bhaikr Hcsain op Bazhak.®

He was one of the foremost among the distinguished men (of
his day) and was employed in the instruction of students in the
college of the imperial city of Dihll. In those bi-anches of know-
ledge which depend on the memory and which are usually studied
m India, he was the most accorajdished man of his time. He had
a generous disposition.

XLVI MAULtN.l i.SUA'lL THE 'ArAB.*

He was one of the contemporaries and equals in age of Shaikh
Hu.sain. In knowledge of mathematics, pr.ilo.sophy. and medicine
he wa.-i niieijiialled, and a,s a teacher he wa'^ associated with Shaikh
Husain, and by the blessing of their notde companionship the
doors of bounty wei-e opened to students. The Maw.jvl was
pos.sesspd of considerable wealth, and one night some tliieve.s,
instigated by the iidiabilants of the ■■ity. broke into his house
and inurdeicd him.^

XLYII. t^izl Min.AKAK ok Gokamac.''

He wa.s a most learned man and performed fhe duties of his
office of Qazi with gieat integrity and honesty. He acquired hi.s
knowledge and good breeding from his teacher, Shaikh Nizaum-d-
i t e. mufti ^ Vuie p 3.

Or Ba 2 ahr. I have not been able to identify this place
* Fid* i, 538

^ Literally, ' caused biro to attain ronriyrdoro ‘

« Then a pnr^'ina town in the ^airibid sni'idr of ttie of Awadh

189

din of Ambethi ' (may liis tomb be sanctified !), and tbe Shaikh,
from the time when the ifiySn first began to study in his hospice,
had a special regaid for him and bestowed care on his education,
and whenever the Qnzi used to make his request, saying, “ Why
siionld not I too receive my share from the reservoir of your
saiutship ? ” Shaikh Nizamu-d-din would always reply, “ Qazi
Mubarak has devoured this world and gained ( his reward in ) the
next.” The Qo^i lived highlv regarded, honoured, and respected 131
to the end of his life, and thus too took his departure to the next
world.

Among the sages and learned men wlio came and settletl in
Gopamau for the purpo.se of studying under (he Qnzi (onliiui
bo God’s mere}’:), and there giew to manhood, su that for the
.sake of profiting by their .society men came from great di.stances,
and attained to perfection thei'eby, was tbe respected Bndh, wbo
u.sed to give iu.striiction in ail tbe books commonly studied.
Auotber was Sayj-id .Miihiyy, of whom the .same may be said, and
there were others too in the >aiue category. Tliat caravan of
-ojonrners has now leached its journey’s end,, leaving no suc-
cessors, and the mansions and abodes <'f learning have now been
cleared of the tigers rd' the forest of knowledge, .so that those who,
fo.x-like, are ever ready to creep into an earth, have taken tlieir
place. The author of the MtaJinTiqu-'t-Anuar too makes the
.same complaint of lii» owc time, saying no sooner is the den clear
of the liones.s with two cubs titan the gravid vixen enters it in the
morning.

Terse.

This one small loaf" remains to poor Ha,san,

I fear tliat day when not even this will be left.

XLVIll. Maula.na Vais of GwitiriR.

He was a learned man, argumentative and disputations, and in
his knowledge of first principles and deductions therpfrom he h.vi

^ Vide p. 27. Now a town in the District and tahpl of Hardoi, in the
U. P., vide Imp. Gatetteev of India, new series, xii, 830. For mention of
Qiizi Hnbarak, vide iupra, p. 31.

* JbL, diminntire of

25

190

no equal in liis time. The power- of liis memory ’ was such that
iu the midst of an argument when there was any necessity for an
appeal to any authority, he would seem to recite from memory
whole pages and would say, “ This is what is vrritten in such and
such a book, look it up and .see,’’ and would thus confute his
adversary, but afterward.s, when the book was searched, no trace
of the pretended quotation would be found. In this manner he
one da\ confuted, in the imperial as.sembly, Manlana Iliyas the
astrologer, who had been the tutor of the Emperor Muhammad
Harnayiin, and had great skill and readiness in the preparation
of astronomical tables, so that the ilaulana, disgnsteil with his
opposition, set out from Court, and travelling through the par-
gana of Mohan 2 in the Surknr of Lakhnau, which was his jagfi,
lie gave up his military appointment in the imperial service, and
132 proceeded in haste to Gujarat, and thence to Makkah the glorious,
and thence went to the laud of ’Iraq and Azarbaijan, and Ardabil.
which was his well-loved native land, and there he died. The
story of his dealings with Shah lsma‘il II is well known, and is
briefly as follows ; When Manlana Iliyas an-ived at Ardabil he
wrote a letter to Shah Isma‘il, who had been confined by Shah
Tahmasp in the fortress of Qahqaha, saying, “ From the aspects
of the planets I have ascertained that in such a month you will
obtain your freedom, and from the dungeon will attain to the
highest rank, and will sit on the throne of the kingdom. Just as
he had prophesied something was put into Shah Xahmasp’s cup
after a short space of time, and the affairs of Iraq fell into great
confusion, and the amiris and ministers of state summoned Shah
Ismahl from his prison, by way of Ardabil, with a view of setting
him on the throne. Now the maulavi bad said in hLs letter, “ On
your way from Qahqaha, when you reach Ardabil it is necessaiy
that you pay me a visit so that certain agreements and settle-
ments may be made between us in your presence, and certain rite <

1 [siV] BadaonI should have said, Miis power of invention.’

® Vide Ain-i-Alcbari, ii, 179. Mohaa is now a town in the talinl of the
same name in the Unao District of the TJ. P., vide Imp, Gazetteer of India,
new series, xvii, 383.

l&l

of exorcism may be performed while we are face to face.” It so
happened that Shah Isma'il was in gi-eat haste and did not visit
the manlavi’s house, but after leaving Ardabil he turned back and
went to the maulavVs house witli tlm object of waiting upon him.

The mutiJavi shut the door of bis mansion and refused to grant
him an interview. After waiting a long time the king was com-
pelled to break the door, ami, entering the niuitlnvi’s room by force,
waited upon him ; but the maiilavi covered his face, and, turning
round, sat facing the wall, an! said, ‘‘The appointed hour passed,
and you did not come ; why should I now see your face ? ” Shah
Isma'il turned away disappointed, and although lie became king,
the nobles of the realm, a year aftei- he had ascended the throne,
conspired to prompt his sister, Paiijan IDiannm, to attempt his
life. He became cogni:iant of the plot, but before he could do
anything to baffle it Parijan il^annm suffocated him and left his 133
room, closing the door behind her on his corpse.

XLIX. SHAigji Muhammad op Syria.'

He is a true* ‘Arab and is nephew to that Shaikh Zainu-d-din
of Jabal-i'lmili who was an ecclesiastical dignitary and religions
guide among the Shi'ahs, and on whom the Sultan of Turkey
after much finesse and many stratagems laid hands when he was
in JIakkah the glorious, and after summoning him to Constanti-
nople, put him to death. Shaikh Muhammad is ranked among
the niansabdnrs, and is distinguished for his bravery and valour
and noted for that generosity and liberality which are character-
istic of the ‘Arab^. He is also well known for bis good breeding
and courtesy and those branches of knowledge which are gener-
ally treated of in the Arabic language, and in the humanities
generally his attainments are such that he may be called a second
Kisa’i.® The following letter, which he Yvrote in Labor in answer

' Shaikh Muhammad is not mentioned in the Ain as a maniabdiir.

2 The expression may also mean ‘ a rough, or brutal, Arab.’ MS
(A)* has wrongly.

■= A celebrated grammarian and reader of the Qiu'.ri V-de voh i, tr in-.,
lU.i'kiug, pi 30, note 1.

192

Lo oue from me, iu which I had been guilty of some iusoleiice,
when our friendship first began, is an example of his correspon-
dence.

[Heie follow fire letter’s in Arabic, of which the Editor of the
'J'ext wriies in a footnote, " Be it knowm that the whole of the
text of these five letters, from beginning to end, is foil of errors,
and I have Ibund it impossible, notwithstanding the utmost care,
to correct it from the three manuscripts at my disposal.’’ After
a careful examination of the text in MSS, (A) and (Bj lam
compelled to agree with the Editor. Professor T. W. Arnold,
who has kindly come to ray assistance, agrees with me that the
text is so corrupt that no satisfactory translation of these letters
can be given. He also agrees, however, that the text, unsatis-
factory as it is, is safiicient to indicate that the letters are not
w'Orth translating and consist, almost entirely, of long strings of
bombasiic and extravagant compliments. For this reason I have
refrained from an attempt to reconstruct the text from other
MSS.— T. W. H.]

136 L. Sh.ukh Hasan ‘Aid or Mausil.‘

He" wF.s the faithfu’i pupil of Shah Fatbu-’llah, but notwith-
standing this be is an orthodox Sunni. He entered the imperial
service iu the year in whicli Kabul was conquered, and was
entrusted with the education of the emperor’s eldest son until
the young prince could repeat certain lessons from Persian and
other treatises on philosophy. Shaikh Abii’l-Fazl also for some
unte .seci etiy received instruction from him in the exact sciences,
and in ph3'sics, and other branches of philosophy, but notwith-
standing this he never attempted to advance tlie Shaikh’, s
interests, so that while he himself has his place on the carpet in
tlie imperial presence his master takes his stand on the bare
fioor. Shai’ich Hasan ‘Ali, finding that the conduct of such men
was not in accord with his religious views, gave up the allowance
which he used to receive and went to Hujarat, where he associ-
ated himself for a time with Mirza Nizsmn-d-din Ahtnad. The

1 Mosnl in tlie maps, on the Tigris, opposite to the site of Nineveh.

193

latter, and his son. Muhammad Sharif, received nmch profitable
instruction from him in those hvanclies of knowledge ''vhich
exerci.se the reasoning facultj-, and in secular learning, so miie’n
so indeed, that tliey advanced to perrcction tlierein

After the death ot Shah Fatfan-’llah Shaildi Abu-'l-Fa;!
other courtiers recon ii ted .some of t]:e ^aikh'.- .ccomplishn-.er^ .
and peifeetion.s in the imperial airembiy, vti.ereby the ern: -:_i
Wiii .so impre.s-ed llmt .SJjaildj '.Ali i.s nr ,v 'recognizes! a.s '

the spiiitnal successor of .Shah Fathii-'llah. .At that tirct an
imperial urdei- v, u.s is.sued suinnio’ ing Shaiid; iias.nu ‘All to tlie
iniperinl presence, and he aecoi-di'jfe’iy came tc oahor. but -vheu
lie paid in.s re.speet.s at Court Xizama-d-din Ahmad directed, him
to ])eiforiii the ,'ijdah (instead of the kuntiskt '■ .vhieh so dis-
pleased him that he made his release from t'ae obligaticn of
performing the ceremony a condition of his artenifance. aiisl e'en
iu hi.s house he could not bear fto v.itness at Court i so r.i.iny
thiiigs which weie abominations to him, and ■' the elephant once
more remenibeied Hindustan ” * and on the plea of an inteutioii to
visit his mother he obtained leave to go to Iv.s own countr\, and
ill the year h. 998 ( a.d. 1589-90': he arrived at Thatha, when
the i^an-i-lOtanaii was governor of that prcvince, and having
attained to tru.st in God and contentment of heart he set ou," tot-
his own country, and when he arrived at Hurniuz he sent r.
message to the officers of the imperial court saying, ■' Praise be to
God! I am freed from the liv pocritical companionship of iny
friends.” Please God he has attained the objeoi ot Ins desire-.

LI. QizT N'Diu'-'Li-iH OK .Shi :iH lAK.s

Although he is bv religion a Shi'ak * he is dishuguisLed tor liis
impartiality, justice, virtue, modesty, piety, coutiuence, and such
qualities as ai’e pos.sessed by noble men, and is well known for
his learning, clemency, quickness of understanding, .singleness of

• Vir^e Ain- 1 - A kbit' i, 1, 159.

^ A proverb .lescrintive nf hi)me-s.ckiie.i<

^ More properly .^I'li^tar. On tl e K.trun nver, in Poraia

* .tccoriiiiig to Jlr. Ulocbinatii. . .ii-i-i-.lLbai/, i, .545 , Qa/i !N’ura-'il.'i!i

137

194

henrt, clearness of perceptiou, aud acaoieii. He is tlie aiithoi' of
sevei’al able v.’orks -and he has wi-itten a monograph on the
“ undotted commentary ” * of ShaiUi Faizi which is beyond all
praise. He .also possesses liie poetic faculty and writes impres-
sive poetry. He was introduced to the emperor by the instru-
raantiility of the physician Abu-’l-Fath,"- aud when the victorion.-^
imperial army reaidied Lahor, and Shaikh Mn'iu the Qcif of
Labor, when he was paying his lespects to the emperor, wa.s
afdicted suddenly in the presence cha’nber with the falling sick-
ness. which came upon him in consequence of the feebleness of
old age, and the failure of bis natural powers, the emperor took
pity on his weakness, and said, "The Shaikh is past Ins work,
138 and we have tiierefore appointed Qazi N'Ciru-’llah to the post
which he held." In truth he has reduced the insolent muftis
and the cra,fty and subtle miihtasibs of Labor, who venture to
give lessons to the teacher of the angels, to order, aud has closed
to them the avenues of bribery, and restrained them within due
bounds as closely as a nut is enclosed in its shell, and to such a
degree that stricter discipline could not be imagined. One might
almost say that the author of the following verses had the Qazi
in his mind when be wrote them ; —

“ Thou art he who has never in all Ids life admitted.

Any statement by anybody in a law-suit, except the sworn
testimony of a witness.”

One dav when lie was in the house of .^aik_h Faizi the
puri commentary was the .subject of discussion, and regarding
the bles.sed verse- — ” Wlim he f-aid to his companion, 'Be not
cast down, verily t.T>d is with u.s,' — which verse is held, by the

great majority of commei'fiit jI-s. to refe'- to the greatest of

piacfised ■ ‘ c-nTifp^almerii ut ■. ce’.ig.ous \ . -g, liinoiiy and

w;.3 well u.' ' ■■■‘d rh ri.e ‘.y-n.-.i- -sf jurispir;., of ,Vr,a Hcnifali

Jahar . ■*- a. 'r~-..on was ipcuIIv. 1 froi.i Labor, Once he orcnded
- -e en-jo.ercr b-f '.'ist-.- --or.i .r-i wa,- esconte't

t Toe S« -o ...y- -.,1, V"' - '.-i-AUjaii, i, "iio.

1 r. L , . ... L,

f Ujoc M-i ■. i « K, :i:>

195

faithful witnesses of the trnth (AbB Bakr)— may God be gi-aci-
ousiy pleased with him ! — he said, ‘‘ If the signification of the
companionship referred to in the text he trifling and unimportant
then the expression cannot be understood as conveying praise of
anybody, but if it be said that the word is used in the conven-
tional sense which has been attributed to it by traditionists, we
come back to the question under debate, and I deny that there
was any companionship (in that sense).” ‘ I replied, “ If a mei’e
child even who knew the Arabic language were asked he would
say that this verse clearly involves praise (of the nerson referred
to therein) and not blame, and an African infidel, or a -Jew, or a
Hindu who knew Arabic, would give the same reply.” There
was much controversy on the subject, and Sjbaikh Faizi after his
usual vile custom took the side of the Qa^i, though he actually
had nothing whatever in common with either side. Suddenly a
passage was turned up, in the Nishapuri oommentaiy itself,
which supported my contention, and even went beyond it, saying
that tile verse, supposing that the prophet (may God bless and
preserve him !) had at that moment been summoned to the
immediate presence of God, would have been authority for

1 The original is rather stilted, and is not easy to translate. The Qdzi,
arguing as a Siu'ah, contended that the word Sahib (“ companion ”) might
be interpreted in two ways. It might be translated literally, without .my
nlterior signification, in which case its application to Abu Bakr could confer
no honour npon him, for it would mean nothing more than that he chanced
to be in the company of Muhammad. The other signification, the techni-
cal or conventional meaning referred to by the Qizi, is the signification
given by Sunni traditionists to the word ^hib when used in connection with
the first three KKalifahs, Abu Bakr, ‘Umar, and ‘XJthman. These three
were, the traditionists argue, the chosen and constant companions of
Muhammad, whose object in admitting them to this intimate companion-
ship was to draw attention to the fact that they had been selected as his
spiritu.il successors, and to qualify them for the posts they were to fill after
his deatli. The Qizi objects to the assumption that the word Sahib bears
this conventional meaning, as a petitio principii. Badaon: as a SannI,
argues that whatever may be the piecise signification of the word Sahib.
the verse confers honour on Abu Bakr, and contends that anybody
acquainted with Arabic and ignorant of theology would at once see that it
did BO.

196

39

regas cling Abu Bakr and no other as the successor nominated by
the proplist himself.

LII. Hijl IsRiaiJi the Traditionist.

He lived iu Agra, leading au ascetic, abstemious, and pious
life, and cccupied in teaching divinity, and especially the iradi-
tions of the prophet. Hi.s strict observance of the holy law and
lii.s asceticism prevented him trom mi.viag or associating with hi,'-
fell-j .v-inen. He wa.s in the habit ot delivering authorirative
eororoand.-! and prohibitions iu matters of faith. When, iu obedi-
ence to a .summons from Coiu-t. he attended the 'Ibadatkhaita, he
deeliiied to observe the etiquette and ceremonies of the Court atid
used to preach and utter admonitions { without' respect of
persoii-.?. To ‘Abdu-s-Samad of Shiraz, uho, by rea.soii of

his habit of letting out for hire oki cotton cloth for deeoratiou.«,
is known as Kh'aja 'Abdu-’llab.^ ami is much occupied with
eereiuonial prayers and fasts, and with supererogatory pravers
and outward devotions, and had gi-eat faith iu the HaJ/, he u-ed
to sqv, Kh'aja. all these observauee.s will protit you nothing
until you give a pl.ace in your heart to love for tlie orthijdox
snccessoi’s of the proplier.”

LIII. jALiL-t-lVA^IL,® Of KaLFL*

He is one of the .spiritual sueces.sor-s of Shaikh Miihiimrnad
Ghaiis,^ I'larly in hi.s career he acquired perfection (in learning),
but later he no longer allowed sucii matters to burden liis
memory and gave him.self np woolly to the delight of listening
to the cliiiiits of m3'stic.s, and to fits of religion.s ec.stasv. His
maje.sty the einpei-or has a very high opinion of him. On the
whole theie was less of striving after appearances among the
spiritnal .succe.s.sors of Shiiikh Muhanimal Ghaus than among

1 I <lo not understand the iipplicability of this nickname.

* The word means ‘ united (with GodJ.’

3 Then the chief town of the Sarkar of the same name in the Saba of
Agra. Now the chief town of a lahfil of tlie same name in tlie Jalaun
Diatriot of tha U.P. Vide Imp. Gazetteer of India, new series, xiv, 318.

♦ See p. 6.

li)7

tliose of ShaiUi Salim,' tliongli each sect decried and sought to
ruin the other ; and now the words of ‘Aii, the leader of the
faithful (may God be graciously pleased with him !), which he
spcke on hearing the blessed verse, The Jews say, ‘ the Chris-
tians are grounded on nothing,’ and the Christians say, ‘ the Jews
are grounded on nothing ! ” ^ are applicable to both parties. ‘Ali
said, on hearing this verse, “ We believe it.” Praise be to God,
no trace of either sect remains.

LIY. Malik MAHMUD-i-PiYARr. 140

He posaessed such outward aceoiaplishuients as a knowledge of
Arabic, Quranic commentaries, the traditions, and miscelianeons
Persian compositions in prose and poetry, and was also adorned
with spiricuai perfection in such matters as de'^otion, piety, a
mystic longing for union with God.- and religious ecstasy. He
was descended from the tnaliks of the land of Gujarat, and his
venerable father bore the name of Malik Piyaru. JIalik Mah-
mud, owing tc the elegance and oooiousness of his discourse, his
knowledge, and his ingenuity, was accorded :hs great honour of
conversing with the Khalifah of the age, in the beaverdy assem-
blies held at Court, and ingratiated himself with his majesty, and
owing to the great pleasure which he tcok in rendering any
service to iIis godly, he was for some time favoured by being
appointed to and associated with the glorious post of the trustee-
ship of the blessed tomb of that p-ole-star of saints who have
become united with God, Kh’aja ISIn'inu-d-din-i-Sanjari-yi-
Oishfci (may God sanctify his tomb!'). Bat notwithstanding all
Ihe favour which the emperor be.stowed upon him and the faith
w’hich he had in him, and his nearness to the emperor’s peitson,
owing to the all-mastering love and overpowering desire and the
strength of the mystic bonds By which he was bound to that
pole-star of the heaven of chiefship and centre of the circle of
happiness, the lord Shah-i-‘Alam of Bukhara, one of the sons of

' See p. 18.

^ isJlj j tiJli j

Qur’ms, ii 11). 3 Seep. 11, note 4,

26

198

Makhdum-i-.Takriiiian of Bukhara' (may God sanctify his
honoured tomb !), him who was the beloved of the possessors of
trne knowledge, and who was songht after by travellers in the
right path, l.lalik ilahmad exerted all the influence and employed
all the interest wiiieb he possessed in preferring his request that
ho might ho ;)erniitted to depart from Court and undertake the
guardianship of the holy man's tomb, employing himself in the
oircnmambnlation of its threshold, the dwelling-place of angels,
and urged his request wit'h an uttei" disregard cf the emperor s
wishes. Since he was thoioughl}’ sincere in his intention and
design, and was altogether free from any suspicion of hypocrisy
oi- worldly designs, hi.-, prayer was nafnrally granted, but after
much discussion and debate, and he retired to t’ne corner of con-
tentment and resignation, passing most of his blessed time in
Ahmadabad in the service of that shrine until he departed from
its parterres to those of the abode of peace.

HI The author had the honour of being admitted to his joy-
diffnsiiig presence in Fathpur and Aimir.

The following opening couplet of a qasidnh is by the Malik : —

I have an ovor-veering heart which nevertheless I call my

Whithereoever I turn it, it still turns towards His eye-
brow.’'

LY. Saue-i-Jahan.^ of PihanI.

Pihani is a village in the district of Qaanauj.'' Sadr-i-Jahan

*

I See to', i, crans. Eanking. p. .370.

5 That which point? to the qih’'i, or rlip tliroction in which to prav.

3 Sec Ahi-t-Akl)-irt. 4SS S<idi -i jahiin was both the Mirsn’s personal
name and the name of the office to which he was appointed in the 34tb
year. Re was one of the si;;natcries to the deeci which acknowledgett
Akbar’s spiritual supremacy as well as his temporal eupreraacy, Hi.s
position with repaid to the ‘ divine faith ’ i.s not clear, bat lie evidently
temporized. D iring the reign cf .Jahiingir, who was very fond of him, he
was promoted to a command of four thonsand, and received Qannauj aa
tuyil. He died in a.d. Hill at ti e age, it is believed, of 120 years. See
also vol. ii, text, passiD,.

♦ According to the Ma’ diiru.’-Vr.uira Pihaai is near LakJmaa, but fro«

19S

is a learned Sayyid of a happy disposition, most of whose life has
been passed in the camp. He aecjuired his gi'eat learning under
the tuition of Shaikh ‘Abdu-’n-Nabi,’ and it was in consequence
of the Shaikh's exertions that he was appointed chief mufti of
the empire, a post which he held for several years. After the
religious leaders of India had fallen into disgrace, his habits of
submission to authority and his time-serving and worldly disposi-
tion led him to regard before eveiything the honour aud esteem
which he enjoyed iu the world. He accompanied the physician
Humam' on his embassy to the ruler of Turaii,^ aud when ’ue
returned thence lie was honoured by being apuoiuted Sadr of the
empii’e. At the time when it was noised abroad in Labor that
those who remained of the ’Ulania were to he banished t Makkah
the glorious, and a list of them had been prepared, the Sadr-i-Jaban
said one day, " I fear lest I may have been iucladed in this
class.” Mirza Nizinui-d-diu Ahmad, who had prepared the li.st.
said, ‘‘ Why should you be sent to Makkah ? ” The Sadr-i-Jahan
asked the Mirza, why he needed to ask the question, and tlio
Mirza replied, “ You have never given utterance to God’s words,
that you should be worthy of this banishment,”

The Sadr-i-Jahan, notwithstanding his poetic gifts aud iiis
great aptitude for writing poetry, now repents of his former
devotion to the art. The following opening couplet of a 'lastdah
is by him —

the face that Sadr-i-Jahan received Qanns.uj as tinjiil iu Jahangir’s rcigii ii
would appear that Badaeni is right.

1 Vide supja, no. x.

Vide ir.ji-a. Chap, iii, no. x.

■’ The object of this embassy was to answer a letter which ‘Abdii-’ilah
Khig Uzbak had written to Akbar, questioning him regarding his apostasy
from Islam. The answer which they took to ’Abdii ’l!ah contained tli->
following Arabic verses ; —

di cll (J'P dJy Av'ill (ill Jwii

lj|

“ Of God it has been said that He bad a tSon ; of the prophet it has been
said that he was a sorcerer. Neither God nor the prophot has escaped the
slander of men, — then how should 1 ? ’

200

May each hair of my beloved’s locks,

0 God, become an affliction.

And may my heart he afflicted with each one of those
afflictions !

1 pray that, if it please God. tie may be given grace to repent
ct foolish dispnraticns on points of secular knowledge, of hypo-
crisy. ostentation, self-esteem, and extravagant boasting, which
lie must have leai’ut from one possessed of a devil, just as he has
renented of writing poetry.

LVI. SHAXKg Ya‘QUB of KASHMTR.t

Ha assumed as a poet the nom-de-phirae of $arfi, and iu him
were displayed both the accomplishments of learning and the
neriect qualities which distinguish a pious man. He was the
spi.itual successor of the great master Shaikh Husain of
Ivh’arazm (may God sanctify his tombl), and acquired honour
by performing tbs pilgrimage to the two most excellent holy
plaees. He received from Shai^ Ibn-n Hajar a licence to give
i user action in the traditions of Muhammad, and clad in the robes
ui A he travelled much and visited most of the Shaikhs of

Arabia and Persia, and profited much by his intercourse with
tbetn, and received authority to assume the prerogatives of a
teligious teacher and spiritual guide, and as such he had many
ii^ciples, both iu Hindustan and Kashmir. He was the superior
iu hospice. He was the author of some sublime and beautiful
'■■'Oiks, and completed a jQia'iiosah,^ and wrote many treatises on
art of composing enigmas, and also quatrains on the mysti-
v.sHi of the SafU: with a commentary. His works, indeed, are
too numerous to be recapitulated, and had it not been necessary
obat some slight mention should be made of his $ujl-hm, and his
mystic longing for God, even these few works could not have
been noticed. He was illustrious and much relied upon as an
authority in ail branches of learning which are treated of in
Arabic, such as Quranic commentaries, the traditions of Muham-
mad, and Suji-ism, and he was an authorized religions leader.

1 A senes of five mannavti,, in imitation of ihe ^-xmaak of Xizami,

201

Latterly, uot long before his death, he was writing a commentary
which was one of the most wonderful productions of iiis perfect
genius. Both the late emperor and his present majesty had a
wonderful belief in him and conferred distinction on him by
admitting him to the honour of their society, regarding him with
gi’acious favour, so that lie was held in high estimation and
much honotu’ed. Ke was generous and open-handed beyond any-
thing that can be imagined of his contemporaries.

Although his poetry was very poor, in accordance with the
verse ; — •' Poetry does not become tbe learned,” he used neverthe-
less, continually to exeMise his intellect in this direction. These
following few couplets ai'e by him : —

(Jouplets. *

“■ 1 see that comely face manifest in whatever I regard,

'■ Though I look at a hundred thousand mirrors in all that
one face is manifest.

'• On ail sides people are wandering in search of the Friend,

“ And the strange thing is that the Friend is manifest on
every side.’

Other couplets by the Skailnii are these : —

‘‘ Thy mole lurks near the corner of thine eyebrow to
deceive,

“ Wherever a recluse, lurking in & comer, is to be found,
deceit is in him.”

'■ Break not my heart. Oh grief i and regard not whose that
heart may be,

Tbe heart is indeed mine, but consider who dweiieth
there.”

“ If thou sayest to him, " It behoves that Thy foot pass
over my head,”

” (Remember that) thou, shouldst at once forsake all thought
of self.”

This enigma on the name of Shaida is also by the ^aikk : —

143

1 The following verses are all mystical.

202

'• My moou liath cast the veil from off her face,

“ See, how she hath of set purpose turned day into night 1 ”

At the time when he obtained permission to depart from Lahor
to his dearly loved native land, he wrote to me from the far side
of the river Ravi a letter, which I copy here as a fortunate relic.

“ My helper and my mighty one I After laying before you the
prayers and supplications of true friendship, I repre.?ent to your
mind, brilliant as the son, that the cause of your neglecting to
observe, in -respect of your sincere and trne friend, one most
excellent institution was probably the fact that, though the
approved custom of travelling with a friend for a part of his
journey is one of the requirements of the observance of setting
144 him on his way, you were not able at the present time to perform
this office and therefore could not help but leave it, undone. I
hope, however that you will not entirely efface the memory of
me from the margin of your bounteous heart, and that you will
adopt the graceful habit of remembering the absent. If you
should have any need of Kashmir paper for rough notes and
diafts I hope that you will inform me of the fact, so that I may
send you from Kashmir the rough copy of my commentaries, the
writing of which can be washed from the paper with water so
ecmpletely that no trace of the ink will remain, as you yourself
have seen. And now peace be with you and grace be upon you.”

When he reached Kashmir he sent me from there another
letter, which was the last he wrote. I copy it hei-e.

“ In the presence of the bounteous Shaikh ‘Abdn-l-Qadir, him
who is removed beyond the need of praise, recommendation, or
encomium, that is to say our lord and leader in learning, may
this letter be opened.

Without a doubt Badaoni excels Dawwani '

In all branches of learning,

I 4Iuiiaqqiq-i-Dawwaiii, the famous logician, tl is name in Persian script
** Badioni is which gfaaiaj Ya'qub would, for the

purpo^ of this couctit, nietamorphoae into by the transposition of

two letters, thus converting it into Dawwani with the addition of one letter
t w ). The play upon the two names is somewhat clumsy.

203

Thus a proof of the superabundance of the signification of his
name,

Is that its very beginning appears to be redundant.

As to the suppliant letters which from time to time I send to
you, although owing to tbeii* not being worthy of an answer I do
not trouble your wonder-describing pen fo write one, nevertheless
the pen of sincere friendship cannot be restrained from running
on in (its desire of) setting forth my snb mission to you. I hope
tlsat whenever you sit in the l^awwab Fazii Fayyazi’s ‘ apartment
of fragrant grass,- on the flooi- with its matting cooler than the
breezes of Kashmir, in the midday heat of summer,® drinking the
water which, though warm, ha.s been cooled with ice, and listen-
ing to sublime talk and witty roiiversatioii, you will think on me,
the captive of the liardships of disappointment.’"

GoupIeK

Ah ! ye who meet 'u the cheerful assembly of union extend
n lielping Itand to the absent.

For the hand of those who thus meet i.s never withheld
from the absent."

I pray you to accept, on behalf of your most honoured, most 146
orthodox, and most glorious son. Shaikh Mnhiyyu*d-dln Muham-
mad, my humble submission. May God. the most Holy apd
most High, as.sist him in the acquirement of all knowledge, both
.secular and spiritual, by the honour of him ^ who was named
with the name cf hi.s sublime title (may his pure tomb be
hallowed !).

It IS probable that, owing to your claims as r. neighbour to
confidence, you may have heard what that re.s.ort of chiefship,

I The text has ‘ Fayyszi ’ only, MS. (A), which I follow, lias ' FsizT
Fayyazi.’

* • a house of is a fragrant grass {andropogon

mwieatiim). See voi. i, trans. Rankiag, 411, note i.

® jy*5, the Syrian monf ti corre.5pondiDg with July. The worn is omitted
from MS, (B).

* i.e. the prophet Mnhamrnad, ircm whom Badacni’s son had one of hi.s

names.

204

Miran Sayyid Qutbu-d-din, had to say with regard to his failure
to answer tny humble letter to him. hut it behoves you rather to
regard my essential claims upon you, for these claims are clearly
to be preferred to the claim of mere neighbourhood ; and likewise
you should not place too much confidence in the display of affec-
tion which the worshipful Miran makes, for in the end it has no
stability. God the most High knows the truth !

I have lost the rough copy of the verses which I wrote in the
new 5safkhani style, explaining what had not previously been
clearly expressed. It is possible that you, my honoured friend,
may have taken a copy from my rough draft, and, if so, I pray
you to send me a copy of your copy. If yon answer this letter it
will be well. (I call to mind) God ! ’

Verses by the Author.^

“ 0 thou, at the thought of whose face intimacy comes back
to me.

My desire cannot be borne on paper,

As tbe lofty mountain cannot be weighed in a balance.

And as the ocean cannot be mea.sured by a water-gauge.

Why shoald I sing your praisss ? They are far beyond the
pretensions of the bald style and the impotent rhetoric of me,
‘Abda-l-Qadu- ; and any attempt to compiise them therein would
resemble the endeavour to imprison the sea in a jug.”

Poetry.

iknd what shall I say of my blessings on you ?

1x0 bird of devotion flies from me to the lote-treeof Paradise,
For no bird bears in his beak a list of my blessings on thee.
Why should I say anything of my desire of seeing you
again ?

Quatrain.

O tlicu whose hand has been held in my two hands.
Who hast hindered me from the enjoyment of health.

1 These verses Ijegin a letter from BaaionI to Shaikh Ta‘qS)).

206

It is impossible, that I sboald record my desire towards thee, 146
The strong desire ihat I have towards thee.

Since the time when you saw fit to take your departure hence
to the land where you now dwell, the interpreter of divine
secrets, by which expression may be understood the root of the
elements of true knowledge, gladdened me by coming to me
repeatedly, both for a few days before and a fe'-v days after the
festival cf the new year, conveying to me tlie truth contained in
the foilov^ing couplet from the Ten Sayings of Good Tidings :' —

Couplet.

" This day a trdl and comely man, in his own city,

Sits with his bride, rejoicing in hia good fortune,”

You wrote with that pen which cherishes the poor and distils
musk,

“ Without a doubt Badaonl, excels Dawwani,” etc.

I reply to those verses in the following masnavi: —

0 thou whose tongue i.s the key of the Hidden Book,

Wliose pure heart is an outcome of the Infallible,

Thy pen hath displayed miracles,

The hidden treasures of “ Be, and it was.’’

Thou saidst. with a logic which nonrishe.s the intelligence,

’■ Badaoiii is more pleasant thati Dawwani.” *

Whether it be cf Dawwani oi of Badaoni (that thou
speakest) ,

Both subjects receive ail their wealth from the treasure-
house of thy grace.

My heart has become the mirror of thy beauty,

The place where thy never- failing bounty is displayed.

What wonder then if, in regarding it truly.

Thou shouldst see thyself there ?

If these verses be mere ostentation then let this much suffice.

Who am I that I should presume in answering yon ? I have had

• 1 have not been able to find any mention of this work elsewhere.

* Jjjf, i.e. ' creation.’ 3 Viiie supra, p. 202, note 1,

27

206

recourse to poetry, wherein I have loosed the tongae of depreca-
tion, seeking forgiveness, and asking pardon for my remissness in
observing the custom of writing friendly letters, a custom which
is contrary to the habit and wont of the vulgar, nay, may rather
be described as one of the peculiar characteristics of those who
are raised above the common herd, as you yourself know well,
and, regarding this letter as atonement for my fault, I count it
fall satisfaction of all that is past.

147 As for what you wrote regarding the air of the apartment of
fragrant grass, and the iced water, it brought to my mind the
follotving verse : —

Of life (is left) -but that which is ice in summer heat.”

And reminded me of the saying, “ O company of Muslims,
have pity upon him whose stock- in-ti-ade has declined,” for it is
some days since I have enjoyed that cool air and that iced water.

“ The wolf’s mouth is bloody, but he has not tom Yusuf,” *

Verse.

“ Let him who imagines that love is an easy matter come,
and look upon my face, and from its haggardness he
will understand that love is a hard matter.”

His Majesty, who is near the sun in excellence, has, for some
reason, and without the intervention of any person whatsoever,
taken the name of me, the humblest of his slaves, on his bleased
tongue, expressing some intention of bestowing on me the trustee-
ship of (the shrine in) the exalted region of Ajmer.

V else.

Those tents have vani.shed from the sight of me, the watcher,

Peace be on the dwellers therein, is the w'ish which I would
have conveyed.

lift. I have not done yon gappose, thoagh appearances may be
f'.gftinsc me.’ Tlie reference is to the story of Joseph According to the
yjnr^dn (chap. lii) t’ne sons of Jacoi. ttdd their father that a wolf had
devoured Joseph. In the Old Teatameet version of the story (Gen. xxxvii.
20, 33) the brethren merely led tlieir father to .suppose that an evil beast
1‘fera pessima ’) had devoured him.

Nevertheless I have not yet been installed in the office,^ and it
is my earnest desire that the effects of this good fortune may
soon emerge from the region of probabilities into that of accom-
plished facts. Then my heart will be independent of the water
of the whirlpools of daily life and the unwholesome air of every
country, and the coolness of pure truth will become my' portion,
so that the rubbish-heap of the world wdl appear’ to me to be no
more than rubbish, and the iced water of the times a mere
m'irage. My wretched lot impel? me to be chanting ever this
mournfui refrain : —

“Wonder of woudeis that youi' heart is not disgusted, and
your soul is not sick

With the putrid odours which arise from these unwhole-
some waters.”

The ambition and object of me, your well-wisher, is that yon
will strive to .help me in all matters, worldly and spiritual, so
that when I go to Ajmir* I may remember that the name of the
place rhymes with Ka.shmu’ inasmuch as each delightful place 148
is the pivot of one of the two axes, or rather the two ex-
tremities, north and south, of the same axis, which extends in
either direction. “ A delectable city, and a forgiving God ' ”

Just as you, in Kashmir, will be drinking the ice water* of the
fount Jhalara,* so shall I be moistening my tongue with the
limpid water of thanks and praise to the Giver of all good things,
both spiritual and bodily.

f'’ ersv.

To the bounteous may their boouty be pleasant.

And to the poor lover that which he sips.

A counterpart of my present condition would be the revealing
of that which has been disclosed to the inspired. Toui' ssrvant's

* Badaonl was disappointed of this office, which wcaid have saited him
very well. See vol. ii, text, pp. -liJO, 101- T.le tii!- nt was that of
Mn'in’d-d-din Ci'ihu

* AjhiTt is now uatially bpeit -tjmer.

" wf accordir.g to both MSS. The lexeh.jj, wrongiy, w-l

* I have not been able to tind raontioii of ti.i? • s -where.

208

son has gone to Badaou, where he is employed in putting up
prayers for you. May your sublime shadow never grow less !

Written in the month of Ramuzau the blessed, dispensing
blessings, in the year H. 1003 (Zday-June, 1595).”

The following ode is one of the productions of the Shaikh's
pearl-scattering and jewel-dispersing pen, which he mote to me
during one of his travels.

Ode.

■‘At the moment when I was writing this letter,
ily tears were flowing, mingled with blood,

All the writing which was set forth by my pen,

The letter of my longing for you, has been blotted out from my
heart.

The bitterness of separation is medicine.

Sarfi, so great is the flood of my teal’s that the nine oceans to
me

Seem but as the dropping of rain.”

To be brief I may say that one so feeble and so devoid of the
graces of speech as I has not the power to recount fully the
excellent qualities and perfection of the noble Shaikh. The
noble works which he has left behind him, and which have, as
one may say, put a girdle round the day of resnrrection, are a
.sufficient witness to what he was. On the 18th of Zi-qa‘dah, in
the vear h 1003 (July 25, 1505) the bird of his soul, whose nest
wa.s holiness, escaping from the cage of tliis world of confinement,
flew to that of liberation, and the words “ He was the Shaikh of
nations ” were found to give the date of bis death.*

Verse.

Peace be to the world, for pleasant are its blessings.

148 As though Yusuf were sitting in it.

Verses.

Seek not in this waste spot the road to the treasure-house of
your desire, •

* ^ ^ it", gbing the date 1003.

209

For this ruiued abode is nought but the piaee of toil aud
grief.

Fate has laid, at every step herein, a snare of calamity,

Who is there that has .set his foot in this region of snares
who has not also left his head heie f
The vanished heart of the rose ha.s left behind it a word of
hope.

But what can that proht us who are unable to read ? *

The daj's of man’s life are exceeding short. Be not deceived
For no sooner have you drawn a breath than you give your
life to the wind.

LVII MACtiXA MiRZi OK SA.MAR'iA.VO.

He was an angel in the form of a man, who had acquired
lionour by performing the pilgrimage to the two holy places,
(may God increase their honour ! \. During the i-egency of
Bairam Sfean, the Khan-i-Kbauan. he dwelt in Agra, where the
people profited much by his precious utterances. Under the
tuition of the Mau/anft, who was one of the best men of his time.

[ stndieid a portion of the Shamdyyah^ commentary on logic, tlie
work cf Amir Sayyid JIuhammad, who was the most noble and
most orthodox son and successor of the holy Amir Sajyid ‘Ali of
Hamadan, by the blessing of whose holy foot-steps, which were
inseparably connected with the spiritual instruction of the people,
the faith of Islam was first promulgated and preached in the
land of Ka.shmir. And besides this commentary on logic I read
other brief works with the Maulann. From bis blessed tongue I
beard the following saying of the prophet, which has the very
highest authority, '■ The prophet (may God bless and assoil
him!) said, ‘He who sees a sti’anger (with his wife) may slay
him; his blood is lawful (to him),’” and from him also I

I There is pan on the word here, which cannot be reproduced
in Sng^lish.

* See vol. i, traos., Ranting, p. i27 and note 1. BadaonVs attribution of
tbia work does not, however, agree with that there mentioned.

210

i-eceived authority to propound and expound this tradition,
he having received it through only six intermediaries from
150 that holy one who was the seal of prophecy (on liini and
on his family be blessings without end ! ) The authenticity of
the tradition of this saying is related in detail in the Najata-r-
lla^id. *

The Aluiddiid, at the time of the Khan-i-Zaman'& rebellion,
came from Agra to Dilili, further than which place 1 have not
been able to trace him, .so that 1 do not know the (latter) circum-
stances of his auspicious life.

LVlil t^AZi AnO-

He is t!ie di.sciple, the spiritual successor, and also the son-in-
law of the Governor" of Bukhara (may his honoured tomb be
sauctitied ! ) The venei’able Governor was so learned in law and
divinity that if we may suppose that all the books on the
theology of the Hanafi school had disappeared froui the world
he would have been able to write them afresh. It was on his
account that ‘Abdu-’ilah Khan,^ the king of Turan, put a
sto'p to tlie study of logic and dialectics in his dominions, and
expelled ilulla •Isamn-d-din of Isfaram with his vile pupils from
Transoxiana. The circumstances were as Ibllov^s : Alter the
study of logic and dialectics had gained ground in Bukhara and
Sainarqand vile and wicked students, whenever they met a pious
and siinpie-nriuded man, used to say, •* This fellow is an ass, for
he will deny the proposition that he is an animal," and, since the

I By Badaciii. See vol. i, trans., Ranking, p. 511, note ti. and p. BOa,
note 3.

■t See vol, ii, text, p, 4y

3 lionorific plural of_)j_y*, must commonly used lu this sense with

regard to Joseph ( y.y ), C-ovemor of Egypt.

* The school of Abu Hanifah, one of the four great Sunni doctoi-s of the
law.

!> ‘Abda’llah ^au LFzbak, King of Transoxiana.

A This appears to be the author's meaning, though the literal tranHla-
tiou is ‘ he denies the proposition (* 110 animui My late fnsufl

Shainau-l-‘Ulama .^ai^ Mahmud-i-Gilaui informed me that the paariage

rejeciion of a general proposition necessarily involves the rejec-
tion of particular propositions dependent on it, he necesrarih
denies also his humanity.” When fallacies of this nature were
frequently repeated and spread abroad the Governor wrote a
treatise on divinity, inciting and urging ‘Abdu-'llali Khan to
banish this school, and adducing clear proofs of the unlawfulness
of teaching and studying logic and philosophy. He al.so recorded
his opinion that there was no harm in losing as n. torchei'id pacet
on which logical exercises had been written, and w rote miu'li
more to the same purport.

The always performed the zikr.i-arra * after his prayers

with hits companions, and used to enroll disciples.

In the year H. 969 (a.l>. 1o 61-62) he came to Agra, and I. a.- a
means of attaining good fortune and blessing, read some lesa.i.i.v
with him in the beginning of the Sharh-i-Wiqryah, and in
truth, so far as that subject was toncerned T fcuiul him to be a
boundless sen of learning.

LIX. ilACLANA MIR-I-KaI-AX,*

He was the grand.son of Mnlla IQi’aja, oiie of tlie greatest of

related ic a childish trick, which the bedding iogieians ol Transoxiana prob
ably believed to be clever. meari'r ‘ aa animal.' and ia csnally .an.r

vulgarly used in the sense of ‘ beast ’ or ‘ hriite.’ The trick was to apply
the term, in its approbrions sense, to some simpleton, as one might call
another in Kngiish ‘a wretched animal,’ thereby indneing him to deny that
he was an animal, and then, referring to the more general and scientirio
meaning of the word, to turn on him and say, ' since yor -ire ro animal you
are no man, for man. is an animal.’ Itjseerns .strange thai this stupid hoa'^
should have seriously annoyed learned men. bet it mast be remerabered that
Badaoio’s ' learned men ' were theologians pare and simph, who regarded
lo.gio as ' carnal learning,' trivial, if not absolutely harmful, and would he
ready to use any prete.xt for the purpose of harassing brih its profes.soi.s
and its students,

' 8^1 ^’ 0 , a religions exercise of the Sitfi-'. The late Shacisu-l-'Dlaml
ShaiMi Mahmiid-i-Gilani informed me that he was not aware in what it
consisted, bnt believed that it consisted in reciting the word ail; (Alidl)
on a prolonged note and in a guttural tone, [170

> He was the first teacher of Sultan Salim (Jahangir). See vol. ii. text

212

the Shaikhs of Qiurasan. Maulana Mir-i-Kalan was endowed
with both inwai'd and outward perfection and was a profound
sage, being especially proficient in the traditions, in which
respect he was the wonder of the age. He had authority from
bayyid Mirak Shah ' to teach this branch of knowledge. He
was highly regarded by Maulana Zainn-d-din Mahmud, the bow-
rtrakei' ® (may his honoured tomb be sanctified !i. He was
preserved by Hod, the most Holy and most High, from all sins,
mortal and venial, and wa.s ever employed in teaching divinity,
and passed his life with hi.s eyes cast down in meditation. He
was the disciple of Shaikh .Jalal of Hirat, who was one of the
most famous of great Shaikhs. Maulana Mir-i-Kalan acquired a
disposition I'ke that of Muhammad (may God bless and assoi!
iiim '), and his angelic nature was a manifestation of the (ninety-
nine ) attributes of God. He attained the age of eighty years,
and his mother , who was a Sayyidah, was living at the time of
his death, tie never married, for fear lest his wife should not
subject herself to his mother, and thus he passed away in his
motner’s lifetime. At the time w'hen the Maulavi passed away
to the eternal abode his mother' wa.s engaged in reading the
glorious Qur’an, and when they conveyed to her the news of the
death of so precious a son, and asked her permission to proceed
with the last rites she reerted the noble verse, “ We are God’.s,
and to Him d.. we return, ' und continued her reading of tJie
<Ji,r’an, without a sign of weeping or lamentation. The Maulana
162 p-i'=^sed awaj’ to the Pre.senoe id God’s inpicy in Agra, iu the

ii, 981 (a.d. 1573-7 tg and was buried also in Agra, and a year
infer his raoiiier too journeyed to the next world and obtained
t'no felicity oi i<.?joining .her hle=,sed son,

J was blessed and honoured by meeting with the Maulana ni
angelic disposition, but 1 received no in-'trnotion from him.

!jX, JMaulax.a Sa'Id ok TraKisTAX.®

He was the T.iost leained of tlie sages of hi.s time. Some of
i See vol ii, text. loc. cit.

t Mr, Blochtnann suggests i, 539) that this saint may be

identical with Shaikh Buknu-d-dm Mahmud, the bow-maker.

i He came from Trarsoxiana to India in a.d. 1560-61, ‘and was nnable

Ills learning lie acquired from Mnlla Ahmad-i-Jand ^ and some
from Mnlla Mahmfid-i-Surkh,® and he also studied for a wldie
under ilulla ’Isamu-’d-diu Ibrahim.’ He came to India and
entered the service of the emperor, ^vlio delighted much in hi.s
company. He- possessed all the qualities of a true, religious mar
and was lowly-minded and of a mo^t genial d;srosition. In
from uiidei'.standing, likewise, and quickness of percention no Mu'la
Turkistan who has appeared in thi'- coiintiy has equalled him.
He wa.s an eloquent and charminit speaker, and as a teacher wu>
kind and gentle towards his pupils.

He passed away into the pre.sence .if the Lord s tuerey in the
year h. 970 s a.d. 1562-63 ) after his retai n from India to Kabul.

LXI. Hapiz-i-Kcm.ikI.*

He was generally known as Hafiz of Ta.shkand.’ and was a
profound scholar, eapecially in Arabic. He .studied under
Maulana ‘Isamu-d-din ** and acquired proficiency in al! branches
of knowledge. He taught much, and all the learned men of
Transoxiana concurred in acknowledging his superiority. He
affected a military mode of life, and whenever he rode abroad had
a quiver in his belt, after the manner of the Turks. He came to
India in the year n. 977 (a.d. 1569-70) and was honoured by J
being admitted to the service of the Khalifah of the age. After

to remain in Hindustan OTying to the blindness of its people.’ See vol ii,
text, p. 49.

t Or ‘ Junaid.’ See vol. i, traas., Banking, 4S6, and note 1.

■2 The text has JfuAamwai^i-Sarkh. but I follow both MSS.

This was ‘Isima-d-din of Isfarain, the logician, who was expelled from
Transoxiana by command of ‘Abdu-’Uah Khan the Uzbak. See vol ii. text.
187.

' See vol. ii, text, 187. He received from Akbar and his contribu-

tions to the extent of Ks 30,000 or Es. 40,000, the greater part of which
sum seems to have found its way to the pockets of the Kli 'nci-vi-Jahan
He is said (loc, cit.) to have been well versed in Arabic, and to have viritteu
a commentary on the Sure.’." -l-Muhammad ((Jui'-'n e. xlvii) nuich was a
good example of his powers- K^inaki means inxiUarv.

5 Tashkent in English maps.

2b

214

jecsiving many substantial marks of tbe imperial favour he set
out, by way of Gujarat, on a pilgrimage to the two holy places,
jrakk-^h auH wiience he proceeded to Turkey, wlip”" he

was nreso-nt-Arl to the Saltan of Turkey, and in th^t country
received ten times more honour and attention than he had
received in India, so that even the office of grand vaz7r of the
empire was offered to him. This office he declined, and returned
to i'ransoxii iia. vvh»-re he died. I never had the honour of pnyii)g
my respects either to Hafiz-i-Kumaki or to Maulana Sa'id.

LXIT. Qizi UizAii OF Badakhshan.*

He received the title of Qazl i^an, and was a native of
Badakhshan. where his home was situated near a ruby-mine. In
such branches of knowledge as are acquired by study he was tlie
pupil of Maulana ‘Isamn-d-diu Ibrahim, and also studied under
Mulla Sa'id. He had a great taste for and proficiency in Sufi-
istic studies, and in these, the way of truth, he was the disciple
of the greatest of leaders. Shaikh Husain of ^’arazm. In con-
sequence of his close adherence to the esoteric school he has also
acquired much respect among men of the world, and in Badakh-
shan was one of the noble.s of the State. When he came to India
he obtained unbounded honour, receiving first the title of Qazi
Khan, and afterwards that of Ghazi Khan. He was eloquent
and his delivery was pleasing. He was the author of some
standard works, among which was a treatise on the proof of the
word (of God) and an account of the religion of truth and verity.
He also wrote marginal note.s on the commentary on the dogmas
of the faith, and numerous treatises on ^((/i-ism. He pas.sed
away to the pre.sence of God’s mercy at the age of seventy in the
year H. 992 (A.i>. 1.584) in Awadh. He was the first person to
•suggest the performance of the ceremony of prostration * before

1 For A full a coiinv o'" Qi'ui NTziin or Ghazi ^ac, wh;: was a com7iia''d9r
of nine hundred See Azn t-AkbarL, i, 410 He firsc reueived the title of
Qazi i^anfpom SUia-man King oi Bidakh^in. This title seems to hr.ve
been oonfrmed or le'ogmzed on or shortly after, his arrival in India, and
he afcerw.ids r" • ired t.ie citie c.' ^izi hihiin.

2 See i, loO, This invention flattered the vanity of Akbar

215

the emperor. Mullsi ‘Him of Kahnl used to say regretfnlly,

“ Alas, tliat I was not the inventor of this ordinance ! ”

LXIII. Maulaxa Ilahdad-i-LasgaemanT. J54

He comes from a quarter in Lahor. He is well versed in all
such branches of knowledge as are included in the ordinary
curriculum, and is a profound scholar. He rule.s his life in
accordance with the holy law. and is abstinent, and most pious
and religious. He employs his time in teachiiiar. He has never
visited the hou.ses of worldly and unpolished men, and has never
asked assistance from the great ones of the earth, nor accepted the
usual subsistence allowance made io religious teachers. He is
nearly eighty years of age.

LXIV. Mcham-Mad, the

He is one of the most respected teachers of Lahor. He is
endowed with many perfect qualitie.s and is employed as
On each occasion on which lie completes the perusal of the
$ahihu-l~Btikhori^ or the he gives a great entertain-

ment, regaling his guests with bu^ra. kh finis* and sweetmeats.

His assembly is the meeting-place of the m<>st learned men.
The Manlana, now that he has reached the age of ninety years,
and is bent and feeble, has given up teaching. He has four or
five orthodox son.s, all of whom are in learning and accomplish-
ments worthy successors of their father.

more, probably, than any innovation introduced in his reign, and the
inventor was proportionately rewarded. Hence the regretful ejaculation of
Mnlla ‘Alim.

1 See Ain-i-Akbari, i, o-ll.

* A collection of authentic traditions, in which an acconi.t of Imam
Bukhari is given. See vol. i. trans.. Kanking, H and note 3.

S Mishkalu-l-Masibih. a celebrated collection of Traditions. See vol. i,
trans.. Banking, 58, note 3. ei pnssun.

♦ A dish invented by Bughrii Kh-an, King of Khwarazm. It consists of
quadran-rolar sections of paste, dressed with gravy or milk.

216

LXV. Mia FateL'-’llah of SHTaiz.i

He was one of the Sayyids of Shiraz and the most learned of
the learned men of his time. He was for a long time the
sprritnal guide of the ralers and nobles of Fai-s. He was
thoroughly versed in all those sciences which demand the
exercise of the reasoning faculty, such as philosophy, astronomy,
geometry, astrology, geomaney, arithmetic, the preparation of
talismans, incantations, and mechanics, and in this department of
learning he was snch an adept that he was able to draw up an
astronomical table as soon as the emperor demanded one from
him. He was equally learned in Arabic, traditions, interpreta-
tion of the Qur’an and rhetoric, and was the author of some
excellent works, which were not, however, equal to those of
185 Manlana Mirza Jan of Shiraz, who v/as a teacher in Transoxiana,
an abstemions recluse, and was unique among the learned men of
the age. Mir Fathu-’llah, although he was polite, courteous, and
well-conducted in society, seemed to be unable, as soon as he
began to teach, to address his pupils otherwise than with abuse,
insinuation, and sarcasm (God save us from the (like !). For
this reason very few ever became his pupils, and he has not left
behind him one worthy disciple. He was for some years in the
Dakan, and ‘Adil Khan,* the ruler of that country, had a great
regard for him. When he entered the imperial service he
received the title of ‘Azdn-l-Mulk.® He died in Kashmir in the
year H. 997 (a.d. 1588-89) and is buried in the place known as
Ta^t-i-Snlaiman. * The words, “ He was an angel,” ® were
found to give the date of his death.

1 See vol. ii, text, and Ain-i-Akbari, i, padsim. Pathu-’Ilah was i^adr-i-
Jahdn ^drn-s-Sudur for four years, from a.h. 993 (a.d. 1585) to a.h. 997
(a.d. 1588-89), bat had very little power with regard to endowments, the
chief sotirce of the income brought by the appointment.

i ‘All ‘Adil Shah I (1557—1580), fifth King of the ‘Adil Shahi dj lasty
Of Bijipor.

A ‘Ardu-d-dauiat, vol. ii, text, p. 343, and Ain-Akbari, i, pasdim,

A The hills above Srinagai.

^ Simj) , giving the date 997.

A

217

LXVI. illNSCR OF LiHOR.

He i s one of the disciples of Shaikh Ishaq i-Raku,* and
acquired most of his learning ander Manlana Sa‘dii- llah,5 with
whom he was connected by marriage. He is a learned and able
man and is proficient in all such philosophical learning as is
usually studied in India. He has a pleasant dispo.sition and a
sound understanding, which enables him reading to grasp a
subject. He associates much with the nobles and chief men of
the State and is resorted to by them. For some time he held tne
post of chief Qazt of Malwa. and when the emperor set up his
court at Labor, he left ilalwa and paid his respects at Court.

He is now employed in the administration of the pargana of
Bajwara ® and the submontane districts. His son Mnlla ‘Ala’n-
d-din was one of the most famous of the learned men employed
iu teaching, and was for some time among the companions of the
Khan-i-KhUnan. by whom he was highly regarded and much
honoured. When he entered the imperial service he also received
much honour, and though much pressed and urged to enter the 156
military service he declined to do so, and employed himself in
teaching, spending w'hatever he received from his jagir on the
students whom he taught. Of all the Mul’as in India, after Pir
Muhammad KTi an, there was nobody so famous as Mulla ‘Ala’u-
’d-din and Mulla Xur Muhammad Tarkhan for generosity, liber-
ality, and open-handedness. Mulla ‘Ala’n-d-din has written well-
known marginal notes on the Shark ‘Aqii’id* He attained to the
honour of performing the pilgrimage of the Hajj and is buried in
the holy land of pilgrimage. I never met him.

LXVII. Mclla PIr Muhammad of ShIhvan.^

He was a Mulla of good understanding and great penetration,

1 See p. 85.

2 The grammarian; he also was one of the papils of Shaitt Ishaq.

3 From the mention of the sabmontane districts it is clear that this
paryana was the Bajwavfi in the Bet Jalandhar Duib Sariir of the &iiha of
Labor,

* I have not been able to identify this work.

6 For an account of MulU Pu- Muhammad Khan of Shiwan. see Ain-i-

218

aud gathered round liim a cheerful eompanj. Notwithstanding
this he was Imrd-hearted man, and took no heed to do that which
was lawful or avoid that which was unlawful. He came from
Shirv'in and entered the service of the ^^5n-i-Khanan, Bairam
Khan, in Qandahar, and received advancement. After the re-
conquest of Hindustan he received the title of Khnn, and after-
wards that of Nasiru-l-Mulk, and lived for three or four years in
the greatest honour aud consideration, but since the days of the
wicked are few, he was shortly afterwards drowned ’ in the river
Narbada in Malwa, and joined Pharaoh in the Nile of hell. His
death has been recorded in the history of the reign. I saw him
from afar, but, thank God, I never associated with him.-.

LXVIII. MIrza Mcflis the Uzbak.*

Ha was one of the disciples of Mnlla. Ahmad-i-Jand.® He was
an able Mnlla, and quick and ready in controversy, but was not
eloquent, and when engaged in teaching behaved grotesquely.
His figure was ungainly. He spent his time in religious retire-
ment. He came from Transoxiana to India, and taught for four
years in they am4’‘ wiosyfa of Kh’aja iMu‘inu-d-din-i-Farankhudi *
in Agra. By the grace of God lie was enabled to perform the
pilgrimage to the two holy places, and in Makkah the glorious he
departed this life, dying at the age of seventy.

LXIX. M.AULAir.A Nuro-u-dix Muham.mad TARraix.^

He had a comprehensive knowledge of philosophy and rhetoric,

ATchnrl, i, 324. He was a man of overlrearing and brntal disposition, who
delighted in oruelty for its own sake. For his treatment of Bnrj ‘Ali, a
messenger from the Khaa-i-Zam5n, see vol. ii, text, p. 23 ; for his treatment
of Bairam ^an, his patron, ibid. p. 27, for his punishment, ttiiZ. pp. 27-29;
and for his revenge, ibid. p. 39. His brutality in Malwa is described, ibid.
pp. 47, 48.

1 As he was trying to swim the river after his defeat by Baz Bahadnr in
1562. See vol. ii, text, pp 50, 51.

2 See vol. ii, text, p. 1S7, and .iin-i-Akhr/ri. i, 541.

S Vide i-iipra, p. 213, n. I.

* See Ain-i-Akbari, i, 434,

= According to the Tabaqui he was a good mathematician and astrono-

219

and was a man of pleasant disposition and a poet. Towards the
end of his life he repented of and gare up poetry. He was
appointed to the trusteeship of the raausolenui of his late
majesty, the emperor flumayiin. and died in Dibli.

LXX. Mintiifi Ilahdad of AmeSha,'

He wa.s an able Mullfi, of a pleasant di.sposition, nnaitected, a
good conversationalist, a charming as.sociate and a boon com-
panion, ever ready with a pleasant jest. He attracted many to
his society and delighted all who associated with him. He
obtained an appointment in the military service of the empire
which enabled liim to live contentedly. He wa,3 much attached
to me throughout his life. In the year H. 990 (a.d. 1582),
when the victorious army was marching towards Atak on the
river in the neighbourhood of SivSlkot, he delivered np the life
which had been entrusted to him.- and his corpse was taken to
a village in the par.jana of Amrolia, which he had beautified for
himself, and w.as there buried

iner. According to the ila aiiti'-ul-T^m'xrd he was born at, Jim in KhnrSsan.
and wns educated in Mashhad. He was introduced to Babar and was a
private friend of Hiimaynn’s, who, like him, was fond of the astrolabe. He
went with Hninayim to 'Iraq, and remained twenty years in his service.
As a poet he wrote nnder tiie takhMuf of Nurt. He is also called Nuri of
Safidrm, because he held Safidun for some time in ji'ijir. A k bar gave him
the title of I^an and later that of Tarkhan, and appointed him to Samana.
His title of Tarkhan was, however, merely an empty honour, and carried
none of the privileges counected with it, for an account of which see Am-i-
Akhari, i, 364,

1 Amroha was .a pargana town in the S^rkdr of Sambhal of the Sdha of
DMi. See p, 63. note 6. It is now the headquarters of a tah^il of tlie same
name in the Muradabad District of the D.P. See Imp Gazetteer of India,
new series, v, 330.

Manlina lialidad was appointed, in 1.581, Sadi of one of the Diiabs in
the Panjab. See vol. ii. text, pp, ?95, 296, where he is de.scribed as a man
well known for his goodness of disposition.

2 ‘ At a distance of three kur,<h MuIIa Ilahdad of .4mroha, who had an
nnhealed wound in his breast, the inflammation of which re.'iciied his heart,
took a purgative from Hakim Hasan and in the course of the day was united
to God.' Vol ii, text, 347.

220

This couclades the brief account of those Shuikhi and leamed
men of the age whom, for the most part. I have had an opportu-
liitv Oi meeting and waiting apon, and by whose illuminating
regard I have been honoured; as for those of them whom I have
not seen, be it as God will ! Of all those of whom my pen has
given an account, but very few remain here and there, like moles
on the face of the age, in these days in which there is such a
dearth of men worthy to be so called. Those vvho remain avoid
.aid flee from the world and have been completely forgotten by
those of feeble and defective nature, the vulgar, that is to say.
who are no better than cattle. These learned men, counting us a
158 loan the few moments of life which are left to them, await the
arrival of the swift-footed messenger of death, and, having fully
realized the dignity of old age, now hearken with the ears of the
soul for the cry *• Prepare to set out I ” expectantly waiting to
answer obediently to the shout.

Quatrain.

In the history of the world the lives of all, both small and
great,

Are written, and accounts of brave men and heroes,

Read,- and on each page of it you will see “ In such a year
Died such one, the son of such a one, the son of such a one.’'

And other Shaikhs and learned men are and were scattered
throughout all parts of India, throughout its length and breadth,
in such numbers tliat the reckoning of them is left to the
knowledge of the Knower of Secrets. Likewise the number of
those who are famed and known foi- the natural wickedness of
their dispositions and innate baseneaa, for their hypocrisy, vile-
ness, worthlessness, crooked dealings and injustice is beyond
computation, and there is no need for me to soil my pen by
recording anytliing conceining this handful of rubbi.sh, these base
fellows, for I have a great task before- me and but little hope of
long life, and my condition resembles that of the ice merchant of
Nishapur who was selling ice in the summer, and when the sun
waxed hot cried out, "O, ye Muslims! Have pity upon him
whose stock-in-trade i.s melting away on his liai'.d-i ' "

Gouplft.

(iiir life is as ice in the heat of summer.

But little of if remains ami its owner is still deceived.”

And mv recording the dates of the deaths of the men of whom
T write resembles the case of that tailor who in a certain city liad
his shop by the gate of the graveyard, and hung an earthen pot
fTOiii a nail in his door, his only eare being to drop a stone in the
pot for every fnnera! which I'ame from the city. Every mouth 159
he itsed to count the stones, saying. They have carried away
so many to burial.’' Then he would empty the pot and hang it
again on the nail, dropping stones into it as before till another
month had passed. It .so happened that the master tailor died
and a man who had not heard of his deatii came to demand his
services. He found the door of his shop shut and asked a
neighbour whither the tailor liad gone. The neighbour replied,

‘‘ He too lias gone into the pot ’’

Coii'plet .

Regard well wliat happens to others,

Eor when it has passed by them it will be youi' lot also,
find be gracious ' Wo hav(> fallen into the mouth, of a
di’agon uhere we cannot even .struggle or move, and
whence we cannot obtain fivedoro.

Devour thine own blood like the i-osebud : mourn and open
not thy lips,

For the rosebud of this garden, the world, has no hope of
blossoming.

Tt jioints our to thee ) liat some form, lofty as the cypjcss,
has crumbled away to dust
On every spot whicJi is shaded by the bov-tree.

Since some rose from the pleasannce is evei v moment limne
away on the wind

The solitarv lily -.vears evei the blue raiment of mourning.

I would here retjuesf my respected and critical readers and
acute appraisers not to be unduly carping and cert.sorious ns
regards the lack of arrangement in thi.s work, for the famous

names of the members of the two classes which I have men-
tioned, who have been specially chosen out from among the
people for honour, are mentioned in these few pages at haphazard
like scattered pearls, and without regard to precedence or ;)lace
1 would deprecate criticism on this score ina.smuch as these
historical selections have been wiitten, as it were, by a broken -
winged pen in a bastv flight, and I have had no leisure to
arrange my composition in a commonplace book. My case
much resembles that of the saddler who vfas constantly losing
160 his needle and said, ” If my time were not mostly wasted in
looking for my needle I should be able to get through a good
deal of work in the day, notwithsranding that the beggars as one
man gather round me like the thong of a whip." Tuis is a well-
known saying. Although some of those whom I have mentioned
may not perhaps be altogether as I would have them, for many a
sineei’ely pious man wears the appearance of an atheist, yet if
there be even one of them who is acceptable to the Lord, that one
person will be sufficient for my salvation, to make intercession
for me and to gain honour for me. Although all of them in
general are' entitled to be considered as. in .some sort, saints, for
“ God is near to them who believe," and are thus many degrees
better than I, yet some of thetn have a specisil and manifest claim,
which I fully admit, to be regarded as sainis. It is for this
reason that T have not included among these liiograpliies those of
the irreligious and lewd, tcvking as my lule of conduct the saying
of the sage of Lustam, which he spoke to one of hi-s disciples by
wav of advice, sayinsr, If in these present times you see any-
body who has faith in the sayings of the Shaikhs recjuest hi.s
prayers both for me and for yourself, for the prayers of .such a
one will most certainly be an.swered.”

I know DO way and I can find no help for myself,

E.xcept the love of those w hose faith is him.

It .so happened that when I reckoned up the number of those
of thus lion 'ured cla.ss w'hom I Laie mentioned, most of whom are
truly men of God, and generous and enlightened souls, I found
that it came to o. hundred and eleven, the number which i.s given

223

by the %vord qutb and also by the word alf (‘‘one thousand”),
which latter word v/as the date of the year * in which I wi-ote
this treatise which has given me so much pleasure.

Now that my heart is disgusted with those depra^-ed wretches
who have not scrupled unblu.sliingly to cavil at and openly to
revile the faith of Islam, convicting theinselve.s of intideiity and
shamele.ssiiess. and w!io are the cause of fill the ruin wliicii has 161
fallen upon both the state and the people of Islam, and are
known as the strife of the latter days. I will proceed to an
account of the physicians ( of the court) although .some of these,
roo, may be classed ia the .'arae category as ti e in.hdels just
mentioned.

1 A.H, KXX) f.v.D. 1591-h2), Tiic \vho!e work was i •■irpieted iu a.h. 10(Ji
f a.d. 1595).

CHAPTER Jii.

As Account of thb Physicians of the Reign of the
Emperoe Akbaf..

Some of tlie pir\\-,;ciaiis in this leign were so learned in tiie
theory and skilled in the practice of medicine that tliev per-
formed mii-acies iike those of Hiisa,* and brought to mind the
wonder-working breath of the Lord ‘Isa,- while others, for the
reason that the healing art is a noble subject of study, .but a
mean pursuit in its practical applicatiou, although they busied
themselves in the study of medicine, sought political employment,
according to their several degrees.

I. Hakimo-l-Mulk of Gil an.®

His name was Sljamsu-d-din, and in medicine and the healing
art lie was the Galen of the age. and tvas endowed with the heal-
ing breath of the Messiah.* In other branches of traditional
learning also he was distinguished far above all his fellows. I
myself had no dealings with him, for when I Hi'st entered the
imperial service and presented my preface to the JSTnma-yi'

Lit. Had tho white hand of Musa,” The expression refers to the
niiricle related in toe tlu-- an, t faap. xavii. 12. ' Moreover put thv hand into

thy bosom, it shall come forth white, without hurt : this shall be one among
the nine signs unto Pharaoh and his people, for they are a wicked people. *
i'he account in the Qiir'iin is taken fiotn the Hook of Exodus iv. 6. The
expi'ession the white hand of Moses ’* is frequently used of a miracle, or
of any extraordinary power in a man.

2 ■ fsi is the name which Musalmans give to our Lord, instead of Yasu',
Wliich is the correct version of His Name in Arabic. It is iheir belief that
it was the miraculous property of His breath that restored the dead to life
and healed the sick.

s According to the Akbarnama be was one of those who awisted in the
capture of the mad ^'aja Ma'awAm, Akbar’s maternal uncle. See vol. ii,
text 71.

^ Sae note 2, &boye.

225

Khirad-atzil 1 to the emperor, the hakim served me very ill,
replying, when asked by the emperor what he iliought of my
writing, “ His style is polished, but his book is ill to read.”
Notwithstanding this the was. to do him juscice, a sincere

well-wisher and a practical helper of God’s servants, firm and
steadfast in the faith, and devoted to the interests of his friends.

He was constantly engaged in teaching students, to whcm,
indeed, he was not only a tutor, but also a generous patron. So
devoted was he to them that he never on any occasion willingly
took his food apart from them, and on this account he was an in-
frequent guest at the houses of others. He was seated one day
in the assembly of Shaikh Salim-i-Cishti, discoursing on theology
and theologians and praising physicians and magnifying and
extolling the importance and glory of the science of medicine,
and the greatness of Shai^ Abu ‘Ali Sina.* This occurred at 162
the time when the ‘Ulama and the physicians were at feud, and
were daily wrangling, disputing, and quarrelling regarding the
digmty of their respective orders. As I was unacquainted with
these matters and liad only recently come from the country and
was ignorant of the real grounds of the controversy, I quoted the
following verses of Shaikh Shihabu-d-din-i-Sahravardi ® ( may
God sanctify his soul !).

Verses.

“ flow long did I say to this people, “ Ye are superfluous ?

One cure, the grave, is to be found in books of medicine.”

But when they sought satisfaction in threatening us.

We rested in God for the sufficiency of onr recompense.

And they died in the faith of Aristotle.

While we live in the faith of God’s chosen prophet.”

And I also quotea, in support of the position 'vhich I had

1 See vol. i, trans. Rankiag. 9.5, ami note S.

^ Called in Europe, Avicenna.

* A renowned saint descended fron. Abu Bakr, 'he hr_-t
was the antlior of the 'Juixytri-t-ih-! u.ud died at Ci.-ncAd in A
(a.d. 12;3i_35).

226

taken up, tho.--e ve)-ses of tlie inspired lord Jami ' (may liis tomb
be sanctified I ) which he has written in his Tiihfatti-l-AArnr.

Couplet.

Seek not enlightenment of the heart from the bosom of
Sin a.*

Seek not fur lip^ht from the eyes of the blind."

This eniMped tlie Anfcfwi, and the Shaikh said. "The tire of
strife was already blazing between these people. Now you have
come and have blown it to a still fiercer blaze.’’

lYheu the arena of strife was clo.sed to the 'iilamii and shaikhs
this physician di.sputed with the enemies of the faith whenever
he could find an opportunity of doing so, as is briefly' related in
the account of that party.® At length Hakimu-l-ilulk was no
longer able to continue the unequal struggle and applied for leave
to go to Makkali the glorious, and in the year h. 98S or 989 (a.p.
1.j 80 or 1581 ) * he departed on the pilgrimage, and died in the
land of the pilgrimage. Thanks be to God for his efforts

(1. H.4Ki.M Saifu-l-MllOk ok Damawavu.''

To great learning and knowledge ot medicine he united a taste
163 for writing vilely scurrilous and satirical verse. His nuni-de-
plume was .Miuja'i.® As ill-luck would have it. wiieiicver thi.-
physician undertook the cure of a sick man, the unfortunate
patient .suriendeied his life to the messengei of death, for whieh

< ^lanlana *Abili:'i'*Rahmaii'i*4dmi, the famoub po^L. Avicenna.

Sec vol. ii. text, 203, 275 The (' in liaej bceu carelec^ly uniitted

trom th»' texi thoa^.zii it is in b »tU ilSS

♦ Accoidiim t‘‘' ii text, p. '275. Hukinm-l- jlnik was? tir^t ordt led tu

to Makk.ih in r- 1571* owinir tu hia quarrel- with Abu-l-Fa/1. whom ]■>
called (!.. t), ‘redundancy,’ ' oris ^ or ‘ t'xcrement.' aii-l atjtuali,^

departed in year considered one ot tr*- unv.'ortay t'

taith an i i-Ai: :• ’ Ho rereivcil, however, a sum of five lahl e of ' Got-cs '
be di'Mi’.'i't at

A'. V i. 1 1 ‘,e ia -»’ uf 'he Htuit Ha ut the caal ns Ti.*-,

Il T'iP 4 . : . '4 ■ ' I c i ‘ • 1 '' uf’i l-M i.s ^ lh« Idiiie )

• r- / - . rV i ’-'Vf!-

227

reason the wits gave him the nickname of Saifu-l-Hukamn.^
He attended one of the grandsons of the venerable Shaikh Jami.
Mntammad-i-Khabhsham 2 by name, better known as Makh'h'nn-
zilda,^ and helped him on his journey to the next world. The
words “ Saifu-l-Hukama killed him ” ^ were found to give tlie
date of ills death. These few lines which were written on tlie
physician Jalal may well be applied to .Saifu-l-l\Inlrik.

I ersc.--.

“ Regarding the phj’sician Jalal the Angel of Death,

Last night made his complaint to God, saying,

' Thy slave is helpless before the physician,

Wherp I kill one he kills a hundred.

Kitlier depose him 1 pv.ay Thee, from the position wliieh
he holds.

Or assign to me some other employment.’ ” ‘

He was held in much honour in India foi- some yeai ' during
the time of Bairam Khan, and afterward.s, but aecoi’ding to his
own statement lie received neither pationage nor honoiu, and
returned to liis country disappointed. Thence he wrote and
despatched a satirical poem, which for gracefulness and the
laughable nature of its subject has been equalled by tlie poems of
few writers of this age. To whet the taste of niv leaders I
transcribe here a few couplets from that jioein, which recall
tliennselve.s spontaneou.sly to my memorv.

■‘A pious calf, untimely born, hailing from Barbarv.

Whom I have sometimes called a cat, .sometimes the mouse
of the saints,

A Brahman without caste-mark or thi-ead. that is to .-ay an
Indian Shaikh.

* means "sword nf kincs.' Sn'i't-! H"k<i'hrb -word of

physicians.'

^ Khabu^ati is near Mashhad. * ' Sou nf the ma-tei

giving the date A.e. 197U (a.I'. 1562 — 63).

& The Urdu pcK^t Saadn has some verses much renemblincr the-e ii: d snfiiv
'1 a physician named Ghau-^

228

I should be no MHsalman were 1 to call such a one a
Mnsalman.

Hold, Shafi‘u-’d-dm Muhammad, cease your eternal mum-
bling of words,

That mumbling which 1 have likened to the chewing of a
cud by a man.

Faridun,* in my anger against you, your shameless face
164 Have I likened to an anvil, not for its smoothness, but for

its hardneas.”

Mir Faridun replied with the following couplet : —

“ Philosopher’s tears are the boast of the ass of the angel of
Death,

Of him whom I have called the doorkeeper of the house of
misfortune.”

When Mir Mn‘izza-1-Mulk * left the anny and entered
upon a life of religious retirement at Dihli Saifu-1-Mnliik
wrote of him ;

“ The king of the ascetics, Mn‘izzn-1-Mulk, is displeased with
me.

Why, when have I, his slave, ever said that he repented of
his ascetic life ? ”

III. Hakim Zanbil.*

He was distinguished for his learning, and had a place among
those who were admitted to the emperor’s company.

1 Possibly Mirza Faridun, son of Mnhsmmad Qnli Khan Barlss. Sep
Aln-i-Akbari, i, 478. The text and both MSS. have, however, ‘ Mir.’

2 For an account of Mn'izzu-l-Mnlk, a MQsawI Sayyid of Mashhad, and a
zealous Shi'ah, on which account Badioni hated him, see Ain-i-Aiiar?, i,
381. His • retirement ' probably took place in 1565, when he fell into dis-
grace and was debarred, for a time, from appearing at court owing to his
conduct in the expedition against the Khan-i-Zaman and Bahadur Kh an.
See Tol. ii. text, p. 83 Ma‘izza-1-Mnlk was ultimately drowned by Akfaar’s
>.rder, as a punishment for rebeliing. This happened in 1579. See vol. ii.
text, pp. 276, 277.

- See Ahi-i-Aihari. i. 442, 542. In the latter passage he is called ‘ Hakim

229

IV. Hakim ‘Aiini-L-MaLK op ^Ieaz.^

He bore the non-de-pl’j/me of Dava’i,* and held a very high
rank among the learned, besides being of a most noble disposi-
tion. He died in the city of Handiya, as has been related.®
The following verses were written by him when I was escorting
him to the gate of the garden of the late Kh’aja Nizamn-d-din
Ahmad in the snbnrbs of Labor. He wrote them and gave them
to me as a keepsake as he bade me farewell, jnst before he set
oat * from Labor for the Dakan, or. his mission to Eaja ‘Ali
San of Bnrhanpnr.® That w'as the last time I saw him.

Versef.

“ So full am I of love that the world will not contain me,

All places are full of my love, and no place will contain
me.

If I care for naught but love it is no wonder,

Regard it I'atber as an example of my chastity, for wine
does not content me.

Zanbil Bei / ' He tvas a commander of nine Imudred Zanbil laeans ‘ a
bsaket.’ Tn the text be is called ‘I.Iabim Zinal Shirizt.’ I have corrected
the meauingless name and have omitted ‘ Sbirazi ' which ccenrs in neither
MS., and is an error, for Zanbil was the orother of Mirza Mahammad Tabib,
of Sabzavar.

1 He was a learned man and a cievef writer. He traced his origin, on
his mother’s aide, to the renowned logicia i, Mnhaqqici-i.DaTTani, In 1564
he was sent as an envoy to Cingiz .Ehar. of GujarSr, In 1575 he was sent as
an ambassador to ‘AH ‘Adil Shah I of Bljaoilr and retnmed to coart in 1577.
when he was made faujdar of Sambbai. In lo&l he defeated ‘Arab
Bahidnr and other rebels of Bengal and wr.s ti.oa oi.'.de Sadr of Bengal. In
iSSo U 0 was made divan of Agra. He was then tv.c tu ti.t Dakan and
rseeived Handiya in "ipir. 'Aziz Kika caucellad kls jiyi?- ind he returned
to coait witiiont leave. He waa at first refuse'! an rtadience but was subse-
jaencly reinstated and returned to the H.akan. 3-e A/n-i-Aio'<ri, i, 4S0, find
Sadaoni, ol, ii, text, passim.

2 J ide infra, Ch. IV, efo. XLIS.

1* On Sep 'd, 1595. See vol. ii, text, 403, * In 1593 or 1S94.

0 Eleventh king of Khandesh. of the Firuqiplynascy, reigned 157C— 1596,
5Se Historic Landmarks of the Deccan, by Major T. ’.V. Haig, p 235 ec passim.

DO

230

165

Why do you ask me of that which I myself do not know.

Verily I am the mystery of unity, though even that
mvstery cannot contain me.”

Other verges hy 'Ainu-l-Mulk.

"Xo desert place has been seen without a .sign of some
habitation.

Jlut again.st tlie incurable pain of love no plans avail.

i became the prev of one fair as a gazelle, but when I
looked intently

1 saw; that there wa.s nothing in the game-straps but a
pure soul.”

V. HakT.u iMA.siHC-r.-i\rrLK, OP ShTraz.i

He had been brought up by the physician Xajrau-d-din ‘Abdu-
'llah, the sor. of Sharafn-d-din Hasan. He had the disposition
of a religious and also sound faith. He was e.vceedingly well
.skilled in medicine. He came to Hindustat) from the Dakan
and was .sent with .Sultan Murad* to Gujarat and the Dakan.
In Malwa deatli cut sho; r tlie ■' silver; cord of his liope.

VT. H.tKi.M-i-ili.sRi.s

He was well skilled lioth in the theory and the practice of
medicine and learned in all traditional learning. He liad some
acfjuaintance with the profane sciences, such as e.xorcism, etymo-
lo<ry, and the formation of broken plurals. He is a cheerful soul
and a good companion, wliose very approach is a blessing. He
pur forth his bcs,; etforrs in treating .Shaikh Faizi in his last
illiie.s.s. but all to no iivail. What indeed could he do in the face
of tlie irresistible decree of fate, before which all are helpless and
dumb. If meditdne could prolontr the life physicians should
never die.

^ See j, 543.

Tlie second of Akbur's sons who pnrvived childhood. He was appointed
governor of Gnjarat in 1593.

8 He was a ro-minander nf four hundred. See A/n-i-Akbarl, i, 491.

231

The hakim sometitnes wrote droll vei'ses iu Persian, aa example
of which is the following couplet which tie wrote ou 166

Shamsu-d-din of Khawaf.'- the DivUn.

Couplet.

'• What overbearing conduct is this of I&'aja rjhamsii-d-
din's ?

He intrudes, God forbid it,'^ upon the domain of medicine ! ”

One day, ou seeing an oleamder. which in Ait, lie is culled
.Cjiq, in bloom, he uttered the following hemistich —

The locks leap up like flame from the head the dijhi."

When the emperor built a dais in the courtyai'l the rao^jid
at Lahor and issued an order to the eflect that anybody wLu
vislied to do so might recite their prayers there in his presence,
Hakim-i-Mi?ri wrote the ftillowiug verses;—

Our king has founded a masjid
0 ye faithful, good fortune may it brin;' '

It is good policy also in this masjid
To recite and reckon up our prayers."

He was very simple-minded and uuselfi.sh, and for this rea.'-on
acquired but little wealth. He produced, liowc'.er. 'ome [U'acti-
cal treatises on medicine. He died in Burhaupur in Khandesli
and was buried in the neighbourhood of that city.s

1 See Aiti-i-Akiar^, i, 445.

2 I follow here the readinsj oi the USS vi-; ^Le, wh.c" I take to lie

coutraction of iPt t-le (‘God forbid’; The text li;'' of \vh;c!, I

cannot make sense in this connection. T.he ti.ie re,,.;.* c inay be

his foot’), iu which case the tianslacion of the hemistic!, would be. ' Hi-
intruding foot encroaches upon the domain of medicine.'

■j This history wns coinpieled in .v H. 1004 (\ d. 159b; se ti.at accurdnie t,.
Badaoni Hakim Misri died before that date, but Abii-l-iad in the .-lv‘ e-
numa mentions his death in A. it. 1009 (a.d. 160<J-01) and s.ivs tiiat Ic .s.iw
liis friend on bis death-bed. There is no means of recinciio.tt tins dis-
crepancy or of deciding the question. The Tabu’ia; pr.'.is. s iiim f..i ms
practical knowledge of medicine and his good dispodition, ie.t his death is
not mentioned there.

232

VII. HakIm ‘Alt.’

lie is sister’s son to Hakimn-l-Mnlk and was the pupil of his
uncle and of Shah Fathu-’llah of Shiraz, in medicine, and studied
traditional learning under Shaikh ‘Abdu-n-Nabi. Notwith-
standing his great learning in the holy law and in Sunni theo-
iogy, his malis’nanoy in adhering to tiie Zaidi^ sect and his
obstinacy in the Shi‘ah heresy, in which matters he resembles the
other physicians of the age, are as great as ever they were.® His
excellence in acquired knowledge, and especially in the science of
medicine, is extreme, and he is passionately devoted to the
practice of the healing art, but as he is bnt a youth, self-opinioa-
167 ated and of lunited experience, it sometimes happens that a
patient, after taking one of Ins draughts speedily has a taste of
the draught of extinction, and notwithstanding the fact that he
was the pupil of Shah Fathu-’llah of Shiraz, he ordered him,
when he was in an ardent fever, a diet of thick pottage,* thereby
handing him (.ver to death, the executioner.

To drink with him is death to the senses.”

1 He came pcm and destitute iroin Gilan to lodia, but b''catne in course
o[ rime a persrrn .! .iti-endar.r. un Akbar In A a. 988 (a d 1o80j be was sent
.'.s atnbaasadoi o ‘All ‘Adi! Shah I of Bijapur and was we!' received, but
be'ore tie coua! !>“ sent back with presents for his master ‘AH ’Adil Shah wa.s
-lain by a eiinr.c - In 1593 Hnkini ‘Ali constructed a wonderful reservoir
• ha’, ;: I at Asia a id in the f'dlowinz ye-ir was a commander of TOO and had
c. e title of JiiHi.i- u-z-Zami'n , e Galen of the A^e He treated Akbar
jutmediiitel-- 'fe his dfca.h, Acbar had dysentery, or .acute diarrhcea,
V.ndcli ‘Aii ci’e v’Ot r,y r powerfa! astringent Costive fever and strangury
tued, and A!' riien ad-.-inistered an aperient, which brought back the
1 ' ' r r n oca, o i , . . ‘ i . n .A kba, died ■ *i 1 609 J aha 'igir visited ‘A! i s reservoir and
'i.iide him a ci'TU 'lunder of twr, tnousand. 'Am uied on April 10 of that year
^ The fpnr.'v u's of Zaid bi.i A'l, who cansed a disseiisiou among tlie
jjiT'uhty by r.n a,-:Qg to curse tne nrst two AAalh'.its

Jahang.r ‘ b'.’iA. p. 74! says of Hakim ‘All that he was without equal as
r-livsician. was ..n excellent Aiabic scholar, and had written a commeatarv
■!i die Qheo!. I.’.t that he l"id more application than brains, that his looks
rt Tr. betrcf iiig morals, and his behaviour better than his heart, for

-nnt ho w:is. o: :‘’,o whole, a bad and unprincipled 'nan.

i Badaonl rr ■ pei naps, let his prejudice against the Sk-'ah hahhn run

233

VIII. Hakisi Abu-l-Fath of Gilan.’

He obtained favour in the emperor’s service to such a degre«'
that he was admitted to his intimate companion.sh.ip and acquired
such influence over him as to render himself an object of envj
to all who concerned themselves in the affairs of state. He was
highly distinguished for his acumen and quickness of apprehen-
sion, and for his proficiency in all worldly accomplishments,
prose and poetry. He was no less a byword for his infidelity
and ail other reprehensible qualities.- I heard, when the hakim
first arrived at Court, that he used to say, “■ The only- things
worth considering" are l^usrat: and these twelve couplets. ’ He
always spoke of Anwari as Anwariak the flatterer,” and likened
him to Mir Badanjan, who was the bufioon of his time Of

away with him here According to another account Tatbu-'llali, who
thought tliat he understood medlcin" better than Hakim ‘All did. ate the
pottage against his doctor’s adrice and presently died.

t Masihu-d-din Abu-l-Fath, son of Maulana 'Abdn-r- Ruzzaq. Sadr of Gilan,
and brother of Hakim Humam and Hakim Nuru-d-din. He and his brothers
arrived in India in 1576 (vol. ii. text, 211) and were well received. Four
years later Abu-l-Fath was made Sadr and Amhi of Bengaf He was
captured by the rebels, but escaped and returned to court. In 1586 Abu-l-
Fath was sent to help Raja Bir Bar against the Tusalziis in Sawad and
Eajant, bat was reprimanded on his letnm. as the disastrous resnit of the
campaign was rivhtly attributed to his and the Saja’s insubordination
against Zain Khin Kuka, In 1588-39 he went with Akbar to Kashmir
and thence to Zabulistan, but on the march he fell sick and died, and was
buried at Hasan Abdai.

Sea vol. ii, text, p. 211. Badaoni says, ‘ The eldest brother (Hahhn
Abu’l-Fath) by means of h's winning address soon obtained great influence
with the emperor and flattered him openlv, complyin'-r with him nil
questions of reliirion nnd the faith, and even goir.v in advance of him, so
that he was soon admitted as an intimate c.mipriiCnr of h’s majesty. Soon
after there came to court from Persia Mulla iluhrmmad-i- 'lazdi, who was
nicknamed Ynzidi. and joined them, and poured rn'iuiited abuse on the
companions of the prophet relating strange stories of them, and cried h-ard
to n.ake the emperor a Sjv^ah. He was soon left behind by the bastard Bir
Bar, Shai^ Abu-1-Fazl, and Kakim Aba-l-lfath who turned the emperor
entirely aside from the faith, and led him to reject inspiration, prophecy,
t! e miracles of the prophet.s and the saints, and the whole law,”

Khaqiiui i'e used to say, “If he were uow liviug lie uould be
much imprnved, for whenever he came to my house I would box
his ears for him. to arouse him from his sleepiue.ss, and when he
weiir lienee to Jdiaikh Abu-l-Fazl's house he also would bo.x his
ears, and eetweeu us ue should improve his poetry.

IX. HakIii H.vsan of GIlan' '

He wa.> noted for his natural quickness of wit. but he had trit
leainin,' in proportion, though he po.s.se.ssed e.vcellent aLUilitie-
aiid piaiseworthy attributes.

X Haki.m Hi.'.mam ®

He was the younger brother of Hakim Abu-l-Faih- and his dis-
jiositioti was better than hi.s brother’s Althouo-h it imis not
naturally good, yet it cannot be said to have been naturally esil.
Hakim Hasan, ^laikh Faizi, Kamala the $adr. and Hakim
-Humam ^ all died one after the other within the space of a
month, and all the wealth which they had amassed disappeared
in a moment, vanishing a.s completely as though it had been sunk
in the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea, and to them nothing
remained but the wind of vain legrets. But this indeed i.s and
has been the common fate of all courtiers, both dead and living,
namely, that, in spite of the treasures of Qariiii* and Shaddad ’’

I In tl\e Lakhnnu I'dition of the Tnba-^dr be is wrongly called ' Hakim
of Gilan,’ and is described as a man of praisewort’ny morals.

- He was the younger brother of Hakim AbO-l-Fath .and came to India with
jiini. Ilis real name was Hum.iyun, but when ho came to court he discreetly
cahcil himself Humayun Quii (‘slave of Hnmayun ’). Akhai gave him the
name of Humfun, which me.ins ‘hero’ or ‘ magnauiiuous prince.’ (ilr.
Blociiniann in the .liti-i-Akbitrf, i, -174, note 2, has appareuclv mistaken it for
Haiixvidiii "a hath' or Xauimdm ‘a tlandeiei ’). He held the otHce of
Rakiiwal Beg and though only' a commander of 600, was a personal friend
of Akbai and had great irfluence at conn. In the Slst year he was sent
with Sadi-i-Jakati {q v ) as an envoy to Turau. and returned to India about
a niontii after lii.s brother’s death. He died November 9, 1595.

= riee Tol. it, text, pp. 205, 206. ♦ The Korah of the Scriptures.

& Shaotraa the soil of ‘Ad, King of 'Yamaii. See Q'li’d,. Ixxxix. 5, and
vol. i, tr.ans. Hanking, p. 261 and note 6.

235

which they are enabled to amass, they depart hence often withoat
so much as a shroud, and bearing- oa their broken necks tlie
affliction of theii’ malignity, the load of eternal di.sappointment
and everlasting ignominv — And this, too, is the saving of 'l.sa
(on whom he peace ! I. whicli he .spoke to the W'oi-Ui, likening it in
parable to an old woman, '• Wot- ;o tby living husbands, thev
believe not on the fate of tby !iu--b,and-S t\ho are no more I ”

*■ Sui'i'frndei thy scul T>. the Beloved, el.se shall death
snatch it from thee !"

■■ .Tiidge t'hou for rhyseif. rev ioul. which of the two is
the better.”

The ka^tra died in Lahor. -mti in' i-O'ly was carried thence to
tile camping ground of Hasan Abdal and interred be.side that of
his brother.

XI. Ahm.'.", of ‘

He wa.s a good theologian -.■.’no wus impeile'l by liis own shame-
less assurance to po-se as a jdnysician. His learning was exten-
sive. and he had travelled throaghoiit Arabi.-i and Persia. He
was a cheerful soul, but somewhat di-^ordered in mind, a prey to
vain desires, and a preten-ier to honoms to which he had no
claim, I constantlv admoaislied him. reminding him that be lind
no right to the r.uik ol .i 'y nji/iiL aitd that groundless I'laims of
this sort met with scant consideration in India. 1 Told him if he
had any regard * for tlie faith, to profess himself a true IMnsal- 169
man, for that in the.se latter davs notliing lemained of the true
faith but its name. Bat my admonitioiis availeil nothing, ami he
met with the just reward of Ids deeds, I saw him after he
had received Ids death- woniul from Mir/.a Fill ad, ^ and 1 swear

1 Hak jm Ahmad ■>vas a bigoted ^i''ah who used to curse and revile the
companions of Muhammad ami all iiicladliig his t.*vvn ai.costois, who

had been Sunntii. See vol. ii, text, 317.

^ word IS carelessly imiitted from the text, thoiiirh

both manscriptg have it.

See vul. ii, text, 319, 3fi4. Mirzfi Fiilad Beg Baihi« ontierd Ahmad from
his house at midnip:ht on the pretext that the emperor h.ad sent for him and
murdered him in the «itreef, if. Lnhor, ‘on nfconnr of his bi^otrv in tlio

236

by God, the God of whose Godhead there is uo doabt, that
the kalclm’s face appeared to others, as rvell as to me, esactiy like
the head of a hog, and the words “ the hellish hog ” ' were found
to give the date of his death. Shai^ Faizl found another chrono-
srram in'the words, “ on the twenty-fifth of the month of ^afar.” ^
1 found two chronograms for the event in the following couplet
slightly alteied from tlie H.adiqah,^ which is applicable equally to
the slayer and the slain.

And we adhered to the certain presumptions.”

Another person found a chronogram in the words, “ Hail,
dagger of Fhlad I ” *

,'^J '-.* 1,1 faith, and other auaovancts v»hic!i Fulid had experienced at his
band.= ’ This oocarred in January, l.nSS Ahmad’s abuse of the orthodox
Ufahs is gireu as the cause of Fulad’s act, bat from tbs earlier passage it
is clear that the murderer had some ocher motire Moreover, when Fulad
was assed by Hakim Abu-.-Fnth, at the in.stanco of Akbcr, wliecher it was
religious zeal which had piompced the deed he ieplied. ‘Had it been onlv
religions zeal I should have attacked a greater than Alimad.’" Although the
ladies •/ the 'h.aram, who adiuired Fuliid's courage, interceded for him, he
was executed by being bound to the fiwc of uu elephant. Ahmad lingered
for three Oi four days and then ‘ went to ids own place.’ Badaom says tiiat
he saw 'the d.og ’ in i'.is death agony, and noticed the change in his face.
This, which IS called 'nos^, is said by Sunuii to happen freiiuently to
bectuse they i-evlie the companions of the prophet. Compare tiie
acci.anr, of Faizi'n death-bed, infra, Ch. IV No. CVil, .After Ahmad's burial
Fairi and Abii-l-Fazl had a guard set oves his tomb, but when toe coait left
hahc" for Kashmir ' the people of Labor one night exhumed bis impure
corDse and burnt it.’

i giving the date 996 (a c. 158s).

•i I « — “j' ■ is something wrong with this ciirouo-

srrin. It gives t'ue date 1153.

’ P'T.bablv the Htidij2tii-l-Haqiqat ...i; Shirr a:iL-t-Tariqrih, otherwise
known as the Fa't^rirMma by San. Pi. See vul. i. trans Raukiiig, 35 note 1,
57 n-’te 1 I cannot, .nowever, find a chronograu’. in the couplet. One
l.eaiistic'i elves 1049, a. id the other 1132.

t Or ’ Hail, dagger of .nee! ! ’ ( ) Fiildd means steel.’

The chrDnoffram gives t-iie correct date, 9y6 *^4.0.

237

Xn. Hak'm Lctfc-’llah, w GIlIx.'

He was well kuotm as a clever practitioner, and his learning
was very great.

Xni. Hakim Muzappab, op ARDAsriN.^

When a young man he was physician to Shah Tahmash.' He
came to India and was here highly regarded. He is a young man
of great piety, and lives cleanly. When lie attends the sick his
very footstep seems to bring them good luck. Although he has
not much learning, his practical experience is very great.

XIV. HakIm Fathb-’llah, op GIlas.*

He has read very many works on medicine, and his knowledge
of astronomy also is great. He has written a Persian commen-
tary on the Qdnun. He has now gone to Kabul to treat Qilij
Elan.

XV. Shaikh

He is the son of Shaikh Hasan, the quack doctor of Sirhind.

His skill in .surgery i.s great, and in the treatment of elephants he 170

1 Brother of Hakim Abu-l-Fath and Hakim Hnmam. He was a commander-
of two hundred. See .lin-i.AJifiaii, i, 518.

* Ardastan is a town lying between Kashan and Yazd. In the Taiaqat
this physician is called Hakim Jalslu-d-dm Muzaffar. 'Jnder Akbar ho
was a commander of two hundred, bnt Jahangir in 1606 gave him the rank
of a commander of 3,000, with 1,000 horse ,Ta;ui.37i .Jahangir beard of
his death on Sep. 14, 1607- In the Tnzuk (p .59), where he calls him .lalaln-
d-din MuzafEar Ardastani, he says th.it liis practice was greater than bis
learning. He praises him very highly.

3 Who, according to Jaliiingir, wrote a verse on MnzaffRr- ’ He is a
pleasi.ag physician, come, let us all fall sick ’

* In the first year of Jahangir’s reign Fathii-'llali had the rank of
commander of l.lXiO, with 3LK) horse (Tizuk. p. 34) .\ccording to the
Pddshiihnamii, i,b, 350, lie retnrned to his native coniitrv. where he died.
There is no authority for Blochmann’s statement (.Iia. i, 542) tliat h.e
committed suicide. His grandson, of the s.ai.ie name, was a physician at the
court of Shdhjahdn.

‘‘ See Ain-i-Akbari. i. 543. ^aikh B ina had a son , Sh ai kh H.isan or Hassu,
who. under Jahangir, attained great honours. Hasan ajjp.arently received

31

238

is one of the tvonilers of tlje acre. Laffeily, he has hecome the
pi’oy of i\iischievoiis hallucination.^

There are also among tiie plivsicians others, obscure Musal-
man.s 1 ami accarsed Hinilhsy from writincr of whom my heart
revolts,

the title of .Maqarr.'ib from Akbar, oi from Jahangir in Akbar’s reign

{Tf'zuk, p. 12). He rose to be a commander of 5, (XX), and was sneeeasivelv
governor of Onjavat, Bibar, and .Agra. He was pensioned off at the
beginning of 5ii^his)han's reign, and died at the age of ninety. In the 41fti
year of Akbar’s reign Shaikh Bini and bis =on succeeded in curing a bad
wound which Akbar had received from a buck at a deer-rtgiic.

) In the .l/i'-i-Alhiiri. i. 542 — 544. eleven Hnharamadau physicians be-
sides those mentioned by Batiiioni are ntentioned. ^ai^ .Ahmad, of Thatlia
is not there mcctiound. The Tnhn-id! mentions all those described here and
live others.

2 In the Aiii-t-.-ikh'in (i, 544) four Hindu physicians are mentioned, and
in the Tiihrujur sii

CHAPTER IV.

An Account of the Poett< of the Rei'jii uf the Pmperor Akhar.

A. full aeuouut of the poets of the reign of the Empei-ur Akhar
is givesL in the Nal'a,'istt-l-Mj,'ijfii\ well known as ihe Tuikirah of
Mir ‘Alau-cl-daulah.' which is the source from wliich the mate-
rials for this brief account are extracted. Some of these poets
have coiupo.sed divans. 1 have woitteu of those with whom 1 was
acquainted, whom I have e\en seen, whether near or from afar, or
who have acijuired fame.

1. (iHA/.if.t OK

Wlieu his life was attempted in ’Iraci on account of Iii.s infidelity
and intemperance, he tied theuce to tlie Dakau. and afterwards
came to Hiudhstan. The Khan-i-Zamuu sent him one thousand
rupees for hi.s expenses, and wrote from Jauiipur a witty epigram!
wliich contained an enigma in the poet’s name.

•'() (dhazali, I adjure thee by the claims of the lord of Najaf ^
That thou come to the slaves of the peerless one!'*

Since thou art without honour in that country *

Take thy head,* and come out of it,’’

t ilii- '.Ali'u-d-daulali was tlie brotlior of Mu- 'Abdu-l-hatif of yazvin, ses
above, <■ II, No. NX His fu-fco u/i, here rcterred to. I have never seen, and do
not know where a copy of il is to be found. Mir Ala u-d-daulah wrote under
cue poetical name ot Kami, see So. ilXlV.

- The Atashkailii-yi-Agar/ says that he wrote sixteen books, and that he
lied from Persia during the reign of Khah Taliinasp The Afir’atii-'.’Jiam
mentions two books written by him. the and the u-l .

H'l'j'O, to wliich the Haft I'pim adds a third, the Mir'iite-l.Kd'imrt.

■' ‘.Ah Muhaniiiiad's coasin and son-in-law, the funrlh Khaiifah . Qha.aii
was a ^‘oii hence the force of the .ippeai.

* 1 believe that this refer.- to Akhar. but il may letei i i (!od. It is not
unlikely ihai ine .iiiihiguily i? iiitciilional.

'! The Uak.ci

* i have iraUolalLd ltd: )>l!r.u,c liuially a. o. Loutaiuu tie. •. nijiiua. It

240

He wah for some time with the K]han-i-Zaman and aiteiTvards ^
entered the emperor's service and received the title of Maliku-sh-
Shn'ard.^ He compiled several divans and a book of masnavis.
It is said rhat he has written no fewer than forty or fifty thousand
couplets.® Although his compositions do not rank very high, yet
his poems, as regards both quality and quantity, are superior to
those of any of his contemporaries. He had gieat facility of ex-
pression, in the language of the mystics. He died veiy suddenly
in .\hmadabad on Friday, Rajah 27, a.h. 980 (Dec. 3, a.o. 1572),^
171 and his maje.sty ordered that he sliould be buried in Sarkhej,®
the resting-place of many of the great saints and famous kings of
old. Qasim Arsalau ^ wrote this chronogram for the date, of his
death, taking it down from the dictation of Qasim Kdhi^.

Last night Qhazdii, that accursed dog.

Went drunk and defiled to hell.

Kahi wrote the date of his death
■ A base infidel departed from this world.’ ” *

means ‘ take your own way,’ just as we say, of a horse, ‘ give him his head
The • head ’ or first letter of Ghazali is ^ , which stands for 1000. Thus the
expression also means here, ‘ Take a tbonsand (rupees) ’

* According to the Tabaqat Ghazali remained in the service of the Khan-i-
Zaman until the latter was killed (June, 1567), and then entered the
emperor’s service.

■2 ‘ King of poets,’ or, as we say, ‘ poet laureate.’ Fai/i was his successor
in the title.

^ According to the Tabuqdt nearly lOi>,00O. The Mir'utu-l~^Alam agrees
with Badosni. Tlie Atajhkadu-yi‘A:ar estimates his couplets at 40,000, and
the Haft Iqlim estimates them at 70,000

4 Faizi has a very neat chronogram, (‘ the year 9S0 ’),

the numerical values of the letters of which give the sum 980.

6 See Ain-i-Akia>). li. 2'11. Sultan Ahmad (1411 — 1442), alter whom
Ahmadabad is named, and many other princes are buried here. A variant is
■ Sarkhec.’

4 Vide infra, No IV,

1 See the next note e.

t jJ'‘^ y , si-, inn- th.-- date 980,

241

Another eliiouogi'am —

•• Gh'izfi^! was a treasure-house of hidden meaning.

His 1 estiiig-place is the pure earth of Sarkhej.

The date of his death, witli the difference of one year only,

Is given by the uoiJs, ‘Ahmadabad and the dust of
Sarkhej.’ ‘

The following i.s the openitur couplet of an ode which I have
uot beeu able to discover in any dndii written by him: —

“ We heard a noise and opened our eye.s from the sleep of
nothingness

We saw that the night of str ife had uot pa.ssed away, and fell
asleep again.” ^

Ctiupletn bi/ Ohazdlj.

“ If in the Ka'hah thy heart wanders towards any, besides
(the Lord of the Kabbah).

The worship is all wickedness, and the Ka'hnk is to thee no
more than an idol-temple.

But if thy heart is fixed on God. even though thou dwell in
the wineshop.

Drink wine fearlessly, thine end can be nought but good.”

*■ We fear not death, but this is our misfortune
That we must remain disappointed of regarding the lovely
ones of this world.”

“Those who are at rest in the dust were all slain by thy
sword.

The sword of Death has had no opportunity here.”

1 This chronogram is entirely wrong Both the text and the MSS. have
‘ Sarganj ’ for ‘ Sarkhej,’ and the rhyme necessitates this reading, which, jf
adopted, gives the date 1021. If the correct name of the place, Sarkhej, b*
substituted we get the date 980 — still six years wrong.

* A description of life.

172

242

■■ We are within the eompass of a revol\'ing lantern * ; a whole
world remains in astonishment therein,

Man whirls madly therein like the figures on the lantern.”

The zealot’s cloak is stretched over his bent form like the
string on a bow.

But the debatichees fear not the arrows of his prayers.”

A Quatrain.

“ Mj' mind is an ocean which contains a gem,

My tongue is a sword which has an edge.

The clarion of my pen has the sound of the last trump,

I am the bird of the angels, my words are winged.”

He has introduced into one qasUlah all the numerals from one
to a hundred. This is its opening couplet —

■‘By one word from thy two ruby lips Mas'h 2 obtained three
favours ;

Eternal life, and graceful speech, and power to give life.”

‘‘ We are wine, and round our necks is the collar of the wine-
jar,

We have a power of iuto.xication in which the whole world
is lost.”

H. QIsim-i-KahI.^

He was Miyau Kahi of Kabul. Although his verses are crude
178 and his ideas all stolen from others, yet they are written in a con-

i A lantern which revolves by the anioke of the candle within, and has on
the sides of it of men and animals.

* The Messia’n.

^ Kahi (‘ atraw-like *) is thus described in the .hVt (i, 566). * He is known as

Mi>3n Kahi He knew aouietliing of the ordinary sciences, and lived quiet
Hod content. He i-arely mixed with people in high position. On account of
his generous disposition a few low men gathered around him, for which
reason well-meaning people wim did not knoii' his circumstances often up-
braided him. PartK from his own love of independence, partly from the
indulgence of his majesty, he counted hinicieif among the disciples, and often
foretold future events.* lu the Tab-j'idf it is said that he had many ac-

243

Tiected style, and in this respect KnM had no equal. He wa.s ^vell
versed in astronomy, rhetoric, and the mysticism of the and

wrote a treatise on music. Tn short, he had no equal ’.n his tiTne
in knowledg'e of the mysticism of the Suft/>. the art of composing
enie-mas, history, elocution, and vsHone other arts Although he
.Oad had the advantages of associating with the sra/M* of former
days, among them that lord of his age ilaulavi Jami. (may his
tomb be hallowed !1 and others, yet all Ins life wa.s spent in heresy
and intideiity. But notwithstanding these ill .nialities his liber-
ality, generosity, open-handedness and houiity weie e.vtrenie. and
he was always surrounded by a crowd of ijitlumlai lewd fellows,
and courtezans, and associated iiii; estrainedly w.'h dogs. It
would seem that such conduct is the iniaviabie .it tribute of one
bearing the title of Maliku-sh-Sku‘ai fi^ as ha-- beet; .said in the
verses —

•• Hearken to this advice from Satf/,

That it may suffice thee all thy life.

On good poetry and a handsome hoy
Pin thy faith, no matter whose they be.’

I have no concern with his religion, but 1 reproilnre the follow-
ing selections from his verses: —

complishments and vras specially distinguished in rHp art oT ninsic, that he
lived a free and nnconventional life, and attainoji the of Miyan

Kalis the name of the hills between Sainar.iancl an<i Accordiug

to the Atashkada-yi’Acari he was bom in Tiirkist-tn md hr* up in Kabul.
One of his ancestors paid his respects to Tirnur, accomi-nrH'd the army of
that conqueror, and settled at last in Turki'-Jtan. Kah: 'v t*' \vt>ll received h>
Kumiyun. According to the Ho/f Iqlhn K5hi's|iiatiie .'^ayyid yajnin-tJ-
din Muhammad, his knnynh being Abu-l-Q.issim. When dfreer* years old he
tisited Jami (died 1493-04) and after«>ard? Ha'diimi nf K i iruin Ko was a
pngilist and a runner, and lived a free li^e, following *■ • od ri doctrine
He lived long at Baolras. and afterwards at .Agra, wt.ei *- r- died May 17.
1580. See also vol. i. trans. Rj-’iking. p. 584. note^ 1 ,i7id A, -uid p. 601.

i T have Translated literallv, although the passage appear rhat

Kahi held tfie title of which ht* never bu-e Bad.M.i.

running atilt ar. Fair!, who was very fcml of dogs, and mejtns to say li.o
Kahi was a resnlar Mni in bii r.indner

244

Couplets.

“ Like iiij siiado-w we are with thee, whithersoever thou
goesi

It may be that m time thou wilt suew as some kindness.

0 ancient of love, seek the company of one with Yusuf’s
cheeks.

Small wonder were it if so thou becamest young 'ike
Zulaikiia.

Kahi, thou art the nightingale which adorns the pleasauuce
of Kabul,

Ko crow or kite art thou that thou shouldst come to Hindu-
stan.”

174 “ Grief for thine absence has reduced my body to the Ukeness

of a .spider’s web.

It is for this reason that the comer of a ruin is my dwell-
ing.”

He set the two odes of which the opening couplets are given
below to sweet music, .so that they liave become known through-
out the world and are sung in all assemblies, enlivening alike the
banquets of kings and the gatherings of mystics

Opening Oouplet of the First Ode.

The bird which began to flap his wings on the forehead of
Majnun

Inflamed in his brain the tire of his grief for Laila.”

ripening Couplet of the Second Ode,

“ When the mirror is tilled with roses, the reflection of the
loved one’s face.

The parrot who looks therein become.s a nightingale. '

The followimr ■ .m enigma ' on the name .f God: —

■ I has! ■ ' r uf.lT'r this emigma or the nett. Tiie

verses rau i...- '.-i;, .i —

a’ i — p ^ t'tf

245

Jfobody has full knowledge of His essence.

From eternity without beginning has He been. He is limit-
less.”

And the following is another enigma on the name of the
prophet

“ Since I journeyed aloisg me road of the holy la^<^

My path has been divided from that of Muhammad the pro-
phet.”

He was the author of a well-known divan and has also written
a ■masnavl which he has entitled <Jui Af^nn, a reply ’ to tlm
Buntan of Sa'di, corresnonding with it rh\'me for rhvme. Its
opening couplet is —

‘‘ To tile world’s Creator be praises from the soul,

To the soul’s Creator a hundred worlds of praise.” ^

The following is anotner couplet by him —

“ My cruel darling has killed thoa.sand.s with hei‘ coquetries,
My spoilt darling still continues her coquetries.”

“ The rain of misfortune has broken on my grief-stricken body,
What misfortune is there that the heavens have not rained
on my head ?”

‘1^0 nareissu.s bloom.s in the place of niy pilgrimage.

My ej'es are whitened with watching for thee ”

The followiiisr couplet w.a.s written by Idm on a Hindu youth, a
Joffi

i A poem written in imitation of anorher, and to conipete

with tile r.riginal.

* This c mplet runs as follows : —

Sa‘di*s Bustau begins—

jjiy'f cj'-’j y * lyyf yUj

32

246

■■ Til V HajTie-r-olaured face shines aho/e the ashes on thy body
like the lotus.

Or it may be that thy head-cloth ha.-' been reduced to ashes
by thy lesplendent fac'- “

175 Bat the idee, developed in this couplet very much resembles
that Tv’hic’n is the motive of the following couplet by -vlulla Var-f'i^
of Kabul : —

■‘It is not riie burning fever of separation from thee whicl
lia.s inuc.eed me to choose the dust for a bed.

Rather i-- it that my' bed has been burnt to ashes by the
ai JfHT icver which posscsse.s me, sick with my longing for'
thee, "

When hi j 11.1 was told that most of his poetical idea*

were stolen fn-Mi other.*, he used to reply, ■' I have never asked y'c.u
to believe tlrtt u.v poems were wholly my own. If they plea.se you
not , take a pen-rti.ife, and era.se them from the copies of my divan.’’
He has an ex-r-tdent qa^idah om the astrolabe, which runs on into
an encomiutu Mie late enqieior, Humayan. His copiousness of
diction is .v.-!'. -.vemplified tiierein. When I^'aja Mu'azzain
'Oan,® notwir' - ending hi.s lameness, came to visit Mulla Qasim-
\-Knhi in hi* -ii-kness, tin- Mulla composed the following extem-
pore ode on me event, setting it tir music at the same time ■ ~

■'Thou aid it halt in attected disdain one pace from the fate
.if my '.ci’ging.

May thy : -.r never jiabi thee more, my graceful cypress!

Howm, .■! "idver f rdcoiuited. in the night of sepaiation, tlu-
ioy= cl ti.y jrresenco.

'I’lie ta'.- my long-dr, iwn-out grief was not le.-.sened."

One (lay rin '>Ie//<7 wii* w.tikiiig in the emperoi-’s garden, on the
iar .side n! i hi, ! imiia. wh.-u the poet Snbuhi'^ met him, and a*

I ii-J, tl e . 1' .-nw-diin^, fil.afc/aif) witli winrii Hindu ascetics

i esiiiear theinoe'.i c- ,

^ See b-^iow, . CLXII.

’ The •( a kbar’a mother.

^ Vide 'S’}. XXXJ

247

goon as he saw him said, ‘"Sii', have yon heard that a man who
accepted Islam late in life' ha.s died in Iiaii'r'” The MuLln
replied, ” May you be spared!” ‘

When the imperial army marched to Gujarat !Mulla Ghasrlli
accompanied it in the early stages of tlie journey. It so hap-
pened that a false report of the death of ilulla Qasim-i-Z'n^f was
s;>read abroad, and when Ghuznli heard it. he composed the
following chronogram, which i.s. altliouirh tar-fetched, and based
on a false rumour, not without elenancc

■‘The wretched KCihi left the world.

Should you wish to know the date of id.-, death,.

Know that since he conhl md help hut go he was constrained. 176
And ‘ Qasim-i-ifd/ii went from tlie world.’ " '

But before this lying tale became a fact Mulla Qasiin-i-KdAf
was enabled to take his revenge by compo.sing a cinonogram on
the death of Ghazni i. and a second one also, as full retributioii,
Those have already been cited.* But.

'■ What can a liar tell, but a iiof "

Although the followiry couplet i.' true.

"I '-have seea poet.s. withiu my expeiieuee.

Without followers, without ott^piirig. .iml without any suc-
cessful kiue of their labours."

and all the poeis of the pre.senc age logethe',-. botn small an.i
are. with the exception of three or lour aged men, adiie-rents td
the /awrut; and tfaf(/a. If ' sects, yet these two wliom, ! iu^t

mentioned svere the guides and leaders ot al' ihe res., and left the
lieritage of their baseness to then folioweis and denenJants.
dividing it among them in due nroportinn to the natiirai titties.'

' ^ tliiiik this is the nieaniuv of tiio phr.ise, Inu c.im

b sure,

^ i e., * to accept Islam ‘

' Os»j y ijiviiis; the date 984 (a n. 1578-77).

* See »lx)ve, p. 240, note 8.

*’ The HaidiiV't. are tlie followers of Quthn-d-din ‘Ali, founder of a mystic
sect. I have no information regarding the Jaaratis.

248

aud ability of each one to avail himself of it. and with due regaiu
to the claims which each had acouiied bv' former companionship
with them.

When I regard tlii' vile gang I am oppressed bv the fear that
the poets of old • : may God protect ns from them 1) may perhaps
have resembled them. God forbid that it should have been so '
Yet the experience of ages tell.s us that worldly people in each
particular period follow closely in one another’s footsteps and
that there are no radical differences of disposition among them.

III. Ivh'a.ia Hi'sain' or Mary,*

He was one of the .sons of that saint of the Lord aud traveller
in the path of the Eternal God, .^^ajkh Rnkiiu-d-din ‘Ala’u-d-
danlah of Samatian (may God .sanctify Ids tomb!). In those
branches of knowledge whicli exercise the reasoning faculty', he
was the pnpil of Maulana ‘Isamn-d-din and ifnlla Hanafi, and
in the study of the holy law he was the disciple of the last and
best of the sages and traditionist.s Shai^u-bnn-Hajar-i-Sani

■ BadSoni ie possibly referring to those poets who wiote against Muham-
mad. See Qur’an, e. xxvi,

■2 Kh’ija Hasain is thus described ift the .lin (i, 574). • He possessed

many excellent qualities, and sold liis encotniums at a higli price. He lived
at the conrt of Hurnayun. and was also during^ this reij^n highiv favoured ’
In the Tabaqdt iie is thus described, ' He is by origin the son of a vazir.
He has acquired learning, and was distinguished above his fellows by ft
high degree of inteUigeiice and ti.e sharpness of his understanding. He
was for years in the service of the emperor Humayun and was one of
his intimates, and a member of hi') heawenlv assembly * See vol li. text, pp
120. 132. Kh’aja Husain composed a on the birth of Sultan Salim
(jHhangiri containing chronogram'': for the accession of Akbar and the
birth of Salim. Badaoni says that the first hemistich of each couplet is a
chronogram for the former event;, and the second hemistich of each couplet
a chronogram for the latter, but this i.s not so He also composed a qtfak
of seven couplets on the birth of Salim and Murad, the first heniistich of
each conplet of which purports to be achronogram fbr Salim's birth, and the
second hemiaticti of each conpiet a chronogram for Mured’g. There are,
however, some errors in the chronogiams. For the qandah he received two
lakhs of tnnkai and it was, perhaps, this reward to which Abu-i-Fa^l referied
when ha said that Hasain sold hia encoraiums at a high price.

249

(may God have merev oii iiim ' ) His fanilitj' in vei'se. his ele-
srance in literary style, liic. ihptorical flotiri.she.«, bis fine delivery, 177
his polish and copiousness of diction, and bis wit, were unrivalled.

He composed a dh-nn. and his poetry, though not in the first
rank, is of respectable .jnality. The following couplets are by
him : —

“ O, thou in whose ab.spnce the tears drop from my eye-
la.shes.

While tlip thonglil of .sleep ' is banished from mv eyes'.

Thou didst display tliv.'elf to me in sucb wise as thou wert
not.

Alas ' that tlinu wert not such a.s thou didst seem.”

It .seems likely that tins couplet is an imitation of the following
quatrain ■ —

‘‘ We say that maybe we are of the faithful, — but we ai'e
not.

And that we are of the truthful and sincere, — but we are
not,

We are adorned outwardly, but inwardly we are otheiwise,

Ala.s ! that we are not what we .seem to be ! ’’

The following couplets are also by Marvi : —

‘‘ V/ith me thy brow is wrinkled like the rosebud,

WGth others thy lips open in .smiles, like the pistachio.”

” I wisti that the love wind 1 bear to tiiee.

Should be known to m.c. and to thee, and to God.”

The following couplets in prai.se of iluhammad are from the
translation of the Siti'jhnsna b’.iffst,* of which His Majesty ordered
this poet to make a tiitiislatiou. which was never completed ; —

^ -The fext and the MSS have j (' ideas and sleeps '):

makes better sense.

■2 This book is not rneutH/neil rhe Ain-i-Akbart as one of those trans-
lated by Akbar's orders; but cee vol h, text. p. I>*H. Badaoni was appa-
rently ordered to coraplefe tho rrinslation He s£^s that the book is a
cclWction of thirty-two atones coccernmj^ Raja Bskramajit (Vikramiditya)

250

“ The sweet-voiced nightingale of the garden of revelation ‘

Whose eves were anointed with the antimon>’ of ns base
crows.

Who in bis unquestionable abrogation of the Psalms of
David.

Has drawn his pen tbrongb. the copies of the Pentateuch
and the Go.sp8ls,

To his high coart is pi-oph.ecy entrusted.

To him, the chief of the prophets and the .seal of apostle-
ship "

A Quatraiti.

" I am lie ». nose kingdom is the realm of wriids

'i'lie money-changer of wisrhin; is the anpiviiser oi my
threaded gems.

The eiordium " Be i '' is b.ir one 'ear of mv wiiting.s ,

The .secret.s of the two worlds are on the tip of my pen

[u rbe year H. VTy (A.n. lo7l-72) he obiaineci permission te
depart from Hindustan and to go to hi.s native land, and Shaikli
Faizi, who was his nupil, found the dau- of his denartuie in the
words may Lis shadosv be extended ' ” * He went to Kaoiu and
v.-af: received witii consideration and iiononr by Mlrs-.a Muham-
mad Hakim, bat wlicn he presented iiis ' o^' laercliandise,

goods, valuable.s, and precious articie.s iiom india, h i rose from
ins pLtoe and toot vlie list of his pre.seut.s fioiu tin .'i.i,nd.s at the
iegi.sirar of comoiuuentary pre.-ent^ and detailed an i '‘xplaiiied
the ijuantity. q'ualily and name ot each descrijhion ot cloth,
evi-n going .so lai' as to g've the p-i'ice ol eacli. 1 lie was

much displeased at tins breacii ot decorum, and. rising from an
assembly witi* winch he was di.sgusted, ordez'ed that ail who
pieHse-.I .should fall on the spoil and carry off what they could.

( t ..lain.. A'l .-.tic-'.i)/, 11 . 211), niid t,i'at the book reHambles thn

//.' i’Tiiie- of H Parrot’j. Badaoai caiisd his trauaiation iVama-t/i-

Kni’-i. ■•■ifzi

literally .-.cn'ling ' or ' apoatlesiiij;

^ ilfe j*li, eiviiig hSO, oue year in excess
5 CompliaieDtary preesat.

261

so that in the spar-e of an honr everything disappeared. The
nja shortly after this died in Kabnl.

IV. QisiM-I-AESALi\.l

He wrote poetry under the nom-de-plume of Arsalgn on aeconnt
of his father ’.s claim to descent from Arsalan-i-Jazib, one of the
great nobles of the court of Sultan Mahmud-i-G-haznavi. His
native place was Tns * and he grew to manhood in Transoxiana.

He was a poet sweet of .song, welcome to all, both great and
small, for his personal beauty and graceful wit, adorned with
the ornament of an open and cheerful disposition and with the
quality of sociability and social amiability. In the composing
of chroncgram.s he had no equal. He was the author of a
Jivna, and tiie following few couplets are of his making:—

1 vvi-ili io rai.se my head, at the resuriection, from a spot
earth

On which the foot of a fair one »hali be lingering in grace- 179
fill coquetry.”

■■ 0, thou who hardly givest up but half thy life, what, place
iiast thou

Where live-s are freely givei. by the huudrcd for one glance
ti'om the beloved ? ”

1 I'einenibei' something very like tlii.s latter couplet in an ode
of the aiitiioi ol which T cannot (jiiite recall the name. It i.s a.s
follows : —

I Araslan 's nieiitionpd in iha Aih-t-Akha/i (i. lU.S) under t!ie n; me of
Nuru-’!lah Qasim Arsalan as one of the renowned calligraphists of the age
Abu-I-Faz.l describes him as a poet {op. cii , i, 609) as follows; ‘QSsim
-Arsalan of Mashhad. He possesses some talent. He works hard in order to
collect wealth and spends it in a genial way.’ In the Tabaqdt he is thus
described. ’ He was a Ma.shh:tdi and w.ts brought up in Tritnsoxiana He
passed many years in the service of the emperor. He wrote the
script well. He held broad views on religion. He composed a divan.’

* A cit) of Khurasan, the native town of Firdanai and of his master,
Hakim Aeadi.

252

“ What though I be alone with thee in lovers’ meeting ?

Thy modesty repels me more than a thousand watchers.”

Another couplet by Qasim-i-Arsalan —

” Both letter and spirit of my reading mourn my lot.
Without thee how can I keep my regard intent on my book ? ”

■■ As we passed weeping to tne loved one’s dwelling,

A hundred times in each step we cros.sed a river of tear.s. '

He has written the following verse descriptive of the mountain
of Ajrair, the holy burial place of the Kh'aja, the pole-star of
pole-stars, Kh’aja Mu‘iira-d-din-i-Ajmiri-yi-Cishti (may his tomD
be hallowed [) : —

Lo! The mountain of Ajmir, a mountain of ambergris,

The lodging of the chief of the leadens of Ci.sht.

What hill is this, that when it rai.ses its head to the empy-
rean,

Has the ocean of the sky no higher than its midst
'I'he bodies of the sun and moon appear
From that hill no lai'ger than the eagle’s eye. *

Fountains there are therein, like to the sun in brilliancy,
Their sand* is the starry host of heaven.

Heaven's eagle ^ winged his flight.

To seek its summit, but his flight fell short.

Should but 8, stone be loosened from that fort.

It would in its downward course loosen the strongholds of
heaven fiom theii foundations.

That halting brilliance which is.sues from the clouds is not
lightning,

It is nought but the sword-like summit of that mountain
striking the sky.

^ I 80 great h distance are they belnn it.

■= riie ceic bas i’colonr’i. I folli-w rlie MtiS., both of wliich have
(‘sand’).

3 ^Lb (■ the flying ea^le'). The ccnstellation ^Aqniia.

253

Glancine from that mountain foot the beholder sees
The sky as a clear pool, and the moon as the fish’s ^ eye.
The torrents which rush down from that awful stronghold
would carry away a thousand hills such as Alwand and
Alburz.’-

VYhen the eagle rises from the vase of the fortres.s’ walls.
His shadow falls on the moon and .snn.

Ar.salan. behold the loftiness of its mere foundations I
The suti seeks protection beneath their shadow.”

The MuUa in the year in which the emperor returned from
Atak took up his dwelling in LahfSr. He died in the year n. 995
(a.:.. 1587).

I should state here that the three or four poets whose biogra-
phies I have already given have been mentioned first on account
of the fame which they acquired as poets only, and of the ill-luck
which they brought with them to the world, as they occurred in
my mind, and in no particular order. Henceforward for ready
reference and for the sake of method I shall mention the poets
in the alphabetical order of their poetical cogticnnna.

V. Atashi ok Qasdahar.^

He came to Hindustan with the Emperor Babar, and was at
first a vn'ji'ah- Subsequently, in the seivice of his late
Ma jesty also he held several high posts, and died in Lahoi- in the
year H. 973 ( t.D. 1565-661. Some of his ver.ses are the follow-
ing;—

“ In thine absence my tears hv degrees became a sea,

■ behold I

Come, .sit in my eye as in a boat and make a voj, age of the
sea ' ”

' The ‘ tiali ' liere sigiiities the cunstellatioii Pisces.

2 -Alwand is a high rajiintain in H-am.-xlan. Alburz is either inonnt
-Alburz in tie* C.tucasus ' feet) or the Alburz mountains between

.Mazanufir.in and Tihr.'ni the highesi point in which is montu Damavand
(19,400 fr-ei ).

■' .\trishi ia not mentioned as a poet in the Ain or in tlic T^A tqCit

t K news-writer.

. 3 ::

180

254

“ Aye, have a dagger at tby waist, a sword in thy hand, a
frown on thy brow,

'thirst for blood and be cruel and still implacable.”

181 What can one do with one who knows nought of those who

are faithful t

What can one do with one whose body shines as silver and
who still inclines to wrath ? ”

“The cri scent moon sh'ncs in the gloaming on the eve of

Settinsr us free to haste to seek a cnp of rosy wine.”

At the time when hi.s late Majesty recovpi’ed from his indis-
position in the Port of Victory, tliis poet composed the following
quatrain: —

“ A thousand thanks to God, that His Majesty the Empei’or is
freed from the sorrow of sickne.ss.

Tiiat he ha.s arisen and seated himself once mm>e on the
throne of his glory.

Tiie news of his recovery was conveyed to me by the words,

‘ Thanks be to God that His Majesty ha.s recovered.'

VI. Ashrap Khan, Mir Mcn.shT.*

He was a Husaini Sayyid of the holy city of ila.shhad. He
was well qualified to instruct the best calligiaphists of the world

1 The appearance of the new moon on the evening of Shawwiil 1, or, as we

should say, on the evening of the last day of Ramazan, is the signal for the
breaking of the thirty days* fast. The ilasaimans reckon their days as dn
the Jews, from snnset to sunset. The is the festival at the end

of the fast.

2 Mnhammad Asghar, a Husaini S^iyyid of S.ibzavar, according to the
Atn {i, 389). bnc of Mashhad, according to the Ma*d’^iru-l‘Umard sjidthe
Mir' dtu-l-' Alain A^iraf was a clever writer, exact in his style, and a
renowned calligrapher, who improved the Ta'Hq very much, lie also under-
■rood jnfar. or witchcraft. He was in Hamavun's service, and had r#>'eivpf!

255

in the seven ditt’erent styles of peimanship. He was one of the
most trusted among the nobles, and it is a pity that he should
have merited the name of poet, but since he iiad natural poetical
ability, the following verses of bis are quoted ; —

‘‘ Before I have received a single cup from the hand of the
cup-bearer of fate,

The stone of leproacb strikes ray -Rine-iai'. What can I

Jo t ”

id.

We are those in this wor" whose hearts are sad,

A heart as sad as onr own. we know not of."

A Quatrain.

■■ O. Loi'il ! consume me not in the fire of Thy wrath !

But light the lamp of taith w.thin the house of my heart ;

And as for this rohe of life nhich han^s toin on my body.

Of Thy ruercv stitch, it acrain with the thread of forgive-
ness.”

Alnother Quatrain.

" Ki’ee fi’om the ai!o_\ aiul like fine g<‘ld came love from the
assay.

Well were it to spend the tush of our lives in the business
nt love,

Hinr-e the expanse of i}i\ heaiiiy bh ssLiiied like the ro'se,

Tht thorns of love have pic-rrod n^y breast jLu^ -..f t;ie
nightingale is pierced.*’

VI L Amir yizi. AsiRld

He possessed both learnine: and accomplishments For some
years lie studied under Hakiniii-l-Mnlk, and was the best ot all his

from him t}ie post and tltl.’ ‘-f Mn Mfinsjii. At Akbar's suecession he
wasinDilih- and took })ait ir t’.*-* ni^anist Hemu. He was impri-

soned by Bairam, but esc.-'td :\T.d went to Makkali. Ho it'tianod in AH.
1>68 (a.u. 1580-61) wlitM. Akbar w in Micblwar-i on id- -w-jy to tnu Sivi alike,
'.viiere Bairam wa>. Ho v... • --.vti i •; l'* t a f/uu In the

following year Akt,ai mi.s • i Kb.n. In 1574

he went with Mnn im to Beniral ;*nd diol tit (buir in 1575

' Called in tiie 'pjba’iai Mu <3^7./, At,.ii Abu-1-Fa*l m the din (i, oi^yj

182

pupils. He w:i' one of the mosteiitertaiuiiig men of liis time. As
the climaie of India ilid not suit him, and as he obtained no real
promotiein in the imperial service, in spite of his having been
admitted to the firole of His Majesty ■' intimates, he went at
ieiio'th to Ids own country, and in the city of Rai, the native
place of !us aiice-toi^. he obtained rest fiom the toils of the world
and departed tiov life The follouiu g vei'.ses are ipaoted as an
indication of the cojuoiisne.ss of hi.s imagination ■ —

"The jealous watcher himself has been onr intermediary,
while I suspected no fraud.

JJe has been enabled to intei'pose between us his own condi-
tions.'’

“’T was but yesterday that my loved one derided my piteous
lot,

My grief and her derision were plain to see.’"

‘‘ To-day has my heart's anguish grown more acute,

For to-day it seems that my loved cnie is more than ever
bent on my destruction.’'

"1 am wounded to the heart by the arrow of a fair boy to
wiiose bauds time

Has not yet delivered a bow to sjiort withal.’'

The iiope of union with thee torbade me to surrender my

life.

Else 1 would gladly have died when I parted from thee.”

•• I lament the presence of other.- wlien that silver-bodied
.me draw- nigh.

It would seem that my tongue breaks into speech from
constancy to her.”

th.i' 1.1- was Amir Qazi and that he came from E«i, near Tibrin.

He adds, ne is a man ol edacaliun,'

257

“ The /ebt of union with her never leaves my heart,

For she spoke with me in graceful coquetry and looked for
my coming.”

yill. Mia ImamT. kxowm as MciiHi..ACA,

He was a Suyyid of Kabul. In the year h. 9S1 a.d. 1573-74?
he fell from his hor.se in Jaunpur. and died of the injuiie.?
which he received. He wrote a divari: and the following' chrono-
gram which he composed on the death of a graceful boy of rare
beauty, named Sultan Caghatai, is well known.

" Scltan Caghata was the lose of the garden of beauty.

But death was his guide to the garden of Rizwan.-

In the season of roses he set forth to journey from this
garden,

Many liearts in mourning for him were drenched with their
blood.

I asked of the mourning nightingale the date of his death.

He Iiroke into lamentations and said, ” The rc.^e has left the
garden ! "^

'■ How shall I compare thy stature to the letter ulif, 0 palm- IS 4
tree of life ?

For alif is quiescent ■* while thy graceful loi'ni is ever in
motion.”

1 Both the i.:.xt and the ilSS. have astsjLX (mannhca;, which ismeaEing-
u S3 and etyinologically improbable. I venture to substitute dsv.iAx. ‘ the
ilagian boy.’

The keeper of the garden of Paradise.

1 his chronogram is an cmigma The nuuK-rical v.-iluc of ^ I
is 1003 and of J? (‘ the rose 50. If ' the ros.- ’ be taken frov
&o3 (a d. 1540.47) remains. This, then, i.s the date cf .Suhan Ca;

^ grammatical conceit, .dfi/ is qnioacent 1 t.e carries :i<j vv,
is strengthened by hamzah.

('giiruen ')
' the garden ■'
ghtai's deatri.
wo!) iinti! it

My heart in thinking on that sweet mouth is in the straits
of perturbation.

Perturbation has confronted it from the place in which it is
bred ’

Never do I forget thee, possessor of ail sweet attributes.
Though thou forget me. vet do I never forget thee."

A Quatraiit

For the proof of His Existence wlmt need is there of words,
Si'jce He is all in all, both of what is manifest and what is
hidden ?

They tell me to open my month in denial of all that is apart
from Him ;

Put what shall 1 deny r* Where is there a trace of ought
that is apart from Him f •

All of her Quatrain.

The juggler who sits on the prayer-mat of the blue expanse
of sky

Shines in the morning with the mark of piety on his face.
At midday he .straightens himself up in prayer.

And when he, the leader of the prayers, made his inclina-
tion. the rest prostrated themselves.” ^

iX. AliR >^ARlr-i-AMANl, Of' Isfahan’.*

He wrote charming verses. He spent twenty years of his life
in India, living in religious retirement. The following verses are
from his pen : —

“The fiood of ray tears ru.shed towards her dwelling.

To wash +he dust of strangers' feet from her thresliold.”

1 This ’• -'5?' 3 fcPt* the pantheism of the

2 The h'-.ii’a i ly c^'-arse 15 likened to the ritnal prayers,

Ahmi" !-' ' -t ir'ntione^:! :n the Ain-i’Akbar^ as a puet. In the Tahunu:
lie la eai’ . - 1 A; ■ .and "-c of hi> couplets is ijaotetl, but no other accuiiUL
of him ip r-o.

The water of life is but a type of thy rnby lips,

Where is a ^izr^ to ^ive his life in keen desire for them ?” 185

“ Like AmUni, in the desire of losin» my head by a stroke of
thy sword

I have entered the ranks of the army (of thy lovers) with
nought but my life for my shield,”

“It is not the presence of the stranger in thine assemblies to
which I object,

But thy fnendly glances for tlie sti-anger which I cannot
endure.”

X. QazT Ahmad-i-GhafparI op QazvIs-.*

He was a son of Imam Najmu-d-din ‘Abdu-I-GhafPar, who was
the author of a compendium of the Shafi'i® doctrines. In learn-
ing, in elegance of literary style, in knowledge of history, and in
geniality of disposition he was unrivalled. He wrote the NigS-
ristSn,* a compendium the like of which has not been produced by
the wit of anybody in this age, and wherein are related wondrous
circumstances and strange occurrences. He also wrote the book
Naskh-i-JahSn-ArH,^ the date of the composition of whicli is given
by the title. It is a cursory history of the world from the time
of Adam to the days of hi.s holiness the .seal of prophecy (may
God bless and save him !). The Qazi towards the end of hi.s life
gave up the office of vazir, which he held under the princes of
‘Iraq, and after his resignation proceeded on a pilgrimage to the

1 The goardian of the water of life.

2 Qazi Al^mad is not mentioned as a poet either in the j.'ffH-i-A/t&firi, or in
the Tahaqdt.

3 The school of jurisprudence founded by Imam one of the four

great Sunni doctors of the law.

* ‘The Picture-Gallery ' There is a MS, of a NJtjui istdn by Ibn-i-Maham-
raad Ahmad (No. iu the library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal.

5 T have not been able to find any other mention of th»s work. The title
gives the date 971 (a-d.

260

holy place (Makkah). After attaining the felicity of perfonnin
this pilgrimage he came to Hindustan by way of the port c
Dabnl,! when the hand of fate, suddenly loosing the cord of the
existence of that incomparable man, led him to the world of im-
mortality. This occurred in the year h. 975 (a.d. 1567-68).

The following couplet is by him : —

If that fair tyrant sit by me, after a lifetime of expectancy,
186 My heart will flutter in my breast, lest she should ri.se too
soon.”

XI. MTr A.shkI op Qum.*

In his {toetry he displayed a pleasing fertility of imagination,
and he was an imitator of Asafi. In Agra he placed the baggage
for his journey to the next world on the back of Death’s swift
steed. I append some of his verses.

“ He whose bosom is rent with grief in thine absence beat his
head with a stone so violently

That the stone became nought but a handful of du.st in his
grasp."

1 Both the text an.t the MSS. have (Jb! v, 'Die port was Dabol or Dabhol,
a f.amous iKirt on tiie west coast of India in Mnhamnmiian times. See Imp,
Gazft^^er cf Iniia, new series, ti, lOO

- In the .Un-i-Aiba-i (i, .59S) Abu-l-Fa/.l says, ‘ Ashki of Qam is a Taba-
taba’i Sayyid. and i.s a jioet of .some talent.’ Tlie Tabat.aba’i Sayyids are the
descendants of the great-great-grandson of ‘All, IsmiVil bin Ibrahim, called
Tauat'iba from a defect, in his speech which caused him t > pronoance the
letter like Jb,

From the Haft LtUif we !e.tri. that Mir Ashki w..s tlie son of Mir Sayyid
All, Af!'?ife„-ii6 (public censor) d Quin in Persia. .Ashki's elder brother.
Hnsi'iri. was also known as ,i p',e'' A^si was attracted to India by the fame
and success of Ghazah. hut he did not. meet Ghazali The number of his
verses exceeded 10 'X"J ami w; ■ •, .'.is d.eath-bed he gave Ids several
d'lvaiig to Mir Juda’i to .arrar.g, li.r .1 uda'i, however, published whatever
he thought good in hi.s own ’-ame. .and 'brew the remainder into water Vide
infra No. XXXII. Daghistli,- say< that .A^ki died in Mir .luli’i’s house,
and he ascribes the epigram 'o Ghazsli ; but as he oi.iv .,aotf-- a hemiatich
the statement of the ..lontemporarT Hoyt ly.irn is preferable.

1^ crq

261

•‘III grief at thine absence I will smite my head, wretched
being that I am, with a stone.

Should my hand fail of its office I will strike my head npou
the stone.”

1, thy candle, O my King, am a slave like hinsair.

Though decapitated a hundred times I yet live.”

“ Those slain by thy cruelty' He scattered here and there like
drunken men,

It would seem that thy .sword was tempered with wine in-
stead of water.”

“ So much has my body melted away in grief at thine absence.

That if thou ca.stest a chain on my neck it falls about my
feet.’’

It is said that when lie recited this la.st opening conplet before
.Maulana Sadiq in Qandahar, and sought his approbation, the
Maalan.ii .said, “ You have stolen thi.s idea from .Vmiv Khusrav of
Dilili, who says —

■ So much has my mournful body melted in thine absence

That if thou placest a collar about my neck it falls to my
feet.’ ”

Another Couplet hf AMt.

•‘If I would fall in following: thee smitten with +he stone
of calamity,

Stones !-aiii upon me from every hair on head jirevent- 187
ing me from fallinir.'

Ashki seems to have used the inetajdior of tJu* stone 50 mnch ns
to leave nothing else for others to -say upon me subject

,See mv feeble bod\' among the dogs of tiiv sti-ei.r.

This one drags it one way, that one nnotlier '

iiy hail- liang.s dishevelled from my liead down to my feet,
Mj' body appears in the midst of it like a .single white hair.”

34

■262

XII. ToIj Q'jli AnIsI'

He is a .ShamlCi Turkman in the service of the Khan-i- Khanan.
He write.s pleasinj;: poetrv and ha.s composed a mapiavf. The
followiiiir ver.se.s are his work: —

“ idv lieart is a fit e-temple when I think of tliee, and on it
is thv lii-and. like a black Hindu who tends tlie tire."

■■ Wlien von see a tongne of dame deem if to be a tormentcri
fire-worshipper

Whose soul ha.s departed, while his lindj still dances in the
tire-romple.’ [heart,

" Love is like tln‘ loadstone, for wimn its arrow enters the
It canniir be removed fill love itself in kindness draws it
Fo)-th."

Xlll. Mrr.t.i. (In.vxi.

He is a yuLiiig man in the tiower of manhood He wa.s for a
lontr rime in Gujarat with Kh’aja Nizamn-d-din Ahmad, and at
first assumed the ipmi ,h of Khaufi, svhicli the

changed, giving iiim his present lch'\ll n‘> He is now in the
service of His ifajesty's eldes'- .s.m. His disposition is pleasing.
The hdlowing qimtrain i.s hi.s —

■■ I am one who can treasure up nough.t but grief :

Thoiigii I am all Jealousy I cannot renounce th.e loved one.

I AnisI is :hu& de.wiibei! .11 :lie .to -i-.-iii ov (i, ‘ .t,nisi SliSmlu, Ilis

real ntiiiri is Yol Qnl'. ite is .i iinui nf a .H .niiy heart amt of pnie r.,ai,m.rs
He Is brave and sincet'*'. I'jie snys tti.'t he iv.as a i^ood

soldier and .served as b'tirarian to 'Ali Quii ^an .^tuiifi, tlic Per.siai:
Govoriior of Hiiat, wiieii he made the iiv.;.i.aiiit.in'-o of Shikini and ifalmo.
Ho wiiite at disr ini'ior >!ie 'uM if’-i (d .lata in.t rhr Per.siiiii iiibice. Saltan
Ibi-rihitii Muza, gate him tii- ra'ii- of Viesi. r.’idrr whicii lie is known in
liteiariiio Vflien Hirit was roiiqaered by ‘Abdn-’llah Khan. .Anisi wag cap-
tured by an Czbiik s-jldier nn i c-irro-d ,,|f T.-ansoxiana He riien wcr.i t,i
India and piitoi-ed the -pi vice of iliizs. Ab l.'aiiioi, Khan-i-Khrcian . H-
died at Bui l..t’iprir in v.H lOU (a n. Irio.A-OCl. He left a n.iivuo .'i adban,
and seveut! 1 ^- 0 '. loJi- ri r, raise of ttn- Kh dti-i-Khrn.iii

^ .According to the hwnqdt Auian. came from Biikiiara, .nin v.-as for a iong
time in tlie emperm’s .service, .md wea for soiin; tiins ». news-writer. He
wrote good prose and compiled a dhas He a],,, wrote a nmtyiav!. p. ihuhr-
nshlih,

263

Although through my eulightemnect of ■'Oui I am as
conspicuous as the sun,

Still I know not how to light the lamp of my o\s u lot.’"

XIV. Abt-xki ok

His as.sumed name accords well with his narurt. He lia.s
committed to memory, parrot-like, some pi-.rnses from the Futuhnr
and tiie fususu-l-Hika^,'^ and ha.-N striven hard, t!; a polemical
treatise, to establisli the good faitli of Pharaoh,® foi v. hich reason
he has been nicknamed “ Pharaoh’s Adcocate." Tlie followiijo
is the opening couplet of a qitsidah by him : —

■■ Thou saidest. * Shall T deal with mv lovers faithfully or
cruelly ? ’

0, impudent one, know that we choose the former ' ”

XV. UbkatT. Qn.l.i K ii1n>

He is of the Jan Qurbani tribe.® He is accompli, 'lied in learn-
ing and the sciences, and is one <>f the commanders of hve thou-

t dbtu) means ‘ worthle.ss.’

See p, 17. note 3, for iin account of iheF‘isi’»u-i-Hikj, \ There a;e
several ivorks havinjf the word FiitcJi or Vut^'liat as part of ir.c-ir titles a; d
I cannot say to which of them Badaonl here refers

Probably referring to the passage iu Chapter M of the '> 5". in which

Pharaoh is said to have said, when drowning in the Red Sea, I je'ieve t!.,-.,
there is no God but He on whom the ohiklrer. of Isiael nsUeve ; and i
am one of the resigned.’

■* Qilif Khan was a pious uiau, aud .i stanncii S'oon. tli i., lirct meutioiied
m connection with the siege of Ruhtiis in Biliar, in !■ 1573 he wu-.

appomted cu.nmaudant of Surat, which .Akba.- bac .i'ist co; ’eioi-ed, witli i.>.-
son as his deputy. In 1576-77 he w.is sent to Surat t( n. i\itb th,

Portuguese Iu 15S8 he received Sambhiil in jiijii. In Mb3-'J4 he wa,
made Governor of Kabul, where ho was not successful U v-is reuiuver
and in 159b-97 accompanied his sou-iii-law, Sul'l.n Daiiiy.i'. t,- tin- Dakaii, a:<
"Jdllq. but soon returned to court. During .Akoar's ahseiicr i. jvhandesh
1598-90 he was Governor of Agra, in 1600 U1 he wrio i.-oinoted to ti,-;
governorship of the Punjab aud Kabul. At the accession nf J..'nangli' h-
was sent to Gujarat, but returneii the next year co the Pair; j lie died
1613. Before he was tutor to Sultan Daniya! he was a coni.uaudcr of iOt i
but he was then promoted to the command of 4500, See .li. - .■Aklari, i, b-
3.54, Tkitik-i-Jahdhglri, 123, and Tahaqat-i- Akian .

*> The MSS. have Jiinf Qurhiiiii. The readings are not auii.’ ijiory, 1 hare

264

sand. His faith is ortliodox. For some time lie held the title of
Jumlatu-l-Mioik,^ and is now Governor of the Suba of Kabul.
He has poetical genius a.nd facility in wmiting verse. The fol-
lowing few couplets are by him : —

" Ko sooner had my sun cast the veil from ofi her face
Than the .situ appeared no more than a mote in a suubeum
in motion,

1 am slaiii by that languid narcissus-like eye, which, in ii?
heaviness.

Has siiiiii a whole world and composed itself to sleep. '

" Thy t wo dark languid eyes* play havoc with my wit and
my faith,

189 ^'Vith drawn bows they lie in wait for me in every corner,”

“ It is not tlie rosebud-iike aiTOw of my slayer that rankles
in my' heart.

But my own blood which, while apart from her lips, 1 have
swallowed, that i,s clotted in my- heart.”

XVI. TIli'att of Vazd.

He was well .skilled in the e.vaet sciences. He was a eori-
jiiiniou or the Khan-i-Zaniaii, and was captured in hi.s rebellion. -
riie emper.r .-pared his life, hut death, less merciful, took it from
;am. The ml mwing opening couplets of (jias;(/a/..3- .ire lil,- —

‘'Lnta like da.-t I .settled on the skirts of the robe of my
beloved.

1 h '.i no !’e.-t troni mv wanderings nor ease at my heart.”

been mio to discover -o tribe with any such name. Perhaps, Badaoni
Hieaiis to eay ihat ho iiaa ef those who wouici not hesitate to sacrifice their
L.ves for lee .-inperor.

i Qili] Kfien tva.s twice d/i-un.

* Literahv I'lirks,' a favourite simile,

3 In !3b7, e vol. ii, lext, IG'J

" We are but a iiaiidful of ashes, but we caiTy tire iu us,

It would be uo wonder if we wei-e eousunied by the sparks
of our own sighs.”

The lOiaii-i-Zamaii gave him a thousand rupees as a rewaiai
for composing this latter couplet.

XVII. Uliati of ‘iKAg.

He was for some time iu Kashmir with Mi;“i^a Yusuf ffliauJ
and there he composed a poem on the people of the city in which
he dwelt.* The following couplet occurs in it ; —

Sarmadi ^ is the squirrel of the tree of the poets,

He loves the stature of Orion and the feelei-s of the Crab.'

On a youth who was beloved by Mirza Yusuf Khan he wrote
the following couplet : —

" Mirza Yusut, the prince of the age, is iu love.

He love.' thy pure love, but be loves the beauty of others.”

XVlll. Baikam KrtiN. the Khan'-i-Khana-n.*

He wa.s oue ot the offspring of Mh"za Ja.han Shah. In wisdom,
geuerositj*, sincerity, goodness of disposition, submissiveness, and
humility he surpa.ssed all. In early life he was in the service of
the emperor Babar, and iu middle age he obtained advancement
iu tile se'.'vice of emperor Humayun, and received the honourable
title ot Khaii-i-Khan:tii. and his present Majesty added BSba-am^
to Lis titles. He was a great friend to j-eligiocs, was subject to tits
of rel iglULis ee'dlasy, Miid was a benevolent man. The second

* See .lin-i-Akhari, i, 345, Mirza Yusuf Kh an was appoiuted to Kashmir
in 1587, but resigned four years later. He was subsequeotly reiuatfited
at the request of Sultan Salim

■ literally * city distarbing.' A poera in praiae tn disparage-

ment of the people of a city.

Viilr Lfi/rd Xo. Ixii.

♦ See .hn'i-Akbari, i. 315, and Badaooi. vol. ii, text, pa^im. Kadaoni had
a great admiration for Bairam Khau, althoagh he was a Shi^ah.

^ 7 My father.'

266

conquest of Hindnstaii.' and tlse buildinj' up of the empire were
due to his strenuous efforts, his valour, and his %vi.se policy.
Learned men came from all parts of the world to visit him and
dej)arted Inuppy in the possession of gifts bestowed by his hand,
as open as ocean itself, and his Idgh couit. lofty as the sky. was
ihe resort (3f the lords of ie.Hrniug and all perfect qualities. His
e.visrence was. indeed, an honour to the age iu which he lived.
At last ''lie liyjinerites iioisoned the mind of His Majesty against
him. uutii his affairs fell at length into the condition of which a
brief description ha.-, been niven in the chronicle of the reign.^
He has composed a iliviin in Per.sian aiul Turki wliicb is in every
band, as liis verses are on every tongue. This quatrain is his: —
"The masters of self-eft'.iceiaent are both high and 'low,

It is they who are ever drunken with draughts fl ora the cap
of immortaiity.

Whatever there may be in the plane oi non-existence,
Know for certain that it is they alone who truly exist. "

• ()li ' Thou whose street is the Kit'bah'^ of our happiness,
Whose Face is tiie point towards whieh .ve turn iu prayer'
Blest uill be the time when tliou graeioiisly draweijt us U)
Thy.self.

Freeiii” U' fi'-nt the laanh of ceremouialism and eoiiven-
tioTiality '

He wrote all ode iu prai->e of bis holiness ‘All, ilio commander
of the faithful l iiui;- God be gra'-ious unto iii.- countenance I) of
■A uic!’, the following are the opening couplets ■ —

i hough, a king be sij great that his crown towers over the
nine heavens.

If Ik be not tne slave of ’Aii let dust be cast upon his head.
Hope not toi io\e for the king of men from eiie who knows
uol his owu father.

Cnjus matris ignomiaiam diseooperiut alteiius,”

1 i.i- , 00 ilamayim's letaru from ?ers:3. Eabar’s was the ‘ first ’ conquest.

^ Vol, ii.

1 ae tempi© of HaUkan,* here used by a tiope for any object of deure.

267

The following is the eommenceinent. of a qasldah which he
wrote on the astrolabe : —

What globe is this wljose axis rests on the centre (of rlie
universe),

This fall moon across whose midst the meteors darfr
Though it vaunts itself the eqnal of both siin and moon
It gladly enrolls itself among the emperor's slaves.

The still’s resplendent o:b looms not so largely in out eyoa
As the crescents which siirmoiint the hannei's of the t\oi Id-
famed king of kings —

Both sky and earth are ever subject to his authority,

Like the seal of a ring on the hand of a monarch us power-
ful as .Tam^iid.

This globe brings with it a golden tray full of atkr/ifh
To scatter liefore the feet of great kings,

The feet of the eniperoi of exalfecl dignity. Hnmayfm, 192
before whom, in order to obtain honou!.

The sky itself places the head of humility on the threshold
of Ihe Court.”

They relate that the emperor Hntnayhn was one night in
conversation with Bairam Ilimn. who was overeome I'V drowsi-
ness. His Majesty reprovingly said, •’Ha. Bait am IQian ! It is
to you that 1 am speaking’' He replieil, '* Yes, sire, I am atten-
tive, but smcc”! have lieartl tJmt in the .service of kings a watch
.siiouhi be kept over the eve.--, and among Janices- a watch
should he kept over rise heart, and among learned men a wareli
.si'.ould be ki-pt over the tongue 1 was just pondering ovei t.'hie'ri
1 shouirt keep a watch, for Your Majesty is a King, :i darvi^i, .itid
a learned liian." His late Miije.stv was much jileased with rh.is
seemly reply, anti eA]aessed h's .ipprova! ol i(.

Bairam KLan obtained the bie.-^sing of martyrdom ' at Fatrau in
trujarst in the vear n 9(iS (.t a. 15(31) and Iris bones were in
r.oeordanee w lib liis wii!. taketi to Ma^ihad.

t tfewac jiiurdercil bv an Afghai- • see vif ii. text, 4o

He Is aci'c.intr-;! a r.iair;)). (irsMus*- ne was on his .v.iv to Makk-nri •vhot. he
was kiUed.

268

XIX. BlKASl OP GhazxIn.

He was known for his varied attainments and nnmerons accom-
plishments. He had performed the pilgimage to the two holj
places, Makkah and Madinah, and afterwards came to India. In
Arabia he had stndied some of the books of traditions such as the
Miskhdt,^ and the Shawid.'iIu-n-Nahi* (may God ble.ss and preserve
tile prophet !) imder Mir MnrtaM-yi-Sharifi * and others. Being
overcome by the weakness of old age he set oat for his beloved
native land, his original home, and while halting at Peshawar
on his way thither he heard the cry, “ Return to Me ! ’’ from the
lips of the Angel of Death, and in a.h. 973 106-5-66) he

withdrew to the Pi-esence of the Merciful God.

The following verses ai-e some of the l elies of his copious ima--
gination.

193 WTiether in the idol-temple or in the Ka'hah 1 have looked
to none hnt Thee,

Wherever 1 have been I have never lieeu forgetful of
Thee.”

“ It i* not m oar age alone that the sky (fate) has been
pitiless,

.Since its revolutions first began it has been both pitiie.s.s
and faithie.ss.’'

■‘Though Bi/tnsj .should hear the reproache.s of fii..i enemie.s
a hundred times.

[It -were fitting that he shoiiii! not allow them to vex OJ
disturb him.

For the following peritvt c oaplet is well known thronghont
the world ■

-And why. indeed, should njt sm-h a eonpler have world-
wide fame'r

J Tiie Hishkdtti-l-MnsdbiA. Sre vgl L trails Sankiiig, p. -tS, note 3, ei
sS* ’<< .

? A|>{n\r«ntlT the fiame as the vol. i,

j t.oLe ‘>.

he’tow. No. cizii-

269

■ Though the worthless stone crush the golden vase

The worth of the stone is not increased nor is that of the
gold diminished.’ ”

Quatrain.

“ Oil heart, give not the rein to thine angaish and grief !

Forgo not one moment of trae delight for all the dominion
of Jamshid ;

Should a loved one fall to thy lot, see well

That thou exchange not the dust of her footsteps for all
that both worlds can give.”

Maulana Bikasi writes that one day the late empei-or fluma-
yun wrote in his own graceful handwriting over the arch of the
jxirch of his palace in the I'oyal residence of Dihli the following
couplet by Shaikh Azari : —

" I have heard that ou this gilded dome

Is written • At last the actions of all become praiseworthy.’ ”

The emperor was fated shortly afterwards to leave this narrow
dwelling of deception for the sweet abode of bliss,* .-.ud owing
to the exigencies of the time that very palace was utilized
as his tomb, and since this action of that enlightened king was
attributed to miraculous prevision the chronogram for that event,
contained in the following veises, was widely quoted at the
time ; —

“ When the Emperor Humaynn shortly before he died

Wrote on the door of the dwelling in which he lived,

■ It is written that at the last the actions of all become praise-

worthy,’

He referred prophetically to his own righteofls end ;

And when that dwelling by the decree of fate became his
tomb

It became the point towards which all torn in prayer, and
the Kabbah of their desires.

i On Babi‘a-l-awwal 15, a.h. 963 (Jan. 28, 1556). See vol. i, trans.
Banking, pp. 600-602. Firi^ta places his death fonr days earlier, but
Badiioni ia the better authority

35

194

270

For this reason I give the following chronogram foFhis
death,

‘ The foundation of the dwelling * of the Sultan whose end
was praiseworthy.’ ”

XX. Bigt OP KoLAii.^

He had a natural talent for poetry. The following verses are
his ; —

“ In thine absence I am the slave of a hundred griefs,

Do thou rejoice since I am overwhelmed with anguish.”

Although the fair to-day do not know my worth,

They will know it to-morrow when I shall be no more.”

“My eyes are suffused sometimes with my heart’s blood,
sometimes with blood from my liver,

To me, the wretched one far from her face, even the way
of sight is closed.”

“ He never becomes liberal like the cypress in the garden of
the world.

Who, like the narcissusj fixes his eyes always in covetous-
ness on silver and g^ld.”

Baqi was a long time in Hindustan and was killed during the
rebellion of Ma‘?nm the Kabuli.*

XXI. Bata?!,

He lived in Agra after the fashion of humble men and the
style of bygone days. This opening couplet of a qasidah is bis :

1 lyUaJU* chronogram is not quite clear.

As it stands it gives the total 1002 If we remove (• which is the first letter
of (Jyh®, and therefore ‘the foondation of the dwelling’ which is, per-
haps, what the poet intended, we get 962 — one year short.

2 Kolab (now more correctly Kilab) is the name of a town and district in

BadaHishin 3 At Jannpiir in 1579. See voJ. ii, text, p. 276.

271

“ Whoever enjoys the fruits of union with that jasmine-
bodied cypress

Owes it to his good fortune. It is his good fortune that
enjoys the fruit.”

On the discussion raised by Kahi and Ghazali * he wrote the
following quatrain : —

KaJii and Ghazali, those two drunken fools,

Have put hand to pen to belittle Jami * and N’ava’i.^

There has been nobody like them in the world,

For Kahi * is nought but straw and Ghazali ^ is nought but
a dog.”

XXII. PairavI.*

He is for the most part an imitator ^ of j^’aja Isafi. He is a
skilful pairter and Kv means of studving the out-

ward form to hidden truths, and itas written on outward form
and hidden essence a poetical treatise which begins as follows : —

“ O Lord, 1 am unable to grasp hidden truth !

Forgive me, for I am too much a worshipper of the out-
ward form

Of thy grace, 0 most Pure God !

Thou hast so fashioned the outward form of our earthly
tabernacles

That every (fair) form which I see

Points out to me the way to the hidden truths of Thine 198
Essence.”

^ See above, Nos. 11 and I.

* The great Persian poet, Mails *Abda-r-RaI?nian-i-Jamu

-5 See below, No, CLYI.

4 Kahi signifies ‘strawy.’

& QJyazdl signifies a ‘gazelle’ or * antelope/ and the adjective de»

rived from it, might be applied to a honnd need for banting that animal.

5 He is thus described in the Airi’i-Akoa^^t (i. dOO) ‘ PairavI of Siwa/ His
name is Amir Beg He w.vi a good painter/

j Thiv- is a pan on hi'* (i'>nirro) means ‘a follower,* ‘an

imitator/

272

Other Verses.

“ When is the wine of love given to him who suffers no
pain ?

Love for the beautiful is a state of exhilaration. To whoso
lot does it fall ? ”

“ In my dream I saw her sitting with the jealous watcher,
and my heart was perturbed.

Had I at that moment awoken from my dream I should
have died, but died too late.”

‘ When I cast a glance at her moonlike face, even while T
am looking,

She glowers at me angrily, to bid me not to gaze at her.”

I steal a glance at that graceful one,

And when she looks towards me, I look downwards to the
ground in shame.”

“ The child of my tears took his way in the road of my
beloved,

Like a sweet orphan he put his foot forward in this path ;
But the delicate child was unable to endure love’s tyi-anny.
And called my beloved cruel and faithless.”

“ 1 am perturbed when she is away from me.

Lest my moon-faced darling shouhl fall in love with
another.”

Pairavi wrote a complete divan of si zaJs. He died in Hindu-
stan.

273

XXITT. BAQi'f.'

On fii’st leaving his native land he went to the Dakan, where
he was with Malik Qumi, the poet. Thence he went to Gujarat
and was there with Jlirza Xizamu-d-din Ahm' 1 * adopting the
nom-de-plunic of Ma^jfArdi. The Mirza changed it, giving him 197
his present nom-de-plume. His poetry is good, and since it is
easy and flowing I quote the following excerpts : —

‘‘ When love made the eyelashes of the fair ones a lancet,

It caused the blood to flow from my arteries and veins,

Alas, that before I could close my eyes the arrow of
thought of the loved one
Penetrated my eye and thence pierced my heart.''

“ In place of tears my wounded heart itself drops piecemeal
from my eyes,

From this fiery cloud all the blood of my liver rains down.”

” So long as the bird of my heart was the prey of that
hunter.

Each separate hair of my head rose up as a bird rising to
flight.”

Baqd’i has now left the service of the Khan-i-Khanan,^ and
they say that he has come to Agra and intends to go to Labor.

XXIV. .Mulla NCnu-r'-rdx Mt'HAM.'iAD-i-TARKuiN.*

He was called Safidoui. and assumed the name of Xuri as his
nom-de-plume. Since he held the par>ia7ia of Safidon in the

1 Baqa’i waa evidently alive when Badioni coraplotci this histury in a n.
1004 (a.d. 1596). He must not, therefore, bo confoniideu with the Ba.qa’i
mentioned in the Tabaqet and below, under Baletl (Yadgii), No. Xbll, who
was executed for murdering his father.

Author of the Tabaqdt-i-Akbai’.

^ Mirzs ‘Abda-r. Rahim

4 See No LXIX, < !u,ptoi li

•.'7t

sarkar of Sirhlnd ‘ as SLjngir for some years, he was spoken of as
though he had been a native of that place. He was distinguished
for his attainments in geometry, the exact sciences, and astroh/gv,
and was one of the intimate coni|ia,nion.s of the late emperor,
obtaining the title of Tarkhan in the course of his coundential
association with him. He was unequalled in libe' alitv, senerositv,
mnnifieence and conviviality, for which qualities he was prover-
198 bial. He had poetic talent too. and composed a dlvu.i One day
on the pclo-grvand at Fat^pCn Le was injured by an elephant, and
was in great pain. tVhile in this conditionhe continued to repeat.
‘‘Be my witnesses, all of you. that in my present uneasiness I
repent of some of my former acts and am resolved- to amend my
ways.” However nuieh he was pressed on the subject he would
not say wiiat those particular act.s were of which he repented. I
said, "The first thing of which you will liave repente 1 will surely
be the writing of poetry.” 1 do not know wliether he was pleased
with my suggestion, or annoyed, but the others wiio were present
were much pleased. In the days of his authority he duar a canal
from the Jamna, fifty kuruJ. in length, in the direction of Kamal,
and beyond that town. This was the cause of large additions to
the cultivated area, and a great increase in the prosperitv of the
people. As it w,t.s dug in the name of the prince Saltan Salim,
it was called which wor<l gives a chronogram for the

date of ita completion . A'-.u in Hindi means “a stream.” At

length cruel fate lirought utter ruin upon him so that he endured
many hardship.? and privation.s. WTien His Majesty in .\.h. 994
(a.p, 1.5S6) departed foi Atak lie appointed Mnlla Nnm-d-din to

t No ptvt'jana of tliia luime is mentioned ia the acctmnt of tiie ^ariar of
Sirhind oii pp. Ii9o, 296 of vo! ii of the Safidon is now & town

in the Jind State .mil jhfl in the Paojib. See Imp. Gazetteer of India, new
series, xxi, 349

^ The text and the MSS. have Sh^I^dnai, which is wrong, for the nnineri.
cal vnlnes of ita letters give the total 967. ten years before the birth of S.-ilitn
(Jahangir), who was born in a.h. 977 (.v.n. 1569) ; we mast, therefore, read
ShaikhQnai. which not only gives the correct date, bat also contains the name
of Salim, whose father called him by the pet name of Shaikhfi, deeming him
to have been granted to the prayer.s nf .Sh.dfch .S.dim i Cishtt

275

the trusteeship of the tomb of the late Emperor ir the impeiia]
city of Dihli, and there the MtiU'l died- The following ’'erses are
excerpts from his poems; —

‘‘ Sad at heart am I sitting, far from those smiling lips,

Like tlie rose-bud arn I silting, with my heod -s-t down f-.
my collar."

"In his kindness and generosity
The most just King' conferred ci. Turkha.i ‘L.- :i,ie
Of this Khan-a.ie he possesses the name alone
From this name, howeier full of ilignity. what d. m in,- ^ain .•

Hay more, he makes this complaint or the tcr'r.' also
Before tl.e king’s perfect wisdom. pog

That besides the " khan ’’ nothing but de.serr 1 tvd' seems to
remain to him,

While with his ta,i-Jiha,i-a.te moisture* seems t^ di~appeai
from them altogetlier."

The Khan, yvhen the Emperor was mrirchinsr aj'a.r.st Hakim
Wirza in a.h. 989 (a.d. 1581 ). remained behind and > ■. turned from
the Panjab to his owny'(?y?r, a line of cji.duct whieli c.xcited su.s-
picion against him, so that after the Emperor ’.= roiani fiom this
expedition he was summoned to FathpCir, there to I;-.- called to
account for liis monetary transactions and his Tyritino's, ro be I'C-
primanded, and deprived of his title. In this marue'. he was
persecuted for some year.s 'I'ho.se who are ijuaiiticJ to dis-

1 Tarkhin was a Mughal title which was hereditary for nice generations
and carried witii it extraordinary privilege.? (tide .Id.-i-.t.ttin);. i, 304} From
these verses it would appear that Nura-d-din claimed to Le a. f’ai khan by
hereditary right, whereas Akbar bestowed on him first tl.e ti'io of Khan and
then that of Tai khfui. the latter, however, merely as an honoiury title, with-
out any of the substantial privileges formerly attached to it i i.e ^orne was
evidently the case with his earlier title of Khan.

* This is a clever poem, y [tar) means ‘n.oist.’ The pC'-i says that he
had nothing but waste lands with his title of Kh an, but that wi eii be was
made far-Khau what little moisture these was in these hind- seemed to
evaporate.

276

criminate attribute his luiu to the impropriety of wliich he was
guilty in lampooning the officials in the imperial city of Dihli,
wherein he was actuated solely by the enmity which he bore to
Tatar IQian.' The satire which he wrote he chose to attribute to
Qasira-i-^u/dj, publishing it as the work of that poet. The
grounds upon which his satire was based will be best defined by
quoting from the etfiision.

■■ IMiyan Jamal lOjan® i.s the mufti of Dihli,

But he never yet delivered one of his fooli.>li judgments
gratis-,"^

He is the Governor of the city under Tatar Khan.

And has just ^ucli another little donke}'’s face as his master
^.aikh Hasan the little decree-writer nith hi- poisoned pen
Spreads on all sides false news and slanderous whisper.?.

At the very time of prayer he pei forms, in a perfunctory
mauner, his ceremonial ablutions
When the reader ha.s already ascended the pulpit.

Tt is he, it is he, it is he that oppre.sses the city,

A vain babbler, with his harlots ”

The openmg coupler ot that etfu.siou, which even to quote is
scurrility, is a- follows:

'■ Alas, for Dihli and its holy shrines,

-Ills, t'o; tli-j ruin of its palaces !

This .satire extends to nearly two huiulred and fifty couplets.
One of the loiirnc-d men of th it city. Shaikh Mulianimad Kambu

^ 1 iUir ai’Anunad, a ^nih'isani. IT.* a c ornnHijiior of a

thoa'iii ; i’l wa-. tm vfl«- of D^Mi m 15('3 04 and tlien Ui'-r-j ih

i.-.TS

: S, - ; I : ’ N-. VI

•' Th' .;ni r- :

Tj- •- f I ! tr*Ls>-i _• -.iplLts. and t'- fi"-?’,. -/t oiio

o-t tiiC’ .1 -itU ’ .hifl. ab^aid Chnniiiatim,,- ii.ii’HUin^ iht

po.si-e- - , - - K\v 'hTj-I I's l' .il ;t,.;.urk app' t ^ V.e

A I r • ' - .] h-:^. i,

277

by i;amp, wrote an answer to the whole of it in the followiag two ■
couplets ; —

“ Narn-d-din is sach a blockhead
That it must have been in folly that his father begat the fool. 2G0
The babbling dolt has been struck on the head with, a mallet,
There i.s no (need to) answer his fooli.sh chatter.”

Praise be to God! These verses are equal to * that woi’ld-famed
fragment of the lord (Maulavi Xiiru-d din ‘Abdn-l-Rab’nar.-i-Jnmi
(may hi.s tomb be hallowed H, the opening reuses of which are
given below ; —

“ Alas for the Love of God, and its ecstasy^

It has consumed my heart with its scorching h6P,t '

Mina eye never glanced towards anglit but God.

My lot is cast with God and with His revelation.^ ’ ”

i he wortliy Manlana Nurn-d-din fancied himself a second tTnml,
botli as a story-teller and as a stj'list. But how can there be any

comparison between the two?

‘ If in your actions you resemble not the virtnou.s, of what use
is it to resemble them in name ?

■' One who bore the title of Masih restored sight to him wiic
was blind from his mother’s womb, but another Masih
had himself but one eye.”

It is to be hoped, however, that as he was not without natural
goo.iness of disposition, ha repented of his evil deeds, and that God
;n His gi’aaioiis mercy allowed his tribulation and suffering in this
world to be an expiation of his sins. (May God tbrcrive him
When the MaidiUia, after being put down froni hi.s histh place,
c'lme to Agra, I was walking in the public market one dar, and
met him. One of my friends, the genial and witty iliya.' Kamaln-
J-iIin Husain of Shiraz,^ who was one of the leading mtr, in Agra,
said to him, ‘‘Well, my lord Xawwab, you b.ave written .something
regaruing the officials in Dihli, and new why .shoubi you not

1 The text an.3 the MSS. have ‘ One couplet,’ thoa^h two are gl"er;,

^ Badaoui seems to mean that their form was copied from .Tarr.’";-. aif‘ah,

3 Sse Chapter TI, No. XLII

36

278

bestow tTie Same favour on the officials iu Agra, wlio expect it of
you ' ” I said, “ Evidently he has seen nothing in the leading men
of Agra whieh renders them worthy of this honour.” iliyan
Kamalu-u-diri laughed and said, “This is a false charge which
you have brought again.st us.”

XXy. T.tRPi. Ba.ui

He is a -.ufite of Transoxiana and is a witty man. He was
with Mirzayan ITlngh ilirza ' at the t-me when the ivfirzas cap-
tured the fort of Bahroe, and wrote the following quati-ain on tne
ev’ent : —

201 “ The Ti'.uurides are unequalled in ^alour,

Victo.'-y smiles on them whithersoever they turn.

When they took Bahroe by storm

This chronogram was found for the event, ‘ They captured
Bahroe.’ ’ '■*

XXVI. TausanI.

His name .i Manohar and he is the sen of Lon Karan, Raja of
•iambliar,® a t-iruous salt tract. It may be that the “Attic salt’’
Irs ver.ies :s the eifect of his native land. He possesses wender-
t'nl personal Oeauty and o.tiriiordiaary intellectual power. He
‘■'i.s called at f-rst “Mjham'.r.ad MmiioIuii'.” and afterwards received
; .6 title C; J-titia Manohar. His t.ither, .u spite of h's inrideiity,
.i-ed, by of honouring and distinaiitishing him, to glcry in
• ailing liioi :f .qamraad Zuanoliar. Although he was not accept-
..t'is to the emperor he lii.-> poetic gvmus. These verse.t ate his : —
"The y- iatlih is boasifii: ot hi.s .'eligion, the Brahman brat's
cf hB icloiatry :

He 1 - f.„ 15 .ntoxi'..ated with tne iieauty of the Fiiencl lias
nuagh. to do witl; idolatry or religion.”

■ Akbar’s cousin. ITe is .tistiuguished by rhe hoiio.' ific piui'.il

-C iv.ayan, or. bcc.tase lia wa.s the head of tiir- House of Tlinar

■2 The cLron. oara ( J ) gi.fea the date A H. 980 = a d.

.'- 73 .

oambhav. •.r..Tious Balt fake ir. Rajputana the borders of the Jodh-
p7r and .J.-.lp ir ic.ires, tyino; between 26= 53' .and 27= 1' N. and 74= W E.

27'.)

Qiiiitraiii.

" Without tlje love of Thee the liver is filled to the brim with
fire,

Without the pain of longing for Thee the thoin is sunk deep
in my b' ain ;

Tile idol-temple and the Ku'baL ’ alike mean naught to mo
but infide'itv.

My couoerii is onlv uith the Ona-ness of God.”

hen they trave him his takhaViis (poetical name! he recited
these te\v couplets ■—

G thou who sippesc sfeurfeuf, visit the a. 5 sembly of u.s who
drink the lee.s !

for our livers supply us with roast-meat, and the wine-
cup is filled -with onr hep.rt’.s blood.

It i.s .shameful f(.r men to make mention of soul or heart in 202
the ca.se of love.

But our hearts are like congealed blood and our souls are
like the bitter blast.

lausani.* give rein to the steed of desire in the field of love.

lhu:i shalt safely attain thy desire with Ak'-ar for thy
guide.”

hiiice a Kindn(» had .so much poetic genius and ecstatic feel-
ing t'-I have recorded ttiese verses.

XXVll. Taz vr.vl OF Aiihai;.

de wjis .sistei' s sou to itaulaua Xargisi. and, in accordance with
-he .saving. ■' the true .son resenunes iiis maternal uncle,” he wa.«
ilistingniobed by his wit and the strength of his intellect. He

t The temple of Miikkal..

laiifnu aignificH a fiery ateed. The appositeness of the metaphor in this
verse is apparent.

3 The anti. or bigotry would not allow him to regard a Tlinuu who dis-
played poetic or .ologioiis; fer.-our otherwise than as a freak of namro.

^ iJoth have which ir meaningless Tiie reading in

the text la nod.inbledly correct.

280

came from Turkey to India in tlie days of Bairam Khan’s supre-
macy, and profited mucli by liis generosity. He was captured in
the battle fought beneath the mountains ' by Ataga Kkan, and wa^
by him paraded before the emperor, as the chief of his gifts, with
the banner of the eighth Imam, ‘Ali-ur-Rija* (may God accept
him). He was very favourably received by the emperor. He
composed Ins treatise on Beauty and YiJjuf ioT Yusof Muhammad
Khan,® the son of Ataga Khan. The opening couplet of the poem
IS as follows ; —

In the name of Him to whom the face of foe and friend
Is turned, in which direction soever He may be.”

He composed some verses desciiptive of the members of the
beloved, among which are the following couplets : —

” Her face is a mirror, her neck is a shaft of ivory,

Those vvho aie in face like the fairies desire that mirror;
The palm of her hand is, like the sun, a mirror of light,

The fingers of that houri are the rays of the sun
To the eye of understanding the parting of the hair of that
sweet-lipped maid

Is a meteor resplendent in the heart of the night.*

Nay, I eried in describing it as a meteor.

Rather is it a stream of fair water traversing ,i garden of
hyacinths.

J Tills wns ttie battle fought in a D 1560 in the Jalandhar Duab between
the imperial troops under the command of Shamg-ud-diu Muhammad, Ataga
Khau, and Bairam Kh au. in which tlie latter was defeated. Vide vol. li, text,
p. AO.

■t Bairam Khan, a Shi'ah, displayed the banners of the Imams of the
ghi'alis before his troops.

3 Yusuf Muhammad Khan, the eldest son of Ataga ^an I Sharas-ud-diu
Muhammad), was the foster-brother of Akbar. He was only twelve years of
age when he distiagaished iiimseif in this battle against Bairam Kh au. Vide
Ain-i‘Akbari, traus Elocbmann, voi i, p. 323. He died of excessive drinkiug
in A.D. 1566, at the age of eightecu. Vtde vol. ii, text, p. 84.

* In this simile tlie poet eemparos the white parting with a meteor and
the hair with the blackness of night, and lu the simile in the following
couplet he compares the former with a sparkling stream and the latter with
a garden of dark hyacinths

281

Desire fails ’ in its hope of reaching her navel,

Remaining for ever in the pit of despair
Desire ever hovers round about her,

Like the thirsty qiian y round about the well.

Above her nose is the palm-tree of our desire.

Her arched eyebrow.s stained with dye;

There grow, in spite of nature’s rule.

Two lily petals from a wild l ose sprig.

In the eye of that light of my eyes

There appears, as it were, a drop of dew on a ro.se

Giicumdunt pudeiidiini maryai itite iilius iiiteinumUie,

Luiine Vtlnl cre^centei dtiae.

In grace she e.x;cela the lily bud,

Tongue placed in palate and lip on lip. "

He has written in reply tc> the Dihnoma of "Imad a masytavi
in which the following couplets occur: —

" E'rom legret for thy moist - ruby lip
And from separation from thy curled looks
His ( the lover’s) weak body has dwindled to a hair,

In his body tliere remains to place for his soul.

From vexation and giief his heart is melted to blood,

He drinks his own blood and draws no bieach,”

In a description of the moiming he has written: —

‘■The ashes of the morning hare gone on the breeze,
f’lie has caught the cotton of the morning." ®

Coui'leu.

■' When my head droops fU my knees iu separation from that
faith le.ss one,

* The words are Ajapt " here is .severed,’' and there is a referei’ce,

which cam, ot be well reprodaeei: ir tiv-iulation. to the cutting of tiie um-
bilical cord.

■2 Or “ respknd,=pt." '‘o{ tire vhI..-' ” The epitliet is apphcuble alike to
a lewel <.r to a moist lip

3 That is oaj.thD cool oi the laoruing has been dispersed

by the fiaice ray 3 of the auu.

203

282

204

My bofij IS reducer! to a heap of ashes by my burnincr
heait ’’

‘When her cruel swoi'd is raised like a banner to slay me.

I make iny complaint of her cruelty, my excu.se for falling
at her feet ;

For hei- sake 1 cheerfully endured the cruelty of the world;
not knowing

h'on little trust could be placed in her tenderness ;iu<i
i.Utli."

In truth the quilting.s tin' patched woollen robe of
poverty

Bind npon the hands and fact of avarice the chains of con-
tentment "

Lo\e's meuciioant htuglrs at the ermine of royalty.

As he comes forth from love'.- futnace smeared with ashes,"

*■ The dust o: existence has goi-o on the breeze, but .still from
ni'iistiue of tear.®

The feet or Thy humble iovoi.s reruain in the mire."

‘The swear, r thine eyela->hes lamt- as a boon to me when
1 ws,' iic'idf m}'<elf,

When I came to mvself I ha;l a hj.ndred wooxicis on my
soul ”

the empei or s order he wrote the toiioning verse,'-- descrip-

of an e'ieph..:it

■ From the 'Inst of the road jf -the emperor whose ;hrone is
tne ,sky

He scatter:-, ambergris on hirii-S‘..-]r by way of peidume.

The constellation of the Eagle appeals on his nead, with.oat
e.xagge; at’.on.

Like a mr.L-e on the summit of the mountains of Caucasus ;

When hi.i i 'My is encircled v. ith it?- golden chain

The milky way and the nei'.veno come into view.

283

When lie is distressed by tlie heat of the sun
He pours water over himself like a fountain.

Damsels of fairy form and moon-like countenance
Sit, by the emperor’s command, on the throne which he
bears.

They .sit there evei in their eutiuncing beauty'

For verily the rnoniitaiiis of Cauca.sus are a meet rcstino’-
place for fairit.s.''

One night in the year H. 975 • ,ro'ober.s put him to death with
cruel sword, and he was buried i" the buildiiur which he had
erect"d for himself in Agra.

XXVIII, T.iSHBlHI-- OF Kashax.®

He came tno or three times to India and left the country again,
and now in these days he has relumed and attempts to seduce
men to heresy, and invite.s them to join tlie sect of the Basakii-
tyanis.^ He has persuaded Shaikh Afau-T-Fazl that he is an 205

* A.D. 1567 - 68 .

- Vide -4ni-i-Aii)fi)v, trans. Blochmann. vcl. i, pp. 596 — 598.

i A city of ‘Iraq-i-Ajam.

t The followers of Mahmud of Basakhwan. a villas’e in Gilan The seer
was also styled ilahmudiyyali, Wahidiyyah, Saqfawiyy&ii, i,r L'uianfi. Mah-
mud styled himself ShaiJis-i- ff'gtud. or, '■the indiriiiaal,” ana professed to
be the Imam Malidi, whose appearance on earth ushers in the end of
the world He lived in A H. 800 lA it 1397-98) in the days of the Amir
T. timer, and httd many followers in Persia, bnfc the sect was there esttin-
gaiahed by Shah 'Abbas I,

Mahmud pressed into his service a verse of the Qt.r’-in, Sur, xvii. 81

' Pei’adveatui e thy Lord will raise thee to an honcar.UDle station.

He maintained that the human body had, since iis ereatioD, been advanc-
ing in purity, and that, on its reaching a higher degree of perfeotior.
' Mahindd ’ would arise, as indicated in the passage iiom the (Jci'd-q and
with his appearance the dispensation of Mohammad would come to an end.
He taught the transmigration of souls, and said that the beginning of every-
thing was tha nuqlah-i-ttak, or earth atom’ from which the vegetables,
and from these the animals, arose. The term gave i ise to the

284

infallible spiritual guide and by bis means bas been enabled to
present to the ^alifah of the age an ode, the object of which
was to ask the emperor why he did not devote himself to the over-
throwing of the self-styled orthodox, so that truth might be
confirmed in its central position and pure monotheism might be
established. He also dedicated to ShaiUj Abu-‘1-Fazl a treatise
after manner of the Nuqtawi sect, .and their manner ' of writing
the letters, all of which is hypocrisy and dissimulation ' and
comparison of the numbers of the letters, and Hakim ‘Ain-ul-Mulk
discovered that the sum of the letters in the word TashbiM was
the same as in the word Taznqi? “ the hypocrite " : and the rest
of his revelations may be estimated in the same manner. Tash-
bihi wrote a divan, and the following few verses are among his
ravings : —

■’For once, 0 dust of the girt.vc_)a,ju, pinme thyself on thy
fertility.

For thou beiire.st m tne tomn a corpse like me killed hv that
baud and dagger.”

“ Wear those garments of whatever colour plenseth thee.
For I recognize the majesty of that graceful form.”

” The two bands of this world and of that world .a'lC naught.
The ring is in thy hand,^ both the ring and the hand are
naught.”

name Niiqtn.U''. Vide Al’i-i-Akharl, trsns. Elochtnann. i, pp. 177, 4.52, 453
and Badaoni, text. vol. ii. pp. 21.5— 24&.

t Tha, is to .say siagly. and not ir; words, as afterwaids appears.

^ ^ word coined by Badaoni, who forms an Arabic \erb;.l nonn from

the Persian word (J,'< He also osos this word in rob ii, p 247.

5 Tde nnmerlcal vainer of the lotrers in the two words are —

4(:'0 + 300 + 2+ 10 + 5+ 1.1 = 727: and
400 + T + 2004 10+100 + 10 = 727.

* PossiBiy a reference to the game of karn-hjzi in which one player hag
to gness in which of the r-ttier’s hqnds a i icg is hidden.

At the time when I was writing this hasty compilation he
gave into my hand, in the presence of Shaikh Abu-’l-PazI, a
treatise on Mahmud of Basakhwan, the preface of which was as
follows : —

“0 God! who art praisew’orthy {Mahmud) in all Thy doings,

I call upon Thee for help, on Thee of whom it is said, ‘ There is
no God but He.’ Praise be to God whose mercies are visible in
all His works, who has shown the existence of all His works.
From Him are their * *,* He knows Himself, bnt we do not
know ourselves, nor Him. He is an existence not existing except
through Himself, and a place of existence independent of others ;
and He is the most merciful. Question : — What is that which is 206
called ‘Nature’? A7isiver : — “That which is called ‘ Nature ’ is
God.’’

Dirt in his mouth, for daring to write such stuff ! The point
of all this lying is ‘the four nuqtahs.' At the end of the
treatise I saw, in his own writing, “ This has been frequently
written with reference to tiie Persian, the infallible religious
guide, T, b, a, r, ‘a, li, a, k, r, b. It, ash, b, i, h, i, Anavi, V-khravi,
Sahib MaqSm (the representative).* And the rest was after the
same fashion. We flee to God for refuge from such unbelief !

XXIX. TAQT-CD-DiNi * OP Shushtar

He has recently entered the imperial service and is well versed
both in those sciences which call for the exercise of the reason-
ing faculty and in traditional knowledge. He is well acquainted
with poetry and has poetic genius. The following couplets are
his ; —

• One word is unintelligible in the text. The word is given aa
With a variant

The text Beems to be corinpt. I have trarsBliterated the letters and
words appearing in the text and in MSS (A) and (B). Mr. Blochmaim
(trans. Ain-i-Akbari. i, .OAT n ) makes the letters re-id “Mir ‘Ai; Akbar
Tashbiiil, the Araini, the last, the representative,’* and his reading appears
to D... a good one, though it is not that of the texx.

s Otherwise kn-own as Mnila Taqiya. Tn the T’-itu-.j be iS styled
Td ,T Muhammad. He is represented as a disciple ol AkLur s ' L'tMue
Pdith.” Tide A'hi-i- Ikharl trans. Blochmann, i. old.

“ If I be not enabled to steal a glance at Tliy face,

I can at least fill my month with sweetness by thinking on
Thy lip :

If Thou hast planted me like a herb on the earth,

Where shall I find the hand and the heart that will enable
me to end my earthly pilgrimage ? ”

He is at present employed, by the emperor’s command, in
turning the Shahnama into prose, or in other words in converting
fine linen into oackeioth, or m unravelling a rope to make
oakum.

XXX. SInI Khan * op HERix.

He is one of the amirs who have been long in the imperial
service, and is well knovm for his ability, scientific knowledge,
and wit. If anybody were praised to him for his learning and
accomplishments he would at once say to him. “ ]My love and
friendship are conditional on this, that you pay no heed to what
the base and vulgar say of me, for such people are a hindrance to
207 friendship and a cause of strife.” His verses are, as it were,
disconnected fragments of chaff, but he has nevertheless com-
pleted a divan.

‘‘ 0 thou whose practice is to vex me, and whose rule of
conduct is injustice !

I cry out against this injustice and against this rule.”

Pass by thi.s bitterness, for in this tardy world no one who
iil-treats the poor prospers.”

“ A rival is on the road to salute thee,

O God ! Grant that he leave not the road with his life.”

1 He was born at Herat and belonged to the Arlat clan. According to
the Aibarnama (i. 379) Manlana SanT, * who is now called SanI Khan,’ was
in the service of Mirza Hindal ; hot after the Mirzi’s death (Nov. 20, 1551)
he was received by Hnmsyun into his service. He served in the wars with
Kh an Zaman. Vide Ain-i-Aibari, trans. Blochmann, i, 476. According to
the Tabaqat-i-Akhari Sani Kh an was a low fellow who was originally a
qalandar and eventually rose to be an amir.

Quatrain.

“ I have suffered fi’om separation as even Jacob i never
suffered,

I have suffered for love what even Majuun never suffered,

This calamity which thine absence has brought upon me
Was never dreamt of by Farhad nor heard of by Vamiq.”

His name is ‘All Akbar and he has made the fact that he
bears the same name s the en^oeror, an excuse for addressing to
him treatises on heresy, in which, agreeably to the system of the
Niiqtamn,^ he sets forth both the emperor and himself as that
promised person who was to appear, in accordance with the
uiimerical values of the letters composing the word ^akhs,^ in
the year h. 990,* and he quotes the words of Mahmud in support
of this view: — the curse of God he upon them all! He has
versihed the Kdfiyyah ^ and a treatise on Siifi-ism, in which
occurs the following ridiculous couplet * which is made to scan
merely by filling in vowels ,■ —

He has apparently, at the latter end of his lifi, repented of
poetry.

XXXI. OF Masbhap.

His name is Khwaja Husain Before he came to India the 208
great men of his country used secretly to assemble at social

t Scii. ia his separation froci Josenh. ilainin, Fariiii aud Vann’t^ were
famouadovers.

* See the note on page —

* A person.” The nnraerical vaiaes of the letters are 3tX) + 600 + 90 «

990.

* A D. 1382.

6 kdnyyat fi-n-nahw {liber sumeient) by ghaikh Jamal-nd-din Abi
*Utnar ‘Uchman bin *ljinr, commonly known ss Ibn-nl-Hajib. A famous
work on .Arabic Grammar, a full account of which, and its various com-
mentaries, is given in Hiji ^alifab, 9707. The author died in a.h. 646—'

A.D. 1248 49. Vide Badioni, vol. i. tnns. Hanking, pp. 428 and 465 and
note^.

® Sic, but a hemistich only is quoted.

^ Sana’i was the son of Ghiyas ud-diu Jlub»mmad of Mashhad. The

gatherings to consider and discuss even one couplet by him, and
in each gather ing his verses were read by way of good augury,
and all agreed, both with tongue and pen, in his pre-eminence
in poesy, and recorded their opinions. Since his arrival in
India all his poetic fancy has been frozen by envy, and lie is
fallen into the corner of neglect and become the target for a
hundred shafts of criticism, and wanders distracted in the way
of the vulgar. His div6ii is well known and contains a good
masnavi, altiiough it is for the most part pointless, and its style
IS not comparable with that of his loftier odes. He has, how-
ever, a poetic nature, and in all subjects save unity, preaching,
advice, and direction he has wonder ful aptitude. I quote these
few couplets as a memorial of him; —

'' Such grace rains down from her from head to foot.

That one could sweep grace out of her bed.”

The idea e.xpressed in this couplet, however, very closely
resembles that iu the couplet of the master-poet ;

“ She causes blandishments to spring from the ground, she
scatters grace in the air

By means of her graceful gait aud her sweet foot on the
earth.’'

‘‘If, for example, thou sittest ’ behind a min-or, a person
Standing before it sees his owu image with the face
reversed.” *

author of the Ataihkuda-i-A^ar says of hia poenia, “either no one under-
atauda the meaning of his rersea, or hia yerses have no meaning." This
criticism appe..fs to be juat. S.ini'i, liaying offended .Sliih Ismail Safari II
by presenting to him an ode on his accession which contained no mention
of his name, lied to India .nnd was well received at court He died at
Liihor ni a.h 1000 (A.ir. 1591-92}, Abu-I-Fair Fai/i. AkbaFs poet-
laureate, aud brother of Abu-l-Farl, was Sana'i’s pupil. Vide Ain-i-Akbari
i. trans. Hlochmann, p. 549, ii. G, and p 363

MS (.4) has a tneauiagieas word which hae apparently

helped to puzzle the editor of the text

’ iXr. ijlocluiaiii ! / traui i eajB of this pasaago, ‘This

289

I shed so much grief abroad from my house
That the difficulties of my house are from without the
door.”

In describing an ambassador he says ; —

“ Like the sun in the sky thou hast traversed the world.

Like sleep thou art welcome to all eyes.

The sun, perchance, is but a distillation from thy hand,
Which washes the whole world with one drop of water.

Such blackness has overspread tliat tribe whose fate
dominated by Saturn tliat if, for example,

Bach hair on their bodies became a candle,

The sight of man would not be able to distinguish their
faces.*

The sound of their shoes would snatch Venus away from
Ufe,

Their hideous voices reach not the understanding.

Their gait is like fire, fheii’ speech is like war.

The sight of them is punishment and their voice is a
bi-azeu trumpet.

If a thought of them passes through the mind of the
wet-nurse

The child from fear desists from sucking.” *

“ 0 thou ! from the splendour of the fair candle of whoso
face the mirror is illumined.

From whose reflection the mirror seems to cherish a soul.
Place not the iniri'or before thee for the sake of seeing
thyself,

Reflect rather on my condition and look not in the glass.
Fire has burst into name in my heart, like its reflection in
a mirror

verse is anintelligibfe to me.’ I have translated it as it stands, but it seem s
to liave DO meaning.

t The meaning of these verses is obscure.

* The author has, unfortunately, not. said to whom these desoriptiv®

verses apply.

209

Since the sunlight of thy face lias been lefiected in every
mirror.

If the burning blast of thy wrath should break into flame,
It will see its reflection in every mirror.”

The Song op the Ccpbearer.

“ Come, ray heart, to the wine-shop of the people of the
Secret,

Drink of the cup of truth which melts outward semblance ;
So free thyself from the outward form

That thou may.st, like the fairy, become invisible to vulgar
eyes.

Perchance the desire of that guide shall seize thee
So that thou mayst obtain a place in the street of the
wine-shops.

Bring me,* cupbearer, that caudle which lies in privacy,
Which is hid<len, like the hand of Moses,* in his sleeve :
Give it into ray hand and thus make my hand resplendent
That in its light I may stretch forth my hand to perform
miracles.

Come, 0 cupbearer, and for the sake of the drunken
debauchees

Stretch forth thy hand to shed the blood of the bottle.
Look to the circulation of the bottle and leck® not of
punishment.

1 Literally ‘ come.’ See the author’s triticism below.

* The reference is to Exodus iv, 6, 7, and to the Qur’an, Surah xxvii

12 .

r y u . * O ' /’i" ' ■ 'T' ‘>1

ojf ^ XT" cr* j

y , y f y ' y ~y '

go- ^ ,

3

“ Moreover, put thy hand iuto thy bosom ; it shall come forth white with-
out hurt; this shall be one among the nine signs unto Pharaoh and his
people.”

3 The text and MS. (B) have > e. " inquire not,” ” have no anxiety

for.” MS. (A) has ' fear not.”

291

For in times of famine it becomes lawful to drink blood
Give me, 0 enpbearer, that amber of existence
That by means of its attraction I may ascend
And may pitch my tent above this lowly place,

And, like ambition, may set my foot on whatever is !

Bring m.e, 0 cupbearer, that warm-blooded wine
Which increases love in my heart.”

This “ Song of the Cupbearer ” clearly contains many vul-
garisms, for everywhere he has used “come” in the sense of
“ bring,” and he has reproduced the expressions used by masters
of poetry on the same subject, forgetting that their expres-
sions are used in brief fragments, of which the second couplet is
dependent ’ on the first.

In his ode on the sun the following couplet occurs : —

“The sun’s reflection makes manifest in water the properties
of oil

When he maiieo of the uust of his worth a crown,” *

He has written oaes on sublime subjects, but in a mean style,
and to him the proverb applies : —

“jl’heir houses are lofty, their spirit is low,

0 Lord ! make these two things equal.” ®

XXXII. Jcda’1.* I

He is Mir Sajyid ‘Ali, the painter, a versatile man. e.ach page
of whose paintings is a masterpiece, and who may be described

^ word is in neither MS., but has been correctly supplied in

the text.

^ this is a literal translation of the couplet, to wnioh the criticism in the
dtatJikadd-i-Azar applies. The “ crown of dust ” is probably a reference
to the sunbeam.

^ i.e., “ either bring down their houses or raise their spirit.’’

* Mir Sayyid ‘Ali of Tabriz, whose poetical name was Juda’i was more
famous as a painter than as a poet. He is mentioned in the Ain~i'Akba>t
(trails. Bloclimann, i, 107), as the first of the court painteis. Of him Abu-!-
Fazl says, “ Among the forerunners on tbe high road of art I may mention
first Mir Sayyid ‘All of Tabriz, He learned the art from his father. From

a second Maul ’ in India I'he story of Amir Hauizal ii
sixteen * volumes was illuminated and completed under Ms
supervision. Bacli volume of it fills a box, and each page ot it
measures a yard wide by a yard long, and on each page is a
picture.

He has completed a divan, in which the following verses
occur : —

“• A.S the morning broke the thorn boasted of its fellowship
with the rose

And thus pierced with its nail the broken heart of the
nightingale.”

The beauty of idols is the Ka‘bah to which T journey ;
love is the deseit by the way,

The railing of rivals ^ is the acacia thorn of that desert.’’

•• From head to toot we are covered with swellings from the
wounds of love for thee,

the time of hia introduction at court the ray of royal favour has shone
upon him. He lias made himself famous in liis an and has met with much
success.”

i Jada’I’s father was Mir Mansur, and Jndah liimself had the title of
Sadir-nl-Mnlk. Bpdaoni doe.s not mention the accusation of theft -whicli
been brought against tiie poet. He is said to have stolen the poems
..f y,'r Asjikl of Q.im {vide supre: no XI). Tlie number of his verses
lU,0tM), and when oil his death-bed he handetl them over to Jiul.Vi
r ' niiange. Jnda'i is said to have publiphed in hie own name w’hatever lie
flmiiglit good find to have thrown the reniHiiidei* into water. l\ruda Tarlqi
of >sva ' ride lyif-'n nr> LXXT7\> has written an epigram on this subject : —
o— j‘ ^ — iutt’ \) U

■■ 'i’lion lia.st nl.iin tl»e disappointed Ashki, my mind is lost in wonderment
at the concealment of thy crime. With thee remained four diiiiiny of his
and what remains of thy poems is his.” Vide Jhi-i-Akhari, trarip., Blocli-
mann. i, 59^:^, n. '6

- Twelve, according to the -d/n-?-AA6aj t. (Tr&ns. Blochmann, i, 108)

S The Atdshkadad’Arr.yi and Taqi'a Tnzkirah mention another Juda’q of
Bava

We are the merchants of lov'e and these wounds are our
merchandise.”

T am a 4 iiariy half-slaughtered, fallen far from the street
of the Friend,

I stumble along on my way striving to see the face of the
Friend.”

■■ I wished to describe my circnrustauces to that ill-natured
one.

She is ever in company with others, what shall I say to
her ?

XXXTII. jAzBi.‘

Ilis name is Padshah Qnli, ana he is the son of Shah Quli
Khan Xaranji.® He has a poetic ® turn of mind. The following
verses are excerpts from his works ; —

“ Such sweetness has the Beauty which knows no beginning
conferred on the loFely.

'J’hat love reaches a stage at which it gladly relinquishes 212
life.”

“See the extent of my jealousy. From lo-. e’s madness I
come to myself

If any one perceives that my speech is of the beloved.”

“ Thou art the unrestrained hunter and I am the ('wounded )
quarry

Which the hunter, from excess of cruelty, neglects to kilL”

1 Vide A^?i-i-A/cburI, traus. Blochmann, i, 4i90, 59t>.

2 Abii-1-Fazl oays that ^ah Qnli was a Kurd from near Baghdad. He was
an old servant of Humayiin. In the first year of Akbar’s reisrn he served
under Kh izr Kh an, in the Panjab He was much attached to Bairam. In
the eleventh year lie was sent to Garha when Mahdi Qasim Kh an had,
without permission, left that province for Makkah. In the Tahaqiit-i-
Akhurt he is ^escribed as a commandei ^ oO'J. Vuie Ain'i^Ahhari^ traus.
Rb'vhmann i, 4S0

’ The text has incorrectly.

38

Both MSS ha\e jxZj which is correct.

•204

“ Thou art one who hast not experienced the delicious
torment of the night of separation,

Nor seen thyself shrinking from (the fierce delight of) the
day of reunion.

The thorn of reproach has not detained thy skirt,

Thou hast not seen thyself with thy head drooping on thy
breast like a bud.

Never has thy love been constant,

Thou hast not felt the sweet anguish of the beloved’s
neglect ;

With no one hast thou held discourse of love,

Thou hast a heart which has nothing to regret.”

” My heart, at the sight of another in the arms of the be
loved, i.s like the bird

Whicli the school-boy, from fear of the master, suddenly
releases.”

“ Now that, after an age, my eye falls on the ravisher of my
heart

The veil of shame falls between us, so that I cannot see
her face.”

“ I am not one to tell my tale to a messenger,

Or to base pretensions on what a messenger may say.”

“ From one glance of thine in the a.ssembly of me and my
friends

213 What quarrels had we not among ourselves r ”

His fathe.'. Shah t)uli Khan, composed ' the following quat-
rain ; —

1 lu the J -Akba', (cran.-. Itlochmann, i, 59C) this ([Uatraiu is ascribed
to Ja.’hi himac.f

“ Soiii6tiin6s I break my vow of repentance and. sometimes
the wine-bottle,

Once, twice, incessantly I break my flute.

'0 Lord, deliver me from the evil promptings of my spirit !
How often shall I repent and again break my vow of
repentance ? ’’

Praised be God ! Even a clod has broken into flame.

One day after the return from the journey to Papia' Jazbi,
Qazl ^ams-ud-din Qazvini, and some other poets, began to argue
about a couplet of Husain Sana’i’s, viz. : —

If, for example, thou sittest behind a mirror, a person
Standing before it sees his own image with the face
reversed.” ®

When I drew near to them they asked me the meaning of the
couplet wliich formed the subject of discussion. I replied, “ Such
is tlie state of things nowaday.s that it is impossible to draw
any disiinction between the poetry of one’s friends and (the
actions of) Tital. ” " Now this Til al, who lived in tlie days of
Sultan Husain Mirza Uarhari,* was a wag^ and a limruist, a
man of disguises,® who used to go into social assemblies and
into colleges clad in the turban, the clothes, and the trappings of
a learned man and accompanied by a body of pupils. He would
first introduce his theses and discuss them in a very orderly
manner, thus making himself attractive to all present. He
would next introduce sophistries confu.sed with meaningless
arguments, until even the most learned doctors were thrown into
perplexity.

I In October, 1574. Vide vol. ii, text, pp. 179 — 184,

i Vide p. 286 and note (2). Contcmpoiary poets seem to have been as
much pii/.ztod over this verse as I am.

■’ JUo uanally sipaitics - deceit” or '• flattery,’’ but it is clear, from what
follows, that the author is referring to a man so iiauicd, or nicknamed.

* I do not understand this epithet Sultan Husain lllr/.i was the Icing
of Khniasan, of the house of Timur.

t wrongly omits the word which

appears in both ilSS.

“ who or wh:it turns, chau^ea, or roveraea, ’

296

1

214

XXXIV. JamilI ok Kalpi.

He is the sou ot Shnikli Jala.1, Wasil, who was the deputy of
Shaildi Muhammad Ghan.s,' and took great delight in the ecstatic
songs and dances of dariislies. Jauiili, though he has very little
of the ecstatic piety of his father, is yet not without a love of
learning and poetic taste, although he has written some ridicu-
lous - verses.

The following verses are extracted from his works : —

“ Whenever 1 think on the rose of thy face,

Like the broken-hearted nightingale I utter lamentations.
If the joy of union with thee has never been my lot,

I can, at least, indulge my heart with grief for the want of
thee.”

‘‘ Since her ringlets have led me into love’s madness,

My distracted heart is hound in the bonds of that mad-
ness.”

He has written an ode in praise of Qasim ‘Ali Qian, the corn-
chandler, govemor of Kalpi, in the course of which this couplet
occurs : —

“ To connect thee with the race of Khans (nobles)

Is most revolting and most unfit.”

This couplet al.so is attributed to him, but God knows whether
correctly or not : —

“ The mouse of my heart, which I nourished with Mood
drawn from my liver.

Has been suddenly seized by the cat of love.

Pierced by her teeth, and carried off.” *

His elder brother. Shaikh Fazil, was a wonderful Arabic
^cholar, and has written some fine poetry in Arabic. The tollow-

1 Vide pp. 6 — 10.

t Or, perhaps, in a good sense, ' comic or “ humorons ”

3 This couplet, and tha-., wiiieh precedes it, raise a donbt as to what the
author meant by .ittnbnting to the poet, One of the

eoiipiets is witty and the other is ridienloas.

297

ing is the opening couplet of an ode which he wrote in answer
to an ode by Mn‘in-ud-din Tantarani

O beautiful of face, my face, from days of old, has declined,

My soul has descended to tlie pit and tears have followed
like running water.

One day he recited this couplet, and as both he and his
respected brothei' have very sallow complexions I said, “ In this
opening couplet you have evidently addressed your younger
brother. ’ This quip was very well received. The opening
couplet of the original ode, which was answered, is

“ O thou of easy circumstances, sure thon hast thrown my
affairs into confusion.

Thou hast disturbed my heart by thine absence and it is
in a decline owing to its palpitation.” '

And Shaitt Fazil has written on Faizi’s commentary * an 215
essay in Arabic, in prose and verse, which furnishes sufficient
proof of his great learning. At the present time both brothers
have set out from Labor for their native place. If, in the
coui’se of following the object which they have in view, which
is a review of all the Imams of India, they do not slay one
another utterly, it will be a wonder.

XXXV. CisHTi.s

He is ^laikh Husain the Sufi, whose native place is Dihli,
and as he i.s a disciple of ^aiyj Salim Cishti * he has chosen

t This is the opening: couplet of a qa^dah by Tantarani.

2 Probably the Sajcaii*-ul-tlhdm rays of inspiration As Faizi has
been careful, in this book, to use i.o words containing a dotted letter the
work is probably more of interest as a feat of intellectual gymnastics than
of value as a theological treatise Vide Ain i-Akb(irJ, trana. Blochmann,

1, 549.

The Tahaqdt-i-Akbari contain'^ the following notice of Cishti ; —

‘‘ Shaikh Ci^ti of Dihli, whose name was Hasan (probably a misreading
for Husain) was one of the <iisci]>les of Shaikh Salim (b^tl. He used to
wear the garb of a STtfi ai,d [jasse-j his days in religious ecstasy

4 Vide pp. 18—27. 1 )c lex^ ‘.as Shaikh Islam,” bat ‘Salim” is

coifect

this poetical name. He was oue of the Sufi members of the
monastery at Fathpur, otherwise known as Sikri. He has
composed a dtcnii and i.s the author of several works, one of
which is The Book of the Heart and the Soul” written in verse,
but in an Indian style, and since its purport is the same as that
of the book ” Beauty and the Heart,” in which the master Mir
‘Ali Shir ■ has displayed his verbosity, it would he a pity to soil
one’s tongue with the mention of it.

Perhaps this opening couplet is the onlv one of .several
thousands of couplets written by Ci.^iti which is worthy of
mention ; —

Such love has Qais ^ for the peacock’s feather
That it would seem that he believes its eye to be the foot-
print of Laila’.s camel.”

XXXVI. JPkar.“

He is a Sayyid of Hirat and has good taste in poetry and in
the composition of enigmas. He was the chief paymaster of
Ataga Khan * and has written an ode and composed an enigma
dedicated to Mirza ‘Aziz Kuka,* containing a list of his titles
and prayers foi' his loug life and prospeiity. The following few
couplets are selected from his poems : —

1 Ainii- Ali ^ir was lUe va:it of Sultan Husaiii Miiza, king of Khnrasan,
of the house of Timur (4,i>. 1470—1505) and was the patron of the poet
Jam:. I have not seen a copy of his book, or of Ci^ti’s, but from the way
in which the author speaks of them they were piobably books on Sf<f

2 Qais, usually knowu by his epithet of JIsjnun, “ the distracted by love,”
was the lover of Lailu.

This poet is not mentioned in the Atn-i-Akbati nor in the Taiaqfit-i-
Ahhari.

i Shams-ud-din Muhammad Ataga (‘ foster-father’) Khan was the foster-
father of Akbar and was a commander of five thousand. He was murdered
by Adham Khan, May 16, 1562. ride .lin-i-Aikbuiv, trans. Blochmami,
\ 321.

6 Mirza ‘Aziz Kuka, Khan-i-A‘/am, was the son of Ataga Khan and a
commander of five thousand. I'l It Ahi-t.Akbnn, trans. Blochmann, i,
325—328

29f*

‘‘ Now tliat t.liecomb lias disturbed those musky locks '

Ab, that the wind would bear this message to thine ear ! ”

“ 1 would not that the dust, even of musk, should settle on 216
that cheek,

God forbid that dust should have a place near thy heart.”

‘‘ The place of herbage in the gaiden is beneath the foot of
the rose,

In the garden of thy beauty^ herbage has settled on the
rose.”

XXXVII. Ja‘far Beg.3

He is well known as Asaf Khan the Qazvini, and is brother’s
son to Mirza Gliiyas-ud-din ‘Ali ‘Asaf Khan, the late paymaster-
in-chief. He is himself now one of the chief paymasters. So

t Literally “ that maaky chain.” The reference is to the chain hnng in
the court of an oriental sovereign which petitioners for jostice could shake
and thus arouse the king and bring their grievances to his notice.

^ as in both MSS, The text has “paradise" which

does not suit the meaning of the verse. The reference is to the down on
the cheek of the beloved.

3 JaTar Beg was Mirza Qivam-nd-din, son of Badi‘>uz*Zamun of QazvTn
who had been vazir of Kasha n daring the reign of ^ah Tabmisp and had
presented his sou at the Persian Court. He came to India in 1577 and was
presented to Akbar hy his ancle, Mirza ^iy-^-^-nd-din ‘All Asaf Khan.
After his uncle’s death he was appointed commander of two thousand, and
recei^ ed tlie title of A>af Khan. He was appointed successively Thanadar
of Sawad (Swat), governor of Ka^mir, dHan-i-kal, Subaddr of Bihar and
commander of three thousand. On Jahangir’s accession he was appointed
utdU'i to Sultan Parviz and, later, raA*/7 and commander of five thousand
He accfjmpanied Parviz to the Dakan as his atdUq and died there in a ii.
1021 (a d. 1612) at the age of 63. Ha was a man of great genius, an
able iiuancier. a good aoc nintant, a great horticaltnrist. and one of tlie bt'st
poets oi liig lime wag a free-thinker, and was one of the members (jf

Akbar's ‘‘divine faitli.” U Akbar} ^ trans. Blochmann, i, 209, 111 —

•113 it Tuziik~\~JaKaiigirl^ 108, 109 et pasosem, and the Tabws'ii-i.-

Alb ifj.

bitter is his resentment at iia\iiig’ received no honour in the
days in which his uncle was influential at court, that he continues
to show it, and to attack his uncle even now that he is deadd
His poetic genius is gi eater than that of all his contemporaries,
hut is restricted by not being exercised, owing to his love of
pleasure and ease and the great demands made upon his time by
official business. He is also moderately fond of learning. Had
he been a man of one occupation he would have enchanted the
hearts of many of the poverty-stricken people of this time,
which would probably have been worth to him fcTrty tumSns in
cash.* (Whenever he made any considerable sum of money by
his poetry he would squander it.)^

The following few couplets are some of his ; —

“ My lives are cast to-day in the ways of injustice
For wherever the, beloved sets her footheads fall.”

“ If, like the moth, I fly distractedly around thy caudle,
O obstinate one !

My presumptuous flight will at length land me in death."

“ The roses of all are despoiled by the autumn,

But in my case both the rose-tree and the rose-garden are
gone.”

Thine affair, O Ja‘far ! is fallen into the fire.

Two hundred songsters are here not worth one sala-
mander.” _____

“ At length the day of resurrection has come for the
reckoning of my .sin.

O, tear up the record of the sins of the people.”

1 Lit “■ He fights and quarrels even with his spirit."

2 Then equivalent to £12".

S The pass.aue in bra'- kets is not in the text, but has been supplied from
the MS.S

301

'• What plain was this and what hunter tnai always brought
down the game ?

Xo quarry appeared in view, but received an arrow from
him.”

• I must write a letter concerning my grief to her who
possesses my heart ;

The grief of my heart is great, I must write to my love
concei’ning it.”

■■ If Thou art pleased with Ja'far, with the faith which he
holds and his heart,

I am deputed by him to say that he freely gives Thee this
faith and heart.”

“ Behold my magnanimity ! A hundred leaves of the book
of hope

Have I torn into a hundred pieces and washed them with
tears of blood! ”

■■ A rose has now bloomed in the garden afresh.

For last night the nightingale slept not till the morning.”

‘‘Since the city was too small to contain the griefs of my
heart

The open plain was created for my heart.”

Ail thy complaints are over, as mine l)egin.

For tile whole of my complaint is that I do not hear the
voice of thy complaint.”

" Come into her lieart, O pity, and let not my grief be in
vain !

For I am deeply afflicted while si'.e is occupied with
cruelty.”

3d

Ju'fai' found the way to the stieet of Ids lovo,
Now he will hardly rise to his feet ngain.”

She came and distracted me, and remained not for so long
That I could make my heart acquainted with consolation.”

XXXVIII. Haidaei of Tabriz. ‘

He has performed the pilgrimage to Makkah. He was the
pupil of Lisani, and lias written, in reply to the book Sahic-ul-

i In the Tahatidt'l-Aklarl it is said that Haidai‘1 c-mie three times from
‘In’iq to India and, having profiled much by the generosity of Akbar’s
Court, finally returned to ‘Iraq The following is the substance of Mr.
Blochmann’s note regaiding him, on p. 603, of his transhition of vol. i, of
the Ain-i-Akharl : —

Haidar! was three times in It»dia, The first time he came he waa young,
and found a patron in Mnhuinmad Qasim IChin of Ni^apur. His company
was more ngreeuble than his poems. The Masnavi wliich be wrote in
imitation of Sa'di’s Bustin is insipid, and remained unknown. Though ho
made money in India he wrote a satirical quatrain on the country, the
purport of wiuclt is that in a country in which two men can feast for a
rupee the worth of the men is not difficult to guess. On his second return
to India he found a patron in Mirza ‘Aziz Kuka, Khiin-i-AVam, who gave
him two thousand rupees for an ode. Shams-ad-din Muhammad, Ataga
IGiun, introduced him at Court For an ode on the elephant Akbar pre*
sented him ivith two thou^aud rupees and a horse. The tiiird time he came
to India he attached iiimself to Miiz-! ‘Abdar-Rahim, Khankhinau. whom
lie MCCfimpauied on his expedition to Gujarat, and received liberal presents
for an ode on the victory of Sarkic. He returned to KTishan, the governor
of which tow'll, A glia Khizr Nahavnndi, befiiended him. As Tabriz had
just been destroyed by the Turks of Hum he settled in Traq. at a place
called in the MSS. j^ai whit-h for its excellent climate and fruits had no
equal in Tiaq or Khurasan. At about that time ^ih ‘Abbas came to that
place on a liawrking expedition and, having been treated with discourtesy
by a darvJ^t ordered a geneial massacie of the inhabitauts, which was
happily prevented by Haidaii’s iuHuence. Haidaiu died at this place, be-
loved by all, in a n 1002 (a d. 1593-94) His son Samir! came to India
after his fathei’s death, and was made by the Kh ankhanan M!r Saman of
his household. He was also a good officer, and was killed during the wars
in the Dnkan, \>hen .^ahiuivaz Khan, the son of his patron.

so;:

Lisiin (‘a slip of tlie tongue’) l>y his fellow -pupil i^niif of
Tabriz, the LisR7i-nI-Ghaib (‘a voice from heaven ') in praise of
Lisani. He was for some time in India and then left and
returned, and again went away in such sort that he cannot
return again 1 have seen his divan, containing about 14,000
couplets, but with very little good stuff ' among all these. In
an ode describing the imperial elephants he has written : —

“ They were not mounds of driven sand —

His elephants, for they are in liattle an’ay .

And, for the puipose of engulting his foes

They are, on every side, the billows of the ocean of cala-
mity.”

As meed for ihis ode t.lie emperor ci'dered tliat a horse and a
money reward should be given to him, but the treasurer delayed
in carrying out the order, and IJaidari wrote this fragment: —

“I have a difficulty, O King! I wish to present to thee a
petition.

My ditticulty imprints on my heart a hundred brands of
regret.

Thou didst command silver and gold to be given to me,
but from thy treasurer

It is hard to get, and yet harder not to get.” '^

Some of his verses : —

“ No trust is to be placed in the love ^ of the moon-faced
beauties of this world

A ray of the sun settles not long on one place.

“ I burn ever with an inward fire, such it is.

1 am contemned everywhere, such is my miserahle lot.

' I liave translated literally.'

® From the note on the pvpcedin;? page it would seem that Haidari at
Itist received hia reward.

* This is a play upon words. The word here used, means also

san.

3U4

219

A fraijmenl.

“ Haidari ! Strive, like the x irtuous, to the utmost

To attain to some perfection in tliis world of sorrow ;

For to go from this world deficient in any thing

Is as though one were to leave the bath unclean.”

XXXIX. HcznI.'

He was one of the learned men oi ‘Iraq. During the dis-
turbances at Hirat he left that perilous piace to journey towards
India, but before he reached his goal he set forth for the desert
of non-existence. The following verses are his : —

“ Laughter comes upon me when I think on the. simplicity
of Iluzni,

For he loves, and expects fidelity from his beloved.

The loved one, in her ignorance, rendered fruitless my
efforts on his behalf*;

And the strange thing is that he is all the more indebted
to me.” .

“ I throw my darvish's robe on the fire that thou mayest
smell the odour of faith

From the ])atched garment, every thread of which is a
fire-worshipper’s sacred thread.”

XL. HatatI of GIlax.®

He was a sympathetic friend, and excelled in all descriptions
of poetry. He entered the imperial service on the recommenda-

I Thus described in the 7’ihaqit-i-Akbari ilir Hazni was one of the
learned men of hi^ time He was travelling from ‘Iraq to pay his respects
to the empi’ror, vvlieu he died.” In the Aui-i-Akbari (traus. Blochmanii,
i, 5G5) he is thus described, ‘‘He was an inoairlng man of a philosophical
turn of mind, and well acquainted witli ancient poetry and chronology. He
was free and easy r.nd good hearted. Friendliness was stamped on his fore-
head. He is said to have been born in Junabnd, and to have been a mer-
chant. He WHS the pnpil of (>asim-i-Kahi. (See no. II.)

gjUi jlJ j. The line as it stands does not

scan. We shonld probably re.id for

i Thus described in the Ahi-i-Akbari (i, 674). ” A stream from the ocean

305

tion of Hakim Abu-’l-Fath and grew up in that service. He has
written a dn-nn and is well acquainted with the poetry of the
ancients. Although he is entirely destitute of actual learning
he is strenuous and has a sound understanding and a well-
balanced mind.

The following verse.s are his : —

“ Wat'di thyself well in every word that thou utterest, 220

Repent of a speech which gladdens no heart.

"Wliat need bast thou of the wing of a bird ? If the men
of this age are employed in light talk
Borrow the foot of the ant, and flee.”

“ Gud doth not accustom my tongue to the uttering of com-
plaints.

Jlay He not associate me with ccmplaints, especially of
thee.”

Quatrain.

“ Ever hast thou treated me with harslmess, — thou art
excused :

Thou hast heard but the name of faithfulness, — thou art
excused :

Thou sayest, ‘ I am falsely accused of harshness ’

Thou hast not tried thyself, — thou art excitsed.”

Quatrain.

“ So long as thou art employed in tlie nurture of vain
de.sires

Tliiue axe shall strike no stump but thine own foot.

of thought passes by liis lioiise ; cc rpctuess and equity tire visible on his
forehead. Serenity and truth are in him tiiiited ; he is free from Mie bad
qualities of poets.” He i.s said to hare been born at Rashr in Gihui and to
have belonged to the common people of tliat pl.ico. To better his circum-
stances he went to Indio, was introduced by Hakim .Abii-l-Fath Gilnni
(see c iii, no. VIIIj at court, got a jUjn', and wns liked by Akbar. He
joined the Khunl^anan in tlie \«irs in the Dakan and lived chiefly at
Hurhinpur, where he bu'lt a villa and a ■•nni/ni called after Lira. He was
alive in a.d. 1015.

SAf;

No enemy works thee such mischief as tliou workest thy-
self.

Thy blood is on tlie head of thine own imagining.”

“We have associated with unbelievers

But found among them no waist worthy of the sacred
thread.” '

An ode,

“ I desire a honse ot mourning that I may shut its door on
myself

But mv resolution has peopled it. and now 1 desire some
desert spot.

The world is disturbed by stories of “ to-morrow ” and
“ yesterday',”

I desire some tale of the speech of my own grief.

221 From the fields of this w’orld, the harvest of ox and ass.

1 desire no harvest nor ear of corn nor even a grain.

I am content whether I be killed by the sword of the
warrior of Islam or the arrow of the unbeliever.

I thirst for my own blood and all I require is a cup.

Havati, sit not before me, prevent not my ravings,

I am a lover and thou art wise, a demented companion
is what I require.”

XLI. Haya’i.

He was iii tiujarat with Mirza Nizam-ud-din Ahmad. “ The
followiuq verses are by liim : —

'■ The message of the loved one I'C-opens the wound in my
livei .

\iv! i-uiews the u'ief of fareweil.s and the pain of the
V voey."

i ,lj'. '>■ ■ lacrro threri •.\.''rn by Hinius of tbe hiq:tier caste^i amt by fire-
svorsltipp-'i '

T1 - ’• » -'t r. jH wliit-h NS'oik Haya’i is not

j'l-.-nf I'tn*'

307

Quatrain.

‘‘ The lover pressed his cheek against thy door and went,

He displayed that love which he had for tliee and went
One night, having obtained admission to the assembly
and union with thee by a thousand stratagems,

The moth opened his eyes to the candle, and went.”

XLII. HalatI.i

His name was Yadgar, and he claimed descent from the late
Sultan Sanjar,'^ though in the Tnrikh-i- Nizami ® Mirza Ahmad
says that he was a Caghatai. He was known for his sincerity
and orthodoxy. He wrote a divan. The following verses are
his : —

“ From weeping there remains not in my liver so much 222
moisture

That the bird of thine arrow could wet his bill therein.”

“ Would that I could be the string of thy shift
So that thou and I might be enclosed in one garment.” *

“ That line of dark musk on the page of thy cheek
Is a new revelation from on high.”

“ 1 constantly come behind the rival and cover his eyes in
sport,

That he may have no share in the joy of beholding my
beloved.”

“ The dark mole is placed by the corner of thine eye
• Like a hunter sitting in ambush for his prey.”

* H&Iati is thus briefly described in the At n-i-Akbari (trans. Blochmann,
695), “His name is YadgSr. He is a selflsh man” In the Tahaqdt-i-
ibari he is described as a soldier by profession.

The fifth son of Pir Muhammad Mirza. grandson of Amir Timur.

* This is the Tabaqdt-i Akbarl by Mirza Nbam-ud din Ahmad-
4 Cf. Tennyson’s “The Miller’s Daughter.*’

“ Again am I weeping for the beauty of that rose,

To-day have I seen Ihe rose, for I have again become the
nightingale.’’ _____

“ Thy ravishing lip has suffered much from fever spots,

Alas that thy rose-petal has been damaged by hail.”

Halati’s father had the poetical name of 'Walihi. This open-
ing couplet is by him : —

“ The moon of the Td has shown her eyebrow, and glad-
dened my heart,

Thanks be to God, who has freed me from this thirty
days’ grief.” ‘

His son, although he had the poetical name of Baqa’i, changed
it to Rusva'i (‘ the blackguard ’) on account of his unprofitable-
ness. He met an early death, for having, by instructions from
his mother, given his unfortunate father poison, for some fault
that he had committed. He was sent, by the emperor’s order, from
Kashmir to Labor, where the KoticSl executed him. He had
some poetic genius, and wrote the following couplet ; —

223 '• Wliile thy death-dealing glance is the despoiler of life

Death looks on from afar with regret.”

XLIIl. The‘Khan-i-A‘zam.*

He is Ataga Oan who, when the imperial army was defeated
at Jausa,® at the time when the king who had obtained forgive-

i The thirty days' fast of Ramazan, which comes to an end on the
appearance of the new moon of Shawwil whieli nshers in the *Id-ul-Fitr.

* .^anjs-ud'dln iluhamniad Khan envired the service of Kimrnn Mirza
as a common soldier. For tiie service rendered in saving his life Humiyun
attached him to lii.s service and subseqaently, at Amarkut, appointed his
wife wet-nurse [ano^u) to the child Akbar, confex*ring on her the title of
Ji Ji atiuga. ^dina-ud-dm remained with tlie yonng prince while Hamiiyun
was in Persia, and icceiveil, after the emperor’s restoration, tlie title of
Ataga f* foster-father ’ ) Kli'*”- After Akhar’s accession Ataga Khan wag
sent to Kilbnl to bring to India the empi ess-motber and the other Begami,

A village on the banks of the Ganges, where Hamayun was defeated

30 . »

ness,* the emperoi- Humajun, fell, like a ci’ocodile, into the rirer
Ganges, and the sun of dignity * nearly disappeared for ever
in that boundless waste of waters, seized his hand and brought
him from that whirlpool of calamity and from the deep waters
of destruction to the shore of safety and security. This service
led to his very great advancement.

Although his dignity is too great for him to be described as a
poet or one given to poetry, still, as he had poetic genius the
following verses by him are quoted : —

“ My little tear, set not thy foot forth from the house of my
eye.

Tor well-born children* leave the house but seldom.”

“ If the full moou in her glory should boast o’er the sun of
thy face

ihe will at last sink down from the turquoise sky invert-
ed.”

by §ber Shsb. Vide vol. i, trans. Ranking, pp. 459 and n. 4 and 462 and
n. 3. Radaoni is, however, mistaken here in saying that Ataga Khin’s
setvioe was rendered at the battle of Janas. Hniniyun was saved after
tha^battle by a water-carrier n.imed. aceoiding to Firishta, Nigsrii, who is
said by the same anthoricy to have been allowed, as a reward, to occupy the
throne for half a day Ataga ^lan saved Hamayun after the battle of
Qananj. “• The King rode o5 with the intention of going to the high
ground. This action of his in itself afforded an excnse to his men to flee,
and a serious defeat ensued. Moreover, the king, while crossing the river
Ganges, became separated ftom his horse, and, by tlie help of Shanig-ad-din
JIuha,nitnad of Ghazni (who eventually became the foster-father of the
prince’s most excellent majesty, and was honoured in Hindustan with the
title of A'zam Kh an), escaped front the w.ater and returned to Agra.”
Vide vol. i, trans, Kiinking, p. f64. Niz.rni-ud-din Aiun.iO, in the Tuhaqdt
5iys, “He had the title of Khsn-i- .4‘zani, and was the foscer-fatlier of his
majesty. He attained to the grade cf an Awr and Vak’i of the empire and
tasted the cup of martyrdom at the hands of Adh.,m Khan.” (M..y 16
lo6’2.)

i That is to sp.y, deceased.

^ MS. (B) has and 'f this reading be accep^ied the traasistion

“fill be, hia snc nearly disappeared/’ etc,

3 obvious reference to ‘the pupil of the eye.*

40

310

The following quatrain is by his son, Yusuf Muhammad
Khan * —

“ Those who walk self-satisfied in the street of desire are of
one sort,

The paupers of the valley of love of another.

Those who seek aught hut the pleasure of the beloved

Differ widely from those who grieve with love.”

XLIV. Khasjar Beg.*

He is one of the Caghatai nobles and is related to Tardi Beg
Khan,^ who has been already mentioned. He has written a
224 mapiavi of three hundred couplets on his own condition and con-
taining also the praise of the emperor. He is a versatile man,
unequalled in the art of war, in calligraphy, in poetry, in the
composition of enigmas, in general knowledge, in the use of the
astrolabe, in astronomy, and in handling figures. He is also the
author of several works, and he has enumerated his own ex-
cellences in the masnavi already mentioned. In the art of music
he collected information regarding the systems of the Persians and

1 MS. (A) styles him, wrongly, Muhammad Yusuf Khan. He was the
eldest son of Ataga ^an and distinguished himself, when twelve years old,
in the fight with Bairam Khan, and was made a Khau. When his father
had been killed by Adham Kh ^u Akbar took care of him and his younger
brother, ‘ Aziz Kuka- He disiiuguished himself during the several rebel-
lions of the Khiin Zaman He died, of excessive drinking, in 1565*68,
at the a^e of eighteen

2 Thns described in the Tubn<jd(’i-Akhaii “ He is one uf the old Ca gh atai
amirs of this dynasty. He was ai; accomplished man and excelled specially
in Huisic. He had poetic genius and wrote a well-ktiown masnavi on
dancing girls.

•' A noble of Ilamajun’s court, who was faithless to his master but was
forgiven after Ilama^un’s return from Persia, During the conquest oi
India Taidi Bpg Kh an distinguuhed himself and received Mewat in jdgtr.
On Humnyun’s de.ith he read the ^Htbah in Akbar’s name and sent the
crown jewels to him in the Paiijab. He was appointed by Akbar a com*
roander of five thousand and governor of Dihll. Or Hemd’s approach he
evacuated Dihli after some unsuccessful fighting and on this account was put
to death by Bairam Khan in 1556

811

the Indians and particularly regarding the six modes' of Hindu
music, an undertaking which is impossible except to wealthy men
of high rank and exalted position; and, indeed, there is now no
trace of that information left in the land.

He had no equal in his time. • These few couplets, written for
the edification and instruction of the emperor, are excerpted from
the u!<ix)7rtiv already mentioned; —

'■ 0 King ! The world is a wonderful place,

Every moment it presents some fre.sh spectacle.

The revolving sky, like a deceitful juegler.

Begins every moment some new prank.

Prom times of old there have been in the world
Crowned kings, with armies and suites.

Of those old heroes, with all their desires and ambitions.
There remain time-worn histories, naught else.

Had the prophets seen any hope of permanence ni the world
Why should they have tied fi om it ‘r
0 King ! the works of this world are all envy,

Thus is it now, and was in the past, and ever will be :
Among all these complicated affairs

One’s first object should be to acquire a good name, the rest
is naught.

The object of this long harangue of mine is to sey
What thou should’st do now that thy turn for sovereignty
has arrived.

In this age, in which the world is adorned by tby presence,
May God be thy protector from harm '.

If the htima^ has flown from this rose-garde, i
Cast thou thy shadow on our heads.

Since my words are without guile

It is meet that I should offer thee counsel.

1 The modes are Bhairav, Malai\ Sdrany, Hindoi, Vasant, Dipek

and Megh.

t

^ A fabulous bird, supposed to fly coiistautiy in the air without touch-
ing the ground, and looked upon as a bird of happy omen, prognosticating a
crown to every one whom it overshadows.

312

Since I strive only for tliy welfare,

Why should I conceal from thee the words of truth ?

To ail words, whether uttered by this one or that one,'

Give ear, if they touch the root of the matter.

It behoves a king, both in season and out of season.

To take heed to himself and to consider both the people
and God.

225 The poor man’s error leads only to the loss of liis bread

The kinif’s erior is a calamity to the world.

The beggar takes heed only for his gullet and his patched
robe.

In the king’s heart there must be thought for the people.
Kingship is best exercised according to law.

As the king’s order is authenticated by his great seal.

Since it is thy turn to exercise sovereignty,

It is necessary for thee to exercise caution and prudence.
Thou art as the candle, thy kingdom as the house,

And thy people are around thee like moths.

The m.ote in the sunbeam is not seen if the sun shines not,
And where tiiere is no candle there is no moth.

That is to say, the livelihood of all is from thee.

Thou art the shepherd, and thy people are the flock.

The flock has come to thy pasture ;

H >w eajst thou leave the flock to wander unrestrained ?
God has appointed thee their guardian.

The shepherd’s dignity belongs to His prophets ;

Neghr.ct not then the practice of the prophets.

But take heed to thyself and also to mankind.

A hapty life is a jewel. See that thou value it properly.
And cciint as gain both wealth and dominion.

Thou art a king with a prophet’s attributes.

Thou art in the world for a great work.

.lustice and equity, generosity, knowledge, liberality,
Favour and grace, humanity kindness, and faithfulness.

L i>4'. ‘ Zaid ■' cr ■ Amr,' proper neme* used by way of generalization ■

313

All these thou hast by the grace of God,

What shall I do if thou ignore thine own worth ?

Thou ridest, laughing light-heartedlv. on thv fierce ele-
phant,

But the people lining the walls to see thee pass are weeping.
Thou lajest thy hand on the task of the elephant.

But thy people take the finger of anxiety between their
teeth ;

Thou layest thy hand on the elephant's trunk.

But our sleeves are shaken free of the world.

Thou boldly facest the raging tiger.

While men flee on every side in terror :

Take than thy pleasnre in the fighting of leopards
While w'e in fear tear our faces with our hands and our
nails :

T'nou withstandest unmoved the attack of the wolf,

While all, both great and small, wonder at thee from afar :
Thou seizest by its neck the snake that has, like the
dragon, an arrow for its tongue,

While the people of the world are writhing in dread
Thou art swimming in a boundless ocean.

While we, washing our hands of life, stand tremhlmg
on its brink.

Thon enterest the forest intent on the chase,

The people stand at its margin in fear and anxiety.

In one dark night thou travellest a month’s journey,

While men struggle after thee sighing for the light of a
torch :

Thou wanderest almost naked in the coia.

While the people are shivering under their wrappings ;
Thon rnnnest, heavily clad, in the heat.

While the people bathed in sweat, take shelter under a tree:
Thon pressest onward in every direction on foot,

While we on our horses are fainting with weai iness :

Thon facest the warlike foe on the deid of battle.

While the army looks on from every side.

226

What favour is this, and what sympathy.

That thou hast towards us and towards thyself :

This valour of thine is bej'ond conception,

This bravery is ever fresh in thee.

Although these things are doubtless a merit,

They are, nevertheless, a defect in a king
While the king remains far removed from hurt,

Tlie people of his land are in safety :

If a king never spares himself,

The whole world is thrown into confusion. [presence ;

We desire the world and our lives to be blessed with thy
Without thee what are the world and ourTives 'to us ?
Khaujar, beware of prolixity,

And weary not the king’s heart :

This speech of thine has wandered from the point.

And the king has no need of it :

Since he is accepted before God

His wealth consists in devotion to business.

His very sleep is perfect wakefulness
Even when he wanders, it is perfect wisdom.

The light is with him who does his duty
And thus becomes independent of all labour.”

When he recited this mapiavi he was honoured with various
favours. He has also composed a divnn, which is well known.
The following verses are by him ; —

“ How often in her street shall my heart secretly heave sighs,
And afterwards how often shall I lament that my life is
leaving me r ”

” The waters have passed over my head, and my life has gone
on the breeze ;

My body has 'necome dust ; yet still the tire of my heart
breaks into flame.”

At the time wlicn the Khauzainau and Bahadur raised their
heads as high as toe star Capella in turbulence and rebellion '

I ' All Quli Kisu received the title of Khinzaman after defeating and

315

Khanjar Beg was confederate with them, and fled into Bengal,
and he has probably disappeared in consequence of those dis-
orders.

XLV. S-HCSEavI*

He is sister’s son to Mirza Qasim of Junabid,* He came to
India after performing the pilgrimage to the Hijaz, and he is in
the service of the emperor’s eldest son.® He is worthy cf mention.
The following verses are by him : — -

*■ The heart of Khusravi is .so inflamed with the light of love
That candles to light his tomb may be made of his bones.”

captQi'ing Hemu at Pinipat Bahadur was his younger brother. The
Khan-i-Z>man rendered moat important services by clearing the eastern
districts of Afghans, and amassed great wealth from his spoils. He was
constantly in rebellion. He first fell into disgrace owing to a scandalous
affair with Shaham Beg, who had been page to Hnihayi'in, and was deprived
of his mal^alh. He then rebelled, and having defeated the Afghans under Sher
Khan, the son of ‘ Adli, in Jaunpui, retained the spoil for himself. At the
end of the sixth year of his reign Akbar moved ngaiust him in person, bnt the
Khanzamau sabmitted, and was p.'irdoned, and hU mnhnUs in .Tannpur were
restored to him In the tenth year he again rebelled, but was induced by
Mun'im Kh.an to submit. Late in the year 1566, when .Akbar marched against
llirza Muhammad Hakim, the JQiaiizanuin lebelled again, read the ^lulbah at
Jaunpur in the name of Miiza .Midjummad Hakim, and marched against
Qannanj.’ In 1567 Akbar resolved no longer to pardon the Khanzanian,
left the Panjab, returned to Agra, and marched rhence against the rebel.
The Khanzamau fled from Qaunauj to Minikpur where his brother Bahadur
was. The rebels were finally defeated by .Akbar at Fathpur about 10 or 12
miles S E. cf Kapa, on the Ganges, on June 9, 1567. Bahadur was captured
and executed and the Kh anzamau w.a 3 decapitated by a soldier, his head being
brought to Akbar. It was probabiv after this battle that Kh anjar Beg fled
to Bengal,

1 Called in the .lia-i-Aihau (trails. Blochmann, i, 591) ^nsravi of Qain,
a town between Yazd and Hiriu. n.lghistani calls him Payyid .Amir Khnsravf
and says tiiat he excelled in mnsic. According to the Tahaqdt-i- Akbar} he
was sister's son to Mirza Qasim of Rtikndhid (probably a misreading) and
entered tlie emperor’s service, in ^Yhich lie was houonred by the imperial
bounty

^ Otherwise Jnnabad and Gunabad.

3 Sultan Salim, afterwards the emperor Jahangir,

316

“ The lions of the temple of Makkali will not pollute their
claws with my hlood,

Do thoo, my companion, regale with this morsel the dogs
of the monastery.” ^

XLVI. Mlp. DaorT.*

His name is Saltan Bayazid, and his title Katib-ul-Mulk (‘ scribe
of the kingdom’). It is probable that nobody in Hindustan has
written the nasta'liq hand better than he, and he has reasonably
good taste in poetry. At the end of his life he obtained grace to
perform the pilgrimage of Islam, The following verses are by
him : —

“ At rimes thou art in my very soul, and at times in my
afflicted heart,

Such is thy levity that thou canst not remain in one
place.”

An ode.

” Had I not been pampered by union with thee,

I had hever suSered so much now from parting with thee.*
228 The 'oird of my heart is burnt like a moth, Ah me i

Would that I had never flattered around that candle which
illnminea the night.

Had I not brought blood to my eyes with the arrow of her
eyelashes,

I had never become a mark for her heart-piercing arrow.”

A quatrain.

Since my love has departed fiom my sight,

My heart’s blood flows from my afflicted eves.

! i.e. *■ Since Islam will have none of *ne hand me over to the Cbriatians
or the Z jroastrians.”

2 Called in the Aln-<.-Alchari {trans. B!rjchmaun, i, 103), where he is men-*
tiofied only as a calligrapnist^ Maulanii Uaiiri. In the Tab iqa^i-AJthan bs is
thaa defaciibed, “Mir Dann, a c illigrapiOst t-,' win-'m the emperor gave the
fcit'e of Katib-uhMulk. He ia the author uf a He was bora a:

Hiral.

^ Cf. * Ae fond Sisa ’ bv BurnSt

317

She has gone from my sight but not gone from my heart.

Nay, surely this cannot be,

For that which goes from the sight goes from the heart.”

One of the Mir’s pupils in calligraphy, who was also one of the
writer’s companions, was Khwaja Ibrahim Husain the
(may God have mercy on him!), who was a well-born man of the
city of Balnt,^ and closely related to Shaikh ‘ Abd-nr Rahman the
Balnti of Labor, who was, in his time, famed throughout tiie
world as a religious leader and a follower of the saints, Khwaja
Ibrahim Husain in the flower of liis youth Lft this world of deceit
for the abode of joy, to the infinite regret of his friends; and the
writer suffered in one year, and within the space of a few days,
the grief of losing him and the grief of losing Mirza Nizam-nd-
din Ahmad, 3 and these griefs renewed my regret for the loss of
my old friends — a regret which grows stronger every day,

1 The .iAadis were a corps of picked men corresponding to the ‘Gentlemen of
the Lifeguards ’ in the days of Charles II and James VII. Most of the clerks
in the imperial ofiBces and the foremen in Akbar’s workshops belonged to
this corps. According lo Abu-l-FazI they were called Aliadis because they
were fit ‘ for a harmonious unity,’ whatever meaning was attached by
Akbar’g phrase-maker to that cryptic utterance. They provided their own
horses and were thus what we call sUaiidars, and men were frequently
selected for command from tliis corps d’ilits. Vide Ain-i-Akban^ trans.
Blochmann, i, passim. Akbar was so prejudiced against tlie Arabic language,
as being the sacred tongae of Islam, that he condescended to tamper with
the spelling of words, excluding letters that were peculiar to Arabic.
thus became in oflScial records.

^ In north-western Afghanistan.

3 The author of the Tabaqit-i- Akbori and intimate friend of the author.
Badaoni (vol. ii, text 397J says, “ He passed away from this faithless world
at the age of 45 of a hectic fever, and carried nothing with him bat a good
name. Many of liis friends and companions who had had experience of his
courtesy, entertained great hopes of iiim, bnt none more than tliis worthless
one, closely bound to him by a oommuni'y of fuith and friendship, entirely
disinterested so far as worldly matters were concerned. We shed tears of
grief and beat onr breasts with the stone of despair, hat sayv at length no
lemedy but patience and resienatiou which are the quality of the holy and
the practice of the pious. Begardiiig this calamity as tiie greatest of mis-
fortunes and disasters, I took it greatly to heart, and henceforth let my heart
41

318

229

Alas, I see no remedy for my pain !

I liad some hope of union: — that is gone

All my concerns are languishing, because

I see that the promise of my friends is unfulfilled.

Alas ! Misfortunes have crowded so thickly upon me that I have
scarcely the strength left to bewail them. But what cause is there
for bewailing, since we are all beneath one dome and have but to
pass behind the veil to meet once more ?

The following chronogram was composed on Khwaja Ibrahim
Husain’s death: —

‘‘ In aceoidance with the command ot the Ruler of the
universe.

In the month of Safar, ^waja Ibrahim Husain
Journeyed from this world of wickedness and dishonour.
And the date of his death was found in tlie woids,

‘ Swajn Ibrahim Husain.’”'

XLVTI.

* He has recently come from ‘Iraq and has been appointed ar

go out no more in friendship to any persfin, resigning myself to the comer of
obscurity.”

1 The sum of the letters i3;—600 + 6+l+3 + 5 + l + 2 + 200+l + 54-10 +
40 + 8 + 60+ 10 + 50 = 097 (* n. 1589).

2 In the (trails. Blochmann, i, 608) Dakhli ‘of Isfahan’ is

thus described, ■' He is a man without selfishness and of a reserved character.
Though he says but little he is a man of worth ” Mr. Blochmann discovered
the following facts about Dakhli. His name was Malik Ahmad, and he was
the son of Jlalik-ul-MulQk Maqsiid ‘AIT, proprietor of Verkopai, twelve
famitHii from Isfahan His mother’s father was the great ^ai^ Abu-1*
Qasim, wiio had such influence with Tahmasp that several legacies in Persia
belonging to Makkah were transferred to him, and of other fonndiitions he
was appointed Ifnt-io'aHi, He thus grew rich, acd obtained so great a
following that people pel suaded Tahmasp that he was bent on rebellion or
l.ei'csy He was therefore blinded, and afterward.s lived .a retired life. He
Htldres-ed to Tahmasp ,a poem which procured him a pension In his retire-
ment Dakhli was employed to arr.mge iiis poems and thns acquired a taste
for poetry, and received from his grandfather the takhahif of DalAli. After
attending on bis tn. eternal uncle for some time Da^ll went to Isfahan, where

319

Ahadi,^ and before lie attained this dignity he wrote the following
quatrain on Shari f-i-Sarmadi^ the roster-keeper, inspector of
the Ahadis, who has an enormous moustache : —

“ This simpleton will at length become an Ahadi,

And will he asking for the felt cap *

In the depth of his perplexity he will, a hundred times a
day,

Become a sacrifice for Sarmadi's moustache.”

XLVIII. DanihT.‘

Danih is a village in the district of Nishapnr,^ where he
passed a life of humble contentment in tilling the soil. Suddenly
the seed of wandering was sown in his heart and he conceived a
desire to visit India and gained no advantage from his husbandry.
He has written niost of his poetry in his own rustic dialect, hut
has also composed many odes in more polished language. He
gave up the use of his own rustic dialect when he found that it
could not be understood by the generality of people. One day
a poet with the takhnUns of Ulfati was playing polo, when his
stick flew from his hand and struck him on the nose. Danibi
'.vrote the following epigram on the circumstance : —

“ So much bad verse did Ulfati recite
That all the libertines were delighted with him.

His polo stick by ill chance broke

The bridge of his nose instead of his teeth.” *

They say that Qilij Stan’ was the subject of this epigram.

he acquired some reputation as a poet He came to ludia in a.d. 1689 and
was for five years in Akbar's service. In 1594-95 he went to the Dakan and
found a patron in the Khan Khanau. in whose service he was in 1616. He
was a good soldier.

1 Vide p. 317, u. 1.

2 Vide no. LXII.

3 Worn by the A^adio.

* Danihi is not mentioned in the Aiti-i-Akbai'i nor in the Tabaqdt-i-AkbaTt.

3 Or Ni.^abiir, the well-known town in Khurasan.

3 i.e., that be rp’ght recite no more poetry.

' Vide no XV.

230

320

XLIX. DAVi’t.

He is ‘ Ain-ul-Mnlk.' He traces his descent on the

mother’s side to that most learned man Maalana Jalil-ud-diti
Dawani.® He is distinguished by his gracious manners and
excellent qualities, and in the ti’catment of ophthalmia his equal
has not been seen. Occasionally he occupies himself by writing
poetry, and the following are some of bis verses : —

An ode.

" It is not only hail that rains down from the cloud of grief
on me in my misery.

But stones that rain down upon me in the form of cala-
mities.

So violent towards lovei’S is that capricious and cruel
charmer,

That even in the course of familiarity warfare gleams in
her eye.

Dava’i, it is infidelity to despair at the door of her favour.

For rain from the cloud of her generosity covers leagues.”

“ Each night my lamentations, sighs, and weeping reach the
sky.

0 Lord ! What shall one whose days are as dark as mine
do with such nights as these ?”

An ode.

“ No waste spot is to be seen which cannot be peopled.

The incurable pain of love is that here no plans avail.

In the night of her dark locks the sleep of death fell upon
me,

A wonderful and confused dream not to be interpreted.

Ah , what a glance was that to slay a lover, and where is
the stage on the journey' of love

In which is to be found a breast unpierced by' an ariow ? ”

I ViJe c. iii. no IV

* A reuowued logician, known aa Mnhaqqiq-i-Oavvini.

3^1

Each one who lias tasted a drop of the wine of love
Has become more wearied than before, and broken both 231
cup and wine-jar.’’

.4wake, my heart, for the beloved is enraged.

And life has become hard for lovers.

For lovers, on the way of devotion.

Every step is a hundreii thousand leagues.

The spacious arsenal of love

Is all too narrow for the army of my affection.

The arm of my ambition is long enough,

But what shall I do ‘t For my good fortune is lame.

Dava’i beware, for in the street of the beloved
Strife is hot and lo\e is in disguise.”

“ Bright are those eyes which know how to see,

Happy is that heart which knows how to palpitate.

How shall the torment of this narrow cage
Be endured by the bird of my soul, which has learnt how
to soar F

Never remains in the corner of ray eye
Tiiat little tear wtiicli has learnt how to run down my
cheek.

There is not to be found elsewhere in a house
A wild creature w'hich has learnt how to flee.

Dava'i no longer has any desire for heaven.

Since he has learnt how to pluck the rose of thy garden.’’

“ On the day of separation, which is the moment when (the
heart) bums,

The soul’s employ is to fan the flame.

In the night of separation, when hope of life must be 232
foregone,

The heart’s employ is to lieap up pain and grief.

Ah separ'ation, such a calamity art thou that ever
Hell IS in flames for fear of thee i

32-2

From the tv%'0 magioians, coquetry and blandishment,

The drunkard may learn quarrelsomeness.

Dava’i, the longing for association with the fair,

Is an attempt to unite flame and cotton.’'

L. RafI’t 1

He is ilir Haidar of Ka.^an, the composer of enigmas. His
understanding is e.'ccellent and he has correct taste. He is un-
rivalled in the art of composing enigmas and chronogi’ams,® —

I Jlr Blochtnann in note 3 on p 593 of his translation of tiie Ai'i-i-
AIcbaii says, " His fnll name, according to Taqi-i-AuhadI is Amir Rafi‘-nd-dTii
Haidar. He was a Tabfitaba Sayyid of Ka^Sn The ■Ua’dsir-i-RaAiini
states that he left Persia in 999 (ad, 1.590-91) on account of some wrong
which he had suffered from the King of Persia, went from Gujarat in company
with Khwaja Habiballah to Labor, and was well received by Akbar.”
After a stay of a few years in India he returned to bis country and in the
shipwreck mentioned below lost property to the value of two lakhs of
rupees. R.'ifi'i was saved and retinned to India, where his lo.«se 3 created
much sympathy, and he received, at .4kbar’.s wish, valuable presents from
the Amirs. After some time he again returned to his country, his two
sojourns in India having lasted about eight lunar years. He went to
Makkah aud JladiuaU, where he stayed four years. In a.d. 1604 he re-
turned to KashSn, found favour with gbah 'Abbas, and received some rent-
free lands in his native town. According to the Atiiihkada-i-A:a)'i he died
in A H. 1032 (a d. 1622-23) He had a sou, Mir Ha^ain-i-Sanjar, mentioned
as a poet in the Ain (traus i, 59.5).

Rafi'i is thus described in the A/n. ' His name is Ilaidar. He is well
acquainted with the art of poetry, and is distinguished as a writer of
riddles and clironograms.' The Tabaqdt-i-A.khari contains the following
notice of iiiin, " 51ir Haidar, the writer of enigmas, had the poetical name
of Rafi‘i. His nnderstanding is e.vcellent and he has correct taste, aud is
unrivalled in the art of composing enigmas aud chronograms. He spent
his time in the emperor’s service *'

't One of KafTi’s feats in this way was the discovery that the numerical
values of the letters of the Siirat-ul-Ikhldf, the 112th chapter of the Qur’an,
gave the date of the completion of Faizi’s Saii-dti‘.ul-Ilhdm, the commentary
on the Qur d composed entirely of letters without dots. The chapter,
which ii also cahed Sin at ut-Tauhid, runs as follows : —

i>a| 'jif iJ ^J£J ^ y ikL ^ iJJi Ajji iji

328

indeed, he does not even know that there are any arts but these
two. One day Shaikh Faizi told him that the ai t of composing
enigmas had gone out of fashion in Hindustan and that the
practice of it was considered unwortliy. He replied, “ I have
toiled for years in my own country in the study of enigmas, and
now thnt I have grown old in this pursuit, how can I arive it up r ”

He came with Khwaja Habibullah from Gujarat ro Labor and
received a fixed allowance from tlie emperor’s ui ivy purse and
from courtiers. He embarked in a ship and set .«ail for his
native land, but, when he had passed Hurmuz and was nearing
Kij and ilakran,* his ship was wrecked and all that he had vvas
lost, among the rest several parts of Shaikh Faizi's pointless
commentary ‘ on the Qar'fl/i, letters of intrcduction from learned
men, and Fazii’s divan, a copy of which he was sending abroad 233
in order to increase his reputation.

The following verses are by Rafi‘i

“ I have a tender heart, ray sprightly love, what remedy
is there for me 'r

^ am a lover with the nature ot one beloved, what can
Ido?”

“I w’as jealous of Rafi'i’s coffin, for tiiou
Didst accompany it weeping more bitterly than tlie
mourners.”

A quatrain.

“ The devotee sins not, for Thou ai’t the Avenger’,

We are steeped in sin, for Thou art the Pardoner;

and the sum of the letters gives the date a.h. 972 { *= a.d. 1564:-65). Mr.
Blochmann in note 2 on p 549 of his translation of vol. i of the
Alibarl makes the date a.h. 1CX)2 (b^a.d. 1593-94) but this is an error. For
this fortunate discovery Rafi'I received 10,000 lupees from Fai/I.

t BadaonI’s geography is here at fault could not have reached

Hurmuz (Ormuz) which is an Island in the Persian Gulf opposite to
Gombroon or Bandar-i-'Abbas, until he bad passed beyond the coast of
Makran. Kij is an inland town of llakran.

^ That is to say the commentary composed of undotted letters. See note
(1) above.

324

He calls Thee the ATcnger, and we the Pardoner.
O Lord ! say which name 'I’hou preferrest.”

And he has a quatrain whieli contains twenty-six chrono-
grams.*

LI, Raha'I.'^

He is descended from .Shaild} Zain-ud-diii of IQiavaf,® and he
has composed a faniovis ilii-iln. Tiie following verses are his ; —

" O love, thou didst encourage me to hope for thy favour,
And didst then repulse my hope on every si-te.”

“ I travelled in order to ease my heart of its grief,

How was I to know that a hundred mountains of ffrief

O

would confront me on my way r ”

“ The secrets which I have with that rose are as buds formed
of my heart’s blood ;

To tell the heart’s secrets to all is hard indeed.”

I This quatiaiii has not been quoted, and is not aieiuioned either in the
■iin or in the Tabaqdt.

* Vide Ahi-i-Akbnri, traua. Blocbmann, i, 592, and note 1. It is there
said of Rahii that ■' he pretended to be a Sufi.” His name was Manlana
Sa‘d-ud-din of Khavaf or Khaf.

3 Zain-nd-din Khafi or Khaviifi, from whom Raha’i traced his descent,
was a fanioua saint v.ho died in the heijiiining of Shawwal, ah, 838 (May
A. D, 1435). He was buried first at Midiii (or Balin), then at Darvishfibad,
tlien at Hint. His hiogr ipiiy is viv.-n m .lami’s y”fh,}t-h!-Unt,, and he is
not to be confounded with the sain. Zaiu-ud-din T.diifuJi

Khaf or Khav.n is a district and tiwn in Khui.oap, wliicii bdlongcd to
the revenue dU 1 of N.^hibur. and w s funiijUs t. r the kiii„'s, uiLiiisteio,
and learned i • vkioh e oiodu'cd. The town was also fce-iions for tlej
fact tl.at It, ii.! -hit..- wei b.goted Sunnis, ai d weie e.-i seeufej bi .Shah
‘Abeas of I P ' 1' in:. irtc aie now Sb rahs. The number of

^avutis 1 ' '■•r- '.T f •' Mu^al iiiper.eis wes e-,.u,.der.ib'.e Tlis out
whose nr. et t — Miilei; eiad n:i.;i;^au), Known as Khafi or

Kh aviifi KL ,:.i. auto'er ct -e d/. Kto\ a valuable historical

woik in thiv*' vc*' ne-.

325

“ Pass not from my eyes like tears, my dear,

Be more humane and pass not thus by men.” *

In the heat of thy wrath thou throwest me into the fire,
And then coquettishly warmest thy hands at the fire.”

” I nave so devoted myself to thankfulness for that small
mouth and that eyebrow like the new moon
That nobody now calls me to mind.”

“ I have suitered cruelty not only at the hands of that
faithless and capricious girl

But at the hands of all from whom I hoped for faithful-
ness.”

Thou, my friend, dost not know all the grief oi my heart,
ilor all that I have suffered at the hands of that cruel
moon-faced beauty.”

LIl. RaughanI.'

He wa.s an impudent jack-pudding whose jesting passed all
hounds. He was for many years in the service of the emperor.
He has written a divan containing nearly three thousand
couplets. This is one of his couplets : —

“The martyr who suffers death by the sword of bis injustice
enjoys life eternal :

Perhaps the master-armourer who tempered the sword
used the water of life.”

The idea contained in this couplet closely leseml'ics that in
the couplet of Mir Ashki,® already quoted, namely ■ —

1 It is difficult in translation to preserve the pan on {‘ humanity,*

‘ urbanity ’) and (‘ a human being’).

2 Baughani is not mentioned in the Jin In the Tai'trUt he is thus
described, “ He was for many year.- in the emperor’s serviea. He had a
bitter tongue as a lampooner.’’

2 Vide supra no. XI.

42

234

326

'■ Those slain by thy cruelty lie scattered here and there
like drunken men ;

It would seem that thy sword was tempered with wine
instead of water.”

The following verses are also bj Raughani: —

“ I w'eep not for her cruelty, for I fear that my rival
236 Might guess from my weeping whose cruelty was its
cause.”

“ My b urning heart in her hands and beneath her feet is
like Sr-li e coal,

Which a boy in sport takes up and quickly flings away.”

“ Thy dignity so plants upon the mountains the foot of
clemency

That fountains of water flow from eacli vein of it.”

0 messenger 1 Give her by word of mouth au account of
my condition,' for in my letter
There are many words which hare flowed from my pen
while I was beside mjself.”

■■ The me-senger trives me news of her coming
In order rhat the force of my desire for her may draw me
to the road by which she is to pass.”

In the year H. (.tr>. lo72), when the imperial army was
nmrching t'lw-iid-. rTnjar,it.* Raughani died beneath the fort of
AbiigarL^ and wm.s bu.ird there Qasiin Arsalan made the
foUowinu chrouogra'ii on hi-, death . —

' Or, ' mv disire ’ if tte vari.iiit be accepted.

s Wheu Ak' u- was inrircaiii'^ r,-) the conquest of Gujarat, which was
annexed tn the eiiip.re at the end of 1572. Vide vol ii, text, pp. 139 —

U9

S Mount ,ibi in Kajputana, now a well-known sanatorium.

4 Vide <njii n. p 251 .

327

“ Like a dog he delivered up his soul to the abode of in-
fidelitj.” ^

LIII. Zain Khan Kcka.*

In playing Hindu music, beating the drum, and other accom-
plishments of that sort he is unrivalled in this age. Although
he cannot be said to liave any other accomplishments, save
calligraphy and transcription, yet he sometimes composes a
couplet. The following is one of his couplets ; —

“ This world, which moves crookedly, gives me no rest.

Until 1 have threaded my needle with the thread of my
desire.”

LIV. ScLTiv 0? Sapl-IF.®

Saplak is a village in the Qandahar district. The vulgar in
India call him Siplaki (Sipkali) with a kasr to the ha, which

^ Tile numerical values of the letters, added togetlier, give 981, or one
vear in excess of the correct date.

® Zaiii ^aii was the son of Khwaia Ma(j?ud ‘Ali, a servant of Akbar’s
mother and Pica Jan Anaga, one of Akbar’s nnrses. As he was thus
Akbar’s foster-brother, he was called Kuka. The daughter of Khwaia
Hasan (Zain ^in’s paternal uncle) married Sultan Salim (Jahangir) and
was the mother of Sultan Parviz. In .t.o. 1595-9(3 Sultan Salim married
Zain ^iin's daughter. Zain Khan was employed ngainst the Afghans in
the campaign in which Sir Bar fell. In 1580 lie operated successfully
against the ilahmands and Ghoris near Peshawar, and in 15b7 was ap-
pointed governor of Zlbulistan. In 158S he moved against the Yii.sufzaia,
and, after eight months’ fighting, subdued them. In 1589 he was emplojed
against rebellious Z'lnunddrs in the Himalayas, and subdued tiicm In
1590 he was made a commander of four th.ousand and in 1595-96 a commander
of five thousand. He died in 1601-02, partly from excessive drinking.
Ft'dc .lin-i-.litaii trans Blochraann, i, 314 In the Tabaqiit he is given a
title, apparently a talAallus, which I cannot understand. It reads Al-
Fathdhd. The text of the Lakhnau edition of the Tahaqdt is very corrupt.

3 I have not been able to find the village * Saplak ’ and therefore caniiot
be sure that the vowels in this are correct. MSS. (A) and (B) read
‘ Sapkali ’ or Sipkali, and this reading agrees better than that in the text
with the Indian nickname given to the poet. Tide inji-a.

328

means ‘ a lizard,’ ‘ and this greatly offended him, and he used tO'
say, “ What can I do, though they call me by the name of such
a dirty carrion creature ? ” He was a devotee girt as to the loins
and unfettered by conventions. On the day on which he saw
Mulla Qasim Kahi * he asked him his age, Qasim replied,
“ I am two years younger than God.” Sultan said, “ My dear
sir, I took you to be two years older. I fear you are deducting
from your years.” Mulla Qasiin laughed and said, .‘‘You are
worthy to associate with us.” It may be noted that as Mulla
Qasim Kahi was a great plagiarist he probably borrowed this
speech from Shaikh Bayazid of Bustam ® who said, “ I am
younger than my Lord by two years.’’ This is one of the
ravings of the Sufis, and some men of God have interpreted it
to mean, ” I am younger than God (may He be honoured and
glorified ! ) by two years, i.e. in two qualities, that is to say self-
existence and omnipotence ” ; for a creature may display all
divine attributes and qualities except these two ; for the brand
of accidental existence and dependence can never be removed
from the forehead of a created being. I ask forgiveness of God for
this nonsense and these ravings I

Sultan had a disposition well attuned to poetry. When he saw
the i^anzaman.* who also used Sultan as a poetical name, and
presented to him an ode in his praise, the Khanzaman sent him,
as a reward for it, a thousand rupees and a robe of honour,
237 together with a request that he would, for his sa’se, change his
poetical name. He sent back the gift and said, “ Sultan
Muhammad is my name, which was given to me by my' father.
How can I give it up ? Moreover, I wrote poetry under this

I cannot discover this word, but its meaning is clear. Kasr is
the short vowel t, but B.iiaoni is wrong in attachiug it t*' the h(2 or pci. He
ehoTild have attached it to the sin. The vulgar apparently called the poet
either Sipitali or Siplakl. (ChipJcaO) is the Hindustani word for the

commou hoase-hzard, which lives on Hies and insects 4-^^^ is a

Dakani corruption of the same word.

S Vide no, II.

5 Vide p 7 and note 1.

* Vid^ he next biography.

329

name many years before you did, and obtained muoh fame by it.'’
The KhSnzaman said, “ If you do not give up the name I -nill
throw you under the feet of an elephant,” and being enraged,
he had an elephant brought to the spot. Sultan said “ Ah, -what
good fortune is mine, that I shall attain martyrdom ! ” After the
Kbanzaman had threatened and intimidated him for a long time.
Maulana ‘Ala-ud-din Lari,' the Khanzamaii’s tutor, suggested

that an ode should be selected from the divan of the reverend

*

Manlavi Jami.* (may God hallow liis tomb 11 -which was at
hand, and that if Sultan could answer it extemporaneously he
should be pardoned, but if not the Khanzaman should do with
him as he had proposed. From the divan of the reverend
master (mat' his tomb be hallowed 1 ) this ode was selected : —

The writing of God's creation knew the writing on thy
heart,

And knew the invisible proofs of kingship on the heads
of beardless boys.

Sultan Muhammad recited an extemporary ode, the opening
couplet of which is : —

“ Whoever has regarded hi.s heart as the shell containing
the pearl of God's secret
Has rightly appraised his own jewel.”

Although this ode was no great matter the Khanzaman was
exceedingly pleased and praised it. and, having given the poet
twice the reward which he had given before, dismissed him with
honour. But Sultan could no longer .«tay in that place, and
without the Khauzaman's lea\ e he c.a me thence to Badaou, and
afterwards travelled through the country, and went to the

1 Vide Ain-i-Afibar/ trans. Bioeliia.iiin, i. 540. Acconting to tlie Ain he
was learned in philosojdiy and theology. He came from LaristSn, and is
hence called LuiJ, He was the son of ^laulana Kamal-ud-din Husain,
and studied under Maulana Jalid DawwanI 51-afid. He vras for some time
Akbar’s teacher Once at a da/ 'dr he placed himself before the Khan-
i-AVatn, when the Mir Tuzak to\i him to go back. Why should not a
learned man stand in front of fools/' said he, and left the hall, and never
came again. He got 4000 as sHyiir^kdl in Sambhal, where he died.

* Tbo celebrated Persian poet, who died in A.n. 1493-94-

330

Dakaii. In the year in which the four kings of the Dakan
formed a confederacy and after a great battle in a stricisen field
238 conquered Vijayanagai-,' .and destroyed that famous idol-temple,
which was a veritable mine of misbelief, Sultan Muljammad
was with their army and acquired great store of plunder, and
returned, but no further information regarding him is to be had.
It was, indeed, the height of discourtesy on Ids part to enter
into a dispute with his better^ and to refuse tlie request, so
courteously made by a man like the Htanzamaii, tliat he would
change his poetical name.

In reply to the following opening couplet by (Ihazali,^ viz. —

“ Devotee, true knowledge of God lies not in the patched
robe, the rosary-, and the tooth-stick,®

Acquire mystical love, for these other things have nothino'
to do with the comprehension of God,"
he wrote,

“Though the dust of envy has settled on my rival’s heart I
have no fear.

This is clear to me, that the mirror ot Jns heart is not
clean.”

1 The great Hindu empire of tho Carnatic. The four Kings were ‘Ali
‘Adil Shiih I of Bijipiir, Husain Nizsm Shah I of Ahmadiiagar, Ibrahim
Qurb Shah of Gulkanda, and ‘Ali Barid Shah of Bidar. The allied armies
of these kings met Sadashivaraya, Raja of Vijayanagar, and his brothers
Titnma and Venkatudri, on the field of Talikota on January 23, i66u, and, in
one of the most decisive battles ever fought in India, utter'y overthrew
the Hindu empire of the sonth which bad for two centuries withstood the
attacks of tiie independent Muhammadan Kings nf the Dakan, first the
BahmanTs and afterwards the lesser dynasties of BIjSpQr, Guikanda,
Ahinadnagar, Bidar, and Bcrar. Vide ‘ Historic Landmarks of the Deccan.’
by Major T. VV, Haig, pp 129 — 132. Badaoui, like all Muhammadan writers,
styles Vijayanagar ‘ Bijinagar.’
i'icie in 239, no. I.

5 A twig of a tree used as a substitnte for a tooth-brush. It is abont n
span long, split at one end and chewed to render it softer. Tlie twig is used
only once and is then thrown away. The European manner of using one
tooth-brush repeatedly until it is worn out is regarded with disgust in the
mst.

381

The following are other verses by him: —

'* My love sits sometimes in my eyes and sometimes in my
heart,

She rests nowhere, she must be bewitched.”

How can I liken thy eyebrow to the new moon, for I
Have seen the new moon in every hair of thy eyebrow P ”

LV. Sultan. 1

This i.s the poetical name of the Qaiizaman. As the events of
his life are well known, not only- from this selection, but from
every history of Hindustan, any further account of him would be
merely a repetition. He wrote these verses : —

“ Slender as a hair is thy w'aist,

No wider than the end of that hair is thy mouth.”

When he published abroad the ode which begins thus, many of 239
the poets of that province* wrote odes to compete with it. One
began as follows : —

I said, ‘ Thy mouth is no more substantial than an idea,’

She said, ‘ The idea that thou hast formed is correct.’

I composed the following : —

“ Thy mouth is the fountain of Khizr,®

Thy tongue is a fish in that fountain.”

In these days I prefer to repent sincerely of such poetry and
versificatiiin, which I published freely' in the days of my ignorance,
but which now appear to me to be a vain accomplishment.

J Vide p. 182, n, 2, wheie a brief account of tlie career of ‘Ali Qnli
lOjan, Khanzaman, is given. He remlered most important services in the
early years of Akbar’s reign and Mr Blochmann justly says, '* Xext to
Baiiam the restoration of the Mughal dynasty may be justly ascribed to
him.” The disaffection displayed by him in his later days may perhaps be
ascribed to mental derangement. His infatuation foi Shaham Beg and it.s
conseqnences seem to have been the beginning of this derangement, and his
successes in the field seem to have converted it into what may be called
megalomania

* Jannpiir. 3 Xhe gnardian of the water of life.

332

The following verses are by the .^anzaman ; —

‘ Cease, my heart, from weeping and wailing continually
like a bell,

Make, my heart, to none complaint of the cruelty of thy
love.”

“ 0 breeze, in the court of my love, in that language which
thou knowest

Make my supplication before her, as thou cansi,"

I have a charmer whose race is like the rose, and like
hyacinths her hair,

Her rippling locks of hyacinth fall over rose-petals.”

“ My love, the darling of no other is like thee,
No other lover is distracted like me.”

“ 0 infidel boy,' we drink no cup at thy hands
We are drunk from another cup, with the wine of
‘ Am I not your Lord ‘r 2

t ‘ the magiaii joy,’ a favourice simile for a handsome cupbearer.

* The reference is to the Qur’an, Surah vii, 16S.

J (•-'I' ‘‘■'tj

* ' ^ ^

“ And when thy Lord drew forth their posterity from the loios of the sons
of Ad&nij and took them to witness against themselves, saying, ‘ I noo
your Lord?’ They answered, ‘Yea: we do bear witness.’” The com*
mentators tell as that God stroked Adam’s back, and extracted from his loins
bis whole posterity, which should come into the world until the resurrection,
one generation after another j that those men were actually assembled all
together in the shape of small ants, which were endued with understanding ;
and that after they had, in the presence of the angels, confessed their
dependence on God, they were again caused to return into the loins of their
great ancestor.

333

The KhSnzaman’s brother, BahSdnr Khan,’ also had some
poetic genius, and wrote an ode, which is r. produced l)elow on 240
the theme of that ode of Mtilla As.ifi’s w’hich begins ; —

“ The night of grief has much embittered my lot.

Where is the morning ? For rust has settled on my
mirror.’'

Bahadur Khan’s ode.*

“ The wanton, cruel charmer has taken a .stone in his hand,

As though lie would attack me, the weary one.

M y moon faced darlir^g sit.s on the throne of beauty.

He is a king, seated on his throoe.

Witlioiit thee. Bahadur, they will not cease from their
wailing and their wine-bibbing
For they have taken from thee the flute of grief.”

In accordance wdth the saying, “the words of kings aie the
kings of wo'ds” this appears to be a sufficiency of the n- etry of
the'intw'o ®

1 Muhammad Sa‘id Shaibani, Bahadur Khan, younger brother of ‘All
QulT Khan, Khnnz iman After Humavun's return from Pet si i he planned
a rebellion, winch failed He was pardoned by Akbar and leceivetl Mukin as
jdgh\ He assisted in the oonquesr nf Malwn, and wns sub'Cqneutlv irovnrnor
of Hiwa. He took on active patt in the beveial rebellions of his elder
brother. After his capture ^ahbaz Khan Kambu killed hitn by Akbar’s
order,

* The text here has, wrongly, gik- (‘opening couplet’). The whole
ode is quoted. The MSS wrongly divide the coupletn of the ode, as though
they were isolated couplets from odes.

3 It is not Oisy to d»^cicle heic whether Bad‘»onT is serious or ironical in his
qnotarion of rlie proverb It is evident that he h-id some admiiMtion
for the Kha zamnn, bs lie has bl uned Sultan of Saplak for nor acceding to
the Ku’iuzatnan’s most unreasonable reqne«*t On ih? otlier hand Rahldur
Khan’s fide dppenr.s to refer to Be^. — mv as Oie Kh^nzainan

used to cdl him — and it is L'‘»s8ihle that the pn.r.uh.s n sis tefeitfioe tot^e
titl^ given by the . m In tn ^§hnm B -g in Ins iufatua' ion. B,> • 'onT

repented of h s oWn soimoos I ‘p-te fiom moialifv. and became or^ <he
■ unc '’guid,' arid 't ij ^'?'‘haps in virtuous iudign itien tha' r;vs t'r n.;
h.Bs nail of the poetry of “these two” «ci7, int. ^ ozamin art h.a

brother.

334

LVI. Sairi.i

He was a qTizl’^ and a theologian of cheerful disposition. He
came to India and died, having acquired honour hy performing
tiie pilgrimage of Islam. In pro.-ody, and ihjming, ami the
composition of enigmas he was unrivalled. The following
quatrain is by him : —

“ Sairi, take up thy abode in the sanctuary of the soul and
the heart,

Withdiaw thy sight from tliis form compounded of water
ami eai th ;

Everything, save the knowledge of God, is naught.

Forsake everything, and acquire this knowledge.”

These verses also are by him ; —

“She does not close that narcissus-like eye on account of
ophthalmia,

241 She shuts the door of mercy on gi ief-stricketi lovers.”

“ Preachei’, miscall me not for my devotion to my idol.

For God’s sake torment me no more.”

TiVII. SiPIHKi.’

He is Mirza Beir, brother’s son to Khwaja Amlna,^ who was
known as Khwaja .Jahan. He has written a divan. The follow-
ing verses are the fruit of his brilliant intellect : —

i Sairi 13 mentioned neither in the nor in the Tahaqdt.

A ju‘^ge, civil, criminal and ecclesiastic.

^ He is not mentioned in tlio Tahaqdt . Mr. BIo<*hmann says (trans. Ain-i-
Akharl, i, 424) tliat his takhnllus ^vas ^ahri. This is a mistake, as the third
conplet given below shows.

4 Khwaja Amin-ud-din Mahmud of Hirafc, Khwiija Jalian, an excf-llent
accountant i«nd a distinguished calligraphist. He accompanied Hamayun in
his flight to Persia and, on Hamayun'B return, was made hakhihi to Afcbar.
He received iiis title, and the rank of commander of one thousand, on Akbar’s
accession. He was at-cnsed of want of loyalty dnring the rebellion of the
Kh anzaman, and was dismissed to Makk ih. On his rernrn he was pardoned
He died near Lakhnau in Nov 1574 fr'»m the result of an accident which
occurred to him when he was convalescent from sickness.

33a

" Soften with a smile the poison of thy angry eye.

As bitter almonds are made sweet by the addition of salt.”

“ My wandering heart passed by the street of calamity,

It is strange that my heart wandered without thee.' Its
action was strange.”

“ Sipihri, take, like the tulip, a cup in the king’s round, -
Now that the heart has blossomed and the rose-grarden
smells sweet.”

“ The king of exalted rank, Humayun, the dust of whose door
In dignity far excels the heavens.”

LVIll. Satyafi.s

He was a servant of Bairam IQian.* and the Ehan sent by his
hand a sum of seven thousand ranees as an offering to the shrine
o£-feie holiness the Imam Riza^ (on whom be blessings and praise!
Having spent all this mone}- he was there called to account by
Shah Tahmasp and in the year H. 974 (.a.d. 1.5h6-67) was
released from torture i by death ). The.se couplets are bj him : —

“AVhen my sallow countenance appeared in the mirror,

The mirror, from the reflection of my face, became an
autumn leaf.”

“My nawow breast, in which lodges grief fur the absence of
my love,

May yet be so situated that joy will leave in it no room for
my soul.”

I ^ as in MS. (A). The text has j3 which does not make sense.
This couplet and the one preceding it are transposed in both MSS.

* ‘a round of the wiee-mp.’

3 He is mentioned neither in the -liu nor in the Tabaqdt. AISS. fA) and
(B) give his takhallus as Siyaqi

* Khatikhanan. Tutor to Akbar and regent of the empire during his
miuority. He was a Sh!‘ah.

5 The eighth imam of the §hi‘ah3, whose shrine is at Mashhad.

336

LIX. Sahmi.*

He chose hi-: poetical nanie from the profession of his father,
who was an anow-inaker. He grew up in the service of Mirza
Aziz Kiika - and, since he lias l)een addicted to poetry from the
age of ten, he has become thoioughly versed in it, and is famous
throughout the woild. In reply to tiiat 6de by Ummidi the
mystic, s which begins,

'■ Thou art the king of tiie kingdom of beauty.

We are beggars enjoung the spectacle,”
he was one day reciting an ode of his own before the court.
'When he came to the hemistic-h,

“ I am a pure Sunni and come from Bukhara,”

Lashkar Klian,^ the paymaster in chief, who was a Khurasani
suspected of heresy, though he did not openly profess it,^ said,
“Then, Mulla, there is also such a thing as an impure Sunni?"
Mirza 'Aziz Kuka said on the spur of the moment, “ Yo n, fp r
e.xample.”

Qasitn Arsalan has the following quatrain refeiring to Sahmi.

1 SaliMii is not mentioned in the Ain nor in the Tabaqat.

® Khan-i..4‘? ,m, eon of Ataga Khan and Ji Ji Anaga, and foster-brother of
Akbiir.

3 Or, ‘ of Rai.’

A Mnhnnirn.id Husain of f^nrisan He was for some time Mir Bakhshi
nmi Mir ‘Aiv bur. was dismissed, (tne d-iy he came dmnk to court and
cliallcnged the courtiers to fight iiim. Akbar punisiied iiim by tying him to
the t>iil of H lioise and imprieoned him He wii3 subsequently released and
attached to the Mun im Khfm’s i-orns in Bengal In the battle of Tnkaroi
( JI ireh 3, 1575; to- was soveiely wounde i. His wounds began to he d bnt he
did not t iho suibcient c o'e of his health and died, a few days after the battle
in Uyisa Vi'in Jhi i-Akbait, trans. bloclunann, i, 4-l)7.

6 Wheiever ^i alls are in the minority tliey practise, if necessary,
tiiqi-jyih. (Akij ‘ fe ir,’ ‘caution,’ cr ‘pious subterfuge’), i.e. they act as
thOiigh tliey were Sunnis A Shi ah may even vilify his own sect, if his
per-onal .-afety require it. Fide Ain i-Akbar}, trans. Blochmann, i, 33S, n 2.
Badaoni relates wi:u evident glee this snub administered to a suspected
nhi'ah

337

“Sahmi, Tariqi,’ and Faridun® are thieves,

They are thieves like the cat, the jjickal, and rhe monkey.

Take care not to recite yonr poetry before them

For these two or three poets will steal the lines rrotn yon.

The following are some lines from Pahmi’s o-;ie vvoitten in
answer to one by® Ummidt : —

“ The thnr.ght of thy mole has eier had its place in my heart 243
I did not mention this scar to thee, but it remained on rny
heart.

I sowed the seed of hope in the field of luve,

But obtained no crop save a crop of de.spair,

When thou sawest in the mirror the reflection of thy cruel
face

The mirror melted before it from shame.”

“This is not the new moon that has risen to the highest
point of the heavens,

It is a sword hung in the air for the purpose of slaying
me.” *

“ The new moon of the Td was likened to the arch of her
eyebro’iv,

t The text has ’ ^ irifi,’ I follow (A ) Q.isioi Ai s tAu wus evideiitir
speakiiigr of poets at Akbar’s coart. Vi ie no. LXXIK.

® Mo Faridini is mentit>ne‘l as a poet in the Af‘i, or the Vh' }r, or in this
work Qasiiii Arsnliin may have beeu reterr'iiir to Karidint maternal

uncle to Miry.a Muhammad Hakim, or more p'ot,.,!.!, to Mn/.a h unluii Harlas,
a commander of live bandied, son of Mnhamaia.i Quit Khiut tlarta^ Mi^'ya
Faridun Barliia served in Sind nnd, in ad . o‘J1;-*.'3, aecomp ,t; e'i jin? Beg
to court. Under Jahiingir he was lapidly promor-d ami hci;i. in the eijhth
year, a command of two thousand, when he seiwd under Sii'tan Khurram
against Rana Amar Singh. He died dnrifv the c'cpeditmii VtAc Ahi-:-
Aibail, trans Bloclimann, i, 342, 478 nud T"-nk-i-Jahanjli'i, Ii6, 133.

® Not the ode quoted above.

* “A sonnet to his mistress' eyebrow.”

338

If the simile "svere jnsk there ■would he eyer another* new
moon at her side.”

“Her mouth is like the end of a hair in its delicate propor-
tions, hut see

How the sword of her tongue in speech splits the hair.” ^

24:4 “ Thou earnest before me in order to vex my wounderl heart,

What evil have I done that thou hast thus come before
me P ”

LX. Saqqa.8

His name -was Bahram. He was a devotee who believed that
he had attained the stage of annihilation.* He was one of the
disciples of Shaikh ilaji Muhammad Khabushani (may his
tomb be hallowed!), and wns in some measure mysteriously
attracted towards God.^ He constantly traversed the streets of
Agra -with a few pupils, giving water to the people of God, and
while he was thus employed his tongue would be uttering re-
freshing verses. One of the sons of his religious guide came to
Imlia, anil to him he gave all that he possessed, and would have
given more, had it been po.ssible, and he then set forth on foot,

t i.e. trie poet himself, who is wasted by love to the sirailitade of a new
moon.

* The Persian metaphor is the same as the English. The douhle entendre
refers to the opeiiiag of the mouth in speech.

3 This poefa name is uot given in the text, nor in the M3S., thougli the
tirst sentence is so framed as to lead us to expect a mention of his name-
I hare supplied it from the Afn-i-Akbarl. In the (trans. Blochmann, i,
5^1, and n. 1) he is thus described, ‘ Darvish Bahram. He is of Turkish
extiaction, and belongs to the Baya^ tribe. The prophet Khizr appeared to
him, and a divine light filled him. He renounced the world and became a
>%ater-c-irrier ’’ The Ba\ac tribe is a Turkish tribe scattered over A^ar-
baljan, Irvan 'rtiiran Fiirs and N'shabur. Bahram is worshipped as a
saitit. Hi- i.i 'la'-leuTn i- in BaiMwin m Betigal.

* Till- 8 st.c terra .dicates s^^ltiessnp-s, or the anniliiiation of self,

the will oh!-. ' PHtii --’v de‘i over into God’s keeping.

5 y . ff’lA,. r )r the technio.d mea»dng of the words wSa.

and - 'e p. 7 v. .

339

alone and destitute, for Sarandib,' and on the way to Ccylcji
the torrent of annihilation swept away the cliattels of bis
existence, and in that infidel land some person, guided by a sign
from the piophet (the blessing and peace of God be upon him ! )
appeared, no one knew whence, and arranged for the obsequies
of Saqqa, (may God water his grave !).

He collected seveial divans of his own poems, and whenever
he was overcome by leligious ecstasy he would wash the ink
from the pages of the divans, one by one, but the remains of his
poems form a large dlvon. The following verses are part of the
outcome of his clear and sparkling intellect : —

“ I am thrown into bewilderment each time I regard the mole
on His cheek,

I distractedly encompass that spot like the leg of a pair of
compasses tracing a circle around its centre.

I, distrsiught as I am, have withdrawn my gaze from fair
creatures for tliis reason

That I have in the nest of my heart a Friend of my soul
like Thee.”

“ I have broken the foundations of austerity that I might
see what would come to pass,

I have sat in the market-place of ignominy, that I might
see wliat would come to pass.”

“ I see ray poor mad heart distracted with the love of Thy
face,

I see it encompassed on every side with the chains of Thy
locks.”

“ This day from weeping am I {dunged in my heart’s blood,
Ah, heart ! cause not my^ head to burst this day with
weeping.”

t Ceylon. The word used immedifitely of tei wards is ' Slldn),

referring to the same place. The latter woid is nsed in order to pun with
(sail) ‘ a flood,’ ‘ a torrent.’ The account of Saqqa’a obsequies may

340

“ The love of that beloved one with garments like the rose
has again grasped me by the collar.

Ah, now, at last, it has rent my garment from collar to
skirt.” ‘

LXI. SiPAHl*

245 He was the grandson of the famous ^,waja Kalan Beg,®
This quatrain is by him.

“ Alas, that- the season of tlie rose has passed so quickly,

Alas, tliat it has passed in the twinkling of an eye !

Without thy eyes nnd the down on thy clieek the violet
and the hyacintii

Pass their days in idindness and in mourning,*’

He died in Agra in the year u. 978 (a.d. 1570-71).

LXIT. Sar:.udi of Isfahan.®

His name is Sharif. He was for some time a roster-keeper,
and now holds some appuintment in Bengal under Sharif Amali.

be accepto-1 wirl' a sraiti of salt As SaqqtVs tomb is in Bardwan he pro-
bably died in hengal on 1 is way ro Opyl>*n

1 The«e voise^ aU mystic *1 The B»-loved, in each case, is God, who
is spoken of. after the fashion the Siifls, as thongh He were a human
object of love. The couplet het/innipg ** I have bioken the foundations ”
proiiahly means rliat the p-'et. having apm ehended tlie esotei ic meaning of
divine love, lias cc-'Sed fo f<rlj( u the ceremonial observances of Islam, and
has thu<^ rendered himself obno'<ions fo the fomi.jlly pions

2 This poet is mentioneii ncirher in the .tin. nor in the Tahtiq^t,

3 1'he G"vernor of Qandal<ar under Mirza Kami an. The Shah of Persia
captured Qandahfir from him.

‘ blue-ne«s.’ npp icihle both to the violet and to the hyMcinth.
Blue, like black, is tlie colour of m »nrning It may, nerliaps. also signifv
blindness. \Yith reference to ilm bluish film wiiich forms in cases of cataract

6 Miihamm.id Sharif. Sirmull. was a commander of two hundred. He
was sent to Bengal witli ^ irif AmaH in A.r> lo9l-92 and in the fdlowing
year was fighring m Urisa -'gainsr R-im ''andia, Rlia of Khurda. He is
8 ‘id to have died in the Dak. in In the A/n \\ oOT t he is thus de.scribed,
“ilia name is ^arif. He po‘Jsess*-s sotne kio'wlt^iige, is upiight, and
zealous in the performance of his diit-e'. Ilis rhyin^- is excellent. He
understands arithmetic.” The Tabuqdt has, ‘ S)iarif»i»Sarmadi ig an

341

He at first assumed Faizi as his poetical name, but wlien
Shaikh Faizi submitted a complaint to the emperor on the
subject he abandor.ed his pretensions, and chose Sarmadi as his
poetical name. He has some poetic genius. The following
verses are bj him.

“ Since the sword of the coquetries of that haughty
beauty has been raised,

Spectators from afar hare stretched out a hundred necks
to receive its blow.”

“ When thou earnest to my house with the fumes of wine
in thy head and roses undei' thy arm
The very dust of this liouse of grief put forth blossoms
to see the sight of thy arrival.”

“ Since in contempt I st-r my foot upon both worlds
Neither joy nor sorrow iias had any power over my
heart.”

LXIII. SlQl OF the: JazaTr.*

He is an ‘Arab, and his father Shaikh Ibrahim was a learned
theologian whijm the Shi ahs, aftrr tiiCir mode of belief, regarded
as an infallible religious g.iide He settled in Mashhad, and
Saqi ivas born tliere. Saqi lias acquired some Iparning, and is 2i6
of a cheerful disposition and eloquent. Ke came from the
Dakau to Hindustan, and is now in Bengal. Tiie folloiving
verses are by him ; —

T?fahaiiT, and is one of the serrancs of ciii5 C'>r:rt: ’ He apparently a
for Badaoni (text, ii, 335) thus abases him, ‘ ShariP Sarmadi/ the
roster-keeper, regarding whom si*meboily has stiU. —

“ Tiiere are two roster-keepers, b th of them vile.

One is anything but previous and the other anything but noble
The two epithets in the second hemistich refer ro the .Hatnes of the two
men, the second referring to Sharif.

1 Thus described in the Ahi fi. 593) * He belongs to the Arabians of the
Jaza’ir. He has acquired soma kaowledue.’ y\y7aj\ \Al-]az<rir) * the
iahmds* is the Arabic form of Algiers, but the term heie probably refers
to the islands of the Persian Gulf.

44

342

“ From my soul, as I weep, arises a sigh of grief,
E^en=ss smoke arises when water is thrown on fire.”

“ I grieve not for the cruelty of my love
Lest my grief should become a cause of joy to others.”

“ When slie passes by rne in wrath the tears flow from my
eyes,

“ Just as tears flow from eyes dazzled by the sun’s rays.”

“ My heart flutters lest thou should have come to it in thy
sleep.

Whenever there comes before me any person heavy with
sleep.”

An, ode.

“ In my desire for thy eyelashes each breath loads my heart
with blood.

In orler that it may bring me once more into tby hand.

My heart obtained a glance from thee which made my soul
thy prey. Aye,

■An arrow which has struck the mark steadies the aim.

Aly heart is, as ever, ardent with love ; thou ai t, as ever,
indifferent.

Saqi, describe to her thy pain, before .she publishes it
abroad.”

LXIV. SAYYini.i

His name is Snyyid .^u\b, and he has already been mentioned.
He comes of the Sayyids of the Garni sir who settled in Kaljii.

1 Sayyiiii is not mentioned as a poet either in the .i/n nr in the Tabaqdt.
The only perron of his mune pi evionsly inentioiied iu tliis work is Sayvid
Shah Mir of Saniana. Vide p 17-t.

2 Garin,,!!', a !iot, low-lying tract. There are two districts to which the
name is given, viz the nort li-eastern coast of the Persian Gulf, and the
valley of the Ilalmund in Sistsn and soutli-weacein Afghanistan. The
latter is prob.ibly intended.

343

He is of a cheerful disposition and is pleasant in cnnyersation and
is to some extent imbued with religious mysticism. He is the
disciple of Shaikh Salim Cishti. He was for some time in the
emperor’s service, but it was his fate to leave it. and he has 247
since spent bis time in the service of various Amtis. He is now
in Kabnl with Qilij Muhaniniad Khan. I quote the following
few couplets of his : —

“ I am in the first pangs of love, and my heart is disquieted.

Like a child who trembles as he wakes from sleep.”

Since that stately cypross-like beauty made for herself a
necklace of roses.

I envy the roses, and the roses envy her shift ”

From my strayed heart the breeze obtained no news of
what had happened.

Although thy two locks spread their tresses to the wind.” *

“ Reverence forbids me to set foot in my house.

Since the whole house has been filled with the effulgence
of thy face.”

“ I utter not a word of the secret.s of thy favoui s and thy
chiding.

No sound arises irom him who has been killed in sub-
mission to thee.”

“ Although there remains to nobody in the reign of the
king of the world

Anything but a draught of water and a patched garment,

Yet tbanks a hundredfold are due to God that poverty
has become universal,

That there remains no envy among the people."

1 “ Altho\!gh thy looks were cs-reless in keeping their Eociet my heart
did not betray it.”

344

'“I wrote an ode in thy hononr, lord of generosity,

Which was a faithful index of the volume of thy virtues
and peifeeticiis,

But the generosity which thou showedst to me in return
for it was so slight.

That my hope of benefiting by thy wealth was destroyed.

Thy generosity was not an equivalent for my poetry,

248 Keep, then, thy generosity, and return my poetry.”

“ God forbid that I shonld have a heart that never ex-
periences pain.

An aiTow i.s better in the breast than a dead heart.”

I;XV. Shah AbO-’l-'Ia'alT,'-

He has h een mentionecl in the historical reco’-d of the reigir
Me ^'as a man of cheerful disposition and had good taste in
f etry. I reproduce rhese few couplets of his : —

- ^ah tvh 3 one of Hutnayurrs Amzrs and did valnable

servicf* on Ilnmayun’s ret.irn from Persia. He was of the family of the
Khwitja-v ,i Hl^.ghirhar. is nor- mentioned amonp Akhar’s Amirs either

in the Ain -'r ’n the Tabaqqt. For an account of his murder of Shir *-Ah
Beg vi^Je "■•o’ i; (cexc pp 9 ef s^’q.) Early In Akbar’s reign he was im-
piisone'^: a. ''^■.ryv but es^caned, and, having persuaded Kamil Khan the
Gakkliar t'- him in a faciie invasion of Kashmir, escaped to Dipiilpur-
vTr-re hr- W‘< nn-! was sent to Gnj;-..rnc en rout? to Ijlakkali. In

linjarSc f.'': c.t '.•.el anoti' -r mui der and fled and joined the Khan’^arr fin.
whn delivo’ • ’ *^0 Mvbar fie was then imprisoned in Biyana bnr was

rcieaaed ^ r .J'-rruii Kh?n wlir'ii the latter fled from court. He left Baiirmi
and joi r-f but nav'^'-g treated the emperor Wxih disrespect, "Vris

sene off lliKkan. Un his leturn he rebelled and tlien fled to Namaiil

and then to Kabul H'^ie he pf-rsuadoci Cucak Begutn, mother of
^^uha^l7n.l . -'d'-kiin Mhzi to eiv.^ him her da>;ghter in marnage. He next,
•?i tiie >5 an attempt to seize on ihe supreme power in Kabnl,

mardere i ;ak Begam Muh. unmad Qisim Kuhbar, Muhammad
^Iil•ziVs vck'.i. -en fled to 3nlaim5n Mirza in Bada khsh an. ^\ho marclied to
attack 8h‘‘h ‘ A^-u-’I-Ma alT. Muhammad Hakim MIrza left Shah Abu-'i.
M i'dU and j-'ined Sulaia«aa. Sulaiman evencnally captiiied ^hah Abi'i*’!-
Ma ali and sent him -o Mub^mmad Hakim, by whose orders he was
strangled (Mai' 10^ 1563).

345

My soul, to keep company witli strangers is not good,

It is iiot good to associate with every lieloved one and to
leave one friendless.

It is pleasant sometimes to torment a lover, but kindness
is also pleasant sometimes.

To sit ever on the throne of scorn is not good.

Sit in the corner of separation, hapfiy in the hope of
re- union.

To de.spair of the good fortnne of seeing ' the beloved one
again is not good.”

Beloved, I have been alone, and separated from thee.

I have been, for a purpose, a prisoner in the bonds of
separation.

In every place have I read the story of thy love so often

That ou this account I am become a by-word in the
world.”

“ My heart suffers grief of a thousand descriptions on her
account,

If my grief kills me not what other boon shall I obtain
from her?

LXVI. ShIrI.’'

He comes from a village called Kokuwal® in the Paajab. 249
His father belongs to the ilajis,* a large and well-known tribe,
and be used to say that his mother was a Sayyiu by race. Al-
though he is not of noble blood be has a disposition sufficiently
noble, and leads a '.vell-regul& ted life. He studied under bis
father, Maulana Yabya, who wrote an ode wdth this opening
couplet : —

1 As ia the MSS. The text has which is not so good a

reading.

2 He is thus described in the Ain (i, 610). • He belongs to a Panjabi

i'amily of Sh-iikhs. Under the patronage of his majesty he has become a
good poet.’ He translated the Haribans into Persian. He seems to have
been orthodox, according to Badsoni’s views (text ii, iOs, 209).

5 Or Khokliowal, in the Bari Daab.

* I have not been able to obtain any information regarding this tribe.

From the rain of Thy favonr, 0 merciful Providence,

Tliere remain, from each drop, in the heart of the wise a
hundred rivers of precious secrets.”

Shiri liad great facility in writing verse, and once boasted that
he had composed thirty odes in one night, but God knows
whether this was true or not. One day lie wms readiup^ in an
assembly a fragment from his divnn, which contained this
hemistich,

“ I have thrown four volumes of verse into the river Cinab.”

The late ilaulana Hahdad nf Amioha t at once said, “What if
you had thrown this spill * of paper after them ? ”

Shiri possessed, to some extent, nnworldliness, sympathy, and
the ascetic sjD.h.t, and has written verses in this vein, for example,
“I am lord of the table of poverty, and never
Will my spirit allow me to beg from my friend.

To borrow from Hindus at four hundi ed per cent
Is better than receiving gifts from these Musalmans.”

No poet among his contemporaries has written better pessi-
mistic poetry ^ than he has. This is a specimt^x of such verses : —
“ 0, ye dead, rejoice that ye are at rest.

For pleasure has departed from our midst !

0, ye who are to follow us, read the fdtiht *

To ofier thanks that you were not living in our time ! ”

In the composition of elaborate odes and epigrams he certainly
excelled all the poets of his time, and silenced them by making
such felicity of diction as they possessed seem as naught beside
250 his own. The following fragment justly idescribes his abilities
in this line.

“ If thou ask me of the poetry of Shiri
I would say, if justice is to be done.

1 Videc. ii, no. LX'X

2 ‘A wick ftn- a lamp/ ‘a linstock. * For clhli.

'* V •

3 oU^ {^ahii-iyydt)j lit. ‘complaints/ scil against fate.

♦ The first chapter of the Qur*cn, oftea read ns an act o? thanksgiving^.

34.7

That not all the verses that poets write pass as current
coin

Just as nobody’s wine is all clear.

Shlri, praise not the base,

For praise befits the noble.’

Shirt’s ghazals and masnavis are mere rubbish,

And this is intended neither for praise nor for blame.

But the fame of his odes and epigrams

Has reached the uttermost parts of the earth.” ^

The few verses quoted below are the production of his
brilliant wit ; —

“ My heart is so enamoured of the beauty of Salma ^

That it wanders abroad with her heart in search of
consolation.

The remembrance of another by that heart in which thou
dwellest

Is equivalent to the worship of ‘Uzza* in the Ka’bah.^

The beloved has so entirely sui rounded herself with an
array of coquetry,

That even desire found no way of access to her in that
deuse crowd.”

“ Bid the caravan move faster, that Egypt
May no linger send back to us the cries of Zulaikha *
grieving for our absence.”

t The verse may have two meanings, one, that which is apparent, and
tlie other, tliat Shi.i was not of sufficiently noble birth to be able to appre-
ciate the qualities that cull for such praise as is contained ii, oriental
laudatory verse.

* Lit. ‘from C.inc.isus to Oancasus.’ This last couplet is in both MSS .
but has been carelessly omitted from the text.

^ A woman celebrated for her be.iuty, hence ' a beloved mistress.'

* An idol worshipiied by the ‘Arabs before the days of Muhammad.

* The temple of M.ikkah.

* The wife of Potiphar. who lot ed Joseph. For the Muhammadan version
of the story vide Qur'an lii

34 $

“I Lave bound my litter to thee with a white thread to
si^ify

That in my separation from thee no blood remains in the
veins of my soul.”

“ Deprived of thy face my existence is a sea of pain and
grief,

My ribs are the waves of that sea.”

“ She comes to slay me, with the sword of cruelty in her
hand.

"Whatever men relate of injustice is committed by that
cruel one.

261 In the abundance of its hopefulne.ss the heart believes that

a me.ssenger comes from Shirin

To the nnfoitnnate Farhad* even though it be Parviz
himself that comes.”

” Wherefore, 0 tear, dost thou traverse my eye

When I bid farewell to my dear ?

Where wert thou then, that thou now obscurest my sight 't

0 Zephyr, niy beloved has entirely filled the inoaid of my
desire,

1 am thy devoted servant, bat thou wanderest overmuch in

her street.”

The following few couplets are from an ode oi" question and
answer* liy him: —

'•‘I said, ‘0 heas-t, what is the cause of thi.s -change in the
condition of’ the world r ’

jly lieai t replied, 'Silence, the brain of heaven is thrown
into confusion.’

* Farhad was ttie lover of Sfjirin, i’arv'c being her baaband.

* A very common variety of the o- '^nbl lah, the form being a con.

serration between the poet and hig heart, or iiia beloved.

S49

I said, ‘ From the well of hope the water of desire is not to
be had.’

It replied ‘ The well-rope of hope was not sufficiently long.’ *

I said, ‘ If there is any rest anywhere, tell me w'here it may
be found ?

It replied, ‘ In sleep, tliey .say, the sleep of death.’

I said, ‘Can anyone sptnd his life in joy ? ’

It said ‘ Tiiis is mere speech, which never comes to pass.’

1 said ‘ Wliy is the brow of the helmed one furrowed wiih
a frown F ’

It said, ‘ It is ill to conteiid with one ill-disposed.’

I said, ‘ The mirror of wisdom is covered with rust,’

It snid. ‘Where is the bui'uialier. genero.sity, tliat it may
once more receive a polish F ’

I said, ■ The eloquent aie the oinament of the assembly.’

It said, 'Tnou caust nut say rhe.se thing.s to the wealthy.’

I said, ‘ .Uas for rhe.se men, w: are far from the truth ! ’

It .said, 'Let justice l)e dune on this deceitful race, which
folli'ws injustice.'

I said. ‘ I have a detailed c ■sapiaiut to make against my
fate.’

it said. 'To the King thou :n’a-t relate it succinctly.’

I said, 'To Akhar. w]e.i rc'emlde-; Jam-djid in glory and
Snlairnan in n i.'dniii ? '

It .s, aid, ‘Yes, the King L.f lu'tth destiny who in dignity
resembles the sun,’

I said, ‘ That per.sonalitv which is .second only to the
jiTTiphet ill hdooiir ? ’

It s.iid, ‘Yes to that ineatuie of Ged who surpa.sses all in
heneticence.’

1 sai(i, ‘By race and (Ic.^cenf the crown and the throne are
justly his.’

It said, ‘ Hi.s favour and libcralit' are the proiei-tion of his
kingdom and hi' jieople.’

t j.e, tlie lover h.id not subsisted suificieiitly long o’n hope.

252

45

850

The following two couplets are from an ode which he wrote on
the utility of the elephant: —

“ How sweetly pass those nights in which, praying inces-
santly foi the safety of the King’s elephant,

Tread the chapter ‘night’* by the margin of the river
Biyah ;

On the fair ones of Kukuwal with the gait of an elephant “
and the eyes of gazelL s

I think every moment, and heave sighs rrom my Dosom.”

Tlie following is the opening couplet of an ode in which he
enumerates six things as being necessary.

“ 0 thou who boldest the world in the grasp of thy wisdom
by the force of thy sword and thy arrow.

Crowned monarch of the throne and of fate.

Who conquerest the world by means of thy elephants and
thy horses.

Thy crown and thy throne, thy sword and thy arrow are
the sun, the moon, the lightninir, and the meteor,

A hundred writers® would be unable to reckon the number
of thy elephants and horses.”

As his divan is exceedingly well known I refrain from quoting
any more of his verses.

At the time when he was employed on the translation of the
MahUbhariUii * he said, “ These prolix fables resemble the dreams
of a man in a fever.”

1 The 92iid chapter of the Qur’an.

® The gait of an elephant is regarded ne pecnliiirly graceful.

3 ( daiir). Having regard to the eimilee in the preceding hemistich

he reference ie probably to the planet Mercury, called (dahir-i-

falak) ‘ the wiiter of the eky.'

* The only translation with which Shirl is credited in the Ain is that of
the Manbans. The ilahibhdratu was translated under the superintendence
of Baiiaoni and Shiri was one of his coll.t bora tors Vide Ain, trans. Bloch-
mann, i, 104. 106, Badtioni, text ii, 319.

351

Mulla Shiri’s deafcli occurred in tlie hilly country of the
Yusufzais, in tlie year H. 994 (a.d. 1586) ae has been already
mentionei).*

LXVII. ShakIbT of Isfahan*

He came recently to India, and is in the service of the !^an-
khanan, son of Bairam Khan.* He has good taste. The follow-
ing verses are by him * —

“ My nightly lamentations are still of some effect.

My broken bow has still an arrow whicli will reach its
mark.

My heart is provoked by her absence ; show me some
mercy, 0 fate 1

For my hand is hampered in combat by my having a
mountain’s weight tied to my waist.

Scatter roses on the skirts of my friends, for he who is
wounded to the heart by lier absence

Has, on the point of each eyelash, a hundred drops * from
his liver.” _____

“ 0 God ! Send me from heaven a market for my wares,

I am selling my heart for a sight of my love ; send me a
buyer.”

” My wares are anguish, not joy ; why dost thou ask the
price ?

Well I know that thou wilt not buy, and I will not sell.”

1 Vol. ii, text 350. This was the battle in tiie coarse of .ich Esja BIr
Bar, in Badaoni’s words, “ joined the dogs of hell.”

* Not mentioned in the Ain. In the Tabnqat he is thus described: " Mnlla
Shakibi of Isfahan has acquired many accomplishments and has many praise-
worthy qualities. He writes elegant reree. He is in the service of the
KhAnkhaiiin Mirza Khan, son of Mnhammad Rairam Khan.”

S M irza ‘Abdur-Rahim, eon of Bairam Khnn. Vide Ain-i~Akban, trans.
Blochmann, i, 334.

* MS. (A) has ' were diptilled from Ids

signihcant pec.’

^ Literally, ‘pieces.’

253

8o2

“'When will the deliciousness of love's grief be forgotten ?

I have sprinkled that salt on the mariMW of my hones.’’

Lxvm. SHrjn.

fie is Saif-ul-Mul6.k the physician.' One day when he came
to tieat a sick man .Mir Sayynl Muhanimad the cloth-weaver, who
has the [loetical name of Pikri,^ and is wcdl know'n under the
nickname of .l/;r Eitba'i, was employed with, the patient. The
Mir said of .Shuja'i,

“A sh;irp sword* is his worship, Maulavi Saif-ul-Muluk,

'Who has introduced a new fasliion in the practice of medi-
cine.

254 Yesterday Death said, when he had come to take the li.fe of

a sick man,

‘Everywhere I go he has been called in first.’ ’’

TiieMauIana (Saif-ul-MuKik )composed the following ‘ increased’
quatrain'* on the incontinence and gluttony of the Mir ( Sayyid
Muhammad),

“ 0 Mir, how can five gallons* of thick broth be contained —
in one debilitated stomach ?

Si autem contineantur, quomodo continehit -e penis tuiis—ah
Mromissione primd? ®

t Vide 0 iii. no 11, nnd traiiB. Blochmann, i, 543, where

he is rallpd Hakim S.iif-nl-.V'i!*, Lan^ (‘tt'.e lame’).

i Vide no. Oil

3 Tlie word (sai/i means ‘ a sword ’ The title Saif-nl- JIul uk means

' the sword of king-*.’ Saif-nl- Jliilk means ‘ ttie sword of the kirisfdnin.’ As
h:is been said, Saif-ul-Muluk was nicknamed Saif-td- Hukantd, ’ the sword of
the physicians ’

4 A quatrain in which, after the metre and rhyme of each verse have been

compleie l. an addition is made to it, prolonging the metre and completing
the seime In the ex imple given I have pl.iced a d.ish between the completed
verse and th- addition In the text the words have been

c iiele-i-ily printed as though they were the heiding of the account of a fresh
poet.

* Lit <df' lanii) ‘two maiinds.’

* I am not sure of the meaning of this line, as the poet rises a word which I

353

A tablet whicli will not contain a quatrain — written in the
smallest wiiting 1

Will surely not contain a long ode — written in large text. 2”
The following verses are the production of the Maulana's
almost magical genius ; —

“ Distracted with love, the hair of thy head is dishevelled,

May I become a sacrifice for thy head, for thou hast traffic
with lovers.”

“ A hair has fallen from my love’s locks across her cheek,

Or is it perchance the thread of my soul lying across the
fire ? ”

“Better that 1 should be buried in the earth than that, for
the sake of base desires,

I should walk the earth to seek favours from worldlings.”

LXIX. Shc'uei op Tcebat.*

He is a student and practises book-keeping. The following
verses are by him: —

“ 0 thou who, for fear of being separated from thy love, art
in the agony of death,

I give thee good news, for she, whose breath is like that of
Masih,* is coming, nay, is come.”

“The desire of seeing thee brings me, each moment, from my
house ;

“Desire has seized me hy the collar, and draws me to thee.

belieee him to have coined. I believe, however, th.it my translation is, at
least, approximately correct.

^ .1®^ tA. {Khntt-i~0}iiihdi'), Thesniallest kind of handwriting, ‘ like dust.’
^ a large kind of nobkhi handwriting nsed in engrossing.

^ Shu uri is not mentioned as a poet either in the Ain or in tlio Tabnqiit.
Turbat is either Turbat-i-H.ddai i or Turbat-i-Shaikli-i-Jam. both in Khurasan.

^ The Messiah. Musalmans attribute the life-giving miracles of our Lord
to a miraculous quality in His breath, and this simile is a favourite with
poets.

354

265 My great Preserver * is harsh to me in a thousand ways,

But how shall He bring tlie poor Shu'un into thy pres-
ence t”

“ Love has entered, and seized the vein of my soul,

The bewilderment of seeing thee has made my tongue
mute.”

“ Her wavy lock has fallen on her moon-like cheek,

A horse-shoe has been put into the fire for thee.” ^

“ Thou didst promise to sow the seed of faithfulness.
What is faithfulness ? To keep one’s promises.”

“ The double chin ® of that beauty with eyebrows like the
new moon

Is the reflection of the new moon in clear water.”

“ Nay, for when the sun rose in the heavens.

The moon appeared beneath his rays.”

LXX. Mclla Sadiq HalwaI’* op Samakqand.

He is too honourable to be placed among the poets and reckoned
along with the poets of this age. So to place him is a disgrace

i The verae is susceptible of the translation ‘my favoured rival, etc.’ but
the epithet [mu^azzam) appears to me to indicate the Deity. The

ambiguity is possibly designed.

^ ‘ Thy heart, like her hair, will be fixed on her cheek, and will be heated
like a horse-shoe, in the fire of love.’

y Fat is regarded as a beauty in the East.

4 The text has, wronizly. {Halican ). Both MSS. have the correct

reading Tn the Tabaqac lie is thus described, Mulla Sfuliq Halwa’i of
Samar raT.-f runefiofn Makkah and paid his r'-spects at court. He was for
some year- iii Hindustan and then went to Kabul, where he was engaged in
teachinsr, and caught M'rzi Muhammad Hakim. He is now in Saniarqand.”
F;df ala” .n' trans. Blochmann, i, 541. where he is called Maultna

355

to him and a disgrace to me. He is mentioned as a MidlH of good
understanding, of pleasant speech, and full of apposite learning.
After many vicissitudes he came to India, and having devoted his
attention to the successions ' of self-styled saints in this country,
set most of them by the ears. By the aid of the divine guidance
he was led to make a pilgrimage to the sacred lionse of God,^ and
the other holy places,’ and in the year h, 978 (a.d. 1.570-71) he
returned and set out for his native country, bnt Mii’za Mu^mmad
Hakim* desired him to sojourn in Kabul and began to study
under him. At present he is living, honoured and respected, in ^56
Transoiiana, where he is engaged in teaching and lecturing. He
has good taste in poetry and a sublime imagination. He has
written a divSn. These verses are by him : —

“ My heart is lost and nobody can tell me whither it is gone,

Thy ruby lip is laughing, my suspicion rests on thee.”

“ There is no resting place but thy door for my wandering
heart ;

I said I would stray from thy door, but my heart would not
depart.”

“ Thou hast returned like the sun from thy journey, O thou
with a face like the moon !

Thou wentest away beautiful, and hast returned most
beautiful.”

“ O thou with a face like the rose, I desire not to see thee
like the snuff of a candle, in every assembly,

I desire not to see thee inclining, like the rose-branch, in
every direction.”

1 The text seems to be corrupt here, bnt meaning is tolerably clear. The
word Sj UJ[.. - r {gilsila) denotes a regular line of saints by spiritual succession,
and, hence, a religious order.

* The Ka‘bnh at Makkah.

^ Madinah, and other places of pilgrimage in the Hijaz

♦ Akbar'a brother, born A.o. 1554, died A.n, l.'iSS.

356

“ My love’s mind is like a mirror set before me,
In it I see reflected whatever is in my heart.”

“ The pain of love, which I kept concealed from thee in my
heart and soul,

Has become manifest from my face, howmuchsoever I
tried to conceal it.”

“ That stately cypress* which I cherished in those eyes of
hers which shed tears of blood
I now see in my own eyes, with all its rubbish and splin-
ters.”

“ Come, my tears, what do you hope to gain by thus raining
down from my moist eyes.”

You have disgraced me before the world : what more do you
l equire ? ”

LXXI. SabOhI*

He was of the Caghatai tribe. He lived a very unrestrained
and licentious life. He had great .skill in poetry. The following
verses are by him : —

257 That my heart loves thee thou alone know'est.

I have told tliis secret to none, God know.®.”

1 i.e the reflection of the poet’s own figure.

* He is thus described in the i (i, 582;: “ He was born in Kabnl.

Once he slept in the bedroom of Amir Khnsray, when the shioing figure of
an old man with a staff in hishend awoke him nnd onleied liim to compose
a poem. As he had no power of doing .so, he took the whole for a vision nnd
lay down in another place ; bnt the same figure wokn him up, nnd repeated
the Older. The first verse that he ottered is the following ; —

‘ When I am far from thee my tears turn gradu diy into an ocean.

Come and see. enter the ship of my eye and make a trip on the ocean ’ ”

In tlie Tabaq'it lie is called ‘ Mulls Sabiihi.’ The oiil, fact tlicre mentioned
of him is th.it lie was for a lot.g time about the court. His name does not
appear to be known

357

“ Come nnyeiled into mj poor house
For there is none in my house save grief for thee.”

Thou hast not been a lover, thou hast not suffered the
grief of separation ;

How should one unfold to thee the tale of separation’s
woe ? ”

“ Thou didst sit nowhere, but the jealous watcher sat with
thee.

Save when thou didst take thy place in my heart and he
remained without.”

“ Last night to save my life, I took refuge from the hard-
ships of separation in thoughts of thee.

Thy image remained in my soul, else had I died.”

*' Alas, that I am so forgotten by that cruel one
That her eye has never fallen upon me, even in thought ! ”

“ With thy image in my mind’s eye I say, ‘ This is re-
union.’

I earnestly desire reunion with tiiee, all I have is imagina-
tion.”

“ We:ikne.ss has overpowered me, and my heart is weary
witli weeping.

Wlio will now inform her of my condition ?

What need is there that I should e,xplain my condition to

I r>

II er r

For my' heart, if it truly burns, will have some effect on
her.”

•“ Long eyelashes cause calamities

And w.hen the white of the lover’s eye becomes red they
shed blood.”

46

358

258

His death oc<-mTed at Agin in the year h. 973 (a.d. 1565-66)
or H. 972 (a.d. 1564-65) and the words ‘ Sahuhi the wine-bibber
gire tile date of it.

LXXII. SiLiHi.2

He came from Hirat and lias good taste both in poetry and in
prose composition. He is somewhat stndions and writes a good
hand. He was for some time employed as one of the secretaries,
and then returned to liis native land. He wrote the following
couplet ; —

Tn tlie night of separation from thee, in my eye-sockets
'I'he hlood from my liver was so congealed that sleep could
not enter them.”

This was written in imitation of the following couplet of Amir
Khusrav’s : —

“ I fenced my eyes in with a thorn-hedge of eyelashes
In order that neither thy image might leave them nor
.sleep find entrance.”

T!ie following are other vei-ses by Salihi : —

‘•"With ray two eyes, red with weeping during the grief of
the night of separation,

What shall I do, for these will be the roses of the day
when we meet ?

I have neither desire nor strength to associate with the
rose, that I should rnam in the rose-garden, Iness *

And the scent of the roses suggests to me only nufaitiifnl-
Like the dogs I have taken my place at thy threshold
In order that my rival may not enter in the guise of a
beggar.* ”

' iSabMl-i-maikhwar). T!ie letters give the date 973.

i he word Sabith or SabuJu means * a morning dranght.*

^ In tlie Ain lie is thus described, ‘ His name is Mahammad M Irak. He
tiaces his de-cent from Nizam-ni-Hulk of Tus * (i, 583).

* as in MSS. (.A.) and B). The text has ‘love’ or

* familiarity.’ which does not rnakc such good sense

* i e.. as a suitor.

“ Since my head was severed by that daarger of ci’iielty
It remains, weltering in blood, in one place, and my sad
heart in another.

Love, whether in separation or in union, is a source of
pain ;

Khnsrav bewails his love in one place and Faihad ' his
in another.”

LXXIII. SadiqI.s

He was born in Qandahar but was a Hirati bv origin. He
t\as for some time in Hindustan and died The following; verses
are his : —

‘‘ So many wounds has my body received from thv sword
That on whichever side I fall niy heart falls to the
ground.”

“ The wounded heart pays no heed to the body.

The martyr of love has no need of a shroud.

Since I liave been created a man of straitened means
Why have I no share in that mouth ^ t
Of my body little is left but a formless idea, and that too,
Wlien closely regarded, is seen to be no more than my
shirt.”

“On tlie day^ on which each man’s lot was decreed to him
by fate.

The lot of others was joy, while mine was sorrow.

0 my lieart ! Tell me not that that mooid ke beauty
comes in answer to my weeping ;

So many thousands of lamentations have I uttered, and
when did she come ? ”

^ Khnsrav was the husband and Farhiid the lover of Shiror

2 Ssdiqi ia mentioned neither in the Atn nor in the Tahfiq>ft.

3 There is a play here on the w'ord ‘ strait ’ or ‘ narrow ’ as

applied both to a man’s means and to a lovely mouth whiub cannot be
reproduced in translation.

259

360

A quatrain.

“ The structure of cruelty was founded by thee,

Tlie sfiucture of niy life was scattered to the niuds by
thee

Tiiou art a treasure of elegance, yet never

Has my ruined habitation been made prosperous by thee,”

LX XIV. Saef!.>

260 He is Shaikh Ya'qub of Kashmir, a small portion of whose
petfections has already been described by the author’s halting
pen. He is an epitome of all a<-complishnnents and therefore if
his praises be I’epeated fa pleasant repetition), what fault can
be found ? In spite of his having written standard works on the
mysticism of the and many other branches of knowledge

his genius was higldy adapted to the composition of eloquent
poetry. The followinir couplets are a small portion of the fruit
of his wonderful meditations ; —

" In the morning that beauty with a face like the moon
threw a veil over her face.

It was strange to see the sun veiled before evenitig fell.”

' Ask not of the merits of tutty, but ask for the dust of her
door.

Ask of its vii’tues from discerni)ig men.”

In his latter days he wished to compose a commentary on the
Quran like the Great Commentary * and he had already written
some of it rougiily when suddenly' death’s decree reached him,
and th<‘ unavoidable summons 0 +' God® was delivered to him in
ids well-loved native land, as has been said, and he died.

I Vide p* 200. In thft Ain his ta^allus is given as 8 liyofi, hut Sarfl is
correct Vide Alti-i-Akbini. i, 581, and n. 2.

^ ( Vti/!f7/--:-Knblr). perhaps the Anu'a?-.utAanzll, vide vol. i, trans.

Ranking, p 6, n 4

3 1 he text has ‘creatures.’ Both MSS. have (3*^

(^j^lldq) ‘ the Creator,’ which is better.

361

LXXV. SaepI of SiwA.i

He was for some time in Gujerat witli Khwaja Xizam-Tid-din
Ahmad, and then came to Labor and lived as a religions mendi-
cant. When Shaikh Faizi was appointed to tlie Dakan he went
with him, and thence journeyed to the next world. He has
written a divan and in long and short odes was a master of style.

The following couplets are In- him ; —

“ I am debarred from traversing the road to the Ka'hah,
else would I have sent there.

The sole of a foot glad to endure the torment of collect-
ing its acacia thorns.”

‘‘ My rose-seller who wishes to bring her roses to market
Must first acquire strength to withstand the impetuous
throng of buyers.”

“ if thou wishest to burn me light up the fire of thy cheek,

And so shall a light arise from my ashes till the day of 261
resurrection.”

LXXVI. SabukI op Hamadan.*

He was taken prisoner on the day on which the j^hanzaman
was slain, and tliough he escaped execution he did not escape
death.3 His poetry is mediocre. These few verses are from his
pen : —

“ I have sun'endered my soul and my heart, being no longer
able to bear the pain of separation from her,

i Thoa described in the Ain (i, 580, : ” He is poor and has few wants, and
lives content with his indigence.” In the corrupt Lskhnan text of the
^abaq^dt he is called ‘ Alulla Harfi of Sawa,* and is thus described, ‘ He was
in the company of this hnnible one (sell, the author, Nizam-ud-dln Ahmad)
for some time in Gnjarat and was for some time at conit. He went with
Malik-nsh-Shii‘ara Shaikh Faizi to the Dakan, and departed thence on the
pilgrimage to the Hijaz.’ His name seems to have been S-dih-nd-dm.

Saburi is mentioned neither in the Ain nor in the ^abuqdt.

3 Vide p 314, n. 1. Tlie author’s meaning apparently is that Saburi
died, ether of wounds or of illness, soon after he was captured.

362

What a pain is this, which has no remedy save the sur-
rendering of one's soul !

When the manifest fever of my love is not visible to hei,
How shall I inform her of my secret w'ounds ?

When that moon-like beauty walks abroad in tlie night in
vesture of the hue of the night
The brightness of dawn may be seen where lier dress
opens at the neck^’'

“ I would that her breast could be cleft by my dagger
That my pure heart might see whether her heart is pure.”

“Her waist has entranced the hearts of men,

Has completely made away with the hearts of men.”

LXXVII. Salih thi. Madman.*

He obtained fiom the emperor the title of ‘•Aqil (‘the saga-
cious'). He is crazy about statuary. For some time b.e has laid
it upon himself as a duty' to eat nothing before he has sent five
or six dishes of meat to be thrown into a river, a fountain, or a
pond as an offering to Khizr (on him be peace). He u.sed to
hand these dishes to Qasim, a native of India (who was a poet
and the son of an elephant driver, and also a low-minded fellow),
and Qasim used to go oat and invite qalandars^ and other rascals
to eat the food, and when (on his return) Salit) would say,
2g2 ‘ Khwaja?’ the impudent rogue would reply,

“ Yes, his holiness the Khwaja deigned to eat the food with much
relish, and sent you his blessing,” and would fabiicate lying
stories of this sort, which the madman believed. He had, how-
ever, some poelic genius, and to him might have been applied
the saying : —

* Thus described in the (ru6u(j''t, “ lluliamniad SiMih the madm.nn re-
ceived the title of ‘Aqil. His father was siid to be Tlami t!ie librarian,
who had been librarian to the empai'or Humayun. Miihamnir.rt §alih snew
□p from ciiildhood in the service of the emperor Akbar and is now enjoying
an allowance in Kabul. He is in easy circumstances and well-to-do."

* yiXiil a waudeiing religious mendicant, usually of louse habits.

363

“ Beautiful poetry emanates from the cross-grained Haidar
Ealaj

Just as roses spring from a midden.”

Salih wrote tlie following couplet : —

“ Since the desire of lier locks has fettered my feet,

Sly only way ont of this bargain ' is to surrender my
life.”

Salih was for some time a favoured and honoured conrtierj
then fell into disgrace and went to Kabul. He returned thence
and was appointed to the trusteeship of the light-diffu.sing shrine
of the Sultan of Shaikhs ^ (may God hallow his sonll 't, but
did not accept the appointment, and, having obtained leave to
return to Kabul, departed,

LXXVIII. TabamI.

He is Mulla ‘Ali the Mithaddig,^ brother of the well-known
Miilla Sadiq He acquired his learning in the Sayitsgs in Arabia,
and was extremely pious and temperate. He came twdce to
India, and in the year H. 981 (a.D. 1573-74) enlei’ed the protection
of God’s mercj, wlien the famous jMalla ‘Alim of Kabul* made
this chronogram on his death.

A This couplet cootains the nsaal play on the words (Arabic)

melancholy,* ‘desire’ and (Persian) ‘traffic/ ‘trade/ and also the

common simile which likens the locks of the beloved to fetters.

2 ^aikh Ni^m-ad-din Aaliya, born at Badaon in Oet. a.d. 1236, and
died at Dihll April 3, a.d. 15-5, Vide vol, i, trans , Sankiii^, pp. 71, n, 2,
236 and n. 2, 266 and n. 1, 267. 269, u. 5, 270 and n 6, 271 nn. 1 and 4, 281,
301, 610 and n. 4, 611, n. Also Firishca, ii, 730, and the Ain-i^Akbari, iii,
365.

^ ‘one learned in the sayings of Muhammad* ( ) men-

tioned below. Malla ‘Ali Tarami the Mtihaddis is not mentioned in the
Ain^ For an account of bis brother, fide p. 354

* Tide no. LXXTY.

364 .

“Alas ! for suddenly Mnlla ‘Ali

Has been snatched from our midst by misfnrtnne’s victoiy.

To ascertain the year of his death remember that the date
of the year wliich followed it

Is contained in the words ‘ Mulla ‘Ali the Mnhaddis is
dead.’ ’’ 1

His sprightly genius, following the dictates of his taste, would
» sometimes emplo}’ itself in the composition of verses. (Tlie
263 following are some of his verses.)

“ My earthy body is so withered away from the scorching
brand of separation

That it escapes from my garments like dust, if I shake
the skirt of my robe.’’

“ Thy .stately form is a plant in the garden of my soul,

The plant of thy stature is more ethereal than my
thoughts.’’

“I have plunged tlie pupil of my eye into water
That it may not for a moment think of sleep.”

“ Since I have no honour among men,

I seek to Hee from men a.s my tears flow' from my eyes.” *

1 ^ JLs t^j'c giving the date a . h . 982. I have been obliged

10 give a s.mTewhat fall paiapur.ise of the hemistich preceding this, wliich
has apparently pnziled the editoi of tne te.xt, in order that the .sense may
not be lost, Tlie editor of the te,v.t, in a footnote in which iie gives an
iiifeiior variant of tlie hemistich, gr.ively lemarks that the chronogram
gives the date 982. not having understood appaiencly that the composer of
the chionogram has drawn attention to tliis tact, nnd expressly says that
the date given in the ciironogram is that of the year following that of the
Mnlla’s death.

There is here a play upon the woids {mardum) ‘men’ and

(mardum, for mardum-i-ca^m) 'pupil of the eye’ which cannot be
reproduced in translation.

365

“ Since I have cast my heart into the bolids of the tresses
of moonlike beauties

I have woven for myself a net of calamity.”

LXXIX, TarIcjT of SiwA.*

He was a lewd old man and a buffoon * and was popular amonor
most of the poets about the court by the mere force of his im-
pudence.

He at last had the honour of performing the holy piigi’image
(to Makkab), and died there. The following vei’ses are by
him : —

‘‘ What business have lovers other than giving up their lives?

Since 1 fear not death what else should I fear?”

“ From the toilsome pain of separation nobody has any life
left.”

If this is separation nobody has any life left.”

“ In this land I have g'ven my heart to a most cruel enslaver.

I have fallen into the snare of the locks of one with a face
like a fairy.”

“ I am the faithful dog of him whose foot does not stray 264
beyond the skirts of his own powei',

Who imposes obligations on none, and is under obligation to
none.”

* Ihns described in the Tahaqdt, ‘ Multi Tariqi spent some year* in the
emperor’s service nnil at length performetl a pilgrimage to tlie HijSz, where
he died. In note 3 on p. 598 of the Ahi (vol. i.), an epigram of liis on
Judi’s (p. 291) is quoted. He accuses Jndt’i of plagiarism fiorn AshkT fp.
260). On p. 252 he is accused by Qiisini Arsaliin, with Sahmi and Farldun,
as a plngiaiist.

2 A word ( ) occars heie the meaning of which I cannot divine.

I neither know nor can discover anv !*ersian or Urdu word i escmbling it,
and have been obliged to omit it. Whatever Badioni wrote, we may be
tolerably certain that it was nothing complimentary.

47

366

“We saw the graceful cypress-Hke figure of that fair oue
depart.

Although no one has seen a soul depart.”

“ Thou saidst, ‘ Do not hoyer around me, or I will disgrace
and slay thee.’

Still do I hover around thee. Depart not from thy word.”

“ When her two cheeks come into my mind in the hours of
sleep.

All night long I see the moon and the sun in my dreams.

Remembering that thou wert to come, although thou
coinest not.

Tranquillity leaves my soul, and distraction enters mv
heart.”

“ The pain of love is increased, and no sympathy remains in
the world,

Majnuu was both afflicted and sympathetic, but he did not
remain in the world.”

“ From this world, as a mistress, I have wholly cut myself off.
That I might quaiTel with nobody for such a thing as a
world.”

“ It is impossible to live withont thee for a moment in the
world,

For thou art my soul, and nobody can live withont a .soul.”

” N^obody spoke, nor asked what a stage this must have been
In which ^hin was the last of the water-carriers of the
caravan.”

“ Tne army of grief for thy absence has captured the citadel
of my heart.

367

The icars which are visible on my heart are the hosts i of
the foe.’

LXXX. TaLIB of ISFAHiN.^

He has now dwelt in Kashmir for nearly eight years. At first
he was a religious mendicant and then he elected to become an
official, and enteied the emperor’s service. From Kashnii'- he was
sent as envoy to the ruler of Little Tibat, ‘All Rai,® and on his
return presented to Shai^ Abu-’l-Fazl a treatise which he bad
written on the wondeis of that land, which Abii-’l-Fazl embodied
in the Akharnnma. He is a very 8ym|>athetic man, and his taste,
both in poetry and in prose, is correct. He wrote the tollowing
quatrain: —

“ Thou givest me to drink of the poison of thy absence, asking
me what has happened.

Thou sheddest my blood and shakes! me from thee, asking
me what has happened,

0 thou who art ignorant of what the sword of thy absence
inflicts on me,

Wring my dust, that thou mayst know what has happened
to me.”

^ (siyihi-i-lofkkar) ‘ dark bodies of troop*.’

* In the -fill (i, 607), where he is called ‘ BSba Talib of Iffshan,’ he ie thns
described, * He is a thoughtful poet, and is erperieuced in political matters ’
According to the Haft Iqlim Baba Tiiib had been for nenrlv thirty years in
Kashmir, patronized by the rulers of that country. When Akbar annexed
the province lie came to Hindustan, where he was inm-h liked. According
to the Ma’dsir.i-Rnhijjii he was often in the company of flnkim Abu-l-Faffi
(p. 233), Zain Khan Kiika, Abu-’l-Fazl, and Shaitt Faizi, and was, in 1616,
Sadr of Gnjaiat. Vide also Badaoni, vol ii, text, p. 372.

3 ndt’ vol. li, text, 372, In 1.591 llaji Mirza Beg of Kabul was sent to
* All Hai to demand his daughter in marriage for 3'’ltfin Salim (JahangirJ,
and returned with the lady, who was duly niairi d to the prince as his
eighth wife. On tlds occasion Hulls Talib accompanied Haji .Mirza Beg, In
A.D. 1602-03 'Ail Rai invaded the frontier distiicts of Knshniir, bnc retreat-
ed before iinhamtnad Quli Khan, Turkman, and Saifnllah. T'nlc Aln-i-
Akiari, i, 474 .

265

368

Another quatrain.

“ Thou readest not the story of my grief, and it waxes old,

Tiion knowest not my disappointment, and it waxes old,

Let not thy coming be delayed, for as for this wound of
separation,

I fear that thou wilt linger, and it will wax old.”

Another quatrain.

“ One day I, weary with, travelling along the road of the stages
of the heart.

Turned its dust into mire with water from blisters on the
foot of search.

I spend my life on this road in order that, in answer to
my supplication,

266 Soul may meet soul, and heart heart.”

Other verses.

“ Seek after enjoyment, for this virgin of life, sitting in the
bridal chamber.

Like a rose bursting forth from the bud casts her mother
aside.

Like the petals of a ro.se scattei’ed by’ the spring breeze

We go, with dust on our heads in the grief of our hearts.”

“ I am pleased with the folk of this world, for I have learnt
from their fellowship

Not to give up my corner of solitude for the world.”
LXXXl. or Yazd.*

He is a penman who writes the nasfa'Iiq hand well and i.s of
moderately’ studious habits. His bu.siness was that of a book-
seller’' in Agra.

1 He ib not mentioned in the .tin or in the Tabanat
• Or ‘ bookbinder,’ or ‘librarian’

369

tile following cou|)lets are by him ; —

“ Cupbearer, ^ bow long can the gi-ief of this -world be borne ?
Bring wine, that I may banish grief from my heart.”

“Every moment she afflicts my heart, that she may make it
weary of her.

When will my heart weary of her, however much she
afflicts it r ”

•‘I wish for no companion but thee, my darling,

I desire thee, and there is none in th.e world that I desire
beside thee.”

“ If, when I have snifered a thousand griefs, she listens to a
word from me.

Bhe hears but the speech of a self-seeker, anr* straightway
forgers it.”

“ She is enraged if I speak to lier but a word of nry sad state;

How strange is this, that I cannot speak of my sad state to
her!”

A qnntraai. 207

“ The devotee boasts of his virtue and piety.

The lover expends the casli of his life for his love ;

Each lives in hope of a glance from the eye of his Friend,

Each wonders tow'ards whom the Friend will cast that
glance.”

Another quatrcuh,

"Summon contentment, if thou art w^^e,
llrm mayst thus, perchance, slay tnc .log of ba'-c desire
bee that neither water nor broth Ih' too plentiful. Drain
not the cup',

hot u v.iii rebuke thee in a bundled dvaught.s of ; led water
ami aod.”

' i'r.e lo\t ”■ I-Oiiglv, jjjUiUo in th*- |,luiiil. 'i MS'S, hiive

Wl-j (►.O'jiy.ji vocative Biogul.ir, iv'.iich is cor..-:'.

370

268

LXXXII. TiflL'

He is the son of Mulla Darvish of Fathpur, and his uncle,
Mulla Salih, is now the teacher appointed to the monastery at
Fathpur. Tifli in his thirteenth year was reading the Shnrh-i-
Shamsiyyah.^ He has a most generous nature and an admirable
taste in poeory He is in the service of the eldest prince,® and
obtained the poetic na,me of Tifli from him. The following few
couplets are from a laudatory ode which he composed in honour
of the prince : — -

“ O Kirig,^ in whose just reign strife itself has become the
guardian of the world against the robbers of confusion,
The hope of thy favour is such that the very sins of sinners
protect them from the fire of hell.

Thou ait he, to the war-horse of whose resolution in the day
of battle

Victoiy is the standard-bearer and success the fellow.

Last night the bird of glory brought the record of thy
success,

That bird the fame of whose pinions comes from the utter-
most parts of space beyond our ken.

The scribe of thy dignity has written passages of which we
hope for a translation and for which we earnestly desire a
ti n-isla tor.”

He also wrote the folbiwing verses : —

“If the beauty of the Idol were- to disptiy itself in the
nion iistery

i ycithcr T;:l t-.r*-!* his » editions are mentioned in the tior in the

Tahaqui .

*2 A comi'ieniary on a faai><us work on logic. Vide vol. i. trans. Rankiticr,
4'37, n, 1 .

3 Scd. Salim, ait'H’wards the emperor Jahangir.

* Jahangir hai not asceiMi-'d the throne when this groaslv fulsome poem
was wrirteii, but the word Shdh was applicable to a prince, as well jis to a
king, an'"! trie voul us-eil for .v-'gn is \dam } not nJA) so ti.at the

poet did u-'-t iisk the resentment of Akbar_ whih- lie Hattered his own
master.

371

Devotees who drag about their prayer carpets would ex-
change their rosaries for the idolater’s thread.

Nobody counts the cash of both worlds offered by the buyer
In that place where the merchandise consists of wounded
hearts.”

‘ I am he who has grown to love the lancet of grief.

Ointment is shamed by the wound in my breast.”

“From our manner of dealing with Islam in the day of
retribution

It is likely that infidelity will seize ns by the skirt.”

“ The song of love’s fea.st this nijjht inflamed the plectrum,
Her glances were the singers and her eyebrow the rebeck-
players this night.”

‘O heart, let my lips for once be wreathed with smiles !

For to-night will be seen the splendour of love’s teais of
blood.”

‘ I fear no reproof, for the reproaches of the jealous watcher
Are as applause to the followers of love'.s religion.”

“ Ah ! See how thy glance imperils our true faith, 269

Trust in thy promises is a sure way to disappointment.” ’

“Brahman, despair not of the efficacy of thy prostrations to
tliy idol.

For tlio tnark on thy foreliead is the mirror of thy fate.”*

t The text has ('pJshdnj) ’ tnreheaii.’ which neither scans nor makes

sense. Both MSS. iiave (piiBhhni/iit), the correct reading.

* The reference is to tlie caste-mark worn on tiie foreliend by Hindus. Ttie
couplet is .S(7fi-istic in tone. Religion, tlie poet says, is a puiely subjective
matter, and it i.s the sincerity of worship rather tiian its object, that is im-
portant.

372

How should my pain be assuaged by lint and ointment,
The bird of wiiose wounded heart breatlies forth flame ? ”

The following few couplets are from a tarJV-band * by Tifli : —

“ My tears, rejoice, for this night
My heart’s blood surges up in my eyes.

0 reunion, plead for me, for my desire for her
Has devastated tlie abode of reason.

Speak not to me of delight.

For the lancet has become the companion of my wound.

It is useless to say to anybody,

‘ Scatter diamond-dust in your wound but do not cry out.’ ”

It is marvellous that a l.ad of Tifli ’s years should understand
and speak Persian ; miicli more so that he should be Able to com-
pose poetry in the language. It may be' hoped that he will
outstrip many of these old men who have wasted their lives.

LXXXIII. ZcHUEi.*

He used to live in the Dakan, and was characterized by his
unrestrained manner of life, bis indifference to public opinion,
and his disinclination from attending at the courts of kings.
Shaikh Faizi u.sed to dilate much on the praiseworthy qualities of
him and of Malik Qurai, known as Malik-ul-Kalam, and tliese tw'o
poets wished to accompany the Shaikh to the imperial court at
Labor, but Burhan-ul-Mulk * prevented them from going. It is

1 A poem in which a refrain occurs at stated Intervals.

* Zuhuri is mentioned neitlier in the Ain nor in, the Tabaqat. The Asiatic
Society of Bengal has a ilS. copy of his divan. He is described as Mulla
Niir-ud din i'liihQri of Tarshiz,

3 Bui'h.in Nizam Shah II, king of Ahnmdnagar, ad. 1590-1594 On his
death tlie affairs of tlie .Mjimidn.ngar kingdom fell into great confusion.
Three kincs followed otie anotiter in quick succession, mere puppets rai.«ed
to the tiirone and deposed by opposing factions, and tiiere was mnch blood-
shed. In 1595. ttic year in which Badiioni’s history was concluded, Akbar’s
troops weie attacking .Ahmadnagar and peace was made on the condition
that Ahrnadnagar ceded to the empire the province of Berar. Vide Historic
Landmarks of the Deccan, by Major T. IV. Haig, pp. 39, 236.

87a

now reported that the unrnly Dakanis, following their detestable
habit of murdering foreigners,* have, in a recent riot, put these
two poor innocent men to death (may God put them to death!).

Maulana Zuhuri was a master of poetical style, and composed
a div3n. The following couplets are quoted as a memorial of 270
him : —

“ The wine-stains cause tulips to bloom on my woollen coat,

The evening of Friday ever brings a Saturday for me.” ^

“ Zuhuri, thy complaints of the beloved are out of place.

Thy destiny is at fault. What fault is that of hers ?”

LXXXIV. ‘Alim op Kabul.*

This Mull/l of pleasant manners, cheerful nature and graceful
actions used the poetical name of ‘Arif. In argument, and
at other times, he would say things fit to make his hearers die
with laughter. In his common-place book he has written an
essay on the commentary * on the Maq/tsid and has stated the
proposition that the title means ‘the book of endeavour,’ which
was one of the compositions of the writer, and also a com-
mentary called the Taj did (‘ renewal ’) on tlie commentary * on (he

1 The domestio history of the independent Mnhaminadan kingdoms of the
Dskan ig largely the history of violent and bloody fends between the Dahani
and Abyssinian nobles on the one hand and the ‘ foreign ’ nobles (Turks,
Arabs, and Persians) on the other. The latter were frequently marh
favoured by the kings of the Dskan and the jealousy of the native Dakanis
led to frequent conflicts and massacres. Tide Haig’s Hintoric Zandmarles of
the Deccan, pp. 4 — 10 et passim.

* Friday, according to the Muhammadan method of computing time,
begins on Thursday evening, which is called the evening of Friday. The
poet’s meaning is that he does not keep the Sabbath of Islam and that Fridav
is ns Saturday to him. This couplet is not in the text nor in MS. (B). I have
introduced it from MS. (A).

3 Mulla ‘Alim is not mentioned in the Ain as a poet. He is thus described
in the Tabaqdt, ‘ Mnlla ‘Alim of Kebnl was a man of cheerful nature, happy
dispontion, and unconventional habits He wrote poetry and composed a
history of governors, learned men, and poets, which he called Fawdtifs-ul-
Wiltyah.’

* I have not been able to identify these two works, which are probably
works on theology.

48

374

Tajdtd, and also some marginal notes on tTie Mupnnval,^ iii wliicTi
lie writes, “This book is copied from tin- bonk which is

eqaal in length to the Matawwal, or even longej’.” He has also
written a book containing accounts of tlie Shaikhs of India, in
which he has entered everything that he has heard from every
mosque-sweeper and beggar, adding also some conjectures of his
own, and he has named it TFa faicatih-u' -wilnyah. When they
questioned him regarding this title, saying, “ The particle im
( ‘ and ’) requires something preceding it, to be coupled with the
latter clause, and what should precede, it does not appear,’’ he
replied, “ That which precedes it is heie understood, and is mani-
fest by transposition, that is tosayq the title should be Fawntih-ul-
walaynh, with a fathah over the wnw of iimldyuh as the lonw
preceding the phrase indicates, not with a kasr umler the ivnw of
toilSyah, as it is commonly read.” =

The Mnlla was always jealous of Qazi !^an of Badakhshan,*
on the ground of his having invented the sijdah “ prostration ’ )
One day in Fathpur he led the late Mirza Nizani-ud-din Ahmad
and the author off to his house at early dawn, with much solicita-
tion. and, having given us an appetizing electuary, began to show

t Vide vol. I (trails. Ranking), p. 42S, ii. 3.

S The Midld is liere puniiiug on the title of the Jlu/an wi’l , whicli means
‘lengthened.’ J’uwal me.ans ‘the duration of life,’ also ’ the seven long
chapters of the Qudan*

3 I have been obliged to translate somewhat freely heie, in order to
make some attempt at explaining the Jfitifa's clnmsy je^t. Wu fau:atih-id-
icildyah means ‘and the beginnings of saintsliip.’ Tiie Mulia wag asked
to explain the apparently red iiiul.int ‘ and’ and replied chat it indicated
that the first letter of the word in 'iyah . saintshin w is to he read with a
short ‘ a,’ like the same letter in me word ■ .< ( and ' . so tiiat tlie title of the
b >ok would read F’nrilih-’d-’eidiTyah (‘the beginnings of yorerninj’'., his
oiiject being to satii ize the pretend -d s lintg wlio niel made their sane tit v a
means of rising to liigli [daces I'.dc nr'-a

* Vide Ain-i-Akb.,ii. HO. wi.- re i is title is given as Ohazi Khan, hi •
niinie being Qa/i Xi/aiii V ' o .114

5 The .sijdah (‘ [a-ostr .tion ’. w I, introdaeed at ,\kh,ir'.s court inste.ad of
the kuniidi and l.sstUm ibowing .md laist.ig tiie liaiel to ciie head), and
gave great offence to the uitnodox, i , !,> j,. gl n 'J,

375

us his books, talking about them from dawn till midday, while
we remained hungry and were not able to get a word in. At last
the Mirza, no longer able to endu'e it, asked the Mnlli, whether
he had anything to eat. The Midla answered, “ I thought that 271
Tou had eaten before j’ou came. 1 have a lamb here ; if you
wdsh I will kill it now.” We rose .and went home. It is im-
possible to recount all pranks of this inture which he played.

When he saw’ that ^aikh .A hii’l-Fazl, Qazi Khan, and others
of his contemporaries from being miillns rose to the rank of
amirs of the highest gr.ide, while he continued to draw a small
..tipend, he petitioned that he too might be admitted as a soldier.

His request was granted, nnd one day, at the time when the guard
turned out for the evening .salute, he appeared in military guise
before the empeior, girt in a grote.sque fashion with a borrowed
sword, and, having approached the presence from one side of the
darbar, stood, and, catching hi.s scabbard to him, said, without
any intrpduction,' “ By which iiians ih.lar * shall I stand, and
from what place shall I make my obeisa-nce ® ? ” The emperor
was sagacious enough to penetrate his design and said, •* Make
your obeisance from that place in which you are now’ standing.”
When the Mulla saw that this effort to obtain recognition had
failed he wandered at large. One day, in order to show that he
possessed all that became a soldier, he came to court, in the
noonday heat, in dirty, greasy clothes qailted with, cotton, which
had been either given or lent to him by somebody, and Mirza

t Tlie text appears to me to be corrupt here. It has C-oIaj

which is unintelligible. MS. (.A) has whicli is nut mtua

better. MS. tB) has ^ win. .. iippc.os to mo to be tiic curjoct

reading, and winch 1 nave lono.ved For m the text and MSS.

w'bich makes no sense,'! have snbstituted oil#.

* A military commander. The object of me uncoromoinoas behaviour of
Mulla ‘.Vliin, who was, apparently, at this time no inoie t .aii apiiv.oc
soldier, was an attempt to obtain a manm-, or inilit.irv comniand.

The word used is (ta-livi) The Mnli."i woun! nit, appircni y,

perform the (.-i/.-bi/.j ' prostration.’

376

‘Aziz Kiika cracked some pleasant jests on his appearance, and
the Mnlla returned pleasant answers to them.

As his birthplace was Gulbaliar, a village in the district of
Kabul, he wrote for some time under the poetical name of Bahari,
hut afterwanhs, having re<'Ognized that the name was unbecoming,
as itcalle 1 to mind the names borne by servant girls, he changed
it, and called himself Rabi‘i.* The motto which he composed for
hi.s seal was, “ He had a well-ordered mind.” *

272 The following few couplets are quoted as a memorial of him : —
“ Tliat eye in which I deliijhted every moment flees away.

It may be that I shall place a straw from her Nvall upon it.”

“ The glass of delight has been .shattered, with whomsoever
I sat ;

The bond of fellowship has snapped, with whomsoever I
bound it.

She has risen to slay me, with the sword of hatred in her
hand.

Whenever I sat in kindness with anybody for a moment.”

He has c<imposed, some couplets in the metre of ‘ The Chain
of Gold ’ 8 and he has called his book of nonsense “ The Tinkling
of the Bell.” and h.as enumerated in it books said to be of his
own compo‘-ition, some of which have no existence but in his
veises, and has given them imaginary names, as in the following
ver.-es : —

1 R'lhVi of, oi- relatina: m the sprin" the Ar.iliic equivalent to
Bdhfui I caimt.c reconcile this statement with ihe statement above, that
tlie Mulla’s tiitinU’ii was ‘.Irit

2 I’iie rtio.f , mav .Jso be riMii>l,ttetl “ tie h'd poetic o-niiiis ” The text

here Itn.^ a ' hv tiie ‘"i.t.ir i _i the effect tiiat the rc'clin^ is ttip sime in
the tlirt'o Jrom w ncli lie edited tlie text. '! lie reading seenia to

1 ’it It is pp’** I'v Pimple

- ■. * (' ■- i'/p-J't 1 , I havpii'-t teen able to trace this

JIOPITl

377

“ Thou mayst have seen, from a copy of the Tajdid,^

That a new favour has newly arrived

In which are concealed a hundred stages of the pilgrimage,*
And from the contents of which great enterprises ® are mani-
fest.

The text of the Tajud * is halting beside it,

Its rose-garden has lost its colour from want of water.

Its splendour, without dissimulation and withont exaggera
tion.

Is perfect wisdom, the wisdom of the sunrise ^

And of that book, the attributes of which are beyond
telling,

Dal/ilat-nl-^ aql * is the name and description.

And that pearl which has come from the ocean of generosity.
Is the Lujjat~ul-jud fi'l-wujudd
I am the compiler of that 'Aw/ilim-ul-dthnr,^

From the instructions of the knower of chronicles.

1 The Tajdtd ( — ‘renewal’) w.is Mnlla ‘Alim’s commentary on

the commentary on tlie Tajiid. In this couplet the poet pnns on the Arabic
root meaning ‘ new,’ nsing three different measures of the triliteral root.

* (mitw'iqtf) ‘ halting places or stages in the performance of the

ceremonies of the pilgrimage at Makkah. It is probable that Mulla ‘Alim
styled the chapters or sections of his tiook maicaqif, or that he is referring
to a hook of this name TdS. (A) has the reading {muwafiq) trhieh

does not make good sense.

3 p,-sIa<o (maqusid) a reference to the poet’s {kitdb-i-qafd) or

book of endeavour ’ and to the Maqasid, ttie book on which it is a commen-
tary.

* k ids note 1 , supra .

^ It is possible that the words (‘ ain)

and (3>"1 i'Shrrrq) refer to the titles of books.

9 ‘ Indication of wisdom,’ apparently one of the poet’s imaginary works.

1 ‘ The ocean of gene.-osity, oo existence,’ apparently another of the poet’s
imaginary works

^ ‘ V. orlda of relics.' Probably another of Mulla ‘Alim’s ima-

ginary worka.

378

273

In whicli I have collected a hundred and twenty different
branches of learning.

Say who else can he thus described.”

In spite of all this fooling he was a good friend, tactful, accom-
plisl.ed, able, sympathetic, nnceremoniou.s, agreeable, acceptable,
and jocular. I hope that God (He is praised and exalted ! ) may
in His grace and benevolence have made him a partaker of
eternal life in heaven.

LXXXV. Mra ‘A bdul Hayt of Mashh.^d.'

He was for some time ^dr * under the emperor Huinayhn and
his brother, Mir ‘Abdullah the jurist, was one of Humayun’s
intimate and specially liononred confidants. Both hi others were
endued with piety, sanctity, and legular-ity of life.®

Mir ‘Abdul Hayy was expert in writing the Blihart hand,
which was invented by the emperor Babar, who sent to the
honoured city of Makkah a copy of the Qur'an written in that
(hand, of which no trace now i-emains.'*' In the memoir of Mir

1 Vide Ain-i-Akhari i, 4GS, 47 1 , 480. tie was a comniander of five tiiindred
and Akbar’a Mir-i-‘A<it or chief justice In the .3.5th year of Akbar’s reign
he and Sadr-i-Jatidn took part in » drinking bout, and amused Akbar very
much. Mr. Blochmann says tliat lie is called in the Tnhnndt ‘ Khiv/iin ‘Abdul
Hayy,’ but in the Lucknow edition he is thns described, ‘ Mir ‘Abdul Hayy
the Sidr w'as a Kh nidi^dnl, The emperor Humai'iin made him Sadr-ul-
Afdzil ( chief of learned men’) He w.as for ve.irs in the service of the
emperor Akbar.’

2 ‘ It was the Sadr, or, as he rvas then (seil. before the reign of Akbar)
generally styled, Sadr-i Jalidtt, whose edict legalized the jiiliis, or accession,
of a new king. During the reign of Akbar also he ranked a.s the fourth
officer of the empire. The power of tho Sadr was immense. They were
the highest law officers and had the powers which Administrators-General
have among ns ; they were in charge of all lands devoted to ecclesiastical and
benevolent purposes, and po33es.sed an almost unlimited authority of
conferring such lands independently of the King They were also the
highest ecclesiastical law'-officers, and might exercise the powers of High
In<(aisitors. Vide Ain i-Akbarl, i, 270.

3 Hr, perhaps, ‘administrative ability.’ Tho word is (nizdmat).

* Shaikh Abn-I-Fazi, in the .lin i-Akbai/, discourse at large on the art o

379

‘Ala-ud-daulah ^ it is mentioned that Mir ‘Abdul 5ayy devoted
some attention to the study of accomplishments and that nobody
had learnt to write in tlie difficult Bnharl style more quickly or
better than he, but Mirza ‘Aziz Khka wrote in the margin of the
memoir that Mir ‘Abdnl Hayy had no knowledge of any branch of
learning, and that his one accomplishment was some knowledge of
the Babari script, with which he was very imperfectly acquainted,
that he was wonderfully simple and would, apropos of nothing
and without consideration, relate in social gathering's strange tales
which no child would believe. As Mir ‘Abdul Hayy was better
known to Mirza ‘Aziz Kuka than to Mir ‘Ala-ud-danlah, it is
beyond doubt that what the Miiza wrote is nearer to the truth
than that which is written in the memoir, for Mir ‘Ala-nd-daulah,
has recorded much incongruous nonsense * in the memoir,

Mir ‘Abdul Hayy has some aptitude for poetry, and wrote an
answer to that fantastical quatrain which was written in the form
of a square by one of the accomplished inen about the court in
honour of Muhammad Hindal ^lirza, and is so well known that
it is tlie first thing that children are =et to learn. The quatrain
is as follows : —

“ 0 thou, before whose court a hundred Rustams® have cast 274
down their crowns,

penmanship and mentions ten different scripts, among which the Bahart
finds no place 'I'h is bears out ISadriom's statement that it was lost. Vide
Ain, i, 96.

I Vide page 239, also Aln-i-AJclnrJ, i. 447 and n. 2, where the name of his
Ta:kirah or inetnoir ia tjiven as (nafa n-id-mn' a^tr) ‘ precious

memorials.’

ishutur-giuha), lit. ‘ caiiH;l-cat * Aiiytliini' incongruous or

absord.

^ In the text the four versos of whicli each of these quatrains is composed
lire written, following t’ue conceit of their authors, on the four sides of a
squaip, with the exception of the titles coiichidiiig the final liemisticli of
each, which are continued in the Ime <»f one of the diagonals of the square.
There is no particular art in this conceit, for any quatrain could he so
written. The text contains tlie following note by the editor,/ In truth tlds
form of composition is no more than a child’s plaything and men of letters
do not class such things among mui'abha'’ (verses "writteii in a doubled metre]?

380

Whose praises are sung by all those who have attained
perfection ;

India has been conquered merely by thy footstep within her
bounds,

Thy title is, Mubammad Hindal ! ”

Mir ‘Abdul Hayy, who also had a childish nature, wrote, in
reply, the following quatrain : —

“ O thou, at whose door a thousana monarchs like Ceesar hold
their crowns,

Whose praises exercise their tongues evening and morning !

May all the confines of the world, O Lord,

Be under the sway of the king of the world, Muhammad.
Akbae!”

276 LXXXVI. ‘ItabL*

He is Sayyid Mu^mmad of Najaf who made a name in the
Dakan* and came to llahabad and paid his respects to the
emperor. He was very unconventional in all outward observances
and was bold and slovenly. It was reported to the emperor that
he had written a satire in the Dakan on Shah Pat^ullah,* and
when he was questioned on this point he denied that he had done
so, saying, ‘ In that country I would have taken no notice of a

nor are they mentioned as such in the Majma^-u9-Sand^i\ nor in the Haft
QuZzum, for any four hemistichs might be written in this form.* The editor
of the text apparently resents the application by Badioni of the term
7nurabba‘ (‘ in the form of a square’) to these quatrains, but BadsonI
evidently did not intend to say that these quatrains belonged to the class of
compositions technically known as murubba*, but merely that they weie
written in the form of a square. The MSS. omit the first syllable of each
hemistich.

1 Thus described in the (i, 588), * He possesses harmony of thought,
but his mind is unsettled, and be lives • disorderly life,* and thus in the
Tabaqdtj ‘ He came from foreign parts to India and owing to his ill-regulated
disposition he was imprisoned for two years in Gwaliyar, and was at last
pnrdoned by the natoml tdeoiAioy of the emperor.*

* Probably in Bijapur.

3 Vide p.3i6,

man of tfiat sort.’ This remark increa.sed the saspicion that he
had written the satire and he was imprisoned, and it was
ordered that all his papers shonld be examined in Fathpur
in order that it might he discovered, whether he had written
satires on anybody while he was in Hindustan, Some incrim-
inating papers were discovered, and he remained in prison in
Gwali yar for ten ^ years until at length he was pardoned at the
intercession of the eldest prince and other courtiers, and was
summoned to Labor, but he still retained his evil disposition.

One day he came to the house of Qazi Hasan of Qazvin,* who
has the title of Khan, and the doorkeeper opposed his entering.
Ttabi grappled with him, entered the assembly, which was a
party of friends who had sat down to food, and said to Qazi
Hasan, ’It was this food, that led yon to cause your door to be
shut in the face of a learned man, a foreigner, and yon have a
perfect right (to keep yonr food to yourself).’ In spite of all
that the master of the house and his gue.sts could do in the way of
excusing themselves, saying that the doorkeeper had not recog-
nized him, Ttabi would not be appeased, and refused to sit down
and eat. He had great skill in writing Persian and Arabic poetry,
also in peiiman.ship and in prose composition. He has composed
a dlvnn. The following couplets are by him : —

“ We hav'e scorclied cur wise hearts in the furnace of desire,

‘■^e have bnrut the lamp of the Ka'hah at the door of the
idol-temple.”

We have given thee permission to shed this innocent blood, 276
e have given it to thee verbally, in writing, and under a
formal attestation.”

‘We swear by thy honour that we are the nightingales of
this meadow,

1 Tiro years accorilmg to the Tithaii'il, lidu n 9.

^ He served in Guj.iiat in A.n 1 .'5S7, .mil i.iter in the siege of .tsirgarh.
Izde A/a-i-Akhnri i, 49S.

382

That the rose has bloomed and we know not where the
garden is.”

“ In thy country the name of faithfulness causes weeping,
Both the messenger, and tne letter which he hears cause,
each separately, weeping.

“ The drum of thy munificence sounds loudly, but I can find
no way to the sun (of the assembly).

This special custom and public assembly of thine will kill
me.”'

“ I have left thy street, besmirched with accusations ;

I brought to it chastity, and I leave it defiled with sin.

May the black night of thy locks be pleased with the
multitude of hearts (offered to it)

While I stray, miserable, from thy street.

The fountain of Khizr * prides itself on receiving the dust
of my feet

While I go, thirstier than ever, from the dimple in thy
chin.

Sugar- was poured out at each door at which I knocked,
thou wouldst think

That I hnd been to beg from that laughing lip.

I knocked at the door of the seventy-two sects of Islam,
and from the door of despair

I turned, liopeles.s of help from either fire-worshipper or
Mu.>alman.”

“ In my impatience, ‘ Itabi, I resolved to part from her, and
now

Each time the thought of her enters my heart I weep nn-
re.straiaedly.”

1 T!..it 18 to say the loved one’s custom of holding public levees, having
previously given notice of them.
i Tiie fountain of the water of life.

A qtiatrain.

“ In the love of thy face I have lost both learning and sense. 2T7
But what of the.se ? I have lost my very soul
In following thee, whatever I had at the end of my life
Have I lost, and yet I have lost all evil.”

“ It would not he wonderful if from the atmosphere of thy
face.

And from the heated iron of my heart, a film should form
on the mirror.”

After iiis release from confinement he was given a sum of a
thousand rupees for travelling expenses and was placed under the
charge of Qilij Khan.* who was ordered to send him off from the
jport of Surat on a pilgrimage to the Hijaz, but on the way to
Siirat he escaped and fled into the Dakan, where he took refuge
with the rulers of the country, and there he still wanders about in
the condition in which he formerly was.

LXXXVII. ‘ UBiiDl.*

He is a youth recently come to man’s estate. He wrote the
following couplet ; —

“ The reward for pain which is not worthy of my asking
after it

Is a glance to ask for which I am unworthy.”

This couplet for some time raised a great stir (among lovers of
poetry) on every side in Labor, and on this account Hakim Ahu-’l-
Fath Gilani * was loud in ‘Ubaidi’s praises, and presented him to
the emperor. When he was asked to write more poetry he did
not continue a poem on the lines of this couplet, but wrote some

t A commander of four ttiousand and governor of the fort of Surat. He
was made governor of the fort when Akbar, after a siege of forty-seven
days, took it. His daughter married Akbar’s youngest son, Sultan D&niyal.

‘2 ‘XJbaidi is not mentioned as a poet in the Ain, nor in the Tahaqat

3 Vide p. 233.

384

pessimistic verses whieli obtained no recojOfnition, and since then
he has disappeared, like all traces of his poetry.

LXXXVIII. ‘ IsHQi Khan.'

He is descended from some of the religious leaders of the Turks.
He is acquainted with book-keeping, and was for some time
accountant-general to the irapeiial government. He has a div~ui
278 f .. 11 of lonir and short odes. One d.ay in Labor lie representfd
that he wislied to present the emperor with a complete copy of
his works, and at the same time to recite before him a long ode
and a short ode which he had just ci'mpo.scd. As his poetry wns
known to be ridiculous, the emperor told him to keep the tivo
odes by him and to insert them in the complete copy of Ids woiks
when he should present it, in order that all his poems might he
hear*! at one readinjr. He composed a long masnavi, like the
■masnavi of Khanjar Reg, which has already been mentioned.
This couplet occurs in it,

“ I am mean, of no consideration, and ugly ,

What a plague of a contemptible mannikin am 1 ”

Bahman Quli Sultan, his son, had skill in composing chrono-
grams, and wrote this hemistich as a posy for Ins seal.

“The slave Rahman Quli Sultan, the son of • Lshql Khan."

(The author adds)

“ How should that ingenion.s man have a worthless son."

Since in tins selection I have imposed upon myself the duty of
quoting, just as it was written, the poetry of all the poets of the
age without any distinction, and most of whatever I found in mv
sources of information, whether melodious or inelegant, has been
reproduced, I have, of necessity, quoted some of the verses of
Tshqi Khan, in order to show im unreasonable preference. And,
in truth, the respon.sibility rests with Alir ‘Ala-nd-daulah,* not
with the author. The following couplets are his : —

i In the A/n (i. 528) he jj4 called Mauiana He came from Gha-cni

* Mir ‘ Ala-ud-daii!aii seems to have helped Badaooi in St^iecting verse to
be quoted.

385

“ The lelieetion of thy eye, heavy with the drowsiness of
wine,’ has fallen on the wine.

Like a drnnkard who, in his drunkenness, falls into the
water.’'

" The iiml, in desire of thy lip, .smiled not at the breath of
the mornins'.

But in order to see thy face opened the eye of its heart.” 279

"As I write my letter to thee the paper is wet with my
tears,

I weep in jealousy of the pen which writes thy name on
the paper.” ®

He was, at all events, a mild and dignified man, of old-fashioned
manners. He has now wholly accepted the $ufi doctrine of anni-
hilation, and is become an old man nearing actual annihilation.

LXXXIX, TlmI.5

He was entitled Mir Marta^ and was descended of the Sayyids
of lJughalbad.* He was one of the most trusted officers of the
^anzaman, and for some time held possession of Badaon. He
was endowed with learning and accomplishments and was im-
moderately fond of jesting. When Hijaz ^ .^an, one of the chief

I A drowsy or languid appearance of the eye is held by orientals to be
nttractsvf..

- Batlaoni seems to have had a very po<»r opinion of ‘Ishqi’s poetry : but
the examples here quoted are ac least np to the standard of mosc. of the
verses quoted by him.

3 ‘Ilmi is not mentioned as a poet in the .-i/w, or in tne 7abnqdt.

* jUic Mi ill tiie texi, with a v.iriant, (Du'at), in a foot-note. MS.

(!i) lias oblijo iDu g-h abaill. I h.are not been able to identify this place, the
name of which bus evidently pozzled the scribes.

6 Thns in both MSS. The text has (Hahjaz) or (JShjazJ,

names which I cnimot iilentify. The reading of the MSS. appears to me to
be better than that of the text.

386

men of Badaon, who wrote poetry tinder the name of Zahid,
recited, from the masnavi which he had written on the plirase
‘ In the name of God,’ the following couplet : —

“ When the crenellations of tlie letter sin ^ began to laugh
The letter lautrhed so as to show its gums,”

The Mir said, “ What are ‘ the crenellations of tlie letter sin ? ’
The doors and the wails are laughing at your verse.”

Sometimes from the sprightline-ss of his nature he would
occupy himself by writing poetry.

The following couplet is his : —

” 0 heart, ail night the street dog gets no sleep
From thy cries and lamentation and wailing.”

XC. Mie ‘Azizu-’llah.*

He came of the Saifi Sayyids of Qazvin® and in book-keepinsj
280 and penmanship he came first among accountants and scribes, and
he also had some proficiency in those branches of learning which
are not treated of in Arabic literature. He was for some time a
dlvan-i-sa‘'adat, ^ and when Karoris^ were appointed throughout

I The poet evidently means, by this expression, the points of the letter
. 5,1 ( ^ j at the head of the small loops, commonly called the ‘ teeth ’ of the
letter. Hence the expression ‘lanjrhed so as to show its gnms '((^1
bun-i-danddn) or. literally, ‘ the roots of its teeth.’ Sin is the second letter
of the Arabic phrase. ‘ In the name of God,’ as nsnally written. The verse
is sntRcientlv absnrd, bnt the critic’s own verse is not much better.

Mir ' Azizu-’llah is not mentioned in the Ain
h The Saifi Sayyids of Qazvin were Sunnis, and snffered some persecntion
in Persia on account of their religions belief.

4 The divdn-i-sn‘udnt was clerk to the Sadr, vide p. 378. n. 2.

6 Karoris were revenue officers placed each over a tract of country which
p.aid aiinnally a haror of dams (1,00 00,000 dam 8 = K 8 . 2,50,000) to the im-
perial treasury. Vide Ain-i-Aibari, i, 13. They were first .nopointed in
A.D, 1.57'i-75 and each iarSri was obliged to give security for his good
beliavinur. Notwithstanding this they were grossly extortionate and de-
populated large tracts by their exactions. Many of them were called to
account and perished under scourging and torture or lived miserably in

387

the empire of Hindustan he, having with much trouble collected
five ftarors (of dams from the Sambhal district, was appointed
to the administrative and revenue charge of that district, ^ and at
last he was for several years under suspension, engaged in render-
ing accounts to the divan and his honour was changed to disgrace,
and he was subjected to torture, and suffered much, and he
surrendered all that he liad, even to the uttermost farthing,® to
the imperial treasury, and, after surrendering all his possessions,
surrendered his life with them. He composed a divan of short
odes, a poem in praise of the people of bis town,^ a poem on roses
and wine, and many other treatises in verse, but his poetry is all
in the style of tlie poets of the time of Sultan Husain Mirza,® and
most of the works which I have named are in that style. The
following verses are his : —

“ The fre.sh down has sprung from her ruby lip with moisture
and splendour.

For she ever drinks water from the fountain of the sun.”

jail till death ended their sufferings. Badaon: says that they lived for one
year in Inxury as karoris and paid for it with their lives or by dragging on
a miserable existence ever afterwards. Ytde Badaoni, vol. ii, text, p. 189.

t Ks. 1,250,000. The meaning of the passage is that Jlir ‘Azizu-’llah
extorted this sum from the people of the Sambhal district in order to pay
for the appointment of revenue administrator of the district. As this large
sum was over and above the revenue which tlie people bad to pay to govern-
ment and as ‘ Aziza-’llah’s habits of extortion probably grew upon him, it is
not surprising that he was called to account.

* The text has iiyo (subah) ‘ province,’ but it is improbable that Mir
Aziza-’llah was placed in charge of the whole of the province of Dihli, in

which Sambhal was sitnated. It is more probable that he had charge of the
sarkdr or revenue district of Sambhal, which was a suiEcieutly important
charge, paying in annual revenue, Ks. 16,73, -536, not reckoning iuy/crghiih.

S Literally ‘all that he had and had not,’ an expressive phrase which may
perhaps be taken to mean that he had to snrrcader all his property and
promise to deliver whatever property he might acquire in the future.

* {shahr-a§hub} ‘ town-disturbing ’ A poem written in praise
or disparagement of the people of a town.

5 King of Khurasan, a.d. 1470 — 1505. He was descended from ‘Umar
^ai^ Mirza, second son of Timur

“ I am tlius fallen in the road of g^rief and toil like rabbish,
Percoance some breeze of thy favour and grace will raise
me from the dnst."

“ 0 Lord, I am distracted by the multitude of my sins,

Show me some mercy, for I am heavily weighed down bv
my sins.

I have grief in plenty, boundless sorrow, but no comforter.

How sliall I make friends for nn self ? I am heavilv
affiicted.”

It i.s evident that he composed the.se last few verse.s while
he was in prison.

XCI. Mikza ‘ Aziz KCk'.'

He is entitled A‘zam Khan, and is well known for his good
281 breed in g. and tor bis vuicd accomplishments and gifts, and there
i.s no other '.ui, who is legarded as hi.s equal in depth of under-
standing or in eapucit \ . .-is lie used formerly, now and again,
out raielt. "o make trial of ins abiliti in the compositioti of verst-,
the following tew’ ver.-e.s of hi?, are quoted, in order that these
memoirs ma'. iiot be destitute of all mention of liirn.

•• Since honour .and reputation preveiitetl me from obtaining -
tiie u'-siie of my heart,

I will i.enct-foi w ‘.rd ,h!itter my repatation wir'i a stone."

He also wrote an illuminated copy of an ode compo.sed by
himself. tiiC- opening -roiiplet of wiiich was this : —

“ I) tii .r. '.■ir I'-'l lock is the tettei’ of mv heai t.

The : of ,iln,'!’i i' uiiiigled with ail the elements of my

t of ht.gr Khi’R anij Ji .J; Aiiaga. aiai fastei-. brother of Akbur. He
rejeived tlie ti...- t*f A'/a’ii Kbin m a D 1.5s<), after his f.itiiei’d death, aiid
t8 !,t tile sitv. ■ t'tiiy I'M te A commander of five thousa'.d His daiighter
Married MoiSt. ,tkbjr’» to;. rib .-on. iliizi ’.t/.iz died in a d, 102^-24 at
Siimadabed lie ,vas reriiartab'e for hid ease of address, iiitelligeace, and
Knowledge of nistory. ride Ain,-t-Akbaii, i. 325,

389

The following couplets are also by him : —

“ The affairs of the world have no stability.

It is better that my heart should be withdrawn from the
affairs of the world.”

“ My heart is sick with the pain arcl grief of iosie-insss,

0 physician of the sick heart, what dost thou escribe t’'

“ My grief- worn heart has become du.st in the roaci ci fidelity ;

See, my faithless love, the waj’ of those who humble them-
selves to the dust.” ^

He laid out a splendid gai'den in Agra, and in it built a garden-
honse adorned with paintings, and composed this quatrain for
an inscription on the building : —

“ 0 Lord, by the purity of heart of men ot discernment,

Which is dearer to Thee than all other things,

Since this house has, by Thy grace, been comjileted,

Of thy favour send me honoured guests ! ”

There are in the world many records of his doings, one of
which relates the story of his high-spirited departure on pilgrim- 282
age to Makkah, and of his return in a different frame of mind,

— one of the inevitable consequences of these evil days.*

1 The text has ( Ehaksart] ‘humility.’ MS. (A) hag

( Khalcsdran ) which is better,

2 In A.D. 1001 (a.d. 1593) Miiza ‘Aziz, who had been absenc from coart
for six years, wns summoned from Gujarat by Akbar. Tiie Mirzu, liien a
good MusMlinan, iiad been much ahirmed by the religions freaks with which
.'Ikbar had inangnrated the millenninm in the previous year and on receiving
the summons fled to Diu on April 3, 1593, and departed tlience on pilgrimage
to Makkah. Here he remained for some time, and was so pluiniered in the
name of religion that this zeal for Islam cooled He retuined to India in
A.T). 1594-95, was favourably received by Akbar, and became a member
of Akbar’s new religion, ‘ the divine faith,’ The orthodox Badaoni here
dismisses the sabject very curtly. Vide vol. ii, texr, pp 387, 398, and Ain-i-
Akiari, i, 327.

50

390

XCII. ‘Ahdi of Shieaz.'

He lias written different kinds of poetry, both long and short
odes. He was for some time in Gujarat wifh Mirza Nizam-ud-
din Ahmad. When he came to Dihli, after the depositioTi of
Qazi Muhammad, who was a fanatical Shi‘ah and an evil liver,
the late Hakim ‘Ain-nl-Mnlk * in Labor besought the Sadrs ^
to appoint Mull a ‘Ahdi to the Qozt-ship, and by way of an
anticipatory omen found the words Qazi ^Ahdi* to give the
date of his imaginary go2f-ship, but it was all of no avail
and resembled the story of an imaginary man riding an imagin-
ary horse in an imaginary plain and playing polo with an
imaginary stick and an imaginary ball. ‘Ahdi then went with
the Hakim to the Dukan, and nothing is known of him after the
Hakim’s death, neither what happened to him nor whither he
went.

The following verses are by him : —

A quatrain.

“ Though the lip of my complaint was wet with blood.

The smoke from my heart arose from the chimney of my
eyes.

My tears rained down sparks and fire,

My sighs kindled and became like a burning coal.”

At the time when Hakim ‘Ain-nl-Mulk departed from Labor
and also (after a short time) from this world of wickedness and
strife, the following quatrain, attributed to Hakim Sana’!, was
discussed : —

“ Breathe once more, for thy Beloved is near thee,

And the bird of thy desire is near to the cage.

How long wilt thou say, ‘ I am far from my Beloved ? ’

Look within thyself, for the Friend is very near thee.” ®

1 ‘Alidi is nviit.oned ceitlier in the Ain nor in the Talaridt

4 Tide p. 229. 3 Vide p. 122, note 2.

* Tlje snm ot the letters gives tlie date A.H. 1000 (a.d.

l.i91-92).

^ This ij n Sdji-.'l:.- qaa’rain. Cf. St. Augustine, Eio ynultum erravi
ouncrcV' Tc< r:,n Tu ?

391

Mahvi composed the following- quatrain 28d

“ Mahvi, -whose heart is near to all men,

Is near to the bnd of the garden and to its thorns and
rubbish.

For this reason he was not repulsed from the litter of the
beloved,

That the sound of his weeping resembles the sound of its
bell.”

Hakim ‘Ain-ul-Mulk composed the following in answer to both
quatrains : —

“ Since thy Beloved is near thee every moment,

Beware, for thy fire is near the dry grass !

0 thou who hast fallen behind thy companions and lost the
way

Hasten, for the sound of the caravan’s bell is near.’'

Mulla ‘Ahdi composed the following quatrain and also wrote it,
as a keepsake, in my common-place book, and our companionship
in prayer was changed for separation :

“ The freedom of this caged bird is near at hand,

And this flame is near to the thorns and stubble.

Grief would fly from me with a thousand wings and pinions,

Did it but know with whom it consorted.”

I wonder at my own hardness of heart seeing that 1 am able to
sit and beat my breast with a stone in the absence of so many
friends.

XCIII. ‘IlfATATU-’LLiH THE ScRII;E.'

He is a Shirazi, and is now employed in the imperial libi-ary as 2g4
a librarian. He has a merry and nimble wit and occasionally
writes poetry. The following ver.ses are his : —

“I am fallen, like a helple.ss bird, into the cage
My broken heart is like a soundless bell.

Though 1 am more contemptible than an ant or a fly
I am suffocated by the straitness of the two worlds.”

1 *Tnriyata-’Iirih is not mentioiieil in the Ain, nor in the Taho'i^t.

392

285

Another quatrain.

■‘We liave leamt tlie way to a cure for ourselves,

We have heaped up the harvest of our transgressions,

We have kindled the fire of hell for ourselves,

vVe have consumed ourselves with the fire of our own sins. '

Another quatrain.

“ So long as the locks of the heautiful curl,

So long as the gestures and gait of the lovely are alluring.
So long as the airow of the glance is in the brow of cruelty,

I die and live agaiu each moment.*’

A couplet.

“ There is no rose in the rose-garden of this world which is
not tinged with the blood of some nightingale.”

In describing a horse he has written :

From his great pace as he gallops, his limbs

Close on one another like drops of water flowing together.”

XCIV. ‘ UaFi OF ShIeaz.*

He was a high-minded young man of sound understanding and
he composed poetry of all kinds well, but he became so puSed up

1 He is thoB described in the xltn (i, 569), ' The forehead of his diction
shines with decorum, and possesses a peenliar grace. Seif-admiration led
him to vanity, and made him speak lightly of the older classics. The bad
of his merits withered away before it could develop itself.’ In the Tahaqdt
he is mentioned as follows : ‘ He was a yonng man of genins and of excellent
understanding, and composed all sorts of poetry well, but he developed so
ranch pride and conceit that he lost the regard of all. He has composed a
divan and some marnaviv.' He was the encomiast of Hakim AbaT-Fath.
That his poetry was highly regarded is evident from the following couplet
by the great Persian poet Sii’ib, written on Naziri : —

‘SaTb, what dost thou think ? Cans’t thou become like Naziri ?

Even ‘Urn has not written poetry like Naziri’s.”

‘TJrfi’s name was ^waja Sayyidi Muhammad Jamal-ud-din, and his
taUaHua has reference to the occupation of his father, who, as darogha to

393

with pride and conceit that he lost the regard of all, and he never
reached old age. When he 6rst came from his country to Fath-
pur he attached himself to Shaikh Faizi above all others, and in
truth, the Shaikh treated him well, and in this last journey he
lived in tlie Shaikh’s tents until the camp reached Atak, and was
supplied with all the necessaries of life by the Shaikh, but at
length, in accordance with the long-standing habit of tiie Shaikh,
who is fiiendly with everybody for a week, a coolness sprang up
between them, and "Urfi attached himself to Hakim Ahu-’I-Fath,
and afterwards, by means of a recommendation which he received
from the Hakim, to the Khankhanan. with whom both his poetry
and the esteem in wldch he was held made great progress daily
One day he went to Shaikh Faizi’s house and found him fond-
ling a puppy. ‘Urfi asked, *' What is the name of this child of
my lord’s ? ” The Shaikh replied, “ His name is well-known
{'Urfi')”. and ‘Urfi replied at once, “May it be auspicious.” ‘ The
Shaikh was very angry, but to no purpose.

Both ‘Urfi and Husain Sana’i * have wonderful good fortune
with their poetry; for there is no street or market in which the
booksellers do not stand at the roadsiile selling copies of the
divans of these two poets, and both Persians and Indians buy
them as auspicious possessions, while it is quite otherwise with
Shaikh Faizi, who has spent large sums from his jagirs in having

the magistrate of Shiraz, was conce’-ned both with the canon { ) and

the common { ^ ) law. He died at Labor in Aaga^c, ISiil, of dysentery,
or, according to another account, of poison, at the age of thirty-six. His
early deatli was ascribed to the abase which he had heaped on the ancients.
His odes have been several times lithographed

^ ‘Hrfi’s question is not quite so pointed in the original Persian, and
might be lendered, ‘ What is the name of this highly-bom one ? ’ Bat the
innnendo is perfectly clear. Faizi replies by giving ‘Urfi’s nom-de-plume to
the andean animal. ‘Urfi’s retort is one of the commonest expressions of
politeness, bnt its mordant wit cannot be reproduced in a translation. In
the original it is {mubdrak bdskad). i.e. ‘ may it be anspicions ’ or

‘ may it be Mubarak.' Mubdrak was the name of Faizi’s father. Faizi slionld
have known better than to measure his wit with that of a Shirazi.

» Vide no. XSXI.

394

his works copied ' and illuminated, and nobody asks for them, the
only copy for which he has had any sale being the solitary one
which he himself sent abroad.

‘ The power of pleasing and gi-ace of diction are gifts of God.’

‘Urfi ha.s a divnn of his collected poems, and a masnavi in the
metre of the Makhzan-i-Asrar^ which is known tlironghont the
286 world The following few verses are quoted as a memorial of
‘Urfi

A quatrain.

“ On the morrow, when the workers of eveiy craft shall be
summoned,

When the good acts of Shaikh and Brahman shall be inves-
tigated,

There shall be taken from thee not a grain that thou hast
reaped,

But for everything that thou hast not sown a harvest sliall
be required.”

The following couplets are by him : —

“ He who thirsts for the blandishments of thy lip knows
That the frown on thy forehead is a wave of the water of

life.”

“ Nobody has been born who can bear the pain of love ;

Every afflicted one has betrayed him.self by changing colour
as he told his story.”

“ As 1 sing of love I weep bitterly,

I am but an ignorant child and this is my first les.son.”

1 The text has ikitdb). The MSS., which I have folioweii, have
OviUf {kitttbat), which ia n better reading.

2 Jj-tl ‘ trengory of secrets.’ The famoas maldi-an-i-Ai-rdr here

mentioned was by the well-known Persian poet .Shaikh .Abu Muhammad
Ilyas Nirami of Ganja. ‘Drfi’s bore thesunie intme.

395

“ Step not beyond the bounds of ignorance, or else become a
Plato,

A middle course is a mirage with raging thirst.”^

The openinij couplet of the ode from which the last couplet is
taken is as follows : —

“My conversation in society consists of muttered speeches.

For here those reputed sensible are ignorant, and my speech
is Arabic.”

The following couplets are also by him : —

“ How shall I endure my desire for my beloved, for, by the
laws of love

A mere glance is disrespect and a thought of the beloved is
derogatory to her.”

“ Of what pain has it beeu decreed by Time that I should
die.

That the eyes of my soul have not gone forth to welcome ? ”

“ I speak no word, for silence is better than speech,

I have no knowledge, for oblivion is better than knowledge.”

“ The Ka‘bah would have circled round thy head and circum-
volated '^ it

Had it had but pinions and wings”

1 Cf. Pope — ■

A little learning is a dani^erong thing ;

Drink deep, or t^iste not the Pierian spring;

Here, shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,

Unt drinking deeply sobers it again.”

2 A eiutnsy word hut necessitated by the suggestion that the temple at
Mahk-ih sToiild be emlrred with wings The idea is that the ceremonial
circuinatn tuilation porforiiied by the pilgrims round the Kd bah would be
performed by the Ka‘biih lound the head of the beloved. Vide p 19, n. i.

287

396

XCV. GhazkayI.^

He is Mir Muhammad Khan-i-Kalan, who is well-known by
reason of his high rank and position. His assemblies were always
attended by learned men and poets. In spite of his constant
employment in administrative business be found time occasionally
to indulge in the customary recreation of writing verses, and
collected a large divan of his poems. He used to say to the
Emperor, ‘ The boast of your reign is this, that a man like me has
lived in it ’

The following verses are his : —

“ In my youth the flower of my age was passed in ignorance.

And what was left of it has been passed in repentance.

Young man, thou hast sown nothing but the seed of despair
in the world.

Now the season of old age is come, and the time for tillage
is past.”

“ Go Ghaznavi, associate with the dogs of the beloved.

Be content with a dry crust and make thyself independent
of the world.

Take the crown of pride from thy head and pass beyond
the stage ot ‘ we ’ and ‘ I,’ *

1 The elder brother of Shanis-ud-din Muhammad Ataga, A'zam Khan
He served under Karanm and Homayun and rose to high dignity during the
reign of Akbar. As governor of the Panjab he distinguished himself in the
war with the Gakklmrs. Later he assisted Mirza Muhammad Hakim of
Kabnl against Mirza Sulaiman and restored hi»n to the throne of Kabnl. but
disagreements afterwards arose and Mir Muhammad retarned to Labor. In
the 13th year he and hia relatives were removed from the Panjab and he
received Sambhal in jdgir. In 1573 he was sent by Akbar in advance, for
the reconquest of Gnjarat. On the march he was wounded near Sirohl, bat
recovered. After tbe conquest he was made governor of Patan (Nahrwala)
where he died in 1575. He was a. commander of five thousand. Vide Am-i-
Akharij i, 322 and BadionI, text, ii, 165 et fassim,

* f.e. egoism.

397

Overthrow (in thy mind) the foniidations of the kingdom of
this world, like Ibrahim, tlie son of Adham.*

Withdraw thy notice from thyself and thy friends that
thon may he at rest,

And if even the light of thy eyes should meet thee in the
way, turn aside

When he was governor of Sambhal he gave great vogue to the
following ode of Shaikh Sa'di (may his tomb be hallowed) : —

“ Tiie heart which loves and is natient must surely be a
stone.

For love and patience are a thousand leagues apart.”

He himself wrote as follows : —

“ When the cupbearer’s cheek is rosy with wine.

Drink wine to the sound of the flute, for the heart is sad. ”

•Mir Amaiii and other poets composed answers to these verses,
in imitation of them, each aci'Crdini; to h'S capacity and frame of
mind, and oi.e of them, the late Jamal Khan of Badaon, who was
a constant and intimate companion of the lAan, and was un-
rivalled in wit, composed an ode of which the following was the
opening couplet,

“ Thy cheek is ever rosy with the wine of delight,

My heart, like a closed bud, is consti'icted with grief in
meditating on thv moutii.’’

When I w'as in Kant-u-Gola ^ in the service of Husain Khan *
this ode reached me one nicht in a letter from Miyan Jamal

^ I ao not uiiJerstnnd this reference. It cannot have anything’ do witli
Aaliam tiu* muroeier of Mm- Mnh iipinad’s brotlior.

^ MDsharr.f-iiri-din Sa'di bin MGs'iih-ud-din, ^hirfiz, one of the most
famous of PcT'ti -n uuets

3 Two adjacent pmganas in the Stuldr of Radaon, nsaally mefitioned
together. Vide Ahi-i-AkharJ ii, 2sy.

^ Hosai lyiun Tukriya (-the pntcher ’ ' ‘the Baynrd and Don Qnsxote of
Akbar’s reign.’ Lie acqeirel his nieknanu from his havif»g, while governor
ot tlie P.icjab, comuelled Hindus C'» distinguish themselves by ■v^'caring a
patch near tiie si'ouldcrs. He was a commnuder of three thousand. lie
died, of wounds, in A.n. 1575.

51

288

398

289

Khan and the next morning news came that he liad been seized
with colic in the place of public prayer in Sambhal on the
‘Id-i-Qiirhan,' and had sickened suddenK, and in the flower of
his youth hsid surrendered his soul to God. His bier was brought
into Badaon. Some mention has been tiia(ie of this event in the
record of the reign, ® and besides (the chronograms there given) ^
the words ‘ Ah, Jamal Khan has died 1 ’ were found to give the
date of his death.

In these days whom have the heavens seated in safety

Whose existence they did not cut short like the morning’s light ?

XCVI. GgcmRi. 6

He is Qa.sim ‘Ali, son of Haidar the STocer. and was notorious
for his pride and groundless vanity. He used to call himself a
Quraishi ® until it became generally accepted that anybody who
had no descent whatever to boast of claimed connection with the
Quraish. Whenever he was ashamed of the arrival of his father
in any social gathering and lost his temper his father used to say,

X The festival of sacrifice, otherwise called Usui)| {id-ud-4uha) oele.
brated on the tenth day of Zi-’l Hijjah in commemoration of Abraham’s
preparations for the sacrifice of Ishmael (not Isnac. accoiding to the Muhum-
mndans).

* Tide TOl. ii, text, p. 135.

S The other chronograms are —

g;Li. JU^ Vtl) j y

‘ a hnndred sighs for the beauty and grace of Jamal ^an ’

and

' He gave Dp liis life on the day of the festival of sacrifice *

The one here given is ji*^ »f

There is something wrong with these chronograms. The first gives the
date 923, the second the date 967, and the third the date 977. The correct
date is A n. 978 (a d. 1578).

A The text has (‘ the sun '). a rollow the leading of MS. (A) wnioh

has ajU; a ranch better reading

Ghnbari is mentioned neither in the Atn nor in the Tabaqat.

The {^nraish is the Arabian tribe to which Muhammad belonged,

399

‘ To spite yon I will sit in the shop which I have in Agra, selling
fruit ami electuaries, and to everybody who comes to the shop,
whether he questions me or not, I will say, ‘ Let it be known that
Qasim ‘ Ali is my, son, begotten by me Yon may kill him if you
like.’ ”

Somebody asked !^idai- how many sons he had; lie replied,
•‘Eight, ilie particulars are as follows: — -

‘•Two are mine, and two aie mv wife’s, and two belong to
u.s both ;

Two others there are which belong neither to my wife nor
to me.” ‘

Qasim ‘All was in his youth very handsome, and used to sing
at social gatherings, and was then for some time servant 2 to the
Ui-alifuh of the age (Akbar), became a man of some importance,
and acquired the title of ^an,® and this case was an illustration
of the remark made by a man when another said to him, “ Have
you heard that they have made so and so a Khan ? ” and he
replied, “ "Well, the mannikin deserved it.”

His manner of forming his letters and his handwriting were
like those of the master of the world.* His unformed hand and
his ill-formed letters are like those of boys, but in spite of that
hand and those letters he has a childish confidence in himself.^

^ i.e, Hmdiir had two sods by another wife and his wife had two sons by
another hosband. and they had two dutiful sons of their marriage, and two
more who were ashanied of their parents, and of whom their parents weie
ashamed.

Literally, ^^altjah to the Khalifah of the age." In India the word
is applied to cooks and other menial servants. Badaojai’s iunaendo
is susceptible of a very ill meaning.

3 I do not think that Ghabari can be the Qasim ‘Ali Khan mentioned on
p. 465 of the Ain (vol. i.) bat he may have been.

Sell. Akbar. As Badaoni is making a slighting remark on the Emper-
or a accomplishments he applies to him an anusoal and ambiguoas title,

^ The words ‘hand,’ ‘letters/ and ‘confidence* are, in the original, dim-
inutives which cannot be otherwise ‘ translated than by employing some
suck <iaalifying adjectives as I have used.

400

Dnrinw my twenty-one years’ acquaintance with ^abari he has
been constantly engaged in taking lessons in (what may be called)
290 the middle standard,' and he used to compel his teachers to make
obeisance to him, and if they did not consent to do so he would
not come for his lesson, and in the lessons received under these
unfortunate conditions he never progressed beyond the elements
of accidence.^' His taste in poetry may be estimated from Jie
following verses : —

“I love water, and the bath is my place.

The bath-honse is the house which is appropriated to me.”

j.n imitation of the opening couplet which runs,

“ I wi.sh for one hair from the curled lock of my love.

That is to say, I am an idolator, and I wish for a sacred
thread.”

He wrote the following : —

“I wish to explain my grief to the dog of my love.

That is to say, I am grieved, and 1 wish to explain my
grief. ”

The following verses are also by him: —

“ From her eyes nothing but calamity reaches me.

Nobody has ever such calamity.”

A quatrain.

“ Everybody who is afflicted by love
Becomes acquainted with toil and grief ;

Everybody who has found hi.s way into love’s circle
Revolves aiound calamity like a pair of compas.ses.”

Ghubari deparied from this world, very unwillingly, in A.H.
lOOO (ad. 1591-1'2), and the ciironogram foitnil for his death
consisted of the word.s, *■ Qasim ‘Ait lyhaii the fool.” ° Accord-

I lessons learnt bv boys not just le.im-

ini^ to read and write, but in tire middle ci.isses iu schools.

J ‘ It is singnlar in meaning”

iLf letters give the date iOOO,

401

ing to another account the year of hts death was a h. 1001 (a.d.
1592-93), and if this be accepted as cwrect the v;oid jahiJ (■ igno-
rant’) substituted for the word ahLah (‘fool’) will give the coriect 291
date.’

Since thou art ignorant grieve not if they call thee fool,

For these two expressions are® synonymous.

XGVII. Ghorba'iI of HtsAR.'=

He has eompo.sed a ilii-nn and has studied to some extent. He
used to tell the following story ; —

I was once in an assembly convened for the ec.static dancing *
of darvi^es by that bing of saints and greatest ^ of pions men,
Shaikh Husain of IQiwarazm (may’ God liallov.- his soul), and
the chanters were chanting the following quatrain ; — •

“Throughout my life I have been one of those who wear my
skin as Thy garment,

I am one of that brotherhood who wear the ring of Thy
service in their ears,

If Thou sliowest me favour I am one of those who shout for
joy of Thee,

And if Thou showest me none I am one of those who are
silent for Thee.’’

And his holines.s the Shaikh, on hearing the last verse, was

seized with holy rupture, and an ecstasy' that communicated

itself to others,'* so that I too, blessed by being in his company,

t The leti era of all’ (’ fool q give ttie iota! SS. and thoee of
rnnt ) 39 If, tliereCore, the l itter word be subsrltutPvl tlie former in the

chronoj^rain ^iven above the grand total will be iOOl of ICKX).

2 I he text h'is 'fo make sense we must read

3 Ghnrbatl is not mentioned as a poet either in the Ain or in rhe

Tahaqut Hisar Firiiza was the chief town of a surfcar in ihc Sf'ha of Dihli,
and is now tlie headquarters of a district in the Punjab.

* a I*-** vide p, 9, and note 1.

6

9

literally ‘ soyl.’

402

experienced holy rapture, and, springing up t’rom niy place as one
heside himself, uttered the following couplet: —

“Whether Thou showest me favour or whether Thou show-
est it not

I am one of that brotherhood who wear the ring of Thy
service in their ears.’’

His holiness the Shaikh seized me by the hand and whirled
me round with him, and the delight of that moment never leaves
my heart ’

He died in Agrn, in the neighbourhood of Shaikh Farid’s Col-
lege, in X H. 966 (k.T>. 1558-59).

The following opetiing couplet of one of his odes is well known:

“ The mouth of my Friend last night told me a secret my.s-
tery.

‘ 1 am the fouiitain of the water of life, and thou knowest
it not.’ ”

292 The following verses are also by him : —

“ Why does not fate shed my blood where thou art not
it would seem that this is beyond the power of fate.’’

The wotds which fell from her lip.s were brief, and I could
not understand them,

The down around her lips is a marginal commentary*
brief enough.

In travelling the road of love for thee I an-ivecl at no stage
At wliich 1 did not find that the jiain of love for thee had
preceded me.”

1 Thi^ criv**'? ns an pic-rur. rii a fitrin of worship w hich

commeii'is sts-ir f-j ciic* of the Hast, ari'i which is nor w tho .'

coaiu.rpirr r ‘iT’vivil iieaivr houif, .la'i ‘cimp ini’- cinif->’ n rci

far

2 ^ -w ' ■- t^) IT. 'inis 'a tr'uge ’ ‘a rnarL^in.’ * a maiVinAl

; i-iU t Li .i'‘5LtC t.ri to ivpro'iii'.v I dt \ l iV ' H ihi^ 'v _ : ;

wir /-• Kha-t‘ \u -- d, '-irlnir ' ■< »

403

XCVIII. GsaieatI op Shiraz.!

He spent some time in India and returned to Shiraz. The
following verses are some of his : —

“I would not consent to the slaying of others, for I know
That death has taken the bitterness of death from the dag-
ger of my executioner.”

“ Devotee, the knot in the string of thy rosary cannot be
loosed without sincerity ;

Go, and for a time convert thy rosary into the sacred
thread of the fire-worshippers.”

“ A pleasant country is the street of love,

For there all tlie malice of the heavens is changed to kind-
ness.”

“ I am slain by the dagger of that slayer who so shed my
blood

That not one drop of it fell on the ground ”

XCIX. FarighT op ShIeaz.*

He was the brother of Shah Fathu-’llah,® who has already been
mentioned. When he came for the first time to Hindustan
Bairam ^^an the Kbankhanan asked him, as Farighi was the
poetical name of the well-known Shaikh ‘Abdul Wajd of Khavaf
to whom he was closely hound in the bonds of friendship and
religious dependence, to change his poetical name to Fa’iqi.

Ha used this name for some time, but when he returned to ‘Iraq 293
he reverted to the use of his former nom-de-phime . He then
came to Hindustan a second time, and died here. His son, Mir
Taqi, was auoctier Shah Fathu- ilah in bis knowledge of astronomy
and astrology, and I presented to him a part of twenty chapters

! The veiy brief description of Gh airati given in the Tahaqdt is word for
word the same as that given here. In the A/n . i, 594) he is tlius described,

“ His diction is good, and he knows the lii.otory of the past ”

* Farighi is not mentioned as a poet in tlie A/u In the Tahaqdt he is
thus described, ‘ Mir Farighi is tiie brotiicr of Mir Fathu-’IIali of Shiraz. He
was for a long time in the Emperor’s service,”

! Fide p. 216,

404

wLich I had written on the astrolabe. He was a man of noble
disposition and hij/h aspirations, and his brother, Mir Sharif, had
many excellences and perfections. Mir Taqi nsed to say that in
his family be and his brother, with their ancle, Shah Fathu-’llah,
were the only ones that held the Sunni faith, all the others being
bigoted ShVahs. The following verses are by Mir Fai’ighi : —

“ Well is it for me that in accordance with thy promise
happy in my abode of toil

“ I sit, glancing ever and again expectantly at the door.”

‘‘ To such a point does love at length bring intimate associa-
tion with the beloved

That the lover finds himself a stranger to separation.”

“On the humble body of Majnun no scar was visible;

For the footprint of Laila’s camel was impressed on
him.”

“The festival time has arrived and I am constantly anxious.

Hoping, 0 Lord, that 1 may have .speech with her, in order
to offer my coiinratulations.”

“ So frequently ha.s the country of my heart been ravaged by
the army of thy love

That the caravan of patience never unfastens its burdens
- there.”

“ Love’s madness can easily unfasten those knots in love’s
bonds

Which wisdom, with all its pretensions, cannot, with count-
less efforts, unfasten.”

“ Farighi has girded up his loins in the service of that lovely
one on the co idition

That he never, until the day of resurrection, unfastens from
his waist the sacred thread of idolatry.”

“In her absence, O death, 1 have put up with my life.

But now I ran no longer .sit patiently waiting for thee.”

The following is tite opening couplet of aii ode which he wrote
in jtraise of his holine.ss our sponsor the eighth Iinnm, Riza’
(blessings and praise be upon him'.): —

405

“ When the money-changer of the recurring morn opened
his shop

He exchanged every copper coin that he had for a piece of
gold.”

C. Fahm! op Tihrax.^

He had travelled much and seen the world. He came to Hin-
dustan and then returned to his own country. He had some
poetical genius. The following verses are his ; —

“I wish that the flame of love may so strike my grief-
nurturing body

That, while I weep from its burning, water may fall on my
ashes.”

“ I will give rest to my heart by patiently bearing her mes-
sage,

Though this (rest) is an impossibility to which I can never
attain.”

“ Go, speak not of love’s burning pain till the last trump
shall sound.

For this world is nothing but a house of mourning.”

Cl. FaHMI op SAMARgAXD.*

He is the son of Ifadiri of Samarqand. He was a jovial man,
and expert at composing enigmas. He came to India and then
returned again to his own country. The following verses are hi.s :

“ Since the tavern-keeper ® described to me the properties
of wine.

My repentance of my repentance passes description.

t In the Tabag^at ic is recorded that he was with the Khan-i-A^ram, but,
as no date is given, it is not certain wliether the reference is to Shamsu-d.
din Muhammad Ataga Kh an or to his son Miraa ‘Aziz Kuka, both of whom
held the title. The latter is probably intended. In the Ain (i, 599) Fahmi
is described as ‘of Rai,’ but this Fahmi is identified as Fahmi of Tihran by
a couplet ascribed to him by Abu-’l-Fazl which is also ascribed to him by
Daghistaul and in tlie Tahaqdt,

* Fahmi of Samarqand is not mentioned in the Ain or in the Tahagat,

3 Literally, ‘ the chief priest of the magians.’

52

406

“ When I saw her dark hair forming a garment round hei
body

295 I believed it to be the garment of the holy pilgrimage and

wound it round myself.”

Cir. FjkeI.i

He is Sayyid Muhammad, the cloth weaver, well known as Mir
Ruba'i. In this description of poetry he is the ‘ Umar !^ayyam
of the age. He left this world in the course of the journey
to Jaunpur,® in the year h, 973 (a.d. 1565-66), and the words ‘Mir
Ruha'i made a journey,® were found to give the date of his death.

A quatrain.

“ Fikri has a head which is unfurnished with contents,

He has at his heart a secret pain for which there is no
remedy.

For an age he has made his iiead his feet on the road of
love,

He has set out on a road which has no ending.”

As his verses are very well known I shall conclude by quoting
the following few quatrains and a couplet which are attributed
to him : —

“ O heart, though thy love be a warrior, fear not.

Though her business be oppression and mortal enmity, fetir
not,

1 Fikri is thus described in the TabaqSt. “ He is Sayyid Muhammad the
cloth weaver. He spent many years in the service of the Emperor He is
distingniehed for his quatrain.s, since he was .always writing quatrains, and
he is also known as Ituia'i (‘ quatrain In the .lin (i, 602) he is thus
described : “ He is a cloth weaver from Hirat. He generally composes

quatrains.” According to the Haft Iqlim he came to India in A.H. 969 (a d.
1561-62).

* Akbar was directing the campaign against the Khanzaman in the neigh-
honthood of Jannpur during the cold weather of 1565-66. Vide vol. ii,
text, pp. 82 — 84.

S The sum of the numerical values of the letters

gives the date 973.

407

In the army of her beauty her two eyes are warriors,

For the rest, the down on her cheek and her mole are the
dark colour of the host.

“If one will not, like the sun, suffer the sword to be raised
above his head

The sky shall not be clad from head to foot in gold for him ;
If the gardener will not endure the hardships of the thorn,
He shall receive into his bosom no loved one in rosy gar-
ments like a bud.”

“On the morrow, when nothing shall remain of tins world 296
but a tale.

When signs shall appear of the Resurrection's .spiiiig.

The beloved ones shall raise their heads from Hie dust-like
verdure,

And we too shall raise oar heads in courlship."’

“ Thou goost with thy locks dark as niglit, and like dew on
every side

Salt (wit) rains from thee, alas for wounded hearts i ”
cm. FANi’I.i

He is a Caghatai of noble descent. He has travelled much
and has acquired honour by visiting the holy places of pilgrimage
(Miikkah and Madinah). He has performed nof.i'ble services m
the field and at one time held the title of Khan, but on account
of some misconduct he tvas degraded from that rank. One day

^ This poet appears to be identical with Fana’i, mentioned in the
(i, 426) as a commander of one thonsand. He served in x.he conquest ot
Malwa and fongbt in the battle of Sarangpur against Baz Bahadur, early in
A.D. 1561. The poet Fasia'i described in the Tabaqdt is undoubtedly the
same person, for the couplet there attributed to him is one of those here,
attributed to him by BadaonI, but in the Tahaqdt he is thus described, * Pi-
is Mulla Kbwurd. the goldsmith, who has spent nil his life in ibis couit. He
was at first in the service of Mirzii ‘Askarl.* ‘ Askari Mirza vrs^ one of the
b»‘ot\ier8 of the Hmperor liumayrm, and ^vas coDBeiiuently Akbai’s uncle

408

lie said, ‘Nobody lias excelled me ia these three spins', Shamshir
(‘the swoid*), ^i'r (‘poetry’), and shafranj (‘chess’).’ The Em-
peror at once replied, ‘ The same might be said of two other
sAfns, ^nitani (‘devilry’) and shattnhi'’' (‘effrontery’).’ Fana’i
spent some time in prison, and when he was released he was
seized with madness, which, taking him by the hand, led him
away into some wilderness, whither, nobody knows. Ho has
written a divan and his poetry is of the character of that of the
debauched (’aghatal nobles. The following conplet is by him,

“ Every one attains his object by his nightly cries of ‘ O Lord,
0 Lord !

0 Lord ' Why do not I attain my object by my cries of
‘ 0 Lord ! ’ ”

The following opening conplet also, which I have home in my
mind for the last fifty years, and which is quoted in the Tdrikb-i-
297 Nizami, ® is by him : —

“I say not that I have a house worthy to be honoured by
thy footsteps,

1 am a stranger, and humble, and have but a waste corner.”

^The follov/ing is ancther opening couplet.)

“ Whilst thy rosy face blossomed above the rosy wine

The wine blossomed ia the cup from the reflection of thy
rosy face.”

CIV. Fi’sInT of Yazd.*

He is a Sayyid, a story-teller, and has a mind adapted to

1 The three woras begin with the letter ishiji) as do also the two words
added to them by Akbar.

^ This word is not in the text, but both MSS. have it. It may perhaps
bare been an atrortbought of some scribe, but ia very applicable to the
boastful Faca i.

^ Sell. The Tabaqiit-i-Jkha)i. by Nizimu-’din-Ahmad.

4 Fusuiu IS .'Ot menticned in the Tabaqat. In the Ain he is called a
.ibirazl. while Df.ehistanI and the Atnshkada-i .fiav say that he came from
Tabriz. Di^n^i 'iii adds that he served under Jahangir and ^ahjahan as a
The mentions a Ftisenl who wan an aryiir in

409

poetrj’. He came from Thatha ^ and obtained a post in the Em-
peror’s service. The following verses are by him: —

“Why didst thou needlessly pass by the unworthy ?

And, if it was necessary to pass by him, why didst thou
glance towards him ?

Thou wert in talk with a stranger, and, when thou sawest
me from afar.

If thou didst not completely veil thyself from me why didst
thou draw thy veil but a little ? ”

“ When I arrived, and thou wert in talk with a stranger.
Thou didst distract his attention, and then glance covertly
towards me.”

“ Fusuni made his obeisance to thee merely to deceive others.
Had it not been for this such a worthless wretch would
have been unworthy of making his obesiance.”

“ When she had, after making a thousand promises, shown
me her face but once.

She then, for fear of strangers, showed it but for a mo-
ment and went.”

“ He who ia slain by the glance of the beloved closes not his
eyes.

As he draws his last breath he is dazzled by the face of his
slayer.”

CV. FiRuzA OP Kabul.*

He was brought up in the household of Mirza Muhammad

Jahangir’s rsign and had the title of Afaal ^Oan. In the Ai/i (i, 604)
Fnsuni is thus described, ‘ His name is Mahmud Beg. He is an excelleni
accountant and knows also astronomy well.’

I The weil-known town in Sind,

* Firaza is mentioned in the din (i, 526) as a commander of two hundred.
He oajne from Kabul to India with ^azi Kh an of Bada^shan in the early
years of Akbiir’s reign

410

Hakim. ^ By birth he belongs to the Langah * clan. It seems
298 probable that lie was captured by a soldier in some of the wars
in Hindustan and was placed in the service of the late Emperor,
and was then brought up with Mirza Muhammad Hakim He is
somewhat studious, in a desultory manner, and is moderately'
skilled in penmanship. He has a general knowledge of music,
and can beat the drum after a fashion.® In body he is well pro-
portioned. He came to court and paid his respects, with Qazi
Khiin of Badakhshan. between Jaunpur and Agra, when the Em-
peror was returning from his expedition to Patna. Although
he does not study assiduously he is naturally somewhat ready in
etymology, and it gradually becomes evident that he has under-
stood the whole drift of any stiff argument.

The following verses are his ; —

“ Thou hast made a stranger the object of thy regard.
What means this ?

Thou hast cast out the slave from thy regard. What
means this ?

I have seen nobody in this age to equal thee in beauty and
grace.

But thou hast destroyed the value of beauty. What
means this ? ”

'• What remedy is there but death for this sick body ?

Go. physician, waste not thy pains on me."

Nowadays it i? reported that he boasts that he has written an-
swers* to most of the odes in the divans of ancient and modern

‘ King of Kabul, second son of Humayun and brother of Akbar,

* An Afghan clan, six members of which ruled in Multan as independent
kings for ninety-two years from A D. 1445. Vide Azn-i-Akbarl ii, 334.

3 Hadaoni certainly seems to be damning Firuza with faint praise, bat
playing the drum is more highly regarded in the east than it is in Europe.
Drums, which are of sexeral sizes and shapes, are carefully tuned, and are
usually played with the fingers and the heel of the hand, with a certain
amount of expression,

i An ‘ answer’ to a poem is a noem imitating the oiiginal in metre and

4.11

poets. As to what lie has di.scovered from these sources it may
perhaps become more generally known than it is at pi esent.

CVI. PahmI of Astababad.

He was a capable man. He died in Dihli. The following
quatrain is by him : —

“0 thon whose face is bathed in rose water,

With ringlets curling around it like wreathed violets.

Thy eyes are like two beauties overcome with wine on one
pillow

Who have laid their heads together and are fallen asleep.”

Couplet.'!.

“In these days freedom fiom care has become no more than
a tale,

Whither shall I go t What shall I do ? The times are
very evil.”

“The piteous state of the faithful is caused by thy cruelty.

Remove the sword, for their blood is on thy head.”

evil. Shaikh FaizI, the Poet Lacrkate.'

In many separate branche.s of knowledge, such as poetry, the
composition of enigmas, prosody, rhyme, history, philology,

rhyme, and either elaborating the ideas of the origica], or introdneing fresh
ideas on the same subject.

i Literally (maUku-$h~^u'ard) ‘ King of poets,’ the official

title given to him by Akbnr in a ft. 997 (a.i> 1oS9).

Shai^ Abu’l Faiz Fsnzi. one of the most learned mefl of Akbar’s court,
was the eldest son of Shail^ Mubarak of Nagor, and elder brother of the
famous AbQ-l-FazI. He wus born at Agra in a h. 954 (a.d. 1547). His
acquirements in Arabic literitnre. the art of poetry, atid medicine were verv
extensive, and he used to treat poor people gratis. As a yonng man he was
regarded with suspicion and ill-treated by the orthodox in Agra on account
of his Shi ah proclivities, and when he was summoned to court the orthodox
believed, or affected to believe, that he was to be called to account for his
heterodoxy, and carried him to coatt by force. He was however, very

299

412

medicine, ana prose composition Shaitt Faizi had no equal in his
time. At first he used to write under his well-known poetical

favourably received by Akbar, and in a short time became his constant
companion and friend. He was instrumental, in a.h. 986 (a.d. 1578-79), in
bringing about the downfall of Shaikh* Abdn-n-NabI the Sadr, who had been
one of his persecntors. It is said that Faizi wrote a hundred and one books.
In 1586 he planned a Sjamsah, or collection of five epics, in imitation of the
Khamsah of Nizami. The first, Markazu-l-Adwir, was to consist of 3000
verses, and was to be an imitation of Nizami’s MaHianu-l-Asrar. The
Sulaiman-u-Bilqis and the Nal-u-Daman were to consist of 4000 verses each
and were to be imitations of the lOzuzrnv-u- Shinn and the Laild-u-Majniin ;
and the Haft Kiehwar and the Aibarnima, each of 5000 verses, were to
correspond with the Haft Paikar and the Sikandamdma. This great under-
taking was never completed. Portions were written, and in 1594-95 Faizi,
encouraged by Akbar, completed the Nal-u-Daman and presented a copy to
the Emperor. The Markazu-l- Adiaar appears also to have been completed.
Faizi translated from the Sanskrt the Lilavati, a work on arithmetic, and
the Bhagavad Gita. Faizi was sometimes employed as tutor to the Princes,
and sometimes acted as an ambassador. He suffered from asthma and died
on Safar 10, a.h. 1004 (Oct. 15, 1595). He was a member of Akbar’s ‘ divine
faith.’ Tide Ain-i-Akbari. i, 490 et passim and Bndaoni, vol. ii, text, pp. 260
309, 365, et passim.

A long description of Faizi as a poet is given in the Ain (i, 549) from
which I give the following extracts : — ‘ He wns a man of cheerful disposi-
tion, liberal, active, an early riser. He was a disciple of the Emperor, and
was thus at peace with the whole world.* * He wrote for nearly forty
years under the name of Faizi, which he afterwards, under divine inspira-
tion, changed to Fayyazi.* * His excellent manners and habits cast a
lustre on his genius.* * He composed many works in Persian and Arabic.
Among others 'ne wrote the Sawdti'u-l-llham (ride p. 194 n. 1 J * * Genins
as he was, be did not care for poetry, and did not frequent the society of
wits. He wns profound in philosophy.* * The gams of thought in his
poems will never be forgotten. In the Tabaqat he is thus described, “ He is
one of the greatest of learned men and Shaikhs and is mnch respected for
his resignation to the Divine will and for his habits of solitary meditation.
He has grown to maturity in the Emperor’s service and has been honoured
with tne title of Maliku-sh-Shti‘ara. In the art of poetry he is a prodigy,
and he has written a work on ethics, entitled Mau-indu-l-Kilam, wiiich
contains no dotted letters, and he has also written a commentary on tfie
-word of God, which contains no dotted letters. It is known as the Sa-wih'-
u-’l-Ilham. His died n contains over 15,000 verses and he has written some

413

name of Fa4i, but later, imitating the title of his younger
brother, whom the Emperor describes in writing as ‘Allnmt and
in order to glorify himself, he chose a poetical name in the same
measure, viz. Fayyazi,® but it did not suit him, and one or two
months later, having packed up the baggage of this life, he took
it from the world with the most hitter regret. He was a mas-
ter ® of malevolent activity, idle jests, conceit, pride, and malice,
and one epitome of hypocrisy, baseness, dissimulation, love of
pomp, arrogance, and ostentation. All Jews, Christians, Hindus,
and fire-worshippers, not to speak of Nizaris and Sabahis, held
him in the very highest honour for his heresy, his enmity to the
followers of Islam, his reviling of the very fundamental doctrines
of our faith, his contemptuous abuse of the noble companions (of
the Prophet) and those who came after them, and of holy Shaikhs,
both dead and living, and of his unmannerly and contemptuous
l)ehaviour towards all learned, pious, and excellent men, both in 300
secret and openly, and both by day and by night. Xot content
with this he used, despite the sacred faith of Muhammad (may
(rod bless and assoil liim and his family), to regard all forbidden

tnainavis. In poetry he is the chief of all poets of the age, and in prose
composition I he is alone and unapproachable. In branches of knowledge
foreign to the Arabic, and in philosophy, medicine and many other sciences
he has mnch skill. In universidity of knowledge he has no equal. I hare
enjoyed intimate friendship with this most learned man of the time from
my childhood up His gentle disposition is equalled by liis cheerfulness.

IHs angelic nature imposes an obligation on all his contemporaries.”

‘ mj very learned man / a title bestowed on ShailA Abu-I-FazI by

Akbar.

signifies ‘ abundance with the added to it, as

IN n.saal ill a iakhalltts, it becomes intensive adjective

formed in tlie same inertsure as from the same root, and bignifies ‘ pro-
fusely generous.’ The yd converts it into a, taMiallus. The letter

^ (yd) in • Ailami is, on the other hnnd, the sign of the first (singularj
possessive pronoun in Arabic.

la). The word has perplexed the editor of the text, who
f-ays, in a plaintive footnote, Sic. in all three MSS.

53

414

things as lawful, and all the injunctions of the sacred law as un-
lawful, and, with a view to washing away the stain of his ill-
repute, which the waters of a hundred oceans (poured over it'
till the day of judgment will not wash away, he used, in the
height of his drunkenness, and wliile he was ceremonially im-
pure,’ to write a commentary* on the Quran, written entirely in
words which contained no dotted letter, and his dogs ® used to
trample on it in all directions. At last, after all his denial of
the truth, his obstinacy, bis pride, and his heresy, he hastened to
tlie place to which he belonged, and went in such sort that I
pray that nobody may see or hear of the like. When the Em-
peror went to visit him when'he was at his last gasp, Eaizi barked
like a dog in his face, and the Emperor used to relate this storj-
in open darbar, his face was swollen and his lips had become
black, so that the Emperor asked Shaikh Abu-1-Fazl what caused
this blackness of the lips and suggested that Faizi had rubbed
miii ‘ on his teeth, as the people of India use to do, but Abu-1-
Fazl replied that this was not so, and that the blackness wns
caused by the blood which Faizi had been vomiting. But, with-
out a doubt, the sufferings which he had already endured were
very little considered with reference to his vice, his abuse of the
tairii, and his revilings of his holine.ss the last of the Prophets
(may God bless him and his family, all of them). Many abusivt-
chronograms were discovered for the date of his death. One was
as follows • —

“When Faizi the atheist died an eloquent man uttered (as
the date of his death) the words,

■ A dog has gone from the world in an abominable state.’ ’ ’

‘ ‘Yir de quo egreditur semen coitus, lavarnt aqua orrrne cor-

pii-s siiuiii . et immntuUis erit usque ad vesperuni ’ Lev xv 3 6 The Ma-
fifMuiii.ulan law on this point was the pame as the Mosaic Tiie obligation
n ,is c» 'll tempt uoti«ly set nMde by the ‘ divine faith': tide Badaoni, ii, text p. 30*).

- i’i.o S<i>rdtJ u-l-Iiham, vide cMpni p 19-1 and note 412.

^ F.d/’ was veiy fond of dogs

■* A d.ut’t'.ice n-ed in India for r!ac‘<enia?

■ y -1- L'o J- 1 I -M -t- 7 -* H 4- ; 1- 1 j- .7<j - liuO -I-

• 4 ,' 4 . 1 . 1 ^ j s -f i + 30 + lu* »+ - 4* lo -f 5 — lij* » ' luo ve<ii '•b'-Ei.

415

Auotlier said :

'‘The date of tlie death of that carrion Faizl is fixed bj- the
words ‘ The four religions of fire.” ^

Another found the following chronogram : —

■ Faizi the inauspicious, the enemy of the Prophet,

Went, bearing on him the brand of curses,

He was a miserable and hellish dog, and hence
Th.e words 'what dog-worshipper has died’ - give the date
of his death.’’

In the same .strain was the chronogram ;

“ The laws of apostasj- have been ov'erthrown.’’ ®

And another wrote : “ Faizi was an apostate.”*

And to the .same effect is the following: —

Since he could not choose but go, there is no help but that
The date of his death shall be found in the words, ‘He is
for ever in tire.’ "

He wrote poetry for a period of exactly forty years, but it wa-,
all imperfect He could set up the .skeleton of verse well, but
the hones had no marrow in them, and the salt * of his poetry
was entirely without savour. His taste in lewd raving, in boast-
ful verse,''' and in infidel .scribblings, is well known, but be was

J jU s + .S el-H-,!00 + 40 + 700 + 5 + 2 + o0-l-l + 20O = 1204.

I his cliroiiogram gives two hundred years in excess Badiioni perhaps
ihought that any stick was got'd enooith to beat a dog with. The ‘four
z'eligious of tire’ w'ere probably .Judaism, Ciiristiauity. Hinduism, and Zo-
roastrianism, ttie ‘divine faith’ of Akbar being, perhaps, substituted for one
of tliese

^ JU-3-t.5 + 60 + 20-b2-b200 + 60 + 4UO-HO+40 + 200-r

4 = 1004.

s |o.£tJi 100 + 1 + 70 + 4 -r 5 + 1 + 30 -t8+ 1 -1-4 -(■300 4-20 +

On + !00= 1004.

* , L .ty.' 2 4 G ■+■ 4 + bO + 10 + S'X) + lo + 40 43. 1 -(-3 + 4+ ]

lOUi"

jJU. (kiO + 1 + .30 + 4-(- S0+ io+ I .1 - I --200 = l icT

1 ' ■ years in e\ ovis

’ ■ h'l-a Sjiiee'- ’ ‘ li.aTOL.i7ng ina:. r.::,."'

1 czlI. iiAy- ,, ,.7 ■ Vt r-'-s boa-til. g of -.'lieii ■ wr. 'ic-coiaplisam.-:.;- ■

301

416

entirely devoid of any experience of the love of truth, of the
knowledge of God, and of any idea of a painful longing for God,
and “ a favourable reception is the lot of enemies.” Although his
divSn and his maanavi contain more than twenty thousand cou-
plets there is not among them one couplet that is not as much
without fire as his withered genius, and they are despised and
rejected to such an extent that no one, even in lewdness, studies
his verse, as they do those of other base poets.

“Verse which is wholly devoid of pith
Remains, for all time, a rough draft.”

And this is stranger still, tnat although he has spent the whole
revenue of his yAgrirs in having his misleading lies written and
copied, and has sent copies of them to all his friends, both far
and near, nobody has ever taken a copy in his hand a second
time.

Thy poetry has doubtless taken a lesson from the dignity
of the veil,

For it displays no desire to come out of its private corner
in the house.

The following few couplets tire taken from his selected poems
which he wrote as memorials of himself, and entrusted to Mirza
Nizamu d-din A^mad and others :

“Cover not thy eyelashes' when thy eyes travel, like feet,
(.the road of love)

For stout wayfarers march with naked feet,"

302 Why dost thou cut my hand, thou sword of love ? If

justice is to he done

Cut out the, tongue of the slanderer of Zulaikha.”

“ When we cast our bounteous glance on tlio^e who sit in
the dust

We distribute even to aiits l)rain.s like those of Solomon.”

“The flood of my tears will hardly turn thy heart of stone ;

To turn this mill-stone the Hood of Noah is re(iuired.”

poetry are a favourite form of ccniposition among Persian poets, and especial-
ly among Indian poets writing in Persian
1 .'.e. ‘Veil net thyself.’

417

•• () love, ovei'tlii’ow not the Ka‘hah. for there, for a moment,

Those e.xhansted in the faith of love sometime.s take rest.”

'■ O love, liavp I leave to remove from the .shoulder of the
sky

To my own shoulder the banner of thy power ? ’

■‘How long shall J stake my heart on the blandishments of
the fair ?

I will burn this heart and obtain a new heart.

Kaizi, my hand is empt}’, and the road of courtship is be-
fore me.

Perhaps 1 shall be able to pledge my divan for this woild
anrl the next.”

The following i.s the opening couplet of a boastful ode. of
which he was very proud : —

•• Thank.s la; to God that the love of beautiful ones is my
guide.

1 am of tlie religion ot Brahmans and of the faith of the
ti re- woi shippers.’’

I’he following couplet is also by him .—

'• In thi.s land there is a .sugar-lipped multitude

Who have mi,ved .salt with tiieir wine and are drunk in-
<leed."

I Poet) say thyself in what part of this poetry there i.s nii\
savour.

I'he following couplets are from the Maf navi Markaz-i-Adicar gQO
which lie wrote in imitation of the Mu khzan-i-Khiyiil ' and which
did not turn out fortunately for him: — *

“ To beg " for what aid I come to this door.

That I have become richer in heart and hand ?

- This is a mistake. The -Adivdr was written in imitatitin o!

Ni/anii’s MakJizanii-’l-asrdr, vide •iiipta p. 412 ii. I

fhia expression Badaoni appears to mean merely cliat he did ntn
live to finish it,

* MSS have

tlie meaninj? nor the scansion.

The difference utXecis neither

418

I asked for little, but my stock inci-eased
Then, though I sat down, my footsteps advanced.”

I'lie following couplets are from his projected ^uaswai'f, Bilqts-
ic-Snlaimdn : —

“• I set myself again to place
The slit of my pen opposite to the window of my heart :
There comes from that window and enters this window ^
riiat very light which .serves as a guide to the soul.
Although from this court of injustice

The throne of the Sulaiman of my %vords® has gone on the
breeze,

Yet it occurred to me to coii.-ider a plan
Whereby, by means of spells. I might bind the demons in
chains,*

Bind them, by what means I have, to the throne of my
rhetoric,

And adorn that (throne) from the treasures of my mind.”

The following is an enigma which he composed on the name of
Qadiri, ^

I will leave the mark from love's brand
Since it i.s a memorial in my heart, and is the only scar
there.”

When he wa.s absent as an envoy in the Dakan I sent him two
letters from the lower slopes of the Kashmir mountains, inform-
ing him of the Emperor’.s disfavour towards me and of his le-
fusal to admit me to his presence in order that I might pay my
respects. In the petition which Faizi sent to court he recom-

‘ i’nauhim) ‘imaginary,’ t'he meaning may perhaps be that f.ie

poem was the work of FnizI’s imaginatioo, but I believe my translation to be
correct. The poemwas never finished. Vale p. 4,12 n. 1.

i.e the light is conveyed from the window of the poet’s heart to the
nibs of his pen, tlie slit between wl.ich is compared to another window.

^ I.e. the poet’s words of wisdom

+ As SnUdman is said to have done.

■. The meaninv of the passage nmy bo, ‘ an enigma which i,e addressed
[o Qadiri.” I l.ave not been able to solve the enigma.

419

iueaded me to the Empei'or’s favour and Shaikh Aba-l-Pazl was
ordered to embody that petition in the Akbai’nama in order tliat
it might be read as an example of what such documents should he.

The following is a cop}' of tiiat petition, whicli was dated on the
10th day of the month Jamadi' u-l- Aicival, a . h . 1(J00 (February
23, 1592), and despatched from Ahmadiiagar to Lahoi- ; —

‘Refuge of the world! There lately came to me froui Badaon
two relatives of Mulla ‘ Abdu-I-Qadir, in a very distuibed state
of mind, weeping, weeping and tortured by anxiety. They told
me that Mulla ‘ Abd-1 Qadir had for some time been sick, and
had been unable to keep his promise to attend ar court, that some 304
of the Emperor’s officers had carried him off with force and vio-
lence,^ and that they did not know what the erd of the matter
would he. They also said that the long duration of his sickness
had not been reported to yonr majesty. Cherisher of the broken
spirited! Mulla ‘ Abdu-’l-Qadir has much aptitude, and he has
studied what the MuUSs of Hindustan usually study in the ordin-
ary branches of learning. He acquired accomplishments under
my honoured father, and I, your slave, have known him for nearly
thirty-eight years. In addition to his acquirements iii lear^i-
ing he has some skill iti poetry, and good taste in prose composi-
tion, both Arabic and Persian. He has also acquired some know-
ledge of Indian astrology, and of accounts, in all their branches.

He is acquainted with Indian and foreign music, and by no means
ignorant of chess, both the two-handed and the four-handed
game,® and has some practice in playing the binA In spite of all
these acquirements he is endued with many virtues. He is not
avaricious, has a contented mind, is not vacillating, is truthful,
straightforward, respectful, unambitious, humble-spirited, meek,

1 iStAiu ( hi-ihiddat-i-tamam) . MS. (A) substitutes (shardrat}

* mftlice* for

Akbar himself played both games. Vide Ain-i-Akbuii, i, 308.

2 The bin is a stringed instrameiit consisting of a narrow strip of vt^ood
connecting, and placed over the openings of, t^o dried gourds, spherica),
or nearly so, in shape. Along the wooden bridge are stretched five or seven
steel strings, which are played with a plectrum.

420

moderate in his requests, almost entirely devoid of the dissimula-
tion so common at court, and entirely faithful and devoted to the
Imperial Court. When the imperial forces were sent against
Kumbhulmer ‘ he, ha\ing requested permission to accompany
them, went thither in the hope of offering his life to your majesty,
and was in action and was wonnded, and when the fact was re-
ported he received a reward. Jalal i^an Qnrci * first presented
him at court, and said, when presenting him ; “ I have discovered
for your majesty an Imnvt^ with whom you will be well pleased.
Mir Fathn-’ilah '* also acquainted your .sacred majesty, to some
extent, with his affairs, and my respected brother^ is also aware
of his circumstances; but it is well known that ‘a grain of luck
is better than a load of merit,”

Since your majesty’s court is the court of the just, your slave,
acting as though he were present in person at the foot of the
august throne, w'hen he saw a helpless man suffering persecu-
tion, has repre.sentedtlie case to your majesty. Had he not rep-
resented it at this time he would, in a manner, have been guilty
3C5 ot insincerity and want of proper regard for the truth. May God
who i.s piai.5ed) deign to keep the slaves of your majesty’s court
constant in. the patli of truth, justice, and righteous dealing under
tiie iieavenly shadow' of your majesty, their Emperor; and may
He long Tna’ntiun your m.ajesty as their shelter, the cherisher of
the miser, I hie, the bestow er of favours, the coverer of faults, with
bonndiesi wealth, glory, greatness and majesty, by the honottr of
the pure ones w.io 'Iwell in the couits of God and the enlightened
who li'-c .jt-i'iiies to praise him. Amen. Amen.

This pla,’.:’ ht name of which is variously spelt by Badfioni, >-
7. cnbhalgari: a fortress on the western border of the Udainur State in
?..-;rui.ina. ai. i;r hi niiios north of Udaipur city. I'uie te.\t, \ol. ii, pp
2'i~ 266 Tr .i- ■■ A;,ri' 1.S76 tnat B.idSoiii asU. ,1 for and oiUiun.'d leave
t e t.oimr’.r.;. di.- xieditior

t i.tl.i'. Khii. tg e. «,i- ,i •..i.uiirtndi-r of five Imudted He di^tiiiguiBlu-ri
-eit I', te. e .H.i.i .Akl, u’ .t' iiiiicn attached to iiini . He w as tniu dt'rcd.

- !j...,take fe, Kha,,. etii in l'i76. rni.. i, !7,7.

1 ne lead, . .i-ia I'-idcf of ir \<‘rs in the inti-f >

■ y.Je p 2!'., ” Al'ch!. .\bu-l-Fa 7 l

421

If any should ask me what rules of humanity and faithfulness
I observe in so harshly reviling one who had so much goodwill
for me and so much sincere friendship, and especially how it is
that I, forgetful of the command. ‘Mention not your dead but
in connection with good,’ have thus written of a man after his
death, and have become one of those who disregard their obliga-
tions, I reply, ‘ All this is true, but wliat could I do 'r ' The claims
of the faith and the safeguarding of one’s compact with God are
above all other claims, and ‘Love is God’s and hatred is God’s'
is an established precept.' Although I was for full forty years
in the company of Faizi, yet after the gradual change in views,
the corruption of his nature, and tlie disordering of his disposi-
tion and especially in his mortal sickness, our relations were
changed, and as our association together became mere hypocrisy
we were freed each of the other. All of us have our faces set
towards that court where all disputes shall be decided. “ On that
day the intimate friends shall be enemies to one another, except
the pious.” I

Among the property left by FaizT were foui- thousand six
hundred valuable bound books, all corrected, of which it might
have been said with but little exaggeration that most of them
were either in the band writing of the authors or bad been writ-
ten in tlie authors’ time. These became the property of the
Empei'or, and when they were presented before him he caused
them to he catalogued in three sections, giving the first place to
books of verse, medicine, astrology, and music: the middle place
to works ou philosophy, refi'gioiis mysticism,® astronomy, and
geometry; and the lowest place to commentaries, the traditions,®
hooks on theology, and on all other subjects connected with the
sacred law.*

t I Qur’an, c. xliii The text

has ,

2 ( tasaivwuf ), the doctrines of tlte

3 the savings of Muhammad.

^ The dassifl'-ation indicates Akbaris contempt for orthodoxy, and evi-
dently much allocked Badaoni’s prejudices.

54

422

Faizi wrote a hundred and one books, the ^aZ- a Daman ‘ and
others, which he used to reckon. When he was near death he
wrote, at the earnest solicitation of some of his friends, some
couplets in praise of the Prophet (may God bless and assoil him,
and of his ascent,* and incorporated them in the Nal-ti-Daman.
The following couplets are taken from the conclusion of that
work : —

“ 0 King of Kings,® who seekest after wisdom.

Wealthy as the sea and glorious as the sky.

The world is a banquet linked with joy.

Thy reign is the wine, which stupefies the heavens ;

I am the minstrel singing melodies drawn from tlie veins
of my heart,''

My pen is the sounding organ.

If from this banquet, in which thy conversation is the cup-
bearer,

I arise, my song will still remain.

The drinkers circulate the tale

That there is no ® singer, and yet the assembly is full of
song.

i The text is corrupt here, «nd reads as thoujri’ there wore a hundred and
one books of the Nal-U’Da7n(in, which was not the case From other sources,
e.g. the Mir'dtu4-‘‘ Alam, wo know that Fai/i whs eredited with the author-
ship of a hundred aud one books in all Tht» Nal-n,’Dn)n>in is the story of
the loves of Nala, kin i? of Niahada or Malwa. and Damayanti, dantjhter of
t)ie kins: of Vidarbha, or B^rar. Fni/^rs source of inspiration was the
Mahabh/iraia, where the story is ♦rivi'ii at length.

(mi'rdj}. According to the belief of Mnaalmwiis Muhammad was
caught up one night from Jerusalem to heaven, his means of convevance
being Buzdq, an animal smaller than a mule and laiger than an ass. While
in heaven he held 90,000 conrersations with God, but on hi^ return found
his bed yi't warm. This belief was one of those soleeted for ridicule hv
Akbar and the followers of the ‘dive.r faith,' riuV- r.'xr. vo] ii, p ‘;510 jf
Fai/l’s recantntion nere genuine it must be regudea 'i.s, in som*' sort, a
triumph for orthodoxy.

•"5 Akbar,

* Literally ‘bhxoy melodies ( T believe the mean-
ing to be that v\h’ ' I ha' e give*-

^ T ht‘ text Ki', v.rn''ty, (SLJ thi>u art Mot (a singt’r}. Fiomthi- scan-
sion it is clear r. :te- ' mpl- : 'gativi- < As ■ is the correct ivafling.

423

To-day, with my honey -sweet masic
I am Barbud,' thou the Khusrav of the age.

Though I have polished my pen on the heavens
I am standing before thee on one leg.*

Look now on the arrangement of my mystical characters
And now on my long years spent in thy service.

This poem, which bears on its tongue the name of love
Takes thy name ® to heaven.

I am the inebriating wine of true wisdom,

If I ferment, no blame is mine.

I am the bell of thy caravan

And must surely be excused if I give forth sounds.

The reward of my handiwork is this (appreciative) eye,
Which I reckon among the gifts of God.

.4 hundred nightingales, drank with love, have arisen,
singing

That the rose of Persia has blossomed in India.

I have arrayed in splendour virgin thoughts
In the Ganja of my genius and the Dihli of my mind.*
Before this, when my poems were all the current coin I
had

Faizi was the name written on my signet;

Now that I am chastened by (spiritual) love
I am Payyazi of the ocean of superabundance.*

In thy reign, incomparable King,

Have I plucked from the bush of time the rose of good
fortune.

* A celebrated musician at the court of Khusrav.

* The attitude, in India, of a supplicraiit, or penitent

f

^ t/AJs {tughra), literally, ‘ thy roynl sign mnnnftl.*

* The reference is to the two j^eart poets Nizami of Ganja (in imitation of
whose Laild-u^majnun this poem was written) and Amlg Kh nsray of Dihlj.
Faizi means to say that he has conceived poetical ideas which neither
Niziml nor Amir Kh nsri^v ever conceived.

& Vide p. 413, note 2.

^ Mr. BlooKmann i, 549) charitably supposes ‘the Ocean

of Superabundance ’~tD mean ‘ God’s love,* as. indeed, it may; but it is just
as likely to signify Abkar’s generosity, or spiritual gifts.

424

The breeze of my genius has diffused the odour of roses
over my banquet.

My cup has been filled to overflowing with the wine of
delight ;

I have sat laughing, like a cup of sparkling wine,

While the cupbearer, like the bottle, stood behind me
Drinking deeper draughts than either I or my good for-
tune,

My days have been good, but my means of spending them
better.

My gardener has been happy, like thy reign.

For my basil plant has grown freelv.

These four thousand jewels of purewater,^

Which I have stirred up with the wafer which is like fire.
Accept, for the lustre of the gems is all thine.

They were- produced that they might bo scattered round
thy crown ;

If I have scattered more than I have said
I have then reckoned my harvest without any deficiency.
From this ocean which, in its turmoil, rears its head to thi
highest heaven

Gems bubble forth on the crest of each wave.

Thus employed, in the art of arranging mystic sayings.

My speech has set itself to no mean emplovment.

Every pithy’ phrase with which my’ pen has charged itself
Has been brought by’ my heart from distant recesses
My pen points out to me the road to inscrutable my.stenes
Where a mountain of meaning best appears.

Hidden under phrases slight as a blade of glass.

This book is illuminated with my heart’s blood.

Its allegories are filled to overflowing with true wisdom.

If its melodies be chanted in the mountains

Their sound will dance among the grains of flowing sand.-

^ l.c, the verses of the Xal-u-Daman.

* Otjy ^_j(ity-i-rai-dn) cominoniT means quicksand. I take it to mean
here the sands of mountain streams, as quicksands are not commonly found
in the mountains.

425

I have woven from my swiftly travelling breath
Sacred threads for the Brahmans of ttie nine monasteries.
My thonglit, which stirs np mystic truths,

Is an ocean which produces gems from its waters.

This writing, which brings to the light the essence of all
things.

Is but half the shadow of my pen.

Every truth contained in it is as water in the stream,

Every knotty saying is as the curl in lovely hair.

This poem is a pearl of which the price may be fixed
For it shows forth the felicity of both worlds ;

This lovely idol from the workshop of Azar ’ received
Its adornment in the month of Azar,*

In the thirty-ninth year of the Imperial reign,

In the new Divine Era,*^

When I reckoned up the years of the Hijn era
I computed them to be a thousand and three alifs.*

This garden, which is full of thy perfume

Is but one rose of the plant of thy boundless wealth.

1 have the prospect of the joy of another cup
In laying out four gardens more.®

If love thus consumes hie entirely,

I shall make moonlight shine from my ashes.

The transparent glass of ray heart is melted.

And I will give it, as a mirror, into the hands of the
assembly.

I The father of Abraham, said by the Musalmans to have been a sculptor
of idols.

® The ninth month of the Fersinu solar year,

3 The era instituted by Akbar, beginning with the first year of his reign
(a.h. 963 = A.D. 1556). Ir. this era the years were solar, and the old Persian
solar months were nsed. The era was instituted in 1582; vide vol. ii, text,
p. 306.

t I.e. A H 1003 fA.i> l,>9t-95), the numerical value of the letter ulif being
one. There is a play on the words {alf) ‘ a thousand.' and the letter
tilif.

® 8cU, the Mai linzii-l-.idini, , the Salaiman-u-Bilqts, the Haft Kishwar. and
the Akbanidma.

308

426

The story-tellers of the market-place base their stones on
their dreams ;

But I have awoken from such stories.

This is the arena of those who have traversed the heavens
And in it valiant heroes are to be descried;

Scribes whose very breath breathes magic, with the points
of their pens

Have completed the adornment of this epic.

I also, for the sake of making a name in the world.

Have with my skill in words made a talisman.

I melted down both my heart and my tongue
In displaying this picture to the world.

When my genius scattered its wit into pen,

The pen poured the water of life into the inkstand ;

The Messiah saw musk in a moist bladder
And dried it with His breath.

Is this an inkstand filled with ambergris.

Or a censer emitting smoke of ambergris ?

When this lofty dome (the sky) became my cradle
The year was 954 (a.d. 1547).'

Now that I have spent forty-nine years in this monastery
I have passed through the seventy-two sects (of Islam)

My meeting- place has been in the idol-temples of India,
The fire-temples of Persia have been in my heart.

With a hnudred incantations and magical devices
Have I cleaned from the mirror of the king’s heai-t the scum
of rust.*

This day, among the great tribe of the ages
The sky beat the naubat for me on the roof ; *

I Faizi refers to his own birth in that year. I'tde p. 41 1. n. 1. The nert
verse fixes the date of the completion of this poem.

® It is obvions that this conclusion * of the Nal’ii-Daman does not consist
of the conplets written in praise of the propliet and on his ascent, men-
tioned on p. 422. Here F*i/i. after boasting of hi.s clecticism mentions with
pride his part in weaning Akbar from orthodoxy. The whole extract con-
sists of the glorifitsition of Akbar and the poet, chiefly the latter.

The naubat was the daily music played at stated hours over the gate
houses of the emperor and some of the chief grandees.

427

Eloquence, that King who has been my surety,

Has enthroned himself on my tongue.

I hav^e become both the equal of the amirs
And the prince of poets.

In every direction I go, uttering my wise words.

The ranks of mystic significations bow the knee to me.

Since love entered into niy mind

I have become the adorner of the diadem which is over the
nine thrones of the heavens.

The valiant swordsmen of the kingdom of rhetoric.

The archers of the battle of pretensions.

When they cast their eyes on my forces.

Cast down their shields in the field before me.

My pen, on account of my great fame
W lites as ray autograph, ‘ He who is mighty in speech ’ ;

‘ The pride of the philosophers ' is the writing on my fore-
head.

‘ The greatest ' of the poets ’ is the device on my seal.

The heavenly Key has opened

To my thoughts the door of mystic significations.

When my breath gave birth to this poem

Khizf came, and bestowed on me his length of days.

If the door has been opened before me
My poems have also been endued with long life.

If I reckon up all that both worlds can give
I find it to be but dust from the stour^ which I have raised.
This pen, which has tiavei’sed the whole of my poem.
Drives its splinters under the nails of bad penmanship.*

See now the drift of this book, which shall last for ever.

See boundle.ss wisdom concealed in (boundless) love.

‘ Literally, ‘ the seal,’ i.e. the last and greatest.

■2 The guardian of the water of life

^ ‘ Dust in motion.’ I know of no Ei"ili>~h word by which to translate
‘ dust in motion ’ as opposed to (ffard) * dust at rest ’

* Faizi here praises Ins penmanship. Driving eplioters nnder the nails is
a well-known turtnre. The meaning of the verse is that other penmen wUl
be torfun d by owing to tiie excellence of his handwritiug

309

428

Those who are not dninb before this splendour
Are men who are not admitted to the pri?y chamber of
imagination.

As for him whose business is with words,

Let the age endow him with justice.

It is the practice of those of meagre wit
Ever to gibe at tlieir contemporaries :

What of those who have fallen asleep, wrapped in cne sheet
of the earth ?

Knowest thon what they said of tlie men of their time ?
And those who shall oh^cnre my light with smoke
Will I afflict in their eyes (with their smoke). ^

Moreover, a time will come when I shall be no more.

And shall no longer be the nightingale of this garden ;
Then those who struck a thorn into my rose
Shall sigh for sorrow over my shrine.

0 thon who hast pom...d the lees of the draught into my
pare wine

Pluck but a rose of the spring of justice.

Or else take my goods at my valuation ;

Look to their worth and consider yourself fortunate in me.
In the morning, when I sing in this meadow
My melodies shed a hundred gardens of flowers.

1 am humble as dust in the path of true appraisers
Who this day, despite the ungrateful,

310 When they opened this treasure from my stock.

Cast on it a glance which justly estimated it
And looked (with pity) on other unfortunates.

They, like the ocean, teemed with gems

And the diver who brought the gems to the surface
delighted in their commendation.

Art is intensely jealous of love

For I have compounded this poem with love’s magic.

This pen is the sonice of great wonder

That from a dry reed such moist sweetness should flow.

1 This verse may also mean, ‘I will hold them excused, owing to (the
badness ot) their eyesight.

429

This breath of mine is a monatnent to love,

For it is vapour which arises from my inward fervoni.
Fayyazi on this incantation of thine
How long wilt thou dilate ?

It is best that thou shonld’st bring thy tale to a close
Before thou becomest, thyself, no more than a tale.

O thou consumed with love restrain thy breath ;

Have done with love’s tale, have done ! ”

CVIII. FiRisT ‘

His name is Sharif, and he is the son of KLwaja ‘ Abdn-s-
Samad the painter. He is a youth lately come to man’s estate,
and he is unrivalled in beauty of penmanship and in painting

I Muhammad Sharif was the school companion of SnltSn Salim, who was
much attached to him. When Salim rebelled against his father Sharif was
sent to bring him to his senses, but only widened the breach. Cn Salim’s
reconciliation with his father gharif had to flee to the bills and jungles, and
was brought to the verge of starvation. On Salim’s accession to the throne
Sharif at once joined him, and was appointed a commander of five thousand,
and vaUl and chief minister of state. In Akbnr’s reign Sharif had been a
commander of two hundred, and Salim, when in rebellion, had appointed
him commander of two thousand five hundred and governor of Bihar.
Jahangir says of him (Tiirufc, p. 6), “ By bis coming niy heart was much
rejoiced for the nature of his services to me is such that I regard him as a
brotner, a son, a friend and a companion. As I had complete confidence in
his sincerity, his intelligence, his wisdom, and his experience of business I
appointed him lakil and chief miuister of state, and conferred on him the
exalted title of Anuru-l-umnr/i, than which no higher title is conferred on.
any servant of the state, and I honoured him with the title of Commander
of Five Tliousand, and the command of five thousand horse, though his rank
was such that I iva.s inclined to appoint him to a higher command 3e,
however, said at last that be would accept r.o higher command until he should
have rendered some conspicuous service.’’ Mr. Biochmann (din. .5, 7)
hits inistransiated this pas.“age. In 1B07 iTiizuk. p. 50) Sharif fell sick, and
Asaf Khan was appointed to officiate for him. On his recovery he was
sent to tlie Dakan hut was recalled as he could not agree with the
KhanHiarian. He was sent .again to the Dakan, and there died a natural
death in November, 1612 (Tinnl:, p. 113).

^arii’.s father Abdu-s-Samad was a Shirazi He held command of *100
horse and received from Akhar the title of Zunri-ijnlom (’golden pen ’,.
Vide Ain-i-Akbari, i, 495, 5, 7.

55

4S0

It is well known that his father wrote in full, and in a good and
legible hand, on one side of a poppy seed, the Suratu-l-lkhlas,'
and on the other side of it the argument of the chapter ; and they
say that his son, Sharif, bored in one poppy seed eight small holes,
and passed wires through them, and that he drew, on a grain of
rice, a picture of an armed horseman, preceded by an outrider, and
bearing all the things proper to a norseman such as a sword, a
shield, a polo-stick, et cetera.

i^arif has a pleasant nature. He has composed a divau and
the following verses were selected by him from his wonts and
given to me (for in.sertion in thi.s work).

“ They who wander by night in the grief of longing after thee
cau.se me to weep.

For they travel over the road by the iftys of that light of
Thine.

311 Clemency is Thine, but I am all -^n.

When Thou pardonest such aruiie as me all will sin.”

“ I sift tne spai-KS of ,uy lamentations in the sieve of respect
Lest, perchance, their harsh sound should strike thy ear.”

“ By the blessing of love 1 am at perfect peace with both
world.s,

Do thou become my enemy and see with what friendliness
I shall treat thee.”

“ The spacious field of my breast is so full of love
That, in spite of my earne.st desire, there is no room for
more.”

“ Prosperity is no assisbance in our path
We have recognized the Friend in another form.”

1 Vide p. 322, note 2.

431

A Masnavi.

“ I have a grief for which may all joys be sacrificed ;

May God guard my grief from the evil eye.

When my heart admitted the fire which buimt within me
Even resignation became a stranger to it.”

“ If she has taken my heart O God, carry to her nostrils
The odour of separation, which was mingled with my
heart’s blood.”

“ Why should I sing of my genius or boast of my intellect ?
The fact that I am generous * disproves my boast.’

“ 0 intellect, how long empty-handed in the market of love
Wilt then ask the price of the goods and blush for what
thou hast to offer in exchange ? ”

A quatrain.

I have a love which is my religion and my faith.

I have a pain which is chief over all niy possessions.

Should love he parted from me it will die
Saying, ‘ Sharif -i-Parisi is my soul.’ ”

“ To have in the breast beauty of the heart i.-i such a wonder
That it is pointed out like the new moon, when it can only
just be seen.”

“ The price of gratitude, that unsaleable commodity, has risen
Because no caravan arrives from the land of grief.’

“ Cast not away the heart which thou hast stolen.
Carry a treasure, although it may seem hpavj'.”

“ O zephjT, bear this message to love, ‘ Take courage, for we
are gone,

1 (Kirdm)j the word is plnral, bat evidently refers to the speaker.

( Kurrdm) ‘ very generous ' would fit the Beuse^ bat not the metre

312

432

No more will the dust of thy street be turned into mire by
tears

I am silent from jealousy, not from pride of love,

For no speech, save of thee, passes on my tongue.”

CIX. QararI op GiLiu.i

He was the son of Mulla ‘jlbdu-r- Razzaq, and full brother to
Hakim Abu-l-Fath^ and ^akim Hnmam.® He had many accom-
plishments and virtues, among them being poetry, penmanship
and studiousness, and he was endowed with the qualities of an
inclination to holy poverty and humility.

When he first came to court the emperor ordered him to be put
313 on duty with ins brothers, and, when the guard turned out to
salute the emperor, as he did not know how to put on a sword he
appeared in the midst disordered in his dress. Some of the
young wits expressed their surprise at this, but he said, ‘ Soldier-
ing does not suit men like me,’ and told that story of the --krair
Timur, ^nhib Qiran,* who, in one of his battles, drew up his army
in a certain position, and ordered that the laden camels, and the

1 Qarari is thus described in the Ain-i-Akharl (i, 586), ‘ His name is Nurn*
d-din. He is a man of keen nnderstanding nnd of lofty thoughts. A carious
monotcania seized him He looked upon his elder brother, tne doctor Abu.
1-Fatb, as the personification of the world, .and the doctor Humam as the
man wlio represents the life to come, for which reason he kept aloof from
them ’ AbU'1-Pazl is sarcastic at the expense of Niiru-d-din. Nuru-d-din
accused his brother Abu-l-Fath of intense worldliness, and described his otlier
brother, Humam, as one who was religious for the sake of the pleasures of
Paradise, while he himself was truly religious, loving Hod with no motive
but love. In the Tahnqdf Qarari is thus described : ‘ Qariiri of Gilau is the
brother of Hakim AbQ-l-Fath. By the emperor’s order he was transferred
from service at court to Bengal, where he died ’

Nuru-d-diu Mnhimmad came to India with .his two brothers in AD. 157.5
.According to the Ata^'cadU'i/i-Azni'l he ita-l ’oeen in the service of Kh ar.
Ahmad Kh an in Gilim, and went, after the overthrow of Gilan, to Qazvin.

* Vide pp. 233, 234 and notes.

3 Vide p 234 and note.

A The gre.it Timur, Akbar’s ancestor, called in English histories ‘ Tamer"
lane.’ Sihib-i^irdn, his well-known title, me.ans ’Lord of the (fortunate)
eonjnnction.’ and has reference to a conjunction of the planets at his birth.

433

footmen, and all beasts with their burdens should take up a posi-
tion of safety behind the troops, and tliat the ladies slumld
remain in rear of the army. At this moment the learned men *
asked where their phice sliould be, and Timhr replied, ‘ Behind
the ladies.’ When this story was repeated to Akbar as a rare
piece of wit on the part of Qarari he ordere<l that he should be
sent to Bengal. He went thither, and there rendered up his soul
to God * during the I’chellion against Muzaffar Khan’s authority, *
The following verses ai’e produolions of his genius : —

“What fear is there if the whole world should become lovers
of Laila,

So long as Laila’s heart inclines only towards Majuuii ? ’’

“ For the sake of my grief Heaven confers on me a nature
like that of the Friend *

If I make of my darkly-clad lot a mouthful of fire.”

t Literally, ‘ the lords of turbans, ’ a common expression for learned men
who:are distinomsbed by the tnrbaii as soldiers are by a helmet or militarv
bat.

* (Huqiii MS. (A) has lylijliu tbi-Khaiinan-i-ajnll i ‘ to the

treasurers of erermty.’

3 Mu/aSar Khan, governor of Bengal, was slain by the rebels in a.i). 1.579.
' and during those turmoils Hakim Nuru-d din Q.irari passed from the world.
Vide vol. ii, text, p. 292.

♦ JJbk (Khalii). Abraham, ‘ the Friend of God/ The reference is to
the legend of Abraham’s persecution. Abraham had broken the idols of the
Chaidaeans, or, according to tne Jewish letreud, the idols in his father’s shop,
and Na»iirud (Nii:irod)ordered him to be burnt. A large space was enclosed
at Kutha and filled with a vast quantity of Twood which, being set on fire,
burned so fiercely that none dared venture near it. Abraham was projected
into the fire by means of an engme, but Gabriel was sent to las assistant-v
and the lire burnt only the cords wnico Iwund him, and became to him 5 .
sweet and odorifemna breeze while the pile beC'ime a pleas. vnc rneadovi
Notwithstanding this the fire raged ho foriouslv otherwise that about two
thousand of th« idolaters were consumed by it. The bgend resembles in
many respects the account of the atterui*t to burn Anattias, Azarias and
Misael, as given in the third chapter of tiie Book of Daniel in the V ulgate, but
is supposed to Imre had its origin in the translation of the proper name * Ur
of the Chaldees,’ the city whence Abraham was brought by God, the propei
name meaning ‘ fire.*

434

*■ What accusation shall I make against Death ? I have
received an arrow from thy eye
Which would have killed me, even though I did not die
for a hundred years.”

I am illumined, as a candle, by the fire of thy love,
I humbly bum, even in my tomb.”

“ An ocean of fire is raging from my burning heart.
Tell IToah to flee, for my flood sbeds fire around.”

“ My grief is this, that however much I am persecuted by
thee

314 The delig-bt of being persecuted by thee leaves my heart

before I have well experienced it.”

“ Of her cruelty all that I ask is more wounds for my
wounded heart,

I am not solicitous for her favour ; all I desire is her
cruelty.

I am distracted by the pain of separation ; O love, for ages

Have I desired to be di>traeted but for a moment by the
delight of seeing thee !

O O

" God forbid that our hearts should be beyond the need of
the sight of her.

For we are entirely guiltless, and she is beyond all need.”

“ I am rejoiced at the duration of our separation, for now I
shall be able

To approach her and make advances as though I were a
.stranger.'’

435

A quatrain.

“ If I be seethed in the caldron of God’s wrath.

If I he placed in the flames of hell,

This will be better than that my sins should, of mere favour,
be forgiven

While I am left to bum in the fire of shame ’’

4 quatrain.

“ If the love of my heart should fina a buyer
I should do something that would reveal my true self,

I should so shake out my prayer-carpet of ab.stinence
That from each thread of it a hundred idolaters’ sacred
tlireads would fall.”

“ If I drive from my heart regret for iny union with thee
It will be better than that I should increase the resrret of
my heart by meeting with thee

CX. QaosI^

He was in the service of the i^han-i-Kalan, * and was unequalled
in these days for tlie carving of toothpicks, comb, and sucli
articles. He once wrote the following couplet in a fair band on
the pointed end ' of a toothpick.

“ The affairs of Qau.si have been thrown into confusion by
the ringlets of his love ;

His affairs are ever twisted in a iiundred places like the
ringlets of his love.”

1 The poet apparently means to say that as the union must necessarily be
transient he will do well to refraiti from seeking to renew oosli it and his

This poet is mentioned neither in the Ain nt>r in the Tibat^dt. His hikf/ii-

13 not. pointed in the text, nor in the Mss. If it 13 as I have written n,
itsigriitiss ‘of, or relating to. a bow, the rainbow, or Sagictarins.* It may,
however, be y/i-/, in which case it would signify ‘of or relsti.ig to a cloister
eeli, or monastety.’

Llfler brotbpr of Ataga Kh an. Vide p 308 and note -

‘ The texr m..

{hanjara an exotes.'ion wh><^h hy.-^

GLi'/.-'Jed thp v'ditor. The true reading is, beyond a doebt
(Khavjoya. .fiAdildU) witli the raeani'ig giv'tn bv me.

315

436

CXI. QiiDl OF ShTrar,'

He came from the glorious city of Makkah and at once entered
tlie emperor’s service and received an appointment near his person.
One day before the court he said to the emperor. ‘‘ Hen are much
harassed by thi.s new rei^ulation of the dn gh-n- nt ahulW^ which Your
Majesty has invented.’ and from that time forth he was debarred
from court and never again girded hi.s loin.s in service. For some
time he wandered about in the Biyana district as a ipdandar'^ and
then came to Pathphr, where he suffered from haemorrhoids and
hectic fever. A quack whom he consulted cut the veins of hi.s
fundament, and he died under the treatment. He was of an
extremely cheerful disposition.

The following verses are b\- him ; —

“ The lover has much of the merchandise of complaints, it
will be better

That he open not his pack until the market daj- of the
resurrection.”

“ 0 thou who hast never wandered from thy place in my
heart,

I marvel that thou should’st have found a place in the
hearts of all ! ”

'• Though I be dying and no other comes to hid her farewell.

Hasten, camel driver, for her littei departs ! ”

*■ What ointment of thv favour is there on niv heart
That melts not my .soul more than all thebr.ituls of regret ? ”

t Qaidi is thus dp.scribpit in th- .-foi (i. 599), ‘ Up spout some time in the
acquisition ot sueh scienros a, ni" usually .~tiidipd , but lie thinks muob of
himself ’ The foli.'vrinit is tl ■* -tcconiit trivon I, th,- ■ Mull ; QanlT of

Shiraz came fi'oin Makkah, i-ntored the innn-ria! ^orvico, and \v,.s honoured
by m iny inai ks of favour. ITi- died in Patbpiir .Sikii. Tn th .-c pedition to
Kabul he shaied the anthoi's (Ni/ano.-d-diu Ahmad’,..) tpiarn i.- ’

S Ketr.ilatioi.s by Akbar pi event tlm grandep, and oiK.nrs Inm, drawing
pay for e-ra ..hsbmtnts « hi ■. t'n-y did not keep up They , r, ii u entircK
ne«,hur iiad se!d,.m been strictly enforc-d anii w n e nim ,i , as .ill

interference with cast'. nia-j euibezz enieni i,s intlie E.ist. V i. t.-rt o !"m

S A waiiderinsr drzrrish a ho ; fnv. o r.'.. all worlclv desire.s.

437

CXI I. Q^riRT.'

He had some poetical genius. The following couplet is his: —

“ Love’s madness gives me not so much grace that niy soul

Ma\ know how it is to come forth and be laid as an offering
at her feet."’

cxiir. Qaxdl*

He cann' from Transoxianav. to jlgra in the time of Bairam
Khan, and there studied. 1 have seen no poetry of liis hnt the
following ode : —

“ The hermitage in which I follow my devotions is a corner
of the wine-shop,

The ecstatic shriek ^ which 1 hear is the shout of tin
drunkards ;

My patclu'd robe of devotion and piety has been pawned foi
wine.

The gurgling of the wine fla.sk is for me the murmur ol
prayer and praise.

Qandi was jouineying, destitute, towards the temple <'i
Makkah,

When a lovely being waylaid him and he tin ned aside to
the idol-temple.”

CXIV. Kami.

This is the poetical name of ilir ‘Ala-u-d-danlah,^ the authoi
it the T,i:kir(itu-^-Shn‘arri which i.s the source from which
this treatise lias been compiled. It is superfluous to deset ibe liiin
and to quote hi.s poems here even if it were not the ca.se that the
author is a poor judge of poetry and 1 -= ill qualified to make selec-
tions. It is better that I should recount my own deficiencies than
that I should leave it to be done by other.s. Most of the couplets
which I have wnutten in imitation of others will bear out what 1
say.

^ Qadri is not nienlioneci as a poet either in the or in the Tahoqd'

- Qandi is not'ir^ntioned in the Aln^ nor in the TabaudK

^ One of the perfor. nances of the in their * worship ' Tti. j p, 92.

* Vide p. 23!) and note 1.

50

438

CXV. KDi.AHi.1

He is acquainted witL several branches of learning, and he
received the title of Afzal Khan. He came to Hindustan from
the Dak an and was enrolled for some rime among the doctors of
the sacred law. On the occasion on which Mirza Muqim and
Mir Haba^ii were put to deaths by the sentence of Mulla ‘Abdii-
’llah of Labor on a charge of heresy and of cursiug the com-
panions of Miihammads he fled in terror* from this countiy to the
Dakan and departed thence for the next world. The following
verses are his : —

“ I tell love’s secret to none but my own heart.

For my heart hears the woid which I speak, and tells it not
again.”

“I placed my head on her feet, but she was vexed with me.

When I .'■eized her skirt she snatched it away and passed
from me.”

“H ow long will the jealous watcher oppose my passing
through that doi;r?

He girds up his loins in enmity against me. O Lord, let
him not gird up his loins ! ”

“ Whenever the eucniy comes to war against thee with helmet
on head.

When thou in battle 'Uiitest his helmet witii thy sword,

1 Kiilah; ;s I'Ot mpmiotipd fis a poet in the Jin or in tL-' Talaqat.

2 Tide tB.M vol. ii, pp. Idi, 19S. ioo. The latter two pa^es contain refer-
ences to the eteenticni oi Mir tfaba^. Froni thi.s passage it is evident that
he siitfereo witn Mirza Muoiin.

'i ^ ( tJ-curru) ndt' voj. irans. Raukiii^, pp. 576, 577 and noie 5. I
'nay add to Raidiint? s note that th<* word is coramonlv applied co

actual reviIipbC Abii B‘-ki. ‘urnar, and ’U tiini.in.

+ It is Clear rhat Kulahi w'as a Shf ah. Tiif kibirdoin in the Dakan from
which iH‘ eaum not ifjentioJied. Of the Muhammadan Kiogs in the Dak-'n
the Qurb Kings of liolkuiula without exception, the 'Adii Shahi

of Bijaphr wiili one exception, and the NiKim .^ahl Kings of Aliniadnas'ir
with veiy fe v evccpiiotis, v ere 3hf^ak'>.

439

(The sword) cleaves his helmet as a pen divides the
columns on the paper, and, with the red blood.

Draws a ruled column on the page of the field of battle. "

CXVl. KalImI.*

He is of Caghatai descent and was foi- along time in Sind. He
used to be constantly arguing and wrangling with Mnlla Xiyazi.*
He came from Bakar,® and was for some time in .Agra. He
writes poetry after the style of the men of Transoxiana. The
following verses are his : —

“ I attempted to close the road against my tears by thinkiuir
on thy ringlets.

But water is not to be bound with a chain.”

“ Thy face is the fountain of love, and drops of sweat
Like bubbles appear everywhere on it.

Look on the bud of my bleeding heart and .see
How it has been cleft once and again by my love’s sword,
and is smiling.”

,Sit for a moment, of thy grace, in the eyes of Kalami,

For there is to be found a purified corner, and water will be
in thy sight.”

CXVIl. Ka-mT ok Qrii.^

He is a youth lately arrived at man’s estate and has recently^
come to Hindustan. His dispo.sition is not without sprightlines.s.
The following couplet is his : —

^ SalaTtii is not mentioned, either in the Ain or in the Tahagai, as a poet.

* Vide infra No CLIII.

S The capital of a rarVdr, or revenue district, in the Suhah of Multan,
t ids Ain-i-Akbari, ii, p. 333.

^ Kami is thus described in the Tabutjdt : ' He is a youth lately arrived
at man's e.state, and has a poet's tongue.' In the din (i, p. 160) he is called
Kami of Sabzavar and Abu-1-Fazl remarks that his mind is somewhat un-
settled. Mr. Blochmann adds the following note: ' Kami's father, Kh waja
Yahya, was a grocer, and lived in the Maidan Mahallah of Sabzav^, in

44U

“ My whole body would turn to blood and flow out at my eyes
It I knew that weeping would be of any avail.”

CXVIII. LiQa'T ok ASTARiHAD.’

He is an epitome of many accomplishments. He was for some
time with the Khanzaman. The following couplet is from hi--
poems ; —

My tongue made mention of my heart-subduing sword,

^lay it be well with the speech that I uttered.” ^

CXIX. LiwaT.»

He was descended from one of the holy men of Sabzavar. He
li.id a pretty wit, and was for some time in service at court. 'J'he
following verses are his: —

“ When the stranger comes towards thee to see thee
T stand between thee and him, that haply he may not see
thee.”

‘* i speak not of thee to the stranger
Lest desire For tliee should find a place in lus heart.”

“ When the lewd mention with lubricity the names of their
ligbts-o’-love

1 ever fear lest, by some error, thy name should be men-
tioned.”

Khuraasn. Occasionally he wrote poems. When the Uzbaks took Sabzavar
Mir Yahja went to India and left Kami, then twelve years old, with one of
his relations in Sabzavar At the request of his father Kami came to India,
and was frequently with the Khankhrinan. He went afterwards back to
|yinras.an, and the author of the Ma’afir-i-Rahimt saw him, in A.H, 1014
(a.o. 160.5-56), ill Hirat. While travellintf from Hir-it to his home he was
killed by robbers, who carried off the property which he had acquired in the
Kh aiikliatiSn’s service.

The Hnft [qUm says that his poems are oood, hut that he was irascible and
narrow-minded.’

J Liqa i is menciont d neither in --Ifn nor in the Tahaqat.

^ l.e. may it oom<' true.

i Liwa’i is mentioned in the Ain (i. 613,! as I'irzada, nephew of Mir Daviin
of Khurasan, a singer and chanter.’

441

In A.H. 995 (a.i>. 1587j in Labor, a wall, blown down by some
ill wind, fell on bis bead, and tbe coin of his life was whirled
away by the breeze. As be was unrivalled as a singer and chantei'
this chronogram was composed on the event : —

Alas, that by the efforts of the unjnst sky
A nightingale of sweet song is gone from the garden !

He wa.s so smitten on the loins by a whirlint; stone
That he was wounded and went from our midst.

1 asked of wisdom the date of his death,

And received the answer, ‘ The Pirsada has gone from
the world.’ ” '

CXX. La'ci-S

He is La‘I Beg, tlie son of ^ah Qnli Sultan of Badaldi-

shan. He is a young man of exceeding nobility of disposition,
and is distinguished by the delicacy of his beauty, and as well
knowm for the purity of his nature as for his beauty of form. He
is remarkable for liis good manners, his humility, his amiable di.s-
position, his courtesy, and his modesty, and he is one of the inti-
mate associates of the emperor. At the present time afarmun has
been issued from court to him in the Dakan ordering him to leave
the service of Sultan Mnrad ® and to join the court at Labor. He
is very well read in history, and in travels. The author is bound
to him by bonds of mutual acquaintance and great regard.

He sometimes occupies himself with poetry, and the following
cou])let fi'oni bis poems remains in the author’s memor 3 ' : —

“ Since I have become as the dust of the road in thy path 1
fear

Lest thou should not pass by me, but should take auorlui-
way.”

' OJj jl Ti'C letters hnre the following values . 2 + 10 +

200 + 7+1+4 + 5 + 1 + 7 + 3 + 5+1 + 50 + 200 + 80 + 400 = 976. The chroni)-
gram is tlms wrong by no less than 19 years.

I have not been able to discover any mention elsewhere of La'li or
his father.

^ Akbar’s second surviving son, at this time (a.d. 1595} employed in the
Dakan.

442

CXXI. LutFI the AbTEOLO(iER.'

He was a good boon eompauiou, and had by heart so many of
the verses of the great masters of poetry that he could in one
night recite a thousand verses on any subject. He also imitated
the gp’eat poets well. He was for some time with Mirza Nizamu-
d-din A^mad in Gujarat, and by his efforts received a fixed sum
of money granted for the purpose of enabling him to travel, and
embarked on a sea-voyage. The following couplets are by him : —
“ That face like the pomegranate flower became like a par-
terre of roses from the glow of wine,

O rose-sellers, good news ! Roses are plentiful.”

“ In the breeze of the rose-garden I smelt but the odour of
thee.

I passed by no rose but it wafted to me the odour of my
love.”

“If my heart becomes a flame of tire, what tlienf It will
wither away.

If the rose of my fate blossom from paradise, what then f
It will fade.” _____

“ Each sigh that I heaved over thee in regret

Has become a palm-tree to adoni the meadow of my
repentance. ’

CXXII, JMTr Mokt.iza SrarTfI ok ^fR.iz '

He was the grandson of Mir Sayyid Sharif-i-Jarjani.® (mav
his tomb be hallowed). In the exact sciences, in v.irious bran-

1 MS. (A) calls ttis poet ' Mil Latfi.’ la the Tahaqdt he is thus rleseribed —

‘ ilulla I.ntfi the Astrologer composed good ettempore verseo, and could
l ecite as many as a thousand couplets at one sitting. He w.as a o-ood com-
panion over the bottle, and a mifnic He understood astrology well, and was
ii. the company of the anthor fur severa' vears.'

^ Mir Murra, 1 is mentioned in the Air, {i. 540! as one of the learned men
of the third d.’grce, acquainted with philosophy and theology,

'• Vide vol. ii, text, p. 84, where ll'r Sayyid .Sharif is thus described ; ‘ that
paragon of mankind, the eleventh intel'.igenco ! ’ From this passage it

443

dies of philosophy, in logic, and in metaphysics he excelled all
the learned men of the age. He went from Shiraz to the glorious
city of Makkah, and there studied the Traditions ' under Shaikh
Ibn Bajar and received a teaching diploma. Thence he went to
the Dakan, and from the Dakan he came to .Sgra, where he
attained a higher position than most learned and erudite men of
foi mer or recent times. He employed himself in giving instruc-
tion in arts and sciences until, in the year H. 9/4 (a.d. 1566-67),
as has already been said,^ he depaited to Paradise. His body,
which was at first interred near that of Mir KhusraV^ (God s
mercy be on him), was taken to Mashliad, and Mir MuhsinRizavi ^
found the following chronogram for his death : —

“ When Mir Murtaza left this world
It was as though knowledge departed from the race of Adam.
To give the date of his departure Mnhsin
Said, ‘ A paragon has departed from the world. ” ^

The following couplet is one of tlie productions of the Mir s
noble genius : —

Ease of heart is not to be obtained from material possessions.
The seed of ease of the heart is in the dispersal of material
possessions.”

It is probable that the source of this couplet is tuat passage in

appears tiiat MTr llurta?a Sharlfi was one of those sent, in 1566. to tl.e
Kh iuizaman. to convev to itini the emperur^s forgiveness, and to exhort him
to repemooco for his rehellion.

^ \hr.d 2 ^) the ‘sayings' of Muhaniinail-

2 Vid^ vol.ii, tc-xt,p. 99. “ In this jear (a h. 9741 that paragon of the

age, Mir Murtaza Sharifi of Shirfiz, pas-sed from this illusory world, and
v.as at first buried m Uihll, near the tomb of Mir ^usrav (on him be tzod s
mercy). But the Sa/ir, and the Qizi, htuI tl.e ShaMa-l-Ulahi., then repre-
.sented that as M.ir Kdi asrav was a native of India and a Snntit and Mir
Martaza a native of ‘ Iraq and a heietic, Mir Khusrav would be annoyed by
fais comnariy, for there is no doubt that ' the companionship of an unworthy
man is a grievous torment to the soul.’ It was therefore ordered that he
should be remuveil fiom there andbuiied elsewdiere, and thus, as is evident
great injustice was done to both ’’

i The famous poet of Dihli.

’ Vide no. CXXIV.

5 vi-rj \ dwilh The sum of the numerical values of the letters is 974.

444

tlie Lawa'ih • in which it is said that some have believed that
contentment consisted in the accumulation of material possessions
and consequently remain in disti-action to all eternity, while otbei-s,
knowing for certain that the accumulation of material possessions
is one of the causes of distraction, have washed their hands of all
things.

CXXIII. MahwI.*

This is the poetical name of Mir Mahmud the who wa.s

for twenty-five years chief secretary to tlie empire of Hindustan.
His dangliter married Naqib Khan.-’ He had some poetical
talent, and wrote poetry like a secretary. The following quati ain
is one which he wrote at the beginning of the divan of Bairam
Khan : —

“ Of being and of a place of existence there was in the begin-
ning no trace,

For all things came into being by virtue of the two letters
of the command ‘ Be.’

Since these two letters were the key of existence

They have become the opening couplet of the preface to the
divan of things seen.”*

The following is another quatrain of hi.s, an enigma on the
name ‘ Qasim ’ : —

1 Probably tbe Lawd' ih-i-Jami, a work on ethics by tbe famous Persian
poet, Mulla ‘ Abdn-r-Bahinitn-i'Jami.

2 Mir Mahmud not mentioned as a poet in tbe Ai'n, or in the I'abaqdt.
Mir Moghis, who also had this takhallu^ is mentioned in both works.

3 Mir Ghiyisn-d'din ‘Ali, son of Mir *Abdn-l-Latif, a Saifi Sayyid of
Qazvin. He was a commander of nine hundred under Akbar. He came to
India with his fatlier while Akbar, after his accession, was still in the Panjab-
He was Akbar*s reader, was very proficient in history, wrote several portions
of the TdriiA-i’AlJi and snperinreuded the translations from Sanskrt into
Persian. On the accession of Jahangir he was made a commander of fifteen
hundred. Ho died at Ajmer in a b. 1023 (ad. 16l4j and was buried besitle
his wife within the encIo>ure of Mn‘inii.d-din Ci^tl’s tomb.

^ iShnhud). '1 he word has several meanings. Its meaning here may

perhaps be that attached to it by the Sufis^ * the sight of God * ‘ r}ie beatific
visicu.*

445

“ There is a capricious one the dust of whose door-step is my
lodging.

From whom I have gained naught but cruelty and oppres-
sion.

When I see her face over the corner of ttie roof
Her eye shoots the arrow of cruelty at my heart.”

Tliis is a couplet of his : —

Perfume not the jasmine with musk,

Draw not a line of ambergris around tiie sun ”

He wrote the following quatrain to describe a horse which had
been given to him by the emperor Humayun : —

0 King with an army like that of Jam.shid, monarch of
boundless power,

1 have a hoi-se which is exceedingly lean and weak ;

When I mount him, at every two or three steps which he

takes

He falls, saying, ‘ Now you carry me for two oi' thiee steps.’ ”

The source of this quatiain is certainly that well-known
couplet, by whom I know not ; —

“ He goes one or two steps and then says,

‘ Now do you carry me for an hour or so ? ’ ”

Following the idea expressed in the following couplet by a
master of poetry,

“ O lovely one with heart of stone and body of silver,^

Who.se lip is comfort and whose glance is destruction”

lie wrote the following ode in two metres * : —

” O thou whose lovely face is the envy of the jasmine,

\\ hose comely stature is the cypress of the meadow

t The text has ) ' fat,’ ‘ plump,’ but tbe metre requires

(s'nniH) * of silver.’

2 There are many Hyllilies wliieh muy be, by theruWs ol Persian prosody,
either or ^ong, aitd tl»e art of the eompositiun deseribed dousuis in the

iutro«\uct*on of syllabios of this uature iu such posiiiuus that the poem may
be read iu two metres. The two metres iu which this ode may be read are
these thown as Bahi-i’&ar *' and A

Whose laughing lip is a load of sugar,

Whose row of teeth is a string of pearls from ‘Adan,

Whose musky locks are a net of calamity,

Whose narcissus-like bewitching eye is seduction’s self ;

Thy fawn’s eyes are hunters of men.

Thy glance, drawing blood from the heart, shoots sharp
arrows,

Thy ringlets work naught but magic.

The glances of thy eyes seek but to draw blood from the
heart.

The dow'ii newly sprung draws on the jasmine of thy cheek
a life-giving line of mask.

Of thy grace cast a glance towards Wahwi
O lovely one with heart of stone and body of silver ! '

Shaikh Faizi also, in the days of his ignorance and while he
was yet a boy, practised the same metrical trick, and wrote the
following ode in four metres ' : —

‘‘ O thou, whose goodly figure resembles a moving cypress.
Whose arched eyebrow is bent like a bow.

The curl of whose locks is a snare of love’s madness,
Whose dark ringlet is the desire of Paradise,

Thy bewitching lip is the water of life,

The lovely down on thy cheek is the Khizr of t.i ;.. days.
Thy fawg’s eyes are calamity’s self,

Even a raging tiger would fall hefoie the eyes of such a
fawn.

The wretched Faizi is bound in the bonds of thy locks,

All the world is smitten with thy dark ringlets.”

One day, about the time when this hasty essay was being
written, Shaikh Faizi saw in my hand the Tazkirah of Mir

fall explanation of these terms wodM involve a long note on Arabic and
Persian prosody which would be of no interest to those who have not mas-
tered its rnles, and snperSnons for those who have.

1 See the last note. The fonr metres in which Fai^i's ode may be read
are: '' I ) Bah} -i-So-rV ‘i-maqtiV , (2) Bnhr-i- KhufU^i-Tnaklibun-i maqtu\ (3) Bohr-
t-Ramal-i-rnuadddas-i-in iqiur, and (4) Bohi -i-Bamal-i-inuaaddas-i-mnkhbua-t-
mabza c

447

‘Ala’u-d-daulah. He snatched it from me, and, tearing out the
leaf containing an account of himself, tore it to pieces, just as
the book of his life was torn to pieces.i I also, in those days
when I had not repented of such vain conceits, composed the
opening couplet of an ode in four metres, a mere piece of trash
which is not worthy of mention. I hope that the generous record-
ing angels have blotted it from the record of my deeds with the
water of forgetfulness.

CXXIV. Mir Mtjhsin RizavI ok Mashhao.-
Hp .sometimes exercises his mind with poetry, and as a poet
stands in the same class as Mir Mahmud the Mtmml, but is rather
superior to him.® The following verses are by Muiisin : —

“ I do not desire her to be kind to me before strangers,

For I fear lest a stranger should see her and be captivated
by her.”

“ One of stature like the cypress and with a mputh like a
rose-bud has stolen my heart.

In the dower of my youth she has disgraced me before tlie
world.”

0 thou, the plant of whose gi-acefnl form is fresh with
the water of life.

The cypress is overcome with shame before thy stature.”

I prefer the word skddnh ( ‘ well-w'atered ’) to Khiirram .
{‘fresh ’) in the first hemistich.

t ‘ The book of his life ‘ is a fie^nrative expression. The nuthor means to
say that Faizi destroyed the leaf as ntterly as his body was afterwards des-
troyed by death. His reason for doing so seems to have been that hr was
ashamed of his childish essay in poetry of several metres.

2 Ri^vi is not mentioned as a poet in the Ain or in the Tabaqat. He wa.s
sent on an emiiassy to the Dakan, from which he retnrned eaily in I57t.
Viiie vol. ii, text. n. 171.

® The author uses a vei-y vague expression here. Its literal ttanslation
is, ‘ He is in the .same world tor carepoiy} as Mir Mahmud the Jfnnfhr. but
more so.’ Whether the words ‘ bnt more so ‘ tnean ‘ rather better ’ or ‘ rar her
worse ’ depends entirely on Badaoni’s estimate of Mir Mahmud’s verse it
the time when the sentence was penned.

418

The following is an enigma by Mm on the word ruh (‘ the
soul ’) ;

“ O thou whose wavy locks waylay souls whom thou chidest,
O thou, the painful longpng for whom pours balm on broken
hearts,

Is it the reflection of thy lip that is seen in water,

Or is it a rose-petal fallen into a cup of wine ?”

The following is another enigma, on the name of Husain
Shah:—

•' How pleasant to me is the habitation in my eyes of that
moonlike beauty !

How pleasant is the acceptable aspect of her moonlike face I
iinhsin has placed his head on her feet.

For her face like the sun, and yet like the moon, is pleasant.” '

CXXV. MacjI.*

325 He was Qasiin ©an of Badakt^shan, one of the well-known
Amirs of tlie emperor Humaynn. He was well acquainted with
the art of poetry and wrote poetry well. He wrote .a masnavi of
six thousand couplets in imitation of the Tusuf-u-Zulaikha (of
Jam!) * from which the following few couplets descriptive of tlie
beloved are extracted : —

“ The pricele.ss jewelled band which bound her hail
Has fallen on her neck, feeling its own worthlessness beside
her hair,

5he has not hung earrings of bright rubies in lier ears
For there are hung distracted hearts.

Fortune, of its great favour, has not adorned
The neck of her dress with pearls like her teeth ;

For as an ornament of the bosom of her goodly dress
Drops of blood fall from her face.*

1 T have not attempted to solve these enigmas The task would be both
dilBcult and anprofi table.

2 This poet is casnally mentioned on p. 31-1 of the text in vol li. but i can
find DO mention of him elsewhere.

3 Vide fi 3 47, note 6.

* Apparently from the hearts hung in her cars.

449

When gold saw itself spumed by her feet
It fell in showers round her feet like fine mnslir.

The whiteness of her ne<‘k, like a camphor candle,

Rises from the bosom of her dress like a cord of light.

The vrhiteness of her arm exceeds that of silver.*

Her fore-arm is as a chaplet of roses hung on pismine
From those two sweet chaplets of hers
Her sleeve.s are filled «ith jasmine.

Her palm is as though she had tasen a rose-petal in her naiiu.
Each finger is like the bud of a lily set upon ii.

Her breast and shoulders, which deprive the mind of sense,
Seem to have taken a harvest of roses into their embrace.
As I am making entries in the register of liei beautj ' !
may say)

That the pure whiteness of her bosom exceeds that of mul: ;
Her two nipples of incomparable beauty.

Are as bubbles on the surface of milk.

Her waist transcends the bounds of description
For here the utmost delicacy is to be seen.”

He has also written" a poem Lailq-u-Majnun of which tbi*.
couplet of his is quoted ; —

“ An old man of an honourable tribe
Whose beard is like a white rose a yard in length.”

The followiiig quatrain, he used to say, occurred to his mine
in a dream ; —

“ O breeze, bring me some news from the street of ray beloved !
Bring to my dyin^ body good news of my life.

It is hard for me to arrive there.

Do me this favour and betake thyself thither swiftly.”

“ The cup-sickness of the wine of grief has made me heavy
headed ;

Come, cup-bearer, and free me from the griefs of the world.'
1 Literally ‘has broken the fore-arm of U e. ‘ has overcome ’) silver.

326

450

“ Cnp-bearer, how long shall we dilate on
What we have snffeied from fate ?

Fill the cnp, that we may for an hour free our hearts of
grief.’ ’

Towards the end of his life he gave up the profession of arms,
resis^ned his appointment, and retired into the comer of seclusion.
How well would it have been with him had he also given up the
writing of poetry ! * His death occurred in Agra, in a.h. 979
(a.d. 1571-72).

CXXV^l. HIrzada ‘Al! Khan.*

He Avas the son of Muhtaram Beg, one of the well-known Amir.'
oi the emperor Humavun. He was a man of pleasing qualities,
and was tf.nd of poetry, and sometimes Avrote it. The following
couplet is his : —

“ In the evening AA'hen thou throwest the A'eil from thy face
The sun, unable to bear tbe dazzling sight, sets.”

He Avas slain in Kashmir in a.h. 996 ® (a.d. 1583) in the battle
ill Avbioh the imperial force.s under Qasim Khan, Mir-i-Buhr,^
A’-ere defeated in a night attack made by Ya‘qub, the son of Yusuf
Khan of Kashmir.

1 Tne author is not casting asppr.siona on Mauji’s verses, but i.s regretting
that lie did not give up a puisuit wliicii is regarded by strict Mii-lims as a
vain, if not uul.iwf'i!. occupation

2 itirzida 'All Khan was ii cotiimander of nim- hnndred. He serA-ed in the
exneilition in ilalwa against ‘Abdu-’llah Khan Uzbak in the nincii year, and
in till' aeventeentii year in tiie war in Oujarat under tiie Kh an-i-Kalan. two
Years later he coriimanded an expe.litioii against Qisiin ^an KasQ in Bihar.
In t)ie tweiitv-tiiiid year he aceomnanied Shahbaz Khan in the war against
Rtna P.irtah He t'nen served in Bihar under the Khau-i-.\‘/am and in Bengal
nude- ghShbaz Khlti. In A.n 15'.5 he Avas present in the iight with Quclu
near Bardnim In 15B6 he was < rdered to join Qasim Khan, who was on his
way to Kashmir Vide Ain-,~A' ‘ irl. i, 443.

I Mr, Bloc’.imann saya i. 443, that he was killed in a.h. 995 (a.d.

1.5S7i in a tig it in which tne Kashmiris defeated an imperial deiachmeat,
nnder Savvid 'Ahila'llah Khiii I do not know wiiat authority there is for
ti.is statement, hut we c.in haidly lefase to accent as correct tiie statement
of Badaoni, who was apparently a personal friend of the poet, and mentions
his death in three passages, here, and in vol ii, I'te.xt) pp. 354, 369,

4 A commander of three thoueaud. and one of Akbai's chief amirs. He

451

CXXVII. Mn'jzzi OF HiEiT.‘

He was a Tabataba’i " Sayyid, and as a boy v/as educated with
KamrSn Mirza ® He was for nearly fifty years in India, and it
was in Hindustan that he departed this life in the year a.h. 982
(a. 0 . 1574-75). The following two couplets aie his; — -

“ How long, 0 sky, wilt thou keep me whirlina: around like 327
a mote in a sunbeam ?

How long wilt thou keep me in e.xiie and destitute ?

“ I said, ‘with a sigh I will drive out grief from my heart.’
3Iy grief is not lessened by sighs. Ah ! What shall I
do ? ”

CXXVIII. Mup.iDi OF Astarabad.*

He was of the Sayyids of .4starabad. He came to Hindustan
and died in a.h. 979 ■ a.d, 1571-72) He is remembered by many
verses which he has left, a few of which are the following: —

“She showed her face from behind the curtain. Ah. this is
indeed the dawn I

This is the perfection of God’s omnipotence in his handi-
work.

Xot even on one night has the star of my desire risen in
thy face;

This is indeed my ill fate and my evil fortune.

See that thou hanker not after delight of the heart, and
ease

In the dast-biu of this world, for tin's is the house of toil.

conquered Kashmir and in the tbirty-fonrtb year was mnde governor of
K&bal. He was mnrdered in a.d. 1593-94 by a yonng^ man who pretended
to be a son of Mirzi ^ahrn^. Vide Ain-i- Akbar'i^ i, 379.

f Mn’izzi is not mentioDed as poet in the Ain, nor in the Ta^'aqdt.

* That is to say, a Sayyid descended from Isma‘li bin Ibrahim, great-
grandsoD of ‘Ali, who was called Tohdidba on accoaut of his prononncing the
letter ^ like i?.

^ Younger brother of Hnmayun, and ancle of Akbar.

4 Moradl is mentioned as a poet neither in the Ain, nor in the Tahaqdt.

452

Yesterday Miiradi passed away to the dust and his love
said,

‘ This is one who has been killed in the path of love by the
stone of cruelty.

0 flood of grief, wash not from my eves the dost of his
road,

For it is to me a memorial of one who, (while he lived),
wa.s as the dost under my feet.’

" It was the blackness ’ of her locks which was all the foun-
dation of my faith,

I am no true Musalman if I tarn my face away from her.
328 Thong h the dog of thy street i.s more hiahly regarded

than I,

Yet I am not a whit behind liim in the path of fidelity.”

'• The lovely ones, who have made their ringlets ornaments
around their faces.

Have taken the people in these snares.”

Absent from that rosy-faced one, my heart is contracted
like a rosebud,

A madman am I, smitten with love’s madness, fighting with
shadows.’’

“ When fate drew that line of dusky down on my love’s face,
It drew beside it the tine cf my dependence on her.”

CXXIX. MushfiqI of Bokhara.*

He came originally from Jlarv. Some men regard him. for his

I ^ip (ia/r) iiterallv ‘ infidelity.’

s Mnshfiqi is mentioned in the di»(i, 583) bat no accoant of him is given.
According to t’ue Haft Iqlim he was born and died at Bnttara. Badtioni’a
statement that he came originally from Marv may possibly mean no more
than that his ancestors came from that place. Dighiatini says that he wae
Mttliku-sh.Shu‘ara or poet-laureate under ‘Abdu-'lUh Khan the Uzbak, King

458

gasidahs, as the Salman * of the age, but this is a great mistake,
for his conceits suffer, to an extraordinary degree, from the
defects common to the poets of Transoxiana, and are all frigid.
He came twice to Hindustan and left the country again. The
folloiving are some of his most pidnted verses: —

‘‘ Since all the cash that Majnun had to show for his life was
his grief for his beloved,

May God pardon him in consideration of this cash, for he
loved much.”

“ For loving I have found myself much blamed,

1 thought love an ea.sy matter, but it proved tobedifficult.” -

Since the meadow each night lias lit in thegaiden the lamp
of the rose.

The tulip s petal has burst into flame and both the petal
and the black sear ou it have been consumed.”

He bad a subtle tongue in .satire, and one of his witty satires
was this fragment, which he composed oo the occasion of his last
visit to India : —

“ The land of Ind is a sugar-field.

Its parrots all sell sugar,

Its black Hindus are like flies
In their turbans and long coat.«.” *

of Sprenger sajs that he was bom in a h 94.5 (.A.n. 15.18-39) «nc

that hi8 second diva,i was collected in A a. 983 t.A.D 1575-76). From th«
Akbamama ii appears that he w.as presented to .Akbir at Pah Patan in A D
1578. He died in a.d. 1588

1 The grent poet Salman of S.i\v:4 who died a r> I387-G8.

Cf Hafiz, oUk^f tjy ^

appeared eaey at firet, but diffioultiea soon aro.-w.

3 The teat is app.irently corropt here. It ipss htn,jit-.u), a word

which IS neither Hindustani nor Persian. Mr. Olochmann, in the Ain (i,58.3)
reads [takaitcia) , a word certainly not in common use, but explained

on p 88 of tlie .tin as meaning the long coat commonly worn in India,
nsnally known as (c jpkan). The meaning of the last verse is that

turban and the long skirts of th» i tiaL are ’ifca t’uf' large h^^ad and straight
Wings of t,ie fly. This fragment quoted in «* condition, by

58 " ^

329

454

CXXX. Mail! of Hirat.'

His name was Mirza Quli. He left a dlvSn and wns a master
of poetical style. His ta.ste in poetry wms snch that if he had
lived till now most of t!ie raw poetasters of to-day would have
grown sick of tiatlicking in verse, and from the time in which he
flourished until now none of our later versifiers can be mentioned
beside him. He was tor many \ears in the service of Naurang
Xltan.- and wrote .-eveiai biilliant encomiastic odes on him. It ia
sai that on rtcccunt of scnie suspicion against him something
was ur lu.si, hy >-idei of Zvaniang KhSn, put into his cup, and that
he was thu.s .sent iront the world. His death took place in Halwa.
Til- following teive.s are by him ; —

Ai.’u .-Fazl, 'li til? -1"-. c' Aba-'!-Foz! tiaiisfers the simile from the
Hinilus. whom he liked, t-o che It-.irr.ed among orthodox Mnslims, whom he
disliked. i’tde Mr. Bloc'itnani 's note (din, he. eit } Mr. Elochnifliin
remarks tha: the first ronplr-: r.i the fragment is a parody on (he should have
said was s izses'ed by ') a ■ onp]. t in the well. known jjArixa? which Hahr
Code las Jarrer's i <i rionl -fn' fU'-va-n din, Snltan of Beng'd —

-jy-h* C.<' A*a

Til.-- parn r.i ..f li.d will be t.asti.eg the sweets
< if this Persian sugar now sent to Bengal ’’

Miishfiqi Sei.-m.= to have been n diligent stndeiit of HSfit.

I Mail] is rhns described in the Tnhnqiit ■. ‘ Mirza Qoli, Maili, was for rears
in the service of 'tsanrang Khan, who wns one of the ami, -a artnehtd to
the emperor’s eaalted family. He baa written a divan of iihazah and qnn}-
dah^. In the .tin he i^ thu.s mentioned, ‘ His mime w-as Mirza tluli. He
w.as of Turkish extraction and lived in the society of gnv people ’ The year
in which he came to India is variously given as s.H. 979 (a.d 1571-72) and
A.H. 983 (a.d. 1.57.5-7( ). The Ata^lcada-yi-Azari says he was brought up in
Mashhad, According to Daghistiin; he belonged to the Jalair clan, lived
under TahmSsp, and was in the service of Sultan Ibrahim MTrai, after whose
death he went to India. He is much praised for his poetrv ; the author of
the Atnihkada says that he was one of his favonrite poets.

t ManrangKhan was the son of Qnthu-’a.dm Khan, the youngest brother
of ^amsu- d-din Muhammad Hian .Ataga. He served under Mirza, Khan-
khnnan in Guj-siat in A.H. 992 (a.d 15841. and received a jdglr in Miilwa and
snbseqnently in Gujarat. Mr. Blochmann (Aln-i-AUan, i, 334) says that he
died in A.H, 999 (a.d. 1.590-91), hut, according to the Tahaqat, where he is
styled a commander of four thousand, he was governor of Junagarh in
A B. 1001 iA.D. 159.3-94)

455

“ Thou surelj knowest that love for thee does not depart
with life

That thou walkest thus proudly over the dust of those killed
(by love).”

“ Thou art neither my friend nor a stranger, and I know nor
Wliat name is given to such intercourse as this.”

“ ify heart is re.stless within my body which iias been •-..tiii
ii v love ;

I know not what more it expects from my beloved,

It describes as ' proving ’ the cruelty which it suffei'S toota
thee.

And by this ni cifice persuade'^ itself to patieacefor a while

My life is about to leave me and I am well pleased vita
rliis, for my heart

Has now some hope of a remedy for its many years of
pain.”

“ In th v absence I do not die, lest thy heart should sny
• This weakling who has not experienced my cruelty could 330
not endure my absence for a day or two.’ ”

Although she came to ask how I fared I died,

In jealous wonder as to wlio it was from ivhora she asked
the way to my house.”

I ilie and iiave pity for those who live, for thou
Art accustomed to committing such cruelty as thou hast
done unto me,”

Some people read rasA/t ( ‘ jealou.sy ’ i for rahm f‘ pity ’ ) in this
last couplet. The distinction between the two is for surli as have
a nice disci iniination in the matter of words.

456

331

The follo\’' ins; verses also are him ; —

" I. with 1113' wounded heart, am a half-dead victim of the
chase, wliom

Tiie hunter in his piij quickly slays.”

‘ My b eloved desires my death for her ease, and I
With sliaine bear ilie burden of my weary life.”

“■ I have made thee, as my beloved, a byword, and
I rejoice

In thy .shame, for thou now wilt cast no glance.s on men.”

" What ill fortune is Maili’s, to experience n<.thing but
cruelty at her hands !

She is lint a child, who cannot distinguish between cruelty
and fidelity." '

' 1 am alone with rny broken heart-, and 1 gladly entrust it
to > hee .

Of what use v.-ill it be to me. that. I .shor.hl keep it 't
0 iny enemy' I am at ui y last breath, .-i'.-e her lo me for .a

moiufur

Th.at I may i-est'.re her to thee witli .i hundred tlnnsand
pangs.”

in spire -
fea-.!’

'•f ln‘i ]

.‘■'ouM

not ari-e at once from he;

F-rt if ’ 1

-itiain 1 )iO|/e ro

1 tor 1 '.'■■meiit at k-asi :

A ftc 1

f .iiti

itr iiir.

..tt .,1 prete'nec, .at lac

A ' . i ' •

.!c^ : -lO '

rpy

! ■ .’..1. ho; iny that 1 « h!

■ I'l’.e'l'O

‘ » ' '■ rn > P.-r-mn 'V'.i.N

4,57

Come not to aak how 1 fare, since thei'e is no hope of my
recovery.

4 he desire to see me die is no sign of love.

So ardently do I desire speech with thee
That I cannot keep silence, despite my wretched plight
Thon art with my rival and Maili pretends to iguoie it,
With an ignorance which is not less than a hundred regret-
ful glances.” *

‘ I feign to he free from my longing for her,

That this wile of love may make her less scornful of me.”

“ A hundred times have I been grieved by her and again made
peace ,vith her,

Bat that moon-like beauty recks not whethei' I be at peace
or at war with her.”

“ What has happened that thou passest by Maili with fierce
shyness ?

Perchance thou art in fresh pursuit of other game.”

'■ 0 Maili, that one with the v/onder- working breath of ‘Isa®
comes to thy pillow.

One who had been dead for a handled years
Would rise up in joy at her coming.”

” 1 expected thee, faithless as thon art, to abide by thy
compact,

lu the great simplicity of my heart I expected this.”

' 1 nis lu-t couple’ is not in the text, but is in both MSS. Ii completes the
o>le T’-c couplet mu3 as follows ; —

^ '‘tsi) IB the n. one given by Mosaluisne to ou- Innl, whose mir-

Kcies of the deat to life they Btrribatt to His bveu;'i vide p. 224 su.l

458

“ If anybody has brought about a meeting between my love
and me

Her auger with me has certainly made him ashamed of
what he has done for me.

The good news of a meeting with her. which the stranger
in ridicule gave me,

Has made me, in my simplicity, expectant of its fulfilment.”

“ So long as there remains between us, even in secret, any
talk of 'me and thee ’

A stranger is at our feast, sitting between thee and me.'
Thou through modesty enterest not into speech, and 1, in
bashfulnes.s, refrain

332 Wondering how the jealous wretchers represent what we
would say.”

'• She came upou me by accident, and pretended that she had
remembered her promise ;

She hung her head, and pretended that she did so in
modesty.”

In the following verse be has imitated the compiler of the
Muidufchah *

“ The sky desired to vex the people, and consequently
Availed itself of the ill-will of her who torments us. "

CXXXI. Malik of

He was supposed to be the king of words. He lived the lite
of a durvi^ in the Dakan,* and his eyes were seldom tree fiom

I This i-ouplet, which is carelessly omitted from MS. (Bt deals with the
favourito theme of the absolute oneness of the lover and the beloved.

t I do not know to what M'lnluUub, or Selection, Bad.'uim here refers
It is uot likelj to be this work, for whenever he casually mentions any poetry
that he may have written he adds an expression of regret for havin" written
it.

^ Malik, not being a poei of Akbar’s court, is not menlionctl in the Ain
or in the Tahutid^

♦ Sc»i ibB kingdom of Ahuiadnagar.

459

teal's. It is said that at the time of the mas.sacre ' of the foreign-
ers by tlie Dakanis he followed the direction of those foreigners
who inhabit tlie land of non-existence. Tlie following verses ai e
extracted from his works : —

“ The edge of the sword of testimony has bruslied away the
dust of dissension.

Fire-worshipper, Christian, and Muslim are all killed ijy
one dagger. ’

■■ The inmost parts of the cold-hearce.l aie cut to pieces.

And salt is then sprinkled on the wounds in their beaits. '

‘ Tliou, with thy sweet smile, art balm to wounded heruis.
But thy e^'elasht*' are a .-harp lancet to the liver ‘

The wine of love is not suited to the capacity ol intellect.'
Thou that i.reteudest to kuow!edt;e art no titrer of our
forest.’’

■■ The cloud oi the eye waters thy narcissus,*

The sight of thee arouses no suspicion of cruelty.”

The sword of her cruelty drips with blood. 1 fear that 333
Malik

Will i_'o in search of hisrewaivl to the house o! the slayer.”

■’ The trea.sury of my imagination is so full uf the treasnre
of the thought of reunion with her that my eyes will not
close.”

“ When the army of well-being * comes impudently against
thee, 0 Malik,

■ Vide p. 373, note 1.

* One of tlie seats of the aSectiuns, according to oriental belief.

S The text has which does not make sense. Both MSS, have ij&c,

which reading I have followed.

■* The eye of the beloved is compirred with, a narcissus.

*> t.e. of complacency and freedom from love.

460

Saddle the horse of strife aud hurl tlivself against the

v O

centre ' of the army.”

‘‘ How long will one expect the fulfilment of promises from
every deceiver?

One has one’s eye on the door and one’s ear open for the
footfall of every comer.

Enemies gladly give this mnch ease to one’s pain.

But woe be to him who expects fidelity from them.”

“ What breeze has been dressing thy head
That thy hyacinthine locks are scattered over the rose of
thy cheek ?

Eternity without beginning is sworn to thy raoon-like face.
Eternity without end is attached to thy waving locks.

Sugar melts at the sight of thy smiling face.

Salt is attracted by thy sweet smile of love
Tiie temple l>ell is melody to the bead-tellers
In that land where the idol is lord.’’

I saw the complete copy of Malik’s work^ which .Shaikh Faizi
brought from the Dakan All his poetry is after the fashion of
that of the poets of this age and he has not departed from their
set forms. No odour of love, of sympathy, or of any fresh subject
334 has touched his verse, and therefore I have confined myself to
quoting these brief extracts. To what extent he understood the
set terms n-.ed in poetry may he estimated from the following
couplet, which is the opening couplet of his Jivmi : —

“ 0 Thou whose praise is the ladder to all discourses,

The mention of whom is the pulpit of all assemblies ! ”

! Ttere is a double entendre here. iqalb) means both ‘heart* and

‘ the centre of an army/

4 Biidiioni is hard to please. He blames Malik for introducing no fresh
matter into his poetry, and then blames him for using an uncommon, if not
oriirinab siiiul-' It must be remembered that Malik was almost certainly a
ishVifk.

461

His rliymes are a deligtt to his enemies, not to mention the
complete lack of dignity in his diction. In my humble opinion
the following couplet is the best poetry he has written : —

“ I stepped aside to take a thom from my foot.

And her litter vanished from my sight.

For one moment 1 was negligent and it travelled a hundred
years’ journey ‘ from roe.

CXXXll. iltOAMi BAtAOJiHiS.-

He had good taste in poeuy. He was for some time in the
service of Mirza ‘Aziz Knka.“ The following couplet is his : —

“ ily heart, thou sayest that a handled di&coids have arisen
on account of that graceful figuie and lofty stature
(of here ) :

Thou sayest truly: from that one of lofty stature I have
experienced many calamities.”

Many have written verses on this theme, but they have tra-
velled round about one another without piogressing, and their
verses are insipid. One wiites as follows : —

“Thou sayest that calamity and strife have arisen in the
world from her footsteps.*

Thou sayest truly. Verily calamities are from above.” ^

Another has written * ; —

“ Thou sayest that tumults have arisen on all sides in the
city on account of thy graceful figure.

* The text reads |j aJU, wLion does not make sense, as there is no sub-
stantive to be qualified by the adjectival expression aiUv I think the

correct reading must be and I have traneiated accordingly.

* MudamI is mentioned neither in the Ain uor in the Tubaqaf.

^ Vide p, 388, note 1.

* {qadam) means ‘ a footstep.’ The text has, and the metre reqaires,

{qadam), a word w’hich does not exist in Persian. The letter ^ has been
doubled by poetical license.

^ There is a double entendre here which cannot be reprodnced in transla*
tiou. VU means both ‘ on high ’ and ‘ the gracefal 6gure and lofty stature ’
of a beantifal woman.

^ The text omits 8;^ both here and before the preceding couplet, though

59

462

Thon sayest truly. Thou hast a wonderful ' figui-e, my
moon-like beauty."

Oue might say that all these poems are the tumults that are
to arise at the last day.

(The following verses are by Mudami ; : —

'* M^' colour is sometimes as the flame of a candle in an orange-
coloured lantern,

Or perchance like an autumn leaf blown on to the tulip
fieni the north.”

335 “ W hen the account of hi.s grief was finished,

He sealed it by dropping on it a tear.”

CXXXIII. ilri.Li iliySUD OK Q.vzvIn.'

He was oue ot the jovial pc»?t.s of the age. He left a divan,
properly arranged iii alphabetical order. The following verse.s
are by him : —

■' In the condition of fidelity the dog of thy street has submit-
ted to me.

Sncce.s.s has become .'ub.servient to m" and the world wags
in accordance with my desire.

All lovers hitve their u-h.nces ti.xed on tliy licanty,

0 king of beauty, thy face is my full moon.”

" 1 planted in ray heart the plant of desire for her.

But this rose-cutting has yielded me nothing but grief."

■■ I had some hope that I might one day hold her ringlets in
my hand,

it appears in both MSS. and serves to .siiotv that the two csouplets are by
otheTfi than Mudami, hs evidently are.

t There is again a pun here, whieh cannot be reprodaced in translation.
The word {qi'jim-j-) which literally ineuna * resurrection ’or ‘ the day

• >f resurrection’ is nsed twice. firi>t in the sense of ‘ tamnlts * and secondly
in an adjectival sense, — ’ wonderful.*

^ Mulia Maqsud is not mentioned either in the Ain or in the Tahaqat, as a
poet.

i63

Alas, that mv precious life has been wasted in this hopeless '
desire ! ”

He also ’.vrote the following ijaH'lah in imitation of KhwAja
Salman, and tacked on to it* the name of Qazi Yahya of Qazviu,
the grandfather of Xaipb IHian ® : —

Once more the sky shivers with December’s cold.

The sun has veiled his head in clouds fearing the wrath of
the thunderbolt ;

The sky once more rains arrows (of hail and snow) on the
earth ;

The earth has made water itself a breastplate against the
arrow of Sagittarius ;

The sea-monster, fearing the biting blasts of December,

Has placed on his iiead a helmet of babbles hard as iron
Once more, by reason of the abundance of snow and the 336
intensity of the cold.

The earth has fallen a-trembling like a sea of mercury.

1 Literally ‘ twisted ’ '1 his is .•mother uutrauslatable doailc entendre.

The woid h.is reference to the cnrling locks of the beloved.

Literally, ‘ has added as a tail, or fringe ’ The author means that Mulla
-Maqaiid, having written his ode, added a few couplets as an encomintn on
Qazi Yahya, probably with the object of obtaining a reward

^ Vide p. 148, noted. His gr.iudf.ither, Jlir Yahya. was a well-known theo-
iogian and philosopher, who had .acqnirod such extraordinary proficiency
in the knowledge of history that he was acquainted with the date of every
event which had occurred from the establishment of the Mahammadan
religion to his own time. He w is at first patronized by ^ih Tahmasp-i-
8afavi and was treated with such distinction that his enemies poisoned his
patron’s mind against him by representing that he and his son. Mir 'Abdn-
’1-Latif, were the leading men among the Sunnis of Qazvin. The king ordered
Mir Y'aljya and his sons to be imprisoned in Isf.ihan, and Mir Yahya accom-
panied tile king’s messenger thither and died there after one year and nine
months, in a.h 962 (a.d 1554-55) at the age of 77. He was the anthor of a
historical compemliam, the in!)6it-’f-Tuii'ortSA , composed in a.d. 1541, Mir
■ Ahdn-l-Latif, the father of Naqib Kha n, tied to Gilan and afterwards, at the
invitation of M'uniayiin, went to Hindustan, and arrived at court with liis
taiiiily jnst after Akbar had ascended the throne. He was appointed pre-
ceptor to Akbar. His son, Naqib Kh an, rove to be a commander of nine
Iinadred in Akbar’s, and fifteen hundred in Jahangir’s, reign Vide Aiti-i-
Alcbni/, i, 4i7.

464

The dark surface of the earth is whitened, covered with an
army of snow.

No black spot is to be found in the heart of the world,

For the surface of the earth is so contracted

That the crow can find no place for his foot thereon.'

On the lawns of the garden, instead of blossoms and ver-
dure,

In tlie ice and the snow which have fallen only ermines *
are to be found.

Once more trembling has fallen on the ti-ees in the meadow.

Like me have they become thus restless from lack of liveli-
hood.®

In this cold air my body quivers like a willow.

In its weakness it is sometimes at fever heat, sometimes in
agony.

This moining a voice fjom heaven conveyed good news to
my ear.

Saying, ‘ How long wilt thou suffer tonnents from the hard-
ships of these days ?

Take refage from the tyranny of vicissitudes at that
threshold

Which is as high as the threshold of the sky.

The threshold of the trustee of the sacred law, an account
of a particle of whose virtues

Would not be contained in a hundred volumes or in a thou-
sand books.

Like ‘All and like Mnhammad in his qualities, Yahya by
name ;

Since his perfection is manifest why should I distinguish
him by titles ? ’ ”

Mulla Maqsud died in Igra in a.h. 977 (a.d. 1569 70). His
father, Mulla Fazlu-’llah, also was one of those who deserve the

1 t.e. the ground ia so cold th'^t the crow fe-irs to slight on it.

* The poet here nsea two words («iy«6) and (qSqum), both

of which mean ‘ ermine.’ The ermine is compared with the whitened of the
mow.

S There is another untranslatable doubU entendre here. The word which
1 have translated by ' lack of livelihood ’ literally means ‘ leaflessness ’

46.T

title of man, ana was held in reverence. He wrote the following 337
fragment : —

“ Fazli ! Enfold not thyself in the robe of existence as a
bud is enfolded in its sheath,

U^rinkle not thy foi-ehead and trail not thy skirt in blood ;

Be like the full-blown ro.se, and like the|cypress

Be free from the griefs of this world and humble not thy-
self before the base sky.

CXXXIV. MiHN.iTi OF His1r.‘

He was moderately fond of study and was in the college at
Dihli. He was afterv/ards, bj* the emperor’s order, appointed
qn:l of Sirhind,* and received his poetical name of ^lilinati from
the emperor. In Sirliind he passed awa3' from thi.s hon.se of
toil,* the world.

The following verse.s are hy him : —

“ T found in my path the print of her foot.

Why shonld I not press my cheek against it ?

I have found her place.”

The folk have lost tlieir hearts in meditating on her waist,
slender as a hair ;

T too. among them, have lost my broken heart.’

CXXXV. Mus.twi OF ^

His descent is indicated by bis poetical naine, Ht- had a poeti-
cal turn of mind. The followintr ver.ses are h’s : —

I Mihnati ia not mentioned as a poet either it fh<‘ . 10 , o:- in ti.e Tahn.ut
HisSr is Hisar Flnizs, chief town of the .-jrk.h ..f the same nanip in the
of Dih'i, now rhe headquarters of the Hisar Uistn-t in the Panifib

t Chief ton-n of the xurkdr of the same iiami iti rhe rz-re; -f Dih!', re.w it
the Patiala State, in the Panjab

* This phrase has reference ro Miiinat7'.i /-/Ir-t.,* wtdcii forme'' ii

id-litjon of the irorn the word ' m h.-cti' ' t.tC

* is ii,.t nientioi.e I as.a p...,.t in the Im or the Tnha>ie\ Fi .iit
hada.mt sa_v» .a Imn here ■: Im . le^r ir,,ii he was one of ti.e Muse- S.,vvi<l-

r-f Mashhad, «dr> rmce .1. -,T-nt to Al' Mfis.a Ri/.b the /. :

of Sh/‘n^ -

466

1 know that in secret your glances are east on me in m)’
affliction,

I know that tbj' pi-etended neglect of me is due only to
fear of strangers.”

Her eyes draw me in my affliction to perform her behests ;

Slie easts towards me a glance suffused with wrath.” '

338 CXXXVI. Khvvaja Mc'azzam.*

He was the maternal uncle of the emperor, and was one of the
sons of his holiness Shaikh Jam (may his tomb be hallowed).
He was afflicted with insanity and mania to an extraordinary
degree, so that he murdered his wife without any cause and was
put to deatli on that charge in a.h. 971 ( a.d. 1563-64),'as has been
mentioned in the record of the reign.® The following chrono-
gram has been found for the date of that event : —

“ The great i^waja, by name Mu'azzam,

Slew his wife, and w'as himself sldin

By the wrath of the emperor, JalSl-i-din Akbai.

I This is the gist of the seooud hemietich of tho couplet, bnt the hemis-
tich does not consist of a complete sentence and it would appear that BadSoni
should have supplied the rest in by quoting further.

* Ftd« Tol ii, text. p. 71. Badaoni, though he admits that gh'yiiia
Mu'.- deserved punishment, seems to blame Akbar for punishing him,

and snys that Muhi^sam always suffered on account of his near relation-
ship to the emperor,. quoting Arabic verses to the following effect : —

*■ Near relations are like scorpions in the harm which they do,

Be not deceived by either patertml or maternal uncle,

For grief is increased by the paternal uncle,

While the maternal uncle is destitute of all good qualities

3 Vid€ note above. Badaom says (loc. cit.) • on the day on which the
emperor went to his house to give him advice and to warn him atrsinst the
repetition of certain unbecoming actions which he had committed, the
Khwaj ir becoming aware of his jippro*\ch. and either having doubts regard-
ing bia intentions or being attacked by one of those fits of madness to
whicii he had long been subject, slew his wife. As he had thus become
deserving of punishment, the emperor had him kicked and be iten and then
had him ducked in water several times, and sent him to Gwalirar, and in
that prison he was freed from the bondaee of his evil nnure, and went
to his reward/ This passage in vol. ii leaves it doubtful whether Ma'ajKam
died a natural or a violent death, but the passage above is quite explicit.

467

Wlien I asked of him tlie year of his death

That man of auspicious qualities said, while he still lived,

‘ Without the world-illumining face of that lovely one
r suffered at length by the greater martyrdom’.” -

This chronogram appears to have been composed by Mir ‘Ala'u-
d-daulah, the author of the Tazhiratu-sh-Shn^arS ? The following
opening couplet was composed by Khwaja Mu'azzam ; —

“ It is impossible for me, my soul, to recount to thee my
heart’s anguish,

I suffer from this anguish to an extent which cannot be
told.”

In quoting this opening couplet of the Khwaja’s I have simply
followed Mir ‘ Ala’u-d-danlah. Otherwise, in spite of the following
opening couplet by a master of poetry% I should have said that
fhe Khwaja’s couplet was mere trash. The couplet of the master *
is as follows : —

“ Since I heard that I could call thy ruby lip my soul
A fire which I cannot describe has stricken my heart.”

CXXXVII. Maczun.‘

He is the son of Shaikh Pir of Agra, who wrote seven scripts
well, and whom I met in Peshawar in the reign of Salim ^ Shah.

His son also was a capable youth and passably proficient in the 339
art of composing enigmas and in penman.ship. He also played
che.ss, both two-handed and four-handed, well. These few verses
are quoted as an example of his style : —

“ What profit is mine from the many colours of the flowers
of spring

I jiS] Bat the sum of the letters is 973, not 971. Jt is possible

that Mu‘a7.z.tm was two years in Gwaliyar before he died or wa.s put to death
Vide p. 239 and note 1

8 These words o.-<l nre ni»t in the text I supply them

from the MSS

* Manzun is not mentioned, either in the J.’n or in tlir- T-ir-oqd' as a

Islam or. by nnf'dah, ns here. IfiHm. otln^rwlse Salim Sba'i Sur. «on and
“iacceBSor of Shir Shah Sur. Vide vol. i ^trans. Ranking), p 4^5 ec

46B

SiiK.e my lieai t in thy absence finds no solace in any colour -

Even those v\ho bear witness to the grief which, in my
misery, I suffer, are afflicted with grief ;

They are my blood-red tears, my pale cheeks, and my
wakeful eyes.”

0 thou, from whose cheek the moonlight has borroived its
brightness.

And in envy of whose beauty the sun burns ! ”

” Each anow that thou shootest, my moonlike beauty with
huw-iike eyebrow,

Is as deeply embedded in my bones as the marrow of them.

The arrow which that beauty with bow-like eyebrows has
shot at any heart

Has been a salve to its hidden wounds.”

CXXXVllI. MTJHAsiii.tD Yusuf.'

He was a handsome man w'ho was born in Kabul and brought
up in Hindu.stan. In penmanship he was the pupil of Asliraf
Khan. He died in Gujarat at the time of the siege of Surat® in
.A.H, 980 lA.D. 1572-73) in the prime of ii is youth. A.shraf K^an
composed a 'umistich which formed a chronogram giving the
date of his death, and Mir ‘Ala’u-d-daulah completed the stanza,
as follows : —

*’ Muhammad Vfi-.uf. that residence of beauty.

Wciir fiMin the world .shedding tears from his eve.s.

340 hononiad ni-m gave thi- chronogram for the date of his

■ Gath,

\Viwre IS Yusnf ot Figypt. O ye lioiioured ones r ' ‘

1 Miiln-W,;.! 'I'ss.ii Is nor tne-itir.!., il in the dOi ...r in the T<.l as a roet

2 Vld. S' p ',a.:>

•■I Tlio ■ '1, . 'O t - parriarcti .losept Thpr- s vrr. nt;

aho'.u; ' • _i I . Til - ' i.r.;- iiemisticii is

wii.ph c - ' ' ; . I let ' ’nuttir-'' the last rw '.-. .rUs tiip i- -

anuom'".: . .. :h.“ first - .ird the 'ora. is rSt, — ^t'i' u iir rear-

too nirt't

469

'This rbyming of ma‘ruf and majhitl is very strange.’ The
following ode, ‘ The Master of the House,’ is by the above-men-
tioned Muh.immad Yusuf ; — ■

“ Happy is be who has taken up his abode in the wine-shop,

And is seated by the tun with a cup and a measure.

It is lie who ha.s given to the beloved her languishing
glances heavy with wine.

I am drunk with the languishing glances of those two
narcissus-like eyes.

The owl found no well-peopled .spot in xhi.s trcn.sitory world

And hence chose for its dwelling the corner ji u •■uin.

I said i to my love), ‘ Take up th_v' abode in icy eyes,’ but
she answered coquettishly,

‘ Does anybody build a house in a channel through which
floods flow ? ’

The comb has disordered thy lock.s.

May the hand of him who made that comb for thy locks
be broken.”

The following couplet is by him

• “ In thy absence I attempted in vain to take rest,

Disappointed by thy absence I took .such rest as I could.”

CXXXIX. MaxzaiiI op

He IS a pleasing poet. He was at Agra in the service of Sairam
Khaa and designed an epic Book of Kings.' and completed the
versification of several of the incidents to be inciuticd in i*. 34l

1 The rhyme to which Badaoni objects is that of (' b',. with

which latter word was pronounced in hi.s day, and. oy oi India, is

Btiil pronounced ’'ezan. The rna’ruf sound is U,’ ti.e mnjf-r C-,’ Altliough
the Persians have long abandoned the majhul sou'His niui now pro-

ncunce the latter word rlzdn it is still considered in-Iegaiu, not ineoirec'^
to rhyme a vocable which W'as always mabvi/ w un one which wa.s anciently
majhtd, though the rhyme is perfectly good, both to the ear auv'. to the ere.

This defect iu rhyme is called {hazv).

2 Manz.rri is not mentioned in the Ain or in the Tohan 11,

3 {Shnhndmd), i e. a poem on the model of Firdaas. s great epic.

the Shihndm ,

oO

470

particularly the battle against Sikandar Sur,' wliicli contained an
account of the valour of Muhammad Husain Hian.* He presented
it to the IHian at Patyali and the K^an made some corrections
in it and told him the whole story of the fight in proper order,
from beginning to end. Manzari in one night, as it was the Khan’s
wish, corrected those three or four hundred couplets and read
them at his levee the next morning, and received a notable reward.
The following couplet occurs in that poem : —

“ The sound of his trumpet deafened the sky.

'I’he chief was perplexed by his sudden attack.”

The following opening couplet by him is very well known, and
is often illuminated —

“ In thy absence I am always destitute,

I am one who never enters thy thoughts.”

The following ghazal is by him ; —

“See the down growing on the moonlike cheek of that
lovel3' silver-bodied one.

both down and cheek are signs of the disturbances of the
age of the moon.^

See a chain of dark ambergris drawn across the face of the
moon .

See a riagletlike violets on a cheek like a moist rose-petal ;

Sec h. r heart-ravi.shiug ej'es and her lashe.<; that shoot
airov,.^.

perils upon perils in tbe road of love.”

ihis la>t c->jplot !':> tlie best. As for tlie rest it is evident that
ho toiled at them to no purpose but to weary oui- ears.

i Vnl.: vol, 1
V tdt: p. I),

' Ou the i.hii
^ i.e. illi'.’iii'

^ Each t'f i’-.
san and :h.? ni
c;-cle. Tie.-'
'■neon, wliiC'i h
CTcIe- an { [ H'

xlaokin^h p. ^^2 et pa^smi.

: oto 4.

in the estate of iluhauimad Husain Khan,
i::*' ou car'iboard as a wab decorucioii.
s-weii pmnfts M.-rciiry. Veiir.3, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, the
Oic r,s hy the Musalrnacs, was to l.ave an age or

•, ’03 t.ave al! i.een com, oleted except the l.st, ti.at of the
? ;aii with ciie cre.-itioii of Adam. It is ilio wor^t of ail the
,c-;i lo.vi IS to ot a peiiud of hioodshetl am! tmauito

471

CXL. McdI.mI op Hamadan,*

In Hindustan he was known as Haidarl. and he wrote good
qasidaha in praise of Mir Mnhanimaa, l£han-i-Kalan.* His 3^
discourtesy led him constantly into quarrels with everybody, and
on this account he suffered much molestation.

The following verses are by him ; —

“ Majriun did not know that a lover is disgraced in the world,

I am disgraced by love and devoted to being a lover.”

“ The new moon ot ‘Id appear.s like a key
To open the lock of the wine-shop of the cupbearer on the
evening of ‘Id.”

‘‘ The lovely one with the green veil * has once more appeared
from behind the curtain,

The bud laughs like the dawn, and the sun appears.”

“ I have on my breast, from my beloved’s sword.

Lines * like those ruled on paper with a ruler.’’

CXLI. Mt'vi.Mi OF Sabzavir.s

He was in the service ot the Ivhan-i-A’zam.” He had a jovial
disposition After the conquest of Gujarat he returned to his
own countiy. The following verses are by him : —

“ Happy is he whom she rates as her dog !

Although I am not so rated she sometimes thinks on me.”

‘‘We are lovers, and the end of th^ street of calamity is our
refuge,

The world is full of the turmoil and din of our .shouts.

Muaami ia not mentioned as a poet »n the Ain r>v in the l'a})aqat.

2 Elder brother of Atnga Kh«n. vide p 30'^ note 2
^ The pprin?

* Literally Hfi/V.

^ MaqimI is not mcnLinned a popt m the firt or in the Tfihf’qdt,

'5 MTrz5 Azi/ Ki'ka V< ie p 3^8 and note 2.

47-2

We dwell wherever grief and toil are heaviest,

Our place is wherever affliction and anguish are greatest.
Despite all the misery which we endure in our grief for her
She who is anxious concerning our hereafter desires our
death.

343 We wander in tlie desert of grief for her, and the only shade
that we have

Is that of our black lot which accompanies us in such days
as these.

Thou didst say to Muqimi eoqueltishly, ‘ I care for nobody.’
Aye, a} e ; with thy beauty how shouldst thou care for me f ”

CXLII. '

He was the son of Qazi Abn-i-Ma‘ali of the place of pilgrimage,^
He was a melancholy youth who had adopted the ^iifi doctrine of
annihilation^ and was after the fashion of his father. He died
of haemorrhoids in Labor.

He composed an opening couplet in imitation of an opening
couplet by Shaikh >Sa'di ' may his tomb be hallowed),
l^iaikh Sa‘di’s couplet,!.

•• Inddels, what do you e.xpect from a lifeless graven image ?
Worship awhile that Idol which has life.”

(The poet’s couplet).

The dead are envious when thou stretchest out thy hand
for thy sword

Saying, ' Death by that sword is the privilege of him who
is alive ! ’ ”

I No name or ta^allu? is entered Leie, eicber in tlie IISS or in the te.tt.
The passages which follow are p.rir.ted in the text as a continuation of the
life of Muifum, but they tleariy refer to another poet, whom I can anfor-
tanatelv lind no mention in any book to which I have access.

^ Vule p 2i0. The ’place of pilgrimage’ seems to have been B’attiia,
so called probably because it was the barial-piace of Savyid Jai.il, seventi.
deeceuda’ t of Imam 'All Nani Alhiidi,

3 Vide p. 42 and note 1.

473

CXLIII. MahwI.i

Shortly after his arrival in Hindustan he was in the service of
the Khankhanan, son of Bairam Khan, and then went on a pil-
grimage to the glorious city of llakkah. In the composition of
qnatrains he has no equal. The following quatrains are his : —

" So long as the ringlet falls over the moonlike face.

So long as the down on the cheek is as an army to the king
of beauty.

Kven if my house is built of bricks from the sun
riie days of me in my wretchedness will pass in
iai.=ery.’'

■' Once I knew not sorrow of the soul and the heart,

Once I knew not what It was to weep tears of fire ;

Xow thou hast left neitliar name nor trace of me,

O'iov^e ! I did not know that thou wert thus.”

black

344

Mahwi, who has wandered far from the street of wisdom,
Has become a greater wanderer than a Thousand ilajDims.

I saw from afar that lost one, wandering far from thee,

In a wilderness where the wind entered, into his blood.”

^ The name of this poet was A.i:r MaghTs. He is thos described in the
Tahaqd'i He is a free-hearted and accomplished man. He arrived in Gujarat
and entered the service of ilirzl Kh^n the Khrtnkliiuan. and, helped and
^-cconraged by him, set forth on *i pilgrimage to Hijaz.’' In the
(i, 68^} he is thus described, Malnvi of Hamadan. Hia name is M arm?.
He tries to change the four mud w.lls of this worhlly life into stone vralls,
and is iiiLoxicated 'tvith the scent oi freedom.” According to the 'Mausir-i-
Rahi 7ni he was born in Asad.ibad {Hamad<m) and went, when twelve years
old, CO Aidabil, where he studied ft r four years at the Ji-tuna-yi-Safdiiyya.
From yourii he was remarkable for hia contentment and piety. He spent
twenty years at holy places, chiefly at Najaf, Ma^had. Karbala, and Hirat*
He embarked at Bandar Jarun for India, and after leaving the Khankhanan’s -
service went back to where the anchor of the Ma^aair saw him at

Ka^an. He visited Najaf and Karbala and returned to Hanaadan. where he
died ill a.h. 1016 (a.d. 1607-0?/ It will be observed that the Ma’d^ir says
nothing of his pilgrimage to Makkah According to^the Ata sh kaia iji-AzaTi
he is often called Nishapurl, because he was long in that town.

474

CXLIV. MazhabI of Ka^hiiIr,'

He has composed a dlonn. He now holds a post ia the imperial
service in his own country. The quality of his poetry may be
estimated from the following couplets, which are, however, a
very small selection ; —

“ The good fortune of thy beauty has prospered thy affairs,
Else thou wouldst not have known hov/ to manage affairs
successfully.”

There is also this opening couplet by a master of poetry (from
which Mazhari’s couplet is evidently copied).

“ Tliou hast not understood what a firm cov'enant -is,

Thou hast not understood wdiat it is to be constant.”

(The following ver.ses are by Mazhari) : —

“ ilay I be a sacrifice for that mirror which the enslaver of
my heart

Keeps in her room, tui-ned towards the rose-walks of the
garden.”

“ Mazhar, be in the world as those that have no share in it,

And as for the rose, be, like the nightingale, satisfied with
singing to it.

Satisfy thyself with the beauty of the world by looking on it,
345 Be, like the strangers, a guest who is content to gaze.”

CXLV. Shaikh Mchammad of DtHLi ®

He was unique in this age for his high lineage and his acqinred

< Mazhari is thas described iii the Ain (i, 5S4', ' He made poems from his
early yoafh, and lived lonjr in ‘Iraq. From living with wood oeople be
aeqnrO'd e.xceUent habits.’ DSgbistpni sajs that in Iraq he was in comnanv
with Moht.ash.im and Wah.shl. After liis retorn to India he was employed 'oy
A'sbar as Mir Riibii of Kashmir, which was evidently the employment to
which BadSoni refers. He had turned ^i'ah. i.rd, as !ii.s fahiier was a Sunni
they used to abase each other. His poet-i.s are said to contain several satires
on his father, Mazhari died in a.ii. IOIS-'a d. iCC9-10,’. The poet cannot
be the .Mazhari mentioned in vol. ii (text), p 2;id. or Badiioni would have
written more warmly of him here.

■i I have not found ehsewLere any mention of fdi.nyi Mnhnmmad of Dihil-

475

and inherited accomplishments. After many years of such
acquaintance as can exist between men at a distance from one
another, I was so fortunate as to have a chance meeting with him
in the neighbourhood of the town of Bari ■ in the year in which
the victorious army set out for the conquest of the fortress of
Citor ; but owing to the shortness of the time at our disposal our
interview and conversation, in spite of the great desire which I
had to prolong them, did not last an hour, and he went on and I
returned, but when 1 first set eyes on him I became aware of the
nobility of his character. Although, considering his dignity, this
mention of him among a string of poets is scarcely gracious, yet,
as he sometimes amused himself with poetry, this opening couplet
is quoted as a memorial of him : —

“ If, in the day of ray grief for thee, I should choose to exer-
cise patience.

Since I have no choice in the matter say what 1 should do,”
CXLVI. Ncvinl of Tckhat.®

He composed a divUn, and also a tarjt‘-hand ^ satirizing Kucik
Beg, the accountant of Bairam Khan, the letters of which a
hundred storms like that which occurred in the days of Xoah
would not wash from the pages of this age. The following few
couplets are by him^ : —

“ 0 thou, in whose glorious days time glories,

Khan. soi\ of a Khan, chief, and high officer of king.s,
Bairam !

I A pargiinn town :u the anif sf'la ol .tori

■2 Nnvidi is not metitioued in the .1/)?, nml ttie only notiee <’f liim in tlie
Tabnoat is that he ttns for along lime at eonrt.

* .1 poem eomp.ose 1 of strophes, e.ieh eonsisniig of any number of ooaplets
from five to eleven I’he two iienii.stielies of tiie Mrst ontiplcr of each stropbo
rhyme together and the remaining :ou[i!et.s rliyine with the Hist At the
end of each stroplia is a refrain eon.sisting of one couplet, tlie two lietuis-
tiohs of vvliich rhyme togetlier, and which is the same thronshout tiie p.oem.

* Tlie verses which follow are certainly a satire on Kiicik Beg, 'out they
do not seem to be from the tarji^^h/nul mentione,!. tor They ore not in the
form of a iii> ji band.

476

The steed of perception cannot traverse the valley of thy
understanding.

The noose of imagination cannot reach the battlements of
the palace of thy glory.

I have a word to say ; I will expound it unto the Nawwab.

I have a difficulty ; I will represent it to his servants.

346 Thou hast given the high post of accountant

T') Kucik Beg. Say for what reason, 0 boast of mankind.

Thou art perhaps ignorant of his reprehensible acts,

Although inquiry into the characters of servants is a duty
incumbent on governors.

He was an infamous boy, and conceited, a wine-bihhing
libertine.

A lad ever hankering after gold, .soft, and self-willed.

His business was the service ' of Khwaja Amii Deg the
Vaxir.

Factor to the family of Hi.'-- Highne.ss Mirza Bahriim.^

Otiier things are known about him from a certain source.

But I feel ashamed to reveal them before bis honour the
Khan.

To cut a long story short and to make an end quicklv I will
come to my tale.

And I will tell a tale regarding that mutilated 2 wretch.

Wherever he has been bis conduct lias been sucb

That he has brought upon him.self the hatred of all, both
srentle and simple.

1 The word is apparently intended to bear a very ill tneaninsj heir.

2 The reference if obviiusly to ?<Iirza llu/affar Husain, .son of Bahrain
MTrza. eon of ^ah IsmaTl-i-Saf,ivi. lie was h coinmamlrr of live rlionsand
and had Sambhal \n jOjh-. The p.eople in Ids j'/yir '.rtferroi complaints
against his grasping factors, or collectors, and iluzuffir. annoved at this,
applied for leave to go to llakkah. Akbar granted Ids reqaeqr but Muzaffar
repented of his resolve, and was reinst.ited in his jiy'r. Mow coraolainta
were prefer! ed and thejdpir w.is resumed, iriivaffar receiving an allowance
in cash in lien of it. The poet’s object in referring to tl.ig is to show that
Kncik Beg was educated in a very had school

S Steingasa give.s the meaning of thi,s word as ' out of propor-

tion. bat it is clearly intended to bear a much worse meaning here, aud I
have accoj'iiingiy translated it more literally.

477

Oh on thj- leprous body,’ thus pray to God,

Both morning and evening, all the inhabitants of the
lieavens,

May there fall fever, colic, haemorrhoids, consumption, and
dropsy,

Mcrisles, intestinal ■worms, epilepsy, and delirium.

Then when thou haltest weak and feeble, seeking a cure.
May all the physicians prescribe for thee the followii'g diet,
Slmiae vomitum, decern dierum catuli stercora,

Cr&i penem, felis caudam, et stercora sicca quibus calefiunt
hypocausta.

Happy will that day be w'hen thou art griped by colic, for
which

Tlie srveat physicians will prescribe an enema.

And the forefoot of an ass, the foot of a camel, the horn of
a goat.

The scalp of a bear, the head of a mule, and the teeth of a
hog.’ ”

He could also be abusively satirical in prose as the following
story will show. One day when -weary • he was seated on an old
felt cushion and said to me before the court, ‘ Dog, dost thou eat
filth before me r’ I said, ‘ Surely it is lawful for any - dog to eat
filth before you.’ However, as Jfnvidi had but one eye I have
closed my eyes to his baseness,* and if I have recounted hi.s faults
it was only because the road was opened to me by the author of
the original Tazkirah,* Mir ‘Ala’u-d-daulah ; and although the
recording of obscene language and the reckoning up of faults
is not the custom of the author of this Selection, yet in this in-
stance, with the object of indulging the love of a jest and keeping

1 SjjU !j •.la-yndu'Jti]. The expression may possibly reter to the felt
cushion, in which case it will mean, ‘ cast off *

^ {kii ’dyi) is in an interrogative pronoan. but lioro Badaoni

clcc.rly a*- s inetirne.-' done i?- India, and always in Afghanistan,

as an ’ .defiuito

2 111 Ji, i-a a O’ ^.<5 mail is supposed to be nece'JsaiJ.y and nnavoid-’.bly
bafio, t ier ‘f.iro, as he cannot help hnujidf, to ho lo bome extent eicQsed.

i Vide y ?39 no 1.

61

347

478

up the merriment of the entertainment, I have blindly and
exactly copied the passage from the original ; and I hope that
the clear-sighted men of this time will regard what they have
seen as unseen and what I have done as though it had never been
done, and will wink at my fault and my shame, and pass by it
and pardon me, for ‘ Satire in speech is as salt in food ’ is a
proposition accepted by all learned and well-informed men, and
although some people, falsifying the text, read, instead of ‘ Satire,’
'Syntax^ in speech,’ the Maqamdt^ of Hariri clearly show that
the first, and not the second, is the correct reading.

The following few verses are from Nuvidi’s dlvSn, but I am
not certain whether they are by this Nuvidi, or by another ® poet
with the same poetical name : —

“ I still have thy arrow, which I have had in my heart for
an age,

I still have the plant of desire for thee which I received
from thee ;

I I still have the fetter which at the very first

I, poor and distraught,

Received from that Laila-like beauty with the musky
tresses.'*

Though my eyes have become dim from weeping,

I retain the picture ® of thee

In that same form which has ever been reflected in the
ipirror of my heart.

Take roy hand, love, for an age.

My foot has been held in the valley of love’s madness in
the i?jire caused by my tears, as it was always held.

I, Nuvidi, stUl have that heart like a bird struck by the
an’ow of her glance

1 By the sabstitation of {An-na^icii) for {al-hajwu) which

is done by the alteration of one letter and the displacement of one dot.

* The ‘ assemblies ’ of Hariri, a very famous woik in Arabic.

3 Vide infra lios. CLII and CLVIII.

* The text has JcIm (skamd’il) ‘ qualities.’ I prefer which is the

reading of both MSS.

.6 Literally ‘ idea.’

479

Which I had long ago, rolling in dust and blood like a bird
half slain.

Another ode.

Longing for thy ringlet has made me restless,

I am at death’s door. O come to my help !

■I could endure tbj- cruelty all my life, but
Thy sitting with a stranger I cannot endure.

I restrain myself from weeping at the end of thy street
For I fear that the flood of my tears would sweep me away
from the end of thy street.

Not for the twinkling of an eye does the restless longing
for thy ringlet

Permit me to sleep during the night of absence from thee.
Nuvidi, since my heart has become united ' with grief for
thee,

The confusion of all material things has left my remem-
brance.”

Another ode.

Though I die miserably from the ceaseless grief which is
mine

I will make to the stranger no complaint of my misery.

If in love’s delirium I declared to thee

The grief of my heart, pardon me, in thy mercy.

Nuvidi wished to declare the grief of his heart to thee, 349
But when he saw thy face he forgot his gi'ief.”

Another ode.

Before thy arrow is drawn from my wounded hfeai-t
My grief-worn life will leave me a hundred times.

Thy heart-piercing arrow has entered my wounded breast
With ease, but will with difficulty be drawn thence.

To the end of her street I, helpless in my weakness.

Go a hundred times, hoping to see her come out but once.

0 Nuvidi, fiom within thy patched woollen I'obe
If thou art a Musalman why does the idolater’s sacred
thread appear ? ”

t-^Thia word (Jnm*) might also be traosbited ' contented-’

4S0

J ronjplft.

I'lien hast no thought for the next vrorld. nor for this,
Niividi, I know not how thou art employed.”

CXLVII. NishajjI.i

He is Maulana ‘All Ahmad, the son of Maulana Husain Xaqshi
of Dihli, the seal-cutter, who was a learned man, saintly in reli-
gion, and was the instructor of the eldest prince.- Both father
and son attained the gre.atest proficiency in this art ( of .seal-
cuttingl, hut especially the Alanlaiia named above (‘Ali Ahmadl
whose own engraved seal is the exemplar of the age. Coins of
which the die.s have been cut by him are taken as talismans and
reiic.s to ‘Iraq, Kliurasan and Transoxiana. He is endowed with
the accomplishments of learning and with such perfections as a
man can possess, but this lesser accomplishment and mercenary
art (of seal-cuttitigl ha.s obscured all his great natural gifts, and
for this reason be has not received that training and that position
3S0 in military affairs and in the service of the state to which he is
entitled. Had lie attained the honourable rank which was his due
he would l ave been in no way inferior to any of tlie more famous
Amvs.^ He is deeply read in astronomy and natural philosophy,

1 NishanI is not mentioned in the din or in the Tahaqdt as a poet, bat he

ifi mentioned mere than once in the Aht as an engraver. Abu-l-Fa?! aays of
him. ‘ at this day, Maalfma ‘AH Ahmad of DiiiH, wlio hag not his equal in
an V country, cuts different kinds of letters in steel in such a manner as et|t3fil.s
th*^* c ipv slips of the most skilful caliornudiers. Hf* liolds the rank of com-
mander of a hundred,* and a^ain ‘ Maulana ‘AU Ahmad of DihHwho. accord-
invto all caligraphers, stands unsnrpa«8Pd asteel engraver, go much po that
his engravings are taken as copies.- Hie is’ehnrming hut he writer

also other characters ’.veil. He learned the trade from his father, Shaikh
Hnsain. studied the manner of Maulana Maqsud, and eventually surpa^^ed
all ’ Vide Aln-i-Ahhari, i, 22, 53

2 Suitan Saiim, afterwards the emperor Jahangir. Husain was probably
his writing ma-'rr.

• The nf thi^ sentence according: to the tenses used by Badaoni

is, ‘ Having an honourable ra»»k he is in no way infon'or to the

famous h i' I bpbeve that 1 have acourafelv rendered the meaning <>f

Badfionl wh«i haji b*'en complaining that ‘411 Ahmad did mn re^'eive t)»^
promotion wlii'i* w.tg Ids dnc

481

is an ardent seeker after knowledge, and is marvellonsly pro-
ficient in all scripts, and in prose composition and ortliography he
is nnrivalled.

Had he been a man of one pursuit many examples of his flow-
ing verse would have been left on the page of time. He some-
times exercises his brilliant intellect and keen peiception in the
composition of veise, and has chosen a poetical name in consonance
with his occupation. Since from the early days of my youth to
the time of writing this selection, which is the period of my
middle age,' or rather of my old age, I have been bound to liim,
to a gi'eater degree than can be imagined, by the bond.s of intimacy,
confidence, friendship, and companionship, it is not unfitting that
I should quote with appreciation, and at some length,^ some of his
profitable pieces of verse and prose. The following couplets are
from his poems : —

Until the down giew above thy life-giving lip

Masih alone was tliere. Now that it has grown Oi?t’ is in
company with Masi^.”*

“ The ceusor yesterday broke the wine-jar, and poured forth
the fiery water which it contained.

He gave my dust to the wind, and poured my blood on the
dust.”

“ The wind brought news to my sad heart of my beloved.

Alas, no trust can be placed in the word of the wind.”

“ Sleep comes on me each night like a robber, my eyes become
moist.

' {kuhulati literally ' laziness,’ ‘ love of ease.

* I am not quite sure of the correctness of this translation. The two
words used are ^U«.) {isbiigh and (ishb^‘)- The latter, which is an

Arabic verbal noim in the measure Jb-il means ‘ satiating,’ ‘ tilling up,’
* dyeing ’ I think that Badaoui means by it that be proposes to quote at
length.

^ Tlie special characteristic of our Loid, accor'.ling to Muhammadan belief,
has already been mentioned, vide eupra, p. 224, note 2. 'i’he meaning of
this couplet i-; that the lip merely gave life until the down grew above it,
after whi^h it gave perpetual life.

482

But, when sleep sees that my heart still wakes in its grief
for me, sleep quickly flees.”

In imitation of this couplet I composed the following : —

“ Fired by a hundred hopes I send a messenger to that cruel
one,

I flee to God for refuge from the hour in which he will
return from her without hope.”

361 (The following couplet is Nishani’s) : —

“ Since my bosom was wounded by the arrow of thy cruelty

I have not treated it with ointment, nor have 1 dressed the
wound.”

At the time when Gujarat was conquered he engraved a coin-
die for the emperor, and submitted it to him w ith the following
chronogram ; —

“ O king ! The coinage of Gujarat is now struck in thy
name,

May the shadow of thy justice be over the liead * of that
country.

Happy will be that moment when thou wilt ask of me the
date (of its conquest)

And I shall reply, ‘ May the coinage of Gujarat be auspi-
cious ! ’ ” *

The following couplets are also by him : —

“ It is a matter of life and death with me, and the beloved
has not come.

My life, which is valuable to me, has become of no account.”

“ I have a wounded heart and the lovely ones bear salt twit)
on their lips ;

This wound of mine will not be healed till eternity.”

1 MS. (A) has {taiaruk) which neither rhymes nor makes good sense.

MS. (B) has {labarak) which is nonsense and neither scans nor

rhymes. I have adopted (bi-taink), the reading of the text.

* loG The sum of the values of the letters la 980.

Gojarat was formally annexed on Sha'han It, A.H. 980 (Dec. 20, 157-2! ; vide
voL ii (text p. 142.

i83

“Outward form and inward truth are not united in every king,
Akbar the emperor is the king both of outward form and
inward truth.

He is the emperor at whose court, when he holds it.

King after king falls down in fear before the doorkeeper’s
staff.”

“ The heart in my bosom is not broken by the stone of calami-
ties

For the glass of my (heart) is made of a diamond.”

When the imperial camp was on it.s way to Kashmir for the
first time ' and I, having taken leave, went to Basawar,® my birth-
place, Nishan! wrote the following verses, and sent them to me “
from ttiat country (Ka.shmir). God knows whether he wrote
(the same verses) with the same warmth of feeling to several
others, and pleased them also, but until another claimant appears
I have made the verses my own,

A Masnavi.

“ Whilst thou art far from me. O moon that illnminest my
heart,

I sleep not at night and have no ease during the day.

My tears, rose-red with blood, trickle adown my cheek
Like tulips blooming in a field of saffron ;

My eyelashes are tinged with the blood of my heart
Like branches of red coral showing their heads above the
ocean.

1 This was, apparently, the occasion on which BadSoni, in 1.577, left the
court at Rewarl. having received five months’ leave of absence. He overstayed
his leave by seven months and was never ag.ain received into favonr. Vide
rol. ii, text, p. 232.

* The text hns ‘ Peshawar,’ which was certainly'not Baaaoni’s. birthplace.
The correct reading is ‘ Basawar.’ According to Mr. Blochmann (Ain-i-
Akhailj i, 104. note 2), Badaimi was born at Badaon, hut this is a mistake.
He was b jrn in Toda, but was taken soon aft^r his 'oitth o Basawar, where
he was enenmeised fvide vol. n, text. 236 1 , and oX which Le always speaks as
his birthplace.

Owing to tliy ab-ence the blood lodged in tny heart, every
moment.

Rises to my neck like liquid in a bottle;

Every breath burns with the fire of grief

And at each respiration throw.s forth from my bosom a
flaming banner.

Now my ej'es contend with the blood of my heart
And shod, instead of tears, sparks of fire.

These are not eyelashes that encircle my eyes.

They ai-e the soot of my heart's fire around its chimney.

0 thoa of angelic dispo.sition, from thi.s sad journey
Which has carried the lives of my dear friends away on the

breeze

Such languor has become the lot of my body and my heart
That I pay no heed to my body or my heart.

My body is disturbed by the pains of fever,

353 My heart within it is like fire in a furnace.”

In reply to that boastful poem ' of Shaikh Faizi’s, which
begins : —

“ Thanks be to God that tlie love of beautiful ones is my
guide.

1 am of the religion of Brahmans and of the faith of the
■ tire-worshippers.”

He wrote a qafidah from which the following couplets are
excerpted ; —

” Thunks be to God that I am a follower of the faith of the
prophet.

The love of the prophet and of the race of the [oophet is
m_v nuide

I am ili.sgnst-ed with Brahmans, prayer-gous-s, and Aliri-
I ,'T i dciiier of the hiitb of monk, ])riest, and t'rc-angel,°

485

I believe in the day of resurrection, and in the resurrection
of the dead,

lam hopeful of Paradise, of hurts, and of Kausar.'^

0 envious one, glance not towards me with contempt
Although in outward semblance I may appear contempt-
ible.

T am a fierce flame, pass not near me.^

Since thon art' not the Friend ® set not thy foot on my fire.
Under my seal is the face of the whole earth.

1 in this age am like the seal, with mv head hidden within
the collar of my robe. *

Prom east to west I am tempered w'ith perfection.

Prom pole to pole I am the axis of every country.

The convex surface of the sky of excellence, even in the
eyes of my enemy.®

Will never fit the concave surface which is hounded by my
€go.

Though I dwell on the earth like an imaginary poitit
I am still the centre round which the spiierical sky
revolves.

The hand of fate has drawn, with the compas.s of time.
The circles of the seven heavens around my book.
Although I am less than the fixed point which is the
centre

I am nevertheless more boundless than the cirnuiafereuce.
If niy enemy performs a thousaml of rlie magical tricks of
Samiri ®

I A river in Paradise whence all the other rivers derive their source.

' This hemistich and the one which precedes it have been carelessly
-imirted from the text. I have supplied tht‘m from the M-SS
.Abraham, ‘ the Friend of God.’

^ I e. as a seal has its head hidden in the wax when it is pressed on it.

'' The ' enemy ’ is ^ail^ Faixi. T have been unable to cransiate literally
this hemistich and the one which follows it, a literal transiation would
not stive the sense, which is rhnt the poet’s intelleot is more spacious than
the sky.

A yreat magician, the maker, according to the Musalmiins, of the golden
calf wloch the Iraelites worshipped Vide c, xx.

62

354

486

I, like the serpent of the Speaker will overpower him in
a minute.’’

He wrote the following couplet in praise of the prophet
“ The seal of thy finality has broken the seals of old
And has introduced in its device a new and fresh design.”

The following verses are selected from one of his poems con-
cerning one of the great ones among those of our kind, ingenious
in oppression *

“ How long wilt thou boast saying, ' In magic
I am a Samiri, a Samiri, a Samiri ’ ? ®

Every breath of niine is one of the mii'acles of Tsa,

A flame of light from the bush of Moses.*

In eloquence I am the phoenix of the age,

The teacher of all the eloquent.

Each breath of mine deprives magic itself of patience (in
enduring its inferiority).

Each speech of mine is magic that would deceive angels.

I ahi the king of the kingdom of omniscience,

I am the wise man of the region of sublime realities ;

I am the jeweller who values the chain of rhetoric,

I am the assayer of the coin of eloquence.

All this am I. To-day, in this contest.

Thou dost but take a flame of hre on thy tongue.

Boast not that thou art the di.scoverer of spiritual truths.
Thou art no candle, let not the machinery of thy tongue be
too well greased.

O thou who art fo.rmed of flame, of jewels of fine water.

1 [Kdlim) for {Kallmu-Hldh) ‘ the speaker with God’ i.e.

Hoses. The reference is of coarse to Aaron’s rod, Ex. vii, 9. 10. In the

Qur’in the i-od is said to be that of Hoses f jU* •

* wherefore he (Moses) cast down his rod, and behold, it became a visible
^ serpent ’ C^urdn c. vii.

2 Shaikh Faizi.

3 A hemistich from one of Faizi’s poems.

> The refe»-=Tie8 is, of coarse, to the bnrnihj? bush, Exodus iii. Qia'du,
zxvit. 7-13.

487

Make no boast, since thoa bast not even dnst in thy pouch.
Although thy mind has knocked at the door of sense
No new conceit has fallen on our ears.

That which thou sayest has been said by others,

The pearls which thou stringest have been strung by other.s.
For the house of verse which thou hast adorned
Thou hast borrowed both the ■ water and the clay from
I ithers.

The painted ceiling which is in this house
Has its colours from a stranger’s pencil.

Thy wit is like that of a gardener

Who lays out his garden with plants taken from others.
The verdure in that garden is from another lawn,

Each beautiful flower that blooms there i.s from another
srarden ;

Each bud of it, though it be life-cherishing,

Is sprung from the heart’s blood of another than thee :
The.unfruitful willow which rears its bead
Has drawn its leaves from that seed already decorated with
designs of trees.'

Its freshness is from no rain which thou hast bestowed on
it.

But is from the sweat of the brow of thy friends.

How long wilt thou burn with desire for the money of
others ?

How long wilt thou glue thy eyes to the profierty of
others ?

Collect not the cash of those who foster eloquence.

Fill not thy pouch with the gold of others.

Turn thy thoughts from the drink of others,

Drink water from thine own fountain.

If thou be Ehizr, where is thy water of life ?

If thou be sugarcane, where is thy sweet branch ?

Like a date-palm thou raisest thy head to the sky.

But thou givest no fruit but dry date-stones.

355

t t e. Fairi merely sowed the seed which had been raised by others.

488

cypress whose head brushes the sky.

Is void of all flavour of fruit.

Why all this vaunting of thine own eloquence
Why all this ridicule of a heart-broken one like me ?

If I from shame open not my mouth
Do not attribute my silence to folly.

My breast does not contain a stone as does a ripe date,

I am like the oyster-shell, full of pearls, but close my
lips.

If I release my tongue from its bonds

The eloquent will refrain from opening their lips.

Do not cast gibes at me as Satan did at Adam.

Consider my state and refrain from speech.

I am a Samiii, and can, by the power of niy spells
And magical power, bring into existence a puppet form.

1 can throw Venus and the moon into turmoil,

I can throw Harnt’s ' magic scroll into his well.

I am all this, — a magician who is magic’s self,

From whose words magic has been spread abroad.

[, who am famous for my words of magic.

Am myself the sky, the moon, and Venus.

Samiris are in every curl of my hair,

Babylons are in the well of my magic.

^ Harrit and Manic were two angels who, havini' expressed their surprise
at the wickedness of men. were sent down to Babil (Babjlon) to be sub-
jected to the Cempcations to which men were exposed. There ther learnt
the ma^ic of the Babjloriians. Zuhrah fthe planet Venus), or, Mccording to
others, a beautiful female of human kind, appeared before them with a com-
plaint against her husband Both fell in love with her aud attempted to
persuade her to admit them to her embraces. She flew np to henven, aud
the angels followed her. bat were not admitted On the intercession of a '
pious man they were permitted to choose whether they would expiate their
sin in time or in eternity. They chose the former, and are suspended, head
downwards, in a well nenr Babylon until the day of judgment If a man
desires to learn magic hr may go to them and hear their voices, though he
cannot see them This explains the refeience to Venns. Ni^InT means to
say that he is so accomplished as u magician that he has nothing to learn
from Harut, and could afford to throw the angel’s magic scroll back to him
in his well.

489

The wealth which springs from this work is mine, to my 366
heart’s desire.

The coin of this kingdom is struck in my name.

Learn from my speech the beauties of style.

Have no false shame ; lay hold of a master’s skirt.

He who comes as a true disciple to his master
Gathers in both worlds the treasure of happiness.

Jfot one line of thy verse is correct.

Thy verses are the laughing-stock of the eloquent.

Although nobody has told thee this to thy face
And nobody rakes up thy faults before thee.

Yet thy detractors, in thy absence.

Delight the meetings of eloquent men ;

When thy verses are quoted among them
They pick out thy errors one by one.

They praise thy poetry to thy face
And curse and abuse thee behind thy back.

Thou art a friend of none and hast none for thy friend.

Thou hast, alas, no bosom friend to sympathize with thee,

To show thee what thy faults are

Or what it is (in thy verse) that thy auditors criticize.”

When I was writing this memoir and asked Ni.shani for some
of his verses as a memorial of him he wrote me the following
letter : —

Having made the jewels of the mines of holy poverty and
humility and the gems of the oceans of despondency and restless-
ness, which the jewellers of tiie workshop of yearning and the
ocean rangers of the handicraft of taste have washed with the
limpid water of sincerity and threaded on the string of suppli-
cation, a sacrifice to the joy-giving footsteps of that incomparable
one of this age, that miracle of the mercy of Providence, who.se
heart, with its knowledge of hidden mysteiies. is as a world-
displaying cup t to prudent searchers after truth, and the mirroi*

* The reference is to the cup of JamshiJ which, according to Kastern
fabulists, represented the whole world, Tn MS (.-V) this passage referring
to Badaoni’s qu.alities of heart and head is leproduced again in Ni.shani’s

490

of whose mind is the astrolabe of the astronomers of the Path,
I humbly represent to those who are admitted to his heavenly
assembly, that gathering where angels sit, swearing by God and
3S7 by the honour of God (He is blessed and exalted ! j, that by the
blessing of the consideration which has been bestowed by that
incompaj'able and unequalled Being on the leisure time of this
humble one, by asking him to collect his scattered scribblings, I
desire to give a hundred praises for the favour which he has shown
to me. I am writing for his servants two fragments, one of prose
composition, and the other of muptaris, et caetera, and have half
finished the work. Please God, I shall pack them up and despatch
them to-morrow or the day after. For the piesetit I have sent
several couplets from that masnavt in the opening couplet of
which the hemistich. ‘ I am a Samiri, a Samiri, a Samiri,’ 1 occurs.
Pray be pleased to correct it and to set aside what may be fit for
reproduction. May you remain in health.”

Among his letters was the following regarding the emperor’s
seal with its die containing the names of his majesty’s great
ancestors as far as the lord of the ffortunate) conjunction (Timur),
which he wrote and sent to me.-

‘‘ O outstripper of the swift runners of the subtleties of .sciences
in diflBculties arising in the assemblies of the noble and the learned,
shooter of the arrows of boundless knowledge from the bows of
perfections against the globes of the hearts of high and low, striker
of the disavowing ordinances with the swords of brilliant proofs,
and opener of the doors of the obscurities of truths with the
keys of convincing arguments ; how art thou in this age, on every^
day of which people of penetration have known the signification
of ‘ on that day shall a man fly from his brother and his mother
and his father ? ’ ^ Verily the object of the gaze of the aspirations

third letter to Badaoni, vide infra, 492. All the complimentary epithets
and similes in this letter are applied to BadSoni. They are even more
tnlsome than is usual in Indian letters
1 Vide supr'i p. 486.

The following letter is in Arabic.

a -P .

.kl ■» O-'O W ^ ^ V'

s J (Tfi Q:n.r'an Irxx, 34, 35.

491

of the people of this age is the defects of others. Verily the
brethren of this age are searchers, after the faults of others, and
they do not regard their own faults ; and this is owing to the
hardness of their liearts, and the dnlness of their hearing, and the ^8
dimness of their sight. “■ Their hearts and their ears hath God
sealed np and over their exes is a covering.’ ^ How, therefore,
should they know their own affairs, much less those of their
brethren ? And they are excused for they are led astray into
this error. And tell me of thyself, of thy sonl which is angelic
in its disposition, in its goodness and purity, and, like the sun,
diffusing rays and bright light, incompanible in natural and
acquired talents, comprehending the truths both of creation and
of creation’s God ; an epitome of precious and world-wide perfec-
tions ; may God most High preserve it from all ills which can
affect the body and all calamities which can befall the soul, with
a perpetual and ineffable protection; and may the raised dust of
detriment not settle on the skirt of its perfection. Sly employ-
ment from the Isf to the end of Rabi^u-l-aivival ^ has

been the engraving of the seal of the ju.st king, the perfect
^al'ifah ou which are engraved his sublime titles and the names
of his exalted ancestors as far as Amir Timur, the lord of the
(fortunate) donjunction.^ The seal is wide and round and
contains eight circles, one in the middle, and the rest clustered
around it.” ^

The following is a copy of a letter which he wrote from Labor
to tshaikh Umam Ya'qnb of Kashmir

'■ It is not my heart alone that is the abode of longing for
thee.

In desire for thee all the members of my body have become
beait.s.”

^ Qar in ii. fi. 2 twelfth month,

a Tiie third month. i Akbar. 6 Tide p 432, note 4.

s The circle in the middle was for Akbar’s name, and the seven circles
round it were for the names of his ancestors, rir: —

(1) Hutnayun, (2) Babar, (3) ’Ijraar Shaikh MirzS, (4; Sultiin -Abu Sa‘id
.Mirzii, (5) Saltan Muhammad MIrzi, (6) Jalalu-d-diii Mirin Shah, (7)
Qatbu-d-din Amir Timiir Gurgan, Sahib-Qiran.

492

Why should I complain of the power ' of the spells of this old
enchanter * sitting^ on a throne, wearing a patched robe, and
dwelling in a lofty temple, who has, by the power of his magical
incantations, brought the whole universe, from the fish * to the
moon, into his blue glass bottle, and. having closed the mouth of
359 *5ottle with wax from the candle of the moon, has sealed it
with so many thousand seals that the foot of flight has no power
to step from witiiin it. and there is no hope of the hand of any
helper from without reaching those within ?

I have uttered many ci-ies hut no one comes to my as.sis-
tance.

It is as though there were nobody in this turquoise vault.*
Perforce, therefore, I remain in the bonds forged for me from
eternity, and place my head on the thre.shold of diseipleship.
And, since the country and the king are alike in this condition in
relation to fate, it i.s evident that mankind in general, much less
a solitary individual, can have but little power to move hand or
foot in tho.se bonds, or release himself from durance in its prison ;
unless it be a perfect 7'eligious leader and perfected guide, aided
in various ways and by different means by divine guidance and
divine inspiration. Such a man might, striving with the strength
of divine assistance, and the aid of boundless struggles and
ecstacies, free himself from this most daugerors of places, this
mo.st difficult of situations. But, in truth, in these day's there
IS, save that incomparable one of the age, whose nature i.s
endowed with auspicious attributes, angelic (jualities, and holy
signs of God’s handiwork, who is a revelation of the marks of
the mercy of Pioviilence (His powei- is honoured), no perfect
knower of God illuminated and adorned by the ijualities described
above.*

1 I believe the text to be eoiTupt h> re. Tt riin^i

literally ‘ why should I complain ot the hand of the lamentation of
the spslls, etc.’ My translation is conjectural.

2 Fate.

3 The fish on which, according to Eastern fabulists, thewnrld rests
* The sky

MS. (A) here inserts the passage mentioned on p. 490 note.

493

I hope that your holiness will, by your exalted * regard, free this
hopeless prisoner in the bonds of the body and of outward forms,
who is a unit not beyond the pale of human kind, from all bonds
contrary’ to the laws of the prophet and intrusive upon the faith
of the chosen one (on him be the most excellent of benedictions
and the most perfect of blessings) and that yon will sometimes,
when yon have leisure to think thereon, call him to mind in
prayer for his attainment of his outward and inward desii-es,
for his happiness both in things seen and things unseen, and for
tiie accomplishment of his objects both in matters pertaining to
the world and in matters pertaining to God ; for there can be for
him no other means but this of arriving at God and at the firm
rope of the manifest religion. He hopes that God (He is praised
and exalted), will, of His favour and perfect clemency, protect 30 Q
and guard your holiness, with your dear sons and your honoured
friends, from all the snares of the world and misfortunes of the
age, and will preserve you over those who love you truly and
those who follow you sincerely.”

CXLVIII. NasihI.^

He was that Jamal )^an, ^on of Shaikh Maugan of Badaou*
who has already been mentioned. He was a young man of perfect
orthodoxy and well known for the beauty of his form and his dis-
position. It may be said that love for him was the cause of the
authors settling in Badaon. Had he not been tra.nsitory as the
rose he would have left behind him many examples of his poetry,
but death gave him not the opportunity of acquiring accomplish-
ments.

The following verses are his : —

Hear this well-weigheil saying from one who was nurtured
0)1 love.

He who dies of love is better than he who lives without
love.’ ”

according MSS. The text has which d.ies not

accord so .veil with the context.

2 Fid' .lupia, p

no:e

494

“ My dark-eyed beauty, thon hast smitten me with a wound,
whilst thou wert riding

I take delight in this love, for thou hast mortally wounded
me.”

In imitation of that opening couplet by the Khan-i-Kalan.*
which begins —

“ In my youth the harvest of my life was neglected in
ignorance.”

He wrote —

Each Sulaiman who did not estimate himself less- than an
ant

Has at last gone away, as dust on the wind, and his wisdom
of Sulaiman ^ has passed away.”

CXLIX.

She was but a woman.* She lived in Agra and was the
mistress ° of Mahisti of Hirat. The followdng opening couplet
is by her : —

361 J have found the day of *^ief and the ni^Iit of pain to give

little ease.

I have experienced much ^rief in these days.”

Although the poets of the age have all attempted to answer
this couplet none of them has equalled it : —

^ Vide p. 396, note 1.

^ The word used here {Sidaiindn}) is not easy to translate, ft

siirnifies, for want of a better word. ‘ Solomonahip,’ i.e. all the wisdom,
inajestr, etc., which were nssociftted with Solomon.

yihdn menns ‘ hidden,’ and is formed into a ta^alluM by the addition of
the Poetesses in the East grenerally assumed some such fakhal-

/us ; e.(f. Akbar’s second wife, Saltan Salima Bei<nm, Jahangir’s wife, Nur
Jahan and Aoran^f/ib's daughter. Zibu-n-nisa, all wrote under the fn^allu*
of Makhfl (‘concealed

weak woman Tiie expression does n(*t necessarily mean that
she was ailing Tt is one of kindly contempt.

5 may possibly mean ‘ wife/ or ‘near relation,’ but I do not

think that Badaoni would apply the term to h wife, and I know of no au-
thority for the latter meaning.

495

What manhood is this, that cannot cope with a woman ?
Her son, Ja‘far by name, is now an Ahadi in Kashmir and
has been appointed to the service of the Mtr-i-Hahr. He
is an able youth.

(JL. N.^.iatI ok Gii.AX.

He came to Hindustan and died here. He wa.s proficient in
poetry, and in the composition of enigmas. The following coup-
let is his

“ O thou in whose absence niy heart runs through fire, shed-
ding its blood

Without thee I am sometimes visible in water ( tears^,
sometimes hidden in tire.”

The following couplet is an enigma on the name Abab ; —

“ Thy heart has not solved my difficulty
Fie upon thy heart, for my heart has become water.”

CLI. HiLL.t NcviDi.'

He has recently arrived at court, and is in the service of the
Khan^anan,^ The following couplet is his • —

“ That fate which wiote the recoid of the sins of the wine-
bibber

Wiote also in the margin the good uews of the Lord’s
pardon.”

CLII. N.vi-i.s

He gives himself out to be one of the descendants of his holi-
ness Shaildi Haji Muhammad of ^abashan. but his conduct be-

t Vide •‘U'pra No. CXLVI.

The author of the Tnhugdt has evidently confused him with the poet there
mentioned, for he attributes to the only Nnvidi whom he mentions the coup-
let given here, and says of the poet, ‘ He was for a long time at the im-
perial court.

* Mir/a ‘Abdu-r- Rahim, son of Bairam E^an.

Nau‘1 is thus described in the A'/n’t-Akba,/ (i, 606) ‘ Nau‘T of Ms,^had
is n ptiet of talent; if sharpTy spoken to be writes well.' Mulla Muhammad
Ki/a came from Khabushin, Tiear Mashhad, On his arrival in India, says the
Rahtmi^he found a patron in MIria Yusnf Kh fm of Ma^had, but

496

lies his claim. He is now in the service of the youngest prince.*
362 The following verses are by him : —

“ I am Naa‘i the wine-bibber, and after my death
My blisters will fester like the sun.”

“ Nau'i’s sorrow arises not from pain and grief
But from the exiguity of his stomach.”

■ Again has my desire taken the road.

That road in which even Khizr fears to walk,

Tbe flowers of the plains about it are thorns of eyelashes
The stones in that road are the skulls of men.”

CLIII. XlYAZf.'’

He was a native of the pleasant city of Najar, but he comes
of a base stock. He was quarrelsome and impudent, and confirmed
by his behaviour the general belief regarding the character of
poets. He was well skilled in the arts of poetry and prosody, in
the composition of enigmas, in hi.story and all other minor branches
of knowledge, and hks written treatises on these subjects. On
the first occasion on which he paid his respects at court to the
late emperor he.stepped towards him at the levee with his left foot.
As his late inaji st\ was very punctilious in such details of eti-
quette he said. ' The Mulla is left-handed,’ * and commanded him

soon afreiwrtrds entcied theservice of the Khankhanan, and stayed with him
and prince Daniyal at Burbanpur. For his Saqirama tbe Khankhanan gave
him an elephant and a present of ten thousand rupees. He also composed
several odes in prai.se of the prince. The l^izana-yi-' Amii n says that his
TfuxitTitivi entitled .Silz-u— is quite sufficient to establish his fame as a
great poet. Nau‘I had not arranged his ./aaidali.s and yhzul- in the form of
a divan whew he died at Bnrhanpur in a h. 1019 (a n. 1610).

1 Sultan Daniyal.

Niyazi is thu.s described in the Tnba iiit M ills Niyazi of Samarqnnd
spent some time in the service of the emperor Hnni.iyun, and then entered
the .service of the KhaUfah of God (.Ykbar). He spent most of his life in
Thatha He was well-acquainted with the art of poetry, and wrote books
on most arts.’

The text has JUc with a variant o— “I <.1^^ wej- 31*. The

497

to be led out and again brought forward. After the command had
been given for him to be seated he began to talk lewdly, obsoenely,
and foolishly, and fell into an argument with Mnlla Bika.si.' To
Mir ‘Abdu-l-!^yy the §adr,'^ who took the part of the Mulld he 363
said, ‘ Wliat shall I do ? I am friendle.ss. The face of a friendless
man is blackened’;-’ and when Eiwaja Husain ot Mart*,* on
whom rested some slight suspicion of infamy, supported the
other two he said, ‘ Kjh waja, what occasion was thei e for vour assis-
tance "t ’ ^ His late majesty, much vexed and annoyed bv this
churlish behaviour, rose and left the darhar. but. in spite of his
annoyance so great was his clemency that he -.votildxtot con.sent to
Niyazi’s being injured or harassed in return for his e-/il and beast-
ly conduct. The reason for Siyazi being turned out or .I’ransoxi-
aha was an ode which he wrote, of which the closing verses run
as, follows : —

“ That is not the crepuscule that appear.s in the sky ; it is m;
rosy-coloured wine

I am a debauchee swilling the lee.s. and the goblet of the
sky is niy cup.

Since Niyazi has become the king of the age in the king-
dom of eloquence

The name of Jami has been obliterated, and that ot Niyazi
is in its place.”

It is said that he was one day reciting this ode of Lis in a ga-
thering at Thatha and there happened to be there a copy of the
divan of his holiness the Maidavl. * It was opened at random and

latter is correct. N--azi seems to hsve committed a serious breach ot court
etiquette.

^ Fide p. 268. 2 Vide p 378*

(bz-kas) means ‘friendless’ and ‘ friendlessness

or ‘ a frieiidless man.’ The last sentence of this speech might be translated.

‘ The face of Bikasi is blackened,’ and it was this that NiyizI intended to
convey.

Vide p. 248.

s This speech suggests a most obscene double emendee, having reference to
Khwaja Hosain’s reputation. It may be translated, ‘ Ennacne, quae occasio
est praebendi teipenni ampiexibus eorum ? ’

® t.e. Jami.

498

oti the page at which it opened this opening couplet was
written :

“ Regard the sky as a cnp which is npside down, empty of
the wine of delight

To look for ■wine from a cap which is upside down is the
mark of a fool.”

Niyazi olim Fusnninm poetam in somnio vidit et putavit se in
barba ejns minxisse. Poeta qnidam hos versicnlos recitayit,
Riyazi Fusaniuni in somnio vidit.

Et bavbam ejus aqua ex amphora aspersit.

Si autem minxit Fasunio opprobrio ne tribuatis,

Canis, si minxit in rubo, minxit.”

364 The following verses are by Niyazi : —

” 0 silver-bodied one, thy locks curl over thy flaming cheek
For when a hair falls on the fire it twists and curls.”

“ Since 1 cannot go round the head of that tyrannical beauty,

1 bring her iiriaore to my sight and ever go round about it.”

“ It is not from the breeze that her shift is in motion,
The grace of her body has siven life to the shift.”
He died in Thatha

CLIV. N.ini.' .

This is the poetical name of Mir Muhammad Ma'sum Safari,
the orthodox and noble .son of Mir Sayyid Safa‘i. who was one of
the great Sayyids and respected elders of the city of Bhakkar.

i Mir M rihammad Ma^sum is raentioned in the Tahnqdr as a pious vomit?
man and a friend of the antiior’s. He beloncrei to a family of Tirtni/I Sav-
^ids who. two or three gen 3ratioQS before his time had left T'-rmiz in Bnkhas a
and settled m Qacdahar where his ancestors were trustees of the shrine of
Baba Shir Qftlandar. iIis father settled in Bhakkar nnd received favours
from SuiTdr Mahmud. After the death of his father poverty c-ompellod Mir
Muhammad Ma'sum to leave Bhakkar and he went to Gujarat where he wit'i
iruroduoed to i^wuja >T’/.5mo-d-din Ahmad, author of the Tabaqdt, dhen dicdn
of Gujarit. He was also introduced to ^ihiib Kh an, governor of Gnjarat,
itid was recommended to Akbar for a manaab He served in Gnjaiat ia

499

Mil- Muhammad Ma‘sum is at present enrolled among the .umlrs
of the empire, and holds some appointment in the imperial service
in Sind and Qandahar. He is very strict in religion, in piety^
praise and prayer, and in reading the Qur'an, and somebody once
said to him, ‘ One cannot do without a director in these duties
Ton should get a director and receive instruction from him, and
you can then take your leave of him.’ Nami replied, "I have
at present two or three directors, what need have I of another “

Hy first director was his majesty, for this reason, that when 1
came ' from my dear native land to the capital I was so filled
with the pride and aspii'ations of youth, which are the sources of
extravagant hopes and desires, that I could not bring myself to
consider the acceptance of anything so humble as a commander-
ship of' a thousand, or even of two thou.sand. When I arrived
at court I tasted the sticks of the ushers and mace-bearers who 365
keep order, and had to endure insults, and when, after a long
period of expectation, his majesty honoured me by bestowing on
me a command of twenty men. all niy extravagant claims took
wings to themselves, and I, recognizing my proper rank and place,
resigned myself to God’s will, and bowed my head in acquiescence,
and was at peace ; and there is that proverb, Although I strug-
gled much to become somebody I became nothing, now I let myself
alone in order that I may become whatever 1 am to become.’’

A.D. 1584, and was present at the tight of Jlaisana, and in the final e.xpedition
against Mnzaffar in Kacoli. In the fortieth year he was a commander of two
hundred and fifty. Akbar became very fond of him and sent him in 1602 as
ambassador co Persia, where lie was well leceived by ^ah ‘.-tbbas. On iiis
return from Persia in 1606 Jahangir sent him as aniln to Bhakkar, where he
died. It is said that he reached under Akbar the couimand of a thousand.

Ho was skilled as a composer and tracer of inscriptions. He was best known
as a poet and historian. He composed a divin, a maxnnr/ entitled Mu^danii-l-
■ifkdr in the metre of Nizami's Makk~ftnn,-l~<isrdi\ the TdrJ^-i-Bind, dedicated
Co hie son, and a short mt'dical work called Mttfriddt-i-ma sum/. The Ruidzii.-
and Taqi's Tazkirah sav that he composed a Khtnn.<ak, viz. : — the
•luunavi already mentioned, the Ha>n-n-Sdz corresponding Co Nizami s Tuf'Uj-
ti-Zulai^d, the Pari- $d rat to the Laild-u-majnun, and two others in imitation
of the Haft Paikar and Sikandaradma

t The words from '‘my first” to “I came” have been'inoet carelessly
omitted from the text, though they are in both .MSS., and the whole passage
is nonsense without them.

500

I am. not ^ievGdtbat my a:ffairs iiave not turned out well
but have turned out ill,

• It will be, it will be ’ nearer comes to pass. Say
‘ Be not,’ and see what comes to pass.”

No other religious director could possibly have "iven me better
direction than this. My second director was Mir Abu-l-Giais of
Bukhara,' who in i-ank and dignity was many degrees greater
than 1, for until the time when I made his acquaintance, if my
horses missed their coin and grass for one day I would be so
vexed and angry that I would turn my head away from every-
body. and not speak a word to any one ; but after I fell into the
company of the Mir I observed that sometimes, for three or four
consecutive days, there was neither corn nor grass in his stables,
nor the smoke of any tire in his kitbhen, and in spite of this
state of things, he was so cheerful, merry, and jovial that no
suggestion of his indigence and actual want was conveyed to
anybody, and nobody was in a position to talk about his affairs.
Wealth and want were always alike to him.

Take refuge from the shocks of fate among those §ufis
Who grieve for existence and rejoice at non-existence.

360 I tlien began to console myself by the thoaght that if times were
so harci with this great man and yet made no difference to him,
1 had a much better reason for being cheerful and happy, seeing
that I had not a hundredth part of his state and pomp to keep
up. My third director is a slave-girl bestowed upon me by the
emperor. Quum enim, instantibus vel diaboli insidiis vel desi-
deriis naturalibns, me seutio, sive ocnlorum micantium sive iibi-
dinis indulgentiae causa, ad stuprum iractum, statim domum
reversus cum ea rem habeo, unde quiescit cor meum ; et, corpore
aqua loto, muiidus fio. And a director has no greater duty than
that of restraining a person from unseemly and unbecoming acts.

The Mir is a most diligent student and has correct taste in
poetry and in the composition of enigmas. He is high-minded
and sublime in disposition He has composed a divan, and a
masnavi^ in the metre of the Yusuf-u-Zulaikhd (of Ni-.dmi).

I l^ide page 1H3. 2 This waa the Hu^n-v-Nuz.

SOI

The following few couplets are productions of his brilliant imagi-
nation : —

“ How sweet it is to tliink that when I am beside myself with
love thou wilt come to ask my condition.

And 1 shall explain it at length to thee in the speech in which
no tongue has part.”

When she sav/ my tears she concealed her smile
It is clear that my tears are not without their effect.”

‘ In love there is an intoxication which revives tired lovars.

In absence there is a subtle delight which even union lacks.”

“My moon-like beauty gave her message to the messenger
with a laugh.

The trace of that laugh still lingers in the message which she
sent.”

He sent the following qa^tdah in praise of the prophet from
Ahraadabad to me in Atak : —

“The scar of love which has been on my heart from eternitv.

Has been changed, by the blessings which even thy absence 367
can bestow, to naught but pain.

The flood of fire which my heart in it.s pain heaved up.

Has thrown confusion into the temperament of the earth and
the age.

The remembrance of m\' grief for thee gives me a taste of
sweet sorrow

The flavour of thy absence from me gives me an idea of the
sweet savour of deatli.

Happy is he who has set his foot in the path of love.

For he enjoys delights without sight, and a love without arts.

If thou find thy way to the Laboratorv of Creation thou shalt
see

Both creation in action and love transformed to deed.v.

My disquiet has drawn me fi’om love to madness,

64

502

Until at length I have become, through thee, a byword for
madness.

I have poured from my heart so much hot blood that it has
cast

All my life, entirely, and utterly, into a tiery slough.

My love for thee has thrown a thousand knotty difficulties in
my path

But has not yet solved even one of the difficulties caused by
thy absence.

On the one hand the fear of death offers the intoxication of
absence from thee.

On the other the delight of reunion with thee offers me the
■fruition of all my hopes.

Though the dead have not risen the tumult of the resurrec-
tion has arisen.

From the fire which has flamed up froiu my heart,’

The eyes of a whole world are sttffnsed with blood by that
eyelash of thine.

A whole people is sleeping in dust by reason of that collyrinm-
tinged eye of thine.

In both worlds have I lighted the fire of madness.

368 But I have not given in my ode a hint of the secrets of thy
love.

That heart which I had, steeped in the love of thee

Is melted into blood and poured out on my body.

From my grief in thy absence 1 have at the end of each eye-
lash a cloud which rains sparks.

I have in my breast a bundled heaps of fire which bum in
thy absence.

The eyes of the age have no employment but to gaze upon thee

The eyes of principalities and powers are smitten with love
in thy service.

I desire to be released from the hell of separation from thee

By him who wipes out infidelity, w'ho protects the faith, and
who guides peoples in the right way.

’ Literally , ‘ livei'.’

503

The king of Xaiaf. ‘Ali, the saint, the king who passes not
away '

He it is whom tlie eush of ali the prophets has gainea for the
World.

He is the moon from whom the sun receives his light.

He is a lion beneath whose feet the lion of the heavens lies in
the mire.

His protection has thrown up a fortress around the people of
the world

From which, except by death and by the a-ate of death, no one
can pass.

If the armof the sky should feel, even in a dream, chestrength
of thy grasps, it would pluck from its. joint - it.s withered
hand.

When thy majestic siiout reaches a monntain range

It reverberates, coiling like a whip lash about the mountain

, masses.

If one dot of thegS/ ^ of thy power could be weighed against
Qaf (Causasus)

The dot would take the place of Qaf. and tlie scale of t^af 369
would fly up as high as Saturn.

If thy hand should check the reins of eternity without end

It would fall a thousand stages behind eternity without be-
ginning.

The tree of the sky is but one leaf from the garden of
thy power.

The garden of the world is but Halt a mound front the cul-
tivated area of thy munificence.

Thy age has .so sweetened the disposition of the t.orhl

That it is no longer possible to distinguish between poison
and honey.

* The text Ims I believe or to be the coi-reci r-ending.

^ Literally ‘ root ’

^ The word (■ power ’) begins with the lef^r sjb ppy') \vi icb nas two

.ot3. The poet me. ms to say that one dot frcnx one of the letters of the
word denoting ‘All’s power would far outweigh Moniit Oaiicasss

504

If thv auspicious glance should fall bj chance on an onion.

The world beside it appears less than an onion.

In this thj age thj Zu-l-faqor * explains to thy enemy and
thy ‘Yea, verily ’ to thy petitioner the meaning of ‘Nay '
and ‘ Yea.’

If through thy mind there pass but the semblance of wrath.

Death trembles like a willow from fear.

The sky of tliy might has .such width that the sun

Woal'i not wonder could be find shelter behind it as behind
a lofty mountain

If thy dagger lend its tongue to the sword of discipline

Woe be to tlie s!:y with its crooked dealings, its fraud and
its many deceits.

.Since eloquence is decked as a bride for thy praise,

I have decked her with striped garments of flowery speech.

Woe to tliee Nami, and wr>e to those who shall arise with thee.

When the black book of your acts is opened before you at
the i’e.siii'ieetion I

I am ho{)eful of obtaining a mediator like tlie sun
S70 On tliat day on whicii there shall no loiig’er remain any
shadow of hope.

Him who is the rain from the cloud of God’s mercy, the cup-
beaier of the Day of Kesurrection.

The greate.st protection of the faith, and the lord even of
death.’'

Qudiiainn.

■■ One s;.>ould sit alone with one's self in the assembly,

O'ne should commune ever with one’s .self.

One should be both the nightingale and the ro.se of the
meadow.^

One should be distrtinght with one’s own affairs ’

. The---.,
2 ... <1
roiae ■^hiOi

^alc 'iT .i'cK . ht

rose £ir;d the

.505

“ Thou hearest the shout of departure from all
Thon hearest the cry ‘ Come on ’ both before and behind
All have made a night march to a distant halting place
Whilst thou hast slept by the road and hearest but the sound
of the bell.”

‘‘ 0 thou who desirest a glimp.se of that Face.

Thou needest eyes other than those in thy head
Dost thou wish to miss none of those Glances ?

Thou must have eyes in the heart, and within them yet other
eye.s.”

■■ The love of thee is not to be bought by every buyer
The price of one hair of thine is this world and the next.
Thy love is not a rose which blooms in streets and markets,
Nor is it such musk ns is found in the pei fumer’s shop.”

“Those complainest of the defilements of the world.

Find not fault with others, for thou, too, art one of the throng.
Preserve thiue own skirt from defilement
Nami, for the two or three days which thou hast to spend on
this midden.”

“ In loving lovely ones one must accustom one’s self to madness,
One must lead one’s .soul to the endurance of .separafion-.

One must become as a bottle filled with blood.

And then pour one’s heart out at one’s eye.s.”

“ In our religion thou must ever be constant
And keep the faith while in the circle of infidelitv
Thiri is the path of love of our beloved.

To stand ever with the sacred thread of idolatry round the
neck, and yet remain a Musalma" ’

A rose-garden of beauty Is the cheek of my enslaver.
Wht-n it displays I'.self before my wounded heart

371

506

I weep seas upon seas and worlds upon worlds of blood,

1 blossom with, gardens, upon gardens and meadows upon
meadows of roses,”

372 ‘‘On the day on which I arise, crying out for grief at her
absence

The hand of my heart is twisted in the skirt of separation.
With those tears which are mingled -with my heart’s blood.

I shed on my skirt the blood of two thousand hearts.”

‘ In the ocean of my heart a sea of blood is ip turmoil,
A hundred hells of pain are burning within me.

1 shall strike fire into the structure of the world
From this madness which burns within me.”

“ Seek not a sweetheart lest thy whole beat t turn to blood.
Lest thou be not hers until thou art completely changed.
Lest thou become distracted, arranged, and mad,

Lest thou depart completely from the fashion of the age.”

“ Although the seekers after His beauty are many
Jiot eveiy eye is worthy to catch a glimpse of the Face of the
Friend ;

all idolatry is worthy of the sacred thread,

Hior is' every head worthy of adorning the gibbet.”

“Every moment my heait arranges its thoughts of thee.

And makes a thousand guesses as to where thou art.

373 I fear, my love, that the bird of my soul

''Vill one day fly from its cage in the desire to be with thee.’

'■ 0 thou who hast laden thy camel.

And hast fallen asleep, forgetful of the march.
Wake, and set in the road the foot of search.

For all have gone and thou too art of this caravan.”

507

‘ To-day the breeze has a scent of fidelity,

As though it knew something of love.

It has thrown my poor mad heart into a turmoil
Perchance it has somewhere found cause to be disturbed.”

At times I weep ; at times I cease from weeping,

Lest haply from somewliere I should hear thy voice,

Xot for a moment am I free from thought.s of thee,

[ sometimes fear that I may' forget to draw my next breath.”

The eyes should know the meaning of grief,

The heart’s pain should be set forth in weeping.

In the breast should be sparks of fire in.stead of a heart.
The heart,' instead of tears, should be in the eyes.”

Every year, when the rose comes again into the garden.
Joy and gladness come into tlie world ;

On the rose's page it is easy to read lier faithlessness.
For the nightingale breaks into lamentations.”

One quarter of mv life was spent in ignorance.

One quarter of it was spent thou knowest how.

One quarter of it was spent in folly and idleness,

And one quarter was spent in grief and repentance.”

■■ My heart i.s wounded in a hundred ways by' grief for thv
absence.

In thy absence I feel that the tumult of the day of resur-
rection is before me.

I draw' in my breath, but exhale it not again.

For between my' lip and my' heart are more than a thousand
hells.”

374

1 Litei ailr, ‘ liver/

Every tear which I have shed from my eyes
I have first mixed with the poison of my grief for her
absence.

I fear that at the resurrection a hell will arise
Prom these tears which 1 have shed in her absence.”

“How long wilt thou fill thy heart with wrath on account oi
one thing or another ?

How long wilt thou make th}"^ breast no more than a coffer of
gold ?

Thy business is not to make thy heart turbid ;

Thy business is to make it as clear as a mirror.”

CLV. NazTrT of NisgirCit '

In graceful wit and clearness of intellect he. is the equal of
^ikibt of Isfahan. He is now in the service of the Khankhanan.

i In the Naziri is thus described, ‘ Manlana Nnzin is from

Ni^apur and is not devoid of freshness of intellect. He has written many
tastefal verses. He was fornierir in the service of the ^aukhSnan. bnt
now he has gone to Makkah/ Abu-l-Fa/1 thu.s describes him in the .Tin,
* He possesses poetical talent, and the jrarden of thonght has a door open for
him. Outwardly he i.s a good man, but he also desires plans for the architec-
ture of the heart ’

Muhammad Hnsain NszTrl of Nishapnr left his home for Kashon. where
he held poetical contests with several poets, such hs Fahmi, Hatim, and
others. He then went to India, where he formed a pation in Miiza ‘.\bdur
Eahini, ^ian^anan. In a p 1603-04 he wei t to Makkah on a pdgrimage,
after which he is said to have become very pious. On In's return to India
he lived at Ahmfldfib.^d in Gujarfit where he died in 1613. Jnhangir says
in his TQzuk (p. 91) 'Some time before this (enrlj in a n. 1611) I }jad
summoned to court Nanri of Nishapur wdio is well known for his poems
and poetical genius, and at pre.sent lives in Gujarat as a merchant He now
arrived and paid his respects, arid presenteil to me an encomiastic qanldah
in the model of a <jri$id(ih of Anvari’s, in return wiiich I presented him
with a thousand rupees, a horse and a robe of iiononr.’ The Ma’/isir.i-
RaKinii says that Naziri was a skilful ‘roldsmich. .and that he died, .after
having seen his patr. n in Agra, in A H. 1022 1613) at Ahmadnbad*

w here he lies buried in a mosque which he had built near his house. Accord-
ing to the Mir’atQi-i-‘Alam he g-*ve what hehad to his fii^nds and the poor.
For the couplet written concerning him by the famous poet S"’ib see

Itfi, 5S0 n.).

S09

and ia enrolled in that band of poets who are entitled gentlemen
of the suite. In imitation of that qasidah by Shaikh Nizami of
Ganja (may God rest his soul, ) which begins,

“ I am king of the kings of learning, by means of the excel-
lence of my grace of language

The earth and the age liave taken on themselves the likene.ss
of the sky,”

he wrote the following qasidah : —

“ I can scarcely contain myself in my excellence when the
wine of my songs in its vat

Rend.s the clothes on my body, when sublime realities seethe
within me.

Waylay me not with foolish stories, tor, with the fire of high
resolve.

I desire to rai.'<e * steam from my brain and my eyes through-
out the night.

I have become the trusted adviser of those who hasten towards
reunion (with tlie Beloved)

For I never return a boastful answer.

I am the dog of the threshold, but all night I gnaw my collar,

For the desire of hunting seizes me, not the intention of watch-
ing-”,

The following verses also are by him ; —

” Although for an age I have girt up my loins in thy service
what rank have 1 gained ?

1 should have become a Brahman had 1 so often girt myself
with the sacred thread. ”

‘ I travel on a deadly road, not knowing to what end it may
lead.

i’rom hat has been said it will appear that Nizilmn-d-dln Ahmad, the
anther of tlie ^abaqat who died on November 18, 1C94 {vide vol. ii, text, p. 397 ),
some ten years before Xaziri left for Makkah has anticipated Naziri’s pil-
grimage. It is possible that the abort accounts of the poets in the ^ahaqdt
received some additions after the death of the author.

1 The text hasdAi, bnt the sense demands

65

376

510

377

How shall the foot which has travelled this road ever again
return to one’s skirt ? ”

■ See the effects of my (burning) sigh, which has not yet
reached my lips,

And yet a thousand blisters from my heart are on the tip of
my tongue, ”

CLVr. Xava’i.

His name was Mir Muhammad Sharif. His brother was Mir
Qudsi of Karbala, who wrote the following couplet : —

” Wonder not if I know not the taste of gladness,

I, Qudsi, have never known gladness in my life.’

Xava’i came to India and at once entered the service of the
emperor. He has recently died. The following verses are , by
him : —

*• I am sitting in a corner, grieving over thy faithlessness

And resigning myself to the hardship of separation from
thee.

For all thy wrath I will not move from my place.

What shall I do ?

For I have no confidence in thy familiarity.

Thou art not. in the way of kindliness and .fidelity that
candle

At the light of which the eyes light up with joy.”

•• I reached no place, I traver.sed no road.

But thou didst traverse my heart and reach my heart.”

Sit down with' friendly glances, and rise not up in wrath.
Thou earnest late to inquire for me, rise not soon to go.”

CL VI I. NuvIdI of XisHirCu.'

He was a man of considerable attainments, and wao highly
regarded as a poet. His death occurred in the city of Ujjain in
the province of Mai wain A.H. 973 ( 3.D. 1565-66) while he was on

I Vide 478

oil

liis way to perform the pilgrimage. The following verses are by
him : —

•‘If my io.se- coloured tears have marked the ground with
purple stains

They cannot be removed, for these are the flowers of true
love."

The new moon on the night of ‘ Id wished to become the
knocker on thy- door ;

It conceived from afar tlie desire, which was never ful-
filled.”

What delight there is in seeing thy face each moment
VVhat joy there is in coming, each moment, to thy street.

Such a bond connects me with thee

That it eatinot be cut by a hundred swords.

iMuvidi, what ha.st thou gained from her ruby li]>

Save the biting of the finger of regret.”

CLVIII. N.tZMl OF T.\BR.iZ.'

The lustre of his poetry' i.s vouclied for by his trade, widch is
that of an appraiser of jewels. He has a mind well adapted to
poetry and has composed a dionn. which is well known,

The following verses are his : —

.1 quatrain.

" She is a capriciou.s beauty whose lips are full of wiles.

All the clear-.siifhted are smitten with love’s madness 'ny
her ;

Is tiiat a red turbaii which she lias bound on her head f‘ 378
Or is it tbe cord of my .soul steeped in blood f ”

" The scar of my- lov-e’.s cruelty, which is on my breast —

-Ah, call it not a scar It lias long been dear to me. ’

■■ How can I write an account of my condition on the page f
For the page is at nnee moistened by- my tears.

* Nazmi is not mentioned either in the Atn or in the Tabaqat.

512

The pigeon brought me thy letter and I live. I should have
died

Had not that bird of auspicious pinion brought me that
letter.

I shall write at length to her of Nazmi’s state
But where will that careless cypress-like beauty ca.st an eje
on the letter ? ”

‘‘ In tlie bath I saw Pari Khanum with a face like a fairy,
I^ay, I saw a spark of fire sitting in the water.”

” Prom thy theft of my heart and thy .subsequent avoidance of
me it is clear

That the sole object of thy friendship with me was the theft
of my heart.”

“ The down which sprouts on the rose of my beloved’s cheek
Is a violet which sprouts on a bed of tulips.”

OLIX. Voq5‘I op NisHAPUE.’

He was a relation of Shiliabii-d-din Ahmad IQian ^ and his
name was Muhammad Sharif. Alas, that such a noble ® name
should be borne by such a vile fellow ! For he wa.s more heretical
than any person who, in this brief age, was known by the same

1 Muhammad Sharif Vaqu'i belonged, according to the Ma’aair-i- Rahim,
to a distinguished family of Sayjids in Nishapur. His mother was the
sister of Amir Shahmir. who bad been for a long time -Assay-master under
Shah Tahmasp

2 A relation and friend of Akbar's foster-motner, and ui.e of the leading
nobles at Court. He was commander of Dihli from the beginning of Akbar’s
reign and was instrumental in bringing about the fall of Bairam K>i5ii
He was successively governor of Malwa, Gujarat, and llilwa again, and in

*A.D. 1576 vras made a commander of five thousand. He died at Gjjain in
Malwa in A.D. 1590-91. Hia wife. Baba Agha, was related to Akbar’s
wother She died in A.D. 1596-97. Vide Ain-i-Ahlari. 332; Badaoni
vol. ii (text), ZQ et passim.

3 Sharif means ’ noble.'

513

name^ He v.as not a BasaJ^icnii) pure and simple nor a §db<ihi * ^579
pure and simple, but was betwixt, and between these two sects
damned by God and cursed by the people, and believed in cycles ®
and held the doctrine of the transmigration of souls, nay, he
contended and strove for these doctrines. One day in Bhimbar,*
which is a city on the border of the highlands of Kashmir, he
came to my lodging in or.der to ask me to accompany him into
Kashmir. He saw some slabs of rock, weighing over thirty-five
tons ^ each, lying about, and said sorrowfully. ‘ These unfortu-
nates are awaiting the time when thej' shall put on human form.’

In .spite of all the.se vile beliefs he has written qasidahs in praise
of the holy Imams (may the acceptance of God be on them allj,
but these mu.st have been written when he was young. In
penman.ship, letter-writing and .accounts he had wonderful skill,
and although he w'as not studious ho hud devoted some attention
to Arabic works on history and hud acquired familiarity with
their style. The following few couplets are hy him : —

“In order that my lamentations in thy' absence may not betray
my secret.

I pray that my weakness may utter no soimd in the night of
my sorrow'”

“ How will shame allow me to raise rny head when thou seest
me r

For my' love for thee has made thy name the talk of all
tongues.

* Such as Shai'if-i-. Sarniadi of Isfahan and Sharif-i-.^muli ' r idr p. 34U
both heretic.s in Badiio.ai’s eyes. See also vol ii (text p. 24.5

2 I have not been able to discover what the distinctive doctrines of the
Stibdhis were, but they were evidently regarded bv Badaoni as vile heretics.

For mention of the Ba.<dkkw/jn}s rid>> p. 283 note 4

S That is to say, the changes of the natuiai kingdom.^, animal, vegetable-
and mineral, in various cycles. VuquT’s remark on the rocks, widen follows
shortly, indicates the nature on his belief on this point.

* A pargana tow'n on a stream of the s..me name in tiie Cinhat Duab in
the Panjab The stream flows four miles N.W. of Gujarat and eventually
joins the Jaldlia nald. a branch of the Cinab.

^ The original has ‘ i thousand mans each.’ A thousand mans are 35J
tout.

514

The torment of the stranger’s hard-hearteduess has cast fire
into my heart

For though thou afflictest him a hundred times he turns not
to thee.”

“ Beneath the wound of tliy sword I flinch not intentionally ;

It may he that I give thee some knowledge of my
weakness.”

“ She reminds me of the restlessness 'vhich 1 suffer in her
absence.

One would tliink that once in the days of my youth she liad
asked me liow I did.” *

For each one of the fair that I see I experience such ecstasies
of los’e,

ggQ That the fire of desire for her leaps, into flame in my soul.”

“ Every hour thou accusest me of some fresh fault,

As thou seekest only to vex me I wonder not at this.”

” I wish not to be questioned at the day of judgment,

For I fear that I should have to tell what I have suffered m
my love for thee.”

“ Thou vexest none but me, and I am glad

That thou hast such dealings with none but me.”

“ In the night of absence from thee I suffer srrief in a hundred
forms.

In the midst of the sighs and lamentations which my mouth *
utters.”

“ One can see from without the burning of my heart in mv
body,

1 The poet pieans to say that he coald hardly veutnre even to long
his beloved had she not once shown him some slight mark of favour.

2 Literally ‘ head.’

As one sees the flame of a candle in a lamp covered with a
shirt.

I fell as one dead w^hen I bade tliee farewell,

That thou mightest know that in thy absence I have no desire
to live.”

The following few couplets are from a qastdah wliicii he wrote
n praise of the Imam Husain (on him be peace) : —

Whenever, from the fierceness of love's fire, I burst into flame
like a candle,

The flame ever and anon heats against me like a moth.

Since my love has assured himself of ray fidelity and love he
emploj’s himself in cruelty.

Would that I had never submitted mr.-^elf to the violence of a
test !

If I should become a partaker of tlie boinitj' of tliy heart

It will be possible for me to convey a hundred tales in
one word.

So common has the content of opulence become in the nge'of
thj magnanimity

That the soulless body turns with io.atl'iug fiom tlie piospect 301
of life eternal

When the weight of thy comroand.s afl'ecis the nature of the
wind

5ven the light breeze oppresses the earth with tlie weight of
a mountain.

There i.s no king like me to-day in the kingdom of eloquence,

Whoever doubts this let him test tiie truth of «hat I say by
this Bismi'-llah ' which I utter.

O ye, beloved of the virgin of reality, when my thoughts
soar

They display their beauty through the windows of heaven.”

From another qasidah,

“If craeitj is done by thee my heart cheerfully subniits to it.

' ‘In the name of God/ the formala need in heginning anv work. The
poet represents what he has said as merely an iiurodaction to what is to
folloir.

516

Ir may be that God will yet give thee a feeling heart.

I die of jealousy when I consider that love for thee

Gives to each heart which it enters pain eternal.

By night when I light my heart with thoughts of thee

The burning glow of my heart is a lamp to the seven
heavens.’

He wrote this qnsldah in praise of her holiness the lady who is
the shilling one of paradise and the chief of women. ' f may God
accept her), but when it came to me in this form I found it to be
one of Ills blasphemous conipositions, and I have theiefore not
considered it right to quote any of the encomiastic couplets.
Sharif’s death occurred in A.H. 1002 (A.D. 1593-94 ). He left
many valuable books behind him, but they w'ere lost in the deep
sea and found their way to the ocean which surrounds the world.

CLX. ViDA‘i OF HikSt.

He was possessed of some attainments. He came to Hindus-
tan and died here. The following verses are his ; —

332 “ The land of Ind is full of darkness, like the niglit of separa-

tion.

Whoever has come hither regrets and repents it.

Vida‘i. seek no gain from the land of India, but leave it.

It is gain eitough if thou carry thy life in safety from
India.”

In imitation of the couplet which ruus : —

“ Happy is that time when, gazing on thy face, I am beside
myself.

From time to time I come to myself, and again and again
I am beside myself.”

He wrote ; —

It is not ftoni wine at thy feast that I am beside myself.

The cuo kisses thy lip, and it is from jealousy that I am
beside myself.”

L Fatimab, daughter of Mohamisad and wife of ‘ Ali.

517

CLXI. VAQi‘I OP Hieat.‘

Ills name is Ibn ‘ Ali, and lie was in the emperor'' service.

The following verses are by him: —

■■ Thy bro'.v is not furrowed from coqnetry.

The ocean of thy beauty is rising in 'billows, and liiis is the
reason of those fui'rnws.

Thou art still intoxicated with the wine of i-oqae:ry'

As is evident, mv dark b-aiity, from thy anoeance.

Why, like the candle, should I bring tiie tire of my lieait to
in\' to'OTue r

Since its fire is clearlv to be seen' in the fiery sighs wliiclfl
heave.

What need is there of the new moon o:i the night of 'Ll

To thee, fiorn the opening in whose sleeve the new moon is,
apparent ? "

“ Her two ruby lips have between them the water of life. 383

True it is that whenever two who are friends to the deatii
come together there i.s ever a life between them." ®

" As no dust settles on the mirror so my heart i.s ve.xed by
nobody.

For I have ceased to hope for manhood from the people of
this age.”

' is that state of intoxication which leads me enran-

tui-ed to thee

And is so deep that I cannot be removed from tliy street.”

t Tlie Tahaqat mention.^ Ibn'AlI iiniter tlie tnkhtllH^oi f'isiji line gives
no informnt.iori reiJCHi'diiig him. The one couplet of lii-v there not

fjnofced hete, so ciiac it caojimt b.^ dirermineti 'woiether the V’ ' •{! of the
labaqdt is the Yaqi \ here mentioned ; but is not improb a cupyjsl'.-=i

error for Viiqi’T.

~ %.e. whenever two stifh friends meet tliere in always between them the
thought thdt each is prepared to giv^e his Jile for the other.

66

518

384

■■ In mV unrest 1 am ever seized by tbe desire of visiting' tne
street of that moonlike beauty.

But the thought of her infidelities arrests me by the
way.”

Her liiiglet trembles on her cheek with the zephyr of my
sigh

As the smoke of the candle trembles in the passing breeze
CLXII. YasfI.

His name is Mir •Abdu-'Hah ' and he is an excellent penman.
He is the pupil of Shah <ihi\as and 3Iaulana Raqinii, and wnies
'■even scripts. He is enrolled amoriir the ahudU. Through hi'
luiitlier he is related to Mirza Nizamu-d-din Ahmad, He some-
time, s turns hi.s attention to poetry. The lollop iiig verses m n
his • —

Now that 1 have experienced the sweetness of love's
sorrow

1 enjo}' 'i thousand biir.sts of weeping for every lauch o!
mine.'

.1 1 / naira ill

•• Where is lover For my inner self is dark as the ilai heSf
night

The seeici.s ot God are hidden from iiiy uuderstaiuliiiu.

It may be that love will lead me to them, but, il iiot.

Then Is the end of my joiuney iai indeed fi'ioe up,- l,,im
effort.s.’'

Anuth’ r qua! ruin.

“■ If a jioel lorm t-.e intention of eulogiziug tliv m rafne.ss

His thuimht' are imprisoned in hi.s :aind l,y tin; wei^htmos'
of tiiL .subject.

in thy r.-nrii strife has .so ;!.'.appeare<l timm oui- mni-t

Tliat V- i! i!iu- sympathi/cs with tlie coti..; ri it-

ai eraa .-r-

■i ■ I n t ,,

519

CLXIII. VaslT.

fle was a facetions and jovial man. Leaving ‘Iraq lie went on
a pilgrimage to the Hijaz and thence travelled for India by sea.
The sailors ran the ship into a whirlpool and disappeared in the
sea of annihilation, but he, reaching the shore of safety, entered
the dominions of (Ibrahim) Quth Shah ' of the Pakan. There
he engaged in a wrestling bout with one of the wrestlers of that
country, and threw him. The wrestler’s comrades, actuated by
envy and rancour, put some poison into Vasli’s cup. The catas-
trophe of his death occurred in A.H. 977 (A.D. 1569-70), The
following verses are quoted as a memorial of him : —

“ My heart goes warily along its road, and I fear
That some sorrow is following it.”

‘ My darling, thou art become so harsh-tempered

That no one can surpass thee in harshness of t’enaper.”

CLXIV. VUQUFI OF Hieat.

He was originally known as Mir Wa‘iz (‘the preacher ’) and
WHS a native of Badakhshan. He held stirring meetings foi’
preaching. The following verses are his : —

‘ Though my head become the dust of thy path and be carried 3 g 5
away on the breeze

It is impossible that the thought of thy face should leave mi'
memory.’’

“ My heart is disturbed, as are thy tresses in the breeze :

Thou hast not undone even the smallest * knot in my .string
of difficulties.”

^ Ibrihim Qatb Shall (A.D. 1550- 1580) was the fourth king of i he Q;it h
HJialii dynaatj of Golkonda Vide HistO'-ic Landmark.', of thf I)er._an, hy
Maior T. \V. Haig, pp 61, 217. 23r,

^ There is a play upon words here which cannot be reprodneed in a
translation. The worde^^T*® (‘ end of a hair ’) are need to describe anyrhii l
very small.

520

All at once I have hecoine the uhirlwind of the valley of
grief.

On account of my evil passions I am become a vagabond" in
the world.”

“ The tale of my gi ief and woe has passed all bounds,

Love has come upon me and has made me his own from head
to foot."

CLXV. VaVAU of ISF.\H.iN. •

He wa.s for some time in Ka^mir, and then come to Labor and
was with Zain Khan Kuka.* The following verses are his: —
Knock at the door of the heart in the middle of the night,
for when the day appear-.s
All other doors are opened, but tlds door is shat.”

” The real dearth of fidelity is this, that the lovely ones of this
age.

Set out the well-spread table and then drink- the heart’s
blood of the guest.”

CLXVI.

He is Mii za Barkhurdar, " who has th-- title of Khan-i-" A lai

i Acconhm); to r'-p At ifhla ht" i-.J. Vaf.rl bpl-mred to ihe ‘ Imridivtah
ivard.-!, ar.d was bi .uei t up .11 Ijfili.oi I'li- ipi.iir-ip, ,irp ci'od. D:bdusuni
- iii.s him a Turk ai.d t'.ac lip wa^ -it i-.i-t an imner of ul. tluM. Fiom a

defc- t Ml tme of ids pros iip was o. d b'-iu'd 1 l.rt, oi tip bliiid Tnfa’
D-iirliis! tTu .i.ids tiiiii ids inipudioit, ll.i'tf-ry w .is pro . -rlda!. la the Ann
(i, lie as tluis th SOI 'lie pos-t^-s.-s spu’ks of taste. He w .imieied

for some time m ii>e tr-st-rt of itoi.anipitt, but bas now tmt the niuntlo of
worhiliiipss on ids slioiihiers.’
i Vl 1c p 327.

3 ilirzi Itai kliurriu- was, in the fortieth year of ,\kliar’s reitrn a
commainler of tt.-o I riodipi’. ami llfty. !i s f.itner ii -d been killed in a tiobt
with the Bili-ir rebel Onlrnt. w ie> ti.e, niier wMnis cn ie t and kept in prison
till the -llth year, ivliee. on p 1 ' inenr i.t u lie i\y lie was allowed to

return to hi.3 home. It o i^ni.iar, howev.-r, w iio wished to avenge the death
of ids f.ithei, Idilwait d r Imn, but D.dpnt ni. united to e-cane, .ykbar
wag mueh annoyed with B iikhuidai and impiiaoned him. He w.is released
after the accession of Jahangir, and in Hill accompanied an embassy to

521

He is the son of llamdam Beg ■ wlio was one of the famous •nnirs
of his late naajestv. Hamitami is well known for his bravery and
his goodness of disposition. He used to occupy himself with
poetry. The following couplet is his ; —

“ See my heart, which has on every part of it a fresh soar
caused by love’s madness ;

It is an oceiu of grief and everywhere in it there is a 3g0
whirlpool of blood.”

In imitation of that gfiazal of ^safi’s, wpich begins ; —

“ My slayer closes her eyes at my dying gasps

Until my heart longs with regret to catch her gaze.”

He wrote, hy the emperor’s ordei-, the following ; —

“ The arrow of that slayer came and passed through my
heart,

And the scar remains on my tieart till the day of resurrec-
tion.”

fehai^ Faizi. at the time when this akn7.ni was under discuss-
sion at .Sgra, wi'ote the following : —

“ Place thy foot on it (my heart!. ® “0 shiyer, .as I gasp in
death.

That thus I may nave an opportunit 3 ' of kissing thy foot.”

At this time (Faizi) produced many ghnznls oi this sort from
his divGu ami dressed them up to suit the emperor's taste. ^

Ft is. a. 1 einlMs-y ivf'.triirci in 1620 ninl Rnrkhnrdar was made a
t .tinmamlei- of tie., r . .nn.s'onl ()a ^ii'nj..li.'tn’s aoeessinn he was marie
governoi of hit*. it* anil a conm, mtier of six rtiousarri, but was very soon
leiTinved from hiliar. In 1632 he was pensioned r.ff as tie was old and given
rn opium, and received nn nnr.nnl pension of one faM of rupees. He died a

11, itural dentil at Aoia. ru.’c .Irn-i-.f i. 512.

According to tiie Ain-i-A'c'.ari (i, 465) Barkhurdar’s fntlier was
Abou-i - R,i h innn Duidai Haindnm Heg was apparently his title. Butdai
IS the n.one of a bran-li of tlie BarUs tiibe.

I am not sntisfied rvicii Ihe iradnig of this verse. I believe that the
te.xt is coi i iipi (,r tliat some context is leqnired to convey tlie exact meaning,
or tint it is an example of P ,i,l’s peoiili .r P. raiaii.

Ihe subject of this sentence is not exinessed. 'I’he sentence may
refer to Oamdaini, but its contemptuous tone suggests that Faizi ig
ndicated.

522

CLXVII. HajeI. ‘

H« is descended from his holiness Shaikh Jam, (may God
hallow his tomb). He was very pious, chaste, and pure, and liad
an angelic disposition. He has compiled a divan consisting of
five thousand couplets. The following verses aie some of tlie
products of his genius : —

A quatrain.

“ 0 Rose to whose skirt no hand can reach

We love Thy name and are intoxicated by Thy perfume !

This is the mai vel, that Thou art present and yet absent *
from our midst

387 Thou art invisible, yet all that is visible is from Thee ! ”

An ode.

It i.s tlie singer of the morning, joy-diffusing, that awakens
desire in our hearts

The nightingale of early morn is welcomed as an intimate to
the a.ssembly of the Rose.

Become by the height of love’s good fortune the humS ® ot tne
lote-tree of Paradi.se

For the giirden and the scenery of this village (tlie world'
oppress, the spirits.

Wash thy moutii with the water of repentance from the dregs
of I hy sins,

For thy life has been spent in transgression and the time for
restraint has eotne

Put on the breastplate of worship, fur. ambushed bv thy
life's way,

'I'he lobber of thy time stand.s to meet thee.

Witli his blood-shedding swoid in his hand.

1 This poet i.s not mentioned in tlie -bn oi in Hn- il'- Blocli-

rnann, referring, on p 6'22 of voi. i of the .iin, to nnntiirr poet benring the snme
ni7iaZ?u.», styles him ‘ Hijri ’ I prefer to cnnaect the tnkhallvi wilh_y?'-Jl
(h.ijr, rather than with ihtjrat).

- i.e invisible. Tliis qaatrnin is S»/!-i8tic — The ' Rose ’ is God

® Vide p. ail note 2 In this ode again the ' Rose ’ us God

523

Make not this inn with two doors a palace for thine
abiding

For strife makes rents in its walls and the wind of death is
keen.

Hasan Hajri in beauty of verse and in the way of perfection

Is the disciple of the wise man of Shiraz and of the saint of
Tabriz,'’ ‘

'■ Sweet is the season of winter, especially in the spring"-time-
of youth

If tlie rose of joy blossoms from the cnp of wine.’’

'■ Happy was that night when the street of the tavern was our
resting place,

And the splendour of the cup-bearer’s form was the lamp of
the assembly.

The breeze of re-union with tlie Beloved gave us fresh life,

Or it would have been difiBcalt to live under the hand of
separation.'”

•'In the morning, the time for the rose and the splendour of
the tulip,

The voice of the ringdove brought subtle truths to our eais ’ 388

My lodging is in the street of disgrace.

Its dooi’ is removed and its wall is mined,”

i esterday I hail a desire tor the holy temple and made m v
wny to the rose-garden,

1 went and walked around - niy loved one’s lodging.’’

^ Tlie s'vinfc of labi’*/* is Mainanii J.il.iIu-tl-din-i-KiimT. The ideutitv
of the wi.se man of Miii-az ’ is not so oc-ifiiiii He may iiave been Sa'di or
il'inj/ DTobuhly tiie latter.

ceremonial circamambulatioii uerformc'i around the K.i'hal

• I , .*I a ttri i .

524

"TheiO'-e, percliance, came to tlie lose-garden from beneath
my beloved's arm

For it lias the sweet perfume of her shift,”

“ Whose spell-casting eyes have once more flnttex’ed my heart 't

Whose ringlets, diffusing ambeigris, have once more become
the chain for my madness of love ? ”

• I fear that my hard-hearted love will wreck the affairs of my
soul.

Oh, may nobody have a love so hard-hearted as mine 1 ”

“ Who am I, fallen in the dust at her door 1' A helpless one

A hopeless one, a friendles.s one, a destitute one.”

“ Ah, vagrant heart, thou hast chosen thy place in the dust at
her door !

Thou hast found a good place for thyself.”

“ If thou desirest faithful friends.

I swear by thy fidelity that none is more faithful than I

*• Desirous of being with thee for an age 1 have sought to hf*
with rliee,

When 1 found that I could not be with thee I tiecustoitied
my.self to thy absence.”

CLXVIII.

He was that Muhammad Haihim who was mentinned ' in
connection with B-di’atn Ivhaii. the lylianl'l.anaii. He w^l^ 389
bi-other’s son to IMaulana Shah Muhnramad UnsL' He wrote

1 Tide vol. ii (rexfi), p. 41. where HSshim is rneMtioned Irtviug sold t >

Bai • am KhAu for <‘0,000 tanli'is, a snm afcei wards iiK reaped to 100, OCo
tankaa, an I'de wiiich Bair.’im j*ff ei w.irds palmed off as hi? own Hashim
is des'*ril»ed as * Ha^uni of Qandahir.’

^ Possibly ^lanliO-a Muhimmad of one of Akbar’s trans-

lators Vide A'ln-i-Akburl, i. 106, 540 and Bndfiunj. Tol. ii. text 595 59ii.
wh«i’e he is described ns a man of depraved mind

525

poetiy sometimes under tiie name ot Sania’i and S'linetiines under
that of Vafi. but at last settled on the poetical name (Hashim)
which is now given to him. He had most exccdlent taste in
poetin-. The following verses are his ; —

“ O turtle-dove, whatever thou bewailest in the garden

Thou mu.st surely be tiiinking on her cypress- like form.

Like a sparrow I am caught in thy snare.

And thou neither slayest nor releases! me. '

“• I wander in the garden, when thy face i.s not before me,
shedding tears of the colour of tulip.s.

I sit beneath each i-ose and tears of blood stream from my
eyes.

In my grief for thee I am filled with blood a.s a flask is
filled with wine, and I desire

To pour out at thy banquet-like wine the blood with which I
am filled.

I shed not tears fi’om my eye.s except on the dust at thy
door ;

How shall I pour forth my honour in the dust at every
d(jor ?

Remembering her wheat-coloured face I sow in the plot of
desire

The grains of my tears which are tlu' seeds of love’s
madness.

I. Hash im, like the wine-flask, shed every moment red teai'.s.
while I sigh like an organ thinking on her wine-coloured

lip." ^

"It is not thy mole, 0 silver- bodied one. that cast> its reflec-
tion in the wine,

It is the pupil of my eye, drowiie 1 in luy hearths blood
A qnatfiiiii,

" 0 thou whose i-inglets are the fetters of nu love-sici; heart,

I am distracted by those two ringlets hke ambergris in coloui' 390
and perfume.

67

526

391

Tliou didst say ‘ Die then of the pain of love for me ;

It is an age since I have been dying of this love.”

It has been said before that the Khankhanan, Bairam I£tan
i)onght one of his gi,azals for a lakh of tankas. The ode was that
which began.

Who am 1 ? one who has dropped from his hand the reins of
his heart.

And has fallen by the hands of his heart in the road of
grief.”

His deatli occurred in the city of Labor, in A.H. 972 (A.D.

loSi-VO).

Conclusion.

This is the account of some of those poets, most of whom were
contemporary with the author and were writing daring the time
in which he was writing, and whose divans are current in this
age and are circulated as examples. As for those who have leapt
from the net of this memoir and are here neither described nor
indicated by casual mention, I puake them over to those who
shall hereafter set foot in the plain of existence, for this serie.s
f of poets) is as endless as the Burhdn-i-Tatbig h and to corapie-
hend them ail within the limits of one age, or one short space of
time is beyond the limits (of anv capacity) and beyond the ex-
tremity (of its powers).

A rnSsnavi.

Two couplets one day seared ray heart,

As the singer was chanting them to his guitar

Many Janes, Decembers, and Aprils

Will come after we have become dust and bricks,

While those who are now invisible to me

Will come and pass over my dust.’’

Praise be to God ! My pen, in its atrabiliousness, has, like a
madman, dealt drily and coolly with everybody, and has poured
out from the cup of its heart every drop of black bile which it

1 . 1 take this to be the name of a book. Tlie ^foid.s mean ‘ the demona-
tr.icion of compariaon.’

had in its spot of original sin‘ and given forth from the columns®
of its fingers all that came to its tongue, so that (I am not sure)
Tvhat those who come after we will say when, in their search for
treasure ^ they have hastened ® in the tracks of the crows’ feet of
this impudent (pen), * or what answer I shall give in respect of
all my idle gossip. I fear that in accordance with the saying,
Thon shalt be treated as thou hist treated others’ they will deal
with me as I have dealt with these poets.

“ Thou hast called me a promise-breaker, but I fear
That this accusation will be laid to thy charge on the da', of
resurrection.”

Bat there is here a subtle distinction if the discriminating
neglect it not, and it is this, that I have apportioned eulogy and
execration according to the canon of the unmistakable sacred law
and have bestowed praise and blame in accordance with my zeal
for the faith, and my case is similar to that of the boor who
entered a company seated at table and began to eat without any
regoji-d to the others, and collected all the dishes round himself.
One of the company said, ‘ Sir, who are yon, and why do you
thus intrude upon us ?’ He replied, ‘I am a Turk, and 1 am a
servant of the daroglia,^ and I am hungry.’ Bat if others, besides
myself, should be jealous for the faith I shall not resent tlieir
ciiticism; may, rather, my life is a sacrifice for those people who
shall apprise me of my faults. But if they be not jealous for the
faith let them hang their heads and hold tlieir peace; for in
truth the bird of my pen, with its sharp bill and its sublime

1 (suwaida) the black spot of original sin whioh the llnsrilmrma
believe to be in every befrrt,

2 ‘rnled oolmiina/

The text hes and MS. (A) hns of neither of wliich can I

make sense. the rending of M3. (B), *jiven as a variant in the text,

is correct. v

* The text has

The variant given in th* text on th

authority of MS. (B) ia correct.

5 ^ ^ The letter < at the end of is not iJi the text.

* Prefect of a town or village. In India^ a police officer.

o'lti

flig it, is in the position of that beast ■ which shall come forth as
tiie fiist sign of the Judgment Day, for it stamps on the fore-
392 heads of tlie circumstances of the folk of this last age the words
• this one is a Muslim,’ or ‘this one is an infiiiel,’ exalting some to
God’s mercy and setting apart others as accursed, and the saying
of the prophet (may God bless and assoil him.) is clear on this
point, ‘ O God, I have not blessed in my prayers any hut him
whom Thou hast blessed, and I have not cursed in my cut sings
any but him whom Thou hast cursed.” It is 'elated that that
chief of the prophets (may God bless and assoil him while t'ne siiii
and the moon shall rise) invoked curses on the polytheistic ‘Arabs
and on. the chiefs of tue Qiiraish, and particularly on one
mentioned by name, for a whole month after lie hud been
slandered* by the wicked, and said, ‘ O God, curse the infilel.s.
who stray from Tliy way, who make Thy prophet a liar, and who
slay Thy saints. Thou art Lord of this world and the no.xt.
0 God, preserve me in safety, and join me to the pious !’ And.
since the end is but a return to the beginning, there is, in these
days vheu tlie faith is exiled (for ‘ the faitli appears as a
stranger, and verily, it has becroiiie us it appears’) every occasion
for the ron.stant recital of the folb'wing prayer, ‘0 Gol, assist
him wlio assi.sts the relistion of iluhainrnud and forsake him who
foisakes the faith of Muhammad ! ’

The author of the (bfid ^ four hundred year.s ago

uttered iiis complaint and said

•’ 0 kings ot tlie earth, hasten, all of you,

That \ou iiiav catch tiie perfu'ne which is all that is left of
tile faith '

: the wiiich. arcoMlinir to the Masitltn^as id to rmna

loll'- as t hf? fir.-'t iliGC'nnins' Jiult^ment Dav, tvjuciiUD^ the l^elievD’s

vv’itD tht* ‘•t.ff of Mu.'Os and marking the ia-jes of tue ii.tulels witli t!ie se»l of

2 i’lie t*'^t his MS (A) has which jippcars to be the

( nrfoct t

^ I reifivt that I be«*n nriahh* r.* find miMition of rhis hook, or of

the na nc of its <itit]ior The nienuing of the title is ‘a hi^hw.iy for (God’s)
servut-jS ’

529

Islam lias ^one from your hanjis, nnd ye heed ir not ;

Infidelity has captured the world, and ye sieeo ! ’

Forsakinc: the custom of authors, who have ir. icspect of each
of their works, of whatever sort, a hundred hore- : civour from
the age and from the people of tlie ae-, and. haw. c dedicated a
work to .somebody, make it a means of bem;: j .tted re the
intimacy of kinvs, of nesging for rewards, and c. : w .mine r' ,;-:'
objects I, aitlioat desire nr expectra'cn .'of rr.aie' .1'. jair ' w
seeking aid from God, Tiu.stiiig in H:’ !. .and rirml- . ng 'h,'. •
the skirt of his uni'.-ersal favour and hts !>■, are" veli-’-.-r'
in bygone rimes, have placed these, my first frui'-s. •' rl - ('i' m
speech merely fo,' the sake of virtuosos uraong ri.. ss ro come. s'.
may be desirous of. and anxious for, informati m .- warding jur
times, that haply its ilavour may pleas., the paia. r ’ riieir sr aG,
and also that some relish from the m .rseks on f-ible cf tbei:
favour may become the lot of the palate of the c.:T.piler cf the
work, who is, tis it were, their gardener.

If thou drink wine, pour a draught out on the ground.

Fear not that sin which carries some gain to others.’

I shall now explain what it was that originally led me to
collect these fragments.* Since a complete revolution, both in
legislation and in manners, greater than any of which there is any
record for the past thousand yeais, has taken place in tbe.se days,
and every writer who has had the ability to record events and to
write two connected sentences has, for the sake of flattering the
people of this age, or for fear of them, or by reason of bis ignor-
ance of matters of faith, or of his distance from court, or for his own
selfish ends, concealed the truth, and, having bartered his faith
for worldly profit, and right guidance for error, has adorned false-
hood with the semblance of truth, and distorted aud embellished
infidelity and pernicious trash until they have appeared to be land-

* »•• ‘pour a draught on the ground tliat tlinse who are dead and
tamed to dust may benefit by it.’ Tlie onneeit is a favourite one ainoi.g
Peruan poets and oconrs in the ’ tomb. song ’ of HafiK (o.lo 439, Jarrett’s edi-
tion), and. frequently in tbe qnatraina of ‘Umnr-i-^ayyam.

* Literally ‘ potsherds.’

630

able, confirming the truth of the verse. ‘ These arc they wlio
have purchased error at the price of true direction : bat their
traffic hath not been gainful,’ ' I am convinced tljat the people of
succeeding generations who shall see their false fables and all
their unprofitable prolixity will, in accordance with the saying,
•he who hears dispenses with the solution of his difficulties,’
with another class of men, regretful not in the least, be per-
plexed, and will expect and await (something else i. and there-
fore, that the veil niay be drawn aside, it is incumbent on me.
who am acquainted with some, at least, of the affairs nnrrated.

394 and have even been intimately connected with these transactions,
to place on lecord what I have seen and what I have heard, for
mv evidence regarding these things is that of an eye-wlme.ss who
i.s certain of vvhat he relates, and does not sprii:g from mere
supposition and guess-work i ‘ and when can that which is heard
resemble that which is seen t j in order that, on the one hand, my
record may he an expiation of the writings,* past and present,
which I have been compelled and directed to undertake, and, on
the other, right may be proved to be on the side of the Muslim’s
and mercy may be shown to me.

‘ Perchance some pious man may one day put up a prayer for
mercy for this poor wretch.’

And when 1 examine tlie matter well I perceive that this lough
draft, and other rough drafts like it, have all the 'merits of fair
copies, for, in conformity with the couplet.

Reduce a word at once to writing.

For words slip suddenly from one’s memory,

Something, at least, of what the author knows whether by hav-
ing seen occurrences or by having heard of them, is fat once)
entered in them and reduced to writing. At the same time, to
efine such ‘•' -I’ibbling.s as literary compositions can, to do no moi’e

Qur i

an. ii, 15.

2 BadaofiT heie refers to '-he worka undertaken by him under the orders
•)f Akbar, vir. ■ — the transta'-ion of the MT-kahharata and the compilation
p.-iUa of Tdrihi-i-Alfi, (viis J.in-i- 1; .-•'i, i, 104. 199, and Badaoni, in
text), 310, 394.

531

than justice, be nothing^ but mere boasting and vaunting, which
are repugnant to refined natures, and so far am I from vain-glory
and pride in this matter tliat I am ashamed of them, and if I
should attempt any lofty flights regai ding them this base coin of
mine, this worthless and contemptible merchandise, my faulty and
inappreciated style, is sufficient to refute and falsify my claim.

In these matters nobody knows me as well as I know myself.

A Story by ivay of Mural.

A fox said to a camel, "O uncle,

Tell me truly whence you come.’

The camel replied, ‘ Lo, I come from the bath
Where I have bathed my limbs in water hot and cold."

The fov said, ‘ You have fine piMof of what you say.

Fur both your forelegs and your hindlegs are very dirty.

It is now high time for me to raise the hand of supplication to
die court of that Providence who lacks nothing and who cherishes
his servants, aud to ask of Him that which shall be mo.st
expedient for me, although His glorious maje.sty is fettered by no
expediencj’. 1 shall therefore conclude with the following suppli_
cations, which are free from all spaciousne.ss and elaboration, and
are (therefore) not far from the assurance of a favourable answer.

Supplications.

0 King, look upon us with the ey'e of acceptance and mercy I
O Lord of all things, visible and invisible, compose us in the
seeking of Thy will, and remove from our wayg and from the way
of all Muslims, all disunion, disquiet, and perplexity ! Bestow
Thy pardon and forgiveness on us in our time. Let Thv
gracious favour and guidance both impel and lead us. Deliver ns
not up into the hands of our own disunion and leave us not
to ourselves, neither entrust us with ourselves, but preserve us
from our own wickedness, and bring onr affairs and those of all
Muslims to a happy conclusion in Thy' paidou and acceptances
Pardon what we have done in the past and preserve us from what
we would do in the future.

395

532

Whiitever Thou he-.tovrest on Thy sei vant, besfow on him
faith,

Bestow on him adherence to Thy will.

Forsake us not in Ti:y wrath; let us not be occupied with any
but Thee. Disjilnee us not from Thy remembrance. If Thou
shooldst que.sfci.on qs' we have no answer ready, if Thou art angry
we ha,Te no strength to abide it. From Thy servant proceed
faults and lapse.s, and from Thee all pardon and merev.
O Ancient of Days that chanee't not, and Glorious one without
peer! O Hidl.-n ant Omnisc.ent God. Thou thtit hearest and
seest, that hast no need or dc.s.-riprion or explanation, our faults
396 are many, and I'liou knoue'-c and seest us ; grant unto ns a good
enri, let us die Muslims, and join us to the pious; and bless and
assoil Muhammad and tlie race of Muhammad, and all Thy
prophets and apostles

Look on me tis though I were entirely free from disobedience,
Consider not mine offences, consider Thy mercy.

MTu'd off from me all the evils of the age,

Keep me afar from eveiy evil that there is.

So dirt’Ct for me all worldly tiffair.s and religious matters.
That I may be free from want in both worlds.

By Thy favour Thou keepest me in safety

From the calamitie.s and tumults of these latter days.

Thou accomplishest the desires of Thy poor servant,

Thou niakest me a partaker of worldly and spiritual bless-
ings.

Deliver me not Iielple-is into the hands of mine own lusts,

But grant me protection from my dominant lusts.

Send me not as a beggar before any one,

My begging is at Tby door and no other.

Give me a portion of lawful gain.

Give me a corner apart fiom the worldly.

Pardon and veil ray sin.

For it is Thou that veile.st and pardonest sins.

Grant me knowledge of Thine eternal bounty,

Free me from ignorance and error.

533

Preserve me from companronship with the unworthy
Cause me to meet witli a pious aud sympathetic friend.

Set my face on the road towards Thee,

Free me from all else but Thee.

Accomplish not my desire in any object
The end of which will bring' me shame.

No one but Thee knows what is for my good,

'I’hou knowest my Io-<8 and my piofit.

Fnrich me with the treasure of contentment,

(live me ease in the joy of serving Thee.

Incline me not to objects of this world,

Alake my heart cold to such desires.

So accustom me to thoughts of Thee
That I may think on no other but Thee.

Open before me the door of knowledge of Thee
And in that privy chamber impart Thy secrets to me.

Give me a cup from the flagon of love

And grant me, from that wine, a new intoxication.

So fashion my inclinations to the world to come
'I'iiat I may no more desii’e the things of this world.

Though death shall rend my upper garment

Let not the dust of this world settle on my lower garment.

When the sword of death cleaves my life,

When ‘Azazil * shall resolve to accept the faith,

Of Thy mercy cast one glance towards me.

Open in ray face the door of Thy favour,

Oeclaie to me the glad tidings of Thy graeions fo7-giveness.
That I may have rest in the sleep of death.

Giant unto me such power that, in that perplexity,

My cross-examination * may be easy to me.

2 Aftf>r ji corpse is laid in the grave it is visited by Mnnkir and NakTr,
two black livid Htigels, of a terrible appearance, who order the dead person
to ait upright and examine him as to his fairb. If he answer rightly they
sirffer the body* to rest in peace and it is refreshed by the air of Paradise, but
if not they beat him on the temples with iron maces. They then press the
earth on the corpse, which is tormented till the day of resorreotion.

68

397

534

When,, the people of this world set their faces townrds the
resurrection.

And rai.se their heads in bewilderment from the dust.
Captured, by their evil fate, in disobedience
Their faces blackened with shame for their sins.

When, in that confusion, in the heat of the Resurrection
Day,

The rocks shall become water from the fierceness of the sun's
rajs.

When there shall not be. in all that plain full of grief
-\ny refuge but the shadow of the Most High,

(If Thy bounty, 0 Creatoi’, Lord of many claims,

Cast the shadow of Thv favour on my head !

When the balance of justice is brought into the midst
-A.iid the deficient;}' and e.xcess of ail shall be made apparent.
When I shall have in my company mountains of sin,

Be.side which the mountains shall seem no larger than a blade
of grass,

Tc is not impos.sible ti.i Thine illimitable mercy
To weigh down the scale of my obedience ;

In that place of fear and confusion

When the records «{ each one’s acts shall fly open

And my record shall be so black

That it will be impossible to enter any fresh sin therein,
Wasii my record with the cloud of Thy clemency.

And, by tiiat washing, raise me to honour:

When the tire of hell shall leap forth as a banner
To draw to itself all the people of the world
Pour, of Thy grace, some water on rny fire
And bring me forth purified from that, fire.

When over hell the nariow bridge ^ .shall appear

1 if i/) the bridge over tne midst of bell, wbich is here graph-
ically described, must be pas.sed by all after the Judgment. Muhammad
and hi.-, Muslims will, with God's aid, i>a.ss rapidly over its path, narrower
aud shai per than the edge of a knife, but the unbelievers, following them
will lose their footing, and fall through the briars, which hedge it in on
either side, into the flames of bell.

58.5

And the people shall raise a shont for joy,*

I'hat bridge, long as the dark nights of separation,
Sonl-melting as the sighs from lovers’ hearts,

Narrower than a hair.

Darker than the smoke of the night of separation,

Sharper than a sharp cutting sword,

Shooting forth tongues of flame like hell fire.

If Thou take me not by the hand, woe is me.

For the nethermost pit of hell will be my place I
T bring no goods with me but hope,

0 God, make me not hopeless of forgiveness !

Piaise be to God, and thanks, that after all tlihs smearing
of nyself with the smoke of the midnight lamp and all this fever
of the brain I have gained freedom from this hasty work, Ah.
how much distraction have I not suffered at the hards o' these
troabled time.s, before this valuable coin of time (.to ..ompietemy
work) and this priceless jewel (the work itself) was obtained.

Please God this work will, for a while, be preserved from the
treachery of lack of preservation,* of faithlessness, or of evil
guardianship,. and will thus be safeguarded from the picking and
.stealing of tlie ignorant cutpurses of this age, and, being con-

1

Joy does not, at first sight, appear to be an emotion suitable
to the occasion. The meaning may be either that men will be overjoyed to
see that hell is bridged at all, or that the devils in hell will rejoice to see
that the bridije is so perilous.

* Badaoni here declares his intention of keeping this work, the M7tn~
ttt^abu’t-Tavdrl^, a secret. His anxiety that it should not become kfiown
during his life-time will be easily understood by anybody who has read it-
He designed it to be a counterblast, in the interests of Islam, to the writings
of Abu-1-Fazl and his elder brother Faizi, w’ho had borne the chief parr, m
leading Akbar into the paths of religions speculation and had so far snc-
ceeded in leading him away from orthodoxy as almost to persuade him that
he was God. According to a statement in the Mir'dtu^l-^Alam the book w.is
made pnblic during tlie reign of Jahangir, who showed his displeasure br
disbelieving the statement of Badaoiil’s children that they had not known
of its existence, Hadaoni's work wrs certainly not known in A.H. 1025
(A.D. 1616), the tenth year of Jshangir’s reign, in which year the Md*dtir~i-
Rnkimi was written, whose author complains of the want of a history besides
the ^ahaqdt and the Akhnrndma,

536

stantly hidden under the protection of God’s guai-dianship, ’.vilt
receive the ornament of acceptance, and no damage will reach it
^l om the evil eyes of squinting (rogues) of varying degrees,* and
the hands of inipotent (foes) vrill fail to reach the skirt of the
beauty of this creature of my wit, and whoever is not admitted to
the knowledge of its secret will remain disappointed.

A thousand thanks to the God of the world.

For that I have entrusted my jewel to one who can appraise
jewels.

It was the intention of my languid and secretive ^ heart and
ray wearied mind to gather together the “ Key to the History of
Ka^mtr* and the histories of the Kings of Gnjarat, Bengal and
Sind, with an account of the wond^s of India, and to have them
t.ound together in one volume with this, but that stuff did not
match t!\i,s, for silk must be joined with silk. Tlierefore, on
Friday, tiie twenty-third of the month Jamfidiu-s-Snm A.H.
1004 (March 5, A.D. 1595) I shortened the rope of prolixity and
contented myself with writing this much. I composed the
following verses with the object of giving, iu an enigma, the date
of its completion : —

Thanks b>^ to God, by whose clemency this Selection * has
ari'ived at completion

When I sought the date of it from my heart (my heart)
replied

(It is j a selection w'nich has no second.

Praise be ro God whose assistance has enabled me to complete
it, and ble.ssings and peace be on the best of mankind, our lord

I BailaonI he«e does noc nesitate to attack the highest.

* Tlie text liere has {satir) ‘a batcher,’ or ‘ batclierly,’ which

makes no sense. ' MS (A) has jpG# {sdtir} which I have tiansiated. Badaoni
apparently refers .''gain to his intention of keeping his book a secret,

3 This was, apparently, the History of Kashmir, based on that of
Mulls Shah Muh'iininad of Shahabaii, which Badaoni, by Akbar’a order,
compiled in A.O. 1591. fide vol. ii, text, p. 374

♦ The letters of the word (‘selection’) have the foilowing

Talaea, 1 + .50 + i00 + 600+ i + 2^*i54 If we sabtraot the value of the
second letter, 50, we obtain the date 1004.

537

Ma^ammad, aad on his family, and on his great companions, till
the Day of ResaiTection.

Tub End.

MUNTAKHABU -’T-TAWARIKH

BY

‘ABDU-’L-OADIR IBN-I-MULUKSHAH

known as

AI.-BADAONI.

Volume III.

'J'HA>sLATKD from THi: ORlGiN-AL PERSIAN AND EDITED BT

SIR WOLSELEY HAIG. K.C.I.E., C.S.I., C.M.G.. c.BE..

LieuUnant-C olo-rM , Indian Army (Bttired).

Piojtisor 0} Arabic, Persian, and Hindustani in the University or uublin.
and Member ot the Royal Irish Academy.

CALCUTTA ;

PBIMTED AT THX BAPTIST MISSION FBESS.
PUBUSHED BT THK ASIATIC 80CISTY OF BENGAL.

1926.

TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

This volume completes the translation of the Muntal^abu-’t-
tawari^ of ‘ Abdu-’l-Qadir b. Muluk Shah, al-BadaonI, in
the Bibliotheca Indica series. Its sources are those enumerated
by Lieutenant-Colonel G. S. A. Ranking in the preface to his
translation of volume I.

It was begun as long ago as 1897, but o%ving to the constant
pressure of official duties was not hnlshed until 1909, and even
then could not be immediately printed owing to difficulties in
the way of allotting funds for the expenses of publication. The
index and list of errata have only lately been finished.

Frequent interruptions in the work are responsible for some
inconsistencies in transliteration — such, for instance, as
Shamsu-’d-din and ghams-ud din, Khaja, Kh’aja, and Khwaja.
My excuse for the frequent omission of any equivalent for the
letter j in transliterating the latter word is that the transla-
tion was made, for the most part, in India, where the frequent
pronunciation of this mute letter was so oSensive that at the
time I judged it better to preserve the correct pronunciation
by omitting it. I confess that this is not a very good excuse
for the omission of a letter, but it is the best that I can offer.

1 have nothing to add to Lieutenant-Colonel Ranking’s
remarks on the difficulty of translating from Persian, except
that they apply with peculiar force to an author like BadaonI,
writing in a language not his own. His style is stilted and
inelegant, as must nearly always be the case with an author
labouring under this disadvantage, and he persists in one error
— the misuse of the word which means “ ungrudging

emulation,” but is always used by him in the sense of “ envy ”
— but it is free from the bombastic prolixity and gross affecta-
tion of that of his compatriot and contemporary, Shaikh
Abu-’l-Fazl.

As this Ti-lnme the historian’s w -t -sists to a great

VI

translator’s PRKRACF.

extent of literary criticism, I have been careful to translate both
his text and the excerpts of verse quoted by him as literally as
possible, in order to convey some idea, however faint, of his
standard of literary excellence. In only one or two passages,
to which reference is made in notes, have I ventured to
modify expressions which in an English dress would have been
merely ridiculous ; but I am conscious that many of the
passages which 1 have rendered more exactly will appear
grotesque. This was unavoidable, and is due partly to the
wide divergence between the standards of taste of Persian
writers of the sixteenth and English readers of the twentieth
centuries, and partly to Badaonl’s own defects.

A few passages are so indecent that I have been constrained
to veil them in such disguise as a dead language affords. To
this practice it may be objected that it calls attention to
what is unseemly, but a book of this nature will seldom be
taken up but by genuine seekers after knowledge, who are not
likely to suffer harm from the obscenities of BadSonl, or of
those whom he quotes.

Interruptions in the work of translation are also responsible
for a .rather long list of errata, for which, and for other imperfec-
tions I crave the indulgence of my readers.

TaiNiTy C0LI.EGK, Dublin.
April 7 , 1924 .

W. H.

INDEX

TO

MUNTAMABU-T-TAWARIK^
Volume III.

{The nurubers refer to the pages ; n stands for foot-note.)

A.

A dan, ^aikh, of Amroha, 63. 64,
65.

‘Abbas I, ^ah, 283 n 4. .302 k 1,
322 n 1, 324 n 1. 498 n 1.
‘Abdu-'l-'Aziz. ^laikh, 83, 163,

164.

‘Abdu-’l-Br,qI-}’i-Ci^itI, Jliyaii
^aikh, of Badaon. 91.
'.Abdu-‘l-rdiafur, MaulSnS, 157.
‘Abdu-’l-(2hai'ur, ^aikh, of A'zam-
pur, 69, 70.

-Abdu-'l-ijhanl, ^aikh, 28, 164,

165, 166, 137.

‘.Abdu-’l-Eaqq, Shaikh, 167, 168,
169, 170, 171.

•.Abdu-‘1-Hayy , lllr, of i^urasSn,
no, Ul, 378, 379, 380, 497.
'.Abdu-'llah, Jlfr, see Vasfi.
"Abdu-’llah, MTr, of Ivla^liad, the
jurist. 378.

‘Abdu-'Ileh, iliya.'i ^laiklj, of
Badaon, 90, 91, 92, 93.
-Abdu-’llah, Manlana, of Qanda-
har, 78.

‘Abdu-’llah, Mullii, of Labor, 438.
-Abdu-’llah, Mullii, of Sultanpur,
see Makhdurnu-’ -Mulk.
'.Abdu-’llah, ^aikh, 82.

; ‘Abdu-’ilah, ^aikh, of Badaon,
106.

‘.Abdu-’ilah !^an, Sayyid, 450 n
' 3

‘Abdu-'llah I^an the Uzbak (of
HumSyun’s and Akbar’s court),

I 11, 450 n 2.

‘Abdu-'llah ]^an the Uzbak (ruler
of Transoxiana). 199, .210, 211,

' 452 n 2.

i ‘.Abdu-’llah Niyazi, Miyan, of Sir-
hind, 73, 74, 75, 77.

‘Abd.u-’!lSh-!-^attari, ^aikh, 7 n

1 .

‘Abdu-’l-Latlf, Mir, of Qazvln,

' 148, 149, 150, 444 n 3, 463 n 3-

‘ Abdu-’n-NabI, i^aikh, 127, 128,
129, 130, 131, 199, 232, 411 n 1.

‘Abdu-’l-Qadir Badacnl, see BadS-
onl.

‘.Abdu-’l-Qadir, ^aikh, (I) 51.
j ‘ Abd'j-’l-Qadir, ^laikh, (II) 51,91.

‘.ibdu 'l-Qadiri-’l-JIlani, Sayyid,
Pir-i-Daitgir , 52 n 4.

‘Abdu '1-Qadir, ^aikh, of Labor,
152, 153.

; ‘Abdu-’l Qadir, ^aikh, of Uoch,
141, 142, 143.

540

Index.

‘Abdu ’l-Quddus, of Gan- ,

goh, 5, 69, 82, 127.
‘Abdu-’r-Rahlm, Mlrza, ^an-i- .
manan, 152, 166, 173, 174, 193,
262, 273, 302 n 1, 304 n 3, 318 n
2, 351, 393, 429 n 1, 439 n 4. 440,
454 n 2, 473, 495, 508.
‘Abdu-’r-Rahman, Ghazt, 46 n 6.
‘Abdu-’r-Rahman, deputy of Hus-
ain Kban, 10.

‘Abdu-’r-Ra.Kman, ^aikh, BalutI,
317.

‘Abdo-’r-Razzaq, Maulana, of
GHan, 233 n 1, 432.
‘Abdu-’r-Razzaq, ^aikh, 31, 33,
144.

‘Abdu-’s-Samad, IGiaja, Zarrxn-
qalam. 85, 196, 429.

< Abdu- ’^-Shahid, ^aja, 55, 66.
‘Abdu-’^-^akur, Maulana, of
Labor, 157, 158.

‘Abdu-’l-Wahhab, Miyafi, 58, 81,
168.

‘Abdu ’1-Wahid, ^aikh, of Bil-
gram, 106, 107.

‘Abdu-’l-Wajd, Shaikh, of ^avaf,
403.

Abhar, 279.

Abtari, of Bada^shan, 263.

Abu, Mount, 326.

Abu ‘All SIna, 225, 226.

Abu Bakr, 25 n 3. 39, Il7, 1.8,
195, 196, 225 n S, 438 n 3
Abugafb, see Abu, Mount.

Abu Hanifah, 5, 37, 41, 110, 125 n
4, 129, 135, 193 n 4, 210 n 4.

Abu Ishaq, Miyah Sbail^, 81.

Abu Ishaq-i-KhatlanT, 84 n 5.

Abu Ishaq-i-llihrang, ^lai^, 60.
Abu-’l-Barakat ‘Abdn-’ilahi 6.
.Ahmad , alias Hafizu-’d-dini-’n-
Naeafi, 4 n 2.

Abu-’l-Fath, Hakim, of Gilan, 9,
10, 100, 101, 194, 233 , 234,304 n
3, 305, 367 n 2, 383, 392 n 1,
393, 432.

Abu-’l-Fath, ^ai^, of Gujarat,
77, 78.

Abu-’l-Fath, ^aikh, of Thanesar.
29, 46, 187, 188.

Abu-’l-Fazl, l^ai^, “ ‘Allami,” 55
n 4, 84 n 1, 98, 100, 110 n 3,
113 n 2, 114, 115, 116, 123 n 2,
124 n 2. 125, 128, 168 n 1, 173 n
5, 174, 193, 233 n 2, 234. 235 n
3, 248 n 2, 251 n 1, 260 n 2,
283, 284, 285, 287 n 7, 291 n 4,
293 n 2, 367, 375, 378 n 4, 405 n
1, 41- n 1, 413, 419, 439 n 4.
.535 n 2.

Abu-’l-Ghais. Mir, of BuWiSra, 182,
183, 500.

Abu-’l-Ma‘Sli, QazT, of Samarqand,
210,211,472.

AbS-’l-Ma‘ali, Shah, 344, 3-15.

Abu-’l-Ma‘alT, ^aikh, Ghurbati,
51, 153, 154, 155, 156.

I Abu-'l QSsira, ^aikh, 318 n 2.

] Abu Musa Muhammad 6. ‘ Umar

j Madini, Tsfahani, 49 n. 1.

! .Abu Sa‘id Mirza, Sultan, 491 « 6.

! Abu Turab, ^ah, 164 n 4.

! Abyssinians, 373 n 1.

I Adabii-'l-Muridin. 29.

! Adam, Malik, Kakar. 103, 104

Adharn Khan, 298 n 4. 308 n 3.

I 310 nl.

.Adhan. Shaikh, of Jaunpur. 66,
67. 68. 69.

'.Adil Shahi Kings, 438 n 4.

‘AdlT, 314 n 1,

-Afghanistan, 37 n 4, 342 n 2.

Afzai Khan, 408 n 4.

-Afzal !&5n Kulahl, see Kulahi

Index.

541

Agra, 6, 8, 10, 11 n 5, 41 n 8, 55,
66 n 5, 77, 78, 110, 120, 124, 130, ;
135, 136, 141, 151, 152, 159 n 1, |
161, 162, 168, 174, 175, 177, 182, |
185, 196, 209, 210, 211, 212, 218, I
229 n 1, 242 n 3, 263 n 4, 273, ^
277, 278,283, 308 n 3, 314 n 1, i
340, 358, 389, 399, 402, 410, 411
n 1, 437, 439, 443, 464, 469, 494,
508 n 1, 520 n 3.
ihadis, 100, 317, 495, 518.

Ahdl, o£ ^Traz, 390, 391.

Ihmad, Hakim, of Tatta, 235,
236.

Vhmad, Malik, see Dakhll.
ihmad, Qazi, 31, 32, 35 n !,

Ihmad, ^aikh, 127.

Vhmad, Sultan, of Gujarat, 240
n 5. I

Ahmad-i-Gjiafiarl. QazI, of Qazvln, {

259,260.

Ahmad-i-Jand, Mulla, 213, 218.
Ahmad-i-Sufiyak, 166. i

,4hmadabad,-70, 158 n 3, 198, 240,
241, 3S8 n 1, 501, 608 n 1.

Atimadl Fayyaz, ^aihh, 131, 132,
133, 134.

Ahmadnagar, 330 n 1, aiy, 438 r, I

4, 458 n 4. !

Alirar, Khaja, 150. |

Aima tenure, 6.

Atn-i-Akbari. I n 2, .3 n 5, 5 n 2, ,
6 nn 3. 4, 11 n 2, 12 nn 3, 4, 14
n 2, 19 n 1, 26 n 4, 27 n 3, 28 j
n2, 36 rf 2, 37 n 1, 41 nji 3, 5, j
45 n 2, 48 n 7, 50 n 2, 60 n 6, i

62 a 7, 63 71 6, 65 n 6, 66 n 5,

69 n 2, 73 nn 3, 4, 76 n 2, 77 n
7, 83 n 1, 84 n 5, 85 nn I, 3, 89
2, 100 n 7, 110 nn. 4, 6, 119 n ]
I, 120 n 4, 123 n 2, 124 nn 2, 3, I

126 n 1, 127 n 2. 133 n i. 137 n

4, 141 n ’, 145 n 2, 148 n 3, 150
nn 2, 3, 152 nn 1, 4, 159 n 1,
160 nn 3, 4, 161 n 4, 163 nn 2,

4, 165 n 3, 171 n 1. 173 nn 3, 4.

5, 180 nn 2, 3, ISS n 4. 190 n 2,

193 nnl, 4, 194 n 1, 193 n 3, 212
n 2, 214 nn, 215 n i, 216 nn
1, 3, 217 n 6, 218 nn 2, 4. 5. 226
n 5, 228 nn, 229 n i, 230 nn.
I, 2, 231 n 1, 234 n 2, 237 nn 1

4, 5. 238 nn, 240 5. 248 n 2.

249 n 2. 251 n 1, 253 n 3. 255
n 1, 258 n 3, 259 n 2, 260 n *,

262 n 1, 263 r. 4, 265 ran 1, 4,

271 n 0, 274 n 1. 275 n 1, 280 n
3, 283 nn 2, 4, 285 nn 2, 3, 286
n I, 287 n 7, 28S n 2, 291 n 4.
292 nn 1, 2, 293 nn 1, 2. 294 »

1, 297 n 2, 298 ran 3, 5, 299 r

3. 302 n I. 304 nn 1, 3, 307 n 1,

315 >1 1. 316 r- 2. 317 ra 1. 318

n 2. 319 n 4, .322 nn, 324 n 2.

325 n 2, 327 n 2, .329 n I, S34

nil 1, 3, 333 n 3. SSO nn 4, 5.

337 .1 2, 338 n 3, 340 nn 2, 5.

341 n 1. .342 n 1, 344 n 1, 345 r.

2, .350 n 4, .351 /in 2. 3, 352 n 1.
353 rt 3. 334 n 4. 336 n 2, 358 -
2,359 n 2, 300 n i, 361 nnl, 2, 36.3
nn 2, 3, 365 n i, 307 nn 2. 3, 36S
n 1, 370 n 1, 372 n 2, 373 n 3
374 n 4, 378 ran I, 2, 379 n

1, 380 n, 1. 3S! 2. 383

2, 384 n 1, 385 -i 3, .380 ii/-

2, .3, 383 n 1, 389 n 2, 30c
n 1, 391 n 1, 393 n 1. 396 n

1. 397 n 3, 398 n 4, ;:99 n -3,

401 n 3, 4C3 nn 1 . 2, 405 nn 1,2,
406 n 1, 407 n 1, *08 n 4 , 409 n

2, 410 n 2, 41! n 1, 419 n 2, 420
n 2, 422 n 6, 429 r. !, 432 /j I,
435 n 2 , 436 n 1, 437 nn 1,2.

542

Index.

f

438 n I, 4_3lJ n 3 , 440 n 3, j

442 n 2, 444 n 2, 447 n 2,

450 nn 2, 3, 4, 451 nn 4,
453 n 3, 454 n 2 , 453 n 3,

461 n 2, 462 n 2, 463 n 3,

465 nn 1 4, 467 n 4. 468 1,

469 n 2, 471 nn 1, 5, 474 n 1,
475 n 2. 480 n 1, 483 n 2, 495 n
3, 508 n 1 , 51 1 >i 1 , 512 n 2, 518
n 1, 520 n 3, 521 n 1, 522 n 1,
524 n 2.

■ Ainu-'l-MuIk, Hakim, of ^iTraz,
Dava’i, 229, 230 , 284, 320 , 321.
322, 390, 391.

Ajmer, see Ajralr.

Ajralr, 83, 13r, 138, 140, 149, 150
n 2. 162, 198, 206. 207, 441 n 3.

Ajudhan, or Pak Pafetan, 19 n 1,
21. .52. 452 n 2.

Akbar

. Jai-ilu-

d-din

^Tu

•an'.:

nad.

the

Empero-.

1 n

6 r? 4. S.

10 «. 2,

1 1 n

5. 1;

? n 3

18

n 5.

47, 55 n

4, 6;.

, 06,

8

3. S4

.85.

89.

99,

00,

101,

118 n 2.

119.

124.

126

p !.

127,

12.8.

129.

130.

131.

134.

1 .36

137.

1.33.

141

n .0.

142.

147.

1.50.

163,

164,

174.

131,

198.

199

r .3

201,

206,

213,

216.

225,

231

■ry >

p I,

233,

2.34

n 2,

233

n 3.

‘‘37

nn

5,

239.

240.

248

n 2,

249

n 2,

233,

254

n 2.

2.56.

262

?j 2

26?,

n 4.

264.

265.

266,

267

274

, 273

278.

279.

280.

284,

285

n 3

287

293

n 2

238

n 4

299

n 3

302

n 1,

303.

304

nn

1. 3,

308

n 2.

310

nn

1. 3,

311,

315

. 31t

n 2

, 317

n 1

318

n 2

32C

„ 2

, 327

n 2.

320

n I.

,331

n 1 ,

333

I 1. 334 n

c

36 n

4, 343,

344

1. 1,

345

n 2,

349,

355

n 4,

362

n 1,

367 n 370 n

4, 3

72 n

3. S'

4 n 5

, 375

37?

n 1,

3807 .383 n 1, 388 n 1, 389 n 2,
396 , 399 , 406 n 2, 407 n 1, 408
n 1, 409 , 411 n 1, 413, 414, 418,
419, 420, 421, 422 nn 2, 3, 423,
425 n 3. 426, 429 n 1, 432 n 4,
433, 436, 441 n 3, 444 n 3, 450
n 4, 463 n 3, 466, 476 n 2, 491
nn 4, 0, 494 n 3. 496 n 2, 498
n 1, 499, 500, 512 n 2, 517, 520
n 3, 524 n 2, 530 n 2, 536 n 3.

Akbarnama, the, (by Abu’-1-Fazl),
3 n 5. 75 n 1 , 77 n 7, 83 n 6,
84 n 1, 367, 419. 452 n 2. 535
n 2.

Akbarnama, the, {by Shaikl) FaizT),
51 1 n 1, 425 n 3.

‘ Ala’i.^aikh, of Biyana, 74, 75,
77, 119.

‘.Ala’u-'d-Daulah, Mir. Kami, 123,
148, 119. 239, .379, 384, 437, 447,
467. 4(W. 477.

•.Ala'u-'d-din, Mir Sayyid, ofOudh.
101, 102, 103.

• AM'u-’d din b Muliaminad ^lah.
Sa\ yid, 58 n 2.

•.Ala u-’d-din, MullB, oJ bahor. 217.

‘Ala'u-'d-din Ci.jhti, Shai^, 3

‘Al.i'i;-'d-diu Lari, Mjlln, 109, 329.

Alburz. 253.

Algiers, 341 n 1.

‘All b. .Abi Talib, 20 n 1, 39 n 4,
48 n 2, 115, 120 n 2. 239 n 3
26G, 4C4, 503, 516 n 1.

‘Ali, -Amir Sayyid, of Hamadan,
209

■Aii, Hakim, 232,

‘All, Jlir« Sayyid, of Ludhiana,
544, 145, 146.

‘Ali, Mir Sayyid, of Nalhar, 102.

‘.All, Mir Sayyid, of Qiim, 260.

‘Ali, Mir Sayyid. of Tabriz, see
Juda i.

Index.

543

‘All, Mulla, the Muhaddit. see
Taraml.

‘All ‘Adi! ^ah I, of Bijapur, 216,
229n 1, 232 n 1, 330n 1.

‘Air Ahmad, Maulana, see Nish-
anl.

‘All Akbar. see SanI !]^an, of

Hirst.

‘Ali Barid ^ah, of Bldar, 330
n 1.

‘.All HiSn, ilirzada, 450.

‘Ali Khan, ruler of Ka^mir, 99.

‘-All Musa’u-’r-Riza, see Riza,
Imam.

‘AH Miitaqqi, Shaikh, 71, 72.

‘.All Naqi’ii-’l-Hadf, Imam, 472

'71 2 .

‘AIT Qull :^an, Sharalu, 262 n 1.

‘AH Rai, of Little Tibat, 367.

‘All ^lir, Amir, 298.

‘Alim, Mulls, of KSbul. ‘ Arif,
RabT‘i, 215, 363, 373, 374, 375,
376, 378

Allah BaWish, ShaiHi, of Garhma-
khtesar, 96.

‘Allahabad, see IlahSbad.

‘Allami, 513, aee Abu-’l-Fazl,

^aiWi.

Alwand, 253.

Alwar, 21, 162, 163.

Amani, Mulla Ohani, 262 , 397.

Amar Singh, Rana, 337 n 2.

Amarkot, 308 n 2.

Ambala, 6 n 3, 47 n 4.

Ambethi, 27, 28, 35, 36, 38, 131,
132, 189.

Amina !]^aja, see !^aja-yi- Jahan.

Amir Qazi, see .Asiri.

Amir Beg, Ipiaja, 476.

Araroha, 3, 63, 64, 120, 219, 346.

Ani8i, Yol Quli, 262.

'.Anqa, 2.

Ansar tribe, 113.

Anup Tala’o, 129.

Anwari, the poet, 233, 508 n 1.
Anwaru- 't-tanzll, ; GO n 2.

‘ Aqaidri-Nasafl, l‘C‘9.

•Aqil, see Salih the Madman.

‘Arab Bahadur, 126 a 5. 229 n 1-
‘Ara'isu-'l-Bayan, 17.

Ardabil. 190, 191.

Ardastan, 237.

‘Arif, ^ai^, Husainl, 98, 99.

100 , 101 .

•Arif, see ‘Alim, Mulla, of Kabul.

‘ Arif-i-Jami, Mauiavi, 49.

Aristotle, 225.

Ariat clan, 286 m 1.

-Arsalan-i-Jazib, 251.

Asadi, Hakim, 251 n 2.

Asaf !^5n 1, see . iliiyfisu-'d-din.
Mirz.%.

Asaf I^'in II, .see .Ja’far Beg.

Asafi. 260, 271. 333, 521.

Asehar, Sayyid. 31. 32, 35 n 1.
A.shkl. M''r, oi Qum. 260, 261, 292
n 1, 325.

Ashraf Khan, 468.

Ashraf Khan, Mir Mun4ii. 255,
256.

Asia Minor, 20.

Asirgarh, 174, 381 7i 2.

Asiri, Amir Qazi, 255 , 256.

‘Askari, Mirza, 407 n 1.

Asrar i Maklum, 203 n 2.
Astarabild 411, 451.

Ataga Khan. ^amsiu-’d-dln
Muhammad, 280, 298. 302 n 1,
308, 309, 310, 336 n 2. 388 n 1.
,396 n 1, 405 n 1. 454 n 2, 471
n 2.

Atak, 75, 253. 274, 303. 01.

Atasht, of Qandahar, 253, 254.
Atashkada-yi-Azarl . 239 2, 240 n

544

Index.

3, 291 n 2, 292 n 3, 3.22 n 1, 408
♦i 4, 432 n I, 454 n 1, 520 n 1.
Awadh, see Oudh.

‘ iwarifu-l-Ma'arii. 17. 19, 38. 225
n 3.

‘ Ayishah, 25 n 3.

‘ Ayyaz, Qazi, 130.

A'zam. ^aikh, of Badaon, 25, 26.
A'zara, ^laikii, of Lakimau. 135.
A'zampur. 69, 70.

Azar. 425,

Azarbaijan, 149, 338 n 3.

AMri, 269.

‘AzazII, 533.

‘Azdl, see Azud'i, al-.

‘Aziz Kuka, Mirza, ^^an-i-A‘zam,
229 n 1, 298 n 5, 302 n 1, 310 n
1. 329 n 1, 336, 376, 379, 388,
389, 405 n 1, 4'*', 471.
‘AzTzu-’llah, Mir, 386 , 387.
‘Azizu-’Uah, ^ai^, 14, 15, 16, 17.
‘Azizu-’llah, ^aikh, of Talamba.
3, 4, 109.

‘Azoo, Mr. R. F. , 24 n
'Azudi, al-. 70, 124.

‘Azudu '1 Mulk, 218.

BabS ^lir, Qalandar. 498 n I.
Babar, Zahlru ’d-din Mul.iamrnad,
the Emperor, 43 *; 4. 21s n 5,
253, 205, .378, 491 n 'i.

Bahari script, 378. 379.

Babil, see Babylon.

BabCI. Miyan. see Abdu-’IWah-
hab.

Babu, Adi ,7, 512 n 2.

Babylon. 4S8 n 1

BadakhMilin. 65. 84 n 5, 214. 26.3.
270 n 2, 344 n 1. 374. 409 n 2.
410, 441, 44.S, 4ijl .'.B>

BadanJSn, .Mir. 233.

Badaon, 25, 31, 32 v u. .“o, 64, 65,
91, loti. lOS, 1,52, U4. 105, 208.
:!2!>. 363 n 2. 'Ib5, S'--:. 397, 398,
tlO. 493

Hadaoni. ■ \i,.i bl.i5.Jir" Muluk
lyiali , i Ip ; 4, 7 ?/ I . : ' n 5.

22. 24 >■ 2 /! 3, 26 e 3 32 /!

1, 33 r b :r • 1-. I - *•> n

3, 41 n , '7 n 1, 6’. ■; . n

1 , 83 84 a i 8i; 88 n ■

10. i.ps ■ i,

2, 142 n 1, 143 n 2, 145 n 6, 173
no, 185 ni, 195, 202, 204, 205,
206. 207, 208, 231 n 3, 232 n 4.
233 n 2, 235 n 3, 248 n 1. 249
n 2, 269 n 1 . 273 n 1 , 283 n 4,
284 n 2. 292 » 1 . 30.8 n 3, 317
n 3 , 323 R 1 , 330 n 1 , 34.5 n 2 ,
350 n 4. 351 n 1, 372 n 3, 376,

385 n 2, 386 n 5, 389 n 2, 399 n

4, 417 n 2, 419, 420, 421, 441,

450 n 3, 458 n 2, 460 n 2, 46-5
n 4. 466 nn 2, ,3. 474 n 1, 477,

I 480 n 3. 481 n 2, 483 n 2, 493,

5, 3, 526. .527, 528. 529, .530, 531,
532. 535 n 2. 536.

' Ba-dT'a-'z-Zan.^n, o: 2*^9

n 3,

, Baglidad, 12 n 4. 29. 52 n 4, 225
' n 3. 293 n 2.

■ Bahadur Khan. 22 h n 2. 314,
333.

Bailor!, 3T'h *Ahra, Mulla, of
i-'Shui

Vu- 'l-din, Khaja. sae Na^-h*
' -nd.

Index,

545

Baha’u-’d-din Mufti, ^ai^, 78,
113, 174.

Baha’u-’d-din Zakariyg, ^aito,
143.

Bahraic, 46 n 6.

Bahrain, see Saqqa.

Bahrain Mirzg, Safavl, 470.

Bahroc, 134.

Baillie John, Captain, 29 n 6.
Bairam !&an, Khan-i-I^anan, 8,
14, 55. 77, 78 n 1, 83, 110, 122,
141, 152, 162, 185, 209, 217, 218,
227, 254 n 2, 265, 266 , 267 , 280,
310 nn !, 3, 335, 344 n 1, 351,
403, 437, 444, 469, 473, 475, 512
n 2, 524, 526.

Bajaur, 233 nn 1, 2.

Bajwara, 159, 217.

Bakhtyar i-KakT, Uiaja yujtbu-'d-
dln, 19 n 1, 45.

Bakkar, 121, 124, 137, 138, 173,498.
Balin, 324 n 1.

Balut, 317.

Banaras, 7 n 21, 166, 242 n 1.
Bandar Jarun, 473 n 1.

Bang, see Bangal.

Bangal, 8, 83, 177, 178 n 1, 188,
229 n 1, 314 n 1, 315, 341. 432 n
1, 433, 450 n 2, 536.

Banja, ^aikh, of Sambhal, 97.
Banoda, 172.

Bgnswala, 137.

Baqa'i, 273.

Baqa’I, aliat Rusva’i, 308
BSqi, of KolSb, 270.

Blrbud, 423.

BMdwan, 338 n 3, 450 n 2.

Bin, 10, 475.

BSrI Duab, 10, n 2, 47 n 4, 345
n 3.

Barkhurdar, Mfrza, Khan i-'Aiam.
see Haindami.

BasSkhwan, 283 n 4, 285.
BasSkhwSni sect, 283, 284, 285,
287, 513.

Baaawar, 26, 146, 162, 48.3.

Bayat, 338 n 3.

Bayad, 270, 271.

Bayaztd-i-Ansari, 37.

Bayazid, ^ailA, of Bustain, 7,
328.

BSz Bahadur, 407 n 1.

Bazhar, 188.

Beale, Oriental Biographical Dic-
tionary, 37 nn 4, 7.

Begum Pad^jeh, 138.

Bellew, Races of Afghanistan, 73
n. 4.

Bengal, «ee Bangal.

Berar, 83 n 7, 330 n 1, 372 n 3,
422 n I.

Beth Jalandar Duab, 159 n 1, 217
n 3, 280.

BhagavadOlta, 511 n 1.

Bhakkar, see Bakkar.

Bharatpur, ICO n 4.

Bhawanigarh, 173 n 1.

Bhiinbar, 513.

Bhungaon, 66.

Bidar, 330 n 1.

Bihar, 178 n 1, 263 n 4, 299 n 3,
520 n 3.

Bljanagar. see Vijayanagar.
Bijapur, 216 » 2, 229 n 1, 232 n I
330 n. I, 380 n 2, 438 n 4.

BIkanTr, 122
BIkasI, 268, 269, 497-
Bikramajit, see Vikrainaditya.
Bilgrain, 106, 107.
j Binn, ^laikh. 237,238.

; BIr Bar, Raja. 128, 233 n 1, 327 n
I 2, 351 n 1.

I BTrun-i Panjnad, 47 n 6, 48 n 7.
Biyah, the, 350.

546

Index.

Biyana, 74, 160 , 344 n 1, 436.
Bohars tribe, 83.

Bombay Presidency, 83 n 7.

Bughra !^3n, king o£ ;^arazm,
215 n 4.

Buhlul Lodi, Sultan, 58 n 2.
Buhlul, ^aikh, 7, 43, 167, 171.
BulAarS, 197, 198, 210, 242 n 3.
336, 452, 472 n 2, 498 n 1, 526.

■ Burhan, ^aiWj, 10, 11, 12.
i Bvrhan-i-Tatk'iq, 526.

I Burhanpur, 174,231,304, n 3, 495
j n 3.

\ Burton, Sir Richard, Pilgrimage to
! El-Medinah and Meccah, 25 n 3.

I Buatam, 7, 222, 328.

I Biistan, the, 90 , 245.

■ Buzaq, 422 n 2.

C.

Caghatal tribe, 307 , 310, 356, 407,
408 , 439.

Caghatal, Sultan, 257.

Canar, 7, 11.

CStganv, 7 n 1.

Cayan Ladh, ^aikh, 163, 164.
Ceylon, 339.

Chati, (Chat), 47, 52.

Chausa, see .Jausa.

Chittagong, see Catganv.

Chunar, see Canar.

Cinab, the, 172 n 2, 513 n 4.
j Cingiz Khan, of Gujarat, 229 n 1.
i Cinhat DuSb, 513 n 4.

Cishti order, 52, 69, 82 n 4.
Ci^ti, ^aikh Husain, 297 , 298.
Citor, 11 n 5, 475.

Cucak Begum, 344 n 1.

D.

Daghistani. 260 n 2 . 405 n 1, 408 !
n 4, 452 n 2 , 454 n 1, 474 n 1, j
520 n 1. ;

Dagh u Mahalli regulations. I

Dakan, 46 n 6, 74, 125, 170, 216,
229, 230, 239, 263 n 4, 273, 299
n 3, 302 n 1. 304 n 3, 318 n 2,
340 n 5, 341, 372, 373 n 1, 380,
383, 390, 429 n 1, 438, 441, 443,
447 n 2, 458, 460, 519.

Dakban, see Dakan.

Dakhli, Malik Ahmad, 318, 319.

Dalpat, 520 n 3.

Damascus, 50.

Damavand, 253 n 2.

Damayanti, 422 n 1 .

Danihi, 319.

DaniySl, Sultan, 263 n 4, 383 n 1,
495 n 3, 496 n 1.

Darvish, Mulla, 370.

DarvT^abad, 324 n 1.

Da'ud, Mir Sayyid, 136.

Da’ud, ^ai!^, oi ’-‘'ati, 47 , 48,
49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57,
5>, -:.P, 60 , 61, 62 , 63, 64 , 81 tin
1, 3, 82 n 4. 153, 1.54.

Da’udiyyah order, 157.

Dauri, Mir, Sultan Bayazid,
Katibu-’l Mulk, 316, 317, 31S.
Dava’i, see ‘ Ainu-’l-Mulk, Hakim.
Dawwani, Jalalu-’d-din, Maulann.
Muhaqqiq, 202, 205, 229 n 1, 320.
329 n 1.

Dholpur, 10 n 2.

Index.

547

Dlbalpur, 50, 344 n 1.

Dihli, 3, 6 n 3, 8, 47 » 4, 58, 63 n
6, 73 n 3 , 91, 97, 122, 163, 164,
165, 166, 167, 168. 169, 186, 188,
210, 219, 228. 254 n 2, 261, 275,
276, 2^7, 297. 310 n 3, 363 n 2,
390, 401 n 3, 411, 465, 474, 480,
512 n 2.

Dihnama, the, 281

i DlpSlpur, see Dlbalpur.

Diu, 389 n 2.

‘ Divine Era,' the, 425.

‘Divine Faith,’ the, 1, 118 n 2,
166 n 5, 198 n 3, 299 n 3, 389 n
2, 411 n 1. 414 n 1. 415 n 1,
422 n 2.

Dughalbad, 3So.

Fahrai, of Astarabad, 411,

Fahmi, of Samarqand, 405.

Fahmi, of Tihran, 405. 308 n 1.

Fa’iql, 403.

Faizi, Shai^, Fayyau, 86, 110 n
3, 118 n 1, 144, 157) 158, 160,
167, 170, 172, 173 n 5, 194, 195,
203, 230, 234, 235 n 3, 236, 250,
287 n 7, 297, 322 n 2, 323, 341,
361,372, 393,411,412,413,414,
415, 416. 417, 418, 419, 420, 421,
422, 423, 424, 425, 426 , 427 , 428,
429, 446, 447. 460, 485 n 5, 486
n 2. 487 n 1, 521, 535 r» 2,

Fa^ru-’d-din, ^aiWi, 13, 14.

Fana'I, 407.

Farah, 76.

Fara’iz, 94.

Farhad, 287, 369.

Farid, ^aikh, 402.

Farid, MaulSna, 175.

Farid-i-^akarganj, 18,19,

50.

Faridu-’d-din ^ir ^5h, see ^ir

^ah.

Faridun, 337.

Farfdun, Mir , 228.

Faridun Barlfu. ’ rza, 337 n 2.

Faridun Khan , n 2.

F.

Farighi, Mir, of ^iraz, 403 , 404.
Fari^ta, see Firi^ta.

Farisi, Muhammad ^arif, 429,
430, 431.

Pars, 216, 338 n 3.

Farru^ ^ah, 19 n 1.
ParrukhabSd. 93 n -5.

I Firuqi Dynasty, the, 229 n 5.

' Fast, the continued, 40.

Pathpur Sikri, 18 n 5, 21, 26, 114,
127, 130, 131 n 4, 137, 142, 144.
i 149, 152, 162, 163, 167, 171 n 1,

; 181, 198, 274, 276. 298, 314 n 1,

I 370, 374,381.436.

; Fathu-’Uah, Hakim, of Gilan, 237.

: Fathu-'llah, Mir, or ^Sh, of
^ira*, 193. 216, 232, 380, 403,
j 420.

j Fathu-'llah Tarin, ^lai^, of Sam-

I bhal. 21.

Fatitnah, 48 n 2, 516.

Fawatihu- l-Wilayah, 373 n3, 374.
FayySa, see Faizi, ^aikh.
j Fazil, Shaikh, 296. 297.

Fazilat, QSzi, 126.

I Paziu-’llah, Mulls, Fazli, 464, 465.

I Fikri, Mir Sayyid Muhammad, the
• Weaver, nicknamed Mir Rub5‘i,
352, 406.

548

Index.

Firdausi, 251 n 2, 469 n 3.

Firi^ta, 19 n 1, 45 n 2, 269 n 1,
308 n 3, 363 n 2.

Firuza, of Kabul, 409, 410, 411.

FSlad Beg Barlas, Mirza, 235, 236.
Fusuni, of Yazd, 408, 409, 498.
Fususu-’l-Hikam, 17, 29, 163, 263.
Fuzail b. ‘lyaz, 19.

a.

Gada'i, ^iaikh,6, 77, 122, 123, 141.
Gakkhars, the, 396 n 1.

Ganges, the, 7 « 2, 309, 314 n I.
Gangoh, 5, 82, 83.

Gangu, see Gangoh.

Ganja, 394 n 2.

Garha, 293 /i 2.

Garhcoakhtesar, 96.

Garhwal, 10 n 2.

Garmair, 342 n 2.

Gaur, 254 n 2.

Ghairati, of ^Iraz, 403.
Ohaus-i-A‘zara, ^laildi, 51, 52, 54,
58, 59, 135,

Ghaus-i-Rabbani, 152.

Ghausiyyah order, 175.

Ghausu s-.Saqalain, 50.

Ghazali, of Ma^had, 239, 240, 247^
260 n 2, 271. 330.

Gliazi Khan, see Ni^am, QSzT.
Ghaznavi, Mir Muhammad, Khiio-
i Kalan, 396, 397, 398.

Ghaznin, 26s
Ghazzall. Imam, 88.
tlhilzaf, 73 n 4.

GhiySs, ^5h. 518.

GJiiyasu-’d'din ‘Ali-yi'-Akfeund,
Yaqib Klian, 150, 173, 180, 444 .
Ghivasii-'d.drn ‘All, MTrzB, A^f
Khan, 14H, 180, 299. '

Ghiy asu- "d-diu Muhammad, of .Ma-
shhad, 287 n 7.

Ghori, 327 n 2.

Ghubari, Qasim ‘Ali ^^an. 398,
399, 4(to, 401.

(Miurbati, of Hisar, 401 , 402.

Gilan, 224, 234, 237, 304, 432
495.

Gopamau, 28, 30, 31, 35 n 1
189.

Greeven, R, Heroes Five, 46 n 6.

Gujarat (Panjab), 513 n 3L

Gujarat, 14 n 2, 74, 77, 78, 83, 84,
85, 98, 99, 114, 116, 134, 152,
153, 158 n 3, 168, 176, 192, 197,
214, 230, 247, 202, 263 n 4, 267,
273, 306, 323, 326, 344 n 1, 361,
381 n 2, 389 n 2, 390, 396 n 1,
450 n 2. 454 n 2, 468, 473 n 1,
498 n 1 , 508 n 1 , 51 2 n 2, 536.

Gul Af:^i5n, 245.

Gulbahar, 376.

Giilkanda, 330 n 1, 438 n 4.

Ouluhan i-Euz . 84.

Gunabad, see JunabSd

Gurgaon. 163 n 2.

Gv.aliyar (Gwalior), 6, 9, 10, 44,
.53, 62. 95, 126, 127 n 1, 158 n
3, 189, .380 n 1, 381. 466 n 3.
467 n 1,

Index.

549

H,

Haba^ , Mir, 438.

I^bibu-'llSh , :^Sja, 322 n 1, 323.

Hafiz, the poet, 36, 37 nn 1, 3, 49
n 7, 105, 140 n 1, 149, 453 n 3,
523 n 1, 529 n 1.

Hafiz-i-KumakI, 213, 214.

Hafizu-’d-dini-’n-Nasafi, see Abu-’l-
Barakat.

Haft I glim, 239 n 2 , 240 n 3, 242
n 3, 260 n 2. 367 n 2, 406 n 1.
439 n 4, 452 n 2.

Haft Kishwar. 411 n 1, 425 n 5

Haft Paikar, 411 n 1, 498 n 1.

Haidar, Mir, of KS^an, see Rafi‘i.

Haidari, of Tabriz, 302, 303, 304.

Hai(», Major41eaeral M. R., The
Indus Delta Country, 89 n 2.

Haig, Major T.W. , Historic Land
marks of the Deccan, 229 n 5,

330 n 1, 372 n 3, 373 n 1, 519

n. 1.

Hairati, 148.

HajI Begum, 168.

HSji ^lalfa (Haji Kiallfa), 4 nn
1, 2, 17 nn 1, 2, 3, 25 n 1, 26 n
1, 29 nn 2, 3, 4, 41 n 5, 49 n 1,

70 n 9, 75 nn i, 5, 84 n 3, 88 n
8. 92 n 7. 93 n 1, 287 no.

Haji MIrza Beg, 367 n 3.

Haji Muhammad l^abu^iani,
^aikh, 338, 495.

H.iji Sultan, of Thaiiesar, 114, 115,
116, 173, 174.

Hajrl, Hasan. 522 , 523.

Hakim-i-Misri, 230, 231,

Haklmu- TMulk, of GTi.in. 224,225,
22b, 232, 235.

Halatr. Yridgar, 27.'; a 1, 307 , 308.

Haltr..anc;. 342 n 2.

Hamadan, 209. 2.53 /; 2,361, 471.

i'3n I.

Hamadani sect, 118 n 2, 119.
Hamdam Beg, • Abdu-’r-Rahman
Dulda’i, 521.

Hamdami, BarUturdar, Mirza,
l^an i-‘Alam, 520, 521.

Hamid, Haji, 7.

Hamid- i Qadirl, ^aikh, 51, 141.
Hamidpur, 141.

Hamzah, Amir, 292.

Hamzah, %ail^, of Lul^nau, 103,
104.

Hanafi sect, 130. 210.

Hanafi, Mulla, 248.

Hanifah, Abu, see Abu Hanifah.
Hansi, 19 n 1.

Hardoi, 189 n 1.

Haribatu, the, 345 n 2, 350 n 4.
Harut, 488.

Hasan, Imam, 48, 148.

Hasan, Hakim, 219 n 2, 234.
Hasan ^an Sur, 178 n 1.

Hasan, QaH, of Qazvin, 381.
Hasan, .Shaikh . 15, 119 n 1, 276.
Hasan, Shaikh, son of ^aiW}
Bins, 237.

Hasan Abdai, 233 n 1, 235.

Hasan ‘Ali, i^aildi, of Mausil, 192,
193.

Ha.shim, 97.

Hasbim, Muhammad, 524,525, 526.
Haahiral, of Kirman, 242 n 3.
Hatim, Miyau, of Sambhal, 3, 4,
5, 109, no. Ill, 112, 113, 188.
Hatira, Shaikh, of Gopamau, 30.
Hatim ipoet), 508 n 1.

Haya'i. 306,

Hayati, of Gilan, 304, 305, 306.
Hemu, 254 n 2, 310 n 3, 314 n 1
HijSz, 14 n 2, ISO 107, 168, 176,
355 ft 3, 361 n i, 365. n 1, 3S3,
473 ft k .0 ’ -

550

Index

HijSz ^Sr, 385.

Himalayas, the, 327 n 2.

HindSl Mirza, 286 n I, 379 , 380.

Hindaun, 161. 162.

HirSt (Herat), 262 n 1, 286, 298.
304, 315 n 1. 316 n 2, 324 n 1,
334 n 4, 358, 406 n 2, 439 n
4. 451, 473 n 1, 494 , 516 , 517,
519.

Hirzu-’l-amani wa Wajhu-l-tahan.
41.

HiaBmu-’d-din, MiySh, of Talamba,
54 .

Hisar FIruza (Hissar), 401, 465.

Hoahiyarpur, 159 n 1.

Hughes, Dictionary of Islam, 21 n
6, 40 n 6, 52 n 4, 82 n 1, 85 n
4, 133 n 3.

Humayun, XSsiru-'d din Muham-
mad, the Emperor, 6 n 4, 8, 11
n 2, 89 n 2, 154, 161, 168 n 2,
199, 219, 246, 248 n 2, 253, 254,
265, 266 n 1, 267, 269, 275, 286
n 1, 293 n 2, .308 n 2, 309, 310 '
n 3, 314 n 1, 333 n 1. 334 n 4, ;
335, .344 n I. 362 n 1, 378, 396 i
n I. 407 n 1, 445, 450, 451 n 3, |
491 n 6. I

Hum am, Hakim, 199, 233 n 1
234 , 432.

Hurmuz, 193, 323.

Husain, TmSro. 48.

Husain, the !)^5dim, 21.

Husain, !^Sja, of Marv, 248, 240.
250, 251, 401.

Husain, Khaja, of Ma^had, see
San a’l.

Husain. Manlana. see Naq.'^i.
Husain-i-Mid", Qazi Mir, 11.5.
Husain, Mir Sayyid, Khing-sawar.
149.

Husain, ^aikh, of Badakhshan,
151 , 152.

Husain, ^aikh, of Bazhar, 188.
Husain, ^aikh, of Ajmir, 136 ,
137. 138, 139.

Husain, ^aikh, of i^arazm, 151,
214, 401.

Husain SuHSn, Laneah, 89.

Husain rasn, Tukruja, Muham-
mad. 6, 31, 32, 34. 35, 37, 38,42,
' 43, 46. 56. 60. 63 n 4. 103, 104,

; 134. 144. 397. 470.

i Husn u Naz, 498 n 1
I Huzni, Mir. 304.

I Huzur. Huji, 6.

I

* Ibadat-Khana, the, 73, 74. 129 n
1, 163, 175, 180, 182, 196.

Ibn Hajar, 443.

Ibn Khallikan, 19 n 2, 37 n 7. 41
n 5.

Ibrahim, Haji, of Sirhind, 84.
Ibrahim, Haji, the Traditionist,

196 .

Ibrahim, son of Adharo, 397.
Ibrahim, ]^aja, 19.

Ibrshim, Sayyid, of Irij, 41.
Ibrahim, ^aikh, ‘-Arab, 341.
Ibrahim Qutb ^ah, .519.
Ibrahim-i-Ci.^ti, ^aikh, 137.
Ibrahim Husain. ^aja, the
AhadI, 317. 318.

Ibrahim Husain, Mirza, 56, 61.
Ibrahim Lodi, Sultan, 43, 103.
Ihya’u ’l-‘Ulum, 29, 75, 88.

Hah Bakhsh , ^aikh, 152.

Index.

551

Ilahabad, 66 n 9, 126 n i, 158,
172, 380.

Ilahabas, see Ilahabad.

Iliihdad, Miyan, of Bari, 10.

IlalidSd, Miyah, of Lakhnau, 134,
135.

IlShdsd, llaulana, of Amroha,
219, 346.

Ilahdad, Maulana, of Sultanpiir,
172.

Ilahdad-i-Langar^anl. Maulana,
215

Iliyas. Maulsna. 190.

‘IlmT, Mir Murt-aza, 385, 386

Imad (poet), 281.

‘Imadiyyah Kurds, 520 n 1.

•Imaroi, Mir, Muglbaea, 257.

Imperial Gazelleet , the, 10 n. 2. 120
n 4, 124 n3. 145 n 2, 159 n 1,
160 n 2. 161 n 4, 1 03 n 2, 173
n 1, 178 n 1, 189 n 1. 190 n 2,
196 n 3, 219 n 1.

•loayatu-'llsh. the Scribe. 391.

‘Iraq. 84 n h, 190, 2i8 n 5, 239,
247, 25S, 265, 283 n 4. 302 n 1,
304 , 31S, -143 n 2, 473 n 1, 474
n ! , 480, .519.

‘Iraq-i-‘Arab. 20 n 1.

Irij, 41.

Irv an, 338 n 3.

‘Isa, ^aikh, of Agra, 188.

‘Isarou-’d-din, Mulla. of Isfarain,
210, 213, 214, 248.

IsaulT, 34.

Isfahan, 149, 258, 318 n 2, 351,
307, 463 n. 3, 508, 520.

Isfarain, 210, 213.

Ishao-i-Kaku, SJiai^, of Labor,
85, 86. 87. 217.

‘Ishqi I^an, Maulana, 384, 385.

Islam, ^aikh, .see Salim, ^aikh

laliin, ^aikh, see Salim, ^aikn.

I3ma‘il, Maulana, the ‘Arab. 188.

Isrog il. Maulana. of Uceh, 48, 157.

IsmS'Il I, ^ah, Safavi, 9.8. 148,
476 r. 2.

Isma'fl II, ^ah, Safavi. 190, 191,
287 H 7.

I.=ma‘Tl, Shaiku, 44, 181,

' I amat-i A nhiyTi . 114.

latilahatu-’a-Suftv’j'ih, 11 ii 4, 12 n
5, 14 r» 1, 17 7i 7. 44 n 4, 67 n
4, 75 n 9.

•Itabi, Sayyid Muhammad, uf
Najaf, 380,381, 382, 333.

Itawa, 333 n 1.

Jaba!-i-‘AmilT, 191.

Ja‘far, 115
Ja‘far, Ahadl, 495.

-Ja'far, Sayjid, of Hir8t, 298,
Ja‘far Beg, QazvinI, Asaf l^an II,
299,300, 301, 429 a I.

Jahan ^lah, Mirza, 265
Jahangir, JJuru ’d-.din Muhammad
the Emperor, 18 n 5, 137 n 4,
149, 150 n 2. 193 n 4, 198 n 3,

J.

211 n 2, 232 rin 1, 3, 237 nn 2,
3, 4, 24S ti 2, 263 n 4, 274, 299 n
I 3, 315 n 3, 327 rj 2. 337 n 2,
' 367 n 3 , 3 70 , 408 n 4, 429 n 1,

; 444 n 3 , 463 n 3. 480, 494 ti 3,

498 n 1 , 520 n 3, 535 n 2.
j Jaipur, 161 n 4. 278 n 3.

\ Jala'ir clan, 454 n 1.

, Jalal, the Physician. 227
! Jala], Maulana. of Tala, 157.

552

Index.

JalBI, Mir Ssyyid, of Badaon, 91,

121 .

Jalal, Sayyid, of Bu^ara, 472 n 2.
Jal5l-i-Wasil, ^ai^, at Kslpi.
196.

Jalal j^an Quroi, 420.

J alalia Nala, 513 n 4.
Jalalu-’d-drn-i-Qadiri, Mir Sayyid,
of Agra, 135, 136.

Jalalu-’d-din, QazI, of Multan. 124 ,
125.

Jalalu-’d-din ^aikh, of Qannauj,
93 , 94, 95.

Jalalu-'d-din, ^ai^, of Thanasar,

5 , 6 .

Jalal.i-’d-din Dawwani, Maulana,
Muhaqgiq. see Dawwani.
Jalalu-'d-din Kumi. Maulana, 118,
151, 523 n 1.

Jalalu ’d-din Miran ^ah, 491 n 6.
Jalandar, 133.

Jalaudar Diiab, .=ee BethJaiandar
Duab.

Jalaun, 196 n 3.

JalinSsu-’z-Zaman. see ‘.41i,Hakin3.
iT'am, 218 n 5.

Jam. ^aikh, 166, 522.

JamBl IvhBn. .Afshan, lino
Jamal ^^an, Miyafi, of Badaon,
397, 398, see NasThi.

Jamal i^an, Miyah, Mufti of
Dihli, 123, 124, 276,

Jamalu-’d din, Mir, 114, 115.

Jaraalu ’d-din, ^laikh, of Hansl. 19 i
n 1.

! Jaraalu- ’d-din, Mohammad, Mau-

1

j lana, 157.

I Jami (the poet), 180, 18! , 226, 227,

! 243, 271,329, 444 n 1.448, 497.

j Jainili, of Kalpi, 296, 297.
j Jamna, the, 246, 274.
j Jamshid, 269, 349, 489 n 1 .
i Jan Qurbani tribe, 263.

I Jani Beg, 337 n 2.

: Jat tribe, 80.

I Jaunpur, 10, 11 n 2, 66, 68 n 3,

' 76, 77, 83, 126 n 5, 135, 158, 239,*

! 257, 270 n 1, 314 n 1, 406, 410.

; Jaurati sect. 247.

' Jau.sa, 161, 308.

1 Jawahiru-' I Qur’an, 88.

Jaza’ir, al-, 341.

; Jazbf, Pad^ah Quli. 293 , 294.
295.

i Jee Duab, 172 n 2.

! Jerusalem. 422 n 2.

' Jhalara, 207.

, Jhanjhana, 144.

. JT-jl -Anaga, 308 n 2, 336 n 2. 388,
n 1.

; Jihlam, 172 n 2.

.Til, 12 n 4.

Jodh 851, 18 n 5
Jodhpur, Is n 5, 278 n 3.

Juda’I. Mir, 260 c 2, 291, 292.
365 n 1.

Junibid, see .iunabud.

Jo.nabud, 304 n 1, 315.

.Junagarh. 454 n 2.
Junaid-i-Bajhdadi, ^aikh, 37.

K.

Ka‘b b Zubair, 4 n 1, 119. 279, 347 , 355, 353 n 2, 361, 38',

K,vbnh, the, 19 n 4, 22. 28 n 2, 395,417,522 n 2.

82, 162, 168 , 241, 266, 268, 269, Kablr, Shaikh, 143, 144.

Index.

553

Kabir, &ai^, sob of Mir Munaw-
war, 158, 159.

Kabul, 65, 99, 137, 192, 213. 215,
237, 242, 244, 250, 257, 263 n 4,
343, 344 n 1, 354 n 4, 355, 362 n
1, 363, 367, n 3, 373, 376, 409,
436 n 1, 430 n 4, 468.

Kacch, 498 n 1.

Kafiyyah, al-, 29, 287

Kahl, MiySn, see Qasim-i-Kahl.

Kakorl, 41.

Kaku, ^aikh, 85.

Kalan Beg, l^aja, 340.

KalpI, 10, 296, 342.

Kalu, ^aikh, 56.

Kamal, ^aikh, of Alwar, 21.

Kamal ]^5n, Gakkhar, 344 n 1.

Kamal-i-BiyabanI, ^aikh, 137.

Kamala, the Sadr, 234.

Kamalu-’d-din Husain, Miyan, of
SMraz, 184, 185, 186. 188, 27T,
278.

Kamalu- ’d-din Sulaiman, 19 n !.

Kanibu tribe. 122, 123.

Karai, 239 n 1, see ‘.Ala’u-’d-Dau-
iah, Mir.

Kami, of Qum, 439.

Kamran Mirza, 308 n 2, 340 n 3,
396 n 1, 451.

Kanauj, see Qannauj.

Kango, 127.

Kant u Gola, 31 r. 3, -56, 60. 103,
134 n 3, 397.

Kapfir-i-Majzub, ^aikh, of Gwa-
Hyar, 95, 96.

Kata, 314 n 1.

Karbala. 120 n 2, 473 n 1.

Karnagarh, 173 n 1.

Kama], 174, 274.

Karoris, 386.

Kashan, 237 n 2, 283, 299 n 3, 302
a 1, 322.

Ka^gbar, 344 n 1.

KaAmlr, 99, lOO, 200 , 203 , 207.
I 209, 216, 265, 299 n 3, 344 » 1,
360, 367 , 450 , 474, 483, 491, 495.
513, 536.

KSyasths, or Kayats, 89.

Kerbela, see Karbala,
i^abushan, 227 n 2, 495.

]^af, see !^av5f.

IGiafT ^^an, JIuhammad Haahim,
324 n 3.

, l^airabad, 28, 45, 188 n 6.
j !l^aja, Muila, 211.

; Khaja -yi-Ahrar, 65.

:^aja yi-Jahan, Aminu-’d-din Mah-
I mud, of Hirat, 181, 213 n 4. 334.

■ Khajagan J^aja, 65.

; !^ao Ahmad !^an, 432 n 2.

; ]&an-i-‘.Alam , see Hamdarai.
:^ani-A‘zam, see ‘A:,iz Kiika,
Mirza.

lOian-i-Jahan. 166.

Khan-i-Kalan, see Muhammad
]^an.

j Wian i-KhanSn. see Bairam
i and '.4bdu-r-Rahim Khan.
! Mirza.

Khan-i-Zaman, ‘All QuH &ian, II
I n 2, 125. 182. 210, 228 n 2, 239,
240, 264, 265, 314, 328, 329. 330.
334 n 4, 361, 385, 406 n 2.

; Khandesh, 229 n 5. 231. 263 n 4.
Khanjar Beg, 310, 314, 315, 384.
I&arazm, 151, 214, 2'-5 n 4, 401
Khavaf, or Kb af, 324. 403.

I J^izuna-yi-'Amira, 495 n 3.

I Khizr, 133, 338 n 3, 362, 382, 427,
i 481,487.
i Khizr ^^sn, 293 n 2.
i Khizr Nahavandi, .Agha, 302 ?i 1.
j Khokhowal, see Kokuwal.
j KhotwM, 19 n 1.

564

Index.

Kiiurasan, 110, 125 , 302 n 1, 319
n 5, 336 n 4, 353 n 3 , 387 n 5.
439 » 4, 440 n 3, 480.

Khurda, 340 » 4.

Khurram, SultSn, 337 » 2.
^usrav, 359 , 423.

Kiiusi'av, Amir, 233 , 261, 357 « 2,
423 n 4, 443.

Khuarav tc Skirim. 41 1 n 1.
Khuwavi, 315 .

Khwurd, Mulla, 407 n 1.

Ivibrawl order, 151,

Klj, 323.

I Klmiya’ u- s-Sa‘adali , 7
I Kirmin, 242 n 1.

I Kisa’i, 191.

Kodi, river, 104.

Kokuwal, 345, 350.

Kolab. 270.

Kucik Beg, 475, 476, 477.

Kufa, 20 n 1.

Kulahi, Afzal !^5n, 438.
Kurabhulmer, ste Kumbhaigarh.
Kumbhalgarh, 420.

Kumisht 193, 374 n 5

Ladan, Miyau ^laikh, of Dihll, 91,
123.

Labor, 47 n 4, 50, 60, 78, 8*5, 86,
S9, 91, 120, 133, 134, 138, 144,
147, 153, 155, 158 n 3, 159 n 1,
loo, 108, 171 n 1, 176, 191, 194.
199, 202, 215, 217, 231, 235,
253, 273, 287 n 7, 323 , 361, 383,
384, 390, 392 n 1, 419, 438, 441,
472, 520, 526.

J.akhnau, 27, 31 n 3, 32, 34 n 4,
38. 41, 42, 43, 103, 104, 106, 108,
134, 190, 334 n 4
La-.U, 244, 433.

J^ada u Majnun, 411 n 1,449, 498

ri 1.

La‘11, I.a‘1 Beg, 441.

Lane, E., Modern Egyptians. 15
n 2.

Langiih tribe, and dynasty, 89, 410.
L.5ri.scan, 329 n 1.

; La.^kar I^an, Khurasani, 336
: Lawa'ih, by Jami, 180, 444.

Ltilavatl, 511 n 1.
i Lisanu-’ l-GJiaib, the, 303.

Liwa’i, PIrzada, 449, 441.
Loiikaran, Raja, 278.

! Lxibbu-'t-Tawarikh, 463 n 3.

' Luokiiow, see Lakhnau.
i Ludhiana, 144, 145.

I Lutfi, the Astrologer, 442.

I Lutfu-'llah, Hakim, of Gilan, 237.

M.

Ma‘uriiu-'n-NubSwah, 147. , Machiwara, 254 n 2.

J/a’5.jtri fioAtmi, 262 n 1, 322 n 1, j Madad-i-Ma'ash, S n 2, 75.

439 n 1, 473 n 1, 495 n 3, 5C8n : Ma'danu-'l-Afkur, 498 n 1.

1, 512 n 1, 535 » 2. , Madinah, 19 n 4, 20, 127, 167. 168.

Maasiru 'l-Vmard, 198 n 4, 254 n 2. 173, 214, 268, 355 n 3.

Index.

555

Mahabharata, the, 173, 350, 422, n
1 , 530 n 2.

Mahdavi seet, 10 n 3. 11, 53 n 1,
74, 77, 84, 110, 111, 118 « 2.

-VlahdT, the Imam, 58 n 2, 74, 77,
84. HO, 111, 283 n 4.

ilahdt, HajI, of Lshor, 78, 157.

Jlahdi Qasim &an, 203 n 3.

MahistI, of Hlrat, 494.

Mahmand^!. 327 n 2.

Mahmud, of Basakhwan. 283 ti 1.
285. 287.

Mahmud. Mir. the Munghi, see
Mahwi.

Mahmud, Sultan, of .^azni. 46 n
6, 251.

Mahmud-i-Piyaru, Malik, 197,
198.

Mahmud-i-Surkh, Mulla, 213.

Slahmud, f^iaikh. Tabrizi.

Mahmud-i-Gilfinl, ^laito, 70 n 7,
210 n 6, 21 I n 1.

Mahmud Beg, 408 n 4.

Mahmud :&an, 75, 77.

Mahmfldiyyah sect, see Basakh-
wanl sect.

Mahru, Mir Sayyid, 102.

Mahwi, Mir Mahmud, the Munshl.
391, 444, 445, 446, 447.

Mahwi, Mir Mu^is, 473.

Maili, Mirza Quli, of Hirat, 454,
455, 456, 457. 458.

Maisana, 498 n 1.

Maji tribe, 345.

Majnun, 244, 287, 433, 453.

Makhdumu-'l-Mulk, ‘Abdu-’llah,
Maulana, of Suitanpur, 52, 53,
54, 74, 81 n 1, 98, 109, 113, 114,
115, 116, 127, 131. 133, 172.

MaJdizan-i-AsTar, 394 , 417 n 1,
498 n 1.

MaUtzan-i Khiyal, 417.

Makkah. 14 n 2, 19n4, 20, 73, 77,
116, 127, 131, 137, 152, 164 n 4,
168, 173. 190, 191. 199 , 214, 218,
226. 254 n 2, 260, 266 n 1, 267
n 1, 268, 293 n 2, 302, 334 n 4.
344 n 1, 347 n 5. 355 n, 2, 377
n 2, 378, 389. 395 n 2. 436 n !
443, 473. 508 n 1. 509 n 1

Makriin, 323.

Malik b. Anas. 130 n 1.

Malik, of Qum, 458, 459, 460, 461.

Maliki sect, 130.

Maliku-'I Kalam, “ee Qumi, Malik.

Malik'u 'gJi_-Shii‘aru, title, 240, 243,
411, 452 n 2.

Malin, see Balln

Malwa, II n 2, 158 n 3, 217, 249 n
2, 333 n I, 407 n 1, 422 n 1, 450
n 2 . 454, 510, 512 n I.

Mamba' u-’n-Nafa' Vyiln, 119.

Man, ^aikh, of Panipat. 15, 17,

j 20.

Mangan, ^aikh, of Badaon, 493.

Mani, 292.

I Manikpur, 126, 314 n 1.

Manohar, see Tausani

Mansur, Mir, 292 n 1.

Mansur-i-Hallaj . 37. 155.

Manzarl, of Sainarqand, 469, 470.

: Maqumulu-’ I harirl, 135, 478.

i Maqsiid, Mulla, of Qazvin, 462

i 463, 464, 465

{ Maqsud ‘All, Khaja, 327 n 2.

i Maqsud ‘All, Maliku-’l-Muluk, 318

I n 2.

i Markazu 'l-Adwar, 411 n. 1, 417,
425 n 5

j Ma‘ruf-i-Ci^ti, ^aikh, 27.

Mfirut, 488 n I.

Marv, 248, 452.

MarvI, see Husain, I^aja.

Maghariqu-’l- Anwar, 176, 189.

556

Index.

MaAhad, 227 n 2, 239, 251 » 1
254, 267, 287, 335 n 5. 341, 378,
443, 447, 454 n 1, 465, 473 n 1,
495 n 3.

Maaihu-’d-din, see Abu-’l-Fath,
Hakim.

MasIhu-’l-Mulk , Hakim, 230.

Mas‘ud, Salar, 46.

Ma‘sum-i-KabuU, 126, 270.

Mathura, 128.

Mauji, QHsim !^an, of Badakh-
shan, 448, 450.

Mausil, 192.

Mauzun, 467.

Mawaridu-'l-Kilam, 411 u 1.

Mazharl, of Kashmir, 474.

Mewat, 163, 310 n 3.

Miltahu-’l-'Ulnm, ’ll), 109, 124.

Mihnatl, of Hisar, 465.

Mihr ‘All Silduz, 11, 12.

Mir BakhshI, see Asaf Khan

11 .

Mir-i-KalXn, MaulSna, 211, 212.

Mirak ^Sh, Sayyid, 115, 212.

Mir’dtu 239 n 2 , 240 n 3,

254 n 2, 408 n 4, 422 n 1, 508 n
1, 535 n 2.

ilir'dtu-^l-Ka inat, 239 n 2.

Mirsadii-’l-‘lbad, 528.

MIrza, Maulaua, of Samarqand,
209,210.

Misbdh, 151.

Mishkatu 'l-Masdbik, 215, 268.

Miyanwali, 124 n 3.

Mohan, 190.

Montgomery District, 50 n 2.

Moses, 486 n 1.

Mu'awiyah, 120 n 2.

Mu‘azzam, Khaja, 224 n 3, 246,
466, 467.

Mubarak, QazI, of Gopamau, 28,
30, 31, 188 .189.

Mubarak, ^aikh, of Alwar, 162,
163.

Mubarak, ^ailA, of Nagor, 75,
110, 113 n 2, 118, 119, 120, 130,
131. 393, n 1, 411 n 1.

Mubarak Khan, Afghan, 267 n 1.

Mudami, of Badakhahan, 461, 462'

MudamI, of HamadSn, 471.

Muflis, MIrza, the Uzbak, 218.

Mufraddt'i Ma‘svrn\, 498 n 1.

Mughbaca, see ImamI, Mir.

Muhammad, the Prophet, 1 n 5, 4
nn 1, 3, 20, 25 nn I, 3, 32 n 3,
39. 40 n 3, 63 n 1, 67, 69 n 5,
78 n 4, 88 n 6, 90, 116, 127, 132,
153, 164 n 4, 170, 195 n 1, 203,
212, 283 n 4, 413, 414, 422 n 2,
438, 464, 516 n 1. 528, 512, 537,

Muhammad, Amir Sayyid, 209.

Muljammad, Maulana, the Mufti,
215.

Muhammad, Mir Sayyid, the
Weaver, see FikrI.

Muhammad, Mir Sayyid, of
Amroha, 120, 121.

Muhammad, Mir Sayyid, of Jaun-
pur, 10, 74. 76, 77, 83, 110, 111.

Muhammad, ^aikh (brother of
Badaoni), 31, 34, 40.

Muhammad, ^aikh (father of
^aikh Sa'di), 42.

Muljammad, ^aikh, of Bahroc,
134.

Muhammad, ^aikh, of Dihli, 474,
475.

Muhammad, ^aikh, of Syria, 191 ,
192

I Muljammad, al-Ahji, 84.

I Muhammad I^an, Mir, Khan-i-
j Kalan, 396, 450 n 2, 471, 494.

; Muhammad Asghar, see Ashraf
' KhBn.

Index.

C'57

Muhammad- i-Nur BakhshI, Mir
Sayyid, 84.

Muhammad Qhaus, ^ailih, 6, 7,
8. 9, 10, 43, 141, 160, 177, 196,
296.

Muhammad Hakfm, MIrza, 137,
250, 275, 314 n 1, 337 n 2. 344
n 1. 354 n 4, 355, 409.

Muhammad Ka.=!an, ^aikh, 15.

Muhammad Hashim Khau, see
I^afl Khan.

Muhammad Husain, ^aikh, of
SiKandara, 105 , 108.

Muhammad Husain Khan, see
Husain j&an.

Muhammad Ja'far, 144, 145

Muhammad-i-Karabu, ^aikh, of
Sambhal, 12, 13.

Muhammad-i-Khabu^ani, 227.

Muhauipiad Ma'sCim, Mfr, Safavi,
see Naroi.

Muhammad Ma’sfira IHiSn, Faran
khfidi, 120 n 5.

Muhammad MIrza, Sultan, 491
n 0.

Muhammad Qalandar, ^aikh, of
Lukhnau, 43.

Muhammad Qasim, Kuhbar, 344
n 1.

.Muhammad yhsim ]&an, of Ni^a-
piir, 302 n 2

3Iuhammad QulT Khan Barlas. 228
ft 1 , 337 ft 2.

Muhatninad QulT ^an, Turkman,
367 n 3.

Muhammad Riza, Mulla, see KauT.

Muhammad Sharif, 193.

Muliammad ^arlf, of Kl^apur’
see Vucju-i.

Muhammad Sultan MIrza, 6 n 4.

Muha.mmad Yahya, Khaja, 150 , j
151

Muhammad Yazdl, Mulla, 126 n
5, 127, 233 n 2.

Muhammad Yusuf, 468, 469.
Muhaqqir;-i-Daw,T5n:, see Daw-
wanl.

j Muhijy, Sayyid, 189.
i Muhiyyu-’d-din. ■Abdu-’i-Qadir-i-
Jlii, 12 n 4, 135.

Muhiyyu-’d-dIn Aluhammad.

^.aikh, 203.

Muhsin Rizavl, Mir. o.' Mashhad,
j 443 , 447 . 448.

I Muhtaram Bee, 450.

I

Muhtasham, 474 n 1.

Mu'In, ^aikh, 147, 194.
MuTnu-’d-dIn-i - Sanjarf-yi - Ci^tl.
IH;5ja, IS ft 5. 13(>, 139 n 1, 160
n 2, 197. 207 n 1. 252, 444 n 3.
Mu‘Inu-’d-drn-i-Fnranki,‘U<ii.ili^>®j®
218.

* Mu'izzl, Sayyid. of Hirat, 451 .

' Mu' izzu-’l-Muik. ?tl;i , 126 n 5. 127,

; 228.

• Mulla (rhanl. see Amanl.

I Multao, 3 ft 4. 47. 4S nn 6. 7, ou
I n 2, .52, 89. 9‘;. 124 -i 3. 141,

I 143, 173.

I Munav^ ar, ^aikh,
j Mua*im I^an. 25-i n 2, 314 n 1
i 337 7} 2.

Munkir, o33 n 2.

! Munialdtaba H-Lubai. 324 n 3.

, Manta kliabu-'c-Ta^r.irl-vu < refer

j ences to VoIuru-?> I :ri'- ilj , 3 n/f .

! 6 n 2. 9, 30 n 2, 3: ft 3, 58 n 2.

! 03 n 4, 08 n 3, 70 n S, 74 n 3,

I 75 «i, HO rt 4, Ho 71 2, 118 n

I 2. H9 7i 1, 126 nn i, 5, 127 n?i

j 4, 5. 129 n 1, 13 i Kf. 1, 3^ 4, ISC

n 2, -*37 nn 3, 4, Ui n 3, 143 n
2, 15S nn i. 2, 16. n 3, 164 nn
1 . 2, 4» 166 n 3, 16S n 2, 172 nn

558

Index,

173 n 5, 191 n 3, 198 n 1, 207 n
!, 209 n 2, 210 nn 1, 2, 211 n 2,
212 n 1, 213 nn 1, 3, 4, 215 nn

2. 3, 216 nn 1, 3, 217 n 3, 2!S
nn 1, 2, 2t<) nn 1. 2, 223, 221 n

3, 225 n 1. 226 n 3, 228 n 2, 229
un 1, 3, 231 n 3, 233 nn 1,

2 . 234 n 5, 235 nn 1, 3. 236 »
S, 242 B 3, 248 n 2, 265 n 4,
266 n 2, 207 n 1, 26S n 1,
269 n 1, 270 3, 280 nn 1,3,

283 n 4, 287 n 5, 295 n i, 308 n
3, 317 n 3, ,126 n 2, 344 n 1,
345 « 2, 330 n 4, 351 n 1, 360 n
2, 363 n 2, 367 nn 2, 3, 370 n 2,
372 n 3, S7i n 1 , 386 n 5, 389 n
2, 396 n 1, 398 n 2 , 406 n 2, 411 |
B 1, 414 .1 I, 136 n 2, 438 ?( 3, |
442 n 3, 4i3 n 2, 450 n 3, 486 |

Muqun. Mir, 438.

Muqlml, of Sabzavar,-471 , 472.
Muqtadir. the KhaUfah. .37 n 7.
Murad. Sultan, 230, 247 n 2, 3S8 n
1,441.’

; MuradSbad, 3 n 1, t2'> ii 4.

I Murad;, of Astarabad, 451, 452.
j Murtaza-yi -j^arlf, ihV. of SiTraz.
i 238, 4-12. 443, 444.

I Musa, ^laikh, 137 n 4. 171.

1 Muaa.. ^aild}, Qp-dir. 141. !.1J,
! 143.

j Musawl. of Ma^had, 455.
j Musavrl Sayj’ids, 403 r. 4.
j Mushfiql, of Bukhara. 452, 453.
Mustafa, Miyah, of Gujarat.
Mutaxvnal , 109, 374,

Muzaffar. Hakim, of .Ardasta.n
237.

nn 2, 3, 43' 5, 468 n 2, 470 n |
I, 474 n 1 308 n 1, 512 n 2, !
•313 n 1, 524 ixK 1, 2, oOu r. 2, j
335 n 2.

Muzaffar III of Gujarat. 498 n 1.
Muzalfar l^an, 433.

Muzaffar Husain. M ' -a. $uf.»vl,
476 n 2.

W.

. 5dira-’l-ilul.4, 202 n. 1, see .Jnda'i
Sa’a’isn "i-Vo'^iir, see Tazkiiih.

aahtna/ i DCi o' . o(t.

1 .ijaf^ 20. 289, 45O, 473 n 1, .>03.

27 ajar. 496.

-\ajati. of Griir. 49.5.

. , aiatu-'r-S-a-yX'iti- 54, 210.

S ajinu-’d-cTn ■ Abdu-'loMiaffar.
iraam, 250

-lajmu-'d din - .^rdu-'llah, 23J.
Xajmu-’d d;.’. Olu'jammad, Sayyid,

242 n 3, see if l.s'na-i-Kah;.

Azkir. 15G, -4.i3 ■. 2.

.Vjj.l u Daman. 41! n 1, 422. 424 n
1, 425 n 2.

Nala, 422 r, 1.

yam'i-vi-Khirad-afza. -'r4. 249 n 2
Nami, Muhammad .'.1 ‘’.sum, Mir,
Safavl, 498, 499, .70", 50).
Naqdn-DitJ^nfff 163.

Naq'b Khan, see '4i.iy5su-’d-dln
'Ali.

Naqshbanu, Kliaja BahAu-’d-din,
37

Naq^baadi order. 119.

Xaq4il, Husain. MauiSii.i, 4S0.
Xarbaia. 2 18.

Xarnol, 44, 45.

Na.s'/il, Jamal I&7n, Miyan, ui'
Badiion, 493, 4i'l.

Index.

559

Xasiru-’d-cim, Shaikh, 123, 161,
162.

Nasiru-’d-din • Qbaidu-’llah Aiirar,
see Ahrar, i^aja.

Nasiru-'l-Mulk, see Pir Muhammad
Khan, Mulla.

N a$Jch-i-J aharidra , 259.

Naubat, 426 n 3.

Nati'i, Muhammad Riza, Mulla,
495, 496.

Naurang l^an, 454.

Nava'i, Muhammad ^arli, Mir,
271, 510.

Naziri, Muhammad Husain, Mau-
lana, of Nl^apur, 392 n i, 508,

509.

NazmI, ot Tabriz, 511, 612.
Nigaristan, 259.

Nihani, 494, 495.

Nineveh, 192 n i.

i

NUhada, J^22 n 1.

Nishani, ‘Ali Ahmad, Maulana,
480, 481, 482, 483, 484, 485, 486,
487, 488, 489, 490, 491, 492, 493.
Ni^apur, 7 n 1, 220, 302 n 1, 319,
324 n 1. 338 n 3, 473 n 1, 508,"

510, 512.

Nljhapuri Commentary, the, 194,
195.

Niyabat lyljan, 126 n 5.

NiyazI tribe, 73.

Niyazi, Muiia. 496, 497 , 498.
Nizam, yazi, .jf Badakhnhan, 214,
374, 3,5, 409 ii 2. 410.

Nizam Kings, 438 n 4.

Nizami, of Ganja, the Poet, 394 ri
2, 411 n 1, 423 r. 4, 498 n i.
500. 509.

Nizamu-'d-dln, , of Ambetlu.

27.28.29, 30.31. ' i., 33, 34, 33,
36,37.38, 39, I- I, i32, 182
158. l8a.

Nizarr a-’d^ifn, ^.c i-_L , of NSrn'.,
■14 . 45.

Niz?,.-.'iu-VI-dm Ahir^rl, MIrza ;oi-
1, 13S, ;-;4, 145, H'.’.
152 loT, 168. IK. ;S7, 192, 193.
199. 2o2, .273, 30*.. 3tT. 317, So*,
374. 375, 390, lit, 13; n 1, 498 n
1, 50S n !. 518.

Nizamu-’d-din .Auliya, &aikh. 16
363.

Nizamu-'I-Mulk, oi 'ius. 358 n 2.
Nizari sect, 413.

Nuqta'.riyyah ^ect. S'c Basakhwa-
nT sect.

Nur Jahac, wife of Ja.hangir, 4E4
n 3.

Nur, ^aikh, Qutb-'. -.Aiam. 27.
Nuru d-din, Haklo. 233 n 1.
Nuru-'d-din Muhai-.-'.rL.ad Tarkha...
Mihla. 217, 21S. fli. 273. 271.
277. 276, 277, 2:,'.

Nuru-'ilah, Qazl. o: ^hoshtar. 198.
194. 195.

Nuru-Mlah Q.isim Kisaian, st;

Qasim .Arsalan.

Nuv^df, ilulla, 495.

Nuvidi, of Turbat, 4't5, 476. 477.
478, 479, 480.

O.

Ohod, see 1 hucl | Outi:., .74 »t 4, 4.0 >. •' 16 n 6 lO’,

Orissa, see T^risa I 188 n 6, 214.

Index.

56(!

P

Padshah-nama. 45 n 5, 237 n 4.

Padshah Quit, see Jazbl, Padshah
Qull.

Pairavi, 271, 272.

Pak Pattaii, see Ajudhan.

Panlpat, 43 n 4.

Panjab, 5fi, 64, 81, 83 n 7. 98,
114, 124 n 3, 154, 159 n 1. 163

n 2, 17-, 173 n 1. 174 n 1, 263

n 4, 275, 293 n 2, 310 n 3, 396

n 1, 397 n 4, 401 n 3. 444 n 3,

463 TO l,513n4.

Parijan I^anum, 191.

Parl-Surat, 498 n 1.

Parvfz. Sult«n, 299 n 3, 327 n

2 .

Patan (or Pattan), in Gujarat, 62
267, 396 n 1.

Patiala, 173 n 1, 465 n 2.

Patiyall, 66.

Patna, 66, 84, 295, 410.

Peshawar, 268, 327 n 2, 483 n 2.
Pica Jan Anaga, 327 n 2.

Pihani, 198.

Pir, ^aikh, of Agra, 467.

Pir Muhammad Khan, Mulla. of
^irvan, 217, 218.

Pir Muhatrmad MIrza, 307 n 2.
Pirak, ^aikh. of Lakhnau, 104,
105.

Piyara, ^aikh, of Bangal, 21
Piyaru. Malik. 197. ‘

Cjadiri order. 12, 52. 61. 82. 135,
156, 157.

Qadrf, 437.

Qaf, 2.

Qahqaha, 190.

yaidi, Mulla, of ^.iraz, 436 .
Qaimganj. 145 r. 2.

Qain, 31.7 1 .

CJandahar, 78, 2! 8, 253, 261. 327.

340 n 3. 3.79, 498 n 1, 499. |

yandi, 437.

Qannauj , oG n 5, 93. 106, 145 n 2,
198, 308 74 3 . 314 n 1.

Qan~>n. the. 237. j

Qanun i l-'lUm, :! n -7. 4 n 3, 7 » 3, j
.71 n 7. j

Qarari, Nuru d din. Hakim, of !

GTian, 432, 4 5.3. 1

Qarun, 234.

Qasida-yi- Fariziyya, 1 “ 9.

Qasidatu ’l-B’Jrda. i ■>;, Hu i50.

Qasim, 362.

Qasini, Mirza, 315.
Qisim-i-Arsaian, 149, 240 , 251 ,
252, 253, 336, 365 n I.
Qasim-i-Kahi, 240, 242 , 243 . 247.

271, 276, 304 n 1.

Qnsim I^an, Mfr-i-Bahr. 450.
Qasim l^ian Kasu, 4.50 n 2.

Qasim Khan, of Bada^^an, see
Mauji.

Qasim ‘Ali, see Chubari.

Qasira ‘Ali Khfin, corn-chandler,
296.

Qazi Hian, see Nizam, Qazi.

Qazi Muhammad, .390.

Qilij I^an, Pifati, 9, lOO, 173, 178,
237. 263 , 264. .319, 343, 383.
Qltun, 135.

Qivamu-’d din, Mirza, 299 n 3.
Qudsi, Mir, of Karbala, 510.

Qunj, 260, 458.

index.

561

Qumi, Malik, Maliku-’l-Kalam,
273, 372.

Quraish tribe, 133 n 1. 398,

528.

Outb ^ahl Kings, 438 n 4.
Qutb-i-‘Alaa), ^aikh, 164.

Qutbu-’d-din BaWityar-i-Kaki,
!^aja, see Bakhtyar.
Qutbu-’dln, Mlran Sayyid, 204.
Qutbu ’d-din ]^an, 454 n 2.
Qutbu'*d-dTn ‘AU, 247 n 5.

Qutlu, 450 n 2.

RabiM, 376, see ‘Alim, MullS. of
Kabul.

Rafl'I, Mir Haidar, of Kashan,
322, 323, 324.

Rafl‘ii-’d-drri, Mir Sayyid, 121,
162, 187.

R*h5’I, Maiilana §adru’d-din, ol
!^av5f, 324.

Rahman Quit SultSn, 384.

Rahmatu ’llah, MiySn, 48,51, 168.

Rai, 7 n 1 , 255 n 1, 405 n 1.

Raja ‘All lUan, of i^findesh,
229.

Rajputana, 27' n 3, 420 ♦» 1.

Ram Candra, Raja of Kburda,
340 n 4.

Ranthambhor, 162.

R^itnl, Maulana, 518,

Rashhatu ’l Hayat, 230 n 2.

Ra^Id, ^aikh, 151.

Raaht, 304 n 3.

Rangliani. 325, 326, 327.
Raushaniyyah sect, 37 n 4.
Rauzatu-’l-Ahbab, 114.

Raverty, The Mihran of Sind and
its Tributaries, 48 n 7, 50 n 2.
RSvI, the, 2o2.

Razmnama, 173.

Rewari, 163 n 2, 483 n 1
Riaala-yi-Makkiyya, 29.

Riyazu 'sh-Shu‘ara, 498 n 1.

Riza, ‘Air Musa, Imam, 280, 336,
465 n 4.

RuhtBs (Bengal), 178 n 1. 263 » 4.
Ruknu-’d-Kiln, ^aikh.of Ajudhan,
21 .

Ruknu-’d-dIn, Shailth, of Gangu,
: 82, 83.

j Ruknu-'d-din ,‘ Ala’u-’^ din , ^aik^ ,

248.

Rum. 302 » 1.

Ruava’i, 308

S.

8abahi sect, 513.

8abuhi, 246, 356,358.

Saburl, of Hainadin, 361.

Sabzavar, 117, 118 , 254 n 2. 439 n
4, 471.

Sa‘d, ^laikb. 28.

Sada^ivnrtiya, fUja of Vijaya-
nagar. 330 n 1.

Sa‘di, of ^ilraz, the Poet, 144,
245, 397. 472, 523 n 1.

Sa‘dl, ^laikh, 42.

Sadiq Halwa’I, Mulla, of Samar-
qand, 354, 355.

Sudiq, Maulana, 261, 363.

Sadiql, 359. [Sadvr.

Sadr-i-J ahdn. title, see Sadru-’.i-

562

Index.

Sadr-i-Jahan, of Pihani, 198, 199,

200 .

Sadru-’d-din, Qazi, 133, 134.
Sadru-’s-Sudur (or Sadr-i-Jahan),
title, 8 n 5, 110, 122. 127, 138,
139, 198 n 3, 199. 378 nn 1, 2.
386 n 4, 497.

Sa‘du-’llab,

BaTii

Jsra'il,

86, 87, 88,

, 158.

Sa‘du-’llah,

the

Gram-

marian, 160, 161.

Safa’i, Mir Sayyid, 498.

Safi, ^aikh, 45, 91.

Safidun, 218 n 5, 273.

Saha’if fl-'l-Kaldm, 92.

Saharanpur, 61, 83 a 1.

Sahih-i Buliharl, 215.

Sahml, .336, 337, 365 n 1.
SahrawardT, ^aiVdi Abu-’n-2JajIb j
‘Abdu-'l-Qadir 6. '.Abdi-’llah, 26,
29 n 4.

Sahrawardiyyah order. 82 n 4.
Sahsaram, 178.

Sahu-u-"l-Lisan, 302.

6a‘ib, the Poet, 392 n I.

Sa'Id, Maulana, 212, 213.

Sa‘Id, see Sa'id, Matilana.

Saifl, 243.

SaifI Sayyids, 148, 3,S6, 444 ti 3.
Saifu-'llah, 75, 367 n 3.
Saifu-’l-Muluk, of Dama-

vand, 226, 227, 228. 352, 353.
Sairi, 334.

Sala.hu-’d-din, see Sarfl. of Sawa.
Salih, the Madman, ‘Aqil. 362, 363.
§alih, Mull5, 370.

9alihi, Muhammad Mirak, 358.
Salim, Prince, see Jahangir.
Salim-i-Oi^ti, ^aikh, 18, 19, 20.
21, 22, 25, 26, 27, 73. 137 n 4,
162, 171 n 1, 197 , 225, 274 r. 2,
297, 343.

Salim ^lah Sur, 53, 62. 74, 75.
Salma, 347.

Salman, of Sawa, 453, 463.

Salsabil, 182.

Santa, 9 n 1.

Sama'I, 525.

Samana, 91, 173. 174, 218 n 5
Samnan, 248.

Samarqand. 65, 209, 210. 354, 405.
496 n 2.

Sambhal, 3, 4, 12, 21, 63 n 6, 69,
96, 97, 103, 120, 121, 188. 263 n 4,
329 n 1, 387. 396 n 1, 397 , 398.
SSmbhar, 278.

Saroiri, 486, 488, 490.

Sann'I, of Ma^had, 287, 288, 291,
295, 390, 393.

Sani ^an, ‘.\II .4kbar. of Hirat,
286, 287.

Sanjar, Sultan, 307.

Saplak, 327.

Saqi, of the Jaza'ir, 341, 342.
Saqvnama, 495 n 3.

SaqqS, Eahram, 338 , 339
Sara'i Sidhu, 3 n 4.

Sarandib, 339.

Sarangpur, 407 n 1.

Sarlund, .^ee Siihind.

Sarmad:, I-sfalian. 319,

340, 341, 513 n 1.

Sarfl, ^.ai "a* Ya'qub, of Ka^mir,
360.

§arfl, Sala’ui-'d-din, of S5wa, 361.
Sarkhej, 240, 241.

Satgarah, 48, 52.

Satkara ='.ae Satgarah.

Savva. n 6, 361, 365, 463 n 1.
Sawad, . .'3 n 1, 29J n 3.

Saivati ' n-l-lUium, 157, 194, 297 n
2, 322 n-2, 323, 111 »l,414n2.
Sayyafi, 335.

Sayyidi, Sayyid Shah, 342, 343.

Index.

563

^addad, 234.

^afi' u-’d-din Muiiammad, 228.

Imam, 115, 259 n 3.
^ahabad, 178 n 1.

Shaham Beg, 314 n 1, 331 n 1,
333 n 3.

^ahbaz Kambu.

^ah-i-‘Alam, of Bukhara, 197.
^ah Jahan, 45 n 5, 408 n 4, .520
n 3.

^ahjahanpur, 56 n 4.

^ah Mir, Amir, 512 n 1.

^ah Mir, Sayyid, 162, 174, 175,
176.

^ah Muhammad UnsT, Maulana,
524, 536 a 3.

Shahnama, 469 n 3.

^ah Quli, Kurd, 293, 294.
^ahQul;, Sultan, of Bada^ishaa.
441.

Shahrukh, Mirza, 65, 450 n 4.

Sliarh-i-‘Aqa'id, 217.
.Sharh-i-Shamsiyyak , 209, 370.
Shath-i~Vtkaya, 132, 211.
Skarhu-’l-Mukammal, 49 n !.

Sharhu shamaili-'n-Ndbl. 114.
^arlf Araall, 340, 513 n I.
Suarlf'i-Amani, Mir, ot Isfahan,
258, 259.

Sharif of Tabriz, 303.

^arlit, see Murtaza, Mir.

Shatibi. the. 119.

Abu Muhammadi ’i
QBsirQi> 4l n 5, 42.

^attarl order, 7.

^ler Khan, 314 n 1.

Sher Shah, see ^Ir ^ah.

^ibli, Abu Bakr, ^aitti. 37.
^ihab W,an,498n 1.
Siiihabu-’d-dm, Qazi, 136.
^ihabu-’d-dln. ^aikb. Sahra-
vardl, 225.

Shaikhu-’l-Hidyah, 28, 29, 45, 46, [ ^.ihabu-'d din .4.hmad lyiSn, 512.

47.

iSZsaiA^i-ll'al.fd, 283 n 4. i

^aklbi, of Isiahan, 351, 508 n 1.
Sioma’ilu-’l iluhammadiy yah, see i
^amd^ ilu 'n-Nabi. <

^amd'tlu.' n y abl, 2(i8.

Shamiu Tarkm:.rL3, 202. ;

Sbamaabad, 145.

^amsu-'d din, see Hakimu '!- |

Mulk. I

^ilmal Khan, 420 n 2.

^ilr ^ah Sur, Faridu-’d din, 89 n
2, 161 nn 2, 5, 178 n 1, 467 n 5.
Shiraz, 184, 196, 216, 229, 230, 277,
390, 392, 403, 436, 442, 443, 523.
Shlrgarh, 50, 52, 56, 60, 61, 62
^lirT. 345, 346, 347, 350. 351
^Irln, 348, 359 n 1.

^Irvan, 217, 218.

^uja‘i, see Saifu-T-Muluk.

^amsu-’d din, Khaja, of Khavaf, i ^u’url, 353,354.

231.

^u^tar, 285.

^amsu- d din, QSzI, QazoinI, 295.
Shamsud-'d-dln, ^aiWi jL’abrizi,
84 n 3.

^amsu-’d din Muhammad, see
Ataga Wian.

Sharafu-’d-din. .A.bu *AbUi-’llah 6.
Sa'id, 4 n 1.

Sharafu- ’d-din Hasan, 230.

j Sidhauli, 10 n 2.

1 Sijdah, 193, 374.

! Sijistan, 76 n 2.

1 Sikandar Lodi, Sull^an, 103.
Sikandar Sur, 470.

Sikandara, 105, 108.

Sikandar ndma, 411 n 1. 498 n 1.
Sikri.see fathpur.

564

Index.

Silsilatu-'dh-Dhahab , by Jim!, 376.
Sind, 89 n 2, 172, 409 nl, 499.
Singhasan Batisi, 249.

Sipahr, 340.

Sipihri, MIrza Beg, 334, 335.

Sirat, aa-, 534.

Sirhind. 6 n 3. 47 n 4, 73. 74. 75,
83 n 1, 91 n 3, 173 n 1, 174 n
1, 176, 177, 237, 465.

Sistan, 342 n 2.

Sitapur. 10 n 2, 28 n 2.

Siwalik. 251 n 2.

Siyalkot, 219.

Sohna (Ladh), 163.

Steingasa. Persian Englith Oiction-
ary, 73 n 2.

§u!l, ^aikh, 28.

Sufia, 3 n 3, 14, 20 n 3, 36, 37 , 42,
69, 78, 85, 133, 166, 177. 243. 297.
298.

Sufi Mystioism. II « 3. 13 n I. 27.

69, 75 n 9. 81 n 1, 91 n 7, 93,
95, 103, 167, 168, 180, 243, 258,
287, 338, 340, 385, 390, 421, 437,
472.

Sulaiman (Solomon), 349, 416.

Sulaiman MIrza, of Badaldi^an,
214 n 1. 344 n 1.

Sulaiman u Bilqls, 411 n 1, 42.5 no.

Sultan, Khan-i-Zaman, 331, 332,
333. See also ]^an-i-Zaraan.

Sultan, of Saplak, 327, 328, 329,
330, 331, 333 n 3.

Sultan Husain MIrza, of Khurasan,
295, 298 n 1, 387.

Sultan Ibrahim MIrza, 454 n 1.

Sultan Salima Begum, 494 n 3.

Sultanpur, 52, 172.

Surat, 383 , 468.

Suz u Qudaz, 495 n 3.

Swiit, see SawSd.

Syria, 20.

Xabagut-i-Akbari, 1. 73 n 6, 133 n

1, 138 n 1, 143 n 2, 165 m 3.
218 n 5, 231 n 3 , 234 n 1. 238

2. 240 tin 1, 3. 242 n 3 , 248 n 2,
251 n 1 , 253 n 3, 255 n 1, 259 n

2, 262 n 2 , 263 n 4, 273 mm 1, 2,
285 n 3. 286 n 1, as n 2. 297 ■

3, 298 n 3, 299 n 3, 302 n 1, 104
n 1, 306 , 307 , 310 n 2, 315 n I.
316 n 2, 317 n 3, 310 n 4, 322 n
1 , 324 n 1, 325 n 2, 327 n 2, 334
nn 1 , 3, 340 n 2, 342 n 1 . 351 n
2 , 354 n 4, 356 n 2, 359 n 2, 361
nn 1, 2, 362 n 1, 365 n 1. 36S rt
1, 370 H 1, 372 n 2. 373 m 3. 378
n 1. 380 n 1, 381 n 1, 383 n 2.
390 n 1 . 392 fi 1 . 398 n 1 . 401 n

3, 403 nn 1, 2 , 405 nn 1, 2, 406
n 1, 408, 411 n 1, 435 n 2, 436
n 1, 437 nn 1, 2. 438 n 1, 439
nn 1, 4 . 442 n 1, 444 n 2, 447 n
2. 451 nn 1, 5 , 475 n 2, 480 n 1,
495 n 1, 496 n 2, 498 n 1, 608 n
1, 511 n 1, 517 n 1, 522 n 1, 635
n 2.

Tabarra, 438 n 3.

Xabataba, Isma‘11 6. Ibrahim, 451
n2.

1'abataba'I Say y ids, 260 n 2, 322
n 1, 451.

Tabriz, 291 n 4, 302, 303. 406 n 4,
511, 523.

Tafsir i-Kabir, 119, 360.

Tahmisp ^5h 148, 149, 190, 237,

Index.

565

239 n 2, 299 n 3, 318 n 2, 335,
454 n.l, 463 n 3, 512 n 1.

Tahqiq fi ueTdi-’l fiqh, 92.

yaifuriyynh order, 7 n 1.

Taju ’d-dln, ^aikh, of Lakhnau,
43.

Takaroi, battle of, 336 n 4.

TfilakSn. 19 n 2.

Taiamba, 3, 54, 60, 61 n 4

Talhah, 115.

falib. Mulls, of Isfahan, 367.

Tali*!, of Yazd, 368, 369.

Talikota, battle of, 330 n 1.

Tanka. 9, 28.

Tantarani, 297 n 1.

TaqI Muhammad, see Taqi’u 'd-
dlni. of ^u^tar.

Taqt’u-’d-dlnl, of ^u^tar, 285,
286.

Taqiya, Mulla, see Taqi’u- 'd-dini,
of ^ushtar.

Taqiyyah, 336 n 5.

X’irami, Mulls ‘AIT, the Mvhadd » •
363, 364.

TardI Beg, 310.

Tardf, Ruda, 278.

TankJi-i-Alfi, 530 n 2.

TSrikh i Ma aunt, 121 n 3.

Tankli-i-Nizam\ , see ^abaqat-i-Ak-
bari.

Tarikh-i-Sind, 498 n 1.

Tailql, of SSws, 337, 365.

Tarihan, title of, 218 n 5 , 273 , 274.
27.-).

Tsr^iz, 372 n 2.

Tasawttmf, 11 n 3, see Sufi mysti-
cism.

Tsyiblhi, of Kashan, 283, 284, 285.

Tashkand, 213.

TatUm, 374 n 5.

Tatar HiSn, 165, 276.

Tatta. see Thstha.

Tausani, Manohar, 278 , 279.
Tatcdf, 19 n 4, 523 n 2.

Tawa’is, see Tawawls.

Tawa’isi, QazI, 125.

Tawawis, 125 and n 2.

Ta^rvl. of .4.bhar, 279 , 280, 283.
Tazkirah, the, of Taqi, 498 n 1.
Tazkiratu-’sh Shu‘ara. the, of Mir
‘Ala’u-d-Daulah, 239, 437, 446,
467, 477.

ThSnesar, 5, 83, 114, 173, 187.
Thatha, 193, 235, 409, 497, 49,8.
Tibat, 99.

Tifli, 370, 372.

Tigris, the, 192 n 1.

Tihran, 226 n 5, 255 » 1, 338 it 3,
405.

Timma, 330 n 1.

Timur, Amir, Sahib-Qirdn, 6 a 4,
242 n 3, 278 n 1, 295 n 4, 307 n 2,
387 n 5, 432, 433, 490, 491.
Timurides, 278.

Tirmiz, 498 n 1.

TirmizT Sayyids, 498 n 1.

Tital, 295.

Tods, 483 n 2.

Transoxisns, 45 n 2, 122, 210, 213,
214, 218, 251, 355,437,453.488,
497.

Tuhfatu-'l-Ahrar, 226.

Tukrlya, see Hu-sain !^an.

Turan, 199.

Turbat, 475.

Turbat-i Haidarl, 353.

Turbat i-^ai^ Jam, 353.

Turkey, 191, 214, 280.

Xus, 29 n 2, 251, 358 n 2.
J’vtinama, 249 n 2.

T^uwal, 374.

Tuzuk-i-Jahangiri. 3 n. 5, 18 ii. 5,
237 nn 2, 4, 5, 263 n 4. 29ff t: 3,
337 a 2, 608 -a i.

566

Index.

‘UbaidI, 383, 384.

Uceh, 48, 167,

Udaipur, 420 n 1.

‘Uhud, 116.

Ujjain. 510, 512 n 2.

Ulfatl, see Qill) Khan.

Ulfati, of ‘Iraq, 265.

Ulfatl, of Yazd, 264, 265.

Uluyh MirzS, alian Sikandar, 6 n
4, 60 n 5, 75, 278.

Ulugh Baig Mirza, 60.

Umana sect, see Basakhwani sect.
‘Umar, the Kliallfah, 25 n 3, 39 n
4. 88, 117 n 2, 193 n I, 438 n .3.
‘Umar, ^laikh, 157.

‘Umar ^aito, MirzS, 6 n 4, UO n
3, 387 n 5, 491 n 6.

Umar KiayySm, 406, 529 n 1.

U.

Ummidf, 336 , 337.

UnSo, 190 n 2.

Undotted Commentary, the, see
Sawati‘u-l~llham.

Ur of the Chaldees, 433 n 4.

‘Urfi, Sayyidi Muhammad Jamalu-
’d-dm, of ^iraz. 392 , 393 , 394,
395.

Driaa, 336 n 4, 340 a 5.

U^, 45.

‘Usman, the ^}ialitah. 39 n 4, 117
n 2, 195 n 1, 438 n 3.

‘Usman, Maulana, of Bangai, 188.

‘Usman, Maulana, of Samana,
173.

‘U^man, see ‘Usman.

Uzbaks, 439 n 4.

I ‘Uzza, 347.

V,

Vafa'I, of Isfahan, 520.

Van, 525.

Vais, Maulana. of Gwaliyar, 189
19u, 191.

Vajd, 9 n 2.

Vajlhu-’d-dln, 5Iiy5n, or ^aiWi
of Ahmadabad, 8, 72, 73, 176.
Vamiq, 287.

\ aqi'i, Ibn ‘.All. of Hirat, 517.

Vasfl, Mir ‘.Abdu-’llah. 246, 518.

Vasli, 519.

Venkatadri, 330 n 1.

Verkopal, 318 n 2.

I Vida’I, of Hirat, 516.

I Vjdarbha, 422 n 1.
j Vijayanagar, 330.

I Vikramaditya, 249 n 2.

I VuqufI, Wa‘iz Jlir, of Hirat, 519.
i Vuqu‘i, Muhammad ^arTf. of
Nl^apur, 512,513, 51b,

W.

Wahidiyyah sect, see BasakhwanI
sect.

Wah^I, 474 n 1.

Wa'iz, Mir, see VuqufI.

WaJIhu-’d-dIn, ^aikii, see Vajlhu
’d-din.

Whintield, Gulshan-i-Raz. 84 n 3

Index.

567

Y.

YSdgar,*'’ee Halati.

Yahya, ]^nja, 439 n 4.

Yahya, MaulSna, 345.

Yahya, Mir, 148, 149.

Yahya, Q5zT, of QazvTn, 463 , 464.
Ya‘qub, QazT, 124, 125, 126.

Ya'qfib, ^aikh. of Kashmir, 20,
200 , 201. 202, 20S. 205 , 206, 207,
208 : see also SarfT,

Ya qub Minn, of Ka^rair, 450.
Yasin, Sayyid, 176, 177.

Yazd. 126 n 5. 237, 264, 315 n 1.
368, 408.

Yazid, 120.

Yol Quli. see Anisi.

Yusuf (Joseph), 206, 208, 244, 347
n 6. 468.

Yusuf, Shaikh, 89.

Yiisuf I^Sn. or ^ah. of Kashruir,
450.

j Yusuf r^an, Mirza. 265. 495 n 3.

I Yusuf Muhammad Khan, son of
.ktaga T^an, 2S0, 310.

YUxur-u Zit’aitiku. 448, 498 n 1,
500.

Yusufzais. 233 n 1, 327 n 2, 3ol

7 ..

Zabu'.istan, 233 n 1, 327 n 2.

Zahid, Hijaz lOiSn, 386.

Zaidi sect, 222.

Zain Khan, Kuke, 233 n 1, 327,
367 n 2 , 520.

Zainu-'d-dio, ^aikh, of Jabal i-
‘.Amili, 191.

Zainu ’d-din, Shaikh, of lOiava;,
324. [212.

Zainu 'd din Mahmud, Maulana .
Zamzani, 108.

Zanb/l, Hakim, 228.

Zanjabil, 182.

I Zauq, II no, 12 » 5.

|- ZIbu-'n-I\'sa, daughter of Aurang*
1 zib. 494 n 3.

!

1

Zibriql, Hakim, 135.

Zikr, 15 n i, 27.

ZitcT-i ari-a. 211.

Zij’a’u iiah, ^ailjh, 175, 176. 177,
178, 170, ISO. ISl. 182.

iiiihiir. Shaikh, 6.

Zuhuri, Mulia Nuro'ul-din, of
Tar.MiIz, 372, 373.

Zuiaikha, 244, 347, 416.

Zu-'l fiqtir, 504.

ERRATA.

P. 19, note 1, 1. 20. For ‘ Fari^tu ’ read • Firi^ta.’

P. 43, note 4, 1. 3. For ‘ Panipat ’ read ‘ Panipat.’

P. 45, note 2, 1. 3. For ‘ lyaltami^h ’ read ‘ Iltutmi;*.'

Do. do. 1.5. For ‘ Fari^ta ’ read ‘ Firi^ta.’

P. 82, 1. 9. For ‘ RIzwan ’ read ‘ Rizwan.'

P 85, 1. 3. After ‘ year ' insert ‘ H.'

P. 94. 1. 4. Dele ‘ and.’

P. 109, note 3, 1. 1. For ‘ 'Utum read ‘ ‘ulum.'

P. 115, 1. 16. Between ‘ work ’ and ‘ Mir ' insert 'of.

Do. 1. 26. For ‘ My ’ read ‘ Thy.'

P. 125, note 2, 1. 1. For ‘ Tawawls ’ read ‘ Tawawis.'

P. 130, 11. 1, 26. ' 1 ^ For ‘ -Abdu-u-na'Di ' read ‘ ‘Abdu-n-

P. 131, 11. 12. 21, and n. 4, I. 6- I nab!.'

P. 139, note 3. For ‘ test ' read ‘ text.’

P. 147, note 1, 1. 3. For ‘Steps to prophethood ' read ‘Degrees in
‘ prophet-hood.’

P. 169, note 3. For read

P. 173, note 1, 1. 1. For = Dilhi ' read ‘ Dibit.

P. 178, note 1, 1. 4, For ‘ ^ah ' read ‘ ^an.'

P. 198, 1. 19. For • qasldah ’ read ‘ qasidah.

P. 210, note 6, 1. 4 (on p. 211). For ‘ approbrious ‘ read ‘ opprobrious.'

P. 216, note 2, i. 2. For ‘ Btjapor ' read ‘ BIjapur.

P. 217, 1. 2. For ‘ Raku ' read ‘ Kakii.'

P. 239, 1. 4, For ‘ Tazkirah ' read ‘ Tazkirah.’

P. 240, note 3, 1. 2. For ‘ BadoanI ' read ‘ Badaont.

P. 241, 1. 16. For ‘ Ka'bah’ read ‘ Ka‘bah.’

P. 246, last line. For ‘ Suhuhi^ read ‘ Sabuhl.

P. 249, note 1. 1. 1. For ■ sleeps’ read ‘sleep.’

P. 262, note 1, i. 4. For ‘ ^amia’ read ‘ Shamlu.

P. 283, note 4, 1. 6. For ‘ Taimur ' read ‘ Timur.'

P. 300, 1. 14. For ‘ lives ' read ‘ lines.’

P. 318, note 2, 1. 14. For ‘ lakhalu-f read ‘ tahhallus.'

P. 329, note 1, 1. 8. For ‘ blghas ' read ‘ b'lghas.’

P. 348, note 2, 11. 1 and 2. For • conservation’ read ‘ conversation.

P. 362, 1. 14. For ‘ ‘Aqil' read ‘ Aqil.’

P. 376. For note 3 substitute ‘ The poem by Jami.'

570

Errata.

P. 405. note 3. For ‘ magians’ read ‘ Magiana.’

P. 408. 1. 24. For ‘ Fusini’ read ‘ Fusunl.’

P 425, note 5, 1. I. For * Salaiman ’ read ‘ Sulaiman,’

P. 436, I. 1. For ‘ ^Irar ' read ‘ ^iraz.’

P. 473, 1. 17. For ‘ Majnims’ read ‘ Majniins.’

Do. note 1,1. 9. For ‘ Safaviyya ’ read ‘ Safaviyya.’

P. 493, 1. 19. For • Tvaailjl’ read ‘ Nasihl.’

Do. note 2. Insert •' 397 ' after ‘ p.' and dele “ note.”

P. 495, note 3, I. 2 (on p. 496). For ‘ Saqirama ' read ‘ Sdqhiam’i
P. 530, i. 19. For ‘ Muslinia ’ read ‘ ^lusHms.'

Central Archaeological Library,

NEW DELHI.

2A52S

Call No. 954,@2/Al-k/R.L.H.

Author — Al-teadaoni

Title— ® •

r‘ Vgi-BL

---■ ■; I r ~ 1

‘ . Borrower No. 1 Date of Issue ! Date of Return t_.

V

V.'' *M hook ihai is shut is huitt block”

GOVT. OF INDIA

Depairtnaent of ArcieKoIojo^ ^ >

^ NEWDELHjL

O - ■ ' vt

■ . . ' ' . ' • Tr

: Please help us to keep the book
and moving.'
