GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA

ARCHAEOLOGICAL  SURVEY  OF  INDIA

Central  Archaeological  Library

NEW  DELHI

ACC.  NO.  1AS-Z7

CALL  NO.  -a54i01|AL-li^4iiL

D.G.A.  79

I AD  ORIENTAL  SERIES  No,  19

MUNTAKHABU-T-TAWAIliKH

HY

‘ABDF-L-QADIR  IBN-I-MULUK  SHAH

KN'.WN  AS

AL-BADAONI

VOI.XJME  T.

TRANSLATED  FROM  THE  ORIGINAL  PERSIAN,

ANTI  EDITED  BV

GEORGE  S.  A.  RANKING,  m.d.  Xaxtab.},  m.r.a.s.

SURGEON-ETEUTENANT-COLONEL,  INDIAaN  MEDICAL  SERVU  B
Secretary  to  the  Board  of  h\afniner»,  Fort
Felluiv  of  the  Calcutta  University.

f—  ; ^ .

, , '

y

M-'

IDARAH-I-ADABIYAT-I-DELLI

2009  QASIMJAN  STREET,

DELHI-110006  (INDIA)

lDARAH-1  ADABIYAT-I  DELLI

2009,  QASIMJAN  ST.,  DELHI.110006
(INDIA)

FIRST  EDITION  1898
REPRINT  1973

PRICE  Rs.  175.00  Per  Set

PRINTED  IN  India

PUBLISHED  by  MOHAMMAD  AHMAD  FOR  IDARAH  1
ADABIYAT-I  DELLI.  2009,  QASIMJAN  ST..  DELHI.110006  AND
PRINTED  AT  JAYYED  PRESS,  BALLIMARAN.  DELHI.110006

TRANSLATOR’S  PREFACE.

r}

a

i ^ T

j

- (V

(V

‘X^  In  presenting  this  translation  of  the

y)

y
' y

I

V

V

r/

/

0

1

O'

d/

first  volume  of
Ji&dzom’^  iluntakhn’iu-t-tuicdrikh  (Selections  from  Histories)
I cannot  but  be  conscious  of  its  many  defects.

No  one  who  has  not  attempted  to  translate  from  Persian  into
English  can  form  the  slightest  idea  of  the  special  difficulties
of  the  task.

The  inhei-ent  differences  of  idiom  in  the  two  languages,
the  rich  expaiisiveness  of  the  one,  and  the  rigid  inflexibility
of  the  other,  render  the  attempt  to  fitly  represent  the  glowing
colours  of  Persian  in  the  dull  monotone  of  modern  English,
all  but  hopeless.  It  has  been  said  that  the  test  of  a transla-
tion is  not  its  literalness  but  its  truth : that  is  to  say,  not
its  fidelity  to  the  author’s  expression,  but  its  response  to
his  inspiration.  It  must  not  merely  reproduce  the  letter,  it
must  embody  the  spirit  of  the  original  composition.

How  great  is  the  demand  thus  made  upon  the  translator
must  be  evident  to  anyone  who  is  acquainted  with  both
Persian  and  English : and  the  difficulties  which  appear  so
formidable  in  prose  translation,  become  insurmountable  .n
the  case  of  poetry.

The  various  metres' of  Persian  poetry  arfe- So' eaitirely  cha-
racteristic and  essential  in  their  nature,  that  it_^has  appeared
to  me  futile,'  if  not  impertinent,  to  attempt  similar  metrical
renderings  in  English.

Even  where  it  is  possible  to  reproduce  by  conjunction  of
English  words,  the  rhythm  and  accent  of  any  Persian  metre,
such  a composition  no  more  recalls  the  original,  than  does
the  skeleton  of  the  anatomical  museum  summon  up  the  living
and  breathing  animal.

For  this  reason,  the  poetical  portions  of  BadaonT’s  work
have,  m the  present  trausldtion,  almost  without  exception

11

been  rendered,  not  in  verse  but  in  pmse.  thus  preserving
the  substance  while  sacrificing  the  form,  aa  the  transparent
cube  of  salt  may  be  crushed  so  as  to  be  unrecognisable  bv  its
crystalline  form,  but  still  retains  its  chemical  composition.
To  render  poetry  satisfactorily  a translator  must  be  both
linguist  and  poet ; if  he  be  only  a linguist  he  should  not
tamper  with  the  tinislied  work  of  the  poet ; he  can,  at  best,
only  hope  to  outline  the  subject,  leaving  the  colour  scheme
untouched.

1 am  aware  that  a high  authority*  has  expressed  himself
in  favour  of  the  translation  of  Persian  poetry  into  English
verse,  but  the  qualifications  which  shall  render  a translator
competent  to  undertake  such  a task  must  fall  to  the  lot  of
very  few.

With  this  full  knowledge  of  the  difficulties  to  be  encoun-
tered, the  present  translation  was  undertaken,  and  it  is  pre-
sented in  the  confidence  that  those  who  are  the  best  judges
of  the  nature  of  the  lask  will  be  the  first  to  make  allowances
for  defects  in  its  performance.

Calcotta  : 1 (lEORGE  RANKING.

July  mh,  1898.  i

For  a life  of  Badaoni  reference  should  be  made  to  page  117
of  the  Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  No.  Ill,
1869,  where  an  excellent  biography  will  be  found  written  by
the  late  Professor  Blochmann

The  sources  from  which  this  translation  has  been  made
are  the  following : —

1.  The  “ Muntakhab  AI-Tawarikh.”  edited  by  Maulavi
Ahmad  Ali,  jirinted  at  the  College  Press,  Calcutta,  1868,  and
published  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of
Bengal,  Vol.  I,  referred  to  in  the  translation  as  the  Text.

• Major-Geueral  Sir  F.  J.  GoIdainKl,  C.B.,  K.C  S.I.,  “on  Translations  from
and  into  Persian.”  Transactions  ut  XintK  International  Congress  of  Orien-
taUste,  1892,

Ill

2.  Manuscript  No.  1592  of  the  Muntiikhabu-t-TinvaiiHi
of  ‘Abdu-I-Qadir  Muluk  Shah  BadaonI,  in  the  library  of  the
Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.  Wrkten  by  one  Muhaminad
Saiyyid  (?),  in  the  year  1255  H.  (1839  A.D.).  This  is  referred
to  in  the  translation  as  MS.  (A)

3.  Manuscript  No.  A.  44,  also  from  the  above  library.
This  is  referred  to  in  the  translation  as  MS.  (B).  The
transcriber  of  this  Manuscript  is  one  Muhammad  Nazim.  It
bears  no  date.

The  printed  text  has  been  carefully  collated  with  these
two  manuscripts,  and  all  variant  readings  noted

TRANSLATION

OF  THE

OF  AL-BADAOXI.'

ItJ  THE  NAME  OP  God  the  COS-'PASSrONATE,  THE  MeRCIFL'1,

OF  thou  * from  whose  name  spring  all  other  names,

Kings  at  thy  door  are  suppliant  as  I at  theii-s —

When  once  the  impulse  of  zeal  for  thee  was  felt,

No  foot  remained  shod,  no  head  remained  crowned.

Emperor  of  the  world  ! with  this  unprotitable  soul  of  mine
which  has  hecome  the  abode  of  demons  and  wild  l)e,Tsts,3  in  what
way  can  I conceive  thy  praises,  and  with  this  worn  and  foolish
tongue  of  mine,  which  has  become  as  it  were  food  for  cats  and
dogs,  how'  can  I chant  thy  eulogy.

How  can  the  miserable  dust  proclaim  the  Unity  of  God.

How  in  this  state  of  defilement  praise  the  Divine  Being.

Moreover,  tue  tooi  ol  search  limps  feebly  in  this  unknown
road,  because  of  my  constant  an.viety  and  habitual  fear,  while  in
this  limitless  desert,  my  stammering  tongue  finds  the  sphere  of
speech  always  contracted.

That  which  my  soul  knows  is  but  secondary,  * wdiat  my  tongue
sneaks  are  but  particles — (and  therefore  iininteliiL'Tble),

How  can  I know  thee  in  my  soul  or  express  thee  ^vitli  my
■ ongue.

1 Al-Biiclior  . Vide  Preface.

^ This  invucatiim  is  to  the  Almighty  iu  wiioso  name  all  literary  works  are
commenced.

3 J>b“.

f »

1 That  which  is  dependent  tor  exist  me  upon  .-i'lnio  pre-CM-,'..

ing  state  or  object,  opposed  to  I’.a-h'le-.  nhiei;  alone  com  c y uo

intelligible  moariiiig — -dso  :;iguiliea  a lettci  w Inch  is  also  ,-0.  uicauiiig.

1

L 2 ]

This  seems  best,  that  I should  restrain  my  pen  from  travelling
2 in  this  valiev.  and  having  hidden  the  head  of  bewilderment  in  the
cloke  * of  meditation  on  merl  and  regions  * should  open  the  eye
of  my  understanding  to  the  knowledge  of  Thy  all-peidect  worKs
and  unfading  kingdom,  and  proceeding,  through  the  vicissitudes
of  affairs  of  created  beings,  to  the  Unity  of  thy  exalted  personality,
should  end  with  the  world  of  proclaiming  and  confessing  the
Unity  of  God,  3 so  that  I may  see  with  the  eye  of  certainty — nay
more  that  I may  recegnize  that

In  thy  excellence  there  is  no  room  for  duality,*

Thou  and  thy  majesty  make  up  the  universe.

and  I have  moistened  my  lips  with  the  pure  water  of  the  praise  of
that  chieftain  whose  name  is  “praised  ”3  whose  end  is  lauded;

1 is  of  two  kinds  which  is  A thing’s  beina:  preceded  by

^

non-existence,  and  which  is  A thing’s  being  dependeui  upon

another  for  its  existence.  Vide  Lane,  ai'C  d.i^.  1.

Li?.  C'jh'ir  or  kt-O'f.

3 Qcr.in  -di.  53  J i/

yve  'vviii  5how  tiicni  enr  in  the  re^ons  and  in  themselves.

S The  Cl  i:y  ot  u.i.  h the  fundamental  propoaituin  of  th'  faith  ot  Islam

>dv.  iiod  aioii'^.  I'lidthe  eternal  JTj  be-.ru''^  ti:  nni,  no."  .?

b _ ir:  :,.--aij.d  '.t-.t  i- * ..*•  r.  .'ue  like  iint'.-  nim.  Qurin — ^?iirai-a.-Ilvh!d?.

■*  lb  ’1  ) oil.' cun  stua  I b*>i'u;  him  in  this  position  of  exccl-.enc*.

t'K  to.t  i’  xx-. 61.

f I'  'I’.re  a (iol  k 1' 1.  n.jiJ  ^ b-jy  ’ Su:

• t ■ ’pi'  " ’ii'*  j>t'or.'  v.^ti  ' ,

1.^  ' 1.  AW’>  iili'a  .aor.d  in  n:*:

nth'  of  wi.u-'i  i?  I’r.i  ^

. r A.r  $ lio,  w:.-)  vhen  o

’ . • ' , I ’ r • £ H -torn;'

fc

r 3 1

Lord  ot  the  promised  fountain,*  and  of  the  praise  which  is
on  every  tongue  * (may  the  blessing  and  peace  of  Gtod  be  upon  him
and  his  family)  because  the  mantle  of  the  honour  of  eternal  and
everlasfing  empire  lies  gracefully  upon  his  noble  figure,  and
the  proclamation®  and  stamp  of  undiminishing  power  and  glorious
sovereign^  of- right  belongs  to  his  exalted  name.

The  monarch  of  Arabia  of  whom  the  world  is  a manifes-
tation.

The  Lord  of  the  earth,  whose  servant  he  is,  swears  by  his
name.

He  was  the  near  neighbour  of  the  Truth  for  this  reason
had  no  shadow  *

To  the  end  that  no  one  should  place  a foot  on  (the  shadow
of)  his  head —

Countless  ® praises  and  eulogies  on  the  elect  family  and  the
tmth-perceiring  companions  of  the  Prophet,  especially  upon  the
rightly-guided  Khalifahs  ® (may  the  favour  of  God  be  on  them
all)  who,  for  the  elevation  of  the  standard  of  religion  and  ^he
promulgation  of  the  woid  of  evident  truth  ^ risked  their  lives
and  laid  down  their  heads  as  a ransom,  and  thus  cleared  the  thorns

1 M.S.  (A)  has,  &c.  — a river  in  Paradise.

4 Verily  we  have  given  thee  al-Ean^r.  Quran  eviiL  1.
literaUy  means  abundance/*

* ijyy-

S AV»>q  ^

The  coronation  cepemony  of  Mahamraedan  monarchs  contsisi  chiefly  in
the  recital  of  the  i^xiiha  and  issuing  coin  {s^kka)  stamped  '‘vith  Lis  name.

^ Muhammad  was  said  to  have  no  shallow.

^ Thousands  upon  thonsauds.

The  four  immediate  successoK’of  Muhammad.  Abd  Bakr,
A.  n.  11.  't’mar,  A.  H.  13.  U^man,  A.  K.  ii3.  ‘ All,  A.  H.  35.  acknow-
ledged by  the  Sunnis.  The  first  three  of  these  are  rejected  by  the  Shi  ci-^
who  hold  that  'All  was  the  hr&t  Icgitiiuato  Eh.vUfah.

' Cf.  Qur^n  sxvii-Sl

Rely  then  i2jr->n  Gjc.  Ver;\-

: v.S  trut:

1..  u ar.

r 1 I

of  iutitlelity  and  the  undergrowth  of  heresy  from  the  plain  of
the  kingdom  of  the  sacred  law.^

After  the  praise  of  God  and  of  the  Lord  the  protector  of
the  divine  missive  (may  the  blessing  of  God  be  upon  him,  his
family  and  his  companions,  a blessing  safe  from  all  termination),
we  have  to  declare  that  the  science  of  History  is  essentially  a
3,  lofty  science  and  an  elegant  branch  of  learning,  because  it  is  the
fountain-head  of  the  learning  of  the  experienced,  and  the  source
of  the  experience  of  the  learned  and  discriminating,  and  the
writers  of  stories  and  biographies  from  the  time  of  Adam  to
this  present  time  in  which  we  live,  have  completed  reliable  com-
positions and  comprehensive  works,  and  have  proved  the  ex-
cellence thereof!  by  proofs  and  demoasti-ations,  but  it  must  not
be  supposed  that  the  reading  and  study  of  this  science  as
certain  lukewarm  religionists,  and  the  party  of  doubt  and  dis-
sent, shortsighted  as  they  are,  are  wont  to  affirm — has  been  or  will
be  a cause  of  wandering  from  the  straight  path  of  the  illustrious
law  of  Muhammad  (may  the  blessing  and  peace  of  God  be  upon
him  and  his  family),  or  become  the  entry  into  and  way  of  ascent
to  the  fountainheads  of  scepticism,  and  drinking  places  of  defilement
of  the  licentious  and  heietical,  and  those  who  have  gone  astray ;
because  for  a body  of  men  who  in  the  very  essence  of  their  eoli-
Stitution  are  devoid  of  any  sliare  in  religious  principle,  the  reading
of  the  eternal  word  which  is  the  key  of  evident  happiness  and  “ a*
healimj  and  a mt-rcy  for  the  icorlds,”^.  becomes  a cause  of  misery

The  -sacred  law,  Cf  Quran  v.  52  Jij

For  each  one  of  you  hare  we  Tna<le  a Uiw  and  a pathway.  The  Mosaic  law
is  always  called  At-Taurat  (Hebrew

The  v.’oi’d  in  the  text  is  always  used  fur  the  sacred  canon  of  the  Quran
is  divisible  into  five  sections  beliefs — moralities  —

devotions  transactiuns — O punishments.  Cf.  Kashshaf.  Isti-

lahiit-ul-Funuu,  arc  —

-"O  . o - ^ c^<j  ^ 9 9

* Quran  xvii.  84,  _^Lo  J

we  wil!  send  down  of  tlio  Quran  that  which  ia  a healing  and  a mercy  to  the
believei's.  I'id.  al-n  Quran  xli.  11.

I 5 ]

and  everlasting  loss  “ and  if  they  are  not  guided  by  it  they  say —

“ this  is  an  antiquated  lie."  ^

If  this  is  the  case  with  the  Qirran  * what  chance  has  History  ?

“ When,  any  man  has  lost  his  hearing  thinugh  melancholia,®

He  cannot  participate  in  the  mnsic  of  David  and  its  harmony.”

But  I'  address  tny  words  to  those  who  are  endowed  with  the
quailities  of  sonnd  intellect  and  brilliancy  of  genius,  and  natural
equity — not  to  those  who.  are  not  led  by  the  sacred  law  and  who
deny  all  principle,  fundamental  or  derivative,*  because  such  men
are  not  worthy  of  this  discourse,  nor  are  they  within  the  pale  of
the  wise,  and  discreet,  and  understanding,  and  how  can  one  ab-
solutely refuse  to  admit  a science  which  is  one-seventh  of  the  4.

1 Quran  xlvi.  10.  In  tne  original  we  read—  In  boih  this  and

the  former  quotation  there  are  verbal  errors  whicli  lead  to  Ihe  conclusion
that  the  author  was  not  thoroughly  at  homo  in  the  Quran.

S I have  inserted  those  words  as  the  only  means  of  giving  an  adequate
rendering  of  the  phrase

B fifkay)(o\ia.  The  orthography  of  this  word  is  Sadidi

) gives  the  etymology  qy-oill  Idi  | fhe  black  humour,  but
gives  no  hint  of  deafness  as  one  of  the  symptoms  of  the  disease.  Deafness
is  not  a concomitant  of  melancholia  as  known  to  modern  medicine,  but  the
cases  of  so  called  hysterical  deafness  with  mental  depression  are  not  nn-
The  Bahr  vX-Jawahir  says  tir®  1*1  jJlgj  (*i)

common.

J'.yi  It  is  only  called  “ malMulia  ” where  it  is

the  result  of  (the  humour  called)  “Sauda”  (black  bile)  which  is  not  in-
flammatory. It  takes  the  ideas  and  thoughts  out  of  their  proper  channel
and  tends  to  despondency  and  fear  because  of  a melancholic  temperament
which  depresses  the  mind.

4 The  two  chief  divisions  of  .TurispruJ.mce.  Ac-
cording to'  the  Istilal.iat-ul-Punun  t-eats  of  the  soul  and  of  all  that

appertains  thereto,  thus  including  all  theological  science;  (Ka.sli-haf  Istilahat-
nl-Funuu  art.  ) cf.^l^^l  J 54“  it  al  At^hhdh  wal  Xazdir  }iy  Zainul  Abidai

biaNajfm,  (H.  K.774;  tjAJ

t.e.  Its  foudamentals  are  firmly  estabiisUed  and  its  dciiMtiivts  cvicleut.

[ o ]

seven  sections  ‘ apon  wliich  the  formdation  of  the  ^tablishment
of  Faith  and  Certainty  is  laid.

“ And  all  that  we  relate  to  thee  of  the  tidings  -of  the  prophets
with  which  tee  have  established  gour  hearts”^  tells  ns  of  this,
and  a large  body  of  the  learned  expositors  of  the  traditions
and  comnientaiors  on  the  Quran,  as  for  e.'Eample  Imam  Rnirhari  ^
and  Qazi  Baizawi  * up  to  our  own  times  have  occupied  them-
selves in  ivi-iting  about  this  heart-enthraUing  science,  and  their
words  and  practice  have  become  an  anthority  for  the  nations
both  East  and  West,  in  spite  of  the  diversity  o£  their  origing
and  the  distinction  of  their  variaas  degrees.  While  on  the
other  band  an.  insignificant  bar.d  of  innovators  and  inventors
who  with  the  disgraceful  partisanship  of  greedy  mindedness
and  importunate  desires,  and  sbertsightedness  as  regards  both
outward  and  inward  qualities,  have  placed  their  feet  in  the
valley  of  audacity,  and  have  introduced  interpolations  and  errors
into  true  and  memorable  histories,  and  having  abandoned

Tiie  tirst  chapter  of  the  wiiicli  contains  seven  verses  f

so  called  in  Sura  xv.  87.  J -

being  ploral  or  repeating  or  reiterating.  The  nniiiber  seven

relates  to  ihe  fnauziU  or  divisions  of  tbc  Quran  each  one  of  which  is  to  be
read  so  that  the  whole  U completed  in  a week.  See  also  Tafsir  nl  Bai/awi

* Quraii  \i.  121  This  quotation  is  correctly  given.

3 Hadz  A>iu’Ab‘JjHa.li  Muhammad  iba  Abil  Hasan  Isma'fl  ibn  Ibrahim
ibn-ai-Muguair  ibii-ul- Ahnaf  iezdibali,  orYczdezbah  according  to  Ibn  Alakula
a Mania  of  the  tribe  of  Jafi.  (Slane  Ibn  Khalliqan,  ii.  595.)  The  last  named
was  a Magian  and  died  in  that  religion,  his  son  A1  Mughairat  embraced  Islam,

He  waa  the  author  of  Sahih-ul-Bnkhari,  a collection  of  authen-

tic traditions— in  which  an  account  of  Imam  Bukhari  is  given.  He  was
bom  A.K.  194  aud  died  A.H,  256,  and  was  buried  at  the  village  of  Khrirtang

near  Samarqand  leaving  no  mule  issue.  The  is  held  in  great

esteem  by  Mtalims.

4 Qazi  Masir  ad-Din  Abul  iChair  Abdullah  Baizawi,  ibn  Umar  ibn  Mu^m-
mad,  was  bom  at  Baiza,  avill^eof  Shiraz,  and  was  apixiinted  Chief  Qizi.
He  was  the  author  of  many  works,  among  other*  Alghdyatu  dl  Ugh,  Shark  ul-
Ma^dhih  teal  mnn'ihij.  His  most  Celebrated  work  was  a commentary  on  the
Quran  called  Anicdnt-t-tauzU,  He  died  A.H.  065  and  \ms  buried  in  Shiraz.
See  also  0e  Sacy  ; Anth:  Gram;  Arab:  notes  on  Baizawi,  p.  37.  See  also
£lliOtt  and  lIo^vsou,  Vul.  11.,  202  and  note.

[ 7 j

recognised  constmeiions  ^ and  explanations,  and  interpretationg
of  obvions  nature,  and  estimating  the  conflicts  and  discussions
of  the  noble  companions  and  mighty  followers  (of  tlie  Propliefc)
by  their  own  condition,  attributed  them  to  mtitual  ocntradiction
and  hatred,  and  to  rivalry  in  the  splendour  and  aruonnt  of  their
property  and  family, ' and  having  seduced  simple  minded  people
of  elementary  belief,  have  led  them,  by  their  own  error  and  by
attributing  error  to  others,  to  Gehenna,  the  house  of  perdition.

“ Wben  the  crow  ® becomes  leader  of  a tribe,  he  ■sviii  snrely  lead
them  along  the  path  of  destruction.”

And  if  the  eye  of  a man  be  instilled  with  the  collj  rium  of  the
Divine  gnidance.  and  illuminated  by  the  light  of  truth,  and  guard-
ed from  every  calamity  which  happens  in  the  world  of  existence
and  evil,  he  passes  to  the  Unity  of  the  Creator,  the  Ancient  of
days,  the  Glorious,  freed  from  the  stain  of  innovation,  and
purified  from  the  blemish  of  change  and  alteration,-  And  when  I
look  carefully,  I see  that  the  world  is  itself  an  ancient  archetype
which  has  neither  head  nor  root,  its  pages  are  a confused  record,
and  in  each  page  there  is  a list  of  the  affairs  of  a section  of  5
mankind  who  have  Lad  the  reins  of  the  management  of  affairs
entrusted  to  their  hands.

'Th.is  ancient  Shahnama  relates  the  affairs  of  the  kings  of
the  world.

Do  thou  always  look  and  read  therein  with  circumspection.

. . ^ ^ 0 ^

1 is  the  plural  from  an  inf.

He  put  the  beat  construction  upon  it,  namely  a saying  {Lane.  s.v.

^ ^ ?

% Amb  proverb  luns  thus :

41-1  - V

- ^ ^ -

“ He  who  has  the  crow  for  a guide  will  be  led  by  it  to  the  carcu-'-es  of  dogs.’-
The  crow  was  considered  as  the  most  inauspicious  thing  on  earth,  thus  the

0 Sg,  o ^

Arabs  say  More  ill-omened  than  a crow*

“ ✓ - *

Its  appearance  is  thought  to  be  ominous  of  separation,  therefore  thev  say
also  urJJv  ' '^]j^  The  raven  (or  crow)  of  separation.

I 8 ]

The  spell  of  this  narrative  Wangs  sweef  sleep  to  him

Who  is  in  deliiium,  and  has  become  distracted  with  mad-
ness of  the  brain.

Bat  it  also  wakens  him  who  on  account  of  pride,  has  fallen
into  the  slumber  of  carelessness  and  whom  the  devil  has
deceived.

And  inasmuch  as  the  iavoker  of  blessing  upon  all  mankind,
‘Abdul  Qadir  ibn  3Ialuk  Shah  Badaoui  (may  God  erase  ‘his
name  from  the  book  of  sins)  in  the  beginning  of  the  year  &9d  ^
in  accordance  with  the  fateful  order  of  his  excellency  the
Ivbnliiilh  of  the  time,  the  shadow  of  the  Deity,  Akbar  Shahi  "
waien  he  had  finished  his  selection  from  the  History  of  Kashmir  -
which,  by  the  soul -inspiring  order  of  that  world-conquering
Em])eror  whose  throne  is  the  heaven,  one  of  the  incomparahlo
doctor, s of  India  had  translated  from  the  Hindi  into  Persian,
jiclded  to  a liking  which  he  had  for  this  science  from  youth
to  maturity,  and  as  it  was  seldom  that  he  had  not  been  occupied
in  reading  and  writing  it,  either  of  his  own  free  will  and  accord
or  in  obedience  to  orders,  it  used  often  to  occur  to  him  to  write
as  well  an  epitome  of  the  affairs  of  the  Emperors  of  the  metro-
polis of  Dehli,  from  the  time  of  the  commencement  of  Islam  to
the  time  of  writing,  in  a concise  manner,

All  the  world  is  but  a village  that  (city  of  Mecca)  is  the
central  point  * (of  Islam).

tliat  it  might  be  a memorandum  comprising  a portion  of  the
events  of  each  reign  in  brief  form,  and  a memorial  for  my
friends,  and  a conspectus  for  the  intellectual,  and  although  it

1 999  of  the  rtijra  (1590  A.  D )

2 The  Emperor  -tkbar,  who  atom  this  time  employed  Badaoni  “ to  make
translations  from  the  Arabic  and  Sanskrit  as  in  the  case  of  the  Mu‘jamu-1-
BuMiu,  Jamiu-r-ila'^hidi,  and  the  Ramayana,”  (Elliott  and  Dowson,  v,  478.)

b Said  to  have  been  translated  from  the  original  Hindi  by  Mulla  Shah
I'lul.ianimaJ  Shali.ibadi  — but  not  apparently  the  Raja-tarangini,  for  the  trans-
lation of  that  ivork  is  usually  attributed  to  Maulana  Imad-ud-din.  Cf.  Ain-i-
Akoari,  Blochn.aim,  I,  pages  105-10G — footnote  1.

^ Mecca,  as  nr-ing  the  central  meeting  place  of  all  Muslims.  The  Arabic

, } , s > ,

phrase  is  *11  The  collective  body  of  the  Muslims.

Vide  Lane  Art-

[ 9 ]

might  not  be  a book  to  be  relied  upon,  or  a notable  composition,
still  in  accordance  with  the  saying

“ These  ancient  pages  of  the  sky  whose  beauty  the  stars  are,  6.
Are  an  ancient  history  of  many  Emperors  whose  armies
excel  the  stars  in  number,”

it  may  be  that  from  the  perusal  of  this  book  a messenger  from  the
world  of  spirits  and  invisible  mysteries  may  cast  a ray  of  light
upon  the  receptive  mind,  and  thus  being  a cause  of  abstraction
and.  seclusion,  may  wean  the  soul  from  the  love  of  this  transitory
world,  and  may  aid  the  compiler  of  these  pages  in  the  prosecution
of  his  task,  and  his  hopes  may  not  be  blighted  ; and  inasmuch  as
each  day  some  new  grief  used  to  appear,  and  some  vexatious
annoyance  used  to  shew  itself,  helps  being  few  and  hindrances
many  ; moreover  by  reason  of  fresh  toils  and  temporal  changes  it
was  diflScnlt  to  remain  in  one  place.

“ Each  day  would  bring  a different  place,  each  night  a different
roof.”

And  besides  all  this,  my  sustenance  was  by  no  means  assured,
hanging  as  it  were  between  heaven  and  earth,  and  my  heart
utterly  distracted  by  separation  from  kindred  and  friends  ; accord-
ingly that  commission  was  only  accomplished  by  fits  and  starts, *
until  a kind  and  complaisant  man  of  wealth,  orthodox  and  reli-
giously disposed,  and  happily  furnished  with  this  world’s  goods,
who  was  very  devoted  to  me,  and  for  whom  1 too  entertained  an
indescribable  affection,  having  completed  the  writing  of  the
Tdnkh  i Nizami^  which  is  a bulky  volume,  and  which  is  here  being
completed  by  me — removed  the  furniture  of  life  to  the  sublime
abode  of  Paradise.

• 1 i used  to  fall  into  the  region  of

holding  back  and  pushing  on.

a Khwsja  Nizamu-d-din  Ahmad,  son  of  Khwaja  JIuqim  Harawl  diwan  of
the  household  of  Babar,  is  said  in  the  Zamrdl<j.-l-Qaicdn{n  (E.D.  v.  178J  to
have  been  appointed  diwan  of  Akbar’s  household.  He  was  sobseouently
appointed  haMis^ii  of  the  province  of  Gujrat.

The  history  referred  to  in  the  text  is  one  of  great  repute  and  authority,
it  was  called  by  the  author  Tabaqat-i-Akbar-shahi  by  which  title  Badaoni
liimself  also  styles  the  work.  Its  name  is  also  known  as  Tabaq.it-

2

[ 10  ]

“ He  has  departed — I too  follow  him.

Each  one  at  last  mast  go  the  self  same  way.”

At  this  iTiiictnre,  when  Time  departing  from  its  usual  custom,
has  treated  me  in  the  matter  of  leisure  with  some  sort  of  I’heral-
i'  Y,  it  has  come  ahcut  that  I have'  been  able  to  steal  a morsel  of
•j  the  chequered  * hours  of  my  life  from  his  grasn,  so  that  I renewed
mv  intention  and  confumed  mj  purpose,  and  on  this  ground  ibat
there  is  no!  h-ygone  event  which  has  not  left  something  tor  the
present,

‘‘  If  the  peasant  thoroughly  clears  under  the  sheaves  of  wheat
He  leaves  the  sparrow’s  portion  on  the  ground,”

1 have  selected  and  transcaabed  accurately  a portion  of  the
circumstances  of  some  of  the  autocrat  Emperors  of  Hindustan
from  ' be  Tdrikk  i Mtibdi-ak  Shdhi^  cjid  the  2^ izdviu-t-Tuwdrikh  of
Jiizami  ^ which  is  as  it  were  a drop  in  the  ocean  and  a bubble  of
the  tanuilent  floods,  and  have  also  added  somewhat  of  my  own,
and  have  kept  befoi'C  me  the  desii-abihty  of  conciseness  and  have

i-Akbari.  i irishta  states  that  cf  all  the  histories  in*  coosnited  this  is  the
only  one  he  tound  complete.  (Elliot  and  Dowson,  v.  177-178.)

^izamn-d-diu  died  in  1003  A.  H.,  15&t  A.  X).  From  the  author’s  pre^ce
in  the  text  above  it  wonid  appear  that  he  had  had  the  work  in  hand
some  considerable  time,  bat  had  not  been  able  to  give  his  imdivided  attention
to  it  until  after  the  death  of  Uizsnm“<i-din.  In  the  space  of  a year  from
that  event  he  had  completed  his  abridgment  so  that,  it  most  have  been  fairly
lar  advanced  at  the  time  of  ^'izamu-d-din’s  decease

1 see  Lane,  Art.  The  days  are  apt  to  decline  from  the  right

^ O''  ^ Sio  ^ S

coxiTSe  apt  to  return  and  The  days.

» This  work  was  written  by  Yahya  ibn- Ahmad  ibn-* Abdullah  Sirhindi
aceordin*^  to  Firishta  with  the  express  purpose  of  recording  the  reign  of
iiubarak  S'liah.  It  i'ommences  with  the  reign  of  Muhammad  Sam,  h>imd£7
of  the  Ghuri  d.ynasty ; the  only  known  MS,  terminates  abruptly  in  the
middle  of  the  reign  of  gultiu  Sayyid  Muhammad,  853  A.  H.— {1448  A.  D.j-

2 This  must  be  tht^  work  already  referred  to,  L e.,  the  Tabaqat-TAkbari
althoagh  the  name  Migamu-t-Tawaiikli  does  not  appear  to  be  giyen  toiteiae-
whero-

Ihe  name  Ni^mn -t-Tawari^  is  generally  restricted  to  the  work  by
Baizawi  {ride  ElHott  s.nd  Dowson  li.  pp.  252-253.)  Its  date  is  about  £74  BL
(3275  A.  D.)

11  1

imposed  npon  myself  ihe  necessity  of  avoidance  of  all  affectation
of  style  and  metaphor,  and  have  named  this  model  composition
Huntakhdbii-t-Tawariih-^  I hope  that  this  imperfect  collation
and  composition,  whose  object  is  the  perpetuation  of  the  auspi-
cious names  of  the  Emperors  of  Islam,  and  the  transmission  of
a memorial  thereof  in  this  changing  world  nntil  the  final  consum-
mation, may  lead  to  the  pardon  of  the  author  in  the  world  to
conic,  and  not  be  an  angmenration  of  the  crimes  laid  to  his
charge.

“ And  do  thon,  O Xightingale,  as  thon  rcamest  through  this
garden.

With  all  thy  sweetness,  abstain  fi-om  blaming  the  defects  of
the  crow.’’

Since  the  object  of  my  tunbitiim  is  to  write  corrccily,  If  1 should
by  accident  let  fail  fiom.  my  pen  t’iie  instrument  of  my  thoughts,
or  commit  in  my  thoughts,  which  are  the  motive  agent  of  my  8.
pen^  any  slip  or  error,  I hope  that  He  (may  He  'be  glorified  and
exalted)  in  accordance  with  his  tiniversal  mercy  which  is  of  old,
will  overlook  and  pardon  it.

By  speaking  evil  do  not  change  my  tongue,

And  do  not  make  this  tongue  of  mine  m>'  wrong.i*

And  since  the  first  of  the  Emperoi-s  of  Islam  who  were  the
cause  of  the  comiuest  of  Hiudastan — (after  Mahomed  Qasim,®

I This  title  is  comjnoii  to  works  by  many  other  authors  (Elliott  and
Dowson  V.  477)  specially  given  to  a history  by  Haran  ibn-iluhammail  al-
ghakl  ash-Shirazi,  completed  A,  H,  1019  (1610  A.  D).  The  w ork  of  Badaoni
is  known  better  as  Tarikh-i-Badaoiii.

S There  is  a play  on  the  words  'cr™®  and  cihj  tongiie  which  canno:
be  preserved  in  translation.

* The  incidents  of  Mnhammad  Qasim’a  engagements  and  victories  are
related  in  the  Chach  Xama,  extracts  from  which  will  be  found  in  Elliott  and
Dowaon  (Vol.  i.  pp.  131-aU.)  See  also  Pntuhn-l-Buldic  of  Al-Bilaznri  (E.
and  B.  i.  113).  His  fall  name  was  Mohammad  ibn-Qisim  ibn-M  ahammad
ibn-Hakim  ibn-Abi  ‘Cqail,  and  he  was  sent  daring  the  l^alifatl  of  Walid-
ibu-Abdal  Malik  705-715  A.D.,  to  command  on  the  frontiers  of  Smd.  (E.

*nd  D.  Vol-  i.  p.  119.)

See  also  and  T>-  Voi.  i.  Appomiix  ac.

L j

cousin  and  son-in-law  of  Hajjaj-ibn-Yusnf  Saqfi,  ^ who  In  the
year,  93  A.H.,  (711  A.D.),  conquered  the  countries  of  Sind,  Multan
and  Gujrat,  and,  by  the  order  of  Walid  ibn-‘Abdal  Malik  Marwanl  ^
who  on  an  important  occasion  wrote  to  him  from  Damascus  and
summoned  him  to  his  presence,  starting  from  Oodypnr  in  India,
and  wrapping  himself  in  a raw  hide,  while  on  his  jonmey  yielded
up  his  life  to  God,  and  after  him  the  affairs  of  Islam  in  that

I Abu  Muhammad  al-Hajjaj  was  son  of  Yusuf-ibn  al  Hatam  ibn-‘Uqail  ibu-
Masud  ibn  Aumir  ibn  Miattib  ibn  Malik  ibu  Ka‘b,  ibn  'Amr  ibn  Sa‘d  ibn
‘Auf  ibn  Qassi  (called  also  Saqif).  He  was  governor  of  Irak  and  Khoragan
for  ‘Abdul  Malik  ibn  Manvan  (692-705  A.D.)  and  was  confirmed  in  that
office  by  tValid  ibn  Abdul-  Malik  (705-715  A.D.)  For  an  account  of  him
see  1.  K.  (.i-lane)  I.  356  and  seqq).  He  founded  the  city  of  Wasit  between
Basra  and  Knfa  (75  A H.)  He  died  on  21st  Eamazan  A.H.  95,  at  the  age
of  fifty -four  and  -was  buried  at  Wasit.  Ibn  KhaDiqan  states,  “ His  malady
was  a cancer  in  the  stomach  for  which  lie  called  in  a physician,  who,  having
ssamined  into  his  ease,  tied  a piece  of  meat  to  a string  and  passed  it  down
his  throat;  after  a laps©  of  some  time  he  drew  it  out,  and  found  a swarm  of
worms  adhering  to  it : God  gave  also  a cold  ague  power  over  him  and
although  vases  filled  with  lighted  coals  were  placed  around  him  so  doss  as
to  scorch  his  skin  he  felt  them  not.  (I.K.  Slane  loc.  cit.).

He  -wag  a brutal  ruler,  and  at  his  death  it  wag  said  in  thanksgiving  “0  my
God  ! thou  liasc  caused  him  to  die : let  his  example  also  die  from  among  us.”

“The  tribe  of  Saqi'f  was  a great  and  well-kno-wn -tribe  dwelling  at  XaH,
who  befoic  tlicir  conversion  to  Islam  were  devoted  to  the  special  worship  of
the  idol  Lat ; the  founder  of  the  tribe  was  Qassi  (called  also  Saqif)  whose
descent  from  Ma'dd  is  supported  by  two  different  genealogies.”  (Caussiu
de  Perceval,  Hist,  des  Arabes,  i.  272).  After  refusing  to  hear  the  prophet
in  a personal  appeal  made  to  them,  t.hoy  made  w.ar  against  him,  but  even-
tual!;,' embraced  islam  in  630  A.H.,  shortly  after  the  return  of  Muhammad
to  ilfcdina.

3 iVal.J  ibn  -i'.ilul  Malik  Marwani,  became  Khallfah  in  the  year  86  A.  HT.
and  d.cd  i.u  tlio  year  96  A.  H.  His  fe.tiier  was  his  predecessor  in  the  Khali-
fatc,  Ills  ] -me  was  'Abdul  31a!ik  ibn-ilarwan  whence  Walid  is  called  Marwani.
It  was  dariug  the  Khallfate  of  Abdul  Alalik  that  al-Hajjaj  pulled  down  the
Ka'bah  and  restored  it  to  the  condition  in  which  it  was  in  the  time  of  As
Suyiiri.  Vdalld  was  ignorant,  despotic  and  tyrannical,  but  withal  dis-
charged the  duties  of  Khalif  well,  ho  built  the  mosque  of  Damascus  and
during  h-.s  Khnufate  many  foreign  conquests  were  achieved.  (See  Jarrett’s
trauslati!  a of  As  Suviitl’s  Tarikhg-l-KTiulafa.  pp.  227—230.)

The  incident  in  the  text  relates  to  the  vengeance  taken  for  their  father’s
death  by  the  two  virgin  daughters  of  Saji  Dihir,  who  were  taken  captive
when  he  was  killed  at  the  siege  of  the  fort  of  Pudwar,  93  A.  H.  Muhammad
Qdsiju  had  sent  them  to  Baghdad  under  the  charge  of  his  negro  slaves.

L la

J

country  lost  all  order)  wore  Nd:>}rn-d~din  Siihuldigni  ^ whose  son
was  Sidtdn  Mahmud  Ghaznavt  who  every  year  used  to  make
incursions  into  India  with  the  object  of  plundering  and  engaging
in  religious  warfare,  and  in  the  reign,  of  whose  sons  Lahore  be-

IViien  they  were  summoned  before  the  Khalifah  Walid  ibn-Abdal  Malik,  he
became  enamoured  of  them  and  desu*ed  to  retain  them.  They  however
assured  him  that  Muhammad  Qasim  had  kept  them  with  himself  for  three
days  before  sending  them  to  the  Ehalifah  and  that  consequently  they  were
not  worthy  to  become  his  concubines.  Walid  being  very  indignant  wrote  a
letter  commanding  Muhammad  Qasim  at  whatever  place  he  might  have
arrived  when  he  received  the  mandate,  to  suffer  himself  to  be  sewn  up  in  a
raw  hide  and  sent  to  the  Capital.  Muhammad  Qasim  received  the  letter
at  ••  Udhufar  ” (Oodypur)  obeyed  its  orders  and  was  brought  before  the
l^alrfah  dead.

XliO  Khalifah  taking  a bunch  of  green  myrtle  in  his  hand,  shewed  the
corpse  to  Baliir’s  twu  daughters,  who  thereupon  told  him  that  they  had  falsely
represented  the  facta  in  order  to  be  revenged  on  the  slayer  of  their  father.
They  were  accordingly  by  his  order  ‘‘enclosed  between  walls.”  (Elliott
aniDowsou.  Yol.  I,'pp.  210,-211,  Appendix  437,  Am-i-Akbari,  Yol.  IL  345,  and
footnote),  Muhammad  Qasim  was  succeeded  in  the  sovereignty  of  Sind  by
til*  descendants  of  the  Band  Taniim  Ansari  from  whom  it  passed  to  the
Sii  -ira  llajpuTS.

1 “ In  A.  H,  107  (A.  D.  725-2G)  under  the  Khalifate  of  ITisham  b-Abdul,
> uik  Amin  b-Abdallah  Kasliari,  governor  of  Khurasan,  conquered  Ghor
« 'h  c'jisrlij,  the  territory  of  Nlmrcz  and  Kabul,  and  made  the  latter  his  capital.
:r-.m  th.xi  rime  continuously  under  the  dynasties  of  L'mayyah  uud  Abbas
It  was  held  by  the  governor  of  Khurasan  until  under  the  v'iaman:s  Alprigln,
a slave  of  that -house,  withdrew  from  their  obedience  "ook  possession  of
<'^azni  and  Kabul  and  asserted  hU  independence.  On  iovath  Subukria>in
{cuher  id'  the  great  Mahmud,  sucoecde‘1  to  the  king-i.’u  .ud  '''^''riuaedl
.u’-der  li.e  Luuse  of  Ghazni  ”

1 have  quoted  this  verbattm  from  Jarrett’s  translation  of  the  Ain-i-Akbari
Y’ol.  II.  p.  414,  because  it  shews  in  a few  words  the  changes  wiiich  occurred
during  the  period  iutervening  between  Mabammad  Qasim  and  S.Abakti"in.

Nasiru-d-diu  Subuktigin  is  affirmed  by  historians  to  have  ht  ^ ■ i lark  by
descent  who  was  brought  by  a merchant  as  a boy  to  Bukii  b . vv  as

sold  to  Alptigin,  who  from  being  governor  of  ^huiMsau  ..vu  ' v u,  .oit
against  Mansur  (A.  H.  351)  established  his  sovereignty  over  ^ l a...

Subuktigin  some  fifteen  years  later  married  the  ox  Aipiigm

and  was  acknowledged  king  by  the  chief  of  Ghazni.  AipriL.iu  having  died
two  years  previously,  daring  which  period  his  son  Abu  Ishiq  was  governor
till  his  death.  He  then  became  founder  of  the  Ghaznivide  Dynasty  or  the
Kings  of  Lahore.  (See  Briggs  FerishtUf  Vol.  I.  pp.  11-96.)  also  (Elliott  and
Dowson,  VuL  VI.  207—221.]  See  also  Tdbaqdt-t-Nd$iri  (Kaverty)  page  70  and
fovtnote.

came  the  seat  of  Governmeiit,  so  that  Islam  never  ag^m  lost  its
hold  on  that  country — accordingly  I deemed  it  right  to  commence
this  history  vrith  an  account  of  that  monarch  whose  end  was
glorious,  so  that  it  may  be  fortnnate  from  the  first,  and  landed  at
the  last— and  God  is  the  best  of  helpers  and  defenders.

The  Ghazxivide  Dtxastt.

From  Sultan  Xasim-d-dic  Subnktigin  to  Khnsran  Malik,  who,
prior  to  the  conquest  of  Dehli,  proclaimed  Islam  in  Hindustan,
fiom  the  year  367  A.H.  (977  A.I).),  to  the  year  582  A.IL  (1186
A.D.).  Their  sovereignty  thus  lasted  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years
under  the  swaj'  of  fifteen  monarcfas.

SCLTAX  XaSIP.l-D-IiJX  SuBUKTIGix

Was  of  Turk!  origin,  the  slav^  of  Alptigin  who  was  a servant  of
Amir  Mansur- ibn-Xiih  SamaniA  In  the  year  367  H.  after  the
death  of  Abu  Ishaq,  the  son  of  Alptigin.  by  common  consent  of
the  soldiery  and  populace  he  succeeded  * to  the  imperial  throne
in  the  city  of  Bust®  and  raised  the  standard  of  conquest,  a£d

^ The  eighth  prince  of  the  Samani  dynasty  who  reigned  22  yeai^.
(D'Kerbelot).

The  Saiiiaei  dc-nasty  was  founded  by  Asad  bin-Siman.  It  held
sway  over  Khurisa:.  and  Transoviana,  holding  its  court  at  Eutt^ra — from
279  A.  H.  to  3&J  A.  II.  See  Tabaqit-i-Xdsiri,  Earerty  pp.  26,  27  and  53.
Amir  Abal  die.!  ai  BnVhara  366  A.  II.  and  was  succeeded  by

his  kbul  iTaba  vit-i-ytLari,  EaTerty  44.)  For  an  account

■i  'ho  SituoT.  n-fisty,  see  D'Herboiot  Hi.  193.  Abu.  fraaq  wa.s  ap-
o i:  c ; Hy  I'rnJjr  -»5  goreraor  of  Gharnin  npon  the  death  of  his  fathti
- ill  !-■  ; t • ''  -j  A.  U.,  and  died  in  367  A.  H.

. .nii  C ■ t .c  7 . - Alptigin  died  in  352  A.  Ft.  and  Ishaq
!i  -^.5  A.  It  IT  ‘H  -.i.e  death  of  Ishaq  Balkatigfn,  the  slave  of  Aiptisin
tac. ic'i  h:  .:  i in  362  A.  H.  after  him  again  Pirey  obtained  the  govern-

r..ent,  but  was  c ■.  ??  J ia  3o7  X.  H.  when  the  Government  passed  to  Snbak-
■ . .Si-r  Rt.  ’r  v Tuhuqdt-i-A'Ai'Tr,  pp.  71^3.)

- The  ...I- states  that  hubaktigm  succeeded  Alaptagin  in

..  R i-  - 1 - -6-74.)

' ■ ' : ■ o-;i  of  Zihaiistan  fi-’-  Abut  Feda  II , ii.  201)  which  in-

r’.  Kii)i.i  . , ■ . • adiaeent  t_rri,',^r--  as  far  as  Ghazna  and  even  bevond.

. '-y  ..  ZaSii;  etindiath-.-r  o!  Rustam.  iXcii-t-Akburi

' ' T ! : l.j  . i h'r..  ••  Accbriiintr  to  the  Q.im'ra  Bust  is

• . fi  ef  1.  - - la-  u o.rding  t.a  t!  e Atwal  in  O')"  long.

■/J  -it  I*.!-:  -i.iE.iite  it-' .1  I ei,  1 i.  Xi.5,  j.-.-etfu-tc  4^  Chief

1;.  1

i

girding  up  the  loins  of  energy  and  effort  for  for-ay  and  religions
war,  he  invaded  Hindustan  on  the  frcmtiers  of  the  country  of  Koh-i-
Jiid  * and  having  fought  a severe  battle  with  Jaipal  who  was  the  9-
mler  of  Hindustan,  concluded  peace  with  him.  Jaipai,  however,
broke  the  treaty.  Accordingly  Nasiru-d-din  Subnktigin  equipped
an  army  composed  of  10,000  cavalry  and  numberless  elephants
huge  as  mountains,  and  engaged  in  conflict  with  him  a second
time,  fought  a great  battle  with  him  in  the  neighbourhood  of
Lamghanat,*  the  breeze  of  victory  stiiTcd  the  banners  of  Amir
Hasim-d-dm,  the  army  of  Jaipal  suffered  defeat,  and  he  him-
self took  to  flight  and  sought  refuge  in  Hindustan,  Thus
Lam^anat  came  into  the  possession  of  Amir  hTasim-d-din,  the
Khntbah  was  read  and  the  coin  struck  in  his  name.®  Then  he
proceeded  to  the  assistance  of  Amir  Nuh-ibn-Mansur  Saruaui^
and  was  the  means  of  procnring  notable  victories  in  Khurasan
and  the  regions  beyond  tbe  river.®  Finally  in  the  month  of
Sha'ban®  of  the  year  387  AH.  (997  A.D.,)  he  obediently  submitted
to  the  summons  of  the  Almighty,  having  reiirned  for  twenty
years.

TAMixr-D-DACLtT  SctTA-v  Mahmud  ibx  Nasieu-d-dix  QjjAzxAvf.

WJion  tjubuktigin,  in  the  month  of  Sha'ban  387  .H.,  wpile  on
the  road  to  Hhaznia,  receiving  the  summons  of  the  Ahoijhty

place  of  ihe  district:  of  Host.  Bost  is  situated  on  the  bank.s  of  th:-  iler.d-
maad  and  is  part  of  Sijistan.  From  Bost  to  Ghazna  one  r-'t  k'ors  ..c  ! 1

marches  (M out  Fedn  II..  ii.  iOSj  Abut  Foda  farther  .states  tf  ,i:  e
the  Ilendmand  (Helmnnfi)  tliere  is  a bridije  of  boat.s  .sitaiiar  to  t.husc  .
rivers  of  Iraq,  {11.76).

t F-r;  Koh-i-J>  d : inclbdc-s  cii  • ciountaiaons  region  between  ..n  ,

^ L-^  -i-j-ilu  .Sf-'  Abu'  FeJa  11-  ii.  -01.  Aot'-rUing-  to  the  Lobab  i.=  r -
i 'I. oral  r.HH.-:-  of  a ooiloction  oi  yjbice>  in  ti.-  inoimtoias  of  Guaziiuh  <
Anal  Ft-.f.i  i.  cc'iAlvi  ) Loi.t-C  10-1-5*3'  Lat  34"S  AtH-i-Alburi  s-

Th-  re.'t  ■:i;r  (if  ■ b'  .'Kim;!,.  ; aiiu  strikb-..;  the  tha:

c . r-’ii''*'-',  v.‘*  ri.‘  r..  ii<  : li  a ’ - • j i jo

tht

1.-'.  .Hi.  .I'l  ’

V '.f  l!t'-  1 F

• 1 U ? »•

1 n*  (

[ ]

responded  “ Here  am  I,”  he  appointed  his  young  son  Tsraa'il  as
his  successor.!  When  this  news  reached  Mahmud  who  was  the
elder  son  of  Subuktigin,  he  wrote  a letter  of  condolence  to  his
brother  and  sought  a peaceful  solution  of  the  difficulty  on  the
following  tei’ms  : That  Isma‘il  shoflld  give  up  Ghaznin  to  Mahmud,
receiving  in  its  stead  the  governorship  of  Balkh  ; Isma'il  refused
these  terms,  and  eventually  war  was  declared  between  the
brothers.  Mahmud  was  victorious,  and  after  defeating  Isma‘il,
10.  kept  him  closely  besieged  in  Ghaznin  for  a space  of  six  months,
at  the  expiration  of  w’hich  time  certain  of  their  friends  interven-
ed and  made  peace  between  them.  Isma‘il  then  came  and  had  an
interview  with  Mahmiid,  and  the  sovereignty  devolved  npon
Taminu-d-Danlat  Mahmiid.  After  this  a quarrel  arose  between
Mahmud  and  ilausfir  ibn-Nuh  Samani  and  also  his  hrotlier
‘Abdu-l-Malik  ibn-Jiiih.  * Eventually  Ma,hmudgot  the  upper  hand.
The  Amirs  of  ‘Abdn-l-Malik  also,  Faiq  and  Baktuzun,  who
engaged  in  conte.st  with  Mahmud,  were  defeated  by  him,  and  the
sovereignty  of  the  whole  of  Khurasan,  of  Ghaznin,  and  the
fronUurs  of  Hiudustau  came  into  the  hands  of  Mahmud.

Mahno.  I's  mother  was  the  daughter  of  the  ruler  of  Zabnl  ^

1 The  question  of  the  right  of  succession  of  the  two  brothers  admits  of
some  doubt.  From  the  text  it  would  appear  that  it  was  the  intention  of  Subuk-
tigin  to  nominate  his  younger  son  Isma'il.  The  author  of  the  Taiaqdt-i-
AVs-iri ignores  Isma'il’s  sw-cession  (see  Raverty,  note  6,  page  75,  and  Briggs,
note  on  1- . ' ' 29).  Subuktigin  died  in  387,  and  Mahmud  succeeded

a cording  O'  F.inakati  in  338.  It  appears  uncertain  how  long  Isma'il  held
T ■ ,,  ,,,  l,ut  prob.ably  the  six  months  during  whicK  he  was  besieged

" ib'nu'l  !■  ‘ azni.  repre.sents  his  whole  reign.

^ b*'  orio  : ut  tlii.->  ijuarrel  is  stated  by  Ferishta  to  have  been  a protest

IcuEred  by  il  ibmud  against  the  nomination  of  Bak-Tuziln  to  the  governorship
ot  Khurasan  (see  Briggs,  p.  84,  see  also  Ravercy,  Tabaqdt-i-Ndsiri,  pp.  49,  50).

Mau-ur  was  deprived  of  his  sight  after  dethronement  by  Faiq  and  Bak-
'■jzuu  wii'j  tl.i  ii  by  agreement  with  Mahmud  were  to  hold  Merv  and  Nishapor.

Shortly  after  this  tin  3S8  A.  H.),  the  Samanx  dynasty  came  to  an  end  after
the  defeat  of  Ahd-ul-Malik  by  llak  i-Nasr.  It  had  lasted  one  hundred  and
eight  years.  See  Raverty,  pp  53,  54.  (see  also  D.  Herbelot  iii.  194).

^r.ihmud  is  related  to  have  assumed  the  title  of  Sultan  and  to  have  been
the  lirst  Oriental  potentate  who  appropriated  this  term  (Thomas,  Coins  of
Kings  of  (^azni,'!.  R.  A.  S.  IX.  270.  see  also  Elliott  II.  480-481.

i siie  was  the  daughter  of  Alptagin,  governor  of  Ghaznin,  which  is  here
meant  by  Zibul,  the  woriis  ‘ that  is  Qandahar  ” only  occur  in  one  copy  and
are  probably  iiueipolated.

[ 17  ]

[tliat  is  io  say  QanJahar  *]  accordingly,  lie  is  called  Mahraiid
Zabuli — as  Firdausi  ^ says  :

The  auspicious  court  of  Mahmud  Zabnii  is  an  ocean,

An  ocean  such  that  no  shore  can  be  found  foi'  it :

I went  to  the  ocean — I dived  but  found  no  pearl
The  fault  is  my  fortune’s — not  that  of  the  ocean.

In  the  early  part  of  his  reign  he  bod  some  tinplr asanr  cor-
respondence with  the  Ivlialifali  of  Baghdad  Al-Qadir  'oillalii
‘Abbasi.®  Eventually  the  Khalif  despatched  a mao-iiiticent  robe  of
honour,  and  many  presents  of  precious  things  and  and  con-

ferred on  him  the  title  of  Amiru-l-Millat  Yaniinu-d-Daulat,

Leaving  Ghaznin  he  went  to  Balkh  and  Herat,  and  in  8s7  A.H..

(997  A.D.)  he  returned  to  Ghaznin  after  having  settled  those  pro-
vinces, and  thence  made  repeated  incursions  and  forays  into
Hindustan,  and  took  several  fortresses.  ‘Asjadi^  compo-sed  the
following  qasUla  in  honour  of  this  expedition  :

When  the  king  of  kings  mfiivhed  to  Soninat*

He  made  his  own  deeds  the  .standard  of  miracles.

In  the  month  of  Shawwal,  BOl  A.H.,  (1000  A.D.)  Mahmud  re-  11.
turned  to  Hindustan  from  Ghaznin  with  ten  tliousand  cavalry,

• Not  in  lISS  (A)  or  (B).

I Firdausi.  For  an  aoronr.t  of  this  famous  poet  see  this  volume  page  32
Note  1,  and  Majma‘ul  Fnsaba  T.  3S2.

• AI-Qadir  billahi  .Vbul  'Abbas  Almiad-ibn-Ishilk  ibn  il  Ma([tadir  n-as  born
in  336  A.H.  His  Khalifaie  lasted  from  3Sl  A.  H.  to  1.22,  ti.e  '•eur  of  his  death,
a period  of  forty-ono  years  As  Sayuli  ip’.otiiig  fr.''m  Al-lv1ia:ib  says  tliat
he  was  distingnishod  for  his  rectitude  and  nobiiicy  of  character.  (Historv  uf
Caliphs  fJarrett,  p.  -131. )

3 Hakim  Alai  .Xa/ar  ‘Abdul  ‘Azia  ilm-M.ausur  oetucmporai-y  of  Hakim
Ansuri,  Hakim  Farrukhi.  and  Hakim  Firdu-i.  He  died  in  4'32  A.  H.  (Majma'nl
Fu^alia,  Yid  I.  p.  3i0.)  The  qiisida  in  whicii  tlie  lines  quoted  occur  i.s  given
at  leugcU  in  the  Majma'al  Fu-alia,  loc.  cit.  HS.  (Ai  ([uotes  tliem  wrongly,

MS.  (B)  is  the  same  as  the  text  which  reads  for  ‘A.sjadi  was  a cele-

brated poet  of  Mere.  The  Teta'/iit-i-A'i/.siV/  gives  anociicr  couplet  in  addiciori
to  the  above  and  attributes  the  poem,  to  'Ansuri  ip.  83.  note  I ).

Somcat.  .Situated  according  to  the  Q.inun  in  97'  10'  long,  a-cd  22”  15'  lat.
Somnat  is  on  the  shore,  in  the  hand  of  pirates  'which  is  pOirt  of  India.  Inn-
Said  savs  that  travellers  often  speak  of  it,  and  it  forms  part  of  Guzerat  or
the  country  of  Lar.  (See  Bayley,  History  of  Gujerat.  p.  IS,  etc.,  i

Ah’)].  II  (Jarrett)  216,  etc.  Abul  Feda  II.  ii.  116.)

See  also  Albiruni  India  (.Sacliaul  I.  205,  and  Index  Swu  lU'Una,

See  also  p.  27  of  this  volume,  Ac.

3

[ 18  ]

and  reduced  Pesliau'ar.  He  also  again  drew  up  Ids  forces  ou
these  ircmtiers  fur  battle  with  Jaipal  who  confronted  him  with
large  forces  of  cavaliy  and  iufantry-and  three  hundred  elephants,
Sultan  Mahmud  gained  the  daj*  and  Jaipal  was  taken  prisoner
together  with  fifteen  of  his  relatives,  liis  brothers  and  his  sous  ;
and  five  thousand  infidels  fell  by  the  sword.  Great  spoils  fell  into
tile  hands  of  th,-  (dhazis,  among  them  a pearl  necklet  which  was
<‘ti  the  neck  of  Jaipal,  which  was  w'orth  some  hundred  and  eighty
thousand  and  the  necklets  of  the  others  too.  on  the  same

t Mote  t.  D''id>\

Tiiore  is  somo  nnoprramty  as  to  the  actual  value  of  the  Dhidr,  as  there
were  different  ooin.s  one  of  silver  and  the  other  of  gold  bearing  this  name —
it  was  'Jurinu  the  palliate  of  Abdul  Malik  ibu  Marwin  (A.H.  73  to
A 11.  h(j,  A U.  G'J2  A D.  70.'>;  chat  a separate  coinaj-e  wag  introduced,  Thus
As  Saviiti  gives  the  following  account;  “ A'uhya-b-B.ikayr  narrates; —

‘ I hrard  Malik  say  that  the  iir.st  who  coined  dluBrs  was  Abdul  Malik  -.ual  he
in'i'  i-ibed  on  t'  la  :t  ver-^e  of  the  Quran.  Musa'b  states  that  Abdul  Malik
iiiSLiihed  on  t!i.r  dinar  "Say.  * lo  1 Is  One.”  IQiir.  cxii.)  and  on  the  reverse
■'  tiieie  IS  no  (hi.i  !.iu  Otal:’  and  us  cireutitference  was  a rim  of  silver  and
ho  iowrihei!  tut-idr.  the  rim.  "Muhammad  is  the  Aiwstte  of  God,  whom
’-le  iiaih  sent  a.~  a guide  unto  Salvation  and  the  true  faith.’”  (Jarrctt
lllsrcry  of  the  p.  222.;

Abdul  Malik  ha.l  introduced  the  custom  of  writing  at  tne  head  of  letters
the  formula,  “ saf  there  is  one  God”  'I'his  was  a cause  of  offence  to  tho
Grecian  Emperor  who  wrote  saying  that  unless  Abdul  Malik  abandoned  this
habit  ‘’there  will  reach  you  ou  our  dinars  the  mention  of  what  you  will  not
like,”  Abdul  Malik  i'onseL|neiitly  decided  upon  coining  his  own  dinars  which
iio  did  in  the  year  75  A.H.  (\  D cild.;

The  origin  of  -h.- woul  d.'/iu/- is  attributed  to  the  Latin  denanita  the  words

Jh/.saiid  diWm,;  Icing  in  the  same  w.ay  derived  from  folhs  and

'^r.ic'nnn,  (Prii.^.'p  I.  19-21*1.)

The  denai  ci,-’.  a .silver  com  nas  worth  approxim.atcdy  8iii  its  average  wei'^ht
being  acconliug  lo  rlie  .autlmnrlcs  Gi>  grains.  It  was  first  coined  B.O.  269

Its  relation  to  the  lim.’,./  ri  was  at  first  as  8’5  to  9 75,  but  owing  to  a
bi'liug  off  in  of  tl.c  I they  at  one  time  frore  pr.acticidly  equ.al

in.  laruo.  Thi>  u hum  n.ts  a xilver  coin  and  occupied  among  tho  Greeks
the  place  of  the  .■mritos  amt-ng  liie  Romans.  Both  these  coins  then,  the
:i  .,ar  and  the  d n ham.  were  ,.ilvi'r  oi  iginully.  and  were  in  all  prohabilitv  of
eiiu  tl  values,  hut  there  is  another  dinar  lueniionetl  in  the  Paija  Taranmni  and

c.seivhere  wliich  was  a goki  coitm-this  answers  almost  exactly  to  the  Roman

rm.rs.  ,,f  which  Pliny  speaks,  tho  average  weight  of  which  was
12u  .rrain.s.  d he  gold  coins  of  Chandragupta  mentioned  in  the  Sanch!
1I*S  ription  veich  from  120  to  130  grains  and  are  indubitably  copied  from
Greek  origin-di,  in  device  ,is  wrl!  as  in  weight.  Prinsep  I.  246.

[ 10  ]

scale.  TLis  victory  was  w'on  on  Saturday, ^ the  8th  of  Muharram,
392  H.,  (1001  A.  D.)  Leaving  this  place  Mahmud  proceeded  to  the
fortress  of  Tabarliindah  * which  was  the  residence  ^ of  Jaipal,
and  conquered  that  country.

After  this  in  the  month  of  Mtiharram  393  A.H.  ho  left  Ghaznin.
and  proceeded  to  Hindustan  hy  way  of  Seistan  and  assaulted
Bhatia*  which  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Multan.  The  Baja  of  that
place,  Beji  Rai,  fearing  the  punishment  of  the  Sultan  killed  him-
self with  a dagger,  and  they  bronglit  his  head  to  the  Sultan.
Many  Hitidus,  more  than  one  can  number,  were  hurried  along  the
road  to  non-existence  by  the  pitiless  sword,  and  ilahmud  took  as
spoil  two-ftundred  and  seventy  elephants  while  Ha’ud  ibii-Na§r  *
the  renegade  ruler  of  Multin,  being  reduced  to  suhuiissioB  by  the
Sultan,  agreed  to  pay  twent}'  times  twenty  thousand  dirhams^
annual  tribute.

We  mav  thus  take  it  that  the  golden  dutdr  was  doable  the  weight  of  the
silver  'dinar  auJ  taking  the  ratio  of  gold  to  silver  as  10  to  1 this  would  give
us  the  rel.dive  values  of  the  gold  and  silver  dinar  in  terms  of  dinars  of
silver  as  20  to  1.

This  'relative  value  is  rendered  more  probable  still  by  a comparison  ot  onr
author’s  statemeut  of  the  tribute  paid  by  Daiid  ibn  liasr  (page  11,  liue  18  of
the  Text;  with  that  of  Firishta  (see  note  G below).

Against  this  however  is  the  statement  in  the  Ain-i-Allari  (Kiochmann  I.
p.  36J  that  “ the  Dinar  is  a gold  coin  weighing  oar  dirh.ams  ”

but  as  both  the  dirham  and  the  mis'idl  were  variably  the  accuracy  of  this
statement  is  open  to  question,

See  Smith’s  Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Antiquities.  (Art  ) Oenartus.

t Firishta  says  Monday,  the  8th  of  Muharram,

® Tabarhtndah.  ' Firishta  calls  this  B-ttindah  which  is  also  the  name  given
to  Jaipal’s  capital  in  a history  of  the  llajis  of  Jamu.  As  to  the  identity  of
this  with  Waihind,  see  Raverty’s  Tahtn^dt-t-Akhari,  pp.  70-80  Jt^nniu’r see
TiefEenthaler’a  map,  Vol.  III.  See  also  E.  and  D.  II  433.

S MS.  (A)  has  OAfi  Text  has  w liich  is  evidently  an  “ im- .

provement”  on  the  author.

* MS.  (A)  has  Bhata  MS.  (B;  has  Bhata.  The  real  name  of

this  place  is  according  to  Elliott  Bhera,  which  lies  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Jiielum  under  the  Salt  Itange — sec  E and  D.,  Vol.  II.,  Appendix,  pp.  43P-'ktO.

^ Grandson  of  Shaikh  Ilamid  Lodi,  first  ruiet  of  Muitan  (Brigg.s.  p.  40.)

^ Firishta  says  20,000  golden  dirams.  According  to  the  A^n-1-Akian,  Vol.

I 3d,  the  dir]  am  is  a silver  coin,  and  no  mention  1.1  made  of  a golden  dirham.
Taking  the  value  of  the  golden  dirham  .it  twenty  times  that  of  the  silver
dirham  the  text  ivoald  give  the  same  amount  as  that  given  by  Firishta
(see  note  1 p.  IS).

[ :

As  be  ^'fis  acl\ auenisr  to  Multan,  Anantlpal, -son  of  Jaipal,  ros0
up  against  him  to  oppose  ttie  advance  of  the  Sultan,  but  fled  after
the  battle  to  the  montitains  of  Kashmir,  and  the  Sultan  reached
12,  Multan  by  way  of  Hindustan.'  Those  events  occurred  in  396
A.H.  {1005  A.D.)  In  the  following'  year  397  A.H.  (1006  A.D.)
a battle  was  fought  at  Balkh  bef.vcen  Mahmud  and  link  Khan  2
king  of  Mawara  an-Kahr.*  Sultan  Mahmud  was  victorious;  llak
KhL  finally  died  in  the  year  403  H.  ■ 1012  A.D.)

In  the  year  398  H.  (1007  A.D.;  Mahmud  entered  Turkistan,
and  having  .settled  the  aft'airs  of  the  Turkis.  pursued  Sukhpal*
Nabsa,  Raja  -of  Sind  ( who  having  embraced  Islam  had  been  re-
leased from  his  captivity  to  Abii  ‘Ali  Siujiiri  but  had  again
joined  the  idol-ators  at;d  apostates)  overcame  him  and  threw  him
into  prison  where  he  died.

In  tlio  rear  399  A.H.  (1008  A.D.)  Mahmud  a second  time
entered  Hindustan  and  engaging  in  battle  with  the  aforesaid
Anand  Pal  defeated  him,  and  betaking  himself  with  his  vast
spoil  to  the  fortress  of  Bhimnagar^  — which  nowadays  is  known

1 Firishta  says  by  way  of  Batindali.  Iti  the  text  we  find  by  way  of
Hlndusciin  and  MSS.  {.-i.)  and  (B-  have  ti,p  same.  According  to  Elliott  (II.
43H)  we  should  here  read  Bihainl  or  V.'aii-mil  a place  of  considerable  impor-
tanco  on  the  western  bank  of  ttif  fr.das  nliout  riftecn  miles  abov'e  Attock.

2 See  Bavercy  Tdtc'jaf-i-.V.i--'/  '',  p and  note.  llak  son  of  Bnghra  Kh&n
took  BuHiara  lotb  Zi-Qa‘dah.  doD  H.  See  also  pages  8iSo,  footnote  9.

See  also  Briggs’  Firiahta,  pp  42—44.

i Transoxiana.

■4  Firishta  calls  him  Sakhpal,  a .son  (,f  one  of  the  R^jas  of  India.  MS.
(A)  and  (B)  have  Sukpal  Saba  According  to  Eiliott  his  name

was  Snkhpai-Mawasa  Shah,  the  name  N'aw4->ii  denoting  his  relationship  to
Jaipal  whose  grandson  he  in  a!!  probaoiUry  was  isee  E and  D,  II.  App.  444.)
He  is  e.aSled  Raja  inasmuch  as  Mahmud  when  leaving  Multan  to  fight  llak
Khan  had  iaccording  to  Firishta)  left  his  Indian  possessions  in  his  charge.
Bee  also  Elphinstone,  Hist,  of  India,  p.  2S(j

6 This  fortress  is  situated  about  a mile  from  tne  town  of  Bhim.  The  fort
itself  was  called  Nagarkot  (Firishta)  and  is  the  same  as  Kot  Kangra.  In
Tiefifenthaler’s  map  Kagarkoco  is  jdaced  some  25  miles  N.  W.  of  Kot  Kangra,
but  at  page  107,  Vol  I , he  says.  Cdtgangra  nommee  aussi  Nagar  cott  est  une
ville  munie  d’une  forteresse  et  situee  dans  les  niontagues.”  See  E and  D,
Vol.  II.  34  and  App.  445.

*'  The  Town  of  Bhim  which  is  about  a mile  from  the  fort,  is  nowon  a spot
called  Bhawan  which  means  a temple  raise'!  to  a Sukti  or  female  deity,  and
Bhim  is  probably  a mistake  arising  from  its  presumed  foundation  by  the
heroic  Bhim.”

I 21  ]

RS  tlio  Tluina  of  Bhim — reduced  it  hv  promising  quarter  to  the
garrison,  and  gained  possession  of  tlic  treasure  and  valuables
wliicii  had  been  buried  and  stored  tlicro  sint  e the  time  of  Bhim,
and-in  the  early  part  of  the  year  400  H.  he  ca  ised  several  goMen
and  silver  thrones  to  be  placed  in  his  court,  and  ordered  that  a'l
that  boundless  and  incomputable  wealth  should  be  scattered  at
the  foot  of  his  own  throne  that  the  people  mig-lit  ga7e  on  it.

In  the  year  401  H.  flOlO  A.D.l  he  lift  Ghaznin  and  again
marched  towards  Multan,  and  took  possession  of  the  remainder
of  the  country  and  put  to  death  the  greater  part  of  the  Karma-
tians  1 and  heretics  of  that  region,  and  sent  the  remainder
whom  he  did  not  put  to  death  to  the  fort.^  where  they  died.  He
took  Daiid  ibn  Nasr,  the  heretic  ruler  of  Multan,  to  Ghaznin  and
kept  him  a prisoner  in  the  fortres.s  of  Ghori,^  where  he  died.

In  the  year  402  H.  flOll  A. D.),  lie  .set  out  for  I’hanosar  ^ and  13.
Jaipil,  the  son  of  the  former  Jaipal.  ottered  him  a present  of  fifty
elephants  and  much  treasure.  The  Sultan,  howevei’,  was  not  to
be  deterred  from  hispurpo.se;  so  refused  to  accept  his  present,
and  seeing  Thanesar  empty  he  sacked  it  and  destroyed  its  idol
temples,  and  took  away  to  Gh.iznin,  the  idol  known  as  Chakar-

1 A heretical  sect  of  Muslims,  so  called  from  the  founder  Karmat,  who  rose
about  the  year  278  H.  They  S'lUght  to  utuiin  their  ends  by  violence  and
in  the  year  319  FT.  under  Abn  Taher,  took  the  city  of  Mecca  with  fearful
tlauffhter,  plundered  the  temple  and  took  away  the  black  stone  which  they
retained  for  twenty  years.

(Elliott  and  Dowson  II.  573).  (See  also  Sale’s  Quran,  Prel.  Discourse,  pp.
130-131,1  D.  Herbelot  {Car-mate).

* MS.  (A)

3 Birishta  '-Cir®  MS.  (Ai

4 Thaneear.  76'62  E 2t^30  N.  vide  Map,  Tieffenthaler,  Vol.  III.

Tieffenthaier  describes  it  as  a largo  and  populous  town  one  mile  in  length,

having  a pond  surrounded  by  buildings  towards  the  east.  The  Hindus  he
Btatos,  claim  that  when  gold  is  thrown  into  this  lake  it  increases  in  weight.
He  naively,  goes  on  to  sav,  however.  “ Mais  e’est  un  fable  ridicule  r:u'  celiu
qni  j jette  son  or  n’en  recouvre  rien.*'  The  water  is  accounted  holy.

He  places  Thanesar  at  a distance  of  66  miles  from  Dehii  giving  the  st-ages. —
Karcla  12  miles,  Sonpat  6,  Honor  6.  Pnnijmt  12.  C.irua!  14,  A:ia'n;ba  l 7
Thanessor  9.  It  lit’s  N.-VV.  of  Dehh  ;.*id  is  riow  called  Thauoawar  .''ee
Cimningham,  Aiic.  Geog.  of  India,  pp.  330—332.  dee  Alberuui,  I.  li/'o

[ 22  ]

s(5m,'  on  account  of  which  the  Hindus  Iiad  been  ruined  ; and
having  placed  it  in  his  court,  caused  it  to  be  tiampled  under  foot
by  the  people.  In  the  year  403  H.  (1012  A,D.),  he  conquered
^arjistan,*  aud  in  the  selfsame  year  an  ambassador  arrived
from  the  ruler  of  Egypt,  and  when  the  Sultan  heard  tliat  he  was
of  the  Batini  sect,  3 he  exposed  him  to  public  ridicule and
expelled  him.

In  the  year  404  H.  (1013  A.D.).  he  prepared  an  expeditionary
force  to  attack  Nandana,^  a city  situated  on  the  mounhiins  of
Balnath.  JaipH  II®  left  a force  to  defend  that  fortress,  and  him-
self proceeded  to  the  Kashmir  pass.  The  Sultan  gained  pos.session
of  that  fortress  with  promise  of  quarter,  and  left  Saregh  Kotwal
to  defend  it,  while  he  pursued  Jaipal.  He  took  the  vast  spoils  of
that  mountainous  region  and  put  many  infidels  to  death  by  the
sword  of  holy  war,  and  hoaoureJ  the  rest  by  admitting  them  to
Islam — a certain  number  he  led  captive  to  ^lazniu.

In  the  year  406  H.  ( 1015  A.D.f,  he  contemplated  the  conquest
of  Kashmir,  and  besieged  the  fortress  of  Lohar  Kot.'^  which  wa.s
a very  high  fort,  but  was  forced  to  abandon  the  siege  on  account
of  the  severity  of  the  cold  and  rain,  and  the  constant  reinforce-
ments available  to  the  Kashmiris,  and  relumed  to  Ghazuin.  In
that  year  be  entered  into  a contract  for  the  mariiage  of  hi.s  sister

1 Chakrasvamin.  or  the  lord  of  the  Chakra,  for  au  account  of  thU  idol,  see
Alberuni,  I.  117.

“ The  city  of  Taneshar  is  highly  verc-raied  hy  rho  Hindus  The  idol  of
that  place  is  called  Cakra  svamin,  i.c.,  th.o  owner  of  tiic  C.

* Gh.ariistlr..  or  Gharshistlii,  the  coui.try  houini.  cl  on  tlio  west  i.o  lierdt
east  by  Ghor,  north  by  Jlerv,  and  .,outh  by  Ghazni.  Sc-.  Jif.nt  in  me.
G'har:ihi:-fdn.

3 E.soterics,  a sect  of  the  Shi'a  Muslims.  For  an  account  of  them  sec  Cure-
ton’s  JdJi  page  i-i7  — •Tb.ey  were  variously  railed

-i  Exposing  to  ridicule  bv  seating  on  a donkev 'a  irh  the  face

to  the  lail.  aud  thus  leading  him  through  the  city.

S Xaiidana.  a fortress  of  brick  situated  on  a uiouritaiii.  TieiTencUaler  1.  I(i5
in  lat.  32'.  fAlberuui,  Sachau  trans.  317^'  lu  Henuedrs  map  Il7s2l  rhe
Beluat  mr.untaiiis  arc  jdaced  in  Imiu.  72' E.,  lat.  32  N.  Fi  r a iidl  de^eripcinji  i,f
ibis  niouuiain.  see  Cuuninghan:.  Anc.  «jf  India,  paires  IGI,  IGo.

Soil  of  .Vuaudpal,  graudooa  of  Jaip.il  I.

'•  ('ailed  aUo  Lohkut  by  Firiaiita.  3XSS.  (Aj/B)  have

[ 23  ]

with  Abul  Abbas  ibn  Mamun  Khwarazm  Shah,'  and  sent  her  to
Iviiwarazm.

In  the  vear  407  H.  (1016  A.D.),  a band  of  rnifians  murdered  14.
Khwarazm  Shah,  and  ilahraiid  leavint;  (rhaznin,  proceeded  first
to  Balkh  and  thence  to  Khwarazm,  is  here  a fiii  ieu..  battle  took
pilace  between  his  forces  and  those  ut  Khaiuarta^li.  tbe  commanior-
in-chief  of  Khwarazm.  The  Sultan'...  riirces  iraiotil  the  day  and
Mahrniid  appointed  Akun  Ta.sh  cr.overnor  of  that  '..nintry,  inve.st-
in?  him  with  the  title  of  Khwarazm  Shah,  he  ak-o  n-fik  Ttng-ear.ee
on  the  murderer.s  of  Khwarazm  Shah,  and  retnined  (to  (dhazniii)
after  havinst  arranged  those  import.rtit  tiffairs.

In  the  year  409  H.,  he  marched  with  the  object  of  subduing
Qananj,2  and  having  ero.ssed  the  .seven  ^ dar.c’erou.s  riveits  of
Hindustan,  upon  his  arrival  in  the  iieighhonrhood  of  Qnnanj,
Kui-ah,*  the  ruler  of  Q.inauj,  offered  his  .snbrai.ssion,  and  sued  for
quarter,  offering  presents.  Leaving  that  place  he  arrived  at  the

1 For  a fiilJ  accounr  of  rln'^  <lrna«ty,  seo  Raverty's  T pp  231
&c..  {hr.tc  2.)  J^warazni  is  a country  on  Kinks  of  'he  Oxiis  of  which
the  capital  is  (xorgang  (Jurjin)  see  Abui  Fcdi  II.  ii  - . J.  Chorasmii  of
Strabo,  llcrodocus,  &c.  Tke  Chorasmii  are  coupled  i»y  ar.cieUw  authors  with
the  Dace,  ’^lassugetcc  and  Soghdi.  (Smith's  Diet,  of  Ocog.

3 Qanauj  or  Qanaj,  was  for  a long  time  the  Hindu  of  Ni-rrlu  rn

India.  Firishta  states  that  when  Mahmdd  .inproachod  -'-‘i-  ■’  -h'-ro

a riev  Avhich  raised  its  head  to  the  ski.'- and.  which  i.:  '•:u  ngih  and  ho  .'L'.y
might  boast  of  being  unrivalled.”  (Bvigus.  I.  uKo  Albeiuni

(Sachau  tr.  I.  I99j.  (Ft-r  a full  accouni:  i-f  this  city  c . .i:  Cutiiilngluim,

op  C'it,  37d,  &:c  ).

TietYeiuha'iOr  states  tha ' in  ancient  mouunionts  Qana’r’  is  called  “ Cunuia
couhadj  ” CO  qui  signiHt'  la  riai.jc  ho.-.-iuc  ^ Vol  I pp.  193,  UU.

S These  in  the  order  ^laiimiid  met  with  ihejii  were  the —

Indus  S'/.;-''*  Sindhii  Or.  IkOo?  ••  In  ius  incoHs  Simia'i  LT-|K*lhir  us"
Jheiam  Hyd.ispes  or  Bidaspes  SA'sr.  Vitasti  ^Viha*- • ■.■r  Viyatca.

Cheiiiib  Accsincs  valleti  in  San?  vi’ic  Chaiidiubh.i  . a.

Ttivi  Hvdraotes  .\rriarij  Sv.?-'  sjuvmm.  ii\ ar>_.:  .'^cidbo/.

Biuh  IlypliaM's  or  hhi'ajiTs  \ 'pa^a

SarL'j  Z iradiM'.  ii '-v  irus  , P.in'- , Shaili  : .r.

Jauiuna  Jauii  or  Vancaii7.

(See  also  / , .lai-rotty  II.  .Mlwrnn.  ' . ,r

^ MSS.  TA)  (B)  Kurah-  AccMriia-  r '■  Firi^lr

prince  of  t^iannuj  was  Kunaai’  Rui,  see  hlli  at,  \ «}l  ii  {■  Idi

\ \ ! V

( PI  iny

J

Vlll*

[ 24  ]

fortt'pss  of  Barnali  ^ vhose  governor  Barwat,  having  eritniNted
tlie  defence  o£  the  fortress  to  his  kinsfolk,  retired  into  seclusion.

Tlie  garrison  of  the  fort  not  being  able  to  withstand  Mahmud's
assault  sent-  a present  of  a lakh  and  fifty,  thousand®  rupees,  with
thirty  elephants,  and  thus  obtained  quarter.  From  thence  Mahmud
proceeded  to  the  fortress  of  Mahawun®  on  the  banks  of  the  river
Jon>  where  the  governor  of  the  fort  named  Kal  ChanJar  “ at-
tempted to  escape  by  crossing  the  river  riding  on  an  elephant,
but  in  the  meantime  the  troops  of  the  Sultan  arrived,  and  he
dcstroj'od  himself  b}'  stabbing  himself  with  a dagger —

By  that  same  watery  path  he  went  to  Hell.

When  to  live  is  to  fnlfil  the  desires  of  one’s  enemies

Death  is  infinitely  preferable  to  life

At  the  taking  of  the  fortress  of  Oanauj  eighty-five  elephants
anc-,  a boundless  amount  of  spoil  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  troops.
Fr-ora  thence  he  wont  to  Mnthra®  which  is  a place  of  worship
of  the  infidels,  and  the  birth  place  of  Kishan,  the  son  of  Basudev,
J.5.  whom  the  Hindus  worship  as  a divinity — where  there  are  idol
temples  witliouc  number,  and  took  it  without  any  contest,  and
rased  it  bo  tiie  ground.  Great  wealth  and  booty  fell  into  the
hands  of  tlie  Muslims,  among  the  rest  they  broke  up  by  the
orders  of  the  Sultdii,  a golden  idol,  the  weight  of  which  was

1 Bamah.  Firisr:.'.  gives  Hardat  as  the  name  of  the  governor  and  calls  the
place  itlratt,  Bt-rc  St . Elliott  II.  4.'8,  on  the  reading  113.  (A.)  has^i^
B..rtah  and  give.'  Bardat  as  li  e name  of  its  rnler.

S Acctirdinii  to  I.ii.-i't.a  2.110,000  eiiver  dinars.  This  gives  the  value  of  the
silver  dinar  ai -14  a rupee.  In  the  A'/i-i-Afriucl  we  find  no  mention  ot  a
silver  dinar,  but  tne  diiham  is  stated  to  bo  of  a dinar;  as  the  dirham  varied
in  noighc  it  >-.,-eTna  alino-vt  certain  fioni  tl.e  above  that  tlie  dirham  and  silver
dinar  w.n-e  i-i-  -.ti-j'.'  (.see  note  1 p.  IS.i

5 ViJeTicu.  Ib-J  llaiiaban  uvec  nne  fortsvesse  eu  briqae.

■t  The  river  J-ami  A!i-erutu  " tli-’>  river  Juun  (Yj-nana)  p.  199.

t Kill  Ch  .i  1 - Elliott  T.  462.  IIS.  (A)  Kulcharid.

6 r-v.- Tieff.-'..  ■ r 2ul -u  sej.

Yiirlira  or  '-r.--  : 'a,  ce'-  brat.-.-,  as  a h.-'y  place,  the  birthplace  of  Vasialeva,

J--J  '-  t -7  i 199;  f r-ious  also  in  the  history  of  Krishna  as  the

stroEKh  i-  ..  , - Raid  ansa.  Arriar-  cuhs  it  fi’.rji-n-u,,  wni.  • Pin-,
states  that  t;--  ■ -■  i-maa}  p .-set'  '-.^tweeu  th-,-  towns  of  Methm-.,

and  L.isobt..  o . t ttis  ivani  -''lauiti-rhani  ip  cit  ]i  - 37-l-o7"

r 25  ]

ninety-eight  thousand  three  hnndred  misq&h^  of  refined  gold  and
a piece  of  sapphire  * whose  weight  was  four  hundred  and  fifty
inisqals:  besides  a celebrated  elephant  of  huge  size,  like  a moun-
tain, belonging  t ) Baja  Gobind  Ciiand,  one  of  the  Rajas  of
Hindustan,  which  the  Sultan  had  long  earnestly  sought  to  buy,
hut  which  was  not  to  be  had.  By  chance  one  night,  when  tl)ey
were  returning,  this  elephant  broke  loose  and  came  into  the
Saltan’s  camp  without  a keeper.  The  Sultan  was  greatly  pleased
with  its  capture,  and  gave  it  the  name  of  Khudadad.®  Wlicn  the.
spoil  reached  GRaznin  it  was  found  to  amount  to  over  twenty
irrrriion  and  fifty-three  thousand  dirams,  and  three  hundred  and
fifty  odd  elephants.'*

In  the  year  410  H.  (1019  A.D.),  Mahmiid  again  turned  his
footsteps  towards  Hindustan  and  encountered  and  fought  on  the
banks  of  the  river  Jon  with  Nanda  the  Raja  of  Kalin  jar,  ^ who

1 The  Misqal  = lf  dirhams  = 6 dangs  = 96  barley  grains  in  weight.  It  is  a
weight  used  in  weighing  gold  and  is  also  the  name  of  the  coin.  [Ain-i~

Akbarl,  I.  36.)  Ch  Hebrew  shekel  see  also  Alberuni  1.  160-164.

• S 45^*/  c>^5b  Firishta  says  i3)}\  a blue  gem.  The  stone  was  in

all  probability  a sapphire.  There  are  four  kinds  of
and  i.e.  red,  blue,  white,  and  coerulean.

8 Tlie  gift  of  God.

* Froip  eoliatiug  the  MSS.  A.  and  B.,  I think  tlie  reading  here  is  quite
plain.  It  it,

I*-  j 8^  j

. iiyi  JUi  All  J J J

Both  MSS,  have  bnt  we  must  read  as  in  Firishta,  Tol.  1

p.  51,  Hue  6,  rt  seq.  we  read  thus  : —

aJ.^  jU-i  I)  (•-’df  A^

ijoi  4t3r^_}  A.Ai»»  J ^ 3 jUdo

- titil

and  when  iw  reached  ^aznin  they  counted  the  spoils  of  the  e.rpedition  to
V'.iiaaj,  iw,fuiv  thousand  dinars  and  thoasands  of  thousands  of  dirams,  and
£ ,y  thousand  slaves  and  350  elephants.^besides  other  booty  in  addition  to
l.’u^se.  (Pirisbia,  I.  p 51,  1.

Kdltnjci'  \:i  Dan‘zav»-  B
fv,  ) jiiircs  wi?l  be  f<jun<l

idelkhand.

ft'i't  laKt'M  by  ?h(_T  pakdC-.l  ti.'.*

i>;tiiipa}a  Bun  J -’UU -n-i ' fror'i  the  ti’ne

]‘'H'  I.a/  :;5  N Lour- 5 £■  {S<e  U-*'*-Aiei

A li-sr^ritition  of  ibi?  fortress  with
t , V A ' p.  244.  He  .'tare??  thfir  tbt3

f't’

lairotl;

[ 26  ]

had  with  him’  36,000  cavalry  and  45,000  i infantry  and  640  ele-
phants, and  who  had  put  to  death  the  Raja  of  Qauauj  on  the
occasion  of  hia  submission  to  the  Sultan,  and  who  had  also  come
to  the  help  of  Jaipal,  who  had  several  times  fled  from  before  the
Sultan.  The  servants  of  the  Sultan  who  had  gone  forward  to
16.  the  attack,  fonnd  the  city  deserted,  and  sacked  it.  A terrible
dread  overwhelmed  the  heart  of  Jaipal,  so  that  leaving  all  his
property  and  material  of  war  just  as  they  stood,  he  took  to  flight
with  some  selected  companies.  Five  hundred  and  eighty  ele-
phants during  the  pursuit,  emerging  from  a forest,  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  Sultan’s  troops.  He  then  returned  to  (^aziiin.—
Many  regions  passed  from  the  possession  of  the  infidels  to  the
Muslims,  moreover  the  people  of  that  country,  either  willingly  or
perforce,  made  profession  of  Islam.

In  the  year  41.2  H.  (10’21  A.D.),  iMahmud  proceeded  to  Kash-  ■
mir  and  laid  siege  to  the  fort  of  Loharkot  for  a month,  but  it
held  out  being  exceeding!/  well  fortified.  Leaving  Loharkot  he
went  to  Lahore,  and  in  the  beginning  of  spring  returned  to
Ghazm'n.

In  the  rear  413  H.  (1022  A.D.),  he  again  made  an  attempt  on
the  country  of  Nandii,  and  when  he  arrived  at  the  fortress  of
Gwallar,  having  reduced  it  peaceably  and  accepted  presents  from
its  governor,  confirmed  him  in  his  governorship.  As  part  of  that
present  there  wyre  thirty-five  elephants.  Leaving  that  place  he
went  to  the  fort  of  Kalinjar,  tlie  eonimandor  of  which  Hist  made
an  ofi’ering  of  three  hundred  elephants  and  sought  his  j)rotcction.®

Ke  ah-  composed  a poem  in  Hindi  in  praise  of  the  Sultan,  and
sent  it  to  iiiin,  w'hereupon  the  Sultan  read  the  poem  in  the  presence
of  the  eloquent  men  of  Hindustan  and  the  poet.s  of  bis  own
countiv.  Tliey  were  all  loud  in  their  praises  of  the  poem,  and
the  Sultan  was  so  proud  of  it,  that  he  wrote  a pateut  conferring
upon  him  the  governorship  of  fifteen  forts  as  a reward  for  tlic
poem.  Is anda  also  sent  large  quantities  of  property  and  iewcl!-.

Firishfa  elves  the  ilatv  cf  tiiis.cvpeil'non  as  412  A. H.  .h'e  ■ Eilioi,  Vch,  f.
4t'2,  fur  an.  L«.-cuurt  <’i’  ^ js.  start  m-Tits.

1 The  test  Jias  j J Fiii^hta  says  45.!jOO.  _MS.  fA  ;

likewise  says  45,U10.  3IS  ! ij  • is  >:nne  as  ti.e  test  uiiikli  - i-in'diU,
but  4.‘'>,C<>0  is  no  doubt  corrfet.

* Abul  Tuzl  Text  I.  -423;  s.i.s  ilds  n.  440  A.H.

[ 27  1

bad  countless  articles  of  value  as  an  offering  to  Mahmud.  The
Saltan  victorioas  and  triumphant  returned  to  Ghaznin.

In  the  year  414  H.  (1024  A. D.l,  Mahmud  went  to  Balkh,  and  17.
passed  tlie  river  Jaihun.'  The  chiefs  of  the  regions  beyond  the
river, 2 hastened  to  meet  him,  and  Yusuf  Qadr  Khan  king  of  the
whole  of  Turkistan,  came  out  to  receive  him,  and  visited  the  Sultan.

They  held  great  banquets  and  gave  presents  to  each  other,  and
*Ali  Tagin,  of  whose  oppression  the  people  of  the  regions  beyond
the  river  had  complained,  learning  what  was  happening  took  to
flight.  The  Sultan  pursued  him  and  having  captured  him  sent
him  a prisoner  to  one  of  the  fortresses  of  Hindustan,  then  he
returned  and  spent  the  winter  in  Ghaznin.

Once  more“  he  led  his  army  against  Somnat,  which  is  a large
city  on  the  coasts  of  the  ocean,*  a place  of  woi’ship  of  the  Brah-

1 The  Amu  D.irya  or  Oxns.  Jaihun  is  the  name  ot  tue  great  river  wh’ch
separates  Khwarazm  and  I^ariisan  from  Bokhara,  Saraarqand  and  tliat
country,  all  the  region  on  the  Bokh.ir.i  side  of  the  river  is  called  the  country
beyond  the  river  (ina  ward  .anr.ahr)  I.  K.  iii.  229.  According  to  Abiil  Fazl
BailA  is  sitaatcd  iu  L'),"g  lUlAO  Lat  36M1.  Tlie  Jaihiiii,  is  also  called '■  the
river  of  B.dKA  ” See  also  Abul  Poda  • ^It.uuaud  i II.  ii.  19S-199.

s [yjbc  - Transoxiaaa.  The  country  lying  between  I^warazm  on  the

west  and  :-.c  'Jxus  on  the  south  fioni  Bad<iklish.4n  to  the  fron.'ors  of
Kh  w.irazm,  See  Abul  F.  da  ; (Beinand  • II.  ii.  212  anef  ic.;.

s The  accounts  of  this  celebrated  expedition  are  given  in  great  detail  by
most  autiiors.  Those  who  follow  (fb.i  A'ir  and'  Mirkhond  make  it  coni
mence  with  410  H.  The.te  who  follow  F.'rishta  with  Uio  H.-  (Elii'Jtt.  II.
4dSi.

* So’'iiia".  'Uth-wO':  of  the  peninsiili  of  Guzorat,  Long.  107  10,  Lat  2i’15,

' ' 1.1  1 iii  5A,,  on  the  sea  shore.  At  a distance  of  50  farsakh  from

Batfiua.  (A.  i'h'-'  river  r^o'snti  falls  into  the  sea  at  the  distance  of  a

buw.'liot  e.ist  ..f  'koi'.uu.uth  201).  It  was  hero  that  the  Yadavas  killed

eaeii  . l1..t  ■ -1”..  40.5 ..

The  idol  of  S..r.  mi'll  i^  it.i-.-H!  'w  Alberutii  to  have  been  the  liii'ca  of
Alahudeva  er.  ■ o *1  to  r-^ni  * tie-  le,.io.!’.  of  "he  moon.  The  word  .Sonianatk
In .s  rn.i.'i.er  - .f  the  m -o'l..  “ ih.-  im-oLTO  was  destroyed  by  the  I'llnce
M iln'  1. 1 n:  iv  li-el  L'e  lO'  reilul  to  him  ' — .A  il.  41t5,”  .Alb.  11  103.  Aib-ernni
giv,'..  O'  .1  ■ i h--re  III  .S -man  1:1. , and  states  :p.  Ifd)  that  the  day  of  full
„io,  •,  i'l  . .i.ih  'liv.tn.t  i-  a f.-.'t  -lay  holy  to  S-smanath.

- Ii  Pis- 170  i'.  ' liiphinstone  26(5,  note  1G_-17,  Brig-_'s’  Fir.  1.
ii."  7..  "1.  -.1.  ’.  . 5 ol  ii.  C4o.  and  note.

■;  li  .1-.  his  .1-.'  --.-.'-Bi  —' i leivoi  an  account  of  the  idol  of  I'.iinnat  and
- I H aa-  .'.I'pouded  in  niid-.iir  without  e.ij.poit  of  aiLV  kind.ntnd

[ 28  1

mans  who  worship  a large  idol.  There  are  many  golden  idols
there.  Although  certain  historians  have  called  this  idol  Manat,
and  say  that  it  is  the  identical  idol  which  the  Arab  idolators
brought  to  the  coasts  of  Hindustan  in  the  time  of  the  Lord  of
the  Missive  (may  the  blessing  and  peace  of  God  he  upon  him),  this
story  has  no  foundation,  because  the  llrahmans  of  India  firmly
believe  that  this  idol  has  been  in  that  place  since  the  time  of
Kishan,  that  is  to  say  four  thousand  years  and  a fraction.  Its
name  too,  in  the  Hindi  langnage,  is  really  Sobha  Nath,  that  is  to
say  Lord  of  Beauty,  and  not  Mauatd  The  reason  for  this  mistake
must  surely  be  the  resemblance  in  name,  and  nothing  else.  In
this  expedition,  having  taken  the  city  of  Patan®  which  is  known
as  Jfaharwala,  a city  of  Gujerat,  and  having  obtained  a great
supply  of  provisions  from  thence,  he  arrived  at  Somnat  where  the
garrison  closed  the  gates  of  the  fort  against  him,  and  reaped
their  reward  in  rapine  and  plunder.  The  fort  was  taken  and
Mahmud  broke  the  idol  in  fragments  and  sent  it  to  GLiaznin,  where
18.  it  was  placed  at  tlio  door  of  the  Jami‘  Masiid  and  trodden  under
foot  !>.

'At  the  time  of  his  return,  not  con.sioenng  it  expedient  to  fight
with  Bairam  Dev,*  one  of  the  mighty  Rajas  of  Hindustan  vGio
stood  in  his  way,  Mahmud  turned  towards  Multan  by  way  of

further  states  that  it  was  snppnseJ  to  Jio  kept  in  ibis  position  by  magnetic
action  Qe-zwiiii  died  ft  (iSZ,  i A IX  12^4.;

• Ct.  (^bcan  LliJ.  Ht,  20.  ZaTcnkhshari  in  the  ttas/jshe/  states  that  Manat
was  an  idol  worsidpp*  d by  the  rrtbos  (»t  Ihc/ail.  Khnzaa  and  f.  attd  that
it  was  called  Manat  lAi-iLA'i  > Uo  {Calcutta  Edn,.  Vo!.

II.,  page  1422),

S Pattan.  Tieffeiithaler  I.  385.  Bt.ato.s  tl.ni  I’at!...;  was  a wry  aneioet  cirv
founded  even  before  Gnzerat,  20  miles  from  K.aiihaDpnr,  40  nnlos  north  of
Gnzerat.  .Ito  ancient  name  waB  Nehrttala.  It  was  onginaliy  calleil  Aiiii.alpnr,
Sec  .Itjt-t  Akhan  [J j It,  262.  Ill,  59,  00.  Compare  Briggs’  Pirishta,  1 , 69
&e  , Anhaiwara  (EIp'jiiiiBtoiie).

S Cf.  Albernni  II.  103.

* Finahta  CallB  thia  Kaj5  Brahma  Dev,  and  states  that  having  fled  front
Mabm.Vl  he  shat  himself  up  in  the  fort  of  Gamiaba  (Kandaina  Tdy  ikh-i-Alfi) .
Briggs  states  that  tho  position  of  this  place  Las  not  been  ascertained,  but  it
appears  to  me  to  be  the  place  Canda  inonnoncd  by  Tieffenthaler'l.  402.
••  Catida  est  nne  bonne  forteresse  a 40  millcs  de  Somnath  elle  eat  entouri”J
d'eau  comeie  nne  Be  : mais  on  pent  y abordrr  h gue  en  qaelqneg  endrohs."
This  description  tallies  • ■ exactly  with  Firishia'a  that  there  can  be  little

r 29  1

Sindh, ■ His  army  suffered  great  liardsliijjs  from  scarcity  of
water  and  forage,  until  with  great  difficulty  he  reached  Ghaznin
111  the  year  417  H.

In  tliat  year  A1  Qadir  billahi^  the  Khalifah,  -despatched  a
flag  with  a letter  appointing  the  Sultan  to  the  Governorship  of
-Khurasan  and  Hindustan,  Ximroz  and  Khwarazm,  and  conferred
titles  of  honour  upon  hi.s  brothers  and  sons,  and  in  the  same  way
assigned  the  titles  of  Kahfu  d-Daulat  wal  Islam  to  the  Sultan, and
to  his  elder  son  Amir  Mas'ud  that  of  Shahabu-d-Daulat  wa
Jiimalu-1-iIillat,  and  to  Amir  Muhammad  liis  younsrer  brother  that
of  Jalalu-d-Daulat,  and  to  Amir  Yusuf  that  of  ‘Azdu-d-Daulat — ■
and  so  forth.

In  this  year  by  way  of  punishing  the  Jats*  of  the  vicinity  ot
Multan,  .who  had  committed  many  acts  of  disrespect,  Mahindd
brought  an  army  to  Multan — and  four  thousand  (sojue  say  eigiit
thousand)  boats  belonging  to  the  Jats  laden  with  their  families
and  projierty,  were  sunk  in  the  Multan  river  on  the  occasion  of
a victory  obtained  by  the  boats  of  the  Sultan,  on  which  they
had  arranged  some  especial  contrivance,^  and  the  Jat.s  were
drowned  and  sank  in  the  whirlpool  of  destruction,  and  the  rest
became  food  for  the  sword,  their  families  were  taken  captive,  and
the  Sultan,  victorious  and  triumphant,  returned  to  GKaznin. —

In  the  year  418  H.  (1027  A.D.)  marching  towards  Baward®,  he

doubt  as  to  the  identity  of  Gaiidaba  with  Canda.  Cf.  Elliott  II.  -173,  note  I
Elphinstone  Hist,  of  India,  239.

In  the  Tabaqdt-i-Akhart  this  raja  is  called  Parama  Dev.

1 For  particulars  of  this  march  sec  Briggs’ Firislita  I.  7S.  Elph.  290,  and
note.  Tnhaqdt-i-ifasirC  (Kaverty)  p.  83,  cf.  Elliott  II.  p.  192  from  .Jd/ni'iL-l-
Hikdydt,

3 History  of  tho  Caliphs  (Jarrett;  p.  -131,  A1  Qadir  bilUhi  4bul ‘Abbas
Al.iinad-b-Ishaq  b-il-Muqtadir.  A.  H.  381—422.

3 See  Elliott  11.  pp.  480-481  on  the  assumption  bv  Mahmud  of  title  of
Sultan,  see  also  p.  16  of  this  volume  note  2.

4 Cf.  Elliott  11.  p.  477,  and  I.  p.  507.  The  Jats.

3 Cf.  Elliott  II.  477.  Briggs’  Pirishta  I.  82.

The  contrirance  alluded  to  was  fixing  spikes  on  the  prows  and  sides  of  the
boats  like  the  rostrum  or  tpSoAo?  of  ancient  warships.  This  iustriniient
the  origin  of  the  modern  ram  is  said  to  have  been  invented  by  the  TyrrlieniaD
Pisteus.  (Smith,  Diet  of  Autiq).  See  also  Elph.  291,  and  note.

6 Baward.  MS.  (A  ) has  MS.  (B.)  is  sarixe  as

the  text.  Abiward  villc  du  Khora.s.iu  est  situee  selon  1’  AtioM  par  84'  de  longi-

C 30  ]

utterly  destroyed  the  Turkomans  of  that  country,  and  thence  he  has-
tened to  Rai  1 and  laid  hands  on  the  treasures  and  hidden  valuables  of
that  country  which  had  been  there  for  many  yeai^s,  and  eradicated
19.  the  false  religionists  and  Karanianians  of  that  place,  and  bestowed
Rai  and  Isfahan  on  Amir  Mas‘ud  his  elder  son.  He  then  returned
to  Ghaznin  and  shortly  afterwards  became  attacked  by  consump,
tion,2  his  weakness  day  by  day  increased.  Nevertheless  he  used
to  take  great  pains  to  pretend  that  he  was  well  and  strong,  and  in
that  condition  went  to  Balkh  and  in  the  spring  came  to  Ghaznin,
and  died  of  that  disease  on -Thursday,  the  23rd  of  Rabi'ul  Awwal,

tude  et  37^  2C'  de  latitude.  On  la  nomme  encore,  dit  le  Lobab,  AbawarJ  et
BawarJ  /Abul  Feiki  (KeiuaudJ  If.  ii.  18.5-18ib.  Firislita  calls  it  Badward
(see  also  Meynard  (Diet  de  la  Perse)  p 13,  .Vr/iwerd).-

1 A district  of  Persian  ‘Iraq,  situated  according  to  Abul  Feda  quoting
frdfii  the  Atu-iil,  in  long.  20' and  latitude  33°  35'.  Its  original  name  v as
he  states,  Eazi.

Ibn  Ilancjal  in  his  article  on  Dailara,  speaks  of  Reyy  as  a large  city  at  a dis-
tance of  oi_dit  uiaiclcjs  trom  Azfii-baijan.  It  is  the  ancient  Pthages  or  '
of  Arrian,  tlie  capital  of  the  in-oviuce  of  Hhagiaaa.  lirst  known  to  us  in  liisiory
as  the  place  to  which  the  Jewish  exiles  were  sent.  If  wtis  t’.c  birtli  jili.-e  of
the  famous  physician  Abu  Bakr  Muliatnui'id  ibn  Zakariya  Ar-lhlzi.  fannliar
to  the  medical  ttorld  as  Illiaz.cs  wlio  liced  in  the  tenth  century.  Ills  treatise

on  small-pox  and  Tncaslcs  (Av«as-'(^  was  piihlisbod  in  a Greek  tians-

lation  trfpl  Aoiuotijs  in  ISIS,  and  an  ilnglish  translation  from  the  Arabic
by  Br.  Grceiihdl  i.rydeuham  Society.  1817  J It  w.as  ten  days’  iiiarcli  from
Ecbatana  ( bi  a It  was  called  at  different  periods  Europn^  at:d  .Aisacia.
In  modern  times  the  nacient  name  i.as  retume-.l,  and  its  ruins  lie  now  to  the
south  of  Ti.her.In  and  north  of  Ispahan  'rii-c  famous  .iurisconsult  Jluliainniad
ibn  al-II:'^an.  and  al-Ki,siyt  the  readi  r of  the  Qai'in  are  batiid  there.
Persian  Iraq  comprised  the  regions  of  licyy,  Qashiir.,  Ispaiian  and  Ilaina-
dan.  (Diet,  of  Greek  and  Roman  Go-tg.,  Vid,  II.  ait  Rhag.oy  (Abul  Feda,
(Rcinaud)  II.  ii  169,  Ac  ) ah-i  sec  I.  K (.Slant  ),  iii.  311  c!  tcjij.

3 Brii.'as,Yol  I.  p.  S3,  states  ilmt  ilal.um'id  died  of  stone,  but  a reference  to
Firislita  in  the  oxiL'Cial  sliens  that  this  is  nut  the  case.  Tlie  words  are
b Ac.

The  diseaS'O  Sd-ul  ymija  which  literally  means  an  unuesiralde

acquisition,  is  thus  deSnfd  by  Vulitw  stth  Core  “praytift  i'alutu.s  cot  p, oris,

gr.  /caxe'fia.  while  the  following  translation  fnmi  the  JI.S.  copy  of  Ba/ini-l-
J^irdhi,-  in  this  Library  will  show  how  it  is  there  delined  :

■ The  distase  i.s  so  called betaase  the  skin  whicij  eurrouiids'  a unoi  <and  chatiue.s
with  ilia  clnmp-es  I ! e.  contracts  and  expands  as  necosaity  ariaes;  is  di.seused,
it  is  the  begmiiii.g  of  ilrup.'y,  but  inasmuch  as  the  term  tlropsy  is  speoitic.illv

L 31  ]

421  A. an  J was  buined  at  Grbaznin.  His  age  was  sixty  years,
and  he  had  reigned  thirty-one  years.  They  say  that  when  he  was-

restricted  to  another  disease,  this  term  Sii  ul  qinya  is  rnade  applicable  to
this  condition  ”

In  the  IsLlihdtu-l-Funun  we  find  the  disease  described  as  "the  com-
nieiicemeiit  of  dropsy  dae  to  weakness  of  liver  and  derangement  of  that
or^an.”  The  quotation  however  is  an  erroneous  transcription  from  Al  Mujai
of  Sadi'li.  a translation  from  which  follows, — he  writes  the. commencement  of
dropsy  due  to  weakness  and  derangement'  of  the  liver,  with  resulting  pallor
and  whiteness  owing  to  defect  in  the  formation  of  good  blood  from  disorder
and  weakness  of  the  liver,  it  al«^  from  disorder  of  the  stomach  and

weakness  of  tliat  organ.

The  face  and  extremities,'  that  is  the  hands  and  feet,  and  especially  the
eyelids,  become  swr.llen  owing  to  the  weakness  of  digestion  and  the  rising  of
moist  vapours,  and  their  effect  upon  the  eyelids  and  extremities,  and  at  times
it  extends  to  the  entire  body,  so  that  tho  body  becomes  like  dough.  One  of
its  symptoms  is  fiatulence  and  boiborygmas,  witli  irreguiarity  of  the  bowels.
All  of  these  are  due  to  indigestion.  The  gums  also  are  affected  with  pustules
from  the  evil  vapours  wjiich  arise.

Its  cure  is  a gentle  course  of  treatment  for  ^he  dropsy.  Means  must  be  taken,
at  hi'st  to  secure  a minimum  of  excrementitiems  products,  and  drinking  much
water 'must  be  forbidden,  and  the  patient  directed  to  bathe  in  borax  and
alum  water,  or  in  sea  water,  as  bathing  in  fresh  water  is  harmful.  Drinking
wormwood  and  dhidrC  anil  zcanii  is  beneficial.  The  food  must  be  appetising
and  strengthening  to  the  liver,  as  for  instance  partridges;  Cantliarides
flavoured  with  cloves  and  cinnamon  and  mastic  and  saffron  arc  beneficial.
The  vomiting  must  be  treated  with  aperients,  when  it  will  cease,  bub  It  more
energetic  treatmeuc'be  required  wa  may  add  agaricuin  and  rhubarb  W'hich  do
no  harm  in  this  disoas*;.'’  {Al  ilujhni  fi  Sharhi  Mdjaz  by  Sadidi).

It  is  evident  from  the  above  description  that  the  disease  from  which
Mahmud  died  was  not  either  hectic  fever  (Hadauai)  or  phthisis  (Firishta),
but  an  ameraia,  very  probably  idiopathic  anaemia'' or  progressive  pernicious
anoDmia.”  The  condition  of  the  ghms  points  to  a possibly  scorbutic  taint,
though  it  was  probably  ulcerous  stomatitis  so  common  at  the  close  of  wast-
ing disease.  Malaiia  may  have  shared  in  the  causation  of  tlm  illness.  There
is  just  a possibility  that  the  disease  may  have  been  myxcxjdema,  the  increaae-
in  bulk  of  the  body  with  the  alteration  and  sweating  of  the  skin,  the  turges-
cenco  of  the  mucous  membrane  of  the  mouth — ail  point,  in  this  dirociion.
Against  tliis  supposition  however,  is  the  sex  and  the  age,  both  of  which  are  in
favour  of  pernicious  amemia.  His  age  was  61.

The  question  of  stone  nowhere  appears  in  the  original  authorities,  and  it  is
difficult  to  see  why-Briggs  should  put  forward  such  a statement.  .See  also
Elliott,  IV  188,  Tiole  1,

^ Thi«  dato  i.s  tlie  same  as  that  given  by  Firishta.-

Kaveity  in  the  Taha<i''t-i-yaf>it  c,  p.  87,  note  9,  gives  Thursday  , the  l-4th  of

[ 32  ]

Uvhig  lie  ordered  them  to  bring  all  his  wealth  and  treasures  and
property  before  him,  he  lay  looking  at  them  from  time  to  time
regretfully  sighing  at  having  to  part  with  them.-  He  would  not
give  the  smallest  trifle  to  any  one.

He  bad  made  the  journey  to  Hindnstan  and  engaged  in  holy
war.  twelve  times.  Verily  his  reckoning  is  with  his  Lord  ; and
the  story  in  connection  with  him  and  Firdausi  ^ the  poet  is  well
known,  and  the  holy  Jatni®  saj’s  :

It  is  well  to  recognize  merits  for  when  the  arched  sky
At  last  discharged  the  ariows  of  misfortune.

The  glory  of  Mahmud  passed  away,  nothing  remained  in  the
world

Save  only  this  saying  “ He  recognized  not  the  worth  of
Firdausi.

Rabi‘u-?-=ani,  421  H.  (.4.D.  1030)  quoting  the  Maqdmdt  of  Amid  Abd  Nap-  by
Al-Baihaqi  as  his  authority.

The  Tubaqat-i-Nafirl  gives  his  age  at  the  time  of  hi?  death  as  61,  and  states
that  he  had  reigned  33  years.

1 Abul  Qasim  Firdausi  the  celebrated  poet,  author  of  the  Shah  Ndmah,  was
a native  nt  Tiis  in  Khorasan  where  he  was  bom  about  339  A.H.  (930  A. D.)
He  died  in  411  .4. H.  (1020  A. D ) or  416  . 4. H.  (Cinzida).  He  was  appointed
by  llalimud  to  complete  the  Shah  XJinnh.  Asa  reward  for  this  labonr  he
was  promised  a thousand  miiqals  of  gold  for  every  thonsand  distichs.  How-
ever by  the  machinations  of  Aiyaz  one  of  Jlalnnud’s  favourites  who  bore
Firdausi  a grudge  for  a fancied  slight,  the  poet  was  represented  to  Mahmud
as  being  a schismatic  and  heretic,  and  eventually  was  put  off  with  60,000
silver  dt'i  hams  instead  of  the  promised  00,000  wor/uis.'  This  so  enraited  him
that  he  divided  the  60,000  dirhams  among  the  attendants  of  the  bath  where
he  was  at  the  time  of  receipt.  Finally  he  wrote  a brilliant  satire  on  the
Sultan  in  the  very  copy  of  the  Shdhndinah  which  he  had  presented  to  him
on  its  completion,  ami  tied  from  JIabraud’s  court  to  Mazinderan  and  thence  to
Baghdad.  Mahmud  at  last  relented,  and  sent  Firdausi  the  60,000  di'Hdi.i  with
a robe  of  state  and  apologies  fur  his  former  harsh  treatment,  but  wlien  the
presents  arrived  the  body  of  Firdausi  was  being  carried  out  for  burial.  See
Atafhkada  ‘Azur  p.  92  et  feqq,  also  Atkinson’s  Shdhnajuah,  Preface  aLso
Elliott,  IT.  191.  See  also  Hunter’s  Indian  Empire,  p.  219.  and  Beale's  Diet,
of  Oriental  Biography,

S Mnlla  Xurud-Din  Abdur  Rahman  ( Jam:)  author  Of  “ Tiisuf  and  Znlaikha  ”
Beharistan,  Ac.,  was  born  at  Jam  inB17  H.  (? ) He  died  in  898  II.  See  Atooh-
kada-i-Azur  p.  78,

He  .vas  called  the  ha’y  from  his  position  as  one  of  the  greatest

divines  of  his  day.  He  was  the  spiritual  guide  of  the  Vazir  Amir  Ah'  Sher.
He  performed  the  Haj]  in  877  A H.,  and  died  at  Herat  twenty  years  later.

[ ]

And  ill  the  Tajhira  of  Muhammad  Ufi,’  the  following  Qita‘k
has  been  attributed  to  the  Sultan  Mahmud.

From- the  dread  of  the  world-winning  sword  and  the  fear  of
the  fort-crushing  sceptre.

The  world  became  subject  to  me  as  I am  subjected  to  reason.

At  one  time  there  would  I sit  serene  in  my  splendour  and
riches

At  another  time  following  Avarice  roamed  I from  co.untiy  20.
to  country  ;

Oft  would  I boastfully  say  Lo  ! I am  a man  of  importance,

But  now  I clearly  perceive  that  the  King  and  the  beggar  are
equals.

I,  "w  ith  one  wave  of  my  hand,  have  conquered  a myriad  of
castles

With  one  firm  plant  of  my  foot  I have  broken  lines  without
number

When  Death  made  the  final  assault,  naught  then  did  my
splendour  avail  me

Nothing  continues  but  God,  God’s  kingdom  alone  is  a kingdom.

ScLTAK  Mchammad  ibn  Scltaji  Mahmcd  Ghaznavi,

Who  was  styled  Jalalu-d-Daulat,  in  the  aforesaid  year,  by  the
provisions  of  his  father’s  will,  and  with  the  acquiescence'of  Iba
Arsalan  * a relative  of  Sultan  Mahmud,  succeeded  to  the  royal
throne  in  Ghaznin,  and  a month  and  a half  after  his  accession  Amir
Aiyaz®  came  to  terms  with  the  servants,  and  having  mounted
horses  from  the  royal  stables,  took  the  road  to  Bust  with  the  object
of  entering  the  service  of  Shahabu-d-Daulah  Mas'iid  who  was  at

1 Mahammad  Ufi,  author  of  a biography  or  Tazkira  Luhdhm-l-Albab,
and  of  another  work  called  J dmiu-l-Hiltdydt.  The  latter  he  compiled  in  1228
A.D.  (625  A H )^-  He  was  a native  of  Merv  which  under  the  Saijuq  prince*
was  the  capital  of  Persia.  He  was  also  known  as  Numddin  Muhammad
Ufi.  (Beale,  0.  B.  D.).  See  also  J.  B.  A.  S.,  Vol.  IX.  113.

Hajf  Khalfa  calls  him  Jamaln-d-Din  Muhammad  al  Tiff.  See  J.  B.  A.  S.,

Tol.  V.,  p.  111.

* Called  in  the  Tazkirat-ul-Muluk,  ‘Ali  soo-of  lyal  Arsalan  a relative  of  the
late  Snltan  Mahmud.  (Ravorty,  Tabaqdt-i-Ndfiri  89  note  8).

Firishta  calls  him  Amir  ‘All,  son  Kizil  Arsalan  father-in-law  of  Mahmud.
(Bri^s,  93).  See  ElUott,  IT.  193.  Ali  Kurbat  (Baverty),  or  All  KhishawandL

® Abul  Najm  Amir  Aiyaz  (Firishta).

5

Sipaliriu.i  AniU' lluhanimad  despatched  Suadlii  '^  RcVi  the  Hindu
\\ith  a large  army  in  pnrsnit  of  them,  Amir  Aiyaz  .was  victoiions
in  the  tight,  and  put  to  death  Sundhi  Rai  the  Hindu  >vith  a large
numher  of  Hindus,  and  sent  their  heads  to  Amir  Muhammad.
Amir  Aiyaz  joined  Amir  Mashid  at  Nishapur,®  and  four  mouths
later  Amir  Muhammad  moved  his  camp  in  the  direction  of  Bust."
and  came  out  in  full  force  from  Ghaznin  with  the  intention  of
fighting  with  his  brother,  and  when  he  reached  Takinahad  ^ all
his  Amirs  haviisg  revolted  against  him,  put  out  his  eyes  and
threw  him  into  the  fort  of  Bajj  ® in  Majbaristan  ' and  having
gone  over  to  Amir  Mas‘ud  with  the  whole  army  and  treasures,  went
21.  to  HerH  and  met  him  there.  The  blinded  Amir  iluhnmmad  reign-
ed five  months,  hut  according  to  Qazi  Baiziivi  ^ it  was  foniteen
years,  and  the  period  of  his  imprisonment  was  nine  years.  God
knows  the  truth.  The  author  of  the®  Lubbu-t-TaicdriJch  wiites
that  Jluhammad  ihn  Mahmud  wielded  sovereignty  in  Ghaziiit
for  four  years  in  the  first  instance,  during  the  reign  of  his  father,
afterwards  ho  was  imprisoned  for  nine  years  by  the  command
of  his  brother  Mas'ud,  and  after  the  murder  of  Mas'ud  he  reigned
for  another  year  and  then  died.

An  Amir  in  whose  palace  thou  seest  thousands  of  sentinels

How  on  the  vault  of  his  tomb  thou  seest  ravens  keeping  watch ;

t Ispilian,  see  Abut  Feda  II.,  ii.  170.  (R'einaud).

S Sess'niicl  Rai  (Firishta).

3 The  tinest  city  of  Khorasan  situated  at  an  equal  distance  from  Merr^
Herat,  Jiirjan  and  Damaghan.  See  Abui  Feda  II.  ii.  189.  (Reinaud).

♦ Fourteen  marches  from  Ghazni  in  Sijistan,  between  Herat  and  Ghazni.
AbiiT  Feda  TI  ii  108.  (Remand).

3 Takinabad,  see  Elliott  ii.  pp.  271,  293  iv,  p.  193  note  1.  Briggs  places  it
80  miles  N.  of  Ghazni ; see  Ain-i~AJchari  (J)  HI.  68.  Long  101®  5,  Lat.  33.®

3 The  reading  in  the  text  is  ahsolntely  without  authority

judging  from  the  two  MSS.  I hare  before  me.  These  both  read,

y ^ I am  unable  to  elucidate  this,

but  it  certainly  gives  no  countenance  to  the  reading  in  the  text  which,  how
ever  I have  translated,  as  it  stands, /aute  de  mieva.

^ Variously  called  WalaJ  (F,^hta)  Mangsal  '{Nizdmu-t-TaicdriM}  See
Elliott  IV.  193  note  3.

S Abii  Said  Abdallah  ibn  Abui  Hasan  AH  BaizawL  See  Elliott,  II.  252.

^ Yahya  ibn  ‘Abdnl  Lntif  Qazwini  DimUhqi.  Hied  960*  A.  H,  (18th
Dscember,  1552)  Kh  ilfa).

[ 35  3

Thou  didst  see  the  head  of  Alp  Arslau  i reach  the  sky  in  its
grandeur,

Come  to  Marv  that  thou  mayest  see  the  body  of  Alp  Arslau
beneath  the  dust.

Shahabu-d-Daulat  Scltax  Mas‘ud  ibn  Mahmud.

By  the  consent  of  the  Amirs  and  Vazivs  of  Mahmud  he  ascend-
ed the  imperial  throne,  and  having  come  from  Hari  ^ to  Dalkh.
spent  the  winter  there,  and  summoning  Ahmad  ibn  Hasan
iMaimandi  whom  Saltan  Mahmud  kept  a prisoner  in  the  fort  of
Kaiinjav,  made  him  a Vazir.  Then  leaving  Balkh  he  came  to
tihazuin  and  thence  started  for  Sipahan  and  Ihii,  and  arriving
ar,  Herat  entraged  in  war  with  the  Turkomans,  and  not  overcoming
them,  hut  on  the  contrary  suffering  defeat  nt  tlieir  hand.?,  turned
hick.  The  Turkomans  increased  in  power  day  by  day  owing  to
Ids  weakness,  till  affaii'S  assumed  the  aspect  which  they  eventual-
ly did.®

In  the  ’year  423  H.  Abroad  ibn  Hasan  Maimandi  died,  and  in  22.
the  year  424  Saltan ' Mas‘ud  having  undertaken  to  conqaev

1 Abu  Shnja‘  Muhammad,  son  of  Chakirbeg  Daad,  son  of  Mikail,  son  of
S.iljuq,  son  of  Duqaq  surnamed  ‘A/.du-d-Daulac-  Alp  Artslan  (arm  of  the
Empire  the  hero  lion)  was  tlie  third  monarch  of  the  SaljiV|irah  dynasty  who
ascended  the  throne  of  Khoiasan  in  451  A.  H.  (see  Piavercy  132,  note  2).

Born  424  A.  H.,  murdered  465  A H.  The  Hues  are  attributed  by  the  author
of  the  Tahaqdt-i-Nds^rC  to  Hakim  Sanai  a celebrated  poet  of  Ghazni.  His
most  celebrated  work  is  the  Had(qat-ul'-Ha(ii<iat  ica  Shuri'atu-t^Turojat  other-
wise known  as  Fakhrindmah,  His  fall  name  was  Abu  Muhammad  ibn  Adam.

Sanai  A1  Hakim.  He  died  in  the  year  525  H.  (4th  December,  1130J  (H.  K.J.

See  also  Majma'ul  Fusahd  I.  254  and  A'taohkuda-i’^^zur,  p.  108.  cf.  I.  K.
(Slane)  iii.  230.

2 Herat.  The  well-known  city  in  Khurasan,  the  ancient  Aria  {'Ap^ia)  (see
D.  G.  R.  G.  (Abul  Feda  11.  ii,  193,}  founded  by  Alexander.  Meynard  Diet,
de-la  Perse,  p.  592,  note  1,  says  :

L’  opinion  generale  des  Persans  est  qu’  Herat  doit  son  iioyi  et  son  orh^ine  a
un  des  olfioiera  de  Neriman  lePehlevan  et  qu‘elle  fat  rebucie  par  Alexandre  ...

-^3

cf-jq

Le  nom  d’origine  qai  en  derive  est  Har.kwi.

3 i e.  The  establishment  of  the  dyiKt'siy  of  the  Saljuqiyuh  in  129  If  by
Tu;^ril  Beg

[ 36  ]

Hindustan  marched  towards  the  fortress  of  Sarsatl  • wliiuli  is
situated  in  the  way  to  Kashmir,  laid  siege  to  it  and  reduced  it
and  made  Ids  waj-  to  Ghaznin  Avith  great  booty.  Then  in  425  H.
Saltan  Mas'tid  reduced  Amal  ® and  Sari  3 and  sending  legates  to
Kalinjar  and  Tabaristan  established  his  authority  there*  and
sent  Tnghdi  Beg  and*  Husain  ibn  ‘All  ibn  Maikal  with  a large
army  from  Nishapur  against  the  Turkomans,  and  a seTere  battle
ensued  in  which  Husain  was  takes  prisoner  and  Tnghdi  Beg  fled
and  retnrned  to  the  Amir  Mas‘ud.

Amir  Ahmad  Kiyal  Tigin*  the  treasurer  of  Sultan  Mas‘ud
whom  Mas'ud  had  fined  and  had  sent  to  Hindustan,'^  on  arriving  in
Hindustan  revolted*  and  the  Amir  Maa'ud  nominated  a general
of  the  Hindus  named  Nihir^  to  oppose  him.  Ahmad  being  over-
come in  battle  fled  to  Mansurah'®  in  Sindh  and  was  drowned- — his
head  they  sent  to  Ghaznin.  In  the  year  427  H.  (1035  A.D.)  a
new  palace  was  completed  in  which  they  erected  a throne  inlaid
with  jewels,  and  suspended  above  it  a jewelled  crown.  The

1 Sarsati.  (Firishta)  a fortress  situateJ  among  the  hills  of  Kashmir.

* ‘Araol  the  capical  of  Tabaristan,  birthpUe*  of  at-Tabari.  Abul  Feda  (B)
n.  a.  377-179.

8 Sari  or  Sariyah  in  Tabaristan  according  to  al-Luhdb  in  Mizindarmn.)

* Lit.  had  coins  struck  and  the  Khntbah  read  in  big  own  name.

5 31SS.  (A)  and  (B)  j ^

6 Cf.  Tdrikhu-S-Siibuktigin.  tlliott  II.  116.  He  was  supposed  to  be  a
natural  son  of  the  Arair  Mahmud.

I As  governor,  with  kettle-drums  and  baneers  and  all  things  usually  given
to  generals  of  the  army.

* Elliott  II.  123.  Buihaqi  says,  In  this  interval  letters  were  constantly-
arriving  with  the  news  of  Ahmad  Nival  Tigin  having  reached  Lahore  with
the  Turkomans,  and  that  numerous  turbulent  fellows  of  Lahore  had  flocked
to  him.

5 Baihaqi  says,  Tilak  the  Hindu  was  sent : while  Firishta  states  that
Mas'ud  sent  Nath  one  of  the  Chiefs  of  Hind,  and  that  upon  his  death  in  battle
Tulak  ibn  Husain  was  sent  wUo  killed  Ahmad.

Briggs  translates  “ Tilok  the  son  of  Jye  Sein”— and  remarks  upon  the  fact
that  he  was  an  uaconrerted  Hindu.

1®  A1  Mansurah  in  Sindh  : the  fori.icr  city  of  Bahmanwa,  conquered  and  re-
named by  Muhammad  ibn  ul  Qasim  ibn  u!  Mnnabbili.  It  is  sitnated  at  a
distance  of  20  farsal-h  from  Bhati,  sitnated  between  the  arms  of  the  Mihran
river.  {Alberimi)  Almansura.  Tieffenthaler,  Vol.  IH.  Map.  Known  later  and
up  to  the  present  time  as  Bukknr,  see  Impe.  Gazetteer.  Also  Abul  Feda.  II.  ii
113.  Ain-%-Akhail  (Jarrett)  II.  327  and  note,  also  111.  58,  and  note.

L J

Sultan  took  his  seat  upon  that  throne  and  having’  placed  the
crown  upon  his  head  gave  a public  audience.  And  in  this  self
same  year  he  bestowed  npon  Amir  Maudi'id  ibn  Mas'iid  (his  .«on)
the  drum  and  ensign,*  and  'despatched  him  to  BalHi  while  he
himself  proceeded  with  an  army  against  Hindustan — captured  the
fort  of  Hansi  * and  thence  proceeded  to  the  fortress  of  Sonpat.^
Deipal  * the  commander  of  that  fortress  fled  to  the  forest  and  lay
hid  there.  They  reduced  the  fort  and  captured  immense  booty
putting  to  the  sword  the  greater  part  of  Deipal’s  army,  but
he  himself  escaped  alone.  From  thence  Mas‘ud  turned  his  steps
towards  the  valley  of  Ram^  who  sent  a large  ofi'ering  accom-  23.
panied  by  a written  apology  for  his  noii-appenrancc.  Amir
Mas'iid  accepted  his  excuses  and  giving  the  Amir  ® Abul-Mujahid
sou  of  ilashid,'*  the  drum  and  standard  (of  commission)  sent
him  to  Lahore  and  retraced  his  .steps  to  Gliromin,

In  the  year  428  (1036  A.D.)  he  left  Gliaznin  for  Balidi  intend-
ing to  crush  the  rebellion  of  the  Turkomans  who  evacuated  Balkh
and  retired  into  the  surrounding  country.  The  Sultan  then

* As  tokens  of  his  comniisaion  as  a general  of  the  army.

5 According  to  Baihaqi  this  fort  had  been  hitherto  kuoivn  as  “ The  Virgin'*
as  no  one  had  yet  been  able  to  take  it.  It  was  taken  ton  days  before  tho
close  of  Rnbi'-ul  -Awwal  i{an«(,  a city  i\ itii  a ruined  castle  11  miles  to  the
east  of  TJissn'.  Tieffenthnler  I.  131.

3 S'onpath,  a city  with  a brick  fortress.  Ticffenthaler  I.  133.  It  lies  North

of  Delhi.  MSS.  (.A  and  B).  read  AaIj

4 MSS.  (A  and  B).  J'-wi

6 Fiiisbta’s  account  is  almost  identical  here.

6 Firiblita  writes  His  son  AJiul  Majfli'td.  See

also  Eaverty  p.  95,  note  7.  In  the  text  we  shoaid  read

7 Here  I follow  MS.  (B).  .-Tiie  reatlings  of  the  MSS.  vary  lieiT*  '-y
considerably.  M3.  (Ai  rends  (ncrrecin<^  with  the  text)

cx.

J.Ji

MS.  (B)  read.s,  j

Preference  must  be  given  to  MS.  (A),  the  copyUt  c\  identiy  li  iririhr  mistaken
his  place  after  the  fii. St  3-^*^  instead  ot  continuing'  ^ he  i .is

gone  on  tX-fli  chat  he  was  a careless  arul  inc*->mpetent  copyist  is

shewn  by  the  next  line  where  he  wiite.s  J

for  (^vj

[ 33  ]

crossing  the  Jihun  occupied  the  -whole  of  Transoxiana.  Baud
the  Turkoman,  who  had  previously  defeated  Tughdi  Beg  and
Amir  Husain,  marched  with  a large  force  towards  Balkh.  Amir
Mas‘ud  thereupon  returned  from  Transoxiana  to  Balkh  and  Baud
the  Turkoman  ^ leaving  Balkh  went  to  Merv.  In  the  meantime
Tughdi  Beg  2 had  been  acting  oppressively  in  the  neighhoui-hood
of  Gurgiin.  When  the  Amir  Mas‘ud  perceived  the  symptoms  of
his  rebellion  he  ordered  him  to  be  impaled.  The  Amir  ilas‘ud
then  exacted  a stipulation  and  promise  from  Beghu  ^ the  Turko-
man who  was  the  chief  of  that  tribe,  that  henceforward  they
would  never  attempt  any  lawlessness,  and  having  delimited  their
honndaiies  in  a suitable  way  left  for  Herat.  W bile  on  his  way
thither  a body  o£  the  Turkomans  fell  upon  the  army  of  Mas‘ud,
killing  some  and  plundering  the  baggage.  The  soldiers  of  the
Sultan  -who  were  told  off  to  attack  them  made  the  whole  of  that
party  food  for  the  sword,  and  brought  their  wives  and  families
together  with  the  heads  of  the  slain  into  the  presence  of  Amir
MasAd  who  sent  asses  laden  with  the  heads  to  Beghu.  Beghti
apologized,  and  it  so  happens  that  this  is  the  very  same  Beghti
in  piuise  of  whom  the  poet  Ziai*  of  Persia  has  composed  several
odes  from  which  the  following  verses  are  selected —

24.  It  is  wrong  for  me  to  bewail  the  misfortunes  of  others  than
thee,

It  is  wrong  not  to  weep  with  thy  sorrow.

Mj  occupation  day  and  night  is  to  lament  and  bewail  thy
sorrow.

i See  Raverty,  p.  94,  note  2;

8 MS.  (A)  has  not

8 Israil-i-Beghu.  See  Raverty  {Tabaqdt’i’Ndfiri}  p.  94,  note  2,  page  110,
note  3,  for  an  account  of  the  rise  of  the  Saljuqiyah  dynasty.  See  also  Ibii
Khali:  (Slane)  iii.  225  and  segq,

4 Zidu-d-Dni  EJinJandi  Al  Fdrsi,  a native  of  Shiraz  who  left  Shiraz  in
his  youth  and  took  up  his  abode  at  Khajaud.  He  was  a contemporary  and
panegyrist  of  Saltan  Malik  Shah  Saljuqf,  and  died  at  Herat  in  the  year  522  H.
(In  the  3fayma‘-u^  from  which  these  particulars  are  taken,  the  date

of  his  death  is  622  H.,  bat  this  is  an  error  as  Malik  Shdh  died  in  491’ H.)

Beale  (Oriental  Biogmphical  Dictionary)  gives  the  date  as  622  II.,  but  this
is  in  alt  piobabiliiy  copied  from  the  above  authority.

L ] ■

Thon  did’.st  sav,  “ Thou  did’st  weep  for  love  of  me,”  Irat
verily  there  is  a differeace  in  shedding  blood  and  shedding
tears

At  all  hours  I suffer  a thousand  pangs  for  the  grief  of  the
love  of  thee,  nor  do  I weep  alone.

I cannot  but  melt  with  love  of  thee,  nor  is  there  any  remedy
for  the  pain  I suffer  for  thee,  save  weeping.

Apart  from  thee  Fate  has  nothing  in  store  for  me

Save  vexation,  one  day,  and  weeping  the  next.

From  thy  era  discord  springs,  for  if  not  how  comes  it  to  pass
that  the  whole  world  should  weep  from  my  time  to  that  of
the  king  ?

Beghn  Malik  Shah,  he  who  by  his  sword  made  the  bravo
wuiiriors  to  weep  openly  on  the  field  of  battle.

The  King  Kizam  Din  to  whom  at  the  time  of  his  conflict

Came  from  the  tombs  of  Rustum  and  Dara  the  sound  of  weep-
ing.

The  gems  in  tlie  depths  of  the  sea  or  in  the  heart  of  the
flinty  rock  were  compelled  to  weep  for  shame  at  his  elo-
quence,

The  itihahitaiits  of  the  world  above  were  compelled  to  weep,
cast  down  by  the  destroying  arrow  of  his- wrath.

From  envy  of  his  splendour,  which  surpasses  the  sun  in  its  25.
zenith,

Tlie  Gemini  were  forced  to  weep  constantly  in  the  heavens.

Oh ! thou  in  presence  of  whose  pearl-scattcring  hand  the
ocean  weeps  like  a cloud  from  every  pore  !

Who  in  view  of  thy  majesty  would  dare  or  desire  to  weep
over  the  corpse  of  tliy'  enemy  ?

Thy'  sword  from  very'  fineness  of  tempei’  weeps  tears  of  blood
over  thy  enemies  in  the  field  of  battle,

What  is  prepared  for  thine  adversary  in  either  world  ?

There  is  the  torture  of  hell,  here  he  must  weep.

Lo  ! one  who  in  (he  madne.s.s  of  his  fear  at  thy  displeasure

Seeks  to  hide  himself  in  a corner  and  prepares  to  weep.

Thy  enemies  hiive  many  manifest  and  hidden  projects

But  the  wound  is  hidden,  the  weeping  is  manifest.

I believe  that  tliis  must  have  come  into  your  exalted  mind,

After  all  what  use  is  praise  to  me  with  weeping.

When  I recite  any  poem  in  separation  from  tlree

t 40  1

Botli  I he  first  and  last  verses  weep  for  anguish.

Till  lovjers  pass  from  excess  of  grief  to  endurance  and  to  weep
like  Wamiq  and  ‘Azra  t
May  it  be  thy  lot  to  smile  after  a happy  life,

May  it  be  the  fate  of  thy  enemies  perforce  to  weep.

26.  The  follo\ving  is  also  by  him  : —

Oh  thou  whose  lip  distils  sugar*  at  the  opening  of  each
smile  !

Thy  ruby  lip  when  thou  smilest,  rebukes  the  soul.

In  every  movement  thy  curling  locks  ravish  the  heart
In  every  smile  thy  ruby  lip  scatters  the  life  blood.

The  trade  of  thy  hyacintbine  ringlets  is  to  scatter  perfume,
The  habit  of  thy  delicate  lips  is  to  smile  sweetly.

Till  thou  seest  not  the  cheek  of  gold  thou  smilest  not.

Every  flower  smiles  from  the  enjoyment  of  the  gold.

When  thou  smilest  a whole  world  smiles  looking  tow'ards  thee
For  no  one  before  this  has  seen  the  sun  and  moon  to  smile  (at
one  time.)

I have  a great  sorrow  and  lamentation,  and  eiidle.ss  grief
and  pain,

I have  in  separation  from  thee  all  of  these,  but  no  smile.
What  could  mankind  have  learned  of  the  shape  of  thy  mouth
Had’st  thou  not  given  them  from  thine  own  month  the  news
of  a smile.

Because  of  thy  cruelty  I do  not  smile,  for  attlietimeof
mourn  ing

The  wise  and  excellent  do  not  approve  of  smiling.

All  my  disorder  is  due  to  grief  on  thy  account,

Why  then  do  you  smile  at  me  disordered  as  1 am  ?

It  may  be  that  from  the  crown  and  canopy  of  kings  thy  locks
and  cheek  have  learned  to  smile  both  morning  and  cv'oning.

27.  King  of  thu  East  Malik  Shah  who  in  his  feasting  is  careful

always  to  smile  fj  om  joy"  and  pride.

1 The  loves  of  Wamirj  and  ‘Azra  form  the  siibjeci:  of  two  Turkish  romances,

one  by  Mahmud  bin  A>mun,  L»maf,  and  the  ocher  by  Mu‘id,  a native  of
Tarkhan-  j.

2 eff*  must  be  read  here.

L -il  ]

ConquBror  of  infiJelitv,  Isizamn-nd-IHii,  whose  friends  are
always  engaged  in  enjoyment,  and  only  vary  it  by  smiling.
If  the  seed  conld  receive  the  good  tidings  of  his  approbation,
even  from  the  loins  of  his  father  would  one  begin  to  smile.
A father  to  whom  a son  is  essential  to  do  hirn  service,  smiles
from  the  pleasure  he  experiences  at  the  success  of  his  son.

It  is  not  strange  that  from  the  excess  of  his  joy,  the  cloud  of
weeping  which  shrouded  his  moist  eyes  gives  place  to  smil-
ing.

Oh  ye  obedient  ones,  since  the  beauty  of  the  rose  is  added  to
your  own  charms,  ye  are  smiling  in  this  garden*  of  two  doors.
Thy  charms  have  power  to  add  sweetness  to  sugar
Thy  words  have  power  to  add  brilliance  to  the  jewel.

Thy  shaft  when  fitted  to  the  bow  has  established  the  custom
In  the  array  of  battle  to  smile  at  the  helmet  and  shield.
Following  after  victory  when  thy  sword  is  furious
There  comes  to  it  from  the  soi-ceries  of  heaven,  a smile.
Doubtless  the  enemy  of  thy  grandeur,  smiles  sweetly
If  scattering  his  heart’s  blood  fin  envy)  be  to  smile.

In  order  that  the  saffron*  may  fulfil  the  promise  of  its  properties,
namely  to  bring  smiles  to  the  lips  of  all  conditions  of  men ; may
the  lips  of  thy  enemies  be  saffron,  that  their  lips  may  always  from
fear  of  thee  smile  from  his  -want  of  success.

1 i.e.,  the  world.  Birth  and  death  are  the  two  doors.

s Saffron  was  held  by  the  Greek  physicians  to  cause  slniling  when  taken
internally.

It  is  it*  property  of  inciting  to  mirth  and  laughter  which  is  here  alladed  to-
With  regard  to  Saffron  the  says.

j Jbr*  j of  3 J'"!

j y,  cif

3 3 J .7^  3 y3i=^  ^33^3^  J j i-ajli

*1  ^^3i\  <^3^  faijUy  J J J J J ^33^

* 3 3 1!*^  3 ^Ui  J

Actions  and  properties  of  Saffron.  Exhilar<ating  and  tonic  to  the  senses
excitant  and  digestive,  laxative  and  corrective  of  the  impare  hamonrs  of
the  phlegm,  and  preventing  and  preserving  tliera  from  alteration  and
badness.  It  is  diuretic  and  constipating,  aphrodisiac  and  strengthening  to
the  essence  of  the  animal  spirits,  to  the  liver,  and  bowels  and  respiratory
6

I j

28.  Tlien  Amir  M;\b‘u(l  marched  from  Herat  to  Jfisliapur  ami  ilier,c>-
to  Tiis  * and  a body  of  Turkomans  giving  him  buttle  met  their
death,  the  people  of  Baward  gave  ap  that  town  to  tlie  Turkomans
and  the  Sultan  having  overcome  that  fortress  and  haying  put
them  all  to  death  spent  the  winter  at  Nishapur.  ®

Then  in  the  year  430  H.  having  set  out  to  attack  Tughral  ® the

organs.'  It  produces  mirth  and  langhter,  pnrifiee  the  kidneys  and  bladder
and  skin.  It  carries  the  virtues  of  medicines  to  the  heart  and  to  all  viscera —
removes  obstructions  of  the  brain,  liver  and  spleen.

The  following  extract  from  the  gives  a further  account  of

its  properties.

J

L5J^  j J ii'illpl  lJf~i  3 3 (*>M  3

j Akfctdl  J 3 3^.  3

— J=^l  (y*'3i3  *Vl  iJ

It  prevents  the  flow  of  moist  humours  to  the  eye  when  used  either  as  an
ointment  or  a oollyriura.  It  is  hot  in  the  third  degree,  dry  in  the  first
degree,  laxative,  or  constipating,  digestive,  improving  the  complexion,  and
very  intoxicating  with  wine  causing  heaviness,  headache,  and  drowsiness,
clears  the  sight  and  facilitates  p.nrturition,  and  respiration,  is  a cardiac  tonic
and  is  dinretic  and  controls  the  animal  passions  and  cures  internal  diseases
and  uterine  complaints ; dispels  the  effects  of  debauch,  and  is  a sexual  tonic
and  cures  diseases  of  the  spleen.

Sadidi,  p.  143,  says  of  Saffron.  J^]3^  Ai>y^  A^Li.  il  j

Aj_^lsxlt  3 W ^=^*1  j

— SOjO^I

It  has  a wonderful  power  as  an  cihilarant  increasing  the  brilliance  and
strength  of  the  mental  powers.  It  is  assisted  by  strong  perfumes.

I Tiis,  a district  and  city  of  Khorasan,  one  of  the  dependencies  of  Nishapur,
distant  from  the  city  of  Nishapur  about  10  farsakhs.

See  Abul  Feda  II.  ii.  190.  Diet,  de  la  Perse,  p.  396.  According  to  Ibn
Khalliqan  the  Saljuqs  gained  possession  of  Tun  in  429  A.  H.  and  in  the  month
Ramavaa  of  the  same  year  they  took  Nishapur.  I.  K.  (Slane)  iii.  226.

* MS.  (B)  has  shewing  clearly  that  the  copyist  was  a native  of

Hindustan.  A line  or  two  lower  he  writes  This

MS,  is  quite  worthless  for  purposes  of  comparison.  It  abounds  in  errors  and
is  plainly  the  work  of  an  inferior  copyist.

S Tughral  Beg.  Abu  Talib  Muhammad  Ibn  Mikail  Ibn  Saljiiq  Ibn  Dnkak
Bnknn-d-Din  Tughral  Beg  was  the  founder  of  the  dynasty  of  Saljuqs  (<■/.
Uu\cvty,  pp.  94  and  122,  ana  also  1.  K.  (.Slane)  iii.  224,

[ 43  ]

Turkoman  who  had  raised  a rebellion  in  Baward,  when  Tughral
took  to  flight  Amir  Mas'iid  turned  back  and  came  to  Sarakhs  ^ by
way  of  Mahnah  * and  gave  orders  to  rase  the  fortress  of  Mahnah.
Then  he  put  to  death  some  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mahnah,  and
cut  off  the  hands  and  feet  of  many  moi’e  and  thence  went  in  the
direction  of  Zirqan®  in  which  place  the  Turkomans  brought
together  a large  army  and  fought  a severe  battle  with  the  Sultan.
In  this  battle  the  majority  of  the  generals  of  the  army  of  Qhaznin
mutinied  and  went  over  to  the  enemy.  The  Sultan  remaining  all
alone  on  the  field,  felled  several  of  the  Turkoman  leaders  with
sword,  spear  and  mace,  and  eventually  came  out  of  that  engage-
ment safely.  This  event  took  place  on  the  8th  of  Ramazan,
431  H.  (1039  A.  D.).  From  thence  Amir  Mas'iid  came  to  Merv,
and  several  of  the  soldiery  from  the  neighbouring  country  having
come  in  at  last  sided  with  him.  He  went  to  Ghaznin  by  way  of
(Ihaur,*  and  having  fined  these  chiefs  who  had  not  fought  and
had  fled,  sent  some  of  them,  as  for  instance  ‘Ali  Daya  and  Hajib-
i-Buzurg,®  And  Beg  Tughdi  to  Hindustan  and  imprisoned®  them
in  fortresses.  All  of  them  died  in  imprisonment.  Amir  Mas'ud
now  desired  to  go  to  India  and  collect  some  forces  there,  an’d  to
come  from  there  with  a large  ai’my  against  the  Turkomans  to
punish  them.  "With  this  intention  he  made  Amir  Maudiid  t Amir  of

1 Sarakhs  of  Sarkhas  (Meynard,  Diet,  de  la  Perse,  307)  said  by  the  Persians
to  have  been  founded  by  Kaikaus,  a city  situated  between  Nishapur  and  Merv,
in  a plain.  Abnl  Feda  II.  ii.  193.

* Mahnah.  Firishta  ■says  Mahtaks  bat  Alfr*  is  undoubtedly  the

right  reading.  In  Persian  this  name  is  spelt  M.aihana,  a small  town

of  the  district  of  Khaberan  between  Abiward  and  Sarakhs.  See  Meynard,
Diet,  de  la  Perse,  558.

8 Zirqan  is  not  mentioned  by  other  anthers  I have  consulted  and  may  be  a
clerical  error.  The  name  of  the  place  where  this  battle  was  fought  was  Dan-
dangan  a town  in  the  vicinity  of  Merv,  cf.  Raverty,  p.  94,  note  3.  Also  Abnl
Feda  II.  ii.  197.  Meynard,  p.  239.  It  seems  to  me  most  probable  that  we
slionld  read  cylA.  though  all  MSS.  give  Zandkhan,  is  a

fortified  town  situated  at  the  distance  of  one  farsa^  from  Sarahs  (Meynard,
28S).

4 Abnl  Feda  II.  ii.  201.  A province  lying  between  Herat,  Eartiwsn  and
Gr.rjiatan.

8 Firishta  Hajib  Shalbani.

6MS.  (B)  ^

^ Shiru'tba-d  Daalut  Maudud  hia  eldest  son.  Compare  the  account  gireu  by
Firishta.

[ 44  ]

29.  Balkh,  and  having  appointed  Muhammad  ibn  Abdu*  Samad  as
his  Wazir  despatched  them  thither.  He  then  appointed  the  Amir
Muhammad  ^ with  two  thousand  soldiers  to  proceed  to  Multan,
and  sent  the  Amir  of  that  district  * to  the  foot  of  the  hills  of
Ghaznin  to  restrain  the  Afghans  of  that  district  who  bad  broken
out  into  rebellion  ; and  having  laden  camels  with  the  whole  of
Mahmud’s  treasures  which  were  stored  in  Ghaznin  and  the  neigh-
bouring fortresses  started  for  Hindustan  and  despatched
mesengers  en  route  to  bring  his  brother  Amir  Muhammad  who
had  been  blinded  ® and  was  then  confined  in  the  fortress  of
Bazghand.'^  When  Sultan  Mas'ud  arrived  at  the  frontier  fort  ^
of  Marikala,®  his  slaves  plundered  all  the  treasure-camels.  In
the  meantime  the  Amir  Muhammad  arrived  there,  and  the
slaves  who  recognised  that  this  violence  would  have  no  successful
issue  unless  another  governor  were  appointed  ^ perforce,
approached  the  Amir  Muhammad,  raised  him  to  the  Sovereignty
and  breaking  into  open  riot  assaulted  Sultan  Mas‘ud  who  had
taken  refuge  iu  that  fort.  The  nest  day  the  whole  army  becom-
ing violent  brought  Amir  3Ia.s‘ud  from  within  the  fort  of  Illarikala
and"  made  him  prisoner  confining  him  within  the  fortress  of
Kiri,^  till  at  last  in  Jamadin-l-Awwal  432  H.  they  sent  a false

1 Firiahta  aays  Amir  Majdud— the  second  aon  of  Mas'ud

MS.  (A)  has  jM\  Amir  Mahduda,  which  should  in  all  probahility  he

read  ilajdud.  MS.  (B)  agrees  with  the  text,  both  are  probably  wrongs,

2 The  words  in  the  text  appear  to  be  a misprint  for  the  following

which  is  Firishta’s  version.  The  Amir  Izad  Yar  was  Mas'ud’s
fifth  son.  Both  MSS.  however  hare

5 See  page  21.

4 MSS.  (A)  and  (B)

h Dozy  quoting  from  de  Slane  gives  casernes  fortifiees  qn"on  constmisin't
snr  les  frontieres  de  I’empire  as  the  meaning  of

6 Mai’ikala.  Firi&hta  says  Marknla  which  according  to  some  is  on  the
Jhilam  rirer  which  in  those  days  was  called  the  Behat,  Raverty  in  his  note
4,  page  95  says  : A pass  somewhat  difficult  situated  between  Rawal  Pindi  and
Attock — See  Elliott  11.  273,  note  2.

MS.  (A)  cA’M  (B)  the  text  read

y for  jl  Cf.  Firiahta

Firishta  reads  Kiri.  Cf.  Baverty  95  MS.  (B)  113.  (A)  LSJ^

Sec  Elliuu  II,  ’^73,  i.'Av  3.

[ 45  ]

message  purporting  to  emanate  verbally  from  Amir  Ifahammad
ordering  him  to  kill  Amir  Mas‘ud  and  to  send  bis  bead  to  him.

The  Kotwal  in  obedience  to  this  order  severed  Mas'ud’s  head  from
his  body  and  sent  it  to  Amir  Mnhammad.

Of  the  vicissitudes  of  time,  this  much  pleased  me
That  I saw  good  and  bad,  right  and  wrong,  pass  away
He  who  at  morning  time  wore  on  his  head  a jewelled  crown
Him  I saw,  at  the  time  of  evening  prayer,  with  a brick  30
underneath  his  head  (in  the  grave).

This  story  is  according  to  the  relation  of  Nizami,!  hat  the  Qazi
Baizawi  relates  that  in  the  year  432  Ma8‘ud  fled  defeated  from
before  the  Seljiiqs  to  Gbaznin,  and  Amir  Muhammad  who  had
consolidated  his  power  daring  Mas'ud’s  absence  sent  him  to  a
fortress  whither  his  son  Ahmad  ibn  Muhammad  followed  him  and
murdered  him.^  The  Government  of  Sultan  Mas'ud  ibn  Mahmud
lasted'  eleven  years,  but  we  ought  to  note  that  the  Qazi  Baizawi
(may  God’s  mercy  be  upon  him)  assigns  the  year  433  H.  as  the
date  of  the  death  of  MaS'iid,  and  writes  that  Muhammad  ibn
Mahmud  reigned  in  Ghazni  n for  fourteen  years  after  his  father,*
one  year  after  his  father’s  death,  nine  years  in  the  lifetime  of  his
brother,  and  four  years  after  his  brother’s  death,  as  has  already
been  stated.  God  alone  knows  the  truth.  Apparently  this  is  due
to  the  mistake  of  a copyist.  Among  the  poets  who  flourished  in

1 Nizimn-d-Din  Ahmsd,  author  of  the  Talaqdt-i-Akbari ; Elliott,  v.  177.

Died  1003  H.

* Baizawi ’a  account  is  as  follows  ; —

Mas'ud  after  his  arrival  at  Ghaznin  sent  Yusuf  to  prison  and  became
master  of  all  the  dominions  of  his  father.  In  his  time  the  Seljuqs  crossed
the  Jihun  nnd  invaded  Khurasan.  He  fought  with  them  and  made  peace
with  them  several  times  bat  being  defeated  in  A.  H.  432,  he  returned  to
Ghaznin  where  his  brother  Muhammad  had  regained  power  in  his  absence.

On  his  arrival  he  was  consigned  to  a fort,  and  Ahmad,  the  son  of  Muhammad,
went  direct  from  his  father  to  the  fort,  and  there  slew  him,  A.  H.  433 ; Elliott
II.  256.

* That  is  from  421  A.  H.  to  434  A.  H.  with  interruptions  during  the  supre-
macy of  Mas'ud.  Mahmud  died  in  421  A.  H.  Mas'nd  iws  murdered  on  the
11th  of  Jamadi-nl-Awwal,  433  H.  (Raverty,  pp.  95-6.)

Hnhammad  was  put  to  death  by  Maudnd  in  revenge  for  his  father’s  murder
in  the  year  484  H.  Kandud  reigned  seven  years  and  died  in  441  H.  (1049  A.D.)

[ 46  ]

the  time  of  Sultan  Mas'iid  is  Manuchihri  ■*  who  speaks  as  follows
in  a qasiiiah  concerning  liis  Wazir.

Couplet.

Shah  Mas'ud  is  as  proud  of  his  rectitude
As  is  the  prophet  of  Naushirwan  ^ the  upright.

jSuLTAN  Macd6d  ibn  Mas'ud  ibn  Mahmijd,

Ascended  the  throne  of  Empire  (after  the  murder  of  his  father
in  Bamian*)  with  the  consent  of  the  Wazirs  and  Amirs,  and  with
the  object  of  avenging  his  father  purposed  to  march  towards
Mari  galah,  but  Abu  A'asr  Ahmad  ibn  Muhammad  ibn  Abdns
Samad  opposed  his  pi-ojected  expedition  and  brought  him  to
Ghaznin,  wlience  he  proceeded  with  a large  army  to  attack  his
uncle  the  blind  Amir  Muhammad.  On  arriving  at  Dipur*  he  en-
gaged in  a severe  battle  with  the  Amir  Muhammad  and  thus
31.  passed  the  whole  day  till  nightfall  v/hen  both  fell  back  upon  their
positions.  The  next  day  Sultan  Maudiid  induced  the  Amir  Saiyyid
Mansur  who  was  one  of  the  trusted  (generals)  of  the  Amir
Muhammad  to  side  with  him,  and  engaging  in  battle  took
prisoners  the  Amir  Muhammad  and  his  son  AhmW  and  put  them
all  to  death.  The  Amir  Maudiid  founded  there  a city  which  he

^ Manuchihri  Dima^Sni.  Hakim  Abunnajm  Abmacl,  a pnpil  of  the
poet  ‘Unsuri,  whom  he  is  said  to  have  surpassed  in  sweetness  and  facility  of
e.vpression.  He  was  called  shaft  galla  because  of  his  possessing

numerous  flocks  and  herds.  He  died  in  432  H.  (Jlajma’-ul-Fusahs).

6 Naushirwan.  Chosroes  I son  of  Kobad,  one  of  the  Sassanide  dynasty,
ruled  over  Persia  from  531  A.  D.  to  579  A.  D.  (See  Diet.  G.  and  B.  B.,  p.  720,
Vol.  III).  The  prophet  Muhammad  was  bom  in  the  fortieth  year  of  his
reign,  April '20th,  571  (Sprenger)  or  August  20th,  570  A.  D (Gaussin  de  Per-
ceval I.  283).  Muhammad  used  to  boast  of  his  good  fortune  in  having  been
born  during  the  reign  of  so  just  a king.  Cf.  D’Herbelot  III.  57.

1 Bamian.  “•  Situated  ten  days’  march  from  Balkh  and  eight  from  Ghaznin.
There  is  a bnilding  there  of  a prodigious  height  ornamented  with  paintings
of  ail  the  birds  created  by  God,  and  containing  two  enormous  images  called
Sur"^  hud,  the  Bed  idol,  and  Khing  httd,  the  White  idol.”

Meynard,  Diet,  de  la  Perse,  p.  80.

Abul  Feda  II.  ii.  203,  between  Balldi  and  Ghaznin.  The  district  in  which
Ghaznin  and  Kabnl  are  situated.

> Text  has  Deipur  (MS.  A Dinur).  For  the  locality  of  this  place,

see  Raverty  96,  note  2 'The  name  is  in  all  likelihood  Dinur  as  in  Baihaqi.

[ ]

named  Fathabad.  ^ This  victory  was  gained  in  the  month  Slia'baii
of  the  year  432  H.,  or  according  to  another  account  in  the  year
434  H.  * And  in  the  year  433  H.  being  angry  with  Ehwaja
Ahmad  ibn  Abdus  Samad  he  imprisoned  him  in  Ghiaznin  where  he
died  in  prison,  and  in  this  same  year  he  sent  Abii  Nasr  Muham-
mad bin  Ahmad  towards  Hindustan  to  fight  with  Nami  ibn
Muhammad  ^ and  Nami  was  killed  in  the  coarse  of  that  war.
And  in  the  year  434  H.  Artagin  at  the  order  of  the  Sultan
proceeded  with  an  army  to  Tabaristan  against  Da'ud  * the  Turko-
man, and  having  lost  in  battle  a large  number  of  his  men  came  to
Balkh  and  established  the  coinage  and  proclamation  of  sovereignty
in  the  name  of  the  Amir  Maudiid.  Afterwards  when  the  Turko-
mans attacked  him  several  times  in  force  not  being  able  to  con-
tend with  them,  he  quitted  Balkh  and  came  to  Ghaznin.  Then
in  the  year  435  H.  Amir  Maudiid  imprisoned  Abii  ‘Ali  the  Kotwal
of  Ghaznin  for  a time,  but  eventually  appointed  bim  as  the  Diwan
of  the  kingdom  and  Kotwal  of  Ghaznin.  and  imprisoned  Tasiiid
ibn  lyamghui'  the  Diwan,  till  at  length  he  died  in  confinement ;
he  also  punished  Altigin  ^ and  in  the  year  43fi  H.  Khwaja  Tahir
who  had  succeeded  Khwaja  Ahmad  as  Wazir,  died,  and  was
succeeded  by  Khwaja  Ima^  Abul  Fath  ‘Abdur  Razzaq.  ® In  this
same  year  he  sent  Tughral  Hajib  in  the  direction  of  Bust,  who
took  prisoner  Abii  Mansur  Zangi,  ^ the  brother  of  Abul  Fazl  and
brought  him  to  Ghaznin,  he  then  departed  for  Seistan  and  having

i Raverty  96,  note  2.

* The  latter  date  must  be  the  correct  one  as  Mas‘ud  was  not  put  to  death
till  433  A.  H.  See  note  3,  page  45.

The  Tarikh-i-Mas‘udL  however,  writes  as  follows  : —

E J J

)'i  J Ij  4^^*^  J 1)  j

See  Thomas’  Coins  of  kings  of  Ghaznin,  J.  B.  A.  S.j  lx.  279.

5 Firishta  describes  him  as  the  sou  of  the  Blinded

Mnhammad.

^ See *710/6  1,  p.  38.

^ Alptigin  Hajib.

6 Grandson  of  Hasan  Maimandi.

7 Firishta  says  also  Zangi,  Briggs  in  his  translation  has  said  “ Oozbuky/'

[ ]

32.  engaged  in  conflict  ■with  the  Torkomuns  at  the  Ribat  Amir,*  put
most  of  them  to  death  after  which  victory  he  went  to  Garm  Sir,
where  he  pnt  to  death  the  Turkomans  of  that  district  who  were
known  as  Red-caps*  and  took  many  of  them  prisoner,  and  brought
them  to  Ghaznin.

In  the  year  438  H.,  he  sent  Tughral  to  Takinabdd  who  on
arrival  there  revolted.  Accordingly  Ali  bin  Rabi‘  was  nominated
to  proceed  thither  and  Tnghral  fled  with  a few  followers.  Ali
plundered  his  army,  and  having  captured  some  of  them  brought
them  to  Ghaznin.  In  the  year  439  H.  the  Aaair  Qazdar  raised
a rebellion  ® and  suffered  defeat  at  the  hands  of  Hajib  Buznrg
Bartagln  * and  after  a time  tendered  his  submission.

And  in. the  year  440  H.  having  conferred  upon  his  two  sons  Ahnl
Qasim  Mahmiid  and  Mansur  on  the  same  day  robes  of  honour  and  the
drum  and  ensigns  of  commission  sent  one  of  them  towards  Lahore
and  the  other  towards  Parshur  * and  he  sent  Abu  Ali  Hasan
Kotwal  of  Ghaznin  to.Hindnstiin  to  punish  the  rebels  there,  and
when  Hasan  returned  to  Ghaznin  after  having  done  good  service
Maudud  made  him  over  to  Mirsk  ibn  ^asan  with  orders  to  im-
prison him.  He  died  in  prison.  As  a sequel  to  this,  Mirak  ibn
Hasan  the  Vakil  who  had  murdered  Abii  ‘Ali  Hasan  without  the
orders  of  Amii'  Maudiid  and  had  kept  it  secret,  incited  the  King  to

1 Firishta  Ribat  Amir,  Long.  105,  Lat.  3i,  Ahi-i-Aliiari  (J.)  iii.  68.

Both  MSS.  have

* Firishta  also  says  j-  and  does  not  mention  the  word
though  Briggs  translates  “ called  Kuzil  Bash,  owing  to  their  wearing  red
caps”  Briggs,  Yol.  I , p.  121.  Qizil  Bed  is  Turkish  Bash.  Head  is

Turki.

3 In  one  copy  we  find  Firishta  has  the  following

so  we  should  read  here  ‘Vjll

4 According  to  Firishta  MS.  (A)  reads  Biitigm,  MS.

(B)  reads  BibtigiD.  Briggs  says,  “In  the  year  439  he  was  sent

against  Khoozdar,  the  ruler  of  which  paid  the  usual  tribute  ” but  in  the
original  of  Firishta  .ve  find  these  words  :

■♦rhich  looks  as  if  Amir  Qazdar  was  his  name.  Elliott  V.  App,,

p 558,  states  “ Ku.sdar  lies  to  the  south  of  Bust,  and  is  the  present  ^huzdar
of  our  maps  the  capital  of  Jlialawan  in  Biluchistan.’*

See  pp.  557-559  from  which  the  above  is  quoted,

5 Parshur,  the  modern  Peshawar,  called  originally  Parashawara.  Cunn.
Auc.  Geog.  of  India,  p.  78,

[ 4y  ]

proceed  to  Kabul  so  that  that  misdeed  of  his  might  remain
concealed.  When  the  Amir  Mandiid  reached  the  fortress  of  Sialkot*
he  was  attacked  with  colic*  and  was  forced  to  return  to  Ghaznin,  and  33.
ordered  Mirak  to  release  Abii  Ali  Kotwal.  He  accordinglj-  prayed
for  a week’s  respite,  and  in  the  interim  Amir  ilaudud  departed
this  life  on  the  24th  of  Rajab  A.  H.  441,  haring  reigned  nearly
nine  years.  The  Luhhu-t-Tawdi  ikh  * states  that  Sultan  ^Maudiid
asked  in  marriage  the  daughter  of  Chnghz*  Beg  Saljiiqi,  by
whom  he  had  a son  whom  he  named  Mas'iid,  that  he  reigned  seven
years,  and  that  in  the  month  of  Rajab  411  he  attempted  to  go  to
Khorasan  to  visit  Chughz  Beg,  but  died  on  the  journey  of  colic.

1 Firiahta  writes  Sankot.  Both  MSS.  read  very  plainly

written.

probably  intestinal  obstruction  which  is  inelucled  under  tlie  ter.in
Qulinj  of  which  there  are  stated  by  Sadidi  to  be  fire  varieties.  Cf.
Sadidi  drf.

i True  or  apumodic  colic.

ii  Obctruotire  colic — due  as  he  says  to  an  aocnmu-

lation  of  or  mncns  in  the  coeeuin  or  colon,
iii  Flatolent  colic.

iy  aASCIi  j ho  j Ojb  j\  An  acnte  or

chroiuo  swelling  of  the  bowels  and  neighbour-
ing parts  such  as  the  liver  and  kidneys.

V I Twisted  colic  which  he  defines  as  a twitt  of  the

distal  end  of  the  small  intestine.  Volvulus.

In  the  we  dud  the  following  definition  of  the  disease  A

disease  in  which  the  bowels  become  disarranged  on  account  of  some  un-
natoral  obstruction  ( ) It  is  very  painful  and  increases

in  violence  and  is  fatal.”

Defining  the  Colon  the  author  says  : J

Colic  principally  arises  in  this  bowel  and  is  a strangulation  of  part  of  it.

8 Lubbu-t-Taivdrikh,  “ The  marrow  of  History.  " The  author  was  Yahya
ibn  ‘Abdnl  Latif  Qazwini  who  composed  it  in  1541  A.D.

He  died  18  Dec.  1552.  See  H.K.  iu65«-<-Tau'ari'W  also  Elliott,  Vol.  iv.  p.  293,

* Jaghar  Beg.  See  Kaverty  Tabaqat-i-Ndsiri  p.  97,  notes  3-4.

MS.  (A  ) Chacliar  Beg.  MS.  (B)  Cha^s  Beg.

7

C 50  ]

ScLTAN  Mas'iJd  IBS  MaITDIJD  IBS  MaS'IJD  IBS  MigMUD.

Ascended  the  throne  in  the  third  year  of  his  age  by  the  machi-
nations of  ‘Ali  ibn  Rabi‘,  however  his  affairs  did  not  prosper  and
they  raised  his  uncle  to  the  throne  after  he  had  reigned  only  five
months.

SuLTAS  ‘Ai.i  IBN  ilAS‘dD  iBK  MahmiSd.

Ascended  the  throne  by  the  consent  of  the  nobles,  and  when
‘Abdn-r-Razzaq  ibn  Ahmad  Maimandi  who  had  been  sent  by  the
Amir  Mandiid  towards  Seistan  arrived  at  a fort  between  Bust
and  Isfirar,®  and  learned  that  Abdn-r-Rashid  ibn  Mahmud  was
confined  in  that  fort  by  the  orders  of  the  Amir  Mandud,  he  brought
him  back  and  placed  him  upon  the  throne,  ‘All  having  reigned
for  a period  of  about  three  months.  This  event  took  place  in  the
year  443  H.  (1051  A..D.)

Si;lt.ax  ‘Aedl'-e-Rashid  ibn  Mahmud.

34.  Came  to  the  throne,  and  with  the  consent  of  ‘Abdn-r-Razzaq
proceeded  to  Ghaznin.  ‘Ali  ibn  Ma3‘ud  fled  without  engaging  in
bhttle,  and  Tughral  Ilajib  who  was  one  of  the  household  slaves
of  Sultan  Mahmiid  having  conquered  Seistan  turned  his  steps
towards  Ghaznin.  Amir  ‘Abdu-r-Rashid  fortified  himself  there
till  Tughral  obtaining  an  opportunity  in  the  year  445  H.  (1053
A.  D.)  put  the  Amir  Aodur  Ra.-j.nid  with  all  the  descendants
of  Sultan  Mahmud  to  death  and  married  the'  daughter  of
Mas'ud  against  her  will.  One  day  when  he  was  on  the  throne
a body  of  determined  wrestlers  inspired  with  hatred  against  him
tore  him  to  pieces.  ‘Abdu-r-Rashid  s reign  lasted  for  four  years.

^ The  account  given  Lr  t irislita  cliiTer?  slightly  from  t‘.i3 — he  says — that
on  the  death  of  ^lairiud ‘Ah  ibn  llalji' vho  laid  claim  to  the  throne  placed
hlasud  the  son  of  Jl.tnducl.  v.-i.o  w.e,  rhen  a boy  of  four  years  of  age,  npon
the  throne  of  Ghaznin  ; this  Krrar.g.?nierit  was  opposed  by  Bashtigin  Hajib
who  fought  with  ‘Ah  ibn  Kabi‘ whereup-n  the  whole  populace  of  Ghaznin
rose  in  arms,  and  eventually  Baslit  gin  H ijib  succeeded  in  deposing  Maa'ud
ibn  Mandud  after  a reign  of  five  or  si.x  days,  raising  his  uncle  Abul  Hasan
‘All  to  the  throne.  Compare  also;  T^baqat-i-SdnirC  (Ravertv.  p.  97  and  foot-
note).

' ‘V  l'‘ri'?hta  says  Isfirain  which  is  in  the  neighbourhood

of  Kishapur.  see  Meynard.  p.  34.  fAbul  I tela  n.  ii.  188).

8 4i  if  peopie  i!l.  fFir-hra).

[ 51  :

but  iu  the  N'lzain ii-t-Ta u-drilch.  his  reigri  is  said  to  hare  lasted  for
seven  years,  ^ and  in  the  Lnbhti-t-T'j !>-arikh_  \ii<  is  said  to

have  occurred  in  the  year  445  H.  (4od  knows  th-,-  Tiuth.

ScLTAS  Faerukh  Zai)  ibn  'L'-'ud  rr.y  3Iah:>:l’d.

Beins  released  from  confinement  succeeded  to  the  kiuKdom  hr
consent  of  the  nobles.  A body  of  Saljuiis  c.inie  up  affainst
Ghaznin.  and  Farrukhzad  put  most  o.^  them  to  deatli  and  oveic.,!ue
them,  and  made  many  of  them  prisoners  and  sent  them  to  Ghaznin.

Alp  Ar.siilan  2 the  Saljiiq  king  broimht  an  army  against  Ghaznin
from  ‘Iraq  and  IOlorii:^an,  and  being  victorious  in  fight  conveyed  a
large  number  of  the  notables  of  Ghu/.nin  to  Kliorasan.  Eventually
upon  the  arrangement  of  terms  of  peace  the  pvi.soners  of  both  35.
sides  obtained  their  release,  and  since  Zabuli.'tan  had  been  laid
waste  the  Sultan  remitted  the  usual  tribute,  and  treated  the  in--
habitfints  with  kindness.  He  used  to  fast  three  months,  and  used
to  spend  the  greater  part  of  the  night  in  juv-qi  er.  He  died  of
colic  in  the  year  450  H.  ^ The  period  of  his  reign  was  .sLx.  jears

SAiTYipr-s-f'.ir..fT[it  Ibrahim  ibn  Mas'ud  ibx  Mahmud.

Ascended  the  inrone.  He  was  a just  and  devout  king,  and
used  to  write  each  3'ear  a Quran  with  his  own  hand  and  de.spatcli
it  to  the  holy  city  of  Mekka.  He  built  no  hou.se  for  him.self
with  the  exception  of  a temple  and  a school  to  the  honour  and
glory  of  God.  When  the  affairs  of  .state  «kvol red  upon  him,  ho
made  peace  with  the  Saljuqs  and  Lilng  free  I'roi'i  appreliension,
went  to  Ilindustiiu  and  conquered  many  fortre.sses  and  districts.

• Firisuia  says  “ less  than  one  year.”  Tcfc.i]  [-i-ydx'ii  savs  two  and  a half
years.

* Alp  Arsalan  son  of  Baud,  son  of  Mikail  son  of  .Saiiiiq  was  the  second

Sultan  of  the  family  and  dynasty  of  the  He  succeeded  his  uuclo

Tughral  Beg  in  455  A.H.  (1063  A.D.)  He  was  burn  in  421  A.H.  and  was  mur-
dered 406  -A  H.  and  Vvas  buried  at  Jlorv.

For  a full  account  of  this  }>rince  see  D Ilerbolot,  pp.  19'‘i-203.

See  also  Ihn  Khanicpiii  (.‘slaile)  lii  23U  .uid  sc  e; ; wbric  it  is  stated  that  t;i
Arsalan  was  born  in  the  year -4-24  t.A.D.  1032-3/  aiid  uied  /ui  the  loth  t.l
llabi‘ii-i  .\wwal  465  A.  H.  (1072  A.D  }

a Firislita  mentions  that  a year  pre-nnis  to  his  deatii  an  aLteuq/t  ^^as  ir  tdo
upon  bis  life  while  he  tvas  in  the  haium  lui  .-j***”***''-*

/j-

r -s  '

-A**

i

[ 52  1

From  one  c’lty  ^ the  inliahitants  of  which  were  of  Kimrasaniau
descent,  whom  (Afrasiab)-  had  expelled,  and  who  had  become  a
populoas  community  in  Hindustan,  he  took  prisoners  a hundred
thotisand  persons,  2 and  sent  them  to  Ghazuin,  with  other  spoils
on  the  same  scale.  He  built  a number  of  towns,  among  them
lOjairabad,  and  Imanabad  and  others.  He  has  been  described  by
the  title  of  Sniyyidu-s-Salatin.  and  enjoyed  the  reputation  of  being
a Wali.  2 111  his  reign  in  Ghaznin.  the  Darii-i-Chashm  (eye  medi-

cine ) and  other  mixtures  ar.d  medicaments  and  dietai  ies  for  all
36.  diseased  folk  used  to  be  obtainable  from  his  store-house.  His
death  took  place  in  the  year  472  after  a reign  of  thirty
j-eais.  Qazi  Baizawi  says  that  his  reign  extended  from  the  year
4.70  H.  to  the  year  492  H.  Mas'iid  Sa'd  Salman  ilourislied
in  Ids  time  and  the  following  verses  are  taken  from  an  ode  which
wa.s  written  in'hi.s  honour.

• Named  " Darro.’’  (Finslita)  where  we  read  ^

In  unr  author’s  text  we  read b J which  is

eiideiitlv  corrupt.  The  words  in  t)io  Tuha.jdt  Stu'hi  are  almost  iden-

tical with  those  quoted  from  Firi&hta  and  some  such  change  as  the  substitu-
tion of  the  word  v***“Lr*l  for  the  words  — hich  may  easily  have

flriiOii  from  ii  ounyiat^s  iui8t3.1^c^  - - — >o»»r)-  i-rj  oui*  toxr.  (^iSS.  (A.)

ati'!  aru  hkt'  the  te.xt)

^ ti.Gv  wc'Vi*  idolaters  and  refused  to  embrace  iBlam,  according  to

Fin.'  la.

^ J Wall.  Abul  Fazl  'Acf2-i-Akbarz)  fJarrett)  iii.  350  gives  tlie  following
dt.iiiiLUuu  of  a wuh  - “In  ancient  works  many  signilications  lia\e  been  given
tke  outcome  of  which  is  that  it  means  one  who  has  attained  to  the  know-

loanrp  of  the  Supreme  : a iofiy  soul  will  indeed  love  God  alone

A "’ft  in  my  opn:.  ui  is  one  who  acquires  fuur  great  virtuc.s  and  avoids
eiu’iit  leprehen?!'-).  • ilo  t-hould  always  wuL'e  a \ ic^t -rl' ‘U o uar  by

Circumspect  dm  nt.iin«r  the  myriad  disorders^  of  tlxe  snir't  a .d  never  for

instant  relax  hir  u ' ntion  from  i’’*  deceits.  This  h-Uty  s-utibui  nnain-
ah[fy  oy  the  gr-  . t God-  and  th*^  guidance  of  foi  tune  aru-l  '■  n < Li’  n > to
'o<-  rt-Bched  t _ clic  Bpnit-ial  piiwers  of  a iiietliwil'u . ai;d  m’i .•>  imes
Wiroout  11

Fi: hta  ^avr

' u«i  >

of  KIco.'i  ^

-1^2  II.  or  *492  II.  Ticbt>  idi-tStimri  492  11  u!  a rt.igu  o:

- -h.n  J.. I jail'  Known  -cM'-f  f .e-i  as  Ka-  t ’■  T\  o
--  -it--  *■  poet  e or  JuMUa  .h',*  ,l.  .

[ 53  ]

Aljul  Qasim  Malik  Mahmud  Tbi-aliim'  ibn  Masbid
In  whom  four  things  exalt,  each  of  them  glories  in  him
Firstly,  his  expanded  canopy,  secondly,  his  flaunting  banner,
Thirdly  his  golden  pen,  fourthly  his  brilliant  dagger.

This  ode  he  finished  completely  in  the  same  style,  and  in  another
place  he  says  ; —

Emperor  of  the  higher  .world,  from  the  blessings  of  whose
reign

The  sword’s  lofty  occupation  is  the  control  of  things  tem-
poral and  spiritual.

Mas'dd  (Fortunatus)  becan.se  from  the  fortune  of  the  ex
pause  of  kingdom’s  conquest

He  has  gone  beyond  that  which  comes  within  the  scope  of
the  sword.

Ode.

Ob  thoti  that  bast  formed  the  design  of  travel  and  girded
the  loins  of 'conquest.

Right  and  left  of  thee  the  heavens  have  opened  for  thee  the
doors  of  conquest,

Mas'iid,  the  world- conquering,  for  whom  the  age  of  fortune
Has  sent  forth  every  moment  the  heralds  of  conquest,

Like  a lance  point  thou  hast  placed  thy  head  in  the  direc-
tion of  battle,

Like  an  arrow  thy  waist  girds  up  the  loins  of  conquest,

In  sooth,  % hundred  victories  thou  winnest,  and  a hundred
■ years  hence

In  Hindustan  in  all  directions  will  be  seen  the  traces  of  thy  37.
conquest.

So  many  are  thy  conquests,  that  in  the  expanse  of  the  world
Every  day  in  every  place  they  tell  the  tale  of  thy  conquests.

high  distinction  in  t'ne  service  of  Mas‘ud  bin  JlahmiiJ  ar.cl  Sultan  Ibrahim
of  ^aznin  but  was  imprisoned  for  a time  in  the  fortress  oi  Hai  owing  to  the
.spiteful  rancour  of  Abul  Faraj  Rani.  He  obtained  his  release  upon  the  death
of  Mas'iid  ibn  Mahmud.  He  was  however  again  made  prisoner  for  some  years
and  upon  being  released  left  the  court  and  went  into  retirement  in  Ghaznm
where  he  died.  There  ia  a very  long  account  of  him  with  copious  extracts
from  his  various  poems  in  the  Majma'ul  Fnsaha,  Voi.  I.  pp.  514  and  se.j?.
See  also  Beale  (O.B.D.  p.  173.)  and  Atashkada-i-Acur,  p 162,

Thy  spear  and  thy  arrow  and  thy  sword  will  he
If  my  fanev  limns  a line,  the  painter  of  the  forms  of  con-
quest

'When  thy  sword  said  I will  deal  a light  blow
Its  oath  lay  not  heavy  save  on  the  head  of  conquest.

The  TJstad  Ahul  'Faraj  Runi  ^ too  was  eulogist  of  Sultan
Ibrahim,  and  abo  the  panegyrist  of  Sultan  Mas'iid,  and  many  odes
in  their  honour  ;ae  to  be  found  in  his  Diwan,  and  Eiiin  * is  the
name  of  a village  of  the  dependencies  of  Lahore,  and  in  these
dia  s_  it  is  as  one  may  say  in  ruins,  because  not  a trace  of  it
reinuins,  and  the  following  in  praise  of  Sultan  Ibrahim  is  by

the  L'stad  Abnl  Faraj.

Hail  to  the  might  of  thy  powerful  sword

Precious  as  the  breath  of  life,  and  rare  as  wisdom  itself.

Thou  hast  imprisoned  that  lifeless  one,  as  one  seizes  the
throat,

Thou  ha-t  made  oi'phan  this  which  has  no  issue  Uke  a
peeib, '.s  pearl.

And  ilas'ud  Sail  Salnnin  with  that  envious  nature  which  is
peculiar  to  poets,  bore  a grudge  against  L^stad,  who  became  the
cause  of  Mas'uu's  imprisonment  for  ten  years,  he  wrote  this  ruba‘1
((quatrain)  in  piison.^

- -tbul  J jt’T' 1 a .'-‘I,  b’Ti' i.j  poet.  The  name-  Kilni  is  from  the  Tillage

!■-  i.,nnri  ^ A.jj  1 j,,  yisopur.  li,  as  a groat  favourite  and  companion  of

Milrin  IbrahiTr.,  am  ne  leaiii  ll--*'.  tf.i-  ud  fta'd  fSalmau  Jurjuni  that  lie  fell
ui.'ior  the  dij-iilea*.  of  ths-t  kirii^  aud  was  imprisoned  in  the  fortress  of  Isai
ti,.-  caluiiiif/  -‘I  Ahii!  Faruj,  as  is  ptated  in  the  text  a few  lines  further
< e Ahul  FaiTi’  iA'-’i  for  poiiie  time  at  Lahore,  so  that  he  is  known  to  a few
1 ’ -•  - .-rF  ri5/s  were  very  eieofant  and  served  as  a model  for  the

p cl  Aknwiii  .1  l->  ‘-an  of  hi-  containing  about  2,000  verses  is  extant.
iM.i-inn’ul  Fii',uh  1.  T*’;  St-  also  ArasJtkada'i'Aiur^  pp.  137,  138.

i Bcthe  {()  B.D  . p.  15'»  says  cl. at  he  came  from  Kuna  place  near  Lahore.”
'I  V m'iM  appf 'ir  rroLii  the  t *xt  ah'we  that  Badaoni  attributed  his  name  of
liiui’  U)  Ills  v.irh  ih>‘  \ij]atr<*  of  Ruin.  The  author  of  the  Majuia'ul

P\.- i ..li  L-ivt  s ’ I ’-.'inTy  fur  the  -uitement  above  quoted  so  that  it  is  diffi.
^ ' li.  I 111  ■ ' . .1'*  the  plao**3  i'’  to  be  given  the  honour.

^ -■  ' -i  .11  tie  year  572  H.  by  Mahmud  ibn  Ibrahim  in

ih  lui'.icsr  i I.,  u’- Fu-aha  toc.  cit.).  See  note  5,  page  52.

L 55  ]

For  thy  prison  such  a prisoner  as  Malik  Sliah  is  necessary
So  that  thy  fetter  may  chafe  the  foot  of  monarchs.i
That  one  who  springs  from  the  loins  of  Sa‘d  Salman
Even-were  he  a serpent  would  not  sting  thy  realm.

The  following  verses  are  also  by  him  :

My  heart  has  become  rent  in  all  directions  like  a comb  from
regrets

Because  I saw  a white  hair  in  the  tooth  of  the  comb.

There  are  extant  also  JJlwans  by  him  in  Arabic,  PersisCn  and
Hindi.

‘Alau-d-Din  MAS‘tfD  iBN  Ibrahim  ibn  Slltan  MAS'tfo,

Succeeded  after  the  death  of  hi.s  father  and  died  in  the  year
508  H.  (1114  A.  D.),  having  reigned  seventeen  years.

Sultan  Sherzad  ibn  Mas'iJd  ibs  Ibrahim,*

By  his  father’s  order  became  king,  and  reigned  for  one  year.

His  brother  Arsalan  Shah  revolted  against  him  and  killed  him  in
the  year  509  H.  (1115  A.  D.}

'Sultan  Arsala'n  Sh.aii  ibn  Mas'lId  ibx  Ibrahim,

Ascended  the  throne  of  sovereignty  and  seited  upon  the  whole  39.
of  his  brothers  with  the  exception  of  Babrarfi  Shah  who  fled  and
.went  to  Sultan  Sinjar  * who  was  the  son  of  his  maternal  uncle.  *

In  spite  of  all  the  apologies  for  Bahram  Shah  which  Sultan  Sinjar

1 Oj!A  13  tsb  y OAJ 13  ms.  (A).

8 Cf.  Ravertv.  Tabaqdt-i-Ndsirt,  page  107,  note  7.  Firishta  also  mentions
the  accession  of  Kamaln-d-Danlah  Sherzad,  and  calls  the  preceding-  monarch
^Alau-d'Danlah  also  Elliott  II.  278.

8 Sultan  Sisijar  Muizzuddizi  Abul  Haris  Sinjar  was  the  third  son  of  Sultan
Malik  Shah  and  the  last  of  the  Salji'iq  dynasty  in  Khurasan.  He  was  bom
A.  H.  479  (1086'A.  D.)  in  the  environs  of  Sinjar  and  it  was  on  account  of  this
circumstance  that  he  received  this  name.  See  I.  K.  CSliine)  I.  tJ'JO.  He
governed  the  province  of  Khurasan  for  20  years.  He  died  in  552  A.  H.,  at
Merv  of  a “ coiique  compliquee  avec  un  devoyeijaent.”  D'Herbelot.

See  also  Beale  (O.B.D.,  p.  236).

* The  sister  of  Sultan  Sinjar  called  “ 3Iahd-i-‘Iraq”  was  married  to  ‘Alau-d-
Din  Mas'ud  father  of  Sultan  Arsalan  Shah.  Cf.  Kaverty  Tabarjdt-iSdsiri,
p.  107,  note  6.

[ 56  J

40

Made  the  subject  of  several  letters,  Arsalan  Sbah  would  not
listen  to  him,  and  eventually  Sultan  Siiyar  raised  an  army  against
him.  He  gave  battle  with  thirty  thousand  cavalry  and  being
defeated  went  to  Hindustan.  Sultan  Sinjar  remained  forty  days
in  Ghaznin  and  after  presenting  that  country  to  Bahram  Shah
retraced  his  steps.  Arsalan  Shah  having  collected  a large  army  in
Hindustan  proceeded  thence  to  attack  Ghaznin,  and  Bahram  Shah
not  being  able  to  withstand  him  sought  refnge  in  the  fortress
of  Bamian  and  with  the  assistance  of  Sultan  Sinjar  having  again
seized  Jghaznfn  and  taken  Arsalan  Shah  captive  put  him  to  death
in  the  year  510  H.  (1116  A.  D,).  The  reign  of  Arsalan  Shah  had
lasted  for  a period  of  seven  years.  i

Sultan  BAEiiAU  Sjiah  ibn  Mas'^d  ibn  IbbahIm

Succeeded  to  the  throne.  Hakim  Sanai  * was  his  panegyrist.
Kalilah  Damnah  and  many  other  books  were  composed  in'  his
reign  and  on  the  day  of  his  accession  Saiyyid  Hasan  Ghaznavi  ®
declaimed  an  ode'  of  which  this  is  the  opening  couplet.

A shout  went  forth  from  the  seven  heavens,  saying
“ Bahram  Shah  is  Lord  of  the  world.”

And  this  ode  he  wrote  in  his  honour,  and  despatched  it  from
the  sacred  city  of  iiekka.

Should  it  ever  be  that  I again  behold  the  face  of  the  king
I will  apply,  as  a thank-offering,  the  dust  of  his  feet  to
both  my  eyes

1 This  account  differs  from  that  .given  in  other  authors.  The  Tahaqdt-i-
jra^iri  says  that  Arsalan  Shah  died  in  511  H.,  after  a reign  of  two  years.
Firiahta  says  tliree  years.  Baizawi  gives  512  A.  H.,  as  the  year  in  which
Arsalan  Shih  was  pat  to  death.  (D’Herbelot).

8 Abu  MaSammad  ibn  Adam  Sanair  died  525  A.  H.,  A.  D.  ^1130  (H.  K.).
A celebrated  poet,  author  of  the  Had'i'qatu-l-Haqiqnt,  a Persian  poem  com-
monly known  as  Fakhi't-ndmalu  Among  his  other  woyks  were  :

. aUib  (Jrc  - ^ - 0U4J1  ^'1  iWf (3^

According  to  Majma'n-l-Fnsaha  (I.  254)  he  died  iu  690  A.  H.  but,  see  note  1
p.  36.

* Ashrafu-d-Din  Basan  ibn  Ifasiri-l-'Alavi,  died  565  II.  Majma‘a-1-I'usaha  I,
192.

[ 57  ]

Bahrain  Shah  for  whom  may  the  lives  of  emperors  be  the
ransom.

May  it  be  that  their  lives  are  even  worthy  of  the  king
The  planets  of  the  sky  fall  like  meteors,  if  they  but  place
a foot  outside  the  boundary  of  fidelity  to  the  king.

Another.

Bahram  Shah  from  desire  of  whose  sweet  honied  name
The  young  tree  of  the  kingdom  hereafter  brings  forth
parrots,  (poets).

And  the  Hadiqatu-l-Haqiqat  * of  Shaikh  Sanai  is  written  in
honour  of  Bahram  Shah,  it  was  written  during  his  imprison-
ment, the  reason  of  which  imprisonment  was  Ghaznevide  fana-
ticism wjth  regard  to  Stinni  doctrine,  when  this  book  having
reached  the  capital  of  Baghdad  received  the  impriniatitr  of  the
chief  men  and  nobles,  it  attested  the  reality  of  his  faith,  and
they  wrote  a memorandum  which  led  to  his  being  released.  A
short  time  subsequently  he  departed  this  life.  It  is  said  that
when  they  accused  the  worthy  Shaikh  Sanai  of  heresy  after  he
composed  the  Hadiqat,  he  wrote  the  following  letter  to  the
Sultan  Bahram  Shah.

In  the  name  of  God  the  merciful,  the  compassionate  :

Praise  be  to  God  the  Lord  of  the  worlds,  and  blessings  upon
the  best  of  His  created  beings,  Muhammad,  his  family  and  com-
panions all  of  them.  To  proceed,  it  is  said  in  certain  traditionary
sayings,  that  two  things  tend  to  prolong  life,  and  to  cause  rain  to
fall  and  trees  to  grow,  one  of  these  is  to  assist  the  oppressed — the
other  to  repress  the  tyrannical.  An  argument  which  they  have
advanced  in  support  of  this  is  that  the  prophet,  may  the  •peace
find  blesHng  of  God  be  upon  him,  declared  that  the  heavens  are
established  by  righteousness  (equity).  Equity  is  like  the  bird  *
which,  wherever  it  casts  its  shadow,  secures  an  amplitude  of

1 The  work  mentioned  in  note  2 page  56.  Its  fall  title  is  Hadiqdtu-l-
Haqiqat  wa  8han‘atu-fTariqat  (hortus  verttatid  ei  lex  xise),  and  it  treated
among  other  subjects  of  the  Imams  Abu  Hanifa  and  Shafi'i,  the  founders
respectively  of  the  Hanifite  and  Shafi'i  sects  of  Sunnis.

* j\  Uii  jj  jyJ  itjLa  1,^

No  one  would  go  under  the  shadow  of  the  owl,  even  if  the  Huma  were
extinct  from  the  world.  See  Boebuok.  Oriental  Proverbs  p.  327,  The  Ua
8

[ 58  j

wealth,  and  tbe  place  where  it  bnilds  its  nest  becomes  the  centre
of  durability,  and  rain  falls  from  the  heaven,  while  tyranny  and
oppression  is  as  a bird  ^ which,  wherever  it  flies,  leads  to  famine
and  life  and  modesty  are  lost  from  among  mankind.  And
God,  may  He  be  glorified  and  exalted,  preserves  the  Emperor  of
Islam,  and  the  just  king  Bahram  Shah  ibn  Mas'iid  Shah  ibn
Ibrahim  Shah  ibn  Mas‘ud  Shah  ibn  Mahmud  Shah,  from  iniquity
and  oppression,  and  although  the  whole  world  should  combine  to
write  and  describe  the  stock  and  supply  of  grateful  acknowledg-
ment of  this  slave’s  heart,  they  would  have  no  power  to  express
it,  and  the  tree  which  the  king  of  the  kingdom  planted  * for  the
discovery  of  the  secrets  of  the  unseen,  even  Gabriel  and  Michael  *
were  precluded  from  having  any  share  therein  : it  is  certain  that
in  all  circumstances  the  just  man  is  happy  and  the  tyi'ant  is
miserable,  and  the  worst  of  all  oppression  is  this  that  a small
party  should  read  a subject  and  not  understand  it,  but  become
arrogant  with  regard  to  it  and  loosen  tbe  tongue  of  censure  against
the  learned.  Hence  it  is  that  our  prophet,  may  the  peace  and
hleesing  of  God  be  upon  him,  said,  Pity  three  people,  a rich
man  who  has  become  poor,  the  great  man  of  a tribe  who  is  dis-
graced, and  a wise  man  among  foo!s.+  A book  which  is  written
in  the  language  of  the  learned  in  the  knowledge  of  God,  demands
an  acute  and  discriminating  mind  such  as  that  of  Bayazid  ^ and

Huma,  is  a fabulous  bird  of  good  omen  j it  is  supposed  that  every  head  it
lA'ersliadowa  wil)  ■wear  a crown*

1 Tho  1 on  the  other  hand  is  the  type  of  ill  omen.

e <J.  b ]J  tfji,  y,

Thou  art  a snake  biting  everyone  tl.ou  soe;=t,,  or  an  owl  tlostroying  every
place  where  thoa  alighteat.

agnn  j\i>S  OJ  jUj  Jpys  KaIj

O nightingalo  bring  the  glad  tidings  of  spring  and  leave  bad  news  to  the
ill  oint'i.L-J  owl.^  Jioei.iirk,  Oriental  Proverbs  pp.  110,  349.

S Espnuge  from  line  6 and  read  jl  ,

* By  this  tree  is  meant  the  lute  tree  of  Paradise  Sidratn-1-

Muuiahd,  See  Mislikat,  X.XIV.  vii.

Cf.  Quran  II.  90-95.

Batazid  .Vtisari  also  called  Pir  hoshan,  founder  of  a Sufi  sect,  called  the
U ;=l.a  .1-,  i.ih  ,,r  enlightened.  Beale  (O.B.D.,  p.  70).

-1  u'ooil  aeeiiunc  of  him  will  be  fonnd  in  The  Emperor  Akbar  by  Beverid"’e
Vui,  11  pp,  iy.j  ,,,  , ■

[ ]

Sliibli : 1 these  men  of  wisdom  who  read  that  book  and  appreciate
that  which  is  written  in  it,  but  who  have  not  the  slightest
trace  of  religious  knowledge,  it  must  be  from  spite  and  ignorance
that  they  find  fault  with  the  book,  and  this  is  a proof  of  their
blindness  of  heart  that  they  call  the  Al-i-Mai’wan  contemptible,
and  carry  their  eulogy  of  the  elect  family,  the  peace  and

blessing  of  God  be  upon  it,  beyond  bounds  whije  they  exalt  the
commander  of  the  faithful  ‘All,  may  God  he  merciful  to  him,
above  the  other  companions,  may  God  he  graciously  pleased  with
them,  and  they  do  not  see  that  lie  has  been  placed  below
Siddiq*  and  Pariiq  ^ and  Zu‘ Nurain  * on  the  ground  of  descent  42.
and  rightful  succession,  and  there  is  a true  story  related  of  the
Lord  of  the  Created  beings  Muhammad  Mnstafa,  may  the  peace
and  blessing  of  God  he  upon  him,  with  reference  to  the  vices  of
the  Al-i-Marwan  and  the  virtues  of  the  Al-i-Muhammad  Mnstafa,
may  the  peace  and  blessing  of  God  be  upon  him.  If  it  is  a lie,
and  most  people  believe  it  to  be  so,  reason  tells  ns  that  it  is  true,
and  the  word  of  the  trne  God  is  this,  “Oh  God,  adorn  the  world
with  those  learned  men  who  fear  thee  or  who  reverence  thy
people,  and  do  not  make  me  to  suffer  at  the  hands  of  those  who
ire  wanderers  from  the  path  of  thy  love,  for  thy  mercy’s  sake

1 Abd  Baler  Dolaf  Ibn  Jahdar  (or  Ja'far)  Ibn  Yunus  (his  name  is  thus
inscribed  on  his  tomb)  surnamed  As-Shibli,  a celebrated  saint  was  born  and
brought  up  at  Baghdad,  but  his  family  belonged  to  Khnrassn.  This  highly
respected  Sufi  followed  the  doctrines  of  the  sect  of  Malik  and  had  for
masters  Al-Junaid  and  the  other  holy  men  of  that  epoch.  As-Shibll  died  at
Baghdad,  A.  H.  334  (A.  D.  946),  and  was  interred  in  the  cemetery  of  AI-
Qaizuran.  He  was  born  at  Surra-man-raa  (Samarra  on  the  Eastern  bank
of  the  Tigris).  Shibli  means  belonging  to  Shibla  a village  in  the  dependencies
of  Osrushua,  a large  town  beyond  Samarqand  in  Transoxiaua.  I.  K.  (Slane)
1.  513.  See  also  regarding  Samarra  J-  K.  A.  S.  1895  p.  36.

* “ The  faithful.”  The  title  given  by  Muhammad  himself  to  the  first
Khalifah  Abu  Bakr,  who  reigned  two  years  and  died  A.D.  634  (A.H.  13).

S The  second  Khalifah  ‘Umar,  A.H.  13  to  A.H.  23.  Called  Fan'in  or  “ the
Discerner”  as  distinguishing  Truth  from  Falsehood  in  Islam.

4 Usman.  The  third  Khalifah.  A.H.  23  to  A.H.  35.  Called  Zu-^urain
‘ the  possessor  of  the  two  lights  ” because  he  married  two  of  the  Prophet’s
laughters,  Rnqaiyyah  and  Ummn  Kulsum.

The  above  three  Khalifahs,  the  first  three  successors  to  uhammad  accord-
ing to  the  Sunni  Muslims,  are  rejected  by  the  Bhi'ahs  w,  assert  that  ‘All
was  the  first  legitimate  successor,  tlie  others  iiaving  beeu  usurpers.

[ 60  j

and  for  thy  bounty  and  beneficence  oh  Thou  most  merciful,”  an^
this  Terse  is  from  the  Hadiqat.

If  the  earth  is  a fit  place  for  any  court

It  is  for  the  court  of  ^ahram  Shah  that  it  is  fitted.

Then  Sultan  Bahram  Shah  brought  up  several  armies  against
Hindustan  and  conquered  the  cities  which  his  forefathers  had  not
taken,  and  leaving  one  of  his  Amirs  of  high  rank  in  Hindustan
returned  to  Ghaznin.  That  Amir  revolted,  and  fought  a severe
battle  with  the  Sultan  in  the  vicinity  of  Multan,  and  a hitter  conflict
ensued  ; in  the  end  the  Sultan’s  enemy  fell  a prisoner  into  his  bands
and  was  put  to  death,  and  a second  time  the  country  of  Hindustan
came  into  his  possession,  and  ‘Alau-d-Din  Hasan  ibn  Husain  Suri
who  is  one  of  the  kings  of  Ghor  revolted  against  him  and  pro-
ceeded to  Ghaznin.  Bahram  Shah  fled  and  ‘Alau-d-Din  left  his
brother , Saif  n-d-Din  Suri  in  Ghaznin.  Bahram  Shah  returned
and  retook  Ghaznin,  and  having  seated  Saifu-d-Din  upon  a cow,
and  having  exposed  him  to  public  ridicule,  killed  him  in  the
worst  possible  way.  ‘Alau-d-Din  upon  hearing  this  news  was
most  distressed  and  made  for  Ghaznin  with  a huge  army — before
his  arrival  however  Bahram  Shah  had  reached  the  other  world
and  his  son  was  on  the  throne  in  his  stead.  ‘Alau-d-Din  by  way
of  avenging  bis  brother  carried  several  loads  of  the  earth  of
(jhaznin  to  Ghor*  and  set  rivers  of  blood  flowing,  he  is  according-
ly famous  in  his  own  country.  Bahram  Shah  left  this  world  in
the  year  547  H.  ( 1152  A.D.)  the  period  of  his  reitrn  was  thirty
two  years.

Mas‘ud  S‘ad  Salman  wrote  the  following  hexastich  in  praise  of
Bahram  Shah.

Bahram  Shah  became  the  world  conquering  king.

He  became  the  Sun  of  the  Age,  and  the  shadow  of  the  glory
of  God.

His  canopy  which  was  auspicious  became  the  glory  of  the
huma.®

1 Cf.  Eaverty,  Talaqdt-i-Ndfiri  p.  347  note  2.

* Cf.  rabaqat-i-yufij-j,  Kaverty  p.  356.  This  earth  was  mingled  with  the
blood,  of  certam  Saiyyids  whom  he  took  prisoner  from  Ghaznin,  and  from  it
•everal  towers  were  built  on  the  hills  of  Firuz  Koh.

» The  hW  is  according  to  the  ^ifcu-l-Lughat  “a  bird  which  eats  bones

God  be  He  ej'alted  and  glorified  became  his  guide.

That  polished  dagger  became  of  increasing  authority.

The  face  of  his  enemy  became  black  like  bis  canopy.

As  long  as  tlie  emperor  of  the  world  in  his  time  .sowed  the
seeds  of  justice,

Every  criminal  that  he  detected,  he  passed  over  his  crime,

If  the  sky  placed  his  praise  upon  the  running  water
The  flowing  water  retained  ^ his  image  like-  an  engraving  on
stone.

He  raised®  true  religion  and  justice  to  the  zenith.

The  Emperor,  dispenser  of  justice,  lover  of  truth,  and  defende'i’
of  the  faith.®

KfttTSEAB  Shah  ibn  Bahram  Shah.

Ascended  the  throne  after  his  father,  and  ‘Alau-d-Din  Husain
ibn  * Hasan  Ghori  came  up  against  him.  Khusrau  Shiih  fled  and
came  to  Lahore,  and.  occupied  himself  with  the  empire  of  Hin-  44.
dvistan,  and  when  ‘Alau-d-Din,  as  has  been  related,  returned  from
Ghaznin  successful,  he  went  back  and  recaptured  that  country,
and  after  that  the  tribe  of  G^uzz  ® seized  Sultan  Sinjar  he  turned
towards  Ghaznin.  Shusrau  Shah  was  not  able  to  withstand  him

and  its  shadow  falling  upon  any  one  ensures  his  attaining  royal  dignity.”

See  note  2 page  57.

1 MSS.fA)(B)  not  Ax.it  ^ as  in  the  text,

S Ax^\^  ^

MS.  (A)  not  as  in  text.

S MS.  (A)  reads

The  text  has  but  the  MSS.  A.  and  B.  have  which

is  the  correct  reading.  ^Alan'd-Din  Hosain  (5iow  Jahansoz,  the  jQrst  of  the
kings  of  Ghor.

^ A tribe  of  Turks.  They  took  Sinjar  prisoner  in  558  H.  From  them
sprung  the  Seljuq  dynasty  the  founder  of  which  was  Ruknu-d-Din  Tughial  Beg.
Originally  from  beyond  the  Oxna  they  established  their  power  by  the  conquest
of  Tus  in  the  year  429  A.  H.,  when  under  the  leadership  of  Tughral  Beg  and
Daiid  they  defeated  the  forces  sent  against  them  by  Mas'ud  ibn  ilahmud.
Ravaging  Armenia  they  entered  Dj^rbakr  in  433  A.  H,  and  in  435  A.  H.
entered  Mosul,  but  in  the  same  year  were  defeaud  in  an  encounter  -with  the
Arab.^  and  fled  to  Nasibm,  and  thence  passing  through  Arraeniu  returned  to
AzarhiiiJuL,

Cf.  DTIerbelot,  art.  Gaz.  who  attributes  the  » ligin  of  this  tribe  to  Gaz
U--nd.  dull  of  Japhfi  of  N^oah  ; from  Bulgar,  one  of  cbc  sons  of  Gaz,  spranc
the  3u"';rar  viD^  rvUtl  from  T’erthab  the  other  S’Ui  sprang  the  Ghuz-r  tribe

[ ]

and  for  the  second  time  returned  to  Lahore,  where  he  died  in  the
year  555  H.,  after  a rei»n  of  eight  years.  In  his  time  many  great
poets  flourished  and  wrote  odes  in . praise  of  him.  The  following
poem  is  oh  the  kind  called  Tarjvband  i and  was  written  by  one  of
them  in  his  honour.

The  revered  Emperor  Khusrau  Shah  who  with  ease
Conquers  with  sword  and  mace  from  Hindustan  to  Kliorasan.

It  must  he  stated,  that  in  the  historical  works  by  Qdzi  Baizawi
and  others  * it  has  been  written  that  when  ‘Alau-d-Din  plundered
Gbaznah  and  put  many  of  the  inhabitants  to  death,  he  left  there
Ghiyasu-d-Din  Abul-fath  Muhammad  and  Shihabu-d-Din  Abul
MumSut  who  were  his  nephews.  They  then  wdth  great  craft  put
Khusrau  Shah  at  his  ease  with  regard  to  themselves  and  took  up
their  abode  in  his  city.  Khusrau  Shah  3 was  imprisoned  in  the
year  555  H.,  and  died  in  the  same  year,  and  the  days  of
the  Ghaznevide  family  came  to  an  end.  After  a time  Ghiyasu-d-
Din  died,  and  the  whole  kingdom  remained  in  the  possession  of
Shihabu-d-Din,  but  since  iQiwaja  Kizamn-d-Din  Ahmad  deceased,
has  written  in  the  Tankh-i-Nizdmi  copying  from  the  Rauzatu-s^
45.  Safa  that  Khusrau  Malik  ibn  Khusrau  Shah  was  the  last  of  the
kings  of  the  Ghaznevide  dynasty,  1 have  followed  him — God
knows  the  truth.

Khcsrau  Malik  i6n  Kbcsrau  Shah.

Ascended  the  imperial  throne  in  Lahore  after  the  death  of  his
father,  and  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  time  in  luxury  and  licen-
tiousness, so  that  in  his  time  great  damage  found  its  way  into  the

- The  Tarji‘-band  consists  of  a series  of  couptets  followed  oy  a couplet  in
th'*  same  metre,  but  having  a different  rhyme,  recurring  at  regular  intervals.

2 See  Aih-i’Akhari  (Jarrettj  iii.  34-1  See  also  Elliott  II.  258.

S The  Rauzatu-s-Sjfd  however  states  that  lyiusrau  Sh»h  reigned  at  Lahore
two  years  after  he  fled  from  Ghaznin,  and  on  liis  death  was  succeeded  by  his
son  Khusrau  Malik.

The  account  ki  the  text  is  that  given  by  Baizawi  and  other  reliable
authorities.

^ Cf.  Raverty  op.  cit.,  p.  112  note  5.

Baizdici  states  that  the  Ghaznevide  dynasty  ended  with  Khusru  Shall.'
The  work  here  quoted  is  best  known  as  the  Tahaqdt-i-Akbari,  but  its
author  called  it  Tabaqdt-i-Akbar-Shdht,  and  Badaoni  calls  it  also  by  that
name  as  well  as  by  the  name  TdrikA'i-NizdiuL  As  has  been  seen  the
present  work  is  admitted  by  the  author  to  be  merel\  an  abridgment  of  the

[ 63  ]

kingdom,  and  tlie  dynasty  of  the  Ghazneviyah  was  grcnving  old
while  that  of  Ghor  was  in  full  Tigonr,  accordingly  Sultan
Mnizzii-d-Dln  Muhammad  Sam,  who  is  well-known  under  the  title
of  Sultan  Shihabn-d-Din  Ghori,  having  gained  the  upper  hand
and  making  Ghaznin  his  capital,  brought  an  army  against  Hin-
dustan and  came  with  overwhelming  force  near  to  Lahore.
Khusrau  Malik  fortified  himself  there  and  was  compelled  to  ask
for  quarter  in  a personal  interview.  Sultan  Muizzu-d-Dln  Mu-
hammad Sam  took  him  to  Ghaznin,  from  thence  sending  him  to
Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-Din,  who  imprisoned  him  in  Firoz  Koh  * and
sent  an  order,  and  after  ten  years’  confinement  made  him  taste
the  cup  of  destruction.

Set  not  yonr  heart  on  this  world,  for  it  is  without
foundation

It  is  a newly  wed  bride  entangled  with  many  a lover.

This  event  took  place  in  the  year  583  H.  (1187  A.  D.).  He
reigned  twenty-eight  years  ; the  times  of  the  Ghaznevide  dynasty
came  to  a close-,  and  the  Empire  passed  from  their  hands  to  those
of  the  Sultans  of  Ghor.  “ Thou  givest  the  kingdom  to  -whom
thou  seest  fit.”  2

Hemistich.

Nothing  endureth  but  God,  God’s  kmgdom  alone  is  a kingdom.

And  Qazi  Baizawi  may  God's  mercy  be  iipjit  him  states  that

Idi  ikh-i-Ki;dm{.  “Kh-waj-a  Nuama-cl-Dm  Ahmad  was  tii*“  son  cf  Khwaia
Muq'irr.  Harawf  Diwan  of  the  household  to  Babar,  he  .'uhse(.iuenc!y  sei-.-e-d
under  .\kbar.  (Elliott  V.  177  et.  se/r/.).  The  real  facts  are  that  the  sen
Khusrau  llalik  succeeded  his  father  and  reigned  till  583  (H  ) (1187  A.  D.J,  as
is  stated  by  our  author.

J The  Tabwi'it-i-Kdfiri  states  that  Khusrau  Malik  -svas  imprisoned  in  the
fortress  of  Balarwan  in  Ghariistan.  Piruz  Koh  was  the  capital.  The  story
of  the  treachery  by  which  Shihabn-d-Din  Ghori  took  Khusrau  Malik  prisoner
is  told  bv  Firishta.

See  also  page  41  where  the  author  states  that  Ghivfeg-d-Din  imprisoned

Khusraa  Shah  in  one  of  the  fortresses  of  Ghnrjistan  where  he  died  a prisoner.

* Quran

1/  ..fo—  ^ O'  y S O''  0^0  ' 0^0^  . -

III,  25  wiiWl  ^ _>i5  J tU3  oJ-Ul  iJjbe  JJ

“ Say  ‘ O God,  Lord  of  the  kingdom,  thou  givest  the  kingdom  to

whomsoever  thou  pleasest  and  talcest  the  kingdom  from  wliomsoevcr  thou
pleasest.’  ”

[ 64  ]

46.  the  duration  of  the  Ghaznevide  dynasty  from  Sultan  Mahmud  to
Kliusrau  Shah  was  one  hundred  and  sixty-one  years  in  the  hands
of  twelve  persons,  while  Qazi  Yahya  Qazwdni,  may  God’s  mercy
he  upon  him,  says  one  hundred  and  fifty-five  years  in  the  hands
of  fourteen  persons,  and  the  author  of  the  Tarikh-i-Nizdmi.  as  has
already  been  quoted  ^bove,  says  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years  in
the  hands  of  fifteen  persons,  and  God  knows  the  real  truth  of
the  matter.  1

II.  The  Ghoei  Dynasty.

Who  reigned  in  Dehli.  This  dynasty  commences  with  Sultan
Shihabu-d-Din  Ghori*  who  is  known  as  Muizzu-d-Din  Muham-
mad ibn  Sam.

SultXn  Muizzu-d-Din  Muhammad  ibn  Sam  Ghori.

Ascending  the  throne  as  regent  in  place  of  his  elder  brother
Saltan  Ghiyasu-d-Din,  king  of  Ghor  and  ‘Iraq  and  Khorasan,  in
the  year  569  H.,  in  Ghaznin,  had  the  khutha  read  and  the  cur-
rency struck  in  his  own  name,  * and  in  obedience  to  the  command
of  his  brother  brought  several  armies  against  Hindustan  and
raised  aloft  the  standard  of  holy  war.  Dehli  was  reduced  in  his  -
time.

I None  of  these  estimates  are  exactly  accurate,  that  of  the  TdritA-i-Nizdmi
is  the  nearest,  flie  actual  duration  of  the  Ghazneyide  dynasty  taking
Khusriiu  Malik  as  the  last  representative  was  from  366  A*  H.  (976  A.  D.j  to
683  A.  H.  {1187  A.  1).J  a period  of  217  years  during  which  time  there  were

fifteen  sovereinns.

It  is  diliicult  to  see  how  Baizawi  arrives  at  his  statement  above  quoted  as
from  the  accession  of  Mahmud  in  387  A.  H.,  to  that  of  Qiusrau  Shah  in
552  A.  H.  is  165  years  daring  which  twelve  kings  reigned.

The  statement  of  Qazi  Yahya  Qazwini  is  so  far  from  the  truth  as  to  be

inspoKsiuli*.

If  we  take  IQiusrau  Shah  as  the  last  Ghaznevide  king  the  dynasty  lasted
from  366  A.  H.  to  555  A H.,  a period  of  189  years.

* Who  was  nominated  with  his  elder  brother  Ghiyasn-d-DIn  to  the  charge
of  a province  of  gior  by  his  uncle  Alau-d-Dm  Husain  Jahansoz.

8 As  a matter  of  fact  the  coins  were  struck  in  the  joint  names  of  Ghiyasn-d-
Dif!  .iQii  Muizzu-d-Diu,  and  ae  Thomas  remarks  the  superlative

)'h'  ” is  applied  to  Gtiya>u-d'Din  while  Slutzzu-(J*Dm  is  only  styled

“ Ore--'  fThonias,  Pathan  kings  of  Oehii.  p.  13).

C 65  ]

In  brief,  Saltan  Gbijasu-d  Din  when  he  had  seized  Ta^inabad  ^
which  was  one  of  the  dependencies  of  Garmsir  and  had  made
over  the  governorship  of  that  place  to  Snltan  Shahabn-d-Diii,
used  continually  to  bring  np  armies  against  Ghazuin,  till  at  last
in  the  abovementioned  year  Sultan  Ghij4sn-d-Dm  brought  that
country  within  the  circle  of  his  conquests,  and  drove  out  of
Ghaznin  the  tribe  of  Ghnzz,  who  after  the  captivity  of  Sultan
Sinjar  had  been  in  possession  of  it,  and  bestowed  upon  Sultan
Muizzu-d-Din  Muhammad,  the  jiitle  of  Sultan  Shihabn-d-Din.*
Sultan  Shihabu-d-Din  after  one  year  of  sovereignty  as  vicegerent

1 - ^ Talcinab.id  which  was  one  of  the

chief  cities  of  Garmsir.  Tabaqdt-i^N'dsirt^  p.  115,  line  9,  (Cal.  Edn.),  see
Ain-i-Akhari  (J.)  iii.  68,  also  Elliott,  II.  292,  293.

2 The  statement  in  the  text  forms  the  subject  of  considerable  controversy
as  there  are  found  those  who  assert  tbat  the  title  Shibabu-d-Din  is  an  im-
possible one  as  applied  to  Maizzn-d-Din  popularly  knowm  as  Mnhammad
Ohori.  (see  Eaverty's  Tabnqdt'i-Ndfiri  p.  note  5).  It  is  true  tbat  the
author  of  the  Tabaqdt-i-Ndiiri  states  that  Muizzu-d-Din  was  onginally  called
Zangi  while  Ghiyasn-d-Dm  was  called  flabshi — both  of  them  being  called
Muliammad.  He  goes  on  to  say  that  prior  to  Ghiyasu-d-Din’s  accession  to  the
throne  Ghor  he  was  called  Shamsn-d-Din  and  that  Muizzn-d-Dm  was  called
Shihabu-d-Din.  The  actual  statement  is

‘‘  Before  this  his  title  had  been  Malik  Shamsu-d-Din  and  the  title  of  his
brother  had  been  Shihabu-d-Din.  Some  time  after  his  accession  his  title
was  changed  to  Snltan  Ghiyasu-d-Din.”  From  this  the  possibility  is  not  ex-
cluded that  the  author  of  the  Tabaqat-i-Ndsirt  intended  to  lay  stress  not  so
much  upon  the  change  of  names  as  the  change  of  dignity,  the  assumption
that  is,  by  both  of  the  title  of  Sultan.

But  whatever  may  be  decided  about  this  there  can  be  no  question  that  the
name  “ Shihabu-d-Din  ” is  just  as  applicable  to  the  person  known  more
familiarly  as  Mnhai^mad  Ghori,  as  is  the  name  “ Muizzii-d-Din,”  and  Badaoni
evidently  held  this  opinion  as  he  henceforth  speaks  of  him  constantly  as
“ Shihabu-d-Din.”

On  the  other  hand  if  this  really  was  a subsequently  acquired  title  it  is
certainly  strange  that  it  does  not  appear  on  any  of  his  coins  on  which  ho  is
always  styled  As  Sultan  Al-3Iuazzam  (or  AI-A‘zam)  Muizzu-d-Dunya  wnd
Din  Abu-1- Muzaffar  Muhammad  ibn  Sam.

It  is  not  however  a point  of  serious  importance  as  ir  involves  no  uli'.puied
question  of  identity.

9

[ 66  ]

for  liis  brotlier,  in  the  year  570  H.,  conquered  Kardlz  > and  in  the
47.  year  571  H.,  took  Uchh  and  Multan  and  drove  out  the  tribe  of
the  Karmatians  from  those  regions,  and  utterly  destroyed  the
Bhati  2 tribe  who  had  fortified  themselves  in  the  fortress  of
Uchh,  3 and  having  entrusted  that  country  to  AH  Kirmaj  * re-
turned to  Ghaznin.

Then  in  the  year  574  H.  (1178  A.  D.)  proceeding  by  way  of
Multan  ^ he  brought  an  army  against  Gujriit,  and  suffered  defeat
at  the  hands  of  Itai  Bhim  Dev  ruler  of  that  country,  and  with
great  difficultv  reached  Ghaznin  and  obtained  relief.

And  in  the  year  575  II.  he  seized  Panshur,  ® and  in  the  year

580  H.  (118i  A.  D.)  marched  against  Lahore ; Sultan  Khusrau
Malik  who  was  the  last  of  the  kings  of  Ghaznin,  shut  himself  up  in
the  fortress  of  Lahore  as  has  been  related,  and  after  considerable
corre.spondence  by  letter  and  messenger,  he  sent  his  own  son  with
an  elephant  as  a present,  and  Sultan  Shihdbu-d-Din  made  peace
with  him,  and  set  about  building  the  town  of  Sialkot  and  having
left  his  deputy  there,  proceeded  to  Ghaznin ; and  in  the  year

581  H.  he  brought  au  army  against  Diwal  by  w'hich  is  meant

1 Snrdi'z  a district  lying  between  Ghaziui  .uid  Iliudastiin,  Viiqut.  (Jr
Garriaiz,  the  name  of  a large  *•  darak  of  the  Tajiks,  Tabaiidt-i-Xd}’.ri  llaveity,
p.  449,  note  9.

2 IISS.  (A  and  B)  agree  with  the  text  For  a full  account  of

this  from  Firishta  with  a comparison  of  other  translations,  see  Xlaverty,
p.  459,  note  2,  Raverty’s  translation  corresponds  exactly  with  the  original
and.  iis  he  very  justly  remarks,  the  incorrect  translations  given  by  Briggs  and
others  have  placed  JIuizzu-d-Diu's  conduct  in  a wrong  light.  Bhatia  a strong
fort  of  this  name  was  situated  between  Jlulian  and  Alor.  The  Raja  referred
to  according  to  the  Mir'at-i-Jahdn-Xuma  w-as  chief  of  the  Bhati  tribe.  See
Raverty  Tabaqdt-i-Xi'niri  451,  nule  3 last  paragraph.  See  Elliott,  Vol.  I.  p.  til.

3 Uchh.  On  the  Eastern  bank  of  the  Panjoad  70  miles  S.  S.  W.  of  Multan.
See  Cunningham,  A.  G.  of  India,  p.  242.

According  to  Tictfenthaler  it  is  20  miles  from  Multan,  Tieff.  I.  118,

* So  also  Firishta  though  Briggs  translates,  Ali  Kirmany.

& In  the  text  read  jl  Flii&hta  says,  “ came  again  to  Uchh  and

Milk  an/’

6 C-vMif  J J V-ai.w  ^

(Firishta)  cf.  Raverty  Tabaqat-i-Nd^it  ij  p.  452,  note  B.  i*eshawar  was  known
as  Bagram  or  Farshur.

'i  Sialkut  is  said  by  other  authors  to  have  been  founded  by  one  of  the  early
Hindu  rulers.  Tieffenthaler.  “ Un  chateau  ties  fort  bati  par  Mahmoud

L *^7  J

Tattah  l and  having  thrown  into  confusion  the  cities  on  the  sea
shore  took  a vast  amount  of  plunder  and  returned.

And  in  the  year  582  H.  he  came  again  to  Lahore  and  plundered
the  surrounding  country,  and  having  provided  Husain  with  the
means  of  fortifying  and  holding  Sialkot  retraced  his  steps,  and  48.
from  Tdrikh-i-Nizdmi  which  is  the  original  source  of  this  selection
we  gather  that  the  building  of  Sialkot  took  place  in  this  year,  in
contradiction  to  the  Mubdrakshd/ti^  from  which  we  learn  that  the
building  of  Sialkot  was  two  years  earlier.  God  knows  the  truth.

And  inasmuch  as  the  house  of  history  is,  like  the  house  of  dreams
and  other  things  of  that  sort,  ruinous,  apologies  must  be  made
for  discrepancies  ; and  in  that  year  !^usrau  Malik  with  the  assis-
tance of  the  Ednikhars  ^ and  other  ti’ibes,  besieged  the  fort  of
Sialkot  for  a long  time,  but  had  to  return  without  attaining  his
object.  In  this  year  also  Muizzu-d-Din  again  besieged  Khusrau
Shah  in  Lahore,  who  after  striving  for  some  days,  found  himself

Gasnavi  ...  La  petite  riviere  d’.-iyek  coule  le  long  de  cette  forteresse  an
couchant.”  Firishta  states  that  lIuizzn-d-Din  founded  the  fort  of  Sialkot
which  lies  between  the  Chenab  and  Ravi  and  left  fllusain  Khannil  as  governor,
in  the  year  580  H.  (1184  A.  D.)

1 Cf.  Eaveriy  452  note  2.  See  also  Tieffenthaler,  I.  121.  Tatta  est  tres
ancienne  ...  on  la  nomme  anjourd’hui  Dobil  . . . Tatta  is  not  the  same  as
Debal  which  lies  between  it*  and  Kar-lcid.  See  Abul  Fed.i,  (Heiuatid)  I.
coclxxxvi.

The  position  of  Deha!.  Judging  by  the  map  given  in  Tieffenthaler
Debal  lay  between  Karachi  and  Tatta  at  a distance  of  30  miles  from  the
former  and  seventy  from  the  latter,  almost  due  East  from  Karachi  and  N..W.
of  Tatta.  It  lay  at  a distance  of  about  20  miles  from  the  sea  on  one  of  the
large  arms  into  which  the  Mehran  (Indus)  divided  in  those  days,  but  which
to  judge  from  modern  maps  have  now  disappeared  or  much  diminished  in
size.  It  also  lay  a short  distance  to  the  North  of  Lari  Bunder  which  was  at
the  head  of  an  arm  of  the  sea  whicfi  had  evidently  in  former  times  been  an
arm  of  the  Indus  also,  at  a distance  of  about  teoj  miles  to  the  South;  the
arm  of  the  river  joining  the  sea  from  Debal  lay  some  six  miles  or  so  to  the
westward.

This  position  tallies  with  that  of  the  ruined  city  mentioned  by  Ibn  Batuta,

Paris  Edition,  III.  112,  113,  114,  a translation  of  the  description  of  which  is
given  in  Cunningham’s  Anc.  Geog.,  p.  ^99,  300.

* By  Tahya  ibn  Ahmad  ibn  Abdullah  Sirhinili.  Elliott,  IV.  6.

5 The  Khiikhara.  This  seems  to  be  the  same  triJoe  as  the  Gakkhars,  cf.
Ain-i-Akhar-l  (Bl.)  Vol.  L 456  note  i,  and  Vo!.  II.  (J)  3b3  )iofe  ],  but  see  also
Eaverty  (455  note  4),  who  asserts  that  the  two  tribes  are  quite  distinct.

[ J

unequal  to  tlie  task,  and  yielded  to  the  Sultan  who  conveyed  him
to  Qiaznin  and  sent  him  to  his  brother  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-Din  at
Piroza  Koh.-  Ghiyasu-d-Din  imprisoned  him  in  one  of  the  fortresses
of  Ghurjistan,  where  he  died  a prisoner,  and  the  plain  of  Empiie
once  for  all  passed  to  the  dynasty  of  Ghor  without  the  thorn  of
a partner  or  rival,  as  has  been  already  mentioned.

QtlA’II.

If  you  saddle  the  piebald  horse  of  Circumstance,

and  if  the  ti'hite  horse  of  state  leads  thee  beside  him,

And  if  tlie  garden  of  yonr  pleasure  in  happiness
copies  fair  the  past  memories  of  Paradise,

Be  not  proud,  for  this  mean  time  will  unexpectedly
draw  its  pen  through  the  writing  of  your  fortune.

Time  is  like  a wind,  which  at  the  first

draws  from  the  cheek  of  the  rose  the  veil  with  all  respect,
Then  after  a week  has  passed  in  the  midst  of  the  garden,
drags  its  body  with  ignominy  to  the  dust.

The  world  at  one  time  brings  forward  by  turn  in  the
narrow  course,  the  horses  of  honour  and  disgrace.

The  crafty  fowler  gives  the  bird  grain,  and  then  draws  it
into  the  noose  of  Lis  artfully  laid  snare.

One  man  who  has  lost  all  hope,  gains  honour.

Another  who  is  always  hopeful  in  spite  of  all  is  disgraced.
Strange  is  it  if  a man  who  has  walked  in  tlie  shadow  of
poverty  should  court  a favour  from  the  sun  ?

49.  Be  content,  if  you  have  a portion  of  wisdom,

that  the  ignorant  should  be  oppressed  by  the  foolish
What  of  that  man  who,  in  the  assembly  of  mirth  and  merri-
ment quaffs  the  wine  of  pleasure  from  the  cup  of
luxnriousness  ?

What  of  him  who  sitting  behind  the  wall  of  sorrow  suffers
from  the  after  effects  of  sorrow  and  the  worry  of
toil?

At  last  the  hand  of  fate  takes  both  of  them  straight  off  to
the  brink  of  the  pit  of  death.

Happy  is  the  brave  hearted  man  who  like  Sharaf  draws  the
foot  of  fidelity  beneath  the  skirt  of  retirement.

L 59  J

And  in  this  year  Sultan  iM  uizzn-d-Din  left  Ali  Kirniaj  ‘ wlio  was
governor  of  Multan,  as  bis  Vicegerent  in  Lahore,  and  in  the  year
587  H.  coming  from  Ghaznin  he  reduced  the  fort  of  Tabarhindah*
which  was  the  capital  of  the  great  rajas  of  Hindustan,  and  left  Malik
Ziau-d-Din  Tukili^  with  a corps  d' elite  consisting  of  one  thousand
two  hundred  cavalry  soldiers,  and  was  contemplating  a return.

In  the  meantime  Rai  Pathura  the  Governor  of  Ajmir,  and  Khandi
RM  his  brother  who  had  been  Governor  of  Dehli  before  Pathiira,
arrived  with  a vast  army  at  a place  called  Tarayan  on  the  banks
of  the  river  Sarsuti  at  a distance  of  seven  krohis^  from  Thanesar.

It  is  now  kno^vn  by  the  name  of  Tara  wart*  and  is  distant  forty
krohs^  from  Dehli.  A great  conflict  ensued  with  the  Sultan  and
the  Muslim  troops  were  defeated.  The  Sultan  evinced  great
bravery  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  in  that  engagement  also
Khandi  Bai  who  was  mounted  on  an  elephant  at  the  head  of  his
army,  received  a spear  thrust  in  his  mouth  from  the  hand  of  the
Sultan.  The  Sultan  also  was  struck  on  the  head  by  the  Rai’s
spear,  and  his  arm  was  also  wounded  but  both  escaped  in  safety.  50.
The  Sultan  got  off  his  horse  and  taking  up  his  son  Khilji  upon  his
horse  and  mounting  behind  him  took  him  off  the  field ; the
Sultan  proceeded  to  Ghaznin,  and  Rai  Pathura  took  the  fortress
of  Tabarhindah  from  Ziau-d-Din  Tukili  on  peaceable  terms  after  a

1 Tahaqdt-i-Ndpiri  fays  .Vli  KarmaWi.  Firishta.  All  Kirmaj,

MS.  (A)  MS.  (B)

2 Both  MSS.  A and  B have  Jarrefct  [Ain-i-Akharl  trans.,  III.  360

vote  2)  sars  he  is  not  able  to  determine  the  position  of  Tabarhindah,  and
Raverty  {Tabaqdt-i-Na?\ri  p 457  note  3)  thinks  Tabarhindah  is  a copjist^s  error
for  Bathindah  apparently  relying  on  the  Luhhu-t-TawdriMi'i'Hind.  From
Rennell’a  map  in  Tieffenthaler  it  would  appear  that  the  situation  of  the
fortress  of  Tiberhind,  which  is  there  marked  though  not  described  in  the  text,
was  about  half  way  between  Bikanir  and  Jhunjhnii  in  Rajputana,  that  is  to
say  about  100  miles  north  of  Ajmir.

See  also  Raverty  458,  vote  3.

5 Malik  ^iysu-d-Dm  Tulaki,  [Tabaqat-i-Na^ri)  Raverty  p.  457  note  3.

4 MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  read  See  Raverty;  Tahaqdt’i-Ndsiri  note  7.

Tieffenthaler  mentions  this  place  calling  it  Narain,  bat  it  is  not  to  be  found
in  the  map  he  gives,  see  Vol.  I.  p.  155.

It  is  placed  by  Cunningham  (map  facing  p.  327),  S.  E.  of  ThAnesar.

6 The  Skr.  tcTosh,  is  equivalent  to  aboot  two  miles.

See  also  Ain-i-Akban  (J)  ii.  p.  116  note  2 and  414  note  2.  Cnnn.  Geog.  of
A.  I.,  App.  B p.  571.  See  also  Tdrikh  i RasMdi.  Elias  and  Boss,  p.  424  note  1.

[ 70  ]

siege  of  one  year  and  one  month.  And  in  the  year  588  H.  the
Sultan  again  came  into  Hindustan  with  a large  and  brare  army
of  40,000  cavalry,  and  divided  his  forces  into  four  army  corps,
and  having  given  battle  time  after  time  in  the  place  above  men-
tioned gained  a victory.  Pathiira  was  taken  prisoner  and  Khandi
Rai  hating  been  overcome  in  battle  was  killed  and  hasted  to  his
resting-place  in  Hell.-  The  Sultan  then  having  reduced  the
fortresses  of  Sarsuti  * and  Hansi  proceeded  to  Ajmir  the  capital
of  Pathiira,  reduced  it  and  plundered  its  environs  killing  and
taking  prisoners.  From  certain  other  sources  we  learn  that
Hazrat  Khwaja  Muinu-d-Din  Chishti*  may  God  sanctify  Ms
heart,  that  revered  one  who  is  the  fountain  head  of  the  great  and
holy  men  and  the  dignified  e!der3  of  the  land  of  Hind,  whose
blessed  tomb  is  a place  of  pilgrimage  situated  in  Ajmir,  was  at
that  time  in  the  company  of  the  Suit, in,  and  this  victory  occurred
through  the  impulse  of  the  blessed  and  divine  soul  of  that  pillar
of  holiness.  And  in  thfs  year  leaving  Sultan  Malik  Qutbu-d-Diri
Aibak  who  was  his  .servant  and  adopted  son  and  vicegerent  in  the
town  of  Ktihram  which  is  distant  seventy  krohs  from  Dehli,  he
invaded  and  plundered  the  Siwalik  range  which  lies  to  the  North
of  Hindustan,  and  proceeded  to  Ghaznin.  In  the  same  year  too
Qiitbu-d-Din  having  captured  Dehli  took  it  away  from  the  kins-
men of  Pathiira  and  Khandi  Rai.  Then  in  the  year  589  H.  (J193
61.  A,  D.)  Sultiiii  Shiliabu-d-Dln  fought  with  Rai  Jai  Chand  the  gover-
nor of  Qananj,  on  the  confines  of  Chand  war  ^ and  Atawah,  ^ killed
him  and  went  to  Ghaznin.  The  fort  of  Kol  fell  into  the  hands  of
Qntbn-d-Din  Aibak,  and  he  made  Dehli  his  capital  and  brought
its  surrounding  districts  under  his  sway.  From  that  date  Dehli
once  more  became  the  metropolis  of  the  Sultans.  The  erection  of
minarets  and  other  buildings  of  that  kind,  such  as  mosques,  was

1 The  country  south  of  the  Himalaya  between  the  Sutlej  and  Ganges  as  far
south  as  Hiinsi.  (Raverfcy).

S Khwajah  lIuh'nn-d-Din.  Ilasan  Chishtl  was  the  son  of  Gliiyasu-d-Di'n
Uasan  born  in  A.  H.  537  in  the  villag-j  of  Sijz  of  the  province  of  Sijistan.

He  died  in  A,  H 633  and  is  buried  near  Ajmir.

3 Tieffenthaler  L 166  mentions  A.tava  and  Chanoni  as  belonging  to  the
Serkar  of  Agra.  (See  Raverty  {Tahaqdc-i-ifdnri)  also  p,  470  note  1).

4 Col — ville  munie  d’nne  fortercsse  qu’ou  appelle  Sabetghar  et  Ramo-har.
Tieff.  I.  200,  in  the  province  of  Agra  40  miles  North  of  Agra.

r 71  ]

commenced  in  the  reign  of  Sultan  Sbamsn-d-Din  Altamash  ^ in
the  year  606  H.,  as  will  be  related,  if  God  {may  He  he  exalted)  so
-will  it,  in  its  own  place.  And  in  the  year  691  H..  be  took  the  fort
of  Bhangar^  and  Badaon.  And  in  the  year  693  H.  he  conquered
Gujerat  and  took  his  army  to  Nahrwahi  which  is  known  as  Pattan,®
and  having  taken  vengeance  for  the  Sultan  on  Bliim  llai  Dew.  and
having  taken  much  spoil  returned ; and  in  that  year  Saltan  Ghivasn-
d-Din  removed  his  effects  from  the  transitory  world  to  the  eternal
abode,*  and  Sultan  Muizzu-d-Din  having  heard  this  news  when  on
the  confines  of  Tus  and  Sarakhs,^  turned  towards  Badghis  and  per-
formed the  duties  of  the  mourning  ceremonies  and  haviiiir  divided
his  brother’s  dominions  among  his  kindred  ^ came  to  Ghaznin
and  brought  an  army  against  Khwarazm,  and  on  the  first  occasion
Sultan  Muhammad  Khwarazm  Shah  suffered  defeat,  and  the
Sultan  pursued  him  and  fought  the  Khwaiazmians  at  the  head
of  an  aqueduct  which  they  had  dug  from  the  eastern  bank  of  the
Jaihun,  and  a number  of  the  noted  generals  of  Glior  were
martyred  and  he  could  not  take  Khwaiazm  ; he  also  fou<rlu  a !:rr<>at
battle  with  an  armj^  of  Khitai^  kijigs  of  Turkisfiin  who  had
come  to  the  help  of  Sultan  iluhammad,  ? on  the  banks  of  the
river  Jaihun — he  fought  right  bravely  but  at  last  was  defeated,
and  being  left  with  a hundred  thousand  cavalry  soldiers  he
entered  the  fortress  of  And^ud  where  he  entrenched  himself,  and  52.

1 Sultan  ITl-Mnazzam  Shamsu-d-Dunya  wau-d-Dhi  .Vbul  Jln^affar,  Ivul
Timish  tie  1st  of  the  Shamsiyah  Salfans.  See  Kavertv  .i07  note  -1.

* MS.  (A)  Thankar,  but  it  should  be  apparently,  as  in

Tieffenthaler  we  find  Banghar  described  as  un  Fort  triangulaire.  construit
de  terre  par  ordre  d’uii  prince  Iiidou  nommc  Harcamn  ...  Banyhar  est  a 30
milles  d 'Autila  a -hi  de  Bareli  et  a 8 de  la  rive  ulterieure  du  Gan'm.

Biiddon,  ville  ancienr.e  ...  elle  it  une  forteresse  au  dehors  de  laquelle  sont
des  maisons.  F.ile  est  a 20  milles  de  Bireli,  a lO  d’  Amda  et  k o de  Banuhar.

Budaon.  was  the  birtliplu’o  of  the  famous  Xizamu-d-Din  Anbva.  called  "

Bahhds  ” or  the  coiirroversialist,  and  " iloAiil-shikan  ” tlic  assemblv-roiirer.

5 20  miles  from  Kadhaiipur  '10  miles  from  Guzerac  to  the  N.W.  Tieff  I
385.  See  also  Barley.  ili,,t  of  Gujarat  25  Ac.  Abul  Foda  I'iieinaud;  II  ii,  117
Ain-i- Akban'  (J.i  II.  202  and  III.  59.

* He  died  at  Herat

6 See  Raverty  {Tnhaqat-i-ydsiri)  257  uiOe  2 and  471  text  and  note  5.

6 The  details  of  this  p.artition  are  given  in  the  Tabaqdt- i-kS' ayin'  (Kav.  ji.  472.)

^ Sultan  Muhammad  ^warazm  Shah  appHed  to  Gurkhau  of  Qara  Klnta
for  assistance.  See  Ravert  v (Tnharidf.i.yds-;, 473  2,

[ 72  J

having  asked  for  qnarteri  returned  to  Ghazni n ; and  at  that  time
tbe  tribe  of  the  Khilkhars  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Lahore  shewed
symptoms  of  revolting  the  Sultan  accordingly  brought  an  army
against  them,  and  also  summoned  Qutbu-d-Din  Aibak  f:om  Dehli,
and  having  given  the  Khukbars  a severe  lesson  returned  to  Ghaznin.
and  while  on  the  vi-ay  back  was  martyred  at  Damyak,  ^ which
is  the  name  of  a village  of  the  dependencies  of  Ghaznin,  at  tbe
hands  of  i^iikhar  bandits — the  following  qitd'h  has  been  writteu
to  chronicle  this  event  ® : —

The  maitjndom  of  the  king  of  sea  and  land  Shihabu-d-Din,
Whose  like  has  never  yet  been  seen  since  the  world  began,

On  the  third  day  from  the  first  of  Sha‘ban,  in  the  year  602
Happened  in  the  road  to  Ghaznin  at  the  stage  Damvak.

The  days  of  his  reign  from  the  commencement  of  the  rule
of  ^aznin  to  the  end  of  his  life  were  thirty  and  two  years  and
some  months,  and  he  -left  no  heir  save  one  daughter,  but  lie  left
behind  him  much  treasure  of  gold  and  silver  and  precious  stones,
among  these  latter  were  five  hundred  mans*  of  diamonds
jewels  of  great  value,  besides  cash  and  estates  and  other  property
the  value  of  which  we  may  estimate  on  the  same  scale.  He  made
expeditions  to  Hindustan  nine  times,  twice  Avas  defeated  and  seven
times  was  victorious.

Thon  didst  see  Mnizzu-d-Din  Muhammad  Sam,  who  in  war
Was  stronger  in  heart  and  hand  than  Sam  and  Nariman
He  obtained,  like  Mahmud,  from  the  elephants  of  Hindustan
Goveiuments  of  Sasan  and  many  kingdoms  of  Saman

1 For  an  account  of  the  iuoidenta  here  briefly  referred  to  see  Itavertv
{T(ibaqdt-i-Xdfiiri)  478  note  6.

2 A villa;2:e  beyond  the  Indus  on  the  road  to  Ghaznin,  Its  e.xa<;:  situHtion

is  a iiHiftor  uf  some  uncertainly.  Firishta  (Bombay  text)  has  ' liohcak

S No  authttr  that  1 have  seen  records  the  name  of  the  author.  The
Tiihuqdt-i-NoMii  I attributes  it  to  *“  one  of  the  learned  men  of  that  period.”

^ The  Tabriz  man  inu*?t  be  meant,  bein"  somewhat  less  than  211)3.  while
the  >nan  of  Hindustan  varies  from  4iJ  to  80  the,  (Raverty).

Olie  Ain-i-  A!  i“i'  i makes  nc*  rneiilion  of  the  }nfin  as  a,  woi^rjit  unit  for  jewel-?

Two  V la  aie  eipial  to  iralf  a -u'/M  As  the  j was  ncai  ly  two  pounds  thi-j
would  make  the  man  equal  to  eiglit  pounits  aeailv.  {See  Ain-i-Akba/
(Jariettj  U doO  uaie  4).

Iho  -J).’-?  , i 5,  nwiiA  of  fliaiuoiids.

t 73  ]

He  departed  this  world,  and  they  say  (the  writer  vouches
for  it)

That  there  remained  of  his  secret  treasure  500  mans  of  dia-
monds.

And  in  his  reign  many  learned  doctors  and  scientists  and  poets  63.
flourished,  of  whom  was  Imam  Fakhm-d-Din  Edzi  i may  God  he
merciful  to  him  who  wrote  the  Latdif-i-Ghiuasi  and  other  books
in  honour  of  his  brother  Sultan  Gkiyasu-d-Din  Abii-l-Fath.  He
remained  with  the  army  of  Saltan  Muizzn-d-Din  Muhammad  Sam,
and  oveiy  week  used  to  stand  up  to  preach,  and  at  the  termination
of  his  sermon  the  Sultan  used  to  evince  great  emotion,  and  since
the  Imam  got  very  wearied  of  this  continual  coming  and  going,
and  everlasting  service,  one  day  addressing  the  Sultan  from  the
pulpit  he  said  Oh  ! Sultan  Muizzu-d-Din,  some  time  hence  neither
will  this  greatness  and  glory  of  yours  remain  nor  the  flattery  and
hypocrisy  of  Razi : The  following  qita‘h  is  by  him  :

If  an  enemy  does  not  agree  with  you  0 friend
If  behoves  you  to  agree  with  your  enemy,

If  not.  then  have  patience  for  a few  days

He  will  not  remain,  nor  will  you,  nor  the  pride  of  Razi.

And  after  the  assassination  of  the  Sultan  certain  mischief-
makers  out  of  envy  accused  the  Imam  of  having  conspired  with
the  Fidais,  * and  asserted  that  the  Imam  was  well  aware  of  their

1 Abu  AbUullali  Muhammad  Ibn  Omar  Ibn  al-Hasain  Ibn  al-Hasan  Ibn
All  al-Jaimi  al-Bakri  at-Tabareatani  Ar-Razi’ (native  of  Eai  in  Tabariatan)
was  a doctor  of  the  Shafiite  aect,  he  waa  bom  at  Kai  A.  H.  544  (A.  D.  1150)
and  died  at  Herat  A.  H.  606  (A.  D.  1210j.  (Ibn  j^alliqan).  Bee  D’Herbelot
art  Eazi.  See  also  Majma'ul  Fusahd  1.  p.  37i,  where  he  is  called  Al-Quraiahi
at-Tamimi,  Ibn  Khalliqan  doea  not  mention  the  Latdif-i-Qhiydei  among  Ar-
Eazi’a  worlta,  while  on  the  other  hand  Haji  Khalifa  gives  a work  of  this  name
but  does  not  mention  the  author.  His  reference  to  it  is  aa  follows.  “ 11124
El-Letait  El-Ghiyathiyeh,  subtilitates  Ghiyath-ed-Dini  Liber  persicns  in
[natnor  partes  divisus,  quarum  prima  de  principiis  religionis,  secnnda  de
uriaprudentia,  tenia  de  ethici.  quarta  de  precatione  agit.”

S The  term  Fid4-i  is  particularly  applied  to  the  disciples  of  the  chie^  of  the
Mulahidah  heretics,  at  whose  hands  Mnizzu-d-Dm  met  his  death  according
to  the  express  statement  of  the  author  of  the  Tabaqdt-i-Nd.iH.  (See  Eaverty
485  1 ( fc  3).  This  attempt  to  implicate  Razi  iu  the  responsibility  for  the
murdei  is  recorded  also  in  the  Jdr,n‘u.t-TaieirilA,  and  the  Idju-l-Hadeir.

See  Elliott  II.  p.  236.

10

hypocrisy.  They  made  an  attempt  upon  the  Imam  and  he  tied
for  refuge  to  Muaiyyidu-l-jNIulk  Sinjari  * tvho  was  one  of  the  dis-
tinguished generals  of  the  Sultan;  he  despatched  him  in  safety  to
a place  of  security.  A .poet  has  written  an  ode  in  praise  of  him  of
which  the  following  are  two  couplets.

Sultan  Muizzu-d-Din  Shah  Ghazi  whose  sword  in  the  woild
has  become  like  the  famous  Zulfiqar  ^ of  Ali  Murtaza.

The  true  Sultatt  Muhammad  Sam,  he  whose  love  for
the  people  is  like  the  Sun  of  the  friendship  of  Mustafa.

1 Tabaqdt-i-Ndsir{  states  that  he  held  the  olEce  of  Yazi'r,  and  was  put  to
death  by  the  Turkish  Maliks  and  Amirs  of  Ghaznfn,  together  with  Malik
Nasirn-d-Din  Husain  the  Amir-i-Shikar.

* Zdl  Fiqdr.  The  following  is  extracted  from  Ibn  Khalliqan  (Slane)
Yol.  lY.  p.  220.

“It  is  related  that  Han'm  ar  Rashid  on  sending  Tazid  ibn  Mazyad  against
A1  Walld  gate  him  Zii'l  Fakar  the  sword  which  had  belonged  to  the  Prophet
“Take  it,  Yazid,  by  it  you  tvill  be  victorious.”  To  this  Muslim  Ibn  al-Walid
alludes  in  the  following  verse  of  a ka^ida  composed  by  him  in  praise  of
Yazid ;

‘ You  caused  the  Prophet’s  sword  to  recollect  his  way  of  acting  and
the  bravery  displayed  by  the  first  (Musulmiin)  who  ever  prayed  and
fasted.’

By  these  last  words  he  meant  Ali  the  son  of  Abu  Talib  for  he  was  the
person  y>ho  dealt  blows  with  it.”

Lower  down,  quoting  as  his  authority  Hisham  ibn  al  Kalbi,  Ibn  Khalliqan
states  that  2ul  Fiqar  belonged  to  Al-Aasi  son  of  Xabih,  both  of  whom  were
killed,  in  the  battle  of  Badr ; Al-Aasi  being  slain  by  'Ali  who  took  the
famous  sword  from  him — and  he  continues  “Another  author  says  that
Z'tl  I'a'idv  was  given  to  ‘Ali  by  the  Prophet.”  I must  observe  that  faqdr  tvith
an  a after  the  is  the  plural,  of  Faqdra  which  means  a vertebra  of  the
back.  The  name  of  this  sword  is  also  pronounced  Ziil  Fuqdr  the  word  fiqJr
is  the  ijlura!  of  J’-na  (Vertebra'.

At  Tabari  states  that  Z<il  fiqdr  came  into  the  possession  of  H^un  ar  Kasliid
in  the  following  manner  :

“ Zul  fiqar  was  borne  by  Muhammad  Ibn  Abd  Allah  ibn  al  Hasan  ion  al-
Hasan  ibn  All  ibn  Abi  Talib  on  the  day  iu  which  battle  \va^  g.cen  to  ihe
army  of  Abu  Ja‘  far  al-Mansur  the  Abba.side  ; when  ho  fidt  death  in  be  ne.ir
he  gave  Zulfqdr  to  a merchant  who  had  followed  him,  and  to  whom  he  ev, , d
four  hundred  dinars  ‘ Take  this  sword,’  said  he,  ‘ any  member  of  tlic  Abd
Talib  family  whom  you  may  meet  with  will  buy  it  from  you  and  give  you
the  sum  to  "which  yon  .are  entitled.  The  sword  remained  with  t’nu  merchant
till  the  Abbaside  prince  Ja  far  the  son  of  Siilainian  ibn  Ali  ihn  Abd  .Mlah
ibn  al  Abbas  ibn  Abd-al-Muttalib  obtained  the  goverumenrs  of  'A  mcr:  .md

[ 75  ]

Another  poet  says  : —

The  Emperor  of  the  age,  Khusran  ^azi  Mnizzri-d-Din
From  whom  the  glory  of  crown  and  diadem  gains  increase,
The  origin  of  victory,  Muhammad  ihii  Sam  ibn  Husain
His  very  presence  has  become  the  mark  for  princely  gloryd

And  Hazukl  Maraghai  too  says  in  praise  of  him  ; —

Shah  Ttluizzn-d-Dln  before  whose  princely  might
The  heaven  stands  girt  like  a hunch  of  flowers
He  came  to  the  throne  like  a rose  at  the  time  when
The  heaven  brought  the  Sun  into  the  Balance.  *

lledira,  and  he  purchased  it  from  the  merchant  for  four  hundred  dinars.
From  him  it  passed  to  al-M-ahdi  the  Son  of  At  Mansur  (Khalifah  from  775
A H.  to  78.5  A.H.)  from  him  to  Musa  al  Hadi  and  from  Musa  to  his  brother
Harun  ar  Rasiiid.”

Al  Asmai  relates  that  he  s'aw  Haruu  ar  Rashid  at  Tus  wearing  a sword
and  that  he  said  “ Asmai  would  you  like  to  see  Zul  fqdr"  and  on  Asmai
t’Xpressing  a wish  to  see  it  Harun  ar  Rashid  bade  him  draw  the  sword — on
doing  so  he  found  on  it  eighteen /-.is —The  word /ugaVn  is  said  in  a note
to  the  above  to  designate  “ a sort  of  waving  ornament  on  the  blade  or  else
a notch  on  its  edge.  It  is  doubtful  which  is  meant  probably  the  latter  ”

The  word  Z’Hriqdr meaning  verteb>'ated  Ithink  it  quite  possible  that  th'e  sword
in  question  was  so  called  from  its  strength  and  pliability,  the  vertebral  column
being  the  type  of  the  combination  of  these  two  somewhat  incompatible
elements.

1 MS.  (A)  has  Ij  MS.  _(B)  agrees  with  the  text

* i.e.  In  the  time  of  year  (autumn)  when  the  Sun  was  in  the  sign  of  Libra

The  sun  pnters  Gemini

Tatirn?

Aries

(Spring)

21st  March.

Virgo

Leo

Cancer

fSnmmer)

21st  June.

Sagitt.ariiis

Scorpio

Libra

(Autumn)

21st  September.

Pisces  Aqu

arins  Capricomas

eWinter)

21st  December.

Tno  sign  Libra  was  a later  addition  to  the  Zodiac.  It  was  known  to  the
. Her  Greek  astronomers  as  Geofg>  I-  33.

54.

[ 76  J

He  in  the  fire  of  whose  wrath  evil  doers
Give  np  their  sweet  lives  like  sugarcane.

The  sugar  of  religion  and  the  rose  of  sovereignty
The  revolving  sphere  has  mixed  together  ;

Oh  Lord  ! let  this  conserve  of  religion  and  sovereignty
Be  the  cause  of  health  to  the  whole  world.

And  Qazi  Hamid  * of  Balkh  says  :

Ghazi  Mnizzu-d-Din  wad-Dnnya  with  whom
On  the  day  of  battle  victory  marches  with  his  anspiciotis
standard-

Qua  locus  Erigonen  inter  Chelasque  seqnentes  Panditur.

Subsequently  it  was  called  Zuydt  (the  yoke)  by  the  Latins  Jugum  and  was
first  formally  called  Libra  in  the  Calendar  of  Julius  CiBsar.  This  name
seems  to  have  been  derived  from  the  East,  and  must  be  regarded  as  a symbol
of  equality  introduced  into  the  heavens  at  the  period  when  the  entrance  of
the  sun  into  that  constellation  marked  the  Autumnal  Equinox.  “ In  the
commentary  of  Theon  on  the  Almagest  Libra  is  frequently  represented  by
\irptk  (a  pound)  or  Atrpai,  a word  originally  borrowed  by  the  Romans  from
the  Sicilians,  transformed  into  Libra  and  then  restored  to  the  later  Greeks  in
the  new  sense  of  a balance.”  See  Smith’s  (D.  G.  E.  A.)  p.  151,  also  .li'n-t-
Ahbari  (Jarrett)  III.  p.  13  and  notes.  Also  Albiruni  (Sachau)  p.  173,  where  a
table  is  given  of  the  signs  in  seven  languages.  Sir  William  Jones  (Jones’
Works  Vol.  I.  p.  334)  leant  to  the  opinion  that  “ both  Greeks  and  Hindus
received  their  divisions  of  the  Zodiac  from  an  older  nation  ” and  there  can
bo  little  doubt  that  this  was  the  case ; the  almost  absolute  identity  of  the
nomenclature  in  Arabic,  Greek,  Persian,  Syriac,  Hebrew  and  Sanskrit  points  to
a pictorial  rather  than  to  a verbal  original,  the  more  so  as  in  the  case  of  a
pictorial  symbol  of  ambiguous  shape  it  was  possible  for  the  name  to  differ  in
different  languages.  Thus  we  know  that  the  sign  Libra  was  first  known  as
XVbat  to  the  Greeks  from  its  resemblance  to  the  claws  of  a scorpion,  then
this  name  was  changed  to  feyiii  from  the  resemblance  to  a yoke,  and  finally
called  Libra  a balance.

’riif  satin'  t-t'-iGtitil  idea  is  applicable  to  all  three  words,  and  it  is  more  than
probable  iliat  m C miltt  look,  for  the  origin  of  the  Zodiac,  to  the  same  source
whence  we  trace  tlie  origin  of  our  .Alphabet.

See  also  Albiruni  [Sachan  (Truimer)  ] Vol.  1.  p.  219.

1 Fakhru-l-Ulama  wa  Ziim-1-Fuzala  Hamidu-d-Din  Umar  ibn  Mahmud
lialkhi,  a celebrated  writer  whose  Maqamat  called  forth  the  praise  of  the
poet  Aiiwari.  He  was  the  author  of  several  works  written  in  a style  of
great  aiiii  .studied  elegance.  He  was  an  accomplished  poet.  Several  of  bis
works  arc  mentioned  by  name.  See  Majma'ul  Fusahd  I.  197.

[ 77  ]

Bd  1 MuzafEar  • the  Ruler  of  the  East  for  whom  in  the  field
of  battle

The  Huma  of  his  canopy  carries  as  it  were  victory  under
its  wing.

Sultan  Qutbu-d-DIn  Aibak

Who  was  one  of  the  specially  favourite  servants  of  Sultan
Muizzu-d-Din,  on  the  occasion  of  an  eclipse  of  the  moon  had  a
broken  little  finger,  * and  was  known  by  this  soubriquet  (Aibak),
they  also  call  him  Qutbu-d-Din®  Lak  bakhsh.*  With  the  consent  of  55.
the  nobles  of  Hindustan  he  established  himself  as  Protector  of  the
kingdom  of  Dehli,  and  after  the  martyrdom  of  Sultan  Muizzu-d-
Din  his  brother’s  son,  Sultan  Ghiyasn-d-Din  Mahmud,  the  rightful
heir  of  Suljan  Ghiyasu-d-Din  Muhammad  in  whose  praise  they
wrote  the  following  verse : —

I His  full  titles  were : Sultan  al-A‘zam,  Muizzu-d- Dunya  wa-d-D£n  Abnl
MuzafEar  Muhammad.  On  his  death  difficulties  arose  as  to  the  succession,
the  Turkoman  generals  claiming  it  for  GhiTasn-d-Din  Mahmud,  son  of  Ghivasu-
d-D£n,  while  the  chiefs  of  ^ur  on  the  other  hand  favoured  the  claims  of
Bahau-d-Din  Sam,  and  a quarrel  arose  between  the  two  parties  as  to  the  route
to  be  taken  in  conducting  the  corpse  of  Mnizzn-d-Dm  to  Ghaznm.  Eventually
this  was  settled  by  the  diplomacy  of  the  ^waja  Muaiyyidu-l-Mulk.  Taju-d-
Din  Taldkuz  (Yaldiiz)  came  out  to  meet  the  body,  which  was  buried  in  an
enclosed  grave  which  he  had  built  for  his  daughter,  on  the  22nd  ShaTian
(Firishta).

* This  is  the  reading  of  the  text  and  of  both  MSS.  and  it  serves  in  a

measure  to  correct  the  current  idea  as  to  the  etymology  of  the  name  Ibak.
Baverty  (514,  note  1)  states  that  Ibak  in  Turkish  meema  finger.  This  does  not
appear  to  be  the  case,  so  far  as  1 can  learn  from  dictionaries  means  the

comb  of  a cock,  while  the  word  finger  is  parmaq.  On  the  other  hand

the  word  tyl  ay  means  moon  and  beg  or  bei  means  Lori.  Whether
the  finger  was"  broken  at  the  time  of  the  ecbpse,  or  whether  it  was  a congeni-
tal defect  does  not  appear,  but  from  the  text  before  ns  the  connection  with
the  moon  is  the  cause  of  the  name,  not,  as  has  been  said,  the  broken  finger-
See  also  Haverty  loc.  cit.  and  Thomas’  Pathan  kings  of  Dehh,  page  32,  note  1.
Firishta  however  distinctly  states  tjyl

Aiiij  if  his  text  is  correct.

S He  was  given  the  name  of  Saltan  Qutbu-d-Din  Aibak  by  Muizzu-d-Din
on  the  occasion  of  a public  ceremony  when  he  distinguished  him  by  special
marks  of  his  favour  (Firishta).

* The  bestower  of  lake.  So  called  from  his  lavish  generosity.

[ 7S  ]

Sultan  from  East  to  West,  Monaroh.  from  West  to  East

Mahmud  ibn  Muhammad  ibn  Setm  ibn  Husain,

liaVing  sent  to  Malik  Qutbu-d-Din  from  Firoza  Koh  the  panopy
and  insignia  of  royalty,  addressed  him  by  the  title  of  Sultan,  t
and  in  the  year  602  H.  (1295  A.D.)  having  come  from  Dehli  to
Lahore  on  Tuesday,  the  sixteenth  of  the  month  of  ZuQa‘dah  in
the  aforesaid  year,  ascended  the  throne  of  empire  and  became
proverbial  for  his  kindness  and  clemency.  He  used  to  bestow  upon
deserving  recipients  rewards  far  in  excess  of  their  anticipations,
and  inaugurated  his  custom  of  lak  hakhsJii  ( bestowing  laks).  One
of  the  learned  men  of  the  time  named  Bahau-d-Din  LTshi  ^ said
in  praise  of  him.

Quatfaiii.

Oh  thou  that  hast  brought  into  the  world  the  bestowal  of
laks ;

Thy  hand  has  brought  the  mine  into  great  straits ;

From  envy  of  thy  liberality  the  heart  of  the  mine  has
seized  blood  drops,

And  2ilaced  them  forward  pretending  that  they  are  rubies.

And  after  some  time  enmity  arose  between  him  and  Taju^d-Din
Talduz,  who  was  one  of  the  slaves  of  Muizzu-d-Din  and  had
read  the  Khutba  in  his  own  name  in  Ghazuin,  on  account  of
Lahore,  and  the  fire  of  war  and  conflict  blazed  forth  on  the  con-
fines of  the  Punjab;  Taju-d-Din  was  defeated,  and  went  to
Kinnan  whicli  was  his  usual  abode.  Sultan  Quthn-d-Din  went
and  took  po.sse^sion  of  the  fort  of  Gliaznin  and  staying  there  for
a period  of  forty  day's,  sjient  his  time  in  rioting  and  wantonness
and  dissipation.  According'ly  the  people  of  Gliaznin  were  an-
noyed at  his  behaviour  and  secretly  summoned  Taju-d-Din  yaldiiz,
who  arrived  without  warning,  and  Saltan  Quthu-d-Din  not  being
able  to  oppose  him  came  to  Lahore  by  way  of  Sang  Surabh  ^

t He  appear;!  to  liave  already  possessed  the  title  of  Sultan  (see  note  3 page  77b

8 Bahan-d-Din  IXuliamniad  LAlii  Farghani  was  a very  famous  preacher  and
learned  divine,  very  famous  according  to  U'fi  as  an  extempore  speaker,  and  an
extremely  able  poetry  and  prose  writer.  (Ilajma‘u-1-Fusaha,  I.  172i.

3 One  of  the  routes  between  ^aznin  and  the  Punjab,  for  he  did  not  dare
to  take  that  through  Kimian  fRaverty,  527,  note).  The  Tahaqdt-i.Ndsin'
omit.s  all  reference  to  this,  and  merely  mentions  Qutbu-d-Din’s  death  with-
out saying  where  his  fatal  accident  happened.  As  to  the  exact  date  of  his
neath,  see  Ra-erty  52S,  note  2.

[ 7i>  j

Verse.

Whea  the  head  of  a Sultan  becomes  unsteady  from  wine

Without  warning  the  crown  of  Empire  falls  from  his  head.

And  after  wielding  power  for  some  time  he  fell  from  his  horse
when  playing  mamjaa  at  Lahore  in  the  - year  607  H.,  and  died  t
and  was  buried  in  that  city  and  his  tomb  is  at  present  the  resort
of  pilgrims.  The  period  of  his  reign  after  the  conquest  of
Hindustan,  was  twenty  years,  out  of  which  period  he  was  for  four
years  a Sultan,

This  ancient  revolving  heaven  has  overthrown  many  heroes  ;

So  far  as  you  are  able,  place,  no  reliance  on  the  sun  and
moon  and  Jupiter.  *

Seven  other  individuals  of  the  generals  and  slaves  of  Sultan
Muizzu-d-Dln  reached  piincoly  power  in  Hindustan  and  Q-haznin
and  Bengala  and  other  places,  -whose  afc-iirs  are  written  in  their
proper  places  ; among  others  Taju-d-Din  Yaldiiz  on  the  confines
of  Tarayan,  otherwise  known  as  Tarawari,  having  fought  with
Sultan  Sliamsu-d-Din  lyaltamish  was  taken  prisoner.  Another
is  Sultan  Na^iru-d-Din  Qabacha  ^ who-  is  also  one  of  the  slaves  of
Muizzu-d-Din,  and  had  mai-ried  one  of  the  daughters  of  Taju-d-
Din  Talduz,  the  other  daughter  was  married  to  Sultan  Qutbu-d-

Literally,  emptied  the  mould  (in  u'hich  he  icos  cast).
The  word  though  Arabic  in  appearance  is  not  really  so.  It  is  in

reality  the  Persian  word  ) in  an  Arab  dress.

The  game  of  diauyd,)  is  the  origin  of  the  modern  game  of  polo ’’the
chaiujdn  called  in  Arabic  Saulajdn  is  a name  applied  to  a

stick  with  a carved  es.tremity,  .Carling  locks  are  called  kixiuw
A pony  which  is  fit  for  the  game  of  is  called  (Biirhan-i-Qati‘).

2 In  the  •Ajaibu-l-AIa^luqat  of  Qazwini  we  find  that  the  astrologers  con-
sidered the  sun  as  holding  the  place  of  king,  and -the  .stars  are  his  corn-tiers
and  troops.  The  moon  is  his  Vazir  and  Jupiter  the  Qa/i.  Thepianefrig
considered  to  be  a very  fortunate  one  by  astrologers  who  called  it  0>ju»
The  moon  is  also  lucky  so  much  so  that  everything  lucky  was  culled  by  the
Hindus  Somagralia,  Soma  being  the  Sanskrit  word  for  moon.  The  sun  was
called  ^ Aditya,’  i.  e.,  the  beginning  as  being  the  origin  of  all  things.  See
Albiruni  (Sachan)  I.  217  and  seqq.

^ Wlio  on  the  death  of  Qutbu-d-Din  proceeded  to  usurp  Uchh  and  Multin
according  to  Raverty  (530,  note  6).  The  lubaqdt-i-Ndftiri  states  chat  N^iru-d»
Din  Qabacha  married  two  of  the  daughters  of  Qatbu-d-Din.  (See  not^  4,
p.  529j  (note  2,  p 532).

57.

[ 80  ]

Din  and  Snitan  Mnizzn-d-Din  during  his  lifetime  had  bestowed
npon  him  the  governorship  of  Dchh  and  Mnltan#  .Aiter  the  death
of  Snitan  Quthn-d-Din,  he  brought  the  whole  country  from  Uchh  i
to  Sarsuti  and  Knhram  under  his  own  rule,  and  also  took  posses-
sion of  Lahore,  and  having  fought  with  the  army  of  Malik  Taju-
d-Din  who  was  on  his  way  from  Gkaznin,  iQwaja  Mu‘aiyyidu-1-
Mulk  Sinjari  * being  in  command  of  that  army,  was  defeated  and
went  to  Sindh  in  which  country  he  obtained  great  ascendancy.

In  the  year  611  H.  (1214  A.  D.)  a Moghul  army  arrived  and
laid  siege  to  Multan  for  forty  days  and  the  Snitan  Nasiru-d-Din,
having  opened  the  doors  of  the  treasury,  evinced  great  bravery  and
warded  off  their  attacks,  and  at  last  after  a reign  of  twenty-
two  years  fell  a prisoner  into  the  hands  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Din
and  trod  the  way  to  the  next  world.  * Another  is  Malik  Bahau-
d-Din  Tughi-al,  when  Muizzu-d-Din  Muhammad  Sam  reduced  the
fortress  of  Bahankar  * he  entrusted  the  command  of  it  to  Malik
Bahau-d-Din  Tnghral.  and  he  having  built  a fortress  in  the  country
of  Bhasiyana*  elected  to  reside  there®  and  used  continually  to

1 70  miles  south-west  of  Multan.  For  the  situation  of  Uchh,  see  Cnnn.
A.  G.  I.,  p.  242.

Tieffenthaler  says  that  under  this  name  are  comprised  seven  villages  the
chief  of  which  contains  the  tomb  of  Syud  Buttari.  Tieff.  I.  118.  In  Een-
nell’s  map,  "Vol.  III.  Sumsty  is  shewn  as  in  Long.  74-6  Lat.  28  6,  Korsm
Long.  75'4  Lat.  20*4.

* See  note  1 page  74.

* In  the  year  612  H.  according  to  the  Tdju-l-Madsir,  but  from  the  text  it
appears  to  have  been  in  610  H.  or  early  in  611  H.

According  to'Thbagdt-i-JTdeirt  he  was  drowned  while  trying  to  escape.  See
Baverty  542—543,  notes,  cf.  Elliott  II.  304.

* Both  MSS.,  but  according  to  Tabaqat-i-Ndsiri  and  Alfi  the  name  of  the
fort  was  Thankir  or  Thangir.  [See  however  Baverty  544  note  1).

6 MS.  (B)  has  Bhasiyana,  MS.  (A)  has  Bhayana.  Tabaqdt-i-Ndfiri  says
“ the  fortress  of  Thankir  which  is  in  the  territory  of  Bhiana.”  This  fortress
he  bnilt  was  called  Saltan  Kot  [Tabaqdt-i-Ndiin).

Tieffenthaler  mentions  a place  which  he  calls  Beana  and  says,  concerning
it,  Bedna  etait  autrefois  nno  viUe  bien  penplee,  aujonrd’hui  le  nombre  de  ses
habitans  est  fort  diminue,  apres  qne  le  Bajah  Indon  ea  a chasse,  il  n’y-a  qne
pen  d’aunees,  les  Mahometans,  Afgans,  et  Saldes,  qni  se  vantent  de  descendro
de  la  race  d’Ali.  Elle  est  an  pied  des  montagnes,  h 14  milles  commnns  de
JFatepour  an  Sud-Onest.

He  mentions  no  fortress  named  Thankir  or  Bahankar  nor  does  he  mention
Snitan  Kot.

6 Cf.  Tabaqat-i-NoMn  where  this  fort  is  called  Sultaiikul.

[ 8J  J

harass  the  enTirons  of  Gwaliar,  and  8uitan  Muizzii-d-Diiv  at  the
time  of  liis  return  from  Gwaliar  had  pi'omised  to  give  that  for.
tress  to  ilalik  Bahau-d-Din  who  acc-oruiu<>-!y  sn-: . , ]y  fortified  a
position  at  a distance  of  two  kroJti  from  Gwalihi  and  harassed
the  garrison  of  the  fort,  so  that  after  a rear  the  gan-isun  sending
messent'ors  and  presents  invited  Sultan  Qutbii-il-foii  and  sur-
rendered the  fort  to  him.  On  tliis  account  enm'Cy  se  between
Malik  Qutbu-d-Din  and  Babau-d-Din.  Malik  JMhiu-d-Din  died
a short  time  afterwards.  -

Another  is  Malik  Mnh.tmmad  Balm'var  (rriii;;.-  He  was  one
of  the  great  men  of  Ghtu’  and  Garm>ir,  a man  mod  with  a..l
nooj  (jauJiiies  wlio  came  to  Ghazcin  in  the  icign  of  Sultan
Muizzu-d-Diu  and  from  tlieuce  went  to  Hiodiistan,  He  did  not
approve  of  having  to  Jjve  in  Lahore  with  Sitltiii.  G'atbu-d-Din,
and  joined  hands  with  MaJik  Hnsainu-d-Din  Ugh.ti  III  g '■=  ralc-r  of
tlie  country  between  the  two  rivers  (The  Doui/ ' .tnd  tho  country
bevoud  the  river  Ganges,  aud  Kanpilah  and  Patud  • were  allotted
as  his  reward.  He  proceeded  to  Oadh  aiic  . nuiuered  that  couii-

1 \o  date  is  given  of  these  events.

» Called  also  Muhammad  Bakbtvar  Khilji.  the  first  to 'earl  a Mnsnlmaa
invasion  of  Bengal  in  o&C  A.  il.  He  bcloiiiied  ro  rhehni.’,  riahf  ot  (^Gr.  a
Tuikisli  tribe,  liegarding  him  the  Aih-i-Ai'.  o/ stares  tiuv  rhe  astrologers
liad  predicted  the  overthrow  of  the  kingdom  of  Mad-lya  by  Mnl.aminad
Biikhtviir  Khilji.  He  destroyed  the  city  of  Ma.liy.a  (in  1203  A D , 600  A H )
ind  transicrred  the  Capital  to  Lajchiianti.  From  that  time  Bengal  ha:^  bocH
subject  to  tl...  kings  of  Dehli.  -tt'n-i-A/.hciri  (Jarrc-tr)  II  14S.

He  was  a nephew  of  Mnhainmad  son  of  M.aLmurl.  (See  T’rLr.p-tt.l.vVfvo  1
549):  Ilavertv  denies  his  having  ever  been  a slave  but  from  t:  » .st.tretnent  in
the  test  there  seems  to  be  no  donbt  that  tiic  author  s..  rer-;;d--d  him.  dre
Raverty,  ji.  530  nnre  6).

Malika-l-Miiazzain  Husainii-u-Dln  Uglini  Iipg_  held  in  fief  a considerable
tract  of  country  in  the  Huab,  indcjtendentiy  of  Qutbu-d-Dtn.

£ See  Ilaverty  7(di<7.(o7-i-.Yo'->  , 550  note  6.

4 YISS.  (A-)  aud  !lh)  Konpiltt,  MS.  (^A.)  F'lhC':^'.  MS.  (B  )

Pid/!;'.'!'.  Kaverty  p 550  note  6,  s.avs  Pu,' 'v.'.  AL-G  Car.  23^  I.oi.v,
hZ’ si'l  aud  Kiin*:iah  Mii/  [[.at.  2.L -7'  hove  S2 ' 35'"  the  Kuntil  of  the
Indian  AtJaa.

♦See  ihe  noip  n'j'ivr  fer  n disCnSiiiun  lij*-  nsiertion.

In  the  text  AIaxT  ,5  ev-dcu-'y  a cj-vi-tA  emu  for  AUvS"

11

[ 82  ]

tiy,  recl'iced  Beliar  and  Muaer,*  and  liaving  taking  large  booty
Sultan  Qntbn-d-Dln  sent  him  royal  honours  and  a banner  of
Sultanship.  He  then  brought-  many  presents  to  the  conrt  of  the
SSk  Snitau,  and  received  great  favours  and  distinctions ; the  grandees
of  the  court  seeing  - they  were  powerless  against  him,  became
envious  of  him,  and  instigated  the  Snltan  to  snch  ■ an  extent  that
one  day  he  made  him  fight  with  a rogue  elephant,  * hut  he  struck
the  elephant  so  hard  upon  the  trunk  with  a heavy  clah  that  the
elephant  turned  and  fled.  The  Sultan  was  overwhelmed  with
astonishment  to  see  this,  and  nominated  and  appointed  him  ruler
of  the  whole  country  of  Lakhnauti ^ in  Bengala  and  sent  him
away.  In  the  second  year  after  this  arrangement  Muhammad
Bakhtyar  brought  an  army  from  Behar  towards  Lakhnanti  and
arrived  at  the  town  of  Nudiya'*  with  a small  force,  Nudiya
is  now  in  ruins.  Bai  Lakhntia  (Lakminia  the  governor  of  that

t ilaner  ville  assez  distingue'e  sitaee  sur  la  rire  citerieure  (du  Q-ange)  a 4
milles  ouest  de  Sclierpour — (qui  est  a 6 rallies,  de  Patna)  I’emboachiire  du
Son  (Soane)  se  tioute  entre  Ilaner  a I’onest  et  Scherpoiir  i Vest.  Le  Son
se  jette  dans  le  Gange  J de  cosse  avant  Ilaner.  Tieff.  I.  423  note  (a).

Behar  the  capital  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  Magadh  is  situated  on.  the
Panchana  river.  Tteffenthaler  describes  it  thus  “ Une  grande  ville  molns
peuplee  aitjourd'hui  quelle  ne  Va  ete,  remarquable  par  des  tombeaux  magni-
liqnes  de  ilaliomthans  (Shaikh  Sharafuddiu  Manir!  is  buried  there).

Elle  a ete  la  capitale  autrefois  de  la  proviar?.  Sa  distanca  de  Patna  en
ligne  droite  est  de  17  rallies.”

See  Sunteo  Gazetteer  of-  India.

s On  the  occasion  of  a public  audience  held  hv  Quthu-d-DIn  in  the  Qasr-i-
Safed.

t The  ancient  capital  city  of  Bengal  called  originally  Lakshmanawati,  and
possibly  also  G.ic  c.  Called  aannatabad  by  the  Emperor  Hnmayun.  See  Atn-i-
Af:hari  II.  ( Jarre". j 122,  131  also  Imp.  Gaz,  art  Gaar.  See  also  Savertj
T>ihaqdt-i-X‘'Airi  5--j  note  2,

■*  Both  !^^SS.  -*  Kudiya.  Also  Tahaqdt-i-Akhari.  Sec  Imp,  Gaz.  Nadivn.
Nadiya  or  -.0  is  on  tho  ■V7est  batik  of  the  Bha<^irathi,  it  was  futmded

by  Laushman  S-. son  oi  BalUi  Sen  King  of  Bengal  who  is  said  to  have  left
Gaur  for  > the  ‘ •lot'rior  sanctity  of  the  Bl‘.%irathi  at  Nadiv-l.

The  name  was  ■ • Wl  Bi-.iij  ''.."i  the  time  of  Aurangzeb—

See  Haver'y  . p r.  5b, > -ic-te  2

^ i 11  (Jarret’  'IS.  r.lnq  >

I ]

^ovra  wlio  had  -heard  from  astrologers  • the  fame  of  Muhammad
Baldit yar.  and  his  great  power,  fled  thence  to  Kamraii.  and  property
and  booty  beyond  computation  fell  into  the  haiuls  of  the  Muslims,
and  Muhammad  Bakhtyar  having  dcsti’f>yed  the  place  c£  w'orship
and  idol-temples  of  the  infidels  founded  5Ios<nies  aiid  dilonasteries
and  schools  and  caused  a inetropolis  to  be  built  called  by  bis  own
name,  which  now  has  the  name  of  Gaur.  ®

Vebse.

There  where  was  heard  before  the  clamour  and  uproar  of
heathen.

Now  there  is  heard  resounding  the  shout  of  “ Aliaho  akhar”

.4.nd  after  having  the  khu/fiah  read  and  the  currency  struck  in  his
name,®  having  collected  a large  body  of  men,  under  the  command
of  Amir  All  ilasij*  ( Jlich)  he  attempted  to  conquer  the  countries
of  Tibet  and  Turkestan  and  twelve  thousand  cavalry  fully  armed
and  equipped  arrived  at  a city  which  they  call  Bardlian.^  A river

1 For  an  account  of  Iho  birch  of  Lahhntaniva  see  Tahaqdt-i-AklaH  which
relates  that  in  order  to  delay  the  birth  for  two  hoars  his  mother  caused  her-
self to  be  suspended  head  downwards  with  her  legs  bound  together  till  the
auspicious  moment  predicted  by  the  astrologers  to  ensure  his  reigning  for
eighty  years  arrived,  immediately  after  delivery  of  licr  child  the  mother  died,
(see  also  Kavetty  Tahaqdt-i-Nanri,  p.  555).

8 There  is  lio  authority  for  the  statement  that  Gaur  was  ever  known  by
the  name  of  Muhammad  Bakhtyar.  Concerning  the -name  Gaur  see  Hunter
Imp.  Gaz.  Gaur.

3 Tho  recitation  of  the  or  public  prayer  in  the  name  of  the  new

Sovereign  and  the  issue  of  coins  bearing  his  name  was  regarded  by
Muhammadan  nations  as  constituting  actual  accession  to  tho  throne  and  the
Statement  is  probably  incorrect.

As  to  this  passage  see  Eaverty  559  note  3.  See  Thomas  Pathan  Kings  of
Dehli  p.  37  and  p.  110,  and  notes.  It  appears  unlikely  that  Muhammad
Bakhtyar  issued  coins  in  his  own  name,  as  he  was  nothing  more  than
Sipahsalar  of  the  Sultan  JIuizzu-d-Din  Muhammad  Sam  : moreover  no  so  li
coins  are  known.

* A chief  of  the  tribes  of  Kunch  and  Mij  called  All  Mij  {Tuhiiqcit-i-X”%  • ' /
tribes  between  Tibet  and  Lakhiiauti.

^ Regarding  tins  the  Tibaqdt-i-^dsiti  says  that  a chicr  ..i  one  of  tke

[ t ]

liere  crO'sed  tlieir  route  culled  tlie  Bralimauputr,  wliicli  tliev  also
call  Brail!;! Krcli.  1;  three  or  foiu  times  the  size  of  the  Biuiges.
Shall  Gaisiui'p  5 Nvlieii  he  came  to  Hiudastan  built  a bridge  over
that  river,  anil  cr  ;sseii  it  ;,c  Kainrud  iind  vaeiit  on  his  way.  Muham-
53.  mad  Bakhtyiir  ciC'tvl  by  that  bi-idire.  and  leaving  certain  of  his
trusted  genez all  J 1 [■; elect  the  bi'idge  and  command  the  road,
entered  the  ttrrii>-i}  of  Tibet,  and  spent  ten  days  among  the
mountaina  and  d;dij’.,.c  ro.'tds.  and  at  last  ain-ived  at  a plain  in

nonntuin  trit.es  here. -en  L'lkhnft'Jti  ar,  I 'I'ibb-i:  the  Kiiucli-inj-and  Tiliarii
-ivho  arc-  .V'  of  ' i coinuo>'.r.!iC';  ( ***  ) 'md  speak  a

iaEgua^je  ..Uff-riim  bozii  from  tliat  of  InUir.  ami  that  of  Tibteit.  adopted  tlia
reiic'On  of  and  agiecd  to  act  as  guide  to  Muhammad  Bakhcyar  whom

he  conducted  to  a place  where  ihore  is  a city  called  Mardluin  Ivot  (i  r
Bardhaa  kot^  :..  in  front  of  which  flows  a vast  river  called  the  Bang  Mat!
and  when  it  enters  the  country  of  Ilindnstan  they  style  it  S.tiiiaiuuir  in  tho-
Hindi  dialect;  in  mageitudo,  width,  and  depth  it  is  three  times  the  bite  of  ti.o
Canges.

FroTu  this  point  the  uccrjunt  too  f says  that  they

joui'neyod  up  tlie  iivei  fur  ion  d.iyi  iOiioug  iS.e  inoiuiiLuius  till  they  came  to
an  old  bridge  built  of  hewn  stone,  ac.

Our  text  on  the  other  hand  .slates  t'lat  they  eroised  the  old  bridge  imnie-
diately  on  reaching  the  river  e/'t,  wnieh  they  journeyed  for  ten  days  in  the
monntains,  &o.

Badiioni's  statement  has  more  pv;;:. c e probability,  the  statements  of
tSie  Tm.  ■!  I'lt-  ' -y'dai,  i moreover  are  s .nicwhac  confused  and  contradictory.
KeiiLer  aiitiior  meutions  nu'.v  ioiig  the  out  airy’  force  took  to  reach  Bardhan.

It  sec-ins  lairly  certain  Uuiii  Bndh  account  that  the  city  of  Bardhan
was  el’,  the  near  side  of  the  rivc-i  . : .t  me  i.io"ii.g  ot  tl.o  river  was

impractioa’ble  at  tliat  point,  h,,w  f.tr  it  \.  teo.i  Kaeiiud,  wbere  iiadaoni  savg
they  crossed  by  the  bridge;  d'les  not  app.-’.ir.

MS.  (A)  Abardin  ; iMS.  (Cj  Alkardhan.

Tah.i  -.V  'vri  b.ij  a li'irdhau  (Il.ivorly  oOI  le.V  bj.  Calouita  ton  iias

Tala  I'it  cails  this  river  tho  Kuvorry  GGl  n '\  i.)

For  a fall  ditevL»:5ion  ut  tho  ultutiiy  of  tlio  river  cro’^-oil  aud  t'ne  place  of
t. ' :■»  o Ruvei’Cy  pp  oOi-505.  Tiic  only  additional  iiforiaaiion  triveu
Vy  the  I '-'o'  i.-t  that  tho  bridge  was  at  Kiiorutl,  and  it  heeins  not  imoosaib'e
that  ib  ' - •'  : th‘-  bridge  of  Sil  Uako  and  the  river  the  Braimiaputra  thoutdi
.r.rth^  it  v,a:i  the  Toesta.

• iSce  P-.,vt.;i\  p oGl  r 'c  9 and  Alifi-Ahbai(  III.  (Jarrett)  32^  ucv  i.

wliicli  was  a fort  of  gi“eat  strength : the  garrison  of  that  fort  who
were  descendants  of  Gushtasp  (that  foit  too  was  one  of  the  build-
ings erected  by  Gushtasp)  came  forth  to  light,  and  fought  so
bravely  till  nightfall  that  many  men  were  lost  on  the  side  of
Mahammad  Bakhtydr.  He  pitcht.!  his  cainpi  on  that  very  spot,
and  comine  down  received  tiJines  that  five  farsansTs  hevond  this
city  there  was  another  city  ' fior.i.  which  Turks  ali  warlike

and  ready  for  battle  would  come  tu  the  relief  uf  their  city.  The
folio wiiiij  day  iluhammad  Bakhtydr  Uut  thinking  it  advisable  to
remain  there,  and  not  being  able  to  oppose  therr,  turned  back  and
came  to  the  head  of  the  biide.;.  Befoie  his  arrival  the  Generals
in  charge  of  the  road  had  amoni;  themselves,  and  the

infidels  had  broken  two  ai.-he-  of  that  bridge.  The  army  of
Muhammad  Bakhtydr  had  liiis  liridge  in  front  and  the  infidels
kept  coming  up  in  their  rear.  aaJ  rouc’iit  with  determined
bravery.  In  that  neighboiirli  .ed  riarc  was  an  id..l  temple  ef  great
strength. 2 They  passed  the  ;.i_bf  I’.u  ' e by  ^oa.e  siiaiiigi'ni.  and
ill  the  morning  a ford  was  t'>  aro  a oai-ty  or  .nicu  vlie  mossed
by  the  ford  found  the  sami  i.f  .1. '■  liver  was  a sort  of  (p.icksand,
and  the  water  of  the  river  ertd.uully  growing  deeper  and  deeper,
the  greater  part  of  the  .<o!diers  of  Muhanimud  Bakh^^ydr  were
drowned  ill  the  ocean  of  de-itt umiou,  and  the  remnant  wbicli  re-
mained became  fuel  for  tin;  !:;•:■  .-r  tiic  inii  Id's  sv.-'.rd  and  attained
the  exaltation  of  martyrdom,  il  ihaiauiad  B idicyar,  ei‘i  many
thousand  men,  arrived  at  D.:.,  ,\  )t  witli  si-nie  three  or  I'oui  hun-
dred only,  and  fell  ill  from  vcv.rri..,!']  and  wa>  attacked  by  heetio
fever  5 and  used  to  sav  '■  no  d but  .Sultan  iMiihummaJ  Muizz-iid-
Diii  Sam  has  met  with  an  ,iccidx-iit  that  fortune  ia.s  gone  so
against  me.”  And  lyhen  weakness  took  pos^e^^i.jii  i.f  him  ‘All
Mai’dan  one  of  Muhammad  IJabjicyav's  greatest  gem  cal.- arrived  60
at  Deo  Kot  from  the  distii_t  of  Ahlrnuli  * and  tinding  him

i Called  Karpattan  ( 7ata'/;fr- i-V. ^ j see  Riverty  p.  567  uad  fur  a
fail  account  of  Hakhtyar’s  reertat  and  di-a-ters.

^ See  Itaverty  570  note  9.  re^urdinc  the  p,»ssdjle  locality.

* I take  thia  to  the  meaning  of  tue  text  * T/h

- M.SS.  (A)  and  (B)  See  llaveity  572,  note  7,  wner;  I c-  calls  tliia

Xal•au-koe^

L

j

OoJridclei!.  puii*-d  dov,-n  ilie  sliect  Troni  his  face  and  rutluc'sly  des-
p AtL'hed  him  willi  one  blow  of  a dagger.  This  event  happened  in
the  year‘6ij'2  H.  after  the  death  of  Sultan  Muizzn-d-Din ; and  after
the  death  of  Saltdn  Qutba-d-Din  this  same  Ali  ilardan  eventually
seized  the  reins  of  power  by  great  craft,  and  promulgating  the
ikutha  and  of  Lakhiianti  in  his  own  name  was  styled

Sultan  Alau-d-Dln,  and  from  the  excessive  folly  and  pride  and
arrogance  of  hi,^  mind  sat  quietly  in  Lakhnauti  and  divided
the  country  ot  Iran  and  Turan  among  his  adherents,  and  no  one
dared  to  say  ■■  the-se  dominions  are  ont.side  the  scope  of  the  Sr.ltan's
jiower  why  do  you  divide  them  t ’’  They  say  that  some  unfortunate
nioichant  laid  a complaint  of  poverty  before  Alau-d-Din,  who
a-ked  “where  does  this  fellow  come  from?”  They  answered
“from  Isfahan'’  tlien  he  ordered  them  to  write  a document  to
Isfahan  which  should, have  the  force  of  an  assignment  of  lai,d  to
him.  The  merchant  would  not  accept  this  document,  but  the
Vazirs  did  not  dare  to  represent  this  fact  and  reported  “ the
ruler  of  Isfahan,  l)y  reason  of  his  travelling  expenses  and  assem-
bling his  retinue  for  the  purpose  of  subjugating  that  country,  is  in
difficulties.”  He  thereupon  ordered  them  to  give  a large  sum  of
money  far  beyond  his  expectations ; and  when  his  tyranny  and
oppression  exceeded  all  bounds  the  Amirs  of  Khilj  consenting
together  put  him  to  death  and  raised  to  the  throne  Malik  Husamu-
d-Diii  Khilj i who  was  one  of  the  nobles  of  Khilj  and  Garmsir  and
one  of  tho  servants  of  Muhammad  Bakhtyar.  The  reign  of  Ali
Mardau  lasted  thirty-two  years.  “

Another  was  Malik  IIusainu-d-Din  * abovementioned  who
became  possessed  of  the  whole  country  of  Tiihut  and  Bengala
and  Jajnagar  and  Karariid  and  gained  the  title  of  Saltan  Ghiya.su-
d-Diii,  till  in  the  months  of  the  year  G22  H.,  he  sent  to  the  Sultan
Sliainsu-d-Um  lyaltimish  thirty-eight  head  of  elephants  and

1 Cf.  Tahaqdt-i-NdsxrC  57S.  He  would  appear  to  have  been  the  subject  of
eipausive  delusions  very  likely  an  early  symptom  of  the  general  paralvsia
which  would  have  declared  itself  later  had  he  not  been  removed.

S Both  MSS.  have  >> J but  as  a matter  of  fact  All  Mardaii
reigned  only  two  years  and  some  months  (see  also  Kaverty  580  note  7 )

• Malik  Hnsaieu-d-Dlu  ‘Iwaz.

r 87

seventy  thonsand  tayiqaJis  i in  cash  as  a present  and  acknowledge d 61
the  Sultan’s  authority^  as  will  be  mentioned,  if  God  (be  Me  exalted)
so  w’ill  it^  And  in  the  year  624  H.  ilalik  Xf1sira-d-Dm  Muham-
mad ibn^  Sultan  Sbamsu-d-Din  went  from  Oadli  to  Lakhnanti  at
the  instigation  of  some  of  the  Amirs,®  and  Ghiyasu-d-Din ^ who
at  that  time  had  taken  an  army  from  Lakhnanti  to  Kamrud  turned
back,  and  fougiit  a severe  battle  wtith  Malik  Xasiru-d-Din  and
was  taken  prisoner  together  with  tlie  majority  of  his  generals  and
was  put  to  death.  The  duration  of  his  reign  was  twelve  years.  ^

The  mention  of  these  few  kings  of  the  regions  of  Hindustan
incidentally  with  the  affairs  of  the  Sultans' of  Dehli  w'as  botli
opportune  and  necessary,  and  the  affairs  of  the  remainbig  Muizziyeli
kings  who  attained  to  the  Sultanat  of  Multan  and  other  kingdoms
are  mentioned  in  other  places.

SuLT.&  Akam  Shah  ibs  Qt-TDr-n-DL  Aiiak  ®

After  his  fatjier,  succeeded  to  the  throne.

In  the  world  no  family  remains  without  a master
If  one  departs,  another  takes  his  place  ;

Tliis  too  is  the  way  with  this  deceitful  world
The  father  departs,  the  son’s  foot  is  in  the  stirrup.

13y  the  consent  of  the  Amirs  he  marched  from  Lahore  to  Delhi.

In  the  meantime  Malik  .Shamsu-d-Din  lyaltimish,  who  was  a
servant  and  adopted  son^  and  son-in-law  of  Sultan  Qutbu-d-Din,

i Tinuiuh.  For  the  value  of  this  see  J.  K.  A.  S.  New  Series  Yol.  i.  p.  343
also  Raverty  584  note  2.  Thomas  Chr.  Pathan  Kings  of  Dehli  pp.  161  and
p.  49  note.

The  silver  tainiah  weighed  175  grains.  There  v'as  a com  known  as  rUe
kdni  which  was  of  a,  fcriqah,  while  anotlier  coin  was  intrcwlaced  under
Muhammad  Tughlaq  known  as  the  hlnek  tanqak  which  was  of  the  silver
tampih.

The  value  of  the  silver  fcauqrih  was  about  the  same  as  the  rupee.  See
Akhari  III.  (Jarrett)  362,  note  3.

^ The  text  should,  read  (j*^**'^  ^tiaX***  MSS.  A.  and  B.

^ Malik  Izzu-d-Dm  Jam.  See  Kavecfy,  p.  594,  note  1.

* CJlii}  Iwaz  ...  Husain  Khiljf.

5 Ho  was  the  last  of  the  Muizzi  Suitans  according  to  the  Tiihaqdt-i-S'>.Uin.

^ Succeeded  his  father  in  6i’7  II.  Cf.  Kaverty,  529,  note  4.  Thomas  po  40.

r 88  j

a'^d  had  trihntary  relations  with  Malik  Xa?iru-d-Diii  Qabachd'^
at  the  invitation  of  Sipah  )Sa!ar  Ali  Isma'il,  had  come  fiom
Hardwar  and  Badaim  to  Delili  and  had  taken  jjossession  of  the
citT  and  its  country.  When  Aram  Shah  arrived  in  the  vicinity
of  Debit  ilaiik  Sharnsn-d-Din  came  out  against  him  in  battle
array,  and  Aram  Shah  was  defeated.  The  duration  his  reign
vras  just  a year,  ^

^All  of  us  young  and  old  are  doomed  to  die
one  remains  in  this  world  lastingly
62.  Thi.s  is  the  way  of  the  lofty  sky.  It  holds

In  one  hand  a crown  in  the  other  a noose.

Sri.T.o’  Sn.tMStr-D-Ditr  ly.tLTiMiSH  “

Called  by  the  title  of  “ Yamin-i-Amir-al-Muminii:  ”

(Eight  hand  of  the  Commander  of  the  I’aithful.)

In  the  year  GOT  H.  ascended  the  imperial  throne  of  Dehli ; and
th.e  reason  of  the  name  lyaltiniish  is  that  his  birth  occurred  on
the  night  of  on  eclipse  of  the  moon,  and  the  Turks  call  a child

1 Mlrihaj.ns-.'iir.’J  mentions  tliat  at  Aram’s  death  Hindustan  was  dirided
iiV/.t-nr  piincc' ;liiic3.  Sind  in.  the  possesbion  of  Xasirti-d-L'in  Qabicl.ah  ;
tu’.l;  and  it-;  'hcrdicaie  divibi<ins  h'.Ionncd  to  Sliamsn-d-Diu  Iyal:iini,]j ;
I ■aLd.naiitl  ira.b  he  id  by  the  Kl'iij  chiefs  ‘Ali  ilia  ifii  luiviug  thiown  cS  Lis
•.ilegiance  on.  the  death  of  Qin’ou-d-Tiii.,  and  Lahore  reinaineJ  a aabjecc  of

'nientnon  fcetwe-.  a "’ne  rnlers  of  Sind,  Dclill  and  ^nziiiu.  See  Thomas’
P.ath'm  '.<.ing=.  p,  -I'''.

2 Ah:  irt  r.'/  Th.-so  vcivos  .are  from  the  Shahnamah  of  Fiialausl.  (t  it7e

S',  ihraniah  C Edition,  ii-- Tarner  JIacan,  1829,  Tol  I,  p.  3G1,  line

3.  1 A'cl.  I.  p 372.  line  5 Tlie  editor  of  c'ao  text  has  apparently  quoted

. _s  ■ f,-,’ - iry  or  po.s-.li.Cy  thev  were  in  the  AISS.  from  whi^  he-

prepared  the  r.-yr

’ la  AISS.  -A  : 1.  I B this  Word  is  clearly  written  This  te.xt  has

Ty.-.ltimisy.  or  Altainish  as  he  is  generally  called  was  the  firyt  sovereign
'.lemert  it  Ihodi  with  independeat  power.  He  received  .a  diploma  of
ir-\“Sticare  fr-  • . the  Ehalif  of  Ilaghdnd  [Al-Mustansir  b-illdh,  A.  H.  626]
o !.  ss  imporfv  : lec'.gnitior,  t.o  a .Aluliammedan  sovereign  and  one  t’nat  is
u-T  .'irka’ale  a~  beimr  the  earliest  notice  taken  by  the  arrogant  court  of
c-Aidad  of  th'-b  t.cw  Indo-iluhainniaaau  kirig-iom.  (Thomas,  p 13).

C 89  ]

born  under  these  circumstances  lyaltimish.'  His  father  was  the
chief  of  many  of  the  tribes  of  Turkestan.  His  kinsmen  under
pretence  of  taking  him  for  a walk  took  lyaltimish  into  a garden
and  sold  him  like  Joseph  to  a merchant,  from  there  he  happened
to  be  taken  to  Bokhara,  and  thence  in  the  time  of  Saltan
Muhammad  Sam  to  GBaziiin  ; and  in  tliese  days  Sultan  Qutbu-
d-Din  after  the  conquest  of  Xahrwalah  and  the  taking  of  Gujrat
bad  go&e  to  Ghazniu.  and  since  without  permission  of  Sultan
IMa’qammad  Sam  no  one  could  purchase  lyaltimish  he  asked
permi.ssion  from  the  Sultan  to  sell  him.  Sultan  jlahammad  Sam
said  that  since  he  had  given  orders  that  no  one  there  should  buy
that  slave  they  were  to  take  iiim  to  Delili  and  sell  him  there.
Sultan  Qutbu-d-DIn  after  his  return  from  Ghazniii  bought  a
slave  named  Ibak,  a name.sake  of  his  own.  and  lyaltimish,  at
Delili  for  MO. 00')  fangahs-.  at  first  he  called  him  Amir  Tamghach,*
and  appointed  him  to  the  Amirship  of  Tabarhindah,=  and  at  the
time  when  Sultan  Qutbii-d-Din  fought  with  Taju-d-Din  Talduz,

Ibak  his  slave  tasted  the  cup  of  death.  At  that  time  he  made
lyaltimish  an  e.sjiecial  favouiite,  and  after  the  cajdare  of  Clwiiliar
he  made  him  Governor  of  that  place,  and  subsequently  bestowed
upon  him  the  rule  of  'Baran  * and  its  environs,  and  since  he  63.
Leg.iu  to  shew  sign.s  of  extraordinary  bardiness  he  entrusted  the
country  of  Badiitin  to  him,  and  in  the  war  of  DIuizzn-d-Din
with  the  Khukhars  (as  has  been  already  related),  lyaltimish
having  got  together  a huge  army  from  Badaou  and  the  foot
of  the  hills,  joined  hands  with  Sultan  Muizzu-d  Din  in  the
service  of  Sultan  Qutbu-d-Dlu,  and  armed  as  he  was  having
forced  his  horse  into  the  river  ° engaged  the  enemy  bravely  several

1 Concerning  the  origin  of  tlio  n,vdie  see  lliomns,  p.  41.  ' it.;  1 The-  note  is  too
long  to  transcrilje  here,  bur.  briollv  it  may  be  said  licit  Hr  Kcdlmuso  to  wh.om
the  aboce  text  was  submitted  by  3Ir  Thomas  thinks  it  probable  that  on  iiig
to  errors  of  transcribers  of  the  Turkish  compound  word  the  (J  has  become
displaced  and  that  the  word  should  really  be  written  ay-tufidnuish

*=  eclipse  of  the  nmon.

This  explauation  seems  most  plausible.  In  Turk!  the  word  I

altanish  means  the  advanced  guard  of  an  army,  or  the  number  sixey.

S iis.  A.  5;U*J=  MS.  B.

S Tabarhindah  in  ilS.  A is  written

^ Baland  shahr,  (Thoniasb  Sue  iluntei  imp.  Gaz.  (p.  141).

® See  Tabaqdt-i'Nasiri.  It  was  the  rivei  Jliflain.

12

C so  ]

times  : Sultan  Muizzn-d-Din  bestowed  on  him  fitting  hononrs
and  'distinguished  him  royally  and  gave  him  high  recommendations
to  dik  Qntbn-d-Din,  and  went  to  the  greatest  possible  lengths
in  3 care  fcr  him  ; and  that  same  day  Malik  Qutbu-d-Din  wrote
his  letter  of  emancipation,  and  by  degiees  raised  him  to  the
dignity  of  Amir-ul-Umara  (Chief  of  the  Amirs)  till  his  affairs
reached  the  height  they  did.  And  in  the  beginning  of  his
reign  certain  of  the  Mnizziyeh  and  Qutbiyeh  Amirs  rebelled
against  him  and  suffered  punishment  and  became  food  for  the
pitiless  sword.  And  Malik  Tajn-d-Din  Talduz  after  he
had  suffered  defeat  by  the  Aimiy  of  Khwarazm  obtained  possession
of  Lahore ; Sultan  Shamsn-d-Din  coming  from  Delhi  to  meet
him  in  the  year  612  H.  drew  np  in  battle  order  on  the  confines
of  Tarayan  which  is  known  as  Serai  Talawari.i  After  a severe
battle  Snltan  Taja-d-Din  Yalduz  being  defeated  fell  a prisoner
into  the  hands  of  Shamsu-d-Din  who  sent  him  to  Badaon.  The
bird  of  his  sonl  there  escaped  from  the  prison  house  of  the  body
and  took  its  flight  to  the  nest  of  the  next  world.  His  tomb  is  in
that  city.

And  in  the  year  614  H.  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Din  came  into  conflict
with  Sultan  ‘ Nasirn-d-Din  Qabacha  who  had  married  the  two
daughters  of  Sultan  Qutbn-d-Din  one  after  the  other,  and  was
in  possession  of  TJchh  and  Multan,  and  victory  rested  with  Sultan
64.  Shamsu-d-Din,  and  for  the  third  time*  Sultan  Sliamsu-d-Din
went  up  in  person  against  him.  He,  having  fortified  the  castle
of  TJchh,  himself  went  to  the  fortre.ss  of  Bhankar,  and  Nizamul-
Mulk  Wazir  Jandi  pursued  him  while  tiie  Sultau  reduced  Uchh.
After  hearing  the  news  of  tfie  capture  of  Lmhh,  Xasiru-d-Diu
sent  his  own  son  Bahram  Shah  into  the  presence  of  the  Sultan
and  sued  for  peace.  Bhankar  also  was  captured.  And  in  the
year  615  H.  Nasiru-d-Din  was  overwhelmed  in  the  sea  of  destruc-
tion in  the  Punjab,  and  snrrendered  the  property  of  life  to  the  flood
of  death,  and  the  Sultan  turning  back  came  to  Delhi.  In  the
year  618  H.  Sultau  Shamsu-d-Din  raised  au  army  against  Sultan

J Cf,  Raverty,  p.  60S,  note  8.

8 According  to  the  Tazkiratu-I-Muh'«k  this  4\as  the  fiist  occasion  in
'which  Su'tau  Shamsu-d-Din  had  shewn  hostility  to  Nn«iru-(1-Din  Qabacha
Oil  the  otiier  hand  the  Tahaqdt-i-Xaairi  states  that  there  used  to  be  constant
contention  between  them  Badaoni  is  very  likely  correct  iu  his  statement.
See  Jiavoty  p.  bOU,  note  1.

[ 91  ]

Jalaln-d-Dm  Mangbnmi  * son  of  jOiwarazm  Shah  who  having
suffered  defeat  ai  the  hands  of  Changiz  Khan  after  Tajn-d-Din,
came  to  (^aznin  and  thence  from  fear  of  the  incursions  of
Changiz  Khan  had  gone  to  Lahore  with  his  family  and  relations;
and  Sultan  Jalaln-d-Din  not  being  able  to  withstand  him  went
towards  Sindh  and  Siwistsn  and  fi-om  there  by  way  of  Knob,
and  Makran  arrived  at  Kirman  and  Iiaq.*

And  in  the  year  622  H.*  Sultan  Shamsn-d-Uin,  took  an
array  towards  Behar  and  Lakhaauti  andbronght  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-
Diu  Khilji,  who  has  been  before  mentioned,  into  obedience,  and
having  accepted  the  present  above  mentioned,*  established  the
hhutba  and  in  hi.s  ow'n  name*  and  having  given  his  elder

son  the  title  of  Sultan  Nasiru-d-Din  Mahmud  ® made  him  his  heir,
and  having  made  over  that  country'  to  him  returned  to  the
metropolis  of  Delhi.  Eventmally  Malik  Kasiru-d-Din  Mahmud
having  fought  with  Ghiyasu-d-Din  on  the  confines  of  Lakhnauti
got  the  upper  Land,  and  having  taken  him  prisoner  put  him  to
death,  and  great  booty  fell  into  his  hands  which  he  divided  into
portions  and  sent  it  as  rewards  to  each  of  the  nobles  of  Dehli.  65.

t So  called  because  of  a mole  which  he  liad  on  his  nose  (Raverty  28,o,  no^e  3).

He  was  the  last  of  the  Khwarazm  Shaid  dynasty.  He  is  said  to  hare  rnrned
devotee  and  to  have  lived  till  688  H (Kaverty  299,  note.)  There  is  some  question
as  to  the  orthography  of  this  name.  'Thomas  p.  90,  note  1,  judging  from
inscriptions  on  his  coins  calls  him  ilankbarnin,  as  he  considers  the  hhal
letter  to  be  cl  » not  i.  '1  he  etymology  given  above  is  probably  correct  as
the  word  (meng)  in  Turki  means  grain  de  heaate  while  means

” (Diet  Turk.  Chientale  Pa.yct-de  CouvteWh)  the  word  ori^nalir  being
mengburun  would  in  Persian  have  become  altered  in  pronunciation
to  mangburun  and  with,  the  addition  of  the  ya  i-nisbat

Mangburuni.

* For  a full  reference  to  the  bibliography  of  this  expedition,  see  Elliott  11,

549.  See  also  Ain-i- Akbari,  Xol.  11.  Jarretc  34:1,  and  D’Heibeloc  art.

Gel.tleddin,  Yol.  II.  p 87.

5 Mistake  in  text  |*rr  where  422  H.  is  in  figures.

4 Thirty  elephants  and  eighty  laks  of  treasure.  ” ^{Tahaqdt  i-Xasrr:.}

^ See  Thomas’  Pathan  Kings,  p.  46.  It  is  not  said  here  kind  of

coinage — Thomas  puts  the  yeai’  620  A H.  as  the  first  of  the  silver  coinage.

6 MS.  (A)

7 The  word  (•i"l  in  MS.  A is  omitted  in  the  text  after  the  word

MS.  A continues  after  the  word  as  follows  : —

jyj,?  j j diJU  *L«  lijIJlL.  5

[ 92  i

^ [It  is  well  known  that  a poet  luime  Xnsii-l  an  ived  in  tliat  eonntry
from  Dekii  in  the  service  of  Hazrat  Khwaja  Qutba-d^Diu  L shi
niaij  God  satictijij  him  and  said  I hare  cotn^tt.seJ  a Qasida  in
praise  of  Siiltyii  Shamsu-d-Din.  Kead  the  I'atiha  that  I may
get  the  accastonied  reward.”  They  read  the  Fatiha  and  be
having  been  admitted  to  the  Sultan's  presence  read  tlds  Mat}a\

Oh  thou  fiuni  dread  of  whom  sedition  lic^s  sonuht  ref  age,
Whose  sword  has  sought  from  the  iutidels  property  and
elephants.

The  Sultan  by  the  meie  reading  of  that  ointla^  learnt  it  hy
heart  and  repeated  it,  and  \Nhen  ilie  was  Hui>hcd  ho  a-'k^d

How  many  couplets  does  this  Qasida  contain  ? The  answer  was  hfiy
and  three.  He  thereu]»on  ordered  thetii  to  give  him  rlilv-ihrce
thousand  white  taiiguhs.'J  Snh.'n;  Slinm=u-d-JJ  ii  in  [rho  ycr>]  Odd
H.  made  an  attack  upon  Run'!,, ud-hui- ^ aiul  ]i-i\ ine' hr.'UuFt  iiu
army  iliither  ledaced  that  lurti-ess,  and  in  the  y<.ar  021  II.  having

h [j  lo''  ^-^^I***  yxj

^yt  U/i'ii  j\  it  J

^*j|  j *^1 4^^*^  '-^■y  '•S'^ j

MS.  /B,  I’fru'U  r->  ii./Bo\v-3  ..  j

^ j~  j vii  ^ j

J di.  r"C  krr.'Tr  v.hu.  '[<.  ti.-  lijulo'-  Anu  ‘-d  Aii  ii'-'  i o r :ii-v  cdLnoii,  out
i:  c , I'/i'  ..-■  'jce’i  c td.Lr  01  U-  MS'?,  u .•  ■ u '•  I !ia  s <.•  at. >•

i L..':  ..'IM-J  ill  _ unuk'!.-:  UJV  li-jl  iu  Cli  I l.i  IIS  I l.lLv  6

S -V  iciUinLW  sai’.ii  known  Kaki  I’r  n'  tl.o  ' Rai:  ” or  Ca'.'  s \v]  ir;;'  v/ttp
s'ii;j)ii-ti  ic  the  nr”‘'k..t  Klii/r  t )r  tl.**  -i.-'i*  (..in' ■*  v'l  !ii^  tu’ai!/  ['‘i’  ".ln.'n
JC'  'u  ■',  ic:  'fiS  letr  iiiin  iio  Risuif*  c.i  I'^akc  pii^vi.xict;  >t-''  i jl.

( JuiTt'tt , O'  s-',  ' '"V  2,  lie  dio«l  A H 63  4-,  and  i-  bci--"'!  m 1 )r  hii  m^iO  Ka\  ert  v
p.  021.  /'■:♦  b.  ih.ri  para.  ‘ A il-:-A’.  <if\  11.  (.Jui'iect'  27u  1

® I'lie  .'•iivei  tai.c.L  pitjce  of  175  ^radi::

4*  A iRpjro  uf  iii.s  fortic'-i  i"  viv».*n  iii  Ti“!Tc.i,tU-''cr  V<.1.  T Faoii'ii  p 3‘^o
plate  XX.  lit;  desi. rlba3  it  arj  a furU\  ss  ,-,;tirite  i at  the  iiOaO  oi'  a iiarr'>'.v
gorge  taut  a cun  be  Keltl  by  aat*  p no  ‘“-.l.iaiH b..- u -piiut*-

of  water  arising  from  the  lucks  aal  tormi-.g  ..  stiena  ..kkh  run„  down

[ ya  ]

detailed  a large  army  to  attack  and  capture  tlie  fort  of  Mandur,i
brought  that  fort  together  with  tlie  Siwahk  hills  into  the  circle
of  his  conquest  and  re  lined  to  Delili,  and  iu  this  same  year
Andr  ItuLuui  ^ who  was  one  of  the  most  leai’ued  men  of  that
time  came  to  Dehli  from  Bukhara  in  the  affair  of  Chanyiz  Khan,
and  wrote  seveial  brilliant  odes  of  congratulation  upon  these
victories,  of  which  the  following  verses  are  an  extract.

The  faithful  Gabriel  carried  the  tiJicga  to  the  dwellers  in
heaven.

From  the  record  of  victories  of  the  Sultan  of  the  age
Sharasu-cl-Din,

Saving  — Oh  ye  holy  angels  raise  upon  the  lieavens,

Heaiiiiq'  this  e'ood  tiding.^,  the  = canopy  of  adorninenf.

That  from  the  hiiid  of  the  htreiics  the  Shahanshah  of
Isicim

Ha.s  conquered  a .second  time  tlie  fort  re.scmbliug  the  sky;

Tlie  Sluih.  holy  wairior  and  Gh.izi,  whose  hand  and  sword

The  .soul  of  the  lion  of  rc-peated  attacks  ^ praises

And  there  are  also  ocher  many  cliarming  poems  attributed  to
him,  of  which  the  following  ode  is  one  : —

i’jom  the  tongue  of  the  pen  my  own  story  I tell  in  the
words  of  the  pen

to  S'  lii.vjiour  two  mil'  > Ui'omt  iTlu's  jil.ice  is  not  marked  on  Rennell’s  map),
f!  "tl.  ~ rl' i-  I i.cfo  are  < I'l'T!!'  am  n '.III  .'f  tlie  rocks  in  the  fort  to  collect
th  ".''M  11  it'ct.  It  is  enteivd  bv  foil''  gates  approached  by  steps  cut  iu
' . 1 .(

- ''1  lA  -ii.Lt’-vtr  {T.(}  p d*!.  note  3,  Mandwar  .''Ai

iit.Tp,  31' 'iivi',)- -ai*  Lon^.  77  Lut  27.  Ili.';  It'-  A’.''.'. f'l'a

■ s-”  t'.-’  •siiuaTi''ii  <>;■  ur  3iiiii'Ia.\\ nr.  Tg  1.

' ’ ■ -M.i.  ■Mr;nir\ini'  dt'  .ivec  uiu*  fortorosso  a 13  inilles  Nurd  do

Dj.  I'Uii  T,  i>  i]ie  t>»rt  Lore  caliod  AFundu.

^ Al'U  Bukr  litii  3liihaini!iad  Ali  Samartjandi.

•'  3l''  'Ay  wt‘  harr'  instead  of  as^  in  tiiC  t.-xr  tlie  words

wiiic’i  ajij'C-ars  a better  reading,  **  the  canoj'j'  of  adoi anient,'*
I i\-i\  f*  '.1  f fc  1 f'd  it

.\1'-  M!  I h.i«  u.'dirl  wliich  id  evidently  a copyist’s  error  for

^ J!A  is  u name  < >f  •All  v% ho  is  cuiieJ  Asad  ‘Cllah  or  by  the

Per&iaii^  bhii-i'Kl  iria  'I  ht.-  li'>n  Of  God.

66.

I 9^  ]

On  llie  page  of  my  life,  tbough  tbe  writing  or  grief  Las
been  ti’aced  by  tbe  pen

Since  I lived  in  this  world  with  the  pen  all  my  days  Lave
been  black  as  the  pen

And  swift  as  I write  mj  account,  so  fierce  is  tbe  point  of
tbe  pen

That  like  to  my  own  gentle  voice  is  tbe  sharp  loud  laaieot
of  tlie  pen.

Altbongh  in  tbe  midst  of  my  loss  I reap  always  rewards
■fiom  the  pen.

Still  no  one  will  mention  my  state  to  rny  Lord  save  tbe
tongne  of  tbe  pen.

’Tis  from  I^waja  Mansiir  bin  Sa‘id  thrives  tbe  market  of
test  of  tbe  pen

That  great  one  whose  words  load  tbe  bnrden  of  truth  on
tbe  van  of  the  pen.

He  lias  monnted  his  beautiful  thoughts  on  tbe  steed  of  bis
Swift  running  pen.*^

In  the  road  of  jnst  rnling  bo  gallops,  light  bolding  the  rein
of  the  pen.

His  skill  hand  in  band  with  his  wisdom  reveals  bidden
arts  of  tbe  pen.

*And  in  tbe  year  626  H.  Arab  Ambassadors  came  from  Egypt  *
bringing  for  him  a robe  of  bononr  and  titles,  and  ont  of  joy  at  this
they  built  triumphal  arches  in  tbe  city  and  held  banquets.  And  in
this  same  year  tbe  tidings  arrived  of  the  death  of  his  son  Snl^n
67.  Nasirn-d-Din,  Governor  of  Lakbiiauti,  and  the  .Saltan,  after  com-
pleting the  duties  of  mourning,  gave  his  name  (t.e.,  Nasirn-d-Din)
to  his  younger  sou  after  whom  tbe  Tahaqdt-i-Ndsiri  is  named.  In
the  year  627  H.,  be  proceeded  against  Lakhnanti  and  quieted  the
disturbances  of  those  regions,  and  after  entrusting  tbe  govern-
ment of  that  place  to  Tzzn-1-Mnlk  Malik  ‘Alan-d-DIn  Khafl®
l eturned  to  tbe  capital  and  in  the  year  629  H.  reduced  the  fortress
of  Gwallar.  Malik  Taju-d-Din  the  Secretary  of  State,  wrote  the

1 MS.  (A)  Jiy  j!r-  b

3 This  must  liave  bfen  from  BagUdW  from  the  Khalifat  A1  Mnstar.sir
b-ii.ah.  S'eo  Kaverty  616.  itofe  2.

3 MS,  (A)  MS.  (B).  as  in  tho  text  Tahaqdt-i-

reads  Alau-d-Dm  Jdn{.  See  p.  G18,  notesi.

[ 95  ]

following  quatrain  upon  tlie  taking  of  that  fort,  and  they  en-
graved it  upon  stone  : —

Evei’y  fort  which  the  king  of  kings  conquered
He  conquered  by  the  help  of  God  and  the  aid  of  the  faith :

That  fortress  of  Kalevvar  and  that  strong  castle
He  took  in  the  year  six  hundred  and  thirty.  ^

It  is  apparently  the  date  of  the  siege  which  accounts  for  the
difference  of  one  t ear.  And  in  the  year  631  H.*  having  made
an  iiicuraion  in  the  direction  of  the  province  of  Maivvah  and
taken  Bhilsa  ^ and  also  captured  the  city  of  Ujain,*  and  hav-
ing destroyed  the  idol-temple  of  Ujain  which  had  been  bnilt  six
hundred  years  previously,  and  was  called  Mahakal,  he  levelled  it  to
its  foundations,  and  threw  down  the  image  of  Sai  Viki-am.ijit
from  whom  the  Hindus  reckon  their  era  ^ (the  author  of  this
selection,  by  the  order  of  the  Khalifa  of  the  time,  the  Emperor,
the  Shadow  of  the  Deity,  in  the  year  972  H and  again  anew  in
the  year  1003  H®  with  the  assistance  of  Hindii  pundits  trans-
lated 32  stories  about  him  which  are  a wonder  of  relation  and
strange  circnmstance,  from  the  Hiudui  iutotlie  Persian  tongue  and
called  it  Hama-i-^iirad  Afza  — ) and  brought  certain  other  im-
ages of  cast  molten  brass  placed  them  ou  the  ground  in  front  of
the  door  of  the  mosque  of  old  Dehli  ^ and  ordered  the  people  68.
to  trample  them  underfoot  and  a second  time  he  brought  an  army
against  Multan  ; * this  expedition  was  in  every  way  unfortunate

1 26tli  of  tbe  month  Safnr  630,  A H,  (Tabaqdt-i-Nafiri),  1232,  A.D.

5 632  H (Tabaqat-i-NafirC)  p.  621,  T,ofe  6.

* Bhilsa  on  the  Betwa,  is  a place  of  Hindu  pilgrimage,  in  its  neighbourhood
are  many  interesting  Buddhist  topes.

* Djjaiu  on  the  Sipra,  was  in  ancient  times  the  capital  of  Jtfalw^  and  the
spot  which  marked  the  1st  meridian  of  Hindu  geograohers.  It  w.as  the
city  of  Vikraniaditya  See  Hunter,  Imp.  Gaz  , and  Tieff.  Vol.  I.  p-  346.

6 Ain-i-Akbar{  (Jarrett)  II.  15,  notes  2,  3.  Aiberuni,  (Sachnu)  II.  5,  6.  The
Samvat  era  commencing  from  57  B.  C.

S 1.'564  A.D.  and  1594.  A.D.  Al-Badaom  died  according  to  the  7a6aqaf-t-
Skdh  hdiam' in  the  year  1034,  A.H.  ;I61j  A.D.,.  I can  liinl  no  mention  of
the  Nimii-i-lCliirail  Afzii.  and  can  oder  no  sn-ruestion  as  to  what  this  work
wa.s  a trans’atiun  of.  possibly  it  w.is  of  one  of  nalidasa's  poems  jj  j

(Bl.  >5  J>  >-^1 J (A).  The  tert  (C  . arriao,  wiii^  t: .,y

7 See.l-iip  Gaz.  art.  Deiiii.

* 3ee  l.aTerty  623.  ,o:e  8,  win- hoMs  that  this  Sf  i ^il  i r.-oisc.

r (.  ".td  !'.>  '-u>e  v*-'  0 .i - t

[ 96  ]

for  him,  and  a very  fspvere  bodily  illness  afflicted  him,  he  so  returned
and  came  to  Deldi,  and  in  the  year  633  H,  ( ll!35  A D.)  left  this
lodcfiiicr  honse  of  the  world  for  the  eternal  mansions  of  the  next
world.  Tie  duraticm  of  his  sultanate  was  twenty-six  years.

Terse.

For  this  reason  this  heart-enthralling  palace  became  cold.

Because  when  yon  have  warmed  the  place,  they  say  to  yon
Rise  ^

And  the  prince  of  poets  * (ort  Jihn  he  mercy)  says  : —

® [In  all  Hindustan  you  saw  the  dn.st  of  the  troops  of  lyalti-
mish

Look  now  drink  your  wine,  others  walk  in  his  phiinl

It  is  the  same  Dehli  one  would  say,  yet  where  is  his  victori-
ous canopy  ?

It  is  the  same  kingdom  at  all  events,  where  has  that  royal
disjuity  of  his  gone  f

The  earth  is  a house  of  mourning,  and  rnourns  too  for  its
own  sake

At  the  time  of  the  birth  of  that  child  whom  they'  see
weeping.

It  is  a well  known  story  that  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Din  was  a man
of  a cold  tonipei’ameiit,  and  once  upon  a time  lie  desired  to  consort
with  a pretty  and  comely'  girl,  hut  found  tliat  he  had  not"  the
power.  The  same  Tlnni,'  Inippe-uc-d  several  times  : one  day  the  girl
was  pourintr  some  oil  on  the  head  of  the  Sultan  and  .shed  some
tears  upon  the  Sultan’s  head.  He  raised  lii.s  head  and  asked  the
cause  of  her  weeping,  after  a great  deal  of  in.  sitation  slie  an.s\ver-
ed  : I had  once  a brother  who  was  bald  like  you  and  that  reminde,!
me  of  him,  and  I wept.  hen  he  had  heard  the  story  of  his  being
imjirisoiieJ  it  benme  evi  lent  that  she  was  the  own  sister  of  tlic

t Nizami.

S ilir  ^icsru  Delilavi.  A feiv  translatril  selections  from  tlio  works  of  tliis
poet  -nill  be  fotincl  ill  Elliott,  Vol.  iii.  p .ir;!,  and  a notice  of  the  poet  historian
at  p.  07  of  the  sime  volnine.  His  full  was  Yaiiu'nn-ii-Diii  .Mnliaminaa

Hasan,  he  is  saiil  to  have  left  behind  him  some  half  imlHon  of  ver.ses.  Efe
was  horn  in  esi  A 11.  (1-73  A. U.)  and  died  in  72.7  A.li.  A.D.j  but

aceoiilinc  to  the  A'uda  his  death  occurred  A.H.  752  (A.D.  1351).

8 Nut  in  M.S.  l A I.

L

97

Sultan,  and  that  God  belie  glormed  and  had  pre^.-.  red

him  from  this  incestuous  intercourse.  The  wv.i'jv  cf  these  | na'cs
heard  this  story  fi’om  the  lips  of  tlie  Eli-ild’.i!;  i r t’:  worhi.  i la
Akbar  Shah  mmj  Ll-id  ri'tke  Pw / se  • -r  ; in  idh,-  ‘ir
and  also  in  Lahore,  cue  eveiiiijy  uht-u  he  ];ad  .'  i-i’n^ioned  _ ..  o
the  prirate  apartments  of  tlie  ca  ami  h.  . eui\  ei~  o •;  n

him  on  certain  topics,  lie  said,  I i.eard  r;_:^  =1  ly  fi-un:  'in.

Ghiyapj-d-Din  Bai'oan  and  tl.ey  s.o.J  that  Y.heu  r.ie  Sultan  ' . .led
to  hare  connection  with  that  ft-iil  her  c.!t''nie;  -a  used  coma
on  [and  this  occurrence  was  at  the  time  of  «:  in'cc

SuLTAX  Rckxc-p-DIx  Fip.ca  SkIh  IPX  S;;a;>  ;-:-Drx

Who  in  his  father's  time  ha,d  several  times  ’ cet;  in  ciia:  .•'•e  of
the  districts  of  Biuldoa.  and  afterwatds  had  reoeired  rr.e  ‘ niopy
and  staff  of  aathoiity,  and  while  hoKlinsr  the  country  of  chore
was  his  heir-apparent,  succeeded  TO  the  throne  i-r  e.-ritonr  , f the
authorities  in  the  aiore'^aid  yea’’,®  and  jialih:  Taju->,i-l);n  Ijis
secretary  3 wrote  this  congratulatory  ode  iii  iionjur  of  his  aece.s-
sion  —

All  hall  to  the  everlasting  kingdom.

Above  ail  to  the  king,  in  liis  heyday  cf  ro  uth,

Yamlnu-d-Daulat  Ruknu-d-D;n

Whose  door  beearoe  like  the  Ruku-i-Yaniani  ’ ’roni  :’s  aus-
piciousne's.

When  lie  ascended  the  throne,  he  openc’l  ti  e d’  or-’  - f the  trea-
sury, and  gave  full  .scope  to  his  taste  for  ri. and  tvant  ...imss
and  indolence  and  slotli,  and  used  to  -.priiJ  his  in  - c;r,  ;s  p,
the  company  of  prost irutes  and  Auacrabonds.

When  thy  heart  inclines  towards  iJ.'  -vi:  >>  sl.on

E.vcepc  the  tavern  keeper-  am.  the  ■•ii.'i.’ian  who  irill
praise  thee.

I The  words  in  brarcets  .are  not  found  in  either  MS.  A or  (Tl  i,

8 633  A.H.

* MS.  {Aj  omit.s  j bf  fore

^ The  south  cotnt;r  of  the  K-ababa,  a spot  .jf  speci.t!  vener-crMU  .’o  o * '■«
Bnrt..fi’s  pilgrimam'  to  El  Medina  .ind  Mecca,  til.  In-.  Ilighe-
Isl'ini,  CIS  .See  ai-o  Alnir's  Life  of  ji.ir.-}  let,  IT.  36,  n:.u.
t C-s’ :CM  M.-^.  .A',_,rs

1;:

69.

L ]

Ahil  h’^  mot!;*  r Tuikau  Khatiin,^  who  was  a Turkish  slave  girl,
liit'v  iiij-  u liuea  ab^iiiiiCe  power,  used  to  vex  the  other  coDCuhines  of
the  Sululu  ag.uust  whom  her  envious  heart  burned,  in  varioos
wav-,,  and  put  to  death  Quthu-d-Din  the  eldest  son  of  the
S.'-tai  bv  ani'tl  vr  eoiicahinc  The  treasury  became  empty,  and
79  .0  - ■ .'-..i-l  Si-ah  the  younger  brother

f‘i  ne  .'rnifa...  v.ii,  u.ts  ra..  r ot  Oiidh,  refu.sing  to  actnow-
his  autb  ,:ity  revolted  against  him,  and  Malik  Tzzu-d-
Iibi2  fijiJ  Kaolr  Khan  Sultani  governor  of  Multan,  and  Malik
Sid.-'a-d-Uin  feulatory  of  Mansi,  entering  into  correspondence
V,  itli  one  anot'uer  rai.sed  the  standard  of  opposition.  Snitan
Rnknu-d-Din  Firoz  Shah  had  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Mansurptir  and  Tar-ayan  with  the  intention  of  quelling  this
disturbance,  and  before  this  occnirence  Nizamu-1-Mnlk  Jnnaidi
the  Wazir  and  Agent  of  the  torriiory  of  Hindustan,  fearing  the
Snitan  had  lied  to  Kllughaii^  and  had -gone  in  the  direction  of
Kol  and  joined  hands  with  Malik  Tzzu-d-Din  Mohammad  SMari ;
and  other  trusty  Amirs  who  had  remained  in  the  army  having
fled  from  the  vicinity  of  Mansurpur  went  to  Dehli  and  having
sworn  * fealty  to  Razziyah  Khatun  who  was  the  eldest  daughter
of  Saltan  Shamsu-d-Din,  and  his  heir  apparent  according  to  her
father’s  will,  and  a woman  endowed  with  excellent  qualities,
hrave,  generous,  and  intelligent,  jai.sed  her"  to  the  throne  and
iinpri.sone. I Turkaii  Khatun.  "When  the  Sultan  having  returned
from  the  army,  arrived  at  Kilukhari,  the  troops  of  Snitan  Ra^iyah
went  ont  to  meet  him,  and  having  seized  him  without  fighting
impri.soned  him,  and  he  died  in  prison.^  The  duration  of  his
leign  was  six  months  and  a fraction.

1 Slifili  Tnrkan,  styled  Khnrtan-anda-i-Jahan.

2 Tcie  Tn'baqut-iS'('<-r'/  Bay.s,  ‘‘  ihilik  ‘Izzu-d-Din,  Muhaimnad  Salari  who

was  the  feadatory  of  Bad.vaii  broke  one  into  rebellion  : and  in  another  direc-
ti'in  M.ihk  ‘Izzu-d-Dm  K-ibir  Khan  feoffee  of  Multan,  Malik  Saifn-d-

Ijiii  Ku]l  feudatory  of  Hansl,  and  Malik  Alan-d-Din  Jani  who  held  the  fief
of  Labor  united  toofetner”  and  revolted.  Raverty,  pp.  633,  634.

5 Kilukhari,  a snh-.rh  of  Dehli.

i VS.  (Aj

6 In  cht'  yo  u ii-’-i-  ii  , I'^th  of  A^w^al.

lUs  V.  ■-  ’ »'>.ibly  diM''  to  occurring  as  it  did  acoording^  to

'/M  tii«  (Jtsy  of  ni  seizure  and  imprisonment.  See  Eavertv,  p.

63G.  ?iO‘*  -i.

[ 99  ]

Do  not  set  thy  heart  upon  the  world,  for  it  is  a stranger
Like  the  singer  who  is  every  day  in  a new  iiouse.

Among  the  poets  of  that  age  [^aiid  the  master  of  that  time]  ^
of  Ruknn-d-Din  was  Sliihab  Mahaiiira  Ba'taoni®  as  ?'Iir  Khusrfi  ^
on  him  be  mercy  says  iu  one  of  his  openinir  odes

In  Budaon  Muhamra  ri'P<  intoxicated  foim  sleep
If  tliere  comes  forth  from  this  n.elody  the  sound  of  the
birds  of  Dehli

And  Malika-l-Ealam  Fakhra-l-Mu'k  ‘AnildTulaki*  mentions
him  as  a master®  and  since  the  speech  of  the  modern  ( poets)  after
t!ie  appearance  pf  the  cavalcade  of  the  Prince  of  poets  has  be-
come like  .the  stars  at  the  time  of  the  raising  of  the  banner  of  71
the  glorious  sun,  and  like  the  seven  poems  ® at  the  time  of  the
descent  of  the  inspired  revelation  upon  the  best  of  men,  and  the

1 [ ] not  in  MS.  CA).

• The  name  is  wrongly  given  in  MS.  (A)  MS.  (B)  and  the  text.  The  real

name  of  this  poet  is  Shihabu-d-Din  ibn  Jama!n-d-l)in  Mntmara  ( ).

He  was  known  as  Shihab-i-Macraara.  The  verse  here  quoted  should  be  as
follows  ;

fjJ  4,5— ^*5  , i *ij

In  Madaran  Shahab-i-Mntmara  rises  intoxicated

If  he  hear  the  sound  of  the  singing  of  the  birds  of  Debli  m this
melody.

Vide  Majma^u-l~Fusahd,  Yol.  I.  page  304.

• Mir  Khnsru.  the  celebrated  poet  born  at  Patiali  6.51  A-P.  Died  725  A.H.
the  author  of  99  poetical  works  (Beale'  (ilajraa'u-l-Fusahj'j  see  a ere  4.  page  68.

• MS.  (A)  Lu3'aki  We  should  read  "Amid  Lumakl.  Fakhru-I-Mulk

E3iwaia  ‘Amldu-d-Din  commonly  kuown  as  ‘Amid  Dailami.  the  paxiegyrisfc  of
Sultan  Muhammad  Yamln,  said  bv  some  to  have  been  a native  of  Gilan,
called  also  ‘Amid  Lumaki.  Majma^u-l-Fusahu  1,  353.

* 6 MS.  (A)  j.

6 The  olaUJl  or  seven  poems.  The  well-known  poems  of  the
Jahilljat  or  pre-Islamic  age.

See  Introduction  to  Ancient  Arabian  Poetry^  by  C.  J.  I yall,  pp.  xxxii  (Effect
of  al-Islam  on  the  old  Poetry)  and  xliv.  (The  Mu'allaqat...

See  also  Noldeke  (Beitrage  zur  Kenntuiss  der  Poesie  der  alten  Arabe,
pp.  rvii  and  aeq.

See  also  Arabian  Poetry  (Clouston)  pp.  xy.vi  aud  aeq.

[ 100  ]

Lord  of  the  ^orld  on  him  he  peac^,  remains  concealed  as  by  a
curtain — men  speak  and  write  less  concerning  tliem.  nay  more  they
do  not  even  possess  them — accordingly  in  harmony  with  tlie
sayinff,  TAe  ni-s‘  corner  hoe  the  heel  of  it,  I have  tlioiiglit  it  in-
cumbent unoii  me  to  include  a few  odes  iroiu  that  easinent  author
as  a benediction  and  blessins,  in  this  compositiou  of  mine,  and
to  leave  a memorial  for  his  friends,  and  ti  establish  my  own  con-
nection with  the  master,  and  to  display  upon  the  diiis  of  evidence
the  excellencies  of  that  doughty  bniglit  of  the  arena  of  elo-
quence, ai\d  more  especially  to  fuitil  the  demarid>  of  fellow-citi-
zenship. The  master  poet  Shihab  ^ Muliamra  [BadaouiJ  then  says
as  follows  : -

I am  A.lif  in  the  table  of  existence  and  of  no  value  as  a sign.*
My  exi.=;tence  depends  upon  the  duration  of  the  existence  of
others,  my  own  existence  is  transitory

I stand  at  the  end  of  tlie  row  * in  the  hope  of  obtaining  a
better  position,  having  rested  from  all  movement  with  the
attributes  of  insignificance.

I have  not  the  attributes  of  Alif  for  Alif  has  no  crookedness.  *

All  my  writing  has  become  crooked  on  the  jiage  of  desire.

Hiere  is  the  song  of  the  nightingale,  the  rose  is  hapjiv  while
I am  careless  like  the  lily.^

1 See  note  o,  pajre  70.

S Alif  Stands  for  1.  in  tiie  namorijol  vr ' '.e  of  letters,  a;  d is  looked  upon  as
haring  no  iucriiisi.,-  rr.;  .e.  h.u  ssrring  as  the  start. i.g  pl'-.c<‘  cr

ori^xin  for  other  numb^is.

In  U3  literal  vnlue  aUo  it  is  j tbar  ir  no  (.anabil't^-  (j*

being  pronounced  till  it  is  compoundea  v-uS  tutme  oiher  .'■u  <nol  a--  * ’rm.  -n

8 Alif  must  stand  at  the  eml  eit^or  /.t  a nord  m in  '>  ,,«•  a stilable

as  in  o-xLf  7 nuaf.  The  Abf  at  the  coaiuieiicenioiir,  La>.  a ' fi

^ MS;?.  (A  ; ' 11 . '-5*^

6 'Tl)e  Idris  said  l.y  th-  p.i.-rs  not  he  affected  i-.y  ite  ,,^115  of  the
nightingale  and  to  remain  speefliV-i.,.  .

Pity  it  is  that  s-!ch  a nightingale  as  I living  in  such  a garden  and  haring
80  Street  a tong'ie  shi>u]ii  be  silent  as  the  lily

[ 101

Like  Alif  I have  no  tongue,  what  have  I to  do  with  ten
tongues  ^ ?

Since  1 c<aii  seize  ic  ^ -while  thus  at  rest,  Why  should  I
pursue  y

Since  I cannot  see  openly  how  can  I follow  a hidden  path  ?

By  stratagem,  I can  recognize  no  distinction  between  earth
and  heaven,  although  I am  like  the  heaven  in  my  whirling,
and  like  the  earth  stationaiy.

I am  not  like  water  in  freshness,  nor  like  lire  in  sublimity,
nor  like  the  wind  in  sweetness,  nor  like  the  earth  in
heaviness.

^ The  ten  tougues  of  the  lily  are  of  ireq-ueiu  oiontion  in  Persian  poetry,
cj.  Hilh.

O'O  *o

(Xm  [j  i-At;

Were  Hafig  like  the  lily  emlowc-d  wrh  ic-n  itn-cues

fiis  lips  in  thy  presence  would  cViuaUi  5-caiod  like  tuo  lips  of  the  rosebud,
also

^ LcU  ^ J

I sir  alone  utterly  heedless  of  thy  cvpres^j-Hke  form
Even  though  like  the  lily  my  body  A>L-re  cleft  into  tongues.

The  lily  is  of  four  vai-rtic^.  Tto  wliite  variety  is  called

^v^an-i‘dzdd,  see  BHrhun-'‘--'ic~tfi'’  v.  to  flu*  TloKi  ’id-  'a  j iVjir

its  properties  are  those  of  iieut  and  ilr\  ut>-v  utid  it  is  u.'^efal  in  the  headaches
of  fever.

The  dfcUiZd  ■,}id -adh'hja  states  that  th*  v.ord  S-'.-an  is  an  Arabicised  form
of  tliB  Sc5'/>J  The  article  may  he  eoiiiultcd  for  fuitr.cr  information

regarding  the  varieties  and  properties  of  these  liUe^.  The  linear  leaves  of
the  lily  are  compared  to  tongues.

3 ilS.  (B)  ‘

The  text  should  read  —

j*jy

p ij  Cji  — Cj  Aj^

]

72.  I am  not  made  ont  of  these  four  elements.’  I am  composed  of

the  effluvia  of  the  kennel.  The  refuse  of  the  sewer  wafer
has  boasted  of  piety.  *

My  wisdom,  as  though  incarnate,  seems  to  have  taken  to  praise
my  faults  ; my  avarice,®  huge  as  a mountain,  has  girded  its
loins  for  taking  presents.

I am  become  fixed  in  the  way  of  avarice,  not  a sign  of  truth
remains  in  me.  The  oppression  of-  my  vices  has  over-
whelmed the  mercies  of  the  Sscred  Book.

My  gi’eediness  has  so  deceived  me  that  the  five  sensual  appe-
tites have  taken  away  from  my  heart  with  disgrace  the
blessings  of  the  readings  * of  the  ‘‘asli.ars.

My  inner  natni’e  as  well  as  my  body  is  devoid  of  meditation
and  recollection.  My  eye  like  my  ear  is  inclined  to  the
singing  women  and  their  songs.

I desire  brilliant  speeches  to  fall  from  my  tongue  which  is  like
a well-tempered  sword.  My  pen  has  made  me  bent  like  a
sickle  ® in  the  pursuit  of  my  daily  bread.

My  speech  has  failed  me  because  its  glory  was  in  .the  relation
of  this  story.  Tes  ! all  this  loss  of  honour  was  owing  to
inordinate  desire-  for  bread.

I am  that  mean  one,  less  than  the  least,  who  am  not  worth  a
groat,*  if  you  think  me  worth  a barleycorn,  you  will  not
buy  me  for  nothing.

1 For  the  eonstitorion  and  properties  of  .the  four  elements,  see  Sadtdi,
{.Asiatic  Lithographic  Press,  Edition  12t4  A.H.,  page  7.)

Bahiu-l-Arlcdn,  two  of  the  four  are  light  and  two  of  them  are  heavy.  Fire
is  .-ibsolntely  light,  air  is  relatively  light  Earth  is  absolntclv  heavv  while

•water  is  relatively  heavy The  three  kingdoms  (animal,  vegetable  and

mineral)  are  composed  of  an  adniixtore  of  these  four  elements.

5 MSS  (A)  (B)

jlj  W 3 jb  rfii

8 MS  (A)

* The  reading  of  the  Qur'an,  which  is  divided  into  portions  called  ‘ashars
consisting  of  ten  Ayats.

8 The  a bill-hook  or  reaping  hook,  is  cnrved  like  a sickle  and  very

sharp.  It  is  also  called  das.  {Burkdn-i-i^dti' .)

6 MS.  (A)

[ 103  J

Oh  Shihab  it  is  strange  that  yon  in  this  ro  of  kingly  affairs
are  neither  the  Amir  of  the  Eight  Squares  ^ nor  the  Knight
of  the  Seven  Places  *

Yon  are  not  an  angel,  nor  are  yon  a devil,  from  tvhat  workshop
are  you  ? Yon  are  not  a sojourner  nor  yet  a traveller,
from  what  court  are  yon  ?

Your  heart  and  intellect  are  careless  of  the  tortures  of  the
grave,  you  have  dressed  yourself  in  Gurkhani  silk.  ^

Yon  have  become  utterly  regardless  from  lust,  owing  to  desire
for  license,  from  urgent  desire,  bt-  means  of  false  accusatipn
yon  have  planted  the  foot  of  success.

Sorrow  for  the  tulip-cheeked  beloved  has  shut  fast  the  door  of
your  wisdom.  The  vein  of  your  eye  has  shed  blood  frcm
desire  for  the  cup  of  red  wine.

Yon  are  corrupt  like  the  wind,  you  stand  paralysed  like  the  eai  tli.
Youareapearl  of  transitory  existence,  a sliell  enipty-nionthed.

With  breath  like  the  burning  lightning  you  are  the  enchanter
of  bad  and  good  : with  heart  like  a flint,  you  ai-e  the
whetstone  of'  dry  and  moist.

Naturally  with  desire  yon  revolve  like  the  sky  in  its  figure-
designing,  from  your  youth  basting,  with  greed,  you  are
like  a child  in  weakness.

Yon  carry  the  sorrow  of  the  seven  (heavens)  and  the  four
(elements)  in  your  heart,  and  every  moment  from  pride  yon
are  put  to  a hundred  thousand  devices  in  the  performance
of  one  genuflection.

You  are  as  coarse  as  the  earth,  and  yet  your  speech  is  always
of  the  moon  in  the  heavens  ; you  will  not  reach  ^ the  dignity
of  a king  from  the  station  of  a doorkeeper.

1 The  Wazir  at  chess

“The  Wazir  havnng  a straight  move  can  he  placed  on  all  the  squares  which
shows  the  great  honour  and  advantage  attached  to  rectitude  of  conduct.”
Bland.  On  the  Persian  game  of  chess,  J.  R.  A,  S.  XIII,  p.  11.

2 The  seven  labours  of  Isfandiyar,  see  the  Shah  Ndma  (Turner  IMacan)
Vol.  IT,  pp.  1126  and  seqq.

S Gurkhan.  the  heredita'y  title  of  the  kings  of  the  Kara  Khitai,  the  mean-
ing of  the  title  being  “ universal  king.”  It  must  not  be  confounded  with  the
title  of  Gnrkan  which  was  a Mongol  title  bestowed  upon  all  who  were  allied
by  marriage  with  the  house  of  Chingiz  Khan.

See  Tdri^-t-Rdshidi,  Elias  and  Boss.  p.  278,  note.

♦ MS.  A I prefer  text.

73.

V j;i  yoursc’f  owing  to  frivolity  liave  not  attained  even  toi- a
nn  .mi  nt,  irroing  your;-eli  from  the  imperfections  of  the
'i.'ihi.  rr.  tij.^  ;■■-!. D'ioiis  dutie.s  at  stateu  times.

F .,m  C.2"  ce  of  tiie  holy  men  may  yr.n  be  infoi  nied  at  ir-ist

oiie.‘,  ■ '’,11  111  the.^e  two  worlds  at  any  l.^Zc  yon  are  ’.m
ill  Lr’Mtinn’  dmsensions.

Ihiveisbi  -pi inns  from  your  Le-irt  as  rmide  sorino-s  fnm
f'joiisknesS.  Jfvil  arise-  fioiii  your  body  as  lasLueSs  ’lies
from  Yoatli.

Y .,u  aic  tt;e  !i)o;sr-ai'e  of  ibe  t'ndet  of  iiynociisy.  t.ne  IF,. - :
thefji'n’e  -I  tv.unuy.  you  are  the  ii"  v er  of  the  omr  Ici,  tf
inordinate  uesiie.  and  the  niuu  which  befouhs  the-  rc.sei'  -ir
of  the  so’ai.

74.  h'Fhen  pre.scm- Volt  melt  the  soul,  pcrciiar.ce  you  spiing  , .n

the  heal  of  T.iniuz ' ; in  your  o.le  you  ecatter  sn  .'W  '
I’ci  cbauLe  on  aie  of  the  bienth  of  autumn.

i'ou  like  a eiu’.d  ^eek  chrouniiout  your  life  after  vain  iuiai'es  :
from  tour  iaiioifuhiess  the  sorrows  of  time  have  made  you
old  in  O’ar  louth.

Fuetry  is  b'at  a uesiie,  and  its  metie  is  like  t!ie  mirage  wlilch
IS  Void  c£  v.-.icer.  Thi.-  r.reath  of  life  is  grief  to  me,  but  its
•■-avo'tris  in-t.ei  than  the  water  of  life.

1'  hi  '.!  y.  .'1  !'  -13  c becoiiie-!  c.  dlectcd  tli.i  c fancy  becomes  enjoy-
ment, . I"  :i  your  breathing  is  lifirtuonious.  it  becomes  a
.-Ciitlel'cl'  oi  p .iris.

How  long  thi.,  de-iie  of  Fie  imaginf.ti'.n  ? make  one  bieath
7'Carl--c  iticiing  iu  pi'j,i.-e  that  laau  whose  equal  wisdom
ha,  not  seen  even  from  the  beginiiiiig.

’ FF;  ^jls,

■J  y,,.,-.  1 ....  !u  n;'i  t.r.r.ih  of  t}.,'  Jewish  year  iriyinfilly  .sivrcl  to  tiie

1,.  1 1,  '.i.i'ir,  1 viii  14  ’ .inj  lichoid  thc-rt- sat  wouien  weepinrr  for

Tr.;m,.lz,  ' Tiiri-’F.v  .va,  u aiiiy  of  the  Fhixiiiciaris  caliod  by  the  Greeks  and
Tie  Word  sig'.i.'iies  " di.-soluliou  ” or  " diiflueace ’’  ^ee
- s.  r also  -Viidniiii's  Chronology,  fSachan)  pp,  6.S-82.

'F.i  ' ■ ' .ii.F  !?■  : 'with  t!ie  sr.ii’-  j.i.isition  in  Caacer  which  is  called  the

no-..’.  ,.-  ,,f  rl.e  hei  aiise  by  its  or.nriou  rh-  ere  ition  of  the  four  elements

c..!iiph‘ie.  a.i'l  by  their  becnm.nir  coirijilete  all  growth  became
c ....  ; AIii:i-.u. : Corresponds  to  oar  July,  the  hottest  month  of  the

I'll--  fii.o.n.er.

'i  speech  is  not  coa.sidered  pleasing  th-e  Persians  say  of  him
Ki.u.ndsh  ij‘~ih  att.  His  speech  is  ice.

[ ]

The  King  of  the  tliroue  of  “Kun  ” ^ is  Muhammad  who
pitched  the  tent  of  dignity  by  the  side  of  tlie  door  of  the
Protector  (God)  from  the  house  of  TJnimalianl.*

He  was  a mortal  of  angelic  beauty,  a sky  with  t!ie  lowliness
of  earth.  Like  tlie  sky  he  was  pure  in  body,  like  the
Angrels  he  was  pure  in  soul.

Ha  was  a pearl  whose  place  was  in  the  treasury  of  God,  and
he  was  a moon  whose  brightness  shone  forth  from  the  sky
of  eternity.

He  was  sadi  a pearl  that  nothing  of  more  value  than  his
nature  was  ever  produced  by  the  medium  of  the  elements
fr.jm  the  sea  of  heaven.

He  was  such  a ino'ai  that  in  every  early  morning  the  face  of
the  star  of  Taman  became  black  as  coal  ^ from  shame  at  lus
C'jruelian-Iike  lip.s.

So  sv.  eet  tougued  a prophet  that  the  salvation  of  his  disciples
comes  bv  faith  in  his  words,*  from  the  eloquence  of  his
nrteraiices.

So  eloquent  in  pearl-like  .speech  that  the  beauty  of  his  utterance
makes  tiieiieait'.s  blood  like  the  hidden  wealth  of  the  mine,
a royal  treasure.

The  brightness  of  the  eastern  sun  is  shamc-d  by  the  beauty  of
his  face,  aud  the  stature  of  the  cy pre.ss  of  the  garden  is
bowed  before  the  perfect  uprightness  of  his  form.

1 In  the  technltal  language  of  oufi  philosophy  l-ud  ia  called

'Slam-i-amr  the  world  of  the  order,  or  potontiahey.  fahtriii

is  called  jjiA  ‘.Vum-t-ldin’.q  the  %vor!d  of  creation,  or  the  material  w-orid.

* Ummahanl,  daughter  of  .tbn  T.ilib,  the  uncle  of  lluliammod,  and  sister
of  ‘All.  The  reteronco  is  to  the  iiocttirnul  journey  of  iluhammad  called
tnVruj  (the  ascent)  which  Cook  place  from  the  honse  ot  [ nimaUdiiT,

When  Muhammad  awoke  from  his  Vision  in  w*hich  he  seemed  t-t  iiave  prayed
in  the  temple  of  Jerusalem,  Uiiiutah:  ni  aitempt*‘d  to  pi’oveiit  him  from  going
out  of  the  house  and  telling  the  Vision  to  others,  thus  exposiug  himself  to
mockery  from  unbelievers,  Muir  /.ifr  o.  ilafunnmad  II.  U-i>.

S MS.  (A)  (B)  *!jr-  The  text  ns  it  stands  is  uieaningless.

* MS.  (A)  Jiioiau.  The  text  and  MS.  ( B ) have  |(XkAa5j

which  is  evidently  wrong  for  two  reasons.  Firstly,  hecanse  of  the  sense  of
the  passage,  aud  secondly,  the  jjioAsr  oetweea  aud  AUfi*

14

75.

C 106  ]

By  liis  accountantship  he  has  adopted  the  way  of  absolute
monarchy ; and  by  his  eloquence  he  has  opened  the  door  of
auspicious  government.

The  attraction  of  secret  desire,  by  revelation  has  drawn  him
from  the  expanse  of  the  natural  world  to  the  ocean  of
spiritual  existence.

By  the  good  tidings  of  his  friend,  his  heart  became  intoxicated
with  the  hope  of  a meeting.  The  son  of  Abu  Qabafah  * has
drunk  from  the  cnp  of  his  fi-iendship.

His  speeches  have  founded  a fortress*  for  the  decrees  of  God.®
‘Umar  by  bis  justice  became  the  builder  of  it,  by  right
government.

One,  third  in  order,  has  placed  the  footstep  in  this  way,
whose  path  to  the  enjoyment  of  this  world  was  not  ohstmct-
ed  by  pride.

His  fonrth  pillar  was  ‘Ali  ^ who  at  the  time  of  battle  made
the  face  of  the  snn  pale  from  the  glitter  of  his  sword.

Ob,  King  ! I entreat  yon  by  your  friends  deliver  me  dnring
the  whole  of  my  life  ® by  yonr  aia  from  the  calamity  of
foolish  friends.

He  who  demanded  from  me  7 this  Qa?lda,  may  bis  life  like  my
Qasida  bo  ornamented  with  the  jewels  of  meaning

1 Abu  Batr,  whose  original  name  waa  Abdnl  KaTiah  Ihn  Abl  Qabafah.  He
was  the  companion  of  Muhammad  in  his  flight  to  Medina.

* bbj,  A frontier  fortress.  The  same  word  is  used  in  more  recent  times  to
signify  a traveller’s  rest  house  or  caravansarai.

^ MS.  (B).  If  we  read  we  must  translate

“for  the  expanse  of  the  truth  he  has  founded  a rampart.’’

* ulUi*,  ‘Urndn  the  third  ^alTfa,  who  was  rich  and  thus  able  to  enjoy

tit!’  the  good  things  of  this  life.

‘ tte  fonrth  Khalif  whose  sword

Zi-I-Jiqdr.  (See  note  2 page  74),  was  brought  by  Gabriel  to  Muhammad
from  heaven,  and  bj  him  given  to  *Ah.

6 Text  **A  MS.  (A)  reads  and  MS.  (B)

'“‘I*  of  are  wrong.  Only  the  first  half  of  the  Qasida

is  given  in  the  Mtfjma^ul  FMahd,

7 Text  4»3|  MSS.  (A)  (B)  have  *i.

[ IW  ]

The  following  Qasida  also  he  wrote,  imposing  upon  himself  the
necessity  of  introducing  the  words  “ hair  ” and  “ ant,”  in  a de-
claration of  tlie  unity  of  God  and  in  praise  of  the  Prophet,  may
the  "peace  of  God  be  tipon  Mm

Although  with  my  tongue,  I split  hairs  at  tlie  time  of  dis-  76.
course,  still  in  the  praise  of  God,  by  reason  of  amazement,  I

. am  dumb  as  the  ant.

1 And  in  the  pursuit  of  the  fairy-faced  ones  with  chainlike
locks,  through  desire  often  have  1 bound  fast,  like  the  ant,
m-  life  to  my  waist  with  my  heart.

And  for  the  sake  of  the  ant-eyed  and  .sugar-lipped  ones,  in  my
fancy  I have  bored  the  hair  of  speech  a hundred  ways  by
way  of  trial.

That  I might  have  a store  like  the  ant,*  in  his  praise  I have
cleft  the  hair  into  halves,  and  have  not  received  one  jot
from  any  one  in  recognition.

Henceforth,  like  tlie  ant,  I wilt  gird  my  loins  at  the  door  of
the  Incomparable  one,  and  from  the  root  of  each  hair,*  with
a hundred  tongues  will  I proclaim  his  gracious  aid.

How  can  I open  my  lips,  I that  am  voiceless  as  an  ant  and  a
fish.  Nay  rather  will  I make  each  hair  a tongue  to  scatter
pearls.

With  this  ant-like  writing  and  the.se  sugar-like  words,*  by
means  of  pcetical  arrangement  1 will  split  the  hair  in  the
declaration  ot  the  unity  of  God  the  discerner  of  secrets.

That  God  to  whose  workmanship  each  several  hair  bears
witness,  and  ail  that  exists,  ant  and  fish  and  snake,  wild
beasts  and  birds,  men  and  genii.*

He  who  alone  is  self-existent,  and  is  not  within  the  bounds  of
computation,  from  whose  wisdom  * in  both  worlds  nothing
is  hidden,  neither  the  track  ot  the  ant  nor  the  point  of  the
hair.

t MS.  (A)  ,<>«J
SMS.  (A)

SMS.  (A)  (jfjj

* MS.  (A)  3t ^

* Insert  j in  text  after  MSS.

* MS.  (A)  y.

L 1

if,  thongh  as  a single  hair,  His  favour  is  shed  npon  the  egg
of  an  ant,  from  it  tliere  will  issue  in  a single  moment  a
bandied  Jamshids,  each  one  like  a hundred  Jamshids.

If,  tlioiig'h  as  a single  hair,  he  lets  fall  his  wrath  upon  an
elephant,  the  elephant  will  experience  that  which  tlie
cub  of  the  I'iming  lion  suffers  from  the  anti
77  The  intellect  herein  cannot  understand,  even  by  a hair's  breadth,

the  reason  why  the  oifspi-inn'  of  the  powerful  lion  spuuld
hoeoiiie  tlie  prey  of  the  poweiless  ant.

In  uis  decree  tl’.ei'e  is  nut  the  space  of  a hair’s  point  open  to
criticism,  eceiithoug'h  he  .shonld  gi'.  e the  kingdom  of  a
Solomon  to  u;i  ant  without  leconipense.^

By  ilia  decree,  the  shape  of  the  ant  and  t’ne  lion  are
similar,  and  by  his  ai  t the  colour  of  hair  and  bone  are
oppO'ites.

By  his  s-race  it  i.s  that  every  hair  has  kinw'ledge  of  him,  and
freni  ids-  Loaity  it  comes  to  pass  that  there  is  a ® g'uaniian

over  every  ant,  tiiat  ‘dust  in  ihe  palm  i.s  eudov  ed  with

chcmioal  ])ropertie.s,  and  water  in  the  .sea  hoeoiueR  converted
into  pearl : * that  t’ue  aut  appears  to  tlie  eye  as  a dragon,
and  a hair  of  the  biubs  as  a spear.®

1 It  U .saiil  tint  :}ir-  r.r.ts  .itrack  the  no.vly  hern  li.-iri  c.ib  a»  yet  aiiprotected
by  Irhr  .li.iI  kih  it.  i'/ie  Arata  ca.il  the  ant  jjf  Father  B'i,'y  and

Til  1 -cl'-i't,  utrl  have  s cut  a. i,>  IvcernU  abiu:  tla-ni  and

regai  J tiietii  witli  S'Uueivhat  of  sapi.-f,tiii  .uS  awc.  They  sin  that  to  .see  in  a

dri  ai- .tr:-  .-oterinr  a ii  betoken.^  praspei 'hy  to  it^  oa-c  .-r  wl.;:-,  to  see  ants

cnc.vn  '_  ■ rh  ■ t.i-oikciis  piol.fn,'  j!}Aj,ri:  g-.  The  appearanc-j  of  dying

aiii~  ii  !■  ' ' w ii  ■ t t -ie  i.~  a '-i'’k  perioi'  bct'.ktMis  his  death,  and  on  no
areui,’  r . _ 'A/,  'li’-'il'l  .iiiE'  tj>‘  p.nit’tn'd  to  tr.wl  over  ai.y  O-oe  lyiTsg  sick
f//n  h . '.u' a ' that  t‘i»-  attt  itas  ’!.j  stomaLh.  and  tr.-at  it
lives  u,.  li  til..’  ’.nr  it  bf  . rvA..,  aiid  that  n never  .eh-eoa,

^ bee  tpir’an,  xxvii,  i-j  -t’o.
e II  ^ I J O.tc'f

icjijhj  hJo/.Kt-i-luiis.a!!.  The  di.op.s  of  rain  fallirLe  in  the  inorifh
of  NaiAiin  ale  ‘•aid  when  received  into  the  .ohell  of  the  oyster  to  become
converted  inoi  nearia  tTh  nyh'/T.  NaiSitn  {Biir^un^t-Qtii i'  \ or  iSTsau

was  the  !;ist  iiiontii  of  the  Je-.yi.ah  year  corrcspoiidiiis  to  the  nionrh  of  Apidi,
see  E-vodus  .vii.  2,  xiii  4 : Albirfmi,  Clironology  i Saciiauj  o2,  and  feqii.
s ilS.  (Aj  iSJ^  J hi.;^|

r

[ J

Oh  Thon  by  whose  power  hair  and  blood  and  bone  take  shape,
Oil  Thou  1 who  art  siu’-‘ty  for  tlie  daily  supply  of  food  to
bird  and  ant  and  snake  and  tisli.

In  the  body  of  every  ant  there  is  an  exact  account  of  thy
equity,  on  the  point  of  each  hair  there  i-s  a boundless  praise
of  thy  bounty.

The  eye  of  thy  inerey  provides*  susrenari're  for  eveiy  rmt  and
locust.  The  hand  of  thy  favou"  tint.s  the  l.air  of  all  both
old  and  yountr.

The  pen  of  thy  skill  shews  " that  of  which  r.  mauiiest  sign
is  shewn  on  the  body  of  every  ant,  and  appears  on  the  end
of  every  hair.

The  inolo  on  the  cheek  of  th.e  brides  appear  like  spots  on  a
niin-or.

The  hair  on  the  face  of  kings  appear.s  li,;e  ants  upon  the
Arghawiiii.'*

By  thy  order  it  is  that  the  sfomachiess  an;  is  hungry  in
the  wiLj,

By  this  bounty  it  is  that  the  motionless  hair  upon  the  body
is  satisfied.

1 ilS.

* IIS  {A)  oXAi  i ho  r.  ..Jiii-,'  in  tio  t..'.

is  preferable.

^ MSS.  'A  f Bi  UoA'  - .-i’.A.

i The  or  .’■•i  e -T..  Is  ii.-c  ccl’-c;  t -•  o

d-h'  jio  u ’roi'  '.iliieli  i’i  i\  r.-  . a ; kli-.nr'iy  ri  S- .wer  ^ f

beautiful  hue  but  sliobt  oduur,  haviii,;  a .iwttiish  taM,-  [c  is  UsO'i  as  a
dessert  by  the  Persians  ly  u is  rouard.-d  as  au  o.x-hdtirant  and  as

cleai  iiio  the  voice  I[s  uooil  is  t'-r'i  aud  iiut  t.  , The  nrueo  ticce.  which  the
abui'c  is  fttractLMi  may  be  con.iiited  ft  r au  :.e.s*iinc  of  us  po  OerLif.s^.

Tiic  iiui/iea-t-iyiO'  'i.iif.s  til  It  a drink  is  made  from  the  tl'nvers  which
relieves  the  aftei  elTects  of  tirinkiiig.  ami  the  .isiies  of  the  burnt  wood  xtre  used
as  a hair  d;,  e and  hair  restorer.

Yuliers-Lc-xieon  Pers  Lat.  states  p.  81.  Ilac  arbore  de-icnari  vidernr  arbor
Jiidae.  I.L'.  Cercis  .silitjna'trum  (l.inn.);  ef.  J.  A.  S.  ISiq,  Dee.  |>.  45(.

T'hat  the  dve  obtained  from  it  is  of  blood  eolour  apiiears  from  the  lines  in
the  poem  { M it'al ’ uquh  • b.\  Ibn  Kiilsiim,  where  he  antes
f

IxxlT  .jt  ^ txsc  txj

ds  tiiou^n  i'et/i  < III- -I'T;  so  at'  u s J n - i .'a  kiui  hfca  (ly€il  0:'  be^ntpaved  t/tth
Aijuiirin.

[ nu  ]

78.

I He  who  did  not  tarn  away  * his  head  from  yonr  door  even  by
a hairs’  breadth,  the  ant,  although  tongneless,  began  to
praise  him  like  the  lizard.*

When  he  like  the  ant  became  sleepless  and  fasting  in  devotion
to  yon  then  without  doubt  with  the  .sword  of  the  linger  he
split  the  moon  into  two  parts  like  a hair.^

He  was  a sign  like  the  true  dawn,  hair-splitting- in  his  stieeeh.

His  followers  were  as  successful  as  ants  in  opposing  tlie
scorpions  of  religion.

The  silvery  body  ef  the  seven  heavens,  would  become  (black)
like  ants,  wben  be  cast  aside  the  covering  from  bis  dark
locks.

t The  poet  passes  on  from  the  praise  of  the  Almighty  to  praise  Maljammad.

* MS.  (A)  The  metre  shews  this  reading  to  be  right.

S This  story  is  related  as  follows  in  the  Haiatu-l-Quh'b  ;—r-

One  day  the  Prophet  was  sitting  alone  when  an  Arab  came  who  had
caught  a lizard  and  had  it  in  his  sleeve.  He  asked  the  people  who  that  was
sitting  there,  they  answered  God’s  prophet ; he  replied,  addressing  Maliammad,
“ I swear  by  Lat  and  ‘Uzza  that  I consider  you  my  greatest  enemy  and  were
I not  tinder  an  oath  to  my  tribe,  1 would  certainly  till  you.”  Tne  prophet
said  “ Accept  the  true  faith.”  The  Arab  cast  the  lizard  from  his  sleeve  and
said  “ I will  never  accept  the  faith  till  this  lizard  does.”  Then  the  prophet
spoke  to  the  lizard  saying,  *•  Oh  thou  lizard.”  The  lizard  answered  him  in
choice  Arabic  saying  “ I am  thy  servant.  Oh  thou  ornament  of  the  Muslims.”
The  prophet  asked  “ Whom  dost  thon  worship  p ” He  replied  “ That  God  who
is  in  Heaven  and  Earth,  whose  kingdom  is  in  the  eartli  and  his  wonders  in  the
sea,  and  his  marvels  in  the  deserts.  Him  I worship  who  knows  what  is  in  the
womb,  and  has  established  his  punishment  in  the  lire.”  The  prophet  asked
“ Who  am  I ? ” the  lizard  replied,  Thou  art  the  prophet  of  the  upholder  of
the  world,  and  the  seal  of  prophecy.  He  is  rightly  guided  who  believes  in
thee,  and  he  is  lost  who  denies  thee.”  The  Arab  said  — “I  reqnh'e  no  more
cogent  proof  than  this ; when  I approached  thee,  I had  no  greater  enmity
to  any  one  than  to  thyself,  but  now  I hold  thee  dearer  than  my  life,  my  father
and  my  mother.”  {Haidta-l-Qulicb  by  Agha  llnhammad  Baqir  MajHsi.)

* Qur'an,  Surah  54.  “ The  hour  draws  nigh,  and  the  moon
is  split  asunder  ” (Sacred  Books  of  the  East  Vol.  IX).  In  the
Haiatu-l-qnluh  a MS.  copy  of  which  dated  25th  Zul  Hijjah  1087  A.  H.
(1676  A.  D.)  is  l^fore  me.  1 hnd  the  foUowiiig  aocoant  of  the  miracle  per-
formed by  the  prophet  Mahammad  at  Mekka.  The  tribe  of  Qoreish
sought  as  a sign  from  Muhammad  the  performance  of  some  miracle  • the
pr'^phet  pointed  to  the  moon  and  by  the  power  of  God  Most  High  it  split  into
two  halves.  A trustworthy  Hadis  by  Hazrat  Imam  Ja'far  Siulitj  has  come
down  to  US’,  relating  that  fourteen  infidels  who  were  desirous  of  working

[ 111  ]

He  lived  like  ants  upon  the  earth  in  the  midst  of  poverty,

For  this  reason  the  heaven  appeared  in  his  eyes  as  inferior  in
value  to  an  eyelash.

In  that  place  where  the  angels  would  have  always  cast  their
wings  like  ants,

If  he  had  placed  his  foot  even  one  hair’s  breadth  beyond  his
■ abode.

^ In  intercession  from  the  lightness  of  his  spit  it  he  split  a hair,

So  that,  for  the  sake  of  an  ant,  intercession  was  not  heavy  to
him  even  by  the  weight  of  a hair.

If  for  the  sake  of  an  ant  one  fell  into  error,  he  would  make
his  excuse.

He  remained  without  bounty  if  he  was  not  thankful  in  the
least.

On  that  night  when  he  caught  the  least  glimpse  of  that
illuminated  dwelling

Wings  * grew  upon  him  like  the  ant  in  iiis  desire  for  the
infinite.

Having  cast  his  eye  upon  the  fat  morsel  of  the  world  which
perishes  like  a hair,  he  closed  the  avenues  of  his  appetite
against  this  turqnoise-hued  table,®  like  the  ant.

the  prophet’s  destmctiou  came  to  him  on  the  evening  of  the  14th  of
Zul  Hijjah  and  said  to  him,  ‘ Every  prophet  has  shewn  some  wonderful
miracle,  so  this  evening  we  desire  you  to  shew  us  some  great  miracle.’
The  prophet  asked  what  miracle  they  desired  him  to  shew  them.  They
replied,  ‘ If  you  have  any  power  from  God  order  the  fall  moon  to
divide  into  two  halves.’  Thereupon  the  angel  Gabriel  came  down  from
heaven  and  said  to  Muhammad,  ‘ The  Lord  of  heaven  and  earth  sends  greeting
and  has  ordered  all  things  to  become  obedient  to  you.’  Then  the  Prophet
raised  his  eyes  to  heaven  and  commanded  the  moon  to  divide  into  two  halves,
wherenpon  it  split  into  two  parts,  and  the  prophet  knelt  to  shew  his  gratitude

to  Almighty  God All  anthorities  relate  that  this  took  place  in

Kekka ; and  further  it  is  related  that  when  certain  travellers  arrived  they
said  in  answer  to  questions  ‘ We  too  saw  on  that  night  that  the  moon  was  in
two  halves.’  Consequently  the  infidels  believed  that  it  was  a tme  miracle
and  not  merely  magic.”  He  also  relates  that  these  infidels  imposed  upon
Mahammad  the  task,  of  restoring  the  moon  to  its  original  condition,  and  also
of  turning  one-half  of  the  orb  of  the  moon  black  while  the  other  half  was
bright.

1 MS.  (B)

i MS.  (A1  jij*

3 MS,  (A)  \yiy-

[ 11-i  ]

For  the  ant=:  of  religion  lie  cai-ried  away  so  much  provision
that  tliere  reniaiiied  on  the  point  of  each  hair  an  evidence
of  that  bounty  ' for  ever  and  ever.

Oh  thou  Creator,  I have  made  every  hair  a tongue,  hut  yet
like  an  ant  I complain  in  my  heart  of  my  voicelessness
to  sing  thy  praise.

If  thon  liadst  illnmiued  the  e\  e of  the  ant  like  the  threna
of  hair,  without  the  permission*  of  thy  mercy  this  caravan
would  not  have  passed.

I am  like  an  ant  in  water,  or  like  a hair  in  the  tiie,  because
this  sugar-scattering  mind  of  mine  is  not  tit  for  this  rela-
tion.®

] have  the  foot  of  effort  in  the  stirrup  of  devotion  to  you
like  the  ant ; as  long  as  one  single  ha.ir  remains  of  me  ^
I will  not  desist  from  this  endeavour.

How  can  my  burden  be  in  the  least  degree  ligliteneu  apart
from  thy  consent  f How  can  I gird  my  loins  like  the  ant
through  avarice,®  in  the  service  of  thi.s  one  or  that  ?

Although  like  the  ant  I have  been  crushed  by  the  (iron)
hand,  of  desire

Yet  I never  contemplated  the  slightest  idea  of  profit  or  lo.ss
apart  from  thee.

Since  this  is  from  thee  I am  happy,  although  my  heart  is
distraught  and  pained;  my  heart  is  like  the  eye  of  the  ant
and  my  ° condition  is  like  the  hair  of  the  heart-ravishing
one.

If  the  ant  brought  the  foot  of  a locust  into  the  presence  of
Solomon.  Shihab  would  b.ave  como  lieadlong  to  thy  door
with  the  feet  of  his  soul  about  his  head  a^  liair.

The  ant  of  thv  generous  table  O Salih  showed  him  (Shihab)
that  path  of  rectitude.

! 'A)

J MSS  iBj
» MSS  f-ii  iB)  ijlL-tJ,
* ilss.  {\}  iB)  ojU

6 MS.  (A)  j.

[ 113  ]

O Lord ! grant  him  protection  in  crossing  that  hair  like
bridge  * over  the  fire

On  the  point  of  each  hair  of  his  you  have  a hundred  favours,
for  this  reason  that  the  heart  of  an  ant  is  not  vexed  by
him  by  so  much  as  a hair’s  breadth  in  the  world.

Oh  Lord  ! * keep  a watch  upon  the  enemy  of  the  king’s  domi-
• nions,  for  this  is  best,  that  he  should  be  as  a hair  in  the  fire
and  as  an  ant  in  the  running  water

And  he  also  wrote  in  praise  of  .Sultan  Rnknu-d-Din  Firoz  80.

imposing  upon  himself  the  necessity  of  introducing  four  things®

as  follows  : —

Every  moment  this  old  wolf  lion-hearted  infant-eating*

Does  with  me  that  which  the  elephant  and  rhinoceros  do  at
the  time  of  contest.

The  elephant-like  sky  wears  away  my  body  as  does  the
rhinoceros

The  time  like  a lion  takes  away  my  patience  like  a wolf.

I have  not  the  strength  of  the  rhinoceros,  and  the  sky  is  like
a fierce  elephant  towards  me.

It  displays  the  boldness  of  a lion  like  the  old  wolf  of  the  time.

The  elephant  did  not  so  treat  the  rhinoceros,  nor  did  the  wolf
so  treat  the  sheep

As  the  lion-like  heaven  treated  this  being  who  is  thin  as
hair  from  oppie.s.siou.

The  Lion  of  the  sky  has  the  craft  of  the  wolf  and  the  strength
of  the  rhinoceros.

For  this  cause  he  heaps  pain  continually  on  my  heart  like  the
load  of  an  elephant.

^ The  Sirit  or  bridge  across  the  fire  of  Hell.  The  Sir:1t  or  bridge  crossing
the  infernal  fire  is  described  as  finer  than  a hair  and  sharper  than  a sword
and  is  beset  with  briars  and  sharp  thorns.  The  righteous  will  pass'  over  it
with  the  swiftness  of  the  lightning  but  the  wicked  will  soon  miss  their  foot-
ing and  will  fall  into  hell  fire.

See  Haghe.s,  Diet,  uf  lelum,  art  .Sirat.  See  also  Qur'an  I.  5.

® MS.  (.\)  Aj  jto  I)  tbi

® The  words  karg  rhinoceros,  wolf,  stir  lion,  /il

elephant.

* MS.  fA)  lMJ:

15

[ Jii  3

A maddened  elephant  * is  this  wolf-haired  rhinoceros.

Even  if  mankind  are  like  male  lions  still  sooner  or  later  he
effects  their  ruin.

The  sky,  the  overthrower  of  the  rhinoceros,  the  conqueror  of
the  lion,  if,  in  play,  like  the  wolf  it  brings  against  the  life
of  Rustam  a strong  move  like  “ pilband.”  *

1 MS.  (A)  JLijj.

> A stratagem  in  the  game  of  chess  See  Albiruni  (India)  I.

183-184.  The  Jqj  or  elephant  it  appears  had  the  same  mobility  as  the  queen

does  in  our  modern  game,  that  is  it  commanded  both  rank  and  diagonal.

There  was  one  pawn  known  as  the  Fiyada-i-Asli  or  original  pawn,  which
had  certain  primlegcs  attached  to  it.  It  was  permitted  once  in  the  conrse  of
the  game  to  remove  to  any  square  on  the  board  where  it  might  inflict  the

greatest  injury  on  the  adversary,  as  by  attacking  two  pieces  at  once — “fork-
ing” them  as  chess  players  call  it ; under  certain  combinations  this  pawn  was
utilised  to  give  mate.  Thus  in  Aahadi’s  Life  of  Khwaja  ‘Ali  Shatranji  we
find

“ When  he  moved  his  Rnkh  in  the  Board  of  imagination  he  gave  the  odds  of
two  Knights  and  the  Bishop  to  the  kings  of  rhetoric  : the  strategist  of  imagi-
nation fell  into  the  pawn’s  mate  from  the  “Filband  ” of  confusion.”

This  was  explained  to  me  by  a Muhammadan  friend,  a chess  player,

thus;  suppose  the  white  king  at  his  own  square,  and  a hostile  pawn  on  his
second  square  guarded  by  Black  Bishop  at  Q.  Kt.  4,  the  adversary  brings  his
other  Bishop  to  Q E.  4 (eh)  mate,  white  having  other  moves,  but  none  which
can  prevent  this  final  move  of  the  Black  Bishop.

The  Bahi'-i  'AJam  gives  the  following  definition  of  .vitl  .j

. -y  •

oL«jl  lyitA  <^*1^  j .vbl

^ »

Pilband  is  the  name  of  a manoeuvre  in  chess,  “ To  give  pilband  ” means
to  mate  by  giving  check  with  the  Bishop  (Pil).

AV./

— vxUj  Ij  ^ ii  ISli

When  in  contest  with  elephants  thou  disengagest  thy  noose.  Thou  defeat-
est  the  king  of  Qananj  with  the  “ pilband  ” (Nijsamij.

[ 115  1

The  wolf  of  my  patience  casts  off  from  him  the  waterproof
like  a lion,  if  the  elephant  of  this  toernlean  castle  has
made  me  over  to  his  charge  like  a rhinoceros.

The  lion  of  the  sky,  like  the  elephant  in  colour,  a wolf  by  a
nature,  takes  and  tears  to  pieces  the  armour  of  my  patience
like  the  hide  of  the  rhinoceros. t

Last  night  when  the  lion  of  the  sky  became  elephant  coloured
in  the  hide  of  the  rhinoceros,  countless  Josephs*  appear-
ed from  the  wolves  of  the  heaven.

My  life  is  in  the  hands  of  the  lion,  and  under  the  foot  of  the
rhinoceros  of  pain,  until  from  the  elephant  bodied  sky  the  81.
tail  of  the  wolf  * became  evident.

The  claw  of  the  lion  and  the  horn  of  the  rhinoceros,  the  tears
of  the  elephant  and  the  hair  of  the  wolf.

Although  these  four  are  of  use  in  making  the  amulet^  of
heart’s  attachment.

Of  what  use  are  the  special  properties  of  the  lion  and  rhino-
ceros and  the  wolf  and  the  elephant,  when  that  silvery
cheeked  one  demands  from  me  gold  more  than  the  weight  of
an  elephant.

Since  I do  not  possess  the  ferocity  of  the  rhinoceros,  the
heart  of  the  lion,  and  the  breath  of  the  wolf,  I will  go  to
meet  my  beloved  with  an  elephant  load  of  sorrow.

^9an  Dehlavi  also  says.

. tvl*  > tS  va»L  -juti

Alas ! that  the  pilband  ” of  thy  love  cannot  essiiy  be  overcome.

For  an  excellent  paper  on  the  Persian  Game  of  Chess  by  Bland,  from  which
some  of  the  above  information  is  extracted,  see  J.  R,  A.  S.,  Vol.  XIII,  pp.

1-70.

t This  reading  is  in  the  text.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  have  a different  reading

Jjjlj  ^jL,  dj

* i e.y  when  it  became  dark  countless  stars  appeared.  See  Qur'an  XII.  1-15.

* The  morning  Zodiacal  light.  A light  which  appears  in  the  east  before  the

true  dawn.  It  is  called  also  S^hh-i-Kdzih  the  false  dawn  ; see

J R,  A.  S.,  Jnly,  1878  • also  a name  of  one  of  the  mansions  of  the  moon  called
also  Shanla.  Burhdn-i-Qdfy.

^ ta^wlz  MS.  (A).  An  amulet  made  of  the.^  four  things  is  said  to  be

efficacious  in  securiag  affection.  We  are  reminded  of  the  witches  in  Macbeth,

“ Scale  of  dragon,  tooth  of  wolf/*  &c.

[ 116  ]

In  the  jaws  of  the  lion  and  under  the  foot  of  the  rhinoceros,
and  of  tliis  old  Tvolf,  my  beloved  one  keeps  me  as  though
depicted  upon  the  tear  of  the  elephant  on  account  of
love.

My  beloved  with  the  rhinoceroB-hilted  sword  is  trotting  like
a wolf,  I,  like  the  elephant,  am  following  him  with  a body
thin  as  thread.

Afterwards  the  wolf  in  rhinoceros-like  armour,  the  elephant-
like heaven,  the  lion-hunter  of  the  sky  appeared  like  the
torch  of  the  king.

The  pillar  of  the  world,  the  elephant-conquering  king  with
the  lion-headed  mace,  by  whose  wolf-swift  horse  the
rhinoceros  is  fiercely  attacked.

The  eye  of  the  wolf  of  the  sky  is  of  all  colours  from  his  lion-
like mace,  the  hump  of  the  rhinoceros  of  the  earth  is  trodden
into  hollows  by  the  foot  of  his  elephant.

His  elephantine  club  empties  the  forest  of  wolves,  his  wolf-
swift  horse  ^ seizes  the  meadow  from  the  lions.

His  rhinoceros-like  staff  of  office  is  . in  the  heart  of  the  wolf
of  the  sky,  his  club*  like  a pillar  has  cleft  asunder
the  lions.

82.  From  the  point  of  his  javelin,  and  lion-headed  mace,  that

happens  to  the  wolf  and  elephant  which  happened  to
the  life  of  Gurgsar  from  the  sword  of  the  ’brazen-bodied
one.®

Oh  thou  from  whose  lion-headed  mace,  rhinoceros-destrover
elephant-crusher,  the  tomb  becomes  narrow  and  dark  for
Gurgin  ' like  the  pit  of  Bizhan.®

1 •

* MS.  (A)  jjr.

3 Isfaudiyfir  at  the  conclusion  of  the  seventh  stage  of  the  Haft  khwan.

4 Gurgin-i-MilaJ  one  of  the  chief  warriors  of  Kai  Khnsran.

6 Bizhan,  son  of  Geo,  and  nephew  of  Rnstam,  was  the  lover  of  Manijeh
danghter  of  Afrasiyah,  Gurgin  being  jealous  of  his  prowess  plotted  against
him  and  treacheronsly  betrayed  tlie  secret  of  his  amour,  and  Bizhan  was
condemned  to  be  confined  in  a deep  pit  head  downwards.  He  was  eventually
released  by  Rustam  ; Gurgin  was  punished  by  Geo,  and  then  imprisoned,
i'or  .an  epit'.mo  of  the  story,  see  Atkinson’s  Shah  Numa,  pp  300-324.

See  Shiih  Numa,  Voi.  U,  pp.  771-797.  (Turner  Macan  Edition).

[ 117  1

The  reflection  of  thy  elephant  coloured  * sword  if  it  falls
upon  lion  and  wolf  makes  their  eyes  which  are  like  the
, jujubes  * of  Grurgan  to  become  like  the  pomegranate.

If  the  breeze  of  your  lion-standard  blows  upon  the  dust  of
tlie  world  the  maddened  rhinoceros  will  seek  shelter  from
the  elephant,  and  the  wolf  from  the  sheep.

When  thou  brandishest  ® thy  elephantine  mace,  the  lion
casta  away  its  teeth,  the  W'olf  its  claws,  the  rhinoceros  its
gall  bladder,  and  the  snake  its  head-stone.*

Rhinoceros-like  in  attack,  wolf-like  in  gait,  lion-like  in
bravery,  elephant-like  in  body  is  thy  steed,  Oh  hero  ! hun-
dreds of  thousands  like  Rustam  are  thy  slaves.

Oh  King!  in  thy  praise  I have  become  more  powerful  than
wolf  and  rhinoceros,  lion  and  elephant,  by  the  order  of  the
Lord  who  rules  the  sky.

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)

S ‘Cnndb,  Zizyphna  jujuba  (N.  O.  Kha-mnacerej,  a tree  bi-.aring;  an  oval

baccate  fruit  of  a reddish,  colour  called  in  Hiinlnstiim  ^ },,,.  np.nrly  allied  to
the  Lotus  of  the  Lotophagi,  both  leaves  and  fruit  were  used  by  the  Ar./oian
physicians.  According  to  the  Bahru-l-Jaudhir  the  fruit  is  useful  to  purify
the  blood  from  evil  humours,  and  is  of  service  in  dry  coughs  and  roughness  of
the  chest  and  lungs,  also  in  pain  in  the  kidneys  and  bladder.  The  lips  of  a
mistress  are  compared  to  this  fruit.  {BurhJn~i’Qdiy),

3MS.  (^)

* jLo  The  serpent  is  popularly  supposed  to  carry  a stone  in  its  head.

The  Maihzanu-l-Adxdya  .'ays : — Hajaru-l-Haiijynh  ) called  in

Persian  Juc  Muhra-i-ilar  is  of  two  kinds:  one  a mineral  which  is

known  as  Hui-  ilnhra,  some  say  that  it  is  found  in  emerald  mines.

It  has  an  emerald  colour,  inclined  to  black  or  ashy,  shaped  like  a square
signet  stone ; weight  from  one  to  two  migqdls.

The  other  is  an  animal  product  which  is  found  in  the  hinder  part  of  the
head  of  certain  vipers.  It  is  not  found  in  all  vipers,  in  f.ict  it  is  onl'-  rarely
found  in  any  of  them;  when  it  is  taken  from  the  muscles  it  is  a.-t  but  in
contact  with  the  air  becomes  stony  hard.  In  size  it  is  about  the  size  of  i.alf
a shell,  (cowrie)  oblong  in  shape,  ashy-colonred.  Certain  sto  les  are  black  and
hard,  striped  with  three  white  stripes,  otic  rs  .are  white  and  soft.  Some  are
artificial.  In  order  to  di.'tingnish  the  g od  and  true  from  the  false,  pl.ice  it
noon  the  bite  of  a snake,  it  will  stick  to  it  if  genuine  If  milk  is  ponrc.l  o-
it.  the  milk  becomes  clotted  and  ch.anged  in  appearance  ; and  it  is  sai*!  that
when  some  of  them  are  placed  in  milk  the  milk  does  not  become  coagnhiit.l
auii  when  all  the  poison  has  been  extracted  by  the  stone  it  fails  off,  re.''uaing

t 118  ]

Thon  art  eleptiant-bodied,  lion -conquering,  thy  mace  if  it  so
■wishes,  can  place  the  rhinoceros  firmly  on  the  head  of  the
skv  like  the  tail  of  the  wolf.*

That  Wazir  tvho  to  the  punishment  of  the  wolf  of  the  sky
has  given  his  heart,  like  the  rhinoceros  and  the  elephant
and  the  lion,  instead  of  being  confused.

"Without  the  craft  of  the  wolf,  and  the  power  of  the  rhino-
ceros, his  determination  strikes  the  head  of  the  elephants
with  the  driving  hook  * and  brings  sparks  to  the  eyes'of
the  lions.

In  thy  kingdom.  Oh  King  ! from  the  strategy  of  thy  caution  the
lion  Las  laid  aside  i!s  oppression,  the  wolf  its  deceit,  and
the  rhinoceros  its  disorder  tlirongh  fear  of  thee.

Oh  thou,  whose  order  is  like  the  decree  of  fate  thou  from
whose  dignity  the  Emperor  like  Fate  overcomes  the  rhino-
ceros, the  wolf,  the  lion  and  the  elephant.

83,  SUin,  and  horn,  and  hair,  and  tear,  of  wolf,  rhinoceros,  lion  and
elephant  will  be  of  use  in  the  way  of  life,  and  heart,  and
nature,  and  speech.

to  adhere  any  longer,  and  does  not  coagalate  milk.  Whilst  it  is  extracting  the
poison  its  colour  changes,  aint  when  it  is  thrown  into  milk  it  returns  to  its
original  condition.

Another  test  is,  -ivht-n  you  rub  it  upon  black  or  blue  woollen  cloth  the  cloth
becomes  white,  if  rubbed  very  hard  for  a long  time  the  cloth  becomes  black
and  all  whiteiiGSS  disupp'rari!.

Another  test  -.  When  it  is  placed  in  a porcelain  vessel  in  lemon  iuice  it
begins  to  move  in  a eirtular  fashion.  This  test  i.s  nut  peciili>,r  to  this  stone
but  most  shells  and  snuils  too,  shew  the  same  pheuoniKuon.  ( -U.fA/i
AdiCiya).

The  ^ahriL-l-Jao.'fh'. /•  shya  only

Ttie  stone  l*id^ahr  .•‘tcne,)  ,r<:-

heavy  and  bluck,  b^iiiq  are  asheu-i^rsy,  and  some  have  ihree  Ptiipt  -

I See  liOte  11. >.

® g<'-ad  with  which  --

railed  in  .i  ‘

■. . $

[ 119  ]

For  your  armour  and  sLoes,  when  did  the  wolf-natnred  sky
select  tears  and  skin  from  the  elephant  and  lion  and
rhinoceros  ?

For  that  purpose  again  and  again,*  this  old  wolf  from  the
elephant  and  lion  and  the  rhinoceros,  brings  as  an  offering
its  hide  and  skin  and  teeth  as  a present  of  rare  value.

The  she- wolf  drives  away  the  he-lion  ^ as  a good  omen,

If  in  hunting  it  comes  in  sight  of  your  rhinoceros-conquering
elephant.

Elephant-hestower,  I desire  a desert  place  in  Badaon,

Even  though  these  regions  are  the  abodes  of  the  wolf  and
rhinoceros  and  the  lion.

As  long  as  the  lion  and  the  elephant  are  co-partners  in  awe,
and  the  wolf  and  the  rhinoceros  are  alike  in  writing  ^ so
long  may  your  wolf-crafty  enemy.  Oh  rhinoceros-destroyer
and  elephant-like  in  strength,*  be  humbled  in  the  dust
before  the  lion  of  your  portico.

May  your  enemies  bereft  of  life  become  like  the  lions  and
elephants  and  wolves  and  rhinoceros  at  the  end  of  the
stony  line  in  the  public  baths. ^

STTLTix  RazzIyah  bixt  Sultan  Sh.ajisu-d-Di.v

Came  to  the  throne  in  the  year  634  H.  ("1236  A.D.),  and  followed
the  path  of  equity  and  the  principles  of  justice  ; set  in  order  the
affairs  vthich  had  remained  in  confusion,  and  set  before  her  the  pur-  84-
suit  of  beneficence,  ( wljich  is  as  great  a fault  in  women  as  stinginess
is  in  men)  as  the  object  of  her  ambition,  and  made  Nizamu-l-Mulk

1 MS.  (A)  ^ ^ Ms.  (B)  has

* Text  and  MS.  (B).  MS.  {.Y)  has  Tc  sight  a jackal  wlien  going

to  the  chase  ia  considered  a good  omen,  a snake  or  a sheep  is  considered  a
had  omen.  The  she-wolf  js  held  to  represent  craft  and  cunning  while  the
lion  represents  strength.  The  meaning  seems  to  be  the  triamph  of  stratagem
over  force.

and  These  words  are  exactly  alike  in  writing.

4 MSS.  (A)  and  (Bj

6 The  custom  of  ornamenting  the  walls  of  the  public  baths  with  frescoes
of  animals  and  other  subjects  obtains  at  the  present  time  in  Persia,  as  it  did
in  ancient  in  the  public  baths  of  Greece  and  Rome.  The  wails  and  ceilings
of  the  baths  at  Pompeii  are  an  example  of  this.

[ 120  ]

Jiindi  (Junaidi)  Chief  Wazir.i  Antagonism  and  strife  shewed
itself  among  the  Amirs,  and  Sultan  Razziyah  formed  an  excellent
plan,  and  threw  these  disloyal  Amirs  into  confusion  so  that  they
fled  in  all  directions,  and  she  having  selected  certain  of  them  for
punishment  put  them  to  death,®  and  Rizamu-l-ilulk  retired  to
Sir  Mur  “ and  took  up  his  abode  in  the  secret  place  of  death,  and
Khwaja  Muhazzab  the  Deputy  succeeded  him  in  office.  The
kingdom  of  Razziyah  gained  considemhle  power,  she  despatched
an  army  to  relieve  Rantanbhur,'®  which,  after  the  death  of  Sultan
Shamsu-d-Din,  the  Hindus  had  invested  continuously,  and  liberated
the  Muslims  from,  their  captivity,  and  Jamaln-d-Diii  Yaqut,  the
Abvssiiiian,  wIjo  was  Master  of  the  Horse,  became  her  confidant
and  trusted  adviser,  to  such  a point  that  Sultan  Razziyah  when-
ever she  rode  horse  or  elephant  used  to  rest  upon  his  arm  or
shoulder.^  He  became  an  object  of  envy  to  the  Amirs,  and  the
Sultan  Razziyah  came  out  from  the  curtain  of  chastity®  and  wear-
ing the  garment.s  of  men,  regardless  of  propriety,  used  to  wear  a
tunic  and  Jctdldh"  when  seated  on  the  throne  to  rule  the  kingdom.
And  in  the  year  637  H.  (1239  A.D.)  Malik  ‘Izzu-d-Din  lyaz.  Gover-
nor of  Lahore,  displayed  hostility.  Sultan  Razziyah  proceeded
asainst  him  and  having  reduced  him  to  obedience  added  Mult.in  also
to  his  audin  the  same  year  she  brought  up  an  army  against

1 See  Thomas,  Pathan  Kinya,  p.  104  and  Talaqiit-i-Xasiri  states  on  the
ouutrarr,  tLat  Junaidi  refused  to  acknowledge  her.  She  accordingli,'  issued,
orders  for  his  arrest,  but  he  became  aware  of  this  and  went  into  hidlug,  even-
tually dying  in  the  hills  of  Sir  Mur  Bardar.

S  Malik  Saifu-d-Diu  KujI  and  his  brother  Fakhru-d-Din  were  taken  prison-
ers and  put  to  death.  Tahaqiit-i-Xasiri.  p 640.

5 MS.  (A)  liijjyc tjS Retired  to  the  hill  country  of  Sirmur.

* Tlie  fortress  of  Kant.-nbhur  in  the  province  of  Ajmir,  75  miles  south-
east of  Jaipur,  see  p.  92,  note  4,

6 The  text  has  jl  tsj'!  ® misprint  for  jt  iSjj^

which  is  the  reading  of  the  MS.  (.4).

6 In  the  MS  'Aj  we  have  the  following  J|  came  out  of  retirement,

that  is  simply  abandoned  the  habits  of  pm dnh-nishini  generally  imposed  on
Mnsu’mSu  ladies.  Tliis  seems  the  better  reading  (see  Kaverty  p.  642,  note  3,
with  reference  to  this  subject).

7 The  bi  'jah(!  and  tils-  knll'ih  were  a tunic  and  hat  worn  hv  men.

8 Aftb.  niviking  over  Muitiin  to  Malik  ‘Izzu-d-DIn,  Saltan  Kazziyah  returned
to  the  capital  on  the  19th  of  Shaban  G37  L*”  < '^<*haqut-i~Xa^iri).

A jf/ep'r  was  land  held  in  fief,  generally  be&iowed  as  a reward  for  some
service

L 121  ]

Tabarhindah,  and  on  the  way  the  Tiirki  Amirs  witnessing  her
immodest  behaviour,  rebelled,  and  seized  both  Sultan  Razziyah
and  Jamalu-d-Din  Yaqut  the  Abj’ssinian,  wlio  had  risen  to  be  the
Chief  Amir,*  and  confined  them  in  the  fortress  of  Tabarhindah.*

Seek  not  fidelity  to  its  promise  from  the  indolent  world.  85.

For  this  old  woman  is  the  bride  of  a thousand  lovers.

® There  is  no  sign  of  faithfulness  to  promise  in  the  smile  of
the  rose.

Lament,  Oh  heart-reft  nightingale,  for  here  is  cause  for  com-
plaint.

ScLT.vN  Mc'izzr-D-Di.v  B.ahr.vm  Sh.\h*  ib\-  SH.r.Msr-ii-DLv.

Next  succeeded  to  the  throne,  and  came  to  Ueliii.  At  this  time
Malik  Ilditivaru-d- Din  Altuniyah^' the  ruler  of  'I’abai  hiudah  liaving
espoused  the  Sultan  Razziyah,  and  having  gained  over  certain  of
the  Amirs  and  a body  of  the  Lits®  and  Khukhai-s,  and  all  the  land-
holders, brought  au  army  towards  Delhi,  Sultan  3lu‘izzu-d-l)iii
Bahram  Shah,  sent  the  iMalik"  Balban  the  yonuge!’  (who  evej]-
tually  became  Sultan  Ghi\asu-d-Din)  with  a vast  army  to  o|)pii-.i;
Razziyah,  and  a battle  ensued  in  wluch  the  forces  of  Razziyah  uc’  -
defeated.  She  then  went  to  Tabarhindah,  and  a second  ti]ne  col-
lected her  forces  and  rallied  her  scattered  troo]-)s,  and  arrived  in
the  neighbourhood  of  the  village  of  Katilial^  with  the  intention  (jf
conquering  Delhi,  and  again  being  defeated  at  the  hands  of  the

1 Rau:atu-s-Safa  calls  him  Chief  rommaud''!'  ef  troops.  For  .subipqtreiit
events. lip  ro  de^rh  of  Kazzivah  see  7a!ioq.rf./..Ve<iiv.

S  Tjbaqiit-i-Xa.pn  states  that  tiiey  put  J.iinrilu-d-Din  to  ffeath.

5 Hilfz.  Ode  betrinning  (Ju:[  .

See  Diwan  Hafis  Rosenweig-Schwaiinau  1,  p.  30.

t Son  of  lyaltimisli.

6 A ituniyah  was  appointed  by  Razziyah  as  feud  dory  of  Barah  (Bnl.indsi.alir)
irnmediat- Iv  upon  her  acce.ssion,  iie  was  afteri^aids  m.ade  foudatoi  i i f Tai  a’’-
hiiidah.  The  account  in  the  text  differs  slightly  from  tliat  of  the  Talaqut-
i-Xdsin,  .-ee  Rarerty  647.  Jude  9,

6 Elii'dt  T.  507.  Tieffeidhal"-r  II.  206

7 .Malik  Badru-d-Din  Saukar  liiimi  had  become  .tmir-i-Haiib  on  tl.c  death
of  latiyiiru-d-Din.  He  was  the  patron  of  t^iviisu-d  Din  Ball, an  for  whom
he  obtained  promotion  to  the  dignity  of  Amir  Akhur.  The  account  in  the
text  tallies  with  that  given  in  the  Tabaqdt-i-Akharl,  but  see  Raverty  04S,  n.  2.

8 Kaitha!  Skr.  Kapisthala.  bat  29’  4S'  7"  X.,  bong  76’  26'  26'  E .‘kS  miles
distant  from  Karmil.  r.'ul  about  lOO  miles  X W.  of  Delili.  See  Hunter.  Vaz
Til.  3ij9.

Id

[ 1^2  ]

Malik  Balkan  the  yoniige.-,  took  to  flight  and'  both  she  and
Altuniyah  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Kawars  ^ and  were  put  to
death  by  order  of  Sultan  Bahram  Shah.

This  event  took  place  in  the  year  6d7  H.  (1239  A.D.),®  and  the
duration  of  the  reign  of  Razzlyah  was  three  yeais  six  months  and
six  days.

A head  which  the  neck  can-ies  loftily

That  same  head  later  finds  a rope  round  its  neck.

When  tjlie  sovereign  power  nas  firmly  e.stablished  in  the  hands
of  Sultan  Bahram  Shah.  Malik  Ikhtiyuru-d-Dln  Itkin  who  was
86.  fos'merlv  Haiib  and  was  uiarried  to  a sister  of  the  Sultan,  and  had
got  all  the  afsaiis  of  the  kingdom  into  his  own  hands  by  the
assistance  of  lSi:zauiu-l-Mii!k  Muhazzabu-d-Din,  being  accustomed
always  to  keep  a large  elephant  tied  up  at  his  door,  like  a king,
was  murdered  in  the  year  638  H.  together  with  Muhazzabu-d-Dln
Wazir,  by  certain  Fidais,^  by  the  oi’clers  of  the  Sultan,  and  in
this  year  the  Sultan  dealt  with  a party  composed  of  Amirs  and
chief  men,  and  leading  noble.s,  and  grandees,  and  judges  who  used
to  hold  secret  meetings  to  discuss  a change  of  monarchy  and  the
appointment  of  a new  king.  Some  of  tliem  he  put  to  death,  and

1 The  printed  text  and  MS.  (A)  and  MS,  (B)  all  have  Knwaran.

There  is  some  little  uncertainty  as  to  the  identity  of  this  tribe.  The  Talaq^at-
i-yjn'-i  says  “ Sultan  Eaziyyah  with  Malik  -■tltumyah  fell  captive  into  the
hands  of  Hindis  ” ■ See  Raverty’s  translation  page  6i8  and  note  3.)

It  seems  probable  that  the  Kawaran  here  spoken  of  were  a tribe  of  Jats
otherwise  known  by  the  name  of  (iatwaras  They  are  mentioned  by  Elliott,
as  holding  village's  in  Gohana.  in  .<onipat  Bangar  and  in  the  Duab  on  the
opposite  side  of  the  Jumna  Elliott,  Itaceo  of  the  Ak  W.  Provinces  of  India,
Vo!  I page  126)

i 638  .A.H.  T,tyaqnt-i-y,lsi,i.  There  is  a confusion  here  in  the  dates.
Eiiishta  says  th  it  the  armies  met  on  the  4th  Rabi‘nl  Awwal  637  A.H.,
and  that  Ka  ziyaii  and  .iltiiniyah  were  put  to  death  on  the  25Dh  of  the  sanie
month.  As  Ra/./Tyali  came  to  tne  throne  in  634,  637  would  seem  to  be  the
correct  date  but  see  Ilaverty,  p.  648.  note  2

* reading  of  MS.  (.4).  Firishta  says  “ two  Turks  in  a

state  of  (feignedj  intoxication.  ji  Minhajn-s-Siraj  writes,

p,  192,  Cal,  Text  jjS

He  sent  two  intoxicated  Tuike,  alter  the  manner  of  Fidais,  down  from  the
roof  of  the  palace.  A Fidai  is  one  who  voluntarily  and  cheerfully  undertakes
any  enterprise  which  he  knows  will  cost  him  his  life.  {Bmhun-x-Qjti‘)  see
Kavorty  7id'  p.  651  n 7.

[ 123  3

some,  as  for  example  Badru-d-Dia  Sangai-  Amu-  Ilajib  i lie  sent  t-o
Badaon  wliere  they  died  in  piison.  Among  them  was  Qazi  Jalalu-d-
Din  Kashani,  whom  they  removed  from  Ids  military  command  and
appointed  Qazi  of  Badaon,  and  Qazi  Shainsu-d-Din  the  Qaji  of
Marhii-a  * they  threw  under  the  feet  of  an  elephant  in  the  same
way.

And  in  the  year  639  H.  the  troops  of  the  Miighul  Changiz  Khan
came  and  invested  the  city  of  Lahore,  and  Malik  Qaraqash  the
Governor  of  Lahore  fled  one  day  at  midnight  and  came  to  Dehli,
where  the  Sultan  pledged  the  Araiis  anew  to  fealty,  and  having
summoned  a conference  sent  Xizamu-J-Mulk®  Wazir,  who  at  heai-t
was  not  friendly  to  the  Sultan,  to  oppose  the  Mughal  force  in  the
Panjab.  He,  with  craft  and  hypocrisy  wrote  a letter  to  the  Sultan
and  made  tnaiiy  complaints  of  the  Amirs  who  were  with  him,  and
begged  the  Sultan  to  come.  The  Sultan,  however,  not  thinking  it
advisable  to  go  in  penson,  wrote  a despatch  to  him  in  apparent
sincerity,  saying,  “those  recalcitrant  Amirs  shall  meet  their  jiunish-
ment  in  due  time,  you  should  treat  them  with  civility*  till  then.”

He  shewed  that  despatch  in  original  to  tlie  Amirs  and  brought
them  over  to  his  side,  and  the  Siiljan  Mu‘izza-d-Din  Bahram  87-
Sbah  sent  Hazrat  Shai^u-I-Isl5ni  Khwaja-i-IOiwajagan  Qurbu-d-
Din  Bakhtyar  'O'sbi,  “ »>iuy  God  sanctify  him,  to  the  Amirs  to  put

1 Who  had  been  appointed  .tmlrHiijib  when  Ikhiiyarii-d-Dm  was  murdered.

S The  its.  (A)  reads  Ji.J  H

which  reading  I follow.  Terishta  ■writes

Tabaqut-i-tSasiri  gives  (he  details  of  this  circumstance  and.  states  that  it
was  brought  about  by  the  machinations  of  a Darwe.sh  -u-ho  was  jealous  of
Qn/.i  Shamsu-d-Din  ami  had  sufficient  iutiueuce  over  Baliram  Shah  to  compass
his  enemy's  death.

He  culls  the  town  ^Vt7ur.  (Kaverty  ti57  ami  noic  >■},  iLS.  (A)  has  tJA yo

\Iarhira.

S 7ahaqat-i-NSsirl  st-ites  that  the  Sultan  uominated  Malik  Qutbu-d-Din
Husai’i  :bn  .tii  Ghuri.  together  with  the  Waxir  the  Khwajah  lluhaz;abu-d-
i)in  for  rills  purpose,  and  that  the  hater  reterivU  m iu  the  te.vt  was  written
bv  li.m  Kavertv  b57,  '>o^;

AIS.  iS)  ^ ^Sect

the  m'.riHs  ’ji,^'C  ^

i .-J  . ihneirv,  p.  6.7S  ,_,vr.  que m.-ii-Hiu  a.'t,  r whom  the  Q'atb

n.,nir  of  IJ  -..a  is  calU-l  died  ii.  O'tP,  il.  Sec  U.ivesry  ligZ.  .v.fc  6.

also  'ai'c  fi.;,  i.’*.  't  i his  was  aiioihev  mau  ii  tj^olbu-d- Daw

[ 124  j

matters  straight  and  to  quell  the  disturbance,  but  without  success  ;
the  Shaihbii-1-Tsla,in  returned  and  came  to  Dehli,  and  just  at  this
juncture  Nizamu-l-Mulk  and  the  Amirs  also  arrived  and  besieged
the  Sultan  in  Dehli, ^ and  taking  him  captive  imprisoned  him,
and  after  a few  days  despatched  him  to  the  next  world  * and  set
up  another  king  in  his  place.

The  times  of  old  have  had  this  habit
To  take  from  this  man  and  give  to  that.

The  duration  of  his  reign  was  two  years  and  one  month  and
fifteen  days.

Sultan  Alau-d-DIn  Mas‘0d  Shah  ibn  RuKNU-D-Dir  FiRozsH.tH

Having  been  released  from  prison  by  the  consent  of  his  uncles
Sultan  bifisiru-d- Din  Mahmud  and  Sudan  Jalalu-d-Din,  the  sons
of  Sultan  Shamsu-J-Din  lyaltimish,  became  king  at  the  end  of
the  year  already  mentioned  (639  H.),  after  that  Tzzu-d-Din
Balban  ^ (the  elder)  had  occupied  the  throne  for  one  day  and  had
issued  a proclamation.  None  of  the  Maliks  or  Amirs  had  been
sati>tied  with  this  arrangement  and  reverted  to  Sultan  ‘Alau-
d-Din,  and  appointed  Malik  Qutbu-d-Din  Hasan  as  Deputy,  and
Malik  Muhazzabu-d-Din  Nizamu-l-Mulk  Wazir  of  the  kinc'dom
and  in  the  year  64.)  H.  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Mas'ud
put  to  death  Nizamu-l-Mulk  the  Wazir.

88

One  should  not  desire  brief  kingship  like  that  of  the  ro.se
For  a torrent  speedily  breaks  down  a bridge.

The  Wazir.ship  was  conferred  upon  Sadru-l-Miilk  Najmu-d-Din
Abu  Haki.  and  IMalik  Gbiyasu-d-Din  Balban  the  younger  who  had
at  first  been  called  Ulugh  Khan  and  afterwards  attained  the
dignity  of  Sultan. i became  Amir  Hajib  and  in  succession  to  him
the  governorship  of  Nagor  and  Sind  and  Ajmir  was  conferred

>-«ed  till  the  month

of  /a  Qa  dan  p 6o9),

3 t'n  the  l.'Jtii  of  7a  Qa-dah  639  H.

s Alalik  -Izza-a-DIn  Balban-i-Kashlu  Kh5n.  see  Eaverty  p,  77.5  „ ,,

* Jlalik  aiy5?u.cl-Dm  Balban  was  dignified  with  the  title  of  Uiu  h Kh-
and  made  Deputy  of  tie  kiomlom  and  leader  of  tne  troons  in  the  vear^u’ u"
but  w,,s  deprived  of  hi.s  office  in  65(>.51  U.  He  was  A.nir  akha;  nl!

When  he  became  Ainir  Hajib.  — '

■was  Amir  .ikhur

hliur  til!  642  H.

See  Ain-i-AJibarl  (Jarrett)  If.  298.

[ 125  ]

perinaiientl}'  upon  Malik  ■Izzu-d-Din  Balban,  tlie  elder,  Budiion
was  cDiiferred  upon  Malik  Taju-d-l)iii;  and  in  this  year  ‘Izz-ud-  Din
Tuglia  Khan  who  had  advanced  from  Karmh  ^ to  the  neighbour-
hood of  Lakhnauti  sent  Sharfu-l-Mulk  Aslia‘ri  to  the  Sultan  ‘Alaii-
d-Dlu  with  a written  despatch,  the  Sultan  then  sent  a red  canopy
and  a special  robe  of  honour  in  charge  of  the  G-overaor  of  Oiidh  *
for  ‘Izzu-d-Din  Tugha  Khan  who  was  in  Lakhnauti,  and  having
brought  both  his  uncles  aforementioned  out  of  confinement,
assigned  the  district  of  Qanauj  to  Malik  Jalalu-d-Din,  and
Bahraij  to  Malik  Nasiru-d-Din  Mahmud,  who  acquitted  them-
selves in  those  districts  to  his  satisfaction.  And  in  the  year  (;4'2  H,
the  Mughul  forces  ® arrived  in  the  district  of  Lakhnauti,  the
assumption  is  that  the  Mughuls  must  have  come  by  way  of  Tibat
and  Khita,  and  Saltan  'Aian-d-tliii  sent  Timur  Kban  Qara  Beg*  to
the  assistance  of  Tugha  Khun  and  the  Mnglnils  were  defeated.
Hostility  arose  between  Tugha,  Khan  and  ihilik  Qiran,*  'J'ugha
Khan  came  to  Dehli,  and  Lakhnauti  remained  in  the  hiii.ds  of
Timur  Khan,*

• The  priuted  text  lias  but  Ms.  (A)  lias  ^vlli(•h  is  correct.  Karrah

is  ('n  the  right  bank  of  the  Ganges  Lat.  25^41'  N bong.  St  ’ 2i'  E.  (see  Hunter,
hup  Iraz.)  A'ol.  YIII  Before  .tkbar's  time  Karrali  was  the  seat  of  govern-
ment,

S Qazi  Jalalu-d-DIn  Kisiun

S Tin's  is  an  error  which  lias  according  to  Ravenj  been  handed  on  from
author  to  author.  The  way  tlie  mistake  originated  is  pointed  out  by  him
in  his  note  8 on  p,  085.

The  original  reading  was  Knuftr-i  Ji/jnagar  which  by  some

strange  perversion  became  thence  to  jlgf'  and  so  to

our  author’s  statement.

Jajnagnr  or  Jajpur  on  the  Baitariini  river  iii  Orissa,  capital  of  the  province
under  the  Lion  Dynasty,  the  Gajpati  or  Lord.s  of  Elephants  [Ain-i-Akhari  It,
219  n.  1.)  (see  Imp  Guz.  Vol.  VII,,  and  Stat.  Acc.  of  Bengal,  XVIII.  85-89).

The  Iniidel  hordes  of  Jajnrgar  were  of  course  Hindus  and  not

Jlughids,  lienee  the  assumption  in  the  te.xt  to  account  for  their  presence  before
Lakhnauti  is  as  unnecessary  as  it  is  absurd.

■t  The  real  name  of  Timur  ^an  Qara  Beg  as  he  is  called  in  the  text,  is
Malik  Qamaru-d-Diu  Qinin-i-Timnr  Khan  and  he  is  the  Malik  Qiran  referred
to  a tine  or  two  larcr.  In  other  words  Malik  Qiran  and  “Timur  Khan  ” are
one  and  the  same  person.  In  the  text  is  a misprint  for

MS.  (A).  Sec  also  Haverty  86 1,  n.  9.

[ 12*5  ]

In  tills  .year  tlie  ifughul  army*  ai'i  ived  in  the  vicinity  of  TTctib
and  assaulted  it,  and  the  Sultan  proceeding  by  forced  marches  with
all  possible  speed,  readied  ttie  lianks  of  the  river  Biah,  and  the
Mughtils  raising  the  siege  of  Uchh  took  to  flight ; the  Sultan  on
reaching  Delhi  took  to  arresting  and  putting  to  death  to  such  an
extent  that  the  Amirs  and  nobles  turned  against  him,  and  agreed
to  summon  Malik  Nasirn-d-Din  Mahmud  ibn  Shamsu-d-Din  from
Bahraij,  and  upon  his  arrival  at  Delhi  in  the  year  644  H,  they
t'nrew  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Mas’Cid  into  prison  and  he  speedily  *
exchanged  that  continement  for  the  prison  house  of  eternity.

This  is  the  way  of  the  changeable  world.'

In  klndiie.ss  it  gives  and  it  robs  you  in  wi-ath.

89.  The  duration  of  his  reign  was  four  years  and  rne  mouth.

Sl-LtIx  X.^SIRf-D-DiX  M.tHVCD  IBS'  SH.tMSr-U-DiN-  ItALTIMISH
Succeeded  to  the  sovereignty  in  the  year  641  H,  (1246  A.D  ) and
the  'Wazir.ship  was  conferred  upon  Clhiyasu-d-Dni  Balbiin  the
younger,  who  was  in  reality  great,  and  was  the  slave  and  son-
in-law  of  the  father  of  Nasiru-d-din.3

At  the  time  of  his  accessi.m  great  large.sse  was  given,  and  the
poets  recited  many  eougratulutory  odes  front  some  of  'which  the
following  verses  are  taken —

1 124t  A D.  Th.-s  was  renlty  a MusJi.il  force,  under  the  command  of  “ the

acotiT’^t’d  M iDiTurah  l T

• On  tlip  lIHrti  <if  Mnh.iri-am  H (1246  A.D  ).

^-7

5 Shan.sxi-d-Din

yasiru-d-Dm  .MahmCd  son  of  S.,am.„-d-Dm  hsiUimish  was  born  at  the
Qasr  Bajh  in  Pelhi  in  th.'  year  iV’6  If  i f’nti.iv.t'.i.jvV?,,;- 1

It  will  be  remeniliercd  that  he  was  the  second  son  of  T i '-
, f s-  ■ 1 n-  I ■ ^ fyiiitimish  to  be.ir

the  name  of  A.istrr.-d-Din.  which  was  o.ven  him  upon  the  death  of  his  elder

brother  (seep  04)  in  (*2ti  A H Cal.  Text  p *>01  / IR  >

He  was  a man  of  ^mot  and  rearm,  disposition  and  spent  most’o’f  bii

finish  of  the  legends  of  his  cunayo.  which  dispiay  a remaruiradvanoe

r t::t:sr  ^p-d  nefini.

[ 527  1

Tliat  great  Lord  who  is  a Hatim  in  genei'osity  and  a Rustum
in  energy.

Xasir-i-Dunya  wa-Din  Mahmud  ibn  lyaltimish.

That  great  world  conquei or,  thereof  of  whose  palace  is  the
heaven.

In  the  bright  of  his  dignity  this  lower  spliere  is  his  vestuie.

How  can  v,e  measure  the  gioi'y  the  Sikku  acquires  from  his
ausjticious  titles.'

Or  liow  compute  the  exultation  of  the  KKuthah  at  the  mention
of  his  happy  name.

Tlie  records  of  his  equity  ami  his  laiidalde  qualities  are  evident
fioni  the  book  called  ■ uiiich  was  composed  in  his

Ih  nor.r.

The  Saltan  entrusted  all  tlie  aif.urs  of  the  kingdom  to  Ghiyasu-
d-Din  Ilalban  and  in  giving  him  the  title  of  Ulugh  Khan  said,  “ I
deliver  into  thy  bands  the  reins  of  abs'-lnte  autlnu-ity,  bev.-are  le.st
thou  commit  thyself  to  any  evil  actiou,°  for  tomorrow  thou  wilt  be
at  a loss  in  the  presence  of  Almighty  God  and  thou  wilt  bring
shame  upon  me  and  upon  tiiyself."  The  Sultan  himself  tvould
generallv  retire  into  his  chamber  and  occupy  bini'ielf  in  devotion,
and  re.ading  the  Qur’an  and  in  repeating  the  sacred  names  of  God
tmiy  i/e  le  qloriTiMl  mtd  exaltPil  ■,  and  it  is  cmrently  reported
that  oil  the  occa'i -n  of  a public  audience  he  used  to  clothe
himself  from  lu  iul  to  foot  in  regal  apparel,  while  in  piivate  be  used
to  wear  an  old  ragged  garment ; and  they  also  say  that  he  used  to  9®.
devote  his  time  to  the  copy  of  the  (,)ur’aii  uiiich  lie  was  writing,*

> His  titles  .is  given  in  tlie  Til"'  tvere  :

As  sultf'nti-i-A'z  .mii-i.il'n.vem.  >‘.oirii-ii-Dunyii  wau-d-Din.  Abu-1- XIu-
zaftiir-i-Jlahnoid  .Shib  ibn-i  sultan  lyaltimish  Yamin-i-Kha!ifatB-llah  Xasir-i-
Amlri-l-M  uminni.

The  71c  n.;uf-!-AVio7  of  llinh.ijii-s-5irij  was  written  in  hi.s  court  and
dedirated  to  ! im  ■ hence  its  name.

S Tiha'ai-u'Sri^in  uf  Xlinhain-s-Siraj  is  a general  h'stcry  up  to  65S  H.
composed  by  Abu  rmar  MinhSjn-d-DTn  Usmaii  ibn  Sicijn-d-Din  al  Juzjani.

See  Elliott  II,  259.  An  Engli-'h  trans'atirn  by  Jlajor  Raverry  has  been  pub-
lished in  the  Bli.iiot'neca  Indi,  .n  by  the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal.

4 lbn-i-Bara*r^  srares  in  hi?  his"«-’rv  (french  edition.  Vol.  III.  p.  169  .

Ajlixl)  JUT  J oi

[ 128  ]

fni-tlipr  that  he  used  to  write  it  himself  in  private  so  that  no  one
might  recognize  his  liandwritiiig  and  buy  it  for  more  than  its  fair
value,  and  he  used  to  sell  (these)  in  the  Bazar.  Tliey  relate  also
several  other  sti-ange  stories  about  him,  which  resemble  the  narra-
tives  a egarding  the  rightly  directed  Khalifs  - among  them  I have
seen  it  written  in  a book  that  one  day  his  wife  was  complaining
of  not  having  a servant,  and  she  said  “ Whenever  1 bake  bread  for
yon  my  bands  get  burned  and  blistered.”  He  wept  and  replied,
*■  Tlie  world  is  passing  away,  bear  your  toil  for  these  few  days  for
God  Almighty  on  the  morrow  of  resurrection  (ice  trust  in  Him  and
helieve  in  Him)  as  a reward  for  this  labour,  will  surely  give  yon  a
Hiiii  to  wait  upon  you,  as  it  is,  I cannot  possibly  buy  a slave  girl
for  you  from  tlie  public  funds.  His  wife  too,  agreed  to  this.

The  world  is  but  a dream  in  the  eyes  of  the  vio-ilaut

A wise  man  does  not  set  bis  heart  upon  a dream.

And  the  Sultan  in  the  month  of  Rajah  in  the  year  of  his  acces-
sion, took  an  army  towards  Multan*  and  in  Zul  Q.rdah  having
ci'ossed  the  1 iver  of  Lahore  ("Ravi)  and  having  appointed  TJln gb
Klian  as  leader  of  the  forces, 2 sent  him  towards  the  jQd  hills  s and
the  country  round  Nandanah,  and  he  himself  halted  on  the  hanks
of  the  river  Indus.  Ulugh  Khan  having  punished  that  part  of  the
country  brought  it  into  subjection,  and  having  given  a lesson  to

C etait  iiu  smiverain  pieux  : i!  copiait  ties  exempiaires  du  livre  illnstre  (la
Koii'.ii),  les  veiidait.  et  s.-  nourrissait  aver  le  prix  qn'il  eu  retirau.  La  Kadhi
Caiaal  eJdai  m’  a fait  v.)ir  un  Ki.ran  copie  de  ?a  main,  artistemeut  et  ele-am-

iiiont  fotit.

1 We  find,  Banifm  in  ihc  Takepif-i-Xe.nW  (Raveny  G77.  note  3 6 1

bnr  bor'i  MSS.  (Aj  and  (B)  read  Multan  ’ ^

“ in  MSS.  (A  amt  B),  hut  this  must  be  a copyist’s

error  for

8 The  Kohi  JCicl  (See  Uemiell'.-  M.,p  Koh-i-Jehou.l  I is  apj.arentlr  a part  of
Ttie  Salt  Range.  Lat.  SZ”  Long,  7L.  lif.i.er  states  that  the  tnhes  of  .Ihd  and
Janjahah  descended  from  a common  aoee-ror,  are  the  riiiinv  i aees  of  the
and  ot‘  all  the  tribc^i  rrn*  aud  B.ihi-di

{.l.iTi't'it j H.  405,  note  2).

Tiellentl.aler  (I.  lO.'-l,  places ' Xandanah  or  .Vandaiipniir  (forteeesso  eii
hriiiMO  siii  i.u  looiitavnej  between  the  Reioit  and  t).e  Indus  it  must  liate  I-du
eoini-ot  iiei  e nea,  the  hue  .Iheiam  In  IV-li.f  w.ir.

Ahi-i-Al-tini

[ 129  ]

the  Khukhars^  and  other  contumacious  tiibes,  joined  the  Sultan
and  returned  to  Dehli,  and  in  the  year  645  H , having  taken  Miwat*
turned  his  attention  to  the  country  of  the  Doab,  and  the  same  year
having  sent  Ulugh  !^an  from  the  confines  of  Karrah  to  oppose
and  overthrow  the  rebels  of  that  district,  arrived  at  Dehli  with
great  spoil.

And  in  the  year  646  A.H.,  he  proceeded  against  Hantanbhur,  and
haring  punished  the  seditious  tribes  of  those  districts  he  returned,
and  in  the  year  647  H.,  he  marrieil  the  daughter  of  Ulugh  Khan.

Then  in  the  year  648  H.,  he  took  an  army  towards  Multan,  and
after  some  days  Malik  Tzzu-d-Din  Balban-i  Buzurg,  the  Governor
of  Nagor,  withdrew  his  foot  from  the  ciicle  of  allegiance  and
rebelled, 5 but  when  the  Sultan  proceeded  thither,  he  begged  for
pardon  and  joined  tlie  Court.

I And  in  the  year  649  H.  he  marched  in  the  direction  of  Gwaliar
and  Chanderi  and  Malwa,  and  Jahir  Dev*-  the  Rai  of  that

t Khukhars,  see  Tieff.  I,  104  and  105,  Le  district  des  salines  est  habite  par  les
Khocares  ce  sent  oeui  qui  tireut  lo  sel  des  mines,  e’est  nn  nation  qui  » qnitte
I’idolatrie  pour  embrasser  le  maliometisme.  See  also  this  volume,  p.  67,  n.  3.

* Text  and  113.  (.4)  lliwut.  Thfs  place  is  not  mentioned  in  the

Tdbaqat-i~Xasiri,  it  is  mentioned  in  the  A>n-i-Akbari  (I.  (Jarrett  307)  as  the
place  to  which  Nasrat  ^an  fled  from  Dehli  when  it  was  seized  by  Iqbal
^ian,  some  150  years  later  than  the  events  recorded  in  the  text.

Tieffenthaler,  Vol.  I,  p.  211,  llevat  est  un  canton  assez  etendn,  borne  par  les
provinces  de  Dehli  et  d’Adjmere  et  par  les  Districts  de  Djepour  et  de  Dik.
It  extends  “ north  and  south  from  Badshapur  to  Harsana,  47  miles,  and  east
and  west  from  Dik  to  Namol,  57  miles.”  Alwar  is  about  the  centre  of  it  now.

Tieffenthaler  goes  on  to  say  “ Cette  contree  est  h.abiieo  par  beauconp  do
Mahometans  qui  etaient  ci-devsnt  gentils.  Elie  appartmait  auparavanfc  aux
Afghans  dans  le  terns  qu’ils  regnoient  a Dehli.  La  Gouvernement  passa
ensuite  aux  Mogols.  Maintenant  le  Djiit  (Jats)  s’en  est  approprie  la  plus
graude  partie  et  une  partie  est  tombee  au  pouvoir  du  Bajah  de  Djepour
(Jaipur)  qui  en  a expulse  beauconp  d’habitans  mahometans.

He  speaks  of  the  abundance  of  Nim  (Melia  azadirachta]  and  Sissoo  (Dalber-
gta  sissoo)  trees,  and  praises  the  cattle  and  horses  of  the  country.

He  speaks  of  Narnol  the  capital  city  of  the  district,  as  having  formerly  been
populous  and  flourishing.  See  also  Kennell's  Memoir  (1788),  p.  75.

5 Talaqdl-i-Ndtiri  says  this  occurred  in  649  H.,  which  is  more  probably
correct,  as  it  is  the  account  of  a cotemporary  historian.

* This  Rdj.a  is  called  in  the  Tahaqiit-i-Xiisiii,  Chah.ar  Aj.ari,  ho  was  indepen-

dent sovereign  of  Narwar  in  A.D  1216  (644  A.H.)  under  the  name  of  Chaiiar
Derva,  his  coins  bearing  the  inscription  ft  Ho  was  a very  power-

ful Kaja  (see  Thomas  67  et  seqq  : and  Kaverty  690  note  1.)

17

91.

[ 130  ]

Country  witli  five  thousand  cavalry  and  200,000  infantry  came
out  to  meet  liim  and  gave  battle  to  the  Sultan  in  great
force,  but  was  defeated  and  the  fort  of  Narwar  ^ was  taken.
And  in  this  year  Sher  Kian  Governor  of  Multan,  and  Malik  ‘Izzn-
d-Din  Balban  who  had  left  Nagor  with  reinforcements  for  him
reduced  the  fortress  of  Uchh,  and  Sber  'Hjan  remained  in  the
fortress,  while  Malik  ‘Izzn-d-Din  Balkan  came  to  pay  his  respects
to  the  king,  and  received  from  him  as  a jaegir  the  districts  of
Bndaon  and  was  given' the  title  of  Kashlu  KhM.

And  in  the  year  650  H.  (125*2  A.D. ) he  left  Dehli  intending  to
proceed  to  Lahore,  and  from  there  he  went  to  Multan  and  Uchh,
and  in  t bis  expedition  Kashlu  Khan  accompanied  the  Snltan  as
far  as  the  river  Biah.

And  in  the  year  651  H.  marchim?  from  Dehli,  he  detailed  forces
to  act  against  Tabarhindah  and  Uchh  and  Multan  of  which  Sher
TThan  had  lost  control,  and  of  which  the  Sindhis  held  possession  ;
and  having  regained  possession  of  them,  handed  them  over  to  the
charge  of  Arsalan  Khan  and  returned.  And  in  the  year  652  H.
having  assembled  an  army  on  the  confines  of  the  country  at  the
foot  of  the  hills  ^ of  Bijnor,  and  having  crossed  the  Ganges  by

1 Katwar, — In  the  lln-i-Akbari,  we  find  the  Sarkar  of  Narwar  be  having
500  Cavalry,  30,000  Intantry.  Karwar  itself  had  a stcme  fort  (see  also
Raverty  090,  note  1).

In  the  text  is  a misprint  for  513.  (A).

Naricar.  Tieffi.  I.  175  gives  a sketch  plan  of  the  fortress  of  Narwar  and
a long  description  from  whieh  the  following  note  is  abridged.

A town  of  moderate  size  about  j a mile  long.and  ten  in  breadth,  protected
in  his  time  labout  1780  A.D.)  with  stone  walls,  but  formerly  unprotected.
Latitude  35’  30'  N.  Longitude  takeu  from  the  Islands  of  the  Blest  93'’  24'.
(Cf.  Am-I-Aiburi  [Jarrett]  III.  60.)  Houses  well  and  substantially  built  with
flat  roofs.

It  has  four  gates,  and  there  was  a Christian  family  of  Armenian  stock
who  had  built  a palace,  and  a chapel  where  a Jesuit  father  said  mass.  The
fortress  was  built  upon  a monncaia  having  two  peaks  or  spurs  running
parallel  North  and  South.

He  considers  it  must  have  been  impregnable  in  old  times  before  the  invention
of  gunpowder  “ pour  le  malheur  du  genre  humain  et  la  mine  des  villes.”

A good  supply  of  water  is  furnished  by  a large  tank  paved  and  flanked  with
atone.  He  also  speaks  of  a magnetic  iron  ore  from  which  they  procure  iron
by  smelting  for  export  in  various  forms,  and  a flint  of  a w^tish  colour
and  marvellous  hardness  used  for  flint  locks.

> Of  Bardar  and  Bijnor  (Tubaqdt-i-N-ifiri}.  In  the  text  instead  of

L 131  ]

the  ford  of  Miapur  i and  hugging  the  skirt  of  the  mountain,
reached  the  hanks  of  the  river  Eahab,  * and  having  taken
much  booty  and  made  many  prisoners,  giving  themselves
up  to  rapine  and  making  prisoners,  ® invaded  the  country  of  92
Katihar  going  to  Badaon  and  from  thence  to  Oudh,  and  hastened
to  the  capita].  And  after  some  time'  news  arrived  that  certaia
of  the  Amirs,  namely  Ulugh  Khan-i- A‘zam,  and  Arsalan  Khan
and  others,  in  concert  with  Malik  Jalaln-d-Din.  the  brother  of
the  Sultan,  had  commenced  hostilities  in  the  viciniiy  of  Tabar-
hindah,  The  Suitan  thereupon  marched  from  Dehli,  and  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Tabarhindah  and  Kuhram  and  Kai'hal,^  hy
the  intervention  of  a party  of  Amirs,  the  Amirs  agreed  to  peaqe,
and  with  many  protestations  and  oaths  suing  for  pardon  came
into  submission  to  the  Sultan ; and  the  Sultan  conferred  upon
Malik  Jalaln-d-Din  the  Governorship  of  Lahore,  and  proceeded
to  the  capital.  And  - in  the  year  653  H.  the  feeiings  of
the  Sultan  underwent  a change  with  respect  to  his  mother
MMika-i-Jahan.  He  gave  Qntlngh  Khan,  to  whom.  Maiika-i-,
Jahan  was  married,  a jaegir  in  Oudh,*  and  a short  time  after
tnniing  against  him  also  7 . sent  him  to  Bahraij.  He  took
fright  at  this  and  c'ame  to  the  hill  country  of  Sir  Mur,  and  Malik
‘Izzu-d-Din  Kashlii  Khan  and  certain  other  Amirs  mad.e  common
cause  witli  him  aud  laid  the  foundation  of  revolt ; the  Sultan

Jjij  which  is  manifestly  wrong  I read  tjf

as  in  MH.  (A).

1 Here  again  the  printed  text  is  hopelessly  wrong.  MS.  (A)  reads  as
follows  —

vTjlJ  which  is  intelligible  and  tallies  with
Tuhaqdt-i-NHsin.  Where  the  reading  jjj  3/fy^  in  the  text  comes  from,  it  is
hard  to  say.

2 MS.  (A)  The  text  reads  • see  Albir'inl  (India)

(Sachau)  II.  2G1 : also  Elliott,  I.  49  as  regards  the  Rahab.

* MS.  (A).

4 The  Calcutta  text  of  the  Tahaqdt-i-Nasirl  calls  this  Ki-’^^har.  Oar

text  has  Kafthar,  MS.  (A)  has  (?)  (!)

see  Raverty  696,  note  4.

^ See  Elliott,  II.  p.  354.

® The  printed  text  gives  It  should  be  MS,  fA;

7 This  should  read  j not  as  in  the  printed

text.

L 1?>2  ]

aceordiiiely  detailed  Ulugh  Khan  Balban  -with  a large  army  i to
oppose  them,  and  tvhen  the  two  forces  had  arrived  within  a short
distance  of  each  other  the  Shaikhn-l-dslam  Sait'vid  Qiitbu-d-Uin
and  QazI  Shamsti-d-Din  of  Bharaij  and  another  paity  of  men
incited  Qutlugh  Ktan  to  come  into  Dehli,  and  iii'ipired  him
with  a desire  to  possess  that  country  ; ® the  inhabitants  of  Dehli
joined  in  this  instigation.  Ulugh  Kbaii  lepreseiited  this  at  the
Sultan’s  court,  and  the  Sultan  issued  an  order  for  every  indivi-
dual of  that  party  to  go  separately  to  his  own  place,  and
Qutlugh  Khan  and  Malik  ‘Izzu-d-Din  Kashlu  Khan  after  this
defeat,  traversed  the  distance  of  a hundred  kroJ's^  In  two  days
an,d  came  from  Samana  to  Dehli,  but  did  not  find  the  ]:arty
93.  which  had  been  the  cause  of  their  being  sumnionel.  Qatlugh
Khan  and  Kashlu  Khan  also  were  separated,  and  Ulugh  Khan
following  them  arrived  in  tlie  Sultan’s  presenced  And  in  the
year  6do  H.  the  Saltan  issued  an  order  for  the  expulsion  of
certain  nobles  and  grandees  from  the  city  of  Dehli,  and  at  the  end  of
this  year  the  Mughfds  arrived  on  the  boundaries  of  Uchh  and
Multan  ; Kashlu  Khan  Balban  made  common  cause  with  them  and
the  Sultan  came  up  in  hot  haste  against  them.  The  Mughuls  were
not  able  to  stand  against  h.im  and  turned  back  towards  Khurasan.
The  Sultan  also  raised  the  banner  of  return  towards  the  Cftpital
and  having  bestowed  a robe  of  honour  upon  Malik  Jalalu-d-
Din  Jani  marched  towards  Lakhnauti.*  And  in  the  year  656  H.
(1258  A.D.)  ambassadors  came  to  the  Sultan  from  Turkistan,  and
he  sent  them  back  loaded  with  presents,  and  in  this  year  Hazrat
Makhdum  Ganjshakar,  ® may  God  magnify  las  'power  and  exalt  his

I Tliis  account  differs  from  that  given  in  the  Tabaqat-i-Kusin.  {See  Earerty
p.  T03  and  seqo}.

*

MS

in

(A).  The  word  is  omitted

Calcutta  text.

3 About  ISO  miles,  see  Aln-i-Akhari  II,  p 414,  also  Cunn.  A.  G I.,  p.  571.
The  .nneient  Kro-^a  of  Magadli  was  about  ir  miles,  the  ios  of  the  Gangetic
province-s  was,  rasher  more  than  2-t  miles.  The  Akbarl  (toa  was  rather  less
than  1}  tnile>  and  this  is  the  standard  referred  to  above.

* These  Mehh.s  (Qatlach  and  Tzzn-d-Din  Kashlu  Khhn)  retired

towaids  the  S'waiik  territory  foiled  in  their  object  (Tabajuf-’.y-,g,ry^

6 Compare  the  account  in  Tarara-i-yrnu-i  according  to  which  these  events
took  place  in  the  rear  656  H.  m>t  in  655  II.

^ Shaikh  Faridu-d-DIn  MasTid  Ganj-i-sliakar  wa"  the  grandson  of  Farmkh
Shfih  of  Kibul,  rnd  son  of  Karadlu-d-Din  Suleiman  who  came  from  Kabul  to

[ 133  ]

memo)-y,^  left  the  lodging  house  of  separation  and  disappointment
for  the  home  of  nearness  and  fulfilment.

And  in  the  year  657  H.  elephants  and  great  treasure  and
jewels  and  cloths  withont  number,  arrived  from  LathnautI  as
presents,  and  in  Eajab  of  this  year  Malik  ‘Izzu-d-Dln  Kashlfi
TThan  Balban  earning  relief  from  the  turmoil  of  this  ti.iusitory
world,  hastened  to  the  next  world,  and  in  this  year  (jhausu-1-
‘Alam  Hazrat  Shaikh  Bahau-d-Din  Zukariyal  ® the  Zvlultaiii,  iiiaj
God  sanctify  him,  raised  the  tent  of  ® close  union  with  Clod  Al-
mighty, and  a celebrated  poet  wrote  this  couplet  to  recoi  d the  date  •
By  the  arrow  of  the  love  of  God  one  was  wounded  (zakh hu)
the  other  perished  (Jchun).*

Multan  in  the  reign  of  Shihabn-d-Din  Ghuri.  He  was  one  of  the  numerous
disciples  of  Bahau-d-Dm  Zakarlyii,  and  died  two  vears  later  than  Ida  master,
according  to  Firishta  (see  also  i_Jarrectj  III.  p.

His  tomb  is  mentioned  in  the  AJu’i’AHan  (I.  325)as  being  ui  Ajailiiuii  (RTk;
Patan  or  Patand-Panjilb).

There  is,  as  will  be  seen,  considerable  discrepancy  in  the  dates,  Badaonigires
656  H.  as  the  dace  of  Farlda-d-DIn  Ganjo-shakar's  death  and  657  H.  as  that
of  the  death  of  Bahau-d-DIn  Zakariya,  while  according  to  Firishta  the  latter
should  be  666  H.  and  the  former  66S  H.  The  Atn-i-AkoGf/  gire«  66S  H.  as  the
date  of  the  death  of  Farlda*d-d)n  Gauj.i-shakar  and  665  11  as  the  date  of
thesdeath  of  Bahan-d-dln  Zakariya

1 MS  (A)  ^3  j The  i-rinted  text  is  wrong  iiere.

8 ShailA  Bahau-d-Din  Zakariya  was  a famous  Muhainnuiflun  saint  of
Multan.  He  w'as  the  grandson  of  Kamalu-d-Dm  ‘All  Shah  Qureishi  who
left  Mecca  for  Khwarazm  and  thence  came  to  Multixn,  the  Qiibhacu-1-Tslani,
and  resided  ther-e,  and  became  acknowledged  by  the  people  as  their  teacher
and  guide,  Shail^  Bahau-d-DIn  was  the  son  of  Shaikh  VTajlhu-d-DIn  by
the  daughter  of  Hiisani-d-DIn  Tarmadi  and  was  born  in  liio  fort  of  Kot
Karor  in  587  H.  He  died  at  Delhi  about  the  year  fi»i6  K. : wlin.'  ri  L icr>  d in
devotion  in  his  chamber  an  angel  bearing  a sealed  ini^.sire  h-tvink;  anjiMared  to
his  son  Sadru-d'DTn  ‘Anf  witli  a command  to  give  the  :lli^iive  to  Bahaii-d-Din.
He  did  so  and  retiied,  but  returned  on  hearing  voices  in  the  room  savins'
“ The  friend  has  joined  the  friend  when  lie  found

his  father  lying  dead

This  account  is  abridged  from  Firishta.  The  account  of  tfo*  saint  given
by.Beale  differs  from  this  bat  the  source  of  the  inforuiati-i’i  L'^iven  there  is
not  stated.  See  also  Ahi-i-AJ^U'iri  (Jarrett)  III.  862  and  /<"b

The  tomb  of  Bibau-d-Din  Zakariya  is  in  Multan

3 MS.  (A)  jVi  Jd-

* The  word  gives  the  date  657  H the  word  gives  the  date

66  H.  See  page  133,  nute  1,

[ J

94.  And  in  the  year  658  H.  Snltan  Jfasiru-d-Din  Malimud,  chasti'^ed
tlie  country  of  Miwat  ^ and  the  rest  of  that  district,  and  when  he
was  fully  established  as  Malik  in  the  year  664  H,  he  fell  sick  and
closed  liis  eyes  on  the  world  of  dreams  and  fancies,  and  went  to
the  eternal  kingdom.*  He  left  no  heir  ; the  duration  of  his  reign
was  nineteen  years,  three  months  and  a few  days.  His  tomb  M
well  known  in  Hehli,  and  every  year  crowds  flock  to  visit  it.

Verse.

Come  and  cast  one  thoughtful  look  upon  this  dust.

For  it  is  the  dust  of  the  resting-place  of  trusted  kings.

And  of  the  number  of  those  who  sounded  the  drum  of  poetry
and  attained  the  rank  of  Maliku-l-Kalam  (Loid  of  Eloquence)
dttring  Nasiru-d-Drn’s  reign,  one  was  Shamsu-d-Din  Dahir  ^ whose
manifest  excellencies  and  perfection  are  beyond  description  and
need  no  narration  and  praise,  and  Mir  Khusru,  * viay' God
sdnctify  hiiiif  who  tested  the  genuineness  of  hi.s  own  poems  by  the
touchstone  of  their  acceptability  to  that  other  (Shamsu  d-Din)
used  to  boast  of  them,  and  in  the  preface  to  the  Ghurratii-hKamal
and  at  the  end  of  the  Haslit  Bihisht  greatly  embellished  his  words
in  the  mention  of  the  praiseworthy  qualities  and  in  spreading

1 The  TahaqUt-i’XdsirJ  Cn!.  Text,  p.  227  reads  :

jLJ  lyli.

ji  ly-Aj'  jf  if  o[yA,o

€lug!i  gtan-i-A‘zam  marched  towards  tlic  hills  of  Dcldl
to  qnell  the  insurrection  of  the  robbers  of  Miwit  who  would  he  a terror
to  devils.

For  a lull  account  of  the  province  of  Miwiit  see  Hunter,  Imp.  Ciz  , To]  IX
It  includes  the  British  districts  of  Muttra  and  Gurgiion,  part  of  L lwar  and
Bhartpur.  See  also  page  129,  note  2,  of  this  Volume.

» On  the  11th  Jamadiu-l-Awwai  ; as  he  came  to  the  thione  on  tlie  23rd
Miiharram  6+1  H,  his  reign  was  tiienty  years  three  month.s  tmd  some  days
not  as  stated  i . the  text.  He  left  no  i«sue,  his  only  sou  by  U.c  dam-hter  of
Ulogh  Khan  ! r*vnig  died  in  infancy.

S There  is  >•  mention  of  this  poet  in  either  the  M(.
Ata^Jikn<K;.  x hpre  are  hitrhly  lacdarory  verses  a

m praise  c-i  one  . : Ilanifah.  pi>ssib!v  referrin
* Amir  Khusru './who  h.  .tut-ady  been  mentioced  u
of  Ar.iir  Ms.bin-'.  ’ .S  of*.  .-L>.n  ivas  born  at  Fairth'
Dehh  i’i  T-5  A 11  AA.  t-  lol}.

-/to','  or  the

the  c-.d  , tiie  Ha.i.t
? to  s:h:im>o-d-din,
ttotreifo,  „,-c,  2,
o-.I  A.il.  and  died  at

[ 135  ]

abroad  the  excellencies  of  (that  friend  of  his).  Ajid  -Saltan
Qhiyasn-d-Din  Balban  having  at  the  end  of  his  reign  appointed
him  Secretary  for  the  countries  of  Bangala  and  Kanu-ud  had
left  him  in  the  service  of  his  elder  son  Jfasirn-d-Din  ^ Bnghra
Khan,  and  these  few  couplets  are  from  an  ode  of  his.

Oh  thou  * of  whom  this  work  of  my  heart  is  nnworthy
though  my  ignorance  ; thou  gavest  me  last  night  a false,
promise  of  entertainment.

All  night  I kept  my  eyes  awake  and  * I did  not  know  that
that  was  longing  of  that  kind  which  yon  know  to  be  vain.

I keep  my  heart  * exercised  thinking  of  thy  face,  and  wonder-
ing why  thy  colour  is  so  ripe  and  thy  forehead  like  virgin
silver.

The  date  E^si^ed  for  his  birth  seems  unlikely  as  he  would  only  hare  been
thirteen  when  Nasiru-d-DIn  died.  The  ilajma‘ul  Futaha  gives  no  date  for  his
birth  but  says  his  father  came  to  Dehli  from  Tnrkistan  in  the  time  of  Changiz
Khan’s  invasion,  and  obtained  great  distinction  in  the  court  of  Saltan  Mahmud
ibn  Toghlaq  Shah  and  was  killed  in  "a  rebellion  of  the  infidels,  when  his  son
Amir  ^nsrii  was  appointed  as  his  successor  in  his  Amlrship,  which  he
eventually  gave  up  and  acquired  great  skill  and  distinction  as  a poet.  He
died  in  725  H.  and  was  buried  in  the  tomb  of  Shai^  Shakarganj  (Paridu-
d-DIu  Ganjshakar  aee-note  1,  page  133).

He  was  the  author  the  celebrated  Qiranu-s-Sa'dain  the  poem  which  was
written  to  commemorate  the  meeting  of  Sultan  N5?im-d-Din  with  his  son
Snltin  Sai  Qnb^  on  the  banks  of  the  Ghagra,  and  of  several  other  works
(see  Klliott,  111.  pp.  523  and  aeqq).

1 MS.  (A)  reads  correctly  i^UlLw  Sultan  Niisiru-d-Din  Bnghra

Khan  second  son  of  Ghiyasu-d-Din  Balban.  He  was  placed  in  charge  of  Bengal
after  the  revolt  and  defeat  of  its  governor  Tugbi-al.

He  married  a daughter  of  Sultan  Kasiru-d-Din  Mabmiid  Shah  by  whom  he
had  a son  and  successor  Kai-Qubad.  {See  Kaverty,  Tabaqat-i-IfSfiri  716  n.).

In  Thomas,  Pathan  Kings  of  Dehli  there  is  given  a copy  of  an  inscription
of  Nasirn-d-DIu  Mahmud  which  was  engraved  over  the  doorway  of  the
minaret  at  Aligarh  bearing  the  date  10th  Bajab  A.H.  632,  and -the  author
mentions  in  rather  too  mild  terms  the  wanton  Vandalism  which  allowed  a
record  of  this  kind  to  be  destroyed  in  1861.

Thomas  advances  the  opinion  that  the  original  design  for  this  inscription
both  in  matter  and  form  was  the  work  of  N«i?ira-d-D)n  himself,  (cf.  Thomas
op.  eit  129-130).

* MS.  (A)

» MS.  (A)  j"

• MS.  (A)  Ja  Cjli

[ ^36  ]

S5.  I am  overcome  with  idleness  though  it  urges  me  on  to  strenu-
ous endeavour — but  there  is  a loose  bond  between  me  and
distraction.

Do  not  make  me  prepared  with  (the  fire  of)  thy  love  * since  I
am  thy  guest,  because  it  is  a great  virtue  to  offer  sacrifice  of
unprepared  flesh.

We  said  “ no  Muslim  will  eat  raw  flesh.”  but  look  ! thy  grief
has  devoured  me  raw.  Is  this  your  religious  devotion.

* You  call  me  raw,”  if  I cut  open  my  own  breast,  I will
shew  you  that  the  heart  which  thou  considerest  rawg  is  ready.

So  amazed  am  I at  thy  beauty  and  the  glory  of  the  king  that
my  imperfect  work  remains  raw  from  my  amazement.

Since  the  king  is  a second  Khusru,  my  work  will  never  re-
main unfinished,  by  reason  of  the  kingdom  of  the  second
Khusru—

Conqueror  of  the  world  3 and  of  religion,  he  in  view  of
whose  sovereignty  the  desire  of  Emperors  for  the  Kingdom
of  Suleiman  was  vain.

The  king  Mahmud  Shah,  that  Sultan  from  whose  father’s
glory  the  cauldron  of  one  single  ^ desire,  by  reason  of  his
empire,  is  not  left  unfilled.

If  the  Suu  of  his  benevolence  shines  in  the  direction  of  the
garden  no  fruit  issues  from  the  branches  of  the  garden
unripe.®

What  resource  has  the  Sky  if  it  does  not  support  the  burden
of  thy  dignity — how  can  you  expect  a raw  baggage  animal
to  bear  a heavy  load !

Thy  enemy  deserye.s  this  that  you  should  sew  him  in  a raw  hide®

1 MS.  (A)

> MS.  (A)

tS'  cjI

*MS.  (A)  The  text  baa  which  is  mcauingless  amUpoila

the  scansion.

* its  (A).

6 MS.  (A)

8 This  was  a favourite  mode  of  punishment  in  olden  times ; the  nnfortanate
victim  was  sewn  up  in  a raw  hide  which  as  it  dried,  shrunk  and  inflicted
terrible  tortures.

ride  page  12,  note  2.  Muhammad  Q.lsim,,  (Elliott  and  Dowson  I.  209  )

[ 137  ]

foi-  OE  the  body  of  an  inexperienced  man  of  what  use  is
it  for  yon  to  fit  a rnw-liide.^

Thy  enemy  bathes  in  blood,*  instead  of  the  collar  of  his  96.
garment  the  'prisoner  places  on  his  neck  every  moment  a
raw-hide.

Every  deed  of  thine  is  like  - perfected  gold,  and  those  who
wish  thee  evil  are  imperfect  in  their  woik  from  frivolity
and  the  assurance  of  shame.

Thy  enemy  is  that  naked  demon*  who  has  a skin  made  of
the  whole  of  the  Earth,  and  that  too,  if  yon  take  it  off  him
is  a raw-hide.

If  thou  do.st  not  spread  thy  table  every  day  twice  before  the
people,  the^'  will  perforce  eat  raw  grain,  since  the  hand  of
despair  from  lack  of  bread  has  no  other  resource.

If  thy  enemy  becomes  ruined  ^ what  fear  is  there  ? although
he  advances  in  a futile  attack,  like  the  lion  of  the  flag  he
is  hclp’.t-.ss  though  impotence.®

Of  what  avail'  is  the  sorcery  of  Fara'un  since  the  dragon
of  your  stand. ii-d  will  swallow  the  fictitious  serpent.

01)  Khtisru ! .iihftm.su-d-din  ’ is  thy  secretary,  strong  and
well  pvoyeii  ill  .sptech — lie  !->  not  like  the  worthless  Scribes
an  iiu'.V'MTienced  scribb'c'.

lie  liin;',eli  exfcrd'iive  i ' '.n ; his  yeivo  is  like  purified
word-  lua  ■■.,  ■ ; ' o hv^t  sayii'iis  of  Khaqaui
stiil  in  the  i.'Ugb

The  .'ky  Las  piep.iiwl  a per  ' . tin,. bom  -O  for  thee —Oh  Lord

! tfs.  ;A'  p-sx  A.^

s Jis  ' .'t  J,  w!'., r-sKt  :r  -

Tho  LOiUial  i-.M  iii>^  i',  uJojJie'-i  \Mlli

A reails
iii  place  of  *d3

3 MS.

* (-\)  31  ^

6 VI \ ,

0 . U'lrhjn-i-iyiti'  )

^ MR.  (A1  ^ .

P jiii:  ^ce  pat<r  u

^ MS  (A!  J

MS.  (A)  V jJ  xUe  liuo  as  it  sH:  tnds  in  the  text  will  not  scan.

18

L

138  ]

in  thy  favour  grant  that  his  perfect  work  may  never  revert
to  imperfection.

And  the  King  of  Kings  and  of  Speech  Amir  Fakhrn-d-Din
‘Amid  Lumaki  ‘ writes  in  a Qasida  of  which  this  is  the  opening

couplet.

When  my  loved  one  takes  * the  lute,  and  binds  the  plectrum
on  her  fingernail

Her  nail  strikes  Nal  id  ^ wirh  a hundred  wounds  in  the  heart
through  envy.

97.  Through  envy  of  her  harp-  fever  seizes  upon  Kahid  at  that

instant.

Her  nail  becomes  altogether  blue  from  the  effect  of  that
fever.*

Consider  the  henna  on  her  nails  to  Le  like  blood,  which  at  the
time  of  the  springing  of  the  .stiings  from  the  liarp  dry
as  a reed,  has  spurted  forth  and  made  the  nail  moist.

If  in  play  my  nail  has  scratched  your  lip,  do  not  be  vexed  ^ at
that,

Because  now  and  then  they  dip  the  nail  into  sugar  by  way  of
tasting  it.

Keep  the  point  of  your  nail  as  sharp  as  a glance  my  love,  for
the  harp  has  no  confidence  in  the  fingers  save  for  the  sharp-
ness of  their  nails.

Bring  me  consolation  by  the  tenderness  of  thy  kindness,*
because  compared  with  thy  face,  the  bride  of  the  moon
has  hi  ought  blood  to  its  nails  through  envy.

Give  me  wine  red  as  the  blood  of  a hare  at  the  remembrance

1 FaVhrn-d-Mnlk  Khwaja  ‘.\inTda-d-Din,  commonly  known  as  ‘Amid
Dailami  or  ‘Amid  Luniaki  said  to  be  a native  of  Sannam  and  eulogist  of  Snlfaii
Muhammad  Yamin.

* MS.  (A)  reads  j plii

(B)  reads  Aj'AyJ  pl»y®  the  l“te.

8 Ndhid,  The  planet  Tenus  whose  seat  is  in  the  third  heaven

(B«rhon-i-Q<?/t‘|  called  also  vSlH  raqqdt-i-falak.  (the  dancer  of  the

sky).  Astrologers  say  that  this  planet  is  of  a pearly  hue,  of  beneficent
aspect,  and  with  the  quality  of  excessive  moistneas.

* wj  US.  (A).  This  reading  is  preferable  to  that  of  the  text.

I MS.  (A).

« US.  'A).  US  (B)  is  like  the  text.

[ 139  ]

of  the  assembly  of  the  king,  for  his  wmih  ,has  forced  off
the  claws  from  the  paws  of  the  male  lions.

Shalianshah  Nasir-i-Dnnya  wa-Din  Mahmud,  by  whose  equity
the  partridge  with  its  beak  has  tom  off  the  claws  of  the
swift-flying  ' hawk.

By  the  fate-like  oppression  of  his  enemy  he  has  fallen  in
danger  of  ruin,*  just  as  one’s  nail  is  in  danger  in  the  hands
of  an  unskilled  barber.^

His  head  is  in  danger  of  severance  * by  the  sword  of  the  daring,
like  the  nail  at  the  time  of  paring,  in  accordance  with  the
Hadis. ^

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)

* MS.  (A)  is  the  better  reading  as  in  tbs  text.

* Compare  the  Arabic  proverb.  fn  eapttt

crphani  discit  tonsor.

There  is  also  a Hindi  proverb  to  the  sarae  effect,  which  rons: —

jlL  \i4£  IS'jb

The  barter’s  son  will  leo/u  and  the  traveller's  head  will  be  C}tt.

* ilSS.  (A)  (B)  O— Jjj  Sj)i ji  t4r*'  I'be  reading  in  the  text  is  a
copyist’s  error.

‘ MSS.  (.A)  {B;  Intliejlj^Jl!  C«^-.  Jdmi^U‘l-a}±hdr

of  we  find  (33yi  ^

Paring  the  rails  prevents  the  worst  of  all  diseases  (%.  poverty)  and  in-
creases the  means  of  pnbsisteuce.**  Also,
iLm  j dJJ|  Jli  ^ ^

* He  who  pares  his  nails  and  trims  his  beard  every  Friday  saying,  “ In  the
name  of  God  and  in  accord. mce  with  the  oidiuance  of  the  prophet  of  God,**
eveiy  paring  shall  be  counted  to  him  as  the  manumission  of  a slave  of  the
sons  of  Jsma^Il  *

Special  rules  are  laid  down  for  cutting  the  nails.  They  mnst  be  cat  on
Friday,  and  Muhammad  said.  He  who  cats  his  a tils  in  alternate  order  will
never  be  afflicted  with  blear  eyes  It  is  also  said  in  a Hadis  by  Hamid  ibn
‘Abdu-r-Rahnian.

*1,3  ijuc  j U*?  ur*

“ He  who  pares  his  nails  on  Fritlay  is  filled  with  health  and  afeknew  leaves
him.’*  The  preferable  time  for  paring  the  nails  is  Thursday  after  the  evening
prayer.  In  the  ca-se  of  the  right  hau»!  one  t-hould  comrnence  from  the  little
finger,  proceeding  to  tne  middle  finger  and  thence  to  the  thamb,  thence  to
the  ring  finger  and  lastly  to  the  forefinger-  The  order  in  the  left  iiand  is
(1)  I'hamb  {i,i  middle  finger  (3,  little  finge.'  (4)  forefinger  (5;  jing  finger.

[ 140  ]

Fi  ■om  the  dread  of  the  falcon  of  his  equity  it  behoves  that
they  shonld  take  to  fliglit  ' when  tlie  eagle  witli  lancet-liko
talons  casts  his  feathers  and  talons  (througli  fear).

Such  a quarry  do  they  see,*  that  from  their  absence  of  claws
and  their  distress,  their  claw  demands  as  a loan  from  the
small-clawed  partridge  its  claws.

98.  For  this  reason  that  in  the  presence  oj.  nis  power,  the  sky

scratches  his  head  for  envy,  and  each  month,  because  of  that
power,  displays  the  body  of  the  ® moon  in  the  shape  of  a
nail  paring  (crescent).

Compared  with  the  perfumed  dnst  raised  by  his  charger  the
dust-like  grains  of  the  mask-bag  have  become  valueless  as
the  dust  which  is  found  under  every  nail.

You  would  say  his  arrow  is  a finger  from  the  hand  of  victory
because  it  appears  as  though  his  nail  were  like  a willow-
leaf-bladed  soul-destroying  spear.

A finger  which  if  he  .so  wills  it,  like  an  Indian  spear  embeds
its  nail  in  the  mind  of  iron  and  the  heart  of  separation.*

The  sword  of  his  wrath  has  imprinted  such  a scar  on  the
oheelt  of  his  enemy  as  remains  on  the  cheek  of  the  mother
from  the  anger  “ of  the  infant.

Grudging  the  life  of  his  evil-dispo.sed  enemies,  lo  ! the  boars
of  Fate  have  sharpened  their  tnsks,  and  the  lions  of  Destiny
their  claws'.

Power  of  the  world:  wnen  the  point  of  thy  sword  scratches
the  hearts,  it  has  carried  away  from  the  paws  of  the  op-
pression of  tue  dog-natured  sky  its  claws,®

Dow  can  tlij  enemy  be  at  all  like  thee,  liow  can  he  approach
thy  dagger,  whereas  when  he  brandisho.s  his  dagger  it  he-
comes  at  that  moment  like  a finger  nail.

1 The  text  should  read  thus,

s aIDj  iISS  (A)  (B).

8 MS  (B)  writes

♦ This  lino  shonld  read,  i i\

and  (B)  ^ k'*;

t Text  ^ir-31  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  havo^j^-jl  „hich  must  be  wrong
® The  text  is  wrong,  we  should  read  •,

MSS  (.A)  and  (B).  ’ • J ji

1 The  text  it  .appears  should  read  MS.  (A).

[ 141  ]

If  Ilia  pride  so  misleads  Iiim  that  he  finds  fault  with  yofl,  the
tip  of  his  finger  becomes  as  dust  in  his  hand  and  his  nail
as  nothing^

The  edge  of  thy  sword  protects  the  face  of  the  world,*
there  had  not  been  the  nail  as  a shield  behind  the  back  of
the  finger  tip  it  had  not  been  well.

If  the  envier  of  the  nail  of  tliy  bravery  bears  a grudge
against  thee,  perchance  poor  fellow  it  is  because  he  does
not  know  that  the  nail  is  poisonous.

I have  brought  in  the  word  nail  fuuM’tn)  as  radif®  in  this  99.
poem  which  is  like  a charm.  Verily  it  is  as  useful  in
magic,  as  the  hair  of  the  head  or  the  tip  of  the  nail.*

Oh  king,  do  not  desert  me,  so  long  as  the  spiteful  heaven
stiikes  every  moment  one  nail  npon  another  by  way  of
producing  the  notes  of  my  fate.

Inasmuch  as  the  mention  arose  of  ‘Amid,  who  was  controller
of  all  the  states  of  Hindustan,  it  is  essential  to  reproduce  some
thing  from  poems  of  his  which  are  rai’ely  met  with  :

Arise  ‘Amid,  if  thy  heart  is  not  cold  and  dead

Leave  thy  lovc-poeins,  and  speak  the  praise  of  the  Lord  of
tlie  world.

Praise  the  Court  of  Heaven,  for  he  has  raised  on  high  many
an  azure  dome  without  the*irksome  aid  of -tools  ;

1 MS  (A)  j

» MS.  (A)  jlL

8 Radif.  The  name  given  to  a syllabic  nr  word  followinef  the  rhyme  but
in  no  way  essential  to  it.  Thus  in  thi*«  poem  tho  word  nuHun  is  the

rad/fy  the  rhyming  letter  or  qt/jiyah  being  J (r).  In  JIS.  (A)  these

verses  are  in  the  order  given  here.

* In  Persia  it  is  the  cnscom  to  bury  the  parings  of  the  nails,  and  the  cut-
tings of  the  hair,  lest  some  harm  should  happen  to  the  owner  should  they
fall  into  the  possession  of  a malicious  person  with  matrical  power.  The
butchers  also  make  a hole  or  a cut  iu  the  blade  bones  of  sheep  for  tho  same
reason,  as  they  are  considered  a powerful  instrument  of  magic  In  the  list  of
charms  given  in  G;ister’8  translation  of  *tlio  “Sword  of  Moses’*  we  find  “69,
to  send  plagues,  take  (parings  ?}  from  seven'  men  and  put  them  into  a new
potsherd  and  go  out  to  tho  cemetery  and  there  say  No.  69  and  bury  it  in  a
place  that  is  not  trodden  by  horses  and  afterwards  take  the  dust  from  this
potsherd  and  blow  it  into  his  face  or  upon  the  lintel  of  his  house”  J.K.A.S.,
Jaa.  1896,  p.  185.

[ 142  ]

Me  has  appointed  two  Icings  ( the  Stm  and  Moon)  to  travel
over  this  bine  dome,  and  has  allotted  to  them  the  planets
as  attendant  cavaliers  on  all  sides.

The  tiring  woman  of  his  skill  has  displayed  a hnudred
heanteons  stars  at  ‘nightfall  from  behind  the  cnrtain  of
nine  foldsd

He  has  ordained  for  the  lady  of  the  world,  in  Night  and  Day
two  able  handmaids  with  the  titles  of  Rumi  and  Hindu
(i.e.,  fair  and  dark).

"Withont  any  shop-keeper  in  the  small  shop  of  the  sky,  he  has
Suspended  in  one  comer  a pair  of  scales  with  two  pans.*

His  skill  has  caused  the  crimson  anemone  ® to  grow  upon  the
summit  of  the  mountains,  his  bounty  has  caused  the  Suri  ^
and  Rahu'^  to  blossom  in  the  garden.

1 The  nine  heavens,  beginning  from  the  lowest  are : —

1 aJlli  Falakn-l-qamar  (Moon).

Falaka-l-n}.arad  (llercnry).

Falaka-z-Zahra  (Venns).

4 *1  FatakU'Sh-Shams  (Srm).

6 Falakn-l-MirrilA  (Mars).

fl  Falaku-l-Mashtarl  (Jnpiter).

Falaku-z-3ahal  (Saturn)

8 Faiaku-s-sawabifc  iFiied  starB).

9 Falaku-l-Atlas  (The  plain  sky).

Means  an  unstamped  coin )

See  the  Qhiydsu-l-Lughdt.

See  also  Ain-i-Akbari  111.  (Jarrett)  37,  note  1.

See  also  Kashshaf  Bib : Ind.  Yol.  II  , p 1134  and  seqq.

S Tbe  constellation  Libra,  called  (tardzu-i-charU)  or  lJU

{tardzi-i-falak)  or

” * kS)y^  ^ beantifoi  red  rose  of  an  odoriferous  and  exhilarating  flavour  ”
(sic.)  Steingass  In  the  Basht  Bihisht  of  Amir  Khnsrii.  we  fnd  v-J
y • ^ smiling  lip  like  the  flower  of  the  Surl.

None  of  the  dictionaries  give  this  word  nor  can  I ascertain  what  the  flower  is.

Shaqa'tqu-n  Nu'mdn  so  called  because  of  its  redness  as

being' Ukened  to  the  flashing  of  lightning  or  from  iyU»d|  in  the  sense

of  “ blood  ” as  resembling  blood  in  colour  so  that  it  signifles  “ pieces  of

blood,”  (Lane)  s.  t’.

[ 1^13  ]

At  one  time  with  the  point  of  the  compasses  of  his  bonnty
he  has  limned  the  form  of  the  month  : at  another  with  the
pen  of  his  favour  he  has  delineated  the  two  eyebrows.

The  face  of  dav  by  his  bonnty  has  become  a blaze  of  whiteness  ' 100.

The  locks  of  the  night  by  his  skill  have  become  a marvel  of
blackness.

The  kings  of  the  earth  t with  submission  and  hnmility,  in.

, search  of  honour  have  rubbed  their  faces  in  the  dust  of
•his  threshold.

Every  month  has  its  moon  upon  the  plain  of  the  sky,  at  one
time  curved  like  the  chaugd;i,^  at  another  round  like  the  ball.

So  just  is  he,  that  at  the  time  of  dispensing  justice  he  has
never  injured  any  one  even  an  hair’s  breadth  by  oppression.

That  one  who  sonurht  his  food  in  the  heart’s  blood  of  grapes
he  ii.a'le  on  the  morrow  black  with  disgrace  like  the  cheek
of  the  plum.®

The  partridge  with  its  (weak)  claws  could  attack  a hundred
hawks  if  so  many  heads  of  ants  give  such  power  to  the
partridge.

The  morning  breeze  bestowed  out  of  his  all-encompassing
bounty  upon  Chin  and  Qata*  the  perfume  of  the  bag  of
the  musk  deer.

Hear  fiom  me  oh  friend,  since  you  have  heard  the  declaration
of  unity,  a piece  of  advice  to  hearing  which  both  your  ear
and  mine  are  attentive.

Beware  of  giving  an  ear  to  the  sound  of  the  stiings  of  the  harp.

Beware  of  turning  your  attention  to  the  flagon  fashioned  of
earth  (wine  3a.sk)

Those  who  in  this  way  live  on  good  terms  with  their  lovers,
such  as  you,  do  not  say.  Where  is  one  of  that  company  ?

T (Saldtin-i  TPaJdzl)  So-called  kings,  aa  opposed  to

[Saldtln-i-haqtql)  true  kings,  i.e.,  the  prophets.

S lyffy*}-  According  to  the  Burhan-i-Qati'  this  name  is  given  to  any  stick
with  a bent  end,  especially  to  the  bent  stick  with  which  they  play  the
“dnhal”  and ‘-haqqara  ” tkinds  of  dmms).  Also  applied  to  a long  pole
with  a cnrved  end  from  which  is  suspended  a steel  ball  at  one  of  the  insignia
of  royalty.  Here  it  is  a “ polo  ” stick.

S Wine  is  forbidden  to  ilnslims  by  their  religion,  Cf.  Qur’an,  II.  216  and
V.  9-A

s IhA  Kh<t(d  Cathay  rid.  D’Herbelot,  IT*  431  Kliathai.

[ lit  ]

101.

Do  Toa  youi-self  behold  everj’  moiningr,  for  the  aovo  on  tlie
garden  bongh  by  its  song  of  Ku  Ku  ^ heel's  witness  to  this
beneficent  one.

Cast  thine  eye  upon  the  ground  that  thou  ranyest  see  poured
out  there  many  a friend  of  kind  aspect,  and  many  a sweet-
natured  loved  one

Do  thou  ‘Amid  again  lay  hold  of  the  thread  of  confession  of
unity

And  hang  it  upon  the  rosary  of  tliy  prayers  as  it  were-peai'ls.
Oh  Sovereign  Lord  ! world-possessing  Deity  who  art  ever-
living

Yet  without  (the  intervention  of  the  vivifying)  spirit,*  and
eloquent  without  a (material)  tongue.

The  song  of  the  dove,  iVhere  ? tVhero  ?

. •

‘‘j  ^

(_g,i — iil— j.'  citilA  _jt

i lAli  ji  — Ji

ii  (Omar  Khavvainh

"Sou  palace  towering  to  ttie  welkin  blue
tVtere  kings  did  bow  them  down  and  homage  do
1 saw  a ring  dove  on  its  aretes  perohod
And  thns  she  m.ade  compl.iint  Coo  Coo,  Coo  Coo  (Tt'iunjieid).

The  pious  Muhammadans  in  India  sav  tha't  tho  ringdove’s  noto  is

ctyAJ  Sulhdn  fci'i  cjiiJiaf,  tiulftiin  teii

qudrat.  Praise  be  to  Thee  for  thy  power.

* wjy  Ruh  is  the  vital  principle  the  “breath  of  life  ’’((ten.  ii  7)  as
distinguished  from  the  nafs  or  con'seious  m.onifestation  of  life,  or  the

couscionsness  itself.  Tlius  we  find  in  the  Qur’in  XV.  29.

^ ‘LAi'

UP®  ^ J wa  nanthhUi  Jiht  imn  ruhi,  “ and  breathed  into  it  of

" ^ ^ ^

mv  spirit:’’  and  again  in  Qnr’an  V.  IIC.

' o - c c.

Co  jJjtl  ai»Xv  uai  Aili  ^ |

In  \itn'o  quHiIiu  faiiod  ‘aHiulaltu  ta‘!ai:iu  ni,i  fir.afs~.

“ Had  I said  so  verily  then  wmuld=c  have  known  it,  thou  knowest  what  is
in  my  soul  ’

It  is  said  in  a 'tradition  that  Gnd  created  Adam  and  put  into  him  a
nafs  and  a w y;  rilh.

It  would  seem  ns  thong’n  tlie  word  nn/s  conn. Ips  tlic  same  idea  ns

the  word  mind,  nsing  this'word  in  the  souse  of  tLe  plicuomona  produced  by

[ 145  ]

B}-  thy  order  three  daughters  have  come  forth  from  the  soul  *
Without  the  pangs  of  childbirth,  aud  without  the  intermediary
influence  of  a husband.

Compared  with  thy  ancient  order  what  is  Kisra  ^ and  what
is  Qai^r

In  face  of  thy  decree  what  is  the  Ehaqan  and  what  is  Halaku  ?
Without  thy  command  no  ant  can  draw  a single  breath
of  its  own  will,

Without  thy  knowledge  no  sleeper  turns  from  one  side  to  the
other.

the  action  of  the  rih  or  vital  principle  upon  matter : the  highest  form

of  matter,  with  which  we  are  familiar,  namely,  the  nerve  structnres  of  the
human  brain,  admits  of  certain  phenomena  which  in  their  totality  we  call
mind  : the  existence  of  a higher  form  of  matter  cupablt)  of  higher  manifesta-
tion than  those  which  come  within  onr  present  experience  is  obviously  pos-
sible. A force  apart  from  matter  may,  for  anything  we  know,  exist  in  a way
that  we  cannot  fignre  to  ourselves  for  want  of  some  example.  Such  a force
self-existent  would  be  ^ jj  Rfih.

1 These  three  daughters  here  referred  to  are  the  three  divisions  of
nafs.  nafs,  is  by  Arabian  metaphysicians  divided  primarily  into  two

divisions  (a)  nafsu-l-'aql  which  is  also  called

annafsu-n-ndtfqak  the  reason,  mind,  or  discriminating  faculty  and  (6)

nafsu-l*haiydt  the  breath  of  life.

The  first  of  these  is  again  sab-divided  into  two,  that  which  commands  and
that  which  forbids:  thus  they  say  nil.-a.oi  yii'dmint

nafsaihi.  Such  an  one  consults  his  two  minds,  i.r  , weighs  the  pio.s  and  runs.
See  Lane  article  ^ and  J , also  and  Ahs/ishs/  art.

TheChosroes.  Qaisar  Cxsar ; an  Emperor-

A Turkish  word  moaning  Enip'’ror.  The  name  given  to  the

Emperor  of  China  ami  potentates  of  Chuiese  Tuttary.  ('See  do  Courteille

Turk.  Orient  Dii’t.  OiigiuaUy  the  title  Qrian  was  given

X J.I  • -,«  fV»A  Mn-niN  while  the  subordinate  princes

to  the  snpreiuo  sovereign  ot  tne  •uo.^ui^,  mx-  t'

of  the  Chaghatai  and  other  Chlrtglzi  lines  were  styled  only  Khan.

After  a time  the  higher  Qa  .n  lost  its  peculiar  distinctive  dignity  and  wm

UVHI  hy  many  besides  the  sovereign  (see  TiriUi-i-Rashidi  (Ehas  and  Koss/,

p,  do  Ti.  ij.

Halaku,  descendant  of  Chans^ir.  Khan.

19

[ 1^6  1

Altliorigh  I like  a liarp  am  hump  backed  aTid  head  dovfnwards,*
Yet  in  the  assembly  of  thy  hope  I play  the  air  of  Ya  Huwa.*
On  that  day  when  oat  of  awe  of  thee  all  the  assembly  of  the
prophets  own  their  allegiance  on  bended  knee,

Oh  Lord  do  thou  of  thy  clemency  bestow  npon-  me,  wretched
man  that  I am,  forgiveness,  for  I am  defiled  witir  disobedi-
ence and  engulfed  in  it  on  all  sides.

His  also  is  the  following  in  praise  of  the  prophet  may  the  peare
and  blessmg  of  God  be  ttpon  him  *

1 fashion  now  a garment  of  song  the  embroidery  of  whose
sleeve,  flows  gracefully  from  the  * adornment-  of  the  son!
as  the  ornament  of  its  divine  Creator
1Q2.  I choose  the  path  of  thy  fcaming  by  thtfortament  of  straight-
fomvard  praise.

Because  the  two  worlds  are  an  indication  ^ of  the  embroidery
of  its  sleeve;

Bose  of  the  garden  of  the  prophetic  office,  than  whose  spikenaj^d^

1 The  word  e?win>^  in  its  original  sens©  means  hent  or  curved;  hence  it

ini»na  a hook-,  and  especially  the  hook  called  also  “gajaV  Trith  ■which

elephants  are  driven.  Another  secondary  meaning  is  the  bent  hand  and  fingers
of  man,  or  the  claws  of  animals  and  talons  of  birds.  Also  the  name  of  a
Hittsical  instmmeiit  The  was  played  with  a plectrum

called  Za^may  and  from  its  • description  as  JTkz  and

sarnigun  was  like  the  of  the  Arabs,  and  very  similar  to  the  mandoliir

€£  our  times.

t ykL.  Yd  huiea.  An  inroeationt©  the  most  High — equiTalentto  My  God
and  my  LordJ*

5 These  words  are  not  in  MS.  (A)  which  has  no  'ntroduction  to  the  poem..
MS.  (B)  has

* MS.  (A)  AJ;^.  MS.  (A)  ^ MSS.  (A)and(B)

S c4^  Sumbal  {Nardostachys  jatamansi  N.  O.  Valerianacea;)  vdpSot  or
spikenard  of  the  ancients,  a perfame  held  in  high  esteem.  (S.  John  xii.  2).

In  the  Bahru-l-Jauahirit  is  stated  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  Sambnl-

Bombnl-i-Hindi,  and- Snmbal-i-Rami.

It  is  laxative  and  a tonic  to  the  brain m dropsy,  in  flatulence

and  as  a hsemostatic  in  meti-orrhagia.

The  perfnmed  snmbnl  is  the  variety  called  Snmbil-i-Hindi  whOe  the
Bmnbnl-i-Rumi  is  also  called  Nardin.

Btt  also  Ibnn-l-Baitar  (Sontheimer),  Vol.  II.,  pp.  68  et  ttqq.

L ]

the  morDing  breeze  bas  never  borne  from  Chin  to  Machln  t
a rarer  odour  from  the  fragrant  musk.

Head  of  the  created  beings  of  the  world,  by  wiiose  glorious
advent,  the  heaven  has  brought  forth  a pearl  of  great
price  from  the  shell  as  an  offering.

The  heaven  ha.s  placed  its  too  standards  firmly  planted  in  the
seventh  of  its  citadels,  throughout  the  length  and  breadth
of  the  world  in  the  live  stated  times  vi  prayer  *

Hip  onyx-like®  .eye  has  not  cast  one  glance  npon  the  signet  of

' Cf.  Tieffentiialer  III.  107.  Abul  Feda  (SeinaudI  II.  II.,  122  D'Serbetol
Vol.  II.  Art  Khatai.  Machln  or  llaha  Chin  see  Ai II.  1 1"  and  note  2.

“ Japhet  is  credited  by  Orientals  with  the  paternity  of  Chin  who  received
the  Celestial  empire  as  his  inheritance  and  begot  Maciiin  his  first  bom.”

* The  phrase  jjjX)  means  literally  the  six-sided  oven-shaped  (world).

Thersix  sides  or  divisions  of  tiie  world  are —

^d^.amu-l'ins,  the  world  of  mankind.
crF*(  the  world  of  the  jinn  or  genii.

^dlamu.~l-Tnaldikahf  the  world  of  angelg,
oIjWi  ‘dlamu-l-taiwqii,  the  animal  .world.

‘alamnrTi-ndbit,  the  vegetable  world.
‘ilamv.-L-ma‘idin,  the  mineral  world.

The  five  stated  times  of  pvaver  are  known  a.s —

zuht  ‘a??*  itiiightib  ‘ashd  and  fajr.

The  two  standards  ^ ‘alam  are  the  snn  and  moon,  cf,  Qur’iiu,  XXXVI,,
38,  39.

S M.  S.  (A)  reads  His  onyx'like  eye,  fee.

This  must  be  taken  to  refer  to  a saying  of  the  prophet  Muhammad  ‘f  The
cornelian  for  me  and  the  onyx  for  my  enemies.”  According  to  the  XulAhaiu-
d'^hr  (p.  6^!,  be  said  this  “ because  the  onyx  causes  its  wearer  to  become

ill-tempered,  rash,  precipitate,  and  litigions There  are  several  varieties

of  onyx...... ...the  best  is  that  in  which  the  markings  are  of  eiju.d  bre.adth

Tne  whiteness  of  the  onyx  increases  as  the  moon  waxes,  and  diminishes  as  it

wanes.  The  onyx  softens  when  boiled  in  oil,  sparkling  and  emitting  light

The  people  of  China  ( ) where  the  onyx  is  found,  will  not  approach

the  mines  on  acconnt  of  the  unluckiness  of  the  stone,  so  that  only  the
poorest  claS9  will  work  there.

One  property  possessed  by  the  onyx  is  that  of  curing  scald-head  in  children  :
it  also  acts  as  a sialagogne  causing  them  to  dribble  when  it  is  hung  round
their  necks.”

See  also  Lane  Art.  wliere  it  is  stated  that  the  wearing  of  an  onyx

in  a signet  induces  anxiety,  disquietude  of  miud,  grief  and  terrii^iug  droams

[ J

Salomon  ^ because  there  is  tlie  stamp  of  his  seal  upon  every-
thing from  the  moon  above  to  the  fish  below.®

Fate  and  Destiny  are  his  guardians,  Eternity  and  Hope  his
helpeis.

Eartii  ® and  the  tinre  are  his  advocates,  angels  and  heaven
pledged  to  him.

His  lip  is  honej-  and  his  cheek  a rose,  what  an  advantage  to
both  worlds.

His  gulangabin  ^ (confection  of  rose  and  honey)  relieves  the
tremor  of  disobedience.

The  mouth  of  the  shell  is  full  of  the  pearls  of  bis  pearl-like
words,

The  belt  of  the  horizon  is  bejewelled  with  his  widespread
faith.

The  prosperity  of  the  body  of  the  faithful  is  in  his  left  hand,
and  tlie  good  foitiine  of  the  face  of  those  who  follow  tha
path  of  ids  religion  is  in  his  right  hand.

The  pT£r>?s  of  the  seven  heavens  are  but  an  atom  of  his  being,

The  two  worlds,  compared  with  the  stream  of  his  might,  are
but  a sweat  drop  from  his  forehead,

The  tongue  of  a green  lizard  ^ is  one  of  the  marks  of  his  seal,

Thi  wfcb  of  the  spider  was  a curtain  which  concealed  his
relation,*

■ Solomon's  power  lay  according  to  tradition  in  the  signet  of  his  ring,  on
which  was  engraved  the  “ most  mighty  name.”

S*:e  Lane  Aranian  Nights  introduction  n.  21  and  Chap.  i.  n.  15.  This  stone
was  supposed  to  shew  Solomon  every  thing  he  wished  to  knnw
See  D’Heibelot  art.  Solitnan.

® Called  Yahmut  upon  which  the  world  is  said  to  rest.  See  page

1'j2,  n.  2

i MS.  fA’’

* Tiie  properties  of  the  rose  arc  said  in  the  Bahru-1  .Jauedhir  to  be

I-iiative,  e.vpeotorant,  and  anaphrodisiac  : while  honey  is  said  to  be  a light
dew  which  faUs  upon  flowers  and  is  collected  by  bees,  it  is  hot  and  dry  in  the

vcond  de-re  -.  A relieves  .-imness  of  vision  and  is  a stomachic  tonic,  is  a
laiaiive  and  erpi-ctorant.  Sadijl  further  says  that  honey  is  beneficial  to  old
men,  but  inju  nms  to  youtlis  and  people  of  hot  temperament,  is  aphrodisiac
wnen  heated  with  pulp  of  roses,  and  cures  the  bites  of  sna'ses  and  of  dogs

Neither  book  mentions  its  use  in  the  treatment  of  tremors  specifically  but
Sadidis  statement  that  it  is  go.id  for  old  men  may  refer  to  senile  tremors  "

6 This  line  should  read.  ijljjj  page  110,

[ ]

In  the  moon-bedecked  heaven,  one  irlance  of  his  clett  tin-
heart  of  the  moon  tlie  beloved  of  the  sky  into  tw.j  halves  as
thong’ll  it  were  a piece  of  cloth  '

Both  beu'ts  of  prey  ai.d  birds  have  gilded  tlie  I ■;  s of  faith'
fuiiies'  to  him.

Both  yoniig  babes  and  old  men  1 a-.e  opened  then-  hps  in  uis
praise.

The  rose  and  the  thorn  of  fragr.-.nt  fieivers  aro  the  fruits  -i
bis  love  and  kindnts-;.

The  (swei  t ) s'asar  ami  the  (bittei  ■ eolocyntii  au  botii  re-
mindei'.s  of  his  love  andwratli.

The  gaxden,  in  sabinis=ion"  to  In-  creative  pov  ic . i; he  the
violet  has  scratched  its  cheek  with  vcxd-’.m,  Look  I
there  is  a blue  mark  iiiion  its  doe  eheob.

His  body  is  composed  cl  spiiit  of  ditiiie  sanctity,  which  is  the
purification  of  ^ the  spii-jc  of  the  hiinian.  One  caiinot  reach
to  his  essential  constitution,  for  his  composition  is  of  light.

oie  3,  for  the  story  of  the  lizard.  tVhen  Muhammad  vas  .deeing  from
tekka  to  Medina  in  company  with  Abu  Bakr  as-Siddi'}  Lis  fath“r-in-
iw,  they  came  to  a cave  in  the  Jabal  S uir  and  took  ri'''u>:c  ir  from  their
nemiea.  In  order  to  eonceui  their  wheiouoo'its  a spin -r  v directed  to
pin  its  web  over  the  entrance,  which  led  the  pnr-.uers,  v.  lio  In  d fulluM  cd  them
has  far,  to  conclude  they  had  not  entere.I  the  cave.

Haidtii-l-QvJrih.  See  also  Muir's  Life  of  Mali.  U.  r.>7  nc‘e.

Compare  the  following  lines  by  Ya'qubu-l-Manjainqi,  quoted  by  Ibn
Khnlliqan.

Oh  thon  who  art  so  Tain  glorious  ! leave  glory  to  him  w'ho  is  the  lord  of
might  and  of  power

David’s  weaving  would  liave  been  of  no  service  on  the  night  of  the  care
The  honour  was  all  given  to  the  spider.

See  Ibn  Khalligiin  (cle  Slane),  Tol  IV  , p.  375.
According  to  another  account  immediatelv  after  Muhammad  and  Abu  Bakr
had  entered  the  cave,  an  Acacia  tree  grew  up  at  the  entrance  and  u pair  of
pigeons  had  already  nescod  in  it,  while  a spider’s  web  closed  what  remained
of  the  entrance.  D.  Herbelot  II.  231  art.  (Hegrah),

1 MS.  (A)

* MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  jIa-' J|

8 MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  AS",

103.

L 15^  J

When  Baraq  the  lightning- fleet  came  under  his  stiimp  he
leapt  towards  thehighest  heavens  so  that  the  curved  cres-
cent moon  was  like  the  hinder  part  of  his  saddle.

When  his  course!'  trod  the  face  of  the  plain  of  the  earth  he
placed  his  foot  in  such  a way  that  the  heaven  became  like
the  earth  to  him.

One  step  of  his  reached  to  the  extremity  of  the  earth  from  the
hou.se  of  TJmmahani,'  the  second  step  reached  to  the  SiJra  *
from  the  earth  like  the  angels.

The  orb  of  the  sun,  the  untamed  steed,  was  led  along  in  his
cavalcade.

The  moon  having  stamped  a brand  upon  its  quarter  with
its  horseshoe  shaped  crescent.

Consider  the  goodness  of  his  nature  in  that  for  our  sakes  in
the  next  world,  he  has.  long  pleaded  the  cause  of  his  fol-
lowei  s with  a heart  full  of  pity.

Wi.sdom,  by  his  favour,  is  drawn  out  from  the  well  of  super-
stition by  the  rope  of  the  cord  of  Chastity  ® which  was  his
104.  mighty  title

Asad  Ullah  leaving  his  lair,  with  his  polished  spear  has  tom
out  the  heart  of  the  envious  cur-hearted  ones  like  the
tongue  of  a dog.

A hand  ‘ like  the  ant.s  of  the  ground  travelling  fast”  along  a
path  .>k!id(-r  as  a hair.

Shining  like  tiie  lightning  from  the  brilliancy  of  the  torch
of  his  rcliirion.®

A hand  tot  ’.leu  lost ) like  a hair  wiiicji  has  fiilleri  into  leaven  ’’
by  rcu-  '-n  uf  hi^  wrath  fell  into  the  hre  from  tlie  . hriilge,
with  th’-ir  waists  bound  like  the  ant  in  their  hostility.

i Set'

r,  i.iv  !■■■!.  .Sec  !jar

Tn  .^ar.  XVfl.

% A :

f • 'Ui,

it^  in  the  .^^rxth  ' After  that  T

•wns  tatei.  u

, • - . irava-I-Mrufri]

.1  art  1 beholvi  Jtsfiaics  were  ni.t*  water  ptitd

umi  Its  lea  ■

.’  ear

s”  ~ -ih,  Vol.  11.

p 61,  t

S.'-,-'  ,11-  ' !

;,7_  - fi  -i  ■ T .1

. (Siiraru-l- Mancahv).

S

'.t,  .'i.  Qi;

r'ai:  Snr.  III.  OS.

* M.S.  !

^ ^ Tins  ;•  . . ie

^ to  the  Maslima,

6 Ms

s MS.

■MS'

n.u  ;-'.v

' ^ • TiiC'ge  aie  Katirs,  infidels.

[ 151  ]

On  tiie  snrtnce  of  the  hoard  of  his  sincerity  who  can  raise  his
head  in  deceit  i since  not _ even  the  heaven  Survives  the
throw  of  his  two  dice*

Seven  pillars  are  established  by  his  four  friends,  for  the
seven  heavens  which  are  firmly  fastened  to  the  pole.

Of  these  four  stars  * there  are  two  conjunctions  both  of  which
are  fortunate.  Tlie  Moon  and  Jupiter'*'  are  in  conjunction,
each  one  with  its  own  partner.

In  the  two  ears  of  the  four  element.s  how  happy  is  my  earring.
From  the  two  earrings  ^ sprang  eiglit  Paradises  with  the
two  lights  whicii  give  sight  to  the  ejes.

‘Amid  has  devoted  -his  powers  in  all  directions  to  sing  his
praises,  if  perchance  the  good  and  bad  of  his  words  may
gain  some  currency.

How  can  I boast  of  my  descent,  here,  when  I from  my  heart
supplicate  the  intercessor  of  the  day  of  judgment  whose
I'eligion  God  approves.

From  the  embroidery  of  my  eulogy,  what  legality  ® is  evident,
in  my  magic  ? It  is  like  wine  whose  pure  brilliancy  is
enhanced  by  the  crystal  cup.'^

From  the  sugarcandy  of  his  sayings  the  lips  of  the  parrots

1 Gi  MS.  (A)  (B).

* MS.  (A)  (B)  ^ Ka'hatain.  The  temples  of  Mekka

and  Jerusalem.

8 The  first  four  Khalifa  the  “rightly-directed.”  MS.  (,t.)  roads  jA-

i Both  the  Moon  and  Jupiter  are  fortunate.  See  tbn  l^aldun  I’roleg  :
(De  Shine)  II.  217  and  seqq

6 ikjji  ; Hiissan  and  Hnsain.  Their  eiglit  children,  jj#'*

‘All  and  Fatima.

8 See  Ibn  KhalliqSn  (Slane)  lll-SW  it.  (S).  Magio  -was  held  to  be  un-
lawful except  the  magical  effect  ot  eloquence  such  as  in  poetry  which  is^

called  As-<aht  n-hhahll . 11  aP,/ says,

Is  this  poem  a miracle,  or  is  it  lawful  magic  ?

Has  a heavenly  mes.senger  bronsrht  this  messave  or  was  it  Gabriel  himself  ?

See  Hughes’  Dirt,  rf  J.-.'-zm  article  Magic,  af-o  Lane  sub  i .re

7 This  couplet  is  omitted  in  MS.  (B?

MS.  (A)  reads  ^ >}..

[ 152  ]

105.

are  imbned  with  sugar  as  thougii  from  the  tray  of  elo-
quence they  hare  eateif  the  crumbs  of  his  wisdom.

What  person  am  I,  what  parrot  aic.  I,  1 that  sing  these  verses  ?
When  I sing  his  praise  it  is  like  the  buzzing  of  a fly.  ilav  the
breath  of  the  parrots  of  my  s.oul  not  fail  for  a single  moment  from
the  singing  his  praise  and  proclaiming  his  triumph,

AsorHi'-R  QasIda.i

Oh  thou  from  awe  of  whose  Older  ihe  heaver,  is  bowed  in
sabmissicn,  the  proclamation  of  thy  miglit  is  this,  Thou
Ktaiidest  alone  thou  hast  no  ccmpanivii

Thy  kingdom  is  an  everla.sting  kingdom,  thy  dominion  ia  the
dominion  of  uprightness.

Thy  empire  is  no  changeable  empire.  Thy  mle  is  not  a
divided  rule.

The  ray.s  of  the  brightness  of  thy  holiness  are  the  portrayers
of  the  sun  and  moon.  The  rt-claae  of  thy  kingdom  is  in
the  hig!ic.sr  altitude  of  Simak  re.iching  even  to  Saniak.*

At  one  time  thou  srivest  to  the  partridsre  of  the  dav  wincrg
and  featho'S  of  fiery  hue,  at  another  in  the  liquid  cage  of
the  heavens  thou  makest  t'ne  moon-tailed  pigeon  of  the
night  ^ as  an  angel.*

Thou  hast  broken  the  cup  of  the  moon  at  the  head  and  foot
of  each  month.^  Thou  hast  b.jund  thine  all-encompassing
contemplation  around  the  star  Farak.’

1 JIS.  (.Fi  has  tlu’ words  .t/r,..-  .'at..  Also  bv  hitr<.

5 Tlie  fuurtocnrh  l.oas..  <,i  the  i...a-..--  of  ih.-  M.  on.  There  a..,,  two  Smiiks
one  As-Simiku-r-Kiim..,  tlio  lai.-.-L  .ar'.er  sbntk  ! Areturua)  ; and  the  ether
As-Siniiiku-l-A-z.a,  the  r.uiiriiiod  smi'k  ■ spi.  V,r..'lni=.)  Bhih  uf  tlie-e  ar*.  in
the  feet  of  the  constellation  Lou,  T!..,.  w rd  Sinhk  i,  said  l,v  the  Arab  com

meiitator  on  Ulue;  Beg  to  denote  er-eat  alt, t tide,  m derivation  from  the  root

Samaka  tr.  rise,  ta  he  emlted.  tiee  Ibn  p^rdliqfm  ide  dlane  , Vol.  I nvtc  11

bamak,  the  fish,  wliicli  is  below  the  Earth  bearing  on  its  back  a cow
which  bears  the  earth  on  its  horn.  7fj

Burh.ln-.Q.Ui-.  A bird  having  claws,  with  a black  ami  white  tall

from  which  they  make  feathers  for  arrows  . J.'so  a pigeoa  all  black  with  a
white  tail.

* iis,  (A)  reads  i-il®  which  seems  to  have  no  meaning.  The  text  reads

cSllp  with  a variant  which  w'e  find  in  MS  (B).

6 Both  in  the  new  moon,  and  in  the  hast  quarter,  the  moon  has  a defective
form  ; crescent  or  hecrescent

* Parak  The  <tar  Cauopu?.  But'i

J

^ ir.3

Thy  power  is  the  garrlener,  the  four  qiiartei-s  of  the  eartli
are  his  tilth.  Thoii  ha.st  cast  around  that  as  the  shelter  of
an  eyelid,  the  bounty  of  the  seven  oceansT

From  the  midst  of  the  oven  of  the  east,  thy  order  hringeth
forth  the  loaf  of  gold  of  the  west  after  the  silvery  loaf.*

In  the  garden  full  of  thy  skilled  works,  the  hand  of  the  tiring
womai'i  of  the  morning-breeze  mbs  on  the  rouge  of  adorn*
ment  like  the  beanties  = do  over  the  patches.*

The  ro.se  with  the  mark  of  the  mole  on  its  cheek,  displaved
it.s  huds.  Like  the  cheek  of  the  be.anty  the  moon  displays
its  from  the  hea^en.s.^

On  tile  f'.vtremiry  of  the  plain  of  spring,  is.suing  from  the  door
of  lay  creation,  the  tulip  sits  with  a shield,  the  villovv
stai  d.s  with  its  R.r!ow.

The  jasmine  atid  tiie  ro.se  proclaim  thy  .skill  wiihlipand
cheek.

Thy  care  preserres  the  sugar  of  the  confection  ’,vith  salt.^

Except  thy  etei  nal' existence  how  can  any  cai'avsiii  arrive  at
seeoi'.dary  existence.^

In  the  eye  of  truth  there  is  kuhl*  (of  ornament',  in  the  eye
1 These  are  according  to  the  Bm-, -7

lijl— B'O,;--. - :r.  7i,  ’ 7-

Darv  I-t-Rurn,

1.  u’erj- Daru'J-i-Chin.

Biih  i- Kh^>‘  Jynziii
S JtSS.  (A)  and  i.B)  read
3 jJU*o  >[SS.  and  iK;.

■t  - (Jl=*  '•  A p,at'’ii  ■'  f.ir  rh--  f.ioe  {B-irluhi.i-Q'i  ')

^ I read  here  Aj'jki  ^ '-frJ  Tfiis  seems  tha

best  reading.  Both  MSS.  (A)  and  ,'Bj  lend  conncenaBce  to  it.  The  reading
in  the  text  is  impossible.

« That  is  to  sav  the  sweet  lips  of  his  beloved  are  ao  piquant  that  it  seema
as  though  they  were  tinged  with  sait.  Coaserye  of  roses  is  called  cAtiqf
parwarish.

T pAi.  (qidar.i)  E.xistence  from  all  eternity.  For  i/otduj(}  aae  nota

*,  page  1.

8 The  iuhl  was  used  as  a collyrinm.  <-*"  ilH  Kashidan)

is  to  put  out  the  eves.  md.  called  also  mulmul,  is  th#  bodkla

or  style  used  for  applying  the  }.nU,

20

106.

I 154  j

of  infidelity  and  doubt  there  is  the  probe  (of  destruction).
Whoever  has  the  inscription  on  his  rin^  in  accordnnce  with
thy  way  ^ verily  is  saved,  but  whoever  has  on  his  forehead
the  bi-and  of  opposition  to  thee  veril}'  he  is  lost.

In  the  glory  of  thy  approbation  why  should  any  one  take  to
craft  ? Why  should  the  saw  of  Nuh  ibn-Laniak  * cut  down
every  tree  ?

The  parrot  of  my  life  at  the  remembrance  of  thee  has  re-
mained safe  from  the  snare  of  grief,®  just  as  in  the  ocean
of  Jupiter  the  Fish  is  safe  from  the  net>

Like  an  Ethiopian  and  a Greek,  the  day  has  taken  away  from
thy  threshold  a gold  embroidered  mantle,  the  night  has
despoiled  thee  of  a dress  distinguished  by  a plumed  ‘
cap.

One  draught  of  thy  kindness  is  equal  to  the  display  of  several
rows  (of  cups).

A morsel  of  tliy  favour  is  for  the  accountants  ® several  laka.
107.  As  long  as  tliou  drawest  him  as  by 'the  end  of  the  cord,  no
one  turns  away  his  face  from  the  door.  It  were  better  that
the  neck  of  the  heaven  should  be  in  the  noose  of  the  Milk}’-
way.

Thy  wrath  drives  out  the  pride  of  tyrants  ’ from  their  heads,
by  means  of  the  point  of  tlie  sting  of  a mosquito^  not  by
the  advanced  ffuard  of  an  ai  my.

1 MS.  (A)  reads  but  this  is  an  error.

S The  text  and  both  MSS  read  Qenesia

T.  28-30.  No:ih  thp  .'‘On  of  Lamech  ; also  Gen.  vi.  1-i.

I ^ MSS.  (4-J  and  (H).  The  text  reads  wrongly  ^ £*'^3

* Wiien  Jupiter  enters  ihe  constellation  of  Pi.sjcea  lie  ia  in  the  ascendant.

‘ MS.  (A)  'Alls'  JlS"  [ms.  (8)  <-SdS'  Ji"  Text

iulah-i-parddr.  {Bnihdn-i-QdWj.

" MSS.  (A)  (B;  cU|.

" MS.  [K]  [ms.  (B)  Text  !)

8 (Aj  ms  (Aj

In  the  .VisiWiot-ia.Mrii*  of  Lisauu-l-Matk  we  Hnd  the  following  account
of  th'8  incident  • —

The  Cftuae  of  tne  death  of  Ximrod  wns  ihia  that  after  despairing  of  hia
a'riiiur  to  burn  .^br.xham,  in  consetj-.ience  of  hir  nrotection  by  the  Almighty,
the  idea  of  entering  into  conflict  with' tiie  Most  High  entered  his  head,  and

[ 155  ]

If  the  drops  of  the  bounty  of  t!iy  nearness  distil  upon  the
palate  of  my  heart  say  to  the  clouds  of  supplication  “ Do
not  rain.”  and  say  to  the  tear  of  hope  “ Do  not  fall.”

I am  fulfilled  with  thy  bounty  like  a pearl  in  the  cloudy
weather.t

. Not  like  the  wine  flask  which  comes  forth  from  the  assembly
after  yielding  the  benefit  of  its  fulness.*

I have  attained  the  dignity  of  eloquence  from  thy  consent.
By  thy  help  it  is  that  this  joyful  sound  * has  been  placed  in
my  hand  by  destiny.

How  long  shall  I uttei'  cries  of  grief  round  the  carpets  of
Emperors,  because  at  thy  door  there  is  a sustenance-
gaining  world  free  from  vexation.*

Wine  which  gives  you  a headache  is  better 'cast  on  the  ground.

A carpet  if  it  be  of  silk  * is  more  fit  to  be  burnt  than  thorns.

he  ordered  Abraham  to  be  brought  before  bimj  then  turning  towards  Idm  he
said.  Oh  Abraham,  bid  your  Go  t to  come  with  hia  army,  and  array  himself
against  me  in  battle  so  that  the  one  who  conquers  may  have  the  upper
hand.  Tomorrow,  that  is  Wednesday,  we  will  arrange  the  battle  held  before
this  city,  and  test  man  with  man.

Then  having  reviewed  hia  army  he  came  ont  from  the  city  with  a conntless
array,  and  drew  up  in  line  on  the  battle  field.

The  prophet  Abraham  came  ont  alone  and  unaccompanied,  in  face  of  that
vast  host,  and  stood  there.  Suddenly,  by  the  command  of  the  Almighty,  the
face  of  heaven  became  darkened  by  a cloud  of  mosqnitos,  which  are  the
most  contemptible  of  all  creatures,  and  they  at  once  began  to  sting  the  army
of  Nimrud,  and  pat  them  to  flight,  and  most  of  those  worthless  ones  died.
Nimriid,  on  seeing  this,  in  fear  and  shame  tnmed  his  back  upon  the  whirlpool
of  death,  and  fled  into  his  fort  Suddenly  a single  mosqnito  entering  after  hina
stnng  his  lip,  and  reached  his  brain.  For  forty  years  the  mosquito  fed  upon
his  brain,  after  which  Nimrud  died  in  abject  misery.”

As  the  mosqnito  is  known  to  be  the  intermediary  host  of  certain  parasites
and  may  be  the  means  of  conveying  infective  disease,  there  may  be  a snbs-
tratnm  of  truth  in  this  fable.

1 MS.  (A).  The  text  reads  wrongly  ^<5

S Tl.at  is  to  sav  rov  fulness  is  one  which  is  permanent,  like  that  of  the
pearl  which  remains  bidden  in  the  shell,  not  transitory  like  that  of  the  win**
flask  which  leads  to  emptiness.

! Utumtk  literally  means  the  sound  of  clapping  the  hands  from  joy.

♦ ii'S.  (A)

t By  the  laws  of  Islam,  cloth  made  entirely  of  sll'  is  n.ar  pera  i V ;j-
u,-<:  0>tb-r  as  clothing  at  times  of  prayer,  or  as  ..  prater  r-n  ■
woven  of  silk  and  - ctton  mixed  is  permissible  arei  is  oitiioi  icfA  -a  ,

[ 156  ]

Ob  Lord,  with  that  rose  of  benevolence  from  the  exhalations
of  whose  excellence  the  olfactorv  sense  of  the  ansels
is  refreshed  while  the  musk  of  Chin  remains  dry  as  a
husk,

Let  me  refresh  the  olfactories  of  my  soul  every  moment,
until  I am  on  the  blink  of  the  grave  ; that  my  dust  may
he  like  a rose  garden  far  removed  from  the  pricking  of
thistles.

The  possession  of  sincerity,  and  true  equitv,  lUe  root  of
modesty,  and  the  secret  i of  truth,  the  house  of  religion
is  founded  on  all  of  these  both  by  bond  and  deed.

On  the  heaven  of  his  prophecy,  for  the  travellers  along  the
high  road  of  the  sacred  law,  each  of  these  four  pillars  * is  a
sign  of  the  injunctiou  Go  on  thy  way  and  be  puie.®
lOS  May  every  breath  of  my  life  be  praise  and  glory,  until  the

breath  of  the  morning,  that  each  breath  may  then  be  a
worthy  present  for  the  soul.

Think  that  the  pupils  of  my  two  eyes  are  fouv  in  affection,
(i.e.,  four  Khulifs t.

Otherwise  thou  wilt  fail  to  gain  Paradise,  and  art  ready  for
the  door  ot  hell.

What  good  will  apostasy  do  you  when  ‘Ali  is  independent
of  you  ? How  cull  gold  shew  its  perfect  purity  if  the
touchstone  does  not  shew  the  shine  of  it  ?

What  blame  u it  to  the  body  of  the  lute  if  daring  the  tune  ♦
either  its  silken  string  break.s,  oi'  its  bridge  slips  down.

Go,  and  open  the  letter  of  the  Prophet  in  all  sincerity,  that
it  may  efiace  from  your  mind  the  suspicion  as  regards
•*  Faddak.’*  ^

1 MSb.  (Bj

The  term  ri/ji  is  applied  by  Sunni  Muslims  to  any  of  the  Shi'ah

Sects.  See  Hughes.  Diet,  of  Iiilim.  Art.  EafizI.

* The  four  kligliis.

* HadU.  companions  are

like  the  stars,  whichever  of  them  you  follow  you  will  be  led  by  it.

« MS.  I'A).

^ 6 au  estate  near  Medina  which  Muhammad  left  to  his  daughter

After  the  ruophefs  death  Aim  Baki  lock  it  and  Fitima  demanded  it  of

r IS?  ]

And  lie  who  like  the  ill-omened  owl  ^ boasts  of  being  a KlyEn'ji  *

him,  be  replied  : “ Thy  father  said  that  we  who  are  prophets  do  not  leave
hereditary  legacies,  all  that  I leave  is  for  Moslinis.

The  Shi'ahs  say  that  Abu  Bakr  seized  Faddak  by  force.  The  poet  deniaa
this  assertion  in  the  above  verse.

The  iil-tnnen  attending  the  owl  is  common  to  all  coantries,
probably  from  the  habit  it  has  of  freq’-enting  mined  buildings.  The  And>ic
proverb  indicates  the  estimation  in  which  the  owl  was  held.

Si  in  uUila  honum  fuisset,  earn  Venator  non  reliquxsset.  Freytag  Meid.
Piov.  n.  p.  572.

The  story  told  by  Mas‘ud5  about  Bahram  points  in  the  same  direction.  See
Ibn  Khaldun  fde  Slane).  Prolegomenes,  I.  107.

In  the  HaidtvA'Haiivdn  there  is  a story  told  of  Al  Ma’mun  who  in  the  course
of  his  peregrinations  one  day  saw  a young  mm  writing  something  on  the  wall
with  a piece  of  charcoal.  He  ordered  his  servants  to  see  What  the  man  waa
writing  and  it  was  as  follows  i

vJ^  Jjf  ly^l  trt/*

OK  palace  ill-luck  and  curse  are  assembled  in  thee  j
When  will  the  owl  make  her  nest  in  thy  pillars  ?

Happy  the  day  when  the  owl  bailds  her  nest  in  thee !

I shall  he  the  first  to  announce  thy  downfall.

He  explained  this  before  Al  Ma’mun  by  saying  that  be  was  in  great  distress
and  hoped  to  benefit  by  the  rain  of  the  palace.

* The  name  Khariji  was  given  to  any  One  who  denied  any  one  of  .the  true
Imams  (see  Coreton’s  Shahrastani  Milal  u'a  Sthal,  page  83.)

See  the  article  Khawarii  in  Hughes,  D.cf.  <>/  I>la,n,

The  Khariii  heresy  was  that  any  man  of  no  matter  what  nation  or  tribe
may  be  appointed  Khalifah  provided  that  he  was  a good  man  and  was  elected
by  the  whole  body  of  lloslinis.  .

See  for  a fuller  account  of  this  sect.  Sale’s  Qnr’an.  Preliminary  Discourse,
p.  123  (Ed.  of  1857)  (Badger.  Imdms  and  Seiy^ids  of  Oman,  Appendix,  pp.  371,
and  seq.)  (Osborn,  lUdm  under  the  Arabs,  p.  116).  The  last  mentioned
gives  a full  account  of  the  origin  of  this  heretical  sect  when  ‘All  and  Mu'awia
met  at  Siffiu  from  which  the  following  is  an  extract  “ The  valour  of  ‘Ali  was
brilliantly  seconded  by  that  of  his  favonrite  lieutenant  Malika-l-Ashtar,
the  Marshal  ■Ney  of  the  Arabian  Army.  A tremendons  pharge  by  Malik  at
last  forced’ a ' wing  of  the  Syrian  troopa  to  give -ground.  Qi-adually  the
whole  line  was  forced  back,  the  retreat  became  a rout."

However  at  this  critical  moment  Amron  ibn  al-’As  knowing  the  fanatical
character  of  ‘Ali 's  troops,  ordered  a number  of  Syrian  soldiers  to  advance

[ 158  ]

compared  to  the  confidant  of  the  cave^  is  like  the  night-flying
bat  * in  comparison  with  the  standard  of  the  day  (the  Sun),
tat  aside  your  desire  of  rebellion,  say  not  a word  save  in
respect,  how  can  a dog  contend  with  a tawny  lion.®

What  power  have  you  to  decide  between  the  companions  of
the  Prophet,  you  who  from  foolishness  like  a blind  man,
seek  the  softness  of  ermine  from  the  stoat.*

It  were  better  that  the  skirt  of  the  time  was  freed  by  skilfal
management,  from  the  impurity  of  those  abomination-
working sects  before  that  this  sound  reaches  their  ears
What  brought  you  into  hell  1 ®

Oh  Lord  ! although  for  a long  time  my  heart  has  been  afflict-
ed by  the  darlings  of  Chigil,  and  held  fast  by  the  rosy-
cheeks  of  Yamak  ®

towards  their  line  bearing  copies  of  the  Qor’an  fixed  to  the  heads  of  their
lances.  Let  the  blood  of  the  Faithful  cease  to  flow”  they  cried  “ let
the  Book  of  God  decide  between  ns.”

‘All’s  soldiers  thereupon  turned  upon  him  headed  by  certain  men  whom
Ash-Shahrastani  names,  and  insisted  upon  ‘Ali  recalling  Malik  Al-Ashtar
from  fighting  against  the  Moslims  “ or  ” said  they  ‘‘we  will  assuredly  deal
with  you  as  we  dealt  with  ‘Usman”  and  insisted  npon  the  matter  in  dispute
between  ‘Ali  and  Mu'awia  being  settled  by  arbitration.

• AW  Boir.— The  sole  companion  of  Muhammad  when  he  fled  from  Mecca
to  Medinah,  cf.  Qur’an  ix.  40.

. ,/fc  o.A-*' .5  * "o',  <!  O' ' .r  ^

•UJ|  jt  Uaii  lyyu  el  tyoi  A&t  3(1

Unless  ye  help  him,  and  God  did  help  him  when  these  who  disbelieved  drove
him  forth  the  second  of  two,  when  they  twain  were  in  the  cave  (of  Jabal  §aar).

S MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  have  w-i  which  seems  to  have  no

meaning.

a Kixil  Arslan  is  the  ’Turkish  for  ” red  lion.”  He  was  son  of  Ildighiz  the
first  of  the  Atabaks  of  Azar  baijan  whose  dynasty  commenced  in  553.  H.  and
ended  in  622.  H.  Muhammad  the  elder  son  of  Ildighiz  succeeded  bis  father
and  was  in  tnm  sncceoded  by  Kixil  Arslin  who  was  assassinated  in  587.  H.
(D’Herbelot)  (Beale).

4 fanaJe.  'The  animal  commonly  known  by  the  name  dalla,

weasel  or  stoat.

'x  * ' I ' ' ^ ‘2'

6 Qur’an  Ixiiv.  43,^^

''  - s'

In  gardens  shall  they  ask  each  other  about  the  sinners — what  drove  yotf
Into  hell-fire  ?

6 ChxgxL  The  Burhun-i-Qati'^  says  : A city  in  Turkestan  where  inhabitant*
are  exceedingly  beautiful  and  are  nnequRlled  in  arcbery.

loy  J

Yet  in  the  beo’innin»  of  the  nun  ftiid  dal  of  my  a»e  (54 1 109.
after  the  year  khft  and  nun  and  lid  (655  H.','  tlianks
be  to  God  that  the  bird  of  my  ambition  has  burst  tlie
bonds  of  this  net  and  gone  free.

I have  waslied  my  liands  of  the  one,  and  have  freed  my  foot
from  the  other,  springing  out  of  both  snares  like  the  clay
pellets  from  a pea-shooter.*

At  thy  footstool  henceforth  my  constant  cry  is  “ I repent,”
my  supplication  is  to  thee,  my  secret  thoughts  and  open
dealings  are  with  thee.

Thou  shewest  me  mercy  at  that  time  when  by  the  intoxica-
tion of  the  wineskin  of  death  both  m}'  chin  and  jaws  are
cold  and  shrunken,^

Wlieu  my  breath  is  bound  upon  the  bali.sta  of  my  body  like

Yaqut  says : A city  lying  beyond  the  rirer  Sihun  in  Tnrkestan  near
Turrar.  Thence  sprang  Abd  Jlnhammad  ‘Abinr  Rahman  ibn  Yahin  ibn
Yunas  Aljigili  the  Khatib  of  Samarqand  in  tlio  days  of  Qadar  Khan  he  died
in  Sba'ban  51ti.  H.

Tainak.  Name  of  a city  and  country  celebrated  for  the  beaaty  of  iti
people.  Burhdn-i-Qiiti' .

Yaqut  does  not  mention  this.

1 The  above  shews  that  ‘.Amid  Lum.aki  was  born  in  the  year  601  H.  The
mode  of  reckoning  is  tliat  always  adopted.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  any
intended  double  enteadre  here ; though  the  word  which  stands  for  54
means  good  guidance,  no  meaning  can  be  attached  to  the  which  stands
for  655.  See  page  99  r\ute  4.

* t Ilf  ale  is  a long  tabe  for  throwing  oI»y  balh  throagh  by  tha  forco

of  the  breath  cj.  SteingaBs’  Vtct,

It  is  also  called  Tufuk.

</.  English  pop-gun,  traced  by  Skeat  (Etym.  Diet.)  to  the  base  exprea-
Bive  of  the  act  of  blowing.  Bkt.  bukk.

pu/  kaidan  to  blow  out — to  pnif.

A lamp  which  God  has  lighted.

He  who  attempts  to  blow  it  out  burns  his  beard,
must  be  added  in  the  text  after  the  word  MS.  (A).  This

appears  to  mean  that  when  he  is  at  the  point  of  death  he  finds  mercy.  The
intoxication  is  the  unconsciousness  resulting  from  approaching  death,  and
the  retraction  of  the  chin  and  lower  jaw  in  the  death  struggle  is  belieTed  to
be  the  effects  of  the  wineskin.

[ 160  ]

a missile,  then  the  stone  of  the  halisln  ' of  deatli  strikes  my
body  breaking  it  as  though  it  were  an  earthen  jar.*

Grant  me  a place  at  the  banquet  of  thy  pardoning  mercy.

At  that  time  when  the  Angel  of  Death  says  to  me  “ Take
and  eat,”  ^

Shewing  his  helplessness  Amid  thy  slave  offers  these  voi.sei
in  pi-aise  of  thy  excellence  to  the  best  of  his  power.

Accept  these  few  brief  words  from  this  vile  cur,*

For  this  mangy  cur  is  a partner  of  your  journey.

Thy  praise  is  written  on  my  heart,  afterwards  comes  the  prais#
of  the  Prophet.  May  every  word  besides  these  be  erased
from  my  heart.

An  Eulooistic  QasIda.

Oh  thou  upon  whose  jasmine-like  face  are  the  countless  toils
of  the  violet-hned  locks.

By  whose  rnhy  lips  the  brilliant  pearls  are  impri.coned.

Thy  locks  are  an  armourer  who  every  moment  brings  foi’th

Fragrant  chains  to  fetter  thy  lily-like  face.

110,  Thy  lily  face  is  better  confined  by  the  links  of  thy  spikenard.
hued  locks.

Bid  the  morning  breeze  as  it  breathes  nor  to  remove  the
chains  (of  thy  hair)  from  thy  rosy  (cheeks).

Thy  month  is  like  a delii-ate  bud  which  hursts  into  smiles ;
Loosen  the  folds  of  that  bml  even  if  with  tlie  point  of  a
thorn.

Thy  rose-petalled  cheeks  are  adorned  by  the  bonds  of  thy
dark  and  fragrant  locks..

1 This  .appo.ars  to  be  the  anther’s  meaninK.  The  convul.«ive  breathing  is
compared  to  the  jerkirg  action  of  the  balista.

• If  we  read  for  the  meaning  will  be  '■  strike.^  it  with  the  elephant
goad  ” There  is  some  uncertainty  ahont  the  meaning  of  the  word

One  meaning  is  according  to  the  Surh-in-i-Qati‘  “ an  earthenware  vessel  which
is  used  for  holding  datea.”

ft

S should  be  the  reading.  MS.  (A)  MS.  (B)  read

ff

(^ufaq)  is  a Turkish  word  signifvinof  anv  thing  eaten  as  a relish.
igazak)  is  the  Persian  eqnivalpr-t  of  (3^'  (qyfin).

* Thii  translation  is  admitteilly  inelegant,  bat  it  is  ineyitabie.

[ 161  1

Save  oil  thy  rose  who  has  ever  seen  so  becoming  a
bond  ?

Perchance  thou  didst  say,  thy  face  is  like  the  rose  and  tulip
to  look  upon,  the  fragrant  don  n on  thy  cheek  is  like  the
edging  of  a bed  of  tulips.

Thy  cheek  was  not  tit  for  this,  why  does  it  hear  its  chain,
like  me  who  bear  my  chain  in  the  time  of  the  reign  of  this
monarch.

The  world  conquering  king  J^asini-l-Haqq  (ally  of  the  truth),
he  who  places  upon  the  hands  and  feet  of  meanness  a
thousand  fetters  by  his  generosity.

Wala  Muhammad  Balban,  who  entangles  rebels  in  the  time
of  war,  in  the  noose  of  his  wrath. i

Oh  king  of  the  age,  by  whose  auspicious  fortune  the  treasurer
of  Fate  has  undone  the  fastenings  of  the  shell  of  the  mine
of  prosperity.

Beneath  the  saddle  of  the  confusion  of  thy  enemy  on  the  day
of  lighting,  each  girth  of  thy  saddle  becomes  sixty-four  *
thongs  to  hind  him.

He  is  like  the  opium,  provoking  quarrels  and  suspi-

cion.

If  his  opium  remains  enclosed  within  the  poppy

head.3

When  the  aromatic  odour  of  thy  good  qualities  removed  the
bond  from  the  wrinkled  month  of  the  nuisk  bag  of  Tat.ir,
ambergris  gained  a fresh  odour*  from  its  fragrant  bree^.L',
and  the  rose  bud  too  was  loosed  from  its  prison  by  iLo
newly  arrived  spring.

• These  conplets  are  transposcJ  in  IIS.  (A)  as  given  above.

> Avj  J 1 do  not  understand  this,  nor  can  I get  any  aileqnaie

explanation  of  it.

S MS.  (A)  THio  Bahru-l-Jiiinf}n,  sum?  up  pro[>f'i  i ir -t

of  opium  thus  Jjjjj  j j joB  *1^  qulilifl-ii  fjitijiiii  H’tf  yfiiiHiiL  ’in
kaiiruliif  tj<i'jhiiu.

In  Bmali  doses  it  in  beneficial  acting  as  a soporifio,  in  largo  it  kiiN.

No  mention  is  made  of  its  (piaiTol'pri'ivokiiiu  p»''  p'-ilii:-’,  and  tir . i r -
socond-lialf  of  the  cuiiplci  it  would  seem  U's  th«*au'l-  tl'  u.  p.  .k.d

by  its  cultivation  ratiier  than  bv  tlio  drug
MS.  (A),  The  te.vi  re-.d-

21

111

4

[ 162  ]

Tie  lieaven  every  moment  easts  the  fetter  of  intoxication  on
those  who  are  drunk  with  the  cup  of  thy  favour,  by  the
obstruction  of  their  brain. *

I'hy  kingdom  is  a rivulet  flowing  from  the  spring  of  satisfied
desire  ; safety,  enjoyment  and  pleasure  are  the  banks  of
this  stream.

In  such  a way  open  the  road  of  equity  for  the  ends  of  victory,

That  by  thy  justice  no  fetters  may  exist  in  the  world  save
the  locks  of  lovers’  hair.

You  see  one  who  has  assisted  injustice  in  his  soul  in  whose
path

Destiny  places  countless  * obstacles.

Like  Xaushlrwan  when  thou  kuocke.st  at  the  door  of  justice.

Thou  keepest  not  the  chains  firmly  fastened  on  bad  and
good.

In  thy  reign,  ic  behoves  that  no  one  in  his  lifetime  should
see  any  fetter,  save  ou  the  foot  of  the  cypress  and  the
tinger-beariug  leaf  of  the  Chinar.'^

Tiie  knot  of  the  dragon's  tail  and  the  dragon's  head  ^ is  a
fetter  on  the  sky,  come  and  relieve  the  distressed  heaven
from  its  'ooudage.

That  the  sun  and  moon  may  become  relieved  of  the  affliction

1 Both  MiS-i  B)  bare  jA  \ am  not  satisfied  with  tliii

bu:  •'  tii  suggest  no  bcUd-.

S

■>’  its  ^ 4 ) reads

fi  PLvn,  :

- ..  ^rhe  oi

-ta.ii  plane  Itai  a bi-uad  pal.aate  ieuf.  Ic  is

tlie  i

. f • -e  ancieucs  a.,

'•■.miog  to  I'aliji.r

L-ipiir,  et  .

, pr,,  p oi^-itnr

.1  ler-i,  :

P-  ...crou:/;  ■ aunt.  ,p.,oonis.

L'l."  e’  ' ■ at

■s”  V„l;er  ,..V  j'h,.

'pat.

-Hi.edc  , r -

^ ■

. . ' 1 .W  '

‘ ■ tw  •

■ ^

' ■ ' ’ - - ‘-i  ii  t’  1.  .-is  i.cle

c , - b,  re  ::  - , . r-  ^ ar$

' ; Hie  ; ' ii.

[ 163  ]

of  eclipse  ' in  the  knot  of  the  di-»gon’s  tail,*  like  me  who
am  in  the  bond  of  distress.

Thon  hast  ordered  that  the  learned  should  be  imprisoned.

Beware  that  thon  lajest  no  bond  npon  the  learned.

Woe  is  me  ! Hononr  them  rather  ont  of  policy,  and  on  the  112.
newly  wedded  bride  of  enlogy  bind  the  princely  pearl
taken  from  the  casket  of  my  heart.

Has  ever  any  monarch  placed  a bond  on  literary  men  ont  of
love  of  empire  and  nsnrpation  ?

I,  at  all  events,  am  a talking  parrot,  not  a hunting  falcon,
the  hawk’s  jesses  are  not  rightly  placed  on  the  legs  of
parrots.

Why  do  yon  imprison  me,  as  from  my  secret  heart  there  is
an  evident  fastening  (of  grief)  fixed  npon  the  door  of  my
heart’s  fortress.

Loose  my  bonds,  and  by  way  of  conquering  the  fortress,  fix

* As  regards  the  word  L-tctif  it  is  generally  held  that  thig  word  is

more  specially  applicable  to  an  eclipse  of  the  enn  while  applied

to  denote  an  eclipse  of  the  moon.  The  QKivasu-l'L'i^dt  applies  it  to  either  :
while  the  KashskdA  Iftaii^-i-Fun«n  lays  down  that  should  be  nsed

to  denote  a total  eclipse,  and  a partial  eclipse ; moreover

indicating  onlv  a change  of  colour,  while  denotes  a total  loss  of

colour.  Xa«e  however  says  they  both  mean  the  same,  or  that  ‘‘  in  the  common

conventional  language  *J|  is  the  partial  loss  of  the  light  of  the  sun,  and

is  the  total  loss  of  the  light  thereof,”  and  it  is  said  in  a tradition.
j/t  'ill

As  1.^  is  a much  earlier  letter  chan  r-  it  is  probable  that  originally  at  al

events  stood  for  an  eclipse  eiiiier  of  the  sun  or  moon,  the  meaning

being  subsequently  modified  for  convenience.

* Compare  the  Hindu  mythological  monster  liahu-

The  name  Hahn  by  which  the  ascending  node  is  designated  is  properly
mvthological  and  belongs  to  the  monster  in  the  heavens  which,  by  the
ancient  Hindus,  ashy  more  than  one  other  people,  was  believ&i  to  uocasiori  the
eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon  by  attempting  to  devour  ti.em.  hutgesS,  5*  .a

p.  SO.

Mythologically  K.afaa  is  a Daitya  who  is  suiposod  t i sci.-  ■ tv-  r.'.d  r,..  . ,

aind  Pw.t’Jov^r  thf^m  thus  obscuriti^  their
Kera  tire  'n  ustrenomv  :’;e  aa  en-'it.ii  ’•*-
csfise  of  ecupses  and  used  t - ‘t-  v'  ■'

Mtftdu  P 2Zi2-f

Iii.  ■'‘..•Opt.t.'.c.  iv-LU

sj -wi’t- r It.’QU  .s  ’

itself.  X,'*.  _•

164  j

tUf-  IjuiKi  or  tiiy  heart  upon  the  mercy  of  the  tliitblioM  of
■ hf  ( 'leacor.

M>  heart  was  wonniled  hy  the  tyranny  and  oppression  of  the
heaseii,  i]0>v  the  chain  wounds  my  leg  as  well  as  my  iienrt
Iso  one  has  seen  half  a danor  weiarht  of  gold  in  mv  possessio:!.
And,  eren  if  he  has,  I -v,  Ji.i  not  willingly  under^fo  imprison-
ment for  the  saiee  o:

Gold  has  no  '.  f iue  n.  n r bisnr.  iiow  can  I pledge  it  like  a
usurer  so  is  to  rrt'  f-'-eire  :;.r  --Vtry  ten.

1 have  eloipitje  e ike  riue  j,.i.i  ;in._.ther  man  has  gold  itself,
Optrii  s'oar  hand  in  ho  n -y  to  me.  vud  keep  him  imprisoned
Do  not  keep  me  so  lo>iy  u saspense  waiting  for  my  release,
My  impiisoument  ha.s  tamed  my  blood  to  water  in  this  weary
waiting.

At  least  kill  ti.is  hapless  icE.icent  with  the  swited  of  thy
avi*nth,

113.  Lut  do  not  imprison  me,  for  imprisonment  kills  me  *.  with  its
ptvpetnal  agony,

5Iy  iijwne  has  become  famous  for  eloqnence  from  east  to  west,
Is  it  htting  to  put  fetters  on  the  feet  of  such  a famous  poet  ?
Wi.bdom  said  to  me  long  ago  by  way  of  advice,

(’iniin  thyself  at  the  threshold  of  the  victorion.s  king.

1 was  iiiduh.dn.e  in  tiif-'C  hopes,  when  the  king  him.self  shewed
kiiiJiuss  and  impi  isoned  this  miserable  one  as  though  he
were  a inaidvrer.

You  may  he  iptire  sure  that  imprisonment  is  not  required
It!  that  phiee  in  which  the  seal  of  the  treasury  was  opened
IpV  his  generosity.

Fii't  thou  didst  fasten  tlien  thou  didst  loosen.^  Oh!  noble
bounty  ' I carry  the  frtti  r-  from  thy  door  into  the  presence
of  the  AlmiL'lity  as  a menioiiai.

It  was  the  sword  -of  royalty  [which  loosened  them]  by  the

I MS  .A)

JJ

uJj

ur-^  *1  tir*

' ‘ylnr?  }j

In  MS  (B),  the  first  hue  is  like  the  teit,  the  aecoad  like  MS  ( A)
» MS.  lA)

3 M.S-  lA;

[ 165  ]

mercy  of  tlie  Most  Bountifnl ; iiad  that  not  Been  so  the
imprisonment  would  have  utterly  ruined  me.

Since  I you  ‘Amid  girt  the  loins  of  loyalty  in  the  service  of
the  throne,  therefore  by  l.is  care  the  day.'  o?  voiir  imprison-
ment were  brought  to  a happy  termii.ati.-j'

As  long  as  the  young  and  sprightly  rurdde!’,'  to  the  distraction
of  their  lovers,  have  pniposely  bound  theii  cheeks  with  the
chain  of  youthful  blooio

So  long  may  the  do<;>r  of  ^-ood  fort  it  ue  be  closed  m every
direction  to  yonr  eneado-.

And  by  the  sword  may  th-  -.f  ix)th  fortresses  he  opened,
b'-'r  e.v.

My  eye  is  the  boundless  o-:ean.  tiie  t’xoufrhr  of  my  heart  is  a
bark.

In  sorrow  my  bark  S£-t=  I’orta  or.  t’:c  floods  as  thev  flov,-  fiom
my  eyes.

Night  and  day  I 3eat  ...i  • te.ir-^.  li  nv  can  my  bark  lU

live  in  the  mhlst  of  th  > i o.  ,va  oi  blood  r

How  can  I expect  to  win  iii_.  its.ie  fr...”.,  the  vile  w5rld  r

How  can  I launch  my  bark  or  the  surface  of  a gutter  r

Although  my  bark  in  tlds  oce.tn.  now  .'.tils  on  and  now  lies  at
rest,  sailing  with  the'  Seven  sri.l'.*  and  resting  on  the  four
anchors.®

1 MS.  (A)

The  text  as  it  stands  must  be-  traidated,  If  thon  Labt  gii-c  , . woniJ
hare  been  brought  4c.

It  is  evident  from  this  QasTda  that  ‘Amid  Loniaki  W' ? iri.-n  iooned.  on:  I
can  find  no  reference  to  it  in  the  account  of  him  given  ii. ’.ho  M •

FufoAd,

* The  seven  sails  here  appear  to  mean  the  seven  nienibers  ct  th  ' IjoJy,

known  as  the  hotf  av.tlfm  (1)  the  head,  (2)  the  chest,  (3)  the  back,

(5)  and  (6j  the  two  hands,  (7)  the  feet  or  (1)  the  brain,  (2)  the  heart,  (3,  the
liver,  (4)  the  spleen,  (5)  Inngs,  (6)  gall  bladder,  (7.  stomach.

This  name  was  also  given  to  a vein  by  section  of  which  it  was  snpposod
that  blood  was  withdrawn  from  the  seven  members  first  menti  .ned.

* The  four  anchors  are  the  four  “ bnmonrs,”  according  to  the  old  humoral

pathology.  ad~dam.  The  blooJ.  gildf  The  phlegm.

af  -fafrd'.  The  hue.  The  black  bile.

The  four  anchors  may  however  bt*  taken  tu  be  the  ftmr  elements,  earth,
air,  fire,  and  water.

[ 166  ]

Of  what  use  to  me  are  those  sails  and  those  anchoTH,

If  my  hark  is  saddenly  overwhelmed  by  the  billows  of
death  ?

In  this  age  I sought  fidelifcj'  from  the  tyraniiical.

Who  has  ever  seen  a boat  on  the  Jihuii  in  the  month  of
Mehrgan  ^

In  front  of  the  claws  of  this  crab  * and  the  rewolntioa  of  the
nine  heavens,  loosen  ® thy  four  anchoi-s  and  then  lanneh
ihy  bark.

Ti'.e  sea-monster  of  rvarice  of  my  sotti  tnms  back,  otherwise
one  might  (hag  the  heat  to  the  shore  by  some  contrivance.

With  the  exception  of  the  philosophers  how  can  an-oce

1.  “ ia  former  times  'says  Aibiren:;  taU  day  (Mihrajan)  csei  to  t'oi.''.ci'V

with  the  beginning  of  wicter  ” at  which  time  the  Jihiin.  wonid  be  fv  z-n  ar  I
unfit  for  navigation  owlngto  ite  intens > cold.  I' aqut  states  that  in  the  w r.Ter
the  Jhiun  frec-zes  f 0 he.- ’ ‘ .."lO  ice  A fiv-t  spans  'about  tO  i'’ohe=  click,
that  the  people  dig  «e;is  tr.rougn  t_e  ice  -.viti!  pick-axiis  to  ge:  ivater.  and
that  caravans  and  cans  cross  the  ice.  which  become  like  a high  road  coveted
with  dust.  -This  continaes  two  mouths.  Concerning  the  word  ilihrgan,  the  ■
Burhan-i-Qiti‘  says,  “ Mitrgan  is  the  seventh  month  of  the  Shamsi  yetir.  which
correspends  with  the  position  of  the  sun  in  Libra,  which  is  the  beginning  t(
antnmn.  The  feast  of  ilihreriin  is  the  next  greatest  feast  among  the  Persians
to  that  of  X.vtrcZ,  and,  like  this  latter  feast  is  divided  into  two,  J/i/n-pan-:.
Mauri  and  iliK  at-.i ; the  iea»:  of  ilihrgan  lasts  for  six  days  beginning

from  the  sixteciuli  of  the  month.  It  is  said  that  God  Almightrv  laid  ont  the
world  on  the  2lst  and  endowed  bodict  with  souls  on  that  dav.  Thev  savabo
that  Faridan  ascended  the  throne  on  that  day.  The  meaning  of  JlihrgHn  is  the
binding  tjf  a;tcr--n  ci-aJp®  I and  it  waa  so  called  hecattse  for  the

above  reasons  the  jieoplc-  were  tre.ateil  kindly  by  their  rulers  on  that  day.

Others  again  say  tlmt  there  was  a king  of  the  Persians  named  Mihr  who
was  a great  i;.  rant  and  was  consigned  to  bell  in  the  middle  of  this  month,  so
that  they  cahe.l  it  Jlii.rgaU  in  the  .moaning  of  death  of  a tyrannical  ling.
{Burk'ia- i-Q'ity ),

According  to  others  Jlihr  is  the  ratne  of  the  gun,  who  is  gaid  to  have  for
the  first  time  appeared  to  the  world  on  this  day.  This  is  indicated  by  the
cnsioui  of  the  Kiaras  of  crowning  themselves  on  tliis  day  with  a crown  on
which  was  worked  an  image  of  the  Ban  and  of  the  wheel  on  which  he
rot&tes. — ( Aibiruiii).

Set  aho  Albirunl  {Chron.  of  Avetenf  Xations)^  p.  206  and  SfHjq.

* At  the  commencement  of  spring  when  the  Son  enter*  Cancer-  ie

March  2l8t.  ‘ ' ’

* MSS.  (A.  and  (B)  have.  Ail  j.

[ 167

I

truide  the  ship  out  of  the  whirlpool  of'this  v.oild  to  its  final
haven  of  refuge.*

Do  not  set  thy  heart  upon  the  eboiu  '-like  world,  hel;au^c  a
ship  built  of  ebony  is  overwhelmed  in  the  sea  of  thin
worthless  world.

Do  not  seek  for  safety  when  loarted  with,  boasttoiaess

For  an  overloaded  -.hip  is  spveediiy  wrecked.

Seek  security  from  sorrow  at  that  time  when  vou  have  been
wise  enouijli  to  make,  as  I have,  a ship  from  iLe  planks  oi
tlie  piaise  of  thy  ]<.rd.

Tlie  centre  of  king.shij)  of  land  and  sea  Trijr.-i-ilaqo.  who
made  a ship  of  safety  for  traversino  the  oct.,’;  Qiilznin
of  sorrow.

Sinjar*  who  is  like  the  sky  in  dignity,  in  fe...’ of  wlicni
sedition  navigated  its  ship  in  t!,e  direction  or  cJ.e  cros.sing
of  the  ocean  of  Qairawan.'*

* He  compare.^  Uie  world  to  ebony  becanvo  of  its  bli'.vsi  indic.nthnt

Jlnefortune.  Ebony  is  said  in  tlie  Bui'nOt.-l-Qr}!''  to  io  '•abiaL'k

wood  which  when  placed  upon  the  fire  emits  a pleasant  smei!  like  the
(‘id;  or  aloes,  when  robbed  down  with  water  and  Osed  .n  a collyrium  it
relieves  night  blindness,  given  internally  it  dispels  calculns  or"  i,iie  Lladder.”

The,  Bahrit-l-Ji}v/!hir  says  that  ebony  “ is  a black  wood  w!!:.’.  sinks  whor.
thrown  into  water,”  hence  the  poet  assumes  a ship  hailt  of  eloiiv  would  .si.ik

® Abnl  Haris  Sinjar  Ibn  Malakshah  ibn  Alp  Arsl.'m  w.as  SuMn  '. Klinn'isan,
Ghazna  and  MawarSu-n-Nahr.  He  was  the  s'xch  of  the  Scljufi  .faitiin.s,

He  was  escesoively  libera',  and  was  supposed  to  be  T,-.-,''ud.u  r tuau  r.nv  of
the  Persian  kings.  He  was  defeated  and  taken  prisoner  by  the  Ghuzz  tre
in  548  A.  H.  (H53  A.D.)  but  eventually  escaped  and  was  at  the  time  of  his
death  in  .555  A.H.  on  the  point  of  recovering  his  throne.  Ke  was  bom
according  to  Ibn  Khaliiqiin  in  A..  H.  479,  in  the  environs  of  Si-ij'r  whence  he
received  his  name.  One  authority  places  his  death  in  the  ear  3.52  ITe  died
at  ilerv.  See  Ibn  Khallicpdi,  (tie  Siane.)  I.  600.

See  also  D’  Herbelot  art  Sangiar.  Vol.  II!.  p.  202,  f?  segg.

* Qairawan,  Long.  10''  E.  Lat.  36  S.  is  situated  in  the  North  of  Africa,  it:
the  province  of  Tunis.  It  is  the  ancient  Cyrene,  the  moe’er,  icairwrin.  .vi
the  commencement  of  the  Jlusniman  occupation  it  was  r'-e  capita!  of
Africa  See  Abul  Feda  (Kenaud)  II.  i 196.  The  ocean  of  Qairuw.'m  is  tlie
Mediterranean.

In  AhnI  Feda  (Annales),  we  find  that  Qairawan  was  fotinde.l  the  vear  50‘

, S6t)S-666  A.D.)  am!  was  completed  five  years  later.

[ lo8  ]

From  the  brcezo*oE  his  smile  in  the  ocean,  tlie  sliip  produces
fi’om  every  dry  stick  the  branch  of  salfrond
Wiien  his  auspicious  prow  turns  towards  the  ocean  the  ship
looks  like  a pearl  emerging  from  the  sea.

The  heaven  oifers  itself  as  his  ladder  when,  arriving  near  the
shore,  the  ship  stands  in  need  of  a ladder.

At  that  time  when  his  ship  floats  over  the  crimison  tide  of  the
blood  of  his  brave  enemies,

If  we  look,  it  appears  as  though  his  ship  crosses  over  the  dry
(sparkling)  water  of  the  points  of  dagger.s  ami  speais.

Thy  enemy  saw  his  life  like  a snare  (from  which  he  must
escape)  and  the  ship  of  his  desire  shattered  to  pieces  by
thv  bond-loosening  arrow.®

By  the  good  fortune  of  thy  arrival  the  ship  sails  along  ou
its  breast,  on  the  tops  of  the  waves  to  the  very  highest
heavens.^

Thj’  dagger  lays  open  the  breast  of  thy  envious  enemies  just
as,  by  means  of  its  keel,  the  ship  opens  the  lips  of  the
waves  and  the  mouth  of  the  ocean.

At  that  time  when,  in  pursuit  of  the  punishment  of  thine
enemies,  the  morning  breezes  hasten  their  march  aud  th  ?
ship  goes  with  slackened  rein.

116.  From  this  lake  KhusiCi  demanded  a ship  (ode).

Saying  such  and  such  a ship  is  fit  for  this  wide  ocean.

I obediently  set  it  sailing  over  the  face  of  that  ocean.
Although  that  ship  was  not  fitted  for  such  a sea.

When  the  sea  of  my  mind  burst  into  waves  in  thy  praise,  I
made  the  word  {kishtl)  the  7’udif  by  way  of  trial.

If  the  ship  had  not  been  like  a fi;.h,  tongueless  in  its  essence
It  would  not  have  addre.ssed  me  e.vcept  as  “ Ocean  of  benevo-
lence and  mine  of  eloquence  ”

Among  the  profoundly  learned  is  there  anyone  better  than

I See  page  41,  7K<te  2.

* MS.  (A).

(>jo  1*1

MS.  (B)  has  the  same  with  the  exception  of  foi*  2,

8 MS,  (A)  aud  MS.  (B)  both  have  wrong  readings  of  these  lines.

I ifiy  j

‘Amid  who  has  launched  his  ship  fronrthe  Nile  of  excellence
into  this  Clysma  of  eloquence.

Always,  as  lonq  as  in  the  shape  of  the  crescent  moon,  with
each  new  month,  the  ship  appears  on  the  bosom  of  the
ocean  of  the  sky.

May  thy  boat  of  wine,  bright  as  the  sun,  and  liquid  as  fire,
float  upon  the  water  of  delight  for  ever  and  ever.

Qasida.

Happy  art  thon  ! at  the  sight  of  whose  maddening  glances
the  stag  is  intoxicated.

The  snood  of  whose  musk-fragrant  ringlets  puts  the  stag  to
shame.

The  eye  of  the  nareissns  is  embarrassed  by  thy  glances.

The  stag  is  harassed  by  envy  of  those  mnskladen  locks.

Though  the  stag  roamed  round  the  garden  a hundred  times
he  saw  no  bed  of  violets  to  equal  the  bloom  on  thy  cheeks.

What  magical  power  is  there  in  that  eye  which,  with  one
glance,*  captivates  hearts  from  within  and  hunts  the  stag  117.
from  without.

From  envy«of  the  musk-coloured  spot®  which  stands  like  a
drop  of  dew  upon  thy  rose-like  cheek,  the  stag  without
respite  norses  a lacerated  heart  in  his  breast.

1 The  Baht~i-QuhuT»:  Clysma.  The  Gulf  of  Heroopolia,  or

Western  Gulf  of  the  Red  Sea,  through  which  the  Israelites  passed  on  dry-
land. It  is  the  modem  Gulf  of  Suez,  and  it  is  probable  that  Snez  occupies
the  site  of  the  ancient  town  of  Clysma.  Epiphanins  mentions  rh  KthrTpov
Tov  K\v(Tfi.aT05  as  onc  of  the  three  ports  of  the  Red  Sea.  the  others
being  Elath  and  Berenice.

There  was  in  ancient  times  a fork  or  arm,  of  the  sea  of  which  the  * Bitter
Lakes  are  remains.  The  canal  of  Trajan  beginning  at  Babylon  entered  the
Red  Sea  at  Clysmon.

* MS.  (A)  (B)

3 Gf.  ksr-i  ^

i ai«  vAJ  ~ ...lb  ijj  er*  nf

QiJ,  Lk.  JyAI

Thon  my  life  art  when  thon  smilest
Bat  my  death  when  thou  art  angered.

Ah  ! thy  cheek  like  summer  roses
With  the  grains  of  musk  be  sprinkled  t

22

r 170  ]

Needs  must  that  with  those  two  love  fascinated  eyes,

TliC  stag  shoaicl  endeaToni-  to  protect  himself  from  the  snares
of  thy  locks.

When  the  story  of  thy  fragrant  tresses  reached  him,

The  stag  curtailed  his  narration  of  the  bag  of  mnsk.

The  stag  suffered  from  the  effects  of  the  intoxication  of  thine
eyes,

And  he  got  rid  of  his  headache  by  drinking  of  the  cup  of  the
assembly  of  the  world-subduer.

The  auspicious  lion,  protector  of  the  crown  of  true  religion,

■ Sinjar,

la  whose  estimation  th.e  fierce  lion  of  the  sky  is  hut  a stag.

The  stag  tlsought  right  to  carry  a fragrant  ball  of  camphor  ^
taken  from  the  dust  of  his  threshold,  to  Kbits  as  a memorial.

Perhaps  it  was  from  the  dust  of  his  dignity  which  became  ' tiie
crnam&ct  of  the  sun,  that  the  stag  obtained  supericnty
over  the  wild  beasts  by  reason  of  bis  mosk-bag.

Happy  arc  thou  star-arrowed  one,  whom  the  demon-hearted
fear  and  shuu  as  ^ the  stag  avoids  the  lion.

An  enemy  who  falls  into  thy  clutches  does  not  escape  ;

Who  has  ever  known  the  stag  to  escape  from  the  claws  of  the
lion  ?

At  that  time  th.e  stag  prided  himself  npon  beins  fleeter  than
118.  hliy  charger,  now  iu  sooth  the  stag  is  ashamed  of  his  slow-

footedness.'

At  the  time  of  attack,  how  can  the  stag  in  spite  of  all  his
efforts,  reach  the  dust  which  is  thrown  up  by  thy  char-
ger's hoofs  ?

Think  it  not  strange  if  from  the  abundance  of  hia  bountv,  the
lynx  goes  slowly  on  foot,  and  the  stag  swiftly  like  a horse
man.

T'wixt  thiae  eT’eiids  reigng  a S^Utan,

Helpless,  lo  I I bow  befors  hita.

This  comparison  of  the  mole  on  a cheek  to  grains  of  mnsk  is  cne  of  the
coininoDest  ‘similes  amoiig  Peraiao  poeta.

1 The  son  is  called ‘**1*»»  ihamdma-i-hifiT.

» Dy;u8.  (A).

» MS.  A.

[ 171  1

Compared  with-  the  fr^rance  of  thr  goodness  how  can  the
stag  boast  ^ of  the  dried  blood  of  his  navel  in  Tatar.

Bj  the  aid  of  th'j  words  whieh  ai’e  like  an  antidote,  I have
no  fear,  even  thongii  the  stag  shall  beoonie  like  to  one
that  feeds  on  snakes.*

His  food  is  the  snake,  bnt  afterwards  like  the  eik,  besides  the
antidote,  the  stag  oTer?  in  every  direci;  ;r;  the  bag  of  musk.

In  the  land  in  wiiicli  iLon  art.  bv  reason  of  th_v  ^reac  justice
the  lynx  sits  sorrowfni,  aug  the  stag  stands  to  comfort  him.

Tiue  day  that  thou  pnrsaest  him  he  siiewS  .'nly  bis  right
•si.ouider  when  the  stag  .uiLesfrcni  th-e  right  tc  the  it;:  of
thy  atmT.

In  reliance  upon  thee  if  p.  stf  g -.vere  to  cherish  a ynacg  iio.-.
its  bosom  it  would  be  n.'  -vo..der.

Vv’l.at  power  have  two  im:  ."red  enetnieS  against  .hy  prowess  ?

What  dues  the  Lncting  Iecpa:d  think  of  a head  of  a thoussud
stags  r'

Thy  enemy  will  be  abip  to  s'lgage  in  ronriicr  witr.  thee.

At  that  time  when  the  sta.-?  s rorns  are  eapa ole  of  nghting-  the
lion.

i MS.  (A)  oij'jli.

* The  elk  is  gaid  to  feed  on  gcatrs  and  the  water  which  ooiiect*  at  the
coiners  of  ■ the  eye  ( inner  canthus)  is  repoted  an  antidote  for  aU  poisons.

( Burhan-i-Qiii‘  j.

The  following  is  abridged  from  me  ‘ ine  s-.m  is  fond  of

snakes  which  it  eats  wherever  ir  can.  dr.c  them,  oomnie.:  nr  from  cho  rail  of
the  snake.  Sometimes  the  stag  gtis  lute':  by  f-ne  .'.ke  m wh  ch  case  its
tears  Sow  down,  and  fill  two  hollows  beneath  us  eyes  large  enough  to  con-
tain the  finger,  here  they  congeal  one  become  solid  .:ke  was.  ihig  wax  is
nsed  as  an  antidote  against  the  poisoi:  cf  eoakes  and  scorpioTie,  and  when
given  by  the  month  is  useful  as  a renieiy  for  other  po.soos.  The  stag  also
eats  crabs,  and  hants  for  -fish  by  walking  along  the  margin  i f tiio  lake  or
river,  when  the  fish  come  cut  of  enriosiry  to  see  ir.  this  fact  .s  made  use  cf
by  fisnermen  who  are  wont  to  dress  in  the  skin  or  the  stag.

The  horns  of  the  stag,  which  ere  shed  yearfy,  are  cf  great  service  to
mankind,  more  especially  as  a remedy  for  impotence,  and  to  facilitate  parton-
tion.  If  a portion  is  burned  and  administered  mixed  with  honey  it  acts  as
a vermifuge,  and  when  nsed  as  a dentifrice  removes  discoloration  of  the
teeth.  Used  for  fnmigation  it  drives  away  reptiles  and  other  venonioua
animals.  If  a portion  is  hang  roned  the  neck,  the  wearer  will  not  sleep  so
long  as  it  remains  there.  A draught  of  the  stag's  blood  dissolves  stene  in  the
bladder.”

119.

[ 172  1

■ In  tte  meadaw  of  thy  favour  the  stag  has  never  seen  his
quarters  and  sides  as  thin  as  his  legs.  ,

Couqneior  of  the  world,  I have  Loniid  “The  stag”^  with
thirty-three  eonplets  in  thy  praise  by  way  of  experimeut
as  though  it  were  a cameh

It  is  fitting  that  the  word  “ musk  deer  ” should  be  repeated  as
radif  a hundred  times  si  .ce  thou  hast  sent  me  in  thy
kindness  a stag  twice.

Formerly  the  stag  thought  of  nothing  bnt  the  mnsk-bag,  now
he  makes  the  glory  of  thy  praise  his  constant  occnpation.

‘Amid  has  opei.ed  the  innsk-bag  of  wisdom  in  singing  thy
praises,  like  the  mask-lji-g  upon  which  the  stag  pridesitself.*

Always,  as  long  as  men  search  for  mask  on  the  surface  of  the
ground,  anil  no  mask  Jeer  laj.'s  aside  its  power  of  prodnc-
ing  miisk,

May  the  peifeccion  of  thy  justice  reach  such  a height  that
the  stag  may  extract  mask  from  the  hunting  leopard.

Mayest  tin  a roam  at  luige  and  enjoy  thyself  in  the  meadow
of  forture,  j:;,t  a.s  the  stag  roams  over  the  meadows  in
spring  time.

Fasting  has  made  his  form  which  was  like  the  Narwan®
slender  as  a reed,  and  has  made  his  face  which  was  led  as
the  Arghawan  ^ pale  like  tl.e  saffron.

1 The  wor5_>*f  dkii  stag,  occurs  in  every  couplet  of  this  qasida.

S miihi  is  said  to  be  the  congealed  blood  of  tbe  navel  of  the  stag  of

Khita.  Oiud  MrMz  ■-•iu-l-Alictya).  The  latter  work  says  “It

13  very  difficult  to  precore  genuine  musk,  it  is  only  brought  as  a great  rarity
as  a present  to  kings  and  great  rulers  mixed  with  saffron  and  a little  carnnhor
as  a remedy  for  head.iche  ; and  is  used  aloae  or  with  other  drugs  such  as  the
testicles  of  the  be.aver  (Castorenoi;  as  a stimulant  snuff  iu  paralvais  and
other  cold  diseases  of  the  brain,  for  which  it  is  also  used  by  inanction
Smelling  it  removes  the  evil  effects  of  poisons,  especially  of  iish  (aconite)
ind  uun'  ■.•.-i-suynl’-l.  ?)  It  is  alsovery  useful  as  a coUyrium  iu  many  diseases

if  the  eye.

It  is  a cardiac  tonic  removing  palpitation,  and  faintness,  relieves  dysentery
and  globulent  distension.  A suppository  of  mask  assists  parturition.”

See  also  Ibn  Baitar  (Sontheiroer)  Voi.  II.  pp.  513  et  seqq.  for  a fnU
acconnt  of  the  statements  of  various  aathorp  regarding  musk.

3 cyjh  The  Nirwau  is  described  in  the  Burhdn-i-Qati'  as  a very  graceful
tree  with  abundance  of  leaves ; called  also  Gulnar.

* Tno  Aj^awan  according  to  the  Bwhaa-i-^tt‘  is  a tree  with

How  can  it  be  i2:  i-  ; ; hH~  i .t  made  ine  smile.*

Fasting  has  mail  e.  ■ ci  - yellow  ’ike  the  Zarir*  through

weeping,  and  y :-a  as  the  Arghawau.

How  can  it  be  a t„. 1.1  : lasting  makes  his  cheek  like  the

Khiri.^

How  can  it  be  .i  eyyrts'  when  ^asticg  makes  it  weak  and
tremalons  ?*

brilliant  red  flowers,  a .r  , ren. -res  the  e^ec:=  cf  intoxica-
tion, Tile  wood  is  burn-.-  : j ooiji.l  eyof.riws  wliich  it

ca OSes  to  grow  and  becut.--  » -i  it_-J-i:!ar  ; 5ontnc.n.er,i  savs,  t.

p.  28i,

The  tree  is  very  abund.1  ■ - and  tears  .. . red  iiiwera

which  are  edible,  hairing  .=  0.-,-=;  ' .-te  which  is  ^ jUil, ini'.aie  1 to  wine.
The  wood  is  soft  and  when  bir-;  ■ c-.-is  a b'.ack  ash  wL::_  is  used  as  a
cosiuatic  The  decoction  of  ’ : 1 barb  when  drank  .1  certain  emetic  ”

Sonthoimer  dues  injt  give  the  o-'  1.  1 ..  ni'.,e.  ice  loh  r :i..re  i’jy.

* See  p.  41,  n.  2.  .

Ji)}  Zarir.  The  Durhin-x-U  i - vs  t’l  a is  " a herb  with  w:.-,ch  they  dye
clothes,  it  is  called  also  asp<i,a  ' • i .arding  t.j  s me  however  it

is  the  leaf’of  ^ard  c/iota  I'rurmenc  s ue  ..cher  luta  -rs  -.ly  is  a d'lwer.  It
is  also  the  name  given  to  the  in't  . .liso  to  yiundice.  ■ -i  .-i-Cizii’)

In  S'nllers  we  find  >-^^1  _i-  . heioa  flaia  tingendo  iiiserviens,

I Zarir)  or  (icu/iy

According  to  I bn  Baifar.  (Sontheimer’  wxjj  u.a'S  is  Meinecylon  linotorinm —
X.  U,  Jlelastotnaceas,  regarding  wtii-'ii  Drnry  in  his  C^r'j.1  piaids  trf  Ihdia^
page  291,  says,  “ The  leaves  are  is.-d  iu  dyeing  affording  a deiicate  yellow
lake  ,,  ..they  are  also  good  for  ilv-  "j  clothes  rtd,..i*y  itseif  ic  gives  au
evanescent  yellow.

^ iSji^  A flower  of  which  iher**  aro  many  varieties

(jj'diA.  KKri-i-Ki.Ui'i  — rs  . .is  rurple

i-V  taA.  Khiri  -.-ilirdhu  — i-  v.-iet.  It  is  i.lso  called  vh-Ak

rang.

Khin-i-Sahra'i — is  red  and  white;  called  also

hJl"d-i'}0\irdnif.

LS>i^  Kh’ri-i-Sh}razi — ^ is  yellow;  called  u!s,.  Jf

Unit  kamesha  buhdr  ami  iu  Arabic  jkUM  ‘A^fir  i Burhu-i-i.Quti').

See  also  Viillers.

According  to  Ibn  Baitar  (Soim-eimer)  tbis  plant  is  the  wa  ’ flower  Cheiran-
thus  Cheiri.  N.  O.  Gruciferstf.

^ MSS.  A and  B have  kjtjA-  The  text  reads  ef’y-’  wkic.i  is  a better
reading.

[ 174  ]

His  fonn  stately  as  the  ISarwan  is  bowed  like  the  reed.

Has  any  one  ever  seen  fasting  proceed  from  the  Harwan  and
cypress  of  the  garden  ?

Till  his  face;  which  was  like  a full-blown  rose,  drew  back  again
into  the  bad  there  was  no  certainty  that  the  rose  and  the
garden  had  commenced  their  fast.

Till  his  fall  moon  once  more  became  a crescent  moon  who  had
clearly  seen  fasting  overtakiug  the  snn  and  moon  of  the
heavens.

The  shaft  of  grief  is  broken  in  my  heart,  tor  his  statnre  nas
been  brought  by  fasting  from  the  straight  form  of  an  arrow
to  the  shape  of  a bent  bow.

It  is  two  days  since  I have  seen  jar  npon  jar  of  sngar*in
that  very  moment  when  fasting  set  its  seal  npon  his  lips.

I am  in  astonishment  at  her  sngar-distilling  lip  which  is  like
the  pistachio,  for  there  is  sugar  in  the  jar  on  each  side  and
fasting  in  the  middle.

Because  of  her  love  her  month  is  less  than  an  atom,  nay
even  less  than  the  minutest  atom,  can  any  one  imagine  that
a minute  panicle  such  as  this  can  endure  fasting.

Look  ! how  maryelloas  it  is  with  what  skill  she  imprisons
fasting  between  those  particles  of  mby  which  scatter
sweetness.

With  a glance  she  drinks  my  heart's  blood  because  she
thinks  that  by  taking  a draught  of  blood  she  wtU  openly
break  her  fast.

121-  This  heart  of  mine  is  faint  -.vita  longing  for  her  lips.

In  this  desire  that  1 may  b:*eak  my  fast  with  the  seeds  of  the
pomegranate.®

• The  cc:5i  has  MSS.  A.  B.  have  which  is  right.

5 Niaiinl  Gar.j^iLi  sajs.

^irtgAaka.!-,  means  the  lip  of  a mistreeg,  and  also  a sugar  jar
of  bp€-:ial  form  a very  narro'-v  l

Tbe  ^leart  ot  ^ar  cf  sugar  frc-r..  iHe  tigntnew  of  her  homed  is
m re  rr-nird  is  tht  cinctu.'?  cf  her  vsisi.

^ a.  N'izfio'i  •■’i'  ^ ^ /iti)

L 175  ]

Haply  she  has  hang  the  amalet  on  her  silvery  monse-like
neck,  so  that  wisdom  like  a fasting  cat  has  been  compelled
to  remain  fasti  ng.^

My  tongne  has  become  dry  like  that  of  one  fasting  in  advising
her.

For  thy  form  is  like  a fresh  blown,  rose,  fasting  is  the
antamn  wind  (which  withers  it).

Althongh  than  openest  thy  lips  like  a bucl  which  had  been
closed  by  fasting,  just  as  I broke  my  fast  at  the  table  of
the  praise  of  my  Lord  ;

The  ocean  of  benevolence  champion  of  the  tmtb,  round  the
table  of  whose  bounty  tnen  and  genii  broke  their  fast ;

Mohammad  whose  vanguard  is  like  destiny,  the  joints  of  whose
spear  broke  their  fast  with  the  blood  of  the  .enemies
(trickling  down)  from  the  point.

He,  whose  right  hand  is  like  that  of  Isfandiyar,  has  also,  from
the  liberality  of  his  hand,  caosed  the  age  * to  break  its  fast
on  this  side  of  the  seven  stages.

Before  the  generosity  of  his  heart,  the  ocean  and  the  mine,
have,  in  their  ntter  poverty,  considered  fasting  to  be  their
bonnden  duty.

Hail  O King  ! in  whose  jnst  reign  the  wolf,  as  though  it  were  a
shepherd,  has  kept  its  fast  to  secure  the  safety  of  the  flock.

Thou  art  like  the  two  firet  fingers,*  a close  companion  of  the
heavens,  jnst  as  fasting  goes  hand-in-hand  with  prayer.

Thy  existence  is  the  twin  brother  of  kingdom,  just  as  fasting
is  the  twin  brother  of  Zahat,  Hajj  and  ‘Umrah.*

}S

A lip  more  ailuriag  than  the  seed  of  the  pomegranAte
A tongae  far  sweeter  than  the  whitest  sugar.

^ favourite  simile  with  Persian  poets.

^ These  couplets  occur  m thw  order  in  Ma5-  A and  B.

M*'3.  'A)  reads whicn  ip  i-'.e  adopt-d  nere,

i jjg  forefinger  and  ni-dllo  winch  are  meat  comm  -tTj

t'  : iier  t . rpi/o'y*

^ -ok;;  or  alttigiFiiig  is  i i£e  of  the  cr  pra,',’ ;

r ‘ f ^ ^

Qar'in  d 77.  J -■  ' /

“ Auii  to  r>en  kindU  aiid  be  - :;ri

The  pro  r.  ’ ? g^vy  > • ' ' ‘ '

[ 176

J

122.  The  hreeze  of  thy  good  qnalities  like  the  fragrance  of  the

perfume  of  the  breath  of  the  faster,^  has  carried  fasting
as  a special  offering  to  the  garden  of  Paradise.

Thou  hast  cast  out  the  custom  of  tyranny  from  the  kingdoms
under  thy  sway,  inasmuch  as  thou  hast  relieved  waste
countries  of  taxes,  and  excused  the  feeble  fi-om  fasting.

The  spirit  of  man  is  often  broken  by  the  vicissitudes  of  the
heavens  * jnst  as  his  bodily  fast  is  broken  by  bread.

In  this  time  no  one,  from  the  time  of  Janishid  till  now,  remem-
bers fasting  at  the  table  of  such  a host  as  thou  art.

At  the  smeli  of  the  table  of  thy.  bounty  the  guest  has  con-
sidered it  incumbent  upon  him,  whether  in  the  feast  or  in
the  fray,  to  fast  from  food  of  all  kinds.

The  bird  of  thy  arrow  has  broken  its  fast,  like  the  gnat  of
Nimrud  on  the  brain  of  thy  enemy  in  the  cup  of  the  .skull
(the  cup  of  vapours).

For  the  maintenance  of  thy  kingdom,  young  and  old  have
fasted,  both  the  old  and  the  new  creation.

The  revolution  of  this  six-storied  world  is  full  of  the  mention
of  thy  glory,  just  as  fasting  lills  the  seven  members  of  the
Dody  in  this  darkness.

IJiiij.  The  Pilgrimage  to  Mecca  which  is  incumbent  upon  all  Muslims
who  h.ave  the  p.c-cess;.ry  means.

‘ Umrah.  The  li.t=i  r jillsTrimaire,  which  may  be  performed  dt  any  time
except  daring  the  Sth,  9tli,  and  10th  days  of  Zul  Hijjah  See  Hnghes  (Diet,
of  Islam.)

1 Text.  (MSS.  A and  B read

y f

13  defined  as  the  smell  of  the  breath  of  pne  who  fasts

Ha

The  breath  of  one  fasting  is  sweeter  in  the  sight  of  God  than  sweet  smelh
ing  saTonr.

See  also  Lane.  Art.  It  became  altered  (for  the  worse).

The  Oamus,  says

t.

o lijlA  >.  bK  j

S Both  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  agree  with  the  text.  I take  the  word  ChUU
nfciliit  to  be  a plural  formed  by  Badioni  on  the  analogy  of  ’imtiw/.i',

and  to  stand  for  the  ^ abd-j-'uhrit/a.  the  nine  heavens.

177

Oii  t ii • •.rill,  ilie  \M  ! S ci.;!ii!’ ■!.  h'^vr  - ■ ::  -.i!

fiiJ. irKnr‘0  tluit  til*  '*  .’I’ltuai  nef- M - *

break  the  fti't.

I strou  biifnre  thte  -.vita  niy  loii.*;  *:;  ■■  ia  !.  a ■ he  -.

tlraia'a  because  fastiria' ;■=  i-  • ert'

I'.LCthi  r I'l.tCilv  nr  ;■  in  FiH'iet.-
oily  cictitiili.'j.  b\  a t

arat  =ai:i.

IiKayiue  t’.at  botli  y.'n.r  i.en  and  — rl;  _'  ; '

1 be  clairas  of  thv  tr-^aiei-iFitv  cans  *c  C-.  n : _ , ■

and  consume  nty  time,  had  it  *.< *:  l—tn  : o ' I '
Inave  speedily  imposed  a fast  aper.  iny  'vo;,;-
Had  m.t  the  praise  (f  thee  been  the  snsf-nanc*'  i .or  pev -as
or  speecii  Jiow  i‘  'ubi  the  point  uf  ni'.'  tr..  o , r btoketi

its  fast  by  breakinc-  nan  poftvv  >

Like  the  jiarrot,  my  lii'st  nmrnir.n-  lo  -iii  ■*  i-  • soioar  of
gt&titnde  to  thee,  not  like  the  do  I -.iO  my  fa-t

upon  bones.

Who  is  able  to  break  bis  fast  in  this  n-.\y  .s  .m-f.'icfd'
hi'iuging  in  the  '‘rad?/’’  better  than  •■tar.i,  -■it:-  •]  >
draught  of  trial.

He  has  broken  bis  fa.^t  with  a feather  from  th*

bird  of  praise,  becau.so  at  tliis  time  fastin;.-  i.s  'iie  i -i  i.*.-st
for  the  bird  of  praise.

313-  (Ai  reads  ^ 31^.  .b'

the  reading  in  the  text  is

ci'tj  iJj  S.sir?  *^4)

All  of  these  readin^rs  appear  to  be  corrupt  and  t':c  lolK^wiin.;  ■ '‘e'ti-

*^a.soaabie,  and  has  been  adopced  in  the  trauslution

iJ'J  ‘Hr^j

* The  text  reaas  >jut  MSS.  (A)  and  (Bj  read

ijkLo  iis.  (A)

* “ The  following  is  the  routine  of  a fast  day.  About  Imlf  an  h-'^nr  after
midnight,  the  gun  sounds  its  warning  to  faithful  mea  tlai"  ii  is  time  t>
prepare  for  the  SaJinr  ()y^)  or  iTiorning  meal.  " ( i’-ui  :i.>r.'s  Mtcra  I.

P 1 10  note)  see  aUo  Lane's  Modern  Kjnidiuny  fur  the  ob';>;r7aaces  uf  the
mouth  of  Kamazaii.

28

[ 1

Al'.vars.  ns  long  as  fasting  brings  as  its  rcwai’d  from  the
bootity  and  mercy  of  God,  a hidden  treasure  worth  a
liundred  princely  treasures,

■Mavest  thou  be  famed  ^ for  generosity  and  kindness  in  this
world,  for  fastir.gr  points  the  way  to  the  highest  heaven.

Axothkr  Q.tSiDA.

I.  wlio  have  made  roy  dwelling  in  a corner  like  the  .Slnini-gh  “

1 ]ia\e  made  my  nest  beyond  t’re  axis  of  eartldy  spliei e.
Wiiy  do  I bear  tiie  shame  of  every  bird  in  this  ill-omened
land  r "

124.  I have  gone  like-  the  'Anqa  ■*  and  have  made  my  rtitjng

place  in  the  mountains.

I its.  (.t  i-fads  lA-kij  instoful  of  as  in  tlie  Text,

8 The  i/h.i  of  tnc-  mountain  of  .Vlbur?.  wliicli  noqrislic-il  Zal  when  ije  was
abandoned  there  by  order  of  ids  f.itlier  Sam,  and  tan^lit  liiiii  the  l.insjnnjre
of  the  country.  On  restoring  Zal  to  his  fattier  she  g.ive  him  a feather  from
her  wing  atid  said  Wiienever  thon  .ort  involved  in  any  difficulty  or  danger
put  this  feather  ou  the  fire  and  I will  instantly  appear  to  thee  to  on, sure  thy
safety.”  See  Shah  S'/ina  (Atkinson)  p.  75  Shuhnama,  Turner  Jlacan,  Ed.
I.  pp.  97  ct  t-eqq.

3 Tliere  is  a play  on  the  word  here  which  ennnot  be  preserreci,

Aii»'thci  iGiiiir*  f..r  rlic  Shnnj^.  ami  a synonyrn  for  anytiiing  rare  and
unattainublo.  B-n'i,  niitlor  tlio  name

There  is  a I'tii"  nccomu  of  tlie  'Ajuifi  in  the where  it
gars  on  the  authuiity  of  Qazwinl  that  the  *Anqu  is  the  largest  of  all  birds
which  can  seize  an  elephant  as  e'isily  as  a kit*  snatches  up  a rar.  It  once
lirei  aninncr  ni'-Ti.  but  caused  thrill  so  much  annoyance  thar  by  tlie  prnvcrs
of  a holy  if  was  banished 'to  an  nnInhalKced  islaral  in  mul  ocoan

h.  y-.im.l  ciic  i.i  iG.ior  tail  of  cnormuus  Miruals.  When  the  ’Anqu  liics  lli'-ro
iw  fi  iirf.  I'l  odor  mil]  Hoods  it  lifcs  N-.'ai-.aml  pairs  at  llor  a.i'o

uf  1.“*’.  1 I-  "a.  } tie  ci  iw-  aio  luude  into  1 a’cre  dii'ki':^  ( ups  A

di'51  lip:.  jA  A :h'.;  i.iudc  of  captuiiu^^  tiio  Anqa  is  aUr.  c^d\v  a ba:  is  toe  Ion"
to  lyi  ao

\rT'  ’iij;  lit''  - r.  -rbs  of  the  Aiaba  one  is  hdi  is

Mtir;  : . j ’ V, ji  ise  reioima:’,-rr  thcic  i«  i...  li.jpe.  aJuv  :ho  Ariqa
I’v  • -y  >f

q - J *^vm*  j )

n.MU

[ 179  ]

tJiitil  the  bird  of  ,ny  ambition  swoops  down  upon  the  harvest
of  the  lower  world,  1 have  made  the  haivest  field  of  tlie
sky  full  of  grain-like  stars.

Why  does  the  moon  display  the  halo-harvest  when  it  doe.s
not  shewa  single  grain  to  any  one,  wh.ereas  I with  one  single
grain  of  manlines.s  have  bound  many  a sheaf.

By  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  God,  1 have  made  the
newly  wedded  virgin  h'lde  of  reality  to  .shine  in  the
chamber  of  wisdom  with  the  brilliancy  of  the  day.

The  course  of  the  heavenly  bodies  in  the  columns  of  the
almanac  of  the  Creation,  I have  proved  one  bv  one  by
comparison  with  the  a-trenomicnl  tables*  of  intellect.

In  the  bridle  of  four  rings,  that  is  the  trappings  of  the  four
elements,  great  is  the  training  which  1 have  giv'en  the
unruly  steed  of  my  passions.

I have  ma^e  the  parrot  of  my  soul,  who.se  cage  is  the  form
of  this  uncouth  body  wbicli  is  like  a midden,  evei-y  moment
to  rival  the  nigbiingalc  of  the  veidant®  garden.

The  parrot  has  left  for  the  garden,  the  kite  of  lust  whieli  is
following  it  circling  round  and  round  my  nature  1 have
detained  within  the  midden  of  tlie  body.

In  many  an  art  for  which  * the  scientist.s  had  no  taste

I have  made  as  great  progre.ss,  Iiundred  fold  as  they'  are,  as
a man  who  follows  but  one  art.

-My  intellect  has  served  to  light  the  lamp  of  the  treasure  of
science,  I have  made  my  skill  tiio  oil  uliieh  supplies  the
light  to  the  wick.*

The  jewel  of  the  secret  of  reality  has  been  acrpiired  in  such  125.
a (perfect)  v,.iy  that  1 have  ni.ide  my  miinl  the  storehouse
of  the  treasury  of  seeia  t knowledge.

Once  by  way  of  vaunting  in  the  rose-garden  of  desire,

1 Tlie  text  (and  also  MS.  15)  lias  an  absurd  reading  ji  tlie  real

reading  is  us  is  st'cii  in  ilS.  (-V).

2 MS.  (A)^'riifre  is  a veibal  antnliesis  between

{fjHL<lian]  g-irden  and  ./NlUnn.  <1  1-t  hpap  in  tlie  Persian  'whicii  X

attempted  to  imitate  Ly  the  w^rtls  'jn-h  >t  and  ntulJen,

^ ilS.  { i)  Xiio  text  and  (B*  read

* Mh).  and  (B)  bjtli  re  td  The  texi  l.-f"

Ir;c

<■  5 -M

I J;s]i]a7e.l  tl.-  '.j liLaiicv  jf  my  ikill  pjitk-cloarcd  ;;ke
peacock.

TLe  falcon  ci  tia.  I'Hine  in-lig-nation  smote  rae  --v!:!!
taions  fioni  !!lliiig-pLioe.  so  that  I took  rtfage  i;i  a
corner  like  toe  T-e’c'-.-n.

Tliev  woald  La  . c siitwi-  rat  the  way  f and  have  bia Jen  me
walkl  in  thi^  solitary  wind  .-vtiess  tower

Had  not  n;y  amoitior;  tairied  me  far  beyond  ti.e  seven
v.'indows  (..f  xh-  sky)

A t'/wer,  narioi-, , ay:  ax  tlii-:  time  eren  nr.rrower  than  my
heart,  (so  nasao'-’.-  thuc''  2 '-*a  would  say  I am  a cord  and
bave  given  myself  a pltice  in  the  eye  of  a needle.

It  is  tbe  coiiSteliaxion  of  the  Aieher,  and  I am  like  tue  Sun,
and  have  by  my  cold  sighs  changed  the  bright  .‘piring  of
the  world  into  the  bitter  cold  of  winter.!

This  was  not  all ; tbe  good  tidings  of  my  bad  fortune  bron:rht
to  me  the  blacksmith,  to  whom  I stiid — Strike  o;S  mv  Lead
in  retaiTi  for  the  biooj  wliicii  is  upon  my  head.

The  splendour  axid  comfort  i:  the  golden-tbroned  sun  is  my
desert.

Whereas  I am  re- ting  npon  a Lard)  iron  ( prison  1 seat.

The  seven-headed  dragon  (Th~  y ' hides  its  bead  (in  astonish-
ment)  to  see  that  I have  brought  this  two-headed  serpent
(night  an-'  il'i.-)  n-nder  my  skirt.

They  dete.-miin  for  me  an  imp;  isonment  like  that  of  Bizhan
in  the  well  tyranny,  I haye  not  seen  ificnizha*  nor
have  I eouimn'o'i  the  crime  Bizhan.

1 The  Stm  enters  -.1;’  .Sau-.tririus  in  the  cotr.mencetnent  of

the  winter.

* The  danghrer  of  Afraefrib  XV'.cn  Bizhan  nnifertook  to  clear  the  conntry
of  Arman  of  it*  pla^me  of  wild  hccs.  after  faltfiling  hia  task  he  was  led  by
the  machinations  of  hie  companion  Girorn,  who  was  jealoas  of  him  to
intrude  n{K-n  the  retirement  of  llanizha,  the  bcaatifal  daughter  of  Afrujivab
and  press  id-  suit,  which  he  did  with  such  success  that  aft>-r  some  time  their
amour  was  discovered  and  Gersiwaz  wa.s  sent  b\  Afrasiyib  to  pat  Bizhan
to  death : by  tLe  intercession  of  Tiran  the  pnidshment  was  averted,  but
Bizhan  was  imprisoned  in  a deep  pit.  At  6rst  JIanIzha  was  condemned  to
nnderpo  the  same  punishment  nut  her  d->om  was  changed  and  she  was
allowed  to  dwell  near  the  pit,  all  the  people  being  forLi.Iden  by  proclamation
to  sopply  her  with  food.  Eventually,  by  the  help  of  Kastnm,  Bizhan  was
freed  and  he  and  Manizha  went  to  Iran  together.  (Sea  Atkinstm's  Shih
Sim^,  PP-  300  and  teqql.  See  also  page  116  nofe  5

i'l  ''

P:  ‘i-‘’3ce  lia-;  tlie  ^treutriP  >:  nu^tuiu,’  -js  r.i.e  niav  sav,

I e;.trasrej  ti.e  sTre-:irli  iiecessirr  for  :nv  r-lease  to  the

ana  of  Ru.rtam-like  patito--?.

AH  at  Tny  conipanioTxs  aiv  free  to  foH.on'  tlieir  occfipations
avlilie  I am  fast  in  prisuc,

Gurt  foruid  I should  he  tise  only  oao  of  all  rmakiini  to  have
coriimirted  rids  fault.

The  times  are  oat  of  j'Oi.r,  if  not  how  c.'iu  thj  fullowii-.n;  of
the  Tshra'p.  pliiiosifil.r  ® %'l:ioli  I foll..nvLd  so  excellently
have  tliio'.vn  me  into  mi.sfo!  tnr.e  h

The  shaft  of  the  tyrani'icai  heaven.s  passed  tlii-ouith  and
thi-ough  from  the  Ge  h.  although  I had  armed  my  breast
tvith  the  cuira.ss  of  jiatienee.

ily  body  longs  for  food  in  the  captivity  of  sorrow,  and  I have
prepared  for  its  support  my  blood  as  its  drink,  and  my  heart
as  its  meat.

Once  I was  like  the  taTip  in  “iimpiriiiiing.  but  then  aftervranis
I made  myself  like  the  liiy  ten-tonitued  (but  silent  ) =

Like  the  violet  I iutve  lot  my  hoai.l  fall  forward  (in  sorrow)
from  detrth  of  ht,-nef:i'. t oi v.  and  luoije-h  like  the  lily  I have
ten  tontrut's  I am  heeoirio  dumb. in  thv  prai.se.

I am  suffering  the  pauis’nraeut  of  my  words,  because  in  ray

1 Rnstam  extricated  BIzhan  from  the  pit  by  drawing  him  up  with  liis

afriftV'i  or  lasso.

S xhg  Illuminati.  A seot  of  Puiiosop^iers,  of  whoi.:  was

one,  who.  instead  of  following  the  prpcep'’'*  of  any  • i 1 toked  to  their

own  proper  UJSpirjtrion  and  inenTuI  illnminaiion,  waiclj  tliny  hold  to  be  the
result  of  spiritual  me.liration.  Haji  Kha'hfah.,  Ill,  p,  h7,  writj^a  as  follows;

P/i (ti  ’ h' ft ,;i Ml  if («.//(!’*  .''if e Aeo- i>a  inter  reteres

dif^ciplincis  ph‘^ii«>uhh'a'<  1 tenet  ipi‘' n The-j'^ovhia  inter  diyrtrina$

Islami  f-iinili  modn,  quo  p/tiht-op/n'j  pliJ/--ica  ef  fhe->h  jira  inter  illas  dificipJinas
locum  tenet  quern  theol-ogii  rH7ilco-i:cl’otast'ca  inter  has.

lu  tiie  by  we  find  : Piiilobophera

•xe  of  four  kinds, — those  wlib arrive  at  wibitun  '•imply  hr  inenicHtion.  tho&o
who  arrive  at  it  simply  by  purilir  ition  of  the  mind  l«v'  sodusion  and  retire-
3nent,  those  who  arrive  at  it  by  combining  these  two.  These  last  are  called
the  Isbraqi  sect-

See  Haji  KhaJifsb

Sen  aliO  dc  Slanc,  Profry.  Ibn  Khal  : HI.  1G7.

* The  Mis.  (A}  has  ^ The  text  fullows  MS.  (Hj.

See  «of€  1 page  101.

126.

[ 182  ]

lying  flattery  I hare  made  every  beggar  a king,  and  have
made  the  (worthless)  Ladan  ' into  frankincense.

At  one  time  I have  proclaimed  Suha  ^ superior  in  brilliancy
to  the  moon,

At  another  I have  .scorned  the  river  as  being  inferior  to  the
drippings  of  a sieve.-^

I have  made  friend.s  with  Avarice,  like  ‘Amid  from  the  lust
for  blood,  and  for  that  reason  I have  made  contentment  my
enemy.

I have  sabjected  my  spirit,  which  is  like  a hirjii  mettled  horse
to  the  burthen  of  labonr.  because  of  tne  tvranny  and
meanness  of  the  heavens,  see  now  what  a jade  he  has
become.

127.  I hare  made  barren  my  truth-adorning  heart  and  mv  jewel-
producing  r-atare,  withoat  the  help  of  not  now-

only  but  long  ngo.

1 La.hm.  Tlif  resinous  haisan-.-c  juice  of  cjefigm  and  other

species;  accorain-.;  cho  B t.hi-i-Qt,/;- it  is  called  also  Uouiy.

anileryrii,  and  is  used  in  medicine.  It  is  tiie  juico  of  a plant  growing  iti
sandy  soil,  of  which  voais  are  very  fond,  cud  tiirir  hair  becomes  covered  with
the  exudation,  the  lost  is  ooihcted  from  their  beards;  si  femina  qwpda-n
cui  in  uteraf-eUii  i.-.iji-l-  iit,  vajDi.rn  sit-i  n vipore  ladani  vaporat  cnt,  fafus
tile  mnrtuus  illico  etftdit.  .See  also  Ibn  Bait.ir  (Soiitheimer)  I.  p 4J9,

It  is  the  •^2':)  of  Genesis  xxxvii  2,5.and  xliii.  11,  where  it  is  translated  in
our  version  myrrh.  The  Greeks  called  it  o-tu/ctI;.  The  true  myrrh  (dr.

jauniLn)  ia  diiteivni.

The  Ad.l,.!)  is  the  wtdte  ambergris  which  wms  accounted  the  best.

2 A small  obscure  star  in  tlie  Lesser  Botr.

8 MSS^  (k)  and  i B)  h.ive  ^ ^ l,„t  is  ^ better  reading.

* Qilrdn,  the  exndation  from  specie.s  of  mountain  piiics,  Hack  in  colour,
used  according  to  the  liurhdn.i-Q.th-  (uni  Q,.,.  tor  inunction  of  camels  affect-’
ed  with  mange.  It  is,  according  to  these,  tlie  exudation  of  the  tree  e.alled
‘ar-ar,  (Juriiperl  the  properties  of  wiiich  are  thus  enumerated  in  the  Uakhiunii-
l-Admya  i Deobstriiuiit.  diuretic,  emmenagogm-.  relieves  cough  and  chest  pains
and  pain  in  the  spleen  ; relieves  flatnlornte,  lioemorrhoids.  flatulent  colic  or
uterine  pains.  Sitting  over  a hot  infusion  of  it  causes  uterine  spasm,  while
a poultice  of  it  is  antisudorilic.  I can  find  no  mention  in  either  of  these
books  of  its  use  as  an  abortifacient.  It  is  perhaps  Juniperus  Sabina  (Savine)
which  is  powerfully  ecbolic.  -According  to  Ibn  Baitir  (Sonth.)  II.  p.  94  jt  jg
Pi  nuscedrus,  bat  this  appears  to  be  incorrect.  jSee  also  II.  p,  189,  ‘Ar‘ar

The  word  is  derived  in  from  ^ud  tc-ij

mule-like,  because  mules  ha\e  no  offspring.

i.e.’

L

]

This  one  poem  * of  mine  is  worth  a whole  Blciui  and  a
hundred  caskets  of  jewels,  nay  more,  every  verse  of  it
have  I made  better  than  particoloured  hair  1

Iniprisoument  has  brought  me  to  lamentation,  art!  from  the
delicacy  of  my  speech  you  see  the  joy  (vhich  I have  given
ill  the  very  midst  of  my  lamentation.

Oil  Lord,  give  me  my  sustenance  f.-oin  the  date-tree  t'f  thy
favour,  I have  ma  ie  the  bird  of  my  heart,  to  sing  the
praises  of  thy  Unity.

Present  me  witli  the  robe  of  honour  of  thy  prelection,  for
tliv  court  is  my  original  refuge,  lo  I have  tlt-,1  ro  rcy  refuge.

Keep  far  from  the  darkness  of  i.ifidelity.^^  hyporri-y.  iuitred
aud  enmity,  that  heart  which  I have  erabellisiied  vtitii  ti.e
light  of  sincerity  to  Thee.

Keep  thou  the  Sun  of  Divine  knowledge  sluning  '■  if  in  my
heart,  for  I have  made  my  heart  the  mine  of  ti;c  jewels  gf
true  belief.

Sl'LtIn  QthlTlsC-D-DiN  B.iLBAX-!-KlIURD

Who  had  the  title  of  Ulugh  Khan,  by  the  consent  of  the  Ivlaliks
and  Amirs  adorned  the  throne  by  his  acces.sion  in  the  tj  i.M’-i-dafed

1 jxJii  The  word  here  ha?  its  double  meaning.  Snifl  in  hi- jir  'so.ty  says.

‘■A  bait  (po--iiii  is  called  iiaif  for  the  reason  that  b’uf  means  o iicise  and

tliey  comp  iro  the  tuit  of  poetry  ) with  the  tajt  of  hair  ‘ and

he  quotes  the  verses  by  Abii-l-Ali  Ma‘rra

urt-VVt'*!

The  brilliancy  of  beauty  is  shewn  forth  in  f eo  tents
The  tent  of  poetry  fslia‘r)  and  the  tent  of  hair  shi  r;

2 Shiy{,  “Idolatry:  pau'.aTdcTn : polytheism.”  Ascribing  pilurality
to  the  Deity.  Associating  anyciiing  with  God.

The  Wahhfibl  writers  define  Shir';  as  of  four  kinds  :

jJjtl)  cAyi  Shirk\L-l-''ilm.  Ascribing  knowledge  to  other-  tl.an  God.

Shirku-t-tasarncf,  Ascribing  power  to  others  i!  :i'i  (iod.
cAyi  Shirkn-l-’ihddah.  Offering  worship  to  creat.’u  tho.rs.

>iUJ|  cAyli  SinrLu-l-'ddah.  The  performance  of  ceremonies  which

iiuplv  ichinuc  uu  oilitrs  tLtiu  God.

Hughes.  Victivnanj  of  Islam,  p.  579,  Art.  Shirk.  9.  v.

See  also  Qur'an,  xxsr.  38  and  xivi,  and  \ an'^  various  other  places.

[ 184  . i

(ths  Wliite  Palace)  in  the  year  664  H.l  He  was  one  of  tlie
■' r ovtY  Slaves  ” of  Sultan  Shanisn-d-I):n,  each  one  oi  whom  had
jTtained  to  the  dignity  of  Amir.  Inasmuch  as  the  rein*  of
government  had  been  in  his  hands  even  in  the  days  when  he  was
mei'ely  Ulugh  Khan,  the  affairs  of  the  State  very  fj-iickly  came
into  his  trrasp.  He  would  not  allow  people  of  low  oriain  to  have
the  slightest  authorit-v.  It  is  said  that  a man  named  F.ikhr,  vho
liad  for  vmrus  sm-ved  as  chief  of  the  Bazar,  had  recourse  to  one  of
128.  ttie  Sultaii's  more  intimat?  attendants,  and  offered  a very  Ltroe
sum  ^ on  the  condition  that  if  the  Sultan  GIiiyasu-d-D:n  Balban
would  speak  with  him  once  only,  he  would  give  him  all  this  money
and  valuahle  property.*  ’When  this  request  was  repre'Liifou  to  the
Sultan  he  would  not  entertain  it,  and  said  ‘ to  converse  with  ueople
of  low  and  mean  extraction  will  lower  niy  pi'estij-e.’  He  was
altou'ether  opposed  to  oiipre.ssion,  and,  in  the  early  days  of  his
i^hed  certain  of  his  Amirs  on  account  of  some
tyranny  wl.u-li  they  liad  practised  upon  their  subject.s,  and  havino'
handed  over  one  or  two  of  them*  he  permitted  the  complainants  to
exact  retaliarloii.  and  after  that  these  Amirs  had  paid  the  hlood
money,  tor  shame  they  could  never  come  out  of  their  houses  as
long  as  they  lived,  and  at  last  they  left  the  world.

Verse.

Repurati  in  arise.s  from  equity  and  ju.stiee  ;

Opprc'.sion  and  kingship  are  as  the  caudle  and  the  wind.

And  all  his  praiseworthy  qualities  may  be  estimated  from  this,
that  he  nsed  never  to  omit  the  ceremony  of  purification,  and  on
going  into  an  assembly  where  one  was  preaching  he  used  to

1 l)f  tiie  .r.ix  years  v.ln'ch  iutervened  between  the  events  recorded  as  having
oocuire.i  in  liC.''  It.  and  t!  e p.cce&sina  of  Gh;yi).u-d-Diii  Balban  there  is  no
known  hist  rieal  record.  The  t’iroz  ShtiJil  of  ?iau-d-Dia  Baranl

only  br-cins  from  ^iyisu-d-Diii  Balban.

S M.S.  f A I h'is  the  word  between  and

5 .'.f.s.  i X ; rmds

* According  to  i’irishta  one  of  these  was  Haidar  Khan  the

Amir  of  I )ii  [h,  wi'o  b.ul  killed  a man  in  the  fury  of  intoxication.  Balban  after
enquiiy  had  the  .\mii*  pufdicly  tlotrged,  .and  delivered  him  to  the  widow  as
a slave  He  boiivht  his  rol.'i^e  with  a sum  of  20,000  silver  tankabs  but
never  left  liis  house  afterwards  and  died  from  shame.  {See  also  Elliott
111,  lot  )

I 3

diSpIny  emotion,  and  weep  muck,  while  as  regai-ds  his  treatment  of
sedition  and  revolt  he  used  to  shew  himself  a merciless  repressor.

He  laid  claim  to  the  glory  of  an  Emperor,  because  of  this
That  he  adorned  the  woild  with  wisdom  and  equity.

In  days  of  retirement  he  would  wear  a blanket ;

And  be  str-ove  in  prayer  and  supplication
His  eyes  fixed  upon  the  ground,  his  heart  boiling  like  a,
cauldron  ;

A heart  eloquent  of  speech,  bnt  a silent  tongue  ;

Till  Ilia  heart  perceived  with  the  eye  of  secret  knowledge
All  that  was  visible  of  these  intricate  matters.

In  this  same  year  of  his  reign  Tatar  Khan  the  son  of  Arsalan
Khan  sent  from  Lakhnaoti  sixty-three  elephants  as  a present ;
nid  in  this  year  the  Snltan  proceeding  to  Patiali  ' and  Kanpila,
built  the  forts  of  Patiali,  Kanpila,  Bhojpiu’,  and  certain  19Q
other  forts,  and  with  five  thousand  cavalry  crossed  the  Ganges  on
the  pretext  of  making  preparation  for  an  expedition  to  the  Jud
hills.  In  two  days  after  leavintj  Hehli  he  arrived  in  the  midst  of
the  territory  of  Kaithar*  and  ]>nt  to  death  every  male,  even  tlio.so
of  eight  years  of  asre,  and  bound  the  women,  and  indicted  such
chastisement  that  up  till  the  reign  of  Jalala-d-Dln  the  territory
of  Badaon  and  Araroha  remained  safe  from  the  ravnges  of  the
Kaitiiaris,*  and  he  threw  open  all  the  roads  of  Bihar  and  Jaun-
pur,  and  all  the  roads  of  the  Eastern  part  of  India  wliich  were
closed,  and  made  over  the  territory  of  Miwat,  wliich  lies  in
the  Doab,  to  stmiig  handed  governors,  with  ordei-s  to  put  to  death
the  rebels,  which  they  did,  imprisoniug  some.  Then  he  made  an
attack  in  the  direction  of  the  country  at  the  foot  of  the  Sintur

‘ MS.  (A)  Paiiall.  The  printed  text  has  Betall.

PiitiaiL  In  Ali^nJ  tAksil,  23  north  of  Etab,  a ruined  fort  still
exists  (ilunter  Imp.  Gaz.)

Kanpila.  In  Farakhdbad  district,  celebrsded  in  ^lahabbaratn — (I^p^
Gaz.)

Bboj^r.  The  residence  of  the  Ujjainiab  Kajaba,  west  of  Arrab  and
north  of  Suzerain,  a pargana  in  the  Sirkar  Bobtis  Bihar,

• So  also  T^itt-t-jP7roa  Firiabta  reads  Kateher-  SIS.  (A)

•eadB  Kanthac.  The  district  of  Rohilkhand  is  meant.

3 Who  Firishta  were  ootorioos  robbers  and  brigauds

24

■ ]

hills, ^ and  built  a fort  on  those  boundaries,  and  having  called  if
Hisar-i-Nan  (Xew  Castle)  proceeded  to  the  Jiid  hills,  and  brought
an  army*  towards  Labor,  and  rebuilt  the  castle  of  Labor  which
had  been  laid  waate  by  the  Mnghids  in  the  reign  of  Suita.!'.  Muh'zzu-
d-Din  Bahram  Siiah.  Here  he  became  iil,  and  the  news  of  his
illness  ^ reached  the  confines  of  Lrikhnauti,  and  Tnghral,  Xaih  of
Amin  Khan,  who  had  been  appointed  to  succeed  Sher  Khfiii  in
that  district,  laid  the  foundation  of  relielHon,  and  fought  witii
his  master  Amin  Khan  and  came  off  victoiioiis,  and  having  im-
prisoned him  gathered  lutind  himself  the  paraphernalia  of  i oyalty,
and  gave  himself  the  title  cf  Ma‘izzu-d-Din,  and  complerely
defeated  some  imperial  tro-ops  whicli  had  been  sent  to  oppose  him.
Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-Din  brought  up  an  army  against  Tiighna!  b'ut
he  went  towards  Jainagar  and  Tarkila  (Xarkila,.’  ar.il  Malik
Ikhtiyaru-d-Din  Beg  Eirlas  ^ was  ordered  to  pm  -ue  him.  the
Rai  of  S'ur.iirgam  named  Dhanuj  “ offering  his  sci  vice.s  to  the
Sultan  engaged  to  bring  Tnghral,  and  Muiik  Ikhriyaru-d-Din
proceeding  by  forced  marches  found  Tughi-al,  who  had  fled  into  a
a jungle,'^  walking  about  off  his  guard,  an  1 havinsr  put  him  to
130.  death  sent  his  liead  to  the  court.  The  Sultan  conferred  that
kingdom  with  a canopy  and  baron  of  office  on  his  yountrer  son
Bughia  Hi5n,  Governor  of  Samana,  who  eventually  received  the

i SIS.  (A)  reada  Koh-paya-i-Sanbiiz.  This  seems  to  be  a

copyist’s  error,  but  I cannot  sDggest  the  true  reading.  The  Kaniaon  hills
must  be  meant.

i MS.  (,t).

8 Xeichor  Firishfa  nor  Zihu-d-Din  BamI  menrmn  this.

* iis.  (A)  reads  nnj  dl.^ jlj

6 MS.  (A)  t>  Malik  Ikhtijarr.-d-DIn  Tangras.

TarilA-i-Flirz  Sh/Jii  calls  him  Malik  Barbak  Bekt.ars  Sultdai.  See  Elhott
III.  117  note.

8 Called  Danuj  Rai  in  Tdr}l^-i-Flroz  _ See  Kiliotc,  III.  ll;j.  ante.

“ The  Jajnagar  here  menrioned  was  evideutly  east  of  the  B.uhmaputra
and  corresponds  to  Tippera.  The  Sonai-franw,  presently  tnei  tioned  as  on  the
read  to  Jajnagar,  is  described  by  Rennell  as  i.eing  once  a iai-ge  city  and  new
a village  on  a branch  of  the  Brahmapnrr.'i  1.5  iuiies  S.  E of  Dpcca.”

It  is  marked  in  Rennelt’s  Map  given  in  Voi.  III.  of  Tii-ffenthaler  “ Sonner-
gong.”  See  Map  N.  6.  See  J.  A S.  B , 1871  p.  82.

' The  printed  text  and  MS.  (A)  both  have  dS"

The  above  apjjoars  to  be  the  meaning.

L 1&7  ]

title  of  Sultaii  Nasivu-d-Din,  and  then  left  for  the  capital.  Since,
after  the  de.ifii  of  Sher  Khan  '[who  was  uncle's  son  to  the  Sultan
and  one  of  tlie  *'  Forty  Sl;ive.« " of  .Sultan  ,Sh,am=u-rl-Din,  and
Gcrernor  of  Lfilioe  and  Dietilpur,  and  had  read  tlie  KnuthaJi  in
Ghazui'i  in  tlu-  name  of  .Saltan  Xasiru-d-Uiii,  t’ue  IMaghfils  durintr
his  yovei  not  daring  to  mvade  Hindustar  tlie  road  of

cornmauicti' Ion  i.ad  heeoaie  opened  ^ to  the  MaghCd'.  accordinfly
Salto.!!  jjalLaa,  to  leuiedy  iliK.  de.epate!ied  his  cld.-. r son  Siiltdn
'Inn  i a'li-i.L  .v;  a .triiow"'  a-,  t-O  Xh~ and
'■  ha',  tiig  ni.,t  _ tcire  1 anon  h:  n a carao'V  and  hat  "a  of  ofSce.  and
■ -m  =;;ea'  facL  : e-:  toyihv.  un-.l  i;.t.'lug  ntadv  hmi  Ids  imir-

K - 'ontr  .v.' Sinl  with  it-  iependm  is  caret

It!'  - . t m .t  ''to,  iris  I'lnlraa.  a";  1 the  c ■ 'y  .itiit  up

on;  -t  ii  . ■'  F',  - 1.;^.  ScC'..;  ;'.'r  '.ive  vt'.rs*

*•  ' j...,  , ■ * ,1. 1:.'*  C '.'11

I .'.-o  toL' ist.  1-,..  h.  srar  l.i.  re  s-ina^  uf  gold  from  dirdtau  to  .Shi.'fiz
and  he.'li'edl  th  it  .S..al'ih  So'did  hl.oj  'fe.f  AiJia  ■■'.s/'  ^ t >J  Aida,
W'juld  cunie  ti,>  live  villi  him.  lue  Siiu'd^  did  nor  eiaie,  excusing
I'.iic.self  on  ti.e  score  of  old  a&'e.  but  ccunmeaded  Mir  Ehnsru  to
the  care  of  the  Snltan.  writing  in  t.xoessively  laudatory  Term.s
concendiig  him,  and  sent  a collect  on  .if  latograpii  j ot-ms.  Sidtan
Muhamma  1 used  to  vi.sit  .Mahan  .-.eyv  year  to  'oe  S-ihan  B.ilhaii,
and  nsed  to  return  disri’iirai~,jied  witn  robes  r. ''iiour  .and  nil

* rile  Culcurta  o-.et  ^x.ietiy  rwci-sfs  trie>  Tae.ming  by  reading
Tims  iusius:  ni!  "he  sense  ot  the  >p.ssag-:'.  C:'.  .US3.  (A)  (B,.

IMt'  ( t.)  has.  rorrectlv.  0^

2 dilHikh  Hharfu-d-OTii  iliidib  ibn  ‘Aijiiii''’ah  as-Sa'tu.  lie  was  a iiative  of
dlibau  wjioie  his  family  for  generiuioi  ? i.ad  been  ftom  u : r emir.tiiee  in
leannng.  He  is  said  to  li-ive  lived  to  a treat  ..tre,  .aov  iii.t-  d'l'V.n'r.g  hetween
lOi  and  112  years  ''Beale  savs  iUOy  lie  “o.  a.  le  yc.im  in  , ■•■.iidiig  srlitn-ts.

30  years  iq  travelling  ,'hc  ma.ie  the  li  ■'*;  -'.-.ai'te.n  tniu ..i.il  30  } ears  in
Iluietude  ; He  died  in  the  vear  001  H {'.20l  Or  I'.)  H-  w.ir  tec  eonieinporary
uf  mnny  great  men,  among  tlTem  Amir  Irh,l^r  i i.i  Dohli  who  .itertaiued  hini.
Ills  Kalliyat  are  of  world  wide  repdLution.  The  J/nj,;-.-.  i eva//e  i!,2.4j
.tiw’n  which  the  above  is  t.iken  deies  n-.t  c ve  the  littte  ol  sa'm  s b.riis.  and
gives  the  date  of  his  death  as  7!)1  il.  whicii  'a  wrong  .lee.'.rdiiig  r,.  the
•iceimnt  given  by  Beale  S.vdj  was  Lorn  '■  nlmu  ti  o ye-.r  .'.71  AH”  Ti.e
.ibnve  aee.iunt  wonid  ho\v*over  phiee  1 «s  l-ij  ih  .n  eitlier  o80  A if  or  .),0  A H.

Ilf  nis  woiks  tlie  Goiislar.  riiid  i’.i.at.ln  at'-  the  best  known.

For  .a  full  .ireu.int  of  Sa'di  <.ei'  the  rielaec  to  I’l.ttt’s  i.'.iic.bi,  5'cf  also

p.  d'Si,

: i-r?  !

pc-j-ioie  lewan!:*  and  distiiictions.  and  on  the  last  occasion  on
which  they  were  able  to  meet,  the  :Saltan  instructed  him  in
private  with  excellent  counsels  and  pl<  using  u'>courses,  which  are
mentioned  in  the  books  of  the  Histories  of  Dehli,  and  having
granted  him  pei mission  to  depaid  sent  him  to  Multan ; and  m the
same  year  Itimar  i the  Mnghul  with  thirty  thousand  horsemen
having  crossed  the  Eavi  hy  ihe  ford  of  Labor  caused  great  com-
motion in  those  districts,  and  the  Governor  of  Labor  sent  a
131.  petition  to  Khan-i-Shahld » telling  him  of  what  had  occurred.
He  while  in  Lis  assembly  read  SO.OO'J  as  S.CKlu'J  and,  marching  with
a lartre  force,  hv  rapid  and  continnons  marches  arrived  at  the
boundaries  of  B-lgh-i-Sabz,»  on  the  hanks  of  the  Labor  river  where
he  engaged  the  infidels  and  attained  the  dignity  of  martyrdom.
This  event  took  place  iu  Zu-H;jjah  of  the  year  OhS  H,*  and  Mir
• Hasan  ^ of  Heiili  composed  a prose  lameiift  and  sent  it  to  Debit.

it  is  copied  here  iu  its  vciy  woio?

The  Lammi  of  il'i,  llasan.

It  is  ail  old  .story  that  the  tyrannous  sphere,  though  it  may  for
a time  knit  the  knot  of  complaisance,  and  make  a covenant  of
mutual  sincerity,  turns  from  its  promi.se,  and  that  discordant  time,
alihouttu  it  professes  to  .shew  acipuiescence,  and  makes  specious
proinhe.s  of  fi  lolity.  fails  to  perforin  them.

The  wanton-eyed  heaven,  the  pupil  of  whose  maiiHncs.s  is  sullied
by  the  defect  of  the  mote  of  meanness,  at  fir>t.  like  a drunken  man,
gives  some  bounty  in  a case  where  there  lias  hern  no  favour
received  to  demand  it,  but  in  the  end,  like  the  children,  takes  the

. 1 Vtimor.  Ectli  in  the  printed  text  and  in  MS.  (A)  Zian-d-DIn  Barm  calls
hin.  Sau.ar.  Fins'). ta  calls  L;in  Timur  Khan.

- Called  ^ih-.-Sha'iiid  or  the  “ Martyr  Prince  ” because  he  fell  in  battle
opposing  ' the  accursed  Samar,  the  bravest  dog  of  all  the  dogs  of  Changiz
Khin”  lElliott.  III.  122.)

i>  MS.  (A)  MS,  {B,!  the  text  reads  ^ BaA-i-

Sarir  m itn  a footnote  variant  Be^-i-Sard.

* Zi.in-d-Din  Barni  says  684  H.

6 Zlau-d-Dln  Barn!  attributes  this  lament  to  Amir  Khasru.  (Elliott  III.
12'2).  Firishta  also  states  that  Amir  Khusrii  escaped  when  the  Prince  was
killed,  and  wrote  a lament.  It  seems  probable  therefore  that  the  lament
should  be  attributed  to  Mir  Khasru.  The  Hn^an  which  occuta  in  Text  and
both  MSS.  (A)(B)  may  have  had  its  origin  in  a copvist’s  error.

[ l;f-  j

gift  back  aeriin  without  any  treacherous  cortiuj:  baviu^  been
CT'Cnruitted  Tiie  habits  ar.-l  cust_-:i;s  <.f  thec.  riessive  time;  ai  e
cast  iu  the  farae  rne-uld.  boiLer  br  t'Xcerienc-  ri  by  heat  “-ay.  we  132.
see  or  hear  that  v. he m'Ceee-i  peiceive-  com.irc'  to  r,e;TV.;-t:on  like
tilt  laeoi;.  it  desires  to  .datk  -i.  the  face  of  hi-  tclnc's  with  the
blot  of  defect,  and  TcLorcsocver  it  zt  |s  risii.c;  -.hr  a tlcud  him  it
strives  to  tear  to  pieces,  utid  to  icu:tv;t’  hi-  ' siauce  to  the
eitreae  bouitdaries  ut  !iic  hcrizoii.  As  it  ...le  oieiiaru  of
amazcEaent  and  ttardeu  mo  tose  bloom'  oitiitai  a th.;in

so  no  heart  escapes  tie  th.rio  cf  .sorrow,  A..es  ' :c."  txue  tte-' ’.y
sprung  vet  date  which  h,'.' l-ectrtte  yellow,  withd  - ' ;r.  :;.e  cicotn
cf  it.'  beauty  by  the  a’ltuciii  of  caiauiity.  Alt  ? ' ::i'  ti.e  inaiiy
fre.sh-sprirciKg  tif-s  wi.ich  have  been  laid  low  iu  the  Just  of  the
ground  by  tUe  neice  i la.'t  cf  beath.

CoEsider  the  winds  cf  Autumn,  how  chill  th
The  cowardly  blows  they  have  'leak  alike  at
ohh

One  of  the  examples  of  this  allegory  is  the  eketh  of  O'.e  late
Ernpercr  Gm.m!  * ■ ■■y/  ked  i.-  • - ..y--'  1.;-

d’: hi r ,i.-ifrati.-’KS  and  laijr.  -I.  ■,  - .scefe  ic  ’ ' .u,.^

on  Friday

the  last  dav  of  i'..c  r-

th  of  ZCi-l-H:  ■ ij  ;

the  vc-C.r

6^3  A.H.,

when  the  nri.-..'.,

1 h.udness  in  ti.r  i.i.u:  ^

f £ iu;..ie!5.

could  now

Uci'e  be-  M-en  ti.f.  >■_  .

“ '.A  the  comj  •.  ./

the  .i:rzy

cf  lalaui

C Jilc  ft'Tt.h  in  .'’.i.C..-

'vuli  the  sword  aci

the  oreat

Priacr?  'vL

was  til-.-  Sue  >f  the  1

Le.iven  of  the  kin;-.'  m

with  rh-tj

cl

r 'W  Y7*";  S’  ‘■‘-iiig  c

r.  his  noble

I the  ttn-

yk.tn2:eaf'  A

deteriniaari.ju  of

‘‘jihad”  firmly  r tm.

c II4  It'S

' nrioua

mind,  placed  his  ac

spicions  foot  in  the

Cy

..  gkt  they  submitted  to  Lis  judgiueut  which  solved  all  difficulties,
that  Itimar  with  the  whole  of  his  army  had  advanced  iuto  the
plain  at  a distance  of  three  fanangs.  When  morning  broke,  he
commenced  to  march  intending  to  leave  that  place,  and  at  a
distance  of  onefarsang  coming  face  to  face  with  those  accursed
ones,*  elected  to  draw  np  their  forces  in  a place  on  the  outskirts

1 Qaan-i-MuIk  ^axL  The  eldest  son  of  ^iyisn-d-Bin  Baiban  who  was
Khan  of  Mnlian.  Sy^e  page  IjST  ante.

s t)  ert*  ^ vyt  MS.  t A)

[ ]

of  Biali-i-Savsi-  ‘ on  the  banks  of  the  river  of  Labor.  Accor-
133.  lio  very  strongly  fortitiod  a laige  village  wliicb  was  eluso

to  r'ne  river,  and  made  sucb  dispo.sitious  that  when  the  infidels
came  agaiu.st  it,  both  rivers*  should  be  in  the  rear  of  bis  army,
so  that  neither  could  any  man  of  his  own  array  turn  in  flight  nor
couid  anv  injury  be  inflicted  upon  his  army  by  that  riOubicsomo
hoide*  and  in  very  truth  that  choice  of  position  was  the  nemo
of  cMiuiou  ami  the  very  height  of  skill  in  that  world-conquei ing
Kli  iii,  hut  .since  when  Fate  is  adverse  the  thread  of  all  plans
becomes  targled,  and  the  orderly  row  of  enterprises  becomes  dis-
ordered,

He  who  falls  in  with  evil  fortune  by  the  way.

Hi.s  an.sivs  fall  out  just  as  his  cnenuos  desire.

HI.s  Fortune  like  a mad  mar.  lo.se.s  t!;e  right  way,

His  sen.se.s,  like  the  nightbliml,  fall  into  the  well.

By  chance  that  day  the  Moon  and  the  Sum  which  may  bo
compared  to  king.s,  wore  .suspended  in  (he  sign  of  tlie  Fi.sh.'*  and
Stars,  whose  blood-red  aspect  i.s  entirely  due  to  tlie  blood  of  (he
princes  of  the  people,  had  drawn  out  from  the  quiver  of  that
sign  the  arrow  of  disappointment  and  the  dart  of  disobedience
against  tliat  Orion  ^ (white)  girdled  JQian,  who  wa.s  like  Leo
comii'g  foi'tli  from  a watery  sign  ; the  house  of  fear  and  calamity
and  the  proofs  of  .sediliou  and  .sign.s  of  harm  lliii.s  became  evidently

1 ilii.  (A'  Prali.ably  tlio  before  nientiniicd.

* Tlie  R-ivT  and  Sattoj.  This  buttle  was  fo.i<,'Kfc  clo.sc  to  iriilt.'m,  and  is
described  by  Tiridit  I,  who  snates  that  after  having  routed  the  "Mughril  army,
thi'  Prince  .'iml  s-.'ne  tu  his  ret.ainors  were  resting  hy  the  Jb.'ink  of  theriier
V.  1 en  -l.ov  V *'!(- -c  tac’cv.!  hy  one  of  the  ^Incjihl  chiefs  who  wa.s  lying  in
an'bn-h  v..'te  t;  ii  lO  men,  and  the  I’rincr  hois  kihed  v if  h nninv  of  his  fol-
lowers : the  nrmy  niiich  had  t. ikon  the  alarm  leturning  jiist  in  time  to  tec
him  die.

3 I read  yiS.  (A).

* .'dS  i roads

iAaJ|  Lit,  Whoa  Fate  come.s.  tiio  jilam  becomes

iiat  row.

O'ht  r provHibs  of  tiiis  kind  arc  ilio  foilowijiir  : —

(Jiaj  Will  11  Tate  comes,  c;tutii<ii  is

^,^'f  ^ Jjr>  WJien  F aie  ctmK---!.  thr  rve  is  blmJ

o 'J

The  tbicc  i’.ais  ijj  UriouT  bull

•5' t Lam  '

[ 191  1

manifest,  while  the  liint  anil  iiulicalion  of  the  proverb  “ Jn /ace
of  Fate  v;idf  hec^iiiii  s strait”  becaiiio  written  on  the  consecutive
paces  (of  his  history).  In  shuri,  at  midday  jnst  as  the  courier
of  t’ie  iiraven  reached  the  country  of  noim.  and  the  day  of  that
woiid-conquerinc  Emperor  was  aptiroaehiii j its  decline,  suddenly
a band  made  its  appearance  from  the  diiectirm  of  those  infidels.

Tiie  KIian-i-Gliazl  at  that  same  inomeiit  nioantcd  Lis  horse  and
issued  an  oidcr  in  obedience  to  which  aii  the  cat  airy  and  the
body  servant.'  and  retinue  and  letainers,  in  accordance  with  the
mandate  ‘ Kill  the  infidels  all  of  llrem’,^  dresv  up  in  a line  a
hundred  times  stroncer  than  the  rampart  of  Sikandar.*  After
Orderiiig  the  light  wine  and  di-tssinc  tb.e  left  wiiic.  he  Iximsolf
of  noble  quahties,  stood  in  the  centre  like  the  moon  and  the  host
of  the  stav.s,  ready  for  the  jihad,  while  tlie  Tatar  infidels,  let
couftision  and  dismay  come  upon  them,  crossed  the  river  of  Labor,
and  confronted  the  ranks  of  the  Muslims.  Thereupon  these  wild-  134.
loving  desert-born  savages,  placing  the  feathers  of  the  owl*
upon  their  illomened  heads,  while  the  Ghazis  of  Islam,  kings  of
Turkestan  and  Khilj  and  notables  of  Hindustan,  and  all  the
soldiery  made  the  hattlefiekl  a place  of  prayer— as  the  Holy
Apostle,  may  the  hles'.-iiiys  and  peace  of  God  he  upon  him,  dec\a.rei
that  the  holy  war  was  closely  allied  to  prayer,  saying  We  return
from  the  lesser  holy  war  to  the  greater  holy  war,*  reciting  the  takbtr  *

1 See.  Qnr’an  IX.  5.

o ^ ^ o * — o o 9 9f  ^

*>»1|  l^liiji  U

2 The  tluck  w.all  said  to  liavo  been  buik  by  Ale.v:uulor  the  great  to  restrain
the  wild  natives  of  Xorrhern  Asia . comiiinnly  known  as  the  wall  '•{  Goo-
an.i  ?Ia-jog.  See  B'Ueilwlot  Vol.  I.  p.  010.  II.  p.  2S2.  Ibn  Khaldoun,  V,-ole°-
I.  102.

3 Tho  owl  oalle.l  by  the  .\rabs  is  a bird  of  ill  omen  and  is  held

to  be  m.ele  ra.  IXusluns  being  forbiticlen  to  eat  its  flesh  {ffai'yetu-i-Haiiviiiuit).

li.'iiee  ti.e  proveib

Had  rhere  been  any  good  in  the  owl  the  h-int.-w  would  not  have  passed  h
by.  See  .iI'O  page  It, 7.  ii  ■ e 1.  See  ai-o  .!  A.  ? B.  1S77,  p.  81.

■4  Aecording  to  s ,f:  -v,  hm-s  tin  re  arc  f.v..- ...aVu--.  At-Jikmla.i-Al-Sar  or  “ 0 e-
gi-iu  r .ler.-ri-  ’ wiii  is  againsi  . • ■ a lusts.  • aivl  A' -Jihifct; -t - .A.<yh/ir
' Tv  1 ri  tr<'  r-car.^-r  inri-;  ^ee  ’Hw;*' es.,J),r\  'x^z.  ■’  .' ! ,

’ . ' ' is  Alp.t’irG'"  *-  J/  ' •/  ' }

[ 192

paisen  tKeir  liaTias  in  prayer,  and  in  the  first  attack  thev  pnt
to  tilt;  S', void  fi  considerable  number  of  ablebto-lied  men  of  the
Maghi;!  cavalry,  and  the  lances  of  the  Maliks  of  the  Court  so
~-oir,  O'd  the  limbs  of  their  enemies  that  above  each  of  them  the
hi  -jC  spijT-ted  up  like  it  spear,  while  sixty  selected  Turks  inter-
V.  eavicg  their  arrows  like  closely- woven  cloth,  made  it  appear  as
thjagli  the  weft  (of  existence)  of  the  Tatars  was  being  torn  to
sL'lvds.'

In  the  beginning  of  the  fray  the  arrow  of  the  king  leapt  forth
I he  Tatars  were  all  laid  low.

crten  as  the  great  Lord,  lion-hearted,  wielding  the  sword,
with  a blade  as  bright  as  his  own  faith,  sallied  forth  to
attacx  from  the  midst  of  the  ranks.

You  would  say  that  the  sword  was  trembling  in  that  battlefield
at  the  excellencies  of  the  monarch,  and  becoming  in  its  entirety
a tongue  was  saying  to  him.  Up  and  make  an  end  of  these  ac-
cu’ s:  1 Cue;,  and  entrust  their  discomfiture  to  thy  servants,  but  do
tn  thy-  f refrain  from  personal  action,  for  the  sword  is  double

I n v'.  ai.  tne  sciraitar  of  hate  pitiles'^  in  it.s  wounJincr — no  one
wnat  may  happen  to  any  one  of  us  from  the  decree  of
tre  Ail  •owerful.  I close  my  eyes -against  the  fatal  eye  *

Go  not,  that  I may  bind  thy  dust  upon  mine  eyes.

Act  not.  for  1 greatly  fear  the  evil  eve.

T!.  .'  hciivc;n  has  never  seen  such  a brilliant  countenance,

I r-  rr.  Hi  rae  urion  that  fire  to  guard  that  eve.^

A-  r.i  he  srrenuously  performed  the  duties  of  fighting  and
vHc  ot  the  weapons  as  it  were  entered  into  colloquy  with
- ' - t ' -pvar  was  saving.  Oh  Uiug  i refrain  vonr  hand  from  me

; T-.ire  is  a seqaence  of  plays  upon  words  in  the  original  which  cannot
possibly  be  pres.'rTed  in  a translation.  tir  is  a kind  of  cambric  or  lawn.

It  also  has  the  nsaal  meaning  of  - arrow.”

An  eye  supposed  to  have  the  power  of  killing  with  one
glance.  The  Arabs  says  trt*  iSif  aU)  lay  blind  the  fatefnl

eye  to  ti.ec.

s .xxw  Acer, riling  to  Burhun-i-Qvti‘,  a seed  which  is  borned  to  avert  the
consequences  of  being  ‘'overlooked  ” by  the  evil  eye.  See  Toiler’s  Lexicon.

For  an  iniereating  aceonnt  of  charms  against  the  evil  eye  see  LaWsv
Mode  t'n  Ezyptintt'’.

[ 193  ]

this  day,  for  the  tongue  of  my  point  by  reason  of  constant  fighting
and  slaying  is  blunted,  and  I have  no  po-sver  left  of  opposing  the
enem3-  with  thrusts,  I fear  lest  I should  leap  up  and  should  commit
some  untoward  act.  The  arrow  too  was  saying.

Thou,  the  knot  of  whose  bowstring  opens  the  knot  of  the
Jauzhar,  do  not  advance  to  meet  this  danger.^

i myself  in  rushing  forth  to  destruction  cast  dust  upon  my  head,
lest  the  close-ej’ed  beauty  of  the  heav^en,*  who  sits  on  the  fifth
roof  near  the  door  of  the  eighth  mansion,"  sitting  in  ambush,  out
of  temeritv’  and  spite,  should  discharge  against  you  the  shaft  of
error  from  the  bow  of  fraud  and  malice  ; the  lasso  ivas  saving,
to-day  the  thre.ad  of  planning  should  not  be  let  go  from  the  hand
of  deliberation,  for  I am  contorted  with  anxiety  at  this  precipitate
conflict  and  ill-considered  battle  ; wait  a while  ! for  Islam  and  the
Muslims  are  like  the  tent  ropes  connected  with  tlie  tent  of  j'our
favours.  Oh  God  ! in  dealing  with  this  people,  do  not  so  long
delaj'  putting  the  halter  round  their  necks.

I have  willingly  put  mj’  neck  in  the  noose  for  thj-  sake
Thou  art  my  lassoer,  who  takest  me  with  the  noose  of  thy
looks.

In  short,  that  mighty  king,  the  defender  of  the  faith,  tlic  uprootcr
of  infidelity,  from  mid-day  till  eventide  attacked  timt  inj])ious
crowd  with  the  whole  main  body  of  his  army, . clu-n-fitlly  and
willingly,  while  the  shouts  of  the  viot.ns  in  ti  e fm'nt  and  tlie
clamour  of  those  eager  for  the  fra\'*  dea.fei-ed  die  oai-  o:  the  world
and  of  the  sky,^  and  tongues  of  fire  which  leapt  fiem  tiie  I.eads  of

1 IIS.  (A)  has  as  has  the  text.  3IS.  It  X.-;'  i i I j'-',

Pos.5ioiv  we  should  read  SA— Jt-c  ■naf'it^hr.  tt  - .cl  r.td  of

Div.co,  fee  Snrhun-i-Qriti  also  ‘Am-i-Aklarl,  XL  (.J  J p.  9,  -Jso  Ji'  iSrA  o,  I.  202.

2 ^iJ  cfy  loLw  Jl.S.  (A).

s I read  JfSS.  (A)  and  (B)  hare  v.odi  h makes

no  sense  unless  wo  supply  a w ord  such  as  JAxjUjj  f,,i  «i,i  h i i . n .s  in,
sanction.  The  text  reads  but  it  seems  to  me  is  ni.iuo  to  bo

ri'-ht.  It  might  e isily  have  bec.nnc  by  copyist’s  err-  i

* MS  (A)  JJsC  C-'ldLfc  lij  lil'-d'-c  J,  in,-  i-  a ttei  rea-X-

ing  than  the  text.

6 ilSS  (-1)  and  (B)  read  lot  >♦-<-!  in  the  test.

2.5

[ 194  ]

t!ie  fltvsJiing  spears,  and  tongues  of  the  swords  made  not  a single
mistake  in  eren  in  a letter  in  transmitting  the  message  of  des-
truction. In  that  uproar  like  the  day  of  resurrection  erery  one
thought  of  this  Ayat  -1  day  when  a man  will  dte  froni  Tiis  oicn
136  brother,^  the  siiiface  of  the  earth,  like  the  eyes  of  old  men  who
have  lost  their  sons  **  was  full  of  blood,  and  the  face  of  the  sky
like  the  head  of  sons  who  have  killed  their  fathers,  full  of  dust.

Alas  ! ray  father  why  dost  thou  siihmit  to  the  steel  of  the  tirt-
like  swurd

Oh  ! dost  thou  wish  to  inflict  the  wotituI  of  orphanage  on  my
heart

In  the  Very  midst  of  this  weary  conflict,  and  amid  all  this
pain  and  anguish,  suddenly  an  arrow  shot  by  Fate  struck  the
wing  of  that  falcon  of  tlie  field  of  foray,  and  the  bird  of  his  life
took  its  flight  from  the  caye  of  the  body  of  that  noble  one  to  the
gar!.k'U.s  ci  the  Compassionate  and  meadows  of  Eizwan  =

Verily  n e are  God's  and  verily  to  Him  do  w'e  return.'*

At  that  .same  moment  the  backbone  of  the  religion  of  lluham-
mad,  may  th?  peace  and  blessing  of  God  he  upon  him,  broke  like
the  heart  of  sorrowful  orphans,  and  the  rampart  of  the  religion
of  Huhammad  fell  in  like  tlie  grave  of  poor  people  of  low  origin,  and
the  a.ssi.-5tanee  which  the  arm  of  the  king  alone  could  give  slipped
fi'otu  onr  giii'p,  and  the  confidence  which  the  army  of  the
Muslims  h.td  possessed  = was  lost.  Exactly  at  the  time  of  .sunset.

^ Q’ar'un  Sur  : Isxx.  34.

S JIS.  (.t)  The  text  has  -nhieh  ia  bald

and  du-s5tru}s  aTitulieticiil  force  of  the  ecnceiico.

If.  .^IS.  (i!,  b '■  nojil  ia.  omi^fod.

S 31.^  i.\;  tho  nriiuo  'In  d-mr-koeper

ot  liic  LMidcii  L'l  r.ii.i'ii-e  Tli<'  wtji'i  TiitMiis  ” ■■  f'H t: ivL

i’lic  f.  rmiil  i i’i  iof-jL*’!iati')’i  to  tl'o  Umhio  uiLerod  hv  pio'  < Mr.slnns

in  Uil  niii''  L'f  '.Li’Lfy,  iiior*'*  i. '.'‘'''..I’iy  IfS  CviFjiuunh  tir  in  j.ixsunce  of
Ill  ti  ' i:  .n  ij.  15U,  lol  .vt-  **  Wo  onl  'pj.  \oa  witn  aointthiu.;

‘>1  ii  p ..I'll  !.  1’  _ . and  lo-s*?  of  vv^-atin  and  feoa:-'  tnd  I'niit;  bui  uivo  hd  'd
n-  iiic:'  i ■ r in;  v. iiou  tk'-ie  f*!!'-  on  i'ml.u  a.  cilarnpv  b.iv,  ‘ '.'c-ri..-

‘ f'  ip  i.t  il.in  Cv..  ’.ve  rctum"  t]xc*s>-,  on ''h.  ..  ir-  i,

f- i'p  1-  ; . i 'orcy.  ■ ml  they  x is  who  are  gaide^.’'  (P  Ijop:

b c I.  pe.  At  Die:,  The  jp.’n.  u'hi -h  C'-n-

iirfo  as  tile  ‘■p  ' . >,  yiiaCa  l-i-.
oi  li  . II  L. ao,

A Lm-

L ly-  ]

the  sun  of  tlic  life  of  tliat  kiiip-  wJioso  buii  was  settiiic;  sank  into
the  west  of  extinction,  and  the  lieaven.  alter  the  habit  of  mourners,
d}cd  its  raiment  blue,  wl,ile  falling  tears  beican  to  course
down  both  its  cheeks.  Saturn,  bj-  way  ot  fultlliintr  tbe  require-
ments of  tiJelifc}’ and  tiio  demands  of  iinjin iiinif.  turned  its  robe
to  black  and  bewailed  the  people  of  Ilindustau  because  of  bis
death.  Jupiter,  in  pity  for  that  dust  besoiled  i)od\-  and  biood-
staiiiod  mantle  rent  bis  ttarnieiits  and  cast  his  turban  in  the  dust.

And  iliu’s,  mat-  tbe  band  of  iiis  {)Ower  be  tiLriirlt-  Lio-.i‘d  :is  the
eye  of  the  licautics.  and  the  face  of  bis  sustenance  be  dark  as  tbe
locks  of  Etliiopians,  sore  wounded  by  con. passion  for  that  calamity,
with  a raukliiis:  thorn  ‘ which  brought  forth  bis  beiut’s  blooil,

W'as  trembling  like  the  Fish  * before  the  Sun.  ami  like  the  Rarn  *
in  the  hands  of  the  slaughterer,  while  the  Sun,  for  shame  that
it  had  not  striven  to  avert  this  calamity  and  prevent  tlii.s  disaster,
came  not  forth,  but  sank  below  the  earth,  and  Venus  wlien  slie
saw  what  violence  the  heavenly  bodies  were  undergoing  at  the
Itanils  of  Time,  played  her  tainhour  more  vehemently,’  changed  137.
the  tune  of  the  drum,  and  commeneed  ninsie  in  a fresli  mea-sure,
and  because  of  the  deatli  of  that  .-slave-che' ishing  kieu',  others  in
place  of  uttering  musiciil  .strtiins  beuMii  to  weei),  tiud  Mei  eury  ^ who
in  forage  and  coiiqtie.st.s  in  accord  with  the  scribe,  used  to  write
many  records  of  victory,  in  that  tyranny' “ was  blackening  liis
face  w'ith  the  contents  of  liis  inkliorn,  and  was  olotliitig  himself
in  a garment  of  paper  made  of  the  .sheets  of  liis  own  lecurds,
while  the  new  moon  in  the  shape  of  a crescent  on  the  hoi'i/on,
witli  bowed  statmv,  in  that  day  of  judgment  which  had  risited
tlieeai'th,  was  striking  its  head  on  the  wall  ;ind  peiforneng  all  the
customary  mourning  dutie.s.

1

Kh^fr->~^A  imh  The  lliorn  of  Scorpio  Marii  is  c.iUi

O I’isces.

^ H'lnnil,  siVtl  Aries,

* f)u  the  Fvtuilopv  ut  sjitl  of  .i  har.

The  fin,l/n  is  a kind  of  mainlolin  witu  chords  of  brnss  wiro  ]>l:i  \ ed

witji  a plectrnm,  1 lie  -woul  was  originally  5/?  fioia  ita  being  Iiki  m d tf»

tlie  tail  of  a lamb.  (ban.  ).

^ MfiCury  is  called  D.,b}r-i.Fiilaf:.  The  srribp  of  ih.- sky.

^ / iziilhn.-i  MS.  [.V;  MS.  (B)  The  itading  mu-t  !-?  wi..>ig

[ 19C  ]

Thou  placest  tliy  cheek  in  the  dust,  alas,  I wish  not  this
for  thee

Moon  of  my  days,  I do  not  wish  thee  to  pass  beneath  th^
Earth.

If  thou  goest  out  to  the  chase  (t.e.  diest)  thy  dust  is  my  life  :

My  life  ! is  the  solitude  of  thy  dust  pleasing  to  thee  r 1 do
not  wish  it  for  thee.

May  God,  be  He  exalted  and  blessed,  raise  the  purified  and
sanctified  soul  of  tliat  warrior  prince  to  lofty  heights  and  high
dignities,  and  give  him,  from  time  to  time,  cups  full  of  the  hiil-
liancy  of  his  beauty  and  glory,  and  make  all  the  kindness,  and
clemency,  and  alfection,  and  care  wliich  he  evinced  towards  this
broken  down  worthless  one,  a means  of  increasing  the  dignity  and
wiping  out  the  faults  of  that  prince.  Amen,  Oh  Lord  of  the  worlds  !

And  Mir  Khiisru  * also  on  that  day  fell  a prisoner  into  the
hands  of  Lahori,  a servant  of  the  Mnghul,  and  had  to  carry  a
nosebag  and  horsecloth  upon  his  head.  He  recounts  this  circum-
stance in  these  words —

I who  never  cA'en  placed  a rose  upon  my  head.

He  ])hiccd  a load  on  my  lieail  and  said  " It  is  a rose.”  2

And  he  composed  in  poetry  and  sent  to  Deldl  two  elegies  written
in  tarkib-bcuid  ^ which  are  found  in  the  anthology  known  as

t for  an  aocomu  of  Mir  Khtisru  see  index  reference.

The  jicet.  reUit-a  some  of  ).is  e\ivriei.ccs  aa  a captive ‘‘At  the  time

that  tl.is  learner  of  ..oil.  iLo  aninor.  u-,,5  u captive  in  the  hands  of  the
Mughals— may  such  il.o  , i.vvei  i-tan.  -r.av  -Ian-  in  a sandy  di  sort,  where
the  heat  made  my  hom!  hoi:  lise  ..  c.ii.hii-m,  J and  tin- man  w ho  was  with
me  on  horseback  arrived  ihir.-it  at  a .--t;.  am  by  the  road-ide.  .\Uhou''h
the  naphtoa  of  iny  lib-  was  la  at.  d I w.,u'id  not  intlame  it  with  oil  by
dl’inkiiiL’’ a (Irautrl  t i f ■water.  13.  iii  in\  jfu.ird  :ind  ins  iiorae  drank  tiieir
till  !.Tid  expireti  imiiie.liai*-*] y/'  Kihott.  111.  Appendix,  p.  odo.

“ cla.  nieaiiB  both  /..u -rchd.'!  and  aUf*  -■  -e.  There  is  a difference  in  the  read*
lags  Mfi.  (.A)  reads.  Ji?.  Sy  yj  US.  ( B)  is  like  the  text.

® In  this  class  of  e,  mpuscaoii  a certain  number  of  verses

having  ti:e  same  metre  and  rhyme  are  followed  hy  a couolet  in  the  same
metie  but  hating  a ilifferenc  rhyme— then  the  original  rhyme  is  reverted  to
foi  a certain  number  of  viisc.s,  and  is  ag.iin  followed  by  a hesli  couplet
h.iMmj  lie  same  metre,  but  a ibi  ine  ilillering  fioui  both  the  ongin.il  rhyme
and  that  of  ti.e  tlrst  iutvr,.  uated  couplet— and  so  on.  In  'iarjfbuud  aa

[ ]

Ghurrafu-l-Kamul For  a space  of  a moiitli  more  or  less,  folk
used  to  slug  those  tarMb-hands  and  used  to  chant  them  as
threnodies  over  their  dead  from  house  to  house.

The  following  is  one  of  them  : —

Is  this  the  Resurrection  day  or  is  it  a calamity  from  heaven  138.
which  has  come  to  light  ?

Is  this  a dfsaster  or  has  the  day  of  Judgment  appeared
upon  the  earth  ?

That  breach  which  has  appeared  this  year  in  Hindustan
has  given  entrance  to  the  flood  of  sedition  below  the
foundation  of  the  world.

The  a.ssemhly  of  his  friends  has  been  scattered  like  the
petals  of  the  rose  before  the  wind.

Autumn  the  leaf  scatterer  has,  one  would  say,  appeared  in
the  garden,*

Every  eyelash,  in  the  absence  of  friends,  has  become  a
spear-point  to  the  eye,  and  each  point  of  the  spear  has
bi'ought  blood  spouting  forth  to  a spear’s  length.

The  heart  writhes  in  agony  since  Time  has  broken  the  thread
of  companionship  ;

\Then  the  string  is  broken,  the  pearls  are  scivttered  far  and
wide.

Such  a flood  of  tears  has  been  shed  by  the  people  on  all
sides  that  five  fresh  rivers  have  appeared  around  Multan.®

1 wished  to  bring  mj  heart’s  fire  upon  the  tongue  in  the
form  of  words.

When  lo ! a hundred  tongues  of  fire  appeared  within  my
mouth.

has  been  stated  elsewhere,  the  plan  is  similar  to  the  above,  bat  the  interpolat-
ed couplet  is  always  the  same.  This  interpolation  occurs  not  more  than
seven  times  both  in  Tarkib-band  and  in  Tarji'band.

1 dhurratu-l-hamal.  The  lonijest  of  the  tour  Diwdns  of  Amir  Khtisru,
It  contains  poems  written  from  the  3tth  to  the  42nd  year  of  his  life  ; for  an
account  of  this  and  the’  other  “ Dlwans  ” see  Elliott,  III.  Appendix.  See  also
Hfiji  Khalifah,  IV.  311,

* MS.  (A)  reads  for

3 MS.  (A)  agrees  with  the  text.  MS.  (3)  has  a worthless  reading

[ I

139

1 diisr  deep  in  rny  empty  of  all  desire,  ami  tears  burst

forth  from  both  my  etcs  ; when  the  earth  is  hollowed  out
then  springs  of  water  make  their  appearanre.

Weeping  has  taken  the  bloom  off  mj’-  cheek,  and  disgraced
me.  because  bj"  reason  ot  it,  the  skin  has  left  my  cheek
and  tiie  hones  have  come  in  sight.

The  planets  ate  all  coujo'iied  in  my  eyes  ^ perchance  it  por-
tends a storm,  since  in  a Vvatery  consteUatiun  a conjunc-
tion of  planet;,  is  seen.

I oniy  wi^h  for  that  same  collection  (of  friends)  and  how
can  this  be !

It  is  essentially  impossible — how  can  this  Banatii-n-Na'sh
heconie  the  Pleiades*  (How  can  mourning  become  joy).

With  what  orneu  “ did  the  king  lead  his  aimy  from  Multan
and  draw  the  infidei-slaymg  sword  in  order  to  slay  the
intidels.

t The  text  has  Ji  we  should  read  as  in  M.S.  (A).

Tlic  a^rroliiceif- st-ce  That  when  a conjunctuir.  of  all  ttie  planers  shall  take
place  in  one  of  ihe  w.iti-rj  cons;telUaioiis  iScorpio,  Pisces,  .Sciuauus)  .i  deluge
like  that  wlricli  destroyed  the  world  iu  the  time  of  Noah  will  occur  again.

s This  couplet  differing  as  it  does  in  rhyme,  but  being  in  the  same  metre  is
characteristic  of  tnrkib  band,  see  p.  196,  note  3.

this  name  “The  daughters  of  the  bier”  is
given  by  tlie  Arabs  to  the  constellation  Ursa  Majoi . See  Lane,  i.  v.  .

'ihe  oriem  i t the  name  " The  dansrhters  of  the  bier  ” is  said  by  Sediilot  in
his  Notia  to  the  Pi./h  cotnents  de.s  T.ibles  Astronoiniqnos  d'filoug  Bco-,  to  bo  that
tl.e  Arab  Chiisiiaii'- called  tiie  ••Chariot'’  or  the  four  stars  coniposino- the
body  of  the  (ireat  Bear  Ftictuno  Lazoi  i,  and  the  three  stars  (ti  e

handle  of  ti.e  idotigh)  of  the  t.nl  Jl.o  la,  iLi,tha  ,ie  aunll,,;'  Xl.o  Persians
have  a siipcistitiun  tiiat  if  two  people  are  Logetiie-r  and  one  of  them  poirds
out  this  consteUaiion  to  the  other,  one  of  tiie  two  will  die  within  tlie  year.

The  alla'U  ii  to  trie  Pleiades  is  e’Xphiined  by  the  following  verses  of  Ibnu-l-
Amid  {'Oe  de  Slasie,  it/i  Khali.  ; III.  363p

••  1 have  seizeil  on  one  of  the  opjiortunities  which  life  offers  to  form  with
my  compnriioiis  a i>ait  of  the  band  ot  tne  Pleiades,  and,  if  you  do  not  aid  us
to  ruaint.iiu  our  rank  iii  that  choir  by  sending  us  some  wine,  we  shall  be  sad
like  the  daughters  of  rhe  hearse.”

The  Pleiades  is  considered  a fortunate  asterism  (cf.)  Job  x.xxviii,  13
••  The  sweet  irifraeuces  of  i’leiade.s-  ’

S Jl.SB,  (Aj  and  (B)  read  t*hl=

[ ]

Wlieii  they  brought  bi'm  tidings  of  the  eneiiiy.  «itlitliai
sti-ongth  which  he  possessed,  ruthlessly  he  displayed  bi.s
wrath  aud  uufurled  his  standards.

That'  army  which  was  then  present  sought  for  no  second
army,

For  this  reason  that  Rustum  must  not  be  iudebred  to  an
armed  liostd

One  assault  took  him  from  Multan  to  Labor,  saying

In  my  reign  can  any  one  rebel  against  me  ?

Am  I not  such  a lion,  that  niy  swoid  which  is  like  fire  and
water

Has  by  its  slaying  turned  every  year  of  theiis  to  dust  and
ashes  ?

Such  torrents  of  blood  often  have  I set  flowing  over  the
earth,

That  the  vulture  flies*  over  the  surface  of  blood  like  a
duck  over  the  water.

In  this  year  to  such  an  extent  do  I stain  the  earth  with
their  blood,

That  the  evening  twilight  reddens  with  the  reflection  of
the  earth.

He  was  bent  upon  this  enterprise  and  did  not  know  that
the  Destiny  of  heaven  had  diawn  the  line  of  fate  across
the  writing  of  the  page  of  intention.

His  eyes  were  smitten  by  the  stars ; if  1 have  the  power
I must  heat  a needle,  and  like  a shooting  star  thrust  it
into  the  eye  of  the  seven  planets.

The  first  day  of  the  month  became  Muharram  ^ for  him,  140.
not  for  him  only  but  for  all  people.

These  verses  are  transposed  in  the  text.  IIS.  (A)  and  ilS.  (Bj  give  this
order.

2 MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  read

8 Mi.  (A)  reads  (V**  ^

_The  Martyr  Prince  was  killed  on  the  last  day  of  Zul  Hijjnh  the  morrow
ot  which  was  the  sacred  montli  of  Muharram.

The ‘Ashura  ( the  tenth)  is  a voluntary  fast  day  observed  on  the  tenth  of
the  month  of  Muharram.  We  read  in  the  Mishk^t  (VII.)  Ihn  Abbas  said

I did  not  see  his  highness  intend  the  fast  of  any  day  which  he  considered
more  noble  than  the  ‘Ashura  and  the  fast  of  Kamaziiu  ” Again  the  fast  of

[ 200  ]

Since  at  the  end  of  Zhl  Hijjah  he  drove  his  dagger  into
the  neck  of  his  enemies.

That  the  day  of  ‘Ashtira  might  arrive  he  entered  the  ranks
of  holy  war  like  Husain  ; the  dust  of  his  steed  served  as
collyrium  for  the  eye  of  the  brilliant  moon.

What  an  hour  was  that  when  the  infidel  r eached  the  van  of
the  army !

One  upon  another  his  squadrons  passed  over  the  river  and
came  upon  them  unawares.*

Thou  didst  see  the  king’s  steed,*  casting  the  cloud  of  dust
to  the  sky.

The  wind-footed  courier  charging  the  infidels  worthless
as  dust.

He  raised  a turmoil  among  the  stars  by  the  shouts  of
his  army.

He  produced  an  earthquake  in  the  world  by  the  rushing
of  his  cavalry,

From  the  roll  of  the  drnms,  the  neighing  of  the  horses,  and
the  shouts  of  their  riders,  he  caused  a quaking  of  the
plain  and  desert  and  mountain.

His  horses  were  reeking  (with  sweat*,  with  shoes  as  hot  as
fire,  so  that  the  hoofs  of  each  fiery-shod  steed  struck
sparks.®

What  awe  was  there ! at  one  time  drawing  up  for  battle.

What  terror  was  thoic  1 at  another  time  raising  the  battle
cries.'*’

141,  Fiom  the  flash  of  the  sword  in  his  hand  he  scattered  heat

and  oppressiveness  around  him.

the  day ‘Adiii-ri  I am  hepeful  will  cover  the  faults  of  the  coming  year.’’
(Matthews,  \^ol.  I.  p.  402).

“ It  is  the  only  d.ay  of  Mnh.arram  observed  by  the  Sanni  llnsliria,  being
the  day  on  which,  it  is  said.  God  created  .\dam  and  Eve,  heaven  and  hell,  the
tablet  cf  decree,  the  pen,  life  ord  death.”  (Hughes,  Diet,  of  Istdm).

1 MS.  (A)  reads  c.’f  and  j

2 MS.  (A)  leads  instead  of  '■=?•  as  in  the  text.

8 MSS.  (A  ; (B.J  read  )j-

* MS  (A)  — Hi*  ^ of

MS.  (B)  reads  the  same  as  (A)  repeating  in  the  second  line.

C 201  ]

While  the  very  thought  of  his  spear  pricked  the  heart  liko
so  many  thorns.

The  hrave-hearted  were  attacking,  bent  on  consuming  their
enemies,

The  faint-hearted  were  plotting  intent  upon  flight.

[Whiles,  the  king  the  cherisher  of  brave  men,  in  that
field  of  battle,

Was  doing  deeds  of  bravery  and  urging  on  the  warriors].

Striking  manfully  blow  after  blow  upon  the  ribs  of  the
unmanly  cowards.

And  sending  forth  flames  of  fire  from  his  well  tempered
sword.

Raising  aloft  like  Jamshld  the  standard,  to  restrain  the
demons.

Urging  on  his  steed,  like  the  sun,  to  capture  kingdoms.

Bringing  the  sky  into  supplication  from  that  aflBiction.

Making  the  sun  perform  the  Tayammum  * with  that  dust.

[At  that  time  when  there  was  a distinction  between  brave
and  coward.

Many  a one  there  was  whose  lips  were  dry  and  his  cheeks
pale].^

I These  lines  are  omitted  in  the  text  bnt  are  in  both  MSS.

JJji

tayammum.  This  vrord  signilies  “Intention”  and  is  restricted
to  the  Wuzii  or  .ablutional  ceremony  performed  with  sand  instead  of  water,
which  is  permissible  under  certain  circumstances,  as  for  instance  when
water  cannot  be  procured  witliout  incurring  nndno  risk  or  l.tbonr.
Qur’an  Y.  9.  “ If... ye  cannot  find  water  t'nen  take  fine  surface  sand  and  wipe

your  faces,  and  yonr  hands  therewith.”  This  like  so  many  of  Muhammad’s
injunctions  was  excellent  as  a sanitary  measure.

* The  text  and  MS.  (B)  are  both  wrong  here,  repeating  the  preceding
band  as  though  this  poem  were  a tarji'band.  The  following  is  the  correct
reading  as  given  in  MS.  (A)

if)  ij — «lj  13  ^ Jl  ijj — ’ ^ Sj
‘iti  ^ Ij  tfl

Consequently  in  the  translation  I have  omitted  the  incorrectly  repeated
lines,  and  have  given  these  in  their  place.

26

[ 202  ]

142.

The  day  was  cast  into  darkness  when  they  hurled  * one
upon  the  other,

The  sun  became  pale  when  aagger  was  interweaved  with
dagger.

The  day  was  nearing  its  decline,  seeing  that  the  swords  *
were  weaving  a sky  of  cast  over  the  sun  of  the  army.

The  rows  of  swords  in  both  ranks  resembled  (the  teeth  of)
a comb.

The  combatants  are  entangled  one  with  the  other  like  hair
with  hair.s

The  Ear  th  looked  like  a sheet  of  water  when  cuirass  was
knit  s^ith  cuirass,  the  plain  resembled  a rose  garden
when  .sliield  was  woven  with  shield.

The  heaven  flies  away  as  though  flying  from  an  arrow.

The  arrows  flying  above  their  heads  are  thick  as  the  feathers
of  a wing.

When  half  the  force  of  the  infidels  had  their  heads  swept
off  by  the  sword

Those  infidel  heads  * which  were  matted  together  like  the
locks  of  black  hair.

Ruby-red  drops  of  blood  sprang  like  tears  ^ from  the  sword

So  that  (he  gold-woven  standards  were  besprinkled  with
the  jewels.

Bach  single  head  .,<»s  cleft  in  twain  when  the  swords
blows  met.

l MS.  ( B ) reads  which  is  the  best  reading.

» This  is  the  reading  of  MS.  (A)  ^ MS.  (B)  follows  the  text

but  with  no  intelligible  meaning.  The  reading  of  MS.  (A)  is  not  quite  satis-
factory and  it  seems  possible  that  we  should  read  jy  Jl.  i.  e.  The  war*
liors’  swords.

S JIS.  (A)  has  the  following

Jf  jjd  lyf  Aijlm  Ij  uU

MS.  (B)  has  *>^1*  Ij  while  the  text  has  this  as  an  aiternativa
reading  for  tj  AiLi.

MS.  (B)  is  the  reading  adopted  for  this  line,  reading  however  iliiiO
(text)  and  MS.  (A)  for  iWaib  MS.  (B)  in  the  second  line.

* US.  (A)

t Insert  jl  before  ft*  MS.  (A).

t 2u3  J

The  cloven  heads  became  as  one  again  vs-hen  head  was
thrust  against  head.

The  slain  were  lying  on  all  sides  of  that  verdant  plain  1

Like  the  figures  which  they  weave  on  the  green  brocade.

Long  bad  they  been  striving  even  from  morning  till  even-
ing, face  to  face,  and  hair  to  hair,  and  hand  to  hand.®

The  king  ® wished  to  spread  the  carpet  of  victory  bat  to
wliat  avail

Since  the  heavens  had  woven  that  carpet  in  another  pattern.

* [His  auspicious  sword  did  not  cease  from  contest  for
one  moment.

From  the  declining  day  till  night  in  that  day  of  declining
fortune].

Oh  Lord  ! was  that  blood  which  flowed  over  the  face  of  the  143.
plain

Or  was  it  a river  urging  its  waves  toward  the  lips  of  the
thirsty.

Just  as  water  drops  to  the  earth  when  you  sift  it  ^ in
a sieve

So  the  blood  drip!  from  the  limbs  of  the  weary  warriors.

The  mortally  wounded  lay  in  the  death-agony  writhing  on
the  ground,  while  from  his  throat  blood  burst  in  billows,
spouting  in  the  air.

The  arrows  drove  the  bodies  over  the  sea  of  blood  like
boats.

Plying  their  oars  madly  and  urging  their  course  onwards.®

1 MS.  (A)  reads  jO  !cU»|  which  is  the

reading  adopted.

® MS.  (A)  reads.  J } LSiHJt)

MS.  (Bj  >ijjkilj  ji  j }y.}>

^ MS.  (B)  reads  incorrectly

* The  text  and  MS.  (Bj  are  again  wrong  here  giving  in  this  place  cha

couplet  beginning  see  page  196  note  3,  instead  of  the  lines

which  should  follow

JUJj(  (jWUil  i£)^j  iJj

Jtjj  j})  JJ)  Jljjj}

* MS.  (A)

® These  lines  follow  here  la  MS.  ',A}  in  the  text  they  are  five  couplets  later.

[ 204  ]

The  river  bore  those  (the  infidel  enemies)  to  hell  and  the
stream  bore  these  (the  Mnslims)  to  Paradise,  althongh
the  blood  of  infidel  and  Muslim  was  flowing  side  by  side.

The  chargers  were  plunging  and  the  heads  of  the  riders
falling.

The  feet  of  the  horses  speeding  and  the  heads  of  the  riders
bowling  along.

Every  spurt  of  blood  which  spurted  from  the  body  struck
by  an  arrow

Leapt  without  restraint  like  a man  who  leaps  to  avoid  an
arrow.  1

The  arrow  of  every  man  who  from  stoutness  of  heart  had
an  arm  nerved  for  the  fight,  fitted  accurately  to  the  bow
flew  straight  to  the  heart  of  the  enemy’s  army.

And  he  who  from  faint-heartedness  has  lost  command  of
his  arms  and  legS,  was  running  now  to  the  water  and
now  to  the  plain.

The  king,  the  commander  of  the  army,  was  urging  on  the
charger  of  his  fortune,  and  it  galloped  with  him  in  draw-
ing up  his  line,  and  planning  the  scheme  of  action.

144.  The  heavens  turned  Victory  backwards  seizing  it  by  the

hair.

Although  Victory  was  speeding  towards  us  having  left  the
accursed  (infidels).

* [The  infidels  were  expecting  the  coming  of  night,  to  take
to  fliglit,

Suddenly  the  scale  of  the  balance  turned  against  us].

What  a night  was  that ! when  the  sun  had  fallen  from  the
sky  !

Aud  demons  were  hurling  fire  upon  the  earth,  and  the  stars
had  fallen,.

When  nothing  of  day  remained  for  that  sun  of  fortune.®

I These  lines  follow  here  in  MS.  (A)  which  reads

3 Here  again  the  text  and  MS.  (B)  are  wrong  Here  should  follow  as  ia
MS.  (A).

h

8 These  are  omitted  in  MS.  (B.).  MS.  (A.)  reads  \j  vUif

This  and  the  following  are  transposed  in  the  text.

[ 205  ]

Some  little  daylight  remained  when  the  snn  (of  royalty)
fell.

Althongh  Hnsain  of  the  famous  Kerbela  i was  in  straits  for
want  of  water.

He  was  the  Muhammad  whose  end  came  upon  him  in  the
water.*

The  heart  of  mankind  became  (full  of  holes  like)  a fishing
net  because,  from  the  craft  of  the  demon  the  royal  signet
which  was  on  the  hand  of  Solomon  fell  into  the  water.®

The  infidels  were  wallowing  in  blood  as  the  donkey  wallows
in  the  gutter,  the  believers  lay  in  the  mud  like  jewels  in
the  mire.

One  army  was  passing  through  the  water  of  the  flood  of
disaster,

The  other  parched  with  thirst  had  fallen  in  with  a mirage.

Each  one  of  them  was  put  down  on  the  tablet  of  the  earth
^or  this  reason  that  their  affairs  had  fallen  into  the
account  of  the  day  of  reckoning.

I A city  in  ‘Iraq  50  miles  south  west  of  Bagdad  and  six  miles  west  of  the
Euphrates.  Husain  was  slain  there  A E.  61  in  conflict  with  Tazid  ibn
Mn'awia  on  the  10th  of  Muharram  ; the  name  of  the  place  whera  Husain  was
cat  off  from  the  Euphrates  was  called  Kerbela.  Hughes  of

Islam  art.  Kusam.

* MS.  (Jl)  roads  So'-iil  w.-f  but  the  text  is  the  correct

reading.

It  refers  to  the  circumstances  r.'rc-ady  related  under  which  the  Khan-i.
Shahid,  the  M.artyr  prince  met  hl<  drat:;.  Eu-ishta  relates  that  iiaving  defeated
the  enemy  the  generals  of  Hi; 'I’lJ-r.,;  discarded  all  cai::'on  j ’irsued
the  fugitives  while  the  Mul'ammad,  t'.  - M.avtyr  Kh.ln,  who  h...  i ; t perlVrmed
the  mid-dny  prayer,  went  l.ast'lv  c,  •’ch.  of  ins  army  to  rl.o  nnrair.  of  a
large  tank  wliich  then  was  near,  aluho  ■'  ■■■'’;  enuatr.  d in  prayer  wren  Ins
party  were  sut.deuly  attacked,  by  Mu.Vrd  d.c : ortls  with  ll  OLD  men

who  were  in  ambush'’  I.  11-3.  i’dinon.)  The

Prince  after  a srallant  fie-l-.t  w.is  kii!“  i bv  an  arrow  and  most  of  his  men
killed.  It  wa.s  here  Amir  KPusnl  wa?  r rl-,.ii  pris'.iter  i,nt  esc'ped.

S The  following  1?  groatlv  .ibridged  fr.-’n  rh.’  Q «v7.c,i-(-J'dd,-'.

•Solomon’s  famous  signet  ruig  in  whiiu  L.y  th,-  secret  of  a.i  io.s  power  wa.s
stolen  from  hint  >,v  the  jinn  Astnr,’  wd.n  wlul  ■ Solomon  w.as  batidng,  per-
sonated him  and  demanded  tlie  i.ng  f;.  m l.is  wife  (rnom/oj,  ; in  whom  ho
had  entrusted  it.  Obtainin",-  it  from  iwi  he  sat  on  the  throne  ami  ruled  ^ho
kingdom,  Solomon  having  been  t tst  out  ns  an  imposter.  Solomon  entered
the  service  of  some  lishermeu  who  used  to  give  him  two  fish  daily  as  his

[ 206  ]

145.

The  skull  caps  -which  -were  lying  in  the  fresh  crimson  blood
looked  like  cocoanuta  engraved  and  ornamented  -svith
vermilion, 1

The  -wounds  of  the  heart  -were  tveepirg  tears  of  blood  in
bidding  fare-well  to  the  soul,  and  the  bodies  were  Ivino-
desolate  o-wing  to  separation  from  life.

4.1as  ! many  -were  the  living  who  were  lying  amo-ag  the
dead  overcome  with  terioi.  their  bodies  blood-stained  and
their  eyes  sunk  in  (feigned  . sleep.

Look  at  the  deeds  of  this  crafty  old  wolf  ( tne  sky)  for  lions
were  as  though  bound  in  chains  and  elephants  in  fetters
at  the  hands  of  (inSdel)  dogs.

[This  was  not  a battle,  I verily  saw  that  that  was  the  day
of  resurrection.  If  these  are  the  tokens  of  the  resurrec-
tion, then  I have  seen  it].*

Look  at  the  revolution  of  the  heaven,  for  it  brought  about
such  a change,  that  it  made  the  centre  of  Islam  to  go
round  and  round  (in  perplexity)  like  the  compasses.®

wngos,  one  of  -n-hich  he  ate  bat  sold  the  other  to  feed  the  poor.  -In  the  mean-
time Asaf  recognized  that  ic  was  not  Solomon  who  was  ruling,  and  brought
40  iioly  men  ( ) before  the  tlirone  each  bearing  an  open  copy  of  the

Taiirj:  iBock  of  the  Law)  -nhicli  tliey  read  aloud;  Astarji  the  demon  was  not
ah'.'  to  1 1'iir  tills,  up  to  ti  o roof  of  t'oe  palace,  cast  the  ring  into  the

witter  atid  lie,].  Solon. on  h.ippcnc-d  to  I..-’  ii-hiiig  that  day  but  being  tired  fell
asl-M  p on  tlie  oank  of  tlie  river,  a large  simke  came  out  of  the  water  and
taking  the  green  b.. ugh  of  a tree  in  its  nioutli  ttas  faulting  Solomon  as  he
slept,  -tv.hon  the  lisl.erniati's  daughter  i.-.ssed  hy  j she  rau  off  to  her  father
and  begged  hint  CG  matry  l.er  to  Solomou.  Eventually  this  was  settled
(*bot,u|,  Sol.  n on  piotcsted  his  inability  to  provide  a dowry)  and  Solon.on
11  nr:' • i t,,e  L' il.  d j .■  !:^ll  which  luid  swallowed  tiie  ring  fell  into  their  net
on  ib.  foil  .w  i,a'  d'l;,-  a:  ,1  ■'.tas  civcti  to  Solomon  with  two  other  fish,  Solomon
tool;  r:  cm  at. u sold  two  of  them  .'.i.d  gave  the  orlu  r to  the  fishei  man's

(laiiL'h.ier  to  fry  Sl.o  struck  a knhc  into  it  and  tlie  i ii,o  fell  out,  the  whole

huuse  becoming  ilinm.i.atcd,  she  .=cicaii,ed  and  biuoted,  Colotnon  seized  the
ring  and  put  it  on,  thus  recovering  l.is  lost  kitigdom.

1 MS,  I'.V)  read?  ^r**  [j  1 he  te.vt  and  ilS.  (B)  read

wblcb  s-ojos  preferable,

^ Th.-‘  tLXt  and  MS.  (B)  are  again  wrong  the  proper  lines  here  are

cjT

3 MS  -'A^  road-  ’ vanu!  t .ill.  pLt  .1)  c:,':  cjU— *T  MS  (H;  is  the  same

as  the  text  except  that  i:  reads  lu  Hues.

[ 207  ]

Has  one  ever  seen  an  atom  carry  off  the  water  of  the  sun’s
spring  r

Has  one  ever  seen  a stone,  which  has  rivalled  the  princely
pearl  ?

When  the  king  entered  the  cave  of  the  protection  of  God,
that  man'is  a dog  who  did  not  wake  the  sleepers  of  the
cave  1 with  his  lamentations.

That  he  entered  the  secret  cave  (of  death)  when  fleeing
from  his  enemies,  is  no  disgrace.

The  elect  of  God  (Sluhammad)  fled  towards  the  cave  to
avoid  the  attack  of  his  enemies.*

And  if  a spark  reached  him  from  the  arrow  of  his  enemies
this  too  is  right  ® for  the  wrath  of  Nimrod  at  last  com-
mitted Abraham  to  the  fire.*

And  if  he  went  to  the  holy  place  (Paradise)  do  not  be  vexed
and  count  it  as  a shame  to  him  * for  ‘Isa  through  the
spite  of  the  Nazarenes  devoted  his  life  on  the  cross.

And  if  the  (infidel)  dogs  were  crafty  as  foxes  to  him,  say
tliis,  that  it  is  of  a piece  with  the  dog  like  behaviour
W'hich  was  shewn  to  (‘Ali)  the  Haidar-i-Karrar  (lion  of
repeated  attacks).®

And  if  the  denftins  caused  him  to  drown,  then  say  this  that
it  is  like  when  a demon  drowned  Bustum  in  the  ocean.’

Every  year  he  used  to  devote  his  life  and  energy  to  fighting
the  Mughuls,

At  last  he  yielded  up  his  precious  life  in  this  endeavour.

1 Qur’:!!!,  Suratu-l-Kahf,  XYIII.  The  seven  sleepers  of  Ephesus.  113.  'A)
reads  of  irs,  fB)  which  tho  text  follows  reads  *J‘**-C^  j

and  the  texc  reads.  for

S ilSS.  (A'  and  (B)  read

5 The  text  and  MS.  fB)  are  bopefeasl/  wrong  here:  the  correct  reading

MS  (A)  15  Jf.

* Qur’an.  52-C9.

SaiJ  tlsrr’'  Burn  him  and  help  ycur  gous  if  ye  are  going  to  do  so
V’  c Uh  hre  1 be  chtiu  coul  and  a s..»f8  y : Abraham.

6 ASo.  (A)  and  (3)  read  (Jo  . The' reading  in

the  text  'J-i^  {g  inadmj'f*-ibh  .

**  AbG'.r  jf-'hciian  ibn  M;.A  xi  alew  ‘Ah  w'th  a sword  vrhdo  engage.!
prayf'j:  the  I9ch  Ramazan  33  A H-  in  the  Modoi*  ’ rt  Kufa,

oee  ^ah  bama  t Turuer  Macau).  Vol.  II..  p 7-4d  I.  S.

146v

[ 208  ]

This  is  one  of  the  tricks  of  fate  -which  at  one  time  sheds
blood  and  at  another  gives  life  : 1 we  are  powerless,  it  is

• nseless  to  strive  against  the  all-powerful  tyrant  (fate).

The  mighty  lion  when  stung  by  the  ant  roars  aloud  in
agony.

The  infuriated  elephant  when  pricked  by  ar  thorn  shrieks
from  pain.

[It  was  on  Friday,  the  last  day  of  Zul  Hijjah  that  this  battle
took  place

At  the  end  of  eighty-three  and  the  beginning  of  eighty-
fonr].*

The  sun  and  moon  wept  over  the  face  of  that  one  of
auspicious  features.

Day  and  night  wept  over  the  youth  of  that  short-lived  one.

Like  his  orders,  tears  from  the  eyes,  flowed  from  east  to
west

Behold  the  obedience  of  the  servants  ® who  wept  without
any  master.

In  his  reign  birds  and  Ashes  were  so  happy
147.  That  the  Ashes  wept  in  the  water  and  the  birds  in  the  air.

The  heavens  with  its  thousand  eyes  wept  over  the  people
of  the  earth  like  vernal  showers  upon  the  grass.^

The  dew  which  falls  every  morning  from  heaven  and  waters
the  earth,  consider  that  as  the  tears  of  the  stars  who  are
weeping  in  the  highest  heavens.

The  {'tuple  of  ilnltan,  men  and  women,  weeping  and  tear-
ing their  hair,  in  every  street,  face  to  face  and  every
■where.

Ko  one  cr.ald  .sleep  at  night  for  the  noise  of  the  wailing,
and  the  heating  of  the  chums,  for  in  every  house  the
moumei'S  were  weeping  bitterly.

1 MS.  (A)  )

* MS.  (A)  has  the  follo-cving  Unes  in  place  of  those  in  the  text

if  ***»-

lil— — xiub  jf  -vl  ■ — , , 1 ■*. 'I'

1st  Muban-am  (o'?-!  A.H.)

8 MS  (A)  XM.

* This  couplst  is  omitted  from  MS.  fB).

[ 209  3

They  ■were  preparing  to  perform  the  icazu  in  the  water  of
their  eyes,

Hoping  for  pardon  for  that  they  wept  at  the  time  of  prayer.

Their  tongues  were  blistered  like  the  feet  of  prisoners,

So  sorely  did  they  weep  for  the  captives  of  calamity.

Their  eyes  poured  forth  blood  upon  the  earth  like  the
throat  of  the  slain.

So  bitterly  did  each  one  weep  for  his  own  deadd

And  if  by  chance  a captive  returned  from  that  bond  of
calamity,

Every  one  seeing  his  face  wept  honest  tears  of  sorrow.

[So  great  was  the  weeping  that  the  waves  of  the  tear.s
were  greater  than  those  of  the  .Jlhun.

1 his  was  my  own  condition,  the  state  of  the  other.s  how  can
I describe  IJ*

Shall  I wring  my  hands,  or  shall  I with  my  own  teeth
make  my  arm  livid.

Or  shall  I wear  clothe.s  of  a.  darker  blue  than  tliis  blue  148
heaven  f®

Every  man  of  reputation,  tattoo^  his  arm  with  the  needle.

But  when  1 make  my  arm  blue  with  my  teeth,  the  ntuue  of
the  king  leap.s  fortli  on  my  arm.

Alas  ! that  he  by  the  tyranny  of  the  blue  sky.  is  slee])ing
beneath  the  earth,  while  * because  of  hi.s  sleeping  tlioie
the  whole  hoi'izon  ha.s  become  blue  (darkl.

There  was  both  the  blackno.ss  of  the  Hiinlu  and  the  white-
ness of  the  Turk,  whereas  nuw  both  Turk  nii'l  Hindu  are
weariiiir  blue  (as  inonruincr)

^ [ It -Was  as  thnngh  the  people  were  teai-ing  the  heavens
and  dividing  them  among  thcinselve.s,

^ Thi.s  is  ttic  or'ti'r  of  tiie  couplets  in  Mri  (.\  i.

‘ JIS.  (Ai  y SOoi  ~jjc  ki  .xi

b loLr^-  c-'d  u"*

® Blue  ivas  the  custonuirv  ii.oiirnino  colour  lu  I’crsM

*MS.  !.\,3j

^ 1 his  Cf.>uplet  HOT  iu  the  text  nor  iu  31 S.  ''!?}  31  rt.  i A ) t r td -

kx  y'  3 li, ..j

27

[ 210  ]

To  sneh  an  extent  was  the  eai  th  in  all  directions  hlne  with
mourning  garments.]

Now  it  has  become  customary  to  wear  blue — so  that  hence-
forth it  behoves  the  weavers  of  white  cloth  to  dye  their
thread  Line  in  the  shnttle.i

In  every  street  * of  Cairo  a river  blue  like  the  Nile  was
flowing ; to  sncli  an  extent  were  blue  garments  being
wasbed  in  tears  on  all  sides.

Tbe  dyers  of  blue  clotb  were  as  happy  as  if  there  was  a
bridal  in  their  houses,  because  so  many  brides  had  their
garments  dyed  blue  iu  moiiniing  for  their  basbauds.^

The  lovely  ones  who  were  smiting  their  foreheads  and
shedding  tears  of  blood  had  their  cheeks  below  their
eyes  red  (with  blocd)  while  above  their  eye-brows  it  was
blue.

The  beauties  have  no  need  of  blue  (patches)  and  redness
(rouge)  after  this.

For  the  checks  are  torn  till  they  are  rod  (with  blood)  and
the  face  is  smitten  till  it  is  bine  (with  bruises).

Ill  such  quantities  do  they  tear  their  hair  ficm  their
delicate  biows,  one  aud  all

That  the  root  of  every  hair  becomes  blue  from  such  rough
treatment.

[How  long  shall  I tear  out  the  hair  of  my  head  in  this
lauientation  and  mourning  I

Nay  1 will  pluck  this  body  of  mine  like  a hair  from  the
head  of  my  life].’

Alas ! that  my  heart  h.us  saddenl y turned  to  blood  on
account  of  (the  loss  ot;  my  friends

The  order  ctf  the  following  couplets  JiilVrs  from  tint  of  the  test  as  will
be  seen.

lilts  (A)  reads  k for  the  Utter  is  the  correct  readinv.

S 11=5.  ( A,'

» MS.  (A)

* MS.  A.  y.  J yi  US'  y ^ l^ot  in  the  te.yt.

^ j!  u*-'  c.'il

L 211  ]

Alas  ! for  that  assembly  who  were  a constant  fresh  joy  to
their  friends.

The  eyes  became  flooded  with  water  and  blood  on  account
of  their  friends,  so  long  as  I saw  my  friends  in  the
midst  of  blood  and  water.

Such  priceless  blood  of  my  friends  has  the  earth  swallowed

That  it  is  my  right  to  demand  fiora  the  Eurth  the  blood
money  for  my  friends.

If  it  were  possible  for  those  who  sloop  in  the  dust  to  aiise.

I would  devote  the  remaiinler  of  my  life  to  secure  the
existence  of  my  friends.

It  were  a pity  that  the  eye  should  have  its  pupil  always
with  it,  and  yet  that  its  friends  should  be  cut  of  sight.

How  can  one  bear  to  look  at  other.?  i''=te(»d  of  one's  friend.?.

My  friend?  are  gone  ! How  can  I ei/ifiace  a stranger  1

How  can  I clothe  any  other  per?jii  i.i  the  mantle  of  any
friends  '

I will  place  their  du?t  in  my  eyes  : a.?  a collyrium'i.  Hon
can  it  be  right  that  the  dust  of  yuv  friends'  feet  should
be  so  little  valued,*

In  desire  for  my  friend?,  even  thv'.'.gh  they  sever  my  head
(from  my  body),

Still  the  desire  for  n'.y  friends  Will  never  la-  •'C’.cred  fivun
my  head.

Oh  my  King  ! whc-uever  thou  I'in.hst  me  I will  tear  my
garment  of  life  to  the  very  e Igc  in  mouining  for  my
triends.

My  life  has  been  torn  to  shreJ?  in  a huudie'.t  phces  through
grief,  how  can  it  be  right  that  f sh  uild  t'-.ai  .1  shu  ed  i.'.tc*
shred.s  for  the  sake  of  u)}'  fricu'l?.-'

My  friends  have  gone  of  whom  a;..-  lo  t talKirg.

Once  for  all  bring  your  speech  to  an  ei.d.rg  atid  breatne
a prayer  for  my  friends.

t MS.  (A)  jji  j /*"?■

2 MS.  (A)  The  order  in  the  text  differ^

S MS.  (A)  .>■— .ifr  oir*'

^ I follo'w  tiie  toxr  hfie.  (A  r-M''"'

31  cy — ty'j

150

[ 212  ]

[Always  remember  the  departed,  especially  at  the  time
of  prayer,

Because  nothing  shews  you  the  way  to  mercy  save  the
guidance  of  prayer].*

0 Lord  may  the  illumination  of  the  sun  of  mercy  light
upon  their  souls,^

ilay, their  souls  shine  like  the  sun  from  the  bounty  of  thy
light.

In  the  day  of  battle  the  Great  Khan  was  their  leader.

May  the  same  Khan  be  also  their  leader  to  the  Garden  of
Paradise.

If  an  angel  flies  thither  in  desire  for  him  it  become.s  a fly,''

May  the  wings  of  the  peacock  of  Paradise  drive  away  the
flies  from  them.

Tlie  bonnty  of  mercy  is  the  water  of  life  in  the  gloom  of
the  grave,*

Oh  Lord,  in  the  darkness  of  the  tomb  may  they  have  the
water  cf  life.

hen  the  faces  become  black  from  the  sun  of  resurrection

May  the  wing.s  of  the  angels  cast  protecting  shade  over
their  head.s].^

tPhcn  they  give®  into  their  hand.s  the  record  of  their  deeds
taken  num  the  hook  of  punisliment.

May  the  record  bear  as  its  heading  the  words  “ A book  for
the  right  hand.”''

These  lilies  are  tiGt  in  the  text  nor  ia  MS.  (R’i.

i Ua  JL.  ^

La  J'i  j Lc

La  iJ:J  DH  t'.e  ifur  «ii!i  v.'nitji  the  Moid  <0

wli.lo  Jj  - ' ai'U  meau3  tliai  ",  hi^..  thews  t!io  wav  ”

3ji  A

-iS.  ^A)

f ’ .'if-  I :r  tt..\^

Z *^-‘.5  3 — .-J

- v‘.  •**

: a ’ll  I

9en  IKS  .^'ook  la  ms

[ 213  ]

May  the  drops  of  blood  which  were  shed  from  their  throats

Become  the  most  costly  rubies  of  their  crown  of  pardon.

For  the  thirsty  ones  ^ whose  souls  departed  for  lack  of
water,

May  the  cloud  of  mercy  rain  continuously  upon  their  heads.

For  the  captives  * who  were  long  subjected  to  hardships.

Oh  Lord  ! may  the  hope  of  speedy  release  make  their  way
light  for  them.

May  the  affliction  which  they  suffered  in  imtu-isonment,  he
to  those  who  have  escaped  from  prison  (by  death)  the
cause  of  their  eternal  salvation,

And  those  who  have  survived  and  have  rerurncd  from
that  calamity,

May  they  experience  the  mercy  of  the  Author  of  good.®  and
may  the  favour  of  the  Sultan  he  theirs.

Since  Muhammad  has  departed  may  the  event  i':-  happy  f.r
the  kiug.  May  his  son  Kaiqubad  be  most  forcuuate  auJ
his  son  Kaikhusrii  be  blessed.

And  the  opening  [of  another  threnody]  * is  as  follows  :

My  heart  sit  silent  in  sorrow  for  no  trace  of  i.:<y  remains,

Grief,  do  thou  take  away  the  world,  for  no  joy  is  left
therein.

In  the  following  ode  too  he  refers  to  the  same  disastrous
occurrence  :

Behold  this  calamity  ^ which  has  he  fallen  this  t ear  on  tiie
frontier  of  Multan,

The  right  wing  of  the  believers  has  been  demaced  ^ by  tlit
infidel  ranks.

right  hand,  he  shall  be  reckoned  with  hj  an  ea.sy  reckoning;  and  he  shall  go
back  to  his  family  joyfully.

1 MS.  (A)  ^ X follow  the  text  here.

2 This  is  the  reading  of  the  text.  MS.  (A)  reads  ty’ilAS’  ',13.  (Bl

3 ViUlcrs.  lylijj,

* These  words  are  not  in  either  MS.

6 Its.  (A)  reads  (Jkwcl^Li  lb  ehi**-  This  is  the  preferabie  reading.

8 MS.  (A)

151.

r 214  1

152.

How  can  I exjolain  that  day  of  resurrection,  from  the
ao-ony  of  which  the  Angel  of  Death  would  hare  craved
3'e.spite.

How  can  I describe  the  way  in  which  the  Glilzls,  attacked
the  front  of  the  Khaibaris.  like  the  Lion  of  repeated
attacks.

But  what  help  has  anyone  against  the  decree  of  fate  which
was  ordained  by  and  issued  from  the  Almighty.

What  was  the  condition  of  the  battle  field  r it  was  one
load  of  dead  bodies,

So  much  blood  was  spilled  and  the  load  was  lying
npon  it.^

The  Idood  of  martyrs,  poured  out  like  a libation,  was
miucled  with  the  earth.

The  r.sck^  of  piisoncrs  hound  together  with  ropes  in  rows,
like  ro'C  chains.

The  heads  strangled  in  the  tight  noose  of  the  saddle-
coivD,^

The  necks  cangiit  in  the  toils  of  the  head-ropes.

Although  my  head  escaped  tliat  game  of  strangulation,

Still  my  neck  did  not  escape  that  noose  of  torture.

I -u.ts  taken  captive,  and  for  fear  lest  they  should  shed  my

My  blond  dried  up.  ri.it  a .single  drop  remained  in  my  weak
and  emaciated  hodt'.

I was  poured  out  like  water  running  wituouf  beginning
and  wiclioiit  end,  and  like  bulibles  thousands  of  blisters
ni't  cared  on  mv  feet  from  much  travellintr.

The  ritin  was  .separated  from  my  feet  by  the  blisters,

Like  to  the  svaiii.s  of  a slipper  burst  open.

liy  heart,  hecauso  o£  affliction,  was  as  hard  as  the  hilt  of  a
sword

MS.  1 B;  j -i  1*3;  t:J^3

The  r-jiB  roTiliiig  seem'^  to  he  AijS  jU  tX*#

- <-53^"?  ci'j-  Fvicbar'lson  e.  v.

[ -^15  1

From  weakness  my  body  was  become  wood  like  tlie  handle
of  a club.i

Not  a breath  remained  in  my  wind-pipe  by  reason  of  thirst,
ilj'  belly  was  like  a dram  from  the  duration  of  my  hunger.*

My  body  was  stripped  naked  like  a b’ee  in  autumn,

And  like  a rose  torn  into  a thousand  shreds  by  the  thorns.

For  sorrow  the  pupil  of  my  eyes  poured  forth  drops
Like  the  (scattered  pearls)  of  a necklace  broken  from  the
neck  of  a br'de.

A Quruna  = driving  me  on  in  trout  followed  along  the  way  153.

seated  on  a horse,  like  a leopard  on  a hill  range
Foetor  ah  isto  ore  teterrimus  axillse  odori  similis,

Capilli  oris  ejus  pubi  similes  u.sqne  ad  mentum  delapsi.^

If  I lagged  belsiiid  a step  or  two  through  fatigue
He  would  draw  at  one  time  Lis  falchion  ^ at  another  his
javelin.^

I kept  heaving  deep  sighs  and  saying  to  mvself  ’

Alas  ! 1 shall  never  be  able  to  escape  from  this  calamity
A thousand  thanks  to  God  Almighty  uho  libLiated  me
With  my  heart  fieo  from  arrow  ^YOunds  and  my  biidy
unhurt  bv  the  sword.

When  ho  desired  to  make  my  body  a brick  for  the  grave,

Water  aud  clay  built  up  for  me  auew  my  palace  of  years.

But  what  good  to  me  was  my  escape  from  that  rope
If  snapped  like  the  bond  between  the  Miiliojir  and  A/i^rir  '

1 Chuqinui.  Pavet-de-Courteille  in  liis  Tuiki  ihctionary  gives  tliis

TN'oi’d  as  Chi'qjfiflr,  with,  tiic  nicaiiiiigs  gt^urdin.

* These  lines  are  as  folloT\*s  iu  MS.  (Ah

3 I cannot  fiiicl  this  word,  possibly  it  is  connected  with  tlic  TarkT
qPrchl,  an  armed  soldier.

* See  Elliot  and  Dow^on,  III.  52S.

6 Ajfifc  faghPna  there  is  a TarkI  word  tPfjhPn  which  means

a falcon,  and  another  tPijhannlc  oiseau  semblahlc  a repcr\  ier  ( P

dc  C.).  Hence  tiic  above  translation  by  the  vrovd  jalchuin.
fi

faHm»r  a dart  having  no  point  (Richardson).

The  or  ‘helpers  of  the  prophet'  were  those  tribe's  of  El  Mcdinah

[ 216  ]

154.

All  those  lives  were  poured  out  in  the  dust  like  roses

By  the  fierce  blast  of  misfortune,  this  is  Autumn  not  Spring.

The  world  full  of  roses  and  the  assembly  emptied  of  those
who  can  smell  their  perfume,

How  should  not  my  heart  turn  to  blood  like  the  rose  bud
at  this  treatment ! *

Hot  one  of  my  friends  of  last  year  remains  to  me  this  year,

It  is  evident  that  “ this  year  ” also  will  become  “ last  year.”

Do  thou  also  like  me,  oh  cloud  of  the  newly  horn  spring

How  wash  tbv  hands  of  water,  and  rain  teardrops  of  blood.

Give  me  a cup,  that  from  the  depths  of  my  regret

I may  empty  it  of  w'ine,  and  fill  it  with  bitter  tears.

How  that  the  date  is  6Si  (H.)

To  me  in  my  three  and  thirtieth  year  comes  the  good
tidings  of  the  thirty-fourth.

Hot  tliirty-i’oar  because  if  my  years  should  be  thirty
thousand,  when  one  comes  to  the  account  of  Anuihilatiou
neither  thiity  counts  for  aught  nor  a thousand.

1 am  not  a poet,  even  though  I were  a magician,  still  then
1 shall  become  dust.

I am  not  a Kh'isrfi,  even  were  I a Kaikhusru,  still  at  that
time  my  kingdom  would  be  but  the  grave.

And  in  the  preface  to  the  Ghurratu-l-Kamal  he  writes  some
epitomised  poern.s  relating  to  this  circumstance ; tho  gist  of
the  ni.itter  is  that  they  brought  Tughral  to  nothing,  and  the
prince  who  u=ed  l..>  pray  with  lamentation  and  tears  at  the  foot-
stool of  the  best  of  all  iieipei's  saying  7ne  of  thy  Yiiercy

a vLYiori'jiis  Emp-ror  rose  to  such  power  in  the  district.s  of
Lakhiianti  and  Chatar  La'l  that  lii.s  head  which  touched  the
stars,  reached  to  the  starless  expanse  of  the  highest  heaven,  and

who.  whilf  in  other  respects  rivals,  unitet!  so  far  as  to  espouse  the  cause  of
Jluhatnniai.

The  were  the  refugees  from  Mecca,  and  to  avoid  jealousy  and

Btrifo  between  their,  and  the  Ansur,  each  of  the  Ansur  was  made  to  swear  an
oath  of  brotln.-rhood  with  one  of  the  This  bond  was  however

broken  shortly  after  the  battle  of  BeJr.  See  Muir's  Life  of  JIahomed.  Vol.  111.
p,  2u.  also  Palmer's  translation  of  the  Qur'an,  p.  xxxiv.  and  Hughes  Diet.
Ilf  ' 1 tnsar.

1 These  hues  foli-jw  here  in  31S  (A).

r 217  ]

Malik  Shaniau-d-Din  Dabir,  and  Qazi  Asir  aesired  to  retain  me
by  seizing  my  garments, I but  the  separation  from  my  friends
seized  me  by  the  collar.  I was  obliged  like  Joseph  to  leave  that
prison  pit  and  turn  my  steps  to  * the  metropolis,  and  under  the
shadow  of  the  standard  of  the  Shadow  of  God  1 remained  in  the
city.  In  those  very  same  months,  the  Khan-i-Bnznrg  Qaan
Malik  arrived  from  the  conquest  of  Damrela,®  and  a rumour  came
to  us  that  my  words  had  reached  him,*  so  that  he  made  enquiries
I’egai-ding  the  ripe  frnit  of  my  words;  unripe  fi’uic  as  it  really  was
I laid  it  before  him,  and  it  was  honoured  with  acceptance  in  his
private  hall  of  audience,  and  I was  distinguished  by  a robe  of
honour  and  rewards,  and  I girded  my  loins  in  his  service  and  wore
the  cap  of  companionship,  and  I gave  for  five  jer.rs  more  tc  the
Panjab  and  Multan  water  from  the  sea  of  my  comb  rrable  cL’cnra-
stanecs,  till  suddenly,  by  the  potent  order  ft’  the  -vi.se  ruler,  the
star  of  my  glory  came  into  opposition  w ith  the  inaa<=p:ciou,s  Mars  ; =
the  time  of  its  decline  had  arrived  when  the  unlucky  cavalcade
of  those  born  under  the  influence  of  Mars  came  in  sight,  and  at
evening  time,  the  bright  sun®  sank  by  the  revolution  of  the
heaven,  a world  of  brave  men  struck  by  arrows  had  fallen,  -.nd
the  plain  of  the  earth  was  full  of  broken  cnp?.  and  Death  it.self
was  saying  at  that  time  “ Where  sliall  I place  mv  cup  ami  w here
shall  I take  my  pitcher.”  The-  sky  fed  upon  ..bi.st  and  tiie  .sun
swallowed  a bowl  of  blood.

How  can  we  describe  that  day  of  resnrreotion.

When  even  the  Angel  of  Death  sought  protection  from
the  fray.

In  that  forge  of  calamity  the  rope  of  the  infidel,'  seized  me  also
by  the  throat,  but  inasmuch  as  God  Most  High  ha  1 iengtlseiied  the

i cMitq  (Jj  mss.  (A)  and  ( B).

S See  Muqaddasi.  DeGoeje's  Glossary,  p.  207,

8 MS.  (A)

4 MS.  (A).

8 Mara  and  Sainm  aro  considered  stars  of  ill  omen,  and  are

called  in  Arabic  nahsdn^  TliO  tv. o misforinnes.  (See  Jbn  Kbalduu

Proleg  ii.  218).

* MS.  (A)  reads  .jUil  MS.  (B)  ijtifl.

variant  to  the  text.  The  former  is  tlie  reading  adopted.

28

155.

So  also  footnote

L ]

ropfc  of  rny  llto,  I obtained  release,  and  by  tbe  bigb  road  I made
for  tbe  abode  of  favoni’s,  and  attained  to  tbe  sight  of  tlie  dome
of  Islam  • and  at  the  feet  of  my  mother  became  (as  it  were)
an  inhabitant  of  Paradise,  while  as  for  herself,  as  soon  as  her  eyes
fell  upon  me  the  fountain  of  her  milk  flowed  from  tenderness
towards  me.

Paradise  always  lies  beneath  tlie  teet  ot  a mother,

See  two  sti'eams  of  milk  flow  therefrom,  the  sign  of
Paradise.®

And  I spent  some  time  pleasantly  and  quietly  in  seeing  my
beloved  mother  and  other  dear  ones  in  the  fort  of  .Murninpiii-.
otherwise  called  Patirtli  ® on  tlie  banks  of  tbe  l i^ci’  tianLres."

In  sboi't,  when  tbe  news  of  this  lieart-j'ending  dj'ct'tei  i-eaelied
the  ears  of  the  Sultan,  having  observed  the  duties  of  inoin-ning
for  some  days,  a great  afllicfmn  fell  upon  him,  so  much  >o  that
he  could  never  again  gird  his  loins,  but  be  used  to  oceupv  himself
156  in  all  matters,  and  sent  a despatch  addressed  to  Puglirfi  Khan
who  had  acquiretl  tlie  title  of  Sultan  Kasiru-d-Din,^  to  Lakhnauti
saying.  Since  so  great  a calamity  has  fallen  upon  your  brother
I desire  that  you  should  take  his  place  as  you  .arc  well  able  to  do,
that  ill  looking  in  your  face  I may  be  able  to  forget  tbe  numerous

1 The  reading  here  is  very  uncertain,  tbe  text  reads.  l)^-!  lyY  •

which  has  no  evident  moaning ; JIS.  (D)  rends  ("tij  5I|  jiJO
The  word  here  is  clearly  wrong.  MS.  (A)  reads  (♦Aj  Di  j|iiJ  j.| j

and  this  is  the  v.ariant  I adopt  aUhongh  the  phrase  ill  house  jf  benejits
is  not  a very  usual  one.  Still,  I havedhopght  it  better  to  take  this  as  the
true  rcutHiitj  tlian  to  suggest  other  liypotiietical  readings.

S This  refers  to  tlic  two  springs  of  Paradise  mentioned  in  the  Qnr'iin,  ir,

r ''  I • r?'  . "

{Sra*ata-r-Rahm:in),  (»;Uaa

And  licsiiTcs  these  are  garden.s  twain In  eacli  two  gushing  springs.

The  proverb  runs  See  Roebuck  O.  P.  484.

® Patifili  “ Ancient  town  iiiAliganj  tahsil  Erab  Distiict,  N -W.  Provinces
sitoafcfd  on  tlie  old  big^h  b-mk  of  the  Ganrrei  22  mile  north-en.st  of  Ktah
town.’*  Imp.  Gaz.  xi.  IK).  TiriTruLhnlr,  J.  plares  it  at  a distance  of

about  75  miles  from  Dilili  ami  about  2u  from  KnrrncLabfnl.

4 See  page  186.

C 219  3

sorrows  which  I suffer  on  his  ncconnt.  Nasii  u-d-Din  who  * had
acquired  permanent  and  independent  control  over  that  district
(of  Lakfanauti)  put  off  for  some  time  coming  to  Dihli,  and
even  after  coining  to  Dihli  at  the  earnest  solicitation  of  his
fatiier  was  not  able  to  remain  there,  “ the  elephant  bethought
him  of  Hindustan  ” ^ so  that  forgetting  the  demands  'of  filial,
paternal,  and  biotlierly  affection  he  became  so  restless  from
staying  in  that  place  that  one  day  witliout  his  father’s  permission*
together  with  certain  of  his  kinsfolk  he  went  foi  th  on  pretence
of  hunting,  and  marching  by  rapid  stages  reached  Lakhuauti  and
busied  himself  with  his  own  affairs.

Veuse.

Why  should  I not  betake  my.self  to  my  own  conntrj’  ?

Why  should  I not  be  the  dust  of  the  sole  of  the  foot  of  my
friend  ?

I cannot  endure  the  sorrow  of  exile  and  absence  from  home,

I will  go  to  my  own  country,  and  be  my  own  monarch.

Accordingly  Sultan  Balban,  who  was  very  depressed  and  dejected
at  this  occurreuco.  so  that  clay  by  day  his  weakness  gathered
strength,  as  ho  lay  on  his  bed  of  sicknes.s,  being  moreover  past
eighty  years  of  age,  conferred  upon  the  eldest  son  of  the  ^Martyred
Khan  evho  was  called  Kaiyiusru,  the  title  of  Kbusru  Khan,  and
gave  the  affairs  of  Empire  into  his  hands.  Multan  too  was  entrusted
to  him,  and  he  made  him  the  heir-apparent,  and  made  a will  to
the  effect  that  Kaiqubad  the  son  of  Biighra  Khan  should  be  sent
to  hi.s  father  iu  Lukhiianti.  After  he  had  relieved  his  mind  of
anxiety-  as  to  the  sucoes.siou  of  Kaikhusrfi,  and  the  other  testamen-
tary- dispositions  of  the  government  having  occupied  him  three
days,  he  removed  the  baggage  of  existeuce  from  this  world  to

1 MSS.  (.\)  and  (B)  ^ The  text  and  both  MSS.

call  him  Nasiru-d-Dlii.

2 His  thon^-lits  tamed  homewards.  Anotlior  proverb  of  thia  kind  is

3 zau(i-i-chamuv  zi  HiUir-i-buIbul  namrawaa^

I.C.,  the  desire  of  the  garden  never  leaves  the  heart  of  the  nightingale.

3 1.-- JISS.  (A)  and  (B).  The  reading  in  the  text

is  at  variance  iKjth  with  the  sense,  and  also  with  the  sbiteraent  of  other
historians.  Barm  says  “ Up  wanted  to  go  to  laikhnaiiti  .so  he  found  .a  pretext,
for  doing  so  and  set  off  tlntlier  williont  leave  fiom  his  father  (K.  D Ilf-  124).

[ 220  ]

157.  the  next.  This  eyeiit  took  place  in  the  year  686  H,’  He  bad
reigned  twenty-two  years  and  some  months.

Oh  my  heart ! the  world  is  no  place  of  permanence  and  stay.
Keep  thy  hand  from  the  world — for  it  has  no  stability.

Sultan  Mu'izzu-d-DIn  Kaiqubad  bin  Sultan  Kasieu-d-Di.n  bin
Sultan  Ghitaou-d-Din  Balkan.

In  the  sixteenth  year  of  his  age,  in  succession  to  hi.s  grand-
father, by  the  intervention  of  Malik  Kachhan,  wlio  wa.s  called
Itimar,  and  other  Amirs  Avho  were  disaffected  to  the  Martyred
Khan,  succeeded  to  the  throne  of  Empire.®  Then  having  bestowed
Multan  ujjon  Khusru  Khan  with  hi.s  futnily  and  dependents,  they
sent  him  off  there  under  some  pretext  and  -exiled  hi.s  adherents,
and  when  tiie  Empire  became  established  he  appeitited  ■ all  the
oiSoers  of  ti;e  state  to  their  old  p.-.-ts  in  the  kingdom,  and  Mn!ik
Kizamu-d-Din  ^ was  appointed  Budbeg  ’ and  they  gave  Khwajn
Khatlru-d-Din  the  title  of  Khwaja-i- J ahan.  and  Malik  Siialiik
Amir  Hajib  that  of  Wazir  Khan,  and  Malik  Qiyamu-I-Mnlk
obtained  the  post  of  WakUdar : and  after  six  months  he  left  Dihli
and  founded  the  palace  of  Kilughari,  which  is  now  a min,  near  the
ford  of  Khwaja  Ehizr  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Jumna  ; there  he
held  public  audiences,  and  by  craft  getting  hold  of  the  Murals
who  had  newly  become  Moslims,  put  the  majority  of  them  to
death,  and  banished  a certain  number  of  them.  The  chief  author
and  cause  of  this  action  was  Malik  Nizamu-d-Din  ‘Alaqa  the
158.  Wazir  (this  Nlzamu-d-Diu  ‘Alaqa  is  the  same  in  whose  honour
Muhammad  ‘Aufi  composed  the  books  Jaini‘u-l-Hikaydt  and

1 12S7  A.  D.

* Ziaa-d-Din  Barni,  author  of  the  Turith-i-Firoz  ^>2ht  gives  a slightly
different  accoant  of  the  means  by  whicli  Kaiqiib.iJ  attained  the  succession.
He  states  that  shortly  before  his  death  Baiban  sanimoned  tu  his  presence
Malika-l-Uniarri  Kotwal  of  Dihli,  ^waja  Hasaiu  Basri  the  Wazir  and  some
others  and  charged  them  to  set  KaiUiosrii  son  of  the  ilartyr  prince  npon
the  throne.  After  his  death,  however,  the  Kotwal  and  his  people  who  for

some  i,rivate  reason  ( ) had  been

unfriendly  to  the  Martyr  prince,  were  apprehensive  of  danger  if  KaiUinsru
succeeded,  so  they  sent  him  to  Mnltiin  and  phvced  the  son  of  Bnghra  Khan.
Kaiqubad  ’on  the  throne  with  the  title  of  Mu'izzn-d-Din  (Elliott  III.  124).

* Nephew  of  Malika4-Dmara  Kotwal  of  Dihli.

* Chief  J ustice.

[ 221  1

Tii2kiratii-3h-Shu‘ara) ; and  to  Malik  Chhaju  ( who  eventually  became
grantee  of  Karra  *-  and  Manikpur,  and  whom  Mir  Khusru  euloglBea
in  the  Qiranu-s-Sa‘dain  in  these  words,*

Khan  of  Karra  Chhaju,  conqueror  of  countries

Who  hast  encircled  thy  feet  with  anklets  ® formed  from  the
lips  of  Khans)

was  given  Samana,  his  daughter  was  united  in  marriage  to
Sultan  Mn‘izzu-d-Din  Kaiqnhad.  At  the  end  of  the  month  of  Ziil
Hijjah  in  the  abovementioned  year,  news  arrived  that  the  Tatar
infidels  whose  leader  was  Itimar  had  attacked  Lahore  and  the
frontier  of  Multan.  The  Sultan  appointed  Shahik  Barbak  wiili
thirty  thousand  cavalry  and  giving  him  the  title  of  Khan-i-Jahan
despatched  him  to  oppose  tiiem.  He  pm-sued  the  Tatars  as  far
as  the  foot  of  the  JCid  hills,  and  put  the  greater  number  of  them
to  the  sword,  or  made  them  prisoners,  and  having  repulsed  them
he  came  to  the  Court.

Inasmuch  as  Sultan  Kaiqubad,  during  the  lifetime  of  Sultan
Balbau,  had  not  attained  the  desires  of  his  heart,  and  learned
instructors  had  been  placed  in  charge  of  him,  at  this  time  when
he  attained  to  the  Empire  finding  himself  completely  unfettered
he  occupied  himself  wdth  the  full  fruition  of  lustful  delights,
while  the  majority  of  the  people  took  advantage  of  the  luxurious-
ness of  his  reign  to  spend  their  days  in  wautonness  and  license.
The  ministrants  of  debauchery,  jesters,  singers  and  jugglers  were
admitted  to  close  intimacy  in  his  Court,  in  marked  contrast  to  his
grandfather’s  reign,  and  learnitig,  and  piety,  and  integrity  were
nothing  valued  ; .and  Malik  Nizamu-d-Din  ‘Alaqa  seeiuer  that  the

1 Sot  as  in  the  text,  but,  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  also  Barni.  See

ti'tre  3.  Malik  Chhaju  was  brother’s  son  to  Balban.

a JiSS.  (A)  and  (B)  j *0^  See  HijI  Khnlfa  IV.  510,  9390,

fill

S ill  fiio  orij,;in;il  there  is  a play  on  the  word  Knrrc  which  canut-v  bo

rcprodui:e«l  in  Enc-Ush.  The  lines  arc  as  follows  • (A)  and  (B).

-7  n.  Ji’iT  wh*Tr  Karra  i»  said  (ais  by  ilni  lo

f.  1’.- . ’■•  eii  rho  place  .)t‘  meeting  of  M an-i  Na^  i
CcNo  r.  » u I !Tip,  G:v7  of  i mlia,  Vbd.  V'  1 1 1 bnr  K.i'  ra  '>}•  » U'31 1'-'!'  i?  ttd  i ^>=5

iai  :>w.t',  from  ti  c iin*'  Lakhuauti  -- Dihib  '‘.u  ei-  «;  - ’h^'  i.>»*  t '•'.isy.

r 222  J

Snltan  was  immersed  in  laxnry  ^.nd  enjoyment,  and  uttei-ly  care-
-lesa  of  his  kingdom’s  affairs,  stretched  forth  the  hand  of  oppres-
sion and  went  to  nnwarranted  lengths.  The  vain  desire  of
sovereignty  came  into  his  heart,  so  tliat  he  set  about  devising  the
downfall  of  the  family  of  Ghiyasu-d-Din.  In  the  first  instance
having  instigated  Sultan  Mn‘izzn-d-Dm  to  murder  Kai  Khnsru  the
son  of  Sultan  Muhammad  the  Martyr,  he  summoned  him  fi’om
Multan,  and  in  the  town  of  Rohtak  raised  him  to  the  dignity  of
martyrdom  and  sent  him  to  join  his  father.

159.  In  the  same  way  he  accused  Khwaja-i-Jah  an  of  an  imaginary
crime  and  had  him  publicly  paraded  on  an  ass  through  the  city,
he  also  imprisoned  the  Amir  and  Maliks  of  the  house  of  Balban
who  were  related  to  the  Mughals  who  bad  recently  become
Moslims,  and  deported  them  to  distant  fortresses,  and  destroyed
the  glory  of  Mu‘izzu-d-Din.

Sultan  Nasiru-d-Din  Bughra  Khan,  when  the  tidings  of  his
son’s  ruinous  condition  reached  him  in  Lakhnauti,  wrote  a letter
full  of  hints  couched  in  the  language  of  enigma  and  innuendo  to
Sultan  Mn‘izzu-d-Dla  waining  him  of  the  sinister  intentions  of
Nizarau-l-Mulk.  Sultan  Mu’izzu-d-Din  out  of  the  hot-hoadedness
of  youth,  (lid  not  act  on  his  father’s  advice,  and  after  much
coiTespondence  it  was  decided  that  Sultan  Nasiru-d-Din  should
leave  Lakhnauti,  and  Snltan  Mu‘izzu-d-Din  should  start  from
Dihli  and  that  they  should  visit  each  other  in  Oudh.

F’om  what  Mir  Khusru  may  the  meecy  of  God  he  upon  him,
says  in  the  (Jua,iH-s-Sa‘-dain,^  and  also  from  the  Turlkh-i-Muburak
we  learn  that  Bughra  Khan,  on  his  accession  to  the  throne
of  Beiigala  with  the  title  of  Kasii  u-d-Din,  was  comim,'  with  a large
gat li -till S’ to  attack  Uihli,  and  .Sultan  iln‘izzu-d-l)ia  also  having
collected  his  forces  from  the  neighbouring  districts  .advanced
agtiin-t  liim  in  the  direction  of  Oudh  ; and  since  the  river  Saru^
hiv  between  tliem  the  son  alighted  on  this  side  and  the  father  on

Qii  anii-s-Sa‘dain.  The  conjunction  of  the  two  anapicious  planets.
Jupiter  and  Venus,  see  11.  K,  9399,  also  E and  D.  III.  524.

s T'lrith-t-iluldrni  Sk’il.J,  the  author  of  this  work  is  Yahva  bin  Ahmad
bin  Abdullah  Sirhindi.  (Elliott.  IV-  6j.

S The  principal  streams  (of  Ondh)  are  the  fiaru  (SarjilJ  the  Ghaghar
(Gogra)  the  Sai,  and  the  Godl  (Gumti).  In  the  first  mentioned  divers  aquatic
animals  and  fm-m.s  of  strange  appeiu-auce  shew  themselves.  {.iin-i-Akbui /,
Vol.  II.  171).

[ 223  ]

the  oHicr  side,  and  neither  w£i.s  able  to  cross  the  river.  Tlic
Amirs  and  Maliks  of-  Gdiiyasn-d-Din’s  party,  intervened  with
advice  to  come  to  peaceful  terms,  and  Sultan  Xasiru-d-Din  with
a party  of  special  retainers  crossed  the  raver,  as  it  had  been  agreed
that  the  son  should  sit  upon  the  thi-one,  and  the  father,  standing
below  the  throne,  should  pay  the  customary  dues  of  reverence  and
respect  to  him.  Sultan  Mu‘izzn-d-Dln  from  excess  of  desire  forgot
tliat  compact,  and  on  the  instant  his  er'es  fell  upon  the  sphuidid
pre.sencG  of  his  father  he  came  down  from  his  throne  and  running
barefooted,  was  about  to  fall  at  his  feet.  The  father  however
would  not  permit  this,  whereupon  each  embraced  the  other  and
for  a long  time  they  w’ept  bitterly,  and  in  spite  of  all  the  father’s
attempts  to  take  his  stand  at  the  foot  of  the  throne,  the  son
forcibly  took  him  by  the  hand,  and  led  him  to  the  throne  and
seated  him  upon  it.  Then  he  also  took  his  seat,  and  after  a long
time  the  Snltan  Nasirn-d-Din  returned  to  his  own  camp,  and  sent
as  presents  to  his  son  a large  number  of  famous  elephants
and  very  many  extremely  valuable  presents  and  curiosities,  and
priceless  treasures  from  the  country  of  iiakbnauti.  Thp  son  also
sent  to  his  father  an  equal  number  of  Persian  horses,  and  other
kinds  of  valuable  articles  and  cloth  goods,  and  rare  and  unique
presents  such  that  the  accountant  of  imagination  is  unable  to
estimate  their  number  and  value  ; and  all  sorts  of  delight  and
pleasure  buivst  upon  the  Amiis  of  <Miiyasu-d-Din  and  Ivasiru-d-
Din  aud  Mu’izza-d-Din,  and  upon  high  and  low  of  the  armies,
and  the  Malik.s  of  both  partie.s  exch.mged  visits  ; ilir  Khusru
relates  in  detail  this  meeting  * in  the  Qiranu-s-Sa‘Juin,  and  iu
another  phice  he  writes  in  a qnpJa  :

Hail  i to  the  happy  kingdom  when  two  kings  are  as  one.

Hail  ! to  the  happy  era  when  two  troths  are  as  one.

Aln-i-Al-barJ  II.  305  gives  an  accouiit.  of  the  meeting  of  father  and  son.
For  the  river  Sarji,  see  TiefE.  I.  250.  259,  260,  291,  also  plate  XIX.  facing
page  2U2,  in  wnich  the  coDfiueuce  of  the  Sariii  and’ Ghrgrrt  shewn  ns  if
was  in

The  Qi  1 unU’a’Sci‘dai7i  fixes  the  meeting  between  father  and  son  as  having
taken  place  aL  Ajudliya  on  the  banks  of  the  iJhagra.

1 Ibn  Batata  gives  a somewhat  more  fanciful  description  of  this  meeting
of  Nasirn-cl-Dhi  an<l  ^tii*i/zu-d-DTn  Paris  E'du.  1855,  III.  p.  177,  see
also  Elliott  III.  p.  o'if6.

[ 2-24  ]

161.

Beluilil  ! the  sou  is  a moiiiii-ch.  tlie  father  a Sultan,

Heliolil  tlio  glorious  kiiigdoui  now  that  two  kings  are  as  one.
’Tis  for  the  sake  of  kingship  and  world  enslaving  power,
That  for  the  world,  two  world-protecting  kings  become
as  one.

One  is  the  Nasir  of  the  age,  the  king  Mahmud  Sultan,
'Whoso  edict  in  the  four  parts  of  the  world  is  still  as  one.
The  other  is  Mn‘izzu-d-Din  the  world’s  king  Kaiqubad,

In  whose  gi’asp  Iran  and  Tnran  are  welded  into  one.

And  this  is  his  also —

Sultan  Mu‘izzn-d- Danya  wad  Din  Kaiqubad  Shah
Hast  thou  ever  seen  one  who  is  the  light  of  the  eyes  of  four
kings

On  the  last  day  i when  Sultan  Nasirn-d-Din  came  to  bid  fare-
well in  the  presence  of  Malik  Niz4mu-1-Mulk  and  Qiwamu-1-Mnlk,
who  were  both  of  them  counsellors  and  closely  bound  up  with
the  Government,  he  gave  Mu‘izzn-d-Din  many  good  pieces  of
n.seful  advice  on  all  subjects,  with  exhortation,  and  examples  and
instances,  and  first  of  all  warned  him  against  excess  in  wine  and
venory,  then  spoke  of  his  carelessness  with  regard  to  state  matters,
and  rebuked  him  severely  for  killing  bis  brother  Kai  Khusru  and
the  other  noted  Amirs  and  ilaliks  of  the  adherents  of  Ghiyasu-d-
Din  ; then  he  exhorted  him  to  be  continually  given  to  prayer  and
to  perform  the  fast  of  Ramazan,  and  to  keep  all  the  principal
tenets  of  the  Mnsnlman  religion,  and  taught  him  certain  fixed
rnhes  and  essential  regulations  of  sovereignty.  At  the  time  of
taking  his  .Irparture  he  whispered  in  a low  tone  telling  him  to
get  rid  of  Nizamu-l-Mulk  ‘Alaqa  as  soon  as  possible,  “ for  ” said  he
“if  he  "et.s  a chance  at  you  it  is  small  chance  you  will  get’’  this
much  he  .said,  and  they  bid  one  another  farewell  with  great
emotion,  and  Hultan  Mu‘izzu-d-Din  for  a few  days  remembered
bi^  father's  injunctions,  and  gave  np  bis  vicious  pleasure.s,  but
when  lie  hui!  travelled  a few  stages  the  merrj-  conrtesan.s  and  all
kinds  of  eiit'  ino- musicians  and  enchanting  jugglers,  subvertor.s
of  piety,  ski.iio  .tnd  clever,  crowded  round  him  on  all  sides,
and  eiitiLed  hi'  !eet  from  the  firm  p.ath  of  fortitude  and  sclf-

! MS  ''A,

225  ]

L

restraint,  by  all  sorts  of  gallantries  and  coquetries,  and  sense-
ravishing  gestures  and  allurements.

The  bitter  parting  advice  of  his  father  did  not  find  place  in
his  heart

For  this  reason  that  his  heart,  was  inclined  to  "sweets  of
pleasure.

And  the  elephant  saw  Hindustan  1 in  its  dreams  and  he
broke  through  his  forced  repentance,  which  was  as  filmy  as  the  web
of  a spider,  at  tlie  first  provocation,  and  used  to  say,  “ Which  16&
advice  r * and  what  counsel  ?

I will  not  give  up  the  delights  of  to-day  for  tomorrow
Let  tomorrow  bring  what  it  may,  say  to  it  “Bring  it.”

In  opposition  to  this  view  is  the  following.

It  befits  not  a king  to  be  drunken  with  wine
Nor  become  entangled  in  lust  and  desire  ;

The  king  should  be  always  the  guardian  of  his  people,

It  is  a sin  that  a guardian  should  be  drunken.

When  the  shepherd  become.s  full  of  new  wine
The  flock  sleeps  in  the  belly  of  the  wolf.

Heavy  cups  of  wine  used  he  to  drink  from  the  hands  of  the
light-living  cup  bearers,  and  used  to  snatch  a portion  from  his
short  ephemeral  existence,  and  in  this  state  malicious  time  used
to  foretell  this  calamity,*

Oh  thou  whose  reign  is  the  reign  of  faithles.s  friends
From  thy  love  springs  hate,  from  tliy  honour  disarrace.

Thou  art  as  full  of  turmoil,  but  as  empty,  as  the  drum  ;

Lasting  for  one  night  like  the  caudle,  and  for  one  day  like
the  rose.

In  this  licentious  mode  of  life  he  made  his  way  to  Dihli  where
he  aiTived  in  the  year  689  H.  (1290  A. D.l.  There  certain  of  his
notable  Amirs  became  suspicious  of  his  intentions,  and  withdrew

t See  note  2,  page  219.

* The  text  has  misprint  for  (*100 ,

* The  text  reads  tyil  but  MS.  (A)  reads  preferably

29

L -26  J

to  the  ot  the  iiioiiutiiius  Shev  lO.aii  ' wlio  was  on?  of  their

number  repented  ami  returned,  and  was  throwm  into  a prison
which  he  oidv  left  to  go  to  the  prison  house  of  the  grave,  the
others  weie  p^uli■^hed.  They  bestowed  upon  Firoz  Khan  ibn
Yaghrash  the  Khiljl,  who  eventually  obtained  the  title  of  Sultan
163.  Jalalii-d-Din,  the  title  of  Shayista  Khan,®  and  entrusted  the
district  of  Baran  ^ to  his  control  ; accordingly  he  formed  a plot  by
which  he  . got  Malik  Himar  Kachhan,  who  had  treacherously
attempted  to  slay  him,  into  his  power,  and  took  vengeance  on  him
for  the  deed  which  he  had  failed  to  accomplish.  Then  was  seen  the
truth  of  the  proverb  " He  who  digged  a pit  for  his  brother  is
fallen  into  it  himself.

Thou  hast  ditrged  a pit  in  the  way*  that  thou  mayest  over-
throw others.

Dost  thou  mot  fear  lest  one  day  thou  should’.st  find  thyself
in  the  midst  of  it  ?

This  was  the  plan  which  Sultan  Mu‘izzu-d-Din  carried  into
effect.  He  was  very  anxious  to  act  upon  the  advice  of  his  father
and  remove  Nizamu-l-Mulk  ‘Alaqa,  so  he  in  the  first  instance
appointed  him  to  Multan,  hut  Nizanm-l-Mulk  saw  through  this
device,  and  kept  making  excuses  for  delaying  his  departure,  where-
upon certain  of  the  king’s  retainers  at  a hint  from  him,  poisoned
Nizamu-l-Mulk’s  cup,  and  despatched  him  to  the  land  of  non-
existence. It  so  happened  that  this  occurrence  became  a cause  of
injury  to  the  State.  At  this  same  time  the  Sultan  was  attacked
by  paralysis  ^ from  his  excesses  in  wine  and  venery,  in  addition
to  which  other  deadly  ills  and  chronic  diseases  obtained  the
mastery  over  his  body,  and  his  constitution  not  being  able  to  stand
against  them,  his  powers  succumbed.  The  greater  number  of  the
Amirs  and  Maliks  who  were  well  disposed  to  him  raised  his  son

1 MS.  (A)  reads  Arsar  Khan.

» MS.  (A)  ohk

* MS.  (A)

* MS  lA)  Jo  jO

6 Laqtva  Facial  paralysis.  The  disease  is  thus  described  in  the

Bahru-l-Jaivahir  “ a disease  in  which  one  half  of  the  face  is  drawn
to  me  side  so  that  the  breath  and  the  spittle  come  from  one  side,  the  lips
cannot  be  properly  approximated  and  one  of  the  eyes  cannot  be  cloa^.”

[ 2a7  ]

Kai  Kaus  who  w'as  an  infant  ^ of  tender  years  to  the  throne  with
the  title  of  Shams'i-d-Din.

In  the  year  688  H.  (1289  A.D.)  they  made  terms  with  Shayista
Khan  who  had  distanced  all  his  rivals.*  Accordingly  he  ordered
all  his  kinsmen  and  retainers  whom  he  had  summoned  from  Baran,

® and  had  stationed  fully  armed  and  equipped  in  readiness  on  the
other  side  of  the  river,  to  cross  the  river  Jumna  and  prepare  to
contest  tlie  day  with  their  enemies.  Certain  of  the  Amirs  of  the
party  of  Ghiyasn-d-Din  and  Mu‘izzu-d-Din  came  out  to  oppose
him  with  elephants  and  a large  gathering,  and  having  placed  a
royal  umbrella  over  the  head  of  Sultan  Mn'izzu-d-Din,  who  was  164.
reduced  to  a shadow  by  weakness  and  emaciation,  displayed  him
from  afar  off  from  the  summit  of  the  palace  of  Kilughari  where
he  was  but  bai’ely  visible,  and  made  obeisance  to  him.A  In  the
meantime  Malik  Chhajti,  brother’s  son  to  Snlfan  Ghiyasu-d-Din,
who  had  acquired  the  title  of  Kishll  Khan  cried  out  “ I wish  to
place  Sultan  Mu‘izzn-d-Din  upon  a boat  and  take  him  to  his  father
at  Lakhnauti  and  remain  myself  in  the  service  of  Sultan  Shamsn-
d-Din  Kai  Kaus  ” — In  spite  of  this  the  people  of  Dihli,  fron  the
highest  to  the  lowest,  came  to  the  assistance  of  Shamsn-d-Dip.
and  having  assembled  in  front  of  the  Bndaon  gate  stood  up  ^ to
oppose  Shayista  Khan  in  battle,  and  since  the  sons  of  Maliku-1-
Umara  Fakhru-d-Dln  Kotwal  had  been  taken  prisoners  in  the
fight  with  Shayista  Khan,  and  Malik  Himar  Surkha,  who  had
plotted  with  the  servants  of  Ghiyasu-d-Din  to  kill  Shayista
Khan  and  carry  off  Sultan  Shamsa-d-Din  (Kai  Kaus),“  had  fallen
by  the  hand  of  Ikhtiyaru-d-Din  sou  of  Shayista  Khan  : accordingly
Maliku-l-Umara  (Pakhru-d-Din)  opposed  the  people  and  prevented
their  assembling  as  they  desired,  till  at  last  the  adherents  of
'Shayista  Khan  removed  Sultan  Sliamsu-d-Din  Kai  Kaiis  from  the
throne  by  force  and  carried  him  off  to  Bahapur,*  wlime  Shayista

1 MS.  (A)  omits  the  word  clit.

* The  reading  of  the  text  is  here  adopted  MS.  (A)  reads  iojCe

* MS.  (A)  omits  the  words  ( J ) after

* j ggg  jjQ  other  meaning  for  these  words.

^ MS.  (A)  reads

• * MS  ( AJ  omits  the  word

MS.  (A  I reads  Sarm  says  Baharpiu.  (E.  and  D.  111.  131).

[ 228  ]

166.

Khan  was  ; ihev  then  ordered  * a man  whose  father  had  been  put
to  death  by  Sultan  Mu‘izzu-d-Din  to  go  to  the  palace  of  Kilughari,
which  he  did,  and  finding  the  Sultan  at  his  last  gasp,  he  kicked
him  several  times  on  the  head,  and  then  threw  him  into  the  river
Jumna,  and  the  Empire  passed  from  the  dynasty  of  Ghor,  and
kingship  from  the  family  of  Ghiyasn-d-Din.  This  occurrence
took  place  in  the  middle*  of  the  month  of  Muharram  in  the  year
689  H.  (1209  A.D.).^  The  duiation  of  the  sovereignty  of  Sultan
Mtt‘izzu-d-Din  was  three  years  and  some  months.

This  is  the  changeableness  of  the  ancient  heaven.

At  one  time  it  is  like  a bow  at  another  like  an  arrow  ;

At  one  time  it  feeds  you  with  kindness  at  another  poisons
you  with  enmity,

This  is  an  example  of  the  custom  of  the  revolving  heaven.

We  learn  from  the  Taiikh-i-Miibarak  Shuld  * that  Sultan
Mu‘izzu-d-Din,  after  the  capture  of  the  ^abzada,  was  seized
while  sitting  in  durbar  daring  that  revolt  of  the  populace,  and  was
bound,  and  died  in  captivity  of  hunger  and  thirst : in  the  course
of  his  sufferings  he  wrote  this  quatrain,

The  horse  of  my  excellence  has  been  left  far  behind  on  the
plain.

The  hand  of  my  generosity  has  fallen  between  the  hammer
and  the  anvil.

My  eye  which  used  to  see  the  gold  of  the  mine  and  the
invisible  jewel

To-day  alas  ! is  blinded  for  lack  of  bread.

And  when  the  tumult  between  Itimar  Surkha  and  the  people
of  Giiill  subsided,  and  Shayista  Khan  had  gained  his  heart’s
desire  and  seated  the  prince  upon  the  throne,  and  bad  set  the
afiairs  of  the  kingdom  going  again,  on  the  second  day  after  this,
Sultan  Mu  izzn-d-Din  bade  farewell  to  this  transitory  ^ unstable

1 MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  ji.

* Firiahta  says  6b7  H.  TdrilA-i-ifuhdrak  ^hi  says  19th  Muharram  689  H.

♦ The  TiriM-i-Muharak  §^ihl  gives  the  date  of  the  death  of  Mn'izzu-d.Pin
aa  the  19th  Mnharram  A.  H.  689.

• MS.  (A)  omita

[ 229  ]

world,  and  realised  that  all  that  wanton  enjoyment  had  heen  bnt  a
dream  and  a phantasy.

Quatrain.

If  with  your  love  you  have  lived  in  peace  your  whole  life
long,

Should  you  taste  all  the  sweets  the  world  can  give  your
whole  life  long.

Still  at  the  end  comes  Death  to  meet  you,  and  then  y^ou  find

’Tis  hut  a dream  you  have  vainly  dreamed  your  whole  life
long.

Sultan  Shamso-d-DIn  Kai  Kaus.

The  son  of  Mu'izzu-d-Din  Kaiqubad  nominally  ascended  the
throne  * in  Bahapur  in  the  year  already  mentioned,  by  the  co-
operation of  Shayista  Khan  and  Malik  Chhaju;  and  the  uncle  of
Shayista  Khan,  named  Malik  Husain,  who  had  kept  quiet  at  Kilu-
ghari  during  the  disturbances,  for  the  safe  custody  of  Sultan
Mu‘izzu-d-Din,  had  e.stablished  great  confidence.  Shayista  Khan
made  Malik  Chhaju  Kishli  Khan  undertake  the  duties  of  Regent,  166.
and  handing  over  the  young  prince  to  his  charge,  made  a request
on  his  own  behalf  for  the  districts  of  Tiberhinda,  Debalpnr,  and
Multan,  and  asked  permission  to  depart  thither  ; Malik  yielding  up
the  Regency  and  Vazlrship  to  Shayista  Khan  * asked  for  the  dis-
trict of  Karra  for  himself.  Sh.iyista  Khan  immediately  acceded  to
his  request,  and  conferred  on  him  a robe  of  honour,  and  some  days
later  allowed  him  to  proceed  to  Karra,  and  Maliku-l-Umara  Fakhru-
d-Din  KotwM  having  congratulated  Shayista  Khan  on  his  accession
to  such  high  office  and  great  prosperity  was  instrumental  in  obtain-
ing permission  for  Malik  Chhaju  to  leave.

Shayista  Khan  used  to  bring  the  prince  into  the  durbar  hall
and  used  himself  to  give  audience  and  to  regulate  the  important
affairs  of  state.  After  a month  or  tw  o,  he  brought  .Sultan  Shamsu-
d-Din  on  horseback  to  the  palace  of  Kiltighari,  and  impi  isoned
him,  and  giving  him  as  his  fellows  the  inhabitant.s  of  the  prison-
house  of  the  grave,  sent  him  to  the  secret  abode  of  destruction.

1 MS  (A)  reads  vsAkU*

3 MS  (AJ  reads

[ 230

The  dnratinn  of  tlie  kingdom  of  Shamsii-d-Din  Kai  Kaus  was
three  months  and  a few  daysd

The  wine  of  the  sky  is  not  unmixed  with  the  brine  of
sorrow,

The  world’s  one  employment  is  jugglery  — naught  else.

Sultan  JALALU-D-Dix  IBS  Taghrash  Khilj!

Whose  name  was  Malik  Firoz  and  his  title  Shayista  Khan,
came  to  the  throne  in  the  year  (!S9  H.  as  has  already  been  said,
167.  with  the  consent  and  assistance  of  Malik  Chhaju  Kishli  Khan  ;
P.nd  inasrnucli  he  had  previously  been  regent  and  governor  of  the
kingdom  ® the  affairs  (of  state)  all  devolved  upon  him.

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  although  Shihabu-d-Din  Hak  im
Kirmaiii  tJaunpun,^  the  autlior  of  the  history  called
Mahaiid  Shdh'^,  deduces  the  pedigree  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  and
Sultan  Mahmud  Mahvi  from  the  stock  of  (jalij  Elua.  soii-iu-law
of  Chatigiz  IQiaii,  there  is  a long  story  connected  "vvith  this.  This  at
least  is  clyar  that  this  ancestry  has  no  real  authority,  anj  one  of
Bound  judgment  will  be  able  to  detect  the  falsity  of  his  claim  to
this  descent ; and  as  a matter  of  fact  there  is  no  connection  what-
ever between  Qalij  and  Khalj,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  Qalij  has
too  rough  ii  sound  for  the  Turki  tongue,  and  if  it  had  any  equi-
valent (of  sufficient  softues.s)  it  would  be  Qalj  ^ with  the  meaning

1 Neither  Burnl  nor  Firishta  reckon  Kaikau^  (or  Kaiumoiiis)  having  had

oil  independent  reigu,  and  inasmuch  as  he  was  only  an  inf  nit  oi  >onic  liircc
ycnrs  of  oe:e.  U sec-ms  more  rational  to  allnde  to  him  merely  as  the  pnppefc
that  he  redl.y  was.  The  only  object  in  raisinsr  him  to  the  throne  was
an  attc-iup:  to  save  the  kingdom  from  passing  into  the  hands  of  the  Khiljts.
Ja'  uu-d-Din  who  had  been  appointed  Vizir  whea  Ni/’druu-l-Mulk

had.  been  poison. .-’i,  was  read}’  to  seize  upon  the  throne.  Tlic  ref  uf  Baran
hod  been  coruVrred  upon  }iim  with  the  title  of  ffiiTyisti  subsequently

he  was  made  ’Aii'-i-^^iamaiik,  The  plots  he  coarnred  to  get  rid  of  Kaiqubiid
have  been  dotaih.-d  .,hove.

2 MS.  (A)  >mi' = : ’10  word  (

S See  the  T ^ ■ 'r-i- Mnhmiid  Sha'j.

♦ The  cih  ' th.-'  text  states  in  a footnote  that  this  ii  a mere  rei'i);i  i

quibble  of  ■ a'tar.c*-,  boce  iso  qnlj  and  are  the  same,  the

'lb/ in  ■ ill  , ■'.cc  i’*’  which  follows  the  y in  i,-

accoi  innc-'  • ■ ■< -h*  wf  pjf  idl' Tu rk i.  fui  t hci  ho  -iiates  chat

= . ^ . mK  . i f-'

aui-  .no

[ 231  ]

(if  a sirord  nnd  in  .some  hisfories  it  is  said  that  Klisilj  is  the  name
of  one  of  the  sous  of  Yafis,  (Japhet)  the  son  of  Niih  (Noah)  on
ivhoni  be  peace  and  that  the  Khiljis  descend  from  him.  God  knows
the  truth  of  this.  To  make  alonsrstory  short,  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din
divided  the  gieater  portion  of  the  valuable  appointments  hetween
his  sons  and  brothers,  and  bestowed  the  following  titles — upon  liis
eldest  son  the  title  of  IQifni  Ivlianan.  upon  his  si-cond  son  that  of
Arbali  IQjan,  and  on  bis  youngest  son  that  of  Qadr  IGifm.  while
he  gave  to  his  uncle  Malik  Husain  the  title  of  Taju-l-Mulk.  Tn
thi  s same  waj'  he  bestowed  various  titles  upon  others,  and  allotted
tlnuu  estates,  atid  having  built  a new  town,  and  a new  nfarden  on
the  banks  of  the  Jumna  opposite  to  the  Mu‘izzi  palace  he  called
it  a citadel,  “ The  Rocky  Citadel  ” ; when  it  was  completed  it  was
called  “ Shahr-i-nau  ” (iN’ew-tnwn)t  and  in  Sha'basi,  of  the  second
year  after  his  accession,  Malik  Chhajii  Kishli  Kban  went  to  Karra,
and  became  openly  rebellious.  The  Amirs  of  the  party  of
Gdiiyasn-d-Din  who  held  estates  in  that  district,  joined  with  him^
came  to  Budfion  and  crossed  the  Ganges  by  the  ford  of  Bij'fina
with  the  intention  of  attacking  Dihll.  waiting  for  the  arrival
of  ]\Ialik  Chhnju  who  w.as  to  come  by  way  of  Karra, ^ (and)®
Sultan  Jalalu-d-Dlii  left  Khan  Khanan  in  Pihll  and  marched
against  them.  Dividing  his  forces  into  two  army  corps  he  himself
went  by  way  of  Kol,  and  reached  Budaon,*  sending  Alkali  Khan
towards  Amroha  to  oppose  Malik  Chhaju.  Arkali  Khan  fought
the  enemy  valiantly  in  many  engagements  dining  several  days
on  the  banks  of  the  Rahah,  In  the  meantime  the  people  of
Bairam  Dev  the  Raja  of  Kola,  which  was  also  c-dled  1\...-Iu,  gave
information  to  'Malik  Chhaju  that  Bultan  Jalalii-d-Diii  was  in
pursuit  of  him,  and  having  frightened  him  c-vctcilinglv,  urged
him  to  take  to  flight  He  was  in  such  dread  of  tlic  Sultan,  that
he  did  not  know  his  head  fn.im  his  lucls,  and  in  the  dead  of  night
ho  made  his  escape,  hut  eventually  fell  into  the  hands  of  the
Knwars.®  Arkali  Klian  cros.sed  the  Rah.ah,“  di.spat(.'hcd  Bair.am

1 MS.  (A)

5 MS.  (A)  roaiU  lij'jgi  be  reading  in  tlie  text  is  adopte^l-

8 MS.  (A)  inserts  J h.*ie

* MS.  (A]  reads  *^'^**J  3^-  Tlie  text  ia  pref*  ruble.

6 The  text  gives  an  alternation  reading

« MS  (A)

[ 232  ]

Dey  to  hell,  and  pursued  Malik  Clihaju,  and  took  him  prisoner
together  with  some  of  the  other  Amirs  of  the  Ghi\  asi  faction.
Then  he  went  in  the  direction  of  Bahaii  and  Kasam  Kur,  which
is  the  same  as  Shamsabad,*  and  when  *hey  took  Malik  Chhajii  and
the  other  captive  Balbani  Amirs  in  fetters  and  chains  * into  the
presence  of  the  Sultan,  he  called  to  mind  their  old  ties  of  rela-
tionship, and  loosed  them  from  their  bonds,  sent  them  to  the  baths,
clothed  them  in  rich  garments  of  honour,  and  made  them
partake  of  his  own  table,  sending  Malik  Chhaju  with  the  greatest
marks  of  respect  to  Multan.

169.  Malik  ‘Alau-d-Din  who  was  the  brother’s  son  and  son-in-law  of
the  Sultan,^  and  had  been  appointed  to  the  district  of  Karra,  and
Ilmas  Beg,  the  brother  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  who  subsequently  became
Ulugh  Khan  * w'as  appointed  to  the  post  of  Akhor  Beg.  In  the
meanwhile,  the  summons  which  is  distasteful  to  all  reached  Khan-i-
Ehanan.  The  Sultan  was  greatly  distressed  at  his  loss.  Mir
Khusru  wrote  the  following  dirge  in  uiemoiy  of  him  : —

Wliat  day  is  this  that  I see  not  the  sun  shining.

It  night  has  come  why  do  I not  see  the  brilliant  moon.

Since  two  days  my  sun  has  remained  behind  the  clouds.

So  that  in  my  ej-es  I see  nothing  but  clouds  and  rain.

In  Hindustan  an  evident  danger  has  appeared,

On  every  face  I see  thousands  of  wrinkles  but  I do  not  see
the  Khaqan.®

Tlie  stone  of  the  royal  signet  is  hidden  as  a stone  in  the
mine.

My  heart  has  turned  to  blood  like  the  ruby  for  that  I see
him  not.

1 MS.  (A)  omits  '^AU.

s SIS  (A)  ^

8 SIS.  (A)  has  [)  ^ which  is  a mistake  : and  omits  the  j

after  the  word  inserting  it  after  the  word

* MS.  (A)  which  reads

6 There  are  plays  on  the  words  meaning  a fault,  and  the  kingdom

of  Khata  or  Cathay,  and  meaning  a xvrinJcU  and  the  kingdom  of

Chin  or  China.  The  title  Khaqan  is  the  title  of  the  Emperors  of

Cathay.  Fnr  the  meaning  of  Khaqan,  see  T^iiA-i-Ra^Md? , (Rosa  and  Elias),
page  30,  note  1

[ 233  ]

Lo  there  is  the  King,  seated  on  his  throne,  with  his  courtiers
standing  roimd  him  on  all  sides.

All  are  there,  but  still  I do  not  see  Khan-i-Khanan.

When  I saw  fortune  blinded,  I asked  him.  Dost  thou  wish
for  sight  ?

He  replied,  Vi  hat  could  I do  with  sight,  since  I cannot  see
Mnhmud  Sultan!

And  in  the  year  following,  Arkali  Khan  came  from  Multan  to
Dihli,  and  the  Sultan  leaving  him  in  Dihli  proceeded  to  Maudawar,
and  after  his  arrival  at  that  stage,  having  received  with  anxiety
tidings  of  the  revolt  of  certain  of  the  Ghiyasi  Amirs,  he  made
over  the  district  of  Budaon  to  Malik  MaghlatiA  sent  him  off  at
ouce  and  appointed  Malik  IMiibarak  to  Tiberhiudah,  then  after
reducing  the  fortress  of  Mandawar  proceeded  by  an  uninterrupted  170.
seiues  of  marches  to  Dihli;  and  in  those  days  a certain  Saiyyid
ascetic  and  recluse,  holding  close  communion  with  God,*  relying
upon  Him,  bountiful,®  adorned  with  so  many  excellencies  and
perfections,  Sidi  Maula  by  name  first  came  from ‘Ajam  (Persia)
to  Ajudhan  in  the  service  of  the  pillar  of  the  Saints  the  master
Shaikh  Farid,  Ganjd-Shakkar.  m(ty  God  sanctify  his  resting  place,
and  sought  permission  to  proceed  to  the  eastern  parts  of  Hin-
dustan. They  .said  to  him  “ Beware  of  crowds  of  men,  and  abstain
from  iiitercnui'se  with  kings.”  When  he  reached  Dihli,  Khan-i-
Khanan,  the  oiliest  son  of  the  Sultan,  displayed  the  greatest  desire
to  become  his  di.sci[)le.®  In  the  same  way  the  greater  number  of
the  deposed  ilaliks  and  Amirs  of  the  Balban  party  ® used  daily
both  morning  and  evening  to  sit  at  the  table  of  that  darvesh,  who
would  not  accept  anyi  biiig  from  any  one.  People  used  to  credit
him  with  alchc  iiistlc  powers,  and  used  to  come  in  such  crowds  that
a thousand  lacuis  of  fine  flour  and  five  hundred  mans  of  freshly
skinned  meat,  and  throe  hundred  wans  of  sugar  used  to  be  the  daily

1 MS.  (A)

* MS  fA).

8 MS.  (A).

* See  Beale’s  Dictionarv^,  page  24*"^.
6 MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  omits  ^

30

[ 234  j

expenditare  of  the  Shaikh  which  he  expended  in  alms  ; the  afore-
said  Sidi  although  he  engaged  always  in  vigils  ‘ and  the  prayers
of  the  five  stated  times,  was,  however,  never  present  at  the  public
prayer  on  Fridays,  nor  was  he  bound  by  the  conditions  of  public  *
worship  in  accordance  with  established  custom,  and  Qazi  Jalaln-d-
Din  Kasliaiii  (and)®  Qazi  Urdu  and  men  of  note,  and  trusted
rhiefs,  and  all  both  great  and  small,  used  continually  to  worship  at
his  monastery.

When  this  news  reached  the  Sultan,  the  story  goes  that  one
night  he  went  in  disguise  to  his  monastery,  and  saw  for  himself
that  he  expended  even  more  than  was  reported.  Accordingly  the
next  day  he  held  a grand  durbar  and  ordered  Sidi  Mania  with  the
Qazi  and  the  other  Amirs  who  were  his  disciples,  to  be  brought
before  him  with  ignominious  treatment  of  all  kinds,  bound  in
fetters  and  chains.  He  enquired  into  the  state  of  the  case,  and
asked  each  one  whether  the  Sidi  laid  claim  to  kingly  power.  The
aforesaid  Sidi  denied  it,  and  fortified  hi.s  denial  with  an  oath,  hat
to  no  purpose.  At  that  time  Qazi  Jalalu-d-Din  lay  under  the
Sultan’s  displeasure,  he  also  denied  the  allegation.  The  Sultan
171.  deposed  him,  and  nominated  him  as  Qazi  of  Budaon.  la  order
to  verify  the  claims  to  Saiyyidship,  and  to  test  the  miracnlons
powers  of  the  Sidi,  he  had  a huge  fire  like  that  prepared  by
Ifimnid  (for  Abiaham)  liehted,  and  wi.shed  to  have  Sidi  Mania
thrown  into  that  temple  of  lire.  The  UiamS  of  the  time,  in  con-
sideration of  the  irreligious  nature  of  that  oi'der,  issued  a manda-
mns  which  they  communicated  to  the  Sultan  saying,  “ The
essential  nature  of  fire  is  to  consume  things,  and  no  one  can  issue
forth  from  it  in  .safety  unhurt.”  The  Sultan  accordingly  desisted
and  gave  up  that  ordeal,  hut  he  punished  the  larger  number  of
those  Maliks  in  that  same  assembly,  and  some  he  expatriated ;
and  inasmuch  as  the  answers  of  Sidi  Maula^  were  all  in  accordance
with  reason,  and  no  fault  could  he  found  with  him  either  on  the
score  of  religions  law  or  logic,  the  Sultan  was  reduced  to  extre-
mity. and  suddenly  turning  to  Abu  Bakr  Tusi  Haidari  who  was
the  ciiief  of  the  sect  of  Qalandarg,  and  utterly  unscrupulous,  he

1 MS.  (A)  Asrt*.

« MS.  (A)  adds
® MS.  (A)  omit*  }■

* MS.  (A)  omit*  the  word*

[ 235  ]

said  “ Why  do  not  yon  darveshes  avenge  me  of  this  tyrant,”  there-
upon a Qalandar  leapt  up  from  their  midst,  and  struck  the  unfor-
tunate Sidi  several  blows  with  a razor  and  wounded  him,  then
they  shaved  off  the  holy  man’s  whiskers^  with  a knife  even  to  the
chin,  and  stabbed  him  in  the  side*  with  sackmakers’  needles,
and  then,  by  command  of  Arkali  ^^an,  the  second  son  of  the
Sultan,  an  elephant  driver  drove  a rogue  elephant  over  the  head
of  the  poor  oppressed  Sidi,  and  martyred  him  with  countless
tortures  may  God  be  gracious  to  him.  They  say  that  this  same
Sidi,  for  a whole  month  before  this  occurrence  used  to  sing  these
verses  at  all  times,  smiling  the  while  he  sang :

In  the  kitchen  of  love,  they  slay  naught  but  the  good :

The  weak  uatured,  and  evil  disposed  they  kill  not.

If  thou  art  a sincere  lover,  flee  not  from  slaughter.

He  whom  they  slay  not  is  no  better  than  a corpse.

And  just  at  this  time,  on  the  very  day  of  his  murder,  a whirl-
wind black  with  dust  arose,  and  the  world  was  darkened  ; there  172.
was  a scarcity  of  rain  in  that  year,  and  such  a famine  occurred
that  the  Hindus,  from  c.vcess  of  hunger  and  want,  wont  in  bands
and  joining  their  hands  threw  themselves  into  the  river  Jumna,
and  became  the  portion  of  the  alligator  of  extinction.  Many
Muslims  also,  burning  in  the  flames  of  hunger,  were  drowned
in  the  ocean  of  non-existence,  while  the  rest  of  the  world  took
these  signs  and  events  as  proofs  of  the  verity  of  Sidi  and  as
evidence  of  his  sincerity.  Although  no  inferences  can  be  drawn
fi-ora  facts  of  this  kind,  since  they  may  finally  prove  to  be  ordy
coincidences,  still  I myself  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes  examples
of  such  incidents,  as  shall  be  related  in  their  proper  places  if  God
so  will  it.

God  has  never  cursed  any  nation

Until  the  heart  of  a holy  man  has  been  grieved.

The  remainder  of  the  accused,  at  the  intercession  of  Arkali
Khan,  were  delivered  from  the  danger  which  threatened  their
lives,  end  from  the  punishment  intended  by  the  Sultan  ; and  in
this  sania  year  the  Sui'.iU  for  the  second  lime  marched  agaiiisc

^ MS.

* y -■*  MS.  (A).

[ 236  ]

Bantanbhor,  and  destroyed  the  country  round  it,  and  overthrew
the  idols  and  idol-temples,  but  returned  without  attempting  to
reduce  the  fort.  Arkali  !Qan  went  to  Multan  without  his  per-
mission, at  which  the  Sultan  was  very  vexed.

In  the  year  691  H.  the  Mnghuls  under  Chingiz  Khan  came  up
against  Hindustan  with  a very  large  army,  and  fought  a very,
severe  battle  with  the  Sultan’s  victorious  forces  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Sanam.  When  the  Mugbuls  became  aware  of  the  size  of
the  army  of  Hindustan  they  began  to  make  overtures  for  peace.
The  Sultan  thereupon  summoned  their  leader,  who  was  veiy
closely  related  to  Halaku  Khan,  and  also  his  son,  who  called  the
Sultan  his  father.  They  accordingly  had  an  interview  and  ex-
changed gifts  and  presents  and  each  returned  to  his  own  country  ;

173.  and  Alghu  i the  grandson  of  Chingiz  Khan,  embraced  Islam,  and
several  thousand  Mnghuls  besides  followed  his  example  and  having
learnt  to  repeat  the  sacred  and  blessed  formula,  elected  to  remain
in  the  service  of  the  Sultan.  Alghu  was  selected  for  the  honour
of  becoming  son-in-law  to  the  Sultan.  The  Mnghuls  took  up
their  abode  in  Ghiyaspur  in  which  is  now  the  sacred  tomb  of  the
Prince  of  Holy  men  Nizamul  Auliya  * may  God  sanctify  his  resting
place.  It  is  commonly  known  as  Mughulpur  and  those  Mughuls
were  called  the  “ new  Muslims.”

At  the  close  of  this  same  year  the  Sultan  having  gone  up  against
the  fort  of  Mandawar  ravaged  and  pillaged  the  country  round  it
and  then  returned.  ‘Alau-d-Din  the  Governor  of  Karra,  obtained
permission  in  that  year  to  proceed  to  Bliilsa  ^ and  attacked  that
country  * and  brought  much  booty  thence  to  present  to  the  Sultan,
and  the  idol  which  was  the  object  of  worship  of  the  Hindus,  he
caused  to  be  cast  down  in  front  of  the  gate  of  Badaon  to  be
trampled  upon  by  the  people.^  These  services  of  'Alau-d-Din
being  highly  approved,®  the  jayir  of  Oiidh  also  was  added  to  his
other  estates  ; and  since  ‘Alau-d-Din  was  very  angry  and  incensed

1 See  Tdrikh-i-Rashidi  (Elias  and  Ross)  p.  34.

* NizamU'd-Din  Aaliva.  See  Beale  O.  B.  D.,  p.  211,  also  Airi’i-Akhdrz  (J)
III.  365.

» MS.  (A)  reads  A-V  Bhilsa.  The  text  has  which  is  meauingleBS.

* MS.  (A)  \j  cjf-

6 MS.  (A)  omits  after  and  has  for

* MS.  (A)  for

[ 237  ]

against  the  Sultan’s  consort,  who  was  his  mother-in-law,  and
agaiust  the  daughter  of  the  Sultan,  because  she  always  made  a
practice  of  speaking  ill  of  him  to  her  father,  he  was  anxious,  on
any  pretext  whatever,  to  leave  the  Sultan’s  dominions  and  go  to  a
distance,  and  find  some  place  of  refuge  for  himself ; accordingly  he
provided  himself  with  new  servants,  and  making  all  preparations
as  to  personal  clothing  and  furniture,  he  asked  the  Sultan*  to
bestow  upon  him  the  district  of  Chanderi,  and  leaving  Dihll  came
to  Karra,  and  from  there  under  the  pretence  of  attacking  Chan-
deri, he  went  by  way  of  lllichpur,  and  made  for  the  frontiers  of  the
country  of  Deogir  ; leaving  Malik  ‘Alau-l-ifnlk  who  was  one  of  his
friends,  as  his  deputy  in  Karra,  and  having  instructed  him  to
temporise  with  the  Sultan,  went  off  somewhere  unknown  to  anyone,
and  when  no  news  could  be  obtained  of  Malik  ‘AlSu-d-Din’s  where-
abouts for  a considerable  time,  the  Sultan  was  exceedingly  sorry.*
Suddenly  news  arrived  that  ‘Alau-d-Din  having  gone  up  against  174.
the  rebel  Deo  Gir,  had  conquered  the  whole  of  his  country  as  far
as  the  confines  of  the  country  of  the  Deccan,  and  had  taken  as
spoil  much  treasure,  and  elephants  and  property,  several  thousands
of  horses,  together  with  valuables  ; silk  and  cloth  goods,  and
jewels,  beyond  the  limits  of  computation,  and  that  he  was  making
for  Karra.  This  was  a source  of  great  gratification  to  the  Sultan,
but  the  wise  men  of  those  times  knew  very  well,  both  from
analogy  and  inference,  that  ‘Alau-d-Din  ® had  gone  to  that
country  without  permission  from  the  Sultan,  and  had  suffered
much  annoyance  at  the  hands  of  Malika  i-Jahan  who  was  the
consort  of  the  Sultan,  and  al.so  from  his  own  wife,  and  had  accord-
ingly faced  the  world,  always  nursing  in  his  breast  sinister  inten-
tions. Now  ^ that  he  was  in  a position  perfectly  to  put  his
rebellious  ideas  into  execution,  and  had  not  the  access  to  the
Court,  it  was  strange  that  the  Sultan  seemed  to  suffer  no  appre-
hension as  regarded  him ; but  no  one  dared  represent  these  views
to  the  Sultan,  who  was  wholly  and  eiitiiely  ignorant  of  the
annoyance  which  ‘Alau-d-Din  had  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the
Queen-mother  and  his  own  wife,  and  if  by  chance  they  ventured

I MS.  (A)  lylfetU  t,*iU  y.

s MS.  (A)  pU

S MS.  (A)  omits

* MS.  (A)  omits  j.

[ 238  ]

to  speak ' of  the  possibility  of  the  revolt  and  treachery  of  ‘Alau-
d-Din,  the  Sultan  attributed  it  to  jealousy,  and  would  never  allow
the  idea  of  his  contumacy  or  rebellion  to  enter  his  head.

In  short,  at  the  time  when  the  Sultan  was  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Gwaliar  he  summoned  a council  of  his  Amirs  to  deli-
berate about  ‘Alau-d-Din  and  said.*  “ What  in  your  opinion  is
‘Alau-d-Din’s  object  in  coming  hither  with  so  great  display  and
circumstance,  what  will  he  do  and  what  ought  I to  do  ? shall  I
go  to  meet  him  by  way  of  Chanderi  or  shall  I remain  where
I am,  or  again  shall  I return  to  Dihli  ? ” Malik  Ahmad  Chap  who
was  a Vazir  of  sound  judgment  and  ripe  experience  and  loyal  to
the  backbone,  did  all  he  could  to  warn  the  Sultan  by  adducing
logical  arguments  and  quoting  precedents,  reminding  him  of  the
revolt  of  Malik  Chhaju  and  the  mutiny  of  the  inhabitants  of
Kajra,  events  which  were  of  recent  occurrence,  as  testifying  to
175.  the  probabilities  of  the  present  position,  aud  urged  him  to  go  out
to  meet  ‘Alau-d-Din  on  the  way  by  which  he  would  arrive,  and  to
put  an  end  to  his  ostentations  display  and  pompous  arrogance,  to
seize  his  elephants  and  property,  and  all  the  things  which
were  likely  to  be  of  use  ; but  the  Sultan  would  not  listen  to  his
advice,  and  launching  forth  into  extravagant  eulogy  of  ‘Alau-d-
Din  declared  that  his  mind  was  perfectly  at  ease  on  his  account
in  every  possible  way,  “ for  is  he  not  ” (said  he)  “ my  protege  ® and
foster  child,  he  can  never  harbour  any  evil  designs  against  me.”
Malik  Fakhru-d-Din,  and  the  other  Amirs  also  went  with  oily
speeches  to  the  Sultan,  and  brought  forward  all  sorts  of  absurd
arguments  simply  to  suit  the  humour  of  the  Sultan,  and  adducing
weak  examples  induced  him  to  return  to  Dihli ; Malik  Ahmad
Chap  rose  up  in  wrath  from  that  assembly,  and  spoke  as  follows  :
“ If  Malik  ‘Alau-d-Din  with  all  this^  pomp  and  royal  display  has
arrived  at  Efaira  and  crossing  the  river  Saru  makes  for  Lakhnanti,
I do  not  know  what  can  be  done  by  any  one  to  oppose  him,”  and
lamenting  exceedingly  the  condition  of  the  Sultan  he  repeated  the
following  lines —

I MS.  (A)  y tit*'*-

* MS.  (A)  W J
» MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  ***llti'  ^

£ 239  ]

A foemati,  thouorh  small  one  should  never  despise,

For  a mountain  is  made  up  of  stones  of  small  size.

The  Sultan  then  came  from  Gwaliar  to  Dihli,  and  ‘Alau-d-Din
having  reached  Karra  ^ wrote  despatches  full  of  craft  and
cunning  to  tlie  Court,  and  worked  upon  the  avarice  of  the  Sultan
by  presents  of  elephants  and  endless  wealth,  and  begged  for
a kindly  worded  letter  summoning  him  to  the  Court,  while  all
the  time  he  was  engaged  in  preparations  to  start  for  Lakhnanti,
and  having  sent  his  brother  * Zafar  Khan  to  Oudh  ordered  him
to  hold  iu  readiness  all  the  boats  on  the  river  Saru.  The  simple
minded  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  wrote  a command  with  his  own
baud  in  accordance  w’ith ‘Alau-d-Din’s  request  and  sent  it  ® by
the  hand  oi  two  confidential  and  trusted  body  servants,  one  of
whom  was  named  Imadn-l-Mulk  and  the  other  * ^iau-d-Din.
These  men  when  they  arrived  soon  perceived  by  his  manner  and
bearing  ^ that  the  face  of  affairs  was  altered  ® and  ‘Alau-d-Diu
having  prepared  the  dish  for  the  Sultan,  and  having  arranged
for  its  service  at  a given  signal,  handed  over  ^ those  two
messengers  to  sentries  who  were  charged  to  keep  them  so  closely
guarded  that  not  even  a bird  sbonld  be  able  to  flap  its  wings
near  them,  then  he  wrote  a letter  to  Ilmas  Beg  his  brother,  who
was  also  a son-in-law  of  the  Saltan,*  and  sent  it  to  Dihli,  couched
in  these  words  : “ Inasmuch  as  in  the  course  of  this  expedition,
I have  committed  many  unwarranted  acts,  in  that  without  taking
the  orders  of  the  Sultan  I proceeded  to  Deogir,  for  this  reason
certain  persons  have  aroused  fear  in  my  heart  and  anxiety — but
seeing  that  I am  the  loyal  servant  and  son  of  the  Sultan,  if  he
will  march  lightly  equipped  and  by  rapid  marches  come  and  lay
hands  upon  me,  and  carry  me  off  I have  nothing  to  urge  against

1

* M3.  (A)  the  word  in  the  text  is  omitted  here.

8 MS.  (A

* MS.  (A)

‘ MS.  (A)  jl

* IWue  tS  literally  “ that  the  leaves  had  changed  colour.”

* MS.  (A)

^ M3.  (A)

176.

[ 240  ]

imprisonment,  and  if,  as  they  have  said  the  current  rumours  are
true,  and  the  Sultan’s  mind  is  in  reality  turned  against  me,
I must  perforce  lay  violent  hands  upon  myself  and  efface  myself
from  the  world.”  When  Ilnias  Beg  laid  that  ^ letter  before  the
Sultto,  he  on  the  instant  sent  * Ilmas  Beg  to  reassure  ‘Alau-d-Din
and  gave  him  a promise  that  he  himself  would  follow.  Ilmas
Beg  embarked  in  a boat,  and  going  like  the  wind  over  the  surface
of  the  water, 3 on  the  seventh  day  joined  Malik  ‘Alau-d-Din,  and
urged  him  to  proceed  to  Lakhnauti,*  but  certain  of  the  wise  and
far-seeing  companions  of  ‘Alan-d-Din  said,  “ What  need  have  we
to  go  to  Lakhnauti  when  the  Sultan  by  reason  of  his  excessive
greed  for  the  wealth  of  Deogir,  and  the  elephants  and  horses  of
that  country  will  come  here  lightly  equipped  ^ in  the  very  height
of  the  rainy  season.®  At  that  time  we  will  take  any  steps  that
may  he  necessary and  whatever  has  to  be  done  to  meet  the  emer-
gency, we  have  it  all  stored  up  and  we  will  put  an  end  to  him  on
the  spot.”®  Since  the  cup  of  the  life  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  was
full®  and  his  heart  was  brim  full  of  lust  and  greed  for  that
fancied  and  ill-omened  treasure,*®  and  Fate  too  bad  rendered  him
deaf  and  blind,  not  one  of  these  evil  designs  was  perceived  by
him ;

Terse.

When  Fate  lets  fall  from  the  sky  a feather,

177.  All  the  wise  men  became  **  blind  and  deaf.

Casting  the  advice  of  his  well-wishers  behind  him,*®  he  embarked
on  a boat  with  certain  of  his-  trusted  followers  and  a thousand

I MS.  (A)  Ij  vyf.

* MS.  (A)  3

* MS.  (A)  aA  V*.

* MS.  (A)  by  3

i MS.  (A)  Ji-x-i.

or  Turk!  word,  “saUon  doa  pluies”  (Pavet  do  Courteillos.)

7 MS.  (A)  j»  Oob  Si’

8 MS.  (A)  and  omits

» MS.

1®  MS.  (A)  (.jA  jjc  JU.

II  MS.  (A)  AiJAf.

*•  Lit,  strikmg  their  words  on  the  dorsum  of  his  foot.

{ 241  ]

sowars,  lioiTowitig  his  speed  from  the  wind  and  his  haste  from  the
stream,  and  set  out  for  Karra : he  sent  Malik  Ahmad  Chap  the
Vazir  with  an  armed  force  and  a body  of  retainers  by  land.i
Malik  Ahmad  Chap  W'as  rending  his  garments  but  all  to  no
purpose.

T'erse.

If  the  listener  will  not  turn  his  ear  to  counsel.

He  will  reap  retribution  from  the  high  heaven.

The  Sultan,  whose  life’s  boat  had  been  wrecked  by  a contrary
wind,  and  had  been  cast  on  the  shore  of  destruction,  arrived  at
Ka  rra  on  the  17th  of  the  blessed  month  of  Ramazan  : and  ‘Alan-d-
Din,  who  had  kept  his  forces  in  readiness,  had  crossed  the  livt  v
Ganges  between  Karra  and  Manikpurand  had  pitched  his  camp  ;
then  he  sent  Ilmas  Beg  to  the  .Sultan,  sending  by  him  some  valuable
jewels,  with  strict  order.s  to  use  all  the  means  he  could  devise
and  all  the  craft  he  could  command  to  separate  the  Sultan  from
his  army  and  bring  hint  to  'Alau-d-Din.  His  confederate  there-
fore went  and  presented  himself  before  the  Sultan,  and  with
great  ciaftiness  and  deceit,  and  with  obsequious  liunii’.ity  represen-
ted that*  if  lie  hud  not  come  •Aluu-d-Din  would  have  been  utterly
scared  and  would  have  escaped,  “ and  to  such  an  extent  ” said
he,  “ liave  the  evil  speakers  stuffed  his  ears  ® with  reports  of  the
unkind  and  ill-disposed  utterances  of  the  Sultan,  and  filled  his
mind  with  fear,  that  even  now  fear  and  suspicion  is  by  no
means  entirely  removed  from  his  mind.*  There  is  still  a probabi-
lity of  that  of  wliich  I spoke  before,  unle.ss  the  Sultan  should
shew  him  some  favour  and  kindness,  and  should  re-assuro  him,
and  going  alone,  without  any  retinue,  sliould  take  him  by  the  hand
and  lead  him  here.”

^Ths  Sultan  taking  Ids  blood-thirsty  woids  for  the  truth,
ordered  the  cavalry  escort  which  accompanied  him  to  remain
halted  where  they  were,  and  he  himself,  together  with  a small
body  ot  retainers  armed  and  ready  for  battle,  proceeded  a short
distance  forward,  going  forth  to  meet  Death,  while  the  arch-

I MS.  (A)  siA-U  liJljj.

3 MS.  (A)  Ijjl  Jty.

3 MS.  (A)  omita  J.

31

s MS.  (A)

* MS  ( A)  omita

r 242  ]

178.  traitor  Ilnias  Beg  further  represented  ' saying  “ my  brother  is  in
great  fear  and  awe  of  the  Sultan  *aud  is  quaking  from  head  to
foot ; and  when  he  sees  even  this  small  body  of  men,  he  will  be
all  the  nioie  alarmed,  and  will  despair  of  the  Sultan’s  clemency.”  ®
Accordingly  the  Sultan  oidered  this  body  of  retainers  to  lay
aside  theii  arms  which  they  did  ; those  who  were  closely  attached
to  the  Sultan  were  greatly  agitated  at  (his  foolish  decision,  but
the  Sultan  would  not  be  dissuaded  by  their  objections.  "When
they  aviived  near  the  bank  of  the  river,  the  army  of  ‘ Aiau-d-
Din  was  plainly  visible  drawn  np  in  close  order  fully  armed  and
equipped,  and  evidently  expecting  an  engagement.  Malik  Khnr-
ram  * the  Vatildar  said  to  Ilma.s  Beg  “ We  left  our  army  behind
ns  at  your  instigation,  atid  we  laid  down  our  arms,  what  is  this
that  we  see  an  army  ready  for  action  ? ’’  He  replied  “mj  brother
wishes  to  review  his  army,  and  following  his  nsual  course,  be
wishes  to  make  a proper  display  ^ before  tlie  Sultan,  with  an  eye
to  future  advantage,”  the  Sultan  in  accordance  with  the  saying
‘•When  fate  comes  the  pidiri  becomes  narrow”^  up  to  that
moment  even  did  not  discover  the  deceit  of  his  enemy,  but  of  bis
own  free  will  walked  deliberately  into  the  jaws  of  the  dragon.

Verse.

When  the  day  becomes  dark  to  any  man,

He  does  that  which  is  hurtful  to  him.

When  he  said  to  the  stony-hearted  Ilmas  Beg  “ In  spite  of  my
old  age  and  the  weakness  dne  to  fasting  I came  so  far,?  even  yet
will  not  your  cruel  brother’s  heart  induce  him’  to  get  into  a boat
and  come  to  me  ? ” Ilmas  Beg  answered  “ my  brother  is  unwillincr
to  receive  the  Sultan  empty  handed^  and  with  reserve.  ”

“ If  thou  goest  empty  handed  to  visit  a Sheikh,

Thou  wilt  get  no  profit,  nor  wilt  thou  even  see  him  ”

ITS.  He  is  busy  selecting  elephants  and  valuables  and  goods  to  present

1 MS.  (A)  s MS.  (A)

s MS.  (A)  yilhh-.  ♦ MS.  (A)  pyk  vAULc.

6 MS.  (A)  Jii

* See  page  190,  nofe  4.  7 MS.  (A)

• MS.  r.Vj  ^ S MS.  (Aj  ^

C 243  ]

and  is  quite  occupied  in  that  service  * and  he  has  heen  preparing
food  for  breaking  yonr  fast,  and  to  do  honour  to  the  airival  of  his
guest,  and  is  now  awaiting  the  honoured  coming  of  the  Sultan,  so
that  he  may  be  distinguished  among  his  peers  by  the  honour
derived  from  the  royal  visit.”  The  Sultan  all  this  time  was  occu-
pied in  reading  the  sacred  volume;  they  reached  the  river’s  bank
by  the  time  of  afternoon  prayer  and  he  took  his  seat  in  the  place
they  had  made  ready  for  him  to  sit  in,  and  ‘Alau-d-Din  having
got  every  thing  ready  * came  with  a great  gathering  to  pay  his
respects  to  the  Sultan  and  fell  at  his  feet.^  The  Sultan  smiling,
with  allection  and  kindness  and  love  smote  him  a gentle  blow  on
the  cheek,  and  addi'essing  him  with  great  shew  of  fondness  and
clemency  and  warm-heartedness,  began  to  give  him  words  of
counsel,  and  was  talking  to  him  affectionately  and  lovingly,
reassuring  him  in  every  possible  way,  and  seizing  the  hand  of
Malik  ‘Alau-d-Din  was  drawing  him  near.  At  this  moment  when
the  Sultan  laid  hold  of  his  heard,  and,  kissing  him,  was  shewing
him  marks. of  his  special  favour,  and*  had  given  his  hand  into  his,
‘Alau-d-Dia  seizing  the  Sultan’s  hand  firmly',  wrenched  it,  and  gave
a,  signal  to  a party  of  men  who  were  confederate  and  had  sworn
together  to  murder  the  Sultan.  Then  Mahmud  Salim  who  was
one  of  the  scum  of  Samfina,  aimed  a blow  with  his  sword  at  the
Sultan  and  wounded  him  ; on  receiving  that  wound  the  Sultan
made  for  the  boat  crying  out  as  he  I’an  : “ Thou  wretch  ‘Alau-d-
Din,  what  is  this  thou  hast  done!”  At  tliis  juncture  one  Ikhti-
yaru-d-Din  wlio  had  been  a particular  protege  of  the  Sultau  ran
behind  him  and  inflicted  a second  wound  which  killed  him  ; he
then  cut  off  his  head  and  brought  it  to  ‘.41au-d-Din.‘'  By'  Alau-d-
Din’s  orders,  the  head  of  the  unfortunate  oppressed  and  martyred
monarch  was  placed  npon  a spear  and  carried  round  Karra  and
Manikpur : fi-om  thence  they  took  it  to  Oixdh ; and  the  hotly-  180.
servants  of  the  Sultan  who  were  in  the  boat  were  all  put  to
death,  some  of  them  threw  themselves  into  the  river,  and  were
drowned  in  the  ocean  of  deslrnction.  Malik  Fajchru-d-Din
Kuchi  fell  into  their  hands  alive  and  was  murdered.  Malik  A^mad
Chap  having  made  prisoners  of  the  Sultans  army  brought  it  to

I MS.  {A}  iJfAiuo
s MS.  (A)

6 MS.  (A)  OyT.

S MS.  1-A)  omiM
♦ MS.  ( A)  adds  >

[ 244  1

Dihli  and  1 pending  the  arrival  of  Arkali  KLan  from  Multan
(he  was  the  worthy  son  of  the  Snltan  and  fitted  to  succeed  him
ill  the  kingdom)  as  a temporary  measure,  with,  the  co-operation
of  Malika-i-Jalian,  seated  Qadr  Khan  the  youngest  son  of  the
Snltan,  upon  the  throne  of  Dihli,  with  the  title  of  Ruknu-d-Din
Ihrahim.  The  Amirs  and  Maliks  of  Jalalu-d-Din’s  party  came
one  and  all  to  swear  allegiance  to  him  at  his  accession.  He
retained  the  name  of  King  for  one  month.  Malik  ‘Alau-d-Din
lost  no  time,*  hut  on  the  very  day  of  the  assassination  of  the
Sultan,  made  open  display  of  the  insignia  and  emblems  of  royalty,
and  raising  the  imperial  canopy  over  his  own  head  3 was  addressed
as  Sultan  and  in  the  middle  of  the  rainy  season  marching  unin-
terruptedly he  made  straight  for  the  metropolis  of  Dihli,  and
showering  dinars  and  dirhems  like  rain  over  the  heads  of  the
populace,  and  pelting  the  people  in  the  streets  great  and  small  with
golden  missiles  from  halistae  and  slings,^  came  to  his  own  garden

on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna  and  alighted  there.  Day  by  day  the
AmiiS  of  the  Jalali  faction  joined  themselves  to  liim  and  swore
allegiance  to  him,  and  by  the  hope  of  the  red  gold,  all  regret  for
Jalalu-d-Diu  was  completely  effaced  from  their  black  hearts.

Liberality  is  the  alchemy  « of  the  copper  of  faults  ;

Liberality  is  the  remedy  for  all  pain.

It  is  said  that  by  the  day  when  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  reached
Badaon  sixty  thousand  sowars  had  joined  his  standard,  Malik
Kaknu-d-Din  Ibrahim  seeing  that  lie  had  not  the  power  to  resist
him  went  to  Multan  to  Arkali  Khan,  with  certain  chosen  Amirs
who  remained  faitliful  after  the  massacre  (of  Jalaln-d-Din),
and  the  whole  of  the  kingdom  fell  under  the  dominion  of
‘Alau-d-Diu.

1 MS.  (A)  inserts

* MS.  ( A)  roads  jj)  ^
a MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  inserts  j.

^ MS.  (A)  reads  j

* ffJndy,;.  Cf.  Koeback.  Proverbs,  398.  jj  L*Ah  if
All  copper  which  is  affected  by  Kimiya  becomes  g<dd.

The  science  (of  Alchemy)  has  for  its  object  the  aabstance  bv  which  gold
and  silver  is  perfected  by  .-irtificial  means.”

See  Froleg  : Ibn  Khalddn.  (de  Slanej  III.  207.  See  also  Skeat,  s.  v.

[ 245  ]

The  kingdom  is  God’s  and  greatness  is  His.  The  massacre  of  181.
Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  took  place  in  the  seventeenth  of  the  month
of  Ramazan  in  the  year  694  H.  (A.D.  1294)  and  the  duration  of
his  reign  was  seven  years  and  some  months.

Verses.

Hast  thou  seen  the  acts  of  the  tyrant  heaven  and  its  star,
Mention  it  not ; what  is  the  heaven,  its  revolution,  or  its
arched  vault  ?

How  is  it  that  the  revolving  heaven  has  cast  the  sun  of  the
kingdom  headlong  into  the  dust,

Dust  be  on  the  head  of  his  sun  of  glory.

Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  had  a taste  for  poetry,  and  Amir  TThnsni
after  the  death  of  Mu*izzu-d-Din  Kaiqubad,  came  into  the  service
of  the  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din,  and  was  honoured  by  being  selected
as  an  intimate  companion,  and  was  made  Qur’an-keeper  to  the
Sultan,  he  was  presented  every  year  with  the  robes  of  honour
which  were  reserved  for  the  Amirs  of  the  Sultan^  and  were
tokens  of  special  distinction  and  peculiar  trust.

In  this  same  category  were  Amir  Hasan  and  Muid  Jajarmi  and
Amir  Arslan  Katibi  and  Sa‘d-i-Mantiqi  and  Baqi-i-!Qatib  and  Qazi
Mughis  of  Hansi,  who  is  one  of  the  most  learned  men  of  tlie
time  of  Jalalu-d-Din  and  wrote  a Ghazal  in  nineteen  metres  * of
which  this  is  the  opening  : —

Two  pearly  ears,  a stately  form,  two  lovely  cheeks,  with
fresh  youth  dight.

Thy  glory  is  the  fairy’s  pride,  a fairy  thou,  at  glory’s
height.

Amd  t^ie  rest  of  the  learned  men  used  to  keep  the  Sultan’s
assembly  embellished  and  adoined  with  the  jewels  of  poeras,  and
delicate  points  of  learning  and  philosophy,  and  the  following
few  verses  are  the  offspring  of  the  Sultan’s  genius  : —

1 MS.  (A)  yilt.-

^Sj=‘-  Jji.  It  wonld  appear  from  the  statement  that  this  ^azol
or  ode  was  made  up  of  nineteen  lines,  each  of  which  was  in  a different  metre.

The  first  of  the  above  lines  is  either  Mutaq^nb  or  RarnaL  This  is  called
JZubahraiii  (of  two  metres)  iu  prosody.

The  second  line  is  iu  RainaL

[ 246  ]

182.  I do  not  wish  those  flowing  locks  of  thine  to  be  entangled

I do  not  wish  that  rosy  cheek  of  thine  { with  sliaine)  to  bum.
I wish  that  thou  one  night  unclothed  may’st  come  to  my
embrace

Yes,  loud  I cry  with  all  my  might,  I would  not  hare  it
hidden.

And  at  the  time  when  he  was  besieging  Gwaliar  he  built  a
pavilion  and  a lofty  dome  * and  wrote  this  quatrain  as  an  inscrip-
tion for  that  building  ; —

Quatrain.

I whose  foot  spurns  the  head  of  heaven.

How  can  a heap  of  stone  and  earth  augment  mv  dignity  ?
This  broken  stone  I have  thus  arranged  in  order  that
Some  broken  heart  may  haply  take  comfort  from  it.

And  Sa‘d  Mantiqi  and  the  other  poets  he  ordeied  to  point  out
to  him  the  defects  and  beauties  of  this  composition.  They  all
praised  it  exceedingly  and  said  ! It  has  no  fault,  but  be  replied  ;
You  are  afraid  of  hurting  my  feelings,  I will  point  out  its  defect  *
in  this  quatrain  ;

It  may  be  some  cliauce  traveller  may  pass  by  this  spot
Whose  tattered  gaimeut  is  the  satin  mantle  of  the  starless

sky;  5

Perchance  from  the  felicity  of  his  auspicious  footsteps
One  atom  may  fall  to  my  lot : this  will  suffice  me.

Sci.TAN  ‘Alac-d-DIs  KhiljI.

On  the  twenty-ninth^  of  Zid  Hijjali  in  the  year  six  hundred  and
ninet3--five  (69.5  H.)  (A. I).  1295 j raised  the  banner  of  the  Sultanate

1 MS.  i.t)  y ^

S MS.  (A)  omits  *>7*'^.

® The  highest  of  nil  the  heavens  so  called  because

it  has  no  stai  s.  The  literal  meaning  of  ia  “worn  out”  ‘'effaced.”

Thus  means  a man  whoae  garments  are  worn  ont.  It  also

by  a secoudury  (|'0»t  classical)  meaning  is  nsed  in  the  sense  of  “ Salin.”
Hence  there  is  a double  play  on  the  word  hero,  in  its  opposite  senses.

* -MS.  (A)  reads  (*py  while  our  text  has  j li—

V

[ 247  ]

of  Dihli,  with  the  consent  of  his  brother  Ilmas  Beo^,  to  wliom  he
gave  the  title  of  UIug]i  i^an  * and  to  Sinjar,  liis  wife’s  brother,
who  was  the  Mlr-i-Majlis  he  gave  the  title  of  Alp  Khan,  while  to
Malik  Nnsrat  Jalisari  he  gave  that  of  iSusrat  Khan,  and  to  Malik
Badi'U-d-Din  that  of  Zafar  Khan,*  and  alighted  at  the  plain  of
Siri,  where  he  pitched  his  camp,  and  giving  puidic  amlieiiee
delighted  the  heaits  of  the  Amii-s  and  all  classes  of  his  subjects
bj  his  boundless  munificence,  then  he  had  the  T^vfJnOi  and  tiic
Sikka  promulgated  in  his  own  name  and  conferred®  ai'pointments
and  titles  upon  the  Amirs,  and  distributing yf7g7rs  gave  his  mind
first  of  all  to  his  principal  object  which  was  to  overthrow  the  two
sous  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-JDin  who  were  in  Multan.'*

Verse.

As  long  as  the  head  of  the  heir  to  the  throne  is  on  his
shoulders.

Disorder  is  the  mantle  of  the  bodj  of  the  state.

In  the  Muliarram  696  .4.  H.  (he  sent)  Ulngh  Khau  and  Alp
Khan  against  Arhali  Khau  and  Sultan  Rnknu-d-Uin  ; ® both  tlicse

Mir  ]^usru  in  the  Tunkh-i-' Ahh,  states  that  ‘.^tna-d-Din  left  Karra
Jlanikpnr  on  the  19th  of  R.ibl'nl  Akhir  695  FT.  and  after  taking  great  booty
from  Ram  Deo,  Rai  of  Deogir,  returned  to  Karfa  on  the  28th  Kajab.  His
accession  to  the  throne  took  place  on  the  16th  Ramazan  695  11.,  and  lie  .arrived
at  Dihll  on  the  22nd  of  Zilhijjah  of  the  fame  year.

The  test  has  possibly  been  corrected  to  agree  witli  this  antlior’s  date.
Barni  does  not  give  the  day  of  the  month  ■ nor  does  Firisht.a.  Tlie  latter
tells  us  tliat  on  the  death  tU'  Jaialu-d-Din,  5[alik.a-i-Jahrtn  of  liar  ow'n  accord
set  Qadr  Khan  the  Tonntrost  son  of  Jalalu-d-I)in  on  tlic  tlirone.  with  the  title
of  Unkna-d-Diu  Ibraliim,  and  finding  he  was  too  young,  sent  to  Mnltan  to
snmnion  the  second  son  Arkali  Khan,  who  refused  to  come  hearing  of  ‘Aliiu-
d Din’s  success  with  the  armr.

t JIS.  (Aj  ; the  text  reads  tlt^

* Barni  says  that  the  title  of  Zafar  Khan  was  conferred  on  Malik  Hizabrn-
d-Din,  (Elliott  III.  157).

B The  text  omits  before  supplied  from  MS.  ('A}.

^ It  appears  both  from  Barni  and  Firishta  that  the  yonii^ost  son  of  tho  lato
Sultan  -was  in  Dihii  and  that  Arkali  Khan  Avas  in  Mukfuu  See  notf*  b'hisc
page,  and  Elliott  III.  159.

^ Although  the  author  has  given  no  account  of  Qadr  Khiih's  (.nrouaiiun  ha.
hero  gives  Inni  title  by  Asliich  he  was  raised  to  the  throne.

183,

[ 248  ]

brothers  were  besieged  ^ in  the  fortress  of  Multan.  The  inhabi-
tants of  the  city  and  tlie  Kotwal  asked  for  quarter,  and  made  over-
tures for  peace,  and  the  two  princes,  by  the  intervention  of  Shaikh
Itiiknu-d-Dln  Quraishi  may  God  sanctify  his  resting  plaoef  came
forth  and  had  an  interview  with  Ulugh  dOran,®  who  treated  them
with  the  utmost  respect,  sending  a despatch  announcing  his
victory  to  Dilili  ; and  taking  the  family  and  tribe  of  Jalalu-d-Din
he  set  out  for  Dihli.  VYhen  they  came  near  Boliar*  a place  in  the
vicinity  of  Hansi,  ISTusrat  Khan  arrived  with  an  order,  in  obedience
to  which  they  put  out  the  eyes  of  both  the  sons  ^ of  Sultan  Jalalu-
d-Din,  of  Alghu  Khan  the  Mnghul  son-in-law  to  the  Sultan^
and  of  Malik  Ahmad  Chap,®  and  lianded  over  the  Sultan’s  sons  7
to  the  Kotwal  of  Hansi  and  martyred  them  together  with  two
sons  of  Arkali  Khan.®  They  kept  the  Saltan’s  wives  and  the
rest  of  his  children  imprisoned  in  Dihli,  sending  Ahmad  Chap
and  Alghu  the  Mughul  to  the  fortress  of  Gwaliar,  and  putting  out
the  eyes  of  some  others  also,  scattered  them  in  all  directions  and
punished  them  with  tortures,  and  very  many  of  the  old  families
they  utterly  destroyed  and  the  hidden  meaning  ©f  Sidi  Maula®  soon

1 I read  here  though  there  is  a question  if  we  should  not  read

The  text  reads  which  is  inanifeBtly  wrong  : MS.  (A)  reads

which  is  perhaps  meant  for  JI8.  (B)  which  is  of  very

little  valne  as  before  pointed  out  reads

* Banii  states  that  the  sons  of  the  Sultan  sent  Shai^u-l-Isliim,  Shaikh
Ruknu'd-Oin  to  sue  for  safety  from  Ulugh  Khan  and  received  his  assurances,
(Elliott  III.  161),  MS.  (A)  omits^ 3*^1.  This  Euknu-d-DIn  was  the  son  of
Shaikh  Sadru-d-Din  ‘Arif  and  grandson  of  Shaikh  Bahau-d-Din  Zakariya
(See  Aln-i-Akhtln,  Jarrett  III.  365).

Firishta  gives  a fall  biography  of  Ruknn-d-Din,  his  father  and  grandfather

q.  V.  _

5 MS.  (A)  otiiu  b.

* MS.  (A)>trJ.

6 MS  {A)^jV>.

* AVib  (Bami.  Elliott  III.  162).  MS.  (A)  omits  \)-

1 MS.  (A;  omits  clbal-.

Baini  merely  states  that  the  princes  were  imprisotied,  and  that  al  the
sons  of  Ark.tU  were  si.iin.

9 MS  {A;  OD'-.-i

[ 249  ]

became  evident,  and  (vengeance  for)  his  blood  did  not  long  sleep.*

In  a short  time  * it  became  the  cause  of  the  shedding  of  the
blood  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  and  his  family,  and  of  so  many  184-
thousands  of  others  among  the  people  who  had  been  murdered.

The  wealth  of  Qarun  which  still  sinks  down  to  the  bottom
of  the  earth,

You  may  have  read,  that  it  was  a source  of  envy  to  the
poor.®

And  in  the  year  * 697  A.H.  (1297  A.D. ),  Nusrat  Khan  having
been  appointed  to  the  office  of  Vazir,  used  strenuous  efforts  to
recover  the  money  which  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  had  lavished  in
the  commencement  of  his  reign  in  order  to  gain  over  the  affec-
tions of  the  people,  and  demanding  tlie  repayment  of  very  large
sums  deposited  them  in  the  tx-easury  ; and  having  summoned  from
Kafja,  ‘Alan-l-Mulk  the  uncle  of  Zuiu-d-Din  BaniT,  the  author
of  the  Tarikh-i-Flroz  Shiihl  (whom  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  had  re-
moved fi’om  the  kotwalship  of  Dihli  and  had  sent  as  governor  to
Karra,  appointing  Kasrat  Khan  to  the  office  of  Kotw.'il)  he
conferred  upon  him  his  old  rank.  Alp  Khan  being  appointed
to  Multan.  And  in  the  year  698  A.  H.  (1298  A.D.)  one  Saldi  ® a
Mughal  commander,  crossing  the  Indus  came  towai’ds  Hindustan,
aud  Ulugh  Khan  and  Tughlaq  Khan  the  governor  of  Depalpur
(who  is  Ghdzl-i-Mulk),  wei’e  appointed  to  put  down  that  rising,
and  offered  strong  opposition  to  them  ® on  the  confines  of  Jarin
Manjhui’.'*  The  Mughul  army  was  defeated,  some  of  them  were
killed  and  others  taken  prisoners,  and  the  army  of  Saltan  ‘Alan-d-
Din  retunied  victorious  with  many  spoils.  A second  time

1 its.  (A)  jii.

» MS.  (A)

* See  Qnr’an  XXVIII.  76.

* Omic  ju  MS.  (A).

6 The  text  reads  Chataldi.  MS.  (A)  reads  ShWJ,  so  also

Burn!  (Elliott  III.  165)  uud  AJn-t-Akban  (Jarrett)  III.  347,

Firishta  calls  him  Chaldi,

MS.  < Aj

1 IJoth  Barm  and  Fivisiita  say  Slwifiliii.

32

[ 250  ]

Qutltiq  Khwaja,  the  sou  of  Dua,*  came  from  Mawarau-ii-nahf
with  a countless  host  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  Hindustan,  and
penetrated*  as  far  as  Dihli,  inflicting  no  injury  on  the  districts
through  wiiich  he  passed.  In  Dihli  itself  grain  became  very
dear,  and  the  citizens  were  in  great  straits,*  and  Sultan  ‘Alan-d-
185.  Dm  placing  Ulugh  i^an  and  Zafar  Khan  in  command  of  the
forces,  sent  them  with  a countless  host  to  oppose  the  AJughnl
army,  and  a severe  battle  was  fought  on  the  frontiers  of  Gill.*
Zafar  Khan  was  killed,  and  the  Sultan  had  gained  what  lie
wanted  in  tliis.®  Qutinq  Khwaja  after  Lis  defeat  made  his  way
to  Kbuiasan  wheie  lie  died.

A third  time  Targhi  Mughnl  who  was  one  of  the  rnai-gau?,^  that
is  to  say  accurate  archers  of  that  country,  accompanied  by  100,000
infantry  and  20,000  valiant  and  renowned  cavalry,  seized  the  fort
of  the  hills,  and  gaining  possession  of  that  country,  penetrated
as  far  as  the  township  of  Baran,  where  Malik  Fakhru-d-Din  Atnir
Dad  the  Governor  was  etttrenched ; Malik  Tughlaq  Ghazi-i-
Mulk  was  sent  from  the  metropolis  to  put  down  that  disturbance.^
Malik  Fnkhru-d-Din  sallying  from  the  fortress  of  Baran,*  joined
with  Malik  Tu^laq,  and  they  jointly  made  a night  attack  upon
the  Mn^nls.®  The  Mughul  forces  being  routed,  Targhi  was  taken
piisoner  and  Malik  Tughlaq  brought  him  into  the  royal  presence.

A fourth  time,  Jluhanimad  Turtaq  and  ‘All  Beg  Mughul.  who
were  the  sons  of  the  royal  house  of  Khurasan,  brought  together

I MS.  (A),  80  also  Firishta.

» MS.  (A)  ji.

8 M.S  (A)  Vi-Af  I^io  l.^.

A Or  Kill  (Harni

6 H.irni  explains  this.  H-e  say.s  “ ‘Alan-d-Din  retnrned  from  Kill,  c insider-
ing  that  he  had  won  a great  victory  : the  Mnghuls  had  been  put  to  flight  and
the  brnve  and  fearless  ^afsir  Khan  liml  been  got  rid  of  without  disgrace.”

8 Tl.is  ^vol•d  is  given  by  M.  P.vvet  de  Courteillo  in  the  meanings  of
/t/.'-'tc’/  ; b-'H  tirriir:  hc^ro.y.  Jt  is  a Turk!  word.

” The  re..iliiig  of  f.-\)  is  here  foll-nved  : viz.

VS.A?  iioj  lyl  J|  uAbo  (5^  iAUa).

MS.  (A ;

9 MS  (A)  J** ^ 6'^**

1*^  1'he  reaclintr  of  ihi.s  nrune  is  a little  iinreitam  M?'.  (A.)  niav  be  either
<3^  or  Neither  Bavni  nor  Firishia  give  any  asaistunce  : nor  does

[ 251  1

a very  large  army,  wliicii  they  divided  into  two,  one  bore  dowia
upon  Nagor,l  while  the  other  seized  the  fort  of  the  Sirmur  liills
and  occupied  the  country  as  far  as  the  river  Biah  which  they  call
Kali  Pant.®  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Diu  appointed  M ilik  Manik  his
slave  (vvho  is  Kafur  Kaib  or  Hazar  Dinarl®)  with  Malik  Tgghlnq
Governor  of  Depaipur  to  proceed  to  Amroha ; and  while  tlie
Mughal  army,  haviug  succeeded  in  capturing  much  spoil  and  many
cattle,  was  marching  to  the  banks  of  the  river  Bahab,  Malik  Manik  186.
came  np  in  pursuit*  and  a severe  battle  ensued.  Both  the  Mughul
princes  evinced  great  bravery,  but  were  ultimately  taken  prisoners,
and  tvere  put  to  death,  while  the  greater  part  of  those  accursed
ones  became  food  for  the  sword  of  vengeance,  and  the  remnant
of  the  sword  fled  panicstricken  to  their  own  country.  The  heads
of  those  tw'o  princes  were  taken  to  Badaon  and  impaled  upon
the  battlements  of  the  fort.  One  of  the  learned  poets  of  that
time  wrote  the  following  quatrain  which  was  afterwards  inscribed
upon  the  southern  g.iteway  of  that  city.

Quatrain.

Xohle  fortress!  whose  ht-lper  may  the  assistance  of  the
.'Vliniglity  ever  be  !

the  victory  and  conquest  of  the  Emperor  ever  be  thy
.siandard-beat  er  !

The  Malik  of  this  age  became  thy  builder,  and  built  thee
anew,

!Mi’,y  Targhi.  like  ‘All  Beg^  become  thy  captive

And  !Mlr  IQinsrii  “ ha.s  written  an  account  of  the  fight  bctw'eea
Malik  Mauik  (who  had  obtained  the  title  of  Malik  Naib^J  in

vi'i.or  "wortl  appear  in  the  Tarki  dictionary.  The  text  reads  Tai-yaq

whifii  •'Lvms  rarher  aner  ncceasitate  readi.ig.  The  TdrlMi-i'WhU  roada  Turtaq.

(hriuLi  ill.  72.)

1 'A)

s MS.  (AJ

8 So  ca]h*d  because  ho  liad  been  originally  .purchased  for  a thousand  dinrii-s.

^ AIS.  (A)

6 MS.  (A)  ^
s MS.  (A)  omits

^ Firishta  states  that  this  title  was  conferred  upon  Milik  Kiifiir  (IT  i/,ir
llinari)  on  the  occasion  of  his  being  placed  in  coramami  of  an  ariiiT  to
proceed  against  Ram  Deo,  Raja  of  Deoghar,  a refractorv  tribntarv.

[ 252  ]

the  Tankk-i-KhazShui- l-FutiiA  ^ a mai’vel  of  literature,  which
mortal  powers  confess  themselves  impotent  to  approach  or
inaitate,  though  to  tell  the  tiuth  all  the  writings  of  tliat  king
of  poets,  rightly  named  Khusru,  are  of  this  excellence,  and  to
praise  and  crown  them  is  an  impertinence  and  error  for  any  other.

Whenever  any  thought  shines  forth  from  his  mind
It  is  so  subtle  as  to  escape  comprehension  and  defy  imita-
tion.

On  the  fifth  occasion  Iqbalmand  and  Kapak,  Mughnls,  brought
together  an  army  to  take  vengeance  for  Turtaq  * and  ‘Ali  Beg,
and  invaded  the  frontiers  of  Multan.  The  Sultan  on  this  occa-
sion also  appointed  Malik  Naib,  and  Malik  Tughlaq.  They  pro-
ceeded by  forced  marches  while  the  Mughal s were  falling  back,
and  pursuing  them  gave  battle.  Kapak  was  taken  piisoner,  but
was  ransomed  by  the  infidel  'i’atars,  with  the  prisoners  and  abun-
dant booty  which  had  fallen  into  their  hands.®  From  that  day
the  Mughuls  lost  their  enthusiasm  for  the  conquest  of  Hindustan,
and  the  teeth  of  their  ambition  became  blunted.

After  these  victories,  the  Sultan  one  night  was  holding  a wine
party  quite  at  his  ease  with  his  companions,  and  was  quaffino-
copious  draughts  of  wine.  The  night,  like  the  circulation  of  the
187,  svine  cup,  had  come  near  to  an  end  ; suddenly  some  of  the  assembled
guests  began  to  make  signs  to  each  other  * with  hand,  and  eye,
and  brow  that  it  was  time  to  break  up,®  the  Sultan  happened
to  perceive  it,  he  was  annoyed  and  cried  ont  Mutiny  1 Mutiny  !
and  on  the  instant  gave  ordei-s  for  Baha  (who  was  one  of  his
boon-companions  and  choice  spirits)  to  be  killed.  The  rest  fled
in  confusion.  On  the  following  morning  when  he  came  to  realise

1 This  work,  known  also  as  the  Tutikh-i-‘Aldi,  is  a prose  history  of  the  first
years  of  Sultan  Alan-d-Din  Khilji  from  his  accession  in  695  H.  to  the  close  of
710  H.  (Elliot  in.  68-69.)

* MS.  (A)  omits  and  gives  the  pointing  of  Turtaq  as  Jky.

S MS.  (A)  This  account  differs  somewhat  from  that  given  by

Khusru.  who  makes  the  invasion  of  Kapak  separate  from  and  precedent  to
that  of  Iqbal  Mndbir  as  he  calls  him.

* MS.  (A)

5 MS.  (A)  tylltU  jlii  j.

[ 253  1

wliafc  liad  occurred,  it  was  as  clear  as  day  to  the  Sultan  * that  his
suspicion  was  groundless.

Wait,  till  the  world  removes  the  veil  from  tlie  face  of  events.

And  till  that  thou  hast  done  this  evening,  tomorrow  is
plain  to  thee.

Then  he  asked  for  Qazi  Baha.*  They  replied.  He  was  sent  into
eternity  at  that  very  moment.^  The  Sultan  was  very  repentant
and  ashamed  at  hearing  this,  and  vowed  never  again  to  drink
wine,  and  ordered  it  to  he  proclaimed  that  the  use  of  wine  should
be  absolutely  abandoned  throughout  the  kingdom.  Cask  upon
cask  of  wine  was  poured  out  in  the  court  till  it  became  a flowing
river.  Everyone  who  was  discovered  intoxicated,  was  hauled  off
to  prison,  and  punished  by  imprisonment  and  confiscation  of
property.

Piety  and  penitence  became  the  order  of  the  day,  the  taverns
were  in  ruins, ^ and  the  police  officers  had  plenty  of  work,
and  there  was  no  longer  any  need  to  purchase  vinegar,®  while  the
wine  bibbers  were  giving  expression  by  their  actions  to  tliese
verses :

Now  he  sprinkles  the  flagon  with  salt,  now  he  shatters  the
cup, 7

How  the  policeman  disturbs  the  peace  of  the  tavern  in
which  we  sup.

1 The  text  has- a note  here  to  the  effect  that  a Ij  shonid  prolialily  be  in-
serted after  but  that  it  is  not  found  in  oitiicr  of  the  two  MSS.  before

the  editor.

MS.  (A)  lias  Ij,  .and  reads  ctT  jfj  tj

* The  text  here  and  in  the  former  line  rends  MS.  (A)  has

® The  text  reads  ^

* MS.  (A)  J

^ There  is  a play  on  words  here  in  the  original

^ Wine  not  beini?  drunk  all  the  grapejuiee  con^d  be  utilised  for  vinegar ;
There  is  a hint  heie  that  every  one  was  discontented,  h »d,  as  we  say,  soar
looks  which  the  Persians  express  by  saying  AxS"

So  and  so  sells  vinegar.  Qaani  says  to  his  mistress.

*\jSLs  1*5"  asy.

'1  MS.  (A)  omits  [)  but  the  text  is  correct.

C 251  1

And  in  tlie  year  697  H.  (1297  A.D.)  the  Sultan  becoming  suspi-
cious of  the  uewly-converted  Muslim  Mughnis  was  contemplating
188  to  murder  and  eradicate  them,  and  tliey  also  for  their  part,  goaded
by  the  extortion  of  the  revenue  collectors  and  their  extortionate
demands  for  refunding  money,'  w'ere  plotting  a rebellion  whilst
the  Saltan  should  ho  hunting  and  hawkiiig.3  One  of  them  who
■was  opposed  to  this  scheme  made  it  known  to  the  Sultan.  Seciet
orders  were  written  and  despatched  to  the  Governors  of  the  country
saying  that  on  a certain  day  ^ they  should  put  to  deatli  all  the
new  Muslim  Mughuls  with  one  consent  wherever  they  found
them.

Accordingly  on  the  appointed  date  they  despatched  so  many
poor  hapless  Mughuls  w'ith  the  sword  of  in-justice,  and  sent  them
on  their  travels  to  the  kingdom  of  annihilation,  that  the  mind
cannot  compute  their  number,  and  the  name  of  Mnghiil  no  longer
survived  in  Hindusifan,  although  this  custom  of  killing  strangeis
has  survived  from  that  time.

And  in  the  commencement  of  affairs,  the  fact  of  so  many
victories  following  one  another  in  close  succession  led  to  extrava-
gant ambitious  in  the  mind  of  the  Sultan;  one  of  the.se  was  reli-
gious innovation,  and  moreover  by  the  assistaiico  of  these  four
Ulugh  Khan.  Nusrat  Khan,  Zufar  Khan  and  Alp  Khan  he  was  led
to  estimate  himself  as  being  superior  to  the  Prophet  on  whom
he  the  peace  and  hlessiny  of  Godf  and  his  companions  may
God  he  g-racioui  to  them  atl>  The  second  was  the  conquest  of
the  -whole  inhahited  world  like  Sikandar  ; thi.s  led  to  his  ordering
his  name  to  be  inscribed  on  the  cui-reiicy  and  niemioued  in  the
proclamation  as  Sikauuar-i-san.I.''  When  he  sought  the  advice

1 This  -was  spoken  of  above.  ‘.\iriu-d-DIp.’s  officers  disapproved  of  the  lavish
wav  lie  had  squandered  his  money  m gifts  in  the  early  days  of  his  accession
to  power.

ilS  (.4).

s ^15.  (A)  omits  }

4 IIS.  (A)  3

6 M3.  (A)  omits  3-

6 Alexander  the  second.  The  accnracy  of  this  statemout  is  te>.KQed  to  by
tbe  ' xiatoi-ce  of  coins  bearing  this  title,  uold  eoiiis  we-gbiag  Ifjfj.  ib8  6 and
ktrs  nro  in  existence  bearing  tlu-  lo-.^end

(gee  Thomas,  p.  168  )

Sikiindai  u-s-sdn.  1 nnunu.-1'khii.djtit  }\uSii  u Aitiifii-l'hn unini  In.

[ 255  ]

of  ‘Alau-l-Mulk  Kotwal  of  Dihli  he  restrained  the  Snltan  from
pursuing  both  these  claims  and  said,  “ No  one  can  evolve  a reli-
gion out  of  his  own  brain  nidess  he  be  aided  * by  God,  and  till
he  can  pei  foriu  miracles  * This  object  cannot  be  acquired  by  the
strength  of  dominion,  and  wealth,  and  majesty,  and  splendour,
moreover  such  an  attempt  may  be  expected,  nay  is  certain  to
result  in  violent  disorders  and  tumults  of  all  kinds,  nothing  will  be
gained  while  disgrace  will  follow  the  attempt : as  for  conquering
realms,  it  is  a worthy  ambition,  but  needs  the  highest  qualifica-
tions, as  well  as  perfection  of  rule  and  a vazir  like  Aristotle,
none  of  which  are  here  existent.

Tf  the  Sultan  clears  Hindustan  of  infidels  and  frees  the  envi-
rons of  Dihli  from  these  contumacious  ruffians,  this  will  be  in  no
way  inferior  to  the  world  conquests  of  Sikandar.”

The  Snltan,  after  due  meditation,  was  greatly  pleased  with  these  189.
proofs  deduced  from  reason  and  supported  by  precedent,  and
bestowed  a robe  of  honour  upon  ‘Al.iu-l-Mulk  and  gave  him  large
rewards,  and  abstained  from  attempting  to  satisfy  either  of  his
ambitions.  The  Amiis,  who  on  account  of  the  harshness  of  the
Sultan,  and  the  roughness  of  his  temper,  were  unable  to  say  any-
thing of  service,  all  sent  presents  of  horses  and  valuables  for
‘Alau-l-ilulk  and  were  loud  in  praise  of  him.

Fo'se.

In  my  opinion  that  one  is  thy  well  wisher,

Who  says  that  will  be  a thorn  in  thy  path.

In  this  year  the  Sultan  pi’oceeding  to  Deogir  gained  a fresh
conquest  ^ and  doubled  his  spoils  :

Th'at  which  he  cut  after  that  his  sword  cut  double.

That  which  he  defeated  after  that  his  mace  defeated  again
and  again.

And  in  the  year  698  H.  (1298  A.D.)  he  appointed  Ulugh  Khan
to  the  command  of  a powerful  ar.my,  to  proceed  into  the  country  of
Gujerat  against  Rai  Karan  who  had  thirty  thousand  cavalry,  and
eighty  thousand  infantry,  and  thirty  head  of  elephants.  Ulugh

t IVtS.  (A)  Av.wtxJ  iiJ\  tXxx  b.

2 MS.  ( .\ ) j.  The  text  rcaiU  correctly.

8 MS.  (A)  j

[ 256  ]

KLati,  after  Eai  Karan  was  defeated,  mvaged  and  laid  waste  Nahr-
wala,  and  pursued  him  ; • and  Rai  Karan  took  refuge  with  Rai
Ramdeo  ® who  was  the  ruler  of  Deogir,  in  the  country  of  the
Deccan.  The  family  of  Rai  Kaian,  with  his  treasury  and  elephants
and  all  his  possessions,  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Muslim  warrior.
Among  the  ladies  of  his  harem  was  one  Dewalrani,  of  whom  Khizr
190.  Khan  the  son  of  Sultan ‘Alan-d-Din  ultimately  became  enamoured.
He  j-elated  the  account  of  his  amours  to  Mir  Khusru  for  him  to  turn
into  Terse,  and  the  book  of  Khizr  Khan  and  Dewalrani,  which  is
known  as  the  ^Asliiqa,  is  in  his  name.  Ulugh  Khan  canned  off  an
idol  from  Nahrwala  (in  place  of  the  idol  of  Somnat  which  Sultan
Mahmud  had  carried^  to  Ghaznin,  and  the  Hindus  had  made  aii
object  of  their  worship,)  and  took  it  to  Dihli  where  he  caused  it
to  be  trampled  under  foot  by  the  populace  ; then  he  pursued  Rai
Karan  as  far  as  Somnat,  and  a second  time  laid  waste  the  idol
temple  of  Somnat,  and  building  a mosque  there  retraced  his
steps.

Nusrat  Khan  having  proceeded  to  Kuhanbayat,*  a well-known
post,  seized  much  spoil  of  valuable  goods  ajid  rubies  and  otiier
jewels  from  the  traders  ; ^ Kafur  Hazar  Dinari  whom  the
Sultan  Alau-d-Din  had  latterly  taken  into  close  favour,  and  made
Kaibu-l-Mulk,  was  part  of  that  booty.

Wheu  Ulugh  Khan  arrived  ou  the  frontiers  of  Alwar  he  occupied
himself  witli  verifying  the  amount  of  projierty  and  spoil  which
had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  his  people  during  these  several
battles,  and  exacted  the  giving  up  of  much  of  it  with  great
severity.  A certain  party  of  Mughuls  who  accompanied  him  thought

1 JI3.  [S)j

s MS.  (A)

i MS.  (A)  ifj  ny..

* MS.  (A)  reads

Cambay,  in  Gujerat.  According  to  Hunter  (Imp.  Gaz.,  IIT.  272)  “the
name  of  Cambay  or  Khambhat  is  said  to  be  derived  from  Khamlha  or  Stam-
bhatuth,  the  pool  of  Mabideva  under  the  form  of  the  pillar  god.  During  the
llth  and  12tb  centnrics,  Cambay  appe.ars  as  one  of  the  chief  porta  of  tlie
Anhelwiira  (NabriTfda)  kingdom  and  at  the  conquest  of  that  kingdom  by  the
Mnsnlmnns  in  1-97,  it  is  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  riclieat  towns  in  India.

Tieffenthaler.  Yol  I.  p.  372.  Canhniiot,  grande  ville  et  port  de  iiicr,  que  Us
EuropUns  nppeJlriit  Cainhaye.  (pp.  380— 3SI.)

6 MS.  (A)  y^3h

[ 257  3

this  rather  untiiir,  and  consequently  plotted  a rebellion,  but
eventually  tvere  dispersed  ; some  of  them  went  off  to  Rai  Hamir
Dev  in  Jham.i  which  is  near  Rantanbhor,  and  some  went  else-
where.

Ulugh  it  ban  proceeded  by  continuous  marches  to  liis  master  at
Dihli,  and  from  this  we  gather  that  the  massacre  of  the  foreigners
(above  alluded  to)  took  place  after  the  arrival  of  Ulug^  Khan
from  Gnjrat.  Historians  have  paid  little  attention  to  the  due
order  of  events,  but  God  knows  the  truth.

And  in  the  year  699  H.  ( 1299  A.D.)  Ulugh  Khan  was  nominated
to  proceed  against  the  fortress  of  Rantanbhor  and  Jhain,  which
is  better  known  as  Rau.shahr,*  and  Rai  Hamir  Dev,  tbe  grandson  191
of  Rai  Pithora,*  who  had  ten  thousand  cavalry,  and  countless
infantry,  and  celebrated  elephants,  gave  him  battle  but  was
defeated,  and  with  great  generalship  withdrew  the  whole  of  his
forces  into  the  fortress  of  Rantanbhor.

Ulugh  ^^an  having  repoi-ted  * the  state  of  affairs  to  the  Court,
urged  the  Sultan  to  capture  the  fort ; the  Sultan  collected  his
forces  ^ and  marched  against  Rantanbhor,  and  in  a short  time,
by  skilful  effort,  and  aided  by  the  energy  of  his  ilaliks,  completely
subdued  and  took  the  fortress,  and  despatched  Hamir  Dev  to
liell.  Great  booty,  and  spoil,  and  treasures  fell  into  his  hands.

Then  he  appointed  ® a Kotwal  to  hold  that  fortress,  and  having
bestowed  the  country  of  Jhain  upon  Ulugh  Khan,  left  to  attack
Chitor,^  and  having  conquered  that  place  also  within  a few  days,

1 TiefEenthaler,  I.  p.  322,  mentions  a city  called  Tsclum  at  a distance  of
five  miles  from  the  fortress  of  Rantanbhor.  This  would  appear  to  be  pro-
bably the  place  spoken  of  in  the  text.

See  Elliot,  III.  146  where  Jh.im  is  said  to  be  Ujjaiu,  also  p.  172,  note  1,
where  this  opinion  is  abandoned.

* Tieffenthaler  does  not  mention  this  name.

S SIS.  (A)  reads  Rui  Hamir  Dev  of  Rantanbhor,  omitting
bat  Barni  calls  Hamir  Dov  the  naisa  of  Rai  Pithorii,  so  that  the  reading

of  the  text  is  adopted.

* MS  (.4)  o^.

S MS.  (A)  omits  I).

9 MS.  (A)

*1  Bami  says  that  after  taking  Rantanbhor  and  putting  Hamir  Dev  to
death  the  Snltan  returned  to  Dihli : so  also  Firighta.  See  Hunter (iaz.
III.  430.

33

[ 258  j

and  ^ liavir."  given  it  the  name  of  Kliizrabad.  and  having  bestovi  ed
a red  eanopy  upon  TOiizr  Khan  aforesaid,  made  Chitor  over  to  iiim
as  governor.  Among  the  events  wliieh  happened  in  this  expedi-
tion this  vr.ns  one,  that  Xnsrat  Khan  had  come  from  Karra®  to
Rantanbhor,  to  reinforce  Ulugh  Khan  before  the  Sultan  arrived
there  ; ® and  daring  the  siege  one  day  a stone  struck  him  on  the
Lead,  and  lie  '.vent  vi'ithout  delay  to  the  otlier  world.  One  arm
of  the  Sultan,  that  is  to  say  Zafar  Khan,  had  been  broken  in  the
fight  with  Qutluq  Khwaja.  and  now  the  second  arm  was  broken
also.

When  the  army  was  encamped  in  the  neighbourhood  of  d.Ialh.ab't
the  Sultan  one  day  was  engaged  in  the  hunting  field ; “ when
night  came  on  he  remained  in  t'he  plain,  and  at  dawn  of  day  lie
posted  his  troops  all  round,  while  he  himself  with  a select  follow-
ing ascei-ded  an  eminence  and  was  watching  the  spin  t.^  In  the
ineantiaie  the  brother's  son  of  the  Sultan,  Akat  Khati.^  together
with  a band  of  new -.Jin slim  Mughiihs  who  were  engaged  in  per-
192-  fcrniing  the  duties  of  guards,  attacked  the  Sultan  relentlessly  and
sire'.te  him  witji  airc'ws,  seized  him  and  wounded  his  arm.  As  it  was
the  v.'iiiter  .-ea^oti,  and  the  Sultan  was  wearing'  a cap^  stalled  with
C'ortoi.  hi3  wo'dTids  wei-e  not  fatal.  Akat  Khan  wished  to  aJight
from  iii.s  hoi.=e  and  .strike  otf  the  Saltan's  head  from  Ins  body,
hut  some  of  the  attendants  pretending  to  side  with  him  and  take
hi.s  p.art.  cried  out,  the  Sultan  is  killed  ! Akat  Khan  was  satisfied
•at  lieni  ing  thi-.  tnid  made  off  with  all  speed  to  the  camp  on  horse-
bae'.t.  i.iui  entering  the  loynl  hall  of  audience  seated  himself  upon
tiic  thrwjie,  p.i;d  dr.'iwing  the  canopy  over  his  head,  the  Amirs,  in
aeeordaiice  with  ancient  cu.stom,  gave  in  their  allegiance  to  him

1 AS.  (A,  j.

i MS,  :A  1 i'JfS' jt.

5 MS.  I A;  oiini=,

* ^ m •

■t  Tin)  reading  here  is  donttful.  The  text  has  ‘•^.**05

with  an  alternative  reading  tyj-***  in  a footnote.  MS.  (A)  reads

Firishta  (Bo.  Text  p.  186)  reads  V’-sL)  Ta’Jil.

6 ilnnurjhn.  lieu  de  chasse.  (Pavet  de  Conrteille),  A Tnrki  word
sigi  ifyintr  huntinir  ground.  Firishta  loc  cit  also  uses  this  word-

II.S.  (Ai  omits  J 1 Firishta  also  s.iya  .\kat  Khan.

S AIS.  _A)  reads

[ 259  ]

as  the  rightful  king,^  and  raised  no  overt  objection.  Akat  Klaii
was  so  overwhelmed  by  his  inordinate  hist  that  on  the  in.stant  iie
made  an  attempt  upon  tiie  haram,^  but  ilalik  Dinar  Ilaraml  who
was  on  guard  at  tlie  enti“ance  to  the  kamm  with  his  men  armed
and  equipped,  said,  Till  you  shew  me  the  head  of  the  Sultan  I
will  not  permit  you  to  set  foot  within  this  private  chamber.  Sultan
■Alau-d-Din,  when  ho  had  .somewhat  regained  consciousness  ® after
that  perilous  attack,  hound  up  his  wounds.  He  wa.s  convinced
in  liis  own  mind  that  Akat  IHian,  iti  unison  with  the  Amirs  who
liad  revolted,  had  had  the  audacity  to  make  this  disgraceful
attempt  uporr  his  life,  for  that  were  it  not  so,  he  was  not  the  man
to  attempt  it  alone.

Accordingly  his  intention  was  to  make  his  way  to  Jhain  (where
Ulugh  liliaii  was)  with  the  fifty  or  sixty  attendant.s  who  had
remained  with  him,  and  .see  what  course  Ulugh  lUidn  would
rocomraond.  One  or  two  of  his  confidential  retainers  p.ucj-'Tl
out  the  unwisdom  of  this  course  and  urged  him  to  go  at  once  to
the  royal  paviliou  and  kingly  court.

Before  they  arrived  at  the  Court  titty  horsemen  joined  tliem,
and  Akat  Khan  took  the  road  to  Afghanpur,  but  a body  of  men  193.
who  had  been  despatched  in  piu’suit  of  him  by  forced  mavclies
made  him  prisoner,*  sent  him  into  the  Sultan's  p''o.^oI;co.  and  then
uctei’ly  destroyed  ail  his  family  and  relations  wherever  they  found,
them,  among  whom  Qutluq  Khan  liis  brother  al.vj  peri-lied.-

\ erse.

One  who  injures  the  country  is  better  beheaded

And  at  that  same  time  ‘Umar  Khan  aud  Maugu  Khan  the  two

1 The  words  tora  n tr'za'’c  are  Tnrkl  words  (P  de  C)  or

sivnides  the  royal  family,  tt  also  uieins  king  . law  : right,  also  a custom  iutro-
d iced  by  (’heiigiz  Khan  means  Minply  or  *’ authority/*  hence

the  words  111  the  text  would  mean  that  they  acknowledged  lam  as  rightful
kiptj  with  due  formalities.

2 MS.  (A)  omits

8 its.  (-\)  (jiSjtJ.

* its.  (A)  \jjl

6 The  account  given  by  Barni  of  this  occurrence  is  the  san\e  ns  the  text
(Elliot  III.  17--173J,  Firishr-i  also  calls  him  Snleiinlii  Akat  Kh.in.

though  Briggs  in  his  tiauslatiou  calls  him  The  Prince  Rookii  Khan.”

[ 260  j

nephews  of  the  Saltan,  revolted  in  Badaon : certain  of  the  Amirs
sent  from  the  Court  seized  them  and  brought  them  to  the  Sultan,
by  whose  orders  their  eyes  were  put  ont.t

If  thou  revoltest  against  thy  benefactor

Even  if  thou  art  the  sun,  thou  wilt  fall  headlong.

This  further  occurrence  took  place,  namely,  when  the  Sultan
was  engaged  in  besieging  Rantanbhor,  a pei'son  named  Haji
Mania,  one  of  the  slaves  of  Maliku  1-Umara  Eotwal,^  gathered
together  certain  ruffians,  displayed  a counterfeit  order  in  Dihli,®
entered  the  city  by  the  Badaon  gate,  and  sent  for  one  Tnrmuzl
Kotwal  and  in  an  instant  cut  his  head  off,*  closed  the  city  gates,
and  sent  a messenger  to  ‘A!au-1-Mulk  ^ a friend  of  his,  who  was
Kotu'ul  of  the  Hew  Castle,  saying  “ An  order  has  come  from  the
Sultan,  come  and  read  it  ” ‘Alau-l-Mulk  being  fully  alive  to  wbat
was  going  on  ® did  not  obey  the  summons,  whereupon  the  rebel
Haji  Maula  went  to  the  Ruby  Palace,  and  liberating  all  the
prisoners,  gave  a horse  and  arms  and  a large  bag  (of  gold)  out
of  the  treasury  to  each  one,  gathered  together  an  immense
following;  then  he  seized  by  force  Saiyyid  Zac!a-i-‘Alawi  Shah
Nabsa,'^  who  on  his  mother’s  side  was  descended  from  Sultan
Shamsu-d-Hin  Altamsh  (lyaltimi.^),  summoning  his  chief  men
194.  and  nobles  for  the  purpose,  and  seated  him  upon  the  throne  at

1 MS.  (A)  aA  Ij-'i

2 According  to  Bami  “ a maula  or  slave  of  the  late  Kotwal  Amira-l'Umai^
Fakhm-d-DIn.”

S Pretending  to  have  received  it  #’roin  the  Sultan  (BarniJ.

♦ ilS.  (A)  tiP  y

5 *jilau-d-Diu  Ayaz  (Bariuj.

8 MS.  (A)  »!f|  Jl.

^ Barni’s  account  is  as  follows  : “ There  was  an  ‘AlawT  (descendant  of  ‘Ali)
in  Dihli  who  was  called  the  grandson  of  Shah  Najaf  who  by  his  mother’s
side  was  grandson  of  Sultan  Shamsn-d-Din.  The  Mania  set  off  from  the
Bed  Palace  with  a party  of  horse,  and  went  to  the  house  of  the  poor  ‘Ala-wi.
They  carried  him  off  by  force  and  seated  him  on  the  throne  in  the  Bed  Paleco.
The  principal  men  of  the  city  were  brought  by  force  and  made  to  kiss  his
hand, — (Elliot  III.  176).  The  editor  remarks  that  the  passage  in  which  he
is  called  tlie  gr..'ndson  of  Shah  Jfajaf  is  very  doubtful.

Firishta  writes (j-iixJkJh  AAiatA  if  ‘Alawi  whom

they  used  to  call  Shahan^ah  who  on  his  mother’s  side  traced  descent  from
Sh,amsn-d-Dia  Altamsh.

[ 261  ]

tlie  entrance  to  the  Heel  Palace,  and  compelled  the  chief  men
whether  they  would  or  no,  to  swear  allegiance  to  him.

The  Sultan,  when  he  heard  this  tidings,  did  not  publish  it,  nor
did  he  betray  any  signs  of  emotion,  until  he  had  succeeded  by
superhuman  effort  in  entirely  reducing  the  fortress.  A week  had
hardly  passed  after  this  exploit  of  Haji  Maula  when  Malik
Hamidu  Din,  who  was  Amir  of  Koh,  with  his  sons  wdio  were
renowned  for  their  valour,  and  a body  of  the  cavalry  of  Zafar
Khan  who  had  come  from  Amroha  to  oppose  the  Moghuls,*
engaged  Haji  Maula  in  fight,  and  having  destroyed  him,  put  to
death  the  hapless  Saiyyid  Zada  also,  and  sent  their  heads  to
Rantanbhor.  The  Sultan  nominated  Ulugh  Khau  to  proceed  to
Dihli  to  tiaek  out  those  who  had  taken  part  in  that  ^ rebellion,
and  bring  them  to  destruction.  He  also  cornpletely  eradicated
the  family  and  relations  of  Maliku-l-Umara  on  this  suspicion  ihat
Haji  Mania  would  not  have  embarked  on  this  enterprise  without
their  instigation.*

The  Sultan  after  adding  the  fortress  of  Rantanbhor  and  ils
surrounding  districts  to  the  jaegir  of  Ulugh  Kihan  returned  (to
Dibit).  Ulu^  Khan  was  taken  ill  that  very  day  while  on  the
road,  and  died,^  and  Rantanbhor  became  for  him  like  the  Pamdise
of  SHaddad.®

1 MS.  (Aj  J <Ma  ititf  j

» MS.  (A)  ,^1*0

3 MS.  (A)  ji.

* The  text  reads  <^*lj  so  also  MS.  (A),  bat  ;re  should,

read  Aj  as  witliout  this  the  sense  is  not  very  obvious.

BarnI  states,  “The  sons  and  grandsons  of  the  old  Malika-I-Umara

hnd  no  guilty  knowleuge  of  the  revolt,  but  they  and  every  ona  belongincr  to
that  family  were  put  to  death.

5 The  Tdrll^-i-I'h-oz  ^dJu  states,  in  opposition  to  our  author,  that  L’luf-h
Khan  did  not  die  till  four  or  five  months  later,  v»hen  he  I ad  coHectud  a lar-i-e
force  for  the  purpose  of  attaching  Tilang  and  Ma'bar,  Firishtu  also  atat-‘S
that  Ulugh  Khau  died  about  si.x  months  l.»ter.

^ AIS.  (Aj  reads  ^♦C-^ . See  Qui'jn  Jxwix.  5,

“ Ha^t  thou  iu)t  seen  how  th\  L--i*d  did  with  'Ad  ' uick
Irani  of  the  culuiun-5  f the  liL*r  of  nh.-. h has  not  been  created  in
the  iaTid/’

[ 26:2  ]

Moreover  a band  of  robbers  of  Jalor,  whose  leader  was  Mir
Muhammad  Shah,  were  captured  in  Rantanbhor  after  the  fort

Iram  of  the  coliunns  “ This  city  is  said  to  have  been  situated  in  yemen,
between  Ha/ramaut  and  Sana‘a.  It  was  founded  by  Shaddad  ibn  *Ad,  who  was
excessively  strong  and  mighty,  and  when  he  heard  of  Paradise  and  of  what
God  had  prepared  therein  for  his  saints,  ‘ palaces  of  gold  and  silver  and  abodes
beneath  which  rivers  flow,  and  upper  chambers  above  which  are  other  upper
chambers,  (Qur’an  ssxis.  21)  he  said  to  his  mighty  men  ‘ Verily  I will  take  to
myself  upon  the  earth  a city  like  nnto  Paradise.’  Then  he  appointed  thereunto
a hundred  men  of  his  servants  and  mighty  men.  of  valour,  and  under  the  hand
of  each  of  them  a thou&and  helpers,  and  bade  them  search  out  and  find  an
open  space  of  the  plain  in  the  land  of  Yemen,  and  choose  the  best  thereof
in  soil.  Then  he  provided  them  with  wealth,  and  designed  for  them  the
pattern  of  their  work,  and  wrote  to  his  three  chief  lords  Ghanim-ibn-’Ulwan,
Zahhak  ibu  'Ulwan,  and  Walid  ibnar  Raiyyan,  and  charged  them  to  write  to
their  I'lids  in  the  utmost  pai'ts  of  their  cities  that  they  should  collect  all
that  was  in  their  lund  of  gwid  and  of  silver,  of  pearls  and  of  rubies,  of  musk
and  ambergris  and  saflron,  and  should  send  them  unto  him.  Then  he  sent
unto  all  the  mines,  and  cook  out  therefrom  all  the  gold  and  the  silver  that
was  in  them,  and  he  sent  his  three  agents  to  the  divers  into  the  oceans,  and
they  brought  out  therefrom  jewels,  and  gathered  them  together  as  it  wer*-
mountains,  und  all  of  this  was  brought  to  Shaddud.  Then  they  gene  the
miners  to  the  mines  of  rubies  and  emeralds  and  all  other  jewels,  and  they
brought  out  from  thence  immense  riches.  Then  he  ordered  and  the  gol  T
was  beaten  and  fashioned  into  bricks,  and  he  builded  tlierewith  that'  city,
and  he  coinmanued  ilu*  pearls  and  the  rubies,  the  onyx  and  the  emerald  and
the  cornelian,  and  the  walU  of  the  city  were  sec  with  them.  And  he  made
for  it  upper  chambers,  and  abos'e  them  ocher  chambers  supported  on  columns,
and  to  all  of  them  piUurs  of  enjOiuld  and  of  onyx  and  of  ruby.  Then  he
caused  to  flow  beneath  the  city  a wide  channel  which  he  brought  to  the  city
from  beneath  the  earth  a .space  of  forty  leagues,  like  to  a large  canal.
Then  he  ordered,  and  r'uere  were  made  to  flow  from  that  channel,  rivulets
in  the  streets,  and  higliw.iys  and  streets  flowed  with  clear  water.  And  he
ordered  bankN  to  be  made  f-w  tint  canal  and  for  all  the  rivulets,  and  they
were  overlaid  with  red  gold,  and  the  pebbles  thereof  were  made  of  all  kinds  of
precious  stones,  rcil  and  yellow  and  green.  And  there  were  planted  on  either
bank  of  the  streani  and  of  the  iivalecs  trees  of  gold  bearing  fruit,  aud  the
fruits  of  tiicm  wore  of  those  rubies  and  precious  gems.  And  the  length  of  the
city  was  made  twelve  /■  . and  the  breadth  thereof  like  unto  tne  length.
Aud  the  ot  ihf  ciry  wore  h-gh  a.id  lofty,  and  there  were  bniUled

therein  thiee  Luudiod  thousand  p. daces  set  with  all  kinds  of  jewt ’’  within
and  wich‘>uc.  And  he  ' uilt  f*  r hinnself  in  the  midst  of  the  city  on  'ne  bank
of  the  canid  a p:  ’.a  'c  loity  ind  Li:rh,  towering  over  all  those  palaces  *

* • » » # # ^bere  passed

in  the  bui.diiig  of  it  llv*.  hundred  years

[ 263  ]

Tvas  taken.  When  the  Saltan  asked  Muhammad  Shah  (who  had
been  'wounded)  ‘ If  I should  spare  your  life  and  have  you  cured,
and  you  should  thus  escape  this  deadly  danger,  ho'^v"  would  you
treat  me  in  future  ? ’ he  replied,  ‘If  1 should  get  well  and  si  ould
have  an  opportunity,  I would  kill  you  and  I’aise  the  son  of  Hariiir
Dev  to  the  throne.’  The  .Sultan  wotsdered.  and  was  amazed  at  195.
this  audacity,  and  enipiired  of  his  most  shrewd  and  astute  Amirs
the  reason  why  the  people  had  so  turned  agaiusi  lii.n,  and  'why
these  continual  riots  and  seditions  were  so  constantly  occurriug,
and  further  sought  to  know  how  to  set  about  remedying  these
evils.  They  shewed  him  several  path.s  of  conduct  -which  -would
eud  naturally  in  four  things.  Firstly,  that  the  king  should  in
his  own  person  be  aware  of  the  enterprises  both  good  and  bad
-which  are  going  on  in  his  kingdom.  Secondly,  that  he  should
put  an  end  to  -wine  bibbing,  which  is  the  source  of  so  much  evil.
Thirdly,  abandonment  by  the  maliks  of  their  gadding  about  to
each  others’  liouses  and  hohiii.g  deliberative  meetings.*  Fourthly,
to  demand  back  the  money  -which  he  had  lavished,  fiorn  all
classes,  whether  soldiery  or  populace,  because  it  i-?  the  foaiitain
head  of  all  riot  and  sedition,  especially  upstait.s  and  uioiveuiu.'  ricJiL<,^
and  in  a short  time  these  regulations  would  by  their  inherent
good,  be  acceptable  to  the  Rais,  and  pass  fioin  ]'>otentiality  to
actuality  just  as  has  already  been  related  in  a former  place.

The  Sultan  did  away  with  wine  drinking,  and  brought  the  other

Then  Almighty  God  -wished  to  send  a warning  to  him  nnd  to  Ins  host,
calling  him  to  repentance,  and  he  chose  to  liiui&elf  ILhl  ibn  IChalid  who
came  and  called  upon  »^addad  to  belitifo  and  confess  the  power  and  unity
of  God,  but  he  persij'ied  in  his  idolatry  and  disobedience.  Ihen  hifid  w. lined
him  of  punishment  to  come  and  of  the  fall  of  his  kingdom,  but  be  would
not  be  moved  from  his  evil  ways.’^

At  last  lie  wa.s  informed  that  the  city  was  finished  and  lie  set  out  to  go  to
it  with  three  Iininired  thousand,  leaving  all  his  kiimdum  to  Lbs  son  Mui'iil
who  had  it  is  said  believed  in  the  words  of  Hud.  When  ^•uUiad  arrived
with  one  day'.s  journey  of  Tram  a voice  came  from  heaven,  and  he  m..]  all
wlio  were  with  him  fell  dead,  not  one  remained,  and  all  wb..  wire  ia  thj  c'z\
died,  tiie  workmen  and  artinccr.^.  the  agents  and  warriois,  not  r-  soul  leLAuii.td
alive.  And  the  city  sank  into  the  earth.'’

Y.lqf.t  Vol.  I.

1 MS.  (A)  reads  in  jiiace  of

2 The  Per=i,i;i  pbi-a=c- !6  ilA-.  yavkt^dri  i •

[ 2G4  1

regulations  also  into  force,  and  also  published  sereral  new  rules
of  his  own,  which  have  never  been  heard  of  either  before  or
after  his  time,  whether  they  were  in  accordance  with  religious
law  or  not  ; one  of  these  rules  was  that  regulating  the  price  of
grain,  and  cloth,  and  horses,  and  all  necessaries  essential  to  the
comfort  of  the  soldiery  and  populace,  and  the  bestowal  of  rewards
and  alms  upon  all  classes  of  the  people,  the  detail  of  which  is  told
at  some  length  in  the  history  of  Zia-i-Barnid  Those  laws  were
the  most  extraordinary  of  all ; this  cheapness  of  provisions  was
one  of  the  chief  sources  of  the  prosperity  of  the  people,  and
formed  a stout  wall  of  defence  against  the  irruption  of  the
Mughnls.  And  inasmuch  as  in  mentioning  some  of  these  events
„i.a  occurrences  in  the  original  work,*  the  chronological  sequence
has  not  been  preserved,  and  they  have  been  only  incidentally
mentioned  as  occasion  arose,  for  this  reason  thev  have  also  been
recounted  here  in  the  same  manner.

196.  In  the  year  700  H.  he  ordered  ‘Ainn-1-Mnlk  Shihab  Mnltani  to
proceed  to  Malwa  with  a large  army  [and  Koka  the  Rani  who
had  forty  thousand  cavalry  and  100,000  infantry,  not  being  able
to  stand  against  him  fled].^  ‘Ainn-1-Mnlk  ravaged  and  pillaged
that  country  and  returned  victorious  with  countless  spoils,*  The
Khusru  of  poets  has  described  this  in  the  '‘As'hiqa,  in  these  words  :

He  gave  ‘Ainn-l-Mulk  a signal  with  his  brow
To  turn  his  face  towards  the  kingdom  of  Malwa  ;

From  the  clear-sightednes.s  wliich  ‘Ainn-I-Mnlk  possessed.
That  which  he  ordered  was  brought  into  sight.

He  marclied  with  an  army  drawn  np  in  array,

And  placed  lound  them  sentinels  like  the  eyelashes.  ®

Aud  ill  the  year  already  mentioned  the  Sultan  sot  out  for
Soruth®  on  a hunting  cxpeditii  ii,  and  despatched  to  hell  Satal

The  Shaht.  Elliot  and  Do'srson,  Til.  pp.  192  et  seqq.

2 MS,  f.\,>

3 T!ie  woid-5  n br..cket&  are  not  found  in  MB.  (Ab

4 I'in’shtt  ghc.-  the  date  of  ting  expe'otLon  as  704  II.  and  calls  Koka  the

Iti-jT  of  Mai'.va.  Hie  t-ost  aud  MS.  (B)  reads  Uani

3 Theie  is  a ' lifn  < f plnytio'iii  the  words  'oin  [-nCi  oh!n  both

of  1'  -’au  ■ oye  ’ '.vLich  ^ -^uice  lost  iu  tr.-iuslation .

^ MS  ' A'l  S -wlna  Tne  text  has  Sorath.

Ak'-a’-l  II.  21  ' 45^.  B-'  ’ey,  ■_/  p.  2,

L

265  ]

Dev  a rebel  who  had  taken  refuge  in  that  fortress  with  a huge
army,  the  Sultan’s  army  having  before  been  unable  to  reduce  it,  but
it  now  fell  into  their  hands.  And  in  the  year  701  H.  (1301  A.D.)
the  fort  of  Jalor  was  reduced  by  Kamaln-d-Din  Kark  and  he  sent
Knnhar  Dev,  a headstrong  rebel  to  the  lowest  abyss  of  hell.

And  in  the  year  702  H.  (1302  A.D.)  he  sent  Malik  Kafur  Naib  *
with  a large  army  and  complete  equipment  towards  Tilang  and
Marhat*  and  an  immense  quantity  of  treasure  with  elephants
and  horses,  jewels  and  cloths,  fell  as  spoil  into  the  hands  of  the
troops.

And  in  the  year  709  (1309  A.D.)  * Malik  Naib  Kafur  went  a
second  time  to  Arankal  * and  having  taken  much  treasure  and
several  fine  elephants  and  seven  thousand  horses  as  a present
from  Rai  Nadar  Dev  the  Governor  of  Arankal  made  him  a
regular  tributary.  And  in  the  year  710  H.  (1310  A.D.)  the  country  197.
of  Ma‘bar  ^ as  far  as  Dhor  ® Samundar  came  into  the  possession
of  the  Muslims.

And  in  the  year  711  H.  (1311  A.D.)  Malik  Naib  brought  to  court
and  presented  his  spoils  consisting  of  three  hundred  an  I twelve
elephants,  and  twenty  thousand  horses,  ninety-six  thousand  mam
of  gold,  and  many  chests  of  jewels  and  pearls  besides  other

t MS.  (A)  reverses  the  order  of  this  name.  The  text  has

* Teliagi  or  Telingana,  the  ancient  name  of  one  of  the  principal  kingdoms
of  S.  India.  See  Ain-i-Akbar-i  II.  (J.)  237 ; also  Hunter  Imp.  Gaz.  1.  art
Andhra  ; also  Cunningham  Anc.  Oeog.  of  India  p.  519,  527.

S There  is  a great  gap  here  in  the  history  partly  dne  to  the  confusion  of
dates,  and  absence  of  chronological  sequence  mentioned  by  the  author.  Bami
gives  no  assistance  and  Firishta  very  little.

* Warangal  was  the  ancient  capital  of  Telingana  (Tieff.  III.  5)  See  Hunter
hnp.  Gaz.  XIII.  521.  Regarding  Marhat  or  Maharashtra  see  Hunter,  Imp.

Guz  IX  166  ; also  Grant  Duff,  History  of  the  Mahrattas,  Preliminary  Observa-
tions ; also  Cnnnmgham,  Anc.  Geog.  of  India  p.  553.

Arangal  or  Warangal.  Bami  gives  Laddar  Dev  as  the  name  of  the  Rai  of
Arangal.  Elliott  III.  201.  So  also  Firishta.  See  text  I.  p.  207.

t Ma‘har.  Coromandel,  See  Ibu  Batutah  fP-aiia  Edn.)  III.  32S.  Ain.i*

AVoarl  fJarrett)  III,  61,  60,  Abu-l-Feda  (Rein.audJ  I.  CDxxviii.

Ma  har  extends  from  K'd.iin  (Cavalura)to  Xilawar  (Nfcllcre).  Wasstf  (E  and
Dili  32'.

S Firi^ra  says  Khw.’ij.a  H."ni  and  Malik  Xaib  v.'ere  sent  to  conquer  Ma'bar
and  Dlior  Simund  vLere  th-re  weie  idol  templos  full  ui  g -Id,  and  I

ca:iu'_i.  nimv.'fy  Dhor  Samund.

34

L 266  j

booty  beyond  the  limits  ot  computation ; Amir  .^nsru  who
was  with  tliat  army  has  given  fall  particulars  in  the  Khazninu-l-
Fuluh  : some  attributed  these  victories  to  respite  before  punish-
ment, and  some  to  the  miraculous  powers  of  Sultan  'Alau-d-
Din,  while  others  held  that  the  peace  and-  security  of  that  reign
were  due  to  the  unbounded  blessings  of  the  Sultanu-l-ila§haitt
Nizamn-l-Auliya  ^ may  God  * sanctify  Ms  resting-place.

At  length  when  the  Sultan’s  mind  was  satisfied,  and  he  gained
some  leisure  from  the  administration  of  the  State,  he  set  himself
to  piovide  for  the  future  of  his  two  sons,  allotting  to  each  one
a province  in  the  neiglibourhood,  and  setting  apart  districts  for
them.  Among  other  events  was  the  marriage  of  Hiizr  Khan  to
Dewal  Earn,  and  Girai’s  account  is  of  a nature  to  last  to  all  eternity,
and  those  who  have  the  taste  may  read  the  account  of  that  in
the  'AsMqa  ; ® then  having  bestowed  upon  Khizr  Kha-n  the  canopy
and  staff  of  office,  and  having  made  him  his  heir  the  Sultan  sent
him  away  to  Hatnapur*  and  the  foot  of  the  hills.  When  affairs
were  settled,*  and  the  heavens  began  to  act  with  their  ingrained
natural  deceit,  and  commenced  displaying  those  evil  traits,  and
old  age  overcame  the  Sultan’s  health,  his  followers  deserted  him ;

Verse.

In  the  woiid,  when  a king  becomes  advanced  in  years
H is  worshippers  grow  weary  of  him  ;

His  head,  which  is  worthy  of  a crown,

He  must  recline  on  musk  not  on  ivory.®

198  Various  disorders  affected  him,'^  and  hectic  fever  which  leads®  to

I Xi.zataud-d-Din  Anliya  was  the  son  of  Ahmad  Dinyil.  He  was  born  at
Badaon.  He  died  A H,  725  and  is  bnried  at  Dihli.

See  Ain-i-Al-iar!  III.  365.  Firishta  gives  a long  biography  of  him.

* MS.  (A)  omit.s  ^1.

* See  E and  D III  552,  553.

* Text  reads  MS.  (A)  reads  HastinSwar  f ? Hatniwar’

See  Ain-i-Akba/i  iJ;  II  104  and  111.  70.  also  Hunter  Gaz  Ind.  v.  352.

* MS,  (A)

* It  was  the  custom  to  bury  kings  with  musk,  camplior  and  other  odori-
ferous  eubstances.  The  throne  was  of  ivory.

1 MS.  (A)  J d-w  U*-)'*-

* iiS.  (A)  reads  for

[ 267  ]

ill-temper,  and  suspiciousness,  and  causes  the  health  to  become
deranged,  gained  the  mastery  over  him,  and  when  only  such  a
smalt  amount  of  health  remained  that  it  was  like  a single  lamp
to  light  the  whole  house,  Khizr  Khan  in  fulfilment  of  a vow  he
had  made,  in  singleness  of  heart  and  sincerity  of  sph’it  set  oat
from  Hatnapur  l barefooted  upon  a pilgrimage  to  the  holj'  men
of  Dihli,  and  performed  his  thanksgiving  for  the  restoration  of
his  father’s  health,  but  it  is  a very  strange  fact  that  he  never
onca  went  to  visit  the  Sultanu-l-Masbaikh  wal  Auliya,

“ ShailA  of  the  sects.  Pillar  of  the  faith,  N'izamu-d-Din

Like  Khizr  and  Masllt,  wdth  a breath  brings  boties  to  life

with  whom  he  was  connected  by  bonds  of  affection  and  sanctity.

And  Malik  Nail)  informed  tlie  Sultan  of  the  coming  of  Khizr
Khan  with  consiiierable  embellishment,  saying  that  Alp  Khan,
the  maternal  uncle  of  Khizr  Khan,  who  had  arrived  from  Gujiat,
out  of  policy  and  pi  udence,  having  legard  to  the  affairs  of  the
State  and  in  his  desire  to  i)ecome  Naib  and  Vakil,  had  himself
summoned  his  sister’s  son,  and  further  remarked  tluit  if  this  crude
idea  and  immature  desire  had  not  fixed  it.self  in  the  mind  of
Khizr  Khan,  why  had  he  come  unbiddeti  to  the  f’ourt  ?

The  Sultan  whose  health  was  upset,  and  his  bi’ain  disordered
and  disposed  to  entertain  absurd  prejudices,  in  according  with
the  saying,  * “ When  a man’s  health  is  disordered  his  fancies  are
disordered,”  from  his  great  lack  of  discrimination  taking  this
suggestion  as  the  actual  fact,  and  regarding  thi.s  as.sortiou®  as  the
truth,  instantly  gave  ordens  for  the  e.xecutiou  of  Alp  Khfin.

Malik  Nail)  and  ilalik  Kamaiu-d-Din  Kark  seizing  that  nn-
happy  wretch  like  a meek  lamb,  cut  him  to  pieces  inside  the  Royal
palace.  After  tiiat  Malik  Naib  induced  the  Sultan  (on  the  ground
that  Khizr  Khan  had  taken  alarm  at  the  murder  of  his  uncle
and  that  it  was  not  expedient  for  him  to  return  to  his  own
place  in  the  court),  to  issue  instructions  that,  to  allow  of
the  restoration  * of  order  in  the  State,  he  should  go  for  some  jgg

1 MS,  (A)  re-a-tg  Satnaioar.  Khiisru  in  the  'Asliiqa  states  “ When  tha
Saltan  rjcorereii  in  some  degree.  Khizr  Kit  an  set  ont  on  Ids  expedition  to
Ijatauprii,''  (E  and  D in,  554'.

S MS.  (Ai
8 MS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (A)  omits  text  line  1 and  text  line  2.

[ 268  ]

200.

time  to  Amrolia  till  a command  should  issue  summonincf  him
to  the  presence.  In  the  meantime  he  might  engage  io  hunting,
and  he  was  to  return  to  the  Court  his  canopy  and  staff  of
office,  and  all  the  other  insignia  of  royalty.  Khizr  Khan  having
obeyed  tliis  order  with  a sad  and  di.stracted  heart,  after  a
little  while  relying  npon  the  sincerity  of  affection  he  enter-
rained  for  his  father  and  the  confidence  between  them,  wiote
;o  him  to  this  effect, ‘ that  he  had  never  committed  any  breach
of  trust  which  could  cause  the  Sultan  to  he  so  wroth  with
him  ; then  overcome  by  sorrow  he  determined  to  leave  Amrolia
for  Dihli.  When  he  ariived  to  do  obeisance  to  his  father,  the  chord
of  fatherly  affection  was  stirred  in  the  heart  of  the  Sultan,  he
clasped  his  son  to  his  breast,  and  kissed  him  several  times  on  the
forehead,  and  motioned  to  him  to  go  and  see  his  mothei'.  Khizr
Khan  went  thither,  and  Malik  Naib  out  of  villainy, 3 on  the
instant  went  back  to  the  Saltan  and  filled  his  ears  with  lies,
saying,^  ‘ Khizr  Khan  lias  now  come  for  the  second  time  to
the  palace  with  evil  intentions  without  orders,  and  the  Sultan
takes  no  notice  of  the  mutter.’  The  Sultan  upon  this  occasion  gave
orders  to  send  both  brothers,  Khizr  Klian  and  Shadi  Khan,  to  the
fortress  of  Gwaliar.'  Malik  Naib,  after  these  two  heirs  had  been
deported,  and  the  way  was  clear  for  Malik  Shihabu-d-Din,  the’
son  of  the  Sultan  by  another  mother,  who  was  yet  a lad  of  tender
years,  made  him  hoir-apparent  and  exacted  from  him  an  agreement.

After  two  or  three  days  the  Sultan’s  life  became  intolerable
through  hi.s  affliction,  and  he  would  willingly  have  purchased  a
breath  at  the  price  of  a world,  but  it  was  not  to  be  had.

Yfrse.

Sikandar,  who  held  sway  over  a world,

At  the  time  when  he  was  departing,  and  was  quitting  the
world,

It  could  not  he  as  he  wished,  though  he  would  have  given
a world  could  they'  have  given  him  in  return  the  brief
respite  of  a moment.

1 I fullow  the  text  here.  M.'!.  (A)  omits
3 JIS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (A)  omits  J .and  inserts

* MS.  1.^)  Kilewar-

[ 269  1

The  misit  of  Existence  was  emptied  of  tlie  coin  of  life.

This  event  took  place  in  the  veai-  715  H.  (13J6A.D.).i  The
duration  of  the  reign  of  Snltan  ‘Alau-d-Din  -was  twenty-one
years.

‘Alau-d-Din  who  struck  his  stamp  upon  the  golden  coin

Subdued  a woild  beneath  the  palm  of  Ids  gold-scatteiing
hand.®

i3y  the  revolution  of  the  sky,  that  .stamp  became  changed,
but  that  gold

Remained  the  same  in  appearance,  and  you  may  see  it  now-
passing  from  hand  to  hand.

[Account  of  Amir  Khusru  and  Mir  Hasan  may  God  have
mercy  on  theDi].^

And  among  the  poets  * by  whose  existence  the  reign  of  Snltan
‘Alau-d-Diii  was  adorned  and  honoured,  one  was  the  Kihusru-i-
Sha'iran  (Pi  inceof  Poets),  map  God  shew  him  mercy  and  acceptance,
whose  writings,  whether  prose  or  poetry,  have  completely  filled
the  world  from  one  remotest  end  to  the  otlier.

He  completed  his  five  works,  collectively  called  Khnmsa,^  in  the
year  698  H.  (1298  A.  D.),  in  honour  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din,

1 MS.  ,A)  reads  Khami  in  place  of  sit  and  this  is  correct

as  ‘Aliia-d-DIn  died  on  the  7th  Shawwiil  715  H.  see  E and  D III.  555,  but  see
also  p.  208.  “On  the  sixth  Shavvwai  towards  morning,  the  corpse  of  ‘Aliin-d-
Din  was  brought  out  of  the  Red  Palace  of  Sirl.  and  w.as  buried  in  a tomb  in
front  of  the  J5mi‘ Jlasjid  ” (Tarikh-i-Firuz  Shit  hi.)  Sec  a!^o  Thomas  Pot/iaa
ATtnjrs  of  Dihli  p.  158  n 1.

® MS.  CA)  «S»*»0  k.flJ’  jUjHj-  Sec  Thomas  Pathan  Kings  pp.  158  ef  seqq,

5 These  words  are  not  found  in  MS.  (A).

* MS.  (.1.)  reads  AS"  j)\  j.

6 These  were  the  following : —

ffasht  Bihisht.

Sitcandar  ndma

Laili  u’a  3Iajnun.  J Shirin  tea  Kh^isni,

Panj  ganj.

Khusru  was  of  Tarki  origin,  his  father  Atnlr  Mahmud  came  to  Dihli  during
the  invasion  of  Changiz  Khan  into  the  service  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Tnghlaq
Shah  by  whom  he  was  advanced  to  high  office,  but  wa?  eventually  murdered.
Mir  Khusru  succeeded  his  father,  but  gave  up  office  and  became  the  devoted
disciple  of  Nizamn-d-Dm  Anliya.  His  Klamsa  was  written  in  imitation  of
the  Khamsa  of  Shaikh  Nizami.

He  is  said  to  have  written  400,000  couplets.  Neither  is  now  extant.

[ 270  ]

within  the  space  of  two  years.  Among  these  works  is  the  Mania'll-
l-Anivar  * which  he  composed  iu  two  weeks  as  he  himself  says  (in
these  verses)  :

The  year  of  this  ancient  heaven  which  had  passed  away

Was  after  six  hundred  and  ninety  eight.

Following  on  the  steps  of  the  sky  traversing  star*

In  two  weeks  did  the  full  -moon  “ arrive  at  completion.

In  the  A'a/aAat  * it  is  stated  upon  the  authority  of  Sultanii-l-
Mashaikh  Nizamu-l-Auliya,  may  God  sanctify  his  sacred  resting-
place,  that  ou  the  day  of  judgment  each  individual  will  boast
of  some  one  thing,  and  my  boast  (said  he)  will  be  of  the  heart-
burnings of  this  Turk  Allah  ^ (God’s  champion) ; Mir  Khnsru
probably  alludes  to  this  when  he  says  : —

Khusru  mv  friend,  strive  in  the  right  way
201.  That  yon  may  be  called  Turk-i-Khuda  (God’s  champion).

Another  poet  was  Mir  Hasan  Dihlavi,^  whose  anthrdogy  also
has  enslaved  the  east  and  west  of  tlie  world.  Although  in  that
reign  there  were  other  jw-jts  who  cornpo.se-l  anthologies,  still  by
reason  of  these  two  eminent  j.'oets  the  mention  of  the  other.s  sinks
into  insignificance.

*•  When  the  sun  comes  out  the  stars  disappear,”

The  death  of  Jtir  Khusru  took  place  in  the  year  72-5  H.  (1D2.5
A.I).).  He  is  buried  in  Dihli  at  the  foot  of  the  sacred  tonib  of  his

1 The  jlb.«  iluHau-l-An'.-i,-,  “Ortus  lumimim,  Poer.ia,  persicum,

qnod  ad  Peiitalu  Khosrewi  Dehlewi,  ai.no  72.5  (me  IS  Deo.  1324 1 mnrtui,
pertinet.  Viainti  1-bri  q.ri  sinquli  Iiietori  on  uniim  couc.  rient.”  H.K.  12256.

i ■ Aiau>--i-<jaidp,’  U’cth)..  8 JaIJ  A*.  ilah-i-Kdmtl.

* V w'i/i  The  ynnih/lTtiJ-Vus  gee  Hiiji  Khalifah.

XafiiKc't'i-'.-ii halitus  fautiliaritatis  e riris  sanctitate  eminentibus
pr^rieiHite!*,  aiictove  Molla  nostro  XCir-ed-dlri  Abd-el-rahmiiii  Ben  Ahmad
Jilnii  anno  liuc.  23  (Jet..  i4-i)2)  mortuo.”  H.  K.  13922.

6 ^JJ|  'Turk  Allah.

S Mir  Hasan  DihlavT,  whose  name  wns  Shaikh  Najuin-d-

Diu  UHsaii,  -vvas  cue  of  the  most  accomplished  poets  of  his  time.  He,  like
M’l-  i-^'isru,  was  a disciple  of  Nizamu-d-DIn  Anllya.  Majyna'u-l-Fusahd  I.
190i  Hr*  ilif.ii  as  our  author  tells  ue  fin  739  A.H.)  at  Daulatabad  in  the
Deccan,  where  Le  was  buried.  So  also  Atash  Kada  p 351.

[ 271  1

(jwn  spiritual  instructor  * may  God  shew  mercy  to  them.  Maulana
Shihab*  wrote  an  enigmatical  chronogram  upon  that,  and  having
had  it  engraved  upon  a tablet  of  stone  had  it  fixed  above  the
si  nine  * of  Mir  i^usru.  It  is  as  follows  • —

Mir  Khusru,  the  Khusru  of  the  kingdom  of  eloquence.

That  ocean  of  excellence,  and  sea  of  perfection  ;

His  prose  is  more  attractive  than  flowing  water,

His  poetry  purer  than  the  most  limpid  streams  ;

A sweet-singing  nightingale  without  a rival,

Honey-tongued  parrot  without  an  equal :

In  tracing  t!:e  date  of  the  year  of  his  death,

When  I placed  my  bead  upon  the  knee  of  thought.

One  phrase  ‘Adimii-l-Misl*  came  as  the  date.

Another  was  T litl-i-Sh'tkar  iTayal.^

Mir  Hasan,  in  the  year  in  which  Sultan  Muhammad  having
laid  waste  Dihli  built  Daulatabad  ® in  the  Deccan,  died  in  that

1 NizImu-d-DIn  Anllya.

> See  p.  99  note  2 of  this  u uik.

5 There  is  no  EngKsh  equivalent  that  I am  aware  of  for  the  word
which  means  “a place  of  pilgrimage.”  The  word  ” shrine”  conveys  this  idea
better  than  most  others.

* Tlie  letters  of  give  the  date  725.  Thns70  + 4 + 10-t-40fl  +

30 -t  40  + oOO  + 30.  So  also  do  those  of  Thus  9 + 6 + 9 +

10+  3(X>  + 20  + 200  + 40  + 100  + 1 + 30  = 725.  Not  counting  the  hamza.

Mir  Khn.srii  died  in  the  month  of  Ram.az.in  725  A.  H.  (1325  A.D  ) and  is
said  in  The  MaJ)na‘u-l-Fuf'ihd  to  have  been  buried  it'  the  burial  place  of
Sh.iileh  .Jhakkar  Ganj ; as  above  stated  in  the  text  he  was  buried  close  to  the
grave  of  his  spiritual  guide  Ni^amn-d-Din  Aullya.

t means  neerless.”  Tilti-i-Shakkar  Jifaqdl.  ” PaiTot  of  honied

speech.”

*1  M3.  (X)  omits  cbf  ending

Daulatabad.  Lat  19°  57'  N.  and  long.  75°  18'  E.  28  miles  N.-W.  of  Hyderabad,

It  was  originally  called  Deogiri  or  Deogarh,  and  was  the  capital  of  the
Yadava  kingdom.  After  being  taken  by  ‘Ahiu-d-DIn,  which  event  is  note-
worthy as  being  the  first  appearance  of  the  Muhammadans  in  the  Deccan,
it  was  given  back  to  its  Raja  Ramchandra  who  rebelled,  was  subdued  by
Naib  Malik  Kaffir,  taken  prisoner  and  sene  to  Dihli  whence  he  was  restored
to  his  kingdom.  Finally  in  1338  (739  A.H.)  Mnl^ammad  Tughlaq  Shiih

[ 272  ]

country,  and  was  buried  in  the  city  of  Daularabad  where  his
tomb  is  well  known,  and  is  visited  as  a shrine  of  sanctity
‘Aiif  Jami,^  may  his  resting-place  be  sanctified^  says  —

Those  two  parrots  from  whose  birth
Hindustan  was  filled  with  sugar,

Became  at  last  a mark  for  the  airow  of  the  sky
And  were  silenced  and  prisoned  in  the  cage  of  earth.

SutTAS  Shihabu-d-HIn  iBN  ‘Alau-d-Hin  Khilji

202.  Who  w'as  a child,  ascended  the  throne  as  a puppet  in  the  month
of  Shawwal,  715  A.H.  (1316  A.D.)  by  tbe  exertions,  and  with
the  consent  of  Malik  Naib,  and  was  styled  by^  the  above  title
He  sent  Malik  Ikhtiyaru-d-Dln  Sanbal  to  the  fortress  of  Gwaliar
to  put  out  the  eyes  of  Khizr  Khan  and  Shadi  Khan.  He  alsc
caused  the  mother  of  Khizr  Khan,  Malika-i-Jahan,  to  be  im-
prisoned, and  confiscated  all  her  property,  a,nd  having  thrown  the
Shahzada,  whose  name  was  Mubarjik  Khan,  into  prison,  intended
to  put  out  hia  eyes,  but  fate  did  not  second  his  effoi  ts.

deserted  Dihli  for  Deogiri  wtiich  he  renamed  Daulatabad  and  issued  stringent
orders  to  all  the  inljabitants  of  Dihli  to  remove  to  the  new  capital.

Ibn  Batata  (Paris  Edn.  IV.  46)  who  visited  at  this  time,  compares  it  to  the
former  capital,  aad  say  that  the  citadel  was  named  This  was  evi-

dently the  old  name  of  the  city,  Deogir  as  we  should  probably  read

1 Jiuru-d-Din  ‘Abdu-r-Rahman  was  bom  in  817  A.H.  (1414  A.D.)  at  Jam
Khurasan,  whence  lie  took  the  name  of  Jami.

His  father’s  name  was  Nizamu-d-Din  Ahmad.  He  was  from  his  earliest
years  distinguished  for  his  mental  powers,  and  at  the  early  age  of  five
received  the  name  of  Nura-d-DTn  (Light  of  the  Faith)  and  later  he  was
known  as  Maulana.  He  became  very  famous  and  attained  to  the  highest
dignity  attainable  by  a mystic,  that  of  ‘Arif. . He  wrote  many  works  in
poetry,  grammai’  and  theology,  among  others  the  Haft  Aurang,  a series  of
seven-poems  viz.,  SUailatii-l-Zahab,  The  golden  chain  ; Qisia-i-Salaman  wa
Atsal,  Story  of  Salaraan  and  Absal  ; Tutifatu-UAhrar  ; The  Offering  to  the
Wise;  Sabhala-l-ahrar,  Rosary  of  the  Fiona;  Tusuf  wa  Zuleikha,  Ynsnf  and
ZuleiUia ; La'tU  wa  Mujniin,  Laili  and  Majnuu  ^irad  Kama,  Book  jf  Wisdom.

He  died  in  the  yc.ar  898.  H.  (1493  A.D  )

See  : Haji  ^alifah  14412.  lusuf  and  Zulei^a  (Griffith’s  Preface  ) Beale
(Diet,  of  Or.  i/tog.).  p.  132.

[ 273  ]

When  his  attempts  to  uproot  the  family  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  became
known,  two  sirdars  named  Mabashshir  and  Bashir  in  concert  with
a body  of  paihs  of  the  garrison  of  the  Hazar  Sntun  palace,  one
night  murdered  Malik  Naib.i

Verse.

If  thou  doest  evil,  hope  not  for  good.

For  never  wilt  thou  gather  gi-apes  from  thorns  ;

I do  not  imagine  that  thou  who  hast  sown  barley  in  autumn
When  harvest  comes  wilt  gather  in  wheat.

Then,  having  released  Shahzada  Mubarak  Khan  from  prison,
they  appointed  ^ him  to  be  Naib  to  Sultan  Shiliabu-d-Din  in
place  of  Malik  Naib  ; Mubarak  Khan  carried  on  the  affairs  of  the
state  for  one  or  two  months  after  that,  and  succeeded  in  conciliat-
ing the  Amirs  and  Maliks.  Then  he  sent  Sultan  Shihabn-d- Din
to  the  fortress  of  Gwaliar  where  he  finally  died  in  the  year  716  H.®

Verse.

No  one  has  ever  seen  a trace  of  fidelity  in  Time,

Everyone  who  seeks  fidelity  from  Time  is  in  error.

The  Sirdars  having  put  some  of  these  paiks  to  death,*  scattered  203.
the  rest  of  them  in  all  directions.

Verse.

Good  requites  good,  and  evil  meets  with  evil.

This  is  the  way  of  the  world  : requital  of  actions.

And  the  period  of  the  reign  of  Shihabu-d-Din  was  three
months  and  a few  days.

Sultan  Qctbu  d-DIn  Mubacak  Shah  ibn  ‘Alau-d-Din  Khilj!.

Ascended  the  throne  of  Dihli  with  the  consent  of  the  Amirs

1 Thirty-five  days  after  the  death  of  ‘Alau-d-DIn  (BamiJ  i.e.,  715  H.

(1316  A.D.)

S MS.  (A)

® There  ia  a difference  here  of  great  importance  between  the  printed  text
and  the  MS.  The  former  has  710  H.  while  MS.  (A)  reads  716  H.  which  is
correct,  as  ia  seen  from  the  Nuh  Sipihr  of  Mir  Khusrii.

* MS.  (A)  ISu-xiLy  JdRl.

With  regard  to  the  succession  of  Shihabn-d-DIn,  see  Firishta,  who
describes  him  by  the  name  of  ‘Umar  Khun  (ilriggs  FiiisLta  1.  3N3).  His
full  name  was  Shihabu-d-Din  ‘Umar  according  to  Mir  Khn&rit.

35

[ 274  ]

and  Vazirs  in  the  early  part  of  the  year  717,  H.*  and  ap-
portioning appointments  and  suitable  jaegirs  among  liis  most
trusted  Amirs,  specially  distinguish^sd  by  promoting  to  high
office  one  Hasan,  Barawar  bacha,*  who  was  very  handsome,
and  had  been  brought  as  a captive  from  Malwa.  He  had  been  the
proteije  of  Malik  Shadi  Haib-i-Khass,  the  Hajih  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-
I)in.3

He  gave  him  the  title  of  Khusrii  Khan.  The  tribe  of  Barawar  *
81  e a family  of  servile  position  in  Gujrat ; but  now  in  the  kingdom
of  Dihli,  the  Sultan,  to  such  an  extent  was  he  infatuated  by  his
beautiful  face,  raised  him,  in  spite  of  his  nufltuess  for  the  office,
to  the  trusted  post  of  Vazir.

Verse.

If  thou  desirest  thy  kingdom  to  be  glorious
Give  not  high  office  to  an  upstart ;

Pnless  thou  wishest  that  thy  state  should  be  ruined
Entrust  not  thy  affairs  to  the  inexperienced.

And  Sukau  Qutba-d-Din,  inasmuch  as  he  had  undergone  the
affliction  of  imprisonment,  on  the  very  first  day  of  his  reign  had
all  the  prisoneis  libeiated,  and  appointed  Malik  Fakhru-d-Din
Juna  the  Son  of  Ghazi  Malik,  who  eventually  wns  entitled
Muhammad  ‘Adil,  to  be  Mir  AkJior.^

In  the  first  year  of  his  reign  he  contemplated  the  conquest  of
Deogir  otherwise  called  Daulatabad,®^  but  his  Amirs  opposed  and
dissuaded  him.

1 So  also  the  Tdrllih-i-Firoz  Shdhl  of  Barni,  but  Khusrii  in  both  the  *As}iiqa
and  yuh  Sipihr,  snys  the  beginning  of  716  H.  In  the  latter  poem  the  date  is
specifically  stated  to  have  been  the  24cU  of  ilaharram,  716  H.  But  Firishta
says  the  7th  of  Muharram,  and  the  editor  states  in  a footnote  to  the  transla-
tion of  the  Xuh  8ipihi\  that  in  some  loose  extracts  the  date  is  717  H.

‘Alau-d-DIn  having  died  on  the  7th  Shawwal  715  and  Shihabn-d-DIn
having  reigned  three  months  and  a few  days,  wonld  bring  the  accession  of
Qutbu-d-Din  to  about  the  middle  or  end  of  Muharram  716,  so  that  we  may
consider  this  as  tlie  correct  date  unless  there  was  an  interregnum  of  a whole
year,  of  which  there  is  no  evidence.

a iis.  (A).

8 MS.  (A)  omits  j after  * MS.  (A).

6 Master  of  the  Horse.  Ai^or  is  a TarkUh  word  signifying  stable.  Cf.
Akhta,  a TnrkI  word  signifying,  a gelding.

® See  p.  271  note  6.

L 270  j

Verse.

It  was  not  deemed  expedient,  from  motives  of  wisdom,
That  the  world’s  king  should  move  from  his  place ;

Who  knows,  what  are  the  hidden  designs  of  evil  wishers,

t 0 7

Or  who,  in  all  sincerity,  is  well  disposed  to  the  king  ?

In  the  year  718  H.  (1318  A.D.)  Snltan  Qntba-d-Din  sent  Sar
Salahi  Kotwnl.^  with  orders  to  proceed  to  Gwaliar  and  put  to
death  Khizr  Khan  and  Sha'ii  Khan.  Having  done  this  he  sum-
moned Dewai  Rani  and  included  her  in  his  haram.  With
reference  to  this  Mir  Khusru  writes  :

I'erses.

In  short  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  secret  of  this  mystery
In  this  way  opened  the  door  of  this  treasury  of  secrets,

That  when  the  Sultan  Mubarak  Shuh  in  crucdty
Turned  against  his  own  kith  and  kin  with  anger  and  frown-
ing,

He  considered  tiiat  the  interests  of  the  country  demanded
their  murder,

And  thought  that  they  deserved  the  sharp  sword.

His  object  was  to  empty  the  country  of  noble  wen  by  mali-
cious enterprise.

Secretly  he  sent  a messenger  to  Khizr  Khan
Making  treacherous  protestations  of  hearty  good  will
Saying,  Oh  thou  shining  light  who  remainest  far  from  the
assembly,

Thy  body  ill  at  ease  and  thy  countenance  without  light ;

Thou  knowest  that  this  is  none  of  my  doing,

The  oppressed  remains  while  the  opprciror  disappears.

If  thou  art  imprisoned,  by  the  Lord  of  the  uoi’ld
When  the  time  comes  he  hini.self  will  luo.sen  these  bonds.

In  this  matter  haste  and  anxiety  aie  not  tittiiig.

An  elephant  extricates  itself  from  the  mire  by  patient  en-
deavour.

Kow',  we  too  are  engaged  in  plumbing  this  m.itte;

So  that  by  clever  contrivance  we  may  free  on  from  that
captivity.

i “ A ruffian  named  5;^Hdi ' {Mit  Khusrti  t,  and  DIM.  555.  )

204.

[ 276  1

If  thou  art  fitted  to  become  a king

We  will  make  thee  ruler  over  a wide  kingdom.

But  the  aHection  for  some  one  which  springs  in  thy  heart
Is  not  fitted  for  the  loftiness  of  thy  ambition.

Dewal  Rani  who  is  but  a handmaiden  to  thee,

For  whom  even  were  the  moon  needed  as  handmaid  this  were
an  easy  matter,

I have  heard  that  she  is  so  dear  to  thee

That  thy  cypress-like  form  stoops  to  kiss  her  feet.

This  is  not  fitting  that  from  shortsightedness
The  king  should  be  enslaved  by  a slave.

The  gourd  is  in  any  case  of  no  account  in  the  garden
205.  That  it  should  attempt  to  raise  its  head  in  emulation  of  the
Ghindr.

A straw  which  places  its  foot  upon  the  face  of  the  stream
Is  carried  hither  and  thither  by  the  wind  and  buffeted  by  the
floods,  t

[My  heart’s  desire  makes  this  request,  that  thou  should’st  give
up  that  mistress  of  thine.]

Since  she  went  from  here,  send  her  back  hither  again
Send  her  to  take  her  place  at  the  foot  of  nay  throne.

When  the  infatuation  of  thy  mind  is  somewhat  less
We  will  send  her  back  to  thee  to  be  thy  handmaid.

When  the  messenger  went  and  took  back  the  message
Khizr  Khan’s  heart  no  longer  enjoyed  any  rest.

First  he  wept  tears  of  blood  which  flooded  his  eyes  and  lips,
Then  he  sent  back  an  answer  mingled  with  blood
Saying,  since  the  Shah  has  attained  his  ambition  in  becoming
a sovereign,

He  must  leave  Dqvval  Rani  to  me.

If  however  you  desire  to  deprive  me  of  this  wealth
You  desire  to  see  me  despoiled  of  wealth  and  light.

Since  this  heart  s delight  holds  her  head  as  high  as  mine
Cut  off  my  head,  afterwards  thou  wilt  know.

When  the  messenger,  from  that  grief -stricken  soul

I Here  follows  in  the  text  the  following  verse  given  above  in  brackets.

ay  Lo  Ji  4^lit*j

With  a footnote  saying  that  this  verse  is  in  the  ‘Aihl^a  but  in  none  of  the
three  MSS.  It  is  also  not  in  MS.  (A.J

[ 277  ]

Bore  those  fiery  sighs  to  the  palace  of  the  king.

The  Emperor  waxed  wiath  from  head  to  foot

From  his  heart  he  smiled,  as  lightniiig  smiles  iu  the  cloud,

The  flame  of  the  fire  of  ^ enmity  shot  forth,

He  whd  sought  a pretext,  was  provided  with  a new  one.*

In  anger  he  sent  for  Sar  Salahi  (the  Kotwal)

Saying  you  must  travel  this  day  before  nightfall  a hundred
kroJis  ;

Go  to  Gwaliar  at  this  moment  without  delay,

And  with  the  sword  cut  off  the  heads  of  the  lions  of  the
country.

That  I may  be  safe  from  the  nobles  of  the  country;

Because  this  disturbance,  small  as  it  is,  risks  the  existence  of
the  country.

At  his  order  the  tyrant  set  out,

The  pigeon  was  tied  ^ by  the  foot  and  the  hawk  hungry.

In  that  day  and  night  he  travelled  several  leagues
He  arrived  and  again  imprisoned  him  intending  (to  kill  him).^

He  made  known  the  orders  he  had  received  from  the  throne,

The  garrison  of  the  fort  set  about  carrying  out  this  severe
measure ;

The  ruthless  soldiery  entered  shamelessly  ^ into  that  pure  206.
place  of  chastity.

The  veiled  ladies®  were  thrown  into  consternation  and  screamed
so  that  the  roof  and  doors  shook  with  their  cries.

In  that  palace  every  arrow-like  beam became  curved  like  a
bow,

The  day  of  resurrection  became  a guest  iu  that  Paradise  ;

From  the  corners  of  the  room.s  in  great  consternation
The  male  lions  leapt  forth  in  wr-ath.

i MS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (A)  reads  AjIj

8 MS.  (A)  The  text  has  a misprint  AX*.

* The  text  is  wrong  here.  MS,  (A)  reads  correctly.

6 MS.  (A)  » MS.  (A!

has  here  the  two  meanings  oianoity  and  ofUi  or  Oe.im,

[ 278  ]

The  arms  had  lost  their  streiigtli,  and  the  bodies  their  power.
Force  was  dead,  and  wit  had  sunk  to  sleepd
Shadi  Khan  Wala  waxed  wrath,  and  sought  aid  from  the
protection  of  God  m jst  High,

Nimbly  he  leapt  upon  the  Kotwal  and  fought  with  him  for  a
long  time,  threw  him  to  the  ground  and  sought  for  a sword
wherewith  to  slay  him.

Inasmuch  as  he  had  lo.st  Iiis  sword  of  victory
What  did  that  unattainable  strength  avail  him  ?

Allies  ran  up  to  help  him  from  right  and  left

Thev  fell  one  after  the  other  and  that  fallen  one  rose  up.

Each  fierce  (lion)  was  attacked  by  ten  dogs,®

See  how  the  dogs  vent  their  wrath  upon  the  lions.

Hey  for  +he  meanness  of  the  cowardly  sky
That  permits  dogs  to  hunt  lions  1

When  they  had  forcibly  bound  those  two  prosperous  chief-
tains.

The  time  bound  the  hands  of  fortune  and  prosperity.

Those  wondrous  men  fell  into  disgrace,

Blood-reeking  swords  appeared  on  every  side
When  the  murderous  clashing  of  daggers  was  heard,

The  blood-thirsty  murderer  appeared  fiom  the  door,

Hard  as  a rock,3  source  of  grief,  though  his  name  was  Shadi
(Joy)

As  repulsive  as  the  document  of  a dowry,  and  the  grief
arising  from  debt.

Artful  enough  to  depose  Dajjal  ■*  from  his  place,

1 MS.  f.i'.

2 MS.  (.V)  kJU

8 MS.  (A)

* ■ cJhk jJt  A'l-BnjJal  called  also  Al-'iIai>ha-l-Kn::(ih.

Tho  false  Christ  or  Aat'christ  Tvho  is  to  appear  as  one  of  the  si^ns  preceding
the  resurrect i.jn.  C'f,  2 Thess.  ii.  So  called  according  to  some;  because  lie
will  cover  the  eartli  >vith  his  adherents  like  as  the  tar  covers  the  body  of

the  mangy  camt-,  t.'ie  word  dajahx  in  Arabic  having  the  primary

meaning  of  smoaring  with  tar.

According  . i-.rd  he  is  so  called  because  of  his  lying  (secondary  mean-
ing of  in  iUTOgaiiiig  to  himself  godship  j or  again  from  dajj'ua

in  the  twofold  ^ignnikaiiou  ot  " coveting ''  (truth  with  falsehood)  or  ‘■gild-
ing.” &€€  Lane  o r.

[ 279  ]

Hideous  enough  to  make  Satan  forgetful  of  his  own  ugliness;
On  each  side  of  Lis  face  was  gathered  a dark  cloud, ^

From  every  hair  sprang  a sword.*

Fierce  wrath  as  cutting  as  the  executioner’s  sword,

A glance  as  piercing  as  the  chisel  of  Farhad  ; ®

His  lips  wreathed  in  an  angiw  smile,

Tiirongh  wrath  seizing.'his  lips  between  his  teeth
His  one  desire  and  wish  was  revenge  and  punishment.

From  head  to  foot  a statue  of  hatred  and  scorn  ;

According  to  the  Mishkat,  Dajjal  will  be  the  second  of  the  ten  signs  or
tokens  which  are  to  precede  the  resurrection.  After  three  of  these  signs  tare
occurred,  namely,  the  rising  of  the  snn  in  the  west,  the  comiug  of  Dajjal,

and  the  appearance  of  the  beast  which  is  to  emerge  from  the  mountain  of

Safah,  repentance  will  no  longer  avail  anything.

The  coining  of  Dajjal  is  to  be  a lime  of  calamity  snch  as  has  never  before
been  known.  He  is  of  low  stature  though  bulky,  with  splay  feet,  blind,  with
the  flesh  even  on  one  side  of  his  face  without  the  mark  of  an  eye.  His

right,  eye  is  blind,  like  the  seed  of  a grape,  and  the  word  kufr,

Infidelity,  is  written  between  his  eyes,  he  is  to  appear  from  tlie  middle  of  a
road  between  Syria  and  ‘Iraq  and  will  mislead  on  the  right  hand  and  on  the
left.  The  repetition  of  the  Chapter  of  the  'Cave  (Qur'an  XVIII)  will  be  a
means  of  repelling  his  wickedness.  He  will  not  be  able  to  enter  either
Mecca  or  Sledinah.  His  stay  upon  earth  is  to  last  forty  days,  one  day  eqnal
to  a year,  and  another  day  equal  to  a month,  another  day  like  a week  and
rest  of  the  days  like  ordinary  days.  Dajjil  will  it  is  said  bestow  great
abundance  upon  those  who  believe  in  him,  but  sorely  afflict  those  who  reject
him.  He  is  to  perform  mii-ades  such  as  killing  a youth  by  severing  him  in
two  with  a sword  and  restoring  him  to  life.  I hen  Jesus  will  descend  from
heaven  and  will  destroy  Dajjal  at  the  entrance  to  a village  called  Lud  in
Palestine.  The  Jews  of  Isfahfui  will  follow  DajjJl  before  whose  coming
there  will  be  three  years  during  the  first  of  which  the  sky'  will  withhold  one-
third  of  its  rain  and  the  earth  one-third  of  her  productions,  during  the
second  the  sky  will  withhold  two-thirds  and  the  earth  two-thirds,  during
the  third  neither  sky  nor  earth  will  yield  rain  nor  produce,  and  every  animal'
in  the  earth  will  die.  He  will  then  come  forth  upon  a white  ass,  the  space
between  the  ears  of  which  is  seventy  feet.

1 His  whiskers.  * MS.  (A)  The  text  reads

3 Farhad.  See  Beale  Diet.  Or  Bing.  p.  b7.  for  the  story  of  Farhad

who  in  order  to  gain  the  lovely  Shirin,  with  whom  he  was  madly  in  love,
attempted  to  cut  through  a mountain ; he  was  on  the  point  of  completing
Lis  labour  when  false  intelligence  was  sent  to  him  by  the  husband  of  Shinu
that  she  was  dead,  whereupon  he  cast  himself  headlong  aud  was  daAied  m

pieces.

207.

[ 280  ]

When  he  gave  the  signal  and  blandished  his  sv'ord  on  all  sides  *
Not  one  leapt  like  lightning  from  that  mass  of  clouds.

May  God  have  mercy  !

How  could  anyone  draw  the  sword  of  revenge  upon  that
crowd  of  moonlike  faces.

Whose  heart  would  not  be  tom  with  distracting  grief
In  pity  for  so  many  young  and  beautiful  men  ?

Oh  Lord  ! may  the  breast  of  beaven  be  rent  a hundredfold
To  think  that  it  has  brought  so  many  noble  ones  to  the  dust.
How  can  you  look  for  pity  for  the  blood  he  sheds,  in  the  heart
of  the  butcher  ?

Whose  one  desire  is  to  see  his  knife  stained  with  blood.

When  the  bloo'dy  butcher  binds  roses  upon  his  head,

Why  should  he  withhold  his  knife  from  the  rose-like  body  ?
Since  no  one  of  them  desired  that  the  sword  should  succeed
in  shedding  their  blood,*

Tliere  leapt  from  their  midst  like  a whirlwind
A man  of  low  origin,  a Hindu  by  birth
Dusky  of  hue,  like  to  Ahriman,*

Nay  ! a thousand  Ahrimans  would  stand  aghast  at  his  face
Grief-increasing  like  the  pleasure  of  those  in  distress,

Wrong  in  judgment  like  the  iutellect  of  young  people  ;
Unlucky  to  look  upon  as  a young  owl.

Like  a morning  in  Dai  * at  Ghaznin  cold  and  inhospitable  ;
Like  the  night  of  sorrow  his  forehead  full  of  gloom.

Like  the  nature  of  a wicked  man,  accursed.

A lip  like  the  sole  of  a ploughman’s  foot,

A cheek  like  the  moutli  of  a man  with  paralysis  ;

That  hideous  one  had  a mouth  like  a helmet,

His  smile  like  the  yawning  of  a burst  shoe  ;

Long  whiskers  twisted  over  his  ears

1 MS.  (A)  5^  OjLif,

» MS.  A L>

8 Ahriman,  the  Satan  of  the  Persians,  is  said  in  their  traditions  to  hare
been  born  out  of  the  thonght  of  the  Almiglitr  and  of  his  pride  in  tTie  world,
while  the  first  man  Cwhom  tliey  call  Gayomarth)  was  bom  from  the  sweat  of
the  brow  of  the  Almighty  wiped  off  in  bewilderment  at  the  sight  of  Ahriman.
See  Albiruni  {Chron.)  p.  107.

* The  tenth  month  of  the  Persian  year.  See  Albiruni  {Chron.}  p.  62.
It  answers  to  our  month  of  December.

[ ‘iSl  ]

His  whiskers  taking  the  place  of  the  ring  in  the  slave’s  ear ;
Lightly  he  leapt  out  from  the  line  of  warriors,

[You  would  think  that  a wave  of  blood  would  burst  from  him,  208.
His  skirt  tucked  up  in  his  Wi-athfnl  haste,  his  sleeves  drawn
back  for  bloodshed.]  1

He  demanded  a well-tempered  sword  from  his  officer,*

Drew  it,  and  tightened  up  the  skirt  of  his  tnnic ;

[The  head  of  that  cypress-like  noble  fell  from  his  shoulders
He  who  was  renowned  for  his  youth  and  beauty]  *

Martyrdom  was  evident  * in  H)izr  in  that  palace  ;

Just  as  the  tree  praises  God  when  its  branches  put  forth  leaves
The  heaven  kept  lamenting  over  his  punishment ;

The  angels  continually  assisted  him  in  his  martyrdom,

Eizwan  threw  open  the  gates  of  Paradise,

All  the  Hurts  began  to  sing  his  praises.

Prom  that  martyr's  shout  of  triumph  which  came  forth  fi-om
the  Shah,

The  sun  and  moon  joined  in  the  martyr’s  song.

When  the  dagger  was  raised  aloft  and  the  Shah’s  face  was
seen  amid  its  clustering  locks.

Lamentation  arose  in  that  assembly  like  ® the  roll  of  thunder;

The  sun  made  his  body  a shield  to  protect  him.

But  Pate  turned  it  on  one  side  from  before  him.

When  the  sword  of  Fate  severs  the  cord  of  Hope,

Neither  sun  nor  moon  can  become  a shield  for  thee;

With  one  blow  which  that  rutldess  one  struck
He  made  the  Shah’s  head  a guest  in  his  bosom.

To  wash  away  the  blood,  the  revolving  water-wheel  of  the  sky
Required  that  the  spring  of  the  sun  should  yield  all  its  blood  ;

But,  since  there  wnts  no  longer  a breath  of  life  in  his  body.

Of  what  avail  was  it  to  wash  the  blood  from  the  surface  of  it,
Dewal  Rani,  who  was  a woman  of  dignity  and  beauty,

Was  the  lifespring  of  Khizr  Khan’s  existence.

^ A footnote  to  the  text  states  that  these  lines  are  not  in  either  Mb.  MS,
(A)  contains  them,
a MS.  (A)

S These  lines  are  not  in  the  text.  MS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (A)  o-wIA  t MS.  (A)

36

L

J

0^2

Since  the  of  the  sky  had  lain  in  ambnsh  to  slay  him

That  \ery  nell  of  life  ^ of  his  became  the  sword  of  enmity.
When  Ave  look  in  this  crystal  globe  carefully
Many  life  giving  springs  are  also  fatal  to  their  ivhizr.

The  soul  of  the  lover  Avas  poured  out  AAith  his  life  blooa,

But  still  Avas  hovering  round  about  the  beloved  one
A rose  from  aa  hieh  thou  hast  tasted  a pearl  of  deAV,

Thou  wilt  shed  thy  blood*  for  it  a hundred  times.

Instead  of  rose  water  they  drew  his  heart’s  blood  from  that
rose,

See  hoAV  they  ( mercilessly)  robbed  him  of  his  blood  !

And  Avhen  the  foundation  stone  of  this  edifice  of  his  destruction
of  the  family  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  was  laid,  the  question  Avas  asked  ot
a devotee,  w'hy  this  should  be  ? His  reply  Avas  because  ‘Alan-d-Din
had  cast  a firebraud  into  the  family^  of  the  uncle  of  his  bene-
factor, and  as  a consequence  similar  treatment  had  been  meted  out
to  his  own  family.

Ferse,

209.  In  this  full  voiced,  re-echoing  dome  (the  world)

Whatever  speecli  yon  utter  that  same  will  you  hear.

At  all  events,  after  the  usurpation  by  Sultan  Qutbn-d-Din.  all
the  rules  and  regulations  made  by  ‘Alau-d-l)in,  each  of  which
embodied  some  wise  purpose  or  far-seeing  design,  were  thrown
into  confusion,  and  dissoluteness  and  wickedness,  contumacy  and
rebellion  sprang  anew  to  life  during  the  reign  of  Sultan  Qutbn-d-
Din,  who  threw  open  the  doors  of  license  and  gratification  of
desiies  to  the  people  : and  when  Malik  Kainalu-d-Din  Gang,  after
that  Alf  IGian  had  been  .summoned  to  the  presence  and  had  been
e.xecuted,  proceeded  to  Gujrat  where  he  attained  martyrdom,
‘Ainu-l-lMulk  Mnltani  was  nominated  by-  the  Conrt,^  and  having
quelled  the  disturbance  there  regained  possession  ^ of  NahrwMa
and  all  the  country  of  G ujrat,  Sultan  QuHau-d-Din  married  the

1 tr'b  » IIS.  ( A)

S 5ts.  {AJ  reads.  ulUilA  instead  of  vylA  and  olAlA  m place  of

(yUiti..

* MS.  (A)  A-i  b jiS  (At  j ^ JA

[ 283  3

(Jang-hter  of  Malik  Dinar,  and  liaving  given  * him  the  title  of
Zafar  Khan  sent  him  to  Gujrat.  He  performed®  the  important
duties  of  that  province  better  and  more  satisfactorily  than  ‘Ainu-1-
Mulk.

In  the  year  718  H.  (1318  A.D.)  Sultan  Qntbu-d-Din  marched
for  Deogir  with  a laiger  army,  and  the  Rais  of  that  country  were
not  able  to  stand  against  him.

He  flayed^  Harpal  Deo  who  had  rebelled  during  tlie  tipie  which
followed  the  death  of  Ram  Deo.*  The  country  of  tlie  ilaihattas
also  fell  into  the  hands  of  Qnthu-d-Din  who,  having  given  Kliiisru
Khan  the  canopy  and  staff  of  office  ordered  him  to  proceed  to
Ma‘bar,  and  having  left  Yakhikhi  in  Deogir  as  Xaib,  returned  to
Dihli.  Rear  Badra-i-Sakun  5 Malik  A.sadu-d-Din  ibn  Yaghvash
Khan  who  was  called  Hlalik  Khamnsh.  and  who,  was  the  uncle’s
son  of  Sultan  ‘AlSu-d-Din,  was  smitten  with  the  ambition  of
chieftainship,®  and  plotted  a rebellion  against  the  Sultan,  who
however  was  warned  1 of  this  design  by  one  of  his  loyal  ad-
herents, and  gave  orders  for  the  immediate  execution  of  iMalik
Asadu-d-Din.  He  also  sent  orders  tliat  twenty  of  the  relations  of  210.
Yaghrash  Khan  who  were  aware  of  this  conspiracy  * some  of  whom
were  children,  should  be  executed,  and  when  he  reached  Jhain  he
sent  Shadi  Kath  ® his  chief  captain  to  Gwaliar  to  bring  the  family
and  relations  of  the  murdered  Khizr  and  Shadi  Khan  with

the  remainder  of  the  haram.  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  to  Dihli,  after  having

* MS.  (A)  inserts  Ijjl  j.

* its.  A.  j).  The  textual  reading  is  preferable.

3 The  Sultan  ordered  him  to  be  flayed,  and  his  skin  to  be  hang  over  the
gate  of  Deogir.

* MS.  (A)  omits  6 Called  Ghat-i-Sakiin  by  Barni.

6 MS.  (A)  reads  7 MS.  ( \)

5 There  is  a direct  opposition  here  between  tlie  prinred  text  anct  the  MS.

The  latter  MS.  (A)  writes  3*  and  this  is  adopted

as  it  seems  more  reasonable  than  that  entirely  innocent  persons  shonM  hav^e
been  put  to  death,  thoogh  the  statement  that  some  were  children  is  in  keep-
ing with  the  reading  of  the  text.  This  latter  is  moreover  supported  by  the
statement  of  Barm.  “ They  had  no  knowledge  whatever  of  the  conspiracy,
but  were  all  seized  and  slaogiitered  like  sheep/*

9 MS.  (A)  reads  tc-*"  gbadi  KatU,  and  this  is  the  rame  ttive  i also
ill  Bariil’s  history.  Neitkcr  ilie  text  nor  the  alternative  iCadiDg  given  in  its
f(>otnote  id  correct.

C 284  ]

killed  Sultan  Shihabu-d-Din.  -which  he  carried  out.  Sultan
Qutbn-d-Din  -was  led  by  the  fact  that  Khizr  Khan  had  been  a
disciple  of  the  Sultanu-l-Mashaikh  Kiz^mu-d-Din  Auliya,  to
regard  that  holy  Shaikh  with  suspicion  and  distz'ust,  and  in
opposition  to  the  wishes  of  the  holy  Sjiaikh,  sent  for  Shaikh
Ruknu-d-Din  from  Multan,  and  honoured  Shaikhzada-i-Jam,  who
was  one  of  the  opponents  of  Shaikh  (Kizamu-d-Din)  with  special
distinction.

Verse

When  God  ^ desires  to  openly  disgrace  any  man

He  leads  him  to  abuse  those  of  holy  and  pure  nature ;

And  if  God  desires  to  hide  the  sins  of  any  man

He  leads  him  to  talk  little  about  the  sins  of  other  sinners.

His  habits  also  underwent  great  change,  and  his  heart  embol-
dened him  to  walk  in  the  valley  of  bloodshed  as  his  father  had
done,  so  that  rivers  of  blood  began  to  flow,  and  he  put  to  death
wnliout  any  cause  Zafar  Khan  Wall  of  Gujerat.

In  tlie  mean  while  Yaklakhi  had  prepared  a rebellion  in  Deogir,
and  had  arranged  to  assume  the  insignia  of  royalty.  At  last
when  Khnsru  Khan  reached  Deogir,  the  men  of  the  army  who  had
been  sent  to  Deogir  seized  Yaklakhi  and  made  him  over  to
Khusrd  Khan,  who  sent  him  bound  to  Dihli  where  he  was  execu-
ted. Tlie  Sultan*  also  put  to  death  Malik  Shahiu  who  was
211.  known  !>y  the  title  of  Wafa  Malik,  without  any  reason  save  the
representations  of  .some  int'iguers.

In  these  days  the  Sultan  used  generally  to  array  himself  in
women's  garrneuts,  and  adorning  himself  like  them  with  gold  and
jewels,  used  to  give  public  audience.  Moreover  he  openly  indulged
in  drinking  and  other  forms  of  vice,  inter  marem  fummamque
discrimen  uullomodo  facere  solebat.

Verse.

Statura  cujusvis  ut  littera  Alif  erecta,  idem  quod  litterce
iJiil  et  Xun  incurvescebat,  adeo  Alif  in  rimam  omnium
inserebat.

t MS.  (A)  omits  the  word  in  error.

* MS.  (Aj  omits  the  word  bat  it  appears  to  be  required.

[ 285  ]

He  used  to  command  buffoons  and  jesters  to  insult  with  jest
and  witticisms  his  most  trusted  and  eminent  Amirs,  as  for  in-
stance ‘Ainul  Mulk  Multaui  and  Qarabeg,  who  held  fourteen  ap-
pointments, and  summoning  them  for  that  purpose  to  the  roof  of
the  Hazar  Sutun  palace,  they  used  to  perform  low  buffooneries,  et
nudefacti,  gestu  turpi  et  obscoeno,  in  vestes  nobilinm  honoratonim
mingebant.  Thus  he  prepared  everything  that  was  necessary
for  the  downfall  of  the  kingdom.

Verse.

There  was  the  rose,  the  leaf  adorned  it  too.

And  the  kingdom  seemed  to  say  : —

Oh  ! King  what  can  come  to  pass  from  wine  bibbers
What  too  can  come  to  pa.ss  from  unrestrained  lust
The  king  maddened  by  lust,  the  empire  ruined,  the  enemy
before  and  behind.

It  is  only  too  plain  in  such  a case,  what  must  come  to  pafs-s.

And  after  the  murder  of  Zafar  Khan,  he  raised  Husamu-d-Diii
who  was  half-brotlier  ^ to  Khusiu  Khaii  to  succeed  to  the  position  212.
enjoyed  by  Zafar  Khan  and  nominated  him  to  proceed  to  Gujrat.
Husamu-d-Din  collected  together  the  Barawar  * crew  from  all
parts  of  that  country  and  nursed  a scheme  of  rebellion  in  his
brain.  The  Amirs  of  Zafar  Ivhan’s  party  * however  seized  him
and  sent  him  to  Dihli.  The  Sultan  led  by  the  feelings  he  enter-
tained towards  Khusru  Khan  took  no  steps  to  punish  him,  but
had  h im  set  at  liberty  on  the  instant  and  gave  iiirii  e.itraordinary
privileges.  Then  lie  appointed  Malik  Wahidu-d-Din  * Quraishii
to  Gujiat  in  place  of  Husamu-d-Diu.  He  it  w'as  who  was  the

t Barni  calls  him  which  the  translator  renders  maternal  nncle.

Bat  if  our  text  is  correct  it  would  appear  that  he  was  net  but

that  is  to  say  half-brother  by  the  same  mother,  but  by  a different
father.  This  is  the  meaning  of  the  word  here  used,  and  would

further  account  for  Barui  later  on  calling  him  baaeborn.

S M3.  (A)  jl ji.  3 MS.  (A)  till^ ^

* Thus  the  printed  text.  Barni  also  calls  him  Walildu-d-DIn  so  I have
adopted  this  reading.  MS.  (A)  reads  Wajiliu-d-Uiu.

[ 286  j

cause  of  the  arrest  of  YaklakliLi  Khusrn  Ehan  having  arrived
on  the  frontier  of  Telinga,  and  having  blockaded  tire  Rai  of  that
country  in  one  of  his  fortresses,  accepted  several  head  of  elephants  ®
vrith  treasure  and  valuables  beyond  all  power  of  computation  as
a present  from  hina,  and  moved  his  camp  towards  the  Maithili
country,®  and  having  gained  possession  of  nine  hundred  and
twenty  elephants  and  a diamond  weighing  six  dirams,  came  into
the  country  of  Ma'har,  and  relying  on  that  * Wealth  entertained  tho
idea  of  disobedience  and  rebellion,  and  obtaining  permission  to
remain  there,  put  to  death  several  Amirs  whom  he  had  with  him.
ilalik  Tiilbigha  Yaghda  ^ and  Malik  Talbigha  Ilagori  and  Malik
HajiXaih,  with  certain  other  Amirs  of  the  Sultan’s  party,  becoming
aware  of  his  secret  intentions  threw  him  by  force  into  a litter,
and,  maiching  with  all  haste  by  forced  marches,  convej'ed  him
from  Deogir  to  Dihli  in  seven  days  and  acquainted  the  Sultan
with  his  nefarious  designs.  Khnsrii  Khan  however  in  tho  private
apartment  of  the  palace  where  he  enjoyed  the  special  companion-
ship of  the  Sultan,  gained  him  over  by  artful  and  specious
representations,  and  fully  persuaded  the  Sultan  of  the  villainy
of  the  Amirs.®  The  Sultan  took  his  words  as  Gospel,  so  greatly
was  he  influenced  and  conti oiled  by  him,  and  was  incen.sed  against
the  Amirs,  censured  them severely  and  subjected  them  to  many
indignities,  and  although  they  brought  forward  many  veracious
213.  witnesses  in  support  of  their  allegations  it  was  all  of  no  use,  and
the  wretched  witnesses  were  severely  punished.

The  story  of  Farazdaq  the  poet  fits  in  with  this,  namely  w'hen  he
accompanied  by  his  wife,  appealed  to  the  Khalifah  of  Baghdad,
he  got  Ja‘far  the  Barmecide,  to  plead  for  him;  and  used  his  wife
Znheida  Khatun  as  an  intermediary.  Harun  the  !^alifah  was

The  printed  text  has  sim  ply  but  MS.  (A)  reads  Yaklakhl.

Yakalakhi  it  will  he  remembered,  had  been  appointed  Governor  of  Deogir  after
Harpal  Deo  had  been  taken  and  put  to  death.  According  to  BarnI,  Yaklakhl
was  •' an  old  servant  of  ‘Alau-d-Din,  who  for  many  years  was  ndib  of  the
bands”  (couriers).  Yaklakhl  now  revolted  and  was  arrested  by  Wahidu-d-Din.

5 MS  (A)  omits.  ® MS.  (A)  3

i MS.  (A)  J>«l  lilT  '^3^-

6 Jls.  (A)  reads  thus.  Barm  calls  him  Malik  Talhaglia  Y’aghda

S ?.IS  (A)  omits  .-liter

1 MS  ;.VJ  omits  h.

[ 287  ]

favourably  disposed  towards  Znbeida,  aud  passed  orders  in  ac-
cordance with  the  petition  of  the  wife  of  Farazdaqd  He  accord-
ingly ^M-ote  these  lines  : —

An  ads’oeate  who  appears  before  thee  clothed
Is  not  like  one  who  comes  before  thee  naked.*

That  is  to  say  an  intercessor  who  comes  near  thee  wearing
drawers  will  not  he  so  influential  as  she  who  comes  naked.
Prom  that  day  this  became  a proverbial  saying  among  the  Arabs.

As  soon  as  Khusrg  Khan  became  quite  assured  in  all  ways  of
his  predominant  influence  over  the  Sultan,  he  gave  orders  for  the
assembly  of  all  his  tribe  from  Gujrat  and  began  to  introduce
them  into  the  service  of  the  Sultan.  The  Sultan  reposed  entire
confidence  both  in  him  ^ and  in  his  family,  and  gave  up  the  reins
of  Government  absolutely  into  his  hands,^  abandoning  himself
to  rioting  and  debauchery.^

t Abu  Firaa  Hammara  or  Hamaim  the  son  of  ^alib  sornained  Abul
AWjtal  vas  a celebrated  poet  of  the  tribe  of  Tamim.  He  was  commonly
known  as  AI  Farazdaq  because  of  his  stem  and  forbidding  countenance.  The
meaning  of  Farazdaq  is  said  to  be  a lump  of  dough  which  has  been  tpeaded.
(Freytag  Hamasah  It.  585).  It  was  a nick-name  given  liim  according  to
Ibu  Kutaiba  on  account  of  bis  ugly  face.  He  further  states  however  that
ho  was  so  called  on  account  of  his  short  and  dumpy  stature  which  male  him
be  compared  to  the  crust  (farazdaqa)  witli  which  women  polish  their  teeth.
But  the  first  explanation  is  best,  because  the  .poet  caught  the  small-pox  and
when  he  recovered  bis  face  remained  deformed  and  wrinkled  (Ibn  Khali ;
de  Slane  HI.  623).

S Read  for  [}j^  which  appears  to  be  intended  for  The

occasion  on  which  these  lines  were  spoken  was,  according  to  Tbn  Khalliqan.
wheu  Kawar  the  granddaughter  of  Dnbpla,  wished  tc  marry  one  of
the  Quraish  tribe,  and  asked  Al-Farazdaq  to  act  as  her  legal  gn.ardian
because  he  was  the  sou  of  her  uncle.  He  however  availed  liiinseif  of  a
formal  promise  given  by  her  to  abide  by  his  decision  as  to  her  aff.vrs,  to  say
he  would  marry  her  himself.  Naw.ir  wa.s  very  angry  at  this  and  went  to
‘Abdullah  ibn  az-Znbair,  sovereign  of  Ilijaz  aud  ‘Iraq,  to  obtain  redress.  AI-
F.ir:tz!la([  set  ont  also.  They  stopped  at  different  honses.  Al-Xawar  stayed
with  al-Khaula  wife  of  Abdullah  ibn  az-Zubair,  and  Al-Far.azdaq  with  Hamza
their  son.  Al-Khania  interceded  for  al-Xawiir,  and  her  intercession  prevailed
over  that  of  Hamza  whereupon  Farazdaq  spoke  as  above  (Ibn  j^all  : (de
Slant).  III.  621).

S .M.8.  (A)  J

* ilS.  (A)  omits  jlp  ‘ MS.  (A'  ^

[ 288  ]

Verse.

Casting'  aside  the  Qnr'an  and  the  sword
214.  Taking  instead  to  the  cnp  and  flagon.

The  attendants  who  were  loyal  to  the  state  were  struck  dumb
and  were  compelled  by  the  necessity  for  time-serving  to  throw,
themselves  upon  the  protection  of  Khusru  Khan,

Verse.

If  the  times  give  the  reins  of  authority  to  a wolf,

You  must  save  youraeif  by  sajing,  God  save  yon  Sir  !

And  tiie  family  of  Barawarl  gained  entire  control  of  the  Court
of  the  Sultan,  and  used  to  assemble  by  day  and  by  night  at  tiie
house  of  Khusrn  Khan  to  plot  sedition  and  rebellion  against  the
Sultan,  and  when  Qazi  Ziau-d-Din,  who  was  known  as  Qazi  Khan,
made  these  facts  known,  the  Sultan  who  was  the  slave  of  his  lust
immediately  summoned  KhusrB.  Khan  in  private,*  and  informed
him  of  what  had  been  said,  whereupon  Khusrti  Khan  said,  the
people  see  the  great  kindness  which  the  Sultan  shews  me  and
regard  it  as  excessive,  and  from  motives  of  jealou.sy  falsely
accuse  me.  The  Sultan  helieved  him  and  * made  over  to  him
tho  keys  of  the  roval  treasury  and  of  all  the  other  store-houses
as  well  : Khusiu  Khiiu  ^ regarded  this  as  a proof  of  his  complete
ascendency  deduced  from  it  a favourable  omen  for  his  future  ; —

T'd'/'se

When  he  saw  his  affairs  so  prosperous
He  considered  that  omen  as  a proof  of  victory;

Fi  nm  that  favourable  omen  the  lieart  of  IQiusru  Khan,

Like  a strong  mountain,  became  firmly  established.

Everdually,  one  night  the  Sultan  was  holding  a drinking
party  in  the  company  of  Khusrn  Khan,  and  the  Amir.s  of
the  guards  withdrew  from  their  posts.  Qazi  Khan  came
down  from  the  roof  of  the  Hazar  Sutnn  palace  and  was  engaged
in  examining  if  the  doors  were  safe,  and  the  guards  posted.

1 MS.  (A)  jt  * MS.  (A)  adds  ji.

8 MS. '(A)  J

* MS.  (A).

[ 289  ]

la  the  meantime  one  Eandhol  * the  nncle  of  Khusru  215.

■with  a body  of  the  Barawas,  having  daggers  concealed  under
their  arms  came  upon  Qazi  TThan.  and  kept  him  engaged  in
talk  on  one  way  and  another,  till,  taking  him  off  his  guard,
they  stabbed  him  and  despatched  him  as  a martyr  to  his  abode
in  Paradise.  There  was  a great  uproar,®  and  the  Sultan,  who
at  that  moment  had  no  other  companion  than  !^usra  Khan,
enquired  what  was  the  tumult.  Khusru  Khan  rose  from  beside
him  and  went  out  to  instigate  his  followers  to  murder  the
Saltan,  then  returned  and  said  that  some  of  the  horses  of  the
stud  had  broken  loose,  and  were  fighting  among  themselves.

At  this  moment  Jahiriya  the  uncle  of  Khusru  Khan  approached
the  Hazar  Sutun  with  a party  of  his  men,  and  having  assassina-
ted Ibrahim  and  Ishaq  who  were  on  guard  at  the  palace,  made
for  the  Sultan.  The  Saltan  rising,®  half  intoxicated  as  he  was,
ran  towards  the  haram,  Khusru  Khan  cansrht  him  from  behind
by  the  hair  of  his  head,  and  as  the  Saltan  was  begging  him
to  aid  his  escape  Jahiriya  arrived,  aimed  a blow  at  the  Sultan
wounding  him  in  the  aide,  then  with  his  sword  cutting  off  the
Saltan’s  head  * threw  it.do'wa  below  from  the  roof  of  the  palace.

Verse.

The  bed  of  that  dear  one  was  one  of  thorns
For  his  brocaded  bed  led  to  his  ruin.

When  the  populace  saw  what  had  occurred,  every  one  of  them
went  into  hiding  and  there  was  dismay  in  all  quarters.  Patting
to  death  some  of  the  Amirs  at  the  door  of  the  palace,  the
Barawas  entered  the  SultSa’s  haram  and  tore  Farid  Khan  and
Mangu  !^an,  the  two  infant  sons  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din,  from
their  mother’s  arms  and  cut  off  their  heads,  and  committed  every
kind  of  violence  they  wished,  and  in  one  moment  scattered  to  the
four  winds  all  the  honour  and  glorv  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  and
Qutbu-d-Diu.

Verse.

In  one  hour,  in  one  moment,  in  one  instant  * 216.

The  whole  course  of  the  world  becomes  chan.g''d.

1 MS  (A).  Cy-AJj.  S MS.  (A)  omits *>i».

S MS.  (A)  Ai-lAy.  « MS.  (A)

» MS.  (A)  has  fiS  iJm

37

[ 290  ]

And  when  they  had  glutted  themselves  with  mnraer  and  rapine,
they  sent  for  certain  of  the  Amirs  namely  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk  Multani,
and  Malik  Fakhru-d-Din  Juna,  by  whom  is  meant  Sultan  Muham-
mad ibn  Tughlaq  Shah,  and  Malik  Wahidu-d-Din  Quraishi  with
the  two  sjhs  of  Qarabeg  and  other  notable  Amirs,  and  kept  them
all  that  night  till  morning  upon  the  roof  of  the  Hazar  Sutun  ;
and  when  it  was  day  tliey  made  all  the  ‘Ulama  and  chief  men  of
the  city  swear  allegiance  to  Khusru  Khan,  and  read  the  ^uthah  in
his  name.  By  craft  they  got  the  upper  hand  of  a certain  party
whom  they  suspected  of  being  opposed  to  them,  and  sent  them
to  the  world  of  non-existence,  and  made  over  the  family  of  Qazi
?iau-d-Din  Qazi  Khan,‘  all  except  his  wife  who  fled,*  to  tlie
aforesaid  Handhol.^

Hu  sarau-d-Din,  the  brother  hv  tlie  mother’s  side  of  Khusrfi
Khan,  was  given  the  title  of  Khan-i-Khauan  and  Randhol  ^ became
Eai-i-Raiyan,  and  the  harams  of  Sultan  Qutbu-d-Din  and  the  other
princes  and  relatives  they  divided  among  themselves.  Khusrn
Khan  took  to  himself  ® in  marriage  the  chief  wife  of  the  Sultan.
These  events  happened  in  the  year  7*20,  H.  (1320  A.D.)  aud  the
duration  of  the  reign  of  Sultan  Qutbu-d-Din  was  four®  years  and
some  months.

Verse.

Since  the  world  began  so  it  lia.s  tieen,  and  so  will  always  be,
To  everyone  the  eml  of  all  things  will  be  as  this.

KisiRt'-D-Dix  Kfl’srO  Khak

Whose  name  at  the  first  was  Hasan  Barw*abacha,  in  the
aforesaid  year  sat  upon  the  throne  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  and  Qutbu-d-
217.  Din,  by  the  co-operation  of  his  own  tribe ; and  the  Amirs  who
have  already  been  mentioned,  whether  they  would  or  ro,  were
constrained  to  give  in  their  allegiance  to  him,  and  addressed  him
by  tins  title.  The  rites  and  ceremonies  of  Islam  tended  towards
neglect  while  Hindu  customs  and  heathen  observances  obtained
currency.^  Idolat.ey  and  devastation  of  mosques  became  wide-

t MS.  (.t)  omits  J.

S MS.  i

» MS.  (Aj  omits  jS).

^ MS.  fA)  jbg.

» MS.  (A)

MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  reads

[ 291  ]

spread,  and  although  Khusru  Khan,  to  conciliate  tlie  people
scattered  gold  and  larished  presents  on  all  sides  so  that  in  a
short  time  he  squandered  the  greater  part  of  the  treasure  of
Alau-d-Din  and  the  wealth  which  Qutbu-d-Din  had  amassed,

Verse.

Who  was  it  had  acquired  the  wealth,

Who  was  it  squandered  it  F

still  the  hearts  of  great  and  small  were  not  so  attuned  to  this
disloyalty  and  irreligion  of  his  that  he  could  bring  them  into
harmony  with  his  own.

And  in  the  year  721  A.H.  (1321  A.D.)  Khusru  Khan  put  out
the  eyes  of  certain  of  tiie  offspring  of  ‘Alau-d-Din,  for  instance
Abubakr  Khan,  and  ‘Ali  Khan,  and  Bahadur  Khan,^  and  gained
over  * certain  of  the  Amirs,  such  as  ‘Ainu!  Mulk  and  some  others.

The  Hindhs  gained  ground  and  increased  their  influence  in  most
of  the  provinces,  and  a torrent  of  destruction  sw'ept  suddenly  upon
the  followers  of  Islam  and  destroyed  their  wealth  and  propei’ty,
giving  their  families  to  the  wind  of  extinction.

The  affair  of  the  ^luzz  which  had  happened  in  the  time  of
Sultau  Sinjar  * was  forgotten,  and  the  state  of  mankind  was
expressed  by  this  verse —

Verse,

You  will  never  see  your  fellowmen  happy  save  at  the  door
of  death,

You  will  never  find  a virgin  save  in  the  womb  of  earth.

Khusra  Khan  * issued  firmans  to  all  the  outlying  districts  and
invited  the  people  to  side  with  him,  he  also  bestowed  upon  Yusuf  218.
Salt  Azlbaclia®  the  title  of  Sufi  Khan  while  Ikhiiyaru-d-Din
Hauhal  was  sta  led  Hatim  Khan.  He  also  made  Kamalu-d-Din
Sufi  11  -ikilJar,  and  the  son  of  Qurra  Qumar  ‘Ari~u-l-}[ulk  ; Halik
Fakhru-d-Diu  Jana  the  son  of  Ghazi  ilalik  he  appointed
Beg,  and  was  especially  desirous  of  gaining  hi.s  good  will,  with
the  object  of  using  his  influence  to  induce  Ghazi  Malik  also,  uho

MS  (A)  tyftbe.

MS.  (A)  ouiits  y.

1 MS.  (A).

I MS.  (A),

* MS.  (A).  The  text  reads

r 292  }

was  one  of  the  notable  Amirs  of  ‘Alan-d-Din  and  was  posted  to
oppose  the  Moghuls,  to  leave  the  frontiers  of  Dipalpur  and  fall
ink)  his  trap.  At  that  time  he  put  into  effect  every  means  he
could  devise  and  gave  ‘Ainu-1-Mn1k  Multam  for  a time  the  title
of  ‘Alam  Khan.  At  last  having  gained  over  Ghazi  Malik,  he
wrote  a letter  1 expressing  his  sincerity  of  purpose,  and  desiring
him  when  the  day  of  battle  should  arrive  to  flee  from  Dihli  to
his  own  country,  that  is  M^wa,  and  return  when  the  danger  had
passed.*

And  of  the  Amirs,  some  sided  with  EKnsrS  Khan  out
of  lust  for  place  and  property,  bat  some  others  were  rebellious.
When  Ghazi  Malik  heard  this  startling  news  his  zeal  for  Islam
and  for  the  preservation  of  the  honour  of  his  benefactor  was
stirred,  so  that  he  girded  up  his  loins  for  vengeance,  and  sending
despatches  to  ae  Mali’'s  of  the  various  districts  sought  their
aid  in  extirjjating  tiit  ungrateful  wretch.  Mahk  Fattru-d-Dia
sent  secretly  a letter  to  his  father  conveying  his  intention  to  fly
from  Dibit  and  asking  for  post  horses,®  which  in  the  Hindi  tongue
are  called  dak  chaukT,  and  for  the  posting  of  cavalry  escorts  at
several  places  along  the  route.

219.  At  last  one  night  by  the  assistance  of  the  Son  of  Bahram  Iba  *
the  governor  of  Multan  and  Uchh  ® he  fled  from  Dihli  with  a
party  of  horsemen  and  made  his  way  by  forced  marches  towards
Dinalpur.

Verne.

Seated  upon  that  fleet  Bar5i:|  ^

He  hastened  steadfastly  .v-th  imity  of  purpose.

t MS.  (A)

* I read  here  y aUbough  MS.  (A)  ia  the  same  a»

the  text

® Vhlq  or  tjldgh  travail  Bans  salaire — cheval — courrier — petit

bateau  (Pavet  de  Conrteille).

* MS.  fA)  and  tevt  footijnt^*.

® The  text  has  a misprint  here.

^ The  a-mir.ui  upon  which  Mnbammad  was  moan  ted  daring^  his  ascent  to
bearen  known  , « he  im/raj)  Qur*an  XVII.  i.

In  the  31  f-M  .<*>'>61/1  it  is  thus  described,  **  Aft^-r  this  a white

animal  was  f.^r  me  to  ride  upon.  Its  size  was  bet  weea  that  oC  a

E 293  ]

And  Gb^Ti  Malik  himseli  previonsly  to  this  had  sent  two
hundred  cavalry  into  the  fort  of  Sarsuti.  When  TThnsrii  TThan
awoke  from  his  slumber  of  neglect  he  recognized  that  the
departure  of  Malik  Fakhru-d-Din  Jnna  was  a strong  proof  of  the
decline  of  his  own  power  ; ^ accordingly  he  despatched  the  son
of  Qurra  Qumar,  whom  he  had  appointed  ‘Ariz-i-21amalik,^  in
pursuit  of  him.  He  proceeded  as  far  as  the  town  of  Sarsuti,  hut
on  his  arrival  there  was  obliged  to  retrace  his  steps  without
finding  an  opportunity  of  accomplishing  his  object,  and  conveyed
to  Khusru  Khan  tidings  regarding  the  real  state  of  affairs.

Ghazi  Malik,  after  the  arrival  of  his  son,  was  demonstrative  ®
in  his  expressions  of  satisfaction,  and  gave  effect  to  the  aspirations
of  the  Maliks  ; further  by  issuing  orders  for  the  commencement
of  the  jihad  * he  made  amends  for  the  previous  delay,  and  gave
full  satisfaction  to  the  demands  of  bravery  by  marching  in  the
direction  of  Dihli.

Khusru  Khan  having  bestowed  upon  his  brother  Khan-i-Khanaa
the  canopy  and  staff  of  office,  despatched  Sufi  Kban  with  the
other  Amirs  of  this  canaille  against  Ghazi  Malik  who  for  many
years  had  done  yeoman’s  service  in  the  various  wars  with  the
Mughuls,  and  had  everywhere  returned  victorious  and  triumphant.
But  on  the  other  hand  Malik  Bahram  Iba,  the  Governor  of
Multan  and  Uchh,  arrived  to  reinforce  Ghazi  Malik.  The  two
armies  selected  as  their  field  of  battle  a spot  near  the  reservoir
of  Thanesar.®  At  the  first  onset  the  breeze  of  victory  blew
favourably  for  the  armies  of  Islam,  the  standards  of  the  infidels

irmle  and  an  ass  and  ifc  stretched  as  far  as  the  eye  could  see.  The  name  of
tlie  animal  was  Buraq  ” Matthews,  II.  651).  The  word

Buraq  signifies  brilliant  like  lightning,  or  swift  as  lightning.

1 MS.  (A)  reads  *-Mnstennaster  General.  See  p.  291.

5 MS.  (A)  j

* Holy  war  undertaken  in  defence  of  the  religion  of  Islam.

6 This  is  the  lake  with  which  one  of  the  alleged  deriva-
tions of  the  name  Sthaneewara  is  connected  viz.,  Sihdnu  {a  name  of  Mahadeo)
and  Sar  a lake.  See  Hunter:  Imp.  Qaz.,  XIII.  260.

This  holy  lake  is  situated  (says  Cunningham)  to  the  Sonth  of  the  town,  ifc
is  called  by  various  names.  It  is  the  centre  of  attraction  for  most  pilgrims.
It  was  in  full  repute  in  A.D.  600,  bat  in  the  Pauranic  legends  is  given  aa
antiqnity  long  anterior  even  to  the  Pandus  themselves,  the  sacred  pool  is  at
least  as  old  as  the  Big  Veda  itself  (Cunningham,  A.G.  India,  pp.  33o-S36.)

[ 294  3

vrere  overthrown,  and  the  adherents  of  Khusru  Ehan  abaudon-
ing  their  elephants  and  horses,  and  ammunition  and  standards
220.  fled  precipitately  to  Dihli.  Ghazi  Malik  with  all  speed  pursued
and  scattered  these  ungrateful  wretches  ^ and  reached  Dihli  in
one  long  march.*  ^^usru  Khan  Jiaving  rallied  his  scattered  and
panic  stricken  forces,  opened  the  doors  of  the  treasury  and
gave  his  army  three  and  four  years’  pay  together  with  large
rewards  and  promises  of  appointments  and  governorships;  and
things  being  as  they  were,  he  brought  out  from  confinement  in
the  haram  the  remainder  of  the  princes  of  the  family  of  ‘Alau-d-
Din  whom  he  had  blinded,  and  put  them  to  death  ; then,  led  by
hostile  Fate,  he  marched  on  from  the  city  in  great  force  and
proceeded  to  the  Hauz-I-I^ass*  where  he  encamped,  his  camp
extending  in  one  line  of  tents  from  the  Hanz-i-Khass  to  Indrapath,*
while  Ghazi  Malik  encamped  in  the  vicinity  of  the  tomb  ^ of  Sultan
Razziya.  In  the  meanwhile  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk,  in  accordance  with
agreement,  having  deserted  the  unsuccessful  army  of  Khusrh
Khan  fled  with  haste  towards  Dhar  and  Djjain ; ® his  defection
was  a cause  of  great  despondency  to  the  followers  of  Khusra
Khan.  On  the  following  day  the  array  of  battle  was  drawn  up
and  the  followers  of  the  truth  engaged  in  close  conflict  with  the
partisans  of  infidelity,  and  utterly  vanquished  the  impious  horde.

At  the  outset  the  army  of  i^usra  KhSn  obtained  the  mastery,
and  the  army  of  Ghazi  Malik  suffered  a repulse,  but  Ghazi  Malik
planting  firmly  the  foot  of  resolution  like  another  Rustum  came
to  the  rescue,  and  with  three  hundred  cavalry,  men  of  tried

» MS.  (A)

5 The  distance  traversed  in  this  march  was  about  90  miles  as  the  crow
flies,  a long  march  bat  perfectly  feasible  for  cavalry.

8 Barnl  says  the  Hauz-i-'Alal.  The  royal  lake  constructed  by  ‘Alan-d-DIu*

* Indrapath.  MS.  (A)  Barui  tells  us  that  Ghazi  Malik’s  force

lay  enc.iinped  at  Indrapath  so  that  the  two  camps  were  face  to  face.  It  lies
just  outside  Dibli.  Its  etymology,  Indraprastha,  points  it  out  as  the  pro-
bable place  where  Indra  slew  the  Vritras  with  hia  thunderbolt  formed  of  the
head  of  the  horse-headed  Dadhyanch  (see  also  Cunningham  335).

6 I read  here  not  as  in  the  text  and  MS.  The  burial  place

of  Sultan  Bazziya  is  not  apparently  mentioned  in  any  of  the  histories,  but  aa
she  was  taken  prisoner  at  Kaicbal  and  put  to  death  there  (633.  H.)  it  is  not
unlikely  that  she  was  buried  near  Indrapath.

« MS.  (A)

[ 295  }

valour,  whom  he  had  kept  in  concealment  in  an  ambush,  utterly
discomfited  the  infidel  horde  • and  Malik  Talbagha  * Nagor,  and
the  son  of  Qurra  Quinar  ® with  the  other  nobles  of  that  ignoble
kingdom,  in  that  battle  became  food  for  the  sword,*  as  such
hypocritical  knaves  should.  Khustn  Khan  biflught  to  bear  all
temerity  and  manliness  in  spite  of  his  unmanly  character,  and
fought  bravely  till  the  close  of  the  day,  but  ^ at  last  finding  he
was  unable  to  withstand  these  lionhearted  warriors,  he  turned  221.
his  back  in  flight,  and  made  for  Talpath ; his  canopy  and
standards  and  borrowed  * retinue  fell  into  the  hands  of  Ghazi

Malik.

Khusru  Khan  returning  from  Talpath  came  to  the  tomb  of
Malik  Shadi  who  was  an  old  patron  of  his,  alone  and  distraught,
and  hid  himself  there  in  despair,  but  the  following  day  they  laid
hands  upon  him,  treating  him  with  all  possible  indignity,  and
brought  him  to  Ghazi  Malik,®  so  that  he  reaped  the  reward  of  his
infamous  and  abominable  deeds.

Verse.

The  tree  thou  didst  nurture  has  home  its  fruit.

Dost  thou  not  see  even  now  its  fruit  in  its  bosom,

If  it  has  borne  thorns  it  is  thou  who  didst  plant  them,

If  it  has  brought  thee  silk  attire  it  is  of  thy  own  spinning.

And  the  following  day  Ghazi  Malik  left  Indrapath  ® and  alighted
at  Kushk  Sabzi.'o  Great  and  small  came  out  to  welcome  his
coming,  and  gave  vent  to  eipressions  of  congratulation.  The  day
following  he  went  on  to  the  city  of  Dihli,  where  tidings  was

S Text  MS.  (.4)  Aixb,

* MS.  (A)  omits  tji-

8  MS.  (A)  omits

9  MS.  A Au  t»j|.  The  text  reads  But  the  real  reading  should  bo

tjojoJi,  Indrapath,  as  is  shewn  by  what  has  gone  before,  and  abo  by
BarnT.

10  “the  Green  palace  "but  althongh  this  is  the  reading  of  the

text  "and  both  MSS.,  I think  we  shonld  read  for  nndoubtedly

kushk-i-Siri,  the  palace  of  Siri.  This  is  the  reading  of  the
Xun^-i-Firoz  Shdht,

1 MS.  (A)

S Shlyista  Khan.

® MS.  (A)  inserts  j.

1 MS.  (A)

[ 296  ]

brought  to  him  that  the  rascal  Khau-i-Khanan  had  crept  into  the
comer  of  a garden,^  where  he  was  lying  concealed.

Malik  Fakhru-d-Diii  proceeded  by  order  of  Ghazi  Malik,  and
having  mutilated  and  disgraced  him  * paraded  him  about  the  city
where  he  met  with  condign  punishment.  This  event  took  place
in  the  year  720  A.H.  (1321.  A.  D).  The  duration  of  Khusru
Khan’s  rule  was  four  months  and  a few  days.

Verse.

That  which  thou  doest  they  will  shew  thee  again,

That  which  thou  givest,  they  will  return  thee  the  like.

ScltIn®  QjtlTAso-D-Dix  Tughlaq  Shah^

"Who  is  the  same  as  Ghazi  Malik,  ascended  the  throne  in  the
year  720  A.H.  (1321  A.D.)  by  the  consent  of  the  Amirs  and
nobles  and  was  styled  by  this  title.  In  the  space  of  one  week
222.  he  ordered  and  regulated  the  important  affairs  of  the  state  with
a perfection  unattainable  to  others  in  the  course  of  years.*

He  appointed  his  own  relations  to  various  posts  and  showing
many  favours  to  the  Amirs  of  ‘Alau-d-Din  and  to  some  of  the
Maliks  of  Qutbu.d-Din  gave  them  districts.  Then  he  directed  his
ambition  to  the  rebuilding  of  the  fortress  of  Tughlaqabad  and  all
the  lofty  edifices,  and  .set  about  it  ( without  delay ) ^ and  Badr
Sha'ir  Shashi  ® invented  as  a chronogram  for  the  date  of  building

1 SIS.  (A)  omits  j.

2 ill*  Musla  SalAtan  is  the  term  applied  to  a form  of  punishment
which  consisted  of  cutting  off  the  nose,  ears  and  lips.  The  literal  meaning
is  '■  making  a public  example.”

5 MS.  (A).  The  text  omits  the  prefix  —

Barni  gives  an  account  of  the  mode  in  which  C^azi  Malik  sncceeded  to
the  throne,  not  as  an  usurper  but  as  the  rightful  successor  in  the  absence  of
any  scion  of  the  house  of  ‘Alau-d-DIn  and  Qutbu-d-Din.  (See  Elliott,
III.  228-2-,;9).

4 MS.  (A)  omits  the  words  ilO  and  the  worus  are  so  loreign  to  the

style  of  the  author  that  they  must  be  regarded  as  an  interpolation.  The
Editor  of  the  text  supplies  them  from  one  copy.  See  footnote  to  Text.

6 There  is  a difference  here.  The  printed  text  reads  Aj*-*  liJijA  'tir—
Shewed  great  alacrity  therein^  bnfc  MS.  (A)  reads  simply  *5^

set  about  it.  This  seems  the  preferable  reading.

® Badra-d-Din  Chachi,  “was  a native  of  Chach  in  Tarkestan.  He  was  a
man  of  great  repute  as  a scholar  who  passed  a large  portion  of  his  Ufa  in

[ 297  ]

the  fort  (of  Tughlaqabad)*  the  following : “ Enter  then  her  gates.”*
He  brought  to  punishment  also  a body  of  men  ® who  during  the
glorious  reign  of  Saltan  Qutbu-d-Din  had  joined  hands  with
Khusru  Khan  and  had  aided  and  abetted  the  band  of  rufidans
and  scoundrels.  He  also  gave  the  title  of  TJlu^  Khan  to
Malik  Fa^ru-d-Hin  Juna  * who  shewed  marked  signs  of  discre-
tion and  kingly  dignity,^  and  conferred  on  him  a canopy  and  the
other  insignia  of  royalty,  making  him  his  heir-apparent ; he  also
raised  Bahram  Iba,®  who  was  the  adopted  brother  of  the  Sultan, t
to  the  dignity  of  the  title  of  Kishlii  Khan,  and  entrusted  to  him
the  district  of  Multan  and  the  whole  of  Sind.  To  his  other  four
SOILS  he  gave  the  titles  of  Baliram  Khan,  Zafar  Khan,  Mahmud
Ivhan  and  Nusrat  Khan  *

And  in  the  j-ear  721  A.  H.  ^he  appointed]  Ulugh  Khan  [ to
proceed  in  command  of  his  troojis  which  were  at  Chanderi  and
Badaon  and  in  tlie  other  eastern  districts  of  Hindustan,  towards
Deogir  and  Tilang,  and  Ulugh  Khan3^  taking  with  him  the  army
of  Deogir,  invested  the  ‘ forti  es.s  of  Arankal  which  for  the
past  seven  hundred  years  had  been  the  capital  of  Rai  Sadar
Mahadeo  and  his  ancestor.s,  and  having  gained  possession  of  the
clay-built  citadel  forming  the  outer  line  of  defence,  was  on
the  point  of  reducing  the  inner  stone  citadel  also.  In  the

Uihli  as  the  panegj’rist  of  SalfSa  Muhammad  Tughlaq  Shah  and  other
monarchs  who  provided  his  allotted  portion  from  the  tray  of  their  bounty.
His  iJivin  consists  of  2,000  couplets.  His  style  is  strange.’’  {Hajma'ul
FusaTid  I.  1G9).  The  date  of  his  death  is  not  stated.  See  also  Beale,  0.  B.  D.
p.  62.

• MS.  (h)  inserts  IaUj.

S These  words  give  the  date  727  H,

® Oaiic  one  from  text

* MS.  (A)  omits  J which  is  in  the  printed  text.

**  MS,  (A)  omits  J.  It  is  unnecessnry.

8 MS.  (A).  The  printed  text  has  Bahram  UUah.

The  printed  text  adds  the  words

® See  also  the  accoant  given  by  Baral  which  is  almost  identical  with  the
above.  (Elliott,  IIL  230),

® By  the  copyist’s  error  the  words  included  in  square  brackets  have  been
omitted  from  MS.  (A),  he  having  omitted  all  the  words  following  the  first
proceeding  with  tha  words  following  the  second
The  printed  text  is  correct.

38

[ 298  ]

meantime  I ‘Ubaid  Rakati*  the  poet,  a turbulent  fellow,  the
notorious  * opponent  of  Mir  Khusru  (on  whom  be  mercy)  who
rascal  that  he  was  wrote  the  following  famous  verses  :

223.  Khusru’s  own  verse  was  very  i-aw',  so  by  mistake  he  took
Nizami’s  * saucepan  by  mistake,  his  flummery  ^ to  cook.

(Mir  !&usru  in  many  of  his  compo.sitions  complains  bitterly
against  him  and  Sa‘d  Falsafi)  joining  with  Shaikhzada  Dimishqi
on  the  occasion  of  the  late  arrival  of  the  stage  from  Dihli,  spread
a false  report  that  the  Sultan  Tughlaqwas  no  more,  where-  upon
gi’eat  dismay  spread  thi’ough  the  Muslims.  ‘Ubaid  also  terrified
the  Amirs  by  his  account  of  Ulugh  Khan,  and  infidels  springing  up
put  to  death  many  of  the  soldier.s  of  the  army;®  Malik  Tigin  and
other  revolutionary  Amirs  planned  an  insurrection  against  Ulugh
TThanwho  with  fifty  sowars  came  by  rapid  marches  to  the  metropolis,
whereupon  the  Amirs  took  themselves  off,  each  to  his  own  district  ;
and  Malik  Tigin  who  had  gone  to  the  country  between  Multan  and
Jaisalmiri  was  taken  prisoner  with  his  family,  and  Taju-d-Uin
Talaqani,  the  son-in-law  of  Malik  Tigin  who  had  escaped  from
prison,  was  captured®  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Saru,  and  Ubaid
(the  poet)®  also  was  captured  in  the  same  way  in  a wretched

1 MS.  (.t)  reids

» ‘Ubaid.  MS.  (A)  adds  See  Beale,  0.  B.  D.,  p.  275.

* MS.  (A)  reads

* Shaikb  Nizami  G.aajawT  whose  full  name  is  Abii  Mnhammad  NizSmu-d-DIn
Ahmad  1115=  ibn  Abi  A'usuf  ibu  Mnrsaiyjidal  MntarrazI,  a celebrated  poet,
author  of  the  Sikandar-Nam.s,  also  of  other  sveil-knowii  works.  His  Kharosa
.(pentad)  consists  of  ^usru  and,  Slyrin,  Hnft  Paikar  Laili-o-Majniin,  MalAzanu,-

l-Airar  and  Sikandar  Kama.

His  death  is  said  by  Beale  to  have  occurred  in  597  A.  H.  but  according  to
the  Majma'ul  Fusaka  (I.  637)  he  died  in  the  reign  of  Tnghrul  ibn  Arslan  the
Saljuq.  576  A.  H.

6 is  a dish  made  of  wheat  flonr,  meat  and  vinegar.  The  word  ‘ flum-
mery ’ suggests  itself  from  its  etymological  signification  of  raw,  crude,  harsh,
W.  llymruicd,  (so  named  from  its  sourness),  (rule  bkeat.  s.  n, )

* We  should  here  read

" MS.  (A)  Lat  26’.  .55'  N.  long.  70*.  57'  E.  in  Rijputana,  C.  I.

^ MS.  (A)  1*

3 MS.  (A)  omit.s  BamT  says  that  he  was  impaled  alive.  Firishta

says  that  he  was  buried  alive.  (See  Elliott,  III,  231-233).

[ 299  ]

plight.  AH  this  party  with  their  families  and  friends,  they  cut
under  the  feet  of  elephants,  and  those  who  escaped  this  fate  met
their  death  wherever  they  went.

And  in  the  year  723  A.  H.  (1323  A.D.)  Ulugh  Khan  for  the
second  time  marched  towards  TUang ; and  Rai  Ladar  Mahadeo
again  shut  himself  up  in  the  fort.

Ulu^  Khan  gained  possession  of  both  the  outer  and  inner
citadels  by  force  of  arms,  and  took  the  Rai  prisoner  together
with  his  family  and  followers,  and  leaving  commissioners  there
drew  off  his  army  to  Jajnagar*  and  Bidar,®  and  having  taken
as  spoil  many  elephants  and  other  property  with  jewels  and
valuables  without  number  [sent  them]  to  Dihli  [and  despatched
Rae  Ladhar  also  to  the  capital  and  having  given  to  Arankal  the
name  of  Sultanpur]  i-eturned  to  Dihli.*

And  in  the  year  724  A.H.  (1324  A.D.),  Sultan  Gkiyasu-d-  224.
Din  Tughlaq  Shah,  upon  the  occasion  of  the  tyranny  of  the
governors  of  Bengal,  left  Ulu^  Khan  as  his  viceroy  in  the
capital  Tu^laqabad  which  had  been  built  in  the  space  of  three
years  and  a fraction,  entrusting  to  his  sound  judgment  the  whole
civil  administration,  and  left  for  Lakhnauti  with  a firm  intention
of  setting  things  straight ; Saltan  Nasiru-d-Din  the  ruler  of
Lakhnauti,  with  the  notable  princes  of  those  districts  hastened  to
meet  the  Sultan  and  placed  their  necks  under  his  yoke ; Sultan
Tuj^laq  Shah  conferred  upon  Saltan  Kasiru-d-Din  the  canopy
and  staff  of  office  and  all  other  insignia  of  royalty,  entrusted
Lakhnauti  once  more  to  his  control  and  sent  a despatch  announc-
ing his  success  to  Dihli  ; then  he  sent  on  in  advance  Tatar  Khan
his  adopted  son,  the  Governor  of  Zafarabad  who  brought  Bahadur
Shah  otherwise  known  as  Tuda  ( ? Nuda  ) the  Governor  of  Sunar
Ganw  who  was  boasting  his  independence,  with  a chain  around

I MS.  (A)

* Or  Jajpur,  the  former  capital  of  Orissa.  (See  Hunter’s  Gazetteer,  Vol.

VH  and  Statistical  Account  of  Bengal,  Vol.  XTItl  for  a full  account  of  this
place).

* Bidar  (or  Bedar)  Town  in  the  Nizam’s  dominions,  Haidarabad  Deccan,

75  miles  N.-W.  of  Haidarabad  town.  Lat.  17’.  53'  N.  Long.  77°  31'  E.  (See
Hunter’s  Gazetteer,  Vol.  II,  419).

* The  words  enclosed  in  square  brackets  are  by  a copyist’s  error  omitted
in  MS.  (A),  the  word  Dihli  occnrriug  twice  has  misled  the  copyist.  The
printed  teat  is  correct.

[ 300  ]

his  neck,  and  accompanied  by  all  bis  elephants  into  the  royal
presence  at  the  Conrt.

Sultan  Tu^laq  Shah  taking  Bahadur  Shah  -with  him,  victo-
rious and  triumphant  returned  to  Dihli,  and  proceeding  by
double  stages  made  forced  marches.  Ulu^  Eiban  upon  hearing
this  news  gave  immediate  orders  for  the  erection  of  a lofty  and
noble  palace  near  Afghanpur  which  is  at  a distance  of  three
Jerohs  from  Tughlaqabad.  It  was  completed  in  three  days,  so
that  Saltan  Tnghlaq  Shah  might  alight  there,*  and  having
passed  the  night  in  it  and  having  rested  might  depart  thence  at
an  auspicious  moment  and  alight  at  Tughlaqabad.

The  Sultan  arrived  there  and  Uln^  Khan  having  gone  out  to
meet  him  with  all  the  nobles  and  grandees,  spread  a banquet  of
welcome.  The  Sultan  gave  orders  for  the  elephants  which  be  bad
brought  with  him  from  Bengal  to  be  raced,  and  as  the  founda-
tion of  the  New  Palace  was  new  and  unsettled  the  palace  began
to  shake  and  totter  with  the  tramp  of  the  elephants.  When  the
people  become  aware  that  the  Sultan  was  mounting  with  all
226.  haste,  they  hurriedly  came  out  from  the  palace,  without  even
washing  their  bands.  The  Sultan  Tnghlaq  Shah  was  engaged  in
washing  his  hands*  and  so  did  not  come  owt.  In  coBseqneiice  he
washed  his  hands  of  life  and  the  palace  fell  in  upon  him.*

We  should  not  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that  from  having  built  a
palace  such  as  this,  which  was  quire  unnecessary,  there  is  a
suspicion  that  Ulogh  Khan  may  liave  built  the  palace*  without

* These  words  are  repeated  twice  in  MS.  (A).

* The  text  has  bnt  MS.  f A)  reads  the

tatter  is  correct.  MS.  (A)  also  omits  the  words  tylJJ  (line  2 of  the

printed  text),

S Barni  gires  a (JifFerent  version,  attribating  the  fall  of  the  pahice  to  a
thunderbolt  which  descended  from  the  sky.  (Elliott,  III.  235).  Eiri^ta
gives  a somewhat  similar  acconiit  to  Badaoni ; withoat  specifically  stating  the
cause,  he  .alludes  to  the  suspicion  which  attached  to  Ulugh  Khan  of  being
designedly  close  by  the  author  of  the  catastrophe,  bat  discredits  it.  He  further
tells  ns  that  according  to  Sadr  Jahan  Gujarati,  Ulugh  Khan  had  raised  the
palace  by  magic,  and  the  magical  art  being  withdrawn  it  fell ; he  proceeds
“ Haji  Muhammad  Qandahari  says  that  it  was  struck  by  lightning  and  this
does  not  seem  at  all  improbable  ” [Firifkia  Briggs,  I.  408].

* MS.  (A)  The  text  has  qa$dan  purposelj.

[ 301  ]

foundations  ‘ as  was  cnirently  rnmonred,  bat  the  anthor  of  the
Tarikh-i-Firoz  Skahi  makes  no  .mention  of  this  although  this  may
possibly  be  dae  to  a desire  to  flatter  Firoz  Shah  and  out  of  regard
for  him.

This  event  took  place  in  the  year  725  A.H.  (1325  A.D.)  and
the  duration  of  the  reign  of  Snlt2n  ^iyasu-d-Din  Tughlaq  Shah
was  four  years  and  some  months,

Verse.

If  thou  places!  the  world  beneath  thy  feet

Thou  wilt  not  sleep  at  last  in  thine  own  place.

It  is  currently  reported  among  the  people  of  India  that  Sultan
Ghiyasu-d-Din  Tughlaq,  on  account  of  the  ill  will  he  bore  to
Sultann-l-Mashaikh.  sent  a message  to  the  Shaikh  .while  on  the
way  to  Lakhnauti  to  this  effect,  “ Afthr  my  arrival  at  Dihli,
either  the  Shaikh  will  be  (ruler)  there  or  I.”  * The  Shaikh  re-
plied, “ Dihli  is  still  some  way  off.”  ® This  saying  became  prover-
bial from  that  day  and  gained  currency.

The  Tughlaq  NSma  of  Mir  i^usru  which  was  the  latest  of
his  works,  was  written  in  verse  in  honour  of  the  Sultan  and  in
obedience  to  his  order.

The  death  of  the  Sultanu-l-Mashaikh  and  also  of  Mir  Khusrn
occurred  in  the  same  year  as  has  already  been  stated.

Sdltan  Muhammad  ‘Adil  ibn  Tughlaq  Shah.

That  is  to  say  Ulugh  Khan,  by  the  agreement  of  the  Amirs  and

1 literally  means  “ hollow  ” bnt  in  its  granmnatical  sense  im-
plies weakness  dne  to  want  of  proper  support.  tf.  hollow  ” verb:

a verb  of  which  the  middle  letter  is  weak.

* In  accordance  with  the  proverb  i>i.>«— ^arvish
dar  gilime  nalAuspatid.  Two  derveshes  cannot  sleep  in  one  blanket  j or  again
the  proverb  j-Ui  ihamshtr  dar  yak  niyim

Tiagunjand.  Two  Bwords  will  not  go  into  one  scabbard  ; as  we  say  : There
cannot  be  two  kings  in  Brentford.

^ This  is  a well-known  proverb  and  has  come  from  the  Persian  into  com-
mon use  in  Urdu,  need  to  express  the  futility  of  an  incompetent  person
attempting  any  task,  or  on  an  occasion  of  uiinece3.'=ary  haste.  “ It’s  a far  ciy
to  Lo^:;h  A. we.”  Roebock  ir.  his  colleotiois  of  Oriental  proverbs  does  not  give
this  as  a Persian,  bat  as  an  Urdu  proverb.  Its  origin  is  clear  from  our
aatbor’s  statement.

/

[ 302  ]

officers  of  the.  Court  ascended  the  royal:  throne  in  the  year  725
226  A.H.  (1325  A.D.),*  and  after  performing  the  ceremonial  mourning
for  the  space  of  forty  days,*  went  to  the  treasure  house  of  the
kings  of  former  ages,  and  gave  largesse  such  as  exceeds  all  hounds
of  description,  and  liaving  distributed  appointments  and  offices
among  the  Amirs,  he  made  Malik  Fiixjz  his  uncle’s  son  (who  is
the  same  person  as  Sultan  Firoz)  Naibu-l-Mulk,  and  advanced  the
dignity  of  his  near  relations  in  the  same  manner.  Hamid  Lawiki,
too,  was  raised  to  an  exalted  position  and  Malik  Sartez  obtained
the  title  of  'Imndii-l-Mulk,  Malik  Khurram  that  of  Zahiru-l-
Juyu^  (Inspector  of  the  Forces)  Malik  Pindar  Khilji  was  given
the  title  of  Qadr  Khan,  and  Malik  Izzu-d-Din  Yahya  that  of
A"z^amu-l-Mul1c,  the  district  of  Satganw  being  also  contiinaed  to
him.

And  in  the  year  727  A.H.  (1326-1327  A.D.)  the  Sultan  having
formed  the  design  of  proceeding  to  Deogir,  posted  a chain
of  dhawa,^  that  is  to  say  j>aiks,  or  runners,  as  guards  at
distances  of  one  hroh  along  the  whole  road*  from  Dihli  to
Deogir,  built  a palace  and  a monastery  at  each  stage  and  appointed  ^
a Shaikh  to  each.  They  used  to  keep  inconstant  readiness  food
and  drink,  betel-leaf  ® and  all  provisions  for  hospitality;  and  in

1 According  to  Firiphta  on  the  third  day  after  the  faneral  (Jhsequiea  of  his
father.

> The  period  here  mentioned  of  forty  days  is  the  same  as  that  enjoined  in
olden  times  to  the  Isrr.elites  : thns  we  find  in  Genesis  1.  8,  speaking  of  the
death  of  Jacob  “ the  physicians  embalmed  Israel  and  forty  d.iys  were  fulfilled
for  him  ; for  so  are  fulfilled  the  days  of  these  which  are  embalmed  ; and  the
Eevplians  mourned  for  him  three  score  and  ten  days.  But  in  lumbers  xr.  29,
we  find  tliat  the  congregation  mourned  for  Aaron  thirty  days.

The  period  of  three  days  only  is  enjoined  on  SJuhammadans,  except  iu  the
case  of  widows  who  must  perforin  the  special  ceremony  of  mourning  called
Ihdid  for  four  months  and  ten  days.  Among  Hindus  tlie  period  of  mourning
is  tliirty  days.  {See  Matthew,  ilishkdtu-l-Mafdbih  1.  389).

* The  word  lyl*i  here  spelt  is  a Sanskrit  word  rt.  tfT^_  to

run.  pdyik  its  Persian  equivalent  has  a more  usual  form  paik.

* IIS.  A omits  *bj4.

6 MS.  (A)

* The  leaf  of  Chavica  beHe  (Miq.)  N.O,  Piperacese  is  used  in  conjunction
with  lime  for  mastication  as  a stoTnachic.  The  leaves  containing  a jh  rtion  of
the  nut  of  Aieca  catechu,  known  as  Supan,  some  lime  (cht'did}  catccliu  {kath)
and  various  aromatics,  sucli  as  cinnamon,  cloves,  &c.,  and  rolled  together

[ 303  ]

both  ' Tpalaces  and  monasteries)  guides  were  stationed  who  were
ordered  to  see  that  travellers  suffered  no  annoyance.  The  traces
of  these  (rest-houses)  remained  for  many  years.  He  gave  Deogir
the  name  of  Daulatabid  * and  considering  it  as  the  centre  of  his
dominions  ® made  it  the  metropolis,  and  conveyed  Makhduma-i-
Jahan  his  mother,  with  all  his  family  and  relations,  the  Amirs
and  Maliks,  the  notables  of  the  city,  his  servants  and  dependents,
and  all  his  treasure  to  Daulatabad  : all  the  Satyijicls  and  Shaikhs  and
‘iTZawia*  also  proceeded  tliither  in  the  following  of  Makhduma-i-
Jahaii,  and  the  stipends  and  emoluments  of  all  of  them  wore  doubled,
hut  ill  accordance  with  the  saying  “ Exile  is  the  i/ravest  of  all
calamities  and  banishment  is  the  sorest  of  all  afflictions  ” this
desolation  of  Dihli  and  its  desertion  was  a source  of  great  dis-

into  the  form  of  a cone  and  skewered  with  a small  piece  of  wood  and  ottered
for  sale.  In  this  condition  they  are  known  as  lihtlJ,  bird  Ijts?  or

yibiuri.  The  distribation  of  this  piin  or  betel,  forms  an  im-

porcanl  part  on  all  ceremonial  occasions,  generally  as  a final  act  of  hospitality
before  the  guests  depart.  To  European  palates  the  bird  is  anything  but
pleasant,  it  has  a,  pungent  somewhat  acrid  taste.  It  is  a powerful  sialagogne.

The  medicitial  virtues  of  the  Chmica  hetle  are  supposed  to  be  great.  The
leaves  smeared  with  mustard  oil  and  applied  hot  to  the  chest  in  several  layers
are  used  as  poultices  in  pulmonary  catarrhs,  or  in  painful  affections  of  the
liver.  They  are  said  also  to  arrest  the  secretion  of  milk  when  applied  to  the
breasts  A form  of  cancer  known  as  “ betle-chewer’s  cancer”  has  been
described  by  Dr.  Elliott  of  Colombo.

The  plant  is  said  to  be  a native  of  Java  whence  it  lias  been  introduced.
It  grows  best  in  a hot  moist  climate  such  as  that  of  Lower  Bengal  where  it  is
largely  cultivated.  (Drury,  Useful  Plants  of  India},

t MS.  (A)  omits  the  word

8 MS.  (A)  j See  page  271,  note  6,  of  this  volume,

8 MS.  (A)  omits

* The  word  Saiyijid  ( ) is  a term  used  to  denote  tlio  descendants

of  Muhammad  from  liis  daughter  Fatima  by  ‘All.  The  Sultan  of  Zanzibar
also  adopts  this  as  his  regal  title.

Sfiuikh  (^)  is  a term  of  honour  denoting  some  considerable  reputa-

tiftn  in  the  religious  world  : a doctor  of  religion  and  law,  a head  or  chief
of  some  religious  order,  a chief  of  a tribe  : or  a reputed  saint.  ^

■Tlie  two  first  Khalifahs  Abfi  Bakr  and  ‘Umar  are  known  as

A‘^h-Shatkka7i,  The  two  Shaikhs.

9

The  term  ^TJlamd  ( ) includes  all  religious  teachers  as  Imams,  Muftis,
Qizis,  Maulavis,  (sc.  Hughes  Dictionary  of  Islam,  ulso  D’Herbelot,;

f 304  ]

comfort  to  the  inhabitants,  large  numbers  of  the  feeble  and
■widows,  the  helpless  and  indigent  perished  by  the  way,  while  even
those  who  arrived  in  safety/  could  not  settle  there  ; and  towards
the  end  of  the  above-mentioned  year  Malik  Bahadur  Gurshasp
227  the  Inspector-General  of  the  Forces,  raised  a rebellion  in  Dihli.i
and  Malik  Aiyaz,  who  held  the  title  of  Khwaja-i-Jahan,  fought
with  Bahadur  and  defeated  him.  Bahadur  was  taken  prisoner
and  brought  before  the  Sultan  and  met  his  punishment.  After
that,  Malik  BaJiram  Iba  the  adopted  brother  of  Sultan  Tughlaq
raised  a rebellion  in  Multan,*  and  put  to  death  ‘Ali  fOjatati  who
had  been  sent  from  Dibit  to  summon  him  thither.  The  Sultan,
in  Older  to  put  down  this  rebellion,  left  DaulatabaJ  for  Dihli  and
thence  by  uninterrupted  marches  reached  Multan.  Bahram
having  come  out®-  against  him  fought  with  him,  but  was  de-
feated and  eventually  put  to  death,  his  head  wms  brought  to  the
Sultan  who  intended  to  set  the  blood  of  the  Multanis  flowing  like
rivers  on  account  of  his  crime,  but  when  the  Shaikhu-1-IslSm
Qutbu-l-‘Alam  Shaikh  Ruknu-l-Haqq  wau-d-Uiu  Quraishi,*  may
God  sanctify  his  holy  rusting  place,  having  bared  his  venerable
head  presented  him.self  at  the  Court  of  the  Sultan  and  made  intei'-
cessiou,  the  Sultan  pardoned  the  ofl^ences  of  the  people.

Verse.

From  the  earliest  times  of  Adam  till  the  days  of  the  king.

Great  men  have  shewn  mei’cy  ® mean  men  have  committed
faults.

And  the  Sultan  having  bestowed  Multan  upon  Qiwamn-l-Mnlk
Maqbnl  retraced  his  steps,  but  after  some  little  time  ® having  turned

1 narnl  inaKes  no  mention  of  tins  occurrence.  Firishta  gives  an  account
of  it  but  calls  the  rebel  Bahau-d-diii  and  states  tliat  he  tvas  governor  of
Saour.  The  yenr  assigned  by  him  to  this  revolt  in  which  Babau-d-din
Gurshasp  was  defeated  is  739  A.H,  twelve  years  later  than  Badaoni’s  date,
according  to  Briggs  (1.418).  A reference  to  the  original  text,  however,
shews  that  the  date  given  by  Firishta  is  the  same  as  Badaoui’s  date.  Firishta
Bo.  Text  I.  241.

2 MS.  (A)

3 MS.  (A)

* A’u-i-Akhurl  (Jarrett),  111.  365.

f-  MS.  (A)

8 MS.  (A)

[ 305  ]

against  him  despatched  Behzad  to  replace  him,  but  Shahft  Lodi
the  Afghan  ‘ killed  Behzad  and  broke  out  info  open  rebellion.  The
Sultan  on  his  arrirai  at  Dipalpur  found  that  Shahu  had  fled  into
the  hill  country,*  so  ho  turned  back.

And  in  the  year  729  A.K.  (1329  A.D.)  Narma  Shirin  the
Ma^ul,*  the  brother  of  Qutlngh  Khwaja  the  Mughnl  King  of
Khtn  asan  who  had  formerly  invaded  Hindostan,  having  entered  228.
the  Dihli  territory*  with  an  enormous  army,  reduced  the  majority
of  the  forts,  ’and  proceeded  slanghteriug  and  taking  captives  from
Lalior  and  Samana  and  Indai-i  to  the  boi’dei-s  of  Badaon ; and
when  the  victorious  troops  of  Islam  came  up  with  him.  he  re-
treated as  they  advanced;  the  Sultan  pursued  him*  as  far  as  the
frontier  of  Kalanor  and  defeated  him,  and  leaving  the  destruc-
tion of  that  fort  in  the  hands  of  Mujiru  d-Din  Aburija  returned  in
the  direction  of  Dilili,  At  this  time  the  Sultan  formed  the
opinion  that  in  consequence  of  the  refractory  conduct  of  his  sub-
jects in  the  Docb  it  was  advisable  to  double  the  taxes  levied  on
that  country;  he  also  instituteil  numbering  their  cattle  and  a
house  census,  and  (>ther  vexatious  and  oppressive  measures,  which
were  the.  cause  of  the  complete  ruin  and  desolation  of  the  country,®
the  weak  were  nttarly  destroyed  and  the  strong  laid  the  founda-
tions of  rebellion.  The  Sultan  gave  orders  for  the  remainder  of
the  inhabitants  of  Dihli  and  the  adjoining  towns  to  start  for
Danlatabad,  caravan  bs'  caravan,  the  houses  wei'e  lo  be  purchased
from  their  owners,  and  the  price  of  them  to  be  paid  in  cash  out  of
the  public  treasury,  in  addition  to  which  large  rewards  were  to  be
offered.  By  these  means  Daulatabad  was  populated,  and  Dihli

I M9.  (A)  The  text  reads

* The  printed  text  hM  hat  MS.  (A)  iias  . Tne  text

is  correct.

* MS.  (Ai  Um.  The  spelling  J>"  adopted  thronghont  the  printed
text  is  incorrect  hut  is  preserved  as  it  is  the  commonly  accepted  form  Hr.

Ney  Slias  in  his  introdnction  to  the  translation  of  the  Tdri^-i- Hn^^di
(p  73,  note  1)  gavs  that  it  takes  a sharp  ear  to  distinguish  the  exact  pronun
ciatioa  of  the  word  as  spoken  by  a trne  Mongol.  Tt  sounds  as  often  ffc-phut
or  Mo-ot  as  Mongol.  It  has,  he  says,  always  the  vowel  sound  of  o,  and  never
that  of  7(  which  is  a foreign  introdnction.

* MS  tA)  lA-of.

6 MS.  3

* MS.  (A!  omits  ctT-

39

[ 30t)  j

became  so  deserfetl  that  there  was  not  left  even  a dog  or  a eat  in
the  city.  The  following  verse  describes  its  condition  ; —

Verse,

There  where  the  heart -ravishing  one  nsed  to  toy  with  her
friends  in  the  garden.

The  wolf  anil  the  fox  had  their  home,  and  the  rhinoceros
and  vultare  their  abode.

This  state  of  affairs  also  led  to  a dirninntion  of  the  public
funds.  Among  other  sources  of  loss  to  the  treasury  was  this  that
the  Sultan  enacted  that  the  mtuMr  ^ of  copper  should  become
current  on  an  equal  footing  with  the  muJiar  of  silver,  and  any
one  who  shewed  reluctance  to  receive  it  used  to  be  instantly
pnni.sbed  severely.  This  enactment  led  to  many  corrupt  practices
in  the  kingdom  as  a matter  of  course,  and  uuscrnpulous  and
229.  contumacious  rascals  used  evex’ywhere  in  their  own  houses  to
setup  mints  and  stamp  coins,''*  and  taking  them  into  the  cities
used  to  purchase  with  them  .silver  and  horses,  weapons  and  fine
things,  and  thus  rose  to  great  wealth  and  d’gnity.  But  inasmuch
as  copper  had  no  value  as  a currency  in  places  at  a distance  and
one  tanha  of  gold  ro.se  to  the  value  of  fifty  or  sixty  copper  coins,
the  Sultan  perceived  the  worthles.sness  of  the  copper  coinage,  and
issued  an  edict  to  tlie  effect  that  every  one  who  had  in  his  house
a copper  tanka  should,  if  lie  brought  them  to  the  public  treasury,
receive  for  them  golden  tankas  in  equal  value. * The  people

1 Finshta  does  not  use  the  word  mnhay  and  it  would  appear  here

to  hare  the  meaning  of  “ccin”  in  its  general  sense.  The  round  muhur  in
Akb-ir'e  time  was  of  the  weight  of  eleven  mi.shas  and  was  worth  nine  rnpeer.
(Aui-i-Akbua  I.  30,1;  B.nrnl  uses  it  in  the  same  way  as  Badaoni.  See  BarnT.
Calcutta  text,  p.  475,  line  10  et  soqq.

S MS.  (A)  omits  the  word  hnt  it  seems  probable  that  this  illicit

coining  was  mainly  confined  to  copper  Barni  states  that  the  Hindus  of
every  province  coined  krors  and  inks  of  copper  coins,  so  also  Firishta.

S The  Persian  text  is  : ctf  jj  This  can  hardly  mean

that  for  every  copper  tanka  a golden  taukn  would  be  given,  and  yet  the  word-
ing of  the  preceding  line  gives  colour  to  this  view.  It  runs  as  follows
AilA  “ Every  one  who  has  in  his  house  a copper

I’-nka.  ’ Barm  s account  is  much  the  same,  Firi^ta's  is  more  explicit,  but  it
ia  no:  ch-a^  a oether  rne  coins  wore  exchanged  at  their  relative  metal  value  or
trurfed-e  ,bi'.6.  I;  however  is  most  probable  that  the  copper  tania  having

r 307

!

profited  grently  by  thia  nrrangeiueiit,  till  at  last  copper  became
copper  and  silver  silver,  and  those  copper  tankas  were  iying  in
heaps  in  Tagluaqabad  as  late  as  the  time  of  Sultan  ’\Iubarak  Shah
according  to  the  author  of  the  Tarikh-l-Mularak  Shaki,  and  had
no  more  value  than  stones.  God  knows  the  trnth.

And  in  the  year*  738  A. H.  (1337  A.L‘.)  he  de-pacched  a force
of  eighty  tiiousand*  cavalry  under  eminc-nt  coiunianders  io  cap-
ture the  mountain  of  Himachal®  whicn  stands  hetweeu  the  coun-
try of  Cihin  and  Hindustan,  and  which  they  ;ilso  call  Q iraehfil  ^
with  orders  to  leave  garrisons  in  each  successive  place  so  that  the
line  of  comminiications  for  transport  and  supplies  rnieht  rt-mriia
open  and  the  load  of  return  migitt  be  ea.sv.  After  the  entrv  of
this  army  into  this  country,  by  reason  of  the  pieeuliar  featiii-es
of  that  nionntain,  on  whii  h heavy  clouds  foim  and  rain  pours  lu
torrents  at  the  sound  of  men’ t voices  and  their  shouts  and  tiie
neighing  of  horses,  in  ccns-quence  also  of  the  narrowness  of  the

been  artincinhy  pronoanreJ  equal  in  vjllue  to  the  silve,-  tarka,  wa.9  repur
chased  by  the  tic  .sury  at  that  same  value.  So  that  tlie  JibIih  .itior.  of  the
canency  and  its  eonsecpient  disasters  are  easily  mtelhgihie.  o'ee  Kliiott  III
2-iO.  I tlo.

hnu’-j's  translation  leartjs  ue  in  as  to  this,  the  text  of

FiiMsi'ta  33  peru'ccly  clear  on  the  subject  : and  we  see  that  the*5e  copper  tufiJcas
■were  . a roke.is  with  an  artifioinl  vdue,  and  it  was  when  the  Saltan

found  cl  at  ’1  .■  c.ipner  currencj*  was  dUtrusco  t hr  his  people  who  found  it  was
not  received  ir,  foreign  couatriesfthat  he  hit  upon  the  expedient  of  offering  to
exchimge  the  c -pper  tauhai  for  silver  or  g’-ld  hopirg  tlierebv,  as

says,  to  rehabilitate  the  copper  bat  the  people  were  too  wise

for  t/Hi  au'i  tiirew  the  whole  stock  geunine  <aiid  counterfeit  alike  upon  the
Tr^-ajinry  ’V'liich  wa?  thus  drained  of  gold  and  silver.  Firi^ta  (Bo.  Ed.  p.  239;

For  a fu  ’ account  of  this  forced  currency  See  Thomas  Pathin  Kings
pp  239,  et  s(.fin

* ilS  (A)  jl .

3 Omit  j.  5 inshta  says  lO'ijOOO.

* Himachal.  S^fowy  mountain.  The  Calcutta  Text  of  Barn,  calls  this

moautaia  misprint  probably  for  p-  477,  hii'^  16,  Ac.

* Rashidu-d-  Din,  the  Jdnn’ul~Tau'drl!ik  (Eiliott,  1.40:  sraTis  ‘ Besides  i.heis

mountains  there  ai“e  others  called  Kaltirchal  (called  a'&o  hj-  I'-  o '^rune  nntl  • r
in  aTiOther  passage  harjal).  The  tnlito’*  iiotcb  " The  inouiKr.i.'i  ..f  .Sir'  .or.  *
Reiuajd  reads  the  name  **  Ke!a»*djek,/'  Itm  Batuta  calh- i lu • JCaiairir'
(Vol.  III.  325;.  The  latter  part  cf  tbs  name  is  piobab’y  tne  uSKir  --cn  J
m-‘untaiiu  The  first  pc.ri  may  be  the  Turk'  woro  ly*  sig'urvi  ,

from  the  intense  cold  c?f  such  a snowy  enj  e

[ 308  3

paths  and  the  scarcity  of  fodder,  the  patrols  were  not  able  to  stand
to  their  posts,  and  the  hill  tribes  getting  the  upper  hand  drove
back  the  army,  and  falling  upon  the  rear  of  the  force  killed  many
of  them  with  poisoned  arrows  and  stone  showers,  and  sending  the
most  of  them  to  the  eternal  world  enabled  them  to  attain  martyr-
dom, taking  the  rest  prisoners.^  For  a long  time  they  wandered
helplessly  among  the  mountains,  and  those  who  escaped  after
countless  hardships  the  Sultan  visited  with  condign  punisbnient.*
And  after  this  calamity  so  great  an  army  never  gathered  round
230.  the  Sultan  and  all  that  money  expended  in  their  pay  was  thrown
away.

And  in  the  year  739  A.H.  (1338  A.D.)  Bahram  Khan  Governor
of  Snnargauw  died,  and  Malik  Fakhru-d-Din  Siiahdar  became
rebellions  and  assumed  the  title  of  Sultan,  and  having  fonglit
with  Qadr  Kban  the  ruler  of  La^nauti  in  conjunction  with  Malik
Husamu-d-Din  Aburija  the  Mustaufi,  and  ‘Izzu-d-Din  Yahya
A‘zamu-l-Mulk,  was  defeated,  and  all  bis  sources  of  grandeur,  his
treasure  and  his  retainers  fell  into  the  hands  of  Qadr  Khan ; and
when  the  rainy  season  had  arrived  the  horses  belonging  to
Qadr  Kban  died,  and  he  bad  collected  much  money  ® and  had
stored  it  up  in  heaps  in  his  own  hoase  with  the  object  of  present-
ing it  to  the  Sultan.  In  spite  of  all  that  Husaniu-d-Din  Aburja
could  do  to  dissuade  him  from  amassing  wealth  and  inducing  men
to  covet  it  and  thus  leading  to  disorder,  Qadr  Kban  would  not
listen,  till  eventually  the  very  result  predicted  by  Husamu-d-Din
ensued  ; Malik  Fakhru-d-Din  returned,  and  the  soldiery  of  Husa-
mu-d-Din joined  him  and  killed  their  own  master,  and  all  the  mot  sj
fell  to  the  lot  of  Faldiru-d-Din.  The  absolute  control  of  Sunar-
ganw  was  given  him  ; he  appointed  one  Muhhlis  a servant  of  his,
to  Lakhnauti,  and  ‘Ali  Mubarak  Inspector  of  Troops  ; Q idr  Khau
put  Mnkhli-s  to  death  and  aspired  at  independence,  writing  diplo-
matic letters  to  the  court  of  the  Sultan.  The  Sultan  appointed
Malik  Yusuf,  but  he  died  by  the  way,  and  the  Sultan,  having  other
affairs  to  attend  to,  omitted  to  send  any  one  else  to  that  distiiet.*

I Barni  etatei  that  the  Hindus  of  Qnrajal  seized  the  passes  behind  the
advancing  force,  and  that  of  ail  the  force  only  ten  sowars  returned,  (p.  478)
S^€  also  Elliott.  III.  242,

^ Accord  ng  to  Fu'ishta  ail  those  who  escaped  were  put  to  death  by  order
of  the  Sultan

5

A;  omits  J

MS.  (A)  V-^

4

[ 309  J

At  this  jnnc.  ure  ‘Ali  Mnbai’ak  by  reason  of  the  enmity  he  bore  to
Fakhru-d-Din,  displayed  the  insignia  of  royalty,  and  assumed  the
title  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din,  and  Malik  Ilyas  Haji  who  was  a man
of  family  and  retinue,  after  a few  days  put  ‘Alau-d-Din  to  death
with  the  assistance  of  some  of  the  Amirs  and  Maliks  of  La^-
nauti,  and  himself  assumed  the  title  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d  -Din.

And  in  the  year  741  A.H.  (1340  A.D.j  Saltan  Muhammad  hav-
ing left  with  the  object  of  reducing  Sunarguiivv,  seized  Fakhrn-d-
Din  and  brought  him  prisoner  to  Lakhnauti,  where  he  put  him  to
death  and  returned.  Shamsn-d-Diti  became  absolute  monarch  of
that  region,  and  the  kingly  power  and  anthoritj  over  that  country
descended  for  a lengthened  period  in  the  hands  of  his  sons,t  and
never  again  returned  to  the  possession  of  Sultan  Muhammad  ‘AdlL

And  in  the  year  742  A.H.  (1341  A D.)  Saiyyid  Hasan  Kaithali
the  father  of  Malik  Ibrahim  a feofee  of  the  Sultan,  who  was
generally  known  as  Hasan  Kangh,  and  who  eventually  obtained
the  sovereignty  of  the  Deccan  with  the  title  of  ‘Alau-d-Din
Bahman  Shah,  fermented  a revolt  in  Ma‘bar  on  the  grounds  of  the
severity  of  the  Saltan’s  goveraors,  and  the  innovations  introduced
in  the  laws,  and  the  number  of  executions,®  and  gained  over  to  his
own  party  nearly  all  the  great  men  of  Dihli  who  had  been  ap-
pointed to  that  district.  He  put  to  death  the  leaders  of  the
opposite  party.  The  Sultan  proceeded  from  Lakhnauti  to  Deogir
for  the  purpose  of  quelling  that  disturbance,  and  on  his  arrival  at
Tiiang  was  taken  ill,  and.  was  forced  to  return  by  uninterrupted
marches  to  Ditili.  He  left  Qutlu^  Khan  in  Daulatabad  ; thus
the  rebellion  in  Ma'bar  remained  unchecked  and  Hasan’s  influence
increased  rapidly.

And  in  the  year  743  (1342  A.D.)  they  put  to  death  by  treachery
Malik  Halajun  and  Knl  Chander  Khakhar  and  Malik  Tatar
Khuid,  the  G-overnor  of  Lahore,®  and  when  Kh waja-i-Jahan
came  up  against  them,'^  they  came  cut  to  do  battle  with  him,  hut
the  scouudrels  suHered  a severe  defeat  and  were  sorely  punished.

1 MS.  (A)  revds  lijiX

* MS.  (A)  has  not  the  word  simply  cil#.

® MS.  (A)  has  and  The  text  has  which  seems

preferable.

* MS.  (A)  omits  and  reads

231.

[ 310  ]

And  in  the  year  744  AH.  (1343  A.D.)  the  Sultan  pnssi’ig
tr.roatch  Sanani  and  Sainana  eave  orders  to  the  Saivvids  and  uil
232  the  Muslims  iu  opposition  to  the  advice  of  Hasau  Kanku,  for  a
general  massacre,  but  he  kept  the  chief  men  of  Those  distiiets  in
their  posts,  coiiTeyed  them  to  the  suburbs  of  the  city,  and  con-
ferred up  in  them  villages  and  districts,  and  bestowing  maiiv  rich
robes  of  honour,  and  purses  of  gold  gave  them  a place  of  abode
there ; and  when  a genera!  famine  arose  he  issued  an  edict  that  anv
one  Ti ho  wished  shordd  proceed  to  the  eastern  part  of  Hindustan
and  spend  the  da\ s of  (teainess  and  scaicitj  there,  without  let  or
hindrance,  and  in  the  same  way  if  anv  person  wishing  to  give  up
living  in  Dauhitabad  shunid  return  to  Diliii,  no  one  would  molest
liirn.  ilorcovei  in  thrif  yerir  so  many  peojsle  arrived  in  Hindustan
from  the  countrie.s  of  Klmrusau  and  ‘Iraq  and  Samarqand,  in  tlie
hope  of  receiving  the  bounty  of  the  Sultan,  that  iiardly  any  other
race.s  were  to  be  seen  it.  ih.at  country.

And  in  this  year  liaji  ^a'id  Saisuri  ' arrived  from  Egvnt  bear-
ing the  diploma  ot  theXhalifah^  witli  a banner  and  a robe  of
houiiiir.  confei  riim  up, on  the  Sultan  the  title  of  Nasir-i- A.niii u-1-
iMu  nuuiii  from  tin-  IQialifidi  of  the  Abbasides  who  were  .still
e.vtant.  iho  Sultan  ordered  decorations  aiul  illuminations  in  the
city,  and  pioceedcd  with,  ail  the  S]iaikhs  and  Saivvids  and  his
retainers  to  give  iiim  an  iionourable  reception,  then,  dismonntiiig,
lie  kisseit  the  feet  of  Haji  Said  and  joined  his-*  retinue.  He  then
1 e-estal  li'hed  the  Friday  prayers  and  the  ‘Id,  which  all  tliis
time  he  li  i i kept  iu  abeyance  waiting  for  the  order.=  and  sanction
oi  the  Khulifab.  he  read  the  Khnthah  in  the  name  of  the  IHirdif.th,
and  .Si  luck  oiu  tne  i,  uue-'  of  tiioso  kings  who  had  not  received
anihoiitv  fiom  the  Idar-iii-lvhilafah.  with  the  exception  of  Sultan
iSlahniud,  He  then  gave  lurijr.-ae  ^ of  money  and  valuables  to
.such  .1.1  cxient  that  his  treasury  became  exliausted,  he  also  des-

1 The  pr'.iitr..l  text  reaiis  but  MS.  (A5  has  So  has  also

Bnrio,  t'ab  >ext  ;■  -192.  !.  lu.  and  13  (See  also  Elliott,  III  249).

hariil  gives  .1  goed  aci'ounc  of  the  events  preceding  this  mark  of  favour
from  the  Kji.ti ifaii,  a coarse  of  fulsome  adulation  seems  to  have  been  then,
as  in  More  inurkTu  rimts.  the  royal  road  to  favour.

i A1  H'i.kmi  hi  Amr  lllahi  -.bul  'Abbas  Ahmad  ibn  nl  Jlustakfi  biliahi,  who
was  prochtimed  iu  741  A.  H.  For  an  acconut  of  the.se  Egyptian  Khalifaiis,
see  Ihumis'  Patiuin  Kings,  pp.  257  and  seqq.  Also  D’Herbelut.

S MS.  ; A)  jl"

[ 311  ]

pafclied  to  Egypt  a precious  jewel,  the  like  of  which  he  had  not
ill  his  treasuiy,  by  the  hands  of  Haji  Barq'ai,  with  other  rarities
and  presents  ; and  having  become,  in  his  own  opinion,  the  risthiful
Ifljaiifah,  and  keeping  constantly  placed  before  him  the  Qur’an  ‘
and  the  honorary  presents  and  the  patent  of  the  Ehalifah,  would
issue  commands  as  though  he  were  the  Khalifnh,  and  used  to  say  233-
“ Tlie  IQia'dfah  says  ” this  or  that.  He  compelled  the  people  to
profess  allegiance  to  the  Khalifah,  and  went  to  Sarkdawaii  which
is  in  the  vicinity  of  Shamsabad,  and  on  two  or  three  occasions*
iu  Baruj  and  Kanbhayat  alsj^  he  received  patents  from  the
Khalifah.  and  a second  time  the  Makhdfi mzada-i-Baghdadi  *
came  to  visit  him,  and  the  Sultan  went  on  foot  to  Palam  to  receive
him;  and  when  he  saw  him  from  afar  off  he  advanced  to  meet
him,  and  seated  him  upon  the  throne  beside  himself  and  made
over  to  him  without  reservation,  the  city  of  Kill  ^ with  the  garden
and  the  palace  and  all  the  buildings.

And  in  the  year  74.5  A.  H.  (1344  A.D.)  JSIahk  Nizamu-l-Mnlk
governor  of  Karra,  raised  a rebellion,  Shahr-ii-llah  the  brother  of
‘Ainu-l-Mnlk  brought  up  an  army  again.»t  him  from  Oudh  and  took
him  prisoner,  but  the  rebellion  was  quelled.  Then  Shihabu-d-din
Sultan  waxed  riotous  in  Bidar,  and  Qutlug^  Khan  was  despatched
against  him,  and  Shihabii-d-din  coming  out  with  his  son  to  do
battle  was  besieged  in  the  fortress,  and  Qiitliigh  Khan  inducing
him  to  come  out  by  promises  of  quarter,  sent  him  to  the  royal
presence.

And  in  the  year  746  A H,  (1.345  A D.)  ‘Ali  Sher  sister’s  son  to
Zafar  Khan  ‘Alah  gained  possession  of  Gulbarga  ® in  strong  force,
having  put  to  death  the  ruler  of  Bidar,  and  taking  much  spoil,

1 MS.  (A)  reads  ojl**  All  MSS.  read  ,v]iich  has  no

intelligible  meaning.  We  mast  read  here  in  the  sense  of  ‘honours,’  i.e.,

the  banner  and  robe  of  honour  sent  by  the  Khalifah  to  him.

5 MS.  (.\)  omits

* MS.  (A)  Broach  and  Cambay  Hunter  Imp.  Oaz.,  III.  101.

* Ghi^u-d-dln  Muhammad,  a son  of  a great-giandson  of  the  Khalif  of
Baghdad  Al-Mustansir-billahi  (Thomas,  P-  K.  D.  257.  note  1).

6 A full  account  of  this  is  given  by  Ibn  Batuta  ; Paris.  Edn,  iii.  253  and

eeqq  ) who  writes  J-  He  gave  him  in  fief  the

city  of  SIri.  Barni  (Calcutta  text  p.  493)  sa/s  J iSj-^

* MS.  (Aj.  See /nijp.  Gaz.,  VIII.  332.

[ 312  ]

fought  with  Outlugh  Khan,  but  was  defeated  and  obliged  to
retreat  to  the  fortress  of  Bidar  where  he  shut  himself  np.
Qutlugh  Khian  however  took  him  also  prisoner,  and  sent  him  to
Saikdawari  wiiich  was  the  camp  of  the  Sultan’s  army.  The
Sultan  in  the  first  instance  sent  the  captives  to  (Jhaziiiu  in  exile,
but  afterwards  recalled  them  thence  and  put  them  all  to  death.

And  in  the  year  747  A H.  (1343  A. D.)  at  the  time  when  the
234.  Saltan  had  made  Sarkdawaii  his  camp,  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk  arrived  at
the  Court,  bringing  from  Zafarabad  and  Oudh  much  property  and
rarities  of  great  value  as  presents  ; then  the  Sultan  came  to  the  con-
clusion that  it  was  advisable  to  recall  Qutlugh  !^an  from  the
Dakkan,  and  send  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk  to  replace  him.  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk  got
some  idea  into  his  head,  and  fled  by  night  from  Sarkdawari  and
crossing  the  river  Ganges  made  for  Oudh,  and  his  brother  Shahru-
llah  laid  hands  upon  certain  of  the  elephants  and  horses  ‘ be-
longing to  the  king,  whicli  had  been  left  behind  to  graze,  and
carried  them  off.  The  Sultan  went  in  pursuit  of  them  as  far  as
Qanauj,  and  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk,  at  the  instigation  of  his  brothers  and
a party  of  the  followers  of  Malik  Piroz  Naib  Barbak,  who  had
been  placed  in  charge  of  the  elephants  and  horses,  crossed  the
river  Ganges  and  coming  over  to  this  side  * attacked  the  army  of
the  Sultiin,  and  like  the  thieves  and  Gawars  (of  India)^  took  to
the  woods  and  fought  on  foot,  but  not  being  able  to  stand  against
the  elephants  and  archers  of  the  king  took  to  flight,*  and  Shahru-
llah  and  his  other  brother  together  with  the  majority  of  the
sirdars  of  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk  were  drowned,  and  the  remainder  fell  by  the
swords  of  the  soldiers,  and  the  fugitives  were  taken  prisoners  by  the
Gawars,  who  having  found  ‘Ainu-l-Mulk  alive  took  him  on  their
shoulders  ^ and  brought  him  bareheaded®  to  the  court  and  gave  him
a few  days  respite,’  aud  the  Sultan  in  consideration  of  his  excellent

1 MS.  (i ) omits  Ij.  * MS.  (A)

8 MS.  (A)  omits  * MS.  ^A)

8 The  text  reads  and  so  does  also  MS.  (A).  It  seems

probable  however  that  this  is  an  erroneous  reading  due  to  the  repetition  of
in  tlie  original  copj,

* MS.  (A)  reads  naked.

T BamI  entirely  omits  all  reference  to  the  events  here  recorded.  The
Gawars  are  a race  of  gypsies  in  India  according  to  Steingaes.  I can  hnd  no
mention  of  them  in  Sherring's  Hindu  Castes^  nor  in  Elliott’s  Tribes  of  the
N.  W.

[ 313  ]

services  gave  him  his  freedom,  and  in  accordance  with  his  former
custom  treated  him  well,  and  giving  him  a district  sent  him  back
to  Dihli  ; then  he  recalled  Oatlugh  Khan  from  the  Dakkan,  hut
inasmuch  as  Qntlngh  Khan  had  reduced  that  country  to  excellent
order  and  had  gained  the  good  will  of  the  people,  his  recall  was  the
cause  of  great  discontent  (and  disaffection and ‘Aziz  Khnmar  *
who  was  one  of  the  canaille,  proceeding  to  Malwa  nut  to  death
many  centm  ions  Cor  Amirs  of  a hundred)  which  is  the  meaning
of  the  word  Yuzbaghi  ^ in  aceordance  with  the  Sultan’s  orders,
and  thence  arose  many  insurrections.

And  in  the  year  748  A.H.  (1317  A.D.)  the  captains  of  hundreds,  235.
stirred  up  i-ebellion  and  sedition  in  Gujrat  against  Muqbil
the  servant  of  Kh'^’aja-i-Jaha.n  who  was  naih-vazir  of  Gujrat,
and  was  bringing  treasure  to  the  Court,  and  attacked  him
by  night,-  getting  possession  of  the  treasure  and  horses  and  pro-
perty belonging  to  the  king.  'The  Saltan  arrived  at  Gujrat  with
tlic  object  of  quelling  this  rebellion,  and  sent  some  of  the  trust-
worthy Amirs  as  for  instance  Malik  ‘Ali  Saijandar,  and  Ahmad
Lachin  to  Daulatahad  to  bind  the  Amirs  of  hundreds  who  were
there  and  bring  them  to  Court.  As  soon  as  Malik  Ahmad  Lachin
arrived  at  the  pass  of  M.inikganj,  the  Amirs  of  hundreds  in  their
alarm  came  to  a common  understanding,  and  put  Malik  Ahmad
Lachin  to  death ; Aziz  Khumar  who  had  gone  from  Gujrat  to
oppose  the  Amirs  of  hundreds  of  Dabhc'i  ^ and  Baroda,  on  coming
face  to  face  with  the  iu.surgents  lost  his  head,®  fell  from
his  horse  and  was  taken  prisoner.  This  news  had  reached  the
Sultan  and  had  augmented  liis  wrath  considerably.  And  after
the  defeat  of  Muqbil  and  the  murder  of  ‘Aziz,  the  Amirs  of
hundreds  waxed  bold,  and  sent  for  their  families  and  relations
from  all  directions,  and  -.vith  one  c'msent  turned  against  the
Sultau’^  and  having  captured  the  fortress  of  Uaulatabad  from  the
the  governors  of  Malik  ‘Alam  to<tk  possession  of  it,  and  raising

1 IIS,  (A)  omits  J.  s MS.  {A)  Aziz  Hmiar.

^ Commandant  de  cent  hommes.  (Faret  de  Coarteille),

^ MS,  (A)  omits  the  words

^ MS-  (A).  1]ic-  text  is  wrong  here.  L/ahlio^i.  Sec  Tieff.  I.  3/2.  also  map,

Vol.  Ill,  see  also  Hnnter,  Iinp.  Gaz  , IV.  76;  and  Baylej,  History  of  Gujrat.
y ‘.2— *,5  iLit.)  H^d  lost  his  hands  and  feet.

"<  The  printed  text  reads  which  is  meaningless.

MS.  (A)  reads  j|  and  this  seems  the  correct  reading.

40

[ ■

to  the  throne  one  Tsma'il  Fath  gave  him  the  title  of  Sultan
IVtisiru-d-Din.  After  this  the  Amirs  of  hundreds  of  Dahho’i  and
Baroda  over  whcm  the  Sultan  had  appointed  other  Amirs,  being
defeated  by  the  army  opposed  to  them  joined  hands  with  the
Amirs  of  hundreds  of  DaulataoAi.  When  the  Sultan  went  to
Daulacabad  Isma'il  Fath  prepared  to  give  him  battle,  but  being
defeated  shut  bimseif  up  in  the  forti  ess  of  Dharauagar  by  which
is  meant  the  citadel  ^ of  Daularabad ; many  Muslims  of
Daulatabad  were  slain  in  this  rebellion,  or  were  made  prisoners,
and  Malik®  ‘Imadul  Mulk  Sartez  was  ordered  to  pursue®  the
236.  fugitive  Amirs  of  hundreds  towards  Bidar.  In  the  meantime
tidings  arrived  of  the  rebellion  in  Gujrat  of  Malik  Ts.ghi,  who,
having  put  to  deatli  Malik  Muzalfar  the  governor  of  that  place,
had  obtained  possession  * of  a large  number  of  horses  and
much  property.  Thereupon  the  Sultan  leaving  in  Dhaianan^ar
Malik  Janbar  and  Khudawandzada  Qiwamu-d-Din  and  Shaikh
Burhanu-d-Din  Balarami  ® left  to  quell  the  rebellion  of  Taghi  : °
the  army  which  had  fled  from  Daulatabad  under  the  leader-
ship of  Hasan  Kangu,  coming  out  of  hiding  attacked  ^ Tmadn-1-
Mulk  Sartez.  ‘Ima<lu-1-Mulk  was  slain,  and  his  army  fled  to
Daulatabad  and  soushr  .shelter  thei’p,  and  Malik  Janhar  with
Ejhudawandzada  Qir,amu-d-Din  and  the  other  Amir.s  not  being
able  to  withstand  Hasfin  in  Daulatabad  evacuated  those  districts
and  made  for  Dharanagar.  Ha.saii  Kangu  pursued  them  and  came
to  Daulntahad,®  and  having  driven  out  Isma'il  Fata  a.ssnmed  the
title  of  ‘AiSu-d-Din  and  usurped  the  government,  and  from  that
time  fonvard  the  rale  .of  the  disrricr.s  of  Daulatabad  and  the
sovereignty  of  that  kingd-rm  remained  in  his  family.  The  history
c■a.Vl<^d  Fufuhii-s-Salatiii^  was  written  in  bis  honour.  And  Taghi

1 aiy,  a small  fort  tuik  between  t^vo  large  forts  (Barhan-i-Qati').

Mt’,  I A)  spells  this  word  .i.

S The  printed  text  reads  ;M3.  (A)  omits

Bariii  calls  him  lALUoljU*  lAbo  JIulik  ‘linadu-l-Mulk

Sartez-i-Sult^iii.

3 The  proper  reading  here  is  ^d3.  (AJ.  The  printed  text  haa

* Bead  '^1  JJ  jl  (A)  6 jrS  (.A).

9 MS.  (A)  omits  i^he.  t MS.  (A)  omits

5 M.S.  (A)  J ji.  » I can  find  no  mciitJon  of  cius  "work.

[ 315  ]

tlie  rebel,  after  the  ai’rival  of  the  Sultan  at  Gujrat,  ventureil  a
eeooiid  time  tn  fl^ht  Tfith  him  and  was  ag'aiti  defeated,  and  giving’
hircselt  up  to  bi'israndage  roamed  about  from  place  to  place,
the  Sultan  however  continued  to  pursue  him  and  followed  him
wherever  he  went.  A-nd  in  this  expedition  the  Sultan  having
sent  for  Malik  Firoz  from  Dihli  attached  him  to  his  Court  ; and  1
in  thi.s  year  Ulalik  Gir  the  son  of  Malik  Qabhl  Khalifati,  to  vfhoni
the  Sultan  had  delegated  the  control  of  all  hi.s  important  afiairs,
and  on  ■who.se  behalf  he  had  written  a letter  expres.sing  submi.s-
sion  to  the  Egyptian  Khalifah,  and  had  sent  it  by  the  hand  of  Haji
Barqa’i,  died,  and  Ahmad  Aiyaz,  who  is  also  called  Khwaja-i-
Jahan,  and  Malik  Qabul  Qiwamu-l-Mulk  were  carrying  on  the
government  in  Dibit.  Towards  tlie  end  of  the  reign  of  Muham-
mad, disaScctic'i  and  rebellion,  mischief  and  sedition  became
increasedly  eTident  day  by  day,*  so  that  if  he  turned  his  atten-
tion to  curing  one  evil,  another  was  not  wanting  to  supply  its
place,®  and  matters  were  past  all  remedy,*  and  the  glory  ‘ of  the
kingdom,  and  pro.sperity®  of  the  country  was  entirely  snbveited.
Tyranny  supplanted  equity,  and  infidelity  flourished  in  place  of
Islam,  There  -were  many  reasons  for  this,  wbicli  by  their  co-
operation led  to  ruin  and  dissension,  and  the  decline  of  the  king-
dom, These  causes  are  given  in  detail  in  the  original  history  ^
the  Firozshah'',  and. also  in  the  MtibSrak^aht.  The  results  are  here
given  in  brief  ai  ranged  under  seven  heads.  Firstly. — The  greater
part  of  the  people  and  inhabitants  of  the  towns  and  districts  were

IMS.  (A)  j G.

* MS.  (A)  omits

S This  is  the  reading  of  MS.  (A)  ^

The  printed  tevt  h-is  MS.  (A)  reads  correctiy  ^^^1.

^ MS  (A)  ® Omit  j MS.  (A).

"i  There  are  tao  histones  ttncwn  as  Taril^.x-Firoz  Srurht  one  by  Ziau-d-Din
Barui,  [„j,,ca  IStiS)  and  the  ocher  by  hhams-i-Siraj  ‘Afif.

(Bibhoth.  India  1.^93).  jElliott,  III.  269i.

MS.  fA;  reads  (as  does  the  printed  text)  hat  the  better

reading  seems  to  be  that  given,  wuKvmt  reference  to  the  authority,  in  the
footnote  to  the  printed  text  This  would  disringnish  the

Tdiilh-i-F:, oz  of  Barni  as  the  original  history  cf  thar  name.  The

tFdrtkh-t.tMnh./ 1-.: . tha*  of  Yahya  ibn  Ahmad  Elliott,  lY,,  pp.  6

and  eeqqj.

237.

[ 316  ]

mined  by  the  rapine  of  Tarrna  ^irin,  and  never  again  recovered
their  prosperity.  Secondly. — The  tribute  to  be  paid  by  the  inha-
bitants of  the  Doab,  ■which  district  comprises  some  of  the  chief
towns  of  Hindustan,  was  increased  from  ten  per  cent,  to  twenty
per  cent.,  besides  which  there  was  the  numbering  of  the  cattle,
and  the  house-census,  and  other  taxes  ’ over  and  above  these,  and  *
in  this  way  the  more  needy  portion  of  the  people  left  their  pro-
perty and  cattle  and  attached  themselves  ® to  the  richer  folk,
while  the  wealthier  subjects  plotted  rebellion  and  sedition  and  took
to  highway  robbery,  and  pillaged  the  country  in  all  directions  ^
60  that  from  all  these  causes  the  revenue  of  the  country  began
to  dwindle.®  Thirdly. — An  universal  famine,  and  ( consequent)
dearness  of  grain,  for  it  so  happened  that  for  seven  whole  years
not  a single  drop  of  rain  fell  from  heaven.  It  should  bo  remem-
bered that  this  statement  has  been  copied  as  it  stands  from  the
Mtibiirak^dhJ,  but  I cannot  say  whether  the  author  of  that  work
has  been  guilty  of  exaggeration  or  if  in  reality  the  facts  were  as
238.  stated.®  Fourthly. — the  desertion  of  Dihli,  and  the  population  of
Daulatabad,  because  after  Dihli  was  laid  waste  they  brought
people  from  the  towns  and  other  places  into  that  city  and
populated  it,  and  then  again  removed  them  thence  to  Danlatabad,
80  that  all  their  hereditary  estates  and  family  holdings,  and
all  the  property  and  efiects'  they  possessed  were  wasted  and
dissipated,  so  that  they  never  saw  anything  more  of  them.
Fifthly. — The  massacre  of  the  eighty  thousand  cavalry  in  a body-
in  the  hills  of  Himachal,  and  the  consequent  desolation  of  their
families.  Shcthly. — The  daily  occurrence  of  rebellion  and  mutiny
in  every  place  where  people  were  in  dread  of  their  lives,  some  of
them  foil  in  battle  but  the  greater  number  were  put  to  death  with
their  families  upon  false  charges,  so  that  in  every  way  that
wretched  country  was  being  ruined.  Seventhly. — The  blood  thirsti-

I The  word  is  apparently  used  here  in  this  nnnsnal  sense.

» MS.  fA)  ® M3.  (A)

i j M3.  (A).

6 Am  qjjyk  j MS.  (4)  inserts

and  omits

® The  question  of  c'cngi'eration  admits  of  no  doubt.  Barm  a contemporary
author  lends  no  countenance  to  such  a statement.

1 MS.  (A)  reads

[ ol7  ]

ness  of  the  Sultan,  and  his  system  of  Government  of  his  people,
which  made  Saiyyids,  ‘ITlama,  Shaikhs.  ragamnfiBns  and  sconn-
di-els,  artisans,!  peasants,*  and  soldiers,  all  alike  in  his  eyes.
Moreover  there  was  constantly  in  front  of  his  royal  pavilion  and
his  Civil  Court  a monnd  of  dead  bodies  and  a heap  of  corpses,
while  the  sweepers  and  executioners  were  wearied  out  with  their
work  of  dragging  (the  wretched  victims)  and  putting  them  to
death  in  crowds.  So  that  ® the  people  were  never  tired  of  rebel-
ling nor  the  king  of  punishing  (the  rebels).!'  At  last  the  Sultan
was  at  his  wit's  end  what  to  do,  but  for  all  this  he  did  not  keep
his  foot  out  of  the  stirrup,  nor  did  his  sword  rest  from  punishment,
but  all  to  no  purpose,  till  the  flood  of  sedition  waxed  violent,  and
the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  by  degrees  grew  ^ feeble,  at  length
disease  overcame  him,  and  the  Sultan  was  freed  from  his  people
and  the  people  from  their  Sultan.

Verse.

Of  all  the  people  of  the  world,  although  most  of  them  239.

Ai’6  gone  astray,  and  few  of  them  are  in, the  right  path.

Do  thou  so  live  that  when  thou  dieat  thou  mayest  escape
(punishment).

Not  so  that  when  thou  diest  the  people  may  escape  (tby
tyranny).

Tliey  relate  an  extraordinaiy  story  of  one  of  the  irregular  acts  of
the  Sultau  which  was  that  he  kept  such  strict  watch  over  all  matters
jr.volviiig  imnishment,  that  he  used  to  keep  four  Muftis  ® to  whom
he  allotted  quarters  in  the  precincts  of  his  own  palace,  and  used
to  see  that  they  kept  to  their  appointed  places,^  so  that  when  any-
one who  w'as  arrested  upon  any  charge,  he  might  in  the  first  place
argue  with  the  Muftis  about  his  due  punishment,  so  far  as  he  was

! Wliether  we  read  or  this  word  is  used  in  a very  un-

usnai  Bense.  Its  proper  meaning  is  a tax  levied  upon  artisans,  bat  here  it
muse  mean  the  ( chtf)  artisans  themselves.

* This  again  is  not  correctly  used.  It  must  be  read  but  should

be  plurttl.

3 MS.  (A)  Aui  jt  Jb 4 MS.  (A)  'Mjf

i MS.  fA)  oib

* Mufti.  The  officer  who  assists  the  Qiizi  or  judge  by  supplying
him  with  faticds  or  dtc-tiiouii.

^ We  sliouUl  read  Iieic*  MS.  (A).

[ 318  I

able,^  and  had  said,  Be  very  earefal  that  you  do  not  fail  in  the
slightest  degree  by  defect  in  speaking  that  which  you  consider
right,  because  if  any  one  sliould  be  put  to  death  wr.insfnily  and
the  oversight  should  have  been  on  your  side,  the  bl-Jcd  of  that  man
■will  be  upon  your  head.  Then  if  after  lonar  discmssion  they
convicted  (the  prisoner),  even  though  it  were  midiiigl.t  * he  would
pass  orders  for  his  execution,^  and  if  he  himself  fonnd  for  convic-
tion * he  would  refer  it  to  another  meeting,  and  would  er.dep,vour
to  find  a means  of  upsetting  their  arguments,”  and  would  come
and  make  a speech,  and  -when  the  Muftis  were  at  a loss  lor  a
further  argument,  he  would  put  (the  prisoner)  to  death  on  the
instant  or  else  release  him  on  the  spot.

They  ,say®  that  one  day  Snltau'  Muhammad  weariuE;  Iris  shoers  went
ou  foot  into  the  Court  of  Justice  - of  Qazi  Kamaiu-d-Din  Sadr-i-
Jahan  and  said,  The  Shaikhzada-i- Jami  has  called  rne  a tyrant,  send
for  him  that  he  may  .substantiate  his  cliarge  of  tyianny  against  me
or,  if  he  fails,  that  you  may  proriounce'^  against  him  the  sentence
of  such  puni.shment  aecoiding  to  law  as  the  case  inav  require.
When  the  ghaikhzida  ivas  summoned  he  confessed  'to  having  said
it)  and  the  Sultan  enquired  (vkhat  his  grounds  wcTe).  He  replied,
every  one  whom  you  punisli  ( with  death ) lawfullt- or  unlawf-ully.
that  is  your  prei'ogr.tive,  bur  that  you  should  hand  over  his  wife
240.  fitid  children  to  the  executioners  as  you  do.  to  do  what  they  v\ ill
with  them,  in  what  religion  and  under  wliac  sacred  lavv  do  you
find  this  ? The  Sit'tan  tvas  silent  and  rose  up  from  the  Court, ‘0  and
ordered  that  the  tjhaikhzada  should  bo  bound  ; this  order  was  carried
out  and  he  was  put  into  an  iron  cage;  then  he  had  him  carried  in
that  very  way  on  the  journey  to  Daulatabad  on  the  hack  of  an
elephant.  When  he  returned  and  arrived  at  Dihli,  he  brought  him
before  tlie  sain.e  Court, and  bringing  him  out  of  the  catze  o-ave
orders  in  obedience  to  which  the  poor  wretch  was  cut  in  two  in
his  pi-esence.  Fi,jm  this  it  is  clear  that  the  Sultan  was  a mixture
of  opposites,  and  for  this  reason  his  name  has  been  banded

1 MS.  (A)

8 MS.  (A)  omits  tSlT-
6 MS.-  (A)  J
8 MS.  (A)  omits  A*3r^.

» MS  AjJUi.

•I  MS  (A)  omit?  1-^ji.

5 MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  Ojb  y',  j

^ ilS.  (A,’  omits
~ MS.  (Aj  UJ
MS.  fA)  omits
l»  MS.  ! a)  j

»'  319  ]

down  in  tradition,  ave  and  even  in  some  books  also  as  the
Bloody  not  as  “ the  Just.’"  There  are  many  scones  bearing  upon
this  which  I have  heard,  but  to  write  or  speak  or  them  would  lead
me  too  far  atield.  So  Take  example  from  it  ye  that  are  endowed
with  sight.”  ^ In  short  * after  great  havoc  had  been  wrought  in  the
affairs  of  the  state  by  the  excessive  tyi'anny  and  oppression  of  the
Saltan,  which  lie  however  regarded  as  the  essence  of  justice,  and
great  breaches  had  been  which  the  wise  and  learned  were
powerless  to  repair,^  by  reason  of  his  various  toils  and  his  evil
designs,  the  disease  of  Phtlosis^  found  its  way  to  his  constitution  ;
notwithstanding  this  lie  Jset  himself  to  follow  up  Taghi,  and  in  the

i Qur\^7i,  LIX.  2.  * MS.  (Ai  j!  iilS.  (A).

^ This  name  waa  yiven  to  any  kind  of  hectic  lever,  most

neually  that  arising  from  phthisical  disease  of  the  iang.  The  follo*ving  defi-
nition is  from  the  Bahru-l'Jan'uhir.

4^  1)|  iLaci'tj  jvki|'  tUt

4k«j!^  te  J

The  fever  failed  «lieu  the  he.'it  which  at.scs  from  tlie  coiistitutioQ

seizes  upon  the  chief  e?seiiti;*.i  oigang,  especially  the  heart,  and  the  moistor©
of  the  body  disapp^-ars  Another  opinion  is  that  this  is  an  e-xtraiieous  fever
wliich  atciicks  the  budv  by  ii.eHns  of  its  generation  in  some  of  its  members.

The  states  that  it  is  called  becacseit  emoc'-ates  the  body.

SadfJi’s  account  is  as  follows.  The  fever  is  nsaaliy  fatal, .It

is  either  simple  or  complicated  'tvi’-.h  putrid  fever,  Tiie  sigt.s  of  this  complica-
tion are  persistence  of  the  fever,  with  an  exacerbation  oi.  cite  day  of  th©
paroxysm  of  the  putrid  fever,  shivering  ia  also  present.  Tiie  worst  complica-
tion of  all  is  I he  says'  when  “ ' is  complicated  with  one  of  the  fevers

which  rciinire  treatment  by  purges,  because  the  treatment  of  ‘‘  diqq  ” is  the
opposite  to  this.

The  pulse  in  uncomplicated  “ diqq’^  is  hard,  frequent,  and  slender  ...The
surface  of  tiie  bnciy  is  not  very  hoc  at  the  first  feel,  but  after  a few  moments
it  feels  scorching,  hottest  of  all  over  the  arteries,  the  heat  increases  especially
m cl  e face  and  upper  parts  of  the  body.

Food  '•houhl  be  nourishing  ..  ..Some  unskilful  physicians  withhold  food
and  kill  the  paiu-nt  speedily.  Food  should  be  moist  and  coolii.g-  If  the
fever  passes  on  to  the  degree  called  zahul  the  pulse  increises  iu

hardness  and  tenuirj.  rlie  eves  change  and  become  covered  with  soraes.  rfio
cartilages  of  all  the  bon^s  are  prominent,  the  te.mples  sink  in,  the  'vkia  of
the  forehead  tightens,  the  skin  loses  its  lustre,  and  has  a dusty  appear  ince'
the  e\eiida  become  heavy;  all  this  is  the  result  of  rapid  di’-solution.  and  the
abundance  of  dryness  and  disappearance  of  the  natural  moistuie  liieie

[ 320  ]

hope  of  exterminating  him  set  out  for  the  kingdom  of  Thatha  where  '
Taghi  had  fled  for  safety ; and  * in  that  expedition  Qarghan  Jfaib
of  the  king  of  Khurasan  sent  Altun  Bahadur  with  five  thousand
cavalry  to  assist  the  Sultan.  The  Sultan’s  illness  was  at  that  time
slightly  less  urgent  * and  when  he  arrived  at  Thatha  he  fasted  on
the  day  of  the  ‘.A  .^ura,^  which  was  in  the  very  middle  of  the  hot
season,  and  after  breaking  his  fast  he  ate  some  fish,  whereupon  his
illness  returned,  and  on  the  twenty-first  of  lluharram  in  the  year
752  H,  (1351  A.D. ) he  took  his  way  to  the  next  world, ^ the
duration  of  his  reign  having  been  twenty-seven  years.

also  appears  in  the  urinary  excretion,  oiliness  and  a scaly  deposit ; the  nose
becomes  sharp,  the  hair  grows  long,  and  lice  are  of  frequent  occurrence  on  the
body  because  of  the  excessive  amount  of  exhalation.  The  abdomen  falls  in
till  it  touches  the  back  hone,  the  skin  oi  the  chest  is  also  retracted,  and  the
nails  become  long  t ) then  the  diarrlicea  recurs,  the  hair  falls

out  and  death  occurs.

It  will  be  observed  that  there  is  no  mention  here  of  any  of  the  lung
symptoms  of  Phthisis,  alt  that  we  have  described  is  a continued  fever  of
remittent  type  running  a moderately  long  course  as  is  shewn  by  the  symp-
toms described.  No  mention  is  made  of  any  eruption,  nor  is  diarrhoea
apparently  more  than  an  intercurrem,  symptom  appearing  late  in  the  disease.

This  was  probably  one  of  the  fevers  so  common  in  India  for  which  for
want  of  a better  name  “ typho-malarial”  has  been  suggested.

Probably  the  complication  of  “ diqq  ” with  “ putrid  fever  ” of  which
SadiJi  speaks  was  more  comparable  to  the  “ enteric  fever  ” of  modern  science.
Sadidi  speaks  elsewhere  of  throe  degrees  of  severity  of  this  fever.  The  first
is  called  “ d'oo  ” the  second  more  severe  is  called  zabiil  and  the  most  severe
of  all  is  called  " haihf.”

I have  only  been  able  to  epitomise  Sadidi’s  account  which  will  be  found  at
pages  4117-423  of  his  work,  {At  Jltighnt  ft  ^ttrh  ll  Unfaz),

1 1^  |OJ  MS.  (A).  * MS,  (h)  ).  5 MS.  (A)  iji  o/pil.

♦ “ The  *A^ura,”  is  a voluntary  fast  day  observed  on  the  tenth  of  the
month  of  Muharram.  It  is  the  only  day  of  Muharram  observed  by  the
Sunni  Muslims,  being  the  day  on  which  it  is  said  God  created  Adam  and  Eve
heaven  and  hell,  the  tablet  of  decree,  the  pen.  life  and  death.  It  is  kept  by  the
Sunnis  as  a fast.”  (Hughes,  Diet,  of  laltrni,  20).

^ On  the  banks  of  the  Indus  at  funrteen  ko$  from  Tbatba  according  to
Banil  (Elliott,  III.  265),  but  Badaoiil  states  he  had  arrived  at  Thatha.  Bam?
states  that  he  was  taken  ill  thirty  ko:,  fr.im  Thatha  where  he  had  arrived  on
the  ^ushurd,  thence  he  was  earned  lU  as  he  was  ‘‘  for  the  second  and  third
day  until  he  came  to  within  fourteen  of  Thatha.”  There  he  remained
acr*ording  to  Bcirui  gradually  growing  worse  and  died  on  the  2ist  of
Muharmm,

C 321  ]

When  the  Empire  of  justice  arose  with  ease,  like  the  sun.

The  land  of  Hindnstan  canja  under  his  sway  like  that  of  241.
Khurasan ;

A fortress  like  that  of  the  Haft  Khwan  * he  built  of  Haft
Jush  * which  in  loftiness

Would  need  the  Nasr-i-Tair  ® to  fly  to  its  pinnacle  inaccessible
as  H arum  an.*

So  strong  that  it  registered  avow  to  last  till  the  Resurreciiou-
day,  but  by  reason  of  the  vicissitudes  of  time,  it  became
destroyed  in  many  places  like  the  web  of  a spider.

Ton  will  find  nothing  upon  the  top  of  its  walls  but  the  voice
of  the  owl.

In  its  topmost  garden  you  will  see  nothing  by  the  ill-omened
raven.

It  befits  the  duration  and  pride  of  Empire  that  its  condition
should  become  in  accordance  with  the  words  “ God  most
High  is  far  above  all  that  the  tyrants  of  men  say  of  Him.”  *

And  among  the  celebrated  poets  of  the  time  of  Sultan  Muham-
mad is  Badar  ShSshi  ® who  wrote  a Shahnama  in  his  honour,  of
some  thousand  verses  t and  for  the  very  reason  that  it  is  a history
in  poetry  it  is  a valuable  acquisition.

Sultan  FIeoz  SgiH  ibn  Malik  Rajab

Who  was  the  brother’s  son  of  Sultan  ^iySsu-d-D5n  Tughlaq  and
uncle’s  son  of  Sultan  Muhammad  ‘Adil,  in  accordance  with  the

1 HaMA  Soft  Khwan,  The  capture  of  the  Brazen  fortress  of  Daz
was  the  final  stage  of  the  seven  great  labours  of  Isfandiyar  known  by  the
name  of  the  Haft-Khwan.  See  §hah  Namah  (Atkinson),  pp.  407  lo  426,  also
Burhdn-i-Qaii' s.  v.

^ Baft  Jush,  These  are  seven  metals  which  are  melted

together  to  form  an  alloy  of  special  value  j the  seven  are,  iron,  zinc  (antimony,
Steingass)  lead,  gold,  tin,  copper,  and  silver.  Bnrhdn-i-Qdti‘,  According  to
the  Qhidfu-l-lugJidt,  it  also  contains  quicksilver  and  brass.

^ Nasr-i-7Sir,  The  constellation  called  also  ‘Uqdb,  The

Eagle.

i Harumdn,  a fortress  on  the  frontier  of  Egypt.  Surhdn-{-Qdti'.

® Cf.  Qur'an  XXVII.  64.  * 296,  jwte  6.

I This  looks  as  though  we  should  read  jtJA  vs.— >1  nearly

twenty  thousand  verses.  Both  MSS.  however  read  the  same  as  the  printed
text  which  is  here  followed  though  it  is  au  uncommon  coustrocticn,

41

[ 322  ]

authority  appointing  him  the  heir-apparent  of  Sultan  Muhammad
ascended  the  throne  of  sovereignty  and  state,  hy  the  consent  of
the  chiefs  of  the  Shaikhs  and  the  leading  Amirs  and  Vazirs  in
the  aforesiiid  year,  in  the  vicinity  of  Thatha.  It  is  said  that  the
M--)khdumzada-i-‘Ahhasi  of  Bagdad,  and  Shaikh  Nafim-d-Din
Chiragh-i-DihK  may  God  sanctify  their  sacred  resting  places  were  ^
the  cause  of  the  allegiance  thus  sworn  to  Sultan  Firoz,  and  it  is
currently  reported  that  [Makhdnm  Shaikh  Nasiru-d-Din  Chiragh-i-
242.  Dihli  may  God  sanctify  Ms  resting  place]^  had  secretly  made  Malik
Firoz  King  during  the  absence  of  Sultan  Muhammad.  Some  of
the  Muftis  informed  the  Sultan  of  this,  and  his  orders  were  that
those  two,  master  and  disciple  ® were  to  be  taken  in  confinement
from  Dihli  and  brought  to  the  camp.  This  was  carried  out,^  and
Malik  Firoz  in  some  way  or  other  gained  over  the  guards,  and
made  his  way,  just  as  he  was,  to  the  neighbouihood  of  Hansi  to
Shaikh  Badru-d-Din  who  was  one  of  the  descendants  of  Shaikh
Janialu-d-Din  of  Hansi  ^ may  God  sanctify  their  resting-places.
That  holy  man  exclaimed  “ Great  God  ! a man  has  been  made
prisoner  and  taken  ofi  to  be  Sultan,  and  he  wots  not  of  it  ” !
When  they  arrived  ® at  the  camp  of  the  Sultan  in  the  vicinity
of  Thatha  and  the  tidings  of  the  arrival  of  these  two  holy  men
reached  him  ^ he  gave  orders  that  they  were  to  be  put  to  death
the  instant  of  their  arrival,  and  with  that  he  lapsed  into  a statg
of  intoxication,  A son  of  his  had  gone  on  a hunting  expedition,
accordingly  when  the  guards  saw  * this  state  of  afiairs,  they
liberated  the  holy  Shaikh  and  the  Sultan  then  Sultan  Firoz  by
the  consent  of  tlie  nobles  raised  the  banner  of  sovereignty  and
got  the  Sultau’s  son  out  of  the  way  by  some  crafty  scheme,  and

1 MS.  (A)  reads  AJjy*)  for  (Text).

* The  words  between  square  brackets  are  omitted  from  MS.  (A).

8 The  reading  here  is  nncertain.  The  printed  text  has  t)  y

while  JfS.  (A)  has  Ij  The  latter  has  the  more  genuine  ring

though  it  is  an  uncommon  expression

* MS.  (A)  The  text  reads

8 MS.  (A)  AJJj

« MS.  (A)  1 MS.  (A)  J'i  litil

8 MS.  (A)  M

» MS.  (A)  *j|  By  Sult^,  Firoz  ^ah  must  be  here  meant

[ 323  ]

after  that  i be  had  returned  to  Dihli  he  made  the  pargana  of
Chaurasi  in  tlie  district  of  Hansi  a present  to  the  monastery  and
rest  house  of  Shaikh  Badru-d-Din,  whom  I have  mentioned.

This  is  what  I have  heard — God  alone  knows  the  real  truth.

They  also  say  that  Sultan  Muhammad  ibn  Tughlao^  Shah  took
the  reverend  Shaikh  under  his  protection,  till  one  day  the  Shaikh,
may  God  sanctify  his  resting-place,  tied  a knot  upon  one  of  the
Sultan’s  robes  and  said  •*  N’asiru-d-Diu  fastens  and  God  opens”
and  that  very  day  the  Sultan  died.

TTrse.

The  only  kingdom  wbicb  sorrows  not  for  the  affliction  of  us
decline,

Hear  my  words  freely  spoken,  is  tbe  kingdom  of  the  darvesb-  243

However  tbis  may  be,  tbe  Sultan  Firoz  at  tbe  outset  of  his  reign
issued  this  order  that  the  Mugbuls  who  bad  obtained  influence
over  the  soldiery  should  be  brought  apart  from  tbe  camp,  and
inasmuch  as  their  mutinous  conduct  bad  passed  all  bounds,  the
Sultan  himself  saw  to  their  safe  custod}',  and  jmiiishing  these
Mughuls  effectually  put  a .stop  to  tbeu-  interfering  with  the  dis-
cipline of  the  army.

Verse.

Par  better  than  giving  a Muglml  a hint  to  plunder

Is  it  that  you  should  rejoice  him  with  a sight  of  Paradise.

Then  he  brought  his  army  in  safety  into  security,  and  piocccd
ing  by  way  of  Siwistan  made  for  Dibit  by  continuous  niarclic;.
and  Ahmad  Aiyaz,  styled  Kh ivdja-i-Jahfi ,i,  who  in  the  absence  *
of  the  Sultan  bad  urged  the  claims  of  an  obscure  child  ^ to  the

1 MS.  (A)

S MS.  (A)

3 ‘Afif  gives  the  “true  account  of  this  transaction  just  as

he  heard  it  from  Kishwar  Khan,  son  of  Ki.^hlu  Khaii  Bula'.an,  one  of  the
servants  at  tlie  Court.”

He  assercs  the  Kh’\\'nja-i-Jahan  who  was  on  terms  of  great  intimacy  with
Firoz  received  false  tidings  that  Tatar  Kh^n  and  tbe

^ah  were  misting  and  cither  dead  or  prisonerri.  ” Alter  tiie  days  of  tnoinri-
ing  were  completed,  the  Khwiija,  believing  this  report  tu  i e correct  placed  a
son  of  Sultan  Muhammad  ^ah  upon  the  throne,  and  thus  through  advoisc
fate  eommitred  a Vdundcr.”  Flliott,  UI.

[ 324  ]

throne,  and  had  given  him  the  title  of  Ghiyasu-d-Din  Mahmud
Shah,  appointing  himself  Vakil,  after  considerable  argument,
and  much  correspondence,  by  reason  of  his  helplessness  and
dejection,  by  the  mediation  of  A^rafnl-Mulk  and  the  other
nobles  and  grandees,  came  with  bared  head,  casting  his  turban
on  Lis  neck,  to  the  neighbourhood  pf  Hausi,  and  had  an  interview
with  the  Sultan,  who  washed  out  the  writing  of  his  fault  with
the  water  of  forgiveness,  and  made  him  over  to  the  Kotwal  of
Hansi,  and  as  for  the  party  who  had  been  his  companions  in  this
faction  and  opposition,  he  dispersed  them  all  in  different  direc-
tions. At  Sarsuti  tidings  arrived  of  the  birth  of  Shahzada  hath
Khan,*  whose  son  eventually  became  Tughlaq  Shah,  and  the  news
of  the  death  ^ of  Taghi  '1  aghi  also  reached  him  there  from
Gnjrat;  and  on  the  second  of  Rajah  in  the  aforesaid  year,  he
graced  the  throne  of  Dihli  by  his  accession  and  made  a fresh
distribution  of  appointments.

244.  And  in  the  year  753  H.  (1352  A.D.)  he  went  to  the  Sirmur  hills
for  the  purpose  of  relaxation  and  sport,  and  returned  thence,  and
in  the  month  of  Rajab  of  this  year  Shahzada  Muhammad  Khan,
who  eventually  obtained  the  title  of  Nasim-d-Din  Muhammad
Shah,  was  born.

And  in  the  year  754  H.  (J353  A.D.)  he  returned  from  Kalanor
whither  he  had  gone  on  a hunting  expedition,  and  built  a lofty
building  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Sarsuti  and  [gave  it  to  ghaikb
Sadi’u-d-Din  Multaui,  may  God  sanctify  his  resting  place,  the
Shaikhu-l-Islam]  and  Malik  Qubul  * Kaib  Vazir  he  made  Khan-i-
Jahan,^  and  at  the  close  of  this  year  he  went  to  Lakhnauti  with
the  intention  of  putting  down  the  rebellion  of  Haji  Ilyas  who
had  assumed  the  title  of  .Shamsa-d-Din.  He  accordingly  took
refuge  in  the  fort  of  Ikdila,"  which  is  the  strongest  of  the  forts

1 Cf.  Elliott.  III.

» MS.  (A)  4—  Sirij  ‘Afif  tells  us  that  he  found-

ed a town  here  and  called  it  Fathabid  in  honour  of  this  event.  Elliott  III
283.

8 MS.  (A)  Juj.

* See  to:-:  b {..ise  254,.

4 In  MS.  (A)  I'JIS  sentence  precedes  the  one  in  sqnare  brackets
ITT  28f ‘V  '-hisfciciess.  sec  J.  A.  S.  B.,  1374.  p.  244.  Elliott,

are.  it  v ,,  at!erTv.;rv!3  called  Azadpnr  bj  Firoz  Shah.  (Elliott,  III  297)

[ 325  ]

of  Bangala,  and  after  a desultory*^  defence  fought  for  a very  short
time,  and  threw  his  elephants  arid  his  material  of  war,  with  his
servants  and  retainers  to  the  winds,  and  all  of  them  fell  into  the
hands  of  the  Saltan  who,  having  made  peace  with  him  because  of
the  rainy  season,  * retraced  his  steps.

And  in  the  year  755  H.  (ISd-t  A.D.)  having  crossed  by  the  ford
of  Manikpnr  he  arrived  at  Dihli  and  built  Firuzabad  ^ on  the
banks  of  the  Jamna.  And  in  the  year  756  H.  (1355  A.D.J  he

t This  apfoara  to  be  the  meaning.  MS.  (A)  omits  and  has

tit  also  Thomas,  Pathan  Kings,  p.  294  and  ^lote.

s

bushkdl  in  M.  Pavet  de  Oourtcilles  Tarki  Dictionary  this  word  is
given  pvshakdl  or  jKAj  pushidl  Saison  dea  plnies.  He  gives  three

instances  of  its  use  from  the  Bdberndmah.

t Firozabad.  This  must  not  bo  oonfonnded  with  the  Firozabiid  which  arose
from  the  change  of  name  of  Pandiiab,  see  Elliott,  III.  295,  and  Panduah,  Imp.
Gaz.  Vol.  XI.

This  Flrozabad  (see  J.  A.  S.  B.,  1870),  was  situated  five  (ten  miles)  from
Dihli,  and  included  according  to  Shams-i-Sinti  ‘At.f,  eighteen  places,  the
gasba  (townships)  of  ludarpat  and  others  a list  of  which  will  be  found  in
Elliott,  III.  303.  At  page  298  will  also  be  found  an  account  of  the  founding  of
the  city  of  Hissar  (Hijar  Firozah)  and  of  the  construction  of  two  canals
leading  to  it  one  from  the  Sutlej  and  the  other  from  the  Jumna.  The  modern
representation  of  the  latter  canal,  which  was  called  Rajiw  n,  is  found  in  tlie
Western  Jumna  Canal  passing  through  Karniil  (see  Hunter's  Imp.  Gaz.,  Tol.
VII.  258  for  an  account  of  this  canal).  The  canal  leading  from  the  Sutlej
was  called  Alagh  Khani  (Ulugh  Khani).  In  modern  maps  tliere  is  a trace  of
this  canal,  but  it  is  called  the  Jnreah  canal,  which  is  probably  the  word  Rajlw'a
converted  and  applied  in  error  to  this  canal.  Remu  ll's  map  (Tieff.  Vol.  Ill)
siiews  the  supposed  canal  of  Firoz  Shah,  and  it  is  evident  from  our  author’s
statement  that  this  canal  was  commenced  not  from  the  Hissar  end  but  from
DTpalpur,  which  lay  at  the  junction  of  the  Bias  and  Sutlej  on  the  banks  of
the  Bias,  and  passed  sonth-east  near  Fathabad,  if  not  actually  through  it,  to
join  the  river  Jahjar,  which  in  Reunell’s  m.ap  is  called  the  Jidjer.  its  nearest
point  measured  from  DIpalpur  being  exactly  IOC  miles  (forty-eight  kroh)  on
this  map,  whereas  the  town  of  Jhajhar  Lat.  28”  16'  N.  Long.  77'  12  15"  E.  is
200  miles  (Hunter’s  Imp.  Gaz.,  Vol.  VII.  195).  (The  river  Jahjar  flowed  south-
east through  Fateljpiir  joining  the  Jumna  near  Etawah).  I or  this  re.sson  it
appears  likely  that  the  canal  was  led  not  to  Jhajhar  but  into  the  river  Jujhar
as  above  stated.  (See  Bo;  Firishta,  Text  J.  263J.

Shams-i-Siraj  ‘Afif  makes  no  mention  of  DIpalpur  in  connection  with  any
canal,  and  there  is  one  difficulty  in  his  account  as  he  saj  s that  both  the
canals,  the  Rajiwah  and  Ulugh  Khani.  w'ere  conducted  through  the  vicinity  of

[ 326  ]

■went  to  Dipalpiir  and  bringing  a qanal  from  the  river  Satlaj  ‘ led
it  as  far  as  the  Jahjar  which  is  forty-eight  kroh  from  there.

In  the  year  757  A.H.  (13.36  A.D.)  he  conducted  a stream  from
the  river  Jamiia  from  the  vicinity  of  Mandni  (Alandili)  and
245.  Sarur,®  and  having  led  seven  other  canals  into  it  took  it  to  Hansi

Karnal.  If  this  was  so  the  “ supposed  canal  of  Firoz  Shah  ” in  Rennell’s
map  cannot  be  the  Ulngh  Khani.  His  words  are  as  follows  ; —

t!jjS  ilLiut  jl

- Oirii’  jtAa. ji

Dahcina-i  In  har  do  jit  azittisal  i karnal  hlriln  dwarda  miyiin  i hashtad  kroh
kroh  dar  Aahr  i Hisar  Firdza  lurda.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed  that  Firoz  Shih  would  take  his  canal  from  Dlpalpur
to  Karnal  when  his  objective  was  Hissar ; we  have  also  Badaoni'a  clear  state-
ment that  a canal  was  brought  from  the  Sutlej  and  led- as  far  as  the  Jahjar,
this  canal  would  coincide  with  the  line  of  that  shewn  in  Eenuell’s  map,  but
not  with  that  of  Shams-i-Siraj,

The  canal  inentionod  in  the  next  paragraph  is  evidently  the  one  to  which
ghams-i-Siraj  ‘.-^fif  refers  (Elliott,  III.  209-300),  although  it  is  not  very
evident  what  the  exact  course  of  this  canal  was;  I can  find  no  trace  of  any
places  named  llandiil  (ilandili)  or  Suriir  anywhere  in  the  maps,  while  Eas
mentioned  hero  by  Badaoni  must  be  what  ‘Aflf  calls  Great  Laras,  as  he  states
that  it  was  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Great  Laras  that  Sultan  Firoz  built  the
city  of  Hisar  Firoza.  (Elliott,  p.  299).  Eennell  (memoir  p.  72,  quoting  from
Dow  I.  327  has  Beraisen,  which  is  a mistaken  reading  of  hi  Easain  in  the
original,  that  is  to  say  the  two  Rases,  Great  Laras  and  Little  Laras.

It  would  seem  that  there  were  in  all  three  canals  to  Hisar  Firoza,  one  from
Dipalpiir  to  Hissiir  and  on  to  the  Jajliar,  this  was  brought  from  the  Sutlej.
A second  from  the  Jumna  as  far  as  Karnal  (Rajiwab).  A third  from  the  Sutlej
as  far  as  Karnal  (Ulugh  Khaui).  At  Karnal  according  to ‘.\tif’s  axiconnhthese
two  last  joined.  The  oniy  way  this  can  have  been  possible  is  by  the  courses
of  the  Sutlej  and  Jumna  being  very  different  from  their  present  courses  or
even  from  the  beds  of  che.oe  rivers  in  1782  when  Eennell  made  his  map.

Bv  bringing  the  Sutlej  further  south-east  near  to  the  course  of  the  Ghaggar
sav  near  to  Thanesar,  we  should  have  a point  from  which  we  can  understand
that  it  would  have  been  advantageous  to  bring  water  from  both  the  Sutlej
and  Jumna  vil  Kama’.

Sre  Journal,  Asiatic  Society  Bengal,  1833,  p.  lOo  and  1840,  p.  688.

See  also  Thomas’  Pat’.an  Kings,  294  and  notes.

I MS.  (A)

s I cannot  identify  these  places.  FirTshta  (Bo.  Text  I.  262j  says  Maudawi
and  Sirmur,  MS.  (A)  reads  Mandili  and  Sardar.

[ 327  ]

and  thence  to  Ras  * where  he  bnilt  a fortress  which  he
called  Hisar  Firoza,  and  dug®  a spacious  reservoir  beneath  th#
palace  which  was  in  that  fortress,  and  filled  it  with  water  from  the
canal ; he  also  led  another  stream  from  the  canal  of  the  Ghaghar
underneath;  the  fortress  of  Sarsnti,  and  from  thence  to  Birni
Khera.®  and  in  the  space  between  them  he  built  a fortress  * and
named  it  Firozabad,®  At  the  end  of  this  year  on  the  occasion  of
the  ‘Idn-z-Zuha  a robe  of  honour  arrived  for  the  Sultan  from  the
Khalifah  Al-Hakim  hi  amrillahi  Abul  Fath  Abu  Bakr  ibn  Abil
Rabi‘  Suleiman  ® from  the  Darul  Khilafat  of  Egypt,  with  a patent
conferring  upon  him  the  whole  of  Hindustan  : and  ^ in  this  same
year  messengers  from  Haji  Ilyas  the  ruler  of  Lakhnanti,  having
arrived  bearing  splendid  presents  and  offerings,  were  distinguished
with  countless  favours  and  kindnesses,  after  which  they  returned,
and  it  was  ordered  that-  in  return  for  these  presents  thandsome)
elephants  ® should  be  sent.  The  whole  of  Hindustan  was  now  in
possession  of  Sultan  Firoz  with  the  exception  of  Lakhnanti  which
was  held  by  Haji  Ilyas,®  who  had  come  to  terms  with  the
Sultan,''’  and  with  the  exception  also  of  the  Deccan,  which,  after
the  death  of  Sultan  Muhammad,  had  come  into  the  possession  of
5asau  Kangu.

1 See  page  326,  continuation  of  page  325,  note  3.  Briggs’  Firishta  calls  it
ilaiseen.  I.  should  be  Rasain,  th.e  two  Rases,  i.e.  Great  Lara.s  and  Little  Laras,
Elliott,  III  298.

* MS.  (A)  ‘^!f.

* MS.  (A)  the  text  reads  Sarsnti  is  shewn  in  Renoell't

map  (Tieff.  Ill)  as  lying  southeast  of  Kamal.  Bimi  Khera,  I cannot  trace.
Firishta  Bo.  Text,  I.  p.  263  reads  1'“  nah)--i-Sarkhatra,  Com-

pare Rennell’s  memoir,  pp.  72-73.

* MS.  (A)  lij.

B (.15  jbf

At  the  village  of  Gawin  on  banks  of  the  JuuniS,

Elliott,  III.  302.

* According  to  the  list  of  Egyptian  Khalifahs  given  in  Thomas’  Pathan
Kings  of  Dihli  the  Khalifah  in  757  A.H.  was  Abul  Path  Al-Mu‘ta?idbillahi
Abn  Bakr  ibn  nl-Mnstakfi  billahi.  He  was  the  sixth  of  the  Egyptian
Khalifahs.  Al-Mnstafcfi  billahi  Abul  Rabi‘  Suleiman  ibn  ui-Hakim  biamr-
illahi  was  the  third  of  this  line.

i MS.  (A)  adds  j.  8 MS.  (A)  omits

* MS.  (A)  reads  o-ilO
10  MS.  (A)  ^

[ 328  ]

And  in  the  year  759  H.  (1358  A.D. ) having  gone  to  Samana,  he
appointed  Malik  Qabul  Snrhardadar^  to  ptoceed  against*  the
Mu^uls  who  had  arrived  on  the  frontier  of  Dipalpur.  The
Murals  upon  hearing  particulars  of  the  Saltan’s  army  turned  back

246.  and  went  to  their  own  country,  and  the  Sultan  returned  to  Dihli  ; *
and  in  this  year  the  Sultan  despatched  some  Arabian  horses  and
foreign  fruits  * with  all  kinds  of  choice  presents  by  the  hands  of  the
messengers  of  Sultan  Shamsn-d-Diii  of  Lakhuauti  who  had  arrived
at  his  Court  bearing  many  presents, ^ and  at  Bihar  they  heard
that  the  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Din  had  died,  and  Sultan  Sikandar  hig
son  had  ascended  the  throne  in  the  room  of  his  father,  so  they
sent  the  horses  in  accordance  with  orders  to  the  Court . at  Bihar
and  conducted  the  messengers  back  to  Karra.

® And  in  the  year  760  H..,  the  Sultan  having  formed  the  design
of  attacking  Lakhnauti  with  a vast  army,  left  ^Oian-i-Jahan  in
Dehli,  and  after  deputing  Tatar  Khan,  that  is  to  say  Malik  Tatar
to  proceed  from  Ghaznin  to  Multan,  set  out  and  passed  the  rainy
season  in  Zafarabad,  and  at  this  place,  A'zam  Malik  Sbaikhzada-i-
Bustaml  who  had  become  intimate  dnring  his  absence  with  Malik
Aljmad  Aiyaz,  and  by  the  orders  of  the  Sultan  had  been  banished,
brought  from  the  Daml  Kbilafat  of  Egypt  a robe  of  honour  for  the
Sultan  and  received  the  title  of  A'zam  !]^an.  Saiyyid  Rusuldar
was  sent  with  the  messengers  of  Lakhnauti  * to  the  Sultan  Sikan-
dar at  Lakhnauti,  and  Sikandar  despatched  five  fine  elephants  with
other  costly  presents  and  offerings  to  the  Court.  The  Sultan  when
the  rains  were  over  leaving  Zafarabad  shaped  his  course  for
Lakhnauti,  and  while  on  the  way  set  apart  the  requirements  of
kingship,  and  elephants  and  a store  of  rubies  which  at  that  time
were  held  in  great  estimation,  for  the  Shabzada  Fath  !^an,  they

247.  also  struck  coins  in  his  name.  When  they  arrived  at  the  confines

1 MS.  (A)  Siraj  ‘Afif  oaUs  him  Toraband.  Elliott,  III.  311.

» MS.  (A)  ® MS.  (AJ  ‘*^1/*

♦ MS.  (A)

» MS.  (A)  ilAA

* The  events  preceding  this  are  related  by  ‘Afif,  shewing  how  friendship
was  established  between  Snltin  Piroz  and  Snlfan  Sikandar.  Badaoni’s  account
gives  no  idea  of  the  circumstances.  (See  Elliott,  III.  305-312.)

1 MS.  (A)  omirs

8 A footnote  to  the  text  states  that  in  two  MSS.  the  words  iji  Alili
follow  the  word

[ 329  ]

of  Panduah,  Snltan  Sikandar  shut  himself  up  in  the  castle  of
Ikdala  ^ whither  his  father  had  been  in  the  habit  of  going  for  refuge,
and  after  the  Snltan  had  laid  siege  to  that  fortress  Snltan
Sikandar  asked  for  quarter,  and  sent  thirty-seven  elephants  with
other  costly  presents  as  his  humble  service.

And  in  the  year  761  H.  ( 1359-60  A.D.)  the  Sultan  proceeded  by
continuous  marches  by  way  of  Paudiiah  * to  Jaunpur  where  he
spent  the  rains,  and  at  the  close  of  this  year  he  murohed  with  a
lightly  equipped  force  ^ by  way  of  Behar  towards  Jajnagar,  and
sent  his  elephants  and  baggage  to  Karra,  and  by  uiiiuterrupted
marches  arrived  at  Satgarh*  the  Rai  of  which  place  ^ withdrew,  and
thence  he  came  to  Baranasi  ® which  was  the  abode  of  the  Chief  Rai,
and  crossed  the  river  Mahfendhri,'^  and  the  Rai  of  Baranasi  having
taken  to  flight  made  with  all  haste’ for  Tilang.  The  Sultan  pur-
sued him  part  of  the  way  turned  back  to  hunt,®  and  arrived  at
the  country  of  Rai  Parihan  Dev®  who  sent  a present  of  thirty-
two  elephants  and  other  costly  offerings.  From  thence  the
Sultan  coming  to  Padmawati  and  Param  Talao  which  was  the
haunt  of  elephants  of  enormous  size,  engaged  in  hunting  them  and
killed  two  [and  they  took  the  other  tliree  alive]'*  and  Malik
Ziau-l-Mulk  -wrote  a quatrain  unon  this  :

1 See  ‘Afif’g  account  of  this.  (Elliott,  III.  808).  Siraj  ‘Afif  calls  this  placp
the  islands  of  Ikdala.”  see  note  6,  page  324.

* ‘Afif  says  by  -way  of  “ Qananj  and  Oudh  ” — Jaunpur  -was  we  are  there
told  so  called  by  Sultan  Firoz  Shah  after  Sultan  Muhammad  Shah,  son  of
Tughlaq  Shdh.  whose  name  was  Jannan,  so  he  called  tlie  place  Jaunan-pur.
He  stayed  there  six  months,  during  which  period  the  city  was  built  on  the
banks  of  the  Kowali  (Giimti).

3 ‘Afif  says  the  Shah  left  his  heavy  bag-

gage in  Karra.  Text  p.  103.  (Calc.  Edn.  Bibl.  Ind.j  see  Elliott,  III.  312,  note  2.

* MS.  (A)

6 Named  Adesar  (‘Afif)  or  Rae  Sidhan  (Firishta).

3 ‘Afif  says  BauarasI  the  ancient  residence  of  the  independent  Rais  of
Ja]  nagar.

1 MS.  (A)

8 ‘Afif  tells  "us  (Text,  pp.  166-67)  that  the  Snltan  turned  aside  from  the
pursuit  to  hunt  some  wild  elephants  {see  Elli9tt  III.  312-313).

9 The  R-dja  of  Beerbhoom  (Briggs’  Firishta),

10  MS.  (A)  reads  three.

U MS.  (A).

13  MS.  (A)

42

1*  Not  in  MS.  (A).

[ 330  ]

Verse.

The  Shah  who  of  right  * assumed  a lasting  kingdom

Seized  the  ends  of  the  earth  like  the  glorious  Sun

To  hunt  elephants  he  came  to  Jajnagar,

Two  he  killed  and  thirty -three  ® he  took  alire.

And  thence  by  way  of  Kaffa  he  returned  with  all  possible
haste.®

248.  And  in  the  year  762  H.  (1360-51  A. D.)  victorious  and  trium-
phant he  came  to  Dehli,  and  after  a short  time  he  gave  orders  for
an  expedition  to  the  river  Salima, which  is  a river  issuing  from
a large  mound  of  sand  and  falling  into  the  river  Sutlej  which
they  also  call  Satlaz.^  The  Salima  is  also  called  the  Sarsuti,®
and  this  river  consists  of  two  large  streams  which  are  always
flowing,  and  situated  between  these  two  streams  there  is  a high
mound  or  dyke,  and  if  this  were  dug  through  the  water  of  the
Sarauti  would  flow  into  this  stream,  and  it  flows  through  Sihriud
and  Mansurpur  and  Samana.t

The  Sultan  gave  ordeis  for  fifty  thousand  men  with  spades  to
be  collected  and  to  occupy  themselves  in  digging  through  that
barrier.  Out  of  it  they  obtained  many  bones  of  elephants  and
human  beings.  Every  bone  belonging  to  the  arm  of  a man
was  three  yaa  ® (iu  length).  They  were  partly  converted,  into

1 MS.  (A)

* There  is  a footnote  in  the  text  which  says  that  ” in  one  MS.  this  same
number  occurs  and  it  is  probably  correct.”  but  on  the  other  hand  there  is
*AfIf  s statement  that  there  were  only  eight  elephants,  seven  males  and  one
female  to  begin  with  (Text,  p.  167  ) However  ‘Aflf,  Text  172,  says  he  took
■with  him  73  elephants  alive.

s MS.  (A)  cW  4 j.li  ^ 6 oJdU..

® Compare  with  this  Firishta’s  accoantj  with  which  -Badaoni’s  is  almost
identical.  Firi^ta,  Bomb.  Edn.  p.  2d5.

" Firishta  says  C^.-ee  Hunter,  Imp.  Gaz.  XII.  261,  for  the  Sarsuti  or
Saraswati.  See  also  J.  It,  A.  S,  Jan.  1893,  pp.  49-76.  The  Salima  seems  to
answer  in  position  to  the  -M.arkanda  which  runs  near  ShShabiid  S.  of  Ambala.

8 Gaz.  See  Ain  .lihuri  (Jarrett),  11.  58  ef  scf/.  Throughout  Hindustan  thero
were  three  kinds  of  gaz  long,  middling  and  short.  Each  was  divided  into
2i  equal  parts  each  of  which  was  called  tassij.

Presumably  it  is  the  shoit  gaz  which  is  here  meant  bat  even  this  would  ba
about  26  inches,  and  taking  the  author’s  meaning  to  be  the  bones  of  the  fore-
arm, an  ulna  measuring  26  inches  is  hardly  likely  to  have  been  human.

[ 33J  J

^toiie  aiul  bad  paitly  remained  bone,  just  as  they  were.  Tliat
Gtream  however  could  not  be  diverted,'  and*  in  the  meantime
lie  made  Sihrind  and  for  ten  A-ro7is  beyond  into  one  district,  which
he  put  under  the  control  of  Ziaul  Mulk  Shamsu-d-Din  Abu  Eijfi,
and  ordered  them  to  build  a fort  there  and  called  it  Firuzpur  which
is  in  fact  Sihrind,^  and  the  Sultan  fi’om  thence,  went  to  ISiagarkot
whose  Eaja  after  a siege  and  some  fighting  came  in  and  submitted
and  met  with  royal  treatment.*  The  Sultan  gave  to  Nagarkot
the  name  of  iluhammadahad  after  the  deceased  Sultan  Muham-
mad ; and  when  they  brought  the  Sultan  ice  on  that  mountain  fort
he  said,^  ‘‘  when  Saltan  Muhammad,  who  is  now  dead  and  whom
I regarded  as  a god,  arrived  in  this  place  they  brought  him  a
^arb'it  mixed  with  ice,  but  he  had®  no  inclination  for  that  bever-
age becad.5e  I was  not  with  him.”  Accordiagly  they  made  an  iced
^Lvbat  with  several  elephant  and  camel  loads  of  cane-sugar
which  wa.?  carried  with  Sultan  Firuz,  and  he  ordered  them  to  read
the  whole  of  the  Qur’an  for  the  soul  of  Sultau  Mahammad  and
di.stributc  the  among  the  entire  army.  Under  these  cir-  249.

cumstances  they  informed  tlie  Sultan  ^ that  from  the  time  when
Sultan  Sikaudav  Zul  Qarnain  arrived  at  this  place  the  people  of
that  city  have  preserved  au  image  of  Nosbaba  * and  keep  it  in  a
room,  where  they  worship  it.  There  are  one  tbousand  three
hundred  books  of  the  Brahtnans  of  olden  time  in  that  idol  temple
which  is  commonly  known  as  Jawalamukhi ; * a flame  of  fire  rises
from  it  towards  heaven  and  is  not  to  be  extinguished,  No,  not
by  thousands  of  ma^ks  of  water.  The  Sultan  having  sum-

I I take  this  to  be  the  meaning.  The  Persian  is  tgf.

* MS.  (A)  inserts  j.

8 See  Imp.  Gaz.  (Sirhind)  SII.  553,  and  Kaugra  TIL  41-1.

* See  Elliot  III.  318-319.

6 MS.  (A)  *5".

8 MS.  (AJ  ujiy.

1 MS.  (A)  adds  the  word

8 Firi^ta’s  words  are  Aj

« FirT^ta  say  Jaiamukhi  4/^^

iO  tnubJik.  The  goatskin  bag  for  carrying  water.

Briggs  in  his  translation  adds  the  words  the  wife  of  Alexander  the
Great,’'  but  tipe>n  what  authority  does  uofc  appear.  The  wives  of  Alexander
were  Uoxana  the  daughter  of  Oxyartes,  whom  he  married  in  327  B.C.  and

[ 332  ]

moned  the  Brahmans,  ordered  some  of  his  translators  to  trans-
late some  of  those  books  ' into  Persian.  Among  those  tiauslators
‘Izza-d-Din  Hjalid  Khani,*  who  was  one  of  the  poets  and  mua^is
of  the  time  of  Firuz  wrote  in  verse  a translation  of  a book  on  the
risings  and  settings  of  the  seven  planets,  and  their  good  and  evil
import,  and  of  auguries  and  omens.  Its  name  is  called  up  to  the
present  day  ^ Dalail-i-Firuzl,  and  the  author  of  this  Muntakhab  read
it  in  Lahor  in  the  year  1000  H.  (1591-92  A.B.  ) from  beginning  to
end.  It  is  moderately  good,  neither  free  from  beauties  nor  defects  ;
and  I saw  some  other  books  before  that  also  which  were  translated
in  the  name  of  Sultan  Firnz,  some  of  them  on  the  Science  of
“Pingal”^  that  is  to  say  on  Music,  and  the  kinds  of  Akhara’^
which  they  call  Patur  bazl,  and  some  on  other  subjects.  I found
most  of  them  to  be  profitless,  and  their  paucity  of  interest  is  for
the  most  part  due  to  the  triviality  of  tl^eir  subject  matter',  and
the  difficulty  of  explaining  it,  as  is  evident.

The  Sultan  leaving  there  proceeded  to  Thatha,  and  the  Jara,^  by
which  title  the  ruler  of  Thatha  is  called,  entrenched  himself  so  that
the  Sultan  was  induced  by  the  vehemence  of  the  rainy  season,  and
the  amount  of  water  which  was  out,  as  well  as  by  the  dearness  of

(2ndly)  at  Susa,  824  B.C.,  Baraine  or  Stateira  the  eldest  daughter  of  Darius
III,  while  according  to  some  accounts  (Arrian)  he  also  tooh  as  his  wife
Parysatis  the  daughter  of  Ochua,  at  Susa,  B.C.  325.  Arrian  is  the  only
author  who  mentions  this  last  wife.  (Smith,  D.  G.  R.  Biography).

It  ijlAy  represents  in  reality  either  of  the  wives  of  Alexander  it  mu.st  he
the  first  named  whose  name  might  have  been  Mrittcn  Rv^ana  and  by

copyist  errors  perverted  to  AiUiyi  Krishdba.

Firishta’s  original  however  gives  no  countenance'  to  the  statement  in
Briggs’  translation.

> ilS.  (A)  omits  but  writes  i>*J.

> MS.  (A)  reads  Beale  (O.  B.  D.)  calls  him  ‘Ixzu-d-Dm  Khalid

Khani  and  mentions  him  as  the  author  of  the  Dalail-i-Firoz  ,^ahi,  probably
on  the  authority  of  this  passage.

» MS.  A UAiU.

’•  So  called  from  Pingnlaor  Ping.alan5ga.  the  inventor  of  the  art  of  prosody.
See  Aibiruni.  India  I.  137,  oh-’o  Colelirooke  Essavs.  II.  57.

‘ The  Akh5i5  ig  an  entertainment  hold  at  nigl.t  and  consists  of  sin-in<t
and  dancing  by  females.  See  Ain-i-Akbari  (Jarrntt),  III.  258.  The  tvord
Patur  signifies  in  Hindi  a prostitute  or  dancing-girl.

» ‘Afif  tells  ns  that  J5m  the  brother  of  RxT  IJnar,  and  Banhbana  (*^b)
his  brother’s  son  were  in  possession  of  Thatha.

r 333  ]

grain,  to  abandon  the  siege  and  make  with  all  haste  for  Gujrat,t
which  country  he  placed  under  the  control  of  Zafar  Khan  ; then
having  deposed  Xizamu-1  Mulk  ® and  appointed  him  Naib  Wazir
of  Dihll,  he  returned  to  Thatha  ; and  ou  this  occasion  the  Jam
asking  for  quarcer^  had  an  interview  with  the  Snltan,  and  with
all  the  Zamindars  accompanied  him  to  Dilill,  and  from  there  took  260
his  leave  after  being  kindly  treated  and  confirmed  on  his  former
footing  as  ruler  of  Thatha.*  In  the  year  772  H.  (1370  A.D.)
KhSn-i-jahan  the  T'arir,  died,  and  his  son  Jana  .^3h  obtained
that  title;  6 and  the  book  Chandaban®  which  is  a Masnavi  in
the  Hindi  language  relatiug  the  loves  of  Lurak  aud  Chanda,  a
lover  and  his  mistress,  a very  graphic  work,  was  put  into  veise  in
his  honour  by  Maulana  Da'nd.  There  is  no  need  for  me  to  praise
it  because  of  its  great  fame  in  that  country,  and  ifakhdum
Shaikh'^  Taqiu-d-Uia  Waiz  Rabbaui  used  to  read  some  occasional
poems  of  his  from  the  pulpit,*  and  the  people  used  to  be  strangely
influenced  by  hearing  them,  and®  when  certain  learned  men  of  that
time  asked  the  ShailA  saying,  what  is  the  reason  for  this  Hindi
Masnavi  being  selected  ? he  answered,  the<  whole  of  it  is  divine
truth  and  pleasing  in  subject,  worthy  of  the  ecstatic  contempla*
tion  of  devout  lovers,  and  conformable  to  the  interpretation  of
some  of  the  Ayats  of  the  Qur'an,  and  the  sweet  singers  of  Hin-
dustan, Moreover  by  its  public  recitation  human  hearts  are
taken  captive.

In  the  year  773  H.  (1371-72  A.D.)  Zafar  Khan  died  and  the
control  of  that  province  was  confirmed  to  his  son.^*

I Encountering  great  difficulties  on  the  march,  so  much  so  tnat  for  some
mouths  the  impression  in  Dihli  was  that  the  army  had  been  lost  (‘Afif.  Text,

p.211).

* Amir  Husain  son  of  the  late  Amir  MIran  (Elliott  HI-  326).

3 Famine  appeared  and  bis  troops  were  starved  out  (Elliott  III.  334).

4 ‘Afif  says  the  son  of  the  Jam  aud  Tamachi  brother  of  Binhbana  were
appointed  to  rule  over  Thatha.

t See  Eliiott  III.  371.

« 11 S.  (A)  reads  Hadiiyan  without  dots,  and  also  reads  (Aiai-

llijiuu.  I liave  failed  to  obtain  any  information  reg-irUing  this  work

i MS.  (A)  omits  ^ * 513.  (A  ' y.-

9 MS.  .'A)  reads  J ^

MS  I A)  Aj|

II  According  to  Ei.  i-ihta.  Z .far  Khun  died  in  775  II.  and  was  succeeded  by
his  elder  son  Darya  KLan.

L 334  ]

Then  in  the  year  776  H.  (1374-75  A D.)  an  event  distressing  to
the  people  (death)  happened  to  Fath  Khan;  and  in  this  year
Shanisu-d-Din  Dama^ani  having  obtained  the  yeliow  girdle  and
the  Gliandol  of  silver,  that  is  to  say,  the  palanquin  of  honour,  was
appointed  governor  of  Gujrat  in  place  of  Zafar  Khan ; and  since
he  had  boasted  when  accepting  the  post  on  his  departure,  that  he
would  send  to  the  Court  every  year  a hundred  splendid  elephants,
two  hundred  Arab  horses,  and  four  hundred  slaves,  Muqaddam-
zadas  ^ and  Abyssinians,  together  with  valuables  and  money,  when
251.  he  found  that  he  could  not  perform  his  promises  he  was  com-
pelled to  rebel.

And  in  the  year  778  H.  (1376-77  A.D.)  the  Amirs  of  hundreds*
of  Gujrat  put  him  to  death  and  sent  his  head  to  the  Court;  thus
that  rebellion  was  quelled,  and  thereafter  Gujrat  was  put  under
the  conti-ol  of  Farhatu-l-Mulk,  otherwise  known  as  Malik
Mufai-rih  Sultani.®

And  in  tiie  year  779  H.  (1377-78  A.D. ) he  marched  towards
Itawa  and  Akchak  * and  having  sent  the  Kais  of  these  districts  with
their  families  to  Dihli,  built  many  fortre.sses  on  these  frontiers ; then
having  left  Fii'ozpur  and  Batlahi,  ^ in  charge  of  the  son  of  Malik
Taju-d-Din,  and  having  given  Akchak  to  Malik  Afghan  returned
to  Dihli.  In  this  ye.nr  alsolMalik  Niz:imu-d-Din  the  ruler  of  Ouilh,
who  was  in  attendance  on  the  Sultan,  died,  and  the  governorship
of  that  province  devolved  upon  !Malik  Saifu-d-DlTi  his  eldest  son.

T.n  the  year  781  H.  (1379  A.D  ) having  gono“  to  Saniana  and
passing  through  Shahabad  and  Ambala,  he  came  to  the  country
at  the  foot  of  Sintur  hills,'^  and  receiving  many  presents  from

1 'iiuqaddaMzuda  has  the  same  meaning  as  itj  Khnnazad.

born  in  the  house.

* Briggs’  “ Ameer  Jadeeda”  is  in  the  original  text  Amlrdn-i-

Suda  as  in  Badaoni.

3 tVe  see  from  Flri^ta  that  it  was  now  he  acquired  the  tide  Farhatu-l-
Mulk  {Bo.  text,  F-  -*>"h

4 Firishta  gives  the  re.ison  of  this  expedition,  wl\ich  w.as  a rebellion  of  the
zemindars  of  Itawa.  Iii.stead  of  <-^^1  Akrhuk,  Firishta  reads

Uo  says  J Ituiuij  AJihol,  auil  TUui.

^ MS.  (Aj

^ Firishta  savs  Ti>  thei'aut  oi  i\iv  iuiid  of  Saharan-

pur.

[ 335  ]

the  Rais  and  Governors  and  Commissioners,  arrived  at  the  capital
and  summoning’ Maliku-sli-Sharq  Marwan-i-Daulat,  ■who  held  the
title  of  Xnsrat  JQian,'  from  the  district  of  Karra  and  Mahoba,
appointed  him  to  the  Multan  district,*  with  a view -to  close  the
door  to  Mng’hnl  intrigues  : lie  then  confirmed  Karra  and  ^ Mahoba
together  with  all  their  dependencies  upon  the  son  of  Maliku-sh-
Sharq  * Suleiman  the  son  of  Malik  Marwau,  whose  adopted  son  was
Saiyyid  Khizr  Khan,  the  grandfather  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Badaoni
w'ho  eventually  succeeded  to  the  kingdom  of  Dihli.

And  in  the  year  782  H.  ( 1380  A.D  ) he  raised  the  standard  for  an
expedition  with  the  intention  of  taking  vengeance  on  the  Khukhar
Eai  Chief  of  Kaithar®,  who  had  invited  and  pnt  to  death  by
treachery  both  Saiyyid  Muhammad  and  Saiyyid  ‘Alau-d-Din  his
brother,®  who  were  Governors  of  Badaon.  The  rebellious  Khukhar  t
fled  towards  the  hills  of  Kumaon,  accordingly  after  laying  waste  and
plundering  the  whole  of  his  country,  he  left  Malik  Khitab  the
Afghan  in  the  country  of  Sambhal  * to  deal  with  the  rebellion  of
Khukhar,  and  tunied  back  after  having  made  over  Badaon  to  Malik
Qabiil ; Qabulpura  which  .at  present  is  a quarter  of  Badaon  lying
outside  the  fort  is  called  after  his  name  ; also  he  used  to  come  every
year  for  the  purpose  of  sport  and  lay  utterly  ■tN’aste  the  Kaithal  *
country .

And  in  the  year  787  H.  he  built  a fortified  town  in  a place
called  Babuli  which  is  seven  krohs  from  Badaon  and  is  better

1 JIS.  (A).  3

s MS.  (A).

* i’lrishra  calls  him  (i)l*xLo  t,AL«  Malik  Shamsn-d-DIn

Suleiman.

& ilS.  (A)  reads,  Firi^ta  reads

The  chief  of  Kaichar  called  Kharku.

^ Fiiil^ta  says  Saiyyid  Mahammad  poremor  of  Budaou  with  his  brothers
Saiyyid  ‘Aliiu-d-Din  and  Saiyyid  Maluuud.

Kharku  (Firi.^ta).

8 I'irishta  iJibw  MS.  (A)  Firishta  calls  him  tjJU

Malik  Da’ud  Afghan.

9 MS.  (A)  Kaithar.  Firishta  states  be  had  given  Malik  Da’ud

orders  to  ravage  the  country  year  by  year

Puasihiy  from  the  abundance  there  of  the  Acacia  Arahica  knotvn  as

Bubul  or  Kikar.  However  Firigtita  calls  it  Basiili.

252.

[ 336  ]

kno^  as  Mawas.^  and  gave  it  the  name  * of  Firnzpar,  and  since
in  later  times  no  other  building  was  ever  erected  by  the  Sultan
it  became  commonly  known  as  Akhirliipiir.®  Now-a-days  although
not  a trace  of  that  building  remains,  still  from  the  old  bricks  and
the  foundations  and  general  lie  of  that  high  ground  it  is  evident
that  once  upon  a time  there  wap  a building  on  that  site.*  The  age
of  the  Sultan  was  now  nearly  ninety  years,  and  how  truly  had
these  verses  come  to  pass —

When  thou  reaehest  eighty  or  ninety  years
Great  is  the  vexation  thou  reapest  from  the  world ;

And  going  further  when  thou  reaehest  the  hundredth  stage
Death  will  then  be  to  thee  a form  of  life.

.^an-i-Jahan  ® the  Yazir  who  had  obtained  great  influence  in  the
affairs  of  the  state,  and  was  in  a position  to  overthrow  those  who
opposed  his  schemes  of  self-aggrandisement,  at  a hint  from  the
Sultan  destroyed  one  party  and  put  to  death  another,  and  makino-
253.  accusations  of  conspiracy  against  Shahzada  Muhammad  Khan  and
some  of  the  other  Maliks  who  were  hand  in  glove  with  him,  by  this
means  turned  the  Sultan  against  him.  and  gave  him  a fixed  idea  ^ that
this  confederacy  had  for  their  object  to  raise  the  Shahzada  to  the
throne  ; accordingly  the  Sultan  set  his  heart  upon  the  defeat  and
fextinction  of  those  Amirs,  't’he  Shahzada,  however,  after  that  he  had
been  in  terror  for  some  days  and  had  omitted  to  pay  his  respects
to  the  Sultan,  one  day  in  private'^  came  into  the  Sultan’s  presence
and  loyally  told  him  the  whole  truth,  and  informed  him  also  of
the  treacherous  designs  of  Khan-i-Jahan,  so  that  the  tables  were
turned.*  Obtaining  carte  blanche  from  the  Sultan  to  defeat
and  exterminate  Khan-i-Jahan,  and  having  brought  over  to  his

1 Or  ilawasai  MS.  (A)

8 MS.  (A)

5 i.  e.  Last  citj.

* SIS.  (A)  omits

6 Brigga  says  Zaffur  Khan  Farsy  — bnt  this  is  not  in  the  text.  This  was
Jilnan  ^ah  who  has  been  mentioned,  see  next  page,  note  7.

8 MS.  (A)

T Firishta  telis  us  that  he  came  in  concealed  in  a woman’s  litter  under
the  pretence  that  his  own  wife  was  visiting  the  Sultan’s  haieni.

3 Ms.  (A)  ^

L 337  ]

side  1 the  Firuzi  Amirs  and  the  mass  of  the  people,  in  the  month
of  Rajah  789  H.  (1387  A. D.)  he  started  with  a strong  force  to
attack  Khan-i  Jahan,  and  having  wounded  him  plundered  his
house  and  family.  Khan-i-Jahan  fled  ^ with  a few  followers
towards  iliwat.  and  took  refuge  there  with  one  Kuka  a Zamlndar : ®
and  the  .^ahzada  de.stiTyed  ceina’-n  (U  the  Aiuir-.  win  h.ul  been
well-diiposed  to  Khan-i-Jahan.  Suoseqnently  to  tiii.s  the  chali-
zada  became  Vazir  wi‘h  ruil  uncontr.o;led  powers,  ana  the  su;r  .n
havmir  given  him  all  the  apparatus  of  royal'y.  e epnants  and
hoises,  servants  and  itisignia,  and  conferrmg  upon  him  the  titl;  ot
Nasim-d- Din  wa-ud  Dunya  Miihaminad  Shall,  in  toe  month  of
Shn'ban  of  the  above  mentioned  tear  laised  him 'o  the  throne,
and  i)etook  himself  to  devotion  and  wor.ship  of  the  Most  High,  so
th.it  in  the  Fridav  Khnthuh  the  tiames  of  iioth  kings  used  to  oe
mentioned;*  Sultan  Muhammad  ordered  upon  a new  sc  ile  the
appointments  and  sal.-iries  of  the  Amirs,  and  confirmed  the  distri-
hntion  of  districts,  and  inivintr  given  Malik  Ya'qub  ihe  titled  of
Sikandar  Khan  appointed  him  to  atta-'k  Khan-i-Jauan  in  Miwat ;

Kuka  Cnulian  a Zaniindar  of  Miwat®  bound  Rhan-i-Jahan  and
sent  him  to  Sikaudar  Khan  who  put  him  to  death, t and  having  sent  234.
hi.s  head  as  a present  to  the  Court  of  Aluljammud  ^.ih  set  out  ®
for  Gajrat.

And  in  the  year  790  H.  (1383  A. D.l  ifubammad  Shah  arrived  on
a hunting  expediiion  at  the  Sirmur  bills,  and  Malih  Mufarnh  who
was  iu  Gujrat,  in  unison  with  the  Atalrs  of  hundieds  put  Sikaudar
Khan  to  death,  and  the  whole  of  his  army  being  utterly  despoiled

1 MS  (A)

* Having  firsc  pat  to  de  ith  ^afar  Khan  (Firishta).

8 Firishta  calls  him  Kukae  Chanhan.

* See  Thomas’  Vathdn  Kings,  pp.  297  and  305.

8 The  word  mast  bo  inserted  here  though  no  copy  has  it.

8 MS.  ^A)  omits  the  words

7 MS  (A)  !S.ijbUj  Jdflj,  The  fir^t  Kh't-i-i-J.ahSn  ■me  ' .ic  ro  -Afif
oriijinaUv  a Hindu.  Tie  was  a native  of  Telingana  a . ■ :

tion  in  favour  witn  the  nai  of  that  con.i:rrv.  H'S  name  ;

becoming  a Muslim  he  v.-a?  named  M3qb<il.  ‘Atif  states  ■■  -.e  f i . ,

A,  H.  and  when  he  died  all  Dihii  wenc  into  mourning.  . ■
was  hia  son  Jdnan  Khan.

MS.  (A)

43

8

[ 338  ]

came  ■with  the  Sipahsal&f  to  Dihli ; Muhammad  Shah,  returning
from  the  hill  country,  with  the  great  carelessness  which  chai-ac-
terises  youth  took  no  thonght  for  avenging  Sikamiar  Khan,  but
speut  his  time  in  enjoyment  and  Inxni-y,  so  that  tlie  affairs  of
the  kingdom  fell  into  great  disorder;  and  the  Sultan’s  soldiery  by
reason  of  thrir  enmity  and  jealousy  agiingt  Samau-d-Din  and
Kamalu.  d Diu,  who  vvere  the  proteges  of  Muhammad  Shah,  set
themselves  up  in  opposition  to  them,  and  assembled  in  a specious
plain,  and  stoned  and  wounded  Malik  Zahiru-d-Din  Lahoii  whom
the  Shahzada  had  sent  to  admonish  them.  He  came  in  th  it  state
before  Muhammad  Shah  and  informed  him  of  what  had  happen-
ed, whereupon  tlie  Shahzada  having  collected  forces  set  out  to  do
buttle  with  that  party.  The  army  of  the  Shahzada  was  victorious
at  first,  and  bore  back  the  army  of  the  Sultan,  so  that  they  took
refuge  witli  the  Sultan  Firuz.  Tlie  battle  raged  fiercely  for  two
diysand  when  the  Sultan’s  body  servants  found  themselves  in
straits,  they  bore  the  Snitan,  who  was  little  more  than  a puppet,
to  ihe  field  of  battle  and  displayed  him  there,  and  when  the
troops  of  Muhammad  Shah  and  his  elephant  drivers  set  eyes  upon
Sultan  Firuz  they  left  fighting  and  came  over  to  the  Saltan.
Muhammad  Shah  with  the  small  following  which  remained  to
him,  went  towards  the  Sirmur  hills,  and  the  array  of  the  Sultftn,
which  was  near  a hundred  thousand  cavalry  and  infantry,  fell  upon
the  camp  of  Muhammad  Shah,  and  entering  his  private  apartments
sacked  them  and  swept  tlicm  away.  The  Sultan  at  the  instigation
of  some  interested  persons,  unwillingly  deposed  Muhammad  Shah
255.  fi  oin  his  position  as  heir  apparent,  and  conferring  upon  Tgghlaq
EThan  • the  son  of  Fath  Kh.an,  his  grandson,  the  title  of  Tnghlaq
Shah  raised  him  to  tlie  position  of  heir-appaient.  Tnghlaq  Shah
beh.  aded  Mir  Husau  the  son-in-law  of  the  Sultan,  who  was  a
special  favourite  of  Muhammad  Shah,  and  having  exiled  ftbalib
Khan  the  governor  of  Samana,  sen'  him  to  the  country  of  Bihar.
On  the  sixteenth  of  Ramazan  in  the  year  790  H.  Sultan  Firuz
attained  deliverance  from  the  tortnres  of  existence,  and  hastened
to  the  world  of  permanence,  and  was  buried  on  the  borders  of  the

1 So  Brigjs  says  here,  p i"!,  “placed  his  grandson  Gheiss-ood-

Dren npuii  the  throne.”  Tiie  text  is

Tnghlaq  Si'lH  ihu  son  of  the  Shahzada  Fath  Khan.  This  was  Ghiasg-d-DIn
Tnghlaq  fihah  IT.

c 339  3

Hau2-i-^ass,  over  his  torab  a lofty  dome  was  erected  whicb
is  well-known.  They  devised  two  chronogfi-ams  for  the  date  of
his  death  Wafat-i-Firuz  and  Naql  i-Firuz  Shah,  the  second  of  these
is  deficient  by  one  unit.*  The  duration  of  his  reign  was  thirty-
eight  years  and  some  months.*

All  good  fortune  is  till  death  and  no  long-er,

In  the  dust  one  man  is  no  better  than  another.

When  a drop  is  thrown  into  the  river
It  cannot  again  be  recognized.

The  nature  of  the  Heavens  is  to  overthrow,

It  is  of  no  use  to  oppose  the  decree  of  Fate.

Who  knows  with  the  blood  of  what  hearts
Tliis  stirred  up  dust  has  been  mixed  !

Every  road,  if  the  wise  man  is  not  blinded.

Is  the  hide  of  the  elk,  and  shagreen  from  the  wild  ass.®

Among  the  poets  of  the  reign  of  Firuz  Shah  and  his  boon-com-
panions, is  Malik  Ahmad,  the  son  of  Amir  Khnsru,  maij  0<id  have  255-
mercy  upon  him,  and  although  there  is  no  famous  anthology  of  his,
still  there  ate  some  imitations  of  the  writings  of  tlie  enilier  poe's
which  sre  entered  in  the  writings  of  some  of  the  learned  men  ; and
are  well-known.  Among  them  is  an  imitation  of  this  poem  of
Zahir  *

jJ  Liji  uXs"  yZMj)

*

Hail ! thou  whose  cap  of  empire  snatched  in  its  exaltation  the
cap  of  empire  of  the  heaven,  by  craftiness.

And  it  is  said  that  in  the  first  hemistich  we  should  read

Hail  to  thee  ! the  blow  of  whose  wrath,  in  thy  supreme  power

1 cbj.  Wafat-i-FJri7z.  These  words  gi^e  the  Talue  790  while  Naql-i-

Ft^Hz  Sh'ik  cMj  give  789.

• Fitisht.i  fi'iys  nearly  forry  years,  p.  271,  Bo.  text.

• That  is  to  say,  it  is  n'»t  re  ‘Hy  dust  but  the  remains  of  living  anfma'^s.

* ^ahlrU'd-DIn  Tiihir  ibn  Muhammad,  a co-temporary  of  Jauiaia-d-DIn
Iffahani  and  H.<kiin  Khaqani  Shirwani.,  was  a native  of  Farvab.

He  died  in  the  yewr  59S.  H.  and  is  buried  nt  Snrkhab  of  Tabriz  which  has
been  called  “the  Sepulchre  of  the  Poets.”  His  poetry  was  held  in  gre^t
estimation.  {Majma'ul-Fufaha  I.  330)  see  also  Beale  0.  B.  D„  p.  2SG.

* MS.  (A)  reads  for  also  footuote  to  text.

[ 340  1

and  in  place  of  tijJj  (snatolied)  in  the  last  hemistich  we  should
read  iixXi  (thrown;  ] ; * and  another  is  this  verse

tj  cf  li)lj  ^

This  was  extremely  easy,  that  he  asked  for  red  sulphur  : *

If  he  had  asked  bread  from  the  Hjwajii,  what  could  I have
done  ?

which  was  thus  wiitfen,

This  would  have  been  very  easy  had  he  asked  for  the  water
of  life.

Another  is  in  this  ver«e,

cod#  'j

U cCAj  ^ y

If  the  sky  calls  the  dust  of  your  door  musk,  do  not  grieve,

For  the  jewel’s  woiiUis  not  affected  by  the  abuse  of  the  pur-
cliaser.

The  poet  had  written,

(JD ^

If  Jnpifer  colls  the  cravel  at  tour  door  rub ie.s,  do  not  grieve.
267.  Ami  -ome  of  his  poems  also  I Iiave  .seen,  but  I remember  none
of  them,  and  since  -\J.ilik  .Ahmad  was  the  real  son  of  Amii  Khusiu,
and  reminded  them  ,.f  hts  l•■ati^■•r,  the  Kitir  ami  his  companions
and  the  learned  men  of  the  age  were  greatly  pleased  with  these
imitations  and  thought  them  veiy  valuable.

1 The  portion  between  brackets  is  not  found  in  MS.  (A).

The  eise  wiiuld  tliPii  read  a**  follow.*?:

■/  - lUr  jlA  (Jj.  k (,#*3

AAmar  (Sulphur)  - he  red  Gug.rd  is  s.iic.  .o  be  a
mineial  of  exceeding  rsrity  which  is  orry  found  in  a niiue  in  tlie  Val  ey  of
the  Ant^;  the  i.nts  of  mat  region  are  the  size  of  goats.  It  is  said  tliat  at
nigiiC  a I'pht  is  em.tred  from  the  mine  which  may  be  seen  for  man v leagues,
but  when  the  mineral  is  taken  out  of  the  mine  it  does  not  possess  this  Innii-

nons  propeitv.  It  is  an  important  ingredient  in  Al-Iksir  (Elixir  of  life)  and
just  as  Quicksilver  is  called  Abiil-arwah  ( Father  of  spirits),  they  call  this
Abiil-ajsad  (Fat'isr  of  bodies).

It  has  various  beneficial  qualities  {Burhin-i-qdti‘.}

[ 341  ]

Another  poet  was  Manlana  Mazhar  Karra, i whose  descendants
are  still  livine  in  the  city  of  Lakhnauti  and  have  been  highly
thcng-ht  of  and  respected  from  srenera'ions  hack.  'I'here  is  an
an'hnloij'y  of  his  consisting  of  fifteen  or  sixteen  ihons.'ind  verses,
bat  inasmuch  as  he  was  more  of  a IMuIIa  than  a poet,  his  p'’etry
is  not  so  bignly  esteemed  by  the  learned,  aL hough  were  they  to
search,  they  would  bring  to  light  many  a good  thing  in  the  way
of  rni'iry  (of  expiession  .

Auotlier  fnoet)  is  Qaji  Abid  who  wrote  this  poem —

My  friends  any,  Abid  with  this  fine  nature  of  yours

Mow  is  it  that  you  have  not  written  more  poems  and  odes  ?

To  whom  sliall  I address  poems  and  odes,  since  in  our  time

Ko  suitable  lover  and  no  generous  patron  has  arisen.

Tiiis  is  a translation  of  the  following  poem  in  Arabic —

They  say,  thou  hast  given  up  writing  poems,  I reply,  yes  !
perfc  roe  ;

The  door  of  claims  and  causes  is  closed.

The  land  is  empty — there  i.s  no  benebacfor  from  whom  to
hope  for  favours,  nor  is  there  any  beauty  to  love.

And  the  stiange  thing  is  that  rhonch  no  ore  wid  buy  poetry

Still  in  spite  of  this  they  appropriate  and  steal  it,

SCLTAN  Tni5HL.tQ  ShAH  IB.\  FaTH  SH-AN  IBX  Srr.l'A.N-  FiRL'Z

Asceirded  the  throne  of  sovereignty  and  power  by  the  consent  of
the  Airirs  in  tlie  year  790  A H.  (1*188  A.D.)  in  acco' dance  with  258.
the  will  of  his  grandfather,  assuming  the  title  of  Gkijasu-d-Din
Tiighlaq  Shah,  and  despatched  several  famous  Amirs  to  oppose
Muhammad  Shah  towards  tlie  foot  of  the  hills  (of  Sirmu'  ).  Mnh  im-
mad  Shah  after  fighting  for  a little  betook  himself  to  Nayai'  Kot,
and  the  armv’  of  Tughlaq  Shfih  on  account  of  tlie  difficulty*  of  the
way  turned  back  (to  Diblii  and  Abu  Baku  Khan  son  of  Zafar  Khan
and  graiuhson  of  Fath  Khan,  who  was  his  brother’s  son,  being
panic-stricken  and  terrified,  went  to  his  father,*  and  Malik  Rukuu-

1 In  the  3Iujma‘u?  FnsflAaheis  called  Mazhar-i-Hindl QazI of  Agra  (.*  Karra)
the  panegyrist  of  Flriiz  fihilh,  but  no  j^arti*  ulars  are  given.  Tiie  AtasA  Kada.
i-Azur  merely  menriona  his  name  as  Ma/h-iri

^ h^either  the  AIuJthA  ul  Fiixcthd  nor  Atu^  hudu-i-Acur  mention  this  poet.

* MS.  (A)  <-**-0.

* MS.  (A)  j ojj

[ 342  ]

d-Din  Chanda  Wazir,  in  concert  -with  other  Amirs,  made  friends
with  Abu  Bakr  Khan,  and  killed  Malik  (Mubarak)  Kabiri  in  Firu-
zabad  at  the  door  of  the  rest  house  of  Tughlaq  Shah,  and  having
pur»ned  Tughlaq  Shah  and  Ehan-i-Jahau  the  Wazir*  when  they
fled,  put  them  to  death  and  hung  up  their  beads®  over  the  gate  of
the  city  ; this  event  occurred  in  the  pionth  of  Safar*  in  the  year
791  H.  (1389  A.D.)  ; the  duration  of  the  reigu  of  Tughlaq  Shah,
was  five  months  and  eighteen  days.®

Yerse.

[He  laid  low  in  the  dust  that  rose  of  kingdom  which  the  garden
of  the  king

Had  cherished  in  its  breast  with  endless  care.]®

Abu  Bake  Shah  ibn  Zafae  Khan  [ibn  Path  Khan  7]
iBN  PiEDZ  Shah.

After  the  martyrdom  of  Tughlaq  Shah,  by  the  ill-jndged  agree-
ment of  the  Amirs  assumed  the  Government  under  the  above
title,  and  at  the  commencement  of  his  reign  distributed  ajipoint-
meiits  among  tlie  Amirs,  and  raised  Ruknu-d-Bin  Chanda  to  the
dignity  of  Vazir,  and  eventually,  when  he  heard  that  Ruknu-d-
Din  in  concert  with  ceitain  of  the  Amirs,  was  plotting  sedition,
269.  and  entertained  ambitious  designs  upon  the  kingdom,  got  lid  of  him
together  with  his  following,  taking  possession  of  his  elephants  and
'treasure,  obtained  complete  hold  over  Dihli  and  increased  in  power
daily.  In  the  meantime  the  Amirs  of  hundreds  of  Samana  cut  to
pieces  Malik  Sultan  Shah  Khushdil,  the  Amir  of  Samana,  who
had  been  sent  against  the  Sultan  Mnharnmai  Shah  to  the  country
at  the  foot  of  the  hills,  at  the  head  of  the  reservoir  of  Samana  and
sacked  his  house,  and  sending  bis  head  to  the  Shahzada  Muham-
mad Shah  at  Nagaikot  invited  him  to  come ; Muhammad  Shah
accnrdingly  left  Nagarkot,  and  came  to  Samana  by  way  of  J.dan-
dbar  by  continuous  marches,  and  having  gatheted  together  the

1 MS.  (A)  omits  F’l-^ta  calls  him  Amim-l-TJmara.

S Firishta  tells  us  that  this  was  Malik  Firiz  ‘Ali  sou  of  Malik  Taja-d-Din,

* MS.  (A)  inserts  \j.

* MS  (A)  Firishta  says  21st  of  Safar.

* MS.  (A)  writes  j}j  J

* Not  in  MS.  (A).

1 The  words  in  square  brackets  are  not  in  MS.  (A).

[ 343  ]

paraphesmalia  of  royal  magnificence-  for  tlie  second  time  raised  the
standard  of  royalty  in  the  month  of  Rabi‘ul  AwwmI  in  the  year  791
H.  ( 1389  A.D.),  and  in  the  following  month  of  Eabi  nl  Akhir  of  the
same  year,  set  out  to  captme  Dihli  with  afo  ce  of  50,0o0,  and
alighted  at  the  palace  of  J.ihan  Nuina  where  he  bestowed  upon  the
Amirs  suitable  appointments;  among  others  ^ he  conferred  upon  the
Governor  of  Multan  tlie  title  of  Khizi-  Elan ; and  Abu  Bakr
Shah  having  raised  an  army  for  the  assistance  of  Bahadur  Nahir
Khan  Zada  of  Miwat,  on  the  (2nd)  of  Jniiiadin-1  Awwal*  of  the
afoiesaid  year  engaged  in  battle  on  the  plains  of  Fuuziibad  with
Jlnhammad  Shah,  and  gained  tlie  day.  Muhammad  Shah,  with  two
thousand  cavalry,  crossed  the  river  Jatnna  and  entered  the  Doab,
and  sent  Huinayun  his  younger  son  to  Samana,  and  having

obtained  thence  a great  following  and  the  requirements  of  sov-
ereignty, and  taking  with  him  certiiiii  Amirs  of  Hindustan  with
fifty  thousand  cavalry,  a second  time  marched  his  standaids  towards
Dildi.  As  it  chanced  he  became  engaged  in  battle  with  Aba  Ilakr  260.
Shah  and  was  again  defeated,  and  Abu  Bakr  Shah  pursued  him  part
of  the  way,  but  considered  it  an  excellent  opportunity  to  retnrn.
Muhammad  Shah  arrived  at  Chaptar,*  which  is  a town  on  the
banks  of  the  Ganges,  and  giving  over  his  following  to  destruction
once  more  attempted  to  fight.  And  in  the  month  of  Muharram  of
the  year  792  H.  (1389-90  A.D.)  Shahzadti  Humayiin  Khan  having
called  together  mtiny  Amirs  from  the  fioidier  of  Samara  to
reinforce  him,  laid  waste  the  countey  round  Dihli,  engaged  in
battle  in  the  neighboui  Imod*  of  Panipath  with  ‘imadnd-Mulk  who
had  been  sent  by  Abu  Bakr  (Shah)®  with  four  thonaand  cavalry
to  oppose  him,  and  being  defeated  retieated  towards  Samana.

And  in  tlie  month  of  Jamadin-l  A wwal  of  the  aforesaid  year  Abu
Bakr  Shiih  marched  for  Chafitar  (Chitar)  with  a sti  ong  force,  with
tlie  object  of  opposing  Muhammad  Shah,  and  had  encamped  at  a
distance  of  twenty  hroh  from  Dihli,  when  Muhammad  Shah  with

1 MS.  (A)  AI^Y  Jt.

* The  text  and  US.  (A)  both  read

Sms  The  text  reads  Chitar.  Fir-shta  says  <l-

Jalesar.  Bo.  text  p.  275.

® MS.  (A)  ■'  MS.  (A)  omits  the  word

[ 344  ]

four  thousand  men,'  passing  unohserved  round  his  right  flank,*
reached  Dihli  hy  another  rente  and  entered  the  pah>ce  of  Huma-
yun,  -where  the  populace  both  oreat  and  small  dei-lared  in  favour
of  hini  ; Aba  Hakr  Shah  pursued  him  and  arrived  at  Dihli,  ai  d
ha'Atig  put  t.i  death  ilalik  Bahau-d-dJin  Jangi  whom  Muh  immad
S_  ah  had  left  to  guaid  the  gates,  without  hesitation  made  for  tiie
pal  ice  of  H.uma\Cin,  and  Muhammad  Shah,  being  taken  off  his
guard,  was  not  able  to  ojipose  him  and  leaving  by  way  of  the  door
of  t he  fled  again  nith  all  haste  to  Chaptar  ('(’hitar)

hi>  oii'jinal  abnde  and  asylum.®  Many  of  his  noted  Amirs  and  of
iii.s  body  servants  were  put  to  deiitb,  and  althongh  Snltan  Mubam-
mnd  Shah  wa.s  ro  longer  alile  to  stand  against  Abu  Bakr  Shah,
stili-^  the  Soldiery  and  people  were  very  il l-di.spost-d  tov.ards  Abu
Bakr  &ah,  and  in  the  month  of  Ramtiaan  iii  the  aforesaid  year,
Muhnsbir  Chap  and  some  of  the  slaves  of  Fimz  Shah’s  pai'y  who
had  been  ptoniLheu  to  the  rank  of  Amir,'and  foj-  one  reason  or
another  boie  a grarlge  against  Abu  Bakr  Shah,  opened  a secret  cor-
responilence-'  with  Muhammad  Shah,  and  invited  him  ; ^ Abh  H.ikr
Shall  when  he  came  to  know  of  tliis  was  ntteidy  dumhfi.uuiled,
au-i  unde!  jirctext  oi  a-kine  ussi'tanee  from  Ihihadni-  X-aiiir  set  his
face  to  go  to  Kvlila'i  of  Mi  writ,  and  Sit  luit  leaving  Mabk  Shahin
and  "Imada-i-Mulk  and  Alalik  Babii  andSafdai  Khan  in  Ddni;  tlien
Muhammad  Shah  in  obedience  to  the  invitation  of  the  Amirs  entered
Dihli  for  the  thiid  time  and  ascended  the  throne  of  ro\alty  in  the
palace  of  FiruzSbad  with  great  ceremony  ; and  Mubashir  Chap,

i Fir’shti  SBTs  ■vtUh  4 CK30  chosen  Cavalry.

5 5_^  Fir'slita  says,

'v*'^

3 ilS.  (A;  dyi  J ^ (^.3  VjxiU-.

'5'  MS  I'Aj  aads  heie  3 ijs.  (A)

6 MS.  fA)

'I  nctla.  IJinai  a small  fortress.  Bahadur  Nahir  was

luler  of  M'wAt,  ,'ee  Fir’^ta  Briggs,  471.  This  -word  Kot'a  se-  ms  to  have
been  made  use  of  by  Firuz  Shah  to  designate  certain  of  his  hunting  p. daces.
Se.3  I hoinas,  P-ith'ia  Kenya,  p 292,  3,  and  references  there  given.

By  this  Ko:it.\  howt  ver,  Kotila  of  Miwat,  we  may  understand  probably
Hardwar  or  a town  iu  its  vicinity,  which  appears  in  Bennell’s  map  G.  n.  as
“ Coupele”  see  Elliott,  ill  455.  n,  and  458.

L m ]

having  received  the  title  of  Islam  Klian.  was  piomoted  to  the  rank
of  Vazir,  and  after  some  time  lie  left  Firuzahad  and  went  to  the
palace  of  Humayuii,  Jnhaii  ( Nnnia),*  and  gave  orders  for  the  slaves
of  the  Fiiiizl  party  who  had  been  a source  of  disturbance  in  the
days  of  tumult  and  liot  to  be  put  to  death  without  distinction,  and
many  of  the  free  men  also,  who  came  from  the  eastern  quarters  of
Hindustan  weie  taken  for  slaves  by  reason  of  the  imperfectiou
of  their  pronunciation,*  and  were  put  to  the  sword.  Abii
Bakr  Shah  after  this  misfortune  could  not  recover  himself,  and
remained  at  the  K<:tiht  (of  iliwat)  just  as  he  was  till  Muhammad
Shah^  by  continuoas  maiches  came  against  him,  and  Bahadur
Nahir  MUvari  and  Abu  B.ikr  Sbah  wlio  had  taken  refuge  with
him,  after  fiirhtmg  for  a long  time  begged  for  quarter  and  bad  an
interview  with  Suit.ju  Muhammad  Shfili,  Bahadur  Xabir  re-
ceived a rube  of  honour  and  other  marks  of  favour,  but  they
imprisoned  Abu  Bakr  Shall  in  the  foit  of  Mirath.  In  that  self-
same pri'On  he  escaped  troni  the  prison  house  of  the  woild.  This
event  took  place  in  the  year  7y3  H.  (1390-91  A.D.)-*  the  duration  of
the  reign  of  Abu  Bakr  Sbah  was  a year  and  a half.

' MS.  (A)  omits  Ui.

* Thi.i  p.Tssago  is  not  intelligible  iu  itself,  but  Firi^ta’s  .ucoount  explains
it  fully.  Ke  tells  us  that  many  of  these  slaves  claitiieJ  to  be  natives  of  the
couiinyantlni.it  t'oreigncr.s,  whereupon  Mnlianiniad  Shah  imposed  upon  tliem
the  pronuneiation  of  cert.iiii  wortls,  and  those  who  failed  in  their  pronunpiation
of  tiiis  ■ Shibboleth’  were  treated  as  foreigners  and  put  to  death.  He  writes,

y libi

.fesAj  jlA  iU  j

Firishta  Bo.  teit  p.  267.  - Al.SiS'  |.>|

Muhammad  Nfiilh  said  ” whoever  among  you  instead  of  Khara  says  Khari,  is
a native  of  the  country,”  and  since  (as  the  King  in  fact  desired)  they  were  not
able  to  pronounce  these  words,  but  followed  the  pronunciation  of  people
of  the  Fast  and  of  Bengal  they  were  pnt  to  death.

The  word  Khiirl  signified  b:-acki,,h  as  applied  to  water  : natives  of  Eastern
Bengal  hon ever  use  tlie  word  A'Jii™  in  place  of  Kiuiri,  using  the  word  as  if
it  were  an  adjective  agreeing  with  the  masculine  word  pdiu,  water.

® sLuj  yjg  text.

* Tliere  is  an  error  in  MS.  (A)  here  which  writes,  J ji

J 753  H.  see  Thomas,  Puthdn  Kimjs,  p.  303.

■44

[ 346  ]

Verse.

He  reckoned  certain  days  and  then  he  came  to  nothing
The  time  smiled  to  think  that  he  too  had  passed  away.

Verse.

262.  This  world  is  like  a corpse  upon  which  there  are
thousands  of  vultures

[One  continually  tears  another  with  its  talons,

The  other  rends  it  constantly  with  its  beak]  *

At  last,  they  all  take  to  flight  and

All  that  remains  of  them  all  is  the  corpse.

Sultan  Muhammad  Shah  ibn  TIeoz  Shah.

After  the  death  of  his  brother’s  son  Abu  Bakr,  this  monarch
ascended  the  tlirone  of  DihK  in  the  abovementioned  year  by  the
consent  of  the  grandees  and  nobles  of  the  State,*  and  assumed
absolute  piiwer  there  being  now  no  one  left  to  oppose  him  in  the
kingdom.  And  in  this  same  year  Mnfarrih  Sultani  governor  of
Gujiat  revolted,  and  Zafar  Khan  ibn  Wajihu-l-Mulk  was  oi-dered
to  proceed  thither.

In  the  year  794  H.  (1391-92  A.D.)  the  zamindSrs  (land-holders)
of  the  Doab  ^ breaking  out  into  rebellion  attacked  the  town  of
Balaiam,  and  Islam  Khan  being  appointed  to  proceed  against
Harsingrai  * defeated  him,  while  the  Sultan  went  as  far  as  Qanauj
and  Itawa,  and  after  punishing  the  infidels  of  that  district  and
laying  waste  Itawa,  returned  to  Chiti  a ^ which  was  a favourite
resort  of  his,  and  there  built  the  city  of  Muhammadabad.

In  the  year  795  H.  (1392-93  A.D.)  he  appointed  Malik  Muqar-
rabu-l-Mulk  to  pi  oceed  again.st  the  mutineers  in  the  district  of

J Not  in  MS.  (A.)

8 MS-  (A)  reads  ; —

sdijjUji  ^ji  y a*j  »U

.ij  jilftiwt  y

» MS.  (A)  omits  ♦ RSja  of  Itawa.

* See  Thomas,  Patlan  Kings,  307  n.  1.

This  place  appears  to  be  the  same  as  Jalesar  judging  from  Firishtii’s
account.

For  Jalesar  see  Hunter  Imp,  Oaz  . VII,  103.

[ 347  ]

Itawa,  who  by  promises  and  engagements  ^ induced  the  rebels  to
come  in,  and  took  them  to  Qanauj,  where  he  put  them  to  death  and
I'etnrued  to  iln^ammadabad.  And  in  the  month  of  Shawwal  in
this  year,  the  Sultan  was  attacked  by  illness ; taking  advantage  263.
of  this  Bahadur  Nahir  made  an  inroad  upon  some  of  the  towns
around  Dihli.  The  Sultan  notwithstanding  his  weakness  pro-
ceeded to  Kotla  ; BahMur  gave  battle  once  and  then  fled,  and  the
Sultan  victorious  and  triumphant  returned  to  Mnhammadabad,  and
was  engaged  in  superintending  the  building  of  the  city  when
his  illness  returned.

In  the  year  796  H.  (1393-94  A.D.)  he  appointed  Shalizada
Humayuii  Khan  to  oppose  Shaikha  Khukliar  who  had  rebelled  and
gained  possession  of  L ihore,  but  the  Shahzadti  was  still  in  the  city
when  the  Sultan*  took  his  departure  from  the  populous  city  of
existence  to  the  deserted  regions  of  annihilation,  and  was  buried  in
the  mausoleum  of  his  father  on  the  banks  of  the  Hanz-i-Khass  : *
the  duration  of  his  reign  was  six  years  and  s-ven  months.

Masnaol.

What  is  the  world,  but  a wayside  abode  of  trouble  and  evil  ?

A house  of  labour  and  toil,  a mansion  of  pain  and  affliction  ?

Here  is  no  truth  and  no  faithfulness  ; hero  are  no  friends  and
no  friendship ;

Hundreds  of  times  have  I seen  this,  and  proved  it  by  frequent
experience.^

Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Sikandar  Shah  iBN-t-MuHAstMAU  Shah  ibn-i-

ITroz  Shah,

Who  bore  the  name  of  Huraiiyun  KTian.  ascended  the  imperial
tltrone  in  virtue  of  his  being  heir  apparent,  on  the  nineteenth  of

IMS.  (A)

* He  died  according  to  Firishta's  account  on  the  17th  of  KabT*a.l-Awwal,
and  was  buried  beside  his  father  on  tlie  banks  of  the  Hauz-i-K/vJts.  Text,  p-
278.

* The  Hauz-i-Khass  was  a reservoir  constructed  by  Firiir.  Shah,  one  of  his
many  public  works.  It  is  said  in  the  Zafarnama  of  Yaadi  to  be  “so  large
that  an  arrow  cannot  bo  shot  from  one  side  to  tlie  other.  It'is  filled  by  rain
in  the  rainy  season  .and  the  people  of  Uihli  obtain  water  from  it  all  the  year
round.  The  tomb  of  Firuz  ^ah  is  by  its  side.’*  Flliott,  III,  411—501.

See  also  Thomas  Puthun  Kinje,  310  note  1.

* MS.  (A)  and  footnote  to  Te.xt  read  , j!  J IajA.

[ 348  ]

Ral)i‘n-1-A\vwal  iu  the  jear  795  H.  (1393  A.D.)  and  after  one
month  and  sixteen  days  he  bid  farewell  to  tliis  hired  rest-house,
ind  removed  his  effects  to  the  permanent  raansiond

So  long  as  the  world  has  been,  thus  has  it  been,  and  thus  will
it  ever  be.

264.  The  issue  of  affairs  will  be  at  last  the  same  for  all.

[And  during  the  time  that  he  was  Shrihziida,  a learned  man  wrote
and  composed  in  his  honour  an  imitation  of  the  Maqainati  Hariri
I have  seen  a Maqamah  from  this  work].®

ScLTAN'  MahmCd  Shah  ius-i-Mchamm-Ad  Sh.ah,

Who  was  his  vouiigesc  son,®  ascended  the  throne  * on  tlie  twentieth
of  Jurnadiu-l-Atvwal  ® in  the  aforesaid  year  relying  upon  the
allegiance  of  the  Amlrs,°  with  the  title  of  Sultan  Xasiru-d-Din
Mahmud,  and  having  bestowed  upon  MuqaiTabu-l-Mulk  the  title
of  Mnqarrab  Khan,  he  made  him  Ids  heir  apparent, i and  confirmed
t)  the  Amirs  their  appointments®  districts  .and  titles  : and  with  a
view  to  re^t  irincf  order  in  the  important  affrdi'.s  of  Stare,  which
had  suffeiod  iu  consequence  of  the  dominance  of  the  perverse
intidels,  lie  besrowed  tiie  title  of  ,Saltann-.sh-Sh  ,rq  ® npon
Khwajii-i-Jahan.  and  transferred  him  from  kJamuij  to  Bihar  with
full  powers  and  uncotitrolled  authority,  and  despatched  him  thither.
He  proceeded  as  far  as  Jajnagar and  took  possession  of  it,

1 an'I  was  buried  beside  his  f.itiier  and  Grandfather  on  the  edge  of  the
He  reisr-ied  oa.e  mo'itli  and  fifteen  days  fFiri-ijitiy

S iiie  ijortio'i  in  5|n.av  brackets  is  i ot  f.mn  i in  MS  'Aj.

S Firinhta  also  says  the  youngest  of  his  sons-  Briggs

translates  ttiis  a youth,  the  Son  ot.’’

A MS.  (A)  omits  5 Text  ri  ails

3 Ti'e  text  reads  here  hut  ti.is  is  I r entnro  to  think  wrong.

ILs.  {.Al  roads  and  t.iking  this  togetlier  with  Firi^ta’s  reading,  we

should,  I think  read  -T?  " relying  npor.  tlie  rdlogiance.”

Firishra  reads  : ‘AtJyf

1 Firishta  says  became  Vakiln-s.Sairm.it  and  .\maMi-l-tiinarri.

? J5S.  t'A)  oUiiAj

5 So  also  Firishta,  Briggs  however  converts  this  into  “ JluIIik-oos-Sluirk,’'
p.  -ITS.

1“^  Firislir'i  suvs  Jaiinpur

r

L

349  ]

auqiilring  a large  number  of  elephants  and  much  valuable  pro-
perty, and  from  tliat  time  the  king  of  Laklinantl  began  to  send
elephants  annually  as  pi-esents  to  Dihli.

He  also  rebuilt  ^ the  greater  number  of  the  forts  nhich  the
infidels  had  destroyed,  in  the  districts  of  Karra.  Oudh,  Sandiln,
ilnlnta.*  Bahraich  and  Tirhut,  and  despatched  Sarang  Khan  to
the  district  of  DiUalpur  to  quell  the  rising  of  Shaikha  Kluikhar.

And  in  tlie  month  of  Zu  Qa'dah  of  the  same  year  Shaikha  Kliuk-
hni-S  fought  a sharp  engagement  with  Sarang  Khan,  at  a place
called  Samothala  * which  is  twelve  Icrohs  from  Lahore,  hut  was
defeated  and  retired  to  the  hill  country  of  Jamun  ; Sarang  Khan
thereupon  left  Lahoie  in  charge  of  his  'brother  ‘ Adil  Khan,^  and
returned  towards  Dibalpur.

And  in  the  nior.th  of  ;Sha‘ban  of  this  year  Sultan  ® Mahmud
leaving  Muqarrab  Khan  as  his  Viceroy  in  Dihll,  and  taking  with  265.
him  >Stt'adat  Khan,  who  was  commonly  known  ’ ns  ‘Ahdu-r-Rashid
Sultanl,  marclied  in  the  direction  of  Biana  and  Gwaliar.  In  obedi-
ence to  the  order  of  the  Sultan  a spacious  chitf  mosijiie-  built  of
stone  was  erected  in  the  town  of  Basauar,  and  is  standing  at  the
present  time,  and  when  ^ tlic  Suit.lti  ariivod  near  tlwaliai',  Malik
‘Alan-d-Uin  iJha'-wal,  and  ililloo  Khan  h’  the  bioiherof  Sarang
Khan,  au.l  iMiiourak  Khan  son  of  Maiik  Ra.j5‘*  conspire  1 against
Sa'adiit  IHian.  but  he,  bcomiiig  aware  of  their , design,  arrested
Malik  ‘Alau-d-Diu  and  ilubarak  Khan  and  had  them  put  to  death.'®

1 MS  (.t)  j S MS.  lA'i  Jir^i

" ils.  f .i  ) snj.ii'ij.g  , Firi.Ata  iuvs  “ adv  ulcu.g  from  Ajiidh  in."

FiriMiiH  doc&  not  give  ilie  iiaiuc  of  the  place.

5 JIS,  (A)  re.ids  nM-
^ Ms.  ( .\)  repe  its  the  words

j ooLi  A>

— ^^.laLo  Apej

T MS,  (A.)  ® (A.l  nits  j.

® MS.  (A)  omits

Mk5.  (A)  omits  cilA.  Firi^^a  calks  this  man  Malioo  Khan.

So  also  Firishta.

1*  Firi.^ta  writes  Badiiom  npiiarenllj  alwavs  uses  in

the  beiise  of  capital  punishment.

[ 350  ]

Afidloo  Khan  fled  to  Mnqarrab  Khan  in  Dilili.  The  Sultan  having
i-etnmed  to  the  Capital,  encamped  at  some  distance  from  the  city,
and  Mnqarrab  ^lan  fearing  his  displeasure  because  he  had  given
asylum  to  Malloo  Khan,i  entrenched  himself  and  prepared  to
fight*  and  remained  in  his  fortified  position  three  mouths,  and
war  arose  between  MaqaiTab  ^md  Sa'adat  Khan  ^

And  in  the  month  of  Muharram  in  the  year  797  H.  (Nov.  1394
A.D.)  Sultan  Mal^mud  was  induced  by  the  deceitfulness  of  certain
friends  of  Mnqarrab  i^an  to  leave  Sa‘adat  Khan,  to  enter  the  fort
and  come  to  terms  with  Muqarrab  Khan,  who  thus  obtained  the
assistance  he  needed.  The  following  day  Muquirab  Khau  and
Sa'adat  Khan  met  on  the  field  of  battle,  and  Muqairab  Khan  being
defeated  again  entered  the  fort.  Sa'adat  Khan  went  to  Firuz-
ab^,*  and  acting  in  concert  with  some  of  the  Amirs  summoned
Nu^rat  Khan  son  of  Path  Khan  and  grandson  of  Sultan  Fiiuz
Shah*  from  Miwat,  and  set  him  upon  the  throne  in  the  month
of  Rabi‘a-1-Awwal  of  the  aforesaid  year,  with  the  title  of  Nasiru-d-
2C6.  Din  Nu?rat  Shah.  Nusiat  Shah  was  nothing  more  than  a puppet,
for  Sa‘^at  i^an  assumed  the  whole  of  the  authority  in  state
matters,  and  some  slaves  of  the  Firuzi  party  and  some  elephant
drivers  joined  with  Snltan  Nusiat  Shall,  and  by  some  clever
artifice  placed  him  upon  an  elephant,  and  without  warning  fell
upon  Sa'idat  Khan  unawares  in  full  force ; Sa'adat  Khan  was
paralysed  and  hefpless,  and  ® of  necessity  took  to  flieht  and  came

1 MS.  (A)  omits  CjlA.  i JI3.  (A)  ISAw.

8 This  account  is  unwtisfaotory  as  it  throws  no  light  upon  tiie  real  course
of  events.  Firishta  writes  as  follows:— Mnq  irrab  ^iu  came  out  to  receive
the  Saltiin  and  to  pay  his  respects,  but  becoming  alai,’iued  at  the  splendour  and
arr.y  of  the  royal  court,  because  of  his  having  given  asylum  to  Malloo  Khan,
fled  to  the  city  where  he  fortified  a position  and  began  to  fight.  The
quarrel  lasted  for  some  throe  months,  with  frequent  engagements  between  the
besiegers  and  the  besieged,  when  recognizing  that  this  w.is  all  due  to  Sahidat
Khan  Biirbak,  Nasim-d-Din  Mahmud  .Shah  at  the  instig  ition  of  his  intimates
entered  the  city  upon  a favourable  opportunity  in  the  month  of  Mnharram
797  H,  and  came  to  terms  with  Muqarrab  Khan,  who  on  the  following  day
started  from  Dihli  to  fight  against  Sa'iidac  Khan,  bat  was  defeated  and  forced
to  return  to  the  city.”  (Firishta,  Bo.  text  p.  279}.  Cf  Briggt,  p.  480.

* Being  compelled  by  the  onset  of  the  rains  to  decamp  ( Firishta )-

* The  text  reads  vylA.  lijlA  The

above  translation  is  to  avoid  the  ambiguity  which  a literal  rendering  involves.

* MS.  (^)  J.

[ 351  ]

to  Dilili,  wlievo  lie  sought  the  protection  of  ilaqairah  ^^lau,  and
waa  treacherously  ' put  to  death  by  him  : then  the  Amirs  of  Nusrat
Shah’s  faction  such  as  Muhatnmad  Muzaffar  Vazir  and  Shihab
Nahir  and  Malik  Fazlu-llah  Balkhi,*  and  the  slaves  of  Firuz
Shah’s  party  one  and  all  ® renewed  their  declaration  of  allegiance
to  Sultan  Nnsrat  Shah  and  divided  the  appointments  afresh.

Sultan  Mahmud  was  known  as  King  in  Dihli,  while  in  Firuz-
abad  Kusrat  Shah  enjoyed  that  title,*  and  Muqarrab  Khan  placed
the  citaiiel  of  old  Dihli  under  the  command  of  Bahadur  Kahir
Miwati,  and  bestowed  upon  Malloo  Khan  ^ the  title  of  Iqbal
Khta,®  and  day  by  day  battles  wei‘e  fought  between  these  two
kings,'?  who  weie  like.  the  two  kings  in  the  game  of  chess.*
Sultan  Kusrat  Shah  retained  possession  of  the  country  of  the
Doab,  and  Sanbhal,  PSnipath,  Rohtak,  and  Jahjar,®  while  a
few  old  ruined  forts  such  as  Dihli  and  Siri  and  the  vest,  remained
in  the  hands  of  Sultan  Mahmud,  and  from  that  time  forward  this
proverb  became  a common  expi  ession  : The  rale  of  tlie  Lord  of  the
world  ( Khudawand-i-‘Alam)  is  from  Dihli  to  Palain.t®  And  all  over
Hindustan  there  arose  various  parties  each  with  its  owm  Malik.?*

Fei'se.

Say,  either  you  rule  in  the  city,  or  let  me  rule

For  the  affairs  of  the  state  go  to  ruin  between  two  i-nlers.

The  affairs  of  the  kingdom  continued  in  this  state  for  a space
of  three  years,  at  one  time  the  Dihli  party  got  the  better  of  the
Firuzabad'S  paity  and  at  another  time  the  positions  were  reversed.

1 MS.  (A)  omits

2 (Firishta).

8 MS.  (A)  omits

* See  Thomas’  Tathan  Kingi^  312,  note  1,  and  318,  note  1.

8 MS.  (A)  omits

8 Firishta  states  that  these  two  joined  neither  kin^  waiting'  to  see  how
affairs  would  turn  out.

‘ For  a space  of  three  years  (Firishta).

8 That  is  to  say  could  neitirer  win  nor  be  removed  from  the  encounter.

5 Cf.  Thomas  Pathan  Kings,  313,  notes  1-2.

Hnkm-i  Khudawand-.-^Alam  az  DihU  ta  Paiam.

ii-  8ee  Thomas’  Pai'nan  K^ngs,  p.  315  n.  1,

MS.  (At

267.

[ 352  ]

Verse.

Like  tke  kite  wkicli  is  six  months  female  and  six  inontlia  male.^

And  in  the  year  798  H.  (1395  A.D.)  many  battles  took  place
between  the  Masnad-i-‘AH,^  Khizr  Khan,  the  Amir  of  ilultan,  and
Sarang  Eian  the  ruler  of  Dipalpur,  and,  eventually,  owing  to  the
treachery  of  certain  of  the  slaves  of  Malik  Marwan,  who  was  the
tutor  of  Malik  Suleiman  the  father  of  Khizr  Khan,  and  in  con-
sequence of  their  throwing  in  their  lot  with  Sarang  Khan  the
governor  of  Dipalpur,®  Multan  passed  from  the  possession  of  Khizr
Khan  to  that  of  Saiang  Klian  and  his  party  began  to  grow  weaker
and  weaker  every  day.

And  in  tlie  year  799  H.  (1396  A.D.)  Sarang'  Khan  having
overcome^  Ghalib  Khan  the  governor  of  Samana,  tind  Tatar  Khan
the  \Tali  of  Panipath,  gained  possession  of  the  country  .ns  far  as
the  outskirts  of  Dihli.®  Sultan  Kusrat  Shah  sent  Malik  Ilyas®  a
slave  of  the  Firuz  Shahi  party  with  elephants  and  an  army  to
reiiiforce  Tatar  Khan.  He  accordingly  drove  SMang  Khtan  out  of
Samana  and  dc-liveted  it  to  Ghalib  lOian.i

Anti  in  the  month  of  Muh-arrani  800  H.  (1307  A.D.)  a severe
engagement  took  place  between  the  two  parties  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  the  villa'ge  of  Kotla  ; Saransr  Khan  was  defeated®  and
fled  towards  hlultfin.  and  Tatar  Khan  proceeded  to  the  frontier  of
Tiiaundi,  and  sending  Kanniln-d-Din  MuMn  in  pursuit  of  Sarang
Kh-an,  returned.  And  in  the  month  of  Rabi'ii-l-Awwal  in  the
year  already  mentioned,®  Mirza  Pir  iluhanmiad,  grauthson  of  the

isto  7,  j f

it  H a tii.ile  fill-  si.K  nioutlis  and  a female  for  six  nioritlia,  some  sav  one
year  male  and  one  year  female

T’no  Ilii'j'U'i-t-.’IaULun  says  nothing  about  tbig  tart.  and  bat

nieptirms  a statement  that  the  i— lilf  ‘uqiib  eagle  or  kite  h.as  no  male,
Imt  t'ue  feni  i1es  are  imprcL'-nactd  by  the  fox.  See  also  I.  K (Slans)  iii,  305.

* .‘ttt’  Thomas’  Butnun  ivinjy.s,  p.  320,  a.  1.

® M.'ty.  : A ) ouiits  Lite  words

* JIS.  (.A)  omits _y.  5 (A)  omits  J.

^ MS.  i-t)  also  Firishti.

■i  In  tne  beginning  of  Mnharram  SCO  H (Firi.shra).

8 MS.  (A)  rftads  loibo

« MS.  (Aj  reads  AW.  10  ns.  (A)  Firi^ta  writes

[ 353  ]

great  Amir  Timur  Gurgani  King  of  Khurasan  and  Mavrara-an-
Nahr,  had  crossed  the  river  Indus,*  and  was  besieging  the  fortress
of  Uchh.*  ‘All  Miilik,  Sarang  Khan’s  Jientenant  fought  and  held
the  fort  for  a month,  and  when  Malik  Taju-d-Din  Bakhtyar  ariired  268.
at  the  fort  of  Uchh  with  a thousand  cavalry  given  him  by  Sarang
Khan,  Mii  zg  Pir  Muhammad  left  Uchh,  and  taking  Malik  Taju-d-
Din  Bakhtyar  and  his  ihousand  sowars unawares  in  their  position
on  the  banks  of  the  river  Biah,  attacked  them.  The  greater  num-
ber of  Malik  Tajn-d-Din’s  force  fell  by  the  sword,  while  those  wlio
escaped  the  sword  were  drowned  in  the  floods  of  destruction  ; -■  and
Mirza  Pir  Muhammad  ® after  gaining  this  victoi’y  pursued  them
with  all  speed, and  invested  the  fortress  of  Multan.®  Sarang  Khan
held  out  against  him  for  six  months  engaging  him  frequently,  but
at  last  beggedifor  quarter,  and  had  an  interview  w'ith  the  Mirza,®
who  took  up  his  station  in  Muitan  pending  the  arrival  of  the
great  Timur.  *

MS.  (A)  Gurgani.  The  eiacfc  meaning  of  this  title  has  been  much

iiscussed  ; the  most  recent  opinion  is  that  nf  Dr.  Erdmann,  according  to  whom
“ Knrkan  or  Gurgan  stands  for  ^ son-in-law  ^ or  for  a prince  who  is  allied  hj
marriage  with  some  mightj  monarch.”  In  this  way,  its  iforgol  sense,  it  is
used,  he  tells  ns  by  Kashidn-d-Din.  He  also  tells  ns  that  Kurkan  or  Gurgan
represents  the  Chinese  expression  Fu-ma  aud  that  the  Amir  limur  was  called
Timur  Fu-md  by  the  Chinese,  because  he  married  the  daughrei’  of  Chun-ti,
the  ninth  and  hist  Emperor  of  th^  Mongot  dynasty.  Fn-md  in  fact  means
“son-in-law”  in  Chinese,  when  applied  to  princes,  and  thus  is  a translation
of  the  Mongol  word.”

For  fuller  particulars  set;  note,  page  278  of  the  Tdnkh’-i-F.a^idl  by  Elias
and  Ross,  from  which  the  above  is  extracted.  In  M.  PuT-et  de  Conrteilie’s
Turki  Dictionary  we  find  prince  de  la  race  de  Timour  qni  eponse  nns

fiile  de  ia  race  de  Djenggiz-Khan : prince  de  race  royale  qui  ppouse  nne  fills
de  roi : prince  ne  de  parents  issus  de  Khans  qui  epouse  la  fiile  d an  Khakan  :
snrnom  de  Timonr  j savant,  bean,  poli.*'  sec  also  Ain-i-Akbari  ^E)  I.  464.  n.

S By  a bridge  of  boats  (Firishta).  ° (F±riyita.)

^ MS  (A)  omits  the  words  ^ Firishta

J

Most  of  them  were  put  to  death  as  they  fled,  and  some  were  drowned  in  the

river.

« MS.  (A)  omits  ^1^.  CA)  omits

^ Firishta  tells  us  that  Malik  Taju-d-DIn  escaped  with  a few'  men  and  fled
to  Mnltan.

9 Being  compelled  by  famine  (Firishta).

45

[ 354  ]

And  in  tlie  month  of  Shawwal  in  the  aforesaid  year  Iqbal  'ELan,
who  is  bettei*'  known  as  Malloo,  swore  many  oaths  of  allegiance
to  Sultan  Nnsrat  Shah,  whom  he  deported  to  the  fortress  of  Jahan-
numa,'  taking  him  away  with  elephants  and  an  armed  force  ; and
Saltan  Mahmnd  and  Muqarrab  Khan  and  Bahadur  Kahir  shut
themselves  up  in  old  Dihli.  On  the  third  day  from  this  Iqbal
Khan  made  a sodden  attack  in  strong  force  upon  Nnsrat  Shah
hoping  to  take  him  by  surpiise  ; Nnsrat  Shah  fled  from  Jahan-
numa  and  came  to  FiruzabaJ.*  and  leaving  there  crossed  the
Jamiia  and  ■went  to  join  Tatar  Khan  his  Vazir  at  Panipath.  The
whole®  of  the  army  and  elephants  of  Nuai-at  Shah  fell  into  the  hands
of  the  astute  Iqbal  Khan,  and  for  two  whole  months  daily  battles
were  fought  between  Muqarrab  Kban  and  Iqbal  Khan,  until  by  the
intervention  of  certain  Amirs  peace  was  established  between  these
two  leaders  ; but  after  a few  days  * Iqbal  Khan  proceeded  against
Muqairab  Khan,®  and  ■'vitliout  warning  suddenly  surrounded
him  and  besieged  him  ; and  after  giving  him  assurances  of  safety
raised  him  to  the  dignity  of  martyrdom,  r.-nd  getting  Sultan
Mahmnd  into  his  power  made  a puppet  of  him  and  took  the
management  cf  the  state  into  his  own  hands.  Then  in  the  month
269.  of  Zn  Qa‘dah  of  the  aforesaid  ^ year  Iqbal  Khan  wrested  Pani-
path by  force  fi'om  the  followers  of  Tatar  Khan,  and  seized  all
has  baggage  and  his  elejjhauts  and  army.  Tatar  Khan  previously
to  tlii.s  expedition  of  Iqbal  Irhan,  had  left  Panipath  with  the
intention  of  aiteniptiug  to  re.laee  Dihli  but  found  himself  quite
■unequal  to  the  task,  and  throwing  his  country  ^ to  the  winds  left
Dihli  and  went  to  Gujrat  with  a large  following  to  join  his
father.®  Iqbal  Khan  coming  to  Dihli  bestow^ed  uj>on  Malik  Nasiru-1-
Muik,  a relation  of  Tatar  Khan  who  had  joined  him,  the  title  of
‘Adil  Xlian,  and  placed  under  his  control  the  district  of  the  Doab.

And  in  the  month  of  Safar  of  the  year  801  H.  (1398  A.D.)  Amir

t M.S.  (A)  reads  hut  t’triahta  reads  as  in  the  text.

5 _MS.  (A)  J S MS.  (A)  ^Uj.  4 MS,  (.A)

6 Firishta  says  “ rro-m  mctivc-ii  of  worldly  wisdom  broke  bis  faith.”

S MS.  {A

' AuluJca  or  aulaJcu.  A Tnrkl  word  siguifying  “ province,  ville.

pays,  Sef  •’  accor-hug’  to  M.  Paret  de  Courteiile.

His  father  Zafar  Khan  (Firislita).

[ 355  ]

Timui'  the  Great  attacked  the  town  of  Tultimba,^  and  taking
Multan,  put  to  the  sword  ^ the  whole  of  the  prisoners  of  the  army
of  Sarang  Khan  whom  Mirza  Pir  Muhammad  had  kept  in  con-
finement ; proceeding  thence  by  continuous  mavches  he  also  took
the  fort  of  Bhat,®  and  having  taken  prisoner  Rai  Jaljin  Bhati
put  him  to  death  together  with  the  garrison  and  inhabitants  of
the  fort.

Leaving  there  ® and  taking  Samana,  he  put  to  death  crowds  of
fugitives  from  Dlpalpur  and  Ajudhau  and  Sarsuti,®  who  were
helplessly  fleeing  in  all  directions  in  terror  of  their  lives,  and
taking  large  numbers  of  them  prisoners  he  took  them  along  with
him,  and  covering  great  distances  he  crossed  the  river  Jamiia,  and
entered  the  Doab,'^  and  sweeping  the  greater  part  of  the  country

1 Text  US.  (A)  Firishta  Tnlumba  (see  Hunter

Imp  Gaz.,  XIII.  163)  is  shewn  in  Rennell’s  map  at  the  junction  of  the  Jhelam
and  the  Chenab,  Langana  being  at  the  junction  of  the  Chinab  and  Ravi :
(Tieff  III.].

Fiiishca  says.  “Arrived  at  a place  where  the  river  of  Jamii  and  the
Cheniib  moot  where  there  was  a stions  fortress  called  Talanbiia.  ’ Briggs
says  “to  the  conflu.x  of  the  Chunab  with  tlie  Kivvy."

From  Tiilumha  Firi^ta  tells  us  Timur  marched  to  Sbahnawaz  where  they
took  all  the  arain  they  required  and  burned  the  remainder.  From  thence
ho  wont  to  AjQdhan  and  Bhaluir.  Shahnawaz  is  shewn  in  Rennell’s  map
on  the  Eastern  bank  of  the  Kiivt,  Long  72^ E.  Lat.  30  5.  N.  Ajadhan  is  Prik
Paltan,  and  is  about  80  miles  3 -VV.  of  gbaiinaw.vz.  Here  is  the  tomb  of  .jjhaikh
Faridu-d-Din  franji  .SJiakkar  which  was  visited  by  Timur.  From  Ajiidlian
to  Bhatnir  is  about  00  miles.  Firishta  says  from  Kh-Hisku!  to  Bliatair  is
fifty  A'i'o/i.  See  Elliott  111.415  or  seqq.  for  the  description  of  tliis  cam-
paign translated  from  the  Titiiur  calls  Khalis  kol,  Khiilis

Kotuli,  and  says  it  is  ten  lus  from  Ajudliaii  and  fiity  from  Bhatnir.

s MS.  (A)

3 MS.  (A)  Bhatprrr  Tli’s  shooUl  l>e  see  note

1 abuve.  Fii'i^ra  says  that  Tininr  s forec  accoinpiislievl  the  distance  betweea
Aju'Uian  kolj  and  Bhatnii  in  one  da^r  This  i3  a long  march  but  a3

they  were  cavalry  it  is  perlinps  possible.  . ^

* Tne  Bombay  test  of  Fin^ta  has  KljiljT,  also  Briggs

Firishta  p.  48S /(.of, lufL  Both  M^8.  agree  with  the  tost  in  gi^'ing  RM  Jaijln
as  the  name  of  tlie  go7^?v^or  of  the  fort.  The  'i  cixUa  him

Hbo  Dili  Chain,  see  Elliott  III.  422'f2.3,

5 On  the  3rd  of  Rabhu-l- Awwab

^ 5l1i  of  Rabrn-I-A wwab  '•rt  EBioti  TIT.  I2(>— 423.

‘ MS.  ( V -rO-

[ 356  ]

■with  the  bitter  whirlwinrl  of  rapine  and  pillage,  camped  on  the
banks  of  the  river  Jamna  opposite  the  town  of  Lnni  • not  far
from  Dihli  ; ^ and  at  this  camp  he  put  to  the  sword  about  fifty
thousand  prisoners  who  had  fallen^  into  the  hands  of  his  soldiery
before  reaching  the  river  Ganges  ; and  some  of  the  ecclesiastical
dignitaries  of  his  army  also,  who  had  not  the  sliglitest  acquaintance
with  the  sword,  taking  all  tlie.se  Hindustani  Muslims  for  Hindus,
in  their  desire  for  the  reward  of  holy  war*  sent  many  of  them
with  their  own  hands  into  the  next  world.

270.  Then  in  the  month  of  Jamaidivl-Awwal  801  H.  the  great
Timur  cros.sed  the  Jamna  and  encamped  at  Fimza'iad  ^ and  the
next  day  encamped  above  the  Hanz-i-Khass.  Iqbal  Khan  having
got  ready  a force  of  men  and  elephants,  came  out  against  him
and  engaged  his  troops,  but  was  defeated  in  the  first  engagement,
and  in  spite  of  alt  their  eiiorts  they  were  not  able  to  withdraw  even
a portion  of  the  elephants  into  the  city,®  so  complete  was  the  rout.
And  in  this  defeat  ’ many  were  killed,  and  -u'hen  the  glittei-ing
soldiers  of  the  army  of  the  niuht  had  routed  the  troops  of  the  dny,
Iqbal  Khan  and  Sultan  Mahmud  leaving  their  families  and  friends

1 Luni,  seven  miles  N'.  S.-W.  of  Dihli.  Tieff.  I.  136.  Lounl  ville  antre  fois
penplee  ec  munie  d'un  fort.  Timur  arrived  there  on  the  27tb  Rnbi’u-1-
Awwal.  Liini  vrae  situated  ou  a Doab  between  the  Jamna  and  the  Halia.

SMS.  (A)  S MS.  (A)  iyJ  iSjUijl.

4 The  reward  of  the  “ Ghazx  ” or  one  who  fights  in  the  cause  of

Islam  is  thus  d‘?fltied  “ God  ia  sponsor  for  him  who  goes  forth  to  fight  in  the
road  of  God,  for  his  sacUfacticn  and  for  that  of  his  Prophet.”  He  shall  if
he  be  not  killed,  retarn  to  his  home  with  plunder  and  rewards.  And  if  he
die,  his  reward  is  Paradise  XVII,  Ij.

The  Jiliuil  or  holy  war  is  a duty  enjoined  in  several  passages  in  the

Qur’an  and  the  Traditions,  and  its  rewards  are  those  of  Paradise.  {See
Hughes  Diet,  of  Islam,  Art.  Jihdd).

6 Firishta  states  that  he  dog  a deep  trench  and  fastened  a nnmber  of
cows  and  bulfaloes  together  with  raw  hide,  stationing  sharpshooters  behind
them,  and  v/heii  Iqbv'il  Khan  carae  out  against  him  with  his  troops  and  120
elephants  deftated  him  v/itli  great  slaughter  and  advanced  to  the  Hauz-i-
Khass ; and  see  Hliiott.  Ill,  438,  et  seqq.

The  dare  given  by  B^ndaoui  is  apparently  wrong,  as  the  Malfuzdt-l-Tlmfirl
says  that  Timur  crossed  the  Jamna  on  the  5th  RabPa-hAkhir.  See  EJliott
III.  443  and  rote  1.

® ilS.  fA)  omits  and  wiites

Not  in  iIS.(A}  which  reads  j-

[ 357  ]

in  the  bonds  of  shame  and  disgrace,  took  flights  Snltan  Mahmud
fled  straight  to  Gujrat,  and  Iqhal  Khan  crossing  the  Jamna
escaped  to  the  town  of  Baran.  On  the  following  day  the  Great
Timur  gave  quarter  to  the  inhabitants  of  Dihli,  receiving  from
them  much  valuable  property  and  many  presents  as  the  price  of
quarter.  In  the  meantime  hov.’ever,  the  people  of  the  city  killed
some  of  the  soldiers,  accordingly  on  the  fourth  day  he  ordered
all  the  inhabitants  to  he  made  prisoners,®  and  took  them  all  off
towards  Transoxiana;  eventually  Shaikh  Ahmad  KathhS  whose  tomb
is  well  known  at  Sar  Khez  ^ in  Gujarat  near  to  Ahinadabad,  went
along  with  the  army  and  had  an  interview  with  the  Great  Timur,
and  made  apparent  to  him  his  condition  as  a Darvesh,  and  his
surpassing  knowledge,  moreover  he  argued  with  and  confuted
over  and  over  again  ^ the  learned  doctors  who  were  with  the

1 On  the  7th  Uabi'n-t-Akhir.

5 Firishta  Elliott,  III  447.

« MS.  (A)

Shaikh  Ahmad  Khattn  was  bom  at  DihlT  A.H.  737  (A.D.  1336)  of  a
noble  family  of  that  city.  His  name  was  Nasiru-d-Din.  He  was  a dis-
ciple of  Baba  Ishaq  MagUnbi,  and  came  to  Gujaiat  in  the  reign  of  Snltan
Ahmad  Gujarati  (.A.D.  1411-13).  He  was  buried  in  Sarkliech  near  Al.ima-
dabad,  (Ain-i-Akbari  [Jarrett],  III.  371).

Shaikh  Ahmad  Khattn  snrnamed  Ganjbakhgh  was  sumamed  from  Khattn
a village  near  Nagor,  the  residence  of  his  spiritual  guide  Babii  Isl.i5q  Maghribi.
After  his  retnm  from  a pilgrimage  to  the  holy  places  he  came  back  to
Gujarat  and  settled  first  at  Sarkhej  and  afterwards  at  Ahtnadabad,  in  the
bnilding  of  which  he  was  associated  with  Saltan  .Abmad,  A.H.  813-20.

He  died  at  Sarkhej  in  849  .A.H.,  aged  111  years,  anu  his  mansolenm  with
the  buildings  attached  are  said  to  have  been  begnu  by  Mnh.iramad  I,  the

son  of  Ahmad  Shiih,  and  to  have  been  completed  by  his  son  and  successor
Qntbu-d-Din  ^ah.  See  Bayley,  History  of  Gujarat^  pp,  90-91,  notes.

* The  text  reads  ch|  Aiu-i-Akbari  (Blochmann),  Text,

II.  220.  ^

The  text  of  Badaoni  reads  JIS.  (A)  reads

Tieffenthaler,  I.  377  speaks  of  it  as  follows: — “A  trois  miiles  de  Gnzarate
se  trouve  Snrkds,  vilLage  oti  est  le  mansolce  construic  a gr.inds  fr.iis  p.ir  Gnus
Ahmad  lloi  du  Gnzarate”  again  at  page  375  wt  find  “ Gn’i.  Ahmad,  di.nt  le
magnifiqne  tombcan  porte  par  des  arcades  vontoes,  a rendn  tameax  le  village
de  Sarkes,  distant  de  3 millc.s  do  la  ville.”

Sarkhej  was  three  miles  South-East  from  .Vsjlwai  in  rhe  vicinity  of  wi  icii
Ahmad.abdd  w.as  built  by  Snhan  -Ahmad.  S20  A.H.  flilT  A.P.).

6 JIS.  (A)

[ 358  ]

Transoxiaua  force,  and  begged  for  the  prisoners’  lives.  The  Groat
Timur  conceived  such  a strong  liking  for  him  that  he  acceded  1
to  his  request  and  liberated  all  the  prisoners.

This  signal  service  of  the  ShaijA  remained  ever  as  a debt  upon
the  people  of  Hindustan  ; and  a full  detail  of  this  cireumstance  is
given  at  length  in  the  Maqamat  of  the  Shaikh.  A few  days  after
271.  this  victory  Khizr  Khan  and  Baha'Jur  Nahir  Miwati,®  who  had
taken  alarm  and  fled  to  the  hill  country  of  Miwat,  came  in  and
paid  their  respects  to  the  Great  Timur : ^ orders  were  issued  to
make  all  of  their  party  prisoners,  with  the  exception  of  Khizr
Khan,  who  had  apparently  done  some  former  good  service  which
saved  him.  After  this  he  raised  the  baiiner  of  return  and  seized
the  country  at  the  foot  of  the  Siwalik  hills,^  and  greatly  shook  that
hill  country  as  it  were  witli  an  earthquake,  ere  he  reached  Labor.

For  the  date  of  this  victory  they  assigned  the  two  words  1^
(Rakha,  affluence,  prosperity)  and  jA  (Knar,^  a thorn)  ; and
Shaikha  Khukhar®  also,  who  had  formerly  served  the  Amir  and
had  taken  Labor  by  fraud  from  Sarang  Ivhan,  fell  into  his  bauds.
He  accordingly  imprisoned  him  together  with  his  w'ife  and  family,
and  gave  orders  to  sack  Labor  an  t take  the  inhabitants  prisoners.
Then  having  made  over  Dipalpur  and  ilultaii  to  Khi?r  ILhan  he

1 IIS.  (A)  JArV

S On  Friday  the  21th  of  Rabi’u-I-Akhir  according  to  the  llalfQzat-i-Timurl,
which  gives  a different  account  of  the  treatment  accorded  to  them.

5 Badaoul  omits  to  mention  the  captare  of  Mlrac  (29th  Rab?n-1-Akhir)  and
the  victories  on  the  Ganges  (Jamadiu-l-Awwal  Ist  to  loth).

* Accurdiiig  to  the  account  in  tiie  ^fniftlzat-i-Thnurl  this  was  in  response  to
an  embassy  sent  to  Bahadur  NTdiir  b\'  Timur  at  Kutila.

6 Both  of  these  words  give  the  date,  =2CK)  + C00+  1 ==S01

jhk  =000  + 1 +200  = P01.

® Timur  captured  seven  forts  iii  the  Siwidik  iiills,  fighting  twenty  battles
in  thirty-two  days  with  invariable  success.  The  eighth  fort  bolouged  to
Sliaikha  Kiiukbar  and  was  taken  about  the  15th  of  Jannidiu-l-Awwal  CKliiott
III.  467).  Malik  Sliaikha  Khukhar  was  brother  of  Nusrat  Khukhar  v/ho  wa.s
formerly  governor  of  Labor  on  behalf  of  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Dihli.  He  imis
taken  prisoner  by  Prince  Fir  Muhammad  and  Rustam  and  Amir  Jaluin  Sliali.
who  had  been  sent  by  Timur  with  an  army  to  Labor  for  that  purpose  and  to
levy  a ransom  from  the  city  of  Labor.  The  Mulfuzut-i-Thnilri  states  that
■ Timiir  proceed  ’d  straight  to  Jammu  whence  hia  route  was  by  Jabhan,
Sambazjt,  Baiuja  to  Attock  where  he  crossed  the  Indus.  This  was  during
the  davr*  henNki-u  rhe  24lh  of  JumadTii-l-Al^er  and  the  3id  of  R.ijub.  Sec
Eilkit  ill.  474  477  . -ct  aUu  of  Vuzdi.  Klbutr  111.  52<)  52.

[ 359  J

saia  to  him  * ‘ I have  takeu  Dihli  and  have  made  a pi-esent  ox  it
to  you.’  Leaving  Labor  he  proceeded  by  nnintenupted  marches
by  way  of  Kabul  to  his  capital  Samartiand  while  Khizr  Khan
went  to  his  own  territory  (Jagir).

At  this  time  such  a famine  and  pestilence  fell  upon  Dihli  that
the  citj^  was  utterly  ruined,  and  those  of  the  inhabitants  who
were  left  died,  while  for  two  whole  months  not  a bird  moved  a
wing  in  Dihli.  In  this  interval  Sultan  Nusrat  Shah,  who  after
his  defeat  by  Iqbal  Khan  had  gone  into  the  lioab,  .seeing  that  he
had  an  open  field,  went  first  to  iliiatli  and  thence  to  Firuzabad,
and  fortified ‘the  city  of  Dihli.  ‘Adil  Khan  and  the  other  folk
who  had  escaped  from  the  hands  of  the  Mughnls,  coming  out  of  the
various  holes  and  corners  where  they  had  been  hiding,  gaihered
round  him ; when  he  had  got  together  this  company  he  nominated
Shihab  Khan  to  proceed  to  Baran  against  Iqbal  Khan.  Whilst
he  was  on  the  way,  a body  of  Hindus  attacked  Shihab  Khan
suddenly  by  nigbt,  and  raised  bim  to  the  dignity  of  martyrdom.

Iqbal  Khan  with  great  energy  and  promptitude  obtained  possession
of  his  elephants  and  army,  so  that  from  day  to  day  his  power
increased,  while  tlie  affairs  of  Nusrat  Shah, became  more  and  more
entangled.  Iqbal  Kban  leaving  Baran,  started  in  the  direction  of
Dibll,  and  Nusrat  Shah  leaving  Firuzabad  made  for  Miwat  where  272.
he  died,  and  the  four  quarters  of  Hindustan  came  under  the  domi-
nion of  !Maliks  of  the  various  tribe.s.^

Then  in  the  year  802  U.  (IS99  A.D.)  Iqbfil  Khan  marched  against
Sham.s  Khan  Auhadi  ^ the  ruler  of  Baiana,  and  the  hostile  forces
met  in  the  vicinity  of  Nuh  and  Fatal ; fortune  favoured  Iq'ial
Khan  and  Shams  Khan  proceeded  to  Baiana.  Iqbal  Kbln  led
bis  army  towards  Kaitbar  and  exacted  contributions  of  money
and  services  from  Rai  Harsingh.'*’  And  in  this  same  year  Ivtuvaja-
i-Jahan  was  received  into  the  mercy  of  God  in  Jaunpur.

1 MS.  (A)  reacts  here

8 Firishta  tells  ns  the  names  of  these  various  independent  rnlers.  See
Briggs  I.  498.

8 According  to  Firi^ta  this  was  in  803  IT.

4 MS.  (A)  jtii  Rfii  Horsing  was  R.ii  of  Tt.ova.  By  KaTtliar  or

Katehar  is  meant  Rotiilkhand.  See  Thomas  P<-ithun  Kiitj',  p.  325,  note  2.

[ 360  ]

Quatrain.

Hove  long  wilt  then  say  “Who  has  drunk  the  cup  of  pleasure  ?•”
How  long  w'ilt  thou  say  “ Who  has  gained  the  palm  of  fortune  ? ”
What  avail  all  these  idle  tales,  for  we  must  depart,

What  profit  in  all  these  empty  stories,  since  death  must  come.

And  Malik  Mubarak  Qaranqal,^  having  assumed  the  title  of
Mubarak  Shah,  took  his  place.

And  in  Jamaidu-l-Awwal  * in  the  year  803  H.  (1400  A.D.)  Shams
Khan  of  Baiana  and  Mubarak  Khan  son  of  Bahadur  Naldr  had
an  interview  witli  Iqbal  Khan,  who  taking  tliem  with  him  fouglit
a battle  near  Baitall  on  the  banks  of  the  Blackvvater,  which  is
known  as  the  Kalapani,  with  Rai  Sir®  the  ruler  of  that  district,
and  overcame  him,  and  pursued  the  infidels  ns  far  as  tlie  cnnfines
of  Itawa  ; and  on  Ids  niniva!  at  Q.iuauj,  Sultauu-sh-Sharq  Mubarak
Shah  came  up  from  Jaunpra-  and  sat  down  over  against  him  on
the  other  bank  of  tlie  river  Ganses,  but  inasmuch  as  neither  of
them  could  effect  a crossing,  they  each  returned  * to  their  own
273.  country  without  doing  anything.  As  he  returned,  Iqbal  Khan
treacherously  put  to  death  j^ams  Khan  and  Mubaiak  Khan.®
In  this  same  year  Turkba.cha  Sultani,  the  son-in-law  of  Ghalib
Khan  of  Siimana.  collected  a large  army,  and  on  the  ninth  of
Rajub  of  tld.s  rear  fought  a batile  with  Khi?r  Khan  near  Ajudlian,
and  being  defeated  went  to  the  town  of  Bijiihar,  where  Ghalib
Kliau  in  concert  with  the  other  Amirs  put  him  to  death.

1 His  adopted  son  Malik

3 All  MSS.  write  tlds  constumlr  Jj5/f  > instead  of
8 Firishta  (Bo.  tex^^  .says.

*X«f  J

Whence  he  arrived  g ihe  township  of  Baitali  on  the  hanks  of  tin
Eai  Sanlr  curne  out  r--  oppose  liiin.

Brig^^s  say?  ; ho  leached  'he  village  of  Puttyaly  on  the  GaiHr''s

the  Kay  of  Str  o‘‘  oiipo.'LJ  liini  ”

’’j  i.c  L.  ao'..  1-  : K ’i  !N’a>!  i ry  Kilim  ( 'Oe  Hunter  Onz-'“  VIT

3271  'yli  e >>ciwt  i ■ ■ J-  .ua  an..  Oange'^.  Timor  calls  it  the  Kai:-rj  t,d:

waitr  ; F d 1 ’ . d'J,

^ The  text  i . ■ v.  ic'-fr  *"  ■ Jfj  j,

6 MS  [A  , ■)’  ' . K'  . ■ ‘ account  includes  Muljaiuk

K1  ila  8'j  'h.e.  • e . v'.  • » >*  t

[ 361  ]

And  ill  the  year  804  H.  (1401  A.D.)  Sultan  Muhammad  ibn
Muhammad  Shah  arrived  at  Dihli  from  Dhar,  and  although  Iqbal
Khan  went  out  to  receive  him,  and  caused  him  to  alight  at  the
Jaban  Nuraa  1 palace  with  all  expressions  of  service  and  mani-
festations of  respect,  still,  since  Iqbal  Khan  was  in  possession  of
all  the  paraphernalia  of  royalty,  Sultan  Mahmud  became  very
jealous  of  him  and  took  him  with  him  towards  Qanauj,  And  in
this  year  Mali ku-sh-Sharq  Mubarak  Shah  died,  and  his  younger
brother  Sultan  Ibrahim  succeeded  him,  and  came  out  to  fight

f O

with  Sultan  Mahmud  and  Iqbal  Khan.  Sultan  Mahmud  before
engaging  in  conflict  left  the  army  of  Iqbal  Khan  under  pretence
of  a hunting  expedition,  and  had  an  interview  with  Sultan
Ibrahim  who  treated  him  with  scant  ceremony ; Saltan  Mahmud
accordingly  removed  Shahzada  Fat^  Khan  of  Herat,  who  was
holding  Qanauj  on  behalf  of  Mubarak  Shah,  and  took  tliat  fortress
under  his  own  control.  The  populace  of  Qanauj,  both  people  and
soldiery,  joined  Saltan  Mahmud,  and  Sultan  Ibrahim  returned
to  Jaunpur,  while  Iqbal  Khan  retraced  his  steps  towards  Dihli,  so
that  Sultan  Mahmud  was  left  in  undisputed  and  contented
possession  of  Qanauj.

And  in  the  year  805  H.  (1402  A.D. ) Iqbal  Khan  made  an  274.
attack  upon  the  country  round  the  fortress  of  Gwaliar,  which  Rai
Harsingh*  had  taken  by  treachery  from  the  Muslims  during  the
invasion  of  Timur,  and  wresting  it  from  the  possession  of  Bairam
Dev  the  son  of  Harsingh,®  took  it  into  his  own  control.

And  in.  the  year  8t)*>  H.  (1403  A.D.J  Tatar  Khan  the  son  of
Zafar  Khin,  forgetting  his  filial  dnty  took  his  father  prisoner  by
treachery  and  sent  him  to  Asawal,  assuming  to  himself  the  title  of
Sultan  Kasini-d-Din  Muhammad  Shah,  and  set  out  at  the  head  of
a large  army  with  the  intention  of  attempting  to  reduce  Dihli.

While  he  was  on  the  way  his  uncle  Shams  Khan  administered
poison  to  him  and  removed  him,  then  he  released  Zafar  Khan  and
the  whole  army  joined  him.

1 MS  (.1)  reads  Jah-lnpanah.  This  ivHS  the  name  given  to  the

central  porf.on  of  the  triple  cita'iei  of  i)ihl:  connecting  old  Dihli  with  Siri.

It  was  situated  in  the  milst  of  the  inhabited  city,  .and  bad  thirteen  gates  ; of
thf  other  two,  Siri  liad  seven,  gates,  and  old  Dihli  tan  g ftes  Sei  Dlhott.  Hi
4iS  The  pa'ace  was  called  Jnht'ii  Kama  as  in  the  text.

2 Fiiishta  calls  him

s • MSS  a •'  /,

[ 362  j
Verse.

A parricide  is  not  fitted  to  be  a kingf,

And  even  if  he  is  fitted  he  will  not  lust  for  more  than  six
months.

And  in  the  year  807  H.  (1404  A.D.)  Tqhal  Khan  marched
towards  Gvvaliar  and  Itawa,  the  Rais  of  which  districfs  all  took
refuge  within  the  fortress  of  Itawa,  and  stood  siege  for  four
months;  at  last  they  made  overtures  for  peace,  sending  four  ele-
phants aud  other  presents  of  suitable  nature.  Iqbal  Khan  leaving
there  came  to  Qanaiij,  and  fought  with  Sultan  IMahmiid,  but  was
unable  to  effect  hi.s  purpose  owing  to  the  stiength  of  the  fortifica-
tions, so  returned  to  Dihli  without  accomplisliing  his  object.

And  in  the  Muharram  of  the  year  SOS  H,  (1405  A.D.)  he
marched  for  Samana,  and  from  thence  came  to  Rupar,t  and  by
stratagem  laid  hands  upon  Baliram  Khan  Tnrkbacha,  who  had
been  an  antagonist  of  Sarang  Khan,  and  flayed  hi.s  head.  Leaving
Rupar  he  proceeded  towards  Multan,  intending  to  fight  with
Khizr  Khan,  and  at  Talaundi  taking  with  him  Eai  Kamalu-d-
Din  Mubin  and  the  other  Znmindnrs,  on  the  nineteenth  of  the
month  of  Jumadiu-l-Aivwal  in  the  abovemeiitioned  year,  ho
engaged  in  battle  with  Khizr  Khan  in  the  neighbonrhootl  of
275.  Ajudhan,*  on  the  banks  of  a tributary  (of  the  Satlaj)  ; ^ and  since

1 In  tbe  Uraball.-t  district,  43  miles  North  of  Ambila  city,  Lat.  20°  57' N.
Long.  76’  33'  E.  on  tlio  south  bank  of  tlie  Sutlej,  (Hunter  Imp.  Gaz.,  XII.  82).

a Ajudhan  the  ancient  name  of  Piikpattan.  Lat.  30’  20'  40"  N.  Long.
73’  25'  50"  E,  It  is  known  as  Pakpattan,  or  Ferry  of  the  Pure,  from  Shaikh
Faridu-d-Din  Ganj  ^akkar  who  is  buried  there.  The  saint  was  called  Ganj
Sbakkar  as  he  w.is  reputed  to  have  the  iniracnious  power  of  turning  into
sng.ir  whatever  he  put  into  his  month,  even  earth  and  stones.  Pilgrims  from
all  parts  of  India,  Afghanistan,  and  Central  Asia  flock  to  this  shrine,  and
during  the  iluhurrani  festival  as  many  as  60,('00  persons  have  been  present.
Dnring  the  afternoon  and  night  of  the  last  day  tno  crowds  vie  with  one
another  in  attempting  to  gain  access  to  a narrow  opening  in  a wall  near  the
shrine  known  as  the  “ Gate  of  Paradise.”  Whoever  can  force  his  way  throngh
this  opening  during  the  prescribed  hours  is  assured  of  an  entrance  into
Paradise.  For  this  reasoti  the  ernsh  is  excessive  and  many  are  injuied.

See  Hunter  Imp.  Gaz.  X.  532-533,  also  Cunningham  (.A.  G.  I.j  214-219.

8 In  the  text  and  ilSS.  we  read  Ajudhan  dar  kind,-

i-d\htnda,  which  at  first  sight  seems  difficult  to  undeistand,  nntil  the  old  maps
are  consulted  We  see  in  Kennell’s  map  (A.D.  1782)  that  Ajfidhan  was
situated  {G.  g)  upon  an  island  surrounded  by  the  Satlaj  to  the  nurtli,  and  a

[ 363  ]

ill-fortune  attended  Iqbal  Khand  lie  was  defeated  in  the  very
first  engagement,  and  his  horse  being  wounded  could  not  bear  him
oH  the  field,  so  that  the  soldiers  of  Khizr  lOian  pursued  him,  and
cutting  off  his  head  sent  it  to  Fathpur,  one  of  the  dependencies
of  ilultan.  And  in  the  month  of  Jumaida-l-Althir  of  this  year
Sultan  Mahmud  came  from  Qauauj  at  the  invitation  of  the  Amirs
of  Dihli,  and  once  more  sat  upon  the  throne  ot  Dilili,  and  conferred
appointments  upon  the  Amirs,  and  sent  the  family  of  Mubarak
IQian  to  Kol.  And  in  the  month  of  Jumaidu-l- Awwal  of  the
year  809  H.  (1406  A. D.)  Sultan  Mahmud  marched  with  a force
towards  Q.iiiauj,  and  Sultan  Ibrahim  came  out  thence  and  crossed
the  Gangvs,  but  they  both  turned  back  without  tighciiig.®

Sultan  Ibrahim  went  towards  Jannpfir,  and  Sultan  Mahmud
towards  Dihli,  but  seeing  that  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Mahmud's  army
one  after  the  other  leit  for  their  own  districts  as  they  came  to  them
in  the  march,  Sultan  Ibrahim  turned  back  and  besieged  Qauauj  ;
Malik  Mahmud  Tarmati,  who  was  holding  Qau.iuj  for  Sultan
Mahmud,  kept  Sultan  Ibrabim  engaged  in  fighting  for  four  months,
hut  when  he  saw  that  no  reinforcements  were  arriving  from  any
quarter  he  was  forced  to  sue  for  peace,  and  suiTendereJ  Qan  iiij
to  Sultan  Ibrahitn.2  Sultan  Ibraliim  passed  the  rainy  season  at
Qauauj,  and  then  having  made  over  tliat  di'-trict  to  Ikhtiyar  Khan
the  grandson  of  Malik  Daulat  Yiir  of  Kanpila,  started  to  I’educe
Dihli.

tributary  stream  which  left  the  mam  river  to  the  eistwarii  of  Ajudhan,  and
ilowiii"  soiitli-west  joined  it  ag  u'i  some  3~)  miles  lower  do«  ii.  This  explains
Badioni’s  statement.  The  town  of  Ajuilliaii  is  generally  s lid  to  have  stood
upon  tlie  bank  of  the  SatUrj  its.tlf.  rnnninglnm  'A.  (1.  of  India  till)  says
“ Tlie  ancient  town  of  .Ajiidhau  is  situated  on  the  high  b.uik  ..i  the  ol.i  rt  iclej
28  miles  to  the  south-west  of  Depilpur  an.l  10  md.'s  fruu  ihe  piesunc  ouiirso
of  the  river”  (1871  A.B.)  But  from  B.idaoni's  st  imneiit  it  is  clear  tiiat
Ajudhan  stood,  not  on  the  banks  of  the  Satlaj  itself,  but  .in  a southern
loop  or  tributary  stream.  It  is  tlie  modern  I’akpUi.ui,  .>cc  note  2.

1 There  is  a play  on  the  words  I'lhal.  good  fortune  .lud  Idhir^

bad  fortune,

* According  to  Pirishta  Ibr.ihini  Shrili  w.is  induced  to  return  to  Jaiaipur
by  the  intelligence  thit  Alii/aff.ir  Bhah  of  Guiriit  h.id  i iLen  pt  isouei  .\lp
Khfin.  commonly  called  Snltfui  llosh.iiig.  aud  nas  now  m-ircliing  tm  JauM])ur.

M8.  { \).

The  ce.Yi  has  the  words  liji  ^3  whn-ii  seem  to  be  .oipei  duous.  'i'hev  ai.
not  m M8.  (A).

[ 364  3

And  iii  the  year  810  H.  {1407  A.D.)  Nosrat  Khan  Kavkandaz,^
and  Tatar  !^a,n  the  son  of  Sarang  Eian,  and  Malik  Marhabu  the
slave  of  Iqbal  !^au,  tamed  against  Saltan  Mahmud  and  joined
Sultan  lb:  aliim,  and  Asad  IThan  Lodi  fortified  himself  in  Sain-
bhal.  The  following  day  Sultau  Ibrahim  reduced  the  forti-ess
of  Sambhal  and  gave  it  to  Tatar  i^an ; then  crossing  the
Ganges  he  encamped  on  the  banka  of  the  Jamna  near  the  fort
of  Kicha  in  the  vicinity  of  Dihli,  where  he  learned  that  Zafar
Khiiii  had  taken  the  district  of  Dhar*  and  was  making  his  way
toJaunpar;8  a.ccordingly  leaving  Malik  Marhaba  in  Baran,  he
reached  Jaunpurbj  continuous  marches  ; Sultan  Mahmud  pursued
him  and  having  killed  Malik  Marhaba  in  battle,  and  taking
Sambhal*  without  a fight,  left  there  Basad  Khan  after  his  usual
custom.  Tatar  Khan  marched  to  Qananj  and  the  Sultan  came  to
Dihli.  And  in  this  year  Khizr  Khan  came  with  a large  force
and  drove  Daulat  Khan  out  of  Satnana.^  The  Amirs  of  that
district  all  sought  an  interview  with  him,  and  the  whole  country
as  far  as  to  the  outskirts  of  Dihli  fell  into  his  hands ; only  Rohtak
and  the  Doab  remained  in  the  possession  of  Sultan  Mahmud.

And  in  the  year  811  EL,  (1408  A.D.)  Sultan  Mahmud  proceeding
to  Hissar  Piruz  took  it  ® from  Qiwam  Khan  to  whom  Khizr  Kljau
liad  given  it,  and  having  taken  possession  of  it,  on  arriving  at  the
village  of  Rata  turned  back  towards  Dihli : Khijr  Khau  then

1 Or  probably  Gnrgandnz  “ the  wolf-sl.'iyer  ” JIS,  (A)  reads  (?)  iiiija,

which  means  a huge  elephant.

> In  Central  India.  Lat.  23°  36'  N.,  Long.  75'  4'  E.  see  Hunter  Imp.  Gaz.  TV.
24S.

* In  Central  India,  between  Lat.  25°  23'  45"  and  26°  12'  N.  Long.  82^  10'  and
83°  7*  45"  E.

Snltan  Ibrahim  built  at  Jaunpur  the  Atola  Masjid,  using  for  this  purixjso
the  stones  of  a Hindu  temple  the  votive  offering  of  Jai  CUand  whicli  he
destroyed.  See  Hunter  Imp.  Gaz.  VII  152,

* In  Ttohilkund  Lat.  28°  35'  5"  N.  Long.  78’  36'  45"  E.,  23  miles  S.  W.  of
Morad.ibad  and  fonr  miles  W.  of  the  Sot  River.  See  Eennell’s  map.  Tieff.
III.  where  he  places  it  4.5  miles  N.  E.  of  Bareilly.  The  Sambalaka  of  Ptolomy.
See  MoCrindle’s  Ancient  India,  p.  133.  See  also  Hunter  XII,  1S7.

* Tieff.  1. 133,  about  25  miles  S.  W of  Hausi  and  100  miles  to  the  eastward
of  Dihli.

* MS.  (A)  re.ads  Firi^ia  c.dl  the  fortress  Finiza.

1 Or  *^3  B.ana  MS.  (4)

[ 365  ]

came  by  way  of  Rohtak  with  a large  army  from  Fathabad  to  oppose
Sultan  Mahmud,^  and  laid  siege  to  Dihli,  but  was  not  able  to
maintain  the  siege  by  reason  of  the  severe  famine  wdiich  prevailed
in  Dihli,  then  having  taken  possession  of  the  Doab  he  retumed  to
Fat^pur  *

And  in  the  year  812  H.  (1409  A.D.)  ® Bairam  ^^an  Tnrkbacha,*
who  after  the  death  of  Bahrain  !^an  Turkbacha  had  become
master  of  Samana,  and  had  been  defeated  in  a battle  with  Danlat  277.
Khan,  and  again  revolting  against  Khizr  Khan  had  had  a second
interview  with  Danlat  Khan,  now  offered  his  services  to  Khizr
Khan,  and  received  a confirmation  of  the  grant  of  the  districts
formerly  held  by  him  in  fief.  And  in  the  year  813  H.  (1410  A.D.)

Khizr  Khan  besieged  the  fortress  of  Rohtak  ^ for  six  months,  and
after  reducing  it  proceeded  to  Fathpur.®  In  this  year  Sultan
Mahmud  made  an  expedition  to  Kaithar  and  arrived  at  the  capital
Dihli.

In  the  year  814  H.  (1411  A.D.)  Khizr  Khan  came  to  Karnul  ^
and  Miwat  ® and  ravaged  that  country,  and  blockading  Saltan

1 MS.  (A)  reads  here  Ko-cf  br^  y

® For  some  iuscratable  reason  Briggs  passes  over  the  events  of  two  \ ears
here.  c/.  Firishta,  Bo.  test,  p.  292,  and  Briggs,  pp.  503-504.

* The  text  says  712  H.  MS.  (.A)  gives  812  H.

The  editor  of  the  text  gives  a footnote  to  say  that  all  three  MSS,  give
712  H.

A MS.  ( A)  inserts  ^ before  and  omits  [)  after

Firishta  savs  that  I^tiyar  Khan  joined  ^iizr  seeing  he  was  the

stronger.

^ Held  according  to  Firishta  by  Malik  Idris  on  behalf  of  Mahmtid  Shah,

® By  way  of  Samana  (Firishta).

" Which  was  held  by  Iqlim  Khan  and  Bahadar  Khan  (Firi^ta).

8 Miicdt.  For  an  account  of  this  Province  see  Hunter  Zm^p. Vol.  IX.
pp.  418  and  segq.  from  which  the  substance  of  this  note  is  taken  :

The  Meos,  a tnbe  which  gave  their  name  to  this  provinco  were  of
obscure  origin  claiming  to  be  Rajputs,  but  probabiy  a combination  frcim
various  stocks  and  soarces  and  nearly  allied  to  the  ilmas  The  original
Mcos  probably  became  converts  to  Islam  at  the  tiino  of  Mahmud  of  CThaznln  :
their  customs  are  a mistrire  of  Hindu  and  Musulnian  observances.

The  province  of  Miwat  lay  sonth  of  Dihli  and  in  ilughul  times  formed
part  of  the  SubaU  of  Agra.  Its  most  famous  towns  were  Xarnaol,  Ulwur,

[ 366  ]

Malimfid  ill  the  fortress  of  Siri,  which  is  part  of  Dihli,'  and
Ikhtiyar  lOian  in  Firozabad,  and  fighting  several  tierce  battles,
was  prevented  from  maintaining  the  siege  * by  reason  of  the
dearness  of  grain,  and  returned  to  Fathpur  by  way  of  Panipath.®

And  ill  the  year  816  H.  (1412  A.D.)  ^ Sultan  Mahmud  departed
from  this  world,  and  the  kingdom  passed  from  the  family  of
Firnz  ^lah.  The  duration  of  his  reign,  full  as  it  was  of  turmoil
and  vicissitudes,  was  twenty  j'ears  ® and  two  months,  dui'ing  which
Sultan  Mahmud  had  had  only  the  name  of  sovereignty'.

Verse.

Wlio  is  there  in  this  long-enduring  world

Who  can  say  ‘‘  Mine  is  the  kingdom’"  save  the  Almigluv'  r

T'erid.

A iiead  which  tlie  fates  exalt  to  a lofty  ]iosition
They  later  on  entangle  its  neck  in  a noose.

Tijira  and  Rcw.'iri.  Bah.alar  N.ihu-  (wlio  is  frequently  inoiitioned  in  tfic
te.xt)  was  tlio  founder  of  (he  Klianz.'aia  lac'',  l.ong  t!ie  rulers  of  Miwiit.

The  province  of  Mivv.'it  included  paitof  the  British  districts  of  iliittra,
Gurgaon,  a oonsiderable  nortior.  of  L'l'.vnr,  and  some  of  Bhartpur.

Sec  Ticlicnthaler.  Vol.  ili.  Map.  wiirrc  '.lie  province  is  inarked.

In  tne  iI'ih'i‘zat-'i-T'ii,:-,-i  we  read  tliuu  Tinii.r  plundered  ' all  the  three
citio^  of  Uildi,  Ijy  nunn,  .l.ih.a  panah  ui.d  old  Dihll.”

Sec  Kilietc,  111.  p.  -if7,  ai'O  Thomas  Paih'ln  p.  313,  note  3

* MS.  (A)  omits

f Pdiv'i't,  A town  of  grc.at  antnjuiiy.  Lat.  29"  2.3'  N.  Lone,  77'’  f pu"
E.  53  mills  N".  of  Diltd.  It  was  t'lo  scene  of  deeii-.i.-e  b.ifles  o.i  three  occ.i-
stons  la  hisconc'il  tim-  s The  lamnns  surgeons,  fatinu'  and  son  sdan'kli  Hasan
aiul  ihaikU  iliua  were  uarive-s  of  Fiiuipat.  see  Ain-i-Akbari  iJJ  I a43  note
to  -No  i.n.

See  Hunter  Imp.  ijnz.  XI  41.

* ill  tiio  month  of  Z i '’da  ( Finshta).  Firi^ta  does  roi  state  the  vear

though  jn  conne.'’(ie:i  with  what  has  yor.e  be.'ore  he  .a'.ptUirs  to  mean

l!  1 il  bat  ...ee  n 2 ■ BadiioiiT  Imwcvor  agre.’.s,  with  the  TinlA-i- ilubdto.k  Shiihl.
On  tins  point  see  Thomas.  I'.ithtiii  Kings,  p,  317,  iion

^ MS.  ;A,i  read.'  hero-.

ijj  JSoc  jP  J tJl«,  J Jjly  tpb  eSLo  Cpuoc  j

FiriOitri  has  almost  t’ac  .'anie  words  but  says  iwciit_,  years  as

in  the  text.  So  also  the  ler/ t-h ~i.tiliihiirr,k  Shulti,

iir..7hti’s  statement  'S  not  very  clear  as  to  the  year  in  wliicii  Mah.nh.l
lilt'd,  but  -is  he  goes  ou  to  say  that  aftei  liis  Ucatli  the  Amus  gave  in  then

[ 367  1

Save  the  blood  of  kings  there  is  nought  in  this  bowl,

Save  1 the  dust  of  lovers  there  is  nought  in  this  desert.

Of  the  poets  of  the  reign  of  Saltan  Mahmud  is  Qazi  Zahir
Dihlavi  * who  has  left  a Diwan  (anthology)  full  of  qasidahs  in
eulogy  (of  Mahmud)  of  which  this  is  one.

Heir  to  the  mighty  monarchy,  Sultan  Mahmud,

Who  succeeded  liis  father  and  grandfather  in  the  sovereignty  278.
of  the  world  ;

He  removed  Dabaran  ® from  the  sky  to  serve  as  his  signet,

While  Taurus  complained  saying  I have  but  this  one  eye
left.*

By  the  first  strain  of  his  bow  stving  he  has  wakened  the  Lion,

And  after  that  he  has  stretched  him  out  in  sleep  with  the
deep-piercing  arrow.

The  whole  world  boasts  of  full  satiation  at  the  board  of  thy
favour.

Save  only  the  lute  which  complains  that  its  belly  is  empty.^

Oh  thoa  whose  world-conquering  sword  flashes  in  the  dark-
ness of  infidelity  like  to  tlie  lightning  flashing  through  the
darkness  of  night.

Although  the  heaven  has  made  thine  enemies  intoxicated
like  the  eyes  of  the  beloved  idols  for  some  time,  still  at  last
it  has  overthro'.vn  them.

ahegianoe  to  D.anlat  KhSn  Lodi,  who  strnck  the  eoinace,  &c.,  in  Jlnharram  of
816H.  icig  tolerably  clear  tli.it  he  me.ins  Zu-I-Qa':la  Slo  11.  as  the  date  of
Mahmud’s  death,  and  not  814  H.  a.s  Briggs  would  have  ic.

1 MIspri-it  in  tbs  text.  M3.  (A.)  reads

2 Qazi  Zihir  Dihlavl.  I can  find  no  mention  of  this  poet.

i xhe  Hyades  one  of  the  two  clusters  of  stars  included  within  the

conscellation  Taurus  the  other  b.cing  che  Pleiades.

Ancient  astronomers  were  not  agreed  as  to  the  number  of  stars  included
.’B  the  Hyades.  Thales  reckoned  two  only  (a  and  «)  the  two  eyes  of  the
Bull.  ..Smith,  Diet,  Greek  and  Rom.  Antiq.  150  a).

4 The  constellation  Taurus  is  liere  spoken  of  as  having  lost  one  of  Ifig  4,^0
eyes  by  which  must  be  meant  the  two  clusters  of  stars  above  mentioned,
and  not  a and  e of  Taurus  as  reckoned  by  Thales.

* The  ruhdb  or  iute,  is  a stringed  instrument  like  a guitar  but  having

the  body  shaped  like  a hollowed  gourd  som.ewh.at  resembling  the  body  of  the
mandolin.

[ 368  ]

It  is  envy  of  thy  generous  hand  which,  throws  tlie  ocean  into
tnmnlt,  for  if  it  be  not  so,  the  ocean  is  never  so  disturbed
by  the  winds  of  heaven.

The  following  is  also  by  the  same  author;

Thou  art  a monarch  before  whom  the  heavens  bow  in  adoration,

Thou  art  a King  in  whose  reign  time  itself  exults.

Qihlah  1 of  the  nation,  and  mainstay  of  kingdoms  and  reli-
gion, llahmud

Whom  the  assemblies  of  Sultan  have  chosen  as  their  Imam.®

The  Qazi  of  the  heavens  ® comes  one  on  foot  to  receive  him
279-  When  the  Governor  of  his  unerring  judgment  sends  the
sumnnons.

He  keeps  constant  watch*  lest  sedition  should  make  a night
assault.

Thy  vigilance  stands  with  a drawn  sword  in  its  hand  while
the  people  sleep  (in  safety).

In  order  that  thy  enemy  may  not  enjoy  the  sweet  breezes
of  the  garden  of  thy  favour

The  heavens  have  afflicted  him  with  fever  and  headache  in
addition  to  catarrh.^

1 This  line  should  read  as  in  MS.  (A).

Oy**'*  tyJA  j dji  (*U»  j ^5,

A foot-note  to  the  Calcutta  text  states  that  the  reading  there  given  is  the
same  in  all  three  MSS.  of  Badaoni  and  that  probably  the  word
has  dropped  out  after  the  word  This  is  a qmte  unnecessary  sup-

position. The  reading  above  given  fulfils  all  requirements.  MS.  (8)  cor^e^-
ponds  save  that  for  it  reads  an  evident  copyist’s  error,

Qi6^a7i.  This  I's  the  direction  in  which  IVXnslims  are  boand  to  turn
during  prayer  : This  is  laid  down  in  the  Qur’5n,  Sara  II.  “ We  see  thee  often
turn  thy  face  about  in  tne  heavens,  hut  wa  will  surely  turn  thee  to  n qiblah
thou  shalt  like.  Tern  then  tny  face  towards  the  sacred  Mosque,  wherever
ye  be  turn  your  faces  towards  it”  (r.  139}.  From  the  Hijra,  Mohammad  at
first  directed  his  followers  to  tom  towards  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  but  in
the  second  year  ot  the  Hijrs.  the  Ka‘bah  at  Mekka  was  fixed  as  the  qiblnh.
See  Hughes’  Did.  of  Islam,  s.  v.  Qjblah.

2 /•tc}  Tmdm.  In  this  passage  the  word  is  used  in  the  sense  of  Khallfah.

^ ^ <,5^^  Qazi-i-Cbarkh.  The  planet  Jupiter.

* its.  (A)  reads  incorrectly

6 This  couplet  is  inevitaldy  ridicalous  to  English  ears  : the  meaning  is  that
in  order  to  deprive  him  of  the  pleasures  of  the  perfnmed  breezes,  he  has
been  afflicted  with  th^  anosmia  which  results  from  a coid  in  the  head.

[ 369  ]

The  heavens  have  apportioned  every  arrow  of  thine  to  one
of  the  various  families.

It  were  not  possible  to  allot  the  arrows  ^ in  any  better  way
than  this.

The  following  is  also  his  :

My  love  has  gone  outside,  do  thou  my  life  also  go  outside,

For  if  thou  art  not  outside  with  my  love,  thou  wilt  be  outside
the  pale  of  love.

Specially  that  now,  in  order  to  uproot  the  infidehs  and  rebels,*

The  royal  atnndard.s  have  gone  out  clothed  in  good  fortune.

Shah  Mahmud,  he  who  when  he  sallied  forth  against  the
infidels,  •

Thou  would’st  say  ‘Isa  has  come  forth  to  slay  Dajjal.®

Thy  reign  ht  s cast  sedition  into  the  bondage  of  annihilation.
I said  to  the  heavens,  Beware ! this  is  a prisoner  * of  the
Sultan,  free  him  not !

1 Siham,  called  also  ^1*^  qiJih,  These  are  the  arrows  used  bv  the

ancieat  Arabs  for  gambling  in  the  manner  called  At-uiaisar  (for-

bidden in  the  Qnr’an,  II.  216,  v.  92,  93).  In  this  game  a cornel  was  bought
and  slanghtered,  and  divided  into  twenty-eight  portions  which  were  drawn  for
with  ten  arrows  called  nztum.  The  numbers  after  the  names  of  tlie

arrows  indicate  the  value  of  the  share  dr.-iwn,  /urr  (I),  (*[>■’ (2).

Vli*}  raqib  (3).  )u?as  (■!],  jjMa-  Alls  (5),  }/tu>biil  (6),

muallq  [7).

The  remaining  three  arrows  were  blanks  and  gained  no  share.  Their
names  were  sixfih,  Tnahih,  tcnghd.  The  name  of  each

arrow  was  written  upon  it  and  they  were  all  put  into  a hag  c. tiled
niilbLih,  and  given  into  the  charge  of  a trustworthy  man  known  as
al-naijil  or  al-hiuftz  whose  duty  was  to  sl  ake  t'.e  ana. v.  s up  amlilrnw

out  one  lor  each  in  turn.  Wiioever  drew  a blank  h.rd  to  nay  t!,e  cn.st  of

the  camel,  while  those  who  die’.v  a winning  ai tow  leovivet;  a r'toporru'n  ite

share  according  to  the  value  of  the  arrow.  Seellojf/ia  i,  .hu.aittKtit,

XIII.  p.  99.

« The  couplets  are  here  given  in  the  order  in  which  they  occur  in  both
MSS.  (A)  (Bj.

8 d Dajjfil.  See  page  278  « 4 “ A name  given  in  the  Ha.I.-  lo  certain
religions  impostors  who  sliall  appear  in  the  woiM  ; .a  teini  cipiiva.onr  to  our
use  of  the  word  Antichrist.  Muhainmiul  is  leJ.ated  to  liave  said  tlieie  wouid
be  about  thirty.”  Hughes’  Du-t  of  IMw.  61.  .See  also  Albirfiui  Chronology  of
Ancient  Nation^,  pp  195-1U6

* MS  (A)  c3-‘^  iis.  (B)

47

[ 370  ]

280.

This  is  also  his  :

The  month  of  Bail  has  arrived,  and  the  air  has  in  conse-
quence become  so  cold  *

That  nothing  save  the  icy  breeze  can  move  from  its  place.

The  earth  is  cold  and  frost  bound, s the  air  is  even  colder  than
the  earth,

In  very  truth  the  air  is  chill  with  the  weariness  of  age.

In  the  garden  the  fire  of  the  tulip  and  Gulnar  have  died
down,

From  the  cold  the  (graceful ) trees  of  the  garden  have  become
mere  sticks.

The  water  is  hard  frozen  from  the  cold,  and  says  with  petu-
lance,

I will  break  if  anyone  places  his  foot  upon  my  head.

No  single  bud  comes  out  from  its  resting  place  in  the  heart  of
the  tree,  although  it  wears  upon  its  cypress-like  body  a cap
and  mantle.

The  bird  has  ceased  its  song  when  it  saw  the  havoc  wrought
by  autumn,

■When  a general  pillage  is  going  on,  lamentation  is  futile.

Seek  not  for  leaves  and  seed-bearing  fruit  in  the  garden,  for
to-day

The  leaves  have  been  scattered  by  the  wind,  the  seeds
remain  hidden  beneath  the  earth.

The  morning  breeze  draws  every  breath  like  a deep  drawn  sigh.
Seeing  that  it  has  cast  to  the  winds  so  beauteous  a being  as
the  rose.

So  far  has  the  rose  gone  that  should  you  search  the  East  and
tlie  West,

You  will  not  find  it  save  in  the  assembly  of  the  King  of  the
World.

Shah  Mahmud  from  the  splendour  of  whose  assemblies,  there
is  eternal  spring  in  the  month  of  Dai,  and  the  world  is  like
Paradise.

I i^a  The  tenth  month  of  the  Persian  ^amsi  year  when  the  San  ia  in
Capricori , corresponding  to  the  commencement  of  winter.

* MS.  (Aj  omits

* MS.  (A)  reads  in  place  of  Text  and  MS.  (B),

[ 371  ]

He  who  when  he  draws  up  his  array,  and  orders  it  for  battle,

The  lines  of  the  enemies  at  the  very  sight  of  him  pale  with
terror.!

His  heart  is  the  rising  place  of  sacred  knowledge,*  and  he  has
knowledge.

Because  ® he  fathoms  the  secrets  of  Fate  with  a glance.

Oh  thou  who  in  the  rules  of  Government  art  an  example  to
vazirs,

Tlie  vazirs  have  issued  no  order  save  on  the  authority  of  tliy
judgment.

If  it  be  not  the  intention  of  the  wind  to  write  a memorial
of  thy  virtues  *

Why  does  it  scatter  the  leaves  of  the  rose  in  the  garden.

The  sun  in  comparison  with  thy  (brilliant)  judgment  looks
like  Suha  ‘

Although  Suha  cannot  be  seen  in  the  bright  light  of  the  Sun.

Thou  slayest  thine  enemies,  and  Time  confesses  thy  excellence  ;

Thou  art  the  refuge  of  the  people,  and  the  evil  doers  take
shelter  under  thy  wing.

The  cupbearer  of  thy  feast  bears  a cup  of  joy  in  his  hand.

The  herald  of  thy  fame  has  the  whole  world  beneath  hi.s  feet.

The  banquet  of  Truth  cannot  be  spread  save  in  praise  of  thee

Although  the  whole  feast  terminates  with  the  distribution  of
sweetmeats.

Hail  Khnsru  ! even  should  I remain  excluded  from  attendance
upon  thee

I shall  not  take  one  moment’s  rest  from  piaising  and  eulogis-
ing thee.

My  duty  is  thy  service,  since  were  I to  refrain  from  that

I have  no  other  occupatiuu  save  singing  thy  praises.

1 An  adequate  translation  of  tliese  lines  seems  imposs.Mble.  Tliere  is  a
tujnu-i-lajzl  or  play  apon  -words  hero  which  cannot  be  pre-
served  in.  English.  Tiie  words  uiod  Sufra^  Jiave  two  meanings,  1st,

draws  up  its  lines,  and  2rid,  glows  pale,  accoi ding  as  1/^  >8  taken  as  two
words  or  as  one.

8 MS.  (A)  and  (B)  write

8 MS.  (A)  write  jf-  Test  and  MS  { B)

* MS.  (A)  reads  incorrectly

• Suhii  is  the  name  of  a dim  star  in  L'r.-a  Major.  See  Lane  *.  r.

281.

f 372  ]

Thou  hast  led  thine  army  against  thy  enemies,  and  I follow
thee

Sending  early  and  late  the  army  of  henedietion  to  thy
assistance.

As  long  as  the  nights  of  the  month  of  Dai  are  longer  than
its  days,

And  until  the  season  of  Nauroz  comes  round  unprecoded  by
■winter.

May  the  garden  of  thy  enjoyment  blossom  like  the  season  of
spring.

May  the  life  of  thy  enemies  be  shorter  than  the  days  of  winter.

This  is  another  of  his  compositions.

The  scent  of  the  rose  has  arisen,  haste  my  companion  to  the
rose-garden.

Seek  for  the  old  wine,  and  re-call  that  old  love  of  thine.

282-  The  branch  of  the  rose,  like  the  date-palm  of  ‘Isa,  refreshes
the  soirl  in  the  garden

Becau.se  the  breeze  gently  shakes  it  continually  like  Mariam.^

Although  the  tender  branch  inclines  with  the  wind,  from  one
side  to  the  other

Xet  a st'.eam  flows.  Praise  be  to  God,  np  to  the  Sirat-i-mus-
taqlm.*

The  branch  is  full  of  leaves,  why  does  the  nightingale  com-
plain in  its  song  ?

Ho^v  is  it  possible  that  Moses  should  have  patience  'when  he
has  Hiizr  for  com})aniou  ? *

^ “ So  sho  C'.nco.ve'l  him  and  ptie  retired  with  liim  into  a remote  place.
And  the  laVionr  name  came  upon  her  at  the  trunk  of  ti  i alia-tree  and  she
s.nd  ■ O that  1 had  -be.!  before  tiiis,  and  been  forgotten  out  nf  mind  ! ’ and  he
.tailed  to  1 re  UOX-!  heii-ath  her,  ‘ flrkve  not,  for  thy  Lord  has  placed  a etream
beneath  thy  to;:  ; , nd  shake  townrda  thee  the  trunk  of  the  i alra-tree,  it  will
drop  upon  l.-e-n  dtdes  fit  to  garher  ; so|eat  and  drink  and  cheer  thine  eye.
Qni-’an.  Palmi-r's  translation.  See  Qur’an.  Sura  XIX,  tv  2U-23.

s S' ? i7f . The  bair-ltke  bridge  over  the  midat  of  Hell  over  which
file  righteous  will  paaa  like  lightning.

Qur’.iu,  T ifogl  es  T' r sirat.  It  is  also  interpreted  to  mean  the  religion
uf  lalauj.  t ..  I'l;  III,  ,p...  See  aI„o  Lane,  s.  r.

^ ilna  ret  rs  to  ti.e  leu-'-nd  told  by  Mah.ammadan  commentators  on  • f'rtain
vMt-es  , - r . '-pii'.  I that  .vhen  Khizr  had  disappeared  in  search  ri'  ’.he  n..:

.1  iin”  ov,  . q . - tuspirea  to  search  for  him  and  was  tolu  t;  a’  i.o

[ 373  ]

Tho  wind  draws  lines  across  the  stream  like  the  scribe  as
he  drives  his  pen,

The  eye  of  the  narcissus  points  to  the  sky  like  the  eye  of  the
astronomer  as  he  prepares  his  tables.

The  parrots  flaunt  in  green  attire,  tho  ringdove  wears  white
garments,

The  crow  is  devoid  of  any  such  honourable  vestments,  wear-
ing as  it  docs  a black  blanket.^

You  would  say*  that  tho  narcissus  lias  produced  a transcript
of  these  people  (uiuani)  who  sleep  below  the  dust.  Look  !
it  has  for  each  ah'f  two  minis  ®

The  sumbul  and  narcis.sus  are  copies  of  the  locks  and  eyes
of  the  fair  ones;

Of  those  two,  one  falls  prostrate  stiicken  with  blackness,
the  other  comes  intoxicated  (with  love).*

wiuilil  meet  him  by  a rock  wliero  two  seas  met,  and  where  he  shonld  lose  a
fish  which  he  wag  directed  to  take  with  him.  Tlie  companion  spoken  of  is
Biiid  to  have  been  Joshua,  and  the  servant  who  RnMed  them  (v.  G4)  was  no
less  tlian  Khizr  himself,  and  wlien  Moses  asked  if  he  stiouUl  follow  him  said,
“Verily  thou  oanst  never  have  patioiico  witli  me.  How  c.iiist  tliun  be  patient
in  what  thou  comprelieniiost  no  knowledge  of.”  Khizr  upon  being  assured
by  Moses  cliat  lie  would  bo  patient  bade  him  to  follow  but  not  to  a.gk  about
iinything  he  niiqlit  see  They  embarked  in  a ship  which  l^izr  scuttled,  where-
npon  Moses  naturally  asked  the  reason  and  w'as  rebuked.  Further  on  they
met  a boy  whom  ^izr  killed  and  again  roused  Moses’  impatience  ; again
they  found  a wall  which  Khizr  prevented  from  falling  without  exacting  any
reward  for  his  services,  and  again  Jloses  bec.amo  impatient  whereupon  Khizr
said,  “ This  is  the  parting  between  me  and  thee”  and  explained  to  Moses  the
reason  for  his  action  in  each  case,  bee  Qur’an  XA  III  6i  and  following  verses.

I The  couplets  are  arranged  in  the  order  in  which  they  come  in  tho  MSS.

* Tho  text  reads  Tvith  a foot  note  variant  MSS.  (A)  (B)

agree  nitlj  teit.

or  ertr*  Nargis.  The  poet's  narcissus  Narcissus  poeticus  N.  O.
Amaryllidacem.  This  natural  order  has  a single  style  with  three  stigmas,
and  six  stamens  of  which  the  anthers  burst  inwards,  the  poet  here  likens  the
three  divisions  of  the  style  to  three  tilba  (1)  and  the  stamens  to  six  juhns
((•  ) the  anthers  forming  the  head  of  the  letter,  and  the  curved  filament  its
downward  stoke.  Thus  the  single  ali/ll-)  and  two  minis  ((•)  form  he  says
the  word  umam  ■.  the  plural  of  ummatun  meaning  the  followers  of

a prophet,  or  a people  of  one  religion,  henco  geneiioaliy  a generation  of  men
as  in  the  saying  generations  of  men  have  passed  away.

4 Sumbul,  Nardostaehys  Jatamansi.  N.  O.  A'aloiianuceie.  See  note  6.

283

[ 374  3

The  rose-bud  has  blossomed  by  the  blast  of  the  breeze  of
the  garden,

In  truth,  he  who  has  a resigned  heart  rejoices  even  when
misfortune  befalls  him.

Ton  would  say  that  the  black  spot  which  has  come  in  the
heart  of  the  tulip  from  the  ci'uelty  of  autumn

Is  a Hindu  who  has  fallen  1 into  the  flames  of  hell.

She  stands  there  on  one  foot  lifting  upwards  two  eyes  *

Beseeching  the  merciful  Lord  ® to  grant  the  King  eternal  life.

He  in  comparison  with  whose  youthful  fortune  the  heaven  is
as  an  old  man  bowed  with  age,*

And  for  instructing  his  judgment,  abstract  Wisdom  ® is  as  an
intelligent  child.

"When  once  the  power  of  growth  ® has  obtained  sufficient
intensity  from  hia  sharp  sword,  it  splits  the  fruit-stone,  as
his  sword  does  the  enemy,  into  two  halves  beneath  the
earth,

The  star  of  sovereign ty.t  which  has  left  its  orbit  to  seek  thy
auspicious  presence,

Will  find  its  pioper  orbit  if  it  becomes  stationary  at  thy
court.

page  146  : see  also  Asiatic  Researches  , Vol.  II,  pp.  405  et  segq  for  a paper  on  this,
the  Indian  Spikenard,  from  which  the  following  is  taken  “ the  true  nanl  or
Jatamansi  which,  by  the  way,  has  othernamesin  the  Amarcvsh,  the  smoothest
of  which  are  gutihi  and  lomasa  both  derived  from  words  meaning  hair."  The
comp.irison  of  the  iiarcissna  to  the  eye  is  so  familiar  as  to  need  no  reference.

I MSS.  (A)  (B)

5 The  scape  of  tlie  tulip  is  here  spoken  of  as  bearing  two  flowers.

8 MS.  (A)  VJ-

* I read  here  p7r-i-nigiinast  for  (MSS.  and  text)

pir-i-nekust  which  has  no  intelligible  meaning.  Probably  the  author  wrote

nigilnwi't.

t JS'JftP  ‘aq!-  i-kull.  The  first  or  Bupreme  intelligence,  a name  given  to  th«
Angel  Gabriel.  In  the  language  of  the  Sufis  the  ‘ag?-i*jkuZi  (called  also
i-airivai)  appears  to  answer  to  the  Logos  *’  of  the  Alexandrian  School.  See
Kask^hiif'n'Istilah’i-Ufunun^  II.  p.  1028.

6 for

1 RuJu*~i'kauk-ahj  called  also  RijaH,  is  the  motion  of  a

star  in  opposition  to  the  movement  in  the  normal  direction  which  is  known  by
the  term  jBtiqamat.  See  Kaghehaf,  s.  r.

[ 375  3

And  in  trutn  after  Qazi  Zaliir  no  poet  arose  in  Hindustan  whose
poetry  repaid  the  trouble  of  reading'.  After  the  death  of  Sultan
Mahmud  the  great  Amirs  of  Hindustan  as  for  instance  Mubariz
Khan  and  Malik  Idris  who  was  the  ruler  of  Rohtak,  quarrelled
with  Khizr  Khan  and  were  - disposed  to  make  common  cause  with
Daulat  Khan,  Khizr  Khan  accordingly  stood  fast  in  Fathpur  and
made  no  expeditions  to  any  country.

In  Muharram  of  the  year  816  H.  (14 14  .A.D.)  Danlat  Khan
having  gone  towards  Kaithar  on  a hunting  expedition  and  having
brought  the  Raie  of  that  district  into  his  toils,  went  to  Baitali,
and  Mahabat  Khan  the  Wali  of  Badaon  came  thither  and  joined
him.  And  in  this  year  Sultan  Ibrahim  besieged  Qadir  Khan  the  son
of  Mahmud  Khan  in  Kalpi,  and  Danlat  Khan  being  very  short
handed,  ignored  him,  and  omitted  to  send  reinforcements  to
either  of  these  places  ; and  Khizr  Khan  in  Zu-l-qa‘da  of  this  year
came  to  the  fortress  of  Firuzabad,i  the  Amirs  of  which  district
came  into  him,  and  Malik  Idris  was  besieged  in  Rohtak.  Khizr
Khan  marched  by  that  route  to  Miwat  and  taking  with  him  Jalal
Khan  Miwati  the  brother’s  son  of  Bahadur  Nahir,  conveyed  him
to  Sanbal  which  place  he  pillaged,  and  in  Zu  Hijjah  of  that  same
year  he  encamped  before  the  gates  of  Dihli  with  the  intention  284.
of  takiiig  it ; Daulat  Khan  held  out  for  four  months,  but  at
last  was  compelled  by  the  want  of  agreement  with  Malik  Lona
and  the  other  supporters  of  Khizr  Khan  to  sue  for  peace,  humbly
and  earnestly.  He  had  an  interview  Tcith  Khizr  Khan  who  threw
him  into  prison,  and  delivered  him  to  Qiwam  Khan  who  conveyed
him  to  the  fortress  of  Firuza  and  slew  him.  This  happened  in  the
year  816  H.  (1414  A.D.)  on  the  seventeenth  of  Rabihi-l- Awwal.*

Verse.

Fveryone  whom  the  world  favours,  she  at  last  ^ spills  bis  blood,

What  can  be  che  condition  of  that  child,  whose  mother  is
his  enemy.

Masnad-i-‘AlT  Khi?r  Kban  ibn  Malieu-sh-Sharq  * ibn  Malik

Suleiman,

In  the  year  before  mentioned  after  the  conquest  of  Dilhi,  having

1 MS.  (A)  reads  <^T  'f-

S Firishta  adds.  The  duration  of  his  reign  was  one  year  and  three  rnontlit.

9 MS.  (A)  reads  for

• MS-  (A).  The  text  reads

[ 376  ]

raised  the  standards  of  monarchy,  became  firmly  established  upon
the  throne  of  sovereignty.

This  Malik  Suleiman  had  heen  exalted  in  his  childhood  by
Malik  Nasiru-l-Miilk  Marwan  Firuz  ShMii  to  the  rank  of  a son,
and  had  been  educated  accordingly.  In  real  truth  he  vas  a
Saiyyidzada  of  high  family,  so  that  on  one  occasion  Makhduin-i-
Jahaniyan  Saiy3'idu-s-Sadat,  the  fountain  of  dignities,  Shaikh
Jalalu-l-Haqq  v'aii-s-Sharabvau-d-din  al-Bukhari  may  God  sanctify
his  soul,  came  for  some  important  purpose  into  the  house  of
Malik  Marwau  Daulat ; food  was  serv'ed,  and  Malik  Suleiman
brought  the  ewer  and  bason  to  Makhdiim  intending  to  pour  water
over  his  august  hands.  Makhdiim  addressing  him  by  the  title  of
Malik  Marwan  Daulat,  said.  This  lad  is  a Saiyyid  Zada,  and  it  is
derogatory  to  him  to  allot  him  such  a menial  service.  From  that
285.  daj'  forth,  it  was  known  that  Malik  Suleiman  was  an  undoubted
Saiyyid ; but  besides  tlii.s,  the  signs  of  Saiyyidship,  and  good
qualities  and  praiseworthy  traits  became  manifestly  visible  in  the
character  of  Masnad-i-‘A!i  Saiyyid  Khifr  Khan.

Verse.

The  Saiyyid  was  a man  in  whom  were  manifested

The  virtues  of  Muhammad,  and  the  grace  of  ‘Ali  the  accepted.

The  following  is  an  epitome  of  the  career  of  Malik  Marwan
Daulat.  He  was  governor  of  Multan  in  the  time  of  Firuz  Shah,
and  after  the  death  of  Malik  Marwan  Daulat,  tlie  Government  of
that  district  devolved  upon  his  son  Malik  Shaikh,  slioitly  after
whose  death  it  was  confirmed  to  Malik  Suleiman.  He  also
bade  farewell  to  this  world  in  that  reign,  and  the  country  of
Multan  with  its  dependencies  was  conferred  upon  Saiyyid  Khizr
Khan  on  behalf  of  Sultan  Firuz  Shah,  up  to  the  date  when  the
afore.said  Saiyyid  was  advanced  to  the  Sultanate  by  the  Amirs.
He  however  would  not  assume  the  title  of  King  ; but  received  the
title  of  Rajat-i-A‘ala,*

On  the  date  mentioned  he  alighted  at  the  palace  of  Sultan
Mahmud,  and  gained  over  the  hearts  of  great  and  small  by  public
laryesse  and  unbounded  favours,  distributing  titles,  offices,  and
territories  among  his  personal  attendants;  in  the  very  first  year
of  his  accession  he  conferred  upon  Malik  Ka^v  * (Tui^fa)  the  title

I See  Tbomna,  Pnthan  Kings,  p.  329,  and /oof  note.

* 113.  (.1)  Tuhfa.

[ 377  ]

vjl  'ia|a  i-Mulk  niiil  nppuinttnl  liiiii  witli  a considerable  fullowiug
to  the  commauJ  of  the  eastern  districts  of  Hindustan  ; he  accord-
ingh'  crossed  the  river  Ganges  at  the  ford  of  Piialia,  * and  entered
the  country  of  Kaithar.  RaiHarSiugh  and  the  rebels  of  that  district
sought  refuge  in  tlie  forests  of  that  country*  and  la}' hid  there.

Then  he  gave  over  Kaithar  to  mpine  and  plunder,  whereupon
Mahabat  Klian  Hahini'  of  Badaon  also  came  in  and  had  an  inter-
view with  him,  and  Rai  liar  .Singh  being  reduced  to  extremities
submitted  to  him,  agreeing  to  tlie  conditions  imposed  of  the
payment  of  tribute  and  of  a yearly  ofiering.  Taju-l-Mulk
and  ilahabat  IQian  seized  the  banks  of  the  river  Rahab,  and  on
arriving  at  the  ford  of  Sargdaivari  cro.sscd  the  Ganges,  chastised  286-
the  infidels  of  Kaliwar  (which  is  now  known  by  the  name  of
Shamsabad)3  Knnpila  and  Baitali,  and  passing  by  the  towns  of
Sakina*  and  Padham  came  to  Raparl ; ^ and  Hasan  Khan  and
Miihk  Hamm  his  brother,  who  held  the  government  of  Raparl,  and
Rai  Sar  the  governor  of  Chandawar,  together  with  the  infidels
of  Gwalifir  all  came  and  joined  hands  with  him,  agreeing  to  pay
tribute,  and  voluntarily  assuming  the  yoke  of  obedience.  From
thence  Malik  Taju-l-Mulk  came  to  the  township  of  .Talesar,®

■which  he  wrested  from  the  gia.sp  of  the  infidels  of  Chandawar,
and  re.stored  as  of  old  to  the  control  of  the  Muslims  »vho  had
held  it  in  days  of  yore,  and  gave  fresh  currency  to  the  Muham-
madan religion.  Then  having  appointed  his  own  agents  and

‘ MS.  (A)

S MS,  (A)

® ShamsabSd.  Town  in  FaniWifih.ia  district.  N.-W.  P.  sitnated  on  the
South  bank  of  the  Btiri  Gaiigfi  river,  IS  miles  Xorth-West  of  Fateiigarh  town
(Hanter,  Oaz.  I, id.,  XII,  375;.

^ Sakina.  For  this  we  should  perhaps  read  Sakita  (MS.  (A)  lends  coun-
tenance to  this  viewj.

S.ikit  lies  in  the  direct  route  indicated  between  Kanpila  and  Rapari,  12
miles  South-East  of  Etah  town.  It  was  here  that  Bahlol  Lodi  died  on  liia
return  to  Dihli  from  an  expedition  ag.'iinst  Gwiiliar  {Aiit-i-Akbar'i}.

® Rapari.  Village  and  ruins  -14  miles  South-West  of  Mainpuri  town.  Local
tradition  ascribes  the  foundation  of  the  ancient  city  to  Rao  Zoriiwar  Singh,
also  known  as  Rapar  Sen  (Hunter,  Oaz.  Jnd.,  XI,  511).

* On  the  Doib  plain,  38  miles  East  of  the  Jumna,  aud  of  Muttra.  (Hmiter,

Oin.  Jnd.,  VII,  103).

48

[ 378  ]

having  seized  the  light  bank  of  the  Black  water,  ‘ inflicted  condign
punishment  upon  the  infidels  of  Etavvah,  and  then  returned
towards  the  city.

And  in  the  year  818  H.  (1415  A.D.)  he  gave  to  Saiyyid  Khizr
Khan  the  younger  son*  of  Malik  Mubarak,  whose  countenance
betokened  royal  dignity,  the  territory  of  Firuzpiir  and  Sihrind,
together  with  the  whole  of  the  districts  which  were  in  the
possession  of  Bairarn  Khan  Turkbacha,  and  subjected  the  supreme
control  and  administration  of  that  tract  of  country  to  his  will
and  pleasure,  while  Malik  Sadliu  Kadir,^  having  assumed  the
control  of  the  western  portion  of  Hindustan,  was  appointed  to
this  ofiice  with  the  rank  of  Ndib-i-Sh/ihzada  {i.e.,  vicegerent  of
the  Prince).

And  in  the  aforesaid  year  the  Prince  here  alluded  to  having,
in  concert  with  Malik  ^ Sadhn  Nadira  and  Zirak  Khan  the
Amir  of  Samana  and  other  Amirs  and  Maliks,^  set  in  order  the
important  affairs  of  that  province,  and  put  everything  upon  a
satisfactory  footing,  returned  to  Dihli  his  capital  city.

And  in  the  year  819  H.  (1416  A.D.)  he  appointed  Malik  Taju-l-
Mulk®  with  a large  army  to  carry  the  standards  of  Kh>?r  Kban
towards  Baiana  and  Gwaliar;  Malik  Karimu-l-Mulk,  the  brother
of  Shams  Khan  Au^adi  came  and  had  an  interview  with  him.

287.  ^Having  cleared  those  regions  of  the  thorns  of  infidelity  he  returned  ;
and  in  this  selfsame  year  some  of  the  T urkbachas  of  Bairam
Khan's  party  seized  by  treachery  Malik  Sadhu  Nadira,  who  was
holding  the  district  of  Sihrind  as  the  Shahzada’s  deputy,  raised
him  to  ihe  dignity  of  martyrdom,  and  took  possession  of  Sihrind.
Khizr  Khan  thereupon  sent  Zirak  Kl'an  to  put  down  this  rebellion,
and  he  accordingly  went  thence  to  the  foot  of  the  hills  in  pursuit
of  those  rebels,  but  after  encountering  many  difiBculties  he
returned.

t The  Kali  Nadi  or  KSlIndi,  or  Kalini,  rises  in  the  Jlnz.Tffarnagrar  district,  and
drains  tlie  whole  eastern  portion  of  the  DoSb.  The  naino  in  the  text
ab-i’Slyuh  means  Black  icater,  and  is  a translation  of  the  Hindustani

kali  naddl.

* MS.  (.t)  reads  wrongly  for  ■

5 MS.  (A).  The  text  reads  *>.>6.  * MS.  (A).

^ Omit  J after  » MS.  (A)  reads  Taju-d-Din,

1 MS.  (A)  j-cA  oil,.

L 37a  ]

In  this  year  also  Sultan  A^mad,  who  was  the  ruler  of  Gujerat,
laid  seige  to  Nagor,*  but  upon  hearing  of  the  march  of  Khizr
Khan  abandoned  the  siege  and  withdrew.  Khizr  Khan  came
to  Clihain,*  and  Alyas  the  governor  of  Chhaiu  gave  in  his

allegiance  to  him.  Thence  he  proceeded  to  Gwaliar,  and  although
he  did  not  reduce  that  fortress,  still  he  levied  tribute  aud  offerings
from  it,  and  thence  came  to  Baiana  where  Shams  Khan  Au^adi
gave  in  his  submission.  And  in  the  year  820  H.  (1417  A. D.)
Tughan  the  Ra’is  with  his  band  who  had  been  the  muiderers  of
Malik  Sadhu  revolted.  Zirak  Hban  was  again  appointed  (to
chastise  them),  and  scattered  that  gathering  in  all  directions.

And  in  the  year  821  H.  (1418  A.D.)  Khizr  Khan  went  up
against  Knithar,  aud  Har  Singh  Dev,  who  has  already  been  men-
tioned, laid  waste  the  whole  of  Kaithar,  and  took  to  the  forest  of
Ann  la,  the  circumference  of  which  is  twenty -four  krohs.  After
several  engagements  he  was  defeated,  and  eventually  withdrew
to  the  hill  country  of  Kuniaon.  Taju-l-Mulk  crossed  the  river
liahab  aud  pursued  him  as  far  as  the  hills,  and  from  there  came
to  Badaon,  and  taking  with  him  Mahabat  Khan,  the  governor  of
Badaou,  crossed  the  Ganges  by  tlie  crossing  of  Bajlana : then
having  dismissed  Mahabat  Khan,  he  himself  went  on  to  Ifawa,
whence  he  returned  to  Dihli  laden  with  spoil.  In  this  same  year,  288.
also,  Kliizr  Khan  ^ again  led  an  army  against  Kaithar,  aud
proceeding  by  way  of  Kol  arrived  at  Baitali,  where  he  crossed
the  Ganges  and  came  to  Badaon.  On  this  occasion  Mahabat

1 Nagor.  In  Brigg’s  translation  of  Firishtathis  appears  asBagore  I'l.  509).
It  is  Nagaur  in  Jodhpnr  State,  Rajpntani  48  miles  Korth-West  of  Nasirabad
and  75  North-East  of  Jodhpur  city.

* The  text  reads  JTirttan  but  MS.  (A)  reads  Chhatn

In  Brigg's  (I.  509)  we  find  this  place  called  Jalwur,  w ith  a footnote  : “I  iiave
some  doubt  as  to  the  true  name  : it  is  differently  written  in  my  varions  MSS.”
In  tiie  lithographed  edition  of  Firi^ita  the  name  is  written  plainly  enongh
(Oombay  Edn.  I,  294),  and  it  is  said  that  without  waiting  for
Khizr  Khan  to  advance,  Ahmad  witlidrew  in  the  direction  of  Malwa,  and  that
when  Khizr  Kh,an  arrived  at  Janur,  Alyas  Khan  who  was  governor  of  the  new
city  called  ‘Arus-i-Jahan,  wliich  w.as  one  of  the  cities  built  by  Alan-d-Din
Khilii.  came  to  pay  his  hom.age.  Evidently,  then,  the  city  mentioned  in  oar
text  and  this  ” ‘Arus-i-Jahan  ” .are  the  same.

SMS.  (A)  reads  here  jb  ji  J >^T  which  ap.

pears  to  be  a c>]\visL’s  error.

[ 380  ]

Khan  Badaoni  being  afraid  of  him,  shut  himself  up  m the  for-
tress, and  opposed  Khizr  Khan  for  a space  of  six  montlis;  he
was  on  the  point  of  being  defeated,  when  Qiwaru  Khan  and
Ikhtiyar  Khan,  and  certain  of  the  other  Mahmud  ^lahi  Amlis  who
had  seceded  from  Daulat  Khan  and  had  espoused  the  cause
of  Khizr  Khan,  meditated  treason  against  Khizr  Khiin  ; but
Khizr  Klian  becoming  aware  of  this  state  of  things  ^ abandoned
(the  siege  of)  Badaon,  and  returned  to  Dihli.  And  in  the  year
822  H.  (1419  A.D.)  he  put  those  traitor  Amirs  to  death  on  the
banks  of  the  Ganges,  in  vengeance  for  the  treachery  of  which  they
had  been  guilty.  In  the  same  year  also  an  obscuic  person  on  the
confines  of  Bajwara,*  falsely  gave  himself  out  to  be  Sarang  Khan
who  had  been  killed  some  time  before,  and  upon  his  .assuming  this
name  several  adventurers  flocked  to  him.  Khizr  Khan  deputed
feultan  ^ah  Lodl^  to  pinceed  against  him.  They  fought  a Heice
battle  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Sihiind,  and  Sarang  Khan  the
impostor  fled  and  took  to  the  mountains.  Sultan  Shah  made
Bupar  his  head  quarters.*  In  this  same  year  Khizr  Klian  sent
Taju-l-Mulk  to  Itawa.  Rai  Sipir  was  holding  out  in  timt  fort,
but  sought  for  quaiter,  and  consented  to  pay  I'evenue  to  Taju-1-
Mulk.^  Thence  he  came  to  Chandwar,  and  liaving  laid  it  waste
and  pillaged  it,  proceeded  by  way  of  Kaitliar  to  Dihli.  In  this
same  year  Malik  Taju-d-Diu  died,  and  the  duties  of  his  Vazirship
were  entrusted  to  his  elder  .son  Malik  Sikaudar.  Ttighan  Ra’is
again  lai.scd  an  insurrection  in  Sihrind,  and  Malik  Khairii-d-l)in
was  appointed  to  oppose  him,  and  returned  after  having  satisfac-
torily quelled  his  rebellion.

1 MS.  (.4)  reads  which  is  preferable  to  as  found  in  the

text.

2 Firishta,  (I.  295)  says  near  iiacliiwura,  and  in  the  Am-i-

Akhetri  we  find  it  stated  that  Mlchlwarah  is  sitnatofi  on  tho  haiitks  of  the
Sutlej  (Jarrett,  II  310).  In  Renneirs  Map  (TicfF.  III.)  we  find  jMachiwarah
fu^uicd  Ijetweeii  Kupar  and  Ludhiona.  It  lies  23  miles  sonth  of  Ludhiana,  and
is  a very  ancient  city  meniioneel  in  tho  Mvathiibharata.  B.ijwrira  is  farther
north  near  lIoshifiTprir.  (Sec  Hniitor,  Imp.  Go:. , II.  439).

^ Firi^ta  adds,  “called  Islam  Khan  who  wa.'^  the  j?avernor  of  Sarhind.’^

* This  appears  to  lx?  tho  meaning  of  the  text.  Firi^ta  tells  us  that  Islan-.
Khan  pursued  “ Sar.iurr  Khun*’  with  his  own  force.?  and  those  of  ccitain.
other  Maliks,  but  returned  npon  finding  that  he  had  hidden  hitiiself.

‘ MS,  (.41  J'O.  Fiii^ta  calls  hnu  F-h

3S1  ]

And  in  the  year  821  H fl4‘21  A.D.)  ©izr  Khan  proceeded  to  289.
Miwat  and  took  Kotia  ; thenee  h e tastened  to  Gwaliar,  from  tlie
Rai  of  which  place  he  levied  cotisideialde  snms  and  returned  to
Itawa.  Rai  Sipar  had  gone  to  lell.  and  ^ his  son  had  tendered  his
submission.  In  this  interval  * at  severe  illnes.s  attacked  Khizr
Khan  which  led  to  his  return  towards  Dihli.  Having  arrived  at
that  city  on  the  seventeen-th  oi  Jamadiu-l-Awwal  in  the  above
year,  he  was  received  into  the  rtei’cy'  of  God  and  ptissed  away  from
the  world.

fe^-se.

Every  evening  is  iollov.ed  hy  the  morning.

At  last  there  comes  auend  to  every  lahonr.

The  duration  of  his  reigtitvas  seven  years  and  some  months.^

Sultan  Mubarak  Shah  iPM  SjBizn  Khan  ib>’i  Malik  SulIman,

In  accordance  with  his  rights  a-s  Leir-presamptive  ascended  the
throne  with  the  consent  of  tl>e  Aaiirs  in  the  year  821 H.  (1421  A.D.)*
and  became  firmly  settled  in  the  administration  of  his  kingdom.

In  this  year  Jasrat  Khukar*  ‘ the  son  of  Shaikhs  Khukar  raised  a
rebellion,  the  reason  of  whioli  was  that  he  had  taken  unawares
Sultan  ‘All  the  king  of  Kashmir,  who  had,  started  with  the
intention  of  conquering  iTatta’  and  had  defeated  him  in  one  of
the  mountain  passes,^  a va.st  amount  of  plunder  falling  into  his
bauds.  Emboldened  by  this  vietory,  he  used  the  royal  treasures
wliich  be  had  obtained  to  f udliir  an  attempt  to  seize  the  kingdom
of  Dihli,  and  having  crossed  tUe  rivers  Biah  and  Sutlej  with  a

1 MS.  (A)  j.  » (A)  ^

3 Firishta  adds,  “ He  was  a jest  snd  wise  king,  kind  and  trne  to  kis  word,
Lis  subjects  loved  him  with  gra.;eful  affection  so  that  great  and  stnali,
master  and  servant,  sat  and  motroei  for  him  in  blaelt  raiment  till  the  third
day,  when  they  laid  aside  th^^i.-  DoiArtiing  garments,  and  raised  his  son
Mubarak  Shaji  to  the  throne.”

* MS.  (AJ  reads  correctly  Sll  br  MS.  ,'B ) has  the  same  reading

as  the  text.

' MSS  (A)  and  (Bj  unuL  Firiita  wi  e'i  Khakar  and

■•alls  him  the  brotlter  of  Sh  dk}  jh  r^'.k*Ar.

6 Thui  the  text  and  M i*
Xf'Ufi,  i e , f(>r  the  roivn  of

1 MS.  ^A)  ilo  ^

M;  ( Ai

10 cl,  ;'im[';

The  text

Bnqa.'hai

[ 382  ]

large  army,  and  assaulted  Talaundi  wliloli  was  i:i  the  possession  of
Rai  Kainalu-d-Din  Mubin,*  and  Rai  Fii-Qz  fled  from  befoie  him.

290.  Jasrat  came  to  Ludhiana  * and  plundered  and  pillaged  along  the
banks  of  the  river  Sutlej  as  far  as  the  bonndaiies  of  Rupar;*
there  he  crossed  the  river  and  came  to  Jalandhar.*  Zirak  Khan
had  taken  refuge  in  the  fort  of  Jalandhar.  Jasrat  descended  the
bank  of  the  river  Sarsnti  whereupon  the  question  of  peace
arose ; Jasrat  by  some  treacliery  made  Zirak  Hian  prisoner.
Sultan  Mubarak  Shah  moved  towards  Sihrind,  upon  hearing
which  Jasrat  Shaikha  ^ released  Zimit  Khan  who  went  to
Saniana  and  offered  his  services  to  Mubarak  Shah  who  proceeded
to  Ludhiana.  Jasrat  having  crossed  the  Ludhiana  river  drew  up  to
oppose  him,  being  in  possession  of  the  whole  of  the  boats.  Tlie
army  of  Mubarak  Shah  was  unable  to  cross  the  river,  until
after  the  rising  of  Canopus  ® when  the  river  became  fordable.
The  Sultan  then  crossed  the  river ; Jasrat  fled  and  having

1 We  must  read  nrl'^l  This  is  shewn  to  be  the  right

reading  by  the  collateral  passage  in  Firishta  which  reads  (I.  p.  207),
ijS  cyli  ^ 3 “ and  laid  waste  Talaandi  which

belonged  to  llfu  Kamal.”

8 The  tort  and  both  MSS.  read  Kudiihna,  but  it  is  evident  that

we  should  read  Ladhiana.  We  find  in  Firishta  {Joe-  cit.).

^ J-  “ Jasrat  having  come  to  Liidiana.”  Talaundi  I

cannot  identify,  bat  there  is  a place  on  the  North  bank  of  the  Sutlej  in
Eennell’s  map,  called  Talloom,  this  with  the  .aflfixed  genitive  feminine  termina-
tion (Punjabi)  d/,  would  give  Tnlumdi  or  Tulundi,  i.e.,  the  village  of  Tulum.
Talloom  lies  about  20  miles  S.  S.-W.  of  Ladhiana  (see  Kennell’s  map,  Tieff,
III),  on  the  opposite  bank  of  the  river.

5 Rupar  in  Rennell’s  map  is  placed  North-East  of  Ludhiana  abont  50  miles
distant : bnt  on  modem  maps  it  is  shewn  almost  due  East  of  Ladhiana  and
about  35  miles  from  it.

♦ A place  of  considerable  antiqnity,  the  original  capital  of  the  Rajpnt
kingdom  of  Katoch.  It  is  described  by  Hwen  Thsang  as  having  been  a town
of  two  miles  in  circuit  in  the  7th  century  A.D.

It  is  mentioned  by  Ptolemy  by  the  name  of  ICulindritie  or  S'lJindritie,  fee
Cunningham,  A.  G.  1.,  pp.  135,  etc  , and  Hunter,  Guz.  Ind.,  VII.  01.

6 MS.  (A)  omits  prob.ably  coriectly  as  we  have  seen  f’om  Firishta's

acconnt.

^ Firi^ta  tells  ns  tbev  cro.ssed  ou  the  lllh  Shawwil  (tictoher,  tirh  A.P.

1421).

[ 383  ]

crossed  the  I'u'er  C'liliiiialj  ' uanie  to  TalLar*  in  the  liill  tracts-
The  troops  of  Mubarak  Khiiii  followed  him  and  the  greater  part
of  his  infantry  and  cavalry  were  killed,  and  all  his  wealth  and
treasure  was  plundered  and  lost.  Rai  Bhim  ® the  chief  of  Jammoo
offered  hi.s  services  to  Mubarak  Shah  and  guided  his  army.*
Mubarak  Shah  returned  thence  to  Labor.

And  in  the  year  8d5  H.  ( A.D.  1421)  he  remained  encamped  on
the  bank  of  the  river  Ravi  for  nearly  a month,  rebuilt  the  city  of
Liihor  which  bad  been  lai.l  in  ruins  during  the  late  invasion,  and
completely  repaired  the  citadel  whei’e  it  had  been  breached  and
levelled  ; ^ then  having  left  there  Malik  Mahmud  Hasan  who  bore
the  title  of  Maliku-.sh-Sharq,  returned  to  Dihli.  Five  months  later
Jasrat  Khukar  again  came  against  Labor  with  a large  army  and  en-
camped at  the  abode  of  Shaikhu-t-Mashaikh  Shaikh  Hasan  Zinjani,*
may  God  sanctify  him,'  and  every  day  for  a month  made  repeated
efforts  to  take  the  city  by  assault,  hut  eventually  failing  to  attain
his  object  7 witlidrew  to  Kalanor^and  fought  a battle  with  Rai
Bhim,  and  when  both  sides  were  in  the  midst  of  the  fight  they
agreed  to  'make  peace.

Malik  Sikander  Tu^ifa  who  had  been  despatched  from  Dihli  to
reinforce  Malik  ® JIahnmd  Hasan  cros.sed  the  Ravi  by  the  ford  of
Pull!  and  encamped  at  Labor,  and  Jasrat  feeling  that  he  was
not  able  to  cope  with  the  conjoint  forces  crossed  the  Chhinab

I The  Chenab.

> In  the  Kashmir  hill  tracts.

8 Firisht.a  tolls  us  that  Rai  Bhim  offered  his  services  and  gnided  the  army
to  Bisal,  the  strongest  of  Jasrat's  strongholds.  Jasrat  fled  from  there,  hia
men  were  killed  and  he  lost  all  his  possessions.

* MS.  (A)  reads  some  lines  lower  down.

» MS.  (A)  reads

* Firishta  says  W

7 MS.  (A)

8 Seventeen  miles  west  of  Gurdiispur  town.  bat.  32®  1'  N.  Long.  73®  11'
30"  E.  It  was  here  that  -■Vkbar  in  later  times  received  the  news  of  his
father's  death  and  ascended  the  throne  (Hunter,  Imp.  Oaz.,  VII.  323).

S MS.  (A)  omits  and  reads  in  the  next  line.

10  Firiahta  Lu’i.  See  however  note  1 next  page.

II  Firishta  says  that  Mahmud  Hasan  was  also  joined  by  the  forces  of  Malik
Kajub,  Uoveruor  of  Dopalpur  and  of  Islam  Khan  Lodi,  Governor  of  Sihrind

291.

[ :<8-i  j

liver  anil  pioeeeded  to  the  hills  of  'I'alwiirl,'  iiad  the  army  ot
Maliarak  having  put  down  that  rebellion  roturued  to  Dihli.

In  the  year  82G  H.  (14:22  A.D.)  ilubaiak  Shah  proceeded
to  Kiiithar,  and  iJahahat  Kliiln  of  Ihidaon  who  had  revolted
against  Khizr  lOiau  came  in  and  submitted  himself,  and  was  dis-
tinguislied  by  special  marks  of  favour.  Leaving  thei-e  * he  cro.ssed
the  Ganges  and  attacked  the  country'  of  the  Paiiwars  = in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Hior  otherwise  known  as  Sham-sabacl,*  and  having
put  the  majority  of  them  to  the  sword  ravaged  the  country  ; then
having  loft  Malik  Mubariz  and  Zirak  Khan  and  Kamal  Khan
with  a large  force  in  the  fortres.s  of  Kanpila  to  quell  the  insurrec-
tion of  the  rebels  he  returned  to  Dibit.

And  in  this  year  Ain  Khan  Governor  of  Dhar  ^ came  with  the
object  of  chasti.sing  the  Kai  of  Gwaliar  and  with  the  intention  of

and  that  Jasrat  withdrew,  crossed  the  Chhinab  and  Ravi,  and  took  refage  in
the  hills.

I This  is  the  reading  of  the  text.  Talwara  is  possibly  the  same  as  Talhar
mentioned  above.  Dr  Stein,  whom  I have  consulted,  considers  that  Talwara
in  the  text  refers  to  the  village  Talwara  on  the  right  bank  of  the  ChinSb  just
opnosite  to  the  town  of  Kiusi  (74^  od'  laxig.  33'  Lat.).  This  is,  he  says,  a
common  plate  for  crossing  tlie  Chinab  as  the  rente  connecting  Foni  with
RiasI  and  Jammu  is  shown  on  the  survey  map  (Atlas  of  India,  Sheet  29  j,  a.s
pissing  Talwara.  Dr.  Stein  cannot  aseeriain  whether  the  hill  range  rising  to
the  north  of  Talwara  isdesignated  by  tlnit  name.  Paid  in  the  text  is  probably
ideinical  with  Poni.  The  reading  of  MS.  (A)  is  went  to

Ketla.

s Firliii' a tel's  ns  that  M.ahabat  Kjian  in  obedience  to  the  orders  of  the
Sult.lu  cios.sC'd  the  (.T-iiiges  and  iev.idt-d  the  t-iritoiies  of  the  Rathor  tiibe.

^ The  Rriihors  aie  a clan  of  the  U.'-jiints,  ami  tlie  Panwais  form  iinuthcr
of  '.heir  clans  regaiding  whom  -\hal-F.i/l  s-i\  s " lit  ancient  times  the  royal
dynasty  of  Hindustan  came  from  ti.is  tribe”  Mlrwur  is  mentioned  by  rhu
same  author  as  tlm  head-quarters  of  the  Rachor  tribe.  (.Seta  yun-i-Aklan
fJarrett),  II.  270  and  III.  IIS'.

For  a full  acco’ant  of  the  Panwars  Sherring  ‘.Hindu  Tnlus  and  Chistc.s),
I!  p 93,  ree  a'lS  Elliot.  (Rurrs  cy  A'-IF  F of  lo  h i;.

4 1 in  the  sontn  oaiik  of  the  Buii  Gang,!  river,  IS  miles  Xorth-West  of
PaLt  hgarh.

t The  text  reads  DiKH  with  a foot-note  vaniinc  Dhar.  MS.

(A)  rt-.vls  Dhr'ir.  Firishra  aava,  Sultan  floal'uij/  WTili  of  Mulwa.  The

th'o  n L'jjiuri  and  Dhar  have  at  one  period  or  anutiier  supplied  a capital  fo
ti.b*  it'!_ff7udAi'v  HiriUj  dynasties  of  Maiwa.  ivStrtr  Hunter  hu}/  Oaz  , i \\  4^45,

[ 385  ]•

subduing  that  rngioii  ; Mubarak  Shah  upon  receiving  intelligence
of  this  proceeded  towards  Gwaliar;  when  he  arrived  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Baiana,  Shams  Khan  Auhadi  * the  son  of  Auhad
Khan  Auhadi.  Governor  of  Baiana,  who  had  put  to  death  by
treacherous  means  his  uncle  Mubarak  Khan,  became  alarmed  and
revolted,  and  after  laying  waste  Baiana  entrenched  himself*  in
the  fortress,  but  eventually  submitted.

Mubarak  Shah  left  that  place  and  marched  towards  Gwaliar,  but
Alp  Khan  proceeding  along  the  banks  of  the  Chambal  river  ’
would  not  permit  the  army  of  Mubarak  Shah  to  cross  : however
the  soldiers  of  Mubarak  Shah  crossed  by  another  ford,  se.atter-
ed  the  forces  of  Alp  Khan,  and  returned  ti-iumphant.  This  292.
engagement  led  to  a peaceful  settlement,  and  Alp  Khan  sent  in
many  presents  and  returned  towards  Dhar,  while  Mubarak  Shah
pioceeded  to  Dibli.

And  in  the  year  827  H.  < 1423  A.D.)  he  again  orJered  an  expe-
dition towards  the  hills  of  Kumaon  and  Kaithar,  on  retarning
whence  he  laid  waste  Miwat.  In  this  ye§,r  a severe  famine
occurred  throughout  the  whole  of  Hindustan.  In  the  year  829  H.
he  again  proceeded  towards  Miwat  and  reduced  the  fortresses  of
Indor  and  Alwar.

1 MS.  (A).  The  text  omits  the  words  Shams  Khan  Auhadi.  Firishta  calls
him  Amir  Khan  ibn-i-Da‘ud  Khan  ibn-i-Shama  Khan  {see  Bombay  Edition,
p 299  la.st  line),  and  savs  that  he  had  entrenched  himself  on  the  heights.

2 MS.  (A)  reads  The  text  reads

^ Firi^ta  writes  of  this  : And  Sultan  Hoshang  seized  the  fords  of  the
Ciihanbal  river  and  opposed  his  progress,  but  Mnbarak  discovered

another  ford  and  crossed  rapidly;  and  certain  of  the  Amirs  of  the  advance
guard  of  the  Dihll  forces  pillaged  the  camp  of  the  Sultiin  of  Malwa  and  took
Tnany  prisoners,  but  inasmuch  as  these  were  Muslims  Mubarak  Shah  set  them
free.

Sultan  Hoshang  sued  for  peace  sending  in  suitable  offerings,  and  withdrew
towards  Dhar.  Mubarak  Shah  halted  on  the  banks  of  the  Chhanbal  levying
taxes  on  the  old  scale  from  the  landholdere  of  that  district,  and  eventually
arrived  at  Dihil  in  the  month  of  Rajah  827  H.

The  Chambal  or  Chhanbal  river  is  a river  of  Central  India  .and  one  of  rlie
principal  tributaries  of  the  Jamna,  it  rises  in  Malwa  ; ahout  eight  or  nine
miles  south-west  of  Mhow  it  is  joined  by  the  Kah-Si:id,  Paibati  and  Hanas,
flows  past  Dliolpnr  into  Etawali  and  joins  the  Janiiia  -40  miles  holow  Etiwah
town.  The  ChatuiauwaLi  of  Sauskrit  writers.  {Stc  Huiitei.  hep.  Caz
111.  331).

40

[ 386  ]

And  ill  the  year  830  H.  he  took  Baiana  from  Muhammad  Khan
Auhadl.  and  sent  the  family  pf  Auhadi  to  the  palace  known  as
Jahan  Kiima/  and  assigned  it  '■o  i m a residence.  He  then
gave  Baiana  to  Malik  Muqbil  Khan  one  of  his  retainers,  and
Sikii  to  Malik  Khairu-d-Din  Tuhfa,  wliile  he  himself  led  an  army
against  Gwaliar  receiving  the  submission  of  the  Rai®  of  that
district.

And  in  the  year  831  H.  (1427  A.D.J  ambassadors  arrived  in
Dihli  from  Qadir  Khan,  governor  of  Kal pi,  bringing  tidings  that
Sharqi  * was  besieging  him.  Mubarak  Shah  marched  to  oppose
Sharqi  ; but  in  the  meantime  tidings  arrived  that  Sharqi  had
attacked  Bhungaon  ® and  was  encamped  there,  intending  to  pro-
ceed to  Biidaon.*  Mubarak  Shah,  who  had  crossed  the  river
Tamna  at  the  foi  d of  Nuh  Fatal,  and  had  attacked  Jartauli,°  on
arrival  at  the  township  of  Atrauii  ^ received  intelligence  that
Mukhtass  Khan'?  the  brother  of  ^larqt  had  arrived  on  the  borders
of  Itawa  with  an  army  and  many  elephants ; Mubarak  Shah
detailed  Alaliku-sh  Sharp  Mahmud  Hasan  with  ten  thousand
cavalrj  to  oppose  Mukhtass  Khan.  Alukht.ess  i^an  joined  hands
with  Sharqi  who  proceeded  along  the  banks  of  the  Black- 'Water,
293.  otherwise  known  as  the  Kalini.’  and  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  the
township  of  Burhiinabad  one  of  the  dependencies  of  Itawa.
Mubarak  Shah  marching  from  Atrauli  encamped  at  the  town  of

1 This  palace  was  in  Dihli.  Firishta  writes:  “Sent  liis  family  and  rela-
tions to  Dihli.’’

S Stiltan  Ibrahim  Shah  Sharqi.

8 The  text  reads  Bhh'i,  (A)  reads  BJifikanur,

III  Firi^ta  W3  find  The  troops  of  Sharqi

attacked  Bhugiion.  Bh‘.tr.guun  js  in  the  Mainpurl  District,  9f  miles  east  from
Mainpurl  at  the  junction  of  Agra  and  Grand  Trank  roads.  The  town
was  founded  according  to  tradition,  by  EajI  Bhim  Sen  who  was  cured  of
leprosy  by  bathii.g  la  the  jkll  or  lake.  (Hunter,  Imp.  Gaa,  U.  403.)

^ Badaon  lies  N.  of  Bhongaon  at  a distance  of  about  fifty  miles.

5 Firishta  writes.  ^ J Attacked

Jarcaull,  one  oi  t'.',  tatnnaa  cities  ot  Mawas.  I fail  to  locate  this  place  but  it
must  have  beei.  h.  r.:c  Doab.  I can  find  no  mention  of  it.

6 Atrauli,  ’fi  ‘'-’‘es  from  Aligarh  town.  (Hunter,  Iwp.  Gaz.  1.  180),

1 Finsht'i  call*  ; lin  M ukhlis  Khan.

8 ifS  (A),  .i"  ■■  ivads  Tali  Pain.  This  ia  the  Kaliiu,  the  Kara  Sd

of  the  3IahV:  Ic-  i.'ui'rl  .see  uo:'^  3 page  3€0),

[ 387  ]

Kota,'  but  Sbarqi  declined  battle  and  withdrew  tow'ards  Rapri,
and  thence,  after  crossing  the  Jamna,  proceeded  to  Baiana  and
encamped  on  the  bank  of  the  river  of  Kaithar.  Mubarak  Shah
pursued  him  as  far  as  Chandwar;  a space  of  four  'krohs  lay
between  the  two  armies  so  that  the  outposts  of  the  forces  could  see
each  other.  They  remained  thus  confronting  each  other  for
twenty  days  ; at  last  Sharqi  came  out  in  force,  and  from  mid-day
till  nightfall  hard  fighting  went  on  between  the  two  armies,  and
the  event  was  not  decided  on  that  day;  on  the  following  day
Sharqi  turned  back  towards  his  own  country,  2 and  Mubarak
Shah,  considering  that  both  sides  were  Muslims,  no  longer  puisued
him,  but  went  towards  Satgar.a,  ® and  having  conquered  that
country  followed  the  bank  of  the  Cbanbal  river  and  came  down
to  Baiana.

Muhammad  Khan  Auhadi,  who  on  account  of  having  had  an
(unsatisfactory)  interview  with  Sharqi  had  taken  fright,  and
had  entrenched  himself  in  the  fortress,  came  and  sought  pro-
tection in  an  interview  with  ifubarak  Shah.*  Mubarak  Shah
thereupon  retraced  his  steps  to  Dihii.

And  in  the  year  832  H.  Malikn-^-Sharq  Mahmtid  Hasan,  who
had  been  left  in  Baiana  bj-  Mubfiriik  Shah  as  his  Viceroy,  and  bad
put  the  affairs  of  that  place  in  orfler,  and  had  also  chastised  ^
those  infidels  who  had  made  common  cause  with  Mnhamm.ad
Khar*  and  had  raised  disturbances,  came  to  Court  and  received
substantial  favours,  and  the  fortress  of  Firoza  was  confirmed  to
him.  In  that  same  year  Malik  Rajab  Nadira,  governor  of  Multan
died,  and  Malik  Mahmud  Hasan  received  the  title  of  ‘ Imadu-1-
Mulk  (Pillar  of  the  State)  and  proceeded  to  Multan.

And  in  the  year  833  H.  (lt29A.D.^  Mubamk  Shah  went  to
Gwaliar  by  way  of  Baiana,  and  having  taken  the  Rapri  district
from  the  son  of  Hasan  Khan  gave  it  to  Malik  Hamza,  and  returned  294-

1 Firishta  writes  Mulikota.

* Took  the  road  to  Janepur  (Firishta).

® Went  to  Gwaliar  by  way  of  Halghat.  (Firishta).  MS.  (A)

BatgdTia.

* Firishta  says  “Mnhamniad  Khan  Anhadi  ..  ..  for  the  reason  that  he
despaired  of  any  help  from  Sultan  Sharqi,  asked  for  quarter  and  tendered  his
Submission  and  was  freely  pardoned.

6 MS  (A)  Text.

r 388  ]

to  the  city  ( Dihli).  On  the  way  thither  Saiyyid  Salim,  who  had
served  Khizr  Khan  for  thirty  years,  t and  held  the  fief  of  Tabar-
hinda,  died.  The  title  of  Saiyyid  Khan  was  confeiTed  upon  one
of  his  sons,  and  that  of  Shnja‘u-1-Mulk  upon  the  other.*  And
Fulad,  a Turkbacha  slave,  one  of  the  servants  of  the  aforesaid
Saiyyid  Salim,  raised  a rebellion  iru  Tabarhinda  and  took  posses-
sion of  the  enormous  wealth  which  had  been  amassed  by  Saiyyid
Salim.  Mubarak  Shah  imprisoned  the  sons  of  Saiyyid  Salim,
and  appointed  Malik  Yusnf  Sariir  and  Rai  Hansn  Bhati  * to
oppose  him  (Ffilad).  Fulad  Turkbacha  made  a night  attack
upon  them  and  scattered  their  forces,  and  much  valuable  booty
fell  into  his  hands.  Mubarak  Shah  led  an  army  against  Tabar-
hinda, and  the  Turkbacha  slave  was  besieged  there.  Mubarak
Shah  summoned  ‘ Imadu-l-Mulk  from  Multan,  and  sent  him  with
a message  to  the  Turkbacha  slave,  who,  after  suing  for  quarter,
came  out  from  the  fort  and  had  an  interview  with  ‘ lmadu-1-Mulk,
bat  did  not  rely  upon  Ins  assurances,  and  returned  in  alarm  to
the  foit  and  continued  to  fight.  Mubarak  Shah  permitted
‘Imadu-l-Mulk  to  proceed  to  Multan  and  himself  returned  to  Dilili.
The  slave  (Fulad)  continued  to  engage  in  battle  at  intervals  with
the  troops  of  Mubarak  ^lah  during  the  six  months  during  which
he  was  absent.  At  la.st  he  sent  considerable  sums  of  money  by
way  of  presents  to  Shaikh  ‘Ali  Mnghul  who  was  the  ruler  of
Kabul.  Shaikh  ‘Ali  accordingly  came  to  his  assistance  from  Kabul
with  a vast  army,  which  was  reinforced  by  a large  number  of
men  from  the  borders  of  the  Panjab,  He  removed  the  slave

1 Firislita  "NTrites

-

“They  relate  that  Saiy> idQ-s-Sadat  Saiyyid  Salim  was  for  a period  of  thirty
years  reckoned  by  Khizr  Khan  as  one  of  his  best  Amirs.’'

2 MS.  (A)  Text  Firishta  also  adds  that  the  whole  of  their

fathei’s  priviif^ges  together  with  all  the  immense  wealth  he  had  ama.ssed  were
coidirmed  to  these  two  sous,  but  that  these  favours  were  not  sufficient
tvo secure  their  fidelity  to  Mubfirak  ^ah.  Badaoni’s  account  does  not  explain
tho  uicideiit  related  in  the  subsequent  passage.  Firishta  does,  he  says  that
these  sons  of  Saiyyid  Salim  sent  FiilaU  to  Tabarhinda  and  incited  him  to
raise  a rebellion.

h’ir.^ta's  text  reads  Malik  Yusuf  and  Rai  Habrili.  (?)

MS.  (A).  The  text  reads

[ 3?9  1

( Fulacl)  together  \Tith  all  his  family  and  relations  from  Tabar-
hlnda  and  taking  them  with  himself  returned,  and  having  crossed
the  river  Blah  came  to  Labor.  Maliku-sh-Sharq  Malik  Sikander,
governor  of  Labor,  who  used  to  pay  a yearly  tribute  to  Shaikh
All,  discharged  his  obligation  and  induced  him  to  turn  his
attentions  elsewhere.  Accordingly  Shaikh  ‘All  passing  by  Labor
without  sacking  it  * made  towards  Depalpiir,  and  ‘Imadu-l-Mulk
came  out  from  Multan  to  oppose  him.  Shaikh  ‘All  taking  the  295.
bank  of  the  river  Ravi,  proceeded  to  within  a short  distance  of
Tulumha,  * and  turning  aside  from  thence  came  to  Khiitpur.®
(■Imadu-l-Mulk)  fought  with  Shaikh  ‘Ali  but  was  defeated,  and
Malik  Suleiman  Shah  Lodi,  who  was  with  the  advance  guard
of  the  army  of  ‘Imadu-l-Mulk,  fell  in  this  battle;^  [and  Shaikh
‘Ali  came  to  Khusruabad  and  for  a long  time  daily  engagements
were  fought  between  him  and  ‘Imadn-l-Mulkj.®

And  in  the  year  834  H.  (1430  A.D. ) Mubarak  Shah  sent  a vast
army  to  the  assistance  of  ‘Imadu-l-Mulk,  and  appointed  Fath
Khan  ibn-i-Sultan  Muzaffar  Khan  of  Gujnit  to  the  command  of
that  force.  Shaikh  ‘Ali  was  not  able  to  stand  against  them,®  so
changed  front,  and  retired  under  cover  of  night  into  au  entrench-
ment which  he  had  thrown  up  around  his  position  ; when  they
surrounded  his  entrenchment  he  retreated  towards  Jhilam,  and
having  crossed  the  river  there  lost  the  greater  part  of  his  men  by
drowning,  some  were  killed  and  some  taken  prisoners,  t Shaikh
‘Ali  and  Amir  Muzaffar  proceeded  with  a certain  number  of  men
to  the  town  of  Shiwar;®  all  their  baggage  and  property  having

1 Tins  appears  to  be  the  meaning  of  the  Persi.aii.

S Tulumba  is  on  tlie  left  bank  of  the  Kavi  52  miles  N.E.  of  llnitan.  The
old  fort  was  situated  a mile  to  the  soutli  of  the  present  town.  It  has  been
identified  with  a town  of  the  Iklalli  concpiered  by  Alexander  the  Great  during
his  campaign  in  the  PanJab,  and  also  as  the  place  where  he  crossed  the  Ravi.
{See  ilunter  Imp.  Gaz.  XIII  163,  al>o  Cmmii*gham  .lac.  Geog.  of  hidia,  224  )
s Firishta  says  jj  Kh^nbpftr.  The  text  reads  somewhat  obscurely

here.  I have  supplied  the  words  in  brackets  to  restore  the  sense  in  English.

4 'Which  took  place  according  to  Firt^ta  at  Khyrabad  three  stages  from
Multan.

t The  words  within  brackets  are  not  in  MS.  (A).

« MS.  (A)  Jijfbd  Text  ijjl  '•= —

I MS.  (A)  Text

MS.  (A)  Jlyj*—  nr  Fii Ishta  (text' jrk"-

[ 390  ]

been  taken,  the  army  of  ‘Imadn-l-Miilk  pursued  them  up  to  that
point.  Amir  Muzaffar  remained  entrenched  within  the  fortress
while  Shaikh  ‘Ali  set  his  face  to  so  to  Kabul.  The  viciorions
arniT  abandoned  the  sieo-e  and  returned  to  Dihli.  Multan  was
tnken  away  from  Tniadii-1-Mnlk  and  ^Ireu  to  Mnlik  Khairn-d-Din
Khan  which  led  to  great  disturbances  on  the  borders  of  Mnllan.

And  in  the  year  835  H.  (1431  A. D.)  Malik  Sikander,  - governor
of  Labor,  set  out  to  quell  the  rebellion  which  Jasrat  Khukhar  had
stirred  np  at  the  foot  of  the  hills.  Jasrat  took  him  * unawares
and  en^ao-ed  him  in  battle  ; Sikander  falling  into  the  hands  of
296.  Jasrat  Khukhar  wa=  takei.  pris.-ner  rear  Jalandhar.  Ja.srat  took
his  prisoner  to  Labor  and  besiege-l  rho  city,  and  Saiyt  id  Xajmu-d-
Din  the  reeent  of  Sikander,  and  Malik  Khushkhahr  = the  slave  of
Sikander,  h. ue'h*  several  battles  with  him.  In  the  meantime
Shaikh  ‘All  coileoied  an  army  a;,d  again  came  on  to  the  holders
of  Multan.'  and  as.saubed  Khutpur,  ^ taking  prisoners  tlie
greater  portion  cf  the  inhubitanis  of  Jhilam  and  its  vicinity,  and
seized  Talnmba.  pillaging  and  despoiling  all  the  inliabitants  and
mukiii"  them  prisoners  ; most  of  them  he  put  to  death,  and  took
the  rest  of  ihem.  great  a id  small,  to  his  own  country.

In  the  meantime  Fu^ad  Tuiki>aeha,  who  has  been  mentioned
above,  left  Tabaihmda  and  invaded  the  tei'ritory  of  Rai  Firoz  “
who  engaged  him  in.  battle  and  wa.s  slain,  Fiilad  sending  his  head
to  Tubaihinda

In  this  year  also  the  Sultan  again  led  an  army  towards  Labor
and  Multan  ; when  he  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  Samana,  Jasrat
withdrew  from  in  front  of  Labor  towards  the  foot  of  the  hills,
and  Shaikh  ‘All  also  retired  to  his  own  country.  Labor  and
Jalandhar  vv ere  taken  fiom  Shamsn-l-iMulk  and  given  to  Nusrnt
Khan  Gurgaiidai;.  and  Mubarak  Shah  gave  orders  for  the  family
and  relations  of  Shnmsn-l-Mulk  to  be  removed  t from  Labor  to
Dihli,  whither  he  himself  leturued.

t MSS.  ‘Ihe  text  reatlc  wrongly

* MS.  (A,l  omits  b y

5 MS.  (A;  reads  Ehashanjar  i?].

* At  the  instigation  of  Jas’-ac  Khikhar.  according  to  Firishta.

6 See  note  3 page  389,  MS.  lA)  omits  b*

* MS.  (A)  reads  j ALAG  inste.id  of  j as  in  the  text,

t Text  MS.  (A)

[ 391

I

J

And  in  the  year  836  H.  (1433  A.D.)  ilubarak  Shah  once  move
hastened  to  Samana  t to  put  down  the  rebellion  of  Jasrat;  when
he  arrived  at  Panipath  he  received  intelligence  of  the  death  of
his  mother,  who  was  called  Makhdutna-i-Jahau  iMistiessof  the
world),  and  turned  hack  with  a small  retinue^  to  Dih’i,  and
having  remained  theie  ten  days  *o  perfosm  his  mournii'g  for  lie!-,
again  joined  his  army,  and  detailed  Yusuf  Sururu-l-JIulk  to
proceed  to  Tabarhinda  to  put  down  the  insurrection  of  F-ilad,
Ma.barak  Shah  after  taking  Labor  and  Jahimihar  from
Khan  gave  them  to  Malik  Allabdad  Kalti  Lodi  Whei;  ‘ oe
ai  rived  near  Jalandhar,  Jasrat,  having  crossed  the  river  Biak.  iia  i
engaged  Allahd&d  Kalu ' at  Bajvv;ii-a,“  and  had  defeated  h'.is..  297.
Maiik  Allabdad  had  fled  to  the  hill-c-o-a'.itry.

In  this  year  the  Sultan  brouffht  aii  army  into  Miwst  agair-.^t
Jalal  Ehan,  and  from  thence  despatching  .a force  t-.  ore.-ate  tow.u.-s
Gwaliar  and  Itawa,  returned  (to  Diuli).  In  th.is  sai  le  year
Shaikh  ‘Ali  coming  down  into  the  Panjab  again  caused  disturb-
ances there.  Mubarak  Shah  accordi-igly  nominated  Imadu-I-
mulk  to  reinforce  the  Amirs  of  that  district.  Shaikh  ’All  iiivaded
the  country  from  Shi  war  to  the  banks  of  the  Blah,  and  taking
great  numbers  prisoners  and  plundering,  went  to  Labor.  Zirak
Khan  and  the  other  Amirs®  who  were  in  Labor  fortified  them-
selves there,  and  fought  repeated  eng.agements  with  him,  till,  one
night,  the  inhabitants  of  Labor  were  cai-ele.ss  about  their  guards
aud  sentries,  and  Malik  Yusuf  Suiuru-l-Muik  and  Malik  Ism.i'ii
under  cover  of  night  succeeded  in  joining  Ziiak  Khan  : then  sallying
from  the  fort,i^  gave  battle  and  were  defeated.  Shaikh  "AJi
pursued  them,  some  of  the  fuaritiveb  were  pat  to  death,  aud  some
were  taken  prisoners.  The  following  day  Shaikh  'Ali  took  Labor-
and  put  to  death  great  and  small,  ’ and  taking  many  prisoners

1 MS.  (A)  aiUU

* Firishta  saya  he  retoraed  alone.

S Omit  j MS,  (A).

^ MS.  (A)  omits  Kalii.  ^ Bajwara.  A miles  E.  of

Hosbiarpar  about  25  miles  N.  E.  of  Jalandhar.

SMS.  (A)  ^

MS.  (A)  aapplies  the  words

S M.S.  (A)  reads  the  textual  readiiitc  is  probabiy  incorrect,

road  A

[ 392  ]

remained  there.  And  after  some  days,  he  came  to  Debalpur,
•which  ifalik  Yusuf  Surhru-l-Mulk  -was  intending  to  abandon.
Malik  ‘Imadu-l-Mulk  ‘ on  hearing  of  this  despatched  his  brother
Malik  Aljmad  from  Tabarbinda  to  the  fort  of  Debalpur  with
oiders  to  hold  it.  Shaikh  ‘Ali  becoming  aware  of  this  returned
from  that  direction  : Sultan  Mubarak  Shah  proceeded  as  far  as
Samana  in  order  to  quell  these  disturbances.*  From  Samana  ho
proceeded  to  Talaundi  and  thence  to  the  ford  of  Puhi,  where  he
crossed  the  the  Biah  and  came  to  Debalpur.  Thence  he  matched
alouCT  the  banks  ® of  the  Ravi,  and  Shaikh  ‘Ali  crossed  the  Jhilam
and  fled,  * ilubarak  Shah  pursued  him  as  far  as  the  foi-tress
of  Shivvar  and  oiossed  the  Ravi  near  Tulurnba.  ^ Amir  Muzaffar
298.  lOian,  brother’s  son  to  Shaikh  ‘Ali,  who  was  holding  the  fort  with
Shaikh  ‘All’s  troops,  fought  against  the  king  for  a month,  and  at
last  sued  for  quarter,  and  gave  his  daughter  together  with  a laige
amount  of  money  and  valuables  to  the  prince.  A part  of  Shaikh
‘Ali  s forces  who  were  besieged  in  Labor  sought  quarter  from
Shamsu-1-iInlk  and  evacuated  tlie  fort.  As  soon  as  Mubarak
Shah  had  completed  the  affair  of  Shiwar  and  the  conquest  of
Lalior.  he  proceeded  with  a small  retinue  to  visit  the  holy  shrines
of  the  Shaikhs  at  Multan,  and  returning  almost  immediately  came
to  Debalpur  and  remained  there  for  some  days.  Having  regard
to  .Shaikh  ‘Ali  (as  a source  of  danger),  he  gave  the  distriots  of
Labor  and  Debalpur  to  Maliku-.^i-.^^harq  ‘Imadu-l-Mulk,  and
taking  away  the  districts  of  Biiiana  from  ‘Imadu-l-Mulk  he  gave
them  to  Shamsu-d-din.  Marching  thence  in  light  order  by  forced
marches,  he  leached  Djhli  on  the  day  of  the  ‘Id-i-Qurban  ^ and

1 MS.  (A)  omits

* MS.  (A)  omits  j and  writes  (j  for  AjLcLmi  G,

8 MS.  (A)  reads  incoirectly

* The  text  and  both  MSS.  (A).  (B)  read  j The  } is  to  be

omitted.

5 Besieging  the  fort  Shiwar  (Firi.ohta).

''  The  festital  of  Sacrifice.  This  is  the  festival  held  on  the  lOtli  dav  of

Za-l-hijjrdi.  It  is  known  aLo  as  the  ‘ Idu  l azhd,  see  QuTaii  xxii.  33 38.  It

comraemorar..s  the  intention  of  Ibrahim  to  sacrifice  his  son  Isma'il  in  obedi-
ence to  the  command  of  God.  It  is  the  chief  of  the  Muhammadan  festivala
and  is  called  ‘ Lln-t-lahir,  the  great  festival,  to  distinguish  it  from  the  • Idn-l-
htr  which  is  known  as  ‘ Idu-s-saJOr  which  usher.s  in  the  month  of  Shawwal
and  celebrates  the  termination  of  the  fast  of  llamuran.  (See  Uughes  Dkt.

[ 393  3

conferred  tlie  ofiBce  of  vazir  upon  Sarwam-l-Mulk  and  gave  to
Malik  Kamalu-l-ilalk,'^  who  waa-the  Military  Secretary  (Naib-i-
Lashkar),  charge  of  the  civil  administration  in  conjunction  with
Sarwaru-l-Mulk.

There  v?as  a hypoci-itical  bond  of  fellowship  between  these  two,*
inasmuch  as  Sarwaru-l-Mulk  had  a grievous  thorn  rankling  in  his
breast  on  account  of  the  deprivation  of  Debalpur,  and  bore  a
grudge  ngainst  Mubarak  Sh^  : so  that  at  such  a juncture,  seeing
that  he  had  less  than  ever  to  hope  from  him,  he  entered  on  a
course  of  secret  treachery  and  deceit.  He  entered  into  a con-
spiracy with  the  sons  of  Kangu  Khatri  and  Kajwi  Khatii' and
Miran  Sadr  Naib-i-'Arz,  (who  for  generations  had  been  proteges  of
the  Mubarak  Sliahi  family,  and  li’eld  several  high  offices)  and  also
with  another  party  of  Muslim  vagabonds,  to  seek  an  opportunity
of  destroying  Mubarak  Shah.*

And  in  the  year  837  H.  (1433  A.D.)  * Mubarak  Shah  built  a
city  on  the  banks  of  the  river  Janma,*  and  gave  it  the  name  of
Mubarakabad  (City  of  Pro.spority ),  though  in  reality  it  should
have  been  called  KharaMbiid  (City  of  Ruin),  and  was  so  zealous
in  building  it  that  he  spared  no  pains  in  its  superiutendeuce.  In  299.
the  meanwhile  news  of  the  capture  of  the  fortress  of  Tabavhinda
reached  the  court,  accompanied  by  the  head  of  the  slave  Fulad
Turkbacha.®  Mubarak  Shalt  could  not  contain  himself  for  joy  at
this  intelligence,  and  proceeded  by  forced  marches  to  Tabarhinda  t
and  returned  thence  speedily  to  Mubarakabad.  In  this  year
tidings  anived  that  liostilities  were  going  on  between  Sultan
Ibrahim  Sharqi  and  Alp  Khan,  governor  of  Kalpi,  wlio  had  re-

* Firishta  sayi  KanullU’d-dln,

* M3.  (A)  omits

® Firishta  names  as  the  accomplices  Sidaran,  son  of  Kangu  ^atri  and
Sadpal,  grandson  of  Kanjui  Khatri:  with  Miran  Sadr  Naib-i-‘ arz-i-Mamalifer,
‘ Abdn-s-sadr  Hajib-i-^ass  and  others  (Firi^ta.  Bomlai/  text,  I,  p.  308).

* MS.  (A)

& Briggs  in  bis  translation  of  Firishta  (Vol.  I,  p.  529)  assigns  839  H.  as  the
date  of  the  bnildiag  of  this  city,  but  a reference  to  the  original  shews  that
the  historian  gives  837  H.  as  the  date.

' The  text  reads  here  bat  a footnote  gives  a variant

and  this  reading  is  confirmed  by  MS.  (A)  and  also  by  Firishta,

1 Firishta  sa}*i  he  returned  direct  to  Mubarakabnd.

50

[ 394  ]

ceived  tlie  title  of  Hoshang.  l Mubarak  Shab  accordiugly  sent
commands  in  all  directions  for  forces  to  be  collected  and  held  in
readiness  to  march  toT^ards  Kalpi,  and  that  they  should  assemble  at
the  Court.  At  this  juncture  Mubarak  Shah  persisted  in  his  invari-
able custom  of  visiting  the  site  of  the  new  city  in  season  and  out
of  season.  One  day  when  he  had  ridden  out  there  with  a body  of
attendants  without  ceremony,  and  was  preparing  to  say  the  Friday
prayers,*  the  infidels  under  Miran  Sadr,  who  had  continually  lain
in  wait  for  him  at  the  instigation  of  Sarwaru-1-Mnlk,  seeking  an
opportunity  (to  slay  him),*  with  one  accord  entered  the  private
anartment  of  Mubarak  Sbah  on  some  pretext  or  another,  and  Sidh
Pal,’  the  grandscn  of  the  scoamirel  Kajwi  Ivbatri.  put  that
ausT'ieious  monarch  to  a martyr’s  death.  This  event  took  place
in  toe  year  647  H.  The  days  of  his  reign  were  thirteen  years
three  months  and  sixteen  days.

Verse.

Wonder  not  at  the  vicissitudes  of  time,  for  the  heavens

Eetain  a recollection  of  thousands  of  such  stories  as  this.

Set  not  your  affections  upon  that  which  passeth  away,  for  the
river  Dajln  *

Will  continue  to  pass  by  Baghdad,  while  many  Khalifahs
come  and  go.

t Firiehta  tbronghout  eal’e  him  Hoshang.
s On  iha  9th  Bajab  S37  (Firishta  Bombay  text  t HO'd)

8 MS.  (A)  omits

* The  text  is  followed  here  os  it  agrees  closely  with  the  aoconnt  giren  by

Firishta.  MS.  (A)  reads  ixiiAL. Jlc  {.Xm  Weef'  J«=r*  ji

S Daj'a  or  Bagla,  as  it  may  also  bo  pronounced,  is  the  Hiddekel  ot

the  Bible  (Gen.  ii.  14 ; Dan.  x.  4;  lit.,  the  swift.  The  old  Persian

form  is  Tigri,  “ swift  as  an  arrow,”  whence  is  derived  Tigris,  the  modern  name
of  this  river.  According  to  Pliny  (TI.  27),  the  river  in  the  upper  part  of  its
course  where  it  flowed  gently  was  called  Diglito,  and  lower  down,  where  it
is  more  rapid,  on  account  of  its  velocity  it  is  called  Tigris,  for  the  Medes  call
an  arrow  by  this  name.  According  to  Gesenius,  in  modern  Persian  both  the
river  Tigris  and  an  arrow  have  the  common  name  tlr,  which  in  the  Zend

becomes  Tedjer.  See  Gesenins  Thes : also  Smith  Diet.  O.  R.  Oeog.

'•  The  Tigris  is  navigable  for  light  steamers  up  to  Baghdad,  bat  owing  to
the  rapidity  of  the  current,  the  traffic  is  all  down  stream  carried  on  mainly
by  a primitive  style  of  craft,  which  is  broken  up  at  Baghdad  and  transported
by  camels  back  to  Mosul.”

[ 395  ]

Scltas  Muhammad  ShIh  ibn  i FaeId  Sban,

The  brother’s  son  of  Mubarak  Shah  ibn  i Kbizr  Khan,  irhom  300.
Mubarak  Shah  had  adopted  as  his  own  son.  ascended  the  throne  in
succession  to  Mubarak  Shah  in  the  jear  - 837  H.  (1433  A.D.)
and  Sarwaru-l-Mulk,  "whose  head  "was  filled  with,  treacherous
design.s,  ostensibij  owned  his  allegiance.  Muhammad  Shah,  in
spite  of  the  foregoing  circumstances,  .conferred  upon  him  the  title
of  ^^dn-i-Jahdn  and  bestowed  a Ichll'at  upon  him,  he  also  ap-
pointed Miran  Sadr  MuMnt,  ■l-mii.Vk.  and  for  a short  time  winked  as
the  doings  of  those  infidels.  Maiikn-sh-Sharq  Kamalu-l-mulk.
who  was  co-partner  with  Sarwar'a-l-Miilk  in  t’le  vazlrship,  elected
to  reside  outside  the  city,  and  gave  in  his  allegiance  to  Mu’nammad
Siiiah.  Ihe  .second  day  after  the  accession  Sarsvaru-I-Mulk  made
some  pretenr  fir  nrrestlr.g  * cerrain  of  the  servants  of  Mubarak
hbali,  and  put  tliom  to  death,  .I’-.'llefr  nothing  undone  to  secure  the
oveithrowal  of  the  family  of  Mubarak  Shah  ; moreover,  he  began
to  divide  the  couufry  among  his  own  tiartisans,  giving  the  terri-
tory of  Baiana,  and  Amroha,  and  yainoh  and  Kuliriim.  together
with  certain  districts  in  the  Doab.  to  Sidh  Pal  and  Sidharan
Khatri  who  were  the  (actual)  murderers  of  Jlubarak  Shah.

Raniin  the  Black,  a slave  of  Sidn  Pal,  arrived  ia  Baiana  with  a
large  fillowing,  and  attempted  to  enter  the  fort;  but  in  the  mean-
time Yhsuf  IQi  in  Aubadi  arrived  from  Hindwan.®  and  giving  him
battle  defeated  him,  and  sent  the  greater  portion  of  those  in-
fidels to  hell.  Their  women  and  children  fell  as  prisoners  into
the  hands  of  the  Muslims,  and  the  head  of  Ranua  the  Black
was  hung  up  over  the  gate  of  the  fort.  Inasmuch  as  Sarwaru-l-
Mulk  and  his  infidel  horde  began  to  commit  violence,  the
Amirs  of  Khizi-  fflian  and  idubarck  Shah,  who  were  scattered
here  and  there  about  the  country,  in  several  places  shewed
symptom.s  of  revolt  and  set  on  foot  many  insurrections.  Sarwaru-l-
Mulk  had  the  self-same  object,  namely  to  damage  the  kingdom.  301.
Malik  Allahdad  Kala  Lodi,  governor  of  Sambhal  and  Ahar,  *

* Pth  Eajab  837.

® Mb.  (A.)  j

3 The  test  and  both  MSS.  read  tiyois  Ilindan.  Firishta  reads  Hindwan.
Hindann  lies  about  20  miles  S.  of  Baiaea,  it  is  situated  in  the  Jejpore  State.

* Ahar.  In  Bulaudahahr  District.  S.-tV.P.,  20  miles  N.E.  of  Bnlandshahr.

1.  396  ]

and  Malik  Chaman  ^ governor*  of  Badaon,  giandson  of  Kbaii-i-
Jakan,  and  Amir  'All  Gnjrati,  together  with  some  other  Amirs,
raised  a large  following  to  avenge  the  death  of  Mubarak  Shah,
and  started  towards  Dihli.  Maliku-sh-Sharq.  Kainalu-l-ilulk,
and  Saivyid  Kdian.  son  of  Sai3'yld  Salim,  who  had  received
the  title  of  Khan-i-A‘zam  from  Mubarak  >Shah,  were  appointed
by  the  durlar  to  proceed  against  those  Amirs,  and  Malik  Tusuf,
the  son  of  Sarvvaru-l-Mulk,  together  with  Sidbaran  and  Kangu
were  ordered  to  accompany  Kamalu-l-Mulk.  The  Dihli  army
crossed  by  the  ford  of  Kicha  and  came  to  Baran  ( Balaiidshahr).
Malik  Allahdad  and  the  other  noted  Amirs  having  arrived  at
the  township  of  Ahar  desired  to  cr«s  the  Gauges  without
fighting  and  go  where  they  could  safely.  Bat  when  they
saw  cieatdy  that  Malik  Kamalu-I-Mulk  was  heaitilv  bent  upon
taking  vengeance  upon  Sarwaru-l-Mulk,  they  took  courage  and
did  not  leave  their  positions.  Sai  waru-l-Mulk  becoming  aware
of  this  sent  his  lieutenant  Malik  il'.i.shyar,  under  pretence  of
reinforcing  Kuraalu-l-Mulk,  as  a spy  into  their  army.  Yusuf
dOtau  and  Malik  ilushyar,  and  Sidhaian  the  iuddel,  eiitertainip^
suspicious  regarding  Kamalu-l-Mulk  left  the  army  and  went  'to
Dihli  ; and  the  Amirs  of  Sambhal  and  lladaon  joined  Kamaln-l-
Mulk  and  came  in  great  force  to  tlie  ford  of  Kicha.  S.irwaru-l-
Mulk  was  engaged  in  stiengthening  his  fort.  The  follow'ing  day
the  lu\al  Amirs  having  crossed  the  Jamna  encamped  in  the  Bagh-
i-Jad3  while  the  traitors  and  infidels  sallied  out  from  the  fort  and
engaged  them  in  battle,  hut  suffered  defeat  in  the  very  first  onset
and  letreated  to  the  foit,  but  before  they  could  enter  it  a large
iLuiubei  were  2mt  to  death  and  most  (>f  the  i'eiuainder  were  taken
]u  isoiu  ; s.

Tile  day  followiiitr  tliis  victory  the  Muhar.ik  Rhahi  Amirs
302.  enc.imped  near  the  fort  of  Siii,  and  tl.e  greater  j)ait  of  the  Amii.s
who  were  imside  the  fort,  came  out  and  joined  them.  Fight-
rug  Went  on  between  the  two  parties  for  three  monliis.

At  the  latter  jiarc  of  this  veut  Zirak  Khan.  Governor  of  Samana

t o

* M.s.  (A)  wilt...  iJiLo  iluiik  llamin  ; by  Fir:fd,ta,  and  in  Elliot.  „

tiiei.M„u(,u  oi  ihi  ■],„  ,|J,  i-.Mub:u:iK  MiJiii  (IV,  b2j  he  is  caili  d M.-dik  Cliaman,
2 1 m;  iv.au  111  ti.e  original  Maqti-,  i.e.,  holder  of  a fki  .^iC.  Eiiishta

cbU-*  hiiii

[ 397  ]

died,  and  the  country  was  confirmed  to  his  son  Muhammad  Klian,
Muhammad  Shah,  although  outwardly  he  held  friendly  relations
with  Sarwaru-l-M  nlk,  still  in  his  inmost  heart  was  in  unison
with  his  father’s  Amirs.  Sarwaru-l-Mulk  became  aware  of  this,
and  accordingly  began  to  plot  treachery  against  him  also,  and  was
only  waiting  his  opportunity.

On  the  eighth  of  Muharram  in  the  year  838  H.  (1434  A. D)
Sarwaru-l-Mulk  and  the  sons  of  the  perfidious  Miian  Sadr  sud-
denly broke  into  the  tent  of  the  king  with  the  intention  of  doing
him  a grievous  injury,  but  at  this  moment  Muhammad  Shah
became  aware  of  their  design  ; and  with  all  despatch  sent  messen-
gers to  Kamalu-l-Mulk,  while  the  attendants  who  were  near  the
person  of  Muhammad  Shah  were  on  their  guard,  and  killed  the
traitor  Sarwaru-l-Mulk,  and  seizing  the  sons  of  Miran  Sadr  exe-
cuted them  in  presence  of  the  darhar.  The  traitorous  infidels
blockaded  themselves  in  their  own  houses.  Kamfilu-l-Mulk,
accompanied  by  all  the  Amirs,  entered  the  fort  by  the  Darwaza-i-
Baghdad  (Baghdad  gate).  The  ruffian  Sidh  Pal  set  fire  to  his
hou.se  and  property,  and  after  performing  ihejauhar  * which  is  a
well-known  custom  expressed  by  that  word  in  the  Hindi  language,
went  himself  into  battle  and  became  food  for  the  flames  of  the
pitiless  swoid,*  and  his  impure  soul  went  to  hell.^  Sidhsran
Kangu  aud  the  rest  of  the  Khatri  confedeiati.m,  were  one  and  all
taken  prisoners,  aud  were  impaled  near  the  (la,: ira  * (mausoleum)

1 Jaukar  or  Jiihar  is  a Hiadl  word  derived  from  the  words

p'!',  and  hara  bignifying  /aii.'ij  one’s  own  life.  The  custom  of
tile  liajputs  when  reduced  to  the  last  extremity  in  warfare  was  in  olden
times  to  perform  a rite  of  self-sacridce  known  by  this  name : as  for
instance  on  the  occasion  of  the  siege  and  capture  of  Chitor  by  Sultan  Alio
d-Diu;  “Huge  piles  of  timber  were  raised  up  and  set  on  fire.  The  womec
approached  in  funeral  procession  and  threw  themselves  into  the  flames.
The  men  arraved  themselves  in  saffron -colcured  garments  and  rushed  out  of
the  fortress  sword  in  hand  ; most  of  them  were  cut  to  pieces.”  The  evident
ol.ject  of  the  rite  was  to  protect  the  persons  of  the  women  from  tlie  indig-
nities to  which  they  would  be  submitted  if  they  were  to  fall  alive  into  the
hands  of  the  enemv.  * MSS.  omit

s The  word  Jaukar,  here  used  for  “ Soul,”  has  the  primary  mean-

iiig  of  '•  essence.”  I’t  U a Torsi  m word  and  is  used  here  as  a pi.iy  upon  the
Hindi  woid  jatikui  used  above  (Note  1).

i Jlazn  a.  The  literal  meaniag  of  this  word  is  a«  eiicfosme,  here

[ 398  ]

of  Mubarak  Sbah,  and  Malik  Hushjar  and  Mubarak  Kotwal  'srere
executed  along  with.  them.  Thf*  following  day  Kamalu-l-Mulk
and  the  other  noted  Amirs  renewcu  tuei*’  'ealty  to  Muhammad

303.  ^ah ; Kamaln-l-Mulk  obtained  the  rai-k  of  vazh'  and  Malik
Chaman  of  Badaon  received  the  title  of  Ghaziii-l-Mulk,  and  was
reinstated  in  hia  former  position  as  governor  of  Badaon,  Amroha
being  also  added  to  his  province ; Malik  Allahdad  Lodi  would
not  accept  any  title,  the  title  of  Darya  Kjimi  however  he  accepted
for  his  brother.  Thus  after  settling  the  important  affairs,  Muham-
mad Shah  gave  durability  to  his  rule,  and  conducted  his  Govern-
ment in  tranquillity.

And  in  the  year  840  H.  (1436  A.D.)  he  turned  his  attention
towards  Multan,  and  halted  for  sonte  days  at  !Mubaiakpnr  to  give
time  for  the  Amirs  of  the  various  districts  to  join  him.  4yheu  the
Muhammad  Shalii’s  troops  were  all  a.s.s6mbled  at  Mitbarakpur  he
marched  theuce  towards  Multau,  and  after  visiting  the  .shrines  of
the  holy  men  at  that  place  ‘ came  to  Dihli.  And  in  the  aforesaid
year,  marching  towards  Samana  he  despatched  a force  to  proceed
against  SJjaikha  Kuukhar.®  Accordingly  they  laid  waste  his  coun-
try and  returned.*  In  the  year  841  H.  (1437  A.D.)  tidings
arrived  that  the  tribe  of  Langalis  bad  raised  an  insurrection
in  Multan,  and  in  the  meantime  Sultan  Ibrahim  Sharqi  obtained
possession  of  certain  divisions  of  Dihli,  and  the  Eai  of  Gwaliar
and  the  other  Rais  refused  to  pay  the  customary  tribute.  Muham-
mad Shah  affected  to  be  indifferent  to  this,  and  disturbances
sprung  up  in  all  directions,  and  everyone  was  hankering  after
something.  The  Khauzadas  of  Miwat,  who  are  the  ancestors  of
Hasan  Khan  of  Miwat,  invited  Sultan  Mahtaud  Khilji  from  Malwa
to  assume  the  imperial  power  of  Dihli.

And  in  the  year  844  H.  (1410  A.D.)  Sultan  Mahmud  arrived
at  Dihli,  and  Muhammad  Shah  drew  up  his  forces  and  sent  out
his  son  Saiyyid  ‘ Alau-d-Din  to  engage  him  in  battle,  giving  the

304.  comanand  of  the  force  to  Malik  Buhlul  Lodi.  Sultan  Mahmud  also

It  means  a tomb  enclosed  within  walls  or  a palisade.  Firishta  Writes  “ were
put  to  death  with  great  tortures  ” (*1*3

1 MS.  (A)  omit*

* MS.  (A).  ji.

s MS.  (A)  oajj  13^

[ 399  j

appointed  his  two  sons  GWasu-d-Din  and  Qadr  Ehan  i to  oppose
them.  A fierce  battle  resnlting  they  at  last  agreed  to  make  peace,
and  Sultan  Mabmud  taking  advantage  of  that,  and  alleging  as  an
excuse  that  he  had  seen  in  a dream  that  the  kingdom  of  Multan
■was  being  ruined,  marched  in  light  order  under  cover  of  night
towai'ds  Malwa.  Malik  Bbhlfil  pursued  him  and  seized  a portion  of
his  baggage  and  valuable  ’equipment.  Sultan  Muhammad  was  so
pleasedat  the  energy  displayed  by  Bnhlul  Lodi  that  he  called  him  his
son,*  and  bestowed  upon  him  tlie  country  of  Labor  and  Detalpnr.

And  in  the  year  815  H.  ( 1441  A.D.  ) he  marched  to  Samana,
and  having  despatciiod  Buhlnl  to  chastise  Jasrat  Khnkhar,  return-
ed to  Dihli.  Jasrat  concluded  a peace  with  Malik  Buhiul  and  held
out  to  him  the  pleasing  prospect  of  becoming  Sultan  of  Dihli, *
till  at  last  Buhlnl  began  to  collect  Afghans  from  all  directions  and
took  forcible  possession  of  a large  number  of  pavganas,  then  with-
out any  ostensible  reason  he  picked  a quarrel  with  Mahummad
Shah  and  revolted  against  him,  leading  an  army  against  Dihli,
He  held  Sultan  Muhammad  for  a considerable  time  closely  be-
sieged, but  could  not  accomplish  his  purpose,  and  returned  without
efiecting  anything.  In  the  meantime  Muhammad  Shah  was
afflicted  with  a grievous  disorder,*  and  the  Amirs  who  were  at  a
distance  of  twenty  krohs  from  Dihli  revolted  against  him,  and
sending  for  his  son  ‘ Alau-d-Din  who  held  njSeglr  in  Badaun,  and
had  left  there  on  a hunting  expedition  at  the  foot  of  the  hills,
made  him*  heir-apparent.  And  in  the  year  8l7  H.  ® he  passed
away,  the  duration  of  his  reigpi  was  fourteen  t years  aud  some
months,  or  thereabouts.

t The  text  reads  lijlA  Madan  Khdrv.  MS.  (A)  reads

Qadan  Khan.  Firishta  says  ujIAjA*  Qadr  Khan.  So  also  Tatajat-i-Aiban.

* MS.  (.%)  \^j\  See  Elliott  IV  85.

• Firishta  says  : Incited  him  to  aspire  to  the  kingdom  of  Dihli.  MS.  (A),

instead  of  writes  *.

♦ toA  Xipe  woue  Firishta  says  : JJji  jj)  becom-
ing day  by  day  weaker.  * MS.  (A)

* Firishta  says  that  he  died  in  849  H.  which  is  probably  correct,  s«e  n.  7.

1 As  he  came  to  the  throne  in  837  he  had  reigned  only  some  ten  years,  not
fourteen  as  heiw  stated,  toih  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  however  read

The  Tahaqat’^Akhari  according  to  Elliott  IV.  86  savg  ten  years  and  some
nji'iithsi  With  {regard  to  thii  Tiiomae,  p.  336  and  1.

[ 400  ]

Come  and  cast  one  look  upon  their  dust,  and  take  warning.

For  the  dust  is  the  resting-place  of  trusted  emperors.

305.  SuLTiN  ‘ALir-D-DiN  ibn  i Mchammad  SgiH  ibn  I Mubarak
Shah  ^ ibn  i Khizr  Khan,

In  accordance  with  the  testamentary  disposition  of  his  father
Bucceeded  to  the  throne,  and  Malik  Buhlul  with  the  other  Amirs
gave  in  their  allegiance  to  him,  and  seeing  that  the  indolence  of
Sultan  ‘ Alau-d-Din  was  even  greater  than  that  of  his  father,  a
still  more  violent  ambition  to  secure  the  throne  began  to  work
upon  the  excited  fancy  of  Buhlul.

In  the  year  850  H.  (1445  A.D.)  Sultan  ‘ Alan-d-Din  made  an
excursion  towards  Baiana ; while  on  the  road  he  heard  a false
rumour  that  the  King  of  Jaunpur  was  on  his  way  to  attack  Dihli,
and  without  attempting  to  ascertain  its  truth  returned  in  hot
haste  to  Dihli.  In  the  year  851  H.  (1447  A.D.)  he  went  to

where  it  is  said  that  Firishta  “ makes  a less  venial  mistake  in  insisting  npoj/
a twelve  years’  reign  in  spice  of  his  own  expressed  figures  of  from  “839  to
819”  A.  H.  Briggs,  pp.  332 — 339.”  This  is  not  Firishta’s  error  but  is  the  fault  of
his  translator.  Firishca  says  clearly  that  llutiammad  succeeded  to  the  throne
on  the  very  day  on  which  Mubarak  Shah  was  assassinated  (Bo  text,  p 309J
that  is,  “ on  the  9th  Raj.ab  837”  (Bo.  text,  p.  308),  so  that  while  his  date  as  re-
gards the  death  of  Muhammad  Shah  may  be  wrong,  his  calculation  based
upon  the  dates  he  gives  is  correct.  I am  not  aware  of  any  direct  evidence
that  Snltatr  ‘ Alau-d-Din  ascended  the  throne  in  847  H.  The  Turtk^-i-Mxiharah
Shahl.  if  Elliott’s  trauslation  (Elliot,  IT,  p.  86)  is  tclbe  trusted,  says,  “ Upon  the
death  of  Muhammad  Shah  the  amirs  and  nobles  assembled,  and  raised  his  son  to
the  throne  uiuier  the  style  of  Sultan  ‘ Aiaa-d-Diu’  and  in  a footnote  on  tire
eame  page  referring  to  the  conflict  of  testimony  between  Badaoni  and  Firishta
as  to  the  date  of  Muhammad  Shah’s  death,  he  says  : “ Firishta  seems  correct  in
making  it  849,”  and  with  this  opinion  I am  inclined  to  agree.  The  mistake
appears  to  have  arisen  from  accepting  the  date  given  by  Briggs  in  his  transla-
tion of  Firishta,  instead  of  confirming  it  from  Firishta  himself,  who  gives  17th
Jatnadi  I 824  as  the  date  of  Khizr  Khan’s  death  and  Mubarak  Shah’s  accession,
and  states  (Bo.  text  309)  that  Mubarak  Shah  reigned  thirteen  years  three
months  and  sixteen  days.  This  would  bring  us  to  837  H.  not  to  839  H.  There-
fore unless  there  is  evidence  to  shew  that  ‘ Alau-d-Din  came  to  the  throne  in
847  H.  we  are  justified  in  accepting  Firishta’s  plain  and  coincident  statement
that  Muhammad  Shah  reigned  twelve  years  and  some  months,  dying  in  849  H.

1 MS.  (A)  omits  ‘‘“'i  writes  Farid  Khan.  Set

Thomas,  Paihun  Kings^  335,  footnote.

[ 401  ]

Badaon  and  elected  to  take  up  his  abode  there,  and  after  making
pi'eparatious  for  remaining  there  * returned  to  his  capital  Dihli.

And  in  the  year  8o2  H.  (1448  A.D.)  having  made  Lis  two
bi’others-in-law  Shahna-i-Shahr  {City  Constable)  and  Mir-i-Kue
(Superintendent  of  Roads)  he  returned  to  Badaon.  A disturbance
arose  between  those  two  brothers,  and  at  last  both  were  put  to  death
by  the  people  of  Dihli.  Husain  Khan  who  was  Umdatu-l-Mulk
(a  Privy  Councillor),  and  loyal  to  the  Sultan,  but  from  time  to
time  spoke  the  direct  truth  to  the  Sultan  in  connection  with  the
administration  of  State  affairs,  had  for  this  very  reason,  fallen  out
of  favour  with  the  Sultan,  and  had  been  deposed  from  hie  office.
Hamid  TOiSn.  Vazir-i-mamlukat,  (vazir  of  the  State)  who  had  fled
to  Dihli  fearing  punishment  at  the  hands  of  the  Snlt&n,  and
dreading  an  attempt  upon  his  life,*  joined  with  Husain  l^han  in
invitixig  Madik  BnhluJ  and  in  raising  him  to  the  throne.  He
accordingly  took  advantage  of  the  absence  of  the  Sultan  to  pro-  306-
ceed  to  Sirhind  * and  having  assumed  to  himself  the  title  of
Sultan  read  the  Khuthah,  and  coming  a second  time  with  * his  whole
army  seized  upon  Dihli.  Leaving  his  viceroy  there  he  pi'oceeded
towards  Dibalpur,  where  he  set  about  raising  an  army,  and  wrote
a letter  couched  in  hypocritical  terms  to  Sultan  ‘ Alau-d-Din  say-
ing, “ I am  your  obedient  servant,  and  am  undertaking  all  this  mar-
ching backwards  and  forwards  solely  ont  of  loyalty  to  your  person.

The  Sultan  in  reply,  wrote  as  follows  : “ The  deceased  King,
Sultan  Muhammad  Shah,  called  yon  by  the  name  of  Son.  There
is  neither  fruit  nor  profit  for  me  in  sovereignty  ; living  in  solitary
contentment  at  Badaon  I resign  the  empire  of  Dihli  * to  yon.
Sultan  Buhlul  leaving  Dibalpur  ascended  the  throne  of  Dihli*

I MS.  (A)  The  text  reads  clyUo

having  laid  the  foundations  of  a palace,  but  there  seems  no  authority
for  such  a statemeut.

* Pirishta  gives  a full  account  of  this,  and  says  that  the  Sultan  was  insti-
gated to  this  attempt  by  Qutb  and  BSi  Pertab,  the  latter  of  whom  had  a

blood-feud  against  Hamid  Mn  (see  Pirishta,  Bombay  text  I.  p.  315).

* MS.  (A).

* His  eldest  son  Khwaja  BSyazid.  At  this  time,  according  to  Fmshta,  the
^utbah  used  to  be  read  in  the  joint  names  of  Saltan  • Aiau-d-Din  and  Snltan
Buhlul,  who  upon  first  marching  against  DihU  had  written  to  Alau-d-Diu
alleging  as  his  excuse  that  he  was  marching  to  oppose  Hamid  ^hin.

' MS.  (A)  * ilS.  (A)

51

[ 4(>2  ]

■without  fighting  or  opposition  ; and  Sultan  ‘ Alau-d-Diu  by  the
orders  of  Sultan  Buhlfd  -was  invested  with  the  sovereignty  of
Badaon  and  the  districts  appertaining  to  it,  towards  the  river
Ganges  as  far  as  Khairabad  and  the  foot  of  the  iiills,  and  used  to
read  the  lOiutbah  in  his  own  name  in  those  distiicts,  till  at  last
after  some  time,  in  the  year  85o  H.  (1451  A.D.)  he  hade  farewell
to  this  worldd  The  dnration  of  his  reign  -was  seven  years  and
some  mouths.

Gerse.

This  is  the  sum  and  total  of  the  world’s  conduct.

It  has  never  proved  faithful  to  any  man.

ScLT-ix  Bl'hlC'L  [icn  i Kala]*  LodI,

Who  in  the  reign  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Shah  had  obtained  the
title  of  Khan-i-Khanan,^  in  the  year  855  H.  (1451  A.D.)  in  concert
with  Hamid  IQian  Yazir  (who,  after  the  c.vecution  of  Husain  Khan
at  the  hands  of  Sultan  ‘ Alau-d-Din,  had  gained  possession  of  the
family  and  relations  of  Sultan  ‘ Alau-d-Din  in  Dihli,  and  had
brought  the  kev  of  the  fortress  and  had  given-it-to-Sultan  BahM)
307.  ascei'dc-d  the  tliioue  of  sovereigntj',  and  by  degrees  contrived  to
secure  the  imprisonment  of  Hamid  Khan,^  and  in  the  same  year
proceeded  to  Multan  to  set  that  luovinee  in  ordor.^

And  ill  the  year  85d  H.  (1452  AD.)  Sultan  Maljtnud  Sharqi
at  the  instigation  of  certain  of  the  Amirs  of  the  party  of  Sultan
‘Alau-d-DUi,  came  with  a large  army  and  laid  siege  to  Dihli,

t AC'.  i.i’''  !!g  to  FiiiAta  ‘ Aian-d-D”n  di..;!  in  Ba.U'ion  in  the  year  883  H.
(li7S  A I',)  i'living  reigned  in  B id  ion  Fonie  tirentT-eight  y.  nrs.

Badaeid’s  et  iti  iaent  is  wrong  in  tld-  jurticnlnr  In  SiS  H.  according  to
Fir.Fit:  ‘ Ahia-d-Diii  retired  into  obtciulry,  having  tlie  kingdom  of  D'idi  to
Bull!..!  L ili.  and  reigind  lu  Badaoii  for  t,\ euty-eight  yeiir^,  tiling  m bsd  U,
(Bo.  text  .SlrJ.)  Stc  It.  -1  page  4ti5.

5 M.S.  ' B)  omits  the  words  in  brackets.

8 MS,  I A',  writes  q?->

A ■ 'j.  art'OiiDc  of  way  ia  which  KLia  was  takeu  prisoner  is

giron  ’ Flri^ta.

6 civGS  an  account  of  the  ciroiimstanco'i  attending  tue  birth  of
Buhl'  Li>lT.  tplUiig  us  that  the  mother  of  liuhlul  Lodi,  wben  close  upon  her
cont.Kement  of  him,  was  killed  hy  the  falling  of  her  house  upon  her ; she  was
taken  out  lifeless,  and  to  save  the  child  the  mother  was  instantly  submitted
to  the  Ciosarean  operation  and  the  child  removed;  as  it  shewed  signs  of  life
i'  was  carefnlly  tended  and  grew  up.  (Bo.  text  p.  317).

L 4U3  ]

and  after  severe  fighting  gained  possession  of  it,  ‘ and  Fath
Khan  Harawi  * who  was  one  of  the  most  trusted  Amirs  of
Sultan  Mahmud  was  killed.  Sultan  Jlahniud  = not  being  able  to  bear
up  against  this  went  to  Jaunpur;  and  the  following  year  came  into
the  same  neighbourhood,  proceeding  from  Jaunpur  to  Itawa,  and
concluded  peace  upon  the  following  tej-ms,  namely,  that  so  much
of  the  kingdom  of  Dihli  as  was  under  the  sway  of  IMubarak
Shah  should  belong  to  Sultan  Bnhlul,  while  that  portion  wliich
was  under  the  rule  of  Sultan  Ibrahim  Shaiqi  should  res'ert  to
Sultan  Mahmud  and  having  promised  that  after  the  rainy  season
he  would  give  ^lamsabad  to  Sultan  llulilul,^  which  was  held
by  Juua  Khati  as  the  deputy  of  Sultan  Mahmud,  each  of  them
went  to  his  own  country.

Sultan  Buhlul  at  the  expiration  of  the  appointed  time  marched
against  Shanisabad.  took  pos.sessiou  of  it,  and  gave  it  to  Rai
Kiran,  ruler  of  Bliunganw.  Sultan  Mahmud  being  displeased  at
this,  proceeded  again  ® to  the  borders  of  .Shara.sabad  and  fought
with  Sultan  Buhlul. 7 In  the  meantime  Sultan  Mahmiid  quitted
this  existence  for  the  house  of  eternity,  and  Muhammad  Shah,  the
sou  of  Sultan  Maljraud,  was  nominated  to  the  kingdom  of  Jaunpur
in  the  room  of  his  father,  and  having  arranged  peace  upon  the
terms  formerly  agreed  upon  between  Sultan  Maljmud  and  Sultan®”

t MS.  (A)  tia?  lioro  a differeat  reading  (note  7)  The  text  seems

riglit  agreeing  witli  MS.  (H).

*•  cSir*  Haraiu,  of  Uerdt.

® MS.  {X)  reads  here  j

Sultdu  Mahmud  Tvas  not  able  to  bear  the  full  ofjFath  Khan  and  Ida  being  killed.

^ MS.  (A)  Muhammad.  Firi^ta  savs  that  iiii-.>cher  term  of  the

agreement  was  that  Buhlul  was  to  return  the  seven  olephanrs  i.ikcn  in  battle
from  Fath  Khan,  and  should  receive  Shamsabud  in  place  of  Junan  Khun  (Bo.
text  p.  322).

6 MS.  (A)  omics  1^.  Fin^ta  tells  us  that  Jiinau  Khan  refused  lo  epait
Shamsabad  when  culled  upon  tu  do  bo  by  Buhlul  Lodn  who  i.o:isr>.[aently
nuirchcil  against  Itiui  and  drove  him  out,  giving  Shamsabad  into  tl  e cliarge  of
Kai  Kiran,  and  coiniuering  all  that  country.  (Bo.  text  p.  322).

6 3IS.  (Aj

” In  this  cngauoinent  Qiitb  K^hi  Lodi  was  ..uken  piisoiier  in  oonsequeuce
of  his  horse  stunibiing  and  clirouiug  him,  and  was  sent  by  Malun  id  ru  Jaun-
t'Ur  >\hore  he  was  iiupi  ii.onod.

^ Firi^ta  says  that  Bibl  Kachl,  the  mother  of  Muhammad  ^fili  Shargi

[ 404  ]

Buhlnl  proceeded  to  Jannpiir,  and,  innsmuch  as  Qntb  Khan,  the
cousin  of  Sultan  Buhlhl  had  fallen  a prisoner  into  the  hands  of
Muhammad  Shah,*  Sultan  Buhlul,  in  defiance  of  the  existing  trearr,
again  brought  up  his  army  against  Muhammad  Shah,  Tvho  also
leaving  Jaunnur  came  to  Shnnisabad  and  took  it  from  the  Hiinlus
308.  by  force,®  and  on  the  borders  of  Rapri  confronted  Sultan  Buhlul.
Muhammad  Shah  tvas  defeated  and  retreated  tovrards  Qanauj.
Sultan  BuhlCil  pursued  him.®  And  in  the  aforesaid  year  Sultan
Hnsain  Sharqi,  ;bn-i-Sultan  Mahmud  revolted  against  his  brother
Muhammad  Shah,  and  seized  the  throne  of  Jaunpur  xvith  the
assistance  of  the  Amirs,  and  detailed  * a large  army  to  proceed
against  Muhammad  Shah,  whom  they  finally  put  to  death  on  the
banks  of  the  Ganges  in  the  vicinity  of  Baj  Gar.  Sultan  Ilusain
made  peace  with  Sultan  Buhlul,  and  sending  for  Qnth  Khan
Lodi  who  was  still  in  prison,  from  Jaunpur,  presented  him  with  a
horse  and  a robe  of  honour  and  sent  him  to  Sultan  Buhlul®  and
returned  from  Qanauj  to  Jaunpur®.

iiitervened,  auu  arranged  peace  npo:i  these  terms,  that  Muhammad  Shahslienld
retain  his  father's  kingdom,  while  Buhlul  should  be  in  undisturbed  possession
of  all  that  he  already  held.  1 See  preceding  page  n.  4.

® Tiiere  is  n rather  iraport.ant  difference  here  in  the  nccnimt  giren  by  Firishfa
nio.  to\t  p.  ,323)  who  writes;  ‘‘When  .s;iill;'in  Buldiil  ariived  near  Diidi
Shams  the  sister  of  Qntb  Khan  I.odi  sent  In'm  a mes.siige,  saving,  “ So

long  ns  Qr.tb  Khnn  remains  in  the  prison  of  ilnh.aniniad  .^Sli  .Sbai-qi  food  and
sleep  is  unlawful  for  thee  O King.”  Accordingly  Bni.ird  bioke  ilie  trnce,  and
came  to  DihlT,  whence  he  returned  townrds  J.'mnpfir  fJn  Ins  anivnl  at
Sti amsabad  l.o  took  it  out  of  the  hands  of  Kai  Kimn,  and  g.avo  it  to  Jun.'in  Khan
who  l.ad  arrived  before  him,  and  Muhammad  Sbiih  ShnrqT  also  had  come  out
to  meet  li’iii,  cen...rqnpntly  the  two  Kings  encamped  near  Sarsnti  f.iciiig  one
anorlicr  at  close  quarters,  .and  engaged  each  otlier  early  and  late.”  From  this
it  appears  that  Shamshbad  was  taken  by  Bulilfd  from  Efii  Kiran,  whereas
Badaoni  makes  ic  seem  as  though  Muhammad’s  forces  re-conquered  it.
Firishta's  account  is  undoubtedly  the  correct  one  as  snbse.juent  events  show.

2 ^13.  fA]  ^ « ais,  (

2 TIio  account  of  the  circamstancos  given  by  Firi^ta  sIiott  tliat  Husain
starte*!  w’l h ilia  army  under  pretence  of  opp'-amg  Bnhliil  but  chanyed
(hroctii'n  ti)  When  J>uhiril  he ird  of  tliis  he  }ia*l  tie-spiacnr-d  ,i  rVw  of

lil^  An.  i'3  to  icot  Hiis.iiii  Kli.in.  and  himself  took  prisoiier  Ja’d  Khriii,  bro-
tlier  of  1 \vh‘>  wa-^  ai^o  coining  out  after  h;.s  biuiher,  and  k*-j)t

him  a<  a ! r .tr  Qu:-'  K^an,  for  whom  he  was  eventually  exchanged

{Bo  tex^  p 3:io).

^ M3  ( i The  text  and  M3  (Bj  ore  wrong  here

[ 405  ]

Sultan  Bulilul  also  despatched  Jalal  Khan,  the  brother  of  Husain
Khan,  -whom  he  held  in  confinement  as  hostage  for  Qutb  Khan,  to
Sultan  Husain  after  conferring  hononrs  upon  him.  And  after  some
Tears  i Sultan  Husain  coming  to  the  borders  of  Chandwar,  fought  a
battle  with  Sultan  Buhlul,  and  having  concluded  a peace  for  three
j'ears  again  returned  to  his  own  country.  At  this  juncture  Ahmad
Khan  Jilwani,  the  rnler  of  Baiana  read  the  KJifUhali  in  the  name*
of  Husain  Khan  ; and  Sultan  Husain,  upon  the  expiration  of  the
period,  for  which  peace  had  been  concluded,  proceeded  towards
Dlhli  with  10,000  cavalry  and  a thousand  elephants.  Tliev  met
near  a place  called  Bhatwara,  and  Sultan  Husain  havi  ;g  t.greed
to  peace  encamped  at  Itawa.  Sultan  Buhlul  came  to  1 .l  it.  The
fact  of  these  two  kings  being  thus  within  a seven  dnys’  journey
is  not  without  its  ridiculous  side.

T'erse.

Who  has  ever  seen  a scabbard  which  can  contain  two  swords  !

Who  has  ever  seen  the  thrones  of  two  Jamshids  in  one  piace  !

And  in  this  j'ear  Sultan  ‘ Alan-d-Din,  whose  daughter  [j^falika-  30.1
i-Jahan]  ^ vias  married  to  Sultan  Husain,  passed  away  in  Badaon,
as  has  been  alieady  related,  * and  left  his  kingdom  to  Sultan
Buhlul  and  Sultan  Husain.

Verse.

Even  supposing  that  thou  hast  attained  to  that  which  thou
desii-e.st.

Even  supposing  that  thou  hast  been  all  that  thou  shouldest  be.

Has  not  everything  which  has  attained  perfection,  suffered
afterwards  from  loss  ?

Does  not  the  azure  heaven  taken  away  again  all  that  it  has
bestowed  'f

And  Sultan  Husain  came  from  Itawa  to  Badaon  to  perform  the

1 A peace  hnd  been  arranged  for  a term  of  four  years  (Firi^ta).

S Both  MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit

^ Tile  nuiiie  is  omitted  in  MS.  CA).

See  note  1 p.age  402,  ‘Aifin-d-Din  really  died  in  883  H.  according  to
Firi^ta.  In  rite  fiitmer  place  our  author  says  lie  died  in  855  H,  but  here  be
corrects  the  mistake.

[ 4:U6  ]

duties  of  mourniiiEr  for  and  liaviii"  taken  those  di.stiicts

from  the  sons  of  Sultan  ‘ Alau-d-Din.  took  possession  of  them
himself,  and  thence  went  * to  Sambal,  and  haviiia'  taken  pri'-oncr
Tatar  Khan,  ^ the  Governor  of  that  place,  sent  him  to  Sarand  and
with  a large  army  and  the  number  of  ele[)hants  alrer  dy  mentioned,
arrived  at  Dihli  in  the  mouth  of  Zu  Hijjah,  in  tlic  year  SSo  II.  ^
and  encamped  on  the  banks  of  the  Jami'.a  near  the  ford  of  Kieba.'^
Sultan  Buhlul  coming  from  Sihrind  summoned t Husain  Kb:in .
the  son  of  Khan-i-Jahan  from  the  vicinitj'  ^ of  Miratli,  and  des-
patched him  to  oppose  Sult.in  Husain,®  while  he  himself  held
Dihli  against  liim.  And  on  this  occasion  also,  owing  to  the  exer-
tions of  Qutb  Khan,  Sultan  Husain  agreed  to  peace,  taking  into
his  own  possession  the  whole  of  the  country  on  the  further  side
of  the  Ganges  then  relinrpiisliing  tliis  ;-i<leof  the  river  to  Sultan
Iluhlul  he  returned.  Sultan  Buhliil  ■'  sei/.nil  Lis  oppoi tiinitv,  and
wlten  Saltan  Husain  marched,  crossed  the  river  Jnmna  aud  cap-
tured sonic-  baggage  and  otlier  ptoperty  wliich  Siiltari  Husain,
relying  upon  the  tnice,  had  left  on  tlie  camping-ground  : a certain
propot  tiou  of  the  trea.snry  also  which  was  laden  on  elejihants  and
horses,  fell  into  the  hands  of  Sultan  Buhlul,  and  as  many  as  forty
310,  noted  Amirs  of  Sultan  Husain’s  force,  were  taken  prisoners,  among
others  for  in.stance,  Qazl  Sama’u-d-Din.  cntitlpd  Qutlugh  Khan  the
Vazir,  who  was  the  most  learned  of  the  doctors  of  his  time.

1 JIS.  fA)  renda  jl  viliieli  agrees  with  the  words

of  Firi^t  L (Bo.  text,  p.  325)  .ami  is  f.ir  picfi  lublo  to  the  rcudiiig  of  the  text
ami  Mte.  (B)  i c.,on  iiis  account.

2 5I.S  oJ)  3 F.iifmta  calls  liim  ct^  >-0^  ilubarak  Khan.

Tliii.a  IU-’  .ih  .'i.S.'i,  A)  aiid(B).  Tlie  text  has  a t'uotuutu  variant

la  Shah  a a

* There  is  a >=ericus  flitcrepaiiov  heroin  tlie  dates.  Firishta  says  in  883
11  (Bo  text,  p.  325)  and  tin's  must  t)C  correct.

I 515.  ( a;  reads  Gatr- i-Oar.-jinu,  Ijut  tlie  text  is  light.  Firishta

reads  lariiha.

h HS.-s,  i A ; .iiid  (15)  omit

3 5155.  ,'Aj  and  f 13)  I’f-ad  for  (Text).

9 Fin.^t.i  b.s;.  s to  take  Jlirak.

15  JI3  f \ re.ads  That  is  to  say  eastward  of  tiie  Ganars.

II  MS.  { \)  mn  Is  j.  IS  M-^.  .-A)  MS  (.B  ^ Ij

1^  FniA.1  I ..Vs  '■  tiiirty  oi  foriy.’’

Sultan  Bulilal  made  o\er  Qutlugli  IQian  in  eliains  to  Qutb
Khan  Lodi,  and  himself  giving  chase  went  as  far  as  Shamsabad
in  the  Doiib,  which  was  held  by  Sultan  Husain,  and  seizing  it,
appointed  commissioners®  of  hi>  own  over  ^ that  country;  this
occurrence  took  place  in  tlie  year  8S4  H.  (1479  A.D.j  * the
chronogram  for  that  year  nas  Nawid-i-KharnLl  (Tidings  of
ruin ).  ^

Arid  Sultan  Husain  scving  that  he  was  being  very  closely  pur-
sued, determined  to  make  a stand  at  Raprl,  and  once  more  peaco
was  agreed  to  between  them  upon  the  old  conditions,  namely,  that
each  should  rest  contented  witii  tlie  countries  of  which  he  was  in
possession,  and  should  retire.  Upon  the  conclusion  of  this  peace
Sultan  Husain  remained  at  Riipri,  and  Sultan  Buliliil  at  a place
called  Dhopamau’ ; and  after  a time  Suitan  Husain  again  collecting
an  army  came  up  against  Snltaii  Bahlfd,  ai  d a fierce  engagement
took  place  in  the  vicinity  of  Soiihar.  ® Sultan  Husain  again
suffered  defeat,  a great  deal  of  treasure  and  valuables  beyond
computation  falling  into  the  linnds  of  the  Lodi  party,  and  was  a
means  of  increasing  their  Inllucuce  and  power.  Sultan  Buhlul
left  Dhopamau’  for  Dildi  to  uumin  fm- Khan-i-Jahan  who  had
died  ill  Dihli,  [and  haiiiig  conferred  the  title  of  Khiin-i-Jahan
u]ion  his  son,  again  returned  to  attack  Sultan  Hustiin,  and  reaching
Rapri  fought  a battle  in  which  he  gained  a victory];^  and  when
Sultan  Husain  took  refuge  in  flight  a number  of  his  family  and

t F.i'ishta  eminieratcs  Knir.pr.  Ksi'nilat)  Biui.tli  .ghaijoriljiil,  Sakit
Mdrhrira  iind  Jalos.xr,  iis  lii'*  i<  v. . .>]'  : ■ St  d 'm  i:  ..w  tn  by  Bul.iul,

S Shi‘_i(ldurdu.  \ “U  r*  d i - collbct  revoune  from  proviu*

CCS

3 MSS.  (A)  Ti.t'-  • 't.i'l'

ill' Imlu.s  ib  s U’',  . If.  S.enoto  17.

^ Ouruutluir  b<T(‘ M t ‘ t .»•  tnt.U  of  ihf  letters  given
anuMiHE-  tu  iH.i  Tinis  oO -{- T. U>  + 4 4 tX'O  + 2t)0  + 1 + 2 +

10  = ^S3.

^ 'Ibis  pn-t-Hij'e  tlifTeno.t Iv  rtoidcii  in  hne  t^xt,  lo  Imt!'  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)
it  niTlS  tb'W  ; —

y

*^T  ^ ^ ij'liL*  iX*jj  c^ijf

^

'l  The  text  reaiU  incorrectU  iiibtead  of  MS,  (AJ.

* MS.  (A)  omits  ibe  p.;rtioii  in  brackets.

[ 408  ]

children  were  drowned  in  the  Jatnna.  Sultan  Husain  continued
his  march  towards  Gwaliar,  and  was  still  on  the  way  when  the
rebel  tribes  of  Hatkant,!  who  are  a clan  of  the  Bhadauris,  attacked
his  camp  ; Rai  Girat  Singh,  the  Governor  of  Gwaliar  came  to  the
assistance  of  the  Sultau  offering  his  services,  and  having  presented
311.  him  with  money  and  property,  horses,  camels,  and  elephants,  with
tents  for  himself  and  his  troops,  sent  an  army  to  accompany
him,  proceeding  himself  with  the  Sultan*  as  far  as  Kalpi ; Sultan
Buhlul  pursued  him,  and  the  two  Kings®  met  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Kalpi  and  a considerable  time  was  spent  in  hostilities.  In  the
meantime  Rai  Tiluk*  Chand,  the  Governor  of  the  country  of
Baksar,®  came  and  offered  his  services  to  Sultan  Husain,®  'nd
enabled  him  to  cross  the  Ganges  at  a place  which  was  fordable.
Sultan  Husain  not  being  able  to  stand  against  him  withdrew
to  Thatta,t  and  the  Raja  of  Thatta  came  to  receive  him,  and
having  presented  him  with  several  laks  of  tankahs  in  cash,  and
other  valuables,®  together  with  several  elephants,  escorted  him
to  Jaunpur.

Saltan  Buhliil  made  an  attempt  to  conquer  Jaunpur,  accordingly

I MS.  (A)  omits  the  word  leaving  a hiatus,  and  writes

Eatkdnt  which  is  correct,  see  n.  2.

Hatkanth  is  said  by  Abiil  Farl  to  be  the  chief  town  of  Bhadiiwar  a district
S.  E.  of  Agra.  Its  inhabitants  are  called  Bhadanriahs.  They  were  known  as
daring  robbers  and  though  so  near  the  capital  managed  to  maintain  their
independence  till  Akbar  had  their  chief  trampled  to  death  by  an  elephant,
when  they  submitted.  Ain-i-Akbart  (B)  I.  488.  Elliot.  Races  of  N.  W.  P.,
vol.  I,  p.  25.

* We  should  probably  read  here  MushaiAt  for  bo  Mutabi'at

see  Firishta.

* MS.  (A)  reads

* Both  MSS.  Also  Firishta  who  calls  him  Rai  Tilok  Chand,  Governor  of
Khatra  (?  Katebr.)

6 Baksar  is  situated  on  the  left  bank  of  the  Ganges  34  miles  S.  E.  of  Unao
town,  and  has  an  interest  in  connection  with  the  massacre  of  1857  at  Cawnpore
{see  Hunter  Imp.  Gaz.,  I,  4.50)  MS.  (A)  reads  Ffiicsar,

6 Firishta  says  Offered  his  services  to  Snltan

Buhlul ; from  our  author’s  subsequent  words  it  would  appear  that  it  was  Sultan
Buhlul,  and  not  SnlL'm  Husain.

^TMSS,  (A)  and  (BJ  read  Bhatta  instead  of  Patna.  Firishta  has

*tV  Thatta,  and  this  seems  to  be  the  proper  reading.

» MS.  (A)

[ 409  ]

Sultan  Husain  leaving  Jaunpur  went  by  way  of  iianraicli  towards
Qanauj,  and  engaged  * Sultan  Bulilnl  for  some  time  on  the  banks
of  the  liahab,  and  met  with  the  defeat  which  had  become  a second
nature  to  him.  On  tliis  occasion  his  whole  retinue  and  regalia
fell  into  the  hands  of  tlie  Lodis,  while  his  chief  wife  Malika-i-
Jahan,  Bibi  Khunza,  ® who  was  the  daughter  of  Sultan  ‘ Alan-d-
Diu,  and  the  grand  daughter  of  Khizr  £han,  was  taken  prisoner  ; ®
Sultan  Buhlul  treated  that  lady  with  the  utmost  respect  and
regard,  and  when  he  again  attempted  to  conquer  Jaunpur,  Bibi
Khunza  by  some  artifice  effected  her  escape  and  joined  her  husband.
Jaunpur  fell  into  the  hands*  of  Sultan  Buhlul.  He  gave  it  to
Mubarak  Khan  Luhani,  and  himself  proceeded  to  Badaon.  Sultan
Husain  took  the  opportunity  to  march  against  Jaunpur  in  full
force  : the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Buhlul  evacuated  it,  and  went  to  Qutb
Khan  Lodi  who  was  in  Mahjauli,  ® and  approached  Sultan  Husain
with  expression.s  of  fealty,  and  by  pretending  to  take  his  part  kept
him  at  bay  till  reinforcements  arrived  from  Sultan  Buhlul.  Sultan
Buhlul  sent  his  own  son  Mubarak  Shah  to  the  assistance  of  these  312.
Amirs,  while  he  himself  also  set  out®  for  Jaunpur,  following  liis
son;  Sultan  Husain  not  being  able  to  stand  against  him  went  to
Bihar.  In  the  meantime  tidings  of  the  death  of  Qutb  Khan
reached  Sultan  Buhlul  at  the  camp  of  Haldi,^  and  having  per-
formed the  requirements  of  mourning  for  him,  he  proceeded  to
Jaunpur,  and  after  placing  his  son  Barbak  Shah  upon  the  throno
of  the  Sharqi  dynasty,®  returned,  and  came  to  the  Kalpi  country,
which  he  gave  to  A‘zam  Humayiin,  another  nephew,  who  had  the

i MS.  (B)  reads  muqdhaJa,  i.c.,  met  him.

* MS.  (A)  reads  tj  MS.  (B)  Khutru.  Firighta  roads

Kh/iuza.

3 MS.  (A)  * Both  MSS.  (.\)  and  (B)  omit  jJ.

^ MS.  (A)  reads  Majhauh,  Firi^ta  MuhjuuU.  A

village  iu  the  Gorakhpur  District  on  the  banks  of  the  Gaadak.  ’Jiiere  are
two  villages  forming  one  : Majhanll,  which  is  Uindu,  on  tlie  nortli  bunk,  and
Salimpur,  which  is  Muhammadan,  on  the  South.  See  Hunter /wji.  G»  ,.  IX.  21;;.

* MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  read

<’  Firi.shta  says  : VVhcii  Sultau  Buhlul  arrived  at  the  township  of  Haldj,  iio
heard  of  the  death  of  Qutb  Khan.

® Firishta  says  : “ expelled  Sultan  Husain  Sharqi,  again  conquered  Jannpfa-
.lud  placed  his  owu  sou  Barbak  .Shit  upon  the  throne  of  the  .Sharqi  Kings.”

52

[ ^10  ]

name  of  BayazidJ  and  having  arrived  at  Dholpur  ^ levied  several
mans  of  gold  as  tribute  from  the  Rai  of  that  place  ; then  passing  by
Bail  went  to  Ilahpur,^  one  of  the  dependencies  of  the  forticssof
Rantauhhur,  and  having  laid  waste  that  country  came  to  Uilili
and  remained  there.  Some  time  after  this  he  hastened  to  His.sar
Firoza,  where  he  remained  a few  days  and  then  returned  to  Dihli
Once  more  he  wont  to  Gwaliar,  where  Raja  Man  the  Governor  of
Gwaliar  sent  an  offering  of  eighty  laks  of  of  that  period ;

accordingly  Buhlul  confirmed  him  at  Grvaliar,  and  proceeded  to
Itawa,  and  was  making  his  way  back  to  Dihli  when  he  was  taken
ill  in  the  neighbourhood  of  a township  of  the  dependencies  of  Sakit.*
And  in  the  year  891  H.  (14S8  A.  D.)  he  died,  the  duration  of
reign  was  thirty-eight  years, ^ eight  months  and  eight  days.

Terse.

Whether  it  bo  Afiasiyfib  or  his  son  Zal,

He  will  meet  wdth  chastisement  at  the  hand  of  Fate.

To  a cup  whi'so  meusnie  the  wine-bearer  has  appointed
It  is  impossible  to  add  a single  drop,  however  much  you  may
strive.

MS  I'A)  writes  another  son.  Firi«hta  s.iys  ijA

-liis  gian.lson  Khfija  A‘z,mi  Hiuuayi.ii  son  of
Khw.ija  BfiyaziJ.'  ilto.  Text,  p.  3:^7;.  Tnis  is  correct.  B.iynziJ  was  the  ehlest
eon  of  Buhlul.

S Both  otSS.  (A)  and  tB)  omit

8 T'iio  text  and  itS.  (i!^  read  PiU.anpr'r.  LIS.  (.\)  reads  la

!'  I ■■  Fii  ti  xt  Iiowover  re.-uls  dearly  fp.  3c7)  jfJ  tl\

ha  j -j-.-L  hi/  a,  Briggs  (p.  50o;  -lys  Ituttnupoor  !

* 'I'-  xt  .ana  :.tS.  (B)  have  Sakpat.  LIS.  (A)  roads  Snklb.

In  F.ri.Aita  wx-  lead  (Bo.  text  3i7)  that  “ Buldal  took  Itiiwa  from  Sakit  Singh
; :Ki  t oat  to  retain  to  Dih'i  but  B U iT  on  tlie  way,”  Later  on  we  read  that
" he  uied  near  Bh.adrnili  one  of  ttie  depcn.ienci“s  of  Sakit.”  Sakit  is  in  the
Lt  ih  District  iif  tlie  N.-W.  Provinecd,  .ii.d  it  is  liere  aceording  to  Hunter  (Iihjj.
ii'iz.  .X  it.  141)1.  that  Bublfil  Lodi  d.etl.  Abiii  F,./,!  states  ( Ahi  i-Akla,'/  text
I.  h.itb  that  tie  died  near  the  town.-hip  of  Stiketh,  but  pUees  Bhaa,iw..li  in  the
Saia.ir  f/f  S her  in  t'le  .Vgr.a  Suban.  wliile  ho  pi  tees  Saketh  in  the  .Sarkiir  of
ty,.t.uj  wvc  .Vl;  -i-Akb.iti(J,irrett)  fit.  309  n.  3).  S.ikit  was  ptobauly  the
he  at  I - 1 paai  t Cl  s of  the  S.ikit  Singb  w li'jiii  I it  i.^t  i niencious.

8 LIS.  {\j  reads  after
6 Fiiishca  aajb  actcis  d.a\s.

his

313.

1

[ -ill  ]

Wliether  it  be-  a king  or  a Mas-seller  *

Fate  brings  to  bis  hearing  the  sumiuons-of . cl«ath.

'J'he  Jute  or  his  deatli^

In  eight  hundred  and  ninety  and  four

The  world  conquering  Khedive,  Buhliil  left  the  world  ;

Witli  his  sword  lie  soizcd-pi-oviiices,  but  for  all  his  bright
sword  and  bui'niolied  dagger.

He  was  not  able  to  repel  death.  ®

Sui.T,tK  SlKAXDAR  inx  I SciTAS  BgHLUL,*

Who  was  known  by  the  name  of  Nizam  Khan,  upon  hearing  the
tidings  of  his  father's  decease,  came  in  haste  ^ from  Dihli  to  the
township  of  Jalali,  entered  the  camp®  and  despatched  the
corpse  of  his  father  to  Dihli.  On  Friday,  the  seventeenth  of  the
year  above  mentioned,  lie  ascended  the  throne  in  the  palace  of
JSaltun  Firuz,  wliich  is  situated  on  the  banks  of  the  Black  water,
with  tile  concurrence  of  Kliau-i-Jahau  ibii  i Khan-i-Jalian,  and
Kbdn-i-Khaiian  Farinali,  ~ and  all  the  Aniii’s,  and  was  addres.sed
liy  the  title  ^ of  Sitltau  Sikandar.  It  is  said  that  at  the  time  of
leasing  Oiiiii,  he  went  to  Shaikli  Sania’u-d-D5n  Kanbu,  ® the
.spiiitnal  guide  of  i^aikji  Janiali,*'’'  who  was  one  of  the  greatest
among  the  Ulamfi  ShiLkJia  of  his  time,  on  pretence  of  taking  an

’ Khiii-f'iri'sh  KliAs  is  a fragrant  grass  (Amlrdpognn  mutica-

t'Od)  fioiii  which  sci-oons  are  made  .and  wetted  with  rvatcr  for  tlic  purpose  of
foiiling  room.,  l,y  tljn  air  which  blows  tla'oagli  them,  cuimuunly  known  as
‘’Khas  Khas  taiuos"  in  India.

2 its.  ( .A)  reads  ej’jj  This  is  omittocl  in  the  te.at.

Prior  to  hi.s  death  Sultan  Bnldid  had  made  r.  partition  of  his  dominions,
assigning  Janiipur  to  ^Tdiz.id.v  Barbak  Shiih,  and  Karra  Alunikpur  to
Shhhz.ad.i  ‘Alim  Khan,  Bahrnieh  to  liia  sister's  son  Shaikh  Alulianiniad  F.ar-
ninli,  wiio  was  known  as  Kiia  Bliiir,  and  Lakhiiau  ami  Kaipi  to  A'zam
Bmiijyrm  ibn  i Khwaja  Bavazid  Khan.  (Firi^ta  Bo.  text  327}.

•'  3'hi  'O  same  \er.ses  ate  found  in  Firi.shta.

^ MS  (.\J  ha.s  no  t'nrther  woids.  AIS.  (Bj  adds  Lodi.  The  text  .adds

^>jt  il,i  I Ahbhb

^ neither  MS  (.A)  imr  (B)  has  as  in  the  text.

® MS  (B)

1 MS.  (B ) (_ylA.5  lihrin-i-Kh'oui'ii  PihU,  it  omits  Funrall.

''  MS.  (.\)  omits  ^ MS  (A)  Kinii.  h)  jjft.  ja).

C 412  ]

314.

omen,*  for  tliis  reason  that  lie  feared  lest  the  Shaikh  might  favour
the  claims  of  tha  other  brothers,*  so  making  his  customary  daily
walk  a pretest,  he  enquired  the  meaning  of  the  expression  As^aclak
Allah^  from  the  Shaikh.

When  he  answered.  It  means  maij  God  Most  High  make  you
fortunate,  he  besought  him  saying.  Kindly  let  this  expression
fall  three  several  times  from  your  auspicious  lips ; the  Shaikh
did  so,^  then  he  arose  and  said  I have  gained  my  request,  then

i iafatid.  Takin"  a cJii  or  omen  from  the  words  of  a book.

Sortilege,  in  the  manner  of  the  Sortes  Viojdiance,  or  the  oracle  of  Prceneste.
Among  Mahammadans  it  is  a not  infrequent  custom,  before  embarking  upon
any  importaut  undertaking,  to  consult  the  Qur’an,  or  the  works  of  Hafiz  in

this  way.  The  word  Jii  fa’ I properly  means  a good  omen,  as  opposed  to
Xjih  llyarat  a had  omen,  this  distinction  is  however  not  strictly  observed.
The  prophet  Muhammad  directed  his  followers  not  to  put  faith  in  a bad  omen,
bat  rather  to  take  a good  one  ; on  being  asked  the  meaning  of  a good  omen
he  said  “a  good  word  which  any  of  you  may  hear:  such  as  if  a person  in
search  of  anything  be  addressed  thus,  O Finder  1 ” (ilishjidtu-l-ilafabih

Mathew  ii.  3S1)  see  also  Lane  s.  v.  also  Lane’s  Modern  Egyptians  259,
where  a full  account  of  one  of  the  methods  of  sortilege  by  the  Zdirgah  is
given.

> MS.  (B)  reads  another  brother.  Firishta  gives  a detailed

account  of  the  circumstances  attending  the  accession  of  Sikandar  j he  says
that  most  of  the  Lodi  Amirs  favoured  A'zam  Humayun,  and  before  Buhliil’s
death  practically  forced  him  to  summon  Sikandar  from  Dihli,  intending  to
make  a prisoner  of  him.  This  plot  came  to  the  ears  of  ‘Lmr  Khan  Shirwani
who  was  a friend  of  Sikandar,  and  he  consequently  agreed  with  the  mother
of  Sikandar,  who  was  in  the  camp  at  the  time,  to  warn  Sikandar  of  his  danger.
Sikandar  accordingly  made  excuses  from  day  to  day,  and  eventually  delayed
coming  so  long  that  BublQl  died.  The  Amirs  then  held  a consultation,  most  of
them  favouring  Barbak  Shah  the  eldest  surviving  son,  but  some  leaning  to
A’zam  Humayun  : Zeha,  the  mother  of  Sikand.ir,  spoke  from  behind  a cur-
tain ill  favour  of  her  sou,  but  was  rudely  repulsed  by  one  ‘Isa  ^an  a cousin  of
Buhl  ill,  who  said,  “ the  son  of  a gold  worker’s  daughter  is  not  fit  to  be  king.’
Thereupon  Khaa-i-Khanan  Farmali  rebuked  him,  and  words  ensued  which  led
to  a quarrel.  Khan-i-^anan  took  his  party  of  Amirs  with  him,  and  removed
Buhlul’s  corpse  to  Julall,  summoning  Sikandar  from  Dihli  where  they  placed
him  on  the  throne  in  the  palafce  of  Saltan  Firuz  on  the  banks  of  the  Biah  as
Sultan  Sikandar.  He  then  sending  his  father’s  body  to  Dihli,  marched  against
‘Isa  Khan  and  defeated  him,  but  pardoned  him  (Firishta  Bo.  text  338-339)

‘6  4iJ|  ' Asa  dale  alldhj  i.e..  May  God  prosper  thee,  MS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (A)  omits  the  words  and  reads  j.

[ -tl3  ]

he  be^onu'lit  tlie  Shaikh  to  assist  him,  and  set  ont  to  go  to  the
army,  and  after  that  bis  lule  was  firmly  established,*  he  left
Dihli.  and  marched  towards*  Eapri  and  Itawa  to  conquer  tlie
country,  and  spent  seven  months  there.  He  also  sent  Isma'il
Khan  Lfiliani  with  overtures  of  peace  to  King  Barhak  Shah
at*  Jaunpur,  while  he  pioeeedcd  in  person  against^  ‘Isa
lOian  Governor  of  Patiali ; ® and'*  ‘Isa  Khan  confronted  and
fought  with  him  and  was  wounded,  and  after  tendering  his
submission  succumbed  to  his  wounds.  Rai  Gane.sh,^  the  Raja
of  Patiali  who  was  friendly  to  Barbak  Shah,  came  in  and  had  an
interview  with  the  Sultan  who®  confirmed  him  in  tb.o  Goverr-
ment  of  Patiali.*®  Barbak  Shfdi  coming  from  Jaunpur  to  Qanaiij,
the  parties  met  and  an  engagement  took  place  between  them.**
Mubarak  Kiau  Luhani,  **  who  was  with  the  army  of  Barbak
Shah,  was  taken  prisoner  in  this  battle,  *®  Barbak  Shah  fled  to
B.idaon,  Sultan  Sikandar  besieged**  that  foi  tre.ss,  and  Barbak  Shah
being  reduced  to  extremities  sought  an  interview  with  the  Sultan,
wlio  reassured  and  encouraged  him,  and  took  bim  along  witli  him  to
Jaunpur,  restoring  him  to  his  former  position  upon  the  tin  one  of
the  Sharqi  kings,  except  that  ho  divided  certain  panjauai  of  these
territories  among  his  own  Amirs,  detailing  armies  for  each  place
and  appoiiitiug  trusted  officers  of  his  own  following  to  assist  Bar-

* MS.  (B)  wrongly  * MS.  (B)

S The  text  and  MS,  (B)  read  Xuh.'mi,  MS.  (.t ) S likli.liii.

* MS.  (.\)  6 iis’  {.\)  Ctbi.  0 M,S.  (li)

* MS.  (A)  omits  j-

MS.  (B)  reads  gylj  R'ii  A'lfinn.  MS.  (.A)  reads  RJi

Giiiicdi  fr)  The  text  reads  ROi  Ganes.  Firishta  rcaiis

Rat  Kilan.

9 MS.  (A)  omits  reading. J

*®  MS.  (I!)  Patirdi.

1*  MS,  (A)  re.ids  instead  of

12  Text

15  Firishta  (Bo.  text  331)  says  that  it  was  Kala  Ehar  (Shaikh  Mnhammad
Farmali,  nephew  of  Sult.iu  Bnlilfd  and  cousin  of  Sikandar  and  Biirbak)  who
was  t.aken  prisoner,  and  in  return  for  his  kind  reception  by  Sikand.ir  joinoU
him  ag.iinst  Barb.ik  Sl.ih,  who  lost  heart  and  fled  to  Badaou.

i*  MS.  (A)  £:/

•t  In  Bihar  (Fiiishtal.

[ -414  ]

bak  Sbab.*  Then  ho  took  Kalpi  from  A‘zam  Kbaii  * Hnmayun  the
son  of  Khwaja  Bayazid.  From  thence  he  came  to  Jahtara,®  and
from  that  place  to  Gwaliar,  sending  IQiwaja  Muhammad  Farrnali
315.  with  a special  robe  of  honour  on  an  embassy  to*  Raja  Man, 6 who
in  turn  sent  his  brother’s  son  to  pay  his  re.spects  to  the  Sultan  and
to  offer  his  submission.  This  nepliew  of  his  accordingly  accom-
panied the  Sultan  as  far  as  Baiana.  Sultan  Sharq  the  Governor  of
Baiana,  the  son  of  Sultan  Abmad  JiRvani  the  Fiist,  came  and  visit-
ed him,  and  was  desirous  of  handing  over  the  key  of  the  fort  ^ to
the  agents  of  the  Sultan  ; however  he  changed  his  mind,  and  on
arrival  at  Baiana  strengthened  the  defences  of  the  foit.  The
Sultan  proceeded  to  Agra  where  Haibat  IQjan  Jilwani,  a subordi-
nate of  Sultan  Sharf  ^ fortified  himself  in  the  fort  of  Agra.®
The  Snltan  left  certain  of  his  Amirs  in  Agra  and  proceeded  to
Baiana^*  and  in  the  year  897  H.  (1191  A.  D.)  Sultan  Sharq
fell  into  straits  and  sued  for  quarter,  surrendering  the  fortress
of  Baiana  to  the  Sultan  ; that  province  was  then  conferred
upon  Khan-i-Khanan  Farmall.  In  the  same  year  the  tribe  of
Bachgotis  in  the  Jaunpur  teiTitory  bad  assembled  to  the  number

I Fii'iehta  says,  leaving  trusted  officers  of  his  own  following  in  liis  service,
though  Badiioni’s  words  would  convey  the  idea  that  these  officers  were  left  to
control  Barbak  Shah’s  actions.  MS.  (A)  omits  before  ct-AUl  and  ly  after

and

S MS.  (Aj  omits  giving  it  to  Mahmud  Lodi  (Firishtiv).

8 Briggs  /p,  odS)  says  Bhnr.iyee,  but  the  original  text  of  Firishta  says
Jnhtara.  I fail  to  locate  this.

* MS.  (A)  6 Governor  of  Gwiiliiir  (Firijhta).

Briggs  has  Jlaii  Singh.  Firishta  reads  Mau  merely.

« F’r  .ihta  reads  tints  Oj-i  cjllil-..  6id tan  Sharf.  Badaoni  (text  and  both
3ISS  ) le.U'is  Sh'l‘  g.

' MS.  (Bj  reads  instead  of  4*U

8 The  text  reads  Sultdn\i-fh~Shari.  MSS.  (Aj  Bireal

SnUdn  Sh  t rg-

f M'S.  (A)  (B.i  oA

I'T  M^S.  iA)  fB)  j oa-AtiM.

II  Where  he  besieged  SuKan  Sharq  who  after  a while  capitulated
(Firi^ta  3:51).

18  (3^  Siluiai  Aext  and  MSS.).

18  Auiboof  R.ijputs  said  to  be  des’ended  from  the  Mainpuri  G haul  in-.

[ 4J5  ]

of  a liuudrod  thoiipaud  cavalry  and  infantry,!  ^nd  were  raisinpr
a distiii'baneo  'I’lie  Saltan  proceeded  tliitlier  and  Barbak  Sbali
came  in  and  offered  liis  allegiance.  Leaving  there,  he  proceeded
to  occupy  himself  with  a hunting  expedition  to  the  borders  of
Awadh  (Oudh),  and  again  returned  to  Jaunpiir,  and  ai-rived  at
the  fortTess  of  Janhar,  * and  engaged  in  battle  with  the  Amirs
of  Sultan  Husain  Sharqi  who  held  it,  and  having  defeated  them,
without  waiting  to  completely'  invest  the  fortress  came  to  Patna
and  having  come  to  Aril,*  which  is  near  Ilahabas  ( otherwise  called
Prayag),^  laid  waste  that  district,®  and  proceeding  by  way  of
Karra  and  Manikpiir  hastened  to  Dalmau’,'?  and  from  thence  came^
t)  Sh  irn-iabti  1,  and  remaining  there  six  months  went  to  Sambal
[wliLMico  he  Huain  i-eturned  to  Sharnsabad].®

And  after  the  rainy  season  in  the  year  900  H.  (1494  A.  D.)
ho  set  out  witli  the  object  of  chastising  the  rebels  of  Patna,  and
great  slaughter  took  place  and  many  prisoners  were  taken  ; from
thence  ho  proceeded  to  Juunpur.  In  this  expedition  very  many

iiiini'ious  for  their  tnrbalenco,  originally  Muhammadans,  see  Elliot,  Races  of
A.-ir,  P.,  I.  47.

1 MSA  rA)  (B)  J

2 Text  Junhar  MS  (Aj  reads  (?)  MS.  Ch!nai-  Firi.ihta

t Firi^ri  ?ays,  came  to  Katauba  (rj  which  is  one  of  the  dependencies  of
Ffit'i.i.  MS  (A)  reads

* X footnero  variant  is  given  in  tt:c  text  tJsjb  in  Arkal.

Fii  'mi  L r -.1  Is  jt  .Vii!  (or  Ary  d ) ; he  says

Ari.  IS  mentioned  by  Abfil  i'a/J  : .V.  :i- 1- Aklari  (B)  1.  “he  he'd

Jiiosi  a!.d  .Vr  c.l  ( Jah'ilSbSs;  as  jagir.”

: The  textiea'.l3  'AKj  Paijak.  V.S.  (A)  reads  >AUj  Bayak,  ilS.  (B)

Bif^k.  llcgai'ding  the  derivation  of  Fra)  iig  the  ancient  name  of  Allahabad,
tee  Caniiincliani  , A.  G.  I.  "391.)

6 oiy  8,^  MS.  (B).

" Daltnau’  lay  opposite  to  Karra  on  t’sc  otlter  side  of  the  Ganges,  'P'?
Iienneirs  ^[ap  ; see  also,  Ahi-i-Akba>ij  (J  ) li.  167  n 2.  Firi^^c  i (Bo.  text;  reads
L)  ijfo’,  p.  332.

5 JIS.  (Bl.

^ Not  in  (A)  and  (B).  The  text  has  a footnote  saving  that  tliese

words  occur  in  only  one  copy.  They  are  however  in  exact  accord  with
Firi^ta’s  statement,  and  are  probably  copied  from  his  work.

W MS.  (.\)  <»-oT.

1

316.

[ 416  ]

horses  were  lost,  hardly  one  in  ten  remaining  alive  the  zemin-
dars of  Patna  and  others  wrote  and  informed  Sultan  Husain  Sharqi
of  the  loss  of  the  horses,  and  of  the  scarcity  of  supplies  in  Sultan
Sikandar’s  army,  and  invited  him  (to  advance).  Sultan  Husain  col-
lected an  army,  and  marched  from  Behar  with  a hundred  elephants
against  Sultan  * Sikandar,  who  for  his  part  crossed  the  Ganges
the  ford  of  Kantit®  and  came  to  Chenar  ^ and  from  thence  to
Banaras.  Sultan  Husain  had  ari-ived  within  seventeen  'krohs  of
Banaras  when  Sultan  Sikandar  marched  against  him  rapidly.  ®
In  the  midst  of  his  march  Salbahan  the  Baja  of  Patna,  who  was
a trusty  zemindar,  left  Sultan  Husain  and  joined  Sultan  Sikandar.

Saltan  Husain  drew  up  in  line  of  battle,  but  suffered  defeat
and  retired  towards  Patna.®  Sultan  Sikandar  left  the  camp,  and
pursued  him  7 with  a hundred  thousand  light  cavalry  ; while  thus
engaged  he  learned  that  Saltan  Husain  had  gone  to  Bihar.  After
nine  days  Sultan  Sikandar  arrived,®  and  joining  his  camp  set  out
for  Bihar.  Sultan  Husain,  leaving  his  deputy  ® in  Bihar,  could
not  remain  there,  but  proceeded  to  Khul  Ganw  one  of  the  depen-
dencies of  Lak^nauti,  and  Bihar  fell  into  the  hands  of  Sikandar’s
troops,  Thence  the  Sultan  proceeded  to  Tirhut  and  conquered  it.

And  in  the  year  901  H.  (1495  A.  D.)  Khan-i-Jaban  Lodi  died,
and  Al^mad  i^an  his  eldest  son  was  styled  A‘zam  Khan  Huma-
yun.  The  Sultan  returned  from  Tirhut,  and  went  to  pay  a visit
to  the  tomb  of  Qutbu-l-Mashaikhi-l-‘Izam,i*  Shai^  Sharfu-d-
Din  Muniri,*®  may  God  sanctify  his  resting-place,  Eind  came  to

' MS.  (A)  <wUj.  * MSS.  (A)  and  (B).

® The  text  and  MS.  (B)  read  jiXxw  mukaddar  gasht,  i.e.,  became  dia-
tnrbed;  but  the  proper  reading  is  o-xif  ji-Cj  buguzr-i-Katit.  MS.  (A)  or
iagtizr-i-Kantit  (Firishta).  Kantat  is  on  the  S.  W.  bank  of  the
Ganges,  in  the  Sarkar  of  AUahabsid,  see  Ain-i-Akbari  (Jarrettj  II.  89 ; 158.

* Text  Jan  bar.

t Both  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  omit

6 MS.  (t)  reads  Panna.  Text  reads  Patta.  MS.  (B)  rends

I MS.  (B)  J ® MS  (B)  omits

s Malik  Kandhu  (Firishta).  W MS.  (A)  O-of.

II  MS.  (A)  reads  ^ j'

1»  MSS.  (.A)  (B)  in  Bih&r  (Firishta).

1®  He  was  the  son  of  Yahya-b-Israil  the  head  of  the  Chishtis,  n disciple  of
Ganj-i-Shakk.ir.  His  burial  place  is  in  BiUsr,  see  Ain-i-Akbari  (J.)  III.  370.

[ 4J7  ]

Darveshpur.  From  tlience  he  set  out  on  an  expedition  against  Sul-  317
tan  ‘ Alau-d-Din  king  of  Bangala,  and  in  the  vicinity  of  Bihar,  the
son  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din,  whose  name  was  Danial,  in  obedience
to  his  father’s  orders  came  out  to  overthrow  Sultan  (Sikandar),  and
prepared  to  oppose  him,  but  they  retraced  their  steps,  each  one
contenting  himself  with  his  own  territories*  and  consenting  to  make
peace.  In  this  year  great  scarcity  and  dearth  occurred  in  the
camp  of  the  Sultan  ; orders  were  promulgated  * remitting  the  cus-
tomary tribute  of  grain  in  all  provinces,  in  fact  they  were  entirely
abolished.  From  thence  he  came  to  the  township  of  Saran,  and
divided  that  district  among  his  own  followers  in  perpetuity,^  and
came  by  way  of  Alahligarh  to  Jaunpur,  and  having  spent  six
months  there  proceeded  to  Fauna. ^ And  in  the  year  OO-l  H.

(1498  A.D.)  he  invaded  the  territory  of  Panna,“  as  far  as
Bandhugarh7  which  is  a famous  fortress  plundering  and  taking
prisoners,  but  being  unable  to  take  the  fortress  on  account  of  its
strength,  went  to  Jaunpur  where  he  remained.  In  the  meanwhile
a quarrel  had  arisen  among  some  of  his  Amirs  during  a game  of
chaugan,^  and  at  last  it  ended  in  an  open  fight,®  and  the  Sultan

1 M3.  (A)  » MS.  (A)

S MS.  (B)  MS.  (A)  i:/

♦ Firishta  reads  MachhVgarh.

‘MS.  (A)  Panna;  text  and  MS.  (B)  Patna.  Firishta  text
Pathna.  Briggs  in  his  translation  say  Panna  (p.  573),  and  tliis  must  be  correct
to  judge  from  what  follows.

* MS.  (A)  reads  Aij  O/jKj  Wiliiy<xt-i-Panna.

7 SIS.  (A)  reads  Madhf/garh  but  Bandhuiiarh  is  tHe  right  reading.

Regarding  the  positiou  of  this  fortress  'we  find  Abul  Fazl  states  (Ahi-i-Akharl
(J.)  II,  157)  that  Baiidhu  lies  South  of  Allahabad.  The  translator  appends  a
footnote  (9)  in  which  he  identifies  it  with  Banda.  Banda,  however,  lies  to  the
■west  and  not  to  the  south  of  Allahabad,  Bandhfigarh  was  one  of  the  two  chief
fortress  of  the  province  of  Bandhu  (which  corresponds  nearly  to  the  state  of
llewa)  and  lies  south  of  Rewa  (Rewa)  distant  about  60  miles,  and  S.  S.-E  from
Panna,  distant  about  90  miles  (Keith  Johnson).  In  Renncll’s  Map(Ticy  III  ,)
it  is  very  plainly  marked,  though  the  distances  and  bearings  differ  slightly
from  the  above,  see  Renneirs  Map  X.p.  Xq.  The  other  fortress  lay  south  of
BandhQg^rh  and  was  called  Mandia  Garb-

Chaugin.  Called  in  Ar.ibic  Saidajan.  The  modern  name '.f

this  game  is  Polo.  For  a full  account  of  the  game,  see  Ain-i-Akbari  'B  ) I.
297-208.

® Firi^ta  gives  a detail*?  1 descripiio'i  of  the  events,  ar.tl  stneos  TKii;  w.'-cm

^3

[ 418  ]

becoming  snspicious  * of  the  Amirs,  gave  orders  that  some  armed
and  trusty  guards  ® should  attend  him  every  night,  -which  was
Bccordiiiglj-  done.  The  majority  of  the  disaffected  and  disappoint-
ed Amirs  urged  Fath  IQian  the  sou  of  Sultan  Buhlul  to  seize  the
empire.  He  in  his  simplicity  communicated  ® this  secret  to  his
mother,  and  also  to  Shaikh  Tahir,  and  a party  who  were  among  the
confidants  of  the  Sultan,  at  the  same  time  giving  them  ^ a memoran-
dum containing  the  names  of  tho.se  confederate  Amirs.  The  party
above  mentioned  diverted  him  from  that  insane  idea  -n-ith  friendly
admonition.  To  prove  their  own  innocence  of  complicity  in
318.  that  treasonable  design,  they  took  that  memorandum  to  Sultan
Sikandar,®  who  devised  some  specious  pretext  for  .scattering  in
different  directions  all  those  Amirs  who  had  shewn  partialit-v
for  the  Prince  i Path  Khan.

And  in  the  year  905  H.  (1499  A.D.)  he  proceeded  to  Sambal,
and  resided  there  for  four  years  employed  in  affairs  of  State,
and  used  to  spend  his  time  - either  in  luxurious  living,  or  in  hunt-
ing expeditions.

And  in  the  year  906  H.  (1500  A.D.)  A?ghar  the  Governor  of
Dihli  began  to  commit  malpractices.  The  Sultan  accordingly
Bent  orders  from  Sambal  to  Khawass  lOian  the  Governor  of
Wachhiwara,®  to  seize  Asghar  and  send  him  (into  bis-presence)  ;
hut  Asghar  anticipating  this  had  gone  humbly  to  Sambal  where
he  suffered  imprisonment ; and  Hiawass  Khan  received  the
Governorship  of  Dihli.  In  this  year  al...o  Khan-i-IQianan  Farmali
the  Governor  of  Baiana  died,  and  the  Goveiiiment  of  that  place
was  for  some  time  entrusted  to  Ahmad  and  Suleiman  the  two
sons  (?  grandsons)  of  Iflian-i-IOiauau.tt  After  a time  they

four  days  the  fight  Tvaa  renewed,  in  cr.nsenuence  of  vhich  t'he  Sult.in  began
to  belieMs  it  nas  due  to  pome  preconoerted  pi. in  against  l.ia  ov.n  person.

I MSS.  (.t)  (B)  00  a lioth  ll.SS.  fA;  (B;  omit  Jl.

5 j .MSS.  (A)  iBj.  i j iCjJ  iiss.  iBj.

6 MS.  (B)  omits  and  reads  ISO^.  MS.  (A;  agiees  with  tl.e  text-

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  reads  t MS.  (Bj  reads  itioG

^ Both  ^ISS.  omit  ^1.  MS.  (A)  reads  , txib  botli  MSS.  read ^ *

® MS.  (.A)  reads  Firi^ta  writes  ^ ilclctuicaya.

‘0  MS.  (B)

The  teit  iiere  reads  iUx ^ both  MSS.  have

this  saQie  i-eadiug  but  Firishta  read3  j b.

[ 419  ]

entered  the  Sultgn’s  service  at  Sambal,  and  the  Government  of
the  fortress  ( of  Baiana)  was  made  over  to  Khawass  Eihan.  while
Safdar  Khan  i was  appointed  to  the  charge  of  Agra,  which  was
one  of  the  dependencies  of  Baiana.  Khawass  Khan  with  the  assis-
tance of  ‘Alam  Khan  * Governor  of  Miwat,  and  Khar.i  Khanan
Luhanl,  proceeded  to  attempt  the  capture  of  Ufcoipur.®  The
Eai  of  that  place  came  oat  to  oppose  them,  and  her.vy  fighting
ensued  in  wliich  many  Muslims  attained  raai-tyidoin.  The  Sultan
leaving  Sambal  came  with  all  haste  to  Di  olpiir,  and  3ai  Mauik
Deo,*  Raja  of  Dholpur,  not  being  able  to  hold  out,  o' acuated  the
fort  and  went  to  Gwaliar.  They  plundere.d  and  '..iae-ed®  the
district  around.  Dholpiir.  The  Sultan  htiviiig  lenuaned  a month
in  those  parts  left  to  reduce  Gwaliar,  and  leavins'  Adr.m  Lcul
there  crossed  the  river  Chambal,  and  encamped  for  two  montlus
on  the  banks  of  the  river  ilendaki.®

By  reason  of  the  7 badne.ss  of  the  climate  of  that  phice  sickness  319.
broke  out  among  * the  population  and  a pestilence  arose.  The
Raja  of  Gwaliar  also  came  and  made  overtures  of  peace.  ^ and
delivered  up  Sa'id  Khan,  and  Babu  Khan,  and  Rai  Ganesh,'’  who
had  deserted  from  the  army  of  the  Sultan  and  had  taken  refuge
in  that  fort,  and  also  sent  his  eldest  son' ^ to  do  homage  to  the

1 Briggs  calls  him  Sucir  Kh.in,  but  the  original  reads  Safdar  Khan.

8 MS.  (.Aj  reacts  Khun-i-^Alain.

5 Native  State  in  Kajputana.  The  town  of  Dholpur,  capital  cf  the  State
lies  34  miles  south  of  Agra  and  37  miles  north-west  of  Gwaiiitr,  see  Hunter
Imp.  Gat.,  IV.  273.

* Firishta  calls  him  Hi  Bindyek  Deo.

6 MS.  (B)  reads  «-* ' for  here  and  in  several  other  places.

• Firishta  calls  this  river  “ the  Asi  otherwise  known  as  MedakT. and  says
that  in  consequence  of  the  badness  of  the  water  sickness  broke  out  among  the
troops  terminating  in  a pestilence.  Alendaki  means,  frog-haunted.

There  is  no  river  which  I can  definitely  identify  as  this  river,  but  the  Asuu
in  Keith  Johnson  (India)  E.  f.  flowing  west  of  Gwiiliar.  would  ansnertothe
Asi  in  position.  Rennell’s  Map  gives  no  name  to  this  river.
i MS.  (A)  omits  j and  also
® MS.  (B)  reads

9 MS.  (B)  reads  musallah  (armed)  for  la  sul/t.

W Supply  tj  iis.  (A).

11  Vikramajit  (Firi.shta).

[ 420  ]

Sultan,  who  sent  him  back  after  bestowing  upon  him  a horse  and
robe  of  honour,  returning  himself  to  Agra.  At  the  time  of  his
return  he  restored  the  fort  of  Dholptir  t also  to  Binayik  Deo,*
and  having  spent  * the  rainy  season  in  Agra,  after  the  r ising  of
Canopus  * in  the  year  910  H.  (1504  A.D,),  marched  to  reduce  the
fortress  of  Mandrayal,^  which  he  took  without  fighting  from  the
Raja  of  Mandrayal,  who  sued  for  peace  ; ha  also  destroyed  all  the
idol-temples  and  cliurehes  ® of  the  place,  and,  as  he  returned,
rebuilt  anew  the  fortress  of  Dholpiir,  then  came  to  Agra  and
gave  his  Amirs  permission  to  proceed  to  their  several  jaegirsJ
[And  ill  this  year  Mir  Saiyyid  Muhammad  of  Jaunpnr,*  may
God  sanctify  • his  holy  resting  place,  who  was  one  of  the  chief
of  the  great  ivalis  and  had  even  laid  claim  to  be  the  Mahdi,
in  answer  to  the  call  of  Him  who  has  the  true  claim  to  us  all
answered,  Here  urn  I.  while  returning  from  Makkah  the  sacred
city  towards  Hindustan,  at  the  town  of  Farah*  where  he  was
buried.  Qazi  Rusaiii  Zargar  of  Qandahar,  God's  mercy  he  on  him,
whom,  as  well  as  the  Mir  himself  I had  the  honour  of  visiting,
wrote  the  following  chronogram;

1 MS,  (B)  omits  and  reads  jb  for  b.

5 MS.  iC;  reads  and^i  iJj  bo,

8 MSS.  I A)  ' 1!)  . ow

* In  the  of  H'lma/.an  (Firtih*a),

6 Maiidi  I;,  a!.  ! is  uot  marked  in  Kennel  s map,  hat  Tieffenthaler  (1. 174)

mentions  it  un  1. 1 M - name  of  Mu  lialayer  ot  Mi  imel,  and  saj-s  that  it  lies
linon  the  e le  ■:  a round  hill  distant  two  miles  from  the  western  bank  of  the
Chamh.l  ami  lo.  ive  miles  S.S.  E cf  Carol!  (Keranli.K.ee  Keith  Johnston's
At!, IS,  India  K 'r',  I'.mdler,  -ee  also  A.n-i-AVwrt  M j il  IbO,  Maiidlaur,

® ^ als.j  r u i^hta.

I The  ■ mre  bra’'<^-'-  is  not  in  r M3.  (A)  or  ,JIS.  (B),

^ Mir  S -.iTTi  .,;".l,an.ma,i  w.ast:.i  s,on  of  Msr  o.iiyy-d  ^an  of  Jaunpur,  and
w ’’O'  r',r<  r ■ j oe,>-.ite  f r;.;  . i Ind-a  to  tii=  -trine  of  tns  advent  of
dioM.h-.  ’ . ! 1'  lev,'  be.- • pronnool  by  tne  , roi.t  et  -Mohammad,  Ha
iti.ned'  . r-os,,-  - ,6  I..  J dv. . ed  n>i..t  lie  ;.:e  pr  .rms.oi  Mahdi,

anon-'t  - , , i M -■luM  i t w„  .-se  t-taest  h -,v  a dnst  he  proceeded

on  : a _ . V ‘ * ^la^  , -ni  w He>  he  waS  reteo  -m,:  '--t  the  time  of  bia

d-  - " ,;  G:  hi-.:  , V

’ '1^  ■ *'-  “ly  I'l ,‘  -.reii,  the  Sunnis  still

l.'c  i f-'t  r..  - ■ _ I ■ ' c . * / - * ' : _ - t '/(.

- -•  .1  - I i I , ...g,  p,  v'j.

C 421  ]

He  said,  Go  and  enquire  from  tlie  Shaikh.*

Shaikh  Mubarak  also  invented  a chronogram  in  the  words  *

MazcL  Mahdi,  The  Mahdi  has  departed].®

On  the  third  of  the  month  of  Safar  in  the  year  911  H.  (6th
July,  3505  A.D.)  so  violent  an  earthquake  occurred  over  the  whole  320.
of  Hindustan  * that  the  hills  began  to  tremble,  while  strong  and
lofty  buildings  ® fell  to  atoms,  and  the  earth  in  places  was  cleft
and  rents  appeared,®  while  they  assert  that  villages  and  trees
left  their  places,  and  men  supposed  that  the  day  of  resurrection
had  arrived. t We  learn  from  the  Waqi‘at-i-Bahari,^  and  other
histories,  that  this  earthquake  was  not  confined  to  Hindustan,  but
that  on  the  same  day  in  Persia  also  a similar  earthquake  occurred,
and  the  word  Qazi,^  was  invented  as  a chronogram  to  record  the
date  of  it.

RuhoM.

In  nine  hundred  and  eleven  the  city  of  Agra  became  the  goal
of  several  successive  earthquakes.

1 ^ a \liS  Qnfta  he  hirau  Shaikh  kun  istif$dT,  The

value  of  the  letters  of  the  word  is  300 + 10  + 600  ® 910.

* 4^0^  Ma^d  Mahdi.  These  words  as  written  in  the  test  only  total

900,  but  if  we  write  more  accuracely;  they  will  be  910.

3 A footnote  to  the  text  states  that  this  portion  (here  included  in  square
brackets)  only  occurs  iu  one  MS.  Firishta  also  has  no  reference  to  this
event.

* Firishta  only  says  iu  Agra.

.6  MS.  (A)  J ^ ^

MS.  (A)  reads  dushu'drihd,  DiiScuUies  and

dangers.

MS.  (B)  oA  OwctijJ

® Regarding  this  work,  see  Slliott  IV,  218.  The  commentaries  of  Baber,
originally  written  in  Turki  were  translated  into  Persian  in  -ikbar’s  reign,  see
Ain-i-Akbari  (B)  I,  105,  and  an  English  translation  was  made  by  Dr.  Leyden
and  Mr.  Erskine.  At  page  170  of  that  translation  is  found  the  account  of  the
earthquake  referred  to  by  oar  author.  Baber  says  “there  were  thirty-three
shocks  that  same  day,  and  for  the  space  of  a month  the  earth  shook  two  or
three  times  every  day  and  night,”  The  date  is  not  given,  but  the  account-
follows  closely  upon  that  of  the  death  of  his  mother,  which  he  states  occurred
in  the  month  of  Muharram,  and  we  may  from  the  account  reckon  about  -10
days  afterwards  so  that  it  must  have  been  early  in  the  mouth  of  §afar.

— ® QSti.  100+ 1 + 800+ lU-911.

[ 422  3

And  whereas  her  buildings  were  excessively  lofty,  that  which
had  been  their  highest  points  became  the  lowestd

Trom  the  time  of  Adam  to  the  present  time  no  such  earth-
quake has  ever  been  known.

And  ill  the  year  912  H.  (1506  A.D.),  after  the  rising  of
Canopus,  he  marched  against  tlie  fortress  of  Untgarli,^  and  laid
siege  to  it,  and  many  of  his  men  joyfully  embraced  martyrdom,  after
that  lie  took  the  fort  and  gave  the  iiitide's  as  food  to  the  sword  ;
tliose  who  escaped  the  sword  fed  the  flames  of  the  fire  of  jiihar
with  their  wives  and  children.  He  then  cast  down  the  idol
temples,  and  built  there  a lofty  mosque.

Ill  the  year  913  H.  (1507  A.D.),  after  the  rising  of  Canopus  he  pro-
ceeded with  tlie  object  of  reducing  the  fortress  of  Narwar.®  Wiiilst
en  route  he  fell  in  with  the  elephants  and  cavalry  and  infantry  of
Jalal  lOian  Lodi,-^  whom  he  had  sent  on  in  advance  to  clear  the
way.‘>  and  whom  he  bad  appointed  to  reduce  Narwar.  Becoming
suspici'Uis  of  liim,  he  set  about  overthrowing  him,  and  made  some
pretext  for  dispersing  his  forces,  and  taking  him  prisoner  sent  him
to  the  fortress  of  Sakkar  ;®  he  then  took  Narwar,  the  garrison  hav-
ing c.ipitiilr.ted.  And  in  the  year  914  H.  (1508  A. D.)  he  constructed
other  forts  round  Narwar  to  increase  its  strength,  and  bestowing

1 Firitht;!  gives  thin  rula'i  with  slight  variation  omitting  chiiii  in  the

second  line.

* Firisht!!  reads  tdlUngar.  MS.  (A)  J Achmnfgar.

MS.  (B)  ^ Ciitgarh.  This  fortress  lay  jnst  South  of  ilandler  ( p.  420

n.  5 ) and  is  shown  in  the  m.ap  as  Deogarh,  see  Ain-i-Al;bayi  IBJ  I,  380  n 1.
Firishta  st.it'-s  that  the  Snltin  regarded  Uditnagar  as  the  key  toGwrdif.r  which
he  wished  to  rtdace  (p.  33S).

* Firi^ta  Bo.  text,  p 339.  s.ays  this  was  after  the  rains  of  913  H.  in  the  year
914  H.,  but  from  tlie  detail  he  gives  of  the  various  operations  it  is  doubtful
if  he  can  be  correct.  Jsarwar  was  a dependency  of  MSlwa  fFirishta)  It  lay
about  half  v ay  between  Gwiiiiar  and  Dhar.  i-ee  Tiiff.  I.  17.j  for  a description
and  r.iaj)  of  i;;e  fortress:  see  also  Ahi-i-Akhuri  (J.)  II,  190,  on  the  right  bank
of  the  river  Sind,  44  miles  sonth  of  Gwaliiir  city,  t-ce  Hnnter  Imp.  Gnz.  X.  227.

* Who  apou  the  death  of  his  father  Mahmud  Khan  had  become  governor  of
KIdpi.

6 FirisKta  says  Julfd  Khan  was  ordered  to  go  on  in  advance  and  invest  the
fort  of  N,arwar.

* Firi^ta  says  Hanwantgarh.

[ 423  ]

a liundrod  and  twenty  horses  * and  fifteen  elephants,  with  a robe  of  321-
honour  and  a sum  of  money  upon  Prince  daial  Khan,  allowed  him,
together  with  Xa‘mat  Khatun.^  wife®  of  Qutb  IQian  Lodi,  who  had
come*  to  have  an  interview  with  the  Saltan,  to  proceed  to  Kalpi,
and  gave  that  district  as  a jacgir  to  Prince  Jalal  Khan.  And  in
the  year  915  H.  (1509  A.D  ) he  marched  from  Liiliayar,^  and  came
to  Hatkanth,®  established  posts  in  different  places  and  proceeded  to
his  capital  Agra.  The  date  of  this  was  (fi.ved  by  the  following
words)  Lahu  aihiikmn  iva  iluihi  tarja'uii.'^  That  is  to  say,  His  is
the  decree  and  to  him  do  ye  return.

Muhammad  Khan,  the  grandson  of  Sultan  Nasiru-d-Din  of
Malwa,  fearing  his  grandfather,  came  for  .safety  to  the  Sultan,  and
was  allotted  the  jcieijlr  of  Chanderi,  while  Prince  Jalal  Khan  tvas
directed  to  ® give  him  every  assistiviice  as  an  ally ; and  in  this  year
orders  were  issued  for  the  erection  of  palaces  and  rest-houses,  and
for  t!io  laying  out  of  gardens  ^ at  intervals  along  the  whole  route
from  Agra  to  DholpiLr,  so  that  when  he  came  back  from  his  hunt-
ing expeditions  he  might  rest  and  refresh  himself*®  tliere.  In  this
year  Muhammad  Khan  of  Kagor,  influenced  by  the  fact  that  certain
of  his  relations  **  hud  sought  and  obtained  an  interview  with  the
Sultan,  euuced  great  respect  for  the  .Sultan,  re.adiug  tlie  Khutbah
in  Xagorin  his  name  without  taisingany  objection,**  so  that  in  this
way  a new  territory*®  came  **  into  the  possession  of  the  Sultan,

1 MS.  (.A)  MS.(B]  <^1  MS.  (A)  JIS.  (B)

*>  The  wife  of  Qutb  Kh.in  Lodi,  foster  niotlier  of  Jal.'dKhan  iFiridiCu).

5 Text  and  MS.  (A)  K'.'cJ..  MS.  {li;  Ko’i.  * MS.  i B)  ilAxf,

6 Gwalidr  (Firishta).  Lalur  i-s  }«I'iced  iii  iletiiioU’s  map  about  50  miles
S.-F.  of  Gwaliar,  ^t'e  Hunter  Itiip.  U-j..  \ 111.  40u.

« See  p 408  «.  1.  its.  (A)  llunklyot.  MS.  (B)  U«tkan

Fil'ishta  kiniijut.

1 The  teit  has  MSS.  ( A)  (B;  have  ^ o'Jiicti  is  correct.  The  date
is  915  H.

8 M.s.  (A)  omits  L,  9 Ms.  (A)  pJ  I'l  MS.  (B)

H Firishta  explains  this  : he  says  that  ceitain  rolatioiis  of  Mohammad  Khan,
namely,  ‘AIT  IGian  and  Aba  Bakr  who  liid  conspired  to  kill  liim,  had  been  over-
come by  him,  and  took  rofut^e  in  the  court  of  Sultan  Sikandar  and  that
Muhammad  Khan  fearing  the  coiisequeiicea  adopted  the  means  described  in
order  to  conciliate  tlie  Sultan.

1*  Tfxc  MS.  (A)  Jl**^

1®  MS.  (B)  omits  **  M3S.(.\)(C)  A-of.

[ 424  ]

la  this  year  also  Saleiman,  the  son  of  Khan-i-Khanan  I’armali,
■was  dismissed  from  the  service  of  the  Sultan,  on  the  grounds  that
he  had  been  appointed  i to  perform  a service  at  Untghar,*  and
in  tiie  direction  of  Supar,  and  had  refused  : the  'pargana  of  Indri
Kanial  5 was  given  him  as  Mada'l-i-ma'ash  (rent-free  land),  with
orders  to  go  and  remain  there.

In  this  year  * Bahjat  Khan  of  Malwa  transferred  Chanderi
to  Sultan  Sikander  on  account  of  the  weakness  ^ of  Sultan
322.  Mahmud  of  Malwa,  and  read  the  Khutbali  in  his  name  in  those
districts.  Accordingly  proclamations  conveying  tidings  of  this
victory  were  written  to  all  parts  of  the  Kingdom  ; and  Muham-
mad Khan,  the  grandson  of  Sultan  Kasirn-d-Din  of  Malwa,®
was  taken  pri.soner,  and  Chanderi  w.is  \ nominally)  ^ placed  under
his  authority,  but  Amirs  were  appointed  to  supervise  him  so  that
they  might  be  aware  of  all  his  movements,  control  his  actions,
and  administer  ^ his  jaegtr,  then  the  Sultan  proceeded  on  a hunt-
ing excursion  towards  Baiana,  and  paid  his  respects  to  the  varion.s
learned  and  holy  men  of  those  districts,  who  were  at  that  time
famous  for  their  miracles  and  wonder- working, ^ especially
Saiyyid  N'amatn-llah  and  Shaikh  ‘Abdullah  Husaini,  't  who  was

I MS.  (A)  iyi  tiycji.

* Firighta  says  Hanwancgarh,  Bo.  text,  p.  311,  and  tells  ns  that  Saleiman
was  snminarily  dismissed  with  permission  to  remove  all  that  he  could  by  day-
break, and  ail  of  his  property  that  remained  was  to  be  looted  by  the  populace

S Firishta  says  Barer!.  MS.  (B)  reads  J For  the

meaning  of  inadad-i-ma'ish  called  also  siiyiirghdl,  see  Atn-i-Akbari  (Bl)  p.  268
Siiyrirghul  is  a TurkI  word  meaning  gifts  (of  land).  (Pavet  da
CoQTteille).

* >IS.  (B)  reads  ^ MS.  (A)  omits

Firi^ta  reads : Bahjat  Khan,  Governor  of  Chanderi,  whose  ancestors  for
generations  had  been  the  faithful  subjects  of  the  Saltans  of  Malwa,  on  account
of  the  weakness  of  Saltan  Mahmud  of  Malwa,  and  the  decadence  of  his  king-
dom, sought  an  interview  with  Sultan  Sikandar,  and  agreed  to  the  Khuthah
being  read  in  hia  name  in  Chanderi,  see  Briggs,  p.  583,  and  Bo.  text,  p 3il.

® MS.  (A)  omits  MS.  (B)  writes  Mubammad  IThan,  as

also  does  Firishta  Tlie  text  reads  Mahmud  gtiSn.

T Firishta  reads  It*!!®.  8 MS.  (A)  omits  MS.  (B)  reads

8 See  Lane  s.  v.  gjgg  Hughes,  Diet,  of  Islim  art.  Miracles.  The  full

expression  is  Khatcdriqu-l^^ddat.

W MSS.  (A)  (BJ  toyAA.  11  MSS.  (A)  (B).

[ 425  ]

one  of  those  famous  for  revelations  and  miracle-working,!  with
whom  he  used  to  consort  frequently.  Shalizada  Daulat  Khan,
Governor  of  the  fortress  of  Rantanbliur,  in  the  service  of  Sultan
Mahmud  of  Malvva,  availing  himself  of  the  intermediary  aid  of
‘All  Khan  of  Nagor,  who  was  in  charge  of  the  province  of  Siwi
Siviipui-,*  came  and  had  an  interview  with  the  Sultan,
and  agreed  to  give,  up  to  him  the  key  of  the  fortress.  It  so
chanced  that  the  ‘All  Khan  who  has  been  spoken  of  above,  once
more  practised  his  hypociisy,  and  came  out  from  the  fort  to  oppose
him.  The  Sultan  pretended  not  to  notice  this,  and  treated  Daulat
Khan  as  though  he  were  his  own  son,  bestowing  upon  him  a
special  robe  of  honour,  with  several  horses  and  elephants,  and  pro-
ceeded towaids  the  fort  of  Thankar,®  and  from  thence  proceeding
by  way  of  the  townslup  of  Bari,*  he  returned  thence  to  Agia.

Here  he  was  seized  with  an  illness,  and  took  the  journey  to  the  ^
ne.vt  world  on  Sunday  the  seventeenth”  of  Zhl  Q'adah  923  H.

(Jan.  1518  A.D,  j.  The  ’words  JaiiuCiiu-l-Fiidaus  nazala.  (The  gar-
dens of  Paradise  came  down)  furnish  the  date’  of  his  death,  the
duration  of  his  reign  was  twenty-eight  years  and  five  mouths.

Verse.

Sikandar,  the  emperor  of  the  seven  kingdoms  continued  not.

No  one  continues,  seeing  that  Sikandar  himself  did  not
continue.

Sultan  Sikandar  used  to  associate  frequently  with  poets  and  323.
w.is  himself  also  a man  of  taste,  and  would  occasionally  compose

1 MSS.  (\)  (B)  read  j cXlt  Jl  ^ and  tbig  reading  is  pre-

ferable to  that  of  the  text.

* The  text  reads  Siilar  with  a fo;>tnote  variant

Siu-l  0 Siupur.  Firishta  reads  Siyup/ir.  (?  Sibij  see  Ain-i-Akbari

(J.)  II.  328  » 1.

* Firishta  writes  Tkaukar.

* In  the  Sarkar  of  Agra.  See  Tieff  I.  166.

6 ilS.  (A)  reads  otisr?.

® Firishta  says.  Sunday,  the  seventh  of  Zul  Qa‘dah,  and  adds  that  lie  died
from  suffocation,  owing  to  the  impaction  of  a morsel  of  food  in  the  air  passages,
not  of  quinsy  as  Britrgs  translates  it.  See  Bo.  text  343,  and  Briggs  I.  585.

7 MS.  (B)  readis  and  omits  The  letters  make

up  the  total  923.

54

[ 12.1  ]

verges  after  the  ancient.  Hindustani  ‘ model.-,  under  the  pseailonjm
of  Gulrnkh,  accordingly  ho  felt  gi-eat  plon.sure  in  tlie  companion
ship  of  Slinijih  Jamal.*  The  following  verses  are  the  product  of
the  genius  of  the  Sultan,  and  are  vvrilteu  with  the  utmost  regard
to  poctictil  form.

OJe.i

That  cypress  whose  robo  is  the  jasmine,  whose  body  the  rose.

Is  a spirit  incarnate  whose  garuieni  the  body  provides.

W’hat  profits  the  Khatani  musk  ? all  the  kingiloins  of  Chin

Are  conquered,  and  hound  in  the  cliains  of  her  clustciing  curbs.

In  the  eye  of  her  eyelatslies’  needle  the  thread  of  Jiiy  soul

I'll  fasten  and  .swiftly  repair  every  lent  in  her  robe.

Could  Gulrukh  essay  to  discover  the  charms  of  her  teeth,

He  would  say  they  are  water-white  pearls  of  the  ocean  of
speech.*

One  of  the  poets  of  the  reign  of  .Sultan  Sikandav  was  the
Brahman  [Uiinkar ‘]  who,  they  say,®  in  spile  of  being  an  infidel,
used  to  give  in-sfi-uction  in  books  of  science. t The  following  nio/iu,
(opening  couplet)  was  spoken  [and  is  a most  auspicious  niafhi’ ® j
by  liim  in  the  metre  of  ilasTtd  Beg,

Bad  not  thy  glance  been  the  dagger,  iny  lienrt  liad  not  bled
to-day  ;

Had  nut  thy  look  been  the  .serpent^  I never  had  lu.-t  my  way.

Also  among  the  great  and  learned  men  of  tlm  time  of  Sultan
Sikaiidar  were  Shaikh  ‘Ahdu-llah  Tulmnbi  in  Dihli,  and
Shui'lih  ‘Aziitu-ihih  Tulumbi  “ in  Sambhul,  both  of  whom  came

! MSS.  (A)  (B)

5 MS.  (B)  (J^^.  MS.  (A)  tJU^  IVm;

» MSS.  (A)  lU,  J\^  Text  oljo).

•*  i'iiu  versed  ure  l.ero  j^iven  in  llio  onTer  in  -wliiili  they  come  in  MS?^.  (A)
anti  ( K;.  liotu  MSS,  reail  ^ Uiut  ilS.  ^ A;  reads  oCi.  L)  (jj*

6 MS,  (A)  jJbji  D.hila,  ? S MS  (A)

7 AtSS.  (A;  (Li, I (_j*^  omit  ® M.S.  i . rra.I.-  0^*— .<  -f'

® .-Itno'.  A noxious  eerjmat  ,vliuh  nooiio  -ou^  wIlIiijuL  sluunio  from  it

sah  Lane  s.  r.

iiS.  (B)  vomits

tl  MS.  (Ay  t>JI

[ 427  ]

to  flin<lu8tan  at  the  time  of  the  ruin  of  Multan,  and  introduced
the  systematic  study  of  the  intellectual  sciences  into  that  country.
Before  their  time,  with  the  exception  of  the  Shar^-i-Shamsiyah,
and  the  Shaih-i-Sahaif  * there  were  no  books  current  in  Hin-  324.
dustau  which  treated  of  lopic  and  metaphj'sics.  I heard  also
from  ray'  masters,*  tiiat  more  than  foity  expert  and  profoundly
learned  men  have  arisen  from  among  the  disciples  of  Shaikh
•Abdii-llali.  fi'i-  exiinijile,  iliyan  Ladan,  Jamal  Khan  of  Dilili,
^liyan  Shaikh  of  Gwaliai-,^  Miian  Saiyyid  .lalaj  of  Badaon,  and
others.  They  say  also  that  Sultan  Sikandar,  daring  the  instruc-
tion of  the  aforesaid  Shaikh  ‘Abdu-llah,  used  to  come*  and
seat  himself  quietly  in  a corner  unseen  by  the  rest,  fearing  lest
he  should  interrupt  the  lesson  of  the  other  students,  and  when
the  lesson  was  ended  they  used  to  exchange  the  customary
salutation  of  Salnm  'aJoikun^  and  mix  freely  with  each  other.

And  i^aikh  ‘Aitizn-llali  of  Tulumba,  who  was  a man  of  great
probity  and  rectitude,  liad  such  an  abundant  genius  and  marvellous
power  of  recolieotiou,*  that  no  matter  bow  difficult  or  minute
the  subject,  matter  of  a book  which  a student  of  intelligence
might  bo  reading,  be  would  give  bis  lesson  in  it  without  previous-
ly reading  it  ; and  that  time  after  time  when  they  came  up  for
examination,  and  propounded  the  most  inscrutable  problems,  tlie
learned  Shaikh  would  explain  them  on  the  instaut  while  giving
his  lesson.

* Tha  former  of  these  two  works  w.is  most  probably  the  famous  commen-

tary by  Qutbu-d-Din  Mabnuiit  bm  Miihaiiim.'ul  Uazi,  ou  the  fbiamsiyali,  a
famous  treatise  ou  Logic  conipi.seJ  by  Xajnui-d-Dm  ‘ Umar  bin  ‘Alt  Qazwini,
who  died  A.  H.  6‘J3  1-93  A.  D j.  .stv  tlTgi  JOndif.ih  No  7tld7.  Ei-S;thaif  fi
el-kabmi, dr  The  ^nh-i-Sahdu  must  be  the  commeutary

mentioned  by  ILiji  Khilif.ili  and  by  him  ascriberl  to  Samarqandi  There  was
anotlier  comment  ti y by  lliiiishtl  See  H.  K.  7718.

* MS.  (A)  KAjUiJI  j

® JIS.  (A)  has  a hiatus  between  the  first  and  last  letters  of  this  name.

* Text  and  MS.  (B)  >^T  MS.  (A)  <N;f  ty*.  ^MSS,

* ‘ Recollection  * doea  not  quite  convey  the  full  meaning  of  the  word  in  the

original  which  is  jt-A*^***!  Is(ih2<Jr,  this  means  literally,  making  stnn~

moiling.  It  seems  to  be  aged  here  for  the  power  of  calling  uj)  at  will  any
impression.  It  is  not  memory,  or  rather  rctentiveness,  but  impiK  s the  pfjwer
of  recalling  impressions  by  pnrely  mental  forces  after  the  removal  of  the
stimulus.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  VVy®

[ 428  1

One  of  his  pnpils  was  * Miyan  Hatim  Sanbali,  who  is  com-
monly said  to  have  read  the  Commerttary  on  the  MifiBk » more
than  thirty  times  in  the  course  of  bis  life,  and  the  Mutawwal^
more  than  forty  times,  -from  the  first  letter  of  the  Bismilldh  to
the  last  of  the  word  Tammat.*

Another  is  Shaikhu-l-Hadiyah  Jaunpuri,  the  author  of  many
worthy  compositions  and  excellent  hooks,  who  wrote  a commen-
tai-y  extending  over  several  volumes  upon  the  Hedayah-uFiqh,^
while  there  is  no  need  of  mentioning  his  commentary  on  the
Ettfiyah  ■■  ® in  addition  to  these  be  wrote  notes  upon  the  Tafsir-i-

1 MSS.  fA)(B)

> The  text  and  MS.  (B)  agree  in  this  reading.  MS.  (A)  reads

which  may  possibly  stand  for  Sharhavn-i-miftah,  the  two

commentaries  on  the  Miftdft.

Miftdhu-h‘ ulfim  (clavis  doctrinamm),  see  Haji  Khalifah  12578.  This  book
was  written  by  Sirajn-d-Din  Abii  Ta'qfib  Tnsuf  bin  Abi  Mnbammad  bin  Ali  as
Bikkaki  who  died  626  A. H.  (1228  A.D.)

The  book  was  divided  into  three  parts,  of  which  the  first  treated  of  gramma-
tical inflection,  the  second  of  syntax,  and  the  third  of  arrangement  and  com-
position of  sentences.  ( j ‘Ilin«iti-l*n)ft‘aDi  wal  bnyan.

(Regarding  'Ilmnd'bayan,  etc.,  see  Garcin  de  Tassj  Jihetorique  des  languea  de
Vorient  Musxilmdn,  pp,  1-5.)

A commentary  on  all  three  parte  wae  written  by  Mania  ^aeamn-d'BIn  al
Muwaz^ini,  and  this  is  probably  the  commentary  alluded  to  in  the  text.  Other
commentaries  were  written  on  the  third  part,  of  which  Hajl  Kballfah  mentions
three  as  worthy  of  special  notice.

2 Muiaunval  (commentarins  longior).  By  this  booh  is  meant  the  commen-
tary written  by  Sa‘da-d-D!ii  at-Taftazani  (who  died  792  A.  H.)  on  the  book
called  Tal^i^u-l-Miftab.  It  was  called  by  the  name  of  Mutavnval  or  long
commentary  because  after  its  completion  in  A.  H.  748  its  author  wrote  a second
commentary,  an  abbreviation  of  the  first,  and  gave  it  the  name  of  Mukhta$ar
or  shorter  commentary.  (See  H.  K.  II.  p.  404).

4 All  works  written  by  Muslims  commence  with  AUU^b  BisinHlldh.  In
the  name  of  God.  The  word  tammat,  stands  for  tammat-il

k\t4h,  the  book  is  finished,  and  forms  the  last  word,  answering  to  our  word
' f’inis,’  MSS.  (A)  and  (B)  write  only

^ Hiddyah'i-Fiqh.  {see  Haji  Khallfah  14366.)

® Kujlyah.  The  famous  grammar  known  by  this  name  is  Al-Kdfiyat  ft-U
nahw  fliber  sufficiens)  whose  author  was  Shaikh  Jamaln-d-Dm  abi  ‘Umar
Usman  bin  ‘Urar,  commonly  known  as  Ihnu’l*hdj\b.  (ob : 646  A.  H),  Fora
fall  account  of  the  work  and  ita  various  commentaries  see  H.  K.  9707.

C 429  ]

MaJarik  * and  other  works,  which  are  read  up  to  the  present
day.*  Sultan  Sikandar  also  collected  togetlier  learned  men  ® from
all  parts  of  the  country  to  instruct  him,'*  placing  on  one  side
Shai^  ‘Abd-u-llah,  and  Shai^  ‘Azizn-llah,  and  on  the  other
Shaikhu-l-Nadiyah  and  his  son  Shaikh  ^ Bhakaii  to  discuss  325.
difficult  points.  Eventually  it  became  clearly  evident  that  the
former  pair  of  worthies  were  superior  in  oratory,  wliile  the  two
latter  were  the  better  writers.  The  death  of  Shaikh  ‘Abdu-llah
occurred  in  the  year  922  H.  ; the  following  chronogram  was  in-
vented to  commemorate  it : Uidika  lahum  uii-darajdtu-l-uld.^

And  among  the  poets  of  the  time  of  Sikandar,  was  the  afore-
said Shaikh  Jaraali  Kanbawi  of  Dihli,  to  w'hom  Sultan  Sikandar
was  in  the  habit  of  submitting  verses  which  he  had  written,  for
his  opinion.

Speaking  generally,  he  had  many  excellent  points,  he  -was  a
man  who  had  travelled  much,  and  had  been  honoured  with  the
fellowship  of  our  master  the  saintly  Jaml,  ^ may  God  sanctify  his
resting  'place,  and  had  gained  many  advantages  from  ® him  and
won  his  approbation,^  and  was  moreover  in  the  habit  of  submit-
ting 10  his  poems  to  that  revered  master:  The  following  verses  are
by  him  :

Verse.

I wear  a garment  woven  of  the  dust  of  thy  street
And  >1  that  too  rent  to  the  skirt  with  my  tears.

• Verse

Love’s  speech  is  swift,  whole  centuries  of  words.

Friend  speaks  to  friend  swift  as  the  eye  can  close.

I Tafslr-i-Madarik  Explanation  of  the  sources  from  ■which  are  sought  the

ordinances  of  the  law.  See  Lane  s.  ti.  Vi^.X.

S M.S.  (A)  omits  ® MSS.  ,'A)  (B)  write  *Uie.

* iliS.  (A)  ji.  6 Both  3IS.S.  (A)  (8)  write

* The  text  reads  wrone-iy  here  ^'|  oU  O ^ MSS.  (A)  fB)

are  correct.  The  quoti^tion  may  be  found  hi  the  Qur'an  (XX,  77).  The  value
of  the  letters  ia  9::*i

"1  (A)  (R)  omit  ^l>  8 JIS.  *1)  omits  jf.

9 MSS.  (A)  (Bi

■'  MS‘_'  .a)  (R‘  11  o.  !

MS.  or]iU;:J  I'.-,  couplet.

[ -tTO  ]

Tlie  following  ode  also,  * wliicli  he  translated  and  set  to  music
iu  liis  native  Hindi,  is  marvellously  inspiriTig,  and  is  well  known.*

My  heart’s  desire  is  fixed  on  thy  abode
Oh  thou  that  art  long  absent  from  my  sight ;

By  day  and  night  the  thought  of  thee  alone
My  constant  partner  is,  ask  tlien  th}-  thon^ht
Shonld’st  thou  desire,  to  bring  thee  news  of  me.

He  also  wrote  a Tazla'mli  (Book  of  Memoirs  / to  recount  the
assemblies  of  some  of  the  Shnildis  of  Hindustan,  called  tlie
Siyaru-l-'Arifin  (Biographies  of  the  Saints)  which  is  not  entirely
free  from  defects  and  discrepaneies.  It  commences  from  the
326.  venerable  Mu ‘inn-1- 11  aqq  wau-d-Din  Ajmiri,  and

finishes  with  his  own  spiritual  guide  ShaijA  Saniaii-d-Din *
Kanbawi  of  Dilili,  in  addition  to  which  it  contains  otlier  matter
both*  prose  and  poetry.  His  diicCiii  is  made  up  of  eight  or
nine  thousand  couplets.

SULTAK  IpRAHTm  BIN  Sci.T.LN  SlKANDAR  Loid,

Ascended  the  throne  in  Agr.a  in  the  year  923  H.  with  the
concurrence  of  the  Amii’s,  and  Shahzada  Jaliil  IQiau  ihn-i-Sultan
Sikandar®  [was  appointed  to  the  rule  of  Jaunpiir  and  was  styled
by  the  title  of  Sultan,  while  Kban-i-Jahan  Luhani  i governor
of  Rapri  came  to  Agra]  and  blamed  the  Amirs  greatly  for
associating  (Jnlal  Khan)  in  the  government  * of  the  kingdom  ;
and  after  that  he  had  pointed  out  to  them  tlie  foolishness  * of
this  procedure  orders  were  issued  to  the  Amirs  of  the  eastern
districts  to  seize  Jalal  Khan  and  bring  bim  to  the  Court.  He
however  went  from  Jaunpur  to  Kalpi  and  collected  a large
following,  and  after  establishing  the  Khuthah  and  sikkuh  in  his
own  name,  as.sumed  the  title  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din.  A'zam
Uumayun  Sliirwani  sided  with  him  for  a time,  but  eventually
came  and  had  an  audience  of  Sultan  Ibrahim.  Sultan  Ibrfiliim

1 (A)  omits  MS.  (A)  oinits

s MS.  (A)  * MS.  (A)  I*^.

S From  this  point  there  is  a very  long  omission  in  MS.  (B).

* The  poition  included  in  square  brackets  is  repeated  twice  in  MS.  (A).
1 MS.  (Aj  Snhani^

8 MS.  (A)  rLds^b.  ^MS.  (A)  r^-

[ ial  J

sent  to  the  fortress  of  Haiisi  eerhiiii  of  Iiis  brothera  who  were
impi isoned,  for  instance  ^lalizada  Jsina’il  Kian,  and  Husain
Kiaii,  and  oiliers,*  and  appointed  for  each  of  thenr  food  and
clotldnir  and  two®  servants  from  tlie  private  establishnient.  Then
he  proceeiled  in  person  with  the  object  of  conquering®  the
E istern  districts,  and  came  to  Bhnn  Ganw,  and  having  settled
the  dl'turbances  in  Mawas  * came  to  Qananj.  Tbeie  he  nominat-
ed a large  number  of  Amirs  to  piocced  ag.-iinst  Jala!  Khan,  who
with  thirty  thousand  cavalry  tind  a ceitain  number  of  elephants
had  gone  off  in  the  direction  of  Agra.  Malik  A'lani  Kakar  was  327.
sent  by  the  Sultan  to  defend  Agm,  tind  certain  other  Amirs  arrived
to  support  him.  They  .succeeded  in  persuading  Jtilal  Khan,  by
making  pleasing  overtures  and  using  iittractive  arguments,  to
surreniler  his  paraphoi  nalia  of  rovtilty  and  kitigly  splendour  to
the  Sultan,  in  order  tliat  thev  might  prefer  his  application  for
pardon  of  lii.s  (>ast  offences  and  obtain  for  him  the  Knlpl  district
as  a jae<jh\  Jidsil  lOjati  in.stantly  agreed,  and  made  over  hia  roytil
cattopy,  his  kettle-drums,  ctcef'-ru  to  Malik  Adam  with  instructions
to  cotivey  them  to  the  Sultuii  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Itawa.

• It  will  be  remembered  th.at  Avam  Haniayt'm  was  the  eldest  son  of  Snltin
Sikandar  Lodi.  IsniCil  nnd  Hu-ain  were  respoocively  the  fourth  and  fifth
sons,  Jalfil  being  the  second  sun,  a.nd  Ibr.'liiin  the  third.

s Text  reads  jO  MS.  (A)  more  correctly  reads  J<5.

S MS.  (A)

* The  text  reads  hero  : Ij  wain  'lan-ashi  ri  pah  k’lrtla

whde  MS.  (Aj  reads  Hawaii  for  1^1^  MawaehJ.  Neither  reading

is  intelligible.

Firishta  read.s  here  :

c'A  Li  y Jji  aiidfr'

[)

\j  ixib  J ciiAj  tj

Jtii  Chand,  a Zemindar  of  ChartulT,  a dependency  of  the  paryana  of  Kol
wliich  wus  better  known  as  M.iwus,  had  foDgl>t  a^.nnst  ‘L  mr  Khan  the  st^n  of
Sikandiir  Khan  Sur  and  had  slain  liiiii.  Accordingly  Malik  Qit-un  Hakim  of
Sanbhal  proceeded  against  him  and  put  that  rebel  to  death,  and  having  quelled
that  sudden  rebellion  came  and  joined  the  king  at  Qananj.

On  the  strength  of  Firi^ta’s  statement  the  above  translation  is  given,  and
I would  suggest  that  the  text  should  read  .

[ ^32  ]

The  Sultan  would  not  agree  to  his  proposal  of  peace,  and  despatch-
ed a large  army  to  oppose  Jalal  Khan,  wlio  fled  in  consternation
and  took  refuge  ‘ with  the  Raja  of  Gwaliar,  and  the  Amirs  of
Sikandar’s  party,  who  had  heretofore  been  a source  of  weakness  to
the  administration  of  the  empire,  one  and  all  owned  allegiance  to
the  Saltan.  The  Sultan  experienced*  a revulsion  of  feeling  with
regard  to  Mijan  Bhoh,  who  was  the  chief  of  the  Amirs  of  Sikan-
dar,  and  had”  been  his  vazir  and  privy  councillor,  accordingly  he
cast  him  into  chains  and  sent  him  to  Malik  Adam  ; however,  he
treated  his  son  with  kindne.ss  and  advanced  him  to  tiie  high  offices
formerly  held  by  his  father.  Miyan  Bhoh  died  in  prison,  and
A‘zam  Humayau  Shirwaui,  the  Governor  of  Karra,  was  sent  with
thirty  thousand  cavalry  and  three  ^ hundred  elephants  to  attempt
the  reduction  of  Gwaliar.  Jalal  Khan  fled  from  Gwaliar  and  went
to  Malwa  to  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Malwa.  After  the  arrival  of  the
Sultan’s  troops  Rai  Vikramajit  the  son  of  Rai  Man  Singh,*  who,
after  the  decease  ^ of  his  father,  held  the  government  of  Gwaliar,
was  not  able  to  cope  with  them,  and  could  not  properly  defend  the
fortress.  The  fortres.s  of  Badalgarli,  which  lies  below®  the  fort-
ress of  Gwaliar,'^  a very  lofty  structure,  was  taken  from  Rai  Mau
Singh  ® and  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Muslims,®  and  a brazen
animal,*'’  which  was  worshipped  by  the  Hindus  also  fell  into  their

I MS.  (A)  omits

* MS.  (A)  Firishta  calls  him  Bhura.

8 The  text  reads  ^ »ih  fad  three  hundred,  MS.  (A)  reads
SI  fad  thirty  hundred.  Firishta  (Bo.  text  p.  349.)  reads  also  AAj.*  si  fad.

♦ MS.  (A)  c;l«.

t MS.  (A)  Text  reads  tAii"  Firishta  says  he  died.

8 MS.  (B;  continoes  here.

1 This  fortress  of  Badalgarh  is  to  be  distitiRnished  from  anotlier  fort  of  the
same  name  mentioned  in  subsequent  pa.'o  ',text  pa"e  429)  see  Aiii-i-Akharl.  I.
(B)  p,  380  n.  1.  Firishta  says  it  had  been  built  by  Man  Singh  and  was  a lofty
fortihed  building  (Bo.  text  p.  350).

® MSS.  (A)  (B,  omit  iji).  * MS.  (A)  omits

10  The  text  reads  Snrate  ruin  .,  brazen  image : but  both

MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  Suture  rii'ln  a brazen  animal.  So  also

Firishta,  who  says  that  it  was  ultimately  erected  at  the  Baphd.id  gate  of  Dihli,
and  goes  on  to  say  ti  at  that  cow  remained  at  that  gateway  uii  the  reign  of
Akbar  ” (p.  350 ,i.

[ 433  ]

hands,  and  jwas  sent  by  them  to  Agra,  whence  it  was  sent  by  Suit/rh
Ibrahim  to  UilJla.  and  was  put  up  over  the  city  gate.  This  image
was  removed  to  Datupurin  the  year  992  H.,  ten  years  before  the
composition  of  this  history, ^ where  it  was  seen  by  the  author  of
this  work.  It  was  converted  into  gongs,  and  bells,  and  implements
of  all  kinds.

In  those  days  Sultan  Ibrahim  becoming  distrustful  of  the  old
Amirs,  imprisoned  the  grettter  number  of  them,^  and  expelled
(others)  in  difierent  directions ; and  inasmuch  as  Jalal  Khan
could  not  get  ou  with  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Malwa,  he  fled  from  Malwa
and  came  to  the  countiy  of  Kara  Kanka,®  where  he  fell  into  the
hands  of  a tribe  of  the  Gouds,^  who  took  him  prisoner  and  sent
him  as  a present  ‘ to  the  Sultan  who  ordered  him  to  be  taken  to
Hansi  and  imprisoned  with  his  brothers.  While  on  the  way  thi-
ther he  drank  of  the  draught  of  martyrdom.

The  draught  of  sovereignty  and  glory  .so  sweet
That  for  its  sake  kings  will  shed  the  blood  of  their  hretliren  ;
Shed  not  the  blood  of  the  afflicted  in  heart  for  the  sal  3 of
kingdom.

For  they  will  pour  the  selfsame  draught  into  the  cup  for
thee.®

After  some  time,  in  accordance  with  the  orders  of  Sultan
Ibrahim,  A‘zam  Humayun  Shirwaui,  together  with  his  son  Fatn
Khan,  abandoned  the  siege  of  GwaliSr  Fort  which  he  was  within
an  ace  of  taking,  and  came  to  Agra,  where  both  weie  made
prisoners.  Islam  Khau  the  son  of  A'zam  fEhan]  ’i  Humayun,
gathered  together  ® a following  in  Karra  by  means  of  his  father’s

l MS.  (B)  agreeing  with  the  text.  MS.  (A)  reads
^ MS.  (B)  reads

8 Text  and  both  MS.S.  (A)  (B).  Firishta  (Bo.  text  351)  re.ads
O-illw  Ajay  ^1,0  Haja  of  Kadha  (r).  It  would  seem  we  should

read  Garha-Katanka  which  is  the  name  of  country  bounded  on  the  Xorth  bv
Panna,  and  on  the  sonth  by  the  Dakhan,  see  Elliot  VI.  30.

* For  an  account  of  the  Gonds,  see  Sherring.  Hind  i Tithes  and  Castes,  lx
134  et  seqq.,  see  u!so  Huuter  Imp.  Gaz.,  article  Cential  Pi  uctueci,.

t MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  .i>*  AlA-L.  OjA*.

® Firishta  also  has  these  same  lines.

1 MS.  (A).  s MS.  (.t)

55

328.

[ ]

Wealth,  and,  having  brought  over  to  Ids  side  the  Amirs  of  that
distiict,  fought  a battle  with  Ahmad  Khan  ^ the  governor  of
Karra,  and  defeated  him.  .SultSn  Ibrahim  accordingly  de.spatched
Ahmad  Khan,  the  brother  of  A’zam  Humayun  Lodi,  in  command
of  a vast  army,*  to  oppose  the  Amirs  who  had  fled  from  his
camp  and  had  joined  Islam  Khan.  With  him  also  he  sent  ® other
329.  Khans  of  eminence,  such  as  Ki5n-i-Khanan  Farmali,  and  others
of  similar  rank.  Near  the  township  of  Bangarmau,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Qanauj,*  Iqbal  Kban,  the  chief  cavalry  commander
under  A'zam  Humayun,  with  five  thousand  cavalry  and  some
splendid  elephants,  broke  out  of  ambu.scade  and  attacked  the
forces  of  the  Sultau,  and  after  throwing  them  all  into  confusion  ^
withdrew  (into  ambush ).  The  Sultan  by  way  of  precaution
despatched  ® a further  force  to  their  assistance,  but  the  enemy,
who  had  about  forty  thousand  cavalry,  well  armed,  and  five
hundred  elephants,  shewed  a firm  front  against  them,  until  Nasir
Khan  LuhaiA  with  other  generals  arrived  fiom  the  direction  of
Bihar  and  engaged  the  enemy  on  both  sides.  A fierce  conflict
ensued  betw'een  the  two  armies,  such  a conflict  as  baffles  descrip-
tion, and  after  a severe  straggle  t the  rebels  were  defeated.
Islam  Khan  was  killed  and  Sa'id  Khan  Lodi  was  taken  prisoner,
thus  the  rebellion  was  quenched.

Verse.

Do  not  inflict  ingratitude  upon  a benefactor  and  generous
friend,

Like  the  cloud,  which  receives  bounty  from  the  ocean,  and
rains  a storm  of  arrows  upon  its  breast.*

As  far  as  you  are  able,  make  the  requital  of  favours  your  habit
and  custom.

Like  the  river,  which  gives  to  the  clouds  an  ocean  in  retuim
for  one  drop  of  it.s  rain.

And  withal  that  ho  bad  gained  so  important  a victory,  yet
V as  not  the  heart  of  the  Sultati  favourably  disposed  towards  the

1 JI.S.

> Vi-'.  r.  A-i  JOyf  s MS.  (A)  ayxU

4 J orfi.rc

5 i w I • i Jk  sOliic  ;.U‘l  manv.”

''  y.s.  1 -•  (.i , j

' \ ^ OH.  • I c-  ' 9 '-nr  . V ! !.ta.

[ 435  ]

Amirs  : and  tliey  also  being  aware  of  tins,  raised  in  all  directions
the  banners  of  antagonism.  In  the  meanwhile,  many  of  the
eminent  Amirs  of  royal  descent,  as  for  eKaniple  A‘zani  Humayun
Shirwani,  and  Miyaii  Bholi,  the  Vazir  of  Sultan  Sikandar,
departed  from  this  world  in  the  confinement  of  the  prison-house.^

This  is  that  same  journeying  place,  this  interminable  desert
In  which  the  army  of  Salm  and  Tiir  was  lost;  *

This  is  the  self.same  stage,  this  world  of  ruin
Which  witnessed  the  palace  of  Afrasi3’ab,^

Miyan  Husain  * Farmali  was  assassinated  in  Chandori,  at  the
instigation  of  the  Sultan,  by  certain  ruflBanly  .‘^laikh  Zadas  of
that  place,  and  Darya  Khan  Liihaiii,  governor  of  Bihar,  anJ  Klnin-
i-Jahan  Lodi  being  alarmed,^  became  disaffected.  After  a short
time  Darya  Kkan  died,  and  his  sou  Bahadur  Khan  turned  rebel
and  occupied  the  place  of  his  father.  The  revolted  Amirs  made
common  cause  with  him,  so  that  he  collected  a force  of  nearly  a
hundred  thousand  caTalry  in  the  vicinity  of  Bihar,  and  gained
possession  of  that  country,®  assuming  the  title  of  Sultan  Muham-
mad,t  establishing  the  Khnthah  and  sikka  in  his  own  name.  Uis
army  penetrated  as  far  as  tlie  country  of  Saiubal,  and  bi'ought  it
within  the  area  of  their  control.®  The  IChnf^hah  was  read  in  his
name  in  Bihar  and  the  teiritories  adjacent,  for  some  time.  It
so  happened  tliat  the  son  of  Daulat  Khan  Lodi,  whose  name  was
Khan-i-Khanan  ® came  from  Lahorto  Agra  to  vi.sit  the  Sultan,  but
being  suspicious  of  his  intentions  fled  fiom  hi^  court,  and  went  to
his  father.  Daulat  Khan,  seeing  no  hope  of  obtaining  rclea.se
from  the  (wrath  of  the)  Sultan,  .sent  that  same  .sou  of  liis  to
Kabul.  He  accordingly  did  homage  to  the  suitreme  King,  Zahiru-

I MS.  (A)  reads  jJ.

® MS.  (A)  reads  MS.  (B)  For  the  story  of  Salm  and

Tur  two  of  the  sons  of  Faridun,  see  Shahnima  ( Atkinson)  pa^'e  -it)
also  SlialmSina  (Turner  Macan)  pp.  5S  to  83.

* MS.  (A)  reads  *Aj.>  if.

* MS.  (A).  6 MS.  (B)  mUlyk.

* MS.  (Aj  omits  J.  Firi^ta  adds  as  far  as  Sanibal.

1 Footnote  variant  ilahmi'd.  Firi'jht.t  reads  .MuliammaJ.

8 iis.  (a;  MS.  (15;  J JiA^.  Text

® Fii'ishta  says  (^i  tzi  Kiiiu.  1'^  MS  '"Bj  .Z"**^*-

[ 436  ]

331.

d-Din  Babar,  and  induced  him  to  advance  agaiiiRt  Hindustan.
Eventually  Khau-i-Khanan  laid  a complaint ' against  his  fatlier
before  the  supremo  King  Babar,  and  poisoned  his  mind  against
him,  and  led  to  discord  between  them,  as  will  be  related  if  the
Most  High  God  so  will  it.  Khan-i-Kliaiian  was  living  up  to  the
date  of  the  rebellion  of  Sher  ^ah,  but  at  last  died  in  prison.
Sultan  Muhammad  departed  to  the  world  of  permanence  from  Bihar,
and  the  Amirs  on  all  sides  rebelled  agajnst  Sultan  Ibiahim,  and
great  damage  was  inflicted  upo%  the  kingdom.  The  pillars  of  the
empire  began  to  totter,*  and  the  standard  of  the  fortune  of  King
Babar  floated  bigb.

The  following  is  a brief  epitome  of  the  matter : Haulat  Sban
and  Gbazi  Kba'n  bis  son,  together  with  the  other  noble  Amirs  of
Sultan  Ibrahim,  sent  ‘Alam  ]Qan  Lodi  to  Kabul,  bearing  despatches
to  Zabiru-d-Din  Babar  Padi^ah,  inviting  him  to  attempt  the  con-
quest of  Hindustan.  Accordingly  Babar  Padisbali  appointed  a
number  of  bis  own  Amirs  to  accompany  ‘Alam  Khan,  with  orders
to  advance  and  conquer  that  country.  Having  conquered  Sialkot
and  Labor  with  its  dependencies,  they  represented  the  condition
of  affairs  (to  Babar)  and  the  following  qiVah  was  written  to
commemorate  the  date  of  the  conquest  of  Hindustan.

Verse.

Zahiru-d-Din  Muhammad  Shah  Babar,

In  fortune  Sikandar,  in  force  a Babram,

By  his  fortune  conquered  the  country  of  Hind,

The  date  of  this  was  Fath  badaulat.^  (Victory  by  fortune).

Babar  Padi^ah  marching  continuously,  arrived  at  the  banks
of  the  river  Indus,  and  drew  up  the  whole  force,  composed  of
ten  thousand  [veteran]  cavalry*  in  that  camp  after  passing  the
troops  in  review.  In  the  interval,  Daulat  Khan  and  Ghazi
Khan  had  turned  back  with  thirty  thousand  veteran  ^ cavalry
composed  of  Afghans  and  other  tribe.s,  and  had  occupied  the
town  of  Kalanur,  and  prepared  to  engage  Babar’s  Amirs  at

1 MS.  (B)  writes  qKa.  after  instead  of  before  it  as  in  the  text.

MS.  (A)  reads  for  vijKi.

S MSS.  (A)  (B)  .sGi).

S ^ Fath  la  daulat.  These  letters  give  the  date  930  H.

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  6 MS.  (B)  omits  jly-.

[ 437  ]

Labor,  while  Amir  Khusru,  who  had  strengthened  the  fortress'
of  Sialkot,  evacuated  it  as  soon  as  (^azl  Hian  arrived,  and
took  refuge  in  flight  to  the  camp.  Some  days  afterwards
Babar  arrived  at  Sialkot  where  he  encamped  [and  after  laying^

■waste  the  township  of  Sialkot  founded  Dholpur.]>^  ‘Alam  Khan
proceeded  to  Dihli  by  order  of  Babar,  aud  encountering  Sultan
Ibrahim,  made  * a night  attack  upon  the  army  of  the  Sultan  ;
and  Jalal  Khan  with  certain  other  Amirs  arrived  in  the  course
of  that  night  and  joined  ‘Alam  Khan.  Sultan  Ibrahim  did  332.
not  stir  fiom  his  tent  till  dawn.  The  followers  ® of  ‘Alam
Khan,  fancying  they  had  secured  an  easy  victory,  were  scattered
in  all  directions,  only  a small  number  remained  * with  ‘Alam
Khan.  Sultan  Ibrahim,  urging  an  elephant  forward,  attacked
the  enemy’s  centre,  who  could  not  withstand  ^ his  attack.  The
faithless  ‘Alam  Khan  passing  through  ® the  Doab  came  to  Sihrind,
and  thence  fled  for  refuge  to  the  fortress  of  Gnnguna,^  one  of
the  dependencies  of  Malot,*  at  the  foot  of  the  hills.  Dilawar
Khan  Ltihani  separated  from  him,  and  joined  the  service  of
Babar  Padishah,  and  became  one  of  his  faithful  adherents.  ‘Alara
Khan  also  after  some  time  came  and  had  an  interview  with
Babar,  who,  in  accordance  with  his  former  custom,  gave  him  an
honourable  reception,  and  as  he  was  halting  at  the  time  of  the
interview  he  distinguished  him  with  a robe  of  honour  and  other
macks  of  favour ; and  when  he  pitched  camp  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Kalanur,  Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza  and  other  Amirs  ® came
from  Labor  and  joined  him.  Thence  he  proceeded  to  the  fortress  of
Malot  in  w'hich  Ghazi  Khan  [and  Daulat  Khan  were,  and  besieged
it,  and  Ghazi  Khan  and  Khan- i-Khanan]  determined  upon  flight

1 Not  in  either  MS.  (A)  or  (B)  a footnote  to  the  text  states  that  this
passage  occurs  in  one  MS.  only.

S MSS.  (A](B)

3 The  text  re  ids  rightly  MS,  A reads

4 MS.  (A)  ^ 6 MS.  (B)  ooli  ijb.

8 MS.  (B)  omits

The  text  and  both  MSS,  read  Ganguua.  See  Erskiue's  Babar,  p,  300.
“ The  fort  of  Kinkuteh.”

8 In  Find  Dadan  Khan  tahsil  Jhdam,  District  Papjab,  see  Hunter  Imp.  Gat,,
IX.  263.  « MSS.  (A)  (B)

Not  in  text.  cf.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  which  read  MS.  (A)

J

333.

C 438  ]

and  left  tlie  fort.  Daulat  Khan  hastened  to  tender  his  submission,
and  his  faults  were'  pardoned  as  on  former  occasions ; and  on
the  day  of  public  audience  when  they  brought  him  into  the  pre-
sence with  two  swords  tied  round  his  neck,  orders  were  giwen  that
he  was  not  to  be  brought  in  in  that  (humiliafing)  manner.  On
the  contrary,  Babar  sent  him  a respectful  summons,  and  biddino'
him  be  seated  ® gave  him  a place  near  himself.^

That  is  (trae)  generosity  to  shew  kindness  to  the  wrongdoer.
For  the  generous  cannot  but  shew  kindness  to  a friend.

However,  he  distributed  his  effects  among  the  soldierr,''  and
the  fortress  of  Malot,  wddch  apparently  means  Malot  itself,  fell  into
the  hands  of  Babar  Padisdiab.  Some  few  days  after  this  occurrence
Daulat  Khan,  who  had  been  imprisoned  by  Babar,  died  in  prison®
and  Babar  proceeded  to  the  Siwalik  hills  in  pursuit  of  Gliazi
Khan,  and  encamped  ^ at  the  foot  of  the  Dun, 7 which  is  a very
high  hill,  Gbazi  Khan  was  not  to  be  found.  Babar  accoi'dingly
returned  stage  by  stage  to  the  frontiers  of  Sihiind,  and  pitched  his
cam  p on  the  banks  of  the  Ghaghar ; ® thence  he  came  to  the  borders
of  ' Samana  and  Sanam,  and  gave  orders  to  Amir  Kittah  Beg  to
pro'-ced  to  within  a short  distance  of  the  camp  of  Sultan  Ibrahim,
who,  after  the  defeat  of  ‘Alam  Shan,  had  stood  fast  near  Dihli,

MS.  (B)  goes  on  jfj*  lyljl  lyli.  (j’jli  j

1 MS.  (A)  reads  jl

» MS.  (A)  MS.  (B)  j

8 Compare  the  account  of  this  given  by  Babar  himself,  see  Elliot  IT.  246.
Firishta’a  account  (Bo.  text  p.  378)  tallies  with  that  given  by  our  author.

* In  MS.  (A)  the  word  precedes  in  the  text  it  follows  it.

8 Firiahta  does  not  mention  the  death  of  Danlat  Khan,  and  tells  us  that
Babar  took  possession  of  Gliazi  Khan’s  library  of  valuable  books,  of  which  he
kept  some  for  himself  and  gave  the  rest  away.

6 MS.  (A)  iyt;*  Ojy.

7 The  text  reads  cy'i  with  a footnote  variant  uyAhs.  MSS. (A)

(B)  read  lilJ'5  0*1 '5.  see  Tiizalc-i-Buiari,  Elliot  IT.  247.  “ Marching  thence
and  passing  the  small  hills  of  Abkand  by  Milwat  we  reached  Diin.  In  the
language  of  Hindustan  they  call  a Julga  (or  dale)  Dun.”

8 MS.  (A)  9 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  Ji.

10  MS.  (A)  omits  11  MSS.  (A)  (B)  iy*

[ 439  ]

and  bring  intelligence  of  the  position  and  strength  cf  his  army ;
and  at  this  camp  Baban  the  Afghan  ivho  liad  been  in  reTOlt  came
and  had  an  interview  (with  Babar),  From  this  camp  also  Shah-
zada  Muhammad  Humayun  Mirza,  together  with  EJuvaja  Kaian
Beg  and  other  notable  Amirs,  were  despatched  against  Hamid  Khan
the  Khass-i-Khail  (Chief  of  Cavalry)  of  Sultan  Ibrahim,  who  was
advanciug  at  the  head  of  a force  from  Hissar  Firoza  lo  give  them
battle.  They  proceeded  by  forced  marches,  and  a severe  engage-
ment took  place.  Hamid  Khan  was  defeated,  many  of  his  men
being  either  killed  or  taken  prisoners.*  The  iarAdr  of  Hissar  Firuza
with  a revenue  of  two  crores,*  was  given  as  a reward  to  the  Shah-
zada,  and  Babar  PMishah  encamped  on  the  bank  of  the  Jamna,  two
marches  from  ShShabad,  and  detailed  Khwaja  Muhammad  Sultan
Mirza,  and  Sultan  Juuaid  Mirza  ® Biiias  to  oppose  Da’ud  Khan
and  a body  of  Amirs  of  the  army  of  Sultan  Ibrahim,  who  had
crossed  the  Jamna  with  live  or  six  thousand  cavalry.  Accordingly
they  also  crossed  the  Jamna  and  gave  the  Afghans  a second  drub-
bing, killing  them  and  taking  them  prisoners,  while  the  remnant  of
the  sword  took  refuge  in  the  camp  of  Saltan  Ibrahim.

Marching  thence,  having  drawn  up  his  right  and  left  wings  and
centre,*  King  Babar  reviewed  them  in  person.  Eight  hundred  334.
gun-carriages  ^ had  been  prepared  in  one  day.  TTsta  ® ‘Ali  Quli
the  Artillerist,  acting  upon  my  orders,  had  followed  the  custom  of
the  Turlsish  artillery,  and  bound  together  the  gun-can  iages  with
chains  and  raw-hide  thongs,  twisting  them  into  the  form  of  a whip-
lash.t  And  in  the  interval  between  each  pair  of  gun-carriages
six  or  seven  shelter  parapets  ® were  placed,  so  that  on  the  day  of

1 MS.  (B)

* MS.  (A)  T?— see  however  Ain-i'Akbai'l  II.  fJ.)  293,  t USS.  (A)  (B),

* hardnghar,  riglit  wing.  jUj|  jA.  jau'dn^urj  iefc  wing,  called  also
joAcdngul.  ^ul  or  Jr*  qul,  mpans  the  centre  of  an  army.  [See

Vavet  de  Courteille  Viet.  Turk-oriental),  see  also  Erskine’s  Babur,  p.  227.

® Text  writes  MS.  (A)  writes  this  word

® Ustad  All  Qali  (Erskine’s  Babur,  p,  302),

^ B.  de  C-  does  not  give  this  word.  (?)  the  end  of  a

whip,  i.  e.,  the  lash.  See  Erskine's  Babar,  p.  304,

S The  text  reads  ^ ^ji9^  tiibra-i-pur^dJe.  MS.  (A)  omits  tlie  words
VurJ^dh,  while  M8.  (B)  writes  pur^dk-i-tufung.  AU

these  readings  appear  to  be  incorrect.  (abra,  w©  should  read  *ix>

[ 440  ]

the  battle  the  riflemen  might  be  able  to  fire  iu  safety  from  tiie  shelter
of  the  guns  and  parapets.  He  had  determined  ^ to  march,  and  en-
camp with  the  city  of  Pauipath  iu  the  rear  of  his  army,  and  to  use
the  line  of  gun-carriages  as  a front  line  of  defence  for  his  troops,*
while  the  cavalry  and  infantry  should  come  into  action  from  behind
the  gun-carriages  with  ^ arrow  and  mnsketiy  fire,  while  the  remain-
der of  the  cavalry  should  advance  on  both  sides,  and  keep  up  a
constant  attack,^  and  in  case  of  necessity,  should  retire  to  the  cover
afforded  by  the  gun-carriages  ^ Accordingly  on  Thursday  the  last
day  of  Jumaidu-1-Akhii  ® 932  H.,  he  encamped  in  the  vicinity  of  the
citj  of  Pauipath,  at  a distance  of  six  krohs  from  the  camp  of  Sultan
Ibrahim,  whose  force  was  composed  of  a hundred  thousand  cavalry
and  a thousand  elephants,  while  the  army  of  Babar  Padishah  i com-
prised fifteen  thousand  cavalry  and  infantry  on  a rough  estimate.^
The  troops  under  Babar  used  to  make  daily  sallies  from  unexpected
quarters,  and  att-mk  the  Afghan  army,  bringing  in  several  beads:
in  spite  of  which  Sultan  Ibrahim  and  his  men  did  not  dare  to  make
a single  attempt  at  any  counter  attack  during  all  this  time.®  At
last  one  night  Mahdi  Khwaja,  Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza  and  cer-
tain other  Amirs,  with  five  or  six  thousand  men  made  a night
attack  upon  Sultan  Ibrahim’s  army,  and  after  killing  a lai’ge

tfira,  with  the  meaning  'palisades  or  ubattis,  see  Pavet  de  Courteille  Diet.  Turk-
orieiiUd  s.  V.  IjA®  pieces  de  hois  et  defer  qu’on  relie  ensemble  avec  des
chaines  et  des  crochets,  et  deniere  lesquelles  s’abritent  les  soldats.  See  also
Erskine’s  Bibar,  p.  301  7i.  2.  See  also  Pers:  Lat  Lexicon  s r.  Ijy*,  also  Ellioft
ir.  251.  n.  4.  This  seems  to  be  undoubtedly  the  correct  reading,  the  word

JS  J tfilra  having  been  written  by  our  author  iu  mistake  for  the  words
having  been  subseqnputiv  added.  Sacks  fall  of  gunpowder  would
form  a not  very  comfortable  shelter  for  riflemen.

1 MS.  (B;  y }b>-  » MS._  (A)  S MS.  fB)

* The  text  reads  with  a footnote  to  say  that  this  is  the

reading  of  all  three  MSS.,  but  that  probably  the  verbal  noun  of  action  should
h.tve  been  written.  MS.  (A)  gives  this  verbal  noun  So  that  clearly

this  MS  was  not  one  of  the  three  from  which  the  text  was  edited.

6 MS,  (B)  omits  and  writes

8 April  12,  1526.  1 MS.  (B)  IsUiU.  « MS.  fB>

S MS.  (.V)  writes  y*''d=  for  f Ij*  MS.  (B)  writeswrongly
for

10  MSS.  (A)  (B)  cr^  gh*.

11  MS.  (A)

r -111  ]

number  of  tliem  returned  in  safety.  In  spite  of  the  consternation
into  which  this  threw  them,  the  enemy  were  not  put  upon  their
guard, t and  on  Friday  the  eighth  of  the  honoured  month  Rajah*
in  the  aforesaid  year,  Sultan  Ibrahim  with  a large  army,  strong  as
the  brazen  rampart  of  Sikandar,®  clad  in  iron  armour  came  out
to  the  fight.

Babar  Padishah  also,  having  arrayed  his  army  with  all  the
pomp  and  circumstance  of  war,  and  shewing  a firm  unbroken  front,
gave  orders  detailing  from  the  left  wing  Amir  Qara  Qurchi  and
Amir  Shaildj  ‘Ali,  with  certain  other  Amirs,  and  from  the  right
wing,  Wall  Qizil  and  Baba  Qushqali,  with  the  whole  force  of  Mu-
ghuls,  to  form  two  parties  and  attack  the  enemy  in  the  rear,  while
the  Amirs  of  the  right  and  left  wings  in  a body,  and  from  the
picked  troops,*  Amir  Muhammad  Goknlta.sh,  and  Amir  Tunas  ‘Ali,
and  Amir  Shah  Mansur  Birlas,  with  other  famous  Amirs,  should
lead  the  front  attack  : and  since  the  Af^aus  [were  specially  ob-
servant of  the  right  wing,  Amir  ‘Abdu-l-‘aziz,  who  was  with  the
reserve,  was  ordered  by  king  Babar  to  reinforce  the  right  wing],^
and  when  he  got  within  bowshot  of  the  enemy,®  the  bodies  of  the
enemies  took  to  tliemselves  wings,  and  tlie  bird  of  the  soul  of  many
of  them  took  flight  from  the  cage  of  the  body,  while  the  wings  of
others^  were  clipped  by  tlie  shears  of  the  two-edged  sword.

Verse.

So  vast  was  the  river  of  blood  which  flowed  on  that  battle
field

That  the  feet  of  the  waiTiors  could  not  stand  against  its  flood  ;

The  breeze  which  blew  from  tliat  battle  field  at  luoriiiiig  time

Brouiiht  to  the  nostrils  the  odour  of  the  heait's  blood.

The  slain  lav  in  heap.s,®  wliile  tlio.se  wlio  escaped  death  by  the
sword  became  the  portion  for  kites  and  raveiisv  A period  of  two

1 MS.  (.\)  \yritc3  >>"  agrees  with  the  text.

S Al-murcijjab.  So  called  because  in  the  Time  of  Tgnorance  it

was  liclu  in  special  honour,  inasninch  as  war  or  fighting  duimg  this  month  was
held  10  be  unlawful,  .s-cc  I..ine  s.r.

8 MS.  (A)  omits

♦ MS.  (B)  ® Omitted  from  MS  (B).

® The  text  is  wrong  here:  we  should  read  ^^It*** d«)  on

the  authority  of  MSS.  fAl  (B).

’’  .MS  (B)  supplies  after  (J^  J

' We  should  read  ixSS  jl  j.

.V5

[ ^ ]

qarns^  has  elapsed  since  this  event  up  to  the  time  of  the  com-
position of  this  Muniakhab,  but  up  to  the  present,  ttie  noise  of
conflict  and  shouts  of  combatants  proceeding  from  that  field  of
battle  reach  the  ears  of  travellers  at  night.

In  the  year  997  H.  (1588  A.D.)  the  writer  of  these  pages*
was  proceeding  one  day  at  early  morning  * from  tbe  city  of
336.  Labor  towards  Fathpur,  and  had  to  cross  that  plain,  when  these
terrifying  noises  reached  his  ears,  and  the  people  who  were  with
him  imagined  that  some  enemy  was  upon  them.  I also  witnessed
with  my  own  eyes  what  I had  heard  related.  Submitting  this
divine  mystery  to  the  Almighty  we  went  on  our  way.

Sultan  Ibrahim  together  with  a party  of  attendants  was  taken
in  an  unknown  desert  and  put  to  the  sword,  his  head'*  was  brought
into  the  presence  of  Babar  Padi.shah,  and  ^ about  five  or  six  thou-
sand who  formed  Sultaji  Ibrahim’s  retinue  were  put  to  death  in
the  one  spot.

Verse.

It  is  plainly  evident  ® to  thee  that  this  dark  world  is  a snare
of  calamity,

Thou  knowest  now  that  the  world  is  full  of  guile,  and  des-
perately deceitful.

That  man  from  fear  of  whom  no  one  would  enter  the  water

He  himself  is  drowned  in  the  ocean,  an  ocean  without  hounds.^
Babar  Padishah  after  gaining  this*  signal  victory  departed
thence,  and  reached  Dihli  i''  on  the  same  day  and  encamped  there.
He  then  caused  the  Khuthah  to  be  read  in  his  name,*^  despatching
Shahzada  Muhammad  Humayun  Mirza  and  all  the  Amirs  to
.Sgra,  with  orders  to  make  forced  marches,  and  to  seize  the
treasure  belonging  to  Ibrahim,  which  was  of  untold  value,  and
divide  it  among  the  soldiery.*^

1 The  ujy  qarn  is  an  nncertain  period  of  time,  here  it  probabl7  means  a
space  of  forty  years.

» MS3.  (A)  (B)  Ciljl  8 MS.  (A)

4 MSS.  (A)  (B)  Ij  * MSS.  (A)  (B)  supply  J.

6 MS.  (B)  reads  ^ MS.  (B)  reads

8 Bead  here  b for  IJ.  ^ footnote  to  the  text  states  that
is  the  reading  of  all  three  MSS.

* MS  (A)  ^ tih?!.  10  MS.  (B)  H MS.  (B)  omits  fUj.

la  MS.  (A)  hi)  and  omit  *15  MSS.  (A)  (B)

[ 443  ]

Verse.

He  who  sacrifices  his  life  upon  the  field  of  battle
Sacrifice  thy  gold  to  him  by  way  of  generosity.

However  brave-hearted  a man  may  be
He  cannot  be  eager  to  fight  when  he  is  without  food.i
This  event  took  place  in  the  year  932  H.  ( 1525  A.D.),  and  the
Hindus  invented  this  date  Shalud  ^iidan-i-Il/ dLfm  * (the  martyr-
dom of  Ibrahim)  to  commemorate  it.  From  that  time  the  empire
once  more  passed  from  the  Afghan  Lodi  family,  and  rested  on
the  descendants  of  Amir  Timur  Sahibqirau.  The  duration  of  the
reign  of  Sultan  Ibrahim  was  nine  years.

ZahIku-d-DIn  ilcHAiiMAD  Babae  Padi.^hah  Ghaz!.  337-

After  thi.s  ascended  ° the  throne  ^ of  sovereignty,  and  by  his
justice  and  liberality  adorned  the  world  with  fresh  lustre  and
glory,  and  sent  rewards  to  Samarqand,  ‘Iraq,  Khurasan  and
Kashghar.  He  also  despatched  offerings  ^ to  the  sacred  cities
of  Makkah  and  Medinah,  and  to  the  holy  places  of  pilgrimage,
and  sent  off  gold  beyond  price  to  all  the  inhabitants  of  Badakh-
.shan  and  Kabul,  to  each  its  separate  store,  from  the  vast  treasuries
of  Hindustan.  He  converted  the  world  into  a rose  garden.  The
Amirs  of  Hindustan,  notwithstanding  liis  conciliatory  behaviour
and  efforts  to  improve  their  fortunes,  did  not  yield  obedience
to  Idm,  but  behaved  like  unruly  .ravages,’  and  took  to  fortify  ing
themselves  in  their  fort re.sse.s  and  estates,^  while  Qasim  Sanbali
in  Sambal,  and  Nizam  Khan  in  Baiaua,  and  Ha.san  Khan  MiwSti
in  Alwar,  and  Tatar  Khan  Saiang  Khan®  in  Gwaliar,  took  I’efuge
in  their  respective  fortresses.  Itawa  was  held  by  Qutb  Khan,
and  Kalpi  by  ‘Alam  Khan,  Avhile  Qanauj  and  all  Lie  eastern
districts  rvere  in  the  possession  of  the  Afghans,  who,  in  the  reign
of  Sultan  Ibrahim  also,  had  refused  to  own  his  sway,*®  and  **
having  raised  the  son  of  Bihar  Khan  to  the  thi’one,  gave  **  him
the  title  of  Sultan  Muhammad ; bis  empire  extended  as  far  as

1 MS.  (B)  reads  S = 932.

8 MSS.  (.A)  (B)  •*  MS.  (B)  ‘ MS.  (A)  jjAJ,

* MS.  (A)  reads  ^ MSS  (A)  (B)

8 MS.  (A)  omits  J-  ’ >->->-■

10  IIS.  (A)  'B*  supply  }

IS  MS.  (A)

L ]

Biliar,  aud  Nasu’  Klian  Liihani  and  Ma‘ruf  Parmali  and  other
powerful  Amirs  gave  in  their  allegiance  to  him,  while  a slave  of
Sultan  Ibrahim  named  Marghub,  having  fortified  tiie  township  of
Mahawan,  which  is  situated  at  a distance  of  twenty  Icrohs  from
Agra,  on  the  far  side  of  the  river  Jamna,  refused  to  own  him  as
king.

Accordingly  troops  were  detailed  by  Babar  Padishah  to  conquer
these  countries,  and  Firoz  Khan,  and  Sarang  Khan,*  and  Shaikh
Bayazid,  the  brother  of  iMustafa  Farmali,  with  other  Afghans
coming  and  tendering  their  submission,  were  given  jaeghs.^
Shaikh  Khuran  who  was  one  of  the  Hindustani  Amirs,  and  also
one  of  their  most  accomplished  men,^  being  unrivalled  in  the  art
of  music,  came  with  his  whole  following  and  had  an  interview
(with  Babar)  in  the  Doab.

The  territory  of  Sambal  was  conferred  as  a jdegir  upon  Shah-
zada  Muhammad  Humayun  Mirza.  The  Amirs  seized  Qasim
Sanbali  and  sent  him  to  Babar.  while  another  body  of  men  had
been  sent  against  Baiaiia,  and  had  besieged  Kizam  Khan,  keeping
him  closely  invested.  In  this  year  also  Rana  Sanka  having  wrested
the  fortress  of  Khandar,*  which  is  in  the  vicinity  of  Rantanbhur,
from  Hasan  son  of  Makhan,  was  in  possession  of  it;  and  Shabzada
Muhammad  Humayun  Mirza, ^ with  a party  of  Amirs  who  had
been  appointed  ® to  capture  and  hold  Dholpur,  wore  ordered  to
proceed  against  a body  of  Afghans  of  the  Lfihani  faction  who
were  close  on  fifty  thousand,  and  had  advanced  beyond  Qanauj.
Both  Saiyyid  Mahdi  Khwuja,  and  Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza,  who
had  been  ordered  to  capture  Itawa,i  joined  the  retinue  cf  the
Shabzada,^  who  hrouglit  into  subjection  the  whole  of  the
eastern  district.s  as  far  as  Jannpur.  In  t!ie  meanwhile  Rana
Sanka  aud  Hasan  Khan  Miwati  raised  to  the  throne  one  of  the
sons  of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  named  Sultan  Muhammad,  with
the  title  of  Pad^iah,  and  started  on  an  expedition  against  the
territories  of  Babar  with  a large  following  and  vast 9 army.

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  * MSS.  (A)  (B)

i MSS.  (A)  (B)  supply  * MSS.  (A)  (B)

t>  MSS.  (A)  (B)  Ij.  6 MSS.  (A)  (B)

T MS.  (B)  writes  for  8 MS.  (A)  writes

* MS.  (A)  ti.’lj'ttJ

[ 445  ]

Marching  by  way  of  Basawar*  they  atTived  in  the  neigh, hour-
hood  of  Fatlipur,  otherwise  known  as  Sikri.®  Nizam  Khan,  the
Governor  of  Baiana  made  representations  to  the  Court  of  Babar
and  gained  a certain  degree  of  influence.  Eafi‘u-d-I)iii  Safwi,  who
was  one  of  the  most  powerful  Saiyyids  of  Balkh,®  and  the  chief*  of
the  traditionists,  and  who,  having  come  to  Hindustan  in  the  reign
of  Saltan  Sikandar  Lodi,  had  been  given  the  title  of  Hazrat-i-Mu-
qaddas  (His  Holiness),  came  and  had  audience  of  the  Sultan  and
tendered  his  service.  Tartar  Khan  Sarang  KKani  also,  after  that
Bana  Sanka  seized  the  fortress  of  Khandhar.  and  the  infidels  had
got  the  upper  hand,  first  of  all  sent  a representation  to  King
(Babar)  saying,  I intend  to  surrender  the  fortress  of  Gwaliar;
but  when  Khwaja  Rahim  * Dad  and  Shaikh  Khnran  and  a further
party  also  arrived,  he  was  ashamed  (of  this  weakness).  This  party
then,  by  the  guidance  of  Shaikh  Muhammad  Ghaus,  who  was  un-
rivalled in  his  time,  and  was  the  chief  authority  on  the  science  of
da^watti-l-asma,^  entered  the  fort  by  soma  skilful  stratagem  and
took  it  from  Tatar  Khan  whether  he  would  or  no,  and  sent  him  339.
into  the  presence  of  Babar  Padi^ah.  In  just  this  same  way  also
Muljammad  Zaitnn  the  Afghan  gave  up  the  fort  of  Dholpur  to  t
the  Amirs  of  Babar,  and  coming  in  had  an  interview  with  the
King.  In  the  meanwhile.  Bana  Sanka  ^ had  arrived  on  the  confines
of  Baiana  and  was  doing  damage  to  the  country,  and  had,  after
a halt  of  a few'  days,  reached  Fathpur;  Babar  Padishah,  with  a
small  body  of  the  soldiery  which  he  had  with  him,  left  the  capital
of  Agra  with  the  object  of  engaging  him  in  battle.  He  also  wrote®
a despatch  to  summon  Shahzada  Muhammad  Humiiyun  Mirza,
ordering  him  to  leave  Jannpnr  in  charge  of  certain  eminent
Amirs,  and  to  come  himself  with  all  speed  to  take  part  in  that  war ;
the  victorious  Prince,  having  taken  the  country  of  Haraud  and

1 MS.  (A)  * See  Hanter,  Imp.  Gaz.,  IV.  433.

3 MSS.  (A)  (B)  ^1  AfeM.  * MS.  (A)  ^l^t.  6 MS.  (B)

® Lit. : calling  upon  the  names  (of  God),  This  is  a term  used  to  express  a
system  of  incantation  which  is  held  to  be  lawful  by  orthodox  vMnhammadans.
For  a full  account  of  it,  see  Hughes  (Diet,  of  Islam)  article  Da‘icah^  p,  72.
MS.  ^B)  reads  The  text  has  a misprint  for

IMS.  (A)  AJ.  8 mss  (A)(B)>jb*^.  9MS.  (B)  ^

10  Footnote  variant  to  the  text  reads  Harld.

[ 3

Biiiai’ fioni  Nnsir  lOjau  ‘ Lnliaul,  and  having  appointed  Kliwaja
Amir,  Shall  Hasan  and  Amir  Junaid  Birlas  to  the  government  of
Jannpui,  proceeded  iiy  way  of  Kalpi,  and  by  adopting  measures
partly  peaceful  and  partly  warlike,  brought  over  ‘Alam  Khan  the
governor  of  that  place,*  and  made  him  one  of  his  adherents.  He
lost  no  time  in  attaching  himself  to  the  king’s  service,  and  was
gi'anted  many  royal  favours.

At  this  same  time,  that  pattern  for  the  great  ^ and  noble,
Khwaja  Khawind  Naqshhandi  arrived  from  Kabul,  and  the  Amirs
sitting  in  council  determined  by  a majoi’ity,  that,  seeing  that  the
army  of  Rana  Sanka  is  currently  reported  to  exceed  in  multitude
the  ants  and  locusts,  it  appears  advisable  to  strengthen  the  fortress
of  Agra,  and  that,  leaving  it  in  charge  of  a garrison,  the  sovereign
of  Islam  should  proceed  in  his  own  excellent  person  towards  the
340.  Panjah,  and  wait  for  the  development  of  unseen  events.  The  king
did  not  agree  to  the  decision  of  this  council,  hut  girded  np  his
loins  to  cany  into  effect  his  intention  of  a jihad,  and  setting  his
heart  upon  martyrdom,  mai'ched  in  the  direction  of  the  field  of
Fatljpur  and  made  this  project  the  aim  and  object  of  his  ambition,*

Terse.

Since  the  soul  must  of  necessity  at  last  leave  the  body,

This  is  best,  that,  wiieu  the  time  comes,  it  should  at  least
depart  with  honour.

The  eud  of  the  world  is  thi.s,  and  nothing  more
That  after  a man’s  death,  his  name  should  remain.

The  Amirs  also,  placing  their  hands  upon  the  saci-ed  word,
( the  Qur’an),  swore  an  oath  to  renew  their  compact  and  carry
out  their  inteution  of  making  war  upon  the  infidels,  for  the
exaltation  of  the  sublime  creed,*  and  the  promulgation  of  the

I A footnote  variant  Xusrat  Khan.  So  also  SIS.  (B).

8 SIS.  (B)  reads  1;'^  nakim-i-Bukliara.

8 'I'ho  text  reads  1*^511  so  also  MSS.  f A)  (B).  A footnote  to  the  tej^t
Bays  that  this  reading  is  found  in  all  three  copies,  but  that  is  correct,

* MS.  (A)  % 0*4

5 'I’ho  KiittiiHih,  “There  i«  no  Ood  hut  (lod  .'ind  Muhammad  is  ilie

Apoaile  of  God,”  'oc  t^nr’.in  xlvii.  21  and  x'.viii  2U.  See  also  Hughes  (Diet,  of
I>lang  art : Kuli'i'ah,

r 447  ]

glorious  law,  deeming  the  field  of  battle  to  lie  a joytul  assembly,
and  doing  full  justice  ^ to  the  claims  of  manliness  in  snch  a way
as  the  eye  of  time  had  never  before  witnessed,  and  after  many
sti  enuous  efforts  the  standards  of  Islam  floated  bravely  on  high,
while  the  banners  of  infidelity  were  laid  low.  In  the  thick  of  the
fight  an  arrow  found  its  way  to  the  forehead  of  Hasan  Khan
Miwati,  who  was  an  infidel  who  used  the  Kalimah  ; tliey  cast  him
into  a Avell  and  took  to  flight,  while  lie  fell  iuto  tlie  well  of  Helh
although  a certain  Mi  wall,*  a.  jogi^  inform  and  appearance,  in
the  year  flfiO  H.,  after  the  death  of  Salim  Shah  Afghan  Stir,
raised  a rebellion  in  Minat,  and  called  himself*  Hasan  Khan,
and  mentioned  certain  of  the  secret  signs  to  the  iliwatis,  still,  a
certain  number  acknowledged  him.  The  composer  of  lliis
Mimtakhab  (selection)  also,  in  the  j'ear  9u5  H.  (1557  A.D.)  saw
him  ^ in  Agra,  but  no  signs  of  nobility  or  authority  were  visible
in  his  features,  ® and  the  late  Khan-i-Khanan  Bairam  Khan  used
to  say,  that  Hasan  Khan  Mi wari  7 was  a man  wlio  commanded  a
large  following,  ^ and  was  of  kingly  appearance,  and  had  a
poetical  temperament.  His  poems  are  well  known  ; but  thi.s
mannikin  * resembled  an  uncouth  rustic,  liis  appearance  was  ex-
tremely repulsive.*^  God  forbid  that  this  wiotoh,  should  be  that
Hasan  Khan.

After  some  time  certain  of  the  Kjianzadas  of  Miwat  moved  341-
by  indignation  and  jealousy  put  him  to  death.  A short  time
after  this  victory,  that  gallant  king  was  attacked  by  a severe
illness,  and  after  that  he  had  reached  the  age  of  fifty  years,  he
departed  from  this  transitory  woild  to  the  eteinal  realms  in  the
year  937  H.  (1530  A.D,).

The  date  of  the  de.ath  of  Sdah  Bahar.

This  took  place  in  the  year  nine  hundred  and  thirty-seven.

The  woids  Shash-i-Shatcical  also  form  the  date  of  his  decease,

1 IMS.  (B)  reads  l!j.  * JIS.  (Ri  omits

S MS.  (A)  reads  * MS  (B)  ■j’e/'t  uud  MS.  fA'

‘ MS.  (B1  « Both  MSS.  (A)  (Bjomit

1 ij'/cii  ItbS.  \A.)  (B)  .-f-' J for  _l>5'Ao,

‘'MS  ;A)  re.-id  a 9 MS.s.  { Ajtii)

MS.  ()n  11  Jjtt.  like  a rh-'otreim,.''.

1“  ^ o;5;'  i j)

[ ]

■while  the  date  of  liis  bivtli  be  found  from  tins  cou]det.

Since  this  revered  monarch  was  born  in  the  sixth  of  Jluhar-
ram,

Tiie  year  of  bis  birth*  also  is  Shnsh-i-Muharram.

The  duration  of  his  rei"n  in  Mawaru-annahr,  Badakhshan,  Kabul,
and  Kashgh-ar,  as  well  as  in  Hindustan,  was*  thirty-eight  years.
He  had  succeeded  to  the  kingdom  at  the  age  of  twelve,  and
Khwaja  Kalan  Beg  wrote  this  couplet  in  his  funeral  ode  ;

Alas  ! that  time  and  the  changeful  heaven  should  exist  with-
out thee.

Alas  ! and  Alas  ! that  time  should  remain  and  thou  should’st
be  gone.

Among  the  learned  men  of  his  time  is  Shaikh  Zain  Khani.S
who  translated  in  most  elegant*  style,  the  Wdqi'at-i-Baharl,^  which
the  deceased  monarch  wrote,  and  the  following  verses  are  by
him :

Verses.

342.  Thou  hast  rested  with  thy  guardians  and  hast  fled  from  me

What  have  I done  ? or  what  hast  thou  heard  or  seen  from
me  ?

There  was  no  necessity  for  injustice  to  enable  tliee  to  seize
my  heart,

I would  have  yielded  it  had’st  thou  but  desired  it  of  me.

Verses.^

So  straitened  did  my  heart  become  for  longing  for  those  lips
of  thine

Too  narrow  was  the  way  by  which  my  soul  should  quit  its
earthly  shrine.

1 The  text  reads  correctly  j\  Jb*  but  both  MSS  (A)  (B)  read

tarlUi-i-faut,  the  date  of  hia  death.

The  letters  of  the  words  give  the  date  888  H.  This  wonH

make  him  fifty  years  of  age  in  93S  H.  This  couplet  has  a variant  reading
which  is  given  in  the  footnote  to  the  text.

* MS.  (A)  omits  <>>?•  3 MS.  (A)  reads  Cti'l'.

* Waqi'dt-t-Bdbari.  This,  called  also  Tdzak-i.-Bubari  is  the  work  of  which
Erskine’s  translation  is  so  well-known.  1 can  find  no  other  reference  to  the
translation  from  the  original  Tiirki  here  referred  to  by  our  author-  Sec
Elliot  V.  218  ct  also  Erskine’s  Babar  (Ititrodnction).

Footnote  variant

MS.  (A)  reads  ^ J-

8

[ 449

My.Torses  are  both  rational  and  traditional,  and  mi  dpsire  i-,
that  Maulana  Hasan,  who  comprises  iu  hiuiself  all  riLtipnal  * ami
traditional  science,  may  liear  tliem.

Another  is  Alaulana  Baqa'i  who  wrote  a Hainavi  ’n  the  metre
of  the  ilakhzan-i-Asrar.*  At  the  moment  1 do  net  teicemher  a
single  poem  of  his.

Anotiiei-s  is  ilaulana  Shihabn-d-Din  the  Eni^'mati'r.  v. In^e
general  learning  was  overshadow'ed  by  his  sppci  .i  -ki.h  in  th-"’
composition  of  enitrmas,  and at  the  time  when  Ir,  — , Kl.an  '
was  appointed  by  ^ali  Isma'i!  !pafa'’.i  Hr.sairi  t.m.  - i-

sliip  of  Khnrasan,  that  jn-ince  of  tiuaitionists.  Hi;  -J d-ihi;-.

the  trailitioniit,  one  day  while  the  pieaciiiiiy  ■■-a>  •_  ,a  e n;  ,
dispfhing  the  apparent  coistt .•dietioti  between  tie-.'  o- 1 i
1 '•■eh'  ;/<  hi'  i,?  GoJ . '"7,0  cre'ict'l  '"•/-r-vs  a.'-i  ■■  - ,,  o’.

da^<.'  and  thpt  true  Hadis  , 1 1 a .iiti on  ' t!i  u /J"  ", r-.- ' ' . . • '

StVsr.  explained  it  in  two  vatps,  i'd  ^ ■ d..' " . - . ■

Din®  refuted  it,  by  adducing  ono  after  another  severtd  cxcellc-i.L
arguments,  and  wrote  a treatise  on  that  subject,  to  wi'ieh  the
learned  divines  of  that  time  subscribed  their  .-ic  nut  ala's.  The
writer  of  these  pages  also  on  the  same  occasion  wn.ui  a few  lines
of  prose  and  poetrj',  from  which  the  following  ud'J.''  is  selected;  ■'

Oiiiitraiii.  3^3,

This  writing  which  iins  appeared  ii'-te  lau  fii!  ■,

Jt.s  I'oetry  and  prose  are  purer  thi.ii  the  p.urt-.st  v.  o ;

1 iSISS,  (A)  (EJ  read

® its.  (A)  supplies  See  -bH-i-.H-fcan  (E,;I.  p.  595  a 2,  also  Beale,

p.  67.

8 JISS.  (A)  (Bj  See  Be.ale,  p.  243.  Sh'l'56'‘"l- u. • iC'.l  ii,

reign  of  tlunidyilu  942  A.  tf.  See  next  page.

* MS,(A)

^ MS.  fA'i  DarBiasii  Khan,  ilSS.  [X'

T Qur’an  YII.  52  X.  3.

^ >See  xxiv.  I.  3.  God  created  the  e.»iEi!  c»n  'i  ■;  . i :!.>  Ki'.'

on  it  on  Sunday,  and  the  trees  on  Monday,  an‘i  i*  i tir'-Mi  i v ,

and  he  created  the  light  on  Wednesday,  and  rht  <<  "i  r .t'  tMirr

on  Timrsday,  and  created  Adam  after  afternoon  jpiM_vcr  or  I’l  la^.i  of

the  cre.tfcion  ”

^ MS.  (Bj  writes  ^ihab  only,  M^'S-  i A t (II)  u i d >7

The  text  reads  Al-^.  (A^  unius  th*.  umtO  ttud

MS.  (B)  reads  ^7^  possibly  for

57

[ -tso  ]

It  is  a gleam  fiom  the  hi-ightiiess  ol  " the  brilliant  Star.'

In  describing  whose  dignity  the  t.jugac  of  ineditairjii  i-  .lU'urk
dumb.

The  following  eiiiErnia  ou  the  name  Kfiyhif  is  also  by  him.

Quid  rain.

With  a view  to  deceive  the  heart  of  th.is  hroken-hearteJ  one.

That  idol  with  mouth  like  the  r.-sehnd  is  e\ery  Tnoiueut
disphij  itjg  coqiietiy.

Upon  tiie  leaf  of  the  io.se  she  wrote  that  curling  ringlet

And  then  displayed  her  moon-bright  face  from  ^ one  corner.’

The  death  of  the  Maulavi  took  place  at  the  time  of  tlie  letuin
of  the  Enippror  IMnhainrnftd  Hnmayun,  whose  abode  is  in  Fai.ciiie.
from  his  expc.litiot;  to  G.ijrdt  in  the  year  942  H.,  and  ilii  Kliond  t
Atnir  the  l.nsiuiiun  invented  the  chronogram  Sh  iJiubii-s-s  l-iib.
And  one  of  the  wonderful  ■'  ins’entioii.s  of  that  Emperor,  whose
shelter  is  the  pardon  of  God.  is  the  Kliatt-i-Babaii  tlie  Bfibaii
script),  in  which  writing  he  indited  a cojn'  of  the  Qur'an,  and  .sent
it  to  the  sacred  city  of  ilakka : his  antiiology  of  Ihrsian  and
Turki  poetry  is  well-known.  He  has  also  compo.sed  a book  on  the
Haiiitite  TljLolo£ry  Culled  iliihaiijyiii,'  and  Shaikh  Zainu-d-lJiu  ^
wi’ote  a coinineiitai-y  upon  it  wliicli  he  entitled  Mubin.  His  trea-
tises ® on  Pru.-^ody  are  also  in  common  use.

1 Shihaba-ii-liln  was  called  Shihabu-s-saqib  {the  brilliant  star)  ; these  words
also  give  the  date  of  his  death,  nee  post.

2 its.  (A;  rt.uis  j’  for  8 JIS.  (.\)  reads  _)il  for  Jl.

4 The  folioiMOtr  is  the  expiaiialion  of  this  Afii'amma  which  is  contained  in

the  two  last  Hues  of  the  R’i’d'i.  lilf  Th.it  is

to  say  : she  took  the  word  ^ and  removed  from  it  the  ddirv.  or  cursed  por-
tion of  the  (J  ^i'n,  thus  leaving  ; to  this  she  added  ciT  an  Sar-i-

zv'f,  that  is  to  say  the  last  letter  of  the  word  the  letter  >-1,  thus

having  To  this  she  added  ^ ruM-i-ma/i,  the  lirst  letter  of  the

word  which  is  in  Arabic  This  will  give  the  whole  wonl

6 MS.  (A), Ihiile,  p.  1.50.  « MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit

7 The  text  rc-ids  |.lj  tttypo.

8 MS  (A),  Elliot  and  Dowson  IT.  288,  etseqq.

9 MS.  (Bj  reads  for  see  Elliot  and  Dowson  IV.  219.

[ ]

Tlie  heaven,  whose  sole  skill  is  oppression,

Has  this  one  object,  to  wiiiiij  each  moment  the  heart’s  blood;
It  gives  not  to  the  tulip  the  crown  of  royalty  without  laying
low  nnder  the  foot  of  oppression  the  head  of  a crowned
monarch.

NasIeu-d-DIx  [hVAL'-o-Drx  "s  tl'  IMuhammad  HumayCjj
PAO^IAH-I-tin  S/i.

^lurching  by  forced  marches  truni  8aiil>iil  in  the  rear  937  H.
flooO  A.D.),  with  the  concurrence  of  Amir  ^inlifa  wiio  wa.s  the
agent  and  prime  minister  ® of  the  Covei'nmcnt,  ascended  the
throne.  The  following  chronogram  was  invented  to  record  the
date.

Tens,.

Muhammad  Humayun  Shah  of  auspicious  fortune
M ho  is  tlie  best  of  kings  by  virtue  of  his  merit
The  year  in  tvhich  he  ascended  the  kiug!y[thione
Was  distinguished  by  the  words  " Khgi rii-1  -Muhlk.”  ^
Moreover,  inasmuch  ns  at  the  time  of  his  accession  he
made  present  of  trays  tille-.l  with  gold,  ain  ther  clironogram  was
invented  in  the  words  Kt^_k  l-i-Zai  ;Tray  of  gold).  After  dis-
posing of  all  matters  of  importance  he  led  an  army  against  the
fortress  of  Kalinjar,*  and,^  after  quelling  the  insurrection  of
Sultan  ‘Alam  ibn-i-Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  who  had  raised  a revolt
in  Jaunpur,  returned  to  Agra  and  made  a great  feast,  at  which
entertainment  twelve  thousand  people  were  distingui^,iied  by  the
bestowal  of  robes  of  honour.

17

A king  will  have  the  upper  Iiaiid  of  his  enemies
When  his  array  is  happy  and  contented  ;

But  if  he  Avithholds  tluir  just  reward  from  his  soldiery,

They  in  turn  will  withhold  tlieir  hand.s  from  tlie  sword.

In  those  days,®  Aluhammad  Zaman  Mirza  ihii-i-iiadi‘u-z-Zaman
ilirza^  ibn-i-Sultan  Husain  Mirzii,  who  had  hostile  intentions

I MS.  (A).

* The  text  reads  J MS.  (A)  reads

8 TChairu-l-Mnluk.  Best  of  Kings.  The  letters  of  the  words

give  the  date  937  H,,  as  do  also  the  letters  of  the  words  jj
ktshti-i’Zar  in  the  next  line.

* MS.  (B)  writes  ^ Kdl^ch^r  atnl  )**X^***S^.

^ MSS.  (A)  (B)  supply  j.  ^ fA-

344

T ru'

[ 452  ]

was  cnptni’rd.  liim  totlie  foriress  of  Baiaiia,  orders  were

given  for  liis  eyes  to  bo  put  out.  The  pupil  of  his  eye  remained
aniujured  however,  aud  .'iliurtly  after,  he  escaped  from  piison  and  fled
for  refuge  to  Sukaii  Raiiailur  of  Guji  at.  It  is  said  that  at  the  time
when  Muhammad  Ztiiuan  iMiiza  joined  Snltan  Bahadur,  the  latter
was  engaged  in  be.siegiiig  Cliitor,  aud  the  weather  wa.s  exceedingly
hot.  ^Inhamiiiad  Ztijiian  ilirza  was  seized  with  a pain  at  the  heart,'
forthecuie  of  w hich  the  physicians  declared  gidc/and  (confection  of
roses)  * to  be  indispensable.  IM'ihammad  Zaman  iliiza  begged
Sultan  Raiiadiir  to  .=e!i.l  ! iui  a p:e'’e  of  thi.s  gidqnnd.  He  at  cord-
345.  ingly  .suii:!uoi!eil  Lis  id  ■«,  or..  | .acu-  of  beverages),  and  enquir-
ed bow  ra  :ch  c'dj  i three  b.d  he-.’.i  btought  vvith  the  cf-rj.p  : he
rejilied  tint  there  icu.t:  'oe  ui  <.c  tiat::  tv.eiity  cart  loads.  The  -viiole
of  this  ho  .sent  to  the  cair.r.  (d  M:tn  inuuad  Zaman  Mirza.^  and
apologe*ion'!y  ".v;  !•-.;>  id  t -.'.i-  .a  .t  had  been  esti.mnted  as  tlie
probahle  lequirements  of  ti.e  aini\',  if  it  wore  not  sufftcieiit  he
begged  to  he  excused.  It  eventually  tran.spired  that  tiie  juice
of  the  Used  to  be  e.xtracted  for  his  use,  and  that  for  this

reason  theie  wetC"  so  many  carts  accompanying  him.  Muham-
mad SiiUdi.  ilirza,  with  hi-  twe,  soiis  Ulugh  Mirza  and  Shah  Mirza,
proceeded  to  Qai  auj  aud  Idd  the  foundations  of  revolt,  and  when
tlie  king,  now  deceased,  wrote  ai.d  de.spatched  to  Sultan  Bahadur
letters  sinuiuoniug  iMahamiinid  Zaman  Mirza,  Snltan  Bahadur
sent  back  a di.scourtoons  reply ; ^ he  accordingly  determiticd  upon
the  ('(jnijue^t  of  Gujiat.  Baliadui,  having  collected  an  army  to
reduce  the  forirc'.-;  of  Chitor  and  oppose  Raua  Sanka,  engaged
him  ill  h.ittle.  ai.d  be.sifgetl  iiim.  ’1  d'^ar  KTian  Lodi  being  de.spiatch-
ed  by  him.  came  and  gained  [)i.)>.-e.-5sIou  of  the  fortress  of  Baiana,
extending  his  depredutions  us  far  as  Agra  ; and  after  a tierce

1 IISS.  (A)  (B)  iji.

Gnlqanth  Cnufection  of  rose-petJils  atid  lioiipy,  said  to  be  a power-
fal  cardiae  atinmlant  aad  tunic,  see  Makkzauu-l-adiciyah  a.v.

5 MSS.  (A)  (B).

#»

♦ MSS.  (A)  (B)  ^ (A)  reads  for

® For  the  text  of  this  reply  and  an  account  of  the  circumstancej  under
■which  it  was  written;  •'■ec  Bayley’s  Ilibtory  of  Giijenit,  pp.  377  to  380.

C 453  ]

co'iHict  * with  Miiza  Haiiitfil,  in  which  lie  attackeil  with  three
thousand*  men,  was  put  to  the  swuduith  all  his  following.

W hile  Snitan  IJahadur  was  bcsie£riiiir  Cliiior  for  the  second  time,
Muhammad  Rumaynii  Pad'diah*  niovid  airaiust  him  from  Atria;
and  in  ihis  same  3'ear  illrza  Kami  an.  proceed iutr  hv  forced  maiehes
from  Lahoi*  to  Qandaliar,  detear-‘d  Sim  ^.lliza,  tlie  in'otin'r  of
Shall  ^ Talimasji.  wi.o  was  lie^ieo-iiiL;'  Klmaja  Kalaii  iJeo',  and
the  fo’.iowino  hemistieh  "i'es  the  date.

Zuda  Pnd^nh  K ii:nrti,t  Sir’ll  rti.^

(Kino-  Kamian  deSVai.  d Sam)

IMaulana  Bekabi  t akso  write.s  the  folli  wiutr

K'aVt.

At  that  time  when  tlie  crow  n and  tlie  golden  goblet  stands  in  346.
sight,

When  amid  the  jo\'  and  feasting  i.s  seen  the  form  of  tlie
flagon  and  the  chafing  of  the  cup,

I emjuired  from  wisdom,  wlpv  hast  thou  cast  down  in  our
niidst  the  gold-sctittering  ciouii,  like  a erims.’U  tulip  r

She  answered,  the  hearen,  h\'  wav  of  assigning  a date  to  this
eneouutur,  iias  ctist  down  the  golden  crown, ^ in  consequence

. of  the  defeat  of  the  army'  of  Sam.

Muhammad  Huma^  uu  Padi^iali,  considering^  that  it  wotild  he  dis-
gi aceful  to  go  up  against  Sultan  Bahadur  and  engage  his  attention

1 MS.  (A)

* Tlie  text  reads  Si  S„<1  3ooo.  MS.  fB)  rea.!,  SK:fh  S„  '

GOO.

s MS.  (A)  writes  .Mii?,:.,  * MS.  (A)  omits  5 MS.  (A)  j Mri

* b (*’'•  tij  Tlii-s.-  lettei-s  fvr.m  tlie  date  942.  II.

7 Footnote  variant

8 pL.  J jj  ^0  JAxi*!.  The  letters  of  this  lijio  form  the

tlato  94:2  in  tJie  follow iiii^

iite  litoral  meaning  of  the  line  may  be  taken  ihns  :

Hms  cmac  awny  the  crown  gold  ( Tnj-i-Z.ir)  tn>ni  tiio  iVfcnt  of  tin'
of  Sfim  f^ikaat-i-Hiprdi-i-Sriin).  By  iiuMiit  tho  h-ttor  j.  "he

first  Icirt^r  of  the  Woni  4J,  tiio  value  vrf  winch  is  7 ; this  bcin<  cutt  out  fiTii-
lii'j  value  of  kin-t-  givOo  — 7-=?42.

[ ]

wliile  he  was  enprn.sed  in  tlie  sieure  of  Chitoi-,i  halted  at  Saifing-
ptii-.  Sultan  BahaJui-  meanwhile  forcibly  reduced  the  fort  of
Chitor,  after  which  he  engage  ! in  war  with  Padyhali  (HnmayCin)
for  a space  of  two  months  in  the  i eighbourhood  of  Mandsur,  a
dependency  of  Mdlwa,  hnt  owing  to  the  fact  that  no  supplies  of
grain  could  reach  the  camp  of  llaha  lur.  man  and  beast  died  from
starvation,  and  ^ Bahiidur  with  five  of  his  most  trusty  Amirs  left
the  royal  tent  hy  the  retir  door  and  fled  totvards  Maudsur.®  H'he
following  verse  commemorates  the  date  of  this  event ; —

Hnmayiin  Shah-i-Crhazi,  who  has  thousands  of  slaves  in  his
palace  like  Jam^iid,

W'  hen  he  came  victorious  towards  Gnjrat,  retarned  in  triumnli
the  glory  of  the  sons  of  Timur.

Since  Bahadur  fell  humbled  and  abject,

The  date  thereof  was  ‘‘ The  di.sgrace  of  Bahadur.”^

Muhammad  Humayun  Padshati  pursued  him,  and  the  Mughiil
soldiers  came  upon  Bahadur  one  night  while  he  was  asleep,^  and
•were  near  taking  him  prisoner,  hnt  he  made  his  escape  w ith  five
or  si.v  horseiueu  towards  Gujrat.  Sultan  ’Alam  Lodi,  however,  fell
into  their  hamU  and  they  cut  olf  his  feet  The  army  of  Humayun
Padshah  puisued  Bahadur  hy  ia[ii.l  marches  and  lai'l  waste
Ahmadahad.  Bahadur  leaving  .Xhmaikihad  went  to  Kauhliauit,'^
and  from  there  to  the  port  of  Dip.’  and  at  that  time  the  fortress

I See  Bayley,  ,.f  0“-.r,yt.  p.  Ss-',  2 MSS.  (A)  I'Bj  supply  j here.

8 MS.  (A;  rpatls  jAxx;.  ..o  vui-gihc  u-  t-jx:.

* '"I  l ■ -kf  1,  ttt-ra  ihte  04-2  11.  M'o  tuny

also  reail  Zill'i-Balu(J»  r,  in  cuae  >ve  translate  “ tsubiuissuu  ot

Bahadur.”

6 MS.  (B)  reafls  iiijS  which  rho  iLAt  uiv,  ^ ilia  fG'..ritote  variant

This  nppf'ars  fiom  the  coittevr  t«)  ht*  iiu*  rrii^  reutli;-i/.

6 Cambay.  The  mime  Kli  luibac  i'i  >-aid  to  hn  derived  fium  K’.(i,ithha  or
Sfamt'hi.ti' t'n.  the  pool  of  31ahldt\u  .mder  the  form  of  the  pillar  \icd.  S"-
Huuter  Imp.  (i‘iz  , III.  -71  Sre  al'^o  TTctTenrhaier  I.  370  cf  .'C/'p

T Tieff  I.  3^5,  writes  LU'i,  appclce  D'fp  daiis  la  lanLcne  du  pay«,  t-st  uno
petite  ile  siinee  tlans  ipies  de  • la  presqii’  ilc  de  Soretli  ou  se  trouve  nne
ville  et  un  chateau  ties  fort,  apparteuauc  unx  Portatrais  avec  an  petit  territoirc.
La  ville  est  separee  du  chateau  par  uu  canal  taille  dans  la  pierre.  Cnpont
de  V>ois  joint  Van  a I’autre.  EUe  a un  port  commode,  dnquel  sort  chacjne  annee
nn  vai&seHU  ciiarge  de  marchandises  poor  Moaauibiqiie.  Diu  est  a bO  milles
portugais  de  Surare  vers  TOufSt  ”

See  also  Aiii-i-Ak-  ut~/  !.  34S,  and  II.  205.  uUo  Ut.'L  <>f  OujiAf.  310  >i

[ 455  1

of  Jaii]>anu'  1 was  also  taken  after  a battle  by  tlie  Padshah,  and
trea-iuf  beyond  computation  fell  into  his  haiais.

Tlie  year  in  which  this  happened  may  be  leiU'ntd  from  the
following  verse  ; —

Wisdom  sought  for  the  date  of  the  victory  of  Shall  Humayun
and  diseoveied  thi.s,

*■  It  was  the  ninih  of  the  month  of  Safar.’'  ^

Then  Bahadur,  in  concert  with  the  Zamindar.s  of  the  country  ®
of  Sui-ath,  collected  a force  and  proceeded  towanW  AhrnidabaJ.
Mivzd  'Askai'i  who,  after  the  return  of  Huiuaj  un  Padshah  towards
the  East,^  remained  at  Ahmadahad  with  the  intention  of  haying
the  Khiilhah  read  in  his  own  name,  in  which  proiect  he  had  the
suppoit  of  Amir  Hindu  Beg;  however,  he  could  not  carry  out  his
plan,  and  after  slight  opposition  left  for  Jaiipanir,  the  sovernor  of
which  jduce,  Tardi  Beg’,  having  entrenched  himself,  .'-.nt  letters  to
the  court  convoying  the  tidings  of  the  revolt  of  Hiiza  ’A'icaii.  But
at  the  time  when  HninayCin  had  left  Mandir  on  lii-  way  to  Agra
■A^kaIi  met  him  on  the  road  and  gave  in  his  'Ubmis.sion,
and  Bahadur  took  Janpanir  from  Tardi  Beg  ’without  t'cc-  necessity
of  fighting.^  [And  in  this  year  Shail^  ® Jamali  Kiiuhawl  of
Hihll  left  this  transitory  world  for  the  kingdom  of  liirnity.  A
chronogiaui  has  boon  im’enred  to  coinniernoi’ate  tin'--  i:;  tlie  wonls
Khnii  hfiLli  (he  was  the  Khnsrii  of  Hindustan)]."  In

this  year  aho  Tahina.sp  came  up  against  <()anclf<hur  from

‘ Iraq  to  take  vengeance  on  Sam  Mirza,’  and  * IQiwSja  Kalan
Beg  leaving  the  city  empty,  and  leaving  the  Diwiinkhana  (Hall

1 t/,- l.’l.,'n,[.:iinr.  See  Baylry’s  ffi.-tory  of  Giijrit,  pp.  3'JO  e.'
i jSLa ai  y dh~i-Sh'ihr-i-Safar  bdd.  Ttiese  worda  give  iKe  drite  942  H.

5 MS.  lA)  omits  A footnote  variant  reads  IJurliiinpOr.

6 The  portion  in  sqnare  Virackets  is  omitted  in  IIS.  (A)  in  this  place
8 MS  Ot).

' tiijj  iiJ.it  The  letters  of  these  worda  give  the  date  942  K.

There  is  a footnote  to  the  text  calling  attention  to  an  alleged  discrepancy  in
the  il.itea  of  riif  ch.rmiugrams,  and  asserting  that  (Jj  represents  932  and
Hot  Tiii'i  i.>  .1  mistake,

8 MS  I'A)  here  inserts  the  date  (942)  in  figures.

9 MS.  I A)  here  inserts  the  paragratih  relatinsr  to  the  death  of  Shaikl!
Jamidi,  sap™  n 6.

[ 456  ]

of  audience)  lor-ked  up  ju't  as  it  was,  atloi-ned  witli  its  splendid
carpets,  its  magiiificeiit  furnilTire,  and  all  the  appaitenances  of
the  audience  chamber,  came  out  to  invite  Shah  Talimasp  to  alig-lit
at  that  pleasantly  prepared-  resting  place,  which  he  did.  and*
Kliwaja  Kalaii  Ben’  ifreat  praise  for  Ids  conduct,  sajin?.  that
is  a good  sciaant  whom  Kamran  iMirz.i  possesses.  Shah  Tahniasp
left  Qandahar  in  charge  of  Badagh  Khan,  one  of  Ids  own  Amirs,
and  returned  to  "Tiaq  Miiza  Krunran  at  this  same  juncture,  pio-
ceeded  by  forced  mai ehes  ii om  Lalior,  and  ariiving  at  Qaadahar
took  jKi.^.ses'ion  of  it.  51  oh.imiiiad  Zaman  Mirza,  whom  Bahadur
liad  despatelied  after  hl.-^  defeat  to  iidlict  injui’y  upon  Hindu^raii,
tO'dc  adsantatre  of  tiie  absence®  of  Mirza  Kamran  to  it’ vest
Luitor ; but,  v.heii  he  heard,  nding.s  of  the  return  of  Hnnia’.  un  Pad-
fd_iah  to  Gajrat,  retriiced  his  steps.  At  the  expiry  of  one  ’.ear
front  the  aece'Sto'n  * of  Hnniayun  PadAiali  in  Ac-ra,  .;i!jir  Khan
Afghan  Sur.  in  the  iib.-ence  of  Hiiniayun.  collected  a large  force,
tuul  took  p’i.sscs'iou  5 of  the  country  of  Goiir,  Bilifir,  ,'nid  Janiipnr,
and  also  the  foi  tress  of  Chinar.  Humayun  Pad’diah  encamped  ®
before  the  fori  ot  Clitnar,  with  the  intention  of  oppositig  Shir  ivhau,
on  the  fourteenth  of  the  ntonth  of  Safar  in  the  ye.ar  943  H.,  and
besieged  dalal  Khan,  son  of  Shir  Hian,  who  eventually  obtained
tlie  title  ,.>f  T^liim  .SJjali.  In  a short  time  by  the  exei  tions  of  Runai
Khan  the  A 1 1 ilh'i  isi . (ou  whose  name  Sultan  Bahadur  had  written
and  despatched  tile  followdng  enigma  : —

\_Haif  I'd^ad  naui  i du  sa'j  hnr  zalnii,
llildL  dar  jdna^  nih  o uaniash  hikhud}i'P
It  were  a pity  to  take  the  name  of  that  dog  on  one’s  lips
Place  .1  stake  (mikh)  in  ins  life  (jan)  and  read  his.  name).

1 yiss.

(Al  (B)

2 yrs

(\)

supplies  J-  3 MS.  fB'i  oni'ts

* MSS.

(AJ  -B,

leuii

i>  MS.  (A)

yis  ’

^ \ J

MW*

'i  1 i . i s

^ain)iid  or  eii.

reipiircd  pxplaiKition  : Tlie  En

iri’SU

% t

1 '■  f ITI  is

iMtiir  ■

. iiieiiiiinirleb?.

Till,'  V. .’]

[’’lb  : i ■

R'niiil^''n  O'  utuiii  ;is  In  :t*_

1 ti.e

1

,”0  ^

' l-h  1

\\  < ‘ii  ti.  - ' . 11  li  i

;;  *

...d  Ti  e-o  toi’ii  ilfp  : i szS' 'j

’ ' ’’N

<)1

111.  1

i>  ,.t  ..  r,

1-  G - ■ IP

, ir'i  : i

■■e-yni-.  .'iri  in  o i c,'Si^

TP

f A’,  nt‘‘l

V ; ;

.!<  ' inr  ‘ ■

Li-  ■-

hi-  !'fi.  oly  '(  . , -uui  ;-,,u

lo

~ na!ue

e."  !■'  .

iTf.'

[ «7  ]

lie  i-edaced  ^ that  forti'ess,  but  Jalal  escaped  by  meaus  of  a

boat,  and  joined  Sbir  Khan  who  was  engaged  in  conflict*  with
Nasib  Shah  Governor  of  Bangala.  Huma_vau  ® Padshah  ai-rived,
after  that  the  Governor  of  Bangala  bad  been  wounded  in  battle  with
Shir  Khan.  Xasib  Shah  ' submitted  himself  to  Humajun,  and
acted  as  his  escort.  Having  entrusted  the  Government  of  Jannpur
to  Mir  Hindu  Beg,  with  the  rank  of  Amirn-l-  Umnra,  and  a golden
tlirone,  he  proceeded  1)3'  way  of  Garid,®  a narrow  pass  sepjarating  the
countries  of  Biliar  and  Bangala,  whicli  Qutb  Kban  the  son  of  Shir  349.
Kban  and  Khawass  Khan,  the  well-known  servant  of  Shir  Khan,
bad  foiaified,  and  came  into  Bangala.  Siiir  Khan  not  being  able
to  withstand  him,  left  liy  way  of  Chaliar  Khaud  to  the  fortress
ot  Rolitas,  and  fell  upon  the  lear  of  Hutnav  un’s  army,  and  gained
posse.ssioii  of  the  fortress  of  Rohtas  In’  crafty  means,  in  the  follow-
ing raannei’.  He  alleged  as  a prete.xt  that  be  had  a large  number
of  families®  with  him,  and  having  placed  two  tlioiisand  armed
Afghans  in  closed  litters  sent  tliem  towards  the  fort.  The  Rnja
of  Rohtas  being  fiied  with  avaricious  designs  upon  the  wealth  and
families  of  the  .Afghans  threw  open  the  gates  of  the  fort.  Then
the  Afghan  soldiers  who  were  concealed  in  the  litters  leapt  out,
and  entering  the  fort,®  put  them  all  to  the  sword.®

I MSS.  (A)  (B)

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  muharaba.  The  text  rende  wrongly

lyiuhuMara.

Bde  [;  MSS.  (A)  (B).

♦ The  Persian  text  is  rather  obsenre,  this  seems  to  he  the  meaning.

® -MSS.  (A)  (Bj  . see  Elliot  and  Dowson  IV,  367  n.  2.

• The  text  reads  Ij  with  two  footnote  variants

and  The  meaning  is  not  clt*ar,  but  from  the  TJdkk-i-Shh'  Shaui  this

appears  to  be  wliat  is  meant.  See  Elliott  and  Dowson  IV.  3.37.

A still  better  reading  however  suggests  itself  namoly

i'istf  ‘ , of  We  should  then  translate  : ' And  ina>n;iMh  as  he

).ad  Fory  many  families  with  liiai  obtained  poas'-.'S-on  of  the  fort  in  the  follow-
Mg  niar.oer.'*

‘ The  Af.Vijjfi  t-.  ua  its  -mnlMj,  'itter  so  dosed  in  that  the:

Cl.  .T,-  purroum.  iti  H''  •’  lea  the  silk’d  it  See  Lane

^ ii?gL.idiTig  ; i.'  ')ce  .M.>,  Cor v;

[ 458  ]

The  climate  of  Baogala  proved  so  extremely  suitable  to  Humayiin,
that  he  changed  the  name  of  Gaur  to  Jannatabad  (The  realm  of
Paradise),  and  having  halted  there  for  (two  or)^  three  months
returned.  In  the  meanwhile  Shir  Khan’s  affair  was  assuming  large
propoi  tions,  and  his  following  was  increasing.  He  wrote  a letter  to
Humayun,  saying,  ‘all  these  Afghans  are  the  servants  and  retainers
of  His  Majesty  the  King,  and  beg  to  be  gi  anted  jaegtrs*  if  the  king
will  think  about  a jnegir  for  them,  tlieu  it  will  be  well,  but  if  not,
hunger  will  drive  them  to  open  revolt.  Up  to  the  present  time  I
have  kept  them  in  check,  but  now  they  no  longer  obey  me,  and
the  proverb  is  well-known.  The  hniiyiy  man  icill  throw  himself
upon  the  svjord.  For  the  rest  whatever  the  king  says  is  law.’

Humayun,  when  he  grasped  the  contents  of  the  letter,  sawcleaily
■what  its  object  was,  and  seeing  that  the  opportunity  had  passed  by,®
and  considering  the  bareness  of  eqniiiment  and  inefficiency*  of  his
army,  which  had  recently  been  doubled,  many  horses  and  camels
having  died,  while  tlie  remainder  were  so  jaded  and  emaciated  that
they  were  of  no  use  whatever,  be  set  about  devising  some  remedial
ntea.sares.  iliiza  Hindal,  who  had  accompanied  the  king  as  far  as
Monair,  w a.s  despatched  to  Agra  to  put  down  the  rebellion  * of
Muluunmiid  Sultau  Mirza,  Ulugh  Mirza,  ami  Shah  Mirza,  who  had
350.  fii.-d  and  had  done  great  mischief  in  the  Dihli  country,  and  were  now
returning.  Muhammad  Zaman  Mil za,  after  that  Sultan  Bahadur
wr.s  drowned  in  the  sea  owing  to  the  treachery  of  the  Firangis,®
could  not  accomplish  anything,  and  again  sought  refuge  with
H Liinai  un.

1 MSS.  ( A ) ( B)  omit  jO.  S MS  (A)  omits  1a.

o Ba‘ti  (te  After  the  ruin  of  Basra.

-A  proverbiai  fvpre.ssioii  eqnivalent  to  the  Engli.sh  “ shotting  the  stable  door
■after  the  lior.,e  is  stolen.”  For  the  story  from  ■which  the  proverb  arises  see
by  ‘.Abda-l-Hamid  bin  Abi-l-Hadid  at  JIu''tazilT.
Wlien  All  ibn  JIuhammad  Sahebu-z-Zaiij  besieged  Basra  in  the  year  255  H.
Ahmad  Ahul-.Vbh.is,  son  of  Al-ilun-ciffaq  b-Iibih  came  up  and  opposed  him,  but
not  until  Basra  wa.s  ruined.  Hence  the  proverb,  t'ce  Arabum  Proverbia.
Frejt.ig  III,  p.  129.  Xo.  774.

4 iI3.  (A)  reads  4^?  MS.  (B)  J

* MS.  (A)  omits  j.

* X his  happened  at  Din  on  the  3rd  Hamazun  A.H.  943.  See  Bayley,  Bistorp
cf  Gujarat,  pp.  396,  397.

[ 459  ]

And  in  the  year  945  H.  Mirza  Hindal,  at  the  instigation  of  cer-
tain turbulent  imiovators,*  put  to  death  ShaiUi  Buhlul,  the  elder
brother  of  .^laikh  Muhamnaad  Ghans  of  Gwaliar,  who  was  one  of
the  chief  exponents  of  the  art  of  invocation  and  incantation,*  and
who  enjoyed  the  full  confidence  and  friendship  of  Hnmaynn.  The
year  in  which  this  event  occurred  was  commemorated  by  the  chro-
nogram Faqa'l  miita  Shahtdan.^  Verily  he  died  a martyr’s  death.

Mirza  Hindal  in  this  year  read  the  Khutbah  in  his  own  name  in
Agra.  Hnmaynn  de.spatched  five  thousand  picked  men  to  rein-
force Jahangir  Beg  the  Mughfil.  and  maUing  over  the  rule  of  that
country  to  him,  with  permission  to  read  the  i^utbah  should  occa-
sion arise,  set  out  for  Agra,  and,  all  unprepared  as  he  was,  reached
Jausa,*  which  is  a \ illage  on  the  hank  of  the  Ganges.  The  Amirs
of  Jaunpur  and  Chinar  came  in  and  offered  to  tender  their  services.
Shir  Khan  seized  the  head  of  the  road,  and  being  aware  of  the
distress  of  the  army,  placed  between  it  and  his  own  army  a canal,®
which  joined  the  Ganges,  and,  owing  to  the  rains,  was  quite  full  of
water,  and  for  three  months  encamped  over  against  the  King.  It
is  said  that  during  this  period  when  they  were  confronting  each

t US.  (A)  reads  cjhJAe

« MS.  (.\)  reads  J U-it  .<  I .-.i'tni'l  • ii  • 'i-  '*  the  invocation

(of  the  attributes  of  uikI  ni.-s'it  ’ ni  riio  Jmcdhiru  U

Kh<iniia  to  be  nseJ  for  sereral  iHa*-;.-  -i  ibiisluuciit  of  frio’i'Lship  or  cnmitv,

for  the  iiitUKTiun  of  sh-kio-'-s  anti  xio-fh  for  iho  care  v*'  for  the  ac*

couiplial  of  ton.p  gmI  or  'tpirirnab  aud  t-*  etcuu  •,  ioroiy  in  butrie.

By  is  uieiini  ii*e  naiiKa  cr  iittiil'-ifo-  ».  f ' •.  I ofy  . tluy  m’o  of

two  categories,  riie  > t a or  ” reriib  anriheiU-'s  and  ilie

Jmii'iliyehy  “'uiuiable  attributes.’’  For  a full  accviij  r,  '<  •'  Uiiglics,  Di-.r  (/
/sJi2m  articles  Da*wah  and  Maoic,

5 Fuqad  iituta  bhuhid-in.  These  Words  give  the  date  945  II.
MS.  (Bj  appends  the  date  in  ngures.

* Footnote  variant  Jausah.

6 The  text  reads  raniahe,  which  b.iT.  no  meaning  A footnote  variant

is  given  zuhabe,  which  means  water  ooziiii.  frotn  the  ground.  This  is

the  reading  of  JIS.  (B).  MS.  (A)  reads  raha’e  We  slioold  read

rahdbc,  in  the  sense  of  a canal  or  aqueduet  Stv  Elliott  uid  Dowson  IV.  370n.

[ -wo  ]

otlier,  Humayun  one  day  sent  Mulla  Mahammad  ‘Aziz,’  who  was
ai!  old  friend  of  Shir  Klan,  as  an  ambassador.*  Shir  Khan  was
at  iLat  moment  with  his  sleeves®  rolled  np,  and  with  a spade  in
351  his  hand,  in  spite  of  the  heat,  was  busy  preparing  the  fort  and
eiitrenchments.

When  ilulla  Muhammad  cp,me  near  he  washed  his  hands,  and
havinsr  ordered  a shdmtana  * to  be  pitched,  sat  on  the  ground  nn-
ccrenioniously,  and  after  hearing  the  King's  message  said,  *■  Take
this  one  message  from  me  to  the  King  and  say  ; ‘ You  yourself  desire
war,  but  your  army  does  not,  I on  the  other  hand,  do  not  desire
war.®  but  my  army  does  : for  the  rest  the  decision  is  the  King’s.’  ”
Then  he  sent  Shaikh  Khalil,  ® one  of  the  de.scendatits  of  the
venerable  Shaikh  Farid  Ganj-i-Shakkar,  may  GoJ  t-andify  his  soul,
who  was  the  .spiiitua!  guide  of  Shir  Khun,  to  linmay  un.  arid  made
overtures  of  peace  to  him,  representing  that  he  was  willing  togivo
np  to  Humay flu’s  representatives  the  whole  country  with  the
exception  of  Bungula,  and  would  have  the  Khntbah  and  sikka  estab-
lished in  Hnniaynn's  name.  This  agreement  was  ratified  between
them  by  an  oath  on  the  Divine  Word,  and  Ilumayun’s  mind  wiis  at
peace  with  regard  to  ^ir  Khan.

A bridge  was  ordered  to  be  thrown  across  : but  Shir  Khan  was
plotting  treacheiy  and  deceit.

T c'/’se.

lltike  the  ctiiiiel  lo.ip  from  the  room  of  the  deceit  of  the  wo'ld,
because  out  of  crttft,

III  tiiat  rciom  w here  they  speak  of  peace  the  camel  is  clad  in
armour.

I flee  from  the  camel  of  the  heavens  and  the  room  of  the  earth,

Bccau'.e  there  are  maddened  camehs  .“urrouiiding  tiiat  room.

TiiP  folio  will'.’'  morning  he  siir[n'iscd  and  attacked  the  ni  my  of
Hun.avun,  without  niviiig  them  time  to  ilraw  up  in  line.  After  a
short  skirmish  Humayiin’s  army  was  defeated,  and  tlie  Afghans

t MS.  (Ai  reads  Mahaniiuad  Yari^harl.  MS.  (Bj  reads

TtiaiiiDiad  pur  *Azi*.

3 Read  . MSS.  (.\)  (R).

£ Oiinr  MSS-  -AjiB),

» Sh-'m-'iuG.  a kind  of  mBr'incf’  rousistiGc;'  of  a fiat  awnin"  support-

r-«i  ’u)  lour  poles  and  having  no  side  curraisis.

* MSS.  (A)  (Rj  orni'  Sre  Elliot  and  Dt)vvaon  IV,  371  and  *

[ 461  ]

ai  riving  first  * at  the  head  of  the  bridge  broke  it  down,  while  their
artillerists  and  archers  seated  in  boats  kept  the  army  under  a per-
fect hail  of  fire,  drowning*  them  in  the  ocean  of  destruction.
Muhammad  Zainan  Mii  za  was  overwhelmed  by  the  teuuest  of  death,
and  Huinayun  urged  Lis  horse  into  the  wa-er  and  was  in  dread
of  drowning,  iti  fact  was  on  the  point  of  drowniMr.  when  a water
carrier  = came  to  his  aid  a.cd  rescued  him  from  that  whirlpool  of
destruction  Then  he  turned  towaids  Agm.  Khan  wiote'^

this  verse  ripen  that  event : — •

Thor  g.vcst  t'.wereignty  to  Fp,:'..t  f,e  p-'s?.

'thou  gr-c:t  the  armv  of  Huir.a’  l-i  to  the  fi-:  's
Alrli'.  ,_j.  :;i..-tfr  iKstiid)  ii- s [this  .secoii‘1  °

•,  ;u  r..ia'.t‘'St  and  givi-.st  iiiu.  .‘ove-reiuut  v.

Aii'oh..;-  r.,stest  down  iro:;'.  lii.-  tin  otic  t ■ tite  fishes  '

Tins  ev--  it  ooc.iri'ed  r.  ti.e  \e.tr  hi-.'  H.  au'l  r:  ctmuicmo! uie  It
the  follo’wtiig  diioiiOgr.'itu  was  wiiitcii  ;

.^fod/auf  bawai  Pd'lAah  Ica^e.^

And  .5ii;r  Khaii  after  the  victoty  turned  tack,  and  came  to
Bangala,  and  after  fightii.g  seveiai  engageruetst.s  - put  to  death
Jahaegir  Quli  Beg  witii  all  his  fuhowing.  In  that  country  he
read  the  KAi/tla/t  in  his  own  name,  and  assumed  the  title  of  Shir
Bhah,-®  and  iu  the  folhwving  year  proceeded  with  a vast  armv

^ r'ih'  iTest;  MsS  ,,B;  re.- 1 , In  yreat  numbers.

*liSd.iA'  IS . OJoAi.,.

5 iNar.'.ed  XtzJm  aci--  I'l’.i-’c  t > Firi^ia  wLo  says  that  as  a reward  Humilyun
permicred  ii'm  t ■ eccinw  t.irone  for  half  a day.  Briggs  II.  fi7

♦JItiS.  (A)

6 ^Ir  TS'as  oriunually  called  Far’d  Khan,  and  Li^  fa:!  f-r  s i inie  was

Hasan  Ktifm.

* MS.  (A;  oniirs  tL.  <:p  w''-*’*!?.  The  r- \t  has  a ft-rt?.-'-  ?.nyiT.<  l hut  the
above  is  the  reading  of  iwo  3f.>S  . but  csi.'  ..'.e  coirect  re.ixiiiiu'  is

No  authority  exists  for  sa*  h a rea-H”/.

The  veises  in  question  are  by  Fir  i.iO.-d.

T Here  the  reading  cf  Mrs  {A;  is  tolioweJ  w hich  reads

^ MS.  (B)adds  the  datp  ia  ['gun*-  (’.’yj)

* MSS.  (A)  (BJ  omit  Cr'-  Krint  and  Dowson,  IT,  pp,  376-378.

‘Abbas  Khan  tells  us  it'-  had  asiuined  the  title  of  'at-i-'Ali

352.

L

462  1

iuteuding  to  capture  Agm.  Kainian  Mirza,  prior  to  the  affair  of
Jausa,  after  hearing  of  the  victory  of  Shir  ^^an  and  tlie  rebellion
of  Mirza  Himial  against  Humayhn,  returned  from  Qandahar  to
Labor,  and  leaving  there  came  to  Agra,  which  he  reached  in  the
year  946  H.  Mirza  Hindal  himself,  before  the  arrival  of  Mirza
Kamran,  in  the  absence  of  HumayCm,  laid  siege  to  Dihli,  in  which
Mir  Fakhr  ‘Ali  and  Mirza  Yadirar  Nasir  had  fortified  themselves;
but  not  meeting  with  any  success  joined  hands  with  Mirza  Kamran.
Mir  FaUhr  ‘Ali  also  came  in  and  had  an  interview  with  him,
353  but  Mirza  Yadgar  Nasir  would  not  leave  the  fort.  Eventually
Mirza  Hindal  separating  from  Mirza  Kamran  proceeded  to  Alwar.
When  Huma3'un  heard  these  tidings,  he  became  still  more  despon-
dent,^ till  that  eventful  defeat  took  place  :*  after  the  defeat  at  Jausa^
he  proceeded  bj'  forced  marches,  accompanied  by  a few  horsemen,
and  arrived  unawares  at  the  tent  of  Mirza  Kamran  in  A.gra.  Tlie
Mirza  also  knew  nothing  of  hi.s  corning;  both  brothers  upon  recog-
nising each  other  burst  into  tears.'*  Afterwards  Hindiil  Mirza  and
Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza  and  his  sons,  vvho  had  for  a time  shewn
hostilitv’,  came  in  and  offered  their  submission  for  certain  consider-
ations ; Their  faults  were  pardoned  and  they  sat  in  consultation.
Mirza  Kamran  o.stensibly  liad  this  intention,  that,  inasmuch  as  the
army  of  the  Panjab  had  gathered  fi-esh  force,  Humayun  should
grant  him  leave  to  proceed  ag.iiust  Shir  S>an  and  enileavour  to
take  vengeance  on  him,  while  the  King  should  remain  in  ease  and
tranquillity  at  the  Capital.  When  Humayun  declined  to  accede  to
this  proposal,  tiie  Mirza  p.it  forward  a claim  to  proceed  to  ^ the
Panjab,  and  urged  an  infinity  of  reasons,  giving  colour  to  tiie
suggestion  that  a refusal  would  cause  iiim  insupportable  annoyance.
Accordingly'  Humay’uu  acceded  * to  all  his  requests,  saving  only
bis  return  ; and  Khwaja  Ka'au  Meg  was  exerting  his  efforts  to
procure  the  return  of  Mirza  Kami  an  to  the  Paujab  : so  that  this
argument  was  carried  on  for  six  months  and  nothing  was  settled.'^
In  the  meantime  Mirza  Kamran  was  taken  ill  with  a complication

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  » MS  (B)  A-ila..

t Text  Chausa.  * MS.  (A)

t MS  (A)

® MSS.  (Al  (B)

Omit  the  words  MSS  tAi  iBi

[ 463  ]

of  severe  diseases, ^ and  wlien  the  diagnosis  was  arrived  at  that  the
source  of  the  disease  was  a poison,  which  had  been  poured  into  his
life’s  cup  by  the  hand  of  cii  cumstance,  he  was  led  by  the  whisperings
of  interested  advisers*  to  enteitain  suspicion  against  Humayun,
and  imagined  that  perhaps  it  was  he  who  had  administered*  354.
poison  to  him.  Ill  as  he  was  he  leturned  to  Labor,  and  in  breach*
of  iiis  former  agreement  that  he  would  leave  the  whole  of  his
ai'my  at  Agia  in  the  service  of  tlie  king,  took  the  whole  of  it  * with
him,  with  the  exception  of  two  tliousand  men  whom  he  left  under
the  command  of  Sikandar.  Mirza  Haidar  the  Mughul  and
Dughlat  ® Kashmiri  also  remained  at  .Agra,  and  were  kindly
treated  Shir  Khan  waxed  bold  at  the  success  of  these  hypocrisies,
and  towards  the  close  of  the  year^  aforesaid  reached  the  bank  of
the  Ganges,  and  despatching  a * force  under  his  son  Qutb  Khan,
sent  him  across  [the  Ganges]  ® against  Kalpi  and  Itawa.  Qasim
Husain  Sultan  Usbeg,  in  concert  with  Tadgar  Nasir  Mii-za  and
Iskandar  Sultan,  after  a fight  in  the  vicinity  of  Kalpi,  put  to  death
the  so.u  of  Shir  Khan  with  a large  number  of  his  following,
sending  their  heads  to  Agra.

Humayun  started  to  oppo.se  Shir  Khan  witli  a large  force  com-
posed of  some  hundred  thousand  cavalry,  and  cro.ssing  the  river  of
Qanauj  encamped  In  face  of  his  enemy  for  the  space  of  one  month.

The  army  of  Shir  Khan  did  not  comprise  in  all  more  than
five  thousand  cavalry.  It  was  under  such  circumstances  that
Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza  and  his  son  fled  a .second  time  from
the  king,  and  the  reinforcements  of  Mirza  Kamran  al.-o  took  flight
to  Laiior,  and  the  Mughiils  of  the  King’s  army  were  scattered  in

l Amraz-i-mutazaddah  Life.  : Diseases  of  opposite  tenden-

cies, i.  e.,  those  diseases,  the  treatment  of  one  of  which  tends  to  aggravate  the
other.

» MSS.  (A)  (B).

8 MS.  (B)  Aj(  •*  MS.  (B)  for

5 Read  here  iji  mss  (A)  (B)  instead  of  Ij  ).

Text.

6 Read  oiUj  j MS.  (Aj.

MS  (Bj  reads  wrongly  for

8 MSS.  (A)  (B)  iXlLkU.  9 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit

>0  MSS.  (A)(B)

H MS.  I B)  says  jlj*  panjdh  hazdr,  fiftj  thousand.

[ 464  ]

all  direcliona  The  rains  now  came  on,  and  inasnmcli  as  tlie  camp
of  Hnmayun’s  army  was  on  low  lying  ground,  he  desired  to  march
from  there  and  encamp  on  tlie  high  ground.  At  this  veiy  time  *
Shir  Khan  drew  np  his  troop.s,  and  came  out  to  give  battle.  This
ensagement  took  place  on  the  day  of  the  ‘Ashura.  the  10th  of
Muhp.rram  947  H.,  and  a chronogi  am  was  found  for  it  in  the  words

Tiie  greater  number  of  the  Mnghul
soldiers  refr.sed  to  fight  * and  took  to  their  heels,  while  a small
3o5.  bodv  of  thorn  who  engaged  in  fight,  strove  manfully  in  battle,*
h;it  chi-  r-  h'  i EToue  beyond  con'r.jl,  and  it  was  of  no  avail.  The
ki-.tr  : . ' • ’.v.t'i  the  intention,  of  going  to-  the  high  ground,

ThiT  " ■ O'  i';s  in  itself  afforded  an  excuse  to  his  men  to  flee,

and  t - . ■ - ’ 'Si-jd.  il.rc-over  the  king  v.hiie  crossing  the

river  i . _V'  ' -.toai  ated  fr.mi  his  horse,  and  by  the  help  of

■ Mr.  l.vhtTnriiad  of  Ghazni  (who  eventually  became
the  r h.c’.  the  prince's  tno-st  e.xcelieJK  icfiy.-sty.  and  was

honoured  in  Hinlastan  with  the  title  of  A’zain  Kban),t  escaped
from  the  -water  and  leturned  to  Agra;  but  seeing  that®  the
enemy’s  army  was  comiug  up  in  pursuit,  he  could  not  remain
there.'  so  made  his  way  to  the  Punjab  with  all  speed.

At  the  commencement  of  Rabi  u-l-awwal  of  this  year  all  the
Sultans  and  Ainlrs  of  the  Ciiagh.ttai  tribe*  assembled  for
conference  in  Labor.  Hypociisy  was  still  the  order  of  the
day,  and  Muhammad  Saltan  and  his  sons  fled  from  Labor  to
Multan,  vvhile  Mirza  Hiiida!  and  Mirza  Yadgar  Niiair  thought
it  advi«ar/le  to  proceed  to  Bhakkar  and  Tatta.  Mirza  Kamran

t M3.S.  fA,i  (B)  Olt**

S These  letters  give  the  date  9-17  H.

5 Jang  7id  MS.  (A)  omit*?  tnrtib.

* MS.  (B)  TiM-U  j

6 Shauisu-d-DIn  Muhammad  Atka  son  of  Mir  Yar  Mnhr.mmnd  of

Ohnzj.’i.  Sp''  A'in-i-.\kbari  (Bloohmann)  i,  [>.  3il  {'So.  15).

The  w._trd  Acka.  At^kii,  or  At/fJcd  is  a Tniki  word,  signifying  jirecepteur
inscitnter.r.  pere  de  Ltit  (Pavet  do  Courtcil’es  .

The  Wife  of  Shamsa-d-Din  was  appoiuled  anakuh  or  wet-nurse  to  Prince
A.kbar  at  AinurkOt.

* MS  i'Aj  omits  7 IISS.  (A)  (Bjre.id  aii-dtpo  jty  .

**  Fir  a fall  account  of  the  Line  of  Chagh.itai,  see  Jlfey  and  Elias  Tarii^-i-

iL  pp.  2s  et  seqq.  MS.  (B)  writes

[ 465  ]

ju’nyed  tliat  this  conference  luisflit  speedily  be  dissolved  so
that  he  niinlit  go  to  Kabul.  After  lunt:  consultation  Humayuii
sent  ilirza  Haidar  with  a lartre  party  who  had  accepted  service
in  Ka:d|niir,  to  that  di.^trict.  It  w.i-,  aerrecd  ^ that  Khwaja
Ki  ilan  Bet?  should  follow  ilirza  Haid.ir,  and  tiro  Iluniayiin
hii.-'oelf  al>n  should  piocet-d  Thither  afrer  tIu  criu.pn  .-r  i o'  Kashmir.

When  IMirza  Haidar  arrived  at  A.o '’'all' a.  ® ah:;;;  i.s  a well-
kanwu  phir'e,  he  entered  that,  conntrv  'virh  <he  ceeieu.rrence  of
ceitaiii  Kauhrnhhs  and  coni[nered  it;  and  on  the  I’fliid  of  Rajah
of  thi-.  same  year  he  gained  posses.sion  of  that  Coiint:  v.  Tvhwuoi
Kaiaii  IJeo'  had  gone  to  Sialkoc.  When  tidinats  reacl  td.  the  king'
t!  at  ^lii-  Idhan  iiad  crossed  the  rivet  at  Snltanptir  and  had  ariived
witiiiu  thirty  kre/;?  of  Labor.  Humayrm,  on  the  iir.-t  of  tlie  month
of  Rajah  in  the  aforesaid  year,  crossed  the  river  of  Labor,  and
IMirza  Kamran,  after  brcaklntr  his  soleiuu  vows,  agreed  for  certain
rea'on.s  to  accompany  Hntnayun  as  far  as  tim  iieighhnurhood  of
Ijahlra,  and  Khwaja  Kalan  Beg  ma.de  forced  rmiM’ites  from

Slalkot.  and  joined  Ilumayun’s  camp,  ilirza  Iv-anirfin  Too-ethc-r
With  ilirzd  "Askari.  .separating  = from  the  king,  pi.iceeilcd  in  eoin-
paiiy  with  Jvliwaja  Kaian  Beg  tiiward'  Kiihnl,  while  lluniavnn
proceeded  towards  .'^ind.  i\Lirza  ilunial,  and  idii'/.a  Ya'igar
X.isir  aKo,  after  aecoaipanying  him  for  a few  stage.',  left  him,
and  after  a few  da'-'.s  returned,  by  the  counsel  of*  Amir
Abed  Baqa.  On  the  banks  of  the  Indus  .such  great  scarcity

jirevrdled  in  the  camp  of  Humayun,  th;it  oin'  si/- ^ of  the

smaller  nullet  ° could  sometimes  m.t  be  bought  evmi  fm-  an
The  greater  part  of  the  army  jiei  I'lieil  owing-  to  this
sc.'iiciry.  while  otliers  died  from  vMiut  of  water,  till  at  hi't

H uuiavfni  Avith  a MiUill  nniuber  pa^>ed  on  to  tiiC  distiiets  oL'
■Taibaimlr,'  and  rlie  of  ^iarw ar,  wlieiH*  stJ'ais^'o-  incidL'iit-i

* MSS.  (A)  iDj  2

^ ! g\  _)  ( ]J)  siipjil^viri'.;  J*.

^ MS.  (1))  n-atj-,  ill  company  wirli.  ^ AJm-ii'  rwo  jnuiii  Is.

^ (jji !' >' i-t-j-r.'  ?i~'  'J  ill."  iM  r m 1 liiiiiiiataii!,  or  r.r  Kl'I',  t P.iii ; V(i!

namo.  In  a is  cuUl-'I

' rii»'  priipcr  ,1  v'(‘ra‘.^'i*  piir'  uf  rliis  LTrii-i  f>i\  "•  r'-r  of  }'<'1kv

siri',  till'  above  lejiresentd  an  crinaiut  riioi.L  «>i  pnte  repif^,h'' .1  hv  ch*-

! T)  1 H II }.

^ MS  (A  1.  “ < ):a!t  *t*‘^/*'  i ^iS.>  . \ j i i’>

356.

[ 466  ]

oocnrred.  After  andergoing  great  hardships  and  distress,  which
it  is  the  invariable  custom  of  the  Heavens  to  inflict,  he  betook
himself  to  ‘Iraq  and  having  obtained  reinforcements,  Shah
Tahmasp  gained  possession  of  Qandahar  and  Kabul,  and  collect-
ing a great  army  re-conquered  Hindustan.  This  exploit  will  be
described  in  its  proper  place  if  the  ilost  High  God  will  it  so.

ShIr  Khan  ibn  i H.asas  Sur

Whose  name  was  Farid  and  his  title  Shir  Khan,  ascended  the
throne  of  empire  under  the  above  title,  which  he  assumed.  The
357.  chronogram  Khnrdhi-i-Mulk-i-BiUi  I Avas  invented*  to  record  that
year.

Inasmuch  as  he,  by  favourable  circumstances  and  his  own
cleverness  and  bravery,  rose  from  the  rank  of  Beg  * to  royal  dignity,
it  is  essential  to  give  a brief  account  of  his  career.  The  father
of  Hasan  Sur,  Ibrahim  by  name,*  in  the  time  of  Sultan  Bnhlul,
came  to  Hindustan  from  * Roh,  by  which  is  meant  Afghanistan,
entered  the  service  of  Sultan  Buhlul,  and  was  stationed  in  the
vicinity  of  Hissar  Firuza  and  Karnul.  After  his  death  (his  son)
Hasan  became  a servant  of  Jamal  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  Sikandar,  and  was  granted  the  jaegir  of  the  pargana  of
Sahsaram  and  iQiawaspur,  dependencies  of  the  fortress  of  Eastern
Rohtas,®  He  had  five  hundred  cavalry  under  his  command.  In
consequence  of  the  unkindness  of  his  father,  and  the  jealous
enmity  of  his  brotbers,^  of  whom  there  were  seven,  he  left  his

1-  Tiiese  letters  give  the  date  947  H.  (1540  A.D.)  MS.  (B)  adds  the  date  in
figures.

* MSS.  (Aj  (B)  with  for  as  in  the  text.

5 The  text  reads  4^  jl  MS.  (B)  MS.  (A)

The  first  seems  the  only  intelligihle  reading  iu  the  seiise  in  which  it  is
transiat-'d.

* Omu  Mi3S.  (A)  (BV

6 The  text  and  both  MSS.  read  Ha  lah  it  should  be  'tjj  See

Firish’-a  Bo.  p.  412,  also  ilhiGtt  and  DoWiNon  JV,  50S.

® Jh-irqt.  Bohrasgarh  in  the  Shah.Vnftd  district  of  Bengal.  The

other  ':-s  is  iu  the  Fanjab.  See  Hunter  Imp.  tru-  , XII.  7^.

1 1 reals  baraiiardn-i-a‘ijuah  L'teriTto  brothers

MS.  fA.  13  A brothers  by  the  sauie  mother,  :.ut  a differeut

father  choru  ‘.ac  cor  tx'’  it  is  clear  that  Badao;  i i.iearif.  all  tne  oous  of
ijasai’  hj_  by  big  four  wives  { L-^ingass),  see  E and  i)  310.

[ 467  j

home  and  giving  up  the  service  of  Jamal  Khan  spent  some  time  in
Jaunpur  in  the  acquisition  of  science,  and  in  perfecting  himself  ^
in  knowledge,  until  he  had  read  the  Kajiyah  * with  its  commentary
and  other  epitomes,  besides  acquiring  by  heart  the  Giilistan,  Bus-
tan,  SiJcandarndma  and  other  works.  He  used  to  go  the  round  of
monasteries  and  colleges,  associating  with  the  learned  doctors  and
Shaikhs  of  that  country,  and  busied  himself  with  the  improvement
of  his  character.  After  some  time  he  was  reconciled  to  his  father,
and  was  entrusted  by  him  with  the  management  of  his  jaegtrs.  This
he  carried  out  with  equity  and  impartiality,  using  clever  devices  ®
for  the  punishment  of  rebels,  and  kept  them  in  check.*  Later
on  circumstances  again  led  to  an  estrangement  between  Farid  and
his  father,  and  going  to  Agra  with  his  own  brother, t he  elected  to
enter  the  service  of  Daulat  i^an,®  one  of  the  chief  commanders  i
of  Sultan  Ibrahim,  and  laid  a complaint  against  his  father  and
brothers®  before  the  Sultan.®  The  Sultan  however,  was  displeased  358
at  this  and  said.  This  is  a disgraceful  and  inhuman  state  of
things  that  a father  should  be  displeased  with  his  son  and  that  the
sou  should  complain  against  him.**  Upon  the  death  of  Hasan,
Daulat  Khan  made  a representation  to  the  Sultan,  and  obtained
his  desire  in  securing  those  farganas  for  Shir  Khan.  There  he
remained  for  some  time,**  and  eventually  was  led  by  the  enmity
of  his  brothers  to  enter  the  service  of  Bihar  Khan,  the  son  of
Darya  Khan  Luhani,'*  who  had  read  the  J^uthah  and  issued  the
sikka  in  his  own  name  in  Bihar,  and  had  assumed  the  title  of

1 There  is  a little  variation  in  the  reading  here:  MS.  (B)  reads

*7*"*^  J 1*^  MS.  (A)  also  reads  /uziii,  e.vcellenries-

s Al-Kafiyah  fl‘l  nahic.  A celebrated  wort  on  Arabic  grammar  by  Shaitt
JamMn-d  Din,  (Ibnu.l.Hajib) ; for  an  account  of  this  work  and  its  common,
tary,  see  H.  K.  No.  9707.

S MS  (A)  ‘-fljUxl.  * MS.  (A)

B Nizam  was  the  brother  of  Farid  Khan  bt  i he  same  mother,

« Daulat  Khiin  the  son  of  Bndhu,  was  a (■ommauucr  of  12/.)0O  horse  and  ii
great  favour  with  Sultan  Ibrahini  (D.  D.  It . o-l  J
7 MS.  I A)  omits  ’ 5*'’-

9 MSS.  (A;  (B  i biirply  ^

Read  hero  A-ih  jyl  Axij(  oiS.  iBt

ll(MSSj(.VB)  ^

'»  MSS,  A)  B).

[ ^68  ]

Sultan  Muhammad.  This  was  at  the  time  when  Sultan  Ibrahim
had  taken  the  tield  at  Panipatli.  and  Babar  Pad^iah  had  conquered
Hindustan  and  planted  1 the  banner  of  soveieignty.  Here  he
vras  well  received,  and  as  one  day.  when  on  a huntint^  expedition,  he
killed  a tiger  in  the  presence  of  Suituii  Muhammad,  the  title  of  .^lir
Khan  was  bestowed  upon  him  by  the  Sultan,  who  al.=o  appointed
him  to  he  tutor  ^ to  hi.s  son  Jalal  Khan.  After  some  time
Muhammad  Khan  Sfir,  governor  of  the  couiitry  of  Chaund,  made  an
attempt  to  turn  Sultan  Muhammad  agaitist  t-hir  Ivhan.  with  the
object  of  advancing  the  interest  of  hi>  bi’others,  and  having  suc-
ceeded in  gettiii"  an  order  from  Sultan  3Iuhanimad  that  the
brothers  were  to  hare  a share  in  the  nsaiian-emeut  of  thejpa/vyiiiia.q
sent  Suleiman,  son  of  Hasan  Siir  who  has  been  mentioned,  accotn-
panied  bv  one  of  his  servants  named  ^adi  to  Khawaspiir,  and
Bhaka  the  servant  of  .;lhit  Kiian  who  was  known  as  the  father  of
Kliawas  Khan  engaged  in  battle  with  Suleiman  and  was  killed.
The  reniaiuder  Hed.  and  came  to  .^^lir  Khan  at  Sah.saram.  Shir
Khan  had  no  h.'nger  the  power  to  cope  with  iMubainmad  Khan,
nor  tlie  inclination  to  serve  Sultan  Muhammad,  he  accordingly
abandoned  his  position  and  jaeijir,  and  having  no  other  resource
betook  iiiniself  to  Sultan  Junaid  Birlas,  who  was  holding  the
Governmoii-t  of  Karra  and  olaiiikpur  on  beliulf  of  Bahar  Padih^h.

359.  He  reniained  in  iii'  .-'Crv  ice,  ancl  after  presenting  many  valuable
offerings,  obtained  a fully  (•puijiiietl  army  as  reinfoieeuient  from
Sultan  Junaid,  and  fought  with  Muhammail  lyhaii,  wn 'ted  from
him  the  ^lanjiinas  of  Chaund  and  other  /'arijnun^.  and  took  posses-
sion of  tiietu.  iluhammad  Khan  tied,  and  took  reluge  in  the  fortress
of  Kolitas  Shir  Khan,  having  wreaked  his  veuge.iuce  on  his
brothers,  made  apologetic  overtures  to  Muhammad  Khan,  addre.ss-
ing  him  b}'  the  title  of  uncle ; having  thu.s  earned  his  gratitude  he
handed  over^  the  pun/unas  he  In.dd  as  jai'ijir  to  him  on  the  same
footing  as  formerly',  and  leaving  Xi'/ani  his  full  brother  in  charge

i MP.  f.CJreatis  tWiAf  f,,r

J jjJbl  tliic-  is  Turki,  Iti  irs  Avab’ciTerl  it  becomes

but  the  ui'tor  is  the  correct  ortKoi^nipiiy.  Afu  U^h  Ktcrally  aiguilles  the

relationaliip  of  au  ala  or  father.

According  to  M.  P.ivet  de  Comtedle  it  sitrnihes  ” Paten. ite  : nom  d’ane
dignity  daus  ie  Turko-stinet  le  Khariour,  chef  d»'  cril)u  : qui  yleve  uae  personne*

S IIS.  (A)  writes  MS  (B)  omits

[ 469  ]

of  t}ie  jaegir,  went  again  to  Sultan  Juuaid,  wliom  lie  found  just
starting  to  pay  bis  respects  to  Babar  Pad^ali.  Taking  Shir
Khan  with  him,  Janaid  enrolled  him  among  the  servants  and  well-
wishers  of  the  king’s  court.  He  accompanied  Babar  on  the  ex-
pedition to  Clianderi.  In  accordance  with  Mughul  habits  and
customs,  and  owing  to  the  carelessness  of  the  king  in  his  manage-
ment of  the  affairs  of  State,  and  the  venality  of  the  revenue-
officers,  and  the  utter  disoi-der  into  which  the  affairs  of  the  people
had  fallen,  matters  came  to  such  a pass  tliai  if  any  person  ^ had
an  object  in  view,  he  could  quickly  bring  it  to  pass.^  One  day  Babar
on  the  occasion  of  a banquet,  observed  him  behave  iu  a way  which
deserved  the  royal  censure,®  and  demanded  the  punishment  of
Shir  Khan.  Those  who  were  present  at  the  banquet  related  the
particulars  of  his  independence  and  arrogant  assumption,  not
omitting  to  mention  some  of  his  double-dealings.  Shir  Khan
accordingly  became  apprehensive  of  danger,  and  fled  from  the
king’s  camp  to  his  pa  ?■</'(  a us,  whence  he  wrote  a lertt-r  couched
in  apologetic  terms  and  sent  it  to  Sultan  Junaid,  advancing
as  a pretext  to  cover  his  return,'*  that  since  Muhammad
Kban  was  led  by  feelings  of  hostility  against  him  to  induce
Sultan  ifuljammad  to  send  = an  army  against  .^lir  Khan’s
puryunus  because  of  his  being  iu  service  with  the  Mughuls,  and  as
he  could  not  easily  and  quickly  ® obtain  leave  of  absence  from
Babar,  he  had  accordingly  taken  this  liberty  and  had  at  all  hazards
determined  to  rejoin  those  who  wished  well  to  the  Sultan,
Thence  he  proceeded  to  Sultan  Muhammad,  where  ho  was  honoured
by  increased  confidence  and  by  suitable  re-wards,  and  was  once
more  installed  as  custodian  of  his  younger  son  Jalfd  Khan,  whose
■whole  affairs  he  took  under  his  own  management  After  the
death  of  Sultan  Muhammad,  he  obtained  absolute  control  of  ■*'he
whole  countiy  of  Bihar  and  its  dependencies.

He  entered  into  a compact  of  friendship  with  Makhdnm
‘Alam,  the  governor  of  Hajipur,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Wall

t MS.  (A)  supplie®

^ MS.S.  (.A)  (B)  siipplv  J after
8 SIS.  (A)  reads  for  te^t

^ SIS.  (A)  has  with  no  dots-

® Omit  before  SISS,  ^A)  (Bj

^ SIS.  (A)  The  ce^c  is  correct-

360.

[ 470  ]

of  Bangala,  wbo  despatclied  an  Amir  named  Qutb  Kban  to  under-
take the  overthrow  of  Makhdnm  ‘Alam.  Shir  Khan  marched  to
the  aid  of  Makhdnm  ‘Alam,  and  ^ after  a fierce  battle  put  Qutb
Khan  to  death,  taking  as  spoil  elephants  and  treasure  and  many
followers.  Jalal  Khan  and  his  tribe,  who  are  Luhanis,*  in  spite
of  Shir  Khan,  made  over  Bihar  to  the  ruler  of  Bangala  and
elected  to  serve  under  him,  and  leaving  Shir  Khan  to  his  fate,
took  care  to  secure  their  own  safety.

The  Bangalis  in  the  first  instance  sent  Ibrahim  Khan,  the  son
of  the  Qutb  Khan  above  mentioned,  against  Shir  Khan  to  wreak
vengeance  upon  him.  Shir  Khan  used  daily  to  fight  with  them
from  within  the  fort,  but  since  the  BangMis  received  large  rein-
forcements, and  no  way  of  retreat  remained  open  to  him,  he
yielded  to  necessity  and  fought  a battle  with  them  in  the  open  ’
in  which  he  gained  the  day.  Ibrahim  Khan  also  seeing  what  had
occurred  went  and  joined  his  father,  and  Shir  i^an  seized  the
whole  of  the  camp  of  the  Bangalis  * with  their  elephants  and
artillery,  acquiring  thereby  great  renown,  so  that  he  established  a
lasting  and  undivided  control  over  the  country  of  Bihar  and
raised  himself  to  the  dignity  of  a Sultan.  He  next  wrested  the
fortress  of  Chinar  together  with  its  vast  treasures  from  the  sons
of  [Jamal  Khan  Saiang-Khani  Taj  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
361.  Sultan  Ibrahim  Lodi,  who  some  years  before  had  regained  possess-
ion of  it,  and  took  in  man-iage  his  wealthy  and  beautiful  wife  who
had  vast  stores  of  treasure.  This  fact  also  enhanced  his  grandeur
and  dignity,  so  that  the  desire  for  sovereignty  daily  gained  more
ascendency  over  his  mind,  till  at  last  certain  powerful  Amirs  of
the  Afghan  Lodi  faction  summoned  from  Cbitor  Sultan  Mahmud,
son  of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  .who,  after  raising  Hasan  Khan
Miwati  and  Rana  Saiika  to  royal  power,  had  induced  him  to
fight  with  Babar  Padshah,  and  subsequently  to  his  defeat  i had
remained  in  the  fortress  of  Cbitor,  and  seated  him  upon  the
throne  in  Patna.*  He  accordingly  came  with  a vast  army  and
invaded  the  country  of  Biiiar,  and  wresting  it  from  Shir  Khan
took  possession  of  it.  Shir  Kban  was  perforce  compelled  to

I MS.  (A)  supplies  j-  * MSS.  (A)  (B)

S MS.  (B)  reads  Sy**'*^  but  the  textual  reading  i.s  correct.

* MS.  (.A)  6 MS.  (B)  « Not  in  MS.  (A)-

1 MS.  (A)  Sii  jt  Aju.  8 MS.  (A)  omits  OjJIj jj.

[ 471  ]

submit,  and  entered  his  service,  and  taking  leave  came  to
Sahsaram.  Sultan  Mahmud  passing  by  Sahsaram,  after  writing
and  making  over  to  Shir  Khan  an  agreement  relating  to  Bihar,t
thereby  raising  his  hopes,  despatched  him  to  attempt  the
conquest  of  Jaunpur  and  to  engage  in  war  with  the  Amirs  of
Huniayun  Padshah.  He  thus  brought  tlie  whole  of  that  province
as  far  as  Lakiinau  into  his  own^  power.  The  Amirs  of  Humayun
Padshah  could  not  stand  against  (^ir  Khan),  and  proceeding  to
Kalinjar  * gave  in  tlieir  allegiance  to  him.  Humayun  marched
to  oppose  Sultan  Mahmud,  and  Baban  and  Bayazid,*  who  were
with  him. ^ When  the  two  armies  met  Shir  Khan,  who  had  stood
aloof  from  Sultan  Mahmud  for  some  days,  again  joined  his  force,
and  sent  a message  to  Mir  Hindu  Beg  Quchin,  Commander'in-chief
of  the  Mughul  army,  saying  that  on  the  day  of  the  battle  he  would
make  a flank  movement  and  stand  on  one  side.  Ton  and  the  362.
Afghans,  said  he,  well  know  how  utterly  I abhor  and  detest  the
command  of  Saltan  Mahmud  and  Bahan  ® and  Bayazid.

Ferse.

If  I committed  a fault,  I have  at  all  events  made  my  road
clear.

Eventually  he  did  as  he  had  arranged,  and  Sultan  Maljmud
and  Baban  ^ being  defeated  retired  to  the  country  of  Patna,  and
made  no  further  attempts  to  fight,  till  in  the  year  949  H.  (1542
A.  D.)  iu  the  country  of  Orissa*  he  encamped  on  the  frontiers
of  the  desert  of  non-existence,  and  having  gone  to  the  appointed
goal  remained  at  rest.  Humayun  Padshah  [after  this  victory]*
sent  Mir  Hindu  Beg  as  his  agent  to  Shir  Khan  with  a demand  to
him  to  yield  up  the  fort  of  Chinar.  He,  however,  made  some  lame
excuse,  so  the  king  ordered  several  noted  Amirs  to  precede  him

1 This  agreement  was  to  the  effect  that  should  Shir  reader  effectaal

assistance  to  Saltan  Mohammad  Lodi  in  recovering  Jannpur,  the  country  of
Bihar  should  be  restored  to  him  as  a reward  for  his  services.  (Firishta).

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  » MS.  (B)

* MSS.  (Aj  (B)  read  Uj  j.  Firishta  says  Baban  and  Bayazid.

6 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  The  te.vt  is  incorrect.

« MS.  (A)

1 MS.  (A).  8 The  text  reads  wrongly

* Nat  in  MSS.  (A)  (B)  which  write  also

[ 472  ]

and  lay  siege  to  that  fortress,  himself  also  ^ preparing  to  follow
them  In  the  meanwhile  Shir  Klirui  wrote  a petition  in  whieli  he
pointed  out  his  own  sincerity  and  the  favour  shewn  him  by  Bahai;,
and  recounted  the  deserving  nature  of  his  former  services,  more
specially  his  opposition  to  Baban  and  Bayazid,  Thi.^  ptrition  he
sent  by  the  hand  of  Qnto  Ivlidn.  his  elde.st  son.  toyether  with  a
lai’oe  foiee.  to  Humayiin  Padshah.  He  sent  uho  with  Quth  Ivhftu.
‘Isa  Ehan  Hajjab,who  was  hisra/ai  with  thepotvois  of  a ooc>--.  and
he  rieeing  from  Gujrat  joined  his  father  in  Bacgala  V.'i.-  n Iiu;.ia.o-
im  Padshah  altered  his  cutirse  toward.s  Gujiat,  »^iir  Kfilii  hhn-oof
had  risen  to  great  dignity  and  power,  so  that  he  engiic>-d  in  t peu
battle  vdth  Humaytiu  on  two  occasions,  and  gained  the  day.  as  Ims
already  been  mentioned.  Shir  Shah  in  the  early  part  of  the  year
of  his  acce-.siui:  laid  waste  the  aucient  city  of  Qannauj.  and  mov-
ing it  from  its  original  site  re-established  it  on  the  bunks  of  the
liver  Garnge.s  ; it  is  now  known  as  i^irgarh.  In  the  same  manner
he  destroyed  the  fortress  of  Shanisabad  and  removed  it  to  another
363.  pla-ce-  ctillmg  it  by  the  name  of  Piusiilpur,  Now,  however,  at  the
date  of  writing,  it  has  been  repopulated  in  its  old  position.  And
when  he  arrived  at  old  Dihli,  which  was  founded  by  Sultan  ‘Alau-
d-Din,  he  destroyed  that  also,  and  established  between  the  fortres.s
of  Dinpaiiah,  which  Muhammad  Humayun  Pad^iMr  constructed,
and*  Firozabad,  an  extensive  city,  and  built  round ^ that  fort
a rampart  of  stone  and  mortar,  having  an  extent  of  three  krohs.
(In  bis  arrival  at  Sultanpur  by  continuous  marches,  the  bro-
thers of  Humayun  Padshah  and  the  Chaghatai  Amirs  quarrelled,
and  eucli  took  his  own  way  as  has  been  described,  and  .^ir  Shah
hiuiselt,*  nor  giving  them  time  to  reassemble,  came  up  in  pursuit.
In  this  year  he  is.sned  a public  proclamation  that  from  the  country
of  Bangahi  as  far  as  western  Rohtas,  which  is  a four  months’
journey,  and  also  from  Agra  to  IVlandu,^  at  every  kioh  a sarai
( rest-house  1 and  a mosque,  and  a well  built  of  burned  bricks  was
to  ba  e.stablished  and  a Muazzin'^  and  an  Imam. t A Musulman

I MS.  (A)  reads  ^ * MS.  (A)  supplies  J-

5 MS.  (-S  i reads  here  L)  * MS.  (A)  supplies

6 MSS.  (Aj  (B)  jAbo.

• The  oiiicer  whose  duty  it  is  to  call  the  A?an  or  call  to  prayer  before  each
of  the  stated  times  of  prayer.  See  Hughes’  Diet,  vf  hliiin,  Aziiu.

' The  priest  who  lends  the  prayers.

[ 473  ]

and  a Hindu  were  also  appointed  to  superintend  the  supply
of  water  for  each.  A refreshment  house  was  also  kept  stocked
for  the  use  of  strangers  and  poor  wayfarers.  On  both  sides  of
the  road  also,  larsje  and  lofty  trees  were  planted  in  avenues,  so
that  all  travellers  might  go  along  in  the  shade  of  them.  Traces  of
these  still  remain  in  most  places  up  to  the  present  time,  though
tifty-tvvo  years  have  passed  since  then.  In  his  reign  justice  was
so  widespread  that  if,  for  example,  an  old  man  holding  a golden
tray  in  his  hand  had  lain  down  to  sleep  whenever  he  felt  inclined,
no  thief  or  ruffian  would  have  dared  to  take  it  away  from  him.

Thanks  be  to  God  tiiat  the  writer  of  this  MuntaJ^ah  was  born
in  the  reign  of  so  just  a king;  to  use  the  words  of  the  Prophet,
may  the  peace  and  blessiny  of  God  be  upon  himj  I was  born  in  the
reign  of  tlie  just  king,  on  the  seventeenth  of  Kabi‘u-s-sani  * in
the  year  947  H.  (lolO  A.D.)  but,  in  spite  of  this,  would  that  the
name  of  that  hour  and  that,  day  had  been  erased  from  the  chroni-
cles of  years  and  mouths,  so  that  I had  not  been  obliged  to  leave
the  private  chamber  of  non-existence,  wh.ere  I dwelt  with  the
inhabitants  of  the  world  of  dreams  and  fancies,  and  to  place  my
foot  into  this  world  of  imaginary  existence,  and  to  suffer  ® so  many
scars  of  various  misfortunes,  all  of  which  are  branded  with  the
stamp,  He  loses  this  tcorld  and  the  next,  the  context  is  well-known.

TVr.se.

My  body  bears  a robe,  surpassing  splendid
Mj-  hopes  for  this  world  and  the  next  are  ended.

Rubai.

I came  yesterday,  and  have  accomplished  nothing,

To-day  my  efforts  liave  availed  me  nothing,

To-morrow  I depart,  having  learned  no  single  secret ;

Better  had  been  non-existence  than  this  v'ain  superfluity.

And  when  one  looks  into  the  matter  carefully  one  becomes
awai’e  that  seeing  that  the  Lord,  the  repository  of  the  seal  of  the
prophetic  office,  upon  him  and  his  family  may  the  peace  and  bless-
ing of  God  rest,  says  ; * “ Would  that  the  Loi-d  of  Muhammad  had  not

1 MSS.  (A)  (B).

2 2l8t  Augnet,  154.0,

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  •hjLi  for

* MSS.  (A)  IB)  omit  writing  simple

60

[ 474  ]

created  Muhammad,”  it  is  not  in  the  power  of  a weak-minded
mortal  (like  myself)  to  draw  a single  breath  in  this  valley  (of
desolation),  and  one  fears  lest  such  an  attempt  should  lead  to
audacity  in  the  way  of  religion,  and  lest  its  fruit  should  be  ever-
lasting destrnction.  I entreat  parclmt  from  God  of  all  that  is  an
ahomination  to  Him.

What  power  has  the  clay  that  it  should  say  to  the  potter

Why  dost  thou  make  me  and  why  dost  thou  break  med

After  that  Shir  Shah  reached  the  hill-country  of  Balnat.  Ha
built  there  the  fortress  of  Rohtas  as  a protection  for  the  army  of
Hindustan  against  the  Mughul  forces.  Then  he  appointed  lOiawass
Ivhan  to  undertake  the  pursnit,  and  returned.  While  on  the
march  he  heard  that  a commander  named  Khizr  Khan  Sarak  had
become  infatuated  with  rebellious  notions  and  was  behaving  as
though  he  were  a Sultan.  Shir  ^ah*  accm-dinglv  bent  his  course
365.  thither,  and  Khizr  Khan  hastening  to  encounter  him  was  taken
prisoner.  Shir  Shah  tock  possession  of  that  country  and  conferred
it  by  way  of  jaegir  upon  several  of  his  Amirs,  and  appointed  to
the  superintendence  of  thfe  fort  of  Rohtas,®  Qazi  Fazilat  the  QazI
of  the  army,  who  was  popularly  known  by  the  more  appropriate
title  of  Qazi  Fazihat.*

In  the  year  948  H.  he  came®  to  Agra,  and  in  the  year  949  H.
proceeded  to  Gwaliar  with  the  intention  of  conquering  ilalwa.®
Abiil  Qiisini  Beg,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Humayiin  Pad.Giah  who  had
entienched  himself  in  that  fortress,  c.ame  in  and  had  an  interview

1 Cf.  fsaiitli  x\v.  9 : Romans  ix.  21.  So  also  Omar  Khayyam

vTjt

*3 ^ j|  ^ ^

I*— I.  ■

Thou  formedst  me  of  clay.  What  help  have  I !

Thou  didst  this  garment  weave.  What  help  have  I !

Whatever  for  good  or  ill  from  me  proceeds

Is  thy  pvescriptioti,  Thine!  What  help  have  I '

2 MS.  (A).

3 Omit  MS.  (A).

4 t'azif  nt  means  excoMence.  Fazihat  means  ignominy.

MSS.  (A)  (B)  <^1  Omit  MSS  (A)  -B).

[ 475  ]

with  him,  giving  up  the  keys  of  tlie  fort.  Mallu  IQian  the  govex’-
nox'  of  Malwa,  who  ^ was  one  of  the  slaves  of  the  Khilji  Sultans,
and  held  absolute  and  unlimited  power  in  that  province,  offered
his  services  to  Shir  Shah,  and  was  honoui’ed  by  s'plendid  rewards.

Shir  Shah  also  had  tents  pitched  for  him  close  to  his  own  tent,
and  prepared  a hundred  and  one  horses  and  other  apparatus  of
pomp  and  dignity  in  his  honour.  In  the  meantime  a suspicion
arose  in  Mallu  Khan’s  mind,  and  one  night  he  tore  his  tent  and
escaped  alone  after  the  accustomed  manner  of  slaves,  and  fled.

Shir  Khan  wrote  the  following ; —

Kerse.

Toil  see  how  the  chicken-hearted  slave  Mallu  has  treated  me
It  is  a saying  of  ilnstafa  *'  There  can  be  no  wood  in  a slave.”

Shir  Khan  then  nominated  Haji  Khan  Snltani  to  the  subjuga-
tion of  the  province  of  Malwa,  and  Sazawal  Khan*  to- adminis-
ter the  affairs  of  the  district,  of  Sawas  ; ® Mallii  Khan  fought
with  Haji  Kban  and  Sazawal  Khan,  and  suffered  a defeat  fi-om
which  he  never  recovered.

Evei'y  weakling  who  fights  with  one  stronger  Th.mi  he,

Gets  such  a fall  that  he  can  never  again  rise.

And  Kban-i-Kbanan  Sarwani,*  who  was  the  ® permanent  Gov-
ernor of  the  fort  of  Ranthanbur,  yielded  up  that  fortress  to  Shir  366
Shah  and  came  with  his  family  to  the  township  of  Basawar.  It  is
said  that  some  one  introduced  some  poison  into  his  cup.  His  tomb
is  in  the  snbui'bs  of  that  township,  in  a pleasant  spot,  and  is  well-
known  at  this  time :

Qnafrnin.

Death,  thou  hast  desolated  hundreds  of  homes,

In  the  kingdom  of  existence  thou  makest  life  thy  spoil.

No  jewel  beyond  price  has  come  into  the  world.

But  thou  has  borne  it  away  and  hidden  it  beneath  the  dust.

In  tliis  v’ear  Shir  Shah » led  an  army  against  the  fortress  of
Rai  Sen  and  besieged  it.  because  Puranmal  the  sou  of  Silhadi,  one
of  the  Chief.s  of  Rai  Sen,  had  attacked  the  city  of  Chauderi,  which

1 Supply  ^ MSS.  (A)(B).  2 MS.  (-4)  supplies  tj.

9 MSS.  (A)  (B).  * MS.  (-4)

9 Umit  W before  MSS.  (A)  (B).  « MS  (A).

[ ^7(3  ]

is  one,’of  the  chief  cities  of  Hindustan,  and  had  put  its  inhabitants
to  death,  and  was  keeping  two  thousand  i women,  Hindus  and
Muslims,  in  his  own  hartm.  The  following  couplet  was  found  to
record  the  date  of  this  siege  •

Qiyam-i-bargah  hashad  mtihdrak.

May  the  stability  of  the  court  be  fortunate.*

After  prolonging  the  siege  for  some  time  Shir  Shah  entered  into
a compact,  and  succeeded  in  dislodging  Puranmal  3 by  the  inter-
vention of  Shahzada  ‘Adil  Khiin  and  Qutb  Khan  Naib,*  and
assigned  him  a place  in  his  own  camp,  bestowing  upon  him  a
hundred  horses,  with  a robe  of  honour  and  a sura  of  gold;  and
eventually  by  the  advice  of  Mir  Saiy^’id  Rafi‘u-d-Din  Safawi  of
which  was  given  the  title  of  Mnqaddasa  (Sacred)  by  Sikandar
Lodi,  broke  his  word,  and  caused  Fhranraal  together  with  his
family  and  children  to  be  trampled  to  death  by  elepliants.  Not  a
single  man  of  those  turbulent  and  rebellious  Hindus,  who  were
367.  near  ten  thousand  souls,  escaped  in  that  battle.  Their  women  and
men  either®  became  food  for  the  edge  (jauhar)  of  the  sword  or
fed  the  flames  of  the  fire  called  jithar,  a well-known  word  in  the
Hindi  language.  This  chronicle,  from  that  day  forwai’d,  remained
as  a record  upon  the  pages  of  Time,  mail  he  merciful  to  its  author.
This  event  occurred  in  the  year  950  H.,  and  ’ after  some  time  he
girded  up  his  loins  for  a holy  war  to  nproot  the  pestilent  infidels  of
the  country  of  iliirwar,  and  led  a vast  ® array  against  Rai  Maldeo  *

i M.5.  (A)  omits

S letters  give  the  date  949  H.  MS,  (B)  gives

this  date  in  figures,

* its,  (A)  reads  Deorlmal  and  omits

* MSS  (A)  (B)  omit

i Died  at  Agra  in  954  or  957,  see  Ain-i-AIcbarl  (B).  I,  523.

The  text  reads  erroneously  Ilchi’-e.  MS.  f A)  reads  Inf:,  and

MS.  (B;  reads  fchl.  We  should  read  Iji,  in  the  sense  given  m

the  translation.  Ij  is  stated  by  Yiqut  to  be  a city  rich  in  gardens  and  other
advantages.  The  Persians  he  says  pronounce  it  >-Sb|rj:  Buidan,

1,  p.  415).

» MSS.  (.4)  fB)  b.  7 MSS  (A)  CB)  >

S Lit.  exceeding  i«  its  numbers  the  ants  and  locusts.

* MS  (Bj  oinita  tsh'

the  leader  of  the  Rais  of  Hindastau  who  held  sway  over  the
country  of  ifagor  and  Jannpur,  and  was  a powerful  opponent  of
tlie  Muslims  ; and  inasmuch,  as  one  of  the  maxims  of  Shir  Shah,
from  which  he  never  departed,*  was  to  throw  up  an  entrenched
position  I'ouiid  his  army,  no  matter  how  few  the  enemy  might
be,  as  soon  as  Maldeo  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of  Ajmir  with
fifty  Thousand  picked  eavairy  trained  and  experienced  in  war,
intent  upon  slayititr  or  being  slain,  and  confronted  ^lir  Shah,
he,  findi’.ig  it  impossible  to  make  trendies  and  rampart.'  becau.se
of  the  sandy  soil,  held  a conference  with  his  expeiieiiced
and  veteran  Amirs.  No  one  of  them  however  could  di-vise  a
way  to  effect  that  object.  Suddenly  Mahmud  Khan,  tlie  son  of
‘Adil  Khan,*  who  was  arramlson  to  .^lir  Shiili,  notwithstanding  his
youth  said,  “ Let  .^lah  ‘Alam  order  the  haiijnra.f  (yiain  sellers)  of
the  army  to  fill  sacks  with  sand  and  arrange  them  round*  the
aimy.”  This  idea  ^ highly  commended  itself  to  Sliir  i^iah,  and
he  immedi.arelv  placed  his  turban  upon  the  iad’.s  head,  and
bestowed  upon  him  in  perpetuity  the  treaty  tei'ritorie.s.

In  the  end  Heaven  did  not  favour  his  dc.'igns,  and  Hlarn  ;^ia!i  *
after  reaching  kinulv  power,  made  this  unlortunute  boy  the  very
first  of  hi'  family,  iieits  to  the  kii,g.h>m,  t'.  hate  Li'  '..lUie  blotted
out  from  rile'  p.ige  of  existence,  -ii  accordance  w itii  t!;e  saying
Al  niulk’i  -,1  (The  kingdom  has  no  heir),  ami  that  treatment

which  he  nit  ted  out  to  them,  viiidietive  Time  measured  again  to
his  posterity.

TT.-.v

If  thou  hast  done  evil  renip.iu  n.it  '••■.lire  from  cakuuuy,

For  the  nature  of  things  brings  about  requital.

In  short  .Shir  Shah,  who  ' would  not  give  the  head  of  one  of
his  soldiers  for  a kingdom,  and  to  whom  the  Afghans  were  ^ far
dearer  tbau  can  be  expre.ssed,  was  by  no  means  willing  to  invnho

I MS.  I'ii)  oinlt.ii  1—

S MS  (Ai  rea'la  ''*S  (Ii  v:,q

t M.S  f.\;  reads  for  J
* MS.  (A)  reads  j\  gylj  (oot  omitting
^ MSS.  (.\)  (BJ  read  tbi  ^

1 MS  (A)  omits  8 MSS.  (A)  (Bi  read  Ay

368.

L -*78  ]

his  arraj  in  calamity  witli  the  ignorant,  boar  natured,  currish  i
Hindus.  Accordingly  he  devised  an  artifice,  and  wrote  fictitious
letters  purporting  to  emanate  from  the  generals  of  Maldeo’s  army,
to  him.self,  couched  in  enigmatical  languagp,^  the  substance  of
them  being  that  there  would  be  no  need  for  the  king  in  person
to  superintend  the  fighting,  when  the  armies  were  drawn  up
for  battle,  because  they  themselves  would  take  Maldeo  alive  and
deliver  him  up,  upon  the  condition  that  such  and  such  places
should  be  given  them  as  a reward.  Having  done  this  he  so
arranged  that  those  letters  fell  into  Maldeo’s  hands,  with  the
i-esnlt  that  Maldeo  became  utterly  suspicions  of  all  his  general.s,^
and,  in  the  dead  of  night  * fled  alone  without  looking  behind  him  ;
and,  notwithstanding  that  his  generals  denied  their  complicity
wiih  oath  upon  oath,  .sajing  that  they  never  could  have  been
guilty  of  such  dastardly  conduct, ^ and  that  this  was  all  the
handiwork  of  Shir  Shah  in  his  desire  to  raise  dissensions  ® between
them,  it  was  of  no  use,  and  had  no  effect  upon  Maldeo’s  mind.
Kaiihaij’a.7  who  was  his  minister  and  agent,  abused  Maldeo  iu
violent  terms,  and  taking  four  thousand  resolute  men  devoted
to  death,  or  even  more  than  this  number,  came  down  upon  the
army  of  Shir  Shah,  with  the  intention  of  surpiusing  them  by
night,  but  missed  his  way,  and  after  marcldrig  the  whole  night,
when  morning  broke  became  aware  that  he  had  left  the  camp
far  in  rear. s After  striving  to  the  utmost  of  their  powers,  when
they  had  abandoned  all  hope  of  life,  at  the  very  moment  when
the  army  of  Shir  Shah  came  in  sight,  as  a result  of  their  own
stupidity,  by  the  good  luck  of  Shir  Shah  or  by  the  superior  good
foi  tune  of  Lsldtn,  the  infidels  in  a body  dismounted  from  their
hoises,  and  renewing  their  vows  of  singleness  of  put  pose  and

I jUL,  n fo.jfnote  variant  fonnd  in  MS.  fB  <

£ MS.  ' }};  oinitd  MSS.  fA)  fB).

^ ^ 3IS3  A I (B).  3 MS.  fA)  omits  J

^ L'’-  lo  cast  the  srone  of  discord  in  our  midst.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read

lx  M reads  ^ ^ (Text).

' Tj  is  name  i-  udven  on  tne  uuiin.iity  oi  Fiii.^liUi  U'o.  text.  p.  427).  Our
’-‘x:  a!'(i  liof.  M''^S.  ;A}  B;  reau  (i.-r,,-  Wfion  not  appear  tfi'C

p ’ssii):^,  xoi  re  M Bngg’js  IT.  p.  122.  culls  luni  Kooiibha.  I’Canhaiya  is  a proper
Huriie  ani'iitg  Jliudu.q.  and  is  one  of  the  names  of  Kri^na.

^ Firi^i.i  nn-’rt'ly  says  they  missed  their  w.iy  and  reached  the  enemy’s
camp  ill  d'>Tj.ghr  (Bo.  text,  luc  iitj.

[ 479  ]

mutual  assistance,  binding  i their  sashes  together  and  joining  369.
hand  to  hand,  attacked  the  army  of  the  Afghans  with  their  short
spears,  which  they  call  Barchha,^  and  with  their  swords.  Shir
Shah  had  given  orders  saying  that  if  any  man  ventured  to  fight
with  the  sword  with  this  swinish  hor*de,  his  blood  would  be  on
his  own  head.  He  accordingly  ordered  the  elephant  troops  to
advance  and  ® trample  them  down.  In  rear  of  the  elephants,  the
artillery  and  archers  gave  them  a taste  of  the  bowstring,  and
admitting  them  to  the  banquet  of  death,  gave  them  the  hospitality
of  the  land  of  extinction.  The  bright  surface  of  the  world's
page  was  polished,  and  freed  from  the  dark  lines  of  the  land  of
infidels,  and  not  one  of  the  infidels  got  off  with  his  life,  nor  was
a single  IMuslim  lost  in  that  encounter.*  A poet  of  Basawar,
whose  takhtillus  is  Faizl,^  wrote  this  verse  on  that  subject.

Suddenly  check  to  the  king  happened  to  Maldeo
It  would  have  been  checkmate  had  not  the  piece
Kanyii  protected  him  as  ‘Ira.^

It  is  said  that  after  this  victory  Shir  Shah  on  several  occasions
used  to  say,  “ I have  sold  the  empire  of  the  whole  of  Hindustan  *
for  a handful  of  millet.”  Retmming  thence  and  making  over
tlie  foi  tress  of  Rantanbhur  to  his  son  ‘Adil  Khan,  he  gave  him
leave  for  a few  days  to  visit  the  fort,  and  put  tlie  garrison  in
order,  when  he  was  to  follow  his  father.  The  writei'  has  Imard
from  a ti’ustworthy  source,  that  one  day  while  on  that  expedition
?tlir  Saij'vid  Rafi'u-d-Diii,  the  renowned  and  unique  traditionist
now  pardoned  and  absolved,  who  has  been  already  mentioned,  said
to  Shir  Shah,  “All  niy  ancestors  were®  authors  of  authorita-
tive compositions  and  used  to  give  instructions  in  the  two  sacred

t The  text  reads  but  we  should  re.ad  bdfta

2 Tliifclilid.  A.  Hindi  word  meaning  a small  spe.tr.

= MSS.  (A)  (B)  read
* 31S.  (M)  writes  jteedlesslv

^ S'‘e  Ain-i-.H-huri  ( B)  I 49^,  for  a full  account  of  the  poet  Fai?i.

- ! reufl  hi!  > bdf  j.  s.o  7.  ■■■Vir-  474.

' jA-'  V[SS  (A'  'B;  i ! oh at  ches«  which  is

ini , rpo-o.l  I, -rt.-ion  , king  ami  K.ook  n pi-o.-oi”.  '1  i Wing  froui  c!!e‘'k  iiy

t’.s.  Ko.'k.  .1  K .t,  xiii  p I'.i,  Bi.iNil.  oil  rhi-  I’ci-iimi  uaiiie  f 5^.

» MS  (A  ^tc  )>Ii'  - ‘j

M.'-  > \ ' J

L J

370.

cities. ‘ I alone  of  all  my  family  have  become  so  helpless  and
powerless  that  in  search  of  the  gold  and  fame  of  Hindustan  I
am  blindly  wandering.  I beseech  your  Majesty  to  grant  me
permission  to  depart,  so  that  at  the  end  of  my  days  T may  be
able  to  relight  the  lamp  of  those  venerable  ancestors  of  mine.

Seeing  that  I was  not  worthy  to  succeed  those  mighty
intellects  who  have  gone  before  me.

My  hand  3 have  spoiled  many  books,  my  ignorance  has  wasted
many  parchments.*

Shir  Shah  answered,  I should  have  no  objections  to  make  on
this  score,  were  it  not  that  I have  kept  you  with  me  for  a .special
object,  which  is  this  that  I intend  in  a short  time  by  the  helo  ot
God,  Ee  is  blessed  and  exalted,^  to  clear  the  heari-delightinsr
plain  of  Hindustan  of  the  thorns  of  infidtdity,  and  shortly  to  re-
duce the  few  forts  which  remain,  with  very  little  difficulty,  and
passing  alons'  tlie  seashore  to  fight  with*  those  Qizilbashes  who
oppose  the  pi-ogress  of  the  company  of  pilgrims  ' to  the  holy
temple  (of  Makkahjand  liave  given  rise  to  bigoted  interference
with  the  established  religion  a.nd  the  orthodox  followers  of
Muhammad,  may  the  peace  and  llcssin'y  of  God  be  upon  himf  and  to
send  you  thence  with  a mission  bearing  letters  to  the  Sultau
of  Rum.  in  order  that,  having  knitted  the  Ir'.n  ja  of  religions
brothcriioi h!  between  ns,  you  may  bear  to  him  a icrjuest  on  my
behalf  to  be  entrusted  with  the  service  of  one  of  tin-  two  -a.-cd
temples,  t/iny  God  increase  their  dii/uiti/.  Then  i eoii'.ing  no  fr  jm
one  dir-ection  [and  the  Khn-andanr'  from  the  otlie;’’.  mav  clear
onttlie  Qizilbasb  from  between  us.  b cause  **  as  soon  as  the  Sultin
of  R'im  attack^  him.  ie  v.  ill  ino-o.  with  al)  rapnhty  in  thi..,  di'-'  -o
tiou.  and  when  the  .Suit.iu  of  Rum  witini'-aw.-  Ins  forces,  he  will

I Makkah  ai^d  Madinah-  Dafatir

8 MSS.  (.\)  iB)  rr.ml  j

♦ MSS,  :A)  (B)  Ij

^IS.  fB)  read-  ‘ BrLrarrii  pi.''  m jiileritirisre  to

Miikkah,  Hucrkos  Dirt,  rf  art.  Hnji.

6 A footnote  variniit  rviiirntl v the

interpolation  of  sonio  <lov«»nt  cupvist.

' MS.  (B)  omits  the  n*  Ftjuare  biackets

P MS.  ^

L -tSl  ]

agHin  l etni'D  to  tlie  place  he  came  from,  whereas  if  we  stirround
him  from  both  directions  with  this  army  and  the  hrge  following
we  have  in  Hindustan,  together  with  that  powerful  force  and  its
ai-tillerj,^  his  resisting  power  will  be  tul  and  on  carefiillv  con-
sidering over  this  matter  I can  think  of  no  per?  on  more  fitted  371.
tc  carry  = tiiis  message  than  yourself,  and  siniplT  in  view  of  the
attainment  of  this  object*  1 cannot  entertain  the  id-ea  of  you’-
ieave.

It  mast  not  be  forgotten  that  it  is  by  no  means  improbable
that  this  same  good  intention  may  be  the  cause  of  the  salva-
iioii  of  that  faithful  king  from  the  fire  (of  Ltll  • althou^li
he  fell  into  the  fire.^  in  the  Day  of  Reckon  in:;,  for  tlie
Almighty,  may  He  be  glorined  and  ej’ahe.i.  is  sati,-fii.,l  with  little
and  very  bountiful,  and  the  .story  of  ’Arar  ibc:  ® '"wbc

for  all  his  vast  army  and  equipment,  w'nich  grave  liun  riie  pre-
eminence over  all  kintrs  of  'Iraq,  in  the  four  quarters  of  the
glol'e,  was  always  regretful  because  he  ha  i not  been  i.resenr  at
the  slaughter  of  Imam  Husain,  may  ibid  High  yie  ised  u-trk
liun.  so  that  he  might  have  smitten  ami  ih—rroyed  trie  ' fu'h/wpr;
of  lazid,^  and  of  his  having  a vision  in  wiucli  he  n.is  walkins:  >n
the  gardens  of  Pnradisel  is  well  known,  .--ny.  ex-ery  ''ic.n  xu'U  af:.'
his  own  maiinpr,^  that  is  after  his  own  desire.

Verse.

My  brother  thou  art  all  desire,  naught  else  ;

All  the  rest  of  thee  is  but  bone  and  fibre.

If  a rose  is  thy  desire,  thou  art  a rose  warden.

If  a furnace  is  thy  desire,  thon  art  its  fuel.*®

1 cPt  MS.  (A)

^ We  should  probablr  read  here  j*^*^*^  for
^ MS.  (A?  reads  for  * MS.  'A)  reads

^ See  next  page  for  the  acconnt  of  Shir  Shah’s  Hocidep;:  at  r.he  ‘siege  of
Kalinjgjr.

* See  Ibn  Khalliqan  (De  Slane)  IV,  pp.  30i  et  se^q.

’ M3S.  (.-V)  (B)  omit

^ Yazid,  the  son  of  Muhiwiyab,  the  second  Khallfab  of  the  house  of
Unimaiyah  He  is  celebrated  in  Muslim  history  as  the  oppoaenr  of  Husain
who  was  killed  at  Karbala  A H.  61,  -tv  Hughes,  Diet,  of  ish'ntK
^ Qnran  XVII.  86.

M3.  (A)  leads  tor  MS.  (B)  reads

6L

[ 482  ]

And  in  tlie  year  952  H.  (1545  A.D.)  Shir  Shah  invested  the
fortress  of  Kalinjar,  which  is  one  of  the  strongest  and  most
famous  of  the  forts  of  Hindustan,  and  with  great  energy  and
skill  in  a short  time  prepared  galleries,  and  used  to  make  daily
attacks  upon  the  bastions  ; ^ and  by  the  time  that  the  galleries
had  advanced  near  to  the  walls  of  the  fort,  and  the  mines  were
ready,  attacking  on  all  four  sides  he  made  the  condition  of  the
garrison  very  precarious.  Shir  Shah  from  the  position  where  he
was  standing,  gave  orders  to  hurl  grenades  filled  with  gunpowder
3Y2-  into  the  fort.  This  they  did,  and  by  chance  one  of  those  grenades
struck  the  wall  of  the  fort,  and  recoiling  with  great  force  ex-
ploded. Its  fragments  fell  among  the  other  grenades,  which
exploded,  burning  Shir  Shah  severely  from  head  to  foot.  And
inasmuch  as  he  was  badly  scorched,^  and  Shaikh  Khalil  the  son
of  his  spiritual  guide,  and  the  learned  Manlana  Nazimu-d-Din  ®
also  were  fellow-sufferers  with  Shir  Shah  in  this  explosion,*  Shir
Shah  as  he  ran  using  his  hands  to  cover  his  nakedness,^
took  refuge  in  a tent  which  they  had  pitched  for  him  in  (front  of)
a bastion,^  where  he  lay  unconscious.  Whenever  he  recovered
consciousness  a little  t he  shouted  to  his  men  encouraging  them®
to  seize  the  fort,  and  if  any  one  came  to  see  him  he  signed  to  him
to  go  and  fight,  so  that  in  his  absence  the  Amirs  ® in  command
in  the  trenches  worked  harder  than  if  he  had  been  present,  and

t The  text  reads  here  with  a footnote  variant  MS.  (B)

reads  MS,  (A)  however  has  a totally  different  readiug  for

Tvhich  I can  see  no  raeauing,  but  we  should  probably  read
“ bastions  ” which  would  be  consonant  with  both  the  text  and  MSS.  (Aj  and
(Bj.  This  supposition  is  the  more  probable  as  some  lines  fnrtlier  on  we  have
MS.  (B)  reading  MS.  (A)  and  the  text  See  note  6.

S jUJb  Yuhna.  The  meaning  of  this  word  is  given  in  Fazln-llah  Khan’s
Turkish  Persian  Dictionary  as  Chize  ki  muye  an  kanda  hdshad,  that  which
has  lost  its  hair.

a MS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (B)  reads  J

a Both  MSS.  (.i  ) (B)  read  i.J^J  This  is  a com-

mon  expression  to  denote  utter  wretchedness  and  poverty,

* The  text  reads  MS.  (A)  M!S.  (B)  see  ante  n.  1.

1 MS.  (A)  8 3XSS.  {Aj  (B)  read  here

S MS.  (A)

[ ^3  ]

behaved  with  the  utmost  gallantry,  and  coming  to  close  quarters
with  the  garrison,  brought  matters  to  a fight  with  knife  and  dagger
and  did  full  justice  to  the  demands  of  endeavour  and  manliness.

The  writer  heard  a story  from  a most  trustworthy  source,  that
on  that  eventful  day  of  assault,  in  which  the  deeds  of  every
individual  a.ssailant  were  conspicuous,  and  the  standards  and  faces
could  be  easily  distinguished  one  from  another,^  I saw,  said  he,
a soldier  armed  cap-a-pie,  who  had  not  previously  been  seen  nor
was  ever  after  seen,  clothed  from  head  to  foot  in  black,  wearing
a plume  * of  the  same  colour  upon  his  head,®  and  urging  and
encouraging  our  men  in  the  battle.  Then  he  entered  one  of  the
galleries  and  made  his  way  into  the  fort.  I searched  for  him
everywhere  after  the  battle,  but  in  vain,  I could  find  no  trace  of
him.*  The  men  in  the  other  trenches  also  gave  the  .same  account,
saying,  we  saw  several  horsemen  wearing  these  clothes  who,  kept
advancing  in  front  of  us  till  they  entered  the  fort  and  vanish'ed  :

Verse.

If  thou  hadst  not  been  on  the  side  of  religious  law,  Heaven  373.
itself  would  have  girt  its  loins.

If  thou  hadst®  been  on  the  side  of  the  faith,  the  Gemini
would  have  ungirt  their  sword.

A report  became  current  that,  in  that  battle,  certain  men  fiom
the  invisible  world  had  come  to  the  aid  of  the  ^Muslims.  And
Shir  Shah  suffering  and  distressed  as  lie  was,  from  time  to  time
enquired  for  tidings  of  victory.  The  air  was  terribly  hot,  and
although  they  sprinkled  him  constantly  with  sandal  and  rose-
water, it  was  utterly  useless  ® to  relieve  the  scorching  heat  whose
intensity  increased  hour  by  hour.

1 The  text  reads  J*  j.  JI.S.  (.4}  reads  for

MS.  (B)  reads  t'lie  reading  of  the  text  is  adopted.

* Fazln-llah  Tthin  gives  a word  Yuldu  in  the  meaning  of  ^ alam.  a

standard  or  ensign.

s MSS.  (A)  (B)  agree  with  the  footnote  variant  oniittiug  Lhe

words  foand  in  the  text.

* MS.  (A)

® In  the  first  line  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  >>  (Text;.  In  the  second
line  MS.  (A)  reads  ^ for_}^  (Text).

* The  text  reads  jl  fAjli.  MS.  (B)  reads  ctf  for

bat  the  correct  reading  appears  to  be  MS.  (A;.

r 484

Verse.

A breast  wiiicn  is  consumed  by  tbe  fire  of  separation
Sandal  * can  afford  it  no  leiie*^.

At  tbe  very  moment  of  hearing  the  good  tidings  of  victory  he
yielded  up  iiis  life*  to  the  Lord,  the  Giver  of  life,  the  Receiver
of  life.  The  follotvicg  stanza  was  w'ritten  to  record  the  date  of
his  death  ; —

Shir  ^ah.  he  in  dread  of  whom
The  lion  and  the  goat  drank  at  the  same  source
Left  the  vforld  ; the  wise  sage  pronounced
The  date  of  his  death.  Zi  dlash  murJ^  {he  died  from  the
effects  of  fire).

His  corpse  was  taken  to  Sahsf.ram  where  was  the  burial-place
of  his  fathers,  and  there  buried.  Ti.e  period  of  his  military
command  was  fifteen  years,  and  of  his  Sultanate  five  years.

It  is  said  that  on  one  occasion  when  he  was  looking  in  a
mirror,  iie  exclaimed.  “ Alas  ! that  I obtained  my  kingdom  at  the
time  of  evening  prayer.’'*

1 Santa’tir.y  n'.hnm.  Useful  in  headache,  Sontheimer  II,  138.  There

are  thiee  kinds  according  ro  the  ilakhzar.n.l-adii.'iyah.  The  white  sandal
called  in  Hindi  Chan'Tiin  . the  yellow  satida'  called  in  Hindi  ilolagir',  the  red
sandal  caUed  m Hindi  Rakcc  C'yandjr,.  This  I liter  is  the  wood  of  Pterocarpns
santahiKis  (Ued  Sanders).  It  is  generally  called  Debt  Ciiaudan.  it  is  used,
not  for  headache,  but  after  being  offered  at  the  shrine  of  Kali  is  used  to
mark  the  forehead  of  the  worshioper.  The  others  both  Chandan  and
ilalaijdifir  (so  called  becaase  it  comes  from  Maliiyalam  or  JIalabar)  are  used
as  a powder  mived  into  a paste  with  tvater  to  apply  to  the  forehead  as  a care
for  headache.  They  are  also  used  in  rJ.ji  or  worship  by  the  Uindiis,  who  have
a saying

Chandan,  dhrp.  dip,  malaydgir
Prern  snhit  Thdkur  nahahradn.

With  (gifts  of;  Chandan,  frankiccen.se,  lamps,  and  malayagir
I will  lovingly  bathe  the  Thaknr  (Lord).

• Omit  ilS.  (.41.

8 ijJC  (Jijf  J,  These  letters  give  the  dace  952  H.  This  dace  is  given  in
figures  in  botii  M5S.  (A)  I'B).

* That  is  to  say  eo  late  in  life.  Fiiishta  says  : Whenever  he  looked  in  tbe
glass  and  saw  his  white  beard,  he  used  to  say,  **  Ic  was  near  evening  before
I attained  to  empire.”

MSS,  r.A)  fB!  writes  if  jjjO

[ 48o  ]

Verses.

My  heart ! like  !^izr  * lake  and  drink  the  water  of  life.

Like  Sikandar  come  and  conquer  land  and  sea.

If  thou  eatertaiiiest  any  longing  for  the  cup-bearer  and  wine.

Take  the  cup  of  Kausar  * from  the  hand  cf  the  Hurt  ® and
drink.

The  fame  of  thy  greatness  and  glory  and  majesty

Has  reached  the  Koh-i-qaf,  go  thither  and  hear  its  tale.  374.

If  thou  art  sitting,  for  instance,  on  the  throne  of  Solomon,

One  day  like  the  ant  creep  into  the  recess  of  a care  and  hide
there ;

Two  or  three  days  like  the  spider,  spin  in  the  deserted  corner
of  the  world  the  strands  of  desire  and  take  thy  place  there.

Every  beautiful-faced  one,^  whose  beauty  is  unapproacbabh
With  that  one,  to  thy  heart’s  content,*  take  thy  delight.

This  world  is  a dream  in  the  opinion  of  the  wise.

Do  thou  at  last  see  this  dream  and  take  ir.

Thy  life,  0 Qadiri,  is  as  a fairy-tale  of  enchantment.

Thou  hast  heard  the  tale,  take  the  spell  of  enchantment.

When  the  hand  of  Death  tears  * the  sleeve  of  ihy  existence
Raise  thy  hand,  and  seize  the  skirt  of  the  true  Friend  ( God  j.

IsLEM  Shah  iu.m  .Ship.  Seau  SCi:,'

Who  is  Islem  Khan,  on  the  fifteenth  of  the  month  Kabi’u-l-
Awwal  in  the  year  952  H.  (J545  A.D.),  acting  upon  the  sum-
mons of  the  Amirs  • of  Bhatta  came  by  foiced  marclies  from  the
neighbourhood  of  Patna,*  and  by  the  co-operation  of  ‘Isa  Khan
Hajjab  and  the  other  men  of  influence  and  power,*®  succeeded  **  to
the  imperial  throne  in  room  of  his  father,  with  the  title  of  l.slein

* AI-Kbizr.  See  Hughes,  Diet,  of  Islam,  p.  272.

* Qar  an  cviii  1-3.  See  Hughes,  op.  cU..  p.  262.
t The  women  of  Paradise.  Qur'an  It,  56— i 8.

* MS.  (A)  reads  y.  for

* Ja  footnute  variant  IIS.  (B,'

» 5jd(Teit)  MS.(A  MS.  (BjreaJs

t MS.  { A)  omit8j>^-w

* A footnote  variant  q Ai|j  4.5‘Lr’^'.  M8  (Bi

» MS.  ( Ai  Aiff  Bhatta.  F di* j Jua  Ja|

d MSS.  (Aj  (Bi  read  for  ( i’eitj.

[ 486  J

Shah,  and  the  son  of  Mulla  Ahmad  Jtinaid,!  who  is  well  known,*
375.  found  this  verse  of  the  sacred  word : ® “ And  already  we  have
written  in  the  Psalms,  after  the  admonition  that  ‘ the  earth
shall  my  righteous  servants  inherit,’  ” * to  give  the  date  of  his
accession.  He  wrote  a despatch  to  his  elder  brother  ‘Adil  Khan
and  sent  it  to  him  in  Ranthanbur,  of  which  the  following  is
the  substance.  “ Although  the  succession  was  really  your  right,
still  as  yon  were  at  so  great  a distance  there  was  a danger,
nay  a certainty  of  the  occurrence  of  disturbances  here  before
yon  could  arrive.  Accordingly  with  a view  to  keep  down  in-
sur-rections,  I will  take  charge  of  the  army  for  a few  days  as
your  deputy,  and  after  you  arrive  I shall  have  no  alternative  but
to  submit  to  and  obey  you.”  Leaving  Kalinjar  he  made  for  ^ Agra
and  in  the  vicinity  of  the  township  of  Kura  Khatampnr.*  Rhawass
Khan  arrived  from  Sihrind  which  was  his  jaeglr,  and  yielded  a
forced  allegiance,  because  he  was  more  inclined  to  favour  the
accession  of  ‘Adil  Khan  as  compared  with  Islem  Shah;  a splendid
banquet  was  held  and  he  was  anew  placed  on  the  throne.  After-
wards when  fresh  despatches  from  Islem  Shah  reached  ‘Adil
Khan,  he  referred  the  question  of  his  coming  to  the  following  four
persons  upon  whose  advice  and  opinion  as  to  its  expediency  he
made  his  action  dependent : Qutb  i^an  Kaib,  ‘Isa  Khan  IvTiyazi.
Khawass  Khan,  and  Jalal  Khan  Jilwain,^  all  of  whom  were  great
Amirs,  men  of  eminence  belonging  to  his  family.  Islem  ^ah  sent
this  body  of  men  to  him  bearing  an  agreement  by  which  he  under-
took to  allow  ‘Adil  Khan  to  depart  to  his  jnegir  after  the  first  inter-
view, and  to  deli  ver  to  his  control  any  place  in  Hindustan  which  he
might  select.  ’Adil  Khan  acting  upon  the  advice  of  these  Amirs
proceeded  from  the  neighbourhood  of  Ranthanbur  to  Fathpur,

1 MSS.  (A)  I'B)  uaj?.  Jund.  * .MS.  (B,,  omits

* Supply  b (A).  See  Qur'an  xxi.  lU5.

* Pcalrn  xxxvii,  29.  ‘ The  righteous  :ihall  iiihei  the  hind  ;tnd  dwell  t'nerein

for  ever.’

The  date  is  given  by  the  words  which  fidlows

The  valne  of  being  9ol,  that  which  follows  is  952  H.

6 MSS.  (AJ  (B,,

® Kora  (Cora^j  Town  in  Fathpur  district,  N -W.  P,  on  tiie  t>iti  Road

from  Agra  to  Allahabad.  See  Tieff,  Vol.  I,  p.  235  and  map,  Vol.  III.  See
also  Hunter,  Imp.  Gaz.  viii,  p.  295.  MSS.  (A;  {Bj  Jjtii.

[ 487  ]

otherwise  called  Sikri,  and  Islem  Shah  - left  Agra  and  came  to
Shikarpur,*  where  the  royal  palace  is  at  present,  to  receive  him  ;
and  when  they  met  they  first  fulfilled  the  duties  of  condolence,  and  376-
evinced  great  cordiality,  and  after  a short  time  set  out  together  for
Agra.  Islem  Shah  had  plotted  treachery  against  ‘Adil  IQian,  and
had  conseqnently  made  a siipnlation  that  not  more  than  two  or
three  persons  shonld  be  left  in  the  fort  with  ‘Adil  Khan.  This
however  was  not  carried  out,  and  a large  body  of  followers  accom-
panied him  ; accordingly  Islem  Shah  was  constrained,  in  order  to
avoid  suspicion,  to  treat  ‘Adil  Khan  with  extraordinary  = fawning
and  flattery,  saying  “ I have  taken  care  of  these  unruly  * Afghans
so  far  by  artful  meansA  now  I make  them  over  to  you.”

Verse.

Subject  the  intoxicated  and  riotous  one  to  the  warning  glance
of  the  cup-bearer.®

Having  placed  him  upon  the  throne  he  himself  assumed  an
attitude  of  submission  and  obedience,  and  from  iiiotives  of  worldly
wisdom  was  most  punctilious  in  the  observance  of  courtesy.'^
Altliongh  ‘Adil  Khan  was  in  the  flower  of  Ids  youth,  and  of  great
bodily  strength  (many  well-known  tales  of  his  strength  are  told),
nevertheless,  since  he  was  fond  of  ease,  and  was  well  aware  of  the
craft  and  subtlety  of  Islem  ^ah  and  his  ® ways  of  dealing,  would
not  agree  to  that  procedure,  rose  to  his  feet,  and  seating  Islem
Shah  on  the  throne  again  with  all  honour  and  ceremony,^  swore
allegiance  to  him,  and  offered  him  congratulations  upon  his  acces-
sion, with  the  customary  offerings  and  oblations.  Islem  Shah,
in  accordance  with  the  compact  which  had  been  made.**  sent  ‘Isa
Khan  and  Khawa.ss  Khan  to  accompany  'Adil  Khan,  and  having
contii-med  Baiana  to  him  as  a jaeijir.  permitted  him  to  proceed
thither.  Tno  months  hirer  he  appointed  Ghfizi  iliihalli,  who  was
one  of  his  confidential  attendants,  to  go  and  arrest  ’Adil  Khan.

I Omit  Msi.  (B,.

* M.S  (,\;  S(r,ikrjpr/r.  9 M>  (.\'|  read.s  (3*^1  <3j^-

^ MS.  (A)  ^ t M.S.  (.-tl  L«,

® From  Hafiz,  See  ode  eominoncing
Kishore  Pres.^,  p.  303.

"*  (Al  reaiis  ■'  ^tS.  (P,)  pnpr  hes  jt

9 MSS.  (AUBJ-  *'*  MS.  (Aj  SaA  J j.

**  MS  (B)  omits

488  ]

‘Adil  IQisn,  howevei,  iitard  of  this,  and  fled  from  Baiana  taking
refuse  with  IQiawass  Khan  in  Miwat.  Khawass  KTian  then
summoned  vjJjazl  ilahalli.  and  bound  him  with  that  same  golden
chain  which  he  had  brought  for  "Adil  Khan,  and  having  gained
377.  over  to  ins  sine  all  ^ the  Amirs,  set  out  for  Agra  with  a large
army.  Qntb  Khan  and  •f-.a  Khan  also,  who  were  two  of  the  chief
nobles  of  the  State, ^ with  whose  concurrence  the  compact  = had
been  made,  were  annoved  at  this  bieach  of  faith  on  the  part  cf
Lslem  Shfih,*  and  with  great  management  summoned  'Adil  Khan
at  a time  agreed  upon,  irunely  at  day  break  after  the  Shih- i-barat,'”
so  that  they  miglit  own  allegiauce  to  him.  It  so  chanced  that
‘Add  Khau  and  Khawass  Khan,  having  arrived  at  Sikri  on  the
Shab-i-barat.^  spent  that  night  as  a vigil  in  the  service  of  .Shaikh
Salim.  Cnighti,  in  voluntary  prayers  i and  benedictions,  so  that
their  depitrcure  for  Agra  was  delayed  long  pa^t  the  time  agreed
upon,  and  it  was  breakfast  tiuie^  when  they  reached  the  outskirts
of  Agra.  lslem  Shah  who  was  alarmed,®  spoke  very  courteously
to  Qtitb  Khan  and  the  rest  of  the  .Amirs,  and  permitted  them  to
go  and  pieseiit  themselves  bebne  ‘Add  Khan.  His  object  was
to  get  rid  of  his  opponents,  and  that  very  in.stant  to  start  alone

t MSS.  (.4)  (B)  read  |^l

S MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  J l/o\.  5 MS.  (A)  jy  j Jy.

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  j'nsDtad  of

^ The  tift'-ench  dav  of  .^a'baa.  A day  of  great  rejoicing  among  Maham-
maduTiS.  Mnljarnniad  ordei»>d  his  followers  to  keep  vigil  during  this  night,  to
repeat  a !’.Hrid»\'d  pr.-yere  and  keep  the  next  day  as  a fast  day.  See  Hughes,

Ihct.  of  Won-

Briggs  ill  l.is  ti’anslarioii  of  Firi^ta  says,  ‘‘  as  it  was  the  night  of  the
Koorbaii  festiv  ji."  and  in  a footnote  says.  ” this  fast  is  kept  in  commemoracion
of  the  SHcritie-'  «>t  Isaac  by  Abr.iharn  ’ The  tranblator  however  13  at  fault
here,  ns  the  orisriaal  snys  J iBo.  Text,  p.  4^31)  and

vnicJ'  at  tr  J'Hc  t-  e Shnb-i-hoidt

® MS.  (A)  in  enor

" J ^ XaiL'ipl  u'a  -id^iyth  Xa-fvdjil  are  voluntary  pravers  which

mav  be  omi::  ’ TMthout  sin,  a?  distinguished  from  Far2  which  are  prayers
eiijoiuea  by  ( -a  j,nd  tn  ’:i  S>nuiah,  prayei-s  founded  on  the  practice  of  the
Proph.er

5'tr’ ir-’Lr’ne''  0;c‘.  Isla  > nit  Prayer.

t I hr ;ar.  U ilij  MSS.  (A)  (B).

^ MS.  . onut,  ji  a.'-,  also  1)  aft'  -

!ii«i  wA-  aISS  , (H)  iiiateu'd  uf  as  in  rhf  inxi

L -isy  j

for  the  foi  tress  of  Chunar,  seize  the  treasure  which  was  there,  and
after  collecting  the  necessary  equipment  for  an  army  to  return
and  again  engage  in  war.  ‘Isa  Khan  Hajjab  warned  him  of  the
follw  and  absurdity  of  this  project,  and  prevented  him  from  send-
ing his  Amirs  to  his  enemy  and  from  starting  for  Chunar.  Even-
tually Islem  Shah,  accompanied  by  a party  of  his  own  bociygnard,
and  two  or  three  thousand  old  and  trusty  retainers,  left  Agra  with
all  haste  and  came  out  in  force  to  fight,  first  recalling  those  Amirs'
whom  he  had  sent,®  saying  “ I am  by  no  means  confident  tl'.at  'Adil
JOian  will  not  deal  treacherous] v with  vou  ; you  had  better  return
quickly  and  rejoin  me,  because  the  question  between®  him  and  me
can  only  be  settled  by  the  sword.”

Verse.

In  tliis  case  messengers  and  despatches  can  avail  nothing,

Tile  two-edged  sword  will  make  this  matter  clear.'*

The  Amirs,  iiowever,  who  were  friendly  to  ‘Adil  Khan,  on  seeing
Islem  Shah  take  the  field,  refused  ^ to  return  to  his  side  and  378.
entered  the  ranks  of  the  more  powerful  army ; a severe  battle
ensued  before  Agra,  and  ‘Adil  Kl)5n  was  defeated®  and  fled
alone  toward  Bhatta.''  Khawass  Kbaii  and  ‘Isa  Khan  Niyazi,  who
had  a strong  regard  and  unbounded  loyalty  for  each  other,  took
the  road  to  Miwat  and  the  township  of  Firuzpur,  enyaged  the
force  which  had  been  sent  in  pursuit  of  them,  and  ovei  came  it ;
but  eventually,  not  ha\  lug  power  to  resist  the  army  of  Islem  Shah,
proceeded  to  the  hills  to  the  north  of  Hindustan,  W'hich  * are
called  (the)  Kamaon  (hills),  and  took  refuge  with  the  Rajas  of
tiiat  district.  Qutb  Khan  Kaib,  having  been  appointed  to  attack
them,  kept  continually  ravaging  the  country  at  the  foot  of  tiie
hills.  In  the  meantime  Islem  Shah  proceeded  to  Chunhaj-,  and
sent  the  treasure  which  was  there  to  Gwaliar,  and  on  his  return,
when  he  reached  tlie  township  of  Kurah  Khatampur,  while  en-
gaged in  playing  chaugaii  with  Jalal  Khan  Jilwani,®  who  was  one
of  iho  married  Amirs  of  the  Afghans,  and  had  been  an  adherent

1 MS.  fA)  * Omit  j jl ll.  - * M.S.  (B)  omits

* tins  order  ■ f the  In'  .jBiichea  is  'r.veu  in  i.i.S.  (A),
r ,V  ,,  (A)  » MSs  lA)  ,B.

t nS.S.  (Aj  (B)  oma  3 ® MS.  (A)  r.i’.its  U ‘JJ: .

•=  M-  fA'  (:i)  if.':  .,  '.

02

L 490  ]

of  ‘Adil  Khan,  and  a great  object  of  suspicion  to  Islem  Shah,  by
some  treacherous  device  persuaded  him  to  come  to  bis  camp,  and
cast  iiim  into  chains  together  with  his  brother  Hjudadad,  making
them  over  to  an  Afghan  who  had  a blood  feud  with  them,  and
having  put  them  to  death  under  the  cloke  of  vengeance,  proceeded
to  Agra,  [and  from  thence  to  Grwaliar  which  he  had  made  his
capital],^  and  setting  himself  to  slay  and  eradicate  a paity  who
were  favourable  to  ‘Adil  Khan,  gilded  up  his  loins  in  enmity
against  them,  and  swept  tliein  one  by  one  from  the  board  of  the
world  like  so  many  pieces  in  tiie  game  of  draughts  or  chess.
Qutb  Khan  also  took  fright,  and  fled  from  the  foot  of  the  Kumaon
379.  hills  to  Lahore,  taking  refuge  with  Haibat  Khan,  to  whom  Shir
Shah  had  given  the  title  of  A‘zam  Huma}uu.  Haibat  Khau
in  obedience  to  a summons  from*  Islem  Shah,  sent  Qutb  Khan
in  chains  to  him.  Islem  Shah  sent  him  together  witli  Shatibaz
Khan  Lfihani,®  who  was  brother-in-law  to  Shir  Shall,*  and
Barmazid  Kor  who  was  the  Bajjal  ^ of  that  sect,  aud  the  Hajjaj  ®
of  Ids  age,  and  thirteen  or  fourteen  other  Amirs  f and  Amirs’  sons,
to  the  fortress  of  Gwaliar.  where  most  of  them  quitted  the  body
in  imprisonment,^

[Among  them  was  Mahmud  Khan,  son  of  ‘Adil  Khan,  who  in
his  seventh  year  had  counselled  Shir  Shah  to  throw  up  a rampart
of  sand,  in  consequence  of  which  Shir  Shah  had  made  him  his
heir-apparent,  as  has  been  related  Another  was  Kawal  Khan
Ghakkar  who  will  be  mentioaod  .shortly]  9

And  in  this  year  Salim  ^ah  summoned  A’zam  Huinayun  from

1 Xor  ''n  MSS.  tB).  8 wAb  t MS.  (B)

* t'lii^ra  hays

wli'.t  ^vus■  sifter’s  liustiand  to  Salim  .^ah.  with  Barmazid  Kor  and  some  others.
Bo.  Text,  432.

Briggs  tiauelatee  tiiis,  “ tiie  king\s  brother-in-law,  who  was  deprived  of  his
Bight.”  Tiubtaking  Bin  7/iar/(i  (Biicas  H,  132.)

^ Dnjjal.  The  or  lying  Christ,  the  last  of  the

impostors  v,  l.ose  .appearance  was  piediLtfd  by  Muhammad.

« her  aute.  p 12  n.  1.  i JIS.S.  (A)  (B)  omit

* The  text  reads  .Axllj  by  gunpowder.  MS.S.  f.t)  B)  omit  tl  ese

words.

9 This  portion  cnclcsed  in  square  brackets  is  not  in  JISS.  (A)  (B)  a foot-
note to  the  text  states  that  it  is  foniid  in  one  MS.

[ 491  ]

Lalior,  but  he  advanced  some  excuse  * for  not  coming  in  person,
and  sent  Sa‘id  Khan  his  brother,  wlio  was  renowned  for  courage
and  sound  judgment.*  Islem  Shah  received  him  with  the  utmost
show  of  favour,  and  made  mucli  of  him,  advancing  him  to  the
highest  place  of  intimacy,  but  inwardly  cherished  the  intention
of  putting  an  end  to  him  ; at  last  one  day,  having  summoned  him
to  a private  interview  within  the  palace,  he  shewed  him  the  heads
of  the  Amirs  who  had  been  immured  alive  in  the  walls,  for  instance
Zaia  Khan  Xiyazi  ® and  the  others,  saying  : Do  you  recognize  these
per.sons,  who  they  are  ? He  mentioned  the  names  of  some
whom  he  recognized.  Previously  to  this  he  had  thrown  * the
abovementioned  Amiis,  men  of  ability,  into  a chamber  in  Gwaliar,
and  setting  fire  to  it  with  gunpowder  had  burned  them  all  except
Kawgl  Khan  Ghakkar.  who  remained  under  the  protection  of  the
Ail-cherisher  safe  in  a corner  of  the  roora.^  [It  is  said  that  the  380-
following  was  the  reason  of  his  escaping;  the  sister  of  Kawal
Khan,  who  had  been  united  by  marriage  to  Islem  Shab,  became
aware  of  the  conference  and  sent  word  to  her  brother,  saying  : This
very  night  they  iutend  to  blow  up  the  prisoners  with  gunpowder.

She  also  sent  from  inside  (the  palace)  four  quilts  stuffed  with
cotton,  and  several  skins  of  water.  Kawal  Khan  poured  quanti-
ties of  water  upon  the  quilts,  and  under  pretence  of  taking  a bath
betook  himself  into  a corner,  apart  from  his  friends,  and  rolling
himself  up  in  Che  quilts  had  gone  to  sleep  when  they  set  fire  to  the
room,  and  all  were  burned  to  ashes,  but  he  alone  remained  alive
bent  ath  the  quilt.  In  the  morning  Islem  Shah  came  to  inspect
that  pii-.tn  liuuse,  and  seeing  Kawal  Khan  alive  said  ; It  is  right
i.'ii'  me  to  relea.se  you  seeing  tuac  tire  had  no  power  over  you].®

Tiieu  Isleiu  Shah  having  made  him"  take  an  oath  that  he  would
’.ever  auain  oppose  him,  released  him,  and  appointed  him  to  assist
the  Governor  of  the  Paajab  to  conquer  the  country  of  the  Ghak-
k.irs  wiiere  he  arrived  with  all  honour].^  In  short  Sa‘id  Khan,  who
had  been  a witness  of  this  sudden  death,  gave  orders  in  obedience

I its.  fA'  2 MS  (B)  reads

8 M3.  I'Ai  .'unts  * *’IS.  (.A)  omits  ii)f.

8 ^I3S  i.tj  f B)  read  simply

6 Th  a portion  enclosed  in  square  brackets  is  not  in  MSS,  (A)  (B)  a foct-
ni  to  t'j  tlie  trvt  states  that  it  is  found  in  one  MS.

1 M3^.  i .V  C)  omit  jb,  s Xot  in  M.'-S.  (.-t)  (B)

492  1

to  which  post  liorses  were  tied.ap  along  the  road  to  Labor,  bo  that
he  travelled  the  distance  between  Agra  and  Lalior  within  three
niglits.  Day  b)  day  the  scale  turned  more  and  more  in  favour  of  the
Nlvazi  faction,  and  A‘zam  Hnmayhn  read  the  Khutbah.  in  his  own
name  in  Lahor,  Isleni  Shah  returned  from  that  same  camp  and
came  to  Agra,  and  summoning  a vast  army  from  all  sides  marched
for  the  Paujab.  Sazawal  lOian  came  from  Mahca  to  join  this
tnovement,  and  was  received  very  graciously,  and  after  brinstiiig
forward  certain  important  matters  took  leave,  while  Isk-ni  Shah,
after  halting  for  a few  days  in  Dihii  and  oi  dering  his  army,  set  out
381.  for  Labor. ^ A‘zam  Hutnayun  and  Khawass  TLhan,  and  ‘ Isa  IQian  ^
Nlyazi  as  well,  (who  had  come  down  from  the  hill  country  to  join
him),  came  from  the  Panjah  with  armies  strong  as  the  hills  to
receive  Islem  Shah.  In  the  early  part  of  the  ® winter  ti-ne  a
fierce  battle  was  fought  in  front  of  * the  township  of  Ambala,  anc
on  the  evening  preceding  the  day  on  which  the  battle  was  to  be
fought,  A'zam  Eian  had  asked  EhawSss  Khan  : After  the  victory
who  will  be  selected  as  the  successor  to  the  throne  ? He  answered  :
It  may  be  that  it  will  be  ‘Adil  Khan  who  is  the  eldest  son  of  Shir
Shah  ^ and  is  really  fit  to  rule.  It  appears  that  the  NiyazI  faction
said,^  The  kingdom  is  not  by  inheritance,  but  He  icho  conquers,  takes
the  booty J It  is  a foregone  conclnsion.  vihat  sense  is  theie  in  this
that  we  should  strike  with  the  sword  and  the  kingdom  should
come  to  others.

Khawass  Khan,  who  was  heart  and  soul  attached  to  the  cause
of  Shir  Shah,  was  displeased  at  this  claim  of  theirs,  consequently
when  the  battle  began  to  rage,  he  refused  to  fight, ^ and  standing
aloof  left  the  battle  field  togmiher  with  ‘ Isa  Khan  Kiyazi.  The
Nijazi  faction  fought  right  iiianfuily.  witiiout  yielding  a foot  of
ground,  and  were  near  carrying  away  the  centre  * of  Islem  Shahs

1 MS.  (A)  reads  J-

8 MSS,  (A;  (B)  omit  a footnote  to  the  text  states  that  the

woi'iIb  are  in  one  MS.

* MSS.  (AJ  f B)  read  only  in  tlie  winter  time.

^ MS.  (A).  ^ MS.  (AJ  supplies  *wlj.

■w.  1 man  ^aliiho.  stLlaha,

^ The  text  reAfis  ^ but  this  is  manifestly  wrong,  and  the

reading  ehotihi  be  U ns  in  MS.  (A)  (B^h

9 MS  ..uiits

[ 493  ]

army,  but  in  the  eud^  pluck  told,*  and  their  efforts  tvere  of  no
avail.

1 erse^

Tiij  wound  which  utters  presas’e  of  thy  death
Wiieii  it  feels  thy  stilt  closes  its  lips.

And  Sa'iu  Klian.  the  eider  Lrcther  of  A'zam  Huniayun.  attended
by  a body  o?  men  fully  armed  and  equipped,  disqi.ised  in  such  a
wiiv  that  no  one  would  know  him,  came  in  under  the  pretext  of
offeriitg  coiigrarnlations.  "with  the  intention  of  putting  an  end
to  r.-,!em  and  v,'ith  that  object  asked  repeatedly,  where  :s  the

Ptiddiali  that  T may  offer  him  nir  congratai.ations  on  his  victory.

An  elepha,iit  driver  of  one  of  these  eleph.ai.i.s  wiiich  had  sur-
rounded Islem  ^ah  i'ecognised  the  voice  of  Sa'M  Hian,  and
struck  a blo.v  at  him  with  his  sjiear,  but  he  ^ made  his  way  in
safety  throueb.  tiio  crowd  of  elephants,  great  as  it  was.*  and
foiled  in  his  purpose  made  hi.s  escape  ; tiie  Niyaz!  faction  fled  382.
and  carae  to  iJhankot,®  which  is  near  Roh,®  and  the  remainder
were  plundered  by  the  Kawars.  while  some  were  drowned  in  the
nullahs  of  Arntala.  Isiem  ^lah  pursued  as  far  as  Western
RoLtas,  and  dp.sjnitclied  fvhu.aia  VTais'  Sirwani  with  a large
army  to  oppo.se  the  Niyuzi.s,  and  returned  towards  Agra.  Leaving
Agra  he  went’  to  Gwaliar.  and  made  it  his  capital.®  When
Khawa.ss  I£hari  and  ‘Isii  Ehan  NivazI,  who  had  made  common
cause,  left  the  battle  field,  ‘Isa  Khaa  went  to  the  hiil  country,''’

[while  Khawa.ss  Khan  with  five  or  six  hundred  cavalry tied  to
Lahor]  ; yind  ^ Islam  Khan)-*  Islein  Shsh  appointed  ^ams  Khan

t MS.  (Bl  re.ids  for

S cy  iyL  j'i  The  word  ‘pluck  ’ seems  the  best  equivalent  for  the

Persian  Jiunak  which  liteiallv  'a/t.aud  secondarily  spirit,  c.  i<ya-jc.

It  may  also  mean  however  that  Isiem  .fall’s  men  were  ' true  to  their
3 The  text  reads  j here  which  quite  loses  the  sense.  Reud  jl  MS.  I'B).

* Omit  MS3.  f A)  ;B).  6 JXS.  (A.i  DhnnWn

I’  MS.  fA5  SSC,  R,„lak.  t MS.  (A)  Aw.us.

s MS  tA!  -iiij  MS.  (B)  s tj  lyf  JISS  (A)  (B).

i’  \Va  should  foiirw- the  text  here.  .MS.  (A)  omits  the  words

and  goes  on  o-'iAo'f  fi.  omitting  the  passage  in  tqiiare

brackets  which  follows.

I!  M.S,  (!!'  13  sU  (♦K-.I  MS.  'At

[ 494  i

Luhani  as  (rovernoi-  of  Lalior ; and  at  a time  when  Rhams  Khan
had  come  out  for  some  nudertaking  ^ to  a distance  of  tliirty  krohs
from  Labor,  Khawass  Khan,*  with  three®  or  four  hundred  cavalry,
each  individual  man  of  whom  could  have  withstood  an  army,
advanced  with  the  idea  of  taking  Lal  or,  and  encamped  * in  the
gi’ove  of  Kamran  Mirza.  The  inhabitants  of  Labor  shutting  them-
selves up  in  the  fort  held  the  city  till  the  arrival  of  Shams  Khan,
and  Kh'iwass  Khan,  having  cnt  down  the  lofty  trees  ® of  Safidar  and
Chinar®  of  that  grove,  had  set  about  making  Sntili-  ^ and  la<lders,
when®  his  cavalry  brought  news  that  Rai  Husain  Jilwani  and
other  Amirs  of  Salim  Shah’s  party  with  an  army  of  thirty  thou-
383.  sand  cavnlry  had  arrived  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Labor.  Kha-
wass Khan,  after  a conference  with  ‘ Isa  Khan,  abandoned  the  siege,
and  went  out  some  five  or  six  kiohs  to  meet  (his  enemy),  and  with
five  hundred  veteran  cavalry  well  tried  in  war  bulled  himself
against  that  wall  of  steel.  Rai  Husain  said  to  his  men,  leave  the
way  open  so  ® that  this  black  calamity  may  pass  through  our  midst.
Accoidingly he  made  a breach  iu  the  line  of  Salim  Shah’s
army,  and  attacked  them  again  from  the  rear  and  threw  them
into  confusion.  At  this  juncture  he  received  a wound  in  the  knee
which  bore  him  from  his  horse  to  the  ground,  hut  his  opponents
had  not  sufficient  enterprise  to  come  up  to  him  and  take  him
prisoner,  and  be  was  openly  borne  off  the  field  upon  a charpoy.'^

1 MS.  (A)  '■S*t=4.

» MS.  (.1)  ® MS.  (A)  A-a***.  ♦ MS.  (A)  ijj*.

i MS.  (A)

6 The  Safeddr.  is  the  whit©  Poplar  or  Abele.  The  Chindr  has  been

alreadjf  mentioned.

i MS.  (A)  This  woid  is  not  given  in  any  of  the  dictionaries.  The

only  word  I can  conjecture  it  may  possibly  be  meant  for  is  the  Turk!

Sdtu^  which  means  the  roof  of  a Louse  (P.  de  C.}  in  whicb  case  it  would  have
a meaning  of  a shelter  under  which  to  approach  the  walls,  like  tlie  Roman
Vinea,  which  consisted  of  a roof  resting  upon  posts  eight  feet  iu  height,  made
sufficiently  light  to  admit  of  its  being  carried  by  the  soldiers.  The  roof  was
formed  of  planks  and  wicker  work.

8 MS.  (A)  ® MS.  (A)  rends  Ijjj  tf.

MS.  (A)  reads  J jAJ  j\.

I have  retained  this  word  in  its  English  dress  as  being  one  so  familiar  to
all  who  know  India.  The  cha/mr  pot  is  simply  an  oblong  wooden

frame  on  four  legs  (as  its  name  implies;  fitted  with  a bottom  of  string,  matting

L 49o  ]

Ral  H nsaiu  forbade  bis  raeu  to  give  parsait,  and  Kbawass  Kb  an
went  oif  ill  safety  towards  NagarkotJ  * whence  he  proceeded  to  the
foot  of  the  Kumaon  hills.  The  final  issue  of  his  affairs  will  bo
related  shortly  * in  its  own  place  if  God,  He  is  exalted,  so  will  it.

The  Niyazi  faction  set  their  hearts  upon  the  government  of
Kashmir,  but  by  the  craft  of  the  Kashmiris  were  enticed  into  bye-
ways,  and  eventually  reached  their  rest  in  the  corner  of  destruc-
tion, as  will  be  mentioned,  if  God,  He  is  exalted,  so  will  it.

And  in  the  year  954  H.  (1547  A.D.)  an  Afghan  named  Usman,
whose  hand  Sazawal  Khan  had  cut  off  for  some  reason,  one  day
laid  an  ambush  in  Agra,  and  at  the  entrance  to  a road  aimed  a
blow  at  Sazawal  Khan  and  wounded  him.  Sazawal  Khan  went
to  the  camp,  and  represented  that  this  attack  had  been  made  at
the  instance  of  Salim  Shah,  he  then  took  his  way  to  Malwa.

Islem  Shah  pursued  him  as  far  as  Banswala,  but  seeing  that
Sazawal  Khan  was  hidden  among  the  Zamindars  of  Snrur,“

Salim  Shah  left  ‘Isa  Khan  Sur  with  twenty  thousand  cavalry  in
Ujjain,  and  reached  the  capital.  In  the  early  part  of  his  reign  334.
Islem  Shah  detailed  five  thousand  cavalry  for  the  chief  sarkdrs  of
Hindustan.  Among  them  Mubariz  Khan,  the  son  of  Nizam  i^an  *

Sur,  who  was  the  cousin  and  wife’s  brother  of  Islem  Shah,  and
eventually  leceived  the  title  of  Muhammad  ‘Adili,  was  appointed
as  a commander  of  twenty  thousand  to  the  vicinity  of  Ajawan
in  the  Sarkar  of  Sanbal,  in  order  that  Khawass  Khan  and  the
other-  Amirs  might  not  be  able  to  raise  disturbances  in  that
province,  and  he  appointed  as  his  deputy  Pabandh  !^iazak.*  He
had  also  given  orders  at  the  beginning  of  his  reign,  that  between
every  two  resthonses  built  by  Shir  Shah,  which  were  at  intervals
of  one  kroh,  another  rest-house  of  the  same  patti-rii  should  be  built,
with  a temple,  and  a dwelling-place,  and  a conduit  for  water,  and
that  a buttery  and  kitchen  containing  food  both  cooked  and  uncooked,
for  the  use  of  travellers,®  both  Hindu  and  Musulman,  should  be

or  a broad  tape  called  niwar,  in  eoramon  use  as  a bedstead,  and  everywhere
known  as  atcharpoy.  See  Yale  and  Burnell,  Glossary,  s.  v.

1 The  portion  inclnded  in  double  square  brackets  is  omitted  from  MS.  fB)

S MS.  (a)  aA  iJjttyA  * Footnote  variant  Sarud.

♦ MS.  (At  writes  Ujhi.

MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  MazaJe  as  in  footnote  variant.  Tlie  text  reads

Khahrak

® MSS.  ( A)  ( B)

L 49C  j

always  open.  Among  other  commands  of  iiis  was  this,  that  the
madad-i-  ^ and  aimah  grants  of  the  whole  of  the  protected*

provinces  of  Hindustan  which  Shir  Shah  had  given,  and  the
re.st-Louses  which  he  Lad  furnislied,  and  the  pleasiii  e-gai  dens  he  had
laid  out, 3 shouid  lemain  just  as  tliey  weie,  and  should  not  he
altered  m the  slightest  degree.  Asiother  order  was,  that  all  the
FiJtais*  shonld  bo  taken  hy  force  from  those  Amira  who  kept
Akhdras  (these  are  well  known  in  Hindustan).  He  also  seized®
the  elephants  in  the  same  manner,  and  did  not  leave  in  the  posses-
bioii  of  tiny  one  any  bnt  a wretched  female  elephant  fit  only  for
cai'iying  baggage,  and  gave  ® orders  that  the  red  tent  wa.s  con-
fined solely  to  his  own  nse.  Another  Oi'der  was  tliis,  that  he
hn.agiit  the  whole  eo.uutry  under  his  own  personal  c 'rntrol,'  and  in
accoidasioe  with  tlie  regulat’ons  aiid  custom  of  the  dogji!  system’*
which  .^1r  Shah  had  instituted,  the  soldiery  were  jniid  in  cash,
A fuithoi.'  step  was  to  send  written  orders  to  all  the  kata
containing  comprehensive  instructions  on  all  important  points
of  religion,  and  all  political  and  civil  questions. entering  into
the  miiiutest  essential  detail, aud  dealing  with  all  regulations
385.  which  might  be  of  service  to  the  soldiery  and  civil  population,  to
the  merchants  and  other  various  classes,  and  which  the  authori-
ties uere  bound  to  follow  in  their  jurisdiction.

All  tliese  points  were  written  in  these  documents  whether  agree-
able to  the  religions  law  or  iiotjit  so  that  there  was  no  necessity  to
refer  any  such  matters  '*  to  the  Qazi  or  Mufti,  nor  was  it  proper
to  do  so.*^

1 See  .\m-i-Akbari  (Blochmann)  I,  268,  272,  regarding  the  tenures  of  land
called  respectively  nia'lciii-i-tiurash  and  aimuh.

* iiS8  (A,  (Bj  omit

s AISS.  i'.\;  (B)  i Dancing  eirls.see  ante,  p.  250  (Text)  n.  4.

® MSS  (A)  I B1  omit  fl  il8.  (A)

j£S.  I A)

^ St-c  Ain -1- A It  ban  (Hloehtnannl  I,  242.  XJnder  the  svstant  every

Amir  bc'jan  as  a commander  of  twenty,  aud  wbor-  he  brought  his  full  comple-
ment of  twenty  horses  to  be  branded  t diijh  signifiag  a brand),  be  was  to
be  promoted  to  the  next  higher  gratte,  and  so  on.

S its.  (Aj  nn.its  the  words  J MS.  f B)  oiiiila

^ 0 qitinn  -j-ztii  i/i  t.  A'u.^.,  um.ans  the  small  groove
on  the  d.tte  btone,  .jitmir  is  the  thin  pellicle  which  covets  the  il.itestone.

MS.  I A;  ^ **  MS  f-A;  b— 13  AIS.  I'A)

: 497  ]

Also  the  Amirs  of  five  thonsand,  ten  thousand,  and  twenty
thousand,  used  every  Friday  to  pitch  a lofty  tent  supported  by  eight
poles,!  and  bring  the  shoes  of  Salim  Shah  together  with  a quiver
which  he  had  given  to  the  sardfirs^  in  front  of  the  throne  ; and  first
of  all  the  commander  of  the  troops,  and  after  him  the  Munsif,  that
is  to  say,  the  Chief  Commissioner  (Amin)  followed  by  the  others  in
dne  precedence,  with  bowed  heads  and  every  expression  of  respect
would  take  their  seats  in  their  appointed  places.  Then  a Secretary
would  come  and  read  aloud  that  order,  chapter  and  verse,  which
occupied  eighty  sheets  of  paper  more  or  less.  Any  question
which  presented  any  difiiculty  was  referred  by  them  in  conclave
to  the  various  provisions  and  rulings  of  that  document,  by  which
it  was  finally  decided,  and  if  it  should  so  happen  that  any  Amir
acted  in  contravention  of  that  order,  the  Secretary  used  to  write
a report  of  that  action  and  despatch  it  to  the  Court,  and  the
disobedient  Amir  would  forthwith  be  visited  with  punishment
together  with  his  family  and  relations.  This  procednre  remained
in  force  to  the  end  of  the  reign  of  Islem  Shah.  The  writer  of
this  Muntakhah,  in  the  year  955  H.  (1548  A.D.),  when  he  was  of
tender  age,  went  to  the  country  of  Bajwara,  one  of  the  dependen-
cies of  Baiana,  with  the  army  of  Farid  Taran,  Commander  of  five
thousand,  in  the  company  of  his  maternal  grandfather,  on  him  be
the  mertyy  of  Ood,  and  witnessed  these  customs  and  rules  of  practice.
And  in  the  year  954  H.  or  in  955  H.,  God  knows  which,  ^hwaja
Wais  Sirwani,  who  had  been  commissioned  to  proceed  against
A‘zam  Hnmayun®  [fought  a battle  with  the  Niyazis  in  the

! This  18  a conjecture.  I have  failed  to  find  the  word  Surgha  in  any

dictionary.  It  sounds  like  a Turk!  word.  There  is  a word  in  the  Turk!
language  Suqkma  or  Suqma  (Fazlu-llah  Khan)  meaning  pilier

colonne  (P  de  C)  and  it  is  quite  possible  that  in  copying  the  wordj  has  been
written  for  ^ and  the  omitted  by  oversight.  We  should  then  hare
as  in  the  text  and  MSS.  The  meaning  is  reasonable:  eight-poled  shamianas
being  very  commonly  used.

S MS.  (A)  has  a different  reading  to  the  text  here.  It  reads
iji  upon  a tray  which  he  had  given  to  the

Sarddr,  instead  of

3 MS.  (B)  omits  the  words  from  iy-b  to  the  cop}-ist  haviiu^  1^.

t&ken  his  placf'  after  the  first  occurrence  if  the  name  AVim  EJijm.  yua.

[ 498  ]

vicinity  of  Dhankot,^  and  was  defeated.  A'zam  Humayun]  having
taken  a strong  force  pursued  him  as  far  as  Sihrind.  Islem  Shah
sent  a large  army  against  the  rebels,  and  at  last  they  fought
another  battle  in  the  same  country,  and  on  this  occasion  also  the

386.  Nivazis  suffered  defeat,  and  some  of  their  women  were  captured
and  sent  to  Gwaliar.  Islem  Shah  dishonoured  them,  and  made
over  to  the  harlots  in  his  camp  the  banners  and  tents  and  all  the
tokens  of  dignity  of  the  Nlyazis  who  had  fallen  into  his  hands,  and
naming  one  Sa’id  lOjan,  and  another  A’zam  ^ Humayun,  and  a
third  Shahbaz  Khan,  in  this  way  he  distributed  titles.  More-
over he  gave  them  drums  which  they  used  to  play  at  their  doors
at  the  time  of  the  nauhat,^  and  the  prostitutes  used  to  give  them-
selves airs^  and  used  to  say  Sag-i-fulalimn.^  This  class  used  to
come  every  Thursday  evening,  in  accordance  with  the  custom
of  the  harlots  of  Hindustan,  to  pay  their  respects  to  Islem  Shah,
and  the  heralds  and  cliambcrlains  used  to  call  out  with  a loud
voice,  0 King  cast  a gracious  glance  hither,  for  a certain  Khan
Kiyazi,  and  Bahman  Khan  are  here  to  invoke  blessings  on  thee.
This  used  to  annoy  the  Afghans  who  were  all  of  one  tribe  and  of
one  mind,  so  that  an  intense  disgust  for  him  bad  sprung  up  in
their  hearts.  Some  assert  that  his  conferring  the  titles  of  the
Niyazis  and  giving  the  ensigns  and  drums  was  ou  the  first
occasion.®  God  knows  the  truth.  And  A'zam  Humayun,  who  ou
the  second  occasion  was  defeated,  was  not  able  to  gird  himself
again  to  war,  and  the  Niyazi  party  being  scattered  asunder  grew
daily  weaker,  and  at  first  took  refuge  with  the  Gbakkars  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Rohtas,  making  the  hill  country  adjoining  the
Kazimir  territory  their  asylum,  Islem  Shah,  in  order  to  remove
the  cause  of  the  mischief,  marched  with  a large  army,  and  reach-
ing the  Panjab  took  up  a strong  position  in  the  northern  hill
range,  and  by  way  of  guarding  his  head-quarter  post  built  five

387.  forts:  viz^  Mankot  and  Rashidkot  and  the  others.  For  a space  of

1 MS.  (A)  Dhaukob.  * MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit

» oJy  ,Vau6at.  Music  which  is  played  daily  by  the  band  appointed  for
the  purpose  at  stated  hours.  See  Aln-i-Akbari  (B)  I.  51.

* Footnote  variant,  also  MSS.  (A)  (B)  Text  reads  ^ t-Kh
Tabl-i-nla  (nawakhtan).  To  beat  the  drum  of  self-conceit.

8ag-i~Falakam.  “ I am  the  dog  of  the  sky/’  a parodied  expres-
aion  taken  from  the  astronomical  ShJr-i-faiak,  the  constellation  Leo.

* On  the  occasion  of  their  first  defeat.

[ 499  ]

two  years  he  kept  the  Afghans  • employed  in  canying  stone  and
lime,  and  bad  snch  a hatred  of  the  whole  tribe  that  lie  heaped  *
the  dust  of  infamy  and  oppression  on  their  heads.  At  this  time
he  did  not  give  them  even  the  smallest  coin  ® by  way  of  recom-
pense. A party  of  them,  however,  who  bad  obtfiined  exemption
from  this  labour,'*'  he  detailed  to  oppose  the  GhaKka.s,  and  they
engaged  in  continuous  warfare  with  them.

The  Ghakkars  in  appearance  like  the  tribe  of  ‘ Ad.‘  dfdly
with  the  Afghans,  and  Lv  night  entered  their  camr  ' ike  thieves,
and  used  to  cairy  off  whomsoever  they  miffht  find,  v .'inaa  or  man
freed  man  or  slave,  and  keep  them  in  bonds  with  the  utmost
rigour,  and  sell  them.  The  Afghans  ® dragsred  them  in  the  dirt,
and  gave  them  the  nickname  of  Ruswai  (disgraced),  but  uo  one
had  the  power  to  represent  this  state  of  things  to  Islcrr.  Shah  fill  at
last  one  day  Shah  JMuhammad  Farmali,^  who  was  one  of  tne
most  noted  Amirs  for  wit  and  good-humour  in  Hindustan,  and
was  also  a specially  favoured  and  forward  boon  companion  .said,

“My  Lord  the  King  ! Last  night  I saw  in  a dream  three  baa's
descend  from,  heaven,  in  one  of  which  was  du.st,  in  another  gold,
and  in  the  third  ^ paper.  The  dust  fell  upon  the  head  of  a
soldier,  the  gold  went  to  the  house  of  the  Hindu  dnjfari.^  and  the
paper  remained  in  the  royal  treasury.”  Islem  Shah  was  pleased
with  this  speech,  and  promised  that  after  bi.s  ri-turn  to  O'waliar  he
would  make  his  accountants  draw  up  an  account  of  the  .soldiers
pay,  and  pay  them  in  gold.  As  it  happened  tliat  order  was  never
carried  out,  for  in  those  same  days  death  seized  him  by  the  collar.

Verse.

Attend  to  my  wants  to-day  for  that  draught  is  of  no  avail
Which  is  given  to  Sohrab  after  his  death.

In  the  end,  the  affairs  of  the  Niyazis  came  to  this,  that  when  388.

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  .51? ^5.  * MS.  (Aj

8 MS.  (A)  j ° reads

tryli  fuliis.  The  jltal  is  an  imaginary  division  of  the  used  .miy  for

purposes  of  calculation.  Its  fictitious  value  is  only  the  thousandth  part
of  a rupee.  A>n-{~AJcbar2  (B)  I.  31.

* Read  Ij  5/  MS.  (A).  MS.  (B)  _ The  text  is  wrong.

6 See  Sale’s  Koran,  p.  4.  ® MSS.  lA)  (Bl  iWO*.**?

1 MSA.  (A'  ^ A scribe,  clerk

[ 600  ]

tlieir  streDgtli  i Tvas  "broken,  and  they  came  into  Kashmir,  the
Kashmiris,  who  are  ^ bom  traitors  and  deceivers,  first  of  all  invited
the  Kiyazis  from  Raiuri  after  inflaming  them  with  spurious
ambition  for  kingdom,  and  in  the  end  their  guides  leading  them
astray  ® brought  the  tribes  of  Ka^mir  to  oppose  them,  and  at  a
hint  from  Islem  Shah  held  the  head  of  the  pass  against  them.
The  women  even  of  the  Niyazis  in  defence  of  their  honour  girded
on  quivers,  (among  them  were  the  mother  and  wife  of  A'zam
Humayun),*  and  fighting  with  the  Kashmiris  were  attacked  by  a
hail  of  stones  which  literally  covered  them,  and  not  a sonl  escaped.
It  is  said  that  in  the  reign  of  Shir  Shah  a body  of  the  Afghans  of
the  tribe  of  Sanbal  invited  the  Niyazis  to  Dhankot  under  treaty,
and  put  two  thousand  of  them  to  death  in  obedience  to  the  orders
of  Shir  Shah,  putting  their  wives  and  children  to  the  sword.  Five
years  later  the  same  thing  happened  to  them,^  and  in  this  hou.se
of  retribution  they  received  the  reward  of  their  deeds,  hand  for
hand.  And®  in  these  narrow  passes  they  put  all  three  brothers
to  the  sword,  sending  their  heads  as  an  offering  to  Salim  Shah.
They  also  sent  for  him  a girl  from  there.  A part  of  this  story  has
been  elegantly  told  in  the  TarikJi-i-Kashmtr,'’  the  composition  of
which  is  ancient  though  its  arrangement  is  modern;  and  at  the  time
when  Islem  Shah,  had  sent  troops  against  the  Gbakkars  and  the
Janoha  party  who  were  strongly  entrenched  on  the  banks  of  the
river  Bebat,  he  himself  was  occupied  in  building  tlie  fortress  of
Mangarh  ; * and  Kaniran  Mirza,  after  fighting  many  battles  with®
3gg  Muhammad  BuiKayun  Padsliah,  fled  trom  Kabul  and  took  refuge
with  Salim  Shah,  in  the  hopes  that  he  would  give  him  reinforce-
ments which  would  enable  him  to  capture  Kabul,  in  the  (vain)
expectation  that  the  water  which  bad  flowed  away  would  return*®
to  its  source.  TVhen  Islem  Shah  heard  this  tidings,  he  selected
from  his  aimy  the  notorious  Humtin**  Baqqal,  who  in  those

1 Footiit.t  ' •...f’.tnt  S MS.  (A)  *^1  3 IISS.  (A)  (B)  iJTi-

* Umit  'I"-!'  (A)  (B)

3 1^  jA  ^^1  Human  dar  Kd^'a-iihdn  hvd.  Lit.

7 tie  &aiH-  (*i  .1.  wr.“  i.i  tiie.-  eup.

3 ilS.iA*  1 T'/. 'C'i-i-A'd^n  . veep  8,  n.  3-

3 Text  il  iljT.ir'  MS.S  I'A  j ' ii  ■ Jl.om'.irh.

® ^ MS.  (A..  *'  ’ S.  (A)  omits

I*  i’ojti  , a;  ;!it  , ■ flu- nit ji.  ' ’-.e  text  reaiis  fhdmM.

[ 501  ]

days,  in  virtue  of  his  capacity  for  extorting  taxes,  liad  been  pro-
moted from  being  overseer  of  the  market  to  a post  of  confidence,  and
sent  him  with  another  body  of  Afghans  to  the  neighbourhood  of
Rohtas  to  meet  Mirza,  and  although  IsJem  ShAli  in  his  own  mind
thought  this  a reason  for  increased  confidence  in  ilirzii,  being  led
to  this  by  the  want  of  confidence  * ho  had  in  the  Afghans  as
a tribe,  and  the  entire  trust  he  reposed  in  Hamu.!!,  siiil  Mirza
himself  made  light  of  this,  and  * recognising  tliat  there  were
dregs  in  the  very  first  draught  of  the  cnp  was  unwilling  to  come
in  person.

Verse.

Now  indeed  thou  repentest  but  thy  repentance  profiteth  thee
nothing.

Nevertheless,  in  spite  of  this  Mirza  still  believed  chat  poss.bly
Islem  Shah  would  overlook  everything,  and  would  treat  him  with
honour  and  respect  when  the  time  of  meeting  arrived.  However,  on
the  day  of  public  audience,  he  himself  entered  with  ari  ogaut  assur-
ance, and  sitting  on  the  seat  of  a FaraAn  or  a ShauJad,®  gave
orders  to  Sarmast  l^an  * the  Afghan,  a Da’udZa’i,^  who  held  the
office  of  Barhak,^  in  accordance  with  which  he  directed  Mirza  to
perform  the  enstomary  salutations  like  the  servants  of  the  ordi-
nary public.  He  accordingly  performed  the  Kornishj  and  those
diabolical  men  * out  of  sheer  inhumanity  seized  Mirza  roughly
by  the  nape  of  the  neck,  and  shouted  aloud  several  times  saying,

Tour  Majesty  ! ® Be  pleased  to  cast  a glance  hither,  fox’  Kamran
the  Muqaddam-zada  of  Kabul  invokes  blessings.  Islem  Shah
after  ignoring  him  for  some  considerable  time,  cast  a haughty
glance  in  the  direction  of  Mirza,*®  and  uttered  a hypocritical  390
“Welcome.”  He  then  ordered  a tent  and  canopy  to  be  erected

I Footnote  variant  and  MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A.)  J 1*^  y J-

* Shaddad  the  son  of  ‘Ad,  see  ante,  p.  261  n.  6.

* MS.  (A)  omits  ® MS.  (A)  omits

* Barbak.  The  chief  attendant  of  the  darbdr  or  pnblic  a-ndience.

'*  Kornish.  A mode  of  salutation  in  which  the  palm  of  the  right

hand  is  placed  on  the  forehead,  and  the  head  bowed.  Ir.  signifies  that  the
saluter  has  placed  his  head  ( which  is  the  seat  of  the  senses  and  the  mind)
into  the  hand  of  humility.  See  Ain-i-Akbari  (B)  I.  158.

* MS.  (A;  9 MS.  (A)  UUab.  lo  MS.  (A)  (B' ji/

[ 502  ]

for  Mirza  near  to  his  own  tent,  and  bestowed  upon  him  a horse
and  a robe  of  honour,  and  a slave  girl  and  a eunuch  so  that  they
might  spy  into  his  affairs.  He  nsed  also  to  summon  the  Mirza
from  time  to  time,  and  hold  converse  with  him  regarding  poetry,
but  their  intercourse  was  always  disagreeable,  and  the  Mirza  was
worried  by  those  incessant  ceremonial  visits  and  shew  of  polite-
ness, till  he  grew  sick  of  his  life,  and  was  watching  a favourable
opportunity  to  make  his  escape.  Moreover  the  Afghans  used  to
make  jibes  at  him  in  the  Hindi  tongue,  and  when  lie  appeared  in
fiarhar  used  to  say*  Moro  mi  dyad^  (Here  comes  the  peacock).
The  Mirza  enquired  from  one  of  the  attendants,  in  the  presence
of  Islem  Shah,  “ What  do  they  mean  by  More  ? ’’  He  answered,
“ It  is  the  name  they  give  * to  a man  of  great  dignity.”  The
Mirza  replied, 5 “ At  that  rate  Salim  Shah  is  a first  rate  d/oro
and  Shir  Shah  was  a still  finer.”  Salim  Shah  con.seqnently  gave
orders  that  no  one  was  ever  to  use  that  word  again,®  nor  to
indulge  in  pleasantries  at  the  Mirza’s  expense.  At  last  one  day
Islem  Shah  called  upon  the  Mirza  for  a verse  of  poetry,  when
the  Mirza  recited  this  matla"  off  hand :

Gardish-i-gardun-i-gardnn  gardananra  gard  hard
Bar  sar-i-sahib-tamizan  naqisan  ra  mard  hard?

The  revolutions  of  the  circling  heaven  have  brought  low  the
mighty.

And  have  made  worthless  men  to  lord  it  over  men  of  intel-
ligence.

Islem  Shah  fully  caught  the  meaning  of  this  verse,  and  gave
secret  orders  to  iiis  attendants  to  keep  the  Mirza  under  open
arrest.  The  Mirza,  however,  by  the  help  of  the  zamindars,^
made  an  arrangement  with  one  of  the  hill  Rajas,  and  persuaded
him,  by  holding  out  inducements  of  various  kinds,  to  station  post-

1 MS.  (A)  (B)  * MS.  (A)  «■.

S HTTT  iLno  is  the  Prakrit  form  of  the  modem  Hindi  Mor,  a peacock.
Mri.  (Bj  reads  J Moro,  that  is  to  say,  a bird.

MS.  (A)  reads  J so  also  footnote  variant  to  text.

•*  MS.  (A)  omits  6 MS.  (B)  omits  cui?.

« MS.  (B)  rends  for

^ Read  ^^Ufor  Ja|  MSS.  (A)  (B).  9 MS.  (B)

[ 503  ]

horses  along  the  banks  of  the  river  Chinab.  One  night  he
emerged  from  his  tent  with  a woman’s  chadar  * drawn  over  his
head.  The  guards  imagined  that  it  was  one  of  the  women  of  his
harim  and  offered  no  interference.

The  Mirza  crossed  the  river  with  his  horse  and  saddle  and
succeeded  in  reaching  the  Raja.  From  there  he  proceeded  alone
clothed  in  a,hurqa‘?  and  taking  ajilauddr^  with  him,  was  escorted*
by  some  of  the  Rajas’  subjects  till  he  arrived  in  the  vicinity  of
the  railage  of  Ghari  Khn.^  on  the  bank  of  the  river  Behat,  and
rested  there  one  night.  Inasmuch  as  that  village  is  near
Sultanpur  the  residence  of  Snltan  Adam  Ghakkar,  at  a distance
of  three  krohs  from  the  fortress  of  Rohtas,  some  one  went  to
Snltan  Adam  and  informed  him  that  a Mughnl  woman  was
encamped  at  such  and  such  a place,  attended  only  by  one  jilaudar
and  that  her  intention  was  to  proceed  on  the  following  morning.
Sultan  5dam  sent  messengers  to  make  enquiries,  and  then
proceeded®  in  person,  and  had  an  interview  with  the  Mirza,  who
by  persistent  entreaty  prevailed  upon  him  to  give  a promise  that
he  would  send  him  in  safety  to  a place  of  refuge,  Sultan  Adam
accordingly  wrote  a letter  to  Muhammad  Humayun  Padshah,  who
had  recently  arrived  in  that  neighbourhood,  begging  him  to  spare
the  Mii’za’s  life-'^

The  Pad.shah  wrote  an  order  in  accordance  with  this  request  *
of  his,  and  sent  it  to  him ; but  eventually,  two  years  later,  he
again  seized  the  Mirza,  and®  after  blinding  him  with  a lancet

1 chadar,  A garment  worn  by  women  over  the  head  and  body.

* Burqa'.  Here  the  author  probably  means  the  garment  covering  the
head  and  body  completely,  and  having  only  a small  latticed  opening  for  the
month,  and  similar  openings  for  the  eyes,  worn  by  Afghan  women  when  out
of  doors.  See  Lane,  Modern  Egyptians,  for  a description  of  the  burqa‘  proper,
which  is  a kind  of  veil.

Jilaudar.  An  attendant  whose  duty  it  is  to  run  beside  the  horse.
Abul-Fa/.l  says  some  of  them  will  run  from  50  to  100  kroh  (100  to  ^X)
miles  ! ) a day.  See  Am-i-Akbari  (B)  I.  133.

^ Text  With  a footnote  saying  that  this  is  the  reading  of  all

three  MSS.  However  MS  (A)  reads  correctly.

» MS.  (A)  MS.  (B)  reads  Ghari  JQ.  « MSS.  (A)  (B)  J ^f.

1 Read  with  MS.  (A)  for  (Text).  » MSS.  (A)  (B)  *.

* MS.  (A)  supplies

391.

[ 504  ]

(ni^tar)  sent  Mm  to  the  holy  city  of  Makkah.  The  word  nishtar
records  the  date  of  tMs  occuiTence.l  These  incidents  have
only  been  briefly  alluded  to  here,  because  they  are  related*
fully  in  the  Ahbar  Ndma  and  the  (Tarikh-i-)yiza7ni.*  Among
the  events  wMch  took  place  during  the  reign  of  Islem  Shah
was  the  affair  of  Shah  Muhammad  of  Dihli,  of  which  the  follow-
ing is  a brief  account.  Shah  Mu^mmad,  in  the  reign  of  Sher
Shah,  had  come  from  the  country  of  ‘Iraq*  to  Hindustan,  and
had  given  himself  out  ^ to  be  a Saiyyid.  There  was  some  hesi-
tation among  the  people  as  to  this  claim ; however,  he  used  to
live  in  accordance  with  the  customs®  of  the  Shaikhs  and  holy
392.  men,  and  was  acquainted  with  the  science  of  invocation  of  the
mighty  names,'^  and  was  not  without  an  admixture  of  deceit.®

Verse,

What  is  expected  of  Shai^s  is  the  performance  of  miracles
and  prayer-statious.

Whereas  what  we  really  see  in  them  are  ecstatic*  and  in- ,
coherent  ravings.

In  spite  of  all,  Shir  Shah  gave  him  credit  for  being  a
todli,  and  Islem  Shah  also  bad  reposed  great  confidence  in  him
from  the  time  he  was  a prince,  and  used  to  go  and  do  reverence
to  him,  and  as  is  the  custom  of  kings,  used  to  take  omens  con-
cerning (his  accession  to)  the  kingdom,  and  from  the  excessively
high  opinion  he  had  of  him  used  to  lift  (the  Saiyyid’s)  shoes.
The  story  goes  that  one  day  they  had  brought  a basket  **  of  melons
as  a present  to  Shah  Muhammad  and  just  then  **  Islem  Shah
arrived.  The  Saiyyid  pointed  to  Islem  Shah  and  said,  I present

1 The  letters  of  this  word  nishtar  give  the  date  960  H.

* See  Elliot  and  Dowson  V.  147  and  235.  * MSS.  (A)  (B)  readjjt— o.

* MSS.  (A)  (B).  ® '*‘*r^t*  we  should  read

* The  text  reads  wrongly  ji  bar  dash  MSS.  (A)(B)  read  ba

ravrish.

7 See  ante,  p.  445  n.  6.  *

» MS.  (A)  reads  sathiyit,  snperficialitiea.

10  MS.  (A)  anppUes  J MS.  (B)  roads
U Jjlai  ta/o’ai  MS.  (B)  roads  J".

MS.  (B)  reads  saiyyid  for  sahad.

1*  MSS.(A)(B)

[ 505  ]

you  with  this  basket  confident  in  its  being  as  a royal  umbrella  to
you,^  rise,  and  place  it  on  your  head  and  be  gone.  Isiem  Shah
without  hesitation  lifted  the  basket  accepted  it  as  a lucky  omen
and  took  his  departure.

How  good  it  is  to  take  a Itteky  omen,

Not  to  strike  one’s  cheek  (in  grief)  but  to  give  mate  with  the
rook.^

But  eyentually  this  matter  became  a source  of  annoyance  to
liim  = as  is  generally  the  case  At  all  events,  when  Isiem  Shah
succeeded  to  the  kingdom,  during  his  reign  two  Saiyyids  of  good
birth,  men  of  ascetic  habit,  clean-living,  dignified,  and  agree-
able, one  of  whom  was  named  Amir  Ahu*  Talib  who  was  the
inferior,  and  the  other  named  Mir  Shamsn-d-Din  who  was  his
fiupeiior  and  brother's  son  to  him,  arrived  from  the  country  of
‘Iraq  at  the  camp  of  Isiem  Shah  in  the  Panjab,  and  came  to  Dihli,
where  they  took  up  their  abode  in  one  of  the  quarters  of  the  city,
and  were  resorted  to  by  all  classes.  Amir  Abu  Talib  was  so
marvellously  skilled  iu  the  abstruse  seieuce  of  medicine,  that  the
majority  of  the  sick  who  came  under  his  treatment  obtained
cures,  and  used  to  bring  him  presents  and  offerings  in  return,  to
say  nothing  of  perquisites.®  A report  was  spread  that  he  was
in  possession  of  the  ring  of  ‘Ali.®  may  God  be  satisfied  with  him,
one  of  the  properties  of  which  was  that  no  one  who  was  sus-
pected (of  being  of  bastard  origin)  could  stand  in  presence  of
that  ring,  and  retain  the  power  of  seeing  it,  God  knows  the
truth.  Relying  upon  his  former  intimacy  with  Shah  Muhammad,
he  desired  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  to  the  nephew  of  Mir
Abu  Talib,  but  he  was  by  no  means  inclined  to  agree  to  this

1 MS.  (A)  supplies  after

® Chi  nihu  haicad  fdl-i-farrukh  zadan

Na  bar  rut^  zadan,  halki  shah  rukh  zadan

There  ia  a play  here  on  the  words  ruW  and  famkh,  illustrating  the

figure  known  as  The  word  tuIA  means  the  cheek,  and  also  the

castle  or  “ rook  ” at  chess.

* MS.  (A)  pats  after  * MSS.  (A)  (B).

6 MS.  (B)  reads

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  'supply  The  ring  of  Solomon  which  was  given  to

*AU  by  Muhammad,  was  possessed  of  magical  properties.

64

393.

L S06  ]

proposal,  and  folk  began  to  entertain  increased  suspicion  against
him,  and  both  small  and  great  talked  openly  about  him.  Shah
Muhammad  summoned  these  two  holy  men  into  his  own  private
dwelling  for  safe  custody,  and  took  great  pains  to  entertain
them.  One  night,  not  long  afterwards,  an  armed  band  entered
his  ^ house  by  the  upper  story  and  martyred  both  father  and  son
who  were  engaged  in  their  night’s  devotions.  They  then  left  the
house,  and  in  the  morning  the  governor  of  the  city  came  and
enquired  of  Shah  Muhammad  bow  this  had  occurred.  He  abso-
lutely denied  any  knowledge  of  the  circumstances,  and  stated
that  he  had  no  idea  who  the  murderers  were  ; then  he  prepared  a
report  of  the  affair  under  the  Great  Seal,  and  sent  it  together
with  a despatch  to  Islem  Shah  at  his  camp.  Islem  Shah  there-
upon sent  to  Dihli  Mnkhdumn-l-Mulk  Mulla  ‘Abdu-llah  of
Sultanpur,*  who  was  Shaikh n-I- Islam  and  Sadru-s-sudiir,  to  investi-
gate this  matter,  and  also  despatched  circular  letters  summoning
the  Chief  ‘Ularaa  of  the  time,  for  example  Miyan  Hatim  Sanbali,
Miyau  Jamal  Khan  Mufti,  and  others.  This  conflict  lasted  two
months  after  this  time,  and  after  gieat  argument  and  enquiry  it
was  with  tolerable  certainty  conjectured^  that  the  murderers
were  agents  of  Shah  Muhammad.'*  This  result  was  reported  to
394.  Islem  Shah,  but  before  any  reply  could  be  received  Shah  Muham-
mad, who  had  sunk  from  so  high  dignity  to  the  depths  of  disgrace,
could  not  endure  the  anxiety,  underwent  vene.section  and  took
sour  milk  in  addition,  and  endured  voluntarily  humiliating
penance.  Report  also  says  even  more  than  this,  but,  every  one
knew  perfectly  well  that  all  these  austerities  and  self-inflictions,
were  the  outcome  of  hypocrisy  and  deceit,  and  not  inspired  by
religious  motives.

Thou  hast  forsaken  the  world  for  the  sake  (f  the  tvorld.

Quatrain.

This  long  time  thou  hast  made  thy  tongue  like  a sword.

So  that  thou  givest  the  attributes  of  a lion  to  one  who  is  but
a tlog.

Thou  turnest  upside  down  the  storehouse  of  falsehood
In  order  to  satisfy  thy  own  hungry  belly.

I MS.  (A)  omits  2 See  Ain-i-Akliari  ( Blockmann)  I,  Biography  VII.

« MS  (B)  reads  <vi  i jiS.  (B)

L 507  ]

This  event,  took  place  in  ths  year  956  H.  Another  important
incident  was  the  affair  of  ShaiWi  ‘Alai  Mahdi  of  Baiana,^  which
closely  resembles  the  affair  of  Sidl  Mania,*  which  took  place
during  the  reign  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  Firoz  Shah,  in  fact  the
proverb,  One  shoe  is  like  its  fellow,^  is  exactly  applicable  here.

The  following  is  a brief  exposition  of  this  affair  : The  father
of  the  aforesaid  Shai^  ‘Alai  was  called  Hasan,  and  was  one  of
the  great  Shaikhs  of  the  country  of  Bangala,  and  on  his  arrival
from  Bangala  on  the  occasion  of  his  pilgrimage  to  the  holy  city
of  Makka  with  his  younger  brother  Shaikh  Xasru-llah,  who  was
one  of  the  most  eminent  of  the  ‘’llama,  came  from  there  to
Hindustan  and  took  up  his  abode  in  the  province  of  Baiana.  The
words  Ja‘a  nasru-llahi  walfath,*  were  found  to  give  the  date  of
that  event.  The  eider  brother  gave  his  attention  to  irshad  ^ and
Ardflyaf,  and  the  younger  ® to  fatwdi  and  instruction  in  religious
knowledge.^

^aikh  ‘Alai,  who  was  the  most  orthodox  of  the  sons  of  the
Shail^,  the  tablet  of  whose  forehead  was  from  early  boyhood
distinguished  by  the  marks  of  nobility  and  uprightness,  and  the
evidences  of  a youth  to  be  spent  in  the  worship  of  God  and  in
following  the  ordinances  of  the  prophet  of  God,  may  the  peace  and
Messing  of  God  rest  upon  him,  in  the  service  of  his  venerable
father  devoted  himself  to  the  acquirement  of  exoteric  and  esoteric
sciences,  and  to  the  improvement  of  his  character,  disposition,  and
behaviour,  and  in  a short  time®  having  read  all  the  routine  works
by  the  aid  of  his  natural  quickness  of  apprehension  and  clear
intellect,  engaged  in  tuition  and  instruction.

1 See  Ain-i-Akbarl  (Blochmann)  I,  Biography  V,  seiiq.

* See  Beale  (Oriental  Biog.  Diet.),  p.  240.

® (J«il|  jiXzk..  They  also  say  iioAllj  i.e..  one  feather  of  the

arrow  is  like  another.  See  Freytag  Free,  rtrah  I.  345.  As  we  say  “ As  like
as  two  peas.”

* The  letters  give  the  date  935  H.  The  words  mean,

The  victory  of  God  and  conquest  has  come  to  pass.

6 Irshad.  Orthodoxy.  Hidayat,  Guidance,  direction.

* JISS.  (A)  (B)  both  omit  but  the  text  seems  probably  correct-

fatwq.  Religioaa  or  judicial  rulings.

® MS.  (A)  omits  the  words  ^ MSS  (A)  (B)

396.

[ 508  ]

Verse.

Contiimal  learning  is  reqnisite  with  application  and  exertion,
Always  by  day  argument  and  by  night  repetition.

Piety,  asceticism,  worship  and  reverence.

Without  these,  all  acquisitions  are  wondrous  vain.

After  the  death  of  his  revered  father,  having  abandoned  the
ordinary  conversation  and  giving  up  all  connection  tvith  the
delusive  phantoms  of  the  world,  he  set  himself  to  follow  consis-
tently the  paths  of  obedience  and  austerity,  firmly  occupying  the
prayer  carpet  of  the  Shai^s,  and  used  to  engage  in  the  direction
and  instruction  * of  seekers  of  the  right  way.  Nevertheless  he
still  retained  a residue  of  evidences  of  worldly  desires,  and  in
accordance  with  the  saying,  “ The  last  thing  to  leave  the  head  of
the  just  is  the  love  of  glory,”  * seeking  as  he  did  to  claim
superiority  over  his  fellow-men,  he  was  unwilling  that  any  other
Shai^  in  that  city  should  share  his  dignity ; this  he  carried  so
far  that  on  the  day  of  the  festivals,  from  his  excessive  jealousy®
and  envy,  he  caused  one  of  the  leaders  of  the  contemplative  *
and  ascetic  ® Shai^s  of  the  Sufi  party  to  descend  from  his  litter,
thus  inflicting  a grievous  blow  to  his  dignity.  He  used  to  arrogate
to  himself  alone  the  dignity  of  Shaikhdom.  His  other  brothers,
who  in  respect  of  years  and  experience  were  his  superiors,  used
also  to  yield  submission  to  him  and  pride  themselves  upon  it.®

In  the  meanwhile  Miyan  ‘Abdu-llah,  a Niyazi'l'  Afghan,  who  was
at  first  one  of  the  most  noted  lieutenants  of  Shaikh  Salim  Chishti
of  Fathpur,  and  who  eventually  with  his  permission  proceeded  on
a pilgrimage  to  the  sacred  city  of  Makka,  and  performed  various
kind  oflices  and  favours  for  him,  taking  part  with  Mir  Saiyyid
Muhammad  of  Jaunpnr,®  may  God  sanctify  his  holy  resting-place,
who  had  claimed  to  be  the  promised  Mahdi,  and  adopting  the
manners  of  a Mahdi,  on  his  return  from  the  Hij^  took  up  his

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  write  >11^1  j

5 “ That  last  infirmity  of  noble  minds.’

> Badaoni  here  uses  Ata*  ghibtat  in  a sense  opposed  to  its  classical  mean-
ing which  is  emulation  nnmized  with  envy.

* MS.  (A)  reads  for  in  the  text.

6 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  in  the  text.

6 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  7 See  Ain-i-Akbari  (Bj  I,  v.

* See  Ain-i-Akbari  (B)  I,  iv.

[ 509  ]

abode  in  Bianah,  and  making  his  dwelling  in  the  comer  of  a
grove  far  from  the  haunts  of  men  on  the  borders  of  a tank,  used
to  cast  water  upon  his  head  ; and  when  the  times  of  prayer  came
round,  used  to  gather  together  certain  of  the  labourers,  hewers  of  396-
wood  and  drawers  of  water  who  had  to  pass  by  that  way,  and  compel
them  to  form  an  assembly  for  prayer,*  with  such  a degree  or
enthusiasm,  that  if  he  met  any  man  disinclined  for  the  meeting
be  would  give  him  a few  coins  * and  encourage  him,  thus  not
allowing  the  reward  of  the  assembly*  to  escape  him.

When  ShaiHi  ‘Alai  saw  bis  conduct  he  Teas  greatly  pleased,*
and  said  to  his  own  followers.  This  is  religion  and  true  faith
which  Miyin  ‘Abdn-llah  Niyazi  has,  whereas  the  path  in  which
we  are  held  is  nought  bnt  idolatry  and  infidelity.^

So  long  as  a hair’s  breadth  of  existence  remains  to  thee  *

The  danger  of  idol- worship  still  remains  for  thee  •

Thou  sayest  I have  broken  my  idols  and  my  Zunnar,  I am  free,

This  idol  however,  thy  slavery  to  self-conceit,  remains  to  thee.

Abandoning  the  customs  of  his  forefathers,  and  giving  np  his
claims  as  a Shaikh  and  a leader  of  religion,  trampling  under  foot
his  self-esteem  and  conceit,  he  devoted  himself  to  the  care  of  the
poor  of  his  own  neighbourhood,  and  with  the  utmost  self-mortifi-
cation and  humility  gave  himself  up  to  the  service  of  those  whom
he  had  formerly'*  vexed,  and  abandoning  his  madad-i-maa^*
and  his  alms-house  and  monastery,®  enteiung  the  valley  of  self-
renunciation  and  abnegation,  bestowed  all  his  worldly  possessions

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  jUi.  » MS.  (A)

S Concerning  this  it  is  said:  “ The  prayers  which  are  said  in  multitude#
increase  the  rewards  of  those  said  alone  by  twenty-seven  degrees,”  See
Mish k(2tu-l -Masdbih  (Mathew)  xxiv.  1.

* MS.  :B)

5 yo’/'ac’t  . zunndrduri  n/st.  The

term  ZuTiiiar  [Gk.  iwapri  (GoUas)  vt  (^revtag)]  is  s-ppUed  to  the  beH

orgiidie  worn  by  :1jc  Ch»-  or  M.-^uisn.  !t  --*'‘-'0  applies  to  the  Eraliminical
and  ihua  the  wt  tr  ;r  of  ary  ’if  these  ie  t j Mutshms  au  innde*.

« MS.  i X)  O—!  Jl y G.

' Land  ; for  b’^’ievoleni  p '•«. ' A.ind--A‘ch  .

B)  !'  '-ISS  • ■ ■

MS':,

[ 510  ]

even  to  his  books  npon  the  poor,  and  said  to  his  wife,*  “ Tlie  pains
of  the  search  after  God  have  gotten  hold  of  me,  if  thou  canst
endure  poverty  and  hunger  come  with  me  in  God’s  name,  but  if
not  take*  thy  portion  of  these  goods  ; and  take  the  reins  of  choice
into  thine  own  bauds,  and  go  thy  way.”

Follow  my  fortunes,  or  else  depart  far  from  me

She  of  her  own  accord  was  liigidy  pleased  with  this  deter-
mination of  his.^

397.  There  are  some  women  who  perform  perhaps  even  better  than
men  the  duties  of  religion

Just  as  in  boldness  the  lioness  surpasses  the  lion.

Then  approaching  Miyan  ‘Abdu-llah,  with  all  respectful  sub-
mission to  him,  be  took  instruction  in  the  ceremonial  observance  of
!Zikr  * in  the  manner  which  obtains  among  that  sect.

The  interpretations  of  the  Qur‘an,  and  the  delicate  points  and
miuutite  and  true  meanings  of  that  sacred  book  were  easily
revealed  to  him,  and  a large  number  of  the  friends  and  coni-
panion.s  who  were  in  accord  with  him,  and  believed  iu  him,  some
of  them  unmarried  and  some  with  families,  chose  conipanionshij)^
with  him  even  at  the  risk  of  theii  lives,  and  following  the  path
of  his  guidance  with  the  foot  of  reliance  in  God,  three  hundi'cd
householders,  abandoning  all  other  source  of  gain  and  traffic,
agriculture  and  skilled  labour,  spent  their  time  with  him.  And
whenever  anything  was  given  by  Providence  they  used  to  divide
it  justly,  apportioning  to  each  individual  an  equal  share.  If
notliiug  came,^  comforting  themselves  with  the  sacred  word,

‘‘ Alen  whom  neither  merc*iandi.se  nor  selling  divert  from  the
remembrance  of  God,”®  even  had  they  died  of  hunger,  they  would
not  have  uttered  a .sound,  and  if  any  person  abandoning  his  vow
made  according  to  their  mutual  compact  engaged  in  any  lucrative
occupation,  of  a surety  he  would  expend  a tithe  of  it  in  the

1 MS.  (A)  reads  * MSS.  (A)  (B)  The  text  reads  wrong-
ly ® omitted  from  MS.  { B).

4 yi.  ^ikr.  The  religions  ceremony  practised  bj  the  various  religious
orders  of  Faqirs.  See  Hughes,  Diet,  of  JsldrA,  art.  Zikr,

* I read  here  MSS.  (A)  (Bj,

**  Qur’an  xxiv.  37.

* * ^ * * * *

[ 511  ]

service  of  Almiglity  God.  Twice  daily  after  the  morning  prayer
and  aiiotlier  prayer,  great  and  small  would  gather  in  that
assembly,  and  listen  to  an  exposition  of  the  Qur'an.  Shai^  ‘Alai
had  such  a marvellous  power  of  attraction  that  when  he  was
expounding  the  Qur'an  almost  every  one  who  heard  him,  of  his
own  accord  withheld  his  hand  from  all  worldly  occupation,  and
elected  to  join  that  assembly,*  abandoning  his  family  and  relations
and  children,  enduring  the  hardships  of  poverty,  hunger  and
religious  wa.rfare  never  troubled  himself  again  about  his  work  or
gains  ; and  if  he  had  not  that  degree  of  fortitude,  his  penitence
and  repentance  of  his  sins  and  iniquities  would  certainly  have
availed  nothing,  while  many  a one  thought  it  his  duty  to  empty
his  cooking  vessels  at  nightfall  of  all  the  necessities  of  life  even
to  and  tionr  and  water,  and  let  them  remain  upside  down,  and  398.
the 5"  kept  nothing  in  the  way  of  means  of  existence  by  them,  from
their  extreme  faith  in  the  providence  of  Almighty  God,  and  the
saying  “ Each  new  day  brings  a new  provision  ’’  was  the  basis  of
their  practice.

A short  account  of  this  sect  is  gi^en  inihe  Najatu-r-rashid^
which  should  be  consulted.^

In  spite  of  this  they  were  in  the  habit  of  keeping  arms  and
implements  of  war  always  with  them*  as  a protection  against
their  eneniies,  so  that  anyone  who  was  anac(iu.ainteJ  with  the
trurh  of  the  matter  would  bo  apt  to  think  they  -wei-e  wealthy  ;

Tl:-^  i/.ivruar  thiiik  them  to  be  rieh  brcause  of  their  modeity.^  And
w henever  they  saw  any  irreligious  or  forbidden  action  either  in
the  city  or  the  market,  they  went  and  called  the  offenders  to
account  by  main  force,®  and  admitted  no  inrestig'ation  by  the
governor,  and  on  most  occasions  tiiey  got  the  be.st  of  it ; they
aided  every  magistrate  of  the  city  who  acted  iu  conformity  with
their  religious  tenets  and  principles  '*  in  carrying  out  his

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  insert  \j  after

Kajatu-r-rashld.  A MS.  of  this  work  is  ia  the  Library  of
the  Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  No,  E.  204.  Its  author  is  Badaoni.

® MS.  (A)  reads  * MS.  (A)  reads

» Qnr’Sn  ii,  274.

* MS.  (A)  reads  for

7 MS.  (A)  reads

L 512  J

measures,  'while  no  one  who  ■was  opposed  to  their  views  conid
[stand  against  them.  Matters  came  to  such  a pass  that  fathers
left  their  sons,  brother  left  brother,  and  wife  left  husband]  * and
entered  the  charmed  circle  of  the  Mahdi,  voluntarily  submitting
to  poverty  and  extinction.  Miyan  ‘Abdu-llah  when  he  saw  that
Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  had  lost  his  influence  with  rich  and  poor  alike,  and
that  his  day  was  over,  was  mnch  vexed,  and  speaking  with  gentle-
ness and  moderation,  said  by  way  of  advice.  The  time  cannot
awav  with  afiairs  of  this  kind,  and  tenth  nowadays  has  become
more  bitter  than  colocynth.  ft  were  wiser  for  yon  to  quit  this
vale  (of  iniquity)  and  either  retire  into  obscurity  or  determine
upon  a journey  to  the  Hijaz.

Verse.

Alas ! for  him  who  escapes  not  from  public  turmoil,

Alas  ! for  him  who  sets  his  heart  upon  the  men  of  this  world.

The  hand  of  the  faqir  holds  no  other  coin  but  that  of  leisure,
399.  Alas ! for  him  if  he  abandons  that  also.

Shai^  ‘Ala’i,*  retaining  that  selfsame  habit  and  conduct  ®
•which  he  always  had,  accompanied  by  six  or  seven  hundred
families,  set  out  for  Gujrat  in  the  hope  that  in  the  companionship
of  the  chiefs  * and  leaders  of  this  sect  he  might  learn  the  customs
of  the  inmates  of  cloisters.*  At  the  time  of  his  arrival  at  the
township  of  Easawar  from  Baiana,  my  late  father  took  me,  the
writer  of  these  pages,  to  do  homage  to  him.  In  consequence  of
my  tender  years,  his  form  remained  fixed  in  my  memory  as  a
dream  or  a vision.  On  his  arrival  at  Hiawaspur  which  is  near
Jodhpur,  Khawass  Khan  who  had  been  appointed  to  that  district,
at  first  came  out  to  receive  him  and  joined  the  circle  of  his
adherents  : but  in  consequence  of  his  devotion  to  musical  enter-
tainments and  pastimes,®  whereas  now  every  Thursday  night
Sufis  used  to  assemble  in  his  house,  and  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  forbade
music  and  other  prohibited pastimes,  and  enjoined*  that  which

1 MS.  (A)  Oj.  The  words  in  brackets  are  omitted  in  MS,  (B).

5 IIS.  (A)  omits  * MS.  (B)  omits  j.

* M3.  (A)  reaii.s  wrongly  oUeb.

^ Insert  in  the  text  I;  after  MSS.  (A)  tB).

6 .MSS.  (A)  (B)  1 MSS.  iA)  (B)

S MS.  (B/  reads  wrongly  yofjf  for

513

was  Jawfal  and  opposed  that  which  was  foibidden  by  law,  accord-
ingly their  association  was  not  agreeable,  besides  wliieli  opposition
and  disagreement  arose  with  regard  to  the  upholding  of  the  rights
of  the  soldiery  : The  saying —

Verily  .ipeahing  the  truth  will  not  le-ive  me  a j-iend^

is  a well  known  proverb.  Shaikh  ‘Ala'i  in  consequence  of  cer-
tain opposition  which  arose,  turned  bauk  in  the  middle  of  the
journey  and  returned  to  Baiana,  and  at  the  time  wLen  Jslem  Shah
had  taken  firm  possession  of  the  throne  of  power  in  Agra,  and
"the  rumours  regarding  i^aikh  ‘Ala'i  reached  his  ears,  he  sent  for
Mir  Saiyyid  Rafi'u-d-Din  the  traditionist,  and  Miyan  ® Ahul-fach
of  Thanesar  and  other  learned  doctors  of  Agra,  and  summoned
Shaikh  ‘Ala'i  from  Baiana,  at  the  instigation  of  3Iakhdumu-I-
mulk  Maulana  ‘Abdn-llah  of  Snltanpur.  He  accordingly,  accom-
panied by  a party  of  select^  companions,  all  of  whom  wore  mail
and  were  fully  armed,  came  to  the  Court,  and  paying  no  heed  to
the  customary  observances  of  kingly  assemldici,-*  greeted  the
whole  assemblage  in  the  manner  appointed  by  the  !'nv.s  of  Islam.^

Islem  Shah  acknowledged  his  salutation  with  indioniation,  as  the
appearance  of  the  Siiaikh  greatly  disploa.sed  ® him  and  his
courtiers.

Makhdumu-l-Mulk  had  fully  persuaded  Islem  Shah  that  400.
Shaikh  ‘Ala'i  was  a revolutionary  who  laid  claim  to  being  the
Mahdi,  and  that  the  Mahdi  him.self  would  be  king  of  the  whole
world ; consequently  as  he  presumed  to  rerolt  he  was  de.?erving
of  death,  -isa  Khau  Hajjab  who  held  a ver^-  contidrutial  po.st,
and  the  other  Amirs,  when  they  saw  Shaikh  "Ala'i  in  this  dis-
plea.sing  attire,  with  ragged  clothes  and  worn  out  s-h.oes,  said  to
I.sleiu  .;yjdii  : ■■  This  follow,  in  this  condition  and  with  this  miser-
able appearance,  wisbe.s  to  take  away  the  kingdom  from  us,  doe
he  imagine  that  we  Afghans  are  all  corp.ses  ! ”

Prior  to  the  convening  of  the  assembly  for  discussion.  Shaikh
‘Ala’i  in  accordance  with  his  invariable  custom,  had  expounded  a

•'  y (•>  ' Cm

L ISjU^  ^ Jj3  2 -MSS.  (Aj  (B)

2 .M3.  (BJ  omits  .

* MS.  (A)  reads  uMjb  yo  j-ib  ye  and  omits

6 Omit  j M,3S.  (A)  (Bj.  6 JISS.  (Aj  (B)

' -MSS.  (.tj  (Bj  &iip|)ly  cikk,
do

■;  514  ]

few  verses  of  the  Qur’au,  and  delivered  such  a profitable  discourse,
in  most  elegant  language,  comprising  a criticism  of  the  world,
and  a description  of  the  last  judgment,  and  contemptuous  remarks
regarding  the  learned  men  of  the  time,  and  all  their  faults  and
failings,*  that  it  had  the  most  profound  effect*  upon  Islem  Shah
and  the  Amirs  who  were  present  in  the  assembly,  notwithstanding
their  hardness  of  heart,  so  that  it  brought  tears  to  their  eyes  and
left  them  amazed  and  confounded.  Islem  Shah  then  rose  from
the  assemblj",  and  giving  the  matter  his  own  attention  sent
refreshments  from  inside  the  palace  for  the  Shaikh  and  his  com-
panions,'^ The  i^aikh,  however,  refused  to  touch*  the  food
himself,  and  moreover  when  Islem  Shah  entered  ^ he  did  not  pay
him  any  respect,  and  merely  said  to  his  friends  : Any  one  who
chooses  may  eat  of  it.  T\  hen  they  enquired  of  him  the  reason  of
his  abstaining  from  eating  the  food  ho  replied  ; “ Your  food  is  due
to  Muslims  because  you  have  possessed  more  than  was  yours  by
right,  contrary  to  the  dictates  ® of  the  law  of  Islam.”  Islem
Shah  notwithstanding  this  repressed  his  anger,  and  referred  the
enquiry  into  the  triirh.  of  that  dispute,^  and  the  decision  of  that
contention  to  the  •uluma.

^laikh  "Ala  t vancjuishcd  every  one  of  them  in  argument  by
virtue  of  hi.s  quickness  of  intellect  and  clearness  of  apprehension,
401.  and  whenever  Mir  Saiyyid  Bafiu-d-Din  (who  died  in  the  year
954  H. ) was  engaged  « in  citing  the  traditions  which  existed  relat-
ing to  the  appearance  of  the  promised  Mahdi,  and  the  signs  by
which  he  v,  oiild  be  known,  Shaildi  ‘AlaT  used  to  say,  “ you  are  a
^lafi  ite  by  religion  ® and  we  are  Hanifites,  the  fundamentals
of  your  tiaditicns  are  different  fi*om  those  of  our’s How  can  we
accept-'  jour  explanations  and  inteipretations  on  this  question  ?
Xor  did  he  spare  **  even  Mulla  ‘.■Thdu-llah  him.self  in  his  criticism
of  a single  point,  sajiiig  to  him,  ’‘you  are  one  of  the  learned  men
of  the  world  and  a chief  of  religion,  and  j'ou  engage  in  so  many

l MS.  {.^,1  coti-Tiu...

» MS.  ,A)  j 3 Jig

* MS.  .t  > b JIS.  (A;

9 MSS  c.\;  li,  ; j-i  oltif.  "t  jigg  C»3Srf^iyf.

^ MS.  "■  v.-i!Lf5  oUJi.c  omitting

• M-SS  i.i  L 10  MS.  (B)  h j.

Ms  (Bj  ic.'-Us  MS.  (B)  reads

[ SJ5  ]

illeo^al  practices  that  yoa  have  put  yourself  outside  the  pale  of
equity,  so  that  even  to  this  time  the  sound  of  pipe  and  tabor  may
be  plainly  heard  issuing  from  your  house,  and  in  accordance  with
the  true  traditions  of  the  prophet,  upon  him  he  peace  and  blessing,  a
fly  which  settles  upon  filth  is  by  degrees  better  than  learned  men
who  ^ have  made  kings  and  emperors  the  object  of  their  ambition
and  gad  from  door  to  door.

Verse.

Learning  which  exists  for  the  sake  of  palace  and  garden
Is  like  a lamp  to  the  night  loving  thief.

In  accordance  with  these  premisses  he  uttered  so  many  scathing
satires  [on  those  who  preach  but  do  not  practise,  citing  in  support
of  his  ® arguments  examples  from  the  Qur’an  and  Traditions]
that  Mulla  ‘Abdu-llah  was  not  able  to  say  a single  word  in
defence.  One  day  in  the  midst  of  the  argument  it  happened  that
the  learned  Mulla  Jalal  Bhim  * of  Agra,  having  turned  up  that
tradition  which  relates  to  the  description  and  evidences  of  the
promised  Mahdi,*  read  as  follows,®  Ajallu-l-jabhah,  ® on  the  form
of  the  afalu-t-taful  derived  from  jalal ; Shai^  ‘Ala*i  smiled,  and
said,  “ Good  Heavens ! ^ Ton  have  given  yourself  out  to  the
world  as  a marvel  of  learning,  and  yet  yon  cannot  read  with  a
proper  pronunciation,  you  have  no  knowledge  of  the  delicacies,

1 Omits  ji  MS.  (A).  S Notin  MS.  (B)  which  reads  Ajjf

8 MS.  (A)  reads  Thim.

* Begarding  the  Mahdi.  see  Blochman  Ain-i-Akbari  I,  iii.
t MSS.  (A)  (BJ  ^

6 The  text  here  runs :

(*5^  (JU.(  AT

MS.  (A)  reads  more  correctly  * lLAUxIi

Ajallu-l-jahhah  would  have  no  accurate  meaning,  .fitlkl  meaning  gmatnes,?.

The  superlative  form  with  the  article  is  applied  to  God.  - .ll-Ajalln.

The  form  Cwf  afciHu  is  called  the  or  form  of  superiority,

i.e.,  the  comparative,  or,  combined  with  the  arricic,  the  siipcrlativc.

J’

7 «U|  url**-  Sitbhan-AnaK  : (iit  } J’/Gi.-t  h<r  r.-  /;,»#/  A t’oiiifix'u  modt  i-(
expressing  snrpri5e  oi

[ 516

402.

and  subtleties  and  minntiae  of  the  aeience  of  tradition.'  The
veaX  vs&img  is  AjlqvA-jablah^  which  is  the  form  Afa^alu-t-tafzll
fromjaZfl,  not  from  /aZflZ  which  is  your  own  name.”

He  was  abashed  and  said  not  another  word.^  They  likewise
relate  concerning  Shaikh  Mubarak  * that  he  was  an  ally  ^ of
Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  in  this  assembly,  and  from  that  day  ® he  became
known  7 as  Mahdawi,  and  Islem  Shah  being  deceived  * by  his
speech  and  explanations  used  to  say  “ You  must  have  been  in  the
habit  of  expounding  the  meaning  of  the  Qur’an,”  he  also  gave  a
message  to  the  .Shaikh  in  tliese  words  “ Give  up  this  claim  of
yours  to  be  the  promised  Mahdi,9  and  renounce  this  pretension
secretly  'o  in  my  hearing,  and  I will  make  you  chief  overseer  of
religion  in  the  whole  of  my  dominions,  and  whatever  lawful
orders  you  ha\e  been  in  the  habit  of  issuing  w'itliout  my
authoiity,  continue  heucefortli  to  issue  the.se  same  commands  with
my  permission.  Otherwise,  the  ‘Ulama  of  this  time  have  given
their  decision  that  you  should  be  killed  and  gibbetted,  but  I will
revise  tlieir  sentence,  for  I am  not  willing  that  your  blood  should
be  shed.  The'Shaikh,  however,  who  had  been  successful  at  every
step,  and  in  this  ea.sy  pretension  and  partial  object  of  attainment
had  got  beyond  the  power  of  even  Islem  Shah,"  cared  nought  for

^ MSS,  (a)  (tj  omit

* Ajiau-l-jalhah.  Most  wide  of  forehead.  That  is  to  say

having  that  degree  of  baldness  whieli  is  termed  ^ baldness  of

the  fore  part  of  the  head.  Sef>  T^ant  tt  'j.  v.

* MS.  (.\)  reads  incorrectly  yj  cijX

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  have  J before  the  word

« MSS.  (A)  (B)  correctly  read  JhuM’.  The  text  lii=

^no'-h

S MSS.  (A)  (H)  i-TTiit  jjj  readitig  jh
MSS,  (A;  ^

« M.SS.(A1  (llj  ..cm  r..ad

•MSS.  fA)(Rj  r.ad  h,  f.-i-  jj

w MS.  (A)  reds  for  Ai-off.

1'  MS.  (B)  reads  for

617

J

any  ruler  and  addressed^  him  in  these  words,  “ why  should  I
change  3 my  own  belief  at  your  bidding.”

If  thou  desirest  safety,  reproach  is  right
If  safety  is  lost,  reproach  is  a mistake.

In  the  meantime  tiding.?  reached  Islem  Shah*  daily  “To-day
such  and  such  an  Afghan  * general  has  gone  over  to  the  following
of  the  Shaikh  and  sided  with  him,  giving  up  all  worldly  consi-
derations.”

The  following  day  Bahman  and  Mulla  ‘Abdn-llah  spent  every
moment  in  nrging  Jslem  ^hah  to  pnt  the  Sijaikh  to  death.  At
last  Islem  Shah  save  orders  for  his  expulsion,*  and  torbade  him
to  remain  iu  his  kingdom,  and  orlered  him  to  go  to  the  Dakkan.
Sjiaikh  ‘Ali’i  who  had  for  ye.'u-s  * desiied  to  t''avel  in  the  Dakkan
and  to  see  how  the  iVIahdawi  Mcas  were  progre-'.^ing  there,  hearing
this  good  tidings  recited^  the  text  Vt.riiij  Ct"'Vs  I'arth  is  idde  *

Then  he  arose  and  started  nithoai  delay  for  that  country.

Qas’a,  curtail  thy  .speech,  a’i.se.  and  take  tliy  way.

Cast  the  sugar  to  the  parrot.s.  ca.-^t  the  carcase  to  the  vultuies.

On  his  arrival  at  Handiva,®  which  is  the  frontier  of  the
Dakkan,  Bihar  Khan,  who  was  entitled  A’zam  Humayun  Sirwani,
the  governor  of  that  place,  kept  him  for  some  time  in  his  own
family,  and  havincr  embraced  his  tenets  n.sed  to  go  daily  to  hear
his  preaching,  and  iialf  his  army,  nay  more  than  half,  sided  with
him  ; this  news  was  brought  to  I.siem  .Snah  by  runners,  and  roused
his  indignation.  Maklidumu-l-iiulk  took  great  pains  to  paint  the
event  in  glowing  colours,  and  misi’epresented  it  to  Islem  ^ah  so
that  orders  were  issued  summoning  ^laiklj  ‘Ala’i.  Just  at  thi.s

i Omit  MS.  (A).

S MS.  (A)  * MS.  (A)

MS.  (A)  * MS  CR)  !<.>>'

* JtS  (B)  omits  Jh-  ' ^^3.  (^A)  j AJlfA,

0,0-^  ^ J’o'

‘ yur'Sn  iv.  gt).  *^1  U^l  1*^1  They  said

Was  not  God's  earth  wide  enough  for  you  to  tiee  .away  therein  ?

S Sen  Imp.  Gaz.  y . 309.  Handlya  is  on  the  Xarbadi  in  the  IToshangSbad
District  of  tin:  Central  Provinces.  MS.  (A:  reads  Hi'idan-yu.  aud

for

I'l  MS  (B!

403.

[ 5-lS  ]

j anctoe  Islem  Shah  had  left  Agra  for  the  Panjab  ^ -vrith  the
intention  of  quelling  the  disaffection  of  the  Jfiyazi  faction  ; when
he  arrived  opposite  to  Baiana  at  the  halting-place  of  Bahrstir.
Makhd&mu-l-Mulk  said  to  Islem  Shah  “ we  have  earned  a few  days
respite  * from  the  lesser  evil  ” hy  which  he  meant  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i,
“ bat  the  great  evil,  that  is  Shaikh  ‘Abdn-llah  Niyazi,  who  is  the
instractor  of  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  and  the  spiritnal  guide  of  the  Niyazi
faction,  and  always  remains  in  the  hill  country  of  Baiana  accom-
panied hy  three  or  four  hundied  men  fully  armed  and  equipped,
and  raises  disturbances  there,  is  still  flourishing.”  The  fire  of  the
anger  of  Islem  Shah,  who  was  thirsting  for  the  blood  of  the
Niyazis,  was  fanned  into  flame  by  this  breath  ® of  sugsrestion,
and  he  ordered  Miyan  Bahwa  Luhani  ^ the  Governor  of  Baiana,
who  was  one  of  the  special  adherents^  of  Shaikh  ‘Abdu-llah,
to  produce  the  Shaikh.  Miyan  Bahwa  went  to  the  Shaikh  and
said : It  seems  to  me  to  be  the  best  course  for  you  to  hide  yourself
for  a few  days  in  accordance  with  the  saying  “ one  should  avoid
misfortune  ” and  migrate  from  this  city  to  some  other  place,
then  perchance  the  king  will  forget^  all  about  you  and  never
make  an  attempt  of  this  kind  again,"  and  you  will  have  met  the
emergency,^  while  I for  my  part  shall  have  a good  excuse.

Verse.

404.  Fear  not  a misfortune  when  the  night  intervenes  between  it
and  you.

Shaikh  ‘Ahdu-llah  would  not  agree  to  this  suggestion^  of  his,
and  said,  “ this  is  an  arrogant  monarch  and  Makhdumu-1-Mnlk  is
always  watching  for  an  opportunity.  If  they  go  still  further
away  and  then  send  for  me  it  will  cause  me  great  annoyance  ; for
this  reason,  seeing  that  he  is  only  ten  krohs  distant,  I had  better
interview  him  now,  and  as  for  the  question  of  mastery  here  and
there,  it  will  be  all  one  whether  it  is  to  be  now  or  in  the  future,
since  whatever  is  predestined  will  come  to  pn.ss.”

Man  jircposes  and  God  disposes.

I MS.  (B)  omits

» MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  s MS.  (B)  reads

* MS.  (A)  b MS.  (A'i  8 MS.  ;B)  MS’

"J  MS.  (B)  reads  for  '-5^.  ’’  JIS  (A

MS.  (B)  omits

L 519  ]

Verse.

The  reins  of  affairs  are  not  in  the  hands  of  one  who  looks  to
advisability,

Yield  the  reins  into  the  hands  of  Fate,  this  is  the  advisable
course.

Accordingly  he  set  out  by  night  from  Baiana,  and  had  an
interview  with  Islem  ^ah  in  the  morning  as  he  was  mounted
ready  to  march,  and  greeted  him  with  ' Pence  he  fo  mu.'  On  the
instant  i^li  van  Baliwa  seized  him  by  the  nape  of  the  neck  and
bent  his  head  down  saying  ; i “ My  friend  the  Shaikh  this  is  the
way  they  salute*  kings.”  The  Shaikh  looked  savagely  in  his  direc-
tion “ and  replied  : “ The  salutation  which  is  in  accordance  with
the  sunnat,^  and  which  is  that  which  the  friends  of  the  Prophet,
may  the  peace  and  blessing  of  God  be  upon  him  and  his  fam  ily,  used
to  make,^  and  which  he,  may  the  peace  and  blessing  of  God  he  upon
him  and  his  family,  used  to  give  them  in  response,  is  this  very  form
of  salutation,  I know  no  other.”  Islem  Shah,  with  evident  aversion
asked  : ^ Is  this  the  master  of  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  ? Mulla  ‘Abdu-llah
who  was  lying  in  wait  for  him  said  : The  very  man.  By  order
of  Islem  Shah  he  was  at  once  seized  and  most  unmercifully
beaten  with  sticks,  and  kicked  and  cuffed  ; the  ^aikh  as  long  as
he  retained  consciousness  kept  repeating  this  text  of  the  sacred
word  “ Lord  forgive  us  our  sins,  and  our  extravagance  in  our
affairs  ; and  make  firm  our  footing,  and  help  ns  against  the  mis-
believing folk  ! ” t Islem  Shah  enquired  what  he  was  saying
Mulla  ^ ‘Abdu-llah  said  ; He  is  calling  you  and  the  rest  of  us
unbelievers  ; Islem  Shah  becoming  exceeding  wroth  waxed  still
fiercer  in  his  efforts  to  punish  and  torture  him,^  and  kept  his  retinue  405-
standing  1®  an  hour  longer  while  they  cudgelled  him,  and  when  he
thought  that  the  breath  had  left*^  his  body —

1 MS.  (B)  omits  and  after

5 US.  (A)  3 MSS.  (A;  (B)  i-AjlsP.

* The  <,un?iat  is  the  traditional  law  of  Muhammad.

3 MS.  (A)  omits  MS.  (B)  reads

6 MSS.  (A)  (B)  insert  oif.

Qnr’an  iii.  141.  See  Palmer’s  Trauslatiou.

^ MS.  (B)  omits  ^ MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  j

1®  MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  L)  MS.  (B)  reads

“ MS.  (A)  Ai.  fkabc.

[ 520

One  sini'le  breath  was  left  as  a mediator  (between  Lite  and
Death) ,

That  mediator  also  i ose  and  departed,
he  desisted,  and  went  on  his  way.

A spark  of  life  however  remained  i in  the  Shaikh,  so  they
wrapped  him  in  a raw  hide,  and  kept  him  warm  for  a night
and  a dhy  before  a fire,  till  he  recovered.  Tlii.s  occurrence
took  place  in  the  year  nine  hundred  and  fifty-live.  IVhen
he  had  reg'aiced  hi.s  health  he  left  Laiana,  and  commenced
travelling,  and  spent  some  time  in  Aiglianistan  (Riih),  and  some
time  among  the  Afghans  of  Pattan  in  the  Panjab,-  on  the  confines
of  Bajwara  between  Amber  and  Amrit.-ar.®  and  was  in  the  babrt
of  saying;  ^ This  was  the  fruit  of  con-ortieg  witn  aigamentative
people.

Oh  yi  k.r'is  of  contemplation,  aP  my  trust  is  in  you,

Bitt  ye  mascers  of  discussion.  ITl  have  none  of  vou.

Filially  ho  came  to  Sirlnud,^  and  giving  up  all  connection  with
the  nianac-i’s  and  cList<.Uii>  nf  the  Muhilo-wi  party  (moreover  he
tuinedalithe  Jlalidawi  party  trom  thatfarchl  began  to  deal  with  all
the  folio .-rm'.-'  .'d  Islam  according  to  the  tenets  of  the  orthodox
school,  till  eventually  in  the  year  990  H.,  at  the  time  tvhen  the
Emperor  was  on  his  way  to  Benares,  he  summoned  Shaikh  'Abdu-
llah and  gi  anted  him  a portion  of  madad-i-madsh^  land  in  Sirhind
t,-ith  reman. dsr  to  hrs  children.  And  in  the  year  1000  H.,  he
I'lade  farev.'ell  to  this  transitory  world  at  the  age  of  ninety  or
thereabout

Subd'i.

If  tne  courser  of  tbo  sky  give  the  reins  into  your  hand,

Ann  -i  tne  'ivoilu  gives  you  wealth  as  the  dust  under  your  feet
If  your  wisdom  surpasses  the  wisdom  of  Aflatun,t
405.  These  are  all  as  nought,  at  last  you  must  die.

After  that  Islem  Shan  had  overcome  the  N iyazi  faction,  and  had

1 MS.  c!ui:3

5 MS.  A)  P'ik  Pattan  or  Ajudhan.

8 MSS  (Ai  read  e>:oU.  MS,  (A)  adds  before^.

* MS.  'B,  ^

6 MS.  (Bj  ...  —

« MSS,  (A)  (B).

^ Plato.

[ 521  ]

i^turued  to  Agra,  Mulla  ‘Abdu-llah  set  about  inciting  him,i  and
giving  him  a song  which  reminded  him  of  former  intoxications,
again  induced  him  to  summon  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  from  Hindiya,  and
to  order  punishmenc  to  be  executed  upon  him,  and  spared  no
pains  to  remind  him  in  the  vilest  possible  way,  that  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i
had  been  condemned  to  banishment,  whereas  now  Babar  i&an
had  become  Lis  disciple  and  follower,  and  the  whole  army  had
shewn  their  leaniug  towards  him.  Seeing  that  his  own  relations
had  sought  absolution  from  him  and  had  adopted  his  faith,  there
was  great  probability  of  disturbance  in  the  kingdom.  Accordingly
Islem  Shah  summoned  Shaikh  ‘Ala’i  thence,  and  used  still  more
strenuous  exertions  than  before^  to  bring  matters  to  a satisfactory
settlement,  and  knowing  as  he  did  the  ambitious  nature  of  Shaikh
‘Ala'i,  and  recognising  that  there  was  i!0  other  man  among  the
learned  men  “ of  Dehli  and  Agra  capable  of  settling  this  dispute,
he  therefore  directed  Shaikh  'Ala'i  to  be  sent  to  Bihar  to  Shaikh
Budh  ■*  the  learned  physician,  in  v.diom  Sher  Khan  had  the  very
utmost  confidence,  and  who  i.s  renowned  for  the  authoritative  com-
mentary which  he  wrote  upon  the  L ^ad-i-Qazi,^  and  bade  him  act
in  accordance  with  his  directions.^  "When  ^laikh  ‘Ala'i  went
thither,  he  heard  the  sound  of  singing  and  musical  instruments  pro-
ceeding from  the  rooms  occupied  by  Shaikh  Biidh  the  physician,
and  saw  in  his  assembly  certain  other  thijigs  repugnant  both  to
the  natural  ftoliiigs  and  ^ to  religions  law  * also,  the  very  mention
of  which  is  disgraceful,  so  felt  constrained  to  enjoin  * what  was
lawful  and  t<j  forbid  what  was  prohibited.  Since  Shaikh  Budh
was  very  infirm  and  aged,  and  was  not  strong  enough  to
speak,  bis  family  answered  tor  him  that  certain  customs  and
observances  which  have  obtained  vogue  in  Hindustan  are  of

I MSS.  (Aj  (B)  JAi  * Omit  jjs  (A).

5 MS.  (B)  omits  t)  after  and  inserts  it  after

* MS.  (A)  reads  ^ailch  Hadah  (?)

6 See  Haji  Khalifah.  C-22.  Irshid.

® MS.  (A)  roads  jl  ilS.  (B)  reads  AbUi

T MS.  (B)  jA.  MS.  fB)  Ai'AJO.

8 MS.  (A)  reads  ^ whick  is  the  exact  opposite
of  the  reading  iu  the  text.

MS.  (B)  omits  and  reads  OAS  for  0;A>  and

66

[ 522  j

such  a nature  that  if  one  should  forbid  them  iu  any  way
whatever,  worldly  injury,  and  loss  both  bodily  and  spiritual  l
would  inevitably  result  to  the  prohibitor,  also  that  the  women
of  Hindustan  who  as  a class  are  worthless,  consider  that  loss
407.  as  the  result  of  restrictive  rcea-sures,  and  for  that  rea.son  become
infidels.  In  any  case  legalising  incontinence  was  probably  a
less  sill  than  legalising  infidelity.*  Shaikh  ‘Ala'i  said  that  this  is
an  iniquitous  conjecture, ^ as  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  whenso-
ever worldly  loss  according  to  their  belief  is  the  result  of  the
interference  ^ with  some  prohibited  pleasure,  and  the  injunction
to  obedience  is  held  by  them  to  be  the  cause  of  personal  death
and  injury  to  their  property  and  po.sitioii.  they  have  not  even
the  fuiidamental  propertie.s  of  Muslims,  so  that  their  conformity
to  Islam  need  not  even  be  cor.sidered.  Seeing  that  the  argument
concerns  the  validity  of  Xikalj.s  why  should  one  regret  " the  fact
of  their  not  being  iMuslims  ’r  fur  iris  said,  That  "hirit  is  based  ujjun
iniquity  is  most  iniiji(itoii<  rj  nil  ~ That  clas.s  therefore  .stand  coii-
deniued.  Shaikh  Budli  the  pby.siciau  hoaever,^  having  regard  to
equity  became  their  tipologist  and  entered  a plea  for  them,  praising  ^
ghaikh  ‘Alai  and  treating  him  aith  the  utmost  courtesy  and
respect.

First  of  all  he  wrote  a letter  to  Isleni  Shall  in  the  following
terms.  " Seeing  tlud  the  Mabdaui  qiie.stiou  is  nor  indi.s.solubly  bound
up  with  the  tailh  of  l.slaiu.  and  very  great  iliffeieriee  of  opinion
exists  as to  the  veritable  -ign.s  by  wliichtiio  .ihilidl  i.s  to  be  distin-

1 The  text  varies  fruui  ilie  JIS.S.  (A)  and  (JJj  which  read

j y wiiile  ilS.  (lij  unut

2 We  ..lieiild  read  iiero

i .Ms.  (A  | * -Mrt.  (Uj  le.ith  wrongly  for

^ A;/!"//,  i t'e  iimiriage  contr.jrt.  A niarriiipre  eoiitraeted  between

iii'iTi  Hud  ii  iliudii  wuHiaii  is  invulid  in  ucccjrd.iucc  the  iiijuiic-
titiii  ui’  the  Ihe  ig^ue  of  ancii  a tniui'iaire  hfjv.'uvor  hold  to  he

legitinmti',  Tixier  no  (.-iicnuiitaiices  can  a iMo.-lim  woiuau  marry  tiny  but  a
Mu'ijhin.  Tor  fuller  di-custion  of  this  subject,  iln^lie??.  Did.  oj  Isl-hit,
art  Marria;L'0.

» ilS.  (B)  rends  for  T

S MS.  (B]  rends  j for  anfi  omits  oLajI  (“Ia*  ji,

« -MK,  {Dfre.id-  for  I"  (b)  omits  wb.

[ 523  ]

guished,  it  is  accordingly  impossible  to  convict  Shaibb  i ‘Ala’i  of
infidelity  and  impiety.  At  any  rate,  all  doubts  regarding  bim
should  be  removed.  Here  books  ® are  very  scarce,  whereas  there
are  sure  to  be  many  s books  in  the  library  of  the  learned  men  of
your  country,  let  them  settle  the  truth  of  the  matter.”

The  sons  of  the  Shaikh  impressed  upon  him  that  Makhdnmn-1-
llulk  * was  the  Sad ni-^-giidurJ’  and  .said,  " This  opposition  of  theirs
to  him  has  undoubtedly  been  the  cause  of  your  being  summoned.

At  your  great  age  it  is  far  from  wise  for  you  to  undertake  so  long
a journey,  and  to  undergo  the  severe  fatigue  incidental  to  it.”

They  accordingly  cancelled  bis  first  letter®  and,  whether  be
would  or  not,  secretly  wrote  another  letter^  as  if  from  Shaikh
Budh,  couched  in  terms  of  flattery  of  Mulla  ‘Abdu-llah,  and  sent
it  to  Islem  Shah,  saying,  “ ilakhdnmu-l-Mnik  is  one  of  the  most
discriminating  of  the  learned  doctors  of  the  day.  What  be  says  is
the  truth  and  his  decision  is  tiie  sound  decision.”

At  the  time  when  Islem  Shah  was  encamped  in  the  Panjab  408-
Shaikh  ‘■Ala’i  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Bin  Bau ; when  Islem  Shah  read
the  sealed  letter  of  Shaikh  Budh  the  physician,  he  called  Shaikh
‘Ala’i  to  come  close  to  him  and  said  to  him  in  a low  tone  of  voice,

“ Do  you  only  say  to  me  iu  my  own  ear  that  you  are  penitent
for  having  made  this  claim,  you  shall  then  be  accorded  complete
liberty  to  go  where  yon  will  * and  do  as  you  please.”  Shai^  ‘Ala’i
however  refused  to  give  ear  to  bis  proposals  and  paid  no  heed  to
him  ; Uem  Sbab  iu  despair  said  to  Mulla  ‘Abdu-llah,  I leave
bim  in  your  bands. This  he  said,  and  gave  orders  for  him  to  receive
a certain  number  of  stripes  in  bis  own  preseuce.'*  .^laildi  ‘Ala’i

1 JIS.  (B)  omits  * its.  {-4)  reads  0—1  J-

® JI.S,  (Bl  omits  * il-'’.  (B)  reads

® The  Sadru---sudur  is  tlir  chief  judge  of  all  religious  questions  among
Muhammadans.  He  was  also  known  as  Sadr-i-kul  or  Sadr-i-jahau.  See  Ain-
i-Akbari  (B)  I.  271.

® MS.  (A)  reads

1 Insert  after  (B).

* MS.  (A)  reads  A
^ MSS,  (A.)  (B)  insert  j before  JU|

MS.  (B)  reads

^ Lit.  You  know  and  this  fellow,  t,e.,  the  matter  is  one

between  you  and  bim.

**  MS,  (B)  inserts  after  not  as  io  the  text.

[ 524  ]

liimaelf  had  a wound  in  his  neck,  the  result  of  an  operation  for
tlie  pestilence  which  raared  in  that  year  throughout  the  whole  of
Hindustan,  and  had  destroyed  the  greater  part  of  the  peopled
This  wound  had  to  be  kept  open  by  a tent,^  in  addition  to  which
he  was  suffering  from  the  fatigue  of  his  journey,  and  had  hardly
a breath  of  life  left  in  him.  so  that  at  the  third  lash  his  lofty  soul
quitted  its  humble  frame  and  took  its  flight  to  the  abode  promised
in  the  words  “ the  seat  of  truth,  in  the  presence  of  the  poieerful
king”^  and  rested  in  the  pleasant  places  of  which  it  is  said
“ Eye  hath  not  seen,  nor  ear  heard  neither  hath  it  entered  into  the
heart  of  man.”  And  after  hi.s  death  they  tied  his  delicate  body*
to  the  feet  of  an  elephant,  and  trampled  him  to  pieces  “ in  the
street  of  the  camp,  and  issued  orders  forbidding  the  burial  of  his
corpse,*  and  appointed  agents  {to  see  to  thisb  At  that  Tery
time  a vehemeut  whirlwind  arose  and  blew  with  so  great  violence,
that  people  thought  th.t  the  iast  day  had  arrived,"  and  great
lamentation  and  mour.ning*  was  heard  throughout  the  whole
camp,  and  men  were  in  expe'trdioti  of  the  early  - downfali  of  the
power  of  I.s'.em  fjha’..

And  they  say  that  in  liie  co  u-'C  of  the  nigld  such  a wealth  of
flowers  was  scattered  over  the  h'-iy  of  the  .^laildi  that  ho  was
completely  hidden  beneath  ilr-iu  and  was  so  to  speuk  entombed
in  flowers.

After  this  event  the  power  of  Jslern  Shah  lasted  barely  two

tf.S

L ’’  1 A,  ,ja

I.  T!ie  bahonio  pla,:;tit!  appears  lo  have  been  iLo

referr-  "i  to.

2 *LAi  11^,  ; \ , re.  Jf
^ Iviv.  5.;;,.  The  till  qaoratioa

'’e/ily,  tiiP  pions  ?ha!l  be  aiiiid  ^rirdeiis  and  rivi-r.^,  'n  the  seat  of  truth,
with  the  ooiverfiil  kuifr.

4 ;B?  reads  o iig.  (B)  reads

® ilS.  (A;  reads  "i  MSS.  TA)  TB)  tead

5 :,t3s.  A,!  (B)  i-ad  j 9 MS.  iB;  omits

I't  A footnote  CO  the  tevt  reads  'cJjd  JIS.  (A)  omits

these  wt'r.js  and  reads  J-

The  te.ttaai  reading  a^..  ■'=  to  be  wrong.

[ 525  ]

years.  It  was  in  fact  an  exact  counterpart  of  the  affair  of  Sultan  409
Jaialu-d-Din  Firoz  Shah  Ehilji  after  the  execution  of  Sidi  Mania, ^
save  that  the  decay  of  the  kingdom  of  Salim  Shah  was  even
more  rapid  than  that  of  Jalalu-d-Din.  People  considered  Mnlla
‘Abdullah,  who  was  always  vexations  to  the  holy  men,  to  be  the
cause  of  all  this  heart-burnino'.  and  this  was  really  the  case.

This  event  took  place  in  the  year  957  H.  (1550  A.D.)  the
writer  of  these  page.s  was  at  that  time  ten  v'ears  of  age,  and
invented  the  two  following  chronograms  : The  first  is  Zaiiru-llah,
the  second  Saqahum  rabhuhum  sharaban.^

Among  the  events  which  happened  in  the  reign  of  Islem  Shah
wa.s  the  murder  of  Khawass  Khan,  of  which  the  following  is  a
brief  account.  When  Khawass  Khan,  after  the  battle  with  the
Kiyazis  fled  to  the  foot  of  the  hills,  Islem  Shah  appointed  to
that  district  Taj  Khan  Karrani  who  was  the  brother  of  Suleiman
Karrani,  and  the  most  learned  and  able  of  the  whole  Afghan
line,  and  wrote  a command  from  his  camp  at  Bin  Ban,  that  they
were  to  induce  Khawass  Khan,  even  if  it  were  by  means  of  treaty
oaths,  to  come  down  from  tlie  hills,  and  put  an  end  to  him.
However  T5  j Khan  was  unable  to  effect  ^ anything  owing  to
the  iiupi'egiiabiliry  of  that  mountain  retreat,  and  accordinely
sent  Khawass  Khan  the  me.ssaee  of  Islem  Shah  promising  him
safety.*  He.  relying  upon  the  word  of  a Muslim,  came  ^ and  had
an  interview  with  Taj  Khan,  wlio  instantly  ® had  him  put  to  death
and  sent  his  head^  to  Salim  Shah  at  the  township  ^ of  Bin  (Ban),
and  after  burying  his  body  9 at  the  townsliip  of  .Sara.stu,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Sambal,  transferred  it  thence  to  Dihli.  This
event  happened  in  the  year  95911.  D.  1551  j.  As  a chrono-

1 MS  CA)  reads

^oquhum  yiib^uhun  skarahan.
The  mindful  of  God.  May  iheir  Lord  give  them  to  drink  a

draught  of  wine.

Each  of  these  gives  the  date  9o7.  H
^ MSS.  (A)  (B)  Jl^JL

* MSS-  (A)  (B)  insert  j.  & MSS.  (A)  (B)

* MS.  (B)  omits

1 MS.  (B)  omits  and  reads  for

® MSS.  (Aj  (B)  omits  ^4"*  * MS.  (A)

[ 526  ]

graphical  record  thev^  invented  the  words  Musihat  ba^alam  shud}
that  is  to  say,  A calamity  for  the  world.

One  of  his  magnanimous  acts  was  the  following.  On  his  arrival
410.  at  Kalpi  in  the  company  of  Shir  Shah  he  gave  two  laks  of  rupees
to  the  sweetmeat  sellers  of  that  city  so  that  tliey  might  send
sugarcane  to  Rautanhhor  without  inrermission.  In  the  same  way
also  he  gave  money  to  all  the  mango  garden.s  of  Baiana,  so  that
they  might  send  mangoes  day  after  day^  to  the  halting-places  for
the  poor  and  necessitous.

In  the  meantime  Shir  Shah  died,  and  Salim  Shah  appointed
persons  who  recovered  the  sum  of  twenty-four  thousand  rupees  ®
which  remained  of  that  money,  and  on  receiving  it  put  it  into  the
treasury.

In  this  same  year  Shaikh  ‘Abdu-l-haiyy,  the  son  of  Shaikh
Jamali  Kanbawi  of  Dihli,*  who  was  adorned  with  excellencies  of
science  and  poetry,  ^ and  was  a devout  man,®  and  the  boon
companion  and  specially  favoured  intimate  of  Islem  >5h3h,
delivered  up  the  life  entrusted  to  his  keeping,  and  Saiyyid  Shah
Mir  of  Agra  invented  the  following  chronogram  ; —

He  said  —

My  name  in  itself  would  furnish  the  lunkh

At  such  time  as  ‘abd  (the  slave)  was  not  in  the  midst  of  ifc.'^

Among  the  events  which  happened  during  the  time  that  Islem
Shah  was  encamped  at  Bin  was  the  following.  One  day  in  the

1 A footnote  to  the  text  says  that  these  words  give  the  date  989  and  that
therefore  there  is  some  mistake.

It  appears  that  the  real  reading  should  he  j*l*J  muslbat  la  ‘dm

shud^  which  would  give  the  correct  date,  aud  this  is  iu  fact  the  reading  in
MS.  (Ah  The  text  should  accordingly  be  corrected  in  accordance  with  this,
and  we  should  translate,  A general  calamity.

S MSS.  (A)(B)3;i^ij>

* MS.  (Bj  omits  and  reads  Ij  after  instead  of  as  in  the

text.

* MS.  (A)  6 jfs,  reads  for

® MS.  ( B)  reads  ^ generous  man.

I The  lines  run  thus  ■ vylyc  ai*  ^ ^

If  we  take  the  name  ami  remove  from  it  the  centre  word

^ah'l  wliieh  meatiy  a sIqi\  liiid  the  rcmainini?  words  erive  the  date  959  H.

L 527  J

interval  between  two  times  of  prayer  lelem  §bah  was  sitting  at  east)
upon  bis  roadster,  and.  was  proceeding  with  a small  escort  from
tlje  camp  to  visit  the  fort  of  MiiB  Garb,*  which  lies  at  a distance
of  five  or  six  krohs  or  thereabouts,  in  accordance  with  his  usual
custom,  wlien  suddenly  a man  sprung  up  in  front  of  him  and
blocking  the  road,  holding  a sword  concealed  in  his  armpit  like
the  proverbial  Taabata  Sharran.^  under  pretence  of  seeking
redress  (for  some  grievance)  came  forward  and  aimed  * a blow
at  him.  Salim  Shah,  however,  with  great  adroitness  caught  the
blow  upon  the  head  of  his  whip.  The  handle  of  the  whip  was  cat
through  and  a slight  wound  was  inflicted  upon  his  face,  When
the  man  raised  his  arm  to  strike  a second  blow  Salim  Shah  sprang
forward  and  hurled  himself  upon  that  ruffian,  and  wrested  the
sword  from  his  hand.  At  this  instant  Daulat  Khan  Ajyara,  the
sou  of  feazawal  Khan,  who  was  the  choseu  intimate  and  bosom
friend  of  Islera  Shah,  galloped  up  and  dealt  a blow  at  that  411.
miscreant.  Others  also  came  up  and  enquired  from  him  the
reason  for_  his  action.  Salim  SJjah  did  not  approve  of  this  ^ and
said  : ‘ This  wretch  will  destroy  the  houses  of  numberless  people,
lose  no  time  in  taking  due  vengeance  on  him.’  However  he  recog-
nised that  sword  as  the  one  he  had  given  to  Iqbal  Sian.  This
Iqbal  Khan  was  one  of  the  scum  and  off-scourings  of  Hindustan
who  had  rendered  Sjjir  ^ah  several  services.  He  was  so  exceed-
tttg'ly  ill-favoured,®  mean-looking,  and  oafish  in  appearance  that
they  used  to  call  him  Rahmatu-llahi,  which  iu  Hindustan  is  the  term

t Read  for

8 MSS.  (A)  (B)

S hjij,  Tjjg  surname  of  Sablt-bin-J3bor  bin  Safyan  al-Pabml,  a
famous  Arab  athlete  and  warrior,  who  was  so  called  according  to  some
because  the  sword  never  quitted  him,  or  because  he  put  beneath  his  arm-pit
( ) a quiver  of  arrows,  and  took  a bow,  or  put  beneath  his  arm-pit  a

knife  and  came  to  an  assembly  of  Arabs  and  smate  some  of  them,  sec  Lane
«.  r.  Kit.  Accordincj  to  the  account  in  the  Agham,  he  acquired  his  Damo
f-'oui  having  slain  a lion  in  a dark  night  in  the  uiidt-r  of  a violent  storm  of
tliUiider  and  lightning:  when  morning  came  brought  the  lion  to  his
companions  under  his  arPi.  and  they  saiJ.  Loqa  vJ  tadtafd  iharran  : '•  V'erily  be
has  puL  destruction  under  his  arm/'

* MSS.  (^A)  (B)  ^ L MSS.  (A)  (B)  A-

**  \'o)  omits  MS.  (A)  omits  insertintr  i*  **Jrcr

[ 528  ]

applied  to  a -weaverd  Islem  Shall  himself  * had  raised  him  from
the  very  lowest  of  the  low,  and  had  given  him  a position  of  inti-
macy with  the  highest,  so  that  helbaade  him  the  envy  of  the  noble
Amirs, ^ and  woaid  not  permit  him  to  be  out  of  his  sisht  for  one
moment.  From  that  day  forward,  when  he  recognised  that  sword,
he  deprived  him  of  his  rank,  .so  that  * he  'made  him  an  esample  ^
of  the  saying  ; Everything  returns  to  its  original  state  ; but  in  spite
of  the  incitation  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Afghans  that  he  should  put
him  to  death,  he  replied,  “ I am  heartily  ashamed  to  destroy  the
man  of  my  own  training.®

Verse.

Water  cannot  swallow  down  wood,  knowest  tliou  why  ?

It  is  ashamed  i to  destroy  that  which  it  has  reared.

Islem  Shab,  who  had  for  this  same  reason  become  distrustful  of
Afghans,  now  became  afflicted  with  cotnplicatioiis  of  hi.s  disease,
end  increased  the  opium  in  his  wine,’  and  the  snake-bitten  one
drank  a draught  of  poison,’  and  thirsting  for  the  blood  of  the
Afghans,  became  more  than  ever  .set  upon  eradicating  them.
The  crisis  was  as  though  it  was  saying  to  him  :

T'c-'C.

Thou  hast  laid  a foundation,  wliich  will  .le.strov  tliv  fnniilv,

Oh,  thou  whose  family  is  destroyed,  whai  a foundation  thou
hast  laid !

1 MS.  fA)  reida  Ul'y..,  Either  readiiit;  may  l,e  accepted.

If  we  read  as  in  the  text  the  tnm.Mation  will  l,c  as  .■d.oir  witl,  ti,o

imiiiied  meaning  of  that  etapidity  for  which  weavers  are  proverbially  noted.
See  FaUon’g  Dictionarr  s.r.

If  we  read  ™eanmg  will  be  dull,  apathetic,  stupid.

8 MS.  (A)  inserts  and  omits  Ijj!  inserting-  tl,i-:  after

5 MS.  (A)  omits  here.  * M''.('Aj  H

6 MS.  (A)  omit.s  ’MS.  fUi  o-jy  f„r

^ MS.  (A)  reads  for  US.'_H)  omit  j.

8 MS.  (A)  vlr"-

’ MSS.  (AKBj  The  meaning  apnoars  lo  l,e  Hr.  • .

j . -r  F.  ^ i>  lip  tii.it  thn  finnim  ho

took  as  an  anods  ne  acted  .as  a noi-on.  and  increased  tiie  effect.s  i
from  which  he  was  already  snffermij.

I’  MS.  (Bi  it

i of  the  disQa&o

[ 529  ]

After  these  events  Islem  Shah  returned  * towards  Gwaliar,
which  he  had' made  his  metropolis,  and  had  arrived  at  Dihli  * when
tidings  arrived  that  Muhammad  Humayun  Pad^ah  had  reached
the  banks  of  the  Indus,  with  the  aim  of  conquering  Hindustan.

Islem  Shah  jnst  at  the  ^ very  moment  when  this  tidings  arrived,  412.
had  applied  a leech*  to  his  throat,  but  instantly  took  it  off,  dashed
some  water  upon  his  head,^  and  binding  up  his  throat  with  linen
rags  ® ordered  his  army  to  proceed,  and ' the  first  day  covering
three  h'ohs,  encamped,  and  the  rank  and  file  of  his  army  who
were  at  the  last  gasp  from  drunkenness,  involuntarily  followed
him  as  though  led  by  a halter  round  their  necks.  Certain  of  the
Vazirs  who  were  well-disposed  to  him  * represented  that  inasmuch
as  a powerful  foe  had  come  against  him,  and  his  soldiery  were
worthless,  it  would  be  just  as  well  if  orders  were  given  for  their
pay  to  be  issued  to  them.  Islem  Shah  replied  that  if  ® he  were
to  give  them  money  at  that  particulaj-  time  they  would  attribute
it  to  liis  being  weak  and  in  stiaits.  .so  I will  wait,  said  he.  till  my
return  after  this  victory,'*’  when  I will  give  them,  with  one  stroke
of  the  2)en,  two  years  pay.  The  soldiers  had  patience  and  without
a murmur  awaited  what  bunune  Providence  would  bring  them,
at  the  same  time  expecting  some  sudden  calamity. ''  and  in  spite
of  their  state  of  uii preparedness  arrived  at  the  encampment.
When  it  was  reported  to  Islem  ^ah  that  the  artillery  was  ready,
but  that,  as  the  bullocks  for  the  gun-carriages  had  been  left  at
Gwaliar,  they  awaited  his  orders,  he  replied,  ‘ What  posisible  use  are
such  a crowd  of  thousands  of  infantry  and  cavalry,  are  they  to  get
their  monthly  pay  for  nothing  ? ’ accordingly  he  made  tlicm  all  do

^ its.  (A)  omits  here  .anti  iTrserts  it  after  in  tlie  next  line,

s ilSS.  (A)  (BJ  omit  Sir*-'  iISS-  IB)  ivmi

S Read  IISS.  , .A  i (B).

* its.  (.AJ  reads  probably  a copyist’s  error  for

or  'Vj-

^ Omieg  ^ ilS.  (A).  ^ MS  f A)  reads  (?)

T Insert  MSS.  (A)  (B).  **  MS.  (A)  insert  before

^ MS.  put  before  not  after  it  as  in  the  text.

MS.  (B)  oznit

MS. (A)  reads  for  MSS  TA)  fB)  reT.ii  for

12  Text  MS  (AJ  reads  MS.

67

[ 530  ]

the  work  of  huliooks,i  and  ordered  them  to  drag  the  gun
carriages,  thus  proving  the  truth  of  the  following  : —

Verse.

These  whom  you  see  are  not  all  human  beings,

Most  of  them  are  tailless  oxen  and  asses.

Some  of  the  large  mortars  were  of  such  a size  that  it  took  one  or
two  thousand  men,  more  or  less,  to  drag  each  one.*  At  this  rate  of
speed  ihey  reached  the  Panjab  in  the  course  of  seven  days.
Humayun  Padshah  in  person,  in  accordance  with  certain  advan-
tageous plans  he  had  formed,  advanced  as  far  as  Banbhar.3  at
the  sku't  of  the  mountain  range  to  the  north  of  the  Kashmir
413.  frontier,'^  and  then  returned  towards  ^ Kabul.  A short  resame
of  these  events  will  be  given  in  it.s  proper  place  if  the  Most  High
God  so  will  it.*

Islem  Shah  also  upon  hearing  this  tidings  t fled'  with  all
haste  from  Labor  to  Gwaliar.  In  the  course  of  his  retreat
arriving  in  the  neighhourhood  of  the  township  of  Anberi,^  he
was  occupied  iu  huntiug,  when  a band  of  ruflians,‘®  at  the  instiga-
tion of  certain  of  the  Amirs,  blocked  his  path,  and  meditated
doing  him  harm,  but  a messenger  arrived  who  informed  Islem
Shah  of  this  design,  and  he  eon.sequently  entered  the  city  by
another  road,'*  and  after  putting  to  death**  a number  of  men,
among  whom  were  Bahau-d-Din  and  Mahmud  and  ilada,*®  who
were  **  the  fountain  heads  of  the  rebellion  attempted  by  the

1 Omit  MSS.  (A)  (B).  MS.  (A)  reads  ISi/f

* The  text  reads  J 3^  3^  O^" jLP*’  L>  ^

MS.  (A)  inserts  after  and  omit  the  second  replacing  ic  by

* At  the  foot  of  the  Alidek  range.  See  Renneil’s  map,  Tiefe.,  Voi.  HI

Behntur.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  Banbhar.  The  text  reads  Bauiiar

* MS.  (A)  omits  **^31  ■ 6 MS.  (B)  reads  Aj  to  Kabul.

* MS.  (.A)  inserts  between  and

1 MS.  (A)  omits  8 ng

* This  is  the  reading  of  the  text : but  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  4.5>L|  Antari.

10  cltAijl  Text  MS.  (B)  reads  aL'jI.  U jjg

1*  MSS.  (A)  (Bj  IaLUj.  ■ *

1*  MS.  (B)  omits  these  la.st  names  and  reads  and  others.

I*  MS.  (A)  ^ for

L 531  j

mutineers,  imprisoned  all  persons  against  whom  he  entertained
snspicion,  afterwards  putting  them  to  death.  Then  he  threw
open  the  doors  of  the  treasury  and  issued  a public  order  directing
the  issue  of  two  years  pay  to  the  soldiery,!  and  sent  written
despatches  to  the  Amirs  of  fire  thousand  and  ten  thousand  to  this
effect.  Some  of  the  troops  received  the  pay.  others  d'd  not.  At
this  very  time  the  army  of  Fate,  who  is  the  most  of  ali

powerful  foes,  made  an  onslaught  upon  him.*

Ferse.

That  man  owned  a sintrle  ass,  but  had  no  jiact'-?!' i .he.

He  found  a pack-saddle,  hut  ia  the  ravautime  the  wolf  bar
made  off  with  the  ass.®

* Among  the  forces  which  overthrew  him  was,  it  is  said,  a
carbuncle  which  appeared  in  the  neighbourhood  or  his  sear,
others  assert  that  it  was  cancer.

He  was  beside  himself  with  pain  and!  j,  hires:'':  ...ho'd,  'ou:
without  relief.  'Whilst  in  this  state  of  distress  and  pi'':stration,
he  used  from  time  to  time  to  say,  ‘ I had  no  idea  tr.ut  G-od  was
so  extremely  powerful,’®  and  while  in  this  conditi'rc..  as  long  as
he  retained  consciousness  he  ordered  Dauiat  Khan  tc  sit  facing
him,  and  would  not  cast  a glance  in  any  ether  direcrioL!  save  on
his  face  alone.^

Ferse.

Mahmud  gives  not  a soul  to  the  Angel  (of  Death.'-
Until  he  sees  him  in  the  form  of  Ayaz.

Notwithstanding  the  fact  that  he  had  lapsed  into  unconscious-
ness, he  would  now  and  hen  open  his  eyes,  and  these  words  would

1 MS.  (B)

S A footnote  directs  attention  to  a suggested  variatict.  in  the  text  by
placing  ^ after  instead  of  before  those  woras.  This  is  the

reading  found  in  MS,  (A)  and  is  obviously  correct.

8 A proverbial  saying  of  this  kind  is—

Wben  I bad  pease  I bad  no  teetb,  now  my  teeth  have  come  I lia\'o  no  pease,
♦ Omit  } MS,  (A).

t Insert  3.  » MSS.  (A)  (B).

1 MS.  (B)  omits  J-i  before  MS.  (A)  reads  t—W  for

414.

[ 532  ]

come  ' to  his  Sips  ‘Where  is  AjySra.’*  They  say  also  that  although
he  found  it  excessively  difficult  to  turn  from  one  side  to  the  other,
yet  he  would  not  consentto  their  giving  Daulat  Khan  the  trcible  of
coming  in  front  of  him,  but  he  would  say,  ‘ Please  turn  my  face  in
his  direction.’

One  day  he  saw  that  Daulat  Khan  was  absent  and  asked  ‘ \v!i_-re
can  he  be  ? ’ They  replied  he  has  probably  gone  to  the  house  of  one
of  his  relatives.  Then  he  knew  that  to  all  appearance  he  was
playing  a time-serving  pai  t with  others.  At  that  moment  Daulat
Khan  arrived  and  Islem  Shah  quoted  this  verse  : —

Thou  knowesT,  my  value,  how  faithful  I am  *

Stay  ! before  thou  seekest  the  companionship  of  other  frier.  Js.

It  is  report-.d  on  excellent  authority  also  that  Islem  ,^,ah  Ltd
ordered  the  ireasury-offieer  that  he  should  give  DaiJat  Khan
every  day  for  Ids  personal  expenses  as  much  as  a hil<  of  tunk.a.s,
as  a matter  or  course  and  unasked,*’  but  that  if  asked  f.>r  a lartoer
sum  he  should  produce  It  for  his  use.  At  last  seein£  that  his
condition  became  more  grave  day  by  day,  nay,  hour  by  Lour,  his
ph.ysicians  despaired  of  rv-lieviug  him.

Verse.

In  one  small  detail  rh.e  wh.ole  of  the  philosophers  have  been
found  wanfiiig.

For  whar  'an  man  do  .a_-ainst  the  Eternal  decree.®

V,  her.  Ihe  tiatural  caiiscT  of  the  pulse  depart  from  the  funda
menial  m jvemeiit.'

‘ MS.  tB)

>>  r;;mliic  KJii”:  Ajy:>ra.  who  has  been  before  mentioned.  (A.)  TB)

.•-a  l Ayvar-I,  bnt  the  text  roads  (V  HaijSra  with  a note  of

interrogation.  Ajyara  is  the  rig’r  reading-.

f For  :,I3.  (Ai  read  (.cA,  i j[gg_

^ M3S.  fA;  fB)  rend  ^ for  Ij.

^ kjnr'an  II.  iii.

.-f  Aj  JjSlj  Ub  yy.i  ^ i^j  ^ ^ ^

The  oi-gmn:  r <-.f  the  hearens  and  the  earth,  when  he  decrees  a matter  ha
d-'th  hot  say  ’;^'o  i',  BE.  and  i:  i>.

J The  inoriiryjig-  causes  of  rh^  pulse  are  classified  by  Sadidi  thns  : (1)
rndsiic  r,i  ■'■oDstunt  sneh  as  aiuraal  force  in  the  heart  and  vesseli,  (2)

[ 533

The  foot  of  Aflatun  himself  becomes  fixed  in  the  mire  of  help-
lessness.

When  the  conduct  of  nature  turns  towards  disorder,

The  Qaniin  t of  Bu  ‘Alt  lies  useless  in  the  hand.

At  last  he  left  this  world  of  regrets,  wounded  oj  countless
sorrows,  and  abandoned  his  kingdom  to  the  desire  of  his  enemies.
The-  duration  of  his  reign  was  nine  years.  His  b.:.dy  was  taken
to  Sahsaram  and  buried  by  the  side  of  his  father.  This  event
occurred  in  the  year  961  H.,*  and  by  a coincidence  it  happened
that  in  the  course  of  this  (.self-same)  year  ^ Sultan  M-ihiniid  of
Gnjrat,  who  had  adorned  the  throne  with  justice  * and  equity  and
the  fear  of  God,  drank  the  cup  of  martyrdom  at  the  hands  of  his
servant  Burhan.®  Nizamn-t-ilulk  Bahri,®  the  king  of  the  Dakhan,
also  took  his  way  to  the  ocean  of  non-existence,  and  Mir  Sairyid
Ha'matu-llah,  -whose  poetical  name  was  Rusuli,'?  who  was  one
of  the  incomparable  learned  men  and  a close  companion  of  Isleiu
Shah,  wrote  this  chronogram  ; —

Verse.

At  one  time  came  the  decline  of  three  emperors.

Whose  justice  made  Hindustan  the  abode  of  safety  :

i/yir  or  variable,  such  fts  age,  sex,  sleeping  or  making;  exercise,
bathing— others  of  this  class  are  external  or  accidental,  such  as,  feveri^  ’mess,
and  indaramatioiis.  The  pulse  says,  he  is  necessary  for  the  of  the

natural  heat,  and  for  dispelling  vapours.  It  is  opposed  ))y  ii'j:irliry  of  the
vessels  and  weakness  of  the  animal  powers.  See  Sadidi,  p.  o4.  <.r.

1 Qanun-i-Bu  'AU.  This  is  the  fan\.>U3

QdnP.n  f -t-fihh,  canon  medicinae,  by  the  celebrated  Ah.  ‘A’-

biu  ‘Abdn-llah  commonly  known  as  Ibn  SJna  (Avicenna),  ''-.t  -’laji  f^aiifrli,
No.  9354,

Abti  Sina  was  a famous  Muhammadan  physician  who  was  born  in  Buyiilra,
and  died  at  Hamadan  in  July  1037  A.D.,  427  A.H.

(H.K.  says  42S  A.H.}.  See  Beale,  Oriental  Btu-jiaphical  P,e^'Onnr^,  p 20.

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  both  write  ij  omitting  J w hich  is  edded

in  the  text.

3 (JU.  lJj  MSS.  (A)  (B).  * MS.  . B)  reads  1.1-8-*.^.

3 The  text  reads  *1  )l  a pnniiing  comment  on  the  seirant’s  iiau:..

which  will  not  admit  of  tianslation.

• See  Beale.  O.  B.  V.  for  uii  account  of  the  N;z.iui-Sbiht  .lynasty.

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  the  text  re.ads  Rishwati.

415.

L ^>3-1  j

One  rvfis  MnhmuJ  the  Emperor  of  Gujerat,

Who.  iilte  h'is  empire,  'was  still  in  the  pride  of  youth  ;

The  see.md  was  Islem  .^ali,  that  mine  of  beneficence,

Whote  beloved  .son  t -.vas  Sher  Klian  :

I'he  th’rd  ■was  Nizamu.-!-  .Mulk  Bahii

Who  fis  Emperor  'ivas  seated  ou  the  throne  of  the  Dakhan.

If  von  ask  of  me  a tarikh  for  the  death  of  these  three  *
Emperors  r

I answer  Z iwSl-i-lihusruan

Islem  Shah  notwithstanding  his  not  hnving  read  poetry  had
416.  manv  apt  ouotations  in  h:s  memory,  and  being  a clever  critic,  used
constantly  to  ptaotise  the  art  of  versification  with  Amir  Saipwid
Na^mat  Husuli,*  and  used  to  compose  many  elegant  verses  and  to
enjoy  ■ listening  to  tliose  of  hi.?  fellow  poet,  Moreover  he  tt'as
hiu'hly  esteep’cd  by  the  learned  and  religious  men  * of  hi,s  time.
They  .say  t’n.c  when  l.e  reached  Alwar  on  his  way  to  the  Panjab,
he  one  dav  . 'aught  siiiht  of  Muila  'Abdu-llah  of  Sultanpiir®  who
■was  at  some  di.stance  coming  toward.s  liim  ; addressing  his  at-
tendants he  said  : •’  Have  you  any  idea  who  this  is  who  is  ap-
pi  oachiii".''  They  repdied  ; ho  is  it.  please  inform  ns.'’ He  said  :
" Babar  Pa  Ishah  had  fi--e  kous.  of  whom  four  8 left  Hindustan  and
cue  J (.  null ' t- !.  ’ Tney  said  ‘‘find  who  is  that  one  ? ’He  repilied  ; “ This ,
Mulct  wli IS  ai'pi  Duchina'.  ’ .Sarniasr  Khan  said  : “What  is  the  nse  of
seeping  ■.;>  ■ ;!!nfcerio:i  wit’n  .each  a vicious  por.son  f " ® He  replied
“ Iv'hat  ' an  < n-  -.  •wneu  I can  find  no  better  than  he  ? " And  -when
Mulla  A',  tu-i;ab  came  up  lie  ordered  him  to  sit  upon  hi.s  own
ihi'ont.  c d ■'  estC'wed  upon  1 ini  a ber.d-roit  of  pearls,  valued  at
twenty  t . u-.i  . ’ rupees. wln-ch  h.'id  a:  tli.'t  moment  atrived  as

t MS,  '.1;

S kJ’jj'  ■"  ■'  ' - --‘A

* ttSs  -t  • ' 1”'  ^ reo:  H-  ' t

* M.s  i'Aj

^ 'r.‘  ill  .,r  ;!ih  Emperors,  The

.',t  OO]  [ ...  f-,,  V . ,j

■ M . i.  Ica  Ij.

'M-  A,

■>  MS  I li)  reads

[ S35  ]

a piesent  from  some  place.  He  never  missed  tlie  public  prayers,
and  never  touched  any  intoxicants  ‘ not  even  jauz,*  [and
Shaili  Salim  Chishti  of  Fathpiir  and  Hafiz  Nizam  of  Badaon
were  both  of  them  his  imams].®

Firoz  Shah  ibn-i-Islem  Shah,

Who  was  called  Firdz  lOian,  was  raised  to  the  throne  in  succes-
sion to  his  father  at  the  age  of  twelve  * with  the  title  of  Padshah.®

The  aliairs  of  the  kingdom  did  not  prosper  in  his  hands,  and
Mubariz  Khan  the  son  of  Nizam  Khan®  Sur,  who  was  brother’s
son  to  Islem  Shah,^  after  three  days  attempted  the  life  of  that
innocent  one,  and  although  Bibi  Ba'I,  who  was  the  sister  of  Mu-
baiiz  Khan,®  and  the  wife  of  Islem  Shah,  fell  at  his  feet  and
besought  him  piteously  saying  : " Ah  ray  brother,  spare  the  life  of  417.
this  poor  harmless  boy,  and  let  me  take  my  own  way  and  bear  him
away®  to  some  place  where  no  one  will  have  a trace  of  him,  and
where  he  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  sovereignty,  nay,  will  not
even  mention  the  name  of  kingship.”  Tliat  pitiles.s  tyrant  would
not  heed  her,  but  entered  the  palace  an.l  cut  off  the  boy's  head
under  the  very  eyes  of  his  mother.  At  this  day  hi.s  i.«sue  is  cut
oif  just  as  the  tine  of  Islem  Shah  ; ar.d  it  is  said  that  Islem  Shah

t MS.  (A)  reads  j\  j,  \ variant  given  in  a footnote

to  the  text  reads  On  the  whole  the  textual

reading  seems  the  best  adding  as  in  the  two  readings  given-

2 (J-‘U  Jauzu  muml.  Datura,  sp  alba.  D.  fastuosa  X.O.  SolaHacece
c.alled  in  Hindustani  tftfKT  dhatura,  and  iu  Sanskrit  'V'sis,  from  elegant,

Vv  V Ck

and  injiirioQs.  (Wilson)  Use'l  as  a narc'»tio  and  iiit*‘xic  tiit.  Accord-
ing to  the  ^lal^zajiu-l-adwiya  a wine  made  from  the  juice  of  the  leaves.

An  overdose  is  said  to  produce  symptoms  resembliiio:  deU>  t>nn  e potu,  the
patient  raving  and  chasing  in.agiaary  antmals  along  the  walls  of  the  room.

3 These  words  are  not  in  the  text  bnt  both  MSS.  (A;  { R . read

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  thus  Tiie  text  reads  ten.

6 MSS.  (A)  (B)  ^ ^ MS  i'B  read^

" MS.  (A1  reads  J J

Who  "was  brother’s  son  to  ^er  Shdb.  and  uncle’s  son  and  wife’s  brother  t )

Islem  Shah.

» M.S.  (Al.  9 MS.  (A)  M.?  : A ' -miits  J-?/*

MS.  i A)  Ji

[ 536  ]

had  made  several  attempts  upon  the  life  of  Mubariz  Khan,  and
used  to  gay  to  his  vs-ife,  ‘ If  you  value  your  child  keep  clear  of
your  brother, I and  if  you  wish  to  preserve  the  one,  take  away  all
hope  of  life  from  the  other.”  She  used  to  say  in  a deprecatoiy
way,  “ My  brother  spends  all  his  time  in  amusing  himself,*  and.
the  robe  of  royalty  is  in  no  way  suitable  to  his  standard  of  ambi-
tion ; give  up  the  idea  of  destroying  him.”  ^ Islem  Shah  how-
ever, whenever  he  saw  Mubariz  Khan  used  to  say  to  his  wife  in  a
reproachful  way,  “ In  the  end  you  will  regret  this  at  a time  when
regret  will  avail  nothing.”  And  at  last  the  prophecy  of  Islem  Shah,
which  he  had  made  by  his  judgment  of  physiognomy,  was  con-
firmed to  the  letter.*

Verse.

"Whatever  the  young  man  sees  the  mirror,

The  old  man  sees  that  same  in  the  unbaked  brick.^

SuLTi.t  Mthammad  ‘Adil  commonly  known  as  ‘Apr.!.®

Who  was  the  son  of  Nizam  Khan  Sur,^  and  went  by  the  name
of  Mubariz  Khan,  nseeuded  the  throne  with  the  concurrence  of
the  principal  Amirs  and  Yazirs.  and  caused  himself  to  be  ad-
dressed by  the  above  title.®  The  general  public  however  used  to
418.  call  him  ‘Adli,  and  that  name  even®  they  perverted  to  Andhli
which  has  the  commonly  accepted  signification  of  “ blind.”  At
the  commencement  t.f  his  reigu,  having  heard  of  the  conduct  of
Muhammad ‘Adil  ibn  Tugbhui  .Shah,**  he  used  to  imitate  him  in
lavishing  money,  au.l  having  '.peiied  the  doors  of  his  treasury  he

1 MS.>.  (A)  (B)  i.tiMt

* Omit  MSS.  'Aj  (B).  3 MS.  (B)  omirs  j!.

♦ In  MS.  thb'C  W'-r-U  viecp'K*  the  reree,  and  re  id  •

j.  MS.  (B)  omits

'MS,  (A)  reads  Axu  a footnote  rariant  reads

rold',  fur  \bak  '-i'  I f jLow  tne  rendiOLC  of  the  text,  taicinc^  the  moan-
ing to  1 e that  ti.--  '-ill  S'-e  cIl  * young  as  clearlr  as  tne

you’if?  can  see  the  rotloc'’:  'O  ui  a nisrru'r
8 Sue  II  fJ.-  --1  ■ B

MS.  (A)  road.s  oitiitting  andj  tiyJ.

8 MS.  (B)  5 MS  (A)  omits  3^*

10

means  “a  Idimi  woman."

It  MS.  (A)  reads  1}  jl*!  CjHd-,

L 5"  7 j

aimed  at  secnidn^  ‘ the  goodwill  o£  great  and  small  : and  he  had
made  arrows  tipped  with  ^ gold  of  a money  value  of  five  hundred
taiikahs  and  used  to  throw  them.  Whatever^  poor  person’s
house  they  used  to  fall  at,  he  then  bestowed  that  amount  in  money
upon  him  and  used  to  take  back  the  kaiiba-hcish,  this  fitful  habit
however  quickly  * came  to  an  end  after  a few  days.

T" erse.

Inorganic  matter  is  one  thing  : spontaneous  growth  is  another.

T’erse.

It  the'  tears  How  down  upon  the  cheeks,

True  weeping  is  easily  distinguished  from  false.

The  rank  of  r(i.;tr  and  Vakil  was  bestowed  upon  one  Shamsher
Khan,  a slave  wlio  was  the  yoiinirer  brotlier  of  Khawass  Khan
and  Daulat  Khan,  the  •“  new-iluslim,”  a protege  of  the  LuhMi  ®
faction.  He  also  gave  uncontrolled  antho'-ity  to  Himnn  the
greengrocer,  of  the  township  of  Rewari  in  Miwat,  whom  Islem
Sh.ah  had  gradually  tdevated  from  the  position  of  police'  suferin-
tendent  of  the  bazars  and  confirmer  of  punishments,  and  had
by  deari'ees  made  into  a trusted  confi.lant.^  He  now  gave  him
the  superintendence  of  all  ini, '.oi  taut  aifairs  both  military  and
civil.

Tnasinuch  as  ‘Adli  had  'oin.-tlly  hoen  accustomed  to  the
profession'  of  music  .tad  (hirrh-c.  i.".'!  'v.is  fond  of  a life  of  ease
and  luxu;  ;-.  and  was  otio.sc  n,  !■;-  ;.;,bits.  be  was  by  no  means  fitted
f.  r ;..e  .■  ■ .dart  of  miiitii  v alr.iir-.  or  the  d'Uties  of  civil

;tii>.:.r,.;~t."n;:  in  ; siiperaldt-il  lo  tins  -v;,^  the  murder  of  Firuz  Khan
and  iris  nn  lion  tided  c nitinet'.  m in  Hin.Cm.  Accoidir.gly  these
A'liiis  who  wore  of  tir.e  A.f^^ati  de.scent,  evinced  a great  repug-
iiuiiee  to  obey  him,  and  .noi.scJ  sucii  wide.sjiread  feelings  of

^ MS.  {X:  oAhw,

* test  MS  [X')  ^ . JIS  ' B '

The  readi'to  of  rlie  test  a'liateii.cible.  tVe  should  lead  iii  the

n^eaning  of  a lomhno  shaft  Firi'Fot's  re-adinc  is  quite  c-ear  he  says
Bo  • Te\t,  4.19  jbe  clT

That  is,  Knt'ih,  R bamboo  <hafr.  \\nos2  lieail  \\\ts  one  ittla  of

* MS.  (A)  rfads  \ ilS  (A)

^ MS.  (A)  « MS.  (A)

MS.  (A)  reads  for

68

[ 53h  J

sliame,  that  hardly  had  a mouth  parsed  since  his  accession,  when
on  all  sides  rebellions  arose,  and  they  became  rulers  of  their
several  clans.  Sedition  awoke  fiom  its  heavy  slamhcr.  the  bonds
of  kiriship  with  Sher  Shah  and  of  orders  passed  by  Islem  Siiah
419  snapped  asunder,  and  disoider  reigned  supi’eme  :

I'e/'se.

When  the  heart  of  the  times  writhes,  the  bond  of  fellowship
snaps,

When  a flaw  appear.?  * in  the  string,  the  licaids  are  scattered.

One  day  when,  having  summoned  the  mo.st  i-enow  ned  Amii  s to  the
durbar  hall  of  the  fort  of  Gwaliar,  ‘Adli  na.s  ensrac'erl  in  distributing
jngirs,  he  ordore  1 that  tiie  Sarkiir  of  Qanaiij  shoul.l  bo  transferred
from  Shah  iluhanimtid  Farniall.  and  given  in  perpetuity  to
Sai  mast  Ivhan  Sarbaiii,  ['ihih  iluhammad  was  ill].®  whereupon
his  son  Sikandar,  who  was  a brave,  hand-roine,  and  well-built  youth
spoke  fiercely  with  regard  to  this  /uy;r.  ^ah  Muhammad  how-
ever admonished  ® him  in  gentle  terms  and  forbade  him  to  speak
thus,  but  he  answered  his  father  ” Once  ,Sher  .Shah  placed  you  in
an  iron  cage  and  kept  you  a prisoiier  for  some  years,  while  Islern
Shah  made  you  the  captive  of  his  kindne.ss  and  by  intercession
and  influence  obtained  your  re]ea=e.  Kow  the  .Sur  faction  are
attempting  to  destioy  us,  and  you  do  not  understand  their  in-
famous design  ; ^ tliereiipon  lie  liogan  to  abuse  Sananst  Khan  with
all  the  petulance  of  youth  and  the  arros'ant  pride  of  race  and  said :
“ iNow  our  aSairs  have  come  ro  such  a pass  ^ that  this  dog-seller  ®
is  to  enjoy  om  jiigir."  Sarmast  Khan,  who  was  a tall,  powerful
man  full  of  energy,  phiced  bi.s  hand  upon  the  shoulder  of
Sikandar  intending  to  make  iibn  prisoner  by  niiderhand  me.ans,  and
said  : -‘My  boy,  why  aic  you  .saying  all  the.se  bitter  things,”  Sikandar
however  pertteived  his  intention,  clapped  his  hand  to  his  dagger,
and  .-struck  .Sarnia.st  Khan  such  a deadly  blow  over  the  shoulder
blade,  that  he  fell  on  the  .spot  uncon.scious  and  died.  Sikandar
also  made  some  others  of  those  • hell-dogs  so  heavy  of  head

i "MS  ht  j rca  U

5 MS.  I A,i  adds  the  wmcls  in  bracket.-  el— is'-i  j.

• M.?  i.t,  1 JJS.  ,A)  onir.=  !j.

6 -M-S.  lA,  6 ^[S,  (A)  jl.

MS.S  (Aj  (B;  i-ond  .yh-^

[ 539  1

and  sleep-stricken  * tliat  they  ■will  never  wake*  till  the  morn  of
the  great  assembly,  and  certain  others  remained  so  intoxicated
that  they  spent  the  remainder  of  their  lives  in  recovering  from  it.®

T erse.

Thine  eye  which  was  wonderful  in  slaying  thy  lovers

Would  slay  one  and  cast  its  glance  upon"another.

It  was  currently  reported  that  from  the  time  when  the
dagger  was  first  invented  in  Hindustan  no  person  can  have  ever
used  it  in  the  way  that  Sikandar  Khan  did.  A tumult  arose
among  the  people,  and  ‘AJli  fled  and  entered  the  women’s  quarter.?
and  put  up  the  chain  on  the  inside.  Sikandar  after  that  he  had
killed  some  and  wounded  ® others,  at  last  made  towards  ‘Adii
and®  aimed  a blow  at  him  with  a sword,  which  however  stiuek  a
plank  of  the  door ; had  he  attacked  him  in  the  first  instance  he
would  have  despatched  him.  The  Amirs  of  ‘Adit's  party  shewed
themselves  in  their  true  colours  that  day,  as  ntost  of  them  cast
away  tlieir  swords  t and  took  to  flight,  and  were  going  about
distractedly,  till  at  last,  after  Sikmdar  liad  done  as  much  mischief
as  salt  in  the  yea.st,^  they  attacked  him  simultaneously  fiomall
side.?.  This  contest  went  on  for  tlnee  or  four  hour.s.  when®  Sikandar
fell  to  a blow  from  riie  sword  of  Ibrahim  Kuan  Stir,  si.ster's
husband  to  ‘Adli,  and  Shah  Muhammad  was  siruolc  down  by  the
sword  of  Daulat  Khan  LCihani,**  both  of  them  taking  their  way  to
the  city  of  non-existence.  It  so  happened  that  on  mat  day
before  the  assembly  of  that  meeting  Taj  Khan  Karraui,  the

1 MS  (A;  ISiVI  wtjA j MS  (U)  read

2 MS.  (A)

^ lleiul  here  Tltig  U the  reading  of  (A)  (B!

Hiid  is  fa:  preteiable  to  the  reading  in  tiie  text.

* MS  A)  reads  ^ -MS.  (A  -

^ MS'^.  ( A (B)  j

-M  ?.  (B)  reuti-  J Most  of  tiirm

Lhi-’vf  t''.nm=(dro3  from  /ne  w.il  s is  .i:e  readhig  givsii  ia  a f.oi-

^ rant  to  Lfic  i 1

e aJ.litIo'.  of  sail  to  joust  a s cd  t”  cnoro  !t:j  fertncutuliv..'  (o  u
® Ms.'  j.  M-5.  ...t  o.'.s  .-iti.

420.

[ 540  ]

brother  of  ‘Amad  and  Suleiman,  who  eventually  became  the
autocratic  * ruler  of  the  province  of  Bengal,  aud  gave  himself  the
title  * of  Hazrat  A'ala,  having  left  the  audience  hall  of  ‘Adli  was
going  outside  the  fort,  when  on  his  way  he  met  with  Shah
Muhammad  Farmali.  They  asked  * after  each  other’s  affairs,
and  Taj  Khan  said:  “I  see  signs  of  mischief,  and  consequently  I
am  removing  my  naanly  footsteps  outside  this  circle,^  and  am
421,  going  outside.  Do  you  too  come  with  me  and  follow  my  lead,^  for
the  scale  has  turned.

Verse.

When  you  see  that  your  friends  are  no  longer  friendly.

Consider  that  flight  is  an  opportunity  to  be  seized.

But  inasmuch  as  the  hand  of  death  had  seized  the  skirt  of  Shah
Muhammad  and  was  dragging  him  to  the  grave,®  he  would  not
consent  to  this  advice  and  went  to  ‘Adli.

Verse.

When  the  appointed  time  of  the  quarry  comes  it  goes  towards
the  huiit-man.

t lo'-  which  was  written  in  his  fate  befel  him  ; Taj  Khan  in
full  Jayligi.c  fled  from  Gwaliar  towards  Bengal  and  ‘Adli  sent
ail  armed  paity  i:i  pursuit  of  him,  and"^  himself  also  started  to
fjh.w  iiiai,  iu  front  of  the  township  of  • Chhapramau  * in  the
cli.itrict  ox  Q.inauj  an  engagement  took  place  between  the  two
pL.ifies  The  itiir=  iu  their  courses  fought  for  ‘Adii,  and  his  army

- : A I,  ’eal  I'licl  AI.S.  (A)  reads  for

A.  SXj

- 3IS.S,  ' A ilJ  J-  j shoulO  omitted,

3 {A;  (Bj  read  which  is  better  than  the  textual  reading

' JfS?.  {.Aj  .Bj  read  (B)

i A )

® JIS.  (A;  leads  wroDjrly  for  lyH-

® M5.  (A)  reads  Ij  iti  and  1133.  (A)  (B)  read  ul’Af

1 MSS.  (A)

> IIS.  (B)  5^  !/»•?■■  The  text  is  without  dots.  MS.  (Aj  reads  Lrit^
Chheiamau.

r

L

541  ]

was  victorious, I and  Taj  Khan  turning  in  flight  made  the  best  of  his
way  to  Chhinar,*  wherever  he  found  the  authorities  favourable
to  ‘Adli  he  made  prisoners  ^ of  them,  and  laid  hands  on  whatever
cash  and  valuables  he  could  find.  A hundred  head  of  elephants
also  fell  into  his  hands.  Thus  he  proceeded  tilt  he  joined  hands
with  Suleiman  and  Tmad  and  Khwaja  Ilyas  who  held  sway  over
certain  pargunas  on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges  and  other  places.

Then  he  openly  sounded  the  note  of  rebellion.  'Adli  arrived  at
Chunar,^  and  tlie  Karrauis  on  the  banks  of  the  river ^ Ganges
came  out  to  tight  with  him.  Himun  asked  for  a halka  of  elephants,
that  is  to  say,  a hundred  elephants,  and  fought  a desperate  battle
with  them  gaining  a victory.  And  ‘Adli  wliile  in  Chnnar  in-
tended to  seize  ® Ibiahim  Kdiaii.  the  son  of  GhSzi  Khan  Sfir,  one
of  tlie  cousins  of  Slier  Khan,  but  the  si.ster  of  ‘Adli,  who  was
married  to  him,  became  aware  of  this  intention,  and  brought  hint
down  by  a secret  passage'^  from  the  fort.  Ibrahim  Khan  made
his  way  towards  Baiana  and  Hindun  which  was  his  father’s  jajlr : 422.
‘Adli  despatched  ‘Isa  Khan  Niyazi  after  Ibrahim  Khan,  and  they
fought  a battle  * in  tlie  vicinity  of  Kalpi,  the  breeze  of  victory
fanned  the  standards  of  Ibiahim  Khan,  and  he  gained  the  day.

Then  having  a.sseiubled  a laige  following,  and  entering  that
country,  he  proclaimed  himself  soveieigii.®  ‘Adli  thereupon
disengaged  himself  from  the  Karrauis,  and  came  against
Ibrahim  Khan  to  attack  him,  and  when  lie  arrived  near  the
river  Jon,  Ibialiim  Khan  made  overtures,  i®  and  sent  a message
saying:  ‘'If  Ra'i  Husain  Jilwani,  n and  Bihar  Khan  Saiwani,  to
whom  Isleni  .^hah  gave  the  title  of  A'zaiii  HuiiiayCiu,  with  some
others  **  of  the  Amirs  noble  and  leiiowuetl,  will  come  and  leassiire
nie,*^  then  will  J in  reliance  upon  their  aS'-iiraiices  agree  to  make

1 Tlie  te.vtual  rending  is  wrong,  omit  rfuding  witli  MSS.  (Aj  (B;

(_jJG  j}

2 MS.  (A)  jlh?..  MS.  (B)  MSS.  (A)  (B).

* MSS.  (A)  (B).  !>  MSS.  lAJ  (IJ;

6 MS.  (A)  ijU  OoSxj.

^ MS.  (A)  reads  0 which  is  better  tiian  tlie

text.

3 MSS.  (A)  (B)  9 JISS,  (A)  (B)

MS.  (A)  omiu  MS.  (A;  i-cads

Ms.  (A)  ouiiib

‘S  MS.  (B)  roath

[ •542  ]

submission  to  you.”  ‘Adli  i accordingly  sent  them,  and  no  sooner
had  they  arrived  than  they  gave  in  their  allegiance  to  Ibrahim
Khan,  giving  him  the  title  of  Saltan  Ibrahim,  and  thus  putting  *
a different  complexion  upon  the  dispute,  rai.sed  the  standard  of
insiiiTectiou  against  ‘Adli.

The  ^.iithah  "svas  read  in  the  name  of  Ibrahim  Khan  in  5g!’a
and  certain  other  districts,  while  ’Adii,  lealising  that  he  was  not
able  to  cope  with,  him,  left  G-waliar  for  Bhatta,  and  thence  returned
towards  Chunar taking  with  him'*  large  amounts  cf  treasuie,
manv  elephants  and  a large  following.

After  the  de.,th  of  Islem  .^ah.  at  the  time  when  the  kina's  of
clans  arose. 5 Ahmad  Khan  Sui'.  one  of  the  cousins  of  Sher  .Shah,
who  hal  TO  wife  the  .second  ststei  ot  ‘Adli.  a man  of  di.stinrfuished

O

bravery  and  enduranc-,  sat  in  co-nference  with  ® the  xVinirs  of  the
Panjab,  and  imp-lanted  in  their  minds  all  sorts  of  evil  notion.^
regarding  ‘Adli  an.l  of  his  undtne.ss,  (they  being  nlreadv  ill-
disposed  towards  him)  and  with  the  aid  and  a.s.sistance  of  Tatar
423.  Bian  Easi.7  and  Habib  Khan,  and  Kasib  Khan  Tughriji,  who  had
attained  this  title  from  ^er  Shall,-  declared  open  tvar  against
‘Adli,  aiid't  assuming  the  title  of  Sultan  Sikandar  and  reading
the  Khutbah,  and  entertaining  hopes  of  still  further  increase  of
power  proceeded  to  Dihli  and  Agra.'t

On  the  other  hand,  Ibrahim  having  collected  a large  army
confronted  Sikandar  at  Farah.t*  which  is  situated  at  a distance  of
ten  kfohs  from  Agra.

ilobt  of  the  noted  Amirs,  such  as  Haji  Khan  Sultani,  Governor
of  Alwar,  who  was  virtually  a king,  and  Rai  Hussain  Jilwiiiu
and  ilas'atid  Khan  and  Husain  Khan  Ghilzai  were  on  the  side  of
Ibrahim.  To  some  two  hundred  of  them  Ibrahim  liad  given  royal

i Omit  j.  MSS.  (A)  (B).

S MS.  (BJ  3 MS.  (B)  omits

* MSS.  (A)  (Bj  omit  reading

^ MS.  (B)  omits  both  and  ® MS.  (A)

T A footnote  variant  reads  Kdlpi.  9 MS.  (A)  reads  Aiily

* JIS3.  (A:  (B)  j,  jjj  *3^  IMiS.  (A)  reads  jjj

I*  MSS.  (.Vj  (Vj)  i>A  la  MS.  (B)  Osi  JblLo

13  MSS.  f.A'  (B;  Sj»,  14  MS.  (A)

111  error.

[ 54:i  J

tents  and  standards,  and  cnsi^as  *■  and  kettle  drums,  and  it  fre-
quently happened  that  to  anyone  who  came  and  brought  nith
him  ten  or  fifteen  horsemen  he  gave  a sort  of  makeshift  flag-srafl:
with  a bit  of  red  raa'  wrapped,  round  it,  simply  to  gain  fat'orn'  and
to  attract  people,  bestowing  upon  him  also  a grant  of  dignity  and
a ydei;-.*  Ill  this  way  nearly  eighty  thousand  men  docked  to  him  ;
and  on  the  day  when  Hap-  Ilian  came  from  Alwar  and  gave  in
his  allegiance  to  him.  he  sl.=wed  i.ini  great  fe.veur  bestowing  upon
him  a lofty  and  sj.a  liou.s  covered  on  the  outside  with  siiqirlac  =
of  Portugal,  a:.d  oil  the  inside  ith  rrankish  velvet.  L.icl  it  freshly
pit.ii-e.I  for  him.  diereco  er  he  lavished  npon  Hait  Khan  niaani-
fi  ent  caioe''.  aiv.l  v-.-'-els  of  g'-:d  and  silver  and  all  oti  er
i''‘qrirerj’.ti.c-  ■ :i  ti.e  mm::-:-  .scale:  accordingly  he  entered  the  tent
v.itLout  lic.-itstioi-  ai-d  ibere  to.  k up  Ids  abode.  Tliis  treatment
v cC':i=ii'i-ird  g! c- t Lilt  V an.'.  ’e.iKnsv’  among  the  Amirs  cf  pure
Afghan  blood  who  became  disheartened  and  spared  net  to  express
t!:eir  discontent  omuua  iheniselvts,  Iskandar,  who  had  a following
of  twelve  thousand  men,  innsniuch  as  he  estimated  the  army  of
Ihraliim  as  being  more  numerous  than  his  own.  shillv-shallied
and  made  overtures  for  peace,  and  wrote  a treaty  in  the  following
terms,  that  from  Dildi  tc  the  eastern  extremity  of  Hindustan  as  424.
far  as  could  be  arranged. ^ .should  belong  to  Ibrahim  Khan,®  and
that  the  country  of  the  Paiijab  and  Multan  .as  far  as  possible
should  belong  to  Sikandar.  so  that  he  miglit  attain  the  object  for
which  the  Mughuh  came  to  Hindustan.  The  Afghans  of  both

* The  text  he.-e  roads  Cj^-  JIS.  (A)  however  readf  The  true

reading  should  evidently  be  which  aecordiug  to  M.  Pavet  de  C'onrteilies

ineaus  a standard  coTiipcsed  of  the  tail  of  the  {qiittls  or  Tibetan  yak)

fi-ved  to  a pole.

* M'-S  (A)

8 IIS.  (B)  reads  !-a<nrldt.  Dozy,  however,  gives  no  such  form  of

the  word  and  the  word  is  probably  .-h^.'a/,  meaning  a silken  stuff

hi-iicaded  with  geld,  ,?t>e’  Dnzv  s.  r.  Sec  also  Yule  and  Burnett  Glossary  s.  r.

Sucltit  also,  ifkeat  Etyin  : Diet.  .'.r.  Scarlet

Another  instance  of  Badloni’s  use  of  in  this  unasnal  sense.

t We  should  apparently  read  here  US.  (B)  omits

The  winds  altogether.  JIS.  fA)  agrees  with  the  text,  which  however  does  not
seem  satisfactory,

“ -MS.  (.A.)  omits

044

arinips,  who  were  blood-relations  or  connections  of  each  other,
were  pleased  at  the  prospect  of  a peaceful  settlement,  and  Kala
Bhar  ‘ the  brother  of  Sikandar,  and  the  Amirs  of  the  Fafij
Bhaii/n  which  means  “the  five  brothers,’  who  were*  with  the
sword  tlie  marvel  of  the  ase,  made  this  additional  stipulation  that
if  after  that  Ibrahim  (Khan)°  s^ets  possession*  of  the  treasury
of  ‘Adli  and  the  kingdom  of  Bhatta,  which  is  near  being
realised,  he  shall  make  us  piartners  in  both  of  these  gains,  then
all  well  and  good, = but  if  not  we  will  annul  the  peace.  Sikandar
agreed  to  this  propo.?ition.®  and  the  majority  of  the  Amirs  of
Ihrahim  (lOian)  ’ impressed  upon  him  that  there  was  no  danger  to
he  nppreheiideJ  from  agreeing  * to  tlii.s  proposal,  inasmuch  as  the
treasury  and  kingdom  of  Bhatta  would  certainly  be  theirs,  “ and
then,’’  .said  they.  “ it  will  require  a man  to  oppose®  us  (success-
fullyl.  while  for  the  present,  at  any  rate,  we  .shall  have  tided  over
rhi.s  difficulty  satisfactorily:

Ve;s,-.

Be  not  proud,  for  I hold  the  staff  of  wi.sdom  in  my  hand,

Ti.e  arm  of  riot  is  long  (and)  a stick  has  two  ends.

Ibrahim  came  round  to  this  view  hut  Masffid  £h§n  and  Husain
Ehiln  Ghilz'ai  with  .some  of  the  new  Amirs  said:  “Seeing  that  in
the  e:'.d  tiie  rmtttei.s  in  dispute  between  us  and  Sikandar  will  one
day  haec  t ■>  be  doenled  by  the  swoi’d,  now  that  our  party  has
incri-iised.  rtliiit-  i.i-  full  iwing  ;s  exceedingly  small,  w hy  should
wo  not  decide  ■■  tiie  matter  at  ot.ce,**  and  not  desist  unid  we  have
secured  oui  Selves  agaiinst  a repetition  of  this  in  the  tuture.  To
agree  to  peace  now  will  be  a confe.s.sion  of  weakness  on  our  part.

425  and  an  admi--,-Jiun  of  the  bravery  of  our  enemies.”  **  Upon  ‘Adli

t it.S.S.  (Ai  ;B)  S'"'  i!so  Firi.^ta.  The  text  reads  5!'^  Kala  Pahar.

~ ^tS.  fA)  reals  Cyt  ® 41.-^.  IBj  adds

* MS.  (R)  re.ad.s  .MjiT  which  p.^eins  better  than  the  text.

2 MS.  lA  r onn'ts  6 reads  for

1 .M  S f B . ■

5 M.S  'B  omit-  5 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  Ajf  U

MS.S  (A  iBj  ciriiit  J-  That  ia  to  say,  a staff  is  a xveapon  both  of
offeiiC'*  and  ii*  iciiro.

MS.  lA  ) reads  but  the  textual  is  better.

t®  M.S.  Bj  reads

12  MS.  (B)  omits  14  .MS.  (Bj  reads  l‘W|.

[ 545  ]

also,  -who  has  crept  like  a rat  into  his  hole,  Tvith  all  his  elephants
and  retinue,  the  desire  of  conflict  with  us  is  creeping,  and  that
peace  which  had  been  concluded  has  been  confounded.”  Ibiahim
Khan  put  off  fighting  till  after  the  arrival  of  Miyan  STahya  Turan,
governor  of  Sambhal,  who  was  famous  both  as  a vrarrior  and  as  a
man  of  sound  judgment.  Miyan  Yahya  in  the  year  9(31  H.  during
the  disturbances,  gave  battle  in  Badaon  to  twenty  of  ■Aclli's  Amirs
who  had  been  appointed  to  the  district  of  Sambhal,  and  defeated
them  ; he  then  fought  a great  battle  on  the  plain  * of  the  township
of  Kandaikhi  with  Raja  Matar  Sen  Kahtariya,  who  was  the
former  ruler  of  Sambhal  and  had  collected  a great  force,  and
defeated  him.  The  author  of  this  Muntakhah.  who  was  at  that
time  accompanying  his  father,  now  deceased,  was  in  the  twelfth
year  of  his  age,*  and  had  gone  to  Sambhal  to  study,  wote  this
chronogram : Chi  has  khub  karJa  and  * (How  well  have  they
done)  ! Before  that  he  could  convey  the  news  to  his  teacher,*
the  prince  of  learned  men,  the  guide  of  connoisseurs,  the  exem-
plar of  the  intelligent, the  master  of  masters,  tlie  Miyan  Hatira
of  Sanbhal,  this  ® tidings  had  already  reached  him.  At  tlie  time
when  he  was  by  way  of  benediction  and  blessing  giving  instruc-
tion in  the  Kanz-i-Fiqh,  he  said,  “ Count  the  lettcis  of  this  tnrlkh
which  I have  spoken  without  forethought,  Fatkhd-i-usmani
I replied  nine  hundred  and  sixty,  which  ^ is  one  unit  short.  Ho
answered,*  I said  it  with  the  haniza  of  Izafat,  that  is  to  say,
Fathha-i-asmani,  which  is  in  conformity  with  the  ancient  spelling
in  respect  to  the  value  of  letters  : and  in  this  way  it  is  correct.!^
He  gave  his  blessing,  and  fixed  a time  for  the  lesson,  and  adding

1 MS.  (B)  reads  * MS.  (B)  reads  jZt  and

* ‘X)|  (J^  tnrda  and.  A footuute  to  the  te.xt

points  ont  that  this  gives  the  date  962  H.  whereas  the  event  chronicled
occurred  in  961  H,  * Read  MS.  (B).

^ MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  instead  of

6 MS.  (A)  ttfb

7 FatAI  Tliey  were  Iteaven-giveH  vic-

tories. Read  with  hainzn  this  gives  961  H.

® MS.  (A)  reads  for  j.  MS.  (B)  reads  ^

^ MSS.  (A)  (B)  r^fid

MS.  (A)  reads  wronglv  According  to  diis  the  valne  of  hnra/a

is  1.  and  it  is  taken  as  efjnivalont  to  Alif.  The  lianiza  of  i/afat  is  said  to  bo

69

[ 546  ■]

a few  pages,  written  with  his  own  hand  to  tlie  pages  which  I had
426.  written  containing  the  instruction  of  the  Qazi,  gave  them  to  me
as  a souvenir,  and  entrusted  my  instruction  to  Miyan  Shaikh
Abul  I’ath,  the  son  of  Shaikh-allahdiyah  i of  Khairahad,  may  God
he  merciful  to  him,  who  is  now  seated  on  the  throne  of  instruction
and  guidance  in  the  room  of  his  father  ; and  inasmuch  as  Miyan
Yahya  after  taking  forcible  possession  of  * the  country  of  Kant  ^-o-
Golah  and  that  district,  going  by  way  of  Badaon  had  built  a
bridge  across  the  Ganges  at  tlie  township  of  Ahar,*  and  had  gone
towards  Ibrahim  Khan,  I accompanied  my  father,  now  departed,
may  he  rest  in  peace,  to  Amroha,^  and  was  thus  separated  from
that  army  ; ° and  being  introduced  to  the  presence  of  the  late  Mir
Saiyyid  ‘ Muhammad  Mir  ‘Adi,  may  God  have  mercy  on  Inrn,^
with  whom  he  had  some  hereditary  connection,  remained  some
time  under  his  instruction.  In  short  on  the  day  on  which  Miyan
Xa^ya  joined  Ibrahim  Khan,  on  that  very  morning  Ibrahim
Khan  had  drawn  up  his  army  and  placed  Miyan  Yahya  in  the
command  of  the  advance  guard,  while  he  appointed  Haji  Khan
to  the  command  of  the  left  division,  and  Rai  Husaiti  Jilwani
with  tlie  Ghilz’ais  to  the  right  division.  He  himself  taking  the
centre  drew  up  in  line  of  battle.  On  the  other  side  Sikandar  Sur

an  abbreviated  is  (Platts’ Persian  Grammar,  p.  43J,  bat  if  this  were  the
case  its  value  would  justly  be  10  and  not  1.  It  thus  appears  more  probable
that  the  bamza  of  izafat  is  in  reality  bamza,  and  does  not  represent  an
original  iS-

I MS.  (A)  ^ See  J.  A.  S.  B.,  1869,  p.  118.

* MS  (B)  reads

8 Kant.  Town  in  the  Shahjahanpur  District,  N.-W.  P , see  Hunter,  I.

G.  vii.  437.  Kant-o-Golah  in  Shahjahinpnr  according  to  Blochraann,  J.  A.  S B.,
1869,  p,  122.

* Ahar,  Ancient  town  in  the  Bulandshahr  District.  N.-W  P , see  Hunter
I.  G.  i.  81.

8 .Arniclia  Town  in  Moradabad  District,  H.-W.  P.,  see  Hunter,  I G.  i.
266.

6 MS.  (A/  reads  tsijjK  [>  j after  iy|j!.

.1  See  J.  A.  S.  B..  1869,  p.  126,  and  Aln-i-Akhari,  (B,l,  I.  p 268.  The  Mir
'Adi  was  t’l officer  eatrnsted  with  the  duty  of  currying  out  the  finding  of
thp  Q^7‘.  -d/n  1 .-ikhyr'  ill.  (J  ) 41.

5 A!  A-,'*

547  i

also  drew  up  liis  foT’ces  and  came  out  * from  his  camp.  The  right
wing  of  Sikandar’s  forces  (the  Panj  Bhaiyal,  carried  away  the
left  of  Ibraliim’s  army  by  sheer  weight,  and  after  sacking*  the
camp  went  on  to  Agra  and  pillaging  the  citv  ’ssued  a proclama-
tion on  behalf  of  Sikandar.^

The  right  of  Ibrahim  Khan’s  army,  however,  carried  away  the
left  of  Sikandar’s  force,  and  driving  them  back  pursued  them  as
far  as  the  township  of  Hodal  * and  Palwal,®  shouting,  Prosppiity
to  Ibrahim  Khan.®  Haji  Khan  at  the  instant  the  two  opposing
ranks  closed,  passing  by  the  side  of  his  tent,’  and  seeing  it  had
been  tom  to  shreds  by  the  pillaging  party,*  in  pretended  ignor-
ance of  what  had  occurred  hastened  to  A 1 war.  A slight  engage-
ment ensued  with  Miyan  * Yahya  Paran  who  commanded  the
advanced  guard  of  Sika.udar’s  aimy,  and  a wound  was  inflicted
upon  the  hand  of  Miyan  Tahya  and  two  of  his  fingeis  were  cut
off  lie  did  rot  draw  rein  till  he  anived  at  Sambhal.  Ibrahim
Khan  took  up  a position  on  the  lower  ground  with  four  hundred
men,  and  with  his  front  facing  dow'n-hill  **  awaited  the  attack  of
Sikandar,  the  shots  from  whose  mortars  passed  over  the  heads  427.
of  his  men,  so  that  thej"  could  not  move  a step.

When  Ibrahim  saw  that  the  field  remained  empty  and  that  his
troops  were  scattered  like  motes*in  a sun  beam,’*  he  realised  that
Sikandar  himself  was  present  with  the  opposing  array,  so  yielding
to  necessity  he  proceeded  to  Itawa.  His  canopy  and  all  his
regalia  were  taken.  Sikaudar  pursued  him  as  far  as  Itawn,^’
where  he  heard  that  Jaunat  Ashiyani  had  reached  **  Hindustan  ;

I MS.  (B)  J<yj.  « MS.  |B)  reads  tir*"

* MSS.  (A)  (BJ  omit  4 MS.  (A)  reads  Bhodal.

^ For  Hodal  and  Palwal,  see  Hunter,  I.  G.  v.  437  and  xi.  21.

6 MS.  (A)  omits  "<  MS.  (A).

8 MS.  (A)  omits  9 JISS.  (A)  (B)

10  Bead  with  MSS.  (A)  (B;yl

II  Supply  from  MSS  (A;  (Bj.

1*  1 am  not  quite  clear  as  to  the  meaning  of  this  passage.

IS  The  text  and  both  MSS.  seem  to  be  incorrect  : we  should  read  I think,

The  text  and  MS.  {X)  read  MS.  (BJ  reads

1*  Qur'iin,  XXV.  25.  M.S.  (A)  reads  wrongly  here  SIS.  (B)  0-1.

1^  SISS.  (Al  ( B ) j *xbc  18  SIS.  (A)  reads  for .

11  MSS.  (A)  fffi  1*  MS.  (B)  Oxif.

[ 548  ]

retracing  his  steps  thence  he  proceeded  by  continnous  marches
a.8  far  as  Sihrind,!  he  eventually  fought  a battle  there  and  was
defeated.  Ibrahim  leaving  there  went  to  Sambal,  and  collecting
an  army  procured  a fresh  gold-embroidered  canopy,  and  a
month  later  crossed  (the  river)  with  a force  of  three*  thousand
Sowars  by  the  ford  of  Kisti,®  and  (?)  made  towards  Kalpi  in  order
that  having  collected  a fresh  army,*  he  might  fight  ‘Adli  again.
At  this  juncture  ‘Adli  had  appointed  Himun  the  grocer,  who  was
his  vazir  and  uncontrolled  agent,  and  had  sent  him  from  Chinhar
with  certain  eminent  Amirs,  and  fire  hundred  elephants  like
storm  clouds  (for  blackness),  and  unlimited  treasure  to  proceed  to
Agra  and  Dilhi.

Himun,  regarding  Ibrahim  as  his  own  especial  prey,  considered
it  essential  to  overthrow  him ; ^ Ibrahim  came  out  to  oppose  him  ®
ready  for  battle,  and  taking  up  a strong  position  shewed  a resolute
determination  to  withstand  him,  such  as  perhaps  Rnstum*  if  any-
one, displayed  before.’  But  for  all  this, ’by  the  decree  of  the
Almighty^  be  was  not  successful.*  He  was  the  possessor  of  all
the  praiseworthy  qualities  which  should  belong  to  kings.®  He  was
well  formed  and  well  spoken,  modest,  cultured  and  refined,’®  daring
and  liberal,  but  success  in  w'ar  is  God-given,’ t and  it  is  not  in
mortals  to  command  it,  it  was  not  his  fate  ’*  to  win.  Accordingly
in  this  space  of  two  years  of  disorder  he  must  have  fought  sixteen
or  seventeen  battles,  and  on  every  occasion  after  gaining  a success
428.  met  with  a defeat.  God  preserve  uo  from  failure  after  success.'*

I MSS.  (A)  (B)  B.  ! MSS.  (A)  (B)  A,,

s MS.  (A)  kani  (?).  MS.  fB}  gisi  (?).

* MS.  (B)

‘ JIS.  (A)  reads  for  6 IIS.  (BJ  reads

’ MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  jaJ  lyltA.

^ MS.  (At  reads

9 A footnote  to  the  text  says  that  the  word  b jg  snperflnoua,  SIS.  (A)
omits  b.

JO  MS.  (B)  reads  wrongly  for  and  for

IJ  ilSS.  (A)  (B)  IS  Jig,  (Uj  reads  again  for

MS.  (A)  supplies

AJJ  (j  rt-  r.  •

- f^“‘nLinn.  niranin^  we  havo  reconrse
to  Uod  for  pu'servatioii  from  dectea-L-  oi  . r.

oi  ueiCGi'\i:iK*-b  ufiui  lucrease,  or

redundance.  Sec  Lano  •*.  >.

[ 549  ]

Ibrahim  Khan  after  this  * defeat,  leaving  Kalpi  made  straight
for*  Baiana  with  all  speed,  and  Himun  pursuing  him  ari'ived  at
Baiaua.  Ibrahim  Khan  taking  a body  of  the  Nuhaiii  ® and
Afghan  cultivators  * and  landholders  of  Baiana,  again  ® went
out  to  meet  Himdn,  and,  making  a night  attack  upon  him,  the
following  morning  fought  a fierce  battle  with  him  near  to  the
township  of  Khanwah,  ten  Icrohs  distant  from  Baiana,  but  could  not
prevail  against  his  destiny,  and  Himun  said  ‘ It  is  easy  to  smite
a stricken  foe  ’ and  rolled  him  up  and  inflicted  a defeat  upon  him,
so  that®  he  was  compelled  to  fortify  himself  in  the  fortress  of
Baiana,  which  is  a fort  of  exceeding  loftiness  and  strength.
Himun  thereupon,  making  that  fortress  the  centre  of  his  opera-
tions, attacked  it  continuously  every  day,  subjecting  the  fort  to  a
heavy  bombardment;'^  Ghazi  ~Khan  the  father  of  Ibrahim  Khan  *
kept  the  fort  provided  ® with  supplies  by  way  of  the  mountain
passes  to  the  westward  of  Baiana.  Himun  kept  up  the  siege  of
this  fort  for  three  months,  and  made  inroads  on  the  districts  of
Baiana  on  all  sides,  pillaging  and  destroying.^"  Nearly  all  the
books  which  my  late  father  possessed  in  Basawar^*  were  des-
troyed. A,  severe  famine  prevailed  throughout  the  eastern
portion  of  Hindustan,  especially  in  Agra,  Baiana,  and  Dihli.  It
was  so  severe  a famine  that  one  ser  of  jawari  gi-ain  had  reached
two  half-tmikahs,  and  was  in  fact  not  to  be  had  (even  at  that
price).  Men  of  wealth  and  position  had  to  close  their  houses,
and  died  by  tens  or  twenties  or  even  more  iu  one  place,  getting
neither  grave  nor  shroud.  The  Hindus  also  were  in  the  same

I MS.  (A)

* We  shoald  read  here  jtoit  yak  andiz  MS.  (A  ).

8 MSS.  (A)  (B).

♦ MSS.  (A)  (B)  '^1'®  text  reads  which  has  no  meaning,

8 MS.  (A)

8 MS.  (A)  '*  MS.  (A)

8 MS.  (A)  omits  ® MS.  (B)  reads  iU-rix*.

W MS.  (A)  clyli  MS.  (B)

II  MSS.  (.V)  (B)  “ MS.  (B)  omits

13  MSS.  (A)  (B)

t'he  ser  is  approximatelv  two  pounds.  Jau'dri  is  the  Ilindasfciini  name  for
the  small  variety  of  millet  also  known  as  chhofa  jaiao-.  (Andro^^otjun  iuryhiim).

MS.  (A)  reads  in  error  foi

[ ooO  ]

plight,  and  the  bulk  of  tiie  people  were  fain  to  live  on  the  seeds
of  the  Mughmlan  thorn  ‘ and  on  wild  herbs,*  also  on  the  skins
of  the  oxen  which  the  rich  slaughtered  and  sold  from  time  to
429.  time  ; after  a few  days  their  hands  and  feet  swelled  8 and  they
died.  As  a date  for  that  year  the-  phrase  Khashm-i-Izad  *
(Divine  wrath)  was  invented.^  The  writer  of  these  pages
with  these  guilty  eyes  of  his  saw  man  eating  his  fellow-man  in
those  terrible  days.  So  awful  was  their  aspect  that  no  one  dared
let  his  glance  rest  upon  them ; and  the  greater  part  of  that
country,  what  with  scarcity  of  rain,  and  shortness  of  grain,®  and
desolation,  and  what  with  the  eonstaut  struggle  and  tunmoil,  and
two  years  continual  anarchy  ^ and  terror,  was  utterly  ruined,  the
peasantry  and  tenants  disappeared,  and  lawless  crowds  attacked®
the  cities  of  the  Muslims.  Among  t;he  strange  ® incidents  of  the
year  962  H.,  during  the  time  of  the  war  between  Sikandar  and
Ibrahim,  was  the  fire  which  occurred  in  the  foit  of  Agra.  The
following  is  a short  account  of  this  incident.  During  the  time
when  Agra  was  emptied  of  the  troops  of  ‘Adli,'*  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Gbazi  Khan  Sur  enter-ed  the  fort  of  Agra  and  took  up
his  abode  there,'®  to  make  certain  preparations  and  to  take  charge
of  the  supplies;  while  he  was  engaged  in  inspecting  the  rooms
of  the  warehouses,  he  happened  to  go  early  one  morning  into  one
of  the  rooms,  and  was  going  round  carrying  an  open  lamp,
a spark  from  which  fell  in  one  of  the  rooms  which  was  full  of

1 ilH^atlan  for  Ummu-^mlan.  According  to  the

Makhzanu-l-Adw'iya.  This  is  the  tree  called  in  Hindi  hlkar  or  babul.  (Acacia
Arabica^  see  also  Ibn  Baitar  (South)  I,  82,  according  to  whom  it  is  Spina
cegyptiaca.  Mimosa  gummifera.  See  also  Drnry,  useful  plants  of  India  who
states  that  the  seeds  and  pods  are  used  as  food  for  sheep  when  grain  is  scarce .

« cr- MS  (B)  adds  S MS.  (B)  jiji

* Khashm-i-lzad.  Gives  the  date  962.  H.

6 MS.  (B)

* MS.  (B)  emits  1 MS.  (B)  omits  Aii».

8 MS.  (A)  omits  reading  9 MSS.  (A)  (B)

10  MS.  (B)  omits  tjr.  11  MS.  (Bj  reads  CjlA.  Khan.

1»  MS.  (A)  reads  Jt  IS  MSS.  (A)  (B)  j ^

1*  MSS.  (A)  (B)  AJApe.  lb  MS.  (A)  iiijji.  IS^MSS.  (A)  (B)

1"  chiriigh  is  an  open  lamp  with  a naked  flame  generally  consisliiig  of

a small  earthenware  saucer  ot  oil  with  a wick.

C '551  ]

gun  powder.  In  the  twinkling  of  an  eye  an  explosion  oecnrred,!
and  the  flames  shot  up  to  the  sky,  attended  with  a violent  shock,
which  led  the  people  of  the  city  to  imagine  that  the' judgment-day
had  arrived,  and  starting  from  their  sleep  they  began  repeating  the
formula  of  TawAfd  (Declaration  of  Unity),*  &nd  Tanha^  (Repen-
tance), and  (seeking  for  pardon).  Heavy  slabs  of  stone

and  massive  pillars  were  hurled  * through  the  air  to  a distance  of
several  krohs  across  the  river  Jamna,  and"  great  number  of  people
were  killed,®  in  fact  human  hands  and  feet,  and  the  limbs  of  all
kinds  of  animals  were  thrown  five  or  six  ® krohs.  As  the  name
of  the  citadel  of  Agra  was  originally  Badal  Garh,  the  words
Ata^-iSadal  garh  made  a chronogram  to  record  the  date.

In  the  days  when  Himun  blockaded  the  fortress  of  Baiana
God’s  people  were  crying  for  bread  and  taking  eac'h  other’s  lives,®  430.
a hundred  thousand  sacred  lives  were  as  nought  for  a single
grain  of  barley,  whereas  the  elephants  of  Himiin’s  army,  which
numbered  five-hundred,  were  fed  solely  upon  rice,  and  oil,  and
sugar;  the  senses®  were  shattered  by  anguish  upon  anguish  in  that
terrible  time  : —

Yerse.

We  cherish  enemies,  we  also  destroy  friends.

What  mortal  has  the  power  to  question  our  decrees.

On  one  occasion  fiimun  was  one  day  presiding  at  a public
banquet,  and  summoning  the  Afghan  Amirs  into  his  presence,

l ss  ts-idf  MS.  (A).

* The  formula  of  Tauhtd  is  Ld  illaha  ilia  Allah  tvahdlia  Id  Sharlka  lahu.

There  is  no  god  save  God.  He  is  one.  He  has  no  partner.

The  other  formula  is  Istashdru-lldh  u'a  atiibu  ilaihi.  I ask  pardon  of  God
and  to  Him  I repent.

Both  these  formulae  are  used  on  occasions  of  sudden  alarm  and  peril.

8  MS.  (B)  omits  J-  * MS.  (B)  reads  8^  instead  of

6 MS.  (A)  « MS.  (B)  omits  j MS.  (Aj  omits  J.

Ata£h-i-Sadolff(zr^-  The  fire  of  Badalgarh,  These  words
give  the  date  962  H.

8 I read  here  with  MS.  (A)  tr*  3 Avli?  ^ Altkou-rh

MS.  (A)  also  reads  in  the  margin  iWClC  the  other  reading  is  more  pro-

bably correct,  and  is  a further  statement  of  the  terrible  straits  to  which  the
garrison  of  Baiana  were  driven.

9 A footnote  variant  reads  43^*  MS.  (A)  reads  ^

10  MS.  (B)  omits  c)b!*»).

[ 552  ]

to  tlie  head  of  the  table ^ urged  them  to  partake  of  food,  saying:
“ Help  yourselves  to  the  largest  morsels,”  and  if  he  saw  anyone
of  them  eating  slowly  no  matter  who  he  was,®  he  would  address
him  ® in  terms  of  the  foulest  abuse  saying : “ How  can  such  a
nondescript  nonentity  as  you  who  are  sluggish  in  eating  your
victuals  hope  to  couteud  against  your  o\Yn  son-in-law  the  Hughul
in.  battle.”  As  the  fall  of  the  Afghan  power  was  near  at  hand.*
they  had  not  the  courage  to  say  a word  to  that  foul  infidel,  and
laying  aside  all  that  disregard  of  superior  force  ^ for  which  they
were  renowned,  swallowed  hia  insults  ® like  sweetmeats,  either
from  fear  or  hope,’  this  had  become  a regular  practice  with  them.

Verse.

Lay  not  your  hand  obsequious  on  my  foot.

Give  me  but  bread,  and  brain  me  with  your  boot  !

In  the  meanwhile  news  reached  Hirnun  that  Muhammad  TOjan
Star,  Governor  of  Bangala,  had  assumed  the  title  of  Sultan  *
Jalalu-d-Din,  and  was  marching  with  an  army  ® like  the  ants  and
locusts  for  niultitnde  from  Bangala,  and  having  reduced  Jaunpiir
was  making  for  Halpi  and  Agra.  Just  at  this  juncture  an
431.  urgent  summons  arrived  from  ‘Adll  to  Himun  in  these  words  :
“ At  all  co.sts  come  to  me  at  once  as  T am  confronted  by  a powerful
enemy.”  Himun  thereupon  abandoned  the  siege,  and  when  be
arrived  at  Maadagar,!®  which  is  distant  six  Tcrohs  from  Agra,
Ibrahim  (Khan)  like  a hungry  hawk  which  leaves  its  nest  and
pursues  the  crane,  pounced  upon  him,  and  hurled  against  him  in

I MS.  (B)  omits
* MS,  {Bj  emits

S MS.  (A)  reads  for  tybjJ  (Text).

^ SIS.  fB)  insert  3 unnecessarily.

S'  I read  here  iyi-o  <Jp?.  Jahl-i-dasthunl  inste.ad  of  the  textn.al  read-
ing. SIS.  (AJ  gives  reason  to  think  that  this  is  correct,  it  reads  dp*,

which  making  allowance  for  conversion  of  S into  S in  writing  gives  the
reading  adopted.  The  textual  reading  has  no  meaning.

« SI.SS.  (A)  (B)  hjf  C^'^.  ’ MS.  A omits  *>«!  yt.

S MS.  (B)  omits  vii'KU.  9 MS,  (a!  omits

StS.  (.\)  l!A.l.  11  Omit  Jjj.  SIS.  (A).

MS  (A)  reads  Mandakar.  SIS  (B)  tjf^'Shc  Ma,i,ldjnrh.

‘3  MSS.  (A)  fB)  omit  CjlA,  li  jjS  (B)  reads

[ 553  j

battle,  but  being  defeated  went  towards  Alwar.  Then,  after
obtaining  * reinforcements  from  Haji  Khan  Alwari,*  he  again  set
about®  accomplishing  his  own  objects,  and  Himun  detailed*  his
brother’s  son  named  Thar  Yal  ® with  a fully  equipped  army  to
pursue  him.  TharYal®  marching  with  restless  haste  pursued
Ibrahim  for  two  stages,  and  joined  Himttn  ; Haji  Shan  was  not
pleased  at  Ibrahim’s  coming,  nor  w'oald  he  send.him  any  assist-
ance. Ibrahim  being  disheartened  turned  aside,  and  bidding
farewell  to  his  father,  brothers,  and  all  his  blood-relations,  left
them  in  Hindun,  and,  with  a small  band  of  followers  took  the
road  to  Bhatta.  Eventually  Ghazi  Khan  a short  time  after,  fell  a
prisoner  into  the  hands  of  Haidar  Khan  Chaghta  in  Baiana,
relying  upon  assurances,®  and  great  and  small  of  his  party  were
put  to  death,  and  not  a single  one  of  that  line  was  left,  as  will
be  related  in  its  proper  place,®  if  God  Most  High  so  will  it ; and
now  that  kingdom  and  empii’e,  and  the  independence  of  that
family  have  become  as  an  idle  tale.  How  wonderful  are  the  ways
of  God  !

Masnavi.

The  world  is  a juggler  decrepit  and  bowed,

It  brings  to  pass  one  thing  but  promises  another ;

It  calls  you  with  kindness  but  drives  you  away  with  rancour ;

All  its  dealings  are  invariably  of  this  nature.

If  it  calls  you  know  not  whither  it  calls  you.

If  it  drives  you  forth  you  know  not  whither  it  drives  you.

All  of  us,  old  and  young,  are  destined  to  death,

No  one  can  remain  in  the  world  for  ever.

Inasmuch  as  everyone  liked  Ibrahim  Khan  who  was  considered
by  all  to  have  a wonderful  fortune  in  store  for  him,  in  a short
time  large  numbers  gathered  to  him  from  all  parts.  He  fought  432.
with  the  army'  of  Ram  Chand,  the  ruler  of  Bhatta,  but  was

1 cXejS".  MS.  (A)  reads  .

* MS.  (B)  omits  3 MS.  (B)  . * MS.  (A)

3 MS.  (B)  reads  Kaharpal.

3 M3.  (B)  reads  Xahar  pal.

T Read  here  A.yot  li.  its.  (A)  reads  (?)•  MS.  (B)

8 MS.  (A)  reads  ® MS.  (A)  reads  for

10  Read  MS.  (A),  for

7u

[ 554  J

forced  to  flee  ^ and  was  taken  prisoner.  Raja  Ram  Chand,  in
accordance  with  the  customs  of  landholdei-s,*  made  him  a present
of  a how,  and  treated  him  with  the  utmost  honour  and  respect, s
and  in  a personal  interview  * presented  him  with  a royal  tent,
with  the  apparatus  of  royalty,  and  attendants  : then  seating  him
upon  the  throne,  standing  humbly  as  a servant,  performed  the
ofiflces  of  attendance.

Ibrahim  Khan  ^ spent  some  time  there,  till  Baz  Bahadur  the  son
of  Sazawal  Khan,  Ruler  of  Malwa,  who  eventually  read  the
'ghuthah  in  that  country,  became  involved  in  a quarrel  with  the
Miyani  Afghans,  who  summoned  Ibrahim  Khan®  and  raising  him
to  the  supreme  command,  sent  him  against  7 Baz  Bahadur.  Rani
Durgawati  the  ruler  of  the  country  ^ of  Kara  Katanka  also,  who
was  embroiled  with  Baz  Bahadur  on  account  of  the  proximity
of  her  kingdom,  rose  up®  to  assist  Ibrahim,  and  went  out  to
fight  against  Baz  Bahadur,  who  made  overtures  for  peace  1®  and
dissuaded  the  Rani  from  assisting  Ibrahim.  She,  accordingly,
returned  to  her  own  country,  and  Ibrahim,  not  considering  it
advisable  to  remain  there  any  longer,  went  off  bag  and  baggage
to  Orissa,  which  is  the  boundary  of  Bangala,  and  lived  on  good
terms  with  the  zamtndars.  Snleiman  Karrani,  when  he  took  pos-
session (of  Orissa),  made  terms  with  the  Rajii,  and  sending  for
Ibrahim  with  assurances  of  safety,  slew  him  treacherously  in  the
year  975  H.

Verse.

Fix  not  thy  heart  on  this  world,  for  it  has  no  foundation,
Speak  not  of  life,  far  that  too  is  ruined.

The  tent  of  life  which  thou  placedst  at  first,

Death  will  surely  uproot,  were  it  of  solid  steel.

* MS.^  (A)  omits

! MS.  (B)  reads  for

* MS.  (B)  omits  (^)  reads

4 MSS.  (A)  (B)  OJi.

6 MS.  (A)  omits  cjiA.  # MS.  (A)  omits

1 Head  oiilqr*-  MSS.  (A)  fB).  for  (Text).

8 MS.  (Bj  omits  ® MS.  (A)

10  MS.  (A)  reads  *1  MS.  ( B)  reads  wrongly  oLeOa<«jO.

IS  MS.  (AJ  reads

[ 555  ]

Himun  proceeded  by  I’apid  marches  till  he  joined  ‘Adli.^

‘Adli  and  Mnhammad  !Khau  Ganria  were  at  that  time  sitting
down  over  against  one  another,  with  the  river  Jnmna  between
them,  at  a place  called  Chhappar  Khatta,  fifteen  hroJis  from  Kalpi.  4o3

Ganria,  confidently  relying  upon  his  superior  force  to  overcome
the  forces  of  ‘Adli,  had  drawn  up  his  cavalry  and  infantry  and
elephants  to  a number  surpassing  all  computation,  and  was  every
moment  ^ expecting  victory,  when  suddenly  the  scale  turned
against  him,  and  Himtin  swept  down  upon  him  like  a comet,  and
no  sooner  did  he  reach  the  ranks  of  tlie  picked  elephants  after
crossing  the  river  Jamna,®  than  he  swooped  down  upon  the  army
of  Ganria,  taking  them  unawares  as  does  the  army  of  Sleep,  and
making  a night-assault  gave  no  one  ttme  so  much  as  to  lift  ids
hand.

They  were  in  such  utter  confusion*  that  no  man  knew  his  head
from  his  heels,  nor  his  turban  from  bis  shoes.  The  greater  part
of  his  Amirs  were  slain,  while  the  remnant  who  escaped  chastise-
ment took  to  flight.  The  wretched  Ganria  was  so  effectually
concealed  that  up  to  the  present  not  a trace  of  him  has  been
found,  and  all  that  retinue  and  paraphernalia  of  royalty*  and
grandeur  became  “like  the  scattei’ed  moths  and  like  flocks  of
carded  wool,”*  and  became  in  a moment  the  portion  of  the  enemy.

The  kingdom  is  God’s,  the  greatness  is  God’s.

Verse.

In  one  moment,  in  one  instant,  in  one  breath,^

The  condition  of  the  world  becomes  altei-ed.

After  this  heaven-given  victory  and  nnfore.seen  triumph,  Adli
proceeded  to  Cldnhar  and  appointed  Himiin,*  who  who  was  the
conimander-in-chief  of  his  arm}',  with  abundant  treasure  and  a
countless  host,  elephants  of  renown,  an  ornament  to  the  army

1 MS  (A)  » MSS  (A)  IB)  roa.t  The  test  reads

* MS.  (A)  omits

Literally  : Crying,  wiiere  shall  I put  the  cup,  where  shall  I put  the  case  'i

6 MS.  (A)  omits  }

6 Qur’an  11.  4.  ,

' MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  AEus'  MS.  (H)  roads

for

MS.  (Aj  L)  ety***

[ 556  ]

and  a terror  to  the  enemy,  to  repel  the  forces  of  the  MughnI
which  had  taken  possession  of  the  country  as  far  as  Itawa  and
Agra,  as  will  be  presently  related  if  God  Most  High  so  will  it.

Just  at  this  juncture  Khizr  Qan,  the  son  i of  Muhammad
Khan  Gauria,  who  had  been  killed,  succeeded  his  father  in  Kor,*
issuing  the  currency  and  reading  the  Khuthah  in  his  own  name,  with
the  style  and  title  of  Sultan  (Muhammad)  * Bahadur,  and  collect-
ing a huge  army  to  revenge  his  father’s  death,  came  up  against
434.  ‘Adli,  who  notwithstanding  his  distress  * fought  bravely  on  that
field,  and  contrary  to  expectation  met  with  fierce  resistance.
After  fighting  manfully  ‘Adli  was  killed,  and  joined  Muhammad
Khan  whose  life-blood  was  yet  freshly  spilled, _ fighting  in  hot
blood.  This  event  occurred  in  the  year  962  H.  and  Gauria  hikusht  ^
was  its  chronogram.

Y^Tse.

My  soul,  do  thou  look  at  the  world  and  take  what  it  gives  to
thy  heart’s  desire  ;

Live  at  thine  ease  therein  a thousand  years  like  Kulj,®

Every  treasure  and  every  store  which  kings  have  laid  by.
That  treasure  and  tliat  store  seizo  ' and  take  for  thine  own.
Every  pleasure  which  the  woi  Id  contains  do  thou  consider  as
made  for  thee  ;

Every  fruit  which  grows  in  the  world  * do  thou  taste  and
take.

In  the  final  round  which  brings  the  end  of  thy  life,

A hundred  times  seize  the  hack  of  thy  hand  with  thy  teeth
and  gnaw  it  (in  despair).

t MS.  (B)  reads  J for  '^J

5 MS.  (A)  omits  Ji-  ® M.SS.  (.A)  (B)  omit

* The  test  reads  clT  MS.  (A)  reads  (sic.)  MS.

(B)  reads  The  meaning  ia  not  very  clear.

6 Gauria  bif:n§ht.  A footnote  to  the  text  points  out  that
these  words  give  963  as  the  date.  Thomas  {Pathu/i,  Kui'j>,  p.  41t>j  gives  964
H.  as  the  date  of  ‘Adli’a  death.

* A footnote  variant  gives  MS.  fB)  reads  v£*.**t3  for

« MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for

[ 5f,7  ]

‘Adli  was  so  liigbly  skilled  in  singing  and  dancing  that  Miyan
Tausin,  the  Avell-known  kalSii-icat  * wlio  is  a past  master  in  this
art*  used  to  own  to  being  his  pupil,  and  Baz  Bahadur,  son  of
Sazawal  Khan,  who  was  also  one  of  the  most  gifted  men  of  his
age  and  bad  no  equal  in  this  life-wasting  accomplishment  acquired
the  art  (of  music)  from  ‘Adli.

Feri'e.

They  owned  no  rival,  but  surpassed  them  all.

May  God  He  is  exalted  and  glorified,  pai’don  them.

One  day  a performer  from  the  Dakhan  brought  into  his  assem-  435.
bly  an  instrument  called  pakhnicaj,^  which  is  in  length  * equal  to
the  height  of  a man,  so  large  that  the  hands  of  no  man  could
reach  ^ the  two  ends  of  it,  as  a sort  of  challenge  to  those  who
were  present,  and  all®  the  performers  of  the  kingdom  of  Dihli
were  unable  to  play  it ; ‘Adli,  hcmever,  found  out  by  his  know-
ledge of  other  instruments  how  to  play  it,  and  placing  a cushion
on  the  floor  heafi  the  drum  now  with  his  hand  and  now  with  his
foot.  The  assembled  people  raised  a shout  and  all  the  skilled
musicians  owned  their  allegiance  to  him.  and  ])raiso(l  him  exceed-
ingly; and  at  the  time  when  he  was  an  Amii,  and  as  a commander
of  twenty-thousand  held  a 'jaegir,'^  a Bhagat  boy  ® handsome  and
comely  who  had  acquired  perfection  in  his  ai  t,  used  to  come  to
his  assembly  from  some  of  the  villages  near  Badaon,  and  used  to
play.'®  ‘Adli  was  so  fascinated  by  hi»  beauty  and  skill  that  he  kept
him  in  his  own  service  and  took  pains  to  educate  him,  giving  him
the  name  of  Mujahid  Khan.'t  When  he  attained  to  kingly  power

I See  Ain-i-.ikb.iri  I.  (B)  612.  tn'te  t.  Kit!  iii-trat  oi  Kih/n-ant  is  a Hindi
word  meaning  a singer  or  musician.  IIS.  (.\)  reads  Ktdiin  uant.

* Bndaoiii  uses  the  word  uadi  a valley  or  deserfc,  apparently  to

shew  iiis  disapproval  of  the  art.

* A large  kind  of  drnm.  See  ATn-i-Akbari  (J.)  Ill,  255.

* MS.  (B)  reads  for  ^ MS.  fA)

® MS.  (A)  omits  ’ MS.  (A)  omits

^ MS.  (A.)  reads  here  Ahdican.  MS.  (Bj  reads  Ajiheun.  So

also  footnote  variant  to  text.  .

® The  Bhagatiya  are  ‘‘a  caste  of  loose  people  who  pass

their  time  in  butloonery,  singing  and  dancing.*’  Sherring  1,  27B.

10  MSS.  (A)  ^ B)  MS.  (AJ

[ 558  ]

he  made  him  a commander  of  ten  thonsand.  His  natural  elegance
and  refinement  were  such  that  one  day  upon  returning  from  the
polo  ground  of  Badaon  ‘ he  said,  “ I am  hungry.”  Ghazi  Khan  Snr
whose  tent*  was  at  the  head  of  the  road  said  “ What  I have  ready
is  at  your  service.”  ‘Adli,  for  politeness  sake,  felt  constrained  to
accept  his  hospitality  ; first  they  Drought  some  fried  sheep’s  liver.*
No  sooner  had  he  smelt  it  than  he  leapt  from  his  seat,  and  was  so
disgusted  that  he  left  the  company*  and  drew  rein  nowhere  till
he  I’eached  his  house  ; they  say  also  that  the  sweepers  used  to
gather  up  the  remains  of  camphor  of  the  finest  quality  two  or
three  times  daily  from  his  dressing-room,  and  whenever  a neces-
sity arose  * he  would  first  grow  red,  then  pale  and  livid,®  and
would  faint  while  his  countenance  changed.  In  spite  of  all  this
leisure  and  luxurionsness,  his  fasts  and  prayers  were  never  duly
436.  performed  ; he  had  entirely  given  up  the  use  of  intoxicants,  and
the  day  he  left  the  world  the  treacherous  time  even  grudged  him
two  yards  of  cloth,  and  it  was  never  known  where  his  corpse
went.*

Ve7'se.

Oh  ye  lords  of  wealth  beware  ! beware  !

And  you,  ye  lords  of  state,  beware  ! beware  I*

After  him,  the  kingdom  fell  away  from  the  race  of  Afghans  and
returned  to  its  original  holders,  and  right  once  more  became
jstablished.

1 The  text  reeHs  with  a footnote  variant  JISS,  (A)  (B)

read

S MS.  (B)  omits  trib  if.

8 MS.  (A)  The  text  reads  meaning  scraps  of  meat.

* The  text  reads  ghoshyan.  MS.  (A)  reads  wh**  If  ve

take  the  reading  of  the  text  it  will  be  ‘ he  felt  faint.’

t MS.  (A).  6 Jig  f

I MS.  (A)  oAilAi.

- Ue  was,  as  has  been  described,  killed  in  bactlo,
jI3.  (A)  reads  in  the  first  line,  and  in  Uu

^ceoiid  MS.  fUt  in  the  fir.-l  and  m i lie  .-.huond

[ 559  ]

NASiRO-D-Dis  Muhammad  Humayun  Padshah  GhazX.

Eetarning  from  Kabul,  a second  time  fougLfc  a fierce  battle  with
Sikandar,  and  being  favoured  by  fortune  * with  victory  and  conquest,
restored  to  the  imperial  throne  fresh  lustre,  glory  and  fortune.

The  following  is  an  epitome  of  these  events  ; After  that  the  king-
dom of  Hindustan  slipped  from  the  grasp  of  that  Padshah  glorious
as  Jamshid,  like  the  ring  from  the  hand  of  Suleiman,*  and  the
opposition  and  strife  between  his  brothers  was  not  changed  to
amity  and  concord,®  and  each  one  took  his  own  way  and  sought
his  own  asylum,  considering  his  own  interests  by  consultation
with  advisers,  as  has  already  been  briefly  related,^  Humayun
crossed  from  the  Panjab  and  attempted  to  seize  Bakkar,®  making
his  camp  at  the  township  of  Lohri,®  which  is  near  to  Bakkar.

Mirza  Hindal  having  left  Sind  proceeded  to  the  township  of
Pantar,^  which  is  fifty  krohs  distant  from  Bakkar,  on  account  of
the  abundance  and  cheapness  of  grain.  Humayun  sent  a robe  of
honour  and  a horse  with  a message  to  Mirza  Shah  Husain
Arghun,  governor  of  Tatta,  saying,  “ I have  arrived  here  driven  by
necessity  and  have  fully  determined  upon  the  conquest  of  Gujrat,*
and  this  undertaking  is  dependent  upon  your  advice  and  guid-  437- •
ance.”  Mirza  Shah  Husain  spent  five  or  six  months  * in  tempo-
rising, and  brought  Humayiin  by  specious  pretexts  from  the
Bakkar  territory  to  the  neighbourhood  of  Tatta,  with  the  inten-
tion of  doing  whatever  might  be  advisable  later  on.

I A footnote  says  that  one  copy  gives  MS.  { B)  has  this  reading.

See  ante  p.  205,  note  3.

* Read  for  MSS.  (A)  (B).

^ MS.  (A)  omits

^ See  Hunter,  Imp.  Gaz.,  Ind.,y6l.  Ill,  also  Tieff.  I,  117,  Bukkur.  See
ProceedingSj  A.  S.  B.,  April,  1895,  p.  69.

® See  Hunter,  Imp,  Gaz.,  Ind.j  Tol.  XI,  Rohri.  Firishta  writes
Luhrt.  See  Bombay  text,  p.  409.

'T  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  Fdtar.  lean  find  no  mention  of  any  place  of
tliis  name.

MS.  (B)  reads  '-’Ap®  cP’  J Firishta  says  “asked

for  assir^tance  in  the  conquest  of  Guji-at,’*  Eomtay  text  p-  4o9.

O 1'-  J-  re-*d  MSS.  (A)  { 3),

L 0(50  • 1

In  this  year,  948  H.,>  Humayun  maii-ied  Harnida  Bana  Begam,
and  coming  to  Pantar  returned  to  Lohri.  Mirza  Hindal  started  fc)r
Qandahar  in  answer  to  the  summons  of  Qaiacha  Beg,*  the
governor  of  that  distinct,  and  Yadgar  Nasir  Miiza,  who  had
encamped  at  a distance  of  ten  krohs  from  (Huinajun’s)  camp
also  intended  to  proceed  to  Qandahar.  Humayun  thereupon  sent
Mir  Abul-Baqa,*  who  was  one  of  the  most  distinguished  of  the
learned  men  of  the  time,  Persian  commentator  on  Mir  Saiyyid
g^arif,  and  author  of  other  compositions,  to  advise  him  and
dissuade  him  from  his  purpose,  * At  the  time  of  crossing  the
river  a party  sallied  out  from  the  fortress  of  Bakkar  and  rained
showers  of  arrows  upon  the  people  in  the  boats.  Tlie  sainted  iMir
was  struck  by  the  soul-melting  arrow  of  Fate,  and  was  drowned  ^
in  the  ocean  of  martyrdom.  This  event  took  place  in  the  year
948  H.  and  the  chronogram  Siirur-i-kdinat  ® was  inv^ented  to
commemorate  it.

Mirza  Yadgar  Nasir  hearkened  to  this  advice  and  counsel  and
remained  in  Bakkar,  and  Huniayup  proceeded  to  Tatta,  where-
upon many  of  his  soldiers  left  his  camp  and  joined  .Mirza
(Yadgar)  and  spent  their  days 'J'  in  comfort  by  reason  of  the
inci  eased  pay  they  received.  In  this  way  Mirza  gathered  strength,
and  Humayun  crossing  the  river  laid  siege  to  the  foi  tress  of
Siyahwaii.^  Mirza  .Shah  Husain  kept  sending  * reinforcements

1 The  text  re.ads  947  H.  ( IpV  ) ^ iXAjl  with  a footnote  s.ny

ing  that  one  MS.  reads  948  H.  and  another  ts»aik  j J

947—918.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  both  read  948  H.  and  this  is  the  correct  date.

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  A-u  Firighta,  Qaracha  Khan,  Bombay  text,  p.  409.

S MSS.  (A)  (B;  read  1^1  jJI ^ MS.  (A)  omita  tj-

♦ MSS.  (A)  (B;  add  j.  B MS.  (A)

S Banii-I-Icainat.  Joy  of  created  things.  These  words  give

the  date  948  H.

7 MS.  fA)  AjiljA?  MS.  (B)

8 Firishta  says  Sihwin.  Sihwon  or  Sehwan  is  in  the  Karachi

district  of  Sind,  lat  26='Z(;'N.  long  G7'’  54' E.  Tlie  river  Indus  formerly  flowed
close  to  the  town  but  has  now  qnite  de.serted  it.  The  foi  t of  Sehwan  is
ascribed  to  Alexander  the  Great.  See  Hunter  Imp.  Gaz  , Xil.  .30.,;  but  Tief-
fenthaler  (I.  123;  attributes  it  to  Husain,  son  of  Shidibeg  ArghCio.

9 MSS.  (A)(B)  <V3f.

[ 561  ]

and  supplies  ^ to  the  garrison  ,*  and  embarking  on  a boat,
and  2 coming  near  to  the  camp  blocked  the  avenues  of  supplies  (to
Humayun).  The  siege  lasted  for  seven -months,  and  victory  seemed
as  far  off  as  ever,  while  great  distress  was  felt  from  scarcity  of  438.
grain*  and  want  of  salt.^

T’ersc.

Every  feast  which  is  prepared  ® by  the  hand  of  heaven
Is  either  altogether  without  salt  or  is  altogether  so  salt  (as
to  be  uneatable).

The  soldiers  were  reduced  to  such  extremities,”  that  they  were
forced  to  give  up  grain  and  content  themselves  with  the  flesh
of  animals,  and  finally  ^ they  had  to  abandon  the  hope  of  even
this.

Verse.

The  hungry-bellied  fastened  his  eyes  on  skins,

For  fur  is  the  near  neighbour  of  flesh.

Then  he  sent  messengei  s a second  time  to  Bakkar  to  summon
Mirza  ® Yadgar  Nasir,  so  that  in  conjunctiou  v/itli  him  he  might
repel  Mirza  ^ah  Husain  and  gain  po.ssession  uf  the  fort.  He
senb  a reinforcement,  which  was  however  of  no  service,*®  and
hearing  of  the  distress  which  prevailed  in  the  camp  he  saw  no
good  in  going  there,  so  remained  in  Bakkar.**  Miiza  Shah
Husain  played  upon  his  ambition  by  false  promises  of  the  rule  of
that  kingdom,  and  of  having  the  Khuthah  read  and  the  currency
issued  in  his  name  ; he  also  promised  to  obey  him,  and  also  that  he
would  give  him  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and  thus  misled  him  into

1 MS.  (B)

* This  is  the  statement  of  one  author,  bat  Firishta  says  “ Tlie  siege  lasted
for  seven  months.  MTrza  ^ah  Husain  AnrUuii  also  came  with  boats  and
blocked  the  road  by  which  supplies  of  ^rain  came,  in  conse<iuence  i«f  so  great
scarcity  of  food  ensued  that  they  had  to  live  on  the  iiebli  of  animals."
Bombay  text,  409.

*MSS.  {A)(B)  j.  *118.18)  4li

* Footnote  van.-inr  jh*  7 MS.  f.A)  omits

® Text  reads  MS.  (B)  reads  fy  most  of  them.

9 MS.  (B)  omits  *®  (.1)  (Bj  read

**  FiKiTnote  variant  But’.uj .

71

[ 562  ]

opposing  Humayan.i  He  further  took  possession  of  all  ® the  boats
belonging  to  Hninayun,  who,  in  consequence  of  all  these  obstacles,
any  one  of  which  was  a sufficient  reason,®  seeing  the  distress  and
misery  of  liis  army,  abandoned  the  siege  of  the  fortress,  and  all
nnwillingly  saying,  “ Retreat  is  the  wisest  conrse,”  turned  back
towards  Bakkai-,  and  remaining  several  days  inactive  for  want
of  boats,  at  last  by  the  help  of  two  Lannndars  recovered  two  boats
which  Mirza  had  sunk,  and  reached  ® Bakkar.  Mirza,  as  a
means  of  covering  ® the  shame  he  felt,  before  he  came  to  pay  his
439.  respects,'^  marched  by  forced  uiarches  against  Mirza  Shah  Husain,
and  putting  to  death  or  taking  captive  large  number  of  the  people
of  Tatta,  who  in  ignorance  of  Lis  intentions  had  left  their  boats,®
did  a good  deal  to  repair^  his  former  defections.  Then  with
shame  and  confusion  he  came  and  had  an  interview  (with
Humayan;  and  brought  in  countless  heads  of  the  enemy.  His
faults  were  overlooked,  but  in  consequence  of  certain  events  which
occurred,  he  again  became  rebellious,  and  being  deceived  by
the  wiles  of  Mirza  Shah  Husain,  prepared  for  war.  Mun'im
Khan  who  eventually  became  Khan-i-Khanan  also  meditated
flight.  Both  of  them,  however,  became  aware  of  the  folly  of
their  design,  and  realising  its  heinousness  abandoned  tlieir  inicjuit-
ous  intention.  The  men  of  Plumayan’s  force  were  day  by  day
going  over  to  the  side of  Mirza  Yadgar  Nasir.  In  the  mean-
time Maldeo,  Eaja  of  the  kingdom  of  Marwar,  who  was  distin-
guished above  all  the  zcmhi  luis  of  Hindustan  on  account  of  the
strength  of  his  following  and  his  exceeding  gi’aiidenr,  again
sent  letters  of  summons.  Humayun  not  thinking  it  advisable  to
remain imy  longer  in  th.e  vicinity  of  Bakkar  and  Tatta,  pro-
ceeded by  way  of  • Juisalmir  towards  Marwar.  The  Raja  of

1 MS.  (A)  reads  i.rui.1-*

* MS.  (A)  omits

s Thus  the  text : MS.  (A)  reads  Jl  AT.

♦ MS.  (A)  t MS.  (B)

6 MSS.  (Aj  ;b)  jji.  7 Footnote  variant

s MS.  (B)  readit  jij  Jl.  9 jig

K MS.  (B)  lo'jl,  a us  ^

H MS.(B)  V’-^-  la  MSS.  (A)  (B)  wile.

Omit  j read  MSS.  (A)  (B).

MS.  (A)  omits  after

[ 663  ]

Jaidalmir  blocked  the  road  by  which  his  army  'vas  co  pass,  aud
foaglit  a battle  m which  he  was  defeated.  In  thai:  waterless
desert  Hamayun'.s  army  suffered  terrible  distress,  so  mncii  so
that  t arouud  the  wells  blood  was  spilled  in  place  of  water  among
his  followers,  and  most  of  them  ® from  the  violence  of  their
thirst  cast  themselves  into  the  well  as  though  they  had  been
buckets,  till  it  became  choked.

In  this  state  of  affains  Humayuii  quoted  the  tollowing  hiatjc.',
whoever  is  the  author  of  it ; —

Vetse.

So  many  rents  did  the  heavens  make  in  the  garments  of  the
afRicted  ones,

That  neither  could  the  hand  Snd  its  sleeve,  nor  could  ttic
head  find  its  opening.

From  Jaisalmir  proceeding  by  forced  inarehe.s  to  iiarwar  he  440.
sent  Atka  Khan  to  ^ 3Ialdeo,  and  lialted  for  several  days  in  the
vicinity*  of  Jodhpnr,.  awaiting  his  arrival.  Inasmuch  as  in
those  ^ days,  Kagor  had  fallen  into  the  hands  of  Sher  iihSh,  and  ®
had  inspired  Maldeo  with- the  utmost  awe  of  the  majesty  and
power  of  Humiiyiin ; accordingly  Maldeo,  fearing  the  wratli  of
Sher  Sliah,7  was  afraid  to  obey  that  suniinons,  and  detaining
Atka  Khan  by  some  trick,  sent  a large  force  under  the  pretence
of  welcoming  Lim,  with  the  intention  of  treacherou.sly  attacking
Humayun  and  taking  him  prisoner ^ Atka  Khan  ^becoming

1 MS.  (A)

2 A footnote  reads  ; fj  J'l  To  sucR

a height  (did  their  sufferings  rise}  that  the  thirstj-lijiped  o'lies  from  cxcp^s
of  hanger  (cast)  themselres  (into  the  wells).  MS.  (B;  has  tins  reading
omitting  the  vsord

8 AIS.S.  (A)  (BJ  .i>>.  * MS.  vBj  omits

8 MS.  (A)  omits  tirl  writing  |*b|  JA.  '*  M.S.  (A)  j.

"i  A footnote  variant  to  tlie  text,  agreeing  with  MS.  (Bj  runs  thus  ;

This  ia  the  reading  adopted  : it  seems  preferab’e.

* This  is  according  to  the  text.  A footnote  variant  (and  M 5^.  (B  > j reads

AX— J J

Sent... -with  treacherous  design,  and  girding  the  ioius  of  rebeUioii  '

I 564  I

aware  of  tlieir  treachery  from  its  outset]  returned  without
asking  permission,  and  informed  Humayun  of  the  real  state  of
affairs.  He  on  the  instant  started  with  all  haste  for  Amarkot.
It  so  chanced  that  two  of  Maldeo’s  spies  had  arrived  at  that  same
place,  and  Humayun  gave  orders  for  them  both  to  be  put  to  death.
In  their  despair  one  drew  a knife,  and  the  other  a dagger,*  and
fell  upon  (tlieir  enemies)  like  boars  wounded  by  arrows,  and
killed  ® a large  number  of  living  things,^  men,  women  and  horses,
whatever  came  in  their  way.®  Among  the  number  was  Humayun's
charger  : Humayun  thereupon  asked  Tardi  Beg  for  a few  horses
and  camels,®  he  however  behaved  meanly,  and  Humayun
'mounted  a camel.  After  awhile'^  Hadlm,  his  foster-brother,*
gave  the  horse  which  his  mother  was  riding  to  the  king,  he  himself
going  on  foot  in  his  mother’s  retinue  through  that  bare
desert,  which  was  'like  an  oven  for  beat.-  His  mother  after-
wards rode  on  the  camel,  and  they  traversed  that  road  wliich  was
BO  terribly  difficult,  amid  constant  alarms  of  the  attack  of
Maldeo,  [and  with  intense  labour  and  distress. In  the  middle  of
441.  the  night  they  reached  a place  of  safety  ; by  chance  the  Hindus  of
Malden’s  army]  pui-suiug  them  through  the  night,  missed  their

I The  words  in  brackets  arc  not  in  IISS  (A)  f D).

5 Read  j jfs.  fA).

3 This  is  the  preferable  reading.

* Read  for  vylAotxx),  USS.  (A)  (B).

6 ^ jis.  (B)  AjT.  ms.  (A).

* This  is  the  reading  of  the  text.  M.S.  (A)  roads  '^■*•1  (s‘c).

Firishta  says  that  Ilnniryun’s  horse  sb.ewed  signs  of  tiring,  ( )

so  that  he  asked  TnrJi  Beg  for  a horse,  who  unkindly  refused,  and  as  every
moment  tiding-  k-p:  arriving  cnafJIiildc-o's  army  was  near  at  hand,  Humayun
load  no  alternative  bat  to  mount  a camel  (Bo.  Text,  p.  410. j

^ Text  Ax.f  ‘J.  Mo.  (A)  omits.  Firislita  writes  (j  wdierenpon.

® Fiiishta  writes

9 Firi^ta  gives  a slightly  different  version  of  this:  stating  that  N.ulTm
himself  went  on  foot  and  placed  his  mothsr  on  his  own  horse  leading  it,
afterwards  mounting  her  on  a camel.  (Bo.  text  loc  cit).

hi  MS.  (A)  Ij  c>f  MS.  (B)  loads  iy.

II  MSS.  (A'>(B>  omit  (.Ayk  j I : Omit  after  MS.  (A).

13  All  t his  pas.s-ige  from  to  is  omitted  in  MS.  (B).

L

wav,^  and  in  the  morning,  in  a narrow  pass,  came  upon  tlic
rearguard  of  the  army,  who  were  two  and  twenty  in  number.
Mun‘im  Khan  and  Ro.^an  Beg*  Koka,  and  another  3 party  of
meP  who  belonged  to  that,  side  haviiiLT  arrived,  a battle  ensued.
In  the  very  first  onset  tlie  leader  of  the  Hindus  went  to  hell  ti’om
an  arrow- wound,  and  a large  number  were  killed.  They  C'  uld  not
withstand  the  attack,  and  many  camels  fell  into  the  liauds  of  the
Muslims.  This  victory  was  the  occasion  of  ereat  rejoicing.’^
Marching  from  thence  and  being  without  water,’  after  three  days
they  arrived  at  a haltins’-pHce,  where,  on  account  of  its  depth  ° a
drum  had  to  be  beaten  at  the  mouth  of  tlie  well,  so  that  its  sound
might  reach  the  place  where  the  oxen  for  drawing  the  water
were.t  For  lack  of  water,  a crowd  of  people  in  their  distress
were  lost,  and  3 disappeared  like  water  in  that  sandy  plain,  which
was  a very  river  of  quicksand,  while  many  hoises  and  camels

1 According  to  our  author’s  acconnr  it  seems  as  tliougii  M'lldeu's  men  lost
their  way,  but  Firishta's  account  is  as  follows  : '•  When  the  tidings  of  the
approach  of  the  infidels  arrived  Humnyi'm  ordered  certain  of  liis  oificers  who
were  with  him  to  follow  him  iu  close  succession,  while  he  himself  started  with
a small  party  of  not  more  than  twenty-five  ; when  night  came  on  the  officers
lost  their  way  and  went  in  another  direction  ; towards  morning  the  ranks
of  the  enemy’s  army  beennie  visible,  and  in  accordance  with  I'HninSyun’s)
orders  Shaito  'Ali  and  the  rest  who  were  in  ail  not  more  than  twenty-five
men  repeated  the  creed,  then  turned  ami  witli  stoat  heart  gave  battle.
Fortunately  the  very  first  arrow  struck  the  le.iJer  of  the  infidels  iu  tiie  breast,
he  fell  headlong  to  the  earth  and  the  rest  fled.  The  Jluslims  pursued  them
and  captured  many  camels.  . Humayun  returned  thanks  to  God  and  alighted
at  a well  which  contained  a little  water  where  the  Amirs  who  had  lost  their
way  came  up.”

* IXS.  (A)  omits  3 JIS.  (.\)  omits

4 MS.  (A)  reads  .

b rending  of  the  text  and  botii  MJSS.  fA)  (B)

bnt  it  does  not  tally  with  Firishfa  who  writes  *’  Marching  thence,  for  three
stages  water  was  absolutely  unprocurable,  and  the  people  were  in  great
distress,  on  the  fourth  day  they  reached  a well,  &c.”  Perhaps  wo  shoald  read
j!.  Putting  up  With  the  w’ant  of  water.

® MS.  (A)  omits  vt-

The  rope  was  so  long  that  before  the  bucket  reached  tlie  niMuth  of  tlie
well  tlie  oxen  used  to  draw  it  up,  had  gone  so  far  that  the  '5:o«nid  ot  a drnm
was  necessary  to  warn  their  drivers  that  thr-'V  nuist  stoji  ilS  (A)  reads
also  for

^ MS.  (B)  omits  j

|_  566  1

drinking  water  after  their  long  and  nnaecustomed  drouth,  died  *
from  surfeit  of  water.  And  inasmuch  as  tliat  desert,  like  the
iiiidday  mirage,®  was  as  interminable  as  Ihe  troubles  of  the  hap-
less ® wretches  of  the  army,  perforce  they  fumed  aside  by  a
circuitous  route  - towards  Amarkot,  which  lies  at  a distance  of  a
hundred  krohs  from  Tatta.  The  governor  of  Amai’kot.  named
Rana,  came  out  to  meet  them  accompanied  by  hi.s  sons,  and  did  all
in  his  power  ° to  render  liftins  service.

Humayun  bestowed’’  ail  that  iie  had  in  the  treasury  upon  liis
followers,  wliile  to  supT>ly  the  party  who  had  not  yet  arrived,^  Ite
borrowed  from  Tardi  Beg  and  others  by  tvay  of  a.ssistance,  and
gave  it  tliern.  He  also  made  pre.sents  of  money,  and  .sword-belts  ''
to  the  sons  of  Rfnm.  who,  for  the  rea.son  that  his  father  had  been
put  to  death  by  iMiiza  ^ah  Husain  Arghun,  collected  a larse
force  ® from  the  surrounding  conntry,io  entered  the  service  oi
Humayun.  and  leaving  hi.s  hageage  and  camp  equipage  in
Amarkot  under  the  care  and  protection  of  Khwaja  Mu‘zam,  the
brother  of  Begam.*®  lie  ( Hnmayun)  proceeded  towards  Bakknr.'®
442.  On  Sunday,  the  fifth  of  the  month  Rajah,  in  the  year  949  H.
the  auspicious  birth  of  the  Khalifah  of  the  age  Akhar  Pad'diali
occurred  in  a foriunate  moment  at  Amarkot.  Taidi  Beg  Khaii
conveyed  this  joyful  tidines  to  H uniayun  at  that  halting-place,
w!)0  after  giving  (the  child)  that  auspicious  name,**  proceeded

1 M?.  a:  2 JI.?.  (Ai  rends

t 'flie  -'.iiianiity-srncken  of  t!;e  army.

^ 3S!j  T otliei  mofiniiifr  ) >v  this  f'xpri^fisio-,

6 IMS.  (A)  r?a.!s  MS  (B)  rea>.l3

^ MSS.  ■ R 7 ^ ^ A/.

^ MS.  {.\).  9 MSS.  fA,i  fB.'  t;.

10  jU  MS.  !B).  The  text  m corredt.

IL

MSS  (A)

B i2  M.S.S.  'A)  (Bi  (..uit  t'.

A 1

J

jS

It  WHS

■ - ; . L Akb.ir  was  bun,  uecordinsr  t'.  rni-l -

n,  b-

t i ' urn 't vTin

lert

for  Buk  ’

• e text,  p.41l.  Brigs-i,,  n.  g-,

fine

1 ‘'IV  aiuif-i  a

text

it  apj-

. - [Ir.rcia;  r.  !,ad  lefc  Ani,irkiit  before  Lis

3lU

v>-;i^  b.jl’lr,  -11. •[

erJy

sav,'  { .

. ..  I’i  ’

H

T.,c  t-^x:  '

* ■ h j'J  MS"^  , (B  j reai

U.V;  whi-It

is  TB‘

1-  enp  '

« V*

‘ t'-i"  ■ -•  ijn'ctution.  It  i-u

* , i

liiat  wo  sUc’Cilu

1 ea'i  . ■

r SB?  1

with  all  haste  towards  Bakkar.  At  the  camp  of  ChanI  ‘ he  sent
for  the  Priuce  of  aaspicioas  mieu,  and  was  rejoiced  by  the  well-
omened  sight  of  his  son.  His  soldiers,  in  whose  iiatore  the  craft
of  nnfaithfalness  was  as  firmly  planted  as  is  deceit  in  the  nature
of  the  times,  were  one  by  one,  including  even  Mun'im  Hian,  de-
serting.* At  this  time  Bairam  Khan  ^ came  from  Gnjrat  and
tendered  his  allegiance.  Considering  it  n iiadvisable  to  remain  in
that  country  Hiimayun  determined  to  make  for  Qandahar.  Mirza
Shah  Husain  thinking  this  an  opportunity  not  to  be  lost,  in  ac-
cordance with  a requisition  * sent  thirty  boats  and  three  hundred
camels,  and  Humayun  crossed  the  river  Indus.  At  that  time
Mirza  Kamrau*  had  taken  Qandahar®  from  ilirza  Hindal  and
had  left  it  in  charge  of  Mirza  ‘A.skari,  and  having  given  Ghazni n
to  Mirza  Hindal  had  read  the  Khiitbah  in  his  own  name.  After
some  time,  however,  he  changed  that  also.'^  Mirza  Hindal  having
given  np  all  royal  dignity  in  Kabul  used  to  live  like  a darve^,^  and
Mirza  Kamran  yielding  to  the  instigation  of  Mirza  Shah  Husniu
wrote  to  Mirza  ‘Askari  saying,  “Seize  the  road  by  which  the
Pad.shah  will  proceed  and  take  him  prisoner  in  any  way  you  can
contrive.”  Accordingly  when  he  arrived  at  the  camp  of  Shal
Mastang,*  Mirza  ‘Askari  marched  by  forced  marches  from

Chaul  or  Chore,  a riilage  sitDated  on  tlie  route  from  Amarkof  to
Jaiealmir,  eight  miles  north-east  of  the  former  place.  See  Thornton’s
Gazetteer,  I.  p.  143,  and  map.  Lat.  25°  25'  Long.  69^  51'.  See  also  Keith
Johnston’s  Atlas.

S MSS.  (A)  (B)  Qp  So  also  Firishta

who  Bays  “ But  after  a short  time  the  army  began  to  scatter  and  nothing
could  be  accomplished,  Jfun’irn  Khan  also  tied,  A:c,”

3 See  Aln-i-Akbarl,  I.  (B)  315,  >'o.  10.

* MS.  (B)  omits  ^ MS.  (B)  omits

* MS.  (A)  omits  [}■

7 MS.  (A)  reads  MS.  (B)  reads

8

® The  text  reads  but  both  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read

Sal  Ma-'tan  annizi^-i-Cnhf  biid.  Firishta  Bo.  text,
p.  411,  line  10  reads  S.7i  U'nh.'.an/hi,  which  is  probably

a copyist’s  error  for  j We  should  therefore

read  ^al-o-Mastang,  understandini;  by  it  Mnstun<j  wliich  lies  S.  S.  W.  of
Quetta  or  Shal,  at  a di.sfance  of  about  25  mile^  S*'<'  Tlujrnton’s  Gazetteer,  II.
pp.  6S  and  188.  The  distance  from  Qandahiir  to  Sha]  ia  about  150  miles.

1*7  A footnote  vuriant  read.s  llnidtU  Not  in  MS.  fA)  or  (B).

L 563  J

Q indahar  and  sent  C'liuli  ‘ Bahadur  Uzbaki  to  reconnoitre.*  He
however,  went  straighc  oti  and  informed  Balram  Khan,  whose
camp  lie  reached  at  midnight,  and  Balram  Khan  went  with  all
443.  haste  beliind  the  rojal  tent  and  represented  the  state  of  affairs.
Accordingly  he  gave  np  all  idea  of  Qaiidahar  and  Kabul,  and  in
opposition  to  his  brothers,  uttering  the  formula^  of  separation,
took  the  road  to  'Iraq,  accompanied  by  twenty-two  men,  among
whom  were  Bairam  Khan  and  Kliwaja  Mu'azzam.  These  two  he
sent  to  bring  the  Queen-consort  and  the  young  prince,  asking
TardiBeg  for  the  loan  of  a few  horses,  who,  however,  again  brand-
ing himself  * with  the  stigma  of  meanness  and  disgrace,  refused  to
comply  witii  this  request,  and  further  declined  to  accompany  him.
Humayiin  left  the  young  Prince,  who  was  an  infant  of  only  one
year,  in  the  camp  under  the  charge  ^ of  Afkah  Khan  ® on  account
of  the  great  heat  and  the  scarcity  of  water  along  his  route,  hut
took  the  Queen- consort!  with  him  and  journeyed  by  way  of
Sistau.

Mliza  ‘Askari  ju-.t  then  arrived  at  the  royal  camp,"*  and
alighting  and  tearing  the  veil  of  liumanity  from  the  face  of
modesty,  Sft  about  appropriating  the  valuables.  He  also  placed
TardiBeg  - in  rigorous  cuntinemeiit,  and  carried  off  the  ^ouiig

1 Footnote  variant

i MSS.  (A)(B)  MS.  (B;  omits

8 MS.  (.\)  omits  See  Qiirfm  xviin  77.

^ MS,  (H)  reads  for

6 The  ntifh'ili  or  ata^-elc  is  a Tnrki  word  sienifring

graiid-pere.  preoepteur,  institiuenr  dn  tils  des  Sultans.”  {Pavet  de  Courteilie),

G ^.inisn-d-Dlti  Mul.amniad  Atg-di  Khan.  Soc  Am-i-Akbar!  I.  (BI.)321.
No.  lo,  Tvherc  ive  le.irii  tliac  it  -was  lie  who  assisted  Huinfivun  to  escape
di'iAvning  uftoi  t!ip  defeat  of  Q'liiauj,  irurmiyun  attached  him  to  his  seivice.
and  subseqnently  appointed  his  wife  wet  iiitvse  to  Prince  Akbar  at

Amarkot.  omifcning  up.m  her  the  title  of  J1  Ji  Anagah.”

The  word  ’inn  mo-ms  a mother  in  TurkI,  while  ^5'L'f  anf/knli  ov
ondkn  means  a nurse,  as  (if(7  means  a father  ; the  word  rit/lkah  would

mean  fostt-r  f.ithei,  and  this  ia  pioh.ibly  the  name  given  to  Shamsu*d-Din
Muhamnind,  not  Atgrdi  or  Atka.

1 MS.  (B)  omits  after  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for

S jyjirun  Khdna-i~'All.

^ The  words  do  not  seem  to  convey  any  definite  meaning,  we  should

perhaps  read  le-hdiu.

L 560  ]

Pi’iuce  * to  Qa’iidaliar,  and  liancled  him  over  to  Sultan  Begatn,  his
own  wife,  with  injunctions  to  take  every  care  for  his  kind  treat-
ment and  protection.®  In  that  journey  important  events  took
place, = which,  although  they  weie  fully  and  elaborately  detailed
ill  the  oiig’.nai.^  do  not  admit  of  relation  in  this  place  ; and  irTust
be  rapidly  passed  over  as  he  did  that  long  stretch  of  road.  These
events  took  place  in  the  year  9.j0  H.  (1543  A.D.).  In  short,
leaving  Sistan  and  journeying  to  the  city  of  lOiurasan,  he  had  an
interview  with  Sultan  ilnhanimad  ilirza,  the  elder  son  of  Shah
Tahmasp,  who  held  the  rule  of  that  country  under  the  tutelage  ^
of  Muhammad  lOiaa  Taklu,*’  and  i-eceiving  all  the  necessaries  of
royalty,  and  requisites  for  his  journey  .t  with  all  honour  and  ceremony
reached  the  sacred  city  of  Mashhad  (Meshed)  ; and  at  each  succes-
sive stage,  by  order  of  the  Shah,  the  goveinors  of  the  provinces
hastened  to  welcome  him,  and  made  all  preparations  for  enter-
taining him  and  shewing  him  h.ospitality,  escorting  him  from
stage  to  stage.  Bairani  Khan  proceeded  to  do  homage  to  the
^ah,  and  brought  with  him  thence  a letter  congratulating
Humat'un  upon  his  ari-ival.  The  two  moiiarchs  met  at  Fulaq-
Suriq  5 and  exchanged  the  customary  honours  and  courtesies.

In  the  course  of  conversation  the  Shah  asked  what  had  led  to
his  defeat ; Hiima^'Cin  incautiously  9 replied  ‘The  oppo.sition  of
my  hrothei.s.’  Bahraui  Mirza,  the  brother  of  the  ^ah,  who  was

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  Ij.  * Omit  J MSS  (A)  I'B)

® (SJJ  MS.  (A).

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  jC>  That  is  to  say,  in  the  T.:': rri-h-i-AUan.

See  Elhot  and  Iiot.soh,  V.  217,  et  se  i j.

6 ^i3|

The  termination  liq,  Vgh,  Z/m,  or  iptlicatcs  eitiier

relationship,  as  in  this  instance;  an  abstraction,  as  in
abandonee  ; or  possession.  See  Pavet  de  Courteiile  s.  r.

The  word  patronage  would  more  etymologically  represent  afJ'Jql,  but  in.
modern  usage  this  word  has  become  perverted  from  its  true  sense.

^ Called  by  Ni/amu-d-l)in,  Ahmad  Muhammad  Khan  Sl;arfu*d-DIn  Ughll
Taklu.  (E.  and  D.,  v.  217).  The  wnid  Taldfi  means  “ eaii  qiii  coule

d’une  vallee  et  des  flancs  d’ane  montagne;  lieax  humnles  et  verdoyaots”
(P.  de  C ).

' MS.  (B)  reads  Us^  This  reading  is  also  given

as  a variant  in  a footnote  to  the  text

8 The  text  has  (Sic)  ( ? ) Ilaq  Sfn'faq^  but  both  MSS.

(A)  (B)  read  Piduq  Snrlq.

® MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  the  article,  reading

72

444.

[ 570  J

present,  was  gi  ieveil  at  tliis  speech,  and  from  that  day  ' forth
sowed  the  seeds  of  enmity  against  Hnmayun  in  his  heart,  and  set
himself  to  ovei  throw  his  enterpiise,  [nay  more  to  overthrow
Humayun  himself  as  well],^  and  impressed  npon  Shah  Tahmasp,
saying,  This  is  tiie  son  of  that  self-same  father  who  taking  so
many  thousand  QizilbaiJi  soldiers  to  reinforce  his  army,  caused
them  to  be  trampled  under  foot  by  the  Ozbaks,  so  that  not  one  of
them  escaped  alive  ® This  was  a reference  * to  that  affair  in
which  Babar  Pad^ah  took  N^ajm-i-Awwal  from  Shah  Ismaffl  *
with  seventeen  thousand  Qizilbash  cavalry,®  and  led  them  as  an
auxiliary  foice  against  the  Ozbaks,  and  at  the  time  of  the  siege  of
the  fortress  of  Nakbshab.  otherwise  known  as  Kash,’  (?)  wrote
the  following  verse  upon  an  arrow  and  discharged  it  into  the
fort :

T'erse.

I made  Najm  .^ah  to  tuin  the  Ozbaks  from  their  patli,

If  I did  wrong,  (at  any  rate)  1 cleared  (my  own)  path.

The  following  day  when  the  two  armies  met  * he  withdrew  ® to
one  side,  and  the  Qizilbash  troops  met  with  the  treatment  which
was  in  store  for  them  ; that  circunnsianee  is  notorious.

However,  to  return  from  this  digression,  Sultan  Begam  *'  the
sister  of  the  Shall,  whom  he  regaided  as  an  adviser  equal  to  the

1 MSS.  (A)  fH)  ivat!  c-'ljl.

S MS.  (BJ  omits  ite  worts  in  brackets.  MS,  (.A)  reads
of.  Tohaqdt-i-Akln.-i.  Kilnjt,  v.  218.

S MSS.  <A)  (3)

* Tbe  te"5t  i.s  c^.n-oct  MS.  1-A)  reads

5 III  the  jrei.a.irs  of  B;iher,  (Krskine,  p.  243),  he  is  railed  Nijira  Sani
Isfahani.  (Naj  sin-i-s.ii.i  iS,.iL:ip!)

^ MSS.  ( Ay  ii)  I'lt.ic

For  an  account  i.i'  tiiis  see  Erskii.e  M<  rnoirs  of  B.'iber),  pp.  242,  213.

1 MS.  (.A;  read";  tas

ildshnb  " In  Miiw.irfn-.-n-nalir  between  tbe.Iailuin  and  Samar-
rpind.  but  n.yt  '‘yiiptr  on  the  ro-ad  to  Bttj^ara.  is  kept  on  the  left  in  joui  neying  from
Hokliii.f  to  Sam  ii\,r.nd.  also  caib-d  Nas-if,  sitnatpil  three  stages  from  Samar-

i^aiid."  See  Vtiqut.  v.r.

In  B.ikhjra,  ~ee  Kesh  (Keith

Johnston’s  .Atii^i.  or  Sbohi -i-S;(l>;r.

3 MS.  (B?  i.-.n!'  for  tS-^h  -MS  (.A)

MSS.  1 i Text  reads

MS,  (A)  re.tds  StilfnnOi^i.  So  al^o  Tuh(i,^f}t-}-Akhar7,

promised  (who  in  the  belief  of  the  Sl!i‘abs  lies

concealed  in  a subterranean  dwelling  in  the  citj  of  Samirah,
otherwise  known  by  the  name  of  Surra- man-ra’a,*  and  when  445.
necessity  arises  will  emerge  from  thence  and  inaugural e an  era
of  equity),  and  with  whose  opinion  and  advice  all  the  affairs®  of
>State  were  bound  np,’  dissuaded  liiui  from  that  mistaken  step,®
and  by  the  use  of  rational  argument  brought  him  back  ° to  an
attitude  of  kindness  and  matihood,  and  induced  him  to  help  and
assist.  His  Maiesty  (Hamayrin)  wrote  a ''ula'i  (quatrain)  of
which  the  following  is  the  last  verse.'

T'ens-

All  kincrs  desire  the  shadow  of  tiie  Huma,®

Behold  I the  Huma  has  sought  th}^  shadow.

On  a certain  occasion  he  interpolated  this  verse  into  a fragment
from  Salman,^  and  sent  it  to  the  Shah.

i The  promised  Mahdi,  or  Leader  who  is  to  appear  before  the  Resarrectiop
See  xxiri.  also  Hoghes*  JDtct.  of  Islam,  305.

8 Samarra,  in  ‘Iniq.  Founded  by  A1  Mu^tasim  b‘Illah  eighth  Khahfah  of
the  house  of  Abbas.  See  History  of  the  Caliphs  (Jarretc),  p.  350.

Ic8  name  was  changed  by  A1  Mu‘tasim  for  tlic  sake  of  good  augury  into
Snrra-man-rna  meaning  ‘‘  Who  .«;ees  it  rejoices.’’  Saniarra  was  at  one  time  the
capital  of  the  Caliphate,  bat  became  once  more  merely  a provincial  town
when  the  seat  of  government  was  removed  to  Baghdad,  remaining  however  a
place  of  pilgrimage  to  the  Si»i*a  Muslims,  for  here  were  to  be  seen  the  tombs
of  two  of  their  Imams,  also  tl»e  Mosque  with  the  underground  chamber,  from
which  the  promised  Mnhdi,  Al-Qfum  is  to  appear  See  3.  R.  A.  S ,
p.  36,  for  the  article  from  which  this  note  is  abridged,  a translation  from  the
Arabic  of  Ibn  Serapion,  by  Mr  I.o  Mrange.

MS.  (A)  4.  jrs.  (I>)  omits

6 Text  reads  (?)

* MS.  (A)  1 M'^S.  (A)  (B)  Oajo.

s U.  I£ii>nii,  see  p.  o7  of  this  work,  and  note  2.

There  is  an  allusion  here  to  the  name  Huniuyuu  in  its  etymological  hen.se
of  rehuiofi  to  the  Humn  or  bird  of  royal  augnry,

9 Re.ad  (j  S*iJ.  .MS.  (A).

Sah'iln  Sfiw'aji.  Jamniu-d-DiP.  .a  native  of  S'^wnh.  Shaikh  ^Alau-d-Danlah
oi  Samnan  said,  “I  have  never  seen  in  all  the  '.votM  tl>e  equal  of  the  verses
of  S-vimi^.u  or  the  pciiiegrarat'^a-  of  Samn-ui”  rl-  died  in  ti.e  year  66ti  H.

3Inj -n  i‘u'‘ ‘Fusuhd,  11.  ir<.  oVc  Beah*  L<  I'.,  p 2.35.  where  Salman  i- s.aid
r>'  ! -iied  in  770  A.TL  See  also  H.  K.  oOlh  rirlfinania.  Toe  «IiUe  f s is
tieatii  ei't'OTi  in  the  Hiijna^u-i’Fnn-ihd  must  he  inLoueci.  a-d  Sahju'n  v/ a a the
paKCo-yrist  of  Air:r  Hasan  and  of  h'S  «:on  -Vwa-s  t;ie

hilt.:  of  died  in  776  A.H  Sec  Ain'i-.Vkbui  i.  * h'~'  '

[ 572  ]

Verse.

1 hope  that  the  Shah  will  out  of  kindness  treat  me,

As  ‘All  treated  Salman  in  the  desert  of  Arzhand

The  Shah  was  extremely  pleased,  and  after  innumerable  banquets
and  associations  in  travelling,  and  linnting  expeditions, ^ arranged
all  preparations  on  a scale  of  retral  magnificence  in  Humayun’s
honour,  and  took  much  trouble  in  giving  his  assent  to  the  religious
tenets  of  the  Shi‘ahs,  and  to  that  wdiich  the  later  writers  of  that
persuasion  say  regarding  the  blessed  companions  of  Muhammad,
may  Qod  he  pleased  with  them,  and  Humayun  after  ^ much  ado  said
“ Bring  them  written  upon  a sheet  of  paper.”  Accordingly  they
wrote  down  all  their  religious  belief.s,  and  Humayiiu  read  them
with  a view  to  cop}'ing  them,  and  gave  precedence*  in  the
after  the  custom  of  ‘Iiaq,  to  the  recital  of  the  twelve
Imams. ^ Shah  Murad,  the  son  of  the  Shah,  an  infant  at  the
breast,  with  ten  thousand®  cavalry  under  the  command'^  of
Bidagh  Hian  Qizilbash  Af.shar,®  was  nominated®  to  reinforce
Humayuu,  and  it  was  determined  that  the  Qizilba.sh  should  march

1 One  clay  Salman  was  in  the  desert  of  Arzhan  which  is  between  Bnshire
and  Shiraz  and  sw.Ttns  with  lions.  Suddenly  a lion  confronted  him,  and  in
his  helplessness  he  called  upon  ‘All  for  aid  who  appeared  and  drove  away  the
lion.  There  is  a spot  known  to  this  day  iis  the  Muqum-i-Salman.  He  is
bnriecl  at  lladfim.  See  Jsdbak,  II.  p.  224.  Salman  Abu  ‘Abdi-llah  al  Farsi,
called  in  Persian  Euzbih.

H.S.  I -A)  re.'.ds  instead  of  the  first  line  given  in  the  text

oiS  Iw  b t-akl  Axlf  Axwf  MS.  (B)  reads  <>^1.

2 Omit  J and  read  j CtC  MS.  (A).  3 J

* Head  here  for  JSj.  MSS.  (A)  (B).

& The  ^’I'ahs  appl}  the  term  Imam  to  tlie  twelve  leaders  of  their  sect
whom  thpy  call  the  true  Imams.  They  are  oti  this  account  called  the
ImrimTyah  and  the  I>na  •Ashariyah.  See  Hughes’  Diet  of  203  and  572.

6 MS.  (BJ  reads  12,000.

^ Bidagh  Khan  was  according  to  Tabag^dt-i-Akharl  the  Prince’s

tutor.  Hence  apparently  the  use  of  this  word.

^ See  Tdnffi-i-Rrithidi  (Elias  and  Ros«).  p.  Afshar  is  the  name

of  one  of  the  seven  Turk!  tribes  who  had  been  the  chief  supporters  of  Shah
Ismail,  and  whom  he  distinguished  by  a particular  dress,  including  the  red  cap
from  which  the  Qizilba^  derive  their  name.

9 MS.  (Al  j

[ 573  ]

by  one  route  and  Humayim  by  anotbei’,'  and  that  Humaytin
should,  after  gaining  the  victory,  band  ov'er  Qaiidiibar  to  Shah
Murad.  Tahing  leave,  and  marching  lapidly  through  Ardabll  and
Tabriz,  (Humayun)  again  went  to  Mashhad  the  holy  city,*  and
succeeded  in  visiting  the  .shrine  of  the  fountain-head  of  light.3

At  the  time  when  one  iiigdit  he  was  walking  alone  in  that  sacred  446.
enclosure,  one  of  tlie  pilgrims  said  in  a low  voice*  to  his  fellow^,

“ This  is  not  Humayun  Padshah.”®  The  other  replied  “ Yes  it  is.  ”

Then  coming  close,  he  said  in  the  ear  of  Humayun  “ So  ! yon  ai‘e
again  laying  claim  to  omnipotence!”  This  was  a i eference  to
the  circumstance  that  Humayun  used  generally  in  Bangala  to
ca.st  “ a veil  over  his  crown,  and  when  he  removed  it  7 ihe  people
used  to  say,  Li;/ht  has  shined  forth  ! He  also  wa,slied  his  sword  in
the  river  and  said*  ‘‘Upon  whom  shall  I gird  the  sword?”

When  he  arrived  at  Agra,  he  impo.«ed  upon  the  pojtulace  a tiew
self-invented  form  of  salutation,  and  wished  them  to  kiss  the
ground  (befoie  him).  At  last  ilir  Abul  Baqa  with  the  Amirs
and  Yazirs  paid  the  due  respects,  and  the  Amirs  of  the  Qizilbash
coming  (by  another  road)  ® arrived  at  Garmsir  and  took  possession
of  the  whole  of  that  territory,  and  had  encamped  within  view
of  Qandahar,  when  after  five  dtiys  Humayun  ariived,  and  Mirza
'Askrii'i  was  besietred,  ami  for  three  mouths  coiitiuiiuu.sl v i*  ficrlitinfr

'-y  ' •.no

was  kept  up,  and  a large  nnipber  were  daily  killed  on  both  sides.
Thei’eupon  Bairam  lOiau  was  sent  to  Kabul  as  an  ambassador  to

t MS.  (A)  reads  \j  jhk  (XiJ  It  was

settled  that  Hnmfijun  sliould hand  over  t.)diidaliiu-  (to  .shall  Muradj.

MS.  (A)  omits

* MS.  (A)  inserts

* .tt  Mashhad  (itemed)  is  the  tomb  of  ‘Ali,  son  of  Musa  ar-Reza.  See
Meynard  Diet,  de  hi  Peese,  p 396  .'.  v.  t/y-h.  See  also  Ain-i-.4kbari,  (J.)  III.

86.  Firishta  reads  (Bo.  Text,  p.  212).

0)11

* Insert  Al-Jt'l’  after  instead  of  after  MSS.  (.4)  (B).

® MS.  (A)  reads  for  mil.

* MSS  (A)  (B)  AliXlAol  T Read  Aiiifi  ^ ^ M,SS.  (A)  (B)'

« Supply  AS".  MSS,  (A)(B),  ^ Vj  jK  MS.  (A),

t'’  MS.  (B)  rrad.s  jA  and  <ikiA.h«.  11  Omit  M -MS.  (A).

'*  Iiiseit  aftei  IsU  A.«,G,  (A)(B)

[ 574

Mirza  * [Kamran  in  whose  behalf  Mirza  ‘Askari  was  fighting  and
Mirza  Hlndal  and  Mirza]  Suleiman  Badakhshi  and  Mirza  Yadgar
Nasir*  ^yho  liad  arrived  f:om  Bakkar  in  a wretched  plight  ; °
and  [since]  * the  idea  of  the  Qizilbash  was  that  no  sooner  would
Humayui.  arrive  thnn  the  Chaghatai  would  submit  to  him  ' and
would  all  come  in,®  This,  however,  did  not  happen,  and  the  siege
became  veiy  protracted,  and  a large''  number  were  killed.  It
was  also  currently  reported  that  Mirza  Kamran  was  coming  to
the  assistance  of  Mirza-  ‘A.skari,  they  accordingly  lost  heart  and
medittrted  a return  to  their  on  n country.®  It  so  happened  that
just  at  chat  very  time. certain  Amirs  deserted  from  Mirza  Kamran,
namely,  Aluhammad  Suitan  .Mirza,  Ulugh  Mirza.  and  Mirza  Husain
Khan  with  other  noted  commanders,  and  offered  their  services  to
Humayun.  Mu'yad  Beg,  who  was  a prisoner  in  the  foitre.s.s  of
447-  Qandalia.!-,  escaped  ■ from  the  foit  and  had  an  interview  with  him,
meeting  with  very  kind  treatment.  Miiza  ‘A.skari  in  his  alarm,
sued  for  quarter,  and  joined*®  the  ranks  of  Humayun’s  follow-ers;
his  faults  were  pardoned  and  he  was  distinguished  by  especial
marks  of  favour.

1 The  woids  within  hr.-ickets  occar  in  both  II.S.S.  (At  (fi!  which  read

This  also  tallies  with  the  Tabaqdt-t- ALbarJ  See  Elliot  and  Dowson,  V.  219-

2 ?,1S  f A]  read«>  but  H seems  to  be  in  error.

8 Omit  in  th  lA  liiace,  ilS  < A',  4 ^JS.  (A)  omits

h iJ’Jl  Ji  To  become  subIIli^s^ve

See  Pavet  (le.._CoQrreille.  s r.  iJjf.

® Read  here.  j MSS.  fA)  (B).  The  word  U

seems  annecessary  and  tauiolog'C.il , po8«.ibly  it  is  an  intci  polation  by  a sciibe
who  failed  to  understand  the  word  tJji  n,  taking  it  in  it?  ordinary  sen^■e
of  “ tribe.”

Regarding  the  Chaghatai,  see  Tdr/f^-i-Eash/d},  (Elias  and  Ross.  pp.  2,  3.)

7 MS.  fA)

S SIS.  (A)  omits  before  j-eads

yc  jIjA)  its'.

9 The  text  read  !iA«T  tybb  having  come  down  The  Tabaqif-t-AHar'i  Buys
“ managed  to  escape  by  stiatiigem.  an.l  iet  hinibelf  down  fiom  the  walls  by
a rope.”  E and  O,  Ir.c  c>f.

1''  SI.^  (A  I stsA

57.j  ]

Tiiere’.=  a swf-etness  in  forgireiiess  wjiicli  there  is  not  in
reTenge.

He  also  ordered  tiie  Amirs  of  Qizil'oa^  tlisr  for  the  space  of
tliree  days  they  should  abstain  from  interference  with  the  families
of  the  Chaghta  tiibe,^  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  so  as  ^ t.o
allow  of  tlieir  rdl  coming  ont  ; and  alrhcngli  Hnmayun  had  no
rerrltory  in  his  possessioi,.  yet  on  account  of  the  promise  which
had  gone  forth  ue  brought  Bidayh  Khan  and  illrza  Murad  into
the  fort  and  made  ocer  the  whole  of  that  country  to  them.

Kerae.

If  a man  falnls  the  obligation  of  his  promise
That  man  rises  superior  to  any  estimate  you  may  form  of
him.

With  tlie  exception  of  Bidagh  Khan  and  two  or  three  other
Amirs,®  no  one  remained  in  the  .service  of  Mirza  Murad,  while
the  veinaininsr  Amins  of  the  auxiliaries,  all  returned  to  ‘Iraq.

Humaviin  was  induced  by  the  eotniug  on  of  the  winter  winds,
to  a.sk  Bidagh  Oan  to  provide  shelter  for  the  followers  of  hia
army  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  but  that  inliuman  being  in--
variably  sent  strangely  rough  answers.*  On  this  .account  some  of
the  Chaghatai  Amir.s  began  ® to  t.ake  to  flight  towaids  Kabul;
among  them  was  ifiiza  ‘Asknri,  who  was  seized  in  the  way  and
brouglifc  to  Humavun.  who  imprisoned  him.  IMany  stirring  events  ®
happened  in  tho.se  days,  winch  ' led  to  the  delivery  of  Qandahar
from  the  hands  of  the  Qiziiba-sh.  First  among  these  was  tliis,  that
the  Chaghatai  Amirs  urged  upon  Humaynn  the  necessity  of  seizing
Qr.ndahar,  on  account  of  tiie  coldness  of  the  weather,  saying

1 !!*:».  The  word  nns  is  a Tnrk'sh  word,  it  is  not

fsund  in  Rediionse‘3  dictionary  In  F;tzin-IIah  -K-iian  s Turkish  Persian  Dic-
tionary its  meaning  is  given  as  qabila  i-buzurq.  a large  tribe,

Ttie  title  uf  VUiihegi  ‘‘chief  of  the  tribe”  w.as  a very  old  one  among  the
Mugbulg.  See  Tankh-t-Ra^^dl  (Elias  and  Hess),  p.  132  n.  1.

2 MS  (At  rend.s  wrongly  ^ f<»r

S Bidf.gh  Khan,  ” Abid-Fath  Snltin  AfshSr,  and  .Siifi  Wall  Sultan  Kadamii.”
Tal'aqdr~i-AJi^’(irl  E.  and  D.,  v 221,

* Ee.id  cjhhir“  USS.  ‘A)  fB'.  6 MS  (D)  reads

1 MS  fA)  reads  Msj.  The  text  is  coirect.

T Omit  MS.  (Ay,

[ ■>'<*>  ]

that  after  the  conquest  of  Kabul  and  Badakb^iaii  he  ought  * to
448.  bestow  the  greater  portion  of  that  place  again  upon  the  tjizilba.sh
as  compensation,  so  that  due  requital  might  be  made  them.

Secondly,  the  passing  of  Mirza  Murad  on  that  very  day,®  by
a natural  death,  from  the  w.orld  of  existence  and  trouble.

Thirdly,  the  tyranny  and  oppression  inflicted  by  Qizilbasb
canaille  on  ® the  inhabitants  of  the  city,  and  their  preventing  the
Chaghatai  from  entering  the  fort,  upon  any  pretext  whatever.^

Fourthly,  this  incident,  that  a iieice  ® Tahurra,  in  accordance  with

1 ilSS.  tA)  (B)  omit  bat  it  seems  to  be  necessary.

8 its.  (A)  inserts  after  jj)  •“  the  very  day  of  the  agreement.”

8 Omit  IIS.  (B).  •*  MS.  (Bj  omits

t MS.  reads  CS'^  t^LrF-  The  word  here  seems  to  mean  one  wlio  is
anathema,  i.e.,  a Sunni.

The  following  long  uote  is  necessary  as  no  book  I can  find  explains  the  word
IrV  Tala  rtd.  This  word  metns  enmity  (as  opposed  to  T'litraJhi.

affection)  and  is  a technical  term  in  use  amon^  the  Slii’nHs.  Jn  defining
a distinction  is  to  be  made  boiween  n; 7' j/t/^  opposition,

and  0^!<^  'adaivat  enmity’,  the  lurmer  not  nece*<sariiy  involving  the  latter,
for  instance  two  men  may  be  in  opposition  (maWi/a/af)  on  worldly  matters,
and  yet  be  in  thorough  amity  (mahabbat)  in  matters  of  fn'th.  or  maybe
opposed  to  one  another  in  questions  of  philosophy  and  yet  bo  unanimous  in
roiigious  qnescions.  Thus  enmity  includes  opposition,  but  ooptsition  does  not
necessarily  iniply  enmity.  And  yet  it  is  held  tliat  >ll■l?irba^,  affecciori>

and  ‘addicat  enniity  may  octaaionally  co-exist  : for  tlie  reason  that

‘adJicat  is  of  two  kinds,  as  for  instance  the ‘arhiieaf  of

liliialims  and  Infidels,  who  regard  each  other  as  enemies  on  tlie  eronnd  of  the
fundamental  differences  in  their  faith  : and,  »to)M4'*  the  'addiLa*-  between
one  Muslim  and  his  fellow  Muslim  on  account  of  some  ccnriict  of  worldly
interests.  Thus  it  is  conceivable  chat  'udif'ia*  and  may  co-exist.  Or

again  one  Mnslini  may  liave  an  affection  fur  auoth-r  Mnsiirn  Muslim,  but
entertain  a hatred  for  Lim  as  an  a»lulterer,  wiiiie  lie  may  love  even  a kafir
(Non-Muslim)  for  his  good  works  sacli  as  alms,  &c  , while  he  hates  liioi  as  an
Infidel  . hi3  love  being  merely  of  a worluly  nature  in  no  way  connected  with
Ti  hgion.

The  co-existence  of  'addicat  and  manabhat  in  one  person  due  to  one  con-
sideration is  however  impossible.

Auain,  the  ‘aduu\it  which  true  believers  entertain  ag.iin^  each  other  on
account  of  worldly  considerations  is  not  injuriocs  to  the  faith,  however
reprehensible  it  may  be.

Moreover,  the  essential  origin  of  ^add'^at  in  religious  matters  is  kufr
(infidelity),  therefore  one  must  consider  eyeiy  kdiir  as  an  enemy  ; thus
although  there  may  be  lawful  ties  of  worldly  affection  (ma^abtat)  between  a

[ 577  ]

Maalim  and  a Kafir,  such  as  the  relation  of  father  and  son,  or  brotherhood
other  blood  relationship  or  friendship,  get  all  these  considerations  must  be  cast
aside  from  the  exigencies  of  religion,  and  ^adaicat  must  be  based  upon  their
hufr.  Again  religious  affection  is  centred  in  zmdn  (faith  of  Islam)  , we  must
therefore  from  religions  considerations  love  all  the  brethren  of  this  faith
whether  they  are  obedient  or  contumacious*

Mahabbat  and  ^addicat  between  a true  believer  and  an  unbeliever  (Kafir)
has  different  degrees,  just  as  there  are  differences  of  degree  in  the  love  which
any  reasonable  being  entertains  for  his  different  relations.  So  also  in

religious  love  there  are  degrees  The  highest  is  that  for  the  Prophet

Muhammad,  next  to  this  love  for  the  assembly  of  believers  who  have  close
connection  and  intimate  relation  to  the  Prophet ; and  that  assembly  is  confined
to  three  parties  : First,  the  children  and  relations  of  the  Prophet  who  are  his
members ; secondly,  his  pure  spouses  who  are  in  a way  his  members  ; thirdly,
his  companions  who  elected  to  serve  him  and  gave  their  lives  for  his  cause.

If  among  the  believers  there  be  any  devoid  of  faith  (tmun),  or  guilty
of  any  sin  which  destroys  their  former  works,  and  in  accordance  with
the  dictates  of  the  Qur'an  become  worthy  of  ‘addivat  ( )

they  are  excepted  (from  the  rights  of  mahahhat)  and  enquiry  should  be  made

into  their  faith  or  absence  of  faith, Inasmuch  as  (immorality)

does  not  necessarily  exclude  luiSn  (faith),  it  is  not  lawful  to  curse

such  an  one,  nor  to  display  taba,-r<i  against  him,  but  rather  to  pray  for
his  pardon ; as  long  as  he  retains  [hiiiii  it  is  lawful  to  entertain
mahabbat  for  him,  and  'adatiat  on  religious  grounds  is  unlawful,  inasmuch  as
tabarra  and  sabb  (reviling)  are  only  justifiable  when  mahabbat  for  a

person  no  longer  remains,  which  is  restricted  to  death  in  infidelity.

Now  we  must  consider  the  words  of  the  Shi'ah  divines  who  consider  oppo-
sition to  and  contention  regarding  the  Khilafat  of  ‘All  as  hufr,  according  to
the  words  of  Khwaja  NasTr  Tusi  “ MiikhaVfiihu  fasaqah  va  muhiinbuhK
hafsrah.”  “Those  who  oppose  him  are  immoral  and  those  who  fight  against
him  are  infidels.”

Accordingly  a section  who  hare  contented  themselves  with  opposition  are
not  deserving  of  tabarra,  because  their  extreme  fault  is  tisq  (immorality)  and
the  fdsiq  (immoral  man)  may  be  a true  believer.

The  above  is  translated  from  the  Tulfa-i-Isni  ‘othariyoh  of  ^ah  ‘Abdu-I-
‘Aziz  of  Dihli.

The  gist  of  the  matter  appears  to  be  this  that  Tabarra  is  not  justifiable  for
immorality,  but  only  for  infidelity.  It  seems  therefore  to  take  the  place  in
Muslim  Theology  of  the  of  the  Christian  Code.  It  is  more  than

excommunication,  inasmuch  as  death  in  infidelity  is  made  thatest  of  tabarra
which  thus  implies  final  separation  and  curse.

The  use  of  foul  abusive  language  ag.ainst  the  companions  of  the  Prophet
would  be  held  to  be  loss  of  (zjUjI  [hnun)  and  hence  to  render  the  reviler
liable  to  be  tabarra  provided  he  died  in  that  state.  As  the  person  referred
to  in  the  story  was  killed  by  Mirza  Yadgar  Ni.jir  he  is  called  Inbarrdt

accursed.

73

[ 578  ]

their  notoriously  brutal  manuer,  iu  the  presence  of  Yadgar  Nasir
Mirza  ‘ [who  bad  fled  in  concert  with  Hindal  Mirza  from  Kamraii
Mirzal  and  come  thither,  uttered  foul  * and  improper  abuse
against  the  companions  of  the  Prophet, ^ may  the  peace  and  blessing
of  Ood  he  upon  him  and  his  family,  and  may  God  he  pleased  with
them;  Mirza.  Yadgar  Nasir  could  not  endure  this,  and  struck  him
such  a blow  with  an  arrow  which  he  had  in  his  hand  that  the  arrow
penetrated  his  chest  up  to  the  wing,  and  passing  through  him
struck  the  ground.^  Haji  Muhammad  Khan  Kuki  with  two
servants  first  of  all  entered  the  fortress  of  Qandahar  together
with  a train  of  camels  laden  (with  supplies),  and  put  the
guards  to  the  sword  ; a second  party  following  him,  came  np,
Mirza  Ulugh  Beg  and  Bairim  Khan  were  of  that  number. ^ The
Qizilbash  were  astounded,®  and  utterly  confounded,’’  and  the
proverb  was  exemplified,^  ‘‘Qiizi,  I am  an  old  woman, ^ and  if  you
don’t  believe  me,  I can  scream  just  like  one,  listen  ! ” Their
haughtiness  was  humbled,  and  Humaytin entering  the  fort’‘
allowed  Bidagh  Kban,  wlio  had  come  to  him’*  in  trepidation  and
anxiety,  to  proceed  towards  ‘Iraq.  Notwithstanding  this,  all  the
inhabitants  of  the  city,  who  were  heaitily  sick  of  them,  killed
the  Qizilba.sh  iu  every  street.  After  he  had  .settled  Qandahar
to  his  satisfaction,’'  he  made  over  charge  of  that  district  to
Bairam-  Khan  and  determined  to  attempt  the  conquest  of  Kabul.
Mirza  Kamran  also  came  out  to  meet  liim  with  the  intention’*
of  fighting.  Every  day  one  or  two’*  of  his  noted  Amirs  deserted
and  joined  the  army  of  Humayun.  In  very  truth  the  greater

1 MS.  (B)  omits  the  portion  in  brackets.

5 MS.  I'A)  omits  C5*  ® MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  AUf

i MS.  (A)  reads  jl  j*  MS.  (B)  reads  Jljf

t UJ’JI  MSS.  (A)  (B;  read  uJljl

6 Omir  j MSS,  fA)  (B).  ’ Literally,  lost  their  hands  and  feet.

8 jlQ  MSS.  (A)  (B).

9 The  text  reads  a footnote  gives  two  variants  (*l

and  (.1  The  latter  is  the  reading  of  MS.  (A).  I read

for  qurtaqa,  the  word  <i>2itagha,  which  is  TarkI  for  ‘an  old

woman.’  See  Pavet  de  Conrteille.

10  MS.  (A)  omits 11  MS.  (B)  insert  ^ AjA  after

la  MS.  (A)  omits  lS.>fA  j 13  MS.  (B)  omits

!♦  MS.  (B)  ^ Jhaiwlj  'S**Jj*J  13  MS.  (A)  Jlji

L 579  ]

part  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  * are  like  a flock  of  sheep,
Trherever  one  goes,  the  others  immediately  follow.*  Mirza  449.
Kamran,  losing  the  clue  of  all  independent  action,  availed  himself
of  the  services  of  the  Shaikhs  and  ‘TThana  to  sue  for  pardon.
Humaynn,  upon  condition  of  personal  submission,  effaced  the
record  of  his  transgressions  from  the  page  of  Li.s  mind  with  the
water  of  forgiveness.  Miiza,  in  accordance  with  the  saying  “ The
traitor  is  a cotvard,”  ^ would  not  consent  to  an  interview,  and  took
refuge  in  the  citadel  of  Kabul,  where  he  entrenched  himself,  and  fled
thence  in  the  dead  of  night  to  Ghazni n.  Tlie  whole  of  his  army  '
came  over  to  the  camp  of  Humaynn,  w'ho  appointed  Mirza  Hindal
to  pursue  him,  and  came  himself  to  Kabul,  and  the  hidden  meaning
of  the  sacred  word  Verily,  He  who  hath  ordained  ^he  Qur'an  for
ihet- trill  restore  thee  tv  thy  returning  place"  ^ was  repealed,  and  he
refreshed  to  the  full  his  eyes  with  the  sight  of  the  noble  Prince
his  son.  This  victory  was  gained  on  the  tenth  of  the  montii  of
Ramazan  the  blessed,®  in  the  year  9o'J  H.  (A.D.  lodoi.  ' and  the
following  hemistich  was  written  as  a record  of  the  date  : —

. Be  jang  girift  mulk-i-Kdhul  az  icaid
He  took  the  kingdom  of  Kabul  from  him  without  fighting.”

And  inasmuch  as  others  are  responsible  for  the  relation  of  these
events,  and  the  compiler  of  tiiis  Muntakh  ih  has  only  adapted  his
record  from  them,  now  however  much  he  may  desire  to  epitomise,®

1 its.  (A)  ; MS.  (B)  omits

S MS.  (B)

S Al-khainu  khiif.  MS.  (Bj  reads  j

* MS.  (A)  reads

^ Qar’aa  xxriii.  85.  6 MS.  (AJ  omits

The  Tdha'iut-i-Ak'barl  (EliioD  and  Dovvsari,  v.  p,  222)  aays  : *“  The  victory
wns  accomplished  oif  the  lOch  Ramazan,  953  tl.  'vvhen  the  Friuce  was  four
years,  two  moiichs  and  five  days  old.  Some  place  the  event  in  the  year  952  :
but  God  knows  the  truth.”  A footnote  (I,  page  223)  states  that  Che  Akbar-
nd//ia  (\oL  I.  p 823)  makes  the  date  12th  Ramaziln,  952.

^ iSJJ^  (..^*0  These  woids  give  952  H.  Fii'i^ta  also

gives  this  same  hemistich.  (Bo,  text,  p.  448).

® Text  •^!4>  Ij  A/,  (.i^aw  tight  the  tent  cords  ■

prolixity.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  tj  ; MS.  (B)  reads

[ 580  ]

the  thi-ead  of  his  discourse  * bas  involuntarily  become  lengthened
(in  accordance  with  the  saying).  'Narration  has  many  hye-paths.^

To  make  a long  story  short  when  Mirza  Kamran  proceeded  to
Gkaznin  and  was  unable  to  enter  it,*  he  departed  towards  Bakkar,
and  Mirza  Shah  Husain,  who  had  given  him  his  daughter  (in
marriage),  came  forward  to  assist  him,

Humayun  put  to  death  Mirza  Yadgar  Xasir  who  was  meditating
flight,  and  proceeded  with  the  intention  of  conquering  Badakh-
shan.  Suleiman  Mirza  gave  him  battle,  and  was  defeated,  and
460.  Kamran  Mirza  coming  up  in  Humayun’s  absence  took  possession
of  Kabul,  placing  guards  over  the  ladies  ^ of  high  degree,  and
over  the  young  Prince.

Humayun,  after  relieving  Mirza  Hindal  of  the  government  of
JBadakhshan,  wrote  a patent  confei-ring  it  upon  Mirza  Suleiman,
and  making  over  ^ the  government  of  that  country  to  him  returned
with  all  speed  to  Kabul.  Mirza  Kami'an,  after  the  defeat  of  his
forces,  remained  entrenched  in  Kabul,  and  when  he  found  himself
in  straits,  out  of  sheer  cruelty  several  times  gave  orders  for  the
young  Prince  to  be  placed  upon  the  ramparts  of  the  fort  witbin
range  of  both  artillery  and  musketry  fire,  bnt  Maham  Anka  ^ made
ber  own  body  a shield  for  him  against  the  arrows  of  calamity.

Verse.

If  the  sword  of  the  world  leaps  from  its  sheath.

It  can  sever  no  vessel  till  God  permits.

I MS.  (A)  omits  MS.  fB)  omits

The  proverb  is  At-hadlsu  zM-£/iuj?m,*and  is  need  to

express  one  story  reminding  the  narrator  of  another,  see  Arahum  Proverhia^
Freytag,  I.  p.  350,  n,  29.

The  text  reads  wrongly  and  a footnote  calls  attention  to

the  correct  reading.  MS.  (B)  reads

S MS.  (.A.)  hF'’T  J

B oljdU  jS  Bar  hazarit-i-‘dliydt-i-Begamdn.

* MS.  (B)  reads  for

» Maham  Auka  (or  Anagahj  was  one  of  Akbar’s  nurses  and  attended  on
Akbar  from  his  cradle  to  his  accession.  See  .\in-i-Akbari,  I.  (B)  p.  323.

Anaka  or  Anaka  in  Turk!  signifies  nurse  (P.  deC.J  Pazlu-Ilah  Khan  gives
^*1  Anagah  in  the  meaning  of  foster-mother  sAb-  mddar.  Bead

the  account  given  by  Nijarau-d-Din.  (Elliot,  t.  p.  227;.

[ 581  ]

The  Sardars  and  Amirs,  on  account  of  the  heat  of  the  contest
in  which  they  were  engaged,  began  to  traffic  in  hypocrisy,*  and
kept  coming  backwards  and  forwards,  now  in  one  direction  now
in  another.  Many  of  them  on  both  sides  were  killed.  At  last,*
Mirza,  2 having  made  a hole  in  the  wall  of  the  fort,  came  out  in
disguise,*  and  when  Haji  iluhammad  Khan,  who  had  been  detail-
ed with  a party  of  men  to  pursue  him,  came  up  with  Mii’za,^
Mirza  said  to  him  “ What  if  I have  killed  your  father  Baba
Qashaqa  ? ” Haji  Muhammad  Khan,  who  was  a veteran  soldier,
energetic  and  experienced,  pretending  not  to  understand  him,
returned,  and  the  Prince  reached  his  father  Humayun  safe  and
sound,  and  the  part  returned  to  the  whole.®

Mayest  thou  live  a thousand  years,  and  a thousand  years
beside.

For  in  the  prolongation  of  thy  life  are  a thousand  advantages.

And  Mirza  Kamran  took  refuge  with  Pir  ^Muhammad  Khan,  451
Governor  of  Balkh,  and  asking  his  assistance ® seized  certain  of  the
provinces  of  Badakhshan  without  a straggle  from  Suleiman
Mirza  and  his  son  Ibrahim  Mirza,  and  took  possession  of  them  ;
and  Quracha  Khan,®  who  had  done  notable  service,  together
with  certain  other  grasping  Amirs,  entertained  extravagant
expectations  from  Humayun,  and  when  their  iniquitous  desires
were  not  realised  betook  themselves  to  Badakhshan  and  Kabul.

Within  those  few  years  the  earth  had  quitted  its  accustomed
state  of  repose,  and  had  undergone  tremblings  and  agitations.

A certain  witty  writer  **  says  with  refei’ence  to  this  :

1 MS.  (A)  omits  t)  i.  e.,  to  make  feints.

2 Read  15  MS.  (A)-  3 Mirza  Kamnin.

* Text  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  Clk.  Ibiti

® MS.  (A)  fjjW-

* Text  reads  MS.  (AJ  has  the  better  reading

t A footnote  variant  reads  [)  ALV*  for  a thousand  objects,  so  also

as.  (Aj.

8 Text  iAx).  MSS.  (A ) (B)  tAAxLt  9 MS.  (Aj  reads  oU,.

MS.  (A)  reads  J

11  Text  V'b  vlIjO  3-  This  admits  of  translation  also  “

a certain

[ 682  J

Tlie  foi  ti  oss  of  Kabul  which  in  height  sui’passes  the  seventh
heaven ; ‘

Like  the  Kite  which  is  six  months  female  and  six  months*
male.

On  several  occasions  it  happened  that  Mirza  Kamran  came  to
pay  his  respects  to  Huniaynn  and  had  a personal  interview  with
him.  Hurnayun,  out  of  natural  kindness  and  innate  good-will
pardoned  his  shortcomings,  and  cleared  his  heart  of  all  rancour
against  him,®  and  after  he  had  sought  permission  to  leave  to
make  the  pilgrimage  to  the  sacred  city  of  Makka,  bestowed
upon  him  the  country  of  Badakh-^Aan,*  and  himself  going
up  ag.iiust  Balkh,  fought  with  Pir  Muhammad  Khan  and
•Abu-l-'Aziz  Khan,  the  son  of  ‘Abdu-llah  Khan,®  the  Ozbak
king,  and  defeated  them  after  a sharp  engagement.  But
following  the  bad  ad\iee  of  his  Amirs,  who  were  treaclierous
hypocrites,®  and  in  alarm  about  IMirza  Kamran,  lie  turned  lack
and  came  to  Kabul.’  Mirza  Kamran^  once  more  • broke  * his
treaty  obligations,  and  inasmuch  as  the  untrustworthy  leaders  on
both  sides  began  to  practise  unfaithfulness,  aud  led  him  out  of  the
way,*®  and  he  had  to  fight  numerous  battles,'*  be  eventually  sought

Ziii-if,”  Thci'e  w.ia  a iMX't  of  tii.u  name,  Jlii:  . .tlulmiuaia'l  Ha.i.ip  u'  Ispahan
See  ililjiilii  ft. II.  3i.V.

* A'a, Til*-’  pliiiu-'i  Saturn  ’vhich  is  in  the  seventh  liefiven.

2 (i/t't?  i' . I.  i.  S

4 See  El  io:,  v-  II-U.  '26').

6 iLS.  (A)  rea.I-  cfA  Oxxc  Cbuidif’:,''’  Khi,

Tlie  Tah  L ',7. -nils  him  *Jv  / LUioc,  v.  p.  230.

« ilS.  (Aj  reml-

7 Tne  account  by  uur  author  is  explained  by  tliat  uf  tin*  Tahaqat-i'

A/c^fVi  which  says  tiuii  on  the  niirlit  h fore  wonld  I'ave  f.tilen,  some  of

the  CliUi^ar  li  chufs  v/’noae  wives  and  families  were  in  Kabul,  became  alarmed
because  Mirza  K 7 ”ij* -L  had  not  joined  the  army,  so  tliey  met  t(ikr*--ther  aud
adviced  Humuyu-.  i..;t  cross  the  nVc-r  of  Rall^,  but  to  fail  back  uptjii  Dun.'.

Gaz  rakintt  'ip  ^ ''ib-ng  p(»->irion  • then,  after  a short  time  ti.  ,*  e’airisun  <>f
B tl^h  won' 1 s’ln  • h.r,  lluindyfir.  a^rreed  to  thi^*,  j-ud  both  frimuls  and  foes
il  l .gined  i’ a:  - ’•-■treat  l;>  Kabul  was  intended.  Tne  OsbakA  r :tt)k  e j'ii’aae
ai  i follow  - Jit.  A ’a  ttle  in  which  ilamr'v  fiu  Wa-*  u- '•-on.-l,  /

^ t

.'iiu'.vj-v.'i,  _ C',."  iii-  way  "ic,  .inJ  rnacbeii  K .ijul  in  baiA-tv.  if..  KUint.  v.  J-

p £3i,

= MS.  - ■.  '*  MS.  fAl

y I A'  Real  .'A*-'  lor  00.^).  MS,  fA:.

L

583  ]

aid  from  Islem  ^ab,  but,  meeting  with  disappointment, ^ and
returning  thence,  was  delivered  into  the  hands  of  Humayun  by
the  machinations  of  Sultan  Adam  Crbakkar  at  Pashala.*  Not-
withstanding all  his  repeated  rebellions  his  life  was  spared,  but  ^52.
the  jewel  of  sight  was  taken  from  him,®  (as  has  already  been
stated),  and  he  was  permitted  to  depart  for  the  sacred  Makka.  He
had  the  good  fortune  to  make  tlie  Hujj  four  times,  and  thus
made  amends  for  bis  past  evil  deeds,  and  there  delivered  up  tiie
life  that  had  been  entrusted  to  him.

T’isrse.*

Never  in  the  garden  of  Faith  has  a blade  fulfilled  its  promise,

Never  has  a shaft  aimed  by  Heaven  failed  to  strike  the  mark.

The  tailor  of  Fate  has  never  clothed  any  man  in  a garment
which  it  has  not  afterwards  torn  from  him.

The  Age  has  never  given  any  coin  which  it  has  not  changed.

The  Time  has  never  played  any  piece  without  practising
decaption  with  it.

Whom  has  the  Heaven  placed  in  safety  beneath  the  Sun,

That  it  has  not  made  .short-lived  like  the  shining  dawu.

Khaqanl  ! cast  dust  into  the  eyes  of  the  world,

For  it  has  caused  thee  paiu  in  the  eyes  and  has  given  thee
no  remedy.

1 MS,  (B)  reads  *'•"  Jl-

S Our  author  is  very  brief  in  his  recital  of  this  portion  of  the  historv,  for
a faller  account  s<’e  Elliot,  v.  233  to  234.  MS.  (A)  reads  Ycihilla.

* Mirzi  Kamran  was  blinded  by  the  stroke  of  a lancet,  Eiliot.  v.  l td

and  235  in  the  year  960  H.  Firi.shta  gives  the  tdnkh  written  to  commetnorate
it  Chashm  po^ld  zi  He  clo.sed  his

eyes  to  the  injustice  of  heaven.  It  is  clear  that  Humayun  in  destroying  his
brother’s  eyesight  was  only  choosing  the  lesser  of  two  evils,  the  Chaghatai
leaders  clamonring  for  his  death.  Firi.^ta  .also  s.ays  that  he  made  the  piigri.
mage  {Hajy,  three  times,  dying  on  the  11th  of  Zu  Hijj.ah  9G4  H.  (Bo.  Text,
p.  455),  October,  1557  A.  D.

♦ Khaqani,  whose  name  was  Afzaln-d-DIn  Ibrahim  ibn  ‘All  an-\ajjgr,  a
famous  poet,  was  originally  a pupil  of  Afard-'Alu  GanjuwT ; he  took  the  name
Haqaiql,  as  his  toMaiin*  and  entered  the  service  of  .^irwan  yi.ah  the  great
^haqan  Manuchihr,  from  wiiom  lit  received  the  title  of  Khligani.  H.aving
absented  himself  withont  iicnnissatn,  he  was  raptured  and  imprisoned  in
the  fortress  of  .jjhridarwan,  «liere  b,-  wrote  m.any  poems.  After  his  relea'-c
he  hastened  to  Makka  and  wrote  tlio  1 't/ijalu-l-- ltd’iatn  while  on  the  way.  He

[ 584  ]

Manlana  Qasim  Kahi  ‘ wrote  this  tcirikk.

Verse.

Kamran,  * thau  whom  no  man  has  been  found  more  fitted  for
sovereignty,

Went  from  Kabul  to  the  Ka‘bah,  and  there  committed  his  soul
to  God,  and  his  bodj'  to  the  dust.

Kahi  spake  this  as  a iarikh  to  commemorate  his  death,
Vadshah  Kamran  died  at  the  Ka'hah?’

And  the  poet  Waisi  * wrote  :

Verse.

^ah  Kamran  the  renowned  Khusru,

Who  in  majesty  raised  his  head  to  Kaiwan.

Faithfully  served  the  holy  temple  four  years
And  entirely  freed  his  heart  from  worldly  bonds.

453.  After  performing  his  fourth  pilgrimage

In  pilgrim  garb,  he  yielded  up  his  soul  to  his  Lord.

died  soon  after  hU  return,  and  was  bnried  in  the  cemetery  of  Snrkhib  in
Tabriz  in  tlie  year  6S2  H.

i[iijma‘u-l-Fuiaha,  1,  p.  200.  See  also  Beale,  O.B.D.  s.  v.  Khaqani.

1 MS.  (B)  reads  MS.  (A,i  reads  j.

* This  also  means,  Happy  is  he  than  whom  &c.

• Padshah  Kurniun  haka'bah  himurd.  The  letters  of  this  line  give  the  date
96b  H instead  of  96-i  H.

Maulana  Qasim  Kahi  otherwise  known  as  MIyan  Kali  Kabuli.  Our  author
(see  voi.  III.  p.  172  of  the  text},  stigmatises  his  poetry  as  crude  and  wanting
in  originality,  although  he  acknowledges  that  it  possesses  a peculiar  quality
unshared  by  any  other  author.  He  was  skilled  in  astronomy,  as  well  as  in
rhetoric  and  Sufiisra,  and  had  also  skill  ns  a composer  of  music.  Badaoni
laments  the  fact  chat  notwithstanding  all  his  advantages  Kaiil  spent  his  life
in  infidelity  and  impiety.  The  Ata^-Kada  fp.  19l>,  Bombay  Edition)  says,
that  he  sprang  from  the  Gulistana  Saiyyidsj  one  of  his  ancestors  came  out  of
the  city  to  pay  his  respects  to  Timur  and  joined  his  army,  whose  fortunes
he  followed  until  the  birth  of  the  Saiyyid  aforesaid  in  Turkistan.  He  was
bronghfc  up  in  Kabul  whence  he  acquired  his  name.  He  went  to  Hindustan
in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Humayun,  where  he  held  a position  of  trust  and
hononr.  No  date  is  there  given  for  his  death,  which  occurred  in  988  H.  See
Am-i'Akbari  (B)  I,  566  n.  1 ; also  Beale,  O.B.D.,  p.  144.

^ MS.  (B)  reads  Dahsi  for  Tl'aisJ  (Text),

[ 585  ]

One  night  as  Waisi  was  holden  witji  sleep.

Ho  visited  him  and  called  him  towards  himself,

And  said,  “ If  they  ask  thee  concerning  my  death
Reply,  “ The  pardoned  Shah  remained  in  Makka.”  ^

Slirza  Kamran  was  as  a king,  brave  and  ambitious,  liberal  and
good-nat&red,  sound  of  religion  and  clear  of  faith.  He  used
always  to  associate  with  the  ‘Ulama  and  learned  doctors.  His
poems  are  well-known.  At  one  time  he  held  such  strong  views
of  probity  that  he  gave  orders  to  exterminate  grapes  from  his
kingdom,  but  afterwards  became  such  a slave  to  wine  that  be  was
not  ashamed  of  the  after  effects  of  debauch  ; eventually  he  left
the  woild  penitent  and  devout.  All’s  well  that  ends  well.®

This  event  took  place  in  the  year®  964  H.

Mirza  ‘A.sbari,  after  Qarraeha  Khan  was  slain  in  the  last  battle
before  Kabul,  fell  a prisoner  into  the  bands  of  Humaytin’s
soldiery,  and  Kbuaja  Jalalu-d-Din  * Mahmud  Diwan  conveyed
him  to  Badakhshan  and  made  him  over  to  Mirza  Suleiman.  He
was  kept  in  confinement  for  some  time,®  and  then  was  released,
and  Mii'za  Suleiman  despatched  him  to  Balkh,  by  which  route  hf
purpose.l  journeying  to  the  two  sacred  cities.®  When  he  reached
a valley  which  lies  between  Shamt  and  the  sacred  city  of  Makka,
without  accomplishing  his  object  he  hastened  from  ® that  desert
to  the  true  Ka‘bah  which  is  the  bourn  of  all  mankind.  The
following  is  the  tarilch  of  that  event : —

Mc'An  t } ajshah-t-daryadil.^

Verse.

Why  dost  thou  soil  thy  fingers  with  the  blood  of  the  world  ?

For  honey  is  oft  mingled  with  deadly  poison.

1 Shdh- i' ir arh^ m dar  Mciklta  niand  This  line  gives  the  date  964  H.

2 jxJb  J,;  umuru  bil  ‘aii-iqib.  Lit.  Events  are  according  to

their  terminations.

» (A)  omits  Ur*.  ■*  MSS.  (A)  (B).  6 MS.  (A)

^ Mura rnain-i-ShaTlf gin.  Mecca  and  Medina.

' Syria.  Nizimu-d-Din  Ahmad  saya:*‘in  the  country  of  Kum,”  Elliot
T.  234

S 51 S.  (A)  reads  Kb  31

® i.e.  ‘Aahari  the  bountifnl  king.  These  letters  give  the  date  922  H.

11  In  the  MiMiit  (xxi.  Part  I)  we  read  that  lioney  was  prescribed  by
Mohammad.  “ A man  came  to  his  majesty  and  said  : ‘ Verily  my  brother  Ins  a
74

[ 58C  ]

454.  The  ead  of  Mirza  Hindal  ■was  on  this  wise,  that  after  ifirza
Kamran  had  suffered  defeat  in  the  final  engagement,  and  had  taken
refuge  wdth  the  Afghans,  and  Haji  Muhammad  Khan  * Kuki  was
executed*  on  account  of  his  numeious  misdeeds,  one  night  Mirza
Kamran  made  a night  attack  upon  the  camp.®  By  chance  that
night  the  daid;  of  death  struck  Mirza  Hindal  in  a vital,  spot,  and
he  drank  the  draught  of  martyrdom.  This  event  took  place*  in
the  year  958  H.  and  Shabkhun  was  found  to  give  the  date.®

purging.’  And  his  highness  said  : * Give  him  honey  to  drink’  and  it  was  done.
Then  the  man  came  to  his  highness  and  said  : ‘ I gave  him  hoLiey  to  drink,
which  has  increased  the  purging,’  then  his  'majesty  said  to  him  thrice  ; ‘ Give
him  honey.’  And  the  man  came  a fonrth  time  and  saiil  : ‘it  incre.iseth  tiic
purging.’  And  his  highness  said  ; ‘ give  him  honey.’  Tijen  tiie  man  said  : ‘ I
have  and  it  increaseth  the  purging.’  Tnen  his  highness  s tid  ; ‘ God  has  said
truly,  there  is  a cure  for  man  in  honey,  and  your  brother's  belly  linl,  by  not
accepting  of  the  cure.’  Tlieu  the  man  gave  his  brother  honey  to  drink  again
and  he  got  well.”

Honey  was  held  in  high  estimation  as  a drag  among  ancient  physicians.
The  poisonous  qualities  of  honey  gathered  fiom  cert.aiii  plants  is  well  kno-wn ;
for  instance,  we  find  in  the  HiikhziiHu,-l-A.du'^ya.  that  honey  shed  by  bees
which  have  lighted  in  the  herb  Absautin  lAbsinthinm)  and  the  like  ac(juiro3
a bitter  taste,  and  causes  diseases  of  the  stomach  and  liver,  while  another
kind  of  honey  causes  fainting  and  cold  sweats  .and  loss  of  consciousness.
So  also  the  poisonous  honey  of  Heraclea,  supposed  to  owe  its  poisonous
properties  to  the  aconite  plant.

Quite  recently  well  authenticated  cases  of  honey  poisoning  have  been
reported  in  the  United  States-  The  honey  in  one  instance  was  found  to  be
impregmated  with  gelsemine.  It  is  generally  behoved  that  two  varieties  of
aconite,  Kalmia  luHfoUa  some  Rhododendrons  Azalea  pontica  and  certain
other  plants  of  the  0.  Kricaceae,  h.ave  poisonous  properties  wliieh  are
communicated  to  the  honey  of  bees  lighting  on  them.  It  i.s  said  that  the
A .iileu  puntico.  was  the  pi.mt  wiiich  yielded  tiie  poisonous  honey  noticed  by
Xenophon  in  his  account  of  the  retreat  of  the  Ten  Thousand.  The  active
pjison  andromedotoxin  has  been  found  in  many  Erioacem.  The  symptoms
honey  poisoning  are  briefly  described  as  vomiting,  purging,  acute  gastric
and  abdomimal  pain  and  cramps,  with  .snrfaco  cn!dnos.s  and  pallor,  and  the
general  signs  of  collapse.  See  hid.  Med.  Gaz.,  January,  ISOr,  p.  27.’  See  also
iled  and  Surg.  Hep.  September,  ISHd.

1 MS.  (A)  omits  s JiSS.  (Aj  (li)  omit  after

S Read  igji  4 MS.  t .K)

i Shai.kinhi.  Night  assanlr.  The  letters  of  this  Word  give  the

d.ate  9o8  U.  The  Tab.i.jdl-t-AkbarJ  gives  another  for.M.  See  Elliot,  v.  234,
whion  however  gives  939  H.

[ 587  ]

Verse.

When  Fate  made  such  a night  attack  * with  the  forces  of  the
world

That  the  zenith  became  red  like  the  twilight  from  bloodshed,
Hindal  the  world-conqneror  left  the  world,

And  abandoned  the  world  to  Shah  Humiijun  ;

The  jonng  plant-like  stature  of  that  shapely  palm-tree
Was  like  a lamp  to  the  sleeping-apartment  of  the  sky.

Wisdom  sought  for  a tnrikh  of  his  death,*  I said,

Alas  ! a lamp  has  been  extinguished  by  reason  of  a night
attack.

Mirza  Amani  also  wrote  ^ the  following  : —

Shah  Hindal  the  cypress  of  the  rose-garden  of  beauty.

When  he  left  this  garden  for  that  of  Paradise,*

The  wailing  ring-dove  nttered  this  tarikh,

“ A cypress  has  gone  from  the  garden  of  glory.”  ^

And  Maulana  Hasan  ‘All  Kharas  ® wrote  ;

Yei'se.

Hindal  Muhammad  Shah  of  auspicious  title

Suddenly  was  martyred  by  Fate  in  the  heart  of  the  night ; 455^

Since  a night  assault  (^shabkhun)  caused  his  martyrdom.

Seek  the  tarikh  of  his  martyrdom  in  ^abkhun.

Humayun  bestowed  the  horses  and  retinue  of  Mirza  Hindal
upon  the  young  Prince,  the  asylum  of  the  world,  and  confirmed  to
them  Ghaznin  with  its  dependencies  as  Igtd^  grants.^

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  * MSS,  (A)  (B)  omit  j.

3 MS.  {K'j  reads  Maul  for  AmauT  (Text).  MSS.  (Aj  (B)  read

aiaf  for  Aijij  (Text).

* Read  for  Cl-hjr*.  MSS.  (A)  (B).

f jl  L&JA**'  Snrve  az  iiiatifn-i-d'iuhit  raft.

Tu  arrive  at  this  fat  've  take  tlie  value  of  the  W'crds  Bn^tda'i-danlai
whieh  is  959,  and  tiieu  take  from  ttiia  the  Vrlue  of  the  sari.'  cypress)  used-
}icre  frr  t’ic  letter  Alif,  widen  i-h  straiirtM  ani  erect  like  tlie  cypress,  and  bca
i \a..u  , 1,  thus  we  obtain  95b  II.

MS,  reatU  • See  A/n-i-  / kl>,  ■ iJaimr'i  II  1*'.

[ 588  ]

The  Af^ans  could  no  longer  protect  Mirza  Kamran,  and  it  so
happened  that  Mirza  went  to  Islem  ^ Shah ; in  the  meanwhile
the  hidden  purposes  of  Heaven  were  made  manifest,  so  that  after
hearing  the  tidings  of  the  death  of  Islem  Shah,  and  of  the
occurrence  of  extreme  confusion  and  turmoil  between  the  Afghans
of  Hindustan  and  the  tribal  chiefs,  Hnmayuu  definitely  deter-
mined upon  the  attempt  of  the  conquest  of  Hindustan.*  In  the
meantime  the  loveis  of  contumacy,  that  is  to  say,  the  envious  and
riotous,  so  distorted  the  appearance  of  the  sincere  loyalty  of
Bairam  !^an,  in  the  clear  mirror  of  the  mind  of  Humaynn,  that
it  was  inverted  aud  he  was  represented  by  them  as  hostile.
Accordingly  an  attack  was  ordered  in  the  dii  ection  of  Qandahar.
Bairam  i^an  came  out  in  person  to  receive  ® Humaytin  and  with
all  ceremony  offered  dne  service.  Thereupon  the  disloyalty  of
his  traducers  became  apparent.  On  this  occasion  Humaynn  was
furnished,  by  the  good  offices  of  Bairam  Qan,  with  the  oppor-
tunity of  meeting  that  Scion  of  the  Walis,  the  offspring  of  the
Saints,  the  seal  of  the  Sliai^s  of  the  Naqshbandi  * sect,  Maulana
Zainu-d-Din  Mahmud  Kamangar.

The  following  is  a fuller  account : —

The  aforesaid  Maulavi  was  from  Bahda,*  which  is  a village  of
the  dependencies  of  Khurasan,®  and  had  attained  to  the  companion-
ship of  many  of  the  Shaikhs,  may  God  sanctify  their  spirits,  espe-
cially Maulavi  Makhdumi  ‘Arif  Jami,  and  Maulavi  ‘Abdu-l-Ghafur
456.  Lari,  may  God  He  is  exalted^  sanctify  their  spirits,  who  supported
themselves  by  giving  instruction  and  making  illustrations,  and
Bail  am  Khau  having  opened  tutorial  relations  with  him,  used  to
go  to  take  lessons  from  him,  .and  now  and  then  when  he  was
reading  Yusuf  and  Zulaikha  aud  other  books,  they  used  to  say,

t MS.  (A)  reads  Salim  Shah.  * MS.  (A)  vyli-yAnk.

8 MS.  (A)  ^ jUki-lj.

* The  Kaqshbandi  Shaitts  were  the  followers  of  the  renowned  saint  Kliwaja
Biihau-d-I)iu  Naqshbaud  of  Bokhara.  See  Ain-i-Akbari  (B;  I,  423  n.  2 wheie
the  meaning  of  A'aqshha7id  is  said  to  be  the  occupation  of  this  man  and  his
parents,  wlio  used  to  weave  Kamkhdhs  adorned  with  figures  [naqsh).  See
also  for  a long  account  of  the  Naqshbandi  School.  Ain-i-Akbarl  (J.)  Ill,  358,
et  eeqq.

Kamangar  means  a bowmaker.

t Footnote  variant  Bahddi/an

6 MS,  (.4}  reads  Qandahar.  i MS  (B)  omits

[ -589  ]

“ Ob,  Baii’am  what  is  year  wish  ! Yoa  yourself  are  as  Yusuf  and
Zulaikha  i in  the  world.”  And  Humayun  having  ordered  a ban-
quet in  honour  of  the  sacred  illuminated  spirit  of  the  asylum  of
the  seal  of  prophecy,  mai/  the  blessing  and  peace  of  God  be  upon  him,
invited  the  Akhilnd,^  and  with  his  own  hands  took  the  ewer,
while  Bairam  Khan  took  the  basin,  intending  to  pour  the  water
over  his  hands  ; seeing  this  the  A^und  indicated  Mir  JHahibu-
llah,  the  grandson  of  Mir  Saiyyid  JamMu-d-Din  the  traditionist,
and  said,®  “ Do  you  not  know  who  that  person  is  ? ” Humayun
thereupon  perforce  carried  the  ewer  to  the  Mir,  who,  with  the
utmost  confusion,  poured  half  of  the  entire  contents  of  the  ewer
over  his  hands,  after  which  the  Akhund  without  scruple  washed
his  hands,  to  their  heart’s  content.  At  this  time  Humayun
enquired,^  “ How  much  water  is  enjoined  by  the  Sunnat  to  he
poured  over  the  hands  P ” They  replied,  “so  much  as  is  necessary
to  clean  the  hands  ; ” then  first  Bairam  Khan  poured  water  over  the
hands  of  the  remainder  of  the  assembly,  and  was  followed  in  this
service  by  Husain  Khan  the  relation  of  the  Mahdi,  son  of  Qasim
Khan.  At  last  the  food*  was  eaten,  and  Humayun  found  very
great  delight  in  their  society,  and  was  much,  benefited  thereby.
Afterwards  he  sent  a piece  of  coined  gold  by  the  hand  of
Bairam  Khan,  saying,  “ This  is  a present.”  ® Inasmuch  as  it  was
his  custom  not  to  take  a present  from  anyone,  after  great  delibera-
tion he  accepted  it,  with  excessive  reluctance  and  disgust,  and  in
return  for  it  sent  into  the  presence  of  the  king  several  hows  of
his  own  fashioning,  with  something  over  and  above  (the  value  of
the  gold)  saying,  “ Presents  ^ must  be  given  on  both  sides.”

The  story  goes  that  one  day  Bairam  Khan  caused  a garment
to  be  made  of  handsome  Kashmir  shals,'^  and  brouglit  it  to  him.  457.
He  took  it  in  his  hand  and  praised  it®  saying,  “ What  a valuable
thing  this  is  ! ” Bairam  Khan  said,  “ As  it  is  a suitable  garment
for  a darve.sh,  I have  brought  it  as  an  offering  for  you.”  He  there-
upon made  a sign  ® with  two  of  his  fingers,  as  much  as  to  say
I have  two  of  them,  come  give  this  due  to  some  one  more

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit S a tntor,  teacher,  preacher.

* MS.  (.A)  reads  * MS.  (A)  reads

^ MS.  (A)  reads  ® MS.  (A)  omits

T Shawls.  ^ Tevt  MS.  (A)  MS.  ( R;  Aa*?,

® MS,  (A)  omits

[ 590  - ]

deserving  of  it  tlian  I.  Many  J miraculous  acts  are  related  of
him.  Some  few  of  these  ShaiUi  Mu'inu-d-Din,  the  grandson  of
Manlana  Mu‘in  Wai?,  who  by  the  order  of  the  Khalifah  of  the
time  was  for  some  time  Qazi  of  Labor,  wrote  in  a separate
treatise  ; among  them  this  is  written,  that  when  archery  practice
was  going  on,  he  nsed  in  opposition  to  his  usual  habits  to  come
every  day*  to  the  butts,  and  give  instruction  in  archery.  The
youths  used  to  urge  and  incite  Baii-am  Khan  to  practise  ^ ai'chery,
saying  that  it  would  surely  be  useful  to  him  some  day.  As  a fact,
the  very  first  * defeat  of  the  Afghans  occurred  in  the  fight  at
Machiwara,^  when  the  victory  was  entirely  gained  by  tlie  ai’chers
and  in  all  probability  that  eagerness  and  instigation  had  this
very  end  in  view.

In  that  collection  of  stories  also  is  the  following,  that  when
Bairam  Khan,  after  making  orer  Qandahar  to  Bahadur  Khan
the  brother  of  ‘Ali  Quli  Khan  Sistani,  came  to  Kabul,  he  ap-
pointed on  his  own  part  a tyi-annical  Turkoman,  so  that  the
people  groaned  under  his  oppressive  hand,  and  made  many  com-
plaints to  the  Akhund,  till  he  became  ill  as  they  desired,  and  they
enjoyed  a fevr  days’  respite  from  his  oppiession,  and  used  to  bring
tidings  of  him  every  day  to  the  assembly  of  the  Akhund.  At
last  one  day,  as  one  of  them  was  ® saying  “ He  has  risen  from  his
bed,”  the  Akhund  also,  looking  him  in  the  face,  said  angrily,
“ Perhaps  he  may  rise  on  the  morrow  of  the  resurrection.”  Three
or  four  days  afterwards  be  again  fell  ill,  and  removed  the  disgrace
of  his  tyranny  from  the  world.  It  is  a saying  of  their ’s  that
the  Turk  when  sleeping  is  an  angel,  but  when  he  sleeps  the  sleep
458.  of  death  he  is  superior  to  the  archangels.'^

1 MS.  (A)  reads

5 MS.  (B)  reads  jjj  j ^ Read  for  MSS.  (AJ  (B).

♦ MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  H

6 jiTdchhi’dra.  On  tJie  banks  of  the  Sutlej  in  the  Ludhiana  District  of  the
Fanjab.  See  Tieff.  I,  11-.  Am-i-Akbari  fj.)  11.  310;  III,  69.

At  page  315  of  Blochmann’s  Aiii-i*Akbari  (1),  we  read  “ The  conquest  of
India  may  justly  be  ascribed  to  Bairam.  He  gained  the  battle  of  Machhi-
warah  and  received  Sambhai  as

6 MS.  (A)  omits  4^.  The  hint  given  by  the  A^und  was  in  true  Oriental
fashion.

1 MS.  (B)  roads  (A)  reads  for

and  omits

L 591  ]

Vense.

I saw  a tyrant  sleeping  at  mid-day

I said,  this  is  a calamity ; It  is  best  that  sleep  should  take
him

And  that  man  who  is  better  when  sleeping  than  when  waking

For  such  an  evil  liver  death  were  preferable.

Hamayun,  at  the  time  of  his  return,  had  some  intention  of
faking  Qandahar  from  Bairain  Khan  and  giving  it  to  Munhm
Khan.  Mun'im  Khan,  however,  represented  that  now  that  the
conquest  of  Hindustan  was  on  the  tapis  a change  of  governors
would  be  a source  of  dissension  in  the  army,  and  it  would  be
better  to  wait  till  after  conquering  Hindustan,  and  then  to  act  as
circumstances  might  demand.  Accordingly  Qandabar  was  con-
to  Bairam  Khan,  and  Zaniindawar  to  Bahadur  Khan.
Then  coming  to  Kabul  be  prepared  bis  army  with  transport  and
commissariat,  and  in  Zii  Hijjah  961  H.  set  out  from  Kabul  to
march  against  Hindustan.*  And  the  following  qita‘h  was  wiitten
which  gives  the  date  in  two  ways.

Qi'^a‘h.

Khnsru  GKazi  Ka-siru-d-Din  Humayun  Shah

Who  without  question  excelled  all  former  kings.

Advanced  from  Kabul  for  the  conquest  of  Hind  ;

The  date  of  his  advance  is  nuh  sad  tea  ^asi  wa  yake.“

At  the  halting-place  of  Parshawaf*  Bairam  Khan  arrived
from  Qandahar®  and  presented  himself  before  the  king.  By
continuous  marches  they  crossed  the  river  Indus*  and  Baii*ani
Khan  and  Khizr  Khwaja  Khan,  with  Tardi  Beg  Khan  and

1 MS.  (A)  8 MSS.  (A1  (B)

3 J J Nine  hnndred  and  siity-one.  The  value  of  the

letters  taken  separately  also  gives  961.  This  is  the  explanation  of  the  state-
ment in  the  text  that  this  yi/a'/'i  gives  the  date  in  two  ways.  Footnote  to
the  text  says  J that  it  is  both  in  form  and  in  literal

value.  ^

k The  text  reads  ParsluiJai-,  in  error.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  ^

Purshdwar^

® MS.  (A)  omits

6 JIS.  (B)  omits

[ 592  ]

Iskaiidar  ^ Sultan  Osbak  forming  tlie  advance  party,  went  for-
ward * and  Tatar  Khan  Kasi,  governor  of  the  fortress  of  Rolitas,
evacuated  the  fort  ^ and  fled.  Adam  Gbakkar  did  not  present
himself  on  this  occasion.*

When  they  arrived  at  Labor,  the  Afghans  of  that  place  also
not  being  able  to  withstand  him  disper.sed,  and  the  commanders
of  the  vanguard  s started  off  towards  [Labor  and  Tiianesar]  ®
Jalandliar  ^ and  Siihind.  That  country  was  taken  possession  of
without  any  trouble;  Sliahbaz  Khan  and  Nasir  Khan  Afghan
however  fought  a battle  near  Dipalpur  with  Shah^  Aba-1-Ma‘ali
and  ‘All  Quli  Shaibani,  who  was  even'^ually  IQinn-i-zamdn,^  and
was  defeated.  So  great  was  the  terror  inspired  by  the  Mughuls
that  thousands  '''  upon  thousands  of  Afghans  would  flee  at  the
sight  of  ten  of  the  huge-turbaned  hor.semen  ( even  although  they
wereLahoii3\  and  never  looked  behind  them.  Before  Humayun’s
army  crossed  the  river  Indns,  Sikandar  Afghan  Sur  gained  the
upper-hand  of  Ibiahim  Sur,  and  having  conquered  him  formed
the  intention  of  leaving  Itawa  and  marching  to  uttuck  ‘Adli.
Suddenly,  however,  tidings  arrived  that  Humayiin  had  crossed

1 MS.  iB)  adds

* MS.  (A)  reads  AJaxf  MS.  (B)  reads  A'lVof  jjiaj

* Road  4*15  omitting  the

* The  Tubaq<7f-!Sdful  s.iy<  “ Adam  Gh.iknr  althouglt  he  owed  service,  did
not  join  the  army.”  Elliot,  v.  2d7.

C/'/iard-i-Manr^at.'IL  MS.  (A)  reads  l;.

The  text  is  cOltgcc.

wJitya/tf/ is  a Tuikl  word  sigtiifving  ffivhcjid  '.>r  i of  pa

army.  Sec  P.  de  C.  i'.  so  also  I'.ir/alUli  Khiu  who  only  the  me.i  'ir'hr

’ forpheaki.

**  6 Tiioso  words  in  br;irk''’-g  shtmhl  be  omitted  apparenrly  They  are
absent  from  MS  (\)  a*.*!  rJso  from  the  which  inentious

Jalandhar  and  Sirh'r.d,  Bo^’dos  tJie  cornmandorg  were  already  in  Lfihor.

1 MS.  ni  ondts  J;'an,',}.a,-.

3 MS.  (Aj  ro.ids  in  error.

9 ‘.All  Qul'  Khrn  WMO  tiips-nof  Hai.l-.r  Stih.'. -i  Otliak-i-ShruhlDT,  who  had
been  made  pn  Amir  in  tiie  .)npi  war  with  the  '.^izilh.ish.

It  was  in  tie-  early  day.s  of  Aklnai’s  reign  that  lie  oh-ained  the  tide  of
Khm-X-Zamun  .'-’la'  Badaoni,  A’ol  1 1,  p.  12.  Lowe's  Translrttioii,  p.  ,d.  ilo  had
defeated'Iiimiin  near  Pinipat.  See  Ani-i-Akhan,  I,  (B;,  p 319.

MS.  (A)  reads  jLV* jD**'  US.  (A).

[ 593  ]

the  Indus,  and  the  Afghans,  wherever  they  were,  set  about  planning
how  to  save  their  wives  and  children  ; however  one  did  not  help
the  other,  each  one  occupied  himself  with  his  ovm  necessities,
and  they  knew  well  that  it  was  only  Islem  S]jah  who  could
successfully  contend  against  the  Mughuls.  no  other  person  had
the  power.  Notwithstanding  this  however,  Sikandar,  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Jalandhar,  first  * .appointed*  Tatar  Khan  Kasi
with  Habib  Khan  and  Nasib  Khan  Taghuchi  with  thirty  thousand
cavalry,  to  oppose  the  troops  under  Humaytin  which  had  been
collected  in  that  district,  and  he  himself  came  on  in  their  rear.

The  Chaghatai  Amirs*  crossed  the  river*  )Sutlei,  and  the
Afghans  followed  them  ; at  sundown  the  two  lines  met  and  a fierce
battle  ensued.®  The  Mughuls  set  their  hands  to  their  bows  with
such  effect  that  every  arrow  which  they  freed  from  the  bowstring
bore  the  message  of  death  to  the  ears  of  one  or  other  of  the
enemy,  and  the  Afghans,  whose  weapons  of  offence  ran  short,®
took  refuge  in'^  a ruined  village  ; and  with  the  object  of  gaining
a better  view  of  the  Mughul  troops  * they  set  fire  to  the
roofs.*  The  result,  however,  was  the  very  reverse*®  of  what  they
desired,  and  their  stratagem  had  this  result,  that  the  Afghans
remained  in  the  light,  while  the  Mughuls  were  in  the  darkness  and
riddled  the  Afghans  with  arrows.  A cry  went  up  from  among
them,  and  shouts  of  Flee ! Flee ! **  rose  on  all  sides,  and  the
victory  was  gained  with  such  ease  that  but  few  Mughuls  were

1 SIS.  (B)  omits  J;i.  * MS.  (A)

* MS.  (A)  So  also  Tahaniit-i-Ahbarl.  Te.it  roaiis

* SIS.  (B)  omits  vT-  ® MS.  (A)  ^1^.

6 *9^  tS.  ]Ci  kotih  ailih  biidand,  A footnote  variant  reads
saldh  which  wonld  mean  “ wlio  were  ill-advised  ” tliis  is  tlie  reading  of

MS.  (B)  bat  the  other  is  preferable.

7 Text  Ji  SIS.  (A)

* Bead  MSS.  (A)  (B)  for

9 The  trae  reading  is  a little  uncertain  here  The  text  reads
•'hamharha  y^hich  may  he  taken  in  the  meaning  of  a roof;  MS.  (A)  reads
j,r(?)  while  MS.  (B)  reads  (?)  ckanbarha.

The  account  given  in  the  Tabaqat-i-AkbarJ  (Elliot,  v 237—238)  differs,  and
makes  it  appear  as  though  the  Mnghul  troops  used  fire-arms  or  fire-arrowa
Our  author*s  account  appeals  more  reasonable.

Omit  iSJJ-  MSS.  lA)  (B),  “ MS.  (B)  omits

75

[ 594  ]

slain,  and  liorses,  eleptants,  and  spoil  beyond  all  compntatioil
fell  into  the  hands  of  Humaj'iiu’s  ti-oops.  The  news  of  this
victory  reached  * Humayun  in  Labor ; thus  the  whole  of  the
Punjab  and  Sirhind  and  Hissar  Fii  tiza  was  entirely  * subjugated.
Thence  he  marched  by  forced  marches  straight  for  the  environs
of  Dihli,  and  Sikaudar  Sur  with  eighty  thousand  cavalry,  and
elephants  of  note,  and  a strong  force  of  artillery,  collected  round
him  the  Af^aiis  from  every  direction,  and  came  to  Sirhind,
digging  a trench  round  bis  cilmp  ^ after  the  custom  ♦ of  Shir
Shah.  This  he  fortified,  and  took  up  his  position  ; the  Ami  is  of
Hamayuu’s  army  holding  a council  of  war,  fortiBed  Sirhind,  and
as  far  as  they  could,  shewed  they  were  prepared  to  defend  it,  and
sending  despatches  to  Laboi-  begged  Humayun  to  come  in  person,
and  then  awaited  his  arrival,  Humayun  with  all  speed  ^ marched
and  came  to  Sirhind,®  and  every  day  fierce  contests  f took  place
between  the  more  venturesome  spirits  on  both  sides.  Sometime
passed  in  this  way,  till  the  day  when  the  command  of  the  advance-
guard  of  the  army  fell  to  the  turn  of  the  young  Prince  of  the
461.  world  ; ’ seizing  his  opportunity  he  drew  up  his  line  of  battle.  On
one  ® side  was  the  Prince,  the  Asylum  of  the  world  ; and  on  the
other  side  Bairara  Khan,  Sikandar  Khan,  ‘Abdu-llah  Khan  Osbak,
Shah  Abul-ma‘ali,  ‘All  Qull  Khan  and  Bahadur  Khan  made
manly  onslaughts.  The  Afghans  also,  as  far  as  they  were  able,'®
behaved  with  due  bravery  and  valour,"  but  could  not  contend
against  an  adverse  fate,  and  after  a conflict  beyond  his  strength
Sikandar  turned  and  fled.*®  The  victoiious  hosts  pursued  the
enemy  for  a long  distance,  reaping  a rich  harvest  of  slaughtered
Afghans ; wealth  and  booty  beyond  all  bounds,  together  with
horses  and  countless  elephants  fell  into  their  hands  : then  they
turned  back  and  erected  with  the  heads  of  their  enemies  a column

1 Supply  after  MSS  (A)  (B).  2 JIS.  (A)

2 MS.  (B1  reads  for  * US.  (b)  reads  iJu  for

2 MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  (*^3.

• The  Tabaqdt-i-Akhart  states  that  llncniiyun  sent  Akbar.

7 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  Text.

MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  9 yis,  omits

W MS.  (A)  " MS.  (B)  reads  J 4^^  Mi.

12  MS.  (B)  leads  18  yigS.  (A)  (B)j  j\j^

[ 595  ]

to  which  Bairam  KLan  gave  the  name  ’ of  Sar  Manzil,  which
(name)  is  in  existence  at  the  present  day ; Time  has  many  memo-
rials of  this  kind  and  still  more  will  follow.^

Verse.^

On  the  road  on  which  thoa  seest  those  particles  of  dast,*
Thou  seest  (it  may  be)  the  dust  of  Suleiman  ^ brought
thither  by  the  wind.®

Another  sajs  :

Verse.

Every  particle  of  dust  whicli  the  whirlwind  carries  away
May  be  either  a Faridun  or  a KaiqubaJ.'

The  words  Shamshir-i-Humayun^  were  found  to  give  the  date
of  this  victory,  as  they  say  in  this  Ruha'i.

The  wise  writer  sough.t  for  an  auspicious  omen,

He  sought  for  the  writing  of  speech  fi-om  his  well-balanced
nature  ;

When  he  came  to  record  the  conquest  of  Hindustan,

He  sought  the  date  in  the  words  Shamshir-i-Huinauun.

Sikandar  then  proceeded  towards  the  Siwalik  hills,  while  Sikan-
dar  Khan  Osbak  turned  towards  Dihlf,  and  the  royal  camp  went
by  way  of  Saniana  to  the  direction®  of  the  capital  of  Hindustan,
and  a party  of  the  Afghans  who  were  in  Dihli,  fled  hot-foot
for  their  lives,  and  were  scattered  on  all  sides  like  a flock  of
sparrows  into  whose  midst  a stone  has  fallen,  and  every  oue
was  saying  to  himself,  “ He  who  escapes  with  his  head,  verily  he
is  fortunate-,  ” and  the  hidden*®  meaning  of  the  words  '■  the  day

1 MS.  (A)  (•Ij.  S MS.  (A)  adds  afeer

8 MS.  (B)  reads  for  (Text).

* A footnote  to  the  text  recites  the  reading  of  MS.  (B)  )■

f MS.  (A)  reads  UH—.  6 MS.  (BJ  reads  ■>':!  for  ob.

" Cf.  The  dust  of  Alexander  turned  to  clay

May  stop  a hole  to  keep  the  wind  away.

S j vAs.A  Shamsh/r-iSumiiyiin.  The  sword  of  Hnniayun.  These

letters  give  the  date  962  H.

9 MS.  (B)  reads  AXA  lo  mSS.  (A)  (B)  omit  j'.

B Bead  b JISS.  (A)  (B)  inste.ad  of  the  reading  in  the  text.

12  MS.  (B)  inserts  after  13  Supply^-v  MS.  (A).

462.

[ 596  ]

iclten  mail  shall  flee  from  his  brother  and  his  mother  and  his  father
and  his  spouse  and  hie  sons  ” ^ became  evident.

Shah  Abu-1-Ma‘ali  was  detailed  * to  pursue  Sikandar,  and  in
the  month  of  Ramazan  the  blessed,  in  the  year  962  H.  the  city
of  Dihli  became  the  seat  of  the  imperial  glory  and  majesty,  and
most  of  the  regions  of  Hindustan  for  the  second  time  enjoyed
the  honour  of  the  khutbah  and  sikkah  of  Hnmayfm.  No  king
before  this  time  had  ever  been  so  fortunate  as  to  attain  to  the
glory  of  impeiial  power  a second  time,*  after  having  suffered
defeat ; whereas  in  this  case  the  power  of  God  whose  glory  is
supreme  was  plainly  shewed.  And  in  this  year  Humaytin  appor-
tioned the  greater  part  of  his  territories*  among  his  faithful
adherents,  and  vowed  the  pargana  of  Mustafaabad,  the  revenue
of  which  reached  the  sum  of  thirty  or  forty  Jaks  of  tankas,
as  a votive  * offering  to  the  Spirit  the  author  of  victories,  the
guardian  of  prophecy  o»  him  ami  on  his  family  he  blessings  ivithout
end.  He  also  gave  Hissar  Fit fiza  as  a reward®  to  the  Prince,
just  as  Babar  Padshah  also  had  conferred  it.  in  the  commencement
of  his  victories,  as  a reward,^  upon  hinhammad  Humayun,  and
the  whole  of  the  Panjab  he  bestowed  upon  Sh.ah  Abu-]-Ma‘aIi,
and  nominated  him  to  oppose  Iskaudar  the  Afghan,  v,  ho,  not
being  able  to  stand  against  him,  shut  h.imself  np  in  the
northern  hills,  and  Shah  Abu-1-Ma‘ali  having  reached  hi^h
rank®  was  living  in  great  pomp  in  Labor;  on  this  account
the  crow  of  conceit  made  it.-,  nest  in  his  brain,  and  brought  matters
to  this  pass®  that  after  the  affair  of  (the  king)  whose  dwelling  is
in  Paradise,  the  queen  shewed  signs  of  contumacy  and  rebellious

1 Qur'an  l.xxx,  34-35.  * MSS.  (A)  (B)  o-A?

s The  reading  of  MS.  (A)  is  preferable  to  that  in  the  text.  MS.  (A)  reads.

jSij A footnote  variant  reads
■1  MSS.  (.A)  (B)  Ij
^ I'ext  MS.  (A)

6 F.aiziillah  Kh5n  gives  this  word  as  J Chihh'.  in  the  sense  of
In  4’ti.  In  the  F.irhaug-i-.Vnandrnj  the  word  is  given  ns  or  jiddu  in  the

saiite  Ff'risc.  Pavpt  de  CourteiI!<*s  does  not  give  tlie  word.

" ^IS,  (Rj  OTiiit'H

^ MS.  (G)  roads  and  on  its

* Text  MS  (C)  reads

[ 597  ]

intentions, ' as  will  shortly  be  described,  if  God  He  is  exalted®  so
will  it.  And  since  Abu-1-Ma‘ali  had  treated  badly  the  Amii-s  who
had  been  sent  to  support  him,  and  had  (occasionally)®  interfered
in  their  Aqta‘s,  and  not  only  in  these  but  even  in  the  public  463-
treasury  and  in  the  government  lands,  the  Amirs  became  dis-
heartened, and  Sikandar  daily  waxed  stronger;  Bairam  Khan
was  appointed*  to  the  office  of  tutor  (AtalJq)  to  the  young
prince,  and  was  sent  to  oppose  Iskandar.  Shah  Abu-1-Ma‘ali
was  appointed  to  Higsar  Firiiza,  but  had  not  yet  started  when
QabS  i^an  Gang  was  appointed  to  .Agi’a,  ‘Ali  Quli  Khan
to  Mirath  and  Sambal,  and  Qambar  Diwana  to  Badaon,  and
Haidar  Muhammad  ^han  Akhta  Begi  * to  Baiana.  Haidar
ilubammad  il^an  kept  Ghazi  i^an  Sur,®  the  father  of  Ibrahim
Sur,  for  sometime  besieged  in  the  fortress  of  Baiana.^  And  inas-
much as  the  good  fortune  of  the  Afghans  wa.s,  like  their  good  sense,
on  the  decline  ; although  before  the  siege  and  after  it  also,  thought-
ful and  experienced  men  urged  him  to  march  on  Rantanblior  and
thence  to  Gujrat,  he  would  not  listen  to  them,  and  fell  like  a fish
into  the  net.

Verse.^

God  carries  the  vessel  whithersoever  He  will.

Though  the  ship  master  rends  his  garments  on  his  body.

The  zamindSrs  of  the  fortress  of  Baiana  sued  for  quarter,  and
had  an  interview  with  Haidar  Muhammad  Khan,  binding  them-
selves by  oaths®  to  certain  treaty  conditions,  and  bringing  Ghazi
Khan  wdth  his  family  and  relations  out  of  the  fort,  bestowed  him
in  a safe  place  in  the  camp,*”  and  “ the  following  day  having  made  a
careful  examination  of  the  wealth  and  treasures, put  all  <ho

1 jjji  O-witf  ^ Xhc  cevt  reads  wroiigI_y

MS.  (B)  reads

8 MS.  (A),  8 MS.  (B)  i't-  _

^ MS.  (Bj  reads  j

S MS.  (B)  omits  Hiiidir  Muhammad  Khiin  BegT  was  an  olti

servant  of  •Hamavun  who  had  giren  the  Emperor  liis  horse  when  Htimriyiar^
horse  had  been  shot  in  the  defeat  near  Bal^i  Aui-i-Akbar?,  (B)  I,  liSt.

a MSS.  (A)  (B),  1 MS.  (A)  omits  .-,nd  reads  fur

8 MS.  (A)  rerprses  rhe  order  of  these  linr-i.

^ MS.  (B)  re  ds  for  MSS  -'A)  (B)  read

U Tiie  text  ha.-3  a diiperfinoiis  J here.  M3,(Aj

[ 598  ]

iiihabilants  to  deatli  from  the  full-grown  man  to  the  babe  at  the
breast, 1 sending  * the  heads  to  the  Emperor,  who,  however,  was
displeased  with  this  ; ^ accordingly  * he  despatched  Mir  Shihabu-d-
Din  ® Nishapuri  BaJchikl,  who  received  the  title  of  Shihabu-d-Din
464.  Ahmad  Khan,  to  Baiana  to  verify  the  wealth  of  Ghazi  Khan.
Haidar  Muhammad  ® concealed  the  valuable  jewels  and  shewed
only  ordinary things.  Qambar  Diwana  had  collected  a large
following  in  the  vicinity  of  Sambal  and  was  saying  ‘ What  has
Qambar  to  do  with  Sanbal.  while  ‘Ali  Quli  Khan  has  a lien  on  the
revenue  of  Sanbal  ? It  is  as  though  the  land  belonged  to  one  man
and  the  trees  to  another.’  ^

And  before  that  ‘Alt  Quli  Khan  could  go  to  Sanbal  Qambar
Diwana  went  to  Badaon,  and  from  thence  passing  by  Kant  o Gola  ®
he  fought  with  Rukn  lOian  Afghan,  and  gained  the  day,  occupying
the  country  up  to  the  vicinity  of  the  township  of  Malaun  ?,‘®  but
was  subsequently  defeated  by  the  Afghans,  and  having  given  up
a large  number  to  death  in  that  fort^  arrived  at  Badaon,  where
he  exercised  groat  cruelty  and  oppression;  and  although  ‘Ali  Quli
Khan  sent  to  summon  him.'^  he  refused  to  yield  to  him  and  said,
“My  relations  with  the  Pad.shah  are  more  intimate  than  yours,
this  head  of  mine  is  twin  brother  of  the  imperial  crown  ’’  ‘Ali
Quli  Khan  upon  his  arrival  besieged  Badaon,  and  that  madman

1 MS.  (B)  read.?  ^ Ij  Tills  reading  is  given  in  a

footnote  to  tko  text.

* MS.  (B)  3 MS.  (BJ  reads  eril.

* MS,  (A)  omits  reading  6 MS.  (B)  reads  Mh-

^ MS:3.  (a)  (BJ.  ' (_)  Ashyu-i-sahl  rce

MS.  ^^A)  omits  Ij-

Head  hei*e  J MSS.  (A)  (B).  Thereadingin  the  text  has

nr.  meaning.

® Shahjahanpiir.  MS  fB)  omits

w The  text  rfi-.dt  iIolun<':ah  (?)  MS.  (.4)  re.ids  (?j  iLiIanah.

MS.  (B)  leads  iijiU  Maliir.ih  I .am  qnite  uncertain  .ns  to  rh--?  oorrectnesg

of  the  sug^rn

>"i.  •;  ->1

the  tr.ir.<!

•ttton.  Malatin  ' S*

C lIufiM*

8 a hill  fort

iu  r

l.;t

‘31M2^X.  long;

O'  52" E

Firi^ta  r*

■iV-  i:o

iiD'iiti'Gi

: tliis.

H MS,  1

, j']‘=

^ aI  '

12  MS.  (i:

(A;  reuds

MS  'T,;

' rf'a'iw

I 599  ]

(Diwana)  • who  knew  no  moderation,  was  at  that  very  time  pre-
paring to  tyrannise  over  the  people  even  more  than  before,
taking  by  force  the  daughter  of  one  and  the  property  of  another  ;
aud  in  consequence  of  his  want  of  trust*  in  the  people  of  the  town,
used  himself  to  go  the  rounds  by  night  ® from  bastion  to  bastion,
and  see  to  the  proper  state  of  the  defences.  In  spite  of  this  bis  ima-
gination used  to  run  riot,^  and  his  ideas,  in  consequence  of  his
infatuation,  were  excited  to  such  a degree,  that  he  used  to  go
for  half  the  night  into  an  empty ^ room  and  lay  his  ear  upon  the
ground,  and  going  on®  from  there  a few  steps  would  spv  about,
and  then  return  to  his  original  po.st  ; suddenly  he  called  the
pioneers  and  said,  “Anoi.se  has  reached  myt  cars,  dig  up  ^ the
ground  in  this  spot.”  When  they  excavated  they  discovered  a
mine®  which  ‘Alt  Quit  Khan  had  laid  from  outside  the  foitress.
The  people  who  saw  those*®  mines  said  that  from  the  side**  of  the
foit  in  whatever  direction  they  struck '*  into  the  mine  they  found
the  foundation  of  the  wall  of  the  fort  reached  the  water,  with  iron
rods,  and  pillai’s  and  baulks  of  «oZ*®  wood  arranged  under  its
mundatious,  bound  together  **  for  the  purpose  of  strengthening
them,  with  the  sole  exception  of  this  place  which  had  been  c.x-
cavated.

In  fact,  had  not  Qambar  been  vigilant,  tlic  men  under  ‘Ali  Quli
Kban  would  ba\e  blown  down  the  wall  by  sheer  force  aud  have
effected  an  entrance  by  way  of  that  breach.  ‘Alt  Quli  Khau  was

* The  word  Dhvdna  means  a mail  man,

S MS.  (B)  rcad.'^  The  text  reads  an  ineiaaeci  form

by  iviiila.

^ 3 MSS.  (A)  fli)  read  after  oTnittin*^  before

■*  This  a]>[>ears  to  be  tin*  nu  tilling,  thongb  the  w(»rd  is  nsed  in  a

somewhat  bliained  and  unasual  Sense.  A footnote  vaiiantto  the  t«\t  sa}s
that  the  textaal  reading  is  found  in  one  MS.  and  in  two  others

Botli  MSS.  (Aj  and  fB)  arc  t)»e  same  as  tliC  text  which  seems  correct.

for

^ A footnote  variant  reads
6 MS.  (A)  oniics
J MS.  (B)  reads
I'’  MS.  'Bji.mits  c-'T.

13  Toil  ^1*^

J

Tlie  text  is  correct.

' MS.  (B)  omits
waAS  Text.  MS.  (A)  reads
MS.  (A)  reads  for  01^1.

(.\)  reads  for

i*  Read  MS.  (.Vj.

465.

[ 600  ]

astonished  at  this  degree  of  vigilance,*  and  the  people  of  the  city
hy  common  consent  despatched  a message  to  ‘Ali  Quli  say-

ing, “ On  such  and  such  a night  let  the  besiegers  make  an  attack*
up  such  and  such  a bastion,  so  that  we  may  bring  them  into  the
fort  by  the  help  of  nooseS  and  scaling-ladders.”  Accordingly  this
they  did,  and  having  admitted  the  soldiery  of  ‘Ali  Quli  Khan,
ShaiWh  Habib  Badaoni,  who  was  one  of  the  most  notable  men  3 of
the  place,  took  his  place  at  their  head,  and  leading  them  to  the
bastion  of  the  Priuces,*  who  were  the  relations  of  Shaikh  Salim
Cbi^ti  of  Fathpur,  set  fire  to  it.  On  the  morrow  when  the  sun  rose,
the  sombre-fated  Qambar,  wearing  over  bis  head  a black  blanket
which  was  an  emblem  of  his  wretched  fate,^  came  out  of  the  city.
They  seized  him  as  one  would  a jackal  and  brought  him  in,  and
although  ‘Ali  Quli  Khan  spoke  gently  to  him,®  saying  “ Bow  thy
head,*'  that  I may  spare  thy  life,”  that  madman,  fed  on  dog’s
brains  gave  him  an  abusive  answer,  so  that  he  was  sent  to  join  the
dogs  of  hell.  His  tomb  is  well-known  in  Badaon.  He  used  to
spread  plentiful  feasts  and  say  (to  his  guests)  “Eat!  for  wealth
is  the  wealth  of  God,  and  life  is  the  life  of  God,  and  Qambar
Diwana  is  the  cook  of  God.”

When  tlie  despatch  from  ‘Ali  Quli  Khan  reached  the  Court
together  with  the  head  of  Qambar,  the  king,  whose  refuge  is  the
mercy  of  God,  was  extremely  annoyed.  Just  about  this  time,  on
the  seventh  of  the  month  of  Rabi‘n-1-Awwal,  in  the  year  963  H.,
when®  Humayun  had  ascended  to  the  roof  of  the  library  which  he
had  built  in  the  fortress  of  Diupanah  in  Dihli,  as  be  was  coming
466.  down,  the  muazzin'^  uttered  the  call  to  prayer,  and  he  knelt  out  of

1 MS.  (B)  omits  jl.

* MS.  (A)  reads  for

t Text  MS.  (A)  reads

* MS.  (A)  reads

6 MS.  (A)  _}b.

9 Text  reads  AlA)  jt  if  ^ it  seems  as  though  we  should

read  in  the  sense  of  wounded,  stricken.  MS.  (B)  omits  ifJ.

T Text  jt  ijj*.  MS.  (A)  reads  Ztjji  Zjji.  8 Supply  MSS.  (A)  (B).

9 elOy*  ila’azzin.  The  crier  whose  duty  it  is  to  utter  the  azdn  or  summons
to  prayer.  The  Azan  was  instituted  at  first  when  the  Moslims  came  from
Makka  to  Madinah  ; some  proposed  the  lighting  of  a fire,  others  the  blowing
of  a trumpet,  bur,  ihe  former  was  objected  to  as  being  a Jewish  custom,  and

[ «01  ]

respect  for  the  J;ou  ; and  as  he  rose  his  staff  glanced  aside  and  his
foot  slipped,  and  he  rolled  down  several  steps'  to  the  ground.
Wlien  he  recovered  a little,®  Xazar  Shaikh  Juli®  was  sent  to  the
Panjab*  to  summon  the  Prince  and  to  tell  him  exactly  what  had
happened,  and  on  the  fifteenth  ' of  the  same  month  (Humayun)®
bade  farewell  to  this  inconstant  world  and  took  his  way  to
the  abode  of  eteinity  ; t and  this  tankh  was  written  to  commemorate
the  event.

Since  by  the  mercy  of  God  he  pa.ssed  to  his  rest  within  the
garden  of  Rizwan

Bihisht  amad  maqam-i-pnk-i-u  gives  the  date.^

and  Maulana  Qasim  Kahi  wrote  as  follows  : —

Humayun,  Pad.^iah  of  the  kingdom  of  reality,

No  one  remembers  such  an  Emperor  as  he  ;

Suddenly  he  fell  from  the  roof  of  his  palace.

And  from  that  fall  his  precious  life  was  lost.

Kahi  made  a calculation  for  the  tdrikh  of  that  event,
Humayun  Pdd^ah  az  bam  uftad.^

the  latter  as  being  the  cnstom  of  the  Christians.  Then  Billal  was  ordered  to
repeat  AVahu  Akbar  twice  in  a loud  voice  as  a signal  for  pm3’er.

The  forefingers  were  ordered  to  be  put  into  the  ears  while  repeating  the
Aznn  to  strengthen  the  voice  ; probable  this  was  due  to  the  subjective  sensa-
tion of  increase  of  sound  of  the  voice  when  the  external  meatus  is  closed.
The  Aziin  has  special  virtues  attached  to  it,  for  those  who  uttered  it.  Thus  it
is  said  “ The  callers  to  prayer  may  expect  paradise  on  the  day  of  the  resurrec-
tion,” and  again  ‘‘  Whoever  acts  as  llu’.azzin  seven  years  to  please  God,  will
he  redeemed  from  hell-fire,”  See  also  Hughes’  Diet,  of  s.v.v.,  see

Mishkat  iv.  Chapter  5,  6.

t MS.  (B)  omit  * Firishta  says  that  he  was  taken  np  unconscious.

* Footnote  variant  Juma'aVi.  * MS.  (A)

t Firishta  says  the  eleventh.  (Bo  : Text.  459).

» MSS.  (A)  (B)  omit
1 MSS.  (A)  (B)

y These  words  give  the  date  963  H.  The  mean-

ing is.  Paradise  became  his  pnre  resting-phice.

9 The  vaJne  of  these  letters  is  063.  Tiie  mean-

jng  is,  HnmiWuti  Padshah  fell  fr^ni  the  rof»f.

76

L

6U2  ]

Tlie  following  wa.s  also  found  to  give  the  date  : ’

Be  not  ignoi  ant  of  the  year  of  his  death — See  !

Hiimiiijun  kuja  raft  ica  iqhdl-i-u^

The  following  tdrikh  was  also  found  ;

Ai  ! Ah  I rdJ^hh-i-man  az  ham  ufthd?

Vei  se.

That  capital  city  of  the  kingdom  which  thou  savvest  is  laid
waste,

And  that  Nile  of  whose  bounty  thou  hcardcst  has  become  a
mirage,

The  sky  gave  the  head  of  Muhammad  Yaljya  to  ruin,

467.  And  calamity  attended  Sinjar  the  lord  of  slaves.

The  fourth  heaven  became  a house  of  mourning

The  spirit  of  sanctity  came  to  condole  with  the  Sun.

Hi.s  age  was  hfty-oue  yeans,  and  the  duration  of  his  reign  * was
twenty-five  years  and  a fraction.  He  was  a man  of  kingly  pro-
portions, adorned  with  all  excellencies  and  perfections,  both  of
appearance  and  reality,  unequalled  in  the  sciences  of  astrology
and  astronomy  and  all  ab.struso  sciences.^  He  was  the  precep-
tor of  the  follow'ers  of  e.xcellcnce  and  perfection,  the  refuge
of  the  seekers  after  piety  and  rectitude.  Fond  of  poetry  and  *
of  poets,  he  used  himself  to  compose  good  verses  i he  never
remained  for  an  instant  without  the  wnzu'f  nor  did  he  ever

1 MS.  t.A)  rends  here

2 j\  J ctjjh**.  The  ralne  of  these  letters  is  963.  The

Hieiiuini'  is  **  What  iias  become  of  Humavun  and  hia  ^rood  fortune.’*

5 MsS.  (A)  (Hj  insert  this  before  tlie  preceding  tariW.  Its  value  is  also
963  H.  and  its  ineaninir  is  ‘ Alas  ! Alas  ! my  king  fell  from  the  roof.’

We  nmat  read  as  in  Text  and  MS. (A).  MS.  (B)  has

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  B reads  ^ ^ >

6 MS.  (A)  omits  j.

Wuzu\  Ceremonial  w.ipliinsj.  Ijefore  prayer.  There  i..  a s.nving
attributed  to  Muhamnmd  " Wii/n’  i.<  li.ilf  the  [inner'-.  ' ami  nnotiier  •'  When  a
M'lsiira  uses  Wn/.,V  it  wnglics  fiom  l.ia  f.ii-e  those  faults  wi.ieh  l:e  may  have
e..8t  his  eyes  ipion  , ard  vrhtn  lot  w.,-he-,  i,is  ii.noic  it  remove.- t lie  faults
ih  ■>  may  have  committevl , and  vvht-n  t,..-  vva-h-.'-  hi-  f.  et  it  di-pels  tue  i.oiUs

[ 603  ]

take  ' tlie  name  of  God  nor  of  the  prophet,  may  the  peace  and  bles-
sing of  Ood  he  npon  him,  without  Tiharat ; * and  if  it  chanced  ® that
the  necessity  arose  for  mentioning  a name*  compounded  of  this
word  '■Ahd.  or  one  of  tlie  Asmau-l-hasna^  such  as  ‘Abdu-llaii  or  the
others,  in  such  a case  he  would  confine  himself  to  the  word  ‘Abd
(servant),  for  example  he  would  call  ‘Abdu-l-Haiyy,  ‘Abdul  simply.
In  this  same  way  in  writing  letter’s  in  place  of  the  word  “ huica  ” •’
when  the  necessity  amse  he  u.sed  to  write  two  Alifs  side  by  side

towards  which  the3'  may  have  carried  him;  so  that  he  will  rise  np  in  purity
fiom  the  place  of  ablution,”  Again  ‘‘The  key  of  paradise  is  prayer  and  the
key  of  prajer  is  ablution.”  The  prophet  also  said  ‘‘  Verily  my  sects  will
come  on  the  day  of  resurrection  with  bright  hands  and  feet  because  of  Wuzu*.

k or  a full  account  of  Wuzu*  and  the  acts  reqniriug  its  performance,  see
iHAikdtu-l-ilasablA  II,  34,  also  see  Hughes*  Diet,  of  Islam,  art.

1 MS.  (A)  <3l«jl

* h'hdrat.  This  term  includes  all  rhe  various  methods  of  purilicatioti
enjoined  by  Muhammadan  law.

Ses  Hugheti’  //icf,  of  art.  Ptnincafton't.

3 MS.  (A)

* The  text  here  gives  some  verses  which  are  not  found  in  MS.  A).

They  are  given  here  as  they  interrupt  the  continuity  of  the  text :

• •

— iXei  Ja  w|A^  ji  tS^  ^ ij  *.>4

Preserve  a lively  fnitli  so  tliat  thy  reliance  thereon  may  not  falter,

. Nothing  of  u surety  d(‘h\cJS  the  servant  from  the  wrath  of  God  save  a
lively  faith.

Ms,  (Pj  reads

^ Abindu-l-Aasiia.  Ihe  best  of  names.  See  Mishkdt,  xxii.  8,  Verilv  the
best  of  names,  in  the  sight  of  Gi)d,  are  ‘Abda-lhih  (the  servant  of  God)  or
‘Alidu-r-Rahnian  (the  servant  of  the  Merciful  One).

^ Hiria.  The  name  of  the  AlmigJity,  wntten  at  the  commencement  of  a
docninei  t by  devout  Mu.sisms,  meariing,  He  abu'c  God.  It  is  the  third
} -'rsun  jf  the  Arabic  ]>cisOiJal  proiiaun.  By  some  cominentaiors  the  'VMrd  is
>iU'P’  sed  G'-  stand  for  rii*'-  hmtfh'azam  or  most  noK*  j u-nc  v>  incli  aceoiOoiir  t >
Mtjs5!  u u.viiG*  kn(*wn  to  G'KI  ahme.  bW  li.,  i L'  .-f.V'.*  '''u

There  is  no  G--  but  He

[ 604  ]

thus  (II),  whose  letters  thus  iirranged  * have  the  same  value  as  those
of- the  woi’d  ” “ Huiva.”  [In  all  matters  he  observed  the  same

reverential  caution  which  was  as  it  were  a part  of  his  nature].*
He  always  spent  his  evenings  in  company  and  was  never  niggard-
ly in  entertainment,  the  revenues  of  the  whole  of  Hindustan
would  not  have  sufficed  for  his  expenditure.  His  vakils,  for  fear
of  (being  thought  to  be  greedy  for)  reward,  would  never  mention
468,  the  name  ® of  gold  in  his  presence,  and  like  his  father  he  was
not  engrossed  in  amassing  wealth  ; no  improper  word  or  term  of
abuse  ever  passed  his  lips,  and  if  he  were  ever  very  wrath  with
any  person  he  used  just  to  say  ‘You  stupid,’  and  not  a word  more.

Whether  in  the  house  or  in  the  mosque  even  by  mistake  he
never  placed  his  left  foot  down  before  the  right,  and  if  any  one
placed  the  left*  foot  in  his  house  lie  would  say,  “It  is  the  left
foot,”  and  would  make  him  turn  back  and  bring  him  in  again.
From  his  excessive  reserve  he  never  opened  his  lips  in  a smile,
nor  did  he  ever  cast  an  angry  glance  at  any  one.  They  say  that
Shaikh  Ilamid,  the  commentator  of  Saubal,  on  the  occasion  of
the  conquest  of  Hindustan,  for  the  second  time  went  to  Kabul
to  receive  him,  and  in  spite  of  ihe  extreme  confidence  which
Humayuu  had  in  him,  one  day  he  fell  into  a passion  and  said
“My  king,  I see  the  whole  of  your  army  are  Rafizi^  (hei’etics).”
Humayuu  replied,  “ Shaikh,  why  do  you  say  such  a thing,  and  what
have  you  to  say  about  it  ? ” He  answered  “ Everywhere  the  names
of  your  soldiers  are  of  this  kind.®  1 find  they  are  all  Yar  ‘Ali
(Friend  of  ‘Ali),  or  Kafsh  ‘Ali  (Shoe  of  ‘Ali),  or  Haidar  ‘Ali  (Lion
of  ‘Ali),  and  I have  not  found  a single  man  bearing  the  name  of
any  other  Companion.”  Humayuu  was  indignant  at  this,  and
dashing  his  drawing  pencil^  upon  the  ground  in  anger,  said  ‘’The

I 'I'he  value  of  * being  5 and  of  J being  0,  the  word  is  equivalent
to  eleven  ; Two  Alifs  placed  side  by  side  (II)  also  stand  for  eleven,
i MS.  (B)  oinita  tbe  sentence  in  square  br.ickets.
i MS.  (A)  omits  and  reads  ^ AIS.  (B)  omits

lidjizl.  This  term  was  originally  applied  to  the  y:irHhs  wiio
joined  Zaid  ibu  ‘Ali  but  foi^ook  him  upon  iiis  refusing  to  curse  Abu  Bakr  and
‘Crnar,  the  first  two  Sunni  ^alifuhs  : but  it  came  ufcerwaids  to  denote  any  sect
of  Shi’aha.  MS.  (B)  alone  reads  Text  and  MS,  (A)  have

® MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  omitting

Qaliim-i-t(ifirir.  Text  and  MS.  (A)  MS.  (Bj  has
writing,  instead  of  Nuir//  (dianingj,  so  aisu  a footnote  vaiiant.

r G05  ]

name  of  my  gi-andfatlier  himself  was  /Umai'  ShaiUi*  and  I know
no  moie  than  this,”  tlien  he  rose  and  went  into  the  haram  and
returning,  with  great  gentleness  and  kindliness  informed  the
Sliaikh  of  the  purity  of  his  faith  *

Verse.

Preserve  a live!}'  faith  so  that  thy  reliance  thereon  may  not
falter,

Nothing  of  a surety  delivers  the  servant  from  the  wrath  of
God  save  a lively  faith.

And  in  oi  der  to  recount  the  many  virtues  of  that  monarch  who
has  obtained  pardon  and  remission,  may  his  resting-place  he  happy,
a sep.'irate  record  would  be  nece.ssaiy.  Countless®  poets,  the
wonder  of  the  age,  sprung  from  under  the  skiit  of  his  auspicious
reign.*  Among  these,  in  Badakh.shan  was  Maulana  Junutii®  469.
Badakhshi  the  enigmatist,  who  composed  a gasidah  made  up  of
thirt\ -eight  couplets  in  honour  of  that®  monarch,  whose  refuge  is
the  pardon  of  God,  during  the  time  that  he  was  a Mirza ; and
certain  tours  de  force  which  had  escaped  the  net  of  the  gasidah
which  Jlir  Saiyj  id  Zu-l-ti<iar  ^irwanl  composed  in  honour  of
Khwaja  Ra.shid  Vaztr,  and  the  gasidah  of  Salman  Sawaji  which
he  wrote  in  honour  of  Khwaja  Ghias  Vazir,  this  poet  ^ seized,  for
example  the  mu'ammd,^  and  Jzhar-i-niiizmar,^  and  the  t&rikhd^
and  other  (tricks ) of  this  kind,  and  in  very  truth  that  work  of
art  is  a veritable  kdmama  (record  of  deeds),  a mii’acle  in  the
world  of  speech.  The  following  are  the  opening  couplet  and
another,  taken  fr-om  it ;

1 ’Umar  Shaikh  Miizo,  second  son  of  Tniiur,  whs  the  father  of  Bfibar.  Seo
Aht-t-Akhaii  (Bj  J.  21)9,

^ MS.  (A)  rends  ^ ^ j

So  also  MS.  (B)  except  tlj«t  1)  is  omitted.

3 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  * MS.  (A)  j}  Jt.

^ Text  reads  Jiiiutbif  but  MS.  (A)  reads  JunKni.

® MS.  (BJ  omits  c^T-  ^ MS.  (B)  oniits  jK

S Um  Mu'ammd,  Enigma.  A saying  of  whicli  the  meaning  is  hidden.  See
Giirciu  de  Tassy,  Rhetorique  et  Protkodie,  p.  165.

^ See  Grarcin  de  Tassy,  op.  cit.,  p.  191.

^dr/kk,  chroiiogntm.  Several  examples  have  been  given,  page

bOl,  n.  8.

[ 606  ]

Verge  }

Shalianshalia  rukji-i-lti  lala  o nasrin  lab-i-tu  jan
Hami  binain  iab-i-tu  gAuiicii-2-i-Tang/‘i,  ^ada  Idjandan
Nami  giiyam  khatt-i-tii  acibza  o laihd",  ]^ad-i-tu  gul
Shavad  z&hir-  qadd-i-tu  titna-l-cc^u i dam-i-jaulan.

And  by  taking  all  the  veisesof  tliis  after  the  manner

of  an  acrostic,®  the  following  opening  couplet  Is  formed: — ^

Shahanshah-i-din  padishah-i-zaman
Zi  bakht-i-Humayiin  ^uda  kamran.

While  again,  if  the  ha^w*  of  the  two  first  couplets  are  written
in  red  ink,  the  following  opening  couplet  results,  which  may  be
read  in  three  different  meties.^

I MS.  (A)  ISAi-fli  qasida.

The  following  ia  the  tranahtion  of  these  lines  which  are  given  in  the
original  in  the  text,  aa  the  whole  sense  of  tlie  passage  following  turns  upon
the  form  and  not  upon  the  me.aning  of  the  couplets.

King  of  kings,  thy  cheek  is  the  tulip  and  jasmine,  thy  lip  is  the  life.

As  I look,  thy  lip  like  the  bud  in  its  redness,  expands  in  a smile
I say  not,  thy  bloom  ia  the  verdure  and  perfnme.  thy  cheek  is  the  rose
Life  itself,  from  thy  figure  entrancing,  appears  in  tliy  gait.

Tuuihlh.  The  initial  letters  of  each  verse  when  taken  together
from  the  couplet  given.  Thus  in  the  four  lines  given  the  initial  letters  are

si  h ID  n (ji  sh  forming  Shahansh.  See  Garcinde  Tassy,  op.  cit.,  p.  164.

» The  couplet  when  translated,  reads:

Emperor  of  the  faith,  Padishah  of  the  age,

From  thy  good  fortune  thou  hast  become  prosperous.

The  play  on  the  words  Humayfin  and  Kamran  will  be  observed.

* The  first  foot  of  the  first  mifid'  (hemistich)  is  called  mdi-,  while  the  last
foot  of  the  same  hemistich  is  called  'uruz ; similarly  the  first  foot  of  the
second  hemistich  is  called  ihtidd,  while  the  last  foot  of  this  hemistich  is  called
zarb.  Ail  the  feet  intervening  between  the  fadr  and  the  ‘un'/z,  or  between  the
ibtidd  and  zarb,  are  called  haphw  which  means  literally  the  stuffing  of  a pil'.ow
iAgm-i-hdJilh).  In  the  above  the  Aashic  of  the  verses  is  printed  in  red  ink.
The  scansion  is  as  follows  ; —

Shahanshaha  rukh-i-tu  la  la-o-nasrin  labitu  jan

Mafa'i  lun  Jlafa'i  lun  Jlufa  i lun  MafiiT  lun

The  metre  is  thus  HazaJ  t-Musnrnman.

6 The  three  metres  in  which  these  lines  may  be  read  are —

(i)  Hazaj-i-mns.iaiuian.  ree  note  4 above.

[ 607  ]

Rnidi-i-tu  lala  o iiasrin  khatt-i-tu  sabza  o raihan
Lab-i-tii  ghanelia-i-raiigin  qadd-i-fcu  fitiia-i-daui  an.^

And  if  they  be  read  in  reveised  older  a conplet  is  formed  wbich
may  also  be  referred  to  tliree  several  metres,*  and  with  a change
of  qafiyah  ® and  radif^  in  the  following  manner  . ^ —

Khatt-i-tu  sabza  o raihan,  rukh-i-ta  lala  o nasriii
Qadd-i-tu  fitna-i-dauran,°  lab-i-tn  ghancha-i-rangin-

And  from  that  wliich  remains  in  black  letters,  a distinct  open-
ing couplet  remained^  Other  tours  de  force  also  existed  in  this
opening  couplet,  which  are  explained  in  the  aatirginal  notes  to  the

work.

(li)  Ramal-i-musamman  makhbun.

and  the  sennsiou  is  :

Ij

(iii)  Mujtas-i-

•musamman  makhbun

: and  the  scansion  is  ;

See  Elements  of  Arabic  and  Persian  Prosody  (Banking)  pp,  49,  67,  90.

1 MS.  (B)  reads  in  place  of  cbjA  so  also  footnote  variant.

* The  tliree  metres  aie  those  given  in  note  5,  on  the  preceding  page.

8 Qdjiyah,  This  signities  tlie  rhyme,  of  which  the  essential  letter  is

called  the  ran-!,  which  may  have  also  other  letters  preceding  it  and

four  following.

4 i-ftJJy  Uailf  is  the  name  given  to  a quiescent  alif  following  a fatha,  a wao
quiescent  following  a zamma  or  a ye  quiescent  following  a kasra,  in  other
words  it  is  one  of  the  letters  t,  J,  placed  as  a letter  of  prolongation
before  the  latvi.  It  is  more  accurately  called  Bit//.

Thus  in  the  lines  now  cited  the  Radif  is  the  letter  ye  in  the  words  rangm,
and  nas‘rin,  whereas  in  the  former  verses  the  radif  was  ahf  as  in  the  words
raiAdn  &nd  dauran.  MS.  (A)  omits  • See  also  Garcin  de  Tassy,  op.

cit , p.  370.

t MS.  (B)  omits  iiriU-

6 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  iilstdn.

" For  example,  we  can  read
Shalianshahu  lab-i-tu  jan
Kami  binam  ^nda  kliandnn,
Naml  sruyaiii  srul

Shavad  /aJiir  dinn-i-janbm

King  of  kings  thy  lip  is  life
As  1 look  it  wreathes  in  smiles ;
I say  not  thy  cheek’s  a rose
Blooming  as  thon  passest  by.

470.

r 608  ]

And  from  the  four*  couplets  of  a qasidah*  some  of  the  words  of
which  are  written  in  red  ink,  the  following  qitti'h^  containing  the
conquest  of  Badajdishan  may  be  obtained,  and  the  qita'h  also  has
a hidden  meaning,  the  explanation  of  which  is  obtained  from  cer-
tain verses  extracted  from  these  two  qasidahs.*

Qita^h.

Tu-i  Shah-i-Sbahnn-i-dauraii  ki  ^ud

Hainlsha  tura  kar  fatb  o zafar.

Girifti  Bndnkhshan  o tarikh  shnd.

Mnhiimmad  Humnyun  Shnh-i-hahr  o hurfi

Until  the  weak  body  of  the  beggar  became  the  dust  of  his
threshold.

Bis  1 icart  on  nccount  of  liis  sorrow  and  vexation,  fell  desolate.

The  life  of  this  helpless  one  left  Iiim  because  of  desire  for  the
beloved.

His  love  exceeded  all  bounds,  if  haply  at  that  time  that  king
might  summon  him.

’ MS,  f ^ ^l*^'

8 AaIsj  .jifiTh  Mn«t  C‘-Tir«in  not  lo«?  H»nn  two  ronp’rta  nor  more

thfin  a hnnHro'l  and  -♦■‘vpiif r.  T)-*'  fir-r  turn  hrmi^rirhe'?  need  not  rhyme,
hilt  the  second  hf'mistich  of  every  vor*e  iniHt  rhyme  with  the  final  hemistich
of  the  openins:  verse.

The  'jng/dah  In  this  form  of  pt>em  the  two  opening  hemistiches

must  rhvme.  It  mn«it  consist  in  Ppr<iian  of  not  less  than  twenty-five  conplets
and  not  more  than  a hundred  and  sierenty,  also  Garvin  de  Tsssr.

Rhefonqu^  Pr-’-sodic  for  an  explanation  of  these  and  other  terms,  and
Gladwin,

* The  readinsc  in  the  text  and  in  h<ith  MSS.  * A i t'B)  is  nnintellieible.  we
mngt  evidently  read  >5  for  The  footnote  to  the  text  merely

states  thot  the  readinsf  in  the  text  is  found  in  alt  three  MSS  , bnt  m.akes  no
attempt  to  evplain  the  tnie  readjn<r.

b ^ A-i  The'ie  words  eive  the  date  027.

The  translation  of  these  verses  is

Thou  art  king  of  the  kirs’**  of  th«  n^e.

Whose  continual  nhj«'''»  c 'n'pics'  '••ml  victory.

Then  did'st  seize  nadaWh-^'-n  ani  o*  ‘ tkh  was
JfHA.TnnnfTd  H’f'nd'.'ft*  o''  -*  •/  nud  J rnd.

^ MS.  ' A'  add"*  fftuzhin.

[ 009  J

Qu^u-ara.^

Tell  the  good  tidings  of  the  victory  of  the  king  of  my  faith.

And  if  my  life  should  obtain  a few  days  grace  from  that  exact-
ing creditor  * Death,  this  qaaldah,  together  with  all  the
and  such  useful  information  as  I have  written  down  lu  a separate
note-book  in  the  course  of  my  travel.s.  shall,  should  opportunity
offer,  be  incladed  among  the  contents  of  the  second  volume  of  the
Najatu-r-Sa^ld  ^ which  I am  anxiou.‘-ly  longing  io  complete,  471-
should  God,  who  facilitates  our  undertakicg.s,  so  will  it.

Another  poet  * is  \Vafa‘i,  by  wiiich  Jiallus  Shaikh  Zainu-d-
Din  Khafi  * is  commonly  known,  who  wa---  S-vlr-i-mtiatn jill  (Judge-
plenipotentiary)  ® during  the  reign  of  Babar  Padishah.  There

1 G'lfihjrdra.  Lit.,  earring.  The  first  line  of  a Qhnzal  or  qafida,

following  iramedintely  upon  another.

Head  il3.  (A)  ^ and  A

footnote  variant  reads.

* The  following  is  the  correct  reading.  Immediately  after  the  tju^vdra

.MS.  (A).  - (;  ->;V

8 ynjrlt  n There  is  a of  this  w tk  r.f  Bada'ir.i.

belonging  to  the  College  of  !'•  r:  William,  in  the  Lihrury  of  the  .Asiatic  Sociotr
E

of  Bengal,  No.  — . (See  J.  A.  S.  B.  .\xxviii.  n 1.36>.  The  tj'io  of  the  wor»:

2‘M  '

gires  the  tdrlkh  of  its  composition  on  the  second  and  last  page«.  The  secoTn:
daftar’'  here  mentioned  by  our  author  does  not  appear  ever  lo  have  bee*,
written,  though  from  his  statement  it  would  seem  he  had  Cvmmence.i  tb*,
work.

* MS,  (A)  reads  ^

8 One  Zainu-d-Din  Khafi,  was  a fatnong  gaini.  Bis  liff-  is  given  in  f)  e
i^adahutu^l-Vn^.  Calcutta  edition,  p.  569;  but  the  one  meant  in  this  p-i^^satTejs
the  Shaikh  Zain  who  read  the  l^uthch  in  Dihli  in  Babar’s  nan;*;  after  tbe
battle  of  Panipat.  see  Fin^itn,  Bo.  Text,  p.  351  and  Frskine.  Mern-  irs  .,f  Bab-r

p 3ns.

Kh^fi  nr  ^awap,  mean?  • roming  fixim  ^awaf  -Thi-j.:  ' • >‘rict  and

t‘'‘wn  in  Kn-ira.-in.  <jar  m.ap?  have  Khaff  or  PChat  dn-  See

‘ (B  I p 415  and  / --'n-v.  .>-•  f.  'vi?  a»  d - --*^0  "

6 ’H  d lastice  whose

power  iPp-  o-  to  have  be^-r  anlim  'cd.  h.s ‘Hl-ct  wan  necessary  tv

of  a r.-w  -it*:

[ 610  ]

is  h mosque  in  Agra  to  his  memory,!  and  a school  situated  on  the
other  side  of  the  river  Jamna.  He  was  the  possessor  of  excellen-
cies both  bodily  and  mental,  and  in  the  construction  of  enigmas
and  chionograms,  and  in  extempore  versification,  and  in  all  the
minutiffi  of  poetry  and  prose,  and  in  rhetoric,  he  was  unapproach-
able in  his  own  age.

They  say  that  in  the  very  first  assembly  in  which  he  made
homage  to  Babar  Pad.shah,  he  asked,  what  is  your  age  ? Without
premeditation  he  ansvrered,  Qahl  azin  oa  panj  sal  chil  sala  hudavi,
■ica  halan  chihal  sola  am,  vja  la^d  az  du  sdl-i-digar  cbihal  tamam
mi  Aavad?

It  should  moreover  be  known  that  (Babar  Padshah)  also  asked
(a  riddle)  of  the  author  of  this  Muntakhub  saying:  P7^  azin  ha
yah  sal  panjah  sala  buJam,  wa  halan  panjah  sala  am,  wa  La^d  azi)i
la  dah  sal  panjah  sala  mi  ^avam.^

It  is  well  known  that  one  day  Shaikh  Zain  went  to  vi.=it  the
brilliant  resting-place  of  Sultann-l-Mashaikh  iS'ixamu-d-Ilin
Anllya  may  God  sanctify  him,  and  having  heard  that  storv  of  the
Shai^  about  “ AZ  Eidayd  mushtarah  wa  tanha  khushturuh"^
repeated  this  qiffah  on  the  spot :

His  dvities  were  to  enquire  into  the  circumstances  of  persons  before  ^rant.s
were  ra.ide  to  tliem.  Under  his  orders  were  the  Uizi  and  tlie  .If?)  wd!  See
Ain-i-AUarl,  (B)  I.  268-270.

' MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  instead  of

(Text).

* That  is  to  say  “ Five  years  ago  I was  chil  ( ) years  of  age  and  now

I am  chihal  ( ) years  of  age,  and  two  years  hence  my  chiltal  (forty)

years  will  bp  complete.

(cfif)  stands  for  33  thus  ^ =3  (J  =30*

lipa.

(riii/iaf)  stands  for  38  thus  ^ ^ =5  {J  =30

while  chihal  is  the  Persian  for  forty,

MS.  (B)  completely  lose.s  the  point  by  reading  chil  thronghout.”

3 That  is,  A year  ago  I was  fifty  (panjah)  years  of  age,  now  T am  fifty-one
(panjah  with  the  addition  of  .\hf)  years  of  age,  ten  years  hence  I shall  be

(*^v)  panjah  rears  of  age.

4^'';  >'Pa?ijaH)  stands  for  60 . thus
=2  iz>  =50^  =.3  I =.5

Apparently  we  shoaM  rea(i  (Punjtih)  which  would  give  61.

* Ihis  refers  to  a visit  raid  by  Auj.r  Khusru  of  Dihli  to  Nizanm-d-DTu
AnHj'ii.  when  he  saw  a.notl\er  •j'isitc*  who  tiad  bront'ht  a present  for  Nizitmu-d-

[ 611  1
Qit‘ak.

Oil  our  Sliaikh  ! may  there  come  to  thee  from  God  gifts  with-
out ceasiug,

What  am  I that  I should  say  “ Al  Hida^n  mu^taxik  ’’

Thou  iia.y est  “ Tauha  khu^tarak"  as  thou  didst  say  before

Make  it  " Mu^taralc  if  thou  dost  uot  say'

“ TanJia  khu^tarak.”

Verse.

Grief  has  seized  me  by  the  sleeve,  why  should  T hide  my  head
in  my  sleeve  ?

Desire  has  grasped  my  skirt,  why  should  I withdraw  my  foot  472.
within  my  skirt  ?

Ah  ! my  sleeve  in  desire  for  thee  and  my  skirt  also  are  torn
to  rags,

Why  should  I hide  my  head  in  my  slee-ve  and  withdraw  my
foot  within  my  skirt  without  thee  ? *

He  wrote  a tdri'M  dealing  with  the  circumstaiiee.s  * of  the  con-
quest of  Hindustan,  and  explaining  its  wonders,  in  which  he  did
full  justice  to  the  claims  of  erudition.

His  death  occurred  near  Chinhar  in  the  year  940  H.  and  he
was  buried  within  the  precincts  of  a college  which  he  him.self  had
founded.

Another  (poet)  was  Maulana  JNadiri-i-Samarqandi,  wlio  was  ono
of  the  wonders  of  the  age,  of  excellent  qualities,  and  a compen-
dium of  ^lerfection.®  He  had  a strong  attachment  for  a beautiful
youth  named  Nizam,  and  the  following  well-known  .solution  of  an
enigmatical  meaniii^,  was  composed  for  him  -.

Verse,

I the  broken-hearted  tell  the  praises  of  Nizam  the  famous,

Din  Anliya.  Amir  Khusrii  exclaimed  ’•  Al  hrdiiija  muehtanik"  ■■  The  gifts  are
in  common  ; ” wherenpon  Nizamii-d-Din  Aiiliya  replied.

“ Al  hidayd  fnufhtarak  laktv  ^anlid  khushfarnk.''

“ The  gifts  are  trnlj  in  common,  bot  f should  be  better  pleased  to  eniov
them  alone.”

1 MS.  (AJ  transposes  the  last  two  lines.

> MS.  (A)  omits

■>  MS.  (A)  reads  See  .iin-i-Aibax,  (B)  I.  mb  r.

For  my  heart,  when  absent  from  him,  lies  disordered  i and
enfeebled.

Muba'i.

I am  grieved,  and  in  my  heart  on  thy  account  I hold  a
hundred  sorrows.

Without  the  rubies  of  thy  lips,  I am  matched  against  pain
hour  by  hour ;

I am  in  despair  for  this  life,  I the  poor,  the  dejected,

I hope  that  the  road  of  annihilation  may  become  my  refuge.

Gu^icara.

1 sing  the  praise  of  the  locks  of  my  beloved.

And  the  following  verses  are  part  of  the  frnit  of  his  fertile
genius.

Qhazal.^

How  wondrous  graceful  is  my  loved  one’s  form,

I yield  myself  a slave  to  that  figure  and  carriage  ;

My  loved  one  would  not  look  towards  me  with  compassion,
Perhaps  she  displayed  an  inclination  towards  strangers.
Nadiri ! go  towards  the  wineshop
And  pledge  thy  head  and  turban  for  wine.

Verse.

Though  I remained  my  whole  life-long  there  at  the  head  of
thy  street,

I swear  by  my  life,  that  I never  enjoyed  a moment’s  peace  ;
Wherever  I bowed  my  head  with  the  intention  of  obeisance
Thou  wert  there  the  Ka‘bah*  towards  which  I turned.

A whole  world  was  admitted  to  intimacy,  and  yet  1 remained
forlorn.

1 Nizdme,  lit.  a governor,  one  who  orders  and  directs.  The  play

npon  the  word  cannot  be  preserved.

S GJuizaL  The  g^azal  or  ode  must  consiat  of  at  least  five  couplets  but

must  not  exceed  fifteen.  Its  first  two  hemistiches  muit  rhyme.

a Sajdahf  commonly  pronounced  means  a prostration  in

which  the  forehead  touches  the  ground : as  a religious  observance  the  pros-
tration, is  on  seven  members  : on  the  forehead,  the  two  hands,  the  two  knees,
and  the  toes  of  both  the  feet ; women  must  touch  the  ground  with  the  elbows,
men  on  the  contrary  must  keep  the  elbows  up.  The  palms  of  the  hands

L 613  3

All  were  accepted  there  but  I was  rejected ;

Why  do  you  ask  Nadiri,  what  is  thy  condition  in  that  road,

At  one  time  I am  unhappy,  at  another  1 was  happy  ^ there.

He  also  wrote  this  Qastdah  in  honour  of  the  deceased
Emperor.

Qaftdih.

Thanks  he  to  God  that  with  a settled  mind

Intimate  * friends  sat  together  in  pleasure  ;

The  rose*garden  is  the  pleasure-resort  of  people,  for  there  in
the  presence  of  the  rose,  the  nightingale  sorrowful  at  the
absence  of  his  beloved  became  rejoiced  by  its  presence.

It  may  be  that  the  beloved  one  of  the  garden  had  been
stripped  naked  by  Autumn,

So  that  she  has  woven  a patchwork  garment  of  the  hundred
petals  of  the  rose.

The  rose  and  the  jasmine,  the  spikenard  and  the  basil  are  in
one  place,*

See  1 the  Emperor  of  Spring  has  come  with  his  retinue  and
troops.

The  birds  are  singing  the  praises  of  the  Emperor  of  heavenly
grandeur  *

On  the  branches  of  the  trees,  like  the  preachers  from  their
pulpits.

The  glorious  Khaqan,  the  Emperor  of  dignity  like  Jamgjiid,
Hnmayftn,

Who  has  a powerful  hand  and  a sturdy  heart  by  the  decree
of  the  Almighty

From  his  intelligence  springs  tue  wisdom  of  the  learned,

From  his  insight  arises  the  perception  of  the  men  of  acute
vision.

tnnst  be  placed  upon  the  ground,  with  the  fingers  in  the  direction  of  the
Qib'.ah,  which  wag  originally  Jerusalem,  but  was  afterwards  changed  to  tha
Ka'bab.  Migliiatu‘l-Mafibth,  Cap.  xv.  part  i.

See  Hughes’  Diet,  of  Islam,  art.  Ka‘heih.

1 MS.  (A)

* The  text  ..dda  c.?-.:.  mporary,  bat  MSS.  (A)  rea^

Intimate.

* MS.  (A)  reads  t Xext  MS.  (B)  reads

^ UU  j

iSlnee  prohibited  things  are  unlawful  by  the  statutes  of  religion.

lie  hastens  to  perform  the  deeds  for  which  there  is  divine
sanction.

474  There  have  gathered  together,  to  secure  the  victory  of  the

army  of  Islam.

The  unrivalled  warriors  of  his  army,  the  brave  men  of  his
troops.

Beneath  his  victorious  standard,  on  the  held  of  Fortune,

IMav  the  favour  of  the  Everlasting  he  his  protector  and  ally

Oh  thou  hy  the  generosity  of  whose  hand  all  tiimifs  have
their  being.'

Dv  the  sharpness  of  wlicse  sword  all  properties  both  acci-
dental and  essential*  ni,r:dii  permanence.

Ill  the  first  Jay  of  etern’ty,  the  object  of  creatioti  f a-  ti;e
Lord  uf  tise  world  was  the  e>  jlutiou  of  thy  form  from  liii.s
revolving  sphere,

Should  G.ihriel  a second  time  he  the  hearei.  or  revelation,

Pure  passages  * will  he  revealed  in  thy  glory.

Kvery  siifitilty  of  science  which  thy  rubj'  lip  pronounces

lla.s  bevT)ine  as  famous  in.  the  world  as  the  uninterrupted
Iraditioii.'*

It  is  well-known  that  this  is  a commentary  on  the  books  of
mathematical  science,  this  wonderful  composition  of  thine
on  the  dibcovei’y  of  circles.

Ho'.v  can  any  one  deny  the  vastness  of  thy  knowledge  ?

Eone  but  a stubborn  disputant®  will  deny  self-evident  truths.

1 q,v:iyi  is  the  stay  or  support  of  any  thing,  that  in  virtue  of  which

It  subsists.

% A‘rd:  c 2y  'A/'azun,  is  meant  in  t!ie

ooiiventic'iial  language  of  iluslim  theologian.s,  a thing  that  is  not  permanent,
an  accident,'’  as  opposed  to  yi  i'-  iriin,  “ an  essential,”  see  Lane.  s.  v.

Asohi^shJJ,  t.  t.  uit*  ami
3 MS.  (A)  reads  preiorubly  oof  for  ob|.

* These  two  lines  eoinmencing  occur  in  IIS.  (AJ  before

the  line  commencing  Jj!  jA  as  well  as  in  this  place.

6 Founoed  tm  certainty,  eoaivaient  to

J-

’iiukitt,.  One  who  conteutiously  upholds  a niopositiu"  which

knows  to  be  false.

L ]

I cannot  estimate  thy  perfections,  for  in  every  art  thou  hast
become  perfectly  skilled  ;

When  compared  with  thy  philosophic  intellect  and  good  for-
tune, the  angelic  essence  becomes  as  one  of  the  common
material  ^ objects.

Thy  generosity  is  of  such  a nature  that  at  the  moment  of  475.
bestowing

Thon  knowest  without  asking  all  the  hidden  desires  of  the
mind.

This  enigma  upon  the  name  of  Kibar  * is  also  by  him  :

Verse.

That  face  ® is  the  Qur'an,  and  that  down  on  the  cheek  is  the
sign  of  tyranny  and  oppression  ;

The  cheek  of  that  heart-ravishing  one  has  no  endowment  of
the  mole  of  fidelity.^  '

1 Read  for  MS.  (A).

* MS.  (A)  reads  ^ MS.  (B)  reads

5 The  text  reads  with  a footnote  saying  that  all  three  MSS.  are

the  same.  MS.  (B)  rtads

* The  text  reads  MS,  (Bj  reads

6 The  verse  in  the  original  runs  thas  :

diugjiof  (3sr  dnrii  tea  an  i jaur  o jafd

‘Ariz  i dn  dil’Sitdn  hi  hahra  az  ^dl  i ivnfu  $t

The  word  Tflushaf  here  hag  two  meanings,  (1)  a collection  of  pages

nihufj  written  upon,  and  placed  between  two  boards,  hence  a copy  of
the  Qur’an,  (2)  affected  by  tashlf,  which  is  a technical  expres.sion  for  so  alter-
ing a word  by  changing  diacritical  points  and  altering  the  ox  der  of  its  com-
ponent letters,  that  it  acquires  a different  signiScation.

In  accordance  with  this  second  meaning,  in  the  word  ■>y  f the  letter  j
u'uo  is  first  dropped  leaving^f  dnr  then  J r is  changed  into  v ^ giving__;jT
dhr,  by  transposing  these  letters  we  get  oir.

The  word  has  also  two  meanings.  (1;  do-wn  on  the  theek,  (2)  a

letter  or  character.  Hence  we  may  translate  “ that  letter  is  the  sign  of  tyranny
and  oppression. ” Now  kaftan^  cutting  or  cleaving,  if  such  a sign,

and  may  be  represented  by  its  root,  kdf,  which  is  the  Ir-tter  of  the

alphabet  leqnired,  and  when  prefixed  to  the  syllable  hdr  above  found
gives  th&  word  kibar,  thus  completing  the  mu^ammd  or  enisi’raa.

I 61G  ]

The  death  of  the  aforesaid  Maulana  took  place  in  the  year
966  H.  and  Mir  Amani  Kabnli  wrote  the  followino’  t'h  i of  the
event.

Verte.

Alas  ! the  pity  of  it,  that  the  discemer  of  subtiltiea  Nadiri
has  departed.

That  rare  poet  ^ who  did  full  justice  to  eloquence  in  the  world  ;

I soug^ht  to  express  the  date  of  his  death  by  way  of  enigma,

Wisdom  answered  one  has  gone  from  among  the  masters  of
speech}

Another  is  Shaikh  Abul  Wahid*  Farighi,  who  was  deeply
imbued  with  the  feelings  of  a darve^  and  was  ® renowned  for  his
sweet  singing  ; the  following  is  taken  from  his  poems  :

Vers'.

So  great  is  the  habitual  oppression  of  that  seeker  after  tyranny

That  a morsel  of  mercy  from  him,  seems  a great  beauty.

And  in  his  impassioned  style  he  says  :

Verse.

Praise  be  to  God  that  I am  freed  from  the  love  of  an  ill-
conditioned  sot,

Who  used  to  fall,  as  did  his  eyes,  from  drunkenness  in  every
road,

Who,  like  the  cup,  for  the  sake  of  a draught,  was  lip  to  lip
with  every  man.

Who  like  the  flagon  beqt  himself  to  every  cup  in  every  place.

1 MS.  (A)  reads  ji.

* ^ This  we  may  read  An,  Kadiri  ki.  That  Nidiri  who  ; or,

An  Kddire  ki.

i ly'jy  Haft  yake  nz  s>/kAun  u'ardn.  If  from

su^un  v:ardn  th'j  vaiae  of  which  ia  967,  we  remove  that  ia  one.  we  have
left  966.

* Footnote  to  text  says  that  the  Hafd'isu-l-Maafir  reads  Abul  Wljid

MS.  (B)  reods  iVa^d.

t MSS  (A)  iP)  omit  ^ attoi  and  insert  it  after

476

[ • 617  1

The  following  is  also  by  him.

Verse.

At  that  time  when  my  heart  was  blest  with  thy  companion-
ship,

It  did  not  seem  that  such  a blessing  could  be  expressed  ;

In  short,  the  whole  of  my  life's  reckoning  had  passed  in
separation  from  thee,

Who  can  count  the  joy  of  meeting ! what  a store  of  happiness
it  was  !

Strangers  last  night  were  near  you,  while  Farighi  at  an
immense  distance  was  burning  like  rue  * upon  the  fire  of
disappointment.

This  is  also  his  :

Vene.

Oh  my  intimate  companions  do  not  break  the  bond  of  union

In  dispersion  is  distraction,  do  not  break  it  and  depart.

And  again  he  writes  :

IVrse.

When  thou  drawest  out  thine  arrow  from  my  breast  lea-c-o  its
point  there,

Grant  me  my  heart  to  yield  my  life  in  thy  service  manfully.

His  death  occurred  in  the  year  940  H , and  he  was  buried  in
the  monastery  * of  Shaikh  Zainu-d-Din  ® at  Agra,  and  in  conse-
quence of  the  extremity  of  their  unanimity  and  concord  both
left  the  world  in  the  same  year.  It  is  said  tliat  at  the  time  when
these  two  eminent  men  went  to  Hindustan,  owing  to  their
exces.sive  profligacy  they  possessed  nothing  but  an  old  po<tln  *
between  them.  ShailA  Zainu-d-Dln  ° said  to  Shaikh  Ahul-
Wajd,®  “ I will  take  this  to  the  bazar  of  Kabul  upon  the  condition
that  you  won’t  come  and  indulge  in  anj'  pleasantries.”  lie  agreed,
and  a purchaser  having  run  it  up  to  a most  extravagant  figure

1 Siparid.  Rue  is  said  in  the  GVami-l-liiahdt  to  be  bamed  to  avert
the  evil  eye.  Rue  was  called  “ herb  of  grace  ” from  its  supposed  efficacy  in
exorcism.

2 Omit  118S.  (A)  (B)

‘ MS.  (A).

78

8 MS.  lA).  * A.  sheepskin  coat.
" MS.  (B).  MS.  (A)  reads

[ 6J8  3

was  ready  to  give  five  shahrukhis  • but  Shaikh  Zain  kept  demand-
ing more.  At  last  Shaikh  Abul-Wajd  came  up  in  a disinterested
way  and  was  acting  as  broker,  after  a deal  of  haggling  he  said,
477.  Ah  ! you  cheat ! why  this  door  mat  * itself  contains  ^ five
^ahrukhts  worth  of  fleas  and  lice  ” ! so  the  bargain  was  at  an  end,
and  ShaiUi  Zain  was  annoyed  and  said,  “ What  sort  of  time  was
this  for  the  stupid  jokes  yon  are  so  fond  of  ? We  wanted  the  price
of  a loaf,  and  this  is  the  way  you’re  going  to  pay  for  ‘ it  ” ! Shaikh
Abul-Wajd  fell  into  a fit  of  laughter.

Another  is  Jahi  Tatman,^  who  was  from  Bukhara,  and  having
acquired  a reputation  on  this  account  in  Kabul,  offered  his  services
at  the  time  when  the  late  Emperor  proceeded  towards  Hindustan  ®
obtained  great  favours  from  Humaynn,  and  rose  to  a confidential
position,  and  at  the  time  when  Shah  Muljamraad  Kb  an  Salfit
was  left  in  Kabul  as  revenue  commissioner,*  he  treated  ® the
Mnlla  just  like  the  rest  of  the  people,  and  caused  him  serious
annoyance.  The  Mulla  accordingly  composed  an  elegant  iarkib

J The  Shahruyil  was  a coin  eqoivalent  to  16  dams,  or  to  a rupee.  They
were  so  called  because  they  were  first  coined  by  Shah  Eukh  the  MnghnI
Sultan  of  Persia,  A.  H 807-850,  Thomas,  Pathan  kings,  p.  383.  The  purchaser
was  thus  willing  to  give  about  two  rupees  for  the  postin.  The  postln  is  a
jacket  made  of  dressed  sheepskin  dyed  a yellow  colour  and  more  or  less
handsomely  embroidered  in  yellow  silk.  It  is  worn  like  Brian  O’Linn’s
breeches  “ with  the  fleshy  side  out  and  the  woolly  side  in.”  They  cost  about
thirty  or  forty  rupees,  according  to  their  embroidery.

* Text  reads  Bat'd.  In  the  text  this  word  is  followed  by  a (?)

MS  (A)  has  what  may  be  hixj  patal,  in  which  case  the  meaning  would  be
” a mat,”  and  this  in  consideration  of  the  matted  condition  of  a filthy  postin
seems  the  true  reading.

s iis.  (B)  omits  4 MSS.  (A)  (B)  vi— f UA

6 MS.  reads  J ^oa  dtgare  Hdml  Tambdn.  MS.  (B)

reads  Jahi-i-yattnlndii,  A footnote  to  the  text  girea

and  says  that  writes  “Jahl  Yatmiyan  was  from  Boldiara,

his  father  Vatmiyan  was  a nativ^e  of  that  plaee,  for  which  reason  he  was
commonly  known  by  this  name.”

* M3.  (A)  reads  Sind,

1 MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  Sdlit.  The  text  reads  Shabpur,  bat  in  a

footnote  gives

^ ha-jihat-i-sazaicaU.

SMS.  (B)  reads  for

[ 619  ]

band  Inmpooning  Salu,*  and  inasmuch  as  the  Emperor  had  the
daughter  ot  ^ah  Muhammad  Salu  * in  his  service,  he  made  an
exception  = in  his  favour  alone,  and  erased  the  names  of  all  the
members  of  his  family,  male  and  female,  consigning  them  to
ignomitiv.  Inasmuch  as  Humayun  was  also  incensed  against
that  ass  * v iio  had  been  the  source  of  all  this  mischief,  he  had  that
lampoon  re  id  ^ in  Salu’s  presence  by  the  Mulla  in  full  assembly,
and  evinced  the  greatest  delight  and  merriment,  and  made  him
give  a laige  sum  as  a reward.  By  degrees  tliat  lampoon  became
more  and  more  disgracefully  scurrilous,  accordingly  I have
restricted  rovself  to  citing  one  extract  from  it  in  this  place,  which
is  as  folhr.vs  ; —

“ I am  the  poet  of  ^hah  Humayun  and  the  dust  of  his  thres-
hold.

The  lerinae  of  my  poetic  worth  casts  the  moon’s  brightness
into  shade.

My  poem  is  the  Emperor,  and  my  noble  verses  are  his  cavalry
and  soldiery,

I e.xperien.ced  oppression  from  a fool,®  without  any  fault  or
crime  of  mine.

If  a fragment  of  paper  has  become  blackened  by  my  ravings,

It  my  melirations  turn  towards'^  satirizing  him,

The  object  is  that  that  these  idiotic  asses

May  lio.ve  a regard  for  the  honour  and  dignity  of  this  class.

Alas,  for  that  mau  who  eouteuds  with  the  tribe  of  poets,

M'hoc\er  contends  with  me  contends  against  calamity.”

The  Emperor  interfered  at  this  verse  saying,  ’*  Why  do  you
not  word  it  thus  :

“ Whoever  contends  with  me  contends  with  God  ”

The  following  verses  are  also  by  him  : —

1 MSS.  (A)  (6).  » MSS.  (A)(B).

8 MSS.  f.t)  (B)  AiAU

* The  Text  reads  iOiar  bai  M,S.  (A),  reads  ^'(sar,  father-in-

law.

6 MSS.  (A)(B;  iso^i

« MSS.  (A)  rs)  read  ic-khtra-i^'  The  text  reads  ./oAiia-

zone.  Whoremast-ei .

1 Text  ^ Ttith  a footnote

478.

[ 620  ]

Verse.

As  long  as  we  have  existed  we  have  been  lovers  and  havf
incntred  ignominy,

Yet  we  have  been  constant  to  the  true  proportions  of  lovers.
This  is  also  his  ; —

Verse.

Ye,  beauteous  ones,  are  all  devoid  of  love  and  faithfulness,

Ye  treat  your  captives  with  tyranny  and  oppression,

Ye  promised  to  be  faithful,  but  have  vowed  falsely,

Say  truly,  why  are  ye  all  thus  false  ?

Not  in  this  city  alone  are  we  disgraced  on  your  account.

479-  Everywhere  ye  are  the  cause  of  our  disgrace,

How  often  will  ye  ask  what  is  your  object  in  the  world  ?

I say  truly  that  ye  are,  ye  are,  ye  are.

Jalii  cannot  save  his  life  from  your  hands

For  ye  are  a calamiiy  of  the  calamities  sent  by  God.

The  following  is  also  by  him  :

Verse.

Last  night  the  moon  of  the  .‘Id  appeared  in  the  form  of  a
misqal  *

Because  from  the  vapoui-s  of  fasting  the  min’or  of  the  heart
was  clouded.

Was  this  the  new  moon  ? or  by  reason  of  the  leanness  of
their  bodies.

Hid  the  bone  of  the  rib  of  the  thirsty-lipped  fast-enduring
ones  appear  ?

Or  was  it  that  they  had  fashioned  a saddle  * for  the  camel  of
Laili  ?

Or  was  it  the  bowed  body  of  Majnun  who  had  become  pale
and  wan  through  grief  ?

The  very  heaven  wishes  to  enrol  itself  among  thy  servants,

1 nusqal  or  misqalat,  called  also  Marazat,  is  a shell  used

for  polishing  swords,  mirrors,  Ac.,  Tdju-l-\irus.

MS.  f-B)  roads  mu$aqqal  which  suits  neither  metre  nor  eanse.

* MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  A footnote  rariant  to  the  ter*

is

[ 621  •]

And  for  that  reason  has  bent  the  bow  in  order  to  string  it.-
Moreover  thy  messenger  has  bound  on  his  bells,  * and  has
placed  the  feather  of  distinction  on  his  head,

He  is  going  from  Rum  to  bear  tidings  from  Zanzibar.

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  verse  * Khwesh  ra  dar  silk-i-
khuddaitii  tu  mikhwaJiad  falak.  (The  very  heaven  wishes  to  enrol
itself  among  your  servants)  he  has  taken  from  a couplet  of  the
qasidiih  of  Nizam  Astarabadi,  which  runs  thus, —

Shah  nujum  az  majma^-i-mardum  tiishan  dwarda  and
Waz  mah  i nau  tdza  harfe  darmiyan  awarda  and
At  night  the  stars  liave  appeared  like  an  assembly  of  men
And  have  brought  into  their  midst  a new  idea  in  the  shape  of
the  new  moon  ;

The  Shah  of  Zangbar  has  taken  his  seat  upon  the  throne  of  480.
Empire

And  the  stars  have  brought  the  bow  as  an  offering  to  him.

The  down  which  encircles  thy  cheek  is  the  cause  of  my  dis-
traction.

Thy  locks  are  the  cause  of  my  helplessness  and  distress,

That  dusky  ringlet  is  bent  upon  my  undoing,

All  these  charms  are  the  cause  of  my  distraction.

The  following  is  also  his  :

Come,  for  the  sky  has  prepared  for  your  pastime  *

The  sun  as  the  golden  gourd;  and  the  crescent-moon  as  the
hook.^

l (Text).  MS.  (A)  reads  MS.  (B)  reads

i ai—j  Basta  zang.  The  dak-runners  in  the  East  carry  a cluster  of
globular  bells  called  Zang  or  rang,  tied  to  one  end  of  the  staff  carried  over
their  shoulders,  to  the  other  end  of  which  the  mail-bag  is  attached,  as  a signal
to  clear  the  way.  Zang-bastan  has  the  secondary  meanincr  of  ncqoiring
importance.  MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  '-^j-

S MS.  (A)  reads  ^ ])  tiTib

* isjh  (3^  qabaq  bazl.  Qabaq  signifies  in  Turki  a gourd  ; in  ancient  times
the  Turkomans  used  to  hang  np  a wooden  gourd  as  a mark  for  archery,  but
in  later  times  a bowl  was  substituted  for  the  goard.

liajak.  The  name  given  to  the  hook  upon  which  the  bowl  is  sus-
pended in  the  game  of  qaliaq  andazi.

t 622  ]

Baii'&m  Khan  has  a well-known  qasidah  with  this  same  rhyme,
but  in  a dift'ei’eut  metre,  of  which  the  following  is  the  opening
couplet : —

Verse.

Thy  shaft  has  carried  away  the  loop  of  the  q.ibaq  ‘ from  its
hook,

Thy  meteor,  by  the  help  of  the  crescent-moon  has  erased  the
form  of  the  Pleiades.

These  two  opening  couplets  are  derived  from  the  opening  couplet
of  a qasidah  by  the  celebrated  Nisaii  Tuni.  The  death  of  Mulla
Jahi  took  place  in  the  year  956  H.  and  was  due  to  some  poison
which  a servant  introduced  into  his  cup.

Another  poet  is  Haidar  Tunia’i,  a man  of  parts  and  unequalled
in  the  technicalities  of  harmony,  he  had  a compeiout  faculty  for
both  poetry  and  music.  He  spent  the  greater  part  of  his  life  in
Hindustan.  The  lampoon  upon  the  Mallku-l-munajjimin  * of  the
481.  time  of  Humayun  Padshah,  which  he  wrote  at  Panjgah,  is  one  of
the  marvels  of  the  age,  and  a rarity  for  all  time.

The  following  opening  couplet  which  he  wi'ote  for  his  threnody
on  the  death  of  the  saintly  martyred  Imam,*  accepted  of  God,
murdered  by  man,  offspring  of  the  Prophet,  by  descent  from  the
pure*  Patimah,  upon  them  bo  peace, is  read  during  the  ‘Ashiird  in
the  assemblies  for  the  commemoration  of  the  death  of  Husain.*

1 The  text  reads  kabak  and  a footnote  states  that  all  three  MSS.  have

the  word  written  with  kaf-i-kalimau  ( i-i  ).  MS  (A)  however  has

yabaq.  The  crescent  moon  is  compared  to  an  erasing-knife

* Prince  of  Astrologers.

5 Hnsain,  the  second  son  of  ‘AIT  by  his  wife  Fatimah,  daeghter  of  Mnham
mad,  was  slain  at  Karball,  A.  H.  61.  See  Hnghes’  Diet,  of  Itldin.

* AUBatid.  The  word  hatil  literally  means  an  offset  of  a palm-tree,
.cut  froifl  the  parent  tree  and  independent  of  it.  With  the  article  Jl  at,  in
its  application  to  Fatimah,  it  denotes  her  distinction  from  other  women  on  the
ground  of  chastity,  excellence  and  religion.  See  Lane  s.  v

6 (.ILJl  ‘alaihimas-saldin.  MS.  (A)  The  text  reads  (*^^1

with  a footnote  variant  *ip  APl  and  stating  that  the  exprestion  in  the

text  is  not  found  either  in  the  dual  or  plural  in  any  MS.  Clearly  the  editor
had  not  MS.  (A)  before  him.

a ,n'au)  ik  lit,,  battle  fields.

[ 623  ]

Verse.

The  month  of  Muharram  has  come  and  our  eyes  are  constrained
to  weep,

We  let  fall  tears  of  blood  at  the  thought  of  Husain’s  parched
lips.i

Ruba^i.

Thou  art  he  whom  in  envy  they  call  the  sun  and  moon,

Thy  troops,  both  hoMe  and  foot,  they  call  the  moonfaoed  ones.

Thou  art  worthy  of  this,  with  this  grace  and  beauty  of  thine.

That  all  the  kings  of  the  age  should  call  thee  sovereign  lord.

The  following  •is  also  b^  him

My  heart  thou  hast  no  friend  to  compare  with  sorrow  for  him,

Thou  hast  no  comfort  in  life  like  sympathy  for  him.

And  this : —

Every  moment  my  heart’s  desii-e  has  some  fresh  allurement.

To  bear  her  coquetry  costs  my  life,  what  of  that  ? it  is  her
life.

How  can  I liken  the  lips  of  my  love  to  the  bud  of  the  rose.

The  bud  is  tightly  pursed,  it  is  true,  but  is  dumb  and  silent.

The  son  of  this  man  Haidar  Tuni  was  an  arrant  coward  and
spiritless  ; * accordingly  in  the  months®  of  the  year  985  H.  he  had  482.
entered  the  service  of  Humayuii ; one  day  he  was  describing  the
circumstances  of  a journey  by  boat  and  its  terrors,  in  such  a way
that  the  effects  of  fear  were  evident  from  his  behaviour.*  I asked
saying.  May  be  you  regret  having  gone  on  the  Hajj  ? * and  I
repeated  as  appropriate  to  the  occasion  that  verse  which  his  rivals
said  to  the  poet  Qudsi.®

i The  pathetic  story  of  the  death  of  Hnsain  .slain  in  his  attempts  to  quench
his  thirst,  forms  the  theme  of  the  annual  ceremonies  of  the  Mnharram,  See
Hnghes’  Diet  of  Islam,  artt.  Mnharram,  and  Al-Husain,  where  a full  account
of  Husain’s  death  is  given.

5 MS.  (A)  reads  MS.  (A)  (B)  omit

8 MS.  (A)  omits

♦ Text  MS.  (A;  MS.  (B)

6 Hajj  or  greater  pilp^rimage.

* Mir  Hnaain  Qudsi  of  Karbala,  see  Ain’t-AIcbfin  (B)  I.  602.

[ 62-1  ]

Verse.

From  the  hardships  of  the  desert  path,  and  its  thorns,  ^

Of  the  coming  to  the  Kabbah  you.  are  probably  repentant.

He  replied  instantly,  “ Yea  I verily.”  The  king  said,  why  should
he  repent  of  having  visited  the  Ka'bah,  though  he  may  indeed
repent  of  sitting  in  a ship.  At  that  same  moment  Mathin  s Khan,
the  elegant  and  accomplished  mime,  in  accordance  with  a hint  from
the  kinsr,  made  himself  up  ® to  represent  a mad  man  bitten  by  a
dos,  and  began  to  bark  like  a dog,  and  seized  Haidar,  ' and  dragged
him  forward  with  his  turban  flying  one  way  and  his  shoes  another.
He  began  running  in  all  directions,  t till  at  last  he  rolled  on  the
ground,  and  set  them  all  laughing  immoderately.  When  he
learned  the  truth  he  was  desperately  ashamed.  The  king  at-
tempted to  console  him,  but  it  ended  bj-  his  being  obliged  to  leave
Hindustan.  Another  is  Shah  Tahir  IHiwandi  Dakkani,  the
younger  brother  of  Shah  Ja‘far;  the  ‘Uhima  of  ‘Iraq,  however
ridicule  his  pretensions  to  descent  from  Khwandi  stock,  and  have
prepared  a document  bearing  upon  this  question,  to  which  both
his  oppoi>ents  and  supporters  subscribed  tlioir  signatures,  ^ as  is
mentioned  in  the  Kamilu-t-tawankh  of  Ibn  Asiv  Jnz'iri,  ’ and  also
in  the  Luhhu-f-taicdrikh^  of  Qazi  Yahva  Qazwiui.  and  other  works.
He  claimed  to  be  intimately  connected  with  Shah  Tahmasp,  but

1 ^ar-i.mughn\ldn.  See  ante,  p SIO  n.  1.

s MSS,  (.K)  (B)  ® MS.  (B)  rends

* MS.  (A)  reads  Ij  U.’^t  6 MS  omirs

S MS.  (Aj  reads  Khondi  Tahir  .Jimai.'t,  „ Rcale  Uft.  O, .

Bioj  , p.  2.50.  Bee  also  Briggs  Firithfa,  vol.  iii.  reign  of  Bnil.au  .N'i/itn
' MSS.  (A)  (B)  Aicljj  liA.  The  text  reads  ilyi  MS.  (B  riads  HiA..

9 The  autlior  of  this  celebr.ited  history  which  is  also  cnlii  d .!  A'
tiilkh  'the  perfect  hiscoryj  or  more  con.niouly  A'-K."hi’,  was  .:iLi’sh  Aljii-l-
Hasan  ‘All  ibn  Abi-l-Karan  Mnliaranaol  itm  Muh.unn.ad  ibn  Abdu-l-Kari.n
ibn  ’Abdu-l- Wahid  a-!i-SlmiTiaid  commonly  known  as  Ibna-bA-ir.

He  is  called  Al-Jacari  (the  islander,  if  in  his  biiih-pl  ice  tiie  islind  of  Ilia
‘Umar.  Jazirat  ibn  ‘Umar,  an  island  of  ihc  T'lgris  above  Mosul  He  was  born
65.5  H.  illdO  A U.)  and  d'ed  630  It.  (tz.J2  A D.,i.  See  E!hot  and  Iluw.suti,  II.
244,  and  Haji  Khalifah,  9733.

Ijiibhu't-Taii  ^1  f ilarroiv  of  History].  The  author  of  this
work  was  Yahya  ibn  ‘Abdu-l-Uat if  Q izwini  f Dimishqi)  who  died  LMiO  A.H.
'1552  A.D.).  See  Elliot  and  Dowson  IV.  293  and  H.qi  Khalifah,  11076

[ 625  !

eventually  he  tvas  led,  by  the  abuse  which  was  heaped  upon  him
in  connection  with  the  aforesaid  claim  to  relationship,^  aud  the
excessive  annoj'anee  caused  him  by  Mir  Jamalu-d-Uin  Sadr
Astarahadi,  to  proceed  to  the  Dakkau,  which  is  famed  as  the  483-
rrfnge  for  the  oppressed,  where  he  met  with  a favourable  recep-
tion fiom  Xizani  Shah,  the  ruler  of  that  country,  and  w'as  re-
warded with  considerable  advancement,  and  attaining  the  highest
dignities"  reached  the  rank  of  Jutuiafn-Z-Jf/dAr  ^ Chief  finance-
minister  of  the  State).  The  Shi‘ah  tenets  .spread  widely,  in  fact
we  niay  sav  thev  were  really  inaugurated  in  those  regions  througli
the  instrumentality  of  .^h ah  Tahir.®  Xizain  .^ali  Bahri,  who  was
nfrlieted  with  an  incurable  * malady  of  long  standina-.  w'as  cm  c d
by  the  virtue  ^ of  a charm  pronouueed  over  him  by  ^ah  .Ta’tar,
and  that  occurrence,  which  was  in  reality  was  of  thctiatuie"!
J.'fidiaj.  ]\c  attnhuted  to  the  miraculous  powei’s  f A'anb/id/ ) of
Shall  JaTar.'^'  and  acting  upon  his  instigation  abandoned  the  religion^

‘ MS.  (.y)  roads  (5'  !1-  )

3 ^fili  T.'iijir,  by  projtbfvvi:  ir  t }'t‘  iec(>V''i  \ <»!  iiw  >'>il '.\i*<tu-]-Q  nin . ^\  j -
was  (UiTi^i'riiu^ly  ill.  irulucLHl  Ni/.'D!  i"  lAjcci  tiie  "f  Abu  JJii.r,

‘Utnar,  and  ‘U'-ni.uij  wiio  are  tlio  ebree  first  s of  eK«  Sunnis,  from  th«

KhutbrUn  und  to  aub.>tituto  those  of  the  Imitnis,  thus  pmclainiinir  .f  **

5t''-  Firi.^tu,  Bo,  texc.  It.  220  Br^uL'^.  -'23

inouLiona  tiu'  f.u't  but  does  not  give  the  scory.

Head  MS.  (A).

lh"n,i:.  Tins-  i-j  a very  srrancro  ex-
pression, and  although  it  occurs  in  the  text  and  3ISS.  i\)  I w.iiild
suggest  we  should  reaii  The  use  of  sptdU  an. I cbairn<  for

the  cure  of  disease  was  })crmittcd  to  J'lnslims  provided  thrr'’  was  in  them  no
suspicion  of  ^irlc,  that  is,  of  as-ociatii-.g  anything  with  Clod.  'Wo  read

in  tlic  that  spells  wore  permitted  to  he  u&ctl  ‘‘  to  counteract  the  ib-

clTects  of  a malignant  eye;  and  on  those  bit  by  snakes  or  s-jornions,  and  for
“^iores  in  the  side.”  They  were  also  directed  to  be  used  for  iaundice  wiifc/i
w'.'iBlicld  to  bo  an  ofTectof  tlioevibcye.  See  \XI.  Fart  II,

MS,  (B)  reads

Juliilfoj  In  the  Kdsh^'ij  this  is  defined  I's  follow'g;  A
pryotcrnatural  occurrence  brought  about  by  the  agency  of  an  nabyliover  or  «n
Jnipiuus  man.  and  in  confoimity  with  las  d^'-ires  ” Anothn  dylinaion  is  aUo
given  from  i ho  u<'i  i^ii-l'M’f/Htrr'WfJihuh.  ‘‘  Ididi'?.  is  a pr  ctei  miiural  ocenr-

70

[ 626  ]

tenets  of  Swinat'  and  Jatnd'at,*  wtich  he  held  as  one  of  the  Mah-
dawiyah,  ® and  became  a fanatical  heretic,*  What  cruel  and  vexa-
tious treatment  as  accursed  and  excommunicate  did  not  these  two
ill-starred  ones^  inflict  upon  the  ‘Ulamd  and  Shai^s  of  that  land !
So  that  at  last  their  disgracefnl  conduct  led  to  the  expulsion  of  the
true  Muslims,  and  heresy®  from  that  day  again  became  firmly
rooted  in  that  country.

Shah  Tahir  was  in  natural  descriptive  poetry  comparable  to
Nizam  Astarabani  in  astronomical  poetry.  The  following  is  from
iji\a  of  his  qastdahs  written  in  eulogy  of  Hnmayua  Padshah.  In
it  he  has  imitated  Anwari.

Terse.

When  the  golden  litter  of  the  sun  Miters  the  resting-place  of
Hamai,'

The  tulip  lights  its  lamp,  and  the  narcisBUS  its  torch

ft'T.ce  brought  about  by  the  agency  of  infideis  or  evil-doers.”  It  is  generally
ki.aerstoou  that  a miracle  brought  about  by  one  who  claims  to  be  a prophet,
it  It  ije  in  acctidaiice  with  his  desires  is  called  'rti-'jitn,  while  if  it  be  contrary
to  ii-.c  inteniiau  itiscaUtd  Ihdna‘,  Again  that  whioh  is  bronght  about  by  any
ctnor  than  a pr  if  he  be  faithful,  pious,  and  perfect  in  the  knowledge
of  God,  is  ■^a!!e!l  iaremai : that  performed  by  the  ordinary  believer  is
tailed  bet  that  which  is  performed  by  infideQs  is  to  be  called  itUdrdj,

Kaih^if  I.  468.

1 'inewotd  Sanaa;  means  literally  ‘ a path  ‘ and  the  Sn unis  are  known

A*.,.  U*!  -i' . i-i’tianat  “ the  pet'ple  of  the  path.”  TheSnuniahavcclaim-

fca- theinsc'ivea  this  title  in  virtue  of  their  acknowledging  the  urst  four
Kh  trfahs  to  h.ave  been  the  rigbtfal  sneoessora  of  Hubammad,  awi  leceiviug
*1.!  '■  -ix  books  ’’  of  tradition.

E jaMij'c',  Assembly.  It  is  here  used  in  its  tecLi,-<-.l  Bense  of

Aiw  ^urnia'un  mu’at.'ka'uiturt  an  autheittioated  traditional  practice.
Tiif  Sunnis  are  commonly  called  Ahl-i-snnruth  iva  jamd'ah.

5 For  an  acr.nant  of  the  ilahuawi  sect,  see  Ai/i-i-Akbari  (B.)  I,,  pp.  iii.  i».

i iiiKtarj^z-i-skdli.  The  meaning  appears  to  be  “ became

more  of  a Shi'ah  than  the  Shi'ahs  themselves.”  The  form  of  the  word
iiiiitaraffz  rc'nilres  seme  snch  translation.

6 triaiVim  MSS.  (A)fB)  read

K'l/r  ht.  forsaking.  The  Snnnl  Muslims  call  all  Shi‘ahs  B './irt  or

heretics.

' Hatnni,  .Aries.  The  snn  caters  Aries  in  Spring.

L J

Now  the  mountain  is  freed  from  the  headache  caused  by
Bahman  and  Dai,  *

And  the  spring  cloud  washes  from  its  forehead  the  sandal.  *

The  following  Qasidah  in  praise  of  the  Prophet  ® is  also
his,  although  the  guriz-gah*  nay  even  the  commencement  of  the
Qcuidah  in  its  entirety,  is  not  suitable  to  the  dignity  of  the  holy  484.
Commander  (of  the  Faithful)  on  him  he  peaoe.^

Qasidah.

Once  more  the  time  has  come  when  in  accordance  with  the
summons  of  the  sky

The  rose  spreads  its  crimson  blanket  on  the  couch  of  the
garden;

The  clouds  of  Naisan,  with  the  keen  blood-hued  dagger  of
the  lightning

Erases  the  word  “ ice  ” from  the  pages  of  the  earth’s
surface.

The  close-eyed  darlings  the  buds,  like  an  army  of  Ozbaks,’

Make  a night-attack  at  early  dawn  upon  the  army  of  Dai,

Behold  the  forms  of  bud  and  of  rose  with  the  sky  for  a
branch !

The  conical  shadow  of  the  earth  is  the  bud,  tlie  suu  m
heaven  is  the  rose.

1 3 Bahman-o-Dai.  Dai  is  the  tenth  and  Bahman  the  eleventh

month  of  the  Persian  year:  they  answer  to  December  and  January.  S^e
Al-Biruni  Chronology,  p.  52

8 Sandal.  Saatalum'albam,  X.  0.  Santalnce.'^:,

The  wood  ground  into  powder  is  ranch  used  in  Indi.t  m-nd-'  into  a paste  wtth
water  as  an  application  to  the  forehe  id  iu  headaches.  The  M • A-'f  :Ann-‘-A
recommends  the  addition  of  a little  camphor  uni  roso-wai'-r  ihtitar

IT,  138.  See  anU,  p.  434  n.  1,  also  Uniry,  Vsrf  A Ptih  '-  < f a,  p,  JH.j

8 Manqahut.  This  word  is  iised  to  connoie  of  either  the

Prophet  or  holy  men  (Walls).

* Guriz-gah.  Point  oi  dop.artiire.  Tti?  name  . i niat

portion  of  a qafidah  in  which  iho  pof*  leaves  his  or^-.tia!  t;-i  i:e-  to  .1,. -scant
upon  the  qualities  of  the  person  t i'..  _'i'ed.

6 MS.  (A)  omits  - u!5i>  ' .'-.  l -

« Text  uiya.  hnri.i-l  ari.  1I<  I!  ■ re;nl-  O;*.  0_r^  /•■irf  -<-hurf.

7 The  Turks  are  called  tiiaj-d.a-h,u  .'k.-.-c;.ed  .in,l  the  red  petals  tightly

folded  iu  the  bad  are  likened  t _■  in  t ■ . ted  caps  oi  the  Qizitbash.

[ ]

And  for  tliis  reason  that  the  asseinbU'  of  the  rose  may  not  be
witliout  a minstrel,

The  n'ihtingali;  has  become  the  lute-player,  the  rose-braiiclj
with  its  buds  are  the  lute ;

The  garment  of  the  rock  would  have  become  wet  from  the
moisture  distilled  from  the  clouds

Had  not  the  mountain  covered  its  back  with  the  woollen
cloak  1 of  verdure

Had  not  the  lightning  smitten  its  goad  upon  the  head  of  the
elephant-like  cloud

It  would  have  laid  in  ruins  the  stately  edifice  of  the  sky.

The  garden  became  the  table  of  ‘l.-a,  and  the  dew  lying  on  it  *

Looked  like  salt  sprinkled  here  and  there  upon  that  table,

In  order  that  the  people  may  not  receive  base  gold  from  the
hand  of  the  jasmine.

The  tulip  cambist  carries  hidden  under  his  arm  the  touch-  •
stone.

Every  perfect  thing  which  is  not  secure  from  the  defects  of
decay,

Seems  in  the  sight  of  the  wise  and  noble  but  a small  thing.

The  beloved  of  the  garden  is  of  perfect  beauty  but  it  bad
been  well

485.  If  this  beauty  and  comeliness  had  not  been  separated  from  it.

Alas  ! for  that  moment  when  at  the  instigation  of  desire  the
army  of  Dai

Became  emboldened^  to  lay  waste  the  garden  of  roses.

The  time  is  near  at  hand  when  the  staff-bearer  of  the  days  of
Autumn

Will  knock  with  his  staff  at  the  gate  of  the  rose-garden.

The  crow  will  then  hold  in  deiision  the  impassioned*  night-
ingale,

And  the  witliered  petals  will  lie  blackened  beneath  the
hundred  petal  led  rose  (the  sunj.

i Text  rcaiU  .mss  (.A)  (B)  read  iapnnai,  a felt  garment

which  poor  persons  wear  on  their  backs  in  winter.  Oh/anu-l-luahif.

S Read  J MSS.  (A)(B).

* Text  reads  but  we  should  read  MS.  (.A).

* MS.  (.Aj  re.ad^  fur

L J

The  wind  has  cast  the  diadem  from  the  head  of  the  garden
glory,*

While  the  Siparak®  sets  itself  up  in  antagonism  to  the  cheek
of  thh  rose.

With  a %'iew  to  the  construction  of  that  courtyard  of  which
Dai  ® has  laid  the  foundation  in  the  garden,

Everywhere  there  lie  scattered  abont  bricks  of  ice  and  mortar
of  snow,

[For  aged  people  who  hare  experienced  the  tyranny  of
Autumn

The  optician  Dai  makes  spectacles  of  the  crystal  ice.

[Soon  will  it  happen  that  from  fear  of  the  staff  of  the
watchman  of  Dai

The  people  of  the  swegt  herbs  will  take  to  flight  one  after
another].^

It  is  better  for  the  wise  man  that  he  deternane  to  make  the
tour  of  such  a garden

Where  the  autumn  cannot  be  persuaded  to  go  eren  by  force.

That  garden  is  the  rose-garden  of  the  praise  of  a king  of  so
high  dignity

That  the  very  angels  descend  from  heaven  to  frequent  his
Court.

Murtaza  ^ the  king,  both  of  form  and  reality,  inasmuch  as  he  is
the  source  of  the  union  of  .-liadow  and  substance.

That  one  who.  from  the  impetuosity  of  bi.s  royal  falcon’s  486.
talons.

1 j}j>\  hvitan  afruz.  A red  Sower  withoat  odonr,  called  also  Taj-i-

Khurug  (Cockscomb)  and  Gnl-i-Yusaf.  (Bnrhin-i-Qati';  .4 i/iU'-i.nfA'i''  candatus
Love-lies-bleedinK  or  Ceiosia  cristata  (Cockscomb)  O.  Amuraidajicejf.

2 *-^/**»  Sijjrai  a herb,  which  when  boiled  dyes  yellow  f Steiiig-aas).  This
line  may  also  be  translated,  Measles  has  become  opponent  to  the  cheek  of  the
rose.

S MS.  (A)  reads  (J.?  for
* This  couplet  is  in  MS.  (Ai,  as  follows. —

The  text  reads  jt  instead  of

“ ddtntuza.  The  Chosen.  A titie  of 'AL,

L 63u  J

Breaks  the  wiiig  of  the  lieavenly  Eagle  * as  though  it  were  a
duek.

Such  a ki-'g  is  he  that,  in  the  train  of  the  attendants  at  his
door,

Birjis  * beare  the  name  Sa‘d,  and  ‘Utarid  * that  of  Zlrak.

The  table-steward  of  the  sky,  for  the  use  of  his  lordly  table,

Has  brought  the  Pleiades  * in  his  hand  as  salt-cellar  and  salt.

The  moon  has  become  the  censer  of  his  * assembly,  and  the
rays  of  the  moon,“

Are  the  smoke  of  the  aloes-wood  which  issues  from  that
censer,

From  behind  the  mirror  of  the  heavens,  in  accordance  with
the  rules  of  approval.

Whatever  he  said,  F’ate  repeated  .the  same  like  a p.irrot.’’

[Who  else  i.s  there  whom  they  can  bring  into  his  train,

We  recognise  his  other  competitors,  each  one  of  them.

Ue  bears  no  relation  to  tyranny-loving  strangers,

The  connoisseur  perceives  the  difiereuco  between  turquoise^
and  glass  beads ;

I Kacrain-i-falak.  The  constellations  Eagle  and  Lyre.  •

BirJ  .■<.  The  pUiiet  Jupiter,  which  is  one  of  the  cJlJ*—
Sa'djH,  ur  two  auspicious  planets,  ilio  other  being  Venus.

3 ojlhe.  ‘Viand.  The  planet  Mercury,  which  is  held  to  rale  over  intelli-
gence, hence  it  has  the  name  Zir.ik,  inteliigenc.

The  names  Sa‘d  and  Zirak  are  eonunonly  given  to  servants.

* Suraiyyd.  The  Pleiades;  as  iieirg  ire  irost  beneficial  of  the
planets  from  its  influence  on  the  autumnal  rains,  vs  called  by  the  Arabs

rP-'  An-najm.  The  constellation,  r/.  Job.  xxvt  iii.  Ill  The  poet  apparently
draws  his  simile  from  the  form  of  the  eonstellaliun  itself,  and  also  from
the  nebula,  which  he  compares  to  the  salt  grains.  If  this  latter  is  really  the
case  it  would  be  interesting,  as  the  nebula  of  the  Pleiades  is  claimed  to  have
been  comparatively  recently  discovered,  first  by  photography.

6 MS.  fA)  read^  ^ for

" Tlie  expression  j:,m  ,■  r„i.n  is  not  very  clear,  and  properly

•would  hardly  bear  the  meaning  given  t.j  it  in  the  translation.  The  word
j:n,i  13  said  to  be  used  in  the  sense  of  the  separate  members  of  ilie  body
(see  Lane  i.)  anti  on  this  .analogy  the  word  m here  triaslnte  l ravs.

1 Tl.e  text  has  her.-  a fotitnote  saying  that  in  two  MSS.  ther-'  follows  here
In  rh'i^la'i  ft  ivz  a-'t.  So  MS.  {B}.

‘ To  look  each  morning  upon  the  turquoise  is  said  to  enhance  tlie  brilliancy
of  ti>e  eyes  It  is  also  said  that  the  wearer  of  a Turquoise  so  set  that  it

[ 631  ]

Virtual  justice  and  the  decree  of  courts  are  mislakes.

For  this  reason  that  this  question  was  decided  in  the  case  of
Faddak  ^

The  widow  of  time,  since  she  was  not  meet  for  marriage,

He  divorced  her  opeuly  and  irrevocably,  then  he  left  her.]  ®

The  following  opening  couplet  of  his“  is  also  well-  known : — 487-'

Verse-

In  this  grief-populated  world  joy  ha.s  departed  from  my
sorrowful  heart,*

We  are  quite  accustomed  to  grief  to  such  an  extent  has  joy
been  forgotten.

Verse.

We  have  been  defamed  because  of  the  crime  of  love,  as  the
devotee  is  blamed  for  his  hypocrisy ;

Both  of  us  are  defamed,  but  what  a vast  difference  there  is
between  us  ?

The  following  is  also  his  : —

Verse.

Come  not  out,  for  you  will  be  the  calamity^  of  tlic  age.

We  shall  be  slain  and  you  will  be  disgraced.

The  following  qafidah  also*  is  a very  happy  production  of  his:—

Every  man  who  sets  his  heart  upon  worldly  desires

In  the  judgment  of  men  of  wioJom  is  not  wise  ;

touches  the  skin  may  fall  from  any  height  without  iniury.  iho  stone  att-acts
to  itself  the  whole  force  of  the  blow.  JIuw'  Miild  1 , p.  U is  also  sup-

posed to  change  colour  with  the  state  of  the  wearer'?,  heaU.L.  The  Turquoise
is  commonly  worn  set  in  au  amulet.

I Faddak  was  a village  wliich  belonged  to  the  proc'.i  t Munammad.  .\ffer
his  death,  when  his  duiic'uter  Fapmah  hs<i  assumed  i > *f 'u.m,  the
took  it  from  her  by  force,  saying,  ‘‘I  have  heard  u,c  piophet  sa/ ' we
propnets  will  not  leave  legacies  to  our  heirs  bu;  what  U-r  ...  .jnr  death  will
be  ci.en  in  charity.’  ”

* The  verses  in  brackets  are  omitiot  f’.>m  iA)

* MS.  (A)  omits  Jt-

* Text  reads  J*  ^ MSS  ( A ; ’ H i ren  i

It  Krief  tor  her  jt.v  'i  love  ' ah  i-ot

my  sorrowful  heart.

^ MSS.  (A)  (B)  read  for  - j,  au^ti  MS  ' * '

[ 632  ]

His  death  occurred  in  the  yean  952  H.  in  the  Dakkan  and  for
the  iarljdi  of  his  decease  the  words  Tabi‘u  ahl-i-l-hait  * were
devised,

Another  is  Ktiwaja  Aiynb*  ibn  Khwaja  Abnl-barakat,®  who
was  one  of  the  hereditary  grandees  of  Mawara-an-nahr.  Both
father  and  son.  in  spite  of  their  excellencies  acquired^  and  inherit-
ed, have  become  proverbial  for  indifference,  the  one  in  ‘Iraq  and
Klmrasan.  and  the  other  in  Kabul  and  Hindustan.  This  ifuii-
iakhab  has  no  room  to  relate  their  circumstances  in  detaii,  bat  tliev
are  related  in  many  other  places,  and  are  well-knottn.  It  is  said
that  Khwaja  Abu-l-barakat  = read  the  following  rnatja''^  of  one
of  his  own  poems  on  the  k-ai  ned  men  of  the  age.t

I’er'-'e.

The  field  of  my  hope  became  parched,  and  a famine  of  faitli-
fnlness  followed  ^

488.  Either  this  was  from  the  fire  of  our  heart,  or  that  in  the  cloud
of  cur  e\  e there  rennined  no  rain.

By  way  of  titult-’uidiiicr  s'uiie  one  said  to  him  that  the  ///7  ( b ')
in  the  last  hen.i'thdi  was  meaningless,  and  in  its  place  he  should
ha\  (.  written  /'1  I b ).  The  Kliw aja  repeated  the  fellow
oxteinporo  by  way  of  excuse  ;

Q'lt'ali.

'd'hat-jver  con-rs  before  men  of  discrimitiation,

Tliev  0 3 no:  .Ir.iW  iiue.s  by  way  of  criticism.

Tiny  t ti  ' ii'.t'  either  above  or  below  (as  m:iy  be  required'.
Wi'c  i;ie.!  1-  not  bound  bv  .simple  li-it.s.

They  le  i'i  ; 'j  ! anil  c.ir-  fully  consider.

The}  do!'  •-  ; - .1  I !jCi  ( i->  ) but  make  it  id  ,,  ti  ) m Liim

- M?S.  A i.

, -Ar

wLi.n  n
s Tex:  r:'  .r , *
s lls.  fd

- MS.  ' A

iw.'i

1 k

f.d-’  r.;:  .•!-a/.'-i-.--,nr.  Fi'T.nn-er  (,I  ti...  j,s
\ r*  m,  x\'\:  i T?.  The  t*.'-.!;  o:n:ts  t;L.j  m'

: 1.3  <\  .le  r*.  iiired  i>

^ M'>.  ‘ } rerM'i  j-'

^ il.S.  rid.’s

(A:  oHiit  i.e.i’

'■  ^ ST  ^ sX  1-  V

- . A'-'l-st  •■flrti  n M - !

[ 633  ]

He  also  wi’ote  a qasidah  in  imitation  of  Salman  Sawaji,*  of
which  the  following  is  the  opening  couplet; —

Verse.

I burn  with  the  fever  of  love,  and  my  head  is  racked  with  the
pain  of  separation,

Ify  soul  comes  to  my  lips,  but  my  beloved  comes  not  to  me ;

[Since  the  fire  of  my  heart  burns  in  my  body  like  the  flame
in  a lamp

My  skirt  has  been  rent  and  my  garment  tom  upon  my  head].*

And  the  following  two  poems  are  taken  from  a qasidah  which
he  wrote  to  satirise  the  Qazi  of  Nishapur ; —

Verses.

A certain  theologian  wrote  contrary  to  the  religious  law  of
the  Prophet,®

There  was  nothing  of  that  kind  written  in  the  books.

He  wrote  that  honey  is  unlawful  and  wine  lawful  to  be  used
because  (said  he)  the  latter  is  the  juice  of  the  vine  and  the
former  the  spume  of  the  bee.

To  the  wife  who  went*  to  complain  of  her  husband  to  the  489
Qazi,  saying  I get  no  enjoymeut  of  sense  from  him,

He  replied.  If  he  hns  become  enfeebled  and  weak,

It  is  right  that  he  should  employ  a hireling  in  his  place.

The*Khwa'ja  in  his  poems  sometimes  uses  the  takhallu^-  of
Ayub  and  sometimes  that  of  Firaqi;  the  following  ghazal  is  by

Lovely  rose-branch,  whose  stature  is  straight  as  the  cypre-t,,
Thou  base  twined  a line  of  emerald  around  thy  bps,

The  last  Unea  also  mean —

Either  they  read  and  consider  carefuUy

Or  t!ipy  do  not  read  lest  thay  should  make  mistakes.

1 Salmii.  Siwaji,  whose  surname  waS  Jalhla-l-din  Muhammad,  was  a cele-
Lr-ited  poet,  a natire  cf  Siwu.  and  flourished  m the  -vagirs  of  Shaikh  Hasau
J.Uiyer  and  his  sou  Sultan  Aweis.  U--  died  T7‘T  -A  U (R-  a!o,  0.  B.  D.;
2XotiuA's  tB).  s MSS  ;.A;  \V'.

t its.'.  (A,  (B)  read  dWj  for  iy
^ Poeticai  name  ^■de-ylu.nu’

[ 6M  ]

Thy  fonn  is  straight  like  the  letter  Alif  [may  his  shadow  be
lengthened),

And  thine  eyebrows  are  extended  like  the  madda  over  the
Alif.i

Thon  hast  cast  the  die  of  acceptance  on  the  words  of  others,

But  through  the  words  of  lovers  thou  has  drawn  the  line  of
refusal ;

Tliou  endurest  troubles,  do  not  attempt  to  draw  her,  O painter
of  Chin,

Wert  thou  to  draw  a hundred,  never  would  there  come  eyes
and  locks  like  her’s.

Firaqi,  be  not  over-desirous  of  the  wealth  of  union  with  her.

Thou  hast  suffered  boundless  tyranny  and  spite  at  the  hands
of  thy  beloved.^

The  king,  who  has  now  taken  refuge  in  God’s  pardon,  in  spite  of
that  unseemly  behaviour  was  excessively  fond  of  the  Khwajah.

Accordingly,  so*  desirous  was  he  of  his  society  that  he  joined
him  in  the  marriage-bond  to  one  of  the  Begams,  in  the  hope*  that
he  would  adopt  th6  manner  of  life  of  people  of  probity  and
rectitude,  but  the  Khwajah  was  held  so  close  a prisoner*  by  his
evil  habits,  that  he  could  not  abide  companionship  with  the  king.

T’erse.

When  once  evil  habits  have  taken  pos.session  of  the  nature

They  will  never  leave  it  till  the  day  of  death.

490.  He  put  forward  various  flimsy  pretexts  to  that  end,  and  not
even  contenting  himself  with  this,  one  day  while^  in  the  king’s
assembly  he  was  guilty  of  a breach  of  decorum  which  one  blushes
to  mention.  The  k'ug,  out  of  the  exceeding  kindliness  and  good-
ness of  his  i^ture,  ovexdoo'ued  his  fault,  and  merely  remarked,
*•  My  dear  TGrwaja  what  sort  of  manners  are  these  ! ” The  Khwaja
sought  permission  to  proceed  to  Makka  the  revered,  the  blessed,*
and  after  duly  setting  in  order  the  requisites  for  his  journey  and  the

1 An  Alif  I with  a curved  line  written  across  it  horizontally  f is  called  .4?i/
mamdida.  This  cross  line  was  originally  the  word  madd  which  means
lengthening  or  prolonging.

* MS.JB).  transposes  the  two  last  lines.  3 ng,  J(  omits

* (A)  reads  aS"  .xjU  Ij  6 MS.  (A)  reads

^ MS.  fA)  omitft  MS,  'B;  omits

[ G3o  I

req^uiretnents  for  a sea-voyage,*  he  bade  liim  farewell.  When  he
embarked  he  enquired  of  his  companions,  what  * are  the  advantages
of  going  thither  ? They  replied,  ‘‘  Purification  from  past  sins.
He  rejoined,  “ I will  wait  then  till  I have  fulfilled  the  catalogue  of
sins,  and  then  be  purified,  so  that  1 may  have  no  further  desire  to
sin.”^  Thus  he  remained  destitute  of  that  grace,  and  abandoning
himself  to  his  desires,  gave  the  rein  to  his  passions,  bultan
Bahadur  of  Gujrat  in  consideration  of  pleasant  companionship  aud
good-fellowship,  appointed*  him  a daily  allovvance  .-f  me
for  his  expenditure.  One  day  when  he  wa.s  p.»s?.ug  through  the
bazar  of  Ahmadahad,  seeing  the  Khwaja  in  the  2 ir^aultya  mosque, “
he  reined  back  and  with  great  kindness  and  ernpresienieiit  asked
“ How  is  the  Khwaja  faring  f ” He  replied  “ On  the  fare  which
you  have  allotted  me,  one  of  my  limbs  even  cannot  obtain  sufficient
sustenance,  why  do  you  ask  such  a question  ? ” Sultan  Bahadur
notwithstanding  this  rudeness  doubled  his  allowance.-

Just  at  that  time  too  Shah  Tahir  Dakkanl  came  to  Gujrat
with  all  pomp  and  circumstance  on  the  occasion  of  ii-s  embassage
from  Kizam  Shah  Dakkanl,  and  having  heard  sue;,  ugh  praise
of  the  Khwaja,  arrived  at  his  house,  which  had  nc'.tht  r a mat  nor
a pitcher  of  water.  A very  pleasant  colloquy  fed.,  wed,  each
reciting  his  own  and  hearing  the  other's  verses,  and  un  the  next

1 MS.  (A).  The  reiD  rea-l.e  and  'id-ls  a footnote

saying  that  this  is  the  reading  of  all  three  MSS.  and  also  .<nc-.-si8  that  we
should  perhapa  read  ' .i.J  is  H.iweter  evnl.,-nt,.  -rrect  her...

S .MS.  (A)  reads  si— I

Rend  here  -iJUj  'j-  MS  ( A ;.  instead  of  tne  reading  la  the  text

MS.  (A]  ^ L ■ ^

5 The  A^yajl  is  a gold  coin  weighing  ten  m wh;*  n nret  obtained

(-■lirLoncy  in  the  reign  of  A^raf

Ms'  fA)  reads  for  The  word  y uryau.ua  is  a

Sim:>krit  word,  meaning  hai  iri'j  three  door.^  U does  not  apt  earjwhich  m'jsqae
is  n'oaut,  but  Hunter  in  the  fiazettre>  ol  Imiia  Vol.  I,  pp  '*■-9^,  ^-pea  ung
t)t  the  architecture  of  Ahmadahad,  pointu  out  the  compromla*  i b rm  between
Hindu  or  J-vin,  and  Muhammadan  types,  be  says  Even  ^-be  niusques
Hindu  or  Jain  in  their  details,  with  a Saracenic  arch  throwr  iU  occaaional  J,
nf)t  from  any  constructive  want,  but  aa  a symbol  of  laiaui.

^ MS  (A)  omits  tj

[ 636  J

491.  day,  after  arranging  all  the  requirements  of  hospitality,  with  a
khil'dt,  a horse,  and  a bag  of  coin  and  valuable  gifts  in  his  own
lodging,  sent  the  Khwaja  an  invitation.  In  the  warmth  of  their
njeeting  and  the  enthusiasm  of  their  conversation,  suddenly  the
conversation  turned  upon  I religion  and  sects.  The  Khwaja
enquired  of  the  ^ah,  what  is  the  reason  that  the  Shi‘ahs  among
you  say  such  unbecoming  things  regarding  the  companions  of  the
Prophet  on  him  he  peace  ? He  answeied  ‘0  nr  jurisconsults  * have
decided  that  cursing  is  an  element  of  faith  (loan).’  The

i^waja  rejoined,  ' Curses  on  a faith  of  which  cursing  is  an  ele-
ment.’ The  .Shah  was  astounded  at  this,  and  their  colloquy  came
to  au  end,  and  that  urbanity  and  courtesy  which  he  had  thought
to  shew  remained  hidden  by  tbe  curtain  of  bis  a.nger,  and  was
lost.  Finally  he  departed  tbence  in  wretchedness  and  ignominy
to  the  Dakkan.  and  had  an  interview  * wdth  Nizam  Shah,  who
likewnse  sent  ail  that  was  necessary  to  his  honourable  reception,
and  received  him  cordially,  but  neither  there  could  tbe  Kbwaja
remain,  owing*  to  his  perverse  temper  and  bis  want  of  self-
restraint,  till  by  leaving  tbe  world  he  freed  himself  from  the
torment  of  u-xhteucc

Verse.

My  heart,  be  patient  for  that  stern-hearted  friend.

Is  sitting  and  grieving  sore  ’’  at  bis  own  unhappy  fate.

Terse.

'Wbeic  r.  AS  ’'he  black  horse  ? wliitber  did  I wend  ?

Who  an  I,  au<l  what  words  are  these  ? but  what  can  I do,  for
the  rein  of  t ly  re.-tivo,  hasty®  and  audacious  pen  has  been
turned  in  this  direction,  and  words  have  leapt  forth  beyond  tbe
area  of  my  control.  Were  it  not  so,  I know  that  it  is  no  virtue
to  pry  into  fault.s.  while  to  carp  at  tlje  vices  of  others,  shutting
one’s  eyes  to  one's  own  defects  is  the  acme  of  shortsightedness.

I MSS.  (A)  (B)  insert  ji  before

9 il!.jtahidin.  Majtahid  .one  who  strives)  is  the  highest  attain

rt>!--  tide  among  Jliislim  divines  Sec  llnghea’  Diet,  of  Islam,  s.  r.  and  Ijma'.
S MS.  (A)

* MS.  ( y.  .MS.  .’B'  read^  for

5 MS.  (A:  re.id-.  f,,r  dayii  i ilS  (A)  jjAiJ

V,

Tlie  wicked  set-'  ni:  ri  ot  I'thers.

Fiom  the  pitclier  Ui„r  ■'.i-.tiU  which  it  cctriins  *

God  He  is  glo'.itied  and' -exaited.  piV'erves  ali  of  us  from  that
■which  is  wrong  arat  improper  and  as  at  this  time  * the  writer  lias
not  with  him  a selection  fi-.jni  The  anthoiowies  of  tiie  eloquent  and
learned  poets,  aceordingiy  he  iais  fcuiid  it  necessary  to  restrict
hini'C-lr  = to  the  brief  tneniion  ''-f  these  few  poets  by  way  of  an
example.

Should  this  inconstant  and  transitory  life  give  a few  Jays  le.s-
pite,  and  sLonld  the  days,  in  nj  position  to  their  usual  habit  affoid
assistance,  and  should  Fate  gwe  its  help,  l.e  will  make  mention
ot  the  pcc'ts  former  times,  and  the  cantemporary  poets  of
Hindustan,  especially  of  those  whom  ha  has  seen  or  heard  and
appreciated  in  his  own  lifetime,  together  with  e.xtracts  from  their
poems  included  in  their  biographies.

Mine  is  the  endeavour,  its  perfectiaii  is  from  God.*  Should  this
not  come  to  pas.s,  this  much  will  sntHce  a-  a iiicmoiiat  of  the
author

If  I remain  in  life.  1 will  repair
Ihe  garment  which  exile  has  rent  -.

If  I should  dio,^  accept  this  my  excii'c.
dlany  are  the  hopes  which  ciumblc  into  dust

^ 'iiiis  jH'overb  in  one-  ttr  mu'.lier  is  v. i-U-kcOwn.  The  Arnbic  proverb

runs  *U|  Even  W'Se!  i \si.at  it  t*i..-UsUiiis.

*iMs.  s Ms  t-Vi  iBl  jboiLt jUAiJl

i AU|  MS.  .-t;  (Bj  wJ.iyi-  on.it
^ MSS,  (A I

492.

I'llF  FM)

INDEX

or

MUXTA^ABD-T-TAWAKIOI-

VOLtVE  I.

The  numbers  refer  to  the  pages ; n stands  for  footnote.

A.

Aaron  of  Scripture,  302  n 2.

Abahdt,  the  nuh  dha-x-'ulv.'iya,  or  nine  1
heavens,  176  n 2.

Abardhan,  town  of,  84  n.  See
Bardhaa.

Abtrdin,  town  of,  84  n.  See  Bavdhan.
Abaward,  city  of.  30  ri.  See  tinder
Abiward.  |

‘Abbas  ibu  ‘Abdu-l-Muttalib.  uncle  of  i
the  Prophet  iluhammad,  74  n 2.  |

‘Abbas,  Dynasty  of,  13  n 1 . House  I
of,  571  n 2.  See  also  under  the  |
‘Abbisides.  |

‘Abbas  ^iin,  the  Historian  of  Shir  j
Shah,  461  n 10.  |

‘Abbisides,  the,  17,  310.  See  also  j
above  under  ‘Abbas,  j

‘Abdu-l-‘Azi2,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Babar,  441.  !

‘Abdu-I-’Aziz  Khan,  the  son  of
‘AbdU'Uah  Khan,  the  Ozbak  king,
582  and  n 5.

‘ Abdu-I-Ghafur  Lari,  ilaulavi,  — a
celebrated  ^ai^,  588.

J

‘Abdu-l'Haiyy,  Shaikh,  son  of  Shaikh
Jamili  Kanbawi  of  Dihli,— apoet
of  the  time  of  lelem  Shah,  526  and
n 7.

‘Abdu-l-Ijiamid  ibn  Abi-l-ijadid  al-
Ma‘tazili,  author  of  the  Sharh^u
NahJU’i‘Balugh<^k,  45S  n 3,

‘Abdu*l-Ka‘bah  ibn  Abl  Qabafab,  ori-
ginal name  of  Abu  Bakr  as-Siddiq,
successor  of  iluhammad,  106  n 1.

‘Abdu-ilah,  one  of  the  best  of  names,
603  n 5.

‘Abdu-Uah  IJusaini  of  Baiana.  Shaikh,
—one  of  the  learned  and  holy  men
of  the  time  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  424.

Abdu-llah  Khan  Osbak,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Humayiin,  594.

‘Abdu-llah  Khan,  the  Ozbak  king  of
Khurasan,  583  and  n 5.

‘Abdu-llah  Niyazi,  Miyan  Shaikh.—
a Niyazi  Afghan  who  adopted  the
manners  of  a ilahdi,  508,  509,  510,
513,  518,  520.

11

Iwlex.

‘Abdn-llah  of  Sultanpur,  MuUa«  —
Shai^u-l’Islum  and  ^drn-a-Sndi^r
under  Tslem  ^ah,  506  and  n 2,
513.  n4.  515,  517,  518,  519,  521,
52  525,  534.

*Abdu-llah  Tulumbi  of  Dihli.  Shaikh.
— one  of  tho  great  and  learned  men
of  the  time  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  426  and  n 10,  427,  429-

‘Abdu-llah  ibn  az-Zubair,  sovereign
of  Hijaz  and  ‘Iraq,  287  ti  2.

‘Abdn-l-Malik  ibn  Marwan,  of  the
Cmayvad  dynasty  of  Khallfahs,
12  71  n 1 and  2,  18  n 1.

‘Abdu-I-ilalik  ibn  "Nub  Samani.  Amir,
— last  of  tbe  Samani  dynasty,  16
and  n 2.

‘Abdu-l'Muttalib,  grandfather  of
Mubammad  the  Prophet,  2 n 5.

'Abdn-l-Qadir  ibn  Muluk  Shib
BadaonI,  author  of  the  Muntai^ahu-
t’Taicd-nkh,S^  See  under  al-Badaonl.

‘Abdu-l-Qadir,  son  of  Nizam  Shah  j

Bahri,  ruler  of  the  Dakkan,  625  n 3 !

1

‘Abdu-r-Rahmau,  one  of  the  best  of  ;
names,  603  n 5.

‘Abdu-r- Rahman  JamI,  Mnlla  Num*d*
Din,  32  n 2.  See  under  Jami.

‘Abdu-r-Rahman  ibn  Muljim,  mur-
derer of  ‘All,  207  n 6.

‘Abdu-r-Rashid,  son  of  Sultan  Mahmud
^aznawi,  Sultan  of  Ghaznin,  50.

‘Abdu-r-Rashid  Sultani,  Sa‘adat
Khan, — one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Mahmud  ^ah  of  Dihli,  319.

‘Abda-r-Razzaq  ibn  Ahmad  ibn  |
Hasan  Maimandi, — Wazir  of  Sultan  !
Mandud  Ghaznawi,  50.  Same  as
Khwija  Imam  Abnl-Fath  ‘Abdu  r-  !
Eazzsq,  iq.  V ]

‘Abdu-s-sadr  Hajib-i-Khass,  Qizi,—
of  the  Amirs  of  Mubarak  Shah  of
Dihli.  393  n 3.

‘Abid.  Qizi, — a poet  of  tbe  reign  of
Flruz  Shah  of  Dihli,  311  and  ti  2,

‘Abid  Khin,  the  Ozbak  king  of
Khurasan,  582  n 5.

Ab-i-Siyih.  See  the  Kali  Nadi,
378  « 1.

Abiward,  a city  of  Khurasan,  also
called  Abiward  and  Baward,  29  n
6,  43  rt  2.

I Abiwerd,  same  as  Abiward  {q.  r.),
j Abkand.  hill  of,  438  n 7.
j town,  445  n 3

j Abraham,  154  n S,  155  n,  207  and  G
I 4,  234,  488  « 5.

I Abmntln  (Absinthium),  herb,  586  n.

I Zbtar,  name  of  a noxious  serpent,  426
n 9.

Abu  ‘Abdu-llah  Muhammad,  ibn  Abi-1-
Ilasan  Ismail  al.Bukhirl,  the  cele-
brated Imam,  6 n 3.  See  under
Bukhari.

Abu  'Abdu-llah  Muhammad  ibn  Omar
ar-Razi, — a doctor  of  the  Shaftite
sect,  73  n 1.  See  under  Fakhru-d-
Din  Razi.

Abu  'AU  Hasan  theKotwal  of  Ghaznin,
and  Dhvdn  of  the  kingdom  under
Sultan  Mandtid  Ghaznawi, 47, 48, 49.

Abu  ‘Ali  Husain  bin  ‘Abdu-llah,  com-
monly known  as  Ibn  Sina  (Avicen-
na), 533  n 1.

Abu  ‘All  Sinjuri,-— a contemporary  of
SuStiin  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  20.

Abu  Bakr,  the  tiryt  Khalifah,  3 n 6,
59  n 2,  106  and  n 1,  149  n,  156  n
5.  157  n.  loS  n 1,  n 4,  604  n 5,
625  3 See  andei  as-Siddiq.  •

Index.

in

Abu  Bakr  Dolaf  ibn  Jahdar  {or  Ja‘far)
ibn  Yunus  ash-Shibll,  a celebrated  i
Muhammadan  Saint.  59  and  n 1.  j

Abu  Bakr  ibn  Muhammad  ‘Ali  ^

Samarqandi,  Amir  Ruham, — one  v>f

the  most  learned  men  of  the  time  of  ,

Saltan  Shamau-d-Dm  lyal-Timi^,  |

93  and  n 2.  t

)

Abu  Bakr  Khan,  a prince  of  the  family  j
of  ‘Alau-d-Din  Khilji,  291.  j

Abd  Bakr  Khan,  a relation  of  Maham-  j
mad  Khan  the  ruler  oi  Nagor,  423  j
n XI.  i

Abu  Bakr  ^ian,  afterwardi^  Abu  Bakr  |
Shah,  son  of  2afar  Khan,  the  grand-  j
son  of  Sultan  Flroz,  341,  342,  343,
344,  345,  346.

Abu  Bakr  Muhammad  ibn  Zakarlya
ar-Rizi,  known  as  Rhazes,  the
famous  physician.  30  n 1.

Abu  Bakr  Shub.  See  under  Abii  Bakr
Oan,  son  of  Zafar  Khan.

Abd  Bakr  T‘'si  Haidari,  chief  of  the
sect  of  Qalandars,  234.

Abd  Firas  Haxnmam,  sop  of  Ghalib,
the  poet  known  as  al-Farazdaq  (q.
V.),  287  n 1.

Abii  Hanifah,  Imam. — founder  of  the
Hanafite  School  of  jurisprudence.

57  71  1.

Abu  Hanifah,  a poet  of  the  time  of
Sultan  N?.sira»d'Dm  Mahmud  Shah
of  Dihli,  134  n 3.

Abu  Ishaq,  son  cf  Alptigin,  governor
of  Ghazni.  13  n 1,  14  and  a 1-

A.bd  Ja‘far  al-Mansdr,  the  ‘Abbaside
Khalifah,  74  n 2.

Afcu-l-‘ Abbas  ibn  Mamdn,  Khwarazm
Sh«h, — a contemporary  of  Sultan
Mahmud  ot  Ghazain.  23.

AbU'l-* Abbas,  al-Qadir  billahi  Ahm^
ibn  Ishaq  ibn  al-Muqtadir,  the
‘Abbaside  Khalifah,  17  and  n 2.
Abu-I-Jjsdd,  Father  of  bodies,  a name
foi  Sulphur,  340  n 2.

Abu-l'‘Ala  Ganjawl,  master  of  the
I ' KhaqanI,  583  n 4.

Abn-l-.Ala*  al-Ma‘arri,  the  Arab
poet.  1S3  71 1.

Abu-UAnvdh,  Father  of  spirits,  a
name  for  Quicksilver,  340  n 2.
Abu-l-Baqa.  Amir,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Humayun,  465,  560,  573.
Abu*i'6arakah,  632  nn  3 and  5.  Same
as  the  next  (q.  t’.).

Abn-l-Barakat  of  Mawarau-n-Nahr,
Khwaja,  632  and  nn  3 and  5.  See
the  above.

Abu-l-Faraj  Runl,  the  Ustad,  a cele-
brated poet  of  the  time  of  Saltan
Ibrahim  Ghaznawi,  Saiyyidn-s*
Salat  in,  53  u,  54  and  n 1.

Abu-l-Fatb  ‘Abdnr-Eazzaq,  grandson
of  Hasan  Maimaudi,  Khwaja
Imam,— Wazir  of  Saltan  Mandud
Ghaznawi,  47,  50,

Abn-i'Fath,  Miyan  Shaikh,  son  of
Shaikh-allabdiyah  of  Kliairabad.
546  and  n 1.

Abu-l-Fath  al-Mn‘tazid  billahi,  sixth
of  the  Abbasi  Klialifahs  in  Egypt,
327  7t  6.

Abu'!*Fath  Sultan  Afshar,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Qiziibash,  575  n 2.

Abu-l-Fath  of  Thanesar,  Miyan, — a
learned  doctor  of  the  time  of  Islem
I ^ah,  513.

I Abul-Fazl  ‘Allami,  — the  celebrated

j

j minister  of  Akbar  and  author  of
i the  Ahi-t-Akbarj,  26  n 2,  27  u 1,  52

IV

Inde^

n 3,  384  n 3,  408  n i.  410  n 4,  415  j
n 4,  417  n 7,  503  n 3.  !

Abn-I-Fazl  Zaugi,  of  Bust, — a con-  1
temporary  of  Sultan  Maudud  Ghaz-  \
nawi,  47.

Abnl  Feda,  Annales,  167  n 4.  ,

Abnl  Feda,  Geography  of,  14  n 3,  !
15  n and  n 2 and  5,  17  n 4.  23  n ;
1,  27  71 1 and  2,  30  h and  n 1,  34  nn  '
1,  2 ?,nd  3,  35  n 2,  30  yin  2 and  10,  i
42  n 1,  43  7m  1,  3 and  4,  16  7i  1,  !
50  n 2,  67  71  1,  71  7!  3,  147  7i  1.
167  n 4,  265  n 5

Abu  l-FidiV.  See  under  Abnl  Feda.
Abu-l*Hans  Sinjar  ibn  Malak^ah
ibn  Alp  Arslan,  the  Seljuq,  J67
3.  See  under  Sinjar.

Abu-l-Hasan  ‘All  ibn  Abi-l-Karam
Muhammad  ash-Sharbani,  Shaikh,
commonly  known  ais  T bnu-l-Asir,
624  71  8.

Abu-l-Hasan  ‘All,  Sultan. son  of  Sultan
Mas‘ud  Ghaznawl,  50  and  n 1
Abu-l-Hirs  Mansur  Simaui,  Amir,  j
14  71  1.  See  under  Mansur  ibn
Nuh.

Aba-l-Majdud,  son  of  Sultan  Mas‘ud
Ghaznawl.  37  and  ti  6.

Abu'l-Ma‘all,  Shah.  one  of  the  areat
Amirs  of  Humayun.  592,  594.  596.
597.

Abu-l-Mujahid,  son  of  Sultan  Mas^ud
Ghaznawl.  37  and  n 0.

Abu-l-Xajm  Amir  Aiyiz;.  33  n 3.  Set-
under  Alyuz.

Abu-l'Gasim  Bes,  one  of  the  Amus
of  Humayun,  174.

Abu-l-G'^sim  Fir-iausI,  tre  famors
poet,  author  of  rhe  Sk'7\  AV./mo.
32  I See  nuder  Fu-dans'.

Abu-l-Qasim  Ibrfihlm.  Sult^.  ‘>on  of
Mas‘ud,  son  of  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,
53,  See  under  Ibrahim  Sayyidu-a-
Salatln.

Abu-l-Qasim  Mahmud,  son  of  Sultan
Maiidud  Ghnznawi.  48.
Abu-l-Qasim-i-Nuh  son  of  Mansur,
son  of  Xuh  Sfmrani,  Amir,  14  n 1.
See  under  Nub.  son  of  Mansur,  son
jof  Kuh  Samani,

Abu-l-Wahid  Farighl,  ^ai^,  a poet
of  the  time  of  Humayun,  616  and
n 4,  617  and  ti  6,  618.  See  the
next.

Abn*l-Wajd  Ffaughi,  ^ai^,  616  n 4,
617  and  n 6,  618.  Same  as  the
above  ( q.  r.).

Abu-lAVajid  Farighi,  Shaikh,  616  n 4
i See  the  two  above,
j Abu  Maufur  Zangi,  brother  of  Abu-I
Fa/l  of  Bust  (<7.  i’.),  47.

Abu  Muhammad  ‘ Abdu-r*Rahnian  ibn
Yah  in  ibn  Y'unas  Aljigili,  the
Khatib  of  Samarqand,  159  n.

Abii  Muhammad  ibn  Adam  Sanai  al
Hakim,  35/1  1.  See  under  Hakim
Sana!,  06  n 2.

Abii  Muhammad  al-Hajjaj,  son  of
^ usuf  ibn  al-Hakam  as-Saqafi
12  n 3 See  under  al-Hajjaj.

Ahu  Muhammad  Nizamii-d-Din
Ahmad,  the  relebrated  poet  Niziimi,^
298  II  4.  See  under  ^.aikh  Nizami
( tanjaw  i

Abu-n-Najm  Amir  Aiyjlz,  33  72  3.  See
under  Aiyiiz.

Abii-n-Najm  Ahmad  ManiiChihri
Dimr.gtjau'.  Hakim. — a Poet  of  the
nr.ip  t'f  Sn'tau  iMas'iiu  Ghnznaw!,
46  ri  4.

Abfi  Xa^r  Ahmad  ibn  Muhammad  ibn
‘Abdus-^amad,  Wazir  of  the  Ghaz-
nawi  Sultans,  -46.

Abu  Nasi-  Miibamniad  bm  Ahmad. —
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Maudud
of  Ghaznin,  47

Aba  Nazar  ‘Abdn-1-  Aziz  ibn  Mansar.
Hakim,  the  poet  known  as  ‘Asj  idi,
17  n 3,

Aba  QabaTah.  See  Aoa  QrJaifah

Abii  Qiihafah.  father  of  Abu  Bakr
as-Siddiq.  thehrst  of  the  Khallfahs.
106  and  1.

Aburiju,  Mahk  Husamu-d-Din  or
Mujlra-d-Dm, — one  of  the  Amirs
of  Snlrrui  Muhammad  Tuehl.iq
Shah,  305,  SOS.

Abu  Sadd  'Abdullah  ibn  Abu-I-Hasan  |
‘All  Baizawl,  QSzI. —author  of  the  j
^izdrnu-t-Tau'dnl^y  34  a 8.  See  1

under  Baizawi.  5

Abu  ^uja‘  Muhammad,  son  of  Cha-  ]
kirbe^  Daud.  son  of  Mikad  Suljuqi,  ■
snrnamed  ‘Azdu-d-Daulah  Alp  |
Arslan,  third  monarch  of  the
Saljuqiyah  dynasty,  35  and  n 1.
See  under  Alp  Arslan.

Abii.  Taher  ('Tahir’S,  chief  of  the  Kar*
matian  sect  of  Muslim  heretics,

21  71  1.

Abu  Tiilib,  i^ncle  of  the  Prophet
Muhammad  and  father  of  ‘All,  74
T.  2,  105  71  2.

Abfi  T:lKb  facilly.  74  ti  2.  See  the
above

Abu  Tuhb  of  ‘Trlq.  Mir  Sayyid. —
a contemporary  of  Islem  ^rh.  505

Anil  Tftlib  Muhammad  ibn  Mika'il
ibn  Saljuq,  Kukna'd-Din  Tugliral
Beg.  42  n 3.  See  under  Tughral

Beg,  founder  of  the  Saljilq  dr-
na^ry.

Abl  ’Uaiar  Mmhaju-4-i)In  'Usmuii
ion  Sir;iya-d-D;n  a.-J  LizjanI,  author
of  the  Taha-jl'-'-A'i*,/'’,  127  u 2.
See  u’lder  Minha'-i-rira].

Abv'SS’n'an  slaves.  .134

Aeesir.e-  b e. — the  r.ver  Crenub,  23
7(  3.

Ac::  ’L''*  pi‘''i.ts,  dSb  .

'Ad.  ml  c "'f — -'t  u-'-i 'h'-t''r:e  tribe  of
Ar.tos  2'  1 I b.  Ita'  ai_ci  ji  3,

Adur\  4.  1^4  2.  2vJ  ’ 304,  S20  k 4,

422.  -Mb  - S.

Adam  G'  akkar,  or  Gaakkar  Snltin,
— a (.  er.renipor.-.iy  ../i  Isiein  .S/AL
and  Hninuyun.  5'J3  5*3,  593  and
r 4.  The  innie  i-s  aUo  spelt  Ghakar.

Adair.  Kukar.  Mahk. — one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  Ibrahim  Lodi,  431.
432.

Adam  X-C'li.  3Iahk, — cue  of  the  Amirs
of  Snkan  Sik<ander  Lodi,  419.

M-br-  fi-niity,  576  u 5.  .577  n.

Adesnr.  Lli  of  Setgarh. — contem-
! porup  rt  Ftrlz  Shih  329  n o.
j ‘Adil  Kbdr.,  brochfroi  S.irang  Khar,
the  ruier  of  OTpilrur.  349  and  7i  5.

‘Adil  Xhaii,  MhU.';  Naviru-I-Mulk,
the  &-ovLrnor  ci:  cut  Boab.  354,  359.

‘Aail  Ifbar.  ?ca  ct  •'M'r  -ihah,  476,
477,  479,  4''6,  4'3P  4-S.  489,490
492

Adityn,  rune  of  the  Sun  :u  Sanskrit
a-  beibig  the  origb.  v.5f  all  things..
79  2

Adiaieiv,  ^ame  as  .Vudr  i.j,  129

fi  2.

•Adi  1 S,;i,  5o0  e 11.  Sue  Under
■Adn.

VI

Index,

•'Adll,  popular  ns.me  of  Sultan  Mu-  |
hammad  ‘ Adi],  son  of  Nizam  Khan
Sur,  formerly  Mnbariz  Khan  (o.  r.),
536,  537,  53S,  539,  540,  641,  542,
544,  545,  543,  550,552.  555,  656
and  no,  5 5 7 , 558,  592.

Adonis,  104  n 2.

Adwantgarh*  fcrcress,  422  r.  2
Afalu‘t-tafzll,  515  and  n 6.

Afgans,  80  n 5.  See  under  the
Afghans.

Afghan,  Malik,  334, — of  the  Maliks  of
Flroz  Shah.

Afghanistan,  302  n 2,  466,  520.
Afghanpur,  259,  500.

Afghans,  the,  44,  80  n 5,  129  ;i  2,  399,
436,  439,440,  443,444,  457,  45S,
460,  470,  471.  477,  479,437,489,
490,  49S,  499,  500,  501,  502,  503
n 2,  513,  517,  520,  525,  528,  537,
543,  549,  551,  552,  554,  568,  586,
558,  590,  592.  593,  594,  595,  597.
59S.

Afif.  the  Historian.  See  Shams-i*
Siraj  ‘Afif,

Adatun  (Plato),  520  and  n 7,  533.
.4frasiab,  an  ancient  king  of  Turan,
52,  116  n 5,  130  a 2.  435.  See  also
the  next.

Afr.*i>yrib,  410.  Same  as  the  above
'i-

Afrii-a,  167  u L

name  )f  .i  Tarki  tr.be,  572

ruiii  f>  8,

A f/ tlu-d-DIi?  i’iri’iim  ibn  •All  an-
N'-j’-ir  the  .Anims  poet
C’^3  /I  4.

Bac^r

luthor  of  'ue  - ,’0.  Ill)  :

••  3.

Aghdui^  Kitdbu-l-,  527  it  3.

Ag7n-i-hdh 606  n 4.

Agra,  city  of,  70  n 4,  341  n 1,  386  n
3,  408  n 1,  414,  410  and  n'3,  420,
42'1  and  n 4,  423,  425,  430,  431.
433,  435,  442,  444,  445,  448,  447,
4*51,  452,  453,  455,  4.56,  458,  45S,
461,  462,  463,  464,  467,  472,  474.,
476  71  5,  486  and  n 6,  487,  488,  489,
490,  492,  493,  495,  513,  515,  51S,
521,  526,  .542,  547,  548,  549,  550,
551,  552.  556,  573,  597,  610,  617,

Agra  road.  386  n 3,

Agra.  Sarkar  or  district  of,  70  nn  3
and  4,  425  n 4.

Agra,  Subah  or  province  of,  365  r.  8,
410  n 4.

Ahar,  ancient  town  in  the  Baland-
shahr  district,  395  and  n 4,  393,
546  and  n 4.

A^awan,  a Bhagat  boy,  named
Mnjahid  Khan  by  ‘Adli,  557  n 8.

Ahl-x-Snnnch.  ica  jami'ah,  a name  of
the  Sunnis,  626  n 2.

Ahl-i-Sunnat,  a.  name  of  the  Sunnis,

626  71  1.

Ahmadabad,  capital  of  Gnjrat,  357
and  nil  3 and  4,  454.  455,  635  and
n 6.

.A.liinad  ibn  'Abdus-Samad,  Khwajab,
47.  Wazir  of  Sultan  Maudiid  .of
Ghaznin.

.\hmad  Abu-l-‘Abbas,  son  of  al-
lluwaffaq  bi-llah  ai-'AbbasI,  458
n 3.

Ahmad  Aiyaz,  aja-i-Jahan  (q.  v.),
Slalik, — cf  the  Maliks  of  Sultan
JIuhani.iiad  Tugh’aq  .Snah,  304,
315,  321,  328

Ahmad  '.Al',  ilaulawi,  euuor  of  the

Indeoc,

ri:

M’UTitaJ^ahu’U'Iawtin!^  of  BadSoni,
92  n.

Ahmad,  son  of  Amir  TThnyru  of  Dihli,
a poet,  339,  340.

Ahmad  Chap.  Malik,  Vazir  of  Saltan
Jalaln-d-Din  Khiiji,  238,  241.  243,
348  and  n 6.

Ahmad  Danyal,  father  of  Nizamn-d-
Din  Aaliya,  the  celebrated  Mnham-
madan  Saint.  266  n,  1.

Ahmad  ibn  Hasan  Maimandi,  Vazir
cf  Snltan  Mas'iid,  eon  of  Mahmud
of  Ghaznin,  35.

Ahmad  Jilwani  the  First,  Sultan,  ruler
of  Baiana,  414.  See  also  under
Ahmad  Khan  Jilwani.

Ahmad  Junaid,  Mulla,  486  and  n 1.  j
Same  as  the  nest.  I

A^mad  Jund,  Mulla,  486  and  n 1.  |
Same  as  the  above.

Ahmad  Kathu,  Shai^,  357  and  n 3.
Surnamed  Ganibakhsh.  the  name  is
also  written  Khsttu,

Ahmad  Khan,  brother  of  A’zam
Humayun  Lodi, — one  of  the  Amira
of  Sultan  Ibrihira,  son  of  Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi,  434.  I

Ahmad  Khin  Jilwani,  ruler  of  Baiana,  j
405.  See  also  under  Sultan  Ahmad  !
Jilwani.  I

Ahmad  Khan,  the  Governor  of  Karra,  j
nnder  Sultan  Ibrahim,  son  of  Sultan  |
Sikandar  Lodi,  431,  j

Ahmad  Kuan,  son  of  Khan-i- Jaban  |
Lodi,  styled  A’/am  Khan  Ilurnriyun,  !
416  and  /;  11.  ■

Abn-'id  Khao.  son  of  Khan*i-|yi:i^»an  :
I'.trmali, — of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Sikandar  Lod:.  418  and  n IL
Abmad  Khan  Lodi, — one  of  the  Ani'is

of  Snltan  Ibrahim,  son  of  Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi,  434

Ahmad  Khan  Sur,  one  of  the  cou-
sins of  Sher  ^ah.  assumes  the
title  of  Snltan  Sikandar,  542.  See
under  Sultan,  Sikandar  Sir.

Ahmad  Khattu,  Sh-’il^,  357  n S.
surnamed  GanibaKish.  The  name
is  also  written  Kathu.

Ahmad  Lachin,  Malik, — one  of  the
Maliks  of  Sultan  Muhammad
Tuffhlaq  Shah.  313.

Ahmad,  Malik,  son  of  Amir  Khusru
the  famous  poet  of  Dlhli,  339,  340.

Ahmad,  Malik,  brother  of  *Imadu-l-
Mulk  Mahmud  Hasan,  the  governor
of  Multan,  392.

Ahmad,  son  of  Muhammad,  son  of
Sultan  3Iabniud  ^aznawi,  45  and
rt  2,  46.

Ahmad  Nival  Tigin,  .Amir,  treasurer
of  Sultan  Mas'ud,  son  of  Mahmud
cf  Ghaznin,  36  and  :i  7*  6,  8 and  9.

Ahmad  .^ah,  Sultan,  the  ruler  of
Gujarat,  357  n n S and  4,  379  and
n 2.

Ahriman,  the  Satan  of  the  Persians.
tSC'  and  n 3.

Aibal . sonbriq  let  of  Snltan  Qutbu-d
Din  L.^kbakhsh.  the  ruler  of  Dilhi,

\ * and  n 2.

Aiuuih  •rrari'-s  of  land.  40n  and  n 1.

the,  8 a 3,  13  n and
« i,  1 1 7.  3,  15  71  2 17  71  4,  19  n
and  n 6.  23  ?>  3 24  k 2.  25  nn  1

iiii'i  J 2 ' r 2 4 2?  f>  2,  34  v 5,

'I’t'  ' n I-  52  /-  .3.  62  'i  2.  r35

1 v7  3.  60  'in  2 :.r.d  5,  71  n 3,  72
Si  '<  2 '■'J  »..v  3 and  5
-1  )'  J S7  '1  i,  91  2.  92  n 2.  '4'

/

liidf.r.

n 5,  124  p 4.  125  u 3.  12b  3.  139

2,  130*h  1,  132  3,  133  ami

r 2,  142  7i  1.  147  rt  1,  193  /.  1.  221
a 3,  222  3.  223  rt.  233  n 2.  2-*S  //  2

249  'I  5;  2o4  k 6,  265  i"-  2 ai-d  5
266  Ti?i  1 and  4,  304  n 4.  3u6  « 1,
330  n 8,  332  /:  5,  353  « 1,  357  -iv

3 and  4,  366  n 3.  377  'i  4.  3bO  fi  2.
384  n 3,  403  a 1 410  ti  4.  415  .■  i

4 and  7,  416  kk  3 and  13  4'i7  in

7 and  8,  420  n 5,  8 and  0,  421

‘Tt.  8j  422  nn  2 and  3,  424  /.  3,  427  -

2,  432  ft  7.  439  n 2,  449  /*  2.  454  .

7j  464  n 5,  478  * o,  479  n ^

1 and  8,  49S  /i  3,  •x99  a 3.  50 1 v 7.

503  ft  3,  506  /i  2,  5U7  a 1.  5o3  ft  a

7 and  8,  509  a S,  -515  a 4.  523  /.

5,  536  n 6,  546  u 7.  557  ft 1 and

3,  567  ft  S,  568  ft  6.  571  ft  9.  573
n 3,  580  ft  5.  584  n 3.  587  ft  7.  583
n 4,  590  n 5,  592  n 9.  597  n 5.  605
71  1,  609  ft  5.  610  ft,  611  ft  3.  623  ft

6,  626  ft  3.

'Ainu-l-MuIk  Mul'’rfii7 — onc»

of  the  Anniv:  of  Snltin  ‘A17u*d*D'n
264,  232,  283.  235,  290.  291.
292,  294.  312.

Aijaz,  Amir. — one  of  I'.e  favourites
of  Sultan  MaiinnVi  of  ^aznin,  32
ft  1.  33  and  ft  3 31
A:vlz.  Malik,  Kh''  r.i'i'laLan,  '9  iw
— of  the  Atulrs  «.f  Sulran  Mul-am-
in.id  TngUKi  { 81;. di.  304  315-
Aivftb,  Kh\Nlj'-  ihn  Kh Abu-'-
Parakat,  of  M5'v  iran-n-Xahr,  a
poet  of  the  ol  llniii'«\ur.  f‘.32

and  ft  2,  633,  634.  6,i6

‘4, ' '-la  il-Q'iZwiiii.  79
n 2.

4;  d .•[.ychK:"  3; ' . u_\  _ h.

Ajam  ^Persia),  233.

Ajuwan.  town,  495.

Ajawaii, — a Bhagat  ooy  to  ^'hon*
Islera  ^ali  gave  the  name  of
ilujahid  Khan.  557  ft  8.

Ajla-l-jahlidli,  516  and  ft  2.

Ajmir,  69  and  7!  2,  70  and  n 2,  120  /’
4,  124,  129  ft  2.  477.

Ajudhaii.  — known  also  as  Pak

l^at  au,  133  n,  233.  349  ?i  3.  355
and  nu  1 and  3,  360.  362  and  H 2
and  S,  363  n.  520  ft  2.  See  also
the  nesi.

Ajftdhva,  town,  223  n.  Same  as
Ajddhan.  (q.  r.).

Ajydra.  Daulac  Khan,  son  of  Sazawdl
Khdp.  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Isiem
Shah,  527,  531,  532  and  ft  2.

Akati  ^au.  brother’s  son  o5  Snltan
‘Alau-d-DIn  Khilji,  258  and  ft  7.
259  and  n 5.

Akbar,  the  Emperor,  8 and  n 2.  9 ft  2,
5S  n 5,  63  /i,  97,  125  ft  1,  132  ft  3,
306  ft  1,  383  ft  8,  408  a 1.  421  ft  8,
432  ft  10,  464  ft  5,  320.  566  and  ft
13,  568  It  6.  580  and  n 5.  581,  592  ft
9,  694  and  n 6.  596,  597-

Akhut  Xihti'i  of  Abu-i‘Fazl

'Aildni'  ftj4,  579  ft  7.

Akbar  l4i«h,  8 and  n 2.  See  under
Akbar

Akchak,  a district  of  Hiiidustan  334
and  It  4.

Akhah  C-.  wri,  334  4.

ft.  a kiiii.!  of  rimsi(.M!  ( ni'U  cuic*
meat  332  and  n 5,  l'J6

Akhiiftip  ir.  naii'.--  (»!  the

i-nv!i  of  F ' L - : .1 . a-'  t hr  ■ 1.  !■;[  . * %■
naiit  b\  Faoz  ^th  33^■  .-na  3,

Aih>  ‘ sptt  3,  274  . 5.

Indejc.

IX

Ak^or  Beg,  a Court  Officcj  232.

Akktd,  a gelding,  274  n 5.

Ak^und,  tutor,  589  and  n 2,  the
Akhund,  Maulana  Zainu-d-Din
Mahmud  Kamangar  Kaqshbandi,
589,  590  and  n 6.

A^yafi,  brothers  by  the  same  mother
but  a different  father,  466  n 7.

Al-Aasi,  son  of  Kablh,  of  the  tribe  of
Quraish,  killed  in  the  battle  of
Badr,  74  n 2.

Alagh  Khani  (Ulugh  KhanU,  a canal
leading  from  the  Sutlej,  now  called
the  Jureah  canal,  325  n 3.

‘Alai  Mahdi  of  Baiona,  son  of

Shaikh  Hasan  of  Bangala,  507  and
n 1,  509,  511,  512,  513,  514,  515,
516,  517,  518,  519,  521,  522,  523,
524.  [to  God,  515  n 6.

Al'Ajali,  the  Great,  an  epithet  applied

^Alam,  a standard  or  ensign,  483  n 2.

‘Alam  Khan,  title  of  ‘AiQu-l-Mulk
Multani  (q.  r.),  292,

‘Alam  Khan,  son  of  Sultan  Bohlul
Lodi,  411  n 2,

‘Alam  Khan  Lodi,  Governor  of  Kilpi,
— one  of  the  Amirs  of  Humayun,
436,  437,  438,  443,  446.

‘Alam  Khan,  Governor  of  Miwat, —
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  419  and  n 2.

‘Alam  Lodi,  Sultan,  ibn-i-Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi.  451,  454.

‘Alam,  Malik,  Governor  of  Daulat-
abad, — of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Muhammad  Tughlaq  ^iih,  313.

‘Alams,  the  two — , or  standards,  the
sun  and  moon,  147  n-  2.

'Alam-t-amr,  the  world  of  the  ordel,
or  potentiality,  105  /i  1,

•2

tiie  world  of  creation,
or  the  material  world,  105  n.

^Alainu-l-Haiicdn,  the  animal  world,
147  n 2.  [147  n 2.

‘AZamit-L/ws,  the  world  of  mankind,

^Alamu-l-Jinn,  the  world  of  the  jinn
or  genii,  147  /i  2.

‘Alamu-l-Ma'ddin,  the  mineral  world,
147  n 2.

''Alarim-l-MaldUkah,  the  world  of
angels,  147  n 2.

''Alamu'n-2^abdt,  the  vegetable  world,
147  n 2.

Alaptagin.  See  under  Alptigin.

Al-Arkdu,  the  four  elements.  102  n i.

Al-Asma'i,  the  celebrated  Ajab  Gram-
marian and  Philologist,  75  n.

‘Alau'd-Daulah  Ma3‘ud,  Sultan,  ihn
Saiyyidu'S-SalItJn  Ibrahim  Ghaz-
nawi,  55  and  n 2.

‘Alau*d-Daulah  of  Samnan.  Shaikh.
571  n 9.

‘Alau-d-Din,  Sultan,  title  of  ‘AH
Mardan  (5.  v.)  as  ruler  of  Lakh*
nauti,  86.

‘Alaa-d*Pin  Ayaz,  Kotwal  of  the  New
Castle  of  Dihll,  under  Sultan  ‘Alau-
d-Din  Khilji,  260  n 5.

‘Aiau-d-Din,  Saiyyid,  Governor  of
Badaon  under  Sultan  Firoz  Shah,
335  and  i*.  6.

‘Aiau-d-Din  Badaoni,  Sultan  of  Dihli,
335.  See  ‘Alau-d-Din  ibn  Muham-
mad Shuh.

‘Alau-d-Din  Bahram  ^ah,  Sultan  of
the  Deccan,  309,  314-  See  Hasan
Kaithali.

*Alau-d-DIn,  Sultan,  king  of  Bangala,
— contemporary  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  417.

z

Index,

‘Alau-d-Din  Dhirwal,  Malik, — of  tlie
Amirs  of  Sultan  Mahmud  Shah  of
Bihli,  349.

*Aliu-d-BIn  Hasan  ibn  Husain  Suri,
King  of  Gbur,  60,  6 1 , 62.  Same  as
the  next  (q.  t*.).

‘Alau-d-Din  Husain  ibn  Hasan  Ghori
Jahansoz,  the  first  of  the  kings  of
Ghnr,  61  71  4,  64  71  2.  See  also  the
above.

‘Alau-d-Din  Jani,  Malik,— of  the
Maliks  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Dm
lyal-timish,  94  n 3,  98  n 2.
*Alan-d-Din,  Governor  of  Karra,  236.

See  ‘Alau-d-Din  Khilji.

‘Alan-d-Din  Khafi,  Malik  ‘Izzn-l-
Mnlk,  Governor  of  Lakhnanti, — of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Din
lyal-timish,  94  and  n 3.

‘Alau-d-Din  Khilji,  Malik  and  after-
wards Sultan,  232,  236,  237,  238.
239,  240,  241,242,243,  244,  246.
247  n,  249,  250  and  n 5,  251,  252  n
1,  254  n 1,  256,  259,  266,  2 6 9 and
n 1,  271  n 6,  273  and  1,  274  and
n 1,  282,  283,  286  n 1,  289,  290.  291.
292,  294  and  n 3,  296  and  « 3,  379
n 2,  397  n 1,  472.

‘Alau-d-Din  of  Lakhnanti,  Snltan
See  under  ‘Ali  Mardan.

'Alau-d-Din,  of  Lakhnanti,  Snltan,
309.  See  under  ‘Ali  Mnbarak.
*Alaa-d-Din  Mas'Qd,  Sultan,  £>on  of
Saiyyidu-8-Salatin  lb  ahim  ibn
Sultan  Mas'ud  Ghazuawi,  55  and
n n 2 and  4.

‘Alan-d-DinMas‘iid^ahibn  Rnknn-d-
Din  Firoz  Shah,  of  the  ^amsiyah
Sultans,  124,  125.  126.

’Alau'd-Din  ibn-i-Muhammad  Snah

ibn-i-Mnbarak  ^ah  ibn-i-Khizr
^han,  Sultan  of  Dihli,  398,  399,
400  and  n,  401  and  n 4,  402  and
n 1,  405  and  n 4,  406,  409.

‘Alan-d-Din  Sikandar  Shah.  Sultan,
ibu-i-Muhammad  §hah  ibn-i-Firoz
Shah.  347.  See  Humayun  Khan,
son  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Shah.

‘Alan-l'Mnlk,  Malik,  uncle  of  Ziau-d-
Din  Bami  the  Historian,  KotwM  of
the  New  Castle  of  Dihli  under
Saltan  ‘Alan-d-Din  ^iilji,  237, 2d9,
255,  260  and  n 5.

Albernni.  See  under  Albirunl.

Albiruni’s  Chronology  (Sachau),  76  7t,
104  n 2.  108  71  4,  166  n 1,  280  Tin  3
and  4,  369  n 3,  627  n 1.

Albiruni’s  India  (Sachau),  l7  ti  4,
21  n 4,  22  nn  1 and  5,  23  nn  2 and
3,  24  71  6,  25  71  1,  27  71  4,  28  n 3,
36  n 10,  76  n,  79  n 2,  95  n 5,  114
n 2,  131  n 2,  332  n 4.

Alburz,  mountain  of, — in  Persia,  178
n 2.

Alchemy,  science  of,  244  n 6.

Alexander  the  Great,  35  m 2,  191  rt  2,
254  and  n 5,  331  n 10,  332  n,  389
n 2,  5&5  n S,  595  n 7.

Aiexandri.in  School,  the.  374  n 5.

Alf  Khan.  See  Alp  Kh-in  Sinjar.

Alfi,  ^ n 4.  See  andertbe  Tarikh-i-
Ain.

Alghdyatu  by  Qazi  Baizawi

6 n 4.

Alghii  Khan,  the  Magrbui.  grandson  of
Chingiz  Khun,  and  son-in-law  of
Sultan  Jaialu-d-Din  236

248.

‘All  ibn-Abi  Talib,  the  fourth  Kha-
iitah  3 a 6,  59  and  n 4,  74  and

« 2,  80  n 5,  93  n 4,  105  n 2,  106
and  n 5,  151  « 5,  156,  157  n 2,  158
rt,  207  ajid  n 6,  260  n 7,  303  n 4,
376,  505  and  n 6,  572  and  n 1,  57,
n,  ®)4,  622  n 3,  629  ft  5.  See
under  Asada-llah.

‘AH  Beg  Mnghnl,  a prince  of  the  royal
house  of  Khurasan^  250,  251  and
n 5,  252.

‘AH  Daya,  one  of  the  generals  of
Saltan  Mas‘ad,  son  of  Solt^
Mahmud  Ghaznawh  43.

Alidek  range  of  mountains,  530  n 3,

Mifj  the  first  letter  of  the  Alphabet,
100  and  nn  2 and  3,  587  « 5,
634  and  n 1.

Aliganj  tahsil^  185  n 1,  218  n 3.

Aligarh,  town,  135  n 1,  386  n 6.

*Ali  Gujratl,  Amir,— of  the  Amirs  of
Snl£an  Mabarak  Shah  of  BihH,
396.

‘AH  Istna‘11,  the  Sipah  Salar, — one
of  the  Amirs  of  Saltan  Qatbn*d-Din
Aibak,  88.

‘AH,  son  of  lyal  Araalan,  a relative  of
Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  33  n 2.

‘All  Karmakh.  69  n 1,  See  under
‘AH  Kirmaj.

‘Ail,  of  Kashmir,  Saltan,  381.

‘All  Elhan.  a prince  of  the  family  of
Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Khiljl.  291.

‘AH  Khan,  a relation  of  Muhammad
E^an,  the  ruler  of  K’agor,  423  n 11,
425.

‘All  l^atati,  a court  officer  of  Saltan
Muhamuiad  Tughlaq  Shah,  304.

‘All,  Khilafat  of^  577  n.

‘AH  Khi^riwandi,  a relative  of  Sultan
Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  33  n 2.

‘AH  Kinuaj,  an  Amir  of  the  Ghori

dynasty,  Governor  of  Mol  tin,  66
and  ft  4,  69  and  n 1.

‘AH  Kirmany,  66  n 4,  For  ‘AH
Kirmaj  (q.v.),

‘All,  son  of  Kizil  Araalan,  father-in-
law  of  Saltan  Ma^iid  of  ^aanin,
33  ft  2.

‘AH  Korbat,  a relative  of  Salian
Mahmud  of  Cffiaznin,  33  n 2.

‘AH  Malik,  Got*eruGr  of  ITchh,  under
Sarang  Khan,  the  mler  of  Dipalpur,
353.

‘AH  Mardan,  one  of  Muhammad
Bakhtvar’s  Generals,  seizes  the
sovereignty  of  Lakhnanti  under  the
style  of  Sultan  ‘Alan-d-Din,  85,  86
and  n 2,  88  ft  1.

Al-i-Marwan,  the, — a branch  of  the
Umayjad  family,  59.

‘All  Masij  (Mich),  Amir,  a chief  of
the  tribes  of  Kunch  and  Mij,  83
and  ft  4.  Called  also  ‘Ali  Mlj,

‘AH  ibn  Ma8‘ud  ibn  Mahmud  Ghazna-
wi,  Sultan  of  Ghaznin.  50  and  n 1.

‘AH  Mlj,  83  ft  4.  See  under  *AH
! Masij.

I 'AH  Mubarak,  Inspector  of  Troops
1 under  Sultan  Muhammad  Tughlaq
I Shah.  308,  309.  Assumes  the  title
of  ‘Alan-d-DIn  as  Sultan  of  Lakh-
nautl.

‘AH  Mughul,  ^ai^,  ruler  of  Kabul,
—contemporary  of  Sultan  Mubarak
^ah  of  Dihii,  388,  389,  390,  391,
392.

Al-i-Muhammad  Mustafa,  the  Family
cf  the  Prophet,  59,

‘AH  ibn  Muhammad  Sahibu-z-Zauj,
of  the  family  of  ‘AH,  raises  a revolt
at  Basra,  458  n 3.

Index.

‘All,  son  of  Musa  ar-Eiza,  one  of  the
twelre  Imams  of  the  Shi‘ah,  573
n 3.

‘All  Qnli,  Usta,  the  Artillerist  of
Babar,  439  and  n 6.

*Aii  Qnli  Khan  E^aibani.  the  Khan-i-
Zaman,  son  of  Haidar  Sultan
Osbak-i-Shaibani, — oneof  the  Amirs
of  Hnmayiin  and  Akbar,  592  and
n 9,  594,  597,  598,  599,  600.

‘All  Qnli  ^an  Sistani, — one  of  the
Amirs  of  Humayun,  590.  Probably
the  same  as  above.

‘Ali  bin  Eabi‘,  an  Amir  of  the  Gha?.-
navide  dynasty,  48,  50  and  « 1.

‘Ali,  ring  of,  possessed  of  magical
properties,  505  and  zi  6.

‘Ali  Sarjandar,  Malik, — one  of  tne
Amirs  of  SnltanMuhammadTnghlaq
Shah,  313.

‘Ali,  Shaitt,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Humayun,  565  n 1.

‘AH,  Shai^,  the  ruler  of  Kabul.  See
under  ‘Ali  Mnghul.

‘Ali  Shafranji,  Khwaja,  Auhadi’s  Life
of,  114  ti  2.

‘Ali  Sher,  the  Vazir  Amir,  disciple  of
Manlana  Jami,  32  n 2.

‘All  Sher,  sister’s  son  to  ^far  Khan
‘Ala’i, — an  Amir  of  the  time  of
Sultan  Muhammad  Tughlaq  Shah.
311.

‘Ali,  Sultan,  King  of  Kashmir,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Mubarak  Shah
of  Dihli,  381.

‘Ali  Tagin,  ruler  of  Mawari-an-Nahr,
— contemporary  of  Sultan  Alahmud
Ghaznawi,  27.

Allahabad,  city  of,  415  n 5,  417  n 7,
486  n 6.

Allahabad,  Sarkiir  of,  416  n 3.

Allahdad  Kalu  or  Kala,  Lodi,  Malik,
— one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Mnferak  Shah  of  Dihli,  391,  39.5
396,  398.

Allahddd  Lodi,  Malik,  398.  See
Allahdad  Kalu  Lodi.

-Almagest  of  Ptolemy,  76  n.

Almanstira  in  Sindh,  36  « 10.  See
under  al-Mansurah.

Alor,  city  of,  66  n 2.

Alp  Araalan,  son  of  Daud.  son  of
Mika’il,  son  of  Suljiiq,  second
monarch  of  the  Saljuqiyah  dynasty,
35  and  n 1 . 51  and  n 2.

Alp  Khan,  Governor  of  Dhar,  384
and  n 5,  385,  Governor  of  Kalpi,
.393.  Same  as  the  next  q.  v.

Alp  Khan,  commonly  called  Sultan
. Hoshang,  mler  of  Malwa.  363  n 2,
384  and  n 5,  385,  393.

Alp  ^lan,  title  of  Sinjar,  wife’s
brother  of  Sul  tan ‘A15n-d-Din  l^ilji,
247,  249,  254,  267,  282.

Alptagin.  See  under  -Alptigin.

Alptigin,  a slave  of  the  house  ot  the
Samanis,  the  independent  gover-
nor of  Gh&zm  and  Kabul,  13  II  1,
14  and  m ti  1 and  2,  16  n 3.

Alptigin  Hajib,  an  Amir  of  the
Ghaznavide  dynasty,  47  n 5.

Aitamish  or  lyaltimish,  88  n 3.  See
under  Shamsn-d-Din  lyaltimish.

Altamsh,  meaning  of  the  woid,  89
n 1.

.Altigin,  47  and  n 5.  Same  as  Alpti-
gin Hajib  {q.  v.)

Altun  Bahadur, — one  of  the  Amirs  oi
the  king  of  Khurasan,  320.

Altiin  T;is]i,  an  officer  of  Sultan  Mah-

hidesp.

xiii

Tnud  of  Ghaznin,  whom  he  appoints
Governor  of  Shwarazm,  with  the
title  of  Khwarazm  Shah.  23.

Altunlyah,  Malik.  See  under  Ikhti-
yaru-d-DIn  Altunlyah.

Alwar,  town  and  fortress,  129  n 2,
256,  385,  443,  462,  534.  542,  543,
547,  553.  See  also  under  Ulwar.

Alyas  Khan,  Governor  of  Chhain,
nnder  Masnadd-'AU  Khizr  Khan.
Sultan  of  Dihll,  379  and  n 2.

‘Amad  Khan  Karranl, — one  of  the
Afghan  Amlra  of  Hindustan,  540.

Amal  or  Amol,  capital  of  Tabaristan,
36  and  n 2.

Amani  Kabuli,  Mirza,  a poet  of  the
time  of  Humayuu,  587  and  n3,  616.

Atnarcosh,  a Sanskrit  Dictionary,
374  n.

Amarkot,  town,  464  n 5,  564,  566  and
n 13,  567  n 1,  568  n 6,

Ambala,  town,  330  n 7,  334,  362  n 1,

Amber,  town,  520.  [492,  493.

Ambergris,  notes  on,  182  n 1,

Ameer  Jadeeda,  334  n 2.

‘Amid  Abu  Nasr,  Maqamat  of, — by
Baihaql,  32  n.

Amid  Dailaml,  the  poet,  99  n 4,
138  7t  1.  Called  also  ‘ Amid  Lumaki,
q V.

Amid  Lumaki,  of  Gilan,  the  poet.
— panegyrist  of  Saltan  Muhammad  j
Yamin,  99  and  n 4,  138  and  n 1,
141,  144,  151, 159  7i  1,  160,  165  and
n 1,  169,  172,  177,  182.  Called
also  'Amid  Dailaml.

Amid  Luyaki,  99  n 4,  for  ‘Amid
Lumaki  the  poet,  (g.  r.).

‘Amid  Tulaki,  99,  for  ‘Amid  Lumaki,
the  poet.  (g.  r,),  *

A'/nln,  Chief  Commissioner,  497.

Amin  b*‘ Abdullah  Kashari,  governor
of  Khurasan,  under  Hisham  ibn
‘Abdu-l-Maiik  (q.  i’.),  13  n 1.

Amin  ^^an,  Governor  of  Bengal,
under  Sultan  Ghiyasa-d«Diti  Balkan,
1 186.

j Amir  of  the  Eight  Squares,  the

j Wazir  at  Chess,  103  and  n 1.

j Amir  Abu  Talib,  of  ‘Iraq,  Saiyyid,

j — a skilful  physician  of  the  reign

i of  Islem  Shah,  505.

1 —

j Amir  ‘'AU  ^er.  the  Vazir,  disciple  of

Maulana  Jami,  32  7i  2.

Amir  Arslan  Katibi.  See  Arslati
Katibi.

Amir  Hasan.  See  Hasan  of  Itihli,
the  poet.

Amir  Khalifa,  Prime  Minister  of
Babar,  451.

Amir  Khan  ibn-i^Da’ud  Khan  ibn-i-
Shams  Khan  Aubadi,  the  Governor
of  Baiana,  385  n 1.

Ajnir  Khusru.  the  poet.  134  n 4, 135  n,
143  n 3.  Bee  under  Khnsru  and
Mir  Khusru.

Amir,  Khwaja,  of  the  Amirs  of  Babar,
446.

Amir  Aln/afF  ir, — one  of  the  Maliks  of
Shaikh  ‘All  Mughal,  the  King  of
Kabul,  3S9,  390,  392.

Amir  Ruhini,  Hakim  Abu  Bakr
ibn  Muhammad  ‘All  Samarqandi,
— a learned  man  of  the  time  of
Saltan  ^amsu-d-Din  lyaLtimi^,
93  and  n 2.  [san,  571  n 9.

Amir  Shaikh  Hasan,  King  of  Khura-

.Amir  Tarnghiich , title  of  Ibak,  slave
of  Saltan  Qulou-d-DIn  Aibak,  89
and  n 2.

XIY

Index.

Amirdn-u^da,  the  Amirs  of  hun-
dreds, 334  and  n 2.

AmIra-l-Millat  Yamiuti-d-D  a a 1 a t,
title  of  Snltan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,
17.

Amiru-l-Umara  (Chief  of  the  Amirs),
a title,  90.

Amirn-l-ITmarS  Fakhra-d-Din.  Kot-
wdl  of  Dihll,  260  n 2.  See  Maliku-
1-TJmara.

Amim-I-Umara  Hindu  Beg,  of  the
Amirs  of  Hnmayun,  457.  See  under
Hindu  Beg  Qiichin.

Amini-i-Umara,  Malik  Mabarak  Ka-
bir, — of  the  Amirs  of  Tcghlaq
Shlh,  grandson  of  Saltan  Firuz,  343
and  n 1.

Amol,  capital  of  Tabaristan,  also
written  Amal,  36  ■n  2.

‘Amr  ibn  al-‘A?,  of  the  Banu  Umay-
yah,  one  of  the  Governors  ot
Ma*awiyah,  157  n 2.

*Amr  ibn-n-Lais  as-Saffar,  King  of
TrVniraaan,  4SI  and  n 6*

AmrdZ‘i-Mutazdddahj  463  and  n 1.

/

Amritsar,  520.

Amroba,  town,  l8o,  231,  2ol,  261,
26S,  395,  398,  546  and  n 5.

Amron  ibn  ai-‘A?.  See  *Amr  ibn
al-‘As,

Amu  Darya,  the, — the  Jaifaiui  or
Oxas,  27  » 1.

And,  a mother,  in  Turki,  568  n 6.

Anagah  or  Andgah,  foster-mother,  in
Turki,  580  n 5.  See  also  the  next.

Andka,  Andkd,  or  Andkah,  wet-nurse,
in  Turk),  464  n 5,  568  n 6,  580  n 5.
See  also  Ariagah.

Anandpal  or  Anand  Pal,  son  of  Jaipal,
luler  of  Hind, — contemoorary  of

Sultan  Mahmud  of  Qiaznin,  20
22  n 6.

Anandraj,  Farhang  of,  596  n 6.

Anberi,  township  of,  530  and  n 9

Ancipnt  Aralyian  Poetry,  Lyall’s  In-
troduction to,  99  n 6.

Ancient  Geography  cf  India,  Cunning-
ham’s, 21  n 4,  22  71  5,  23  n 2,  24
n 6,  48  «,  5,  66  n 3,  67  1,  69  n 5,

80  n.  1,  132  n 3,  265  nn  2 and  4,  293
n 5,  362  n 2,  363  n,  382  n 4,  389  n
2,  415  n 5.

Ancient  India,  McCrindle’s,  364  n 4*

‘Andhli,  the  name  *Adli  (q.  v.)  per-
verted, 536  and  n 10.

Andhra,  country,  265  n 2.

Andkhud.  fortress  of,  71.

Anhalpnr,  original  name  of  Patan,  a
city  of  Gujeriic,  28  n 2.

Anhahvara  (2s^eiiroaIaj,  ancient  name
of  Patan,  a city  of  Gnjerar,  28  n 2.

Anhelwara  (^S’ahrwala;  kingdom,  in
Gnjerat,  256  n 4.

Ankas,  in  Hindi,  a hook  or  goad  for
elephants,  118  n-  2.

An^naJm,  the  Pleiades,  630  n 4.

Anaa^es,  of  Abul  Fida,  167  n 4.

'Angd\  a fabulous  bird,  called  SImurgh
in  Persian,  178  7i  4.

Ansar,  the,  — tiibes  of  al-MadInah
who  supported  the  Prophet,  215
and  n 7,  216  n.

Ansuri,  Hakim,  — a famous  Persian
poet,  17  « 3.

Ant,  notes  ou  the,  108  n 1.

Autarl,  towusiiip  of,  530  n 9.

Anth : Grum  ; Arab  ; , of  de  Sacj,
6 .i  4.

Anti-Christ,  273  n 369  n 3.  See
under  ad-iltjjiil.

Index.

XV

Ants,  Valley  of  the,  340  n 2.

Anwarl,  the  famous  Persian  poet,  54
71  1,  76  71  1,  626.

Anicdru-t-T'jnzU^  the,  a celebrated
coniTnentary  on  the  Qur’an  by  Qazi
Baizawl  {q.  r.),  6 'i-  4.

Aowla,  forest  of,  379,

^Aql-i-awical,  374  n 5.  See  under
‘Aql-i-kall.

^Aql-i-hull,  called  also  ^Aql-i'atou'al,
the  first  or  supreme  intelligence,  a
name  given  to  the  Angel  Gabriel,
374  n 5.

*Aql  Ndmah^  a work  by  Hakim  Sanai,
the  celebrated  poet,  56  n 2.

Aqtd‘Si  597'  See  Iqfi'  grants.

Arabia,  3.

Araoian  liights,  the.  143  u 1.

Arabian  Poetry,  Clouscou’s,  99  n 6.

Arabs,  the,  28,  61  n 6,  94,  117  n 2,
145  71  1,  U6  n 1,  192  n 2,  198  ti  2,
2S7,  369  71  1,  527  n 3,  630  n 4,  637

71  1.

Arabum  Proverhia^  Freytag’s,  458  n 3,
507  71  3,  580  71  i.

Arail,  town,  415  n 4.

Aram  Shah.  Sultan,  ibn  Sultan
Qutba-d-Din  Aibak,  37,  88  and  n I,

Araugal  or  Warangul,  265  7i  4,  See
Arankal.

Arankal,  ancient  capital  of  Telingaoa,
265  and  n 4,  297,  299.  After-
wards called  Snltanpur.  The  L'ame
is  also  written  Arangai  or  tVarau-
gal.

‘Ar‘ar,  the  Juniper  tree,  182  n 4.

M'-ar,  an  accident,  a lerm  of  .Muslim
theology,  614  2.

A'idZ‘0-jawdhir,  614  ti  2.  See  under  I

i

and  Jauh'jr,

ArdabU,  a town  of  Persia,  573.

Arg,  meaning  of,  314  n 1.

Arghawan.  the,  ( Arabice)  Arjnw^,  a
kind  of  tree,  109  ti  4,  172  and  n 4,
173.

Aria,  ancient  name  of  Herat,  in
Kharasan.  35  n 2.

'Arif,  or  holy,  a Sufi  title,  32  ti  2,  272
and  n 1.

Aril,  a place  near  Ilahabas  (Allaha-
bad), 415  and  7i  4.

Aristotle,  255.

*Ariz-i-JfamdIii,  ilnstermaster  Gene-
ral, 230  71  1,  293  and  ti  2.

Arjnwan,  the.  See  under  Arg^wan.

Arkal,  a place,  415  ti  4.

Arkali  Khan,  son  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-
Hin  Khilji,  231,  233,  235,  236,  244,
247  and  n and  ti  4,  248  and  n 8.

Al-Arkan,  the  four  elements,  102
n 1.

Arman,.'»ountry  cf,— iu  the Shdh  Xdma
of  Firdausi,  180  n 2.

, Armenia,  61  n 5.

Armenians,  the,  130  n 1.

Arrah,  town,  1S5  n 1.

^Vrrian,  the  Greek  geographer,  23  n
3,  24  n 6,  30  n 1,  332  n.

Arsacia,  an  ancient  name  of  the  city
of  Ua'  (q.  i’.),  30  n 1.

Arsalan  Khan,  one  of  the  Shamaiyah
Aralrs.  130,  131.

Arsalan  Shah,  Sultan,  ibn  Mas'ud  Ibn
Sayyidn-s-Salatin  Ibrabiin  Ghazna-
wi,  55  and  n 4,  56  and  n 1.

Arsar  Khan,  one  of  she  Amirs  of
Sultan  Mu‘iz2U-d*DIn  Kaiqubad,
the  grandson  of  Snitan  Ghiyasu-d-
Diu  Balban,  226  n 1.

Arslan  Kaiibi,  Amir,  an  eminent  poet

ivi  Index.

of  the  reign  of  Saltan  Jalalu-d-
Din  Khilji,  245.

Artagia,  a general  of  Saltan  Maadud
Giaznawi,  47.

Artanll,  township,  386  and  n 6.

‘Arus'i-Jahaa.  town,  37S  n 2.

“Aruz,  a term  of  Prosody, — explana-
tion of,  606  n 4.

Aryal,  a place,  415  n 4.

Arzan^  the  smaller  millet,  465  n 6.

Arzhan,  desert  of,  between  Bashire
and  Shiraz,  572  and  n 1.

Asad  Xnaa  Lodi, — of  the  Amirs  of
Mahmud  Shah,  the  grandson  cf
Firoz  Shah,  364.

Asad  bin  Saman,  founder  of  the
Samani  dynasty,  the  princes  of
Khnrasan,  14  1.

Aa^adalc  Allihy  412  and  n 3.

^Asadu-d-Din  ibn  Yaghrash  Khan,

« ^

called  Malik  Khamush, — uncle’s  son

of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Khiljl.  283.

Asad  ‘tJllah,  or  the  Lien  of  God,
a name  of  ‘Ali  ibn  Abl  T^lib,  93  n
4,  150.

Asaf,  Wazii-  of  Solomon,  King  of  the
Jews,  206  n.

Asamabad,  town  of,  21  n 4.

Afdru-l-Bildd,  the,  — of  al-Qazwini,
n 4.

Asawal,  town  in  Gujarat,  357  n 4.  361.

*A?fir,  a flower,  173  n 3.

Asghar.  Governor  of  Dihli  under  Sul-
tan Sikandar  Lodi,  418.

Ash’ari,  Sharafu-l-Malk,  of  the  Amirs
of  Sultan  ‘Alan-d-Din  Mas'ua  Shah,
of  Dihli,  125.

'^Ahhars,  portions  of  ten  Ayats  into
which  the  Qur’an  has  been  divided,
102  and  1.

j Al’Ashhdh  ica-h-Xazu'ir,  a work  on
Fiqh  or  Jurisprudence,  by  Zaina-L
LAbidin  bin  Najim,  5 n 4,

Ashhab,  or  white  ambergris,  182  n 1,

'Ashlqa^  a poem  by  Mir  Khusru,  of
Dihli,  256.  264,  266,  267  n 1,  274  n
1.  276  n 1.

Asbraf  Padshah,  635  n 5.

A^rafl^  a gold  coin,  called  after
A^raf  Padshah,  635  n 5.

A^rafa-d-Din  Hasan  ibn  Nasiri-L
i ‘Alavi, — a poet  of  the  time  of
j Bahrain  Shah  Ghiznawi,  56  n 3.
t Same  as  Sayyid  Hasan  Ghaznawi
i the  Poet,  q.  V.

j ‘Ashura’,  day  of,  199  n 3,  2U0  and  n.
j 320  and  n 4,  464,  622,
j Asi  river,  the,  otherwise  known  as
j the  Medaki,  419  n 6.

I Asia,  Northern,  191  n 2.

; Asiatic  Lithographic  Press,  the,  102
n 1,

Asiatic  Researches,  374  n.

Asiatic  Society  of  Bengal,  127  n 2,
511  n 2.

Asir,  QazI, — contemporary  of  Saltun
Ghiyusu-d-Din  Balban,  217.

‘Asjadi,  Hakim  Abu  Na^r  ‘Abdu-1*
‘Aziz  ibn  Mansur,  a celebrated  pcet
of  Mer^,  17  and  n 3.

I *AskarI,  Mirza,  one  of  the  Mughal
chiefs  under  HumayOn,  455,  455,
567,  56S.  573,  574,  575,  585  and

n 9.

Ad  tea  Far\  signification  of  the
t term,  5 n 4.

: Asmd\  names  or  attributes  of  the
I Deity,  459  n 2.

. Asma'i,— the  celebrated  Arab  grain-
maiiau  and  philoiogisi,  75  n.

Ltdea:.

X VJl

A^'u'jn-l-hu.oiq.  the  best  of  naciea,
603  and  n 5.

As-int/u-l'Jalullyeh,  terrible  attributes
of  the  Deity,  459  n 2.

Ai^mdii-l-JaT/idUyeh.  atniable attributes
of  the  Deity,  459  ii  2.

A:>parag^  a herb,  173  ?i  2.

Ayirafu-1-Mnlk,  of  the  Amirs  of
Saltan  Firoz  Shah,  brother’s  sou  of
Ghiyasa-d-Din  TnghUiq,  324

As-Suyuti  See  tinder  Suyuti.

Astarji,  the  jinn  who  stole  Soloraou’s
signet  ring,  and  ruled  in  his  place,
205  3,  206  ,i.

Astronomers  or  (.xreece.  75  n 2.

Asun  river,  the. — flowing  west  of
Gwaliar,  419  n 6.

Aid,  a father,  in  Turki,  5S8  n 6.

Aidbak  or  Aidbek,  a Turki  word,
signification  of,  568  n 5.

AtdbaJcJ,  the  office  of  Atdbak  (q.  tn),
568  n 5.

Acabaks  of  Azarbaijan,  the.  158  n 3.

AtdJcd,  a Turki  word,  meamng  of,  464
n 5,  568  )i  6.

A tala  Dasjid,  at  Jaunpur,  builc  by
Sultan  Ibrahim  of  Jaunpur,  564
3.

AtdU_gh,  or  AtdUq,  a Turki  word,
signification  of,  468  and  n 2,  569  n
5,  597.

Atashkudd  i-Aziir,  the,  32  nn  1 and
2,  35  n 1,  53  ti,  54  li-  1,  96  n 2,  i34
3,  187  yi  2,  270  n 6,  341  nn  1
and  2,  581  n 3

Aiava,  a town  in  the  Sarkar  ot  A-gra,
70  n 3.  See  under  Atawah-

Atltwah,  town  of,  in  Kindaslau,  70
and  h 3.  Also  written  AtavU;  (w  t.).

A‘gnh.  568  u 6.

3

Atgah  Khau  Sh  eui^u-d-DIn  Mah.am-
I mad.  See  u.ider  Atka  Khan.

I Atlkd^  a Turki  word,  meaning  of,  464
j 71  5.

Atka,  a Turk!  word,  meaning  of,  464
n 5,  568  6.

Atka  Khin,  ’^hurasn-d-Dhi  Muham*

* mad.  son  't  5i:r  A’ar  I'luhammad  of
Ghazni,  die  of  the  Amirs  of
. Humayun  ..nd  foster-father  to
Prince  AkhAi’.  404  5,  563,  568

and  /I  b.

Atkinson’s  inf  Y.h'.ah.  32  ; 1.  116
' ?i  5,  178  7l  2 iSu  ■;  2,  321  o 1.  435

! n 2.

. Atlas,  meanings  of  the  word.  142  i.
j 246  n 3.

I

i Atlas,  Keith  Johnson's  Royal,  567  n 1,
j 570  n 7,

I Atlas  of  India,  384  n 1.
j Attock,  on  the  Indus,  20  *1  1.  44  n 6
I 358  n 6.

\ Aticdly  the,  — a geopraphical  work,

] 14  n 3,  29  8,  SO  n 1.

I *Anf  ibn  Q.issi  (called  also  Saqif),

i 12  n 1.

*Aufi,  Muhammad,  author  of  the
Jdini^uA-Hikdydt  and  Tazkiraiu-^h-
Skidard,  220,

Aubad  Khan  Auhadi,  Governor  of
Baiana.  385,

AuhadTs  Life  of  l^waja  ‘All  Sh.Rt-
, ranji,  114  n 2.

! Auhadi  family  of  Baiana,  the
I Governors  of  the  city,  3R6.

\ AM/uku  or  auiaki?,  a Turki  word,  signi-
j fication  of.  354  a 7.

; Aunia,  Lown  of,  7l  n 2.

' Aurangzeb,  Emperoi  ot  India,  32
t'  4.

Index.

xvm

Avicenna,  533  n 1.  | A'zam  ^au  Humayiin,  son  of  Baya-

Awadh  (Oadh),  415.

Awais  Jaliyer,  Snltan,  son  of  Amir
Shaitt  i^asan,  King  of  Khurasan,

571  n 9.  See  also  nnder  Aweis.  Jalinn  Lodi,  — one  of  the  Amirs  of

Awaia  Sirwini,  ^waja,  one  of  the  Snltan  Sikandar  Lodi,  416,  434.

Amirs  of  Islem  Shah,  493  » 7.  A‘zam  Khan  Shamsn-J-Din  Mnham-

Awe,  Loch,  301  n 3.  tnad  of  ^azni,  one  of  the  Amirs  trf

Aweis,  Saljin,  son  of  Shaikh  Hasan  Hnmayun,  464,  Same  as  Atkah
Jalayer,  King  of  ^nrasan,  633  -»  1.  ghan,  (g.  r.).

See  also  nivder  Awais.  A'zim  Malik,  Shaikhzada-i-Bostami,

A ‘i/im,  nterine  brothers,  466  n 7.  I — of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Firoz
Ayek,  the, — a small  river  of  Sialkot,  j Sh.ih,  3'i8.

07  n.  j A‘»»mn-I-Malk,  Malik  ‘Izzn-d-Dia

Ay-tiitulmash,  eclipse  of  the  moon,  A'ahya,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Saltan

probable  origin  of  the  name  lyalti-  Mnhammad  Tugblaq  Shah,  302,  308.

mish,  89  n 1 Azun,  ther— or  call  to  prayer,  472  a 6,

Ayub,  iaaalluf  or  jKjetical  name  of  600  n 9,  601  and  n.

Khwaja  Aiyub  ibn  ^wija  Abn-1-  Azarbaijan,  province  of,  30  a 1,  61  »
Barakat,  a poet  of  the  time  of  5,  158  « 3.

Humayun,  633.  Azdn-d-Danlah  Alp  Arslan,  third

Azadpiir,  fortress  of,  334  n 6.  • monarch  of  the  Saljuqiyah  dynasty,

A'isam  Humayun,  Bayazid,  nephew  of  i 35  and  n 1.  See  nnder  Alp  Arslan.
Sultan  Bahl'il  Lodi,  409,  410  and  j ‘Azdu-d-Daulat.  title  given  by  the
n 1.  ■ Khalifah  AI-QSdir  billah  to  Amir

A'zam  Humayun,  Haibat  Khen  of  | Yusuf,  son  of  Saltan  Mabmud  of

Lahore, — one  of  the  Amirs  of  Shir  | Ghaznin,  29.

Shah,  490,  492,  493,  497  and  k 3,  I ‘Aziz  Himar,  31.3  n 2.  Same  as  the
498,  500.  j neat  (q.  v.),

A'isni  Humayun  Shirwaui,  Governor  j ‘Aziz  Khutoar, — of  the  servants  of
of  Karra,  — one  of  the  Amirs  of  j Sultan  Muhammad  Tugblaq  Shah.
Saijau  Torahhn  bin  Sultan  Sikandar  313  and  " 2.

Lodi,  430.  433,  433,  434,  435.  ‘A-zizu-llah  Tnlumbi  of  Sambhal,

A‘i.ain  Humayun,  son  of  Snltan  Shaikh.  — one  of  she  great  and
Sikandar  Lodi,  451  n 1.  j learned  men  of  the  time  of  Sultan

A‘zam  Hnmayun'Sirwani,  Bihar  Khan.  1 Sikandar  Lodi,  426,  127,439.

Governor  of  Handiya, — one  of  the  j jiz'Jm,  the  airowo  in  the  game  of
Amirs  of  lelein  Shah,  517,  541.  j maisi'’,  369  a 1.

.I'zam  ^an  Eaibat,  of  Lahore,  492.  i ‘A»ra,  herume  of  a TiirkiBh  romance,
Sts  A'zam  Humiyuii  Haibat.  ' mietress  of  Wanuq,  40  and  u 1.

zid,  son  of  Sultan  Bnhlul  Lodi,  410
u 1,  411  n 2,  412  n 2,  414  and  n 2.
A'zam  ^han  Hnmayun,  son  of  Khan-i-

] 'flit  >

XIX

B.  I

BSba  Isbftq  Maghribl,  a Shai^  of  |
Ni^or,  357  n 3.  ]

I

Baba  Qnshaqa. — or  |

Baba  Qn^qahj  one  of  the  Amu'S  of  j

Babar,  441.  581  I

Babao.  the  Afghan,  of  the  AmTrs  of  i

Babar.  439.  ,

Baban,  of  the  Atnirs  of  Sulran  Mab-

mad,  son  of  ShlTiin  Sikandar  LodT.  '

471  and  nn  4 and  6,  472.  i

Eabai'j  9 ?l  2,  93  128  h 3,  421  n 3,  '

436.  437j  438  and  nn  3 and  5.  '

439  449,441.442,44  3 , 444.  445,  ;

447,  4o^,  4ti9.  534,  570,  596,  605

n 1 , 699  and  .i  5.  810.  J

Babar,  Erskine'a  3/e/«oir.«  of,  421  « 8.  ;

437  7,  439  nn  4,  6 and  7,  *40  n,  j

448  n 4,  570  rtn  5 and  6.  i

1

Babari  script,  or  the  Khatru-RabnrT,  ;

invented  by  Babar,  450.

Bubaynumah,  the, — the  Memoirs  of
Babar.  325  n 3.

Baber.  See  under  Babar.

Bi7be/ ncH/uih.  See  tindev  BJbar-n>3f?2ii/i.  j
Babriffln,  for  Bru'rap;!n,  the  Hajib  i
Bnzur^  of  SuUan  Mandud  Ohazna-  ;
wi,  48  71  4.  j

Babu  ^han,  one  of  tlie  Ainirs  of

)

SaUan  Sikandar  Lodi,  419  !

Babul,  the  Aracia  Arabica,  335  » 10,  |
650  n 1,

Babuli,  a place,  335  and  n 10.

Babylon,  169  n 1.

BacbgotTs,  a tribe  of  Eajputs,  414  |
and  n 13.  ;

Badagh  Khun,  of  the  Amirs  of  Shah  j
Tabniasp.  King  of  Persia,  456.  |

Bndakh^rni,  27  h 2,  413.  44S,  5"6,  !
580,  581,  582  585,  605,  608  and  5.

Badaigarh,  fortress  of,  in  Gwaliar,
432  and  n 7.

Biidalgarh. — or

Badal  Garla,  original  name  of  the
citadel  of  Asrra,  432  r.  7,  551  and
n 7.

Badaon.  district  and  town  of,  7l  and
n 2,  88,  39,  90,  97,  99  and  jc  2,
119.123.  i24,  130.  131,  185,  231,
233,  234.  236.  244,  251  260,  266

n 1,  297,  305,  335.  375  377.  379.
380,  386  and  n 4,  396  and  ’!  2,  398,
399,  44d,  402  and  1.  405,  409,
413  and  /;  13,  427,  535.  545.  546.
557,  5o8;  597,  598,  6i'0.  Written
al.^o  Eadaun,  Bud7-ni  a--'!  Bad.um.

Bad'.oTiI,  Abdii-l-Q'd'r  b:.t  Muluk
"I'.lo'-r  01  me-"/

u’ii  ■ 'aJ  1 and  7^  1.  € iind  n 2,
9 /I  2,  11  n 1,  31  n 54  n 2,  62  » 4,
65  n 2,  84  n,  90  n 2 133  7!.  176  n V
3CH5  71  3,  304  71  1,  £06  7t  1.  320  n 5
326  7(  32S  n 6,  3'J9  *1  6.  332.  334
n 2,  S49  rt  12,  356  3.  357  7i  4,  3d8
u 3,  060  n,  366  n 4.  363  -?  i,  388  2,
n.  402  a 1,  404  n 2,  414  7!,f  1
n'id  6,  466  n 7,  473.  497.  50S  ti  3
511  71  2,  543  71  4,  545.  557  71  2,  5"9.
584  n 3,  592  n 9,  609  n 3.  610.

Badlun.  See  under  Badaon.

Bnda'inl.  See  under  Bauaonl.

Badger's  Imams  and  S:uyyids  vf
Oiiidn,  157  71  2.

Badghls,  town  of,  71.

Badx’,  bafuie  of, — the  principal  of  the
Frophet^s  nnUcarj  exploits,  74  n 2,

216  7?.

Budr  Sh.'i’ir  Shuml,  a poet  of  thn
time  of  Sult.ln  Iduhajnmaa  Tnghluc
296  and  n 0,  321  and  n C

XX

Indesr.

Known  also  as  Badra-d-Bin  Chachi,
of  Turkestan.

Badra-i*Sakun,  a place,  283  and  n 5.

Badrii-d-Bln  Chachi.  the  poet,  296
n 6*  See  under  Badr  ^i‘ir  Shashi.

Badin-d-Din  of  Hansi,  Shaikh,  con-
temporaiy  of  Sultan  Firoz  Shah.
322  and  n 5,  323.  !

Badru-d-BIn  Sankar,  or  Sangar,  j
E.umi,  Amir  Hajib,  of  the  Sham*  !
siyah  Malika,  121  n 7,  123.  ^ j

Badm-d-Din  ^afar  ^an,  one  of  |
the  Maliks  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din
Khilji,  247  and  n 2.

Badahapur,  town,  129  n 2.

Badward,  a name  of  the  town  of
Baward  or  Abiward  in  Khurasan,
30  ».

Bagh-i-Jiid,  the,  396  and  ii  3.

Baghd'Sabz,  on  the  banks  of  the
Labor  river,  188  and  n 3,  190  n 1.

Bagh-i-Sard,  18S  n 3.  For  the  Bagh-i-
Sahz  (q.  V.).

Bi’gh-i-Sar!r,  ISS  n 3.  For  the  Bagh-i-
Sabz  {q.  r.).

Baghdad,  12  ti  2 (read  Damascus),
17,  32  n 1,  57,  59  n 1,  88  c 3,  94
n 2,  205  n 1,  286,  311  and  n 4,  322,
394  and  n 5,  397,  432  n 10,  571
n 2.

Baghdad  gate,  at  Dihli,  4^2  n 10,

Bagore,  town,  379  n 1.

Bagram,  old  name  of  Peshawar,  66
n 6.

Saha,  Qazi,  one  of  the  boon-com-
panions of  Snltan  ‘Alan-d-Din
Khilji,  252,  253  and  n 2.

Badadnr  Guishasp,  Malik,  of  the
Amirs  of  Saltan  Muhammad  Tngh-
laq  Shah.  304  and  H 1.

Bahadur,  Sultan,  ruler  of  Guinit, —
contemporary  of  Hnma^^un,  452,
453,  454  and  n 4.  455,  456,  458,
635.

Bahadur  Khan,  a prince  of  the  family
of  Sultan  ‘Aiau-d-Din  Khitji,  291.

Bahadur  Khan,  son  of  Darya  Khan
Luhani,  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Ibrahim  Lodi, — takes  possession  of
Bihar,  assuming  the  title  of  Sultan
Muhammad,  435.  Elsewhere  he  is
called  Bihar  Khan  (<j.  v.).

Bahadur  IQian,  Govertior  of  Namul
under  Sultan  Mahmud,  grandson
of  Saltan  Firoz  ^ah.  365  n 7.

Bahadur  Khan  Sistani  I'Shaibani  ?).
Governor  of  Qandahar, — one  of  the
I Amirs  of  HumayQn,  590,  591,  594.

! Bahadur  ^ah,  otherwise  known  as
Tuda  \r  NQda),  independent  Gover-
nor of  Sun^  Ginw,— ’Contemporary
of  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Tughlaq
Shah,  299,  300.

Bahadur,  Sultan  Muhammad,  son  of
Muhammad  Khan  Gauria,  — con-
temporary of  ‘Adli,  556  and  n 3.

Bahadur  Aahir,  Khar  Zuda  of  Miwfifc,
343,  344  and  n 7,  345,  347,  351
and  « 6.  354.  358  and  4,  366  n,
375.  Founder  of  the  Khan  Zadu
race,  the  rulers  of  Miwat.

Bahankar,  fortress  of,  80  and  nn  4
and  5.

Bahapur,  town,  227  and  n 7,  229.

Bahar  Khan,  A'^ni  ITuriiuyun  Sir-
wani,  521.  See  uudei  Bihiir  Khan.

Bahari,  town,  232.

Bahai't.'^faTif  one  of  the  works  of
Maulfini  Jami,  32  n 2.

Baharpur,  town,  227  T,

Inileu'.

XXI

Bahau'(l*Din,  one  of  the  Amirs  of

- Islem  Sur,  530.

Bahia-d-Din  Garshasp,  Halik,  Grover-
Dor  of  Sigar,  under  Sultan  Muham-
mad Tughlaq  Shah,  n 1.

Bahan-d-Diu  JangT,  Malik,  of  the
Amirs  of  Muhammad  Shah  Firoz
^ahi,  344-

Bahau-d-Dln  Muhammad  Ushi  Far-
ghani,  78  n 2.  See  Bahau-d-Din

tTshl.

Baliau-d-Dm  Naqshbandl  of  Bukhara,
Khwaja,  a renowned  saint,  the
founder  of  the  Kaqshbandi  School,
58S  n 4,

Bahla-d-BIn  Sim  ^huri,  Malik,  77
n 1.  Probably  Malik  'Alau-d-DIn
Muhammad  is  meant.

Bahiu-d-DIn  Tnghral,  Malik,  one  of
the  generals  and  slaves  of  Sultan
MnMzzu-d-Din  Sim  Ghurl,  80,  81.

Bahau'd'DIu  C^i,  a famous  preacher
and  learned  divine  of  the  time  of
Sultan  Qutba-d-Din  Aibak,  78  and
n 2.

Babau-d^Dln  Zakariyii  the  Multani,
Gfaausa-I-‘Alam  Hazrat  Shaikh,  a
famous  Muhammadan  Saint,  133
and  n and  n 2,  248  n 2.

Bahda,  a vill^e  of  the  dependencies
of  Kfaurisan,  588  and  n 5.  Called
also  Bahdavan.

transfera  Chanderi  to  Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi,  424  and  n 4.

Bahlol,  Sultan,  377  n 4.  See  under
Sultan  Buhlul  Lodi.

Bahmau,  an  ancient  King  of  Iran,
35  n 2.

Bahman,  eleventh  month  of  the
Persian  year,  627  and  n 1.

Bahmin,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Islem
Shih  Shr,  517.

Bahman  Khan,  a NiyazI  Afghan.
498.

Bahmanwn,  ancient  name  of  the
town  of  al-Mansurah  in  Sindh,  36
n 10.

BaAr-i-‘.4jam,  the, — a lexicographical
work,  114  n 2.

Bahr-i-Jurjan,  the  Caspian,  153  n 1.

Bahr-i-Khwarazm,  the  Lake  Aral,
153  n 1.

Bahr-i-Nitas,  the  Black  Sea,  153  n 1.

Bahr-i-Qulzum,  the  Red  Sea,  169
n 1.

Bahr-i-Tabariya,  the  Dead  Sea,  153
n 1.

Bahxah,  town  of,  128  n 3.  Probably
same  as  Bhera  {q  v.),

Bahraich,  district,  349,  409,  411  n 2,
See  also  the  next.

Bahraij.  district,  125,  126,  131,  See
also  the  above  and  under  Bharaij.

Bahrara,  ancient  King  of  Persia,  157

Bahdayan,  village  of,  588  n 5.  See  n 1,  436.

the  above.  Babrim  Iba,  Kishlu  Khan,  gove  nor  of

Al-Bahhas,  or  the  controversialist,  a Multan  and  Uchh,  adopted  brother
name  of  Shaikh  2?izimn-d-Din  of  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-Din  Tn^laq

Anliyi  of  Bndaon  [q.  v.),  7l  n 2.  Shah,  292  and  n 4,  293,  297  and

Bahlra,  town,  465.  n 6,  304.

Bahjat  Kban,  governor  of  Chanderi  Babram  Khan,  son  of  Sultan  <3iiva-
under  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Malwa,  su-d-Diu  Tughlaq  ^ilh,  297.

xxii  TtnJ

Bahrnm  ^overnox'  of  Snnar-  !

ganw  under  Sultan  Mu'xammad  j
Tughlaq  ^ah,  30S.

Baljrain  Khan  Turkbacha,  ruler  or
Samana,  contemporary  of  Mahmud  |
of  Uihllj  362,  365.  j

Bahrain  Mirza,  brother  of  ^ah  ■
Tahmasp.  King  of  Persia,  569.

Bahrum  ^ah,  Sultan,  ibn  Mas'ud  ibn
Sultfin  Ibrahim  Ghaznawl,  55,  56,
57,  oS,  60.

Bahnira  Shah,  son  of  Sultan  Nasiro-
d*Din  Qabachah  {q.  i*  ),  90.

Bahram  Shah,  son  of  Snltan  Shanisu-
d-DIn  lyai-cimiih.  See  under
MnizzU'd-DTn  Bahram  Shnh.

Bahrain  Uilah,  297  n 6,  For  Bahram
Iba  (q.  r.).

Bahrl.  Malik,  of  the  Maliks  of  Abu
Bakr  Shah,  Sultan  of  Dihli,  344.

Bahraur,  a haltiug-piace  opposite  to  |
Baiaua,  518.  I

Bahru-UJaLcdhir,  a work  on  medicine,  |
5 H 3,  30  71  2,  42  iiy  49  n 2,  101  n 1,  j
117  n 2,  118  «,  146  n 6,  148  n 4,
161  n 3,  167  n 2,  226  n 5,  319  n 4.

Bahwa  Luhanl,  Miyan,  Governor  of
Baiaiia.  one  of  the  Maliks  of  Tslem
^ah,  518.  519.

Baiana,  di.sitricfc  and  town.  359,  360,
378,  379,  3n5,  3^6,  387,  392.  395
and  n 3,  400,  405,  414,  418,  4J9,
424,  443.  445.  452,  487,  488.  497,
507,  509,  512,  513,  518,  519.  520,
526,  541,  549,  551  and  n 8,  553.
597,  59S.  See  also  under  Bhiana
and  Biana.

Baiana,  fortress  of,  549,  551.

BaihaqI,  the  Historian,  32  //,  36  un  8
and  9.  37  n 2.  46  n 2,

Bairam  Dev,  Raja  of  Hindustan,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Mahmud  of
GhaziiTn,  28.  and  n 4.  See  under
Brahma  Dev.

Bairam  Dev,  son  of  Rai  Harsingh  of
Icawa,  contemporary  of  Mahmud
^ah,  grandson  of  Sultan  Firoz
I Shah, 361.

I Bairam,  Dev,  the  Raja  of  Kola,  con-
! temporary  of  Sultan  Jalaiu-d-Din
i Khilji,  231.

j Bairam  Khan.  Khan-i-Khanan,  one  of
! the  great  Amirs  of  Hnmayfin  and
i Akbar,  447,  567,  568,  569,  573,  578,
j 588,  589,  590  and  n 5,  591,  594,

! 595,  597.  622.

j Bairam  Khan  Turkbacha,  ruler  of
Samana.  under  Masnad-i-‘Ali  Khizr
KIban  of  Dihli,  365,  378.

Baitidi,  township  of, — on  the  banks  of
the  Ganges.  36<D  and  n 3,  375,  377,
379,  407  r)  1,  See  also  Betall.

Baitarani  river,  the, — iu  Orissa,  325
n 3.

Baitigin,  48  a 4,  for  Bartagin,  the
Hajib-i-Buzurg  {q.  r.).

Baiza,  a village  of  Shiraz  in  Persia,
6 7i  4.

Baizawl,  Qizi,  authorof  the  Anivd7‘U‘f‘
Tamil,  a celebrated  commentary
i on  the  Qur’an,  and  of  the  Nizam  ti-^-
j Tawdtikh,  6 and  n 4,  10  n 3,  34  nud

; n 8,  45  and  n 2 52,  56  7i  1,  62  and

1

; nn  3 and  4,  63,  64  n 1.

I Baj],  fort  of, — in  Majbaristin,  34  and
i n 6.

, Bajlana,  a place  on  the  Ganges,
I 379

J Bajwara,  town,  380  ;ind  u 2,  3fil  and
n 6,  497,  520

Lideje,

Bakhtvar  Malik,  85  a 1.  See

under  Muhammad  Bakhtvar  Ghuri
or  Khilii.

Bakkar,  town,  559  and  n 5,  560,  561
and  71 11,  562,  566  and  u 13,  567,
574,  580.  See  alao  under  Bukkur
and  Bhakkar.

Baksar,  country  of,  408  and  n 5.

Baktuzun,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  ‘Abdu-1-
Malik  ibn  Nuh  Samani,  King  of
Khurasan.  16  and  ti  3.

Balaram,  town,  346.

Balarwan,  fortress  of,  in  Gharjistan,

63  71  1.

Balban,  the  elder,  124.  See  Malik
‘Izzu-d-Din  Balban-i-Kashlu  Khan.

Balban,  Snlfan.  See  under  Gfaiyaag-d-
Din  Balban.

Balban,  the  younger,  Malik  aud  after-
wards Sultan  Ghiyasn-d-Din  {q.  « ),
121  and  n 7,  122.

Balbani  Amirs,  known  also  as  the
Ghiyiisi  Amirs,  the  partisans  of
Sultan  ^iyasa-d-Din  Balban,  232,
233.

Balfour,  162  n 3.

Balkatigin,  the  slave  of  Alptigin,
Governor  of  Ghazni,  14  ti  1.

Balkh,  16,  17,  20,  23,  27  and  n 1.  30,  1
35,  37  and  n 7,  38,  44,  46  n 1 , 47,
445,  681,  582  and  n 7,  585,  597
n 5

Balkh,  the  river  of, — the  Jaibun,  27
71  1,  582  n 7.

Balnat,  hill  country  of,  474.  See  ,
alao  the  next.  ''

Balnath,  mountains  of,  22  and  t;  5.
See  also  the  above.

Bamian,  district  and  t(7wn  ot,  — m
Afithanisian.  46  and  n 1,  ,56.

ixni

Banaius,  416,  520.  Banarasi,  339  n
6.  See  Baranasi.

Banas,  the, — a tributary  of  the
Chambal  river,  385  nS-
Bauatu-n-Na‘sh,  the  constellation
Ursa  Major,  198  and  n 2.

Banbhar,  town,  630  and  n 3.

Banda,  town,  417  n 7.
j Bandhu,  fortress  of,  417  n 7.

' Bandhiigarb,  fortress,  417  and  n 7.
j Bangala,  79,  82,  86,  135,  222,  325,
417,  457,  458,  460,461,470.472,
507,  552,  554,  573.  See  also  under
Bengal.

Bangalis,  the,  470.

Bangannan,  township  of,  434.
Bang'Mati  river,  84  n.  Culled  also
the  Beg-Matl  (q.  i\).

Banhar,  town,  530  n 3.

Banhbana,  Rai,  brother’s  eon  of  the
Jam  of  Thatha,  contemporary  of
1 Sultan  Flroz  ‘^ah,  332  n 6,  333
n 4.

Banian,  town,  95  n 8,  128  n 1,
Banjdras,  grain  sellers,  477.
Banswala,  town,  495.

Banu  Tamim  Ansari,  early  Muham-
madan sovereigns  of  Siiid,  13  n.
Bapjik,  4)5  n o,  for  Prayng,  the
ancient  name  of  Allahabad.

Baqa’i,  Mauh’ina,  a learned  man  of
the  time  of  Biibar,  419.
Biiqi-i-KhJdib,  one  of  the  learned
poets  of  the  time  of  Sultan  Jalalu-
d-Din  Khilji.  245.

Bnrddnrdn-i'okhydp , brothers  by  the
same  mother  but  a dilfereut  fathei ,
466  n 7

Bu)d‘laidn'i’a'ydii'>.  uterine  biothtr*
466  /»  7,

XXIV

Index.

Baran^  district  and  town,  89  and  » 4,  [
121  n 5,  226,  227,  230  n 1,  250,  357,  |
359,  364,  396-  See  also  tlie  next-  j
Baran,  fortress  of,  24  n 1.  See  \
Bamalu

I

Baranasi,  town,  329  and  n 6-  See  \
under  Banaras.

Barangharj  right  wing  of  a Turkish  ;

army,  439  n 4.  |

Baram,  the  Historian.  See  under  \
Zian-d-Din  Barni.

Barawar  bacha.  See  under  Hasan,  j
Barawar  bacha.

Barawar  tribe,  a family  of  servile
position  in  Gnjrat,  274,  235,  283.
See  also  the  next.

Barawas,  the.  289.  Same  as  the
Barawar  family  (<2.  i\).

Bdrhaky  chief  attendant  of  a da>

501  and  n 6.

Barbak  Bektars  Sultaiii,  ifalik,  one
of  the  Maliks  of  Sulran  Ghivasn-d-
Din  Balban.  1S6  n 5.

Barbak  Shah,  sou  of  Sulran  Bnhlul  ;
Lodi,  409  and  n 8,  411  n 2.  412  n 2,
413  and  n.  13,  414  n 1,  415.  ,

Barcicha,  a small  S|)ear,  479  and  n 2.
Bardar,  hills  ot,  130  n 2.

Bardat.  govenior  of  the  fortress  r-f
Bartah  in  Hindustan,  eontempurary  ■
of  Sultan  Maijmud  of  Ghaznin.  24
n 1.

Bardhan,  town,  83,  84  n,

Bardhan  Kot,  town  of,  84  n.

Bareilly,  364  n 4.  See  also  the  next.
Bareli,  town  of,  71  n 2.  See  also
Bareilly.

Bareri.  porj^ana  of,  424  n 3.

Bari,  township  in  the  SarkvU*  of
Agi<i.  4lU,  1*25  uud  't  4.

Bartnazid  Kor,  one  of  the  Amir«  of
Shir  490  and  n 4.

Barnah,  fortress  of,  24  and  n 1.
Same  as  Baran  (q.  r.).

Bami,  the  Historian.  See  under
Zian-d-Bm  Bami.

Baroda,  district.  313,  314.

Barqa*i.  Haji,  a conrt  oficer  of  Sultan
Muhammad  Tnghlaq  Shah.  311,  315.

Barsine,  wife  of  Alexander  the  Great,
332  IK

Banagin,  the  Hijib-i-Buzurg, — one
of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Slaudud
Ghaznawi,  48  and  n 4,  See  ahio
under  Bashcigin.

Bartah,  fortress  of,  24  t*  1.

Baraj  (Broach),  311  and  « 3,

Baruja.  town,  35S  n 6.

Barwat,  Governor  of  the  fortress  oi
Bamah,  in  Hindastan,  a contem-
porary of  Snltau  Mahmud  of  Ghaz-
nin.  24  and  n 1.

Basad  ^^an.  one  cf  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  Mahmud,  the  grandson  of
Suitan  FIroz  Shah,  of  Bihll,  364.

Basawar,  town,  349,  445,  475,  479,
512,  549.

Ba.^Ir,  the  Sirdar,  an  adherent  of  the
house  of  Sahun  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Khijji.
273.

Ba^tigin  Hajib,  one  of  the  Amifs  of
the  Ghaznnvides.  48  r 4,  50  n 1.
See  under  Bartagin.

Basra,  town  of.  — in  Arabian  ‘Iraq
12  u 1.  458  n 3.

Basudev  (Vasudeva.,  one  of  the  Hindu
■ gods.  24  and  n 6.

Basuli,  a place,  335  a 10.

Bathindah,  town  of  69  n 2.  See  aUc
under  Balitidah.

Index.

XXV

Batll,  618  n 2.

Batindah,  called  also  Tabarhiudab,
the  capital  of  JaipSl, — the  ruler  of
Hindustan  at  the  time  of  Mahmud
Ghaznawl,  19  -u  2,  20  1.  See  also

Bathindah.

Batini  sect,  the, — a sect  of  Muham-
madan heretics,  22  and  n 3*

A1  Batiniah,  22  n 3-  Same  as  the
above  (q.  v.).

Batlahl,  town,  331  and  n 6.

Batiil,  the  offset  of  a nalm-tree,  622
71  4.

Al-Batiil,  a name  of  Fajimah,  daughter
of  the  Prophet,  622  n 4.

Baward,  a citv  of  Khurasan,  29  and
n 6,  30,  42,  43.  Called  also  Abl-
ward  (q.  f.).

Bayakj  415  n 5,  for  Prayag,  the  ancient
name  of  Allahabad.

Bayazid  Ansarl,  also  called  PIr  Roshan,
founder  of  a $afi  sect,  called  the
Ro^aniyyah  or  enlightened,  58
and  n 5.

BiiyazTd  A'zam  Humayun,  nephew  of
Sulfur  Buhlul  Lodi,  409,  410  and
n 1.

Bayazid,  ^waja,  eldest  son.  of  Sultan
Buhlul  Lodi,  401  n 4,  410  ft  1,  414.

Bayazid,  Shail^,  the  brother  of
Mustafa  Farmall, — one  of  the
Afghan  Amirs  who  Joined  Humayun,
444.

Bayazid,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Mahmud,  son  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  471  and  /i  4,  472.

Bayley,  of  G-ujatiit,  17  4,

71  n 3,  294  >i  6,  313  n 5,  357  n 3,

452  '/  6,  454  1 and  7,  455  3,

453  n 6.

Baz  Bahadur,  son  of  Sazawal  Khan,
ruler  of  Malwa,  contemporary  of
‘AdU,  554,  6 5 7.

Bazina,  town  of,  27  n 4.

Bazghaad.  fortress  of,  44  and  n 4.

Beale’s  Dictionary  oj  Oriental  B'*o*
graphy,  32  n 1,  33  n 1,  38  n 4,  53
54  n 2,  DO  n 3,  58  5,  99  n 3,  133

u 2,  134  n 4,  158  3.  187  n 2,  233

ri  4,  230  n 2,  272  ’i  1,  279  n 3,  297  n,
293  nn  2 and  4,  332  n 2,  339  ji  4,
419  nn  2 and  3,  450  n 3.  507  n 2,
633  nn  1 and  6,  571  n 9,  584  n and
n 3,  024  n 6,  633  n 1,  [Baiami.

B»VaDa,  town  oi,  SO  n 5.  See  under

Bcdar,  a town  of  the  Deccan,  299  7i  3.
See  also  under  Bidar.

Bedr,  battle  of, — the  Prophet’s  prin-
cipal military  e.'tploit,  74  n 2,  2i6  n.
More  correctly  Badr.

Beerbnoom,  the  Kaju  of.  329  n 9.

Beg  Tughdi,  one  of  the  generals  of
Sultau  Mas'ud,  son  of  Sultan  Mah-
mud GhaznawT,  43.  See  under
Tu^di  Beg.

Bcgam,  the  Quecn-cousort  of  Huma-
yuQ,  mother  of  Akbar,  560,  566,
568  and  n 7.  See  I^atnida  Biinu.

Begliii,  the  Turkoman,  chief  of  tiie
Turkomans,  contemporary  of  Stiluin
Ma-a^ud,  son  of  Mahmud  Ghaznawi,
38  and  n 3,  39.

Beghd  Malik  ^ah.  See  the  above.

Beg-Maii  river,  the.  84  n 1.  Called
also  the  Bang-Mati  {q.  v.).

Behrir,  capital  of  the  ancient  kingdom
of  Magadh,  82  and  n 1.  See  under
Bihar.

Betnif'r'm  of  Maullua  ‘^bdu-r-
U ihmaii  Jami,  32  a 2.

4

XXVI

Index.

Behafc,  the, — old  name  of  the  Jhilam,
one  of  the  five  rivers  of  the  Panjab,
44  n 6,  128  71  3,  500,  503.  Spelt
also  the  Behat.

Behubur,  town,  530  n 3
Behzad,  Malik,  Governor  of  Multan
nnder  Sultan  Muhammad  Tughlaq
Shah,  305.

Beitrdge  zihr  Kenntniss  der  Foesie  der
alten  Arahe.  Noldeke’s,  99  n 6.

Bejl  Bai,  Eaja  of  Bhatia,  contem-
porary of  Sultan  Mahmud  of
Ghaznin,  19,

Bekasi,  Mauiana,  a poet  of  the  time
of  Hnmayun,  453  and  n 7.

Belnnt  mountains,  22 ti  5.  See  under
Balniit  and  Balnath.

Bengal,  81  n 2,  82  nyi  3 and  4,  135
n 1,  299,  300,  303  n,  345  ti  2,  456
n 6,  540.  See  also  under  Bangala
and  Bengala.

Bengala,  79,  82,  86.  See  also  under
Bangala  and  Bengal.

Ber,  fruit  of  the  "i'/ir>dh  tree  in
Hindu.'StanI,  117  2.

Beraisen,  a mi>tnken  reading  of  hi
Basaii),  i e.,  the  two  Rases  (‘i  c.j,
326  7i.

Berenice,  an  arcient  port  of  the  Red
Sea.  169  1.

Betaii,  on  the  Gansre”,  185  n 1.  See
under  Pati^Ii  an-i  Bairftii,
Berel-ipai.  nor-  on.  302  ■■  6
Betle-chewer  can-'f-r  •M.i  k
Betwa  river  ri  or  , 3
BevHri'ltre  s ' . /•  7 r /•,./  Ah\

71  o.

B -.''n.  . 1 -

h'  ..'’i  < ' -ft'.*  df  re,

Bhadauriaha,  the,  408  n 1.  See  the
Bhadanris.

Bhadaurls,  the, — the  inhabitants  of
the  Bhadawar  district,  408  and  n 1.

Bhadawar,  a district  S.  E.  of  Agra,
408  n 1.

Bhadawah,  town,  410  n 4.

Bhagat,  the, — a Hindu  caste  of  loose
people,  557  and  n 9.

Bhagatiya,  the, — a Hindu  caste  of
loose  people,  557  n 9.

BhagirathT,  the  62  n 4.

Bhaka,  a servant  of  ^^ir  Khan,  after-
v:ard^  Shir  Sbiih  Sur,  46S.

Bhakarl,  Shaikh,  son  of  Shaikhn-l-
Hadiyah,  contemporary  of  Sultkii
Sikandar  Lodi,  429  and  n 5.

Bhakkar,  town,  4'34.  See  under
Bakkar  and  Bukkur.

Bhangar,  fortress  of,  71  and  n 2,  See
also  under  Bliankar  and  Bahankar«

Bhankar,  fortress  of,  90.  See  also
nnder  Bhangar  and  Bahankar.

Bliar.nj,  district,  132.  See  under
Bahraich  .a ml  Bahr.'tij.

Bharepur.  district.  134  ??  1,  :>66  d

Bha.«^iyana,  i-onnrry  of,  So  and  n 5.

Bhat,  fore  ot,  3.55  and  n 3.  Seo
Bhatnir.

Bhata  or  Bhilta.  a p’ace,  10  ??  4.  See
under  Bhatia

Bhati,  a town  sitnafpl  bprween  the
arms  .jf  the  Mu.rtln  Mndasj  36
n In.

Bhat:  iiihr.  of  Hind-is,  tii*^  66  and

n 2.

Bhiiti.i.  a place  in  i\.-.  v:c':iity  of
Multan.  19  an  1 n 4.  06  ■ 2,

Bhatn.r,  town.  355  dn  1 and  3.

Bnatpar,  355  n 3 for  Bhatrdr  (7.  i . ■.

Index,

XXVll

Bhatta,  town,  408  n 7,  485  and  n 9,
489,  542,  544,  553.

Bhalta,  Kingdom  of,  544.

Bhatta,  Amirs  of,  485.

Bhatwara,  a place,  405.

Bhawan,  a place,  20  n 5.

Bhayana,  country  of,  80  n 5.  See
under  Ehiiiua,  Biana  and  Baiana.

Bhera,  a place  on  the  left  bank  of  the
Jhelum  under  the  Salt  Range,  19
n 4.  See  under  Bahrah.

Bhiana,  territory  of,  80  n 5.  See
under  Bhayana,  Biana  and  Baiana.

BLilsa,  a to'v^'n  on  the  Befcwa  in
31ahva,  95  and  n 3,  236  and  n 3.

Bilim,  a hero  of  Indian  mythology,
20  n 5,  21.

Bhiiii,  town  of,  20  a 5.

Bilim  i)ev,  Kai,  ruler  of  Gujrat,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Ma'izza-d-Din
Sam  ^url,  66,  71.

Bilim  llli  Dev,  71.  See  under  Bhim

Bilim,  Rai,  the  ciiief  of  Jammoo,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Mnbarak  Shih
of  Dilili,  383  and  n 3.

Bhira  Sen,  Raja,  founder  of  the  town
of  Bhongaou,  386  n 3.

Bhimnagar,  fortress  of,  20  and  n 6,

Bhodal,  township  of,  547  n 4.

Bhojpiir,  fortress  of,  185  and  n 1»

Bhongaon,  a iown  in  the  ilainpuri
district,  386  nn  3 and  4.  See  also
under  Bhiinganw.

Bhugaou,  380  n 3.  See  the  above  and
also  Bhiinganw.

Bhuhar,  town,  300.

Bijiikanur,  town,  386  n 3.

B hu  n g?i  n w, — or

Bh  ingi’orj,  in  the  Mairjjri  district,
380  and  ii  3,  403,  431.

Bhurayee,  town,  414  n 3.

Biih,  the.  23  n 3,  126,  130,  251,  353,
381,  389,  391,  392,  412  n 2,  Called
the  Kali  Pani  (q.  r.),  and  the  Bias.

Bias^  the,  325  n 3.  Same  as  the  river
Biah  (q.  v.).

Bibi  Ba’i,  daughter  of  Nizam  Khan
Siir  and  wife  of  Islera  Shah.  535.

BibI  Khunza,  Malika-i-Jahan,  chief
wife  of  Sultan  Husain  Sbarqi,  409
and  n 2.

Bibi  Rachi,  mother  of  Sultan  Muham-
mad ^ah  Sbartp  of  Jaunpur,  403
n 8.

Bible,  the,  394  n 5.

Bibliotheca  Indica,  the,  127  n 2, 142
« 1,  315  71  7.  329  ri  3.

Bidagh  Khan  Qizilba^  Afshir,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Shah  Tahmasp  of
Persia,  572  and  nn  7 and  8,  575
and  n 3,  578.

Bidar,  town, — in  Haidarabad,  Deccan,
299andn3,  311,  312,  314.  Called
also  Bedar.

Bidaspes,  the,  the  Jhelam  rirer,  the
Vitaeta  of  Sanskrit  writers,  23  n 3.

Bihand  or  Waihind,  a place  on  the
western  bank  of  the  Indus,  20  1.

Bihar,  185,  328,  329,  338,  348,  416
and  nn  12  and  13,  417,  434,  435,
436,  444,  446,  456,  457,  407,  469,
470,  471  and  n 1,  521.

Bihar  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Lodi  dynasty,  443.

Bihar  Khan,  A*zam  Humayun  Sirwani,
Governor  of  Handiya  under  Islem
^jh  bar,  517,  521,  541.  See  Bahar
Khm.

; n hnr  Kh.an.  son  of  Darya  Kb^n
' Luhfciii.  of  Bihar,  467.  See

Index.

xxTiii

Sultan  Ma^mmad  of  Bihar.  Else-
where called  Bahadur  Khan  (q.  «.).  ‘

Bihiahti,  author  of  a commentary  on
the  Sakai},  427  n 1.

Bijlana,  a place  on  the  Ganges,  231.

Bijuor,  hills  of,  130  and  n 2.

Bikanir,  town  of,  69  n 2.

Bilal,  the  Abyssinian  mu’ariin  of
Hnhammad,  601  n.

Al-Bilarnri,  author  of  the  Futi^-l-
Sulddn,  11  n 3.

Biluchistan,  48  n 4,  420  n 9.

Bin,  township  of,  526.  See  also  Bin
Ban.

Bins  Panipati,  Shai^,  a famous
surgeon,  366  n 3.

Binayek  Deo,  Baja  of  Dholpur, — con-
temporary of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,
419  n 4,  420  and  « 2.

Binayik  Deo,  same  as  the  above

(«.  ®-)-

Bin  BaUq  in  the  Fanjab,  523,  525.
See  also  Bln.

Bird,  note  on,  303  n.

Birjis,  the  planet  Jupiter,  630  and  n 2.

Birni  Khem,  tovrn,  327  and  n 3.

Biruni.  See  under  Albiruni.

Bieal,  fortress,  383  n 3.
aconite,  172  n 2,

Bismi~lldh,  in  the  narae  of  God,  used
at  the  beginning  of  all  works,  428
and  n 4,

Bitter  Lakes,  the,  169  n 1.

Bizban,  son  of  Geo  and  nephew  of
Hnstam,  in  the  Shdhjidmak  of
Firdausi,  116  n 5,  180  and  n 2,  181
n 1.

Black^rater,  the, — known  as  the
Kalapani  (q.  r.),  360  and  n 3,  378
and  n 1,  386,  411.

Bland,  On  the  Persian  game  of  chess,
103  « 1,  115  n,  479  n 7.

Blochmann,  8 n 3,  19  n,  67  « 3,  353
n 1,  357  « 4,  366  « 3,  4*38  a 1,  415
a 4,  417  n 8,  420  nti  8 and  9,  421
n 8,  422  » 2,  424  n 3,  432  a 7,  449
n 2,  464  n 5,  476  n 5,  479  n 5,  496
nn  1 and  8,  498  n S,  499  3,  501

» 7,  503  n 3,  506  n 2,  507  a i,  508
an  7 and  8,  509  a 8,  515  n 4,  523
a 5,  546  tin  3 and  7,  557  a 1,  567
a 3,  568  a 6,  571  n 9,  580  a 5,  584
a 3,  588  a 4,  590  a 5.  592  a 9,  597
a 5,  605  a 1,  609  a 5,  610  n,  611
a 3,  623  n 6,  626  n 3.

Blue,  the  customary  mourning  oolour
in  Persia,  209  and  a 3.

Bohar,  a place  in  the  vicinity  of
Hand,  248  and  a 4.

Bokhara.  See  under  Bokhara.

Bombay  edition  of  the  Atash-Kada,
584  n 3.

Bombay  text  of  the  Tantft-i-Ptri^ta,
72  a 2,  205  a 2,  304  a 1,  307  a,
325  n 3,  326  a 2,  327  a 3,  330  « 6,

334  a 3,  339  a 2,  342  a 3,  345  a 2,

350  a 3,  355  a 4,  360  a 3,  365  a 2,

379  a 2,  385  n 1,  393  a 3,  400  a,

401  a 2,  402  n»  1 and  5,  403  nn  4
and  5,  404  nn  2 and  5,  406  an  1
and  5,  410  an  1 and  4,  411  a 2,
412  a 2,  413  a 13,  415  n 7,  422  a 3,
424  an  2 nnd  4,  425  a 6,  432  7in  3
and  7,  433  a 3,  438  71  3,  466  n 5,
478  na  7 and  8,  488  n 5.  490  n 4,
537  a 2,  559  aa  6 and  8.  560  n 2,
-561  a 2,  564  an  6 and  8.  566  a 13,
567  n 9,  573  a 3,  579  a 8,  583  ti  3,
609  n 5,  625  n 3.

Boat,  district,  15  a.

Index.

sxix

Bost,  town, — on  tbe  banks  of  the  ^

I

Hendmand,  15  ».  See  under  Bust,  j
Brahma  Dev,  one  of  the  Bajaa  of  j

Hindustan  at  the  time  of  Snltan  i

1

Slahraud  of  Ghazni,  ^ n 4.  i

t

Bralimanpatr,  the,  84  and  n 1,  186  |
n 6.  Called  also  the  Brahmkadi.  |
Brahmans,  the,  27,  28,  331,  332,  509  ■
n 5.  i

Brahmapatra,  the,  84  n 1.  See  the  ;
Brahmanpntr.

Brahmkadi,  the,  84.  See  under  the
Brahmanputr.

Brentford,  301  n 2.

Brian  O'Linn.  618  n 1.

Brings,  Ferishta,  13  ji  1, 16  «ti  1 and
2.  19  ft  5,  20  « 2.  23  » 2,  27  n 4,
28  ftft  2 and  4,  29  na  i and  5,  30
« 2,  31  n,  33  n 2.  34  ft  5,  36  « 9,  47
n 7,  48  ftft  2 and  4,  66  mi  2 and  4,
259  H 5,  273  n 4,  300  ft  3.  3(H  n 1,
307  ft,  327  n 1,  329  « 9,  331  n 10,
332  ft,  334  ft  2,  336  ft  5,  338  ft  1,
344  n 7,  348  nn  3 and  9,  350  n 3,
355  ft  ft  1 and  4,  359  ft  2,  360  n 3,  I
363  ft  2,  367  m,  379  wn  1 and  2,  393  i
ft  5,  400  n,  410  n 3,  414  n»  3 and  5,  j
417  « 5,  419  ft  1,  424  ft  4,  425  ft  6,
-1«1  n 3.  478  rt  7,  483  » 5,  490  n 4,  ;
506  ft  13,  624  n 6,  625  ft  3.  ;

Broach,  311  n 3.  See  under  Baruj.

Bu  ‘Ali,  commonly  known  as  Ibn
Sina  (Avicenna),  533  and  n 1,
Bubonic  plague,  524  and  n 1.

Budaon.  See  under  Badaon.

Bndaon  gate,  in  BihH,  227,  260.
Budaoni.  See  under  Badaoni.

Bndaun.  See  under  Badaon.

Budauni.  See  under  BadauuL
Buddhists,  the.  05  n 3.

Bndh,  a l^raed  physician  of

Bihv  in  the  time  of  Sher  Shah  and
Islem  Shah.  521  and  a 4,  522.

Bnghra  KbM,  son  of  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-
Din  Balban.  See  under  N^irmd-
Din  Bnghra  Khan.

Buhiul  Lodi,  Malik  and  afteni-ards
Sui^n.  338/  399,  400,  401  and
n 4,  402  and  nn  1 and  3,  403  and
nft  4 and  5.  404  and  n and  nn  2
and  5,  405.  406,  407  and  ft  1,  40S
and  ft  6,  409  and  n 7,  410  and
«»  1 and.  4.  411  and  n 2,  412  n 2,
413  ft  13,  466.

Bnhlul,  Snltan,  ibn-i-Kala  Lodi.  See
the  above.

Bahlu],  Shaikh,  brother  of  Shaikh
Muhammad  ^haus  of  Gwaliar,
comtemporary  of  Homayho,  459.
Bu^ara,  13  » 1,  14  n 1,  20  n 2,  27
ft  1,  89,  93,  446  ft  2,  533  n 1,  570
n 7,  588  ft  4,  618  and  n 5.

Buttari,  Imim,  the  celebrated  author
of  a collection  of

aniheiicic  6 and  n 3.

Bukkur,  later  name  of  al-Mansurah
in  Sind.  36  n 10,  559  n 5.  See
under  Bakkar  and  Bhakkar.

Boland^ahr,  district  and  town  of.
n 4,  121  n 5.  395  n 4.  396,  546  a 4.

Bulgar,  one  of  the  sons  of  Gaz,  the
tenth  son  of  Yafis  ' Japhet),  61 » 5.

Bulgarians,  the,  — descended  from
Bulgar  (g.  r.}.  61  n 5.

Bu-l-Mozaffar,  77  and  ft  1,  for  Abn^l-
Homffar  Ma‘izza-d'Dm  Muhammad
Sam  C3idri.  [omen,  58  n 1.

Btfftuzh,  the  Owl, — the  type  of  ill-

Buraq,  the  animal  upon  which
Muliamiuad  was  mounted  daring

rxT

Index,

his  ascent  to  heaven,  150,  292  and
n 6,  293  n.

Burgess,  Surya  Siddhantaj  163  n 2.

Burhan,  servant  of  Sultan  Mahmud
of  Gujarat,  533  and  n 5.

Burhanabad,  township,  386.

Burhdn-i-Qdti^  a Persian  Dictionary,
79  n 1,  101  n 1,  102  n 5,  108  n 4,
109  n 4,  115  n 3,  117  n 2,  122  n 3,
137  n 6,  138  n 3,  143  n 2,  146  ti  1,
152  nn  3 and  6,  153  nn  1 and  4,
154  n 5,  158  n 6,  159  n,  160  n 2,
166  n 1,  167  n 2,  171  n 2,  172  nn  2,
3 and  4,  173  n 2,  178  n 4,  182  nn  1
and  4,  192  n 3,  193  n 1,  314  n 1
319  n 4,  321  nn  1,  2 and  4,  340
n 2,  352  n 1,  629  n 1.

Barhan  Ni7ara  ^ah,  ruler  of  the
Dakkan,  624  n 6.

Burhinpur,  455  n 4.

Bnrhanu-d-Din  BalaramI,  Shaikh,  one
of  the  Amira  of  Sultan  Muhammad
Tu^laq  Shah,  314.

Buri  Ganga  river,  the,  377  n 3,  384
n 4.

Burqa^,  a kind  of  reii,  503  and  n 2.

Burton’s  Bilgrimage  to  Bl-Medina  and
Mecca,  97  n 4,  377  n 4.

Bushire,  572  n 3.

Bu^hJcdl,  the  rainy  season,  from  the
Tnrkl  pushalcdl  or  'pu^lcdl,  325  n 2.

Bust,  capital  of  Zabulistan,  14  and
n 3,  33,  34,  47,  48  n 4,  50.  See
nnder  Bost.

Biistdn  of  ^ai^  Sa^di  of  ^iraz,  187
n 2,  467.

Bdstdn  AJruz,  a red  flower  without
odour,  629  and  n 1,

Cairo,  210.  See  also  under  the  Daru-l-
Khiiafat  of  Egypt.

Cakra,  the,  22  n 1.  See  also  the
Chakra.

Cakra  svamin,  or  owner  of  the  Cakra,
name  of  the  idol  of  Taneshar,  22
n 1.  See  also  Chakra-svamin.

CalcuUa  edition  of  the  Kaskshdf  of
az-Zamakhshari,  28  n 1.

Calcutta  text  of  the  Muntai^ahu-f-
Tav'drlJ^  of  Badaoni,  132  n 2,  187
n 1 , 368  n 1.

Calcutta  edition  of  the  NaJaJmtu-U
I'm,  of  Maulaiia  Jami,  609  n 5.

Calcutta  edition  of  the  Shdh  Ndma,

' HSn  2.  [329  n 3.

Calcutta  text  of  ^ania-i-Siraj  ‘AHf,

Calcutta  edition  of  the  Tabaqdt’i'

Kd^iri,  65  n 1,  84  n,  126  n 3,  131
n 4,  134  n 1.

Calcutta  text  of  Zida-d-Dhi  Barnif
306  71 1,  307  n 3.  310  n 1,  311  n 5.
Calendar  of  Julius  Ca)sar,  76  n.

Carnal  eddin,  Kadhi,  one  of  the  Qazis
of  Saltan  Nasiru-d-Din  Mahmud
Shah  of  Dihli,  128  n.

Cambay,  in  Gujerat,  256  n 4,  311  n 3,
454  n 6.  See  also  under  Kuhan-
bayit,  Khambhat  and  Khambat.
Cambahat,  the  Cambay  of  Europeans,
a port  of  Gujerat,  256  n 4.  See
under  Cambaj . [29  n,

Canda,  a place  near  Somnath,  28  n 4,
Cannia  coubadj,  name  of  Qananj  in
ancient  monuments,  23  n 2,
Carmate.  See  under  Karmat  or

fndeit.

XXXI

Qarmat,  tonnder  of  the  Ka,rmafcian
sect  of  heretics.

Carnal,  town  of,  21  n 4.

Caroli,  town,  420  n 5.

Cathay,  the  coantry  of  143

n 4,  232  n 5.

Caussin  de  Perceval,  Essai
VHistoire  de  Arahes,  12  n 1,  46  ti  5.

Cavaiam,  the  town  of  Kiilam,  265  n 5.

Cave,  Chapter  of  the, — the  Euratii-l-
Eahf,  in  al-Qur’an,  279  n.

Cawnpore,  408  n 5.

Celestial  Empire,  the,  147  n 1.

Central  Asia,  362  n 2.

Central  India,  298  n 7,  364  nn  2 and
3,  385  n 3-

Central  Provinces,  the,  433  n 4,  517
71  9,

Chach,  a town  in  Turkestan,  296  n 0.
See  also  Shash.

Chach  Ndma,  the, — a History  of  India
in  verse,  11  n 3.

Chddar,  a garment  worn  by  the
women  of  India,  503  and  n 1,

Chaghar  Beg  Saijuqt,  King  of
Siunisan,  contemporary  of  Saltan
Maudiid  Ghaznawi.  49  n 4.  Called
also  Chughz  Beg  or  Chaghz  Beg.

Chaghatai  line  of  Mogul  princes,  146
n 2,  464  n 8,

Chaghatai  Khan,  son  of  the  Chingiz
Khan,  145  n 2,  464  n 8,

Chaghatai  tribe,  Amirs  of, — adherents
of  Humajun,  464  and  n 8,  472,
574  and  n 6,  576,  582  n 7,  583  n 3,
593.  See  also  under  Chaghta.

Chaghta,  Ulua-i-,  575  n 1.  See  also
under  the  Chaghatai  tribe

Chahar  Ajari,  independent  Raja  of
Narw'ar,  contemporary  of  Sultan

Na?irU“d-Din  Mahmud  Shah  of
Dihll,  129  71  4.  Called  also  Chahar
Deva  and  Jahir  Dev.

Chahar  Deva.  Raja  of  Narwar,  129
71  4.  See  Chahar  Ajari.

Chaghz  Saljuqi,  49  7i  4.  See

nnder  Chaghz  Beg.

Chahar  Khand,  a place,  457,

Chahar  pdi,  charpoy,  494  n 11«

Chakarsiim,  came  of  the  idol  of
Thanesar,  21.  See  Chakrasvamin.

Chakra,  22  n 1.  See  under  Cakra.

Chakrasvamin.  or  Lord  of  the  Chakra,
name  of  the  idol  of  Thanesar,  22
n 1.  See  Cakrasvamin.

Chaldi,  a Mn^hl  commander,  in  the
time  of  Saipan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Khiiji,
249  n 5.

Chaman,  Malik.  Ghiziu-l-Malk,
Governor  of  Badaon, — one  of  the
Amirs  of  Muhammad  Shah  of
Dihli,  396  and  n 1,  398.

Chambal  or  Chhanbal  river,  a river  of
Central  India,  the  Charmanwatl
of  Sanskrit  writers,  385  and  n 3,
387,  419,  420  n 5.

Chambarhd,  a roof,  593  ti  9.

Cliampanir,  fortress  of, — in  Gnjrat,
455  n 1.  Called  also  Janpanir.

Chcnbarhdj  593  n 9,

Chanda,  the  heroine  of  a Ma^naun  in
Hindi,  mistress  of  Larak,  333.  See
under  the  next.

Chandaban,  a Jfu^nairi  in  Hindi  relat-
ing the  loves  of  Lurak  and  Chanda,
333  and  » 6.

Chartdan,  the  white  sandal  in  Hindi,
484  n 1.

Chandawar  district,  377.  See  also
under  Chaudwir.

xxxii  Iiuiejr,

Chandeti,  district  and  town  of,  129,
237,  238, 297,  423,  424  and  n 4,  435,
469,  475.

Chandol  of  silver,  t.c.,  the  palanquin
of  honour  for  ^vemora,  334.

Chandrabhaga,  name  of  the  river
Chenab  in  Sanskrit,  23  n 3.

Chandragupta,  King  of  Kagadha  or
Behar,  18  n 1

Chaedwar,  district,  70  and  n 3,  380,
387,  405.  See  also  Chandawar.

Chang,  a musical  instmment,  146  n 1.

Changiz  Khan.  See  under  Chiogiz
Khan.

Chanona,  in  the  Sark^  of  Agra,  70

nS.

Chaptar,  a town  on  the  Ganges,  343
and  n 3,  344.  Called  aUo  Chitar.

Charlch-i^Sfa^,  the  highest  of  ail  the
heavens,  246  n 3.

Gbarmanwati,  Sanskrit  name  of  the
Chambal,  a river  of  Central  India,
3S5  n 3.  See  under  the  Chambal.

Charpoy,  description  of,  494  and
nil,  495  «.

Chartull,  a dependency  of  Kol,  431
n 4.

Chd^tgdhe,  breakfast  time,  488  and

n 8.

Chataldi,  a Mnghui  commander,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  ‘Aliu-d-Din
Khilji,  249  n 5.

Ghatar  LaM,  district,  216.

Chiiugdn,  game  of, — origin  of  the
modem  game  of  polo,  79  » 1,  417
and  n 8.

Chaugdn,  a stick  with  a carved  end,
79  n 1,  143  n 2.

Ghanhans  of  Mainpur,  a tribe  of
Sa^puts,  414  » 13,

Chaal,  a vfllage  on  the  route  from
Amarkot  to  Jaisalmir,  566  n 13,
567  and  n 1.  Called  also  Chore.

Channd,  country  of,  468.

Chaurasi,  pargana  of,  in  the  district
of  HansT,  323.

Chausa,  vil^ge  of,  462  n 3.  See
under  Jansa.

Charica  heile,  302  n 6,  303  n.

CLenab,  the, — one  of  the  five  rivers
of  the  Panjab,  23  n 3,  67  n,  355  n 1,
3S3  and  « 1,  3S4  •*  and  n 1,  503.
Written  also  the  Cliiiub,  Ch^uiLb
and  Chhinab.

Chenip,  town,  416  and  » 4.  See  under
Chinar.

Chengiz  Khan.  See  under  Chingiz
Khan.

Bland,  On  the  Per$i-an  game  of,
103  n 1,  1 14  n 2,  115  n,  479  n 7.

Chhain,  town,  379  and  n 2.

Chhaju,  Malik,  Klghlu  Khan.  Khan  of
Karra,  brotbePs  son  of  Sultun
Ghivasu-d-Dm  Balban,  221  and
1 and  3,  227,  229,  230,  231,  232,
238.

Chhanbal,  a river  of  Central  India.
See  the  Chambal.

Chhappar  Khatta,  a place,  555.

Cbhapramaa,  township  of.  540  and

»8.

Chheramau,  township  of,  540  n 8.

Chhinab  river.  See  under  the
Chenab.

Chhinar,  town,  541  and  n 2.  See
under  Chinh^  and  also  Chinar  and
Chunar.

Chhota  Jawdr,  small  variety  of  millet,
549  K lA  6,

Ohigil,  a city  of  Turkestan.  158  and

Index,

XXXlll

Childi,  a Torkl  word  in  sense  ct
In‘am,  596  n 6.

Cbin,  conntry  of,  143,  147,  136,  232
n 5,  307,  426,  634.  See  also  China.
Chin,  Sea  of,  — the  Indian  Ocean,
153  n 1.

Chin,  Bon  of  Japbet  the  son  of  Noah,
147  n 1.

China,  145  » 2,  147  » 3,232  «S.  See
also  under  Chin.

Chinab  or  Chinib,  the.  See  under
the  Chenab  river.

Chinar  tree,  Piatanns  orientalus,  162
and  « 3,  276,  494  and  » 6,

Chinir,  fortress,  415  « 2,  456,  459,
470,  471.  See  Chenar  and  also
Cbinhar  and  Chnnar.

Chinese,  the,  353  n 1.

Chinese  Tartary,  145  a 3.

Chingiz  Khan.  Smpranr  • of  the
Mahals,  91, 93, 103  a 3,  123, 135  n,  ,
145  » 2,  188  a 2,  230,  236,  259  * 1,  j
269  n 5,  353  a 1.

ChingizI  line  of  Mogul  Princes,  14S
n 2.

Chichar,  town,  548,  555,  611.  See
Chhinar  and  also  Chinar  and
Chnnar.

Chirmgh,  an  open  lamp  with  a naked
Same,  330  « 17.

Ohishtis,  the, — descendants  of

^Iwijk  Mu'inu.d-Din  Chishti,  416

n 13.

Chishti.  Khwa^a  Ma‘Inia-d-Din  Hasan,
contemporary  of  Sultan  Hu^zu-d-
Din  Muhammad  Sam  Ghuri.  70  and

na.

Ckitar,  town  on  the  Canges,  343  and
w 3,  344.  See  Chspiar  and  also
Chitri.

Chitor,  267,  258,  397  b 1,  462,  ^
454,470.

Chitri,  same  as  Jalesar,  346  and  * 5.

See  also  under  Chitar.

Chorasmii,  the,  23  n 1.

Chore,  a village  on  the  route  from
Amarkot  to  Jaisalmir,  667  » 1.
Called  also  Cbaul  (q,  n,).

Choroes  I,  son  of  Kobad,  called
Nanshirwin,  of  the  Sassanide
dynasty  of  Persia,  46  n 5.
Christians,  the,  509  » 6,  577  «,  601  ».
Chronicles  of  the  Pattis  Kings  of
Delhi,  Thomas*  s,  87  n 1.  See  under
Patkan  Kings  of  DdH.

Chronology  of  Ancient  Nsttoss,  Albi.
runPs,  104  n 2,  108  * 4,  166  » 1,
280  Bs  3 and  4,  369  « 3,  627
. » 1.

ChUbkd-i-Sal,  baulks  of  sal  wood,  599
and  It  13.

Chaghz  Beg  Saljuqi,  King  of  Khuri-
Mn,  contemporary  of  Sultan
Mandiid  ^aznawi,  49  and  n 4.
Called  also  Chag^  Beg  and  Cha^ar
Beg.

Cbuli  Bahadur,  UzbakI,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Mirza  ‘Astari,  568.

China,  lime,  302  n 6.

Chunab  river.  See  under  ttee  Chenab.
Chunir,  fortress  of,  489,  541  and  » 4,
342.  See  also  under  Chinar  tuid
Cbinhar.

Chunhar,  same  as  the  fortress  of
Chnnar  (q.  ».),  489.

Cbnn-ti,  the  ninth  and  last  Emperor
of  the  Mongol  dynasty  of  China,
353  Bl.

Chnqmar,  Tnrki  word,  meaiUDg  of,
215  « 1.

5

XXXIT

Index.

Clisobora  of  Pliny,  corresponds  to  the
town  of  Kalikavartta  or  Vrinda-
vana  of  Sanskrit  writers,  24  n 6.

Clouston’s  Arahian  Poetry,  99  m 6.

Clysma, — or

Clysmon,  town  of,  169  n 1.

Cockscomb,  the  flower  called  Tdj-i-
^iuriiis,  629  n 1.

Coinage,  First  introduction  of  Muham-
madan— , 18  n 1,

Coins  of  Kings  of  Qhazni,  Thomas’s
16  71  2,  47  n 2.

Col,  fort  of,  70  n 4.

Colebrooke,  Essays,  332  n 4.

Colic,  notes  on,  49  n 2.

College  of  Fort  William,  Calcutta,
609  71  3.

Colombo,  303  ti.

Commentaries  of  Bdher,  the,  421  n 8.
See  the  Wdqi'dt.CBdbari,

Commentary  on  the  Miftdhu-l-‘UUtm
(g.  i'.),  428  and  n 2.

Companions  of  the  Prophet  Muham-
mad, 636.

Corah,  town,  486  n 6.

Coromandel,  265  « 5.

Cotgangra,  fortress  of.  See  under
Kot  Kangra

Conpele,  town,  344  n 7.

Conrteille,  de,  91  n 1,  145  n 2,  215  nn
i and  5.  See  also  under  Paret  de
Conrteille.

Crow,  the, — believed  by  the  Arabs
to  be  a bird  of  ill-omen,  7 n 2.

Cunningham’s  Ancient  Geography  of
India,  21  n 4.  23  n 5,  23  ti  2,  24  n 6,
48  n 5,  66  n 3.  67  n 1,  69  nn  4 and
5,  80  71  1,  132  71  3,  265  nn  2 and  4
293  71  5,  294  n 4,  362  n 2,  363  n,
382  71  4,  389  ti  2,  415  7i  5,

Cureton’s  Ifiiai  and  Nihal  of  Shahras-
tdm,  22  71  3,  157  n 2.

Cyrene,  town  of, — the  modern  Kair-
wan  in  Tunis,  167  ti  4.

Dabaran,  Ad-,  the  Hyades,  in  the
constellation  Taurus,  367  and  n 3.

Dabho’i,  a district  of  Gujrat,  313  and
n 5,  314.

Dabir-i-Falak,  the  scribe  of  the  sky,
a name  of  Mercury,  195  n 5.

Dabsi,  584  ti  4,  for  the  poet  Waisi,
a poet  of  the  time  of  Humayun.

Dacca,  town,  186  n 6.

Dddbeg,  Chief  Justice,  220  and  n 4.

Dadhyanch,  the  horse-headed  mons-
ter of  Indian  Mythology,  294  n 4.

Daftari,  a scribe  or  clerk,  499  and  ti  9.

Dagger,  first  invented  in  Hindustan,
539.

Bdgh,  a brand,  496  n 8.

Bdghl  system,  instituted  by  Shir
Shah,  496  and  n 8.

Dagla  or  Dajla,  the  river  Tigris,  394
71  5.

Dabir,  Raja,  contemporary  of  Muham-
mad Qasim  the  conqueror  of  Sind,
12  71  2,  13  71.

Dahra,  a bill-hook  or  reaping  hook,
102  n 5.

Dai,  tenth  month  of  the  Persian  year,
280  and  n 4,  370  and  n 1,  627  and
71  1,  629.

Dailam,  province  of, — the  Persian
‘Iraq,  30  r.  1.

Index.

;szr

Daityas,  the, — of  Hindu  mythology,
163  n 2.

Dajjal,  Anti-Christ,  278  and  Di  4,
279  n,  369  and  n 3,  490  and

n 6.

Dajla  or  Dagla,  the  river  Tigris,  394-
and  n o.

Ddk-chauki,  post-horses,  292.

Dak-rnnnera  of  the  East,  621  n 2.

Bakhan,  the,  433  n 3,  533,  634,
557.  See  also  under  Dakkan  and
Deccan.

Dakkan,  the,  312,  313,  517,  625,  632,
635,  636.  See  also  under  Dakhan
and  Deccan.

Daldil’i-Firuzi  of  Tzzu-d-Din  Khalid
KhanI,  a work  on  Astrology,  332
and  n 2.

Daldil-i-Flroz  ^dht,  the,  332  n 2.
See  the  Daldil-i-Flruzi.

Dalla,  a weasel  or  stoat,  158  n 4.

Dalman’,  a town  on  the  Ganges,  415
and  n 7.

Dalmiir,  district  of,  349  n 2.

Dalpur,  town,  415  n 7.

Damaghuu,  a city  of  Khurasan,  34
71  3.

Damascus,  12  and  n 2.

Damascus,  Mosque  of,  12  n 2.

Damrela,  district  of,  217  and  n 3.

Damyak,  a village  beyond  the  Indus
on  the  road  to  ^aznln,  72  and
n 3,

Dandangau,  a-town  in  the  vicinity  of
Merv  in  Khnrasan,  43  n 3.

Dangay,  a district  of  Bundelkhaod,
25  n 5.

Danial,  son  of  Sultan  ‘Aifm-d-D7n>
King  of  Bangala,  contemporary  of
Sultan  Sikaudar  Lodi,  417.

I Daniel.  Book  of.  394  n 5.

I

' Danuj  or  DhanZj,  ilai  of  Sunarginw,
! contemporary  cf  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-*
} D:n  Balban,  ISd  and  a 6.
j Da^  the, — name  o?  an  ancient  people
j cf  Central  As:r.  23  ?i  1.

1 D2ra,  one  cf  th-.-  ancient  Kites  of
i Persia,  39.

Darius  III,  King  of  Persia,  con. cm-
porary  of  A'.enauder  the  Great,
332  n.

Darma^  Khan,  Governor  of  Khura-
san under  Shah  Isma'Il  Safawi,
King  of  Persia  449  and  n 5.

Darra,  a city  of  Kindustan,  52  and
n 1.

Darra  Gaz,  in  ^urilsan,  582  n 7.
DarQ-i-Cha^m  (eye  medicine),  52.
Daru-l-Khillfat  of  Egypt,  Cairo,
328.

Darwaza-i'Baghdadl,  at  Dihli,  397.
See  also  under  the  Baghdad
Gate.

Darya  Oan.  ron  of  Zafar  Khan,
Governor  of  Gajrac  under  Sultan
Eiroz  Shfdi,  333  and  n 11.

Darya  Khan  Lodi,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Mohammad  ^ah  of  tbeSajyid
dv  nasty,  398.

Darya  Khan  Luhanl.  Governor  of
Bihar,  under  the  Lodi  dynasty,
435,  467  and  a 12.

Daryii-i-Chin,  the  Sea  of  China,  i.c.,
tlie  Indian  Ocean,  153  n 1.
Darya-i-Maghrib,  the  Atlantic  Uccau,
153  ti  i.

Darya-i-Kum,  the  Mediterranean  Sea,
153  1.

Dy--,  a bill-ho&k  or  reaping  hook,
102  n 5.

VI

Index.

Datma,  note  on,  o35  n 2.

Da’ud  Afghan,  "vlalikj  one  of  the
Malika  of  Scikan  FIroz  ^hkn
Taghlaq,  335  nn  S and  9.

Da’ad  Khan,  one  oi  ihe  Amirs  of
iSiiltaa  Ibrahim  Lodi.  439.

Xa'ud,  Maolana,  antnor  of  a lXa?i.awi
in  Hindi,  conteriiix>rary  of  Snltan
Firuz  333.

Hu'ud.  son  of  MasT-,  son  of  Shaika
Kamid  Lodi,  the  renegade  rabn*  of
ilukan,  conce^T.porary  of  Saltan
Mahmud  of  ^aznin.  19  and  a and
n 5,  21.

Ba'ud,  the  Turkoman,  contemporary
of  Sultan  Mas'll,  son  of  Suirin
Mahmad  of  '^niznin,  37  n 7.  38,
47,  bl  n 5.

Da’ud  Za’i  Afghans,  the,  501.

Daulatabad,  in  the  Deccan,  270  n 6,
271  and  n 6,  272  and  ti,  274  and
n 6,  303,  3Cil,  305.  309,  310,  S13,
314,  316,  31S.  Originally  called
Deogir  {q.  or  Deogarh,  capital
of  the  Yadava  kingdom.

Daulat  Khan,  the  new  Muslim,  a
protege  of  the  Luhani  faction,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  ‘AdU,  537.  See  1
Daulat  Khan  Luhani.  ;

Daula.r  Khan  Ajyara,  son  of  Saziwal
Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Islem
^ah,  527,  531.  532  and  n 2.

Danlat  ^han,  son  of  Budhu,  one  of  |
the  Chief  Commanders  of  Sultan
Ibrahim  Lodi,  467  r 6.

Daulat  Kh.in  Lodi,  Crovemor
Samiina,  one  of  th  .-  Amirs  of  Sultan
Mahmud  of  the  Taghlaq  'jAkhi
dynasty,  364,  365,  367  n,  1*^5.
3S0,

Danlat  Khan  Lodi,  one  of  the  Maliks
of  the  Lodi  dynasty,  435,  136,  437,
438  and  n 6.

Daulat  Khan  Luhani,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  ‘Adli,  539  and  u 11.  See
Daulat  Khan,  the  new  Muslim.

( Daulat;  Khan,  Shahzada.  (lovernor  of
I the  fortress  of  Rantanbhur  under
I Sultan  ^lahmud  of  MLvra  and
! Saltan  Sikandar  Lodi.  4J5,

1 Daulat  YCir  of  Kanpiia,  Malik,  363,
j Darye^pur.  town,  417.

; David  cf  Scripture,  5.

] DaUvah.  invocation  of  the  attributes
of  God,  445  n 6,  459  n 2.  See  the
next.

Da^ivatu’l-asma,  a system  of  incanta"
tion,  445  and  n 6,  459  n 2.  Seo
the  above,

Daz,  the  Brazen  fortress  of,  in  the
story  of  Isfandiyar  in  the  Shah
Ndmnh,  321  n 1,

Debal,  the  modem  Tattah,  67  n 1,
Called  also  DTwal  (5.  r.),

Debalpur,  district  and  town  of,  229,
392,  393,  399.  See  also  under
Depiilpur,  Dibalpur  and  Dipalpur.
Dehf  Cha7idan,  the  Red  sandal,  484
n 1,

Dsccan,  the,  237,  256,  270  n 6,  271
and  n 6,  309,  327.  See  also  under
the  Dakhan  and  the  Dakkan.

De  Goeje,  Qloi*6ary  on  Muqaddasl,
217  n 2.

Dehli,  See  nnder  Dihll.

of  I Deipal,  the  Hindu  commander  of  the
furtress  of  Sonpat  at  tlie  time  of
Sultan  Mashd  Ghaznawi.  37  rtnd
j n 4.

' Deipur  or  Dipur,  town  of,  46  and  n 2.

i

Index.

xxxvn

Delhi.  See  under  DihlL

Denarios,  a silver  coin  of  the  Bomans,
origin  of  the  word  dinar,  18  n 1.

Denarius  aureus,  a Boman  gold  coin,
18  » 1.

Deogarh,  422  n 2,  for  the  fortress  of
fjntgarh  (g.  r.).

Deogarh.  See  under  Deogiri.

Deoghar.  See  under  Deogir.

Deogir,  district  and  town  of,  237,
239,  240,  247  n,  251  n 7,  255,  236,
274,  283  and  n 3,  284,  286  and  ti  1,
297,302,303,309.  Sultan  Muham-
mad Tughlao  Shah  gives  it  the
name  of  Danlatabad  (g.  v.},  mahing
it  bis  capital.

Deo  Gir,  a rebel  during  the  reign  of
Sultan  Jalaltt-d-Din  Khilji,  237.
See  Bam  Deo.

Deogiri  or  Deogarh,  capital  of  the
Yadava  Kingdom,  271  n 6,  272  n.
See  under  Deogir.

Deo  Kot,  town  of,  85.

Deorimal,  son  of  SilhadI,  one  of  the
-chiefs  of  Bai  Sen,  a contemporary
of  Shir  Shah,  476  n 3.

Depalpur,  district  and  tovrn  of,  249.
251,  363  n,  383  » 11,  389.  See  also
under  Debalpilr,  Dibalpur  and
Kpilpfir.

Denal  Banl,  one  of  the  ladies  of  the
harem  of  Bai  Karan  of  Gujerat,
heroine  of  the  ‘Aehiqa  of  Mir
Khttsru,  256,  marries  Kh4r  Khan,
son  of  Sultan  ‘Alan-d-Diu  Khilji,
208,  275,  276,  281.

Dbankob,  town,  493  « 5,  498  « 1,
See  Dhankot.

Dhankot,  town,  493  and  n S,  498  and
■a  1,  §00.

Dhar,  district  and  town  of,  294,  361,
364  and  n 2,  384  and  n 5,  385  and
n 3,  422  7t  3.

Dharanagar,  fortress  of, — the  citadel
of  Danlatabad  (g.  r.),  314.

Dhaturd,  note  on,  535  n 2.

Dhanui  or  Danuj,  Bai  of  SnnarganW,
Contemporary  of  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-
Dln  Balban,  186  and  n 6.

Dhdica,  a rnnner,  from  the  Sanskrit,
-302  and  n 3.

D’Herbelot,  14  m 1,  16  n 2,  21  n 1,
40  m 1,  46  n 5,  51  « 2,  65  n 3,  56
n 1,  a 5,  73  » 1.  91  n 2,  143  n 4,
147  n 1,  148  n 1,  149  Ji,  158  n 3,
167  n 3,  191  n 2,  303  » 4,  310
« 2.

Dholpur,  a Native  state  in  Bajpntana
and  Capital  of  the  state,  385  n 3,
410,  419  and  n 3,  420,  423,  487,
444,  445.

Dholpur  State,  in  Bajpntana,  419
n 3.

Dhopamau’,  a place,  407.

Dhor  Samnnd, — or

Dbor  Samnndar,  a place  in  the  sontb
of  India,  265  and  n 6.

Diarbafcr,  town  of,— in  Armenia,  61
n 5.

Dibalpur,  district  and  town  of,  187,
349,  401.  See  also  nnder  Debalpor,
Depalpur  and  DTpalpnr.

Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Soman  Anti-
quities, Smith’s,  19  71,  29  n 5,  76  n,
367  n 3.

Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Boman  Bio-
graphy, Smith’s,  46  n 5,  332  n.

Dictionary  of  Greek  and  Roman  Geo-
graphy, Smith’s,  23  « 1,  30  7i  1,
35  71  2,  394  n 5

xxxvm

Index.

IUctumary  of  Sindii  Mythology,
Dowaon’s,  163  n 2.

Dictionary  of  Islam,  Hughes’,  2 k E,

97  n 4,  113  n 1,  150  n 2.  151  n 6,
156  n 1,  157  Ti,  2,  176  n,  183  n 2,  !
191  n 4,  200  n,  203  n 1.  216  n,  |
303  n 4),  320  n 4,  356  n 4.  36S  t.  1'  j

S3S  n 3,  392  n 6,  420  a 8.  424  n 9,  j

445  n 6,  446  n 5.  459  ji  2.  472  n 6,

480  n 5,  481  n 8.  4S5  nn  1 and  2,

488  TM  5 and  7,  510  n 4,  522  n 5,
571  j.  1,  572  o 5,  601  n,  603  n and  i
It,  2,  613  n,  622  n 3,  623  n 1.  636  n 2,
Dictionary  of  Oriental  Biography,
Beale’s  32  r«  1,  33  n 1,  233  n 4,  272  j
n 1,  279  n 3,  624  n 6.  See  also
under  Beale  and  the  Oriental  Bio-
' graphical  Dictionary.

Dictionnaire  de  la  Perse,  Meynard’s,

30  n,  35  n 2.  42  n 1,  43  nn  1 and  2,

46  a 1,  573  n 3.

Dictionnaire  TarJ.-Oritntal,  Pavet  de  '
Courteille’a,  91  n 1,  145  n 2,  215
n 1,  325  n 2,  353  n 1,  439  n 4,  440  n.
Diglito,  name  of  the  Tigris  in  the
upper  part  of  its  course,  394  n 5.
Dihli,  14,  21  n 4,  25  n 5,  37  n 3,  64,  i
69,  70,  72.  77,  78,  81  n 2,  87,  88  |
and  nn  1 and  3,  S9,  90,  91,  02  and  ;
n 2,  93,  95  and  n 7,  96,  98  n 3,  99
and  n 2,  121  and  n 8 123  and  n 5,
124,  125,  126  and  n 3,  129  and  n 2,
130,  131,  132,  133  n 2,  134  and  nn
1 and  4,  135  n,  185,  188,  196,  218
n 3,  219,  220,  221  n 3,  222,  225,
227,  228,  231,  233,  237,  238,239,
244,  247  and  n and  n 4,  248,  249,  i
250,  255,  256,  257  and  n 7.  260  and  '
n 7.  261,  266  n 1,  267.  268,  269  ■_  3,  ;
271  and  n 6,  272  ).  273.  274.  283.  '

284,  285,  286,  292,  293,  294  and  n 4,
293,  297  n,  298,  299,  300,  301,  302,
S03  , 304,  305,  309.  310,  313,  315,
316,  318,  322,  323,  ,'?24,  325  and
,■)  3,  328,  330,  333  and  n 1,  334,  335,
337  n 7,  338,  341,  342,  343,  344,
346,  347  and  n 3,  349.  350  and  n 3,
351  and  n 10,  .352,  354.  356  and  n 1,
357  and  nn  2 and  3,  358  n 6,  359,
36j  and  n 1.  362,  363,  364  and  n S,
365  and  n 8.  366  and  nn  ] and  3,
375,  377  n 4,  378,  379,  380,  3S1,
333,  384  and  n 5,  385  and  n 3.  386
and  n 1.  387.  388,  390,  391,  396,
398,  399  and  n S,  400,  401  and  n 4,
i02  and  n 1,  403.  404  n 2,  405,  406,
407,  410  and  a 4,  411  and  n 7,  412
n 2,  413,  418,  426,  427,  432  n 10,
433,  437,  438,  442,  455,  458,  462,
472,  492,  504.  505,  506,  521,  525,
526,  529,  542  , 543,  548,  549,  657,
577  n,  ,594,  595,  596,  600,  609  n 5,
610  n 4,  The  name  is  also  written
Behli,  Delhi  and  Dilli.

Dijla.  See  under  the  Dajla.

Dik,  district,  129  n 2.

Dilawar  ]^an  Lubani,  one  of  the  ad-
herents of  Babar,  437.

Dilli,  464  and  n 2,  466.  See  under
Dihli.

Dimishqi,  Yahya  ibn  ‘Abdn-l-Latif
Qazwini,  author  of  the  Luibu-t-
Taictirikh,  34  n 9.

Din,  town,  458  n 6.

Dinar,  a gold  and  silver  coin,  18  n 1,
19  )i.

Dinar,  value  of  the  silver  coin,  24  n 2.

Dinar  Haraini,  Malik,  — one  of  the
Anurs  of  Sultan  ■Aian-d-Din  KhiljT,
259.  Snltan  Qutbu-d-Din  Khihi

Index

xxxix

gi?es  him  the  title  of  ^far  ^han  |
and  appoints  him  Governor  of  |
Gnjrat.  ;

DJ/it/ri,  a beverage,  31  n.

Dlnpanah,  fortress  of, — in  Dihli,  472,
300.

Dinar,  name  of  a place,  46  w 2,  47
71,2,

Dip,  port  of, — in  Gujarat,  454  and
Q 7.  Called  also  Din.

Dipiir,  town  of,  46  and  n 2.  Also
written  Deipiir.

D:gg,  note  on  the  fever  so  called.  ,
316  and  n 4.

Dirham,  a silver  coin,  IS  u 1,  10  n
and  n 6,  24  n.  2.

Gladwin’s,  608  n 3

Din,  port  of,  4o4  u 7.  See  under  |
Dip,

Diwal,  town  of,  the  modern  Tatta,  ,

S6.

Dhcdn  of  the  Ustad  Abu-l'Varaj  Runi.
the  Poet,  54  and  7i  1.

Dlwana,  599  and  n i.  See  under
Qambar  Dlwana.

Diu'dn-i- Hufi-r,  1?1  n 3,  487  r 6,  !

the  Kali  of  audience,  I
455

X>lii'diil^ana‘i''‘An,  the  royal  camp,  ,
56S  and  S.

Diwdns  of  Amir  ^^asru  of  Dihil,  the
famous  poet,  197  ?i  1.

Bhvdm  of  Mas'ud  Sa‘d  Salman,  the  :
Poet  (q.  r.j,  55.  j

Djafc,  same  as  the  Jats,  129  n 2.

Dienguiz  Khan.  See  under  tb^  j
Chingiz  Khan.  j

Djepour,  93  n 1,  129  7i  2,  See  under  1
Jaipur.

Doab,  the,  81  and  n 2,  122  n 1,  129,
185,  305,  316,  343,  346,  351,  354,
355,  359.  364,^  365,  377  n 6,  378  ?/.  1,
386  n 5,  395,  407,  437,  444.

Dobil.  same  as  the  town  of  Diwal  or
Defcal,  67  n 1.

Dow’s  History  of  India,  326  n.

Dowson’s  Dictionary  of  Hindu  Mytho-
'ogy,  163  n 2.

DowsoAa  History  of  India,  6 ti  4,  8
ii  2,  10  71  and  n 3,  11  nn  1 and  3
13  71  and  n 1,  19  !i7i  2 and  4,  20  nn,
4 and  5;  21  n 1.  136  n 6,  215  7i.  4,
219  rt  3,  222  H 1,  264  r.  1,  265  5,

266  3.  207  I.  269  n 1,  450  Tin.  8

and  0,  457  nn  5 and  6,  459  n 5,  460
n 5,  -+61  n 9,  466  nn  o and  7,  467  n 6
504  n 2,  o69  n 4,  674  7i.n  i and  9,
575  n 3.  579  :i  7,  624  nn  8 and  9.

Dozy.  Su^pUmr^us  ayn  Dictionnaires
44  n 5.  543  7i  3.

Drachma,  a silver  coin  of  the  Greeks,
origin  of  the  word  dirham,  18  n 1.

Druiy,  Useful  plants  of  Indta^  173
n 2,  303  7i,  550  n 1,  627  n 2.

Duff,  Mr.  Grao:,  265  « 4.

Dnghlat  Ka^mlrl,  one  of  the  Amira
of  Humayan.  4«)3  and  n 6.

Duhai.  a kind  of  drums,  143  n 2.

Dui  Chain,  ilac.  Governor  of  Bhat,
contemporar}  of  Timur  the  Great,
355  n 4.

Dun,  hill  of,  438  and  n 7.

Dunkar,  a Brahman  poet  of  the  reign
of  Sultan  Sihandar  Lodi,  423  and
n 5.

DurgewatJ,  Kani,  ruler  of  the  country
of  Kara  Katanka,  contemporary  of
Adli,  Sa-t.

Eagle,  the  constellation — , 630  and
n 1.

Eastern  Bengal,  345  n 2.

Eastern  Bohtas,  fortress,— Holitas-
garh  in  the  Shahabaci  di^tnc*:  of
Bengal,  466  and  n 6.  See  also
nnder  B.ohtas-i-Bharqi.

Ebony  wood,  notes  on,  167  rt  2.

Ecbatana,  the  ancient  name  of
Hamadan,  the  old  capital  of  Persia,
30  71  1.

Egj-pt,  22,  94,  310,  311,  321  n 3.  327.
328.

Egyptian  Khallfahs  of  the  Honsc  of
'Abbas,  310  a 2,  315,  327  n B.

Egyptians,  the,  30.2  n 2.

‘EUth,  a poit  of  the  Bed  Sea,  ICO  v 1.

Elements,  the  Fonr—,  called  al-
ArJcda,  102  n 1.

TAcifenta  '/  Anihic  )'’•  < '.uiu

Fro^ody,  Ranking's,  0'.»T

Elias  and  Ross,  Tdr'i^.i.Ttn^'>i{7,  oO
71  5,  j03  n 3,  145  n 2,  232  //  5.  236
n 1,  305  n 3,  353  n 464  n 8,
572  n 8,  57-4  n 6,  575  n I .

EUiir  of  life.  al-V\-^7r.  3 40  r.  2.

El-:,  notes  or.  the,  171  n 2

Eliictr.,  L’r  . o?  Colotr-bo.  303  n.

Elliott’s  Hi>iL0nj  'f  Indm,  16  /:  ?_  19
n 4,  20  nn  1 and  4,  2>  n 4,  24  i
and  5,  26  n,  27  n/r  3 and  4.  29  »;
and  nn  i,  3,  4 and  5.  31  3*2  / 1,

33  n 2 34  rin  5.  7 r.nd  -S,  30  'u-  0
and  8,  44  nn  6 ar.-^  S,  15  nn  1 and  2
48  n 4,  49  ti  3,  55  n 2.  02  a 2,  03  w,
€5  n 1,  66  r.  2,  67  n 2 Tb  ’•  2,  SO
r.  3,  91  n 2,  96  a 2.  121  « 0. 12-  1,

127  7t  2,  131  nn  2 and  5,  135  iS4
n -i  1^6  nn  o and  6,  13.S  nn  2 .ind

I 5,  196  w 1,  197  n 1,  220  n 2,  222

j n 2.  223  n 1,  247  nyi  2 and  4,  24S

' mi  2 and  6,  249  n 5,  251  n,  252  n I,

I 257  71  i,  259  n 5,  26C  n 7,  265  n-  4,

275  n 1,  296  7.  3,  297  n S,  29S  ti  S,
j 300  n 3,  307  n and  n 4,  308  n 1,

; 310  71  1,  315  n 7,  320  n 5.  323  n 3,

; 324  7171  1,  2 and  6.  325  n 3,  326  n,

< 327  7in  1 and  5,  228  nn  1 and  6,

I 329  mi  I,  3 and  S.  331  7i  4,  333  7in

j 2,  3 and  5,  344  n 7,  347  n 3,  355

}

1 7zn  1,  4 and  6,  356  n 5,  357  n 2,

358  n 6,  360  n 3,  361  n 1.  366  n
396  n 1,  399  y-n  2 and  7,  400  t:,  421
I 71  i>,  433  7\  3,  -*38  nn  3 and  7,  440  n,

\ 448  n 4,  570  n 2,  &30  n 5.  582  nn  4^

I 5 and  7,  583  nyi  2 and  3,  585  7i  7,

5S6  n 5,  592  n 4,  593  n 9.  See  also

I ’

, under  ElUott  and  Dowson.

Elliott’s  Rareu  vf  fhc  X.-Tl’.  Piovince^i
of  India,  313  n 7,  3^4  /•.  3.  -l-O  ^ 1,
41c  /i.

' Elliott  and  Dowson,  Hisrinry  of  Induit
6 n 4,  8 n 2,  10  7*  and  n 3.  11  mi  I
I and  3,  13  n and  ti  1,  IS  nn  2 and  4;

i'  20  nn  4 and  5,  21  n 1.  136  n 6,

215  n 4,  219  n 3,  222  n 1.  264
n 1,  265  n 5.  266  r,  3,  267  n I.'
369  n 1,  450  nn  S and  0.  IcA  5
arid  0,  459  n 5.  460  a 5 461  n 9.
466  nn  b and  7.  467  /:  6,  2,

569  rt  4.  57-1-  r.  n 1 and  9 575  n 3,
579  n 7,  624  nn  H ariO  i).
KlpKinston.^’s  Lnua,  20  ?;  4,

27  7t  4,  2S  h 2.  29  n and  n7i  1 and  5
Emyercrr  Akha,\  Eeveridgo's,  58  n 5.

; Enteric  fever,  notes  on  320  n,

I Ephesutf,  the  seven  si^^epers  of,

Index.

EpiphaniuS;  the  Greek  Geograplier.
169  1.

Erdmann,  Er.,  353  n 1,

Erskiue’s  Memoirs  <}f  Bilbar,  421  n 8.
437  n 7.  439  nn  4,  6 and  7,  440  n,
44S  n 4,  570  nn  5 and  6,  609  n 5.
Esoterics,  or  Bdfiniyyah,  a sect  of
Sli?a  Mnslims.  22  n 3.

Essays,  Colebrooke.  332  n 4,

£rab,  district  and  town  of,  1S5  n 1,
218  n 3,  377  n 4.  410  n 4.

Etawah^  district  and  town  ofj  325

j Ti  3,  378,  385  ft  3.  See  also  cmder

I T.-
Itiiwa,

j Etynio^oaical  Dict)ora->y  cf  the
] L nyiage,  Skeat*!:,  159  n 2,  513  7i  3.
I Eupbrares,  the,  205  >■.  1.

I Europcs.  an  ancient  name  of  tho
I to\VG  of  Kai  in  Persia,  30  n 1.

! Eve.  tte  llother  of  mankind,  20G  -n
; 320  ti  4

I Evil-ep’e  the,  192  ‘‘.j,!  tm  2 and  3.

■ EKodns,  Book  of,  P-t-  < 4.

1 Ezekiel.  Book  of,  li-'-  ■ 2.

T.

Fadak.  art  estate  north  of  Medina
■which  bad  b*  lonjted  to  Muhammad,
156  and  n 5,  157  n.  631  and  n 1.
Faiq,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  ‘Abdu-l-
Mniik  ibn  ^^uh  Samani,  King  of
Khurason.  18  and  n 2.

Fai^i,  a p.'et  of  Basawar.  contem-
porary of  Shah.  479  and  n o.
Ea^r,  chief  of  the  B'k-'r  .'i:  Dihli,
in  the  rei^n  of  Siilt’xn  (thiyasu-d-
Din  Balban,  184,  [HTiinayu.n,  462.
Fakhr  ‘Aii,  5Iir,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Fokh-l  ndmah.  popular  name  of  the
Hadiqat'j  I’HaqJqat.  tbe  most  cele-
brated work  of  the  famous  poet
Sanal.  35  7»  i,  56  n 2.

Fakhrn-d-Din  ‘Amid  Lumaki,  the  poet
cf  Giiln,  138.  See  under  ‘Amid
Lumakk  1

Fakhrii-d-DIn  Amir  Dad,  3falik.  1

Governor  of  Baran  under  Sultan  ■

‘Alau-d-DIn  Khilp,  25u.  '

V:  kijra-l-Din  f'li.a,  Mitlik.  .-(I.,  of
Maiik.  one  of  the  3iu'iik!>  of
ti.c-  Chi'ji  Suitin'?.  274,  290,  2'd,
292  293,- — receives  the  title  of
ITin^  Khan,  29“  and  n 4.  — suc-
ceeds ':>  tbe  tbror.e  of  Dihli  under
tbe  style  of  Su'.tiu  51u}i'i:r  mad
'A'lil  ibn  Tuxb!  1 i'l  S :

a!.:^o  under  L' uijdi

tG.k]sru-d-Din  the  MaJicu-l

l'a»ara  or  Atnirc-l-UtQara,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Su:tin  Mu'iz2Q-(’.-i'‘I.i
Kuiaubad,  of  tht- Halbanl  d^.  i.i.  5.
220  2 and  3 2_7,  t:29,  26^  200

? 2.

_ .i?^ru-d-DIii  Iv  c!  , Muhk.  ei'f  rd
The  ArOrs  *'■'  S dtan  Jal’-Iu-u-i-On
1 2.;s.  243.

Iki uhru-d-Din  Kh.‘.  Malik,  one  s'  r .j
Milihs  of  i-d  I'ln

Tyail'.mish,  I2('  ■.  2.

F-khrii-d-Din  Imaui,  a aoctJi-

o

Index.

X 11

of  the  Shafi‘ite  &ect.  contemporary
of  Saltan  Ghiyasn-d-Dm  and
Mu'izzu-d-Din  r^Iuhammad  Sam,  73
and  nn  1 and  2,

Fakhm-^f-DIn  Silahdar,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Mahainmad  j
Tn^leq  Shah,  30S,  309,  j

Pakhrn»l-Mulk  ‘Amid  LumakT,  ■
Malika-l-Kalam,  99  and  n 4i.  See  j
under  ‘Amid  Lumaki.  |

Fakhra-KHuIk  Shwaia  'Amld-n-Din,  j
99  n 4,  Z38  n i.  Same  as  the  j
above.  i

Fa'l  a good  omen.  4l2  n 1.  !

Fallon’s  Hmduitdn}  Dicfiona^'u^  528  j
n I.  j

SalSi  ^ coin  of  srna’.l  value,  from  the
Latin /o//iS,  28  a 1.

F'lnak^  vveasel  or  stoat.  158  a 4.
FanakaLi,  the  Hiscorian,  16  n 1.  j

FaQin\  vertebrje  of  the  back,  7^r  n 2.  j
Faqdra,  a vertebra  of  the  back,  74  |
^ 2.  {
Fci'jdra,  a sort  of  v.-aving  ornament  j
on  the  blade  of  a s’.vord  or  else  a j
notch  on  its  edge,  75  n.  I

Fcqirs,  various  rel’g’ous  orderij  of,  |
310  n-  4.  I

F::r\  one  of  the  two  chief  divisions  or  j
F!/fA‘-l-Fiqhf  5 n 4.  [and  n 9.

Farah,  to^vn  of,— in  3ilnchistan,  ^20
r.arnh,  a town  a distance  of  ten
from  Agia,  542.

Farakh^bad  district.  Tv.-W.  P.,  185
i.  See  also  auder  FarnkhaodJ.
Fax;'  2n  (Fir  aun’,  the  Pharaoh  uf
F;^ypt,  137,  oGi.

FaiJC'daq,  Abu  Firas  Hammam  ibn
uhalib,  the  cei:jpr.itod  Arab  poet,
2bG,  287  and  n?i  I and  2

Farhad,  the  lover  of  ^Irin,  in  the
romance  or  KhusrU’O-Shlrhi,  279
and  n 3.

Farhang-i-Ana7idrdj,  a Fersiau  dic-
tionary, 596  n 6.

Farhatu-l-Mulk,  Malik  Muiarrih  Snl-
tfml.  Governor  of  Gujriit,  under
Siiltiin  Firoz  Shah,  334  and  ti  3.

Farid  Ganj-i-Shakkar,  Shai^.  the
famoas  Muhammadan  Saint,  233.
460.  See  under  Farldu-d-DIn.

Farid  Khan,  son  of  Hasan  Khan  Sur,
original  name  of  Shir  Shah,  461
and  n 5,  4 6 6,  467  and  it  5.

Farid  Khan,  infant  son  of  Saltan
Alan-d-DIn  Khiljl.  2S9.

Farid  ^an  ibn-i-Masnad-i-’AlI  Khizr
Khun  (i  V.).  395,  400  7i  1.

Farid  Taran,  one  of  the  AmTrs  of
Islem  Shah  Siir.  497.

Farldu-d-DIn  Ganj-i-Shakkar.  Shaikh,
grandson  of  Farru^  ■ Shah  of
Kabnl,  — a famous  Muhammadan
saint  of  Hindustan,  232  and  n 6,
133  n,  135  n,  355  n 1,  362  n 2.  See
also  under  Farid.

Farldu-d-DIn  Mas'ud  Ganj -i-Shakkar,
132  n 6.  Same  as  the  above.

Faridun,  an  ancient  King  of  Persia,
166  n 1,  435  n 2,  595.

FarighI,  a poet  of  the  time  of  Hunii-
yun,  616,  617.  See  under  Abu-l-

j Wahid.

j Farmall,  Khan-i-Khanan,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  Buhlul  and  also  of
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  411  and  rt  7,

I 412  n 2,  414,  418.

Farmall,  Khxtn-x-i^apan,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  Ibrahim  Lodi,  434.

rarru^I,  Hakim,  a famoas  Persian

Index.

xliii

poet,  contemporary  of  ‘Asjadi,
Anaarl  and  Firdausi,  17  » 3.

Farmkh  of  Kabul,  graudfathei

of  ShaiKb  Farid  Ganj-i-Shakkar,
132  n 6.

Farrukli  Zad,  Sultan,  ibn  iXaa‘ad  ibn
Mahmud  Gbaznawi.  51.

Faryiur,  old  name  of  Peshawar,  66
n 6.

Farukhabad  district,  X.-W.  P.,  377
n 3,  See  also  under  Farakhabad.
Faruq,  oi  the  Di-'Ccrner,  a name  of
‘Umai,  the  second  Khalifah,  59
and  n 3.  I

Faiyab  a town  of  Mawarau-n-Xahr  '
(Tiansoxiana),  339  n 4.  I

Farr,  prayers  enjoined  in  the  Qur’an,  ;

4S8  n 7.  I

Fd^iq.  immoral  man,  one  wiio  opposes  I
Fatehgarii,  town  in  Farukhab'-d  dis-
trict, X,-\V.  P , 377  a 3.  3S4  n 4.
Fatenpur,  325  n 3.  See  under  Fath-
pur.  !

Fateponr,  80  n 5,  tor  Fathpn'ir  {q.  v.),  i
Fath  Khan,  son  of  Azam  ilumayui'  !
Suirwani,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  i
Sultan  Ibiahim  hodi,  433.  :

Fath  Khan,  son  of  Snltln  Puhlul  Lodi  '
41S.

Fath  Khan,  sou  of  Siilrin  Firoz  Idhai).  '
of  the  Tu^laq  nynusty.  3if4  and  ■

2.  32S,  334.

Fath  Khan  Harawi  or  the  Amirs  of
Suitdj  Mahmud  Sharq]  of  Jaunpui.
403  and  nn  2,  3 and  4.  See  also
the  next.

Path  Khan,  of  Heiat,  ^.ahzada,  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Mnbaiak  Shah
ot  Jaunpur,  361.  Sam©  as  the
above  \ q *

I Fathabad,  founded  by  Sultan  Maudud
I Ghaznawl,  47  and  n 1.
j Fathabad,  founded  by  Sultan  Firoz
i Shah,  of  the  Tughlaq  dynasty,  324
n 2,  325  n 3,  365.

Fathpur,  otherwise  known  as  Sikri.
one  of  the  dependencies  of  llultan,

I 80  71  5,  97,  325  n 5,  363,  365,  366,
3iO,  433,  442,  445,  446,  486,  508,

; 535, 600.

! Fathpur  District,  K.-W.  Provinces.
486  n 6.

Fatimah,  daughter  of  thp  Prophet
Muhammad  and  wife  of  ‘All.  iol
n o,  156  71  5,  303  ii  4,  622  nn  o and
4,  631  n 1.

FativaSy  legal  decisions  by  a Mufti
(q.  u.),  317  n 6,  religious  or  judicial
rulings,  507  and  n 7.

Fazihat.  Qa?!,  jr  Qdzl  Ig7ior7iin}j,  174
and  n 6.  See  under  Qdr/  Fa/.ilat.
Fazilat,  Qazi,  the  Q'dzl  of  the  aimy  ' f
Shir  Shah,  popularly  known  as  Qazi
h’azihut  {g.  r.j.  474  and  a 4.
Fazlu-llah  Ealkhi,  Malik,  styled
Qntlugh  Khan,  one  of  flie  Ami:  a
of  the  Tnghlaa  ^shi  dynasty,  351
and  n 2.

Fazlu-Iiah  PChan's  T'lrki.'h  Pf-cniP
Dtciionaru,  4^*2  n 2,  483  2.  497

n 1,  575  ti  I,  580  ri  5,  592  u 5,  596
a 6.

Farr  the  frst  arrow  in  tne  game  cf
iiiaisiry  369  ?i  1.

Feriahtd.  See  under  Firi‘^hta.

Fiditls,  the, — disciples  of  the  chief
or  the  Mulahidah  heretics.  73  and
n 3,  122  and  n 3.

Silh'ind,  a stratagem  m tho  gam©  oi
cuess,  114  } 2

Index.

rliv

Fiqdr,  venebrge  of  the  back.  74  w 2.  | 304  n 1,  SOS  r.n  1,  2 and  3,  307  n

Fiqh,  the  two  chief  divisions  of,  5 ; and  n 2,  SOS  n 2,  325  n 3,  326  n 2,

n,  4.  * 327  nn  1 and  3,  329  ii/i  5 and  9.

FirangiSj  the,  45S  and  » 6.  See  also  j 330  «n  6 and  7.  331  Tin  8 and  9,

nnder  the  Franks.  j 332  n.  333  n 11,  334  nn  3,  4,  5 and

FiraoT.  or  poetical  name  of  i 7,  335  nu  4,  5.  6.  7,  B 9 and  10,

Khwaiii  Aivdb  ibn  Kh’.vaja  Abn-i-  i 336  n 7,  337  'nn  2 and  3.  328  ?:  1.
Barakar  (o.  v.),  633.  634,  j 339  n 2,  342  nn  1,  2 and  4.  343  n i,

Fir/iqridn.ak.  one  of  ihe  poetical  works  : 344  nn  1,  2 and  7,  345  n 2,  346  n 5,

of  Salman  Savra’i,  571  n 9 ; 347  n 2,  34£  nn  1,  3,  6,  ",  9 and  jO,

Firdausi,  the  celebrated  author  of  the  i 349  nn  3,  4,  10,  11  and  12,  350  n/i

Sad  ’.-yuhnah.  17  and  an  1 and  3,  j 3 and  4 351  nn  2.  6 and  7.  352  nn

32  an,i  n 1,  n 2,  461  n 6.  j 6,  7 and  10,  353  n/i  2.  3.  5,  3 and  9,

Firdl'sl,  Hakim,  17  -n  3 See  niider  354  n,n  1,  5 rnd  8,  255  nn  1,  3 and
Firdausi.  j 4,  356  r.  5,  357  n 2,  359  nn  2 and  3,

Fir.'^ta.  lO  n.  IS  n 16  nn  1 and  2,  ! 360  nn  3 and  5,  361  n 2,  363  n 2,

19  n and  nn  1,  2 and  6,  20  1,  364  n 6,  365  nn  2,  4,  6.  6 and  7,

2j  4 and  5,  21  n.  3,  22  -n  7,  23  nn,  2 , 366  nn  4 and  5,  375  n 2,  379  nn  1

and  4,  24  nn  1,  2 and  5,  25  nn  2 j and  2,  3S0  nr.  2,  3,  4 and  5,  381  mi

ani  4,  26  a and  n 1,  27  nn  3 and  4,  | 3 and  5,  382  nn  3,  2,  5 and  6,  383

2S  nn  2 and  4.  29  7in  i and  5.  33  « ! nn  3,  6,  10  and  II.  3S4  2 and  5,

and  n '2.  31  % and  ti  1,  33  nn  2 \ 385  ha  1 ana  k 3*^6  nn  1.  3,  5 and

and  3,  34  nn  1 and  7,  36  nn  1 j 7,  387  hn  i,  2,  3 and  4,  388  nn  1,

and  9,  37  an  5 and  6,  43  nn  2,  5 I 2 and  3,  3S9  ’■.•v  3,  4 and  8,  390  n 4

and  7,  44  nn  i,  2,  6,  T and  8,  47  Tin  j 391  a 2.  392  n 5.  393  nn  1,  3,  5,  6

3 and  7.  48

/i.C

1,

2,  3 and  4,  49  n

1.

! and

1

7,

805  ;

3,  396  717?

1 and  2,

5' ; ’

, 1.  2 .

) p 2

0

51  T./j  1 and

3,

1 SyS

OOP

■t  1,  3,  4 and  6

, 4C0  n,

5:i  '

..  i,  2

and

4,  55

n -2,  7t!

1

1 4-71

nn

2 and

4,  402  -la  1,

4 and  5,

65

1,  d''>  /-

4

. 5 and  6,  67

'1,

j 403

nn

1,  5 £.

xd  8.  40i

2 and  5.

dd  '

. 1,  1-

' ;>

2.

77

1,2  and

3.

i 4U5

nn

1 and

4,  40b  r.n  1,

3;  5,  6,

91  n

5 122

2

and

A 123  n

2.

! 9 and.  1

3,  407

nn  1 and  4,  4

sOS  7i7£  2,

13 -5

n a:.'!

2-

i 4,  IbO  cr

! 2

, 4,  6

and  7,

409  nn  2,  5,

7 and  8,

'h  180

3,

ibS

.V  1 .tnd

n.

: 410

/'  a

' 3,

1 and  6,  411  ,

nn  2 and

13  V

2.  2

■_'5

^ 0

228

7i  3.  23U  /i

1,

; 3 ii2

’i.  2

Ui  .'.7i  8,  13

and  15,

2

a;.-l

n

4,

248  -

'i  2,  249

' 4U

n‘

3,  2.  :

S.  5,  6 and  11

, 415  nn

: 2

5u

/<  K

i :u  d

i lb,  251  a

/ .

3.  3

, 7

ni*d  9.

416  nn  3,  9

and  12,

257

7.  2;

38

ml

4.  5

and  7,  i

Job

: 417

717*

4.  5 a

nd  9,  4IS  n-i  ;

* and  11,

K O

, 26  ’

T

261  c 5.

b64  r;  4.

419

nn

4,  6 fi

lid  11,  420  nu

4 and  6,

n V.  3.  4 ill  •

1 q

. 266

1,  273  ;/

4.

! -‘^1
i

nn

3 ar  ci

i 4;  422  nn  1

, 2,  3.  5

::7-i

n 1 20

-

s_

J‘.-0  n

3,  bU2  n

i.

} and

6.

423

nn  2,  5.  6 and  11.  12

I

Index.

sir

nn  2,  3,  5,  5 and  7,  i25  nn  2,  3 and  Firoz,  Malik,  son  of  Malik  Bajan.
fl,  431  n 4,  432  nn  2,  3.  5,  7 and  10,  same  person  as  Firoz  Shah  of  the

433  nn  3 and  6,  434  nn  5 and  S,  Ta^iaq  ^ahi  dynasty  (g.  r,),  302,

435  nn  &,  7 and  9,  438  nn  3 ajid  5,  315,  322.

46i  n 3;  466  n o,  471  nn  i and  4,  Firoz  ‘Saib  Barbak,  Malik,  one  of

478  an  7 and  8.  484  n 4,  4SS  n 5,  the  Amirs  of  Snltaa  Muhammad

-i&O  it  4,  537  fi  2,  544  n 1,  o5&  nn  6 Toghlac,  Shah.  312,
and  S,  560  nn  2 and  S,  561  n 2,  FIroz,  Sai,  a contemporary  of  Snlran

564  7171  6,  7,  8 and  9.  565  an  1 and  Mubarak  Shah,  of  the  Saiyyid
o,  56'J  a 13,  667  -nn.  2 and  9,  573  dynasty,  3S2.  390.  ^535,  £37.

3;  579  n 8,  583  n 3,  598  n 10.  . Firoz  Sh^h,  of  Isleni  S.l'lh  Sur,

601  7in  2 and  5,  699  'i  5,  624  6,  | Firoz  Shah.  S;:]t5n,  xbn

ij2c  7^  5.  j of  the  cynurty  of

I’rozfibi'd,  f-  town  ct  the  banks  of  • Lihli,  301,  C'.2.  321,  322 'ic-:*.  ^ 9.

tl’.e  Jamna,  at  ten  miles  from  Dihlh  ’ 323  and  n 3,  324  n 6 o-c  r 3

bralt  by  Sultsln  Firoz  ;^ah  of  -he  ' 326  ;i,  327,  328  ?.  6.  329  -i  2.  S31

ITughlaq  dynasty,  325  and  11  3,  ! 332,  338,  339  and  7i  1,  ?4l  rt  I

342,  343;  344,  3-t5.  35U,  351,  354,  ! 344  and  n 7,  347  n 3.  363,  376,

356,  359.  S66.  51ritt&n  a.'io  FIruz-  i 411,  412  n 2.  Written  also  Flruz

abld.  ' Shah.

Flrozlbpd,  a fortress  at  the  village  of  ■ F-roz  Shah,  canal  of,  325  n 3,  326  n,
Oriwin  on  the  banks  of  the  Jamna,  I Fh-ozihah’.  See  under  the  TcriH-i-
built  by  Firoz  Shah,  327  and  'a  5.  I Firoz-S'rAk'!

FlrozlLld.  later  name  ot  the  town  of  i Fn.'.zr*.  f i.r-ss  of,  364  n 6,  376,  378,
Fandaab,  325  ‘6.  See  c.i  i H.=aur  rirnz.iif.

Fuoz  ’Alu  -lahk,  =o:ioi  Malik  T4ja-d-  \ FiiiIzaL-  i,  -a  rh.*  Janina,  See  nadex*
Lb'i,  one  the  Amirs  of  F’ircz  1 Firezanfd.

Saob,  called  also  i^an-i*Jahaa  the  Fh-.lzi  Amirs,  -he. — partisar-i  <-t  the
Muzir.  3-12  and  '■  2.  ' House  of  StJtln  F‘r--»z  r..),

Firoz  i^aii,  one  of  the  Afghan  Amiis  ! 3o7.  345,  3-:-0.  361,  362.

urder  Fuu.i:,  444.  , Firlz-Kuh.  capitrd  of  rho- e -r.n i.ry  of

Firoz  KLln,  eon  of  Inlem  Shah  Sur.  ' Ijnur,  6v)  ?:  2,  63  and  n I.  cr,  73.
eii-.aerids  OiS  facLer  under  the  tirle  ■ F-r’.zpur,  ^ortzess  of.  be. I:  hy  Saltan
.-f  1 .r-jz  535,  537.  ■ f iroz  SI  nh  in  Sihrind.  331,  334,

F)icj  KL-’n  i£,n  Yughra^,  the  Khilj.'.  j 378,489.  Written  ais.-.  F:r:zpur.

AL  •>  ista  ig.  ..h  j Firi:zpu»*.  towu  of,  336.  Called  also

tu.illy  L-wonjc.*'  Salti.u  ihdalu  d-'Jm  ; Aidiirinn’ir  as  the  Fast  city  uaiit
’.'X'  h 226.  230,,  I by  Firo"!  S-.lh.

F,!o/.  Foil,  L-atitai  of  :see  j Firuo  8naL,  Soltc^n.  See  under  Firoz

uiiuvr  Fir  iZ' Bull.  ' Th^h

Index.

xlvi

t'tsq,  immoralitr,  does  not  exclude
Imdfi  (faiili),  577  n.

Follis,  a Roman  coin,  origin  of  the
word  fats,  IS  n 1.

Forty  Slaves  of  Saltan  Shamsu-d-DIn
lyaltimish,  184.

Franks,  the,  543.  See  also  nnder  the
Firangls.

Frey  tag,  Arabic  Dietionaryy  509  n 5.

Freytag,  Arabum  Proierhia^  157  n 1
458  n 3,  507  n 3,  580  n 1.

Freytag,  Hajndban,  287  n 1.

Freytag,  Jieid.  Frov.y  157  n 1.  See
also  under  Arahum  Pioverbia.

Fiilad,  a larkbacha  slave,  servant  of

Saiyyid  Salini  of  Tabarhindah
{q.  v,'},  38S  and  n 2,  d89.  390,  39i,

393.

Fu-md,  in  Chinese,  equivalent  to  the
ilongol  Gurgdn,  which  means
“Son-in-law,”  when  applied  to
pj*mces,  353  n 1.

FurruckahaJ,  'S.-W.  Provinces,  218
n Z.  Properly  Farrukhabad.

Funi*,  one  of  the  iwo  chief  divisions
of  ’ihn-l-Fiqh,  5 71  4,
F'-tishii-i-Bnlddn  of  al-Biiazuri,  11
71  3.

Fiitdhii’S’Saldriny  an  hisconcul  work .
314  and  ri  9.

G,

Gabriel,  the  Angel,  58  and  n.  2,  93,  ;
106  71  5,  111  w,  151  n 6,  374  n 5,  I
614.  '

Gajpatis,  or  “ ruts  Lords  of  Elephants.”  ,
title  of  the  Lion  irvuasty  of  Jaj-  '
nagar,  125  >>  3.

Gakkhars,  the,  — a tribe  of  the  '
Hiadus,  probably  the  same  cribf
as  tiie  Khukhars,  67  anil  n 3.

Gaij  l iba,  fortress  of,  28  n 4,  29  n.
Ca‘l‘-d  o.1jO  Xandama.

Gan  hik  river,  the,  — in  the  Gora^-  ■
p’lr  District,  409  n 5.

Gane-^  Hfu. — or

Rai.  the  Raja  of  Patialh  con
tempi-rary  of  Saltan  Sikandar  Lodi,

41  i and  n S,  419.

Gan'^es,  the,  70  n 1.  71  n 2.  81,  82
' 1,  84  and  n,  125  ’i  1,  130,  132  3,

185.  218  and  3,  221  « 3,  231.  241,  '

312.  343,  356,  358  ii  3.  360  and  n 3,
363,  364.  377,  379,  380,  3S4  and
■n  2,  396,  4o2,  404,  406  and  n 10,
408  and  a 5 415  n 7.  416  and  n 3,
459,  463.  464,  472,  541,  546

Garj-Bakh^,  surname  of  Shaikh
Ahmad  Kliartn,  ''.''ii\ompcrary  of
Sultun  Ahmad  Cruu-ati,  357  7i  3.

Canj-i-^akkar.  ^aikh  Far'dii-d-Din
Mas'ud,  a famous  Mnhamtnadac
Saint  of  Ilindastau,  132  and  n 6,
133  H,  135  71,  233.  362  n 2,  416
n 13.

Garcin  do  Tossy,  Rotlorique  st  Fro-
.'odie  Jes  ’anqnp.s  de  UOrient  Musul-
inati.  428  ti  2.  6o5  g
u 2.  607  .1  4,  60S  7E  3.

CTHi'daiz,  a didrict  -Ving  between
Gharna  and  ilindnsiaTi,  86  n 1.
Called  iiUo  Xardiz.

Index.

xlvii

Garha-Katanka,  name  of  a country
north  of  the  Dakhar.',  433  n 3.

Garhi,  a narrow  pass  separating  the
countries  of  Bihar  and  Bangala,  i
457  and  ri  5.

Garmsir.  a prorince  of  Khurasan,
4S,  65  and  n 1,  SI,  S6.  573.

Garshasp,  ^ah,  of  the  Srst  dynasty
of  Persian  Kings,  84  and  n 2,  85.
Gaster’s  translation  of  the  Sicord
cf  Moses,”  141  7)  4.

Gate  of  Paradise,  a narrow  opening
in  a wail  near  the  shrine  of  Shaikh
f anda-d-BIn  Ganj-i-Shakkar  at
Pakpattan,  3G2  n 2.
ir'itdu,  Sanskrit  name  of  the  Indian
Spikenard  or  nard,  374  n.

Gatwarfs,  ilie,  — a tribe  of  the  Jats,

122  /I  1.

Gaur,  old  capital  of  Bengal,  82
rni  3 and  4,  83  and  n 2.  458.  j
Name  changed  t'>  Januatab.'  1 bj  j
Humuy  tu.  1

Gauna.  S^^e  under  Mahaaiitivii  h'bhi  |
{ »aui'ia  a»  also  Khl'r  KL7.'.  < -'..'..i.  j
Gau'i  A^’inad.  of  G.iZrtraie,  357  4.  j

Same  as  Sultan  Ahmad  ^ah.  the  '
ruler  fif  1 mjarat.  '

Gawars,  the,  — a race  of  gypsjcs  in
India,  312  and  n 7.

Gawin,  village  of, — on  the  banks  of
the  Jumna,  327  n o.

Gayomarth,  the  Adam  of  the  Persians,
280  n 3.  [of.  330  n S.

(iaz,  a measure  of  length,  three  kinds
Gaz,  tentfi  -son  of  Japhet,  son  of  Noah,
Ml  u 5

iiazt'trt’Ci  (>i  i)ir  (’<-<< oh  fh.-  Xt^rth-

Ht'-f  I'J  Inihii,  ddiurntiin’s,  567  7in
1 and  y.

Gelaleddin,  91  n 2,  for  Jalalu-d-Dm
Mangburni  {q.  v.).

Gemini,  the,  39,

Genesis,  Book  of,  144  n 2,  154  a 2,
182  K 1,  302  n 2,  394  n 5.

Geo,  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Shdh~
Tidmdh.  llo  n 5.

Geograjphy  of  Ancient  India,  Cunning-
ham’s. See  under  A7icient  Geo-
grapJiy  of  India.

Gersiwaz,  one  of  the  attendants  of
Afrasiyab,  in  the  Shdh^ndmah  of
Pirdansi,  180  r 2.

Gesenins,  Thesaurus  of  the  Hehreiu
language,  104  n 2,  394  n 5,

Ghaggar  river,  the,  326  n.  See  also
the  next.

Ghaghar  river,  called  also  the  Gogra
and  Ghagra  {5.  r.),  222  n 3,  327,
438.  See  also  the  Ghaggar.

Ghagra  rirer.  the,  135  n,  223  n.  See
under  the  Ghaghar.

Ghakkars,  the, — a Hindu  tribe,  491,
41\>,  499,  500.

hihalib  Khun,  Governor  of  Samana
under  the  Toghiaq  ^ahl  dynastv,
33S,  352.  360.  [465  71  6.

Ghnlla-x-jawun,  the  smaller  millet,

^anim  ibn  ‘Ulwan,  one  of  the  three
chief  lords  of  Shaddad  ibn  ‘Ad,
262  n.

Ghari  Ju,  village  of,  503  n 5.  Called
also  Ghari  (g.  r.).

Ghari  Khu,  village  of,  on  the  bank  of
the  river  Behat,  503  and  n 5.

Gharjistan,  a country  between  Herat,
Ghor  and  (^aznin,  13  n I,  22  n 2
63  n 1.  Called  also  Gharshistan.

Gharshistau,  22  n 2.  See  under
Gliarjjstan

xlviii

Index.

Ghat-i-Sakun,  name  of  a place,  283
n 5.  Galled  algo  Badra-i-Sakun.

^anr,  a province  lyin^  between
Herat  and  Gharjistan,  43  and  n 4.
See  also  under  Giiir  and  Ghor.

Ghansn-I-’Alam  Hatrat  Shaikh
Bahau-d-Din  Zakariyai,  the  Mnl-
tani,  133  and  n 2.  See  under
Bahan-d-Din  Zakarivai.  [6  n 4.

Al-Qhlyatu  ji-l-Fiqh  of  Qizi  Baiziwi,

Qhazal,  ode,  612  and  n 2.

^azi  Khan,  gon  of  Dauiat  Khan
Lodi,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Snitan
Ibrahim  Lodi,  435  a 9,  436,  437,
438  and  n 5.

Ghazi  Khan  Sir,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Stir  dynasty  of  Afghans,  549,
550,  553,  658.  597,  598.

Ghazi  Maballi,  one  of  the  confidential
servants  of  Islem  §hah  Sur,  487,
488.

^azi  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  ‘Alan-d-Din  Khilji,  succeeds
to  the  throne  of  Dihli  under  the
style  of  Saltan  Ghiyasu-d-Din
Tughlaq  ^ib,  291,  292,  293,  294
and  n 4,  295,  296  and  n 3.  See
^iyasn-d-Din  Tnghlaq  Shah  and
also  Tnghlaq  Khan.

^oti,  one  who  fights  in  the  cause  of
Islam,  356  n 4,

Ghazls,  the,  18.  See  under  G^zi.

Ghaziu-I-Mulk,  Malik  Chaman  of
Badaon,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Muhammad  Shah  of  the  Saiyyid
dynasty  of  Dihli,  396  and  n 1,
398,

^azna.  See  under  Ghaznin.

^aznavide  dynasty,  the.  See  under
the  Ghaznivide  dynasty.

Ghazni,  House  of.  13  m 1.  See  under
the  Ghaznivide  dynasty.

Ghazni,  town  of,  13  n 1.  See  nnder
Ghaznin.

Ghaznin.  14  nn  1.  2 and  3.  1.5  and  a
and  n.i  1 and  2,  16  and  nr.  1,  2 and
3.  IT.  19.  21,  22  and  n 2,  23.  25  and
u 4.  26,  27,  2S,  29.  3t'.  31.  33,  3.i
and  nn  4 arid  .5.  35  and  n 1,  36,  37,
43.  44.  4.5  and  n 2.  46  and  n 1,  47,
48,  49,  Cu  and  r 1,  51.  52,  53  n.  56,
60  and  r 2,  61,  62  and  r 3,  63,  64,
65,  66  and  ;i  1,  6b  69.  70,  71,  72
and  n 2,  74  n 1,  77  n 1.  78  and  t>  3,
79,  30.  81.  88  ti  1,  89.  90.  167  r.  3,
1S7,  256,  280,  312,  328,  464  and  r,  5,
567,  579,  580,  587.  See  ^azni  and
Ghazna.

Ghaznivide  dynasty,  the,  — founded
by  Kisirn-d-Din  Sabuktigin,  13
n 1,  14,  62  and  n 4,  63,  64  and

n 1.

^eias-ood-Deen,  grandson  of  Snitan
Firoz  Shah  Tnghlaq,  338  n 1.
See  nnder  ^iyasn-d-Din  Tnghlaq
Shih  II.

Ohtbta.  unusual  use  of  the  word  by
Badaoni,  508  n 3,  543  n 4.

^ilz’ai  Afghans,  the,  542,  544,  646.

^ias  Tazir,  Khwiiia. — Salman  Sawa-
ji’s  Qafidah  in  his  honour,  605.

Ghiyasi  Amirs,  the, — of  Snljan

Ghiyasn-d-Din  Balban,  223,  224,
231,  232,  233.  [Mughnlpir,  236.

Ghiyaspiir.  commonly  known  as

Ghiyasu-d-Din  Abu-l-Fath  Muham-
mad ibn  Sam  Ghori.  Snitan  of  Ghor
and  Ghaznin.  62,  63  and  » 1,  64
and  nn  2 and  3,  65,  68,  71,  73  and
n 1,  77  and  n 1.

Index

xlix

^ivHSii-d-Dm  Balban,  Saltan,  of  tbe
Slave  dynasty  of  Dihli,  97,  121  and
n 7,  124  and  n 4,  126.  127,  135,
183,  184  and  nn  1 and  4,  1S6,  187,
1S9  r.  I,  219,  220  a 2,  221  andnl,
222,  223,  224,  227,  228,  231,  232,
233.  Before  his  accession  he  was  *
called  Uiugii  Khan  ( f.}.  j

^iyasii-d-Diu  Hasan  Chi^ti,  father  j
of  the  famdiis  saint  Khwaja  Mu‘7-  j
nn-d-Din  Chi^tl,  70  a 2.  j

Ghiy3>Q-d-DIn  ‘Iwuz,  the  IGialj,  |

Sultan  of  Lakhnauti  and  the  last  ®

of  the  -Vn'izzI  Sultans  fg.  r ),  86,
87  and  n 4.  See  also  the  next  and
Tinder  Hnsamn-d-Din  ‘Iwaz.
Ghiyasa-d-Dm  ^iljh  Sultan,  91.

Same  as  the  above.

^ivasu'd-Din  Mahmud,  son  of
GIiiyasQ»d«DIn  Muhammad  Sam
Ghurl,  Sultan  of  Ghur  and  Gliaznin,

77  and  u 1.

Ghiyasu-d'Din,  son  of  Sultan  Mahmud
Khiljl  of  Malwa,  399.

Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Mahmud  Shah,  son  of
Sultan Wubammad  Tughlaq  Shah.
324,  *

Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Muhammad,  Ghori,
Sultan.  See  under  Ghiv^u-d-Din
Abu-i-Fath.

Ghiyasn-d-Din  Muhammad,  the  3Iakh-
drimzada-i-Baghdadi,  a prince  of  the
House  of  'Abbas,  the  Khallfs  of
Baghdad.  311  and  n 4.

Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Muhammad  Shah,  the
ruler  of  Uudh,  son  of  Sultan  Sham-
su-d-Din  Ijal-timi^,  98.

Ghiyit'U-d  Din  Tughlaq  ^ah,  Sultan,
first  (‘f  the  Tnghlaq  ^ahl  dyi-.tsty
of  Dihr,  296,  298,  299,  300,  301.

304,  321.  Before  his  accession  he
was  called  ^azl  Malik  (q.  v.).

Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Tughlaq  Shah  IT,  ibn
Fath  Khan  ibn  Saltan  FIruz  Shah.
338  1,  341.

Ghiiiusii'l-Luahdt.  a lexicographical
work,  60  n 3,  108  4.  142  nx,\-io

n 1,  152  n 2,  163  >:  1,  321  « 2,  617
t;  1,  621  no,  628  n I.  635  n 5.

Ghor,  country  of,  13  n 1,  22  n 2,
60,  61  :i  4,  63,  64  and  7i  2.  Co
'i  2,  68,  71,  77  n 1,  81  and  n 2.
The  name  is  also  written  ^ur  and
Ghaur.

^or,  Kings  of,  60,  61  n 4.  63.  See
also  under  the  ^orl  dynasty.

^ori,  fortress  of,  — in  Ghaznin,  21
and  n 3.

Ghori  dynasty  of  DililT,  64,  68,  22  8.
See  under  Kings  of  Ghor.

Qhfd,  centre  of  a Turkish  army,  439
71  4.  Also  called  Qul.

Ghur.  See  under  Ghor.

Ghurjistan,  same  as  Gharjistan  (g.  r.),
22  and  n 2,  63  n 1,  68.

QhurratU’UKamdl  of  Mir  Khusru,  the
famous  poet  of  Dihli,  134,  197  and
n 1,  216.

Ghuzz,  tribe  of,  — a tribe  of  Turks
61  and  n o,  65,  167  n 3,  291.

Gilan,  a province  of  Persia,  99  n 4.

Gilauri,  note  on,  303  n.

Gill,  town,  250  and  n 4.  Called  also
Kill.

Gir,  Malik,  son  of  Mnlik  Qabul
Khallfati,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  Muhammad  Tughlaq  Shah.
315.

Giril,  one  of  the  poets  of  the  time  of
Sultan  *Alau-d-L'in  Khiljl.  266.

Index

Girat  Singh,  Eai.  Governor  of  Gwaliar,  |
contemporary  or  Saltan  Buhlal  ■
Lodi,  408.  ^

Girgin-i-Milad,  one  of  the  chief
warriors  of  Kai  ^nsran  in  the
Sh'ihiitimah  of  Firdausi,  116  and  nn
4 and  5 ISO  n 2
Gisi,  a pl.ice,  548  ri  3i
Gladwin’s  DissemiHons,  608  n 3.
Glossary  of  Anglo-Imlmn  Words,  f'ule
and  Burnett’s,  495  n,  543  n 3.
Glossary  on  Muqaddasi,  De  Goeje’s
217  n 2

Gcbind  Chand,  Kaja,  — one  of  the
Eajaa  of  Hindustan  at  the  time  of
Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  25.
■Godi  river,  the,  222  n 3.  Called
also  the  Gumti  and  the  Kowah

(3.V.).

Goeje,  de,  Olossar]^  on  Muqaddasly
217  n 2.

Gog  and  Magog,  Wall  of,  191  n 2.
Commonly  known  as  the  rampart
of  Sikandar,

Gogra,  the,  222  n 3.  Called  also  the
Ghaghar  and  Ghagra.

Gohana,  a district  of  the  N.-W.  Pro-
vinces, 122  n 1.

Ooknltash.  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Bfibar,
441.

Golius,  Dictionary  of  the  Arabic
Language,  509  n 5.

Gonds,  the, — a tribe  of  Hindus,  433
and  n 4.

Gonor,  a place  at  24  miles  from  Dihll,
21  n 4.

Gorakhpur  District,  409  n 5.

Gorgang,  the  capital  of  Khwarazui,
called  Jurjun  by  the  Arabs,  23  n 1.
S'.c  Liuder  Gariraii.

Goar,  country  of,  45b  Read  Ganr,
a name  of  Bengal  from  its  capital.

Goya,  or  Kanhaiya,  minister  and
agent  of  R^.i  Maldeo,  contemporary
of  fihir  §hah,  478  and  n 7.  See
also  under  Kanhaiva.

Grand  Trunk  Road,  the,  356  n 3.
i Grant  Duff’s  Hi.'rcry  of  the  Makrattas,
j 265  n 4.

I Great  Laras,  town.  326  n,  327  n 1.
]■  Called  Has  by  Badaoni.
i Grecian  Emperor,  the,  18  n 1.

Greece,  119  n 5.

Greeks,  the,  18  n 1,  41  n 2,  75  n 2,
76  ii  1,  104  n 2,  182  n 1.

Greenhill,  Di\,  30  n 1.

Griffith’s  Yusuf  and  Zuleikhay  272
n 1.

iJvgird’i’Ahmar  or  Suli>hur,  notes  on
340  and  n 2.

Gujarat.  See  under  Gnjrat.

Gdjerut.  See  under  Gujrat,

Gnjrat,  9 n 2,  12,  17  n 4,  27  n 4,
28,  66,  71,  89,  255,  256  n 4,  257,
267,  274,  282,  283,  284,  285,  287,
313,  314,  315,  324,  333,  334,  S37,
316.  354,  357  and  nn  3 ai^4,  379,
389,  450,  452,  454,  456,  472,  533,
534,  5<l.9  and  n 8,  567,  597,  635.
The  name  is  also  written  Gujarat,
Gujeiat  and  Guzerat.

Guliitiynhin,  confection  of  rose*  and
honey,  148  and  n 4.

Gulbarga,  town,  311  and  n 6.

Guli-ytau  of  ^ai^  Sa'di  of  Shiraz.
187  H 2,  467.

; Gulistana  Saiyyids,  the,— -a  family  of

' Saiyyids.  584  n 3.

I Gu^-i-YiisuJ,  a red  flower  without
odour.  629  a 1.

Index.

li

Gidndr  tree,  called  also  Nurican^  172
71  3.

Crulqand,  confection  of  roses,  452  and
n 2.

Gnlrnkli.  the  pseudonym  of  Saltan
Sikaridar  Lodi,  426.

Gumtl,  the,  222  n 3,  329  n 2.  Called
also  the  GodI  and  the  Kow.ih.

Gunguna,  fortress  of,  one  of  the
dependencies  of  Malot,  437  and
71  7.

Gordaspur,  town,  3S3  S.

Gargan,  town  of, — the  Jarjan  of  the
Arabs,  37  7i  7,  38.  117.  See  under
Gorgang.

Gurgan,  a surname  of  the  great  Timur
and  a tide  applied  to  the  sons-in-
law  of  a Mughul  Emperor,  lU3  n 3,
353  and  ti  1.

Gnrgaon,  a district  of  Miwat,  134  7i.  1,
366  n.

Gurgln-i-iliiad,  one  of  the  chief
warriors  of  Kai  Khasrau  in  the
Shilh-nufiiah  of  Firddusl,  IIG  and
nn  4 and  5,  180  n 2.

Guriz-guh,  a term  of  Prosod^,  627
and  n 4.

Gurjistrui,  43  n 4,  for  (Tharji’gc'in  (q.  v.).

Gurkan,  a Moug<il  title,  103  n 3.  See
under  Gurgan.

! Gdrkhan,  or  unirersal  king,  heredi-

I — ®

j tary  title  of  the  Kings  of  Kara

KhitaT,  103  n 3.

' Gurkhan  of  Qara  ^iita,  the  con-
I temporary  of  Sultan  Muhammad
; Khwirazm  Shah.  71  n 7.

I Gu*^htasp,  an.  ancient  King  of  Iran,

I 35  71  2.

i Giiskudra,  a term  of  Prosody,  609
' and  71  1.

I Guzarate,  See  under  Gajrat.

I Gazerilt,  town  of.  2S  n 2,  71  n 3.

Guzerat,  province  of.  See  under
Gujrat.

Gazerat,  peninsula  of,  27  n 4.

Guzida.  See  under  the  Tdril^-i-
Quzlda.

\ Gnzr-i*Ganjiua,  a ford  on  the  Jamna,
4C>6  71  6.

Gwaiiar,  26.  S:  ' ),  94,  129,  23S,  239,
246,  243.  268,  272,  273,  275,  277,
2S3,  349,  361.  362.  377  and  n 4,  37S,
379,  381,  384,  385.  3S6,  387  and
11  3,  391,  39''  40S,  4i(),  414  and
7i  3,  419  aud  ../i  3 ani'i  6,  422  7in  2
and  3.  -123  n 5.  427,  432,  433,  443,
445,  439,  474,  480,  490,  491,  493,
408,499,  312,  529.  530,  53S,  540
542.  The  fortress  of  Gwaiiar  is
called  al&o  Kalewar.

Habib  Badaoni,  Shai^,  one  of  tl;e
noiable  nien  of  Badaon  at  the  time
of  il  uiiidy  in,  GoO.

Habib  Khan  '.l  eghujior  Taghuclii,  one
i.f  the  Afghan  \nnis  under  Sikandar
Kiiau  Sue  iq-v.).  342.  593.

H,

Hanibu-

il.ih.  Mir,

giar.d

5.)n  ef  M'.v

.8.tiyy

id  J iiullu

-d-Oiii

tie  tradi-

I.  •ni'5

ij  589.

on-.;inal

name

of  SulrSn

j trhiv  I'U-d-D’n  Muhammad  Sam

} ^ th  ip:.  03  2.

lii  Indp.r,

Habuli,  Rai,  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Mubarak  ^fih  of  the  Saiyyid
dynasty  of  Dihli,  388  n 3.

Hadah,  Shaikh,  a learned  physician
of  Riliar  in  the  time  of  ^er  Shah
anc  ^ah,  521  n 4.  ;

Haduyan^  a Masnaicl  in  Hindi  relating  |
the  loves  of  Lurak  and  Chanda,  |
333  n 6.  I

Hiidi,  son  of  al*Mahdi,  the  ‘Abbaside  |
Khalifah  of  Baghdad,  75  n.  j

Hadi  Sabz-vvari,  Haji  Mulla,  author  of  |
the  Sharh-i-Man;:vTna,  181  n 2.  1

Had'iqatU'l-Haqiqat  tea  Shar'i^atu^t-  ■
TarJ^af,  othertvise  known  as  FaMrl-  \
ndmah,  the  most  celebrated  work  !
of  the  famous  poet  Sanai,  35  n.  1,  ,
56  71  2,  57  and  n 1.  60.  i

Hafiz,  the  famous  Persian  poet,  100
71  0.  101  7t  1,  121  n 3,  151  n 6,  412
n 1,  487  71  6.

I^afiz  Isizim  of  Badaon,  Imam  of
Islem  ^ah,  535.

Baft  anddiri,  the  seven  members  of  ;

the  body,  165  n 2.  i

Baft  Aurnng,  a series  of  seven  poems  [
by  Manlana  ‘Abdu-r-Rahman  Jami,  I
272  « 1.  j

Baft  Juih^  seven  metals  melted  toge-  j
ther,  321  and  ti  2,  i

Hafc  Khwan,  the  seven  great  labours  J
of  Isfandiyar  in  the  Shuh-ndindli  of  j
Firdausi,  116  n 3,  321  and  n 1.  j
Haft  PaiJiar,  a poem  «f  Shaikh  Nizami  j
Ganjawi,  298  n 4.  |

Baft  rni)g,  a variety  of  the  Khirl  !

flower,  173  n 3.  j

Haiatu-l‘Haiican,  a work  on  natural  >
history.  108  n 1,  157  n 1,  171  n 2,  !
ITS  n 4,  191  n 3,  352  n 1.  *

Hauitu-l^Qiiliib  of  Agha  Muhammad
Baqir  MajlisI,  110  Tin  3 and  4,
149  71.

Haibat  Khan  A‘zam  Humayun  of
Labor,  490.  See  under  A‘zam
Hnmayun  Haibat  Khan.

H.ribat  Khan  Jilwani,  a subordinate
of  Sultan.  Sharq  of  Baiana,  414.

Haidarabad,town, — capital  of  Haidar-
abad  Deccan,  the  Nizam’s  domi-
nions, 299  n 3.

Haidarubiid  Deccan,  the  Nizam’s
dominions,  299  7i  3

Haidar  ‘All,  a common  name  among
the  Shl‘ah.  604.

Haidard-Karrar,  a name  of  ‘AH  ibn*
Abi  Talib,  93  ti  4,  207.

Haidar  Khan  Chaghta,  553.  Same
as  Haidar  Mnhammad  Khan  Akhta
Begi

Haidar  Khan  the  Amir  of  Ondh,  one
of  the  Maliks  of  Snltafl  Ghiyasn-d-
Dm  Balban.  184  ti  4.

H.aidar,  MlrzS,  the  Mnghu!,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Humayun,  4u3,  465.

Haidar  Muhammad  ^an  Akhta
Begi,  an  old  servant  of  Humayun,
597  and  n 6,  598.  See  under
Haidar  Khan  Chaglita.

Haidar  Sultan  Osbak-i-Shaibaiu,  592
n 9.

Haidar  Tuni. — or

Haidar  Tuniu’i,  a poet  of  the  time  of
Humayun,  622,  623,  624.

Haimue  Baqqal,  500  n 11.  See  under
Himun  Baqqal,

Haimun  Baqqal,  500  n 11.  See  under
Himun  Baqqal.

Haiyura,  532  n 2,  for  Daulat  Khan
Ajyara  {q.  r.).

Index.

Haiyatu-l-Haiiedndt.  See  under  the  !
Haiatu-l-Haiwdn.

Hajaru-l-Haiyyah,  the  Bezoar  stone,
117  n 4,  118  n.

Haji  BarqaU,  a court  officer  of  Sultan
Muhammad  Tughlaq  Shah,  of  Dihli,
311,  315.

Haji  Ilyas,  ruler  of  Ijakhnauti,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Muhammad
and  Sultan  Firoz  Tughlaq,  assumes
the  title  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d-DIn.
309,  321,  327.

Haji  Khalfa, — or

Haji  ^alifa,  author  of  the  S'afh-
fa-z-Zanun  fi  Aamd'i-l-Kutuhi  iva-l-
Funi'in,  0 n 4,  33  n.  1,  34  n 9,  35  I
n 1,  49  n 3,  56  n 2,  73  ?i  1,  181  n 2,  |
197  n 1,  221  n 2,  222  n 1,  270  nti
1 and  4,  272  n 1,  427  » 1,  428  nn.

2,  3,  5 and  6,  467  n 2,  521  n 5,  533
?i  1,  571  w 9,  624  )iti  8 and  9.
iji  J^fin  Alwari,  553.  Same  as
Haji  Khan  Snlfilm,  Governor  of
Alwar  (q.  V,).

Mi  S^an  Sultani,  Governor  of
Alwar,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Shir
Shah  and  his  successors,  475,  542,
543.  546,  547.  See  under  Hiiji
Klian  Alwari.

laji,  Khwaia,  a general  of  Saltan
‘Alau-d-Din  Khiljl,  265  n 6.

laji  Mauia,  one  of  the  shaves  of
Maliku-l-Umara  Kotwal  (<;.  v.),  260
and  n 2.  261.

Hiiji  5Inlla  Hadi  Sabzwari,  author  of
the  Shiirh-i-ifanziima.  181  n 2.

Hij;  Xaib,  JIalik,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Saltan  Qathu'd-Hln  Khilji,  286.

Haji  Sa'id  Sarsari,  the  envoy  of
the  Egyptian  Khalifiih  to  Sultan

!iii

Muhammad  Tughlaq  ^,ih,  of  DihU,
310  and  r.  1.

Hajib-i-Euzurg,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  JIas’ud  Ghaznawi,  43  and
K 5.

H.ajib  Shaibani,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultiu  Mas'ud  ^aznawi,  43  n 5

Hajipur,  a district  or  EanglU,  469,

ffajJ,  the  ?ilgrim,.ge  to  Mecca,  175.
176  u,  'ISO  n 5,  623  and  n 5,

Hajjaj  ibn  Yusuf  as-Saaaii.  Governor
of  ’Iraq  and  Kburasin  under  the
L'mayyad  Kbalifabs.  12  and  nil  i
and  2,  490  and  n 6.

Hakim  Abu  Kazar  hAbdu-l-’Azia  ibn
Mansur,  the  celebrated  poet  'Asjali,
17  n 3.

IJakim  Ansnri,  a fatuous  Persian  poet,
contemporary  of  Firdausi,  17  n 3.

Flakim  Farrn^i,  a famous  Persian
poet,  contenipor.arj'  of  Firdausi,  17
>i  3.

IJakim  Firdausi,  the  celebrated
acthor  of  the  ^'th-ndma,  17  n 3,
See  under  Firdausi.

Hakim  Khaqiini  Shirwani,  the  famous
Persian  poet,  33'J  n 4.

Hak  ini  Sanai,  a Celebrated  poet  of
Ghazni  35  it  1.  oG,  57.

Hakim  bi-amrMlah,  Abu-l-'Abbas
Ahmad  ibuu-i-Muscakfi  biilVn.

Knallfgh  of  the  House  of
‘Abbas,  310  and  jj  2.  See  the  next.

Hakim  bi-amri-liph,  Abu-l-Fath  Abd
Bakr  iba  Abii  Rabi*  Suleiman,  sixth
of  the  Egyptian  Khalifaha  of  the
House  of  ’Abbas,  327  and  n 6.
See  the  above.

HaUjun,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  Sult  'ii
-Muhammad  Tu^iaq  ^ah,  30h.

liv

Index.

Halakii  Khan,  srandson  of  the
Chingiz  Khan,  145  and  n 2,  23fi.

Haldi,  township  of,  409  and  n 7.

Halghat,  a place,  387  n 3.

Halin,  the,  — a rher  of  the  Panjab,
35o  n 1.

Halka  of  elephants,  or  a hundred
elephants,  541 .

IT:iikiiayat,  town.  423  n 6-
Kiimadan,  a city  of  Persian  ^Iraq,  |
anciently  called  Eebatana,  30  n j
o33  n 1.

Hamadan,  a district  of  Persian  ‘Iraq,

30  Ti  1.

Hamal,  the  sign  Aries,  195  n 3,  626
and  n 7.

Hdrndsah,  Freytag’s,  287  r<.  1.

Hami  Tamban.  or  Jahi  Yatmam  of
Bu^ara,  a pcec  of  the  time  of
lIurtirTun.  Cl>  and  n 5.

Hamid  ibu  ‘ Alnia-r-Ruhnian.  a Tradi-  j
tionidtj  139  I.  5.  i

Idamid  of  Balkh,  QazI  a celebx'ated  !
writer  and  poet,  cor-temporary  of  |
Saltan  Mui^zn-d-Din  Mnr.animau  |
oato  Gharl,  76  and  H 1.  j

iri.-'nid  Khan,  rh''  Khdss-i-Khii'  of  !

8 iltau  lurahi’n  Le-ll,  439.

Hamid  Kh-'-^-  T ’;h -i*.V  .>.■  i .1  of
under  C'e  Sairyni  dy-sas^y.
and  nn  J SAod  4,  4'-.l  .ui-i

71  4.

Hamid  Lawiki,  ''■tie  ''d  the  Am.ir-  f
Sulran  Muhan'n.ad  Taghlaq
302.

riO-mid  Lcdi.  :ir-.r  raicr  fd

lifultan,  19  K 5.

H tmid  of  SoiA-d.  Siiaikh,  lI.'-

rucetator,  contemporary  of  Uun.d-
yiu.  6<>i.

Hamida  Band  Begara.  ti  e Queen-
consort  of  Humayun  and  mother
of  Akbar,  560,  566.  56S.
Hatnidn-d-Din,  the  Amir  of  Koh,  one
of  the  Maliks  of  Sulrfm  ‘Alau-d-Dm
Khiljl.  261.

Hamida-d'Din  ‘Umar  ibn  ilahmld
Eal^i,  76  7i  1.  See  Qizi  Kamid
of  Balkh.

Hamin,  Malik,  Governor  of  BadaoT’
under  the  S'iyyid  dynasty  396

n 1.

Hamir  Dev,  Pai  of  Rantanbhor
grandson  of  Kai  Pifchora  and  con-
teinporaiy  of  Multan  'Alcu*d-DIa
I Khilji.  257  and  nn  3 and  7,  263.

1 Hamra,  5Ialik,  Governor  of  Rapar*
under  ilasnad-idAli  Khizr  Khun
{q.  V \ 377.

Hamz'i  <.'j  'icdfdt,  remarks  ou,  545  and
» lo  5t6

Hamra,  5lal:k,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Mubiirak  ^hah  of  the  Saiyyid
dynaaty.  387.

Hamzah,  son  of  ‘Abdiidlah  ibnu-z*
Ziibair,  287  n 2.

Hun'id,  a Hiodu  Afa.niau’b  333  n G.
Sert  Chandabun.

Handi'l  5Iirzi.  See  under  Hmdal.
Ilaudiya.  a town  on  the  Narbada  in
the  Central  Provinces,  517  and
n 9,  521.  Called  aUo  Hindly'u
Ha/iinte  sect  of  Sanni  Musiirns,
founded  by  Abu  Hai-ifah,  57  n 1,
I oil.

j irankaya!:,  town,  423  n 6.

1 llansi,  di-'CricL  and  town  of,  37  and
j n 2,  70  and  ii  1,  98  and  n 2.  24S,
i 322,  323.  324.  326,  364  u 5.  fortress
! of,  Pii,  1:4:3.

Indesr.

Harigu  B'lat:,  Rai,  one  of  the  Amirs  \
of  Miihaiak  Shah  of  the  Safyyid  |
dynasty.  388  and  n 3.  j

Hanwam^^arh,  fortress  of,  422  n 6,  i
424  n 2

Haq:‘iqi,  Or  -jetical  name

AT  the  ooet  ShaqanT,  5S3  :i  4.  :

Harj\n:a;n-i-Sharifain,  the  t'^^o  sacred  '

cities  t--f  iUecca  and  diedina,  555  ■
n 6.

Har.m  ihii  dliihammad  ai-Khaki  ash-
^'razT.  autlior  of  a
Tni(.'d)^kh,  11  n 1.  |

Harand.  a country  of  Hindustan.  445  ■
and  n 10.  ;

Harawi,  a native  of  Harnr,  35  h 2.  ■

Harcaran,  a Hindu  Piince,  founder  of  i
Banghar,  71  2.  i

Bardat,  Governor  of  the  fortress  of  ■

Mirath  ac  the  time  of  Suitan  Mrih-  |
mud  GhaznawTs  invasion.  24  7i  1.  i
Harchv'ar.  city  of,  S8,  344  u 7,

HarT,  another  name  of  the  city  of
Harac  or  Herat  in  Khurasan,  35
and  71  2.  !

Harld,  a country  of  Hindustan,  445

u 10.

Hnriri,  the  celelrate-i  a.'tl  orof  the
2Iaqu)/u?t,  348.  ;

Hnrpai  Deo,  Rai  of  D&:>?ir,  coTitom-  j
por.iry  of  Sultln  Qi:tbu-d-Dir.  ,
283.  280  ri  1.

Uarsana,  a to\vn  in  the  province  of  :
MTwjr.  n 2.  :

Bar  Sinuh  Dev, — or  I

Harsingh  Rai,  Rjija  of  Iti»va  and
Kaithar,  contemporary  of  Khi/r
l^iin  of  the  Saivyid  d\ nasty,  3i6
anil  n 4,  359  and  ?(  4,  3'*!  .‘iml
2 and  3,  377,  379.

Haruman,  a fortress  on  the  frontier
of  Ec:ypt,  321  and  u 4.

Barhi  ar-Sa&hid,  the  V\bbas:  Khali-
fail.  74  ’I  2.  75  i 2S6.

Haran.  son  of  ’All  ibn*AbI  Tii'ib,
se't'.nd  of  Z..C  twelve  Imln;'  the
ah,  I3I  ; 5.

-“iasaTi  "Aii  Knarss.  *'1111-20;  t 'et

Kasan  of  Bar'Ai'd.  th:'  ^r  of

Siiaikli  'A'ai  fdai  di  of  ../li.fna,

5‘>7.

Hasan  Barrovei'-*  achn,  favor.;  i’^e  of
SuTan  Qu:bU'C.-Din  Kh:  vfhri

gives  him  the  cit.e  of  Khusra  Khar.
274,  290-  under  Khusru  ivh.'n.

Hasan  Barwabacha,  290.  Same  as
the  above  1 q.  r.  i.

Hasan  Dihlavl,  M*r,  a famou?  noet  of
Di'.li.  cop.temricraiy  of  5I:r  Kh.nsru,
115  7K  1S7.  1^8.  245,  269,  2:0  ..lid
n 6.

Hasan  (^aziirnl.  StiyyiJ,  a yiet  of
the  rime  of  Milth:  Eahri'm  5']  nh
Ghaznawi.  53  ar.d  n 3.

Hasan  Jaiayer,  K.nc:  of

Khuritsan,  0/3  • 1.

Hasan  Kai'‘ii.-  ' 8..jyyid.  goi,,:rrd'y
known  as  Klngu.  arhrr'-var.is

‘Aiaii'd-Diri  i'l'inin  Suhan

of  Dtc*^  ' , .309.  Sea  .uaor

Hcisan  Kt’i  iru

Hasan  Kangu,  tontoniporary  ct  3ub;in
5fiihainni?id  D ;^h>q  Shall,  Ct'V  310,
3l4,  32..  Sif  uiidur  Hnsaa  Kai-
•J  all.

K !.R  . olO.  Same  rs  Hasa^’

Kaiitrh

Hi-an  l^an  5_.’..ati,  ai  thr  7^  a-
'1/  .V  I M.-. , ' ,.i.  ,,1  th<  -

VI

Index,

of  the  Lodi  dynasty,  39S,  4-i3,  444,
447,  470.

Hasan  Khan,  an  impostor  of  Hiwiit
who  prerended  to  be  the  Hasan
Khan  Miwati  mentioned  above.  447.

Hasan  Khan,  Governor  of  Rapari
under  ilasnad-i-^A-lI  Khi/r  Khan
r.},  377,  3S7.

Hasan  Khan  Sat.  father  of  ^:r  Sr.ah,
461  and  n 5.  466  and  n 7,  4t>7.

Hasan,  Kotwai  of  Ghaznm  under
Sultan  ilauddd  Ghaziiawi.  4S.  See
also  under  Abu  ‘All  Hasan.

Kdsan  Haimandl,  Tazir  of  the  GKaz-
navidea,  35,  47  n 6.

Hasan,  JIanlana,  a learned  man  of  the
time  of  Babar,  449.

Hasan,  Hir,  son-in-law  of  Sultan
Firoz  Tu^laq  ^ah,  33S.

Ilf^san,  Shaikh,  a famous  surcceon  of
Panipat,  366  n 3.

Ilasan  Ziniaul,  Shaikh.  Shaikhu-1«
a famous  Saint  of  Labor,
383  and  n 6.

Hash/,  tlie  last  and  most  severe  stage
of  the  fever  called  Diqq,  320  n.

Hadkt  Bifxsht  of  Mir  Khnsrii Dehlavi,
the  famous  p«.“r,  the  lirsc  poem  in
his  131  and  n 3,  142  't  3,

269  n 5.

HasjiiL,  a term  of  Prcsody,  606  H 4.

flasciuawar,  town,  266  ii  4.

Hutaiipur.  district,  267  n 1.

Hatim  Khan.  Malik  Ikhtiyaru-d-D'n
Saiibal,  one  uf  the  Amirs  of  the
I^ilj'  dyna-'/  272.  291,

Hatim  S:\T  1 r '/r  Saiubhvill.  Miyin,  u
learned  D’'>  '-.  r 42’^,  545

Hatim  of  liiv,  the  ryp  < f Aiah
127

Hatkan,  town,  423  n 6,

Hatkant, — or

Hatkanth,  chief  town  of  the  Bhada-
war  district,  408  n 1,  423  and  n 6.

Hatkant,  tribes  of,  a clan  of  the
Bhadaurls,  408  and  n 1.

Hatnapur,  town,  266  and  n 4,  267  and
n 1,

i Hainawar,  town,  2G6  4,  267  n 1.

Han/.-i-'Alal,  an  andlciul  lake  at
Dihll,  constructed  be  SuPlu  ‘AU-
u-d-DIn  294  n 3.

HauZ‘i-Khags,  a reservoir  ac  Biuii
constructed  by  Sultan  FirQz  Tughlaq
Shah,  294,  339,  344,  347  and  nn  2
and  3j  348  n 1,  356  and  n 5,

EazaJ-i-Musamman,  a kind  of  metre,
606  an.  4 and  5.

Hazar  DInarl,  a name  of  Malik  Manik,
the  slave  of  Sultan  ’Alau-d-Diii
li^iljl,  251  and  nn  3 and  7,  256,
Called  also  Kifur  XMb.

Hazar  Sutiin  palace,  at  Dihll,  273,
285,  288,  289,  290.

Haztra,  Mausoleum,  397  and  n 4.

Hazramaut,  a province  of  Arabia,
262  «.

Hazrut  A‘la,  Taj  Kh.in  KarranI,  ruler
of  Beng.d,  540.  See  under  Taj
I Khan  KarranI.

j Hazrat-i-‘Ali,  a title  assumed  by  Shir
i ^lli,  461  n W.

I l.luzrat-hMuqaddaa  Saiyyid  Kafhifd-
; D.ii  S.uwt,  of  Balkh,  445.
i Heuvei:.s.  7xiue,  142  n i.

Helmund,  cj^^ed  also  the  Hendmand,
a rivei  of  Sijiatau,  15  n,

^ Hendmand,  called  also  the  Helmund,
j a ri^cr  of  Sijistan,  15  n,

■ llei.iclen,  586  n.

hitlex.

Ivii

Herat,  district  and  town  of,  — in  |
KhurSsan,  17,  22  2,  32  n 2,  31  i

and  nn  2 and  4,  35  and  n 2,  38  |
and  n.  4,  42,  43  n 4,  71  n 4,  73  n 1,
361,  609  n 5,

Herb  of  grace,  a name  of  rue  from  its
supposed  efficacy  in  exorcism,  617
7i  1.

Herbelot.  See  udder  D’ETeibelot.

Herodotas,  the  Greek  Historian,  23
n 1,

Herdopolis,  Gulf  of,  — the  modern
Gulf  of  Suez,  169  n 1

Hesydrus,  the, — the  river  Sutlej,  23
n 3.

Hiddyah-i-Fiqh,  tlie,  428  and  n 5,

Hiddyat,  spiritual  guidance,  307  and
n 5.

Hiddekel,  the  river  Tigris  as  called
in  the  Bible,  394  n 5.

I^ijaz,  province  of  Arabia,  287  n 2,
608,  512,

Hikraatu-l-Ishraq,  Philosophia  iUu-
mmatiunis,  181  n 2.

Htia,  name  of  the  fifth  arrow  in  the
game  of  maUir,  369  n 1.

Himachal,  mountain  of, — between  the
country  of  Chin  and  Hindustan,  307
and  n 3,  316.  See  the  Himalaya.

Himalaya,  the,  70  n 1.  See  also  the
above.

Himir  Kachhan,  Malik,  226.  See
under  Itimar  Kachhan.

Himar  SurUa,  Malik,  227.  See
under  Itimar  Surkha.

HImun  Baqqil,  the  Hindu  General  of
‘Adli,  500  and  n 11,  501,  537,  541,  '•
548,  549,  551,  552,  553,  555,  592  !
n 9.  Called  also  Humuu,  Haimun  j
and  Haimue.

Hind,  36  n 9,  70,  436,  591 . See  under
Hindustan  and  India.

Hindai.  MIrz.l,  453,  458,  459,  462,  464,
465,  559,  560,  567  and  n 10,  574,
578,  579,  580,  586,  587.

Hindal  Muhammad  Shah,  587.  Same
as  MTrza  Hindal.

Hindaun,  town  of, — in  the  Jeypore
State,  395  n 3.

Hindawiva,  town  on  the  Narbada,
517  n 9.

Hindlya  or  Handiya,  a town  on  the
NarbadS,  517  and  n 9,  521.

Hindu  Beg  Quchin,  Amiru-l-TJmara,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Humayun,  455,
457,  471.

Hinds  Castes,  Sherring’s,  312  n 7.
See  under  Hindu  Tribes  and
Castes.

Hindu  dynasties  of  Malwa,  384  n 5.

Hindu  Mythology,  Dowson’s  Diction-
ary  o/,  163  n 2.

Hinds  Tribes  and  Castes,  Sherring’s,
312  n 7,  384  n 3,  433  n 4,  557  n 9.

Hindun,  town  iu  the  Jeypore  State,
395  n 3,  541,  553.

Hindus,  the,  19,  21  rt  4,  22  and  it  1,
24,  34,  76  11,  79  It  2,  95,  120,  122
re  1,  125  71  3,  163  n 2,  209,  235.  236,
256,  291,  302  n 2,  306  ti  2,  309  n 1.
356,  359,  374,  384  ti  5,  404,  432,
443,  476,  478  and  n 7,  484  n I,  522
re  5,  549,  664,  565,  635  ii  6.

Hindustan,  10,  11,  14,  15,  16,  17,  19,
20  and  re  1,  23,  23,  26,  27,  28,  29,

32,  36,  37,  42  re  2,  44,  47,  48,  61,

52  and  re  1,  53,  56,  60,  61,  62,  63,

64,  66  re  1,  69,  TO.  72  and  a 4,  77,

78,  79,  81,  84  and  «,  87,  88  re  1,  96,
98,  141,  187,  191,  195,  197,  206  re  2,

Iviil

Indece.

219,  232,  233,  236,  249,  25U,  252,

254,  255,  272,  297,  305,  307,  310,

316,  321  327.  330  n 8.  333.  343,

845,  351,  358,  359,  375,  377,376,

384  n 3,  385,  420.  421.  427.  436.
443,  445,  448,  455.  456,  464,  466.
468,  474,  475,  477.  479.  480.  481,
4S2.  4S6,  489.  495,  496,  493,  499,
504.  507,  521,  522,  524,  527.  529,
503.  534.  539.  543.  547,  549.  559.
562  584  3.  588,  591,  595,  596,  604,
611.  617,  61S,  622,  624.  632,  637.
See  nu6er  Hind.

Hindascanl  Amirs,  444

Hindustani  models  of  poetry,  426  and
n 1.

IlindustaTH  ^^uslims.  356.

Hindwrin,  co^'n  in  die  Jeypore  State,
395  and  n 3.  Called  also  Hindiin.

Hisham  ibn  ‘Abda-l-ilalik,  of  the
Umavyad  dynasty  of  Khalifa*. s.  i
13  nl.  :

Hi^iam  ibn  al-Kalbi,  an  Arab  His-  =
torian,  74  n 2.

Hisar  Firozah,— or

Hisar  Firuzab,  a fortress  and  town
founded  by  Firoz  Shah  Tugblaq.  '
325  ri  3.  326  ;i,  327,  364.  410.  439,  ■
466.  594,  596,  597  Called  also  ,
Uissar  or  Hissar  F:r'>zah-

Hi>ar-i-Nati,  fort  uf,  186.

Hissar,  town  uf,  37  n 2,  325  v 3,  326  />.
See  under  Hisar  Firuzab.

Hissar  Firoza.  See  under  Hisar
Firuza.

Hi.'-toue  de^  Amhei,  Caussin  de  Perce-
val. 12  n 1 i

o/  f-he  Cdlifhi,,  Jarrett's,  15
n 4,  17  Tt  2,  18  ii  1 . 29  7j  2,  571  *t  2 j
See  under  2 kh n-i- Kh •> lofd

HUtory  of  Guierat,  Bayley’s,  17  n 4,
71  n 3,  264  n 6,  313  n 5,  357  n 3,
452  n 6.  454  and  nn  1 and  7,  466
n 1,  45S  n 6.

Hxstcry  of  India,  Elphinetone’s,  20
n 4.  See  under  Elphinstone.

HUtory  of  Kashmir,  8.  See  under
Tdrikh-i-K<ish.yn'r,

Hi>t(yry  of  the  Mahrattas,  Grant  Du5’e,
265  n 4.

Hizabru-d-Din  ^afar  ^an,  one  of
the  Malika  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din
Khilji.  247  n 2.

Hodal,  township  of,  547  and  nn,4  and  5.

Honey,  notes  on,  148  n 4,  585  n 10,
586  n.

Hoshang,  Sultan  of  Malwa,  otherwise
called  Alp  KhSn,  contemporary  of
Mubarak  ^ah  of  the  Saiyyid  dy-
nasty, 363  n 2,  384  n 5,  385  n 3,
393,  394  and  n 1,

Hoshangabld  District,  in  the  Central
Provinces,  517  n 9.

Hoshiarpur.  town,  380  2,  391  Ji  5.

House,  People  cf  — de.^Leiidants
of  the  Prophet's  family,  632  n 1.

Hud  ibu  Khubd.  the  prophet  sent  to
the  tribe  of  ‘Ad,  263  n.

Hudt'tzh,  f-xplanaiior.  of  the  term,
1 n 4,  2 n 1.  153  n 7.

explanation  of  the

term.  2 u 1.

fludu^  Z(i/ridn},  explanation  of  the
term,  2 n 1.

Hughes.  Dictionai  y of  Isldm,  2 n 5.
97  H 4,  113  fi  1,  150  n 2,  1^1  n 6,
156  Tt  1,  157  V 2,  176  n,  * 3 it  2,
191  II  4,  2(0  i(.  2u5  i<  i,  216  ii.  303
n 4,  320  u 4,  356  i 4,  368  n 1,  369  it  3.
372  » 2,  392  /I  6.  420  n 8,  424  n 9,

Indent.

4'4o  fi  6,  446  n 5,  459  n 2.  47*''  6^  \

480  H 5,  481  n 8,  485  hti  1 and  .
2,  488  nn  5 and  7,  510  n 4,  522  n 5.  :
571  n 1,  572  n 5.  601  /i,  ^3  n and
n 2,  613  7^,  622  n 3,  623  a 1.  636  h 2 .
Huma,  a fabulons  bird  of  srood  omen,  ,
57  n 2,  58  n.  60  and  n 3,  77,  177,
571  and  n 8.

Humaviin,  Emperor  of  India,  82  « 3.  ,

448  Tfc  3,  4o4-,  ‘♦uOj  4o6,  4o#.  40?^,

459,  460,  461  and  n 3,  462.  463,  464,  ■

465.  471,  472.  474,  530,  659,  560.  ;

561,  562,  563,  564  and  n 6.  565  /i  1.  {

!

566  and  n 13.  567,  568  aad  n 6,  569,  ;
570,  571  and  n 8,  572,  573  and  n 1,  ,
574,  575,  578,  579,  580,  581.  582
and  n 7,  683  and  n 3,  oS4  ?i  S.  5S5>  ;
587,  588,  589,  591,  592,  593,  594
and  '»!  6,  595  and  n 8,  596,  597  n 5,  i
598,  600,  601  and  n 9,  602  and  n 2,  ■
604,  6'16  n 3,  608  and  n 5.  613.  618.
619,  622,  623.  626.

Ilumajun,  name  of  a palace  at  Ditdi.
344,  345.

IJiiniayun  Khan,  eon  of  Muhammad  :
Shah,  son  of  Sultan  FIroz  Tughl-.g.
343,  347.  Succeeds  to  the  tiii'one
under  the  title  of  ‘Ah'iu-ci-]'Mn
Sikan'l.'.r  Shah.

Human  o*j0  nnct  n 11.  JOl.

See  under  Hinian.

Hunter’s  Imj^erial  Gaz‘'tte’*r  »f  Tnnut,
82  1.  83  ji  2,  89  n 4.  95  « 4,  121  .

71  8,  125  n 1,  134  a 1,  185  n 1,  256  .

71  4,  257  n 7,  265  nn  2 and  4.  266  '

n 4,  293  71  5,  299  nn  2 and  3,  311  '

n 3,  313  71  5,  325  n 3.  330  tj  7,  346  ,

7<  5,  355  n 1.  360  ii  3.  362  nn  1 ’
and  2,  364  nn  2,  3 and  4,  365  7t  8,  ;
366  n 3,  377  nn  3,  5 and  G,  38i>  n 2,  '

382  n 4,  383  n 8,  384  n 5,  385  n 3,
386  Tin  Z and  6.  389  7i  2,  408  n 5,
409  n 5,  410  n 4,  419  n 3,  422  7f  3,
423  71  5,  433  n 4,  437  n 8,  445  n 2,
454  7t  6,  466  7i  6,  486  n 6.  546  7in  3,
4 and  5,  547  ri  5,  559  nn  5 and  7,
56<j  ?i  8.  598  7i  10.  635  n 6.

Hunter's  Indian  Empire^  32  n 1.

HdrlSj  the  women  of  Paradise,  281,
485  and  n 3-

Husain,  son  of  ‘AIT  ibn-AbI  lllib,
third  Imam  of  the  Shi’a’i.  151  n 5.
200,  205  and  n 1,  4Si  and  n 8.  622
and  n 3,  623  and  n 1.

Husain  ibn  ‘AIT  ibrx  Maikal,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Snltan  Mas'ud  Ghaz-
nawl,  36.  37  n 7,  38.

Husain  Arghun.  See  under  Shah
Husain  Arghuu.

Qusain  Basri  the  Wazlr,  Khwaja,  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Gliivii>n.d«DTri
Balban,  220  »i  2

Husain  Farmaii,  MIvlu,  of  the  Amirs
of  the  Lodi  dynasty.  435.

Husain  Jilwanl.  "Rai,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Islem  Shah  Sur,  494,  495,  541,
542  and  u 14,  546.

H isain  Khan  Ghi'zai,  one  of  the
An.Irs  * : the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty,
542.  544.

Husain  Khau,  son  of  Khan-i- Jahan,  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  BuhliTl  Lodi,
406.

H usain  Khan,  son  of  Mahmud  Sharqi.
of  Jaunpur,  404  n 5,  405.  See
under  Husain  vSliarqi.

H usain  Khan,  Mirza,  one  of  Amirs  of
Huniayun,  574.

Husain  Khan,  son  of  Qasim  Khaii.  of
the  Amirs  of  Hnraayun,  589.

ix

Indesf.

Husain  son  of  Sultan  Sikaudar

liOdlj  431  and  n 1.

Husain  ^an,  ‘Umdatu-i-Mulk,  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  401j  402.

Husain  ^armil,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Gtori  dynasty,  67  and  n.

I^nsain,  Malik,  Taju-l-Mulk,  uncle  of
Sultan  Jalalu-d-DIn  Khilji,  229,
231.

Husain  Nhamu-l-Mulk,  son  of  Amir
Miran,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultau
Firoz  Tughlaq.  333  n 2.

Husain  Qudsi  of  Karbala,  Mir, — a
poet,  623  and  n 6.

Hneain,  son  of  ^ahbeg  Arghuo.  530
n 8.  Same  as  Mirza  Sbab  Husain
Atghun  (q,  v.).

Hnsain  Sliarqi,  Sultan,  son  of  Sultan
Mahmud  of  Jaunpur,  contemporary
of  Snlfan  BuliUil  Lodi,  404  and  n
5,  405,  406,  407,  40S  and  n 6,  409
and  n 8,  415,  416.

Husain  Zargar  of  Qandabar,  Qi;i,  420.

yaaainu-d'Dln  ‘Iwaz,  Malik,  86  and
7i  3.  See  Husimu'd-Diu  *Iwaz.

Husairm-d-Din  Ughal  or  Ughul  Beg,
ruler  of  the  Doab  at  the  time
of  Sultan  Qutbu-d'Dm  Aibak,  81
and  nil  2 and  3.

Husamn-d-Din  Aburija,  the  Jlfw«tat</7,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Saltan  Ma^am-
mad  Tughlaq  Shah.  308.

Hnsamu-d'Din  Barawar,  Malis,  of
the  Amirs  of  Snljan  Qatbu*d-Din
Khilji,  285,  290.

Hu8amn«d-I)iu  ‘Iwaz,— or

Husamu-d-DIn  ^ilji,  Malik,  86  and
n 3.  Eventually  becomes  Bnltaii
Ghiyasu-d-Din  Twaz  (q.  r.).

Huaamn-d“Din  al-Muwazzini,  Mania,
author  of  a commentary  on  the
Mi/taAu-l-‘ 428  n 2.

Husamu-d“Din  Tarmadi,  Shaikh.  133
n 2.

Hu-^yfir,  Malik,  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty.  396,  398.

/fwf,  the  Zodiacal  sign  Pisces,  195
n 2.

Hnwa,  name  of  the  Almighty,  603
n 6.

Hugail,  a tribe  of  the  Arabs,  28  n 1.

Hwen  Thsaflg,  the  Chinese  Traveller,
382  n 4.

Hyades,  the,  ad-Daharan,  367  7t  3.

Hyarotis,  the, — the  river  Kavi  in  the
Panjab,  23  n 3.

Hydaspes,  the, — the  river  Jhelam,
23  n 3.

Hyderabad  of  the  Deccan,  271  n 6.
See  Haidarabad.

Hydraotes,  the,— the  river  Ravi  in
the  Panjab,  23  ft  3.

Hypanis,  the, — or

Hyphasis,  the, — the  river  Biah  in  the
Panjab,  23  7i  3.

I.

Ibak,  soubiiquet  of  Sul|i«  Qolbn-d-  , Ibn  ‘Abbas,  uncle’s  eon  of  the  Pro-
Din  of  the  Slave  dyiasity  of  Dibli,  ' phet,  199  « 3.

77  n 2.  See  Aibak.  ■ Ibn  Araalan,  a relative  of  Sultan

Ibak,  slave  of  Salman  Qnt.bu-d-Din  , Mahmud  of  Ghaanin,  33  and
Aibak  or  Ibak  of  Dihll,  69.

n J.

Ibji  AsTr  [AtliTrJ  Ja2an.  the  Arab
Historian,  author  of  the  Kumilu-U
Taii'drll^,  27  n 3,  624  and  n 8.

Ibn  Baitur,  author  of  the  Mufraddt,
146  n 6,  172  n 2,  173  n and  nn  2
and  3,  182  nn  \ and  4,  550  n 1,
627  « 2.

Ibn  Baluta,  Travels,  67  n 1,  127  n 4.
221  n 3,  223  « 1,  265  n 6,  272  n,
307  n 4,  311  n 5.

Ibn  Hauqal,  the  Arab  Geographer,

30  ft  1.

Ibn  Khaldun,  the  Arab  Historian,  151
ft  4,  157  ft  1,  181  n 2,  191  n 2,  217
ft  5,  244  ft  6.

Ibn  Khallikan,  the  Arab  Historian,
6 ft  3,  12  ft  1,  30  ft  1,  35  n 1,  38  n 3.
42  ftrt  1 and  3.  61  ft  2,  55  ft  3,  59
ft  1,  73  n 1,  74  ft  2,  149  n,  151  n 6,
152  ft  2,  167  ft  3,  198  n 2,  287  nn  1
and  2,  352  n 1,  481  n 6.

Ibn  Kulsum,  one  of  the  poets  of  the
Mu'allaqdt,  109  ft  4.

Ibn  Makula,  the  Historian,  6 n 3.

Ibn  Mnljim,  the  assassinator  of  ‘All
ibn  Abi  Taiib,  207  ft  6.

Ibn  Kutaibah  [Qutaibah],  an  Arab
author,  287  n 1.

Ibn  Sa‘id,  the  Arab  Geographer,  17

ft  4.

Ibn  Serapion,  the  Arab  Greographer,
671  n 2.

Ibn  Side  (Avicenna),  533  n 1.

Ibu  ‘Umar,  the  island  of, — an  island
of  the  Tigris  above  M<M9ui,  624  n 8.

Ibnu-l-’Amid,  a celebrated  Arabic
writer,  198  n 2.

Ibnu-l-Hajib,  author  of  the  Kdjiyah,
a famous  treatise  on  Grammar,
42b  ft  6,  467  ft  2.

TbrabTni,  Abraham  of  the  Scriptures,
392  ft  6.  See  under  Abraham.

Ibrahim,  one  of  the  guards  at  the
palace  of  Sultan  Qutbn-d-Dln  Khilji
of  Dihli,  289.

Ibrahim  ^han,  son  of  Qutb  Khan,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Wall  of
Bangala,  470.

Ibrahim  Khan,  son  of  ^azl  Khan
Siir,  one  of  the  cousins  of  Sher
Shah,  539,  541,  642,  543,  544  545,
546,  547.  Assumes  the  title  of
Sultan  Ibrahim  (g.  v.).

Ibrahim,  Malik,  son  of  Saiyyid  I^asau
Kaithall,  feofee  of  Sultan  Muham-
mad Tughlaq  Shah.  309.

Ibrahim  Lodi,  Soltan,  son  of  Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi,  430,  431  n 1,  433
434,  436,  438,  439,  440,  441,  442,
443,  444,  467  and  n 6,  468,  470.

Ibrihlm  HIrsi,  son  of  Suleiman
HIrza  of  Badakhs^^an.  581.

Ibrahim,  the  SaiTyida'S^Salatln,  ibn
Sultan  Mas^ud  ibn  Mahmud  Ghaz*
nawl,  51,  52,  53  and  n,  54  and  7i- 1.

Ibrahim  Shah  Sharqi.  Sultan  of
Jaunpur,  361,  363  and  n 2,  364  and
n 3,  375,  386  n 2,  393,  398,  403.

Ibrahim  ^arql,  Sultan  of  Jaunpur.
See  the  above.

Ibrahim  Siir,  grandfather  of  Sher
Shah.  466.

Ibrahim  Sur.  Sultan,  542,  648,  549,
550,  552,  553,  554,  592,  597.  See
under  Ibrahim  Khan,  son  of  (Biazl
Khau.

Ibttda,  a term  of  Prosody,  606  n 4.

Idris,  Malik,  Governor  of  B,ohtak  for
Mabuuld  Shah  of  the  Tughlaq
dviiustv  365  ft  5,  375.

Tndejc.

Ixn

‘Idti-l*nzha,  the  festival  of  Sacrifice,
the  chief  of  the  MuhamiMadan
festivals,  392  n 6.

‘Idn-l-Fitr,  the  festival  following  the
fast  of  Ramazan,  392  n 6.

‘Idn-l-Qarban,  same  as  ‘Idn-l-azha  !
{q.  V ),  392  and  n 6.  j

‘Idu-l-Kabir,  or  the  great  festival,  a j
name  for  *Ida-l-azha  fg.t'.l,  392  a 2.  j

‘Idn-s-Saghir,  a name  for  ^Idn-l-Fitr  i
(q  r.),  392  n 6.  '

Ignorance,  Time  of.  the  ages  preced-  [
ing  the  advent  of  Islam,  44-1  n 2.

Ihthld,  special  ceremony  of  moorning
by  widows,  302  n 2.

Ihdnat,  miracle  contrary  to  the  inten-
tion of  a prophet,  626  n.

lj,  town  of,  476  and  n 5.

theolosrical  term,  636  n 2

lk,  town  of,  476  n 5.  |

IkdMa,  a fortress  of  Bangila,  after-  |

wards  called  Azadpur,  324  and  n 6,  j
329  and  n 1 . 1

Ikdilla,  the  islands  of,  329  n 1.  Same  i
place  as  the  fortress  of  Ikdala(<ji.  v.).

Ikblas.  name  of  a Surah  in  the  Qur’an.
See  under  Surata-l-Ikhlas.

I^rajat,  in  the  sense  of  tares,  316
and  n 1.

Tkhrivar  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  j
Mahmud  Phuh  of  the  Tughlaq
^uhi  dynasity,  366,  3S0,

Ikhtivar  Khan,  grandson  of  Malik
Daulat  Yar  of  Kanpila,  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Tughlaq  dynasty,  363.

I^tiyar  ^ban,  Governor  of  Simina
nuder  Khizr  Khan  of  the  Saiyyide,
365  n 4.

I^tiyiiru-d-DTn,  a servant  of  Sultan
‘Air'n-d'DIii  IQiilji-  243.

Ikhtiyarn-d-DTn  Altuniyah,  one  of
I the  Maliks  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d-Din
1 lyaltimish,  121  and  nn  5 and  7,
122  and  nn  1 and  2.

Ikhtiyarn-d-DIn  Betj  Birlaa,  Malik,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Saltan  Ghiyas-u-
d-Din  Balban.  1S6  and  n 5.
IkhtiyarPt-d-DIn  Itkin,  Malik,  one  of
the  Aniiis  of  Sultan  Shamsu^d-DIn
lyaltimish,  122,  123  n 1.
Ikhtivara-d'Din  Panbal,  Malik,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  the  Khiljl  dynasty,
272,  291.

Ikhtiyani-d-D?n,  sou  of  Shrivista
^han,  otherwise  Snltin  Jalaln-d-
Din  Khiljl.  227.

Ikhtiyaru-d-Din  Tangms,  Malik,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Shamsu-d-
Dln  Tyaltimi^.  186  n 5.

JAwir,  the  Elixir  of  life,  340  n 2.
Ilahabaa,  the  modern  Allahabad,
otherwise  called  Prayag.  415  and
Ti  5.

llahpur,  one  of  the  dependencies  of
Rantanbhur,  410  and  n 3.

Ilak  ^ian,  son  of  Bughra  Khan,
called  liak-i-Naar,  King  of  Miiwa-
ran-n-Xahr,  16  n 2,  20  and  nn  2
and  4

Ilnk-i-Nasr,  King  of  Mawnrau-n-
Nahr,  16  n 2.  See  the  above,
j Ilaq  Surtaq,  name  of  a place,  569
! n 8,

j lidighiz,  first  of  the  Atabaks  cf  Azar-
- baijan,  158  n 3,

I Ilhanpur,  town  of,  410  n 3.

; Illichpur,  town  of,  237.

\ Illuminati,  a sect  of  philosophei
i called  I^raqlyah,  181  n 2.

, *JbHaiH-l'ma\lnl  nal  lay.in,  42S  n 2

Index,

Ixiii

Ilmas  Beg  Ulugh  Khan,  brother  of
Salt;au  'Alau-d-Din  KhUji.  233,  239,
240,  241,  243,  247.  Soe  also  tinder
Ulugh  Khan.

*Ilmii-l.'baydnj  428  n 2.

*IlmU‘l‘Fiqh.  See  under  Fiqh.

Tl  shudan^  to  become  submissive,  674
n 5.

Ilyas  Haji,  Malik,  contemporary  of
Sultan  Muhammad  and  Firoz  Shah
Tughlaq,  assumes  the  title  of
Sultan  Shamau-d- Din  as  ruler  of
Uakhnauti,  309,  324,  327.

Ilyas,  Khwaja,  contemporary  of
‘Adll,  541.

Ilyaa,  Malik,  of  the  slaves  of  Piroz
Shah  Tughlaq.  352  and  n 6.

*lmad  Khan  Karrani,  of  the  Afghan
Maliks  of  Bangala,  540,  541.  |

‘Imadu-d-Din,  Maulana,  translator  of  j
the  Rdjd-tarangitu  into  Persian,  i
8n  3.  j

'Imadn-l*Mulk,  a court*servanb  of  |
Sultan  Jalalu-d-DIn  Khilj-i,  239.  |

*ImadU'l-Mtilk,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Abu  Bakr  Shih  of  che  Tughlaq
dynasty.  343,  344.

'Imadu-l-Mulk,  Malik  Mahmud  Hasan,
of  the  Amirs  of  Mubarak  Shah,
387,  388,  389,  390,  391,  392.  See
also  under  Mahraud  Hasan.

‘Imadu*l-Mnlk  Sarfcez-i-Snliani,
Malik,  of  the  Amirs  of  Saltan
Muhammad  Tughlaq  ^ah,  303,
314  and  n 2.

Imam,  Priest,  368  n 2,  472  and  n 7,
572  « 5.

Imam  the  celebrated  author  j

of  Sa-hibn-l- Bukhari,  a collection  of  j
authentic  traditions,  6 and  k 3.

Imamiyah,  a sect  of  ShTah  Muslims,
672  n 5.

Imams  of  the  ^i‘ah,  Twelve,  572
and  n 5,  625  n 3.

Imams  and  Saiyyids  of  Oman,
Badger’s,  157  n 2.

Tmin,  Faith,  577  n,  636.

Imanabad.  town  of,  founded  by
Sultan  Ibrahim  Ghaznawi,  52.

Imperial  Gazetteer  of  India^  Hunter’s,
36  n 10,  82  nn  1,  3 and  4,  83  n 2,
89  n 4,  95  nn  4 and  7,  121  n 8,  125
nn  1 and  3,  134  n 1,  185  n 1,  218
« 3,  221  n 3,  256  n 4,  257  n 7,  265
nn  2 and  4,  266  n 4,  293  n 5,  299
nn  2 and  3,  311  nn  3 and  6,  313  n 5,
325  H 3,  330  n 7,  331  n 3,  346  n 5,
355  H 1,  360  3,  362  nn  1 and  2,

364  nn  2 and  3,  365  n 8,  366  n 3,
377  nn  3,  5 and  6.  380  n 2,  382  n 4,
333  n 8.  384  n 5,  383  n 3,  386  »n  3
and  6,  389  n 2,  408  n 5,  409  n 5,
410  n 4,  419  n 3,  422  a 3,  423  n 5,

437  n 8,  445  n 2,  454  n 6,  466  n 6,

486  u 0,  517  n 9,  546  nn  3,  4 and  5,

547  H 5,  559  nn  5 and  6,  560  n 8,

598  n 10,  635  n 6.

In‘dmy  reward,  596  \ 6.

Indari,  town,  305.

Indarpat,  township  of,  325  » 3.  See
under  Indrapath.

India,  12,  13,  17  w 4,  20  n 4,  28,.  43,
84  n,  144  n 1,  256  n 4,  265  n 2,  301,
312  and  n 7,  362  n.  2,  411  n 1,  420
n 8,  494  n 11,  590  n 5.  See  also
under  Hind  and  Hindustan.

India,  Map  of,  in  Keith  Johnson’s
Atlas,  419  n 6,  420  n 5.

Indian  Atlas,  the,  81  n 4.

Indian  Enipi>e,  Hunter’s,  32  n 1.

Indian  Medical  Gazette,  the,  586  «.

Indor,  fortress  of,  385.

Indra,  the  Hindu  god,  294  n 4.

Indrapath,  a township  outside  Dihli,
294  and  nn  4 and  5,  295  and  n 9.
See  also  Indarpat.

Indraprastha,  original  name  of  the
township  of  Indrapath  (3.  v.),  294
n 4

Indri  Kamal,  pargana  of,  424  and
n 3.

Indns,  the,  20  n 1,  23  w 3,  67  n.  1,
72  n 2,  128  and  « 3,  249,  320  n 5,
353,  358  n 6.  436,  465,  529,  560  « 8,
667,  591.  592,  593.

Infidelity,  the  origin  of  ‘addicat  in
religious  matters,  576  n 5,  577  a.

Intvodiiciion  to  Ancient  Arabian
Poetry,  Lyall’s,  99  n 6.

Iqbal  Khan,  chief  cavalry  commander
nnder  ‘Azam  Humayun  ShirwanI,
434

Iqbal  ^an  Malloo,  one  of  the  Maliks
of  the  Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,  129  n 2,
351  and  n 6,  354,  356  and  n 5,  357,
359,  360,  361,  362,  30  3 andnl.
See  also  nnder  Malloo  Khan.

Iqbal  Khan,  called  KaIjmatQ-llahi,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Islem  Shah,
527.

Iqbalmand,  the  Mog^nl,  invades
Mnltan  in  the  reign  of  Sultan
‘Alau-d-Din  Khilli,  252  and  n 3.

Iqbal  Mudbir,  the  name  which  Mir
^Hnsru  gives  to  Iqbalmand,  the
Moghul,  (q.  V.),  252  n 3.

Iqlim  Khan,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  the
Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,  365  n 7.

Iqtd'  grants  of  land,  587  and  n 7,
.597,

‘Ird,  name  of  a certain  piece  at  the
game  of  chess,  479  and  n 7.

‘Irak,  t See  under  ‘Iraq.

Iram  of  the  Columns,  a fabulous  city
in  Arabia,  261  n 6,  262  n,  263  n.
Iran,  the  native  name  of  Persia,  86,
180  n 2.

‘Iraq,  country  of,  12  n 1,  15  n,  51,  Q4,
91,  205  n 1,  279  n,  287  n 2,  310,
443,  455,  456,  466,  481,  504,  505,
568,  571  n 2,  572,  575,  578,  624,
632.

‘Iraq,  Persian,  30  ti  1.

Iravati,  name  of  the  Ravi  in  Sanskrit,
23  TO  3.

Ir$had,  spiritual  guidance,  507'  and
TO  5.

Irshad-i-Qi:l,  the,  521  and  to  5.

‘lea,  JeBUS  Christ,  207,  369,  372,  628.
‘Isa  ^an  Hajjab,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Shir  Shah,  478,  485,  489,  513.

‘Isa  Khan  Lodi,  Governor  of  Patiali,
a cousin  of  Snlt.an  Bnhlul  Lodi,  412
TO  2,  413,

‘Isa  Khan  Niyazi,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Shir  Shah,  486.  487  , 488,  489,'
492,  493,  494,  541.

‘Isa  Khan  Sur,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Islem  Shah,  495.

Isaac  of  the  Scriptures,  488  n 5.
Ifdbah,  the, — a biographical  diction-
ary of  the  Sahdbah  or  Companions,
572  TO  1.

Isaiah,  Book  of,  474  n 1.

Isfahan,  district  and  town  of,  30  and
TO  1,  86,  173  TO,  279  to.  See  also
under  Ispahan.

Isfandiyar,  of  the  first  dynasty  of
Persian  Kings,  103  to  2,  116  » 3)
175,  321  TO  1.

Index.

Ixv

Isfirain,  a town  of  Khurasan  in  the
neighbourhood  of  Nishapur,  50
n 2.

Isfiriir,  a city  of  ^uraaan,  50  and
n 2.

Ishaq,  one  of  the  palace  guards  of
Sultan  Quthu-d-Din  Khilji,  289.

‘liha-Xamah.  one  of  the  poetical
works  of  Hakim  Sana!,  56  n 2.

Ishraqi  philosophy,  the,  181  and
n 2.

Iskandar  Sultan  Osbak,  of  the  Amirs
of  Humayiin,  463,  592  and  n 1,

493  and  a 2,  495,  498,  499,  500,  501,

502,  504,  505.  506,  513,  514,  516,

517,  518,  519,  520,  621,  522,  523,

524,  525,  526,  527.  528,  529,  530,

532,  533,  534.  535  and  n 7,  536,
j 537,  538,  541,  542,  583,  588  and
! n 1,  593.  See  also  under  Salim
I Shah.

i Isma'il  (Ishmael).  139  n 5,  392  n 6.
j Isma‘il  Fath,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
I hundreds  of  Ua.nlat.il/ad,  rebels

I against  Sultan  lluhammad  Tughlaq

! Shih,  314.

594.

Iskandar  Sur,  Sultiin,  543,  596,  597.
See  under  Sikandar  Sir.

lildm  under  ike  Arabs,  Osborn’s,  157
n 2.

Islam  ^an,  son  of  A‘?am  Khan
Humavun  Shirwani.  of  the  Amirs
of  Sultan  Ibrahim  Lodi,  433,  434.

Islam  Khan  Lodi,  called  also  Sultan
Shah,  Governor  of  Sihrind  under
Khisr  Khan  of  the  Sayyid  dynasty,
380  nn  3 and  4,  383  n 11.

Islam  Khan,  Mubashir  Chap,  the
Tazir,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  Muham-
mad Shah  ibu  Firoz  Shah,  345,
346.

Islam  Khau  (Islera  Shah)  Sur.  sou  of
Shir  ^ah,  493  and  n 12.

Islam  ^ah,  son  of  ^ir  ^ah,  c-allctl
also  Islem  .^ah  {q.  i and  Salim
Shah  (g.  v.),  456,  477  and  n 5

Islands  of  the  Blest,  the,  130  n 1.

Islem  Khan  Sur,  afterwards  Islera
Shah  (g.  r.),  435.

Islem  ^ah,  son  of  Shir  Sbah,  of  the
Afghan  Sur  dynasty  of  Dihli,  4S-5,
486,  487,  488,  489,  490,  491,  192,

Isma'il  Khan  Luhani,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,
413  and  n 3.

Isma'il  Khan,  son  of  Snlf.an  Sikandar
Lodi,  4-31  and  n 1.

Isma'il  Malik,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Mubarak  Shah  of  the  dynasty  of
the  Saiyyids,  391.

Isma'il,  son  of  Sultan  Kasirn-d-Din
Subuktigin,  16  and  n 1.

Isma'il  Safawi  Husaini,  Shah  of
Persia,  449,  570,  572  n 8.

Ismu-l-a'zam,  the  most  holy  name  of
God,  603  n 6.

Isna  ‘Ashaiiyah,  called  also  the  Ima-
miyah,  a sect  of  the  Shi'ah,  572
n 5.

Ispahan,  same  as  Isfahan  (g.i'.),  30
ti  1,  34  n 1,  5S2  n.

Israel,  302  n 2.

Israelites,  the,  169  n 1,  302  n 2.

Israil-i-Beghu,  chief  of  the  Turko-
mans at  the  time  of  Sultan  Mas'iid
Ghazuawi,  38  and  n 3.

Istidi  aj,  miracles  performed  by  infi-
dels, 625  and  n 6,  626  n.

1 Istighfar,  formula  of,  551  and  n 2.

9

Indej..

Ixvi

Istihzdr,  power  of  recollectioii,  427

K 6,

'istildhatU‘l-Fununj  the)  4 ti  1,  5 7i  4,

31  n,  142  n I,  145  u 1. 162  n 4,  163
n 1,  193  n 1,  374  h*;  5 and  7,  614  n
2,  625  n 6,  626  ?i.  Full  name  ^

Mf  Istildhdti-l^Furiitn.

Istiqdmai,  a term  of  Astro-nomy,  374  j

n7.  I

Itawab,  disfCricC  and  town  of,  334  arrd
7i  4,  346  and  n 4.  347,  359  n 4,  360,
362)379,380,  381,  386,  391,  403,  '
405,  410  and  n 4,  413.  431,  443,  444.
463,  547,  556,  592.  Called  also
Etawah  (q.  r.),-

liitnar  Kacbhau,  Malib,  one  of  the
Amira  of  Saltan  ^ijusu-d-DiB  Bal-
ban,  220,  226.

Itimar,  the  Mogbal,  one  of  the  Gen-
erals of  Chingiz  Sban,  188  and  n I?
1^9,  221.

Iiimar  Sur^a,  ilaTib,  one  of  the  Bal*
banl  Amirs,  227,  223.
lyal-tintish,  Salian  ^amaa-d-Dm
Aba-l'Ma^affar,  of  the  Slavedynaa-
ty  of  Dihli.  70  n 1.  6S  ^ 3.  89,  96,
121  and  4 See  under  Stiarnsu-
tl-Diii  jyahtimisJ:.

yd'tJUi.^.  crigiu  r-f  tlie  liame,  88,
89  ai-i  1.

zad  T,'‘r  fifth  son  of  Snltan  Mas'dd,
son  of  Snhan  l'Iahm.4d  Ghazaavvi,
44  )i  2.

I:t  .i/--.-;/ivrmcr,  605  and  n 9.
*Azzii-d-i3in  Balbati,  Muliii,  oiie  of  the
Miui4-  of  the  .^amsiyah  Sultans,
124  and  3,  125,  130-  Called  also
‘izzu-d-Biii  Baiban-i-Buzurg  (q,  v.}.

and  ‘Izza-d-UTfi  Balban-i-Ka^lu
Klian  {q.  t.).

‘Izzu-d-iyin  Balban-i-Buznrg,  or  the?
ettier,  124,  125,  129.  See  the

above,

‘Izza-d-BTn  B:tlban-i-Kashlu  Khan^
one  of  the  Maliks  of  the  Shamsivab
Sultans,  124  n 3,  130.  See  under
‘Izzu-d-DIn  Kashlfi  Kliaa.
‘Izzu-d-Din  lyaz,  one  of  the  Maliks
of  the  Shamsivah  Sultans,  120  and
n S,  Called  also  ‘Izzu-d-Bm  Ka-
bir  Ehau  Ayaz  (g.  v,).

‘izzQ'd'Din  JanI,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Suitan  Shamsu-d-Dm  lyal-timish.
S7  and  n 3-

‘Izzu-d-Dln  Sabir  ^an  Ayaz,  Malik,
9S  and  n 2.  See  under  ‘Izzu-d-
Diin  lyaz,

‘Izzn-d-Din  Kashld  Khan,  Malik,  132,
132  and  iv  4,  133.  See  under  ‘Izzn-
d-BTn  Balbaii-i-Kashlu  Khan.
‘izzii-d-Din  Khalid  i^ani,  one  of  the
jroets  and  of  the  time  of

I Flroz  Sbfih,  332  and  ts  2.

*IzzQ-d  Bin  Mchatnniad  Salari,  one  of
the  Maliks  of  the  Sbamsijah  Snl-
98  K 2.

4zza*d-DIn  Tughf*  Khan,  one  of  the
Malika  of  the  Ptiamslyah.  Sultans,
125.

*inzu-d-I>in  YahyS,  A'rcmw-Z-midk,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Sultan  Maham-
‘ rtad  Tu^laq  8hah,  3C>2,  208.
'Iz.''i'l-Maik,  Malik  ‘Alaa-d-Bin
KUafi  or  Jani,  one  of  the  Mahks  of
Sjllln  S2iamsu-d-Dia  lyal-timish,
9ni  and  n 3,

irni

^a'bal  Sanr,  a kill  149  «.

158  n 1.

JabliSG,  toim,  358  n 6.

Jacob,  the  Patrinrcfe,  303  n 2.

JacuE-  See  under  Yaqiit.

Jieglr,  land  held  in  fief,  120  n S.

Ja‘far,  the  Bermecide,  Waair  of  Ha-
riin  ar- Rashid,  286.

Ja’far  Khwandl.  See  Tinder  Shah
Ja'far  Khwaadl.

oa^far  Sadiq,  one  of  the  Imams  of  the

Sfal~^ah.  110  a 4,

Ja*far,  son  of  Solaiman  ib^  ‘Aii  ibn
‘Abdn-llah  ibn  al-Abbas,  a prince
the  ^Abbasides,  74  n 2.
a tiibe  «f  the  Arabs,  6 k 3.

Jag-har  Beg  Saliuql,  contemporary  of
Saltan  Maadud  ^ninaw:,  49  « 4.

Jahangir  Seg  the  Mughal,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Huiuayuo,  459.

Jahangir  <JalI  Beg,  one  of  tiie  Amirs
<rf  Hmroayun,  461.

Jahan  Kznni,  -a  pal»ce  and  a fortress
at  Bihil,  ^43,  345  and  m 1,  354  and
» 1,  361  and  fi.  1,  386  and  a 1.

Jahinpaaah,  one  of  the  flTnn  oides
of  DMi,  m F.  i,  366  » 4.

Shlk  AjBir,oae  of  the  gemrals
«C  Thaik-,  358  s 6.

Ji&i  Tatsoan,  of  BnkhXra.  a poet  of
ihe  time  of  Hamayua,  618  and  n 5,
630,  622.

Jahl  yatmiyln,  618  n 3.  Savae  as  Jihi
¥'d;inan  r.).

JihId*Tatraman,  618  % 3.  Same  aa
Jahl  Yatmaa  (q,  c.}.

Jahilijai,  or  tune  of  Ign(»ance,  the
pre>Isiamic  age,  99  a 6,  441  n 2.

Jabir  Dct",  the  Haja  of  Narwar,  1^
and  « 4.  See  imder  Chahar  AJ^l.

'•  Jahirija,  ancle  of  ^huafi  ^han  Bara-

1

j war,  the  faroorice  of  Sultfin  Qutbu-

* d-DIa  Khilji,  289.

I Jahjar,  town,  351.

■ Jahjar  river,  the,  325  ?i  3,  326

and  n.

.Jahcara,  name  or  a place,  414  and
n 3.

Jai  Chand,  a Zenitn  lar  of  Chartui;.

; at  the  lime  of  Snl^n  IbraLIm
Roai,  431  H -i«

Jai  Chand  of  Janirpir,  364  n o.

! Jai  Chanjj,  Eai,  Governor  of  Qaraaj,
i contemporary  Sultan  Sldhaba-d-
I Din  GHiurl,  70.

t&uhun,  tke, — or  Oms,  27  andn  i,  :i7
I n 7,  38,  71,  570  n 7.  Called  alsr

■ the  JilTun  (q.  v.).

! Jain  architecture.  635  n 6.

; Jaipil  L,  ruler  of  liindustnn,  coiii'-in-

j porary  of  Sulran  Mahmud  Ghaznaw".

j 15s  18,  19  ajad  « 2,  30  and  » 4,  22

-)  « 6.

J

I Jaipsi  li.,  «on  di  Anandpei,  -^auideoa

1 of  Jaip3  I,  the  n^er  of  Hind,  21,
j 22»nd«6,26.

Xai{W,  district  «id  town  of  Sajpnta-
na,  93  « 1 , 13*3  a 4,  129  « 2,  299  « 2.
See  under  Jsypore.

Jaisalmir,  4istrict  and  town  of  Bn j-
putana,  298  and  n '7,  -165,  562,  563,
567  a 1.

Ja’armi,  one -of  the  poets  of  the  titno
of  Suttnn  Jai^u-d-Diu  Klulii.  245.
Jajnagar,  called  also  Jajpur,  capital
I of  Orissa,  86,  125  a 3,  186  and  n 6,
j 299  and  n 2,  329  and  a 6,  330,
j 348

> Jajpur,  on  the  Baitarari  in  Orissa
! 125  n 3.  Same  as  Jajnagar  (-.  r.  .

Ixviii

Indent.

Jala,  baldness  of  the  fore  part  of  the  j
head,  516  and  n 2.  {

Jalalabls,  called  also  Arail,  a town  •
near  Allahabad,  415  n 4.  j

Jalaly  greatness,  515  and  n 6,  5l6  ;

Jalal  of  Badaon,  Allran  Saiyyid,  one
of  the  learned  men  of  the  time  of  ^
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  127.  j

Jalal  BhTm  of  Agra,  ll'Inlla,  contem-  ■
porarv  of  ^alkh  ‘Alai,  515  and  n 3 |
516.  :

Jalal  ^an  Jala,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Shir  ^ah,  486  n 7,  4S9  n 9.

Jalal  Khan  Jilwanl,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Shir  ^ah,  486  and  ii  7,  489  and  |
71  9.  j

Jalal  lyiau  Lodi,  son  of  Mahmud  j
Khan  of  KalpI,  one  of  the  Alinrs  of  I
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi.  422  and  7in
4 and  5,  437.

Jalal  Khan  Luhanl,  sou  of  Sultan  Mu-  I
hfiminad  of  Bthiti',  468  469,  470.  '

Jalal  Khfai,  son  of  Sultau  Mahmud
^arql  of  Jaunpur,  4'J4  n 5,  405.

Jalal  Khan  Miwatl,  contemporarj  of  j
the  Saiyvids  of  Dihll,  375,  391.  ,

Jalal  ^an,  son  of  Shir  -Shah,  original  |
name  of  lalem  ^ali  S’lr,  456.  4 j7.
Jahll  Khun,  sun  of  S I’ric.  Slkai.dn
Ludh  42.3  and  2,  430.  4dl  and  n 1,

4 52.  4‘i3.

Jull!  Thiiii  of  Agra,  Muila.  515  -i  3
516  J.dra  Bj-;’:.

Jul.id,  -111.  412  /t

JaM!'.  .i-L'a'.iu’;  t:cI‘_  or  Am.r

Tli.l.  s-’l.  ‘'I  Suit  .ti  . ~

o-~  ^ 'I

Kh  ! ~ }

Jalillu-d-BIn  Janl,  Malik,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  Snltln  Na-iru-d'DIii  Mah-
indd  .^ah  of  Dihli.  132.

Julalu-d-DIri  Kilslni,  one  of  the

Amirs  of  the  Shamslyah  dynasty,
125^  n 2.  See  the  next.

Jahtlii-d-DIn  K-l.^anT,  Qu?!,  123,  234
See  the  above.

JalulQ-d-DiU  Khilih  Siiifin,  v-hnse
na.me  ■v\'as  Malik  7-Von  and  hi>:  title
Shaviota  Khun  1 185.  226),  230

audn  1,  231,  239,  24(3,  243,  241,
245,  247  and  24S,  249,  507.  -525,

Jaialu-d-Din  Mahmud  Dlwan,  Khwaja,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Humfiyan,
585  and  n 4.

Jalulu*d-Dla  Mangburnl.  Snlfan.  son
of  Sultan  Muhammad  Khwarazm
Shah,  91  and  nr-  1 and  2.

Jalalu-d-DIn,  sun  of  Snltun  ^uimsti-d*
Din  iyal-timish,  124.  125,  131.

Jalulu-d-D’u>,  Sulrlu.  s-jii  uf  SuUuu
Bikumlar  Lutli,  430.  See  under
Jaliil  J^au,  son  of  Snlran  Sikandar

JalalU'd'DTn,  Sultan,  titl‘d  ‘ assumed
by  Mohammad  Khan  Sur.  GoTe^nor
of  Bangala  lu),  5.52.

J-dula-l-Huq  J '^va-d-D'n

uUnu^ari,  Miairdi  u.  !'u.Qi-jQ3  S.iiv-

yid,  376

Juian-uki.i,  idol  temple  of,  in  Nai'.ir-
k t 331  a 9.

.'•I'.L'i-O.  T .pf,  3 =3,  3^2  . i n 4,

■3*->  391  : -.d  5,  5''J  --nd  »>  ,.u.i

7 793

^1-.  t ’ - .’4  ; 3,  346  n 5,

•’77  -i’-'i  11  6,  »7  i .

^ I I-l.i'i  Pill.  tiuV.ril.T  nf  T fo-
T at  ch-.  [Ihit-  Th;.  .-4

Index.

ixix

Julor,  forfc  of,  262,  2C5.

J?lwar,  town,  379  n 2.

Jam,  a town  of  Khurasan.  32  n 2,
272  n 1,

Jam,  the  ruler  of  Thatha,  332  and
n 6,  333  and  n 4,  592  n 9.

Jama' at,  technical  sense  of,  626  and

2.

Jamfil  Khan  of  Dihll,  one  of  the
learned  men  of  the  time  of  Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi,  427.

Janial  Khun  Mufti,  Mljan,  one  of  the
learned  men  of  the  time  of  lalem
^ah,  506,

Jamil  Khan  Sarang-KhanT,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Snljan  Ibrahim  Lodi,
470.

Jamal  Khun,  one  of  the  Amira  of
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  466,  467.

Jamiil,  Shaikh,  a poet  of  the  time  of
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  426  and  n 2.
See  the  next,

Janifdi,  ,Shai^, — or

Janiall  Kanbawl  of  Dihll,  Shaikh,
one  of  the  greatest  of  the  •L'lainl
of  the  time  of  Salr.“n  Sikandar
Lodi,  4ii  and  n 10,  429,  455  and
71  9.

Jamaiu-d'Din  Abl  ‘Umar  'Usmao  bin
‘Umar,  commonly  known  as  Ibnu-l-
Haji;j  [>1.  f.},  428  }i  0.  467  7i  2.

Jamalu-d-DIn  of  Xlans'i,  a

celfbrated  saint,  322.

J,.nirilu-d'DIn  I^fahaiii,  the  poet.  con>
tem}>orriry  of  Khaqani,  339  n 4.

Jaiiiaiu-d-Dru,  !iUr,  the  Iraditionist,
cuntempoiary  of  BIbar,  449.

JamaIu-d-D;n  M 'hannu.id.  cuiname
of  Suiui’u  ilie  poet,  571

and  n 8.

Jamilu-d-DIn  Muhammad  al-UfI  or
‘Aufl,  author  of  a Tazhira  and
other  w'orks,  33  1.

Jamala-d'DTn  Sadr  3srarabadl,  MTr.
contemporary  oi  Hnmayiin,  625

Jamala-d-DTn  Yac  ht  the  Abyssinian,
Chief  Amir  under  Stnrln  Razzlyah,
120,  121  and  n 2.

Jaml.  Mullit  2suru-d-D~n  ‘.a-bdu-r-Uab-
mriii,  the  cele  author  ■‘.r.i

poet,  32  and  n 2,  270  4,  272  and

n 1,  429,  5SS.  Culled  also  by  tbo
title  of  Maulaw:  ‘Ar.f.

Ju}7u  u-UAkh^jdr  of  !^siUi  Saduq,  139
7t  5.

JdmiUt'UHikiiyut  of  3Xuhammad  Ufi
of  Merv,  29  n 1,  33  7i  1,  220,

Jd)nru-r-Iio?hHU.  ^ -i  2 See  the  7<7-
)ui'H‘t-Taui7i'l^  of  Bashlda-d-DIn.

Jdi.'ii'u-t-TawdnH  of  Has]iida-d*Din,
8 ft  2,  73  71  2,  307  n 4.  See  the
TdrikJt-i-Ra&hidJ

Jauiua,,  the,  343.  354,  355,  356  and  n^i
1 aud  5.  357  360  n 3>  364.  377  n 6,
3^5  fi  3,  of'o  3S7,  393,  396,  -±o6,
439.  414,  ooo,  blu.  8ee
also  under  the  Jumna  and  Jamiina.

Jamshid,  ancient  king  cf  Persia,  loS,
176,  201,  405,  454,  559,  613.

Jamuiuo.  See  under  Jviiufm.

Junitnii,  Sco  iii,  L-'  'ua.In.

J.-‘i).',  ki*  u»i.i  • •

Ja- . ii%'r  (.1  — - .‘j  Jritdun..  355

i..

Jamln,  country  »'i.  19  h 2 34.'».  35.5
»i  1.  358  H 6,  38--  , ; 1.  L.alitr.s.

ilibO  JaTllU.OlU  - Ul.  . .'lid  J.iiu’".

Janiuijtv  iht*.  c.i'i  - . ' * J'tM.  f.r

•Jou  and  the  '-h-  . 2.1  k 3

tin.  .ht’i  • . : 7‘  c J.-.n',  ;

o

Index,

Ixs

Jandl  (Juiiaidi),  tho  WazTr  '>i7r>niu-l-
Mulk,  of  xVmIvs  of  Sultan  Sliam-
sii-d-DIn  I;^al-rimisb,  90,  93,  120
and  n 1.

Jannar,  fortroaS  of, — in  Jaunpjr,  415
and  iL  2,  410  4.

J.injuliah,  on  of  tlio  tv\o  tribes  in-
Lnbitintj:  rk-?  4ud  hilli;.  12S  ' b.
Jannat;  A^:yr)rd,  invades  Uiodasran.
547.

Jannatcibiid,  nen’  name  of  G.-'in  tl.e
capical  of  Bangaln.  ho  cad  ‘d  by
Huniayun,  S2  3,  458.
druioha  a tribe  f,f  rhe  TTind-l'?.  7*00
Jarpanir,  K'l'tres-^  of.  45G  a:iu  'i  1.
Janur,  town,  37'^  ’•  2.

Japhet,  son  of  Zvoab,  01  /i  5,  147  n 1,
231.

3'jiiin  Manjli'li',  country  of  Siwif-
tan,  249  and  n 7,

Barrett's  -Vn-i^AV-arl,  13  n 1,  14  n 3,
17  Ti  4.  23  n 3,  25  n 5,  27  n 4.  28  n

2.  3 t ?i  5.  30  n 10,  48  n 1.  -52  n 3,

0. 2  ?i  2.  05  1,  1.  0,9  ji/i  2 and  5.  71  n

3.  72  n 4.  70  '*]  n 2.  S2  'tm  3 and

6.  S4  a 2,  -7  n 1 Oi  /t  2.  n 2.  95

n 5,  12i  ?i  4.  i2'<  ?.  3.  129  n 2,  130  i
n 1,  1.3.)  //  and  ' 2,  142  n 1,  193  n j

1,  236  2 214  ,*  2 219  n o,  264  n j

'6.  265  7ih  2 ai’'!  o,  266  /<  4,  3014  n 4,
330  n S.  332  n 5,  357  n 3,  3SU  « 2,
344  n 3,  41u  n 4,  415  >1  7,  416  hn  3
and  13.  417  7 120j  n o,  422  f,  3,

12.5  n 2.  4':0  /,  2 .536  a 6,  5 Hi  >'  7,  j
557  7i  3.  573  u .3,  5^7  7i  7,  58.8  »i  4,  •
590j  n 5.  1

ifarrett’s  T'-O'.,  0,.;  CnOpf* 12  2,  *

15  /(  4.  . 7 ' fj  1 . 29  a 2,  571  n 2 |
3ar?  all.,  : a,  u«.  c ’-y  of  M.  386  j
r 1' . 1 f

Jasrat  Khaknr, — or

Jr.si’ut  Khiikar, 'boh  of  Shaiklia  Kka-
k/ir,  contemporary  of  the  Saiyyids,
381  and  n 5,  382  and  nn  2 and  5,
I 3S3  and  7i  3,  334  n,  390  and  «■  4,
I 391, 399.

i Jasrat  Shnikha.  3S2  and  n 5.  Same
] as  t‘he  above  ( p ? \

! Sanskrit  name  of  the  rinr^

or  Indian  Spikenard.  374  n.

Jits,  tne, — a tribe  of  the  Hindus,  29
aiid  n 4,  121,  122  /i  1,  129  n 2,

Janhar,  essence,  397  'a  3.

Janhar  or  JiVnar,  a rice  of  self-sacri*
fice,  397  and  nn  1 and  3,

Jauhar,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  ol
Sultan  Mohammad  Toglilaq  Shall.
314.

Janharan,  a term  of  Mnslim  theology,
614  n 2,

Jaun,  the, — a name  of  the  river  Jum-
na, 23  n 3,  24  n 4.  Called  also  the
Jon  {q.  V.).

I Januan,  original  name  of  Sultan  Mn-
I hammad  Tughlaq  Shah.  329  n 2.

1 Jauniinpur,  origin  of  the  name  Jann-
pur  329  n 2.

Jannptir,  town  of,  185.  329  and  n 2,
348  71  10,  359,  361,  363  and  » 2,
364  and  a 3,  387  n 2,  400,  403  and
n 7,  404  and  n 2,  40S,  409  and  n 3,
411  n 2,  413,  414,  41  o,  417,  420  and
n S,  430,  444,  445.  446,  451,  456,
457,  459,  467,  471  and  ti  1,  477,
50s,  552.

Jausa, — cr

Jausah,  a Village  on  the  bank  of
the  Gauges,  4-79  and  n 4,  462  and
n 3.

Jfi’iz,  535  S*^-'  ;:i.der  Jauza

Index,

ixxi

Jauzhar,  the  head  and  tail  oi  Draco,
10:;  and  H 4,  I'd?  and  n 1.

Jat'zu  maitii,  or  Datnra,  a narcotic  and
intoxicant.  535  aiid  n 2.

Java.  3J’iS  n.

u-l-Kh'iinsa,  the, — name  of  a
bouk.  459  7i  2.

JawdlamukhI,  an  idol  temple  of  ^a-
garkot  331  and  n 9.

Jawalfipfir,  for  the  ford  of  Miapur  on
the  Ganges,  131  n 1.

Ju  ivi.hijhur, — or

Jawanyf'l,  left  tring  of  a Turkish
army,  439  n 4.

Jaicdn,  the  small  variety  of  millet,
549  and  n.  14.

JaicaxaHr,  the  head  and  tail  of  Draco,
162  azid  n 4,  193  and  n 1,

Jazarl,  Ibn  Aslr,  azithor  of  the  Kami-
Z «*f- Tali' 624  n 8.

Jazirat  Ibn  *Umar,  an  island  of  the
Tigris  above  Mosul,  624  n 8.

Jerusalem,  105  n 2,  151  n 2,  368  n 1,
613  n.

Jesuits,  the  130  n 1.

Jews,  the,  30  n 1,  279  ti,  600  n 9.

Jeypore  State,  the,  395  n 3.  See
under  Jaipur.

Jhaban,  town,  379  n 2.  Probably
Jhain  (q.  v.)  is  intended.

Jhain,  a city  near  Uantanbhor,  better
knovm  as  Nanshahr,  257  and  n 1,
259,  283,  379  and  n 2.  Called  else-
where Chhaln  (q.  v.).

Jhajhar,  town  of,  325  n 3.

Jhalawan,  a district  of  Biluchistan,  48
n 4,

Jhclam,  the, — or

Jbeluro,  the,  one  of  the  riv'ers  of  the
Panjab,  19  « 4,  23  n 3,  44  n 6,  89

'n  5,  128  n 3.  355  n 1,  392.  Culled
also  the  Jhikiin.

Jhilam,  river,  the.  44  r..  6 See  the
Jhelum.

\ Jhilam,  town  of.  389,  Si^j.

Jhiiam,  a District  of  tlic  Paniab,  437
n S.

Jhosi,  a town  near  Allahabad,  415
n 4.

Jhunjhnu,  a town  iu  Hl;putaiia,  Gl»
n 2.

Jidjer,  the, — the  rive.  Jubjar,  31:5
n 3.

Jigili,  Abu  llahamtrr.fl  Cn cdu-r-Eab-
mac,  the  IGiaCb  ef  Samarqand,
159  n.

Jihu'l,  holy  war  in  defence  of  Isi«tn,
293  and  B 4,  356  n 4.

JiJiuds,  the  two — , 191  n 4.

Jikddu’UAkhary  or  the  greater  war-
fare, 191  n 4.

Jihdda-I'A^ghar,  or  Che  lesser  warfare,
191  n 4.

Jihuu,  the, — the  O.tus.  38,  45  n 2,  166
and  n 1,  20J.  Culled  a so  the  J.d-
hue  (,.  r.).

Ji  Ji  Anagah,  wet-narse  ot  Princa
Akbar,  568  ti  6.

Jilav.dCir,  an  attend-mt  to  run  beside
the  horse,  5\J3  and  i.  3.

Jildu,  a Turki  word  in  tiie  sense  of
in’urn  or  reward,  596  n 6,

Jtr,  593  n 9.

Jirtu,  tl)c  separate  members  of  the
body,  doO  n 6.

Jirm-i-Qamai'y  rd.ys  oi  the  moon,  630
and  n 6.

Jital,  au  irnuginury  di’-ieiun  of  the
dam,  499  u 3.

Job,  Book  of,  198  n 2,  6o0  4.

Ixxii  Index,

Jodhpur,  -a  city  of  Rajputana,  379  n I,
512,  563.

Jodhpur  State,  in  Kaipntana,  379

r.  1.

John,  Sfc.j  the  Gospel  of,  146  n 6.

JoiTjanes,  the. — a name  cf  the  river
Jumna,  24  n 6.

Jon,  the,-— a name  of  the  river
Jamuna  or  Jumna,  24  and  n 4,
25,  541.  See  also  the  Jann.

Jones,  Sir  IViih.am.  76  n,

Joseph,  the  Patriarch,  89,  115  and
ri,  2,  217,

Joshaa,  the  acn  of  In  an,  373  n.

Journal  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of
Bengal,  1S6  6,  191  n 3,  324  n 6,

325  n 3,  226  u,  516  nn  1,  3 and  7,
609  n 3.

Journal  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,
16  2,  33*  a i.  47  n 2,  59  n 1,  87

n 1,  103  n 1.  109  u 4,  115  n and  n 3,
i4l  n 4,  330  ri,  7,  479  ’><,  7,  571

71  2.

Jud  hills,  thr,  i28  and  n 3,  385,  1S6,
221.  See  aUo  under  the  Koh*i»
Jud.

Jud  tribe,  tn?.  — one  of  the  two
Liibe.?  iuhahi.iLg  the  Jud  hiils,  128

. 3,

j'l^irovJo.ih'-  . u rite  cf  self-sacri*
tice,  397  r-  1,  -'■u'?,  476.

JlII  Bahadur  l'/J,akT,  one  o7  the
Amirs  of  A%kar:,  568  >t  1,

J I'a'i  a,  a wtja.’t-v,  02S  n 1.

■/  '■du,  a Tu’ -I-  »'»>rd  in  the  sense  of

i.d'/o’i  or  rc'^>  506  n C.

.'fan,  a dal*.,  4 j''>  > 7.

Julius  Ca!f:ar,  7o  ’i.

Jumlatu-l-Mulk,  chief  finance-minister
of  the  State,  625.

Jumna,  the,  24  nn  4 and  6,  122  n 1,
220,  227,  228,  23i,  235,  244,  325
and  71  3,  326  and  n.  327  n 5.  See
also  under  the  Jamna.

Juna  Khan,  or  Junan  Khan,  Governor
of  Shamaabad  under  Sultan  Jlah-
mud  Sharqi,  403  and  un  4 and  5.
404  rt  2.

Juna  ^ah,  or  Junan  Shah,  Kh  ln'i-
Jahdn,  son  of  Malik  Qubul,  one  of
the  Maliks  of  Sultan  Firoz  Shih
Tnghlaq,  333,  336  n 5,  337  n 7-

Junaid,  the  famous  Muhammadan
Saint,  59  n 1.

Junaid  Birlas,  SalJ.an,  of  the  Amirs
of  Biibar,  Governor  of  Karra  and
Manikpur,  439,  446,  46S,  469.

Junaidi.  the  Wazir  Ki/imu-hMoik,
of  the  Amirs  of  Suliraa  S/tamsa-d-
Din  lyal-timish,  90,  98,  120  and
n 1.

Jundl  (Jnnaidi),  the  "Wazir,  120  and
n 1.  See  the  above,

Junubi, — or

Jununi  Badakh^i,  Mauliina,  the  enig
matiic,  one  of  the  poets  of  the
lime  of  Kumayiin,  605  and  n 5.

Jupiter,  notes  on  the  planet,  7S  and
n 2,  151  n 4,  154  n 4,  630  n 2.

Jureah  canal,  the. — a canal  leading
from  the  Sutlej,  325  a 3.

Jurjan,  the  capital  of  Klnvarazm,
23  n 1,  34  71  2,  52  n 5.  Called  also
Gargang.

Jurjan,  Sea  of,  — the  Caspian,  153
n 1,

hulelt.

Ixxiii

K.

Ka'bah,  the,  12  » 2,  97  n 4,  368  n 1,
684,  685,  612,  613  n,  624.

jfabai,  622  and  n 1.

Ka'batain,  the  Temples  of  Mecca
and  Jerusalem,  151  u 2.

Kabir,  Amiru-l-Umara  Malik  Muba-
rak, of  the  Amirs  of  the  Tughlaq
Shabi  dynasty,  342  and  n 1.

Kabir  Khan  SultfinT,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  Sultan  SliaTnsu-d-t>m
lyal-timish.  98  and  n 2.

Kabul,  territory  and  town  of,  13  n 1,
14  n 3,  46  n 1,  49,  132  n 6,  359.
3S8,  390,  435,  436,  443,  446,  44S,
465,  466,  500,  oOl,  530,  559.  567,
663,  573,  675,  576,  673,  579,  6SU,
581,  582  and  n 7,  684  and  n 3,  585,
690,  691,  G04,  617,  618,  632.

Kachlia,  one  of  the  fords  of  the
Jamnn,  406  u 6.  Called  also  KIcha.

Kacbhau,  Malik,  called  Itimar  or
Hiinar,  one  of  the  Ainirs  of  SuUJu
Gbiyasa-d-DTn  Balban,  220,  226.

Kadba,  name  of  a country,  probably
Garba-Katanka,  433  n 3,

Saethar,  the  district  of  Rohilkhand,
131  n 4.  Called  also  Kaitbar  (q.v.),
Katlbar.  and  Kaithal  (g.  v.).

Kaj,  615  u 5,

Krrpr,  a Non-Musliin,  576  rt  5,  677  n.

KiinyaJi  of  Ibnu-l-Hajib,  a famous
treatise  on  Grammar,  428  and  n 6,
467  and  u 2.

KaMi  ‘All,  a common  name  amontr
the  Shi‘ah,  G04.

Ki/ftan,  cutting  or  cleavinc,  615
71  5.

Kaftlr  Haz.ar  Dinar!,  name  of  Malik
-Lluik,  slare  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Dvii

[ 251  and  nn  S and  7,  256,

Called  also  KMur  Kaib  (q,  v.)*

Kafur  Naib,  called  Hazar  Dinari,
name  of  Malik  Manik,  slave  of
Sultan  ‘Aliu-d-DTn  ^iiljl,  251  and
nn  3 and  7,  265  and  n 1.

. Kuhf^  Strain -I- j name  of  a Chapter
' in  the  Qur'an,  207  n 1.

K;ihfu-d'Daulai  wa-i-Tslam,  one  of
the  titles  of  Snitan  Mahmud  of
Gbnzpin,  29.

Kahl,  Maulaiia  Qasim,  a poet  of  the
time  of  Huma\Qn,  584  and  7in  1
and  3,  601 .

Kahi  Kribull,  MIyan,  584  n 2.  Same
as  Maulana  Qi-sim  Kahl,  see  the
; above.

' Kahwar,  town  of, — now  known  as
Shamsabad.  N.-IV,  P,,  377  and  n 3,

Kaiklius,  ono  of  tiie  ancient  Kings  of
Persia,  43  4 1,  210.

Kai  K'lls,  son  of  Mu‘izzu-d-DIn  Kai-
i Qubad  of  the  BalbanI  dynasty,  227,

! 230  n 1.  Same  as  Sultan  Sham-

1 1 —

J su-d-DIn  Kai  Knus.

' Kai  Khusrau,  one  of  the  ancient
Khigs  of  Perv^ia,  116  n 4.

' Kai  l^iisru,  son  of  aultrm  Mnham-
riad,  son  of  Ghiyas-u-d-DIn  Balban,
213,  219,  220  7i  2,  222,  224  Ho
was  called  by  the  title  of  Khusru
Khan.

, Kai  Qubad,  Sultan  Ma‘Izzu-d-DIn,
s>*n  of  Sultan  Na^iru-d-Din  Bnghra
Khan,  of  the  Balb.tnl  dynasty,  135
7t  arid  7=  1 213,  219,  220  and  7i  2,
' 221  224  230  n 1.

Ivaiqubbl  one  of  the  ancient  Kings
j of  Peii-ia,  595.

10

bciiT

Tndeji.

Ka^nbad,  soa  of  Saltan  Muhammad,
sen  of  (^yagg-d-Dln  Balbaut  213.
Hairwan  or  Qairawan,  the  ancient
. Crrene,  in  the  province  of  Tunis,
167  » 4-

ItaiHtal  or  Katihal,  a village  in  the
neighbenriiood  of  Dihli.  121  n 5,
131  and  r*  5,  294  n 5.

Bauthal,  the  country  of  Kaithar
(q.  r.),  3S5  and  n 9.

Kaithar  coantry,  the  district  oi
Hohiikhand,  185  and  » 2,  335  ana
nn  5 and  9,  359  and  n 4.  365,  375.
377,  379  380,384,  385,  3S7.  Called
also  Kaethar  (q.  Kafcihar  or  J
Kateher  and  Kaithal.  f

Kahhar,  the  river  of,  387.  !

Kaitharie,  the,  185  and  n 3.  !

Eammonra  (or  Kaikius),  sou  of  Snltin  |
mn^izza-d-Dni  Kaiqubid  of  the  t
Balbanl  dynasty,  230  n 1.  j

Khiiraa,  the  placet  Satarn.  6S2  f.  1.  \

KajaJcj  the  hook  in  the  game  of  ^ubtic
and^t  621  n 5.  |

Kajwi  Kihatri,  a prcUgi  of  the  Muba-  t
rak  Shahi  family,  393  and  n 3,  394.  |
Ka^h,  or  Cakes,  origin  of  the  name  of  L
£Ca*ki  (3.  p.),  92  n 2.

Ka'kl,  a name  of  the  famons  saint
Khwaja  Qatbn-d-Din  tTshi,  92  n 2.
Sala  Bhar  Shaikh  Mahmaiad  Farma-
U,  nephew  of  Saltan  Bnhiul  Lodi,
411  H 2,  413  n 13.

Kala  Bhar,  or  Kali  Pahir,  brother  of
SilraTidar  Sar  (q.  r.),  544  and  n 1.
y^lan  Beg,  Khwaja,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Bibar,  439,  448  453,  455,  456,
<^2,463.

Kaiim^  or  Kalanor,  fort  of,  306,  324.
MSQ  and  n 8.  See  also  Kalin  hr.

, Kelanor,  town  of,  436,  437-  See  al^c
; under  Kalanor.

: Kalda  tranf,-— or

: KalJit-tcat,  a Hindi  word  meaning  &
singer  or  maaician,  557  and  n,  1
Kaia  Pahir.  See  under  Sl.a  Bhar-
brother  of  Sikandar  b ir.

KiUpaci,  the, — firi^rer  I5ir.tr
the  Jumna  and  Gatijfes,  36l»

E.  8,  386  n S.  Called  also  the
Kali  Nadi  op  Kalini  (q,  i .).
Kalarchal,  mountains  of, — the  inor-i:-
tains  of  Sirincr,  3C»7  n 4.

^a'du'fznt,  a siogsr  or  1iit13icir.11.  557
n 1.  See  Kuldn-icat.

Sai  Chandar,  gorernor  of  the  thrtres-
of  Mahawnn  on  the  Joa,  a«  she
time  of  Mahm-id  cf  Ghaznli^^a  icva-
sioD,  24  and  n 5.

Kalewp-  fortress  of,  95,  4.

Same  as  the  fortress  of  Gwiiiar.
Kali-  the  goddess,  484  u 1.

Kv’tlichar,  for  the  fortress  of  Kalinjar;
451  n 4.

Kilidiiffi,  the  famons  poet,  95  a 6.
Kali  Kabnli,  MIj^  584  n 3.  See
under  Kihl  Kabuli.

Kalikarartta,  town,  24  a 6.

Kalilah  and  Samnoh,  thfi  famoos
book  of  Fables,  56.

Kalimah^  the  creeds

446  and  u 6,  447.

I Kill  Nadi,  the,  360  » 3,  378  a 1.
I Called  also  the  Kalapani  (g.

I and  the  K^ini  (q,  r.J

'(  Kalindi,  the,  378  » 1 . S&mo  aa  the

i Kali  Nadi  (g  r.},

I KalinT,  the, — a river  between  the
j Jumna  and  Gashes,  360  a 3,  378
* 1,  38b  and  a 8.  See  ttw*  Kali  Paul.

Indpjr.

iXXV

Silinjar,  fortress  of,  25  ami  a 5,  26.  ■
3S.  36,  451,  47i  and  » 3,  4^1  n 6.
482,  4^*6.

Kali  Pam,  the, — a name  of  the  sirer  i
Biils,  25X>  386  it  8.  See  '
KalirL

Kali-Sind,  the, — a tributary  of  the  ■:

CLambal  river,  385  n,  3.  !

Salpd,  distrKJt  and  town  of,  S75^  S93,
S^4,  408,  40&,  411  a 2,  414,  422  a !
4.  433,  430,  43i,  443,  446,  463,  536,  1
5-tl.  &48,  5-19,  652,  555.  !

Khan,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  '■
Ifnbcrak  Shlh.  of  the  dTnaa-
of  the  Saiyyids,  3S4.  |

K&mal,  Hai,  gjvei'nor  of  TahiundT,  '
SS2  n 1.  Same  aa  Kamila-d-Din  ;
Hubln  Tj.  r.}.  I

Kamala-d-Daalah  Sherzad.  Saltan,  [
son  of  Saltan  Mas'ud,  son  of  Ibri-  \
him  Ghazztawi,  5o  and  ti  2*
Kamala-d-Din,  a proUgi  of  Moham-
aad  Shah,  soa  of  Sultan  Plro*
^iih,  33S.

Kamiia-d-DIn  ‘Ali  Shah  Qoraish:,  ^
grandfather  of  Shaikh  Bahia-d-Dia  |
Zakarija,  133  n S.  !

Kamalu-d-Dm  Garg, — or  |

Kamila  1-Dia  Kark,  Malik,  one  of  |
the  Aiaira  of  Soltaa  ‘Aiia-d-Din  I
265,  267,  282.  I

Kamaia-d“Dia  Mubin,  Malik,  one  of  {
the  Amirs  of  the  Firdz  Sbiihi  dj-
nasty,  352,  362.  382,  and  a 7.
KamaltL-d-Din  biiib-i-Lashgar,  393
and  n 1,  See  Kamala-l-  I

Hoik.  I

Kamala-d-Din,  — one  of  the  i

Qizis  of  Saltan  Nasiru-d-DIu  Mah-
mtid  Shah  of  Dihli,  12S  n.

Katuala-d-DTn  Sadr-i-Jahin,  Qizi,—
ere  oi  the  Qa?is  of  S^ilAn  Muham-
mad Tnghlaq  Shah,  3iS.

Kbmiia-d-DTn  Safi  one  of  the  Maliks
of  Saltan  Qatba-d-DIa  2&i.

Kama.Iu-d.-DIn  Salaiu:  an.  son  of  Far-
rokh  ^ah  of  Kabai.  132  n 6.

Kamiiu-I“Muik,  5rutko.-gh-Shar-'~‘.  the
yzIih-i-Zashh: r,  cue  of  the  Xfaliks
of  Mub^ak  Shah  of  the  Saiyyid
dynasty,  393  and  a 1,  395,  896,
397,  393.

Katnatigar,  Maulica  Zainu-d-DIn
Mahmud,  of  ;Le  Xac-^baiidi
Shaikhs.  5SS  and  n 4

Ku^iiil  /.-t-TijrJMr  ~ or

KiIi/u^u^t^T2urdr!M  of  Ibu  Aslr  Jazarl,
a general  Hh-corr,  624  and  « 8.

Kom^ib,  658  :i  4.

Kamrim,  oountry  of,  S3,

Kamran  MIrza,  brother  of  Humayun,
453,  456,  462,  464,  465,  494,  500.
601,  502,  603,  607,  574,  578,  *^79,
6S0,  5SI  and  n 3,  5S3  ar;  i n 7,  683
and  n 3,  654  and  \ 3,  585,  556,
688,  6*j6  n 3,

Kamriin  Mlrzi,  grove  of, — outside
Labor,  494.

Kamrud,  country  of,  84  and  ?«,  and  n
1,  S6.  87,  135,

Kanbhayat  (Cambay),  in  Gnfarat,
311  n 3,  4(54  and  n 6.

K&nbc,  Shaikh  Sama‘a-d-DTn,  one  of
the  triami.  of  the  time  of  Sultan
Sikandar  Lodi,  411  and  n 9.

Kandaaia,  fortress  of,  called  also
G-indaba,  2S  n 4.

Kandarkhi,  township  of,  545.

Ksndha,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  Sultin
^tLSain  Sharqi  of  Jaunphr,  416  n 9.

Ixxvi

Imlest.

Kangra,  town,  331  n 3.

Kangu  ^atri,  a 'prottoi  of  the  Muba-
rak Shahi  family,  393  and  n 3,  396.

Kanhaiya,  one  of  the  namefi  of  Krish-
na, 478  n 7.

Kanhaiya,  minister  and  agent  of  Rai
Maldeo,  the  mler  of  Nagor  and
Jaunpur,  478  and  n 7,  479  and  n 6.

Kanhar  Dev,  governor  of  the  fort  of
Jalor  in  the  reign  of  Sultan  *Alaa-
d-Din  Khilji,  265.

Kam,  a coin,  87  n 1.

Kani,  name  of  a place,  548  n 3.

Kanjai  Khatrl,  393  n 3.  See  tinder
Kajwi  Khitru

Kanpilah,  town  of,  81  and  n 4,  ISo
and  n 1,  363,  377  and  n 4.  3S4,
407.

Kansa,  KajTi,  of  Ma:hra,— the  enemy
of  Krn^na,  24  ti  0.

K'lnt,  town  in  the  .^ahjahanpar  Dis-
trict, N.-W.P.,  546  anc’’  /i  3.

Kanrhar,  country  of,  185  n 2.  See
Kaithur.

Kantit,  one  of  t);'-:  fords  of  the  G<in-
ges,  416  and  n 3.

Kant-o-Golah,  country  of,  548  and
'?t  3.  59S  and  n 3.

Kany.l,  or  Kanhaiya.  minister  of  Rai
Miild-.-o.  479  and  « 6.

K‘in  i)\°. — a work  on  Muharn

rnad.tii  I-a;',  5 15.

Kapal:,  T.e  invades  Mukr'n

In  tiiO  reign  cf  Sult'ln  ‘Ahia-d-DIn
252  and  3.

. i'L,  ;*  f ic  gar;.)-  lit.  628  n 1.

K.du'^hftla,  Tfie  village  of  Kuithai

I;,  i./,  121  -1  8.

Kaiae.a  57  I,

Kari'clii  district,  o»di  a 8.

Karabhil,  monritains  of, — the  raoan>
tains  of  Sirinor,  307  n 4.

Kara-Kanka,  or  Garha~Katanka,
country  of,  433  and  n 3.

Kara-Katanka,  country  of,  433  and
n 3,  654.  Called  also  Garha  Katan-
ka  {q.  r.).

Kara  KhitaT,  the,  103  n 3.

Karanianians,  the, — a sect  of  false
religionists,  30.

Kaniinat,  a miracle  performed  by  a
pious  person,  625,  626  n.

Karan,  Rai,  of  Gujerat, — contempo-
rary of  Sultan  ‘AIua-d-Din  KhilfT,
255,  256.

Karaau  river,  the,  360  n 3,  386  'n  8.
Same  as  the  Kala  Pam  or  Kalini
(q.  T.).

Karawan,  a proTicce  of  Central  Asia,

! 43  4.

j Karbala,  town  of,  205  and  n 1,  481
■ »i  8.  622  n 3,  623  n 6.
j Kardiz,  a district  lying  between
' (^azTia  and  Hindustan,  66  an.l  ri  1.

; Karimu-1-Mnlk  AnhaJi,  llallfc,  bro-
i ther  of  Shams  Khan  Auhadi  of
i Baiaiia,  378.

i Karmat  (Qarmat),  founder  of  the
Karinatiaa  sect  of  jiuslim  heretics,

I ^21,.l.

' K.'.rmatians,  the, — an  heretical  sect
; touiided  by  Karmat.  {.Qarma'),  21
; and  11  1,  66.

Karnai,  town  of,  I2i  n S.  32.5  n 3,
j 32a  a.  327  n 3.

Kn  I'jiii'i  record  of  deeds,  605.
i rl'i!  na.nuh-i-Ba’ kh,  cue  »>f  the  works
i of  Hakim  Sanal,  the  famous  poet,

i 36  ..  2.

i Kaipattun  town  of,  85  n 1.

Index,

Ixxrii

Karra,  diBtrict,  and  town  of, — on  the
river  Ganges,  125  and  n 1,  129,
221  and  n 3,  229,  231,  232,  236,
237,  238,  239,  241,  243,  247  n,  249,
258,  328,  329  and  n 3,  330,  335,
341  n 1,  349,  411  n 2,  415  and  n 7,
432,  433,  434,  468.

Karra  Manikpiir,  district  of,  411  n 2.
Karrani  Afghans  in  Bangala,  the,  j
541.  i

Kas,  fortress  of,  570  n 7.  See  under  I
Kash.  j

Kaaara  Kar,  game  as  the  town  of  j
^amsubad,  232.  j

Kash,  fortress  of,  otherwise  known  |
as  Nakhshab  in  Mawarau-n-Nahr,
570  and  n 7.

Ka^ghar,  country  of,  443,  448.

Kashif,  enigma  on  this  name,  450.
Ka^lu  Khan,  title  of  Malik  ‘Xzzu-d-
Din  Balbau-i'Buzurg  ('i.  130.

Ka^mlr,  8,  20,  22,  26,  36  and  « 1,
381,  383  n 2,  465,  495,  498,  500,
530  and  n 5,  589.

Kashmir  pass,  the,  23.

Ka^rnir  Shdls  (Shawls),  589  and  n7.
Ka^mlrls,  the,  22,  465,  495,  500.
KasJi^df,  a celebrated  commentary
on  the  Qur’an  by  az-Zamakhshari.
28  /I  i.

Kashirhdf  IsUlahuti-UFun'in,  4 n 1,

5 n 4,  31  ?i,  142  n 1,  145  n 1,  162  j
n 4,  163  ?L  1,  193  n 1,  374  n/i  5 and  j
7,  814  li  2,  825  n 6,  626  n.  I

Katah.  a bamboo  shaft,  537  ?i  2.  ■

Katauba,  one  of  the  dependencies  of  |
Patna,  415  u 3,  I

Kateher,  the  district  of  Kohilkhand,  J

185  n 2,  359  n 4,  408  n 4.  See  j
under  Kaithar.  '

Katehr,  country  of,  4f)S  n 4,  See  the
above.

Kath,  catechu,  302  n 6.

Katiba-bash,  537  and  n 2.

Katibi,  a poet  of  the  time  of  Sultin
JalMu-d-Din  Kiilji,  245.

Katihal,  a village  in  the  vicinity  of
Dihll,  121  and  n 8.

Katihar,  country  of,  131  n 4.  See
under  Kaithar.

Katie,  one  of  the  fords  of  the  Ganges,
416  and  /i  3.

Katlu,  original  name  of  Khan-i-Jahau
Malik  Maqbul  or  Qubul  (q.  r.),
337  n 7.

Katoch,  the  KajpQc  kingdom  of,  382
n 4.

Kaosar,  name  of  a river  in  Paradise,
3 n 1,  485  and  n 2.

Kawal  ^an  Ghakkar,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Islem  ^ab,  490,  491.

Kawarin,  the, — or

Kawars,  the, —a  tribe  of  the  Hindus,
122  and  n 1,  231  and  n 5,  493.

Keith  Johnson's  Foyal  Atlas,  417  n 7,
419  n 6,  420  n 5,  567  n 1,  570
n7.

Kelardjek,  mountains  of, — the  moun-
tains of  Sirinor,  307  H 4.

Kerauli,  town,  420  n 5.

Kerbela,  town  of,  205  and  n 1,  481
n 8,  622  n 3.  623  7i  6.

Keeh,  a town  in  Bokhara  (Mawarau-
a-Nahr;,  570  n 7.

Ketu,  one  of  the  Daityas  in  Hindu
rnytaology  and  in  astronomy  the
descending  node,  163  n 2.

Khaberan,  a district  of  Khurasan,
43  n 2.

tlhaf. — or

IxxriLi

yhiff,  a district  and  toTm  in  Kinra-
siii.  called'ulao  Klinwaf.  609  n 5-

Sliifi.  Sharkb  Z^tmn-d-Din^  one  cf  the
poets  of  ._e  time  cf  Babar  and
HomiTunj  609  and  « 5.

Kbafl.  Zainn-d-Dm,  a famous  saint,
6i.'9  a 5.

KhaibarTa,  the,  214.

^hairibatl,  a town  bailt  by  Snljan
Ibrahim  Ghaznawl.  52.

Khaira-d-Dig  KKin^  Malik,  one  of
tne  Amlra  of  Khizr  Khan  and  Mu-
barak ^ah.  of  the  Saij-jid  dynast/.
380,  390.

Khaira-d'Din  Tuhfa,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Mubarak  ^ah,  of  the
Saiyyid  dynast/j  3S6.

Khai^oran,  a cemetery  at  Baghdad.
59  n 1.

Ehaj&nd^  a town  in  Khurasan.  38
n 4.

^Khakl,  author  of  a JU^unfa^a^a-t-

TatrJntt,  11  » 1.

J^nllfa,  Amcr,  prime  minister  of
Baber,  451.

Khallfabs,  the  Four  rxghtlj-guided,
3 and  ZL  6,  128.  151  n 3,  156  and
« 2,  626  n I

Khallfaha  of  Bagdad,  the,  17.

Khalil.  Shaikh,  of  the  descendants  of
Shaikh  Farid  Gaaj-i-Shakkar.  con-
temporary of  Sher  460,  482.

Kh^iskol,  town  of,  355  n/i  1 and  3.

Khalis  Kotali,  town,  355  n 1.

Khali,  ocymok^y  of  the  name,  230
and  n 4.

Khali,  son  of  Yifis.  sou  oi  Kub
(Noah),  231.

, Khnmart^sh.  commander-in-chief
I Khwamzm  at  the  time  of  Salt^
^lahmcd  Ghamawi.

; Khambit  (Cami^y),  454  « 6.  See

j KhnnibhaE.

j Khamhhaj  the  pool  of  Mahadeva,  266
' n 4,  454  n 6.

I Khambhat,  a port  of  Gujerat,  2s6  it
1 4,  454  a 6.

j KRumjfl  of  Amir  Khnsra.  a wsilection
I of  Sts  of  his  works,  269  and  * 5.

I KkftTnMt  of  Shaikh  Nizami,  269  a 5,
298  a A

Kbamiish.  Malik,  a name  of  Malik
Asadn-d-Din  ibn  Naybrash  Khin,
nucleus  arm  of  Sultan  *Aliii-d~Dm
Khilp.  283.

title  of  the  suhcrdinate  pHucea
of  the  Chaghatai  and  other  Chin*
gizi  lines,  145  n 2.

Slyhiazmdj  a slare  bom  in  the  house,
334  n 1.

j^andhar,  fortrefis  of,  445.

Khandi  Bai,  brother  of  Ral  Fithora,
the  ruler  of  A jmir,  G9,  70.

Khan-i-^Alam.  gOTemorof  Miwat, —
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sahait  Sikan*
dar  Lodi,  419  and  n 2.

Khiii-i-A*2nm.  title  of  Saijyid  Khan,
son  of  Saiyyid  Salim— one  of  the
Amirs  of  Mubarak  Shib  cf  the
t Saiyyid  dynas^,  396.

1 Khin-i-Buzorg.  Qaan-i-MuIk,  Sultan
[ 3Inhammad,  son  of  Suitin  ^iyi-
su-d-Din  Balban.  217.

■Khan-i-Ghiai.  Sultan  Mu^mmad,  son
of  So^m  Ghiyasn-d-Dm  Halharij
191.

Khai|.  tribe.  See  under  Kldlj,
Khallikan.  See  nndgr  Xbn  Khaltika^,

Khan-i-Jahan.  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Saltan  Bxihl^  Lodi,  4106,  407.

IndeJt^

Isxis

R3iin-i-Jalsiii,  Husain  ibn>i-

^ian-i-JalM,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Siiil;^  BuMii  Lodi,  4073  "^^3  416-
Called  X3iin-i-Jahin  Lodu

Khan-i- Jabin  Juna  or  Jdnan  Shahv
BOH  of  Malik  Qabiil  or  Maqbul, —
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Snlfaa  Firoz
Tn^laq,  333,  3^  and  » 5,
S37  and  a 7.

Khan-i-Jahaii  Lodi,  — one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultin  Enhlol  Lodi,  407»
411,  416.

Khan-j-Jahin  Lodi, — one  of  the
Amirs  of  Snltan  Ibrihlm,  son  of
Sni^n  Sikandar  Lodi,  435.

Kban-i-Jafain  I^liani,  Goremor  of
Bapid, — one  of  the  Amirs  of  Saltin'
Sikandar  Lo£,  430  ancT  n 7.

Kh5n-i-JaJhin«  Malik  Firua  All,  the
Wazir,  son  of  Malik  Tija-d-Hin, —
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Saltan  f^roc
Shah.  342  and  n 2.

Khin«i«Jahin-  Malik  Qobai  or  Maq>
bul,  the  Yaalr,— cme  of  the  Amirs
of  So^  Fm*  ^ih,  824,  32S,  333,
337  n 7.

Khin-i-J^iin.  Ma.]ik  Barwmni'l-Malk,
— one  of  the  Amirs  ^ the  Seijjid
dynasty,  395.  See  under  Sarwa-

m-l-Muik.

Khin-i-JahaB.  M»lik  Shihik  Barfaek,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sol^n  £m-
qubid  Balbanl,  221.

Mliin-i-Jahin.  the  Tazir,  336.  See
nnder  Khin-i-Jahin  J uni  Shah.

Khau-iAahan.  the  Yazir,  333.  See
Khaa-i-Jahan  Malik  QobdI.

sihviii-i-JahaB.  the  Wazir,— one  of  the
Amirs  of  So^an  Firoa  34S

n 3.

I Khind-lB^aiisaa  Bairem  Xhan,  one  of
I the  great  Amirs  Knmayun,  447-
I See  nnder  Baiiim  Khan.

I SThan-i-Khinanj  son  of  Daulat  Khan
1 Lodi,  436  and  n 9,  436,  437
; Khan-i-Khinaa-i-Diiiil,  one  of  the
• Amirs  of  Snliln  Sikandar  Lodi,

' 411  a 7.

. KhSs  d-Khanan  Tarmali,  one  of  the
I Amirs  of  Snlian  Sikandar  Lodi,
j 411  and  n 1,  412  n 2,  414,  418-
j Khin-i-Khnnan  Farmah,  one  of  the
j Amirs  of  Saltan  Ibrahim,  son  of
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  434.

Khin-i-Kh^in  HusAma-d-DIa  Bara-
war,  brother  of  Khnsru  Kh^  Bari-
warbacha,  290,  2£e,  296.

^han-i-Khanin.  son  of  Sultan  Jalala-
d-Din  231,  232.  233.

IThin-i-Kh^an  Ldhsni,  one  of  the
Amirs  oi  Sahin  Sikandar  Lodi,
419.

ybin-i-Khinin.  Malik  Bohlul  Lodi^
mfterwarda  Saltan  Bnhlul,  402.

Khin-i’Khipsa  Mnn^im  Khan,  one  of
the  great  Amirs  of  Hnmajuii.  562.

Khan-i-Khanan  Sarwini,  Goremor  of.
the  fort  of  Banthanl^,  475.

Khan-i-Sbahid.  Sult^  Mu^mzimd
ibn  Sultin  GhiTasa-d-Din  Balban,
187,  188  and  n 2,  199  a 3,  206  » 2,
219,  220  and  n Z.

Khin-i-Zamln  *Ali  Quli  ^aibanl,  son
of  Haidar  Salt>a  Qsbak-i-Sh aibani,
cme  of  the  Amira  (A  Hamaydn,
odZ  and  n 9.  See  under  *AIi  QulI
Khan.

A township  in  the  Doab,

4*j7  a 1.

a Chinese  Kmperoi,  353  u 1.

Indent,

irxX

gianwah,  a township  in  the  Ticinity
of  Baiana,  549.

ghanzada  race,  the  rulers  of  Miwat,
306  n,  398,  447.

ghiiqan,  title  of  the  supreme  sore-
reign  of  the  Moguls,  145  n 2,  232
and  n 5.

KTianan  Manuehihr,  ghirwan  ghah,  i
patron  of  the  poet  Kiaqani,  583
n 4.

ghiqani,  the  famous  Persian  poet,
137,  339  71  4,  583  and  n 4,  584  n.
g^aqani  ghirwani,  yakim,  339  7»  4.
Bee  the  above.

IQtara,  brackish  water,  345  n 2.
^arihabad,  City  of  Ruin,  893.

^aras,  Manlana  Hasan  ‘Ali,  one  of
the  poets  of  the  time  of  Humayun,
687.

jg^arazat.  shell  for  polishing,  620  n 1.
jgy'iil,  blackish  water,  345  n 2.
gh.T-i-'.tqnib,  a name  of  the  planet  ]
Mars,  195  n 1.  |

gharijis,  a sect  of  Muhammadan  1
heretics,  157  and  n 2.  j

Khdr-i-iluahailan,  a thorny  tree,  624  j
7!  1.

Kharisur,  cotintry  of,  468  ti  2.

Kharku,  the  c?  i' f of  Kaith.ar  at  the
time  of  Salvia  P 102  ghah  Tnghlaq,
33;  ; : 5 al-d  7

' ' , -..he'--  or  Samarqar.J,

a 11  iBraM  qr,,-,  411  71  1.

jfA.-  tr.tui-s.  111  ii  1.

Ift  oi-.-M/iii,  (.'hiff  i.f  Chavalry,  4.39.

1£._  : 1-.  <1  r,  I,  .o-.r  the  tonu-

yh  p 01  Kira  I^h.’t.i'.’jiitr.

Kjpi!  1 .See  uriio!  Kj  iia
lihaiaiii  mu.-.k,  426.

TThathni.  the  conntry  of  ghita
(Cathay),  143  71  4,  147  n 1.

^latib,  A1-, — the  Historian  of  Bagh-
dad, 17  71  2.

Khatlbpur,  town  of,  3S9  71  3.

Khatirn-d-Din,  Khwfija-i-Jahan,  one

■ of  the  AmTrs  of  Sultin  Kaiqab.id
Balbani,  220,  222.

Khatra,  conntry  of,  408  71  4.

ghatri  family,  the, — prot^^B  of  the
Mnbarak  Shiihi  family,  393  and  71  3,
397.

Khatt.  meanings  of  the  word,  615  ti  5.

ghatt-i  Babari  (the  Babari  script),
invented  by  Emperor  Babar,  460.

Khatto.  a village  near  Nagor,  367
71  3,

Khanlah.  wife  of  ‘Abdu-llah  ibnn-z-
Znbair,  the  ^halifah  of  al-Hijaz,
287  71  2.

ghawaf,  a district  and  town  in  Khn-
rasan,  609  7.  o.

ghaiiafi,  Zuiiia-d-Din.  See  nnder
Khafi.

ghawarij,  the, — a sect  of  Muhamma-
dan heretics,  157  n 2.

Khan-ariuu-l-' Ad nt.  meaning  of  the
expression,  424  n 9.

Khawiispur,  a dependency  of  Rohtas,
466,  468,  512.

Khawas?  Khi-n,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Snlriin  Sikuitd.-ir  Loiii,  418,  419.

Khan.iSy  Kh'-o,  servant  of  ^er  Shah
of  the  Af^an  Sur  dynasty,  457,
468,  47-t.  4r6.  487,  488,  489,  492,
493,  494,  49.',  .-,12,  52.3,  537.

Khawind  N’uijMibandi,  Khwiija.  con-
temporary of  ihihar,  416.

Kh'i-iitnK'l-FHU'h,  known  also  as  the
Ti' ! Ai  li,  2.32  anti  n 3,  266,

Index.

Ixxxi

Khili,  the  bete!  in  the  form  it  is  offer  j
ed  for  sale,  30:H  n . i

Ki,  il  j.  the. — a Turkish  tribe  of  &ur,  I
SI  n 2,  S6,  88  « 1,  191,  230  « 1,  ;
231.  I

IQiiiji,  son  of  Siiltan  Mu'izza-d-Dia  j
Muhflnic'.ad  8am  ^iuri,  €9.

Khiiji,  R«o,  Governor  of  the  fort  of
Bhat  at  the  time  of  TlmTir’a  inva-  ,
sion,  355  ti  4 ;

Khilji  Sallans,  chOj  475.  !

the.  See  under  the  tribe  of
Khilj.  ^

Khni-j  bnd,  or  the  wldtc  idol,  one  of  ;
two  enormous  images  in  Bamian,
40  ?t  1.

Kh  irttd  Samn,  one  of  the  works  of
Mrinlunfi  jr.mT,  272  n 1.

Kh'n‘1,  a O -wf  r,  173  and  a 3,

Khita  (Cfiti  ay;,  country  of,  125,  143
and  n 4,  170,  172  n 2,  232  n 5,
Khitlb,  th«''  Afghan,  Malik,— one  of
tue  Am':-  of  Sultin  Firoz  5hih
'L  I C.5.

Kh’r’iii  < f Turkiecln.  71  ai  <1  k 7.

Knt/r  oi-ht.  2.  207,  2^2,

3V-  -ilJ  n 't  .^73  It.  4n5  aii<i  n 1«

Khi  ’ r -iin  nf  Suhtm  ’au-d-I'Ti;

V ' ' 25S  I:/.;  0*  d :

.0.  r\ — ni'i  v>f  the  S''-.;  -id  t-yori^.T
i'lhi;.  od-jj  343,  C'5j.  ScS

303.  304,  3t'o  .lorl  . 4.

•4' '1,4*'''

K 0 1 Kh' i 'Jio  cf

— o;-..,  ‘ji  t..'  Alti'l-  ('f

3fasnad-i'‘Ali  ^Ran,  of  the

Saiyyid  dynasty,  378.

Khizr  ITh an,  son  of  Muhammad  Khin
Gauria,  Governor  of  Kor,  assumee
the  title  of  Saltan  Muljammad
Bahadnr,  556.

Khi?r  Khan  Snrnk,  one  of  the  com*
manders  of  ^ir  Shrth,  474.

Khizr  Khwnj  t Khan,  one  of  the  Amira
of  Huinaviiii.  591.

Khi/rahiid,  a name  of  Chitor,  258.

Khucares,  the,  129  n 1,  See  the
Khiik  liars

Khondi,  Siiah  T^hir.  one  of  the  poets
of  the  time  --f  lliiinayuu,  626  n 6.
See  under  Siiali  I'aiiir.

Khoozdar,  to\Mi  of,  48  n 4.  See
under  Kusdar.

j Khor.  otherwise  known  m ghama-
I ibad,  384  and.  n 4.
j Khorasan.  See  under  Khurasan.

; Khndadad,  name  of  an  elephant  of
' Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  25  and
‘ n 3.

Khiidadld,  btotlier  of  Jalal  Khan
oi-e  of  the  Afgh^^  Amirs
of  Ifliem  ^ati,  490.

KLnda\vand.i-i*Juh5u,  title  of  Shah
mctiitr  i:ukur.-'I-Dia
i'd,'/  ihah,  S‘-».  ■ > d''i  ' -’'UM.*

£u-'i-Dlu  lyul-tii.  1

Kuurriwaiidivhla  ( o a or.©

vf  tho  An.  : - of  Muhammad

Tughlaq  314.

Ki.uki.ai  Kai.  Chiofof  Kaithar,  con-
te::.L>-'mry  of  S/.  tar.  1 ir-'iz  Shah
i ’.-hiKJ.  33->  ur':  t. .

Kh.ihhais,  tiitr — IX  ir:oe  of  ti>s
Ijni.’us.  67  ir  I n 3,  72.  Mo  121,
i2'j  and  n 1 , o.>ij

i

Ixxxii

Inder.

Khalflfs-e-HosInf^m.  the  rightly-auided
KhnUfoh^,  3 r.rid  n 6.

KfiTil  (^anw,  one  of  the  dependenoea
of  Lakhnnnii,  416.

si^ification  of  the  word,  176

n 1 .

Khurnoi,  meaning  of.  155  w 3.

I^ui.za,  BihTj  Malika-i-Jahin,  ''hief
■wife  of  Snir't’.  Husain  Sharqi  of
Jap-np^r,.  4C‘y  a-  d n 2
Khriran,  ^ai^.  one  of  the  Hindug-
tr.iii  Amirs  of  liabar,  444,  445.
Kbnrisan,  12  n 1,  33  n 1,  14  n 1,  15,
16  and  ti  2,  27  n 1,  29  and  -n  6,  32
71  1.  34  n 2,  35  »7re  1 a;  d 2,  42  n 1,
45  n 2,  49,  51,  52  h 1,  55  n 3,  59  n 1.
6:!,  64,  65  n 2.  ^32,  167  n 3,  250.
272  nl,  305,  310,  320,  321,  353.
443,  449,  569,  588.  609  n 5,  632.
Khrirrara,  >laHk,  the  TakTldar, — one
of  the  Amirs  of  SahSu  Jalaln-d-Din
242.

Khnrram.  M.ilik,  ^ihlru-l'Juytith.
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Siiitin  Muhaci-
mad  Toj^Uq  302.

Khpsha.'ijax,  Malik,  390  » 3.  See
Malik  Khasbkhabr,

^pshkhabr,  Malik,  the  filare  of
Malik  Sikandar,  the  Governor  of
Labor  under  the  Saiyyids,  399  and

« a.

Khnsran  ^ari,  Snlt^  Mti‘irru-d-Dm
Muhammad  Sam  Ghuri.  75.
ghnsrau  Malik,  son  of  Kbasran  Shah,
the  last  of  ihe  Ghu^rneride  djn.ssty,
14,  02  and  a 3,  63  and  » and  n 1,
64  n 1,  66,  67.

Khusran  Shah,  son  of  Bahram  ^ah,
Gbaznawi,  Gl,  62  and  n»Z  and  4,
63  » li  <>4  f ad  » 1 , 67.

ghnsru,  an  ancietit  king  ol  Persia,

136,  216.

Khasf'i.  Amir,— one  'yt  tbe  Amirs  of
B5bar,  437-

Kha^ra.  AmTr — or,

Khasrii.  MTr,  t]>e  famoas  poet  of  Dih'
11,  96  and  f.  2.  134  and  n 4.  137,
lSf7  and  n 2,  1S8  n 5,  196  and  7i  1,

. 197  « i,  205  r.  2.  216.  221.  222,  223,

i 232,  24.5.  247  n.  251.  252  and  n 3.

i 264  26*3,  267  n 1.  269  and

* n 5.  27U  and  n?i  1 ar^d  6.  271  ai  d
n 4,  273  3 at  d 4,  274  1.  275

and  n 1.  29S,  3«jl,  33t^.  34.s  455,
610  n 4,  61 1 «.

Khu?ru  DetilaTi,  Mir,  the  poet.  See
the  abore.

Khnsru  Khan,  Hasau  BarStrar  hac^ia.
the  favcriteof  Snitfin  Qntba-d-Dm
Khllil,  274,  2S3,  28  4 2S5,  2S6,  i;87,
2SS,  2S9.  290,  291,  292,  293,  2*4,
295.  269,  297.

Khnsru  Khin,  son  of  Snhan  Ghiya-^u-
d-Dln  B.tU>an.  2 1 9,  225  and  n 2,
See  nndor  Kaikhnsru.

Khosruih'id,  town  of,  SS9.

‘ Khngru-i-Sltadrip,  Prince  of  Pnefa,
title  of  Mir  Khnsru  the  fninof>e
pool  of  Ilihli,  269

Kkv-^rH-o-Si^'rln  of  Shaikh  XiTimi.

' the  jv>ec,  being  one  of  his  jKAaw.^ah
29s  « 4.

■ an  eclipse  of  t'he  moon,  163

j » 1.

I ^hulh'ih,  public  prayer  in  the  name
of  tbe  ereign,  3 n 3,  15  nad  * 3,
j 83  and  n 3.

I f^hut  (»ur  iiiWii,  ;;  3. 390  and  « 5.

I Khuti a.  liihi,  chief  wife  of  Stillan
Husain  Hhargl,  of  Jaiuipur,  4 9»2.

Itiilex.

^nka'n,  a tribe  of  tho  Ai^bs,  28  n 1.

^iizdir,  the  capital  of  Jlirilawiin  in
Biluchistan,  4B  n 4.

^hwaja  Amir,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Bibar,  446.

Khwtiia  Bavazid,  eldest  son  of  Sultan
Buhlul  Lodi,  401  n 4,  410  n 1,  414.

Khwija  Ghivas  Vazlr,  Salman  Siwa-
ji’s  Qafidah  in  his  honour,  605.

Khwaja  Hiji,  one  of  the  Generals  of
Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Silji,  265  n 6.

Khwija-i-Jahan,  Malik  Abmad  Aiyaz,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Saltan  Mu-
hammad Tughlaq  Shah,  304,  309,
313,  315,  323  and  tt  S,  328.

ghwajn-i-Jahin,  Malik  Khatim-d-
Hin,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Suhan
Mu'izzu-d-Din  Kaiqnbad  of  the
Balbani  dynasty,  220,  222.

Khwija-i-Jahin,  Snltinn-sh-Sharq.
one  of  the  Maliks  of  tho  6'ughl.iq
Shahi  dynasty,  348  and  n 9,  359.

Khizr,  a ford  on  the  river
Jumna,  220.

Khwija  Kfeitr,  See  nader
the  Prophet.

Kfewaja  Ma'amam,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Humayun,  568.

j^waja  fiashid  Fazir,  Mir  Stiiyyid
Zu-l-fiqar  §liirwini's  Qafidah  in
his  honour,  605.

Khwandgar,  title  of  the  Snltin  of
Rum,  480.

Khwandi,  ^ah  Tahir,  one  of  tho
poets  of  the  time  of  Homayuii,  624
and  n 6,  See  nnder  ^ah  Tahir.

Khwandi  family,  the,  624.

^warazin,  a country  on  both  banks
of  the  Oxus,  23  and  n 1,  27  1

and  2,  29,  71,  90,  133  n 2.

J.Xxxiit

Khwartzm.  Sea  of, — the  Lake  Aral,
153  n 1.

Khwarazmiaus,  the,  71,  90.

Khwarasm  §hah,  ‘Abbas  ibn  Mamun,
ruler  of  Khwarazm  at  the  time  of
Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  23.

Khwarazm  §hSh  Altnn  Tash,  an  oflScer
of  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin  whom
he  appoints  governor  of  Khwarazm.
23.

Khwarazm  Shihi  dynasty,  the  23  n 1,
91  n 1.

Khvribad,  or  KhnirabSd.  in  tho  Pro^
vince  of  Multan,  389  n 4,  402,
546.

Kibir,  an  enigma  on  this  name,  615
and  n 5.

Kicha,  fort  of,  in  the  vicinity  of
Dihli,  364.  See  tho  next.

Kicha,  a ford  on  the  banks  of  the
Jnmna,  396,  4' >6  and  » 6.  See  the
above.

Kikar,  the  Acacia  Arabica,  335  n lO,
550  » 1.

Kilan  Rai,  the  Bsji  of  Putiali^  con.
temporary  of  Sultan  Sikundar  Lodi,
413  » 8.

Kill,  town  of,  250  n»  4 and  5,  311
and  n S.

Kilughari  or  Kilukhari,  a suburb  of
Dehli,  98  and  n 3.

Kilughari,  Palace  of,  on  the  banks  of
tho  Jumna,  called  also  the  Mu'izzi
palace,  220,  227,  228,  229,  231.

Kilukhari.  See  under  Kilughari.

Kimiyd,  Alchemy,  244  and  n 6.

Kings  of  Ghazni,  the,  16  n 2.

Kings  of  Lahore,  of  the  Ghaznivide
Dynasty,  13  » 1.

Kinja,  a huge  elepliant,  364  n 1.

Ixxxiv

Index.

Kintntfth,  fort  of,  one  of  the  depend*
enciea  of  Ma’ot,  437  7.

Kinu,  411  n 9.  See  under  Shaikh
Sama‘u-(1-Dm  Kaubu.

Xiran,  Hai,  raier  of  Bhuuganw,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Buhlul  Lodi,
403  and  n 5,  404  n 2.

Kiri,  fortresa  of.  44  and  n 8.

iCirman,  proviiice  of,  73  and  n 8,  91.

Kisa’Ij  A1-, — the  celebrated  Gramma-
rian and  Reader  cf  the  Qarin,
30  n 1.

Kianan,  son  of  Sasndev, — worshipped
by  the  Hindus  as  a livinicy,  24,
28.

Ki^an  Eai,  the  Raja  of  Patlall.  con»
temporary  of  Suljan  Sikandar  Lodi,
413  n 3.

Kishll  Khan,  title  of  M.dik  Chhaju,
brother’s  son  to  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-
Bin  Balbar.,  227,  229,  z30,  231.
See  also  under  Cldiaju.

Kish’.u  Shan,  title  of  Bahrim  Iba
(q.  V.},  the  adopted  brotiier  of  j
Sultan  Ghijasu-d-Din  Tnghlaq  Sbab,  j
297,  323  rr  3

Ki^vrar  Khan,  oon  cf  Ki^^u  Khan
Bahrarn.  rr.ic  .-f  I'-e  servants  uie
Court  of  S ‘.hail  I iioi  ^ah
laq,  3-2  5 tc  3.

Ki-ra,  rhf':r--es  ‘•itlr  of  tho  Klnj^r
of  Persia,  14"  and  n 2.

Kiati,  for.!  of  ''IS  auvi  r.  3.

JSifdhu-L-AIi!  •'  .i-7i-y ihiil.  Caret  i.  s
22  ?i  3.

Kittah  ^ of  tiie  Aiohs  oi

Babar,  4-  -

Kizil  .n  '■  a lid  • . ono  • .
the  Atab::’^:  of  158

ft  3.

Knight  of  the  Seven  Piacea,  the  seven
labours  of  Isfandiyar,  103  and  n 2.
Koela,  called  also  Kola,  country  of,
231.

' Koh,  rown  of,  261.
i

j Koh'i-Jehoud, — or
I Koh-i-Jud,  the  mountainous  region
^ between  GSiazua  and  Lahore.  15

I —

I and  7i  i,  128  n 3«  See  also  under
j the  Jud  hills.

I Koh-i-Qif,  a fabulous  mountain
round  the  -world,  483,
Kolipsya-i-Saubuz,  the  Kumaon  hills,

186  71  1.

Koka,  the  Rani  of  Mai  wa,  contem-
porary of  Saltan  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Khiljl,
264  and  n 4.

Koka,  the  Raja  of  Malwa,  contem-
porary of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Khiljl,
264  n 4.

Kol,  fort  of,  in  the  province  of  -^gra,
70  and  n 4,  98,  231,  363,  379.

Kol,  parganc  of,  better  known  as
IJawas  (q.  v.),  431  a 4,

Kola,  called  also  Koela,  country  of,
231.

Koor.'dia,  or  Kanhaiya  (q.r.),  minia-
ter  of  R'i  Maldeo,  478  7.  7.

Koorban  festival,  the,  488  n 6.  See
under  ‘Idu-l-Qurban.

Kor,  country  of,  556.

Kora,  town  in.  Fathpur  dii^trict,  N.-W.
P,  called  also  Kura  Khatampur
{9  r » 486  n 6.

Koram.  i r che  cnnntiv  r.f  Knhram

(9.  i.i.  1.

Koran.  So*'  rj'^.der  ti  i Qur’an.

Koran.  Sale’s.  499  71
Koth  -a.  a It.  .dt?  of  sulntation,  0<>1
and  i*  7.

Inder.

Ixxxv

Ko8,  a measure  of  length,  132  n 3.  j

Kota,  town  of,  387  and  n 1.  Called  j
also  MalTkota.  j

Kotila  of  Miwafc,  344  and  n 7,  345,  j
347,  352,  381,  384  n 1,  Called  also  \

I

Kotla  and  Kutila  (q  v.),  |

Kot  Karor,  fort  of,  133  n 2.  !

Kotla,  Tillage  of,  352.  See  also  Ko-
tila  of  Miwafc.

Kotla,  a Hindi  word  meaning  'a  small
fortress,*  344  n 7.

Kotwal  of  Dihli,  Malika-l-Umari
Fakhrg-d-Din.  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sulfaii  MQ*izzu-d*Din  Qaiqubdd  of
the  Balbani  dynasty,  220  nn  2 and
3,  227,  229,  238,  260  n 2.

Kowah,  the  329  n 2.  Same  as  the  I
Gumti,  which  is  also  called  the
Godi  (g.v.)

Kri^na,  the  god  of  the  Hindus,  24  n
6,  478  ft  7.

Krohj  from  the  Sanskrit  krosh,  a
measure  of  length,  69  n 5,  133
n 3.

Kfosa,  an  ancient  measure  of  length,  j
132  ft  3.

Krofh,  69  ft  5.  See  under  Kroh,

Kach,  proTince  of,  91.

Kudahna,  for  the  town  of  Ludhiina,
382  ft  2.

Kufah,  in  Arabian  ‘Iraq,  12  n 1,  207

ft  6.

Kufr,  infidelity,  576  n 5,  577  ft-

Kuhanbayat,  a well-known  port  of
Gnjrat,  256  and  ft  4.  See  under
Cambay.

Euhl^  need  as  a collyrium,  153  and
n 8.

Kuhrim,  a country  of  Hindustan,  70,

80,  131,  395.

Kaka,  a Zaminddr  of  Miwit,  contem-
porary of  Saltan  Firoz  337

and  ft  3.  See  the  next.

Kuka  Chuhan, — or.

Kukile  Chauhan,  a Zaminddy'  of  Miwat,
337  and  n 3.  See  under  Kuka.

Kuki,  Haji  Muhammad  Khan,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Humayun,  578,  581,
686.

Km  Kit,  the  song  of  the  dove,  144  and
ft  X.

Knl  Chand,  goTernor  of  the  fortress
of  Mahawun,  24  ft  5.  See  Ksl
Chandar.

Kul  Chander  Khakhar,  one  of  the
serrants  of  Snlfan  Muhammad
Tughiflq  ^flh,  309.

Kuliodrine  of  Ptolemy,  same  as  Jalan-
dhar, the  original  capital  of  the
Rajput  kingdom  of  Katoch,  383
n 4.

Kullah,  a hat  worn  by  men,  120  and
n7.

K'liliydt  of  Shaikh  Sa‘di  of  Shiraz,
187  n 2.

Kumiloii  hills,  the,  186  ft  1,  335,  379,
385.  489,  490,  495.

Kunch,  one  of  the  tribes  between  Ti-
bet and  Lakhnauti,  83  n 4.  Sin.

Kun  fakdna,  meaning  in  the  technical
language  of  Sufi  philosophy,  105
n 1.

Kuntn,  town  of,  81  ft  4.  See  Kunti-
lah.

Kaniilah,  town  of,  the  Kuntil  of  the
Indian  Atlas,  81  n 4.

Kunwar  Rsi, — or

Kurah.  the  ruler  of  Qanaui  at  the
time  of  Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaz-
nhi’s  invasion,  23  and  n 4.

IxTXVi

Index.

Kura  ^atampur,  township  of,  480
and  n 6,  489.  See  under  Kora.

Kurkin,  or  Gnrgin,  a title  applied  to
a prince  who  is  allied  by  marriage
with  some  mighty  monarch,  353
n 1.

Kusdar,  a town  to  the  south  of  Bust,
the  present  Khusdar,  48  n 4.

Kushk  Sahzi,  a palace  in  the  Sabnrbs
of  Dihli,  235  and'n  10.

Kfii^lc-i-fiTrT,  a palace  Outside  Dihlr,
295  n 10.

Kuaif,  an  eclipse  of  the  sun,  163
n 1.

Kutils,  town  of,  358  n 4.  See  under
Kotila  of  Miwat.

Kulam  (Cavalum),  in  the  country  of
Ma‘bar  or  Coromandel,  265  n 6.

Kuzil  Bash.  See  uoder  the  Qizil
Bash,

Lddan,  resinous  balsamic  juice,  182  |
and  « 1.

Ladar  Mahadco,  Rai,  ruler  of  Tilang,
contemporary  of  Suljan  Ghiyasu-d-
Dln  Tughlaq  Shall,  297,  299.

Ladder  Dev,  the  Rai  of  Arangal,  con-
temporary of  Siilt.ln  ‘Alau-d-Din
Khiljl,  265  n 4.

Ladhiir  MahSdev,  Rai  of  Tilang.  See
nnder  Ladar  JIahadeo.  i

Lahar, — or  j

Lahayar,  a town  in  the  vicinity  of
Gwaliar,  423  and  n 5.

Labor.  See  under  Lahore.

Lahore,  13  and  n ],  15  n 1,  26,  36
n 8,  37,  48,  54  and  nn  1 and  2,  61,
62  and  n 3,  63,  66,  67,  69,  72,  78,
79,  80,  81,  87,  88  nl,  90,  91,97,
98  n 2,  123,  130,  131,  186,  187,  188,  1
19C,  191,  199,  221,  305,  309,  332,  j

347,  349,  358  and  n 6,  359,  383.  |

3S9,  390,  391,  392.  399,  4.3.5,  436,  j

437,  442,  453,  4,56,  462,  463,  464,  j

465,  490,  491,  492,  493,  494,  530,  |

590,  592  ami  n 6,  594,  596.  Tho  1
name  is  also  written  Labor.

Lahore,  Kings  of,  13  n 1.

Lahore,  river  of, — the  Riyi,  128,  188
190,  191,  465.

Lahori,  a servant  of  the  IMughuh  the
captor  of  Mir  ghnsru,  the  fanions
poet,  1%.

Laboris,  the,  592.

LailT,  the  mistress  of  Mnjnfin,  620.

Laili-O'Mnjnnn  of  Maulana  lAhdu.r-
R.ihniin  JamT,  272  n 1.

Lailt-o.ifajniin  of  Mir  Khasru  of
Dihli,  269  n 5.

Laili-o-ilajniin  of  Shaitt  Nizami,  298
n 4,

Lak-Ba^sh,  the  lestorver  of  la^kaj
surname  of  Sultan  Qatbn-d-Din
Aibak,  77  and  n 4,  78,

Lakhmia,  Rai, — or

Lakminla,  Rai,  the  ruler  of  Nadiya,
contemporary  of  Sultan  Qntbn-d-
Din  Aibak,  82  a;  i n 5,  83  n 1.

Lakhnau,  411  n 2,  471.

Lakhnauti,  the  ancient  capital  cicy
ot  Bengal,  81  ti  2,  82  and  n 3,
83  n 4,  84  a,  86,  87,  88  n 1,  91,  94,
125  and  n 3,  132,  133,  185,  186,  216,

Index,

Ixxxvii

218,  219  and  n 3,  221  n 3,  2S2,  229,
227,  238,  239,  240,  299,  301,  308,
309,  324,  327,  328,  341,  349,  416.
Lskshman  Sen,  son  of  Ballal  Sen,
Sing  of  Bengal,  82  n 4.
Lakshmanawati,  original  name  of
Lakhnanti  (g.  u.),  82  n 3.
LnUmaiiiys,  Rai,  the  ruler  of  Nadiya,
83  n 1.  See  under  Lakminia.
Lamai,  Mahmud  bin  Asman,  anthor
of  a Turkish  romance  on  the  loves
of  Wamiq  and  ‘Azra,  40  « 1.
Lami^an,  a town  in  the  mountains
of  Ghaznah.  IS  n 2.

Lamghanat.  the  general  name  of  a
golleotion  of  places  in  the  monn-
talns  of  Ghaznah.  15  and  n 2.

La'n,  cnrsing,  an  element  of  faith
with  the  Shi'ah,  636.

Lane’s  Arabian  Kights,  148  n 1.

Lane’s  Lexicon  of  the  Arabic  Language,

2 n 1,  7 n 1,  8 n 4,  10  n 1,  142  n 8,
146  n 1,  147  n 3,  151  n 6,  162  n 4,
163nl,  176nl.  190  n 5,  194  n 6,
195  n 4,  198  n 2,  278  n 4,  371  n 6,

872  n 2,  412  n 1,  424  n 9,  426  n 9,

429  n 1,  441  n 2,  457  n 7,  616  n 2,  |

627  » 3,  548  n 14,  614  n 2,  622  n 4,  |

630  n 6.

Lane’s  Modem  Egyptians,  177  n 4,
192  n 3,  503  n 2.

Langahs,  the  tribe  of,  in  Multan,  398.
Langana,  a town  at  the  junction  of
the  Chinab  and  Ravi,  355  n 1.

Laqwa  or  facial  paralysis,  notes  on,
226  n 5.

Lar,  the  country  of,  on  the  coast  of
Guzerat,  17  n 4.

Laras,  Gre.at — , town  of,  326  n,  327
n 1.

Laras,  Little — , town  of,  326  n,  327
n 1.

Lari  Bandar,  an  ancient  port  of  Sind,
67  n 1.

LSrjal,  mountains  of, — the  mountains
of  Sirinor,  307  n 4.

Lat,  idol  worshipped  by  the  Arabs,
12  n 1,  110  n 3.

Laidtf-i  Qhivdti  of  Imam  Fa^ru-d-
Din  Razi,  73  and  n 1.

Lazarus,  brother  of  Martha  and  Mary,
198  n 2.

Le  Strange’s  translation  of  Ibn  Sera-
pion,  571  71  2.

Letkif  El-Qhtydthiyeh,  73  ti  1,  See
under  Latdif-i-Shiyafi.

Leyden,  Dr.,  translator  of  the  com*
mentaries  of  Babar,  421  7i  8.

Libra,  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  notes  on,  75
7»  2,  76  7»,  1 42  7»  2.

Library  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of
Bengal,  611  n 2,  609  n 3.

Life  of  jChwaja  ‘Alt  Shatrann.  Auha*
di’s,  1 14  n 2.

Life  of  Mahomet,  Muir’s,  97  n 4,  105
71  2,  149  71,  216  71.

Ligh,  a Turk!  termination,  669  n 6.
Lily,  notes  on  the,  100  7»  6,  101  n 1.
Linnaeus,  109  n 4.

Lion  Dynasty  of  Orissa,  called  the
Gajpati  or  Lords  of  Elephants,  125
n 3.

Liq,  ligh,  liiq  or  high,  a Tnrki  termi-
nation, 569  71  5.

Lisann-l-Mulk,  anthor  of  the KasiMu-
t-Tawdri]A,  154  7i  8,

Little  Laras,  town  of,  326  7»,  327  n 1.
Lizard,  story  of  a,  110  7i  3.

Lobdb,  the, — a geographical  work,  30
7».  See  also  under  al-Lubdb,

Ixxxviii

Index.

Loch  Awe,  301  n 3.

Lodi,  Shei^  Hamid,  first  ruler  of
Multan,  19  n 6.

Lodi  family  of  Afghans  in  Dihli,  402,
411,  430,  443,  470.

Lodi  party  in  Hindustan,  the,  407,
409,  412  n 2.  See  the  above.

Logos,  the,  374  n 5.

Lohar  Kot, — or

Lohkot,  name  of  a fortress  in  Kash-
mir, 22  and  n 7,  26.

Lohri,  township  of,  near  to  Bakfcar,
now  called  Rohri,  559  and  n 6,
560.

Lomaaa,  a Sanskrit  name  of  the  Indian
Spikenard  or  nard,  374  n.

Lonn,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Khizr  ^an,  first  of  the  Saiyyid
dynasty,  375.

Louni,  356  n 1.  See  under  Luni.

Love-lies-bleeding,  called  bilstdn  afrux,
629  n 1.

Lowe’s  translation  of  the  Second
Volume  of  Badaoni's  Muntakhahu-t-
Tau'dnM,  592  n 9.

Lower  Bengal,  303  n.

Luhdb,  a geographical  work,  36  n 3.
See  also  the  Lobdb.

Lubdhu-l-Albdb,  a Tazkira  by  Muham-
mad Cfi  of  Merv,  33  n 1.

I Lubbu-t-TawdiiWi  of  Yahya  ibn
I ‘Abdu-l-Latif  Qazwini  Dimishqi,
j 34,  49  and  n S,  51.  624  and  n 9.

1 Lubbu-t-Tawdrlkk-iSind^  69  n 2.
j Lud,  a village  of  Palestine,  279  n.

I Ludhiana,  town  of,,  380  n 2,  382  and
I nn  2 and  3.

j Ludhiana  District  ot  the  Panjab,
i 590  n 5.

j

i Lndhi.ana  river,  the,  383.
j Ludiana.  See  under  Ludhiana,
j Lugh,  a TurkI  termination,  569  n 5.
j Luliani  Afghans,  the,  413  and  nn  3 and
I 12,  444,  470  and  n 2,  537  and  n 5,

I Luhrasp,  an  ancient  King  of  Persia,
j 35  n 2.

Lnhri,  a township  near  Bakkar,  now
called  Rohri,  559  n 6.

Lu’T,  one  of  the  fords  of  the  Ravi,
383  n 10.

Luni,  a town  near  Dihli,  on  a Doab
between  the  Jamna  and  the  Halin,
356  and  n 1.

£«q,  a Tnrki  termination,  569  n 5.
Lurak,  the  hero  of  a MatnavA  in
I Hindi,  lover  of  Chanda,  333.  See
i under  Chandaban.
j Lyali’s  Introduction  to  Ancient
Arabian  Foetry,  99  m 6.

I Lyre,  the  constellation,  630  » 1.

M-

Ma'add  ibn  ‘Adnan,  ancestor  of  the
Arabs  of  the  Hijaz,  12  n 1.

Ma'drtk,  battle-fields,  622  and

n 6.

Ma’arri,  Ahn-l-‘Ala*  Al-  — , a famous
Arab  poet,  183  n I,

Ma'bar,  country  of,  (Coromandel),
261  n 6,  265  and  nn  5 and  6,  283,
286,  309.

Macan,  Mr.  Turner,  editor  of  the
Siidh-ndmah,  88  n 1,  103  n 2,  116
n 5,  178  n 2,  207  n 7,  435  n 2,

Tndey

Ixxxiy

Macbeth,  Shake?p6re’s,  115  >1  4.
rvlai'^hlibgarb,  to>Tnship  in  Jaunpfa*.
“tI  / ?i  4.

Maciun,  conntrv  oi,  147  and  'n  1.
iSiachTn.  son  of  Chin,  son  of  Jt.phet,
147  n 1-

M^chiwara,  an  ancient  city  on  tiie  i
banks  of  the  Satlej,  in  the  Liidhi-  |
ana  District  of  the  Panjab,  330  ^
H 2j  4IS  n 9,  590  and  n 5.  j

Hada,  one  of  the  servants  of  Islem  I

i

^ah,  of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty,  i
530,  I

^adad-%‘ma'dsh,  rent-free  land,  424  j
and  n Sj  496  and  n 1,  509  and
n 8,  520.

iladain,  the  capital  ot  the  Sassanide
dynasty  of  Persia,  near  Baghdad,  j
572  n 1.  I

hiiadan  Khin,  or  Qadr  Khan,  son  of
Salman  Mahmud  ^ilji,  of  Malwa,
399  n 1.

Madaran,  name. of  a place,  99  n 2.
MiiddriTci  the  sonrces  from  which  are
sought  the  ordinances  of  the  law,
429  and  7i  1.

Madda,  the  cross  line  over  the  Alif
'nia7nd?ihahj  634  and  n 1,

Madhugarh,  for  the  fortress  of
Bandhugarh,  417  n 7.

Madrael,  for  the  fortress  of  Mandra-
yal  (q  r ),  420  n 5.

Magadh,  an  ancient  kingdom  of
Hindustan,  82  n 1,  132  n 3.

Maghlatl,  Malik,  — one  of  the  Amirs
of  Sultan  JaMIa-d-Din  Khiiji,  233.
Maghrib,  Sea  of,  — the  Atlantic,  153
n 1.

Magians,  the,  509  n 6.

2^agic,  notes  on,  151  n 6,  459  n 2.

j Mabalian.  a fortress  on  the  banks  of
the  river  Jen,  24  ?i  3.

Mahabat  £iian,  the  'Tail  of  Badaoc,
under  the  Flriiz  Shuhi  and  Saiyyid
dvnasries.  3/5.  377.  319,  384  and

n 2.

^lahaolft  religious  !ove  or  worldly
.aiicCtioii,  576  ii  5.  577  u.

Afyncbl.dj'cra,  the,  1S5  u i,  SSO  n 2.

Mah'^.  Cnhi.  country  ci  147  7i  1.

Maha  deo, — or

Mahadeva,  the  chief  of  the  Hindi
gods,  27  a 4,  256  n 4,  293  n 5,  454.
■u  6.

Mahtikal,  name  of  the  idol  temple  of
Ujain,  95.

Maham  Anags  or,—

Maham  Anka,  one  of  the  wet-nurses
of  Akbar.  580  and  r.  5.

Mahandi.ri  river,  the  329  and  n 7.

Maharashtra  or  Marhut,  country  of
the  Mai'hattas,  265  r.  4.

Mahiwan,  a township  on  the  Jamna,
444.  See  also  the  nexr.

Mahawan,  a fortress  on  the  banks  of
the  river  Jon,  24  ai-id  n 3.  See  a’so
the  abo»’0.

Mahdawl,  Shaikh  Mubra'uk  of  Nago.’
(/£.  i’.),  516.

Mahda'vis,  the, — the  followers  of
Shrakh  'Alai  of  Baiuna  (q.  v.),
520.

Mahd  ivviyah,  the— a sect  of  MnsUm
heretics,  626  and  H 3

Mabd-i-‘iraq,  sister  of  Sultan  Sinjar,
and  wife  of  Sali7:i  ‘Alaa-d-Dhi
M.as'rul,  son  of  £uPan  Ibrahim
Ghaznawi,  55  n 4

Mahdi,  tho  prouitsoJ.  420  and  :)  8=
508,  512,  513,  514,  515  and  n 4,

12

xc

Index.

516,  517,  520,  522,  571  and  nn  1
and  2,  589.

Mahdi  ^-waja,  Saiyyid,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Babar,  440,  444,

Mahdi,  son  of  al-Man;ur,  the  ‘Abba-
side  Khalifah,  75  n.

Mahdi,  Mir  Saiyyid  Mnhammad  of
Jaunpiir,  420  and  n 8,  421.

Mahduda,  Amir,  for  Amir  Majdud,
son  of  Snltan  Mas‘ud  ibn  Mahmud
Ghaznarri,  44  n 1.

ifah-dum,  a kind  of  bird  and  a pi-
geon, 152  and  n 3.

Mabfil-shiican.  or  the  assembly  router^
a title  of  the  famous  controver-
sialist Nizamn-d-Dm  Auliya,  71
n 2.

ifayanli,  a village  in  the  GoraWipur
District  on  the  banks  of  the  Gan-
dak,  409  and  n 5.

Mahligarh,  tO'svnship  in  Jaunpur,  417
and  n 4.

Matjniond  Gasiiavl,  66  n 7.  See  nnder
Ma^imud  Ghaznawi.

Mahmud,  one  of  the  servants  of  Islem
Shah,  of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty  of
Dihli,  530.

Mahmud  ibn  -tsman  Lamoi,  author  of
a Turkish  romance  on  the  loves  of
IVamiq  and  ‘Azia,  40  to  1.

Mahmud  of  Badaon,  Saiyyid, — brother
of  Saiyyid  Muhammad,  governor
of  Badaon  nnder  Snltan  Firoz
Shah  Tughlaq,  335  to  6.

Mahmud  of  Bihar,  Sultan,  435  to  7.
See  under  Saltan  Mu^jammad  of
Bihar.

Mahmud  Ghaznatvi, — or
Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  Snltan,  son  of
Sultan  lifisiru-d-Diu  Sabuktigin,  13

and  TO  1,  16,  16  and  nn  1 and  2,
17,  18,  19,  20  and  to  4,  23  and  nn  2
and  3,  24,  25,  26,  27  and  n 4,  28
and  TO  4,  29  and  n 3,  30  and  n 2,
31  TO,  32  and  n 1,  33  and  to  2,  35,  36
TO  6,  44,  45  n 3,  50,  64  and  n 1,  66
TO  7,  72,  256,  310,  365  m 8.

Mahmud  of  Gnjrit,  Snltan,  contem-
porary of  Islem  Shah  of  the  Sur
dynasty  of  Dihli,  533,  534.

Mahmud  Hasan,  Maliqu-sh-Sharq,  one
of  the  Maliks  of  Mnbarak  ghah  of
the  Saiyyid  dynasty,  383  and  nil,
386,  387.

Mahmud  ibn  Ibrahim  Ghaznawi
Saiyyidn-a-Salatin,  54  n 3,

Mahmud  Khan,  the  son  of  ‘Adil  Khan,
son  of  Shir  Shah  Sur,  477  and  to  2,
490.

Mahmud  Khan,  son  of  Ghiyasn-d-Din
Tughlaq  Shah,  297.

Mahmud  Khan  Lodi,  one  of  the  Maliks
of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  414  to  2,
422  TO  4.

Maljmud  Khin.  gaandson  of  Snltan
Ni?ira-d-Din  of  Malwa,  424  to  6.
Mahmud,  E^han-i-Khanan.  son  of
Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  Khilji.  231,
232,  2 3 3.

Mahmud  Khilii.  Saltan  of  Malwa,  con-
temporary of  the  Lodi  dynasty  in
Dihli,  398,  399,  424  and  to  4,  425,
432,  433.

Mahmud,  father  of  Mir  Khnsru,  the
celebrated  poet  of  Dihli,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Muhammad
Tughlaq  Shah,  269  m 5.

Mahmiid  Malwi,  Sultan,  230.  See
nnder  Mahmud  Khilji,  the  Sultan
of  Malwa.

Itidex.

xci

Mahmud  ibn  Muhammad  ibn  Sam  ibn
Husain,  78.  See  GhiYaju-d-Dm
Mahmud,  son  of  Ghiyasu-d-Din
Muhammad  Sam  Ghuri.

Mahmud  Salim,  a servant  of  Sultan
‘Alau-d-DIn  Khilji.  243.

Mahmud  Shah,  136.  See  Sultan
Na^iru-d-Din  Mahmud  Shah  ibn
Shainsu-d-Din  lyal-timish.

Mahmud  Shah,  Sultan,  ibn-i-Mul.iam-
mad  Shah  ibn  Firoz  Shah,  of  the
Tughlaq  Shiihi  dynasty  of  Dihli,

3 48  , 349,  350,  351,  354,  356,  357,
358  n 6,  361,  362,  363,  364,  365
and  11  5,  366  and  n 6,  367  and  n,
368,  369,  370,  375,  376,  380.

Mabmiid  Sharqi  of  Jaunpur,  Sultan,
contemporary  of  Saltan  Buhlul
Lodi,  402,  403  and  nn  3 and  7,  420

rt  8.

Matimud,  Sultan,  son  of  Sultan  Sikan-
dar  Lodi,  the  ruler  of  Patna,  470,
471  and  n 1.

Muljmud  I,  Saltan,  420  » 8.  See
Sultan  Mahmud  Sharqi  of  Jauu-
pur.

Mahmud  Tarmati,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Mahmud  ^ah  of  the
Firoz  Shahi  dynasty,  363.

Mahmud  ibn  Tughlaq  ^ah,  for  Sultan
Muhammad  ibn  Sultau  Ghiyasii-d-
Din  Tughlaq  ^ah,  135  n.

Mahmud  Zahuli,  a name  of  Sultan
Mahmud  of  Ghaznln,  17.

Mahnah,  a email  town  between  Abi-
ward  and  Sarakbs  in  Khurasan.
43  and  n 2.

Mahoba,  district  of,  335.  j

Mahomed  Qasim.  See  under  Muljam-  I
mad  ibn  Qiaim  as-lwqafi.

Mahometans,  the,  80  n 5,  82  n 1,  139
« 2.  See  also  under  the  Muham-
madans and  the  Mnslims,

Mahtah,  a small  town  in  KhurasaB,
43  n 2.

MahnrA  or  Mathra,  a sacred  city  of
the  Hindus,  24  a 6.

Maihana,  a small  town  between  Abi-
ward  and  Sarahs  in  Kharasan,
43  n 2.

Mainpuri,  town  of,  377  n 5,  386  n 3,
414  a 13.

Mainpuri  District,  386  n 3.

Mainpuri  Chanhans,  a tribe  of  Eaj-
puta,  414  11  13.

Maisir,  AI-,  a gams  of  the  ancient
Arabs,  369  n 1.

Maithili  country,  the,  286.

Majbariatan,  province  of,  84  and
nn  6 and  7.

Majdud,  Amir,  son  of  Snltau  Mas'ud
ibn  Mahmud  ^aznawi,  44  a 1.

Majhanli,  a village  in  the  Goraytpur
District  on  the  north  bank  of  the
Gaiidak,  409  n 6.

Mujma‘u-l-Ba/paiii  of  ShaiWi  Najif,
containing  his  Maqamdt,  369  n 1.

Majma'v.-1-Fusaha,  Lives  of  the  Poets,
17  nn  1 and  3,  35  n 1,  38  n 4,  46
n 4,  53  u,  54  nn  1,  2 and  3,  66  nn  2
and  3,  73  n 1,  76  n,  78  n 2,  99  nn  2,
3 and  4,  106  n 6,  134  n 3,  135  n,
165  n 1,  187  n 2,  270  n 6,  271  » 4,
297  n,  298  n 4,  339  n 4,  341  nn  1
and  2,  571  n 9,  582  n,  584  a.

Majuun,  the  hero  of  the  romance  of
Liii!i-0-Miij  nicH,  lover  of  Laili,
620.

Makhduni  ‘Alam,  the  Governor  of
H.tjipur,  one  of  the  A-mirs  of  the

sell

Indea.

Wall’  of  B.'vn^ala,  conteaaporary  of  {
gh er  SliSh,  469,  470.  j

^lakliQum  Ganjshakar,  Sliaikh  Fari-  |
flH-d  Dill  ^Mas-’ud,  132.  See  andei'  i
Gan  j-i-shakkar.  |

Ma^diim-i-Jal;Sniyan  SaTyidu-s-Sp-  i
dat  SLaikli  Jaiala-l-Haqq  al*  i
Bukhari,  376.

Makhduma-i'Jahan,  mother  cf  Sultan
Mubarak  Shah  of  the  Saiyyid  dy-
nasty of  Dihli,  591,

Makbduma-i’Jahau.  mother  of  Sr.ltan
Moharrmad,  son  of  Ghijasn-d-Dhi
Tughlaq  ^lah,  S03.

Makhdumu-l-Malk  Mulia  ‘Abda-llah
of  Sultaripur,  Shdxkhu-l'lsldm  and
Sadru-^-Sudur  under  Islem  Shah.
506  and  n 2,  513,  614,  515.  517.  i
5ia  519,  521,  523,  525,  534  j

Makbdumzada’i-^Abbasi  of  Baghdad.  ;
apiinee  of  the  House  of  ‘Abbas,
the  Khallfabe  of  Bagj^ad,  311  acd
n 4,  322,

Maklidumzada-i'Baghdadi,  Prince  !
, (
GuiyasTi-d-Din  Muhammad,  311  j

n 4.  Same  as  the  above  (7.  v.).

Mal^zan-X’AsTdr  cf  Shaikh  Nizam;,
being  one  of  his  five  works  called
colieccirely  Khainsa-i-Kizdmt^  298
n 4,  449  and  n 2.

Ma^zanuA'Adw'tyahj  a work  on  medi-
cine, 41  n 2,  101  n 1,  109  n 4 117
n 4,  118  n,  172  n 2,  182  n 4,  452,
4S4  n 1.  535  ?i  2,  550  n 1,  5&G  n,
627  n 2,

MaHzanu’l’Asrdr  of  Nizami,  j

298  u 4.  See  under  Mafehzan-i’

A^rtlr.

Makka.  city  of,  8 and  n 4,  21  n 1,
51,  56,  110  n 4,  111  «,  133  n 2,  !

149  K,  151  n 2,  158  n 1,  176  n,
216  «,  279  ?i.  30S  n 1,  420  and  u 8.
443_  450,  4SC  and  nrt  1 and  5.  504,
507,  50S,  582,  5S3  and  yi  4.  5S5  and
nn  1 and  6.  600  n 9,  C34.  See
Mecca.

Makrfai,  provin  -e  of  91.

Makula.  See  under  Ibn  Makiila.

Malabar,  484  n 1.

See  under  Mulaydyh'.

Malanvrah,  lownsliip  of,  598  n 10.

I Malaun,  a hill  feu’t  in  the  Paniab,  59S
1 *'

j and  p 10-

I Malawoh,  towjislap  cf,  598  u Jo.

I Maiai/dyJr,  the  yeiluw  feaudal,  uses  of-
484  }i  1.

Malay fdam  or  Malabar,  4S4  n 1.

Maldeo,  Kai,  the  ruler  of  Nagor  and
Jaanpur  and  llaja  of  the  kingdom
of  Marwar,  contemporary  of  Sher
Shah  and  Hnmayun,  476,  477.  478,
479,  562,  563,  564  and  n 6,  565  n 1.

Zlalfuzdt-i-Tim/hJ^  the,  355  Tin  1 and
4,  356  n 5,  358  nn  2,  4 and  6,  366
71  1,  386  n S.

Malgarh,  fortress  of,  500  n 8.

Malhab,  name  of  a place,  258  and
n 4.

Malik  Ahmad,  son  of  Amir  Khnsru,
the  famous  poet  of  Dihli,  339,  340.

Malik  ibn  Anas,  founder  of  the
Maliki  School  of  Muhammadan
Jurisprudence,  18  n 1,  59  n 1.

Malik  al-Ashtar.  one  of  the  Generals
of  ‘AH  ibn  Abl  7'^lib.  the  fourtii
Khalifah,  157  n 2,  ioS  n,

Mahk  Chhajii.  See  under  Chhaju,

Malik  SaljuqT,  Sultan,  of  the

SaljUqi  dynasty  in  Khurasan,  38
w 4,  40,  55  and  n 3.

Index.

Malika-i-Jahan,  daughter  of  Saltan
‘Alan-d-Din  of  Badaoii,  405.
Malika-i-Jahan,  the  Queen-consort
of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Khilji,  272.
Malika-i-Jahaa  Bibi  Khunza,  chief  ^
wife  of  Sultan  Huaaiii  Sltarql  of
Jaunpur,  409  and  2.  i

Malika-i-Ja’nan,  the  Queen-consort  of  !
Sultan  Jaiaia-d-Dm  E'.hihh  237j
244,  247  n.

Malik-i-Jahan,  mother  of  Nasirii-d-  !
Din  Mahmud  ^ah,  son  of  Sham-
sn-d-DIn  Iyal-timi?h,  131.

Malikhulid,  Melancholia,  definition  of.

5 and  n 3.

^Mnllkota.  town  of.  387  n 1.
M'lliku-l'Kaldm,  or  Lord  of  Elo-
qaence,  a literary  title,  134.
Malikud-Kalam  Fakhru-l-MuIk  ‘Amid  I
Tulakl  (Lumakl),  99  and  n 4.  See  :
‘Amid  Lumakl.  « }

Maliku4-munnjjimtn,  or'  Prince  of  '
Astrologers,  622  and  n 2.  j

Maliku-l-Umara  Fakhru-d-DIn.  the  j
Kotwal  of  DihlT,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  i
Sultan  Mu‘izzu-d-Din  Kaiqubad,  of  |
the  Balbani  dynasty,  220  nn  2 and  3,  [
227,  229,  260  and  n 2,  261  and  tv  4.  j
Maliku-sh-Sharq  ‘Imadu-l-Molk  Mah-  !
mud  Hasan,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  j
Mubarak  Shah  of  the  Sayyid  dy-  j
nasty,  383,  386,  3S7,  392.  j

Maliku-sh-Sharq  Kamalu-l-Mulk,  the  j
Vazlr,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  j
Sayyid  dynasty,  395,  396,
Maliku-sh-Sharq  Malik  Sikandar,
Governor  of  Labor  under  Shaikh
■^All  of  Kabul,  389.

Maliku-sh-Sharq  Marwan-i-Daulat,
called  Nusrat  Khan,  one  of  the  ’

XClll

Amirs  of  Sultau  FIroz  Shah  Tugh-
laq,  335,

^Ialika-sh»Sharq  Mnbarak  Shah
Qaranqal,  the  ruler  of  Jaunpur,
360,  361.

Malikn-sh-Sharq  Suleiman,  son  of
Malik  Marwati-i-Daul.tt,  of  the
Amlra  of  FIroz  Shah.  335  and  n 4,
352,  375.

Main,  the, — a people  of  the  Panjab,
3S9  /V  2.

Malloo  Khan,  brother  of  Sarang
Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Firoz  Shfihl  dynasty,  349  and  7i  10,
350  and,  n 3.  351  354.  feee  under
Iqbal  ^lan  Malloo.

MalluKhan,  Governor  of  MMwa,  one
of  the  slaves  of  the  Sufiano,

475.

Malot,  in  the  Jhllam  District  of  the
Panjab,  437  and  n 8,  433  and
n 7.

Maluta,  district,  849.

Mahva,  or  Malwah,  95  and  n 4,  129,
264  and  « 4,  274,  292,  313,  379  n 3,
384  n 5,  385  tv  3,  398,  399,  422  n 3,
423,  424  and  n 4,  425,  432,  433,
454,  474,  475,  492,  495.  654

Ma’mun,  AI-,  the  ‘Abbiiside  Khallfah,
157  n 1.

AfaTi,  a weight  72  n 4.

Man.  Raja,  the  Governor  of  Gwidiar,
contemporary  of  Saltan  Buhlul  and
Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  410,  414  and
n 5,  432  and  ti  7.

Manat,  an  idol  worshipped  by  the
old  Arabs,  28  and  n 1.

Mandagar, — or

Maiidagarh,  a town  in  the  district  of
Agra,  552  and  n 12«

Mandikar,  552  n 1 2.  See  the  abore.

Mandalayer,  a fortress  on  the  western
bank  of  the  Chambal,  420  » 6.

Handiwar,  fortress  of,  93  n I,  233,
236.

Mnndawi,  name  of  a place,  326  n 2.

Mandili,  town  of,  3^  and  n and  n 2.

Mandir,  town  of,  455.

Mandlaer,  town  of,  420  n 5.

Handla  Gafh,  one  of  the  two  chief
fortresses  of  the  province  of
Bandhd,  417  n 7.

Randier,  town  of,  420  » 6,  422  n 2.

Mftndrayal,  fortress  of,  420  and  n 6.

Mi^ndsur,  a dependency  of  Malwa,
4*54.

JIandu,  town  of,  93  n 1,  472  and  n 5.
Galled  also  Mandawar.

Mandui  (Mandili),  town  of,  826  and  n
and  n 2.

Mandur,  fort  of,  93  and  n 1.

Mandwar,  town  of,  93  n 1.

Maner,  or  Muii4r,  a town  on  the
banks  of  the  Ganges,  82  and  n 1.

Mangalaij  a Turk!  word  signifying
advance- gnard  of  an  army,  692  n 6.

Mangarh,  fortress  of,  500  and  n 8,
627  and  n 2.

Mangbuml,  Saltan  Jalllu-d-DTn,  son
of  Snltau  Mohammad  Khwarazm
^ali, — the  last  of  the  Kliwarazm
Shahi  dynasty,  91  and  n 1.

ManghaW,  advance-guard  of  an  army,
592  n 5.

Mangsal,  fort  of,  varionsly  called
Walaj  and  Bajj,  34  n 7.

Mangii  ^an,  nephew  of  Saltan
‘Alaa-d-DIn  Khilji,  259,

Mangu  Khan,  infant  son  of  Sultan
'Alau-d-X)iu  Khilji,  289.

Mangutah,  the  Ma^ul,  one  of  the
Generals  of  Chingiz  ^an,  126  n 1.

Mani,  Mirza,  or  Mirza  Amani  (q.  v ),
a poet  of  the  time  of  Humayun,
587  and  n 3.

Mdnz  Maid,  a treatise  on  gems,  631  n.

Manth,  one  of  the  blank  arrows  in
the  game  of  maisirj  369  n 1.

Manijeh, — or

Manizha,  daughter  of  Afrasiyib,  one
of  the  heroines  of  the  Shdh-ndma,
116  n 5,  180  and  » 2.

Manilc,  Malik,  a 'Slave  of  Sultan
‘Alau-d-Din  KhiljTj  251.

Manik  Deo,  Kai,  the  Baja  of  Dholpur,
contemporary  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  419  and  n 4.

Manikganj,  pass  of,— in  Ghjjrat,  313.

Manikpur,  district  and  town  on  the
Ganges,  221,  241,  243,  247  »,  325,
411  n 2,  415,  468.

3fanikpur,  ford  of,  on  the  Ganges,  325.

Munkbarnin,  for  Snltan  Jalalu-d-Din
Mangbami  {q.  u.),  91  n 1.

Mankot,  a fort  in  the  northern  hill-
range  of  the  Panjab,  498,

Manoarpur,  town  of,  93  n 1.

Manqahat,  nse  of  the  word,  627  n 3.

Manqaldi,  in  Turki  the  advance-guard
of  an  army,  592  n 5.

Man  Singh,  Governor  of  Gwaliar,
414  n 5,  432  and  n 7.  See  under
Raja  Man.

Mansur,  A1-,  the  ‘Abbaaide  Khalifah,
74  712.

Mansur,  Saiyjid,  one  of  the  Generaio
of  Amir  Muhammad,  sou  of  Sultan
Mahmud  Ghaznawu  46.

Maastir,  son  of  Sultan  Maudud  Ghaz-
nawi,  48.

Index.

*01?

Mansur  ibn  Nnh,  of  the  dynasty  of
the  SaminTs,  the  Kings  of  Khnra-
san  and  Miwaran-n-Kahr,  13  n 1,
14  and  n 1,  16  and  n 2.

Mansur  ibn  Sa‘id,  Khwaia.  94.

Mansurah,  or  Al-Man?urah,  old  capi-
tal of  Sindh,  36  and  n 10.

Mansurpur,  town,  98,  330.

Manuehihr  Shirwan  Shah.  King  of
Khurasan,  patron  of  the  famous
poet  Khaqani.  583  n 4.

Manuchihri  Damaghani,  Hakim
Abu-n-Kajm  Ahmad,  a poet  of  the
time  of  Saltan  Mas'ud  Ghaznawi.
46  and  n 4.

Maqamdi  of  ‘Amid  Abu  Nafr,  Al-
Baihaqi’s,  32  n.

Maqdmat  of  Qazi  Mamid  of  Balkh.
76  nl.

Maqdmat  of  Shai^  A^mad  Khattu,
surnamed  GanjbaUsh,  358.

Maqdmdt-i-Hanri,  348.

Maqbul,  Malik,  337  n 7.  Same  as
^han-i-Jaban  Malik  Qubul  the
Vazir,  of  the  Amirs  of  Sulfin  Firoz
Shah.

Mardhan  Kot,  or  Bardhan  Kot,  a city
of  Tibet,  84  n.

Margan,  a Turk!  word  signifying  ‘an
archer,’  250  and  n 6.

Marghub,  a slave  of  Sultan  Ibrahim
Lodi,  414.

Marhaba,  Malik,  slave  of  Iqbal  Khan
Malloo  of  the  Maliks  of  the  Firoz
Shahi  dynasty,  364.

Miirhara,  township  of,  in  the  Doiib,
407  n 1.  See  also  Marhira.

Marhat  or  Maharashtra,  country  of
the  Marhattas,  265  and  n 4,  283.

Marhattas,  the,  283.

Marhira, — or

Marhira,  town  of,  123  and  n 2.  See
under  Marhara.

Maria,  sister  of  Martha  and  Lazarus,
198  n 2.

Mariam,  the  Mother  of  Jesus,  372
and  n 1.

Mari  galah,  fortress  of,  46.  Called
also  MSrikala  (q.  v.).

Marikala,  a frontier  fort  on  the
Jhilam  river,  44  and  n 6.  Called
also  Markalaand  Mari  galah  (5.  «.).

Marikala,  a pass  between  Bawal
Pindi  and  Attock,  44  n 6.

Markala,  on  the  Jhilam,  44  n 6.  See
under  the  Marikala  fort.

Markanda  river,  the,  330  n 7.

Mir  Muhra,  a mineral  of  an  emerald
colour,  117  n 4.

Mars,  notes  on  the  planet,  217
n 5.

Martha,  sister  of  Maria  and  Lazarus,
198  n 2.

Martyr  Prince,  the,  188  n 3,  199  n 3.
See  the  Khan-i-Rhahid  Sultan
Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan  Ghivas-
u-d-Din  Balban.

Ma'ruf  Farmali,  Malik, — one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Lodi  dynasty,  444.

Marv,  a city  of  ^^urasan,  35.  See
under  Merv.

Marwan,  Malik,  335,  362.  See  under
Marwan-i-Daulat.

Marwan  ibnu-l-Hakam,  a Elhalifah  of
the  Umaiyyad  dynasty,  69.

Marwan  Daulat, — or

Marwan-i-Daulat,  Malikn-sh-Sharq.
Nasiru-l-Mulk  Firuz  ^ahi.  Gover-
nor of  Multan  under  Sultan  Firoz
.ShSh,  335,  352,  376.

xcvi  index*

MarTvlni,  Walid  ibn  *Abda-l-Malik,  1
the  ITmaiyyad  l^a'iifah,  12  and  n 2.  j
Marwar.  the  country  of,  384  n 3,  465,  !
476j  562,  563.

Ma^had  (Meshed),  the  holy  city  of,
in  Persia,  569,  573  and  n 3.  j

Ma^k,  goat-skin  bag  for  carrying  j
water,  331  n 10.  ;

Mnaih.  Christ,  267.

Masihu-d-Dajjal,  Antichrist,  490  n 5.  .
See  also  the  next.

Masihu-l-Kazzab,  Antichrist,  278  n 4.  ;

See  also  the  above.

Masik^  constant  as  applied  to  the
pulse,  532  n 7.

Masnad-i-‘AlI  Saiyyid  Khizr  Khan,
the  first  of  the  Saiyyid  dynasty  of  i
DihlT,  352,  375,  376.  See  under  !
TThizr  Khan  Masnad-i-‘AlI.  !

Massagetse,  an  ancient  people  of  !
Central  Asia,  23  n 1.  I

Mash'id  Beg,  metre  of, — a kind  of  ■

]

prosodical  metre,  426.  [

Ma3‘Qd  Khan  GhiizM,  one  of  the  |
Afghan  Amirs  of  ^er  Shah  Sur,  |
642,  544.  j

Afas'ud,  Saltan,  ibn  Saltan  Ibrahim
GhaznawT,  called  by  the  title  of
‘Alau-d-OTn,  55  and  nn  2 and  4.  1

Mas'Qd,  Saltan,  son  of  Sultan  Mah-  •
mud  of  Ghaznin,  29,  30,  33,  34,  35,  :
36  and  n 9,  37,  3S,  42,  43,  44  and  i
uni  and  2,  45  and  nn  2 and  3,  46,
47  n 2,  50,  53  and  n.  54,  61  n 5.
Afas^ud,  Saltan,  son  of  Sultan  Maudud
ibn  Mas‘ad  (^aznavvi,  49,  60  and
XI 1.  !

Mas’Qd  Sa‘d  Salman  Jurjani,  known  |
sometimes  as  Hamadaul,  a famous
poet  uf  Jurjao,  contemporary  of

Sultan  Mashld  and  Sultan  Ibrahim
Ghaznawi,  52  and  n 5,  54  and  n 1,
60.

Mas'udI,  the  celebrated  Arab  Geo-
grapher and  Historian,  157  n 1.

Matar  Sen  Kahtariya,  Baja,  the  ruler
of  Sambhal  at  the  time  of  the
Afghan  Sur  dynasty  of  Dihll,  545.

Mathew’s  J/ishkiztii-I-^fasabzA,  150
n 2,  200  n,  293  n,  302  2,  412  n 1,

509  n 3.

Alathl  Khan, — or

Mathm  Khan,  one  of  the  courtiers  of
Humayun,  624  and  n 2.

Matlira,  a sacred  city  of  the  Hindus,
24  and  n 6.

JIa/hru’I’Anu'ar,  one  of  the  poetical
works  of  Mir  &usru,  the  famous
poet  of  Dihll,  270  and  n-  1.

Maudud,  Sultan,  son  of  Sultan  Afas'ud
ibn  Mahmud  Ghaznawi,  37,  43,  45  7t
3,  46j  47  and  7i  2,  48,  49,  50  and  nl.

Maulana  Baqa’i,  a learned  man  of
the  time  of  Babar,  449.

Maulana  Hasan,  one  ot  the  contem-
poraries of  Shah  Babar,  449.

Maulana  ‘Imadu-d-Din,  translator  of
the  Rdjd^tarangini  into  Persian,
8 n 3.

Maulana  .^ihlbu-d-DIn  the  Enig-
matist,  on©  of  the  learned  men  of
the  time  of  Babar,  449.

yia^lfuit,  a miracle  performed  by  the
ordinary  believer,  026  n.

Miiwara  an-Xahr. — or

Ma warau-n-Xiihr  ( Tiansoxiana),  the
rcjimi  beyond  the  rlrer,  16  and  7i  5,
20  and  n 3,  27  nn  1 and  2,  29  n 6,
37  n 7,  167  n 3,  250,  353,  448,  570
n 7,  ti32.

Index.

xcvu

MawftS,  a district  In  the  Doab,  386
n 5,  431  and  n 4.

Mawas, — or

Mnwasai,  a place  at  seven  krohs  from
Badaon,  336  and  n 1.

MaztiTj  signification  of  the  word,  271
and  n 3.

Mazdakiah,  Al*,  another  name  of
the  heretical  Bltinl  eect  of  Shi‘ah
Muslims,  22  and  n 3.

Mazhar  Karra,  Manlana,  one  of  the
poets  of  the  cime  of  Saltan  Firoz  }
^ah  Tughlaq,  3-11  and  n 1.

Mazhari,  the  poet,  341  n 1.  Same  as
the  above  {q.  v.).

Mazhar-i'Hindi,  Qa?T  of  Agra
(?  Karra),  panegyrist  of  Flruz  Shah,
341  n 1.  See  the  two  above.

Mazindaran, — or

Miiziiideran,  a province  of  Persia,
32  n 1,  36  n 3.

McCrindle’s  Ancient' IndiCf  364  n 4.

Mecca.  See  under  Makbah.

MedakI  river,  the,  419  n 6.  Other-
wise known  as  the  Menduki  or  the
Asi.

Medes,  the,  391  n 5.

Medical  and  Surgical  Reporter,  the,
58tJ  n.

Medina,  the  City  of  the  Prophet,  12
n 1,  75  71,  106  n 1,  149  «,  156  n 5,
15S  n 1,  215  n 7,  279  n,  443,  480
n 1.  585  n 6,  6o0  n 9.

Mcdiuii  arid  Mc’ccUj  Bui’iou’s  Filgrivi-
atje  to,  97  n 4.

Mufiiterraiieun,  tliC,  167  ti  4.

Mohriin,  the,  — the  river  Indus,  36
u JO,  07  n 1.

Mehrgufi,  the  seventi;  inunth  of  the
Pcidiau  year,  106  and  a 1.

Melancholia,  definition  o/,

5 and  n 3.

Memoir,  RennelPs,  129  n 2,  326  n,
327  n 3.

Memoirs  Saber,  Erskine’s,  421  n §,
437  n 7,  439  nn  4,,  6 and  7,  .440  n,
448,  n 4,  370  Tin  5 and  6,  609  n 5.
Meudakl  river,  the,-r-in  Gwaliar,  4h9
and  n 6.  Otherwise  known  as  the
Medaki  or  the

Mengburun,  origin,  of  the  name  of
Sultan’  Jalalu-d-Din  Mangburni
(q.  r.},  91  n 1.

Meos,  the,  a tribe  of  the  Rajputs  in-
habiting  the  province  of  Mlwat,
365  n.8.

Mercury,  the  planet,  held  to  rule
over  intelligence,  630  n 3.

Merv,  a city  and  province  of  Khura-
san,  16  n 2,  17  n 3,  22  n 2,  33  n 1,
34  n 3,  35,  3^  43  and  Tin  1 and  3,
51.  n 2,  55  n 3,  167  n 3.

Meshed  (Mashhad),  in  Persia,  569,
573  and  n 3.

Methora  of  Pliny,  same  as  the  town
of  Alatbra  v.),  24  n 6.

Methoras  of  Arriap,  same  as  the  town
of  Mathra  (3.  r ),  24  n 6.

Mevafc,  district  of,  129  n 2.  See
under  Miwiit.

Meynard’s  Dictionnaire  de  la  Pe^se,
30  71,  35  Ti  2,  43  tin  1,  2 and  3,  46
71  1,  50  n 2,  573  »i  3.

Mhow,  a town  of  Central  India,  385
« 3.

Miapiir,  a ford  on  the  Gauges,  131
and  7«  1.

MjcIi,  83.  ree  under  Mij.

I Mic’nael,  the  Arrhungei,  58  and  n 2
t Mtjtuk.  the, — or

1“

xcyiii

Indtx,

of  Siraja'd-Bm  Abu
Ya'qub  Yusuf  ibn  Abi  Muhiimmad
ibn  ‘All  B8-8ikk8ki,  428  and  n 11«

Mihaffa,  a kind  of  litter,  467  « 7.

Mibir,  town  of,  123  n 2.  Called  algo
Marbirs  {q.v.).

Hihr,  name  of  tbe  ann,  168  n 1.

Mihr,  an  ancient  king  of  tbe  Fersans,
166  « 1.

Mihrajan,  Day  of,  166  n 1.  See
nnder  Mihrgan.

Mibran,  the, — tbe  river  Indus,  36
71  10,  67  71  1.

Mihrgan,  the  seventh  month  of  the
Persian  year,  166  and  n 1.

Mihrgan,  a great  feast  of  the  Per-
eians,  166  n 1.

Mihrgan-i-'amm,  166  7i  1.

Uihrgan-i-J^dtf,  166  ti  1.

Mij,  one  of  the  tribes  betiveen  Tibet
and  I-akbnanti,  83  and  ti  4,  84  7>.

Utl,  the  bodkin  or  style  used  for
applying  kuhl,  153  n 8.

Miial  wa-n-Nihal,  of  ash-Shahrastani,
Cnreton’s  edition,  22  ti  3,  157  » 2.

Milwat,  town  of,  438  t*  7.  Called
also  Malot  {q.  v.).

Minas,  a trike  of  the  Hindus,  366

i»  8,

Miiihajn-s-Siraj,  author  of  the  Taiia-
qat-i-lfufiri,  88  7t  1,  98  n 6,  133  a 3,
137  nn  1 and  3.

Mir  Abn-l-  Baqa,  one  of  the  most  dis-
tingnished  of  the  learned  men  of
the  time  of  Humajun,  465,  660,
573.

Mir  ‘Adi,  an  officer  of  justice  nnder
the  Sadr,  546  ti  7,  610  n.

Mir  Akkor,  Master  of  the  horse,  274
and  T>  5.

Mir  Hasan,  son-in-law  of  Sultan  Firca
Shah  Tughlaq,  338.

Mir  Hasan  Dihlavi,  a famong  poet  of
Dihli,  contemporary  of  Mir  ^hnsru,
116  TT,  187,  188,  245,  269,  370  and
n 6.

Mir  Jamaln-d-Din,  the  traditionist,
corrtemporary  of  Shah  Igma'i]
^afawi,  449.

Mir  Khond,  the  Historian,  contem-
porary of  Humayun,  27  n 3,  460t

Mir  Khnsru,  son  of  Amir  Mahmud
8aifu-d-Din,  the  famons  poet  of
Dihli,  96  and  ti  2,  99  and  n 8,  134
and  t1  4.  See  nnder  Khnsru.

Mir  Saiyyid  Khan  of  Jaanpi£r,  480

nS.

Mir  Saiyyid  Muhammad  of  Jannpdr,
son  of  Mir  Saiyyid  ^an,  one  of
the  great  waiis,  420  and  M 8,  6Q3
and  T>  8.

Mir  Saiyyid  Muhammad  Mir  ‘4^
646.

Mir  Saiyyid  Na‘niatn-llah  Knsuli,  the
poet,  contemporary  of  Islem  Shah.
533  and  tj  7,  534  and  n 4.

Mir  Saiyyid  Rafj'n-d-Din  ^afawi  of
Ij,  contemporary  of  Sher  Shah.
476  and  n 5,  479,  513,  614,

Mir  Saiyyid  Sharif,  a distingniahed
author,  560.

Mi'rsj,  or  the  Ascent,  nocturnal  jour-
ney of  Muhammad  to  heaven,  105
T»  2,  29'2  71  a

Mirak  ibn  Hasan,  the  Vakil,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  the  Ghaznavide
nasty,  48,  49.

Mirak,  tqwn  of,  406  n 9.

Miran,  Amir,  one  of  the  Mahhs  cA
Sultan  Kitoz  Shah,  333  » 2.

In^€T.

MTrnn  Sn.dr  a j

profegt^  of  the  Mnhnriit  §hatn  fami-  1
ly,  S93,  394,  395,  397.  j

MTrifn  Saiyyid  Jalal  of  Badnon,  one  of
the  le.-irned  men  of  Hiiidfistan,  427.  j

Mirat, — -ir  !

MIrath,  fortress  of,  24  !i  1,  345,  358
a 3,  359,  406,  697.

Mi  r'at-i-Jahiln  Numi,  an  historical
work,  66  n 2.

Uir-i-Kiie,  Superintendent  of  Hoads,
401.

Mirza  Hahdll, — or

MTrzi  Hir.df.1,  4-53,  458,  4.59.  462,  464,
465,  5.59,  560,  567  and  n 10,  674,
578,  579,  580,  5 80,  587.

Mirza  ^lusain  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Humiiyun,  674.

Mirza  Katnran,  brother  of  Hnmayun,
453,  456,  462,  464,  405,  494,  600,
601,  502,  503,  567,  674,  578,  579,
680,  581  and  n 3,  582  and  n 7,  583
and  n 3,  584  and  n 3,  685,  586,
688,  606  « 3.

Mirza  Mnrad,  son  of  ghlh  Tahmaspof
Persia,  572,  573  and  n 1,  676,  676.

Mi  !za  Pir  Muhammad,  grandson  of
the  great  Amir  Timur,  King  of
Khnrasan  and  Blawaia-an-Nalir,
352,  353.  355.

Mirzl  yridgfu*  Nasir,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Hunifiytin,  462,  463,  464,  465,  j
560,  561,  562.

Muhlc,  or  Musk,  notes  on,  172  n 2.

Mifhkdfn-l-Mnmhrh,  Mjttiiew’s,  58  3,

150  n 2,  191  n 5,  199  n 3,  2fK)  :
270  ti,  292  n 6,  293  n,  302  n 2,  356  I
n 4,  412  n 1,  449  a 8,  5C^9  ti  3,  57l  I
n I,  585  n 10,  6Gl  n,  603  h and  n 5,  ■
613  n,  625  n 5,

a weight  for  gold  and  ellrer
and  also  a Cuin^  19  n,  25  and
n 1.

Mci'ia?,— or

Mifiaiat,  shea  for  polishing,  620  and
a 1.

2-I,sid*j  hemiSLioh.  a term  of  Frosody,
0o6  n 4.

Miwac,  district  ani  town  of,  .125  and
I n 2,  134  and  u i,  185,  337,  343,
344  and  n 7,  34.5,  350,  358,  369,  365
and  n 8,  366  k,  375,  3S1,  3S.5,  391,
398  419,  U7,  483,  480,  537.

Miwatls,  the,  417.

MIyau  *Abdn*H.ih  Niydzl,  a Niyaai
Afghan  who  ad  -pted  the  manners
of  a Mahdi,  508,  60S,  510,  612,  518.
620.

Miyfm  Abu-1-FaOi  of  Thanesf«r,-*-a
learned  doctor  of  the  time  of  Islern
513.

Miyan  Bahwa  liUhani,  Governor  of
Bainna,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Islem
Shah,  518  and  ti  4,  519.

Miyan  Bhoh,  the  V^azir  and  chief  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,
432,  435.

Miy«T.u  Hatint  Sanbali  or  Sombhaii,  a
learned  Doctor  of  lliuduatiia,  428,
506,  545.

Miyon  Hnsain  Farmall,  one  of  tlie
Amirs  of  rbe  T.odi  dyiia«?ty,  435.

Miyan  Jamal  ]\Iufti,  one  of  tlio

Chief  ‘Ulamfi  of  the  time  of  Islem
^fih,  50G.

Milan  Ksilifir  K.’dil  Kabuli,  one  of  the
of  the  rime  of  Humavun,  5^4
a 3.  See  undrr  Knhi.

Miyjin  Ladnn,  o;jf  of  the  lo.irned  rricn
of  Hindustan,  127

e

hvdex.

Miyaji  Shaikh  of  GwaUaY,  a leatiied
doctor,  427

Miyan  SJiail^  Abu-l-Fath,  son  of
ghaikh-allahdijah  of  Khairabad.
contemporary  of  Badaoni,  546.

Miyan  Tauain,  the  well-known  mnsU
cian,.  contemporary  of  ‘Adii,  557.
Miyan  Yahva  Paran.  one  of.  the  gen-
erals of  Sikandar  Siir  C5.  i’)»  547.
MTyan  Yabya  Tiiran,  governor  of
Sambhal,  one  of  the  generals  of
Sultan  Ibrahim  Sur  (g.r),  545,  546.
Mi3anl  Afghans/ the,  554.

MizuTiy  the  constellation  Libra,  142
n 2,

M'^dei'n  Egyptians,  Lane’s,  177  n 4,
192  n 3.  412  n 1,  503  n 2.

Moghale,  the,  80,  103  n 3.  See  under
the  Moghuls,

Mongir,  town  of,  458.

^fongi'l  dynasty  of  China,  the,  353
nl.

Mongols,  the.  See  under  the  Mnghuls,
Monorpour,  fortress  of,  93  n 1.

Moon,  Splitting  of  the,  miracle  per-
formed by  Mnliammnd,  110  n 4.
Morndabad,  in  Kohilkund,  364  n 4,
Moradabad  District,  N -W.  Provinces,
516  n 5.

Mo?o,  a peacock,  502  and  n 3.
Mozambique,  454  n 7.

Moses  of  the  Scriptures,  372  and  « 3,
373  n.

Mosul,  capital  of  Mesopotamia,  61  n
5,  394  7i  5,  624  n S,

MuaLyidu'l  Mnik  SinjarT,  Khwojn. —
one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Ohor^  dy-
nasty, 74  and  n 1. 77  n 1,  80.
Mu'nllq,  name  of  iho  -event’n  ariow
in  the  ul  "‘.ati'i'',  369  n 1.

Mn‘allaqafc,  the,»“fieven  well-known
poems  of  the  Jahiliyat,  99  « 6,  109
n 4.

Mu^ammq,  enigma,  456  n 7,  605  and

n S.

Mu‘awiyah,  first  Khalifah  of  the
House  of  Umaiyyah,  157  n 2, 158  n,
Mu‘aEam,  ^^waja,  one  of  the  Amirs
Of  Humayun,  668.

Mu*aszin,  the  crier  of  the  hour  of
■prayer,  472  and  Tt  6,  600  and  n 9,

601  7i.

Miihaiyyin,  a book  on  the  Hanifite
Theology,  450  and  n 7.

Mubarak,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Saltan  Jalalu-d-Din  Khilil,  233,
Mubarakabad,  a city  on  the  Jamna,
393  and  n 7.

Mubarak  Kabir,  Malik, — one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Tughluq  Shahl  dy-
nasty, 342  and  n 1

Mubnr.ak  I^un,  son  of  Sultan  ‘Alaii-d-
Din  l^ilji  272,  273.  See  SuIJ^n
Qntbu-d-Din  Mnbai*ak  Shah.
Mubarak-  Khan  Auhadi,  of  the  AubadI
family  of  Bainna,  38“

Mubarak  Khan,  sou  of  Bahadur  Nanir,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Firuz  Shfihi
dynasty,  360  and  n 5.
i Mubarak  Khan  Luhani,  Malik, — one
I of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Buhlul  Lodi
I 409,  413  and  n 12.

' Mubarak  Khan,  son  of  Malik  Raju,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Firuz  Shahi
I dynasty,  349.

Mubaiak  Khan,  Governor  of  Sambal,
contemporary  of  Sultan  l^nsain
j Sharqi  of  Jannpur,  406  n 3
Mubarak  Kotwai,  one  of  the  Amlis  of
the  Saiyyid  dynuatv,  398.

Inder,

Cl

Mnbwak  of  Nagor,  Shaikh,  father  of  j
^aikh  Abu-1- Pazl  ‘Allami,  421,
516.

Mubarakpur,  398.

Habarak  Qaranqal,  Malik,  assumea
the  title  of  Mubarak  S]iah  as  ruler
of  Jannpiir,  360  and  n 1,

Mubarak  ^ah  son  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-
Dln  Khiljl.  *See  under  Saltan
Qatbu-d-Diii  Khilji.

Mubarak  SJiah,  son  of  Sultan  Buhlul
Lodi,  409.

Mubarak  Shah,  sou  of  Masnad-i-‘AU
Khizr  Khan,  of  Lne  Saiyyid  dynasty
of  Dihll,  10  n 2,  o07,  381  and  n 3,  |
382,  383,  384,  385  and  u 3,  386,  387,  |
388  and  n 2,  389,  390,  391, 392,  393,  !
394,  395,  396,  398,  400  and  n,403.

Mubarak  Shah,  SulSann-^-^arq,
Qaranqal,  ruler  of  JaunpQr,  360  and
n 1,  361,  363.

Mubarak  §hdhu  an  historical  work  by
Yahya  ibii  Ahmad  Sirhindl,  10  n 2,
67  and  n 2.  See  under  Tdrikh-i-
Mtihd)\ik  Sh/jhi,

Mubiinz  Khan,  one  of  the  great  Auiirs
of  the  Piruz  ^ahl  dyimety,  375.

Mabariz,  Malik,  one  of  the  Atnirs  of
Mubarak  ^ah  of  the  Saiyyid  dy-
nasty, 384.

Mabariz  Khan,  son  of  T^izam  Khan
Sur,  ascends  the  throne  with  the
title  c'  Muhammad  ‘Adil  or  more  !
commonly  ‘Adli,  495  and  n 4,  535  j
and  v-aGand  7,  636.  See  under  '
‘AdU.  '

Muba.^ir  Chap,  Islam  Khan,  the  |
V^azTr,  ono  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Firuz  dynasty,  344,  345.

See  also  under  Islam  Khrin

Mnbash^ir,  one  of  the  Sirdars  of
Sultan  ‘Al:ui-d-Din  Khilji,  273.

Muhhi,  a commentary  by  Shaikh
Zainu-d-Din  on  the  Muhai^yin
(q.  r.),  450  and  n 7.

Mufarrih  SultanI,  Malik,  governor  of
Gujrat  under  Sultan  FIroz
334  and  n 3,  337,  346.  See  under

FavKatu-l-Miilk,

MufJz,  A/-,— the  man  in  charge  of  the
arrows  in  the  game  of  369

n 1.

Miiftiy  a law  officer  who  gives  fatu’Sn
or  legal  decisions,  317  and  n 6.

MuyhaildUf  for  Ummu-^aildn^  a
thorny  tree,  550  and  D 1,  624  n 1.

Mughaivuti\  variable  as  applied  to  the
pulse,  533  a.

Moghals,  the.  See  under  tbe  Mughuls.

Mughlrah  ibn  al-Al?naf  Tezdibah  or
Yezdezoah,  ancestor  of  Imam
Bukhari.  6 n 3.

Mugbis  of  Hausi,  QazT,  one  of  the
most  learned  men  of  the  time  of
Sulian  Jal.ila  d-Dm  Khilji,  245.

Muyknl  fi-sharAi4~Mujaz,  Sadidi's
commentary  on  the  Mdjaz  in  Medi-
cine, 31  n,  320  n.

Mughul  Road  from  Agra  to  Alluhabad,
486  H 6.

Mughulpur,  popular  name  of  the  town
of  l^iyaspur,  236.

Mnghuls.  the,  125  and  n 3,  Izo  and  n
1,  129  n 2,  132,  145  n 2,  186,  187,
ISS,  190  ft  2,  192,  l96  and  7i  1,  205
« 2,  207,  220,  222,  236,  249,  250  and
« 5,  251,  252,  254,  256,  25S,  261,
264.  292,  293,  305  n 3,  323,  328,
335.  359,  365  » 8,  441,  454,  463,  464,
! 469,  471,  174,  486  n 6,  503,  5 13,  553

cii

Indea.

56B,  575  n 1,  592,  593  nnii  n 9,  61S  j

I

Mohajirln,  the,  — Meccan  Mnslims  I
who  emigrated  with  Mahamraad,
215,  216  n.

Mohammad,  the  Prophet,  2 n 5,  3 nn
4 and  6,  4,  12  n 1,  18  n i,  46  n 5,
57,  59  and  nn  2 and  4,  74  n 2,  97
n 4,  105  and  n 2,  106  nn  \ and  5,
110  tin  1,  3 and  4,  111  n,  139  n 5.
147  n 3,  149  n,  156  n 5,  15S  n 1,
194,  201  n2,  207,  216  n,  254,  293
n 6,  303  n 4,  368  n 1,  369  n 3,  376,
412  71  1,  420  n 8,  446  n 5,  473,  474,
480,  488  n 5,  490  n 6,  605  n 6,  519
and  n 4,  572,  577  n,  585  n 10,
589,  596,  602  n 7,  (‘•22  and  n 3,
626  n 1,  627  and  n 3,  631  n 1,  633,
636,

Mohammad  ibn  ‘Abda^llah  ibn  al-
Hasan  ibn  al-Hnsan  ibn  *AU  ibn
Abi  T^Hb,  74  n 2.

Muhammad  ibn  ‘Abdii-s-Samad,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  tho  Ghazni  vide
dynasty,  44.

Mohammad  ‘Adil,  commonly  known
as  ‘Adli,  of  the  Afghan  Surdyn^ty
of  Dihli,  495,  636.  See  under
Mnbiriz  son  of  Nizam  Khan

SQr  and  also  under  ‘Adli.

Muhammad  ‘Adil,  of  the  To^laq
^fihi  dynasty,  274.  See  under
Muhammad  ibn  Tnghlaq  Shah  and
also  under  Malik  Fakhra»d-DIn
Juna.

Muhammad  ‘Aofi,  author  of  the
JdnnUi-l-Hilaydt  and  Tazkiratu  fh-
Shn^aru,  220.  See  Muhammad  Vfi.

Muhammad  ‘Aziz,  Mtilla,  one  of  the  \
Amirs  of  Humayriit,  460  and  n 1.  '

Muhammad  of  Badnon,  Saiyyid,  one
of  the  Maliks  of  Sultan  Piro*  Shah,
335  and  n 6,

Muhammnd  Bahadur,  Sultan  of  Kor,
556  and  n 3.  See'Khizr  Khan,  sotl
of  Muhammad  Khan  Gauria.

Mobamm:.d  Bakhtyar  Ghuri.  Malik,
one  of  the  Generals  and  slaves  of
Sultan  Mu‘izza-d*Din  Muhammad
Sam,  81  and  n 2,  82,  83  and  -nn  2
and  3,  84  and  »,  85  and  n 1,  86,
See  the  next.

Muhammad  Bakhtyar  ^ilji,  Malik,
81  n 2.  Same  as  the  above  fg.  v.),

Muhammad  BSql  ilajlisi,  author  of
the  Hnydtu-l-Qulub^  110  n 3.

Muhammad,  son  of  Bihtr  Khan.  SuUin
of  Qanauj  and  the  eastern  districts,
contemporary  of  Sultan  Ibrahim
Lodi,  443.  Same  as  the  next  (q  r).

Mu^iammad,  son  of  Darya  Khan
Lubani,  Sultan  of  Bihar,  originally
called  Bihar  Khan  or  Bahadur
Khin,  435  and  n 7,  436,  468,  469.
Same  as  the  above  {q.  i’.),

MuJiammad  Farmnli,  ShsM,  known
as  Kala  Biiar,  nephew  of  Sultan
Bnhlul  Lodi,  411  n 2,  413  n 13,
414.

Muhammad  Ghans  of  Gwaliar,  Shaikh,
contemporary  of  Babar,  445,  459.

Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan  Ghiy^a»d>
Din  Balban,  187,  190  n 2,  205  and
7t  2,  213,  Called  the  Khfm-i-
Bnzurg,  the  Khln-i-GhrizT,  the
Kh:ln-i-^ahid  and  Qa:in-i-Mulk.

Muhammad  .^ori,  popular  name  of
Sultan  Mu  izzu'd-Diu  Muhammad
Sam,  who  is  also  known  as  Shiha-
bu-d*Din  Ghori.  65  a 2.

Index.

Ma^ammad  OokuHasli,  one  of  the
Amlra  of  Babar,  44  i.

Mc^mmad  ibrni'i-Hasan,  the  famous
jorisoonault,  30  n 1.

Muhammad  ^agan  of  Ispahan,  Mirza,
— the  poet  kaowu  as  Zarif,  582  n.

Muhammad  Hamayfm  Mlrza,  sou  of
Babar,  439,  442.  444.  445.  See
under  Humayun.

Muhammad  Huiuayan  Padishah,
Emperor  of  Hiudustiu,  450,  451^
453,  454,  472,  500,  603,  529,  6 6 9,
69ti,  608  aud  « 6.  Sea  the  above  |
and  also  under  Humayun.  |

Muhammad,  son  of  lldighiz  and  hia  I
SQocesflor  as  Atabak  of  Azarbaijan,  !
168  n 3.  I

Muhammad  Au^di,  ruler  of  ^

Baiana,  contemporary  of  ilubaiak  '
Shah  of  the  dynasty  of  the  Saiyy  ida,  j
386,  337  aud  » ^ |

Muhammad  ^an,  son  of  Sn^Mi  Plroz  |
ghah  Tu^laq,  324,  336,  337  See  i
Na$ini-d-Diu  Muhammad  Sh^.  and
also  Muhammad  Shah.

Muhammad  ^an  Gauria,  the  ruler  of
Eor,  contemporary  of  'Adli,  555,
556.

Muhammad  Khan  KukI,  one  of

the  Amirs  of  Eumayun,  678,  681,
586.

Muhammad  Khan  of  Nugor,  contem-
porary of  Sultan  Sikftndar  Lodi,  423
and  n H.

Muhammad  grandson  of  SulUn

Nasiru-d-Din  of  Milwa,  contempor-
ary of  Snltan  Sikandar  Lodi,  423,  s
424  and  n 6.  {

Mubammmi  Khan  SalCi,  cue  of  the
Amirsof  Humayuu,618andH.7,619.  '

ciii

Mohammad  Khan  Sharafn-d-Din
Ughli  Takiu,  Vatir  of  Snltan
Muhammad  MIrza  of  Khurasan.  669
and  n 6.

Muhammad  ^au  Sar,  assumes  the
title  of  Suh.an  Jalalu-d-Din  as
governor  of  Bangala,  562.
Muhammad  Khan  Sur,  governor  of
the  country  of  Chaund,  468,  469.
Mohammad  Khaii  Takiu,  Vazlr  of
Suitau  Mubammad  Mirza,  rnler  of
Khur^au.  569  and  n 6.

Muhammad  Khan,  son  of  Zirak  KhSn.
Governor  of  Samana  under  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  397.

Mul.ammad  ]^warazm  Shah.  Snltan,
of  the  Khwarazm  Shahi  dynasty  of
Khurasan,  71  and  n 7.

Muhammad  Lodi,  Sultan,  son  of  Saltun
Sikandar  Lodi,  444,  471  n 1.  See
also  under  Mahmud  Lodi.
Muhammad,  younger  son  of  Snltin
Mahmud  of  ^azuin,  29,  33,  34,  44,
45  and  nn  2 and  3,  46,  47  n 3.
Muhammad  ibn  Mnhmud,  the  Khalj,
feudatory  of  Kusbmandi,  uncle  of
Muhammad  Bn^tyir,  81  n 2.
Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan  Mas'ud  ibn
Mabmdd  GhaznawT,  44  and  n 1.
Muhammad  Mnzaffar  Vazir,  one  of
the  Amiro  of  the  Firuz  Shahi
dynasty,  351,

Muhammad  pur  ‘Aziz,  Mulls,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Humayun,  460  n 1.
Muhammad  C^audahari,  ^iji,  the
Historian,  300  « 3.

Muhammad  ibn  Qdsim  s^-gaqafi,  the
conqueror  and  first  governor  of
Sind,  XI  and  U 3,  12  n 2,  13  ft  aud
» 1,  136  a 6.

CIV

Index

Muhammad  ibnn-l-Qisim  ibnn-1-
Munabbih,  governor  of  Sindh,  36
n 10.

Muhammad  8am,  founder  of  the
^ori  dynasty  of  India,  10  n 2,  74,
75,89.  See  Mu‘izzu-d“I)m  Mubam-
xnad  Sam.  j

Muhammad  Shah.  3fir,  leader  of  a :
band  of  robbers  in  tho  reign  of  *
Sultan  ‘Alnn-d-Din  262,  263.

Muhammad  ^ah,  of  the  Mughal  dy-  :
nasty  of  Diliii,  25  n 5.  !

Muhaminad  Shah  I.,  son  of  Ahmad  |
Siiah.  Sultan  of  Gujarat,  357  n 3,  |

Muhammad  Shah  ibn*i-Farid  Khan,
of  tho  Saiyyid  dynasty  of  Dihli,  ,
395,  397,  398,  399  and  n 7.  1

Muhammad  Shah,  son  of  Sultan  Firuz  j
Shahi  of  the  TugUlaq  Shalii  dynasty  ;
of  Dihli,  337,  338,  341,  342,  343,  1
344,  34p  and  nn  2 and  3,  346*
See  under  Muhammad  Khan.

Muhauimad  Shah,  son  of  Mahmud  i
k^anj,  Sulriifi  of  Jaunpur,  403  and  ;
n 8,  404  and  n and  n 2.  ]

Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  444,  471  n 1 See  also  under
Mahmud.

Muhammad  Sultan  Mirza,  Khwajn,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Babar,  437,
438,  440,  444,  458,  462,  463,  464,
574.

Mul^mmad  Tughlaq  Shah,  Saltan,  87
n 1,  269  n 5,  271  and  n 6-  See  the
next.

Muhammad,  son  of  Tughlaq  Shah,
the  second  of  the  Tughlaq  Shahi
dynasty  of  Oihll,  290,  297  n,  301
309,  315,  318,  321,  322,  323  and
71  3,  32/,  329  u 2,  331.  See  under

Mnnammad  ‘Adil*  and  also  under
Ulugh  Khan.

Muhammad  Turtaq,  the  Mughal,  of
the  royal  house  of  Khurasan,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  ’Aiaa-d-Din
Khiiji,  250  and  n 10,  252  and  n 2.

Muhammad  Cfi  of  Merv,  anthor  of  a
TazhirOf  33  and  n 1.  See  Muham-
mad ‘Aufl.

Muhammad  Yabya,  602.

Muhammad  Yamln,  Sultan,  the  ruler
M Khiiriisari,  99  n 4,  188  n 1.

Muhammad  Yarghari,  Mulla,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  HutnSyQn,  460  7i  1.

Muhammad  Zaitun  the  Afghan,  on©
of  tl»e  Afghan  Amxrs  of  Babar,  445.

Mulidmmad  Zaman  Mirzu  ibn-i-
Badi*u-Z‘Zamc.n  Mirzd  ibn-i-SuItan
9asain  Mirza,  contemporary  of
Humayuu,  451,  452,  466,  458,  401.

Muljammadabad,  the  town  of  Nagnr-
kot,  331.

Mu^amniadabad,  a city  built  by
Sultan  Muhammad  Shah  ibu  Firoz
vShali,  346,  347.

Muhammadans,  the,  271  n 6,  302  n 2,
412  n 1,  415  n,  445  n 6,  488  n 5,
523  n 5,  635  n 6.  See  also  under
the  Mahometans  and  the  Muslims.

Muhamia,  for  Mutmara.  See  ^i-
hab-i-Mutmara,  the  poet,  99  and
n 2.

Muhar  or  Ma/iur,  a coin,  306  and
n 1.

Muharrara,  annual  ceremonies  of  the,
623  and  n 1.

Muhazzab, — or

Muhazzabu-d-UIn  Niziimu-l-MuJk,
Khwoja,  Wazir  of  Sultan  Ka;jzfyah,
120,  123-71  3,  124.

Index.

cv

Muhra-i-Mdr,  the  Bezoar  stone  called
in  Arabic  Hajaru-l-Huiyyah,  117
n i,

Muhur  or  Muhar,  a coin,  306  and  n 1.

Mnid  Jajarmi,  one  of  the  poets  of  the
time  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-Din  ^ilji,
215.

Mu'id  of  Tarkhan,  author  of  a Turkish
romance  on  the  loves  of  Wamiq
and  ‘Azra,  40  n 1.  I

Mu'in  Waiz,  llaulana,  590.

Mn'inn-d-Din  Chishti,  Khwaja.  a
famous  saint,  70  and  n 2.  See
under  Mn‘inn-1-Ilaqq.

Mn'inn-d-Din  Qasan  Chishti,  Khtvaia,
70  n 2.  See  the  above.

Mu‘inu-d-Din,  Shai^,  grandson  of
Manlana  Mn'in  Wai/.,  Qazi  of  Labor
under  Hnmayun,  590.

Mn'inu-l-IJaqq  wa-d-Diu  Ajmiri,
Khwaia.  430.  Same  as  Mn'inu-d-
Diu  Chi^ti,  (q.  v.),

Mn‘ina-1-Malk  Miran  Sadr,  395.  See
under  Miran  Sadr  Naib-i-'Ar?-i-
Mamalik.

Muir’s  Life  of  Mahomet,  97  n 4,  105
n 2,  149  n,  216  n.

Mu'izzi  palace,  the  Kilughari  palace
(g.  v.j,  on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna,
231.

Mu'izzi  Sultans,  those  of  the  slaves
of  Saltan  Mu’izzu-d-Din  Sam  who
attained  sovereignty,  87  n 5.

Mu'izziyeh  Kings,  the  Amirs  of
Saltan  Ma‘izza-d-Diu  Sam  Ghuri,
87,  90.

Mu‘izza-d-Diu  Abu-l-Haris  Sinjar,

55  n 3.  See  under  Sinjar.

Mu‘izzu-d-Din  Bahram  Shah,  son  of
Sultan  Shamau-d-Diu  lyal-tiniish,  !

14

121  and  n 4,  122,  123  and  n 2,
124,  1S6.

Mu‘izza-d-Din  Kaiqubiid,  Sultan,  ibn
Sultan  Nasiru-d-Din  ibn  Sultan
Ghiyasg-d-Din  Balban,  220  and
n 2,  221  and  n 3,  222,  223  and  n 1,
224,  226,  227,  2 28  and  n 4,  229,
245.  See  also  under  Kaiqubad.

Mu‘izzu-d-Din  Muhammad  Sara
Ghuri.  well-known  under  the  title
of  Sultan  Shihabu-d-Din  Ghiiri.
10  n 2,  63,  64  and  n 3,  65  and
n 2,  66  n 2,  67  and  u,  59,  71,  72,
73  and  n 2,  74,  75,  76,  77  and  nn
1 and  3,  78,  79,  80,  81,  83  n 3,  85.
86,  S9,  90.

Mn‘izza-d-Din  Tnghral,  Governor  of
Lakhnauti,  186.  See  niider  Tngh-
ral.

Mnjahid  IQian,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
‘Adii,  of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty,
557.

Mu'jama-l-Bu!dr'iii  of  Yaqut,  a Geo-
graphical Dictionary,  8 n 2,  263  n,
476  n 5.

Mujawwaf  hollow  or  weak,  301  and
n 1.

Mujaz,  a work  on  medicine,  5 ti  S,
31  n.  See  under  al-Muykni.

Mujil,  the  man  in  onartre  of  che  arrows
in  the  game  of  mmsir,  369  n 1.

Mnjiru-d-Din  Aburijii,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Muhammad
Tnghlaq  Shfib,  305.

M-u'jizah,  a miracle  performed  by  a
prophet,  626  n.

Miijtahut,  highest  title  among  Muslim
divines,  636  n 2.

Mujtiis-i-  numininun,  a kind  of  metro,
607  n.

Index.

ovi

JIukdbir,  a stubbcru  disputant,  614
and  n 6.

'MuM.dlafat^  opposition,  576  n 5.

a servant  of  Malik  Fakhrn-
d-DIn  Silaiular  iq.  i'.),  308.  j

iltiklilis  Khan,  brother  of  Sultan
Ibrahim  »^arql,  of  Jannpur,

3S6  and  n 7.

of  Sa‘da-d-Din  at-Tafta*
zhni,  428  K 3.

Makbtass  Khan,  brother  of  Saltan
Ibialiim  .^ah  Sharqi  of  Jaunpur,
336  and  n 7.

Muirihidah,  the,  a sect  of  i^inslim
heretics,  73  n 2.  See  the  ne:tt.
Jiulljidnh,  the,  another  name  of  the
3atiiu  sect  of  .^ra)i  MasUms,  22
?i  3.  See  the  above.

Mnlhi  Muhammad  'Aziz,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Hum^yjn,  460  and  n 1.

the  botlkin  or  styh*  for  ap*
pl/iiig  knhl,  103  8

Multan,  12,  .19  and  n 5,  20  and  n 4,
21,  28,  29,  44,  00,  66  and  nn  2,  3
and  o,  69,  79  n.  3,  80  and  n 1,  S7,
90,  95,  9S  and  n 2,  120  and  a 8,
12b  and  n 1,  129.  130,  132,  133
d-nd  n 2,  ib7  ib9  rt  1,  19()  /.  2,

197,  193,  109.  2i>,  213.  217.219.
220  and  7^  2,  2j1.  222.  226.  229,  232,
233.  236.  241,  247  and  n and  a 1,
243,  210,  2."2.  284,  292,  293,  297.
298,  31*4,  32S.  335,  343,  352  353
and  h S,  35.1  358,  3('(2,  .n;,3,  376,
387,388.  .3n9  ,.!;d  ?.»/  2 ;.-‘d  4.

392,  398,  399.  402,  427,  464,  543.
rdultati  river,  the.  29,
jl'Oitruiis,  the,  3o±.

bluminpiir,  fort  of,  otherv  ise  cal!t.d
Patiuli,  on  tiiL*  Ganges.  218.

Muner,  town  of,  82  and  n 1.  Alsc
written  Maner.

Man'im  Khan,  ^han-i-Khanan,  one
of  the  great  Amirs  of  Hnmayun,
662,  565,  567  and  n 2,  591.

Mumif,  one  of  the  high  officers  of
the  State,  497.

MuntoJ^ahii-t‘Taicdnkh  of  Badaoni,
ll  and  fi  1.  332,  412,  447,  473,  497,
545,  579,  610,  632.

Muntokhabu-t’Tavjdn^  of  Haran  ibn
Muhammad  a.l« Khaki  ash-ShirazI.
11  n 1.

Mnqaddasa,  a title  of  the  town  of
Ij,  476.

Muqaddasi,  the  Arab  Geographer,
217  rt  2.

I Muqaddamzdda,  a slave  bcrii  in  the
j house,  334  and  n 1.

. Maqaddam-zada  of  Kabul,  501.

I Muqam-i-Sahuan,  in  the  desert  of
Ar^aii  between  Busbire  and
^iraz,  572  n 1.

Muqarrab  Shan,  title  of  Muqerrabu'h
Mulk,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  the
Firuz  Sll^hi  dynasty,  848  and  n 7,
i 349,  Sou  and  n 3,  351,  354,
i Muqarrabu'l-Mulk,  Malik,  346,  348.

I See  the  abov’e.

Muqbil,  the  servant  of  Khwaja-i-
Jaiu’m  of  Gujrat,  313.

Maqbil  Khiii.  Malik,  one  of  the  re-
i tainers  of  Mubarak  Sh'ih  of  the
! Suiyyid  dynasty  of  Dthfl.  386.

Muqim  Ilarawj,  Dlwan  of

j the  houseliold  of  Babar,  9 n-  2,  63  n.
, holder  of  a q'J\  396  3,

! Mni'ad.  ^ah,  son  of  ^ah  Tahmasp
of  Persia,  572,  573  and  .u  I,  575,
576.

Index.

evil

Murajjab,  A1-, — a title  of  the  month
of  Rajab,  441  2.

Mursad,  son  of  ^addad  ibn  ‘Ad,  a
king  of  tho  ancient;  Arabs,  263  n.

Murtaza,  the  chosen,  a title  of  ‘All  ibn
Abi  Tfilib,  74,  629  and  n 5.

Musa  al-Hadi,  the  ‘Abbaside  ^lalifah,
75  71.

Iili2s‘ab,  a traditioniatj  18  n i.

Mushal,  name  of  the  sixth  arrow  in
the  game  of  maisir,  369  n 1.

Mitshaf,  meanings  of  the  word,  615  n 5.

MiL^htarilc  of  Taqut,  a Geographical
work,  lo  n 5.

Musk,  notes  on,  n 2.

Mu$la  saMtan,  meaning  of  the  ex
pression,  296  7i  2.

Muslim  ibna-l-Walid,  a poet  of  the
Cou”t  of  Harucu-r*Rashid,  74  n 2*

Muslim  theologians,  614  n 2.

Muslima,  the,  83,  120,  143  n 3,  150
n 4,  176  n,  191  and  n 3,  194  and
nn  4 and  5,  201,  235,  256  ii  4,  361,
368  n 1,  377,  385  n 3,  387,  393,  395,
428  n 4,  432.  477,  4b';:{,  509  n o,
514.  522  and  n 5,  550,  565  and  rt  I,
576  n 5,  577  600  n 9.  6-2  n 7,

603  n 6,  625  ji  6,  626  i-nd  yi  b,  636
n 2-  See  also  atider  ihe  Muiian
madaiis  and  the  M-ihometai.s.

Mustafa,  the  Prophet  Muhaiiitnad,  59,
^^4,  475.

Mustafa  Farmall,  one  or  me  Afghan
Amirs  of  Hindasran.  444.

Mustafa! bud,  paryrjua  of,  596.

Muscakfi  bi-llahi  Abu-r-Rab?  Sulei-
man, thiid  of  the  h^bbusi  Khalifahs
ill  Egypt,  327  n 6,

I Mnsfcansir  billah,  the  ‘Abbaside  Khalb
fall  of  Baghdad,  88  n 3,  94  n 2,  311
n 4.

Mustang,  village  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Quetta,  567  n 9.
MutaraMz-i-ghdll,  a fanatical  heretic,
j 626  and  n 4.

Mu'tasim  billah,  eighth  Kha'^ifah  of
the  House  of  ‘Abbas,  571  n 2.
Mutaivical  of  Sa‘du-d-Dm  at-Taf.;a-
i zani,  428  and  ?i  3.

I Ma‘tazid  bi-liahi  Abu  Bakr  ibnud-
; Mustakfi  bi-Ilahi,  sixth  of  jhe
I ‘Abbasi  Khnllfabs  in  Egypt;  327
I n 6

I

I Mnchra  or  Mahura,  a sacred  town  of
j the  Hindus,  24  n 6.

I Mutmnra.  See  ^ihab-i-M^atmnra,
the  Poet.

Mnttra,  District  of,  134  n 1,  366  n.
Muttra,  town  of,  in  the  Doab,  377
n 6v

I MrtwazzinI,  Mania  l^usamu*d-DIn,

I author  of  a conimetirary  on  the
j Mtftdhu-l 423  7i  2.

. ilu'yad  Beg.  one  of  the  Amirs  of
j Humfiyun.  574.

i Mnzaffar,  Malik,  Gorernor  of  Gujrat
under  Sultiiii  Mnbammad  Tuglilag
314.

■ Mu^aff-,r  Khun,  nephew  of  Sh.aikh
j ‘All  rniot  of  Kilbui,  3b9,  399,  392.
j Mu/affar  ^ih  of  CTiijilt,  contem*

I poiary  of  the  FirCz  •bhrdii  dynasty,

! 363  2

Mu/affainagar  Disti’icr,  373  n 1.
Mu'zain,  Khwujfi,  one  of  die  Anrrs
I of  Huinuyun,  566.

CTIU

Index.

Nabadwip,  another  name  of  Nadiya,
old  capital  of  Bengal,  82  n 4.

Nablh,  of  the  tribe  of  Qnraish,  Villea
at  the  battle  of  Badr,  74  n 2.

Nadar  Dev,  Kai,  Governor  of  Arankal
under  Saltan  ‘Alau-d-Din  Khilji,
265  and  n 4.  j

Nadim,  foster-brother  of  Hnmayun,  j
564  and  nn  8 and  9.  j

Nadiri-i-Samarqandl,  Manlana,  one  of
the  poets  of  the  time  of  Hnmayun,
611,  612,  613,  616  and  n 2.  I

Nadiya,  once  the  capital  of  Bengal,  ;

81  71  2,  82  71  4 Called  also  Nudiya.  ■
Nafakdtu^UUns  of  Manlana  ‘Abdu-r-  !

Rahman  JamI,  270  and  n 4,  609  n 5
Kafd'isU’UMa^dsir,  Lives  of  the  Poets,
616  71  4,  618  71  5.

NdjU^  name  of  the  fonrxh  arrow  in
the  game  of  maisir,  369  n 1
Na/s,  the  soul,  144  n 2,  145  n 1.
NafsU’l’^Aql,  the  reason  or  discrimi-
nating faculty,  145  n 1.  i

Hafsu-l-^aydt,  the  breath  of  life,  145  |

nl-  ' i

Kafsu-n-Ndtiqah,  the  reasoning  facal-  ;

ty,  145  71  1.  I

Nagar  Cott,  fortress  of,  20  n 5.  See  i
Nagar  Kot.  I

Nagar  Kot,  fortress  of,  20  n 6,  331,  j
341,  342,  495.  Also  called  Ehim-  j
nagar  and  Kot  Kangra.  j

Nagaur, — or  i

Nagor,  city  of,  124,  129,  130,  251,
357  71  3,  379  and  n 1,  423,  425,  477,
563.

Nah&r  Pu.,  nephew  of  Himiin  Baqqal,  I
•the  Hindu  General  of  ‘Adii,  553  |
nn  5 and  6.

Naharwala,  a city  of  Gnjrat,  called
also* Patau  or  Pattan,  28  and  ti  2,
71  and  n 3,  89,  256  and  n 4.  282.

Nahid,  name  of  the  planet  Venus  in
Persian,  138  and  n 3.

Nahir.  a Hindu  General  in  the  service
of  Sultan  Mas*ud  ibn  Mahmud  Gh>iz-
nawi,  36  and  n 9.

Kahfidn,  Mars  and  Saturn  as  the  two
stars  of  ill  omen.  217  n 5.

Nabv  (Tuhfa)  Taja-l-Mulk,  one  of
the  Maliks  of  Khizr  Khan  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty  of  Dihli,  376  and
71  2.

Nai,  fortress  of,  53  n,  54  nn  1 and  3.

ydib  of  the  hands,  286  n 1 .

Ndih-i-jihdhzdda.  Malik  Sadhu  Nadir
(q.'v.),  378.

Naib  Malik, —or

Naibu-l-Mulk  Kafur,  title  of  Malik
Manik,  the  slave  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-
Din  25!  and  n 7.  252,  256,

2G5  and  nn  1 and  G,  267,  263,  271
n 6,  272,  273  and  n 1,  Called
also  Bazar  Dinnri.

Nails,  Paring  of,  139  ti  5.

Nariman,  one  of  the  heroes  of  the
Shflhnd7na,  35  n 2,  72.

Naifcin  or  Nisan,  first  month  of  the
Jewish  year,  108  n 4.

Najam-i-Sani.  See  Najra-i-Sani.

I Xajdtu-r^'Rashid  of  Badaoni,  511  and

1 n 2,  009  and  n 3.

Najm.  An-,  the  Pleiades,  630  n 4.

Naim  Sh.ih,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
^ah  Isma'il  Safawi  of  Persia,  570.

I Najm-i-Awwal,  one  of  the  Amirs  of

j ^ah  Isma'il  Safa>vi  of  Persia,  570
and  n 5.

Index.  cix

J^R]*m'i*Sani  TsfahM,  one  of  the
Amtrs  of  Shab  Isma*!!  Safavri  of
Persia,  570  n 5.

Najmu-d-Dia,  Saiyyid,  regent  of
Malik  Sikandar  of  Labor  (q,  i;,),
390.

Najmn-d-Dm  Abu  nn^r.  the  feaclm-l-
Mulk,  Wnzir  of  Snltan  ‘Aiaa-d-Dln
Mas'ud  Shab  of  the  Shamsiyah
dynasty,  124,

Najmti-d-Din  Hasan,  Shaikh.  270  n
Same  as  the  famous  poet  Mir
Hasan  Dihlavi  (q.  v.)

Najmti-d-Din  ‘Umar  bin  ‘Ali  QaxwTnT,
anthor  of  the  Shnmsjyah,  4*27  n 1.

Na^shab,  fortress  of,  in  Klburasin.
570.  Otherwise  called  KhsH.

Ndma~i’Khirad  Afzn  of  Badaoni,  95
and  n 6.

Ka*raat  j^atun,  wife  of  Qnjb  Khan
Lodi  (g.  r.),  423  and  n 2.

Na'mat  Easull, — or

Na‘matn*lllh  KusulT,  Mir  Saiyyid,
one  of  the  poets  and  lean»ed  men
of  the  lime  of  lelem  Shah  Sar,  633
and  n 7,  534  and  n 4.

Nami,  son  of  Muhammad,  son  of
Sultan  Mahmud  Ghaznawi,  47  and
n3.

Nanda,  the  Raja  of  Kiilinjar,  contem-
porary of  Snltan  Mahmud  Ghaz-
nawi,  25,  26.

Nandana,  a city  on  the  mountains  of
BaJnath,  22  and  n 5,  128  and  v 3.

K.indanpour,  128  n 3.  Same  as
Xandana  (q.  i’.).

Naqir^  the  small  groove  on  the  date
stone.  496  n 10.

Kaqqura,  a kind  of  drums,  143  n 2.

Aag|h,  ornamental  figures,  588  n 4.

Naq^bandf  a weaver  of  KamlAabs
adorned  with  figahes,  588  n 4.

Naq^band,  Khwaja  Bahau-d-Din,  of
Bokhara,  a famous  saint,  588  n 4.

NaqshbandT,  Khwaja  Khawind.  con-
temporary of  Babar,  446.

Naqshbandi  School,  the,  588  n 4.

Naqshbandi  Shaikhs,  the  followers  of
the  renowned  saint  Khwaja  Baba-
n-d*Din  Naq^ibaud  of  Bokhara.
588  n 4.

Narain,  town  of.  on  the  banks  of  the
river  Sarsnti.  69  and  n 4.

Naran-Koe,  town  of,  85  n 4.

Narbada  river,  the,  517  n 9.

Narcissus,  notes  on,  373  and  n 3.

Nmd/n,  a perfume,  146  n 6.

Narela,  a place  in  the  neighbourhood
of  Dihli,  21  n 4.

Nargis  or  Narji^,  the  poet’s  narcissus,
373  n 3.

Nnrkila,  town  of.  186  and  n 4.

Narma  SiiTrin,  the  Mughal,  brother
of  Qnclogh  Khwaja  (q  r.),  305,

Narnili,  District  of,  85  and  n 4.

Naroaul,  in  the  province  of  Miwat,
365  n 8.  See  the  two  nest.

Narnol.  capital  city  of  the  district  of
Miwat,  129  n 2,  365  and  ri  8,  395,
466.

Naniul.  district  and  town  of.  365,
466.  See  the  two  above.

Nnrsingh,  Rai,  361  n 2.  See  Km
Harsingh.

Nanvan.  the  tree  called  Gulndr^  172
and  n 3«

Narwar,  fortress  of,  a dependency  of
Malwa,  129  w 4,  130  and  31  i,  422
and  nn  3 and  5.

Narwar,  Sarkar  of,  130  n 1.

cx

Index.

Kasaf,  a town  of  Khurasan,  called
also  Kaklishab.  570  n 7.

La^dzar,  the  Chariot  or  the
four  stars  composing  the  body  of
the  Great  Bear,  198  n 2.

Nasib  Khan  Taghuchi, — or
Nasifa  Khan  Taghfiji,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty
of  Dihli,  542,  593.

Ifasib  ^fih,  Governor  of  Bangila,
contemporary  of  Sbir  ghah  and
Humayun,  457.

KasThin,  a town  of  Mesopotamia,  61
n 5.

Ndni^U'UTatcdrlkh  of  Lisann-I-Mnlk,
154  n 8.

Khan  Afghan,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty,  592.
Ka?Ir  Khan  LubanI,  one  of  the  Gene-
rals of  Sultan  Ibrahim  Lodi,  434,
444.  446  and  n 1.

Nasirabad,  in  the  Jodhpar  State,  j
Rijputaiia,  379  7t  1.  |

Na?iri,  a poet  of  the  time  of  Saltan  j
^amsa-d-Din  lyaltimish,  92.  ■

Nanru-d-Din  Aba-l'I^rdr  ‘Abdu-llah  j
Bai/uvsi.  Qa?i,  6 n 4.  See  under  |
Bai/3wl.  I

Nasiru-d-Din  Ahmad  Khr»ttu,  Shaikn.  j
sarnatned  Ganjbakl.^h,  35'^  n 3.  •

Kasirn-d-Din  Bgghra  Saltan,  j

son  of  Saltan  Ghiyssa-d-DIn  Bal-  I
ban,  135  and  n and  a I,  186,  i87,  j
218,  219,  220  n 2,  221  a 3.  222,  223  j
and  n 1,  224,  j

NasIra-d-Din  Baghra  Khan,  219  n 1.  |
See  Nusira-d-Din  Hr.ghra  ^han.  |
Xasiru-d-Din  Cruragh-i-D’bli,  Shaikh,  j
contemporary  of  Sultan  Firoz  -^ah  j
Tughlaq,  322,  323.  i

Nasiru-d-Din  Husain,  the  Amir-i-
Shikar,  one  of  the  Maliks  of  Saltau
Mn‘izzn-d-Din  Muhammad  Sam
GhuTi,  74  71  1.

Nasiru-d-Din  Isma'il  Fath,  Saltan,
314.  See  Isma^il  Fath.
Nasiru-d-Din  &usru  Khin^  the
favourite  of  Suitan  Qutbu-d-Din
Khilji,  290.  See  ^hnsru  Khan
Hasan  Barawar  bacha.

Na^ira-d-Din  of  Lakhnautl,  Sultan,
contemporary  of  Sulf.an  Ghiyiisu  d-
Din  Tughlaq  ^ah,  299.

Najini-d-Din  Mahmud  I.,  Sni};,an,  soi
of  Sultan  ^amsn-d-Din  lyaltimish,
91,  126  71  3.

Nasirn-d-Din  Mahmud  IT..  Sultan,
son  of  Sulyan  Sljamsu-d-Din  Jyal-
timish,  of  the  Slave  dynasty,  124,
125,  128  and  n 3,  127  ^ind  n 1,
134,  135  n and  ?i  ],  136,  139,  187.
Nasiru-d-Din  Mahmud  S]_ih.  ibn-i-
Muhnmmad  ^ah,  of  the  Firuz
ghahi  dynasty,  348  350  n 3.  See
unde?'  Mahmud  gbah.

Nasiru-d-Din  of  Mulwa,  Scltan,  con-
temporary of  tlie  Lodi  dynasty  of
DihlT,  423.  424.

Nusira  d-Din  Muhammad  ilnmaTua
Fads3hali-i-Gha.2i.  451,  5 5 9.  See
under  Humayun.

Nasiru-d-Din  Muhammad  son

of  Saltan  Firuz  ^ah  TnghViq,  324,
337.  See  under  Miihamtaad  SJiah.
Nasiru-d-Diu  iluhainmad  Shah,  Sul-
tan, o6l.  see  Tatar  Khun,  son  of
2^afar  Elhag.

Nasiru-d-Diu  Muhammad,  Malik,  son
of  Shamsu-d-Din  lyaltimi^,  87
and  n 2.

Index,

cxi

Na§iru-d*I3m  Nnsiat  Sbahj  son  of
Fath  Khan,  son  of  Sultan  Firoz
Shah,  350.  See  under  Xnarat  Shah

Nasiru-d'Din  Qabachah,  Sultan  of
Sind,  one  of  the  slaves  of  Saltan
Mu‘izza-d'Dm  Sam  GhurT,  79  and
n 3,  SO,  88  and  n 1,  90  and  n 2.

Nasiru-d-Din,  aon  of  Shauian-d-Dm
Jyal-timish,  94.  See  under  Nasiru-
d-Din  Mahmud.

• I

Nasiru-d-Din  Subnktigln,  rnler  of  ^
Kabul  and  founder  of  the  ^azni*  |
vide  dynasty,  13  and  n 1,  14  and

I Naoshahr,  a name  of  the  town  of
I Jhain  (q.  v.),  257.

Nanshahm,  the  town  of  Kowshera,
465  and  n 2.

Naushirwan.  Chosroes  i.,  son  of
Kobad,  King  of  Persia  of  the  Sas*
sanide  dynasty,  46  and  D 5,  162.

Katcanl,  voluntary  prayers,  488  n 7.

Nawar  wife  of  al-Farazdaq,  the
famous  Arab  poet,  287  n 2.

Nawass,  a name  of  SQkhpal,  the
grandson  of  tTaipal,  contemporary
of  Saltan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  20

«l,  15.  !

Nasiru-d-Din  TQsT,  K3iwaia.  a cele-
brated mathematician  and  ShPah
divine,  577  r

Nasiru-I-Haqq,  a title  of  kings,  161.
NasTrud-Mulk  ‘Adil  Khan,  one  of
the  Maliks  of  the  Firuz  ShabI  dy-
nasty, 354.  ^

Nasr-i-  ITi'ir,  the  constellation  Eagle,  |
321  and  n 3.  j

Nasrain-i-falak,  the  constellations  |
Eagle  and  Lyre,  630  a 1 . j

Nasrat  ^an,  129  n 2.  See  Nusrat
Khan,  son  of  Fath  Khan  and  grand-
son of  Sujt.ui  FTrQz  Shah.

Nnsrat  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Saltan  ‘Alan-d-DIn  Khiljl,  249.  See
nnder  Nasrat  Khan  Jnlis.iri,
Nasru-llah  of  Bangula,  ^ai^,  uncle
of  ‘Alai  of  Baiaua,  5U7.

Nath,  one  of  the  Chiefs  of  Hind  under
Sultan  Ma8‘ud  ibn  Mahmud  Ghaz-
nawl,  36  n 9.

Nauhat,  music  played  daily  by  a band
at  stated  hours,  498  and  n 3.

Nanroz,  the  greatest  feast  among  the
Persians,  166  n 1.

n 4-

Na/^r  Shaikh  JQII  or  Jnma‘alj,  one  of
the  court  officers  of  Humayun,
601  and  n 3.

Nazarenes,  the,  207.

* Nazim  u-d- Din,  Maulana,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  ^ir  v^ah,  of  the  Afghan
Sur  dy!ia.*Dy  of  Dihli,  482  and  n 3,

NizukI  Maraghi.  the  Poet,  contem’
porary  of  Sultan  Mu'izzn-d-Dii
Sam  ^uri,  75.

Nebula  of  the  Pleiades,  630  n 4.

Nehroala,  a city  of  Gujrat,  28  n 2.
Same  as  Naharwala  (q.  l*.).

Nellore  (Nilawar’,  town  of,  265  n 5,

N#^riman  le  Pehlevau,  35  n 2.  See
under  Nariman.

Newa  Kishore  Press,  487  n 6.

Ney,  Marshal,  157  n 2.

Ney  Elias,  Tt/r/i/i-i-Bnsh/di,  305,  454
n 8.  See  under  Elias  and  Ross.

Nijim  Sani  (Najrn-i-vSanl)  Isfahan!,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  ^ah  Ismadl
Safawi  of  Persia,  570  n 5.

Hikahj  marriage  contract,  522  and  n 5.

Niliwar  { Nellore J,  town  of,  265  Ji  5.

Nile,  the,  210,

JCXll

Index.

tree  (Melia  azadiraehta),  129

n 2.

Nimalc,  meanings  of  the  word,  493  n 2.

Ni‘mata-llah  of  Baiina,  Saiyyid,  one
of  the  learned  and  holy  men  of  the
time  of  Sultan  Sikandar  Lodi,  424

Nimrod,  154  n 8,  207,  234.  See  aUc
under  Nimrud.

Kimroz,  territory  of,  13  n 1,  29.

NinirQd,  155  n,  176.  See  also  undei
Nimrod.

NIsan  or  Naisan,  first  month  of  the
Jewish  year,  108  n 4.

Nisari  Tunl,  a celebrated  Persian
poet,  622.

Nisapur, — or

NIshapiir,  a town  of  Khurasan.  16  n.  2,
34,  36,  42  and  n 1,  43  n 1,  50  n 2,
54  n 1,  b33.

Kfshtary  a lancet,  504.

Nitas,  Sea  of,  — the  Black  Sea,  153
n 1.

JTiwdr,  495  n,

Niyal  Tigm  Amir  Ahmad,  treasurer
of  Saltan  Mas'ud  ibn  Mahmud
Ghaznawi,  36  and  nn  6,  8 and  9.

Niyazi  Afghans,  the,  492,  493,  495,
497,  498,  499,  500,  508,  518,  520,
525.

N’lram,  a governor,  one  who  orders
and  directs,  612  n 1.

Nizam,  the  water-carrier  who  rescued
Humiyun  from  drowning,  461  and
n 3.

Nizam,  a youth  mentioned  in  the
poetry  of  Manlana  Nadiri-i-Samar-
qandi  611.

Nizam’s  dominions,  the,  299  n 3.

Nizam  Astarabadi,  a master  in  astro-
nomical poetry,  621,  626.

Nizam  Khan  of  Baiana,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Lodi  family,  443,  445.

Nizam  ^an,  son  of  Sultan  Buhlul
Lodi,  afterwards  Sultan  Sikandar
Lodi,  411.

Nizam  Khan,  son  of  Hasan  ^ian  SQr
and  full  brother  of  Shir  ^ah,  467
n 5,  468,  495  and  n 4.

Nizam  Shah  Bahri,  ruler  of  the
Dakkan,  625  and  n 3,  635,  636.  See
also  under  Nizamn-l-MuIk  Bahri.

Nizam  ^ahi  dynasty  of  the  Dakkan,
I 533  n 6.

[ Nizami,  nom  de  plume  of  Khwaja
Nigamu'd'Din  Ahmad,  author  of
the  Tabaqat-i-Akbari,  10,  45  and
n 1.

Nizami, — or

Nizami  Ganjawi,  Shaikh,  the  famous
Persian  poet,  96  ti  1,  114  71  2,  174
vn  2 and  3,  269  n 5,  398  and  n 4.

Nizamii-d-Din,  Malik,  nephew  of
Maliku-l'Umara  Kotwal  of  Dibli
(g.  V.),  220  aud  n 3.

Nizimu-d-Din  Ahmad,  father  of
Manlana  ^Abdu-r-Bahman  Jami,
272  71  1.

Nij^amu-d-Din  Ahmad,  sou  of  Khwaja
Mnqim  Harawi,  author  of  the
Tabaqdt-i-Alcharij  9 H 2,  10  n,  45
71  1,  62,  63  71,  569  n 6,  580  n 5,  5S5
n 7

Nijcarau-d-Din  Ahmad  Iliaa  ibn  Abi
Yusuf  al-Mutarrazi,  name  of  the
celebrated  ptjet  Nizami,  298  ti  4.

Nizamu-d-Dia  ‘Aiaqa,  Malik,  Wazir
of  Sultan  Mu‘izza-d-Din  Kaiqubad
of  the  Balbani  dynasty,  220,  221,
222,  224.  See  also  under  Nigamu-l-
Mulk  ‘Aiaqa.

Index.

Ni7amTi-d-I)m  Anliya,  6on  of  Ahmad
Danyal, — the  Prince  of  Holy  men,
71  n 2,  236  and  H 2,  266  and  n 1,
267,  269  n 5,  270  and  -n  6,  271  nn  1
and  4,  284,  301,  610  and  n 4,  611  n=

NizIran-d-DIn  Beghu  Halik  Shah,  the
Turkoman,  contemporary  of  Sultan
Mas’ud  GhaznaTvI,  39.

NizamU'd-DIu  ilalik  Shah,  the  Saljuq,
41.  See  under  Malik  ^ah  Sal-
juqi

Kizamu-d-Din  of  Ondh,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Saltan  Piroz  Shah
Tughlaq,  334.

NizamU'l-Auliya,  236  and  n 2.  Same
as  Nizamu-d-DIn  Auliya  (g.  v.).

Nizamu-l-Mulk  ‘Alaqa,  Wazir  of
Sultan  Mu‘izzu*d-Din  Kaiqubad  of
the  Balbani  dynasty,  222,  224,  226,
230  n I.  See  also  under  Nizamu'd*
Din  *Alaqa.

Nizamu-l-Mulk  Bahri,  King  of  the
Dakkan,  533,  534,  625  and  n 3.
See  also  under  Nizam  Shah.

Nizamu-l-Mjjlk- Husain,  eon  of  Amir
Miran,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Firoz  ^ah,  333  and  n 2.

Nizamu-l-Mulk  Jandi  ( JunaidI),  Wazir
of  Sultan  Shfimsu-d-DTn  lyal-
timish,  90,  98,  119,  120.

Nizamu-l-Mulk  Juudi  (Junaidi),  l20.
See  the  above,

Nizamu-l-Mulk  of  Karra,  Malik,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Sultln  Muhammad
Tughlaq  .^ah,.311.

Nizanni-l-Malk  Muhnzzabu*d-Din,
Wazir  of  the  Shamsiyah  Sultans,
120.  122.  123  and  n 3,  124.

Niramu't-Taivurikh  of  Baizawi,  10  n 3
-34  n 7,  51,

csiii

Kizdmu-t-Tau'dri^  of  Nizamu-d-Dm
Ahmad,  more  commonly  known  as
the  Tahaqdt‘i‘Ah.jart,  10  and  n 3.

Noah  of  the  Scriptures,  61  n 5;  154
n 2,  198  n 1.

Noldeke’s  Beitrdge  zur  Kenntniss  der
Poesie  der  alien  Arahe,  99  n 6.

North-Western  Provinces  of  India
218  K 3,  377  n 3,  410  n 4,  486  n 6,
546  nn  3,  4 and  5.

Northern  Asia,  191  n 2.

Northern  India,  23  n 2.

No^aba  or  Niishaba,  image  of,  S31,
332  n.

Nowshera  (Naushahra),  town  of,  465
and  n 2.

Nuda  Bahadul*  Shah,  Governor  of
Sunar  Ganw,  contemporary  of  SuU
tan  Ghiyasn-d-Din  Tnghlag  Shah,
299,  300

Nudii,— or

Nadiya,  old  capital  of  Bengal,  82  and
« 4.  Called  also  Nadiya  (g.  r.).

Nuh  and  Fatal,  name  of  a place,  359,
See  also  under  Nuh  Fatal.

Nuh  ibn  Lamak,  Noah  of  the  Scrip-
tures, 154  and  n 2,  556.  See  also
under  Noah.

Nuh.  son  of  Mansur,  son  of  Nuh
Samani,  of  the  dynasty  of  the
Samanis,  the  kings  of  Khorasan
and  Transoziana,  14  JX  1,  15  and
n 4.

Nuh  Fatal,  a ford  on  the  river  Jamna,
386.  See  also  Nuh  and  Fatal.

Nuh  Sipihr,  one  of  the  poetical  works
of  Mir  Khusru,  the  famous  poet  of
Dihli.  273  n 3,  274  n 1.

NuhanT,  for  Luhani  (g.  v.),  413  n 8.

Nuhini  Afghans  of  Baiana.  549.

lo

cxiv

Index.

yukhanl,  for  Luh^ni  {a,  u.},  413  and
nn  3 and  12.

'Ku'Matu-d^Bahr  of  DimashqT,  147
% 3.

Knmbers,  the  Eook  of,  302  n.  2.

Nuru-d-Din  ‘Abda-r-Eahman  Jaml,
Mnlla,  32  n 2,  272  nl.  See  nnder
Jami.

Surn-d-Din  Muhammad  "Cfl  of  Merv,
33  n 1.  See  under  ilubammad  Cfi.

Nu^uba  or  Xoshaba,  image  of,  331,
332  n.

Nusrat  JallsarT,  Malik,  247.  See  un-
der Nusrat  Khan  JalisarT.

Nusrat  ^han,  son  of  Fath  KEan,  son
of  Sultan  Firoz  Shah.  350.  See
under  Nusrat  Shah.

Nusrat  Khan,  son  of  Ghiyasn-d-Din
Tughlaq  Shah,  297.

Nusrat  JOafin  Gurgandaz,  one  of  the
Malika  of  the  FIruz  Shahi  and

Saiyyid  dynasties,  364  and  n 1,^
390,  391.

Nusrat  Jalisari,  one  of  the

Maliks  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-Din

Silti,  247,  248,  249,  254,  256,
258.

Nusrat  Khan  Karkandaz,  864.  See
under  Nusrat  Khan  Gnrgandaz,

Nusrat  Khan  Luhani,  one  of  the

Generals  of  Sultan  Ibrahim  Lodi,
446  n 1.  See  under  Nasir  Khiin.

i.,usrat  Khan  Maliku-sh-Sharq  Mar-
wan-i-Daulat,  one  of  the  Mahks  of
Sultan  Firoz  Shah,  335  and  n 1,
376.

Nu|rat  Khukhar,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amira  of  Saltan  Mahmud  of  the
Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,  358  n 6.

Nu?rat  ^ah,  Sultan,  son  of  Fath

Khan,  son  of  Sultan  Firoz  Shah
Tughlaq,  360,  351,  352,  354,  359.

Ochns,  father  of  Parysatis,  wite  of
Alexander  the  Great,  332  n.

Old  Dihli,  366  n 1,  472.

Oloug  Beg,  the  royal  astronomer,

19S  71  2.

Omar  Khayyam,  the  celebrated  Poet,
144  n 1,  474  n 1.

Onyx,  notes  on,  147  n 3.

Oodypur,  called  also  Udhafar,  town
of,  12,  13  n.

Oozbuky,  Abu  Mansur,  47  n 7 See
under  Abu  Mansur  Zangi.

Opium,  notes  on,  161  and  n 3.

Oriental  Biogiapliical  Zfictionary,
Beale’s,  32  n 1,  33  » 1,  38  a 4,  53  n,  j
54  2,  53  n 3,  58  n 5,  23G  n 3,  ’

O.

! 297  n,  2'JS  n 332  n 2,  339  n 4,

507  n 2,  533  nn  1 and  6,  571  n 9,
584  n and  n 3,  633  n 1.

Oriental  Fruverls,  Koebnck’s,  57  n 2,
58  n 1,  218  n 2,  244  n 5,  301  n 3.
Orientals,  the,  147  n 1.

Orissa,  125  n 3,  299  n 2,  471  and  n 8,
554

Oabaks,  the.  See  under  the  Oznaks.

I Osborn’s  lalim  under  the  Arabr,  157
I n 2.

j Osrashna,  a town  beyond  Samarqand
in  Transoxiana,  59  n 1.

Oudli.  81,  87,  98,  125,  131,  222  and  n
3.  236,  239,  243,  311,  312,  329  n 2,
334,  349,  415.

Index.

cxv

Owl,  the,— the  type  of  ill-omen,  58  n

1,  157  and  n 1,  191  n 3.

OluB,  the,  13  TO  5,  23  n 1,  27  nn  1 and

2,  61  TO  5.  See  also  under  the
Jaibun  and  the  Jlhun.

Oxyartes,  father  of  Boxana,  wife  of
Alexander  the  Great,  331  to  10.
Ozbaks,  the,  a tribe  of  the  Turks,  570,
582,  and  n 7,  592  and  to  9,  627  and
TO  7.  See  the  Osbaka.

P.

abandh  Khabrak, — or
abaudh  Khazak,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Isiem  Shah,  of  the  Afghan  Sur
dynasty  of  Dihli,  495  and  to  5.

Padham,  town  of,  377.

Fadmawati,  name  of  a place,  329.

Pddzahr,  the  Bezoar  stone,  called
Hajaru-l-Haiyyah,  118  to.

Vdik  or  Paik,  a runner,  302  and  n 3.

Pak  Patan, — or

Pak  Pattan,  the  town  of  Ajiidhan,
133  TO,  355  TO  1,  362  n 2,  363  to,  520
n zi.

Pakhdwaj,  a large  kind  of  drum,  537
and  TO  3.

Falam,  town  of,  311,  351  and  n 10.

Palhanpur,  for  the  town  of  Ilahpiir,
410  TO  3.

Palmer’s  Qiir’an,  194  to  4,  216  to,  372
TO  1,  519  TO  7.

Palwal,  township  of,  547  and  to  5.

Pan,  or  betel,  303  to.

Panchana  river,  the, — in  Magadh,  82
TO  1.

Fanduah,  town  of,  323  to  3,  329.
andus,  family  of  the,  293  to  5.

Paneali,  town  of,  81  » 4,

Panipat,— or

Panipath,  town  of,  21  to  4,  343,  351
352,  354,  366  and  n 3,  391,  440,
4u8,  592,  TO  9,  609  « 5.

Panjab,  the,  78  and  n 3,  90,  123,  217,
388,  389  TO  2,  391,  437  to  8,  446,
462,  464,  466  m 6,  491,  492,  498,
505,  518,  520,  523,  530,  534,  642,

543,  559,  590  to  5,  594,  596,  598  to
10,  601.

Panj  Bhaiya,  or  the  five  irothers,  Amirs
of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty  of  Dihli,

544,  547.

Panjgah,  town  of,  622.

Panj  Ganj,  one  of  the  poetical  works
of  Mir  Khusru,  the  famous  poet  of
Dihli,  269  n 5.

Panjnad  river,  the,  66  to  3.

Fanna,  town  and  district  of,  416  to  6,
417  and  toto  5,  6 and  7,  433  « 3.
Pantar,  township  of,  559  and  to  7,
560.

Panwars,  the, — a clan  of  the  Eajputs,
384  and  to  3.

Parak,  the  star  Canopus,  152  to  6.  — -
Param  Talao,  name  of  a place,  329.
Parama  Dev,  one  of  the  Rajas  of
Hindustan  at  the  time  of  Mahmud
of  Ghaznin’s  invasion,  29  n.

Parbati,  the, — a tributary  of  the
Chambal  river,  385  to  3.

Parihau  Dev,  Eai,  contemporary  ot
Saltan  Firoz  Shah  Tughlao.  329
and  TO  9.

paring  of  nails,  139  n 5,

cxvi

Index.

Paris,  67  n 1,  223  n 1,  265  n 6,  272  ra,
311  Ti  5.

Par^adar,  for  Par^awar  (g.  r.),  591
n 4s.

Parshawar,  haltiag-place  of,  591  and
n 4.

Parshawara,  original  name  of  the
town  of  Peshawar,  48  n 5.

Parshur,  the  modern  Peshawar,  48
and  n 5,  66  and  n 6.

Parysatis,  wife  of  Alexander  the
Great,  332  n.

Pashala,  town  of,  583  and  n 2.

Pntal,  town  of,  359,

Fatal,  a mat,  61S  n 2.

Patan  or  Pattan,  a city  tf  Gujerat,
anciently  called  Naharwala,  28  and
n 2,  71  and  « 3.

■^'atan-i-Panjab,  the  same  as  Pak
Patan  or  Ajudhan,  133  a,  520.

Putar  or  Fdtu/',  a dancing  girl,  332  n
0,  496  and  n 4.

Patar,  name  of  a place,  559  n 7.
Fathan  Kings  of  Dehii,  Ihomaas,  64
m 3,  77  n 2,  83  n 3,  87  nn  1 and  6,
88  n 1,  91  a 5,  210  n 1,  126  n 3,
135  n 1,  269  «'i  1 and  2,  307  n,  310
n 2,  311  n 4,  325  n 1,  326  a,  327  n 6,
337  n 344  n 7,  315  n 4,  316  a 5.
317  n 3,  351  nn  1.  9 and  11,  352
m 2,  350  n 4.  366  uni  and  4,  309
n 7,  400  n 1 , 556  n 5,  618  n 1.
Pathna,  for  the  town  of  Puun.i,  417
n 5-

Pathura,  Kfii,  Governor  of  Ajmir,
contemporary  of  Sultan  llu’izzn-d-
Din  Jliihammad  Sam  Ghfiri,  69,  70,
257  and  a 3.

Patiala,  town  of,  99  « 3,  131  n 4.  See
the  next.

Patiali,  town  in  Aliganj  tahsil  Etah
District,  X.-W.  Provinces,  81  and
n 4,  185  and  n 1,  218  and  n 3,  413
and  n 10.  See  the  above.

Paticah,  town  of,  81  n 4.

Patna,  town  of,  82  n 1,  415  and  n 3,
416,  417,  n 5,  470,  471,  485.

Patna,  for  the  town  of  Thatta,  408  n 7.
Patta,  name  of  a place,  416  n 6.

Pattan  or  Patan,  a city  of  Gnjerat,
28  and  n 2,  71  and  n 3.

Pattan  of  the  Panjab,  the  same  as
Pak  Pattan  or  Ajiidhan,  520  and
n 2.

Fitur  or  Fdtar,  a dancing  girl,  332
n 5,  496  and  n 4.

Pdtur  bdzty  a kind  of  entertainment,
332  and  n 6.

Pavet  de  Conrteille,  Victionnaire
Tnrk-Orientaly  91  n 1,  215  nn  1
attd  o,  240  n 6*  250  n 6,  258  n 5,
2o0  n 1,  292  i,  3,  313  n 3,  325  n 2,
353  n 1,  354  n 7.  424  n 3,  439  nn  4
and  7,  440  n,  464  n 5,  468  n 2,  494
n 7,  497  n I,  543  n Ij  568  n 5,  569
nn  5 and  6,  574  n 5,  578  n 9,  580
7t  5,  592  n 5,  590  n 6.

Fayak,  for  the  tovm  of  Prayag  {q,  r.),
415  n 5

Pdijiky  a runner,  302  n 3.

Perceval.  See  under  Cauasin  de  Per-
ceval,

PerMfi,  33  ti  1,  46  n 5,  119  ri  5,  141
t n 4,  209  n 3,  233,  421,  618  n 1,

I Pei-siau  Game  of  Chess,  103  n'l,

1 115  fi,  479  n 7.

Pt'f'i'i/i  O I'anihKir.  Platt's,  546  n 1.
Persian  30  ti  1.

Persians,  the,  35  n 2,  43  7i  1,  93  n 4,
1 iU4  n 3,  109  n 4,  166  n 1,  170  n,

Index.

CXVil

17o  n,  198  n 2,  230  n 4,  253  n 6,
280  n 3,  476  n 5.

Persico-Latin  ii  rn  Le  t zcon,  Yiiiler’s.
440  n.

Pertab,  Eai,  one  of  the  Ifaliks  of
the  Saiyyid  dynasty  of  Dihli,  401
n 2.

Perthas,  son  of  Gaz  the  son  of  Japhet,
61  n 5,

Peshawar,  IS,  48  n 5,  66  n 6,  128  n 3.

Philosophers,  Pour  kinds  of,  181
n 2.

Phcenicians,  tlie,  104  n 2,

Phthisis,  319  and  n 4,  320  n.

Pilhandy  a stratagem  in  the  game  of
Chess,  114  n 2.

Find  Dadan  Siuu  tahf/l,  Jhllani  Dis*
trict,  Panjabj  437  n 8.

Pindar  Khiiji,  Malik,  called  Qadr
Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Suljan
Muhammad  Tughlaq  Shah.  302.

Pingalf  the  Science  of  Music,  332  and
n 4.

Pingala,- — or

Pingalanagu.  the  inventor  of  Hindu  I
Prosody,  332  a 4.  i

Pir  Muhammad,  Mirza,  grandson  of  j
the  great  Timur,  King  of  i^arasan  |
and  Muwarcl-an-Nahr,  352,  353,  355,  i
358  u 6.  j

Pir  Mohammad  Khan,  Governor  of  i
contemporary  of  Humayur,  ,
581,  5S2,

Fh-  ib-^han,  name  of  Bayazid  /inra"..
bjiiiuler  of  a Si'fi  sect,  58  n 5.

ibi  Li,  a ford  on  the  river  Gargej.
oT:  Mid  n 1.

Fir  in,  I'ln*  of  the  comjmnions  of

Pirey,  Governor  of  ^aznin,  14  n i.

Pisa?us,  the  Tyrrhenian,  inventor  of
the  29  n 5.

Pithora,  Rii,  257  and  r.  3 See  un'er
Rli  Pathura  of  Ajmlr.

P'h^da'i-adl  or  original  pawn,  at
Chess  114  n 2.

Plague,  bubonic,  524  and  n 1,

Plato,  181  n 2,  520  n 7.

Platt’s  Giili.ddn,  187  n 2,

Platt  s Persian  Gra'nrna/',  516  n 1.

Pleiades,  the,  198  and  n 2,  367  u 3,
630  and  n 4.

Pliny,  23  n 3,  24  n 6,  394  n 5.

Polo,  game  of,  417  n S.

I Pompeii,  119  n 5.

I Poni,  town  of.  384  n 1,

Fcrrugal,  543.

Portuguese,  the,  454  n 7.

Po'tlh.  a sheepskin  coat,  617  and  n 4,
618  D 1*

I Prayig,  the  ancient  name  of  Allah-
abad, 415  and  n 5,

Prayer,  tive  staled  times  of,  147
n 2.

Prinsep’s  Indian  Antiqi  IS  n 1.

Proceedings  of  the  Asiatic  Society  of
Bengal,  559  n 5,

Pri'enesie,  oracle  of.  412  n 1,

Pi  L-lcjo'i^cnes  d'lhn  Khaldun,  de
Siane'a,  15l  n 4,  157  n 1,  ISl  n 2,
191  n 2.  217  n 5,  244  ii  6.

/ T'  . jvniuie'i  desTahles  Astronomi'ivcs
d Oh-  .-J  Beg,  198  u 2.

I’l  ' f'v.  Banking’s  Elements  of  Arabic

« !■".  I't.'sian,  6uT  k.

Pr  'Cilia  Aralum,  Freytagy  157  n 1,
-±58  n 3,  507  n 3,  5b0  ii  1.

\xiis\ib.  in  the  Shdh-ndma  of  j P*  Roebuck’s,  57  n 2,  58  n 2,

Firdausi,  l&O  n 2.  | -18  -i  2,  244  n o,  301  n 3,

cxviii  Index.

Psalms,  Book  of,  486  n 4.

Ptolemy,  364  n 4,  382  n 4.

Pufiih  or  Tufak,  a long  tube  for
throwing  balls,  159  n 2.

Puhi,  a ford  on  the  Ravi,  3S3  and
n 10,  384  a 1,  392.

Piijd  of  the  Hindus,  484  n X.

Punjab.  See  under  the  Panjab.

Pulaq-Suriq,  name  of  a place,  569
and  n 8,

PurdnaSf  the,  293  n 5.

Puranmal,  son  of  SilhadT,  one  of  the
Chiefs  of  Rai  Sen,  contemporary
of  Sher  Shah,  475,  476  and  7i  3.

Purifications  enjoined  by  Muham-
madan law,  603  n 2.

PushaTcdl^ — or

Pushkal^  the  rainy  season  in  Torki,
325  n 2.

Puttyaly,  for  the  township  of  Baitali
on  the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  360
71  3,

Q

Qaan,  title  originally  given  to  the
supreme  sovereign  of  the  Moguls,
143  n 2.

Qaan-i-Mulk,  title  of  Sultan  Muham-
mad, son  of  Saltan  Ghiyasu-d-Din
Balban,  187,  189  and  » 1,  217.

Qaani,  the  famous  Persian  poet,  253

71  6.

Qaha,  a tunic  worn  by  men,  120
n 7.

Qabfi  Khan  Gang,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Humaydn,  597.

Qahn';,  a gonrd  in  Turki,  G21  n 4,
622  and  n 1.

Qabaq  andilzi,  the  game  of,  621  n 5.
See  the  next.

Qaii"i  idzl,  a game  of  the  ancient
Tcrkomaus,  who  used  to  hang  up
a wooden  gourd  as  a mark  for
archery,  621  n 4.  See  also  tht
ubove.

Qabul,  Malik,  Governor  of  Badeon
under  Snitan  Firoz  Shah  Tughlau.
335,

Qab'ii  Khalifati,  ilalik,  315.

Qabul  Qiwamn-l-Mnlk,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Snltiin  Muhammad
Tnghlaq  Shah,  304,  315.

Qabul  Sarhardadar,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Snltin  Firoz  Sbih  Tngh-
laq,  328  and  n 1.

Qabul  Toraband,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Snitan  Firoz  .^ah  Tnjj]!-
laq,  .328  n 1.

Qabulpfira,  a quarter  of  Badiion,
335.

Qadan  Khan,  or  Qadr  IGiun,  son  of
Snitan  Mahmud  Khilji  of  Jlfilwa,
399  n 1.

Qadar  Khan,  King  of  Turkistau,
159  n.

Qiidir  Khan,  the  son  of  Mahmud  Khan
of  KalpI,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Firoz  Wiihi  and  Saivyid  dynasties.
375,  386.

Qudir  bi-ilahi  Abu-l-'Abhas,  Ahmad
ibu  Tsiuiq  ib.i  al-Mui,tadir.  KhaUiuh
I of  the  House  of  'Abbas,  17  and
j n 2,  29  and  n 2.

' Qadiri,  the  Persian  poet,  483,

Index.

CXIX

(^acir  ^an,  son  of  Saltan  Jalaln^d-
Dln  Khilji,  233,  244,  247  n and
n 5.

Qadr  Khan,  son  of  Saltan  Mahmud
Khiiji  of  Mulvra,  399  and  n 1.

Qadr  Khan,  Malik  Pindar  KhiljT,  the
ruler  of  Lakhnaati,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Tugh-
laq  ^rih,  302-  308.

Qaf,  Koh-i-j  a fabulous  mountain
round  the  world,  485.

Qdjiyah,  the  rhyme,  a term  of  Pro-
sody, 141  n.  3,  607  and  n 3.  j

Qa’im,  A1 , the  promised  Mahdi,  j

571  n 2.

Qairawan,  the  ancient  Gyrene,  in  the
province  of  Tunis,  167  and  n 4.

Qaisar  or  Csesar,  145  and  n 2.

Qaizuran,  probably  al-^ai^urlu,  a i
cemetery  at  Baghdad,  59  u 1.

Qalandars,  a sect  of  derveshes,  234,
235.

Qalij  son-in-law  of  Changiz

Khan.  230.

Quiij,  a sword  in  Xurki,  230  mid  n 4.

Qalj,  moditicatioE  of  the  word  ijdUj
(q.  V.),  230  and  n 4.

Qamaru-d-Din  Qiriin-i-Timur  Khan,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  the  Shamslyah
dynasiy  of  Dihll,  125  ti  4.

Qanibur  Uiwana,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Humayun,  597,  598,  599,  600.

Qamuryha,  a hunting  ground  in  Turk!,
258  n 5.

the  Arabic  Dictiouaiy  of
t’iru/.abadi,  176  n 1,  1S2  7t  4.

Quuaj.  Same  as  tlie  itiwn  t>f  Qaiiauj

U-i.)-

Qanauj  or  Qanaj,  the  Hindu  capital
of  Kuriheru  India,  23  and  ha  2 :

and  4,  24,  25  n 4,  70,  114  n 2,  125,
312,  329  n 2,  346,  347,  348.  360,
361,  302,  363.  364,  404  and  n 5,
409,  413.  431  and  n 4,  431.  443,

I 444,  452,  463,  472,  540,  568  fi  6.

I See  Qannanj.

• Qanauj,  river  of,  463.

I Qananj,  Sarkar  of,  410  n 4,  53S.

' Qandahar,  16  n 3,  17,  453,  455,  456,
462,  466,  560,  567  and  ?i  9,  568,
569,  573  and  n 1,  574,  575,  578,
oS8  and  n 6,  590,  591.

Qannanj.  See  under  Qauauj.

QcJuUfi,  a Geographical  work,  14  n 3,
17  «■  4.

Qdndn  ji-t-Tibhy  a work  on  medi-
cine by  the  celebrated  Ibn  Siiia
(Avicenna).  533  and  n 1.

Qarabeg,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Mub.Irak
Sliah  of  the  Saiyyid  dyua&cy  of
DihlT,  285,  290.

Qaracha  Beg,  the  Governor  of  Qan»
dahfir,  contemporary  of  Humfiyun,
560  and  u 2.  Sn  al&i>  under
Quiat  li.i  .ind  Qarrachu  Khan.

Qaracha  j^au,  560  a 2.  Same  as  the
above  {q  r.).

Qaruc'hal,  another  name  of  the  moun-
tain of  Himachal  {q.  i\),  3U7  und
n 4.  See  also  the  next.

Qarajal,  the  mountain  of,  307  n 3,
308  iL  1.  See  the  above.

Qara  Khita  (Cathay),  71  n 7,  103
u 3.

Qdramituh,  heretical  sect  of  the,  22
/I  3.

Quraiia^,  Malik,  one  of  the  Aniiriii
of  the  ^am>i\ah  dyna'^tv.  123

Qara  Qurchi,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Babar,  441,

cxx

Index^

Qargtan,  Naib  of  tlie  King  of  Khnra
san,  contemporay  of  Sultan  ^Inham
mad  Tn^Iaq  ^ah.  320.

Qarn,  an  nncercaia  period  of  time
442  and  n 1.

Qarnicha  Khan,  contemporaiy  of
Humayun,  5S6.  See  under  Qaracha
Beg  and  Quracha  Khan.

Qarun,  the  Korah  of  the  Scriptures,
249.

Qashan,  a district  and  town  of  Persian  j
‘Iraq,  30  n 1.  |

QafidaJi^  a form  of  poem,  608  and- 1
n 3,  I

Qasim  Husain  Snltiin  TJabeg,  one  of  j
the  Amirs  of  Humayun,  463.  |

Qasim  Kahl.  3-Xaalana,  otherwise  !
known  as  Oliyan  Kali  Kabuli,  one
of  the  poets  of  the  time  of  Huma*
yun,  517,  584  and  na  1 and  3,
601.

Qasim  SaubalT,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Lodi  dynasty  of  Dihli
431  a 4.  443.

Qasr  Bagh.  a palace  in  Dihli.  126  n 3

Qa?r-i-Safed,  a palace  in  Dihli,  82
n 2,  183.

Qassi,  called  also  Saqif,  founder  of
the  Arab  tribe  of  saqif,  13  n 1.

Qntardt-i‘1ia%idn,  converted  into
pearls,  108  n 4.

Qa/dar,  an  Am’r  of  the  Ghaznavidc
dvnasty,  48  and  iin  3 .ind  4.

Qdzi,  an  offic^’r  of  justice  under  the
Sadr,  610  n.

Qf/i-i-Charkh,  tl"  planet  Jupiter.
368  ar.I  3.

Qay  of  the  1 ".'veijS,  the  planet
Juph,_T,  '16S  a-. . / 3.

Qa-  f :sV±\i.\v  .aiirisc-i,  633

QazI  *Abid,  one  of  the  poets  of  the
reign  of  Sultan  Firuz  Shdh  Tughlaq,
341  and  n 2.

Qazi  Asir,  contemporary  of  Sultan
Ghiyasn-d-Din  Balban,  217.

Qazi  Baizawi,  author  of  the  Anwuru-t’
Tanzil  and  the  ^{zdhui~‘'-Tiiv:dr1]di,
6 and  n 4,  34,  45,  52,  62,  63.  See
also  under  Baizawi.

Qizi  Hamid  of  Bal^,  a celebrated
writer  and  poet,  76  and  n 1.

Qazi  Khan.  Ziau-d-Din,  a court  officer
of  Sultan  Mubarak  .^ih  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  2S8.  289,  290.

Qazi  Mughis  of  Hansi,  one  of  the  poets
of  the  reign  of  Sultan  Jalalu-d-DIn
Khiljl.  245.

Qazi  Urdu,  of  Sultan  Jalalu*d-Din
Khilji,  234.

Qazwini,  author  of  the  Aadnid-Bildd
and  the  ^Ajadhu-l-'MaWMut,  27
n 4,  28  n,  79  n 2,  178  n 4.

Qihlah,  the  direction  in  wliicb  Mus-
lijns  turn  in  pra3'er,  368  ?i  1,  613  n,

Qiddh,  arrows  used  for  gambling,
369  n 1.

QUlam,  explanation  of  the  term,
1 ft  4,  153  ft  7.

Qiran,  Malik, — or

Qiran'i-Timur  Khan,  otherwise  called
Timur  Khan  Qara  Beg,  one  of  the
^amsiyah  Maliks,  125  and  n 4.
j Qirdnu-b-Sa'dain,  a ctlebruted  poem
by  Mir  Khusru,  the  famous  poet
of  Dihli,  135  n,  221  and  n 2,  222
' and  n 1,  223  and  7t.

Qisasu-l'Anli'jd,  Lives  of  th-  Pro-
phets, 2 '5  o 3

Qism-i-Salumdri  ica  Absdl  ui  71ajL  .a
Jami,  272  n 1.

Tndei.

CX.X1

a district,  896  n 2.

Qt(,‘ah,  a term  of  Prosody,  explana-
tion of,  608  and  n 3

Qit/nir,  the  thin  pellicle  which  covers
the  date-stone,  496  n 10.

(iitrun,  exudation  from  species  of
mountain  pines,  182  and  n 4.

Qiui'H,  the  stay  or  support  of  any-
thing, 614  n 1.

Qiwain  Khan,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Khizr  Khun,  the  first  of  the  Suit'yid
dynasty,  364,  375,  380.

Qiwamu-d-Din  Khudawandzada,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Muliammad
Tnghlaq  Shah.  314.

Qiwamn-l-Mulk  Malik  Qabul  or
JIaqbul,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Mu^mmad  Tnghlaq  Shah,  304,  315.

Qiyamn-l-Mulk,  one  of  the  Malika  of
Sultan  Ma‘izzu-d-Dia  Kaiqubad
Balbani,  220,  224.

Qizil  Ea^,  the, — or

Qizilbashes,  Bed-caps,  48  n 2,  480,
670,  072  and  n 8 , 673,  674,  676,
576,  578,  592  n 9,  627  n 7.

Qoraish,  tribe  of.  See  under  Qnraish.

Qubbatu-l-Islam,  a title  of  the  city
of  Multan,  133  n 2.

Qubil  Naib  Vazir,  the  Khan-i-Jahan.
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Sultan  Piroz
Shah  Tnghlaq,  324.

Qudsi,  Mir  Husain  of  Karbala,  the
poet,  623  and  n 6.

Queen-consort  of  Humayuu,  568.  See
Hamida  Buuu  liegam.

Quetta,  567  n 9.

Quicksilver,  called  Abu-l-Ancih,  340
n 2.

Qii,  centre  of  an  army  iu  Turki,  436
a 4.  (Jalli'd  also  Ghc'I .

IG

Quiinj  or  Cqlio,  notes  on,  49  n 2.

Qulzum,  the  Ocean,  167.

Quracha  Khan,  contemporary  of
Humayun,  681  and  n 9.  See  also
under  Qaracha  Beg  and  Qarraoha
ghim.

Qnraish  or  Qoraish,  tribe  of,  2 n 5,
110  n 4,  287  r.  2.

Qnrian,  the,  2 nn  2,  3 and  4.  3 r.n  1
and  7,  A and  nn  1 and  2,  6 and
n 1,  6 nn  1,  2 and  4,  IS  n 1,  28  n 1,
30  n 1,  51,  58  n 4,  63  n 2,  102  and
n 4,  103  n 2,  110  n 4,  113  a 1,  115
n 2,  126  n 3,  127,  128  n,  143  n 3,
144  n 2,  147  n 2,  150  an  1 and  3,
JfiBnandnl,  169  n 5,  175  n 4,
183  n 2,  101  n 1,  194  nn  1 and  4,
201  2,  207  nn  1 and  4,  212  n 7,

216  n,  218  n 2,  249  n 3,  261  n 0,
262  n,  279  n,  2S8,  292  n 6,  311,
319  (I  1,  321  V 5,  331,  833,  356  n 4,
36S  n 1,  369  n 1,  372  nn  1.  2 and  3,
373  n,  392  n G.  412  n 1,  429  n 6,
446  and  n 6,  449  n 7,  450,  481  n 9,
485  nn  2 and  3,  486  n 3,  610  and
n 6,  511  and  n 5,  614,  515,  616,
617  n 8,  519  n 7,  622  71  5,  521  n 3,
532  n 6,  547  n 14,  655  n 6,  568  n 3,
677  n,  579  and  n 5,  506  n 1,  603
n 6,  615  and  n 6 , 632  n 1.

Qur’an,  eeven  jnunziO  or  divisions  of
the.  6 a 1.

Qiirchl,  armed  soldier  in  Turki,  215
n 3.

Qurra  Qnmar,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
the  Khilji  dynasty,  291,  293.  295.

Qurii  u,  an  armed  soldier,  215  .unJ

n 3.

Qiirttnu-'’-Sii  i-hul.  a puieun.  172  ''

Qufd-,  the  Tibetan  '/ul  543  1

c'xxn

IndejC.

Qutb  ^in,  one  of  the  Amira  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  401  n 2,

Qutb  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Wall  of  Bangala,  contemporary  of
Shir  Khan  Sur  (q.v.)  470.

Qntb  ^ian  of  Itiwah,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Lodi  family,  443.

Qatb  &an  Lodi,  cousin  of  Snljan
Buhlul  Lodi,  403  n 7,  404  and  n»  2
and  5,  403,  406,  407,  409  and  n 7,
423  and  n 2.

Qntb  ^ian  Naib,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Phir  Shah,  476,  486,  488,  489,  490.

Qntb  ]^an,  son  of  Shir  Khan  Sur
(q.  V.),  457,  463,  472.

Qutb  Minar  of  Dehli,  called  after
Qntbu-d-Diu  TTshi  (q.  v.),  123  n 6.

Qntbiyah  Amirs,  the  Maliks  of  Snltan
Qat.bu-d-Diu  Aibak  (q.  v.),  90.

Qatbu-d-DIn  Aibak  or  Ibak,  Sultan,
slave  and  adopted  son  of  Sultan  i
Ma'izzu-d-Diu  GhOri,  70,  72,  77
and  n 3,  78  and  n 3,  79  and  n 3,
80,  81  and  n 2,  82  and  n 2,  86,  87,
88  n 1,  89,  90.

Qutba-d-DIn  Bakhtvar  Qshi,  Khffaja-
i-Khwaiagan,  a famous  saint,
known  as  Ka'ki,  92  and  U 2,  123
and  n 5.

Qutbu-d-Din  Hasan,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  the  ^amsiyah  dy-
nasty, I..’4

Qutbu-d-Din  Hnsain  ibn  ‘All  Ghuri,
one  of  the  Shamsiyah  Maliks,  123
n 3.

Qiitbu-d-Din  Ibak.  See  under  Qutbu-
d-Diii  Aibak.

Qutbu-d-Din  Lak-bakh.sh.  or  he.-t'.ccr
'■/  lilt,',  a name  of  Srtltau  Qutbu-d-
Din  Aibak,  77  anil  a 4

Qutbu-d-Din  Mabmud  bin  Mn^smmad
Bazi,  author  of  the  Sharh-i-Sham-
aiyah,  427  n 1.

Qutbu-d-Din  Mubarak  Shah,  Snltan,
sou  of  Snltan  ‘Aliu-d-Diu  Khilii.
of  the  Khilp  dynasty  of  Dihli,  273,
274  and  71  1,  275,  282,  283,  284,
289,  290,  291,  296  and  n 3,  297.

Qutbn-d-Din  .Shah,  the  son  and  suc-
cessor of  Mnliammad  Shah  I,  son
of  Ahmad  Shah,  Sulfan  of  Gujarat,
357  n 3.

Qntbu-d-Din,  Saiyyid,  Sbaikhn-l-
Islam  of  Dihli  under  the  Sham-
siyah  Snitans,  123  and  n 5,  132.

Qutbn-d-Din,  eldest  son  of  Saltan
Shamsn-d-Din  lyal-timish,  98.

Qutbn-d-Din  Cshi,  ^waja,  the
famous  saint,  92  and  n 2,  123  and
n 6.

Qutbn-l-‘Alam  Shaikb  Euknu-l-Haqq
Qnraishi,  Shaikbu-l-Islam  under
Sultlu  Muhammad  Tnghlaq  Shah,
304  and  n 4,

Qntbu-l-Mashayi^ii-l-'Izam,  Shaikh
Sharafu-d-Diu  Mnniri,  a famous
saint,  416  and  71 13.

Qutlugh  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  dynasty  of  Sultiin  Shamsn-d-
Din  lyal-limish,  131,  132  and  71 4.

Qutlugh  Khan,  one  of  the  Maliks  ol
Sult.in  Muhammad  Tughlaq  Sh.ih
309,  311,  312,  313.

Qutlngh  Khan,  Malik  Pazlu-llah
Balkhi,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,  351  and  n 2.

Qntlagh  Kh.in  the  Vazir,  Qa/i
Sama*u-d-Din,  one  of  the  Amiis  of
SiiUfift  Husaiu  Sjiarql  of  Jaunpur,
RiO,  iUT

Index.

Uutlugh  Khwiiia,  the  Mnghnl  King  of
^nraaan,  305.  See  also  under
Qutluq  Khwaia.

Qntluq  Khan,  brother’s  son  of  Sultan
‘Alau-d-Din  ^iljl,  259.

cxxiii

Qntlnq  Qwaja,  the  son  of  Dna,  the
Mnphnl  King  of  Khnrasln  and
lOwarau-n-Nahr,  contemporary  of
Sfnitin  ‘Alan-d-Din  KhiliT.  250  and
™ 1,  258,  305.

Bores  of  the  North-Western  Provinces
of  India,  Elliott’s,  122  n 1,  312  n 7,
384  n 3,  408  n 1,  415  n.

Sadah,  for  Roh,  a name  of  Afghanis-
tan, 466  a 5,  493  n 6,

Badhanpur,  a city  of  Gnjerat,  28  n 2,
71  71  3.

Badif,  in  Persian  prosody  the  name
given  to  a syllable  or  word  follow-
ing the  rhyme,  141  n 9

Badif,  in  Prosody  a letter  of  prolonga-
tion before  the  rawl,  607  and  n 4.

EafI‘u-d-Din  Safawi  of  Ij,  Mir  Saiy
yid,  Hazrat-i-Muqaddas,  contem_
porary  of  Saltan  Sikandar  Lodi,
415,  170  and  n 5,  479,  513,  514.

Bafizi,  or  beivtic,  a term  applied  to
any  of  the  Shi'ah  sects,  156  ti  1,
604  and  n 6,  626  n 6.

Rafz,  heresy,  626  and  n 6.

Rahuie,  a canal  or  aqueduct,  459
n 5.

Rahd’e,  for  Rahdhe,  a canal,  459
71  5.

Eahab  river,  the,  131  and  n 2,  231,
251,  377,  379,  409.

Bahim  Dad,  Khwaja,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  the  Lodi  dynasty,  445  and  ti  5.

Rahman,  Sicratu-r — , a chapter  of  the
Qar‘aii,  218  n 2.

Rahmatu-lldhi,  a term  applied  to  a
weaver,  527,  528  71  1.

I Bahmatn-llihi  Iqbal  Khan,  one  of  the

j Amirs  of  Islem  Shah  of  the  Afghan
Snr  dynasty,  527.

Sdhu,  a kind  of  flower,  142  n 3.

Kahn,  a Hindu  mythological  monster
and  in  Astronomy  the  ascending
node,  163  n 2.

Bai,  the  ancient  Bbages,  a district
and  town  of  Persian  ‘Iraq,  30  and
21  1,  35,  73  71  1.

Bai-i-Eaiyan,  title  of  Eandbol,  the
uncle  of  ^usru  Oan  Barawar-
bacha,  290.

Bai  of  BaranasT,  the  contemporary  of
Sulfan  Firoz  Shah  Tnghlaq,  329.

Bid  of  Dholpur,  the  contemporary  of
the  Lodis,  410,  419.

Bai  of  Gwiilirir,  the  contemporary  of
the  Saiyyids,  381,  384,  398.

Bais  of  Jajn.ngar,  the,  329  71  6.

Bai  of  Satgarh,  the  contemporary  of
Sultan  Firoz  Shah,  329  and  71  5.

Bai  of  Serinagar,  for  Bai  Sir  (9.  v.),
360  71  3.

Bai  of  Telinga,  the  contemjjorary  of
Saltan  Qutbn-d-Din  Khilji,  286,

Bai  Bhim,  the  chief  of  Jammoo,  con-
temporary of  Mubarak  Shah  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  383  and  r.  3.

Bai  Firoz  of  Tilaundi,  contemporary
of  Mubarak  Shah  of  the  Saiyyid
dynasty,  382  and  nn  1 and  2,  390.

CXXIV

Index.

Eai  Jai  Chaiul,  G ivi  rnor  of  Qanauj,
contemporary  of  Sultan  Shihabn-d-
DTn  (&uri,  70.

Bfii  Jaljin  BbatT,  Governor  of  the  fort
of  Bhat  at  the  time  of  Timor’s  in-  j
vasion,  355  and  n 4.

Rai  Karan  of  Gnjcrat,  contemporary
of  Sultan  'Alau-d-Din  Khiljl,  255,
256.

Eiii  Lakhmaniva,  Lakhmia  or  Lak-
minia,  the  ruler  of  Nadiya,  con-
temporary of  Saltan  Qntbn-d-Din
Aibak,  82  and  n 5,  83  n 1.

Rai  Pathura,  Governor  of  Ajmir,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  JIa‘izzu-d-Dm
Ghuri,  69,  70.  Soe  also  ESi  Pithora.
Eai  Pertab,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  tho
Saiyyid  dynasty,  401  n 2.

Eai  Pithora,  257  and  n 3.  See  under
Rai  Pathura.

Eai  Sanir,  360  n 3.  See  Eai  Sir.

Eai  Sar,  the  Governor  of  Chandiwar,
contemporary  of  Eihizr  Khan  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty.  377.

Eai  Sen,  contemporary  of  Shir  Shah.
475.

Eai  Sir,  the  ruler  of  Baitaii,  contem-
porary of  tho  Flruz  Shahi  dynasty,
360  and  n 3.

Eai  TJnar,  contemporary  of  Snlfan
Firoz  Shah.  332  n 6.

Eai  Tikramajit  of  ITjain,  95.

Eaiseen,  for  Easain  or  the  two  towas
of  Eis,  327  n 1.

Eaja  of  Bheerbhoom,  329  n 9.

Eija  of  Dangaya  (Bundelkhand),  the
contemporary  of  Mnt>«mmad  Shah
of  the  Mnghul  dynasty,  25  n C.

Eaja  of  Gwaliar,  the  oontempotsry
of  the  Lodis,  419,  432.

Eaja  of  daisalmir,  the  oontemporarv
of  Hnmayun,  562.

Eajas  of  Jamu,  19  n 2.

Raja  of  Kadba  (?  Garha-Katanfca),
the  contemporary  of  Snltan  Ibra-
him Lodi,  433  n 3.

Raja  of  Mandrayal,  the  contemporary
of  Snltan  Sikandar  Lodi,  420.

Eaja  of  Nagarkot,  the  contemporary
of  Snltan  Firoz  Shah  Tughlaq,  331.
Eaja  of  Qanauj,  the  contemporary  of
Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  26
Eaja  of  Rohtas,  the  contemporary  of
Shir  Shah.  457.

Eaja  of  Thatta,  the  contemporary  of
Snltan  Bnhlul  Lodi,  408.

Eaja  Dahir,  contemporary  of  Moham-
mad Qasim,  the  conqueror  of  Sind,
12  n 2,  13  n.

Baja  Kansa,  of  Mathra,  the  enemy  of
Krishna,  24  n 6.

Rdjd-Tarangini,  an  historical  work  in
Sanskrit,  8 « 3,  18  1.

Rajah,  M.alik,  the  Governor  of  Dopal-
pur  under  the  Saiyyid  dynasty,  383
n 11.

Rajah  Eadira,  Malik,  the  Governor  of
Multan  under  the  Saiyyid  dynasty,

387.

Eaj  Gar,  a town  on  the  banks  of  the
Ganges,  404.

S^jiwa,  a canal  leading  from  the
Jumna  to  Hissar,  325  n 3,  326  n.
Efijputina,  69  n 2,  298  n 7,  379  n 1,
419  « 3.

Eijputs,  the,  13  n,  365  n 8,  382  n 4,
•84  713,  397  71  1,  414  n 13.

Raju,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,  349.

Rajuri,  town  of,  oUO.

Index.

cxxy.

Rakat  Chandan,  the  red  Sandal,  4S4
n 1.

Kam,  a Rajii  of  Hindustan,  contem-
porary of  Sultan  Mas'ud  ibn  Mah-
mfid  Ghaznawl,  37.

Rarn  Chand,  the  ruler  of  Bhatta,
contemporary  of  the  Afghan  Sur
dynasty  of  Dibit,  553,  554.

Ram  Chandra,  the  Raja  of  Deogarh,
271  n 6.  Same  as  Ram  Deo

(q.  V.).

Ram  Deo,  Rai  of  DeogTr,  contem-
porary of  Saltan  *Alan-d-DIn  EhiljT,  ]
237,  247  n,  251  n 7,  256,  271  n 6,
283.  See  the  above.

Ramnl’i-musamman,  a kind  of  proso-
dial  metre,  607  n.

Raraayana,  the,  8 » 2.

Ramghar,  a fortress  in  the  province
of  Agra,  70  n 4.

fiana,  village  of,  364  n 7,

Rana,  the  Governor  of  Amarkot,  con-
temporary of  Humayun,  566.

Rana  Sanka,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Lodi  dynasty,  444,  445,  446.  452,
470.

Randhol,  Rai-i-Raiyan,  the  uncle  of
Khusru  Khan  Barawar,  the  favour-
ite of  SuRan  Qutbu-d-Din  Khilji,
289,  290.

Rang,  a cluster  of  globular  bells,  621
n 2.

Ranking’s  Elements  of  Arabic  and
Persian  Prosody^  607  n.

Rantanbhor, — or

Rantanbhur,  fortress  of,  in  the  pro-
vince of  AjniTr,  92  and  n 4,  120
and  H 4,  129,  236,  257  and  nn  1,

3 and  7,  25S,  260,  261,  2G2,  410,
425.  ■^175,  471’,  486,  526,  597.

Ranthanbhur,  fortress  of,  92  and  n 4
Samo  as  the  above  (q.  v.).

Ranun  the  Black,  a slave  of  Sidh  PU
(q.  L'.),  395.

Rao  Governor  of  the  fort  of

Bhat  at  the  time  of  Timur’s  inva-
sion, 355  and  n 4.

I Rao  Zorawar  Singh,  also  known  as
Rnpar  Sen,  founder  of  the  town  of
Rapari,  377  n 5.

Rapar  Sen,  377  n 5.  See  the  above.

Rapari, — or

, Rapxd,  district  and  tovn  of,  377  and
nn  4 and  5,  387,  404,  407,  413.  430.

Raqibf  name  of  the  third  arrow  in
the  game  of  ma  tsir,  369  n 1.

Raqqdi-i‘falak,  or  the  dancer  of  the
sky,  a name  of  the  planet  Venus,
138  n 3.

Ras,  town  of,  326  n,  327  and  n 1,

Risain,  the  two  towns  of  Ras,  326  n
327  fi  1.

Rashid  Vaxlry  Qsrija,  minister  of
the  King  of  Khurasan,  605.

Eashidkot,  fortress  of,  in  the  northern
hill-range  of  the  Panjab,  498.

Eashidu-d-Din,  author  of  the  Jdmu
*U’t-Tau'dr7M,  307  n 4,  353  n 1,

Rata,  village  of,  364  and  n 7.

Rathor  tribe  of  Rajputs,  the,  384  nn
2 and  3.

Rauzatu-f-Safqy  an  historical  work,
62  and  n 3,  121  n 1.

Kaverty’s  Tahaqdt'i-Ndsirt,  13  n 1,
14  nn  1 and  2,  16  nn  1 and  2,  19  ti

2,  20  n 2,  23  71  1,  29  n 1,  31  ti  1,  33
n 2,  35  71  1,  37  n 6,  38  nn  1 and  3,
42  ft  3,  43  77  -3,  44  7171  6 and  8,  45  n

3.  46  It  2,  47  ft  1,  49  ft  4,  50  n 1,  55
nn  2 and  4^  60  nn  1 and  2,  02  n

cxxvi

Index.

4,  65  n 2,  66  nn  1,  2 and  6,  67  nn  1
and  3,  69  nn  2,  3 and  4,  70  nn  1 and

3,  71  nn  1,  5,  6 and  7,  72  nn  1 and

4,  73  n 2,  77  n 2,  78  n 3,  79  n 3,  80
an  3 and  4,  81  nn  2,  3 and  4,  82  nt;<
3 and  4,  83  nn  1 and  3,  84  n andnn

1 and  2,  85  na  1,  2 and  4,  86  n 2,
87  nn  1,  3 and  3,  90  nn  1 and  2,
91  n 1,  92  n 2.  94  n 2,  95  n 8,  98  an

2 and  5,  120  n 6,  121  nn  5 and  7,
122  nn  1,  8 and  3,  123  nn  3,  3 and

5,  124  n 3, 125  nn  3 and  4, 127  n 2,
128  n 1,  129  n 4,  130  n 1, 131  n 4,
132  n 1, 135  n 1.

Bavi,  the,  one  of  the  five  rivers  of  the
Panjab,  23  n 3,  67  n,  128,  188,  190
and  n 2,  353  n 1,  383,  384  n,  389
and  n 2,  392.

Bawal  Pindi,  44  n 6.

Bawar,  Port  of,  in  Sind,  12  n 2.

Bold,  the  esaentifil  letter  in  the
qajiyah  or  rhyme,  007  nn  8 and  4.
Bajat-i-AHa,  title  of  Saiyyid  Khizr
Khan,  the  first  of  the  Saiyyid  dy-
nasty of  Dihli,  376  and  n 1.

Bizi,  relative  adjective  from  the  town
of  Eai,  30  n 1.

EazI,  Abu  Bakr  lluhamraad  ibn  Zaka-
riya,  known  as  Rhazes,  the  famous
physician,  30  n 1.

RazT,  Imam,  73.  See  under  Fakhrn-
d-DIn  RazT.

Kazziyah  ^atim,  Sultan,  eldest
daughter  of  Sulriiii  Shanisu-d-Din  |
lyal-timi^,  08,  119,  120  and  n 8,
121  and  nn  1 and  5,  122  and  an  1
and  2,  294  and  n 5.

Red  Palace  of  Siri,  at  Dihlt,  260  n 7.

261,  269  n 1.

Red  Sea,  the,  169  n 1.

Redhonse,  Hr.,  89  n 1.

Redhonse’s  Turkish  Dictujnary^  575
n 1.

Eeinand,  Geuyraphie  d’ Ahoulfeda,  27
nn  1 and  2,  30  n and  n 1,  34  nn  1,
2 and  3,  36  n 2,  67  « 1,  71  n 3,
147  n 1,  167  71  4,  265  n 5,  307
n 4.

Rennell,  22  n 5,  69  7»  2,  80  ti  1,  93  ti
and  n 1,  128  n 3,  129  7i  2,  186  n 6,
325  n 3,  326  n,  327  n 3,  344  n 7,
355  n 1,  362  n 3,  364  n 4,  380  n 2,
382  n 2,  415  n 7,  417  n 7,  419  n 6,
420  71  5,  423  n 5,  530  n 3.

Rewa,  town  of,  417  » 7.

Bewa  State,  417  n 7.

Rewari,  a town  in  the  province  of
Miwiit,  366  n,  537.

Bevy,  30  n 1.  Same  town  us  liui
(?•  i’.).

Rhagae,  ancient  name  of  the  town  of
Rai  (q.  V.),  30  n 1.

Ehages,  capital  of  the  province  of
Rhagiaua,  30  n 1.

Ehagiana,  the  province  of  Rai  in
Persian  ‘Iraq.  30  n 1.

Rhazes,  the  famous  physician,  30
n 1.  See  nnder  Riizi,  Abu  B.akr
Jlahammad  ibn  Zakarlya.

Rhrfu)  iqiii;  el  Rio^'Aie  'k---  tiinyue.-  dc
tOrieiil  (birciu  do

Tassy,  428  n 2 OijS  nn  8 and  0,
606  n 2,  607  « 4.  ti08  a 3.

Eiasi,  town  of,  3S4  71  1,

Ked-ca}7S,  the,  a name  of  the  Turko-  . Ribabah,  the  bag  in  wltich  tlic  arrows
minus  of  Garra  Sii,  48  and  77  2.  ! were  put  iu  the  gainn  of  77/7700,
See  also  un7ler  the  Qizil  B.T^.  ‘ 3(19  « 1

Index.

cxmi

Ribdt,  a fortified  station  on  an
enemy’s  frontier,  44  n 5,  106

n 2.

Bibat  Amir,  name  of  a place  in
Seistan,  48  and  n 1.

Eicbardson’s  Persian  Dietionaryy  214
n 2,  215  n 6.

Ridf,  a letter  of  prolong;ation  before
the  raiL-l  of  a rhyme,  607  n 4.

Big  Veda,  the,  293  n 5.

Rij‘at,  motion  of  a star  in  opposition
to  the  movement  in  the  normal
direction,  374  » 7.

Bing  of  ‘All,  possessed  of  magical
properties,  505  and  n 6.

Bing  of  Solomon,  203  n b,  503  n 6,
559  and  n 2.

Bishwatl,  poetical  name  of  Mir
Saiyyid  Na'mata-llah  (q.  v.),  533
n 7,  534  n 4.

Eizwan,  the  door-keeper  of  Paradise,
194  and  n 3,  251,  601.

Eocky  Citadel,  the,  or  Shahr-i-Nan,
on  the  banks  of  the  Jumna,  231.

Eoebuck’s  Oriental  Proverbs,  57  n 2,
68  n 1,  218  n 2,  244  n 5,  301
n 3.

Roll,  a name  of  Afghanistan,  466  and
n -5,  493  and  n 6.

Eoliilkhaud, — or

Eohilkhund,  district  of,  linowii  also
as  Kaithar,  183  n 2,  339  n 4,  364
n 4.

Eohri,  town  of,  559  n 6.

Bohtak,  town  of,  72  n 2,  222,  3.31,
364  365,  373.

Eohias,  fortress  of,— iu  the  Pinjab.
437,  466  n G,  468,  472,  474.  493,  498,
301,  503,  592,

Eohtas  Biliir,  Sarkar  of,  183  a 1-

Eohtas  Sharqi,  in  the  Shahabad  dis-
trict of  Bengal,  466  n 6.

Bohtasgarh,  in  the  Shahabad  district
of  Bengal,  466  n 6.

Bomans,  the,  18  n 1,  76  n,  104  n 2,
494  n I.

Bomans,  Epistle  to  the,  474  n 1.

Borne,  119  n 5.

Book,  the  castle  at  chess,  603  and  n 8

Bookn  ^han,  for  Akat  Khan  the
nephew  of  Snlt;an  ‘Alan-d-Din
Khiljl,  259  n 5.

Bose,  properties  of  the,  148  n 4.

Eosenweig-Schwannan’s  Viwan  Eajis,
121  n 3.

•Boshan,  Pir,  founder  of  the  Boshaniy-
yah  Sect  {q.  v.),  58  m 5.

Bo^an  Beg  Koka,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Hnmayun,  565.

Boshaniyyah,  or  the  Enlightened,  a
Sufi  sect  founded  by  Bayazid  An-
5ari,  also  called  Pir  Boshan,  68
» 6.

Boss.  See  under  Elias  and  Boss.

Rostrum,  an  ancient  instrument  of
war,  29  n 5.

Eoxana,  wife  of  Alexander  the  Great,
331  n 10.

Eojal  Asiatic  Society,  Journal  of  the,
16  n 2,  33  II 1,  47  n 2,  59  n 1,  87  n
1,  103  n 1,  109  n 4,  115  n and  n 3,
141  » 4,  330  n 7,  479  n 7,  571
Tl  2.

Rubdb,  a stringed  instrument  like  a
guitar,  367  n 5.

Ruby,  Four  kinds  of,  25  n 2.

Kuby  Palace,  at  Dihli,  26U.

Rue,  its  elHcacy  iu  c-\orcisin.  617  ?!  1.

Rub,  tile  vital  pnuciple,  144  « 2.
143  11.

cxxviii  Index.

Kuh  or  Roh,  a name  of  AfghMstan
466  and  n 5,  493  and  a 6.  520.
Ruhani,  a learned  man  of  the  time  of
Sultan  ^amsu-d-Din  lyal-timish^
93  and  n 2.

Ruin,  a village  of  the  dependencies  of
Lahore,  54  and  n 2.

Ruju^'i-kaukab,  an  astronomical  term,
374  n 7.  See  under  Mij'at.

£tuJ^,  the  cheek  and  also  the  castlo  at
chess,  505  n 2.

Rnkn  ^Lan  Afghan,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  the  Sui  dynasty,  59S.
Rukri’i'Ta^ndni,  the  south  corner  of
the  £a‘bah,  97  and  n 4.
RnknU'd-Din  Chanda  Wazir,  Malik,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  the  Firuz
Shahi  dynasty,  341,  342,
Euknu-d-DIn  Firoz  §hah,  Saltan,  Eon
of  Saltan  Shamsu-d-Din  lyal-
timish  97,  98,  99,  113,
finkan-d-Din  Ibrahim,  son  of  Sultar
Jalalu-d-DIn  ^iljl,  244,  247  and  n
andn  6.  See  also  under  Qadr  Elian.
Kuknu-d-Din  Quraishi,  ShailA,  son  of
Shaikh  Sadrn-d-Dm  "Arif  and
grandson  of  SliailA  Bahan-d-DIn
Zakariya,  contemporary  of  the
Saltans  ‘A!aa-d-DIn  and  Qntbn-d-  I
Din  Khiiji,  248  and  n 2,  284,  3U4  j
and  n 4.  j

Euknu-d-DIn  Tcgliral  Beg,  founder  of  I
the  Saljuqiyyah  dynasty  of  Khora-  |
san,  42  n-  3,  61  n 5.

Euknu-l-Huq'i  Qarai^i,  F^haikhnd-
Islam,  304  and  n 4.  Same  as
KuknU'd-I'iu  Qurai^il  {g.  v.).

RuiUj  country  of,  Oho  n 7,  621.

Rum.  Sea  of, — the  .deditcrranean,
153  n 1.

Hum,  Sultan  of, -title  of  the  Sultans
i of  Turkev,  4S0.

f _ _ ^

Humi  ^an,  the  Artillerist  of  Hnma-
j yun,  456  and  7i  7.

Run,  a place  near  Lahore,  54  n 2.
Runa,  a village  in  Kisapur  of  Khura-
san, 54  n 1.

RunI,  Abu-l-Faraj,  a celi'hrated  poet
of  the  time  of  Sultan  Ibrnhlni  Ghaz^
nawl,  53  n,  54  and  n 1.

Rupar,  town  of.  362  and  n 1,  380  and
n 2,  382  and  n 3-

Rnqaiyyah,  dauditer  of  Muhammad
and  wife  of  ‘Usman  ibn  LAffan,  59  n 4.
Rushana,  wife  of  Alexander  the
Great,  332  n.

Rustam,  the  famous  hero  of  ancient
Ir5n,  14  n 3,  39,  114,  116  n 5,  117,
127.  ISO  n 2.  181  and  ,i  1,  199,  207,
2;i4,  548

Rustam,  one  of  the  Generals  of  the
Great  Timur,  358  n 6.

Rusuldar,  Saiyyid,  one  of  the  court
oSiceis  of  Saltan  Firoz  SliTih
Tughlaq,  ?2>.

Rusuli,  poetical  name  of  Mir  Smyyid
Ka'rnatu-ilali,  one  of  the  poota  of
the  reign  of  lalem  Shah,  533  and
11  7,  534  and  n 1.

Rivsulpur,  the  funresa  of  Shambabad.
472.

Ruawai,  di-^njccd,  490.

Ruttnnpoor.  fur  the  town  of  Ih’hpur,
410  n 3.

. Ruzbih,  iV'r.siun  name  of  Salman  al
I Farsi,  572  n 1.

Index.

exxix:

Sa'adat  Khun,  oomraouly  known  as
^Aidii'V-R.i^id  Saltan!,  one  of  tlie
Amirs  of  the  Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,
3-iO,  350  and  n 3.

Sa'adat  Khan  Barbak,  350  n 3.  Same
aa  the  above  {q.v.).

Sahh,  reviling  on  religions  grounds,
when  justifiable,  577  n.

Sabetghar,  a fortress  in  the  province
of  Agra,  70  r*  4.

Sabic-bin-Jiibir  al*Fahm!,  commonly
known,  us  Ta’abbnta  Sharran,  a
famous  Arab  athlete  and  warrior,
537  n 3.

Sab^u-l-Mathanl,  the  first  chapter  cf
the  Qur’an  and  also  the  seven
7nanziU  or  divisions  of  this  book,
6 1.

Sachan^s  Allirunt,  17  n 4,  22  n 5,  23
n 2,  76  n,  79  n 2,  95  n 5,  104  n 2,
108  n 4,  131  n 2.

Sacred  Boots  of  the  East,  110  n 4.

Sacy,  De,  Aiithologir  GrammaticuJe
Arahe,  0 n 4.

iSahZ,  an  auspicions  planet,  C30  and
r.n  2 and  3.

Sa‘d  Falsafi,  the  poet, — one  of  the
Cf  itemporaries  of  IMir  Khusrii,  298.

Sa‘d  ibn  Salman,  ^wajii,  father  of
the  famous  poet  Mas‘ud  Sa‘d
Salman  Jarjani,  52  n 5,  55.

Sa^d-i-Akhar,  name  given  to  Jupiter
by  asn*oiogers,  79  n 2.

Sa‘d*i-ManTiqi,  one  of  the  })oet3  of
the  reign  of  Sultan  Jalf»!u-d-Din
Khilji,  215,  2-lG.

Sahhhi,  name  of  Jupitf-r  and  Venus
as  the  two  auspicious  pluuets,  63U
n 2.

s.

j Sadar  Mahadco,  Rui  of  Arankal,  one
i of  the  coDcemporaries  of  Sultrin

‘ Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Tughlaq  297

; Sadhu  Nadir, — or

Sadhii  Nadira,  JIalik,  one  of  the
I Amirs  of  Khi/r  first  Suhrin

i of  the  Saiyyid  dvnasty,  and

1 n 3,  379.

j Sa*dl  of  Shiraz.  Shaikh.  1>7  and

; n2.

j Sadldl,  author  of  u 5'iw'-

I hi^l-Mifjaz  {q.  c ),  5 71  3,  31  v,  42  n,

I 49  n 2,  102  n 1,  143  ti  4,  319  n 4,

I 320  Uy  532  n 7,  533  n.

Sadpal  or  Sidh  Pal,  graiidsuti  of
Kanjul  Khatrl,  a of  the

Mubarak  Shrdu  family,  393  a 3,
394,  395,  397.

^cdr,  a term  ot  Prosody,  explauation
of,  606  n 4.

Sadry  highest  officer  of  justice,  609
n 6.

Sadr^i-Jahdn,  Chief  J udge,  523
n 5.

Sadr  Jahaii  Gujra:!,  the  iliscorian,
300  n 3,

Sadr-i-kuUy  Cliiof  Jadgo.  523  n 3.

Sadr-i~7niutuq*.J ^ j v.lgT.-^ioiiipoLen.

liary,  6C9  and

Sadru-d-Din  “A.* if,  Sh‘^ihii>  ^on  of
1 Shaikh  Banlg-d  Lh  u ZaLuj  Is  133
a 2,  248  *i  2

Sadru-d-Diii  Malf*iU,  the  Sh'Xi^ii-^-
j Islam  under  SuUan  Firoz  SMih
I Tagrhlau.  324.

I Sadru-l-ilulk.  Na:mn-d-Din  Alnl
' Bakr,  the  VTaz'r  of  Suh'u  ‘Alaa-fK
DlnJlas'ud  >:'ah  of  the  Sliaius'v ah
dynasty.  124.

17

cxxx

Index.

.Sadru-s-Sudiir,  Chief  Judge,  506,  523
and  n 5.

Sa‘da-d-Din  at-Taftizani,  anther  of
the  ilutawwal,  428  n 3<

Saduq,  Shaitt,  anther  of  the  lami'u-
l-AlAbdTj  139  n 5.

Safa,  a hill  in  the  vicinity  of  Ifakkah,
279  n.

Safdar  !^an,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Flruz  Shahi  dynaaty,  344.

Safdar  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Snitan  Sikandar  Lodi,  419  and  n 1.

Safedar  or  Safidar,  the  white  Poplar
or  Ahble,  494  and  n 6.

Saffron,  notes  on,  41  n 2,

Safidar,  the  white  Poplar.  See  un-
der Safedar.

Safih,  one  of  the  blank  arrows  in  the
game  of  Maiiir,  369  n 1.

Sag-i-falab,  the  dog  of  the  sky,  498,
and  n 5.

Sagur,  town  of,  304  n 1.

^aha’if  fi-l-Kalum,  a treatise  on  Meta-
physics, 427  n 1.

Sahar,  Sarkar  of,  410  m 4.

Saharanpur,  hills  of,  334  n 7.

Sahibu-z-Zanj,  ‘Ali  ibu  Muhammad,
of  the  family  of  ‘Ali,  raises  a revolt
at  Basra,  358  n 3.

Sakihu-l-Bakhari,  the  famous  collec-
tion of  authentic  traditions  bv
Imam  Bukhari.  6 n.  3.

Sahsarim,  a dependency  of  Kolitas,
468,  468,  471,  484,  533.

Sahur,  or  morning  meal  on  a fast  day,
177  n 4.

Sai,  the, — one  of  the  principal
streams  of  Oudh,  222  » 3.

Said  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sal-
tan Sikandar  Lodi,  419.

Said  Khan,  brother  of  A'/um  Huma-
yun  of  Labor,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Shir  Shah,  491,  493,  498.

Sa‘id  Khan  Lodi,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Lodi  dynasty,  434.

Sa‘id  Sarsari,  ^iji,  envoy  of  the
Egyptian  Khalifah  to  Snitan  Mu-
hammad Tnghlaq  Shah.  310  and
n 1.

Saides  or  Saiyyids,  title  of  the  des-
cendants of  ‘Ali  ibn  Abi  Talib,  80
n 5.

Saifi,  author  of  a treatise  on  Prosody,
183  n 1.

Saifu-d-Diu  Kuji,  feudatory  of  Hansi,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  the  Shamsivah
dynasty,  98  and  n 2,  120  n 2.

Saifu-d-Din,  Malik,  son  of  Malik
Nit.amu-d-Din  the  ruler  of  Oudh,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Snltiin  Firoz
Shah  Tnghlaq,  334.

Saif n-d- Din  Siiri,  brother  of  ‘Alau-d-
Din  Hasan  the  king  of  ^or,  60.

Sairu-l-' Ibad  ila-l-Ma'ad,  one  of  the
works  of  Hakim  Sanai,  56  ii  2.

Saiyyid,  application  of  the  term,  80
n 5,  303  n 4.

Saiyyid  En^ari,  a Muhammadan
saint,  80  n 1.

Saiyyid  Khan,  Khan-i-A‘zam.  son  of
Saiy3  id  Salim  of  Tabarhindah,  388,
396.

Saiyyid  Mansur,  one  of  the  Generals
of  Amir  Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan
Mahmud  Ghaznawi.  46.

Saiyyid  Rusilddr,  one  of  the  Court
officers  of  Sultan  Firoz  Shah  Tngh-
laq, 328.

Saiyyid  Salim  of  Tabarhindah,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Khizr  Khan  of  the

CXXXl

Saiyyid  dynasty,  388  and  nn  1
and  2.

Saiyyid  Zada-i-^Alawi,  Shah  Nabsa,
grandson  by  hie  mother’s  side  of
Saltan  Shamsu-d-DIn  lyal-timish,
260  and  n 7,  261.  1

Saiyyida-3-Sadai  Saiyyid  Salim  of  i
Tabarhindah,  388  n 1.  See  under
Saiyyid  Salim.

Saiyyidu-s-Salatln  Saltan  Ibrahim
ibn  Mas‘ud  ibn  Mahrajud  Ghaznawl,
51,  52.  See  under  Ibrahim.

Saiyyids,  the  descendants  of  ‘AIT,  80
71  5.

Sajdiih  or  Sijdah,  a prostration  in
prayer,  612  n 3.

Sokhdj  a dish  made  of  wheat  flour,
.neat  and  vinegar,  298  n 5,

Sakech,  a township  in  the  Sarkar  of
Qanauj,  410  n 4.

Saklb,  for  the  township  of  Sakit,  41 C

n 4.

Sakloa,  town  of,  377  and  n 4.

Sakit,  a town  in  the  Etah  District  of
the  N.-W.  Provinces,  377  n 4,  407
n 1,  410  and  n 4.

Sakit  Singh,  the  Kai  of  Itawa,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Buhlul  Lodi,
410  71  4.

Sakita,  town  of,  377  n 4.  See  the
town  of  Sakit.

Sakkar,  fortress  of,  422.

Sakpat,  for  the  town  of  Sakit  {q.  r.),
410  4

Sakti,  a feinale  deityy  20  71  5.

Sdl  wood,  599  and  ii  13.

Sal  Mastan,  for  Shal-o-Hastang.  two
villages  near  Quetta,  567  n 9.

Sii  Wahsaiuln,  for  Shal-o-Mastang,
two  villages  near  Quetta,  567  n 9.  -

Salaman  and  Absal,  Story  of,  one  of
the  poetical  works  of  Manlana
‘Abdu-r- Rahman  3 ami,  272  n 1.

Saldtln-i-haqJqi,  trae  kings,  i»e.,  the
prophets,  143  n 1.

Saldtin-i-majuzl,  so-c&lled  kings,  i.e  ,
the  kings  of  the  earth,  143  and  1.

SMbahan,  the  Raja,  of  Patna,  one  of
the  contemporaries  of  Sultan  Sikan-
dar  Lodi,  416.

Saldi,  a Moghul  ccminander,  attacks
Hindustan  in  the  reign  of  Snlthu
‘Alaa-d-DIn  Khiljl,  249  and  n o.

Sale’s  Koran,  Preliminary  Discourse.
21  7i  1,  157  n 2.  409  n 5.

' Salim  Chi^tlof  Fathpur.  ^aiUi.  the
famous  saint,  4SS,  50S.  535,  600.

Salim  Shah,  son  of  Shir  Shah,  of  ihe
Afghan  Sur  dynasty  of  Dibll,  447.
490  and  71  4,  494,  495,  497,  500,
502,  525,  526,  527,  588.  See  under
Islem  Shah.

SMim  ot  Tabarhindah,  Saiyyid,  one
of  tlie  Amirs  of  Khizr  ^an  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty  of  Dihli,  38S  and
7jn  1 and  2.

Salima,  same  as  the  Sarsuti,  a tribn-
wary  of  the  Sutlej,  330  and  nr,  4
and  7.

Salimpur,  village  of.  on  the  south
bank  of  ’he  Gandak.  4u9  n 5.

SaljuqTyali.  dynasty  of  Khurasan  and
Mawai^u-ii-Nalir,  35  n,i  1 and  0,
38  n 3,  42  71  3.  51  n 2,  55  n 3,  81
n 5.  See  also  the  ne^t.

Saijuqs,  the,  33  n 1.  42  n 1.  45  and
n 2.  ol,  167  n 3.  See  the  above.

Salm,  one  of  the  sous  of  Faridun,  of
the  ancieut  kings  o-  Persia,  435
and  It  2.

CXXXll

Index.

Salman  aI*Farsi,  called  in  Persian
Hiizbih,  one  of  the  Companions,
672  and  n 1.

Salniiu  Siwajij  a famons  poet,  pane-
gyrist of  Amir  Shaikh  Hasan  and
his  son  SuUan  Awais  Jalayer,  57l
n 9,  G05,  633  and  « 1.

Salt  Range,  the,  19  n 4,  128  n 3.

SalQ,  ^ah  liiuhammad  Khan,  one  of
the  Amirs  or  Humayiia,  618  and
71  7,  619.

Sam,  one  of  the  heroes  of  the  Shf'-h-
■^iilma,  72,  ITS  ■;  2.

Shib  Mlrza,  brothti*  of  Shtlh  Tahmusp
of  Persia,  153  and  u S.  455.

SamaVj  the  fish  Tv'hich  bears  che
Earth,  152  and  2.

Sanian,  ancestor  ''•f  the  Samlni  Kings
of  ^lurfisan,  ~2.

Samatin,  town  or.  132,  186,  221.  243,
305,  310,  328,  330,  334,  338.342
343,  352,  355,  3C0,  362,  304.  365
and  71  6,  373.  SP2,  390.  301,  302,  '
356,  30*^,  390.  d.",!*,  595.

Slmlnis,  :h:n  a ciytiasry  cf  K.ngs
in  Khnil^fiii  ‘ml  ilfm.ij  :-ii-n-X.ihr,

13  71  1,  14  ij.  1 , 10  n 2.

Samar,  the  ilngUGl,  one  cf  the  gone-
rals  of  Chiiigiz  Khin,  13S  nn  I
and  2.

Sunin.r^'ind,  tov?n  or,  6 ti  3,  lC  r>  1,
59  71  1,  150  n.  SIO,  359,  443.  570  n 7.

Saiaarqandi,  autin'r  of  the  Sha>/i-i^
S'ii/ia:f  on  ^letajdijsics,  427  7i  1.

Scmarrl,  also  eal’ed  Sarra-iiian-iaa,
a to'.'rn  In  ‘Iraq  on  the  Eait^^rn
bank  uf  the  4 ieris.  50  ?<  1,  571  4 2.  j

S.ima‘u-d-Din,  a of31uij:irn-  1

mad  sou  of  Sulrfin  Firoz  '

33S,  i

STtma^n-d-DIn  Kr.nbaw.. — or

Si*ma’n-d-Dui  KanhQ  of  Dhinl.  Sliniili,
one  of  the  gi  e..tt:;r  of -Jif'  ‘I'laina
^ni]^s,  contain norai'v  o£  Sultln
Sikandar  Lodi,  411  and  n 9.  430.

Saina*'Ti*d.Din  Qntlogh  Khan  the
VazTr.  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Husain  uf  JaanL"ir.  4',)6.

j Samba],  See  nndtr  Sambhrh.
j Sambalaka,  the  town  of  Sambi.a!  as
I called  by  Ptolemy.  3ui  4,

I Sambast,  town  of,  358  v 6.
i Snmb’naf,  district  and  lown  of,  calk-.l
also  Sambal.  Sar-bal  i'nd  Saubi.a'
335  and  n S,  351,  364,  375,  305,
396,  406,  415.  41S,  419.  426.  431  a
4,  435  and  n 6,  443.  44  h 451,  105,
525,  545,  547,  54S,  590  n 5,  597,
59S,  604.

Samir.  Rai,  OoTernor  of  Lawa,  con-
temporary of  Khizr  Khan  of  the
dyuasty  of  the  Saiyyids,  380  7i  5.

Samiudi,  otherwise  known  as  Sun  i*
m.in-ra’n  or  SfunaiTr.,  in  4raq,  571
and  n 2.

! Saninari.  town  of.  571  7l  9

Samothala,  a place  tweivu  from

Laitore  349

Sanmudar.  name  of  the  Bang  Matl
when  it  etJters  Hindusiuti,  84  ji.

Samvat  cia  of  Vikramadit)  2,  95  and
ii  5.

San‘a\  capital  of  Yatnan  in  Arab'a,

262  7i.

SatiTiI,  H.iklp.i, — the  celebrated  poet
of  f^azril,  35  7i  1,  56,  57.

Sanam  or  Sannam,  tow'n  of,  138  n 1,
236.  310,  330  n 7,  43S.

Saiibal,  town  uf,  375.  Sec  SamMial.

Sanbal,  .^arkar  of,  495.

Index,

cxxxiii

Sanba!,  a tribe  of  tbe  Afghans,  500.

Sanbhal.  See  under  tbe  town  of
Sambhal.

Sanbiiz  hills,  the  Kumaon  hills,  186

n 1.

Sancbi  inscription,  the,  18  n 1.

Sandal  wood,  notes  on,  484-  and  n 1.
627  and  n 2,

Sandila,  district  of.  349.

San^  Sura^,  on  the  rente  between
GhnznTn  and  the  Panjab,  78  and
71  3.

Sanir,  Kai,  of  RaitalT,  contemporary
of  the  Firuz  Shahl  dynasty,  3G0
71  3.

Sanka,  Kana,  one  of  the  Auiirs  of  tbe
Lodi  dynasty,  444,  44oj  446,  452,
470.

Sankapur,  for  the  town  of  SbikarpQr,
4S7  and  2,

Simkot,  for  the  fortress  cf  Sillkot,  49
and  n 1.

Sannam  or  Sanam,  town  or,  138  n 1,
236,  310,  330  7i  7,  43S,

Saqif,  called  also  Qassi,  founder  of
the  Arab  tribe  of  Saqif,  12  n 1.

SaqTf,  a tribe  of  the  Arabs,  12  n 1,
28  n 1.

Saqirldf  or  Siqlat,  a silken  stuff  bro*
ended  with  gold,  543  and  n 3.

Sar,  Rfd,  Governor  of  Chandawar,
contemporary  of  Khi/r  Khirn  of
the  dynasty  of  the  Sayyids,  377.

Saracens,  the,  635  n 6.

Sarakhs.  a city  of  Khurasan,  also
called  Sarkhas,  43  and  Tin  1,  2 and
3,  71

Saran,  town  of,  406  and  n 4,  417.

Sarang  Khan,  tfie  ruler  of  Dlpalpur,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  the  Firuz

8hahi  dynasty,  349,  352,  353,  355,
358.  362,  380  and  n 4.

Sarang  Khan,  one  of  the  Afghan
Amirs  of  Babar,  441.

Sarangpur,  town  of,  454.

Sarastu,  township  of,  in  the  neigh-
bourhood of  Sambhal,  525.

Saraswatl,  the,  330  n 7.  See  under
the  Sarsnti  river.

Sardar,  town  of,  326  n 2,

Sarddrs  in  front  of  the  throne,  497.

Saregh  Koiwal,  an  officer  of  Sultan
Mahmud  of  ^aznln.  22.

Sargdawari,  a ford  on  the  Ganges,
377.  See  also  under  Sarkdawarl.

Sari, — or

Sariyah,  a town  of  Tabaristnn,  36
and  n 3.

Sarju  river,  also  called  the  Sara  (g.  r.),
221  n 3,  222  .a  3,  223  n,

Sarkar  of  Allahabad,  416  n 3.

.'^arkar  of  ni?':\r  Flroza,  439.

Sarkar  of  Qanauj,  410  n 4,  533.

Sarkar  of  Sahar,  410  n 4.

Sarkar  of  Sanbal,  495.

Sarkars  of  Hindustan,  495,  496.

Sarkdawari,  town  of,  311,  312  Sco
also  under  Sargdawuri

Sarkes,  in  Gujarat  near  to  Ahmad-
abad,  357  n -i.

Sarkhas.  a city  of  ^hurasan,  called
also  Sarakhs.  43  and  nn  1,  2 and  3,

ri.

Sarkhatra,  canal,  327  n 3.

Sarkhech.  near  Ahmadabad,  357  n 3.
See  the  following.

Sarkhej. — or

Sarkhez.  in  Gajarat  near  to  Ahmad-
abnd,  357  and  nn  3 and  4.

Sar  Manzil,  595.

OXXXIV

Indp.r.

Sarraast  ^ian,  the  Afghan,  one  of  the  i
Amirs  of  Islem  Shah  of  the  Afghan  ;
Sur  dynasty  of  Dihll,  501,  534.  j

Sarmast  Khan  SarbanI,  one  of  the  1
Amira  of  *Adli,  538.  j

Sar  Salahl  Kotwaly  an  officer  of  Sultan  |
Qutbu-d-Din  Mubarak  Shah,  son  of  |
^Alau-d-DIn  275  and  n 1,  ;

277.  i

Sarsatl,  a fortress  in  the  hills  of  i

Kashmir,  called  also  Sarsatl  and  !

~ I

Sarsatl  {q.v.),  36  and  n 1.  |

Sarsatl  river,  called  also  the  Saras-  |
wati,  and  the  Salima,  27  n 4,  69,  ;
324,  330  and  nn  6 and  7,  382.  ;

Sarsutl,  the  country  south  of  the  j
Himalaya,  also  called  Sarsatl  and
Sarsatl,  70  and  n 1,  80.

Sarsatl,  fortress  of,  293,  324,  327  and
n 3,  355,  401  n 2.  See  under  Sar-
satl.

Sartez  "Imada-l-Malb,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Togh-
laq  ^ah,  303,  314  and  n 2.

Sard  river,  called  also  the  Sarjd
(q.  v.l  222  and  n 3,  238,  239,  298.

Sarud,  district  of,  495  n 3.

Sarur,  town  and  district  of,  326  and
n and  n 2,  495  and  n 3.

SarwanI,  Khan-i-Khanan,  Governor
of  the  fort  of  Rantaiibhur,  contem-
porary of  ^er  ^ab,  475.

Sarwarn-l-Mulk,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Mubarak  ^ah  of  the  dynasty  of
the  Saiyyids,  393,  394,  395,  396,
397.

Sasan,  founder  of  the  Sassanide  dy-
nasty of  Persian  Kings,  73.

Sassanide  dynasty  of  Persian  Kings,
46  n o.

Sasseram,  town  of,  185  n 1.

Sa^al  Dev,  of  Sorath,  a rebel  in  the
reign  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIu  EThtlil.
264.

Satgana,  country  of,  387  and  n 3.

Satganw,  district  of,  302.

Satgarh,  town  of.  329  and  n 4.

Sathiydt,  superficialities,  504  n 9.

Satlaj,  the,  23  n 3,  70  n 1,  190  and
n 2,  325  n 3,  326  and  n,  330,  362
and  7in  1 and  3,  363  n,  380  n 2,  3S1,
382  and  n 2,  590  n 5,  593.  Called
also  the  Satlaz  and  the  Sutlej.

Satlaz,  the  river  Satlaj  (g.v.),  330
and  n 5.

Sdtu,  the  rcof  of  a house  in  Turk!,
494  n 7.

Sdtdr,  494  and  n 7.

Saturn,  notes  on  the  planet,  217  n 5.

Saudd,  black  bile,  5 7i  3.

Saulajan,  from  the  Persian  Chaugd7i,
a stick  with  a curved  extremity,
79  n 1.

Saulajuii^  origin  of  the  modern  game
of  polo,  417  n 8.

Saur,  Jabal,  a mountain  near  Mecca,
149  n,  158  n 1.

Sawadu-l-A ‘dham,  meaning  of  the
expression,  8 u 4.

Suwa  or  Sawah,  a city  of  Kharasinj
571  n 9,  633  n 1.

SawajI,  Jamalu-d-DIn  Salman,,  a
famous  Persian  poet,  contemporary
of  §bai^  Hasan  Jalayer  and  his
son  Sultan  Awais,  571  n 9,  605,  633
and  n.  1.

Sawana,  fort  of,  264  n 6.

Sawas,  district  of,  475.

Saziwal  Klhan.  one  of  the  Amirs  of
^Tr  Shah,  475,  492,  495.

Index.

cxxxv

Scherpour,  town  of,  82  n 1,  93  n.

Sedillot’a  Tables  Astronomiques
d’Oloug  Beg,  198  n 2.

Sehwan,  in  the  Karachi  district  of
Sind,  560  n 8.

Seistan,  province  of,  19,  47,  50.

Seljnqa,  the.  See  under  the  Saljuqs.

Sepulchre  of  the  Poets  in  Tabriz,
called  the  Snrkhiib.  339  n 4.

Serdi  Talawari,  a common  name  of
the  town  of  Tarayan,  90  and  n 1 .

Seven  labours  of  Isfandiyar,  in  the
Shih-Ndma,  103  n 2.

Seven  Places,  the  seven  labours  of
Isfandiyar,  103  and  n 2.

Seven  poems  of  the  Jaliiliyat,  called
the  Mii'allaqdt,  99  and  n 6.

Seven  Sleepers  of  Ephesns,  207  n 1.

Sewand  Eai,  or  Sandhi  Eai,  the
Hindu  General  of  Sultan  Muham-
mad, son  of  Sult.an  Mahmud  Ghaz
nawi,  34  and  n 2.

Skab-i-Bardt.  the  fifteenth  of  the-
month  of  Sha'ban,  488  and  n 6.

Shadarwan,  fortress  of,  in  ^nrasSn,
583  n 4.

Shaddad  ibn  ‘Ad,  a king  of  the
ancient  Arabs,  261,  262  n,  263  n,
501  and  n 3.

Shidi,  a servant  of  Mnhammad  Khan
SQr,  Governor  of  the  country  of
Channd,  468.

Shadi  Khan,  son  of  Sultan  ‘Alan-d-
Din  ^ilji,  268,  272,  27  6,  278,  283.

Shadi  Kath,  the  Sar  Salahi  Kotwdl  or
chief  captain  of  Snltan  Qntbn-d-
Din  ^ilji,  275  » 1,  283  and  n 9.

Shadi  Niib-i-^ha??,  Malik,  the  Hdjib
of  Saltan  ‘Alan-d-Din  Khilji,  274,
295.

Shafi^,  Imiim,  founder  of  the  Shafi'ite
sect  of  Sunni  Muslims,  57  n 1.

Shafi‘ites,  the, — one  of  the  four  sects
of  Sunni  Muslims,  57  n 1,  73  n 1,
514.  See  the  above.

Shah  ‘Abda-l-‘Aziz  of  Dihli,  author
of  the  Tuhfa-i-Ifnd-‘a§hariyah,
577  71.

Shah  Ahu-1-Ma‘ali,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Hnmayiin,  592,  594,  596,  597.

Shah  ‘Alam,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sher  Shah  of  the  Afghan  Sur  dy-
nasty, 477.

Shah  Hasan,  one  of  Amirs  of  Babar,
446.

Shah  Hindal,  587.  See  under  Mirza
HindM.

Shah  Husain  Arghun,  Mirza,  Governor
of  Tatta,  one  of  the  contempora-
ries of  Humayun,  559,  560  and
n 8,  561  and  n 2,  562,  566,  567,
580.

§hah  Isma'il  Safawi  IJosaini,  King
of  Persia,  449,  570,  572  m 8.

Shah  Ja'far  ^Iwandi  Dakkani,  a
Shi'ah  divine,  contemporary  of
Kizam  Shah  Baliri,  624,  625.

Shah  Kamran,  584.  See  under
Kamran  Mirza.

Shah  Mansur  Birliis,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Babar,  441.

Shah  Mir  of  Agra,  Saiyyid,  one  of
the  contemporaries  of  Islem  Shah.
526.

Shah  Mirza,  son  of  Mnhammad
Zaman  Mirza,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Humayun,  452,  458.

Shah  Muhammad  of  Dihli,  contem-
porary of  Sher  ^ah  and  lalent
^ah,  .504,  505,  506,

CXXXVl

Indc^:.

Sbah  Mnhammad  Farmuli,  one  of  the  j
Amirs  of  Tslem  ^ah,  499  and  n 7,  j
538,  6 3 9,  540.  j

Shah  Muhammad  Kliau  Salu,  one  of  j
the  Amirs  of  Humayiin,  618  and
n 7,  619

^ah  Muhammad  Shaliabadi,  Mulli,
translator  of  the  History  of  Kashmir,

8 n 3.

Shah  Murad,  son  of  Shah  Tahmasp
of  Persia,  572,  573  and  n 1,  575,
576.

^ah  Najaf,  grandson  by  his  mother’s
side  of  Saltan  Shamsu-d-Din  Tyal-
timish,  260  n 7.

Shnh  Hamah.  See  under  the  Shah-
nama.

Sha’i  Rukh,  grandson  of  the  Great
Timur,  Sultan  of  Persia,  618  1.

Shah  Tiihir  JunaidI,  the  poet,  624
n 6.  Same  as  the  next  {q.  i\).

ShfiU  Tahir  KhondT. — or

^Ih  Tahir  Khwandl  Dakhani,  one
of  the  poets  of  the  time  of  Iluma*
yun,  624  and  n 6,  625  and  n 3,
626,  632,  635,  636.

Shah  Tahmasp,  King  of  Persia,  con-  |
temporary  of  Humayun,  453,  455,  |
456,  466,  569,  570,  572,  624.  '

Shah  Turkan,  mother  of  Sultiln
Ruknu-d-Din  Firoz  ^fdi  ihti  Shgm.  I
su-d-DIn  lyal-tinii^,  98  il  1.

^ahiib.  See  under  Sliihab.

Shaliubful.  district  and  town  in  I
Bengal,  330  n 7,  334,  439,  466  ■
n 6.

^ahabu-d-Daulat.  See  under  ^iha-  <
bu-d-Danlat.  ,

Shahabu-d-DIn.  See  under  ^ihrt-  j
bu-d'Din.

Shahanshah  Sayyid  Zada-i*‘Alawi
a descendant  on  the  mother’s  side
from  Sultan  Shamsu»d-Din  lyal-
260  and  n 7-

Shahbaz  Kb  an  Luhani,  oue  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty,
490  and  a 4,  592.

Shahik  Barbak,  the  Khan-j-Jahan,
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Sultan  Mu‘iz-
zu-d-Din  Kaiqubad  Balbani,  221.

Shahik  Wazir  ^ian,  one  of  the  Maliks
of  the  Balbani  dynasty,  220.

»^ahin,  Malik,  known  by  the  title  of
Wafii  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Khiljl  dynasty,  284.

Shiihin,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Firuz  ^^ahi  dynasty,  344.

^ahjaliunpur  District,  N.-W.  Pro-
vinces, 546  n 3,  598  7i  9.

Ska/nia-i-ShaJi r.  City  Constable,  401.

Shdh-yg.'fia  of  Fii  Jausj,  32  n 1,  88  7i  2,
103  tL  2,  llu  n o,  170  u 2,  180  .i  2,
207  7,  321  n 1,  435  n 2.

Shdh^huma,  Atkinson’s,  32  n 1,  116
n 5,  178  n 2,  ISO  n 2,  321  n 1,  435
a 2.

of  Badr  ^nslii  the  poet,
321

^vtiinawnz,  on  the  eastern  bank  of
the  Ravi,  355  n I

.^aiipur_  Sliuh  Muhammad  Khan,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Uumriyuii,  61-S  a 7.

^ahiastaiu’s  al-H'lal  v'u-ii'Hihal.
157  Ti  2,  158  n

^ahr-i-Kan,  on  the  banks  of  the
Jumna,  231.

8hahr-i-Sabz,  in  Bokhara,  570  n 7.

Stidhru khL  a coin  first  coined  by  Shah
Ru^  tlie  jIu^uI  Sultaii  of  Persia,
61S  u 1.

Indese.  cxxxvii

SIiahra-llIL.  brother  of  ‘Ainn-1-Mn1k
Mnltlni,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan
Muhammad  Tugblaq  §hah,  311,
312.

^ahu  Lodi  the  Afghan,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  Muhammad  Tugh-
laq  Shah,  305  and  n 1

^ahzada  Fath  Khan.  See  Fath
Khan,  son  of  Sultan, FIroz  Shah.

^alizada  Fath  Khan  of  Herat,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Mubarak
Shah  of  Jaunpur,  361,

^ahzada  Mubirak  Khan,  See
Mubarak  Khan,  son  of  Saltan
‘Alau'd-Din  Khilji.

Shahzada  Muhammad  Khan.  See
Muhammad  Khan,  son  of  Sultan
Firoz  Shah.

Shaihk.  application  of  tlie  term,  303
n 4,  604,

Shaikh  ‘Ali,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Babar,  441,

£haijch  ‘Ail,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Humayun,  565  n 1.

Shai^  ‘All  Mtighul,  the  ruler  of
Kabul,  contemporary  of  3Inbarak
Shah  of  the  dynasty  of  the
Saiyyida,  388,  389,  390,  391,  392.

Shai^-allahdlyah  of  Khairabad,  646
and  n 1.

BayazTd,  brother  of  Mustafa
Farmali,  one  of  the  Afghan  Amirs
of  Babar,  444.

Shai^  Hamid,  the  commentator  of
Sanbal,  contemporary  of  Humayiln,
601.

Shai^  Hasan  Jalayer,  King  of
Khurasan.  633  n 1.

Shaikh  Khuran,  one  of  tlie  Hindustani
Amirs  of  Bibar,  414,  445.

18

Shaikh,  son  of  Malik  iMarwan  Daulat,
Governor  of  Multsn  under  the
Firuz  ^ihi  dynasty,  376.

Shaikh  Sa‘di  of  Shiraz,  author  of  the
Gnlist^n,  187  and  n 2,

Shaikh  Tahir,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
the  Lodi  dynasty,  41S-
Shaikha  Kliakar, — or
ShsikLa  Khukhar,  Maliic  contem-
porary of  the  Firdz  ^ahl  dynasty,
347,  349,  358  and  n G.  3&1  and  n 5,
3^»8  and  n 2,

^aikhan,  the, — title  of  the  Abu  Bakr
and  ‘ Umar,  the  first  two  Khali-
fahs,  303  n 4.

Shaikhs,  holy  shrines  of  the,  at  Mul-
tan, 392.

ghaikhu-l-Hadlyah  Jaunpurl,  an
author,  4-8,  429.

Shaikhn-i-I'idm,  506.
Shaikhu-I-Mashaikh  ^ni^  yasan
Zinjani,  a famous  saint  of  Labor,
883  and  n 6.

Shai^u-l-Nadiyah  Janripurl,  429
Shaikhz%da-i-  Buatiimi  A /am  Mnlik,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Sultan  FIimz
Toghlaq,  328.

Slmikhzida  Dimiahqi,  one  of  the
courtiers  of  Sultan  Ghivasa-d-
Din  Toghinq  ^ali,  29S.
Shaikhzada-i-Jam,— or
Shaikhzada-i-Jamh  one  of  the  learned
men  of  the  time  of  Sultan  Qutbu-
d-Din.  Khilji,  284.  318,

Sbakarggnj  Sliaikh. — or
Shakkar  Ganj,  ^ 135  n,  271  n

4.  Same  as  Faridu-d-DIn

Ganjshikar  (</.  r ).

Shal,  village  of,  in  rhe  neighboui-
hood  of  QioUta,  oi>7  n 9.

CXXXVJll

ghal  Mashang.  village  of,  567  n 9.

Shal  Mascang,  village  of,  567  and  n 9.
^al-o-Mastan,  two  villages,  567  ?<-  9.
S]ial-o-Mastang,  two  villages  near
Quetta,  567  n 9.

^am  (Syria),  585  and  n 7.
§hama\lu-l-Miihammadtyu}i,  name  of
a book,  625  n 6.

^dmidnaj  a kind  of  marquee,  460
and  n 4,  497  n 1.

tShains  Khan,  uncle  of  Tatar  Khan,
the  son  of  ^a.i&r  ^han  {q.  i\),  361:
Shams  Khan  Anhadt,  son  of  Anhad
Khan,  the  ruler  of  Baiana  under
the  Firuz  ^ahi  and  Saiyjid  dy-
nasties, 359,  360  and  n 5,  378,
379,  385  and  n 1.

Shams  Khan  Luhani,  one  of
Amirs  of  Isleni  ^ah,  493,  491-.
Shams  Khatun,  sister  of  Qntb  Klifm
Lod!  (q.  V.},  404  n 2.

^amsabad,  town  of,  232,  311,  377
and  n 3,  384  and  n 4,  403  and  -nn
4 and  5,  404  and  n 2,  407  and  n 1,
415,  472.

Shamsher  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  [
of  ‘Adll,  537-  _ i

^ams-i-Siraj  ‘Afif,  author  of  the  j
TanM^-i-FiVuz  Sh-ihij  315  n 7,  323  i
n 3,  324  n 2,  325  n 3,  326  n.  323  '
njt  1 and  6,  329  nn  i,  2,  3,  5,  6 |

and  8,  330  n 2,  332  n 6,  333  nn  I j

I

and  4,  337  n 7.  j

b'ftc/mav j/ah,  a famons  treatise  on  •
Logic,  427  n 1 . j

^amsiyah  Sultans  of  ITind, — of  the  j
family  of  Sultan  Sliamsu-d-DIn  j
lyal-timish,  71  1 i

^arnsn-d-Din  Altamnsh,  71.  See  i
under  §ham*u-d'Oin  lyal-iiniish.

I Shamsu-d-Din  of  Bharaij,  Qazi,  one
; of  the  Qazis  of  the  Sbamsiyah
Sultans,  132.

I ^fimsu-d-Din  Dabir,  one  of  the
j poets  of  the  time  of  Sultan  Isasiru-
i d-Din,  son  of  Shamsu-d-Din  Jval-

t

j timish,  134  and  n 3.  137  and  n 8,

: 217.

{ Shantsu-d-Dm  Damaghani,  Governor
of  Gujrat  tinder  Sultan  Firoz  Shah
Tnghlaq.  334.

Shamsu-d-Din  of  ‘Iraq,  Mir  Saiyyid,
one  of  the  contemporaries  of  Islem
. Shah,  505.

■ ^auibu-d-Diu  Jyaltimish,  Sultan,  of
j the  Slave  dynasty  of  Dihli,  71  and
I n 1,  79,  80,  86.  87,  88  and  n I,

i 90  and  7*  2.  91,  92,  93,  96,  98,  120,

j 126  and  n 3,  184,  187,  260  and  n 7.
S|i;«msU'd*DIn  KaiklQs,  son  of
Mu'izzu-cl-Din  Kaiqubad,  Sultan  of
the  Shamsiyah  dynasty,  227,  229,
230  and  n 1 .

Shamsu-d-Din  of  LakbnautI,  Sultan,
309,  324,  328.  See  under  Ilyas
il^ji.

Shantsn-d-Dip  of  Mnrhira,  QozT,  one
of  the  Qazis  of  the  Shamsivab
Sultans,  123  and  n 2
^amsu-d-Diu  Muhammad  Atka
l^aii,  eon  of  Mir  Yar  Muhammad
of  Ghazni,  called  the  A'zam  Khan,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Humayun,
464  and  n 6,  568  and  n 8.
Shamsu-d-Din  Muhammad  Sam  Ghuri,
tjile  of  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Ghfiri
before  his  accession,  65  n 2.
i^amsu-d-Din  Suleiman,  son  of  Mahk
MarwOn,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
bul|au  Firoz  Sh^h,  335  n 4,

hitle^r.

cxxxix

Sliamsn-I-Mulk,  one  of  tlie  Maliks
of  ilubfirak  .^aii  of  the  S;iiyyid
dynasty,  390,  392.

Shaqi' iqU'Ti'Nu' man,  a red  flower,  142
/i  3.

Shar^,  a§h,  the  sacred  canon  of  the
QiirMn,  4 ?4  1.

Sisiraf.  a poet,  68.

^araf  of  Baiana.  See  under  Sultan
^arf,

SItfu‘afu-(l-DTn  Mnnirl,  Qiitbu-1-
Mashaikhi-l-‘IzaTn,  a famous  saint,
S2  7i  1,  416  and  n 13.

*Sharafu-d-Dm  Musiih  ihn  ‘Abdn-llah
as-Sa‘di,  ^aikh,  187  n 2.  The
famous  Sbai^  Sa'di  of  Shiraz.
^ar.jfud-Mulk  Ash'ari,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Shamsiykh  Sultans,
125.

^aran,  town  of,  406  n 4.  [452.

^arhutildr,  preparer  of  beveiages,
^harf.  See  under  Sharaf«
Sfiarhain-i-Mittuh.  two  commentaries
on  the  Miftdhu-l-^Uliitfi,  428  h 2
Sha ih-x- JXa u zv. ina  of  Haji  Mulla  Had!

Sabzwari,  181  n 2.  ;

Sharh‘i-J^ahju-l~Bald^at  of  ‘Abdu-1-
Hamid  bin  Abi-l-Hudid  abJSIu'ta-
ziii,  458  n 3.

SKarh-i-Sahdif.  a treatise  on  Meta-  i
physics,  427  and  7i  1.
jiharh-i-Shamsiyah,  a treatise  on  logic,
427  and  n 1.

^arhu-l-Masdhih  wa-l-Mandhij,  one
of  the  works  of  Qazi  Baizawi,  6 n 4.
Sharif.  Mir  Saiyyid,  a wcil-kjiown
author,  560.  i

Sh arq.  Sultan,  Governor  of  Baiana,  j
sun  of  Sultan  Ahmad  Jjlwani  the  •
First,  414  and  nn  6 11  auJ  12.

Sbarqi.  Sultan  Ibrahim  Shah  of
Jaunpur,  386  and  Tin  2 and  3,  387
and  Ti  4,  403,

Sbarqi  dynasty  of  Jaunpur,  409  and
n 8,  413.

Sh'ist  Qulla,  surname  of  the  poet
Maniichihri  Daraaghani,  46  n.  4.
Shatladar,  name  of  the  Sutlej  in
Sanskrit,  23  3.

5h‘tula,  name  of  one  of  the  mansions
of  the  moon,  115  n 3.

' ShSyista  Khan,  son  of  Qurra  Qumar,
one  of  the  courtiers  of  Sultan
Qutba-d-Din  ^ilji,  291,  293,  296
and  n 3.

j Shiyista  Khan,  title  of  Firoz  Khan
ibn  Yaghrash  the  j^ilji,  afterwards
Sultan  JalalU'd-Din  Kbilii  (q.  v ),
22  6,  227,  228,  229,  2 30  and  n 1.
Shehr-i-Sabz.  in  Bokhara.  570  n 7.
^ekel,  a weight  and  a coin  of  the
I Hebrews,  25  n 1.

I ^er  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  Mudzzu-d-Din  Eaiqubad  of
the  Balbani  dynasty,  226  and  n 1.
Sher  Khan,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Sultan  ^amsu-d-Din  lyal-timish,
130,  186,  187.

Sher  Khan,  son  of  Islem  Shah  of  the
Afghan  Sur  dynasty,  534.

Sher  ^ah,  the  first  of  the  Afghan
Sur  dynasty  of  Dihli,  25  n 5,  436,
See  under  ^ir  Shah.

Sherpur,  town  of,  82  n 1,  93  n.
Sherring’s  Hindu  Tribes  and  Castes,
312  n 7,  384  a 3,  433  n 4,  557  n 9.
Sherzad  ibn  Sultan  Mas^ud  ibn
Ibrahim  Ghaznawi,  Sultan  of  the
Ghaznmde  dynasty,  55  and  n 3.
Sh?ah3,  the,  3 n 6,  22  n 3,  59  n 4,

cxl

Iadt.L.

156  n I,  157  «,  -120  n S,  571  nml
n 2,  572  and  n 6,  576  u 5,  577  n,
604  n 5,  625  and  n 3,  626  nn  4 and
6,  636.

§|iibla,  a village  m tlie  dependencies
of  OsrQshna  in  Transoxiana,  50  n 1.

^iblT,  a famous  Muhaniinadun  Saint,
59  and  n 1.

^ihab,  Manlana.  See  nnder  Sbiha-
bn-d-Din  the  Eiiigniaiist.

^ihab,  Mir,  one  of  the  Amirs  cf
Hamayua,  598  n 5.

^ihab  Khan.  See  ^ihnb  Nahir.

^ihab  Mnbamra  Uadaoni,  for
^ihib-i-Mutuiara,  the  poet,  99  and
n 2.

Shihab  Nahir,  ^Inlilv,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  FIrQz  Siiahi  dynasty,
351,  359.

Shihab-i-Mutmara,  Maulani,  one  of
the  poet.g  of  the  reign  of  Sultan
Rukiiu-d'Dia  ihn  Shunjsu-d-l>in
^Tyal-timjsn,  99  and  n 2,  100  and
n 1,  103.  112,  271  and  n 2.

^hihabu'd-Daalih  Maa*ud,  son  of
Sultan  MahnvVI  of  Ghaztiin,  29,  33,
35  See  under  Sultuu  Mos'fal.

Sj^iiiubU'd-Daulah  Maudiid,  son  of
Sultan  Mas’ud  Gliaznawi,  43  n 7.
See  under  Sultan  ^hnulud.

^iiiabu-d-llin  Abn-l-Muzaffur  Ghori,
62,  63  and  n 1,  64  and  n 2.  65  and
n 2,  66,  70,  72.  133  n.  See  under
Sultan  yiu'izzu'il-Diu  Mti/tamy/tad
Sdrn.

^ihaba-d-DIn  Ahro-id  Khan,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Huniayim,  598  and
n 5.

Shihabu-d-Din  the  Enigmatist,  Man-
lana, a learned  man  in  the  time  ot

Babar,  449  and  nn  3 and  9,  450  and
j n 1.

j Shihaba-d-Din  Hakim  Kirmani  Jaun-
• purl,  author  of  the  Talaqat-i-
I '•M(thfn/fd  ^kahJ,  230.

[ ^ihabu-d-Din  ibn  Jamalu-d-Din
i Mutmara,  known  as  Sh^ihab-i-Mut-
mara  (q,  v.).

[ S^iliabu'd-Din  Kishapuri  BakAsh?.
Mir,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  Humayun,
o9S  and  n 5.

^ihubu'd-Din  Snltan,  Malik,  one  of
I the  Amirs  of  Sultan  Muhammad
Tugblaq  Shah,  311.

^ihabu-d-Din  ‘Umar,  son  of  Saltan
‘Alau-d-Din  268,  27  2,  273

and  n 4,  274  n 1,  284
I ^ihabn-S'^aqib,  a name  of  Manlana
, ShihSbu*d-Din  the  Enigmatist
j (q  v.)y  450  n 1.

I Shikarpur,  town  of,  487  and  n 2.

■ ^ikebi.  Manlana,  a poet  of  the  time

of  Hntnayun,  453  n 7.

; diirdn,  officers  appointed  to  col-

lect reyenue  from  provinces,  407
n 2.

SI  ir  Khan,  son  of  Hasan  Sur,  a/fer-
I uatds  ^ir  ^ah,  456,  457,  458,

' 459,  460,  461,  462,  463,  464,  465,

j 466,  467,  468,  469,  470,  471  and
I n 1,  472,  475,  521,  541.  See  also
! under  ^Tr  Sliah
' ‘^ir  Shah,  the  tirst  of  the  Afghan
j Sur  dynasty  of  Diidl,  461  and

■ Hr  5,  472,  474,  475,  476,  477,  478,

I 479,  489,  481  /*  5,  482,  483,  484,

j 490,  492,  495,  496,  5u0,  502,  504,

i .'126,  527,  535  n 7,  538,  542,  563,

I 594,  8ee  the  abovo.  The  name

I Id  also  wiitteii  Si'er  Jihiih.

Index,

cxli

Shir-L-fiUuk,  t!ie  conatellatiou  Leo,
4-9b  n 5.

ir-i'-Klnida.,  the  Lion  of  God,  &
name  of  ‘All  ibii  Abi  T^bb,  93  n 4.
Slilr  mcidar,  foster-mother,  580  a 5.
.^iraz,  the  city  of,  6 n 4,  38  » 4.

187  and  n 2,  572  n 1.  j

^irgarh,  the  new  name  of  Qanaiij,  .

472  I

tiiib'In,  the  wife  of  Kliosru.  King  i
of  Persia,  279  /l  3.  j

f^irin  tea  Khun  ft.  a poeui  of  Mir  j
Khusru,  the  famous  poet  of  Dilill,  j

269  n 5.  1

i

^irk,  polytheism,  183  a 2,  025  n 5.  j
iiib'wan  ^ah  Khaqan  Maniichihi*,
King  of  Persia,  patron  of  the
famous  poet  Khiiqaul,  583  n 4-.
ftiilwar,  town  of,  389  and  h 8,  391,
392  and  n 5.

Slirines  of  the  ^ai^is  at  Multan,  j
392.  I

5iiinja*n-l- ilulic,  son  of  Saiyyid  Salim  j
of  Tabai'lilnd.-th  (q.  r.J,  388.  |

8iulktjt.  forLiriS"  cff;  49  and  7i  1.  06  ■
and  n 7,  07  '‘jid  h,  436,  137,  465.  j
8ibi,  town  of.  425  n 2.

Sii'i Hans,  tbe,  70  n.  I

biillran  or  Sidiiaran,  son  of  Kiugu  j
a proti-'jc  of  the  Mubaiak  |
ciiihi  family,  393  n 3,  395,  396,  |
b97.  1

7i‘Miq,  As-,  title  cf  Abu  Hakr,  me  i
Ovst  KhaIIfn.il,  oO  and  n 2-  i

P.'il,  grandson  of  Kajwi  Khatri,  i
a of  the  Muiiarak  .^ahi  I

f.iirdly,  394  395.  397  i

Sulhan,  Pai  of  ^atg.nrh,  ooutempor-  ^
ary  of  Sultan  Fii'oz  ^ah  Tughlag,  i
329  ri  5.

Sidbaran  KhatrT,  395,  See  under
Sidaran.

Sidi  Mania,  Saiyyid,  contemporary
of  Sultan  Jalaln-d-Din  KhilJI,  233
and  n 4,  234,  235,  248,  607  and
n 2,  525.

Sidra,  the, — or

Sidracu-I-Muntaha,  the  lote  tree  of
Paradise,  in  the  seventh  heaven,
58  71  3,  150  and  ti  2.

Siffin,  a celebrated  battle  between
‘All  and  Mu‘awiyah,  157  n 2.

Sihdin,  arrows  used  in  the  game  of
matsir,  369  and  « 1.

Siiirind,  town  of,  330,  331  and  tip*  3,
378,  380,  382,  383  n U,  406,  437,
438,  486,  498,  548.  See  also  under
Sirhind.

Sibru-l-Halal,  lawful  magic,  151  n 6,

SIbun  (Jaxartes),  the,  169  n.

Sihwan,  in  the  Karachi  district  of
Sind,  660  n 8.

Sijdah,  a prostration  in  prayer,  612
71  3.

Sijistan.  province  of,  15  n,  34  n 4,
70  n 2.

Sijz,  a village  in  the  province  of
Sijiscan,  70  n 2.

Siknndar,  a general  of  Mlrza  Kam<
rau’s  aruiy,  463,

yikandar,  milled  Zu-l-Q  a r n a i n,
Alexander  the  Great,  254,  255,  268,
331,  425,  436,  441,  485.

Sikandar,  Rampart  of,  191  and  n 2.

Sikaudar-i-Sani,  title  of  Sultan
‘Alau-d-DIn  ^ilji,  254  and  7i  6.

Siknndar  Khan  Osbak,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  fiumayuu,  592  and  n 1,
594,  595.

Sikandar  ^ban,  sou  of  Shah  Muham-

cxlii

IniletT.

mad  Farmali,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  ,
the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty,  538,  639.  |

Sikandar  Khan,  Malik  Ta'qub,  one  [
of  the  Amirs  of  Firoz  ^ah  |
Tnghlaq,  337,  338.  |

Sikandar  Lodi,  Sultan,  son  of  Sultan  !
Bnhlul  Lodi,  411,  412,  n 2,  413  and  !
n 13,  416,  417,  418,  423  n.  11,  424  j
and«4,  425,  426,  427,  429,  431  '
and  n 1,  432,  435,  444,  445,  466,
470,  476.  i

Sikandar  Maliku-sh-Sharq,  governor
of  Labor,  contemporary  of  Moba*
rak  Shah  of  the  Saiyyid  dynasty,
389,  390.  '

Sikandar,  son  of  Sh  a m s n*d-D  i n,  j
Saltan  of  Lakhnanti,  contemporary  '
of  Sultan  Firoz  Shah.  328  and  n 6,  .
329.  j

Sikandar  Sur,  one  of  the  cousitis  of  1
Shir  SJiah,  assumes  the  title  of  |
Saltan,  542,  543,  544,  546,  547,  550,  I
559,  592,  593,  594,  595,  396,  597.  '

Sikandar,  sou  of  Taju-LMulk  Nah\
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Khizr  Khin,
the  first  of  the  Saiyyids,  380.
Sikandar  Tahfa,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Saiyyid  dynasty,  383.
See  the  above.

Sikandarndma,  one  of  the  poeticnl
wor&s  of  Mir  ^hnsru  of  Dihli,
269  n 5.

Sikandamdmaj  one  of  the  poetical
works  of  the  celebrated  poet
Nizami,  174  n 3,  298  n 4,  467.

Sikkah,  Currency  stamped  with  name
of  sovereign,  3 n 3,  15  and  n 3.
Sikkaki,  SirajU'd-Diu  Abu  Ya'qub
Yusuf,  author  of  the  MiftahuA-
428  n 2.

Sikri,  another  name  of  the  town  of
Fathpur,  386,  445  and  n 2,  487,
488.

Sil  Hako  bridge,  over  the  Brahma-
putra, 84/1-1.

SilsiiaUi-z-Zaha‘‘,  one  of  the  works
of  3Iaulaixa  Jami,  272  n 1.

Simak,  the  fourteentli  of  the  houses
of  the  moon,  152  aud  n 2.

SimHku-l-A‘zal,  Spica  Mrginis,  152

n 2.

Simaku-r*Bamih,  Arccurns,  152  n 2.

Simurgh,  a fabulous  bu*J,  178  itn  2
and  4.

Sind,  11  n 3,  12,  13  20,  29,  36  and

71  10,  80,  88  n 1,  91,  124,  187,  297,
465,  559,  560  n 8,  018  7i  6.  Called
also  Sindh.

Sind,  the, — the  liver  Indus,  128  n 3,
422  n 3.

Sindh  see  under  Siud.

Sindhis,  the,  130.

Sindhu,  name  of  the  Indus  iu  Sans-
krit, 23  n 3.

Siudus, — the  liver  Indus,  23  3.

Sinjir,  town  of,  in  Mesopotamia,  55
n 3,  167  n 3.

Siiijar,  Alp  Khan,  wife’s  brother  of
Sultan  ‘AKiu-d'Diu  Khilji.  247.

Sinjar  ibn  Malik  ^ah  Saljiiqi,  tlie
last  of  the  Saljuq  dynasty  in
Khurasan.  55  aud  nn  3 and  4,  56,
61  and  n 5,  65,  167  and  n 3,  170,
291,  602.

1 Sinjuri,  Abu  ‘All, — contemporary  of
Sultan  Mahmud  of  Ghaznin,  20.

Sintur  hills,  the  Kumaon  hills,  185,
18G  n 1,  334  and  /t  7,
i Sipahan,  same  as  Ispahan  or  Ispahan,
' 34  and  a 1,  35.

Index,

cxliii

isl  and,  rue,  burned  to  avert  the  evil
eye,  192  n 3,  617  and  1.

Sipar,  Eai,  G^overnor  of  Ita'jva,  con-
temporary of  Khizr  Khan  of  the
dynasty  of  the  Saiyyida,  380  and  ;
n 5,  3Sl,  !

Siparak,  a herb,  629  and  n 2.

Sipra  river,  the— in  Malwa,  95  n -4.
Stpral,  a herV),  629  n 2.  1

Si;(/7t,  a silken  stufi  brocaded  witl  .
^old,  543  n 3,

Hai.  ruler  of  Baitali,  contempor-
ary of  the  Flrilz  Shahi  dynasty,  •
36U  atid  a 3 j

Siiaj  ‘Afif.  tile  Historian.  See  nndei  \
'^ams-i-Sjriij  'Aflf,  !

Siraju-d-Din  Abu  Ya^qub  Yusuf  bin  i
Abi  Muliarnmad  ibn  ‘Ali  as-Sikkaki.  |
author  of  the  Miftdhu-h'Uliloi^  428  i
n 2.  I

Sirat,  bridge  across  the  fire  of  Hell,  ■
113  h 1,  See  also  the  next.  |

Sirat-i-Mustaq im,  tne  hair-like  briilge  i
over  Hell,  372  and  u 2.  See  also  '
the  above.  1

Sirhiud,  town  of,  331  n 3,  401,  520  |
592  and  7t  6,  594.  See  also  under  |
Sihriiid.

SiihindT,  Yahya  ibn  Ahmad  ibn  I
‘Abda-l!ah,  author  of  the  TurlM-i-  \
Mubdralc  ^dhi,  10  ti  2,  67  n 2.  j

Slri,  one  of  the  three  cities  of  Dihli,  j
247,  269  n 1,  295  n 10,  311  /-  5,  I
3ol,  361  n 1,  366  and  n 396.  i

Sirinor,  mountains  of,  in  the  j

Himalayas,  307  n I

Sir  Mur, — or  ‘

Sirmur,  hilly  country  of,  120  and  nn  1 !

and  3,  131,  251,  324,  337,  338,  341,  |

Sirmur,  town  of,  326  a 2.  \

Sirmur  Bardar,  hills  of,  120  n 1.
Sissoo  tree,  the,  Dalbergia  sissoo,  129

rt  2.

Sistaii,  province  of,  669.  See  also
under  Seistan,  SIwistan  and  Sijis-
tan.

Sxwalik  hill-range,  to  the  north  of
Hindustan,  70.  93,  132  n 4,  358  and
n 6,  43S,  595.

Siwi  Siyupur,  province  of,  425  and
n 2.

Siwi  o Siupnr,  province  of,  425  n 2.
SIwistan,  province  of,  91,  249  7i  7,
323.  See  nnder  Sistan,

Siyal'wfn,  fortress  in  the  Karachi
district  of  S,ind.  560  and  8.

Siyai  ud’'Arifhi  of  Shai^  Jamah
Knnbawi  of  Dihli,  430.

Siyupur,  piovince  of,  425  n 2.

Skeat's  Etymolojical  Victionari/  of  the
E)tgli$h  Languaje,  159  n 2,  244  n 6,
298  n 5,  543  n 3.

Slane,  De,  Ibn  Khallikdn  or  Proldgo-
}nene$  d*  Ibn  J^aldP.n,  6 n 3,  12
71  1,  30  n 1,  35  n 1,  3S  n 3,  42  nn  1
and  3,  44  n 5,  51  n 2,  55  n 3,  59  n 1,
74  n 2,  119  n,  151  nn  4 and  6,  152
n 2,  157  n 1,  167  n 3,  181  7i  2,  198
n 2,  244  n 6,  287  nn  1 and  2,  352
n 1,  481  7i  6.

Smith’s  Dictionary  of  G-reek  atid

Roman  Anii^i.  ,nes.  19  n,  29  n 5,  76
7i,  367  n 3.

Smith’s  D:ctnynu}'2j  of  Greek  a7id

Roman  Biocnvpny,  46  n 5,  332  n.
Smith’s  Dictnyna7  7i  of  G^eek  and

Rorjian  Geograpkij^  23  n 1,  30  n 1,
35  n 2,  394  n 5.

Soane,  the, — cr  the  Son,  a tributary
of  the  Ganges.  82  n J ,

cxliv

Index.

Sobha  Nath,  or  Lord  of  Beauty,  name
of  the  idol  of  Somnat,  28.

Soghdi,  the,  name  of  an  ancient
people  of  Central  Asia,  23  n 1.

Sobrab,  son  of  Enstam,  the  famons
hero  of  ancient  Iran,  499.

Soliman  f Solomon),  148  n 1.

Solomon,  King  of  Israel,  108,  112,
136,  148  and  n 1,  205  and  n 3,
206  n.  485,  505  n 0.

Solomon,  ring  of,  possessed  of  magic-
al properties,  20-5  n 3,  5o5  n 6,
559  and  n 2.

Soma,  name  of  the  moon  in  Sanskrit,
79  11  2.

Somagraha,  lucky  things,  79  >i  2.

Somatiath, — or

Somanatba,  gouth-west  of  the  Penin-
eula  of  Gujarat  ou  the  sea-shore,
17  n 4,  27  « 4.  See  also  the  next

Somnat, — or

Somnath,  in  Gujarat  on  the  coast.
17  and  n 4,  27  and  n 4,  28  and  n 4,
256.  See  Somanath.

Son,  the,— or  tne  Soane,  a tiibutary
of  the  Ganges,  82  a 1.

Sonhar,  town  of,  407  and  n 6.

Sonipst  Bangar,  district  of  Hindustan,
122  71  1.  [and  n 6.

Sonnergong,  same  as  Sunarg.aiiw,  186

Soijpat, — or

Sui^pa*"!!,  a ciry  Tritli  a t'0Jtres=9  north
of  Dihl-j  21  71  4,  3i  ar.a  n 3-

Bonrheimer’fl  ibn  Baildr,  14(.i  n 6,  172
Ti  2,  173  71  and  nn  2 and  3,  182  nn
1 and  4,  484  ii  1.  550  n

Sorath.  country  of,  2d4  and  n 6,  454
« 7,  155.

Surf-th,  peninsula  cf,  -*54  ti  7.  Same
as  Sornth.

Sortea  Vtrgiliancs,  412  n 1.

Sortilege,  different  methods  of,  412
n 1.

Sot  river,  the^  in  Rohiikund,  464  n 4.

Southern  India,  265  n 2.
j Spider,  story  of  a,  149  n.

\ Sprenger's  Life  of  Muhajnmad,  46  n 5.
I S^ravana,  a Hir.du  month,  27  n 4.
i Stag,  notes  on  the,  171  n 2.
j Sta/nbhatirth,  the  pool  of  ^Mahndeva
under  the  form  of  the  pillar  God,
256  n 4,  454  n 6,

Stateira,  wife  of  Alexander  the  Great,
332  7i.

Statistical  Accotcni  of  Beyigul,  Hunter’s
125  7^  3,  299  n 2.

Stein,  Dr.,  384  n 1,

Steingass,  Persian  Dictionary.  142  ti  3,
159  n 2,  312  n 7,  321  n 2,  466  ?i  7,
629  n 2.

Stnaneswara,  the  modem  Tbanesar,
293  n 5.

Sthann,  a name  of  Mahadeva,  293  n 6.

Strabo,  the  Greek  geographer,  23  nn
1 and  3.

Siibah  of  Agra,  410  n 4.

Sfdhdn-Allah,  to  express  surprise  or
astonishment,  515  7.

one  of  the  poetical
works  cf  ilauiana  ‘Abdu-r-Rahman
Jami,  272  n 1.

Subh-i-Kuzib,  the  false  dawn,  115  n 3.

Snbuktigin,  Nasiru-d-DIn,  ruler  of
Kaoul  and  Ghazriin,  13  and  n 1,
14  and  Tin  1 and  2,  15,  16  and  n 1.

Sucldt,  a silken  etuS  brocaded  with
gold,  543  n 3.

Sndr  ^an,  Governor  of  Agra,  one  ot
the  Amirs  of  Sulran  Sikandar  Lodi,
419  n i,

Index.

cxlv

Suez,  Gulf  of,  169  Ti  1,  i

Buez,  town  of.  169  n 1.  i

SiifT  Khau  Yusuf  Azlbacha,  one  of  fche  |
courtiers  of  Saltan  Qutbu-d-Din  j
Kh\]p,  291  and  n 6,  293.  j

Sufi  Wall  Saltan  Kadamu,  one  of  the  j
Amirs  of  the  Qizilbash,  575  n 3.  '

Sufis,  the,  58  n 6,  191  n 4,  374  n 6,  i

608,  612.  i

Sfiphrna  or  Suq-tnd,  a Torki  word  j
meaning  a pole,  497  n 1 ;

Suhd,  a small  obscure  star  in  the
Lesser  Bear,  182  and  n 2,  371  and  |
r.5.  '

Suhuf,  a collection  of  p^^ges,  615  n 5.
Sui  Subar,  province  of,  425  n 2.

SQklipal  Nabsa, — or  |

Sukhpal  Naba,  R5ja  of  Sind,  contem-  '
porary  of  Sultan  Mahinud  Ghaz-
nawi,  20  and  n 4 See  the  next.  j
Sukhpal-Nawasa  Shah,  graiidsori  of  '
Jaipnl,  20  a 4.  Same  ns  the  abore  ;
<qv.).  1

Suleiman  (Solomon),  136,  5.59,  595.  I
Suleiman  Badakhshl.  MIrzS,  ruler  of
Badakhshan.  contemporary  of  Hu-  |
maviin,  574,  580,  581.  oS5
Suleiman,  son  of  Hasan  Sur,  and  i
brother  of  Shir  Shah,  468.  ;

Suleiman  Khan  Karrani,  one  of  the  j
Amirs  of  Islem  Shah  Sur,  525,  64Ch  '
541,554.  i

Suleiman  Khan,  son  of  Khin-i-Shanao  |
Farmali.  one  of  the  A mb's  of  Sul-  j
tan  Sikandar  Lodi,  418  and  % II,  !
424  and  n 2.  j

Suleiman,  adopted  son  of  Malik  Mar-  *
wan-i-Daalat,  one  of  the  Maliks  \
of  Sultan  Fi:oz  335,  352,  |

878.

Suleiman  Siiah  Akat  Khin,  brother’s
son  to  Saltan  *Alaa-d-Din  Khiiji,
259  n 5.

Suleiman  ^ah  LodT,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Mnbarak  Shah  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  389.

Sulindrine,  the  town  of  JSlandhar  in
Ptolemy,  382  and  n 4.

Sulphar,  notes  on,  340  n 2.

title,  first  assumed  by  Mah*
mud  Ghaznawl.  16  n 2.

Sultan  of  Rum,  the  Sultan  of  Turkey,
480.

Sultan  ‘Alam,  son  of  Saltan  Sikandar
Lod:,  451,  454

Sultnu  Bahadur,  ruler  of  Gajrat,
contemporary  of  Humiyun,  462,
453,  454  and  n 4,  455,  456,  458,  636.

Sultan  Bpgam,  wife  of  Mirza  ‘Askari,
569.

Sultin  Begam,  sister  of  Tah-

ni&sp  of  Persia,  670  and  n 11.

Sultan  Hoshang,  A'lp  Khan,  the  ruler
of  Malwa,  363  n 2,  384  n 6,  385  n 3.

Sultan  Jnnuid  Mirza  Birlas,  one  of  the
Amirs  cf  Babar.  439.  446.  468,  469

Sultan  Kot,  fortress  of,  in  the  country
of  Bhasiyara,  80  and  nn  5 and  6.

Sultan  Mahmud  Ghaznawl.  See  un-
der Mahmiid  of  Ghaznin

Sultan  Mohammad  Mhza,  ruler  of
^arasan,  elder  son  of  Shah  I'ah-
masp  of  Persia,  669.

Soltanpur,  town  of,  formerly  called
AraJ'kal,  209.

SuhinpOr,  on  the  river  of  Labor,  465,
472,  503.  506,  513,  534

Saltan  Saiyyid  Muhammad,  same  as
Muhammad  Shah  of  the  Saiyyid
dynasty.  10  n 2,

19

cxIti  Index,

Sal^in  Siifth  Khushdil,  the  Amir  of
Samana,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Fiiuz  Sliihl  dynastr.  342.

Stilt&o  §hah  Lodi,  called  Islam  Khan,
Governor  of  Sihrind  nncer  Khizi*
Khan  of  the  Saiyyid  dyniiaty,  380
and  n 3.

SnltSn  Sharf  or  Sharq,  Governor  of
Baiana,  414  and  tm  6 and  8.  See
the  next.

Saltan  SI  arq.  son  of  Sultan  Ahmad
Jilwaiii  the  Fiisfc,  414  and  nn  6,  11
and  12.  See  the  above.

Sultanam,  sister  of  ^aii  Tahniasp  of
Persia,  570  -nil.

Snitann-l-MashaiWi  Nizamn-l-AuUyo,
266,  301.  See  under  NizSma-d-DIn

• Aaliya.

Snljann-sh-Sharq,  ruler  of  Baiana
contemporary  of  SuUan  Sikanaa
Lodi,  414  n 8,

Saljanu-sh-^arq  Khwajad-Jahan,  one
of  the  Maliks  of  the  Tnghlaq  Shahl
dynasty,  348  and  n 9.

Sultanu-sh-^arq  Mubarak  Shah
Qaranqal,  rnler  of  Jaanpur,  360.

Sumliil,  the  spikenard  of  the  ancients,
146  n 6,  373  and  n 4,

Sombni-i-Hindi;  the  perfumed  sum-
bul,  146  n 6.

Snmbul-i-Eumi,  called  also  Nardin,
146  n 6.

Sumra  Eajputs,  the  rulers  of  Sind,  13  n.

Sunargarn,-— or

Snuarganw,  on  a branch  of  the
Brahmaputra  S.  E.  of  Dacca,  186
end  n 6,  308,  309.

Sundbi  liSi,  the  Hindu  General  of
Sultan  Muhammad,  son  of  Sultan
Mahmud  Ghaznaw'i,  34  and  n 2.

Sunnah,  the  practice  of  the  Prophet,
48S  7,  519  and  n 4,  589,  626  and

n 1.

Sunnatiin  inu^aJckadatun,  an  anthenti*
cated  traditional  practice,  626  « 2.

Snnnis,  the,  3 n 6,  57  and  n 1,  59
n 4,  156  n 1,  200  n,  320  n 4.  420
n 8,  576  n 5,  604  n 5,  625  n 3,  626
j mi  1,  2 and  6.
j Supar,  town  of,

Supdri,  the  nut  of  Areca  catechu,  302
I 11  G.

i Suqmd  or  Siighmd,  a Turql  word
! meaning  a pole,  497  n 1.

Sur  Afghfins.  the.  538.

Suraiyyd,  the  Pleiades,  630  n 4.

Surnte,  town  of,  454  n 7.  See  Sorath.

Suratu4*l^ld^,  one  of  the  chapters
of  the  Qur’an,  2 nn  3 and  4.

SnratU‘hK(ihf,  one  of  the  chapters  of
the  Qur'an,  207  n 1.

Si'(rutu-r-RaAnu7n,  one  of  ilie  chapters
of  the  QurTm.  218  n 2.

Surgha,  probably  for  Sughmr  a TurkI
word  meaning  a pole,  497  n 1.

Sdrt,  a flower,  142  and  n 3.

SarkliTib  of  Tabriz,  called  *the
Sepulchre  of  the  Poets,'  339  n 4,
584  n.

Surkh  bnd,  or  Red  idol,  one  of  two
enormous  images  in  Bamian,  46  n 1.

Sur^  Kulah,  or  Red-caps,  name  of
the  Turkomans  of  the  district  of
Garm  Sir,  48  and  n 9

Sarm-man-rii’i,  or  Samarra,  a town
I of  ‘Iraq  on  the  eastern  bank  of  the
I Tigns,  t59  n 1,  571  and  n 2^

I Sursati,  a fortress  in  the  hills  of
j Kashmir,  called  also  Sarsati  and
Sarsuti,  36  n 1.

Inde^r.

cxlvii

Sartftq,  Tlaq,  name  of  a place,  569  n 8
Sarur,  town  of,  326  n.

Snrnsrr,  for  the  conntry  of  Sarsuti
(q  t’  ),  SO  n 1.

Bttryn  Sidhay^ta  Bnrsyess,  163  n 2.
Sus^,  a town  of  Persia,  332  a.

Sunfin.  th-'  l-.ly,  norea  oo,  101  n 1.
Silsoii-i-dzdd,  the  white  variety  of  the
lily,  101  n 1.

Susdnl,  the  srriac  origin  of  the  word
Susan  or  lily,  101  n 1.

Sutlej,  the  See  under  the  Saclaj.
$u-ul-qtnya,  description  of  the  di-
sease 30  called,  30  n 2,  31  n.

Snvuti,  AS-,  author  of  the  Tarildiu-l-
Kh»flaf/7  12  n 2,  15  n 4,  17  n 2,  18

n 1,

Sivord  of  yfose^,  Gaster’s,  141  n 4.
Svdenham  Society,  the,  30  n 1.

Svn:t.  279  n,  5S5  n 7.

Siiydy ghdl,  a Tnrki  word  meaning
gifts  of  land,  424  n 3,

T

Ta*abbnta-pharran,  surname  of  Snhit-  |
bin  Jabir  al-Fahmi,  the  famous  J
Arab  athlete  and  warrior,  527  and  i
n 3 I

^uhfiqilt-i’Akbnr  Sh-rhf,  9 n 2.  53  n I,  |
62  n 4.  Seethe  Tabaqdt-i-Akh^tn.  |
^ab'iqf/f‘i~Ak'‘fn/,  nopul  ir  name  of  the  '
T/7rll^-i-2siCf7ipl  f)f  Kliwaja  Xizainu-  1
d-Din  Ahmad,  9 u 2,  10  n 3,  29  n,  j
45  n 1.  62  n 4,  82  n 4,  83  n 1,  121  i
n 7,  399  mi  1 and  7,  569  n 4,  570  |
nn  2 and  II,  572  n 7,  574  nn  1 |
and  9,  575  n 3,  579  n 7,  582  nn  5 |
and  7,  596  n 5,  592  n 6,  593  nn  3 j
and  9,  594  n 6.

^ahaqat-i-^Inbmiid  Shdhi  of  Shihahg-
d-DIri  yakim  Kirmani  JaunpuiT,
230  and  n 3,

TTabaqiit-i-Ndfiri,  Raverty,  13  n 1.  14
nn  1 and  2,  16  7in  1 and  2,  17  n 3,
19n2,  20jt2,  23n  1,  29  n 3,  31
n 1,  32  n.  33  n 2,  35  n I,  38  n 3,  4i)

« 4.  50  n 1,  51  n 1,  52  n 4,  5*1  nn  2
and  4,  56  n 1,  60  nn  1 and  2,  63  n 1,

65  na  I and  2,  66  nn,  I,  2 and  6,  69

nn  t,  2,  3 and  4,  70  « 3,  71  nn  5,
6 and  7,  72  nn  1,  3 and  4,  73  ?i  2,
74  n 1,  78  n 3,  79  n 3,  80  7m  3,  4,  5
nnd  6,  81  nn  2 and  3,  S2  nji,  3 and  5,
83  nn  1.  4 and  5,  84  n and  n 1,  So
n 1,  SO  n 1,  H7  n 5,  89  n 5,  90  n 2,
91  ii  d,  03  rt  1,  94  and  n 3,  95  nn  1
and  2,  9S  n 2,  120  nu  1,  2 and  8,  121
7in  1,2  and  5,  122  nn  1,  2 and  3,
I23nn2and  3,  124  7i  1.  125  n 2,  126
nn  1.  2 dind  3.  127  a!iJ  nn  1 and  2,
128  n 1.  129  nu  ’h  3 and  4,  i30
7i  2.  131  7in  1 and  4,  132  Tin  1.
4 and  5.  134  ti  1,  135  n 1,  592
71  4.

Tubaqdt  J^.-kdnJ,  95  n 6.

Tabarhiiid  »h,  fortress  of,  in  liajpf’.
lanii.  19  and  n 2,  69  and  n 2,  89
and  n 3,  121  and  n 5,  120,  131,  229,
233,  388  and  n 2,  389.  390,  391,  392,
393.

Xabari,  the  celebrated  Arab  Historian,
36  71  2,  74  n 2.

Xaharistfii',  a province  of  Persia,  38
and  7 n 2 and  3,  47,  73  n 1.

cxlviii

Index.

Tabarlya,  Sea  of, — the  Dead  Sea,  158
n 1.

Tahartdf  or  enmitj',  a technical  term
in  use  among  t .3  Sbi^ahs,  576  and
H 5,  677  ».

TobarriM,  aeoursed,  677  n.  See  under
Tahan'd.

Tahl-i’*uli  fiawnkhtan^  meaning  of  the
expression,  45y8  n 4.

T^tbriz,  town  of,  in  Persia,  72  n 4,  573,
584  n.

Tafd*fd,  taking  a fa'l  or  Oman  from
the  words  of  a book,  412  n 1.
Tafsir-i-MaddriJi,  a work  on  the
sources  of  law  ordinances,  428,
429  and  n 1 .

TafKru-l‘Baisdm,  a celebrated  com*
mentary  on  the  Qur’aa  by  Q&zT
Bai?iwi,  6 nn  1 and  4.  See  under
the  Jnwdru^t^  Tamil,

Taftizlnl,  At-,  author  of  the  3ru^atr-
u’a?,  a commentary  on  the  Talkh'/su’
l-Miftdh,  428  n 3.

Tn^dna,  a falchion,  215  and  n 4.
Taghi,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Saltan  Mahanimad  Taghlaq  Shah.
314,  319;  320  324,

Taghi  Taghi,  324.  See  the  above.
Taginabau,  one  of  the  chief  cities  of
Garnisir,  ^'5  and  n 1.  Sec*  also  un-
der Takinabid.

Tahir,  Khwi'js,  Wazlr  of  Sulian  Man-
dad  ^azT’-'o.vi.  47.

Tahir,  one  of  the  Aners  of  the

Lodi  dyna-c y.  4l8.

Tahir  ihe  pcet,  624  tt  6.

Same  as  r.ie  following,

T'ihir  Khvii  iT, — or

Tahir  Sh'-'andi  Dakknnh  ■»»’.€  »»f  the
poe  “ cf  Jiifi  Lime  of  Hun.urao  624

ftndw  6,  625  and  n 8,  626,  682,
635.  636.

Tahmasp,  §hah,  the  King  of  Persia,
contemporary  of  Htimayun,  463,
455,  456,  466,  469,  470,  624.

Ta’if,  a town  in  Kijaz,  12  nl.

TdJ  or  red  caps  of  the  Qizilbash,  627

n7.

Taj  ^an,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  SuUan
Ibrahim  Lodi,  470,

Taj  Khan  KarranI,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Islem  ^ah,  625,  539,  640,  541.

Tdjd'Khurus^  a red  flower  without
odour,  629  n 1.

Tajiks,  the  deecendanta  of  Arabs  in
Persia,  66  « 1.

Tajn-d  Din,  Malik,  Secretary  of  State
of  Snltin  Shamsn-d^Din  lyaL
tiraish,  94,  97.

Tajn-d-Din,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  the  Taghlaq  ^ahi  dynasty,  334.

Taju-d-Din,  Malik,  feudatory  of
BadaoD,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Shamsiyah  Saltans,  125.

Taju-d-Oin  Ba^tjar,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  the  Firuz  Shabi
dynasty,  353  and  7i  8.

Tuju-d-Din  Nahv,  Malik,  378  « 6.
See  Taju-l-MuIk  Nahv.
i Tuju  d-Din  T&iuqaiii,  one  of  tli3
I Amirs  of  Sullau  Ghivtsu-d-Din

I Tughlaq  ^ah,  298.

j Taju-d-DTii  Yaldkuz, — oi
, Taju-d-Din  Yalduz,  one  of  the  Mu-
I 'izzi  Saltans  of  Ghaznin,  77  n 1,
: 78,  T9,  80,  89,  90,  91.

. Tdju-l-'AtiiSy  a celebrated  Arabic  Die-
; ti<»uury,  620  ■»  i.

, name  of  an  historical
woi  k,  73  u 2,  80  /t  3,

Index,

cxliz

Taja*l-Malk  tfalik  Husain,  nncie  of
Saltan  Jalila-d-DIo  Khiljl,  231.

Taja-I-Malk  Na^y, — or

Tiju'l-Mnlk  Tnbfa,  one  of  the  Maliks
of  Masnad'i'^An  Khizr  Khan  of
the  Saiyyid  dynasty,  376  and  n
2,  377.  378  and  n §,  379,  380.

TalAidlufy  poetical  name,  633  and
n 5.

TalAmiir,  a dart  having  no  point,
215  n 6.

Takinabad  or  Taginibid,  one  of  the
chief  cities  of  Garmslr,  34  and  n
5,  48,  65  and  n 1.

Takluj  a Turki  word,  meaning  of,  669
and  n 6.

Talanbha,  a fortress  at  the  janction
of  the  Jhelam  and  the  Cheuab,
356  n J.  See  under  Talamba.

Talaundi  town  of,  332,  362,  382  and
n 2,  392.

Talbagj^a  Nigor,  Malik,  296  and  n
2.  See  under  Talbigha  Nagori.

Talbagha  Yaghda,  Malik,  286  n 6.
See  under  Talbigha  Yaghda.

Talbigha  Nagori,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of Saltan  Qatba-d>Din
^iilji,  286,  295  and  n 2,

Talbigha  Yaghda,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Saltln  Qutbu-d-Oin
Khilji,  2S6  and  n 5.

I'aihar,  a town  in  the  Ka^mir  hill
tracts,  383  and  n 2,  384  n 1.

Ta‘iimiah,  a sect  of  Muslim  heretics,
culled  also  the  Ba^iniah,  22  n 3.

Talkhifu-l-Miftdh,  at-Taftazani's
abridgment  of  the  Mtftdhud’^Ulum,
428  n 3.

Talpath,  town  of,  295.

Taltib,  name  of  a place,  258  n 4.

Talwnra  hills  of,  3S4  and  n 1.  See
the  next.

Talwara,  a village  on  the  right  bank
of  the  Chinab,  opposite  BiasI,  384
n 1.

TamRchi,  brother  of  Banhbana  Bai,
governor  of  Thatha  under  Sultan
FIroz  ^ah  Taghlaq.  333  n 4.
Tamghach,  Amir,  one  of  the  slaves
of  Snljan  Qntbu-d-Bin  Aibak,
89  and  n 2.

Tamim,  a tribe  of  the  Arabs,  287
n 1.

'Tamim  Ansart,  one  of  the  oompa<
nions  of  Muhammad,  13  n.

Tammatf — or

Tammoiid  Kitdb,  answering  to  the
word  Finis  at  the  end  of  books,
428  and  n 4.

Tammuz,  a god  of  the  Phcsnicians,
104  n 2.

Tamuz,  the  foarth  month  of  the
Jewish  year,  104  and  n 2.

Tanbiltf  a kind  of  mandolin,  195  n 4.
Tane^ar,  22  n 1.  Same  as  the  town
of  Thanesar

Tungah,  92  and  n 3.  See  under  Ton-
qah  and  Tanka,

Tana-chaikyn.  or  close-eyed,  a name
of  the  Turks,  627  n 7.

Tano-fhakai'f  a sugar  jar  having  a
very  narrow  mouth,  174  n 2.
Tania,—  or.

Tanqah,  a copper,  silver  or  gold  coin,
87  Ti  1,  92  and  n 3,  306  and  n 3,  307

and  n.

Tamil  a-i-Musaddas,  the  world,  147

>i  2.

Taqiu-d-DIn  Wii/  Babbanl,  MeWndum

^aikh,  333.

cl

Index.

Tarawarl,  later  name  of  the  town  of
Tarayan  69,  79.  I

Tarayan,  on  the  banka  of  the  SarsntT,  j
69  aTid  n 4,  79,  90,  93.  See  ander
Tarawarl.

Tarazu  - i -ch-i  rich , — or

Tarazu-i-fidalc,  a name  of  the  con-
stellation Libra,  142  n 2.

Tardl  Beg, —or

Tardi  Beg  Khan,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Humayiin,  455,  564  and  n 6,  566.
668,  591.

Targhi  Mughal,  invades  Hindustan  in
the  reign  of  Saltan  ‘Alau-d*Din
Khilji,  250,  251.

Td'tkh,  chronogram,  605  and  n 10.

of  Mir  Khusru.  the
famous  poet  of  DiliH,  247  n,  251  ?i,
252  n 1.  Called  also  the  2'drikk-i*
lChazdh\u^UFatu^  (q.i\).

Tdrtkh-i'-Alfi.  28  n 4.  80  n 4.

Tdril^^i'Bfiddonl,  another  name  of  the
MuntaMabu^t'Tau'drJ^  of  BadaonI,
11  n 1,

TdiJ^-i-Firtihtaf  205  n 2.  See  under
Firishta.

Tdri^-i-Firuz  Shdht  of  Shains-i-Siraj
‘Afif,  315  n 7.

Tdr'iJ^-i'Fhuz  Shdhi  of  Z.an-d-Din
Barni,  184  n 1,  185  n 2,  18?  -nn  5
and  6,  220  n 2.  2 19,  26L  7t  5,  264  n
1,  239  n 1,  274  n I,  235  n 10,  301,
315  and  a 7-

Tdri^-i-Guzida,  32  n 1.

TdrM-i-Fa^mir,  8 and  n 3,  500  and
n7.

Tdn^»i‘Kha2dinu-l-Futuh  of  Mir
^husru,  known  also  as  the  TdrJ^h’
V.),  252  and  n 1,

286.

Tdri^-t-M'.is'iidi,  the  history  of  Sultan
Mas'ud  ^aznawl,  47  n 2.

Td!i^-i'2Aiihdr(i'k  SKdhl  of  V.ihya  ibn
Ahmad  ibn  ‘Abdu-llah  Sirhindi  10
and  n 2,  67  and  n 2.  222  and  7i  2,
223  and  mi  3 and  4,  307,  315  and  n
7,  316,  366  and  iin  4 and  5.  393  1,

400  71.

Tui ikJi-i-Kizdini  of  Khwaja  Nizamn-
d-DIn  Ahtnad,  called  iilso  the  Taha-
qdt-i-Alcba}-!,  9 and  n 2,  62  and
I n 4,  63  )1,  61  and  n 1,  fi7,  50i
; Td} zkh-i’Rashtdi.  Elias  and  Ross,  69
j 7i  5,  103  71  3,  145  n 2,  232  n 5,  236
I n 1,  305  71  3.  353  7i  1,  464  n 8,  572
I n 8,  574  n 6.  575  it  1.
i TdnkA  i-Shh’  Sh'/hJ,  457  n 6.
j TdjJ^-i'Stibnkfirjin,  36  n 6.
j Tdtikhii  l-Khnhifd  of  as-SnyutI,  12
n 2.  See  auder  the  IlUtory_  of  the
I Caliphs.

1 TarJqu-t-TohqJq,  one  of  the  works  of
I H -kirn  Sana!.  56  n 2.
j Ta>ji  handy  a kind  of  poem,  62  and
I n 1 , 19't  n 3.

I T.irkhan.  town  of  40  7i  1.

T'tr’klb-hand,  a kind  of  poetical  com-
position, 196  )i  3,  198  a 2.

Tarkila,  town  of,  186.

Tarma  Shirin.  contemporary  of  Sul-
tan Mohammad  Tughlaq  Shah.
316

T<«rtary,  Chinese,  145  n 2.

Taryaq  or  Tartaq  the  Mughal,  of  the
roytd  house  of  Khurasan,  251  71,252
n2.

Tashhir  kardan,  to  expose  to  publio
ridicule,  22  n 4.

Tashif,  technical  meaning  of  the  ex-
pression, 615  n 5.

Index.

cli

Tus^uj,  one  t^enty-foarth  part  of  a
Gaz,  330  71  8.

Tatar,  country  of.  161,  171.

Tatar  Khan,  Governor  of  Samba!,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Hasnin  Shnrqi  I
and  Saltan  Bahliil  Lodi,  406  ;md
n 3.

Tatar  Khan,  son  of  Arsolan  Khan.  ;
Governor  of  Laklnmnti  nnder  j
Saltan  ^hivasu-d-Din  Balban,  185.  j
Tatar  Khan,  adopted  son  of  Sultan  -
Gh’'yasa-d-Dm  Tughlaq  ^ab,  ^99,
323  )7  3,  328.  |

'I'atar  Khan  Kalpi, — or  |

Tatar  Khan  KasI,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  ;
the  Afghan  Sur  dynasty  of  Dihli,  \
5^2  and  n 7.  592,  593.  j

Tiitar  ^an  Lodi,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  !

Saltan  B.iliidar  of  Gujrat.  452.  '

Tatar  Khan,  son  <»f  Saiang  Khan,  one  |
of  tile  Amirs  of  the  Firaz  Shi  hi  j
dynasty,  364.  |

Tatar  Khan  Sfirnng  KhnnT,  one  of  the  ,
Amirs  of  the  Lodi  dynasty,  443,  445.  j
Tatar  Khan,  son  of  /Jaf.ir  Khan,  one  1
of  the  Amirs  of  the  Firuz  Shahi  1
dyiiMstv,  352,  354  and  ti  8,  361.  |

Tatar  Khard.  Malik,  Governor  of  |
Liilior  under  Siiltfin  Mul.iammud  j
Tughiaq  ^fih,  309.

Tacara.  the,  l‘U,  192.  221.  252.
r.itta,  town  of,  67  and  n 1,  3 87,  320  j
and  n 5,  322,  332  and  ii  6,  333  and  \
n 4,  881  .and  a 6,  408  and  n 7,  464,  j
559,  560,  562,  o6G.  Called  also  i
Tacrli.tb  and  Tliath.-ui.

Tatthah.  See  under  the  town  of
Tatca.  ;

Tnu’flirt,  name  of  the  second  arrow  m
Gie  game  of  maitur,  369  n 1.  '

Tauba  (Repentance),  formula  of,  Used
on  occasions  of  sudden  alarm  and
peril,  551  and  n 2.

Tauh'id  (Declaration  of  Unity),  for*
mnla  of,  used  on  occasions  of  peril,
551  and  n 2.

Tanruf,  the  Mosaic  law.  4 n 1 — The
Book  of  the  Law.  206  n.

Taurus,  the  constellation,  367  nn  3
and  4.

an  acrostic.  606  and  n 2

Tausiti,  Miyan,  the  famous  Hindu
musician,  557  and  n 1.

Taivalld,  affection  fas  opposed  to
Taharrd  g.r  ),  o76  n 5

TaHGz,  an  amulet,  115  n 4.

Tayapxmum,  ablutional  ceremony  per-
formed with  sand,  201  and  n 2.

Tozkira  {Book  of  Memoin)  of  Shaikh
J.imali  Kanbawl  of  Dihli,  430,

Tazkira,  of  Muhammad  Cfi  of  Merr,
33  and  n 1.  See  also  under  Tazki-

riif-U‘^h'Sh»‘ari7,

Tacktrotti'GJIuluk,  an  historical  work,
33  n 2.  9>»  ii  2,

Tazk irutu-dk-Shu^a rd  of  Mnhammad
‘Anfi  of  Merv,  33  and  1,  221.

Tedjer,  name  of  the  river  Tigris  in
the  Zend,  394  n 5.

Teesta  river,  tiie,  84  n 1.

Teheran,  capital  of  modern  Persia,
30  71  1.

Telinga, — or

Telingana,  Kingdom  of,  265  nn  2 and
4,  236.

Ten  Thousand,  Xenophon’s  account
of  the  retreat  of  the — , 586  n.

Thakur  of  the  Hindus,  484  n 1.

Thales,  the  celebrated  Greek  astrono-
mer, 367  nn  3 and  4

clii

Indest,

Th&na  of  ^him,  a name  of  the  fort-
ress of  Bhimnagar,  21.

Thinesar,  town  of,  21  and  n 4,  22  n
1,  69  and  n 4,  293  and  n 5,  326  n,
692.

Thanessor,  21  n 4.  See  Thanesar.

Thaneswar,  modem  name  of  Tha-
nesar, 21  n 4

Thangir,  fortress  of,  80  n 4.  See
under  ThankTr.

Thankar,  or  properly  Bhankar,  fort
of,  71  n 2,  423  and  n 3.  See  under
Thankir.

Thankir,  fortress  of,  in  the  territory
of  Bhiana,  80  nn  4 and  5.  Called
also  Thangir  and  Thankar

Thar  Tal,  nephew  of  Himun  Baqqal
the  Hindu  General  of  ‘Adli,  553  and
nn  5 and  6.

Thatha.  See  under  the  town  of  Tatta.

Theon’a  commentary  on  the  Alma-
gest, 76  n.

Thesaurus,  Gesenius’,  394  n 5,

Thessalians,  Epistle  to  the,  278  n 4.

Thomas,  Coins  of  the  Kings  of  Ghaznif  j
16  n 2,  47  n 2,  |

Thomas,  Pathdn  Kings  of  Dehli,  64  |
n 3,  77  n 2,  83  n 3,  87  nn  1 and  6,  |
88  nn  1 and  3,  89  nn  1 and  4,  91  i
nn  1 and  5,  120  « 1.  126  n 3,  129  n
4,  135  n 1,  254  n 6,  269  nn  1 and  2,
307  n,  310  n 2,  311  n 4,  325  n 1,
326  n,  327  n 6,  337  n 4,  344  n 7,
345  n 4,  34^  n 6,  347  n 3,  351  nn  4,

9 and  11,  352  n 2,  359  n 4,  366  nn
1 and  4,  399  n 7,  400  n 1 , 666  n 5,
618  n 1.

Thornton’s  Gazetteer  of  the  countries
on  the  North-West  of  India,  567  nn
I and  9

Tibat, — or

Tibbat,  country  of,  84  n,  125,  See
also  under  Tibet.

Tiberhind,— or

Tiberhindah,  fortress  of,  69  n 2.  See
under  Tabarhindah.

Tibet,  83  and  n 4,  84  and  n.  See
under  Tibbat.

Tieffenthaler*8  Description  of  India,
19  n 2,  20  n 5,  21  n 4,  22  n 5,  23  n
2,  24  nn  3 and  6,  26  n 6,  28  nn  2
and  4,  36  n 10,  37  nn  2 and  3,  66
nn  3 and  7,  67  n 1,  69  nn  2 and  4,
70  nn  3 and  4,  71  nn  2 and  3,  80
nn  1 and  6,  82  n 1,  95  n 4,  121  n 6,
128  n 3,  129  nn  I and  2.  130  n 1,
147  n 1,  186  n 6,  218  n 3,  223  n,
256  n 4,  257  nn  1 and  2,  265  n 4,
313  n 5,  325  n 3,  327  n 3,  355  n 1,
356  n 1 , 357  n 4,  364  nn  4 and  5,
366  n,  380  n 2,  382  n 2,  417  n 7,
420  n 5,  422  n 3,  425  n 4,  454  nn  6
and  7,  486  n 6,  530  n 3,  559  n 6,
560  n 8,  590  n 6.

Tigin,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Sultan  Gbiyisu-d-DIn  Tuj^Iaq
Shah,  298.

Tigra,  name  of  the  river  Tigris  in  old
Persian,  394  n 5.

Tigris,  the,  59  n 1,  391  n 6,  624  n 8.

Tihdrai,  purifications  enjoined  by
Muhammadan  law,  603  and  n 2.

Tiharu,  one  of  the  Mountain  trib^
between  Lakbnanbi  and  Tibat,  84  n

Tijara,  town  in  the  province  of
Miwat,  366  n.

Tilai,  town  of,  334  nn  4 nod  5.

Tilak,  the  Hindu,— a General  of  Snl-
tin  Mas'ud,  sou  of  Mahmud  Ghaz-
nawl,  36  n 9.

Index.

cliii

Tilang,  Called  also  Telinga  or  Telin-
gana.  country  of.  261  n 5,  265  and
n 2,  297,  299,  309,  329.

Tilaundi,  or  Talaundi,  town  of,  352,
362,  382  and  n 2,  392.

Tilok  Chand,  Kai,  Governor  of  K'natra
(?  Kateiir},  contemporary  of  Sultan
Husain  ^arqi  of  Jaanpur,  408
71  4,

Tilok,  the  son  of  Jye  Sein,  36  n 9.

For  Tulak  ibn  Hnsain  (q.  u.).

Tiluk  Chand,  Rai, — Governor  of  Bak-
sar,  contemporary  of  Sultan  Hns&in
^arqi  and  Buhiiil  Lodi,  408  and
n 4,

Timour.  See  under  Timur.

Timur  the  Great,  353  and  n 1,  355
and  Tin  1 and  3,  356  and  nn  1 and
5,  357,  358  and  nn  4 and  6,  360
n 3,  361,  366  n 1,  443,  454,  584
n 3,  605  71  1.

Timur  Khan,  the  Mughul,  one  of  the
Generals  of  Chingiz  Khan,  188  n 1.
Timur  Khan  Qara  Beg,  known  also  as
Malik  Qiran,  one  of  the  Shamaiyah
Malika,  125  and  n 4.

Tippera  District,  186  n 6.

Tir,  a kind  of  cambric  or  lawn  and
also  an  arrow,  192  n 1.

Tirhut,  86,  349,  416.

Tirpauhya  mosque  of  Ahrnadabad,
635  and  n 6.

r-'iyarah,  a bad  omen,  412  n 1.

o fuzak,  Tiirkl  words  implying
the  acknowleflging  one  as  rightful  '
king  with  due  formalities,  259  » 1.  ,
Toraband,  Malik,  one  of  the  Maliks  !
of  Sultan  Firuz  ^ah  Taghlaq,  328  |
71  1.  ‘

Tradition,  six  hooka  of,  626  n 1.  !

Traditions  of  the  Prophet,  356  n 4,
515,

Trajan,  canal  of,  169  n 1.
Transoxiana,  14  ti  1,  15  n 5,  20  n Z,
27  71  2,  38,  59  n 1.  357,  338.  See
Mawari-an-Js’ahr.

Travels  of  Ibn  Baffttah,  67  u 1.

Trites  of  the  North-ZVeit,  Elliott’s,
312  71  7.  See  Elliott's  Rjces  vf  tJte
N.-W.  Provinces  of  India.

Trubner,  the  London  Publisher,  76  n.
Tschan,  a town  near  Rantanbhor,  257

71  i.

Tahra,  for  Tilra  {q.  r.),  440  n.

Tuda  Bahadur  Khan,  the  Governor
of  Suniir  Ganw  under  Sultan
Ghiyasa-d-Din  Tughluq  ^ah,  299.
Tufak,  a pea-shooter,  159  and  n 2.
Togha  Khan  Malik  ‘Izza-d-Din  of
Lakbnanti,  one  of  the  Malika  of
the  Shamsiyah  Sultans,  125.

TilnhlVf  a falcon  in  Tarki,  215  n 5.
Tughan  the  Ra’ls,  one  of  the  Turk-
bachas,  raises  an  insurrection  in
the  reign  of  Khizr  Khan  of  the
Saiyyi.i  dynasty,  379,  380.

TughdiuVi.  a kind  of  bird  in  Turki,
215  n 5.

Tgghd:  Beg,  one  of  fne  Amirs  of  Sul-
tan Mashld  ibn  Mthtnud  Ghaznawi.
38,  37  71  7,  33,  43.

Tughlaq  Khiin,  sou  of  Faih  Khan,
son  of  Snltun  Firoz  ^ah,  338,  See
under  Tughlaq  Shii’n.

Tnghlaq  Kh”^  Ghazi-i-Mulk,  a/fei--
n-uT-d*!  Sultan  GhijaSu-d-DIn  Togh-
iaq  ^al:.  249,  250,  251,  252.  See
unti‘*r  Glilzl  M:0ik.

Tughl  u.  ^iin.  See  nn  ler  Suitsu
a^’i-d-Din  Tughlaq  Sh iih.

cliv

Index.

Tughlaq  Shab,  son  of  Fafh  Khan,  son  i
of  Sultan  Firoz  ^ah,  of  the  Togh-  j
laq  Shah!  dynfigty  of  Dihil,  324,  338  I
and  n 1,  841,  3i2.  j

Taghlaqabad,'' fortress  of,  296,  297,  j
2 99,  300,  307.

Tughlaq-Xdma.  one  of  the  poetical  \
works  of  Mir  Khusru  of  Dihli,  301,  |
Tughral,  Governor  of  Bengal  under  |
Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-DIu  Balban,  135
n 1,  186,  216.

Tughral  Beg  Abu  Talib  Muhammad
ibn  Mlka’il  ibn  Suljuq,  founder  of
the  Saljuql  dynasty,  42  and  n 3,
43,  51  n 2.  61  n 5.  See  also  under
Tughrii  Beg.

Tughral  Hajib,  an  A.mir  of  the  Ghaz»
navide  dynasty,  47,  48,  50.

Tughral,  the  Turkoman,  42.  See
Tughral  Beg,  founder  of  the  Sal-
juql  dynasty.

Tnghril  ibn  Arslan  the  Saljuq,  of  the
Saljuql  dynasty  of  Khurasan,  298
n 4.

Tnghril  Beg,  founder  of  the  Saljuqi
dynasty,  35  n 3.  See  under  Tugh-
ral  Beg,

Tuhfa,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Khizr  Khan  of  the  Saiyyid  <lyna8ty,
376  and  n 2.

Tuhfa-i-Is7id-‘GiharJy'ih  of  Sbah
*Abdn-l-*.A7’iz  of  Dilxl).  577  n.
Tuhfac.i’l ‘Ah''d--.  one  of  the  poetical
works  of  Maulaua  ‘Abdu-r-Kahmau

Tulum  or  Tulloom,  a village  on  the
north  bank  of  the  Sutlej,  382  n 2.
Tulntuba,  town  of,  at  the  junction  of
the  Jhelam  and  the  Chenab,  355
and  n 1,  389  and  n 2,  390,  392,
427.

Tuhimdi, — or

Tulundl,  the  village  of  Tnlum  q»  v.,
probable  origin  of  the  town  of
Talaundi,  382  n 2.

I Tulloom,  a place  on  the  north  bank
of  the  Sutlej.  382  n 2.

Tunis,  the  province  in  North  Africa,
167  n 4.

Tur,  one  of  the  sons  of  FarTdan,  King
of  ancient  Persia,  435  and  n 2.

Tura,  palisades  or  abattis  in  Turk!,
440  n,

Turan,  name  given  to  the  collection
of  countries  situated  beyond  the
Oxus,  15  n 5,  86.

Turk  Allah, — or

Turkd.Khuda,  God’s  champion,  a title
of  Mir  iChusru.  the  famous  poet  of
Dihli,  270  and  n 5.

Turkan  ^atun,  called  also  Shih
Turkan,  mother  of  Snltan  Euknu-
j d-Din  Firuz  ^ith  ibn  Shamau-d-
I Din  lyal-timish,  98  and  n 1.

J Turkbacha  SultanT,  ruler  of  Sarnanii,
; 360,  362.  See  under  Bahram  Khar

! Turkbacha.

I Turkbachas,  the,  378  388.

I Turkea’-Ju.  See  under  lurkistan.

Jami,  272  /-  1.

Tubfatn-Wlr' ^‘lin  of  the  celebiated

I Ti.rltl  Dutir.naiy.  St-e  D..  Coiirteillef
Die  ’Gntiaire  Tiuk-OrxeiJnl.

poet  Khaqa».  ."S3  n 4
Tulak  >br.  Hu-u,:s,  -srse  of  t]i*j  Am'i-.

Turkla  tl:P.  20,  572  n S.  See  the
Turk«.

of  v8  . .‘I •

T'nkii^h  Dt-:ttvaary.  '.odl  575

a 1

Index.

civ

Turkish-Persian  Dictionary  of  Fazla*
llah  Khan,  482  n 2,  575  ra  1.  See
nnder  Fazla-llah  TThan,

Turkistan  or  Turkestan,  20,  71,  83,
89.  132,  135  n,  158  71  6,  159  ti,  191,
296  n 6,  468  n 2,  584  n 3.

Turkomans,  the,  30,  35,  36  and  n 8,
37,  38,  42,  43,  47.  48,  77  n 1,  590,
621  n 4.

Turks,  the,  61  n 5,  85,  88,  121,  122
n 3, 192,  209,  5 90  , 627  n 7.  See
the  Turkis.

TurmazI  Kofwal.  a kotwal  of  Dihli  in
the  time  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn
Khilih  260.

Turner  Macan’s  edition  of  the  Shah-
Kdma^  88  n 2,  103  n 2,  116  7i  5,  178
n 2j  207  n 7,  435  n 2.

Turquoise,  notes  on  the  gem,  630  and
n 8,  631  n.

Turrar,  a city  of  Turkestan,  159  n.

Tnrtaq  the  Mughal,  of  the  royal  house
of  ^hnrasan,  invades  Hindustan
in  the  reign  of  Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn
Khilji,  250  and  n 10,  252  and  n 2.

Tu8,  a district  and  city  of  Khurasan.
32  n 1,  42  and  H 1,  61  « 5,  7l,
75  n.

Tiizak,  a Turki  word  meaning  * right  *
or  ‘ authority,’  259  n 1.

Tdzak^i-Bdbarl,  called  also  Wdqi'dt‘i’
Bdbari,  438  n 7,  448  n 4.  See  also
Memoirs  of  Bdbar.

Typho-Malarial  fever,  320  n.

Tyrrhenian,  Pissens  the,  inventor
of  the  rostrum,  29  n 5.

IT.

*Ubaid  Eakau,  the  poet,  one  of  the
contemporaries  of  Saltan  Ghiyasu-
d-dln  Taghlaq  ^ah,  298  and
n 2.

*Ubaidu-llah  ^^an,  the  Ozbak  King,
582  r.  5.

Uchh,  the  city  of,  66  and  titi  3 and  5,
79  71  3,  80  and  n I,  90,  126,  130,
132,  292,  293,  353.

*t)'d,  a musical  instrument  of  the
Arabs,  146  n 1.

Udhafar,  the  town  of  Oodypur,  13  7i.

tjdTtnagar,  fortress  of,  422  n 2.

"Cfi-  author  of  a Tazkira,  78  n 2.  See
under  Muhammad  Cfi  of  Merv.

TTjain, — or

Uj}ain,  on  the  Si’pra.  95  and  u 4,  257  I
■h  1,  294,  384  /■  5.  4i*5,

Ujjaimah  Eijaa  of  Bhojpur,  186
n 1.

Vld^  or  VJdq,  post-horses  in  Turki,
292  n 3.

*lJlamd,  application  of  the  term,  303
n 4.

CJdq,  post-horses,  292  n 3.  See
under  VT.dgh.

TJlag  Beg,  the  royal  astronomer,  152
7t  2,  198  n 2,

UIngh  Beg,  Mlrza,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Humayun,  578.  See  also  under
Hlng^  Mirzi,

Ulugh  Khan  Balban,  132.  See  under
Uhtgh  Khan  Ghiyasu-d-DIn  Balban.

UIngh  Fakhrg-d-PIn  Jiina,  son

of  Ghi . C:  ^n-d-D'a  Taghlaq  Shah,
297,  2.^5.  299,  300  and  7t  3,  301.

olvi

See  under  Saltan  Mabammad  Togh-
laq  Shah.

Ulugh  Khan  Ghiyasa*d-Diii  Balban,
who  eventually  ascends  the  throne
of  Dihii  under  the  title  of  Sultan
Ghiyasu-d-Din,  124  and  n 4,  127,
128,  129,  131,  132,  134  nn  1 and  2,
ISa,  184.

Ulugh  Khan  Ilmas  Beg,  brother  of
Sultan  'Alau-d-Din  Khiljl,  247,
248  and  n 2,  249,  250,  254,  255,
256,  257,  258,  259,  261  and  n 6.
See  also  under  Ilmas  Beg.

Ulugh  ^han-i-A‘zam,  Malik  Ghiyasu-
d-DIn  Balban,  131,  134  n 1.  See
Ulngh  Khan  Ghiy^u-d-Din.

Ulugh  KhanI  canal,  leading  from  the
Sutlej,  325  n 3,  326  n.

Ulugh  Mirza,  son  of  Muhammad
Zaman  Mirza,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Huraayun,  452,  458,  574.  See  also
under  Ulngh  Beg.

ITIilSj  a Turkish  word  signifying  ‘a
large  tribe,’  575  n 1.

rJ/fshegl,  or  chief  of  the  tribe,— a title,
575  n 1.

Ulu8-i*Cbaghta,  575  n 1.  See  also
under  the  Chaghatai  tribe'.

Ulwar,  district  and  town  of,  134  n 1,
365  n 8,  366  n.  See  also  under
Alwar.

Ulwur,  See  Ulwar.

Umum.  plural  of  ummotun,  the  fol-
lowers of  a prophet  or  a people  of
one  religion,  373  and  n 3,

‘Umar,  the  second  Khalifah,  called
al-Fnruq,  3 n 6,  59  n 3,  106,  303  n 4,
604  n 5,  625  3,

‘Uraaf  ^«n,  nephew  of  Sultan  ‘All-
u-d-Din  Khiljl.  259.

‘Umar  ^han  Shihahu-d-DIn.  son  of
Saltan ‘Alau-d-Din  KhiljT.  273  ti  4,
See  under  Shihabn-d-Dm  ‘Umar.

‘Umar  Khan  Shirwani,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  Sultan  Buhlul  Lodi,  412
n 2.

‘Umar  Khan,  son  of  Sikandar  Khan
Siir,  431  n 4,

‘Umar  Shai^  Mirzo,  second  son  of
Timiir  and  the  father  of  Babar,
605  and  n 1,

Umayyah,  Dynasty  of,  the  KhalTfahs
of  Damascus,  13  n I,  481  n 8.

Umballa  District,  862  n 1,

^JJmdatU‘l‘Mulk,  or  Pri\’y  Councillor,
401.

Umm  HIni,  daughter  of  Abu  TSlib
and  sister  of  ‘All,  105  and  n 2,  160.

Ummahani.  See  the  above.

Ummdhdiy  a scientific  term,  176  n 2.

Ummu  Q}yiildn,  a thorny  tree,  550
n 1.

Ummu  KuMm,  daughter  of  Muham-
mad and  wife  of  ‘Usman,  the  third
Khalifah,  59  n 4.

‘Umr  Khan  Shirwani,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  Sultoa  Buhlul  Lodi,  412
n 2.

‘Umr  Khan,  son  of  Sikandar  Khan
Sur,  431  n 4.

'Umrahj  the  lesser  pilgrimage,  175,
176  n.

Uuao,  town  of,  408  n 5.

Unar,  Rfii,  the  ruler  of  Thathah,  con-
temporary of  Sultun  Firoz  Shah
Tnghlaq,  332  n G.

United  States  of  America,  586  n.

*Unndb,  a tree  and  its  fruit,  117  a 2.
Unsuri,  the  famous  Por.sian  poet,  46
/c  4,

civil

Untgarh,  fortress  of,  422  and  n 2,  :

424.  I

*Uqdh,  an  eagle  or  kite,  352  n 1.

* Uqdh,  the  constellation  Eagle,  321  n 3.  i
‘UqdatU’l-Jiiniihiyah,  an  astronomical  '

term,  162  n 4.  ;

* Uqdaht-T’Ba^ s,  an  astronomical  term,  !

162  n 4.  i

*Uqdatu-§h-Shinidliyah,  an.  aetrono*  j
mical  term,  162  n 4.

*Uqdatu-Z‘?anab^  an  astronomical  ’
term,  162  n 4.

‘Ur/lz  or  ^ArPZy  the  last  foot  of  the  j
first  hemistich,  a term  of  Prosody,
606  n 4.

U?!fiful  Plants  of  India,  Ernry’g,  173  ^
n 2,  303  n,  550  n 1,  627  n 2.  '

Khwaja  Bahaa.d-D|n,  a famons  l
preacher  and  learned  divine,  78  |
and  n 2.  S

tjshi,  Khvaja  Qnt.bii-d-Diii.  See
under  Qntbu-d-Dm  Ushi.

‘Usman,  tbe  third  Khalifah,  called
2a-n-Nurain,  3 n 6,  59  n 4,  106  n 4,
158  n,  623  n 3.

‘Usman,  an  Afghan  of  the  time  of
Islem  Shah  Sur,  495.

Uata  ‘All  QulT,  the  Artillerist  of
Babar,  439  and  n 6.

Uatad,  the, — a title  of  FirdansI,  the
celebrated  Poet,  461  and  n 6.

Ustad  Abn-l-Faraj  Runi,  the  Poet,
contemporary  of  Snlran  Ibrahim
Ghaznawi,  53  n,  54  and  n 1.

Uatiid  ‘All  QqI),  the  Artillerist  of
Babar,  439  and  n 6,

‘Utarid,  the  planet  ilercory,  630
and  n 3.

‘Uzza,  an  idol  worshipped  bv  the
old  Arabs,  110  n 3.

Valley  of  the  Ants,  mentioned  in  the
Qur’an,  340  n 2.

Vasudeva,  one  of  the  deities  of  the
Hindus,  24  n 6.

Teims,  one  of  the  two  auspicions
pLmets,  138  3,  630  n 2.

Vihnt,  name  of  the  Jhelam  in  San-
skrit, 23  71  3-

Vikramaditya,  the  Raja  of  Ujjain,
9o  n 4.

Vikramajit,  Rai,  95.  Same  as  the
above  {q  v.).

^ ikramijit,  sou  of  Manik  Deo,  the
Raja  of  Gwaliar,  contemporary  of
Saltan  Sikandar  Lodt,  419  and  n 11.

V.

Tikramajifc,  Rai,  son  of  Rai  Man
' Singh,  Governor  of  Gwalifir,  con-
temporary of  Sultan  Ibraliim  Lodi,
432.

Vinea,  a shelter  under  which  to  ap-
proach the  walls  of  a fortress,
494  n 7,

, Yipasa,  name  of  the  Biah  in  San-
skrit. 23  n 3.

Virgil,  Georg.,  75  n 2.

‘ Virgin,  the, — once  the  title  of  the
fort  of  Hansi,  37  n 2.

; Vitasta,  name  of  the  Jhelam  in  San-
skrit, called  also  Vihnt  and  Yiyatta,

1 23  ft  3.

clviii

Tjidrjr

V'ivatta,'^the  river  .Ihelara,  23  n 3.
See  the  above.

Voyages  d’  Ibn  Batilta,  67  n 1.  See
under  Ibn  Batut-ah.

Viindavana,  town  of,  24  n 6.

I Vritras,  the,  slain  by  Indra  with “liis
i , thunderbolt,  294  n 4.

; Vuller’a  Persico-Latinum  Lexicon,  SO
! n 2,  109  n 4,  162  n 4,  173  nn  2 and
■ S,  192  ri  3,  213  n 3.

w.

Wddi,  a valley  or  desert,  nsed  in  the
sense  of  act,  557  and  ii  2.

Wafa  llalih.  title  uf  Malik  Shriliin,
one  of  the  Amirs  of  Snltan  Quibu-
d-Din  Kdiilii.  294.

W.ifa’T,  one  of  the  poets  of  the  time
of  Humayun.  609.

Waghd,  name  of  one  of  the  blank
arrows  in  the  game  of  maisir,  369

n 1.

Wahhabis,  the  183  n 2.

Waliidn-d-Din  Quraiahi,  Malik,  one
of  the  Amirs  of  Snlt.au  Qntbu-d-
Din  Khilji,  235  and  n 4,  286  ft  1,

290.  I

Waihind,  on  the  western  bank  of  the  i
Indus,  19  ft  2,  20  n 1.  ,

Wais  Sirwani,  Kh'vija,  one  of  the  !
Amirs  of  Islera  Shfib  Sur,  493  and  i
71  7,  497.

Waisi,  one  of  the  poets  of  the  time  I
of  Hnmayiiri.  5.31  and  n 4,  585.  i
Wajiha-d-Din,  Shaikh,  son  of  Kamaln-
d-Din  ‘All  Shah  Quraishi  and  j
father  of  Shaikh  Bahan-d-Din  :
Zakarlya,  133  n 2 :

Wajihn-d-Din  Quraishi,  one  of  tho  |
Maliks  of  Sult.in  Qntbii-d-DTn  .
Khilii,  283  ft  4 ;

Wall  Muhamm  -.d  Balhan,  161.  Same
(l>,ivasii-d-Din  Balhan  (q.f.)  '

Walaj,  fort  of,  called  also  Bajj,  34
and  'ft  7.

TVaii,  one  who  has  attained  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Supreme  Being,
52  and  n 3.

Wail  of  Bangala,  the  contemporary
of  Shir  ^ah,  469.

Wall  Qizil,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Babar,  441.

Walid  ibn  ‘Abdn-l-Malik  Marwani,
one  of  the  Umaiyyad  Khalifahs
of  Damascus,  11  n 3,  12  and  iin
1 and  2,  13  ft.

Walid  ibun.r-Kaiyyan,  one  of  the
three  chief  lords  of  ghaddad  ibn
‘Ad  (g.  V.),  262  n.

Wa’Id  ibn  Tarif  ash-Shaiblini.  one  of
the  Khnwarij  in  the  reign  of
Haruna-r-Ka.shid,  74  n 2.

Waiis,  holy  men,  627  ft  3.  See  Walt

Wamiq,  hero  of  a Turkish  romance,
40  and  ft  1.  See  the  next.

Wdmiq  and  ‘Azra,  a Turkish  romance
by  Mahmud  bin  Asman  Lamai,  40
n 1.

Wdmiq  and  ‘Azi-a,  a Turki.sb  romance
by  Ma‘Id  of  Tarkhan.  40  n 1.

Waqi'dt-i-Bdbarl,  called  also  TiizaJc-i-
B'ibaA,  421  and  n 8,  448  and  ft  4.
See  also  under  the  Memoirs  of
Btibar.

Index.

clix

Warangal,  ancient  capital  of  Telin-  i
gana,  265  n 4.  s

Ward!,  a kind  of  beverage,  31  n.  \

TFars,  a herb  used  for  dyeing  clothes,
173  71  2.  ;

Wasil,  Malik,  adopted  son  of  Malik  ,
Mubarak  Qaranqal  of  Jaunpur,  360  1
n 1.

Wasit,  a town  of  ‘Iraq  between  Basra
and  Kufah,  12  7i  1.  i

"Wassaf,  the  Historian,  265  n 5.  I

JVazJr,  at  chess,  103  and  n 1.  j

TVazIr  Khan  Malik  Shahik,  one  of  the  j
Amirs  of  the  Balbanl  dynasty,  220.  I

Western  Jumna  Canal,  the,  325  n 3.

Western  Rohtas,  493,

Whinfield’s  Omar  Khaiyyamj  144  n 1.

Wilayat-i-Panna,  417  and  n 6.  See
under  Panna.

Wilson’s  Sanskrit  Dictionary,  535
n 2.

TTo/A'S  of  Sir  William  Jones,  76  n.

Wuzu\  ceremonial  washings  before
prayer,  602  and  n 7»  603  n.

X.

Xenophon’s  Accouyit  of  the  Retreat  of
the  Ten  Thousand,  586  n.

Y.

Tadava  Kingdom  of  Deogiri  in  the
Deccan,  271  n 6.

Yadavas  of  Hindu  Mythology,  27  n 4.

Yadgar  Kafir  Mirza,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Humayun,  462,  463,  464,
465,  660,  661,  562,  574,  577  n,  578,
580.

Yafis,  (Japhet),  son  of  Ndh  (Noah),
231.  See  under  Japhet.

Yaghrash  Khan,  of  the  royal  family
of  the  Khiljis,  283,

Yaghrash  Khilji,  father  of  Sultan
Jalalu-d-Din  J^ilji,  230,

Yahraut,  name  of  the  dsh  upon  which
the  world  is  said  to  rest,  148  n 2.

Ta  huv/a,  an  invocation  to  the  Most
High,  146  and  ?i  2.

Yahyi  ibu  ‘Abdu-I-Latif  Qazwini
Dimi^qi,  author  of  the  Lubhu-t-
Tawdrif^,  34  ?i  9,  49  n 3,  64  and
n 1,  624  and  n 9.

Yahyi  ibn  Alimad  ibn  Abdndlah
Sirhindi,  author  of  the  Tdr'ikhd-
Mubarak  Shdhl,  10  n 2,  67  n 2,  222
n 2.  315  n 7.

Ya^ya  ibn  Bukayr,  a traditionist,  18

n 1,

Yahyi  ibn  Isra’il,  the  head  of  the
Chishtls,  father  of  Shai^  Sharafa-
d-DIn  MunJri,  416  yi  13.

Yahyi  Paran.  Miyan,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sikandar  Sur  (g.  r.),
547,

Yahyi  Qazwini,  Qizi,  64  and  n 1,
See  under  Yahyi  ibn  ‘Abdu-l-Latif.

Yahyi  Turan,  Miyan,  Governor  of
Sambbal,  one  of  the  Amirs  of  the
Afghan  Sfir  dynasty,  545,  546,  547.

Yak  of  Tibet,  543  n 1.

Yaklakhi,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Saltin  Qatbu-d-Din  ibu  ‘Alau-d-
Din  Khilji,  283,  284,  286  and  n I

clx

Index.

1 akaar,  for  Baksar,  on  the  left  bank
of  the  Ganges,  408  n 5.

Yakut.  See  under  Yaqat,  the  Arab
Geographer.

Tdlau^  a standard  or  ensign  in  Tarkl,
483  w 2.

Tamak,  name  of  a city  and  country
celebrated  for  the  beanty  of  its
people,  158,  169  ».

Taman,  country  of,— in  Arabia,  74  n
2,  262  n.

Taznin,  Saltan  Mubamxnad,  king  of
Khnrasan.  99  n 4,  138  n I.

Taminah,  wife  of  Solomon,  205  n 3.

Tamm-i-AmTri-l-Mii^minin,  title  of
Saltan  Sbamsa-d-Din  lyaltimish,
88.

Taminn-d'Daalab  Saltan  Ifabmud  ibn
Na^irn-d-Din  Ghagnawi.  15,  16,
17.  See  Salfan  Mahmud  of  Ghaz-
jjTb.

TamInu-d*DanIah  Ruknn«d-t)iQ  Firuz
§blh,  son  of  Sultan  Sbarosu-d-Din
- lyaUtimish,  97.

YammU'd-DIn  Mahammad  Hasan,
fall  name  of  Mir  Khueru.  the

famous  poet  of  DihlT,  96  « 2.'

Yammu-l-Khiiafat,  title  of  Sultan
*Alau-d-DIn  Khiljf,  254  n 6.

Yamuna,  the  rirer  Jumna  which  is
also  called  Jamana  and  Jaan,  23
n 3,  24>  n 4.

Ya‘cjiib,  Sikandar  ^au,  ono  of  the
ilali’ks  of  Sultiln  Muhammad  Tugh-
laq  Shah,  337.

Ya'qubu-l-SIar  jaulqi.  an  Arab  writer,
149  71.

Tdqfit  or  ruby,  Four  kinds  of,  25  ji  2.

yaqfit,  the  reiebrared  Arab  Geo-
grapher, 11  r 5,  15  n 4,  22  n 2,

66  n 1,  159  n,  166  n 1,  263  n,  476
«5,  570  u 7.

Yaqut  the  Abyssinian,  Chief  Amir
/under  Sultan  EazzTyah  iint  Snltiin
Shamsu-d-DIn  lyaltimi^,  120,  121
and  71  2.

Ifarhala,  town,  583  n 2.

Yasiirl  ibn  lyamghur.  the  Diwan  of
Ghaznin  under  Saltan  Maudud
^aznawi,  47.

Yatmiyan  of  Bukhara,  father  of  the
poet  Jahi  (q.  i\),  618  a 5.

Yazdi,  author  of  the  Zafai-ndma,  347
n 3,  358  n 6.

Yazid  ibn  Mazyad,  one  of  the  Gene^
rals  of  Haruuu-r-Rashid,  74  n 2.

Yazid  ibn  Mu'awiyah,  second  Khali-
fah  of  the  house  of  Umaiyyah,  205
n 1,  481  and  n 8.

Yemen,  country  of,— in  Arabia,  74  n
2,  262  n.

Tezdezbah, — or

Tezdibah,  the  inagian  ancestor  of
Imam  Bukhari,  6n  B.

Yar  ‘All,  a common  name  among  the
gbpah,  604,

Yale  and  Burnettes  ^.uO.v^a/y  of  Ayiylu-
Indian  Wordg  and  495  n,

543  n 3,

1 Yulma,  a Turki  word  meaning  ‘ that

1 ’which  has  lost  its  hair/  482  7i  2.

I Yunas  ‘All,  one  of  the  Amirs  of

I

I Babar,  441.

Yusuf,  Malik,  one  of  the  Amirs  of
Sultan  Muhammad  Tughlaq  Shah.
308.

Tiisiif  and  Zulai^d  of  Maulana  ‘Abdu-
r-Rahmao  Jami,  32  n 2,  272  n 1,
58S,  589.

Ydoutand  Zu’eitfLd,  Grirtith’s,  272  f‘  ^

Index.

clsi

TTuanf  ‘Azdu-d-Danlah,  *on  of  8ul),5u
Mahmud  Ghazaawi,  29,  45  n 2.
Yusuf  Khan  AubadI,  Malik,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  the  Saiyyid  dynasty,  395.
Yusuf  Sariir,  Malik, — or
Yusuf  Sururu-l-Mulk,  Malik,  one  ot
the  Amirs  ot  Mubarak  Sfeah  of  the
Saiyyid  dynasty,  388  and  n 3,  391,
392.  See  also  the  next.

Yusuf,  son  of  Sarwam-1-Mnlk,  Malik,
396.  See  the  above.

Yusuf  Qadr  Khan,  king  of  Turkistan,
27.

Yusuf  Sufi  Aalbacha,  one  of  the
Amirs  of  Sultan  Qutbu-d-Din  Khil-
ji,  291  and  n 5.

Tiizbdgjiu,  an  Amir  of  a hundred,  313
and  n 3.

Zabnl,  a name  for  the  town  of
Ghaznin,  16  and  n 8.

Zahul,  the  second  degree  of  the  fever
called  diqq,  319  n 4,  320  n.

ZSJml,  grandfather  of  Rnstam,  the
famous  hero  of  ancient  Iran,  14  n 3.

Zabuli,  a name  of  Sulfan  Mabmud  of
Ghaznin,  17.

Zabulistau,  14  n 3,  51.

Zafar  Khan,  one  of  the  Malika  of
Sultan  FIroz  Shah.  337  n 2.

Zafar  Khiin,  Ouvetuor  of  Gujrat
under  Sultan  Piroz  ghah  Tughlaq,
333  and  n 11,  334.

Zafar  Khan  ‘Alai,  311.  See  Zafar
Khan  Badru-d-DIn.

Zafar  Khan  Badru-d-Din,  called  Zafar
Khan  ‘Alai,  one  of  the  Maliks  of
Sultan  ‘Alau-d-DIn  Khiljl,  347  and
n 2,  250  and  ti  5,  254,  258,  261,  311,

Zafar  Khan  Malik  Dinar  flarami,  one
of  tbe  Amirs  of  Sultan  Quthu-d-
Din  Khilji,  283,  284,  285.

Zafar  Ittan  Farsi,  one  ot  the  Maliks
of  Snltan  Piroz  Shah  Tughlaq,  336
n 5.

Zafar  Khiin,  son  of  Sultan  Ghiyasu-d-
Din  Tughlaq  Shah,  297.

21

Zafar  ^an  Hizabm-d-Din,  one  ol
the  Maliks  of  Snllin  ‘Alin-d-Din
Ebilji,  247  n 2.

Zafar  Khan  Khilji,  brother  of  Snltan
‘Alan-d-Din  Khilji,  239.

Zafar  Khan  ibil  Wajihn-l-Mulk,
Governor  of  Gujrat,  one  of  the
Maliks  of  the  Firuz  Shahi  dynasty,
346,  354  n 8,  861,  364.

Zafarabad,  town  of,  299,  812,  828.

Zafar -Nama  of  Tazdi,  an  historical
work,  347  a 3,  358  n 6.

Zaffnr  Khan  Farsy.  See  Zafar  Khan
Farsi.

Zahdb,  water  oozing  from  the  ground,
459  n 5.

Zabhak  ibn  ‘01  wan,  one  of  the  three
chief  lords  of  ghaddad  ibn  ‘Ad
(q.  V.),  262  n.

Zabir,  nom-de-plume  of  Zahiru-d-Dia
Tahir  ibn  Muhammad  the  Poet,
339  and  n 4.

Zahir  Dihlavi,  Qazi,  one  of  the  poets
of  the  reign  of  Sultaa  Mahmud  ot
the  Firuz  ,Shahi  dynasty,  367  and
n 2;  375.

Zahiru-d-DIn  Biibar  Pidi^ah,  435,
1 436.  See  under  Babar.

H'.y

clxii

Index.

Zahiru-d-Din  Lahori,  Malik,  one  of
the  Amirs  of  Saltan  Firoz  Shah
Taghlaq,  338.

Zahiru-d-Din  Mohammad  Shah  Babar,
436,  44  3.  See  under  Babar.

Zahlra-d-Din  Tahir  ibn  Muhammad
Faryabi,  a celebrated  poet,  con-
temporary of  ^aqani,  339  and
n 4.

Zahiru-l-Juyush,  Inspector  of  the
forces,  302.

Zaid  ibn  ‘Ali,  one  of  the  Imams  of
the  Shi‘ah,  604  n 5.

Zain  ^afi,  Shaitt,  a learned  man  of
the  time  of  Babar  and  Hnmayun,
448  and  » 3,  609  and  n 6,  610,  617,
618.

Zain  ^au  Niyazi,  one  of  the  Amirs
of  Shir  Shih  Sur,  491.

Zain  Shaikh,  a learned  man

of  the  time  of  Babar,  448  and  « 3.
See  Zain  Khafl.

Zainn-d-Din,  author  of  a commentary
on  the  Mubanjyiii,  450  and  >i  8.

Zainn-d-Din  &afi,  Khwaja,  a famous
saint,  609  n 3.

Zainn-d-Din  Khafi,  ShaiWi,  one  of
the  learned  men  and  poets  of  the
time  of  Babar  and  Hnmayun,  609
and  n 5,  610,  617,  618.

Zainu-d-Din  Mahmud  Kamangar,
Manlana,  one  of  the  Naqshbandi
Shai^s,  contemporary  of  Hnmayun,
588  and  n 4.

Zainu-l-‘Abidin  bin  Najim,  author  of
al-Aihidh  im-n-Nazuir,  5 n i,

Ztiirgah,  sortilege  by,  412  n 1.

Zakat  or  almsgiving,  one  of  the  five
foundations  of  practical  religion,
175  n 4,

ZalAlratu-l-Qawamn,  an  historical
work,  9 n 2.

ZalAma,  the  plectrum  with  which  the
chcmg  was  played,  146  n 1.

Zal,  father  of  Eustam,  one  of  the
heroes  of  the  Shah-Nama,  178  n 2.

Zal,  the  son  of  Afrasyab,  king  of
Turan,  410.

Zama^shan,  the  celebrated  author
of  the  Ka^^dff  a commentary  on
the  Q’nr’an,  28  to  1.

Zamindawar,  country  of,  591.

Zandttan,  a fortified  town  near
Saratts,  43  to  3.

Zang,  a cluster  of  globular  bells  car-
ried by  dak-runners,  621  to  2.

Zang-bastan,  to  acquire  importance,

621  TO  2.

Zangbar,  Shah  of,— the  Moon,  621.

Zangi,  Abu  Mansur,  brother  of  Abn-
1-Fa?l  of  Bust,  contemporary  of
Sultan  Maudud  ^aznawi,  47  and
TO  7.

Zangi,  Sultan  Mn‘izzn-d-DIn  Mnbam-
mad  Sam  ffliuri,  65  to  2.

Zanzib.ar, — the  Night,  621.

Zanzibar,  Sultan  of,  adopts  Suiyyid
as  bis  regal  title,  303  to  4.

Zaradrns,  the  river  Sutlej,  23  to  3.

Zarb,  in  Prosody,  the  last  foot  of  the
second  hemistich,  606  n 4.

Zard  choba,  turmeric,  173  to  2.

Zarif,  Mirza  Muhammad  Hasan  of
Isfahan,  the  Poet,  582  to.

Zarlr,  a herb  used  in  dyeing  clothes,
173  and  a 2.

Zeba,  mother  of  Sultan  Sikandar  ibn
Sultan  Bnhliil  Lodi,  412  to  2.

Zend,  of  the  Zoroastrians,  394

TO  5.

dzm

Ind,:,.

Barni  See  nniier  ?iau-d-Dm  . Zikr,  a religious  ceremony,  510  and
Barni.  n 4.

Zii  i-Barni.  See  under  Ziiu  d-Din  , Zinjani,  Shaikh  Hasan,  a famous
Barni.  eain'i.  of  Labor,  383  and  n 6.

Ziai,  the  Persian  poet,  contemporary  \ Zirak,  a name  of 'Utiirid  (the  planei
and  panegyrist  of  Sultan  ilalik  j Mercury),  630  and  3.

Shah  Saljiiq!,  38  anu  a 4.  ; Zirak  ^an,  the  Amir  of  SamSna,  one

Ziln-d-Din,  a court-servant  of  Sultan  j of  the  Malika  of  the  Saiyyid  dy-
Jalaln-d-Din  Khilji,  239.  ! nasty,  378,  379,  382,  384,  391,  396.

Z'.au-d-Din  Barani, — or  j Zirqan,  name  of  a place  in  Khurasan

Ziau-d-Diu  Barni,  author  of  the  ■ 43  and  n 3.

Tdi'M-i-Firi'z  ^dln,  184  n 1,  | Zodiac,  signs  of  the,  75  a 2,  76.

186  n 3,  188  nn  1,  4 and  5,  219  n 3,  Zorawar  Singh,  Rao,  also  known  as
220  n 2,  221  n 1,  227  n 7,  230  >i  1,  Eapar  Sen,  founder  of  the  old  city
247  11  and  nn  2 and  4,  248  un  2,  6 of  Rapari,  377  n 5.
and  8,  310  it  1, 311  n 5,  312  ?i  7,  314  j Zu-bahraiuj  in  prosody  a line  of  two
n 2,  315  It  I,  316  n 6,  320  n 3.  metres,  245  n 2.

Ziau-d-0in  Khaiandi  al-Parsi,  the  Zubaidah  Khatun,  wife  of  Harunu-r-
Poet  Zili,  38  rt  4.  See  under  Rashid,  286,  287.

?iii-  * Zu/i/uh,  the  planet  Venus,  138  11  3.

Ziin-d-Din  Qazi  Khan,  one  of  the  Zn-l-Faqar, — or

Amirs  of  Sultan  Qutbu-d-Din  ^il-  Zu-1-Fiq5r,  famons  sword  of  ‘Ali  ibn-
ji,  288,  289,  290.  Abi  Jalib,  74  and  n 2,  73  n,  106

Ziau-d-Din  Tukili, — or  » 3.

Ziau-d-Din  Tiilaki,  Malik,  one  of  the  Zn-l-Fiqar  Shirwini,  Mir  Saiyyid,  a
Amirs  of  the  Ghori  dynasty,  69  and  famous  poet  of  Persia,  605.
n 3.  Zunndr,  the  belt  or  girdle  worn  by

Zifiu-l-Mulk  Shamsu-d-Din  Abu  Rijii,  Christiana  or  llagians,  also  the
one  of  the  Maliks  of  Sult.lu  Firoz  Brahmanical  thread.  509  and  it  5.
Shah  Tgghlaq.  329  and  n 13,  Zu-n-Nurain,  title  of  ‘U«mau  the  third

331.  Khalifah.  39  and  n 4,

1

Central  Archaeological  Library,

NEW  DELHI.

. 74527

Call  No.  f54.©2/AI-ls/R.L.H.

Author — Al— ^ada©ni

Title Muntakhabu-t-tawarikh-

Borrower  No.  j Date  of  Issue  ' Date  of  BeturQ

v *M  booh  ihai'is  shut  is  but  a block'"

Ail

u

GOVT.  OF  INDIA
Departmcat  of  Arcbaeoli[^  ^

NEW  DELHI.

Please  help  ns  to  keep  the  b{x>k
olean  and  moving.  .

5.^..  14B.H.  DELHI.
