THE GREEK ATOMISTS AND EPICURUS: A STUDY
By Cyril Bailey
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1928.
Public domain. Scanned from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/greekatomistsepi0000cyri).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

THE GREEK.ATOMISTS
AND EPICURUS

: —= ll co ote

THE GREEK ATOMISTS
AND EPICURUS

A Study
By CYRIL BAILEY, M.A.

Jowett Fellow and Tutor of
Balliol College

a

OXABORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1928

wer.

OXFORD
UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON: AMEN HOUSE, E.C. 4
EDINBURGH GLASGOW LEIPZIG

COPENHAGEN NEW ¥ ONTO
MELBOURNE CAPETOWS [BAY
CALCUTTA MADRAS § vHAI
HUMPHREY WiLL d
PUBLISE TH:
UNIVERSITY

Printed in Great Britain

PREFACE

S a natural sequel to an edition of the text of Epicurus
I attempted a general exposition of his system. But as

oon as one sets about that task it becomes clear that it would
Ye incomplete and unsatisfactory without an account of the
Atomic philosophers who preceded him. This book is there-
ore intended as a study of the development of Atomism in
Greece and of its embodiment in the comprehensive system
of Epicurus. An attempt has been made to put together
rom the scattered remains which we possess the theories of
the three Atomic philosophers, to set them in relation to one
another and to deal with some of the problems which in-
evitably arise in considering them. | cannot claim to be a
philosopher, still less a man of science. There will therefore
be found little criticism from an external philosophic point
of view and little attempt to indicate, except incidentally,
parallels or differences between the ancient and modern
Atomic theories. What I have tried to do is to understand
as far as possible the minds of these Greek thinkers and to
set out their thoughts from the inside. The ‘plain man’s’
exposition of what Epicurus intended to be the ‘plain man’s’
philosophy may at least prove a useful basis for the criticism
of others more learned in science and philosophy.

- Thave tried as far as possible to let the three philosophers
tell their own story in their own words, when they have been

preserved, and failing that to use the accounts and comments

given by ancient writers. Happily, except perhaps for

vi PREFACE
Leucippus, there is a sufficient quantity of material pre-
served, but it is necessary to piece it together. It is often
tempting to try to bridge over gulfs by conjecture and to
attribute to the philosophers theories and ideas which their
recorded beliefs seem to suggest. Some of their modern
critics have in their enthusiasm gone too far in this direction,
and I have tried to resist the temptation except in places
where I felt confident that the ground was sure. 2

My debt to many modern writers will be sufficiently indi
cated in the foot-notes, but a special word of sincere acknow:
ledgement is due to Hermann Diels and Hermann Usenet
for the collection of the material on which this account i
based, and, among critics to Carlo Giussani, Dr. Ettor
Bignone, and Professor John Burnet. I wish also to expres
my gratitude to the Trustees of the Jowett Copyright Fun i
for their assistance towards the publication of this volume

Csi

OcrToBER, 1926.

CONTENTS
NTRODUCTION . : ; ; nie?

PART I. THE ATOMISTS

I. THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM . : 9
| § 1. The Monists . : , <dimt2
©2.-‘The Bee En diodes ‘ ” nee 4

§ 3. The Pluralists—Anaxagoras é : «34.

§ 4. Subordinate Problems ; J : eras

II. LEUCIPPUS . : ; : ; ~ 40¢
§ 1. Life and Writings : : : . OF

§ 2. The Atomic Theory : 4 a)

§ 3. Atoms and Space: the creation of ass ° .¥ 76

§ 4. Cosmogony: the creation of worlds ; . go

§ 5. The Soul, Sensation, and Theory of Knowledge . I01

§ 6. Conclusion : , ‘ ; . 106

III. DEMOCRITUS : ; : : < Wrs9
§ 1. Life and Writings 3 : : . 109

§ 2. The Atomic Theory : : ; ek:

§ 3. Nature and movement of Atoms: creation of things 123

§ 4. The Cosmic Whirl: creation of worlds : 1 ESS

§ 5. Our World: the heavenly bodies and the earth « 849

§ 6. The Soul, Sensation, and Thought . : 4p hsG

§7. The Gods P : : s A GIL

§ 8. Theory of Knowledge ; : : apes

§ 9. Ethics : : . . . 186

§ 10. Conclusion

viii CONTENTS
PART II. EPICURUS

I. LIFE AND WRITINGS ‘ ; ‘ . ae
II. CANONICE . : ; ; : «. ao
III. ATOMS AND SPACE . ; ‘ : am
IV. PROPERTIES AND ACCIDENTS , 4 . 300
V. THE MOTION OF THE ATOMS . ; . | 3am
VI. COMPOUND BODIES AND THEIR QUALITIES . 33

VII. WORLDS AND OUR WORLD : Z : a
VIII. THE SOUL, SENSATION, THOUGHT, AND WILL 384
IX. THE GODS—THEOLOGY, AND RELIGION . 45a
X. ETHICS : ‘ ; : ’ - 482
XI. CONCLUSION a : : : i =
APPENDICES

I. On the Theory of Anaxagoras

II. Other Views of apdAnyis
III. On the Meaning of émBodrn ris Siavoias «
IV. On the Meaning of 6yxos cacumen and glomeramen

V. On the Relation of the ‘Nameless’ Element and the ‘Mind’
VI. Other Views of the Constitution of the Epicurean Gods

BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY .

INDICES
I. General
II. Greek Words .

III. Passages quoted or referred to

Abbreviations used in foot-notes

E.G. Ps = Early Greek Philosophy, J. Burnet, 3rd edition, 1920.

10F — Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, H. Diels, 3rd edition, 1912.
Under each author the quotations are divided into A. refer-
ences to life and teaching, B. fragments.

U. = Epicurea, H. Usener, 1887.
GB. = Epicurus, C. Bailey, 1926.

| rene
i mis oe
wane ta ad fe

PN ROW UO GAra ON

7 Ries the modern mind few facts in the history of human
thought are probably more astonishing than that the
cardinal theories, on which two great branches of science,
astronomy and chemistry, are now respectively built, should
have been propounded by Greek philosophers only to be
abandoned and lie dormant for centuries. The notion of
a helio-centric world, the germ of which was contained in
the speculations attributed to the Pythagorean Philolaus, was
completed in the third century by Aristarchus of Samos, yet
produced no effect on scientific thought, till the truth was
rediscovered by Copernicus. And though the Atomic
Theory of Leucippus and Democritus in the form in which
it was adopted by Epicurus, became widely known in Greece
and at one period still more widely at Rome, it was even so
regarded rather as the eccentric adjunct of a popular theory
of morals than as a scientific explanation of the world. It
was totally eclipsed throughout the Middle Ages by the
physical speculations of Aristotle which rested on the older
notion of the four ‘elements’, and had to wait for its partial
revival by Gassendi and its modern rediscovery by Dalton.
Yet, though the world so long refused it, its association with
one of the noblest works of Latin poetry and its own intrinsic
interest in the light of modern scientific theories make it
worth while to attempt to put together its history. It has
for us a double interest as a theory with which we can find
ourselves in greater sympathy than with most of its com-
petitors, and also as a peculiarly fascinating product of the
subtle and penetrating Greek genius, making its way with
acute observation certainly, but with little that can be called
experiment, into the inner secrets of nature.

Atomism ‘flourished’ in Greece for a period of about 150
_ years, from 430 B.c. to 280 B.C. During the ps of te
period there was something like an Atomic school, working
at the theory, handing down traditions and developing new

3307 B

2 INTRODUCTION

points with greater or less activity, but three great names
stand out as landmarks in the course of its evolution, those
of Leucippus, Democritus and Epicurus. If in passing
through their hands the theory had remained unaltered, if,
as some critics have thought, it were impossible to distin-
guish the original ideas of Leucippus from the additions and
expansions of Democritus, and if Epicurus, as it used to
be said, had in reality adopted the theory of Democritus
without change to serve as a physical base to his moral
system, it might be possible to treat of Atomism as a single
whole. But the careful research of modern scholars, and in
particular the work of Diels, Usener, and Giussani has shown
that this is not the case. The theory until it left Epicurus
remained always vital, capable of new developments and
applications, admitting not merely of greater refinements in
the working out of detail but also of a securer co-ordination
as a whole. No better proof of this growth could be given
than a comparison of the extant fragments and notices of
Leucippus with the poem of Lucretius. The same funda-
mental theory is indeed recognized, and certain doctrines
have been transmitted with singular tenacity, but the crude-
ness of the earlier theory has been refined away, and the
whole system has been so elaborated in detail and unified
in structure as to have been in fact completely transformed,
Atomism then must be regarded as a theory in process of
development. Moreover, so widely different were the three
men in personal character and in the attitudes with which
they approached their work that it is essential that they should
be treated of separately. Leucippus with the humility of
a pioneer regards himself as the mediator between the rival
theories of his predecessors, and having formulated the
fundamental principle of atomism, sets himself to work out
some of its consequences with a certain naive insight, but
without any serious attempt at the creation of a complete
system. Democritus, the man of encyclopaedic learning and
universal interests, taking over the theory from Leucippus,
develops and systematizes it on every side, weaving it into
a vast but loosely constructed philosophy, which ranged in

INTRODUCTION 3

an all-embracing spirit over the world and human life.
Epicurus is primarily a moralist, a preacher of a Gospel of
life, who cares nothing for knowledge and learning as such.
But he does care greatly, and that not only from a moral
point of view, for a materialist theory of the universe, based
upon a complete trust in the validity of sensation, and in
such a theory Atomism takes its natural place on the physical
side. He simplifies in places, elaborates in others, has a
minute eye for consequential details and a singular power
of visualizing effects: above all he welds together physics,
morals, and psychology into a consistent system based on a
single principle. Itis therefore impossible to group together
in a single account a theory developed on such different
lines and approached from such different points of view,
and though, in telling the story of Atomism it will be neces-
sary to some extent to trace and retrace the same ground,
yet such are the divergences between its three exponents
that there should be no danger of monotony. But beyond
Epicurus it is not profitable or indeed possible to follow the
history of Atomism: it is true that his followers attempted to
develop his sytem in certain outlying provinces, especially
in the spheres of Logic and Rhetoric (both of them subjects
banned by the Master), yet so great was their respect for
the authority of his name that the first care of the school
was to preserve intact, without addition or subtraction, the
heritage which he had handed down to them. It is owing to
this scrupulous conscientiousness of his disciples that we
can accept the poem of Lucretius, written more than two
hundred years after the death of Epicurus, as a certain record
of his doctrines.

For similar reasons it is impossible, in the case at any rate
of Democritus and Epicurus, to deal merely with the
physical theory of Atomism and neglect the rest of their
work; such an abstraction would give a false impression not
merely of the philosophers but of the development | of

-Atomism itself. For in some respects the most interesting
feature in its history is the way in which, starting as a
physical cosmogony—one in the long series of speculations

B 2

4 INTRODUCTION

of the early Greek philosophers—afterwards, as the range
of philosophy widened or the centre of interest shifted, it
gradually became co-ordinated in a greater whole. In Demo-
critus indeed its position is perhaps rather one of juxta-
position than of co-ordination; though it is closely connected,
for instance, with his metaphysical scepticism, it is not so
easy to trace its relation to his moral theory, still less to those
manifold and diverse subjects which filled the books of his
Tetralogies. But with Epicurus the change is very marked.
Epicureanism is indeed a very different thing from Atomism.
Morals, psychology, and physics are all grouped together in
a system which is a whole. And Atomism is not loosely
attached to the other fields of interest, but penetrates them
all and is penetrated by them. The theories of psychology,
even of morals, rest directly on an Atomic basis, and the
theories of Atomism in turn are controlled and conditioned
by the fundamental principles of psychology. For this reason
[have had no scruple in treating generally of the many fields
of Democritus’ activity and in regarding Atomism in its
last stage as a part of the wider Epicureanism.

In reading or writing the history of Greek Atomism, it
is impossible not to have an eye on modern science. Yet the
temptation to see closer parallels than actually exist and to
read modern ideas into ancient speculation is very real and
must be resisted. It must always be remembered that ancient
speculation is a very different matter from modern research:

at its best it rested in the main on a priori reasoning, and ;

though observation and even experiment may have given
some knowledge of detail, they had little place in the develop-
ment of the larger fundamental theories. And not only do
methods differ, but the fundamental conceptions of the atom
in the ancient theory and modern chemistry are widely
divergent. The Greeks conceived a perfectly hard unalter-
able body, incapable of entering into any combination except
by juxtaposition or at most entanglement: modern chemistry
conceives an elastic changeable body, which in the fusion of
chemical combination merges its material identity in a new
substance. The ancient theory conceived of infinite atoms all

Se

INTRODUCTION .

of homogeneous material; the modern chemist assigns a
materially different atom to each of his numerous elements,
though indeed in its latest developments chemical physics
seems to be coming back to the notion of an ultimate homo-
geneous germ of all the elements. These are some of the
differences which should put any writer but an expert in
modern science upon his guard. He cannot forbear from
time to time to note coincidences, or apparent coincidences,’
between the ancient and the modern ideas, but a complete
comparison of the two, fascinatingly interesting as it would
be, must be left to others. For myself, | shall endeavour
simply to tell the story of Atomism in Greece, hoping that it
may possibly inspire some expert in modern chemistry to
add the missing chapter with an authoritative hand. But
even a layman may assert without contradiction that it was
the Greeks who put the questions which modern science is
still endeavouring to answer: had their problems been
different, the whole course of European scientific thought
might never have existed.

t Many such interesting coincidences have been remarked in Dre Je
Masson’s Lucretius, Epicurean and Poet.

Te Ae

~ a

Pl
i; is

I
THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

© important system of thought has ever appeared in

the world as the ‘special creation’ of its founder, wholly
detached from what has gone before: it must have its roots
in the speculations and discoveries of many predecessors,
which have been advancing unconsciously towards one solu-
tion. This solution could not have been anticipated and
may often at the moment pass unrecognized, yet to one
looking back it is seen to be the inevitable outcome of
previous thought. So it certainly was with the Greek theory
of the atomic constitution of the universe; it was no brilliant
and isolated invention, but the natural issue of the long
series of speculations of the early physical philosophers.
Alike the nature of the problems which they had set them-
selves to solve—problems which grew in complexity, as each
new thinker made his fresh contribution of difficulties—and
the general trend of the answers they gave, pointed to
Atomism as the ultimate conclusion, and Leucippus, who
had the genius to perceive this, regarded himself not so much
as a conspicuous innovator, but rather as the reconciler of the
rival theories of his predecessors. In order then to under-
stand both the form and the content of the system of the
Atomists, it is necessary to inquire briefly into the main lines
of previous speculation, with a view to determining the
problem which they inherited and the given conditions of
its solution.

The history of early Greek speculation has often been
written,! and it is not my purpose to attempt any general
description or estimate of it; it is only intended here to inquire
{nto it in so far as it led up to Atomism. It will therefore be

: It is almost superfluous to refer to Zeller’s Philosophie der Griechen, to
Gomperz, Greek Thinkers (vol. i in English Translation by L. Magnus), and
to Professor Burnet’s Ear/y Greek Philosophy (31d edition, 1920); to the last
work in particular this Chapter owes very much.

10 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

necessary to abstract from the theories of the earlier thinkers
what is relevant to this purpose and to neglect other elements
which lie apart from it; but there is the less danger that a
false picture will thus be given, because what is essential for
the present discussion is in fact just the kernel of their
speculations. For the ultimate problem lying at the back of
. them all is the inquiry, what is the nature (¢vous) of the world?
It is no doubt true that this question was in origin religious
rather than physical;* cosmogony sprang from religion and
brought forth cosmology. It is not therefore surprising that
a theological undercurrent is discernible in the theories of
many of the early philosophers and that from time to time
it comes prominently to the surface; Epicurus himself,* some
three centuries after Thales, still finds 1t necessary to implore
his disciple to beware of ‘myth’ and cling to ‘physiology’.
Yet from the first moment thatit comes into view,3 philosophy
is seen to be honestly endeavouring to free science from the
prejudices of religion and to regard nature as a purely
physical existence. ‘Thus the intention of the early thinkers,
when they posed the question ‘what is the nature of the
world?’ was to suggest an inquiry into the ultimate material
substance of which it was composed. It is therefore on their
answers to this fundamental question, given in the long
debate which ensued, that attention must be concentrated;
for those answers constitute in fact the antecedents of
Atomism.

Lucretius, whose poem preserves the doctrines of Atom- _

ism in a more expanded form than any other extant docu-
ment, devotes a large section of his first book‘ to the criticism
of the predecessors of the Atomists. This section has for us
the peculiar interest that, based as it certainly is on an

x ‘The connexion of theology and physical science in the early Greek
philosophers is well brought out in Mr. F. M. Cornford’s From Religion to
Philosophy, though I cannot agree with his notion of the origin of the con-
ception of dais and think that he overrates the importance of the religious
element in the philosophers of the ‘scientific tradition’.

2 e.g. Ep. ii, § 87.

3 See Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, Chap. I.

* 1. 635-920.

THE MONISTS -

Epicurean work, it represents the orthodox tradition of the
Atomic school. In this aspect its main value lies not so much
in its criticism, which is often delivered from an unsym-
pathetic and dogmatic Epicurean point of view, but in its
preservation of the Atomists’ conception of the steps by
which their own system was approached. Lucretius recog-
nizes in previous speculation three stages. In the first the
answer to the ultimate problem of the constitution of the
world is given as a single ‘element’? or substance, and of this
stage Heraclitus} is made typical. In the second stage he
places philosophers who postulated as the ultimate basis two
or more elements, and associates it with the name of Empe-
docles,+ who believed the world to be composed of all the
four. Finally, as the nearest approach to Atomism—though
_ in some respects its opposite pole—he places the theory of
Anaxagoras, which stands alone in its unique originality.
This division is not merely arbitrary, but does in fact repre-
sent clearly enough the natural process of development
from Monism to a greater and greater Pluralism, of which
in a sense Atomism was the culmination, and it will therefore
be more than a mere matter of convenience to follow it. At
the same time the separation of the early philosophers into
schools, though based on logical as well as local and historical
grounds, must not be exaggerated: for there is a vital con-
nexion running all through their speculations. Each new
stage of thought arises out of the criticism of its predecessor ;

t Possibly the *Emropi) trav mpos tovs puorxods (D.L. x. 27). The main
bulk of Lucretius’ poem is probably based on Epicurus’ Meyddn ?Emvrop}
(see Giussani, Stud. Lucr. p. 10), but it is improbable that that work con-
tained systematic criticism of other philosophers. :

2 The word ‘element’ (arorxetov) is first used by Plato. The idea may
have come from the Pythagoreans and is explicit in Empedocles (ZG.
, : That oct is really taken as a type is, I think, clear from the fact
that some of Lucretius’ criticism—and in particular that of the notion of
condensation and rarefaction (647—54)—is not applicable to his theory, but
to those of others of the Monists. :

4 In this section Lucretius expressly states (716) that Empedocles is only
a type, and recognizes (763, 770) two distinct schools among the upholders

of the theory of the four elements.

12 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

indeed even constructive thinking is sometimes intended as
a form of attack. But usually this is not so: a constructive
period will be followed by a period of criticism and out of
it again arises new construction on a fresh basis. It will
therefore be necessary not merely to consider the prominent
representatives of the three main constructive stages, but
also those other philosophers, who by a largely negative and
critical attitude prepared the way for the next development.
Parmenides, and later on Zeno and Melissus, are as 1m-
portant precursors of Atomism, as Heraclitus, Empedocles,
and Anaxagoras.

§ 1. The Monists

Under the title of Monists may roughly be grouped to-
gether those philosophers who held that the primary sub-
stance, out of which the world was made, was one. Their
speculations were throughout guided by the ultimate desire
- for unification, a feeling perhaps rather than a reasoned con-
clusion that behind all the infinite variety and changeableness
of the world around them there must be some one permanent
substance, which did not vary or change. But though all
held this fundamental belief in common, their theories are
marked by a growing sense of difficulty in the monistic
explanation. After its apparently first confident enunciation
by Thales, arises an ill-disguised feeling of dissatisfaction :
it is easy enough to suppose an ultimate unity, but much
more difficult to explain how multiplicity can have arisen
from it, and how both the one fundamental substance and
the many forms in which it appears can be equally real.
Two periods may be clearly distinguished: the first consists
. of the ‘School of Miletus’, all closely dependent on one
another, ‘Thales, Anaximander and Anaximenes, the second
is represented by the independent and original theory of
Heraclitus of Ephesus. To these must be added the strange
doctrine of Parmenides of Elea, which in its thoroughgoing
Monism and its relentless disregard of the appearances of
normal experience, really reduced Monism to an absurdity
and prepared the way for a solution on different lines.

THE MONISTS a

Though considerable information is extant with regard to
THALES himself and his doings, his journey to Egypt and
importation to Ionia of Egyptian geometry," his political
importance and his plea for Ionian federation, and his
famous prediction of the eclipse of the sun, very little indeed
is known about his philosophical views. For the present
purpose practically all that can be counted certain is the bare
statement that he said the primary substance was water.’ ~
Why he selected water and how he explained the creation of
other things from water we do not know. Aristotle suggests
that he was led to his conclusion by observing that the
‘nourishment of all things is moist and that even the hot
3s created from the moist and lives by it’, and further “that
the seeds of all things are in their nature moist’, but this
looks rather like the reasoning of a later age, after physio-
logical interests had arisen. It is perhaps more probable that.
he selected water because as a matter of commonplace obser-
vation it seemed most likely to be able to give rise to other
things. He saw it not only in a liquid state, but in a solid
form as ice and also in an ‘airy’ condition, as he would
probably have said, as vapour. Such observation would have
led him to conclude that it might change. also into other
solids, hardening into earth and rock, and passing through
the medium of ‘air’ even into fire itself. It is most unfor-
tunate that we have no further trustworthy information as to
his theories, for it seems impossible in view of the. subtle
reasoning of his immediate successor that he can have been
content with the mere enunciation. of his belief. As it is, it
must simply be accepted as the foundation of the Ionic
speculation. We may notice as a survival of the theological
interest—though too much has been made of it—the state-
ment attributed to Thales that ‘all things are full of gods’ ;3
the same sort of animism seems to be implied in his argu-
ment that ‘the magnet is alive, because it moves iron’.

: For an examination of these traditions see EiGsP 3; ppe 43-7
2 Arist. Metaphys. A. 3-983 b; D.A.12. Aristotle states that Thales said water
was the ‘material cause’, but he is speaking of course in his own terminology.
3 Arist. de Anima, A. 5.411a;D.A.22. 4 Ibid. A. 2. 405 a; D.A. 22.

14 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

ANAXIMANDER, who is described as a ‘companion’ of
Thales, which means probably a member of the same group
united by philosophical interests, though not so versatile a
man, would appear to have been a far more audacious and
subtle thinker. He developed something like a system of the
heavenly bodies,’ explaining their nature and their relations
to one another, he formed a new view of the earth and its

“. position in the world, and propounded a theory of the

creation of animals and man, which has, perhaps over-
_ enthusiastically, been recognized as the forerunner of modern
“ideas of Evolution. In dealing with the main problem, he
would seem to have adopted from Thales the general notion
of a single primary substance and then to have set himself
deliberately to consider of what nature it must be, and what
were the fundamental conditions of its existence. The idea
that most forcibly impressed itself on him was that it must
be ‘infinite’? (dzeipov), ‘boundless’, that is to say in extent.
As he looked at the world around him he saw that there was
a continual ‘strife of opposites’: the hot and the cold appear
to be at war with one another, so too the moist and the dry.
The result is a continual destruction and waste. If then
there is to be material to keep this destructive warfare going,
and to repair its losses, there must, so to speak, be an eternal
stock to draw upon ‘in order that becoming may not fail’.3
The primary substance then, whatever else it may be, must
be something without limit: it must never be possible to get
« to the end of it: it must be ‘boundless’. Moreover, it must
for the same reason be eternal: it is, as he said,4 “deathless
and ageless’. Is it possible then to describe its material
character? Can it be, as Thales had thought, water, or
indeed any one of the things of ordinary experience? Em-
phatically not, Anaximander replied, for ‘these things are
hostile to one another; air is cold, water is moist, fire is
hot, and if any one of these were infinite, it must even

« For a very brief treatment of these subordinate interests see § 4 of this
Chapter. 2 Diog. Laert. ii. 1; D. 1.

3 Act. 1. 3. 33 D. 14 iva pndev eddelrn % yéveas.

A ElippeRerei.6.11.3 Diiny:

THE MONISTS te

now have put an end to all the others’.t What the material
nature of ‘the boundless’ is Anaximander does not say;
he was content to leave it indefinite. Later philosophers,
speaking of it in their own accustomed phraseology, called
it ‘indeterminate matter’? or something ‘distinct from the
elements’,3 or even with greater precision ‘a nature between
air and fire or air and water’.t Such phraseology is anachro-
nistic, as it implies a distinction of the ‘elements’, though it
may to some extent express Anaximander’s idea. The
‘boundless’ was apparently conceived as outside all the
worlds, a vast envelope,5 as it were, enclosing them, out of
which they were created and into which they would ulti-
mately be destroyed.* Not content with this general idea,
Anaximander went on to specify the way in which ‘worlds’,
which he conceived of as innumerable,? were created out
of ‘the boundless’. There was in the ‘boundless’ eternal
motion,® which brought the worlds into being by means of
the ‘separating out of opposites’:9 this seems to mean that
a constant jostling inside the ‘boundless’ shook out ‘the
opposites’. An interesting reference explains the process
and its consequences: ‘something able to beget hot and cold
_was separated off from the eternal at the creation of this
world, and out of this a circle of flame grew up round the
air enclosing the earth, as the bark grows round the tree’.
A piece of the ‘boundless’, we must understand, was shaken
off and separated itself into the two opposites, the hot and
the cold; the cold composed the earth in the centre and the
‘fiery circle’ gave birth to the heavenly bodies. Similarly

Arist. Phys. I’. 5. 204b. 2 Arist. Met. A. 2. 1069b.

3 Arist. Phys. I’. 5. 204 b mapa ta orouxeta. ; a

4 Alex. Aphrod. in Arist. Metaph. A. 6. 988 a; D. 16 ri petagd dvow
ddpos Te kal mupés, 7) dépos TE Kal bdaTos.

s Hipp. Ref, l.c. wdvras mepiexew Tovs KOOMOUS.

6 Aet. 1. 3. 3. D. 14. ,

7 Ibid. dzetpous xéopovs. Burnet (£. G. P.3 58 ff.) has shown that this
must mean infinite coexisting, not successive worlds.

8 Hipp. Ref. i. 6. 2; D.A. 11. 1 i ; webs

9 Arist. Phys. A. 4. 1874 ex Tod évds evovoas TAS EVAVTLOTNTAS EKKPL-
veobar. D. 16. 10 Theophrastus in Ps.-Plut. Sérom. 2.

16 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

other worlds would be formed, though in their case it might
be a different pair of ‘opposites’ which were ‘separated out’.
In such worlds ‘the opposites’ would be in a continual state
of strife, sometimes the one, sometimes the other gaining
the upper hand, but at last ‘they make reparation and satis-
faction to one another for their injustice according to the
appointed time’ ;* the balance is exactly restored, the ‘world’
is destroyed and ‘the opposites’ merged again in the bound-
less. ‘This picturesque description of the birth and death of
worlds passes perhaps a little outside the main problem of
the ultimate matter, but it greatly assists in the understand-
ing of Anaximander’s general notion, and contains the germs
of many cosmogonical ideas which persisted through the
whole of early speculation and take their place in the theories
of the Atomists.

It seems at first sight a retrogression that after the singular
insight of Anaximander AnaximeEnss should have gone back
on the idea that the primary substance was one of the things
known to experience and selected ‘Air’. But an examination
of his theory shows that it was really an advance on Thales
and even on Anaximander himself.3 Anaximander’s diffi-
culty had been that he could not see how any of the known
substances could change into the others, and for this reason
he had spoken of his ‘boundless’ as being neither one nor
the other of them. But if any satisfactory explanation of this
change could be given, it might be possible to return to
a theory less arbitrary and more like that of Thales. This
explanation Anaximenes found in ‘thickening and thinning
out’,t or as we should say, rarefaction and condensation. —
All things were formed of air, but the differences between
them were due to the presence of more or less air in a greater
or less state of compression: in other words the difference
between things was quantitative, not qualitative. ‘The diffi-

* Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (24. 13); D. 9.

* Simpl. in Arist. Pays. A. 2. 184 (24. 26) (Theophrastus); D.A. 5.

Shoce © .G..P3,. 73

4 Simpl. l.c. duagepew 8 pavdryre (also called dpatwous, Plut. Strom.
3; D. 6) Kat muKvornr. Kata Tas odclas.

THE MONISTS

culty of Thales’ theory was avoided and moreover it was now
possible to conceive of a fundamental substance, which was
really homogeneous, while Anaximander’s ‘boundless’,
which contained the ‘opposites’, would seem to have had
the character of a mixture. What then was Anaximenes’
‘air’ and how did he conceive its changes? His notion was
a very delicate one and deserves appreciation. He appears
to have worked from the analogy of the human body. ‘Even
as our soul, which is air, holds us together, so breath and air
encompass the whole world.’* Moreover, he observed the
curious fact that if we breathe out with our lips tightly
pressed the breath feels comparatively cold, but much
warmer, if the mouth be wide open.? From this he drew the
conclusion that air condensed is cold, but rarefied it becomes
hot, and on this fact he founded his theory of the formation
of other things from air. ‘When air is most even (uoddraros
i.e. as we might say, in a normal state), it is invisible to the
sight’,3 and this is the reason that we do not see air as such,
‘but it is made visible by the cold and the hot, the moist
and the moving’, or as we should perhaps more naturally
say, when it becomes hot or cold or moist or moving.
Hence extending his notion gradually beyond our im-
mediate experience of air he could say that ‘when it is thinned
it becomes fire, when thickened, wind and then cloud, and
if still more thickened, water, and then earth, and then
stones’. The theory was indeed based on elementary obser-
vation and then carried by conjecture beyond its limits: on
the one hand the air seemed to ‘thin out’ into the fiery bodies
in the heavens, on the other to thicken into clouds,5 which in
their turn produced rain: it required no great stretch of the
imagination to conceive the process continuing and creating
solid earth and even stones. In his new idea then Anaximenes
had shown not merely how a single homogeneous substance,

* Quoted by Aet.i. 3, 4; D.B. 2.

2 Plut. de Prim. Frig. 7,947 F; D.B. 1. A gt

® Hipp. Ref. 7.2; D.A: 7. 4 Simpl. in Arist. Phys. lic.

5 Hipp. Ref. i. 7. 7. D.A. 7. ovveAOdvra 8€ Kal emt mAciov mayvvOevra
védn yevvaobat Kai odTws els Bdwp weraBdAdew.

3307 Cc

18 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

such as Thales had conceived, might create the rest without
losing its own identity, but had also incidentally accounted
for the creation of Anaximander’s ‘opposites’ without having
to suppose them already existent in the ‘boundless’: hot and
cold, moist and dryare all produced by quantitative difference
in the compression of air. It is not without cause that Anaxi-
menes was regarded in antiquity as the culmination of the
Milesian School,! for though at first sight his theory seems
so much less far-sighted than that of Anaximander, it is
seen ultimately to be a more logical working out of the
fundamental idea of the school and to be free from the
difficulties involved in the theories of both his predecessors.

The Milesian School then had established the main idea
of the single primary substance, out of which all else was
created, had shown that this must be unlimited in extent, and
had suggested various means by which the different sub-
stances of experience might come into being. But though
their theories had thus enunciated principles which were to
prove of great and lasting importance, they were yet beset
with great difficulties, two of which seem to have made
themselves almost immediately felt. In the first place the
assumption that the primary substance exists as something
external to the worlds—an infinite store of matter, as it
were, parts of which might be broken off to form worlds—
is at once unnatural and uneconomical. Secondly, the
Milesians had themselves betrayed a sense of the difficulty
of passing from this one primary substance to the many
things of sensation: Anaximander’s ‘boundless’ containing
the ‘opposites’ could not really be homogeneous, and Anaxi-
menes’ expedient of quantitative difference suggested an un-
reality about other substances which were actually only com-
pressed or rarefied air. It was apparently with these difh-
culties that Heracurrus-of Ephesus set himself primarily
to deal. Though he disclaims all connexion with his pre-
decessors and despises the speculation of philosophers* no
less than the ignorance of the mob, proclaiming himself the

t See E.G. P.3, p. 78.

a frs. 16-18 Bywater ; D.B. 40, 129, 108. 3 fr. 5 Bywater; D.B. 17.

THE MONISTS 7

possessor of a unique secret, which men are yet ‘unable to
understand, when they first hear it’,? it is nevertheless clear
not merely that the Milesians had set him his problem, but
that his solution, for all its originality, has a close kinship
to theirs. The great ‘discovery’ on which Heraclitus so
prides himself was the identity of the One and the Many:
‘out of all one and out of one all’.3 The implication of this
rather cryptic statement must be found in the speculations
of his predecessors: it is not sufficient, Heraclitus says in
effect, to suppose some external One, from which the sub-
stance of the world is supplied; rather it is the world itself
which is One, and its unity is in fact constituted by the very
multiplicity of things, which at first sight seems to destroy
it. In the world, as he insisted, we see perpetual flux and
constant change: ‘all things pass away, and nothing abides’,4
they are like the current of a river, whose water changes at
every moment so that ‘you cannot step into the same river
twice’.5 Yet behind this unceasing flow and constant altera-
tion there is permanence; the ever-shifting things of experi-
ence are but the parts of an abiding whole. Nor again is the
‘strife’, which had seemed to Anaximander an ‘injustice’, in-
consistent with the universal unity: it is indeed its essential
condition; ‘war is the father of all and the king of all’.6 The
world is a ‘harmony of opposing tensions’,’ just as the strain-
ing of its parts against each other and against the hands pro-
duces the efficiency of the bow, and the tension and reaction
of its strings give the harmonious note of the lyre.

So far the ‘discovery’ sounds mystic and its statement
dogmatic, but Heraclitus knew what it meant, and it is

1 fr. 2 Bywater; D.B. 1.

2 It is more difficult to give a succinct account of Heraclitus’ cosmology
than of those of his predecessors. This is not so much due to lack of informa-
tion or the obscurity of his fragments, but because, as Burnet has ably shown,
all the parts of his system—cosmogony, astronomy, psychology, and as far as it
goes, ethics—are closely knit up together and abstraction is consequently ~

_ harder. 3 fr. $9 Bywater; D.B. 10.
4 Plut. Theaet. 152 e; Crat. 401 d, 4024.
5 fr. 41 Bywater; D.B. 91. 6 fr. 44 Bywater; D.B. 53.

1 fr. 45 Bywater; D.B. 51 maAivrpomos dppovin.
c2

20 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

easier to grasp his idea when it is translated into physical
terms. What then is this One which is also All? As the true
successor of the Milesians Heraclitus conceived his One as
| a primary substance out of which everything else was made,
and selected fire: ‘the world was ever and is and shall be
an everliving fire’.t Just as Thales had probably based his
theory of water as the primal matter on the observation of
its changes, and Anaximenes, as we know, had argued for
air on the analogy of the human breath, so without doubt
Heraclitus’ selection of fire was not arbitrary: for the flame
seems at once to illustrate the idea of the single world with
its ever-shifting material. We see the fuel passing into the
flame and disappearing, and at theother end issues the smoke,
yet the flame itself, ever shifting in shape and position, pre-
serves a constant identity as long as fuel is supplied it. So
it is with the world, whose existence Heraclitus conceived
pictorially as ‘an upward and a downward path’,? like the
lap of the Greek racecourse. At the head is the eternal fire
itself, on the downward path,3 as heat becomes extinguished,
the fire changes into moisture, and the moisture in its turn
hardens into earth. Then begins the upward path; the earth
again liquifies into water, and the water evaporating and
passing again into the fire‘ supplies the fuel to keep it ever
alight. How does this process take place? Is it really a
change of matter, so that there is not in fact a single funda-
mental substance, or is it a quantitative change, such as
Anaximander conceived or something else? The answer,
though highly important, is not very easy to give. ‘T'radition$
certainly speaks of ‘thickening and thinning out’ in con-
nexion with Heraclitus’ theory, and Lucretius’® criticism
assumes it, but on the one hand the accounts of Heraclitus

t fr. 20 Bywater; D.B. 30.

2 fr. 69 Bywater; D.B. 60. 3 See DL. tz. 9; D.A. 1.

4 dva0upiacts is the characteristic word used by Heraclitus both of the
process of the ‘upward path’ and of the kindling of the dry light of the soul
(frs. 41, 42 Bywater; D.B. 12).

s So Theophrastus (PAys. Op. 1; D. 475, apud Simpl. in Arist. Phys.
A. 2. 184 (23. 33); D.A. 5) and Diogenes Laertius, l.c. 8.

6 i, 645-54. |

THE MONISTS 21

do not rest on good authority and there has probably been
confusion with the theory of Anaximander, on the other
Lucretius though nominally attacking Heraclitus yet pro-
bably intends to cover the whole of the Monists. More light
can be obtained from certain fragments describing Hera-
clitus’ “cosmology’,’ which seems just to be the concrete
manifestation of the ‘upward and downward path’. The
eternal fire appears in the world as the sun: his fire ‘is first
transformed into sea” through the intermediate stage of the
‘fiery waterspout’,3 which itself is due to the ‘kindling and
extinction of clouds’. Waters then passes into earth (the
process of freezing would act as an indication, as well as the
observation of sea-shells and fossil fish inland attributed to
Xenophanes).° Earth again becomes sea by means of the
rivers, and the sea once more is taken up by evaporation to
pass again into the light of the sun. Thus in the course of
a ‘great year’ the whole world is renewed. The idea is now
far more definite but it is still doubtful whether Heraclitus
could have said whether he conceived the changes as qualita-
tive or quantitative. He would have insisted that the eternal
fire was the one reality, the source and goal of all matter:
other things were not indeed condensed or rarified fire, nor
yet had they independent reality: they existed only in relation
to fire, he might have said, as its fuel or its smoke. :

Throughout the whole world then is this double motion,
to fire and from fire, and it is the exact balance of the move-
ments which preserves the equilibrium of the world and
ensures its eternity: ‘all things are given in exchange for fire,
and fire for all things, even as goods are exchanged for gold
and gold for goods’,7and the permanence of all is preserved
because all things observe their own ‘measures’, ‘the fire is
kindled in due measures and in due measures extinguished’.°

: Burnet’s argument (£. G. P.3, pp. 148 ff.) on this point seems convincing.

2 fr. 21 Bywater; D.B. 31.

3 Ee aaa ne vi. 423-50. 4 Aet. iil. 32.9; D.A. 14.

3 fr. cit. D.B. 31 Oaddoons S€ To pev Hpuov v9, TO Sé Huwov mpnoTnp.

6 Hipp. Ref. 1. 14; Xenophanes D.A. 33.

7 fr. 22 Bywater; D.B. go.

8 fr. 20 Bywater; D.B. 30: cf. fr. 29 Bywater; D.B. 94.

22 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

Nor is this true merely of the world as a whole, but of all
in it. The sea, for instance, is ‘half earth, and half fiery
waterspout’: half of it, that is, is just ceasing to be fire and
becoming sea, the other half is ceasing to be sea and be-
coming earth. If there were not this ‘tension of opposites’,
the world would cease to be: if the upward path, for instance,
were to gain the victory over the downward, all would end
in a great conflagration.’ Thus it turns out that Anaxi-
mander’s ‘opposites’ are in all cases the two aspects of a
single process: ‘the cold is getting warm, the warm cold,
the moist is becoming dry, and the parched is becoming
damp’. And their ‘strife’, the pulling of the two processes
in opposite directions, is in fact just the ‘harmony which
gives the world its permanence’. ‘Homer was wrong in
saying ‘“‘would that Strife might perish from among gods
and men”: if his prayer were heard, all things would pass
away.’ 3

In this somewhat fantastic—or perhaps we should say
mystic—theory Heraclitus felt that he had finally satisfied
the conditions required by his predecessors. He had shown
that there was a primary substance which was yet not external
to the world, that it was in the fullest physical sense One but
that yet the Many were but forms of it, and that the Strife,
which had proved a stumbling-block to Anaximander, was
just the condition of that equilibrium which ensured the
world’s eternity. It was not without cause that he could
look down on the ignorance of the multitude and say that
‘wisdom is apart from other things’. Heraclitus has for us
a double interest; for not only was his theory the culmination
of the Ionian Monism, but long afterwards he became an
object of special veneration to the Stoics, the permanent
rivals of the Epicureans. They perceived naturally enough
in his speculations an anticipation of their own belief in the

t Certain authorities actually attribute the doctrine of the éx7¥pwors to
Heraclitus, but Burnet (£. G. P.3 158 ff.) has shown that it is a hopeless
contradiction of the main principles of his system and must be a Stoic accretion.

2 fr. 39 Bywater; D.B. 126.

3 fr. 43 Bywater. 4 fr. 18 Bywater; D.B. 108.

THE MONISTS 23

‘divine spark of fire’,’ which was alike the ‘soul of the world’
and the soul of man. It was undoubtedly for this reason in
a great measure that Lucretius? selected Heraclitus as the
type of the Monists. Some of his criticism is certainly beside
the mark: he attributes to Heraclitus3 the notion of rare-
faction and condensation and complains that he does not
admit the existence of a void —a point which did not arise
in discussion till after Heraclitus’ day. But in two respects
at least his observations are of value, for they mark the
weakness of the Monist position not merely from an atomic
point of view, and suggest the problems which immediately
arose from it and were to be the material for the work of the
next generation. Firstly, he argues in effect, if the primal
substance is one, other things must differ from it either in
quantity or quality: if in quantity,5 then their own existence
is unreal; you would only get more or less concentrated
‘fire’: if in quality,® then Monism is a delusion, for there are
other existences which are not in fact ‘fire’. Secondly,’ with
a slight shifting of his ground, he complains that to maintain
that everything else is only a disguised form of the one
primary substance, is to attack the validity of the senses: they
recognize ‘fire’, but fail to see that all else is really ‘fire’ too.
As will be seen,® Heraclitus was apparently ready to accept
this position, but it marks the first avowal of scepticism, and
the beginning of the discussion of the source and validity of
knowledge: for the first time ‘wisdom’ declares itself ‘apart
from other things’. :

Among the Monists may best be included a philosopher,
who, although he was in fact the founder of a new school, yet

brought the Monist theory to a culmination, because he

t Unfortunately they also interpreted his doctrines in their own terminology
and even attributed to him ideas which he cannot have held, such as those of
the Adyos and the éxavpwors, and one of the chief difficulties of under-
standing our doxographical tradition about Heraclitus is the necessity for
disentangling Stoic elements: see Burnet.

2 1. 635-704. 3 647 ff. 4.655 ff.

5 650-1. 6 665-71. 7 690-700.

8 Sext. adv. Math. vii. 126; D.A. 16: cf. fr. 132 Bywater; D.B. 46.

See § 4, p. 58.

2.4 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

made it for ever impossible. Parmenipzs of Elea was indeed
one of those thinkers, whose work seems to be mostly
negative: he follows out the old idea to its logical conclusion,
and that conclusion proves impossible for any one to accept;
yet because it shows the weakness of the old, it also sets the
conditions for the new, and may be, as Parmenides’ theory
was, the starting-point of more than one line of inquiry.
While the later Ionians were engaged in their endeavours
to reconcile the existence of the one primary substance with
the many substances of experience, there had been among
them a wandering philosopher, whose thoughts had turned
mostly to religion. The chief work of Xznopuanes of Colo-
phon was his Satires or Silloi, in which he had attached the
old anthropomorphic polytheism of Homer and Hesiod—
the Olympian religion—and proclaimed that there was ‘One
god, the greatest among both gods and men, like unto mortals
neither in form nor in thought’. This was not however,
as it sounds, a proclamation of a monotheistic religion, but
had its direct relation to Ionian physical speculation. The
‘one god’ was in fact, as Aristotle? tells us, the whole world,
and the import of his aphorism was just that, while his con-
temporaries were looking for some external substance—for
he preceded Heraclitus—from which the many might be
supplied, Xenophanes insisted that the world itself was one.

That Parmenides was in any sense a pupil of Xenophanes,
as the doxographers tell us,3 is improbable, but it is quite
likely that the older philosopher in the course of his wander-
ings visited Elea and may have influenced the younger. At
any rate it was this notion of the actual Unity of the World
itself which Parmenides determined to work out to its logical
conclusion. It has been noticed that Heraclitus had already
expressed himself sceptical as to evidence of the senses, and
was inclined to appeal from them to the reason of the mind.
Parmenides threw himself whole-heartedly into this sceptical
position: at the outset of his poems he boldly declares that

B23. 2 Metaphys. A. 5. 986 b.

3 Simpl. in Ar. Phys. A. 2, 184 (22. 27); D.A. 7—derived from
Theophrastus. 4: D.Bi gz.

THE MONISTS as

there are two ‘Ways’, the Way of Truth, which is reached
only by the mind, and the Way of ‘the Opinions of mortals,
in which is no true confidence at all’, which is based upon
sensation. The poem proceeds to expound both ‘Ways’, and
the views of the world at which they respectively arrive,
but it is clear even from such fragments as we possess that
the Way of Truth is alone Parmenides’ own view, the Way
of Opinion is only expounded to show its falsity.1 What then
is the Way of Truth? ‘That It is and that it cannot not be is
the path of Persuasion, who is the companion of Truth, but
that It is not and that it must needs not be, this way I tell
thee is a path wherein is no learning at all. For that which
is not thou canst not know—for that cannot be—no nor
utter it. For the same thing can be thought and can be.”
The main proposition here contained that what is, is, and
what is not, is not, appears at first sight both indisputable
and unprofitable, but the clue to the riddle lies in the last
clause. Parmenides’ test of reality is ‘thought’ (voeiv), or
rather, according to the essentially material notions of early
Greek philosophy, ‘visualization’: ‘for it must needs be that
what can be spoken of and thought is: for it is possible for
it to be, but it is not possible for what is nothing to be’3
What then can be thought or ‘visualized’? Clearly, since
once more the whole train of previous philosophy may be
taken as a sure guide, matter or body. ‘It is’ then means
neither more nor less than the existence of matter or body:
it exists to the full and it alone exists: empty space unoc-
cupied by matter does not exist, empty space is nothing, for
nothing cannot, in Parmenides’ sense, be ‘thought’. In other
words the world is solid body, pure matter, a corporeal
plenum. Here then, Parmenides seems to say, 1s the logical
conclusion of the Ionian hypothesis: if anything is seriously
meant by the statement that the world is one, it must be
that it is a continuous homogeneous body and nothing else.

« For the controversy as to what Parmenides intended by the Way of
Opinion see E. G. P.3, pp. 182 ff., and Cornford, pp. 218 ff.

eID. ay 1. gs 5.

3 D.B.6. I follow Burnet’s interpretation as against Diels.

26 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

Nor does Parmenides shrink from the consequences of his
conclusions, but proclaims them with cheerful confidence.
‘If what is is, it can never have come into being or pass away,
for what can there have been before or after it?" It is
eternal. Indeed what was and what shall be do not exist:
what is, is now: past and future are an illusion and time itself
a dream. Moreover, the world being absolutely continuous
body, ‘itis not divisible, for it is alike all over’ :? the apparent
separation of things from one another is but a fallacy of the
senses. Nor can it move, for motion implies empty space,
which is nothing and does not exist:3 it therefore does not
change and there is no ‘becoming or passing away’,+ no
birth nor death. Nor is it infinite in extent:5 for it is com-
plete in itself and ‘lacks nothing’ outside itself. It is in
fact ‘complete on every side, like in bulk to a perfect sphere,
equal from the centre in every direction’. Parmenides’ world

is thus a finite, eternal, indivisible, immovable, spherical, -

corporeal mass: motion, change, variety, birth, and death,
all that we know by the experience of our senses are mere
delusions. It is no longer strange to learn that he ‘expelled
the senses from the way of Truth’ ;7 for thought had certainly
led to conclusions very far from the ‘opinion’ of the senses.

The theory of Parmenides was indeed the death-blow of
Monism, for it showed conclusively that no further progress
could be made in this direction. The expedients of the later
Ionians for preserving the unchangeable One and at the
same time reconciling it with the ever-changing Many had
been shown to fail, because they in reality involved the
abandonment of the fundamental principle of Unity. The
strict following out of this principle could only lead to a view
of Unity, which was wholly divorced from experience, and
seemed to be entirely devoid of fruitful results. Yet Par-
menides’ theory was in effect a turning-point in the history
of Greek philosophy. It had in the first place shown for
the first time the importance of logical thought: a theory

r D.B. 8, ll. 3-14. 2 Tbid., 1. 22. 3 Ibid., 1. 26.

4 Ibid., 1. 27. 5 Thids Igz. 6 Tbid:,1. 422
7 Ps. Plut. Strom. 5; D.A. 22.

THE MONISTS 27

could not henceforward be accepted, until its full conse-
quences had been thought out and weighed. It was again
the starting-point for further speculations on the part of
Parmenides’ Eleatic disciples, which were to lead along the
peculiar lines of the master’s thought to consequences of
great importance. But above all, it pointed to the inevitable
direction of future development: ‘philosophy must now
cease to be monistic or cease to be corporealist’.* The old
belief in matter as the sole reality, on which Parmenides’
own system rested, was too strong to be broken down yet:
philosophy chose the line of least resistance and ceased to
be monistic. It is not without significance that the view of
the world which Parmenides expounded—or more probably
exposed—in the Way of Opinion, was a dualism, based on
the complementary ‘substances’ of Light and Darkness.

§ 2. The Pluralists—Empedocles

The theory of Parmenides had made it impossible any
longer to maintain the single homogeneous substance as
the primary basis of the world, because the variety and com-
plexity of phenomena could not by this means be accounted
for. Thinkers began to search for a solution on new lines, and
it is not hard to perceive the form which new theories must
take. Indeed it had almost been suggested by the theory
of Heraclitus, whose notion of ‘fire which was not fire’,
when it took the forms of the moist and the solid, was but
a thinly disguised pluralism. If variety could not be pro-
duced by a single primary substance, it might be explained
by the assumption of two or more such substances, which
by their mixture could secure complexity in derivative com-
pounds without themselves altering or losing their primary
homogeneity. Accordingly a number of such theories sprang
up, in which the substances selected by the older philoso-
phers were coupled together in pairs. Lucretius notices’
among such dualistic speculations the combinations of
air and fire (Oenopides of Chios), earth and moisture

t E.G. P3, p. 180. 4 i, 712-13.

28 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

(Xenophanes), and doubtless the changes were rung also on
the other possible conjunctions. Buta dualism did not open
up much greater possibility of variation than the old monism,
and the more complete form of pluralism was soon pro-
pounded by Empspoctss of Agrigentum, who assumed as
the foundation of the world the four ‘primary substances’,
earth, air, fire, and water.’ The striking character of Empe-
docles’ personality, at once politician, physician, prophet,
magician, and mystic, and the great poetical merit of the
work in which he expounded his system, admired? and indeed
imitated long after by Lucretius, have perhaps gained for
his theory a greater fame than it deserves. But it was an
important step in the long dialogue and suggested concep-
tions of lasting value, supplying indeed the main basis for
the physical theory of Aristotle.

Philosophically Empedocles appears to have regarded
himself as a mediator between the system of Parmenides and
the evidence of the senses.3 He admits indeed their in-
security as witnesses of the truth,4 and urges his disciple not
to trust to any one sense rather than another,’ but at the
same time he warns him not to ‘refuse his trust to any of the
bodily parts, by which there is a path for understanding’:
the supremely important thing is to ‘consider everything in
the way in which it is clear’. If we are to press this rather
vague ‘theory of knowledge’, it seems to mean that the
understanding is to be the final judge, but its data must
come through sense, and sense-evidence after careful con-
sideration must be accepted. In this spirit Empedocles takes
Parmenides’ conception of the world and asks in what
respect it must be modified to correspond with the evidence
of the senses. But though Parmenides’ position may be his
immediate starting-point, he also desires without doubt to
place himself in immediate relation with the Ionian Monists.
Of his four ‘primary substances’ Water was the ultimate
matter of Thales; Fire of Heraclitus; Earth played a large

t D.B. 17, 1. 18: see also D.B. 6, where the four substances are introduced
under allegorical names. 2 i. 731-3.

4 Sea PIGIP3, p. 227. 4D Boas 5 J).Bs4, 41-9 &:

THE PLURALISTS—EMPEDOCLES 29

part as a derivative in all the systems, and though Empe-
docles’ Air is no longer the misty or vaporous air (d7jp) of
Anaximenes, but the clear Air of the Atmosphere (aijp), it
was no doubt suggested by it. Further, it may be noticed
that the four new primary substances correspond exactly
to Anaximander’s pairs of opposites, the hot and the cold
(i.e. air), the moist and the dry. Empedocles thus clearly
wished his solution to stand in close connexion with the
speculations of all his prominent predecessors.

The four ‘primary substances’ are all of them, of course,
to be conceived of as purely material or bodily, just_as were
the substances of the Monists. But each of them now is
absolutely homogeneous with itself, indestructible, and un-
changeable: each bears the marks of eternity which Par-
menides had assigned to ‘the whole’. In other words Em-
pedocles had reached the conception of an ‘element’*
(crowyetov): compound things could be separated into matter
which in its turn might be compound, and so on, but ulti-
mately you would come to twoor more of the ‘four’ and beyond
them separation could not proceed. The conception was of
the utmost importance, not only for the Atomic Theory, but
indeed for all future chemical and physical science: though
Empedocles’ ‘elements’ have long ceased to be regarded as
such, the conception still survives. These elements then by
their combinations produced the things of sense: earth
mingling with water, for instance, might make mud, fire and
water vapour and so on. But it soon becomes clear that even
with four elements, the possibilities of difference in com-
pound bodies are greatly limited: this difficulty Empodocles
solved by another of the far-sighted conceptions, which are
really his contribution to knowledge—the elements could
mingle,” he saw, in different proportions. Thus the bones
of animals,3 he thought, were composed of four parts of fire

« Empedocles did not himself use the word, but it is constantly employed
by the critics and doxographers, and it is a considerable economy to follow

them. Ste
2 Gomperz, p. 233, has called attention to the importance of this point.

3 D.B. 96.

ae
30 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

to two of earth and two of water, while in flesh and blood *
the three were mingled in equal proportions. By this means
a far greater variety of combinations was made possible and
indeed Empedocles thought that he could thus account for
the whole infinite complexity of phenomena. What we know
then as the birth and death of things is a delusion, in so far
as it implies an actual coming of something into being and
an annihilation: for, as he says, laying down definitely for
the first time the great principle which was really assumed
even in the speculation of his predecessors and was to be
handed on to the Atomists: ‘it cannot bethat anything should
be created out of that which is not at all, and that that which
is should utterly perish is impossible and unheard of’,?
Therefore ‘there is no birth of any of mortal things, no, nor
any end of accursed death, but only the mingling and change
of things mingled, and the name of birth is given to this by
men’.3 The apparent creation of a new thing is only the
coming together of ‘elements’ which before were separate,
or a shifting of their positions (SudAAagis) so as to form a
different compound: this again is a conception which was
to be very fruitful in future speculation. Moreover, since
‘no part of the whole is empty or overfull’,+ since, that is,
there is no space (the influence of Parmenides is again
visible) and matter is equally distributed over the whole,
the ‘shifting of positions’ must be regarded as a kind of
kaleidoscopic change, in which the bits of the various ele-
ments take each other’s places, much as matter has some-
times been conceived to move in ‘ether’. All creation and all
dissolution is but’a readjustment of the positions of the
particles of the four ‘elements’.

Such is the general trend of Empedocles’ theory, in which
the influence of the recently established studies of physiology
and medicine is clear enough, leading to an interest in the
structure of individual substances and bodies no less than

1 D.B. 98. These examples illustrate the growing interest in physiology

and medicine, which had a still greater influence, as will be seen, on the
theories of Empedocles’ contemporary Anaxagoras.

2 D.B. 12. 3 \D.B. 8. 4 D.B. 33:

THE PLURALISTS—EMPEDOCLES 31

in the macrocosm of the universe. But Empedocles, like
his predecessors, threw his theory into the picturesque form
of a great world-process, and it is necessary to consider this
briefly, as it exhibits more clearly his relation to previous
thinkers and especially to Parmenides. Like him Empe-
docles conceived of the world as a sphere, ‘the spherical
and round, rejoicing in its circular solitude’.' Within this
sphere in origin were all the elements in perfect mixture,
mingling one with another in harmony, and as yet there was
nothing of a world such as we know, ‘there neither the swift
limbs of Helios are descried, no, nor the shaggy might of
earth nor the sea’.? There was no ‘division nor unrighteous
strife in his (the world’s) limbs, but he was equal on every
side and quite boundless’s—unlike the limited sphere of
Parmenides. But besides the four ‘elements’, Empedocles
imagined two other existences, which from his usual manner
of speaking of them,‘ he clearly conceived of as equally cor-
poreal, ‘accursed Strife, equal in weight everywhere, and
Love equal in length and breadth’; the scrupulous reference
to weight, length, and breadth seems to proclaim them as
the same in kind with the ‘elements’. Of these two Love is
that which makes for harmony, that is, ‘the union of un-
likes’ (there seems to be a trace of Heraclitus’ influence
here), and Strife that which makes for discord, the separation
of unlikes and the union of like to like. All the six sub-
stances were equal and eternal: ‘for all these are equal and
alike in years, and each has rule over his own prerogative,
and to each is his own character. And besides these there is
nought that cometh into being or passeth away... . They
are themselves and nought else (i.e. perfectly pure), but
running through one another (i.e. mingling) they become

: DB. 27,1. 4. 2 Ibid., l. 2.

4D. Be 273,' 22.
4 e.g. D.B. 17, Il. 19, 20, which follow immediately after the list of the

four ‘elements’ and suggesting no trace of a distinction in kind between them
and Love and Strife.

s Once again the influence of physiology is apparent as Empedocles ex-
pressly says (1. 22) that Love is ‘she who is known as implanted in the limbs

of mortals’.

32 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

now one thing, now another, yet are ever unceasingly
alike.’' In the original period of the perfect mixture Love
is wholly within the Sphere, mingling with the four and
causing their mingling with one another: Strife on the other
hand is wholly outside it on the ‘extreme bounds of the
circle’. But in course of time in accordance with the
‘mighty oath’3 of destiny, ‘when Strife had grown to great-
ness in the limbs of the god’, that is, had begun to make its
way from outside into the mixture, then ‘all the limbs of the
god were shaken in turn’. The mixture began to separate
out into its constituent elements, and like to join like:
‘earth increases its own bulk, and air increases air’,5 and
Love which had held the mixture together was gradually
driven out of the Sphere. When the process was complete
and Strife reigned supreme, the four ‘elements’ would be
wholly distinct. ‘hen would set in the reaction: Love would
come back and Strife retire, so that the unlike would again
unite with unlike, until at last it returned once more to the
perfect mixture from which it started. Thus it will be seen
that there are four recurring stages in the world’s history,
(1) perfect Love, (2) Strife prevailing, (3) perfect Strife,
(4) Love prevailing. Now a world of mortal things like ours
could not come into being in the first and third periods,
either when all the ‘elements’ were completely mixed or
when they were absolutely separated: it can be created and
exist only in the second and fourth periods, the intermediate
times, when both forces are at work: ‘twofold is the birth
of mortal things and twofold its passing away: for one genera-
tion the coming together of all things brings to birth and
destroys, and the other is nourished and scattered as they
spread apart again.” Empedocles went into great detail of
the differences in creation at these two periods, describing
for instance in the case of animals how in the period when
Love was gradually gaining the upper hand over Strife,
separate limbs would be created which joined themselves
in fantastic combinations,’ but when Strife was vanquishing

+ D.B. 17 lie? i 2D. Bags. ae: 3 D.Bu30. 4 D:Bogt:
S73 .237- ° DR Ale 1 DBA 66.

THE PLURALISTS—-EMPEDOCLES 33

Love, indistinguishable and sexless beasts appeared, which
gradually separated into distinction of sex and kind. It is
not worth while to follow out these ingenious but rather
grotesque speculations, but it is worth noting that Empe-
docles probably placed our present world in the second
period, when Strife was entering in and separating the
previously mixed elements.

Lucretius’ criticism of Empedocles and the pluralists—
even if considerable latitude of generalization be allowed
him on the understanding that he is dealing with a ‘school’
and not a single theory—is on the whole of less value than
his comment on the Monists. The complaints that they
assume motion without allowing empty space,’ and that they
permit infinite division,? which ultimately spells destruction,
are really anachronistic and are delivered from the Atomist

oint of view, and a large section of comment} is more applic-
able to the theory of Heraclitus than to that of Empedocles.
But there are at least two criticisms which are cogent and
help us to estimate the true position of Empedocles. In the
first place he argues that the four primal substances are too
‘soft’4 (mollia) to act as a basis to the world: we are familiar
with earth, air, fire, and water and we see them constantly
changing and perishing: the real primal substances cannot
be like in constitution to the ‘mortal’ things of experience.
Secondly he maintains that,° if these four ‘elements’ actually
change into other things, then they are not real elements, but
if they always retain their nature in combination, then they
can make nothing else but themselves: in other words, there
is still the same difficulty as there was with Monism; you
cannot account for change and complexity without destroy-
ing the immutable character of the elements. These two
criticisms taken together do in fact exhibit the real weakness
of the theory of the ‘four elements’. On the one hand it has
destroyed the old idea of fundamental unity, for it leaves the
world fourfold in character, and the permanence of its new
basis is very doubtful: on the other hand its pluralism is not

1 i, 742 ff. 2 746 ff. 3 782 ff.
4753 ff. 3 763 ff.
3307 D

34 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

thoroughgoing enough, for it is in reality no easier to explain
the world as we know it with four ‘elements’ than with one.
The true solution must at once offer a greater permanence
and unity, it must be more Monistic; and it must also afford
far greater possibilities of complex combination and conse-
quent variety, it must be an infinitely more genuine plu-
ralism. Yet Empedocles’ theory was at least a step out of the
Parmenidean impasse: it showed the direction in which
speculation must now move and suggested incidentally a
number of new interests and novel conceptions, which were
to be of lasting value.

§ 3. The Pluralists—Anaxagoras

The highly ingenious and in many ways far-sighted theory
of Anaxagoras of Clazomenae, who although Empedocles’
senior in years,' published his work later, stands in a sense
alone in the history of Greek scientific thought. No other
theory directly led up to it, and, as far as we know, he had
no followers. Yet on the one hand it very markedly brought
speculation a stage nearer Atomism, on the other it was
equally clearly the outcome of the conditions of thought in
his time. Empedocles had shown that the only hope of
progress lay in abandoning a strict Ionian monism, which
Parmenides’ logic had shown to be impossible, and assuming
a pluralism in the ultimate constituents. The world of
sensible things, with all its variety and movement and change,
could not be accounted for by the postulate of a single con-
tinuous substance underlying them: it could better be ex-
plained by supposing four ultimate elements. Yet even they
were not sufficient, a more thoroughgoing pluralism was
required. Anaxagoras? was prepared to meet this require-
ment without reserve, his pluralism was absolutely com-
plete: ‘he said that the first-beginnings were infinite’.3 We

t Arist. Metaphys. A. 3.984; D.A. 43 TH ev HAtKia mpdtepos av Tov-
Tov, Tots 8° €pyous Uorepos, azrelpous eivat Pyou Tas apxds.

2 It will be noticed that in many points my account of Anaxagoras’ theory

differs from those ordinarily given : I have attempted to justify it in Appendix I.
3'Seem7.

THE PLURALISTS-~ANAXAGORAS 35

_ are no longer, that is, to think of the primary existence as
a single mass of homogeneous substance, nor even of four
such masses capable of breaking up and intermingling with
one another in different proportions, but rather of an un-
limited number of small particles. Nor are these ‘seeds’ of
things homogeneous in substance and quality, but again
almost infinitely different—for there are ‘seeds’ correspond-
ing to every known form of corporeal matter. In other words
all existing things are formed of ‘particles like to wholes’
(Gpovomeperar), so that, as Lucretius' explains in the rather
crude form in which he first sets out the theory, ‘he thinks
that bones are made of very small and tiny bones and flesh of
small and tiny pieces of flesh, and blood is created of many
drops of blood coming together in union, and that gold
again can be built up of grains of gold, and the earth grow
together of little earths, that fire is made of fires and water
of water-drops, and all the rest he pictures and imagines in
the same way’. This is the utmost limit of pluralism in a
double sense: for not merely are the particles infinite in
number (and indeed every particle is infinitely divisible’),
but there is almost infinite variety in the nature of their
substance—a variety only limited by that of the world of
experience: the old notion of unity seems to be thrown to
the winds. Nor again, if this simple and reckless pluralism
were the whole truth of Anaxagoras’ view, would it account
at all, as Lucretius} points out, for the phenomena of change:
for if bread, for instance, be entirely composed of minute
particles of bread-substance and nothing else, how can it
ever, when we eat it, become, as it clearly does, our flesh
and blood?

Now it was exactly this question of the phenomena of
change which was Anaxagoras’ own great interest: for the
physiological and medical investigations of the new schools
of Magna Graecia and Sicily had transferred the scene of
action, as it were, from heaven to the human body, and
~ focussed attention on alteration and development. At the
same time the logical monism of Parmenides was still influ-

1 {4,835 ff. 2 D.B. 3, see below, p- 37- 3 859 fF.

D2

36 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

ential enough to secure the recognition as the very starting~
point of inquiry of the principle of the permanence of matter:
‘nothing is created out of nothing’. If then Anaxagoras’
theory is to be rightly understood, it must be viewed much
more as an attempt to reconcile the observed changes of
matter with an assured underlying permanence than as a
protest in favour of complete pluralism against the Monism
of the Ionians and the tentative advance of Empedocles. For
it is indeed a far more subtle speculation than it is repre-
sented as being by Lucretius and most of its modern critics.
Anaxagoras faithfully repeats the ultimate principle of Par-
menides, ‘it is impossible, he says, for what is not to be’,? but
from this premise he is led to a conclusion very different
from that of Parmenides. He applied the principle at once
in the field of physiology. There he observed that the food
which we eat is apparently transformed into flesh, blood,
bones, and so on, and he asked himself how this can be.?
In appearance the process involves the perishing of one
substance and the creation of another, but this is inconsistent
with the root-principle: ‘how’,3 he exclaims in one of the
few extant fragments, ‘could hair be created out of what is
not hair or flesh out of what is not flesh?’ It is impossible, and
the only explanation of the phenomenon is that hair and
flesh and the rest must already have been present in the food.
With this start Anaxagoras constructed a theory of the con-
stitution and behaviour of the universe and all it contains,
based on the widest possible extension of the conclusion he |
had thus reached: ‘there is a portion (uotpa) of everything
in everything’.* It seemed to him as he saw the vast number
of apparent transformations of substance in the world around
him that everything must have in it the potentiality of chang-
ing into anything else, and this could only be the case if it
already contained everything in itself.

But at this point his theory appeared to be contradicted
by the evidence of the senses. We observe concrete things

t D.B. 3.

a Simpl. in Arist. PAys. I’. 4. 203; D.A. 45: cf. Aet.i. 3. 53 D.A. 46.
3 D.B. 10. 4 Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2.184 (27.2); D.A. 41.

THE PLURALISTS—ANAXAGORAS 37

as homogeneous wholes. If we take a piece of bread and
crumble it up even into minute particles, these particles
remain bread and nothing else. But if the reason why bread
when eaten can produce flesh and blood is in truth that it
- already contains them, then, as Lucretius‘ urged in his naive
criticism, we ought to perceive drops of blood when we
grind corn, and milk when we cut up the grass on which
the cattle graze: how is it that we do not? Because, answered
Anaxagoras, ‘everything is and was most manifestly (év8yad-
tara) those things of which it has most in it’.? _It is quite true
that bread contains in it portions of everything, but because
the portions of bread greatly exceed in number and bulk
those of any other thing, it has throughout the appearance
and character of bread and nothing else. The subordinate
portions, even those of the bodily substances which bread
may become, are so minute and so scattered in among the pre-
vailing portions of bread, that they not merely are not per-
ceived but never could be perceptible or manifest (évyAa)—
they are, in fact, as a later commentator puts it in his own
. phraseology only, ‘perceptible in thought’.3

Here Anaxagoras might well have stopped, and indeed
many critics think he did, but his thought was nothing if
not thoroughgoing. Just as he extended his discovery that
portions of bodily substances were latent in food to the wide
generalization that there is a portion of everything in every-
thing, so here having noted that the smallest perceptible
particle of bread was still bread, he pushed his view to its
logical conclusion. There is, he held, no limit to division:
‘there is no least of what is small, but always a smaller’; you
can go on dividing and dividing and never reach a particle
so minute that after it you come to nothing: ‘there are an
equal number of portions in the great and the small s for
in both the portions are infinite. This acceptance of infinite
divisibility creates a new difficulty: for how then can there
still be portions of ‘everything in everything’? If you only

ry, 881. 2 Simpl. in Arist. PAys. l.c.
: eh a Aet. i. 3. 5; D.A. 46. Poe

38 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

go on dividing long enough you must come to particles of
pure bread or pure flesh or blood. If Anaxagoras had had
no other idea of composition than mere juxtaposition, there
would be no escape from this difficulty: infinite division
would be incompatible with the belief in ‘everything in
everything’ : for sooner or later, though it might be far below
the ken of the senses, you must reach particles which will no
longer contain everything, indeed ultimately particles which
will be but one thing. Modern critics have adopted many
expedients to escape from this impasse, but there is, as far
as I can see, only one way out of it and that is the supposition
that the ultimate constitution of things is not a mere juxta-
position of particles, but a fusion in which the identity
of the individual particle is merged in the identity of the
whole; not, touse Anaxagoras’ own terms, amere combination
(cdyxpuois), but a mixture (ovpjugis). There is good evidence*
to show that this was in fact Anaxagoras’ solution. In the ulti-
mate constitution of matter ‘all things’ were mixed together
in a fusion, and the concrete world of experience consists of
substances made up of bits of this fusion combined not now
in a fresh fusion, but in juxtaposition. These bits, which
Anaxagoras called ‘the seeds’ of things, or more technically
the ‘homoeomeries’, were not, of course, like the atoms of the
later theory, irreducible minima: they might be split up
and divided to infinity, but seeing that they contained “all
things’ in fusion, however much they might be so divided,
the very smallest particle would still contain all things, would
still be a ‘seed’ or ‘homoeomery’. Thus the principle of
infinite division was made reconcilable with the belief that
‘there is a portion of everything in everythi¥g”.

The ‘things’ thus fused in the ‘seeds’ were just the con-
crete substances of the world of sense, and at this point
Anaxagoras shows that he wished his theory to embrace the
ideas of his predecessors: for included among these ‘things’
are the ‘opposites’ of Anaximander, the cold and the hot,
the moist and the dry, and so on, and the elements of Empe-
docles, as well as all other substances, bone, flesh, gold,

t See Appendix I.

THE PLURALISTS—-ANAXAGORAS 39

wood, rock, &c., which are met with in the experience of
sense. But the seeds, though all absolutely alike in being
a fusion of all things, differed in character according to
proportions in which the ‘things’ were fused in them: there
would thus be a ‘gold-seed’, for instance, containing the
fusion of all things, but dominated by the presence of gold,
a ‘bone-seéd’ in which bone was in the ascendant: once again
each ‘seed’ ‘is those things of which it has most of it’. And
in this difference of character between seed and seed lies the
explanation of the phenomena of change. The compound
body consists of ‘seeds’ united in combination (odyxpuos):
once again in the compound there are ‘seeds’ of all things,
but its character is determined by the prevailing ‘seed’:
bread has seeds in which every other ‘thing’ in turn prevails,
but the majority of its ‘seeds’ are those in which bread pre-
vails, and the other ‘seeds’, minute and scattered, are latent
and never perceptible, so that the whole has the character
of bread. Nor are the alien ‘seeds’ equal in number: there
are more ‘seeds’ of one kind than another even among those
in a minority: more of those substances into which the whole
substance is liable to change, or rather which it is able to

roduce out of itself, and fewer of others. Bread has most
‘bread-seeds’, then next most of ‘flesh-seeds’ and ‘“bone-
seeds’, and so on, and very few, say, of ‘gold-seeds’ and
‘rock-seeds’. Hence when violent external force is applied,
as in the process of eating, the alien ‘seeds’ are ‘separated
out’ (éxxpiverar) from the compound substance and joining
the like-seeds in the body become part of a new substance
in which now they are in turn the prevailing ‘thing’. In this
way it is possible to understand the apparent birth of a new
substance without imagining it to be created out of the non-
existent: birth is only the breaking up (Sudxprors) of a previous
compound and the union of the latent ‘seeds’ in it in a new
compound (ovyxpwis). The theory is subtle and complicated
but clear: the individual ‘seeds’ (onéppara) have portions
(wotpar) of all things in fusion, but in each some one thing
prevails: the compound body is formed of seeds in juxta-
position, but in each body ‘seeds’ of one kind are in the

40 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

majority with others latent among them themselves varying
in number and kind. By this highly ingenious system, which
has been greatly misinterpreted by his critics, Anaxagoras
felt that he had satisfied the conditions required of it: he
had accounted for variety and change without destroying
ultimate permanence by the admission of creation or
destruction.

Like Empedocles, Anaxagoras was not content with his
physical system without working it out in an account of the
universe and the creation of ordered worlds from it. It is
the more important to consider this briefly, because not only
have we more copious information about it than about other
parts of the system, but it is in fact the necessary antecedent
of the physical theory: without it the notion of the ‘seeds’,
their character and combinations would bea merely arbitrary
assumption. The ‘ultimate substance’ of the universe, in
Anaxagoras’ view, is just the original fusion (ue?yya) of the
portions of all things: ‘all things were together infinite in
bulk and in smallness: for the small too was infinite. And
since all things were together, no one thing was manifest
owing to its smallness’.‘ The fusion was complete, and the
fused particles of all things indistinguishable. Yet even
here, though every part of the fusion contained all things,
different ‘things’ prevailed in different parts, and in the
mixture as a whole ‘mist and sky ruled, for they are the
greatest in the universe both in bulk and size’: the universal
fusion, that is, was, like all other things, ‘those things of
which it had most in it’. But there was one ‘thing’ which did
not enter into the universal fusion, and this was ‘Mind’
(vois),* which Anaxagoras conceived of as a corporeal sub-
stance, much of the ‘same nature as Empedocles’ Love and
Strife. “Mind’ remained ‘alone by itself’, not that it was apart
altogether from the mixture, but though it was dissemi-
nated in it, it did not fuse with the other ‘things’ but kept
pure. “Mind’, then, wherever it was present caused a move-
ment of extreme swiftness,3 which took the form of a rota-
tion,‘ first of all of a small portion of matter, then of more

“DB 5: <D,. Beit 2: 3 D.Bi.g: 4 DB.

THE PLURALISTS—ANAXAGORAS 41

and more in an ever-increasing whirl. As the result of this
movement bits of the fused mass were caught up in the whirl
and ‘separated off’, and these bits were of course the ‘seeds’.
Each portion as being a part of the fusion contained every-
thing, but according to the part of the mass from which it
came, differed in its prevailing thing: the portions separated
off were thus the ‘seeds of all things, having every kind of
form and colour and savour (:/80))’.! The next step is that
the ‘seeds’ are separated apart from one another:? those of
different kinds tended to come away from one another.
Then like joined like:3 ‘seeds’ of the same kind came to-
gether and formed the compound bodies of the world; yet
not even then were they absolutely alone but took with them
in lesser proportions ‘seeds’ of all other things. The newcom-
pound body contains again ‘seeds’ of all things, but is ‘that
of which there is most in it’. The detailed process of world-
formation is like that described by earlier thinkers, but has
Anaxagoras’ own stamp: the first things! to be separated off
are mist and sky, which prevailed in the original fusion.
Then ‘from clouds water is separated off, from water
earth, and from earth stones are solidified by the cold’.5
Gradually these separated elements began to form them-
selves into a world, ‘the dense and the moist and the cold
and the dark come together where the earth is now, and
the thin and the warm and the dry (and the light) went out
to the farther part of the ether’ and these formed the
heavenly bodies. Thus our world was created and of course
a similar process is taking place in other parts of the universe
as well, nor is even our world complete, for ‘the rotation
goes on and will go on more and more’.’ Not only then ts
there a complete parallelism between the nature of the
macrocosm and that of the ‘seed’, but the nature of the ‘seed’
is the necessary outcome of its origin as a casual fragment
of the universal fusion, broken off in the whirl. mt
Lucretius’ criticism of Anaxagoras is largely vitiated by
his misunderstanding of its true import. Starting, as was

: D.B.4,§1. a2 DiB: £32 3 D.B. 14. 4 D.B. 2.
5 D.B. 16. 6 D.B. 15. 7 DB. 12:

42 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

seen above, from the notion that Anaxagoras’ main conten-
tion was that compound things were constituted of particles
‘each exactly resembling the whole’ (a misinterpretation of
homoeomeria), he then charges him with trying to avoid
the difficulty of change by the poor expedient of supposing
that ‘all things are mingled in all things’,” and criticizing
this idea in its crudest form complains that in that case sub-
stances ought to give some indication of the alien matter
which they contain. But, as has been shown, it was just this
question of change which was Anaxagoras’ primary interest
and the theory which he proposed to meet it was far more
subtle than the naive ‘expedient’ suggested by Lucretius.
Whether it was that Epicurus and his followers felt that
Anaxagoras’ theory was dangerously like their own and in
their efforts to discredit it intentionally distorted its meaning,
we cannot tell: in any case their traditional criticism is beside
the mark. There is, however, one point in Lucretius’ attack
which is of interest and value. He complains once more,’
as he did in the case of Empedocles, that the primary particles
which Anaxagoras supposed, being like in character to com-
pound things, are ‘too feeble’ (ximis imbecilla). Here he
touches on a real weakness in the theory: if ultimate particles
are to be permanent they cannot be like in character to the
things which are constantly coming into being and passing
away: as Anaximander saw long before, the primary sub-
stance cannot be ‘water or air or fire or anything else’. Such
criticism leads at once to an atomic conclusion: if primary
particles are to be the secret of creation, they must be, like
Anaximander’s ‘boundless’, something lying behind all
created things, different from and prior to them all.

The theory of Anaxagoras takes us from the infinitely
great to the infinitely small. No longer does he set up as the
ultimate matter some one all-pervading substance, but an
infinite number of minute particles, each in their turn con-
taining infinitely tinier ‘portions’ of all concrete things fused
together in a homogeneous whole. Ionian Monism is com-
pletely deserted and the half-hearted pluralism of Empe-

9.875 f- 2 i, 847 ff.

THE PLURALISTS—ANAXAGORAS 43

docles is scouted as insufficient to account alike for the
variety of things and for the changes of experience. With the
adoption of an infinite pluralism the way is definitely pre-
pared for Atomism. Yet for all its nearness in this respect,
the theory of Anaxagoras is in others the very antipodes of
Atomism. Anaxagoras wholly abandoned any thought of
fundamental unity, except in so far as all the ‘seeds’ had once
been part of a single universal fusion of ‘everything’. It was
the distinguishing note of Atomism to return once more to
a fundamental unity, not by seeking, as did the earlier philo-
sophies, for a single ultimate ‘nature’, but by postulating an
absolute homogeneity of substance in the infinite particles
and referring variety to difference in their shape and com-
binations. Anaxagoras again insisted on infinite division:
so great was his fear of admitting a dissolution which might
result in annihilation that he postulated an infinite progress
to smaller and smaller. Atomism, believing permanence to
be as essential to a right conception of the universe as unity
insisted on a minimum: unless there were a limit to division,
annihilation, it held, must result, because there could be no
stability. The contrasts of the two systems are instructive *
the very logical completeness of Anaxagoras’ theory sug-
gested the points in which it was practically untenable. After
all, for all its ingenuity and consistency, the theory 1s com-
plicated and arbitrary: it must make way for a system at once
more economical and more acceptable to common sense.

It is well at this point to pause for a moment in order
briefly to summarize the progress of thought hitherto and
to consider what was the main problem which lay before the
contemporaries of Anaxagoras. The original question of
Thales ‘what is the ultimate matter of which the world is
composed?’ had led to a series of answers so varied and com-
plex that it is not easy at once to disentangle the thread of
logical advance which does in fact run through these varied
speculations. In the first stages a strong feeling—in origin
doubtless religious—had led thinkers to proclaim the funda-
mental unity of the world and to look for it in some one

44 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

homogeneous and continuous substance. But it was soon
realized that this insistence on the physical reality of the
One made it impossible to explain the normal appearance
of the Many: if there is but one substance, how can there be
variety and change? To obviate this difficulty various ex-
pedients were suggested—a boundless indefinite substance
outside the world, which, when its nature is analysed, appears
to be more like a mixture of many things than one, or a
process of rarefaction and condensation, which however will
not produce the Many, but only more or less of the One.
Similarly the ‘upward and downward path’ of Heraclitus
is seen to be little else than a disguised pluralism, and the
strict logic of Parmenides shows that if the doctrine of the
One is to be seriously maintained, it involves the denial of
all the most common experiences of sensation, of the separa-
tion and division of things, of motion and of change.

Monism is accordingly abandoned and experiments made
in pluralistic theories. At first, with Empedocles, pluralism
seemed not to go far enough: for while on the one hand it
had successfully destroyed the fundamental unity, yet it
could not sufficiently account for multiplicity and change.
To meet this comes the infinite pluralism of Anaxagoras,
which in a most uneconomical theory of the ultimate nature
of the world, seems to sweep away altogether any idea of an
underlying unity.

It is clear that thought cannot stop here: a more satis-
factory theory must be evolved. What is required is a system
which can in some way reconcile this ‘strife of opposites’
which has run through the whole debate. It must establish
a pluralism which will explain variety and change, yet pre-
serve a fundamental unity: it must allow separation and
division, yet insist on permanence: it must maintain the
infinity and eternity of the universe, yet explain the creation
and destruction of a limited world. In short, as the.Eleatic
Melissus observed, stoutly maintaining the Parmenidean
Monism against the ideas of the pluralists: ‘if there were
many, they would be bound to be each one of them such as

t D.B. 8.

THE PLURALISTS—ANAXAGORAS 45

I say the one is’: the only kind of pluralism is one in which
each particle may have the unity and permanence of the
Parmenidean whole. This, as Burnet! has pointed out, is in
reality the exact formula of Atomism, and the way is now
prepared for Leucippus.

§ 4. Subordinate Problems

Hitherto the theories of the early philosophers have been
considered only in so far as by their main ideas they led up
to the central notion of Atomism. But side by side with
these main ideas there had gradually developed a mass of
speculation dealing with many topics more or less closely
related to them and spreading, as almost every philosopher
in turn added some new sphere of investigation, over a wide
field of thought and inquiry. It has already been necessary to
observe how they all supplemented their general notion of
the universe with some more or less exact speculation as to
the process by which the world was created, speculation
which in many cases throws considerable light on the main
idea of the ultimate form of existence. Not content with
this from the first they elaborated their notions of the world
with a wealth of usually disconnected conjectures as to the
causes of individual phenomena terrestrial and celestial.
Even Thales is credited with views on such diverse topics
as the causes of eclipses, of the Nile flood, and of the action
of the magnet, and very soon every respectable philosopher
was expected to have his views as to the disposition and move-
ments of the heavenly bodies, meteorological phenomena and
a variety of normal and abnormal occurrences on earth. Soon
too speculation arose as to certain wider and more vital
problems more closely related to the main developments of
thought. Worlds, it was held, or at any rate our world was
_ developed out of a primary substance or substances or fusion :

what was the ultimate cause which set the process in motion?
Or again, when the answers of philosophers as to the con-
stitution of the universe became more and more remote from

: E.G. Ps, p. 328.

46.” THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

the apparent experience of everyday life, they asked, not
unnaturally, what is the source of our knowledge? Does it
come through the senses or by thought? And this led to the
kindred question, what is the nature of our senses and our
mind and what is their relation to the outer world and to its
ultimate truths? With the great mass of speculations relating
to terrestrial and celestialt phenomena it would be outside
the scope of the present work to attempt to deal: for al-
though they too find their place in the theories of the Atom-
ists and Epicurus and must be briefly considered there, they
lie for the most part outside the main current of thought, and
conjecture is usually so sporadic that previous ideas cannot
in any definite way be said to have led up to the views of
Leucippus and Democritus. On the other hand the broader
problems of the ultimate cause, the processes of perception
and thought and the theory of knowledge lie so close to the
main questions and played so large a part in the views of the
Atomists and above all of Epicurus, that it is necessary to
make some attempt to gather up shortly the threads of
previous speculation.

A. The efficient cause.

The question of the efficient cause of the creation of a
world or worlds out of the primary substance did not at
once emerge into prominence as a scientific problem. This
apparent reticence on a point which afterwards became of
primary importance is no doubt due to the origin of philo-
sophy in religion? The primary substance is itself regarded
at first not as so much inanimate matter which must be
worked on by an outside power and set in motion in order
to produce change and so creation, but rather as a kind of
living thing with half-mysterious powers, which by the force
which isinitcan move andchange. ‘Everything’,3said Thales
in this spirit, ‘is full of gods’, for he thought, as Aristotle

1 For speculations on astronomical and meteorological subjects see espe-
cially O. Gilbert, Die meteorologischen Theorien des griechischen Alterthums.

2 See Cornford, op. cit., and especially pp. 4 ff. .

3 Arist. de Anima, A. 5. 411a; D.A. 22.

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 47

explains, that ‘soul is mingled in the whole’: the primary
substance is indeed not merely the body out of which the
world is made, but also the soul which animates and moves
it. And this semi-theological attitude persisted throughout
the speculations of the pre-Atomic philosophers, more or
less prominent according to the personal bent of the indivi-
dual thinkers, but never wholly abandoned. Thus Xeno-
phanes, the bitter opponent of traditional mythology, yet
speaks of the world, whose intrinsic unity he proclaimed,
as ‘one god’, and the same theological conception is apparent
in the ‘perfect sphere’ of Parmenides. But side by side with
this theological notion, as it were painfully emerging from
it by degrees, arises the more strictly scientific conception
of the world, in which it was felt that causes must be sought
for in phenomena themselves regarded as a natural and not
a supernatural manifestation. It is not easy to trace the
growth of the scientific idea, partly because it never wholly
separates itself from religion, and partly because no steady
development can be found in a series of philosophers whose
points of view at all periods differed so widely that a recent
writer' has felt justified in distinguishing a scientific from
a mystic tradition among them. Our authorities too are
vague on the point, but we can at least discover the main
ideas which were current and so realize the problem which
lay before the more definitely materialist thinkers of the
Atomic School. Nothing is more remarkable than the com-
plex interaction of the two impulses, religious and scientific,
and the strange contrasts of attitude which they exhibit.
The Milesian thinkers are at once nearest in time to the
early religious conceptions out of which philosophy springs,
and also the most determined in their efforts to get free from
it. With all of them the primary substance is described in
definitely material terms, the ‘water’ of Thales, the ‘air’ of
-Anaximenes, even the ‘boundless’ of Anaximander, which,
as has been seen, is to be regarded as a material body inter-
mediate in nature between what were later known as the
elements. And so, when we look among the records of their
* Cornford, op. cit.

48 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

theories for a trace of the efficient cause of creation, we find
similarly that it is stated to be ‘eternal motion’. Here at
the outset of speculation is an idea which was to be of lasting
value: the primary substance is regarded as something which
in its own nature is static, and it is the action of motion upon
it which causes the breaking up and mingling and revolution
which gives rise to the creation of ordered worlds (xdéopor).
We seem too to be dealing with a definitely physical concep-
tion, intended to explain creation as the work of natural
causes working within material body. And yet, if examina-
tion is to be pressed a little farther, the result does not appear
by any means so certain. In the first place, as Burnet? has
shown in the case of Anaximander, it is not likely that the
Milesians themselves spoke of ‘eternal motion’: this is rather
the interpretation of their ideas in the terminology of a later
age, accustomed to look to motion as the cause of change.
In the second, even if they had the idea of motion as the
immediate efficient cause, it is clearly necessary to go behind
it and ask ‘what was the cause of the motion?’ We cannot
in the case of the Milesians give any definite answer, but
if Anaximander’s own account of the process of creation be
examined, hints may certainly be discovered of a rather
different underlying conception. The ‘opposites’ “separate
out’ from the ‘boundless’ and the world is maintained in
equilibrium by their strife duly held in balance; ‘they make
reparation and satisfaction to one another for their injustice
according to the appointed time’.3 This language, as Corn-
ford+ has pointed out, is really animistic, if not definitely
theological: its mythical counterpart is to be found in the
legends of the division of the universe between the gods, and
the real underlying idea is that of ‘due portion’ (po%pa).
We seem then to have a physical conception set, as it were,
in a religious background, but implicitly, at any rate, the
notion of a primary motion has been established.

« Kivnots aidvos. Of Anaximander, Hipp. Ref. i. 6. 2; D. 11; of Anaxi-
menes, Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (24. 26); D.A. 5.
eM Ged 3, po OF.

3 Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2, 184 (24. 13); D. 9. 4 pp. 10 ff

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 49

The arbitrary and almost mystic theory of Heraclitus
might well prepare us to find in him a definitely religious
conception of the efficient cause. It is therefore at first sight
} astonishing that the doxographers' attribute to him the
notion of necessity (dvdyxn) as the ultimate controlling force:
for ‘necessity’ in the hands of Democritus becomes the
equivalent of ‘natural law’, the most fully scientific concep-
tion in Greek philosophy, associated with a complete deter-
minism. Can it be that in Heraclitus there was anything
resembling this notion? Again, a closer examination con-
siderably weakens the confident statement of the doxo-
graphers. In the first place notice its application? to the
fantastic notion of the upward and downward path, the
‘exchange’ of all things with fire: in connexion with so
arbitrary a theory, definitely opposed to the experience of
normal sensation, it is impossible that ‘necessity’ can have
anything like the idea of ‘natural law’: it is at most, as it will
be seen to be in some of Heraclitus’ successors, an extraneous
and arbitrary power, a kind of deus ex machina, called in to
produce results which would otherwise seem improbable.
Secondly, it may be observed that in both passages ‘necessity’
is connected with ‘destiny’ (<fuapyévy): now ‘destiny’3 is a
much more clearly religious conception, and suggests at
once the arbitrary external force. And when we look to
Heraclitus’ own fragments for an explanation, it appears at
once in the same conception of the “due portion’ of things
which was seen in Anaximander to have a direct origin in
religious notions: ‘the fire is kindled in due measures and
in due measures extinguished:’4 ‘the sun will not exceed
his due measures’.5 ‘Necessity’, ‘destiny’, is but a physical
t Aet. i. 27.1; D.A. 8: ‘HpdkAeitos mavrta Ka? cipappevnv, tiv dé
avriy brdpxew Kal avdyxnv. Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (2 3-3 as
D.A. 5; wove? S€ Kat rdéw Twa Kal xpdvov piopevov Tis Tod Koopov
petaBoAjs Kata Twa eipwappevny avayKny. As}
2 "This is its context in the passage from Simplicius.
3 Aetius’ identification of Heraclitus’ e{uappyevn with Adyos in a passage
(i. 28.1; D.A. 8) where he is avowedly following Poseidonius may be dis-
missed as an obvious Stoic interpretation.

4 D.B. 30. 5 D.B. 94.
3307 E

50 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

application of the old religious equilibrium. Yet, for all that,
since it so presented itself to later commentators, it 1s not
unreasonable to see in Heraclitus the germ of the notion of
‘necessity’ emerging from a religious background, justas with
the Milesians appeared the first traces of ‘eternal motion’.

In Parmenides the same notion of ‘necessity’ as an ex-
traneous force binding the world into certain definite forms
appears again. Parmenides’ ‘One’ was of course motionless
and external: no cause is therefore required to start the
motion which leads to creation, but, on the other hand,
as a kind of violent contradiction of the views of his pre-
decessors, he announces! that it is just ‘Necessity’ which
ordains that the world shall be motionless. When it is seen
that ‘necessity’ appears in his poems also as ‘the due
measure’? (Moipa) and ‘Justice’ 3 (Aicy), and that the doxo-
graphers? identify it not only with ‘destiny’ (<iuappévn) but
also with ‘providence’ (zpévoa), it is clear that the conception
is more definitely theological than it was in Heraclitus: the
constraining force is super-physical and its action is arbitrary.
Similarly in Empedocles we hear of ‘Necessity’5 and also
of ‘the mighty oath’® as the controlling cause of the succes-
sion of Strife and Love, an even more clearly personified
expression of the theological notion.

Yet for all his theological and mystical bent Empedocles
gives us also the germ of new ideas, and that in two direc-
tions. Firstly, although ‘Necessity’ and “The mighty oath’
lie in the background as the ultimate forces of the universe,
yet he is not content, like his predecessors, to make them the
immediate efficient causes of the changes which bring about
the creation of the world. As if he saw that such a cause
must be looked for in the physical constitution of the uni-
verse itself, he attributes the actual alterations in the whole
to the action of the physical causes, Strife and Love. They,
like the four elements, are corporeal existences, part of the
physical structure of the universe itself; they act indeed

t D.B. 8,1. 30. 2 Tbi :

4 Aet. ee DA. 32. Tae ie rang

5 Arist. de Gen. et Corr. B. 6. 334.4. 6 D.B. 30, 1. 3

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 51

under the control of the ‘mighty oath’, but are in themselves
within and a part of the material whole. Fantastic as it may —
be, this notion is clearly an advance towards the conception
of ‘natural law’ and of a world controlled, immediately at
any rate, by the principles and constitution of its own being.
Secondly, in Empedocles for the first time appears the con-
ception of ‘chance’! (r¥yn): ‘the air’,? he says in the course of
his explanation of creation, ‘sank down upon the earth, for
thus it happened to be running at that time’, and a similar
account was given of the ‘accidental’ putting together of
animals. Here we seem to have a notion of the casual action
of the natural world, and although he was blamed for it
both by Plato3 and Aristotle,+ the idea is clearly an attempt
to get away from the religious conception of an invariable
arbitrary guidance, and was destined to play a considerable
part in the system of Epicurus.

Anaxagoras in this respect as in others stands largely
alone, yet he more definitely carries out the scientific ten-
dency begun by Empedocles. Motion he definitely estab-
lishes as the cause of the creation of worlds out of the ‘mix-
ture’, and even more clearly seeks the cause of motion in
something which is itself a part of the physical universe.
The old religious bias may perhaps be seen in a weakened
form in his selection for this purpose of ‘mind’, yet, as has
been noticed, he understood ‘mind’ as something purely cor-
poreal. Just as in his main theory, in spite of its great
unlikeness to Atomism, Anaxagoras opened the way to a
complete pluralism, so in his scientific conception of the
world he drew very close to the materialism of Democritus.

The Atomists then received the problem of the efficient
cause in a somewhat complex form. Science had as yet by
no means shaken itself free of religion: the notion of fa
mysterious and arbitrary controlling force. constraining the
world into certain forms almost by its own whim, and the
idea of the partition of the universe between contending
‘natures’ held in balance by a kind of supernatural compact

« D.B. 103. 2 D.B. 53. 3 Laws, x. 889 b; D.A. 48.

4 Phys. B. 8. 198 b.
E2

Ly THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

were both close to the surface in the speculation of their
predecessors. On the other hand there were adumbrations
of more purely physical conceptions, in which the controlling
force lay within the physical world and was itself a part of it.
And here the choice seemed threefold: it might be that there
were physical principles subordinate to, yet closely connected
with, an external controlling force like Empedocles’ “Love
and Strife’ or Anaxagoras’ ‘Mind’, or that the effects of
nature were produced by an as yet ill-defined ‘chance’, or
that there was a supreme ‘destiny’ or ‘necessity’, manifested
indeed in the physical world and universal in it, yet in itself
not an unconditional sequence of causality but still a some-
what arbitrary constraint. It was one of the most important
contributions of the Atomists to philosophical thought that
they were able out of these contradictory data to evolve
something like a genuinely scientific principle of law.

B. The Senses and the Mind.

It is clear that the two remaining problems, that of the
nature of our senses and our mind and the processes of their
perception and thought, and that of the validity of these pro-
cesses as a criterion of truth are closely connected, and the
- views held of either must to a considerable extent be affected
by the attitude adopted towards the other. Yet, as has been
recently pointed out,t the connexion between metaphysics
and psychology among the Greek philosophers is not nearly
as intimate as might be expected, and it is quite possible
to consider the two questions separately. It will be con-
venient therefore to deal first with the senses and the mind
and their activities, and then with theories of the cognition
of truth. Both play an integral part in the views of the
Atomists and lie at the very root of the system of Epicurus.

A theory of sensation is attributed first to Parmenides,?

at Beare, Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition, p. 2: the full and interest-
ing account of the views of Empedocles and Anaxagoras in this work is of
great value. ;

2 Theophrastus, de Sensu, 1 ff.; D.A. 46—the chief authority through
for the details of the theory of perception. sree

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 53

but seeing that it is derived from that part of his poem which
dealt with the Way of Opinion, and probably therefore re-
presents not his own views but those of the Pythagoreans,'
and that the theory agrees in the main with that of Empe-
docles, he may in a brief survey be neglected: but he must be
remembered as evidence that the elaborate theory of Empe-
docles does not stand alone at the very outset of inquiry, but
that there had been considerable previous speculation, as
indeed we otherwise know from the accounts which have
survived of the views of Alcmaeon of Croton. For the
present purpose, however, it will be sufficient to summarize
the theories of Empedocles and Anaxagoras, as they will
show the ideas prevalent among the contemporaries of the
Atomists.

The views of Empedocles are of course conditioned by
his general theory, according to which all concrete things
are made of the combination of the four elements ‘running
through’ each other:3 each piece, that is, of one of the ele-
ments had in it pores or cracks into which pieces of the other
entered. Sensation then must be produced in the same way:
there are, he thought, ‘emanations’ (dzoppoat) constantly
being given off by ‘all things that are created’, and these
emanations enter into the pores of other created things.
Sensation does not of course result on all occasions, but only
—and this was the cardinal point in Empedocles’ theory—
when like meets like,’ when the ‘emanation’ that 1s, ‘fits’ °
exactly into the pore which it enters. ‘The whole notion is
thus essentially physical and material and sensation of every
kind rests ultimately upon touch,’ of which, like most of the
other early Greek philosophers, he gives no special account,
thinking doubtless that its nature was too obvious to require
explanation.

The general idea may best be. illustrated from Empe-
docles’ explanation of vision, of which we have a full account

t See E.G. P33, p. 184.
2 See D5. Pp: ve ff.; E.G. P.3. 193-63; Beare, pp. 11, 93, 139°, 160,

180, 203, 251. 3 D.B. 21. 13-14. 4 DB. 89.
5 D.B. 90; Theophr. 2; D.A. 86. 6 Tbid. 7.

54 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

in Theophrastus and several important fragments of Empe-
docles himself. It is based,’ like all early theories, on a
primitive analysis of the eye itself as consisting of a fiery
element (of which we are conscious when we ‘see stars ), and
a watery element surrounding it: it is however noticeable
that Empedocles makes no use of the observation of the
image in the pupil, which plays a large part in other theories.’
The eye, like all other things, is compounded of the four
elements;3 the fire is set in the middle, and an elaborate
description‘ shows how it is protected from the surrounding
water by ‘delicate tissues’, which have fine pores through
which the fire may pass, like the flame in a lantern. Of the
four elements like then perceives like: ‘for with earth we see
earth, with water water, and with air divine air, and with
fire destroying fire’,5 the incoming emanations fitting, we
must suppose, into the pores of the corresponding element.
Empedocles further realized that what we see is really
colour, and he appears to have recognized four primary
colours, ° white, black, red, green, corresponding to the four
elements out of which all colours were composed:7 it is at
any rate clear that he held that the dark element of water in
the eye perceived dark things, ® and the fiery element light
things. So far the eye is regarded as purely passive, perceiy-
ing the emanations which fitted respectively into the pores
of the several elements: but there is no doubt that Empe-
docles also held the view that the fire in the eye passed out-
wards and as it were actively grasped things.9 It is a little
difficult to reconcile the two theories, and accounts of Empe-
docles’ view may have been contaminated by the similar
theory of Plato,’ but we seem here to have a first trace of the
distinction between mere passive ‘seeing’ and active ‘looking’
which was to become so prominent in the psychology of
Epicurus. He further recognized that the eyes of different

t Beare, pp. 9, 10. 2 Ibid., p. 15. 3 ‘Theophr. 7.
4 D.B. 84. 5 D.B. 109. 6 Stob, Ec/. 1. 16. 3.
g.D.Bs9t, ; 8 Theophr. 7.

9 D.B. 84,1. 11; and Arist. de Sensu, 2. 437 b.
10 Timaeus, 45 b: see Beare, p. 17; and E.G. P.3 248.

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 55

animals and even of different persons were differently consti-
tuted and therefore better or worse suited to perceive different
things: * they may even perceive the same thing differently,
an admission which was to have important consequences.

The other senses were explained by Empedocles on the
same general lines. Hearing* was caused by ‘emanations’ of
air hitting upon a ‘fleshy twig’ (odpxwos dfos) inside the ear,
which then oscillated like a ‘gong’ («d8wv) to ‘like sounds’.
Smell3 is closely connected with respiration: as we breathe
we draw in ‘emanations’ and if they fit into similar pores in
the nostrils, the sense of smell is stimulated.’ Of taste and
touch we have no special record,# but must suppose that
Empedocles maintained his general idea of the emanations
and pores and the principle that like perceives like.

More important for our purpose is the statement 5 that
‘he speaks in the same way about understanding and igno-
rance. For understanding (ro ¢poveiv) is due to similars, and
ignorance to dissimilars, understanding being regarded as
the same as perception or very similar to it’. Thought, that
is, is like sensation a purely physical and material function,
both in process and result—a view which was to have vast
consequences in the completely material system of the
Atomists. Unfortunately we possess no account, if indeed
Empedocles ever gave one, of the details of the process,
but we may suppose that he carried out his main principles
logically, for we are told® that ‘according to men’s difference
of formation their understanding differs’ and that the man7
in whom all four elements were most equally combined was
wisest—for he would be able to think about most things.
Similarly in a famous line § Empedocles declares, that ‘the
blood around the heart is the thinking part’, for in the blood
the four elements are equally mixed. It isstrange that from the
outset such a very crude physical psychology should have

t 'Theophr. 8: cf. D.B. 108.

2 Ibid. 9: cf. D.B. 99; Beare, pp. 95-9-
3 Thia: een he he 4 Theophr. 9; Beare, 161-3.

5 Theophr. 9, 10. 6 D.B. 108. 7 'Theophr. rt.

8 afua yap avOpwrots mepixdpdidv ears vonpa D.B. 105.

56 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

appeared satisfactory, but its persistence shows how natural
such materialistic views were to the Greek mind: the atomic
psychology would not have caused to contemporaries the
shock which it gives to the modern reader.

For Anaxagoras’ theories of sensation we have far less
detailed and more sporadic information, but certain facts
stand out which are sufficient to illustrate both the similarity
and the divergence of the views held in the latter half of the
fifth century. In the first place he asserted, apparently in
intentional opposition to Empedocies, that perception * was
due not to ‘similars’ but to ‘opposites’. This he illustrated
from the primary sense of touch:* a body which is of the
same temperature as our own body does not give us any
sensation of hot or cold, but only one which is itself hotter
or colder; we are influenced by the temperature which is
‘contrary to’ our own. Such perception of contraries is of
course always possible on Anaxagoras’ general theory that
‘all things have a portion of everything’, for there will then
be present in each of the sense-organs the contraries of all
they may have to perceive. His idea3 may also have been
dictated by his doctrine that ‘mind’, which controls all sensa-
tion, itself never enters the mixture and is therefore, in a
sense, the ‘contrary’ of all else. He further noted as a kind
of corollary the very interesting observation that ‘all per-
ception involves pain:4 for the touch of the unlike always
produces pain’, This he proves from the painful effect of
excessively bright lights or loud sounds: we seem to have
an anticipation of the modern notion of the part played by
irritation in perception.5

In reference to vision in particular, with regard to which,
as usual, fuller details have been preserved than about the
other senses, Anaxagoras differed again from Empedocles
in basing his views on the image® ({udaovs) seen in the pupil

* Theophr. de Sensu, 27; D.A. 92.

2 Tbid. 28.

3 So Beare, p. 37, but the relation of vods to aicOnous and of vods in the
universe to the human mind are by no means clear.

4 ‘Theophr. 29. 5 See. EF, Gs B3ja7 4. 6 Theophr. 27.

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 57

of the eye («épy), and found confirmation for his general
theory in the observation that the image ‘is reflected in a
part of the eye not of the same but of a different colour’.
The reason then that most animals see better by day than
by night is that the night is ‘more uniform in colour with
their eyes’: but there are some animals with specially gleam-
ing eyes who see better at night, not, as Empedocles thought,
because the fire in the eyes then issues forth, but again
because of the contrast in colour between eye and object.
In his treatment of the other senses there is little that is
remarkable, except another curious anticipation of modern
ideas in the statement that we hear ‘because the sound passes
right through to the brain’,' which makes us wish for further
information as to Anaxagoras’ physiology, and the strange
notion? that the larger the animal and therefore its organs
of perception, the greater will be its perceptive powers, ‘for
the large animals hear great sounds and those from a dis-
tance, while the small sounds escape them, but the small
animals hear only small sounds and those near by’. ;

Anaxagoras’ psychology was of course conditioned by his
general conception of ‘mind’ as the one element which always
remained pure and never entered the mixture, and we have
practically no information as to its details, but he seems,
according to Aristotle,3 to have held that it was present “in
all animals great and small, noble and of small repute’. He
believed 4 that ‘soul’ (ux7) and mind (vods), that it 1s to say,
the elements in the living organism which respectively per-
ceive and think, were one in kind, but that the mind, as the
ultimate cause of motion, was supreme and ‘the beginning
of all things’. This identification we have already notes
in Empedocles, but the distinction seems clearly made or
the first time. If however it is right to understand aca
goras’ whole idea of ‘mind’ as of something corporea fi ere
is no advance on the definitely material and physical con
ception of sensation and mental processes which his pre-

decessor maintained.

t Tbid. 28.
3 de Anima, A. 2. 404 b; D.A. 100.

2 Ibid. 29, 30.
4 Ibid. 405 a.

58 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM
The Atomists thus inherited in the field of psychology

an entirely material idea of the mind and senses and of the
processes of sensation and thought, a belief that both pro-
cesses were in ultimate analysis identical, a supreme con-
fidence in touch as the basis of all sensation and a consequent
notion of ‘effuences’ from the objects of perception. ‘The
main controversy which remained over was the question
whether perception was due to ‘similars’ or ‘opposites’. As
in the main theory of the universe, so here the Atomic
solution was looked on as a reconciliation of opposing
views.

C. Theory of Knowledge.

The problems which centre round what we are accus-
tomed to call the Theory of Knowledge appear in a com-
paratively simple form in the early philosophers and are
concerned only, as is natural, with the question of the
validity of the evidence of the senses. This problem arose
for them inevitably in two ways, firstly, out of their general
theories of the ultimate nature of the Universe, for when
theory propounded a view which was obviously at variance
with the straightforward experience of the senses, it was
necessary to account in some way for this divergence, and
secondly, but never in an acute form before the time of the
Atomists, from the special theories which they held con-
cerning the processes of sense-perception.

To the philosophers of the Milesian school the question
did not apparently occur, or at least, if it presented itself
to them, we have no record of their answers. But the theory
of Heraclitus at once raised it in an acute form: for, as
Lucretius? points out in the course of his criticism, if we
say that the senses correctly recognize fire, but are mistaken
about everything else in the world—for all other things are
in reality fire just as much—we violently impugn their
veracity. hat Heraclitus himself was aware of this diffi-
culty is clear from his own saying, ‘the eyes are bad witnesses
for men,’ so are the ears of those who have barbarous (i.e.

t i, 693-700. 2 Bywater 4; D.B. 107.

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 59

uninstructed) souls’: another fragment seems to represent
him as saying deliberately that ‘the sight makes errors’,?
though he seems also to have admitted that ‘the eyes are
more exact witnesses than the ears’.3 In opposition to the
senses Heraclitus set up ‘reason’4 (Adyos) as the true guide,
and the commentators explain this to mean ‘not reason of
any sort but the divine reason which is common to men’.
We must, however, be cautious about accepting this ex-
planation, as there is little doubt that the accounts of Hera-
clitus’ doctrine have been largely contaminated by the teach-
ing of the Stoics,5 who recognized in him the germs of their
own theories and were apt to ascribe their own beliefs to
him. It is probably safest to admit that we do not know
certainly what Heraclitus meant by Logos—perhaps it was
just his own account of the universe, of which he speaks
in the fragment® of introduction which has come down to
us. But it is clear that we have here in an unmistakable
form the seeds of scepticism of the senses, and the opposition
of a higher truth to be obtained by thought.

It is not surprising in view of the general theory of Par-
menides, which appears to maintain its relentless Monism
in the teeth of all ordinary observations, to be told that he
‘expels the senses from the way of truth’,’ and to find that he
is reckoned by the doxographers® among those philosophers
who said flatly that sensations were false. It is not only a
necessary corollary of his views, but is completely consonant
with his opposition of the Way of Truth and the Way of
Opinion: indeed in speaking of the latter himself, he seems
to make an intentional contrast between the senses and
reason: ‘let not custom full of experience constrain thee
along this road, to turn upon it a careless eye or sounding ear

r 4 vyas éyévrwy which Sextus, who quotes the fragment,
esas tars pre 26; D.A. 16) as meaning BapBdpwyr éort puyav
tais addyos aicbycect qTLOTEVEW.

2 Bywater 132; D.B. 46. 3 Bywater 15; D.B. ror a.
4 aie ler 5 See £. G. P.3, p. 142.

6 Bywater 2; D.B. 1: see E. G.. P.3, p. 133, 0. I.

7 [Plut.] Strom. 5; D.A. 22. '
8 Aet. iv. 9. 14: cf. Philodem. Ries. fr. inc. 3.75 D.A. 49.

60 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

or tongue, but judge by reason the much-disputed proof
spoken by me’. Scepticism initiated by Heraclitus becomes
complete in Parmenides.

Empedocles in this respect as in his general system repre-
‘sents a reaction from the overstrained views of Parmenides.
There is no very clear record of his metaphysic, but it seems
possible to reconstruct it to some extent from his fragments:
it turns out to be, as we should expect, a rather curious com-
bination of common sense and mysticism. Sextus? informs
us that Empedocles held that ‘the criterion of truth was not
the senses, but the right word (épfds Adyos), and that of the
right word part was divine and might not be revealed, part
mortal and capable of revelation’. This looks at first sight
like a modification of the Heraclitean position: the senses
are no longer called false but they cannot be taken as sure
evidence: the truth is contained in Empedocles’ own in-
spired account. But a rather closer investigation seems to
show that with Empedocles the opposition is not so much
between the senses and the mind, as between human
faculties altogether and a divine truth. The feebleness of
man’s faculties is put clearly enough near the beginning of
the poem: ‘Straitened3 are the powers spread over the bodily
members (i.e. the powers of perception and sensation), and
many are the sudden woes which blunt men’s careful
thoughts (jépyvar): they behold a brief part of life that is no
life+ and with short shrift rise up and fly away like smoke,
persuaded of that only on which each has chanced, as they
are driven hither and thither, though each boasts that he
hath found the whole: but verily this is not to be looked upon
nor heard by man nor grasped by his mind’. It is clearly
not the senses only which are disparaged but the mind as
well: man’s whole view is limited and his faculties too feeble
to find out the truth alone. Yet part of ‘the true word’ may
be learnt by man, ‘and thou’, says the poet to his reader,
‘since thou hast turned aside into this path, shalt learn, yet
no more than the wit of man can compass’, Man’s business

t D.B. 1. 34-7. 2° vil. 122.5 -D.B. 20 praeten 7 Be IDV IBY 7.
4 Reading Cwis aBiov with Scaliger: see E. G. P.3, P-i204,in5'3.

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 61

then, apart from such divine inspiration as Empedocles
claimed for himself, is ‘careful thought’; the fools are those
who ‘have not far-minded thoughts’.! And ‘careful thought’
consists in the right use of the faculties we possess, diligent
investigation with them all and the checking of one by the
other: ‘come now, search with all thy powers in what way
each thing is clear.* Hold not sight in greater trust than
hearing, nor set thy echoing ear above the instruction of thy
tongue (i.e, taste) and restrain not thy belief in any other
of thy bodily parts (yuiwv), by which there is a way (zépos)
for understanding, but consider each thing in the way in
which it is clear’. The senses then are not wholly false, but
they must be used for active investigation: we must look
and not merely see: ‘look upon it with thy mind, he says
elsewhere,3 and sit not wondering with thine eyes’. There
seems to be the same distinction which was noticed in Empe-
docles’ theory of perception between the active and passive
use of the senses. It is reasonable then to maintain that in
comparison with Heraclitus and Parmenides, Empedocles
does in a very large measure rehabilitate the senses: the
mere passive experience of the normal man is of little value,
but when the senses are used in active investigation with
‘careful thought’, man may hope to attain something of
divine truth. His faculties are weak but not useless: com-
mon sense is set in a religious background. — itt
It might be expected that Anaxagoras with his belief in
‘mind’ standing apart from all other things and never entering
the mixture and his theory of the hidden portions of ‘every-
thing in everything’ would take up a profoundly sceptical
position as to the evidence of the senses. And accordingly
the doxographical tradition4 tells us bluntly that he said
the senses were false. But once again the examination of the
few extant fragments which bear on the point seems very
considerably to modify this conclusion. He did indeed say
that ‘owing to their weakness we are not able to discern

t Soduyddpoves mepyevae Des. TY.
2 D.B. 4. 9-13-
4 Aet.iv. 9.13; D.A. 96.

3: DUBY wp lirz

62 THE ANTECEDENTS OF ATOMISM

the truth’,t but Sextus, who has preserved this fragment,
has given a very interesting illustration of its meaning,
which puts us on the right track. Suppose, he says, that we
take two coloured liquids and pour from one into the other
drop by drop, our sight will not be able to discern the
gradual alteration of colour, although it takes place in fact.
Here we have a direct link with the general theory: our
senses,? Anaxagoras would seem to say, can tell us the pre-
vailing thing in a compound body, but cannot discern the
portions of all other things hidden in it. And it is in this
sense that we must understand the famous paradox with
which Anaxagoras} used to illustrate the opposition of
thoughtandappearance: ‘snowis white; butsnowis congealed
water; water is black: therefore snow is black’: we know,
that is, from the fact of this change that snow must have in
it black ‘seeds’, which if it melts will give the prevailing
colour to water, but our sight cannot perceive them: they
can only perceive the colour of which snow ‘has most in it’.
Anaxagoras’ scepticism is certainly not complete: the senses
are accurate as far as they go, and what they tell us is true,
but they do not go far enough, they cannot tell us the under-
lying reality which we know by reason to be there. Yet in
spite of their imperfection, they are of the greater value in
investigation and indeed the only guide: for we read in
another fragment, which would, till we understand Anaxa-
goras’ position, appear to be almost a flat contradiction of
that from which we started, that ‘things perceived (daudpeva)
are the vision of the unseen’;4 our investigation, that is, of
what is below the ken of the senses, must proceed from and
be guided by the evidence which they can give us. So far
from a complete scepticism, this is not so very remote from
the position of Epicurus himself: Anaxagoras’ complaint of
‘the instrument’ is not that it is a bad one, but that it is not
sharp enough.

The predecessors of the Atomists exhibit then a strong
movement towards scepticism of sense-evidence followed by

1 Sext. vii. 90; D.B. 21. 2 See E.G. P's, p. 274.
3 Sext. Pyrrh. Hypot. 1. 33; D.A. 97. 4 D.Bs 25 a:

SUBORDINATE PROBLEMS 63

apartial reinstatement: from the attitude ‘the senses are false
and must be expelled from the way of truth’ they reach the
later position, ‘the senses are not of themselves safe tests of
truth, but they are of great value as instruments in investiga-
tion’. Nor is this change difficult to explain in the light of
the general progress of thought. The theories of the Monists
do not rest on observation or investigation, but are rather
based on a priori reasoning about the universe and its nature.
Such reasoning led naturally enough to results which were
not only remote from the normal evidence of the senses, but
often at variance with it. Under these conditions the evi-
dence of perception must necessarily be disparaged and truth
supposed to reside either in the unfettered use of reason or
in a divine inspiration. But with the growth in Sicily and
Magna Graecia of a more minute and terrestrial scientific
interest, and especially with the establishment of the medical
schools, observation and experiment are brought into promi-
nence, and in these the senses, actively investigating and
testing results, are of paramount importance. When philo-
sophy takes the infinitely small as its starting-point, it will
trust necessarily to the instrumentality of the senses. This
attitude is of course most clearly marked in Anaxagoras, who
took as his basis of investigation the phenomena of physio-
logy and nutrition: for him though the senses could not
teach all, nothing could be learnt without them. By the time
of the Atomists then the extreme of scepticism was over:
they breathed an atmosphere in which the senses were not
indeed regarded as the final court of appeal, but were at
least the most important of witnesses."

: It will be noticed that in this chapter no account has been given of the
Pythagoreans, whose theory of the origin of things in ‘ numbers undoubtedly
influenced the Eleatics and through them may have inspired the root-idea
of Atomism. In a very brief sketch of the antecedents of Atomism 1t
seemed best to deal only with the more concrete theories of the physicists,

whom, as we may fairly judge from Lucretius, Epicurus regarded as his

true predecessors.

II
Db EUWCieP? ics

§ 1. Life and Writings

N dealing with the predecessors of the Atomists it has

been sufficient to consider their theories apart from their
personal history and character. But of the three great
figures in the Atomic tradition it would naturally be inter-
esting to know more. Unfortunately, though it is possible
to form a fairly accurate picture both of Democritus and of
Epicurus, Leucippust remains wrapped in considerable ob-
scurity. That he was the founder of the Atomic School in
Greece and that he did not owe his theory to any extraneous
source, there seems no reasonable ground for doubting.
There was indeed a curious tradition? extant among later
writers that the Atomic theory originated from a certain
‘Mochus’, a Phoenician philosopher, said to have lived
‘about the time of the Trojan War’, and one authority3 goes
so far as to say that he himself in the fourth century a.p. was
- actually acquainted with disciples of Mochus’ school.
Modern authorities are inclined to reject this story as a fable,
and probably rightly, but in view of this suggestion of
oriental influence it 1s interesting to realize that at an early
date Indian philosophers had arrived at an atomic explana-
tion of the Universe. The doctrines of this school4 were
expounded in the Vaicesika Sitra and interpreted by the
aphorisms of Kanada. While, like the Greek Atomists, they

« See E.G. P3, pp. 330 ff., for a discussion of the questions concerning
the life of Leucippus and his position in the history of philosophy : compare
also Dyroff, Demokritstudien, § 1.

2 See Strabo, xvi, p. 757; Sext.Emp. adv. Math. ix. 3635); (Democritus)
A. 55; lambl. Vit. Pythag. 14.

3 Iambl. lic.

4 See A. B. Keith, Indian Logic and Atomism, especially pp. 208-32;
also Mabilleau, Histoire de la Philosophie Atomistique, Book I; Colebrocke
Miscellaneous Essays. ;

LIFE AND WRITINGS 65

reached atomism through the denial of the possibility of
infinite division and the assertion that indivisible particles
must ultimately be reached in order to secure reality and
permanence in the world, there are very considerable differ-
ences between the Indian doctrine and that of the Greeks.
The Vaicesika atoms are not all ultimately homogeneous,
but atoms of different kinds are assumed corresponding to
the four elements, earth, water, air, and ether: qualities are
attributed to them varying according to the substance to
which they correspond, and they are conceived of as elastic
in structure. Kanada works out the idea of their combina-
tions in a detailed system, which reminds us at once of the
Pythagoreans and in some respects of modern science, hold-
ing that two atoms combined in a binary compound and
three of these binaries in a triad which would be of a size to
be perceptible to the senses. All these differences make the
suggestion of borrowing improbable: moreover, the latest
writer’ on the subject is not inclined to put the Indian works
as early as previous scholars had done, and states that there
is no proof of the atomic doctrine in India until after contact
with the Greek kingdom of Bactria. He even discusses the
question whether the Indian doctrine is derived from the
Greek, but admits elsewhere? that the works as we have
them presuppose much previous discussion. If there was
then an old atomic tradition in India, it may be that some
inkling of it had penetrated to Greece, either, as the legend
of ‘Mochus’ would suggest, by way of Phoenicia, or possibly
through the Ionian colonies, but there 1s certainly no reason
for supposing that Leucippus owed any direct debt to it,
or that he is other than an ‘original’ thinker in the sense that
he evolved his Atomism for himself as the direct outcome of
the theories of his Greek predecessors. _ soni

The discrepancies in tradition as to Leucippus origin and
training are almost as great as those about the birthplace of

« Keith, op. cit., p. 17-

® pede ; . hf

3 The strange story of the instruction of Democritus by
Xerxes’ army (see p. 110) may point in the same direction.

3307 F

the wise men in

66 LEUCIPPUS

Homer. The first difficulty which has to be met is startling:
Epicurus' in one of his many letters to his disciples asserted
that ‘there never was such a person as a philosopher Leucip-
pus’, and certain modern critics? have been inclined to
accept his statement literally. But we need not in fact attach
much importance to it: Epicurus3 was intensely jealous for
his own originality, and invariably attempted to discredit
all from whom he might be supposed to have derived his
doctrines. In at least one other passage* of his own works
he seems to be making a direct criticism on a doctrine
specially attributed by the authorities to Leucippus, and we
may reasonably interpret his denial of Leucippus’ existence
as a rather more vehement assertion than usual of his own
independence. Aristotle,’ moreover, undoubtedly regarded
him as the founder of the Atomic theory, and so also did
Theophrastus.® Further, Diogenes of Apollonia,? whose
theories are ridiculed in The Clouds of Aristophanes (423
B.C.), shows distinct traces of Atomism; since Democritus’
floruit cannot be placed before 420 B.c., Diogenes must have
drawn on some earlier Atomic source than Democritus, and
this can hardly be other than Leucippus. This argument
not only confirms the existence of Leucippus, but practically
settles the question of his date. We may therefore safely
conclude that Leucippus existed, that he was the inventor of
the Atomic system, and that he ‘flourished’ about 430 B.c.
or a little earlier.

His native place was variously given in antiquity as Elea,
Abdera, and Miletus. There is little doubt that the last
tradition is correct. The suggestion of Abdera is due to

t Diog. Laert. x. 13; D.A. 2.

2 E. Rohde, Fahrbuch fiir Klass. Philol. cxxiii, p. 742, and more recently
Brieger (Hermes, xxxvi, pp. 166 sq.).

3 See Part IJ, Chap. I, p. 226. + Ep. ii, § 89.

5 e.g. Metaphys. A. 4.985 b; D.A. 6 Aevkurmos Sé Kal 6 ETaipos avTod
Anpoxpitos.

6 Diog. Laert. ix. 46; D. (Democritus) 33.

PEG. 8, pe 331

§ D.L. ix. 30; D.A. 1. That MyAtos is a mere mistake for M.rawos is
shown by other references, e.g. Simpl.in Arist. PAys. A.2. 184 (28. 4); D.A.8.

LIFE AND WRITINGS 67

confusion, or at least association, with Democritus and the
Atomic School, which grew up there, possibly founded by
Leucippus himself. The idea that he came from Elea is more
interesting and must be connected with the tradition that he
was a disciple of the Eleatic School and ‘heard’ Zeno.
Burnet? is inclined to think that this may be true and that
Leucippus actually visited Elea, possibly as a result of the
Milesian revolution in 450 8.c. In any case the influence
upon his philosophy of the teaching of Zeno and the younger
Eleatics is clear, and we may perhaps in this connexion note
the further tradition preserved by Tzetzes3 that he was a
pupil of Melissus, whose Eleatic criticism so strikingly fore-
shadowed the Atomic theory. If then we may think of
Leucippus as a native of Miletus who visited Elea, we may
without indulging any fanciful speculation recognize power-
ful influences on his thought. We know that the old
Milesian School did not wholly die out, and in the intensely
physical character of his system and the absence of all mys-
ticism, Leucippus does indeed appear as the inheritor of their
‘scientific tradition’: on the other hand, though Atomism
is the very antipodes of the theory of Parmenides,‘ the
founder of the Eleatic School, it shows evident traces of the
criticism of Zeno and Melissus.5 It does not always happen
that a man’s philosophy reflects the history of his life so
clearly as would seem to be the case with Leucippus.

Of his writings we know little or nothing. If we may trust
Theophrastus, he was the author of ‘The Greater World-
system’ (Meyds Aidxoopos), as the full exposition of the Atomic
theory came to be known in the School, though other
authorities, perhaps with greater probability, assign it to
Democritus: for it seems more likely that we should attribute
to Leucippus the main outlines of the theory, and to the
School culminating in Democritus its working out in detail.

t DLL. lic.; Clem. Strom. i. 64. 3533 D.A. 43 [Galen] Hist. Philos. 3;
DAA.5. a E.G. P43, p. 331: 3 Chil. ii. 980; D.A. 5.
4 Cf. Simpl. in Arist. Pays. A. 2. 184 (28. 4); D.A. 8. BEN
s Especially in the idea that pluralism can only secure permanence, if it
rejects the possibility of infinite division : see p. 72.
F2

68 LEUCIPPUS

On the other hand we may safely believe that Leucippus origi-
nated many of the principal technical terms of Atomism,*
which are credited to him in the doxographical tradition.
There is also expressly assigned to him a sentence out of
a work on ‘The Mind’,? though it again, with its emphatic
assertion of the supremacy of ‘necessity’, reads more like
Democritus than Leucippus. There is therefore nothing
extant of Leucippus’ own work on which it is possible to
build, and the difficulty of forming any exact view as to
his theories is greatly increased, when the accounts of his
theory are examined, for in nearly all the references he is
coupled with Democritus and no distinction is drawn be-
tween them. It has in consequence been the usual practice
of writers on the Atomic theory to group them together
and credit them both with the whole of the system. This is
however a very unsatisfactory plan and clearly ought not to
be adopted, if it is possible to avoid it. For it cannot be
doubted that in fact the theory must have undergone con-
siderable modification and development in its transition
through the School from Leucippus to Democritus, and the
strongly marked character of the later philosopher with his
insatiate love of investigation and his encyclopaedic know-
ledge and interests make it certain that he would not have
been content to accept a ready-made system without develop-
_ ment and expansion. Happily it is not really necessary to
accept the confusion. For on the one hand there is a vast
mass of doctrine, apart from the very considerable fragments
of his own writing, which is expressly attributed to Demo-
critus and not to Leucippus, on the other not merely is it
possible to detect certain points} in which Leucippus held
distinctly different opinions from those afterwards put for-
ward by Democritus, but by a fortunate chance Aristotle4
« See those collected by Diels in B.1.
oy D.B. 2: oddev xpfhua pdrynv yiverat, ddAG wdvTa. ex Adyou te Kal bn”
avaykKys.
: Soe pene the péya Kevov, Hipp. Ref. 1. 123 D.A. 10, see p. g2,
origin of thunder, Aet. iii. 3. 10; D.A. 2 5 (cf. Democritus,

D.A. 93), and theories as to the shape and inclination of the earth.
4 Metaphys. l.c., and de Gen. et Corr. A. 8. 325 a; D.A. 7.

LIFE AND WRITINGS 69

himself in two very important passages of reference and
criticism speaks expressly of Leucippus. The work of Diels
in separating out the references which belong specially to
Leucippus is of immense value, and that he has not exercised
a merely arbitrary choice is shown by the very definite pic-
ture which they present of Leucippus as the founder of the
main principles of Atomism and a person with a marked
genius for the invention of striking and often quaint technical
terms in contrast to the more universal and more detailed
diligence of Democritus. It is not then without justification
that Leucippus' may be dealt with separately and an attempt
made to estimate the general principles which he laid down
and the extent to which he carried the development of the
Atomic system. It must not however be supposed that great
contrasts will appear between him and his disciple: they
stand to one another rather as the pioneer and the enthusi-
astic and energetic follower.

§ 2. The Atomic Theory
It has already been hinted that Leucippus regarded him-

self, and was generally considered in antiquity, not so much
as the founder of a great hypothesis, which was the fullest
answer that the ancient world could give to the original
question of Thales, but rather in the more humble capacity
of a mediator between the diverse views of his predecessors
and in particular between the two Schoois cf thought which
as the result of the long debate were left in sharp opposition,
the Eleatic Monism of the successors of Parmenides, and
the Pluralism of Empedocles and Anaxagoras. Atomism is
in fact presented to us as a reconciliation of those many
antimonies which had sprung up in the course of earlier
discussion, the One and the Many, change and permanence,
division and continuity, the senses and thought. It is in

« Among modern writers Lafaist, Dissertation sur la philosop hie atomistique,
is, as far as I know, alone in attempting a separate treatment of Leucippus and
Democritus, but Dyroff, op. cit., § 1, has drawn attention to important points
of difference, and in particular to a difference of spirit, which is borne out by
Diels’ division of the extant references.

70 LEUCIPPUS

this aspect that it is approached in a most valuable passage
of Aristotle,! which clearly sets out the relation of Leucippus
to his predecessors and will therefore form the best basis for
the consideration of his theory.

Leucippus and Democritus have come to a conclusion about all things
for the most part by the same method and with the same view, making
their starting-point what naturally comes first. For some of the older
philosophers (sc. the Eleatics) held that reality was necessarily one and
immovable: for empty space does not exist, and motion would be im-
possible, unless there were empty space apart from matter; nor could
many things exist, unless there were something to separate them.

Aristotle then goes on to explain the Eleatic criticism on the
pluralists, to state the view of the extreme Monists, and to
point out that, if one appeals to the facts, such a view seems
little short of madness. He then resumes :?

but Leucippus (we may mark this special mention of the founder of
the School) thought he had a theory, which should be consistent with
sense-perception and not do away with coming into being or destruc-
tion or motion or the multiplicity of things. He agreed so far with
appearances, but to those who hold the theory of the One, on the
ground that there could be no motion without empty space, he ad-
mitted that empty space is not real, and that nothing of what is real is
not real: for the real in the strict sense is an absolute plenum. But the
plenum is not one, but there is an infinite number of them, and they are
invisible owing to the smallness of their bulk. These move in empty
space (for there is empty space), and by their coming together produce
coming into being and by their separation destruction. . . . But out
of the One in the strict sense multiplicity could not be produced, nor
unity in the full sense out of the Many, for that is impossible.

This very suggestive passage may be considered first in
the light of previous speculation. Aristotle’s last sentence
puts exactly the position which had been reached with regard
to the central problem of the ultimate existence. The strict
Monism of Parmenides not merely could not account for the
creation of the Many, but actually denied their existence
except as an illusion of the senses, and even the laxer Monism

« de Gen. et Corr. A. 8. 324 b 353 D.A. 7.
a Ibid. 325 a 23.

THE ATOMIC "LHEORY a1

of the Ionians and Heraclitus could not explain the Many
except by a virtual abandonment of unity. On the other the
main weakness of the current pluralistic theories was just
that they destroyed the fundamental ‘One’: neither the
‘sphere’ ‘of Empedocles, in which the four elements were
mingled by Love, nor Anaxagoras’ ‘mixture ’of ‘portions’
were in any sense homogeneous. How then did Leucippus
propose to meet this difficulty? Exactly on the lines sug-
gested by the aphorism of Melissus. The ultimate ‘nature’?
was, he said, an infinite number of small particles, pluralism
is absolute, but yet they are ‘one’, and that in two senses. In
the first place the ultimate matter, though existing in this
infinitely discrete form, is yet absolutely homogeneous: all
the infinite particles are exactly similar in substance and
there is therefore but one ultimate ‘nature’: ‘their nature
they say is one, as if each one of them were, for instance, a
separate piece of gold’.* Secondly, and this is rather the line
of thought which Aristotle reproduces here, each one of the
particles is in itself a ‘One’: for to it, as Melissus postulated,
may be applied all the attributes of the Parmenidean ‘One :
it is an absolute corporeal plenum, sheer matter and nothing
else, it is absolutely indivisible,3 entirely without motion
inside itself, unchangeable, eternal. In other words, as
Aristotle puts it with epigrammatic clearness: ‘the real in
the strict sense is an absolute p/enum; but this plenum 1s not
one, but there is an infinite number of them’. In this way
then Leucippus thought that he had solved the problem of
the One and the Many. He established a unity which yet
allowed infinite multiplicity, a multiplicity which yet pro-
vided to the full an underlying unity. The unity which
thought demanded was satisfied, and yet the multiplicity
to which the senses bore witness was shown to be true.

« For the old Ionian word vous as applied to Atomism see Simpl. in
Arist. PAys. @ 9. 265 b radra yap (sc. the atoms) éxeivor puow éxdovy.
a Arist. de Caelo, A. 7. 275b; D.A. 19: cf. Phys. I’. 4. 2034 To Kowov
Sua mdvrwv early apxy. ;
2 witha justification of these epithets will become clearer when the nature

of the atoms is discussed in § 3.

72 LEUCIPP US

Moreover, this unlimited pluralism was not, like that of
Anaxagoras, uneconomical in assuming an infinite variety
in the substance of the ultimate constituents: it had all the
economy of the Monist theories, for in substance all the
infinite particles were one.

Now this supposition of an infinitely discrete ultimate
matter raises at once the question of division, which was
another form in which the root-problem had recently pre-
sented itself. Anaxagoras, as has been seen, supposed his
‘seeds’ or particles of the original ‘mixture’ to be infinitely
divisible, and Empedocles and the upholders of the ‘element’
theory had taken up the same attitude. Infinity in number
had not yet been thought of apart from endless division and
subdivision. It was against this supposition that the
younger Eleatics, in defence of Parmenidean Monism, had
chiefly directed their attack. Zeno, whose arguments? were
probably aimed primarily at the mathematical pluralism of
the Pythagoreans, had argued in effect, that if we say that
a thing is infinitely divisible we must mean that it is com-
posed of an infinite number of points or units. But what are
these points: have they themselves magnitude or not? If
they have not, then their addition to or subtraction from
something else can make no difference: things will be
infinitely small, indeed non-existent: if they have magnitude,
then they must themselves be divisible into smaller parts, and
So on ad infinitum; everything will be made of an infinite
number of units and will therefore be infinitely great. Either
conclusion is absurd. That the first of these contentions was
also used in a more popular form against the materialistic
systems of pluralism maintained by Empedocles and Anaxa-
goras is clear from its employment in that context by
Lucretius:3 infinite division, it was held, destroys perma-
nence: things could be frittered away from less and less to
nothing, and the process of creation, which is always slower

* D.B. 1 and 2. ; 2 See £..G. P33, p2362.

3 1. 746 ff, 844 ff., which refer back to the fuller exposition of the argu-
ment in 540-64. Lucretius also employs the other half of Zeno’s argument
against the notion of infinite division in i. 615 fF.

THE ATOMIC THEORY 73

than that of destruction, would be impossible. Against these
criticisms of the pluralistic view Leucippus guarded himself
in the only possible way by supposing that there is after
all a limit to division. Things may be divided again and
again into smaller and smaller parts even far below the ken
of the senses, but ultimately a point is reached at which
further division is impossible: you come at last to ultimate
particles of matter which are indivisible (a8caipera) or ‘atoms’
(d-rowa). This conclusion Leucippus seems to have claimed
as a-deduction from experience: “They (i.e. Leucippus and
Democritus) abandoned division to infinity on the ground
that we cannot divide to infinity and by this means guarantee
the perpetual continuity (76 dxardAnxrov) of division, and
said that bodies consisted of indivisible particles’ ;* that is,
that as in our experience there is a limit to the extent to
which we can subdivide, because particles became so small
that they pass out of the ken of the senses, so Leucippus
supposed it was with the ultimate physical realities: there
is a ‘least possible’ for existence, just as there is a least
possible for perception. The line of argument 1s quite con-
sonant, as will be seen, with Leucippus’ general attitude to
the relation of sense-perception to truth, and it reads like
a first adumbration of the very elaborate argument of
Epicurus? on the same topic. However he reached his con-
clusion, Leucippus could now reply both to the dialectic of
Zeno and to the more popular form of his arguments. To
Zeno he could now say that there is a fixed unit of existence:
and though these units are still infinite in number, in any
given thing the number of them 1s limited, they mae
(theoretically at least) be counted, and therefore so far from
nullifying the magnitude of things,’ they form the ultimate
basis for the calculation of size. And to the less scientific
objectors he could say, as Lucretius does again and eer
that the conception of infinite particles as the ultimate sub-
stratum, so far from annulling the permanence of matter,

: Simpl. in Arist. PAys. Zt. 258,43 D.A. 13.
2 Ep. i, §§ 55-9.

3 Compare again Epicurus’ argument on the subject in Ep. i, §§ 55-9-

74 LEUCIPPUS

is now its surest guarantee: for each one of these ultimate

particles is indivisible and eternal, and they provide a point

beyond which further dissolution is impossible, the stopping-

point for destruction and the starting-point for creation.

Thus a discrete infinity is reconciled with permanence: there

are infinite particles, but thanks to their very essential

character, the world can never be frittered away into nothing-
ness. What had been the chief weapon against previous

pluralistic systems, becomes for Atomism its stronghold of
defence.

But there was yet another objection to which this theory
of the existence of matter in the form of infinite discrete
particles was liable. If they are discrete, there must be
something to separate them (8:dorqjpa): if they are to move—
and without motion they cannot combine to form things or
shift their position so as to change things—there must be
something external to them for them to move in. What is
this something? The Pythagoreans,! who with their doctrine
of the infinitely divisible had been confronted with this
problem, had thought of air as lying between the particles
of matter, but since the theory of Empedocles had shown
that air was an element, as corporeal in substance as earth
or fire or water, this answer was no longer possible. Par-
menides had seen that the only answer could be ‘empty
space’, but, profoundly convinced as he was that the only
existence was that of body, he had denied the existence of
empty space altogether: it was ‘nothing’ (od8é). The world
was a corporeal plenum, there was no division between parts
of matter but all was a continuous whole, neither was there
any possibility of motion. Melissus had more recently en-
forced this position as part of his attack on pluralism: ‘Nor
is there anything empty («evedv): for the empty is nothing
and that which is nothing cannot be: nor does it (sc. the
world) move: for it has nowhere to withdraw to (sroxwpfjoa.),
but it is full. For if there were anything empty, it would
withdraw into the empty: but as the empty is not, it has
nowhere to withdraw to.’* Leucippus was prepared to meet

7 See £.G) P.3, p, 289, * DB. 787%

THE ATOMIC THEORY as
this difficulty perfectly boldly: he affirmed, using Melissus’

own terms, that ‘the elements are the full and the empty’, or,
as Diogenes* puts it, ‘the universe is the full and the empty’,
that is, that it is as necessary to conceive of unoccupied
space separating the particles of matter as it is to postulate
the particles of matter themselves. How then did he answer
the metaphysical difficulty of the Milesians? His reply was
extremely subtle, and if it seems to us something of a quibble,
this is due not so much to Leucippus, as to the persistence of
the philosophical tradition which had hitherto refused to
acknowledge reality, except in the form of matter. He ad-
mitted, as is made clear in Aristotle’s exposition, that empty
space is ‘not real’ (2 6v): the only fully real existence is
matter, ‘the completely full’ (wayAjpes). But, he said, though
empty space is not in this sense a real thing, it none the jess
exists: ‘the real exists not a whit more than the not real,
empty space no less than body.’3 In effect Leucippus had
introduced a new conception of reality: in the old sense
empty space is not real, for it has not the most elementary
attribute of matter, it cannot touch or be touched. But it
none the less exists: we must form a new idea of existence,
something non-corporeal, whose sole function is to be where
the fuller reality is not, an existence in which the full reality,
matter, can move and have its being. He thus established
the necessary requirement for his conception of a discrete
infinity of matter; the particles of body were indeed sepa-
rated by the empty. At the same time, 1t must be observed,
he had protected himself against a possible charge of dualism :
if he were taxed with having, like the materialistic plu-
ralists, destroyed the fundamental unity of the universe
by the admission of two ‘existences’, matter and SPAChuts
could reply that he still held that there was but one fu

reality: the other ‘existence’ was, as 1t were, but the nepEOD
of this reality (7d py) dv), but it did nevertheless exist. $
the moment his success was to have conquered in the

t Arist. Metaphys. A. 4. 985 b; D.A. 6.

2 D.L. ix. 30; D.A. 1, &c. ;
3 Arist. ibid.: cf. Simpl. in Arist. PAys. A. 2. 184 (28. 4); D.A. 8.

76 LEUCIPPUS

dialectical debate with the Eleatics, but for the permanent pro-
gress of thought he had achieved the far greater triumph of
establishing the conception of non-corporeal existence: it is,
as Burnet! has pointed out, a strange achievement for the
founder of the great materialist school of antiquity to have
been ‘the first to say distinctly that a thing might be real
without being a body’.

In all these different ways Leucippus had shown himself
the mediator, and had reconciled the oppositions which had
played so large a part in previous debate. He had shown
how the One might also be the Many, he had shown that
there might be a discrete infinity and yet a limit to division,
he had exhibited the existence of empty space without refus-
ing to acknowledge matter as the single reality. But he had
of course done much more than this, for he had discovered
a theory of the Universe, which was not only in itself re-
markable in its penetration, but was to prove capable of
development and application with a completeness which was
impossible to any of its predecessors. To realize this it is
necessary to leave the negative conception of Leucippus as
a mediator and to inquire into the positive doctrines of his
theory and its application as an explanation of the world.

§ 3. Atoms and Space: the creation of things

The main principles of the theory of Leucippus have so
far established the conception of small discrete particles of
homogeneous body separated by and situated in empty
space. It is a long step from this to the infinitely complex
and varied world of phenomena, and it is necessary at this
point to ask how he conceived the nature of the two con-
stituents and by what process they were enabled so to com-
bine as to create the things of experience.

First, both atoms and space are infinite, the atoms in
number, space in extent. This might be deduced from the
belief that the universe itself was infinite,? in which Leucip-
pus followed the Ionians and Melissus,3 who had revolted

eR ant. Pe 360. ,
a Da ix.3r3D.A. 2, aeD.B, 3°

ATOMS-AND SPACE *

on this point from the strict conception of Parmenides. But
it would appear that Leucippus’ argued rather from the
infinite variety of phenomena to the infinite number of the
atoms, and from that the infinite extent of space follows
directly: for in a limited space, infinity of particles could
only be obtained by infinite subdivision.

Of the nature of space there was but little to be said: all
that Leucippus could predicate of it is that it is ‘empty’
(xevov), or as he seems to have put it in one of those quaint
terms which he invented for the Atomic theory, ‘porous’?
(uavdv). The use of this term is instructive, for it makes it
clear that he was thinking always of the intervals (Suaor7para)
between particles of matter. Later on3 there is some con-
fusion between two possible senses of ‘space’. The mathe-
matical sense of extension, though it is sometimes attributed
to the Atomists, was always too abstract a conception for
them, but they did vary between thinking of space as the
whole extent of the universe, some parts of which were
occupied by matter, and on the other hand as the ‘empty’
parts, the intervals between body. But it is clear that by
Leucippus at any rate only the latter meaning is intended:
‘space’ is the sum total of those parts of the whole, which at
any given moment are not occupied by matter. Body and
space are mutually exclusive, and together they make up the
sum total of the universe.

On the nature of the atoms—the only form of the full
existence of matter—there is naturally much more detail.
Their two essential characteristics have already been noticed.
They are in the first place all absolutely homogeneous 1n
substance; there is only one primary matter, although it
exists in the form of infinite discrete particles: here Leu-
cippus places himself of course in the strongest possible

« This is certainly the argument which Leucippus adduced for the infinite
shapes of the atoms (Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 1. 315 b; D.A. 9) and therefore
a fortiori for their infinite number, and its method is supported by the argu-
ment from sensation noticed above in favour of a limit to division.

2 Arist. Metaphys. A. 4.985 b; D.A. 6.

3 See Part II, Chap. III, p. 294-

78 LEUCIPPUS

contrast to Anaxagoras, and by this condition establishes his
own claim to have secured the unity of the fundamental
matter. Secondly, they are indivisible: this attribute 1s no
less essential, for it is again the condition of permanence.
But of this idea there is considerable elaboration. Not
merely did Leucippus speak normally of the atoms as indi-
visible (dS.aipera) or ‘uncuttable’ (droua), but looking at them
sometimes rather from the point of view of their substance
or consistency, he described them as solid! (orépea) or full
(xvxvd, mAnpn), Or, using another of his peculiarly descriptive
technical terms, as ‘compact’ (vaord).2, He appears also to
have given two ‘causes’ for the indivisibility of the atoms,
which are in fact rather in the nature of further descriptions,
but serve to bring out the idea more clearly. The first cause
is that ‘they cannot be acted upon’,3 a notion subsequently
elaborated by Democritus: this does not mean of course that
an atom could not be affected as a whole, for that would pre-
clude motion and so combination, but that it cannot be
internally altered as regards its essential nature or shape:
it is in fact an amplification or explanation of the attribute
of solidity; the atom is absolutely hard sheer matter and
nothing can change its structure—for change of structure, as
will be seen, implies the presence of void. ‘The second ‘cause’
is more characteristic and interesting: the atoms are indi-
visible ‘because they are small and have no parts’.4 Here
there seems in the first place to be a thought of the parallel
of sense-experience by which Leucippus is said to have been
first led to the conception of the atom: in the perceptible
world the smaller a thing is, the more difficult it is to divide
it into parts, and the minimum of perception cannot be so
divided at all without its passing altogether out of the range
of sensation. So with the atom, the miximum of physical
existence: its indivisibility is directly due to its smallness.

t Arist. Metaphys. A. 4. 985 b; D.A. 6.

Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (28. 4); D.A. 8: ri rev arouav
ovoiay vaorny Kal mAnpn trotiéyevos. "The word is unusual and is used
of a kind of close-pressed cake or bread.

3 rHv amdbevay, ibid. in Arist. Phys. Z. 1. 231 a; D.A. 13.

4 TO opiKpov Kal dpmepes, ibid

ATOMS -AND SPACE 79

We may notice incidentally that Democritus by no means
agreed on this point. The statement that ‘the atoms have
no parts’ looks at first sight dangerous, for the Eleatic critics
might well fasten on it and argue that ‘that which has no
parts has no magnitude’, and that therefore Leucippus’
atom was not in reality a physical existence at all. And in-
deed it is clear that later criticism did attack the statement,
and Epicurus had to defend the Atomic position in a very
elaborate argument.’ But to Leucippus no such difficulty
occurred, for to himself his meaning was quite plain. He
did not mean that the atom had no parts in the mathematical
sense, for it had of course extension. He applied the term
in a purely physical sense, and meant that it had no separable
parts: ‘they have no share in the void: there is in their
internal structure no ‘interval’ (8idornua) of space. Indeed
we might not unfairly translate the word he uses (dyepés) as
‘indivisible into parts’. Once again the alleged ‘cause’ 1s
only an amplification of the original epithet ‘indivisible’,
indeed of the word ‘atom’. The atom then is indivisible and
solid, unchangeable and a single inseparable whole: it is in
all these respects the microcosm of the Parmenidean ‘One’.

The ultimate particles then are all alike in texture, and
alike in being indivisible and unalterable. Hlow then can
they produce the countless variety of phenomena? Such
difference in their products must be due to some differences
in themselves. These differences Leucippus} recognized to
be three and expressed them once more in his own quaint
technical terms ‘rhythm’ (gvopés), ‘touching”* (Suabvy7), and
‘turning’ (pom). Aristotle explains these terms to mean

: That already referred to in Ep. i. 55-9.

2 dyotpous Tod Kevod, Simpl. in Arist. de Caelo, A. 7. 2753 D.A. 14.

3 Arist. Metaphys. l.c. Euste. Baie’

4 Beare, op. cit., p. 37, n- 2, inclines to the suggestion that Siabiyy is a
dialectical form of S.abHKn = SudBeors, ‘position in order , but though this
meaning would undoubtedly correspond better to Aristotle’s explanation Tags,
the contact with neighbouring atoms is so vital an element in Atomic composi-
tion that we may well suppose that the old derivati
and that Leucippus thought of order or arrangeme
side’.

on from v Oiy is correct
nt as ‘contact on either

80 LEUCIPP US

respectively ‘shape’ (oxfjza), ‘arrangement’ (rdéis) and ‘posi-
tion’ (@éa1s), and adds an apt illustration’ from the letters of
the alphabet, which he probably derived from Democritus:
A differs from N in shape, AN from N A in arrangement,
and x (the older form of Z) from H in position (1.e. it is
H turned on its side). We may conclude then that ‘rhythm’
is the internal arrangement of parts (of course not separable
parts) or ‘shape’, ‘touching’ is the position of an atom with
regard to other atoms in a series or conglomeration, and
‘turning’ the position of an atom with regard to itself. These
three differences were sufficient according to Leucippus’ view
to account for all the infinite variety of phenomena: for by the
combination of the three differences an infinite complexity
of permutations can be formed. Thus, if we may continue
Democritus’ illustration with the three shapes ANH we
might have as combinations ANH, AHN, A =N, VHN,
&c. Later on the members of the Atomic School worked
out in detail the special ways in which these differences
caused difference of sensational effect, and Democritus in
particular seems to have had especial pleasure in elaborating
this part of the theory; they do not appear to have made
much use of ‘turning’, but roughly speaking accounted for
the direct differences of shape, sound, smell, and taste in
compound things by differences in the shape of component
atoms, and difference in colour in particular by difference
in arrangement. Leucippus probably left the notion general,
except that he did expressly state that the atoms which went
to compose fire were of spherical shape,” doubtless as being
the most mobile.

On the other hand there was one detail on which Leucip-
pus insisted with less than his usual foresight. So eager was
he to be certain that these elementary differences would
account without difference in substance for all the variety of
phenomena that he was not content merely to postulate

t The illustration seems unsatisfactory as it appears in the manuscripts, but
Diels has successfully explained it after Wilamowitz by means of the older
forms of the letter Z written as I.

2 Arist. de Caelo, I’. 4. 303.2; D.A. 15.

ATOMS-AND SPACE 81

difference of shape in the atoms, but asserted that the
number of different shapes was infinite. T'wo reasons are
suggested for this conclusion, both of them interesting and
illustrative of the general attitude of the Atomists: ‘since
they thought truth lay in appearance, and the things of
appearance were infinite and contrary to one another, they
made the shapes (of the atoms) infinite’.!. Here we have once
again the common-sense revolt against the theoretical unity
of Eleaticism: the world is infinitely various and that must
imply infinite variety in that quality in its ultimate con-
stituents which gives rise to the difference of phenomena.
It may be objected that this supposition is really contra-
dictory of the fundamental economy of Atomism,? for by
mere change of order and position it would be possible to
suppose a world created of atoms homogeneous in shape as
well as substance. But Leucippus was opposing Empedocles
and Anaxagoras, and it was natural that having once estab-
lished the fundamental unity of substance he should feel
himself bound to take every opportunity of securing variety
in other ways. The second is an a priori reason which per-
haps savours more of the metaphysical mind of Democritus
than the matter-of-fact Leucippus: “he believed the number
of shapes to be infinite because there was no reason why any
one of them should be of one shape rather than another’.3
It has been pointed out that this in reality proves nothing
more than that it is impossible to predict the shape of any
given atom: their shapes are unassignable but not necessarily
infinite. But it is fully in accordance with the anti-teleo-
logical attitude of the Atomists and they may well have felt
it cogent. The shapes then are infinite in number. Later
criticism perceived the difficulty that since,> after a certain
limit of permutation, difference of shape can only be secured
by increase of size, infinity of shapes must mean that some

x Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 315 b; D.A. 9.

2 See Mabilleau, op. cit., p. 192. ik saree P

3 Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (28.4); D.A. 8: rév ev adrois oxnHa-
Twv dreipov 76 TAROOs Sia TO pNdev UAAAov ToLodrov 7 ToLotTov ctval.

4 Mabilleau, l.c. s See Epicurus, Fp. i., § 56; Lucr. ii. 481 ff.
3307 G

82 LEUCIPPUS

atoms will be of great size and therefore perceptible to the
senses, which is a contradiction of Leucippus’’ own express
assertion that the atoms are ‘invisible owing to the smallness
of their size’. Democritus? indeed appears not to have shrunk
from this consequence, and boldly stated that some atoms
were ‘very large’, but Epicurus realizing the objection which
had escaped his predecessors limited the number of shapes.
For Leucippus the shapes of the atoms were definite} but
unlimited in number, and by this difference together with
those of position and arrangement the atoms were completely
adapted to form an infinite variety of compound bodies
varying in effect for every kind of sense-perception. Aris-
totle clearly suggests the range of possibility: “by changes in
its composition the same thing can seem the opposite to
different people, and can be altered by a small addition and
seem entirely new, if one part of it is shifted: for a tragedy
and a comedy might be written with the same letters’.4
How then did this combination of atoms to form things
come about? For so far we have only the conception of
infinite atoms existing in an empty void which separates
them. Aristotle’s’ general summary gives us the main idea:
the atoms ‘move in empty space . . . and by their coming
together produce coming into being and by their separation
destruction’. Of what nature is this motion and what is its
origin? The two questions are closely linked together but
neither of them is easy to answer. In the first place it seems
clear that the motion was eternal: the atoms are never in the
accounts which are extant said to ‘be’ or to ‘rest’ in the void,
but always to be moving. In the systems of Empedocles

1 Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 8. 325 a; D.A. 7.

2 Dionys. apud Eus. P. E. xiv. 23. 3; D. (Democr.) A. 43: see p. 127.

3 drelpois dplabar oxrjpaor, Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 8.325 b; D.A.7.

4 Ibid. 315b; D.A. 9. The illustration from letters is a very favourite one
with Lucretius (i. 197, 823 ff, 912 #.) and may well go back, like the
‘previous example, to Democritus. 5 de Gen. et Corr, A. 325a; D.A.7.

6 «weicbar, Arist. de Caelo,’.2.300b; D.A. 16; Alex.in Metap. A.4.985b;
D.A.6; Hipp. Ref. 1.12; D.A. 10; PépeoOau, Arist. de gen. et Corr. A. 325 a;
D.A. 7; Simpl. in Arist. PAys. A. 2. 184 (28. 4); D.A. 8; Simpl. in Arist.
de Caelo, A. 7. 2753 DA. 14.

ATOMS AND SPACE 83

and Anaxagoras the original state of the mass of matter had
been regarded as static and compact, and it required the
advent of the extraneous forces of Love and Strife or Mind
to enter in and cause motion which should separate and
break up and so make the start of creation. But in Leucip-
pus’ conception this was not so: no extraneous force was
required to break up the original matter, for it had always
existed in the form of separate particles, and no extraneous
force was required to set the particles.in motion. There
never was a condition of things in which the atoms were at
rest in the void: they had been in motion from all time.
What then was the direction of this motion? This is a
much more difficult question. Epicurus,: who certainly
attributed weight to the atoms, held that their ‘natural’
motion was ‘downwards’, a view which required much ex-
planation with reference to an infinite space,and Democritus?
too had some notion of a connexion of weight and motion.
But there seems to be no trace of such an idea in Leucippus.
The nearest indication of his conception seems to be given
by Simplicius:3 ‘the atoms move in the void and catching
each other up jostle together’ (emxaraAapBavovoas adAyjAas ovy-
xpovecbar). This was of course in all forms of the Atomic
theory regarded as the actual condition of atomic motion
caused by the collisions of moving atoms and the succession
of blows which sent them flying in all directions, but Epi-
curus certainly conceived of a theoretic condition in which
before a single collision, had occurred the atoms were all
moving in the same direction without catching each other
up. This however is due to his belief in weight as the cause
of motion, and it seems safest and most in harmony with the
accounts to suppose that Leucippus did not ee any
two stages, but that for him the condition of jostling an
collision was from the first ‘natural’; in other words that the
eternal motion of the atoms was always in all directions.‘

™ See Ep. i, §§ 60, 61. 2 See Chap. III, pp. 128 ff.
ist. de Caelo, A. 7. 275; D.A. 14.
: aS Ps, ef ac. oe Rh general discussion of the whole question
in Chap. III, § 4, pp. 138 ff.
G2

84 LEUCIPPUS

Such a conclusion would be quite in harmony with the
argument about the infinite shapes of the atoms: for, as
Leucippus might say, ‘there is no reason why motion should
be in one direction more than in another’.

If this be the true account of the character of the atomic
motion, it is necessary to inquire what is its cause. Aristotle
sarcastically complains that Leucippus supplied no answer
to this question: ‘they say that motion is eternal: but what
it is and why it is they do not say nor do they explain the
cause why it is in one direction more than another’ :? and
again ‘the explanation of motion, whence or how it belongs
to the bodies, they indolently omitted’:? his complaint is
echoed by the commentators.3 Now if the character of the
motion attributed to the atoms has been rightly interpreted,
we might reply to part of Aristotle’s question that the reason
why Leucippus did not explain why the motion was in one
direction more than another was that he did not conceive
it to be so. But there remains the more important question
of the cause of motion at all, and it is obvious that we have
thus come back upon the old difficulty of the efficient cause.4
Seeing that this was one of the traditional problems of the
philosophers, it seems at first sight unlikely that Leucippus
should have avoided giving a reply, and indeed our own
difficulty in dealing with the authorities is not that there is
no answer, but that there are too many. Some of these may
certainly be put out of court: Leucippus cannot have said
that the motion was ‘due to force’ (Bia):5 this, as another
commentator® points out, rightly describes the motion result-
ing from the atomic collision, but not the primary andeternal,
or, as Aristotle calls it, the ‘natural’ motion. Nor again could
he have described it as an ‘undesigned (dmpovéyrov) and
fortuitous (rvxaiav) motion’:7 this is a confusion with the

« GAAG Sua th Kal riva od A€yovaw od8 ci WSL <7> HSL THY aiTiav.
Metaphys. A. 6. 1071 b; D.A. 18.

a Metaphys. A. 4. 985 b; D.A. 6.

3 e.g. Alex. commenting on this passage; D.A. 6.

4 See Chap. I, pp. 46-52.

s Simpl. in Arist. de Caelo, I’. 2. 300 b; D.A. 16.

6 Alex. in Metaphys. 4. 4.985 b; D.A. 6. 7 Acti 4.156 DAsza.

ATOMS AND SPACE 86

Atomic descriptions of the concourse of atoms which ‘hap-
pens’ to form a world. If Leucippus gave any answer to
the question at all, it must have been that the cause of motion
was ‘necessity’: there are traces of this answer in the doxo-
graphers," and in the only aphorism?attributed to Leucippus,
he is recorded as saying that ‘nothing occurs at random, but
everything for a reason (é« Adyov) and by necessity’. This was
certainly the answet of Democritus, and if Leucippus gave
it, he meant by necessity, as Democritus did, not the arbi-
trary external force, which his predecessors had called in to
produce any effect which was otherwise unaccountable, but
rather that the atoms in moving obeyed the law of their
own being. The conception of natural law becomes far
more explicit in Democritus, but there is little doubt that
in his whole system, Leucippus too was striving for it and
trying to exclude arbitrary and external forces as far as he
possibly could. And if it be said that from our point of view
it seems arbitrary to assume motion as an essential part of
the nature of the original matter, Leucippus was after all
only returning to the notion of the Ionian Monists. But
perhaps for this very reason it is safest to assume that Aris-
totle is literally correct and that Leucippus did not assign
any cause for the original motion. As Burnet has ingeni-
ously argued, it was when motion had to be introduced as the
cause of the separation of an originally compact mass, whose
nature was to be continuous and motionless, that it was
necessary to explain its origin. Leucippus might well sup-
pose that having demonstrated the existence of a world in
which matter was already discrete, it was unnecessary to
account further for motion: the existence of empty space was,
as it were, itself the cause of motion as it was of separation.
Motion was eternal and therefore ‘natural’: you cannot ask
for its cause any more than you can for the reason why the
primary matter existed in the form of particles. However
this may be, the uncertainty with regard to Leucippus on

1 Fi i. 123 D.A. 10 speaks of the process of world-formation as
= aay a. oe: similarly ale that Leucippus does
not state what this advdyxy is. a DB. 2. 3 £.G. P.3, p. 341-

86 LEUCIPP US

this point is not due merely to the accident of tradition: it
is one of the many signs that Atomism was as yet in its
infancy. It was not till later developments that the solution
appeared or even the difficulty was clearly comprehended.

The primary result of motion is collision between the
atoms: ‘they move in the void striking one another and
jostling’! And collision may have two results: either the
colliding atoms recoil and fly off again moving in new
directions, or they may become entangled with one another,
and this entanglement is the first beginning of the creation
of things. The two processes are well described by Sim-
plicius:? ‘they move in the void and catching each other up
jostle together, and some recoil in any direction that may
chance, and others become entangled with one another in
various degrees according to the symmetry of their shapes
and sizes and positions and order, and they remain together
and thus the coming into being of composite things is
effected’. The atoms which recoil may of course at some
future time enter into combination, when they light upon
a ‘symmetry’ better suited to them, but it must be noted that
the Atomists always assume at any given moment a large
number of ‘free’ atoms moving about independently of com-
binations: indeed the ‘odds’, so to speak, are always large
against the meeting of atoms with the right shape and
position and order to form things. But from time to time
such combination does take place and it is important to
understand its character clearly.

The most usual description of it is certainly “entangle-
ment’,3 which seems to express the idea elaborated in the
above account: a projection, for instance, in one atom will
catch in a depression in another, an atom arriving in a certain
position will fit in to an already formed nucleus, an atomic
group in a certain order will fit on to another group: all the
‘differences’ of the atoms, shapes, position, and arrange-

1 Alex. l.c.; D.A. 6. 2 de Caelo, 242.15; D.A. 14.

3. mepimAeKeoOar, Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 325; D.A.7; Simpl. in Arist.
de Caelo, A. 7.2753; D.L. ix. 30; D.A. 13 ovpemAony, Arist. de Caelo, I. 4.
303 a; D.A. 15.

ATOMS AND. SPACE 87

ment come into play as determining factors. The general
idea is clear but there are two points of special importance
about the atomic combinations, which are brought out by
Aristotle’s comments on Leucippus.’ In the first place the
atoms ‘act and are acted upon as they chance to touch one
another: for in this respect they are not one’. Similarly later
on in the same passage he states that ‘creation comes about
by touching’. The sole relation between atom and atom is
that of contact: it is contact which can repel them from one
another and make them fly apart again, and contact no less
which is their form of union, if they remain together. In
other words, the atoms never so unite as to merge into one
another or lose their identity in a new ‘one’ which they so
form. However closely they may be packed, however
exactly their shapes fit into one another, there is always
between each of them an ‘interval’ of empty space. This
notion is of paramount importance for the understanding
of the ancient Atomic theory and stands in marked contrast
to modern ideas. For the ancients the combination of atoms
was always merely that of juxtaposition. Anaxagoras,” as we
have seen, in his theory of the ‘mixture’ came somewhere
near the notion of a complete fusion, in which the identity
of the original constituents is lost in the new substance, and
such is of course the root-notion of the modern theory of
chemical combination. But for Leucippus and his followers
such a conception was impossible: indeed it would be a
contradiction of the most fundamental principles, for it would
be an alteration of the primary substance, which would of
necessity destroy the ultimate permanence of reality. The
atoms then in juxtaposition produce what 1s for appearance
a ‘one’: but it is not so in reality, for it 1s not continuous
matter, but matter in tiny particles aggregated together but
separated by intervals of empty space, between every one
of them. ‘Out of the One in the strict sense multiplicity
could not be produced, nor unity in the full sense out of the
Many, for that is impossible.’3

1 de Gen. et Corr. A. 3254; D.A. 7.

2 See Chap. I, pp. 38 #. 3 Arist. de Gen. et Corr. l.c.

88 > LEUCHEP Us

A second point of hardly less importance is vouched for,
as far as Leucippus is concerned, only by a casual mention
in Aristotle:* ‘all things are created’, he says, ‘by the en-
tanglement of the atoms and their oscillation’ (wepurddagis).
The word looks again like one of Leucippus’ peculiarly
descriptive technical terms, and though the doctrine only
reached its full importance in Democritus or even in Epi-
curus, there seems no reason for denying its suggestion to
Leucippus. The motion of the atoms is eternal; therefore
even when they are in contact with one another in a com-
pound body, even physically linked by their projections to
one another, their motions still continue. The atoms con-
tinue to perform tiny trajects, greater or less according to the
texture of the compound, colliding with one another in
infinitesimal periods of time, and recoiling again to another
collision: every compound body, every ‘thing’ that we per-
ceive by the senses is in a constant state of internal atomic
vibration. ‘Thisextraordinarily penetrating idea, whichseems
indeed a wonderful anticipation of the beliefs of modern
science, was destined to play an important part in atomic
theories of motion:? it does not appear that Leucippus
worked out its consequences, but we may fairly trust to
Aristotle’s statement that he had the idea.

When once the compound is formed, the void in its com-
position is the determining factor in its fate: ‘it is owing to
the void that dissolution and destruction take place and
likewise increase too, through the entrance of solid particles
(sc. atoms)’.3 Aristotle compares the idea to Empedocles’
notion of the pores, to which indeed Leucippus may have
owed much of his physics, and it is not difficult to under-
stand. Into the tiny intervals of empty space in the com-
pound new atoms will enter in their flight from outside.
Occasionally their ‘shape or position or order’ will fit them
to become entangled in their turn and increase the bulk of
the compound: as long as this happens the thing grows.

t de Caelo, I’. 4. 303.a; D.A. 15.
2 Especially in Epicurus: see Part II, Chap. V, pp. 331 ff.
3 Arist. de Gen. et Corr. l.c.

ATOMS AND SPACE 89

But sometimes a particle unsuited to join the compound may
enter in a space-interval with such velocity that its force will
split up the compound body, loosen the hold of the original
atoms and break up their juxtaposition: if the dissolution
thus effected is comparatively light, the dislocation may be
only momentary, or perhaps only a part of the compound
may be broken off and a lessening or decay (fOivew) be
caused, which is the reverse of the process of growth. But
it may be, especially if the compound has already been
weakened by many such ‘blows’ that the new force will be
strong enough to break it up altogether: then will follow
dissolution: the compound body will be destroyed, will cease
to exist, and the atoms which composed it will again become
‘free’ or enter into some new compound. Creation, growth,
decay, destruction are thus the successive stages in the
history of the compound body, each being a form of atomic
‘combination’ or ‘dissolution’. But even apart from these
irruptions from without, the compound body may also suffer
change, the result not now of the entrance of new atoms, but
of a shifting of the position or order of those which already
compose it.? As the result of an external blow or merely by
a kaleidoscopic shifting in the course of the internal vibra-
tion, the absolute or relative positions of the component
atoms may be altered, and then a change will take place in
the body which will be felt in its sensational effect: the shape,
or colour, or sound, or smell, or taste of the thing will be
altered. Once again the details of this idea were worked out
later, but Leucippus seems to have laid the foundation. ©
The whole conception of the nature of the atoms, their
motions and combinations is extraordinarily subtle and full
of insight. When it is realized that it comes from a pioneer,
succeeding to theories so very different in character, it 1s
remarkable that he should have been able not merely to
reach the main conception by means of which they might »

\ Ua
1 Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 315 b; D.A. 9. SuaKpicer pev Ke VER
yéveow Kal pOopav. Aristotle, though he correctly describes the pr *
seems to be using the technical terms of Anaxagoras.
2 Ibid. rd&eu S€ Kal Béoe dAdoiwow.

90 LE UCIPPUS

be reconciled, but to work it out into so delicate and yet
economical an explanation of the fundamental nature of
the universe. Much still remained to be done in the way
of development and addition—not always felicitous—but
all the main ideas of the nature and conduct of the atoms are
there from the first in the theory of Leucippus.

§ 4. Cosmogony: the creation of worlds

In the first chapter it seemed best not to enter into the
particulars of the early cosmogonies, because they can easily
be studied elsewhere and the mass of detail involved would
have obscured the main issues. For the same reason it will
be sufficient here to note the source of Leucippus’ principal
ideas as we come to them, and to take his cosmogony as
a starting-point, the basis on which later upholders of the
Atomic theory had to build. A full account of his main
views on the creation of worlds is given by Diogenes’ and
is confirmed in some details by an abstract of part of the
“Greater World-system’ which has survived and by a few
notices in the doxographers. It is to some extent expressed
in the terms of a later age, but no doubt preserves the ideas
of Leucippus accurately enough, and here and there has
traces embedded in it of what must have been his own

phraseology:

He says that the whole is infinite ; that part of it is full and part empty,
and these are the elements. Out of these are formed an infinite
number of worlds and into these they are dissolved. The worlds are
produced in this way; a large number of atoms of all kinds of shapes
are carried by severance from the boundless (kaz” dzoropiy ex Tod
a7re(pov) into a great void: they gather together and form into a single
whirl (diy), in which they collide with one another and circle round
in all sorts of ways, and separate apart, like joining like. And when
they can no longer whirl round in equilibrium owing to the congestion,
the fine bodies go into the outer void, as if sifted out; but the rest re-
main together and becoming entangled, unite their motions with one
anotherand forma kind of first sphericalcompound mass: and this mass
stands apart as a sort of membrane, enclosing in itself atoms of all

t D.L. ix. 33,23) DiAom

.COSMOGONY : CREATION OF WORLDS o1
kinds. And as they whirl round in virtue of the resistance of
the centre, the membrane all round becomes thin, as the contiguous
bodies always flow together owing to the contact throughout the whirl.
And thus the earth is brought into being, when the particles, which are
carried towards the centre, remain together. And once more the
enclosing membrane is increased, as bodies outside separate out and
join it:* and as it moves on in the whirl, it adds to itself whatever it
touches. Some of these bodies cohere and make a compound mass, at
first watery and muddy, but afterwards becoming dry, as they move
round with the whirl of the whole system, and then catching fire, they
form the material for the heavenly bodies. ;

At this point the account goes on to deal with astronomical
questions and the conformation of our earth and its conse-
quencesin a passage which will best be considered separately,
and then concludes: ‘and just like the creation of the worlds,’
so also their growth and waning and passing away take place
owing to some kind of necessity, but what this is he does
not make clear’.

There are many points in this account which require com=
ment, and, if it is possible to get a clear idea of Leucippus
conception, it will lay the best foundation for the under-
standing of later theories. The underlying notion of the
infinite ‘whole’ as consisting of the two ‘elements’, ‘the full
and ‘the empty’, is of course derived directly from the root-
principle of atomism, and it is quite clear that here, ‘the
empty’ is regarded as that which is, where matter 1s not, the
two ‘elements’ are mutually exclusive. But it must be re-
membered that owing to the eternal movement of the atoms,
‘the full’ and ‘the empty’ are constantly changing places:
a spot which is occupied one moment will be empty the
next and vice versa. Leucippus follows the lead of all
previous philosophers except Heraclitus and eases in
holding that our ‘world’ is not unique, but only one of many,
indeed an infinite number of similar worlds. For him this
would be a natural deduction from the infinity of the atoms
and space: there ts no reason why atoms should gather to

t Reading éméxxpiow with Diels, 2nd ed. ; :
YT KOUJLOV.
2 The plurals yevéoeis, advéjoets, &c.,seem to demand xécpwv fo pL

92 LEUCIPPUS

form a world at one time or in one part of space any more
than at another time and place: but the idea forms part of
the cosmogonical tradition, and we find it already in Anaxi-
mander.' The next point is curious and shows Leucippus’
tenacity of tradition. It seems that he held the notion that
in origin the atoms moved in empty space united in a mass
of matter which he speaks of as ‘the boundless’? (76 dzretpov).
This notion is not of course essential to Atomism, indeed it
is repugnant to it, for the atoms in the pre-cosmic state are
far more naturally conceived, as in later theories, as freely
dispersed throughout the whole of infinite space. But
Leucippus doubtless wished to attach his new theory to
previous views, and intended to recall both Anaximander’s
conception of ‘the boundless’ and the more recent ‘Mixture’
of Anaxagoras. None the less, it would not be right to
conceive Leucippus’ atomic mass as a full corporeal plenum:
even in this original condition there must be an interval of
‘the empty’ between atom and atom and also movement.
From this conglomerated mass from time to time a large
number of atoms are ‘severed and fall into a great void’,3
a portion, that is of hitherto unoccupied space, which is
therefore suitable for the creation of a world. Diogenes’
phraseology at this point suggests that he is quoting Leucip-
pus’ own words, and once again the idea of the breaking off
of a mass of atoms recalls Anaximander’s ‘separating out of
opposites’ from ‘the boundless’, and more closely the break-
ing away of ‘seeds’ in Anaxagoras’ theory. When Atomism
became more free from tradition, this consequential con-
ception of ‘the boundless’ likewise disappeared.

The idea of the ‘whirl’ (8) is characteristic of the
Atomic School at all its stages, but the account given by

t [Plut.] Strom. 2; D. 10 (Anaximander).

? Gomperz, G. T., p. 335, renders Kar’ dmoropiy é€k rod dmelpov
‘severing themselves from the infinite vacuum’, but it is hard to attach any
meaning to this, and ‘the boundless’ must surely be the concentrated mass of
matter, as in the theories of Anaximander and Anaxagoras.

3 eis peya Kevdv certainly does not mean, as some critics have rendered it,
‘into the great void’.

COSMOGONY : CREATION OF WORLDS 93

Diogenes of its formation and development is obscure. Some
of the difficulties to which it gives rise will be better con-
sidered in the light of the theories of Democritus, but the
general picture can be grasped. ‘The conception of a ‘whirl’
is in fact already found in Anaxagoras, for with him" it was
a rotatory motion which was originally communicated by
‘mind’ to portions of the ‘mixture’ and was maintained after
they had broken off to form a world. The notion is no doubt
derived from the actual appearance of the heavens as the
inside of a hollow sphere, in which the heavenly bodies
move in circles.

As to the cause of the ‘whirl’—the reason, that is, why this
mass of atoms should develop a circular motion, Leucippus
once again, as in regard to the original motion of the atoms,
could only say, if he did indeed assign a reason at all,’ that it
was ‘necessity’, by which here too he probably meant not
an arbitrary force but the natural process of cause and effect.
The atoms moved according to a law of their own being:
they would unite in the void in all sorts of formations and
one of these might be a ‘whirl’: if it was, a ‘cosmos’ resulted.

The ‘vortex’ once formed, four stages are apparently dis-
tinguished. In the first stage the motion of the ‘whirl’
affects all the atoms uniformly, but they still retain their
original motion as well and move about ‘colliding and
circling in all sorts of ways’. The general result is expressed
in terms familiar in the cosmology of Anaxagoras: the atoms
are ‘separated out’ (Svaxpiverar) and ‘like joins like’. Now for
Anaxagoras the meaning is clear enough: the ‘likeness 1s
that of substance, seeds similar in their prevailing substance
are sifted out from the ‘mixture’ and come together: but
what can be the meaning for the Atomists, whose primary
particles are all absolutely homogeneous in substance? The
reference must be to the only points in which there can be

« See pp. 40 ff.
2 Diogenes’ complaint lo
as to the efficient cause, and we must no

statement that Leucippus attributed the creation ©
see above, p. 90.

oks like an echo of the dissatisfaction of Aristotle
t attach too much importance to his
f worlds to avayKn:

94 LEUCIPPUS

difference between atoms, regarded individually, namely,
shape and size. Those of similar shape come together: the
larger join the larger, the smaller the smaller. The conception
is clearly brought out by the famous illustration which is
attributed to Democritus, but was probably a common-place
of the Atomists: ‘for among animals? too like herds with
like, doves with doves, and cranes with cranes, and so on
with other beasts: and similarly in the case of inanimate
things, as we can see with seeds in a sieve and pebbles on
the shore: for in the whirling (Sivos) of the sieve beans range
themselves apart with beans and barley with barley and
wheat with wheat, and by the motion of the waves large
stones are driven to the same place with other large stones
and round with round, just as if the similarity among them
had an attractive force’. The reference in the last example
to size and shape as the determining elements is explicit,
and there is an exact parallel to the first effect-of the whirl.
The second and third stages are more difficult to under-
stand, but are not, I think, really confused in thought. The
atoms in their original free motion outside the whirl were
‘in equilibrium’ (iodppora): that is, as Burnet3 has clearly
shown, their ‘tendency to move in one direction is exactly
equal to the tendency in any other’. But now the uniform
direction of the whirl has produced a congestion (mAj6os),
which impedes the free exercise of the original motion in all
directions. The result is that the ‘fine’, that is the ‘smaller’,
atoms are, by a characteristic atomic conception which is
used to explain all upward motion,‘ caught between the
larger atoms and ‘squeezed out’s into the outer void. The
larger atoms remain behind and ‘stay together’ :6 interlacing

* See Liepmann, Die Mechanik der Leucipp-Democritischen Atome, p. 27.

2 D. (Democritus) B. 164.

3 E.G. P.3, p. 345. There is no question here of weight, nor is there,
I think, in any other part of Leucippus’ theory: Democritus first spoke of
‘heavier’ and ‘lighter’ atoms in a sense which needs explanation : see pp- 128 ff.

4 The ods, Arist. de Caelo, A. 6. 313 a; D. (Democritus) A. 62.

5 Diogenes says ‘sifted out’ (Suarrdpeva), but the corresponding account
in Aet. 1. 4. 2; D.A. 24 has the characteristic atomic term efe0AiBero.

6 cuppevew, the technical word for compound bodies.

COSMOGONY : CREATION OF WORLDS 95

and uniting their motions (ovyxatarpéxew), they form into
the first spherical body’. At the end then of the second
stage we must conceive the ‘whirl’ as filled with more or less
compactness by this mass of the larger atoms, separated of
course by intervals of void, retaining individually something
of their former motion in all directions, but all affected by the
single rotatory motion of the whirl. ‘This mass is described
picturesquely by Leucippus as a ‘membrane’ (Jy7jv), which
‘stands apart’ (d¢iorac#ar) as an individual formation amid the
indiscriminate movement of the surrounding universe: it
contains in itself atoms of every size and shape.

In the third stage the effect of the rotatory motion becomes
still more definite, and modern criticism has done much to
elucidate the rather cryptic phraseology of our account. The
whirl, as Aristotle’ tells us, was always conceived by the
philosophers who spoke of it on the analogy of an eddy of
wind or water. From this two results follow: in the first
place it must be thought of as horizontal, not vertical, so
that motion from the centre outwards or vice versa is not
motion ‘up’ or ‘down’. In the second, it must not be thought
of either as a conglomeration of disconnected and inde-
pendent atoms or bits of compound matter, moved in rota-
tion by an external force, nor on the other as possessing the
complete connexion or rigidity of a revolving solid wheel or
plate. Its component parts are independent in the sense
that they are always intersected by intervals of empty space,
_ but they are connected owing to the contact (eripavors) of
contiguous atoms which holds good throughout the whirl.
In other words the ‘spherical’ mass 1s a revolving body with
the kind of elasticity which might belong, for example, to
a wheel made of chain-mail—indeed even that would be
too rigid an illustration, and the notion of the water-eddy
gives the best idea. This being so the rotatory motion 1s

: de Caelo, B. 13. 295 a3 Burnet, £.G. P.3 346 has completely defended
Leucippus against Gomperz’s charge of blindness in not perceiving and using
the idea of ‘centrifugal force’. His explanation of the character of the whirl

ss ~ / > /
and of the ‘resistance of the middle’ (7 tod peoov dvrépeois) seem to me

convincing.

96 LEUCIPPUS

quickest and strongest at the outer edge, and there it is
impossible for any atom or atomic nucleus to resist the whirl.
Thanks to the chain of contiguous atoms the motion is com-
municated from the outer edge towards the centre, but the
nearer it approaches the centre, the weaker and slower it
becomes: at the centre itself there is a possibility of complete
‘resistance’ to the rotation. Just then as might be the case
with sticks thrown into an eddy of water, the larger atoms
and the more solid of the atomic nuclei! now formed tend in
proportion to their bulk to gather towards the centre: their
size? gives them the capacity of resisting the whirl and they
gather together where resistance is most easy. Two conse-
quences follow. On the one hand the outer part of the
membrane is thinned, as in it are left only those ‘finer’ and
‘smaller’ bodies which offer least resistance and are carried
on by the vortex, on the other the comparatively unmoving
mass in the centre becomes more and more compact and
forms what for the first time may be described as ‘an earth’.
A marked distinction now arises between this central body
and the outer ‘membrane’, which, although always in con-
tact with it owing to the atomic ‘contiguity’, yet becomes
more markedly independent both in character and position.

The last stage is concerned solely with the development
of the outer ‘membrane’. It receives no more accessions
from within the sphere and is indeed in itself wholly rarified,
containing only the ‘finest’ of the bodies: but as it whirls
round it attracts ‘bodies’—again probably, both atoms and
atomic nuclei—from the outer universe. These are caught
up in the whirl, and uniting into compounds with one
another, form large masses, which gradually drying and even
igniting owing to the rapidity of the whirl, become the fiery
substance of sun, moon, and stars. The cosmos is then com-

« I do not think with Burnet that in this stage we are any longer dealing
solely with ‘larger and smaller atoms’; the second stage has clearly led to the
formation of atomic nuclei and compounds, and in the third ‘bodies’ must be
held to include both.

* As will be seen it is at this point in the system that Democritus begins
to speak of ‘heavier’ and ‘lighter’ bodies.

COSMOGONY : CREATION OF WORLDS 97

plete, and a ‘world’, as we know it, has been evolved. The
account does not add, as Leucippus must have held, that the
interval between the outer membrane and the earth is filled
up and the link of contact supplied by the intervening air.

In Leucippus’ cosmogony there are, as has been inciden-
tally noticed, many features which recall the ideas of Anaxa-
goras and even go back to the earlier speculations of the
Ionian philosophers. It may indeed be called ‘reactionary’!
in the sense that Leucippus undoubtedly desired here, as
elsewhere, to attach himself closely to previous philosophical
tradition. But it is surely remarkable that with all this con-
servatism he has been able to present the process of world
creation in the vortex in a manner essentially his own,
developed naturally from his own main contentions and
gaining thereby a coherence and a scientific character which
it never before possessed. The whirl itself is no longer a
causeless, superimposed form of motion, but one of the
many which result naturally from the free atomic movement;
and its effects are no longer arbitrary, but deduced with a
high degree of accurate imagination from the data of its
character: the joining of ‘like to like’, the aggregation of the
larger earth-particles in the centre, the rush of the light
ether-particles to the outer rim are now all accounted for by
a ‘necessity’ which is not an extraneous power, but the
natural manifestation of causation. His originality consists
not in a wholly new imagination, but in the brilliant adapta-
tion of previous notions to his own main position, and the
explanation of them by its means. Those who are interested
in the anticipation of modern ideas may notice a distinct
resemblance throughout to the main conceptions of the
‘nebular hypothesis’, and will be struck again with the notion
of the drying and ignition of solid bodies owing to the
rapidity of the motion of the whirl. In short Leucippus
cosmogony is not an attempt to break away from previous
tradition, but to harmonize that tradition with new condi-
tions. It shows a very notable faculty of adjustment and is
not without prophetic insight.

t BD. God 3ype 347:
3307 H

98 LEUCIPPUS

We may now proceed to the details of the world thus
formed which are mostly derived from the small section in
Diogenes’ account previously omitted: ‘the orbit of the sun
is outermost, that of the moon nearest the earth, those of the
other heavenly bodies between these two. All of them catch
fire owing to the rapidity of their motion and the sun also
receives flame from the stars; but the moon has but a small
share in the fire. And the sun and moon are eclipsed (and
the obliquity of the zodiac is caused *) by the inclination of the
earth towards the south; and the northern regions are always
under snow and are cold and frozen. The sun is eclipsed
rarely and the moon continually because their orbits are
uneven’. The earth then is the centre of the world. The
geocentric idea was held by all the early philosophers, except
the Pythagoreans, who believed in a ‘oreat fire’ in the centre.
Leucippus did not oppose the general tradition, and by
placing the earth in the centre could also explain how it was
held at rest by the ‘resistance of the centre’, and so being
motionless remain solid and moist. In orbits at various dis-
tances from the earth revolved the moon, the stars, and the
sun. This was a direct contradiction of the traditional view,
which placed the orbit of the stars outside that of the sun,
but it was held by Anaximander? and Leucippus’ reason for
adopting it was doubtless that, as the sun gives more light
than the stars, it must be more completely on fire and must
therefore be placed where the speed of the ‘whirl’ is greatest.
It is clear from the theory of eclipses, as due to the passing
of sun and moon behind the raised northern parts of the
world, that all three orbits were regarded as horizontal to
the earth and not, as was usually conceived, perpendicular:
the whole ‘whirl’ must therefore be imagined as lying in a
horizontal plane. No distinction is made between fixed stars
and planets, although this again had long been observed.
The statement that the sun is ‘also kindled (éxmvpodo8a) by
the stars’ is not easy to interpret, but was no doubt intended

: These words are not in the manuscripts, but can be supplied with

certainty.
2 Aet. ii. 15. 6; D. (Anaximander) 18.

COSMOGONY : CREATION OF WORLDS 99

to explain its superior brightness, and is probably connected
with his general atomic view: just as ‘the membrane’ caught
up particles from the void to form fuel for the heavenly
bodies generally, so presumably the sun in its orbit attracted
fire from the neighbouring stars—but the notion js not clear
without further explanation than we possess. The moon does
not apparently get her light from the sun, as even Anaxi-
mander* had held, but simply has ‘less of the fire’. ‘There is
much that seems wilfully childish in all this, but possibly
a fuller account of Leucippus’ reasons would make it clear
why in so many instances he went back to very antiquated
notions.

Almost more puerile is his idea of the earth’s shape and
position and the consequences. The earth itself is ‘drum-
shaped’, that is of the flat shape which we associate rather
with the tambourine: the shape of the earth was always a
traditional matter of controversy among the cosmologists,
and Leucippus once more returns to a notion of Anaxi-
mander,3 who described the earth as ‘the drum of a column’.
It was tilted up towards the north and down towards the
south, because the atmosphere‘ in the southern parts was
warm and therefore thin in texture, that in the north chilled
and frozen, and therefore more solid and better able to sup-
port the earth: the notion is again primitive, but Leucippus
manages to support it in relation to his general atomic and
cosmological theories. To this tilting of the earth are due
the eclipses of sun and moon, which occur when they pass
behind the northern regions, and similarly the cycle of the
zodiac seems oblique apparently because the earth itself is
tilted in relation to it: Anaximenes5 had already used the
same idea to explain night, but that Leucippus should have
had recourse to this ancient notion of eclipses is the more
remarkable since both Empedocles and Anaxagoras had

t D.L. ii. 1; D. (Anaximander) r.

* ruprravoedijs, Aet. iii. 10. 4; D.A. 26.

3 Aet. iii. 10. 2; D. (Anaximander) 25.

4 Aet. iti. 12. 1; D.A. 27. :

s Arist. Meteor. B. 1. 354.2; D (Anaximenes) A. 14.
H 2

100 LEUCIPPUS

rightly explained them. The more frequent eclipse of the
moon is due to the greater proximity of its orbit to the earth -
and its consequent comparative shortness. é

Leucippus no doubt also discussed meteorological pheno-
mena in the traditional manner of the early philosophers, but
all that survives to us is his explanation of thunder, which is
mainly of interest because it is markedly different from that
of Democritus: ‘when fire that is caught in very thick clouds
falls out, it produces a loud clap of thunder’.! Once again
this simple belief comes from Anaximander.

In comparison with the brilliance and originality of
Leucippus’ main atomic theory, his cosmology seems dis-
appointing and lacking in independence. Not only does he
show an extreme tenacity in retaining the views of previous
thinkers, but, at any rate in the details of his world-system,
a wilful perverseness in neglecting recent ideas and returning
to the antiquated notions of Anaximander and Anaximenes.
Burnet? indeed believes his whole cosmology to be based on
Ionian ideas and would account for it on the ground that
Leucippus was unwilling to accept a cosmology from the
Eleatics, who, though their views had been so divergent
from his own, had yet suggested Atomism to him, and wish-
ing his theories to be consistently divergent from those of the
Pluralists, was necessarily driven back on to those of the
Ionians. But surely, if the analysis given above be at all
correct, we must draw a great distinction between the main
theory of the creation of the world and the subsequent astro-
nomical details. In the former, although there is no doubt
much that suggests, and is intended to suggest, the old
Ionian views, it is impossible to deny either the very close
relation of Leucippus’ system to that of Anaxagoras, or
the ingenuity with which previous theories are adapted to
suit the new conditions of Atomism. As far as this main
theory is concerned, it would be truer to say that Leucippus,
just as in his Atomic theory itself, wished to appear as the
mediator between his predecessors. He accordingly con-
structed an account in which many conceptions were meant

t Aet. ili. 3. 10; D.A. 25. a, £2 GP; ps 339-

COSMOGONY : CREATION OF WORLDS: 1or

to recall the views of earlier philosophers, both of the old
Monists and more particularly of Anaxagoras. But for all
its reminiscences the whole is conceived directly on the basis
of his own Atomic theory, and the more closely we inquire
into details the more apparent becomes the insight with
which it was worked out: it has possibly seemed unduly crude
to the critics, because it has not been fully understood. But
the details of the world-system stand altogether on a different
plane and do often show a blindness which is certainly un-
worthy of the rest of his theory. He not only disregards the
theories of the Pythagoreans who, by abandoning the notion
of a geocentric world, had made an advance in science com-
parable in antiquity only to Atomism itself, but, what is more
serious in the light of his ideas of creation, he makes no use
at all of the often far-sighted theories of Empedocies and
Anaxagoras. It is indeed difficult to account for this blind-
ness, but the subsequent history of Atomism would suggest
that the true explanation is that while his primary interest
lay in the first principles of the Atomic theory and in the
main outlines of cosmology, he was comparatively indifferent
to astronomical details, and was content to accept current
popular notions without considering the more serious con-
jectures of his contemporaries: there are not wanting traces
of a similar attitude both in Democritus and Epicurus.

§ 5. The soul, sensation, and theory of knowledge

Certain notices have come down to us concerning Leucip-
pus’ theories on psychology and metaphysic—to use modern
terms. In each case he is associated with Democritus and it
is a little difficult to know how far the views may not really
be rather due to the latter: on the analogy of other parts of
the system, where we have more explicit information, it 1s
probably safe to attribute to Leucippus the first outline of
ideas which Democritus subsequently elaborated.

The soul (pvy7) had been conceived by the early philo-
sophers as the cause of life in the body and also, after they
began to reflect on the subject, as the cause of sensation.
They regarded it as distributed over the body and of course

102 LEUCIPPUS

as a material existence just like everything else. They were
therefore from the first interested in discussing the sub-
stance of which it was composed. Anaximander, for what
reason we do not know, described it as ‘like air’* (depwéns),
and Anaximenes, wishing no doubt to associate the soul with
the primal substance, definitely stated that it was ‘airy’?
(depia). Heraclitus for the same reason called it an ‘exhala-
tion’3 (dvafvupiacs), the word by which he described the
passing of all other substances into the primal fire. Anaxa-
goras* had gone back on the older idea that it was ‘like air’,
but Leucippus5 returned to Heraclitus’ notion that it was
fire. His reason is characteristic and typical of the way in
which he adapted previous notions to his own general
theory: fire was composed of spherical atoms, and Leucippus
decided that it must be spherical atoms also which made the
soul: ‘because “rhythms’’® of this kind can most easily pene-
trate through everything and can move other things as they
move themselves’. ‘The idea is naive, but ingenious. The
spherical shape is the least able to remain at rest and there-
fore the most mobile: fire in the external world and the soul
within us are the most mobile things we know: therefore
they must both be composed of spherical atoms and be
alike in substance. Moreover, a spherical shape can not
only move itself but also move anything in which it may be
contained: the spherical soul-atoms distributed over the body
and rolling about move the limbs, much as a marble will
move a small doll, and in this way it is the soul which ‘gives
living things their power of movement’. The intense
materialism of the idea seems strange to us, but if it once
be granted, the reasoning is acute and was destined to hold
its place with Democritus.
Aristotle? has preserved another doctrine of Leucippus’
« Aet. iv. 3. 2; D. (Anaximander) 29.
* Philopon. in Arist. de Anima, Prooem.; D. (Anaximenes) A. 23.
3 Arist. de Anima, A. 2. 405a.; Aet. iv. 3. 12; D. (Heraclitus) A. 15.
4 Aet. iv. 3. 1; D. (Anaxagoras) A. 93.
5 Arist. de Anima, A. 2.404 a; D.A. 28.
6
7

pvopovs, i.e. ‘shapes’, Leucippus’ own technical term: see p. 79.
lc.

SOUL, SENSATION, AND KNOWLEDGE 103

which is equally interesting: he thought ‘that respiration is
the limit (dpos) of life’-—that is, that when respiration ceases,
so does life.

‘For assurrounding matter presses together our bodies and squeezes out
atoms of the shape which cause motion in living creatures because even
by themselves they can never remain still (i.e. the spherical atoms),
assistance comes from without when other atoms of the same kind
enter in in respiration. For these also prevent those which are already
in the living creatures from being separated out, by assisting in driving
back that which is pressing and contracting them. And they live as
long as they are able to do this.’

The general idea of the importance of respiration to life
comes no doubt from Empedocles,' but once more Leucip-
pus has ingeniously modified the notion of its process and
function on atomic lines. The relation of the surrounding
atmosphere to the living creature is conceived as closely
parailel to that of the outer universe to the created world:
it is at once a source of supply and a danger. The body is at
every moment subject to blows, which tend to disrupt it and
‘squeeze out’ atoms from its structure, the spherical soul-
atoms as muchas others. But for long it is able by respiration
to take in fresh supplies of soul-atoms, which not only add
to its vitality and maintain the power of motion, but also
act as a kind of buffer to those already within the body
against the continuing attacks. But either through some
sudden blow of tremendous force, or by the gradual reversal
of the balance, the attack ultimately gains the upper hand:
respiration fails, the supply of soul-atoms ceases, and life
passes from the body. The whole idea is a special and careful
application of Leucippus’? general theory of growth, decay,
and destruction. eee
Leucippus is also credited by the authorities with having
originated the famous theory of vision, which was so promi-
nent in the Atomic theory. Once more Empedocles 1s cer-
tainly the source. It will be remembered that the theory
of Empedocles,}that vision was due to the fitting of effluences

t i t t of the process in D. (Empedocles) B. 100.
anes 5 See Chap. I, § 3s Pe 54

104. LEUCIPPUS

from things into the pores of the eyes, like perceiving like,
stood apart from the general current of ideas of vision, in
that it took no account of the image in the pupil (eudacs).
Leucippus adopting the general notior that perception must
be due to contact and that therefore there must be some
‘efluence’ from the object to the eye, was, thanks to the
atomic theory, able both to explain what this eflluence was
and to connect it with the image seen in the eye. He said that
‘idols * (ciSwAa) flow off, similar in shape to the objects from
which they flow, that is to say, visible things, and fall into
the eyes of the persons seeing and that sight results in this
way’. This brief account may be a little amplified from our
general knowledge of Atomism. The idea which he held
generally of the constant efflux of atoms from things, broken
off or squeezed out by blows external and internal, enabled
Leucippus to explain without difficulty how effuences might
arise. Moreover, he could now show that these effuences
would bear a direct relation to the thing from which they
came: for they would be in fact, as was more carefully ex-
plained later on, a sort of thin atomic film arising from the
surface of the visible object, and therefore exactly ‘similar
to itin shape’. This film or ‘idol’ he conceived as traversing
the intervening space, entering the eye and then itself be-
coming the ocular image (eudacis). The idea is as yet crude:
it was to be greatly refined and modified by Democritus, but
Epicurus, anxious to leave as little chance as possible for
error in perception, returned to an idea not far removed from
that of Leucippus. We are told briefly that Leucippus ex-
plained the other senses too as ‘alterations of the body’,? and
may suppose that in their case also he worked out the main
atomic ideas of the nature of the effluences and their action
on the senses. More important is the attribution to him of
the belief that ‘thought too takes place when “‘idols’’ come
in from without: for neither sensation nor thought can grasp
anything (émBdAAew) apart from the “idol” which falls upon
them’.3 The identification of the processes of sensation and
t Alex. in Arist. de Sensu, B. 438a; D.A. 29.
a Aet.av. 8. 5;'D.A. 30. 3 Ibid. iv. 8. 10; D.A. 30.

SOUL, SENSATION, AND KNOWLEDGE 10s

thought was, as has been seen, traditional, and Leucippus
characteristically took it over and worked it out on his own
theory: the ‘thought-image’ was to run through all the ver-
sions of the atomic theory, carrying with it an essentially
material view of the mental processes and a continuous habit
of regarding thought as a kind of ‘visualization’. Once more
Leucippus appears as at once reconciler and pioneer.

With regard to Leucippus’ view of the validity of sense-
perception and the means of obtaining true knowledge it is
very difficult to speak with certainty. It might well be ex-
pected in view of his theory that sensation is effected not by
any direct contact or communication between object and
percipient but by the medium of ‘idols’ and effluences, which
might be altered in their transit, that he would be sceptical
in regard to the information of sense-perception. And indeed
the doxographers do attribute to him in common with
Democritus the very definite doctrine that the qualities per-
ceived by sense exist only ‘by convention! (vu), that is to say,
by opinion (8dén) and our sensations (dear): for nothing is
true or comprehensible except the first elements, atoms, and
void. For these alone exist by nature (¢vo«), and all else
are the properties (cuyBeByxdra) of these differing from one
another according to position and order and shape’. Now
this we know to be very nearly the position of Democritus?
reached as the result of a long process of thought and in-
volving something like the distinction between primary and
secondary qualities. Of all this there is no other trace in the
records of Leucippus, and it seems much more like the subtle
refinement and distinction which is so characteristic of
Democritus and so much less usual with his master. More-
over, we have Aristotle’s3 definite statement, when he is dis-
cussing the shapes of the atoms, that it was because aoe
pus saw the infinite variety of things and thought on : e
truth lay in appearance’ that he attributed infinite iffer-
ences of shape to the atoms too. The two positions are not
of course inconsistent, and Leucippus may well have held

1 Aet. iv. 9. 8; D.A. 32. 2 See Chap. III, § 8, pp. 177 #

3 de Gen. et Corr. A. 315 b; D.A. 9.

106 LEUCIPPUS

something the same position as Anaxagoras, that the senses
were, if properly used, safe guides to the discovery of truth,
but could not in themselves give full and accurate informa-
tion. Such a general conclusion would be both in harmony
with his predecessors and a natural accompaniment of an
atomic theory of reality, it may even have led Leucippus to
make the distinction between ‘conventional’ and ‘natural’
existences, but that he held any such precise doctrine as that
here attributed to him, seems unlikely. Again he was pro-
bably content with a general attitude and the careful working
out of distinctions was the work of Democritus.

§ 6. Conclusion

The main points in Leucippus’ Atomic theory have now
been traversed and it remains to form some general conclu-
sion as to its value and importance. Leucippus’ work may
be viewed either with reference to the past or to the future.
There has been much discussion as to his place in the chain
of early thinkers and the true relation of his theory to those
of the preceding Schools. The most recent English writer!
concludes that ‘so far as his general theory of the physical
constitution of the world is concerned . . . it was derived
entirely from Eleatic and Pythagorean sources, while the
detailed cosmology was in the main a more or less successful
attempt to make the older Ionian beliefs fit into this new
physical theory’. If the foregoing analysis has been at all
correct, it may fairly be said that this conclusion is in both its
inferences too narrow. If it was the Eleatic criticism of the
theories of the Pythagoreans which led Leucippus logically
to an Atomic solution of the problems before him, yet the
whole physical setting of his theory and the view it implied
of the physical substratum of existence was a direct inheri-
tance from the Ionian Monists and the Pluralists. On the
other hand though in the details of his cosmology he showed
a perverse preference for the antiquated beliefs of Anaxi-
mander and Anaximenes, yet his main conception of the
‘whirl’ and the process by which within it an ordered world

t Burnet, £.G.0s, pasag-

CONCLUSION 107

came into being has much more affinity to the theory of
Anaxagoras. Finally, in his speculations on psychology and
the process of sensation he undoubtedly took Empedocles
as his guide. It would, I think, be a truer view of Leucippus
to regard him in all parts of his system, as antiquity did, as
the mediator in the long dispute, who was able to reconcile
opposing schools by a new solution of the antimonies which
divided them. Thus he reconciled the ‘One’ of Parmenides
and the Eleatics with the ‘Many’ of the Pluralists by the
conception of a permanent substratum which though not
continuous, is homogeneous, one in substance, though not
in extension. He satisfied the criticism which the Eleatics
had aimed at the Pythagoreans by maintaining that matter
was infinite in extent, and existed in the form of infinite
particles, but was yet not infinitely divisible. He saw that
the only solution of the impasse of Monism was the admission
of the existence of empty space, yet he agreed with the
strictest Monists that it was not ‘real’ or ‘full existence’. In
all these ways he seems not merely the logical successor of a
single School, whose tenets were mostly negative in tendency,
but the inheritor and critic of them all, who by a single far-
sighted conjecture went far to remove the difficulties over
which they differed. And if it be asked what were his
greatest positive contributions to the history of thought, the
answer would be that they were two: firstly, the introduction
of a new conception of reality which showed ‘how body must
be regarded if we take it to be the ultimate reality’,’ and
secondly, the formulation of a Pluralistic theory of the con-
stitution of the world, which was infinitely more economical
than that of Anaxagoras and maintained at the same time
the unity of homogeneity. He had given the most fully satis-
factory answer to the original question of Thales.

For the future he had laid down the lines on which a new and
fruitful speculation might proceed. He had found a basis for
the understanding of the physical world, whose possibilities
were only gradually unfolded. He had established the per:
principles of the Atomic theory and had gone far too, as we

Ibid.

108 LEUCIPPUS

as we can judge, in the working out of its application in
detail both with regard to the nature of the ultimate particles
of matter and the manner of their combinations and in his
ideas of the creation and structure of the world. No doubt
there was much left for his successors to do. The theory
must be amplified and elaborated in detail: gaps must be
filled up and on many points, where Leucippus’ speculation
was obviously crude and unsatisfying, alterations must be
made. Democritus was to work this physical hypothesis into
something like a universal system, to think out its meta-
physical principles and to connect it—albeit loosely—with
a philosophy of life. But however much his successors
added, altered, and improved, the main outlines of the
Atomic theory in antiquity remained always those which
were sketched by Leucippus. His name was obscured later
by the fame of his great disciple, and modern science, when
it propounded an Atomic theory of the world, assumed the
airs of a new discoverer, but none the less Leucippus
deserves all the credit due to the pioneer, the first founder of
Atomism.

ETT
th wt) CR) tS

§ 1. Life and writings

EMOCRITUS is a far less shadowy figure than

Leucippus and the air of mystery which hangs over his
life is due rather to his own strange personality than to our
lack of information. There is no reason to doubt the almost
universal tradition that his birthplace was Abderat in ‘Thrace:
the alternative statement that he was a Milesian must be due
either to confusion with Leucippus or to a desire to associate
him with the Milesian School, just as Leucippus himself was
said to have been bornat Elea. His date is practically fixed by
his own assertion in the ‘Lesser World-system’? that he was
‘a young man in the old age of Anaxagoras, being forty years
his junior’. This would tally well enough with Apollodorus’
assertion3 that he was born in the eightieth Olympiad (460—
457 8.c.), and his ‘floruit’ might then be placed about
420 B.C., which would be quite consistent with the most
probable view of his relations with Leucippus—that he was
his pupil and about ten years younger. ‘The assertion‘ that
he was born in the third year of the seventy-seventh Olym-
piad (470-469 B.c.), though more definite, would make him
rather older than is probable, while the wild statement> that
Democritus and Anaxagoras were both contemporaries of
Heraclitus, born at the outset of the fifth century, only
serves to show how untrustworthy our tradition can be in
matters of chronology.

Many stories of his life have come down to us, some
fanciful, but others out of which it seems possible to con-
struct a plausible account. His father, whose name 1s given
variously as Hegesistratus or Athenocritus or Datea ae
was apparently a man of wealth and position in Abdera an

_D.L. ix. 34; D.A. 13 Suidas, s.v. Anpdxprros, D.A. 2. Ae
Dae. os : = 3 Ibid. ve 4 Of Thrasylus, ibid.

s Euseb. Chron. Cyrill..c. Ful. 1. 135 D.A. 4.

110 DEMOCRIT US

is said to have entertained Xerxes on his march through
Thrace. According to the story’ Xerxes left some of his
household with his host, and they instructed Democritus in
his youth in oriental astronomy and ‘theology ’: but unless
we suppose that they remained in Hegesistratus’ household
for at least twenty-five years it is impossible to credit this
legend and it must be supposed to have arisen to account
for Democritus’ early interest in orientalism. On his father’s
death,? Democritus, who was the third son, is said to have
taken the ready money as his portion of the inheritance and
to have spent it all in travelling, for which he had a passion.3
We are told that he visited Egypt and learnt mathematics
from the priests, and then turning eastward went to Persia
and even to India, where he conversed with ‘the naked
philosophers’. There is nothing improbable in these distant
travels, and their influence may be traced clearly enough in
the very wide scope of the writings attributed to him. A
large number of mathematical works‘ suggest the influence
of Egypt, while treatises 5 with such titles as ‘Concerning the
sacred writings in Babylon’, ‘Concerning things in Meroe’,
‘Account of Chaldaea’, certainly support the story of travel
in Africa and the East. He is said too to have had the habit
of going into contemplative retirements,° during which he
‘lived in tombs’, a practice which may well have been derived
from Eastern sages, and the attribution to him of uncanny
knowledge’ and the gift of prophecy® with regard to the
weather points again in the same direction. Though it is
difficult to trace any direct oriental influence in the main
notions of his philosophy, it adds to the picturesqueness of
his character to think of him as the much-travelled man
tinged in the eyes of his contemporaries with the mystery of
the East.

With regard to his philosophical training authorities seem

Dil ax. 34. 2 Ibid. 35, &c.
3 See his own statement D.B. 247, quoted on p. 205.

4 D1iix.4 76 DiAn 33:

5 Ibid. 49. © [bidase. 7 Ibid. 42.
§ Clem. Strom. vi. 32; .Plin. N.H. xviii. 341; D.A. 18.

LIFE AND _ WRITINGS WET

to be agreed that he was a pupil of Leucippus, and indeed it
can hardly be otherwise, whether we suppose that he visited
him in Miletus, or, as is probable, that Leucippus* himself
came in later life to Abdera and founded the Atomic School
there. There are however several other statements about his
education which deserve attention. It was asserted that he
also ‘heard’ Anaxagoras,” but though there is nothing in the
discrepancy of their age which makes this impossible, nor
can we agree with Diogenes that Democritus’ statement that
Anaxagoras filched his doctrines as to the sun and moon
from earlier philosophers makes it inconceivable that he can
have been his pupil, it seems hard to imagine when they can
have met except during Democritus’ very brief visit to
Athens. Most likely the statement means little more than
that there are traces of Anaxagoras’ influence in Democritus’
theory. The same is probably the true explanation of the
assertion} made on the authority of Democritus’ contem-
porary, Glaucus of Rhegium, that he ‘heard one of the
Pythagoreans’: a visit to Magna Graecia is of course a con-
ceivable incident in his travels, and he certainly wrote a work
called ‘Pythagoras’, but little special trace of Pythagoreanism
is to be found in his theories, except in so far as Pytha-
goreanism was in a general sense the forerunner of Atomism.
A more interesting story‘ tells that he came to Athens and
‘knew Socrates’, though owing to his modesty he refrained
from making himself known to him: ‘I came to Athens ,
he said himself, ‘and no one recognizes me’:5 the influence
of Socrates might account for the far greater preponderance
of the moral interest in Democritus than in any of his
predecessors. ; ;

His universal knowledge gained for him among his con-
temporaries the nickname of ‘Wisdom’® (Zogia), and it is
indeed amply justified by the extremely wide scope of his

« Gomperz, Greek Thinkers, p. 317, definitely asserts this, but evidence
seems lacking, except for the obviously incorrect statement that Leucippus
was a native of Abdera: see Chap. H, p. 66. 2 D.L. ix. 34-

3 Ibid. 38. 4 Ibid. 36. 5 Thid.

6 Suidas D.A. 2; Clem. Strom. l.c.

1r2 DEMOCRIT US

writings. It would be interesting in this connexion to sup-
pose, as Thrasylus' suggested, that he is the philosopher in
the pseudo-Platonic Anterastai, who compares the philo-
sopher to a pentathlete: ‘for indeed he was a pentathlete in
philosophy’. His more famous title of ‘the laughing philo-
sopher’? (I’cAacivos), which became immensely popular in
Graeco-Roman times, is said to be due to his good-natured
amusement at ‘the vain efforts’ of men and is illustrated by
such stories as that of his interview with Darius.3 It is
generally agreed that he lived to an extraordinary old age:
the authorities make him something between go and 109 at
the time of his death.4 It was also said’ that before the end
of his life he went blind, or even blinded himself, and main-
tained that what he could see with the ‘soul’s eye’ was truer
and more beautiful than things perceived with the bodily
eye. There is another characteristic story that, when he per-
ceived that his faculties were waning, he preferred to die
and refused sustenance,® but that during the Thesmophoria,7
which then took place, he prolonged his life by inhaling hot
loaves of bread, in order that his sister might not be pre-
vented by mourning for his death from taking part in the
festival. Whether it be true or not, the tale well illustrates
both his personal fortitude and his kindly feeling for others.

Of Democritus’ works we possess a full list arranged by
Thrasylus® on the model of the Platonic tetralogies. It shows
an extraordinary width of interest and something like an
encyclopaedic attempt to embrace all knowledge as it existed
in his day. It is worth while to notice the titles of some of
the works which were of most philosophical importance or
suggested problems afterwards dealt with by Epicurus:
others will serve to illustrate the variety of his investigations.

we) ber ik. 37:

* Suidas, l.c.; Hor. Ep. ii. 1. 1943 Juvenal, x. Bee

3 Julian. Ep. 37; D.A. 20. ,

4 “go’ Diod. xiv. rr; D.A. 5: ‘over 100’ D.L. ix. 39; D.A. 1; “109”
Hipparchus, D.L. ibid. 43.

5 Cic. Tuse. v. 39. 1143; D.A. 22, &c.

6 Lucr. iil. 1039; 4th. Epit. ii. 46; D.A. 29.

7 DL. ix. 43. 8 Ibid. 45 fF.

LIFE AND WRITINGS 113

(1) Under the head of Ethics, besides the treatise already
noticed entitled ‘Pythagoras’, there was an essay on “The
Lower World’ (epi rv ev “Aidov), in which he’ seems to
have discussed from the physiological point of view the cir-
cumstances under which a man apparently dead might come
to life, and the ‘Tritogeneia’,* where he explained the god-
dess’s title as an allegorical reference to the three gifts of
prudence, right reason, right speaking, and right action.
More important was the work on ‘Cheerfulness’ (<dOupuin)
which represented Democritus’ moral ideal. (2) In the de-
partment of Physics there are four tetralogies, containing the
works of greatest interest for the exposition of the Atomic
theory. The list begins with the “Greater World-system’,
which Theophrastus assigned to Leucippus: it seems on the
whole more likely that the complete elaboration of the
atomic theory should have been the work of Democritus,
but, if the attribution to Leucippus is right, the “Lesser
World-system’ (Mixpos Aidxoopos), which follows in the list,
may perhaps be regarded as Democritus’ own exposition of |
the theory, the title being chosen with the natural humility
of a disciple. Unfortunately such remains as can with cer-
tainty be assigned to it, do not give much clue to its con-
tents.3 The ‘Cosmography’ and the book ‘On Planets’ would
have worked out his cosmological ideas in detail, and it may
be noticed that the title of the last book implies that, unlike
Leucippus, Democritus distinguished between planets and
fixed stars. In the second tetralogy four important books are
included, (2) the first book on Nature (epi ddcews), dealing
with the world, (2) the second book on Nature, dealing with
Man, (c) On the Mind, (¢) On Sensation, these two last
being sometimes classed together under the title ‘On the
Soul’. All these works must of course have been of cardinal
importance and together comprised Democritus’ ai
physiology and psychology. Next comes a tetralogy 2 ae
with the ‘secondary qualities’ of taste and colour and the

: Procl. in Remp. ii. 113; D.B. I.

2 Etym. Orion, p- 1535 5; D.B. 2: see p- 196.

3 D.L.ix. 413; D.B. 5.

3307 I

114 DEMOCRITUS

ultimate differences of atomic ‘rhythm’ by which they were
caused: from these books are preserved some of the most
important fragments" dealing with the theory of knowledge.
The last tetralogy of the Physics dealt mainly with the
logical aspect of investigation and contained the ‘Guarantees’
(Kparuvripia), apparently a critical confirmation of the general
theory, the ‘Idols’ or ‘Concerning Providence’ (titles rather
difficult to reconcile, though the book probably dealt with
the origin of the belief in the divine ruling of the world
owing to the visitations of the ‘idols’ of supernatural beings),
the Logical Canon and certain Problems: fragments of these
books have again survived. (3) Next follow a number of
unarranged books of Airia, which seem to have discussed
those miscellaneous problems which were mostly inherited
from previous thinkers, and ultimately were grouped to-
gether in the sixth book of Lucretius: among them are titles
such as “Causes in the sky’, ‘Causes in the Air’, ‘Causes on
the Earth’, and more special subjects such as “The Magnet’.
(4) The next three tetralogies concern Mathematics and
Astronomy, and probably represent the interests which
Democritus acquired in his visits to Egypt and the East.
Of them practically nothing remains but the titles, except
in the case of the ‘Parapegma’, which seems to have been
a kind of Calendar, in which were noted not merely the main
astronomical occurrences of the year, but meteorological
observations as to the probabilities of the weather which re-
call the stories of Democritus’ uncanny skill as a weather
prophet. One fortunately rescued fragment of the ‘Geo-
graphy’? contains his idea of the shape of the earth and indi-
cates one of his most marked differences from Leucippus.
(5) Two tetralogies on ‘Music’ succeed, in the first of which
he dealt with rhythms and sounds, beautiful and caco-
phonous, and advanced a theory of poetic inspiration, which
subsequently gave rise to considerable exaggerations.3 In

« D.B. 6-8. 2. ik:

3 Cf. especially Hor. 4. P. 296 ‘ excludit sanos Helicone poetas Demo-
critus ’. It would be very interesting to know more of this work, and to be
able to judge of its relation to Aristotle’s Poetics.

LIFE AND_WRITINGS es

the second tetralogy there was first a criticism of Homer,
or rather as it would appear from the fragments,! of Homeric
words and phraseology, and such strange problems as ‘Who
was the mother of the swine-herd Eumaeus?’ where Demo-
critus’ conclusion that she was named ‘Poverty’ (mevia) seems
almost to suggest an allegorical interpretation of the poems.
There was also an important discussion on the origin of
language, in which Democritus? held that names were in-
vented deliberately (@écec) and not naturally (¢vce). This was
a traditional subject of dispute and Epicurus was afterwards
to reverse Democritus’ decision. (6) Finally there are two
more tetralogies of “Technical Matters’, the first of which
dealt with medical subjects, such as diet, the second with
a variety of topics such as painting, tactics and heavy-armed
battle (omAopayixdv), and agriculture: included in the last work
was a discussion of the right arrangement for the plantation
of vines, which reappears in Virgil’s Georgics and Columella.
To the tetralogies is appended a list of miscellaneous
treatises, some of which have been already noticed as indi-
cating oriental interests, others such as the ‘Voyage round
the Ocean’ (mepimdous) and ‘Concerning History’ (probably
‘Investigation’ in the old sense) still further widen the range
of Democritus’ interests. Of the style of his writing Cicero‘
tells us that it was ornate and in the rapidity of its motion
and the distinction of its phrasing ‘more worthy to be called
poetical than the language of comic poets’—a curious and
somewhat equivocal compliment. He also assures us that,5
in contrast to the style of Heraclitus, it was never obscure,
a judgement which the extant fragments hardly bear out.
Dionysius® ranks him with Plato and Aristotle as an eX-
ponent of the ‘middle style’ of composition.

This brief survey of the ‘tetralogies’ shows at once that
Democritus was a man of far greater mental range than
Leucippus; his subjects are derived not merely from the

t D.B. 23-5. 2 D.B. 26. 3 D.B. 27.
4 de Orat.i. 11, 49; Orat. 20, 67; D.A. 34.
s de Divinatione, ti. 64. 1333 D.A. 34.
6 de Comp. Verb. 24; D.A. 34.
12

116 DEMOCRITUS

traditional spheres of philosophic thought in Greece, but
from many other pursuits and interests of his fellow-country-
man and from many sources which he had encountered in
his own foreign travels. He seems indeed to have endea-
voured to incorporate in his writings something like the whole
range of extant knowledge and thought and, as far as possible,
to have reduced it to a systematic whole. By far the most
important part of this system is undoubtedly the Atomic
theory which he had learnt from his master Leucippus: but
the wide scope of his own interests and thought had enabled
him to set the theory in its relations with other departments
of human knowledge and, as it were, to see it in truer pro-
portion. Consequently, he is not only able to attach to it
a moral theory which, although somewhat vague and inde-
pendent, yet contained the germs of a cheerful and good-
hearted philosophy of imperturbability, but in dealing with
the Atomic theory itself he is more conscious of its relation
to other problems, and in particular shows a far deeper in-
sight than Leucippus into the metaphysical difficulties which
it involved. Moreover, his insatiate curiosity for detail—he
was in some aspects a scientific Herodotus—led him to take
greater interest in the working out of the minutiae of the
Atomic theory and the consequences implied in it. This is
particularly noticeable in his treatment of the nature and
combination of the atoms, of the ‘secondary qualities’ ac-
quired by compound bodies, and of the exact details of the
process of sensation: in all these particulars he shows a
subtlety and refinement which was outside the range of the
blunter enthusiasm of Leucippus, and in many respects, for
all his love of detail proved too much for the patience of
Epicurus. Though to Epicurus belongs the credit of having
welded all the parts of his system into a whole based on one
simple metaphysical principle, yet in many departments the
physical and metaphysical sides of Atomism reach their
highest point in subtlety of comprehension in Democritus.

One great advantage we possess in dealing with Demo-
critus is that there is still extant a very considerable body of
his own sayings. Doubt has indeed been thrown on the

LIFE AND_WRITINGS 117

genuineness of some of these, especially those dealing with
the moral theory, but the labour of scholars has made it
possible to distinguish the true from the false with a fair
degree of certainty. There is also a vastly greater number of
references to his theories, containing a wealth of detail, which
is sadly lacking in the case of Leucippus. In consequence
it is possible to arrive much more nearly at a rational account
of his theory as a whole. It will be convenient to preserve
the same order of treatment as was adopted with Leucippus,
though, as Democritus’ theory is a more consistent unity,
some overlapping from section to section is inevitable. As
far as possible too, I shall endeavour to consider the addi-
tions and modifications which Democritus made to his
master’s theory, and will only go back on the main principles
when Democritus put them in a new light, but here again
it is hardly possible to avoid some repetition.

§ 2. The Atomic Theory

The main outline of the Atomic theory is handed on from
Leucippus to Democritus without substantial alteration, but
its statement is at once more systematic, more definite, and
in some respects more elaborated. At the foundation of the
theory lies the same solution of the old problem of the
‘ultimate existence’, the conception of infinite indivisible
particles in an infinite void. ‘Democritus thinks’, says
Aristotle using his own phraseology, ‘that the nature of the
eternal things is small existences (odoéa) unlimited in num-
ber, and in addition to these he assumes space (ré7os) infinite
in extent.’ This, though it agrees exactly with Leucippus
view, is rather more explicit than any statement attributed
to him, and so are the terms he applies to the two funda-
mentals. He adopted Leucippus’ nomenclature and speaks
of the ultimate particles as ‘atoms’ (dropot) and even the
compact bodies’ (vaord), and of space similarly as the ele,
(xevdv): but to these he added the name of ‘the boundless
(dzreipov) for space, and, if we may trust Plutarch, that of ‘the

x d Simpl. in Arist. de Caelo, A. 10. 279; D.A. 37: cf. Diog. Laert. 1x
443 DA aon a Simpl. l.c. 3 adv. Colot. 8. 1110; D.A. 57.

118 DEMOCRITUS

shapes’ (i8éar) for the atoms—a name fully in harmony with
the important part which atomic shape played in his system.
More interesting apparently was his attitude to the old
problem of the existence of empty space with which Leucip-
pus had dealt so ingeniously. Following on his master’s
lines he not only admitted body as the only full existence,
but emphasized his belief in his terminology, speaking
habitually of the atoms as ‘the real things’ (évra): the void
similarly is described not merely with Leucippus as the
“not-real’ (76 px) dv), but even as the ‘nothing’ (odd), in op-
position to which he naively invented the term Sey, ‘thing’, as
a description of the atom. Hence Leucippus’ famous de-
fence of the existence of the void in opposition to the Eleatic
view appears in Democritus in the form ‘the thing does not
exist any more than the nothing’.? Aristotle seems also to
suggest another subtle variation on the part of Democritus,
which, if it can really be attributed to him, greatly cleared
up the conception of the void. Leucippus had been content
to speak of it, as did the Eleatics who denied that it existed
at all, as the ‘not-real’ or ‘non-existent’ (7) 6v): according to
Aristotle,3 Democritus, taking advantage of the distinction
between the two Greek negatives, called it the ‘unreal’
(od« dv) or the ‘nothing’ (ot8v). He was in this way able to
distinguish the void whose existence he affirmed as stoutly
as Leucippus from absolute non-existence (76 7} dv), and to
dispose of his opponents’ objection by phraseology as well as ©
argument. Though it is not perhaps safe to build too much
on the expression of single passages, Aristotle seems so care-
ful in his use of the negative (od) and the refinement is so
characteristic of Democritus that we may well believe he

t Arist. Phys. A.5.188a;D.4.45. 2 Plut.adv. Colot. 4.1108; D.B.156.

3 oddev apud Simpl. l.c., od dv Arist. Phys. A. 5. 188a; D.A. 45: cf.
Hipp. Refut.i.13; D.A.40. As against this evidence in Aristotle we must set
pander in Plut. adv. Colot. 4. 1108 (D.B. 156), where the negative py may
well be due to the construction (dvopierau uy paAAov 7d Sev 7) TO pundev
efvat) and jx) dv in Simpl.in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184.(28.15); D.A. 38, where
Democritus is specifically associated with Leucippus. I think it is more natural
to suppose that Aristotle’s phraseology is right: there seems no reason why
he should have varied the negative, unless Democritus did so himself.

THE “ATOMIC THEORY 119

made it: ‘space’ was not ‘the real’ (dv), not body, neither
was it the ‘not-real’ (mu) dv), that which does not exist at all,
but only ‘unreal’ (od« dv). The distinction is a strong rein-
forcement of what Leucippus meant. His conception of
space seems still to hover between two notions: sometimes
it is the ‘empty’ (xevdv), that in which body is not, sometimes
‘place’ (ré7os), that in which the atoms exist.

Nor was Democritus content in these ways to have given
a clearer and more definite form to the main idea of the
atomic theory: he strengthened it also with at least three
notable additions. It is to him that we first find attributed the
fundamental principle on which the whole physical system
is subsequently based that ‘nothing is created out of the non-
existent or is destroyed into the non-existent’.1 The history
of this principle is significant: it was enunciated before
Democritus by Melissus. “That which was, was always and
always shall be.? For if it had come into being, it must
needs be that before it came into being, it was nothing: if
then it was nothing, by no means could anything have come
to be out of nothing.” In the mouth of Melissus this is an
emphatic restatement of Parmenidean Monism: ‘it is’, the
material universe is one, eternal and permanent. And when
Democritus places it in the forefront of Atomism, he seems
at once to declare his connexion with the Eleatic school and
his difference from them. On the one hand he accepts to the
full the conception of the unity and eternity of the universe:
nothing can be added to it, nothing can be taken away from
it, the ultimate substratum of matter neither comes into
being nor passes away. Yet for all that he is prepared to
show that this unity and eternity is not inconsistent, as the
Eleatics had thought, with the multiplicity and variability of
phenomena: granted that the unchangeable One 1s divisible
and that its parts can move, thanks to the existence of eee
space, it can then give rise to all the variety of the world o
experience, From Democritus’ time the aphorism ween
as the starting-point of Atomism: Epicurus3 not aie
enunciates it, but is prepared to prove it by a Kin Oo

se DL. iz. 443 D.A. t. 2 Melissus, D.B. 1. 3 Ep.i, § 38.

120 DEMOCRITUS

‘universal induction’ from phenomena, and Lucretius,’ follow-
ing his lead, gives it his own characteristic turn as a weapon
against the religious notion of arbitrary creation by divine
beings. In its two parts it is indeed the germ of the modern
‘laws’ of the ‘universality of cause and effect’ and the ‘per-
manence of matter’,

Closely connected with this base-principle are two others,
hardly less fundamental, which are grouped together in an
interesting reference: ‘Democritus* postulated that the uni-
verse was “‘infinite’’ (dzrewpov) because it was not by any means
created by any one (or “‘anything”’ pndapds 76 twos). Further
he calls it unchangeable and in general describes explicitly
what it is altogether. The causes of things now coming into
being, he says, have no beginning, but from infinite time back
are foreordained by necessity all things that were and are and
are to come.’ The ‘infinity’ of the universe is not here, as it
is in Leucippus and in other places in Democritus, a spatial
infinity, but an infinity of time, eternity. The eternity of
the universe is of course an immediate inference from the
first principle, indeed, as is seen clearly in the argument of
Melissus, it is implied in it: if nothing can be created out
of nothing, then the universe can never have been created,
it must have existed from all time. Once again an Eleatic
notion is adopted by Democritus and henceforth in the
Atomic system the eternity of the universe, and by implica-
tion of its component parts, ‘the causes of things’, the atoms
and the void, takes its place side by side with the idea of its
infinity in extent: as it is spatially boundless, so it is tem-
porally everlasting, without beginning and without end.

Secondly, in the last sentence of this extract and in close
connexion with the notion of eternity must be noticed the
emphatic statement of the supremacy of ‘necessity’: ‘by
necessity are foreordained all things that were and are and
are to come’. In the theories of earlier philosophers and in
that of Leucippus himself the question of the ultimate
efficient cause was only raised in connexion with the pro-

* i, 150 ‘nullam rem e nilo gigni divinitus unquam’.

2 Plut. Strom. 7; D.A. 39.

THE ATOMIC THEORY 121

blem of motion: here as a base-principle of the nature of the
universe is asserted a full and unhesitating determinism.
The change is characteristic and important. It has been seen
already that Leucippus' seems to have asserted in a rather
half-hearted manner that ‘necessity’ was the motive cause, .
and that by his assertion he intended not, as previous thinkers
have done, to introduce an inexplicable external force to -
explain what could not otherwise be shown to follow from
his fundamental principles, but rather to adumbrate the idea
familiar to us as that of ‘natural law’: the ultimate controlling
principle is that everything follows the laws of its own being.
This notion which Leucippus applied with some hesitation
to explain the original motion of the atoms, Democritus now
confidently asserts with a much wider, indeed, a universal
application: ‘necessity ’ orders all things, indeed by necessity
the whole course of things is foreordained from all eternity:
the whole history of the universe is but the inevitable out-
come, step by step, of its original and eternal constitution.
In adopting this conception we may suppose that Demo-
critus had two main objects in view. In the first place he
wished, as Aristotle* himself tells us, to controvert the pre-
vailing idea of ‘chance’ (r¥yn), which he regarded as a merely
loose conception, intellectually and even moraliy dangerous:
‘for, they say, nothing is brought about’ by chance, but for
everything there is a definite cause’. But even more he
desired to be rid once and for all of the mysterious, sem1-
religious external forces, which previous philosophers and
even more markedly his own contemporaries had postulated
as the efficient causes of their systems: the world, as he con-
ceived it, did not require the intervention of Empedocles
‘Love and Strife’ or Anaxagoras’ ‘Mind’ to bring it into
being or keep it going: it is a wholly physical existence whose
action is purely mechanical, controlled by the law of its own
being and nothing more. Not less strongly did he desire .
deny a second inheritance from the religious tradition o
philosophy, the idea of the ‘final cause’: the Berane 1s Aw
ruled by design, nor is there, as religion would have ae
t Chap. II, p. 85. 2 Phys. B. 4. 195b; D.A. 68.

122 DEMOCRITUS

believe, a purpose in the creation of the world or of any of its
parts either organic or inorganic. Creation is the undesigned
result of inevitable natural processes. The religious tinge
which had clung to philosophy from its birth and had re-
cently shown itself in less markedly theological, but still super-
natural, forms was to be utterly banished from Atomism
and leave it an untrammelled system of natural physics.
The consequences of this decision were momentous. In the
sphere of physical speculation it introduced for the first time
the possibility of a strictly scientific conception of the world,
and therefore immensely strengthened the Atomic Theory
as a system. Democritus was himself indeed sometimes
rather hard put to it to carry out his own principles and
found that it involved at any rate large postulates in the root-
conceptions: later on, when its psychology was more clearly
developed, Atomism found itself beset with many difficulties
which must of necessity gather round a purely materialist
theory and the expedients invented to overcome them only
showed more clearly the fundamental weakness. In the
moral sphere too, though Democritus himself shows no
traces of having perceived its implication, his rigid assertion
of the law of cause and effect led at once to the controversy
between free-will and determinism, which is still the most dif-
ficult of all the problems concerned with the presuppositions
of Ethics. Once again Epicurus, anxious for the practical
effectiveness of his moral theory, was led to protest against
a universal ‘necessity’ by means of a naive physical supposi-
tion for the preservation of free-will. But for Democritus
himself these inherent difficulties never defined themselves:
‘necessity’, conceived as ‘natural law’, was to be the founda-
tion-stone of his system, consistently recognized throughout
his exposition of the physical world.

An interesting analysis of Democritus’ various uses of avay«n will be
found in Goedeckemeyer, Epikurs Verhalinis zu Demokrit, pp. 32 f., but
I think he is inclined to underestimate the evidence for a general conception
of ‘natural law’, of which the various meanings of avdy«n which he discovers
in ree are in reality aspects, though not always perfectly logically
deduced.

THE ATOMIC.THEORY 123

If then—and there seems no reason to doubt the infer-
ences from the tradition—Democritus in all these points
amplified and solidified the main ideas of Atomism, he ap-
pears at once as a man of much wider interest and perception
than Leucippus. He is not content with a purely physical
theory starting from a physical origin and dealing only with
underlying problems when they are forced upon his notice,
but he has an eye from the first for the metaphysical implica-
tions of the new conception of the universe. By a closer
analysis of the notion of the ‘void’ he makes the whole
Atomic idea more definite, and by his assertion of the
eternity of the universe and the fundamental notion of neces-
sity, he has prepounded a metaphysical basis not merely for
Atomism but for any scientific view of the world. And this
is in fact the character of his work throughout. He has not
the completely co-ordinating mind which would enable him
to systematize all his various interests and views in one
correlated whole, but his many-sided activities led him into
fields unknown to Leucippus, and in particular, as a closer
acquaintance with him abundantly shows, he was prepared
to think out the presuppositions of the physical theory which
he had adopted.

§ 3. Nature and movement of Atoms: creation of things

In passing from the general principles of Atomism to the
individual parts of the theory we shall find that Democritus
once more makes little or no change in the main ideas, but
in detail of argument adds, modifies, and alters considerably,
always with great subtlety of insight and a clear comprehen-
sion of consequences. It is as if a rather crabbed and narrow
theory expounded from the inside has passed into the hands
of a man of the world who can look at it from many points
of view and infuse new life into it. His treatment of the
character and behaviour of the atoms is characteristic of his
general attitude. ; ;

Just as he had insisted in general on the permanence ©
matter as the basis of physical inquiry, so he seems to phess
emphatically for the permanence of the individual atoms.

124 DEMOCRITUS

This had of course been part of the teaching of Leucippus,*
who had argued for the indestructibility of the atoms, firstly
owing to their hardness which made them ‘incapable of
being acted upon’ (dabeis), and secondly owing to their
smallness, which arose from the fact that they ‘had no parts’
(76 dyepés). Democritus’ attitude to both these positions is
interesting. On the proof from the nature of the atoms he
apparently laid great stress. He is represented? as repeating
Leucippus’ statement that the atoms ‘could not be acted on
owing to their hardness’ and making two interesting addi-
tions to it. The first is of the nature of an explanation:3 the
atoms not only ‘cannot be acted upon’, but are ‘unchange-
able’: to the Greek mind‘ ‘acting’ or ‘suffering’ always im-
plied ‘alteration’, and Democritus’ new epithet therefore
makes Leucippus’ meaning plain. He did not mean that an
atom cannot be acted upon as a whole, as it is in fact every
time that a collision with another atom starts it moving in
a fresh direction, but that no external force can change its
internal constitution or alter its material substance or shape
or size. The idea involved that change is always a form of
destruction is insisted on by Aristotle and later plays a
prominent part in the atomic theory.5 A second and more
striking addition to the fundamental idea is assigned to
Democritus by Plutarch,° who speaks of ‘existences infinite
in number, indivisible and without difference, unacting and
unacted on’. The negation of activity as well as passivity is
at first sight startling, but is in reality closely connected with

t See Chap. II, p. 78.

2 D.L, ix. 44; D.A. 13 Plut. edo. Colot. 8; D.A. 57.

3 D.L. lc. avadAoiwta.

4 See Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A.7 ff.

5 Compare the oft-repeated maxim of Lucretius, i. 670, &c.:

nam quodcumque suis mutatum finibus exit,
continuo hoc mors est illius quod fuit ante.

6 adv. Colot. 8. 1110 F; D.A. 57. odaias azeipous 70 mARO0s, arduous
te Kadiaddpovs, ért 8° drrolovs Kal drrabeis. Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 325b
36. avaykaiov arabes re Exacrov Adyew Tav adiaipérwv .. . Kal nbevds
mrowntiKov 74 0ous speaks as if the notion was common to the Atomists gene-
rally. See the notes in H. H. Joachim’s edition (Clar. Press, 1922) for a
full discussion of the whole idea.

NATURE OF ATOMS 125

the idea of ‘change’. If a thing can be changed, it can also
change something else: if, for instance, it can itself become
hot, it will heat anything else with which it comes into con-
tact. Now it was precisely this difficulty of the explanation of
acting and being acted upon while at the same time pre-
serving permanence in the substratum which lay at the
bottom of many of the problems of the early Greek philo-
sophers. And the solution propounded by the Atomists was
that in compound things action and ‘passion’ were possible
because of the existence of the void, which enabled the com-
ponent atoms to shift their places and change their positions:
‘they act and are acted on wherever they happen to be in
contact’. But the indivisible atoms themselves which have
no mixture of void can neither be changed or change one
another. On this line of thought the addition of the active
idea that the atoms cannot act is but the logical corollary
of the passive notion that theycannot be acted on; ‘thatwhich
acts and that which is acted upon are alike and the same’,” as
Aristotle reports Democritus to have said. Both conceptions
are reinforcements of the idea of the unchangeableness or
absolute hardness of the atom.

In all these ways is Leucippus’ simple notion of atomic
hardness worked out in its wider implications and at the
same time very greatly strengthened. But to his second
proof of indestructibility based on the size of the atoms
Democritus’ attitude is strikingly different. Leucippus
argument was indeed open to objections. In the first place
it might be argued that extremely small size 1s 1n itself no
proof of indestructibility. This objection Leucippus had
himself to some extent met by stating that by extreme
smallness he meant that ‘the atom had no parts’, that 1s, was
incapable of further subdivision, destruction being regarded
as the cleaving of a thing into smaller bits of matter. oes
this very contention itself is liable to the Pada ae ee
tion, which might well have been urged by a mem a fo)
the Eleatic school, that ‘that which has no parts had no

1 Arist. de Gen. et Cor. A. 8. 3254 32-
2 Ibid. A. 7. 323b; D.A. 63.

126 DEMOCRITUS

magnitude’; the atom, if it is as Leucippus described it, is not
really a physical existence at all. Whether these objections
had in fact been raised or whether Democritus himself
clearly perceived them we cannot tell: but it is certain that
the Leucippean argument from size is nowhere attributed to
him, and indeed cannot have been used by him. For having
once abandoned the idea of smallness as a proof of indestructi-
bility he seems to have gone to the other extreme, and we are
informed that he stated that ‘some of the atoms were very
large’* and again that they were ‘unlimited not only in
number but in size’ :? it is even stated by one authority that
he said that ‘there might be an atom as big as a world’. To
this idea Epicurus perceived the objection that in that case
some atoms would be perceptible to the senses, and he was
therefore driven to return in a modified form to Leucippus’
view that they werevery small and ‘without parts’. Democritus
seems not to have perceived this difficulty and we may notice
as a proof of his independence of his master the freedom
with which he reverses a conception without hesitation when
it was no longer required. It is clear that for proof of the
permanence of the atoms he relied entirely on the notion of
hardness, explained and reinforced by his own modifications.
That a difference on this point between various schools of
Atomists was recognized in antiquity is shown by an inter-
esting note of Galen:4 ‘they maintain, he says, that the first
bodies cannot be acted on, some, such as the followers of
Epicurus, holding that they were unbreakable owing to their
hardness, others, such as the school of Leucippus, that they
were indivisible owing to their smallness’. ‘The omission of
Democritus is curious, and the description of Epicurus’
position far from accurate: indeed one almost wonders
whether there is not some confusion, for Democritus’ posi-
tion is in fact exactly that which is first described.
Leucippus had assigned’ to the atoms the ‘primary pro-
perties’ of size and shape; Democritus followed him but once
1 Dionys. apud Eus. prep. ev. xiv. 23. 2; D.A. 43.

a DLsix. 44; DAs; 3 Aet.i. 12.6; DA. 47.
4 de Elem. sec.; Hipp. i. 2; D.A. 49.

NATURE OF-ATOMS 127

more worked out the implications of his ideas with stricter
logic and unhesitating consistency. His striking divergence
from Leucippus as regards the size of the atoms has already
been noticed: not requiring minuteness as an argument for
permanence, he frankly abandoned it and postulated ‘very
large’ atoms. His attitude as regards atomic shape is equally
characteristic. Leucippus,! holding that the differences in
compound things were largely due to differences of shape in
the constituent atoms, and observing the great variety in
things, had been led to assume many different shapes in the
atoms. Democritus, whose ingenious mind conceived a still
greater interest than had his master in the mechanical
varieties brought about by atomic shape, seems to have
followed out the idea to its conclusion and asserted that the
number of different atomic shapes was ‘infinite’.? To him
also must probably be assigned the rather strange a priori
argument on which this conclusion is based, ‘that there is
no reason that anything should be of one kind rather than
another’.3_ Now logically of course infinite differences in
shape imply infinite differences in size :4 for within the limits
of the same size there can only be limited differences of.
shape, and further variety of form cannot be obtained except
by increase in bulk. To Leucippus, who relied on the
minuteness of the atom for its permanence, this fact, if he
had perceived it, would have raised a serious difficulty, but
to Democritus, who was prepared to admit the existence of
‘very large’ atoms, it was not open to the same objection. It
was left to Epicurus, returning to the idea of minuteness, to
object also to the assumption of infinity of shapes in the

t See Chap. II, p. 81.

2 Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (28. 15); D.A. 38: cf. Simpl. in Arist.
de Caelo, A. 10. 279; D.A. 37 oxjpmata mavtota. ‘ :

3 Simpl. PAys. lc. Sua 76 pendev pGAAov rovodrov 4 ToLodrov eivae.
Simplicius attributes the argument to the school in general and elsewhere
(28. 4; D. (Leucippus) A. 8) assigns it specifically to Leucippus, but it sounds
more like the generalizing @ priori proof which would have been adduced by

Democritus. :
4 This was perhaps first clearly seen by Epicurus: see the argument in

Lucr. i. 478 ff.

128 DEMOCRITUS

atoms on the ground that it implied infinity of size and
therefore the perceptibility of some atoms. Democritus, cor-
recting what he believed to be a mistake of Leucippus’ and
wishing to secure the utmost variety, held that the atoms
had every kind of shape and size.

In the other details of the nature of theatoms Democritus
followed his master closely. Like him he conceived allatoms*
as being absolutely homogeneous in material substance:
this is of course an ultimate necessity of Atomism and the
only condition by which it can claim a fundamental unity
in its account of the world. Similarly he preserved? the three
‘differences’ of the atoms, shape, position, order, as Leucip-
pus had stated them, and expressed them apparently in the
same curious terms, ‘rhythm’, ‘turning’, and ‘touching’. But
here a double amplification may be noticed. Being free, as
has been seen, to attribute any size to the atoms, he makes
far greater use than Leucippus of differences in size and in
particular makes it the direct cause of the difference in
‘weight’ of atoms in the whirl as he himself conceived it.3
Secondly, since it was a matter which strongly attracted his
subtle mind, he worked out with great elaboration the
various combinations of the atoms in compounds and the
effect produced on sensation by their different shapes and
arrangements, paying special attention to varieties in taste
and colour.4 ‘These will be more conveniently considered
in treating of his general account of sensation.

There is however one exceedingly difficult problem with
regard to Democritus’ views which affects not only his con-
ception of the atom but his account alike of the original
motion of the atoms and of their behaviour in the cosmic
whirl. Did he or did he not assign ‘weight’ to the atoms as
one of their primary properties and make it the cause of
their motion? The ancient authorities show considerable
discrepancy on this point and it has been hotly debated by

« The atoms are described as aduadopa, Plut. adv. Colot. 8. 11103
D.A. 57, and more explicitly as 6uovets ; Simpl. in Arist. de Caelo, 1. 299;
D.A. 61. * Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (28.15); D.A. 38.

3 See below, p. 132. 4 Theophr. de Sensu, 64; D.A. 135.

NAT URE-OF-ATOMS 129

modern scholars. It will be more convenient to discuss the
question in relation to the atomic motion and the cosmic
whirl and to assume here that Democritus, like Leucippus,
was content to make size and shape the only primary pro-
perties of the atom, and that ‘weight’ in an absolute sense
was introduced later into the atomic theory'—possibly by
Nausiphanes—and only fully acknowledged by Epicurus in
close connexion with his general account of atomic motion.

We may therefore proceed to consider Democritus’ ac-
count of the original Atomic motion, which is the first step
in the formation of compound bodies. The information
which has reached us is so various and so contradictory that
at first sight it seems almost impossible to decide what was
in fact his view. But the researches of modern scholars into
this difficult subject have very greatly cleared the ground and
the practicalagreement? of their conclusions makes it possible
to state a theory of Democritus’ position with some con-
fidence. It will be found that it does not in anyessential differ
from that of Leucippus, but is more explicit.

It is however necessary first to consider what is now
generally recognized as the false view. Epicurus in ex-
pounding his own theory of atomic motion finds that it
originates in the universal downward fall3 of the atoms
through empty space caused by their weight, but refuses to
accept the idea‘ that the meeting of atoms was brought about
because the heavier, falling more quickly, overtook the
lighter: in absolutely empty space, as he points out, where

t Since Epicurus (Ep. i, § 61: cf. Lucr. ii. 225 ff.) is concerned to argue
against a theory that the heavier atoms catch up the lighter in their downward
fall in the void, it is clear that the idea of weight as the cause of downward
motion must have been introduced into the atomic theory before his time.

2 See Liepmann, op. cit., Brieger, Die Urbewegung der Atome und die
Weltentstehung bei Leucipp und Demokrit; Dyroft, Demokritstudien, pp. 3 i
Giussani, Lucretius, vol. i, p. 134, n. 1; Burnet, £.G. P.3, pp. 341 ff. Al
these writers are in substantial agreement, but the first two hold that eae. is
an original property of the atoms, though not the cause of motion. eae e-
meyer, Epikurs Verhalinis xu Demokrit, rejects the modern view, but gives
no satisfactory explanation of the difficulty. pros

3 Ep. 1, § 43. 93 Le

3307 K

130 DEMOCRITUS

there can be no resistance at all, bodies whatever their weight
will fall at an equal rate. It was usually supposed that he
is here arguing against the view of Democritus, who is
represented’ as attributing absolute weight to the atoms and
making that, as Epicurus did himself, the cause of an
original perpendicular fall. Some of the ancient evidence,”
which seems to support this view, is undoubtedly contami-
nated by Epicurean influence, but there are other references
which cannot be so lightly dealt with. Thus Simplicius}
informs us that the Atomists said that ‘the atoms moving in
virtue of the heaviness (Bapdrnra) that is in them through the
void which yields and offers no opposition change their
place’, and again almost more explicitly: ‘they say that the
atoms which are all alike in substance have weight (Bdpos),
and since some of them are heavier the lighter are squeezed
out by them as they sink down and carried upwards, and
thus they say that some of them seem light and others
heavy (Bapéa)’.4 Similarly Theophrastus, who states expressly
that Democritus ‘distinguishes heavy and light according
to size’,5 appears to make weight the reason why all the
atoms ‘have the same impulse of movement’,® and Cicero
seems to express the same view.7 Far more important are
two passages in Aristotle, in one of which* he states that
‘Democritus says that each of the indivisibles is heavier in
proportion to its excess (of bulk)’: and in the other after the
simple statement that ‘the larger of them is heavier’,9 goes
on to expound the atomic view that in compound things this
direct variation of weight with size does not hold good, for
in a compound body of larger size there may be more void,
but in the atom, which ex hypothesi contains no void, the

oe by Zeller, P4. d. Gr. i. 604; Ueberweg, History of Philosophy,
i. 884. .
2 Pseudo-Plut.i. 4; Galen, Hist. Phi/.7 : see Liepmann, op. cit., pp. 1 ;
3 In Arist. Phys. @. 9. 265 b; D.A. <8. i fet
4 In Ar. de Caelo, [’. 1.299; D.A. 61. 5 de Sensu, 61; D.A. 135.
6 Ibid. 71. 1 deFin. i. 6.17; DAL 56:
8 Bapvrepov ye Kata THY drepoynv ExaoTov Tav adiaypérwv: de Gen.
et Corr. A. 8. 326.4; D.A. 60.
9 de Caelo, A. 2. 309 a; D.A. 60.

NATURE OF. ATOMS 131

proportion between size and weight must be exact. There
seems then a considerable body of evidence both for attri-
buting weight to the atomsand for regarding it as the original
cause of motion.

Now with regard to the evidence of Simplicius it might
be urged that to some extent he puts himself out of court by
his own contradictions," for in spite of his explicit attribution
of motion to weight in the passages cited, he elsewhere
states* that ‘the atoms are moved in the boundless void by
force’, and in a still more remarkable passage3 he maintains
that ‘the atoms which are naturally stationary (!) are moved by
a blow’. But an argument from inconsistency is never finally
satisfactory and there is evidence‘ that the Atomists could
regard weight itself as a kind of internal blow. Moreover,
we have the express statement of Aristotle that Democritus
associated heaviness with size and Theophrastus’ suggestion
that weight is the cause of motion. But in the first place we
may note that Aristotle does not speak of weight as a primary
property of the atoms, as is their shape and size, but regards
it only as a secondary derivative from size: further he never
associates with Democritus the conception of absolute weight,
but only speaks of atoms as ‘heavier’ or ‘lighter’ than one
another. And a closer examination of Simplicius’ statement
that the Atomists ‘say that some seem to be light and others
heavy’ suggests that he too regarded ‘weight’ not only as a
derivative property of the atoms but even in some sense as
illusory. Still further light is thrown on the problem by
a later passage in the same author,’ where he explains in
regular atomic terms that fire moves upward because it 1s
squeezed out by other bodies and for this reason seems to be
light; ‘and to these other things weight only seems to
belong, and it seems always to be carried towards the centre.

t See Liepmann, op. cit., p. 40. 2 In Arist. de Caelo, I’. 2. 300 b.
3 In Arist. PAys. A. 2. 184 (42. 10); D.A. 47- Picys,
4 TH tod Bdpous mAnyf, Act. i. 3. 185 D.A. 47 of Epicurus: cf. Cic.
de Fato, 20, 46 ‘aliam enim quandam vim motus habebant a wk
impulsionis quam plagam ille appellat, a te, Epicure, gravitatis ct ponceris .
s Simpl. in. Ar. de Caelo, A. 10. 2803 D.A. 61.
K2

132 DEMOCRITUS

He is of course speaking here not of atoms but of compound
bodies, but the similarity of the two passages suggests that
they should be taken together and the last clause provides
a valuable clue. For the mention of ‘the centre’ shows clearly
enough that he is thinking of the cosmic whirl in which the
‘heavier’ bodies are those which are most able to resist the
rotatory motion of the whirl and therefore congregate in
the centre. Can this idea also be applied to the ‘heavier’ and
‘lighter’ atoms? When we come to consider the formation
of a cosmos in the whirl, we shall find that the idea‘ is not
merely applicable but exactly coincides with the cosmological
accounts which have come down to us. It may then safely
be inferred with the bulk of recent commentators that though
Democritus did indeed speak of ‘heavier’ and ‘lighter’ atoms,
he did not attribute absolute weight to them,? still less did
he regard weight as the initial cause of perpendicular motion
downwards in the void, but considered it rather as a deriva-
tive property from size, acting, not when the atoms were
free in the void, but only in the cosmic whirl as a faculty of
resisting in a greater or less degree the motion of the whirl
itself.

If then the notion of the perpendicular fall owing to weight
may finally be dismissed as far as Democritus is concerned,
what is the character of the original motion of the atoms
and what its cause? Now that the main misconception is
cleared away these questions are not so difficult to answer.
In the first place there is almost universal agreement that
Democritus spoke of the atoms as ‘always in motion’ :3 there
never, that is to say, was a beginning of motion, but as the
atoms are themselves eternal, so is their motion. And this
motion was not, as motion due to weight must have been, in
the one direction downward, but in all directions. Demo-
critus describes it in the characteristic and imaginative term

* See below, pp. 144-6.

2 This is explicitly confirmed by Aet. i. 3. 18; i. 12.6; D.A. 47.

3 del Kweiobar Ta mpHra cdpara, Arist. de Caelo, I’. 2.300 b: cf. Hipp.
Ref.i. 13; D.A. 40.

4 Cf. D.L.ix.44; D.A.1: Simpl. in Ar. de Caelo, A.10.279; D.A. 37, &c.

NATURE OF ATOMS 133

‘vibration’? ‘The atoms moving about hither and thither up
and down and in every way, colliding and jostling with one
another from the first, presented the appearance of a great
vibrating mass. We gather indeed from Aristotle? that the
Atomists already made use of the famous illustration, which
Lucretius} put to such good use, from the motes in a sun-
beam: just as they seem to fly to and fro jostling each other
aimlessly, meeting and parting in every direction, so do the
atoms in the precosmic state. In other words what Epicurus
conceived as a second stage in development, when the
‘swerve’ had converted the downward fall into an infinite
series of collisions, is imagined by Democritus as the eternal
condition of atomic motion from all time.

And as the cause of this multifarious motion Democritus,
probably following Leucippus before him, places ‘necessity’,4
the governing cause of everything in the universe. At first
sight this seems a contradiction of his own principle, if it
has hitherto been rightly explained: for by asserting the
supremacy of necessity Democritus meant just that every
effect has a cause, but here is an effect, a motion, for which
no cause at all is assigned except the universal ‘necessity’.
Either then he is employing ‘necessity’ as some of his pre-
decessors had done as an arbitrary expedient to explain what
cannot otherwise be accounted for, or he is abandoning his
own principle. Some such difficulty seems to be in Aristotle’s
mind, when he complains5 that Democritus ‘gives up any
attempt to explain the cause, and refers everything to neces-
sity’. But already in Leucippus we have seen a hint of the
answer to this difficulty: the eternal atomic motion was, 1n
Democritus’ view, beyond all causes, and was itself the cause
of all. For, if the conception of the eternal being of the
universe be not merely of atoms in the void, but of atoms

t qaApds, Aet. i. 23. 33 D.A. 47; mepuraddoacobar, Simpl. in Arist.
Phys. @. 9. 265 b; D.A. 58. Mu

2 de Anima, A. 2.4044. ee tit 4s

4 Arist. de Gen. Animal. E. 8. 789 b; D.A. 66; D.L. ix. 45> &c.

s lic. the 08 évexa here is of course the ‘final cause’, a notion which was

essentially repugnant to Democritus and which his whole conception of
dvdyxn was intended to controvert : see above, p. 121.

134. DEMOCRITUS

moving in the void, then we have no more right to ask for
the cause of movement than we have for the cause of the
existence of the atoms and the void themselves.t We could
only demand the cause of motion, if it were something that
supervened on a previous state of rest. Aristotle, in his more
sympathetic mood towards Atomism, seems to understand
this. In a still more remarkable passage he says that the
Atomists ‘think that the cause of motion is the void, in the
sense that it is that in which motion takes place’. If we think
of this in reference to pre-Atomic speculation, we seem to
understand what is meant. The great difficulty of Monism
and even of the theory of Anaxagoras was how to derive from
the original static mass of matter the phenomena of sense-
perception, separated things and motion. The Atomists
by the introduction of the conception of the void felt that
they had solved both these problems: empty space not merely
separates pieces of matter, but it enables them to move.
Separation and movement to their notion so nearly implied
each other, that movement was an essential part of the new
conception: it is therefore “causeless’, or, as Democritus pre-
ferred to put it, ‘necessary’. ‘The very existence of atoms and
void carried with it atomic motion.

It remains to consider the other two causes of motion
which are suggested by Simplicius, ‘force’3 and ‘a blow’.4 In
the light of Cicero’s identification 5 of the Democritean ‘blow’
with Epicurus’ notion of weight, it might be possible to
explain both these expressions as in reality referring to the
natural original motion of the atoms by an internal force or
blow which is part of their nature. But seeing that Cicero’s

* This would probably have been Democritus’ answer to the charge of
inconsistency brought against him by Aristotle, de Gex.et Corr. A. 8, 326 b,
where he inquires what is it that moves the atom? if it is some external force,
then they are not da: if they move themselves, they are not dzrova (see
p-124). He might have replied ‘they are neither moved by an external force,
nor do they move themselves: they are of their very nature for ever in motion:
a force would be needed not to move them, but to stop them’.

a Phys. A. 7. 214 a. 3 Simpl. in Arist. de Cae/o, I’. 2. 300 b.

4 Simpl. in Ar. Phys. A. 2. 184 (42. 10); D.A. 47.

s de Fato, 20. 46; D.A. 47.

NATURE OF ATOMS 135

statement is almost certainly founded on the false conception
that Democritus assigned weight as the cause of motion, it
is better to disregard it. In that case both expressions will
refer not to the original motion of the atoms, but to deriva-
tive motions which are logically subsequent, though actually
contemporaneous. As the result of their movements in many
directions the atoms immediately come into collision with
one another, and consequently leaping back start off in new
directions: this motion, which is in fact after the first collision
normally that of almost all atoms, may well be described as
due to ‘a blow’, as it was by the Epicureans later on. Simi-
larly other atoms meeting may aggregate in small nuclei, unit-
ing together in various degrees of close connexion and
forming in fact the first beginnings of compound bodies.
But these nuclei will still be in everlasting motion and by the
combined force of the movements of the component atoms
will develop, as it were, a motion of their own as wholes: this
is pre-eminently the case with ‘the whirl’, a motion formed
in this way by an aggregation of atoms and leading by a
series of stages to the formation of a cosmios out of the un-
meaning jostle of atoms. Now a previously independent
atom coming near one of these moving aggregates may, as If
were, be caught up into the prevailing motion and go along
with it: it may be then said to be moved ‘by force’. Again it
is a derivative motion, but one so closely following the original
movement that it may be regarded as eternally contem-
poraneous with it. It would thus appear that neither of these
terms is to be excluded as erroneous from the account of
atomic motion, yet neither of them are in any way incon-
sistent with the general notion which has been attributed to
Democritus. The original motion is due to ‘necessity as part
of the constitution of things, but motion by ‘force’ and
‘blows’ is immediately derived from it.

It seems then that Democritus did not in his account of
atomic motion depart in any essential from the ee
ceptions of Leucippus, but once more we find that the ideas
of the earlier philosopher are worked out ie Se it
sight and imagination, especially in regard to the vibration

136 DEMOCRITUS

of the atoms one with another, and that the wider implica-
tions of the theory and in particular its relation to the under-
lying idea of ‘necessity’ are more clearly defined. This is
what we should expect, and it is satisfactory to find that
Democritus did not in fact make such a wide departure from
atomic tradition as would be involved in the conception of
absolute weight as the cause of a universal downward motion.

A similar inference must be drawn with regard to Demo-
critus’ conception of the union of atoms in compounds, the
small nuclei which may prove either the kernels of ‘things’
or even ‘worlds’, or turn out to be merely, as it were, abortive
attempts. A clear account has fortunately been preserved
to us:*

the atoms are at war with one another (oraovdlew) as they move
along in the void owing to their dissimilarity and their other differences,
and as they move they collide and are interlaced in a manner which
makes them touch and be near to one another, but never really pro-
duces any single existence out of them: for it is quite absurd to suppose
that two or more things could ever become one. The reason why the
atoms for a certain time remain in combination (cuppéverv, obviously
a technical term) he believes to be because they fit into and grasp one
another (dia tas éemadayas Kal ras dvranbes Tov cwpdtwv): for
some of them have uneven sides (cxaAnva), and some are hooked,
some are concave, and some convex and others with innumerable
varieties of shape. He thinks then that they retain hold of one another
and remain in combination until some stronger necessity from what sur-
rounds them comes and shakes them and scatters them apart. And he
speaks of this coming into being and its opposite separation not merely
with reference to animals, but also plants and worlds and generally
about all perceptible bodies.

There are several points in this account which deserve notice
both as advances in definiteness and refinement upon Leucip-
pus and also as laying down the lines of subsequent atomic
theory. In the first place the idea of the ‘war of atoms’ due
to their dissimilarity of shape recalls the old notion of the
repulsion of unlike from unlike and its complement the
union of like with like, of which there are abundant traces

* Simpl. in Ar. de Caelo, A. to. 2793 DIAL 37:

NATURE OF ATOMS 137

in the subsequent account of the cosmic whirl: Democritus,
though not so anxious as his master to mediate between his
predecessors and incorporate their ideas, yet not infrequently
shows their influence. More important is his insistence on
the exact nature of the union of atoms in compounds: the
new creation, the nucleus or compound body is never in the
strict sense ‘one’: the atoms do not coalesce to form a new
body, but even in the compound retain their separate nature
and are kept apart by a larger or smaller interval of void:
‘it is impossible’, as Aristotle? quotes his saying in its full
form, ‘for one thing to be made out of two or two out of
one’, the combination is purely mechanical. A later writer?
puts the notion very explicitly: ‘what seems to be a mixture
is in reality a juxtaposition of the atoms with one another at
small intervals, each of them preserving its own nature,
which it had before the mingling’. Later theory was to insist
further that each atom in the compound preserved also its
own motion. Complementary to this conception is the idea
of the ultimate destruction of the compound by the separa-
tion of the atoms owing to some force or blow from outside.
This is of course a notion which the Atomists shared with
Anaxagoras, but it is here stated with great clearness and
was to have ever-increasing prominence. Even more charac-
teristic perhaps of Democritus is the great elaboration of
the details of atomic shape and their effect on union. This
was indeed the most conspicuous contribution of Demo-
critus to the detail of the atomic theory: he worked it out
not merely for a love of its own detail, but, as will be seen
later, in careful and elaborate connexion with the resultant
effects for sense-perception.

Here again Democritus has elaborated and strengthened
the atomic theory with his own peculiar vividness of imagina-
tion. There is nothing which is really new, but much that
adds freshness and life to the outline of Leucippus. We
must now follow out his ideas with regard to the one special
form of atomic aggregate, the whirl, which is the cause of the
creation of a world.

t Metaphys.Z.13.1039a; D.A.42.  ? Alex. de Mixt.2,p.591; D.A.64.

138 DEMOCRITUS

§ 4. The Cosmic Whirl—Creation of Worlds

No considerable additions of detail at this point in the
theory are recorded of Democritus, but once again he seems
to have worked out and greatly strengthened the underlying
ideas. In the last section it was seen how the atoms moving
in all directions in the void collided and jostled, and some-
times becoming entangled with one another and remaining
in juxtaposition formed new aggregates (dOpotcpara) of
matter enclosing void. These aggregates would differ in the
number of atoms they contained and in the closeness or
laxness of their union, and according to these differences
would be determined the size and shape, the density and
weight of the new compound: such compounds as were
made of closely compact atoms with little void would be
hard and heavy,’ those which were composed of compara-
tively few atoms and much void would be soft and light. It
must be supposed too—though there is no direct evidence
for it—that Democritus conceived of each of these new
aggregates as having its own characteristic motion—the
sum, as it were, of the motions of the individual atoms deter-
mined alike by the direction of their original motion and by
the new motions derived from the successive ‘blows’ of their
collisions. But in no case would such aggregation have any
effective result and lead to the formation of a world, except
when the aggregate formed fell into the particular motion
of a ‘whirl’ (8a). Then by a process which Leucippus
had originally indicated and which must be reconsidered in
the light of Democritus’ main ideas, a ‘cosmos’ with an
earth and air and sky and heavenly bodies would be evolved.

The first question then which must be asked is clearly
enough: what is the cause of this atomic ‘whirl’? Leucippus’
answer, as has been seen, was somewhat vague, but with
Democritus the theory becomes far more definite. In the
first place we have a very clear statement in Diogenes: ‘he
said that all things come into being of necessity: for the

t Arist. de Caelo, A. 2. 309 a; D.A. 60.
2 ix. 45; D.A. 1.

THE COSMICG..WHIRL 139

whirl is the cause of the creation of all things, the whirl
which he calls necessity’. This is emphatic language: Demo-
critus thought then that the whirl was due to the operation
of natural laws, was formed by the atoms as the effect of
their own character and motion and collisions. And if he
did indeed ‘call the whirl necessity’, we are not to suppose
that he meant by that that it was an unexplained postulate,
like the original motion of the atoms, but rather an outcome
of that motion so striking and important in its results as to
deserve the title of ‘necessity’ par excellence. So far this is in
exact accord with what would be expected from Democritus’
main position: the ‘whirl’ is a necessary effect of the opera-
tion of atomic motion under certain conditions. But Aris-
totle in the course of his discussion on chance and the
‘automatic’ seems to suggest another explanation: for he
says with unmistakeable reference to the Atomists: ‘But there
are some who believe “‘the automatic” to be the cause even
of the heaven above us and indeed of all worlds: for they
say that the whirl and the motion which separated and ar-
ranged the whole in this order are produced automatically’,*
and in another place his commentator? remarks with explicit
reference to Democritus that ‘he seems to produce the whirl
automatically and by chance’.

Here it seems as if we had a contradiction not merely of
the first account of the cause of the whirl, but of the very
root-principles of Democritus’ system. Can it be that the
thinker who based his system on the axiom that nothing
comes into being by chance, but that for all things there 1s
a definite cause’,3 yet stated that the cosmic whirl, the most
important factor in creation, was brought about astomeis
cally and by chance’, and if he did, what can he have intende
by it? Aristotle’s evidence is incontrovertible and there can
be no serious doubt that Democritus did give these two

1 Phys. B. 4.1964; D.A. 69 dao tadropdrov yap yeyvecBa THY Sivny
Kal Thy Kivnow Thy SiaKpivacav Kat KaTaoTHaacay els TAVTAV THY Tak
TO TGV.

2 Simpl. in Arist. PAys. B. 3. 1953 D.A. 67.

3 Arist. PAys. B. 4. 195 b; D.A. 68.

140 DEMOCRITUS

apparently inconsistent accounts of the origin of the whirl,
that it was ‘necessity’, yet came into being ‘automatically’.

Modern writers who have taken account of this difficulty
have for the most part attempted to explain it away. Thus
one ingenious critic,’ who incidentally does not sufficiently
distinguish this special movement of the whirl from the
atomic motion in general, holds that Aristotle is not here
using ‘automatic’ in his usual sense of a result occurring
‘accidentally’ (xara ovpBeBnxéds), that is without reference to
the ‘final cause’ of a thing’s existence, but is opposing it to
the conception of an external controlling force, such, for
instance, as the ‘Mind’ of Anaxagoras. That the atomic
movement is ‘automatic’ will then mean that it ‘originates
from itself without a cause’, and Democritus will then be
stating from another point of view what he had already
expressed by saying that the motion of the atoms was due to
necessity, namely, that in moving they were simply obeying
the law of their own being as by nature moving particles:
‘necessity’ and ‘automatism’ are in this sense identical in
meaning. ‘This is a clever reconciliation, but it cannot
possibly be accepted. For in the first place it is perfectly
clear in the context that there is no question of atomic motion
in general, but only of the specific movement of the whirl,
and what is far more important, it is inconceivable that in
a passage where Aristotle is endeavouring to determine the
precise meaning of ‘automatism’ and ‘chance’ and arrives
at a definite conclusion, he should in his crucial instance be
using the word in a quite different sense.

A more profitable line of approach will be to inquire into
Aristotle’s conclusions on the point at issue. His whole
discussion in the Physics is conducted in the language of his
own philosophy and he refers the ideas of ‘chance’ and
‘automatism’ directly to his conception of the ‘final cause’
(05 évexa). His conclusion is that ‘the automatic’ is that
which occurs or comes into being “by accident’ (xara ovpBeBy-
xs), that is, without reference to the final cause, and
‘chance’ occurrences are a subdivision of ‘the automatic’ con-

* Liepmann, Die Mechanik der Leucipp-Democritischen Atome, pp. 34, 35.

THE COSMIC: WHIRL I4I

cerned with actions which are a matter of deliberate choice
(xard mpoaipeow). Now these cannot of course have been with
any exactness the ideas of the Atomists, but they are of value
in the present discussion to this extent, that when the
Atomists said that the whirl was ‘automatic’, part of their
intention was no doubt to exclude the idea of purpose or
design. The atoms did not form themselves into a whirl
in order that a cosmos might result: there is no design either
on their part or on the part of any extraneous force or power.
They fall into the whirl ‘accidentally’ and the result by a
process of strict necessity isa world. Democritus’! intention
was no doubt anti-teleological: this, as has been seen, was
one of his great aims in establishing ‘necessity’ as the basis
of his system, and it remained always a cardinal point in the
Atomic tradition that the creation of a world was not the
result of design. Cicero? speaks of the conglomeration of
atoms out of which a cosmos arises as a concursus fortuitus,
and Lucretius3in notable verses puts the position unmistake-
ably: ‘for not by design did the first beginnings of things
place themselves each in their order with foreseeing mind,
nor indeed did they make compact what movements each
should start, but because many of them shifting in many
ways throughout the world are harried and buffeted by
blows from limitless time, by trying movements and unions
of every kind, at last they fall into such dispositions as these,
whereby our world of things is created and holds together’.
Nor is there of course in this idea of ‘the automatic’ anything
at all inconsistent with the fundamental notion of necessity:
the formation of the whirl is the outcome of natural causes,
the shape, size, motions, and collisions of the atoms, but it is
accidental, entirely undetermined either by purpose or
design. ale rae Titel
That this was in part Democritus’ meaning I have little

doubt: but it is not an entirely satisfactory explanation, if
only because it is based on Aristotelian conceptions which

1 This I take to be the view of Zeller and Lange.

2 de Nat. Deor.i. 24. 66: cf. Tusc.i. 11. 22, and.18. 42.

ef.g02T ff.

142 DEMOCRITUS

could not have been fully present to him. A far more satis-
factory result would be reached, if we could determine his
own conception of ‘chance’ and ‘automatism’, and this, it
appears to me, we are in a position to do.” Aristotle? informs
us that even those who are most fully aware that every effect
can be referred to a definite cause—he must include the
Atomists, even if they are not the only persons in his mind—
yet habitually say that some things are due to chance and
others not. The conception of ‘chance’ then must be con-
sistent with that of necessity. And of the nature of this
conception Aristotle has most fortunately preserved us a
hint: he says3 that the persons who state that the whirl is
produced automatically distinguish its creation from that of
animals and plants, ‘for it is no chance product which arises
from each seed, but from one seed olives and from another
a man’. There is here clearly no question of design: that
which differentiates the creation of the olive and the man
from the creation of a universe is clearly the definite seed:
one can say with regard to these seeds that they must pro-
duce olive and man, but of the atoms moving in space and
colliding it is not possible to say which of them may fall
into the whirl: there is nothing peculiar in their nature which
determines it. It would seem then that the Atomists had
a strict scientific conception of ‘chance’; they knew that
everything has its cause, ‘necessity’ is all-controlling, but
in many cases we are unable to predict what will happen or
to reach back to the cause, and such occurrences we attribute
to ‘chance’. This idea is strikingly borne out by another
passage in the Aristotelian discussion,+ where he again seems
to have Democritus in view: ‘the causes from which “‘chance”
results would follow, must be indefinite (ddpiora): and this is
why chance seems to belong to the indefinite and to be
unascertainable (d3yAos) to man’. If with this passage we
compare the statement of a doxographer’ that Democritus

« See Goedeckemeyer, pp. 36 ff.; Mabilleau, pp. 216-18.

2 Phys. B. 4. 195 b.

3 Ibid. 196; D.A. 69. 4 Ibid. 1974 8.
s Theodoret. vi. 15. atria ddyAos avOpwrivw Adyw.

THE COSMIC WHIRL 143

regarded chance as a ‘cause unascertainable for human
reason’, there seems no longer cause to doubt, but the point
is clinched when we find Simplicius: speaking of Democritus’
conception of ‘the automatic’ as an ‘indefinite cause’. The
Atomic conception of ‘chance’ then is, as we may say, the
purely subjective conception which is proper to a scientific
view of nature. ‘Chance’ is no external force which comes
in to upset the workings of ‘necessity’ by producing a cause-
less result; it is but a perfectly normal manifestation of that
‘necessity’, but the limits of the human understanding make
it impossible for us to determine what the cause is. There
are special conditions—the aggregation of atoms of a certain
shape, size, position, order, and movement—which will
make for the production of a cosmic whirl, and the whole
process is but the carrying out of the universal laws of cause
and effect: but we cannot know what these conditions are
and therefore we attribute the result to ‘chance’. Epicurus,
whose notion of the ‘swerve’ of the atoms ‘at no certain time
or place’ was indeed a contradiction of the universal necessity,
was driven to adopt a somewhat different view of chance,
but Democritus’ conception, so far from being any contra-
diction of his fundamental principles, is perfectly consistent
with them, and forms a notable example of the consistency
and accuracy of his thought. The idea of the origin of the
whirl, so far from being confused by him, has been greatly
cleared and strengthened: it is produced as the inevitable
outcome of natural processes, but it is undesigned and for
men unpredictable. he 4

There are no separate accounts given of Democritus
conception of the process of world-formation in the whirl.*
That which has been already examined in reference to
Leucippus must be regarded as holding good for the

* Simpl. in Arist. Phys. B. 4. 196. ; ‘
2 The account given in Aet. i. 4; D. (Leucippus) 24, is, as Liepmann ie
shown (pp. 19 #.), largely contaminated by Epicurean theory: thus it makes
no specific mention of the whirl, and speaks of ‘the heaviest atoms’ as moving
‘downwards’. But it is useful in preserving here and there an important

technical term.

144 DEMOCRITUS
Atomists in general. But it may in some points be con-

sidered afresh in the light of Democritus’ general views; in
particular it throws much light on the very vexed problem
of the place of ‘weight’ in Democritus’ system. It will be
remembered that on the one hand in the cosmogony of
Leucippus there was no trace of weight either as an efficient
cause or a resultant: it is the larger and bulkier atoms which
by their expanse are able to offer a resistance to the whirl and
so congregate in the centre, the finer and smaller atoms
which are squeezed out to the edges and carried round in
the full rotatory motion of the vortex. Similarly we have
seen reason to agree with the denial of the doxographers of
any attribution of absolute weight to the atoms by Demo-
critus, and still more to refuse to admit the assumption ofa
primary property of weight as the cause of a downward
motion leading to the collisions of the atoms and the resul-
tant formation of a whirl. What then can Aristotle mean
when he states that ‘Democritus says that each of the
indivisible particles is heavier according to increase of bulk’*
(kar. Thy darepoxyv), or elsewhere that ‘the greater of them is
the heavier’?? We are now, I think, in a position at last to
answer this question. Three points in the Aristotelian dis-
cussion must be noted. (1) He never speaks of the atom,
as such, in virtue of its being a piece of solid matter, possess-
ing ‘weight’, but only of some atoms as being ‘heavier’ or
‘lighter’ than others. Indeed in a notable passage3 he re-
marks that ‘former philosophers have never spoken of
absolute weight or lightness but have only used the words
relatively. They never say what is “the heavy” or “the
light” but only what is “the heavier” or “the lighter’’ among
things that have weight’. In other words the earlier thinkers
had no notion of the weight of a thing as a property com-
parable to its size or shape, but only thought of it as heavier
or lighter, that is, offering more or less resistance to an

de Gen. et Corr. A. 8. 326.49; D.A. 60.

2 de Caelo, A. 2. 309 a3; D. ibid: cf. Theophr. de Sensu, 61; D.A. 135.

3 de Caelo, 308 a: see E.G. P3, 342, where it is noted that ‘weight is
never called a “‘thing’’, as, for instance, warmth and cold are’.

THE COSMIC WHIRL 145

external moving force. (2) Throughout the discussion
Aristotle is thinking of weight in a formed cosmos and
regards ‘heaviness’ as a tendency ‘downwards’, that is awards
the centre, and lightness as a tendency upwards, that is,
towards the outside (mpos 76 éoxarov). ‘This notion is not of
course strange even to us, for the effect of weight in ordinary
practice is motion ‘downwards’, as we say, towards the earth,
even though the-absolute direction of such motion is pre-
cisely opposite at the antipodes. (3) His main point with
regard to Democritus is that heaviness is derivative from
and exactly proportionate to size: the larger the atom the
heavier.

If now the Aristotelian idea be applied to the atomic
cosmogony, as it has been interpreted from Diogenes, it
is seen to fit exactly. There is no question of free atoms
moving in a boundless void, but of a cosmic whirl in which
‘up’ and ‘down’ could mean nothing but towards or from
the centre. The ‘heavier’ atom is precisely that which is
‘larger’ and therefore moves towards the centre because it
is more capable of resisting the extraneous force of the
rotatory motion. It is heavier not because of its absolute
weight, but only derivatively because larger and therefore
more difficult to move: we might in fact say,’ without stretch-
ing the language too far, that the larger atom has greater
heaviness, that is greater resisting power, but not more
weight. The account thus given is borne out by the contrast
which Aristotle* quotes from Democritus between the solid
atoms, whose heaviness is exactly proportionate to their size,
and compound bodies where the comparative weight of
things of the same size varies according to the amount of
void in their constitution: a piece of wool, for instance, 1s
lighter than a piece of bronze of the same size, because it
contains more void. Here we are undoubtedly inside a
cosmos and ‘heaviness’ means tendency towards the centre:
but the wool is lighter because it has more void in a ace

I i is rather difficult point comes more easily to the
aa eo x, pe oppose mo eaTe das Schwere and Gewicht.

2 de Caelo, A. 2. 309 a.

3307 L

146 DEMOCRITUS

bulk and therefore less sheer matter to drag it, as it were,
towards the centre. Aristotle’s language is in fact applicable
—and only applicable—to the atoms inside the cosmic
whirl, and in this conception there appears a reconciliation
between the apparently divergent views of the tradition
about Democritus. The doxographers are right in denying
that Democritus attributed weight to the atoms as a third
property together with size and shape—for they are speaking
from the Epicurean point of view which thinks of absolute
weight as the cause of an original perpendicular downward
movement. On the other hand there is no doubt that Demo-
critus did speak, as Aristotle reports him of ‘heavier’ and
‘lighter’ atoms, as a derivative quality, immediately depen-
dent on size, and called into being, as it were, in the vortex,
as a counteraction of the rotatory motion of the whirl. It
is in fact a kind of compendious expression denoting what
is clearly implied without it in Diogenes’ account of Leucip-
pus’ theory.

Like Leucippus Democritus held that worlds were infinite
in number,' but made important additions to the theory in
assuming and elaborating differences between them and
introducing details as to their growth, decay, and destruc-
tion. These are summed up in an interesting traditional
description :*

worlds are infinite in number and different in size. In some there ts
no sun or moon, in some these are larger than those in our world and
in others more in number. The distances between worlds are unequal
and in some quarters there are more worlds, in others fewer: some are
growing, others are reaching their prime, some are decaying or coming
into being in one part and failing in another. They are destroyed by
one another by colliding. And some worlds are without living crea-
tures and all moisture. . .. A world grows towards its prime, until it
can no longer take in any addition from without.

In these ideas there is certainly a freedom of speculation and
a boldness of imagination which contrasts effectively with
the rather bald and restricted ideas attributed to Leucippus.

= tnx, 445 DAS a. 2 Hipp. Ref. 1. 13; D.A. 40.

THE COSMIC WHIRL 147

Democritus is prepared not merely to assume an infinity of
cosmic whirls in the universe, but, as it were, to sweep all space
in his imagination and to postulate the same variety between
world and world which he saw between members of the
Same species of thing within a world. In some quarters of
space he shows us worlds close-packed and crowding in on
one other, in others they are rarer with large intervals of
void tenanted by the free atoms. Internally, too, these worlds
differ in structure: Democritus is not bound by his experi-
ence of our world with its sun, moon, and stars, but can
conceive worlds without sun or moon, or with several,
worlds without life or the moisture which could sustain it.
There is a fine width of view in all this and it seems to add
a dignity to Atomism.

More important perhaps for the subsequent development
of the system is the notion of the various stages of growth
in the worlds: they are not all ‘complete’, but some are still
increasing, others beginning already to decay. The general
idea may perhaps have been suggested by the stages in
Empedocles’ world caused by the interaction of ‘Strife’ and
‘Love’, but it is worked out in a far less arbitrary manner.
Particularly notable is the final sentence which contains the
germ of all the later theory of growth and decay :' a world,
like a living organism, continues to grow so long as it is
capable of taking in and assimilating extraneous atomic
matter, but a period ultimately arrives when this can no
longer be so, when the loss of matter exceeds the gain; then
decay sets in and ultimately dissolution. The idea that a
world may be growing in one part and decaying in another
is, I think, peculiar to Democritus, and is a little difficult
to understand on atomic principles, but it is a further proof
of his vividness of imagination in concetving differences of
condition between the infinite worlds. Democritus too
states for the first time the notion of the ultimate destruction
of worlds: just as a world has a birth in the cosmic universe,’
so it must ultimately pass away and dissolve once more into

See especially Lucr. ii. 1105 #.
2 A world is both zativom and mortale, Luer. v.235 ff
L2

148 DEMOCRITUS

its component atoms: they alone are eternal. That this final
dissolution may take place internally as the result of the
continuation of the process of decay is implied in the account,
but Democritus with a fine stretch of the imagination
conceives another possibility: just as the ordinary atomic
compound may be dissolved as the result of a ‘blow’ which
severs the interlacings of its atoms, so the huge organism
of-a world may be broken up by collision with another
world. The idea is not quite clear, but we are probably not
to conceive the worlds as moving in space—a notion for
which there is no evidence in the Atomists—but rather as
growing in bulk until they jostle a neighbouring world.
This seems to be the picture presented in another brief
account:! ‘a world is destroyed when a greater world over-
comes a lesser’: we may even conceive that the ‘greater
world’ swallows up the component atoms of the smaller in
its own organism. Finally we have evidence of a still further
pursuit of his idea by Democritus in the notion that the
dissolved atoms of a broken world may possibly reunite
themselves to form another: ‘the worlds of Democritus
change into other worlds made out of the same atoms:* the
worlds thus become the same in form, but not in individua-
lity’.3 This speculation does not reappear with reference to
worlds, but it does curiously enough in connexion with the
human body4—another proof of the analogous treatment
by the atomists of the organisms of the living body and the
world. It is probable that the whole idea of growth, decay
and destruction was much more elaborated by Democritus
than our present accounts would lead us to suppose: there
is at any rate enough to show how much Epicurus owed to
him on this point, and to prove once again the audacity and
- penetration of his speculation.

« Aet. ii. 4.9; D.A.84. + Simpl. in Ar. de Caelo, A. 10. 280; D.A. 82.

3 This must, I think, be the meaning of 7@ dpuOu@: the new world con-
structed out of the old atoms would be the same in substance, but its ‘number’,
so to speak, in the series of worlds would be different. We may compare the
famous phrase of Cicero, de Nat. Deor.i. 19. 49, about the Epicurean gods:
‘nec soliditate quadam nec ad numerum’. 4 Cf. Lucr. iii. 847-51.

OUR WORLD 149

§ 5. Our World: the heavenly bodies and the earth

It was noticed with regard to Leucippus’ theory of our
world and its constitution that he did not appear to have
very much interest in the questions which arose, and harked
back in a reactionary spirit-to the rather crude theories of
the early Ionians, neglecting the results of recent and con-
temporary observation and speculation. In this respect there
is considerable evidence for a marked change of attitude’ on
the part of Democritus: indeed we can in this part of the
theory point most certainly to definite differences of opinion
between the two philosophers. Democritus seems to have
had a real interest in these subjects, a much greater respect
for views developed since the time of the Ionian school, and,
as usual, considerable insight and boldness of speculation
on his own account.

In the first place he reversed Leucippus’ strange theory
as regards the relative position of the orbits of the heavenly
bodies, and held that the moon is lowest? (i.e. nearest the
earth), then the sun, then the fixed stars; as for the planets
‘ they are not all at an equal height’. This was a definite
advance, and we may notice moreover the explicit distinction
between fixed stars and planets, which seems to have been
unknown to Leucippus. That he also made use of his con-
clusion to explain the apparent motions of the heavenly
bodies is expressly explained by Lucretius,’ who tells us
that Democritus held that the nearer the orbit of a body to
the earth, the less it is affected by the whirl:3 the motion of
the moon then is slowest, that of the sun next, and that of
the fixed stars the fastest. Consequently by a common
optical delusion the stars appear to us to be stationary, and
the sun and moon to be moving in the direction opposite to
that of their real motion, the moon faster than the sun. This
very ingenious notion, which for long held its place i
astronomy, has a peculiar interest for us in that it accords

* Hipp. Ref. i. 13; D.A. 40. 2 vy. 621 ff.

3 quanto quaeque magis sint terram sidera propter,
tanto posse minus cum caeli turbine ferri. 623-4.

150 DEMOCRITUS

exactly with the view which has been taken of the nature of
the cosmic whirl, and affords another example of the
‘resistance of the middle’. Democritus was evidently at
pains to accommodate his astronomical views to his general
theory of the world.

With regard to the nature of the heavenly bodies too
tradition is similarly suggestive of Democritus’ care for
general consistency. It will be remembered that Leucippus
had held that sun, moon, and stars were masses of matter
caught up from the exterior universe by the outer membrane
of the world and ignited by the rapidity of their motion in
the whirl. Democritus considers their structure from the
atomic point of view.and decides that they are compounded
of smooth and round atoms,’ as is the soul: the round shape,
as always in the atomic theory, being associated with mobility
and consequently with fire. A curious and interesting pas-
sage? seems to suggest an attempt to connect this new theory
with Leucippus’ notion: ‘sun and moon have their own
characteristic motion: at first they had by no means a warm
nature, nor indeed generally speaking very bright, on the
contrary they resembled the nature of the earth. For each -
of them first of all was brought into being by a separate
foundation (imoBoAn) of the world, and afterwards when the
orb of the sun3 increased in size, fire was taken into it’.
Leucippus’ idea of the original earthy nature of sun and
moon is retained, but the change is produced not now by
rotation, but by the inclusion of the round atoms of fire.
The new notion is characteristic, if somewhat clumsy. The
statement of the doxographer ‘ that the sun was according to
Democritus a ‘red-hot mass or a fiery stone’ reads too
suspiciously like Anaxagoras though it would not be in-
consistent with the general idea. More suggestive is a
remark of Cicero’s5 that Democritus thought the sun was

t Diog. Laert. ix. 44; D.A. 1. 2 Plut. Strom. 7; D.A. 39.

3 This I take to be the meaning of tod wepi tov yAvov KUKAov: cf. TH
mept THY yhv pvoer just above.

4 Aet. li. 20. 7 wvdpov 7 aétpov Sudmupov; D.A. 87.

5 de Fin. i. 6. 20; D.A. 87.

OUR WORLD fay

‘large’, for it hints at a conflict with the view to which
Epicurus was led by his insistence on the validity of the
evidence of sense-perception. T'wo interesting notions about
the moon have come down to us, the one as short-sighted as
the other is penetrating. The first is an attempt at the
explanation of the light of the full moon: ‘when she takes
up her position in a straight line with him who gives her
light (i.e. exactly between the earth and the sun) she takes
in and receives the sunlight:' so that it is natural that she
herself should be seen and show the sun through her
(Svagaivew)’. This extraordinary notion that the sun’s light is
seen through the moon is severely criticized by Plutarch,
and contrasted unfavourably with the view of Empedocles,
who saw rightly enough that this was the position which
caused an eclipse of the sun: it does indeed seem strange
that Democritus, if he realized that the moon’s light was
due to the sun, should nevertheless have invented a theory
so perverse. On the other hand he seems to have answered
the problem why the moon looks so ‘earthy’? (yedSns) with
singular perspicacity, saying that it was owing to ‘the
shadow of the lofty parts in it: for the moon has glens and
valleys’. Almost equally striking is his theory of the Milky
Way, which he describes as ‘the joint rays of many tiny
continuous stars shining together owing to their dense
crowding’.3 A longer description is even more remarkable,
though, since it is attributed also to Anaxagoras, the credit
ought not perhaps to be given to Democritus:

The Milky Way is the light of certain stars: for when the sun passes
at night under the earth, his light still falls on certain of the stars above
- the earth: their proper light is then not seen, for it Is impeded by the
rays of the sun. The shadow of the earth runs up in front of others
and keeps them in darkness so that they are not caught by the light of
the sun: the proper light of these stars is seen and they are the Milky
Way.
This view undoubtedly influenced Democritus’ notion of

: j : @, 16.929 c; D.A. 89 a.

: ee, Ba. a ad pi het Gilet es DAL SY,

4 Alex. in Arist. Meteor. A. 8. 3454; D.A. 91-

152 DEMOCRITUS
the shape of the earth. He definitely deserted Leucippus’

idea of its ‘tambourine-shape’ and said that it was ‘long-
shaped (mpouzj«ys), the length being one and a half times
the breadth’,! a formation which would suit the general
contour of the Milky Way. It looks once again as if he were
trying to work his detailed account of the world into a
consistent whole, instead of the rather haphazard jumble of
notions which had satisfied Leucippus. He followed him
however in holding that the earth was tilted down towards
the south because the atmosphere there was weaker :? ‘for
in the north it is unmixed, but mixed in the south, therefore
the earth is weighed down in this part, where it is more
luxuriant in fruits and produce.’ Whether he used this
tilting of the earth, like Leucippus, to explain night and
eclipses we have no information: the theory of the Milky
Way seems to suggest a more rational view of the sun’s daily
‘revolution’, but his strange notion of the moon’s light looks
as if Democritus had not advanced much farther than
Leucippus in determining the cause of eclipses. The state-
ment that the earth ‘was at first wandering because of its
smallness and lightness,3 but in time became thick and heavy
and came to a standstill’, is exactly in harmony with the
theory of the whirl. Altogether the account of the heavenly
bodies is a curious combination of insight and stupidity, but
at least it seems more consistent both with itself and with
Atomism generally than the crude jumble of ideas attributed
to Leucippus.

Democritus dealt further with certain phenomena of sky
and earth, which may most conveniently be considered here.
Comets‘ he curiously explained as an optical illusion pro-
duced when two planets are so near together as to produce
the ‘joint-appearance’ (ovydacs) of a single body. This
notion is obviously connected closely with the theory of the
Milky Way and it is significant that it too is attributed to

t~Agathem. 1. 1. 2;'D.B. 15,

a Aet. iii, 12. 2; D.A. 96.

3) Aetiits 13. 45 DiAa ge:

4 Alex. in Arist. Meteor. A. 6. 342 b; D.A. 92.

OUR WORLD ‘Tee

Anaxagoras jointly with Democritus. The theory of the
origin of thunder and lightning is very elaborate and mark-
edly at variance with the crude notion of Leucippus: ‘thunder
is caused by an uneven combination of atoms forcing the
cloud which encloses it in a downward direction:? lightning
is a collision of clouds owing to which the fire-producing
particles gather together as they rub one another through
the many void apertures into a single spot and filter through.
A thunderbolt is produced when the downward motion is
formed in a cloud by fire-producing particles which are
purer and finer and more even and, as he writes himself,
““close-fitted”’ (xvxvdpyova). Waterspouts occur when com-
binations. of fire with more void are caught in places full
of void and in a kind of peculiar membrane which surrounds
them, and then forming into bodies owing to this mixture
of many elements, swoop down upon the deep.’ The inclu-
sion of thunderbolts and ‘presters’ is very characteristic of
the traditional meteorology, but the whole idea is once again
thought out in atomic terms. Of earthquakes he also gave
an explanation: ‘the earth is full of water and receives a
large quantity of rain-water as well and is moved by this
means: for when the water is in excess and the hollow places
cannot contain it, it forces its way out and so causes an
earthquake’.* In other parts of his works Democritus en-
gaged in the ever-popular discussion in antiquity as to the
cause of the Nile-floods,3 and, as a recently discovered
papyrus has revealed to us, attempted an explanation of
salt-springs.+ In a separate treatise he gave a detailed exposi-
tion of the magnet, the gist of which is that like always
attracts like:5 iron and the magnet are constructed of similar
atoms: they tend then towards each other and when they
are close the atoms rush from one to the other and fill up
void spaces, so that they hold the two substances in contact.

Act. ili. 3. 11; D.A..93.

2 Arist. Meteor. B. 7. 365 a; D.A. 97-

3 Aet. iv. 1.4; D.A. 99.

+ Hibeh Papyr. 16; Grenfell and Hunt; D.A. 99 a.
5 Alex. Quaest. ii. 23, p. 1373 D.A. 165.

154 DEMOCRITUS

Here, as in the cosmogony, we see that the attraction of the
old notion of ‘like to like’ is strong on Democritus, but once
again his ideas of atomic shape and size give it a new
plausibility. These miscellaneous theories are not perhaps
of much value in themselves, but they started certain per-
manent topics of atomic speculation and reveal the origin
of much of that odd conglomeration of discussions which
is so prominent in the second letter of Epicurus and the
sixth book of Lucretius. :
Another great department of inquiry which Democritus
pursued with the greatest interest and elaboration is that
of zoology and physiology. Thrasyllus records three books
on these subjects and it so happens that a very considerable
body of information’ has come down to us as to Democritus’ _
theories. It is hard to find in them anything specially atomic
and his speculations were no doubt inspired by the same
contemporary interest in these matters which gave Anaxa-
goras the starting-point in physiology for his main theory
of the constitution of matter. But there is nothing in the
views recorded which is inconsistent with Atomism and it
may be taken as certain that Democritus took as much pains
to accommodate his theories here to his main principles as
he did in the department of Astronomy. The extraordinary
width of his interest and the vividness of his insight into
detail is again apparent. With regard to human physiology
perhaps the most interesting statement is that he believed
men were originally sprung from ‘water and mud’:? that is
to say, as another account suggests,3 that they came from
the earth, but it was the moist element in it which was the
efficient cause. We seem here to be half-way between the
old mythological story of Prometheus and the elaborate
Epicurean idea of the birth of animals and men from ‘wombs
rooted in the ground’:4 moreover the hint that he compared
the creation of worms from moist earth 5 suggests the origin
of an argument which was ultimately to be worked to death
t See D.A. 139-64. 2 Censor. 4.9; D.A. 139.

3 Aet.’v. 19. 63 D. ibid. 4 Lucr. v. 801 ff.
5 Lact. Inst. div. vii. 7. 9; D. ibid.

OUR WORLD 155

by Lucretius.t Besides this guess at the origin of our first
parents, there are plentiful details as to his theories of
generation and conception? and of the process of gestation
and the nourishment of the infant in the womb3 which show
at any rate acute conjecture: his followers seem to have
neglected inquiry on this head. A curious line of inquiry
which he seems also to have pursued is the investigation of
symptoms of the survival of sensation in the body for a
while after the moment of death:4 his inference would un-
doubtedly have been to the wholly material character of the
soul and its gradual dissolution like that of any other
decaying atomic compound.

With regard to other animals we have evidence of elabo-
rate theories advanced by Democritus as to the birth of
mules,’ the growth of the horns of cattle and stags,° and
even on such apparently minute and obscure topics as
spiders and their webs,7 the eyes of owls,® and the crowing
of cocks. Another whole book was devoted to ‘seeds and
plants and fruits’, and we have evidence of an interesting
theory that plants which grow straight up are shorter-lived
than those which grow crooked” because it is less easy for
the sap to run above the ground than among the roots: this
certainly looks as if it were deduced from the general atomic
theory of motion. Finally there is a theory that even stones ™
have ‘souls’ which are the cause of their shaping: this is not
of course a return to Ionian hylozoism, but rather a purely
materialistic view that ‘life’ cannot be supposed to begin
suddenly in the organic world. It is not without interest
in view both of the system of Epicurus and of the theories
of some modern physiologists.

rane 2 D.A. 140-2.
3 er 4 D.A. oe

5 Ael. H. N. xii. 16; D.A. 151.

6 Jbid. xii. 18; D.A. 153.

7 [Arist.] Hist. anim. ix. 39. 623; D.A. 150.

8 Etym. genuin. s.v. yAadg; D.A. 157.

9 Cic. de Divin. ii. 26. 57; D.A. 158.

%0 Theophr. de Caus. P/. ii. I 1.7; D.A. 162.

m Albert. Magn. de Lapid.i. 1. 43 D.A. 164.

156 DEMOCRITUS

§ 6. The soul, sensation, and thought

(a) Soul and mind. ort

Democritus inherited from Leucippus the general con-
ception that the soul (#vy7) or vital principle was corporeal,
that it was of the nature of fire and was, like fire, composed
of spherical atoms, for they were the most mobile. THese
ideas Democritus retained unmodified, but some of the
notices on the point are interesting, for they serve at once
to bring out the essentially material nature of the conception,
and also point to a dawning sense of its difficulties. In his
summary of Democritus’ doctrines Diogenes’ has the some-
what startling statement: ‘the sun and moon are composed |
of smooth and spherical particles, and likewise the soul’.
The soul that is, is fiery in its nature, therefore it must be
composed of the same kind of particles as the fiery heavenly
bodies: the presence of the spherical particles give to both
their characteristics. ven more astonishing seems the
statement of a late authority? that ‘there is a soul in the
stone’, which is supported by the assertion of Aetius3 that
“Democritus said that all things have a share in some kind
of soul’ (fuyxfs mods). At first sight this looks more like the
doctrine of the Stoic school and even seems to anticipate
the ideas of modern thinkers about ‘mind-stuff’, but Demo-
critus probably meant little more by it than that there was
present in all things a certain portion of the spherical particles
which could produce either fire or the soul, so that in a
potential sense they too had a soul. The idea is striking but
in reality purely material. Hardly less remarkable is a state-
ment made by Aristotle4 in reference to Democritus, ‘some
have thought the soul is fire: for fire too has the finest parts
and is the most bodiless (dowparov) of all the elements and

« D.L. ix. 44; D.A. 1. It is noticeable that the word used here is oyKwr,
not atopwy, and it may be that Democritus was thinking not of spherical
atoms, but of spherical atomic nuclei. There is good reason for believing
that this was the idea of Epicurus.

2 Albert Magn. de Lapid. 1.1.4; D.A. 164.

3 Activ. 4.7; DAE.

4 de Anima, A.2.405a5;D.A. rot.

SOUL AND MIND is

more than anything else is'moved and moves other things’.
We may perhaps accept the view of a commentator! on this
passage that ‘the term “‘bodiless” is not used in its full sense
(for none of them would say that) but meaning that among
bodies it is bodiless owing to the fineness of its parts’. If
Aristotle is quoting Democritus and he himself used the
word ‘bodiless’ in however-a metaphorical sense, we may
imagine that even in his mind there was arising something
of the doubt as to the full capacity of any known material
substance to produce the soul, which led subsequently to
Epicurus’ assumption? of the ‘nameless’ element in the soul.
Be this as it may, it is clear that Democritus took over
Leucippus’ account of the soul’s structure, and that with
regard to the corporeal nature of the soul he was equally
explicit. This must not be forgotten when we come to deal
with the more intricate questions which arise in reference to
his psychology: the more material the interpretation given
to his statements, the more likely it is to be right.

Where is this soul, and what are its functions? It has
been seen that little more can be safely attributed to
Leucippus than that it is in the body and is the cause of the
body’s motions.3 This view was also held by Democritus
and can now be defined more closely: ‘the soul moves the
body iri which it is situated, even as it is moved. itself’.
From an interesting passage in Lucretius’ we learn that
Democritus supposed that it was distributed over the body,
soul-atoms and body-atoms being placed in alternate juxta-
position, a very exact conception, which Epicurus was subse-
quently at pains to refute. Thus disposed in the body the
soul® moves it doubtless in the same mechanical manner as
was conceived by Leucippus; ‘it 1s capable of movement
because of the smallness of its parts and their shape’:7 the

Philop., ad loc.; D.A. ror. 2 See Part II, Chap. VIII, pp. 39° #.
See Chap. II, § 5.

Arist. de Anima, A. 3. 406 b 15; D.A. 104.

iil. 370 ff.

Arist. de Anima, l.c.: cf. ibid. A. 5. 409 4 323 D.A. 104 a.

Ibid. 405 a 5; D.A. rol.

aw nn fk WH

158 ; DEMOCRITUS

spherical shape is again conceived of as the most mobile and
it communicates its motions to the body in which it is
situated. Aristotle adds a curious illustration: “he says that
Daedalus made his wooden Aphrodite a moving figure by
pouring in molten silver;* similarly Democritus too speaks,
for he says that the indivisible spheres (sc. the spherical
particles) move, because it is their nature never to remain
still, and drag along with them and set in motion the whole .
body’. The motion of the soul-atoms actually sets the body
in motion.

But this is not the sole function of the soul, for, although
our authorities are not explicit on this point, Democritus
must also have held that the contact with external bodies
moves the soul in the body and so causes sensation. This
becomes clearer when we pass to the discussion of the means
of knowledge, but we may quote for it at the moment a
criticism of Aristotle,2 which brings out very clearly the
corporeal conception: ‘since the soul is in all the sentient
body, there must be two bodies in the same place, if the
soul is a sort of body (dpa 7)’. There is here at least the
germ of the later Epicurean idea of the soul by its presence
in the body communicating sensation to the body, and the
notion of the ‘two bodies’3 shows how completely the
atomists thought of the soul as corporeal in the same sense
as any other part of the body. The same idea is illustrated
in an elaboration‘ attributed to Democritus of Leucippus’
notion of respiration, which shows clearly how he conceived
the relation of the soul-atoms to those of body:

Democritus says that as the result of respiration something occurs to
those who breathe, for he argues that it prevents the soul from being
squeezed out of the body. . . . He says that the soul and the warm are
identical, the first forms of the spherical. When then these atoms are
being crowded together owing to the surrounding matter which

1 apyupov xvrov here may possibly mean ‘quicksilver’.

2 Ibid. A. 5. 4oga 32; D.A. 104 a.

3 Aristotle’s difficulty is surely solved by Democritus’ idea (Lucr. iii. 370 £.)
that soul- and body-atoms are distributed alternately.

4 Arist. de Resp. 4. 471 b 30; D.A. 106,

SOUL AND MIND 159

squeezes them out, he says that respiration comes in to help. For in the
air is a great quantity of atoms such as he calls ‘mind’ and ‘soul’ ; when
then a creature breathes and the air enters in, these come in too and
arrest the squeezing motion and prevent the soul in the animals passing
out. And this is why life and death depend upon respiration and ex-
piration. For when the pressure of surrounding matter prevails and
can no longer be checked by what comes in from without, as the
creature cannot breathe, then death results. For death is the depar-
ture of atoms of this shape from the body owing to the pressure of their

surroundings.

This passage suggests two further points of importance.
In the first place the account of death is more explicit than
in anything attributed to Leucippus. All through life the
soul-atoms are carrying on a kind of contest with the body-
atoms which tend to squeeze them out in expiration: but in
return fresh soul-atoms are taken in as we breathe from the
outer air. At last the contest proves unequal, the soul-
atoms are breathed out, no more can be taken in, and the
body deprived of the soul, which gave it life and sensation,
perishes. This account must be at once modified and supple-
mented by a curious theory attributed to Democritus‘ that
even ‘the dead parts of bodies have a share in sensation,
because they clearly always have a share in something that
is warm and capable of sensation, when the greater part 1s
breathed forth’. That is to say that even when the soul has
so effectively been squeezed out of the body that death
ensues, there yet lurk in the body enough spherical particles
to give it in a faint measure warmth and sensation. The idea,
which clearly emphasizes the material picture in Demo-
critus’ mind, may be compared with his statement that ‘all
things have a share in soul’,? and is said to have been used
by him as an explanation of stories of the restoration of the
dead to life: 3 ‘for not even death, it seems, was a quenching
of all the life of the body, but life was let go owing to some
blow perhaps or wound, but the bonds of the soul about the
marrow still remained rooted and the heart kept the fire of

t Aet.iv. 4.7; D.A. 117. a Above, p. 156.
3 Procl. ia Remp. ii. 113. 6; D.B. 1.

160 DEMOCRITUS

life stored up in the depth; and because these remained the
body regained the extinguished life and proved sufficient
for the recreation of soul.’ We may perhaps compare the
account given by Lucretius‘ of the remnants of life in the
limbs of warriors cut off in battle.

So the body dies and the soul likewise perishes, for
the mobile round atoms are dispersed in the outer air,
indeed, they are not even breathed out all at once or in
conjunction. It is not therefore surprising to find that
Democritus,’ like Leucippus, held ‘that the soul was mortal
(f0ap77}) and was destroyed with the body’, though in fact
this momentous conclusion receives but little notice in the
authorities.

Not less noticeable in the account of respiration is the
incidental identification of ‘mind’ and ‘soul’, for here we
come upon a cardinal point. Both the distinction and the
identification are important, and are vouched for in many
quotations: ‘Democritus’, says Aristotle} ‘said simply that
soul and mind are the same’, and the phrase is repeated in
later commentators. First as to the distinction: the soul
(buy) was thought, as has been seen, to be distributed over
the body and to be the cause of sensation and of movement:
the mind (voids) on the other hand is considered rather as an ©
aggregate of unmixed soul-atoms, situated in some one part
of the body, and to be the cause and seat of thought. This
was a traditional conception among the physiologists but
here for the first time becomes explicit in atomic terms. In
what part of the body the mind was situated was a matter
of controversy among philosophers, but we may feel sure
that Democritus was in accord with the general atomic
tradition that it was in the breast: “Democritus and Epicurus
said that the soul was of two parts, having both the reasoning
part (7d Aoyuxdv) situated in the breast (@pag) and the un-
reasoning (76 dAoyov) scattered all through the compound of

F gif6a2 f: : bet

a Aet.iv. 7.4; D.A. 109.

3-de Anima, A.2.404a.27; D.A. tor: cf. Philopon. in loc., p. 71.19;
DAS Trs. ;

SOUL AND MIND 16%

the body.’! The statement here is loose, for the Atomists
would not have spoken of the soul as having ‘two parts’ and
the terms ‘reasoning’ and ‘unreasoning’ belong to a later
Stage of thought, but the general idea of the distinction
between ‘soul’ and ‘mind’ is clear, and the statement as to
the seat of the soul unequivocal. By his identification of
‘mind’ and ‘soul’ Democritus meant simply that they were
of the same atomic composition: the spherical particles which
distributed in the body formed the soul, were gathered to-
gether unmixed, as Epicurus later explained, in the breast
and so produced that complex form of sensation which js
called thought. For, as will be seen later on, Democritus
made the complementary identification of sensation and
thought: the two processes being due to the movement of
similar particles were in fact the same.

This account of the soul is of great interest and impor-
tance. It was a first attempt to think out on atomic lines
what must always be the most difficult problem for any
purely materialistic philosophy, how can sensation and
thought and the instruments with which they are performed
be explained on a purely corporeal basis? Democritus’
answer was tentative and crude and left much to be worked
out more completely by Epicurus, but it had laid down the
lines for him, and the difficulties which it left over are not
more insuperable than those which must be met by any
modern attempt to explain the action of the senses and the
mind on rigidly material assumptions.

t Aet.iv. 4.6; D.A. 105. Aetius’ statement in another passage (iv. Banks
D. ibid.) that Democritus held with Hippocrates and Plato that the mind was
in the brain must be.a mistake. Still less probable is the statement of Sext. vil.
349; D.A. 107, that some following Democritus said that the dudvora
(incidentally not a Democritean term) was in the whole body. Goedecke-
meyer (p. 54) is inclined to think that Democritus made no real distinction
at all between a perceptive and a rational element, but this is really implied
in his use of the words yvy7 and vods; of which there can be no doubt. Men-
tion may just be made of an unauthoritative statement in Hippocr. 23. 1 f.;
D.C. 6, that Democritus placed the seat of thought in the brain, of anger in
the heart, and of desire in the liver.

3397 M

162 DEMOCRITUS

(b) Sensation, the senses, and thought. '

In regard to sensation Democritus appears even more
conspicuously as the elaborator of the ideas of Leucippus,*
who had apparently been content with the general notion
that the soul was the cause of sensation in the body, though
he had invented the theory of the ‘idols’ as the cause of
vision and the cause of thought in the mind. Democritus
followed up these clues with much detailed speculation as
regards the individual senses and their relation to their
objects.

As regards sensation in general we have two interesting
statements as to his views. In the first place we are told? that
it was brought about by a process of ‘change’ or ‘alteration’
(r@ ddowsaha), which 1s quite consistent with the generally
material view of the Atomists: the object from without im-
pinges on atoms of soul in the body and.disturbs them,
altering their positions, and then, as the naive simplicity
of atomic materialism puts it, ‘sensation follows’. Here we
have the germ of the elaborate description of the genesis of
sensation by atomic motion described by Lucretius.3

The second statement is the very basis of all atomic”
sensationalism: ‘they make all the objects of sense touchable
(ard):4 if this is so, each of the other senses is a kind of
touch’. In a purely material system there can be no form
of communication between one body and another except
that of contact: if the spherical atoms of the soul are to be
set in motion, it can only be by the touch of another atomic
compound. This idea undoubtedly lies at the basis of all

« See pp. 101-6.

2 Theophr. de Sensu, 49; D.A. 135. Theophrastus raises the question
which side Democritus would take in the question debated by the earlier
philosophers whether sensation was caused by ‘the like’ or ‘the unlike’, and
sets against this statement, which tells in favour of the unlike, Democritus’
statement that ‘that which acts and that which suffers are alike’ (cf. Arist.
de Gen. et corr. A. 7.323 b; D.A. 63). But probably Democritus did not
raise the question to himself at all. e

3 ill. 246 ff.

4 Arist. de Sensu, 4. 4424 29; D.A. 119.

SENSATION AND THOUGHT 163

the theories of ‘idols’ and ‘effluences’ which we meet in the
account of the other senses, and to the end the Atomists! felt
a certain security about the sense of touch which they did
not always feel about sight or hearing.

This being so, it might have been expected that Demo-
critus would have devoted some consideration to the sense
of touch itself, but beyond a single passage? dealing with
the sensations of hot and cold, from which it appears that
Democritus referred them to differences of size and shape
in the atoms composing the object, we have no indication
that he discussed it, and Theophrastus 3 in his detailed
criticism of the sensation-theory passes it over unnoticed,
This notable omission was no doubt in part due to the same
naive spirit of common sense which prompted Democritus
in another context 4 to say “a man is that which we all know’.
It may be also, as a recent critic has suggested,5 that he was
half-conscious that the fundamental problem of touch would
raise in an acute form the ultimate difficulty of the relation
between the physical contact and the psychical sensation.
At any rate it is clear that in his account of the other senses
his chief concern is always to provide for contact and that
this not infrequently gave him trouble.

It is obvious that the sense nearest akin to simple touch
is taste, for in taste parts of the body—the tongue and the
palate—are brought into immediate contact with the object.
They therefore perceive it, just as any part of the body
perceives an object which touches it, but that is not all. In
something of the same way as the body may have an added
sensation of hot or cold from the object touching it, so the
tongue and palate have the further sensation which we
denote by the epithets, sweet, bitter, sour, salt, &c. Now

t Cf. e.g. Lucr. ii. 434-5, ;

tactus enim, tactus, pro divum numina sancta,
corporis est sensus.

4 Simpl. in Ar. de Caelo, I’. 1. 299; D.A. 120.

3 de Sensu, 49 ff.; D.A. 1395. é j
4 D.B. 165. We may compare Lucr. i. 422 ‘corpus enim per se communis
dedicat esse sensus’.
5 Beare, Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition, p. 183.
M 2

164 - DEMOCRITUS

these are not properties or qualities of the atoms, for their
only properties are size, shape, and, in the cosmic whirl,
weight. Nor are they, according to Democritus, qualities
inherent in the atomic compounds: ‘none of the other per-
ceptible qualities * (se. besides the three primary properties)
exists by nature, but they are all experiences (7d6n) of the
sense as it changes, and from this arises the sense-perception
(davracia)’. ‘This idea is of great importance for the under-
standing of Democritus’ sensation-theory: difference of
taste is purely subjective and is not inherent in the object:
it is brought about by the ‘change ’ in the position of the
soul-atoms in the tongue and palate.

But it is not for that reason arbitrary: it is caused by, and
is, as it were, the reflex of differences of size and shape in
the atoms composing the object. In this point Democritus
was apparently greatly interested and worked out in full
_ detail the effect on taste of the different atomic shapes and
sizes. Sharp taste,” for instance, is produced by small and
fine atoms ‘with many corners and bends’, which penetrate
the body and warm it by producing voids in it; ‘for that which
has most voids most easily becomes warm’. Sweet taste
again is due to round and not particularly small shapes, for-
they penetrate the body but ‘not violently or very quickly’.
In the same way Democritus explained the minute differ-
ences in shape which cause the finer distinctions between
the sour, the bitter, the salt, and the pungent.

Now here it is obvious that we have a far more elaborate |
mechanism than in the simple sense of touch, and the con-
nexion is far less close. For the difference in shape in the
atoms of the object produces in the percipient not a simple
recognition of such differences, but a difference in his own
purely subjective sensation of taste. Moreover, there is
here a further possibility of failure of correspondence. The
difference of sensation in the percipient is produced by an
alteration in the positions of the soul-atoms in tongue and
palate. But these may already differ in different individuals

x Theophr. de Sensu, § 63; D.A. 135: cf. also § 60. —
2 Ibid., § 65: cf. Theophr. de Caus. Plant. vi. 1.6; D.A. 129.

SENSATION AND ‘THOUGHT 165

or indeed in the same individual at different times. Hence
what is sweet to one animal may seem bitter to another and
the same man may differ in his judgement of taste in health
and in sickness. ‘We must know ’, says Theophrastus,' ‘not
merely the active thing but the passive, especially as “‘the
same taste does not appear the same to all”, as Democritus
says.’ For there is nothing to prevent what is sweet to us
being bitter to some other animals.’ In another passage” he
gives the physical explanation: ‘ it is of importance into what
conditions of body (éw) it enters: for this too makes no small
difference, because the same thing sometimes produces
opposite effects and opposite things the same’. The sub-
jective element in taste is thus greatly emphasized and a real
and permanent correspondence between object and per-
cipient considerably endangered. Hence arises the famous
saying of Democritus,3 which will have to be examined when
we come to his metaphysical theory: ‘ Sweet is by convention
(véuw) and bitter is by convention.’ There are signs of a
possible divergence between sensation and truth.

It is evident that the sense of sight is by no means so easy
to reduce to terms of touch: the object that you see does not
touch your eye and a less immediate form of cuntact must
be found. Leucippus,‘ as has been seen, explained sight by
the notion of ‘images’ or ‘idols’ («iiwAa), which were con-
stantly being thrown off the surface of things, and travelling
through the air came into contact with the eye and by
stirring the soul-atoms there produced the sensation of sight
much as the direct touch of an external body could give the
sensation of hot or cold. The authorities 5 who attribute this
theory to Leucippus, assign it also to Democritus, and we
find it again in this comparatively simple form in Epicurus.
The idea of contact is preserved and touch is still the cause

1 de Caus. Plant. vi. 2. 1; D.A. 130.

2 de Sensu, 67; D.A. 135.

3 Sext. adv. Math. vii. 136; D.B. 9.

4 See Chap. Il, § 5, p. 103. ,

5 Aet. iv. 13. 13 Alex. de Sensu, 24, 143 56.12; D. (Leucippus) 29.

166 DEMOCRITUS

of sensation, but the intervention of the ‘idols’* clearly leaves
room for the possibility of error, as the ‘image’ may be dis-
torted in transit. The difficulties which beset the theory at
the outset are many and obvious: Aristotle? for instance
raises the question why the eye alone should see and not other
parts of the body which contain soul-atoms; Theophrastus 3
asks pertinently how two people could see each other, for
their ‘idols’, when they are looking at one another, must
collide: Aristotle+ again ridicules Democritus’ statement
that if only there were void and nothing else between, we
could see ‘whether there was an ant in heaven’! These are
superficial difficulties, but they point to an underlying
weakness.

There is however evidence to show that Democritus him-
self, in part perhaps aware of some of these difficulties and
in part wishing to attach himself to earlier theories of vision,
broke away from the strict atomic tradition and elaborated
the crude conception of Leucippus. It seems clear 5 that he
started from the idea of older thinkers that what is actually
seen is the image (u¢acis) in the pupil of the eye, and
decided that this ‘image’ ® was something hard (orepedv) which
entered the ‘moist’ (sypév) formation of the eye, and could
so easily impress itself. ‘For this reason’, Theophrastus tells
us in an account which seems to retain some of Democritus’
own technical words, ‘moist eyes are better than dry eyes
for seeing, since the outer coat (yur) is very thin and com-
pact (mvxvéraros), but the inner parts very spongy (copdd)
and empty of compact and hard flesh, but full of thick and
smooth moisture, while the veins in the eyes are straight
and devoid of moisture, so that they are of like shape with
(Spocynpovetv) the impressions. For everything best recog-
nizes what is akin to it (rd duéddvda).’ All this seems to bear

« Etym. Gen.; D.B. 123 suggests that Democritus called the ‘idols’ by the
characteristic title deikeAov.

2 de Sensu, 2. 438 a 5; D.A. 121: cf. Theophr. de Sensu, 54; D.A. 135.

3 Ibid. 52. 4 de Anima, B.7. 419 a 15; D.A. 122.

5 olerau 76 dpav elvar tiv eudaow, Arist. de Sensu, 2. 438 a 6; D.A.
121: cf. Theophr. de Sensu, 50; D.A. 135.

6 Theophr. ibid.

SENSATION - AND THOUGHT 167

the mark of Democritus’ close interest in details, and we
may notice that his idea of the hard and dry ‘idols’ falling on
the hard and dry veins and so being recognized by them
bears out his general view that ‘that which acts and that
which is acted upon are alike and the same’.' It is the action
of like on like.

But what is this ‘image’ in the eye? Theophrastus ? gives
his account: ‘the image (gud¢aois) is not produced directly
in the pupil («épy), but the air between the eye and the thing
seen is contracted and stamped (ovoreAspevov ru0b08a) by
the object seen and the seer; for from everything there is
always taking place some effluence (azopporjv)’.. He3 goes on
to explain that the image thus stamped on the air is not
broken up (O@pvmrecBar), as the impression (evrvmwots) is like
one made on wax. The idea seems to be that the ‘efluences’
from eye and object meet and contract a portion of the air
into a kind of waxy solid on which is then impressed the
outline of the object: the image thus formed enters the eye
and causes vision. The account is not above suspicion: it
seems to be unsupported and one may well suppose that the
idea of the contribution of the percipient to the formation
of the image may be derived from the theory of Plato,* based
in its turn on Empedocles’ view, but there seemis no reason to
doubt that Democritus held the notion of the ‘impression’
(axortrawas) as the cause of the image in the pupil, and it 1s
borne out by his corresponding theory of hearing. LGiwerare
to conjecture his reason for this elaborate idea, it was pro-
bably that he saw that the objects of sense are in three
dimensions, or as he would have said ‘solid’, whereas the
image in the eye is of two dimensions, as he might have said
‘flat’: the transition then must be made somewhere in transit
between the object and the eye and the formation of an
‘impression’ will account for it. ; in

But how can this idea be reconciled with the traditional
atomic notion of the ‘idols’, which Democritus is said to

x Arist. de Gen. et Corr. A. 7. 323 bj D.A. 63.
2 de Sensu, 50; D.A. 135. a
4 Tim. 45 b. See p. 54.

168 DEMOCRITUS

have held? We have no information on the point and can
only suppose, if he did indeed hold the two theories con-
currently, that the ‘idol’ was in fact the ‘efHuence’ from the
object—still in three dimensions—and that it formed the
two-dimensional impressions on the air. If so, there seem
to be new sources of error opened: the ‘idol’ itself may be
distorted in transit, it may produce an incorrect ‘impression’
of itself, and the ‘impression’ again may be distorted before
it becomes the ‘image’ in the pupil. But we must be content
to be without sufficient knowledge on this point: what is
clear is that the ‘impression’ theory seemed to Epicurus to
be too complicated and that he returned to the simpler
notion of Leucippus that it was the ‘idol’ itself which entered
the eye.

There is a further point as regards vision which leads to
a very characteristically Democritean piece of analysis. If
it is asked what it is that sight tells us about an object, the
answer is in the first place its size and shape. Now these are
real properties of the compound object, as they are of its
component atoms. But sight also gives us the sensation of
colour, and colour is not, according to Democritus, any
more than taste, a quality of things: ‘he says’, Aristotle * tells
us, ‘that colour does not exist’; it has not, that is to say, the
real objective existence of shape and size. It is then, like
taste, an ‘experience of the sense’,* a sensation caused by the
‘alteration’ of the soul-atom in the eye of the percipient due
_ to the particular conformation of the object. Now differences
of taste were caused mainly by differences in the shape of
the atoms combining to form the object: differences of
colour Democritus 3 seems rather to have attributed to their
‘position’ (spo}). The turning of the component atoms

x de Gen. et Corr. A.2. 31641; D.A. 123: cf. Aet.i. 15.8; D.A. 125.

2 dbos THs alcOnoews, Theophr. de Sensu, 61; D.A. 135.

3 Arist. l.c. tpomf yap xypwyarileoBar. ‘This is of course based on
Leucippus’ account of the three ‘differences’ of the atoms. Aet. i. 15. 8
introduces here all the three ‘differences’ of order, shape, and position
(Siarayy, puOuds, Tpo77), but he is speaking rather of qualities in general,

and we may accept Aristotle’s statement that difference of colour was specially
produced by difference in position.

SENSATION AND THOUGHT 169

upside-down or through a right angle would, that is, pro-
duce a different effect of colour on the eye of the percipient.
This general idea Democritus worked out at great length in
a detailed analysis of the various colours and the atomic
conformations which caused them. Theophrastus’ account !
is again open to suspicion because it attributes difference of
colour to difference of shape in the atoms rather than to
difference of position, but it gives the general notion, and we
may well suppose that Democritus admitted the influence
of shape as well as that of position. There were, he held,
four primary colours, white, black, red, and green.?- The
sensation of white was caused by smooth atoms, but it
varied in brightness and dullness according to their arrange-
ment (e.g. ‘crumbling and friable white objects are made of
atoms round indeed, but slanting in their position to one
another’, which brings out the idea of position very clearly),
black is produced by ‘rough, angular, and unlike’ atoms;
red by ‘the same atoms as heat (sc. spherical), but larger’, and
green by a different arrangement of atoms and void. From
these primary colours by combination Democritus deduced
a detailed scheme of secondary colours: it is not easy to
follow out, largely because of our ignorance of the exact
shades of colour denoted by the Greek words, but it seems
clear that it is not based on any practical consideration of the
mixing of paints, but merely on the aesthetic sensations of
the percipient in looking at natural objects. In all this we
have a further example of Democritus’ diligence in the
working out of minutiae, but we are unfortunately left with-
out any indication as to the relation of this theory of colour
to the general theory of vision. We do not know how the
arrangements and positions of the atoms in the objects were
1 de Sensu, 73-8; D.A. 135.

2 yAwpéy, the light-green of young plants. Modern critics have accepted
Diels’ substitution of yAwpdv for &xpdv throughout the passage in ‘Theo-

. . te
phrastus on the ground that it works out more satisfactorily and that wxpov was
due to confusion with the colour-theory of Empedocles: see Dyroff., op. cit.,

~ 179, 2-1. ; : a
z 3 So Dyroff, op. cit., p. 179, in a most interesting appendix on Democritus

colour-system, pp. 176-84.

170 DEMOCRITUS

conveyed by the ‘idols’ or the ‘impressions’, and Theophras-
tus raises a pertinent difficulty when he asks? if colour is due,
as in the case of green, to the arrangement of atoms and void,
how can this be conveyed 'to the eye; ‘for there cannot be
an effluence from void’? It must probably be admitted that
Democritus had not thought this problem out, but we are
left with a sense that the whole theory of vision was very
elaborate and complicated and even less calculated than the
theory of taste to support Leucippus’ naive trust in the truth
of sensation.

The sense of hearing Democritus would appear to have
treated in something of the same way. There is unfortunately
no specific information surviving of Leucippus’ view, but
it may be safely assumed that he held the idea attributed to
the atomic school? in general that ‘sound is a body’, in other
words, that when we utter a sound we eject from our mouth
a certain number of atoms combined in a particular forma-
tion. This ‘body’ then travelling through the air and enter-
ing the ear of the hearer sets in motion the soul-atoms there,
with the result that we hear. But it appears that this simple
explanation did not satisfy Democritus, probably, as we may
conjecture, because it would not account for the hearing of
the same sound at once by many persons, and he introduced
a notion parallel to that which he had employed to explain
sight. Theophrastus} after his elaborate explanation of the
theory of vision states that Democritus explained hearing
‘in the same way’, and a later authority? sets this out in
detail in curious language which must in part be Democritus’
own: ‘the air’, he says, ‘is broken up (8pvmrec8ax) into bodies
of like shape (duovocy7jpova) and is rolled along together with
(cvyxadwS<io0ar) the fragments of voice’. He lays great stress
on the likeness of these particles of air and compares the
way in which on a beach pebbles of the same size get
grouped together or, when a sieve containing cereals is

t de Sensu, 80; D.A. 135.

2 cdpa pac. tHV dawvyv, Schol. Dionys. Thrac. p. 482; D.A. 127.

3 de Sensu, 55; D.A. 135. 4 Aet. iv. 19. 13; D.A. 128.

if

SENSATION AND THOUGHT 171

shaken, the beans and the peas and so on will collect apart.
All this is undoubtedly Democritean in argument,! and the
idea seems to be that the sound particles like the effluence
from the objects of vision, or their ‘idols’, make ‘air-im-
pressions’. These disperse and travel in all directions, and
then, to continue the account from another source,? ‘the air
enters into the empty space and causes a movement; it enters
equally all over the body,3 but chiefly and above all through
the ears, because there it traverses most void and lingers
(dva.iuver) least. For this reason we do not perceive sound in
the rest of our body, but only in the ears. And when it is
once inside, it is quickly dispersed (equably through the
body and does not fall outside it4)’. The theory thus
enunciated seems to give a very close parallel to the account
of vision, and the parallel is strengthened by the working
out which follows of the most favourable conditions for
hearing:5 ‘we hear most acutely, if the outer coat (yrdv) is
dense, and the veins empty and as free as possible from
moisture and porous (c’zpyta) throughout all the body, and
specially the head and the ears, . . . for thus the sound would
come in all together (d@pdov) as though entering through
much void which is porous and free from moisture’. Again
the account is not without ambiguity and confusion, but
it shows Democritus’ love of the working out of detail. A
commentator ® asks contemptuously how ‘a few fragments of
breath could fill a theatre which seats 10,000’, but his com-
ment seems inappreciative, and Democritus’ account, de-
spite its elaboration, goes nearer to solve the problem than
the traditional atomic view. At the same time we must
again notice that the introduction of a medium 1n the ‘air-

t Cf. the similar fragment of Democritus in Sext. ady. Math. vil. 116;
D.B. 164. ;

2 'Theophr. de Sensu, 55; D.A. 135.

3 This suggests the answer to Aristotle’s difficulty (p. 166) about the nee
of vision: Democritus would have said that the ¢{wAa do in fact strike all .
parts of the body, but only in the eyes meet matter of the right texture to

erceive them. ,
4 These words are added from a little farther on in ‘Theophrastus account.

5 Theophr. l.c. 56. 6 Aet.iv. 19.13; D.A.128.

173 DEMOCRITUS

impression’ increases in the sense of hearing too the liability
to error.

With regard to the sense of smell our information as to
Democritus’ view is even more scanty than in the case of the
other senses. Lucretius" gives the natural atomic view that
it was a direct effuence from things, which he curiously
regards as proceeding from deep down inside the object as
opposed to colour which comes from the surface. Whether
Democritus again modified the notion, whether he regarded
smell as an ‘experience of the sense’ like colour and taste
or as an effluence like sound is uncertain. Theophrastus?
complains that he said little in detail about smell except the
somewhat mysterious remark that it was caused by ‘the
thin efluence coming from the heavy things’,3 which without
a context is certainly not very easy to interpret. We may
perhaps conclude that Democritus was less interested in
smell than in the other senses.

Though the five senses have now been dealt with and it
has been seen how Democritus, faithful to his first principle,
reduces them all to touch, the account of his view of sensa-
tion is not yet complete. For to him thought (¢pévyais)* is
sensation, ‘and that is change (dAoiwors)’, or as it is put more
explicitly elsewhere,’ ‘sensations and thoughts (vores) are
alterations (érepouices) of the body’. To this we may add
the information that ‘sensation and thought occur when
“idols” (ci8wAa) approach from without’.© This is not very
explicit, but by the help of the account of the mind already
noticed and of later atomic expositions? of the idea we can
reconstruct his notion with certainty. The mind® is exactly
like the soul in composition—they are ‘the same’—and only

1 iv. 673 ff. a de Sensu, 82; D.A. 135.

3 To AeTTOV amoppéov amo THv Bapéwv: in view of Lucretius’ view that
_ smell comes from deep down in things it is tempting to conjecture Baféwv

for Bapewv. 4 Arist. Metaphys. [. 5. 1009 b; D.A. 112.

5 Aet. iv. 8. 5; D. (Leucippus) 30.

6 Aet. iv. 8. 10; D. (Leucippus) A. 30.

7 e.g. Lucr. iv. 722 ff. 8 See p. 160.

SENSATION AND THOUGHT 173

differs in that it is a close congregation of the soul-atoms in
one part of the body, probably in Democritus’ idea in the
breast. Certain ‘idols’ then which are too fine to stir the
more distributed soul-atoms on the surface of the body and
in the organs of sense and so to produce sensation, pass on
within the body until they reach the mind. There, as the
soul-atoms are so closely packed, the ‘idols’ cannot pass by
without moving them and the result of this motion is the
peculiar kind of sensation which we call thought: it is in its
nature exactly parallel to the movements which produce
sight or hearing. To this general idea little can be added
except an interesting statement in Theophrastus! that
thought ‘takes place when the soul’—note that here the
general word ‘soul’ (#vy7) is used for the mind—‘is equable
in its temperature: but if it is too hot or too cold, it changes
things (ueradAdrrew)’. This curious idea, which again shows
Democritus’ physiological interests, seems to explain his
famous praise? of Homer’s diction, when he says that ‘Hector
lay there out of his mind (a\odpovéwv)’, a word which Demo-
critus thought an exact expression of the effect of anger,
which makes the soul too hot and so incapable of true
thought. The whole idea is very parallel to what he said of
the best conditions for sight and hearing.

It does not seem that Democritus carried his notion of the
identity of thought and sensation farther than this. There
are of course many difficulties in the conception, one of the
most obvious being that which aroused the attention of
Lucretius,3 that thought is not always the result of an
external stimulus, but the mind can turn itself spontaneously
to one object or another. To meet this and other difficulties
Epicurus had greatly to elaborate his psychology, but he
retained the root-ideas that mind and soul are the same in
their atomic composition and that the processes of sensation
and thought are analogous. From Democritus own point

« de Sensu, 58; D.A. 135 ywerae (sc. 70 dpovetv) ovppérpws €xovons
Ths puxis Kata THY Kpyoww.

2 Arist. de Anima, A. 2. 404a 27; D.A. tot.

3 iv. 777 ff.

174 DEMOCRITUS

of view we may notice the ingenious economy of his con-
ception: soul and mind are the same; their objects are com-
municated to them in the same way; thought, like sensation,
can be reduced to a purely material contact. The idea is
a cardinal one in his system and becomes of great importance
in his metaphysics.

The ancient commentators were apt to make fun of
Democritus’ theory of sensation, and Theophrastus’ in
particular, to whom we owe most of our detailed information,
is never weary of asking pertinent and awkward questions:
‘if sight is due to an impression on the air, which then comes
to us backwards, as it were, why do we not see things the
wrong way round (i.e. with the right hand as the left)?”
‘when we see several things in the same place, how can their
impressions coexist in the same piece of air?’ “why can’t you
see yourself?’ In a similar spirit it would be easy to point to
the clumsiness of the theory in detail and the extreme im-
probability of effluence, ‘idols’, and air-impressions: or on
broader grounds to argue that the purely material theory of
Democritus does not really touch the problem which he sets
out to solve: it establishes a connexion between object and
percipient, but it does not really tell us what thought and
sensation, as we know them, are.

But it is more profitable to look at the theory as it stands
and inquire into its efficiency from its own point of view.
Though gaps and weaknesses have been pointed out (some
of which might perhaps be explained if we had fuller know-
ledge), it is impossible not to admire the consistency of the
whole and the economy with which all the different experi-
ences of sensation are reduced to the one central notion of
touch. There is thus laid a foundation for belief in the main
in the evidence of the senses. On the other hand, in the
extremely indirect methods by which in some instances con-
tact is secured and the possibilities of error which they
introduce, the way is opened for doubt and scepticism.
Theophrastus? put his finger on the real weakness of the

t de Sensu, 52, 53; D.A. 135. 2 de Sensu, 69; D.A. 135.

SENSATION AND THOUGHT “7s

theory when he complained with regard to Democritus’ view
of sense-impressions (rd alo@yrd): ‘he at once makes them
experiences of sensation and assigns them to differences of
shape’. He saw, that is, that both object and percipient
must contribute something to the act of perception, but he
did not satisfactorily distinguish their parts. There was
room then for a more carefully thought-out system to be
devised by his successors, but in many ways Democritus’
rather fanciful notions were a nearer approach to scientific
accuracy then the cruder consistency of Epicurus.

§ 7.. The Gods

The references to Democritus’ beliefs as to the gods and
religion are scanty and difficult to piece together, but as
there are indications of a view which may have led the way
for Epicurus, but differed in certain important respects from
his theory, it is well to refer to it briefly. That Democritus
did not hold the orthodox theory of prayer to the gods, as
beings dwelling in the sky who would assist their suppliants,
is clear from a fragment‘ in which he says with an obvious
note of contempt, ‘Some few among educated (Aoyiwv) men
lift up their hands to the region where we Greeks now speak
of air and say: “Zeus ponders on all things, he knows all
and gives and takes away and he is king over all.” ” We do
not know on what grounds he based this criticism, but if,
which will be seen to be doubtful, he believed in the exis-
tence of gods, we may safely assume that, like Epicurus, he
held that they took no part in the affairs of the world. At
the same time Democritus was confronted by the universal
belief in the gods and there is evidence to show that he
explained this on the lines that might be expected. In the
first place he pointed to what he believed to be a false infer-
ence from the phenomena of the sky: ‘men in old days seeing
the occurrences (zaS/jpara)? in the sky, such as thunder and
lightning and thunderbolts and the conjunctions of heavenly
bodies and the eclipses of sun and moon, dreaded the gods,

* Clem. Protr. 68; D.B. 30. 2 Sext. ix. 24; D.A. 75.

176 DEMOCRITUS

believing that they were the cause of these things’. This
argument becomes prominent in Epicurus. But it does not
go far enough, for it is necessary to show how the idea of
gods arise in the minds of men at all. This, as we learn from
a fragment quoted by Sextus,’ he accounted for by the entry
into men’s minds of ‘idols’: ‘certain “idols” draw near men,
and of these some are beneficial,? others harmful, hence he
prays to meet with fortunate (edAdyxww) ‘Gdols”. These are
great, of exceeding size, and not easily destroyed,3 though
not indestructible, and they foretell the future to men, being
seen and uttering sounds. And the ancients receiving the
_mpression of them imagined that there was a god, though
besides these images there was no other god with an
indestructible nature’. Here may certainly be recognized
the same general idea of the visitation of ‘idols’ which we
know in Epicurean writers,‘ but there appear to be important
points of difference. In the first place the mention of harm-
ful images as well as beneficial looks as if Democritus’
‘theology’ included not only gods in the usual sense, but ~
evil spirits as well: as if in fact it were a ‘daemonology’ rather
than a ‘theology’. This has no counterpart in Epicurus.
Secondly, Epicurus had no doubt of the existence of gods
and believed that the images which visited men came from
the persons of divine beings, but the last sentence in the
Democritus fragment looks as though he were sceptical of
the existence of his ‘daemons’ apart from the images. Nor
do references elsewhere satisfactorily clear up Democritus’
osition. The statement that he called the gods (or ‘daemons’)
“dols’ $ and said that the air was full of them, seems to show
that he did not believe in any reality beyond the ‘idols’, but
in another passage, in which he is represented as saying
that the ‘idols’ visited animals as well as men, they are

1 ix. 19; D.B. 166.

a Plin. N.H. ii. 14; D.A. 76, by personifying this notion produces the
ridiculous parody that Democritus said that ‘there were only two gods,
Punishment and Reward’.

3 Sext. adv. Math. ix. 19 Svod0apra pev, od« adbapra dé.

4 e.g. Lucr. v. 1169 ff. s Anonymi, Hermippus, 122; D.A. 78.

6 Clem. Strom. v. 88; D.A. 79.

THE GODS is

described as coming ‘from the divine being’ (dd ris betas
oveias)—an expression more in accord with the Epicurean
view. Cicero* too in a passage of ironical criticism charges
him with gross inconsistency in his ideas on the whole
question: ‘at one time he holds that images endowed with
a divine nature exist in the universe, at another he says that
the gods are elements of mind (principia mentis) which exist
in the same universe, at another living images, which are in _
the habit of helping or harming us, at another certain im-
mense images, so great that they embrace the whole universe
on the outside (extrinsecus)’. The notion here that the gods
are ‘elements of mind’ should probably be taken in con-
junction with an equally mysterious statement? that ‘mind
is god in spherical-shaped fire’: the meaning seems to be
that the same spherical-shaped particles, which make both
fire and soul, and, as has been seen,3 are breathed in in
respiration, form the images of the gods.

On the whole, we must be content to say that we do not
know enough of Democritus’ theory to explain or criticize
it; it is clear however that he held the theory of ‘idols’ which
Epicurus took as the basis of his theology, but he probably
differed from Epicurus in thinking that these ‘idols’ were
themselves ‘divine’ and that there were no ‘divine beings’
from which they came.

§ 8. Theory of knowledge

There is no portion of Democritus’ system which has
been so much discussed and which still remains so obscure
as his conception of the basis on which our knowledge rests.
In antiquity it was fully discussed by Aristotle 4 in relation
to the theories of the Eleatics, and among later writers it was
dealt with by Theophrastus 5 and by Sextus,° who has pre-
served some valuable fragments of Democritus’ own writings.
Aristotle tends to lay stress on Democritus’ belief that truth
lay in phenomena and Sextus on his scepticism, while

t de Nat. Deor. i. 43. 120; D.A. 74. 2 Aet.i. 7. 16; D.A. 74.
3 pp. 156, 158. 4 de Gen. et corr. A. 8, 325 b.

5 de Sensu, 49 ff.; D.A. 135. 6 adv. Math. vil.
SSE N

178 DEMOCRITUS /

Theophrastus, as has been seen, is mainly concerned with
his theories as to the individual senses, which he treats in a
very critical spirit. Modern writers are equally at variance.
Some are inclined to follow Aristotle in claiming Democritus
as a ‘phenominalist’, others * maintain that his foundation is
‘rational’, while others again have proclaimed him a sceptic.?
All that can be done here is to make a brief review of the
evidence which antiquity has left us and attempt some
conclusion from it.

If we turn first to the extant fragments of Democritus,
the impression which they leave is that he was a confirmed
sceptic. Many of them suggest this in a general form: ‘a
man must learn on this principle that he 1s far removed from
the truth’,3 ‘we know nothing truly about anything, but for
each of us his opinion is an influx’s (i.e. is conveyed to him
by the influx of ‘idols’ from without), ‘to learn truly what
each thing is, is a matter of uncertainty’,5 ‘in-truth we know
nothing unerringly, but only as it changes according to the
disposition of our body and of the things that enter into it
and impinge upon it’® (a remark which connects closely
with the general theory of sensation), “we know nothing
truly, for the truth lies hidden in the depth’.?7 A more
explicit statement of Democritus’ line of thought is found
in the famous aphorism: ® ‘sweet is by convention and bitter

t e.g. Natorp, Forschungen, 164 ff.

2 For an interesting reconsideration of the problem see Dyroff, Demo-
hritstudien, pp. 80 ff. Fe

3 yryvdoxew xpi) avOpwrov TH8e TH Kavodvi, Ott Eres amnAdaKxrat,
Sext. adv. Math. vii. 137; D.B. 6.

4 ere oddev icpev mepi odderds, GAN emipvopin exdoToiow 7 Sddéts,
ibid.; D.B. 7.

“5 ere olov Exacrov yryvdoxew ev ardpw eort, ibid.; D.B. 8.

6 wets 5¢ rH pev dvr. oddSev arpeKes ovvicmev, peTarimrov d€ Kata
re odpatos Siabhenv Kal rOv érevodvTwv Kal TOV avriornpilovrwy, ibid.
136; D.B. 9.

7 éref Sé oddev iSpev: ev BIG yap 7 GAjGeaa, Diog. Laert.ix. 72; D.B.
117.

8 pope yAvKd Kal vouw mruKpdv, vopw Oeppdv, vow puxpdv, vow Xpour,
éref S¢ dropa Kal Kevdv, Sext. adv. Math. vii.135; D.B. 9; quoted also by
Diog. Laert.ix.72; D.B. 117 and Galen, de Medic. Empir. 1259.8. vopw is

THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 179

by convention, hot by convention, cold by convention, colour
by convention; in truth are atoms and void’. Putting these
sayings together we seem to havea very strong attack on the
validity of the senses and the indications of a fairly thorough-
going scepticism, and it is not surprising to be informed by
Sextus! that Democritus and his followers have ‘swept away
(avnpyjxacr) phenomena one and all’. And when we compare
these sayings with his theory of sensation, their ground
becomes clear. The qualities of things which we experience
in sensation, hot cold, sweet bitter, red green, are not in
Democritus’ view actually qualities in things, still less in
the atoms that compose them; they are merely ‘experiences of
our sensation’, caused no doubt by differences of shape and
position and arrangement in the atoms, but corresponding
to no reality and liable to be distorted by the atomic con-
formation of the sense-organs of the percipient. By means
of such sensations we can gain no real knowledge of the
nature of things, still less of the ultimate substratum which
lies behind them. From a consideration of most of the sur-
viving fragments alone the conclusion that Democritus was
a sceptic as to the evidence of the senses would be almost
inevitable. And there is one more aphorism which seems to
push the position still farther:? the senses are represented
as addressing the mind and saying ‘wretched mind, from us
you received your beliefs, yet would you overthrow us? your
victory is your own fall’. ‘The mind, that is, receives from the
senses the information on which it builds, and if it then
denies the validity of the senses, it is annihilating its own
validity too. The condemnation appears to be extended to
the mind and the processes of thought, and scepticism to be
complete: the one solid foundation left is the true existence
of the atoms and the void, though of them we.can never
have direct cognition.

here opposed as so often in Greek thought to dice and is almost equiva-
lent in sense to ‘in appearance’. Sextus paraphrases voptlerar . . . elvar Kat
doédlerar Ta aicOnrd. * vil. 3695 D.A. TIO.
2 rddawa ppjv, rap’ Hew AaBodoa Tas TiaTELs NMEAs KataBdarets ;
ar@ud Tor TO KaTdBAnpa, Galen, l.c.; D.B. 125.
N2

180 DEMOCRITUS.

But there is another side to the picture. In a very inter-
esting reference to Democritus’ work ‘the Canons’ (sc.
Principles of Investigation) Sextus’ tells us that he said that
there were two kinds of knowledge, that through the senses
and that through the mind: the latter “he calls “legitimate”
(yrnotn) and assigns credence to it for the judgement of truth,
but that by the senses he calls “bastard” (oxorin) and denies
its certainty for the determination of truth’. He then proceeds
to quote Democritus’ own words: ‘there are two kinds of
knowledge,? one legitimate, one bastard: to the bastard
belong all these, sight, hearing, smell, taste, touch. But the
legitimate 1s separated from this’. Then, adds Sextus, in
preferring the legitimate to the bastard he gives his reason
in the words: ‘when the bastard can no longer see things
smaller and smaller, nor hear nor smell, nor taste, nor per-
ceive by touch, but [it is necessary to investigate] still more
subtly, [then the legitimate knowledge comes to the rescue
with an instrument of investigation more subtle]’.3 It is
clear that this aphorism must be taken in connexion with
the assertion of the true existence of the atoms and the void.
They are known not by the senses, but by the mind. The
way of the senses is liable to err for it deals with the shifting
and changing material which produces our sensations, but
the way of the mind, which deals with the ultimate realities
is ‘legitimate’. Moreover when in the investigation of nature
the senses fail and cannot probe into things beyond their
ken, then the way of the mind comes in with its ‘subtler
snstrument’ and leads to truth. Here seems to be an em-
phatic reinstatement of the truth of thought as against the
evidence of the senses. It is borne out by an interesting

x vii. 138.9; D.B. 11.

2 ywoyins dé So eiolv deat, ev yonotn, 9 Sé oKorin: Kal okoTins
pev TadE ovprTravTa, dys, axon, oop, yedats, pavdots. 4 Sé yvnoin,
darokekpysery d€ TAavTNS.

3 drav 7 oxorin pyKére SvvyTa pate Opiv én’ éAarrov pte aKovew
pare ddpacbar pyre yedeoOar pyre ev 7H pavoe aicbdvecbat, avr eri
Aentdrepov <den Cyteiv, ToTE enuylverar  yunotn are dpyavov €xovoa
a vasa Aenrérepov>. I quote the restoration at the end as given by

1E1S.

THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 181

passage of Sextus™ in which he compares and contrasts
Democritus and Plato as both believers, though in different
ways, in the reality of the objects of thought (rd vonrd): ‘the
followers of Plato and Democritus both thought that the
only realities were the objects of thought, but Democritus
reached this conclusion because there was no physical sub-
stratum perceptible to the senses, since the atoms which
formed all things by their combinations had a nature devoid
of all perceptible qualities, while Plato saw that perceptible
things were always coming into being, yet never existed, &c.’
The comparison of Democritus and Plato is rather fantastic,
seeing the immense difference of their views, but it is
significant that a later commentator should have been able
to group them together in this way. It seems then that a
solid basis for Democritus’ view is reached in the truth of
thought as to the ultimate realities, the atoms and the void,
and this is the ground of Natorp’s view that the basis of
atomism is rational.

At this point we are met with the statement? of Demo-
critus that ‘the mind and the soul are the same’. It has been
seen that the primary reference in this is to their atomic
structure, but the analysis of Democritus’ psychology has
shown further that it conveys with it the conception that
their processes of operation are the same: the mind is roused
by the influx of ‘idols’ and its movement results in thought,
just as the movement of the soul-atoms similarly produced
in the sense-organs results in perception. What is the effect
of this belief on the other side of the equation? if the ‘objects
of thought’ are ‘true’, what of the objects of sensation?
Aristotle twice repeats a kind of compressed syllogism of
Democritus’: ‘soul and mind are the same;3 for the truth
is the phenomenon’, or in a rather more extended form,
‘sensation is thinking, and that is change, therefore the

. . LP BT
t yiii.6; D.A. §9. vonrd is clearly used in different senses of Plato’s ‘ideas
and Democritus’ ultimate realities, the atoms and the void.

a See p. 160. Mea iat
3 de Anima, A. 2. 404. 27; D.A. 101. tadrov puxny Kat your: 70 yap

ddnbes etvar To pawopevov.

182 DEMOCRITUS

phenomenon in sensation is necessarily true’.t Here seems
at first sight to be something like a reinstatement of sensa-
tion, and if so a position would be reached diametrically
opposed to the scepticism which finds expression in Demo-
critus’ own sayings as preserved by Sextus. i
What then is to be said about this divergence? Critics
have been inclined either to neglect the evidence on the one
side or the other, or to impugn its authenticity, and to pro-
claim Democritus sceptic, phenomenalist, or rationalist ac-
cording to preconceived notions; and not a little misunder-
standing has arisen from the assumption that he must have
been the precursor of Epicurus in his affirmation of the truth
of sensation. It is clear that his theory was widely different
from that of Epicurus and considerably more subtle, and
it seems possible to put it together even from the scanty and
contradictory evidence which we possess. In the first place
it must be noticed that Democritus nowhere says that
‘sensation’ is true or that ‘thought’ is true: the statements
are that ‘the objects of thought are true’, and that ‘the
phenomenon is true’. This gives a clue and a reminder that
in any material system, if we wish to understand it, we must
work from the external to the internal. In Democritus’
atomic materialism the real ultimate existences are the atoms
and the void: the only real knowledge then must be the
knowledge of these, of their character and their behaviour.
Now such knowledge can never be obtained by the senses,
for they are both imperceptible to the senses. They can
only be known to the mind by thought; the process of the
mind inquiring into the nature of the atoms and the void
is ‘legitimate’, and the objects of its thought here are ‘true’.
But how does the mind obtain this knowledge of the atoms
and the void? It has been suggested? that Democritus
thought that the mind had direct cognizance of the atoms:

t Metaphys. I’. 5.1009 b; D.A. 112. 81d 76 droAauBavew dpovnow pev
ri alcbnow, tavrnv 8 elvar dAAoiwow, 76 pawdpevov Kata THY aloOnow
e& dvdynns GAnbés elvai dacw. Cf. also Philopon. in Arist. de Anima,
A. 2.40ea4 DAvir3:

2 By Brandis: see Mabilleau, op. cit., p. 226.

THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE : 183

far too minute to stir the sénses, yet individual atoms might
stir the subtle combination of pure soul-atoms and so be
known, as the objects of sense are by the senses. But for
such an idea there is no particle of evidence, and even if the
atoms could thus be known directly, certainly the void could
not, for it cannot ‘move’ anything. The knowledge of the
ultimate realities by the mind must be based on the know-
ledge of ‘things’ by the senses and is in fact an inference
from them. ‘Diotimus’, says Sextus! in an important passage,
‘said that according to Democritus the “criterion” for the
apprehension of things unseen.is phenomena’. This is ex-
pressed in language more suitable to Epicurus, but its
meaning is clear: Democritus held, like Epicurus after him,
that the data on which the mind bases its knowledge of the
atoms and the void are given by phenomena to the senses.
It is no doubt in this sense that Aristotle? says with a slight
variation of the usual phrase that the Atomists thought ‘that
the truth was in appearance’ (76 gaiveoba): the appearances,
that is, presented to the senses in their cognition of pheno-
mena contain the data for the true knowledge of the realities.
It is significant too that in introducing one of the most
sceptical of Democritus’ aphorisms, Sextus points out, by
way of showing Democritus’ inconsistency, that in the
Cratynteria,+ whence the quotation is taken, he undertook
to assign to the senses the mastery over belief’. It seems
only a small step now to the statement ‘the phenomenon tS
true’, and that step is made easier by Democritus insistence
that the soul and the mind are the same, an insistence not
due so much to his physical materialism as to the importance
for his psychology: the cognition of phenomena by the
senses is identical in process with the cognition of the
realities by the mind.

But it is still necessary to ask in what sense is the pheno-

SW FAs) AGEL. 2 de Gen. et Corr. A. 315 ne mi

3 vii. 136 ev... rots Kparuvrnpious . . . brexnpevos Tals atovmaer
76 kpdtos Ths TloTews avabeivar D.B. 9.

4 Natorp, Forschungen, p. 179, n. 2, points out t
KpatvvTypia points in the same direction.

hat the title of the work

Ral a DEMOCRITUS

menon ‘true’ and how can this idea be reconciled with the
many indications of scepticism in the extant fragments?
Perhaps it is possible to get nearest to the answer, if we take
the instance of one of the senses, ‘sight’. Sight gives us the
sensation of an object with size, shape, and colour. Now
colour is not, in Democritus’ view, a quality of the object,
it is ‘an experience of our sense’: it has no objective reality
and exists only ‘by convention’; to build on such a sensation
can lead only to ‘bastard’ thinking. But shape and size are
real properties of the object as a compound of atoms and
the void; they are moreover the properties of the atoms
themselves which compose it. In so far then as we attend
to the information about these properties and these only, our
perception is not misleading, and the ‘phenomenon’, which
is a unity of these properties and weight (also a property
of the atoms acquired in the ‘whirl’) and no others, is ‘true’.
And here we have the secret of the importance which Demo-
critus attaches to the sense of touch: it alone can give us
information as to shape and size without any of the super-
added sensations (except those of hot and cold) which are
subjective and confuse our cognition of the object. The
phenomenon is true then in a double sense: for, if we can
put away all these subjective sensations, it gives us the in-
formation of what it really is, a compound of void and
atoms of a certain size, shape, and weight, and secondly, so
regarded, it enables us by inference to have knowledge of
the ultimate realities. But the moment these subjective ex-
periences are taken to be a report of an objective reality in
the object, the ‘bastard path’ is entered on and we are led
astray in an unreal world. It must be noticed now that it
is in close connexion* with the aphorism that colour, sweet,
bitter, &c., are ‘by convention’ that we find that most
sceptical of all the utterances in which the senses turn upon
the mind. The mind is in error and has no foundation when
it builds upon the ‘experiences of the senses’, but when it
confines itself to the true ‘objects of thought’, the atoms and
the void, and bases its conclusions upon sensation which
t Galen, de Medic. Empir.1259. 8; D.B. 125.

THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE 185
tells of the real properties of things, it is on the ‘legitimate
path’.

It seems then, if this analysis is correct—and it is only
too clear how scanty are the materials for a conclusion—that
Democritus was neither a sceptic nor a rationalist, nor a
phenomenalist, he does not fit into any of the modern
categories; he neither denied nor affirmed the truth of a//
Sensation nor of a// thought; but built up for himself a
‘theory of knowledge’, subtle and almost paradoxical, but
based directly on his atomic conception of the world. The
final realities of the universe, the atoms and the void, are
real and are capable of being known by the mind. Pheno-
mena are built up of the final realities and retain the primary
properties of size and shape: as such they are real and can
be known by the senses. The mind may safely make its
deduction from phenomena, both because the phenomenon
as a unity of these primary properties is real and because
sensation—the mere perception of the real phenomenon—is
the same as thought. But once go beyond these primary
properties, beyond the reality of the phenomenon, and you
are attributing to the object what is really the subjective
experience of your senses, and thought based on those ‘ con-
ventions’ will lead you nowhere.

This tentative reconstruction of Democritus’ ideas is no
doubt cruder and more naive than that put forward by most
of his modern critics, but they seem to me to have been led
astray by the more abstract thinking of Aristotle and the
later Greek philosophers and not to have sufficiently at-
tempted to work out the problem on Democritus’ own
material lines. Yet, if this account is near the truth, it will
be seen that the position of Democritus was difficult and
subtle and might well prove an insecure basis for a world-
system. This Epicurus seems to have felt and swept it all
away in a whole-hearted return to complete trust in sensa-
tion.

186 DEMOCRITUS

§ 9. Ethics

So far the account of Democritus’ theories has been based
mainly on descriptions and references in ancient authors
with the help of an occasional quotation of Democritus’ own
words. When we pass to consider his moral theory there 1s
an unexpected change. Very little is told us by the authorities
either by way of explanation or criticism, but on the other
hand there is a considerable body of sayings’ attributed to
Democritus, contained in an anthology of ‘Maxims’ (yr@par)
and in a collection made by Stobaeus. Of these sayings
some deal with fundamental ideas, most range in a discursive
spirit over the field of human life, containing criticisms and
precepts which might be almost equally applicable, whether
he had a base theory or not. The. question naturally arises
whether he is to be considered as a consistent thinker with
a moral system—and if so, how far he suggested lines of
thought for Epicurus—or is rather to be regarded as a
moralist of the type of Hesiod or Theognis, laying down
sporadic precepts for guidance in life. One of his modern
critics? holds that he had a central system which was in close
connexion with his physical theories, and round this built
a practical morality, another3 is inclined to deny him any
system at all.

Before, however, any inquiry can be made into Demo-
critus’ moral ideas, there is one obvious problem that must
be raised. In the physical world, as has been seen,* he had
emphatically asserted the supremacy of ‘necessity’ (avdyxn)
as the controlling force: ‘by necessity are foreordained all
things that were and are and are to come’. He intended by
this assertion to establish the idea of natural law and to
eliminate both the theological conception of the world and
the idea of chance. If this notion were to be extended—as

x It has seemed good in this chapter to quote most of the maxims in full,
as they are perhaps less accessible than the more connected writings of
Epicurus.

2 Natorp, Ethika des Demokritos.

3 Dyroff, Demokritstudien, pp. 127 fF. 4 § 2, p. 120.

ETHICS By

in strictness it should—to the field of human action, it should
result in a pure determinism; and if man’s actions are deter-
mined, if everything he does is the inevitable outcome of the
past, and what he is to do in the future is foreordained, what
is the value of a moral theory or indeed even of moral pre-
cepts? Strangely enough, this question seems never to have
occurred to Democritus’ mind. There is no trace of it in
any extant fragment or in the authorities, and the precepts
are given as though man were perfectly free to obey or
disobey them. Still more oddly the figure of ‘chance’ (r¥yy)
raises its head again on the moral side, and there are several
passages in which it seems to be set in opposition to man’s
will and foresight: ‘men have fashioned an image of chance
as a cloak for their own ill-council. For chance rarely fights
against prudence, and most things in life keen sight with
understanding guides aright’;* ‘the foolish are guided by
the gains of chance, but those who have knowledge of such
things by those of wisdom’ ;? ‘chance is a giver of great gifts,
but unstable; nature is self-reliant. Therefore by the lesser
and certain means it overcomes the greater gift of hope’;3
‘chance spreads before us a banquet of riches, but self-
control a banquet of self-sufficiency’.4 In all these quotations
chance is represented as ultimately less efficient than man’s
effort, but in another passage it is accorded a more important
position: ‘Courage is the beginning of action, but chance is
master of the end.’5 In each of these passages ‘chance’ is no
doubt used in a loose and popular sense of the unpredictable
issue of events, and is not necessarily in contradiction with
a fundamental belief in necessity: results are determined by

Oto it 6. 102 Dis, 119; N. 209, 30: see pp. 197, 200. a

2 Stob. il. 4. 713; D.B. 197; N. 33. dvorpoves propodvrat trois TAs
TUxNS Kepdcow, of b€ TAY TOLVvde Sarpoves Tots TAS copins. we

3 Stob. ii. 9. 5; D.B. 176; N. 64. rvyn peyadddwpos, aAA dBeBavos,
duos dé adrdpKns: Sidrep vik TO ooo. kat BeBaiw To peilov Tis
ehmridos. 4 4 A 7

4 Stob. ili. 5.26; D.B. 210; N.65. tpdmelav toduteA€éa pev TUyN Tapa-
7lOnow, adtapKkéa dé cwhpoovvn. ; 2 eae :

s  Stob. iv. 51.16; D.B. 269; N. 126. réAwa mprfvos dpyy, Tvxn Se
téXeos Kupin.

188 DEMOCRITUS

natural law working itself out, but to man, who cannot
fathom all the workings of law, they take the appearance of
chance. Nevertheless there is here a striking contrast to
the suppression of the idea of chance in the physical theory
and it seems to show that Democritus’ ethics are largely
independent of his physics. The same independence must
be assumed in regard to his silence on the fundamental
question of determinism, To Epicurus the problem pre-
sented itself acutely, and he fights* as violently against the
‘destiny of the physicists’ as he does against the ‘myth of the
gods’: but by the time of Democritus this great question
was apparently not even simmering and he proceeds to lay
down his directions for the moral life with a simple naivete,
unconscious of the problem which he himself had raised by
his insistence on the supremacy of ‘necessity’ in the physical
world. His moral precepts are given on the assumption
that man is free to act as he will.

It is generally agreed that the key-word to Democritus’
moral ideas is ‘cheerfulness’? (ed8vpin); it is quoted by the
authorities as his conception of the ‘end’ and occurs in
several of the extant fragments. Two fundamental questions
arise at once: is ‘cheerfulness’ to be regarded as the base of
Democritus’ ethical principles, or is it itself derivative from
a wider pleasure-theory, standing to it in the same relation
as Epicurus’3 ‘imperturbability’ (érapagia) does to his ulti-
mate basis of ‘pleasure’ (130)? And if so, is there any link
in a general theory of sensationalism between this conception
in the moral field and the metaphysic of Democritus’
atomism? It is obvious that these questions are of great
importance, for if they were both to be answered in the
affirmative, Democritus would in ethics as well as in physics
be the precursor of Epicurus and the later philosopher’s
claim to independence could not be sustained.

There is one statement which has come down to us which
implies an affirmative answer to both questions. Sextus# in

« See Part II: Chap. V, p. 318.
2 See D.L. ix. 45; D.A. 1, and several fragments quoted below on p. 192.
3 See Part II, Chap. X, p. 499. 4 vii. 140; D.A. III.

ETHICS 189

a passage already referred to quotes Diotimus as authority
for the belief that Democritus maintained that there were
three ‘criteria’, and that among them ‘the criterion of choice
and avoidance is the feelings (7d6n)’. If this statement could
be confirmed it would be clear that ‘cheerfulness’ was in
Democritus’ view only a special form of ‘pleasure’, and that
he held, as Epicurus did, that in the moral field the immediate
feeling of pleasure and pain was the test of good and bad:
pleasure must be chosen and pain avoided. His whole
system would be linked up on a basis of sensation, and
‘cheerfulness’ must take its place as a derivative notion.
But Sextus’ statement can certainly not be accepted without
question. In the first place the language is wholly that of
a later age: the words used, ‘criterion’ (kpuripov), ‘choice’
(aipeors), ‘avoidance’ (duy7), ‘feeling’ (md6os), are all Epicurean
terms, of which there is no evidence elsewhere in connexion
with Democritus: indeed they are ideas which at his time
before the invention of the Aristotelian terminology were
hardly current. Secondly, there is no trace elsewhere in the
fragments or the authorities of any such Epicurean link
between the moral and the physical theories, and lastly—
and this is surely conclusive—it has been seen that Demo-
critus’ position as regards the trustworthiness of sensation
was far more sceptical than that of Epicurus: the man who
held that ‘sweet’ and ‘bitter’ are ‘by convention’ cannot have
joined up his moral theories with his physical system on
a basis of sensation. It can hardly be doubted that Sextus
was led away by the common tendency to associate Demo-
critus with Epicurus, and that here at least their theories
were divergent. ;

It seems necessary then to answer the second question
in the negative, but is it still true that Democritus’ moral
theory was ultimately based on ‘pleasure’? There is a frag-
ment? of his twice repeated in somewhat different forms:

Zips 183. 7 B 2 r
2 répyis Kal ateprin obpos, Clem. Strom. 11. 1393 D.B. 4; N. 3 opos

ovpddpwv kat dovuddpwr tépyus Kal adrepipin, Stob. iii. 1. 46; D.B. 188;
Fee

190 DEMOCRITUS

‘Enjoyment and its absence is the limit of the advantageous
and disadvantageous.’ This might seem to be a counter-
part in Democritean language of Sextus’ statement as to the
‘criterion’ and to bring us back again to an ultimate pleasure-
theory. But too much emphasis must not be laid upon it.
It is quoted in close connexion with the idea of ‘cheerfulness’
and may well be no more than a practical maxim for its
attainment. Other citations tell in the same direction. Dio-
genes‘ in his summary of Democritus’ views says that
“cheerfulness is not the same as pleasure, as some have
mistakenly understood it, but a state in which the soul lives
peacefully and tranquilly, never disturbed by fear or super-
stition or any other feeling’. This looks like the preservation
of a genuine tradition and makes a clear distinction between
‘cheerfulness’ and ‘pleasure’. We may quote too a somewhat
cryptic saying assigned to Democritus himself,? which links
up the moral idea much more satisfactorily than Sextus’
statement with his actual metaphysical theory: ‘for all men
the same thing is good and true; but pleasant differs for one
and another’. There is, that is to say, in the world of know-
ledge an ultimate truth (‘the atoms and the void’) and there
is in the moral world an ultimate good (sc. presumably
‘cheerfulness’), but in both spheres the ‘sweet’ or ‘pleasant’
is conventional and differs from man to man. If then
pleasure is in Democritus’ view an ever-shifting and chang-
ing quantity, it is not likely that it would be taken as the
ultimate moral basis: indeed it is here definitely contrasted
with the universal ‘good’.

It may be assumed then that there was no more funda-
mental idea behind Democritus’ notion of ‘cheerfulness’.
Nor is it probable that he would have described ‘cheerful-
ness’, as Diogenes} does in his account of him as ‘the end’
(réNos): that again is the conception of a later age and implies

ix, 453 D.A. 1.

2 Dem. 34; D.B. 69; N. 6 avOpwrois Tot TwiTov ayabov Kat adnbés-
8d 5 dAAw dAdo. Dyroff (op. cit., p. 131) disputes the genuineness of this
fragment, but there seems no sufficient ground for rejecting it.

3 ix. 45; DA. I.

ETHICS 191

a far more logically worked-out system of ethics than the
detached aphorisms which we possess would allow us to
attribute to Democritus. Indeed, before Socrates had turned
men’s minds to a systematic inquiry into the moral life, it
is improbable that any thinker propounded what could in
any real sense be described as an ethical system. ‘Cheerful-
ness’ is put forward by Democritus as the state of mind at
which men should aim, in a perfectly simple and naive spirit.
Yet on the other hand it is a mistake to regard his aphorisms
as a collection of detached ejaculations: it is perfectly possible
to trace in the majority of them a connexion with the root-
idea of ‘cheertulness’ and by grouping them together to
form a picture of the life which Democritus would recom-
mend to his disciples. The effort of reconstruction is worth
the trouble, if only because there arise in the course of it
many ideas which had a prominent place in the later Greek
theories and in particular in the ethics of Epicurus. If
Epicurus was not indebted to Democritus for the root-
notion of his philosophy of pleasure, many incidental traits
of the ideal Epicurean may be recognized in the maxims of
his predecessor. :

We may try first to get a more definite idea of what is
meant by ‘cheerfulness’: Diogenes! describes it as ‘a state
in which the soul lives peacefully and tranquilly, never dis-
turbed by fear or superstition or any other feeling’. Two
important points emerge from this. In the first place it is
clear that Democritus is thinking solely of a state of mind:
the body, as will be seen later, is definitely ranked below the
‘soul’ by Democritus, and its pleasures are considered only
as they affect the soul. Here we have a contrast with the
pleasure-theory of Epicurus, which not only takes account of
the body, but makes its pleasures and pains the starting-
point. On the other hand when we come to the substantive
description we have an equally clear anticipation of Epicurus
notion of ‘imperturbability’ (d7apagia) as the true pleasure of
the soul, and the mention of fear and superstition as the
causes of disturbance is peculiarly significant. Once again

t15.45 3D AxT- :

192 DEMOCRITUS

we must beware of the possibility of the attribution of
Epicurean views by the doxographers to Democritus, but
it is clear that the idea of ‘cheerfulness’ is one of undisturbed
serenity rather than of an active and sensational pleasure:

the notion is, we might fairly say, Epicurean rather than —

Cyrenaic. ‘The general idea suggested by Diogenes is borne
out by two of the fragments: ‘the cheerful man is always
inclined to just and lawful deeds, and sleeping and awake he
is happy and strong and free from care’;' ‘it is best for a man
to lead his life as cheerful and as little troubled as possible;
and this would be so, if he were not to set his pleasures
on mortal things’.? The picture is of a happy disposition,
rejoicing in good things and undisturbed, yet having its
basis, as will become clearer, in the things of the soul.
Diogenes3 adds to his definition: ‘he calls it also “well-
being” (edeord) and by many other names’; Stobaeus* sup-
lies three of these, ‘harmony, symmetry, and imperturba-
bility’, and Cicero 5 gives us the fourth and very characteristic
synonym, ‘undismayedness’ (d@apBin). It. is not certain
whether Democritus used these words as exact equivalents
of ‘cheerfulness’, or rather as derivative qualities, but a con-
sideration of them in relation to the fragments will throw
some light on the main idea. ‘Well-being’ (edeoré) might
at first sight be thought to be a wider conception than
‘cheerfulness’ and to include bodily welfare: but the defini-
tion in one of the fragments,® ‘happiness arising from a good
state of things at home’, seems to make clear that it too refers
to a mental state, and this is confirmed by an aphorism? in

t Stob. ii. g. 33 D.B. 174 N. 47 6 pev edOvpos eis Epya aict pepo-
pevos Sikara Kai vopyLa kal trap Kat dvap xaiper Te Kal Eppwrar Kat
avaknoyns €oTw.

2 Stob. iii. 1. 473 D.B. 189; N.7 apiotov avOpairrw Tov Biov didyew ws
mrciora edbupnbévre Kal eAdxvora dvinfevrt. TodTO 8° dv ein, el tus pn) emt
rois Ovnroto. Tas Hdovas ToLotTo. 3 ix.45; D.A. 1.

4 ii. 7.3; D.A. 167; N.2 dppoviav ovpperplav TE Kal arapagiav.

s de Fin. vy. 29. 87; D.A. 169.

6 Hesych.s.v. edeora; D.B.140. edSayovia d76 700 eb éardvat Tov olKov.

7 Stob. ii. 31.66; D.B. 182; Ns. 189 o7@ peyddn earl TH pvouKakeoTa. —

This is however only Diels’ correction of a corrupt passage.
y pt passag)

ETHICS 193

which Democritus appears to use the contrary word ‘ill-being’
(xaxeord): ‘a man is often prevented from doing good, he
argues, who has by nature much ill-being’; the idea here
is clearly of mental disturbance. ‘Harmony’ and ‘symmetry’
seem to be descriptions of the nature of ‘cheerfulness’, which
“implies a balance of mind, due to the absence of fear and
other disturbing elements: the conception of ‘symmetry’ may
not be unconnected with the idea of ‘the mean’, which will
be seen to play a considerable part in Democritus’ idea of the
means by which ‘cheerfulness’ is to be attained. ‘Imper-
turbability’ (drapagia) is an admirable description of the
negative side of Democritus’ idea, but does not seem to
convey the positive conception of happiness and strength
which is suggested by the fragment already quoted. If the
word was actually used by Democritus, which is perhaps
doubtful, it is a remarkable anticipation of Epicurus. For
‘undismayedness’ (d8auBin) we have the authority of two
extant fragments: ‘the glory of righteousness is a courageous
and undismayed judgement’,’ ‘wisdom undismayed is worth
all, for it is most precious’.? It is ‘imperturbability’ in its
strongest form and suggests the #i/ admirari of Horace.3
The general character of the Democritean ‘cheerfulness’
is then clear and the question arises how is it to be attained?
Democritus appears to make certain distinctions and to
apply certain tests. In the first place it arises naturally from
pleasure or enjoyment: his maxim that ‘enjoyment and its
absence are the limit of the advantageous and disadvan-
tageous’ 4 has already been considered and to it may be added
the statement that ‘pain is the limit of evil’.s These aphorisms
need not be regarded, as has been seen, as throwing back
the conception of ‘cheerfulness’ on to a wider base of plea-
sure, but merely as supplying a practical test: we shall be
conducing to ‘cheerfulness’, if we choose what gives us

 Stob. iii. 7. 31; D.B. 215; N. 46 dikns Kidos yvwuns Oapoos Kab
abapBin.

2 Stob. iil. 7.74; D.B. 216; N. 34 codin abapyBos a&éin mévrwv TYyLLw-
TaTn ovod. RE pucks Viel 4 D.B. 4: see p. 189, n.2.

5 Epiphan. adv. Haer. iii. 2.9; D.A. 166; N.p.5.

3307 °

194 DEMOCRITUS

pleasure, we shall be thwarting it if we choose what gives us
pain. But not all pleasures are to be chosen, and discrimina-
tion must be shown: ‘ill-timed pleasures produce unpleasant-
ness’;' ‘of all things indulgence is the worst thing for
educating youth: for this it is which produces those pleasures
from which an evil disposition arises’.» These are vague
and general precepts, but the idea becomes explicit in another
larger and more important fragment:3 “Those who take their
pleasures from the stomach, passing the due measure (tov
xoupdv) in eating or drinking or love, for all of them their
pleasures are short and endure but a little while, as long as
they are eating and drinking, but their pains are many and
long. For first the desire of the same things is ever with
them... and there is no good in them, but only brief enjoy-
ment and then again they need the same things.’ Here, in
marked contrast to Epicurus, the pleasures of the body are
definitely rejected as such, though the reason is the same
which Epicurus gives against their indulgence beyond the
point where natural desire is relieved, namely that they
involve the great pain of desire for their renewal. On this
superiority of soul to body Democritus insists with no un-
certain voice: ‘he who chooses the goods of the soul, chooses
the more divine: he who chooses those of the body, chooses
human goods’4—or more clearly still: ‘it is fitting for men
to pay attention to the soul rather than the body; for per-
fection in the soul corrects the faults of the body, but
strength of body without reasoning makes the soul no whit
better.’5 Soul can help body, but body cannot help soul. An
extension of the idea of the inferiority of pleasures of the

« Dem. 36; D.B.71; N. 54 7Soval dkatpor Tixrovow andias.

2 Stob. ii. 31. 56; D.B. 178; N. 198 wavtwy KdKiotov 7 evmeTetn Tat-
Sedan TH vedTynTa: atrn ydp eoTw 7 TikTEr Tas 7Sovas TavTas, e€ dv
a) KAKOTNS YivEeTat. 3 Stob. ili. 18. 35; D.B. 235; N.53.

4 Dem. 3; D.B. 37 N.8. 6 7a puyfs ayaba atpedwevos ta Oeidtepa
atpéerau’ 6 Sé TA OKHVEOS TA GvOpwryua.

5s Stob. Flor.i. 39; D.B. 187; N.18 dvOpamots appdd.ov yvys waGAdov
3) odparos Adyov Trovetobar yuyjs pmev yap TeAcdtHs oKrvEeos oxOn-
pinv ép0oi, oxjveos S€ icxds dvev Aoyiopod yuynv oddév TL dwelvw
TiOnow.

ETHICS 195

body is found in the saying:# ‘happiness dwells not in herds
nor in gold; the soul is the dwelling of happiness’. Worldly
possessions are ‘human goods’ and so to be ranked with the
goods of the body.

Akin to this insistence on the superiority of soul to body
is a marked aesthetic element in his ethics, which is a fore-
shadowing of Plato and a notable contrast with Epicurus.?
‘We must not choose every pleasure but that which is con-
cerned with the beautiful.’3 Here the idea of ‘the beautiful’
is perhaps mainly moral, ‘the noble’, as it became afterwards
in Plato, but the completely aesthetic side is seen in another
fragment:4 ‘the great pleasures are derived from the con-
templation of beautiful works’. One more dictum links this
on closely with the idea of the precedence of soul over body: |
‘the beauty of the body is but animal, unless there bé mind
beneath’. These two quotations certainly place one in the
atmosphere of the Repudlic.

Equally notable is an anticipation in several aphorisms of
the Aristotelian theory of ‘the mean’: true pleasure, which
produces ‘cheerfulness’, is regarded as consisting in modera-
tion and lying between excess and defect: ‘cheerfulness
comes to man through moderation in enjoyment and har-
mony of life: excess and defect are apt to change and to
produce great movements in the soul’.6 Here the idea is
in close connexion with the main theory: ‘cheerfulness’
depends on the right selection of pleasures: the true plea-
sures are those which come from moderation; for excess and
defect disturb the soul and destroy its ‘symmetry’ and ‘im-

* Stob. il. 7. 3; D.B. 171; N. 10, 11 eddaysovin odk &v Bookrpaow
olxe? odd€ ev xpuo@- yuyi) oiknTiprov Saipovos.

a See p. 508, n. 4.

3 Stob. iii. 5.22; D.B. 207; N.4 7Soviv od wacav adda rH emi TO
KaA® aipetobar ypewr.

4 Stob. ill. 3. 46; D.B. 194; N. 36 ai peyddAar répypers dro rob DeGobau
Ta Kara TOV epywv yivovrac. zat

5 Dem. 71; D.B. 105; N. 16 owparos KadAdos Cwddes. Hv wi) vois vif.

6 Stob. iii. 1. 210; D.B. 191; N. 52 avOpwzow yap evOupin ywera
petpiornte Tépy.os Kal Biov cupperpin’ ta 8 €dAcirovTa Kat drrepBaa-
Aovra petanintew Te dire? kal weydAas Kwhovas éurrovetv TH vy.

02

196 DEMOCRITUS

perturbability’. The same idea appears more succinctly in
another saying: ‘equality is beautiful in all things; I like
not excess or defect’ :! ‘equality’ here is moderation regarded
from a mathematical point of view. Similar in tone are the
sayings: ‘if one were to exceed moderation, the most pleasant
things would become most unpleasant’;? ‘to desire im-
moderately is the mark of a child, not of a man’.3 Finally the
notion is seen again in its special application to worldly
goods in the quotation:4 ‘fortunate is the man who is cheer-
ful with moderate possessions, and unfortunate he who is
unhappy with many’.

A more precise idea can now be formed of the means by
which ‘cheerfulness’ may be attained; pleasures which in-
volve the pain of desire must be avoided, the pleasures of the
soul pteferred to those of the body, the beautiful must be
the object of contemplation and enjoyment, and the mean
observed between excess and defect. How then can a man
make a right choice? Democritus, like Epicurus after him,
laid great stress on ‘prudence’ or ‘practical wisdom’ (¢pévnats).
One of his works had the title of Tritogeneia or Athena; in
it he identified the goddess with Prudence and making a
pun on the name said ‘Three things come from Prudence,
good counsel, unerring speech, and right action’.5 In
several of the fragments the value of prudence in various
spheres is clearly brought out: “The hopes of those who
think aright are attainable, but those of the unwise are
beyond their power’, ‘men are happy not through strength

t Dem. 68; D.B. 102; N. 51 xadov év mavti 70 icov: daepBodAn S€ Kat
ZAAeupis ot por Soxeéer.

2 Stob. ili. 17. 38; D.B. 233; N. 55 ei tus darepBadAor 70 pérpiov, Ta
émitepméotata atepTéatata av ylyvo.To.

3 Dem. 35; D.B. 70; N. 62 maudes od avdpos TO auetpws embupeiv.

4 Stob. iv. 103.17; D.B. 286; N.71 edruyis 6 emi petpiou ypyuaow
evOupeopevos, SvaTux7s dé 6 et ToAAOton SvcbvpEdpEVos : cf. also D.B.
285.

: Etym. Orion., pp- 153,53; D.B.2 ywerar d€ ek Tod dpovetv tpia radTa,
BovrcveoBar Kadds, A€yew avapapryTws Kal mpatrew a Sei.

6 Dem. 23a; Stob. iv. rr0. 18; D.B. 58; N. 102 eAmides af rev dpa
dpoveovrwy edixrat, at dé Tav a€vvérwv advvaror.

ETHICS 197

of body or through possessions, but through righteousness
and wide thoughts’,' ‘it is a great thing in misfortune to
think aright’,? ‘reputation and wealth without understanding
are not safe possessions’ ;3 a particularly interesting fragment
brings prudence into relation with chance:4 ‘men have
fashioned an image of chance as a cloak for their own ill-
counsel. For chance rarely fights against prudence, and
most things in life keen sight with understanding guides
aright’. A series of sayings5 on ‘the foolish’ bring out the
same idea from a negative point of view: two may be quoted:
‘fools live without enjoying life’,® the absence of prudence,
that is, causes men to miss the true pleasures; ‘fools long
for what is not there, and despise what is at hand even though
it is more profitable than what has passed away’.?
Prudence is thus the guide to life for it enables a man to
choose the pleasures which will produce ‘cheerfulness’. Is
it an innate gift or can it be acquired? Democritus was a
strong believer in the value of education. In an aphorism ®
which has almost a Socratic ring he says, ‘the cause of wrong-
doing is ignorance of the better’, and in many places he
insists on the value of teaching. In two of them he brings
it into relation with nature: ‘more men become good by
training than by nature’. ‘Nature and teaching are alike.

Dem. 6; D.B. 40; N. 15 odre cwpacw ote yprjuaow edSapovotow
avOpwrrot, adX’ dpboatvy Kat roAvdpoovyy.

* Dem. 8; D.B. 42; N. 90 péya 76 ev Evpdopfor ppoveiv & Sei.

3 Dem. 42; D.B. 77; N. 78 8d€a Kai mArodros dvev Evvécws odK
aofadéa Krjpara.

4 Stob. ii. 8. 16; D.B. 119; N. 29, 30 dvOpwmoe tUyns €iSwArov émAd-
cavto mpodacw idins aBovdins. Bard yap dpovijcer tUyn dyerar, Ta SE
mreiora ev Biw edédveros dévdepKein KaTiObver.

5 D.B. 199-206.

6 Stob. iil. 4. 74; D.B. 200; N. 93 dvorjpoves Brodow od Teprdpevor
Bror7.

7 Stob. iii. 4. 76; D.B. 202; N. 60 dvorpoves trav dredvrwv dpéyovrat,
7a S€ mapedvta Kai<rep THY> Tapwynuévw Kepdadedrepa edvTa duad-
dvvovew.

§ Dem. 49; D.B. 83; N. 28 duaprins airy 7 duabin rob Kpécoovos.

9 Stob. ili. 29.66; D.B. 242; N. 193 mAdoves e€ dexrctos dyabol yivor-
Tat 7 amo pvatos.

198 DEMOCRITUS

For teaching re-forms a man, and in re-forming him makes
his nature.’' The contradiction in the latter saying 1s more
apparent than real; man is born with a certain nature,
education can remodel it into a ‘second’ nature and that
is more often the cause of goodness than the original instinct. -
Nature and education are grouped together again and
brought into immediate connexion with prudence in another
saying: ‘There may be understanding in the young, and
lack of understanding in the old; for it is not time that
teaches prudence, but nurture in due season and nature.’?
Another quotation3 shows clearly the connexion of education
and virtue, and emphasizes in an interesting way the various
departments of the normal training of the Athenian boy at
the time: ‘If boys are slack and fail to work, they would
never learn reading or music or games, nor, what is best safe-
guard of virtue, reverence; for it is from these pursuits that
reverence most loves to grow.’ One more quotation may be
made, for though it concerns education more on the in-
tellectual side, it is characteristic of its author and a striking
anticipation of the thoughts of a later age: ‘culture is an
ornament to the prosperous and a refuge to those in
adversity’ 3

It is possible then to form a fairly clear idea of what
Democritus meant by ‘cheerfulness’ and what he held to
be the means of attaining it. It remains to be seen if any
notion can be put together of the kind of life which the
‘cheerful’ man will lead. A reconstruction from fragments

* D.B. 33; N. 187; Clem. Strom. iv. 1513 Stob. ii. 31. 65 1) dvdous Kal
4 Si8axy TapamArjady €or. Kal yap 7 Sidax7) peTapvopo? Tov avOpwrov,
plerapvopotca dé duatomrote?.

2 Stob. ii. 31. 72; D.B. 183; N. 185 €ore ov véwy Evveois Kal yepdv-
Twv a€vveoin: xpdvos yap od SiSdoxer ppoveiv, GAN pain tpody Kal
vats.

3 Stob. ii. 31.57; D.B. 179; N. 197 e€w Ti Kws } Toveiv maides dvdy-
Tes oUTE ypdupar av udBorev ore WovotKHy OTE dywviny odd’ Srep uddLoTa
Thy apeTHy ovvexer, TO aidetabar wdda yap éx TovTwr dircet ylyvecbar %
aidwes.

4 Stob. ii. 31.58; D.B.180; N.183 7) mavdeta edrvxodor pév eore Kdcpos,
atvyotat 5€ katapvytov. Cf. Cic. pro Arch. 7. 16.

ETHICS 199

is necessarily incomplete, but there is a considerable amount
of material to draw on. A long extract’ may first be con-
sidered which gives a clear picture and suggests lines of
inquiry.

A cheerful spirit comes to men through moderation in enjoyment and
harmony of life... . Therefore you must fix your mind on things
within your power (él rots duvarots) and be content with what you
have, taking little thought of those who are envied and admired and
not associating yourself with them in mind: rather you must contem-
plate the lives of those who have a hard time and mark their sore
suffering, so that what you have and possess already may appear great
and enviable to you, and you may not desire more and so come to suffer
in mind, For the man who admires the rich and those whom the world
blesses and associates himself with them in his thoughts at every hour
of the day, is forced ever to seek some new thing and to set his desire
upon doing some deed irremediable such as the laws forbid. Therefore,
a man should not seek these things, but be cheerful with the others,
comparing his own life with the life of the less fortunate and holding
himself blessed, when he thinks of what they suffer and considers how
much better is his own life and fortune. If you cling to this state of
mind, you will live more cheerfully and will be rid of many evil
spirits («fjpas) in your life, envy, jealousy, and ill-will.

Here there is a strong emphasis on the ideas of moderation
in practice and contentment in spirit, the whole gathered up
in a self-centred view of life in which the less fortunate have
their function in helping to secure one’s own satisfaction.
The idea is repeated in another striking saying:? ‘the man
who intends to be cheerful must not be overactive either in
private or in public,3 and whatever he does must not choose
what is beyond his capacity and nature. But he must so
be on his guard that even when chance falls in his way and
seems to lead him to advancement, he can lay it aside and
not engage in what is more than he can do. For plenty in
moderation is safer than great plenty’. This gives the picture
of self-centred and cautious inactivity in an extreme form

™ Stob. iii. r. 210; D. 191; N. 52, already referred to on p. 195.
2 Stob. iv. 103. 25; D.B. 3; N. 163. ;
3 aoAAd mprocew here has clearly the associations of zroAupaypoovry.

2.00 DEMOCRITUS

and when it came to details it is not surprising that Demo-
critus did not quite succeed in carrying it out.

In a philosophy in which moderation plays so large a part
it is to be expected that much stress will be laid on the
characteristic Greek virtue of ‘self-control’ (cwdpoovvn). The
contrast between self-control and chance’ has already been
quoted and in a similar spirit Democritus says: ‘self-control
increases enjoyment and makes pleasure greater’? The idea
is exactly that of moderation: its pleasures are really greater,
because they are stable and do not involve unfulfilled desire.
Self-control is more than once regarded as the peculiar
virtue of the old: ‘strength and beauty are the blessings of
youth, self-control is the flower of old age’:3 ‘the self-control
of a father is the greatest exhortation to the children’ 4— the
latter a peculiarly shrewd observation. The character of this
self-control is clearly expressed in the saying that ‘to endure
poverty nobly is the mark of a man of self-control’,5 and its
direct relation to bodily health is emphasized in another
striking aphorism: ‘Men ask for health from the gods in
their prayers, but do not know that they have the power over
it in themselves. In their wantonness they do contrary things
and themselves by their desires become traitors to their
health.’® The same idea of the responsibility of the soul,
as director, for the misuse of the body is brought out in a
longer and very interesting fragment: If the body were to
lay a suit against the soul for the pains and ill-treatment it
has suffered during all its life, and were itself appointed

' pp. 187, 197.

2 Stob. ill. 5.27; D.B. 211; N. 56 owdpoovvyn ta tepmva acfer Kai 7S0-
vay emyseilova trove?.

3 Stob. iv. 115. 19; D.B. 294; N. 205 iaxds Kal edpopdin vedtrntos
ayabd, yipaos dé cwhpoatyn avOos.

4 Stob. ili. 5.24; D.B. 208; N. 199 watpos cwhpoovyy péyiorov TéKvots
mapayyeAua.

5 Stob. iv. 108. 70; D.B. 291; N. 83 wevinv emeikéws pépew awdpove-
ovTos.

6 Stob. i. 18. 30; D.B. 234; N. 21 dyreiny edyfjor mapa Oedv airéovrat
avOpwrot, THY S€ Tadrns Svvapw ev éavTois €xovTes ovK iaacw- aKpacin
dé tavavria mpyacovres adrol mpoddérar THs byreins THow emrOupinow
ywovrat.

ETHICS 201

judge in the case, it would gladly condemn the soul on the
ground that parts of the body it has ruined by carelessness
or weakened by intoxication, other parts it has destroyed
and dissipated by love of pleasure: it would be just as if,
when some instrument or vessel was spoilt, a man might
blame another for his reckless use of it." The insistence? in
both these quotations on the supremacy of soul over body
is characteristic.

Similar thoughts appear in passages where Democritus
deals with desire: ‘immoderate desire is the mark of a child,
not of a man’:3 ‘excessive craving for any one thing blinds
the soul to everything else’:4 ‘the desire for more loses what
is in hand; it is like the dog in Aesop’.5 And the lesson of
moderation is again enforced: ‘if you do not desire many
things, the few will seem many; for small cravings make
poverty equivalent to wealth’.6 Several of these aphorisms
and especially the last anticipate the principles of Epicurus.7

The secret of attaining this self-control and the capacity
to endure hardship lies in the practice of work: ‘toils under-
taken willingly make lighter the endurance of those that
come against the will’:® ‘all toils are sweeter than idleness,
when men gain what they toil for or know that they will
win it’. Work in this spirit becomes easier as it goes:
“continuous toil becomes lighter by custom’,” and in the
end this self-training is a stronger power for good than

* Phat. fr. de Libid. et Aegr.2; D.B. 159; N. 22. 2 See p. 194.

3 Dem. 35; D.B. 70; N. 62 maiSds odK avdpos TO aetpws emiOupetv.

* Dem. 37; D.B. 72; N. 58 ai epi ru ododpat dpéteis tupdotow eis
TéAAa Thy puynv.

5 Stob. ili. 10. 68; D.B. 224; N. 59 % Tod mAdovos erOupin TO Trapeov
arddAvat 77] Aiowrein Kuvi ixédn ywouern. one

6 Stob. iv. 24. 25; D.B. 284; N. 69 qv put) rod enbupens, Ta dAlya
Tot ToAAa, Sdfeu opixpa yap dpekis mrevinv icoabevéa tAovTw ToL€et.

7 See Part II, Chap. X, p- 496. . f

® Stob. iii. 29. 63; D.B. 240; N. 131 of éxovovor mévor Ti TOV dxovatwy
drropovny eAadporépny trapacKkevdlovor. , ‘ anny

9 Stob. iii. 29. 88; D.B. 243; N. 130 THS jouxins mavres of movou
Hdioves, OTav wy ElveKev Troveovat Tvyxdvwow 7 eid€wor KUpoovTes.

ro Stob. iil. 29. 64; D.B. 241; N. 132 mdvos ovveyijs eAadpdrepos éavrod
ovynbein yiverat.

202 DEMOCRITUS

natural instinct: ‘more men become good by training than
by nature’. We are back again at the importance of educa-
tion,” though in a more practical sphere.

Besides self-control the other cardinal virtues in Greek
thought are duly recognized by Democritus. Wisdom re-
ceives its tribute in the saying: ‘the doctor’s art heals the
diseases of the body, but wisdom releases the soul from
suffering’ ,3 but it too is only to be won by education: ‘neither
art nor wisdom is attainable, unless one learns’.4 Courage
is said to help in the endurance of hardship: ‘courage makes
calamities small’,5 but it is more than physical courage that
is needed: ‘the courageous man is he who vanquishes not
only his enemies, but his desires. Some men are masters
of cities, but the slaves of women’. The popular conception
is once again subordinated to Democritus’ own insistence on
self-control. Of justice it will be necessary to speak later
when Democritus’ attitude to the state is considered, but
here it may be well to collect certain sayings which regard
justice primarily as a virtue of the individual. His con-
ception of justice is positive and active: ‘justice is doing what
should be done and injustice not doing what should be done
but setting it aside’,? and with a remarkable anticipation of
later thought he sees that not only action but the will to
action is what matters: ‘it is good not merely to refrain from
injustice but not even to wish to do it’.8 Love of riches is a
great obstacle to justice: ‘a man who is altogether the slave

t Stob. ili. 29. 66; D.B. 242; N. 193 aAeoves €€ doxiavos ayaboi
ylwovrat 7 amo pvatos. 2 See p. 197.

3 Clem. Paed. 1.6; D.B. 31; N. 50 tatpixi) ev odparos vocous aKée-
Tat, copin dé puxiv waldv adaupetrar.

4 Dem. 24; Stob. ii. 31. 71; D.B. 59; N. 188 ovre réxvy ove codin
edikTov, Hv pr wan TWs.

5 Stob. ili. 7. 21; D.B. 213; N. 127 dvdpeln Tas dras puKpas epder.

6 Stob. iii. 7.25; D.B. 214; N. 63. 169 avdpeios ody 6 T&v TroAEiov
pdvov, ddAd Kal 6 T&v 7ydovav Kpécowv. Evior S€ 7roAtwv prev SeamdLlovor,
yuvarét dé dovAevovow.

7 Stob. iv. 44, 15; D.B. 256; N. 156 dixn pev eorw epdew ta xpr
édvra, aducin dé pur) Epdew 7a ypr) edvTa, GAAa TrapatpérrecBar.

8 Dem. 27; Stob. iii. 9.29; D.B.62; N.38 dyabov od 76 ur) dduxety GAAG
70 pnde Oérew.

ETHICS 203

to possessions could never be just’,! and its motive should be
higher than the fear of punishment: ‘refrain from sinning
not through fear but through duty’? Self-respect is similarly
urged as a motive in a larger fragment:3 ‘do not respect other
men more than yourself and do not be readier to do evil if
no one will know it than if all the world will know it. Respect
yourself most of all and let this law be set in your heart, to
do nothing disadvantageous’. In the same lofty spirit he
says: ‘he who does wrong is more unhappy than he who is
wronged’.t Not less notable are two sayings about repen-
tance: ‘it is better to take council before acting than to
repent’,5 yet after action there is room for repentance and
it brings its own blessing: ‘repentance over shameful deeds
is the salvation of life’. All these sayings about justice are
conceived on a high plane and some of them have an almost
Christian ring about them. They seem a little remote from
the main conception of ‘cheerfulness’ and it is hard to believe
that they are inspired by no loftier motive than the desire
to protect oneself from depression. Democritus seems some-
times to get outside his self-centred philosophy. We may
trace a similar nobility in the aphorism: ‘it shows a high
soul to bear an offence meekly’.?

A few more detached aphorisms on the individual life
may serve to complete the picture. Frugality is a virtue
often commended, it is of course a form of moderation:

™ Dem. 16; D.B. 50; N. 73 6 xXpnpdtwv tavreAGs oowv obK av ToTE
ein Sixatos. i a a

2 Dem. 7; Stob. iii. 1. 95; D.B.41;N. 45 pt) Sua poBov adra dia 70
déov améxeobar dpaprnudrwv. Pap

3 Stob. iv. 46. 46; D.B. 264; N. 43 pndev te paddov rods dvOpumous
aideicbar Ewvrod pydé tr padAov eLepydlecbar Kaxdv, et peNeu pndets
eldrjcew 7) €f of mavtes avOpwrou: add’ éwvrtov pdhora aidetabar, Kal
Todrov vopov TH uy Kabeordvar wore pnd€ev srovetv dvemur7devov.

4 Dem.11; D.B.45; N.48 6 dduxcdv 700 adixovpévov KAKODAYLOVEDTEPOS.

5 Dem. 31; D.B. 66; N. 101 mpoBovAeveoBar xpetacov mpo TOV mpagéwy
7) peTavoeiv. Prem ave ;

6 Dem. 9; D.B. 43; N. 99 perapeédera em’ aicypotow epypacr Biov
owrnpin. : ;

7 Dem. 12; D.B. 46; N. 218 peyadowuyin ro dépew mpadws mAnupe-
Aevav.

204, DEMOCRITUS

‘the frugal tread in the path of the bee, for they work as if
they were to live for ever’.t It is emphasized again and its
difficulty pointed out in a very remarkable fragment which
shows conspicuously Democritus’ power of simile: ‘the
children of frugal parents, if they grow up ignorant, are like
dancers leaping on swords: if as they descend they miss the
one place where they ought to plant their feet, there is an
end of them. But it is hard to hit this one spot; for there is
only just room for their feet left. So they too if they miss the
print of their father’s thrift and frugality are led to destruc-
tion’? But frugality, though good in itself, must not be
carried to excess: ‘frugality and hunger are good, but there
is a time to be lavish too: it takes a good man to recognize
it’:3 ‘a life without feasting is a long journey without an
inn’. Here the lover of ‘cheerfulness’ seems for a moment
to emerge above the moralist. Avarice at any rate is strongly
condemned on fundamental grounds: ‘a craving for posses-
sions, if it is not limited by satiety, is far worse than the
utmost poverty; for the greater the craving, the greater the
feeling of want’.5 Jealousy is no less shrewdly condemned:
‘the envious man harms himself as he would an enemy’;°® he
is only creating for himself new unsatisfied desires. Con-
tentiousness likewise recoils upon itself: ‘all contentiousness

* Stob. iil. 16.17; D.B. 227; N. 80 of dewdwAol Tov Tis weAloons ofrov
éxovow epyalopevor ws det Buwodpevor.

2 Stob. ili. 16.18; D.B. 228; N. 202 of r@v dewdwrBv traides apablees
ywopevot Worep ot dpynarat ot és Tas waxalpas dpovovTes, iv Evds povvou
<pq> tUxwor Katadepopevor, evOa Set Tods mddas epetoar, amoAAvvTaL:
xadrerov S€ Tuxetv evds* Td yap txyviov podvov AdAeuTTaL THY TOdDV> ovTW
€ Kai odT0L, Hv dudprwor Tod matpiKod TUoV TOD emyteA€os Kal PevdwAod,
pidéovar dSiapbeipecbar.

3 Stob. ili. 16. 19; D.B. 229; N. 81 Pevde tou Kal Aywos xpnoty: ev
Kaip@ S€ Kal Sardvyn ywwaKew dé ayabod.

4 Stob. ili. 16. 22; D.B. 230; N. 229 Bios avedpracros paxpi) odds
dmavoeoKeuTos.

5 Stob. iii. 10. 43; D.B. 219; N. 70 ypynudrwr dpegis, Hv pr) dpilnrar
Kdépw, Trevins €axdrns TodAdv xaAerwrepy: peloves yap dpéEeis pélovas
évdelas mrovetow.

6 Dem. 54; Stob. ili. 38. 47; D.B. 88; N. 82 6 dOovéwy ewvrov ws
€xOpov Aurréet.

ETHICS #05

is folly: for while it gazes on the harm wreaked on its
opponent, it does not see its own advantage’.* Among his
miscellaneous sayings there are two which seem to arise
directly out of Democritus’ own experience as a ‘travelled
man’: ‘Sojourning abroad teaches self-sufficiency ; for a crust
of bread anda wisp of straw are the sweetest medicines for
hunger and weariness.’* Those are the hardships of travel;
this is its high spirit: ‘For the wise man the whole earth is
open: for the entire world is the native land of a good soul.’3

The portrait of Democritus’ ‘cheerful’ man is on the
whole a pleasant one: in spite of the self-centredness of the
motives there is much that is fine and noble in the result.
We may quote lastly some characteristic reflexions on old
age and death. A completed life he thinks of as a good
thing: ‘the old man was once young, but it is uncertain
whether the young man will attain to old age; therefore the
completed good is superior to that which is still to come and
is uncertain.’* Yet for old age itself he has scanty praise:
‘old age is a wholesale crippling: it has all its limbs, but all
lack something’,5 and he warns his disciples more than once
not to strive for old age rather than death: ‘it is the foolish
who through fear of death wish to grow old’:°® ‘it is the
foolish who crave for life fearing death instead of old age’.7
The ‘cheerful’ life must remain cheerful to its close and that
cannot well be if it is prolonged into old age.

* Stob. ili. 20. 62; D.B. 237; N. 221 pirovixin maca avontos: 7d yap
kata Tod Svopéveos PAaBepdv Oewpedaa 76 iSvov aupdepov od Brézer.

? Stob. iii. 40. 6; D.B. 246; N. 66 evrein Blov adrdpKevay diddoKer:
pala yap Kat oriBas Ayod Kal Kérov yAvKdrara idpara. ;

3 Stob. iii. 40. 7; D.B. 247; N. 168 dv8pi c0b@ raoa yh Barn: puyis
yap ayabis marpis 6 Evpras Kdap0s. : nace

4 Stob. iv. 115. 21; D.B. 295; N. 204 6 yépwv véos eyévero, 6 de véos
adnAov et &s yipas adi€era: 7d TéXeLov odv ayabov rob wédXovros ert Kai
adjAov Kpéacov. ne ‘

5 Stob. iv. 116. 41; D.B. 296; N. 207 yipas oAdKAnpos eote mHpwoats:
mavr éxet Kal maow evder. ; /

6 Stob. ili. 4. 80; D.B. 206; N. 95 avonpoves Odvatov SedoiKkdtes ynpa-
oxew €éAovow. ig a

7 Stob. iii. 4. 79; D.B. 205; N. 95 n. dvorjoves Cos opéyovran <avTt>
yipaos Odvarov deSouxdres.

206 DEMOCRITUS

Besides such aphorisms about the individual Democritus
speaks often of the relation of the ‘cheerful’ man both to
domestic and to public life. In regard to domestic life he
takes up a marked attitude. Of slaves he holds the orthodox
Greek view: ‘Use slaves as parts of the body, each for his
own purpose.’? His opinion of women and their position is
no less emphatic: ‘A woman is far quicker than a man to
make intrigues’:* ‘let not a woman practice speaking; for
it is dangerous’:3 ‘few words are women’s adornment: and
simplicity in adornment is good too’4—a Periclean senti-
ment with an added sly touch of humour. He has a horror
of submission to a woman: ‘to be ruled by a woman would
be the last disgrace to a man’,5 and in this anticipates
Epicurus’ aversion to the love of the sexes. Equally clearly
he would dissuade his disciples from having children and
bringing up a family: ‘the rearing of children is unsafe; for
if it succeeds it involves much struggle and anxiety, and if
it fails, it is worse than any other form of pain’:® ‘I do not
think one ought to have children; for I see in the possession
of children many great dangers and many griefs; the
blessings are rare, and such as they are, only weak and
feeble.’7 In similar passages *® he enlarges on the difficulties
of bringing up a family, and in one remarkable utterance?
recommends, if one needs the presence of children, the
adoption of those of one’s friends, adding the cynical reason

™ Stob. iv. 62.45; D.B.270; N.177 otkéravow ws pépect Tod oKyveos
xXp@ dAdrAw mpds dAdo.

2 Stob. iv. 73.62; D.B. 273;-N.174 yuvy) moAAd dvdpos d€urépn mpos
Kakoppadpoovvyv.

3 Dem. 77; D.B. 110; N. 173 yuvr) pa) aoxeitw Adyov: Sewvov yap.

4 Stob. iv. 74. 38; D.B. 274; N. 171 Kdopos dAvyomvOin yuvarkt: Kadov
dé Kal Koopov AuTéTNs.

08 Dem. 78; D.B. 111; N.170 70 yuvatkes apxecBat bBpis av avdpi ety
€oxarn.

6 Stob. iv. 76.13; D.B. 275; N. 182 texvorpodin ofarepov: riv wev yap
emituxinv aydvos weoTHy Kat ppovTidos KexTynTaL, THY dé GmoTUYinv av-
vmépberov érépn ddvvn.

7 *Stob. iv. 76; 155 D.B. 276; N. 180.

8 Stob. iv. 76. 17, 83. 25; D.B. 278. 279; N. 178, 203.

9 Stob. iv. 76.16; D.B. 277; N. 181.

ET HACS 207

that ‘this plan is so much the better because one can choose
out of many the child that suits one’s mind. But if you beget
them for yourself there are many dangers; for you must put
up with the child who is born’. “Yet once unexpectedly * his
cynicism seems to break down, and he admits that ‘it is
possible without spending much of one’s possessions to bring
up children and so set a wall of defence round one’s property
and person’—still an egoistic motive, but with a touch of
humanity. Of a piece with all this is a more kindly saying:
‘he who gets a good son-in-law finds a son, but he who gets
a bad one loses a daughter’.

It might well be asked where this cynical old bachelor
is going to find ‘cheerfulness’ in his relations to others, and
the answer is, as it was with Epicurus after him, in his
friends. A series of aphorisms shows the high value which
Democritus set on friendshipand the importance heattributed
to efforts to acquire and maintain it. ‘The man who has not
one good friend, does not deserve to live’:3 ‘the friendship of
one sensible man is worth all the fools’.4 But a friend is not
to be acquired without giving something in return: ‘the
man who loves no one cannot, I think, be loved by any
one’.5

Friendship must be based on common thoughts and
interests: ‘it is agreement that makes friendship’ :° ‘not all
one’s kin are friends, but those who agree in their interests’,’
and requires the right sort of character: ‘faultfinders are not

* Stob. iv. 83. 26: D.B. 280; N. 184 e€eaTw od moAAa TeV adetépwv
dvadwoavtas radeical te Tovs TaiSas Kai Teixds Te Kal owTnpiny Tept-
Baréoba rots re ypypact Kal Tots cwipaow abtav.

* Stob. iv. 70. 18; D.B. 272 6 yapPpod pev erurvydw edpev vidv, 6 Sé
aroruxdy amdAece Kal Ovyarépa.

3 Dem. 65; D.B. 99; N. 209 Civ odk dévos drw pnde els ort xpnoros

iAos.
4 as 64; D.B. 98; N. 211 évds dirin Evverod Kpécowr aévvérwy
mavTwv,.
_ 5 Dem. 69; D.B. 103; N. 208 otS’ bp’ vos pircecBar Soxger por 6
piréwv pndeva.
© Stob. ii. 33. 9; D.B. 186; N. 212 opodpoovvn diAinv zrove?.

7 Dem:.733D.Bu107;. N. 213 pidou od mavres of Evyyevdes. GAN of

fuppwveorres rept tod Evudé€povros.

208 DEMOCRIT US

Lae dal,

made for friendship’:* ‘the man with whom tested friends do
not remain long, is ill-tempered’.? But there can be decep-
tion in friendship: ‘many who seem to be friends are not;
others are who seem not’,3 and a change of fortune may end
friendship: ‘many shun their friends, when they fall from
prosperity to poverty’;* ‘in good fortune it is easy to find
a friend, in bad fortune the most difficult of all things’.5
Democritus’ conception of friendship has no doubt a selfish
basis, but it is at least more pleasing to contemplate than his
notion of family life. That it has a generous side may be
seen in certain aphorisms concerning kindnesses and grati-
tude: ‘one should receive acts of kindness with the intention
of making greater returns’,° ‘small acts of kindness at the
right moment are the greatest for those who receive them’,7
‘the really kind man is not the man who looks for a return,
but he who chooses to do good’.® In these selfishness seems
at least to be mitigated by a truer feeling.

There is a good deal of information as to Democritus’
attitude to the State and its functions. From his conception?
of justice as a positive and active virtue, it follows naturally
that he insists on the punishment of offenders: “ we must
avenge those who are wronged to the best of our powers
and not let it be; for this is just and good, and the contrary
is unjust and evil’.%° There is an interesting series of

* Dem. 76; D.B. 109; N. 217 of diropeudees eis piArinv odK edhuees.

2 Dem. 66; D.B. 100; N. 216 orew pur) Stapevovow emi aodddv ot
meppabevres pidou SvatpoTos.

3 Dem. 63; D.B. 97; N. 210 woAAoi doxdovres elvar pidou odk Eloi Kai
od doxéovres eiaiv. :

4 Dem. 67; D.B. ror; N. 215 éxrpémovrat oAAol tods didrovs, emi €&
edmropins els Trevinv pweTaTéowouw.

5 Dem. 72; D.B. 106; N. 214 ev edruyin didrov edpetv edmopov, ev de
dvotuxin TdvTwy amopwTatov.

6 Dem. 58; D.B. 92; N. 228 xdpuras d€xecOar ypewv mpooKomevdpevov
Kpé€cocovas adT@v auorBas azrodobvat.

7 Dem. 60; D.B. 94; N. 225 puxpat xdpires ev Kaip@ péyrorat Tots
AapBavovor.

§ Dem. 62; D.B. 96; N. 226 xapiorixds odx 6 Brew mpds THY aporBry
aan 6 €d dpav mponpnyevos. 9. See p.202.

v0 Stob.iv. 46.43; D.B. 261; N.155 dd:coupevoror TYyswpetv Kara Svvapuw

ETHICS 209

aphorisms? in Stobaeus’ collection in which Democritus
appears to approach the question of the punishment of
citizens through the slaughter of harmful animals and the
killing of enemies, and relates his precepts directly to his
root-notions of ethics. He tells us that the man who kills
harmful wild beasts is guiltless (a@Gos) and contributes to
‘well-being’ (mpés eveorodv), and again that the man who kills
‘things that do harm contrary to justice’ will have in every
constitution a greater share of ‘cheerfulness’ and justice and
courage and possessions. Advancing the next stage he says
that as hostile beasts should be killed, so, should hostile men,
and specifies in particular the highwaymen and the pirate.
Finally coming within the State itself he pronounces that
‘those who do deeds worthy of exile or deserve imprison-
ment or fine, must be condemned and not let off ; whosoever
lets a man off, giving judgement for gain or affection, is a
wrongdoer, and this must eat into his heart’.2 There is
a Draconian sternness about this, but the motive is clear: if
the citizens are to live the ‘cheerful’ life, they must be freed
from all forms of molestation external and internal and the
principle must be rigidly applied. And this is the purpose
of the existence of laws: ‘the laws would never have for-
bidden every man to live as a law unto himself, if one man
did not do harm to another. For envy lays the foundation of
civil strife’.3 But even this stern advocate for the execution
of the law knows that there is something better than law
in the persuasion which carries conviction: ‘a man will be
a greater power for virtue if he uses encouragement and
persuasive speech rather than law and force. For he who is
kept from injustice by law is likely to do wrong secretly, but
he who is led to the right by persuasion is not likely either
xpi) Kal py Taprevar: 7d pev yap Tovodrov Sikaov Kat dyabdv, 7d Sé p11)
TowodTov adiKov Kal KaKdv. * Stob. iv. 44. 16-18; D.B. 257-9.
2 Stob. iv. 46. 44; D.B. 262; N. 157 Kal ot buys d&va épdovow 7 Seopav
Owijs afvor, karadmdpiordov Kai put) dmodvew: bs 8” av mapa vdpov
_ droddn Képder pilav 7) iSov7 ddiKcet Kal of roOTo éykdpS.iov dvdyen elvac.

3 Stob. ili. 38. 53; D.B. 245; N. 140 odk dv €xebAvov of voto Civ Exaorov
kar’ idinv efovainy, et pt) Erepos Erepov éAupaivero. pOdvos yap ardavos
apxnv arrepyalerar.

3307 P

ve

210 DEMOCRITUS

openly or-secretly to commit a sin’! For ‘the purpose of
law is tot refit the life of men; and this it can do, when they
themselves are willing to be benefitted. For to those who
are persuaded the law shows its own virtue’? Once again the
rigidity of Democritus is lightened by a shrewd human touch.

Democritus’ precepts on public life and the function of
the State are something of a surprise. The saying already
quoted,3 “the man who intends to be cheerful must not be
overactive either in private or in public’, prepares us for
a quietist attitude, and we should have expected him to
recommend his philosopher to abstain from politics and take
no part in the government of the State, but devote himself
to philosophy. In fact his advice is precisely the reverse:
‘learn the statesman’s art as the greatest of all and pursue
those toils from which great and brilliant results accrue to
men,’4 and again he gives similar advice and expresses the
highest admiration for the State and its functions: ‘a man
should consider state affairs more important than all else,
and see to it that they are well managed. He must not be
contentious beyond what is fair or clothe himself in power
beyond the common good. Fora well-managed State is the
greatest of all successes and everything is included in it.
If it is preserved, so is all besides; if it is lost, all is lost’.5 A
man then must be prepared to play his part in the life of the

t Stob. ii. 31. $9; D.B. 181; N. 44 xpeloowy éx” aperny daveirat 7po-
rpomh xpespevos Kal Adyou meBot Hrrep vouw Kat avayen. AdOpn wev yap
dpapréew elds Tov eipypevov adixins 5776 vopov, Tov 5é és TO S€ov Hypevov
melo? odk Eixds odte Havepas épdew TL TAnUpErés.

2 Stob. iv. 43. 333 D.B. 248; N.139 6 vopos BovAerau pev evdepyerety
Biov dévOpdre: Sdvarat 5€ Stav BovAwyrat maoxew €d* Tolar yap TreBope-
vouot THY iSinv aperny evoetkvuTat. 3 D.B.,3:1see p. 190.

4 Plut. adv. Colot. 32, p.1126a; D.B.157; N. 133 ry te TOATUKTY
téxynv peylorny odcav éxdiddoxeobar Kal Tovs mévous SiudKew ap’ dv Ta.
peydda Kal Aapmpa yivovrat Tots avOpedrrots.

3 Stob. iv. 43. 43; D.B. 252; N.134 ta xara rhv mdAw xpewv Tov
Aordv péytora Hyetcbar, SKws dkerar ed, prjre prrovixéovra mapa TO
emeukes pire ioydv eavT@ mepuriBepevov mapa TO xpynoTov TO TOD Evvod.
nds yap «d dyopévn pweylotn CpAwats eote Kat ev ToUTw TavTa et, Kal
rovrov owlopevov mdvra aylerar Kal Tovrov diapHerpopevou Ta T1avTO

SiadpBeiperau.

a

ETHICS Js 211

State, and if need be to hold office, for, as Democritus says
in a strangely Platonic aphorism: ‘it is hard to }:» ruled by
an inferior’. ‘This suggests that Democritus dic not think
that public office was in itself the best thing for his philo-
sopher, but that occasionally the philosopher must be king
for fear of a worse ruler. The complement of this proposi-
tion is put emphatically: ‘it is better for fools to be ruled
than to rule’, and ‘when bad men come into places of
honour, the more unworthy they are, the more careless they
show themselves and the more are they swollen with folly
and rashness’.3 But a bad ruler, as he tells us elsewhere,#
must be punished just like a man who has betrayed his trust.
The good conduct of the State is all important for the
‘cheerfulness’ of its citizens: therefore the best men should
undertake office, and those who rule must suffer for it. A
closer connexion of thought can be traced here than in many
parts of Democritus’ ethics.

Among the different types of constitution Democritus
undoubtedly preferred a democracy: ‘poverty in a democracy
is as much to be preferred to what is called prosperity under
despots as freedom is to slavery’.5 But it must be a firm and
united democracy, not one torn by strife and faction: ‘civil
strife is an evil on both sides; for it means ruin alike to
victors and vanquished’,® and on the other hand ‘by union
great deeds can be done and wars accomplished for States,
but not otherwise’.?, And—once more with a strangely real

t Dem. 15; Stob. iv. 45. 27; D.B. 49; N. 143 yademov dpyeoBau bd
xepetovos. ;

2 Dem. 40; D.B.75; N.144 xpéocov dpyeabat rois avojrovow 7 apxewv.

3 Stob. iv. 43.45; D.B. 254: N.151 of kaxol lovtes és Tas Tyas 6Kdow
av wGAAov avagvor eovres two, TooovTw paddAov avakndées ylyvovTat Kal
adpoovyyns Kat Opdceos miprAavrat.

4 Stob. iv. 46. 47; D.B. 265; N. 166.

5 Stob. iv. 43. 42; D.B. 251; N. 147 % €v Snpuoxparin wevin Ths mapa
rois Suvdoryat KaAcopevys eddaovins Tocodrdv core aiperwrépy OKdcoV
eAevbepin SovAcins.

6 Stob. iv. 43. 343; D.B. 249; N. 138 ordous eudvdAvos és ExaTepa KaKov
kal yap viKeovot Kal yoowpEevors doin Pop. ¢ ;

7 Stob. iv. 43. 40; D.B. 250; N. 136 dao dpovoins Ta peydda epya Kat
zais méAear Tovs TroAguous Suvarov Karepydlecbar, dAAws 5° ov.

P2

212 DEMOCRITUS

touch of humanity—he considers that it is the part of the
wealthy to bring about this unity by something of what we
might now call practical philanthropy: ‘when the powerful
bring themselves to champion the poor and serve them and
do kindness to them, then there is true pity: men are not
left desolate, but become comrades and defend one another:
the citizens are of one mind and other blessings follow
greater than one could tell’.' Considering the general state
of class feeling in most of the Greek cities, this is perhaps
the most remarkable of all Democritus’ sayings.

The moral teaching of Democritus is not based on any
profound metaphysical or ethical basis, nor is it, as far as
we can judge from ‘detached fragments, in any sense a com-
plete system: it does not attempt to grip together the whole
of life in any reasoned deductions from a single principle.
The gospel of ‘cheerfulness’ was, it would appear, enunciated
by its author as a good practical guide to life, and the many
maxims and aphorisms which have survived were designed
to show in what ways a man could best become and remain
‘cheerful’. The teaching rests no doubt on a selfish basis
and, in so far as it remains conscious of that basis, it is self-
centred in its attitude to life. The advice of Democritus
seems therefore at times cynical, especially in his dealing
with family life; but there is no narrowness of outlook. The
precepts are wide in their application and embrace many
interests and many parts of life, both private and public.
At times too they rise to a real nobility, in which for the
moment the egoistic foundation seems almost to be forgotten.

If it is remembered that Democritus was a ‘pre-Socratic’,
that he taught before the sense of moral problems was felt
and the need of a moral system realized, his teaching may
be regarded as an interesting attempt by a man of wide

x Stob. iv. 43.46; D.B. 255; N. 146 drav of Suvapevor tots pur) xovor
Kal mpotenetv ToAuewot Kal droupyetv Kat xapilecBar, ev rovTw 75y Kal
TO olKTIpew eveoTe Kal fA) Epyovs elvat Kal TO éralpous vylveoOan, Kal TO
apdvew adAjAouor Kat Tovs 7rodujTas Omovdous efvar Kal aAAa ayabd, doa
ovdeis av SUvatto KaraAdEat.

my |

ETHICS | A

experience to give advice to his disciples. If we look rather
to the future, it will be seen that he set the tone of much
in later moral theory, that he shows remarkable anticipation
of the teaching of Plato, and in particular that he expresses
many of the most characteristic ideas of Epicurus, and it is
hard to believe that the later philosopher, for all his denials,
was not indebted to him for some of them.

§ 10. Conclusion

The detailed review of Democritus’ philosophy leaves
perhaps a somewhat piecemeal and incoherent impression.
This is without doubt due to a large extent to the sporadic
and fragmentary way in which his teaching has come down
to us. If we possessed in full, for example, one of the
tetralogies on the physical theory, we should be in a very
different position for judging of the consistency of his views.
But even so it would probably be found that the very width
of his interests and the far-reaching range of his speculations
had made it impossible for him to embrace all in a coherent
system: he was no doubt also more greatly interested in some
parts of his inquiry than others and worked them out with
disproportionate minuteness.

Yet it is impossible not to be struck with the great value
and importance of his cgntribution to the atomic theory.
He received it, as far as we can judge, from Leucippus as
a rather crude and tentative speculation: he left it, if not a
consistent system, yet a correlated attempt to put together
on an atomic basis some account of the world and of man’s
knowledge of it. All parts of the theory have been greatly
strengthened and developed by Democritus. He cleared
and defined the conceptions of the atoms and of space: he
arrived at a working theory of atomic motion and the causes
that underlie it; he thought out the method by which the
atoms united in compound bodies, he analysed the pro-
perties of compounds and attempted to distinguish between
them and the subjective elements in sense-perception; he

laid the foundationsof a materialist psychologyand attempted

to follow out with great elaboration the metaphysical implica-

214 DEMOCRITUS

tions of his view. Finally he added, if only in loose connexion,
a moral theory to the physical. In all these ways the atomic
theory was immensely improved and may be said to have
passed from being a mere reconciliation of opposing views
into a constructive theory of the nature of the world.

Nor was he apparently blind to the problems which such
a view might rouse. His subtle developments of the theory
of perception were an attempt to get over some of the
difficulties which a purely material system must entail: his
elaborations of the ideas of atomic motion were an effort
to establish the supremacy of ‘natural law’, and his strange
and precarious metaphysic was due to a fearless logic which
led him to follow out his psychology to its conclusions.

It must be owned that he left a rather uncouth and unsafe
edifice to his successors: it was disproportionately developed
in many of its parts and it rested on a shifting sand. In order
to grip it together and import stability to it Epicurus was
in many parts of it compelled to simplify and even to blind
himself to difficulties. But just for that reason Democritus
in many ways had the superior mind, and in not a few respects
it may be said that with him Atomism as such reached its
highest development in Greece.

i. mm
i, i ; nN
m\.
Ee p
arms
Aa
Ay
ea]
pat th
vant
Ne ‘ ol

HAY

I
Peer LINO WRITINGS
ed Poses exposition of the atomic theory by Democritus

seems to have made no very deep impression on his
contemporaries or on his immediate successors; nor is the
cause of its failure to attract attention far to seek. The visits
of the Sicilian sophists with their new ethical and rhetorical
teaching were turning men’s minds away from the old cosmo-
gonical speculations to the new and more fascinating pur-
suits of moral and political philosophy. Socrates himself
may be taken as typical of his generation: even if in his
early years he may have speculated, like thinkers of the
previous generation, on physics and ‘the things of the sky’,
in later life his chief study was man, and his disciples were:
at pains to conceal any earlier interests, as though they were
a slightly discreditable episode of youth. Plato, carrying on
his master’s tradition, spoke slightingly of the studies of
astronomy and physics, and would relegate them to the early
training of young men, who were being prepared for the
higher pursuit of dialectic. Thus the older tradition of
philosophy as the inquiry into nature (¢vowdoyia) was ob-
scured by the newer discussion of ethics, politics, and meta-
physics, and was not prominently revived again until
physics found its place in the encyclopaedic system of
Aristotle. Of Aristotle’s interest in Democritus’ theories
sufficient proof may be found in his constant criticisms, but
Atomism carried no conviction to him: so far from being the
logical outcome of previous speculations, it appeared to him
rather as an aberration. Nevertheless the Democritean
tradition did not wholly die out,’ and in the second half of
the fourth century B.c. it was maintained by Epicurus
slightly senior contemporary, Nausiphanes? of Teos. It is
1 D.L.i. 15 implies that he had many followers, though none were famous.

2 D.L. ibid.: cf. Suid. s.v. "Eixoupos (Diels, Nausiphanes, A. 4), Cic. de
Nat. Dear, 1. 26.735.D.A. 5; and Dl x. 13:

218 EPICURUS

unfortunate that of Nausiphanes we know but little, except
through Epicurean channels, vitiated by Epicurus’ desire
to maintain his own philosophic independence which took
the form of violent abuse of those to whom he owed
most. We gather however that Nausiphanes, professing
himself a pupil of Democritus, was also considerably in-
fluenced by Pyrrho.' If he adopted something of Pyrrho’s
scepticism, this need have been no eclectic combination, for
Democritus himself had shown very clear traces of a sceptical
tendency and Nausiphanes may have done little more than
push his master’s doubts a little farther. Of his writings
very little is known, except that he published a work called
‘The Tripod’? which was said to have been the basis of
Epicurus’ Canon. Inthe fragments of Philodemus’3 book on
Rhetoric are certain references to ‘The Tripod’, from which
it appears that Nausiphanes supported the position that the
‘physical scientist (6 duowds) was well adapted for the study
of rhetoric: it is reasonable to conjecture that Philodemus
wishing to introduce into Epicureanism a study which his
master had excluded was glad to appeal to Epicurus’ own
teacher. A more interesting reference? tells us that Nausi-
phanes selected as the end of conduct ‘undauntedness’
(dxaramdnéia), which seems a kind of half-way house between
Democritus’ ‘undismayedness’ (d0ay8i)) and Epicurus’ ‘im-
perturbability’ (drapagia).

Philosophy is perhaps less influenced by outward cir-
cumstances than most branches of human thought and litera-
ture, but it was inevitable that the changed conditions of
life in Greece, and especially in Athens, towards the end of
the fourth century should affect both the sphere of its
activity and the direction of its teaching. The interest in
ethical and political problems had been the natural outcome
of the vigorous existence of the Athenian democracy in the
fifth century, when the identification of the good man and
the good citizen and even the dream of the philosopher king

t D.L. ix. 64, 69; cf. Seneca, Ep. 88.43; D. B. 4.

21). Ee xe Ide 3 1. 48 and iv. 10. See Diels, B. 1 and 2.
4 Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 130; Diels, B. 3.

AN

tt

LIFE AND WRITINGS are

were but an idealization of the life of the normal Athenian
citizen. ‘The temporary recovery of Athens after the Pelopon-
nesian War and the subsequent struggle against the incur-
sion of Philip of Macedon kept the same ideal before men’s
eyes and made possible the philosophy of Plato. The
domination of Alexander and the submersion of the Greek
city-states in the new and ever-extending kingdom has its
reflection in the works of Aristotle: a greater individualism
in Ethics and the revival of the earlier scientific interests are
natural in the teacher at the king’s court, but enough of the
old spirit remained to preserve the political ideal almost un-
changed. But in the last quarter of the century,’ when
Alexander was dead, and the civilized world had become the
battlefield for his ‘Successors’, when Athens herself fell into
the hands of one conqueror after another and retained only
sufficient freedom to greet each new master with more ful-
some flattery than his predecessor, civic life had become
little better than a formality and the old ideal of the good
citizen but a mockery. Athens was no longer a state but
a municipality: statecraft had given way to commerce,
politics to society, and—a small but very significant change
—the Old Comedy to the New. With the change of life
and manners went also a change of thought: the aspirations
and hopes of the free democracy had generated idealism in
speculation, the commercial common sense of the new
régime turned to the sensible and material. The effect on
philosophic thought was bound to be twofold: on the one
hand political philosophy must disappear, for it was almost
meaningless, and its place was likely to be filled, in order to
answer the demand for common sense materialism, by a
revival of the interest in physics: on the other moral philo-
sophy must take an individualist turn, and men be taught
to live, if not as isolated units, at least as private members of
a community. And so about the same time there naturally
arose the two rival creeds of Stoicism and Epicureanism.
Differing widely in some of their underlying tenets—princi-

r A fuller and interesting account of the fortunes and conditions of Athens
will be found in Wallace’s Epicureanism, Chap. II.

220 BPICGURUS

pally in their theology, for the Stoic believed in the divine
government of the world and of the life of man, while to the
Epicurean the very idea was abhorrent—they both equally
answered to the demand; their explanation of the physical
world was material, their morality was individual. Further,
they approach curiously near to one another in their practical
ethical ideals: the ‘self-sufficiency’ (adrdpxeia) of the Stoic was
not far removed from the ‘imperturbability’ (dzapaéia) of the
Epicurean. For four centuries the two creeds were to do
battle with one another, first in Greece and then in Rome,
and time and controversy drew them gradually farther apart:
but both were alike in origin the natural product of circum-
stances, answers, differing mainly in tone, to the same re-
quirements. And it was just these requirements which made
impossible that they should be developed from the Socratic
tradition passing through Plato and Aristotle: the physical
philosophy now needed must be something nearer akin to
the earlier speculation of the pre-Socratics and the root-ideas
of moral teaching must be sought elsewhere than among
Academics or Peripatetics. Although in Epicurus there are
traces of the influence of Aristotle' and a keen critic? has
even seen an approach to the doctrines of Plato, there is
never a word of polemic against either: Epicurus’ con-
troversy is with the pre-Socratics, and his debt, unacknow-
ledged and even violently denied, is to Leucippus and Demo-
critus. It is not indeed true to say that Epicurus borrowed
his physical theory wholesale from Democritus, for in many
fundamental points he differed from him, most notably in
the rejection both of scepticism and of determinism, but not
only are the root-ideas of Atomism derived immediately from
the older school, but at every point in the theory broad con-
ceptions and details alike may be traced back to their source.
Epicurus’ great distinction as a philosopher lies in part no
doubt in the clearness of his thought—though unfortunately
not of its expression—in part in the perspicacity with which
he saw how the material he needed Jay ready to hand in the
See e.g. Chap. ix, p. 450.
2 Giussani, Stud. Lucr., p257; neil.

Ys

LIFE AND WRITINGS 221

work of Democritus, and the ingenuity with which he was
able to mould and adapt it to suit new requirements.

A patch-work ‘life’ of Epicurus is given by Diogenes
Laertius,' compiled apparently from various sources without
any thought of consecutiveness or even consistency, from
which however it is possible to put together a fair picture of
a not very eventful career. His father Neocles, who was an
Athenian of the deme of Gargettus, a village a few miles
north-east of Athens, had been one of many who after the
conquest of Samos began to go out to the island as colonists
in 352 or 351 B.c. in the hope of improving their fortunes.
There he apparently followed the profession of school-
master,? while his wife, Chaerestrata, is said to have been
a kind of quack priestess, who went from house to house
performing superstitious rites of purification. Epicurus was
bornin 342 or 3418.c., whether in Attica or after the removal
to Samos is unknown, but it is certain that he passed his
childhood and boyhood in the island, assisting his parents, as
the legend says, in their vocations: if there is any truth in
the story that he went about with his mother as an acolyte,
reciting the formulae of her incantations, he may well have
been inspired in quite early years with the hatred of super-
stition, which was afterwards so prominent a feature in his
teaching. He took to the study of philosophy, as he used to
tell himself, at the age of fourteen, impelled to it, as the story
goes, because his schoolmasters were unable to explain to
him what Hesiod meant by the primeval ‘chaos’: another
story, not inconsistent with this, states that about this time
he came across the works of Democritus and eagerly de-
voured them. However this may be, at the age of eighteen
Epicurus went to Athens, no doubt in order to pass his
‘examination’ (Soxacta) and be enrolled among the Ephebi
of his native deme. His visit occurred at a critical moment,

x x, 1-27. References will only be given for Epicurus’ life to authorities
other than Diogenes.

2 The suspicious resemblance of this story to the charges made against
Aeschines’ parents by Demosthenes, de Cor. 313, has caused its truth to be
doubted. .

222 EPICURUS

for on the death of Alexander in 323 B.c. Athens fell into
the hands of Perdiccas, the guardian of his sons, who on the
advice of Antipater, regent of Macedonia, practically drove
out the democracy, leaving the city to the management of
the richer commercial classes, who were likely to be dis-
posed for peace at all costs. As a part of the same movement
of suppression Perdiccas expelled the Athenian settlers from
Samos, and, while Epicurus was still at Athens, Neocles was
obliged to settle in Asia Minor. There Epicurus returned
to his family and for some ten years was with them in various
Asiatic towns, and principally at Colophon and Teos. Here
he undoubtedly pursued his philosophic studies, and it was
at this period that he must have met Nausiphanes, who was
then teaching at Teos. Though he always professed the
greatest contempt for ‘the Mollusc’! (zAeduwv) and main-
tained that he owed nothing to him, he yet admits that he
did attend his lectures ‘in the company of certain bibulous
youngsters’, and he was doubtless still further attracted by
his teaching to the Atomism of Democritus. To the same
period may be assigned his study of the pre-Socratic philo-
sophers, among whom he owned to a favourable appreciation
of Anaxagoras and Archelaus, Socrates’ teacher: by Pam-
philus, a disciple of Plato, he is said to have been already
influenced before he left Samos, but it was probably an early
enthusiasm and seems to have left little mark on his thought.

In his thirtieth year (311 B.c.) he settled in Mitylene,
gathered round him certain disciples—including no doubt
his three brothers, whose devotion to him continued through-
out life*—and was now recognized’as a philosophical teacher.
Later on in Lampsacus his school grew and he made many
devoted adherents, including Metrodorus, subsequently the
most important of the Epicurean writers, Colotes, the object
long afterwards of Plutarch’s attack, Polyaenus, Idomeneus,
and Leonteus, with his wife Themista. Inspired, as it
appears, by this success, he determined to return to Athens,
and there form a kind of permanent brotherhood, to live

« Sext. Emp. adv. Math. 1.3; C.B.fr.22; U. 114: cf. D.L. x. 7, 8.
Plutarch, de Frat. Amor., 16. 487; U. 178.

LIFE AND WRITINGS 223
together in the practice of his principles. Athens was now
(307 B.c.) under the domination of Demetrius Poliorcetes,
to whom the citizens devoted themselves with such servile
flattery as to make civic or political life in any real sense of
the term a hopeless impossibility: their very reverence too
for the new master was charged with the grossest super-
stition. In Athens Epicurus purchased a house in the
quarter of Melita, between the city and the Peiraeus, and
also, though probably not attached to the house, the famous
Garden. There withdrawn from the world and taking no
part in political or even social life, Epicurus remained with
his little community, except for an occasional voyage to see
his friends in Lampsacus, for about thirty-seven years.
Besides his brothers and the disciples who had arrived with
him at first, or came from time to time to visit him from
Lampsacus, he was joined also by Hermarchus of Mitylene,
who subsequently succeeded Epicurus in the headship of
the community. We hear too of Pythocles,* a young man
greatly beloved and admired by Epicurus, and ‘Timocrates,
the brother of Metrodorus, who subsequently separated from
the brotherhood and became one of its most virulent oppo-
nents. Women also had their place in the community, and
among them not only women of position such as Leonteus’
wife Themista, but several also of the class of hetaerae.
The most prominent of these was Leontion, who showed
considerable philosophic ability and married Metrodorus,
by whom she had a son and a daughter. Even slaves were
admitted, and one Mys, whom Epicurus subsequently freed
in his will, attained to some distinction in the brotherhood.

Epicurus lived with his disciples in the ‘Garden’ on terms
of the greatest friendship and affection. He himself wrote
much and encouraged the more able of his followers to write
too: the others were recommended to get the main principles
of the system by heart. We do not gather that Epicurus gave
lectures or even formal instruction to his pupils, as did the
leaders of the other schools, but there was much friendly
discussion, master and disciples together working out and

1 See C.B. fr. 33, 34; U. 161-5: to him the second letter is addressed.

224. EPICURUS

discussing new details and aspects of the system. It was
inevitable that the close intimacy of the community, especi-
ally seeing the presence of women among them, should
provoke scandal, and both Diotimus, the Stoic, and Timo-
crates, the renegade, published violent attacks on Epicurus,
representing the life of the brotherhood as one of sensual
debauchery. There is no reason to suppose that there was
any truth in these charges, though on the other hand, as
Epicurus’ moral philosophy shows, the ideal of the com-
munity was not one of an absolute or ascetic purity. That
they certainly did not indulge in gluttony is clear from many
indications of the simplicity of their life. They used to
spend a mina a day for the needs of the table: half a pint
of wine now and then would satisfy them, but their ordina

drink was water. The food was ona par—nothing but bread
as a rule with the occasional addition of a relish: ‘send me
some preserved cheese,’ Epicurus wrote to a friend, ‘that
when I like, I may have a feast’. Luxury was indeed for-
bidden by the principles of Epicureanism, as it did not really
contribute to the true pleasure even of the body: ‘I am
thrilled with pleasure in the body’,? the master wrote, ‘when
I live on bread and water, and I spit upon luxurious plea-
sures, not for their own sake, but because of the inconveni-
ences that follow them.’ This is far enough removed from
the living of an ‘epicure’. From time to time a feast day was
observed, in particular on Epicurus’ birthda , and at any
rate after his death, on the 20th of each month in memory
of himself and Metrodorus. Though this frugal living did
not involve much expenditure, yet funds for the community
were required. Epicurus would not have a common stock
formed, for he thought that savoured of distrust, but ac-
cepted and even asked for voluntary contributions: ‘send
us’, he writes to Idomeneus, ‘offerings for the sustenance
of our holy body on behalf of yourself and your children’ .3

2°CB.y7s,30s La x: TT,
 Stob. Flor. xvil. 34; C.B. fr. 37; U. 18r.

3 Plut. ado. Color. 18.1117; C.B. fr. 26; U. 130: cf. Philodem. V. H.2
1. 1275 CB. rages U. 184.

eA 2 Sees

of

LIFE AND WRITINGS 225

The picture of the community may be supplemented by
certain details of Epicurus’ own personal character. Not
merely did he withdraw from public life, and ask for no
recognition from the State or its rulers, but he expressly
disclaimed any desire for popularity: ‘I was never anxious
to please the mob. For what pleased them, I did not know,
and what I did know was far removed from their compre-
hension;’? ‘I write this not for the many,’* he says to one
of his disciples, ‘but for you: we are audience enough to one
another.” On the other hand his affection and personal
kindness to his friends and followers knew no bounds. This
is sufficiently illustrated by the numerous extant fragments
of letters to absent friends, which contain not only, like the
letters preserved in full by Diogenes, epitomes of different
parts of his philosophy, but many personal touches of friend-
ship and intimacy. He speaks of himself applauding in a
tumult of excitement on receipt of a letter from his ‘dear
little Leontion’,3 he tells Pythocles that he will ‘Sit down and
wait for his lovely and godlike appearance’,4 and thanks5
his friends for their care of him and the proofs ‘heaven-high’
of their good will. Particularly characteristic is the often-
quoted letter to a child, possibly the daughter of Metrodorus
and Leontion, written during one of his absences from
Athens: ‘We have arrived at Lampsacus safe and sound,
Pythocles and Hermarchus and Ctesippus and I, and there
we found Themista and our other friends all well. I hope
you too are well and your mamma, and that you are always
obedient to papa and Matro, as you used to be. Let me tell
you that the reason that I and all the rest of us love you is
that you are always obedient to them.’® The same deep
affection was shown by Epicurus to his parents and his
brothers, and attention is called more than once to his gentle-

* Gnomolog. cod. Par. 1168, f. 1157; C.B. fr. 43; U. 187.
a Seneca, £p. 7; 11; U. 208.
4, CB. fr. 42> DL. 5.
4C.D. JT: 94D. x. Be
5 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 15, 1097 e; C.B. fr. 403 U. 183.
6 Pap. Herc. 176, col. 18; C.B. fr. 35; U.176.
3307 Q

226 EPICURUS

ness and generosity to his slaves. In religious matters in
spite of his hatred of superstition and his own theological
doctrines, he was devout in his attendance at the state-
festivals, and it was in no mocking spirit that he wrote a
treatise on ‘Holiness’.

Almost the only feature, which reveals to us an unplea-
sant side in Epicurus’ nature, is his violent opposition to
other philosophers, which takes a very peculiar form.
He claimed complete independence of them all and main-
tained that he was entirely self-taught. In consequence
when in the course of his extant works he has occasion to
refute their doctrines, he always does so without mention-
ing their names: when, on the other hand, he does name
another philosopher, it is only to cover him with abuse,
which increases in violence, the more Epicurus was really
in his debt. Nausiphanes he not only referred to as “The
Mollusc’, but called him ‘Illiterate’, ‘Cheat’, and even worse
names. Democritus he nicknamed Lerocritus (‘Nonsense’),
while as for Leucippus, he denied that there ever was such
a philosopher, a statement which modern critics have
quaintly enough been inclined to take quite seriously.‘ Other
great men fared no better at his hands: Aristotle was ‘the
Profligate’, Heraclitus ‘the Muddler’ (there seems some
justification in this case), Pyrrho ‘ignorant’ and ‘uneducated’.
It is certainly a serious weakness in a great man, but methods
of controversy were perhaps not so delicate in the days of .
Athenian degeneracy, and it may have appeared to Epicurus
necessary for his own dignity to preserve his independence
even by these very undignified means. His pupils* were
willing enough to admit his indebtedness at any rate to
Democritus, but to Epicurus himself the suggestion seems
to have been unbearable.

At the age of seventy he was seized with a painful disease,
and afterafortnight’s agony, borne with the greatest fortitude,
he died urging his friends to remember the doctrines. In his
will he bequeathed the house and garden to Hermarchus and
his successors in the headship for the use of the faithful, made

t See Part I, Chap. I], p. 66. 2 Plut. adv Colot. 3. 1108; U. 234 n.

wean

ro

LIFE AND WRITINGS 227

provision for the celebration of the Epicurean festivals, and
commended to the care of his trustees the son and daughter
of Metrodorus, who had died before him. It is difficult
to imagine anything but a gentle and noble influence
upon the disciples, resulting from the character of such a
master.

Epicurus is said to have been the most voluminous writer
among the philosophers of antiquity and the rolls of his
books amounted to three hundred. Of these books the titles
have come down to us, and some of the many fragments
which have remained embedded in later Greek and Latin
authors may be assigned with certainty to definite works.
The most important of his writings was undoubtedly the
treatise on Nature (epi dvcews), which extended to no less
than thirty-seven books. Other titles which suggest works
of importance are On Atoms and Void, On Choice and
Avoidance, On the-End (i.e. the moral purpose of life), The
Canon (i.e. the principles of procedure: it is this work which
is said to have been based on Nausiphanes’ Tripod), On the
Gods, On Holiness, On Lives (i.e. the different types of life
which men choose or may choose for themselves), The
Symposium, On Sight, On Touch, On Destiny (no doubt,
an attack on Democritus’ determinism), On ‘Idols’ (i.e. the
images of vision), On Music, On Justice and the other
Virtues, On Kingship. His biographer tells us that he used
‘ordinary language’ to set out his theories and that his style
was ‘clear’. Any one who has attempted to study the Lezter
to Herodotus or the Principal Doctrines will be inclined to
dispute this statement, and to join rather in the censure of
Aristophanes the Alexandrian critic, who complained that
there was too much ‘peculiarity’ in Epicurus’ style.! The
fact is probably that Epicurus in endeavouring to carry out
his own precept? that each word must convey a clear idea
corresponding exactly to the thing spoken of, did not realize
how technical his diction had in consequence become: the
ideas were no doubt clear to himself, but the phraseology is
very obscure to the uninitiated. The Lester to Menoeceus,

1 D.L. x. 13 idwwrdrn eoriv. 2 Ep. i. § 38.
Q2

2.28 EPICURUS

which makes a more general appeal, is far clearer in style,
and perhaps we should recognize an exoteric and an esoteric
style in Epicurus’ writings.

Of the extant sources of our knowledge of Epicureanism
the most important are the three letters preserved by Dio-
genes Laertius purporting to be written by Epicurus himself
to his three disciples Herodotus, Pythocles, and Menoeceus.
The first deals with the main principles of the physical theory,
the second with celestial phenomena, and the third with the
moral theory. Of the authenticity of the first letter practi-
cally no suspicion has been entertained, and the third,
though it is in a very different and far less crabbed style, is
now generally admitted to be the work of Epicurus: the
letter to Pythocles, which bears traces of compilation, was
probably not written by Epicurus himself, but undoubtedly
embodies correct Epicurean tradition. To these are added
in Diogenes a collection of forty ‘Principal Doctrines’
(Kupua. Adéar), whose genuineness is generally admitted. Of
the other works of Epicurus himself scraps are of course
preserved in quotation in many of the Greek and Latin
writers: the indefatigable energy of Hermann Usener? has
collected a vast quantity of these into a beautifully arranged
and invaluable volume. To this collection must be added
a series of eighty aphorisms? discovered in a Vatican
MS. dealing almost entirely with the moral theory. Besides
the work of Epicurus himself certain other writings of
Epicureans have survived. The few fragments} which
remain of Metrodorus do not afford any great assistance to
the understanding of Epicurean doctrine. More useful
material can be found in the great stone inscription? which
was discovered at Oenoanda in Lycia in 1884, on which
a certain Diogenes, an Epicurean, had set forth the main
tenets of his creed in the hope of the conversion of the

t Epicurea: Leipzig, 1887.

* Published by C. Wotke in Wiener Studien, 1888, pp. 191 #., with
observations by Usener and Gomperz.

3 These have been gathered together by A. Koerte (Teubner, 1890).

4 Published in the Teubner series, ed. I. William (1907).

a

LIFE AND WRITINGS 229

passer-by. The exploration of Herculaneum too at the end
of the eighteenth century produced valuable Epicurean
treasure in a large number of papyrus rolls, the greater part
of which proved to be works by Philodemus, the Epicurean
contemporary of Cicero and tutor of Piso, the consul of
58 s.c. The rolls have of course been badly charred and
mutilated and the process of opening them was so difficult
that more damage was done. It has however been possible
to publish* many of them in a fragmentary state. Of Philo-
demus’ works the most important are treatises on Rhetoric
and on Signs, the latter a kind of Epicurean Logic, both of
which show new interests in the school developed after the
Master’s death, and an essay on Piety,? which in spite of its
very mutilated condition is of considerable use in helping
us to reconstruct the Epicurean theology. But by far the
most valuable Epicurean document is of course the great
poem of Lucretius. That for all his poetic imagination and
anti-religious fervour, which at times carry him away from
the immediate exposition of the system, he yet was faithful
to the main doctrines of his master, has always been believed;
but it has been left to modern scholarship,3 by careful com-
parison and continuous research, to reveal the extraordinary
accuracy and insight with which he has expressed even in
minutest detail the ideas and even the phraseology of Epi-
curus. It may be taken as certain that he had always before
him a text of one of his master’s works (probably the
‘Greater Epitome’4), and although there may be places where

* Volumina Herculanensia: published from 1861 onwards in Naples.
Gomperz in his Herculanische Studien (1865) edited the treatises on Signs
and on Piety, and treated of others in magazine articles. W. Scott (Fragmenta
Herculanensia, 1885) has edited considerable portions of the pencil tracings
made at the time of the discoveries and deposited in the Bodleian Library.

2 ed. Gomperz, 1866. The remains of several of the works of Philodemus
have been published in the Teubner texts: zepi o/xovopias, ed. C. Jensen,
1906; mepi Kaxdy, lib. x, ed. C. Jonson, 1911 ; wept povorrijs, ed. 1. Kemke,
1884; wept rod Kal? “Ounpov dyabod BaciAéws, ed. A. Olivieri, 1909; mept
mappnotas, ed. A. Olivieri, 1914; Volumina Rhetorica, ed. S. Sudhaus,
1892, 1895, 1896; mepi dpyfs ed. C. Wilke, 1914.

3 The greatest debt is due to Munro, Woltjer, Tohte, Brieger, and above
all to Giussani. 4 See Giussani, Studii Lucreziani, pp. 1-20.

230 EPICURUS

he has not fully comprehended its meaning, it is exceedingly
improbable that he has at any point introduced notions or
developments of his own.

Besides the writings of Epicureans, we gain also much
useful information from their critics. Cicero in the de Finibus
criticizes the moral theory and in the de Natura Deorum
the theology of Epicurus. His manifest contempt for
Epicureanism and his haste in writing led him often to be
content with a careless paraphrase of his original, and in
difficult places, where he was apparently unable to under-
stand it, he was satisfied with a verbal reproduction. He is
therefore most useful as giving confirmatory evidence of
what we otherwise know, but in the few crucial places on
which we have to rely on his unsupported authority,
especially in regard to certain obscure problems in Epicurus’
theology, he proves a very uncertain guide. Plutarch at-
tacked Epicureanism in two works, ‘Against Colotes’, a
criticism of an essay in which the disciple of Epicurus had
attempted to show that life was impossible under any other
philosophical theory, and a dialogue intended to prove ‘that
a Happy Life is not possible according to Epicurus’ doc-
trine’. Both these are of value for the consideration of the
moral theory, especially as Plutarch is careful, wherever it
is possible, to quote Epicurus’ own words. Seneca in many
of his writings, especially in the Moral Letters, frequently
cites Epicurus’ doctrines and often with approval: he is
more accurate in his translations than Cicero, but his cita-
tions are almost entirely confined to the ethical side of the
system. Of the other authors who help us at all considerably
the principal are Sextus Empiricus, who described Epicurean
doctrines at some length in his work Adversus Mathematicos,
Stobaeus, a Byzantine scholar of the sixth century a.p., who
besides compiling a Florilegium containing many of Epi-
curus’ sayings, was the original author of the ‘Dogmas of
the Philosophers’ popularly attributed to Plutarch, and
Athenaeus, whose “Deipnosophistae’ has many occasional
citations and allusions. No other author contains anything
like a continuous account of Epicureanism or any part of

a

LIFE AND WRITINGS 231

it, but allusions and references have been collected by
Usener from many other sources.

The modern critic of Epicurus must use as the basis of
his work the three letters and the Principal. Doctrines in
Diogenes and the de Rerum Natura: these he must compare
and use to supplement one another, filling in gaps and ob-
taining support or criticism from the other sources. The
work has usually been done, especially in England, in a
rather eclectic spirit, striking ideas being taken from dif-
ferent places and put together without much thought of the
underlying connexion. The result is a confirmation of the
popular idea that Epicurus was a loose thinker and his
philosophy a patchwork. It is the object of the following
account of his system to attempt to knit together its various
parts more closely. This may be done without any violent
distortion or forced interpretation of our authorities, and
the more carefully Epicurus is examined with this intention,
the more clear will it become that the different portions of
his theory are not merely in themselves consistent pieces
of work, but are all alike founded directly on the one funda-
mental principle, from which he started; of the infallibility
of sensation.

II
CANONICE

N dealing with Democritus and the earlier philosophers
It was convenient to treat last of their metaphysic or theory
of knowledge and to regard it as a deduction from their
psychology and theory of sensation, by which it is inevitably
in great measure conditioned. For the discussion of the
system of Epicurus it will be better to reverse the order of
procedure; not that his Canonice, as he called it, is any less
dependent on his theory of sensation or his account of the
soul, but partly because he has himself? placed it at the outset
of the extant summary of his physical system, and still more
because it supplies the one central principle of his philosophy
on which all the rest hangs. It is indeed this single principle
which gives to Epicurus’ system, with all its weaknesses and
blemishes, a far greater organic unity than the theories of
his Atomic predecessors, and the failure to recognize its
importance as the keystone of the whole has led many of his
critics, both ancient and modern, to underestimate the philo-
sophic value of Epicureanism. In order to discuss this
principle and its consequences at this stage, it will be
necessary, since the whole system is very closely interrelated
in its parts, to anticipate to some extent the conclusions of
later sections, especially those dealing with the Soul, the
Gods, and the Moral Theory: similarly in those sections the
ground of the Canonice will in part have to be trodden again.
But it is fortunately possible to examine it now without
discussing disputed points of the psychology, though the
later details will throw fresh light upon it.?

« Ep. 1, §§ 37, 38.

2 A recent writer (F. Merbach, De Epicuri Canonica, 1909) has indeed
maintained that the Canoniceis quite independent of the E picurean psycholo gy
and that it is expressed and thought out in language and ideas, which are non-
materialistic: so also Joyau, Epicure, p.78. ‘This would, if true, be a serious

charge of inconsistency against Epicurus, but (1) there is no real difficulty,
except such as must inevitably attach to a materialist system, in reconciling the

CANONICE ~ 233

Epicurus’ own primary interest lay in his moral theory.
The decay of political life, the general decline of activity in
thought and literature, the weakening of the moral and
intellectual value of the old religious ideas all pointed in the
same direction: a moral guide for the individual life was the
first demand made of a new philosophy. He therefore came
forward not as a teacher of science, the successor of the Ionian
philosophers, nor as a great abstract thinker with an idealist
system such as that of Plato, but primarily as a preacher with
a Gospel of life—the Gospel of peace both of body and mind.
‘Philosophy’, he proclaimed," ‘was a practical activity in-
tended by means of speech and reasoning to secure a happy
life.’ Yet even for the purpose of that ‘happy life’ some
knowledge both of external nature and of the workings of
man’s mind and the relations between them was essential,
such knowledge at any rate of the nature and laws of the
physical world as would save men from the two great terrors
which might disturb their lives,? the dread of the arbitrary
interference of divine beings in the world and the fear of the
punishment of the soul after death. Moreover he believed
that the investigation of the phenomena of the physical
world itself constituted the natural pleasure of the intellect
(S:dvora),3 and, since it brought with it little or no attendant
pain, it was characteristically a ‘pure’ pleasure: he was
therefore led himself to make such inquiry his supreme
mental interest and to recommend the more advanced of his
pupils to imitate him.

But of what nature was this inquiry to be? On what basis
was it to rest and how should it be conducted? Epicurus
desired above all things to be the teacher of the ‘plain man’.
His moral ideal was to be one attainable by all, and his
Canonice with the psychology, (2) all other serious modern critics have taken
the opposite view, (3) Merbach’s only proof (p. 11) appears to be that
Epicurus treats of it before dealing with psychology—which only shows that
in a closely woven system, wherever you begin, you must assume something
to be proved hereafter.

1 Sext. adv. Math. xi. 169; U. 219.
2 Ep. i, §§ 78-82; Ep. iii, §§ 123-7; K. 4. i, ii, &c.: see Chap. X, p. 502.
3 Ep. i, § 78: see Chap. X, p. 504.

2.34 EPICURUS

physical system similarly must be grounded on the common-
sense of the average man: it should be intelligible to any
one who would take the trouble to learn its principles. From
this followed immediately two important consequences:
firstly a disbelief in the necessity or value of education
external or preliminary to philosophy and in the second
place a profound distrust of Logic, or abstract rules of
thought, which tended to lead the mind away from the real
world to remote and unsubstantial abstractions.

In both these respects Epicurus found himself in opposi-
tion to the current schools of thought. Plato had demanded
from his disciples a long course of training in the ancillary
sciences before they might enter upon ‘dialectic’: Aristotle
had given his followers a comprehensive survey of human
knowledge and: thought: Democritus himself had ranged
freely over a vast field of intellectual interests. But Epicurus
would have none of this: ‘Blest youth,’? he said, addressing
his pupil Pythocles, ‘set sail in your bark and flee from every
form of culture’. His anathema extended to almost all
recognized branches of education. For the older training
in literature he. had a profound contempt: ‘for literary
problems and the linguistic researches of critics he would
not even allow occasion over the wine’. Nor did he believe
in the rhetorical training of the sophists either as a useful
education in itself or as a preparation for philosophical
thought:3 it produces a certain ‘gracefulness of diction’+
(edpopdia), but is a “base artifice’,5 and only of value for that
public life, which the true disciple will avoid. Mathematics®
fared no better at his hands: it was not likely that one who
held that area and matter were alike a succession of discrete
minima’ should have sympathy with the abstract conceptions
of the mathematicians. For Epicurus it was enough that

2 Dp 69/7." 3% + Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 13, 10953 U. 5.

3 It is interesting to find Philodemus, Cicero’s contemporary, trying to
introduce Rhetoric into Epicureanism.

4 Philodemus, de Rhet.; V.H. iv. 93; U. 50.

5 kaxotexvia, Amm. Marc. xxx. 4.3; U. 51.

6 Plut., op. cit., 11, and other references in U. 229 a.

7 Ep. i; §§ 57, 58.

CANONICE ~ 235

a disciple should come to him knowing his letters.!| His con-
tempt for Logic is equally marked: he despised ‘dialectic
as misleading’,* and later critics are fond of making this
contempt a charge against him. Plutarch3 complained that
Epicurus did not even know that the syllogism consists of
three propositions, and Cicero* laments in the same strain,
‘he abolishes definitions, he has no teaching about division
and distribution, he does not tell how reasoning is conducted
or brought to conclusions, he does not show by what means
sophisms may be exposed, and ambiguities resolved’. That
Cicero’s charge is somewhat exaggerated will become clear
from the examination of the Canonice; for though Epicurus
was precluded by his fundamental point of view from any
belief in the rules of abstract thought, he yet laid down rules
of procedure, which played in his system the part which

Logic holds in others.5 But there can be no doubt as to his.

general attitude, and for it there are two strong causes. In
the first place all operations of the mind were to Epicurus
mere physical movements of the atoms: there could then
be no separate department of inquiry into the laws of these
movements, at the best such inquiry could only be a subor-

dinate part of physics. And in the second, his fundamental |

and universal materialism made Logic a meaningless pur-
suit: the ‘real’ in the sense of the material was the sole
existence: thought divorced from the content of reality was
an object not of philosophical interest, but of the deepest
suspicion. ‘The only purpose which he could have in view
in establishing rules of procedure was to keep thought
always in the closest and most immediate relation with
reality. The sole method of investigation was organized
observation and inference from analogy.

It was such practical rules for investigation that Epicurus

t Sext. adv. Math.i. 49; U. 22. ad) as xeugt.

3 Aul. Gell. ii. 8. 4 de Fin. i. 7. 223 U. 243.

s F. Thomas (de Epicuri Canonica, 1889) is at pains to show that Epicurus
in practice recognized the procedure of other Logical systems and had ideas
corresponding to all the leading notions of Logic: but such an attempt 1s
really contrary to the whole genius of Epicureanism.

eS

236 EPICURUS

set out to establish in his ‘Canon’! That work has unfor-
tunately perished and the extant references to it are scanty.
But enough has survived in the introductory section of the
letter to Herodotus,” in a discussion later on of truth and
error,3 and in certain of the Principal Doctrines+ to make it
possible to recover its general content. The ‘Canonice’ or
‘Canonicon’, as this body of rules was called, dealt primarily
with the criteria of truth and laid down principles of observa-
tion and inference, which are tacitly assumed throughout
the system. Epicurus again and again warns his disciples
of the practical necessity for such observation, and it is a
fine testimony to the permanence of the Epicurean tradition
that Lucretius, even though his explicit references to the
Canonice are but few and casual, yet observes it in practice
as scrupulously as his Master.

The primary necessity for a philosophical system is
obviously an understanding as to the sources of our know-
ledge. The ancient world recognized always on the one
hand a cognizant mind, on the other a real world of things:
the question raised was as to the relation or communication
between them. ‘No one (in antiquity) ever challenged the
existence of a real world of things lying behind the pheno-
mena of which we are conscious:’5 but philosophers asked
how we obtain our knowledge of this world. Is it by the
evidence of the senses or by reason or by both? Epicurus’
predecessors ® in physical speculation had raised this question
and given varying answers; more or less sceptical according
as their theories were related to ordinary experience. Demo-
critus,7 as has been seen, had reached a semi-sceptical posi-
tion: thought about the ultimate realities, the atoms and
space, was alone true, and sense-perception could be regarded
as containing truth in so far as it supplied information as to

t “The Canonicon’, says Diogenes, x. 30, ‘gives the method of approach to
the system’ é¢ddous éml trHv mpaypareiav exer. The title was no doubt
suggested by Democritus’ work zrepi Aoyuxdv Kavasv.

2 §§} 37, 38. 3 §§ 50-2. 4 Especially xxii—xxiv.

5 R. D. Hicks, Stoic and Epicurean, p. 312.

6 See Part I, Chap. I, § 4, pp. 58 ff.
7 See Part I, Chap. III, § 8, pp. 177-86.

CANONICE ~ 237

these and their primary qualities of size and shape: the -

“secondary a of compound things were merely ‘ex-
periences of sensation’ and therefore ‘conventional’, Epi-
curus made an emphatic return to the view of common
sense: if his system was to be intelligible to the ordinary
mind, he must start from its normal presumptions. As the
root-axiom of all inquiry he affirms the truth or reality—for
to him they are identical—of the external world as known to
perception: ‘Epicurus said that all objects of perception are
true and real: for it was the same thing to call a thing true
and to call it existing. True then means that which is as it
is said to be, and false that which is not as it is said to be.’?
This is clearly enough a statement of the common-sense
attitude of the normal man; but it has several implications
which must be distinguished. In the first place there is an |

external world of things which has existence, our perceptions|

are not self-created or subjective. In the second this world
of external things is truly perceptible by us: things are as
we perceive them: in other words truth and reality are
identical: the world as communicated to us by perception
is the world as it exists. But we express our sensations in
words and in relation to such expression truth acquires a new
meaning: truth in words is the exposition of what actually
exists, that is, of what is actually perceived, falsehood in
words is the expression of what does not actually exist, what
is not perceived. Here in brief is the essential teaching of
the whole Canonice with regard to the reality of the external
world, our relation to it, and the use of language, and it is
not difficult now to answer the question ‘how is our know-
ledge of the external world acquired?’ For the immediate
corollary of the belief in the reality and truth of the per-
ceptible world is the assertion that the one method of cogni-
tion of truth is sense-perception: sensation 1s the ultimate
and only guarantee or criterion of truth. This is indeed the

1 Sext. adv. Math. viii.g; U.244 6 8€ ’Emixoupos 74 ev aiabnra mavra
ddeyev GAnOA Kai dvra: ob Sijveyne yap adnbes elvai Tt Aéyew 7) Smdpxov.
... art, dnalv, ddnbes 76 odTws Exov wis Aéyerau Exew. Kat pebd0s €oTt,
dnai, 76 odx odTws exov ds A€yerau Exel.

238 EPICURUS

one fundamental principle of Epicurus’ whole system and
the Canon is only the exposition of its consequences and
necessary deductions. That it involves considerable difh-
culties was clear to Epicurus himself and still clearer to some
of his followers, but it will be best to follow out his own ex-
position of his principles: certain problems will arise in-
cidentally and general criticism may be reserved.

It is at first sight surprising to find that Epicurus* stated
in the Canon that there was not one but three ‘criteria’ of
truth, the sensations, ‘anticipations’ (mpodyjpers), and feelings.”
But this is no contradiction of the fundamental principle,
for it will be seen that of the other two criteria the one owes
its validity to its immediate derivation from sensation, the
other to the fact that it is in itself a special kind of sensation.
It was therefore essential at first to establish the main posi-
tion that sensation is the immediate and ultimately the sole
guarantee of truth. For this position Epicurus does not for
the most part consent to argue: it is the root-axiom of his
whole philosophy. The Canons, as Plutarch3 says ironically,
‘fell from heaven’, like the sacred shield of Mars, and their
fundamental principle must be accepted as an inspiration or
an irrefutable axiom. But Diogenes# in his abstract of the
Canon suggests that Epicurus did not wholly refrain from
argument and that he rested his contention mainly on two
grounds. In the first place sensation, which is ‘irrational’

t DL. x. 31 év rolvwy 76 Kavovr Aéywv early 6 >Enixoupos, xpurnpia
Ths ddnbeias elvar Tas alaOjoets Kal mpodnybets kat Ta 7407.

2 It must be noted that aic@yois in the singular and plural is used in
several slightly different, but closely allied, senses in Epicurus, (1) the act of
sense-perception or sensation in general, (2) as here, the acts of sense-percep-
tion of the different sense-organs and the sensation of other parts of the body,
(3) individual acts of sense-perception or sensation, (4) as Aetius notes,
iv. 8. 2, p. 394D; U. 249, passively of the sense-impression so made (ro
éraicOnua, Gmep eott To évépynua). A similar looseness will be noticed
in the use of zpdAnyus, but the context always makes the particular meaning
clear.

3 adv. Colot. 19, 11183; U. 34 of Stomerets Kavoves: cf. Cic. de Fin. i. 19.
63; U. 34 ‘quasi delapsa de coelo est ad cognitionem omnium regula’. In spite
of the ironical tone of both passages there can be little doubt that Epicurus
himself applied the epithet dvomer7s to the Kavwv. a oe as

CANONICE 239

(dAoyos), is therefore immediate and does not admit of
question: it is its own guarantee. Secondly, there is no other
criterion by which sensation could be checked. “Every sensa-
tion is irrational and does not admit of memory: it is not
set in motion by itself nor, when it is set in motion by some-
thing else, can it add to it or take from it. Nor is there any-
thing which can refute the sensations. Fora similar sensation
cannot refute a similar because it is equivalent in validity:
nor a dissimilar a dissimilar, for the objects of which they are

the criteria are not the same. Nor again can reason, for all.

reason is dependent upon sensations: nor can one sensation
refute another, for we attend to them all alike.’ The two
arguments are in reality complementary. If we analyse the
fact of sensation, we see that it stands absolutely by itself: it
is not connected with any other mental or bodily process.’
It cannot spontaneously set itself in motion: we cannot see
or hear without seeing or hearing something. It is wholly
detached as an occurrence from any previous facts of the
same nature; a fresh sensation involves no recollection of
previous sensations. Nor has it a content which is due to
other activities of the mind; thought may of course be subse-
quently concerned with it and must indeed be concerned,
if it is to become in any sense an act of cognition, but it has
no part in the mere sensation. It must then be accepted
without question as a guarantee of its own truth. Con-
versely, if we ask from the outside, whether there is any
means by which we can check the veracity of the sensation,
the answer must be that it stands entirely alone. Another
sensation of the same organ cannot contradict it: what we
have seen one moment cannot be altered by what we see the
next, for each sensation is of equal validity. Nor can it be
checked by another sense: what we see cannot be affected
by what we hear, for the two sensations are not 7m part

materia. Nor can reason act as a check, for reason in the

Epicurean system, as will be seen more clearly later on, 1s |

but a combination of the results of sensations: it owes its
own validity to sensations and cannot therefore be used as
t See Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vii. 203; U.247-

240 EPICURUS

a standard by which to correct them. It might be held that
these arguments’ only show that we have no means of proving
sensations false: not that they are necessarily true. To this
an Epicurean might reply that to Epicurus non-contradiction
is equivalent to truth:* but the common-sense philosopher
prefers to reply that sensation is a primary fact of our nature
and our only means of relation with the external world, and
we must therefore accept it. If we do not, the whole possi-
bility of knowledge is overthrown. This is brought out
clearly in the Principal Doctrines: ‘if you fight against all
sensations, you will have no standard by which to judge even
those of them which you say are false’:3 nay more, ‘if you
reject any single sensation .. . you will confound all other
sensations as well . . . so that you will reject every standard
of judgement’.t In other words, scepticism of the validity
of sensation destroys its own right of sceptical judgement.
This position is well put in a famous passage of Lucretius:>

if any one thinks that nothing is known, he knows not whether that
can be known either, since he admits that he knows nothing. . . . And
were I to grant that he knows this too, yet would I ask this one
question: since he has never before seen any truth in things, whence
does he know what is knowing and not knowing each in turn, what
thing has begotten the concept of the true and the false, what thing has
proved that the doubtful differs from the certain? You will find that
the concept of the true is begotten first from the senses, and that the
senses cannot be gainsaid.

Unless we accept the truth of sensation, all knowledge is
impossible and we live in an unknown world. For the apostle
of common sense, such a belief is inconceivable, and we are
driven from sheer lack of alternative to the assumption of
the truth of sensation. ‘That this root-principle involves great
difficulties will become abundantly evident, but to it Epi-
curus clings with unswerving loyalty, and without it every
part of his system must fall.°

t See Tohte, Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrheit, p. 8 fin.

2 See below, p. 259.

3 xxiil. 4 Xxiv. 5 iv. 469-79.

6 Diogenes (I.c.) adds a third argument, which is not of such cardinal

CANONICE 24t

Sensation is thus the ultimate and only guarantee of
reality, and on it all knowledge must depend: ‘sensation is
true’ is the first and fundamental principle of the Canonice,
and ‘we must keep all our investigations in accord with the
sensations’.’ It is necessary then before proceeding farther
to examine a little more closely what Epicurus meant by
sensation and how he conceived its process.? In a material
system it is clear that the only possible relation between one
thing and another is that of contact: if one body is to affect
another it must touch it. All sensation then, in its physical
analysis, is an atomic movement} due to the touch resulting
from the contact of material bodies. Hence the simplest
form of sensation is the feeling of contact which we may
experience in any portion of our body, when an external
body impinges upon it, and to such contact all sensation
must ultimately be reduced. But when we pass from the

importance as the other two and is more technical, implying an analysis of
the process of sensation: kal To Ta éraucOjpata 3 bfeordvar muocrobrau
Thy Tav aicOjcewv adjfevav: ‘ the fact of apperception confirms the truth
of the sensations’. Besides the mere sensation (in sight) of colour and form,
we have also a superadded perception (ézaic$nua) of what they represent,
of the content of the sensation: now this perception is brought about on the
Epicurean theory by the incidence into the eye of a series of similar ‘ idols’
(see Chap. VIII, pp. 418-421), no one of which owing to its fineness of
texture is individually perceptible. But the net result of the series is an im-
pression (favracia) of the external object. The argument then is that the
fact of a continued series of similar ‘ idols’, combining into one single impres-
sion, is evidence of the truth of the sensation—for it must mean the continued
correspondence of the individual ‘idols’ to the object from which they come.
If they changed and no single impression was produced, then there might
reasonably be doubt of their truth: but what could not be guaranteed by a
single ‘idol’ is guaranteed by the series of similar ‘idols’ (see Tohte, op. Cit.,
p. 9). The argument is too technically Epicurean to have weight outside .
the system, and I strongly suspect that it was used primarily to support
the truth of the images of the gods seen in sleep, &c. (see Chap. VII, 414 #.).

t Ep.i, § 38 xara tas aicOjnoers Set rdvra Typetv. :

2 The full examination of the process and its implications from the physical
point of view must be reserved till the discussion of Epicurus’ psychology
(see Chap. VIII, where references will be found), but we can at this point
form a general notion sufficient to explain the Canonice, which cannot be
rightly understood without at least the main outlines of the sensational theory.

3 See Lucr. il. 434 ff.

3307 R

242 EPICURUS

simple sensation of touch to the sensations of the other four
senses, this contact assumes more complex and less im-
mediate forms. In the case of taste we have indeed the
immediate contact of the food or drink and the tongue and
palate, and the special quality of the sensation is due to the
relation between the atomic formation of the external object
and the palate of the recipient. But in smell, hearing, and
sight it is clear that there is no such immediate contact, and
to secure contact at all, Epicurus was driven, like Democritus
before him, to postulate ‘effluences’ passing from the object
to the percipient. Smell is caused by the impact on the
nostrils of an effluence of particles coming from ‘deep within’
the object and again causing a difference of sensational quality
by difference of atomic formation. Sound similarly is due to
the impact on the ear of material particles varying in shape
and size emitted by the speaking person or the sounding
object. Most complex of all—and most important, because
it is at once the source of the majority of our knowledge of
the external world and therefore the assumed ground of the
greater part of Epicurus’ discussion—is the sensation of
sight. ‘This is not the place for a full examination of the
famous theory of ‘idols’,! but certain points in it are essential
for the understanding of the Canonice. All bodies are con-
stantly throwing off a succession of thin films or ‘idols’,
exactly like in form and colour to themselves, and these by
impinging upon the eye form the same indirect contact
between object and percipient as is established in the case
of smell and hearing. But there is this important difference:
whereas each individual smell- or sound-particle can be
directly perceived by nostril or ear, so subtle are the ‘idols’
in texture that they cannot be individually perceived, but
only in the mass of their quick succession. What we actually
perceive is not the single ‘idols’, but the image (¢avzaoia)
produced by their agglomeration in the eye. Now when this
image is of an object close at hand, it is perfectly ‘clear’
(évapyyjs): there is no blurring of outline, no uncertainty as
to shape or colour. ‘A thing is clear, when we perceive all
1 See Chap. VIII, pp. 406-411.

re. **

CANONICE 243

its marks and qualities at once, or at least it is within our
power to do so.’* And it is this ‘clear image’ which it is the
object of all scientific inquiry to obtain. How can this be
done? In some cases, that, for instance, of avery close sight
or sound, it 1s, as it were, forced upon us. Yet even so, it
never has its true value, unless we direct (émPdAXew) our
senses upon it. Sights and sounds and scents may be pre-
sented clearly to us, but if our senses are not ‘attending’, the
clear impression will not be made: we must not merely ‘see’
but ‘look’. It is the ‘clear image’ obtained by the ‘attention
of the senses’ (émPodj} t&v aicOyrnpiwv)? which alone is of
scientific value. When we are dealing with distant objects,
still more with things imperceptible to the senses, this ‘clear
image’ may be difficult to obtain, and the lack of it may often,
as will be seen later, lead us into error, but it alone is finally
satisfactory and certain. All ‘images’ perceived by the sight.
are true, because they correspond to an external reality, but
it is only the ‘clear image’ obtained by ‘apprehension of the
senses’ which can be used as the basis of scientific know-
ledge.3 This point in the Epicurean Canon has not, I think,
been sufficiently emphasized, and its importance in the later
developments is very great.

But what is the content of this sensation? Is it of itself

* Merbach, op. cit., p. 18, who has done much to bring out the importance
of the evdpyna in Epicurus’ theory: for evapyrjs, see Ep. iti. 123; D.L.
X. 33, evapyeia, Ep. i, §§ 48, 52, 71, 82; K. A. xxii.; and &vapynua, Ep. i,
§ 723 11. 91, 93, 96.

2 This ‘apprehension of the senses’ is referred to in Ep.i, § 50 (emBAntixds

. . Tots aiaOyrnpiows), and implied in §§ 38, 51, 62. Fora fuller discussion,
see Chap. VIII, and Appendix III on émBoAy ris Suavolas. Also Tohte, op.
cit., p. 21, and Merbach, op. cit., pp. 31 ff. The idea undoubtedly came to
Epicurus from Empedocles. (cae

3 Ep. i, § $0 qv av AdBwyev davtaciav emPBAntiK@s TH Siavoia 7] Tots
aicOnrnptos ... popdn eoTw adrn Tod arepepviov, ywouevn KaTa TO
éffs TUKvapa 7) eyKaTtdAeppa Tod €iddAov. Epicurus appears to have
said that ‘no one image or sensation was clearer (€vapyeorépa) than another
(Plut. adv. Colot. 25; U. 252). This is true of the passive sensation itself,
but the right interpretation of it all depends on the attention of the senses
and the nearness of the object (ro mapdv 7j5y Kara tiv alcPnow, K.A.
xxiv), See Pp. 253-7.

R2

244 EPICURUS

significant, and can even the ‘clear image’ alone be self-
sufficing for the purposes of science? Clearly not, for the
sensation itself (it is convenient still to take the complex
case of sight as the type) is only an isolated vision of a
certain shape and colour.’ Such an isolated sensation is
meaningless and can have no value for philosophy, the
ordered knowledge of the world, or even for the purposes of
practical life, unless it can be correlated with other sensa-
tions. A mere coloured shape is nothing to us, unless we
can know ‘what it is’: we must be able to compare the new
image with previous experience and to identify it with or
distinguish it from other things which we already know. In
other words the process of sensation, if it is to be a percep-
tion, must be completed by cognition: the act of the sense-
organs must be followed by an act of the mind. How can
this be? what is it that enables the mind on the occurrence
of a sense-perception to say this is, or is not, such and such
a thing, and what guarantee of truth have we in this new
process? According to Epicurean psychology the act of
perception in the sense-organ stirs the particles of ‘soul’ in
its neighbourhood and they communicate the movement to
other soul-particles and so on till the movement reaches the
mind (which is situated in the breast), and there creates a
representation of the sense-image. The mind then by a
spontaneous movement (8dga), akin to the act of attention
on the part of the senses, compares the new image with
previously existing general conceptions and pronounces that
‘this is, or is not, so-and-so’. Just as without cognition mere
sensation is valueless, so the individual image is without
significance apart from the general concept:3 ‘apart from the
1 Sext. adv. Math. vii. 207; U. 247 od yap 6Aov dparar TO arepepviov
. GANG 76 xp@pa Tod orepepviov.

2 See Chap. VIII, p. 418. Some critics have thought that Epicurus
supposed that the actual ‘image’, or the series of ‘idols’, passed into the mind,
but this is unlikely: see p. 417.

3 For the close connexion of image and opinion, or, as we should rather
say, sensation and cognition, which are almost simultaneous and often hard to _
separate, see Sext. adv. Math. vii. 203; U. 247 dvolv vray trav ovlvyovr-
rwv adAtdos mpaypdtrwv, pavracias Kal THs ddéns.

=P <i. e

CANONICE 245

general concept no one can inquire or feel doubt or even
hold an opinion, no, nor refute one’.' So far Epicurus’
position does not seem to be peculiar: the acceptance of
cognition as a necessary element in perception, and the
admission of the impossibility of classification or even recog-
nition without general conceptions are practically universal.
It is necessary to ask how Epicurus conceived his general
concepts, what was their origin and what their validity.

To return for a moment to psychology, the ‘mind-image’
aroused by the movements of the soul-particles started in
their turn by the sensational motions of the sense-organs,
does not immediately perish, but remains stored up in the
mind, and may be, as it were, ‘called up’ for subsequent
contemplation. Thus an act of memory is the momentary
attention of the mind to an ‘image’ so preserved in itself,
and a mental comparison is the apprehension by the mind
of two or more such images side by side. But this is not
all, for when as the result of many individual perceptions of
objects of the same class, a series of similar images, is, as it
were, heaped one upon another in the mind, the result is
a kind of ‘composite photograph’ of the genus or species:
the dissimilarities of the individual images have disappeared,
and that which is common to all is retained in what is in fact
a ‘general concept’. The combined ‘images’ of many horses,
seen in sense-perception, has created in the mind the ‘general
concept’ of ‘horse’. To this ‘general concept’ Epicurus gives
the name of ‘anticipation’ (apdAnus): it is that which we have
permanently in our mind to enable us to anticipate the
general appearance of anything for which we are looking
or wish to create, and to identify and distinguish the indi-
vidual images of sense-perception when they are presented
to us. ‘Anticipations’ then take their place as the second
criterion of truth. They owe their validity to the fact that,
although they are not themselves directly sensations, they
are immediately built up of sensations: our ‘anticipation of
horse is simply the aggregate—or perhaps one should rather
say the average—of a number of individual sensations of

« Epicurus apud Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 4. 157, 443 Wes

246° EPICURUS

horses. The ‘anticipation’ is not itself ‘true’ for it does not
correspond to or issue from any one external existence, but
it is a ‘clear vision’ and as such a test of truth:* that which is
the common element in a number of ‘images’ of ‘horse’ must
itself constitute a clear general ‘image’ of ‘horse’, and to it
may be referred as a certain test the subsequent ‘images’
presented to us in sense-perce tion.

This account of the ‘anticipations’ is not to be found
explicitly stated in any Epicurean source, but it is generally
adopted by modern writers? and is strongly supported by such
testimony as is available. Three pieces of evidence may be
cited which all tend to the same conclusion from different
points of view. Diogenes’ discussion3 of ‘anticipation’ looks
as if it were compiled from several different sources, but
there is nothing in it inconsistent either with itself or with
the explanation given above. It is worth quoting at length
because of the strong support afforded by his illustrations:

the ‘anticipation’ they speak of as an apprehension or right opinion
or thought or a general idea stored within the mind, that is to say a
recollection of what has often been presented from without, as for
instance, ‘such and such a thing is a man’; for the moment the word
‘man’ is spoken, by means of the ‘anticipation’ his form (rvzos) too
is thought of (voetraz), as the senses give us the information (zporyov-
pevwv). Therefore the first signification of every name is immediate
and clear evidence (évapyés). And we could not look for the object of
our search, unless we have first known it; for instance we ask ‘is that
standing yonder a horse or a cow?’: to do this we must know by means
of an ‘anticipation’ the shape of horse and of cow. Otherwise we could
not have named them, unless we previously knew their appearance
by means of an ‘anticipation’. So the ‘anticipations’ are clear and
immediate evidence.

t Merbach (p. 51) notices that Epicurus never speaks of zpoAnibets as
aAnbeis, but as evapyeis.

2 e.g. Tohte (op. cit.), pp. 15 sq.; Brieger, Epikurs Lehre von der Seele,
p- 11; Giussani, Stud. Lucr., p. 174. For other views of mpdAnibis see
Appendix IT.

3 x. 33. The definition runs: rv dé apoAnyw A€yovow oiovei karaAnibw
H ddfav dpOiv 7 evvorav 7 Kaboduyy vonow évarroKemevyny, TovTEoTt
pvipnv Tod modAdKis EEwlev davévtos, ofov 76 Tovotrov eorw avOpwaos.

i al a ©

CANONICE oan

Here we have the main points clearly put. The ‘anticipation’
is the general concept, it is derived from frequently repeated
sense-perceptions and it 1s ‘clear’. It is the fundamental
necessity for all inquiry and it is intimately connected with
the naming of things: the name must represent the clear
concept to which it is attached. Equally significant is a
notable quotation from Epicurus himself preserved in a late
writer:' ‘anticipation he defines as an act of attention to
something clear or to the clear concept of the thing’. Here,
with a slight shift of the point of view, the general concept
in the mind is a clear image, which the mind grasps in the
act of anticipation: we have the active process instead of the
more usual passive notion, but once more the general con-
cept is ‘clear’ and therefore a test of truth. Finally, to bring
out another side of the idea of ‘anticipation’, we have two
passages in Lucretius, where he argues that it is impossible
to set to work to make a thing unless you have already in
your mind an ‘anticipation’ (vo/ities) of it, derived from
previous experience. ‘How could the gods have made a
world, he asks, unless they had already an anticipation of it
due to a previous pattern?’* ‘how could any man have
deliberately invented speech, unless he had a pattern in the
speech of men around him?’3 Here we have the general
concept as the condition of action as well as of knowledge.

Thanks then to the concepts or ‘anticipations’ the act of
sense-perception is completed by cognition: we are not left
with a series of detached unmeaning sensations, but are
enabled to correlate them, to identify and distinguish. Our

x Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 4.1573; U. 255 mpdoAnyw 8€ arrodidwow emtBoAnv
eri re evapyés Kal emi ri evapyh Tod mpdyyatos emivovay. It must be
noted that mpéAnyus is here used definitely in the active sense of the mental
operation of ‘anticipation’. It has a similar active force in the first two instances
in the previously quoted passage of Diogenes, but normally (as in the third
instance above) it has especially in the plural the passive meaning of the
general concept which is the means of anticipation. ‘The same variation of
meaning in the use of aio@oars has already been noted, and it is also latent
in émBorr) THs Suavotas (see Appendix IIT). Note, too, that mpodnipis itself
is here an émuBoA7, which as usual is connected with an evapyes.

2 y. 181-6. 3 v. 1046-9.

248 EPICURUS
experience becomes a connected whole and on it we can

base an ordered world built up by scientific inquiry. The
concepts are themselves infallible as tests of truth, just as are
the individual sensations: error arises, as will be seen later,
not through any want of ‘clearness’ in the concepts, but
through the mental operation of opinion (8d) which may
make false comparisons, wrongly assigning sensations to
concepts, and so producing false identifications and dis-
tinctions. It is clear then that the concept has a large part
to play in the whole realm of thought (émivova): for not only is
it concerned in the identification of individual sensations,
but in those combinations of ideas which constitute abstract
thought—or, as Epicurus would rather have put it, thought
about the invisible (d8yAa). Moreover it is also closely con-
nected with the whole problem of language: a concept is not
fully known until it is named, until it has a label by which it
may be at once called into prominence in the mind. Thus the
growth of language consists in the application of names to
concepts, and the first requisite of philosophical thought is to
be sure that names represent clear concepts. Both these
questions of thought and language in their relation to con-
cepts will become prominent later on in the Canonice: for
the present the ‘anticipations’ must be regarded primarily
as the infallible means, if only opinion makes no false com-
binations, of interpreting sensations in the act of cognition.
The second criterion of truth completes the work of the first,
and owes its validity to its derivation from it.

The third criterion of truth is feeling (aa6os).! Its under-
standing is happily less beset with difficulties than that of
the second, but its nature must be clearly defined, for, as
will be seen, one whole branch of Epicurus’ philosophy, and
that not the least important, rests on it. ‘Feeling’ is an
immediate sensation, but it acts in its own special field and
is a test of its own peculiar truth. In a wide sense? of course
all sensation is ‘feeling’ (7d6os), for in every case of sensation,
in the higher sense-perceptions as well as in the most

t DD. x. 32.
2 'Tohte (op. cit., p. 18) drew attention to this wider meaning.

CANONICE 249

rudimentary cases of touch, we are ‘acted upon’ (mdoyew) and
‘feel’ the sensation. So in the letter to Herodotus Epicurus
speaks of the ‘feeling of hearing’™ and similarly of the
‘feeling’* which smell produces. But ‘feeling’ as a ‘criterion’
of truth is used in a narrower and restricted sense, not of
sensation itself, but of its invariable accompaniment. For
in intimate and necessary -connexion with every sensation
we have also a ‘feeling’ of something ‘akin’ or ‘alien’ to us,3
a sensation of the agreeable or disagreeable, in other words
of pleasure or pain. This is true of all sensations from the
most elementary sense of touch due to the impingement of an
external body on our body up to the most complicated per-
ception of sight: in all cases our sensation not merely informs
us of the presence of something external to ourselves (aicOnas)
but brings with it the sense of pleasure or pain (mdOos): ‘the
feelings are two, pleasure and pain, which occur to every
living creature’.4 It might be objected by a critic of Epi-
cureanism that feelings are really three, for in a large number
of our sensations we are not conscious of either positive
pleasure or positive pain, but of a negative or indifferent
state. But for Epicurus there were only two ‘feelings’, for
absence of pain 5 is in itself pleasure, indeed in his ultimate
analysis the truest pleasure: every sensation must in this
sense either be accompanied by pleasure or by pain, for it
is either associated or not associated with pain. The validity
then of ‘feeling’ as a criterion cannot be questioned nor need
any difficulty be raised as to its origin: for it has not a
derivative value, like the ‘anticipation’, but is itself, like
sensation, immediate and therefore a guarantee of its own
certainty. But of what kind of truth is it a test? Is it a test
of the reality of an external object or of its nature? No doubt

« Ep.i, § 52 dxovorixoy mdbos.

 § 53. In the same way Sext. adv. Math. vii. 203; U- 247, speaks of
tev pavracidy, mabdy mepi %pas obdaadv, which is perhaps going farther
than Epicurus would himself have gone.

3 D.L. x. 34 tHv pev oixetov tiv S€ adAdtprov. nish:

4 D.L. lc. rd6n S€ A€yovow elvar Svo, 7Sovnv Kat adAynddva, torapeva.
mept wav Cdov.

5 Cf. K.A. iii, &c.

250 EPICURUS

in part it is: our feeling of pain, if we touch a burning coal,
is in part evidence of the existence of the coal and of its
present condition. But so far it is merely a form of “sensa-
tion’ ‘ and is no independent criterion of truth. ‘Feeling’, as
such, is not concerned with knowledge but with morals: it
does not inform us of the existence of things or their physical
nature, but whether they are good or bad: for that which is
pleasurable to us is invariably that which we seek, in other
words, good, that which is painful to us we avoid, it is bad.
In short, ‘feeling’ plays the same part in Epicurean Ethics,
which sensation does in his physical theory: it is the basis
from which everything must start and the standard to which
all must be referred. It is the test of rightness in morals, that
is, of rightness in action, just as sensation is the test-of truth
in knowledge, that is, of the rightness of apprehension. With
the difficulties which are involved in this theory at its root,
and the modifications which Epicurus found necessary in
its working out, we are not now concerned? The third
criterion of truth takes its place beside sensation; it is of
equal validity, for it is a part of sensation, and is the test of
its own peculiar truth, of the goodness or badness which is
to be judged immediately by pleasure or pain. Thus the
ethical theory of Epicurus does not stand by itself as an
independent or detached adjunct to the physical theory, but
rests upon the same fundamental principle, the immediate
and necessary validity of sensation.

Sensation then together with its derivative ‘anticipation’
and its necessary accompaniment, feeling, acting in the
special field of conduct, are the three criteria of truth which,
as Diogenes 3 informs us, Epicurus admitted in ‘the Canon’.
But in at least one passage 4 of the letter to Herodotus and in
the Principal Doctrines there is apparently associated with
them a fourth test of truth, which was explicitly raised by

x Merbach (op. cit. p. 16), who deals very summarily with dos,
has fallen into the error of supposing that the truth which zra6os attests is the
existence of external things: the passage which he quotes in support (Sext.
ado. Math. vii. 203) ought in itself to have shown him his mistake.

2 See Chap. X, pp. 485-7. 3x, 90s 4 § 38; K. A. xxiv.

CANONICE a

subsequent Epicureans' to the position of a criterion. A
full discussion of the great difficulties which surround the
understanding of the ‘apprehension of the mind’ (€mBodi ris
dvavoias) must be reserved till the Epicurean psychology? has
been examined in detail. But it is possible here to indicate
what was its probable function as a criterion. Epicurus held
—and the idea is very characteristic of his thought—that
there are certain concrete existences which throw off ‘idols’
like all other material things, but ‘idols’ so subtle that they
cannot be perceived, even when accumulated as ‘images’, by
the comparatively coarse mechanism of the senses. Never-
theless they can penetrate through the pores of the body to
the mind and there cause a disturbance of the mind-atoms
which produces an immediate mental apprehension of the
image. Yet even then, so fine is the texture of the ‘idols’ that ~
the mind itself cannot apprehend them without an active
_ ‘attention’ or ‘act of apprehension’, comparable to that with
which the senses ‘look’ instead of passively seeing (émBod):
it is for this reason that such images are most frequently
seen in sleep,3 when the mind is not disturbed by other
appearances or thoughts. Of such objects the most con-
spicuous examples are the divine persons of the gods: 4 their
bodies are constantly throwing off a succession of such fine
images which come to us and immediately move the atoms
of the mind. Here then we have a kind of direct mental
sensation, analogous to sense-perception, and produced in
the same manner by means of ‘idols’: the sole difference
being that the perception is made immediately by the mind
without the intervention of the senses. The fourth criterion 5
would thus owe its validity to the fact that it is in itself a very

* D.L. x. 31. 2 See Chap. VIII and Appendix III.

3 Cf. Lucr. v. 1171.

4 Lucr. v. 1175-6; Cic. de Nat. Deorum. i. 19. 49: see Chap. IX.

5 In one passage of the Letter to Herodotus (§ 62) we have apparently
an instance in which éBoAy ris Suavolas is not concerned with such im-
mediate perception by the mind, but with a reasoned conclusion as to the
ultimate realities of the atomic world. Its importance is discussed in
Chap. VIII, pp. 422—5, and in Appendix III. Here it may for the time be
neglected.

252 EPICURUS

specialized form of sensation. Why Epicurus omitted refer-
ence to the fourth criterion in the Canon, but assumed its
existence in the First Letter and the Principal Doctrines,
while even then it was left to ‘the Epicureans’ to include it
with the other criteria, it is hard to say. It may be that to
Epicurus when he wrote ‘the Canon’ ‘mental apprehension’
presented itself merely as a form of sensation, not explicitly
to be distinguished from it, that he made the distinction in
other places when he was thinking specially of these parti-
cular cases which could not fairly be classed with normal
sensations, and that the Epicureans, whose religious ortho-
doxy was much called in question, were forced in self-defence
to exalt the basis of their theology into a criterion of truth.
However this may be,! it is not hard to see how it could be
connected directly with the fundamental truth of sensation.

The examination of the subordinate criteria of truth has
shown that they are all in one way or another restatements
of the fundamental infallibility of sensation, ‘feeling’ and
(if it be a criterion) ‘mental apprehension’, because they are
but forms of sensation, ‘anticipation’, because it is in each
case an accumulation of or abstraction from sensations. The
whole Epicurean philosophy is thus based, as its founder
intended it to be, on the common-sense point of view that
‘sensation is true’: there is a world of existing external things
and our senses report to us truly about them. It is time to
go back a little and inquire into some of the difficulties which
this thesis involves: some of these were perceived by Epi-
curus himself and dealt with in the secondary principles
of the Canonice, some were raised by critics of the system
and attempts were made to meet them by the later Epi-
cureans. It will be convenient to deal with them in connexion
with the various branches of inquiry which Epicurus saw
were necessary for a system of physical science.

All true experience, and in particular all scientific observa-
tion, must be built on the ‘clear view’ of the object near at
hand:? ‘the clear view is the foundation and the first step in

: For another suggestion see Appendix ITI.
2 K.A. xxiv 70 rapov 4dn Kata THY aiabnow.

CANONICE ~ 253

everything’.* But we are not always dealing with objects
close at hand or indeed perceptible by the senses at all, and
accordingly various difficulties arise, with which Epicurus
has dealt in the subordinate principles of the Canonice. He
groups the objects of inquiry under two heads, ‘perceptible
things’ (mpd3nAa) of which we can obtain a clear view, and
‘imperceptible things’ (dna) which he subdivides into
celestial phenomena (ueréwpa), of which, though they are
perceptible to the senses, a close view can never be obtained,
and things wholly imperceptible in the strict sense, the
ultimate facts of reality, the atoms and space, which can
never be perceived by the senses but only apprehended by
the operation of thought. It will be convenient to follow
these divisions and to deal with the various problems as
they arise.

The ‘plain man’, whose philosophy Epicurus wished to
embody in his system, while maintaining in general the
truth of his sensations, would probably be the first to argue
that even in matters of everyday terrestrial experience, some
of his sensations are, or at least seem to be, false, for they
are not a correct report of the external realities from which
they are derived. A square tower seen at a distance seems
small and round,? an oar half in the water appears to be
bent, I see so-and-so coming towards me and, when he
comes nearer, he ‘turns out’ to be some one else: in all these
instances the first sensation appears to be false. It was of
course difficulties of this kind which had led earlier philo-
sophers to their distrust of the senses. Now Epicurus saw
clearly enough 3 that to admit the falsity of a single sensation
would overthrow his whole system: for if one sensation is
false, there is no reason that any should be true, for all have
equal validity. How then can he meet these objections?

« Sext. adv. Math. vii. 216; U. 247 mdvtwv 8€ Kpnmis Kai Geuédvos 7
evapyeia.

2 These are instances quoted by Sext. Emp. (l.c.) and are undoubtedly
the commonplaces of Epicurean tradition. The whole passage, which Usener
gives in full, is of great value for this portion of the Canonice. Compare also

D.L. x. 34 and Lucr. iv. 379-468, where other similar examples are given.
3 K.A. xxiv.

254 EPICURUS

His answer lies in the distinction already observed between
the two elements in the process of sense-perception, the
mere passive sensation in the sense-organs, and the act of
cognition performed by the mind. The mental faculty of
‘opinion’ (8a), which performs the cognition by the assign-
ment of the passive sensation to an ‘anticipation’ or general
concept, is indeed allied to the infallible ‘mental apprehen-
sion’,’ because it is in itself a kind of apprehension or
mental attention, but it differs from it in that it is liable to
error: it may make a false combination of sensation and
‘anticipation’. Indeed it is a ‘movement’ which is, so to
speak, ever on the alert, and eager to make its additions
(mpoodoéalopeva) to the data of sense, to put its interpretation
on them before sufficient material has been supplied. The
apparent falsity of our sense-perceptions is then due not to
any falsity in the sensation, which is always true, but to the
‘additions of opinion’,? and it is the function of the philo-
sopher to distinguish carefully on all occasions between
these two elements: the additions of opinion must, as it were,
be separated off and the pure sensation, the only criterion of
truth, left, at any rate for the time, without interpretation.
Take the case of the approaching man: all that we really
saw was a man walking, indeed to be absolutely strict, we
saw a certain shape with certain colouring moving in a cer-
tain direction: it was ‘opinion’ making a comparison of the
sensation with the ‘anticipation’ already in the mind, which
assigned it at once to the concept of ‘so-and-so’. There was
nothing false in the sensation, for it was ‘irrational’, it did
not imply any interpretation of itself: the error lay in the
false identifications made by opinion. In the case then of
such distant views of external objects, we must regard our
sensation as a ‘thing awaiting confirmation’ (xpoopeévov ém-
paprupjocoba).3 Opinion will indeed pronounce on it, for

x Ep. i, § 51 ro d€ Sujpaprnuevov odk av brfpyev, ef pu) eAapPdvopev
Kal aAAnv Twa Kivnow ev Hiv adrois ovvypperny pev <TH pavtactiKA
emBorj>, SudAniw Sé €xoucar. ’

2 Ep. i, § 50 70 Sunwaprnpevov ev 7H poodogalopevw dei éorw.

3 mpoopevov is used absolutely by Epicurus and his followers as a technical

CANONICE axe

it is irrepressible and will not leave an insignificant sensation
as such and nothing more, but we must not accept the pro-
nouncement of opinion until we have had the close view of
the object near at hand: then ‘if it is confirmed, it is true,
if it is not confirmed, it is false’. So far there seems no
serious difficulty and a simple rule of the Canonice deals
with the first set of problems—distant terrestrial objects.
The first sensation no less than the second is true, ‘for it
stirs our senses’,? but only the near view gives us the full
information as to the nature of the external object,
which is requisite for complete or scientific knowledge.
‘Confirmation is the comprehension by means of the clear
vision that the object of opinion is such as it was supposed
to be.’3 But the other instances mentioned above are not so
easily disposed of: in the case of the distant tower and the
oar seen through the water it is by no means so easy to say
that the error lay in the ‘additions of opinion’. The first
sensations were of a round object and a bent object: the near
view showed that the realities were square and straight
respectively. In what sense can it be said that these first
sensations are ‘true’: ‘for that is true which is as it is said
(or seen) to be?’4 With this difficulty Epicurus himself—
wisely enough perhaps—never deals very explicitly, but his
answer may be extracted from the very interesting and
curious passage in which he speaks of the size of the sun

term, e.g. Ep. i, § 38; K.d. xxiv. It is falsely interpreted by D.L. x. 34 as
‘an act of waiting on our part’, 70 7poopetvar Kal eyyds yeveoba TO TUpyw
Kal wabety dmrotos eyyds paiveras. Steinhart was misled by this passage: see
Tohte, op. cit., p. 14, n. 1. There can be no doubt of its real meaning and
implied construction: see Ep.i, § 50 <émi rod mpoopevovtos > emynapTupy-
ocoOar—the addition being certain—and K.A. xxiv 76 mpoopeévov . . . THY
emyapTupyow.

1 D.L. x. 34. It at first sight seems strange that Epicurus speaks always
of od émysaprdpyats in this context, and not dvryaprvpyois—but the
latter word is reserved, as will be seen, for connexion with the ddnAa.

2 D.L. x. 32 Kwe? ydp: 76 5é pur dv od Kwe? in reference to the analogous
case of dream visions: see Chap. VIII, p. 415.

3 Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vii. 212 gore 8é émysapripyots ev KaTddAniyus
5. évapyetas Tod 70 Soaldpevov Tovodrov elvar Gmotcv ToTE éd0€alero.

4 Sext. Emp. adv. Math. viii. 9; U. 244: see p. 237, 0. I.

256 EPICURUS

and moon:! ‘the size of sun and moon, he says, is for us
(kard pév 76 mpds yds) what it appears to be; and in reality it
is either (slightly) greater than what we see or slightly less
or the same size’. ‘For us’, can only imply, ‘this is what the
sun and moon look like as seen from the distance which we
are from them.’ Similarly then in the case of the tower: the
first sensation was true ‘for us’, it told us, that is, what a
square tower looks like at a distance, and it was a false
addition of the mind to infer that the tower is itself round.
So with the oar: the bent oar is what an oar in the water looks
like ‘for us’: we have no right to infer that it really is bent.
This is a poor way of saving the situation: for the ‘truth’ of
a sensation can mean nothing else than its correspondence
with the object which it represents. Either then the first
perception was false and did not truly represent the object,
or else the tower and the oar changed in the interval between
the two sensations and the objective permanence of the
external world is destroyed—which, as Epicurus would
himself say, is ‘unthinkable’ (a8vavénrov). However Epicurus
himself does not seem to have been conscious of the diffi-
culty, and was not perhaps sufficiently attacked with regard
to it to cause him to elaborate a reply. But his followers did
not escape from the pressure of criticism, and, as Sextus
shows,? they took up two lines of defence. In the first place,
they argued that their opponents were demanding greater
accuracy in the sphere of sight than they would require in
the other senses. No one would say that hearing was false,
because what was really a loud noise appeared at a distance
soft. To this plea it might easily be replied that though
diminution in size by distance was not falsification, it was
another matter with apparent alteration of shape. The
second line of defence3 put forward by the Epicureans is
more serious and far more important in its consequences.
The image of sensation, they argued, is true, because it
corresponds always to the ‘idols’ which reach the eye; but
Ep. ii, § gt. 2 adv. Math. vii. 206-9; U. 247.

3 Ibid., § 209: cf. Plutarch, adv. Colot. 25, 1121; U. 252, who pushes
up the advantage gained by this admission with great effect.

CANONICE ~ 257

these ‘idols’ in their transit from an object at a distance may
be altered. The square ‘idols’ of the tower when they have
a long interval to traverse have their corners knocked off and
So Create in our eye the sensation of a round object: the image

we see is ‘true’ to them, but not necessarily to the object |
from which they come. This theory is of course a fatal admis- |

sion and cuts at the very roots of the whole Epicurean system.
For by the truth of a sensation Epicurus meant and could only
mean its truth to the external object which it represented.
If we have no guarantee of such correspondence, but are
at the mercy of the accidents which may befall individual
‘idols’ in their transit, then the ‘truth’ of sensation is value-
less not merely for scientific inquiry, but even for the most
rudimentary requirements of practical life: ‘there is an end
to your “‘all sensations are true, and none are untrustworthy
and false’’’;* we shall indeed be ‘moving about in worlds not
realized’, But Epicurus must not be made responsible for
the sins of his children. A modern critic cannot disguise the
great difficulty which besets his fundamental principle even
in the simplest of conditions, but Epicurus rested in the
belief that he had fully disposed of it in the distinction be-
tween the ‘clear vision’ of near sensation and the possibly
false additions of opinion. The first then of the subordinate

principles of the Canonice will take shape thus: ‘in the case

of distant objects perceptible to the senses, suspend judge-
ment, till you have examined them in the nearer view’.
Epicurus’ own interest lies not in the problem but in the
process of verification on whose truth he insists emphatically:
‘every image which we obtain by an act of apprehension
(emAnriucds) on the part of the mind or of the sense-organs,
whether of shape or of properties, this image is the shape
<or the properties) of the concrete object (rod orepepviou)’.”

The second department of inquiry—or perhaps more
correctly the first subdivision of the department of the ‘im-
perceptible’ (d8Aa)—is concerned with things perceptible

« Plut. lc. cot 8€ olyerau 76 maoas Urdpyew adnfeis, amuorov S€ Kat
pevdh undepuiar.

a Epi; 9 50)

3307 $

258 EPICURUS

indeed themselves to the senses, yet so remote from them
that it is impossible to approach them and obtain the ‘clear
view’ which would tell us their true nature and the causes
of their behaviour. These are summed up by Epicurus under
the general title of the ‘things of the sky’ (uerewpa): they
include the heavenly bodies and their workings and all such
phenomena as rain, thunder, lightning, hail, snow, rasa
which we more strictly class as meteorological, and form the
subject of the Second Letter,! whether it be by Epicurus
himself or a follower scrupulously preserving his tradition,
addressed to Pythocles. Even here there are certain data
given us by immediate sense-perception, and when this is
so, we must make no attempt to get behind them: for they
must be true. We have,? for instance, a perfectly ‘clear
vision’ of sun and moon as bodies of a certain size: this
‘clear vision’ cannot be called in question and we know
therefore with certainty that such is the size of sun and moon.
But on most occasions, when, for instance we are investigat-
ing the occurrence of solstices or eclipses, or the nature of
thunder and lightning, and in particular, whenever we are
attempting to discover the causes of ‘celestial things’, no
such direct information can be obtained. How then are we
to proceed? How is the supremacy of the senses to be main-
tained in a region where the data of sense are insufficient?
Epicurus’ answer 3 is characteristic and ingenious. In the
first place we must start here too from sensation. If sensation
will not give us a direct answer to our problems, yet it will
frequently supply ‘signs’ (onpeta) or ‘indications’ (rexpmpua),
which will help us to a conclusion. Sometimes the celestial
phenomena themselves in this way suggest their own ex-
planation: more often ‘we can ‘obtain indications of what

: Cf. Lucr. v. 509-7703 V1.

2 Ep. ii, §91; Lucr. v. 564-91. This seems inconsistent with the admission
that the size of the tower is apparently diminished by distance, but Epicurus
(as Lucretius carefully shows in a very interesting argument) had special
theories about distant lights, connected closely with the theory of ‘idols’ and
that of the clear vision. See a fuller discussion in Chap. VII, pp. 371-3.

3 It is put most clearly in the opening sections (85-8) of the letter to
Pythocles: but implied also in §§ 38 and 51 of the first letter.

CANONICE 259

happens above from some of the phenomena on earth’. On
the basis of these indications we may by thought? (éévo.a),
comparing phenomena with general concepts, or combining
concepts one with another, frame hypotheses to explain what
we see. But if thought were allowed thus to work at random,
it is clear that its action might be even wilder than that of
‘opinion’ in the interpretation of sensation. Under what
check then must it work? Still, obviously, under the control
of the senses: ‘all our investigations must be kept in accord
with our sensations’.3 But since it is clear that we cannot
_ hope in such instances to have the confirmation (€myapripnars)
of the nearer view (évdpyeia, 76 wapdv), how can this be? The
check in the case of celestial phenomena—and indeed of all
‘imperceptible things’—is no longer positive, but negative.
We must bring the hypotheses we frame to the test of the
senses ¢ and see if they are inconsistent with anything which
sense-perception observes: if they are contradicted (dvrysap-
tupetrat) they must at once be rejected, but if not contradicted,
they must be accepted as true. The test of scientific certainty
is no longer ‘confirmation’ (émpaprépynos), but only the nega-
tive condition of non-contradiction (od dvraprypnois), which
is defined as ‘the agreement of the hypothesis or opinion
about an imperceptible thing with the phenomenon’.5 As the
senses are the starting-point, so are they the touchstone of
investigation. The general idea may best be brought out by

« Ep. i, § 87. The later Epicureans, who showed an illicit tendency to
develop a logic of Epicureanism, were greatly interested in the doctrine of
‘signs’, and remains of a treatise of Philodemus on this subject were found at
Herculaneum.

2 For the psychological analysis of thought on the atomic basis see
Chap. VIII, pp. 422~30. Thought (émivova) and opinion (8d€a) are closely
allied and not always carefully distinguished, but Epicurus’ usual practice
seems to be to speak of ‘opinion’ in relation to the interpretation of the sen-
sations of sense-perception, ‘thought’ in the operations of reason with reference
to all classes of the ‘ imperceptible’ (a57Aa).

3 Ep. i, § 38. ;

4 Ep. i, § 51; Ep. ii, § 88. The process of testing conclusions by pheno-
mena is expressed by Epicurus by the verb émuxpivew: see Ep. i, § 37.

5 Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vii. 213 dxodovbia tod dmocrabévros Kal
Sogacbevros adijAov 7TH dawopevw.

$2

Pry ‘EPICURUS

an example taken from the other class of the ‘imperceptible’
—those never perceptible by the senses—which are, as will
be seen, under precisely the same control: it has the advan-
tage of being Epicurus’ own instance. ‘Epicurus * says that
there is empty space, which is an imperceptible thing, and
this is borne out (morobra) by the clear (évapyods) fact of
motion, for if there were no empty space, there ought not
either to be motion, as the moving body would have no
place to which to shift because everything would be a solid
mass: therefore, since motion exists, the phenomenon does
not contradict the opinion about the imperceptible.’ Similar
examples? might be found in plenty in Epicurus’ astronomy
and meteorology.

So fat then the rule of the Canonice might be framed
thus: ‘explanations of things celestial must be based on the
indications given by phenomena and when framed submitted
to the test of phenomena’. Now it is obvious that this
| requirement is by no means so exacting as that in the case
of terrestrial sense-perceptions: and indeed in many cases
it might be that several explanations would satisfy the merely
negative test that they are not contradicted by phenomena.
Are we then to accept them all as true or distinguish between
them, and if so, on what principle? Epicurus’ answer is
startling, but unhesitating: all explanations which satisfy the
required conditions are to be accepted as equally true.
Celestial phenomena ‘admit of more than one account of
their nature, which harmonizes with our sensations’.3 What
then has become of truth? How will these ‘several explana-
tons’ accord with the real world of celestial things? Can it
be supposed that all uncontradicted explanations really
correspond to actual facts? Again Epicurus does not flinch
from the consequences of his position. ‘Several explana-
tions’ are true, because celestial phenomena happen in
several ways:4 there is no one certain account of them,

x Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vii. 213.

2 e.g. Ep. ii, §.g0, a case of contradiction, §§ 92,93, &c. 3 Ep. ii, § 86.

4 Ibid.: cf. Ep. ii, §§ 87, 88, 113, and many particular instances throughout
the letter: also Ep. i, §§ 78-80.

CANONICE 56%

_ because the ways of their occurrence vary. The conclusion is
surprising, but perfectly consistent, and Epicurus bore it out
by another characteristic doctrine. Even if in our world
there should be only one true explanation of a given pheno-
menon, yet thanks to the ‘equal distribution’ ' (‘covouia) of
things in the whole universe, the other explanations? will hold
good in other worlds. They must then all be accepted
equally, and the attempt? to tie down a celestial phenomenon
to a single explanation savours of ‘myth’; it is an arrogance
unworthy of the spirit of true physical inquiry. In this
astonishing but wholly consistent conclusion lies the reason
of the many curious passages in Epicurus’ astronomy and
meteorology which must strike any reader of the Letter to
Pythocles# or of the fifth and sixth books of Lucretius’ poem,
where again and again what we know to be the true explana-
tion of a phenomenon is classed side by side with the most
puerile hypotheses. It is impossible for a modern critic of
-Epicureanism—accustomed to the accurate methods of
modern scientific inquiry—not to regard Epicurus’ method
as extremely unsatisfactory and slovenly. Indeed there is
some evidence that even his disciples were unwilling to
follow their master whole-heartedly at this point: Lucretius
is occasionally more dogmatic than the Letter to Pythocles,
and omits alternative explanations suggested there, or else,
as in the instance already noticed, relegates their operation
to other worlds. There was indeed good reason why Epicurus
should insist less on exactness of results in this department
of inquiry than in the discussion of the ultimate constitution
of the world: for the phenomena of the sky had in themselves
but little intrinsic interest for him, provided he could once
establish the great principle that they were regulated by
natural law, and so free men from the terrors of belief in the

« For a fuller discussion of icovopia see Chap. IX, pp. 461-7.

2 A characteristic instance of this idea will be found in Lucr. v. 526-33.

3 Ep. ii, § 87 drav 5é tus TO pev amodiny, 7d Sé exBdAy cpotws
atpduvov dv 7H dawopevw, SHAov dre Kal ex mavrds exrimrer puato-
Aoynjparos, emt dé Tov pdbov Karappet.

4 ‘Unica illa in omnium temporum physica epistula Pythoclea’, as Merbach

(p. 27) aptly calls it.

262 EPICURUS

divine agency: ‘first of all, says the Letter to Pythocles,* we
must not suppose that any other object is to be gained from
the knowledge of the phenomena of the sky . . . than peace
of mind (drapagia) and a sure confidence’. Buta truer motive
for his conclusions than such comparative intellectual slack-
ness must surely be found in the rigid acceptance of conse-
quences, which is the clear mark of all his work. In reaching
his conclusions he was only following ‘where the argument
led’, and as, usual was perfectly fearless of contempt or
ridicule, when he was himself persuaded of their truth. Be
this as it may, the rule of the Canonice concerning the
investigation of celestial phenomena must now be amplified:

/ ‘Explanations of things celestial must be based on the indica-

tions given by phenomena and when framed submitted to
the test of phenomena, but all explanations are true and
correspond to existing facts, which are not contradicted by
phenomena.’

There remains the other department of the ‘imperceptible’,
far more important for scientific and philosophical inquiry,
things namely, which are in the strictest sense imperceptible,
for from their very nature they never can be perceived by
the senses. A certain class of these has already been touched
on,? objects which like the bodies of the divine beings cannot
be perceived by the sense-organs, yet send off images which
are directly apprehensible by the mind: but seeing that this
‘mental apprehension’ is more nearly akin to sense-percep-
tion than to thought, it is most in accordance with Epicurean
principles to regard it as a species of direct sensation. At
any rate discussion now must turn rather upon those ‘im-
perceptible’ things, which lie at the foundation of the physi-
cal constitution of the world, the ultimate realities of exis-
tence, on which the whole universe is built up. How is it
possible, in a system which rests wholly on the basis of
sensation to obtain knowledge of them? It must be remem-
bered, in the first place, that to Epicurus these ultimate
realities were always material and concrete. An inquiry into
ultimate realities does not mean, as it might with some

: § 85: see Tohte, op. cit., p. 15. 2 See p. 251. :

CANONICE 263

philosophers, a discussion of abstract principles or immaterial
‘ideas’, but an investigation of the nature and behaviour of
atoms and space, separately and in combination. The objects
then of such an inquiry do not differ in kind from the things
of sensation or the celestial phenomena, for they are always
material and physical. If our sight were only strong enough
to perceive the extremely minute, we should be able to
examine the behaviour of atoms and atomic compounds just
as we can that of any of the perceptible realities: it is only
the limitation of our senses which relegates the inquiry in
this case to the realm of thought instead of the realm of
sensation. Further, it must always be borne in mind that to
Epicurus the processes of thought and perception were in
no way different in kind: thought,’ like sensation,. is a
‘movement’ of soul-atoms, situated in the mind, not in the
sense-centres: this ‘movement’ is aroused by ‘images’ in
just the same way and is undoubtedly conceived by Epicurus
as a process of ‘visualization’: its most remote speculations
are only in reality the result of such movement combining
the images of concepts, built up ultimately out of sensations,
into a new image. In short the mental processes are nothing
but a subtler reproduction of the processes of sensation. If
this is so, and neither the objects nor the instrument nor the
process of inquiry differ in essence from those in use in other
departments, we should expect to find that the principles
regulating such inquiry were also the same. And this is
indeed the case. Nowhere does Epicurus make any distinc-
tion as regards procedure between the investigation of the
imperceptible, in the strict sense, and that of celestial pheno-
mena: they are always grouped together. Procedure? in both
cases must start from phenomena, and opinions formed
must be checked by phenomena: ‘contradiction’ and ‘non-
contradiction’ are for both departments alike the test of
falsehood and truth: the example quoted above—Epicurus’
proof of the existence of the void from the acknowledged

« For a fuller discussion of the process of thought see Chap. VIII,

Ppp: 422-30. a) ae ;
2 See the passages quoted above with reference to Ta peTewpa.

264 EPICURUS

fact of motion—is a typical case of procedure in dealing
with ultimate realities: if an hypothesis be shown to be in-
consistent with the evidence of phenomena it must be re-
jected. Here then we have the origin of two features of
Epicurean argument in the exposition of the physical
system, which became more prominent in the more expanded
work of Lucretius than in the brief résumés of his master’s
teaching which have come down to us. In the first place the
refutation of opponents or rival philosophers takes the form
of showing that their theories are inconsistent with the facts
of experience:' they do not admit the existence of a void,
which would make motion impossible, or they allow infinite
division, which would destroy the permanence of the material
world and so on. Secondly, the positive proof of Epicurean
theories again and again takes the form of an appeal to the
facts of sensational experience, either as demonstrating the
truth of the underlying suppositions or as illustrating them
by analogy: thus the many glorious passages of description
which constitute in no small degree the poetic beauty of
Lucretius’ work are ultimately but the strict carrying out of
the precepts of the Master’s Canonice.

In procedure then it is neither possible nor necessary to
distinguish between the two departments of the impercep-
tible. But when the results come to be examined, a notable
difference is at once obvious. The main characteristic of the
investigation of celestial phenomena is the acceptance as
equally true of several explanations of the same phenomenon:
this was seen to be a consequence of the purely negative
test of ‘non-contradiction’, and also to correspond, as Epi-
curus held, to a real multiplicity of causes of the production
of such phenomena. But when the theory of Epicurus as to
the ultimate physical constitution of the world is examined,
it is seen at once that this multiplicity of causes and explana-
tions has passed away. There is no hesitation as to the true _

t See especially Lucr. i. 635-920, in which he deals with the predecessors _
of the Atomists. "The same tendency in Epicurus himself may be seen in Ep. 1,
§ 49, where he states very briefly that other theories of vision will not explain
the facts as well as his own.

CANONICE 265

explanation, and in no single instance is there a suggestion of
a possible alternative: Atomism is not one among several pos-
sible theories of the universe, nor with regard to any of its
details is there a hint that any other view than that expounded
by Epicurus himself could be true. Indeed the Letter to
Pythocles' draws the distinction clearly and unmistakably:
‘we must not in the case of celestial phenomena’, says the
writer, “expect our investigation to be in all respects like the
principles concerning ethics or the solution of the other
physical problems, as for example, that the universe is
matter and space or that the elements are indivisible, or any
other such statements in circumstances where there is only
one explanation which harmonizes with phenomena (rovévra
dca povayny exer Tots Pawopevors ovpdwviav)’. If procedure in
the two departments is identical, how is it that results can
be so different? How can Epicurus claim, as he apparently
does, a higher—or more single—certainty in the realms of
inquiry most remote from the evidence of the senses? The
full discussion of this difficulty, which belongs rather to the
consideration of processes of thought than procedure, must
be postponed till the examination of the Epicurean psycho-
logy is reached,? but the conclusion there reached may be
shortly stated. Thought—or reasoning—about the ultimate
realities of the world is conducted: by the comparison and
combination of ‘clear’ concepts, each stage in the process
being a new concept recognized as self-evident. These con-
cepts are grasped by ‘an act of apprehension on the part of
the mind’ (émBod} rijs Svavoias) exactly similar to that by
which the senses apprehend the ‘clear vision’ of the near
object, or the mind the subtle images which penetrate to it.
Thus, although the data are now most remote from im-
mediate sensation, and the process by which they are reached
and developed is purely mental, that process is yet exactly
similar to—and even in the wholly materialistic conception
of Epicurus—identical with the simplest of all forms of the
apprehension of truth, the act of observation in which the
senses grasp the image immediately presented to them. It
t Ep. ii, § 86. 2 See Chap. VIII, pp. 425-30.

2.66 EPICURUS

is thus no arbitrary assumption on Epicurus’ part that the
concepts of science have a ‘single’ certainty, but once again,
just as surely as the plurality of explanations in the case of
celestial phenomena, a strict deduction from the psychologi-
cal analysis of the process. It will be seen, when the question
is fully discussed, that this account is not explicitly given in
any Epicurean source, but it is strongly supported by more
than one piece of evidence, nor can the strange divergence
in results between the two processes of investigation be
_ otherwise explained. We may then formulate the rule of the
' Canonice thus: ‘Explanation of the ultimate realities must
be based on the indications of phenomena and when framed
submitted to the test of phenomena: truth is attained by
the “mental apprehension” of the “clear” vision of concepts.’

Just then as the various criteria of truth were seen to be
based on the one fundamental principle of the infallibility
of sensation, so now the rules of the Canonice turn out to
be only a_reassertion of that infallibility anda statement_of
the manner in which it must be used in all departments of
inquiry. In each case the start must be made from sense-
experience, the hypotheses of opinion and thought must be-
referred back to experience and tested by it, and the
supremely important moment in each process is the ‘clear
vision’, whether sensible or mental, viewed with deliberate
observation (éBodj). We are now in a position to give its
full force to the brief summary of this part of the Canonice
in the opening section of the letter to Herodotus: * “we must
keep all our investigations in accord with our sensations and
in particular with the immediate apprehensions whether of
the mind or of any one of the instruments of judgement, and
likewise (in the field of morals) in accord with the feelings
existing in us, in order that we may have indications whereby
we may judge both the problem of sense-perception and the

1 § 38 eri re Kata Tas alcOycers Set mdvra Typeiv Kal dwA@s <KaTa>
Tas trapovoas émiBords etre Siavoias et’ Grou SHmore TOV KpuTnpiwyv (here
=sense-organs, aioOyrnpiwy, see my note ad loc.) duotws dé Kai Kata Ta
dmdpxovta 740y, Ows dv Kal TO mpoopévov Kal TO adyAov Exwpev ols
onpevwadpeba..

CANONICE 269

unseen’, It is in fact, when we fully understand its terms,
a singularly terse and complete summing up of the whole
principles of Epicurean investigation.

So far the rules of the Canonice have been concerned with
the processes of observation and thought. But the philo-
sopher must not merely think and observe: he must,
especially if he is to be a teacher, express his thoughts in
language. And so in the same short introductory section,"
which represents the Canonice in the letter to Herodotus,
there is a discussion of language and terminology which at
first sight appears almost disproportionate. But the reasons
for this emphasis are not far to seek. In the first place it is
no doubt part of Epicurus’ protest on behalf of the ‘plain
man’ against the ‘professionalism’ of other philosophic
schools. As he distrusts their dialectic,* so also he distrusts
their dialect:3 the obscure and technical are to have no place
in his system. Since it is to be addressed to the ‘common-
sense’ man, it shall be couched in clear and ordinary
phraseology. But apart from this polemical motive, there is
a deeper reason underlying his precepts, which has its origin
directly in the theory of the criteria of truth. The importance
of the ‘name’ attached to concepts has already been noticed:4
the ‘anticipation’, owing its validity to the series of percep-
tions of which it is composed, is of no value for philosophy,
or even for practical reflection and the act of cognition itself,
unless it be labelled with a name: we cannot convey our
ideas to others, or even formulate them to ourselves, unless
we can put them into words. When in a later section of the
letter5 Epicurus discusses the origin of language, he throws
much light on the psychology of naming. It was, he holds,
at first a natural process (dvoer): men impelled by a desire to
express their feelings and impressions, ‘emitted air formed
into shape’ to express them in different ways, as it came

S$ 37, 38. 2 D.L. x. 31: see p. 235+

3 Ep.i, §72 Kal odre Svaddkrovs (‘dialectical expressions’) as BeArious
petadnmréov. GAN adrais tats drapxovaais Kat’ adtod XpnoTeov.

4 See p. 248.

s §§75, 76.

268 EPICURUS

naturally to them, each in his own tribe. Later on," when the
convention of language was consciously understood, men
in each nation by common agreement (0écer) invented names
for things, to prevent the confusion which would result if
every man ‘spoke in his own tongue’. Finally, as new things
were brought from foreign tribes either their foreign name
was introduced with them or one chosen by reasoning
(Aoyio) was assigned to them, Concepts then must be
reflected in names: and, as the necessary converse, names
must reflect concepts. What philosophy requires in excess of
the demands of ordinary life is that, just as its concepts must
be clear, so its terms must clearly reflect them. ‘First of all
we must grasp the ideas attached to words (rots POdyyors),
in order that we may be able to refer to them and so to judge
(émxpivew) the inferences of opinion, (ra Sogaloueva) or pro-
blems of investigation (fyrovpeva) or reflection (dzopodpeva), so
that we may not either leave everything uncertain and go on
explaining to infinity or use words devoid of meaning.’* The
philosophic vocabulary is to be the immediate and certain
record of accumulated perceptions, and therefore, as it were,
the coinage for the interchange of philosophic thought: only
the coinage must not belie its face value. As such it will
facilitate, and indeed render possible, the process of testing
the inferences of the mind by the evidence of sensation,
which is the keystone of all true thought and investigation
alike in ordinary life and in the various departments of
scientific and philosophic inquiry. But how can this be
carried out? For one of our most common experiences in
ordinary life is that names by no means always represent
clear concepts: words are apt to have a most confusing
number of different meanings, and it is by no means always
the case that ‘the moment a word is spoken, immediately by
means of the “anticipation’’ the form of the thing is thought

t Giussani, Stud. Lucr. 267-84, called attention to the importance of this
later stage: Epicurus dealt with the old controversy whether language arose
dvoet or Oécer by arguing that both processes had their place but in different
stages of the growth of speech.

a. Boras 9 37<

CANONICE 269

of’.t Epicurus is prepared to meet this difficulty: ‘It is
essential that the first mental image (evvdnua) associated with
each word should be regarded and that there should be no
need of explanation (dzodeifews), if we are really to have a
standard to which to refer a problem of investigation or
reflection or a mental inference :’? for as Epicurus said else-
where,3 ‘the first signification of every name is immediate
and clear evidence’. We come back again to simplicity and
common sense: the ‘first’ or most obvious meaning of words
is to be taken and preserved. Not merely is philosophy itself |
to be within the reach of the ordinary man’s observation, |
but its exposition must be in language within his immediate |
comprehension. 3
The rule of the Canonice then with regard to the use of
words is the direct outcome and counterpart of his principles
of investigation, and there is no need to attempt aformulation
of it, for it could not be more clearly or tersely expressed than
in Epicurus’ own words. Unfortunately it is an ideal which
in practice it is very difficult—almost impossible—to carry
out, nor could there be a more convincing illustration of its
difficulty than Epicurus’ own writings. Although Diogenes‘
tells us that ‘he uses current diction (Aééeu kupig) to expound
his theory’ and the Epicurean in Cicero’s 5 dialogue main-
tains that ‘Epicurus expresses in words what he wishes to say
and states clearly what I can understand’, critics both ancient
and modern have alike complained of the obscurity of his
style, and it would certainly be hard to find any piece of]
philosophic writing more crabbed than the letter to Hero-|
dotus. It abounds in highly specialized terms—the ‘clear’
vision’ (évdpyeia), the ‘image awaiting confirmation’ (poo
pévov), the ‘apprehension of the mind’ (emPody rijs Surolnay
are some whose difficulty has already been noticed—and in!
spite of his professions, he is by no means free from the,
crime of employing words in more than one meaning,
‘Sensation’ ® (aicyois) and ‘anticipation’ (mpdAnyus) are used
a iN OAS oe LE 2 Ep.i, § 38.

\ 2 SEW i / / > / >
3 D.L. x. 33 ravi obv dvopare TO TPWTWS UTOTETAYMEVOV EVAPYES COT
132 T 3s 5S dé Fin.i.5..15. 6 See notes on pp. 238, 247-

270 . EPICURUS

both for the act and for its result, ‘feeling’! (md@os) has both
a wider and a narrower sense. The fact is that Epicurus was
attempting to combine two almost incompatible ideals, the
| use of common words in their ordinarily accepted sense, and
| great precision in meaning and expression. The ordinary
| words of common language are not precise and exact, any
_ more than the general concepts which they represent, nor
| is the language of everyday life adapted for the accuracy of
| philosophic expression. In effect Epicurus paid more atten-
| tion to accuracy than to lucidity, and in many cases where
\ he found ordinary words ambiguous or had already used
them in their ‘first meaning’, he was driven to invent new
terms. The consequence is that he practically created a new
| and highly specialized vocabulary, intelligible indeed to him-
self and conveying definite notions, but travelling very far
from common language—all the farther, indeed, the more
clear-cut and circumscribed the significance of his terms
became to himself. Nor, on the other hand, has he altogether
avoided the pitfall of ambiguity; words must necessarily take
so much of their meaning from their context that to establish
for a single word a single definite meaning and never to
depart from it or modify it is an ideal that even the most
accurate thinker would find it well-nigh impossible to satisfy.
As a natural result, though Epicurus’ exposition of his
system would be understood by the trained Epicurean,
drilled in the exact sense of the Epicurean terminology and
the shades of its variations, it appeared obscure to those who
stood outside the tradition, and is peculiarly difficult to us
who have lost the clue to many of the technicalities and can
only recover it very tentatively by the careful comparison of
passage with passage. Nevertheless not only was his ideal
in harmony with the general trend of his philosophy and the
rule he laid down a consistent completion of the Canonice,
but his avowed purpose deserves much greater attention in
the interpretation of his writings than many modern critics
have given it. To know that Epicurus intended always to
use the same word in the same sense, and that sense the
« See pp. 248—So.

CANONICE 2m

‘first’ and most natural, is an extremely valuable guide to the
understanding of many dark places, and those who neglect
this principle are most likely to go astray. Though his
terminology was not always consistent, any more than his
philosophy, both alike were intended to be so, and to create
a rigidly consistent whole.

The detailed consideration of the Canonice shows then
that alike the criteria of truth and the rules of procedure
depend for their validity on the fundamental principle of the
infallibility of sensation. Although a critical examination
has from time to time revealed difficulties and deficiencies
in the theory, these have not been found due to faults in
logical sequence or connexion, but are rather inherent in
the main principle itself. ‘The Canonice is a connected whole
and in more than one point Epicurus’ fearless consistency
in carrying out his principles and his inferences from them
has given occasion for remark. Criticism must then fall, as
it always has with both in ancient and modern commentaries,
on the bare principle itself. Some of the difficulties, and in
particular those connected with the sense of sight, have
already been discussed, and it has beenseen how the attempts
made by Epicurus and his followers to escape from the
admission of the falsity of any sensation or class of sensation,
only cut more deeply at the root of the main position.
Criticism of a similar kind were early made with regard to
his treatment of other forms of sensation, and no account
of his system can fairly pass them over. Take, for example,
the senses of taste and touch:

‘if,’ argues Plutarch,? ‘when one man says that a wine is rough and
another that it is sweet, neither of them is deceived in his sensation,
how can the wine be in itself rough any more than sweet? Again, one
often sees the same bath regarded by some people as hot, by others
as cold: for these order more cold water to be added and those more
hot... . If then, neither sensation is truer than the other, it seems to
follow that the water is in itself not hot any more than cold. For if itis
argued that it appears different to different people, that is equivalent (if
all sensations are true) to saying that it is both hot and cold.’

* See pp. 253-7: 2 adv. Colot. 4, 1109; U. 250.

272 EPICURUS

Epicurus? attempted to explain these differences by diversity
in the atomic conformation of the sense-organs of the per-
cipient: the palate of the man who thinks the wine rough is
differently formed from that of his friend, and accordingly,
though the atomic structure of the wine remains the same
in both cases, it may produce a difference of effect. But
though no doubt such a theory may help to explain the
diverse judgements of taste, yet, as Plutarch points out, the
theory that all sensations are true, does, when sensations are
contradictory, annul the reality of quality in the object and
leave us with a purely subjective standard of judgement:*
contradictory sensations cannot both give us true information
about the external reality. The same difficulty appears more
serious in the field of ethics. There the one standard for the
judgement of right conduct is the ‘feeling of pleasure and
pain’: that which gives us pleasure is good, that which gives
us pain is bad. But once again, men’s feelings may differ:
what is pleasant to me may be painful to another. There is
then no objective standard of good and bad, and every man
must be a law to himself. We seem once again to be brought
back to the semi-scepticism of Democritus. Atoms and
space are the only full realities and thought concerning them
and their conduct alone true: qualities and the phenomena
which are known by them have but a secondary kind of
reality, and sensation which gives us that knowledge is liable
to be fallacious.

But though Epicurus had no doubt more of Democritus’
philosophy in his bones than he was aware of, certainly more
than he would ever have consented to acknowledge, so that he
admits, for instance, that the ‘secondary qualities’ are merely
the possession of atomic compounds (ovyxpises) and have —
no place in the world of ultimate realities, yet he will have
none of Democritus’ scepticism. The compound is no less
a real existence than the atoms and the void which form it,
its qualities are no less real than the primal properties of the
atoms, and the sensation which gives us our knowledge of

t See Chap. VIII, p-. 404.
2 Plut. 1. c. pndev waAdov elvar Toiov 7 Totov.

CANONICE 273

it is not only true, but the sole instrument of certain know-
ledge. However near his system scepticism may be hovering,
if its principles be logically carried out, Epicurus will have no
truck with it: he is satisfied that he has sufficiently dealt
with such difficulties as are involved in the doctrine of the
infallibility of sensation. Yet even if we shut our eyes to the
incidental difficulties of the theory there remains the one
weakness which haunts the system of Epicurus, as it must
necessarily any sensationalist philosophy—the supreme diffi-
culty both in the field of knowledge and in the field of ethics
of obtaining objective truth and an objective standard.
Truth and goodness must be universal, yet the sensations by
which they are to be known are the sensations of the indi-
vidual. What guarantee is there that his sensations are
identical with his neighbour’s or even with his own on some
previous or future occasion? That Epicurus and his followers
were conscious of this weak spot we may infer from their
eagerness, when occasion offered, to appeal to the univer-
sality of sensations and beliefs, as, for instance, in support of
the existence of matter‘ or the existence of divine beings.” But
in reality the Gospel of sensation, for all its attractive sim-
plicity and apparent certainty must lead to an individualism,
such as that of Protagoras: the individual man must
become ‘the measure of all things’. He is left isolated with
his own sensations and his own criteria, and it is a mere
chance whether his neighbour will be given similar data and
therefore reach similar conclusions. The Epicurean con-
sciously shut himself off from public life and took no part
in the common activities of the state; but he did not realize
that the very foundation of his system in reality cut him off
in thought and conduct from his fellow-men and left him
a philosopher stranded to all intents and purposes on a desert
island. aa

But it is not the object of the present work to criticize
Epicureanism from the outside or to estimate tts value in
comparison with other philosophies. It is indeed necessary
at the outset to point out the difficulties involved in its

t Ep.1, § 39. a Lucr. v. 1169 ff.
3307 T

274 EPICURUS

fundamental position, but a more correct, because more
sympathetic, estimate of its worth will be obtained, if we
attempt to regard it rather from within, to trace its genesis,
and to see how it coheres in a consistent unity, which makes
it worthy of attention as a serious philosophy. With this
view I have endeavoured to show in this chapter how the
axioms and rules of the Canonice are one and all built up
on the single fundamental principle. The following chapters,
which deal with the physical and ethical sides of the system,
will be treated from the same point of view. The Canonice
is the necessary starting-point of Epicureanism, however
much it may involve what can only be clear after the
examination of other departments, because on it depends the
whole of the rest of the system. It may indeed be said with-
out exaggeration that Epicurean physics and ethics are but
the elaboration in many different fields of the supreme
principle of the infallibility of sensation."

: It may be interesting to compare with the principles of the Canonice
a recent and strangely similar statement of the attitude and method of
modern science written by Dr. A S. Russell in his chapter on The Dynamic
of Science in Adventure, p. 6: “The reality of the scientist embraces two
broad classes of concepts. First, those things, such as ourselves, the stars,
the table, and so on, which are ordinarily described as being directly
observed by the senses, the reality of which is accepted uncritically by
common sense. Secondly, hypothetical entities like atoms, electrons, wire-
less waves, and ether, which cannot be directly observed. These hypo-
thetical entities are regarded as real, firstly, if an analogy can be found to
make them correspond with things which are judged to be real, and,
secondly, if they give a satisfactory account of the experimental facts for the
explanation of which they have been invoked.’

III
ATOMS AND SPACE

Le passing from Leucippus to Democritus the atomic
theory has been seen to grow in consistency and harmony:
with Epicurus the change is even more marked. It is now
felt to be a system of interrelated parts: the connexion of
one proposition with another has been thought out and the
various conceptions involved in Atomism ordered and
organized on fundamental principles. This impression is
due in some degree, no doubt, to the form in which our
information has reached us: the theories of the earlier
Atomists have to be pieced together from scattered frag-
ments, the accounts of the doxographers and the detached
criticisms of later philosophers; for Epicurus we have the
compressed and rather confused, though far better ordered,
account in his own letter to Herodotus, and the continuous
commentary of the poem of Lucretius. But there is much
more than this: Epicurus had the master mind, which would |
not rest content with a mere ‘adoption’ of Democritus’
Atomism, as hasty critics have been too ready to suppose,
but insisted on development, modification, and improve-
ment, and above all on the correlation of the whole system
under the central principle of the infallibility of sense-per-
ception. No account can do justice to Epicurus’ physics
which does not attempt to grasp it as a whole, to emphasize
the interdependence of its parts and the constant control of
the principles of the Canonice. It is from this point of view
that I shall attempt in the following pages to describe it.

Epicurus makes his start, like Democritus, from the
principle of causality and permanence: ‘nothing is created
out of the non-existent’, but unlike his predecessor * he does
not leave the principle as an ex cathedra assumption, but
supports it by argument. Here we are dealing with per-
ceptible and imperceptiblealike; the problem is universal and

t Ep. 1, §-38.
se

276 EPICURUS

cannot be solved directly by the senses: we must ask whether
the senses give us any ‘indication’ to support the principle
or whether they in any way contradict it. Such an ‘indica-
tion’ Epicurus finds in the ordered generation of things in
the perceptible world: ‘nothing is created out of the non-
existent; for, if it were, everything would be created out of
everything with no need of seeds’. Lucretius! follows the
same argument and brings it out with a wealth of illustra-
tion. The proof is tersely put, but is clearly on the lines
demanded by the Canon. Critics have proclaimed it un-
satisfactory on the ground that Epicurus, to put it in modern
phraseology, is arguing against ‘spontaneous generation’ by
denying ‘sporadic creation’. The truth is surely that he
proves more than he need: all it was necessary for him to
show was that every created thing was sprung from an ante-
cedent something, was created of substance which already
existed. Epicurus has gone beyond this and pointed out that
not merely is there always pre-existing substance, but in
each case substance in a particular form, a ‘seed’, which can
only produce one particular thing and nothing else. Sup-
pose for a moment that the opposite were true, that things
could suddenly come into existence without being formed
from pre-existing substance? What is the evidence of
phenomena? That things require definite ‘seeds’ for their
creation. The evidence of sensation interposes its veto
(dvrysaprdpyors), and the supposition is untenable: it must be
true that ‘nothing is created out of the non-existent’. There
is no confusion in the argument: it is, if anything, gratuit-
ously specific.2 It may be noticed that it has a double
application: (1) the sum total of things is never increased by
new additions, (2) every material thing has a material cause.

The second principle—the complement of the first—is
next stated and proved. ‘If that which disappears were
destroyed into the non-existent, all things would have
perished, since that into which they were dissolved would not
exist. The statement here is less lucid, principle and proof

t Lucr. i. 149-214.
2 Cf.also Woltjer, de Epicuri Philosophia cum fontibus comparata, p. 13.

ATOMS AND SPACE 277

being run into one: Lucretius puts the principle more
clearly: ‘nature breaks up each thing again into its own
first-bodies, nor does she destroy ought into nothing’,?
nothing, in other words, ceases entirely to exist: as nothing
is added to the sum of things, so nothing is entirely taken
from it. The proof again is from phenomena: if things were
utterly destroyed, and by the first principle nothing new
could be added, the sum total of the universe must gradually
be diminished, and ultimately would pass out of existence
altogether. But this is not the evidence of the senses: we
do indeed see things perish, cease, that is, to be what they
were before, but this perishing means only the assumption
of another form. Change we see all around us, but not the
absolute cessation of existence. Lucretius is fond of using
this principle as an axiom in the converse form, ‘whatever
changes and departs from its own limits is straightway the
death of that which was before’.» Once again there is a
double implication in the principle: (1) the sum of matter is
never decreased by absolute loss—this is the modern idea
of the ‘permanence of matter’, (2) no individual thing 1s
utterly destroyed, but only resolved into its component
atoms.

There follows a third principle: ‘the sum of things always
was such as it is now and always will be the same’. This is
in part a direct deduction from the other two: if nothing 1s
added, the universe cannot increase; if nothing perishes, it
cannot decrease. But Epicurus adds other arguments:
‘there is nothing into which it changes: for outside the
universe there is nothing which could come into it and bring
about the change’. This is the reference to sense-experience.
Among phenomena two conditions are always required for
change, (1) something for the original ‘thing’ to change into,
something which it may become, (2) some external agent to
effect the change—by means, as Epicurus held, of a blow.
But by ‘mental apprehension’, by ‘looking at’ the concept

ROY eth y Gs

a nam quodcumque suis mutatum finibus exit,
continuo hoc mors est illius quod fuit ante, 1. 670, &c.

278 EPICURUS

we have already formed of the universe, we can see that
neither of these conditions can in its case be fulfilled: the
universe cannot change into something else, for there is
nothing else which it could become, nor is there anything
external to it, which could effect the change. The argument
is put in a more elaborate form by Lucretius in a passage
probably based on the Greater Epitome.’ He seems to imply
three possibilities by which the universe might change, (1) if
there were anything outside it into which any part of it might
escape, (2) ifthere were anywhere from which a new force
might come into the universe and alter it, (3) if change could
be caused by internal rearrangement. Epicurus in the letter to
Herodotus? seems to have the first two of these causes most
prominently in his mind. The third might at first sight seem
to be at work in the universe in the constant dissolution and
recomposition of the atomic compounds, but Epicurus’
answer would lie in his conception of equilibrium (icovopia):
the atoms have long ago entered into all possible combina-
tions and cannot create anything new which could alter the
sum total. The universe then cannot change for there is
nothing for it to change into and no external or internal force
to change it. It is birthless, deathless, and immutable.

In these three primary principles themselves there is
nothing new: they were practically implied in the Parmeni-
dean conception, they were enunciated by Empedocles and
Anaxagoras and explicitly stated by Democritus. But Epi-
curus has done more than ‘adopt’ them: he has adduced
proof for them, and in doing so has linked them directly to
the base principles of his whole system. The proofs from .
phenomena and the trust in sensation which they involve
are the new and characteristic addition.

In what form then does this eternal universe exist? ‘In
the form of body (or matter) and space (or, as Epicurus here

x Lucr. 11.1304 2. 9 830. ss:

3 Bignone, Epicuro, Appendix III, p. 253, sees a reference to this third
notion in the words od6év yap éorw els 6 peraBaAde (or as he reads,
following Usener, peraBadci). I think it more probable that this clause refers
to the first possibility and that the third is passed over here by Epicurus.

ATOMS AND SPACE 279

says, “‘place”).’! That body exists is testified by universal
sensation:? all men through all their senses are made con-
scious of matter. That space exists is shown by the existence
and motion of matter: ‘if there were not that which we term
void and place and intangible existence (dvadijs dvous), bodies
would have nowhere to exist and nothing through which to
move, as they are seen to move.’

At this point certain difficulties arise, though rather from
a modern than an ancient point of view. In the first place
it is true that the sensation of matter is universal, but that
has not hindered philosophers from calling in question the
objective reality of the external world, or asking what mean-
ing, if any, can be attached to the statement of its existence as
apart from a percipient intelligence. But, if we are inclined
to raise this objection, we must bear in mind that it is
essentially a modern difficulty, unknown to the ancient
world, and secondly that Epicurus spoke here, as always,
as the average man of common sense. To him, as to the
modern man of science, the existence of matter is sufficiently
testified and its properties sufficiently made known by the
senses. Once again he is content to take as his starting-
point what ‘common sense’ would say, without any attempt
to get behind it.

The difficulty connected with the syllogistic argument by
which Epicurus inferred space from the fact of motion is
more serious, for it was a problem which antiquity had very
fully discussed. Parmenides and the Eleatics had, as has
been seen,3 in order to preserve the unity of the world, denied
both space and motion: the world was a single corporeal
plenum, compact ‘body’ without space, and the appearance
of motion was merely a delusion of the senses. As against
this theory Epicurus was justified, indeed impelled, by his
own first principles to reassert the evidence of the senses:
we perceive motion, therefore motion is a reality. But is it

t § 39 GAAG py Kal 76 Tay ort <odpara kat rémos>. The missing
words can be supplied with certainty from other passages. See especially
mept Dicews, a; C.e ft. 14. ’ ql

2 Cf. Lucr. i. 422 ‘ communis sensus’. 3 Part I, Chap. I, p. 26.

280 EPICURUS

necessary to infer from this the existence of void? Some
modern scientists, holding the hypothesis of ether, would
answer in the negative, and a very similar solution was put
forward by Epicurus’ contemporaries, the Stoics. They,
under the stress of their desire to assert the divine unity of
the world, maintained that the whole world was but one
primary substance, which however was elastic and capable
of existing in various degrees of tension; under the greatest
strain it appeared as fire, with less tension as air, with less
again as water, and with least of all as earth. Motion, on this
view, then is but an interchange of parts, much as one might
move about the various portions of a piece of putty without
causing a break, or as one sees changes of position in a
kaleidoscope. With this possibility Epicurus does not con-
cern himself, though it must have been current at the time
of the writing of his letter, but that it did become a real
question to the later Epicureans, we may infer from the fact
that Lucretius? consents to deal with it. His main answer
is, in effect, simply the restatement of the common-sense
view: there must be empty space in order that there may
be a beginning of motion; a thing cannot begin to move
unless there is ‘room’ for it to move into. His second argu-
ment 3 is an illustration from experience—if you clash two
broad bodies, e.g. boards, together and then quickly draw
them apart, the air rushes round to fill up the space between
them: but there must be an interval of time in which that
space is empty or ‘void’. That Epicurus’ own answer would
have been on these lines may safely be inferred from the
fact that in the controversial passages 4 about the Epicurean
view of space the examples are drawn from such illustrations
as the interior of a cask or a vessel—not of course that
Epicurus would have denied that they were filled with air;
but would have argued rather that they afforded an ‘indica-
tion’ of that real empty space which lay between atom and
atom.: More cogent is Lucretius’ 5 third argument that the

t See Hicks, pp. 24 ff. 2 Lucr. i. 370-97. 3 384 ff.

4 a, Themistius paraphr. Arist. Phys. 4. 4, 214; U. 273.

Seas 390, 7-

ew

ATOMS AND SPACE 281

‘elasticity’ of the primary substance, its power to condense
and rarify, must itself imply the existence of void. The Stoic
view, Epicurus would have maintained, is not that imme-
diately suggested by sensation: it is an ‘addition of the mind’
which the ‘clear facts’ of sensation refute. Once again
‘common sense’ is good enough. Matter then and space are
the sole independent existences: ‘and besides these two
nothing can be thought of . . . such as could be grasped as
whole existences and not spoken of as the accidents or pro-
perties of such existences’. !

We must ask then next how are we to conceive these two
existences, ‘body’ and space? ‘Among bodies’, Epicurus
proceeds, “some are compounds (ovyxpises) and others those
of which compounds are formed’.? This is little more than
a verbal explanation: the term ‘body’ is in itself ambiguous,
for it may be applied alike to the ‘bodies’ or ‘things’ which
we perceive by sensation or to the ultimate bodies of which
they are composed. But the confusion is only momentary
and does not produce any serious difficulty either in Epicurus
or in Lucretius,3 who follows him in making the distinction:
for as soon as the character of these ultimate bodies has been
determined, there will be other descriptive names to apply
to them in order to distinguish them from the bodies of
sensation. What then are they? “These latter’,+says Epicurus,
‘are indivisible (droua) and unalterable (duerdBAnra) (if, that
is, all things are not to be destroyed into the non-existent,
but something permanent (éoxéév 7) is to remain behind at
the dissolution of compounds): they are completely solid
(zAnjpn) in nature and can by no means be dissolved in any
part. So it must needs be that the first-beginnings are
indivisible corporeal existences (drdéuovs owydrwv dices).
Here then is the first statement of the atomic position. The
argument by which it is supported is put very briefly in the
parenthesis and requires examination. It rests on the Atomic
contention that there must be a limit to the divisibility of

« Ep. i, § 40. For the Epicurean view of ‘accidents and properties’ see
Chap. IV. aes
2 Ep.i, § 40. 3 i. 483-4. 4 Ep. i, § 41.

282 EPICURUS

matter, but this is put both negatively and positively. In the
first place Epicurus appears to maintain that, unless there
were such a limit, things would pass out of existence alto-
gether, which would be a contradiction of the principle that
‘nothing is destroyed into the non-existent’. The idea is
that if it were possible to go on dividing and dividing you
would ultimately find that matter had disappeared and you
had reached ‘nothing’. Strictly this is of course a fallacy: it
is theoretically possible, apart from such a physical barrier
as Epicurus supposes, to go on dividing and subdividing to
infinity and yet to reach only smaller and smaller particles of
matter. And it is improbable that Epicurus would seriously
have maintained the point: it is rather a popular way of
putting what he meant. For the stress of the argument lies
on the other, the positive, side: ‘something permanent (or
“strong”) must remain’.t Here the argument is independent
of the fallacy of ultimate resolution into nothing. For if
infinite division were possible, all particles of matter however
small would be compound bodies, for they could always be
separated into smaller particles. But the compound body
on Epicurus’ view is always a mixture of matter and void,
and the presence of void is a source of weakness: for it means
the possibility of destruction by external blows. If, then,
however low one may go in the scale of minuteness, nothing
indestructible is ever reached, matter as we know it in
external things could not exist; for there could be no solid
and permanent substratum—‘nothing strong’—to hold it
together and to resist the shocks of collision.

The argument recurs in two other contexts in the letter,
which will throw some light upon it. In the first Epicurus?
is arguing that the atoms have none of the ‘secondary
qualities’, which we associate with things: “for every quality
changes; but the atoms do not change at all, since there must

: The words ioyddv vu are an emendation of my own, which was made
independently by Bignone (Epicuro, p. 76, n. 1) for the manuscript reading
icxvovra. But the point does not rest on the emendation, for it is confirmed
by other passages, especially Ep.i, § 54 and §56 and Lucr.i.628 ff. : see below.

> § 54.

aT

ATOMS AND SPACE 283

needs be something which remains solid and indissoluble
at the dissolution of compounds, which can cause changes’.
Just then as there must be indestructible particles to explain
the creation and the destruction of phenomena, so to explain
their changes, there must be something unchanging: and
this can be nothing else than the atom, the hard body without
the admixture of void, which alone can resist the attacks
of external blows. The second passage! is more directly
connected with our argument, for Epicurus is there proving
that the atoms must have a definite size, they cannot be
‘infinitely small’. “We must’, he says, ‘do away with division
into smaller and smaller parts to infinity in order that we
may not make all things weak and so in the composition of
aggregate bodies be compelled to crush and squander the
things that exist into the non-existent.’ Again the idea is
the same: if there is no limit to the smallness of particles,
there is no permanent strength in the substratum; things
become weak and can be whittled away past the limits of
material existence. A more striking and interesting form
of the same proof occurs in a difficult passage of Lucretius,’
which has been clearly explained by Giussani.3 If there
were no minimum, the poet maintains, but the infinite
division of matter were possible, then, because the process
of dissolution is quicker than that of creation, all things, 1.e.
perceptible things, must long ago have ceased to exist. Let
us suppose, for instance, that the process of dissolution is
twice as quick as that of creation, and that it takes ten years
to create a living creature and bring it to its maturity: then
in five years it can be dissolved into particles of the size
from which it started, and in ten, if there is no limit to
division, the particles will be as much smaller again. If out
of these particles a similar creature is now to be formed, it
will require twenty years, and on the next occasion forty
and so on. In all the ages which have passed since the
creation of the world, the powers of destruction would have
so got the upper hand that by now no perceptible things
would be left. Again, division cannot go on to infinity:
t § 56. 2 i. 551-64. 3 Stud. Lucr. 48-52.

284 EPICURUS

there must be some permanent minimum ‘with strength’ to
resist the influences of destruction. The passage is unusually
interesting and throws considerable light on the general
Epicurean argument.

This, as I understand it, is the contention of Epicurus for
the existence of indivisible particles as the permanent sub-
stratum of matter: not that, without them, matter would
cease altogether to exist—for however minutely divided, it
must still continue to be matter—but that without a limit
to division, it is impossible to arrive at anything completely
solid, and so sufficiently strong to resist the attacks of
destruction, in other words, the blows of other particles.
The result would be continuous destruction and no forma-
tion: in this sense ‘all things would be dissolved into the
non-existent’, for there would be no power to keep existing
things as they were, or to create similar new ones.

The atom then is a necessary postulate for the existence
of the world as we know it. How is it to be conceived?
Certain characteristics follow immediately from its definition
as an ‘indivisible existence’. It must be completely solid,*
completely compact,” and entirely without void:3 it is, that
is to say, pure body without any intervals. From this it
immediately follows that it is ‘unchangeable’: 4 for change —
is due to the alteration of the position of parts and that can
only be brought about in compound bodies, in which there
is an admixture of void. What then are the properties of this
indissoluble, unalterable body? They are according to
Epicurus,5 three in number, size, shape, and weight.

The question of the size of the atom was already, as we
have seen, a problem with a history in the Atomic theory.
Leucippus °® wishing to insist on their extreme minuteness
had stated that they were ‘without parts’ (dyuepq): Demo-
critus,7 seeing that it might then also be said that they were

1 orepeor, § 54. 2 aAnpn THY dvow dvTa, § 41.

3 duéroya Kevod, Aet. i. 34 18; U. 267.

4 dperaBdAyra, § 41.

5 §54 Tas aropouvs vomioTéov pydeuiav TrovdtnTa THVv paivopevwv
npoodepecbar TAY axjpwatos Kat Bdpovs Kai peyeous.

& dee p. 73: P Dee pp. 12h, 120,

ATOMS AND SPACE 285

without magnitude, i.e. without material existence, had
denied this and gone so far as to maintain that some of
them were even ‘very large’. Epicurus' dealt with the
question in a more systematic and philosophic manner.

‘We must not suppose’, he says, ‘that every size exists among the atoms,
in order that the evidence of phenomena may not contradict us, but
we must suppose that there are some variations of size. . . . The exist-
ence of atoms of every size is not required to explain the differences
of qualities in things, and at the same time some atoms would be bound
to come within our ken and be visible: but this is never seen to be the
case, nor is it possible to imagine how an atom could become visible.’

Here then is the answer to Democritus: sense-perception
is against his theory: there must be an upward limit of
magnitude, otherwise atoms could be seen. What of the
downward limit? It follows of course from the very defini-
tion of an atom, as a limit of division, that it cannot be of
infinite smallness, but Epicurus proceeds to treat the ques-
tion in a subtle and very characteristic argument. This
argument must be studied in the original and compared
with the rather more lucid, but less far-reaching version of
Lucretius.? I shall here attempt to give the gist of it in as
simple a form as possible.3 Epicurus appeals as usual to the
_ facts of sensation: and the appeal involves the expression
of strong controversial views with regard to area and exten-
sion. ‘Not merely can we not admit infinite division, but
we cannot suppose an ‘infinite progression from less to less
(werdBaors eis drretpov emi rovAatrov). His contention here is
directed primarily against the geometrical view of surface
or area, which held that surface was perfectly continuous,
and that it was possible, in considering for instance a line to
pass continually to smaller and smaller sections to infinity:
the idea is clearly expressed in the well-known story of
Achilles and the tortoise. As against this theory Epicurus
upholds the view of common sense based upon the experi-
ence of sensation. If we take any object and try by looking

t §§ 55-9. 2 i. 599-634-

3 See Giussani, Stud. Lucr. 64-72; Hicks, op. cit., pp- 242-5% G:B.

notes ad Joc.

286 EPICURUS

at it to analyse its surface, we find that we may indeed pro-
ceed from smaller to smaller parts for a long distance: but
ultimately we come to a point—not a geometrical but a
material point (dxpov)—which is the smallest visible thing.’
If we attempted to see any smaller part, we should pass out
of the range of the perceptible altogether. Indeed, this point
itself is only visible as a part of a larger whole: it is “dis-
tinguishable, but not perceptible by itself’ (8vaAqmrov ei pn
Kal? éavTd Oewpyrdv), and if we try to look at its ‘right-hand
or left-hand part’, we shall find that our eye has in reality
wandered to the next similar point. We have then in this
point reached something from which further progression to
anything smaller is impossible (duerdBarov): in other words,
surface is not continuous and does not permit of infinite
progression, but is a series of discrete minima. Further, these
‘least parts’ (minimae partes) aftord a standard of measure: as
we pass from one of them to another, we can—or could,
if we had patience—go on till we reached the last point,
then count them up and so from their number reckon the
size of the object. This, Epicurus holds, is the only view
of surface which is warranted by the ‘clear vision of per-
ception’, and the opposite view is due to the contamination
of the sense-perception by the false addition of opinion.
Yet, if we pass from the world of sensation to the world of
thought, we know that even these ‘points’, the ‘least parts’
for perception, are themselves aggregates (éyxor) of infinitely
smaller particles: in thought division may still be carried
on. But in the world of thought the analogy still holds:
ultimately we come to the ‘least possible’ (eAdyvara), the minima
of extension. They similarly are not separable: they can
only exist as parts of the atom. They never come together
to form it, they are not parted in it by void, they could
themselves have no ‘powers’,” but they may in thought be
distinguished. They too are ‘boundary marks’ (épara) and
by their number the size of the atom which they compose

« We can perhaps illustrate the idea best to ourselves by the example of

the extreme point of a needle.
2 Lucr. i. 628-34.

oo

ATOMS AND SPACE 287

may in thought be calculated. The world of thought corre-
sponds exactly (dvadoyia xéxpntat) to the world of sense: in the
world of sense we have the visible body composed of ‘dis-
tinguishable’ points, in the world of thought the atom
composed of ‘inseparable’ parts. This imaginative analogy
has then given us the answer to Leucippus and his critics
and to Democritus: the atoms are not ‘without parts’
(auepq) in the sense that they have magnitude and parts
‘distinguishable’ by thought; they are on the other hand
without parts in the sense that they are not formed of parts
which could be separated. In other words the atom has
size, i.e. measurable extension, but it remains an ‘indivisible
existence’. The size of the atom then is neither ‘very great’
nor infinitely small: it is extremely minute but with a lower
as well as an upper limit.

Furthermore there are some variations in the sizes of atoms:
‘for if this be the case, we can give a better account of what
occurs in our feelings and sensations’.t As will be seen later,”
difference in the size of the component atoms is a large factor
in producing difference of qualities in things. That the atoms
will have shape is manifest from the fact that they have size,
but now that we have the theory of the least parts, we can
go farther: for it is obvious that the shape of the atom varies
according to the number and disposition of the ‘least parts’.
An ingenious critic3 has worked out some of these differ-
ences. If, for instance, we suppose the minimae partes to be
cubes of exactly the same size, then, if an atom contains two
only, it can have but one shape fg; if it contains three,

two shapes A and fh; if four, five shapes on one plane,

: H, Hp Ey FA, and two more in two planes, ac-

cording as one of the parts in the last figure be placed on top
either of one of its neighbours, or of that at the opposite
corner: with five or six parts the possibilities are very

: Ep. 1, § 55. a See p. 354.
3 Brieger, Fahrbuch Fleck., 1875, p. 630, quoted by Giussani on Lucr.

ii. 483.

288 EPICURUS

largely increased. Are we to suppose then that this process
of variation may be infinitely continued, or is there a limit
to the possible varieties? Epicurus’ answer is again carefully
thought out: the number of different atomic shapes * is
indefinitely great (depiAnmrov), but not infinite. It must be
‘inconceivably great’: ‘for it is not possible that such great
varieties of things should arise from the same (atomic)
shapes, if they are limited in number’. Phenomena, as
usual, give the ‘indication’: the varieties of compound bodies
are very largely due to the difference of shape in the com-
ponent atoms, and it would not be possible to account for
these varieties, if we conceived of any comparatively small
number of atomic shapes. Why then is there a limit to the
number? Epicurus does not himself give us any reason, but
Lucretius? suggests two proofs, so characteristically Epi-
curean that they must represent the regular tradition of
the school. The first is an argument suggested by ‘mental
apprehension’: variety of shape, as we have seen, can only
be obtained by supposing an increase in the number of
least parts: or, in other words, an increase of size. If this
process were infinitely continued, we should again arrive
at atoms so large as to be perceptible to the senses: we should
be guilty of the fallacy of Democritus.3 The second is based
on the ‘indications’ of phenomena: varieties of quality in
things are caused by varieties of atomic shape: yet even the
varieties of things are limited; there is an extreme of beau
- and ugliness, just as there is of hot and cold. But if there
were infinite varieties of atomic shape, there could be no
such limitation of qualities: all that we find most beautiful.
and most hideous would long ago have been surpassed. We
must conclude then that these varieties of shape in the atoms
are indefinitely great, yet not infinite. On the other hand
the number of atoms of each particular shape is infinite,‘ for
if it were not so (the reason is again given by Lucretius5), the
sum total of atoms would itself be limited—which is not the

t Ep. 1, § 42. 2 ii. 481-521. 3 See p. 285.

4 Kal? Exdorny dé oxnudriow adds dzetpoi eiow at Suorat, § 42.

5 ii. 522-68.

ATOMS AND SPACE 289

case. The ideas connected with the shape of the atoms are
not so penetrating as those relating to their size, but are
particularly well thought out and form an interesting
example of the application of the principles of the Canon.
Thirdly, the atoms have weight.t The question whether
weight is a property of the atoms has, as has already been
seen, a very perplexing history in the Atomic theory.
Leucippus makes no mention of weight and it may be taken
for certain that he did not assign weight to the atoms. Over
the attitude of Democritus controversy still rages, but we
have seen reason to think that he did not regard it as an
absolute property of the atoms,” but only as a derivative from
their size which comes into action in the cosmic ‘whirl’. We
might therefore naturally suppose that the idea was intro-
duced into the system by Epicurus himself in order to
account for the ‘downward’ motion of the atoms in space.
This conclusion is however made improbable by a passage
in Lucretius3 in which, evidently following Epicurus, he
argues against the idea that variation in weight was the
cause which enabled the atoms to meet in the downward fall,
on the ground that in the void, which offers no resistance,
all bodies, whatever their weight, must fall at an equal
‘atomic’ pace. It is true that Lucretius puts this idea as
a supposition,‘ but it is hard to believe that he is not arguing
against some definite suggestion on these lines, and if so,
the idea of weight as the absolute property of the atoms and
the cause of downward motion must have been introduced
by some one into the atomic theory before Epicurus—
possibly by Nausiphanes. In view of the history of the dis-
cussion it is certainly strange that we find no argument on
the question in Epicurus. He is content with the mere
mention of weight 5 together with size and shape as one of the
properties of the atoms. Lucretius assumes it all through,
and it is only ina passage of the P/aciza® that we find any kind

t Ep.i, § 54- 2 See Part I, Chap. III,§3,pp.128f. 3 Ug Shee

4 ii. 225, ‘quod si forte aliquis credit’. § Het ye54s

6 [Plut.] Plac. Philos.1.3.26; U.275 6 8¢’Emixoupos rovrows Kai Tpirov
Bdpos mpocdOnkev: avdynn yap, Pnot, Kweio0a Ta o@para TH Tod Bapous

3307 U

2.90 EPICURUS

of proof recorded, a proof, as might be expected, from the
fact of motion: ‘it must needs be, says Epicurus, that the
bodies (i.e. the atoms) are moved by the blow of their weight:
for otherwise they will not move’. That this was Epicurus’
own argument is clear, apart from the testimony of Plutarch,
from the passages in which he speaks of the ‘natural down-
ward motion of the atoms owing to their weight’.t There
are reasons too which may be suggested for the absence of
explicit argument on the subject. On the one hand the
weight of the atoms is an immediate deduction from their
size: solid matter, having size, must also have weight:
demonstration is hardly needed as soon as the idea of ‘weight’
had become explicit. On the other hand—a more subtle
consideration—though differences of size and shape in the
atoms were productive of important results, difference of
weight is not effective. For to the atoms, always moving in
the void at an equal rate, difference of weight * does not pro-
duce difference of motion, and in compound bodies where
difference of weight first begins to tell, it is not the weight
of individual atoms that matters, but the weight of the
ageregate of matter compared with the aggregate of void.3
The atoms then have weight, and since they are solid matter
with no admixture of void, their weight varies directly with
their size: their weight is moreover the cause of their natural
‘downward’ motion, but difference of weight has no effect so
far as rate of motion is concerned.

Size, shape, and weight are thus proved to be properties
of the atoms, but beyond these they have no other qualities.‘
Here it might seem that the evidence of sensation was against
such a conclusion: all things that we can perceive have other
qualities, colour, smell, sound, cold, heat, and so on: we
mAnyf. I have no doubt that the manuscript reading wAnyf is here right
as against Usener’s emendation 6Axf. That Epicurus could speak of the
‘blow’ of weight is proved by the similar quotation in Aet. 1. 3.18; D. (De-
mocritus) A. 47 dvdyxn KwetoOa Ta cdyata 7H Tod Bdpous mAnyf: cf.
Cic. de Fato, 20. 46; D. ibid.

r §6r 4 Kdrw dia Tdv iSiwv Bapav: 7 eEwbev ) €k Tod idtov Bapouvs: cf.
the more direct statements in Lucr. ii. 84 and 215-16.

2 See p. 313. ' 3 Cf. Lucr. i. 358-69. 4 Ep. i, § 54.

as

ATOMS AND SPACE 291

might reasonably conclude that the atoms too were similarly
endowed," that white things were made of white atoms, black
of black, and so forth. But this would bea false assumption.
For all qualities are susceptible of change:? the wave which
was green one moment becomes white the next;3 the colours
on the peacock’s tail are always shifting, as the light strikes
it:¢ but the atoms cannot change. They are, as has been
proved, unalterable and we must not attribute to them
qualities which imply alteration. How then can we account
on an atomic basis for the changing qualities of things?
The unchangeable atoms are themselves the cause of change:
‘there must be something which remains solid and indis-
soluble . . . which can cause changes: not changes into the
non-existent or from the non-existent, but changes effected
by the shifting of position of some particles, and by the
addition or departure of others’.5 All the qualities of things
are thus due to their atomic conformation: their original
qualities are given them by the size and shape and arrange-
ment of the atoms which compose them, the change in their
qualities is caused by the mutual change of position and
order among the atoms, and in some cases because some of
the original atoms break off or new ones are added. Nor
is this difficult to conceive, when we remember that the
atoms inside compound bodies are continually in motion,®
ever clashing against one another and starting off in new
directions, so that in every perceptible moment of time their
position and arrangement is altered: the marvel is rather on
Epicurus’ view that the qualities of things should remain as
constant as they do. Here we are once more on the lines of
atomic tradition: the differences of quality are due to the
three ‘differences’ of the atoms originally postulated by
Leucippus, the differences of shape, position, and arrange-
ment. Epicurus of course is not contented with mere tradi-
tion, but as usual appeals to phenomena: even in things

t Lucr. ii. 731 ff.
2 Ep. i. 54 mourns yap ma@oa peraBdAdce ai S€ dropor odder
peraBdAdovow. 3 Lucr. i. 766 ff.
4 806 ff. RE po 1054.2 6 See pp. 330-7.
U2

292 EPICURUS

perceptible which change their shape by a mutual rearrange-
ment of their parts, we see that other qualities are altered,
but the shape of the parts remains the same. So then in all
changes; the atoms with their unchangeable shapes cause
the differences and alterations in the qualities of things. The
idea is greatly elaborated by Lucretius,t who adduces a
series of proofs to show that the atoms are without colour
and then conscientiously applies the same notion to the
qualities perceptible by the other senses. We need not con-
_ sider his arguments in detail, but we must here notice a
__very important addition, which is not suggested in Epicurus’
- more summary treatment. Not merely are the atoms without
qualities, but they are also without sensation:? here again
analogy might lead us astray and we might suppose that
those atoms which compose our ‘soul’ are themselves en-
dowed with sensation. But this is not the case: all atoms are
completely without sensation and sensation and conscious-
ness in us are due merely to particular movements on the
part of a particular combination of atoms: as arrangement
results in qualities, so movement may produce sensation.
It is manifest that this position will prove of great impor-
tance, when we come to consider the Epicurean psychology.
- This denial of qualities to the atoms by Epicurus was
the subject of considerable criticism in antiquity.3 In the
first place the critics asked how could atoms without qualities
merely by ‘coming together’ create things with qualities.
In the second they argued that Epicurus’ theory was in
effect a denial of the reality of quality: if quality did not
belong to the atoms—the only real material existences—it
was in things a delusion: Democritus was right when he
said that qualities existed only in appearance (véyw): the
senses were mistaken in attributing them to things, and
were not therefore infallible. Both criticisms are discerning
and important, but both rest on a failure to appreciate
Epicurus’ true view of the nature of a compound body. If
a compound body were a mere aggregate of atoms—a

« ii. 730-864. 2 ii. 865—ggo.

3 See Plut. adv. Colot. 8, p. 1111 a,and other authorities quoted in U. 288.

ATOMS AND SPACE 2.93

collection of atoms, as it were, arbitrarily separated off from
the hosts of surrounding atoms (much as the old astronomers
separated off a ‘constellation’ from the surrounding stars),
then these criticisms would hold true: the atoms could ac-
quire no new powers in the compound body and must remain
as they ever were. But this was by no means Epicurus’ view:
the compound body to him was not a mere aggregate, but
a new entity, an ‘organism’ almost (ovorypa), or, as Lucretius
calls it again and again, a concilium. In the organism of the
whole the atoms did collectively acquire new properties and
characteristics which as detached individuals they could
never possess: no number of independent atoms could have
colour, but unite them in the new entity of the whole, and
it acquired colour. The idea is important and fruitful and
we shall meet it again in the Epicurean kinetics and psycho-
logy. Moreover this whole is a reality, not a delusion: its
reality for sense is as great as the reality of the atoms for
thought: it is directly grasped by sense-perception, as the
atoms are by ‘mental apprehension’. And this carries with
it the reality of its qualities: indeed, it is by the perception of
its qualities that a thing’s existence is known. To argue
then that no quality which is not possessed by the individual
atoms is ‘real’ in the compound, is to misunderstand funda-
mentally the Epicurean position. There are two worlds, or
rather two departments of the same world, the one known
by sense, the other by ‘mental apprehension’; both are
equally real, and in passing from the one to the other, matter
acquires new qualities. The notion is in reality, as we have
seen, underlying the Canonice,' and to lose sight of it in the
physical theory is to misconstrue Epicurus all through.
We must turn now to Epicurus’ conception of space, for,
although from the nature of the case it is not so complicated
as that of the atoms, it involves certain difficulties which
cannot be disguised. The syllogistic argument by which he
inferred the existence of space from the fact of motion has

: An interesting illustration of this idea is shown in Epicurus’ argument
in Ep.i, § 62, that the motion of a compound body is more than the aggregate
motions of its compound atoms.

294 EPICURUS

been discussed already: ' we must now inquire more closely
what it was that he meant by space. ‘The mathematical con-
ception of space as extension may be put out of court: it is
impossible that Epicurus should have meant that for several
reasons; (1) it would have been inconsistent with his whole
attitude to the mathematical point of view, (2) it would have
clashed with his theory of area as a succession of discrete
minima, (3) it is sufficiently contradicted by the many
synonyms which he employs to describe it, and particularly
with its definition as ‘intangible existence’.3 Space is an
‘existence’ just as much as body, it is not mere measure-
ment or extension: it is a ‘thing’, but a thing whose
sole property is that it cannot touch or be touched, it can
offer no sort of resistance to body. Here then is his
answer to the difficulties of the earlier Atomists: he does
not trouble himself with their subtle discussions as to
whether space is ‘nothing’4 (od« dv), or ‘non-existent’ (uw) v);
he simply affirms, with the same meaning but much closer
precision, that it is an ‘intangible existence’. The conception
is not abstract but concrete: it is derived from that of body
by a negation of its properties.

Yet considerable difficulty remains. Are we to conceive
space as absolutely continuous and universal, coextensive
with the universe itself, or as discrete and consisting only
of the intervals between bodies? In other words, is there
space in a place which is occupied by body, or is there not?
does he mean ‘place’ or “empty space’? The question is a
very difficult one to decide and there seem many indications
on either side. If we consider the synonyms 5 which Epicurus
uses, we see that two of them, ‘place’ (rémos) and ‘room’,
(xépa) are in favour of the former view, that by space he
means occupied as well as empty space—a continuous whole:
the same conclusion may be drawn from the definition of
space as that ‘in which things exist and through which they
move’,° and possibly (though I think it need not be inter-

1 See p. 260. 2 See p. 285. 3 avadis dvats, Ep. i, § 40.
4 Seep.279- é' 5 §§ 39, 40.
6 § 40: cf. Lucr. i. 442 ‘erit ut possint in eo res esse gerique’.

ATOMS AND SPACE 295

preted in this sense) the contention that space is infinite in
extent: for if there is no space, where bodies are, then there is a
limit to space. On the other side, we have the fourth synonym,
‘the empty’ («evdr),? which clearly suggests only unoccupied
space, and the frequent reference to the void in compound
bodies as ‘intervals’ (Svacrjpara) between the component
atoms. Most of the ancient commentators too seem to inter-
pret Epicurus in this sense,’ and among their comments is
the express statement 3 of Simplicius that the Epicureans
regarded space as ‘the interval between the boundaries of
that which surrounds it’. A consideration of the main
passages in Epicurus and Lucretius, where space is men-
tioned, seems to show that they both oscillate between the
two conceptions. Are we then to leave this dificulty—so
fundamental in the system—as a point which Epicurus
never really thought out? I believe that it arises largely from
the fact that we are not easily able to approach Epicurus with
a sufficiently concrete conception. Giussani,‘ in one of the
most interesting of his Essays, has very largely cleared the
matter up. He points out that we must think of Epicurus’
notion primarily in relation to the ideas which he was com-
batting. The Parmenideans, for instance, would readily
admit the conception of space in the sense of ‘extension’,
but they'would maintain that there is matter everywhere, there
is no such thing as empty space. In strong opposition to this
view Epicurus wished to maintain not merely that there was
empty space between portions of matter, but that empty
space was a necessary presupposition to that of matter: there
must be empty space in order that things may exist at all;
otherwise there would be ‘nowhere for them to be and
nothing through which they might move’. ‘Void’ then is
the fundamental notion always in the mind of Epicurus and
his disciple, and therefore he is most often apt to think of it
as completely empty space, or the intervals between matter.

x Lucretius’ ‘inane’. a See U. 273, 274-

3 Simpl. in Arist. PAys. 4. 4, 211 b; U. 273 76 SudoTnpa TO peTagd THY
eoxdtwv Tod TEptéxovTos.

4 Stud. Lucr., i. 21-6.

296 EPICURUS

Yet even where matter is present, he can still speak of
‘place’ or ‘room’, and think not of something which has
ceased to be void, but rather of potential void: it is indeed
empty space which happens temporarily to be occupied.
Space then does mean to Epicurus primarily “empty space’,
but he is not inconsistent when at times he includes in it
the ‘place’ which matter is for the moment filling. The two
ideas are significantly combined in another passage of
Simplicius,! where he says that the Atomists say that ‘empty
space is infinite, and exceeds bodies in infinity (1.e. of exten-
sion), and for this reason can admit different things in its
different parts’. Here the conception works outwards, as
it were, from the notion of ‘interval’ to that of omnipresence.
But the unity of the two conceptions is made very much more
intelligible, if we remember that in Epicurus’ idea? matter is
in perpetual motion: the atoms even in compound bodies
are never still. Consequently the occupation of empty space
by matter is never more than instantaneous: for no two con-
secutive instants is the same space occupied by the same atom.
The idea then of occupied space becomes almost an abstrac-
tion: it is an attempt to take a static view of what is always
kinetic. Our difficulty thus arises in great part from the
fact of our approaching the question with the presupposition
of a world of (mostly) stationary objects: if we can put our-
selves back in thought to Epicurus’ world of ever-moving
atoms, the contradiction between the two views of space very
largely disappears. Space thus means ‘void’, any portion of
which may momentarily, but not more, be occupied by an
atom.

We come back then to the original conception of the
Universe as atoms moving in space and we must ask finally
whether this universe and its two constituents are or are not
infinite. Epicurus gives the traditional answer of the atomic
school, but once again supports it with argument.3 “The
universe is boundless. For that which is bounded has an
extreme point: and the extreme point is seen against some-

t In Arist. Phys. A. 6, 213,23 U0. 273.
2 Ep. i, § 62: see p. 311. 3 Ep. i, § 41.

ATOMS AND SPAC 297

thing else. So that as it has no extreme point, it has no
limit; and as it has no limit it must be boundless and not
bounded.’ Lucretius" puts the proof rather more lucidly:
‘it is seen that nothing can have an extreme point, unless
there is something beyond to bound it, so that there is seen
to be a spot farther than which the nature of our sense cannot
follow it. As it is, since we must admit that there is nothing
outside the whole sum, it has not an extreme point, it lacks
therefore bound and limit.’ The appeal is then once again
to phenomena: the condition of limitation there, the exis-
tence of something else beyond, is one which cannot be
applied to our mental conception of the universe. Lucretius
brings out his point by the famous illustration of the hurling
of the spear. “Go, if you can, he challenges the doubter, to
the extreme limit of the universe and hurl a spear: either
it will be stopped or it will go on: if it is stopped, there will
be matter beyond, if it goes on there will be empty space: in
either case you did not start from the end of the universe.
The same will happen wherever you take your stand.’ The
universe then cannot have a limit.

Moreover the two constituents are also infinite, though
in different senses, the atoms in number and the void in
extent.? For, as Lucretius argues,3 in order that the sum
total, the universe, may be unlimited, either both or one or
other of its constituents must be infinite. Epicurus then
deals with the two questions separately. ‘If the void were
boundless, and the bodies limited in number, the bodies
could not stay anywhere, but would be carried about and
scattered through the infinite void, not having other bodies
to support them and keep them in place by means of
collisions.’ The statement is careful and precise: the condi-
tion of the creation of things is the constant collision of
atoms and their crowding together in such numbers as to
be able to enter into the combined existence of a compound,
which in its turn is kept together and held in its place by the

1 1, 960-7.
a a ~ >? \ =. \ a
2 Ep. i, §41: 7@ wAnber TOv cwpdrwv drewpdv €or To TEV Kal TH
peye0er Tod Kevod. 3 i, 1008-13.

298 EPICURUS

external blows of other countless atoms. That this may occur
in an infinite universe, it is necessary that there should be an
infinite supply of matter: otherwise the comparatively few
collisions which would take place would just send individual
atoms wandering far out into space, where they would have
no chance of meeting their fellows. Lucretius* elaborates
the idea with a fine imaginative description of the chaos
which must ensue.

Similarly, space is infinite in extent: for ‘if the void were
limited, the infinite bodies would have no room wherein to
take their place’. Lucretius’3 argument here is rather
different and perhaps less satisfactory: ‘if space were limited,
the atoms through the downward motion due to weight
would all have sunk to the bottom and there remained in an
inert mass: it is because there is no bottom that they are
still kept in eternal restlessness’. The limitation of space
would in fact preclude the ceaseless motion of the atoms
which is an essential part of the atomic conception. The
argument is more esoteric and less likely than Epicurus’
own to convince a non-Epicurean. It is simpler and more
cogent to maintain that unless space were infinite, there
would not be room for infinite atoms.

The idea of the infinity of space raises again the question
of the conception of space and presents the same difficulty.
One is inclined to ask: does not the existence of the infinite
number of atoms really preclude the infinity of space: for
each atom, inasmuch as it is not itself empty space, is really
a limitation to it? This question requires a careful answer.
It is tempting to argue that the instantaneous occupation of
any ‘piece’ of space by an atom does not interfere with the
conception of space as continuous and infinite ‘place’, in
which the atoms have their momentary station. But there
is a good reason against this: if this were the Epicurean
conception, then space would itself be coextensive with the
universe, whereas Epicurus always speaks of the universe as
‘body plus void’:4 the sum total of matter, divided though it

1 ji, IOI4—-51. 2 § 42. 3 1. 988-1007.

4 § 39: 7O wav core odpata Kat rémos: cf. Lucr.i. 1008-113.

Oe aad anil

ATOMS AND SPACE 299

is into infinite particles in ceaseless motion has to be added
to infinite void to make the sum total of the infinite universe.
Similarly it is significant that in this section space is spoken
of throughout as ‘the void’ (xevov) and not ‘place’ (rézos)
as before. It would probably be a more correct solution of
the difficulty to say that this ‘internal’ limitation of space,
if it may be so described, was not here present to Epicurus’
mind. He was thinking rather, as he clearly was when
speaking of the infinity of the universe, of an ‘external’ limit
(wépas). In extension outward space is unlimited (dzeupov),
even though internally it might be thought of as limited by
the presence of atomic matter. Once again the notion of
‘empty space’ seems to be uppermost and that from which
Epicurus started: the kinetic view of matter helps to an
understanding of his point of view, but the particular difh-
culty would not have troubled him.

We have then at last reached the traditional atomic con-
ception of an infinite universe, consisting of atoms infinite
in number moving in space infinite in extent. The concep-
tion has not varied since Democritus, but in its gradual un-
folding in Epicurus it seems almost to have changed its
nature. Each step in the argument has now been thought
out under the definite rules of the Canonice: the detached
notions about the character of the atoms have been corre-
lated into a self-dependent whole: a universe seems not to
have been assumed but created in thought. There has been
occasion here and there to point out weak points in the
argument or possibly hazy and ill-defined conceptions. But
the result is one worthy of a great thinker: it is no mere
wholesale adoption of the theory of Democritus—in certain
places it has been seen to differ conspicuously from it: nor is
it the work of a preacher, who hastily patched together some
kind of physical theory to act as a basis for his moral
teaching. With all its limitations, it is the construction of
a master-mind, working on definite lines and with a deep
and penetrating interest in his subject for its own sake. Nor
will these characteristics be missed, as the further develop-
ment of the system is traced in detail.

IV
PROPERTIES AND ACCIDEA
ipa title of this section might seem to suggest that

Epicurus’ profession of disbelief in the value of Logic
was something of a pretence and that he was after all driven
back on the current terminology of the schools. But, as
will be seen, nothing could be farther from the truth: if
Epicurus was led to make a distinction corresponding
roughly to that between properties and accidents, he was not
influenced by any considerations of Logic, nor does the
distinction take a Logical form. His problem is essentially
material and his answer is on strictly material lines and per-
fectly consistent with the rest of his theory—indeed he is
at pains to refute more intellectual and idealistic views.

To recall the position hitherto reached, the only absolute,
i.e. independent, existences are the atoms and the void: the
atoms corporeal, body or matter and nothing else, the void
incorporeal, simply that which separates the atoms or that in
which the atoms ‘move and have their being’. Now, if we
turn to the language and experience of ordinary life, it is
clear that this dualism does not exhaust the whole of existence.
It does indeed account for the whole material world, since
things as we know them, things perceptible to the senses, are
but aggregates of atoms with greater or smaller interstices
of void. But there is a residue: we attribute to things pro-
perties and qualities: even to the atoms are assigned size,
shape, and weight, and to compound bodies qualities ex-
pressive of their relation to the senses, colour, scent, taste,
and sound, or of their character, goodness and badness,
virtue and vice: we speak also of their doings and sufferings
and of events which concern one or many things and per-
sons: we have further the conception of time, in which such
events occur. What is to be said of all these from the atomic
point of view? It is clear that they cannot be classed under
either of the heads of being which have hitherto been estab-

—r

PROPERTIES AND ACCIDENTS 301

lished: they are not independent existences, either corporeal
like the atoms, or incorporeal like the void—for they cannot
be thought of apart from the things to which they are attri-
buted; nor again are they independent corporeal compounds
of atomsand void. Howthencan their existence be described?
They are, says Epicurus,' either ‘something which always
accompanies things’ ? (cvpBeBnxdra) or roughly speaking ‘in-
separable properties’, or “something which from time to time
happens to things’ (cuprrapara), or ‘separable accidents’.
These two notions must be examined more closely.

In introducing his conception of the ‘accompaniments’
(cupBeByxdra)' Epicurus3 in his usual manner briefly dis-
misses without any mention of names the theories of rival
schools. Plato in the theory of ideas had imagined qualities
as independent existences, and supposed the reality of pheno-
mena to depend on their ‘participation’ in such ‘ideas’: this
conception Epicurus dismisses by the test of ‘visualization’:
‘we must not suppose that they are independent existences,
for it is impossible to imagine that’, we cannot, that is, form
any mental picture of a quality apart from the thing which
possesses it. Aristotle had conceived qualities as ‘incor-
poreal existences accompanying body’: Epicurus meets him
with a mere negative, but his reason would doubtless be that
they cannot be incorporeal, for they are perceptible by the
senses. Similarly he rejects the notion of his predecessor
Democritus that ‘they absolutely do not exist’—for im-
mediate experience contradicts it—and that of the Stoics 4
that they are material parts (udépia) of things. None of these
theories are consistent with the Epicurean canons, or, as he

: Ep. i, § 68.

2 We must notice that Epicurus uses the word in a different sense to that
in which it had been employed by Aristotle: to him it meant ‘an occasional
accident’, to Epicurus ‘a permanent property’, a meaning more naturally
associated with the perfect participle: ‘that which has come to be permanently
with’ a thing. 3 See Hicks, op. cit., p. 272.

4 The Stoics spoke of properties, accidents, qualities and emotions, and
even of time itself as ‘bodies’ ({@a or adpara): see Giussani, Stud. Lucr.
p- 28; Zeller, Gesch. der Phil. der Griechen, iii. 1 (31d ed.), pp. 118 ff. and
passages there quoted, esp. Plut. Comm. Not. 4.5, 2and 5, and Sen. Ep. 106, 5.

302 EPICURUS

would have said himself, correspond with the ordinary ex-
perience of perception.

Epicurus’ own explanation * of the ‘accompaniments’ 1s
careful and, in spite of certain textual difficulties in the
passage, easily intelligible.

We must suppose that the whole body in its totality owes its own
permanent existence (rijv éavtod duow atdvov) to all these, yet not
in the sense that it is composed of properties brought together to form
it (as when, for instance, a larger structure is put together out of the
parts which compose it . . .), but only that it owes its own permanent
existence to all of them. All these properties have their own peculiar
means of being perceived and distinguished (emBodds . . . tas .. . Kal
Suadnibers), provided always that the aggregate body (70 a@poov) goes
along with them and is never wrested from them, but in virtue of its
comprehension as an aggregate of qualities acquires the predicate of

body.
The property, that is, is perceptible by the senses: shape,

size, weight, colour, &c., are all known to us by sensational
evidence and therefore are real, are in that sense material
existences. Further they are distinguishable one from an-
other and make each their own peculiar appeal to the senses:
we cannot tell weight by the sense of smell, nor colour by
touch, &c. But this existence is not an independent one:
it is wholly dependent upon the presence of the body to
which they are attributed: we cannot perceive or even con-
ceive properties existing apart from body. Conversely, the
matter may be considered from the point of view of the body
as a whole. The body is in the purely material sense an
aggregate of particles, which came together to form it: but
it is also an aggregate of qualities existing in it always and
together making up its ‘permanent’ existence.? It is just
the sum of its shape, size, weight, colour, smell, &c., which
make a thing what it is: and no one of them could be removed
without destroying the existence of the thing as such.

t § 69.

» By ‘permanent’ (aidcov) Epicurus does not of course intend to imply

the eternity of compound bodies, which is contrary to all his teaching, but
only that the aggregate of qualities makes the thing what it is as long as it lasts.

PANN el .

PROPERTIES AND ACCIDENTS 303

Lucretius* in his definition lays emphasis on this aspect of
the conception: ‘a property is that which in no case can be
sundered or separated without the fatal dissolution of the
thing’: if we tried to remove a property from a compound
thing there would follow an atomic or material dissolution
(discidium ).* ‘The ‘accompaniment’ is then inseparable from
the thing in the sense that its removal, possible only in
thought, would at once destroy both its own nature and that
of the thing. Epicurus nowhere gives us a concise definition,
but we may extract it from his discussion: ‘properties (or
““accompaniments’’) are existences perceptible by the senses,
but inseparably associated with things, whose permanent
nature in their aggregate they constitute’.

It may serve to bring out the idea and to prepare the way
for further criticism, if we attempt in a few instances, as
Lucretius 3 has done, to apply this notion. What are the
properties of the two primary existences, atoms, and the
void? The void has but the one negative property of
intangibility:4 it is, by definition, an ‘intangible existence’
(dvadys dvois). If it lost this property, if it could at any point
or under any circumstances be touched, it would cease to
be void and become matter. The properties of the atoms
are, as has been seen,5 size, shape, and weight: to remove
in thought any one of these is to destroy the conception of
the atom as a material existence—it would pass out of the
range of matter altogether.° When we pass to compound
things, it is clear that they still retain the three properties of

x i, 451. Note that Lucretius, following the principle of the Canonice,
does not attempt to translate cvpBeBnKxds, but uses the normal Latin con-
iunctum, which will convey the clearest idea to his countrymen.

2 discidium in Lucretius is the opposite of conci/ium, the union of atoms in
a ‘thing’, which is more than a mere aggregate.

3 1. 453, 4- ele: Wyte:

4 Lucr. i. 454, intactus inani: Munro in excising this line removes an
absolutely essential point from the argument: cf. Sext. Emp. adv. Math.
X. 221 dvritumia pev Tod cwparos, el€is 5€ Tod Kevob.

5 p. 290: to these might be added hardness or solidity or, as Sextus has it,
dvritumia, the ‘power of returning a blow’, i.e. of colliding with other atoms
and knocking them away as it rebounds itself.

6 Cf. the discussion of the 7épara on p. 286.

304 EPICURUS

the atoms: an aggregate of atoms must have all the properties
which the component parts possess and we can conceive
of no material body apart from size, shape, and weight. But
this is not now all: for the compounds acquire also new
properties: fire for instance must have heat and water wet-
ness.! If either of them was to be deprived of these respective
qualities, it would cease to be what it is: if water, for instance,
is frozen so hard that it is no longer wet, it is not now water
but ice, and as such acquires new ‘accompaniments’, because
its physical constitution is changed. There is then no differ-
ence in the conception of the ‘accompaniments’ of compound
bodies and the atoms: but when it comes to the enumeration
of the ‘accompaniments’ there is a difference. Of the atoms
it may be said finally that their permanent and only ‘accom-
paniments’ are size, shape, and weight: but the ‘accompani-
ments’ of compound bodies differ with all the variety of
things which they constitute: each one of them is the sum
of those ‘accompaniments’, those properties and qualities,
the removal of any one of which would alter the physical
constitution of the thing.

The notion of the ‘things which happen’ (cuparepara),
which we may roughly translate ‘accidents’,? follows almost
directly from that of the ‘accompaniments’. Theyare similarly
neither imperceptible, nor incorporeal, nor independent
corporeal existences like the whole body: 3 nor yet are they,
as are the properties, the invariable and ‘permanent’ accom-
paniments of the whole. Rather they are occasional accom-
_paniments, which may come and go, and are perceptible not
in all acts of apprehension of the senses, but only in some.
We cannot, for instance, have any perception of a man
which does not tell us of his size and shape, but we may have
many which do not tell us whether he is rich or poor, free
or slave, asleep or awake. Lucretius 4 again puts 1t well for
us from the atomic point of view. Accidents are such things

Td mers ds 4.53;
2 So Lucr. i. 458, explaining his use of the current term, renders :
‘haec soliti sumus, ut par est, eventa vocare’.

3 Ep.i, § 70. 4 1456

ee

PROPERTIES AND ACCIDENTS 305

‘by whose going and coming the nature of things abides
untouched’, that is, their presence or absence involves no
atomic dissolution (though it may involve atomic rearrange-
ment), and does not alter the nature of things as such. The
main difficulty in the idea is that the term is extremely wide:
Epicurus wishes it to covet not merely what we might call
“secondary qualities’, but also states of action and suffering,
and the whole field of occurrences. It may be well again to
illustrate from the three kinds of existing things: it is an
‘accident’ of the void that a certain atom is moving in it in
a certain direction, it is an ‘accident’ of an atom to have a
certain ‘position’ * (6gous) or ‘place’ (rdéis) or to enter into the
formation of a certain compound body. These are simple
cases, but when we come to compound things the idea is
more far-reaching. All kinds of qualities, colour, heat, cold,
goodness, badness, hardness, softness, and so on, may be the
‘accidents’ of bodies, and so is everything that they do and
everything that happens to them: ‘slavery and liberty,
poverty and wealth, war and peace’ are Lucretius’ examples,
and later on” he explains that all the events of history are the
accidents of the persons concerned in them or of the places
where they occur.3

Under the head of ‘accidents’ Epicurus deals with Time.‘
To us who are accustomed to class Time, whether as a
condition of perception or in any other category, always with
space, this treatment may seem strange. But it must be
remembered that Epicurus’ conception of space was essen-
tially concrete, and so conceived it had taken its place for
him as one of the two ultimate realities. To it Time offered
no apparent analogy: it did not, like space, enter into the

_ physical composition of things, nor could it, he held, be at

all conceived, as space could, as existing apart from things

t See p. 80. 21.464 ff.

3 It is not necessary here to discuss the curious problem relating to past
events which is treated by Lucretius in i. 464-82: it arises from a Stoic
objection to the conception of events as the ‘accidents’ of persons or things
themselves no longer existing, and Lucretius rightly replies that the events
were their accidents, for without the persons or things the events could not
have occurred. 4 §§ 72,-73.

3307 x

306 EPICURUS

happening in it. He must then search for an explanation of
time in accordance with ordinary experience and in strict
conformity with atomic principles. Now all other things,
concrete existences and their attributes, are recognized by
means of reference to a general concept or ‘anticipation’ *
(apddmyus): we know a horse because of the general image of
‘horse’ which is stored in our mind, we know hardness or
wetness by similar reference to a concept built up out of a
number of individual experiences. But this is not so with
time: we do not recognize a ‘time’ by reference to a general
notion of ‘times’ resulting from many experiences. On the
contrary it is a continuous experience, incapable of general
conception, but always with us, and always an immediate
‘clear perception’ (évapynya). Moreover it cannot be ex-
plained by means of any description,” or by any reference to
anything analogous to it: 3 it is in our experience sui generis.
Is it then impossible to analyse further this perception?
Epicurus thinks not except in relation to the ordinary
associations of everyday life. Time is something that we
connect with other things, yet not directly, as attributes and
qualities are associated with things: time is not thought of
as immediately dependent on things or persons. Rather it is
associated with the actions of persons and things,‘ with what
happens to them, with their movements or cessations from
movement, with the succession of light and darkness which
we call day and night. Now all these things are themselves
the accidents of things, and time stands to them in the same
relation as they themselves occupy to things: it is then, in
other words, as Sextus Empiricus 5 tells us that Epicurus
himself defined it, ‘an accident of accidents, accompanying
days and nights and seasons, and states of suffering and
quiescence and movement and rest.’ Lucretius® again assists
us with a clear statement free from technicalities: “Time

t See pp. 245 fF. 2 odte SuadeKrous cs BeAtiovs petadntréov.

3 obre GAXo TL Kat’ adTod KaTnyopyTéoV. 4 § 73.

s adv. Math. x. 219; U.294 odunTwpa ovpmTwpdrov .. . TapeTopevov
Hpepais TE Kal vuél Kal wpais Kal mé0eor Kal dmabelaus Kal KWHoeot Kal

provats. 6 i. 459-61.

PROPERTIES AND ACCIDENTS 307

exists not by itself, but from actual things comes a feeling,
what was brought to a close in time past, then what is present
now, and further what is going to be hereafter.’ This is not
perhaps a profound investigation into the problems which
surround the conception of time—problems more apparent to
the modern than the ancient world—but it is at least a more
satisfactory account than that of Epicurus’ Stoic opponents,
who regarded time as an independent concrete entity (oda)
superadded to things, and it is reached by the consistent
analysis of the ‘clear intuition’ of everyday experience.

The main notions then which Epicurus attaches to the
words ovpBeByxdra and cvprrdépara are clear enough, but they
are not without difficulty in their application, and critics
who have been perhaps too ready to assume the identity of
Epicurus’ ideas with those expressed by the accepted transla-
tions ‘properties’ and ‘accidents’ have accused him of in-
definiteness and inconsistency. Thus Munro? complains
that the two notions are not clearly distinguished and in
particular that Epicurus? speaks of ‘doing’ and ‘suffering’
as ‘accidents’ of the soul, whereas, seeing that they are in-
variable experiences they must be ‘accompaniments’,
Brieger 3 similarly charges him with inconsistency in putting
colour among ‘accompaniments’, whereas the mere fact that
the atoms are colourless is sufficient proof that it is not an
invariable accompaniment of body. The only answer to such
criticism is, as Gtussani 4 has admirably pointed out, that the
critics themselves have not accurately grasped Epicurus’
conception. T'wo points in it must be emphasized. In the
first place, the whole notion is essentially material and
directly related to the main ideas of the atomic theory: the
‘accompaniment’ is not merely invariably present, but an
essential element in the physical constitution of things. Time
is inseparably connected with all material existence, but so
far from being an ‘accompaniment’ of anything, it is, as
has been seen, an ‘accident of accidents’: weight on the other
hand, a physical constituent of body as such, is an ‘accom-

t On Lucr.i. 449. 2 § 67.

3 Epikurs Brief an Herodot, p. 7. 4 Stud. Lucr., pp. 33 seq.

xe

308 EPICURUS

paniment’. Here is the answer to Munro: though the soul
is always acting and suffering, yet these states are not a
direct characteristic of the atomic constitution of the soul:
they are therefore ‘accidents’.

In the second place the terms in Epicurus’ usage are not
absolute but relative. It is not Epicurus’ intention to divide
all qualities rigidly and permanently into the two categories,
nor would he have said absolutely of any quality ‘this is
always an ‘accompaniment’, or ‘this is always an accident’.
Rather any quality might stand in the relation of ‘accom-
paniment’ to one thing and ‘accident’ to another. It is
because they have not grasped this relativity in Epicurus’
idea and the consequent interchangeability of the two terms
in their application to individual qualities and have looked
rather for a rigid division such as that of ‘primary’ and
‘secondary qualities’, that critics have complained of Epi-
curus’ vagueness or inconsistency. But a closer ex-
amination of his words makes the point quite clear. The
section opens thus: * ‘as regards shape and colour and size
and weight and all other things which are predicated of body
as though they were “accompaniments” either of all things
or of things visible or recognizable through the sensation of
these qualities’.» Brieger accuses Epicurus of inconsistency
in having here included colour in the list of ‘accompaniments’,
though it is not always an ‘accompaniment’ of body. In
relation to the atoms colour 1s clearly neither “accom-
paniment’ nor ‘accident’, for under no circumstances what-
ever can the atoms have colour. In the case of compound
bodies in general, colour is an ‘accident’, for in the dark
they have no colour and it requires the blows of light
falling upon them so to arrange the configuration of their
surface that they have colour. Of what then is it an “accom-
paniment’? Clearly of visible things: it is impossible for us

r § 68 doavel ovpBeBynKdra }) maow % Tots dpatots Kal Kara 77
alcOnow avTav yvwotots. ‘The text at the end of the clause is uncertain.
adtav, the reading of P3, is preferable to adrots of the manuscripts; but
there is no need for more drastic emendation, such as was proposed by Usener :
see my note on the passage. 2 See Lucr. ii. 795 ff.

y"

PROPERTIES AND ACCIDENTS 309

to see anything, except it has colour: things can only be
visible when the atomic formation of their surface is such as
to produce colour: alter it, so that they couid have colour
no longer, and they would pass out of the range of the visible.
Colour is the ‘accompaniment’ not of all things, but of
visible things. And it is clearly for this reason that Epicurus
having included colour amongst the ‘accompaniments’ has
added in direct reference to it the words ‘or of visible things’.
Similarly amplifying the idea in reference to the other senses
he adds: ‘or of things recognizable through the sensation
of these qualities’: this will include, for instance, things
capable of being tasted and smelt: their taste and their smell
is in these categories ‘an accompaniment’, but it will not be
if they are thought of simply as ‘compound bodies’ or as
‘visible things’. Similarly ‘slavery’, to take one of Lucretius’
examples, is an ‘accident’ if thought of in relation say to
Epictetus, but an ‘accompaniment’, if in relation to ‘a slave’.
If the essentially atomic character of the whole idea and the
consequent relativity of the terms be borne in mind, there
is no ground for charging Epicurus either with indefiniteness
or inconsistency.

Having thus enunciated his doctrine of ‘accompaniments’
and ‘accidents’ Epicurus has from the Atomic point of view
covered the whole field of possible existence. All things
which can be the objects of perception or of thought must
be either one of the two ultimate realities, atoms and space,
or concrete bodies, formed by their combination, or the
‘accompaniments’ or ‘accidents’ of these, or, in the single
instance of Time, an ‘accident’ of ‘accidents’. It may be
that his theory is lacking in philosophic penetration and that
he had not fully considered the difficulties which it involves,
but it is entirely consistent with his general position and
arises directly from his conception of the constitution of
things and the nature of perception and thought. The base-
conception of the universe has thus been established and it
remains to consider next the more strictly physical part of
the theory, to see what are the motions of the atoms in the
void and how they combine to form things.

V
MOTILON@OB ao hE ATOR.
h fe part of Epicurus’ physical theory was worked out

with greater elaboration than his conception of atomic
motion. Nor merely does he devote a quite disproportionate
part of his Letter to Herodotus to this subject,* but he there
deals with it with a minuteness which shows the importance
he attached to its right understanding. His pupil Lucretius
too, though he does not enter into some of the refinements of
his master, gives a large section of the Second Book to its
special consideration and alludes to the topic again in other
places.? Nor indeed is this surprising: for it is in this portion
of his work that Epicurus most conspicuously broke away
from Democritus and produced in the doctrine of the atomic
‘swerve’ the most characteristic notion in his system: more-
over his treatment of the motion of the atoms in compounds
reveals the subtlety of his thought at its best and throws
considerable light on his whole conception of matter and
space. Though the subject is not free from difficulty—the
sections on motion in the first Letter are among the most
obscure—it is possible to put together a fairly clear account
of his views.

§ 1. The ‘free’ atoms

The first matter to be considered is the motion of the
‘free’ atoms, that is to say, those not as yet entangled in
compound bodies or atomic nuclei. Though, as will appear
later, this is for the most part but a theoretical condition,
yet some atoms are always in this state,3 and their unim-
peded motion is always a necessary logical antecedent to the

x §'43, parts of §§ 46 and 47, §§ 61 and 62, all of which (except the one
~ sentence in § 43) should probably, as was suggested by Giussani (Stud. Lucr.
14), be rearranged so as to be consecutive. ‘They form about one-tenth of
the whole letter and it is probable that at least one section has been lost which
belonged to the same topic: see p. 316.

2 ii. 62-293. : 3 Lucr. ii. 10g-1T.

7

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 311

movements of atoms in compounds and of compound bodies
as a whole. The atom is situated in empty space: is it at
rest or in motion? and if in motion, what is the ultimate
cause of its motion and what is the character of the motion?
These were the questions which the Atomists had to answer.
Some uncertainty prevails, as has been seen,’ with regard to
Democritus’ solution of these problems, but it is most
probable that he held that in the void the atoms were
‘naturally’ always in motion in all directions. Of Epicurus’
answer there can be no doubt—whether the idea was his
own or had already been introduced into the Atomic theory
by Nausiphanes or some one else:? ‘the atoms move con-
tinuously for all time’,3 their motion is ‘downwards’,4 and
the primary cause of motion is their weight.5 Epicurus ®
having insisted as against Democritus that weight was a
primary and absolute property of the atoms was free to use
it as a cause of motion, and he argued doubtless on the
direct analogy of phenomena. Every material body per-
ceptible to the senses is caused to fall downwards by its own
weight: therefore it must be the same with the imperceptible
material bodies, the atoms.

But here a difficulty immediately arises: what can be

t See Part I, Chap. III, § 3, pp. 128 ff. 2 See p. 129.

3 Ep.i, § 43 xwodvrat te cuveyds ai Gropot Tov aidva. It is unfortu-
nate that there is a lacuna after these words, but statements elsewhere make it
possible to fill in the sense with some certainty : see C.B. notes ad loc.

4. dimer. is 217:

corpora cum deorsum rectum per inane feruntur

ponderibus propriis.
Simplicius (in Arist. de Cae/o, A. 8, p. 121 a 18, and again p. 121 b 25;
U. 276) attributes to Epicurus the theory that weight caused the atoms to
move towards the centre. This is inconsistent with everything else in Epicurus’
theory of motion and is expressly refuted as a Stoic doctrine by Lucr. i. 105 2ff.
It must be due to confusion with the account of the motion of particles in
the cosmic ‘whirl’.

5 § 61 1 Kdtw (dopa) Sia. rdv iSiwv Bapav, ibid. ex rob idiov Bdpous,
ef, Luer. 11. 83:

cuncta necessest
aut gravitate sua ferri primordia rerum
aut ictu forte alterius.

6 See § 2, p. 289.

312 EPICURUS
meant by motion ‘downwards’ in reference to infinite space?
Plato! had already argued that to speak of ‘up’ and ‘down’
in relation to infinite space is an absurdity, and it is possible
that if the idea had been introduced into Atomism before
Epicurus, some direct criticism had been made on it. At
any rate Epicurus himself seems acutely conscious of the
difficulty and argues about it at some length in a misplaced
and obscure paragraph in the Letter to Herodotus.” It is
true, he says in effect, that in infinite space we cannot speak
of an ‘up’ and ‘down’ with reference to a highest or lowest
point in space itself, for such there cannot be. But we can
say that motion is in a certain direction, ‘up’ or ‘down’ in
reference to objects situated in space: for instance, we may
call motion in the direction from our own head to our feet
motion ‘down’ and that in the reverse direction motion ‘up’,
‘even though that which passes from us into the regions
above our heads arrives countless times at the feet of beings
above and that which passes downwards from us at the heads
of beings below; for none the less the whole motions are
thought of as opposed, the one to the other, to infinity.’ 3
This reply has provoked the scorn of modern critics# as a
puerile evasion of a serious difficulty, and indeed such
criticism would be justified if Epicurus’ conception of space
were that of the modern mathematician. To him motion in
a certain direction in infinite space is unthinkable, because
the relative position of two points—even the absolute posi-
tion of a single point—in infinite space is itself unthinkable:
if infinite space is infinite extension in the abstract, no terms
involving relation can be used with regard to it.5 But it

t Timaeus, 62d. 2 § 60.

3 ‘The argument seems lame, for if motion upwards from us went on arriving
at the feet of persons in the worlds above us, it would still be motion upwards
to them and our idea would be confirmed. I suspect that the words ‘at the
feet’ (emi rods wddas) and ‘at the heads’ (emi riv Kedadjv) ought to be
interchanged : see C.B. notes ad loc.

4 e.g. Brieger, de atomorum motu principali (Philosoph. Abhand. zu Martin
Herz), p. 217 ‘quae quam inepte excogitata sint nemo est quin videat’.

s Giussani, Stud. Lucr.133,n.1, replied to Brieger’s objection by a reductio
ad absurdum on his own assumption. If relative position and determinate

ee

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 313

cannot too often be repeated that Epicurus’ notion of space
was physical '—one might almost say concrete—and geo-
centric. To him space was a void, every part of which was
capable of being filled or actually filled with matter: and its
infinity ? he would have pictured to himself as extending
outwards in every direction from the earth to the limits of
our world and then on beyond to other worlds and beyond
them again without limit: space extends in all directions
away from us. In such a conception there is a possibility
of the determination of relative position, relative direction,
and relative motion: we can, as he says, take a point in our
world and speak of motion as ‘up’ and ‘down’ in relation to
it. The weight of the atoms, as he conceived it, must always
produce motion in one determinate direction and that direc-
tion may be described as ‘downward’ in reference to our-
selves. The reply no doubt to some extent shirks the diff-
culty, but Epicurus never felt himself bound to think out
his views in reference to other systems, but only to make
them consistent with his own. His idea may perhaps be
regarded as a first essay in Relativity.

The atoms in the void are thus carried ‘downwards’ by
their own weight, falling in perpendicular straight lines 3
‘like drops of rain’. How can they ever meet and form
things? Lucretiuss is here our sole authority for a, view
which, one may reasonably suppose, had been put forward
at some stage in the Atomic theory, after weight had been
recognized as the cause of motion. It might be inferred on
the analogy of the sensible world, that differences of weight
in the atoms are the cause of their meeting; that the heavier
atoms in their downward course catch up the lighter and so
come into collision and form atomic nuclei which afterwards
motion in infinite space are unthinkable, the phenomenal world becomes a
delusion. Butsuchan argument would not have been present to Epicurus, and
it seems possible and more satisfactory to discover a positive reply in Epicurus’
own main conceptions. « See § 2, pp. 293

2 Compare the argument with regard to the infinity of the universe in
§§ 41, 42, and Lucr.i. 958 ff.

3 Kata ordOuny is the Epicurean description of this straight fall: Aet. r.
12. 5; U. 280, &c. 4 Lucr. il. 222. $l @aged.

314 EPICURUS

unite to produce sensible things. But here the subtlety of
Epicurus’ mind came into play and he saw that the analogy
would not hold: in the sensible world the cause of the
diminution of speed was a check given to the moving body
either by the opposition of some external body or in the
case of a compound by the internal vibration of its com-
ponent atoms.’ Thus when bodies are falling through air
or water,” the comparatively loose texture of the medium is
not able to stop them altogether, but it does oppose a check,
and the lighter the falling body, the more effective is the
check and the slower its progress. Or again the motion of
a compound body started by an external blow may be im-
peded and ultimately stopped by the internal movements of
its constituent atoms in all directions. But in the case of
atoms falling through space neither of these conditions can
come into play. The void can offer no resistance and the
constitution of the atom itself is perfectly solid; the ‘least
parts’ have no separate existence and cannot move internally
apart from the atom as a whole. Difference of weight then
cannot be the cause of atomic collision, for all the atoms,3
heavier and lighter alike, will move downwards through the
void at an equal rate. Epicurus has thus arrived by a ‘mental
apprehension’ at the result which modern science has con-
firmed by experiment that in a vacuum all bodies irrespec-
tive of their weight will fall at an equal speed.

This motion of the atoms through the void, being abso-
lutely unimpeded, will be of incomprehensible velocity: ‘their
passage through the void, when it takes place without meeting
any bodies which might collide, accomplishes every com-
prehensible distance in an inconceivably short time’. The

: Ep. i, § 46 BpdSous yap Kal tdyous avrikom Kal odK avTiKOTT
dpotwpa AapBdver. For the fuller treatment of the characteristic idea of
avriKkoTn see pp. 329 ff. a Lucr. ii: 230-4.

3 § 61 lcorayets avayKatov Tas atdpous elvar: cf. Lucr. ii. 238-9 f.

omnia quapropter debent per inane quietum
aeque ponderibus non aequis concita ferri.

4§ 46b % Sia Tod Kevod dopa Kata pndeulay amdvrnow Tav
dvrixoydvtwy (U. avrixopdvrwv MSS.) ywouévn wav wjKos mepiAnarov
ev amepwontw xpovm avvTerei.

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 315

atom, that is, can traverse any distance of which we are
capable of conceiving in a space of time so small that we
cannot visualize it: the speed of the atoms may therefore
well be described in the expressive phrase of Giussani as
‘absolute motion’.* Lucretius’ illustration is peculiarly apt
and gives occasion for one of his finest pieces of brief
description.? At sunrise we see the whole world suddenly
bathed in light: the sun’s light travels with incredible
velocity: yet it is impeded both externally and internally;
how much greater must be the speed of the unimpeded
atom? Once again modern science gives confirmatory
evidence in statistics of velocity.3 The later commentators
give us more precise ideas of Epicurus’ conception of atomic
motion. Pursuing his usual line of argument against the
Eleatics and their successors, Epicurus5 apparently held
that there was not merely a minimum of extension (the zépas or
minima pars)and a minimum of physical existence (the atom),
but also a minimum of movement («ivjois) and a minimum of
time (xpoves). He heldthat the unimpeded atom accomplishes
a minimum of movement in the minimum of time, and there
would thus be a basis for the calculation of speed, just as the
‘least part’ gives the basis of calculation of size. ‘This con-
ception seems to be borne out in an important passage in the
Letter to Herodotus, which must subsequently be con-
sidered, in which he speaks of the atoms in the compound
body moving in different directions ‘in moments of time
perceptible only by thought’,® the minimum that is of time.
The whole notion of the incredible swiftness of this minimum
of atomic movement was apparently expressed by Epicurus

t Stud. Lucr. 107. 2 ii. 142-04.

3 Weare told, for instance, that the molecule of hydrogen moves at the rate
of 1859 metres per second: see Masson, Lucretius, p. 124.

4 On this point, see von Arnim, Epikurs Lehre von Minimum, and Bignone,
Epicuro, Appendix V, pp. 228 ff. —

5 Simpl. in Arist. Péys. Z. 1. 2324 1-17; U. 278 e€ dpepav yap r7v
kivnow Kal 70 wéyeBos Kal Tov xpdvov elvat, idem in Arist. Phys. Z. e
232.423; U. 277 tots wept "Emixoupov apéorer tooraxas mavrTa Ova TOV
dpepav Kwetobar.
. © §62 Kara Tods Adyw Oewpntods xpdvovs.

316 EPICURUS

by saying not that the atom ‘moves’ (xwe?ra:) over the
minimum of distance in the minimum of time, but that it
‘has been moved’ (xexévnrat):* the action is instantaneous and
complete as soon as begun. This idea exposed him to much
criticism on the ground that it was impossible to conceive
of a continuous motion composed of these instantaneous
‘jerks’, but on a more sympathetic view it is easy to see what
Epicurus was trying to express by it. The idea is important
as showing once again the penetration of Epicurus’ kinetics,
and because it becomes of value in explaining his conception
of the relation of the movements of the atoms to that of the
whole body in a compound.

§ 2. The ‘swerve’

The atoms then, if this were a complete account of their
motion, would fall for ever in the void at ‘atomic speed’ in
parallel straight lines, ‘nor could collision come to be, nor
a blow be brought to pass for the first-beginnings; so nature
would never have brought aught to being’.? By his stern
refusal to avail himself of a false analogy in the sensible
world Epicurus seems to have brought his system to a
standstill. But he had his own characteristic solution, which
though it has brought a storm of criticism on his head as a
childish blunder, was yet not only meant in all seriousness,
but designed as one of the crucial points in his system. It is
curious that there is no mention of the ‘swerve’ of the
atoms in the Letter to Herodotus: it must have been there
either at the beginning of § 43, where some words have
been lost, or in another section which has perished. But
we have evidence enough for it elsewhere. Diogenes of
Oenoanda? refers to it in a rhetorical passage in which he is

: Them. paraphr. Arist. Phys. Z. 1. 232 a; U. 278 ed’ Exaorou 5é€ trav
dpepav e& dv ovyxetras (sc. the whole distance travelled) od xwetrar adda
Kexinrat: cf. Simpl. ad eundem locum; U. 278 émdyeu dé kat adAAo &romov
axoArovbobv ravrtn TH t7obce:, To KexwHaOat Te 47) TPOTEpoV KLVOUpEVOV.

a Tauern. 223545

3 fr. xxxiii, William, col. ii, f., William [ovKovv] ofdas, dats more €f,
Kat eAdevbepay Twa ev Tais atopors Kivnow elvar, 7[v] Anuoxpitos pev
ovy edpev ’Emixoupos S€ eis d&[s] Hyayev, mapeyKAuTiKny dmdpyovoar,

CY |S

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 317

arguing against an imaginary supporter of Democritus: ‘do
you not know, whoever you are, that there is also a free
motion in the atoms, which Democritus did not discover,
but Epicurus brought to light, a “swerving” motion, as he
proves from phenomena’, Lucretius! too has dealt fully with
the subject and the ironical criticisms of Plutarch? and
Cicero3 help further to an understanding of the nature of
the ‘swerve’ and the manner in which it suggested itself to
Epicurus’ mind. The root-notion is clear enough: as the
atoms are falling in the void, ‘at times quite undetermined
and at undetermined spots they push a little from their
path; yet only just so much as you could call a change of
trend’. This swerving causes collision with other atoms:
as the result of such collisions direction is changed again,
and there results at once the ferment of atoms moving in
every direction, which gives rise to their union in compounds |
and causes the world of sensible things.

The most scathing criticism has been directed against this
notion of the ‘tiny swerve’ both by ancient and by modern
writers. Thus Cicero speaks of it as a ‘puerile invention’,®
and with more penetration complains elsewhere that such
a notion is really a disgraceful abandonment by Epicurus of
his main position.? This is indeed the line of attack which
has been most usually adopted: this ‘swerve’ of the atoms 1s
a contradiction of the ‘laws of nature’ (foedera naturai) on
which Epicurus’ system is based: it is a breach of his own
first principle that ‘nothing is created out of nothing’, for
it is a force absolutely without a cause. The laws of atomic

ds ex tev pawopéve Seixvvow ; mapéyxhors must have been Epicurus’
technical term for the ‘swerve’: cf. Aet. 1.12. 5 KweioBar S€ 7a dropa
tore pev Kata oTdOpny, Tote SE Kara mapéyKAuow : cf. idem, i. 23. 43 U.
280: Lucretius’ translation is c/inamen. t ii, 216-93.

a de Sollertia Anim. 7, p. 964 e3 U. (Spic.) 281 dropov zrapeyxAivar ptav
emi rodAaxoTov, Srws dorpa Kat CHa Kal THX] mrapeiceAOn Kal TO ep’ Hpiv
pt) arrdAnrav. 3 de Fin. i. 6. 193 de Fato, 10. 22. U. 281.

4 Lucr. ii. 218-20. s ‘exiguum clinamen’, Lucr. il. 292.

6 de Fin. i. 6. 19 ‘res ficta pueriliter’.

3 de Nat. Deor.i. 25.70 ‘hoc dicere turpius est quam illud quod volt non
posse defendere.’

318 EPICURUS

being require that the atoms should fall eternally without
meeting: here is an occasional causeless interruption of that
universal principle—almost a self-assertion of the atom
against the whole realm of nature. From an outside point
of view no doubt such criticism is justifiable. But the matter
did not so present itself to Epicurus: it is clear from
Lucretius’ treatment that he did not regard the ‘swerve’ as
a weakness which must be glossed over and disguised, but
as a strong point of cardinal importance in the system, which
must be brought out into the prominence which it deserved.
Criticism will be more effective, if an attempt is first made
to discover how Epicurus arrived at the idea and what was
its importance for him.

It is a commonplace to state that Epicurus, like his
follower Lucretius, intended primarily to combat the ‘myths’
. of the orthodox religion, to show by his demonstration of the
unfailing laws of nature the falseness of the old notions of the
arbitrary action of the gods and so to relieve humanity from
the terrors of superstition. But it is sometimes forgotten
that Epicurus viewed with almost greater horror the con-
ception of irresistible ‘destiny’ or ‘necessity’, which is the
logical outcome of the notion of natural law pressed to its
conclusion. This conclusion had been accepted in its fulness
“by Democritus, but Epicurus conspicuously broke away
from him: ‘it were better to follow the myths about the gods
than to become a slave to the “destiny” of the natural philo-
sophers: for the former suggests a hope of placating the
gods by worship, whereas the latter involves a necessity
which knows no placation’.* Diogenes of Oenoanda? brings
out the close connexion with moral teaching: ‘if destiny be
believed in, then all advice and rebuke is annihilated’. If
any ethical system is to be effective it must postulate the
freedom of the will. If in the sphere of human action too

* Ep. iii, § 134 xpetrrov qv 7 wept Oedv ptOw Karaxodovbetv TH
Tov dvoikav etwappevn Sovrcvew* 6 pev yap edAriSa TAparTHTEWS Srroypda-
et Oediv Sia TUyLfs, 7) d€ dmrapairnrov exer TH dvdyKny.
2 fr. xxxiii, col. iii (William) muorevbeions yap e(uapevns aiperar aca
vovOeo|i]a Kai émuripnats.

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 518

‘destiny’ is master, if every action is the direct and inevitable
outcome of all preceding conditions and man’s belief in his
own freedom of choice is a mere delusion, then a moral
system is useless: it is futile to tell a man what he ought or
ought not to do, if he is not at liberty to do it. Here at all
events ‘destiny’ must be eliminated. It is a more fatal
enemy than superstition, for it means complete paralysis:
spontaneity—vo/untas—must be at all costs maintained.
But why, in order to secure this very remote object,
should a protest against ‘inexorable necessity’ be made at
this point in the physical system? It would have been easy,
one might think, to accomplish the immediate purpose of
securing the meeting of the atoms in their fall through space
by some device, such as the Stoic notion that all things tend
to the centre,’ which should not be a breach of the funda-
mental law of causality, instead of this sporadic spontaneous
deviation. And in what sense can this ‘swerve’ be said to be
vital for the freedom of the will, with which Lucretius? so
emphatically connects it? The answer must be looked for
in the very material notions of Epicurus’ 3 psychology, which
may be briefly anticipated here. The mind (vos) is a con-
centration in the breast of an aggregate of very fine atoms,
the same in character as those which, distributed all over the
body and intermingling with the body atoms, form the vit
principle (~vyy). This aggregation of atoms may be set in
motion by images, whether coming directly from external
things or stored up as an ‘anticipation’ (mpéAnyus) in the
mind itself. Suppose, for instance, that in this way there
comes before my mind the image of myself walking:
ultimately the atoms of the mind being themselves stirred,
will set in motion the atoms of the vital principle: they in
turn will stir the atoms of body, the limbs will be moved and
I shall walk. But before this can happen another process
must take place, the process of volitional choice. When the
image is presented to the mind it does not of itself imme-
diately and inevitably start the chain of motions which results
in the physical movement; I can at will either accept or reject
t See Lucr. i. 1052 ff. a ii. 251-93. 3 See Chap. VIII.

320 EPICURUS

the idea which it suggests, I can decide either to walk or not
to walk. This is a matter of universal experience and it must
not be denied or rejected. But how is this process of choice
to be explained on purely material lines? It is due, said
Epicurus, to the spontaneous swerving of the atoms: the
act of volition is neither more nor less than the ‘swerve’ of
the fine atoms which compose the mind. The fortuitous
indeterminate movement of the individual atoms? in the void
is in the conscious complex (concilium) of the mind trans-
formed into an act of deliberate will. The vital connexion,
indeed the identity of the two processes is clearly brought
out by Lucretius at the close of his exposition of the theory:
‘but that the very mind feels not some necessity within in
doing all things, and is not constrained like a conquered
thing to bear and suffer, this is brought about by the tiny
swerve of the first-beginnings in no determined direction of
place and at no determined time’.? It is not merely, as has
been suggested, that Epicurus decided to get over two
difficult problems in his system economically by adopting a
single solution, but that he perceived an essential connexion
between them: if freedom is to be preserved, it must be
asserted at the very basis of the physical world.

The ‘swerve’ of the atoms is, no doubt, as the critics have
always pointed out, a breach of the fundamental laws of
cause and effect, for it is the assertion of a force for which no
cause can be given and no explanation offered. For if it be
said that the atom swerves because it is its nature to do so,
that is merely to put ‘nature’ as a deus ex machina on a level

t Fora further discussion of this point see Chap. VIII, p. 435.
2 ii. 289-293.
sed ne mens ipsa necessum
intestinum habeat cunctis in rebus agendis
et devicta quasi cogatur ferre patique,
id facit exiguum clinamen principiorum
nec regione loci certa nec tempore certo.
Brieger, de motu atomorum principali, regards the two processes as parallel
but not causally connected exhibitions of the same spontaneity. His view has
been successfully combatted by Giussani (Stud. Lucr. i. 125 ff.; Clinamen e
Voluntas).

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 321

with ‘necessity’ as it was conceived by some of the early
physicists, a force which came in to do what could not other-
wise be explained. But it was no slip or oversight on Epi-
curus’ part which a more careful consideration of his prin-
ciples might have rectified. On the contrary it was a very
deliberate breach in the creed of ‘necessity’ and is in a sense
the hinge on which the whole of his system turns. He
wished to secure ‘freedom’ as an occasional breach of ‘natural
law’. If criticism is to be brought against him, it must’not
be on the technical ground of inconsistency in this detail,
but on the broader ground that in his system as a whole he
was attempting the impossible. To escape from the old
notion of the divine guidance of the world, the Atomists had
set up a materialist philosophy directed solely by uniform
laws of cause and effect. Democritus saw that this, if pur-
sued to its logical conclusion, must lead to an unflinching
determinism, which with more scientific insight perhaps,
but less care for his ethical precepts, he had wholly accepted.
Epicurus, unwilling in this way to risk his moral system,
tried to escape from the impasse without abandoning a
materialist position. Such a compromise is in reality im-
possible: a wholly materialist view of the world, which ex-
cludes altogether the spiritual and the supernatural, must
lead to determinism, and there is no real path of escape,
except in the acknowledgement of other than material condi-
tions and causes. From the point of view of ultimate con-
sistency, the. ‘swerve’ is a flaw in Epicureanism, but it is not
to be treated as a petty expedient to get over a temporary
difficulty, or an unintelligent mistake which betrays the
superficial thinker.

It may not be uninteresting to notice that a parallel diffi-
culty arises for modern thinkers‘ and that a solution not
unlike that of Epicurus’ atomic swerve has sometimes been
propounded. The modern scientist is not indeed concerned
with the question of free will, which he usually regards as
outside his province, but he is concerned with the origin

: See a very interesting account in Masson, Lucretius, Epicurean and Poet,
chap. x.

3307 Y

ga EPICURUS

of consciousness, and as he pursues it lower and lower in
the scale of being he asks whether there is a point at which
it can be said that consciousness begins or whether it must
be traced back into inorganic matter. There has recently
been a series of thinkers who have been prepared to state
that consciousness must be pushed back right to the very
atoms themselves. Thus W. K. Clifford' argues that ‘in
order to save continuity in our belief, we are obliged to
assume that along with every motion of matter, whether
organic or inorganic, there is some fact which corresponds
to the mental fact in ourselves’, ‘a moving molecule of in-
organic matter does not possess mind or consciousness, but
it possesses a small piece of mind-stuff’. Similarly Haeckel?
was led to postulate that in the most elementary form of
matter there is what he calls a ‘psycho-plasm’, and even to
speak of ‘atoms with souls’. In a recent work one of the
younger English biologists states? in the same spirit that
‘we must... believe that not only living matter, but all
matter, is associated with something of the same general
description as mind in higher animals’ and argues that a new
word is wanted to describe the ‘world-stuff’ which is both
matter and mind. But the most striking parallel not only
to the ideas but even to the phraseology of Lucretius is found
in the Note-Books4 of Samuel Butler: the passage is worth
quoting almost in full.

When people talk of atoms obeying fixed laws, they are either ascribing
some kind of intelligence and free will to atoms or they are talking
nonsense. ‘There is no obedience unless there is at any rate a potentia-
lity of disobeying. No objection can lie to our supposing potential or
elementary volition or consciousness to exist in atoms, on the score that
their action would be less regular or uniform if they had free will than
if they had not. By giving them free will we do no more than those
who make them bound to obey fixed laws. They will be as certain to
use their freedom of will only in particular ways as to be driven into
these ways by obedience to fixed laws. ‘The little element of individual
caprice (supposing we start with free will), or (supposing we start with

1 Essays and Remains, vol. ii, pp. 61, 85.
2 The Riddle of the Universe.

3 J. S. Huxley, Essays of a Biologist, 1923, p. 243- 4 pp. 72, 73:

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 323
neccessity) the little element of stiff-neckedness, both of which ele-
ments we find everywhere in nature, these are the things that prevent
even the most reliable things from being absolutely reliable. ... Atoms
have a mind as much smaller and less complex than ours as their bodies
are smaller or less complex.!

These theories are no doubt still unorthodox and do not
represent the normal view of the modern man of science,
but they show unmistakably a tendency towards a solution
closely parallel to that of Epicurus, and may serve to make
his problem intelligible to us in modern phraseology.
Before leaving the doctrine of the ‘atomic swerve’, whose
psychological implications will have to be dealt with later,?
there are certain other points and problems concerning it
which must be noticed. The first is of the nature of a
caution. Though in the aggregate of the soul-atoms the
‘swerve’ is productive of conscious volition, it must not be
supposed that Epicurus represented the swerving of any
individual atom as in any sense conscious or volitional. Such
an idea would be contrary to the very root-principles of his
materialism, for it would be introducing a supra-natural
element into the action of the lowest and most rudimentary
forms of matter, or, as he would have put it in his own terms
—assigning to the individual atoms a power that could only
belong to the subtlest aggregate of the very finest and
minutest among them under very special conditions. ‘The
atom, so far from having conscious volition, has not even
sensation:3 the ‘swerve’ of the individual atoms is in no
sense Conscious; it could at most be described as a mechanical
freedom corresponding to the psychical freedom of the will.
A second point is of less importance. It has been main-
tained by one modern critic + that Epicurus meant that any
individual atom could only swerve once and no more. Such

« It may be noticed that Butler here attacks not only the problem of con-
sciousness, but that of free will which was raised by Epicurus and Lucretius,
and incidentally touches the question of spontaneity in nature, which Guyau
associates with Epicurus’ zapéyKAvous.

2 See Chap. VIII, p. 435. 3 Lucr. ii. 886 ff.

4 Brieger, de atom. mot. princ., p. 224.:see Giussani, Stud. Lucr. p.138,n.1.

Xe

324 EPICURUS

an idea would be so arbitrary as to be very unlike Epicurus’
usual modes of thought, there is no evidence for it in the
authorities and it would immensely complicate the psycho-
logical explanation of free-will. Moreover the main argu-
ment on which this contention rests, that the atom having
once swerved from the line of the perpendicular fall could
not return to it again and so be in a position to swerve once
more is valueless; for on the one hand, there is nothing to
show that Epicurus did not conceive of a ‘swerve’ from some
other line of motion, on the other it will be seen later that it
is highly probable that he did conceive of the return of the
swerving atom to its perpendicular line.

A far more interesting problem is raised by the notion of
the working of the ‘swerve’ as a principle of contingency
in inorganic nature, which was put forward in the brilliant
essay of M. Guyau.! His contention is briefly this. At the
lowest point of material existence—in the individual atoms—
there is that power of spontaneous movement; at the highest
point of the scale—in the subtle complex of fine atoms which
constitutes the mind of men—the same power appears again
in the act of volition. What has happened to it meanwhile?
Is it to be supposed that in the whole realm of inorganic
nature this power lies dormant? It cannot be that the atoms
cease to swerve: is it possible that their ‘swerve’ is without
perceptible or appreciable effect? Epicurus, answers Guyau,
cannot so have conceived it: the chain must be continuous
from the individual atoms up to their finest complex. The
‘swerve’ then will show itself in inorganic nature as a certain
element of chance or contingency, which contravenes the
iron despotism of the law of necessity in the inanimate just
as much as in the animate world. Occasionally things happen
‘by chance’, apart from the working of the laws of nature,
and these chance events are just a fresh manifestation of the
atomic ‘swerve’. Guyau is himself at some pains to show
that such an idea would not be, as it might be thought, a
re-introduction into the scheme of the element of ‘miracle’,
which it was Epicurus’ main object to exclude. The argu-

1 La Morale d’Epicure, chap. ii, § ii, pp. 85-91.

Ae ee

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 325

ment is unnecessary, for ‘miracle’ implies the action of some
external power interrupting and altering natural law. A
contingency due to the ‘swerve’ would be an internal force,
itself the direct outcome of the one element of spontaneity
which Epicurus admitted into his system. As Guyau has
himself summed up the conception of the ‘swerve’ and its
action, ‘spontaneity precedes, follows, and completes nature,
and prevents it from being a mere mechanism incapable of
improvement and subject to an inexorable fatalism: it is for
this reason that Epicurus maintains it’.!

The idea is very attractive and would give a completeness
and consistency to Epicurus’ whole system, but it is very
doubtful whether it can safely be ascribed to him. It is true
that Epicurus’ conception of ‘chance’ is less scientific than
that of Democritus? and that he does appear to regard it
not as an unpredictable result of the working of natural law,
but as the intervention of an unaccountable force which to
some extent thwarts natural law. It appears in this sense
several times in connexion with the moral theory: simple
diet ‘fits us to be fearless of fortune’,3 ‘in but few things
chance hinders a wise man’, the prudent man recognizes
that “some things happen by necessity, some by chance’,5
and ‘sees that chance is inconstant’,® ‘nature teaches us to
pay little heed to what fortune brings’.?7, A more explicit
passage ® in the third letter states that the prudent man ‘does
not regard chance as a god (for in a god’s acts there is no
disorder), nor as an uncertain cause of all things’: chance is
an uncertain cause, but it only controls certain things in the

t Op. cit., p. gI. 2 See Part I, Chap. III, § 3, p. 142.

3 Ep. ili. 131 mpos tiv Tvynv addBous tapacKevaler.

4 K.A. xvi Bpaxyéa cof@ tvyn Twapeuminres.

5 Ep. ili, § 133 <a pev Kar’ avdyKny yiverar>, & S€ azo TUyNS.

6 Ibid. rHv d€ tUynv doratov dpav.

7 CB. fr. 773; 7a mapa Tis TUyNs puKpdrepa (1) vais) SiddoKer vouitew.

8 § 134, THY € TUyny ovte Oedv . . . SrohapBdvwv (odfev yap*araKTws
0e@ mparrerat) ore <rdvtwv> aBeBo.ov airiav. The manuscript text odre
dBéBaov airiay cannot be right, as that is exactly what Epicurus did think
chance to be: the insertion of wdvtwy seems the easiest way to mend the
clause: see my note, ad loc.

326 EPICURUS
world and those sporadically. It might perhaps be held that

the language in these passages on the moral theory is loose
and untechnical and that ‘chance’ is used in a popular sense.
But it is possible to find parallels in the physical theory too.
In a careful description of the formation of worlds in the
second Letter? Epicurus says that ‘seeds of the right kind
make junctions and articulations and cause changes of
position to another place, as it may happen’, and in the same
context Lucretius tells us that ‘the seeds of things themselves
of their own accord, jostling from time to time by chance, were
driven together in many ways, rashly, idly, and in vain, and at
last those united which could produce a world’. Similarly
in speaking of the end of the world Lucretius prays: “may
fortune at the helm (fortuna gubernans) steer this far away
from us’.3 Equally significant is a later passage * in which
speaking of the services of Epicurus to mankind Lucretius
says ‘he showed what there is of ill in the affairs of mortals
everywhere, coming to being and flying abroad in diverse
forms, be it by the chance or by the force of nature, because
nature had so brought it to pass’. Here ‘chance’ and ‘force’
are as definitely opposed as were chance and necessity in the
Letter to Menoeceus and both are described as ‘natural’.
There can then hardly be any doubt that Epicurus ad-
mitted the existence of a real contingency in nature, an
element of ‘chance’ which at times worked in contravention
of necessity. This is what might be expected from his general
attitude in desiring to circumscribe the working of a universal

x Ep. ii, § 89 mpoobécets re Kat SiapOpaceis Kal peTaoTdacets TOLOUYTWY
én GAAov Témov, Eav OUTW TUYXN.
2 ii. 1059-62:
sponte sua forte offensando semina rerum
multimodis temere incassum frustraque coacta
tandem coluerunt ea quae coniecta repente
magnarum rerum fierent exordia semper.
3 v. 107.
4 Lucr. vi. 29 ff:

quidve mali foret in rebus mortalibu’ passim,
quod fieret naturali varieque volaret
seu casu seu vi, quod sic natura parasset.

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 327

necessity. So far Guyau is justified, but is it possible to take
the further step of assigning this contingency to the working
of the atomic swerve? The one passage which seems to give
support to this idea is the brief and strange statement of
Plutarch already quoted: ‘An atom swerves the very least
so that heavenly bodies and living beings and chance may
come into existence and our free will may not be lost.’ *
This certainly seems to suggest chance as an effect of the-
swerve intermediate between the formation of compound
bodies, animate and inanimate, and the establishment of
free will in man. But it stands absolutely alone. It is not
of course remarkable that no notion of the kind emerges in
the Letter to Herodotus, for the section dealing with the
‘swerve’, if there was one, has been lost. But it is remarkable
that there should be no hint of the idea in Lucretius’ full
and careful treatment of the subject: his transition ? is direct
from the ‘swerve’ of the atoms to the act of volition in the
soul. On the whole it seems safest to conclude that Epicurus
did admit the element of contingency in the world, and may
possibly have attributed it to the atomic ‘swerve’: most
probably the brilliant idea devised by Guyau did not occur
to him, but he would gladly have adopted it if it had.

§ 3. The ‘blow’

The results of the ‘swerve’ must now be considered as it
affects the motion of the ‘free’ atoms and their behaviour in
compound bodies. It was said earlier3 that the perpendicular
fall of the atoms in parallel lines was a ‘theoretical condition’
and the reason is now clear: for the moment that a single
atom had swerved and thus came into collision with another
atom, the result of the blow must be that the two start off
again in new directions. They then impinge upon others,
which in their turn are deflected at an angle from their
straight course, and thus is started the infinite series of
motions in all directions which leads directly to the attach-
ment of atoms to one another and then by the gradual

r Plut. de Sollertia Anim. 7, p.g64e; U. Spic. 281, quoted on p.317,0. 2.
2 See especially ii. 256, and again 284-6. 3 pa gio:

328 EPICURUS

accretion round nuclei to the creation of ‘things’. And so
it comes about that in what is logically the second stage, but
in fact is the eternal condition of things, the direction of
motion is mainly determined by the blow (wAny}) of atom
on atom. Thus Lucretius can speak of the primary and
secondary causes of motion as practically on an equality:
‘it must needs be that all the first-beginnings of things move
on either by their own weight or sometimes by the blow of
another’. What Democritus conceived as the original state
of things due to a ‘natural’ movement of atoms in all direc-
tions is indeed historically original, but it is due to the action
of the ‘swerve’ modifying the ‘downward’ fall due to weight..
Weight still remains the ultiniate cause of motion and in the
absence of a blow determines its direction, but the blows are
so frequent that practically they are the determinants of the
character of atomic movement.

Thus conceived the motion of the atoms is infinitely com-
plex and, as Lucretius says,? it would not be possible ‘to
follow up such of the first-beginnings severally to see by
what means each one is carried on’. But certain principles
can be safely established. First of all it is at this point at
last that difference of weight begins to tell: when two heavy
atoms clash together and a light one at the same moment
falls between them, the result is that the light atom is
‘squeezed out’ and driven in an upward direction.3 Lucre-
tius,t though he does not explain the process clearly, is
careful to point out that upward motion is not the natural
motion either of atoms or of things. It is in fact a secondary
outcome of the ‘swerve’, but it is clear that upward motion
is henceforth established as surely as the original downward
motion and the sideways motions due to blows. The idea is
of course the Democritean notion of the ‘rush’ (oods) 5 in the
new and more elaborate form in which the more scientific
and detailed treatment of Epicurus is able to present it.

x ii, 83-5, quoted above, p. 311, n. 5. 2 ii. 165-6.
3 Simplicius in Arist. de Caelo, I’ 1.299 a; U. 276 e&wlovpeva 7a Kov-
ddrepa tr adta&v ddilavovtwy emi To dvw pépecbar.

4 li. 184 ff. 5 See Part I, Chap. III, § 3, p. 94, n. 4.

Swaee = Cl UT
saa callable

o

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 329

A more important principle is that, though a blow means
the change of direction in the atom’s motion, it never causes
any diminution in its speed: as it meets another atom, its
course is instantaneously deflected, but the original ‘abso-
lute’ velocity is always maintained. This principle is stated
clearly enough by Epicurus? himself: no atomic motion, he
says, is quicker or slower than another, ‘neither the motion
“upwards or sideways owing to blows, nor again that down-
wards owing to their own weight’. The blow is instantaneous
and as soon as the change of direction has occurred, the
atom starts off again through the void: and since it is still
in the void, there is no check or opposition and it therefore
moves at ‘atomic’ speed, ‘quick as thought’. This notion ?
becomes of supreme importance for the understanding of
the behaviour of atoms in compounds.

It is now possible to form a clearer idea of the external
‘check’ (dytixo7}) resulting from the collision of one atom
with another and its subsequent affects. Such collision is the
only thing which can affect the movement of a ‘free’ atom—
indeed of any atoms—and it affects it only by changing its
direction. There is an instant in which the two colliding
atoms are in contact and then each flies off at ‘atomic’ speed
in a direction determined by the angle of their original
incidence. An ingenious modern critic3 has-indeed main-
tained that the duration of the instant of contact is just that
of the ‘minimum of time’,+ so that, if it were desired to
compare the time in which a given distance could be travelled
by an unimpeded atom 4, and another atom B which met
with many collisions, it would be possible to answer that
the time occupied by B will be that taken by 4 + 1 ‘minimum

t Ep. i, § 61 088’ 4 dvw 088? % eis 70 mAdytov bia THV Kpovcewy popa,
ov  xdtw Sia tav iSiwv Bapdv: see on this point Bignone, Appendix I,
pp. 226 ff. ;

2 It is curious that this principle is never clearly stated by Lucretius; but
his treatment of kinetics is altogether slight and allusive. Perhaps the whole
subject was too abstruse for him; more probably it was only slightly dealt
with in the MeydAn ’Emrops and this may be the reason for the dispropor-
tionate length of its treatment in the Letter to Herodotus.

3 Bignone, l.c., p. 230. 4 See above, p. 315.

330 EPICURUS

of time’ for every collision suffered. But there seems to
be no authority for the equation of the duration of the
collision with the ‘minimum of time’ and the idea must be
regarded as an ingenious but uncertain inference. Anyhow
the atom after its collision proceeds at onceat ‘atomic’ speed in
the direction given it by its last blow until it is deflected again
or—and this is a new idea of importance—in a long transit
through the void the original downward tendency will assert
itself. This must be the meaning of Epicurus when he
says in continuation of the passage last quoted: * ‘for as long
as either of the two motions (that due to weight and that
due to a blow) prevails, so long will it (the atom) have a
course as quick as thought, until something checks it either
from outside or from its own weight counteracting the force
of that which dealt the blow’. The downward tendency then
still survives even in the atom buffeted by collisions and
may come into play in a sufficiently long unimpeded course,
but it may be noted that whereas the change of direction due
to collision is immediate, the downward motion would only:
reassert itself gradually. The idea was probably suggested
to Epicurus by the trajectory of a missile, in which the force
of the throw gradually expends itself and the weapon falls
to earth. He does not himself make much use of the con-
ception in the working out of his kinetics, but it must be
borne carefully in mind.

§ 4. Motion in compound bodies

So far inquiry has been limited to the motion of the ‘free’
atoms, which continue to move independently in the void
and have not been brought by their collisions and clashings
into the closer and more permanent connexion with other
atoms, which forms the compound body. But this ‘implica-
tion’ of atoms with atoms is of course the all-important result

t § 61 éd’ Gmocov yap av Katicyn ExaTép<a abr) Av, emi rocobrov apa
vorpare THY popav oxHoEL, Ews Cav Try avriKdyn, 7} EEwbev 7 ex Tod idiov
Bdpous tiv Tod wAjEavros Svvayy. ‘There is no reason to follow Usener in
excluding the words zpos rHv Tod TAnEavTos S¥vapw as a gloss: see Giussani,

Stud. Lucr.i. 104, and C.B. note ad loc. The influence of the downward
tendency is rather loosely spoken of as an avruxo77.

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 331

of the swerve and is the ultimate fate of by far the greater
" part of the atoms.’ It may be explained briefly thus.? When
the atoms meet one another, some become locked in a close
and strong bond of union; these form bodies of great mass
and density, such as stone, iron, &c.; others ‘leap back’, but
nevertheless remain in a loose union; these form thin and
fine substances, such as liquids or air. Between these ex-
tremes there is every possible variety of looseness and close-
ness of texture, producing substances of corresponding
degrees of density.

What then becomes of the motions of the atoms thus
imprisoned in compounds? Is it checked, slackened, or lost?
does the atom come to rest and only regain its motion, if
ever, when it is once again liberated by the dissolution of
the compound? It is one of the most striking of Epicurus’
acts of ‘mental apprehension’ that he saw that this was not
the case. The motion of the atom through the void at
‘atomic’ speed is not in any way diminished or altered by
its entry into the compound body. In no compound—even
that of the hardest rock—is the density so great, the texture
so close, that the atoms in any sense coalesce: there is always
between them a greater or lesser ‘interval’ of void. The only
result of density of formation is that the atom, as it moves at
absolute speed, more immediately comes into conflict with
other atoms and is again changed in direction: its ‘trajects’
—if this term may be applied to its infinitely minute
journeyings to and fro—are made shorter and its collisions
more frequent: ‘the atoms move continuously for all time

. . some are borne on separating to a long distance from
one another, while others again recoil and recoil, whenever
they chance to be checked by the interlacing with others, or
else shut in by atoms interlaced around them’.3 An atom

r The combination of atoms in compounds is more fully treated in Chap. V.

2 Ep. i, § 43: cf. the much more detailed description in Lucr. 11. 95-111,
and its subsequent elaboration in 381-477, and see Chap. VI, pp. 339-41.

3 Ep.i, § 43 xwotvrai re avveyds at dropor Tov aidva Kalai pev. .
eis paxpav am’ GAAjrwy ducTdpevar, ai d€ ad Tov maAwov iaxovow,
Srav TUxwor TH mepiTAoKH KekAysevar 7} oTeyaloperas mapa T&v mAe-
KTLKWV.

<$a4 EPICURUS

then must never be supposed to be more than instan-
taneously at rest at the moment of collision: in the compound,
no less than in its free state, it is for ever in motion: ‘if you
think that the first-beginnings can stay still, and by staying
still beget new movements in things, you stray very far
from the true reasoning’. Thus the compound body, the
aggregate of atoms ever in ceaseless movement, is always in
a condition of feverish vibration (saAyés), even when the
whole is at rest. Lucretius *in a striking passage brings out
the notion clearly:

herein we need not wonder why it is that when all the first-beginnings
of things are in motion, yet the whole seems to stand wholly at rest,
except when anything starts moving with its entire body. For all the
nature of the first-bodies lies far away from our senses, below their
purview: wherefore, since you cannot reach to look upon them, they
must needs steal away their motions from you too ; above all, since such
things as we can look upon, yet often hide their motions, when with-
drawn from us on some distant spot.

Lucretius clinches his argument with two beautiful illustra-
tions from experience, the distant flock of sheep, which looks
like ‘a white mass on a green hill’, and the distant army
manceuvring which appears ‘to be at rest and to lie like a
glimmering mass upon the plains’.

It is not difficult thus to conceive of the internal but wholly
imperceptible atomic vibration in a thing at rest—modern
science teaches the same idea—but what of a compound
body in motion? what is the effect of this vibration on its
motion, and what is in general the relation of the motion
of the individual atoms to the motion of the whole body
which they compose? These are much more difficult ques-
tions to which Epicurus 3 has devoted an obscure section in
the Letter to Herodotus, which has however been consider-
ably elucidated by modern scholars.‘

t Lucr. i. 80-2. 2 il. 308-32.

3 § 61 to which, in my opinion, must be added a portion of § 47, which
occurs in the text in the section devoted to the eiSwAa of vision, but must
refer to atomic. motion in compounds generally : see my notes, ad loc.

4 Especially by Giussani, Cinetica Epicurea; Stud. Lucr. pp. 97-124; and
Bignone, Epicuro, Appendix, § 1.

T. an te AN)

4

a ala\ Ha ie
pe het

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 333

In the first place it is clear that this internal movement of
the atoms, vast numbers of them hastening in directions
different to—and even directly contrary to—that of the
whole, must act as a retardation on the motion of the whole
body. In other words the effect of the collisions (dvrucom})
of atom with atom and their subsequent ‘trajects’ in all
directions is that of a ‘check’. ‘Anticope’ thus comes to
have the secondary sense of an internal ‘check’ or ‘drag’ on
the whole body, but the internal ‘anticope’ is in no sense a
different thing from the external ‘anticope’ of the atoms;
it is only its inevitable outcome. Lucretius’ in a famous
passage traces the upward growth of this retardation. The
individual independent atom moves at ‘absolute’ speed:
when two or three atoms join in a nucleus, that nucleus is
retarded by their contrary motions within it: it joins with
other nuclei in a body whose pace is still slower till at last
there is formed a body sufficiently large and sufficiently slow
in movement to be perceptible to the senses—such as the
mote in the sunbeam, by whose behaviour the poet illustrates
the movement of the atoms. The notion is one of the most
penetrating and—from the point of view of modern science—
one of the most interesting in the whole Epicurean system.

With this conception of the internal motion of the com-
pound body it might then be said roughly that the motion of
the whole body is the aggregate motion of its component
atoms. When it is at rest, that must mean that the internal
movements of the atoms counteract one another and produce
an equilibrium;* when it is in motion, the direction and
pace of that motion is determined by the resultant of the
sum of the movements of the atoms. ‘This account is in
the main true, but Epicurus raises certain points about it,
a consideration of which will serve to make the idea clearer.
In the first place 3 it must not be forgotten that the body as

tii. 132-41.

2 It is also possible that the condition of rest is produced when the ma jority
of the atoms have returned to the original ‘downward’ tendency.

3 Ep. i, § 62. The passage is obscure, the text not certain, and critics have
differed considerably as to interpretation. I have therefore contented myself

334 EPICURUS

a whole may move at different speeds and in various direc-
tions, whether as the result of a blow or of its natural ten-
dency to fall. Suppose two bodies 4 and B are so moved in
the same direction, but that / is travelling twice as fast as
B: even if we take the least possible period of continuous
perceptible time (Kara Tov eAdxioToV ovvEX i} xpovov), A still covers
twice the distance covered by B. We are inclined to infer
that the atoms which compose 4 are moving twice as fast
as those of B. But if we try to pass beyond the region of
sense-perception to ‘atomic’ time,‘ to an instant of time only
perceptible in thought (kara tov Adyw OewpyTtov xpovov), we
perceive that at this instant the atoms are not, like the com-
pound bodies, all moving in the same direction, those of 4
twice as fast as those of B, but on the contrary the individual
atoms are all moving at an equal ‘absolute’ rate, colliding
and clashing momentarily and striking off on their ‘trajects’
in all directions. ‘Mental apprehension’ has here corrected
a false inference from sensation: ‘for the addition of opinion
with regard to the unseen, that the moments perceptible only
by thought will also contain continuity of motion, is not
true in such cases; for we must remember that it is what we
observe with the senses or grasp with the mind by an appre-
hension that is true’. The ‘opinion’ then that the atoms
of 4 are moving twice as fast as those of B in the same
direction is false: what is true is (2) ‘what is observed’ by
the senses that the whole body 4 is travelling twice as fast
as B, and (4) ‘what is apprehended by the mind’ that the
atoms inside both 4 and B are still moving at atomic speed
in all directions. The motion of the whole is to be reckoned
in continuous time as observed by the senses, that of the

with paraphrasing what I believe to be its meaning. Bignone agrees almost
entirely with me, Giussani and Usener both postulate what I believe to be
unnecessary corrections of the text.

- t Notice that the ideas here are based on the conceptions of the ‘minimum’
of movement and the ‘minimum’ of time: see p. 315.

276 yap mpoodokalduevov rept Tod dopdrov, Ws dpa Kat ot dua Adyou
Bewpnrot xpdvot 76 auvexes THs Popas ELovoww, ovK adnbés eotw ent TOV
rovovtwv: emet 76 ye Dewpotpevov av 7} Kar’ émiBodnv AapPavopevov 7H
Siavoia adnbés €orw. ;

a

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 335

atoms by the discrete minima of movement in the minima
of time as apprehended by the mind.

So far Epicurus has a caution against possible misunder-
standing, but it is difficult to refrain from pursuing the
matter farther and asking what then is the relation between
the motion of the whole and the motion of the atoms, which
enables the one body to move twice as fast as the other,
although the rate of the internal atomic motion is always the
same? The answer which Epicurus would surely have given
is that in the body 4 twice as many atoms are moving in the
direction of the whole as in the body B, whose pace is
slackened by greater internal ‘anticope’. Imagine that each
body consists of 24 atoms: if in 4 16 are moving from east
to west and 8 in other directions more or less impeding,
whereas in B 8 only are moving from east to west and 16 in
other directions, / travels from east to west twice as fast
as B. In other words, ‘anticope’ is the inverse determinant
of speed. For this conclusion at least there is the authority
of Epicurus himself: 1 it is true of the motion of compounds
just as much as of ‘free’ atoms that ‘it is “‘anticope’’ and its
absence which take the outward appearance of slowness and
quickness’.?

We must not then interpret the motions of the component
atoms by the motion of the whole body, even though it 1s
itself the resultant of the sum of their motions. Epicurus’ 3
second caution is the converse of this: we must not suppose
the motion of the whole body to be that of each or any of the

« § 46 Bpddouvs yap Kat tdxous avTiKoT) Kal ovK avTiKOT) Opolwpa
AapBaver. aan

2 Giussani (.c.) has attempted to follow up the question farther and inquire
precisely what is the atomic effect on a body propelled by an external blow.
The inquiry is fascinating, especially as I think Giussani is mistaken in some
of his conclusions, but as there is no warrant for a decision in any Epicurean
text, it is better left alone. Giussani’s main weakness is a desire to pursue his
inquiries too far and to read his own ideas into Epicurus’ mind.

3 § 47 b. This is the passage attached in the manuscripts to the account
of the eiSwAa: it is almost impossible to make sense of it there: here it is
exactly in point. Again I am using the text and interpretation adopted in my
edition.

336 EPICURUS

component atoms. This “first principle’ (a7otxetov, as Epi-
curus calls it) is again couched in rather obscure language
due no doubt to criticisms levelled at Epicurus’ theory:

nor must it either be supposed that in moments perceptible only by
thought the moving body too passes to the several places to which its
component atoms move (for this too is unthinkable, and in that case,
when it arrives all together in a sensible period of time from any point
in the infinite void, it would not be taking its departure from the place
from which we apprehend its motion): for the motion of the whole
body will be the outward expression of its internal collisions, even
though * up to the limits of perception we suppose the speed of the
motion not to be retarded by collision. .

If the component atoms are in the atomic minima of time
performing tiny trajects in all directions,it might be supposed
that in the same imperceptible minima of time the whole
body performs this series of motions and reaches the end
of its journey after having followed a devious course in all
directions. Such an idea, says Epicurus, is unthinkable, as
can be seen from its implications: for if it were true, a body
which we see to be moving from east to west may in reality
in an imperceptible minimum of time have been moving
along the course of some of its component atoms from north
to south.? The problem and its solution, as here stated by
Epicurus, seem crude and almost puerile. It is hard to
suppose that any one could have the idea which he is at pains
to refute. But behind it lies an important question. If the
movement of the whole body is the sum of the motion of
its component atoms, and these motions are the tiny trajects |
in all directions in imperceptible moments of time, are not
those motions alone real and is not the motion of the com-
pound body a delusion? To this question Epicurus would

1 There is no reason to suppose, with Giussani, that Epicurus’ reference
is to the points from which the individual atoms started in the void before
they entered the compound body. ‘The idea is very far-fetched and, as
Bignone points out, there could be no possible reason for identifying the
motion of the whole body with the previous motions of its atoms.

2 This is my interpretation of the vague expression expt Tooovrov: see
notes, ad loc.

aN

MOTION OF THE ATOMS 337
reply unhesitatingly, No. The motion of the whole body

is the outward expression in continuous time perceptible to
the senses of the invisible motions of the atoms. Both are
realities, the one for thought and the other for the senses,
and the latter is the sensible exhibition of the former. As
he remarks in the conclusion of the previous section,! ‘what
we observe with the senses or grasp with the mind by an
apprehension is true’.

This paradox rests in fact on one of the most important
of Epicurus’ physical conceptions, which will be dealt with
more fully in the next chapter, that of the compound body
as a new unity (dpovopa, concilium). The compound is, in
his view, not a mere aggregate, it is an entity which acquires
new powers and faculties. This becomes clear in his theory
of the secondary qualities: the atoms themselves are, for
instance, colourless, but by their differences of shape and
arrangement they produce colour in the compound, and that
colour is no delusion, but a new reality. So here in the case
of movement: as separate identities the atoms perform tiny
trajects at imperceptible speed, but as parts of the new unity
they combine to make up a new motion. This underlying
idea lies at the very root of Epicurus’ physical conceptions:
both the world of phenomena, perceived by the senses and
the imperceptible world conceived by thought are real and
the former is the outward manifestation of the latter. The
notion of the compound body is then the aggregate resultant
of the motions of its atoms, but it is also a new reality of
itself. In the light of this conception of the ‘organism’ of
the compound body, both the main theory becomes more
intelligible and also the questions raised by Epicurus and
his answers to them. At the same time the theory of motion
in the compound body aids considerably the understanding
of the conception of the ‘organism’.

If there were no other part of Epicurus’ system which
could be adduced to refute the charge that he was a loose
and superficial thinker, the atomic kinetics would in itself

t § 61, fin.

3307 Z

338 EPICURUS

suffice. It was a department of Atomism which had hardly
been touched by Leucippus and Democritus and Epicurus’
development of it was all hisown. The minuteness of detail
with which he followed out the movements of the atoms in
the compound body is almost worthy of the careful investiga-
tion of a modern physicist, and indeed in its notion of in-
ternal vibration comes very near to his conclusions. And if the
idea of the ‘swerve’ isina strict material sense a weakness, it
was at least a daring attempt to meet on material grounds the
supreme difficulty of the issue of materialism in determinism.
Epicurus’ kinetics are indeed as profound an attempt to
think below the surface of phenomena as any in the ancient
world—even in Aristotle.

VI
COMPOUND BODIES AND THEIR QUALITIES
A CURIOUS chance has brought it about that there is

comparatively little first-hand information extant about
the process by which Epicurus supposed that the atoms
were formed into compounds and about the nature of the
resultant bodies. In the chapter of the Letter to Herodotus !
in which this immediate result of the motion of the atoms
is most likely to have been discussed there is almost certainly
a lacuna, which besides treating of the ‘swerve’ may very
likely have given more detailed information on the process
of combination: similarly in the second Book of Lucretius 2
a long passage must have been lost in which he dealt at
greater length with the subject than in the brief summary
which still exists.3 The loss is the less serious in that it is
clear from the information available and from the references
of later critics that Epicurus in the main followed the lead
of Democritus in this part of his theory: but there are several
questions of great interest—raised in part by the criticism
of antiquity—on which more authoritative statement than
can now be given would have been welcome.

The general notion is simple and straightforward and may
be summed up in Epicurus’ words in the chapter cited. He
is dealing with the motion of the atoms and (in the lacuna)
has spoken of the motions of the ‘free’ atoms and their
collisions: he now goes on to speak of the formation of com-
pounds as the result of collisions: ‘some of them separate
to a long distance from one another, while others again keep
up vibration (adds, the traditional atomic word), whenever
they chance to be checked by the interlacing with others
(zepurAoxn) or else shut in (oreyalduevar) by atoms interlaced
around them (mapa rév mAexrixdv)’. With this brief account
may be compared the rather more explicit statement of Lucre-

t § 43: see above, Chap. V, p. 316.

2 Before line 165: 165 and 166 appear to be the conclusion of such a
section. 3 il. 85-111.
Z2

34.0 EPICURUS

tius:t ‘some when they have dashed together, leap back at great
space apart, others too are thrust but a short way from the
blow. And all those which are driven together in more close-
packed union and leap back but a little space apart, entangled
by their own close-locking shapes, these make the strong
roots of rock and the brute bulk of iron and all other things
of their kind. Of the rest? which wander through the great
void, a few leap far apart, and recoil afar with great spaces
between: these supply for us thin air and the bright light of
the sun’. In both these descriptions there is an obvious
distinction between ‘rare’ and ‘dense’ compounds 3 and
Lucretius gives us the help of examples. In the former the
atoms leap apart at great distances, though they still remain
united in a compound: these produce what we might now
call ‘gaseous’ bodies, such as the air and sunlight (which the
Atomists always conceived as a corporeal ‘thing’). In the
latter the atoms remain in a much closer and more definite
union and produce, as Lucretius says taking the extreme
examples, hard solids like rock and iron. But a closer
examination of Epicurus’ statement reveals a further sub-
division among these denser formations. Some of them are
‘checked by the interlacing with others’: all the component
atoms, that is, are in close connexion with one another:
these are the solids. Others are shut in by atoms interlaced
around them: their own combination, that is, is compara-
tively loose, and they could not be kept together unless they
were enclosed in an outer case, composed of interlaced atoms,
to which Epicurus 4 elsewhere gives the name of the ‘shell’ or
‘covering’ (oreydfov). This rather strange conception is in fact
Epicurus’ notion of the structure of such bodies as liquids,
and it becomes of great importance when he subsequently
applies it to the constitution of the ‘soul’. It would seem then

x ji, 98-108.

2 The text is here uncertain, but I have followed Merrill in transposing
paucula and cetera at the beginning of Il. 105, 106.

3 Brieger, de Atom. mot. Princ., has suggested the convenient names
texturae and mixturae to distinguish the dense and rare compounds.

4 § 65 708 areyalovtos AvbevTos €i6? dAov eite Kai pepous Twos. § 66
7a oTeyalovra Kal mEeplexovTa.

ra

Nee

COMPOUND BODIES 34.1

that Epicurus in fact distinguished between three kinds of
compound bodies, each with its own form of structure, (1)
those in which the atoms are at considerable distances from
one another and the texture is very loose, roughly the ‘gases’
covering the elements ‘air’ and ‘fire’; (2) those in which the
atoms are in a closer union, but require to be kept together
by a ‘shell’, roughly, the liquids (‘water’) ; (3) those in which
the atoms are held together by their own close interlocking,
roughly, the solids (‘earth’). ‘The new theory is thus brought
into relation with the old division of the ‘elements’.

As regards at any rate the second and third classes of
compound, two points of importance may be noted at this
stage. Firstly, the essential condition for their formation is
the ‘entanglement’ (zepimAoxy): it is not enough that a certain
number of atoms should be congregated in a certain limit
of space; there must be such interlacement either among all
the atoms or among those which compose the outer ‘shell’,
as will serve at once to imprison the enclosed atoms and to
mark off the resultant compound body as an entity inde-
pendent of other compounds and of the surrounding atoms
moving in space. Secondly, in all such compounds, even in
the most compact, there must always be empty space, form-
ing intervals (S:aorjpara) between the component atoms, or
rather, since they are in eternal motion and the intervals
between them are consequently ever changing, a field in
which they can perform their ‘trajects’ from collision to colli-
sion. Of these two conditions the former is the essential for
the production of things (yéveous, ovyxpuis), the latter for
their destruction (¢opd), or, more strictly speaking, for their
dissolution (SudAvots, SudKpuois).

It has been seen that Epicurus regards the formation of
a perceptible ‘thing’ as a gradual process.‘ He does not
suppose that on any occasion a sufficient aggregate of atoms
gathers together suddenly to form a complex large enough
to be perceptible to our senses; rather they form at first small
nuclei or clusters, which move about in union, growing
gradually by the accretion of fresh independent atoms or of

1, Chap. Vp. 327.

342 EPICURUS

other nuclei like themselves, until at last they are large
enough for our sense to become aware of them. Is there any
stage in this process of greater significance than the rest, any
point at which the aggregate acquires properties or powers
which mark it off from smaller nuclei and qualify it parti-
cularly for the further union which constitutes ‘things’? A
recent writer ‘ claims to detect such a conception—which he
compares to that of the molecule of modern chemistry—and
believes that it was expressed by Epicurus in the technical
term ‘mass’ or ‘particle’ (yxos), which is translated by Lucre-
tius cacumen: this is the term used to express the minimum
visibile in the concrete ‘thing’.? “These cacumina,’ he says,
‘which when regarded as extension are the least points in the
field of the sensible, when regarded as substance are the
molecules of a body, that is to say, the partes minimae which
have the character of that body or substance.’ The least
visible part, that is, of a piece of iron is also the smallest
part which has the character and properties of iron: any
thing smaller than that is either individual atoms or atomic
nuclei which have not yet attained to the properties of sub-
stance. For this notion there is no evidence either in Epi-
curus or in Lucretius; nor is there any reason to suppose
that Epicurus would not have imagined that far below the
range of perception a particle might still retain the character
- of the substance which it helps to compose. If he at all
consciously approached the question at what point an atomic
nucleus becomes one of the substances of perception, he
certainly did not express his view in the word ‘mass’ (éyxos)
which apart from its technical use3 to denote the minimum
visibile, means simply a chance nucleus of atoms, or from
the other point of view, a particle of matter, which is indeed
a stage in the formation of things, but is in no wise marked

t Giussani, Stud. Lucr., p. 58. The idea is rightly rejected by Masson,
op. cit., p. 129.

2 Ep. i, § 56: see Chap. III, p. 286. In his note on ii. 454, Giussani
further suggests that g/omeramina is used by Lucretius to mean ‘the molecule
of liquids’; it means nothing more there than ‘drops’.

3 See Appendix IV for a fuller discussion of the meaning of 6ykos, cacumen
and glomeramen.

i li

COMPOUND BODIES 343

out by peculiar characteristics from other stages earlier or

later. ‘The whole attempt at a parallelism between Epicurus’
atomism and modern chemistry is in fact misleading and
has done mischief both here and at other points in the
exposition of the theory.

If there is any trace of a technical idea in the early stages
of the creation of things, before the formation of the com-
pound body, it will be found rather in the notion of the
‘seed’ (omépya, semen). Epicurus seems to think of the ‘seed’
as a nucleus of atoms of such shapes and relative arrange-
ment that it is specially adapted for the creation of some
particular thing. Thus at the outset of the physical theory?
he supports his main principle that ‘nothing is created out
of the non-existent’ by the argument that ‘if it were, every-
thing would be created out of everything with no need of
seeds’, and the elaborate development of the theme in
Lucretius? shows that the idea is not that of minute particles,
such as the atoms or ‘molecules’, but rather of complexes of
atoms which are fit to become the germs of living things.
Again in a curious passage,3 where he is arguing that there
are other worlds than ours with similar plants and living
creatures, Epicurus says that ‘no one could prove that in
a world of one kind there might or might not have been
included the kinds of seeds, of which living things and
plants and all the rest of the things we see are composed,
and that in a world of another kind they could not have been’.
Here again the seed is the ‘germ’ primarily of organic
existence. In the parallel passage * of the second letter he
states that a new world is created ‘when seeds of the right
kind have rushed in from a single world or interworld
(ueraxdopuov) or from several’. Here by ‘seeds’ he might
conceivably mean individual atoms, but it seems more
natural in view of the earlier passage to suppose that the
word again denotes the already formed nuclei, specially

-adapted for the making of ‘things’. Lucretius’ use of semen

is far more frequent and he seems to oscillate between two
meanings for it. At the beginning of the poem 5 he mentions

t § 38. 2]. 159-214. 3 § 74. 4 § 89. 5, 1 (59.

344 EPICURUS

the word among the synonyms which he intends to employ .
for the atoms or first particles and in a certain number of
places he does undoubtedly so use it. In the passage * in the
Second Book for instance, where he is arguing that the atoms
themselves are colourless, he constantly speaks of them as
semina,* as he does later in the similar proof that the atoms
are without sensation.3 So again of the ‘smooth and round’
atoms which constitute the light of the heavenly bodies 4 and
the texture of the human soul.’ But in the vast majority of
instances he too seems to have in mind rather the complex
germ, which is the source of the creation of things. Often
it is used in reference to living organisms: so in the argu-
ment already referred to at the beginning of the First Book,
and again throughout the long passage ® at the end of Book IV,
where it is used consistently of the germ of the living human
being. But almost more striking are the instances where he
employs it to denote the ‘germ’ of inanimate things: so in
the refutation of Anaxagoras,7 change is caused because
there are mingled in things ‘the seeds of many things’, and
again and again in the explanations of curious phenomena in
Book VI we have such phrases as ‘the seeds of fire’,® ‘the
seeds of heat’,? ‘the seeds of light’,’ ‘the seeds of water’. It
is true that in these last cases it would be possible to take
semina in its other sense and to suppose that he means ‘the
atoms which when they enter into combinations are capable
of forming fire, water, &c.’, but both grammatically and
philosophically the more natural meaning is better. It may
then be maintained that Epicurus denoted by the ‘seed’ or
‘germ’ a definite conception of a stage in the process of
creation, a complex of atoms of such shape and placed in
such arrangements that they are now ready to create parti-
cular living or inorganic things.

t ii. 730-841. 2 e.g. 960, 1779783 32

3 988. 4 v. 456. Silat Bs

6 iv. 1036-1277, where the word occurs some fifteen times.

7 i. 895: cf. go2: here Lucretius is no doubt intentionally using Anaxa-
goras’ own word (o7épy.a).

8 yj. 160, 200, 206, 213, 217, 863, 867, 876.

9 271, 275, 883. 7 316. 11 497, 507, 520.

aN 5 a

COMPOUND BODIES 345

The internal construction of the compound body must
now be considered more closely. Roughly, as has been seen,
three classes of compound may be distinguished according
to the density or rarity of their texture, but these distinctions
are not rigid, and in fact there may be all possible varieties of
union from the very loose mesh of atoms, which produces air
or light, to the tightly packed formations with very little
admixture of void, which produces the hard solids. But the
One essential is that there must be cohesion, the atoms must
be in some way ‘entangled’ (epumAexépevor, impedita). Now
if the compound were a static body, this would be easy
enough to understand: the excrescences of one atom might
be pictured as catching in the cavities of another, so that
their motions were checked and a solid body formed by the
juxtaposition of atoms at rest. And indeed some of the
language employed to describe the atomic compounds does
suggest a static structure rather than internal motion. The
word ‘entanglement’ ! (zepurAox7}) itself is really more appro-
priate to such a conception, and a late Latin writer? renders
it by the verb to ‘cohere’ (cohaerere) which is certainly a
static word. Simplicius3 too in describing the theory of
Democritus says that he ‘assigns as the reason that the com-
pounds remain together for a time the interconnexions and
graspings of the atoms’. Many of the expressions too used
by Lucretius in describing the differences between the shape
and combination of the atoms composing different classes
of things seem more appropriate to atoms at rest. Thus
‘hard things’,* he says, ‘are made of particles more hooked
one to another, and are held together close-fastened at their

t Ep. i, § 43. ,

2 Lactantius, Divin. Instit. iii. 17. 22; U. 287 ‘si levia sunt et hamis
indigent, cohaerere non possunt’.

3 In Ar. de Caelo, A. 10.279 Tod Sé cvuppévew Tas odatas jet” GAA Aw
pexpe Twos airiarar tas emaAdayds Kal Tas avriAnpers TOV cwudtwv D.
(Democritus) A. 37

4 il. 444-6:

denique quae nobis durata ac spissa videntur,
haec magis hamatis inter sese esse necessest
et quasi ramosis alte compacta teneri. cf. 468.

346 EPICURUS

roots, as it were by branching particles’; olive oil* as con-
trasted with wine ‘is composed of particles either larger or
more hooked and entangled one with the other’. It is
tempting to suppose that the earlier Atomists did in fact
hold that in compounds the atoms come to rest, and that
some of the language that they used was taken over by
Epicurus without the full sense of its implications. But it
‘has been seen? that the doctrine of the movement of atoms
in compounds was held by Leucippus and Democritus. One
or two passages seem to give evidence of a subtler doctrine,
which would explain this apparently static phraseology, if
allowance be made for a certain inexactness of expression.
Simplicius 3 in the same account of Democritus’ theories uses
a careful phrase: ‘they are entangled in such a way that they
touch and are near one another, yet never make in truth any
single existence’: the entanglement that is to say produces
contact but never leaves the atoms absolutely fixed to one
another. A passage in Lucretius 4 seems to go a step farther:
‘all those which are driven together in more close-packed
union and leap back but a little space apart, entangled by
their own close-locking shapes’. They ‘leap back’ but are
yet ‘entangled’. This seems to suggest that in very closely
packed compounds of ‘hooked’ atoms, the atoms while they
retain their movement yet for a time at least are literally
entangled with one another, so that instead of actually per-
forming ‘trajects’, they would oscillate until the chance blow
set them free from one another. This is perhaps over-subtle,
but there seems no other way to account for the close

LEAS)? Boog a
aut quia nimirum maioribus est elementis
aut magis hamatis inter se perque plicatis. cf. 405.
2 Part I, Chap. II, § 3, p. 88; Chap. III, § 3, p. 137.
BY lies
4 jl, IOI—-2:
exiguis intervallis convecta resultant
indupedita suis perplexis ipsa figuris.
With this may be compared the phrase in 1. 98 ‘confulta resultant’: this is
the manuscript text and if it is right the participle may be predicative and the
meaning ‘they leap back still in contact’.

SS

COMPOUND BODIES 347

entanglement of the atoms and yet to retain their ceaseless
motion. ‘There can in any case be no doubt that the doctrine
of ‘vibration’ is true Epicureanism and therefore we may
regard some of the ‘static’ expressions of Lucretius and other
commentators as slightly loose ways of describing a condition
of things which it was curiously difficult to depict accurately.

How then are union and unity to be conceived in a body
of which each single atom is in constant motion at ‘absolute’
atomic speed? This is the difficulty expressed in one of the
many acute criticisms of the atomic theory made by Plutarch:!

‘this interlacing,’ he says, ‘which prevents dissolution only increases
the occasions of collision, so that this process which they call creation
(yéveors) is hot even a mixture (wigis) or a cohesion («éAAnats), but
only a confusion and a battle (rapay7) Kai dyn): and if the atoms at
one Moment move apart instantaneously owing to collision, and at
another approach each other when the blow is spent (his cinetics
are not quite right at this point), they spend the greater part, perhaps
even double their time apart from each other, never touching or
coming near, so that nothing could be created out of them, not even
an inanimate body.’

The difficulty is a serious one and in reality involves a double
problem: externally, what line of demarcation can there be
between a compound ‘thing’ and other ‘things’ or the mass
of free atoms moving all round it and striking on it? in-
ternally, what unity can there be between these ever-moving
and colliding particles? Formally the answer lies in the fact
that the compound body is more than an aggregate of atoms
—it is an ‘organism’ (ovorypa) or, as Lucretius so constantly
and expressively calls it, a concilium: there is about it a real
cohesion, which gives it a unity of its own and marks it
off from other atoms and atomic compounds. But of what
nature is this cohesion? what really constitutes a conciliumt
Once again a modern theorist ? has attempted to answer this
difficult problem by introducing the analogy of chemistry:
a concilium, he suggests, is in fact a ‘chemical combination’, a
complex, that is, in which the component atoms so lose their

1 adv. Colot. 10, p. 1112 b; U. 286.
a Masson, op. cit., p. 129.

34.8 EPICURUS

identity that they are merged in a new substance, different
in kind from that of any of them, as hydrogen and oxygen
combining in certain proportions make water. This com-
parison is surely misleading: for a chemical combination
must mean that the atoms change their nature, and such
change is fundamentally inconsistent with their eternity: if
they so change, they must perish." Whatever Epicurus’ con-
ception of combination may be, it is of a purely mechanical
union, in which each atom throughout retains its own
individuality and may at any moment, by means of the
appropriate blow, be set free from the compound.

A perusal of Epicurus’ own writings might suggest that
he had left unanswered this all-important question of unity
and identity. But Lucretius, as so often, seems to give the
clue, doubtless preserving as usual the true Epicurean tradi-
tion. After explaining the different kinds of texture formed
by the atoms in union he continues:* ‘and many (atoms)
besides wander on through the great void, which have been
cast back from the unions (conciliis) of things, nor have they
anywhere else availed to be taken into them and to link on
their movements (consociare motus).3 ‘This ‘linking of move-
ments’ seems to supply the required answer. All the atoms
are in constant movement, even inside the conci/ium, but the
essential of the conci/ium is that its internal movements are,
so to say, ‘sympathetic’. The individual atoms are moving
in all directions, but there is a harmony in their diversity,
which enables them in all their differences to form one body
with one motion; and it is just this harmony of movement
which constitutes the unity of the ‘thing’ and distinguishes
it from external things and independent atoms. A new atom
colliding with a formed ‘thing’ may join with it, if its move-
ments will ‘fit’: if not, it is driven off at a tangent and, as

r nam quodcumque suis mutatum finibis exit

continuo hoc mors est illius quod fuit ante.

: Lucr. i. 670-1, &c.
a ii, TOg-II.
3 There seems to be a hint of this idea in Epicurus in the expression which

occurs twice in the Letter to Herodotus (§§ 47 and 61) wdvra mdpov ovppe-
tpov éxyovra: see my notes ad loc.

Sse eli

COMPOUND BODIES 349

it were, lost again in space till a new collision gives it a new
chance of union. Two illustrations from different parts of
the system will serve to bring out the idea.

Consider first a reason given for the tremendous velocity
of the thunderbolt. Lucretius assigns for it several causes
and among them one which is not at first sight easy to
understand:* “once again, because it comes with a long-
lasting impulse, it is bound to gather speed ever more and
more, which grows as it moves, and increases its strong
might and strengthens its blow. For it brings it about that
all the seeds of the thunderbolt are one and all carried in
a straight line, as it were towards one spot, driving them all
as they fly into the same course’. How does this happen,
for of course there is no idea of gravity or the attraction of
the earth to increase the speed of the thunderbolt as it
approaches the ground?

The idea must be analysed on the strict lines of Epicurean
cinetics. The thunderbolt is a concilium of very loose texture
and, as Lucretius says,? formed of small and smooth atoms:
but the peculiarity of this conci/ium is that it can only admit
atoms all moving in practically the same direction: others
will either be driven back from it or, it may be supposed,
pass transversely through its loose meshes. Now since it is
a concilium and its atoms are, however slightly, linked, and
since there must be minute differences of direction, there
will be ‘anticope’; the velocity of the bolt therefore will be
something less than ‘absolute’. And now a new atom moving
at ‘absolute’ speed in the same direction, catches up the
bolt: it joins it, ‘links its motion’ and at the same time
delivers a blow to the whole which increases its speed. This
operation is repeated again and again: the thunderbolt is
augmented by new atoms and at the same time its speed
grows ever faster and faster. Here then is a case where
‘cohesion of motion’ is of the very essence of the ‘thing’: to
this it owes its chief characteristic, a speed, which contrary
to the conditions which hold with most compound bodies,
is increased as it acquires new atoms.

I vl. 340-5. 2 vi. 330.

350 EPICURUS

Turn from the loose texture of the thunderbolt to the
closer and much closer formation of the ‘soul’. Why is it
that the soul cannot remain in union after it has left the
body? Not merely because the body is its proper shell
(areydtov) but because * ‘in close mingling throughout veins
and flesh, throughout sinews and bones, the first-beginnings
of mind and soul are held close by all the body, nor can they
freely leap asunder with great spaces between: and so shut
in they make those sense-giving motions, which outside the
body, cast out into the breezes of air after death, they cannot
make, because they are not in the same way held together.
For indeed air will be body, yea a living thing, if the soul
can hold itself together and confine itself to those motions’
which before it made in the sinews and right within the body’.
Once again the cause of identity is not merely local con-
tiguity or imprisonment in a ‘shell’, but harmony of motion.
Harmony then, though not necessarily identity of motion
seems to be the condition of individuality in ‘things’: the
concilium is kept together by it and atoms which cannot
effect this cohesion of motion cannot become part of the
particular compound. It is at once the cause of internal unity
and external identity. It is not surprising to find that
Lucretius’ striking list? of the necessary properties and
capacities which must be possessed by ‘matter which can
be creative’ (genitalis materies) ends with ‘meetings and
motions’.

It must not however be supposed that the identity of the
compound body implies absolute permanent identity in the
component atoms, or that the atoms which originally unite
to compose it remain in union until the final blow which
once again dissolves it and sets them free. On the contrary
there is a constant process of gain and loss—a kind of ‘give
and take’ with the surrounding universe. On the one hand
there is a continual accretion of new atoms and particles,
which as they collide with the ‘thing’ are able to be taken
into it and ‘link on their motions’; on the other, as the result
of the internal ‘anticope’, atoms previously caught in the

x Lucr. iii. 566-75. a i, 632.

oy 2 tat |

COMPOUND BODIES 351

compound are now deflected at new tangents and driven
out from it into the surrounding void. In particular there
is the constant—though very slight—loss to things due to
the efflux of the films which are the cause of their perception
by sight, and of the particles which produce sound and smell.
The whole notion has been clearly summed up ina passage
of severe criticism: !

all compound bodies are liable to flux and change, they are always in
process of being created or destroyed, since countless ‘idols’ are for ever
coming off from them and flowing away, and countless others, we
must suppose, flowing into them from their surroundings and filling
up the compound which is for ever being varied by this process of
exchange and mixed afresh.

We must indeed imagine a continual renewal of substance
in the compound by means of the counterplay of loss and
gain, and it would almost be true to say that in the Epicurean
complex form is the element of permanence rather than
matter. There is a supreme example of this conception in
Epicurus’ explanation of the physical structure of the gods,?
but those who scoff at the absurdity of the notion there, will
do well to remember that the same principle is true on
Epicurus’ view, though in a less degree, of every compound
body.

It is this interaction of the ‘thing’ and its surroundings
which gave Epicurus his explanation of the phenomena of
growth and decay. In a notable passage at the end of the
Second Book3 Lucretius has described the whole process,
arguing from the history of the living organism to that of
the world itself. At first, while a body is young and ‘climb-
ing the steps to its full growth, it takes in more bodies than
it gives off from itself, ‘while the food easily makes its way
into all the veins, and while the limbs are not so wide spread
that they give out much and cause more waste than the life
takes in as food. For in truth we must confess that many
bodies flow off and depart from things; but it must needs be
that more come to join them, until they have touched the

x Plutarch, adv. Colot. 16, p. 1116.c; U. 282. k
2 See Chap. IX, pp. 449 ff. 3 Lucr. ii. 1105-74.

352 EPICURUS

topmost point of growth. Then little by little age breaks
their powers and their full-grown strength and life melts
away on the downward path. For indeed the vaster a thing
is, when its growth is once lost, and the wider it is, the more
bodies it scatters abroad now and casts off from itself’. And
thus, alike in the small bodies of ‘things’ and in the vast
body of our world itself, the process of decay continues by
reason of the excess of matter given off over that taken in:
each part is thus gradually weakened and more exposed to
the effect of the external blows which ‘cease not to rain
upon it’. And so comes the final dissolution, due, in most
cases, not merely to the gradual wasting of decay but to the
ultimate advent of the appropriate external blow. The void
between the atoms is now more extensive than it was when
gain outweighed loss, and when a blow of the right strength
comes it can break up the ‘interlacings’ and at last dissolve
the compound and set the individual atoms free.

The conception of dissolution is thus no less exact than
that of creation. During the whole existence of the com-
pound there is a constant raining of atoms upon it from the
jutside: some of these may be taken in to increase it and
cause its growth: some fly away after dealing it blows, which,
at any rate in the stage of growth, may act as a strengthening
influence, for they will, as it were, keep the shell in shape
and drive back the atoms, which threaten to escape.* But
occasionally there will come a blow so strong that it causes
the internal structure of the body to reel and sway and come
near to dissolution, as when, for instance, a sudden shock3 _
to the human body wounds it and causes the soul within
*t to lose its senses in a swoon. But in such a case the ‘inter-
lacing’ is not shattered and after atime of weakness the body |
‘s able to recover and continue its existence. At last, when
the loss from decay has for some time gone on, comes the
blow ‘found strong enough to overcome the texture of each
thing’: 4 the ‘interlacings’ are undone, the ‘shell’ breaks up,

1 1142.
2 See the remarkable idea expressed only, I think, in Lucr.i. 1042-5.
3 Lucr. ili. 170. 4 Lucr. i. 247.

> 2 aes

a

COMPOUND BODIES 353

and the imprisoned atoms are freed. The thing is destroyed,
not because one jot of matter has perished, but because the
structure is dissolved, the form is lost, and the eternal atoms
wander again in independence to. re-form themselves once
more in a new compound.

One other point of great importance with regard to the
character of compound bodies must be considered here, even
though it involves to some extent the anticipation of the
theory of perception, which will be discussed later, namely,
the nature of the qualities of things and the phenomena of
qualitative change. Here the fundamental ideas of Epicurus
are in strong opposition to Democritus, but his working out
of the details is largely followed. For Democritus, it will
be remembered,’ the only absolute properties of things, as
of the ultimate atoms in the cosmos, are size, shape, and
weight: all other qualities, sound, colour, smell, taste, &c.,
are ‘experiences of sensation’ caused in us by differences of
atomic arrangement. For Epicurus, whose root-principle is
the infallibility of sensation from which follows immediately
the insistence on the reality of the phenomenal world, such |
a view was impossible. We perceive qualities in things,
therefore they are their qualities and not merely subjective

“changes in our sensations. Colour, taste, &c.,3 may be either

the ‘permanent accompaniments’ (ovpPeByxdra) of things or
their ‘accidents’ (cvpmrwpara), according as they are regarded
as an essential part of their physical character or a quality
which they may acquire and lose without essential change.
Thus colour is a ‘permanent accompaniment’ of visible
things, but an ‘accident’ of every solid body—for it has not
colour in the dark, but in both cases it is the real quality of
the ‘things’. ;
In spite of this fundamental difference of conception
Epicurus was free to adopt Democritus’ elaborate working
out of the differences of shape and arrangement of the atoms
to produce not now differences of sensation in us, but differ-

ences of quality in things which we perceive by sensation.

t Chap. VIII. 2 See Part I, Chap. III, § 6, p. 168.
3 See above, Chap. IV.
3307 Aa

354 EPICURUS

Once again it is not dealt with in the extant writings of
Epicurus, but Lucretius has a detailed exposition in the
Second Book,! which may be summarized. Differences of
taste in compound bodies are due to differences of shape in
the component atoms:? things which taste sweet are com-
posed o smooth and round atoms, things which taste bitter
and sharp are ‘held bound together with particles more
hooked and for this cause they are wont to tear a way into
our senses and at their entering in to break through the
body’. Difference of atomic shape accounts likewise for
differences in sound3 and smell: in each case pleasantness
- results from smoothness in the atom, unpleasantness from
roughness.5 All this is traditional and comes with but little
alteration from Democritus.§ In regard to colour the notion
is more elaborate. Lucretius? argues at length that the atoms
themselves are colourless and that the difference of colour
in things is due not merely, as in the case of other qualities,
to the shape of the component atoms but to their arrange-
ment relatively to one another: ‘it is of great matter with
what others all the seeds are bound up, and in what position’.®
He argues that if the atoms had colour, changes of colour
would be impossible to account for, whereas with colourless
atoms, they can be easily explained:

the sea, when mighty waves have stirred its level waters, is turned into
white waves of shining marble. For you might say that when the sub-
stance of that which we often see black has been mingled up, and the
order of its first-beginnings changed and certain things added and taken
away, straightway It comes to pass that it is seen shiningand white. But
+f the level waters of the ocean were made of sky-blue seeds, they could ~
in no wise grow white. For in whatever way you were to jostle to-
gether seeds which are sky-blue, never can they pass into a marble
colour.?

The appeal to sense-experience is characteristic and shows
an advance on the ex cathedra decisions of Democritus. The
consideration of colour, which most conspicuously among

ii. 381-477- 2 ji. 388-407. 3 410-13.

4 grant 5 422-5. 6 See Part I, Chap. III, § 6 (b).
7 ii. 730-841. 8 760-1. 9 11. 766-75.

when Oe ee

COMPOUND BODIES 355

secondary qualities undergoes alteration, leads immediately
to the consideration of change: the peacock’s tail,! for in-
stance, assumes different colouring according ds the light
strikes upon it. This change is due to nothing but the move-
ment and consequent alteration in position of the atoms. For
the constant internal movement of the component atoms
must always be remembered. At times, especially in dense
bodies, this may be more like oscillation, and lead to little
alteration of order and relative position. But when, especially
owing to an external blow, such as the impact of light, the
reciprocal change of position is great, the object colourless
before in the dark may receive colour, or change it, when it
receives the light at a different angle, as is the case with the
breaking wave? or the ‘iris on the burnished dove’.3 The
same is true of heat and cold and all other changes of quality:
they are due to rearrangement in the atoms. All the qualities
of things then are due to the shape and position of the atoms
which go to form them, and all change of quality is due to
change in that position (werdOears).4

The difficulties involved in this position 5 have already to
some extent been dealt with in discussing the properties of
the atom, but they must be considered now from the point
of view of the compound body. The atoms themselves are
without qualities: how can they by mere juxtaposition or by
mere ‘harmony of motion’ produce things which possess
qualities? how is it conceivable that a number of colourless
particles can create not merely a coloured object, but an
object whose colour may change with the motion and re-
arrangement of those particles? Plutarch® once again put
the criticism acutely and with point: ‘it is incumbent on you
to show how bodies without quality can produce qualities
of all kinds by merely coming together. For instance whence
comes what we call heat? how does it supervene on the
atoms? For they neither possess heat before they meet nor
do they become hot after they have met: the former would
be the mark of something which had quality, the latter of

tr ii. 806-7. 2 766-71. 3 801-5. 4 Cf. Ep. i, § 54.
5 Chap. III, p. 291. 6 adv. Colot. 8, p. 111F; U. 288.
Aa2

356 EPICURUS

something which could suffer change: but you argue that
neither of these two can be assigned to the atom owing to
its indestructibility’. The example of heat brings out the
difficulty clearly: the whole body is hot, yet none of its
component atoms are hot: ex hypothesi they can neither be so
nor become so. It might be answered that the position which
Epicurus takes up is in fact the only position consistent with
his general theory of the nature of the atom: for, as Lucretius
points out," to endow the atoms with qualities is to suppose
them susceptible to change, in other words to destruction.
But this only puts the difficulty a stage farther back. The
true reply must be found in the conception of the concilium.
As has already been noticed more than once, the com-
plex body is more than an aggregate of atoms: the close
relation between them, which 1s established by the “inter-
lacing’ and the ‘harmony of motion’ constitutes it a new
entity. And as such it acquires new characteristics and
faculties: the motion of the whole body is different from the
sum of the motions of its atoms, the spontaneous unconscious
‘cwerve’ of the individual atom becomes in the complex of the
soul the conscious act of volition. And so it is with qualities;
the new entity of the compound has in fact the colour, taste,
sound, smell, and heat, no one of which can belong to the
atoms as individual particles. Nor are these qualities a
delusion, or in any sense unreal or less real than the pro-
perties of the atoms. For the complex body perceived by
sense is as real as the atom. Indeed the whole form of the
argument as presented by Plutarch is to the Epicurean per- |
verse. Epicurus starts, as has been pointed out often, from
the reality of sense-perceptions: the most certain thing in
the world is their reality and truth. They tell us of bodies
with these qualities: the qualities therefore are real and true.
This is the starting-point and it is only from this that it
is possible to go on and ask about the realities for thought
(the atoms): are they like the bodies of sense-perception or
does the ‘apprehension of the mind’ cause us to deny them
the attributes which we know are true of the bodies of sense?

t ii. 749-56.

COMPOUND BODIES 357

This is the form in which the question is put throughout by
Lucretius and the only form in which an Epicurean could
propound it. .There might be doubt about the absence of
quality in the atoms, but could be none about its presence as
a full reality in compound things. Epicurus in fact con-
ceives, as it were, of two interrelated worlds, the world of
sense-objects known immediately in perception and the
world of atoms, known by thought, inferred from the world
of sense, but not always on direct analogy. There is truth
and reality in both worlds, and the world of sense is the
‘outward expression’ (Golwpa) of the unseen world of atoms.
The transition from the atoms without quality to things with
quality, so far from being unthinkable, is a necessary con-
clusion from the data of sense-perception and the inference
of the mind acting on the principles of the Canonice.
There is one more ‘accident’ (ovparwpa) which may attach
to the compound body and is of very great importance for
the Epicurean system in general. If the atoms of the right
shape are in the right arrangement and perform the appro-
priate motions, the conci/ium of insensible atoms may itself
obtain sensation: this is the origin of the soul of living
creatures and the mind of man. Sensation is after all only
another quality, like colour or heat, dependent no doubt on
infinitely subtler dispositions and motions, but yet just
another ‘accident’, which supervenes on the particular com-
plex body under particular circumstances, just as do colour
and smell and taste. Again there is no information to be
gained from the Letters, but Lucretius? discusses the ques-
tion at considerable length at the end of the Second Book
with a full sense of the importance of his conclusions for
the account of the soul which is to be given in Book III.
The argument is in the main parallel to that in reference
to the qualities. There is no question of the reality of the
existence of sentient bodies: that is itself an immediate
sensation and cannot be other than true. The only problem
raised is with regard to the world of thought: are the atoms
which compose this sentient whole themselves sentient? The
t ji. 865--9g0.

358 EPICURUS

main portion of the discussion is occupied in negative argu-
ment against the opposite view that the soul-atoms have
sensation or in refuting other views, such as that sensation is
produced by a change in the component atoms which takes
place at the moment of birth.t The positive arguments
adduced seem rather puerile, first that we often see living
worms created out of insensate mud,” and secondly that we
see water and grass turning into the bodies of domestic
animals:3 these in their turn we feed on and so sensation is
produced in our bodies out of our food! ‘do you not then see
now that it is of great matter in what order all the first-
beginnings of things are placed and with what others
mingled they give and receive motions?’ 4

Lucretius’ arguments may seem weak and the position
reached that sensation is nothing but the motions of certain
atoms in certain positions, arrangements, and motions is not
one which would commend itself to most modern minds.
A fuller discussion of this paradox must be reserved till
Epicurus’ psychology’ has been examined, but it may be
said here that Epicurus was at this point face to face with
the fundamental difficulty of any purely material system. If
there is no form of existence save particles of matter moving
in space, then everything of which we are conscious, sensa-
tion, thought, will, all that is mental and spiritual, must be
expressed in terms of the motion of material bodies, for there
is no other plane or sphere of reality to which it can be
referred. And if the resulting explanation appears unsatis-
factory, the weakness is fundamental and inherent in the _
whole system. Epicurus is at least consistent: he reached
a conclusion which was inevitable from his premises and
which was of immense value to him when he came to give
an account of the soul and its fate.

tT ji. 931-43. 2 871-3. 3 874-85.
4 883-5. 5 Chap. VIII.

lek ah at

a

4
y
o

é.
zc
Zi
4
_e 4
aa

Vil
WORLDS AND OUR WORLD

es cosmogony of Epicurus does not show any very
great originality. He is content for the most part to
adopt the theories of the Atomists, modifying and expanding.
here and there, and protesting occasionally against an idea
which he regards as arbitrary or in conflict with the evidence
of the senses. An exception must be made in the department
of astronomy, where the rigid application of the principles of
the Canonice leads either to surprising conclusions or to
a curious suspension of judgement, which does more credit
to Epicurus’ capacity for consistency than to his faculty of
criticism. For the rest there is not much that is new to
chronicle, but certainly a greater unity of conception than
can be extracted from the scattered testimonies to the theories
of Leucippus and Democritus.

Epicurus starts with the conception of an infinite universe,’
that is, space stretching for ever in every direction, and in
every part of it atoms moving and colliding. From time to
time, after many fruitless meetings and combinations, the
atoms will in some part of space form a world («éopos): “for
in very truth not by design did the first-beginnings of things
place themselves each in its order with foreseeing mind, nor
indeed did they make compact what motions each should
start, but because many of them shifting in many ways
throughout the world are harried and buffeted by blows from
limitless time, by trying movements and unions of every
kind, at last they fall into such dispositions as those whereby
our world of things is created and holds together’. Teleology
is from the first excluded: there is no design, no assignment
of parts and functions, no conscious organization: merely
the long sequence of events, due to motions and blows,
which inevitably results on occasions in the formation of a
world like that we know.

« See Chap. III, pp. 296 ff. a Lucr. i. 1021-8.

360 EPICURUS

What then in this sense is a world? Roughly, we know
that for Epicurus, as for all the older cosmologists it means
a system containing earth, and heavenly bodies with definite
boundaries and definite shape. But fortunately there is pre-
served a definition oft Epicurus’ own which contains several
points of interest:

A world is a circumscribed portion of sky, containing heavenly bodies
and an earth and all the heavenly phenomena, whose dissolution will
cause all within it to fall into confusion ; it is a piece cut off from the
infinite and ends in a boundary either rare or dense, either revolving or
stationary: its outline may be spherical or three-cornered or any kind
of shape.

Notice first the general resemblance of this definition to the
description of any ordinary atomic complex.? A world is not
any more than any smaller ‘thing’ a mere aggregation of
atoms: it is an ‘enclosure (mepioxy}) of sky’ with a definite
boundary or ‘shell’, which may be of very varied shapes and
of varying density of texture—in other words, there must,
as always, be the ‘interlacing’ of atoms on the outside, which
can hold the complex together and imprison the myriadatoms
within, which by their various shapes, arrangements, and
motions constitute the component parts of the world. Further,
it must be a concilium, an organism of interdependent parts:
“ts dissolution will cause’ the atomic dislocation of every part
of it: when through the process of decay and the blow ‘strong
enough’ it has broken up, it must, like every other thing,
resolve its constituent parts into their original atoms. The
conception is gigantic, but it is made easier to the imagina- -
tion if it is remembered that Epicurus had no notion at all
of the vast expanse of the heavens and the distance between
one heavenly body and another, and conceived of ‘our world’
as a comparatively small thing. :

The latter half of the definition makes it clear that Epi-

« Ep. ii, § 88. Iam inclined to regard the definition as a conflation from
several Epicurean sources, but there seems no reason to believe that it was
put together by any one other than the compiler of the Second Letter and
therefore no cause to follow Usener in rejecting portions of it as glosses:
see my notes on the passage. 2 See p. 341.

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 361

curus did not conceive of ‘our world’ as unique, but merely
as one of a species, which might show many varieties of
shape and arrangement. And indeed there is ample evidence
that he held the traditional atomic view that worlds are
infinite in number. The Letter to Herodotus" is explicit in
its statement and reasons:

There are infinite worlds both like and unlike this world of ours. For
the atoms being infinite in number . . . are borne on far out into
space. For those atoms which are of such nature that a world could
be created out of them or made by them, have not been used up either
on one world or a limited number of worlds, nor again on worlds
which are alike, or on those which are different from these. So that
there nowhere exists an obstacle to the infinite number of the worlds.

Thus the infinity of worlds is practically a direct deduction
from the infinity of the universe. There is a countless num-
ber of atoms suited for the formation of worlds and an infinite
extent of space for them to gather together in:? it is un-
reasonable then to suppose that they do not at certain times
and in certain places gather together and form other worlds
as they have formed ours. ‘The argument is characteristically
Epicurean: there is nothing in phenomena to contradict the
hypothesis, it may then be assumed to be true. These proofs
Lucretius repeats and elaborates and adds the strange argu-
ment that nothing we know of is unique, but always one of
a species; 3 there 1s about an equal number of things of every
kind: it is therefore probable that there are countless other
worlds in infinite space, and not only our own. Among these
infinite worlds there may be considerable varieties of struc-
ture. Their outer ‘shell’ may differ in density and may be
either rare, like the flammantia moenia‘ of our own world,
or of denser and more solid formation. They may revolve,
as that of our world was imagined as doing, or remain
1 § 45. j
This point is added by Lucr. ii. 1053-5: it is a necessary step in the
argument and may have fallen out accidentally in the Letter to Herodotus.
3 ii. 1077-89. For this curious idea of the equal distribution of things
(tcovopia) which appears from time to time in Lucretius see Chap. IX,
pp- 461-7, and Giussani, Stud. Lucr. pp. 245 ff.
A APACH. 1575:

362 EPICURUS

stationary. There may too be great varieties of shape among
worlds.! They may be ‘round’ (orpoyyvAor),” or rather ‘spheri-
cal (opatpoeeis),3 or elliptical—‘egg-shaped’—(goevdets),* or
even ‘triangular’ (rplywvot),5 by which Epicurus presumably
means ‘pyramidal’. Whether any shape whatever was con-
sidered possible is doubtful: the text of the second letter
seems to assert it,° but it is contradicted by the scholium on
the first,?7 which is probably of almost equal value. The
question is not important, for in any case it is only the
elaboration of an idea inherited from the atomists. Finally
‘n between the various worlds which have their position in
infinite space, are ‘interworlds’ (ueraxdopia) of greater or less
size, which are of importance partly because they afford
fields for the creation of new worlds,’ partly because they
were selected by Epicurus as the seat of the undisturbed
abodes of the gods.?

More interesting problems are connected with the actual
process of the creation of a world, for here Epicurus seems
definitely to break with his predecessors. Leucippus,” it will
be remembered, had the idea of a solid plenum of matter
placed in an infinite void, the creation of a world being
brought about when from time to time a mass of atoms of
all kinds fell off from the plenum into ‘a great void’, where it
was caught up in a whirl and gradually evolved itself into
a world, This notion Epicurus™ scornfully dismisses: a
world will be created ‘in a place with much void (év 7roAvKév
zon) and not in a large empty space quite void, as some say’.
The difference in the two accounts arises naturally from the .
fundamental discrepancy in the two conceptions of the uni-

1 See Ep. i, § 74 ere de Kal rods Kéapous ovTE e€ avdyKns Se? vopilew
&va oxnwatiopov €xovTas.

2 Ep. ii, § 88. 3 Schol. on Ep. i, § 74. 4 Ibid.
5 Ep. ii, § 88. 6 § 88 7) olay dy mote <Exovoa> mreprypapny.

7 ob perro. Mav oXFMA EXE, Schol. on i, § 74.

8 Ep. ii, § 89 <ev> peraKoopim, 6 Aéyoper, peratd Koopwv SiacTnpa.

9 Hipp. Philosoph. 22. 33 U- 359 Kabjobar yap Tov Oedv ev Tots peTa-
Koopiows otTw Kadovpevors i atros: cf. Cic. de Nat. Deor.i. 8. 18 ex
Epicuri intermundiis, and see Chap. IX, p. 467.

10 See Part I, Chap. II, § 3, p- 92. a Ep. ii, § 89.

SN RRA Te eT

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 363

verse: for Leucippus all that was not occupied either by
existing worlds or by the original plenum was of necessity
‘quite void’, whereas to Epicurus, who thought of individual
atoms moving all over infinite space, there was no such
thing: but a world would naturally form itself in a place
where there was not already a great conglomeration of atoms,
in a place of ‘much void’. His scorn is perhaps more justifi-
able than usual, for his own theory is indeed less arbitrary
and improbable. Soon afterwards he turns to Democritus,’
who believed like Epicurus himself in scattered atoms in
infinite space, but held that they were gathered in a whirl
by necessity and so formed into a world, which, as it con-
tinued to revolve, was constantly growing by accretions from
without, until it got so large that it collided with another
world and then was destroyed. Against these notions Epi-
curus once more rebels;? they are at once fantastic and un-
warranted by the evidence of phenomena:

it is not merely necessary for a gathering of atoms to take place, nor
indeed for a whirl and nothing more to be set in motion, as is supposed,
by necessity, in an empty space in which it is possible for a world to
come into being, nor can the world go on increasing until it collides
with another world, as one of the so-called physical philosophers says.
For this is a contradiction of phenomena.

The points are clear: the mere conglomeration of atoms
(aOpovopes) is not enough, they must be atoms of the appro-
priate shapes, meeting in appropriate ways and able to fall
into the requisite motions.3 The whirl set in motion by
‘necessity’ is a mere subterfuge: unless it arose naturally out
of previous motions it was not created by ‘necessity’, or else
‘necessity’ is a very arbitrary power.* Lastly, phenomena
give no support at all to the notion of the gradual ‘inflation’
of worlds and their collisions with other worlds: the process
of destruction, as we see it in other things, is indeed evidence
against such a belief.5

« See Part I, Chap. III, § 4. 2 § go.

3 Lucr. v. 442 motus inter sese dare convenientis.

4 See Part I, Chap. III, § 4, pp. 138 f.
5 Cf. Lucr. ii. 1105-74, and see p. 352.

364 EPICURUS

Epicurus’ own account,’ which he opposes to these re-
jected theories, is set out very briefly, and would be obscure,
if we were not able to explain it by the much amplified and
splendidly picturesque description of Lucretius.’ ‘A world
may come into being both inside another world 3 and in an
interworld, by which we mean a space between worlds...
this occurs when seeds of the right kind have rushed in
from a single world or interworld or from several: little by
little they make junctures (mpoobéces) and articulations
(SuapOpescers), and cause changes of position (ueraordaets) to
another place, as it may happen, and produce irrigations
(énapSevoes) of the appropriate matter until the period of
completion and stability, which lasts as long as the under-
lying foundations are capable of receiving additions.’ The
idea then is of the gathering not of a mere chance collection
of atoms, but, what must happen much more rarely, of the
appropriate ‘seeds’4 either in the space occupied by a decay-
ing world or in some space hitherto unoccupied by any
world. At first all is chaos and confusion, and then a triple
process takes place represented in Epicurus’ account by the
three rather obscure words ‘junctures, articulations, and
changes of position’, but fully explained by the parallel
passage in Lucretius: ‘from this mass® parts began to fly
off hither and thither and like things to unite with like
(mpoobéceis) and so to unfold a world and to sunder its mem-
bers (membraque dividere, clearly a translation of SvapO pacers)
and dispose its great parts, that is, to mark off the high
heaven from the earth, and the sea by itself, so that it might |
spread out with its moisture kept apart, and likewise the
fires of the sky by themselves, unmixed and kept apart.’ It
is the old cosmological idea of the ‘separation out of op-
posites’ and the union of like with like, which in its atomic
setting produces the transition of the atomic nuclei into the
compound formation of the ‘elements’. And then follows

1 Ep. ii, § 89. av. 416-508: cf. also ll. 1105-74.
3 A very curious notion : see my note on the passage.

4 See p. 363, and cf. Ep. i, § 73 €« avotpopaiv iStev.

s Lucr. v. 432-42. 6 443-8.

—o ee OV eee

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 365

the third stage (weraordces): the heavier matter of earth
‘meets together in the middle and takes ‘up the lowest
places’:' the light seeds? are squeezed out and rise to form
sky and heavenly bodies; and between them the seeds of
intermediate weight form the sea which rests upon the earth.3
More and more the elements become distinct from one
another; sun, moon, and stars are created in the heavens,‘
the land sinks in valleys or rises in mountains,5 and the sea
shapes itself over the low-lying parts of earth. At last the
world has assumed the appearance that we know. The
general idea follows the traditional lines, but it has been
more carefully thought out and is expressed with magnificent
dramatic force by the great Roman poet.

One difficulty seems to have been felt by Epicurus in
adapting this traditional account to his own conceptions.
The heavy matter of earth is said to ‘meet together in the
middle and take up the lowest place’. This is the traditional
language of ‘the whirl’? in which the larger and denser bodies
meet in the centre, where there is more resistance to the
rotation: from the point of view of the rotating sphere the
centre can naturally be referred to as the ‘lowest place’.
Epicurus had in general accepted the conception of ‘the
whirl’, and might well have been contented to follow it in
this point. And in his own writings there is no trace of
hesitation, but a strange passage in Lucretius suggests a
difficulty.* It may reasonably be supposed that Epicurus,
having adopted weight as one of the essential properties both
of the atoms and of things, now felt some hesitation in
stating that the heavier bodies gathered together in the
centre of the world and remained there. At any rate Lucre-
tius is concerned to explain how this can be. If, he argues,
the earth were directly imposed upon air underneath, the

* 449-51. ; ; , ?
2 453-70. expressa in Lucretius represents the exOAufus of the Atomists.
3 480-91. 4 471-9. 5 492-4.

6 The whole description may be compared with Virgil’s intentionally
Epicurean account of the creation of the world in Eclogue VI.
7 See Part I, Chap. III, § 4. 8 vy. 534-63.

366 EPICURUS

air would undoubtedly be unable to support its weight and
‘t would sink: but the fact is that the earth gradually ‘thins
out’! underneath into a ‘second nature’, which acts as a link
between earth and air and forms, as it were, a kind of spring
which supports the earth: ‘so then the earth is not suddenly
brought in as some alien body, nor cast from elsewhere on
alien air, but it has been begotten with it from the first
beginning of the world, a determined part of it, as our limbs
are seen to be of us’.? The idea at first sight seems to be
fantastic, another weak subterfuge from a difficulty. But
'f it is looked at more carefully in the light of Lucretius’
phraseology and illustrations, there is nothing inconsistent
with the main principles of the system. It is wrong from the
Epicurean point of view to think of earth and air and the
‘second nature’ as wholly independent existences (aliena):
they are all in reality parts of the great concilium of the world,
interrelated as parts of the same body and growing up to-
gether. In the same way, Lucretius argues,3 head and limbs
are not felt to be a weight by the individual man, though in
themselves they are weighty things, and ‘the force of the
soul, though exceeding fine’,* can, owing to this intimate con-
nexion, lift the whole weight of our body when we jump.
Just as aboveS the earth is gradually connected with the sky
by the intermediate link of the atmosphere, so it is with the
air beneath by means of this intermediate matter. Epicurus
had to some extent created his own difficulty, but he solved
it ingeniously on his own lines.

A world once created, its history as a whole is not far _
different from that of any other concilium. It is surrounded
from the first by space in which countless atoms are always
moving towards it from all directions. Many of these will
enter the world and become merged in it. This happens
specially in the early stages of its growth: there are ‘irriga-

- —8:
io evanescere paulatim et decrescere pondus
convenit, atque aliam naturam subter habere
ex ineunte aevo coniunctam atque uniter aptam
partibus aeriis mundi quibus insita vivit.

2 546-9. 3 540-5. - 4 556-63. 5 550-3.

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 367

tions’* of the ‘appropriate matter’ which feed the world in
its various members ‘until its full completion’, that is, as
Lucretius? explains, for all the time that the world is taking
in more than it gives out and is therefore growing. During
this period even atoms which cannot enter the concilium, may
yet play their part in holding the world together; for they
may batter on its outer shell,3 checking the atoms which tend
to: be driven off from it and holding the whole in shape.
But meanwhile even from the first there is a tendency for
atoms to escape from the concilium and pass out into the
void, driven off at a tangent by their collisions. And
gradually the proportion of atoms entering lessens in com-
parison with those driven out, until at last loss begins to get
the upper hand over gain, and decay sets in. Then the atoms
battering from without can no longer check the flow, and
their blows‘ from being a source of strength, become an
attack on the ‘interlacings’ of the world. And so little by
little the world begins to perish: its ‘underlying foundations’
are no longer capable of receiving additions, loss becomes
greater and greater, external blows have a more and more
destructive effect. At last the great organism is broken up
and the atoms are once again set at liberty to wander in the
void or to unite perhaps again in the formation of some fresh
world. Lucretius 5 insists at great length on the ultimate
_ destruction of worlds, and, holding, as he does,® that our
_ world is already on the path of decay, prays that the final
end may not come in his time.? This tremendous thought
of the final dissolution of the world was already present in
the atomic tradition,’ but here it may be regarded as a
further proof of Epicurus’ consistent conception of even a
world as in every respect a perfect, however gigantic,
example of an atomic concilium.

With the detailed mechanism of our world, thus created,
with the motions and phases of the heavenly bodies, with the
phenomena of the sky (ueréwpa), clouds, rain, lighting, &c.,

« Ep. il. 89 érapdevcers. 2 il. IIO5—30. 3 Lucr. i. 1042-4.

4 il. 1144, 5. 5 v. 64-109, 235-415.
6 ii, LI5O—74. i Ya 107. 8 See p. 148.

368 EPICURUS

and with certain curiosities among earthly phenomena, Epi-
curean tradition dealt in great detail. The Second Letter,
that to Pythocles, attributed to Epicurus himself, but more
probably an authoritative compilation, is entirely devoted to
these topics, and Lucretius in his fifth and sixth books has
resumed the greater number of them with a wealth of poetic
amplification. The great majority of the explanations ad-
vanced are derived from the hypotheses of previous philo-
sophers,? not only from the Atomists, but from the Ionians,
Pythagoras, Empedocles, and Anaxagoras, and there is little
which is characteristically Epicurean, except the occasional
working out of an idea such as that of the genesis of lightning
or the atomic mechanism of the action of the magnet. It
is not therefore profitable to review this part of the Epicurean
system in detail—though its study contains much that is in
itself of interest—but it must be briefly considered in so far
as it suggests or illustrates principles, which are very closely
concerned with Epicurus’ theory of knowledge and his con-
ception of philosophic procedure. For it is in this portion
of his work more than any other that the practical weakness
of the absolute trust in sense-perception is revealed. When
a ‘sensational’ theory has to deal with facts, which are in
themselves obvious but depend on remote and imperceptible
causes, it is apt to be at its worst; for it is not permissible

to fall back wholly on reason, yet sensation itself is apt to

be but a poor guide. It does Epicurus great credit that even
here he remained true to his principles and resisted the
temptation to dogmatize.

In the first place what is Epicurus’ attitude towards this _
whole department of inquiry? Had he a real interest in it —
for its own sake and does he demand in it such accuracy as he ~
required in the fundamental propositions of the atomic
theory? These questions are answered clearly enough in the —
exordium of the Letter to Pythocles:?
we must not suppose that any other object is to be gained from the
knowledge of the phenomena of the sky than peace of mind and a sure —
confidence. We must not try to force an impossible explanation,

x See notes on Ep. ii. 2 §§ 85, 86.

J

ee ee ee BS ewe,

ma

vapid ae ol

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 369

nor employ a method of inquiry like our reasoning either about
the modes of life or with respect to the solution of other physical
problems: witness such propositions as that ‘the universe consists of
bodies and the intangible’, or that ‘the elements are indivisible’, and
all such statements in circumstances where there is only one explana-
tion which harmonizes with phenomena. For this is not so with the
things above us: they admit of more than one cause of their coming
into being and more than one account of their nature which har-
monizes with our sensations.

This passage is of the greatest importance for the under-
standing of Epicurus’ treatment of astronomical and
meteorological phenomena, for it not merely shows the
attitude of mind in which he approached them, but the con-
nexion between this part of his inquiry and the rest of his
system. He was primarily an ethical teacher: his first object
was to secure for man’s life pleasure, which he interpreted
to be freedom from disturbance (drapagia); for this purpose
it was essential that a man should have an exact compre-
hension with regard to his mode of life, and with regard to
the fundamental nature of the universe. He must know that
the world is ultimately of purely material constitution, and
that its workings are governed in general by the operation
of natural law. And in detail too these principles must be
maintained: the great enemy to be faced here, as always, is
religion: enough must be known about the nature and move-
ments of the heavenly bodies, &c., to be sure that the beliefs
of theology are baseless. ‘Such phenomena? must not be
thought to be due to any being who controls and ordains
or has ordained them?.. . nor again must we believe that the
heavenly bodies, which are but fire agglomerated in a mass,
possess blessedness and voluntarily take upon themselves
these movements.’ We must reject, that is, both of the
current theological explanations, the more popular view that
the heavenly bodies are themselves divine, and the more
philosophic belief that they are indeed themselves material

‘bodies, but are fashioned and controlled by a divine being ~

> Bpa;'§§ 76, 77-
2 For the text, see my notes on the passage.

3307 Bb

370 EPICURUS

or obey laws once ordained by a Creator. But for this pur-
pose it is enough that we can establish in each case the
general truth that the actions of the heavenly bodies are
regulated by purely natural causes: it is not necessary to be
able to point to some one cause and say that it and it alone
is operative. Indeed to attempt to do so, is in itself almost
theological dogmatism:! for it is pretending to a certainty
of knowledge about uncertain material, which is like the
theologian’s postulate of a supernatural revelation. In cases
then where several explanations may be suggested,” all of
which are equally consistent with phenomena, we must not
attempt to choose between them, but rest content with the
knowledge that in any case the operation is purely natural
and due to nothing but material causes. All the way through
the Second Letter and the corresponding Books of Lucretius
these two notes are struck again and again:.on the one hand
the violent rejection of ‘myth’ or of any teleological explana-
tion, which may approach a theological view, on the other
the constant warning that a given phenomenon ‘may happen
in several ways’ and that it is not for us to state which is the
true cause in the particular case.

Before proceeding to illustrate this attitude of mind, it is
necessary to return for a moment to the principles of the
Canonice and see what they demand with regard to pro-
cedure in this kind of inquiry. Are the workings of the
heavenly bodies matters of immediate perception or are they
rather to be classed with the ‘unseen’? What rules must be
formulated to regulate our investigations? The circumstances
are peculiar: the facts with regard to such phenomena are
matters of immediate sense-perception, and concerning them
there can be no dispute; they are as we see them. But with
the causes it is different: they are unseen and we must pursue
the methods of investigation which in such cases the Canonice

« Seea very remarkable passage in Ep. ii, § 87 drav 5€ rus 76 juev arroAimn,
70 d€ exBadn cpoiws otudwrov dv 7 dawopevw, SHAov S71 Kal ex mavTos
exrimrer pvovoloynuatos, emt d€ tov pd0ov Karappel. .

? For the connexion of this principle with the Epicurean theory of know-
ledge see Chap. I, pp. 260-2.

a ae

a,

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 371

demands. In the first place we must use the analogy of
phenomena on earth whose causes we can trace: ‘we can
obtain indications (onjeia) of what happens above from some
of the phenomena on earth: for we can observe how they
come to pass, though we cannot observe the phenomena
in the sky’.t Secondly,? we can work by the ‘apprehension
of the mind’ (émBor} rijs Svavoias), combining concepts. In
_ these ways many explanations may be reached, and to them
the test of phenomena must at once be applied: any explana-
tions3 may be accepted which are not contradicted (dvTyapru-
petrar) by phenomena. Of such explanations there may in
many cases be several: if none of them are contradicted by
phenomena, then none can be rejected, and all must be
accepted as possible. Thus by the rules of the Canonice, no
less than by the requirements of the ethical theory we are
driven back into acquiescence in the ‘plurality of causes’:
for the primary moral purposes of our life we do not require
knowledge so accurate as to enable us to decide between
several possible explanations, and our accepted rules of
procedure show us that such decision is in these cases
impossible.

These two considerations, of the ultimate purpose of the
inquiry and of the application of the rules of the Canonice,
explain much in Epicurus’ astronomical theories which has
seemed to commentators foolish and almost childish: it will
be worth while to consider one or two instances in order to
see the principles at work. Take first of all the famous
statement that the size of the sun and moon is just what we
see it to be, and examine carefully Epicurus’ argument.t
“The size of sun and moon) and the other stars is for us what
it appears to be; and in reality it is either (slightly) greater
than what we see or slightly less or the same size: for so too
fires on earth when looked at from a distance seem to the
senses. And every objection at this point will easily be
dissipated, if we pay attention to the clear vision (rois
evapyjpact).’ ‘The conclusion seems merely puerile, but it is

» Fp 87. sch, Epri.8o. 4 See Chap. I, p. 265.
3 See Ep. ii. 88. 4 Ep. ii, § gt.
Bb2

372 EPICURUS

due to a rigid and accurate application of the Canons. The
size of the sun and moon is a matter of immediate sense-
perception: we see it immediately and therefore we must
accept the truth of our perception without question. But
this is a case of a distant vision: therefore what we see is the
truth ‘for us’, i.e. this is the size that sun and moon look at
a distance, just as the square tower looks round. Is it then

their real size? ‘This must be regarded as a ‘problem .

awaiting solution’ (mpoopévov), and above all our perception
must not be contaminated with any inference of opinion
(mpooSoafduevov) as to probabilities. In the case of a terres-
trial object, we can solve our problem by going near to the
object and obtaining the ‘clear vision’ of the close view: we
learn, for instance, that the tower was in reality square. It
is not possible to do this with the heavenly bodies and we
must therefore have recourse to the use of analogy. The
very brief statement of the letter at this point would be
unintelligible, if we were not assisted by a reference of the
scholiast to the eleventh book ‘On Nature’? and the fuller
treatment of Lucretius. The latter treats the sun and moon
separately, but in both cases uses the analogy of earthly
fires, which the author of the Letter clearly had in mind.
‘Earthly fires, he argues, at a distance lose their heat before
they appear to diminish in size, but the sun’s heat is as great
as it can be: therefore he is not far enough away for his size to
have diminished. Again earthly fires become blurred in out-
line by distance before they diminish in size; but the moon’s
outline is clear-cut: therefore itis not diminished insize.’ The

analogy is complete and there is nothing in the ‘clear vision’ »

of sun and moon, which tells against it. Therefore the con-
clusion must be accepted, and, if to us it seems ridiculous,
we must again remember that Epicurus’ whole conception
of the world was of something very much smaller than
modern science has taught us to have in mind. Finally notice
the conclusion: the size of sun and moon is either what we
-see or ‘a little greater or smaller’: analogy, unsupported by

1 ef yap TO peyeBos did TO SidoTnpa ameBeBAnKEr, TOAAD pGAAov av
THY Xpoav. 2 v. 564-91.

: i <

ax

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 373

the near vision, does not permit us to reach absolute cer-
tainty or accuracy, but the knowledge which we can so
obtain is sufficient at least to enable us to put any theological
explanation out of court.

An example of a somewhat different method of procedure
may be found in the discussion of the phases of the moon.
“The wanings of the moon and its subsequent waxings might
be due to the revolution of its own body, or equally well to
successive conformations of the atmosphere, or again to the
interposition of other bodies; they may be accounted for in
all the ways in which phenomena on earth invite us to such
explanations of these phases; provided only one does not
become enamoured of the method of the single cause and
groundlessly put the others out of court, without having
considered what it is possible for a man to observe and what
is not, and desiring therefore to observe what is impossible.”
This problem clearly belongs to the second class: the fact
of the moon’s phases is a matter of immediate perception,
but its cause is not: accordingly the analogy of terrestrial
phenomena must be used and any explanations may be put
forward as probable against which the evidence of pheno-
mena is not contradictory: but there is no criterion by which
any one of them may be selected as true to the exclusion of
others. The compiler of the Letter then states the conjec-
tures of the earlier philosophers and ranks them all as of
equal authority—the view of Heraclitus that the moon was
a body light on one side and dark on the other, which gradu-
ally turned round, the notion of Xenophanes that it travelled
through tracts of air which were not equally well supplied
with the necessary fuel, and the belief of Anaximenes that
there was another opaque body—or bodies—which inter-
vened and screened the moon from us. It is perhaps remark-
able that the true explanation of the phenomenon, which is
placed first by Lucretius,? is omitted altogether by the:
author of the letter: Lucretius seems at times to have had
a rather un-Epicurean eye for probabilities in the matter
of astronomy. Here then is a good instance of the suspense

t Ep. ii, § 94. 2 ¥. 705-14.

374 EPICURUS

of judgement: analogy does not warrant any decision be-
tween rival theories, for with earthly bodies, any of them
might produce the required effect. We must therefore be
content with a ‘plurality of causes’, but they are again sufhi-
cient to show that the phenomenon has natural causes and
to exclude the explanations of ‘myth’.

In these two instances, and indeed, throughout the as-

tronomical section, there is nothing distinctively atomic, and
Epicurus is willing to look with an impartial eye on the views
of any previous philosopher provided they are not contra-
dicted by phenomena. But it must not be thought that in the
details of his cosmology he in any sense abandoned atomism
or was not at pains to think out his explanations on atomic
lines. An instance or two to show this may be taken from his
treatment of celestial phenomena and terrestrial curiosities.
The discussion of the causes of lightning is a good case in
point.
Lightnings are produced in several ways: for both owing to the friction
and collision of clouds a conformation of atoms which produces fire
(note the notion of the ‘seed’ again) slips out and gives birth to the
lightning, and owing to wind bodies which give rise to this flash are
dashed from the clouds: or compression may be the cause, when clouds
are squeezed either by one another or by the wind. Or again it may
be that the light scattered abroad from the heavenly bodies is taken in
by the clouds, and then is driven together by the movement of the
clouds and wind, and falls out through the clouds; or else light com-
posed of most subtle particles may filter through the clouds, whereby
the clouds may be set on fire by the flame and thunder produced by the
movement of the fire. Or the wind may be fired owing to the strain
of motion and its violent rotation: or clouds may be rent by wind and
atoms fall out which produce fire and cause the appearance of lightning.
And several other methods may easily be observed, if one clings always
to phenomena and can compare what is akin to these things.

The method is here the same: sense-perception gives no
immediate knowledge of causes, and the analogy of pheno-
mena in which the cause can be traced, suggests this almost
bewildering array of alternative possibilities, between which .

t Ep. ii, §§ ror, 102.

7)

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 375

there is no ground for choosing. But it is not here a mere
recapitulation of the views of other thinkers with very
different fundamental principles, but a careful thinking out
of possibilities on strictly atomic lines: the ‘formation of
atoms which produces fire’, ‘bodies which give rise to the ©
flash’, the taking in of light from the heavenly bodies into
the clouds, the ‘light composed of most subtle particles’, the
falling out of ‘atoms which produce fire’—all these are
essentially atomic notions, which would be meaningless on
any other view of physical phenomena. Lucretius’! elaborate
treatment of the same topic reveals almost clearer evidence
of the same consistent habit of thought, and his discussion
of the cause of the pace of the thunderbolt? is a notable
addition to our understanding of the nature of the atomic
conciiium. Lucretius} concludes characteristically with an
emphatic protest against the theological view that the light-
nings and thunders are the weapons of divine beings.

The curiosities of terrestrial phenomena are not fully dealt
with in any extant portion of Epicurus’ writings, but they were
part of the atomic tradition handed down by Democritus,‘
and Lucretius has dealt very fully with some of them in
the latter half of the Sixth Book. A simple case may be
selected to illustrate the careful investigation on strictly
atomic lines, the problem of the well of Jupiter Ammon,5
which was cold by day and hot by night. The popular ex-
planation of the phenomena, in so far as it was not regarded
merely as a miracle, was, as Lucretius explains, that the sun
in his nightly journey under the earth warmed the fountain
from below. To this view he very naturally objects that if
the sun could not warm the water in the day-time, when it
was fully exposed to its heat, it is not likely that it could do
so at night when it would have to act through ‘the dense
body of earth’. The true cause is to be sought in an atomic
view. The earth round the well is naturally of loose texture
and contains many ‘seeds of fire’: at night the cold contracts

t vi. 160-378. 2 See Chap. V, p. 349.
3 379-422. 4 See Part I, Chap. III, § 5, pp. 152-4.
5 vi. 848-78, ;

376 EPICURUS

the earth and the seeds of fire are naturally ‘squeezed out’
into the well: in the day-time the earth is again rarefied by
the sun’s heat and the ‘seeds of fire’ return to it from the
well. The modern man of science would probably apply the
brutal test of the thermometer and discover that the well
remained always at much the same temperature, but that
it seems cold in the heat of day and hot in the frosty night.
Nevertheless the Epicurean thinkers may once again be
allowed credit for an ingenious explanation thought out in
accordance with the principles of their general physical
theory. A still more distinctively ‘atomic’ explanation is that
given immediately after of a well,' over which sticks of wood
would ignite—but for the best example of this treatment,
both in its great elaboration and the extreme subtlety of its
realization of atomic conditions is Lucretius’? singular ex-
planation of the action of the magnet.

To Lucretius3 again we are indebted for the only full
account of the Epicurean view of the early history of the
earth and the gradual development of plant, animal, and
human life: at one crucial stage the Letter to Herodotus
comes in to help and critics and commentators have pre-
served some details of interest. But there is no doubt that
here again, though the marvellous vigour and picturesque-
ness of description is his own, Lucretius has strictly pre-
served Epicurean tradition. Though there is nothing which
affects our view of fundamental principles, there are many
points of considerable interest in themselves, and a brief
account must be given of the main notions which he em-
bodies in the poem. When the elements had finally sepa-
rated themselves, and the earth was formed in hill and valley
with the waters here and there ‘covering its face’, it first
began to be covered with vegetable life. Trees and plants
and grass grew out from it ‘as do feathers and hair and
bristles’ 4 from the bodies of birds and animals (plants to the

vl. 879-905.
2 vi. 906-1089: cf. Galen. de Facultat. Natur.,i. 14, t. ii, p45 3 Unegae
we know that Democritus wrote on this subject.

3 V. 772-1457. 4 783-9.

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 377
Epicurean! were not ‘living things’ ({ujvya), and their growth
and movement was mechanical and not vital). And then
‘the races of living things’? (mortalia saecla) began to spring
up from the earth, their mother, even as now under the
influence of rain and sun, worms and other vermin may be
created.3 Finally from ‘wombs rooted in the ground’ came
forth the race of men, whom the earth, like a human mother,
fed with milk through her pores, until they were strong
enough to seek food for themselves. These curious notions,
which have of course been much ridiculed, are not a mere
extravagance of fancy, but are undoubtedly intended to show
the perfect continuity of creation, from the inorganic,
through the vegetable to the animal kingdom and so to the
race of men. Nor need Lucretius’ account present any real
difficulty in a system for which sensation is a mere mechanical
accident of atomic arrangements and motions: once again
the difficulty of transition from the inanimate to the animate
and conscious is glossed over, or rather totally ignored.
A striking passage‘ follows in which Lucretius describes
the early development of the animal kingdom: nature made
many experiments, producing creatures without arms or
legs, or blind or eyeless, or sexless or with limbs indistinctly
formed. But all such, since they could not help themselves
or propagate their species, gradually perished. Indeed, he
says, in a passage® which to many readers has recalled the
modern hypothesis of natural selection, only those species
survived which by strength or craft or swiftness could prove
their worth, or by their usefulness to man insure his protec-
tion, Those who had none of these resources, ‘fell a prey
and spoil to others, all entangled in the fateful trammels of
their own being, until nature brought their kind to destruc-
tion’.7, On the other hand Lucretius® stoutly denies the
creation of such monsters as are told of in myth and legend,

* Aet. v. 26. 3, p. 438 v.; U. 309 7d 8é dura adroudrws mws Kwetobar,

od dia Buys. 2 791-804.
3 This curious belief plays a large part in Lucretius argument for the
creation of a sensible soul out of insensible atoms. 4 805-20.

5 821-54. PSS 5=77- Ore Se 7 * 878-924.

378 EPICURUS

Centaurs and Scyllas and Chimaeras, composed of elements
from different races: for the period of growth of the various
tribes of animals is so different that they could not possibly
combine in such a complex formation, ‘when three years
have come round the horse is in the prime of vigour, but
the child by no means so. .. . Later when the stout strength
and limbs of horses fail through old age and droop, as his
life flees from them, then at last youth sets in in the prime of
boyish years and clothes the cheeks with soft down’.t The
observation is acute and serves as yet another weapon of
attack on the ‘myths’ of religion.

Not less acute from the point of view of the modern study
of anthropology is Lucretius’? account of the life of primitive
man and the beginnings of civilization. Here again he runs
counter to the accepted traditions. Greeks and Romans alike
looked back to an imaginary Golden Age, in which man
was greater and stronger and happier and better than at
present, when through a long series of degeneration he had
reached the Age of Iron. Lucretius will have none of this:
man’s life was then far harder.3 He lived like the beast of
the field,+ feeding on acorns and wild fruits and drinking
from mountain-torrents.5 He hid in caves or groves or
thickets for shelter and every man fought for his own hand;°
at night he lay down to rest, but had no special fear for its
terrors:7 rather his supreme care was to protect himself from
the attacks of wild animals. Not more men perished then
than now:® they were killed by wild beasts or accidental
poisoning, but warfare and navigation were unknown. All
this is largely confirmed by modern investigations into the
life of savage tribes, and the anthropologist would find little
with which to quarrel: but it shows a singular penetration
for one who had but very few recorded data on which
to work and the whole force of popular tradition against
him.

Then began the slow process of civilization. Men devised

t 883-9. 2 v. 925-1457. 3 925 ff.

4 931-44. 5 945-52. 6 g5s—Or.
7 973-87. 8 g88—I0I0.

J,

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 379

for themselves huts to dwell in and skin-clothes to wear! and
above all learned the use of fire.? Family life began to be
recognized3 and even the union of families in communities
under a compact ‘not to harm or be harmed’ 4. This idea of
the ‘Social Contract’ plays a large part in Epicurus’ early
history of man and is very closely connected with his ethical
theory: a considerable series of his Principal Doctrines are
concerned with it.5 Justice in itself is not a virtue, it is
neither good nor bad. The only moral ideal of man is
pleasure: but in order to secure his own pleasure it is neces-
sary for a man to make himself safe from the attacks of
other men. The best way to secure this result is to make a
compact with them ‘neither to harm nor to be harmed’, to
surrender something of one’s own pleasure in hurting others
in order to secure immunity as its reward. ‘The justice
which arises from nature is a pledge of mutual advantage to
restrain men from harming one another and save them from
being harmed’: ° ‘justice never is anything in itself, but in the
dealings of men with one another in any place whatever and
at any time it is a kind of compact not to harm or be harmed’.
The ethical aspect of this theory must be considered later :8
here it may be noticed that Epicurus would regard the first
beginnings of common life and the recognition of the rights
of others as a gradual and somewhat cynical realization of
the selfish advantages which it procured.

When the start was once given to common life, matters,
as Lucretius conceived, moved fast. The strongest men in
communities became kings and settled the distribution of
property.’ Then the discovery of gold brought a new and
sinister motive into life: wealth, not strength and prowess,
became the touchstone of power, and political ambition
brought social catastrophe. Kings were driven out, popular
rule ensued, and magistrates were created: ™ the poet’s account
is obviously influenced by the traditional history of Rome.

* 1011. 2 IOQI—II04. 3 IO12—I4.
4 IOIQ—27. 5 xXXXi—Xxxviil. 6 KA. xxxi.
7 K.A. xxxiii. 8 See Chap. X, pp.510-15. 9 v. 1105-12.

10 TII3—-35. ™ 1136-60.

380 EPICURUS

Later on Lucretius returns to a more primitive period and
shows how the use of metals was learnt from the processes
of nature, of bronze first and then of iron,? which drove out
bronze because of its superior usefulness, especially in the
processes of war. Then, after a digression on the use of
animals in warfare,3 he shows how nature again taught men
the operations of agriculture,t and the songs of birds sug-
gested imitation, which was the origin of music.5 Then
came the knowledge of astronomy,® and private property? and
the science of navigation,® and lastly the finer arts of poetry
and painting and sculpture:9 ‘for they saw one thing after
another grow clear in their mind, until by their arts they
reached the topmost pinnacle’. All this is of great interest
and is described with a brilliancy and irony as great as any-
thing in the poem; but there are two points of greater im-

portance than the rest, the discussions of the origin of.

religion and the origin of language. With the former it will
be more convenient to deal in speaking of the Epicurean
theology, but the latter question must be briefly discussed
here, as it has considerable prominence in the Letter to
Herodotus™ and Epicurus’ position is slightly obscured in
Lucretius and has not always been rightly understood. His
theory of the origin and development of language throws
considerable light on his general ideas of the development
of the arts.
Epicurus plunges rather abruptly, after discussing th
creation of worlds, into the general problems of civilization,
and he appears to recognize, far more clearly than Lucretius,
two stages in the development of the arts, the first in which
nature constrained men to do things by sheer force of cir-
cumstances, the second in which reason deliberately de-
veloped and elaborated what had been introduced by nature
and made further inventions for itself. He then proceeds
toapply this general theory to the particular case of language.”

1 1241-80. 2 1281-1307. 3 1308-49.
4 1361-78. 5 1379-1415. 6 1436-9.
7 I441. 8 y442: 9 1450-3.

10 1456-7. 1 §§ 75, 76. 2 § 75,

RN im ag Tye Ny ee

ne hls ‘a

Po we

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 381

And so names too were not at first deliberately given to things, but
men’s natures according to their different nationalities had their own
peculiar feelings and received their peculiar impressions, and'so each
in their own way emitted air formed into shape (note the peculiar
atomic form of speech)" by each of these feelings and impressions,
according to the differences made in the different nations by the places
of their abode as well. And then later on by common consent in each
nationality special names were deliberately given in order to make their
meanings less ambiguous to one another and more brief y demonstrated.
And sometimes those who were acquainted with them brought in
things hitherto unknown and introduced sounds for them, on some
occasions being naturally constrained to utter them, and on others
choosing them by reasoning in accordance with the prevailing mode of
formation, and thus making their meaning clear. —

It has been usual to compare this discussion with that of
Plato in the Cratylus, but Giussani,? who was the first to
realize the full import of this passage in the Letter to
Herodotus, has pointed out the considerable difference in
the point of view of the two philosophers. Plato is con-
sidering the relation of language to thought and asks
whether there is a natural and inevitable relation (picer)
between words and their objects, or whether the relation is
deliberate and conventional (xara ovvOnknv): he is in other
words discussing the psychology of fully developed language.
Epicurus on the other hand approaches the question as a
problem of the actual history of primitive man. He believes
then that there were two stages in the development of
language. In the first it was made wholly ‘by nature’: men’s
internal emotions (nd@y) or impressions received from pheno-
mena (davrdopara) constrained them to utter certain sounds,
which then reproduced similar emotions and impressions
in other men and so conveyed ideas. These sounds differed
according to the racial conformation of different tribes (xa”
éxaora éOvy) and even geographical position (1) apd rods 76-
mous diagopd) had its influence. In the second stage man,
having now become aware of the possibilities of language,
proceeded deliberately (#éce:) to make distinctions accurate
and invent new expressions for new things. These new

t See Chap. VIII, p. 405. 2 Stud. Lucr. 267-84.

382 EPICURUS

expressions again sometimes occurred as the natural result of
a new impression, sometimes arose from reasoned choice
acting on the lines of natural cause. The account of the
whole process is carefully and minutely thought out, and
it is possible to recognize clearly, though in a complex form,
the two stages of ‘nature’ and ‘deliberation’ which Epicurus
had postulated for the development of the arts in general:
it is once again singularly near to what would now be said
of the historical origin of language. Two rather remarkable
points may however be noticed. In the first place Epicurus
seems to conceive of the entire process as comparatively
rapid and shows little understanding of the gradual growth
of language or of the survival of the first ‘natural’ stage even
after the second has been reached. Secondly, he seems to
imagine that each nation evolved its language independently.
Both these peculiarities are in fact due to his conception of
our world as a comparatively shortlived thing: just as to
him it was comparatively small in size, so was the length of
its existence brief: there had been no time for the slow
development of ages.

In the Epicurean tradition, the polemical desire to main-
tain the origin of language as ‘natural’ seems to have ob-
scured the recollection of Epicurus’ second stage, in which
words were invented deliberately. Thus Diogenes of Oeno-
anda‘ in his famous inscription expressly denies deliberate
invention, and in Lucretius” long and vivid description of
the first stage, which he admirably illustrates by the efforts
of children and animals to make themselves understood, the
second stage is represented by a single verbal hint.3 The
master was here greater than his pupils and the penetration

and subtleness of the theory forms an admirable example —

of his care in the outlying parts of -his system, where
fundamental ideas were not immediately concerned.

1 fr. x, col. iii (William) pujre TOV Prrocddwv miaTevwpev Tots A€yovar
Kara, Oéow Kal divdaynv émireOAvat Ta ovopata Tots mpdy[palou.
2 v. 1028-90.
3 at varios linguae sonitus natura subegit
mittere et utilitas expressit nomina rerum. 1028, 9.

ei

I

J 4

WORLDS AND OUR WORLD 383

The subjects of this section have lain perhaps off the
beaten track of Atomism and Epicureanism, which are
as a rule concerned rather with the infinitely small than the
infinitely great. But it is important to realize the capacity of
the School for wide and far-reaching speculation as well as
for minute and subtle reasoning. ‘The cosmology of Epi-
curus, though weakened perhaps by the logical insistence
on the principles of the Canonice, was the stronger and more
vigorous for being based on an atomic foundation.

Vill

THE SOUL, SENSATION, THOUGHT,
AND WILL

T has several times been necessary, and especially in

treating of the Canonice,' to anticipate Epicurus’ theory
of the soul of man and its action; an attempt must now be
made to examine it in fuller detail. It is an interesting de-
partment of his system not merely because his conclusion
that the soul perishes at the dissolution of the body was of
such vast importance for his ethical theory, but also because
in the purely materialistic account which he gives of its
nature he was pushing his fundamental assumptions to their
utmost limit and from time to time seems almost conscious of
failure—certainly of difficulty. This is no doubt also in a
great measure the reason why this portion of the Epicurean
theory has seemed so obscure to modern commentators and
given rise in certain parts of it to such a strange divergence
of opinion: it is almost impossible for us to approach the
whole question in a sufficiently materialistic mood, and we
are inclined to apply our own psychological notions to the
explanation of difficulties without bearing in mind through-
out the consistently material basis on which Epicurus is
working: to do so is always to court failure. It is true that
Epicurus had probably not thought out—certainly he has
not recorded in extant documents—a complete psychology
of sensation and thought, but all that he has left us is on
strictly and consistently materialist lines which we must
never desert in our attempts to understand him.

For Greek thinkers in general the conception of the soul
(buyx7) was wide and comprehensive, and included on the one
hand an irrational element (dAoyov), the spirit or ‘vital
principle’, as it might be called, which gave life to the body
and was the seat of the passive and irrational feelings which
are classed together as sensation (atcOjos), and on the other

« Chap. II.

THE SOUL” 485

a rational part (Adyov €xov), the mind, which was the seat of
the active movements of thought and will. Most philosophers
made a distinction between these two parts of the soul and
treated of them, if not separately, at least as separable in
thought. Of such a distinction there is no trace in the Letter
to Herodotus; there is little doubt that Epicurus himself
madeut, as his followers certainly did, but the lack of fuller
explanation has given rise to considerable difficulties and has
led to some highly improbable explanations. For the present
however ‘the soul’ must be thought of in a wide general
sense covering both these elements.

Epicurus, after a preliminary caution that in forming a
theory everything must be referred to the test of our sensa-
tions and feelings, opens his account! of the soul with the
startling but unmistakable statement ‘the soul is a body’
(cua). This is to the ‘plain man’ perhaps the most para-
doxical utterance in the whole letter, but the paradox is at
once explained if the fundamental principles of the system
are borne in mind. The whole universe and all that is in
it consists solely of the two constituents, atoms and the
void: all other existing things are a compound of the two.
It is impossible to doubt the real existence of the soul, when
we are constantly aware of its workings in ourselves and
others, and therefore it must be, like all other existences, an’
atomic compound, in other words a body. So obvious does
this conclusion seem to Epicurus himself that he makes
little attempt at the moment to defend his position except
by the usual appeal to experience. ‘All this,’ he says after
adding a description of this ‘body’, which will be considered
immediately, ‘all this is made manifest by the activities of
the soul and its feelings . . . and by what we lose at the
moment of death.’ This rather obscure contention is made
clearer by Lucretius:? the soul can set the limbs in motion:
this cannot be done without contact, and contact implies
body. Again the soul suffers with the body: it must then
have a bodily nature. Once more, whole limbs may be
removed from the body and it will still live,3 but if a few

+ Eps 1 § 635 2 ili, 161-76. 3 I1g-29.

3307 ce

386 EPICURUS

particles of breath and heat desert the body, it dies."
Experience then, as interpreted on a materialistic basis,
demands the conclusion that the soul is corporeal. Epicurus
returns again to his main position* at the end of his section
on the soul, and with his eye on rival theories, he gives a
fuller and more satisfactory argument in favour of his own
view. The two notions of the soul which would be most
likely to come into competition with it were firstly, that of
ordinary belief, which found its expression in the philosophy
of Plato and Aristotle, that the soul was a non-material or
spiritual existence, and secondly that of certain members of
the school of Aristotle, and in particular} of the musical
theorist Aristoxenus, that the soul was a condition or ‘har-
mony’ of the whole body. It is against the first of these
theories that Epicurus’ argument is primarily directed and
it is founded on the base-notions of his system. The only
incorporeal thing which has independent existence, that is,
is not a ‘property’ or ‘accident’ of some corporeal existence,
is the void: the soul then cannot be incorporeal, unless it is
void. But void can neither act or be acted upon, for such
interaction implies touch, which in its turn implies body.
Yet these two capacities for acting (in thought and will) and
being acted upon (in sensation) are just those which are
most closely associated with the soul. The soul then cannot
be void: it must be corporeal or material and popular belief
is mistaken. Here we are on familiar atomic ground: touch
is the pre-requisite of interaction and nothing can touch
except body: if Epicurus’ theory of the soul is to be attacked,
it must be here, at the ultimate basis of materialism.

But the second notion, that the soul is a ‘harmony’ of the
body, would not be open to the same a priori objection, for

the soul would then be, not indeed an independent im-.

« ‘Heat’ (calor, vapor) is of course to Lucretius, as to Epicurus, a corporeal
substance. 2 § 67.

3 It seems probable that the idea of the soul as a ‘harmony’ was originally
a medical, not a musical, notion, and Burnet (E. G. P.3, p. 295) is inclined
to connect it with the Pythagorean Philolaus. This does not of course affect
Lucretius’ main contention, but makes his irony less effective.

THE SOUL” 387

material existence, but an ‘accident’ (ovumrrwpa)* of the body,
an occurrence, not inseparable—for the body can exist
without it—but occasional under certain conditions. With
this theory Epicurus does not deal in the Letter, but that
he assailed it elsewhere is clear from Lucretius”? explicit
attack on it. He argues that it cannot be true either of the
mind (animus) or of the spirit (anima): not of the mind,
because it often feels pleasure, even when the body is in
pain and vice versa, and moreover it is active, when the body
is at rest in sleep; nor again of the spirit, for it often remains
intact when whole limbs of the body are removed, and on
the other hand, if a few particles of heat and air are lost, the
body loses its life. So far then from being an ‘accident’ of
the body, the soul, though conjoined with body, is seen to be
independent in action: sensation and consciousness are
‘accidents’ of the soul, but it is not itself an ‘accident’ of the
body: ‘let these Greek musicians confine their theories of
harmony to their own subjects’. The soul then is a wholly
corporeal and concrete being. This relentlessly material
conception may be more profitably examined when the
deductions which follow from it have been reviewed. At
this point it is more important to notice its perfect consis-
tency with the main ideas of the system. Here, if ever, the
apostle of common sense found popular opinion against
him: but with a courage, which was almost desperate, he was
ready to fly in the teeth of prejudice and in maintaining his
materialism at all costs, to forge another weapon against the
terrors of superstition.

The soul being thus, like any other body, an atomic com-
pound, it is possible to inquire into its composition and
analyse its constituents, and this Epicurus proceeds to do.
Democritus had been content to say that the soul-atoms
were ‘fiery’ (7vpw5eis), for the reason that the atoms compos-
ing fire were spherical and therefore most mobile. Epicurus
preserves this idea, but it is not by itself sufficiently subtle
for him. Rather the soul is ‘a body of fine particles . . . most
resembling breath with a certain admixture of heat and in

* See Chap. IV. 2 ill. 98-135. 3 See Part I, Chap. III, § 7.

aez

388 EPICURUS

some parts like to one of these and in some to the other’.
Heat is thus retained as a constituent element, but to it is
now added the elementof breath or wind (zvedpa). Thereason
for this addition is not far to seek: it is once again due to
empirical observation. “This is made manifest ... by what we
lose at the moment of death.’! The dead body appears to con-
tain all that it had in life except breath and heat: ‘the seeds of
wind and burning heat’, says Lucretius,* ‘are the cause that
life lingers in the limbs: there is then heat and a life-giving
wind in the very body, which abandons our dying frame’.
The assumption of Democritus was made on 4 priori grounds
in order to assign to the soul the kind of atoms which would
be most likely to account for its quick movements: his con-
jecture is confirmed and amplified by Epicurus’ observation.

Breath and heat then, or rather, as Epicurus states it,
with a scrupulous accuracy not imitated by his follower,
‘particles resembling those of breath and heat’, are the first
constituents of the soul; here it may be noticed that heat
is an addition to the ‘breath’ of Democritus—an addition
due to observation—and that the scrupulous description of
the particles suggests already a consciousness that the soul
is something finer than the bodies we know in experience.
Besides these two other elements are mentioned, which
require consideration. In the first place Lucretius, who in
the earlier passages quoted above contents himself with the
mention of particles of heat and wind and may be following
the Letter or a corresponding source,} yet when he comes
later to a fuller account of the structure of the soul,+ adds to
these two elements a third constituent ‘air’, giving the
rather cryptic explanation, ‘nor indeed is there any heat,
that has not air too mixed with it’. Two questions suggest
themselves: is this a spontaneous addition to Epicurus’
theory made by Lucretius on his own authority and, whether
this is so or not, what is the significance of the addition?
The first question is the more easily answered. It is highly
improbable that Lucretius, who in all parts of the poem is SO

t § 63. 2 iii. 128-9: cf. 214-15, and 232-3.

3 See Brieger, Epikurs Lehre von der Seele, p. 10. 4 231-6.

THE SOUL — 389

scrupulous in following his master’s lead in every detail, has
here gratuitously amplified him, and indeed there is other
evidence that the element of ‘air’ was included by Epicurus
himself. Aetius™ states that Epicurus held the soul to be
a compound of four constituents, an element like fire, one
like air, one like breath or wind (mvevparixod), and a fourth
nameless element (which will have to be considered jim-
mediately), and his testimony is confirmed by Plutarch.? It
is therefore safe to assume that Lucretius was here following
a fuller Epicurean source than the Letter (probably, as usual,
the Greater Epitome), and that Epicurus himself, writing
to a disciple already initiated in the system, gives merely a
rough summary: possibly, the mention of the element of
‘air’ has accidentally dropped out in our text of the Letter.
The second question is more important and requires
closer consideration: how does the element of ‘air’ differ
from that of ‘wind’ and what is the significance of its pre-
sence as an element in the soul? Giussani3 has offered a most
ingenious answer. He reminds us that to Epicurus ‘heat’,
‘wind’, and ‘air’ are all substances: ‘heat’, or ‘vapour’, as_
Lucretiust often calls it, is composed of specific heat-forming
particles, ‘wind’”* of particles which similarly produce cold,
and ‘air’ or ‘atmosphere’, as we might call it, of particles
of various kinds, which are squeezed out from the earth and
sea? or enter from the outer sky and in combination form a
substance of middle or tepid temperature.’ ‘Wind’ is thus
distinct in substance from ‘air’ and is composed of colder
particles, just as ‘vapour’ is of particles warmer than ‘air’.
The three elements in the soul then represent, as Giussani
thinks, three distinct temperatures, ‘air’, the normal tempera-
ture of the atmosphere, ‘heat’ a temperature above normal,
and ‘wind’ below normal. The soul has thus, according to

ray. 32103 Ul are

2 adv. Colot. 20, 1118; U. 314 &« Twos Beppod Kal mvevpariKod Kal
aepwdous. :

3 Stud. Lucr. pp. 184-6. 4 €.86 11.233: 5 Lucr. i. 456 ff.

6 Lucr. vi. 319 vis frigida venti. 7 Lucr. v. 273 fF.

8 For the general idea, cf. Lucr. ii. 517 ‘calor ac frigus mediique tepores’.

390 EPICURUS

the prominence of one or other element,’ the capacity for
change of temperature. There is nothing in this explanation
which is inconsistent with Epicurean notions and it is to
some extent borne out by Lucretius” subsequent demonstra-
tion of the effect on character of the predominance of one
or other of the elements in the soul, ‘heat’ causing a tendency
to anger, ‘wind’ to fear, while ‘air’, if it prevails, produces
a generally equable temperament. But it is doubtful whether
the idea of temperature was the primary notion in Epicurus’
mind and the consideration of the historical development of
the theory from the Atomists points rather to the simpler
explanation suggested by Aetius,3 that of the three elements
‘wind’ is the cause of motion, ‘air’ of rest, and ‘heat’ of the
perceptible warmth of the body. It is more likely that
Epicurus in this way took the traditional notion of the
Atomists and amplified it to account for other elements
which experience led him to think were present in the soul,
than that he was led to his conclusion by a psychological
analysis of character. ‘The theory once formed, however,
there is no doubt that the three elements were used by
Epicureans, as by Lucretius, to explain differences of character
and moods of feeling both in human beings and in animals.

But for all his materialism Epicurus is not satisfied with
an analysis of the soul into elements ‘like that of’ recogniz-
able concrete things, even things as fine in nature as fire,
wind, and air. To account for sensation and thought and
will there must be something else in its composition more
subtle still, and indeed as near as possible to the borders of
the immaterial. ‘There is also’, he says, ‘the part which is
many degrees more advanced than these in fineness of com-

= Cf. Lucr. i. 282-4
consimili ratione necessest ventus et aer
et calor inter se vigeant commixta per artus
atque aliis aliud subsit magis emineatque.
2 ii. 288-313. 3 ivn3- Ip OU ang
4 We may notice too that Epicurus himself (§ 63) in adducing the psychical
phenomena which prove the truth of his theory includes ‘the mobility (aé
edxwnatat) of the soul’—probably with similar reference to the presence of
the element of ‘wind’.

es

Ee

ee ee ee

Te SOUS: 391

position, and for this reason is more capable of feeling in
harmony with the rest of the structure as well.’! Much turns
upon the understanding of this ‘fourth nature’? in the soul
and it will be well to begin by collecting such additional
evidence as can be gathered. Plutarch} gives his testimony:
‘that with which the soul judges and remembers and loves
and hates and generally speaking the practical and rational
intelligence arises, as Epicurus says, out of a nameless ele-
ment (€« twos dxarovouderou rrodrnros)’, and Aetiust adds ‘the
nameless element produces sensation in us: for sensation
does not lie in any of the named elements’. Lucretius’ has
two considerable passages of description of the ‘fourth
nature’, the main points of which may be resumed: it is
entirely nameless: it is subtler and more mobile than any-
thing else in the world, and composed of smaller and smoother
particles: it starts all the movements of sensation in the
limbs: if severe pain penetrates to it, the result is likely to
be fatal to the whole body. And again in the second passage
he states that all the four elements combine to form a single
nature, but that the ‘fourth nature’ starts the movements of
sensation and passes them on to the other elements: that it
lies deep hidden and is farther from the surface than any-
thing in our bodies, and is moreover to the rest of the soul
as the soul itself is to the body: it is indeed the soul of the
soul and is supreme (dominazur) in the whole body.

These accounts sound at first mysterious and rather far
removed from the normal terminology of materialism. In-
deed there can be little doubt that, as Giussani® has pointed
out, the idea of the ‘fourth nature’ is derived from Aristotle’s
‘fifth element’ in the soul (wéurrn ovata, evdehexeua), which was

t §63. I retain the manuscript text gor. 5é TO pepos ... cupmabes dé
TovTw paAdov Kat 7H Aowr@ aOpoiopare as against Usener’s corrections
and interpret it as suggested by Giussani: see my text and notes. ;

2 ‘quarta natura’, Lucr. iii. 241, &c.: to him it is a fourth element owing
to the inclusion of ‘air’, but in Epicurus’ own account it is of course the third.

3 adv. Colot. 20; U. 314.

iv. gvtts Wears. 5 ili. 241-57, and again 262-81.

6 Stud. Lucr., p. 187: see especially Cic. Tusc. Disp. i. 10. 22, where,
speaking of Aristotle, he says guintum genus adhibet vacans nomine.

392 EPICURUS

of course wholly spiritual and non-material. One is tempted
to suppose that these extravagant phrases, the ‘nameless’
element, the ‘soul of the soul’, are but a thin disguise for the
abandonment of the materialist position and conceal the
confession that it is impossible to account for sensation and
thought except by the admission of some force which is not
material. It is indeed abundantly clear that Epicurus is
pushing his materialism to the utmost limit, as he did at
the other crucial point in his system, the ‘swerve’ of the
atoms. But here, as there, a closer examination reveals that
the limit is not passed and that each of these extravagant
expressions has a very clear and definite material sense. The
‘fourth nature’ is to be the subtlest existence in creation: it
must therefore be composed of very small and very smooth
particles: for largeness of size means coarseness of structure
and roughness means a possibility of cohesion, which again
makes for a coarser structure than one in which all the atoms
are perfectly free. It is for this reason that the ‘fourth
nature’ is ‘nameless’ or rather ‘unpredicable’ (dxarovdpacrov),
so absolutely unique, that is, that it is impossible to predicate
of it any quality: for to do so would be to imply its likeness
to something else, as in the case of the other elements of the
soul, which are coarse enough to be said to be ‘like’ familiar
concrete existences. The fourth element’ is present in all
parts of the soul with the other three elements, but whereas
any one of the other elements? may come to the surface or
retire beneath the others, the ‘fourth nature’ is always hidden
deep beneath them: the other three form, as it were, a case
to contain it. It is in this sense primarily that it is the ‘soul
of the soul’; as the soul is contained in the body, so the
‘fourth nature’ is contained in the other three. But much
more is it so, because it communicates to the other three

t My account of the guarta natura and its functions agrees throughout with
that of Giussani: there is however a prevailing opinion among German critics
that the guarta natura is confined to the mind (a#imus). ‘This very important
divergence involves considerable differences in the understanding of the process
of sensation and I have thought it best to deal with the whole question in

Appendix V.
2 Lucr. iii. 282-7.

THE soul ~ 303

elements the capacity of sensation, just as the soul as a whole
does to the body. For the ‘fourth nature’ alone has in itself
the power of sensation and is the cause of it first in the other
elements and then through them in the body. By what steps
this comes to be will be considered more conveniently when
the process of sensation is examined: at the present moment
the previous question must be put, how does the ‘fourth
nature’ itself possess or acquire the power of sensation?
Here, if anywhere, a difficulty will be found in the materialist
account. The ‘fourth nature’ is, as has been seen, an agere-
gate of exceedingly fine and smooth atoms: the individual
atoms have not of course themselves sensation, either apart
or when combined in the aggregate, but the compound
which they form has sensation. How can this come to pass?
It has already been observed! that Epicurus believed that
under certain circumstances the insensible could produce
sensation:? worms are produced, as he thought, out of the
dead body, inanimate food could be transformed into ani-
mate flesh: all depended on the kind of atoms present, their
positions and arrangement. So here the insensible smooth
atoms, combining in particular ways, may produce sensation
in the bulk: the creation of sensation from the insensible was
to him no miracle. But a nearer parallel to his idea of sensa-
tion in the ‘quarta natura’ may be found in his account of
the genesis of colour in things.3 Atoms themselves colour-
less may by the appropriate position, arrangement, and
movements create a body which has colour: the organism
(conctlium) acquires a new quality, not possessed by any of
the individuals which compose it. This analogy gives two
important clues to the understanding of the creation of
sensation in the ‘fourth nature’: in the first place there is the
idea of the conci/ium: sensation is an ‘accident’ which super-
venes on the concilium of the insensible atoms of the ‘fourth
nature’, just as colour does on the concilium of the colourless
atoms. And secondly there is the all-important idea of move-
ment. Again and again Lucretius insists that sensation is
t Chap. VII, p. 377. 2 Lucr. ii. 865 ff.
3 See Chap: VI, p. 356: Lucr. ii. 730 ff.

394 EPICURUS

produced when the soul-atoms are forced into the ‘appro-
priate movements’: the body enclosing the soul constrains
it into the movements which create sense; ' it is the ‘fourth
nature’ * which disseminates the ‘sense-bearing’ movements
through the other elements of soul and so through the body.
And indeed it is just this appropriate movement in a con-
cilium of the right kind of atoms in the right positions and
arrangements which for Epicurus is sensation, This may
not to a critic who approaches the theory from the supra-
material point of view seem a satisfactory answer: the move-
ment whether of Epicurean atoms or of the modern scien-
tists’ ‘brain-matter’ is not for him itself sensation, although
it is its invariable accompaniment. But it is the only answer
which a purely materialist thinker can give: the modern
materialist will state in much the same terms as Epicurus
that sensation is a movement, which is ‘superinduced’ as an
‘accident’ in certain forms of corporeal formation. At least
the theory is consistent with itself and with the materialism
of the rest of the Epicurean system.

Certain other statements with regard to the ‘fourth
nature’ can now be explained. It is through the subtlety
of its composition ‘more capable of feeling in harmony with
the rest of the structure as well’,3 because owing to its intense
mobility it can, as it were, both adapt its movements to those
around it and communicate its own movements to its neigh-
bours; whereas the particles of the other three coarser ele-
ments might remain unmoved. Secondly,‘ if a severe pain
(acre malum) were to penetrate to the ‘fourth nature’ hidden
not only below the atoms of body, but also beneath the other
elements of soul, it would mean the destruction of life,
because it would cause the disruption of that which is the
very seat of life and the source of every vital sensation,
emotion, and thought.5 Finally, to go back to Epicurus’®

T. ih, E705 7A Cha 93.50 2 245, 271-2.

3 Ep. i, § 63. 4 Lucr. ili. 252-7.

5 This passage is of considerable importance in the discussion of Brieger’s
theory of the ‘fourth nature’ and I think Giussani has not fully understood
its meaning: see Appendix V. 6 Ep. % § 63.

THE SOUL ~ ve

proof from experience that the nature of the soul js as he has
described it, it is now clear that it is ‘the powers of the soul
and its feelings and its readiness of movement! and its
processes of thought’ which prove the existence of the
‘fourth nature’ as the seat of conscious life, while ‘what we
lose at the moment of death’ is the other elements of ‘wind’,
heat’, and ‘air’

In order to keep the material notion firmly before our
eyes, it will be well at this point to attempt to visualize more
clearly Epicurus’ conception of the soul:? in this way too
a better notion can be formed of its relation to the body.
The soul is composed of the four elements: of what character
will its component atoms be? They are ‘very minute’,3 that
is to say, they consist of very few ‘least parts’, and will there-
fore only combine into nuclei which in their turn are very
small and thus very mobile. A scholium# on the Letter to
Herodotus adds that Epicurus said elsewhere that the com-
ponent atoms are ‘very smooth and very round, far surpassing
the atoms which compose fire’. Lucretius confirms these
additions, stating that the soul-atoms in general are ‘very
round’5 and that those of the ‘fourth nature’ are very
smooth. Of the smoothness of all the component atoms there
can be no doubt, but that they are all round may be regarded
as a rough generalization. For since the element of ‘air’? was
composed of an effluence from all manner of things in earth
and sea, it would naturally consist of atoms of many shapes,
but all of them such as were unable to join in the more
stable structures of solid and liquid bodies, that is to say,

« The ‘readiness of movement’ may also be in part referred to the element
of wind: see above, p. 390. :

2 Brieger has some very suggestive remarks at this point : op. cit., pp. 10, IT.

3 Luer. ili. 179, 187. :

4 §67 €€ drépwr adriy ovyKeicba Aevordtwv Kal otpoyyvAwrdrwr,
TOAAG Tw Siadepovody rGv rod trupés.

5 ili. 186. 6 ili. 244.

7 v. 273. Brieger is, I think, mistaken (p. 10) in stating that the atoms of
air were all very small and round, nor do the passages which he adduces from
Lucretius seem to prove more than that they were mobile, which implies
the presence of round atoms, but does not preclude a mixture of others.

396 EPICURUS

smooth atoms without ‘hooks’. Of the shape of the atoms
of wind there is no information, but it may be supposed that
they resembled those of air: those of heat were, according
to the regular tradition of the Atomists, round.’ The soul
then is an aggregation of atoms, all small and smooth, the
vast majority also round, that is to say, spherical. It is
obvious that there is no possibility in them of close coher-
ence: they cannot unite in the fibrous structure which forms
the body of a solid: in other words, they can only form a
‘mixture’ and not a ‘texture’. Now it is the characteristic of
a ‘mixture’, of which liquids are the main example in nature,
that they cannot hold together of themselves, but only when
contained in some other structure, which is itself solid. Just
then as a vase holds together water3 and prevents it straying
and breaking up into small drops, so the body holds together
the soul, which without its protection would break up and
dissolve: the body is to the soul, in the first place, a protecting
and enclosing vessel.‘

This connexion of soul and body must be more clearly
realized. The soul, says Epicurus,5 is ‘distributed through-
out the whole structure (of the body)’, not, as Democritus ©
had crudely conceived it ‘alternately’, first an atom of soul
and then an atom of body and so on, but in far finer and
rarer particles than those of body, preserving intervals be-
tween them ‘as great as are the smallest bodies which, when
cast upon us, can first start the motions of sensation in the
body’. That is to say, as Lucretius explains,’ that some things

t Brieger (l.c.) on the authority of Lucr. ii. 456-63, argues that the heat-
atoms were ‘pointed but not hooked’, but a careful reading of the passage
shows that he is speaking not of mere heat, but of pungent things like flame,
smoke, and mist (edu/as, perhaps ‘steam’): these even if they are not made
entirely of smooth and round particles, yet are not ‘hampered by particles
closely linked’, i.e. the heat in them is due to round particles, their pungency
to others which even so are smooth.

2 The technical terms are Brieger’s: see Chap. VI, p. 340.

3 Lucretius’ frequent comparison (ill. 434 ff, 440, 555) is thus more than
a metaphor.

4 76 oréyalov, § 65: cf. § 64 ef py bd Tod Aowrod GOpoicpatos éoTe-

yaleTo Trws. ‘

5 § 63, init. 6 Lucr. ili. 370-95. 7 381 ff.

i
f
P
A

THE SOUL~™ 307

which fall upon us, such as spider’s web, down, and very
small animals, do not arouse any sensation: such things
cannot have been in contact with any soul-atoms at all: or
in other words, the intervals between the soul-atoms must
be greater than objects not felt, and their distance may be
measured by the size of the smallest things which we do
actually feel. The picture may be completed by thinking
also of the nature of the body, as Epicurus conceived it.
Our body is a structure of different parts of varying degrees
of atomic compactness: in some parts, such as the bones, the
component atoms are closely interlaced, hooking into one
another and grasping each other with many different kinds
of entanglement, so that the structure is firm and solid; in
others, such as the flesh, sinews, and nerves, the formation is
much looser and the component atoms smoother. But in all
parts, hard and soft, compact and loose alike, there are
intervals of space, pores in between portions of even the
most closely hooked atoms and in all parts the atoms are in
everlasting motion at atomic speed.? In these pores between
the atoms of body are enclosed the fine and subtle atoms of
soul, penetrating into every part, yet constantly shifting
with their own atomic motion3 and the changes of the sur-
rounding structure caused by the movement of the body
atoms.4 The general idea may be illustrated by the parallel
of a rising tide penetrating alike into the hollows of rocky
caverns, into the interspaces of the shingle on the beach and
the tiny crevices between the grains of sand upon the shore,
only the rocks, stones, and sand must be conceived of as

« “caulae corporis’, Lucr. iii. 255, 702.

2 For the grounds of this description see the discussion of compound
bodies in Chap. VI.

3 Lucr. iii. 262:

inter enim cursant primordia principiorum
motibus inter se.

4 Brieger (op. cit., p. g) rightly points out that Lucretius misconceives the
relation of body and soul when he says, iii. 557, ‘conexu corpus adhaeret, and
again, 691, ‘ita comexa est per venas viscera nervos’, for conexus implies the
close interlacing of a ‘texture’, which the soul has neither in itself, nor in
relation to the body.

398 EPICURUS

themselves also in constant and changeful notion, varying at
each instant the shape and position of their hollows, cracks,
and crevices. If we cannot but feel dissatisfied at the
materialism of Epicurus’ idea, we must yet admire the in-
genuity which has produced so subtle and fascinating a con-
ception of the possible differences of corporeal structure and
the variety of their relations to one another.

The insistence both of Epicurus himself and of Lucretius
on the close relation of soul and body is now more intel-
ligible, for their collocation, at any rate, is by now more
fully grasped. The soul owes its own coherence, its very
existence as an aggregate ‘body’, to its confinement within
the pores of the body-atoms, and in its turn it penetrates the
body even to its inmost recesses. Yet this connexion is not
in itself enough to account for our experience, and Epicurus
conceived the relation as something closer and more im-
portant than a mere juxtaposition even of this intricate
nature. The enclosure of the soul in the body has all-
important results: for as its atoms, confined in the narrow
pores of the body-structure, are ever moving at incredible
speed, they are forced by the very minuteness of their field
of movement, into the ‘appropriate motions’ of sensation.
This occurs primarily only to the ‘fourth nature’; when an
external body comes into contact with soul-atoms, the
‘fourth nature’ is moved and by its movement awakes into
feeling and becomes ‘sensible’ (aio@yrixdv); but it then com-
municates the ‘sense-bearing’ movements to the other ele-
ments in the soul and first to the fiery particles, for they are
most subtle. ‘These pass it on to the particles of ‘wind’, and
those in their turn to the less easily moved particles of ‘air’.!
The whole soul is now in motion with the movement of
sensation and jostling constantly against the surrounding

articles of body stirs them too with the same movement
until the body itself, thanks to the presence of soul, can feel.
In the body too there is a fixed succession in the spread of
sensation from the looser to the more compact structures:

« For this succession of sensation in the three other soul-elements see

Lucr. ili. 246-7.

, a

THE SOUL a0

first ‘the blood receives the shock, then all the flesh feels
the thrill: last of all it passes to the bones and marrow, be
it pleasure or the heat of opposite kind’.t Here then is a new
mutual relation between soul and body. From the protection
of the body the soul has acquired sensation: in return, as it
were, for this gift it communicates the capacity for sensation
to the body.

Epicurus explains this point at length in the first Letter,
as a matter of great importance: ?

the soul possesses the chief cause of sensation: yet it could not have
acquired sensation, unless it were in some way enclosed by the rest of
the structure. And this in its turn, having afforded the soul this cause
of sensation, acquires itself too a share in this contingent capacity
(cvu7Twua) from the soul. Yet it does not acquire all the capacities
which the soul possesses: and therefore, when the soul is released from
the body, the body no longer has sensation. For it never possessed this
power in itself, but used to afford opportunity for it to another exist-
ence,3 brought into being at the same time with itself: and this
existence, owing to the power now consummated within itself as a
result of motion, used spontaneously to produce for itself the capacity
of sensation and then to communicate it to the body as well, in virtue
of its contact and correspondence of movement.

The passage is clearer and more emphatic than many in the
Letter and its importance is borne out by Lucretius’ insis-
tence on the same ideas in a more poetical mood:

with first-beginnings so closely interlaced from their very birth are
they (se. body and soul) begotten, endowed with a life shared in com-
mon, nor, as is clear to see, can the power of body or mind feel apart,
either for itself without the force of the other, but by the common
motions of the two on this side and on that is sensation kindled and
fanned throughout our flesh. . . . So from the beginning of existence
body and soul, in mutual union, learn the motions that give life, yea,
even when hidden in the mother’s limbs and womb, so that separation
cannot come to pass without hurt and ruin.

The connexion of body and soul is thus vital: it is owing to
their close local relation that they are able to form a living

« Lucr. ili. 249-51. 2 § 64.

3 For the text here see my notes ad loc. 4 lil. 331-47.

4.00 EPICURUS

being. Neither can be itself without the other: the body
without the soul could not live or grow or move: the soul
without the protection of the body could not hold together
or make the movements requisite for that sensation, which is
the essential characteristic of the living being, the ‘forma-
tion’,! as Epicurus calls it, ‘which has life’.

But in this partnership the sharers are by no means equal
in their contribution: the soul has by far the greater function
in the creation and sustinence of life, for in the ‘fourth
nature’ it possesses that which alone can initiate sensation:
whereas the body does but provide the requisite conditions
and receive, as it were, a reflected capacity for sensation,
when once it has come into existence. ‘Therefore,’ con-
tinues Epicurus,? ‘so long as the soul remains in the body,
even though some other part of the body be lost, it will never
lose sensation: nay more, whatever portions of the soul may
perish too, when that which enclosed it is removed either
in whole or in part, if the soul continues to exist at all, it
will retain sensation. On the other hand, the rest of the
structure, though it continues to exist either as a whole or
in part, does not retain sensation, if it has once lost that
sum of atoms, however small it be, which together goes to
produce the nature of the soul.’ This is a clear deduction
from the main position and is elaborated by Lucretius with
copious illustrations from the loss of arms and legs in battle
and other cases where limbs and even a portion of the vital
spirit enclosed in them are removed, but life still persists.
A much more important conclusion follows: ‘moreover, 1

the whole structure is dissolved, the soul is dispersed and no -

longer has the same powers nor performs its movements, so
that it does not possess sensation either. For it is impossible
to imagine it with sensation, if it is not in this organism and

cannot effect these movements, when what encloses and sur-

rounds it is no longer the same as the surroundings in which
it now exists and performs these motions’.4 The soul that is,
is dispersed when the body perishes and there can be no
1 pdpdwpa jet’ eprpuxias, Sext. Emp. adv. Math. vii. 267; U. 310.
2 § 65. 3 ili. 403-16: cf. 634-69. 4 § 65, ad fin.

bee SOUL ~ 401

question of its survival after death, not so much because
being like the body a material existence, it must come to
an end, but because in no other circumstances could it find
the requisite conditions for sensation. Even if it could find
something else to hold it together and enclose it, it could
not be so constrained as to be forced into the movements
required to produce sensation or consciousness: there can
be no life either for body or soul after death. This conclusion
Lucretius reinforces with a series of twenty-eight arguments
occupying the greater part of the Third Book! and drawn in
the main from the general ideas of the structure of the soul
and its relation to the body:? he then bursts out into that
great paean on the mortality of the soul, which is from the
poetical point of view the most justly famous portion of his
poem. The certainty that the soul perishes with the body
is indeed, together with the assurance that the gods are not
concerned with the affairs of the world, the ultimate condi-
tion of Epicurean happiness and is so put forward in the
second of the Principal Doctrines: ‘Death is nothing to us;
for that which is dissolved, is without sensation, and that
which lacks sensation is nothing to us.’ The moral import
of the conclusion cannot here be examined, but it is well to
emphasize at this point that the conclusion itself is once
again the fearless deduction from main principles. If it is to
be disputed, the attack must turn upon the fundamental
materialism of Epicurus’ conception of the soul: if sensation
can be atomic movement and nothing more, it is impossible
to refuse to accept the conclusion that the soul perishes.

Hitherto mere passive sensations have been considered
resulting from contact with external objects, sensations
which may be felt at and, as Epicurus strongly holds, dy any
portion of our bodies. It is time to pass to the more complex
form of sensation, which is known as sense-perception,
which takes place only through the medium of the sense-
organs and gives us not mere passive feeling, but information
concerning the external world. But before this can be
examined, it is essential to return to the distinction between

t ili, 416-829. 2 iii. 830 ff
3307 pd

402 EPICURUS

‘spirit? and ‘mind’ (anima and animus).! Oddly enough,
though this distinction is so universal in Greek philosophers
and was made by Democritus,” it is not explicitly stated in
the Letter to Herodotus, which speaks throughout simply
of ‘the soul’. That the distinction was made by Epicurus
there can be no doubt: it is implied in the passages3 which
speaks of the act of apprehension by the mind (émPody
rijs Suavotas), and the scholiast+ on the Letter says in so many
words: ‘part of the soul is irrational and is distributed
through the rest of the body, but the rational part is in the
breast, as is clear from the feelings of fear and joy’. This
statement is confirmed by Aetius,5 and is strongly em-
phasized by Lucretius,® who makes use of the distinction
throughout the Third Book. It may be again that some
words dropped out in the text of the Letter, it is less probable
that Epicurus omitted to notice the distinction by inadver-
tence, and most probable that he left it out because, for a
reason that will be seen, it was not of sufficient importance
to be mentioned in a summary, which dealt only with very
essential or difficult points in the theory. However this
may be, the division between the irrational and rational parts
of the soul may confidently be accepted as part of the true
doctrine of Epicurus. What then does it come to? In spite
of the view of certain German critics? that the ‘fourth nature’
was confined to the mind and was not present at all in the
‘spirit’ distributed through the body, the very explicit testi-
mony of Lucretius, apart from many other considerations,
makes it certain that such was not Epicurus’ doctrine. In

material composition there is no difference at all between -

spirit and mind; both are alike composed of the same four
elements and each of them contains them all. The difference
lies in the surrounding conditions of the two and a conse-

t The English words are not satisfactory, for the irrational element is
hardly as much as ‘spirit’ and the rational includes more than we generally
understand by ‘mind’: but they are perhaps the nearest equivalents.

2 See Part I, Chap. III, § 6, p. 160. 3 §§ 38, 50, 51, 62.

4 § 67. 5 iv. 4.6, p. 390 D; U. 312.

6 iii. 94-8, 117-18, 136-60. 7 See Appendix V.

EE ————

HE BO UL 403

quent divergence of powers and functions. The spirit is, as
has been shown, distributed throughout the whole body and
intermingled at all points with the body-atoms: it is the
cause of the passive sensations of contact, and it is also, as
will be seen immediately, the cause in the sense-organs of
the act of sense-perception. The mind on the other hand is
an aggregation of pure soul-atoms, unmixed with those of
body, in a far larger cluster than can gather at any other
point in the body. In consequence its movements are far
less impeded and it is therefore able to develop more subtle
motions and so a fuller power of sensation and a greater
degree of consciousness. Its functions are thus higher and
more complex: it takes its part in sense-perception, not in
the act of sensation, but in the subsequent process of cogni-
tion; it is the seat of emotion as distinct from feeling and it
alone has the powers of recollection, of generalization, of
thought, and of will. It is, therefore, as Lucretius? says,
‘more the keeper of the fastnesses of life, more the monarch
of life than the power of the spirit. For without the mind
and understanding no part of the soul can hold out in the
frame for a tiny moment of time, but follows in its train
without demur, and scatters into air, and deserts the chill
frame in the frost of death. Yet one, whose mind and under-
standing have abode firm, abides in life... . In such a com-
pact are spirit and mind ever bound together’. In other
words the spirit is, roughly speaking, the passive element,
the mind the active element in the soul: the one means life
and feeling, the other consciousness and will; the mind is,
in fact, the governing or ruling Part (76 syepovurdv).? Though
most philosophers agreed in this distinction, they were
divided as to the place of the mind in the body, some locating
it in the brain, others in the breast. Epicurus decided for
the breast on the characteristic ground of experience: for
it is in the breast that we experience the feelings of fear
and joy.3 The distinction then of mind from spirit is of

t ili. 396-416.

? Lucretius translates by ‘consilium regimenque’, iii. g5.

3 Schol. on § 67: Lucr. iii. 140-2.

pd2

404 EPICURUS

importance in the consideration of psychological functions,
but not in dealing with physical structure. This is probably
the cause of its omission in the Letter to Herodotus. With
this preface it is possible to proceed to consider sense-
perception: the powers and functions of the mind will
become clearer in the process.”

In its essence sense-perception does not differ, according
to Epicurus, from the passive sensation of touch: it is
brought under the same inclusive term (aicAyors) and rests in
all cases on the primary condition of contact between the
object and the organ of sense. This idea is of course
essentially inherent in a material system: without contact
any kind of interaction, either active or passive, 1s impossible:
‘for touch, yea touch,’ says Lucretius in an unusual outburst
of emphasis, ‘by the holy powers of the gods, is the sense of
the body’? But when this general idea is applied to the
several senses, it is attended with varying degrees of difhi-
culty. In the case of taste the function of touch is clear
enough:3 as we bite our food, the juice is squeezed out into
the mouth and so passes into the pores of tongue and
palate and affects them either pleasantly or otherwise accord-
ing to the atomic conformation of the thing eaten and some-
times also of the recipient’s palate. Smell and hearing are
more difficult to explain, for in their case there is no per-
ceptible contact between the objectand percipient. Epicurus,
however, following in the steps of Democritus, solves the
difficulty by the assumption of an effluence or emanation
from things. In the sensation of smell the process is com-

paratively simple: ‘certain particles4 are carried off from the’
object of suitable size to stir this sense-organ, some of them

4

in a manner disorderly and alien to it, others in a regular —

manner and akin in nature’, this difference in the particles

: In the following sections it will be necessary to some extent to traverse the

same ground as was considered in the chapter on the Canonice: but whereas
there the emphasis was on principles, here it is rather on psychological processes.
2 Lucr. il. 434-5. :
3 Epicurus does not himself deal with taste, but Lucretius, iv. 615-72,
treats of it explicitly and is no doubt, as usual, following closely a good
Epicurean source. 4 Ep.1, §53-

q
4
4
f

i

, oe

THE SOUL 4.05

causing the distinction between pleasant and unpleasant
smells. Lucretius? in his elaboration adds certain interesting
details: the effuence of smell comes from ‘deep down in
things’, as can be seen from the fact that things smell more
when broken open: consequently it is liable to fail in its
struggle to issue, or to perish after it has won its way out,
and in any case comes slowly from the object and cannot be
carried very far. Moreover? it is composed of rather large
elements, as is seen from its inability to penetrate through
solid obstacles, such as walls, in the way that sound can.
Finally he notices that different smells are better adapted
to the perception of different animals, the smell of honey
to bees, of beasts of the chase to dogs, &c. The case of
hearing is rather more complicated. There is no difficulty
here about emanation: ‘particles of sound’,3 conceived of as
entirely corporeal, ‘are emitted’ by the living thing when it
utters or by the inanimate object when it makes a noise,
but how can we explain the fact that many persons 5 at once,
situated in very different positions with regard to the object,
can all hear equally well? This difficulty Epicurus over-
comes by supposing that the current (fefous)® of sound
emitted by the object ‘is split up into particles (éyxov) each
like the whole, which at the same time preserve a correspon-
dence of qualities (cyydeav) with one another and a unity
of character (évéryra isiétpomov) which stretches right back
to the object which emitted the sound’. This of course
was not the theory of Democritus,7 which Epicurus® ex-
plicitly denounces: ‘we must not suppose that the actual
air is moulded into shape by the voice which is emitted or
by other similar sounds—for it will be very far from being
so acted upon’. As in other cases,9 he rejects what he con-
siders the over-subtlety of Democritus in favour of a more

t iv. 673-705. 2 698 ff.

3 €xOAufis Oyxwv twev Ep. ad Hadt., § 53.

4 Lucretius argues for this at some length (iv. 526-48), adducing the
physical effect of speaking on the throat of the speaker.

5 Lucr. iv. 563-4. 6/§ 52.

7 See Part I, Chap. III, § 6, p. 171. 8 § 53.

9 Especially that of sight, as will be seen immediately.

406 EPICURUS

directly materialistic explanation, but it must be confessed
that his own theory is a very crude solution of the difficulty,
and supposes a very improbable and artificial contrivance
on the part of nature. However by the theory of effuences
Epicurus has established both in the case of smell and
hearing the requisite contact, not now immediate, but
secondary, between the object perceived and the percipient.
The problem of sight is much more intricate and difficult,
and since sight is also of far more importance for our know-
ledge of the external world than any of the other senses,
it is necessary to consider it in detail and to examine not
only the preliminary means by which contact is established
between object and sense-organ, but the subsequent act of
sensation, with regard to which sight will act as a type of all
the other senses. Epicurus* consents to mention, though
only to condemn off-hand, two rival theories as to the means
of contact, firstly that of Democritus,? which was also
adopted in a subtler form by Aristotle,3 that the object made
an impression (dzorvmwois) of itself in the air, just as a seal
does in wax, which then travelled to the eye and entered it,
secondly that of Plato,t which in a cruder form may have
been used by Empedocles,5 that sight was due to the meeting
of rays (dkrives) both from the object and from the eye. Of
these two views Epicurus says no more than that the effect
could not be produced nearly so well by either of them, as
by the process which he himself describes, but the fact of
his mentioning rival theories at all shows that he was con-
siderably impressed by them. His own view he apparently
considered, as usual, the only possible interpretation of ex-
perience, and he started, it seems,° from the observation of

t § 49. 4 See Part I, Chap. Ill, §.6, p. 17%

3 de Sensu, 2. 438 b 3, and 3. 4394 21.

4 Timaeus, 45 .c, 46a, 67 ¢.

5 According to Plut. E£piz. iv. 13, but there is some doubt whether he is
not attributing a Platonic doctrine to Empedocles: see Beare, Greek theories
of Elementary Cognition, p. 17.

6 Alex. Aphrod.in Arist. de Sexsu, B. 438a; U. 319 rexprjprov rapariberau
TO del TOV OpwvTw ev TH Kdpyn elvar TI TOD spwyevov eudacw Kal
elSwdAov, 6 87) Kal TO dpa eivar.

Pe 2ee

_

ei aati Ae

ek BBO UL 407

the image in the pupil of the eye: this was clearly the means
by which sight was effected and the only question to be
asked is how did it get there? Epicurus’? reply was simple
and direct: that all objects were constantly giving off from
their surface fine films? which were exact replicas of their
shape and colour: that these passed through the intervening
air and fell into the eye, where they awoke the sensation of
sight. The general idea of this theory of ‘idols’ (<idwAa,
simulacra) has already been discussed, but the detailed
working out of the notion by Epicurus is so ingenious
as to justify a full restatement.

In the first place the giving off of the films from the sur-
face of the body must be considered: the idea is of course
closely akin to that of the efHuence of smell and the emission
of sound-particles, but Lucretius 3 supports the possibility of
such an occurrence with more homely examples from ordi-
nary life; the giving off of smoke by wood, of heat by flames,
the shedding of its slough by the snake and its skin by the
grasshopper, &c.: such examples show that there is nothing
repugnant to nature in the idea of the emission of films. But
that Epicurus’ notion was not a merely arbitrary assumption
will be more clearly realized from a reconsideration of the
structure of the compound body. However firm and com-
pact such a body might be, its component atoms‘ were
nevertheless always moving and the whole body alive with
internal vibration (mdAos): the atoms were always jostling
one another and starting each other off in new directions, so
that the whole body is only kept together because the atoms
driven outwards meet others nearer the surface of the body
and are driven back again. But on the surface itself there is
nothing to drive back the atoms in the same way: there are,
it is true, the atoms of the surrounding atmosphere (ré
mepiexov),5 but this is much rarer in texture than the loosest
solid or liquid body, and offers much less resistance. Every
object is in this way constantly losing individual atoms, and

* §§ 46-50. ee
2 So Lucr. iv. 50 ‘quae quasi membranae vel cortex nominitandast’,

Shiv. 63 fi. 4 See Chap. V, pp. 330 ff. 5 § 46.

408 EPICURUS

in the same way complete films may be loosed from its
surface, and the films coming simultaneously from the
various side surfaces of the object form the ‘idol’ which is
an exact representation of the thing. It might be objected
that in that case the object would be gradually lessened by
the loss of successive films and so dwindle away. But
Epicurus? has forestalled this objection by observing that the
contrary process is also always at work: atoms from the
surrounding air are constantly joining the compound body
and filling up the gaps: ‘the flow from the surface cannot be
detected by any lessening in the size of the object because of
the filling up.of what is lost’. These films are being given
off from the surface of every object in a constant succession
‘as quick as thought’.3 They far surpass perceptible things
‘in the subtlety of their texture’,+ for however delicate the
structure they leave, they are merely its surface atoms,
‘skimmed’, as it were, from the whole: further, though the
‘idols’ are combined from the films of different surfaces (e.g.
front and sides), they are hollow inside,5’ and thus in every
way incredibly light and fine. Further, when they leave the
object they ‘preserve the respective position and order,
which they had before in the solid bodies’; they are, that is,
a faithful reproduction of the surface of the body, simply
because the atoms composing them were, in fact, themselves
that surface. This ‘position and order’ they will retain ‘for
a long time, though it is occasionally confused’, which
accounts for the blurred appearance of a distant object: the
‘idol’ in such cases has been a little knocked out of shape and
frayed round the edges in transit. Having left the body the

t Neither Epicurus nor any of his followers deals with the problem how
a film could come off a body of three dimensions without a break at some
point: possibly their answer would have been that we never see all the sides
of a body at once, and the image is only that of the surfaces exposed to our
view. But there are many such mizutiae in which the theory was not satis-
factorily worked out.

2 § 48 pedous . . . odk emidyAos TH pevwdoer Sia THY avTavarAjpwow.
3 dpa vonuart, § 48.
4 § 46.

5 T&v KolAwudrwr, ibid: see my notes ad loc.

cer @-eew Ae

EHS SOUL 4.09

‘idols’ travel with ‘an unsurpassable speed of motion," since
they have a capacity for movement in any direction propor-
tionate to the fact that ‘nothing or at least very few things
hinder (dvruxémrew) their emission by collisions’;? owing,
that is, to the extreme fineness of their structure, they collide
but rarely with other objects, and, what is more important,
there is extremely little internal atomic vibration to delay
them.3 Lucretius, in a passage of unusual interest and in-
sight,* has elaborated and supported this notion of the
incredible speed of transit of the ‘idols’. He attributes it
not merely to the rarity of their texture,s which enables them
easily to pass through opposing objects, but also to their
original impulsions by a ‘tiny cause’; the force which is
impelling them from within the compound body is that of
the movement of individual atoms, and as they themselves
are in motion at ‘absolute’ speed, they can communicate to
the light texture of the films a speed which is in its turn only
just short of ‘absolute’. The idea is penetrating and is in
complete accordance with Epicurean kinetics.7

How then can these ‘idols’ cause the sensation of sight?
The answer for Epicurus is simple enough. From the sur-
face of every object the ‘idols’ are flying off in every direction
in everlasting quick succession, and when the eye is turned
towards an object, a succession of ‘idols’ beats upon it. The
process is then exactly similar to that of the passive sensation:
the soul-atoms are touched, the ‘fourth nature’ is set in
“sense-bearing’ motion, it communicates with the three other
soul-elements, and they in their turn with the body-atoms
and then the eyes see: the sole difference here is that by
a special peculiarity of their structure, sensation in the sense-
organs is not, as it is in the rest of the body, a mere passive
feeling of contact, but a ‘perception’; the eyes do not merely
feel, but see. Two points of importance should be noted.

1 § 47 Tdaxn avurrépBAnra exer.

2 The text here is uncertain: see critical and explanatory notes on the
passage.

9° See: Chap. Vy p. 939: . 4 iv. 183-98. 5 196-8.

SEIS 3~5+ 7 See Chap. V, p. 333:

410 EPICURUS
The first is hinted at by Epicurus' and stated explicitly by

Lucretius :? no single ‘idol’ can, owing to the extreme slight-
ness of its structure, awake sensation and be perceived by
the eyes, but only the incredibly quick succession of images
crowding one upon the other: yet, although the ‘image’3 thus
seen (favracia) is in reality ‘cinematographic’, if we may use
a modern term, so quick is the succession that the eye is not
conscious of any break, but perceives only a single object:
the succession of ‘idols’ ‘reproduces the image of a single
continuous thing and preserves the corresponding sequence
of qualities and movements from the original object’.4 This
is again a subtle observation and it becomes of great im-

ortance for the understanding of the ‘mental apprehension’
of ‘idols’. Secondly, the process of sensation may be not
merely passive but active: the ‘idols’ may not merely im-
pinge upon the eye and automatically start the movement of
sensation, but the eye may, as it were, make an effort to
grasp or apprehend the image (émodyj). This is always the

case when we ‘look’ (Sewpeiv) as opposed to mere ‘seeing’ |

(épav). At any moment there are crowding round the eye
‘idols’ from any number of objects lying in the direction to
which the eye is turned, and in order to apprehend the
image produced by any one series of them, the eye must, as
it were, definitely attend to it. It makes a kind of choice
among the images presented to it and fixes its attention
upon it. One case of such attention is particularly note-
worthy: it sometimes happens, especially in the case of dis-
tant objects, that the ‘idols’ reach the eye in a blurred or
indistinct form: we can be certain that the image (¢avracia)
seen by the eye corresponds to the ‘idols’, but we have not
sufficiently certain information as to the nature of the object
from which the ‘idols’ proceeded. In that case the eye must
look again, and it is only when it has grasped by an act of
attention the ‘clear view’ (evdpynua) of the object that we

t § 50 Tod évds Kal ovveyods THY favTaciay arrodidvTwY.

2 iv. 89 ‘nec singillatim possunt secreta videri’.

3 I think it is clear from Epicurus’ use that davraoia is the technical term
for the ‘image’ resulting from a succession of individual ‘idols’. 4 § 50.

4

’ Sf

THE SOUL Ae

can be certain of the complete correspondence of object,
‘idols’, and image. This is the process of ‘confirmation’
(€maprdpnois) which plays so large a part in the Canonice;"
the ‘clear vision’ of the ‘near view’ is obtained by an act of
attention or apprehension on the part of the sense-organs
(émiBod}) r&v aicPnrnpidv). ‘To this act Epicurus alludes several
times in the Letter in conjunction with the parallel act on
the part of the mind,? and Lucretius} has in an interesting
passage underlined his master’s meaning and brought it into
relief. Finally, it should be noticed that the theory raises
once again the fundamental difficulty of materialism, but
this time in an even more acute form; the mere movement of
atoms is now not only a passive sensation of contact or
feeling, but an active perception of external things.

That the theory of the ‘idols’ is open to a large number of
obvious objections and involves many mechanical difficulties,
which the opponents of the atomic system were quick to
raise, may be seen from the criticism of Theophrastus on
Democritus,4 which has already been noticed. Epicurus has
escaped several of them by substituting for Democritus’ ‘air-
impressions’ the theory of ‘idols’ with a texture so fine that
they could collide and pass through one another without
causing any effective damage. There is, however, one
mechanical difficulty which must be taken into considera-
tion. The ‘idol’, as it left the concrete object, would be of
course of the same size as the object itself: how then, if the
object were a large one, could it enter the tiny pupil of the
eye, or if it could not, how did it produce the image of the
whole thing and not merely of such a small part as would
come into contact with the pupil? Epicurus may have in-
tended to deal with this difficulty when he stated that the
‘idol’ enters the eye ‘in the appropriate size’,’ but he never

t See Chap. II, pp. 254-7. 2 §§ 38, 50, 51: see Appendix III.

3 iv. 802 ff.

4 de Sensu, §§ 52, 53; D. (Democritus) 135: see Part I, Chap. III, § 6,
p- 166.

5 § 49 xara 76 evapydrrov péyeBos. I believe, however, that this means
merely that the ‘idols’ gross enough to be seen stay in the eye, others pass on
inward to the mind: see notes, ad loc.

412 EPICURUS

speaks of it explicitly, nor does Lucretius. So far as 1 know,
Giussani! is the only critic who has attempted to tackle this
difficult question. He believes that an actual diminution in
the size of the ‘idols’ in transit is wholly inconsistent with
Epicurean theory, and that Epicurus must mean that the
“Gdols’ are so ‘adapted’ to the eye, as to be able to give an
image of the whole object while yet indicating its real size.
Comparing a fragment in the Herculanean rolls,* where it 1s
said that the ‘idols’ in transit preserve ‘extension (rdow)3 and
unity and fineness of structure and smallness of parts by
means of concentration (814 r@v ovvitijoewr)’, he has invented
the subtle theory that, as the eye confronts a large object,
Gdols’ flow towards it from all parts of the opposite surface
preserving their original size: a fragment of each of these
will strike the eye and the eye piecing together these frag-
ments will grasp an image of the whole, yet of the right size.
But, even granting that the eye has, as Giussani suggests,
a power of determining the ‘provenance’ of each of these
fragments, the result would surely be a hopelessly confused
vision, from which the eye could not obtain an orderly image
of the whole. A simpler solution would be that the image in
transit from the object to the eye is actually reduced in size, so
that it can enter the eye as a whole: this is not merely per-
fectly consistent with Epicurean theory generally, but
in fact supported by such information as is extant. The
‘idols’ in passing through the air, slight as they are, would
yet be beaten upon on all sides by a large number of atoms
and loose compound bodies. This constant succession of
blows the solid compound can resist because of its internal
structure:4 but the effect upon the ‘hollow’ ‘idol’5 would
surely be to cause it to collapse,° or be squashed inwards and
so gradually diminished in size. The longer the transit, the
« yol. iii. Excursus I to Book IV, p. 285, and especially note (1).
2 From Book II of the wepi fucews.

3 This should possibly be ra&w or Bdow: cf. Ep. 1., § 46.
4 See Chap. VI, p. 352. 5 § 46

6 This is the exact meaning of ouviLnous: it is so used of the collapse of
the earth és rd. KotAa, Arist. de Mundo, 4. 395, and of the collapse of houses,

Plut. Crass. 2.

6

FHE SOUL 413

further would the process of diminution be carried: hence
it results that we do actually ‘see’ a distant tower the same
size as a small stone close at hand: the rate of diminution
would be uniform, and the amount proportionate to the
distance. Giussani objects that in that case the eye can have
no perception of the real size of objects. It surely has not,
either on Epicurus’ theory or any modern theory of vision:
what it does perceive is the diminished image caused by the
succession of diminished ‘idols’ together with a sense of
distance derived, as Lucretius! has most carefully explained,
from the length of the current of air which enters the eye
before the arrival of the ‘idols’. It is the function of the mind
to combine these two pieces of information and to infer from
them the original size of the object, a process in which it is
very frequently liable to error, which must be corrected by
subsequent ‘confirmation’ (émapripyos). This seems at
least a consistent theory, and will explain incidentally several
of the difficulties connected with the vision of the distant
object, but it must be admitted that the evidence for it is
slight. It is strange that there should be no information on
so cardinal a point.

But the discussion of such mechanical difficulties? is not
perhaps profitable, as Epicurus’ theory of vision could not
in any case be now supported as even a plausible explana-
tion. It is more worthy of observation that he has once again
secured indirect contact between the object and the eye and
that the general idea, though crude, is not after all so very far
removed from the ‘sight-wave’ theory of modern science: the
same difficulty of contact has to be surmounted by a more
subtle and scientific, but not wholly dissimilar, hypothesis.
It is necessary now to proceed to the consideration of the
function of the mind (vods) in sense-perception and thought.

tiv. 244-55.

2 Giussani, for instance (l.c., p. 283), has raised the question how the
‘idols’, being of almost ‘atomic’ texture, can preserve the colour of the original
object, which is due to the internal movement of atoms in a concilium, and
asks again (285 n. fin.), how it is that with two eyes we do not see two images.
As he says himself satis hariolati sumus.

414 EPICURUS

In the first place there is a series of instances in which the
mind plays, as it were, the part of a sense-organ, and itself
directly apprehends ‘idols’,t which are imperceptible to the
normal sense-organs. The eye can never perceive single
‘idols’, but only the image (¢avracia) created by a succession
of ‘idols’: but it may be sometimes that the single ‘idol’? will
penetrate through the pores of the body to the mind itself
and there be perceived by an act of ‘apprehension’. This
occurs in several different instances. The first is that of the
curious class of ‘idols’ known as ‘compounds’ (ovordeets),3
which, since ‘it is not necessary for their substance to be
filled in deep inside’, since, that is, the ‘idol’ is a mere skin
without any solid substance, may easily be formed in the air
either by a chance union of atoms‘ or by a casual conjunction
of ‘idols’ thrown off by two or more real objects.5 In the
latter case we may receive the mental impression of strange
compound animals like Centaurs, and Scylla and the
Chimaera, parts of the ‘idols’ of existing things being
accidentally united, in the former the image presented to the
mind may be merely grotesque and assume any fantastic
form. But in each instance’ the single ‘idol’ is so slight that
it requires an act of attention on the part of the mind to
grasp it.

- The second instance of mind-perception? is that of images
seen in sleep. Here a succession of ‘idols’ is perceived, but

t By émiBodi ris Suavotas. For a discussion of this most disputed phrase
‘see Appendix III. I have assumed in the text the conclusion there formed.

2 See Lucr. iv. 746-8:

facile uno commovet ictu
quaelibet una animum nobis subtilis imago;
tenvis enim mens est et mire mobilis ipsa.

3 Ep. i, § 48.
4 Lucr. iv. 1312
sunt etiam quae sponte sua gignuntur et ipsa
constituuntur in hoc caelo qui dicitur aer.
5 Lucr. iv. 738: et quae confiunt ex horum facta figuris.
See Lucr. iv. 802:
et quia tenvia sunt, nisi quae contendit acute
cernere non potis est animus.

nN

7 Kal’ drvovs ywopuevwr, Ep. i, § 51:-cf. Lucr. iv. 757-776.

wpe

I

a.

THE SOUL 415

they do not, as in the case of sense-perception, unite to form
a single image, but are grouped separately so as to form a
series, often representing bodies" moving and gesticulating
(the ‘cinematograph’ here helps us to understand Epicurus’
meaning). Such images may either be due to ‘idols’ which
penetrate,* now that the sense-organs are dormant, to the
mind or are called up from the memory-store in the mind,
or again they may be accidental and fantastic creations
corresponding to no reality. Akin to the visions of sleep
are the visions of the madman: these must arise in the
majority of cases from a combination of the ‘idols’ of real
things. In both these cases3 the vision is ‘true’, because it
corresponds to real ‘idols’: the delusion is not due to the
mind’s perception, but to its subsequent inference that the
image seen is directly derived from a real object. So, as
Sextus¢ explains, ‘in the case of Orestes, when he thought
he saw the Erinyes, the perception which was stirred up by
‘idols’ was true, for the ‘idols’ were really there, but the
mind, when it thought that these were solid realities (ore-
péuvot), was forming a false opinion (epevddéer). Very like to
these two is the vision of dead persons, but that the originat-
ing cause is slightly different. Here the ‘idols’ did indeed
spring from the living body, but have continued to float
about in the air ‘unused’, so to speak, even after their
original is dead: these also are usually perceived by the
mind in sleep. Once more the image is ‘true’, now in a fuller
sense, for it corresponds to ‘idols’ produced by realities,
but the inference that the persons are still living is false. -
But by far the most important instance of ‘mind-percep+
tion’ is the vision of the gods. This must be treated more
« Lucr. iv. 768 f., and especially 771-2:
quippe ubi prima perit alioque est altera nata
inde statu, prior hic gestum mutasse videtur.
2 Ibid. 758-9.
simulacra lacessunt
haec eadem nostros animos quae cum vigilamus.
3 D.L. x. 32 7d re rv pwawopevwv gavrdopara Kat <rd> Kar’ ovap
aAnOA: Kwel ydp. :
4 adv. Math. viii. 63; U. 253. 5 Lucr. iv. 733-4, 760-1.

416 EPICURUS

fully in the next chapter, but here it may be noticed that the
bodies of the gods send off a succession of idols, just as do
all other concrete existences, but owing to the great subtlety
of the structure of their bodies,! their ‘idols’ are so fine that
they cannot be perceived by the sense-organs at all, but only
by the finer and purer soul-compound of the mind. Here
‘mental perception’ is not merely ‘true’ because it corre-
sponds to ‘idols’, but true in the fullest sense because it 1s
evidence—the only direct evidence—of the existence of a
corresponding reality.

In all these instances alike the ‘idols’ and successions of
“dols’ are directly conveyed to the mind, but just as the
senses, surrounded by crowding ‘idols’, need actively to
‘apprehend’ the particular image, so these single ‘idols’,
much finer and more fleeting than the normal images of
sense-perception, must be grasped by the act of attention on
the part of the recipient mind.? All such ‘images’, as has been
seen, are ‘true’ in the sense of corresponding to ‘idols’, and
Epicurus3 in several passages asserts their truth. He himself,
however, remembering probably that some such images
grasped by the mind did not correspond to external objects,

t Cf. Lucr. v. 154.

2 émBodr THs Siavotas: R. Philippson, Zur Epikureischen Gatterlehre
(Hermes, li, 1916, pp- 568-608), who is anxious to establish a strict termino~
logy in the Epicurean psychology, states that Sudvota is Epicurus’ word for
the special faculty of the mind which apprehends single images. It is true that
it is so used (Ep. i. 38, 49, 50, 513 K.A. xxiv), but it is also used by Epicurus
himself (1) of an émuBoAr) Tis Suavotas as part of the process of reasoning
about &nAa (Ep. i, § 62), (2) of mental grasp of reasoning or of a principle

(Ep. i, § 78; K.d. xx), (3) as the seat of fear and pleasure (K.4. x, xvili). °

Still less is it the case, as he states, that Lucretius’ translation of dvavoua in
this sense is always mens. Mens and animus in Lucretius are interchangeable
terms for ‘the mind’ in general, and in the passages in the Fourth Book which
deal with the mental apprehension of simulacra, mens is used seven times as
the equivalent of Sudvoua (iv. 748, 75°, 754, 767, 780, 976, IOII), animus
six times (iv. 731, 7475 787, 803, 812, 814), and mens animi once (758). In
his discussion of psychology Philippson appears to me not to have sufficiently
before his mind the essentially material character of Epicurus’ idea of thought,
all of which is occasioned by a mental visualization: its different processes
were not therefore for him so rigidly distinguished.

3 Ep. i, §§ 50, 62: cf. Kd. xxiv.

MEE SOUL 417

was content to leave the matter here: his followers, anxious
perhaps to establish their orthodoxy by asserting their certain
knowledge of the existence of the gods, took the further step
of exalting ‘mental apprehension’ into a criterion of truth!

But besides this special function of ‘mind-perception’, the
mind has its necessary share in all normal sense-perception:
it must distinguish and interpret the data of the sense-
organs. It is necessary to return once more to the examina-
tion of normal sense-perception and consider what follows
on the original sensation in the eye. Our authorities are not
very explicit at this point, but with a little filling in of gaps,
it is possible to put together an account which will not
greatly misrepresent Epicurean orthodoxy. The ‘idols’? are
‘like in colour and form’ to the object from which they come;
but though their shifting succession may represent ‘acci-
dents’3 happening to the object, change of posture, move-
ment, &c., they cannot in themselves convey to us any other
of its qualities. What is it then that the eye actually sees,
what is the image (davraoia) which the eye grasps as the
result of the incidence of successive ‘idols’? Nothing, clearly,
but a certain mass of colour or colours ofa certain size and
shape: the interpretation of this image, the recognition of
the general nature or individuality of the object which it
represents, is not a matter of mere perception, nor is it the
function of the sense-organ: it must be performed by the
mind. How then can this be? how in the first place does the
mind receive the image and how in the second has it the
capacity for distinguishing and classifying images, so that
it can pronounce the judgement ‘this is so and so’? The
answer to the first question is not easy to give. Certain
passages in Lucretius* might lead us to suppose that the
‘idols’ themselves actually passed on through the pores of

« D.L. x. 31. This question is discussed in Appendix III: there were
probably other reasons as well which actuated both Epicurus and his followers :
see also Chap. II, pp. 250-2.

2 § 49 dwoxpdwy Kal duovopdpdwv.

3 Cf. Lucr. iv. 788-801. ;

4 Especially iv. 749 ff. Zeller (iii. 1. 389) has gone astray on this point,
as Tohte notes (Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrheit, p. 4, fin.).

3307 Ee

418 EPICURUS

the body into the mind, but a closer examination of his
illustrations shows clearly that he is thinking not of normal
sensation, but of the images directly apprehended by the
mind: further the very careful distinction of such subtle
images from those of normal sense-perception in itself makes
it clear that the latter do not come into direct contact with
the mind. It has been supposed! that Epicurus meant that
‘the atomic images only penetrate to the sense-organs or
the pores’ (in the passive sensation of contact), ‘but that the
image of the object reaches the mind in an immaterial form’.
This is a contradiction of the most elementary principles
of Epicurus’ system: even if an ‘immaterial image’ could
ever exist, which it could not, it could have no effect on the
mind, for contact would be impossible. It will be much
nearer Epicurus’ mode of thought, even though he may
never himself have elaborated this part of his theory, to
suppose that the movement of sensation in the eye * causes
a movement to pass along the chain of soul-atoms to the
mind, and so by sympathetic movement (ovpmdGea) there
is reproduced in the mind the image of sense-perception.
It is strange and perhaps significant that modern scientific
inventions should help us so much to understand Epicurus’
physical theories: here it is clear that the analogy we want
is that of the sympathetic movement of the needle in the
receiver of the telegraph.

The image being thus apprehended by the mind, how
does it perform its function of interpretation? Epicurus’
answer is characteristic and its main outlines have already

been sketched in discussing the Canonice. The individual -

image, being created in the mind, does not perish, but is
stored up and may at any moment be ‘called up’ by the mind,
or more correctly, be apprehended by an act of attention,
which selects it out of the infinite number of similar images
always present in the mind.3 This is the act of memory.

1 Tohte, Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrheit, p. 5.

2 See Giussani, Stud. Lucr., p. 190.

3 Lucr. iv. 777-87, 802-17, really a consecutive argument, the intervening
lines being an interruption and apparently an alternative version of 768-76.

a

THE SOUL wate

But this is not all. Individual images of the same class of
objects (e.g. horse, cow, &c.) collect and accumulate in the
mind and by a kind of superposition form the ‘general con-
cept’, or, as Epicurus prefers to call it, the ‘anticipation’
(zpdAmfus) of the class:* here the analogy to help us is that
of the ‘composite photograph’. This ‘recollection of that
which has frequently been imaged from without’, as Epi-
curus * defined it, can similarly be called up or attended to
on demand.3 When then the mind has received the new
image, it can, as it were, look at various ‘general concepts’
and compare them with the new vision, and so pronounce
the judgement ‘this is a horse or a cow’.4 The ‘anticipation’
‘is like sense-perception itself an infallible criterion of truths
(i.e. we cannot be misled by its images), because it is itself
built up of sense-perceptions, which are immediately true.
By means of it the mind is enabled not only to interpret
individual sensations, but also, when it wishes to create,* to
know how to set about the work, because it has a vision of
the thing which it wishes to produce: it is in this latter sense
that Epicurus’ name ‘anticipation’ is most easily intelligible.
What then is the result of this process of comparison?
Clearly that what was before a mere irrational sensation has
been given content and transformed into a piece of informa-

* See Chap. II, p. 245. It is not worth while discussing mistaken ideas of
the apdAnyus, such as Schémann’s that it is an ‘innate idea’, or Steinhart’s
that it includes the individual recollection. D.L. x. 33 is very explicit about
it, and Tohte (op. cit., pp. 15-18) has explained the whole notion clearly
enough. * D.L. x. 33 pviun rob modAdns wbev havevros.

3 Clemens Alex. Strom. ii. 4, p. 157,44; U.2 553 quotes a striking passage
from Epicurus in which zpéAnyus is defined as emiPodny emt ru evapyes kat
emt THY evapyh TOO mpdyparos émivo.ay.

4 D.L. x. 33 76 méppw éords tamos éeotly 7 Bobs: det yap Kara. mpd-
Anpuw éyvwxévar wore immov Kal Boos pop.

La Xe She

6 It isin this sense that Lucretius in several passages uses zotities, his render-
ing of zpdAnyus : e.g. v. 181 fF.: how could the gods have created man, when
they had no ‘anticipation’ of men in their minds? v. 1046, no man could have
created language, unless he had heard other men speaking before: cf. iv.
475-73 v. 124 (where the sense is nearer to the ordinary notion of ‘general
concept’).

Ee€2

420 EPICURUS i

tion with regard to the external world. The mind has inferred
from what was previously an image of shape and colour, that
this image is an indication of the presence within the range
of vision of e.g. a man: more than this, by means of the
‘ndication of distance,! it will have decided how far the man
is from us, according to the sameness or alteration of succes-
sive images it will know whether he is at rest or moving
towards or away from us, or engaged in any particular action:
it may even by comparison with certain special and particular
‘anticipations’ (still of course built of many separate images)
be in a position to determine who the man is. It has, in
fact, performed an act of ‘comprehension’ (énatofja1s),” and
so given meaning to the simple ‘perception’ (aiofjo1s). The
sensation of hearing affords perhaps an even clearer notion
of this function of the mind than that of sight. The ‘sound-
particles’ emitted from the throat of our friend reach the
ears, and there awake the sensation of mere noise: the act
of perception takes place in the ear, but it is the perception —
of a succession of irrational sounds. The sensation is ‘tele- —
graphed’ to the mind, and the mind by comparison with the —
‘anticipations’ built of previous sounds, is able, very literally —
in this case, to interpret the sounds: for it can assign to —
them the content of meaning and translate them into speech. —
Thus in all sense-perception there are two parts: 4 the receipt —
of the sensation, as mere irrational shape and colour, or |
sound, &c., which is performed by the sense-organ and is,
like the passive contact-sensation, purely local, and its inter-—
pretation and understanding, by comparison and classifica- ;
tion, which is performed by the mind, acting by means of
the ‘anticipation’. The notion is perhaps complicated, but
perfectly in accordance with Epicurus’ general psychology,
and, allowing for the materialistic form in which it is put,

t See above, p. 413. 2 Ep.i, § 52: cf. D.L. x. 32.

3 Cf. p. 405.

4 Cf. an interesting passage in Aet. iv. 8. 2, p. 394 D3 U. 249 76 <Te>
pdpidv eat % alabnors, 7) TIS éoriv % Svvapis, Kal 76 eraicOnua, o Ep
orl 76 evépynua. ware SixOs map’ adT@ A€éyeoBar aicOnow pev THY
Sdvapuy, aloOnow S€ 70 evépynua. ‘

2

EHE SOUL 421

not very divergent from the account which would be given
by other philosophers, ancient or modern.

During the whole of the above explanation an active
capacity of the mind to attend, compare, and form judge-
ments has been assumed, and it may well be thought that
we have moved some way from the purely materialistic and
atomic conception from which we started. It is necessary
then to return to it and ask what is this power which the
mind possesses, and how, speaking in atomic terms, it comes
to possess it. Happily Epicurus has not at this point left
us in the lurch: there is, he tells us in a passage of curious
interest? in the Letter to Herodotus, ‘another kind of move-
ment produced inside ourselves closely linked to the appre-
hension of images, but differing from it’. This is an un-
mistakable return on the underlying materialism of the
whole theory. The capacity of the mind to apprehend images
(davracruct émBod THs Suavolas), which was being considered
just now, is, like the perception of the sense-organs and the
passive sensation of the rest of the body, neither more nor
less in ultimate analysis than a movement of atoms: but
as the atoms in question are now undiluted soul-atoms, they
are capable of finer apprehensions. Side by side with this
movement there is another, closely akin to it, because it too
deals with images,” but to be distinguished from it, because
it does not now ‘apprehend’ the special fine images which |
visit the mind from without, but by a process of selection
chooses out a ‘general concept’ to which it will assign the
newly received image. This secondary movement is in fact
that of ‘opinion’ (8ééa), which is the characteristic function
of the mind not only in the interpretation of sense-percep-
tion, but in all forms of thought. Its primary difference
then from the ‘apprehension of images’ lies in its object, but
there is a second distinction which is of far greater impor-
tance. The former activity is always ‘true’ in the sense that
if must apprehend an image which corresponds to an ‘idol’

fees me, i

? I am here assuming the results of the discussion of ésuBoA1 Tis Svavoias
in Appendix III.

422 EPICURUS

or a succession of ‘idols’, even though these do not always in —
their turn originate from a concrete reality. But opinion has —
no such guarantee of truth: it selects, as it will, the ‘general
concept’ to which it will assign the new image. In most
cases, no doubt, where the image is clear (évapyyjs) and the
object easily recognizable, it will make no mistake; but it —
is always liable to error, especially in dealing with the images
of distant objects. This then is the origin of the apparent —
errors of the senses: there is no error in the sense-perception, —
for it is the immediate outcome of the contact of the ‘idol’ —
with the sense-organ; the error’ lies in the ‘addition of
opinion’, the selection by this secondary movement of the ©
mind of the general concept with which it will identify the ©
image. Hence arises the rule of the Canonice,” that any
vision other than the ‘clear sight’ (évdpynya) of the near view
must be regardedas a ‘problem awaiting solution’ (zpoopévor).
The mind should withhold its judgement until the inference —
it is inclined to make is either confirmed (éaaprupe?rac) or
not by the clear vision.3 It is unnecessary to refer again to
the stock instances of the square tower at a distance or the ~
approaching man: what must be emphasized here is that
the uncertainty of the results of cognition are due to the
independent character of the mental movement of opinion.
There is no uncertainty about the individual image, there is
no uncertainty about the ‘general concept’, but the “move-
ment’ of opinion is liable to error in connecting the two: the
apparently almost arbitrary rule of the Canonice turns out
to be the necessary deduction from the atomic analysis of
the operation of sense-perception in its various parts.
So far the operations of the mind have been considered
only in relation to sense-perception. But besides being called
upon to interpret and classify the reports of sensation about
the perceptible external world (awéueva, mpddyAa), the mind
has another and almost more important function to perform
For it has similarly to form conclusions about matters ‘im-

PO me

x § 50 76 Sé Pedidos Kal Td Sinpaprynpevov ev TO mpoodokalopeva det
eoTw. 2 See Chap. II, p. 254, and Ep. i, §§ 50, 51.
3 See Chap. II, p. 255.

THE SOUL ee

perceptible’ (d8yAa). These, as the Canonice has shown,’ may
be of various kinds. First of all there is a class, which is
almost on the borderline, of things perceptible indeed to the
senses, but so remote that their inner workings cannot be
directly perceived and are a matter for the investigation of
the mind: these are the heavenly bodies and generally what
Epicurus following the Atomists sums up as the ‘things of
the sky’ (ra peréwpa). More important than these are things
which from their very nature must always remain imper-
ceptible, and of this class the principal example is of course
the atoms themselves and their movements in space. Here
no direct assistance can be obtained from sense-perception,
but sense-perception can give us a start in our investiga-
tions, for it can provide us with signs (oneta)* or indications
(rexpyjpra) in the visible world which may suggest inferences
to the invisible. The work then must be done by thought
(Aoyiouids) 3 alone and hypothesis must be framed on the basis
of phenomena.

What then is the process of its work? It is not easy to
conceive how a purely materialistic system can represent in
a concrete form the processes of thought, and there are not
many indications left in the authorities, but an account can
be given which will at least not go far from what Epicurus
imagined. In the first place it is clear that all thought must

* See Chap. II, pp. 257, 262. 2 See Ep. ii, § 87.

3 Aoyiopos is the most general word in Epicurus for the process of reasoning
about the unseen (Ep. i. 39 70 ddyAov TH Aoyrowd TexpalpecOa, see also
Ep. i, §§ 75, 76; Ep. iil. 132; K.A. xvi, xix, fr. 74 (C.B.); D.L. x. 32, 117,
120): he also uses emAoyropds (i, § 73, and K.4. xx), Svadoyropds (ii, § 845
Sent. Vat. x), and diaddyropa (i, § 68; ii, § 85). The result of this process is
a ‘thought-image’ (émivoia, i, § 45; D.L. x. 32), and émwoetobar (i, § 40),
Siavoeicbar (i, § 49), vdnors (Aet. iv. 8. 10), and Svavdnars (i, § 63) are used
in a corresponding sense. ‘The equivalent in Latin of Aoywopds is ratio (Cic.
de Fin.i. 9. 30, and Lucretius, passim). 80€a in Epicurus is mainly concerned
with the interpretation of sense-impressions, Aoysopds with the more wholly
mental processes of thought and reasoning, but there is some overlapping.
R. Philippson (l.c., p. 571) states that Adyos is the faculty of voids which deals
with a@dnAa, but in Epicurus’ usage it is a quite vague word found in such
expressions as Ady@ Gewpynrds: Philippson has pressed a theoretical view
beyond the facts.

424. - EPICURUS

be a process of the combination of images: nothing but —
images * can stir the sensory movements in the mind, nor —
can the mind apprehend anything but images: all thought
is to Epicurus, as we might say in modern phraseology,
‘visualization’. Further, just as in the interpretation of sense-
perceptions, the faculty of opinion has the capacity to put
together images already existing and compare them for
identification, so here the faculty of thought about the im-
perceptible world can combine previously existing images
or concepts and by such combinations create new images
which are in fact its hypotheses (Sofalopeva). This account —
is borne out by Diogenes’? résumé of the processes of thought:
‘all thought-images (émivoww) have their origin in sensations |
by means of coincidence (mepim7wors) and analogy and simila- —
rity and combination (ovvcas), reasoning (Aoyiopds) too con-
tributing something’. The account is condensed and not
wholly clear, but its meaning must be something like this:
if we wish to reach any conclusion about the imperceptible
world, we must start from sense-perceptions which seem
to us akin to the object of our pursuit, either because we
think they are produced by the underlying causes which we
are seeking or because they seem to resemble the workings
of such causes. From this basis we must try to ‘work by
signs’ (onuevofo8a).3 Occasionally a merely accidental com-
bination of concepts, made, as it were, by chance without
any definite effort of search or inquiry on our part, will lead
us to a fruitful conclusion, or, in strictly Epicurean phraseo-
logy, create a new image. Sometimes again an apparent
likeness or even similarity between perceptible phenomena ~
and the unseen will set us on the track of our conclusion:
such a case would be Epicurus’ own argument? for the

« Cf, Aet. iv. 8. 10; U. 317 Aevxurmos Anucxpitos *Emixovpos THv
alcOnow Kal riv vdnow yivecOar eidwAwv EEwlev mpoordvran: pndevi yap
emuBddAew pnderepav xwpls Tod mpoorinrovros elddAov. eEwOev is not of
course strictly true of images or concepts already in the mind, but it is of their

ae

origin.
2 D.L. x. 32. Some useful comment on this passage is made by Tohte,
Kriterien der Wahrheit, p. 12. 3 Cf. Ep. i, § 38: cf. Ep. ui, § ro4.

4 §§ 55-9: see Chap. III, pp. 285-7.

2

THE SOUL 425

existence of the minimae partes in the atom. In other
instances again we may form our new image by the inten-
tional juxtaposition of previously existing images, however
derived: as, for example, when we reach the notion! of the
infinity of the void by the mental combination of many
images of ‘empty space’. In all these cases then thought is
working, just as in sense-interpretation, by comparing and
combining images: the whole process is purely visual. But,
it might be objected, Epicurus? is reported as saying that
‘reason’ makes some contribution to the process of thought.
The phrase is vague and without support in the Letter to
Herodotus, but there is no question even here of any process
of non-visual thought, and certainly nothing non-material
is implied. Reasoning to Epicurus is nothing more than,
as we might say, ‘putting two and two together’,3 and this
for him must necessarily be a process of the combination of
images: in other words ‘reasoning’ is itself an ‘intentional
combination’ (ovvOeois) and the phrase of Diogenes is loose.

Thought then proves to be a movement in the mind,
which by the combination and comparison of previously
existing images creates new images by a kind of ‘visualiza-
tion’. Its subject-matter is different from that of ‘opinion’,
for it is no longer concerned with the interpretation of the
data of sense, but has to create,‘ as it were, its own data.
Does it differ from opinion in its results? Is it similarly
liable to error or has it, in its scientific use at any rate, any
guarantee of greater certainty? The Canonice 5 gives us the
principles by which it can be controlled: just as the infer-
ences of ‘opinion’ must be referred back to the ‘clear vision’
of the ‘nearer view’, and only accepted if they are confirmed,
so the hypotheses of thought must be tested by being referred
back to sensation. Confirmation (émysapripyois) is no longer

t See Giussani, Stud. Lucr., p. 176. 2 D.L. x. 31, cited above.

3 So ovAdoyilecBar is used in the Second Letter about inferences to
petéwpa from perceptible phenomena: § 112 édv ris SUvyTat 7d adudwvov
tois daivopevors ovdAdoyilecbar. -

4 This is true even with regard to celestial phenomena: for thought is
engaged in investigating the imperceptible causes of phenomena.

5 See Chap. II, pp. 263, 264.

426 EPICURUS

possible, because the ‘clear view’ of sensation is no longer
possible, but phenomena may contradict (dvrysaprupetv), and
if so the hypothesis must be rejected as untrue. At eac

stage then in the process of scientific reasoning thought must
be checked by sensation. In the chapter on the Canonice
attention was also drawn to the singular difference in results

between thought as regards celestial phenomena and thought

dealing with the ultimate realities of existence—the atoms
and the void. In the former case, all explanations which are
not contradicted by sensation are to be accepted as equally
true, for they correspond to a real diversity of occurrence in
celestial phenomena: in the latter there is a one and only
truth.

What are the psychological grounds of this conclusion
and what process of thought can there be which will justify
this assumption of the one and only truth in the realm of
ultimate realities—the realm most remote from the im-
mediate and certain data of sense? No explicit solution of
this difficulty is to be found in the works either of Epicurus
himself or of his followers, and it has been too lightly passed
over’ by his critics, who have been content to group both
classes of ‘the imperceptible’ together and to apply the idea
of the multiplicity of causes to both alike, without perceiving
the startling divergence in the results. Yet nothing could
be more marked than the difference in this respect between
the Letters to Herodotus and to Pythocles: the reader seems
to be almost in a different atmosphere of argumentation.
It would of course be easy to accept this difference and to
condemn Epicurus as a loose or dishonest thinker: to point
out that whereas he had no intrinsic interest in astronomy
and meteorology, he could admit diversity of explanation
and of truth in that field, but that the ultimate principles of
atomism were vital to him and in defiance of logic he would
 stoutly resist any incursion of multiplicity. But before such
a condemnation is passed, it is well to see if some defence
cannot be made.

Historically it is not very difficult to see how Epicurus
was led to claim this higher certainty, or singleness of truth,

7.

THE SOUL 409

for his ultimate physical speculations. Despite all his pro-
testations of originality, it is obvious that his system as a
whole is based on that of Democritus, and though in the
Canonice in particular he seems to break away from his
predecessor in his emphatic reassertion of the supremacy of
sensation and of the reality of the phenomenal world, he is
yet even here more influenced than he imagined by Demo-
critus’ metaphysics." He consequently still felt something
of a superior reality? in the existence of the too fundamental
constituents, and was led therefore to claim almost uncon-
sciously a dogmatic certainty for his thought about their
nature and conduct.

Yet such an explanation of his position, if it stood alone,
would still leave Epicurus open to the charge of unconscious
intellectual dishonesty, and it is necessary to inquire whether
even on his own assumptions his attitude cannot be justified.
For this purpose the analysis3 of the process of thought about
the imperceptible must be carried a little farther: how are
these hypotheses framed for which this unique certainty is
claimed. Consider first the data: in the case of terrestrial
problems sensation can supply alike the problems and their
solution, in the case of celestial phenomena sensation can
supply the problems, but thought must suggest the solution,
but in the case of the ultimate truths of science both pro-
blems and their solution must come from thought. Sensa-
tion, though it can give us indications and must be used as
the test of reference, cannot directly supply the data, for
the ultimate realities, the atoms and space, cannot from their
very nature throw off ‘idols’. In other words the mind is
dealing no longer with the images of sense-perception, but
wholly with mental concepts. By what process then must
the work be done? Clearly by ‘combination’ (ovvOeais).4 The
mind by putting together previously existing concepts, each

« This point was insisted on by Natorp, Forschungen, chap. v.

2 A trace of the same feeling may be seen in his denial of the secondary
qualities to the atoms, which carries with it a faint sense of their unreality
in compound things: see Chaps. III and VI.

3 See Chap. II, pp. 265, 266. 4 D.L. x. 32, see above, p. 424.

428 EPICURUS

tested as they were formed by the reference to the senses, —

forms a new concept. But so far this is equally the process
in the case of the celestial phenomena and may lead to a
plurality of conclusions: what is the difference in the case
of the ultimate realities? There are, I conceive, two differ-
ences, one in the nature of the concept, and the other in
the nature of the process. The concept of science is not
only tested by reference to the senses, but it is ‘clear’ in the
very special sense of being ‘self-evident’: it is not formed
arbitrarily by the loose and erratic operation of ‘opinion’,
but is immediately grasped by the kindred ‘act of mental
apprehension’ (émBod) ris Suavolas).* In other words the opera-
tion of the formation of a new scientific concept is for
Epicurus, what we might call in modern phraseology, the
‘immediate intuition of a self-evident proposition’: the mind
‘looks’ and sees a new picture that is perfectly ‘clear’ and
could not be otherwise than it is. An illustration may make
the idea clearer. Suppose, for instance, that we are inquiring
into the nature of the motion of the atoms. We have as our
data, first the concept of the atom, reached by the combina-
tion? of the sensational concept (if we may use the term to
mean a concept built immediately of sensations) of the
minimum visibile, together with that of further division and
that of a similar limit. All these concepts are ‘clear’ and their
combination must form one new concept and one only, that
of the atom as conceived by thought. Secondly, we have
the concept of bodies moving downwards owing to their
own weight, and thirdly that of bodies moving sideways in
a slight ‘swerve’. ‘These concepts are put in juxtaposition in
the mind. The mind ‘looks’ and by an immediate ‘act of
apprehension’ or intuition it sees the new picture or image
of the infinite infinitesimal movements of the atoms in all
directions,3 colliding at every moment and leaping apart in
new directions only to meet with new collisions. There is
no. question of alternative solutions here: the previous con-
cepts are placed together and the mind has only to ‘look’
+ Bp. a5. $5 te 2 See Giussani, Lucretius, i. 176.

3 See Chap. V, pp. 327 ff.

- 4 hae.

7,

THE SOUL 429

and see the new concept, which is the self-evident image
resulting from those just before it in the series. The whole
of scientific thought? is then to Epicurus a chain of such self-
evident or ‘clear’ concepts, grasped by the act of ‘mental
apprehension’ each in their due order: its ‘uniqueness’ of
truth is as inevitable as is that of the science of mathematics.
At each step we directly apprehend an image that is itself
a precise and certain reproduction of the imperceptible
realities.

Such, I believe, is Epicurus’ notion of the process of
thought about the ‘imperceptible’ things of ultimate reality,
and the justification of his claim for it that it leads in each
case to a ‘one and only’ (uovaxdv) truth. But it would of
course be rash to assume this, if it were wholly unsupported.
Happily it is not, for not only does it fully accord, as has
been seen, with Epicurus’ account of thought as reported
by Diogenes, but in a curious and very valuable passage? in
the Letter to Herodotus we have an unexpected confirma-
tion. Epicurus there warns us that we must not always
argue directly from the analogy of the senses to the conduct
of the atoms, for sometimes such an analogy is entirely mis-
leading. We have, he argues in effect, two parallel modes of
obtaining certainty: in the region of sensation we obtain
truth from observation (76 Oewpotpevov aAnbés), that is, from
the ‘clear vision’ obtained in the near view by an apprehen-
sion of the senses (émBod) rev aic?yrnpiwv): but in the region
of the imperceptible truth must beobtained by ‘mental appre-
hension’ (émBoX) ris Stavolas). Now in the passage in ques-
tion, which deals with the atomic motion which takes place
in a moving compound body, the conclusion which Epicurus

« A quotation from Professor Clement Webb’s Problems in the Relations
of God and Man (p. 79) will express exactly what I conceive to have been
Epicurus’ idea of his own scientific system: “The highest conceivable form
of religious knowledge, as of all knowledge, would, I suppose, be intuitive
throughout, in the sense that the whole result would be present to conscious-
ness in the parts or moments, and all the parts or moments explicit in the whole
or result.’

2 Ep. i, § 62: for the fuller discussion of this passage and its consequences
see Appendix III.

430 EPICURUS

reaches is made precisely in the manner which we have
described: the previously formed concepts of the behaviour
of the atoms are examined in a new situation, and it is found
that the picture thus formed and grasped by ‘mental appre-
hension’ is different from that which a mere analogy of
phenomena would suggest. The analogy of phenomena then
must in this instance be abandoned and the intuitive appre-
hension is the one and only truth. Here is the practical
confirmation of the view advanced above.

The process of scientific reasoning then, conducted by
the ‘mental apprehension’ of clear concepts, is at once the
highest intellectual function of the mind and also that most
remote from immediate sensation. Yet Epicurus can claim
for it a certainty unknown in the operations of ‘opinion’
dealing directly with sensations, and a capacity to reach the
single truth unknown to thought itself when dealing with
the remoter sensations of celestial phenomena. The paradox
is striking, yet its solution is clear. It is that this ‘act of
apprehension’ of the ‘clear view’ of the scientific concept is
a process exactly parallel to the ‘act of apprehension by
the senses’ of the ‘clear view’ of the near object, which is
the guarantee of full and absolute truth in sensation.
Nor is it indeed merely a parallel: for thanks to the whole-
hearted materialism of the Epicurean psychology, there is
no essential difference between the structure of the sense-
organs and that of the mind, between the atomic composition
of the image of sensation and the mental image of the con-
cept, between the movement of the two ‘acts of apprehen-
sion’. The simplest process of the acquisition of truth and
the most complex meet in an identity which is not fully .
shared by the intermediate processes of opinion and thought
about celestial phenomena. The mind at the moment of its
greatest remoteness from sensation shares the certainty of
sensation, for its nature and the circumstances of its action
are identical. Such I believe to have been the conception of
“Epicurus, even though the evidence for it may be slight,
and it forms a fitting crown to his carefully worked-out
account of psychological processes.

THE SOUL ~ 431

The mind then has the function of interpretation and
judgement in all fields, in Sense-perception, in the explana-
tion of physical phenomena, in the discovery of the ultimate
realities of the world. Yet thought unaided can only form
opinion and is always liable to error. In any department
truth may be reached, but only by keeping thought con-
stantly checked by reference to sensation: ‘we must keep all
under the control of the senses’.

The mind has, however, functions in other fields than that
of thought. It is firstly the seat of the emotions: joy and
fear, love and hatred, &c., all originate from the mind
situated in the breast. The authorities? do little more than
tell us that this is so, but a closer analysis may be attempted.
To begin with it is important to distinguish these more
complex emotions from the more passive feelings (dé) of
pleasure and pain. The latter are matters of immediate
sensation, they are perceived locally and immediately in the
parts of the body where the contact or movement which
causes them occurs, and take their origin in the movement
of the ‘fourth nature’ in the ‘spirit’, which is then com-
municated to the other soul-elements and so to the atoms
of body. But though they are distinct, there is a connexion
between these simple sensations of the body and the complex
emotions of the mind, and this connexion is exactly parallel
to that between the sense-organs and the mind in sense-
perception. The body has a simple sensation of pleasure or
pain (7d6os): this is ‘telegraphed’ to the soul, which then by
its own peculiar movement translates the simple sensation
into an emotion, by an inference as to the external body which

Ep. i, § 38.

2 Schol. on Ep. i, § 67 ; Lucr. iii. 136-60; Plut. adv. Colo. 20, p. 1118 d;
U. 314. The last is an important passage. Epicurus, as quoted there, ascribes
the emotions of love and hatred to the ‘nameless element’, and Brieger has
used this as an argument for its identification with the azimus. This is quite
unnecessary : these emotions do of course originate from the ‘fourth nature’
in the mind and Epicurus was here thinking of the activities of the mind
only and not those of pure sensation : see Appendix V.

432 EPICURUS {

caused the sensation, and a mental attitude towards that
body. At times the emotion is so strong, as Lucretius tells
us,! that it is transferred back again to the spirit-particles
and through them to the body, so that all the frame seems
to take its part in the emotion which started in the breast:
‘when the understanding is stirred by some stronger fear,
we see that the whole soul feels with it throughout the limbs,
and then sweat and pallor break out over all the body, and
the tongue is crippled and the voice is choked, the eyes grow
misty, the ears ring, the limbs give way beneath us, and
sndeed we often see men fall down through the terror in
their mind’. Nor need the original stimulus always come ~
from the bodily sensations: the cause of fear or joy, hatred or —
love, may equally well lie in a sense-perception, or even in
an inference of thought: based on sense-perception. The
important point is that these emotions of the mind are not
merely arbitrary or spontaneous; but, just as in all its other
activities, the original motive cause is derived in one form
or another from sensation: we do not rejoice or grieve or
fear or love or hate without an ultimate external cause.’
Once again the mental activity is dependent on the sensory
stimulus.

Closely analogous to the genesis of emotion is a still more —
important function of the mind, the act of will: here again
the movement of the mind is the determining factor and the
motive power, but it acts on the sensory stimulus. The pro-
cess is admirably described by Lucretius,’ who takes the
example of a determination on our part to walk:

First of all idols of walking? fall upon our mind, and strike the mind. ~
‘Then comes the will; for indeed no one begins to do anything, ere the
mind has seen beforehand what it will do, and inasmuch as it sees this
beforehand, an image of the thing is formed. And so, when the mind

r iii, 152-8.

2 There is, I admit, no authority for this account of the stimulation of the
emotions, but it is surely demanded both, as Epicurus would argue, by our
experience, and by the analogy of the other mental functions of which we

have an explicit account. 3 iv. 877-906.
+ 881 ‘simulacra meandi’: he should more strictly have said ‘images of us

walking’ or ‘of one walking’, meantis.

THE SOUL 433
stirs itself so that it wishes to start and step forward, it straightwa
strikes the force of the soul which is spread abroad in the whole body
throughout limbs and frame. . . . Then the soul goes on and strikes the

body, and so little by little the whole mass is thrust forward and set in
movement,

The parallelism is clear: the sensory stimulus is followed by
the movement of the mind; the mind communicates with
the spirit, and the spirit with the body: the only difference
is that in this case the result is not thought or emotion but
action. But one caution is necessary: the act of the mind
must not be thought of as a purely mechanical reaction: it
is not inevitably and immediately set moving by the sensible
image. For when the image has been perceived, ‘then comes
the act of will’: the mind is free and it may choose either to
act or not to act in answer to the ‘stimulus of sense. How
then can this be? It has been already seen" that the freedom
of the will is due ultimately to the ‘slight swerve’ of indi-
vidual atoms, but the process must be considered again
in the light of the analysis now made of the soul and its
workings: for it leads at once to the central question of all
Epicurus’ psychology.

In an earlier chapter? it was seen that the nature of the
atomic ‘swerve’, as the physical cause which led to the union
of atoms to form things, must be regarded as an exception
to the physical law of necessity (foedera naturai), a spon-
taneous but purely mechanical movement, which may be
made by any atom ‘at any moment and in any place’. It was
there also concluded that not only did Epicurus believe that
this atomic ‘swerve’ was the cause of free-will in man, but
that it was largely his strong desire to save the freedom of
the will in a world governed by the inevitable sequence of
cause and effect, which led him to place this element of
spontaneity at the basis of his physical system. Our present
business then is to discover on the lines of the preceding
analysis of the mind and its workings what is the effect of
the ‘swerve’ in the act of will. The act of will, no less than
the acts of sense-interpretation or of thought or of emotion,

* Chap. V, p. 319. 2 Chap. V, p. 320.

3307 Ff

434 EPICURUS :

is an atomic motion, initiated, as always, in the particles of
the ‘fourth nature’ and communicated to the other elements
of the mind. Now, setting aside the ‘swerve’, there are only
two causes which can start movement, weight, and an
external blow due to the contact with another body. This. ¥
is as true of the mind as of any other body, except that from
the circumstances of its nature and position in the body,
weight is not an effective cause of motion. It is the blow
from the atomic movements communicating the sense-
perception which start in the mind the movements of sense-
interpretation, it is the blow of the image or ‘general con-
cept’ which initiates the movements of thought, and the
blow of the movement communicating the passive sensation
of the body which sets going the movements of emotion:
in every case the mental movement is the inevitable reaction
to the stimulus of an external blow.’ But what is it in the
case of an act of will? Is the act of will a purely mechanical
reaction to the blow of the image of an action? No, for in
that case there would be no question of choice, the mind
would always react and we could never refuse to accept the
prompting of the image. Lucretius’? account makes this
clear. The image is presented to the mind and ‘beats upon
the mind’: but then follows a break in the mechanical chain: ©
‘then comes the act of will’; the mind chooses whether it
will act or no, and ‘moves itself’.3 Its movement which
results in action (or the refusal of action) is not the result
of the external blow, but of this internal power of movement,
which is due to the ‘swerve’: so Lucretiust unmistakably
sums up his earlier argument: ‘that the very mind feels not
some necessity within in doing all things, and is not con-
strained like a conquered thing to bear and suffer, this is
brought about by the tiny swerve of the first-beginnings in
no determined direction of place and at no determined
time’. [he movement of will is wholly initiated within th
mind and the mind in starting it is wholly self-determined.

Pee ee

Mott er Se mm

r Except possibly that of the émBod1 rijs Suavotas, but though that is an
active movement, it is not initiated without stimulus.
2 iv. 881 ff. 3 *‘sese commovet,’ 886. 4 ii. 289-93.

THE SOUL 435

Of what nature then is this self-initiated movement? In
the individual atom it is automatic, spontaneous, and wholly
undetermined in occasion or direction. Is the movement of
the mind in will merely the result of such a movement in
one of its component atoms, or even the sum of many such
movements? If so it too must be automatic and undeter-
mined. When the image of action is presented to the mind,
it is impossible to foretell in what way the movement will
occur, or even whether it will occur at all. In other words
the mind is not really self-determined, but is at the mercy
of wholly undetermined movements inside itself, and free-
will after all its careful preservation turns out to be nothing
better than chance. This is indeed the conclusion reached
by one modern critic,’ and it is not to be wondered at that
he is unwilling to believe that Epicurus himself can have
rested the claim for freewill on the atomic ‘swerve’. But the
solution of this difficulty? lies once again to the Epicurean
conception of a compound body (concilium, conciliatus). The
compound is more than a mere aggregate of independent
atoms: it is their union in a complex, which has a new
individuality of its own in which it may acquire qualities
and even powers which are not possessed by the individual
component atoms. The soul or mind3 is a compound body
of such peculiar constitution in the nature of its component
atoms and their motions among themselves, that it acquires
the power of sensation or consciousness. The automatic
swerve of the individual atoms then is translated in the com-
plex of the mind into a consciously spontaneous movement,
in other words into a movement of volition. ‘The complete
conception of the will according to Epicurus’, Giussani
argues in an admirable summary of his position, ‘comprises
two elements, a complex atomic movement which has the
characteristic of spontaneity, that is, is withdrawn from the
necessity of mechanical causation: and then the S€NSUS, OF
self-consciousness in virtue of which the will, illuminated
_by previous movements of sensation, thought, and emotion,
1 Brieger, op. cit., pe2t:

? See Giussani, Stud. Lucr. p. 140. _ 3 See p. 398.
Ff2

436 EPICURUS :

profits by the peculiar liberty or spontaneity of the atomic
motions, to direct or not to direct these in a direction seen
or selected.’ In other words the blind primitive ‘swerve’ of
the atom has become the conscious psychic act. It may be
that this account presses the Epicurean doctrine slightly
beyond the point to which the master had thought it out
for himself, but it is a direct deduction from undoubted Epi-
curean conceptions and is a satisfactory explanation of what
Epicurus meant: that he should have thought that the
freedom of the will was chance, and fought hard to maintain
‘t as chance and no more, is inconceivable.

And if the further question is asked how can a complex
of blind spontaneous movements of atoms become the con-
scjous act of volition of the mind, we are only thrown back
once more on the ultimate difficulty, which has made itself
felt all through this account of the soul. For indeed, if we
look back over it, we find that here and there crudities of
thought or incoherences in the connexion of ideas have been
noted,' yet as a whole the general theory is self-consistent
and complete; but at the back of it always lies the difficulty
which must beset Epicureanism or any other form of
materialism: can the movement of insensible particles pro-
duce or account for consciousness? That all forms of con-
sciousness have their physical counterpart, that sensation,
thought, will are accompanied by material movements of
parts of the physical organism is credible, and indeed scientific
investigation seems to be revealing this parallelism more
and more clearly to us. The more material thinkers of our
own time are content to say that consciousness ‘supervenes’ —
as an ‘epiphenomenon’ on the movements of matter: Ept-
curus went the step farther and was prepared to say that
consciousness, sensation, thought, and will are the move-
ments of the soul-atoms. Such an idea is to most modern
minds, as it was to the majority of philosophers in Epicurus’
day, unthinkable: between the one set of facts and the other
there is a great gulf fixed: nothing can bridge the gulf
that lies between the most elementary sensation and the

« Especially with regard to the theory of ‘idols’.

a

EHE SOUL 437

atomic vibrations which accompany and condition it. If we
accept a purely materialistic system in any form, its con-
clusions will have to be mutatis mutandis something like those
of Epicurus: but he has done nothing to bridge over the
abyss or to make the gulf seem less wide. Consequitur sensus,
inde voluntas fit, his pupil says glibly, but each time rouses
in us the same feeling that this is Just what can never be
understood.

And if it is impossible to accept his account of the nature
of the soul and its workings, so the inference from it cannot
be admitted. Ifthe soul is a mere atomic complex, a ‘body’,
then no doubt like the body it perishes and cannot have any
sort of existence after death. But if that account be unsatis-
factory, then the problem of survival remains open: the soul
may or may not survive bodily death, but the question cannot
be decided on the basis of a purely material analysis.

It is impossible in dealing with a material system to
refrain from pointing out its fundamental weakness, but in
an attempt to estimate Epicurus as a thinker, it is less
profitable to quarrel with his base-principles than to think
of the superstructure he has built upon them. And once
again in examining the account of the soul, for all its weak-
nesses, we are conscious. of the workings of a great mind,
capable of grasping alike broad ideas and minute details of
elaboration. We are certainly not left with the picture of
a moral teacher, who merely patched together any kind of
physics and metaphysics to back up his ethical preaching.

IX
THE GODS—THEOLOGY AND RELIGION

NE of the earliest and most constant accusations —

against the Epicureans was that of atheism. Plutarch," f
though he knows the Epicurean doctrine, yet charges its
followers with overthrowing religion, which is the first —
ordinance of any civilized state’: Cicero,” though to him
we owe the most explicit exposition we possess of the Epi-
curean theology, takes up a similar position, and his Epi-
curean contemporary Philodemus had to devote a treatise,
of which we possess valuable fragments, to the refutation
of the charge. The tradition was continuous through the
Middle Ages and even after the Renaissance it brought

Gassendi, who revived Epicurus’ physical doctrines, into
disrepute and danger, it is glibly repeated against the
Atomists and Epicurus in a well-known passage of Bacon.4
Its foundation is of course obvious enough: as the very first
condition of the moral life Epicurus insists on the belief
that the gods have no part in the government of the world:
‘the blessed and immortal nature knows no trouble itself
nor causes trouble to any other, so that it is never constrained
by anger or favour’.s For him, as for Democritus before
him, the traditional theology was but ‘myth’,® and the whole
ceremonial of prayer and worship valueless,’ in so far as it
was a definite attempt to influence divine beings to alter the
course of mundane events. Yet Epicurus was very far from.
denying either the existence of the gods or the value of
religion as he himself conceived it: ‘for gods there are, since
the knowledge of them is by clear vision (évapyys).* But they
are not such as the many believe them to be. And the

t adv. Colot. 31.

2 de Nat. Deor.i, especially cc. 43, 44.

3 mept eboefelas, for the fragments see Gomperz, Herculanische Studien,
part li. 4 Essays, xvi. 5 K.A.1.

6 § mept Oedv pd0os, Ep. ili, § 134, and elsewhere.

7 Lucr. v. 1198 ff. ; 8 Ep. iii, § 123.

ay

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 439

impious man is not he who denies the gods of the many, but
he who attaches to the gods the beliefs of the many’. It is
probable that Epicurus was at pains to think out with great
care his conception of the nature of the divine beings and
the mode of their existence, and both practised himself and
urged upon his followers a reasoned ‘piety’ which he believed
to have the highest value in human life. But it unfortunately
happens that at this most important point in the system our
normal sources of information fail: none of the Letters give
any real help towards the reconstruction of the Epicurean
theology, and Lucretius after promising to deal fully with
the whole subject has failed to do so except in very brief
references. Weare thrown back on less trustworthy authori-
ties, whose statements are obscure and in some cases corrupt,
so that it is very difficult to put together anything like a
certain account of the nature of the gods. Modern critics
have in consequence supported very different hypotheses,
and it will therefore be necessary later on to discuss the
evidence at some length. Meanwhile in the earlier stages
there is comparatively safe ground.

Epicurus started from the universal belief of mankind in
the existence of gods: ‘for he saw in the first place that gods
exist, because nature herself had implanted a conception of
them in the minds of all men . . . and that on which all men
are by nature agreed, must of necessity be true. We must
therefore acknowledge that there are gods’.» To what then
is this universal consensus due? It is due to two causes, one
of which is a valid proof of the truth of the belief, the other
a false and valueless inference. In the first place} men’s
minds are constantly visited, especially when they are undis-

rv, $55.

2 Cic. de Nat. Deor.i. 16. 43, 44; U. 3523 cf. Lucr. v. 1161 ff.

3 Lucr. v. 1169-82: cf. Sext. Emp. adv. Math. ix. 25; U. 353 ’Etixoupos
€x TOV Kata Urvous davracidy olerar Tods dvOpdsrovs evvovay eomraxevar
Geoé, and similarly, ix. 42. So also Cic. de Nat. Deor. i. 19. 49 ‘eam
esse vim et naturam deorum ut... non sensu sed mente cernatur’, with which
we may compare Aet. i. 7. 34; U. 355 ’Emixoupos avOpwroeideis ev Tovs
Geovs, Ady d€ TdvTas Dewpynrods dia TH AeTrToMEpevay THs TOV eiScéAwY
dvoews.

440 EPICURUS

tracted in sleep, by images of beautiful and powerful beings,
and these images the mind grasps by an ‘act of apprehen-
sion’ (émBod} ris Suavolas). Now such images, though neces-
sarily true to the ‘idols’ which produce them, are not always
a guarantee of the existence of a corresponding external
object: for the ‘idols’ themselves may be produced by the
mere chance combination of other single ‘idols’ or even of
independent atoms (overdoes). And so in Cicero’s dialogue,
Cotta the Academic, who appears as the critic of Epicu-
reanism, asks pertinently enough:’ ‘what difference is there
whether we have a vision of a god or of a hippocentaur?’
Epicurus’ answer would have been that the frequency and
universality of the visions of the gods was cogent proof of an
objective reality corresponding to them: the sporadic vision
of an individual may be due to a spontaneously formed ‘idol’,
but a vision that comes constantly to all men cannot be
produced by chance on separate occasions, but must be
caused by ‘idols’ flowing from a concrete reality. The images
in fact constituted, as Epicurus3 himself says, “knowledge
by clear vision’ (evapyijs yraars), or as Cicero* puts the case
even more strongly, the ‘idols’ came so frequently to the
minds of all men that they had formed an ‘anticipation’ or
‘general concept’ (apdAnyus) of divine beings. For a double
reason then, in accordance with the Epicurean principles,
these images of the gods are true, firstly because they are
grasped by an ‘apprehension of the mind’, and secondly
because they constitute an ‘anticipation’, which is itself a
criterion of truth: or to put it in untechnical language, the

11. 38. 106,

2 Cf. D.L. x. 32 Kal 70 ra eraroOrjpara 8° ddeoravar micTooTaL THY TOV
alcOjncewv aAnbevay, and see Chap. II, p. 240, n. 6.

3 Ep. mie§,123..,

4 de Nat. Deor. i. 16. 43 ‘quae est enim gens aut quod genus hominum,
quod non habeat sine doctrina anticipationem quandam deorum? quam appellat
mpoAnyuv Epicurus—and similarly later, 17. 44 ‘intellegi necesse est esse
deos, quoniam insitas eorum vel potius innatas cognitiones habemus’, where
he does not mean what we should call an ‘innate’ conception, but one which
nature by successive visions has implanted in us: see Giussani, Stud. Lucr.
p- 229, and Mayor’s note on the passage. :

ee eee ee

a“,

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 441

clearness and the universality of the visions attest a reality
to which they correspond. It is certain then that gods exist.
But besides these direct visions, there is another reason
which leads the majority of mankind to a belief in the
existence of the gods, which so far from being accepted, must
at all costs be fought against, for it is the greatest enemy of
that peace of mind (arapagia) which is at once the aim and
the condition of the moral life. Men when they see the
marvels of earth and sky and come to know the majesty of
the heavenly bodies and the orderliness of their movements,
are apt either to suppose that sun, moon, and stars are them.
selves divine beings, or that the world was created and is
governed by the will of the gods.? For neither of these beliefs
is there any foundation: the heavenly bodies are in fact
‘so far sundered from divine power ... that they are thought
rather to be able to afford us the concept of what is far re-
moved from vital motion and sense’,3 and the world, as the
whole of Epicurus’ physical theory proves, is governed by
the laws of nature, the natural processes of change which
arise directly from the atomic motions of its component
parts. These popular ideas are indeed merely the false infer-
ences of opinion, making the unjustifiable combination of
the true images of the gods which we receive in our mind
with the workings of the external world, They are ‘not
conceptions derived from sensation (mpodnjibes), but false sup-
positions (doArpbers pevdeis)’,4 and it is the business of the
philosopher to root them out of life altogether.5 We do
indeed know with certainty of the existence of the gods,
but not through this false inference from phenomena.
Thus far all accounts of the Epicurean theology agree,
but the difficulties begin when the inevitable question is
asked, whence come these subtle images into the mind,
and of what nature are the bodies which throw them off, if
such there be? Singularly divergent answers have been
given to this question, the difference turning for the most
* Lucr. v. 114 ff.: cf. Plut. adv. Color. 27eIl23 a.

2 Lucr. v. 1183 ff. 3, Luer. v.. 122—5. + Ep. ii. § 124.
5 Epicurus is here opposing Stoic doctrine quite as much as popular belief.

442 EPICURUS

part on the interpretation of the famous passage in Cicero"
taken in conjunction with a statement of a scholiast? on the
Tenth Book of Diogenes Laertius, and illustrated by certain
fragments of Philodemus.} It will be necessary to examine
this evidence in some detail, but first it will be well to con-
sider what was Epicurus’ starting-point and what was re-
quired of his theology by the general principles of his system.

The first question one naturally asks in examining a
difficult problem in Epicurus’ system is what was his in-
heritance from Democritus. Though many placest—often
fundamental places—in his system have been noticed where
Epicurus broke away from Democritus, yet it is clear that
in general the Atomists supplied his starting-point. The
views of Democritus about the gods are unfortunately, as
has been seen, not easy to recover,> but it may safely be
stated that besides a general vague theism which caused him
to recognize ‘elements of mind’ in the universe, he held that
the whole air was full of ‘images’ or ‘idols’, derived apparently
from a ‘divine essence’ or ‘existence’. These images, which
visited man and animals, Democritus appears to have re-
garded as themselves living beings—gods or daemons—
with human form, but very large and capable of doing men
good or harm: further, though they were not immortal, they
were ‘hard to destroy’ and therefore lived long.

Some features in this account we should expect to find
reproduced by Epicurus, and if he made deviations from it
there should be reasons in other parts of his system. And
there are indeed certain undisputed points of resemblance —
in Epicurus’ account, enough at least to give us reason to ©
think that Democritus’ theory was, as usual, his basis. Thus,
it is obvious both from Cicero and from Lucretius that the
‘images’ played a large part in Epicurus’ conception.

t Cic. de Nat. Deor.i. 19. 49, 5°. 2 Schol. to K.d. i.

3 See Gomperz, Herculanische Studien, pp. 93-151.

4 Such, for instance, as the introduction of the ‘swerve’ to account for the
meeting of the atoms, or the simplification of the processes of hearing and
sight by the omission of the dzror¥mwois in the air.

s See Part I, Chap. III, § 7, where the authority for the views here stated
is given in the foot-notes.

eal

* 2

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 443

Further, there can be no doubt that he conceived of the gods
in human form, for this is expressly stated by the scholiast!
on Diogenes and repeated by Aetius:* Lucretius 3 adds that
they were, as Democritus had conceived them, ‘of wondrous
bulk of body’. But there were also points in Democritus’
account which Epicurus could not accept. His view that
the gods were wholly unconcerned with the affairs of this
world made it impossible for him to admit that they existed
within the limits of the world or that they could directly
affect men for good or evil: for the same reason the pan-
theistic notion of the ‘elements of mind’ in the universe must
be excluded. Similarly his desires that the gods should
be the perfect example of happiness—the ethical ideal for
men—made it necessary that they should be immortal: for
perfect happiness is precluded by a fear or expectation of
death. Lastly, the idea of ‘images’ or ‘idols’ which were
themselves living beings would be inconsistent with the
conceptions of the theory of vision.6 In these respects
changes would be expected in Epicurus’ view. He must
place his gods somewhere outside the world and let them
have no communication with it, except that they must be
cognizable by men: they must be immortal and they must
have an existence more real than that of mere ‘idols’. It will
be seen that Epicurus’ account satisfied these conditions,
but the crux of his problem lay in the necessity for conceiving
of the gods as a concrete reality of atomic construction,
capable of sending off perceptible ‘idols’, and yet not subject
to dissolution.

The passage in Cicero must now be considered in detail.7
It is very obscure and there is good reason to suppose, as
most commentators agree, that though he is clearly following

2 Le, see pe44g6gn. 1:

21.7. 343 U. 355 "Emixoupos avOpwroedets pev mdvras Tods Beovs.

3° Ve ELT ES

4 See W. Scott, Fournal of Philology, xii. 230; and Giussani, Stud. Luecr.,
p- 229. 5 See below, p. 469.

6 Hirzel does not apparently think so: see Appendix VI.

7 A long technical discussion seems inevitable at this point, but a reader
who wishes only to know its upshot may pass to p- 466.

444 EPICURUS

an Epicurean text, he did not fully understand it and has
contented himself with a rather unintelligent word-for-word
translation. It must be worked out by comparison first with
some very valuable repetitions in the scornful criticisms
made later on in Cicero’s dialogue by the Academic opponent
Cotta, then with the scholium in Diogenes Laertius, and
lastly with various fragments of Philodemus which have been
recovered from the Herculanean rolls, and especially with
those of the Third Book ‘On the Gods’.* It is, however,
necessary to be cautious, for there is reason to believe that
Philodemus—from whom Cicero probably derived his in-
formation—had gone beyond the tradition of Epicurus him-
self and worked out the notion of the constitution of the
gods on his own lines. It would indeed be possible to regard
the whole Ciceronian doctrine as due to later Epicurean
writers, but that the scholiast appears to attribute a similar
idea to Epicurus himself.

After the general statements? already noticed of the uni-
versality of the ‘anticipation’ of the gods in the minds of men
and of their eternal happiness and their anthropomorphic
form the Epicurean Velleius in Cicero’s dialogue proceeds
to expound their physical constitution (forma). His first
statement is quite general: ‘the form (species) of the gods
is not body, but a kind of body (quasi corpus), it has not blood,
but a kind of blood’. This rather mysterious utterance is
important as it prepares us for the description of some form
of existence which is akin to that of the normal atomic com-

x These have been edited by H. Diels in Abhandlungen der Kon. Preuss. ©

Akad., 1916, Parts 4 and 6.

2 'The interpretation here given follows in the main the solution originally |

put forward by Lachelier (Revue de Philologie, 1877, pp. 264 ff.), and inde-
pendently elaborated by W. Scott (Fournal of Philology, xii. 212 ff.) and
Giussani (Stud. Lucr., p. 229), but with some modifications due to the theory
of Schémann (Opuscula, iv. 336-59) and of R. Philippson (Hermes, li, 1916,
pp. 568-608). I have also derived much assistance from Diels’s edition of
the zrepl ris Tv Oedv dywyfs fragments mentioned in the previous note.
Philippson’s theory stands apart from the others in his whole conception of
the passages in the Scholiast and in Cicero, and I have therefore thought it
better to deal with it independently in Appendix VI.

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 445

pound, yet different from it, something which may apparently
be more easily described as ‘form’ than as ‘body’. Then
follows the detailed description’ which must provisionally
be translated as literally as may be: ‘Epicurus teaches that
the power and nature of the gods is of such a kind that in
the first place it is perceived not by the senses but by the
mind: it has not solidity,? so to speak, or numerical identity,
like those things which on account of their compactness he
calls “‘solids” ;3 it is perceived rather by images apprehended
by similarity and “passing”, since infinite forms (or
possibly with Brieger, “‘an infinite series”) of most similar
images arise from innumerable atoms and stream to the
gods: our mind and intelligence straining fixedly with the
highest pleasure towards those images comes to understand
what is the blessed and eternal nature.’ With this may be
set in comparison at once the statement of the scholiast on
the first of the Principal Doctrines, which purports to record
a saying of Epicurus himself and therefore, if correct, would
represent an older tradition than Cicero’s account: ‘Epicurus
says elsewhere that the gods are perceptible by thought, some

* Cic. N. D.i. 19. 49 ‘Epicurus . . . docet eam esse vim et naturam deorum
ut primum non sensu sed mente cernatur (cernantur Schémann), nec soliditate
quadam nec ad numerum, ut ea quae ille Propter firmitatem orepéuwa ap-
pellat, sed imaginibus similitudine et transitione perceptis, cum infinita
simillimarum imaginum species (series Brieger) ex innumerabilibus individuis
exsistat et ad deos (eos codd. nonnulli: nos Lambinus) adfluat, cum (tum
codd. duo) maximis voluptatibus in eas imagines mentem intentam infixamque
nostram intelligentiam capere quae sit et beata natura et aeterna’. The
punctuation is uncertain and is varied by the editors according to their general
view of the meaning.

* That soliditate guadam is not to be construed with cernatur, but regarded
as a descriptive ablative with eam esse vim et naturam is proved by the parallel
passage, 1. 37, 105 ‘sic enim dicebas speciem dei percipi cogitatione non sensu,
nec esse in ea ullam soliditatem, neque eandem ad numerum permanere,
eamque esse eius visionem ut similitudine et transitione cernatur, neque
deficiat unquam ex infinitis corporibus similium accessio’.

3 Again the parallel passage quoted in the previous note shows that the
ablative imaginibus . . . perceptis is to be construed with cernatur, and not as
a substantive description of the form of the gods.

4 The word ¢ransitione must be translated literally if unintelligently for
the moment: see below, p. 447.

446 EPICURUS

of them existing in numerical identity, some in likeness of
form owing to the constant streaming up of similar “idols”
which are perfected atthe same spot: they are of human form.’

The preliminary statement that the nature of the gods is
perceived not by the senses but by the mind accords with
what has already been seen;? the gods are never seen by the
eyes as the result of an ‘image’ formed by a succession of
Gdols’, but by the mind which is visited by a series of single
‘idols’ which owing to its own subtlety it is able to apprehend.
The same idea is conveyed by the scholiast’s statement that
the gods are ‘perceptible by thought’: it is a vague phrase,
traditional in the philosophers, and used by Epicurus3 in
reference to the minima of time in which the atoms perform
their tiny trajects: its implication is that the gods are to be
ranked among the ‘unseen things’ (45yAa). The same idea
is brought out by Lucretius‘ in one of the few passages where
he has dealt with the nature of the gods: ‘the fine nature of
the gods, far sundered from our senses, is scarcely seen by
the understanding of the mind’. The gods then cannot be
known by sense, but only by ‘mental apprehension’ (émBody
vfs Svavolas), and it is worth noticing how strongly this idea
is emphasized by the phrase at the end, ‘our mind and
intelligence straining fixedly’: this is exactly the notion of
the ‘attention of the mind’, and it will be remembered that

1 Ad K.A.i, D.L. x, § 139 &v dAdots 5€ dnot Tovs Veods Adyw Oewpyrovs,
ods pev Kar’ dpiOpov tpeot@ras, ods d€ kata Omoeiderav €k THS ouvexovs
emippicews TOV polwy «ldwAwv emt TO aro arroreTeeopevw, avOpw-

moeLoets.
ots pev ... 085 Sé] od pev... cis 5€ Gassendi: od pev ... yoworods de
Schimann: ob pev... olovs S¢ Bignone dmorereAcopévwv] amorerede-

apevovs Kiihn.

2 See Chap. VIII, pp. 414-17.

3 Ep. i, § 62 Kara tods Adyw Bewpnrovs xpovous, cf. § 47 b: see Chap. Ve
p-329- R. Philippson (Hermes, 191 6), who lays great stress on the inferences of
reason as to the gods, and holds the view that Adyos in Epicurus means ‘reason’
in the strict sense (see Chap. VIII, p. 423, n. 3), takes the phrase to mean ‘cog-
nivale by reason’. But Pewpyrovs would be strange in this sense: see Appen-—
dix Vi;

4 v.148-9  tenvis enim natura deum longeque remota

sensibus ab nostris animi vix mente videtur.

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 447

it was largely to secure the reality of this direct cognizance
of the gods that Epicurus’ followers' raised the act of
‘mental apprehension’ to the level of a criterion of truth.

It will be convenient for the moment to pass over the
next clause and come to that in which Cicero continues the
explanation of the means by which the ‘power and nature
of the gods’ is perceived by ‘images apprehended by simi-
larity and by passing’.? This is clearly a further description of
the process of cognition. The ‘images’ will be the single
‘idols’ which enter the mind: these are apprehended accord-
ing to Cicero ‘by sirhilarity and passing’: what is the meaning
of this strange phrase? The intention, no doubt, is to dis-
tinguish the mode by which direct knowledge of the gods
is obtained on the one hand from normal sense-perception,
on the other from other cases of ‘mind-perception’. In sense-
perception there is a succession of ‘idols’ which forms an
‘image’, no one ‘idol’ being perceived by itself, in ‘mind-
perception’3 sometimes, as in the vision of a centaur or
Scylla, a single ‘idol’ is perceived and nothing more, some-

_ times, as in the visions of sleep, a succession of single ‘idols’
separately perceived gives a shifting picture of a moving
body. In the apprehension of the gods by the mind it is
again a succession of single ‘idols’ which is perceived, but
by their ‘similarity’ they give the impression not of a moving
and changing object, but of a permanent ‘form’: as Lucre_
tius* puts it with accuracy and brevity, ‘their images came
in constant stream and the form remained unchanged’,
What of the other word (sransitione) which for the moment
has been translated ‘by passing’? There are two possibilities

* D.L. x. 31: see Chap. II, p. 251; Chap. VIII, pe duy,

? Philippson (l.c.) has shown the importance of trying to retranslate
Cicero’s phrases into the Greek from which he borrowed them. I take it
that this phrase ran GAAd eiSaAos Swoudryte Kal... KatetAnppevors, the
missing word being either peraBdoes or darepBdcer: see the subsequent dis-
cussion. For Philippson’s own view that the phrase was petaBacer Kal?
opmodrynra see Appendix VI.

3 See Chap. VIII, p. 414.

4 v. 1175-6 semper eorum
suppeditabatur facies et forma manebat.

448 EPICURUS

as to its meaning. It may, as Scott’ and Giussani? interpret
it, represent the ‘flux’ or ‘succession’ in which the single
‘idols’ come to the mind: the Greek word in Cicero’s original
would then probably be perdBaois,3 which is used by Epi-
curus# in the section concerning the minimae partes of the
atom for the process of ‘passing’ or ‘progression’ from one
part of a thing to another, a sense quite consonant with that
required here. In that case the whole phrase may be trans-

lated ‘by images apprehended by their similarity and suc-

cession’, or if we may suppose a hendiadys, ‘apprehended by
the succession of similars’.5 The meaning then will be that
the nature of the gods is perceived by means of ‘images’,

i.e. forms apprehended by the similarity of the successive
single ‘idols’. The process is not unlike both that of normal

sense-perception, except that the ‘idols’ perceived separately
are consciously put together into an ‘image’ by the mind,
and that of the formation of a ‘concept’ (apéAnyus), except
that there the ‘images’ combined are not all exactly alike,
here the ‘idols’ are, so that they naturally fall into a single —
image. But it is also possible that sransitio has a quite dif-

ferent sense. In Philodemus’” treatise ‘On the gods’ there is
a passage in which he is apparently discussing the means by

7

4

a

——_

are ee me anny

x Op. cit., p. 219. 2 hes, pueze.

3 Scott suggests adpeva, which is less probable.

4 Ep. i, § 56 rv perdBaow ...«is dzespov: cf. § 58 7d Tas petaBacers
éyov : and see Chap. III, pp. 285-7.

s Scott and Giussani, following Mayor, would like to take the meaning to
be ‘by the perception of a train of similar images’. Philippson rightly objects
that this is not grammatically possible; Scott himself perceives this and sup-
poses that Cicero not understanding his original purposely used a vague phrase.
But it is surely possible to construe the words as they stand. Philippson agrees
that zransitione stands for weraBdoes, but interprets it quite differently.

6 This is exactly expressed in Cic. N. D. i. 39. 109 ‘fluentium frequenter
transitio fit visionum, ut e multis una videatur’.

7 col. g. 20: see Diels, l.c., Part 6, p. 28 kal kava [ry]v bx[€p]Balow
od]S€ 7H peragd <diao>rdcet [2p<oo>arrodoréov Tas o[v]uAoKds, which
Diels translates ‘und bei dem Uberspringen (der géttlichen Bilder von den
Intermundien zu uns) darf man nicht auch noch dem Zwischenraum die
Verflechtung (der Bilder) zuschreiben’. Cf. also, f. 118 (Gomperz, p. 1343
Diels, l.c., p. 30 €& direpBd[cews] TOV perakv.

’ a

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 449

which the ‘idols’ of the gods can pass from their remote
abodes in the intermundia to the human mind: if they have
to pass first through great tracts of empty space and then
through the clash and turmoil of the atomic world, they
would be particularly liable to destruction or distortion. He
therefore supposes that they have the power of ‘passing over’
(drépBacis) intervening space. It is just possible that transition
here may represent this idea, but less probable because the
notion combines far less well with similitudine and there
- being no trace of it elsewhere, it looks as if both the problem
and the solution were not traditional but had been raised by
Philodemus himself ; 1t would involve a certain arbitrariness,
which is not likely to be due to Epicurus.

Having thus completed provisionally the account of the
way in which the mind’s cognition of the gods is accom-
plished, it is possible to go back to the intervening clause:
the nature of the gods ‘has not solidity, so to speak, or
numerical identity, like those things which on account of
their compactness he calls “solids” ®2 The general sense is
clear: the constitution of the bodies of the gods is not that
of the ordinary objects of sense-perception, which are solid
and have each of them a permanent material individuality.
Just as the method of their cognition is different, so also
is their physical constitution. But the detail of the descrip-
tion requires further consideration. In the first place ‘there
is not in it any solidity’,3 as Cotta says more explicitly in his
reply; the body of the gods has not the ‘compactness’
(firmitas) of the solid bodies of sense-perception. So Lucre-
tiust in speaking of the abodes of the gods says that they
are ‘fine in texture (tenues) even as are their bodies’. But
a more definite conception of the Epicurean idea may be
obtained from Cicero’s sarcastic comments: ‘the gods’,5 he

* See below, p. 467.

2 This clause might tentatively be reconstructed in Greek od OTEpEeoTHTa.
Twa éxovoay odd Kar’ apiOuov ideordcar, Kabdmep éxeiva & Sid rH
muKvoTnTa oTepéuria dvoudter.

3 ‘nec esse in ea ullam soliditatem’, Cic. N. D. i. 37. 105.

4V. 154.

5 N. D. ii. 23. $9 ‘Epicurus monogrammos deos et nihil agentes commen-

3397 Gg

450 EPICURUS

says in ridicule, are ‘mere outlines’, they are ‘like men at
least in their outer lines’.! This appears to mean that the gods
exist as an outline or form without the depth or solidity
which characterizes solid objects: the nearest parallel would
perhaps be that of the “hollow forms’? of the ‘idols’, the mere —
external films of things, which possess no interior structure —
or solidness. Secondly, the gods do not exist as ‘numerical i
‘dentities’. What is the meaning of this phrase and to what
is it opposed? It may safely be assumed that the words
nec ad numerum are a translation of ot8é Kar’ dpuipov (the
recurrence of the expression in the Diogenes scholiast
guarantees this in spite of the difficulties which it raises), and
that Epicurus was here following Aristotle who distin-
guished between things? which have a unity by way of
numerical identity (xar’ dpiudv) and those which are one ‘by
way of identity of form’ (xa7’ elSos). On the one hand there
are things whose matter is permanent, e.g. a rock or any
solid body (arepéurov), and on the other things whose com-
ponent matter is always changing, but whose form remains
constant, e.g. a flame, or a river, or a waterfall. The water
composing the fall is shifting from instant to instant, but
the whole retains an identity of form and by virtue of that
identity remains the same fall. This seems exactly the idea

SRD Ge

tus est’, which is borne out by Dionysius Eus. Praep. Ev. xiv. 27, p- 783°
nevis GvuTroaTdtwv Oedv Teparevodpevos elwypadnce oxias,U., p. 234 0.3
R. Philippson (l.c., p. 596, n. 1) would take monogrammos in the sense which
st bears in Lucilius (Nom. 37. 11) of ‘a thin man’, a ‘skeleton’, as we might
say. But the parallel passages in N. D. quoted below seem to show unmistak-
ably that Cicero was using the literal meaning. :
t Cic. N.D.i. 44. 123 ‘neque enim tam desipiens fuisset ut homunculi
similem deum fingeret, liniamentis dumtaxat extremis, non habitu solido’ ; cf.
27, 75 ‘cedo mihi istorum adumbratorum deorum liniamenta atque formas’5
and 35, 98 ‘deum tamen nosse te dicis, modo liniamenta maneant’. U.,
p- 234.n. 2 Cf. Chap. VIII, p. 408.
"3 Metaphys. A. 6. 1016b 32 74. pev kar’ dpiBpov eorw év, 7d. 6€ Kat €ld
.. 6piud ev dv % Brn pla, cider S° dv 6 Aéyos ets: cf. ibid. I. 2.10544 34
and other passages collected by Scott, p. 216. It is true that this distinction is
not so marked in the atomic physics, for there even the hardest oTEpepviov
is continually changing its matter by accretion and loss, but comparatively
speaking the difference still holds good. j

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 451

which the scholiast expresses when he says that (some of)
the gods exist ‘in likeness of form’ (xard opoeiSevav), The
gods are not like the solids of sens€-perception which
have a more or less permanent material identity, but their
identity is secured, like that of the waterfall, by permanence
of form though with a shifting material. This idea corre-
sponds very well with that of the absence of solidity in the
body of the gods: the permanent element in them is their
form.

Why, if this account be true, did Epicurus adopt so
singular a conception of the nature of the gods? It is obvious

Now this description might be applied to the waterfall: but
the waterfall, though its identity is ‘formal’, yet ultimately
comes to an end, when the supply of water gives out. How
then does Epicurus secure his gods from a similar failure
of material? This can only be done if it can be made certain
that the supply of appropriate material is inexhaustible. This
Epicurus believed that he had assured by placing the abode
of the gods in the intermundia,* the interspaces between the

ErLcstpy 214,

? Hipp. Philos. 22. 3, p. 672; U. 3593 Cic. de Div. ii. 17. 40: see below,
p- 467.

Gg2

452 EPICURUS

worlds. Within any one of the worlds the amount of material
is limited: there is only a certain number of atoms of any
given kind able to form and maintain any particular object
or class of objects. But in the ‘interspaces’ there is no such
limitation, but atoms of all shapes are everlastingly streaming
and moving in all directions throughout the universe and —
the matter requisite for the constitution of the divine form i
will for ever be at hand, coming from ‘innumerable atoms’? ~
(ex innumerabilibus individuis). This contention Epicurus ©
supports,” as will be seen later by the application of his —
principle of ‘equilibrium’ (‘covowia): if within the worlds

the forces of destruction prevail, then in the intermundia the —
forces of creation and preservation must prevail. In short,
the gods are immortal because they are ‘identities in form’ —
with the certainty of an everlasting supply of matter to —
constitute that form.
Lucretius in an interesting passage which is twice re-~
peated in the poem,’ enumerates various conditions which |
may secure eternity. Though he is not thinking of the gods,
but is testing the claims first of the human soul and secondly
of our world to immortality, it is a useful experiment to
apply his test to the present conception of the gods. Things
are immortal, he says, either because their body is absolutely
solid and can repel all blows, like the atoms, or because it
cannot suffer at all from blows, like the void, or because
there is no space outside it into which matter can recede
from it, as is the case with the universe, the sum total of
atoms and void. If the immortality of the gods is to be
accounted for under any of these heads, it is clear that itt,
must be the second: it resembles the void in not feeling
blows, not because blows do not come to it, but because the
continual arrival of external atoms which cause the blows is
itself the very condition of the permanence of existence: the
‘atoms of the right kind are taken up to form the momen-
tary image, those of other kinds pass through the fine texture
without hurt. The divine being would thus be immortal
orice Cic. N. D.3. 19g. 49. 2 pp. 461 ff.
3 iii. 806-183 v. 351-63.

7)

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 453

for the very reasons for which Lucretius? denies immortality
to the soul, ‘because things harmful to its life come not at
all, or because such as come in some way depart defeated
before it can feel what harm they do’.

But this is not a very satisfactory result and there is some
evidence to show that Epicurus conceived of a fourth class
of immortal beings, which he described as ‘similarities’
(Cuotdrnres). In a remarkable passage of Aetius,? after stating

picurus’ view that the gods were immortal and perceptible
by the mind, the writer continues: ‘the same philosopher
says elsewhere that there are four existences immortal in
their kinds, namely, the atoms, the void, the universe, the
“similarities” ’, Now, if, as seems clear, the bodies of the
gods are indicated under the last head, there is here a new
reason for supposing their indestructibility. The notion is
supported by a passage in Philodemus,3 which undoubtedly
refers to the gods: ‘It is possible for beings constituted by
a “similarity” to have perfect happiness for ever, since bodies
with permanent identity (évdrnres) may be produced by

t ii. 821-3.

* Aet.i. 7. 34 (=Plut. Plac.i.7. 153 Stob. Ec/. ii. 29) ’Emixoupos dv-
Gpwroedeis wev mdvras rods beovs, Adyw 5€ mdvras Bewpyntods Sid
THY Aerropépevay TAs tev €iScAwv dvocws. 6 § adrés dAXas (dAdws,
Gassendi, Scott, Giussani, after some manuscripts) réocapas pvoeis Kara,
yevos adOdprous rdoSe, ra dropa, 76 Kevdv, 70 dzrewpov, Tas Opmovornras:
adrat d€ A€yovrar dpovopepera Kat arowxeia. Bignone (Bollettino di Fil.
Class. xvii, 1910-11, pp. 135 ff.) argues for the retention of the reading
@Mas and maintains that the opovdrnres are ‘species’, which are ‘uguaglianze
formali degli atomi delle diverse forme’, under which the gods might be sub-
sumed. But this contention seems to me forced and I prefer to follow most
Tecent critics in reading d\Aws. In either case the general argument will not
be affected, as the gods will be an example of dyodrnrtes, if not the only
example. =

3 epi edoeB, col. 83 (Gomperz, Herc. Stud., p. 110) Svvarau yap ex
Tis opoidtntos bmdpxovar (émdpyovca, Gomperz) Stcucdveov Exew THY
TeXrelav evdaipoviar, erevdirrep ody Arrov ex Tav adbrav n TOV Spoiwy
arToxeiwy evoTntes amroTeAciabat (Gomperz tmoreXciobar pap.) Svvavrat.
Bignone (l.c., p. 136, n.2) has shown that it is unnecessary to read jdpyovaa.
It is unnecessary to transpose adrav and dpoiwy (Scott, p. 232) or to read
HaAAov for #rrov (R. Philippson, op. cit., p. §92, n. 1): the emphasis of
a comparison often falls on the second member.

454 EPICURUS

elements which are alike just as much as by those which are
the same.’ Endeavours' have been made to find support for
this idea in other passages of Philodemus, but the text is so
corrupt that it is hardly safe to rely on possible restorations.
Still less, as will be seen,? can support be derived from the
Diogenes scholiast or the main passage in the de Natura —
Decorum. But it is clear that Epicurus had the notion of
a ‘unity of similars’ and that he almost certainly so regarded
the gods. A ‘unity of similars’ is set in opposition to a ‘unity
of the same’, of which the sole example is the atom, composed
of inseparable parts which can never be removed or altered,
and therefore immortal. All the normal objects of sense-—
perception are unities of shifting material of many kinds,
and it is just the existence of alien matter in them which —
causes decay and ultimate destruction. The gods too are
constituted of shifting matter, but the matter is always
‘similar’ and there never enters into their composition the
alien and fatal elements. If it be asked what exactly is meant ©
by ‘similar’, it is not possible to give a definite answer.
Schémann? boldly states that the meaning is ‘round atoms’,
of which the gods, like fire and the soul, are entirely com-
posed: but there is no evidence for this, and it is better to
leave the idea vague: the bodies of the gods are composed
wholly of one kind of material and that entirely akin te
them: they are therefore exempt from internal disruption,
just as they are secured externally by the infinite supply of
appropriate matter. The argument is not perhaps a very
strong one, but there seems little doubt that it was used by
Epicureans, if not by Epicurus himself.
The conception so far reached of the constitution of the
bodies of the gods is that they are permanent in form, but
not in matter: the matter which from time to time makes the
form is always ‘similar’ in character and therefore not
liable to internal decay or disruption, and the supply of this

: By R. Philippson (l.c., pp. 589 ff.), e.g. rept edoeB, col. 83 (GomperZ,
p- 113), col. 118.

2 See below, p. 456.

3 Opusc. iv, p. 357, but see Appendix VI.

fy

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 455

matter in the intermundia, where there is no limit to the
number of atoms of all sorts and the forces of creation prevail
over those of destruction, is unlimited. Can this conception
be brought into relation with the notion already formed of
the means of cognition of the gods? We have our ‘ mental
apprehension’ of the gods by means of a succession of
similar ‘idols’ entering our mind and there building up an
‘Image’, much as the ‘images’ of normal sense-perception
build up a concept. But what in effect are these ‘idols’?
A normal solid body sends off as its ‘idol’ the outer atomic
‘film’ or ‘skin’: but the body of a god is ex Aypothesi not solid
but mere ‘form’. The successive ‘idols’ then which come
to our minds are in effect the successive atomic constituents
of the ‘form’: the ‘like’ atoms rush in from all parts of the
universe, constitute for a moment the body of the god, and
then pass away as the ‘idol’: their place is instantaneously
taken by a fresh supply of atoms from the intermundia and
the process continues for ever. This is in effect the Scott-
Giussani theory,' and though it has been greatly ridiculed,?
it is hard to find any other view consistent with the evidence
—certainly no satisfactory explanation has yet been pro-
pounded.

But before this theory can be accepted there remain two
serious difficulties which must be carefully considered.
Firstly there is the following clause in the Cicero passage
provisionally translated: ‘since infinite forms of most similar
images arise from innumerable atoms and stream to the
gods’,3 which must be compared with the parallel expression
in the Diogenes’ scholiast ‘owing to the constant streaming
up of similar “idols”, which are perfected at the same spot’.4

t I have purposely endeavoured to use a different line of investigation from
theirs, but find myself forced to the same general conclusion.

» e.g. by Masson (op. cit.), pp. 279 ff; and Class. Rev. xvi, p.277-
R. Philippson also rejects it in certain details and Diels (op. cit., p. 29, n. 3)
_ in one particular: see below, p. 458, n. 1. :

3 ‘cum infinita simillorum imaginum species (series Brieger) ex innumera-
bilibus individuis exsistat et ad deos (eos codd. nonnulli: nos Lambinus) adfluat. ‘

4 €k Tijs ovvexods emppicews TOv Spolwy eiSdAwv em! rd adrd droTe-
Tercopevwy.

456 EPICURUS
These clauses raise a problem of which three main solutions

might be offered.?

Firstly it might be supposed that the clauses are intended
to describe not the formation of the body of the gods, but
the passing of the ‘idols’ from their bodies into our minds.
This at first sight seems the most natural interpretation on
account of the occurrence of the words ‘idols’ and ‘images’
in both the passages, and it might be supposed that Cicero
is referring to this clause when later on he says ‘a passing
of a flux of images frequently takes place’. A good general
sense can thus be obtained: ‘there is a constant flow of
similar images from the bodies of the gods to our minds’. But
in order to get this sense the Cicero passage3 must be emended
and an unnatural interpretation given to the scholium.

Secondly, the Cicero clause might be taken to refer to
the constitution of the gods ‘out of similars’.5 This might
seem to be supported by the later statement® which does
undoubtedly refer to this clause: ‘there never fails an acces-
sion of similars from an infinite number of bodies (sc. atoms)’.

t The weakness of Scott’s exposition—and in some respects of Giussani’s—
is that he does not perceive the difficulties and is apt to confuse the process of
the formation of the bodies of the gods with that of the progress of the ‘idols’
to the mind. ‘Thus here, though he takes the Cicero clause to refer to the
former, he quotes as parallel to it V. D. i. 39. 109 ‘fluentium frequenter
transitio fit visionum, ut e multis una videatur’, which clearly describes the
creation of the image in the mind, and ‘finds no difficulty in it’. Philippson
takes the Diogenes clause to refer to the process of cognition, the Cicero passage
to the formation of the gods: but they cannot be separated.

a N. D.1i. 39. 109, quoted in the previous note.

3 ad nos must be read for ad deos and probably series for species: the latter
is in any case to my mind almost necessary.

4 Unless with Philippson 6yoeidevay is taken to refer not to the constitution -

of the gods, but to the similarity of the ‘idols’, it would be necessary to bracket
ods ev to Guoeidevav and take ék ris auvexods emippicews with Oewpnréov.
But (2) ex is not then the natural preposition, and (4) it is almost impossible
to make sense of emi 7d adro dmorereAcopéevwv. Neither of Philippson’s
proposed renderings (p. 581), ‘die zu demselben Ergebnis fiihren’ and ‘die
in derselben Weise gestalten sind’, seem to me possible.

5 See p. 453, above.

6 i, 37. 105 ‘Neque deficiat unquam ex infinitis corporibus similium
oe
accessio’.

a

x
ee ee ee ee ee

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 457

But it involves still greater tampering with the text of Cicero!
in order to get rid of the idea of the flux of ‘images’, and
against it is the corresponding reference to ‘idols’ by the
scholiast.

Thirdly, the plain meaning of the Cicero passage as it
stands is this: ‘infinite forms (or if we may accept the emenda-
tion series, which though not absolutely necessary, is a great
improvement, “‘an infinite succession”) of similar images
arise from innumerable atoms? and stream to the gods’,3 and
the scholiast says correspondingly ‘owing to the constant
streaming up of similar ‘‘idols’’ which are perfected at the
same spot’. Now if the account given of the constitution
of the body of the gods is correct, the ‘form’ of which it at
any moment consists is in fact what will subsequently become
an ‘idol’, and it is not impossible that the successive atomic
formations which constitute the ‘form’ from moment to
moment should be spoken of proleptically as ‘images’ or
‘idols’. But the Cicero clause seems to go beyond this and
to suggest that the ‘images’ come to the gods, so to speak,
‘ready-made’, that they are formed in space before they enter
the divine form. This conclusion was accepted by Scott
who says: ‘they (the gods) are formed by perpetual succes-
sions of “images” or material films, of precisely similar
form, which having arisen (in some unexplained way) out
of the infinite atoms dispersed throughout the universe,
stream to a sort of focus, and there, by their meeting, con-
stitute for a moment the being of the gods’. The words in
brackets suggest a sense of difficulty and the extreme

 Philippson (p. 604) supposes that imaginum is a gloss and would sub-
stitute rerum; Diels (p. 29, n. 3) applauds the suggestion and seeing no reason
for the superlative simil/imarum would prefer to read similium rerum. In
any case rerum is a very strange word and Cicero would naturally have
expressed what Philippson and Diels wish him to mean by similium corporum
or similis materiae.

2 individuis is Cicero’s regular word for ‘atoms’; Zeller’s translation
(Stoics and Epicureans, p. 466 n.) ‘from innumerable (divine) individuals’ is
an amusing mistake, which has been corrected by all subsequent critics.

3 ‘The manuscripts vary between ad deos and ad eos which would have the
same sense: there is no authority for Lambinus’ ad xos. 4: |e. poeea.

458 EPICURUS

arbitrariness of this notion has been seized on as an absurdity
by the critics of his theory. Dr. Masson asks pertinently,
“if the divine images arise in some “unexplained way” from
the atoms, why should they not flow directly into our minds?
why assume at all that they first meet together and form
divine bodies? On this theory the images cease to be a proof
that gods exist’. And indeed if this ‘pre-formation’ of the
images must be accepted as a necessary part of the theory,
it would certainly constitute a serious weakness in the whole
conception.

One is loth to suggest, as is done so recklessly by those
who support other views,’ that Cicero has reported Epicurus
wrongly, and the suggestion should not be made unless
there is good authority by which to correct him. This
authority seems to be supplied here by the scholiast, if his
words are rightly interpreted: the gods, he says, have like-
ness of form ‘owing to the constant streaming up of similar
idols which are perfected at the same spot’.3 ‘The images, that
is to say, are not images until they are perfected as such, as
the atoms converge on one place. Infinite atoms of the right
kind (Suo1a) are always streaming together from all quarters
of the universe to the spot in which the gods have their
‘formal’ existence. At every moment a sufficient number of
them to constitute a material film unites within the ‘form’
and for that moment constitutes it: they instantaneously
leave it, not now in the independence in which they arrived,
but united as an ‘idol’; and the ‘idol’, not now living but
inanimate, flies off to become in the mind of men an ‘image’
of the divine form. The instant that one image has fled,
another is formed to take its place out of the confluent atoms.
This is the natural interpretation of the scholiast’s text and
it gives an exact parallel to terrestrial things which have an

1 Masson, Lucretius, p. 279; Philippson, l.c., p. 604; Diels, l.c., p. 29, n. 3-

2 See Appendix VI. “

3 ‘This seems to me the natural meaning of the words éml 76 adro azore-
redeopevwy. Scott (p. 21g) translates ‘the continual streaming up of like images
wrought into one and the same object’, and explains ‘streams or trains of like
images directed to a common point’, viz. the point where the gods are.

Se ee ed

a ee

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 459

identity of form: the innumerable atoms are as the innumer-
able drops of water flowing together from many sources
to constitute momentarily the being of the waterfall. More-
over this interpretation is strongly confirmed by a later
passage* in Cicero’s dialogue, where Cotta asks critically:
‘why is an Epicurean god not in fear of destruction, seeing
that he is beaten upon without a moment’s cessation and
harried by the everlasting inrush of atoms, and “images’’,
are for ever streaming from him?’ This is exactly the
thought: it is the atoms which rush in to the form of the god,
but they leave unified as an image: on the other hand this
passage is quite inconsistent with the idea of ‘pre-formed’
images. On the strength then of his own later statement
and that of the scholiast on Diogenes Cicero may fairly be
convicted of an inaccuracy due to brevity of expression: he
ought rather to have said: ‘an infinite succession of similar
images is formed out of innumerable atoms, which flow to-
gether to make in successive instants the forms of the gods’.
If this assumption may be made—and there seems good
reason for making it—the most serious obstacle to the whole
theory disappears. It remains, no doubt, improbable and
fantastic, but it is, as with many of Epicurus’ strangest
notions, the result of a logical following out of his ideas in
the pursuit of an end—here the explanation of the existence
of gods, immortal but of atomic construction.

The second problem arises out of a notable contradiction
in our two main authorities, which cannot be passed over.
Cicero states in effect that the gods have not ‘numerical’,
but only ‘formal’ identity; the scholiast on Diogenes asserts
more definitely that Epicurus said that there were two classes
of gods, some with ‘numerical’, others with ‘formal’ identity.
How can these statements be reconciled? Two eminent
critics,” taking the scholiast at his word, have supposed that
Epicurus had two doctrines, one esoteric, one popular

« N. D.i. 41. 114; U., p. 235 n. ‘nec video quo modo non vereatur iste
deus beatus ne intereat, cum sine ulla intermissione pulsetur agiteturque
atomorum incursione sempiterna, cumque ex ipso imagines semper afluant’.

2 Hirzel and Mayor: see Appendix VI.

460 : EPICURUS

(incidentally they disagree as to which was which), and that
Cicero has become confused between the two. But the
majority of recent writers agree in thinking it impossible that
Epicurus can have admitted a class of gods with ‘numerical’
identity, or that he ever taught that doctrine either popularly
or to his own disciples. Some have in consequence attempted
to get rid of the contradiction by emendation,* Scott? and
Giussani suppose that the statement of the compiler was due
to some misunderstanding of the passage which he was
reporting, while Philippson3 working the passage out on
his own theory would assign a strange and unusual meaning
to the contrast. It is however doubtful whether the statement
can be so easily explained away: it is singularly explicit and
the introduction of the words with the formula ‘he says
elsewhere’ looks as if the commentator were making an
actual quotation from Epicurus. Diels‘ too has pointed out
that there are passages in Philodemus which seem to lend
support to the view that Epicurus did in fact conceive of a
class of gods who existed ‘by numerical identity’. A passage
for instance in the treatise ‘On Piety’ would run, if it has
been correctly emended: ‘he says that the constitution of the
gods, at least of those who have numerical identity, is not
only deathless but everlasting’. Diels himself is inclined to

« od pev Kar’ apiOpcv dpeoTOras, ws dé Kata spoeideray was the original
suggestion of Gassendi: Schémann (l.c., p. 356) accepting od yey proposed
yvwaorods Sé,a most improbable correction, which would change the second
clause into an account of the perception of the ‘idols’, Bignone (p. 55, n. 2)
would prefer the more modest change olovs S¢€. But od pev is very unusual
Greek and the opposition ods ev . . . ods S¢ does not look like the result of
a corruption. Ina note on K. A. 1, in my edition of Epicurus, I was inclined
to accept emendation, but now regard it as unsatisfactory.

2 Scott, p. 221; Giussani, p. 234.

3 ‘partly ... partly’, p. 580: see Appendix VI.

4 Op. cit., pp. 29 ff.

s See Kérte, Metrodori Epicurei Fragmenta, p. 543, where he reads dyotv
bedv otyxpiow Tov ye Kar’ apiOuov od pdvov adbaprov GAAG Kai aidéiav,
but the text as given by Gomperz (Herc. Stud. 132, p. 138) runs dyolv
[... . odvy]xpiow trav [. Kar’ a]piOucv od pdr[ov dd]Oaprov. adda
[...]av shows that the restoration is at best doubtful. Scott (p. 237) would
read t@v pur) Kar’ dpiBuor.

~~ ew

————— ee ee ee ee eee

f,

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 461

believe that the gods which existed in ‘numerical identity’
were in fact the ‘star-gods’ (Gestirngétter), Helios, Selene,
&c., of popular belief, which were admitted by the Epicurean
alongside the more philosophically conceived gods of their
own system. This may have been good doctrine in the
Herculanean villa of Philodemus, but it certainly was not
in Epicurus’ garden. On the whole the question must be
left in doubt, but if Epicurus did in fact admit gods with
‘numerical identity’, we have no information at all how he
conceived them nor how he reconciled the idea of a ‘solid’
god with the requirement of immortality. All that our
information enables us to do is to reconstruct with pain and
difficulty, as has been seen, the conception of the gods who
existed ‘by likeness of form’.

To complete this account of the Epicurean view of the
nature of the gods one more argument adduced by Cicero
for their existence and immortality must be considered.

To the a posteriori evidence of the universal concept in
the mind of man, Cicero’s Epicurean Velleius adds with
regrettable brevity an a priori argument. ‘Mighty’ is the
power of infinity and most worthy of long and earnest con-
sideration, for we must realize that its nature is such that all
things are equal in number and correspond among them-
selves. This principle Epicurus calls “isonomia’”, that is to
say, ‘equal distribution”. From it follow the results that if
there is so great a number of mortal things, there must be
no less a number of immortal, and if the forces which destroy
are innumerable, the forces which preserve ought also to

be infinite.’ The critics? who all through think lightly of the

t Cic. N. D. i. 19. 50 ‘Summa vero vis infinitatis et magna ac diligenti
contemplatione dignissima est, in qua intellegi necesse est eam esse naturam, ut
omnia omnibus paribus paria respondeant. Hanc icovopiav appellat Epicurus,
id est aequabilem tributionem. Ex hac igitur illud efficitur, si mortalium tanta
multitudo sit, esse immortalium non minorem, et si quae interimant innumera-
bilia sint, etiam ea quae conservent infinita esse debere’.

2 So Mayor (ad loc.) speaks of tcovopud as ‘the card-castle of the Epicurean
philosophy’, and Masson (op. cit., p. 277) exclaims contemptuously, “An
infinite number of Gods is, no doubt; a doctrine repellent to reason, but what
is reason compared with logic, or even with the semblance of logic?”

Fe

462 EPICURUS

value of this passage of Cicero and are content to regard
Epicurus as a shallow thinker, take this to be a merely
arbitrary puerility intended to back up the previous un-
satisfactory explanation of the nature of the gods. On the
other hand Scott and Giussani,? who are prepared to regard
Velleius’ argument as a serious, if somewhat confused,
account of a subtle piece of reasoning on the part of a pene-
trating thinker, have, in attempting to work out the Epi-
curean argument at length, ascribed to it a profundity and
ingenuity greater than there is any warrant for assuming.
An attempt may be made with such help as can be obtained
from other sources to see at least how Cicero—or his
Epicurean authority—intended the argument to hang to-
gether without yielding to the temptation of introducing
over-refined speculations. Unfortunately, there is no other
explicit reference to the doctrine in connexion with the gods,
except in Cotta’s3 criticism later on in the dialogue which
only repeats the argument, but there are at least three—and
probably more—passages in Lucretius,t where the idea of
‘isonomia’ is prominent in other contexts, and these throw
much light on the missing links in Velleius’ summary.

The nexus of the argument is clear enough: ‘isonomia’
is the direct result of infinity: from ‘isonomia’ follow two
results, the equality of the numbers of things in opposite
classes and the equality of the forces of disintegration and
conservation; and both these deductions point in their turn
to the existence of immortal beings. Can this argument be
reduced to terms of Epicurean atomism? Infinity for Epi-
curus means the existence of a.boundless universe, which
consists of an infinite number of atoms moving in space
infinite in extent. Now in the first place, these atoms 5 are of
a limited number of different shapes, but there is an infinite
number of atoms of each shape. ‘Thus any given combination

1 pp. 222-5. 2 pp. 245-58, 262-3. ai 39. 109:

4 Giussani (p. 246) is right in excluding from Reisacker’s list (Quaestiones
Lucretianae), ii. 1112 ff., and v. 392 ff. He would himself add ii. 1084-9,
where the argument, though in a different context, resembles that of ii. 532 ff.

5 See Chap. III, p. 288.

ee

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 463

of shapes will occur an equal number of times: for there is
nothing to cause the more frequent production of one com-
bination rather than another. But any particular combina-
tion of atomic shapes produces a particular species of thing.
Two results follow: firstly, there will at any given time be
equal numbers of things of each different species. This is
Lucretius’ argument in the passage! in the Second Book,
where he maintains that there is this ‘equal distribution’ of
animals of different species: though the elephant, for
example, is rare with us, he is plentiful in India. Secondly,
it also follows that any given species of things will be pro-
duced in equal numbers at all times: so Lucretius argues
earlier in the same Book? that ‘such things as have been
wont to come to being will be brought to birth under the
same law, will exist and grow and be strong and lusty, inas-
much as is granted to each by the ordinances of nature’. It
is moreover this same idea, as Giussani 3 points out, which is
really at the bottom of Epicurus’ principle+ with regard
to celestial phenomena that any cause which can produce
the phenomenon must be a real cause and be at work some-
where,’ even though it is not active in our world. But there
is further an ‘equal distribution’ not only of atomic shapes
but also of atomic movements: from this follows that the
movements which tend to atomic combination, the move-
ments of creation, will be equally balanced by those which
lead to atomic dissolution, the movements of destruction.
On this principle again Lucretius® insists in a short, but
impressive passage: ‘And so, neither can the motions of
destruction prevail for ever, and bury life in an eternal tomb,
nor yet can the motions of creation and increase for ever
bring things to birth and preserve them. So war waged
from time everlasting is carried on by the balanced strife of
the first-beginnings. Now here, now there, the vital forces
of things conquer and are conquered alike.’
These principles must now be applied to the problem of

I 2-40. 2 200-2.

3 ee 4 See Chap. Lijpuz6rs

5 See especially Lucr. v. 526-33. 6 ii. 569-76.

464. EPICURUS

the existence of immortal gods. From the equality of the
numbers of things of different species, it is an easy—indeed,
for the mind of antiquity," almost an inevitable—step to the
equality of numbers in opposite species. It may then be
argued directly that if there is created a vast number of beings
liable to death, there must be an equally large number of
beings exempt from death. In other words the number of
mortal beings in the world must be balanced by the number
of immortal gods outside it. Velleius’ second argument is
less satisfactory. It will be noticed that his principle differs
from that of Lucretius in that, while Lucretius speaks of the
forces of creation, which is the natural contrast to the forces
of destruction, Velleius speaks of the forces of preservation.
This is not a legitimate opposition and seems like a slight
distortion of the natural deduction from the infinity of
atomic movements made to suit the purposes of the particular
case.2 There is a further difficulty in the argument in that
in fact both the forces of increase and the forces of decay are
alike at work in the mortal world, for things are produced and
brought to maturity before the work of destruction begins.3
It is therefore false to oppose the two forces as Velleius does,
as though the movements of destruction alone worked in
our world and therefore it must be supposed that elsewhere
there are movements of preservation. But, though this
difficulty + may be got over by a more subtle analysis of

« See Giussani, l.c., p. 251.

2 It may be observed however that Lucretius in ii. 571-2 seems to make
a similar confusion between increase and preservation: ‘nec porro rerum
genitales auctificique motus perpetuo possunt servare creata’, and indeed
preservation is of course a continued increase compensating loss.

3 Cf. Lucr. ii. 1105 ff.

4 This difficulty is perceived by Mayor (notes on Cic. N. D. 19. 50), who, —

as I think, rightly interprets the argument of Velleius, but in his sarcastic
criticism does injustice to the Epicurean system as a whole, and greatly
misunderstands the idea of the iztermundia, which are certainly not places
‘sacred from the intrusion of atoms’. Scott and Giussani are naturally
troubled by the insufficiency of the contention as it stands and attempt to fill
it in more subtly. Scott’s argument (p. 223) is very ingenious and completely
in accord with Epicurean principles: “The processes of growth and decay,
of combination and dissolution, may either prevail ¢/ternate/y in each individual

q

ose hese mammal nama it tints a tinatanh satiny

is

a,

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 465

Epicurean possibilities, there -is surely little doubt that
Cicero—and probably his Epicurean authority—intended

object, so that the result on the whole will be a perpetual decay of existing
things, accompanied by a perpetual growth of fresh things in their place: or
the two processes may go on simultaneously in a given object, so as to produce
an equilibrium, the result of which will be eternal duration. Consequently
(to apply the principle of fcovoyita once more) if we take an infinite number
of cases (that is, if we consider the whole universe) the a/terzate and the
simultaneous action of the two processes must go on #0 an equal extent. Now
in our world (and, by analogy, in a// the worlds) the jirs¢ alternative is that
which universally prevails ; that is, the motions of growth and of decay operate
alternately, both on the world as a whole, and (at shorter intervals) on each
individual within it, thus producing universal death and universal birth.
Hence, outside the worlds, or in the intermundia, room must be found for the
other alternative; that is, the ‘motus auctifici’ and the ‘motus exitiales’ must
there work simultaneously, and instead of producing successions of different
beings must result in the immortality of such beings as exist.’ The contention
is admirable and might well have been used by an Epicurean who had learnt
tats emPodais dws divacbar xphobar, but there is no trace that either
Epicurus or his followers employed it, certainly not in the text of Cicero,
where the argument is clearly cruder and less complete.

Giussani’s explanation (pp. 252-8) is still more subtle, and (if I apprehend
it rightly) runs as follows : ‘Epicurus regards icovoyia as a balance of opposites.
It was not invented to support his theology, but if the conditions for the
creation of immortal beings are possible, it applies automatically. How then
did Epicurus come to think out the physical existence of gods as described ?
(2) By tcovoyia all species are eternal, but not all individuals, owing to lack of’
the persistence of matter. But there are grades in such persistence: for there
is also the substitution of new matter. Reintegration thus occurs to some
extent in all bodies, but especially in organic and particularly in animal bodies.
Why then must animals die? Because after their period of growth they cannot
assimilate enough new matter to repair their losses (Lucr. ii. 1105 ff.).
Epicurus then conceived the gods as beings in whom there was a continuous
change of matter and always assimilation of exactly as much as was lost. (4)
Moreover animals, &c., apart from natural decay, are liable to death from exter-
nal causes, such as disease or blows, and even if the balance of loss and accretion
were perfect, must in time so perish. This liability is due to the temporary
persistence of matter in their bodies. The gods then must have absolute non-
persistence of matter, which incidentally also secures them against the first
danger from overgrowth. Again we have the analogy of flames, rivers, water-
falls, and the sun: yet even the sun must one day be extinguished from loss
of matter. There are thus innumerable grades in the persistence of matter
between the two extremes which are the two forms of eternity, (1) absolute
persistence of matter—the atoms, (2) absolute non-persistence of matter, but
only persistence of form—the gods. Granted in this way the possibility of

3307 Hh

466 EPICURUS q
the argument to run as it stands: in our world the forces of
destruction prevail and beings are mortal, therefore else-
where the forces of conservation must prevail and beings
must be immortal. No greater subtlety than this is warranted
by the text and the same zaiveté in the application of the
principle of ‘isonomia’ is again seen in Cotta’s* criticism,
which is thrown into the form of an imaginary dialogue
between himself and Velleius: ‘ “How do you prove that
the succession of images is continuous? or if it is, how are
they eternal?” “There is, you answer, an infinite supply of
atoms.” ‘Will not that same cause make all things eternal?”
At this point you take refuge in your “equilibrium”—for
so we will call your ‘‘isonomia”, if you like—and you say,
since there is a mortal nature, there must also be an im-
mortal.’ The thought here is simple: one might expect from
the infinity of atoms and therefore from the limitless supply
of material that all things would be immortal, but this cannot
be the case because there must be this balance between things
mortal and immortal, between the forces of destruction and
conservation. The principle of ‘isonomia’ then, acting in

Fe ee ee eee

conditions in which the forces of conservation prevail over those of destruction,
then by icovopia, i.e. the equilibrium of the forces of conservation and
destruction, which is secured by the infinity of atomic movements, the number
of mortals and immortals must be equal.’ This argument, in spite of its
excessive subtlety, seems to me to have more warrant in Epicurean theory
than that of Scott: but, though it may be accepted as representing more or
less the process by which Epicurus reached—or might have reached—his
conception of divine beings, all it proves is that, granted the existence of such
immortal beings, then by tcovoyia they will be equal in number to mortal
beings. Velleius surely intended icovopia to prove also the existence of the °
gods. :
Masson, in a review (Class. Rev. xvi. 453-9) of the essays of Scott and
Giussani, rebukes them for over-refinement and ridicules their theories, but
makes no attempt to explain the idea of écovoyia and its application here,
except as an arbitrary assumption (see also Lucretius, Epicurean and Poet,
p- 277). I hope I have shown in the text that a middle course is possible,
that, though there are gaps and flaws in Velleius’ exposition of the argument,
the principle of icovopia is a direct outcome, as he maintains, of Epicurus’ ”
conception of infinity, and may be used in the two distinct ways he suggests
without unreasonable distortion, to prove the existence and countless number,

of the gods. tN. D. i..39. 109-

Sp ge ee

I,

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 467

two ways, through the infinite number of atoms and their
infinite movements, forces the conclusion that there do exist
immortal beings, or in other words, gods.

The result of this long discussion may be summed up
as follows: There do exist divine beings or gods: they are
innumerable as are the created things which perish and im-
mortal even as created things are mortal. They are, as is
proved by their ‘idols’ which visit us, like in figure to men.
In constitution they are eternal in form but composed of
transient matter: this matter, which is all ‘alike’ and contains
no alien elements, comes from the innumerable atoms moving
in the void between the worlds: in everlasting succession
the atoms stream into the ‘forms’ of the divine beings and
unite there for the moment to constitute their body. Then
they fly off again in the union in which they have now joined,
thus forming the continuous succession of like ‘idols’, which
are perceived by the mind and are our direct source of know-
ledge of the existence of the gods.

It remains to inquire how the life of the gods may be
conceived and what is its place in the Epicurean system.
The inquiry is not without its own difficulties, but the
ground is firmer than in the previous discussion as to the
nature of the gods. Epicurus placed the abode of the gods
in the ‘interspaces between the words’. The worlds, it must
be remembered, were to Epicurus portions, as it were, of
infinite space in which atoms gathering together had fallen
‘into such dispositions as those whereby our world of things
is created and holds together’. Although such worlds are
innumerable,3 yet space is infinite and between the worlds
are left large tracts where the atoms have not developed
those motions which cause mundane phenomena, ‘peaceful
abodes, which neither the winds shake nor clouds soak with’
showers, nor does the snow congealed with biting frost
besmirch them with its white fall, but an ever cloudless sky

* Hipp. PAilos. 22, 3; U. 359 Kabjoba yap tov Oedv ev rots peraKo-
opiots ovTw KaAoupevors br’ abrod; for intermundia see Cic. N. D.i. 8. 18;
de Fin. ii. 23.753 de Div.ii. 17. 40; and Lucr. iii. 18-24.

+ Lucero: 1027,,8. 3 Ep. 1, § 45.

Hh2

468 EPICURUS

vaults them over, and smiles with light bounteously spread
abroad’. There the gods dwelt in peace in ‘abodes, fine
even as are their bodies’? The reasons for this apparently
strange belief were numerous. ‘The moral theory was not
without influence: for the gods in the intermundia could live
the life of perfect happiness, which was to be man’s example,
without being troubled by mundane affairs, and man might
strive to imitate them on earth with the security that there
was no divine power in terrestrial phenomena which might
wreck his plans. But there was also a strong reason for the
belief on the side of the physical theory as well. The gods
lived in the intermundia ‘through fear of destruction’, as
Cicero 3 says ironically, and this may be interpreted seriously
to mean not merely that they were there safe from the shocks
of mundane occurrences‘ and above all from the occasional
catastrophe of the breaking up of a world, but also that they
could have no fear of decay for lack of the supply of material:
in a world this supply is limited, but ‘between the worlds’
the flow of the infinite atoms is ceaseless.‘

That the gods were of human form was directly guaran-
teed by the images® which so presented them to man, but
Velleius also advances reasons for the belief: since the gods
are happy and eternal, they must also have the most beautiful
form, and it is impossible that there should be ‘a disposition
of limbs,7 a configuration of outlines, a general shape or
appearance more beautiful than that of man’. The anthropo-
morphic idea being once accepted, it was impossible, even

t Lucr. iti. 18-22. 2 Lucer. v. 154.
3 de Div. ii. 17. 40.
4 For this primary idea see Seneca, de Beneficiis, iv. 4. 19; U. 364

‘ruinas mundorum supra se circaque se cadentium evitat’ (sc. deus).

5 A serious mistake is made sometimes about the intermundia in supposing
that they were places entirely free from the incursion of atoms (see Mayor’s
note on Cic. NV. D.i. 19. 50). Sucha place it is wholly impossible for Epicurus
to conceive and it would be fatal to the existence of the gods, which depends
on the countless stream of atoms towards them.

6 Cic. NV. D.i. 18. 46 ‘quae enim forma alia occurrit unquam aut vigilanti
cuiquam aut dormienti ?’

7 Ibid. 47 ‘quae compositio membrorum, quae conformatio lineamentorum,
quae figura, quae species humana potest esse pulcrior ?’

8 ee a ER Ee te Re

Fs

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 469

though the cruder notions of the popular mythology were
sternly excluded, that it should not to some extent be carried
out in detail, but we are hardly prepared for what we find.
Philodemus in his work on the mode of life of the gods appears
to have discussed in full how far the ordinary habits of men
could be attributed to them. He decides that they need both
food and drink," that even if they do not sleep *—for sleep,
being akin to death, is the attribute of mortality—they yet
have periods of repose resembling sleep, that they hold
converse with each other and employ speech; 3 for ‘we shall
not be considering them any happier or-less destructible,
if we think of them as not speaking nor conversing with one
another, but resembling dumb men’.+ Indeed it appears
that the language they use is Greek 5 or something ‘not far
from it’. On the other hand he seems to decide that the gods
probably do not use furniture! All this seems rather remote
from the ‘transient matter in the permanent form’ and the
€ver-constant succession of images, and it must surely be
supposed that though there was no definite distinction be-
tween esoteric and’ popular doctrines in the theology of
Epicurus, Philodemus was in concession to popular preju-
dice working out the anthropomorphic idea with a greater
elaboration than his master would have approved: for, in
spite of the argumentative and philosophical appearance of
Philodemus’ exposition, the result is not very far from the
anthropomorphism of Homer or the ordinary popular belief.
It is at least noticeable that in Epicurus himself and the
earlier authorities we have no hint of this popular aspect of
theology.

But there is one attribute of the gods which is of supreme
importance in the theory, and for which there is the fullest
authority—and that is their eternal happiness. Here again

t Vol. Herc. i. vi. 13-17. 2 Frag. Herc. (W. Scott), pp. 167-73.

3 Vol. Herc. 1. vi. 13; U. 356.

4 Philodem. de Vict. Deor.; Vol. Herc. 1. vi. 13; C.B. fr. 563 U. 356. +

5 Ibid. 14 kat vy Aud ye rv ‘EAnvida vopworéov éxew abrods Sid-
Aexrov 7) m1) Téppw.

6 See Scott, Frag. Herc., p- 198.

470 EPICURUS

it is stated that the images which we perceive give us im-
mediate certainty that this is so. Velleius* puts it directly
enough: ‘our mind and intelligence straining fixedly towards
these images comes to understand what is the blessed and
eternal nature’, and Cotta? in his criticism twice repeats the
idea. That the everlasting succession of images should give
us the idea of the eternity of the gods can well be under-
stood: the ordinary succession of the ‘idols’ of sense-per-
ception, which produce one ‘cinematographic’ image, could
not do this, but it is the special property of the ‘idols’ of the
gods that they do not produce the effect of a single image,
but of a continuous series.3 This continuous series then
gives us directly the conception of an eternal existence.
But how does it also inform us of the happiness or ‘blessed-
ness’ of the gods’ life? _Lucretius’# account is here valuable:

Menassigned them everlastinglife because their images came in constant
stream and their forms remained unchanged, and indeed above all
because they thought that those endowed with such great strength 5
could not readily be vanquished by any force. They thought that they
far excelled in happiness, because the fear of death never harassed any
of them, and at the same time because in sleep they saw them accom-
plish many marvels, yet themselves not undergo any toil.

x N. D.i. 19. 49, quoted above, p. 445, n. I.

.2 Ibid. 37. 105 ‘ex eoque fieri ut in haec intenta mens nostra beatam illam
naturam et sempiternam putet’; 38.106 ‘hoc idem fieri in deo, cuius crebra
facie pellantur animi, ex quo esse beati atque aeterni intellegantur’.

3 Of course they do give the effect of a single image in the sense that any
given series conveys to us the idea of a single continuous personality : cf. NV. D.
i. 39. 109; U., p. 234 n. ‘fluentium frequenter transitio fit visionum, ut e
multis una videatur’.

4 v. 1175-82.

s Giussani explains (p. 238) that the ‘great strength’ of the gods “consists
just in the semper faciem suppeditari, guaranteed by the infinite provision of
atomic material and guaranteeing the formam manere, or the eternity of
personal existence’. I doubt whether Lucretius, even if he completely under-
stood the Epicurean theology, had such an elaborate idea in his mind: it was
surely rather the direct impression of strength conveyed by the visions, just
like the accomplishment of the ‘many marvels’ below. Giussani is so intent
on the theoretical significance of the existence of the images of the gods that
he sometimes seems to forget that the visions must have had content: the gods
must have had a definite appearance and seemed to be acting.

a

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 471

If the last sentence be compared with Epicurus’ conception
of human life, Lucretius’ meaning is seen at once. The two
great causes in human life which produced sorrow and pre-
vented happiness were the fear of the gods and the fear of
death: in a less degree too the inevitable accompaniment
of all activity with a sense of weariness. That the gods were
free from the first fear is obvious: they were also free owing
to their constitution from the fear of death, either by process
of natural decay or through external blows: thirdly the visions
showed them performing mighty feats without sense of toil;
for the sense of toil or weariness comes to men from the loss
of tissue in the course of labour, and such loss the eternal body
of the gods cannot suffer. The happiness of the gods then is
the immediate deduction from their eternity: indeed so im-
possible is it to separate happiness from eternity that the
two ideas are said by Velleius to be immediately conveyed
together. And so ‘the blessed and immortal’? becomes the
regular Epicurean periphrasis for the divine existence. In-
deed the blessedness of the gods might well be called the
central point of the Epicurean theology, for it at once makes
their life the moral ideal towards which man must strive
and to which he may assimilate himself by contemplation
of the divine being, and also secures to him one of the two
primary conditions of ‘pleasure’, since it is the guarantee that
the gods do not interfere in the affairs of the world, for ‘the
blessed and immortal nature knows no trouble itself nor
causes trouble to any other’.3

Is it possible to analyse at all the content of the divine
happiness? In the moral theory of Epicurus the conception
of pleasure tends to resolve itself into an absence of pain in
the body (amovia) and trouble in the mind (drapaéia): in the
same way the blessed life of the gods is almost always

* Note especially the striking passage (ili. 59-86), where Lucretius
attributes all human crime to the fear of death.

2 70 waxdpvov Kat dbbaprov K.A. i. tov Oedv Lov ddOaprov Kai waxdprov
Ep. il. 123: cf. Lactantius, de Ire Dei, 17. 1; U. 360 ‘incorruptus est ac
beatus’, and many other Epicurean passages.

3K Ae

472 EPICURUS

expressed by Epicureans in negative terms and ideas, and
the prominent note in its descriptions is supreme peace and
tranquillity. The famous description in Lucretius * may be
taken as a typical summary: ‘it must needs be that all the
nature of the gods enjoys life everlasting in perfect peace,
sundered and separated far away from our world. For free
from all grief, free from danger, mighty in its own resources,
never lacking aught of us, it is not won by virtuous service
nor touched by wrath’. Almost the only positive note, apart
from Philodemus’ very concretely anthropomorphic notions,
which can hardly be taken seriously, is the statement of an
Epicurean writer,’ apparently quoting in part from Epicurus
himself: ‘the blessed and deathless being, filled with all good
things and impervious to every ill, is wholly concerned with
the continuance of its own happiness and immortality’. The
divine being cannot be concerned with the ‘continuance of
its own happiness and immortality’ in the sense that it felt
any anxiety about them or that it could itself or need do
anything to secure them, so that it must be supposed that
its concern is rather that of contemplation and enjoyment.
The gods, that is, not merely live the life of perfect peace and
tranquillity but are conscious of it and this consciousness is
their happiness. The idea does not seem at first sight pro-
foundly inspiring, but when taken in connexion with the
Epicurean Ethics its significance is clear enough: for man
too has pleasure in so far as he attains the consciousness of

tranquillity. Meanwhile the examination of the negative |

conception of happiness is of real value for Epicurean
theology because it establishes at once the relation—or rather
the absence of relation—between the gods and the world.
The main ideas are summed up in Lucretius’ description,
and indeed even more briefly in the first aphorism of the
Principal Doctrines: “The blessed and immortal nature knows
no trouble itself nor causes trouble to any other, so that it

t ii. 646-51.

2 [Plut.] Plac. Philos. 1.7.73; U. 361: Usener takes the last words oAov
dv mept Ti ovvoyiy Tis iSias eddapovias Te Kai apBapatias to be a quo-
tation from Epicurus himself.

a,

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 473

is never constrained by anger or favour. For all such things
exist only in the weak.’* ‘These are in fact just the two new
ideas which Lucretius’ description adds to the notion of
freedom from danger and pain, which is the immediate out-
come of eternity of existence. They might almost be said
to be the inward and outward aspects of the same fact. ‘The
gods know no anger or favour, no hatred or love: for these
are signs of dependence upon others and influence by others,
signs of weakness which can have no place in the perfect
power of divine beings. The gods ‘give not nor take any
share in any good thing’: ? therefore the offerings of men are
doubly vain, for neither will the gods receive them nor will
they give blessings in return. Nor yet on the other hand is
it possible to rouse their wrath by neglect or crime: the old
superstitions of the avenging thunderbolt of heaven3 and
even more philosophical notions of divine indignation are
false, and man may lead his life without fear of divine
punishment. And indeed the gods are wholly devoid of all
emotion: ‘if there is in God an emotion of joy which leads
to gratitude, or an emotion of hate which leads to anger, it
must be that he has also fear and lust and covetousness and
all other emotions, which belong to human weakness’.
Internally then the peace of the gods is perfect: and this is
due to external tranquillity. He has no trouble himself and
causes it not to others: neither can the affairs of the world
reach the gods nor do they for a moment influence them.
Here we must pause for a moment, for it was at this point
that the Epicurean theology came most markedly into con-
flict with other philosophies as well as with popular religion,
and much assistance may be obtained from considering the
lines on which it opposed them.

Velleius at the outset of his statement 5 of the case for the

* 70 pakdpiov Kai a¢Oaprov odre adro mpdypata eye ovre ddr
mapexet, Wore OTE dpyais oTE ydpior cuvexerar ev dobevet yap TEV TO
TOLOUTOV.

2 Euseb. Praep. Ev. xiv. 27, 8; U. 364 Oeol rdvrwv ayabdv adapnroi re
Kal apeéroxou. 3 See Lucr. vi. 379-422.

4 Lactantius, de Ire Dei, 15.5; U. 366. 5 Cic. M. D.i. 8. 18.

474 EPICURUS

Epicurean theology strikes the note of opposition: ‘Listen’,
he says, ‘to no baseless or imaginary opinions about a
fashioner and builder of the world, a god according to Plato’s
‘Timaeus, nor again about a prophetic witch, the “fore-
thought” (mpdvoa) of the Stoics.’ And if the Epicurean
polemics are examined, it appears that it is these two ideas
which they were almost always combatting, the Platonic
notion of the creator of the world (Ajpwodpyos), and the Stoic
conception of the continued divine care for the progress of
events in the world. The divine creation of the world and
in particular of man is refuted on two main grounds, both of
which are prominent in Lucretius. In the first place the
world * cannot have been created by perfect and all-powerful
divine beings, because it is made so badly: ‘so great are the
flaws with which it stands beset’. Great tracts of earth are
useless, occupied by mountains and forests and rocks and
huge lakes and the sea: two-thirds of it are either too hot
or too cold to support life, and even in the better parts the
cultivation of the earth is a constant struggle against the
depredations of nature. Man’s life again is at the mercy of
the wild beasts and the human infant is a miserable helpless
creature as compared with the young of animals. In all
this there are no signs of divine creation or care for man:
‘there is no ordering of things, for many things are made
otherwise than they should have been’.? Secondly,3 why
should the gods in their perfect happiness have wished to
create a world and human beings?’ Our worship can add
nothing to their blessedness,* nor can it be that weary of
their own blessedness5 they craved some new excitement.
But, adds Lucretius,® with a characteristically Epicurean
conclusion, even if they had wished to create a world, they
could not have done so, unless nature had previously made
a world and so given them an ‘anticipation’ (votities=

T vy. 195-234: cf. il. 167-81.

a Lactantius (quoting Epicurus), Divia. Instit. ili. 17. 16; U. 370.

3 Lucr. v. 165-86. '

4 Compare also Lactantius, op. cit., vil. 5. 3 and 7; U. 371.

s So too Velleius in Cic. NV. D.i. 9. 22. 6 vy. 181-6.

a ee

pe apenas a et ae

J.

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 475

mpoAnyus) to act as an example for their work. The world
is no divine creation, but only the fortuitous result of the
movements of the infinite atoms in infinite space. The argu-
ment is crude and it is not fanciful to see in Lucretius’
personifications' of ‘nature the creatress’ and ‘nature the
perfecter’ the germs of a higher religious notion in which
creation is not the arbitrary act of divine beings, but the
natural expression of a divine power present in the world:
if he answered Plato crudely, it was because, as the apostle
of common sense, he apprehended him crudely. So eager
was he to establish the principle of natural law as against
the idea of the arbitrary workings of divine beings in the
world that he did not stop to ask whether it was not itself
reconcilable with a less naive conception of divinity.
More eager still were Epicurus and his followers in their
opposition to the Stoic view of the continued presence of
the divine will in the world and the idea of the government
of its affairs by ‘forethought’ (pévo., providentia, prudentia);
for even supposing the divine being had created the world,
if he had then stepped aside and left it to its own workings,
like Plato’s Demiurgus, man would still have some chance
of exercising his free will, but if the gods may interfere at
any moment, then man’s moral freedom is gone. Epicurean
authorities * are full of this combat against the idea of ‘provi-
dence’,and theschoolapparently went the length of attributing
“non-providence’ (dmpovonoia)3 to their gods asa special charac-
teristic. No special arguments on the subject are found
apart from those directed against the divine creation, for
indeed the whole physical theory of Epicurus is one long
indictment of the Stoic and popular belief. The great
sequence of events, in which each is the inevitable outcome
of its predecessors, and every gradation of growth and
preservation and decay—even the immortality of the gods
themselves—is determined by the blind movement of atoms,
is in itself an all-sufficient answer to religions or philosophies
* Natura creatrix, i. 629; perfica natura, ii. 1116.

See quotations in Usener, pp. 246 ff.
3 Alex. Aphrod. de fato, c. 31, p. 100; U. 368.

476 EPICURUS

which believe the world and its government to be divine.
The hand of God is not in the world, for God himself was
never and never will be within the limits of a world. Of
peculiar interest to modern readers is the closely allied attack
on the teleological view of physiology which crops up from
time to time in Epicureanism. Lucretius’* exposition has
so modern a ring that it is worth quoting in full:

Herein you must eagerly desire to shun this fault, and with fore-
sighted fear to avoid this error; do not think that the bright light of the
eyes was created in order that we may be able to look before us, or
that, in order that we may have power to plant long paces, therefore
the tops of shanks and thighs, based upon the feet, are able to bend; or
again, that the forearms are jointed to the strong upper arms and
hands given us to serve us on either side, in order that we might be
able to do what was needful for life. All other ideas of this sort, which
men proclaim, by distorted reasoning set effect for cause, since nothing
at all was born in the body that we might be able to use it, but what is
born creates its own use. Nor did sight exist before the light of the
eyes was born, nor pleading in words before the tongue was created, but
rather the birth of the tongue came long before discourse, and the
ears were created much before sound was heard, and in short all the
limbs, I trow, existed before their use came about: they cannot then
have grown for the purpose of using them.

Epicurus wished not merely to exclude the gods from the
world, but even any notion of the unconscious forethought
of nature itself, which might seem to give colour to a theo-
logical view of phenomena. If this argument is a striking
instance of his anticipation of the attitude of modern science,
it is also a conclusive proof of the thoroughness of his desire
to leave the world a wholly mechanical structure and to
exclude even the faintest suspicion of divine working. The
gods exist indeed, but the popular notions of their powers
and functions are wholly erroneous.

The question naturally arises whether there is any con-
ceivable relation possible between men and such gods as
Epicurus imagines, whether in fact there is room left for

t iv. 823-42. The same argument may be found in Lactantius, loc. cit.;
U. 370: cf. also the quotation from Galen in U. 381, 382.

fe

oo wee

a“

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 477

anything approaching to religion. Certainly there is no
place for the ordinary religious notion of prayer as an appeal
to divine beings who can hear the appeal and grant the
blessings which are asked: if the Epicurean had nothing to
fear from his gods, he also had nothing to hope. ‘And so’,
Says Seneca® in an ironical summary of the Epicurean posi-
tion, ‘God gives no blessings, but without care or thought for
us turning away from the world He does other things or else
—for this seems the greatest happiness of all to Epicurus—
He does nothing at all, and is touched no more by service
than He is by injury. One who says this, does not listen to
the voice of prayer.’ Epicurus? himself is said to have re-
marked with bitter contempt, ‘If God listened to the prayers
of men, all men would quickly have perished: for they are
for ever praying for evil against one another.’ In a quieter
mood Lucretius} reaches the same general conclusion, though
we seem to see in his words an almost pathetic affection for
the ceremonies of the religion he has abandoned: ‘nor is it
piety at all to be seen often with veiled head turning towards
a stone, and to draw near to every altar, no, nor to lie
prostrate on the ground with outstretched palms before the
shrines of the gods, nor to sprinkle the altars with the
streaming blood of beasts, nor to link vow to vow’. In short,
prayer and vow and sacrifice can have no meaning at all
for the believer in the gods of the ‘interworlds’. Still less
had Epicurus any belief in the popular practice of divination
or the validity of oracles: ‘prophecy’, he says himself, ‘does
not exist, and even if it did exist, things that come to pass
must be counted nothing to us’.4 Cicero5 bears this out:
‘there is nothing which Epicurus derides so much as the
prediction of future events’. If the gods had no part in
the ordering of events, much less would they foretell their
course to men.

1 de Beneficiis, iv. 4.13 U. 364.

2 Gnomolog. cod. Par. 1168, f.115; U. 388; C.B. /r. 58.

3 v. 1198-1202.

4 D.L. x. 135; C.B. fr. 3. The remark is obscure: see my notes, ad loc.
st CicnNe DeasrO5. 1623 Us 395.

478 EPICURUS

And yet it is stated more than once that Epicurus was
a devout attendant at religious ceremonies and in his own
writings recommended a similar conformity to his disciples.
‘Of his reverence towards the gods’,! says his biographer,
‘it would be impossible to speak adequately’, and Philode-
mus insists on this point again and again: ‘it will be found
that Epicurus both observed them all (sc. religious cere-
monies) and recommended others to do the same’:* “not
only did he teach this doctrine,3 but he is found in his prac-
tice to have observed all the fasts and sacrifices of his own
land’: ‘he took part in the festival of “the Pitchers” and the
Attic mysteries and other rites’.4 ‘Let us at least sacrifice
piously and rightly,’5 Epicurus wrote in a passage of the
Physics, ‘where it is customary, and let us do all things
rightly according.to the laws, not troubling ourselves with
common beliefs in what concerns the noblest and holiest of
beings.’ He even carried his piety into ordinary life and
wrote to his friends, as any orthodox Athenian might, that
he would come and stay with them ‘if the gods were pro-
pitious’.© Moreover, just as Philodemus wrote his work,
On Piety, so Epicurus himself had before him written Oz
Holiness.’ It can hardly be supposed that Lucretius similarly
observed the festivals at Rome, but that the Epicurean tradi-
tion of conformity was alive in his time is clear from Philo-
demus’ treatise. How then can this apparent inconsistency
be explained? The opponents of Epicureanism were not
slow to make a charge of hypocrisy: it is brought against
Epicurus by Cotta’ at the end of his speech in Cicero’s
dialogue and, as he quotes Posidonius as his authority, it
is clear that the accusation was no new one: ‘the truth is no
doubt that Epicurus thought that there were no gods, and
what he said about immortal gods was only put forward to

2° DiLoxerey: 2 Gomperz, Herc. Stud. 110, p. 128.

3 Ibid. 109, p: 827- 4 Ibid.

5 Philodem. zepi edo.; V. H2 ii. 108; C.B. fr. 57; U. 387.

6 Medv etAewv dvrwr, Philodem. zepi edo. V. H.2 ii. 107; U. 993 C.B.
Fri tQs
7 Ilept “Oovdrytos, D.L. x. 27. 8 N. Di. 449238

re

a

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION 479

deprecate unpopularity’. But if there is one point that seems
clear in the character of Epicurus it is his absolute sincerity,
nor indeed at the time when he lived would a philosopher
who refused to conform to the outward observances of
religion have found himself in invidious isolation. He must
have believed that his own observance was justified and that
it had for him a real meaning, and though the evidence is
scanty, there is enough to make clear what this was. Epi-
curus himself used apparently to claim that ‘though he
destroyed providence, he left a place for piety’.t If one could
not ask the gods for benefits or feel a gratitude towards them,
it was yet possible to experience true religious feeling to-
wards them, which might properly express itself in the
orthodox ceremonies of worship.

If one looks in the Epicurean writers for signs of this
‘piety’, it is possible to find at least three distinct aspects of
it. In the first place it is a right attitude of man towards
the gods: the knowledge that he has nothing to fear from
them should enable him to look on life with an untroubled
mind, and this peace of mind is itself an act of worship
towards the gods: ‘the summing up of his whole argument
about the gods was this, says Plutarch,” not to fear god but
to cease from being troubled’, and Lucretius} puts it with
a strangely strong feeling of peacefulness: the true piety
is not to pray and sacrifice, ‘but rather to be able to contem-
plate all things with a mind at rest’. Secondly, as has already
been hinted, the tranquil being of the gods was to the Epi-
curean the realized ideal of his moral life: in contemplating
their happiness and peace he might hope to come nearer
himself to perfect pleasure and complete freedom from dis-
turbance. Just as the old anthropomorphic deities of mytho-
logy represented human life glorified—and oddly enough
glorified at times—so were the gods of the ‘interworlds’ the
pattern to which the Epicurean might look and aspire.

t Plut. ado. Colot. 8. 1111 b; U. 368 Kat yap rHv mpdvoray dvaipdv év-
o¢Bevav azroAureiv Adyer. ahs

2 Contra Epic. Beat. 8.1092 b; U. 384 76 yur) poPetobar Oeov adda.
mavoacba Tapattromevous. aViLRS4.

480 EPICURUS

‘Those who believe in the oracles we have given about the
gods’, says Philodemus,* ‘will wish, as far as mortals may,
to imitate their happiness.’ The life of the gods becomes a
moral ideal in the life of man. And lastly, strange though
it may seem, Epicurus and his followers seem to have felt
that an even closer and more valuable relation was possible
than this, a relation which approached singularly near to
the higher feelings of a true religion. It is said that the
Epicurean was conscious even of ‘a blessing coming to man
from the gods’? The idea seems almost that of a kind of
mystical communion with the gods: ‘he admires their nature
and their state’,3 says Philodemus presumably of the Master,
‘and endeavours to draw near to it and as it were yearns to
touch it and be with it, and he calls the wise the friends of
the gods and the gods the friends of the wise’. Lucretius in
a strange passage+ makes the idea clearer to us: you must
get rid, he argues, of the old superstitions about the gods, for
otherwise ‘the holy powers of the gods, degraded by your
thought, will often do you harm; not that the high majesty
of the gods can be polluted by you, so that in wrath they
should yearn to seek sharp retribution, but because you
yourself will imagine that those tranquil beings in their
placid peace set tossing the great billows of wrath, nor with
quiet breast will you approach the shrines of the gods, nor
have strength to drink in with tranquil peace of mind the
images which are borne from their holy body to herald their
,divine form to the minds of men’. The contemplation with
placid mind of the perfect peace of the gods becomes in this
way a ‘blessing’ to the worshipper, for it enables him to
assimilate himself more closely to them and to allow the
images which tell him of their form to bring with them into
his mind something of the tranquillity which they represent.

 Philodem. mept eva. 28, Gomperz, Herc. Stud. p. 148.

2 Atticus Eusebii, Praep. Ev. xv. 5; U. 385 dvnois rots avOpwmous amo
Oecd yiverar.

3 Philodem. de Deor. Vict.; V. H. vi, col. 1; U. 386.

4 vi. 68-78. The thought is echoed in an unfortunately broken fragment
of Philodem. wept edo. 110, Gomperz, p. 128.

a

x“

THEOLOGY AND RELIGION "481

It is a fine and really living conception and is certainly very
far removed from the abnegation of religion: there were
probably few of those who stood at Epicurus’ side in the
Athenian festivals who had so high an ideal of what their
religion meant to them and what real benefit might come
to them in their lives from the worship of the gods.

The theology of Epicurus then is not lightly to be put
aside as though it were either trivial in itself or unimportant
in its place in his system. Once again it shows the subtle
mind, which could think out the intricacies of the atomic
movements and express in material terms the workings of
the soul, occupying itself in a problem which his whole
system had made to him intensely difficult. His theology
is correlated alike with his physical theories and his moral
system: it is indeed in some sort the link between them. If
its main ideas seem at first to be fantastic subtleties, and its
deductions arbitrary, a closer examination reveals their
intimate connexion both among themselves and with the
whole body of Epicurean doctrine.

3307 li

D4
| ee aes Oa

fee primary interest of this work is in the physical
theory of Epicurus regarded as the last stage in the
development of Greek Atomism: his ethical teaching from
the atomic point of view is of comparatively little importance.
Moreover, since Epicurus has usually been regarded as a
moral teacher, and his moral doctrine, largely through mis-
conception of its true character, has become notorious, atten-
tion has most often been focussed on this side of his system,
and it has in consequence been more fully described and
discussed than his physics. But it is clear that any account
of Epicurus which should omit the moral theory would be
lamentably one-sided, and the very fact that it has frequently
been dealt with in detachment from the physical theory,
makes it worth while to attempt a restatement: for the con-
nexion between the two sides of his system is far closer than
is usually realized, certainly by those who believe that Epi-
curus was a poor thinker who laid hands at random on the
first physical theory that presented itself to act as a basis
for his morals. For in fact his ethical doctrine arose directly
by a parallel growth with the physical system out of the .
primary belief in sensation, and it is only by keeping the
physical system in mind that its drift and intention can be
fully understood: at all the critical points of its development
the underlying physical ideas are the key to the moral
doctrine. A certain difficulty attaches to the inquiry in that
our authorities for the moral theory, although far more
numerous than those for the physical theory, are also less

profound: Epicurus’ own letter? on the subject is more of
~ x The most brilliant modern account of the moral theory is that of M. Guyau
(La Morale a’ Epicure). He did for the Ethics of Epicurus something of the ~
work which Giussani has done for the Physics: unfortunately he was even
more liable to read into Epicurus modern modes of thought and his own
ingenious subtleties. A good brief account of the moral theory, which perhaps

lays too much stress on the social aspect, will be found in R. D. Hicks, Stoic
and Epicurean. 2 Ep. iii to Menoeceus. Diog. Laert. x. 122-35.

ah |

ETHICS ~ 483

a popular exposition than the letter to Herodotus, and his
critics in antiquity were in the habit’ of isolating the moral
theory and attacking it in relation to rival philosophies
rather than in its-connexion with his own general system.

The traditional method of Greek moral theory demanded
the selection of some general ‘end’ to which all conduct should
be subordinated, and by which all action should be judged.
Epicurus is decisive and unhesitating in his statement that
pleasure is the end: ‘pleasure’,! he says in a passage whose
full meaning cannot be completely realized till after a closer
investigation, ‘we call the beginning and end of the blessed
life’. The choice of pleasure as the moral end has in itself
been sufficient to bring upon him in all ages the obloquy
which has attached to the name ‘Epicurean’. His critics
seizing upon the word, and not troubling to investigate the
idea underlying it, have accused him of opening the door to
every kind of luxury, debauchery, and sensual enjoyment.
The deductions which Epicurus made from this primary
conception must be closely investigated before passing
judgement on the theory as a whole. But first it is necessary
to inquire into the causes which led him to make this choice.

Epicureans were in the habit of resting their defence of
the selection of pleasure as the end on the grounds of experi-
ence: ‘as proof that pleasure is the end he points out that all
living creatures as soon as they are born take delight in
pleasure, but resist pain by a natural impulse apart from
reason’.» There are several characteristic points in this
argument. In the first place it must be observed that
Epicurus’ moral theory is not based on any abstract ideal of
human nature, or any conception of obligation, but merely
on the fact of experience. He is not concerned with what
‘ought’ to be or what is ‘fitting’, but simply with what is:
pleasure is theend. In other words, just as in the physical

aoe a ,

« Ep. iii, § 128 ryv Hdoviy apynv Kal réAos A€éyowev elvar TOG wakapiws

oiv. A ¢ A ~

2 D.L. x. 137 daodeiter 5 yphrar tod réAos elvar Thy jovny TO

~ ~ a a ~ A s

Ta CHa apa 7H yervyniivar tH pev edapeoteiaba, TH 5é€ wOvw Tpoc
Kpovew duoikds Kal ywpis Adyov.

1i2

484 EPICURUS

theory it is impossible to go behind sense-perception, for
sensation is true, so in the field of morals the universal fact
about conduct conveyed by sense-perception is final: “plea-
sure is the end’. When sensation can give an answer, it is
unnecessary and futile to apply to any other court of inquiry,"
and even if an appeal were made to reason, it could not,?
based as it is on sense-perceptions, suggest any other end
without involving the fallacious aid of opinion: for the
general concept produced in the mind by experience will
be identical with those of the repeated sense-perceptions.
And in fact Epicurus in his argument is at pains to exclude
reason: the experience on which he bases his conclusion is
not that of the grown man, but that of children and animals
at the first moment of their birth. He wishes to get back
to experience when it is most irrational, for it is then that
the animal ‘soul’ is most completely under the control of
sensation and free from the false inferences of thought. And
in this condition we see, he argues, that it always chooses
pleasure and avoids pain ‘by a natural impulse apart from
reason’, or as is said elsewhere, ‘untaught’.3 Ethics then, like
physics, is to be concerned with what is, not with what ought
to be, and its source of information is precisely the same
as in the physical field, the experience which consists of the
impressions received from the continued series of sense-
perceptions.

But, although he rejected the aid of reason, Epicurus was
not content to rest “his choice of pleasure as the moral end
merely on the observation of the behaviour of others: for he
regarded the relation of pleasure and good as an immediate

x Torquatus, the Epicurean in Cicero’s dialogue, de Finibus, admits
(i. 9. 31) that some Epicureans are not content with this demonstration from
experience of the fact“of the pursuit of pleasure and would argue that reason
too tells us that pleasure ought to de the end, and that we have an ‘innate
concept’ (zpoAnyus) to that effect. But he rightly rejects this line of support
as alien to the true doctrine: there is, I believe, no trace of it in Epicurean
literature. Guyau (pp. 22 ff.) has built too much on this unorthodox argument.

2 See Chaps. II and VIII.

3 Sext. Emp. adv. Math. xi. 96; U. 398 duoixds Kai ddvdaxtws To CHov
devyer pev THY aAynddva. SidKer SE THY HSovyy. ;

ETHICS 485

subjective experience. ‘There is no need of reasoning and
argument to show that pleasure is to be sought and pain
avoided: this we perceive at once, just as we do that fire is
hot, that snow is white, that honey is sweet: there is no
necessity to establish any of these things by abstruse reason-
ing, it is enough merely to call attention to them (“tantum
esse satis admonere’’).”' The conclusion is immediate, it is
indeed itself a part of the direct sensation: ‘it is enough to
have sensation and to be a creature of flesh, and pleasure
will be seen to be a good’.? To understand this it is necessary
to go back for a moment to the Epicurean psychology.3 In
the simplest bodily sensations the contact of an external
body large enough to touch the atoms of soul distributed
among the body-atoms, stirs the ‘fourth nature’ at once to
the movements of sensation, which are then communicated
to the other soul-atoms and so to the atoms of body, with the
result that the body then feels. The same process occurs not
merely in other bodily sensations caused by internal move-
ments, such as those of nerves or stomach, but also in the
sense-organs, with the difference that there the result is not
a mere passive sensation, but the more active sensation of
perception. In one and all of these sensations, there is a
certain atomic dislocation and readjustment due to move-
ment. In the vast majority of instances this dislocation
causes not only the sensation of contact or perception, but
also an added feeling (mé6os) of pleasure or pain, and this,
not as a consequence, but as an inherent part of the sensation.
Just as by the sense of touch we know that fire is not only
fire but hot, by the sense of sight that snow is not only snow
but white, and by taste that honey is sweet, so also by all
the senses we know equally directly that the touch, taste,
smell, sound, or sight is pleasant or painful. And in Epi-
curus’ analysis just as the atomic movement is perception,
so also the atomic dislocation or readjustment is pain or

* Cic. de Fin. i. 9. 30; U. 397. :

2 Plut. adv. Colot. 27. 1122d; U. p. 279n. aicOnow éxew Set Kat
odpxwov elvat, Kal davetrar jSov% dyabdv.

3 See Chap. VIII, pp. 398 fF.

486 EPICURUS

pleasure.’ By pleasure or pain then is meant simply that
which is good or bad to the senses: ‘there are two feelings,
pleasure and pain, which occur to every living creature, and
of these pleasure is the feeling akin to us (oiefov) and pain
alien (dAAbrpuov)’.?_ This feeling superadded to the mere per-
ception is a direct indication, a test in its pleasantness or
painfulness of the good and the bad. It is for this reason
that feeling? (d0os) takes its place along with sensation
(aicOnos) and the concept (mpéAnyus) as a criterion of truth.
Feeling is as immediate a test of goodness and badness as
sensation is of truth: to the senses pain is always bad and
pleasure always good. The criterion is direct and is the
direct experience of all living creatures.

The weak point in the Epicurean position might seem to
be the identification of that which is good for the senses
with the morally good, and many cogent arguments against
it might be and were adduced by the upholders of other
philosophies. Two answers might at once be given to such
an objection. That in the first place it is perhaps a misnomer
to speak of Epicurus’ ‘moral theory’: for a ‘moral theory’
necessarily implies a conception of obligation, whereas
Epicurus had no such conception and only wished to base
a practical method of life on the universal fact of experience,
that pleasure is in itself desirable or good and pain undesir-
able or bad. Secondly, what is more important and more to
the present purpose, a system which rests on the infallibility
of sense-perception and on that alone, could give no 7
answer: for the only good and bad which the senses kno
is pleasure and pain. The supreme interest to the student
of Epicureanism is the perfect correlation of this idea which
lies at the root of the ethical theory with the whole of the
rest of the system. The choice of pleasure as the end of life
is not to Epicurus an arbitrary selection detached from his

« For pain as atomic dislocation see Lucr. ii. 963—6: in such cases readjust-
ment is pleasure. For pleasure as atomic movement (750v7) kuvnuatuxy) see
Plut. adv. Colot. 27. 1122 e Acta Kal mpoonva Kwara THs capKos and
other passages in U. 411-14. 2 DL. 254

3 D.L. x. 31: cf. Ep. ili, § 129 ds Kavdv TH Aer Tay ayabov KpivovTes.

a=

Peraias. 487

physical explanation of the world, but the immediate and
necessary outcome of the fundamental trust in sensation on
which the physical theory was likewise built. Just as in the
physical world we trust sensation because it is true, so in
the world of action we must trust the feelings of pleasure and
pain: for they are the sole and infallible criterion of good and
bad. The ‘loose patchwork’ of two independent theories,
with which Epicurus is sometimes reproached, turns out
after all to be a very closely woven texture.

That all pleasure then is good and all pain bad is the
primary principle which must lie at the base of all conduct,
and the ethical problem is simply to tell men how the maxi-
mum of pleasure can best be attained. Now since there is no
other standard of judgement beyond the simple feeling of
pleasure and _pain, it is obvious that any qualitative distinc-
tion of pleasures is impossible: one pleasure can only be said
to be better or worse than another, if there lies behind
pleasure some more fundamental criterion, such as virtue,
self-development, and so on, which may be applied as a
test. Pleasure itself being the final court of appeal, no dis-
tinction can be made except that of quantity: the aim of
conduct must be to secure the maximum amountof pleasure.*
We must ask then in the first place what kind of pleasures
produce the most evident feeling, and the answer is clear—
the pleasures of the body (cdp€), its sense-perceptions, and
sensations of movement. These then must have the first
place in the life of pleasure, and Epicurus and his followers
never hesitate to assert their claim: ‘I know not how I can
conceive the good, if I withdraw the pleasures of taste and
sexual passion and hearing, and the pleasurable emotions
caused to sight by beautiful form.’* But among these
pleasures of the flesh} it is possible by purely quantitative

t Aristocles Eusebii, Praep. Ev. xiv. 21. 3; U. 442 petpeto0ar yap adra
T® TOT Kati od TH Tro. K .

2 Epicurus zepl réAovs quoted by Athenaeus, xii. 546e; U. 675 D.L.
x. 6; C.B. fr. 103 Cic. Tuse. iii. 18. 413 de Fin. ii. 3.7; U. 67. .

3 Epicurus in these contexts always uses the word ‘flesh’ (adp&), the o&pa
being for him the whole atomic body. The word forms one of several signs

488 EPICURUS

measurement to distinguish grades:' the pleasures of the
eye and ear, which are partly aesthetic and even intellectual,
even the pleasures of taste, which have a certain refinement,
are less strong, because less truly corporeal, then the sensual
pleasures of the body. The greatest quantitative pleasure,
the most completely bodily, is the pleasure of the stomach,
and Epicurus with relentless pursuit of his principles to their
logical conclusion assigns to it the first place: ‘the beginning
and the root of all good is the pleasure of the stomach: even
wisdom and culture must be referred to this’. The primary
application then of the ‘hedonistic calculus’ leads to the
ranging of pleasures in precisely the opposite order to that
in which they would be placed in an idealist system such
as that of Plato, which ranks pleasures according to an
extraneous standard of better and worse. ‘The weakest
pleasures are those of the mind, then stronger the pleasures
of sense-perception, sight and hearing at the bottom of the
scale, then smell and taste, and finally the strongest of all
are the gross sensual pleasures of the stomach. In the
graphic phrase of Plutarch} ‘the Epicureans measure the
amount of pleasures as with compasses from the stomach as
centre’. It is of course this audacious reliance on the cardinal
test of the amount of sensation and the conclusion to which
it leads, which brought Epicureanism into disrepute: the
life which had its ‘roots’ in the pleasure of the stomach
seemed little better than the life of pigs. And indeed if the
philosophy of Epicurus stopped here and recommended, as
its opponents pretended to believe it did, the momentary
enjoyment of the maximum of sensual pleasure, not merely
in his Letters of the approximation of the language to the Hellenistic Greek
of the New Testament.

t See Guyau, p. 31.

Quoted by Athenaeus, ibid.; U. 409; C.B. fr. 59 dpyi Kal pila mavrds
dyabod 1 ris yaotpos 7507)" Kal Ta odd Kai Ta mepitTa emt tadrnv
exer THY avapopar.

3 contra Ep. beat. 17, p. 1098d.; U. 409 of dvOpwaor ras HSovas TO
péyeBos Kaba rep Kévtpw Kal Siactipari TH yaoTpt mreprypadovat.

4 Horace, Ep. 1. 4. 16 ‘Epicuri de grege porcum’; Cic. in Pis. 16. 37
‘Epicure noster, ex hara producte, non ex schola’.

ErHros ~ 4a

would it have deserved all the censure and ridicule which has
ever been heaped upon it, but it could not possibly have
attained the position it held among the practical philosophies
of Greece and Rome. But it was a total misconception of the
Master’s meaning to take this as his final judgement on the
life of man. He had reached here by unswerving faithfulness
to his principle the lowest ebb, as it were, of his doctrine:
it is necessary to inquire now how the tide could rise again,
and to suspend judgement until it has been seen at its height.

The philosophy of Aristippus and the Cyrenaics, which
superficial critics have sometimes accused Epicurus of
borrowing wholesale, did indeed recommend this momen-
tary pursuit of the highest pleasure: each moment,! regarded
as a detached instant, was to be filled with the maximum of
pleasure and the happiness of life was the ageregate of such
individual experiences. But to Epicurus’ mind the ‘blessed
life’, as he called it, was not a succession of independent
instants, but a continuous whole, no one moment of which
could properly be regarded as detached from the time pre-
ceding or following: life must be regarded as a unity. Now
the moment this notion of continuity is introduced, it is
obvious that the most important effects follow with regard
to the doctrine of pleasure. For it is seen that certain
pleasures are followed by attendant pains, which may be so
great as to counterbalance the original pleasure: conversely,
certain pains may produce as a consequence so much pleasure
that it is worth while to endure them. The first principle
then that the maximum amount of pleasure must be attained
may lead, if this continuous view of life be taken, to a choice
which will be the exact reverse of that which the Cyrenaics
would recommend. Epicurus has put this strongly and
clearly in the Letter to Menoeceus:? ‘And since pleasure is
the first good and natural to us (ovudurov), for this very
reason we do not choose every pleasure, but sometimes we
pass over many pleasures, when greater discomfort (8vcxepes)
accrues to us as the result of them: and similarly we think

* Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 417: see Guyau, pp. 37 fF.
* § 129: cf. K.A. viii, and fr. 62 C.B.; U. 442.

490 EPICURUS

many pains better than pleasures, since a greater pleasure
comes to us when we have endured pains for a long time.
Every pleasure then because of its natural kinship to us
(Sia 70 pvow exew oixeidv) is good, yet not every pleasure is to
be chosen (aipery): even as every pain also is evil, yet not all
are always of a nature to be avoided (fevery).’ This con-
sideration of consequences once established, the ‘hedonistic
calculus’ assumes another form. It becomes a balancing of
pleasures and pains alike, not now regarded merely in them-
selves but in company with their consequences. Pleasures
must indeed be estimated by quantity, as before, but after
deducting, as it were, the quantity of attendant pain; and
similarly with pain: ‘by a scale of comparison (cuppeérpyors)
and by the consideration of advantages and disadvantages
we must form judgement on all these matters’.* It is mani-
fest that the conclusions will now be very different. Is there
any test by which it is possible to recognize the pure
(dxépovor)* pleasures, unattended by pain, or by which
pleasures may be graduated in a scale? Is there again any
rule of life by which in the long run, when all the calculation
and balancing is done, we may hope to have attained the
maximum of pleasure?

Epicurus gives several answers to these questions, which
it is easy to state, but it is less easy to follow out the process
by which he arrived at them or the connexion that he saw
between several slightly different avenues of approach to his
ultimate conception of the “blessed life’. One critic thinks
that Epicurus’ doctrines can only be understood in the light
of the theories to which they were opposed, another regards
the process as one of continual modification of his system in
answer to the objections or possible objections of critics:4
others have been content to leave the various notions inde-
pendent, as they are found scattered up and down in our
authorities without attempting to discover any close nexus
between them. The clue is almost certainly to be found in
the physical theory, if it can be applied rightly. A rather

: Ep. iii, § 130. 2 KA. xii.

3 Wallace, Epicureanism, P.! 134. 4 Guyau, Livre I, cap. iv.

2 or OF ee

eager sy Qe aw

—_—

ee T HICSS: ~~ aot

closer analysis then must be attempted of the psychology of
pleasure, as Epicurus understood it. Pleasure is the fulfil-
ment of desire (ém@uuia): what does this mean? Desire
may arise in two ways: it may in the first place have a purely
corporeal origin: the waste caused by bodily effort or merely
by the natural processes of life results in a loss of material :1
consequent upon this comes a movement of pain due to
want (70 dAyodv kar’ évdevav):? this pain calls up the image of
its satisfaction and that in turn produces the painful move-
ment of desire.3 Then, if the means of satisfying the desire
is within our attainment, there follows another movement
accompanying the process of satisfaction: this movement
(xdvnais) is a kind of pleasure.t As the result of the completion
of the process there ensues a second kind of pleasure
(7)307) karacrypatuc}),> the static pleasure of the equilibrium
(evdordHeva)® or freedom from pain (dovia) which the body
now enjoys. But the image of desire may also be presented
to the mind without the antecedent process of loss and pain
due to want, as in the case of gluttony or the social desires
of ambition and so on; the desire is in this case also in itself
painful and satisfaction is attended with the pleasure of
movement, but, as it was not originally caused by the pain
of want due to loss, it was a gratuitous upsetting of the
pleasure of equilibrium. What then is to be our attitude to
these different kinds of pleasures and desires? It is clear
that of the two kinds of pleasure that of equilibrium is
superior, for it is pure and in itself entirely free from pain,
antecedent, accompanying, or resultant. Indeed if the body

t Lucr. ii. 1128-9.

2 Ep. iii. § 130; K.A. xviii, xxi.

3 Lucr. iv. 858~—76, gives the outline of the process which may be filled
in from the parallel account of the act of will in the following paragraph. —

4 Plut. 4x seni sit gerenda res publica 5: compare other quotations in
Usain.

Bysilaseey Ae. in Plat. Phileb. 274; U. 416 xaid’ Emixoupos Aéyes rv
Kara pvow 7Sovyv, KaTaoTnuaTtiKiy adriy Aéywr. aitilo- baste

6 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 4, p. 1089d adroit pou SoKobar . . . €is Tiy amroviay
Kai THy edaTdbevav dropedyew THs capKds : and below 76 edarabes aapkos

Kkardornpa fr. 11 C.B.; U. 68 ’

492 EPICURUS

could be kept in this perfect equilibrium, it would, apart
from the incursion of pain from without in the shape of
disease or accident (which must be considered later), be
wholly free from pain: and it is because of the perfect and
instantaneous adjustment of supply and loss that the bodies
of the gods are wholly without pain and their life continu-
ously and perfectly happy. But with the human body the
adjustment can never be either perfect or instantaneous:
there must always be the pain due to want and the pleasure
of the movement of satisfaction. Now this kinetic pleasure,
merely because it is pleasure, is good, but it is always
counterbalanced by the antecedent pain. It is therefore
inferior as an object of choice to the pleasure of rest: it is
indeed a necessary element in human life owing to the
inevitable process of physical loss and repair, but it is not in
itself a pure pleasure. Hence we find that on the one hand
Epicurus' admits the pleasure of movement as a necessary
constituent in bodily pleasure, but on the other speaks of it
contemptuously: the ‘ticklings’ of the flesh? is a favourite
name and elsewhere he speaks of the ‘smooth and gentle
movements in the flesh’.3 Can any practical conclusion be
formed? It must be that in order to secure the maximum
amount of pleasure and the least amount of pain, we must
aim as much as possible at the pleasure of equilibrium, and,
what is the converse of this proposition, as little as may be
at the pleasures of movement. Or in other words, the satis-
faction of the bodily wants, hunger, thirst, &c., is in itself
a necessity and conduces to the true pleasure of equilibrium:
the satisfaction of other wants is unnecessary and, even if it
added to the total of pleasure, would counteract itself by
adding also to the aggregate of pain. And here is exactly
the difference between Epicurus and the Cyrenaics: ‘they
do not admit static pleasure, but oy that which consists in
motion. But» Epicurus admits both kinds in the soul and

x Athenaeus, xii. 546e; US 413.

2 yapyadopot, Athenaeus, ibid.: cf. Plut. de Occulte Vivendo, 4, 1129;

Seneca, Zp. 92. 6 ‘beatum facit titillatio corporis’; U. 412.
3 Plut. adv. Colot. 27, 1122; U. 411.

ae |

Pras ~~ 493

in the body.’ And of the two kinds the static is the purer,
because it does not involve antecedent or consequent pain.

With this problem of the different kinds of desire Epi-
curus has dealt himself and his attitude can now be better
understood. Of desires, he holds,? some are natural and
necessary, some natural but not necessary, and others neither
natural nor necessary but ‘idle’ (xevai) or ‘due to idle
imaginings’ (mapa xerjv Sdfav ywouevar). And of the necessary
some are necessary for happiness (ddaovia), others for the
repose (doxAnoia) of the body, and others for very life.
A scholium further explains the distinction with illustrations 33
‘the desire for food and clothing is necessary: the desire for
sexual pleasures is natural but not necessary, the desire for
particular food or particular clothing is neither natural nor
necessary’. ‘This account may be completed by the distinc-
tion, which can be fairly certainly made, between the three
kinds of necessary desires: those necessary for very life will
be the desire of breath, food, &c., those necessary for the
repose of the body will be those of warmth, shelter, clothing,
&c., and those necessary for happiness will be freedom from
fear, &c.; the last class will be considered again when
pleasures of the mind come to be discussed. What then is
the right attitude towards these various kinds of desires?
The natural and necessary desires must of course and can
easily be fulfilled :4 without the satisfaction of some we cannot
live at all, others if satisfied produce equilibrium of body and
others equilibrium of mind. At the other end of the scale the
‘idle’ desires, which result merely from vain imaginings of
pleasures greater than we at present possess, and will con-
tribute nothing to the equilibrium of body and mind but
may well destroy it, must be got rid of at all costs. The

x D. Lex. 196;

2 See Ep. iii. § 127, and K.4. xxix: the general idea was anticipated by
the division of “goods’ in Plat.“Rep. 357b.

3 On Arist. Eth. Nic. iii. 13; U. 456. Thescholium on K.4. xxix makes
the mistake of classing the desire for ouctAwara (special kinds of food, &c.)
among the natural but not necessary desires, but enlarges the idea of the third

class by the example of the desire for ‘crowns and statues’.
4 Cic. Tusc. Disp. v. 33.93; U. 456.

494 ‘ EPICURUS

middle class of the natural but not necessary desires causes
slightly more difficulty: ‘it is not difficult either to obtain
them or to forego them’.! On the whole the wise man will
make a just and moderate use of them and his practical
wisdom (dpévnows) must be his guide in every case. Going
back now to the psychical account of desire, it is not hard to
see that Epicurus’ decision here is completely in accord with
his attitude to the two kinds of pleasure. ‘The natural and
necessary desires are those which spring from the pain of
want (76 ddyotv Kar’ &Seav) and their satisfaction is produc-
tive not only of the pleasure of movement, but of the pleasure
of equilibrium: they must then be gratified. The natural
but not necessary desires are typically the ‘ticklings of the
flesh’ : they cannot arise without certain painful bodily move-
ments and therefore their satisfaction does to some degree
produce the pleasure of equilibrium, but much more does
it arouse the pleasure of movement: they must therefore be
indulged sparingly. The desires which are neither necessary
nor natural produce pleasures which are wholly kinetic: so
far from contributing to static pleasure they are the cause
of those ‘storms and gusts’ which are most inimical to the
‘calm’ of the body: they must be wholly suppressed. Once
again we are brought back to the satisfaction of the primary
needs of the stomach.

These two avenues of thought lead then to the same con-
clusion: but the whole idea is brought out more clearly by
a third line of approach, which was a favourite with Epicurus
and his disciples. The great mistake,3 they thought, which
men make about the pleasures of the body is that they
suppose them unlimited: it is always possible, men suppose,
to go on adding new pleasures and so piling up the aggregate

amount: if this is true we can never reach the maximum of

« Ibid. ‘nec ad potiendum difficile esse censet nec vero ad carendum’.

2 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 5, 1090 xeydvas ... Kal KaTavyiopovs: cf.
Athenaeus, xii. 456e; U. 413.

3 K.A. xx 4 pev odpé amédaBe ta mépata ris jdovas ameupa Kab
dmewpos abriv xpdvos mapeoxevacev (the last word is uncertain, but the
sense clear, see my notes).

grt apa Peo >

a
= re

Deen ieiirenateetliiieens ania Aan

en Se ‘is aaeacgramenpegiaaiit

ETHICS 495

pleasure, and for its full enjoyment infinite time is necessary.
Epicurus’ analysis of the process of pleasure shows that this
is not so: there is a limit to the amount and the maximum
is easily attained at any moment. For the perfect pleasure,
that in which there is no pain, is reached as soon as the ‘pain
due to want’ is removed: we then enjoy the pleasure of
equilibrium, and any attempt to go beyond this may indeed
create the inferior pleasure of movement with its attendant
pain, but it cannot increase the true static pleasure, for that
knows no increase. “The pleasure in the flesh is not in-
creased, when once the pain due to want is removed, but
is only varied (aouciMerar):’! ‘the limit of quantity in pleasures
is the removal of all that is painful’? A later critic explains
this more clearly:3 ‘nature increases the pleasure up to the
point when pain is stopped, but beyond that point it does not
permit any increase in amount, but only admits of unneces-
sary diversifications (ouAuovs), if pleasure occurs when
there is no pain; the advance to this point which is made with
the accompaniment of longing (épegis) is the measure of
pleasure: it is short and brief’.. The new conception of the
limit thus leads once again to the same practical conclusion,
that the satisfaction of the primary needs brings with it the
maximum pleasure, beyond which no real increase is possible.
And if so, this maximum pleasure is not a matter of infinite
time, but is accessible at any moment, and the pleasure of
the single moment is as great as could be obtained in any
length of time: ‘infinite time contains no greater pleasure
than limited time, if one measures by reasoning the limits
of pleasure’.4 Again, the existence of this natura! limit
affords a basis for distinguishing between pleasures: ‘if every
pleasure could be intensified (xarerv«votro) so that it lasted
and influenced the whole organism or the most essential
parts (74 kupuirara pepy) of our nature, pleasures would never
differ from one another’:5 as it is the limit enables us to

t K.A. xviii. a Ai.

3 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 3, p. 1088 c; U. 417. ;

4 K.A. xix 6 drreipos xpdvos tony Exes ri HSoviy Kal 6 TETEPAGLLEVOS,
edv Tis adrijs Ta Tépara KatapeTpHon TO Aoyiopa. 3 K.A, ix.

496 EPICURUS

separate the perfect pleasure of equilibrium from the less
perfect, because less pure, pleasure of movement or diversi-
fication. Lastly, it is now possible to make a very important
practical deduction, namely that this maximum of pleasure
is within the reach of any man at any time: for ‘the wealth
demanded by nature is both limited and easily procured,
but that demanded by idle imaginings stretches on to infinity’,*
or, as Lucretius? has put it sagely and picturesquely, ‘if a man
would but steer his life by true reasoning, it is great riches
to a man to live thriftily with calm mind: for never can he
lack for a little’. The highest pleasure then for Epicurus
is no far-off ideal attainable only by the rich and powerful
or by the trained philosopher, but simple and easily reached
even by the poorest and humblest: ‘thanks be to blessed
Nature, because she has made what is necessary easy to supply
and what is not easy unnecessary’ 3

So far, from the examination of bodily pleasure the posi-
tion has been reached that the static pleasure resulting from
the satisfaction of necessary wants is pure and complete:
in the human body it cannot be absolutely continuous,
because there must always be the process of loss and supply,
the pain of want and its satisfaction, but the means required
for its restoration, when momentarily upset, are accessible
to all and the process is short and easy. The abjuration of
all unnecessary pleasures of movement in the variation of
enjoyments and the control of the unnecessary physical
pleasures by practical wisdom prevents any attempt to go
beyond the limit and so introduce gratuitous disturbance.
The life of perfect bodily rest (doxAnoia) and health (byte)
is thus the true pleasure and easily attainable by any man.
But it must not be forgotten that there are other pains
besides those of physical desire: for disease or accident may
bring upon us greater sufferings, and sufferings too which
are not, or at any rate only to a small extent, within our
control. Such pains will necessarily upset the balance and

1 K.A. xv 6 ris p¥cews TAOGTOs Kai apioTrar Kal edmdpioTds eoTW, 6
Sé trav Kevav So€dv eis dreipov exminrer. 2 v. III7—19.

3 Joannes Stob. Flori/. xvii. 23; C.B. fr. 67; U. 469.

ss Pu.

ETHICS ~— “40%

materially interfere with the ‘blessed’ life of continuous
happiness: what is to be our attitude towards them? They
are of course bad: ‘all pain is bad’, nor can the pain of
disease be placed among those which we ‘think better than
pleasures, since a greater pleasure comes to us when we have
endured pains for a long time’.t Epicurus’ answer is at
first sight* unexpected in view of the fundamental principle
of the moral system and has an almost Stoic ring: we must
accept pain, he says in effect, and we shall find that it does
not really interfere with the pleasure of our lifetime, for 3
if it is severe, it is short: if long, it is not severe: ‘Pain does
not last continuously in the flesh, but acute pain is there for
a very short time, and even that which just exceeds the
pleasure in the flesh does not continue for many days. But
chronic illnesses permit a predominance of pleasure over
pain in the flesh.’ There is here no real inconsistency with
his main position. Pain must be endured if it comes, but
in the calculation of happiness, there will always be a balance
on the side of pleasure: if pain lasts long, its comparative
mildness will give pleasure a continuous advantage, and if
it is very severe so that it does for the time outweigh pleasure,

.then either it cannot last long and the moments of its

duration will be as nothing to the time in which we are free
from it, or else if it does last,5 it will bring death, and our
‘hedonistic calculus’ is over. This balance of pain against
pleasure in the confidence that the account will end to the
advantage of pleasure may seem to those who have suffered
much bodily pain a hard saying, but it was made by one
who, suffering agonies of bodily torment in his last hours,
could yet speak of ‘this blessed day’® and write to a friend
that though he was enduring ‘suffering which could not be.

t Ep. ui, § 129.

2 See Cic. de Officiis, iii. 33. 117; U. 446 ‘non id spectandum est quid
dicat, sed quid consentaneum sit ei dicere, qui bona voluptate terminaverit,
mala dolore.’

3 Ep. ii, § 133.

+ K.A. iv: compare other quotations in U. 446-8.

s Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 23, 1103; C.B. fr. 65; U. 448 6 yap mdvos 6
depBadAwv ovvaiber Oavatw. « DL. x22; C.Be frase; Use.

3307 Kk

498 EPICURUS

more intense, yet against it all is set the joy in my heart at
the recollection of my conversations with you’. It is a noble
idea and certainly involves no departure from the principles
of the moral theory.

It has been inevitable now and then in speaking of the
pleasures of the body to imply a participation of the mind,
but its special pleasures must now be considered more
carefully: what are they in themselves and what is their
relation to the pleasures of the body? To go back once again
to the Epicurean psychology; the mind does not differ
materially from the rest of the body, but is an accumulation
of atoms of particular shapes and in particular combinations
situated in the breast. Sensations (both aic#jces and 7d6n)
are felt by the body in the places where the contact or move-
ment giving rise to them takes place: the mind itself does
not directly feel pleasure and pain, but these feelings are,
just like the passive sensations and sense-perceptions, ‘tele-
graphed’ to it by the movements of the soul-particles in the
body, and are reproduced in the mind not exactly as feelings
of pleasure and pain, but rather as the ‘emotions’ of joy and
grief: ‘all pleasurable movement through the flesh is sent
up to form a kind of pleasure or joy for the mind’.* The
pleasure of the mind then is primarily at any rate a kind of
reflex of the pleasure of the body: ‘thesoul’ as a contemptuous
critic? puts it scornfully, ‘receives the memory of the
pleasure, and preserves it as a kind of fragrance (domep dopsjv)
and nothing more’. Similarly the soul shares the body’s
pains: ‘think it not unnatural that when the flesh cries
aloud, the soul cries too. The flesh cries out to be saved
from hunger, thirst, and cold. It is hard for the soul to
.repress these cries and dangerous for her to disregard
nature’s appeal to her’.3 The opponents indeed of Epicu-
reanism were wont to attribute to him‘ the doctrine that all

x Plut. contr. Ep.beat. 2 p. 1087b.; U. 433 doa dua capKos emirepms
klvnows ed? HSovyv Twa Kat xapav puyfs avareurropevn.

2 Ibid. 4. 3 Porph. ad Marc. 30, p. 209; C.B. fr. 44; U. 200.

4 Cic. de Fin. ii. 30. 98 “negas animi ullum esse gaudium quod non
referatur ad corpus’; U. 430.

EFHTCS 499

the pleasures of the soul were simply the reflexion of pleasures
of the body, and though this is not really a fair account of
his teaching, it is yet true that he held that all the pleasures
of the soul were either derived thus directly from the
pleasures of the body or had reference to the body’s welfare:
‘the mind does not naturally take joy or find peace (yadnvilew)
in anything but the pleasures of the body, present or ex-
pected’. This is of course again a relentless application of
the root-principle that all pleasure originates in the flesh ;
but though at first sight it seems to allow but a limited field
of action for the mind, if the thought is followed out, it
develops very considerably.

In the first place the mind can rejoice not merely or even
principally in the individual movements of pleasure in the
flesh, but also in its more complete and permanent pleasure
of equilibrium.* This in itself is no slight extension, for it
at once gives the mind an opportunity not merely for
transient emotions of rejoicing, but for a permanent con-
dition of peaceful happiness (drapagia) corresponding to the
freedom from pain (dzovia) in the body. But a far more
important extension of the mind’s activity is opened out by
its own peculiar capacities. The body is conscious of its
pleasure—whether of movement or rest—only at the mo-
ment of its occurrence, and though the whole purpose of the
attainment of equilibrium is the prolongation and constant
re-creation of these moments, yet the succession must be
interrupted, as well by natural processes as by the occasional
incursion of disease or accident. But it is the peculiar pro-
perty of the mind, thanks to its own special movements of
sensation, that it can ‘look before and after’: it has memory |
and anticipation. It is not therefore confined to the con-
templation of such pleasures and pains as the flesh may ‘send
up’ to it at any given moment, but can return upon the
experience of the past: ‘the recollection of good things in
the past is the greatest contribution to the pleasant life’.3

t Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 4. 1088 e; U. 429.

2 Ibid. 5. 1089 d; U. 431.

3 Plut., op. cit., 18. 109g d; U. 436.
Kk2

500 EPICURUS

For even though the body may at any given moment be
sending news of pain, yet the mind by choosing to dwell on
the memory of past pleasures may overwhelm, or at any rate
lessen, its present distress: ‘by the recollection of past
blessings present evils are mitigated’." Nor is this all, for
the mind may look into the future and, confident in the
result which will ensue from the carrying out of the moral
doctrine, may rejoice by anticipation in the pleasure of the
body which is to come. It is indeed noticeable that Epicurus*
in indicating the sources of the ‘highest and most certain
joy’ combines with the ‘stable condition of rest in the flesh’
not the recollection of past pleasure, but ‘the sure and certain
hope’ of pleasure to come. No doubt it is conversely true
that the pains of the mind,? embracing past, present, and
future, are also worse than those of the body, but the mind,
thanks to this power of projection away from the present,
has more control over its emotions than the body has over
its feelings, and the philosopher can train himself to con-
template pleasures rather than pains. Diogenes notes that
in this view that both the pleasures and the pains of the soul
were greater than those of the body, Epicurus again differed
from the Cyrenaics.

The positive pleasure then of the mind is the joy of the
contemplation of the pleasures of the body in past, present,
and future, and its concentration upon this contemplation
leads to a condition of tranquillity (drapagéia) corresponding
to the equilibrium of the body. But this tranquillity of the
mind may again be interrupted, like the tranquillity of the
body, by the invasion of pain, and the mind has special
pains of its own. The pains of the mind are primarily, like
its pleasures, derived from the body: present pain in the
body may cause mental grief, and so also may the recollection

1 Hieronymus, Comm. in Isaiam, xi. 38; U. 437. A practical example of
this may be seen in the saying of Epicurus on his deathbed, quoted on p. 497.

2 Quoted by Plut., ibid. 4; C.B. fr. 11; U.68 76 yap edorabés capxos
KaTdoTnua Kal TO Trepl Tadrns moTOv eAmuopa THY aKpoTaTyY Xapav Kal
BeBuorarny exer Tots emAoyilecbar Suvapevors.

3) Der 37-

_

PL nics-~. 501

of past pain. But the mind has its own ‘unnecessary desires’,
whose indulgence may bring pain. The first of these is
avarice, the desire for wealth, which only produces gratuitous
disturbance in the mind: ‘many men when they have ac-
quired riches have not found the escape from their ills but
only a change to greater ills’,t ‘by means of occupations
worthy of a beast abundance of riches is heaped up, but a
miserable life results’. Far better is the life of poverty which
produces contentment: ‘poverty, when measured by the
natural purpose of life, is great wealth, but unlimited wealth
is great poverty’.3 Another of the mind’s unlimited desires
is for honour and position, for ‘crowns and statues’, as the
scholiast puts it. A striking aphorism sums up the futility of
all these desires: ‘the disturbance of the soul cannot be ended
nor true joy created either by the possession of the greatest
wealth or by honour and respect in the eyes of the mob or
by anything else that is associated with causes of unlimited
desire’.5 It is however the capacity of the mind to project
itself into the future which gives it its most characteristic
and peculiar pains: for mental pain for the future is of course
fear.° Fear is from the nature of the case unknown to the
body, yet even this peculiar pain of the mind is in a sense
derived from the body, for mental fear is primarily at least
concerned with the fate of the body. Now this fear may be
of many kinds, for it may be excited by many causes. It may
be a fear lest the body should be unable to maintain the
pleasure of equilibrium, but it should not be, for of that we
have a ‘sure hope’: it may be a fear of disease or accident,
but again it should not be, for we know that even if pain
comes, pleasure will in the long run have the upper hand.
It may again be fear of the interference? of other men 1n our

t Porph. ad Marc. 28, p. 208; C.B. fr. 72; U. 479.

2 [hid D.2693 0, B.f2735 U. 480. 3 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxv.

4 Schol. ad K.A, xxx. 5 Sent. Vat. C.B. lxxxi.

6 See e.g. Ep. iii, § 128 tovrov yap ydpw mdvra mpdrropev Orrws pre
dAyOpev pre TapBapev. Mews

7 D.L. x. 117 BAdBas e dvOpdruwv 7) Sid picos 7} Sid POdvov 7} Sia
xatadpovynow yivecOar: see also K.A. vi, xl, and pp. 511-13.

502 EPICURUS

life of happiness, but it is possible in several ways to guard
against this.t There are however two great and overwhelm-
ing fears which may attack the mind, and if they are not
dissipated, may swallow up all pleasure in a continual and
abiding dread. The fear of the interference of the gods in
the affairs of the world wrecks the tranquillity of the mind,
because it destroys the ‘sure hope’ of the future, which rests
upon a belief in the perfect regularity of the process of cause
and effect: if miracles may happen, there is no possibility
of a sure calculation of future happiness for the rest of this
life. And the fear of death, if it is combined with a belief
in survival, is an almost stronger provocative of constant
dread: for even if we can so order this life as to secure the
pleasure of tranquillity, there may be awaiting us in an after
life punishments and tortures so horrible that the anticipation
of them will absolutely destroy that tranquillity. So terrible
indeed is this dread that Epicurus sometimes believed it
to be the motive of almost all crimes in life;? at times man
will even commit suicide to escape from fear of death}3
It is therefore a primary condition of mental tranquillity
that man should be freed from these fears. And so Epicurus
at the outset of his Letter to Menoeceus? sets out as the ‘first
principles’ (croweia) of the good life the two beliefs that god
is an immortal and blessed being, who does not help the
good or harm the bad, and that death is nothing tous. The
same two principles stand similarly at the head of the
Principal Doctrines,5 and are indeed the very foundation and
prime condition of the blessed life. We must learn that the
gods do indeed exist, but know no trouble themselves, nor
cause it to others: we must learn that death means the com-
plete extinction of consciousness,° that is, the end of all good
and evil, for it is the end of pleasure and pain. It cannot
hurt us when it comes, nor can its anticipation cause us
distress: ‘for that which gives no trouble when it comes, is

t Séespiss tas 2 See Lucr. iii. 59 ff.
3 Ibid. 79-81; Seneca, Ep. 24. 23; U. 497, 498.
4.123; 5 K-Asisne

6 Ep. ili, § 124 orépnats 5é eotw aicbijcews 6 Odvaros.

oer Ae

2

ge tom po eR a ite ag MT et an ee

aero se -—, 503

but an empty pain in anticipation’.t The loss of conscious-
ness and personality in death is complete: ‘the state after
death is the same as that before our birth’;? ‘even as in the
time gone by we felt no ill . . . so, when we shall be no more,
when there shall have come the parting of body and soul,
by whose union we are made one, you may know that nothing
at all will be able to happen to us, who will then be no more,
or stir our feeling; no, not if earth shall be mingled with
sea, and sea with sky’.3 Even if, as Lucretius suggests in
a curious speculation which seems to have good Epicurean
authority, ‘time should gather together our substance after
our decease and bring it’back again as it is now placed, if
once more the light of life should be vouchsafed to us, yet,
even were that done, it would not concern us at all, when
once the remembrance of our former selves were snapped in
twain’.

Now these ‘first principles’ may be accepted on authority
as a matter of faith, and as such Epicurus commends them
to Menoeceus: ‘become accustomed,’ he says, ‘to the belief
that death is nothing to us’.4 But for the initiated this faith
is not sufficient: if he is to have a sure grasp of the principles,
he must be able to prove both the unconcern of the gods
and the mortality of the soul. How Epicurus effected these
proofs has been seen in previous chapters, but a new link
may be noticed here between the moral and the physical
sides of Epicureanism. For just as the moral idea is an essen-
tial part in and an immediate consequence of the physical
theory, so now the physical theory becomes a necessity
for the full realization of the moral ideal. ‘If we were not
troubled by our suspicions of the phenomena of the sky
and about death, fearing that it concerns us, and also
by our failure to grasp the limits of pains and desires, we
should have no need of natural science (fvowdoyia) :’5 “a man
cannot dispel his fear about the most important matters if
he does not know what is the nature of the universe, but

« Ibid., § 125.

2 Pseudo-Plut. Consol. ad Apollonium, 15. 109 e; U. 495. :

3 Lucr. iii. 832-42. 4 Ep. ili, § 124. 5 K.A, xi.

504. EPICURUS

suspects the truth of some mythical story. So that without
natural science it is not possible to attain our pleasures un-
alloyed’.* [n this sense indeed it is true that Epicurus’
physical theory, though his interest in it for its own sake led
him far beyond the immediate necessity of establishing the
‘first principle’, does exist for the sake of the moral life: it
is in a sense its handmaid: ‘to discover accurately the cause
of the most essential facts is the function of the science of
nature, and a blessed life for us lies in this’? It is true that
the blessed life is in its practice open to the most humble
and least gifted, yet for its complete realization it requires
the co-operation of thought (8dvo.a)} penetrating into the
inmost workings of the imperceptible. And thought, which
is of course a special activity of the mind, in this research
finds in its turn its own peculiar pleasure, which is simul-
taneous with its effort and unlike that of the body, is almost
unlimited: ‘in all other occupations the fruit comes painfully
after completion, but in philosophy pleasure goes hand in
hand with knowledge’.t In other words, the intellect has
practically the whole range of physical science as its pleasure-
ground, and in the pursuit of its own pleasure is incidentally
securing the conditions of the pleasure of the mind as a
whole. It is with reason that Epicurus urges on Menoeceus
the practice of philosophy at all ages of life: “both when
young and old a man must study philosophy, that as he grows
old he may be young in blessings through the grateful
recollection of what has been, and that in youth he may be
old as well, since he will know no fear of what is to come’.5
Nor does the study of his philosophy require any previous
education or training; indeed it is a positive disadvantage:
‘I congratulate you, Apelles,’ says Epicurus to a disciple,
‘in that you have approached philosophy free from all
blemish’,® and to another he exclaims with vehemence:
“Blest youth, set sail in your bark and flee from every form

ie sy Aw ot Fs 2 Ep. i, § 78.
3 Ep. i, §78 Kat todro KaraAaBeiv TH Svavola éorw dmdA@s elvar.
4 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxvii. 5 Ep. ili, § 122.

« Athen. xii, p. 588 a; C.B. fr. 24; U. 117.

eee

om

Primos: 505

of culture.’ By the study of physical science alone can the
tranquillity of the mind be fully and permanently secured:
freed from the possibility of the great fears for the future,
and pleasurably occupied in the search for scientific truth,
which will confirm its freedom, it may peacefully rest in the
contemplation of the pleasures of the body, past, present,
and future, and so attain its own characteristic ‘imperturba-
bility’ (drapagia). There will then be but little room left,
even as there is little inclination, for vain desires: ‘through
love of true philosophy every disturbing and troublesome
desire is ended’.* And the result is a happy and useful life:
‘we must laugh and philosophize at the same time and do
our household duties and employ our other faculties, and
never cease proclaiming the sayings of the true philosophy’

Thus by a series of logical deductions the original simple
notion of the pursuit of pleasure has broadened out into a
wide conception of the ‘blessed’ life, whose ‘end is the health
of the body and tranquillity of the mind’,‘ the latter being
the direct outcome of the former. Pleasure and pain, though
always the final tests of good and bad, are modified through
the application of the calculus of pleasure, into a practical
choice and avoidance, and as a guide for choice and avoidance
certain definite principles have been laid down. But in
practical life there must always remain a residuum of border-
line cases, where the Epicurean will have to make up his
mind as to the right course. In such cases there is but one
guiding principle: ‘if on each occasion instead of referring
your actions to the end ordained by nature, you turn to some
other. nearer standard when you are making a choice or an
avoidance, your actions will not be consistent with your
principles’.s We must never be content to judge a problem
of action by any intermediate or derivative test, such as that
of any one of the virtues, but always have before us the
ultimate standard, the ‘end of nature’, pleasure, which 1s

Digs Ens 2 Porph. ad Marc. 31, p. 209; C.B. fr. 66; U. 457.

3. Sent. Vat. CB. fr ah. ‘

4 Ep. ili, § 128 ry rod odparos dyieav Kal rHv <THS puyis> arapa-
flav, érel TodTo Too paxapins Civ éare TéAos. 5 KA. xxv.

506 - -EPICURUS

the restful equilibrium of body and mind: no other standard
of judgement is safe. But the application of this principle is
by no means always easy, and for this reason Epicurus
regards as the supreme possession of life the faculty of
practical prudence or right judgement (dpdvnats), which
partly relying on experience and partly on a kind of intuition
—it is like the faculty for the right use of ‘apprehensions’
on the intellectual side—enables a man to make a right
choice. “The beginning of all this and the greatest good of
all is prudence: it is a more precious thing even than philo-
sophy.”? Philosophy is not within the grasp of all, nor does
it so greatly matter if a man were to go astray in the intel-
lectual apprehension of the principles of the system: but to
be mistaken in the practical distinction of good and evil
and so to make a wrong choice might mean the wrecking
of a life. Such practical prudence is within the reach of all
and it alone can help a man to the right application of the
principles he has learnt.

The wise man thus instructed and provided is well pre-
pared to meet life, its changes and chances and its end in
death. ‘He neither seeks to escape life nor fears the cessation

of life: for neither does life offend him, nor does the absence

of life seem ‘to be any evil. And just as with food he does
not seek simply the larger share and nothing else, but rather
the most pleasant, so he seeks to enjoy not the longest
period of time, but the most pleasant.’ His normal life,
thanks to the tranquillity which he has attained both in body
and mind, is one of pure, if not uninterrupted, pleasure, and
when pain comes he bears it in the certainty of the ultimate
preponderance of pleasure: ‘the wise man’,} cried Epicurus
in a moment of enthusiasm which has given much merriment
to his critics, ‘is happy, even if he be on the rack’. Chance,
that unpredictable element of spontaneity in nature, he
will not regard as itself a bestower of good and evil, but as
affording ‘opportunities for great good and evil: and he will
x Ep. iii, § 132. 2§ 126. —
3 _D.L. x. 118 Kav otpeBAwOy 8 6 codds, civar adrov eddaipova.

4 Ep. ili, §.134: cf. Ad. xvi.

been CS ~~. 507
think it better to be unfortunate in reasonable action than
to prosper in unreason:’ he would rather let chance spoil his
well-chosen plans, than be successful in an ill-chosen course
by its aid. And so, indifferent as far as possible, to events
and occurrences over which he has no control, he will live
his peaceful life of happiness, and ‘when circumstances bring
about his departure from life, he will not approach his end
as though he were falling short in any way of the best life’.
For the old age of the philosopher Epicurus had a peculiar
sympathy :* ‘it is not the young man who should be thought
happy, but an old man who has lived a good life... the old
man has come to anchor in old age as though in port, and
the good things for which before he hardly hoped he has
brought into safe anchorage in his grateful recollections’.
And to the last his effort must be prolonged: ‘we must try
to make the end of the journey better than the beginning, as
long as we are journeying: but when we come to the end,
we must be happy and content’. And so ‘when it is time
for us to go, spitting contempt on life and those who have
vainly clung to it, we will leave life crying aloud in a glorious
triumph-song that we have lived well’.4

It is a noble structure which Epicurus has raised on the
foundation of pleasure, and it is not in a mere enthusiasm
that he compares the life of the truly wise man to the happi-
ness of the gods: ‘You shall live’,5 he tells Menoeceus, ‘like
a god among men’: ‘if you take away his eternity,” says
Cicero in scorn, but with a singularly true statement of the
Epicurean position, ‘Jupiter is no more blessed than Epi-
curus: for both alike enjoy the highest good, that is pleasure’.
With greater exactness Epicurus has himself expressed the
comparison in a brief phrase which well sums up the blessed
life of the wise: ‘there are two ideas of happiness: complete

: RAs 2 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xvii.

3 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xviii. 4 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xlvii.

5 Ep. mi, § 135.

6 de Fin. ii. 27. 88; U. 602: cf. Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxxiii. “The flesh cries
out to be saved from hunger, thirst, and cold. For if a man keep this safety
and hope to keep it, he might rival even Zeus in happiness.’

508 EPICURUS

happiness, such as belongs to a god, which admits of no
increase, and the happiness which is concerned with the
addition and subtraction of pleasures’.' The wise man’s
happiness is not absolutely continuous owing to the neces-
sary wants of life and the inevitable disturbances of pain
and grief, but all the happiness he has is in itself as perfect
as that of the gods.

It would be natural to pause at this point and attempt
some estimate of the Epicurean moral theory in general,
but that it is necessary first to deal with the philosopher's
attitude to virtue, and in particular to those virtues which
involve dealings with other men: ‘egoistic hedonism’ will not
then perhaps shine so brightly. Virtue is of course not in itself
an end to Epicurus, it is not even in itself desirable: indeed
it is only ‘an empty name’. Pleasure is the only end and
the practical prudence of the wise man has to decide in each
case whether a given course of action will ultimately produce
greater pleasure than its opposite. What is commonly known
as virtue, and is made itself the end of action by other
thinkers, can only be chosen by the Epicurean, if at all, as
a means to an end: it is in itself nothing, but it may usefully
contribute to the real end of pleasure. The position is
succinctly summed up by Diogenes: ‘for the sake of pleasure

the virtues are preferred, but not for their own sake, just as _

the doctor’s art is employed for the sake of health’.3 We wish
to attain the true end, and the application of the ‘hedonistic
calculus’ shows us that the ‘virtuous’ course of action is on
the whole a useful means towards it, though in itself it may
well be laborious and painful and therefore even hateful:
‘I spit upon the honourable’ (xpoomrdw 7@ Kad), Epicurus
exclaimed, ‘and upon those who vainly admire it, when it
does not produce any pleasure.’+ It is not therefore possible

t Dib. x. 12a.

2 See Cic. Tusc. Disp. v. 26. 73, and other quotations in U. 511.

ce eg IF ;

4 Quoted by Athenaeus, xii. 5472; C.B. fr.79; U. 512. 76 xaAov here
probably includes both ‘the beautiful’, the aim of aesthetic culture, and ‘the
honourable’ as a moral end, e.g. in Plato.

BrHics: ~~ as

to discuss virtue as such with an Epicurean: even to speak
of ‘the virtues’ is a kind of brachylogy, for the real question
for him is the course of action on each occasion which will
produce the most pleasure: ‘virtue, according to Epicurus,
is concerned with the selection of pleasant things’. This
selection is the province of practical prudence exercising its
choice unfettered as occasions arise. Yet the experience of
the wise man may make generalizations, and experience
shows that prudence does choose the virtues,’ for its calcula-
tions show that they are conducive to pleasure: ‘the virtues’,
Diogenes of Oenoanda} wrote on his great inscription to
the passer-by, ‘are never an end, but they are productive of
the end’. Indeed not only are they productive of the end,
they are actually inseparable from pleasure: ‘virtue alone is
inseparable from pleasure’,+ for prudence itself ‘teaches us
that it is not possible to live pleasantly without living pru-
dently and honourably and justly, nor again to live a life
of prudence, honour, and justice without living pleasantly’.
In practice then the pendulum seems to have swung round
again: virtue is nought in itself, yet as a practical means to
pleasure it is indispensable. We should expect then to find
that the Epicurean, however widely his motives of action
might differ, lived a life not very different from that of
other men, and in practice followed the ordinary lines of
virtuous conduct. Yet even this conclusion is not fully
justified, for Epicurus’ logic in the moral field is relentless,
and his eye is always on the main end of the pleasure of
tranquillity. There are then striking differences in practice
as well as motive from the ordinary code, and these will be
seen most clearly by a consideration of his attitude towards
some of the individual virtues: it will be convenient to take
the three cardinal moral virtues of temperance, courage,
and justice: wisdom has in effect been discussed already.
Temperance is ‘not to be chosen for itself, but because
it brings peace to our minds and calms and assuages them

x Alexander Aphr. de Anima, ii. 22, p. 156; U. 515. ;
2 See Ep. ili, § 132. 3 Diog. Oen. fr. xxv, col. iii (William).
4 Dee 238. 5 Epwin, Sigacch KAS,

510 EPICURUS

in a kind of concord’.t It has no value in itself, it is even
painful and therefore bad, but it is derivatively worthy of
choice, because it contributes to the highest pleasure of
body and mind. For temperance is just the rule of conduct
which avoids the mere kinetic pleasures, the unnecessary
desires, and the ‘diversification’ of pleasure, and chooses
rather the conduct which conduces to the perfect pleasure
of tranquillity. The conclusion is here straightforward: the
Epicurean will choose temperance and cling to it as strictly
as any philosopher who made it an end in itself. For the
practice of courage the Epicurean has even stronger argu-
ments: for here it is not a question of avoiding pleasures,
which apart from their consequences are in themselves good,
but of choosing pains ‘in order to avoid greater pains’.» The
man who cannot show courage submits himself to pains of
the body, to the tyranny of other men, and to the fears of
the mind which are one and all far greater pains than the
effort which is required to resist them. Moreover the Epi-
curean has a better equipment for courage than other philo-
sophers: for he ‘despises death . . . and 1s prepared to meet
pains with the assurance that the greatest pains are ended
by death, and that lesser pains have many intervals of rest’.3
He can estimate rightly what it is that he has to endure and
so can go to meet pain and even death with ‘a strong and
lofty spirit free from all care and anguish’.* For courage he
has both a stronger motive and a greater capacity than
others: for the sake of his own peace it is infinitely worth
while, and he knows that the demand on it is not so great
as it might seem.

The problem of justice is at once more complicated and
more interesting, for it involves the whole question of rela-
tions to other:men. In other philosophies, such as those of
Plato.and Aristotle, justice was represented as the natural
outcome of man’s capacity and desire to live in society with
his fellow men: it exists by nature (fvcer) and not by con-

1 Cic. de Fin. i. 14. 47.
' 2 Origenes, contra Celsum, v.47; U. 516.
3 Cic. de Fin.i. 15. 49. - 4 Ibid.

ee ee ee]

be wicsi. ~ ae

vention (vow). Such a position was of course impossible for
Epicurus: the individual is concerned with his own maxi-
mum pleasure and cannot consider other men, except as they
affect that pleasure: ‘there is no such thing as human society:
every man is concerned for himself’.' But this very concern
for himself makes it necessary for the philosopher to deter-
mine his attitude to other men: for they may either be a very
serious hindrance to his pleasure or possibly be made to
subserve it. The motive of fear is in this case stronger than
the motive of hope. Indeed the fear of other men, though
not nearly so great or so serious as the fear of the gods or
the fear of death, was yet one of the chief disturbing causes
of the peace of the mind. It must then be the main object
of the individual in his intercourse with others to secure
freedom from the fear of men (Gappeiv é€ dvOpdnwv).2 There
were several possible means which might be employed for
this purpose, but the principal was undoubtedly the line of |
action known to the world as the virtue of justice. Justice,
just like temperance and courage, is in itself of no intrinsic
value, but is useful as a means of securing one’s own happi-
ness. What then is its nature from the Epicurean point of
view? It would clearly be most to the advantage of the indi-
vidual to have perfect freedom of action, which in life among
other men means complete disregard for them, their pro-
perty and their interests. But if this is to be the universal
course of action, it is obvious that any one individual, having
every man’s hand against him, is likely to suffer very much
more than he can gain. It therefore becomes to his advan-
tage to forego the pleasures of aggression, on condition that
he is guaranteed freedom from attack: justice is in other
words a kind of compact between members of a community
to refrain from harming one another. ‘Justice never is any-
thing in itself, but in the dealings of men with one another
in any place whatever and at any time, it is a kind of compact
not to harm or be harmed’3—or as Epicurus again puts it
with obviously controversial intention, “The justice which
t Quoted by Lactantius, Divin. Instit. iii. 17. 42; U. 523.
2 K.A. vi, xl. 3 Ibid. xxxiil.

512 - EPICURUS

arises from nature’'—as opposed, for instance to Plato’s idea
of ‘natural’ (dvcer) justice—‘is a pledge of mutual advantage
(cvpBodrov 700 cvpdépovros) to restrain men from harming one
another and save them from being harmed’. This is of course
practically the seventeenth-century idea of the ‘Social Con-
tract’, and indeed Lucretius,” like the modern philosophers,
represents the making of this contract as an actual historical
event in the history of primitive man. More conspicuously
then than either of the two former virtues is justice a pis
aller, a painful thing in itself and only to be tolerated
because it contributes to tranquillity of the mind, which it
relieves from fear of worse pains. The ideal from the indi-
vidual’s point of view is really injustice: if only he could
commit injustice consistently without ever being discovered,
that would be best, but unfortunately not only is there the
danger of detection, but what is still worse, because it is
a permanent disturbance of mental peace, there is ajay the
dread of detection. This extreme position Epicurus takes
up unhesitatingly: ‘injustice is not an evil in itself, but only
in consequence of the fear which attaches to the apprehen-
sion of being unable to escape those appointed to punish
such actions’.3 And this dread will never leave one, for ‘it
is not possible for one who acts in secret contravention of
the terms of the compact not to harm or be harmed, to be
confident that he will escape detection, even if at present
he escapes a thousand times. For up to the time of death
it cannot be certain if he will indeed escape’.4 In his
book of ‘Problems’s (Atazopiar) Epicurus actually posed
the question: ‘will the wise man do things that the laws for-
bid, if he knows that he will not be found out?’; both his
consistency and his humanity are revealed in his reply that

1 K.A. xxxi. Bignone following Philippson (Arch. f. Gesch. der P hilosoph.,

1910, pp. 291 ff.) would translate ovuBodov ‘symbol’, ‘expression’, holding .

that Epicurus believed that there is a ‘natural justice’ of which just conduct
is the outward sign. But elsewhere the ‘contract’ idea is most prominent:
e.g. in ouvOjxas in K.A, xxxii. 2 vy. IOIg—20.

3 K.A, xxxiv: cf. Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 6, p. 1ogo c; C.B. fr. 82; U. 532.

4 K.A, xxxv.

5 Plut. adv. Colot. 34, p. 1127 a; C.B. fr. 2; U. 18.

‘a simple answer is not easy to find’. Lucretius has finely
brought out the magnitude of this dread in a curious passage?
in which he states that the stories of punishment in the next
world are but allegories of men’s mental sufferings here:
Tartarus and Cerberus and the Furies are only legends, but
the real terror is the ‘fear of punishment for misdeeds in life
and the atonement for crime, the dungeon, and the terrible
hurling down from the rock, scourgings, executioners, the
rack, pitch, the metal plate, torches; for although they are
not with us, yet the guilty mind, fearing for its misdeeds,
sets goads to itself, and scars itself with lashings, nor does
it see meanwhile what end there can be to its ills or what
limit at last to punishment, yea, and it fears that these same
things may grow worse after death. Here after all on earth
the life of fools becomes a hell’. To save himself from this
hell the wise man accepts the trifling inconvenience of the
compact: for it is clear that ‘the just man is most free from
trouble, the unjust most full of trouble’.2 The life of justice
so conceived is a disagreeable necessity, but it saves a man
in every way from great pains and it helps to the supreme
end of true pleasure, for ‘the greatest fruit of justice is
freedom from trouble (drapagia)’.3 Therefore the wise man
is content that there should be laws on the understanding
that ‘the laws exist for the sake of the wise, not that they may
not do wrong, but that they may not suffer it’.4

Epicurus is at pains to emphasize this idea of justice in
several other ways, all tending to show that justice is nothing
in itself, but has only a derivative value. Its very existence
he holds is dependent on the existence of the compact:
‘for all living things which have not been able to make com-
pacts not to harm one another or be harmed, nothing ever
is either just or unjust: and likewise too for all tribes which
have been unable or unwilling to make compacts not to harm
or be harmed’.5 Unless there is the deliberate understand-
ing there is no obligation to refrain from acts of aggression

i iii. IOII—-23. a K.A, xvii.
3 Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 2, p. 266; C.B. fr. 80; U. 519. "
4 Stob. Floril. 43. 139; C.B. fr. 81; U. 530. 5 KA. xxi.

3307 Ll

514. EPICURUS

and no security against them: it is incidentally interesting
to see this doctrine applied to nations, for the modern atti-
tude to weaker and less civilized races has often been based
on much the same principle: if a nation is not strong enough
to enforce justice, it has no international rights. Still more
significant are the aphorisms which deal with the variability
of justice: the same actions are by no means always just
among different peoples or at different times. ‘In its general
aspect justice is the same for all, for it is a kind of mutual
advantage in the dealings of men with one another; but with
reference to the individual peculiarities of a country or any
other circumstances, the same thing does not turn out to be
just for all.” The argument is that if justice had an indepen-
dent existence of its own, if, as Epicurus would say, it were
‘something’, its content would not vary with varying circum-
stances, but would be the same all the world over: as it is
varying circumstances naturally make a difference to what
is advantageous. The same conclusion may also be reached
from the point of view of time: an enactment, which was
just at the time when it was made, may cease to be just: “if
a man makes a law, and it does not turn out to lead to
advantage in men’s dealings with each other, then it no
longer has the essential nature of justice’.» Again the con-
tent of justice is shifting, and has no existence or value other
than the advantage of the time being. In short, as Epicurus
summed matters up with almost brutal directness, ‘the laws
exist for the sake of the wise, not that they may not do
wrong, but that they may not suffer it’.3

There is no doubt then that justice is but of secondary
value. Temperance and courage the wise Epicurean will
cultivate assiduously with a strong belief in their value,
because they contribute immediately and necessarily to the
increase of his pleasure and the diminution of his pains.
But justice is a makeshift: the “wise man’ accepts it with a
view of getting what he can out of it; but he would gladly
evade it, if he could only be certain that he would not be

1 KA, xxxvi. 2 Ibid. xxxvii.
3 Stob. Flor. 43. 139; C.B. fr. 81; U. 530.

an wy

PEs ~~ 515

detected in the breaking of his tacit compact. Itis nota very
pleasant picture to contemplate and one does not like to
think of the possible decisions of an Epicurean casuist on
this basis. The weakness of the Epicurean morality begins
to show itself, as that of any form of egoistic hedonism
necessarily must, as soon as the individual is set in relation
with his fellow men. Nor does the picture become brighter
if the virtues are left and certain other means are considered
which the ‘wise men’ will pursue to secure ‘Immunity’ from
his fellows.

F’picurus’ general attitude is seen with special distinctness
in the precepts which he gives his disciples with regard to
public life, to friendship, and to the family: in each instance
he has his eye very firmly fixed on the supreme pleasure of
tranquillity of mind and is fearless in his deductions, however
much they differ from those of common custom or conven-
tional morality. The injuries which one may receive from
one’s fellow men arise, he holds,! ‘from hatred, envy, or
contempt’, that is, from the action of those who are respec-
tively one’s equals, inferiors or superiors in station: against
all these the ‘wise man’ must provide and it is possible for
him to ‘overcome them by reasoning’. Now the habit of
the world, which in its own blind way does half-consciously
attempt to deal with these adverse circumstances, is to try
for personal power and authority. But there are considerable
dangers about this course. In the first place it is by no means
certain that it will secure the desired end: it may indeed
leave one without superiors to hurt one by contempt and
even free one from the hatred of equals; but it also increases
the number of inferiors who may be prompted by jealousy
to do one harm. ‘Some men wished to become famous and
conspicuous, thinking that they would thus win for them-
selves safety from other men. Wherefore if the life of such
men is safe, they have obtained the good which nature
craves: but if it is not safe, they do not possess that for which
they strove at first by the instinct of nature.’? Like the guilty
criminal such men may appear at times to have attained their

* DD Eetntr7: 2 KA, vii.
Lr2

516 EPICURUS

end and be free, but there is always the danger that vengeance
may overtake them. Moreover, just as to the criminal the
external danger proved to be a small thing compared with
the internal dread which disturbed his mind, so here too the
main objection to this striving for power is the internal
effect on the mind. The peace of mind of the man in high
places is constantly disturbed not only by the dread of an
attack of his inferiors—‘a man who causes fear cannot be
free from fear’ '—but also because power begets the craving
for more power, and the mind becomes a prey to the ‘idle
desires’ for ‘crowns and statues’. ‘The happy and blessed
state belongs not to abundance of riches or dignity of posi-
tion or any office or power, but to freedom from pain and
moderation in feelings and an attitude of mind which im-
poses the limits ordained by nature.’? In short, the life
of power however successful it may be is not compatible
with the true ideal of happiness. What then is Epicurus’
remedy? The only sure way of securing ‘immunity from
men’ is to avoid public life altogether: the ‘wise man’ must
‘flee public life as an injury and disturbance to blessedness’ 3
‘We must release ourselves from the prison of affairs and
politics.’ We must ‘live unnoticed’:5so alone can a man be
sure that he will avoid the attack of enemies and prevent
the intrusion of care and anxiety upon his own peace of
mind. And whatever may be the pleasures of rule and office
and its consequent honour and glory—for Epicurus does
not deny the existence of such pleasures 6’they are as
nothing compared to the glory of the tranquil mind: “The
crown of tranquillity is beyond comparison with great posi-
tions of authority.’7 The wise man will make the choice
which prudence dictates and keep himself far from the
snares of ambition: for he knows that ‘it is far better to obey

t Gnomol. Cod. Par. 1168; C.B. fr. 84; U. 537.

2 Epicurus quoted by Plut. de Audiendis Poetis, 14. 37; C.B. fr. 85;
U. 548. 3 Plut. vit. Pyrrhi, 20; U. 552.

4 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. lviii.

5 Ade Budcas, C.B. fr. 86; U. 551: cf. Plutarch’s dialogue on the subject.

6 Idem. contr. Ep. beat. 18; U. 549.

7 Idem. adv. Colot. 31; U. 556.

ETHICS 517

in peace than to long to rule the world with kingly power.
and to sway kingdoms’.t There is a marked churlishness
and a depressing timidity about the ‘wise man’s’ action, but
if he is to be consistent with his beliefs, this is the only
course he can take.

In his attitude to friendship the ‘wise man’ seems at first
sight to present a more human and attractive side of his
nature. “Of all the things’,? says Epicurus himself, ‘which
wisdom acquires to produce the blessedness of the complete
life, far the greatest is the possession of friendship’, and
the Epicurean3 in Cicero’s dialogue echoes and amplifies
this: ‘of all the means which wisdom has acquired for living
the blessed life none is greater than friendship, none richer,
none sweeter’. He adds that Epicurus upheld this belief
not merely in words but much more in his life and actions
and character. Similarly his biographer states that he was
renowned for his ‘unsurpassed kindness to all’.+ The pic-
ture of the life of the philosopher with his friends in his
‘Garden’ is familiar, and the fragments of his letters 5 which
have been preserved show clearly his deep affection and
care for them: even in his death-bed agony he writes that he
is consoled by the thought of his pleasant discussions with
Idomeneus,° and his will makes provision for his friends and
his friends’ children.7 The tradition lasted in the School, and
Lucretius * can speak of ‘the pleasure of sweet friendship,
for which I hope’ with the scarcely worthy Memmius as one
of his chief inducements in undertaking his great task.

Further information as to Epicurus’ view of friendship
deepens this pleasant impression with the additional note
of genuine trust and unselfishness and even of self-sacrifice.
Epicurus did not wish, it is said, that his community should
throw their property into a common stock, ‘for to do. so
implied distrust, and distrust could not go with friendship’.
In the same spirit he is reported to have said that ‘it is more

t Lucr. v. 1129-30. a KA. xxvii.
3 Cic. de Fin. i. 20.65; U. 539. 4 Debs x.9.
5 C.B. frs. 18-52. 6 D.Li:x. 32C. Big 30.

7 Dik. myi6—21- 8 i. 40. 7 Dioxin.

518 EPICURUS

pleasant to do good than to receive it’,’ and advancing to
greater heights of unselfishness to have maintained that ‘for
friendship’s sake we must even run risks’,” and that the
‘wise man’ will be prepared to ‘endure the greatest pains for
his friends’ 3 and even ‘to die for a friend’.4 It seems indeed
as if there were here a higher conception of the value and
beauty of friendship than is met with elsewhere even in
Greek literature: the joys of friendship last through life and
even beyond, for though there is of course no kind of con-
tinuity after death, yet ‘sweet is the memory of a dead friend’,®
and we must ‘show our feeling for our lost friends not by
lamentation, but by meditation’® on what their friendship
has been to us. Almost equally striking perhaps is the ex-
tension of friendship even to slaves: ‘the wise man will not
punish his slaves, but will rather pity them and forgive any
that are deserving’;7 the position of the slave Mys in the
Epicurean community shows this precept in practice.
Friendship seems indeed the highest blessing in life: ‘the
noble soul occupies itself with wisdom and friendship: of
these the one is a mortal good, the other immortal’,® and in
a moment of enthusiasm, when thinking of its many links,
Epicurus even exclaimed: ‘friendship goes dancing round
the world proclaiming to us all to awake to the praises of a
happy life’.2 The ‘wise man’ may almost be forgiven his
refusal to take his share in the burdens of politics when the
beauty of his life with his friends is realized.

But, though friendship is without doubt the brightest
spot in Epicurean life, there is another side to the picture.
For when its motives are examined, it is found that this
suggestion of self-forgetfulness and devotion is something
of a delusion, and that friendship like every other interest
and action in the ‘wise man’s’ life is based on the primary
consideration of personal pleasure: ‘friendship has practical

t Plut. contr. Ep. beat.15,1097a; U. 544. + Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxviii.

3 Plut. adv. Colot. 8, p. 1111 b; U. 546. 4 Dilexetar.
5 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 28, p. 1105 d; C.B. fr. 50; U. 213.
6 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. lxvi. 7 D.LixrEs,

8 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxviii. 9 Ibid. li.

Biaics- 519

needs as its motive’,' ‘Epicurus says that there is no one
who cares for another except for his own advantage.’? A
more explicit aphorism brings out the two sides of this ad-
vantage:3 “friendship cannot be divorced from pleasure and
for that reason must be cultivated, because without it neither
can we live in safety and without fear, nor even pleasantly’.
In the first place then friendship is part of the provision
made by the ‘wise man’ to secure freedom from fear of other
men. For this purpose he attaches to himself those who
might otherwise be his enemies: as Epicurus‘ puts it in
a rather impersonal manner: ‘the man who has best ordered
the element of disquiet arising from external circumstances,
has made those things (including persons) that he could
akin to himself and the rest at least not alien’. And friends
once secured act as a kind of bodyguard against the aggres-
sions of others: ‘it is not so much our friends’ help that helps
us as the confidence of their help’;5 the man with many
friends feels himself hedged round with security. Secondly
friendship is valuable because it enhances the pleasure of
one’s own life without introducing a disturbing element of
desire and passion such as attaches to love, which Epicurus
wholly condemned. Once more the root-motive even of this
great blessing of friendship is self-interest and the increase
of the aggregate of pleasure in the individual life.

The contrast is strongly marked and it does not seem easy
to reconcile the two pictures of friendship derived from the
contemplation of its practice on the one hand and its motives
on the other, nor to acquit Epicurus altogether of incon-
sistency. A link of connexion might seem to lie in the idea
that ‘it is more pleasant to give than to receive’: ° if this were
really Epicurus’ belief, then it might follow that altruism
is in reality the highest egoism and the greatest joys of
friendship would be found to lie in the opportunities which

» Dd. Xo. 020.
2 Lactantius, Divin. Instit. iii. 17. 42; U. 540.
3. Cic. de Fiz. ii. 26. 82; U. 54r1. 4 K.A, xxxix: cf. K.4. xl.

5 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxxiv.
6 Plut. contr. Ep. beat. 15; U. 544.

520 EPICURUS

it affords of giving happiness to others. But the statement,
as we have it, is not supported by argument or parallel and
in view of the directly egoistic attitude which prevails
throughout the discussion of pleasure, it does not ring quite
true: it ought, for instance, to carry with it a willingness
to perform public service. It is probably safer to suppose
that Epicurus did, as usual, found his advocacy of friendship
on the purely utilitarian motive of personal advantage in
protection and the pleasures of intercourse, but that on that
foundation grew a true sense of the more unselfish enjoy-
ment of friendship for its own sake. This view is not un-
supported: ‘all friendship’, the philosopher says in a brief
aphorism, ‘is desirable in itself, though it starts from the
need of help’, and the idea? is elaborated by his biographer:
‘friendship has practical needs as its motive: one must
indeed lay its foundations (for we sow the ground too for
the sake of crops), but it is formed and maintained by means
of community of life among those who have reached the
fullness of pleasure’. If there is inconsistency, this single
relaxation of an austere and almost cynical devotion to self-
interest may well be pardoned: the true-hearted man emerges
for once over the stern philosopher, and the account of
friendship remains as an oasis in the rather arid desert of
Epicureanism on its social side.

Just as friendship is the highest blessing, so the passion
of love is wholly a curse. Epicurus naturally regarded it
as a supreme example of an ‘idle desire’, which makes true
peace of mind impossible: ‘it is’,3 he said, ‘a vehement
yearning for sexual pleasure accompanied by a goading
restlessness’, and his denunciation of its physical side is
unmistakable: ‘sexual intercourse has never done a man good
and he is lucky if it has not harmed him’.4 It is possible that
Lucretius’ 5 famous attack upon love may have been height-
ened, as the traditional story of his life suggests, by personal

1 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xxiii. a DIL ox F290.
3 Hermias in Plat. Phaedr. 76; U. 483 avvrovos dpeéis adpodiavdv pera
olotpov Kal adnpovias.

4D. Lig rr8 sctident. Kat. C.B. fran. 5 iv. 1058 ff.

oe — ——

oe ow

erurcs:~ 521

experience and suffering,’ but there can be no doubt of its
virulence and deep sincerity; and even if the violence of the
onslaught is his own, it is certain that he was following cor-
rect Epicurean tradition: ‘the wise man will not fall in love,
nor is it true that love is heaven-sent’.? But if the disease is
fatal, it is easily possible in Epicurus’ eyes to avoid it:
‘remove sight, association, and contact and the passion of
love is at an end’.3

Apart from passionate love Epicurus did not look kindly
on marriage or family life. ‘Epicurus discourages marriage
and the begetting of children because of its many unpleasant-
nesses and distractions from more serious matters.’4 The
chief ‘unpleasantness and distraction’ in his eyes appears to
have been the presence of the children who might divert
the philosopher from his high thoughts. But even here
Epicurus’ humanity seems to peep through his cynical mask
and he admits that ‘if once one has a child, it is no longer
in us to refrain from loving or caring for it’,5 and there are
certain fragments which suggest at least a personal under-
standing and affection for children. In one strange extract
he advises them how to behave when their parents are
angry: ‘if parents are justly angry with their children, it is
certainly useless to fight against it and not to ask for pardon:
but if their anger is unjust and irrational, it is quite ridiculous
to add fuel to their irrational passion by nursing one’s own
indignation, and not to attempt to turn aside their wrath in
other ways by gentleness’.6 Another is a charming extract
from a letter to a child telling him of his safe arrival at
Lampsacus and adding, ‘I hope you too are well and your
mamma, and that you are altvays obedient to pappa and
Matro, as you used to be. Let me tell you that the reason
that I and all the rest of us love you is that you are always

: It is said that he was poisoned by a love-philtre, wrote his poems in the
lucid intervals of the resultant madness, and finally committed suicide: see
Jerome’s Fasti, Chron. Euseb. A

2 D.L. x. 118. 3 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. xvii.

4 Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 23; U. 526.

5 Arrian, Epict. Dissert.i. 23.5; U. 525.

6 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. Ixii.

522 EPICURUS

obedient to them.’! And one more perhaps incautious out-
burst shows that he was at least not indifferent to the attrac-
tions of a harmonious family life: ‘most bequtiful is the sight
of those near and dear to us, when our original kinship makes
us of one mind’.? Once again it looks as if the philosopher
would not press very far the relentless requirements of
‘tmperturbability’.

In his attitude then to public affairs and to family life
the ‘wise man’ is consistently egoistic, and though in the
matter of friendship there seems to be a momentary wavering
towards altruism, it is not enough to disturb the general
idea which has been formed. The underlying conception
of the nature of justice is well borne out in other departments
of life, and it may be said generally that the contemplation
of the ‘wise man’ as a member of the community has done
nothing to modify the picture of his isolation. Epicurus at
least succeeded in all the ramifications of his theory in
keeping firmly in view the main principle of an egoistic
‘pleasure’ and in ‘following wherever the argument led’.

The main points of Epicurus’ moral theory have now
been reviewed, and a brief attempt must be made to survey
it as a whole. It is clear in the first place that his debt to
Democritus is here much less than in the physical theory.
Democritus’ ‘ethic’ hardly amounts to a moral theory: there
is no effort to set the picture of the ‘cheerful’ man on a firm
philosophical basis or to link it up in any way with the
physical system: he is content in a discursive manner to
draw a portrait. Epicurus’ theory is much deeper and broader
than this. It is made one with the physical system by its
foundation on the base of sensation, its security is provided
for by the insistence on free-will, guaranteed by the ‘swerve’
of the atoms, and its main conception of ‘pleasure’ as the
end goes farther back than Democritus’ root-idea and 1s
based on the empirical observation of experience. The theory
is indeed not now a picture but a structure. There is in
consequence a notable difference of tone between the two

t Pap. Herc. 176, col. 18; C.B. fr. 35; U. 176.
2 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. 1xi.

ee eee

a

BUHICS > 7 523

philosophers: the aphorisms of Democritus leave one with
the impression of a series of comments on life made from
no very deep conviction of its ultimate purpose, but rather
with an acceptance of conventional standards and modes of
expression: the moral system of Epicurus is the work of
a preacher with a gospel to proclaim, the work too of a
scientific thinker evolving a connected system of fearless
deductions, flying often in the face of conventional ideas,
and all worked out with a consistent observation of funda-
mental principles. The idea of ‘pleasure’ is carefully
analysed through the distinction of static and kinetic pleasure
and the division of desires, and it is only when as the result
of a series of inferences he has reached the notion of ‘im-
perturbability’, that he is brought into relation with Demo-
critus. Then there are no doubt some points of likeness.
The conception of ‘imperturbability’ is not greatly different
from Democritus’ ‘cheerfulness’—indeed it was one of the
synonyms used by Democritus himself. There are details
too in which similarity may be traced, such as the general
notions of temperance and bravery and the rejection of
family life. Yet in detail too Epicurus takes his own line,
when his argument requires it: his attitude to public life
is precisely the reverse of that of Democritus and friendship
plays a far more prominent part. It would perhaps be difficult
to assert with confidence that Epicurus’ moral theory owes
nothing to his predecessor’s work or that, if Democritus had
not existed, it would have taken precisely the same form,
but there is no doubt that Epicurus was here almost entirely
independent and showed himself at once a more profound
thinker and a more sincere believer in the value of his own
teaching.

The system which is thus built up cannot but affect us
strangely, for it has such strongly marked heights and depths.
At times, as for instance, in the general idea of the tranquil
mind and especially in its endurance of pain, Epicureanism
seems a broad and even noble conception: at other moments,
especially in the discussion of the ‘wise man’s’ relation to other
men, it appears narrow and almost degrading to human

524 EPICURUS

nature, It may help to clear the general idea of Epicureanism
to consider briefly some of the criticisms which it suggests.
It is perhaps hardly necessary to dissipate the ‘vulgar
error’ which regards Epicureanism as a doctrine of pure
sensualism. Such an idea could only arise from the most
superficial consideration of its teaching: though pleasure is
to the Epicurean the only good, though the root of all
pleasure lies in the flesh and even in the stomach, yet
Epicurus’ ‘wise man’ is very far removed indeed from the
common notion of an ‘Epicure’, picking and choosing his
pleasures so as to obtain the maximum of bodily titillation
at the moment. The misconception is a very old one and
was made even in Epicurus’ own lifetime, for we find him
replying to it in a passage’ of the Letter to Menoeceus, which
should in itself finally dispose of the charge: ‘when therefore
we maintain that pleasure is the end, we do not mean the
pleasures of profligates and those that consist in sensuality,
as is supposed by some who are either ignorant or disagree
with us or do not understand, but freedom from pain in
the body and from trouble in the mind. For it is not con-
tinuous drinkings and revellings, nor the satisfaction of lusts,
nor the enjoyment of fish and other luxuries of the wealthy
table, which produce a pleasant life, but sober reasoning,
searching out the motives for all choice and avoidance and
banishing mere opinions, to which are due the greatest dis-
turbance of the spirit’. These vulgar charges might with
more justification be brought against the doctrine of Aris-
tippus and the Cyrenaics, but Epicurus had made them
wholly inapplicable to his system, first by the introduction
of the conception of the ‘blessed life’ as a whole with its
consequent continuous balance of pleasures and pains, and
secondly by the distinction of the pleasure of movement and
the pleasure of rest, and the selection of the latter as the true,
because the only pure, form. For all his belief in the mor-
tality of the soul Epicurus could never say ‘Let us eat, drink,
and be merry, for to-morrow we die’, for the simple reason
that he believed that by such a course of conduct a man is

t §§ 131, 2.

eraics ~~ 525

failing to secure the maximum pleasure of life. “Your aim
is good’, he might have said to Aristippus or to an ‘Epicure’,
‘but you are totally mistaken as to the means.’

Nor again is it justifiable, as might be suggested by a
consideration of the practice of Epicureanism—of the ‘wise
man’s’ withdrawal from the life of his fellows and the almost
monastic limitation of his pleasures—to regard it as an
ingenious and attractive apology for asceticism. It is true
that in practice Epicurus’ teaching has a strong ascetic
flavour: the complete suppression of all ‘idle desires’, the
rejection of all ‘diversifications’ of pleasure, and the confine-
ment of bodily enjoyment to the simple satisfaction of neces-
sary needs are indeed a surprising outcome of a system based
upon the pleasures of the flesh. But however much practice
may suggest an ascetic ideal, the motives of Epicureanism
are dead against it. The mortification of the flesh would be
in itself almost a crime to Epicurus’ mind, nor even in
temperance as such is there any merit: and it may be carried
to excess: ‘frugality too has a limit, and the man who dis-
regards it is in like case with him who errs through excess’.?

The maximum of pleasure for the body and therefore for
the mind is always the aim of conduct, and it is only because
as the result of the balancing of pleasures against pains it
is found that through temperance this pleasure is secured
at its maximum height and with the least break in continuity,
that a practice anything like ascetic can be recommended:
‘we think highly of frugality, not that we may always keep
to a cheap and simple diet, but that we may be free from
desire regarding it’.» There is never for a moment any
ulterior idea of virtue as regulating pleasure in Epicurus’
mind, and that he has succeeded in eliminating it more
successfully than most advocates of Hedonism, is shown in
the fearless originality of his conclusions with regard to
social life, which were the very reverse of the ordinary Greek
notion of virtue.

There is then no disguise or reservation about Epicu-

* Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. \xiii.
2 Stob. Flori/. xvii. 14; C.B. fr. 29; U. 135 a.

526 EPICURUS

reanism: it isa system of uncompromising egoistic hedonism.
The supreme difficulty which always and necessarily attaches
to a hedonistic system is the establishment of a satisfactory
calculus of pleasure: if pleasure is to be the sole test of good,
then the worth of actions can only be judged by the amount
of pleasure which they produce: there can be no qualitative,
but only a quantitative distinction of pleasures. How then
is it possible to measure one pleasure against another or to
decide which is quantitatively the greater? Epicurus sur-
mounts this difficulty with greater ingenuity and success
than many of the modern Utilitarians by the distinction
between kinetic and static pleasure and the doctrine of the
limit. Absence of pain is the only pure pleasure: the pleasure
of movement is only a ‘variation’ and is impure because it
necessarily involves accompanying pain. It is thus possible
not only to establish a scale of pleasures, but, what is even
more satisfactory, to point to one kind of pleasure, which
alone is perfect, and which is within the reach of all men at
all times. But satisfactorily as he has thus overcome his
greatest difficulty, he has in so doing laid himself open to
another serious criticism: for many of the ancient philoso-
phers, Plato for example, did not admit that absence of pain
was pleasure at all: it was, they held, an indifferent state
lying intermediate between the two and: not to be classed
with either. This was, as might be expected, the ground on
which the Cyrenaics criticized Epicurus’ theory: ‘the re-
moval of pain produces merely the tranquillity of a corpse
(vexpod xatdoraois)’.t We do not unfortunately possess any
reply of Epicurus in so many words to this criticism, but
we can surely conjecture safely enough what it would be.
Guyau ? endeavours to meet the difficulty by pointing to the
essentially positive and ‘constitutive’ notion which Epicurus
had of the pleasure of rest. It is not merely absence of pain
and, absence of trouble, but a positive harmony of body
and mind, an equilibrium (évordGea): ‘the last word of

Epicureanism ought not to be dzrovia, the absence of pain,

but rather the conservation of pleasure’: tranquillity has a
t Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 21; U. 451. 2 pp. 52 ff.

ernres-— 527

positive and not merely a negative value. This is no doubt
true of Epicurus’ conception, but it does not go to the root
of the difficulty. For what right had Epicurus to claim as
a positive pleasure, that which others regarded as a merely
indifferent state? Epicurus’ answer would surely be to
return to the ultimate principle from which he started. We
must take the evidence of sensation: there are only two
feelings (7d), pleasure and pain: these are mutually ex-
clusive and cover the whole ground of experience. An in-
different state between them is not conceivable: we have no
such feeling: if we have not pleasure, we are in pain, and if
we have not pain, we have pleasure. In the experience of
life the two, though distinct, are no doubt often combined:
we are conscious simultaneously of elements of pleasure and
of pain. These may be in different fields, or sometimes, as
in the case of certain of the kinetic pleasures, attendant on a
single action. The only pure pleasure, and therefore the most
completely positive pleasure, must be the entire absence of
pain: these are mere synonyms for the same feeling. Once
again then, if we are to quarrel with Epicurus’ moral theory,
we must quarrel with his psychology, and if we are to quarrel
with his psychology, we must attack the root-principle of
the whole system, the infallibility of sensation.

In the detailed working out of his system Epicurus from
time to time makes inferences which most other philosophies,
and indeed the normal outlook of the plain man, would find
it hard to accept. This is especially the case with regard to
man’s social activities: the guiding motives which rule the
‘wise man’ in his conduct to others frequently revolt us, and
sometimes the resultant course of action no less than the
motives. Here of course is a difficulty which inevitably
attaches to any system of egoistic hedonism: the man who
professes it can have no care for others except for his own
profit. He is thus at once brought into conflict with the
social instincts of man and the normally accepted notions of
justice and altruism in general. It is possible to circumvent
this difficulty, and Epicurus shows an inclination to make
the attempt in dealing with friendship by the paradox that

528 EPICURUS

altruism is after all only a higher form of egoism, but most
modern hedonistic systems’ have preferred to abandon
egoism in favour of a social utilitarianism aiming at the
‘oreatest happiness of the greatest number’. Epicurus how-
ever is prepared to stand by his principles and take their
consequences. He does not flinch from the ugly sound and
evil reputation of certain forms of selfishness, which are the
natural outcome of his main position. The picture of the
‘wise man’ who would count justice as nought, if only he
could be sure of escaping detection in injustice, spurning
alike the life of the family and all notion of service to the
State, can have been no more pleasing to Epicurus’ con-
temporaries than it is to the modern reader. But it is the
direct result of a fearless pursuit of the main principle of his
creed to whatever conclusion it may lead him.

These are some of the more obvious criticisms and pro-
blems which the examination of Epicurus’ moral theory must
inevitably suggest. When tried by the standard of the best
moral systems, ancient or modern, it is no doubt found
inferior: even taking it, as its author would most have pre-
ferred to represent it, as a practical method of conduct,
based on the observation of what is, it is insufficient, as it
does not account for some of the most natural impulses of
the normal human being. But for us, who are examining
Epicurus primarily as a thinker, the supreme interest is in
its consistency, and in this respect at least it demands
admiration. Starting from a principle derived as immediately
from the fundamental trust in sensation as are the primary
principles of the Canonice, he has worked out a system
simple indeed, yet characterized by something of the same
ingenious subtlety which helps him over the difficult places
in the physical theory: he has pursued his system into detail,
each step following closely from the last, and all knit together
by an unwavering adherence to the ultimate standard of
judgement. Once again as a moral teacher Epicurus is at
least a serious and consistent thinker.

« For a very interesting account of the relation of modern Utilitarianism
to the theory of Epicurus see Guyau, Livre IV.

— 2

re eee

a ll = A ca epi, *

a, alin

i ea —re . gQhas- > Sima

¢ XI
feee NCE USION
[z is not easy to put Epicurus in his due place in the

succession of the Atomists because in many ways he lies

so far out of the direct line. That the Atomic theory of
Democritus and Leucippus was his working basis there can
be no possible doubt, and the foregoing essays will have
furnished abundant proof of his dependence on it both in
fundamental ideas and in detail. But they will also have pro-
vided ample evidence of Epicurus’ originality. He started
from a base-principle, the trust in sensation, which Demo-
critus would have rejected, but which he himself passionately
embraced and applied in a far-reaching spirit to all parts
of his system. In working out the detail he was rigidly
faithful to it and used Democritus’ ideas only in so far as
they were consonant: he never hesitated to throw them over
where they proved unsuited to his own sensationalism.
Many of these divergencies have been noticed in the course
of the review of Epicurus’ system. He rejected for instance
Democritus’ conception of the ‘very large’ atoms,’ because
they would have been perceptible to the senses and sensation
gives us no intimation of their existence: in its place he set
up the extremely subtle doctrine of the minimae partes,
working out the idea in a polemical spirit against the
Eleatics with a minuteness and penetration which were pro-
bably beyond the capacity of his predecessor. He added
weight to the primary properties of the atoms,? because
sensation showed it to be a property of all perceptible things,
and having done so thought out anew the picture of the
‘free’ atoms moving in space and the cause of their meetings:
introducing here the idea of the atomic ‘swerve’, he used it
to escape from the Democritean determinism. He insisted 3
on the reality of the ‘secondary qualities’ of compound
bodies against Democritus’ belief that they were subjective

* See Chap. III, pp. 284-7.

See Chaps. III, pp. 289-go, and IV, p. 304.

3 See Chap. VI, p. 353.

3307 Mm

530 EPICURUS

‘experiences of sensation’, because sensation presented per-
ceptible things as possessed of colour} taste, 8cc.; but here
he preserved Democritus’ account of the differences of
atomic shape and arrangement as their cause, since it could
be adapted to his own view. He immensely elaborated and
refined the psychology of Democritus," adding the idea of the
‘nameless’ element to push materialism to the utmost limit;
he worked out the whole atomic machinery of sensation and
thought with complete originality and introduced the con-
ceptions of the active ‘apprehensions’ of the senses and the
mind. He invented the atomic psychology of the ‘will’ and
as its basis insisted on its freedom. Most conspicuously he
showed his originality in his moral theory, based like his
physics on the trust in sensation ; the root-notion of ‘pleasure’
as the natural end was his own, and he cannot be said to have
done more than take from Democritus a few general notions
concerning the life of the ‘wise man’, and even here in
details of the picture he was always prepared to desert and
contradict him, when he felt that the requirements of the
true doctrine of static ‘pleasure’ demanded it.

These are some of the ways in which Epicurus showed
his independence of the Atomists and a careful study reveals
many more: they should at least suffice to justify Epicurus’
claim to be an original thinker and to put an end to the
negligent tradition that he ‘adopted Democritus’ Atomism
to act as a basis to his moral theory’. But after all his
originality is shown mostly in his conception of the system
as a whole and in the fundamental metaphysic of the
Canonice. It may be that the semi-scepticism of Democritus
was a truer analysis of the conditions of man’s knowledge
of the world around him and its ultimate constituents, but
it produced an almost unworkable combination of rationalism
and sensationalism, and was regarded by him rather as a
deduction from his analysis of things than as a guiding
principle of all his observation and thought. Epicurus re-
turned to a crude sensationalism, believing it to be the only
possible foundation of scientific thought. Its weaknesses

t See Chap. VIII, pp. 388 ff. 2 See Chap. VIII, pp. 432-7-

oe

ee ee

-_

-_

CONCLUSION 531

have been obvious at many points in his system, but he
never lost sight of it and pursued it relentlessly into detail.
In result it binds together his theories with a uniformity and
consistency which Democritus never attained and leaves
them as a far wider and more audacious attempt to correlate
thought and knowledge than the encyclopaedic but dis-
cursive views of Democritus. Atomism is a theory, but
Epicureanism is a system.

In the ancient world it was the moral theory of Epicurus
which had the greatest and most lasting influence. His
atomic theory was hardly taken seriously as an explanation
of the world except by a few ardent spirits such as Lucretius,
and by even so conscientious a thinker as Cicero it was
regarded almost as a joke. But Epicureanism as a theory of
life made a deep impression and for at least four centuries
it remained one of the leading philosophies of antiquity.
The school * as an organization endured throughout that
time and could reckon its heads in unbroken succession back
to Epicurus himself. In Rome in the last century of the
Republic and in the early Empire it practically divided the
allegiance of the ‘intellectuals’ with Stoicism; among
Cicero’s contemporaries his own great friend Atticus and
Cassius, Caesar’s murderer, were prominent Epicureans,
and in a later generation Seneca, though he professed himself
a Stoic, was always ready to cull practical maxims from
Epicurus. The fact is that though they started from very
different bases, the two philosophies were not in practical
teaching very far apart. Epicurus’ austere development of
the theory of pleasure as the natural moral end was not far
from the ruling principles which the Stoic derived from his
belief in the presence of the ‘divine spark’ in man. Indeed
in Epicurus’ precepts from time to time we stumble on the
actual catchwords of the Stoics. ‘Self-sufficiency’ (adrdpxeia),
the leading Stoic idea, takes its place in Epicurus’ system
as the means by which the ‘wise man’ dealing with his
desires reaches ‘imperturbability’. ‘Self-sufficiency (or rather
perhaps, as Epicurus conceived it, “independence of desires’’)

es. 9.
Mm 2

532 EPICURUS

we think a great good—not that we may at all times enjoy
but a few things, but that, if we do not possess many, we
may enjoy the few in the genuine persuasion that those
have the sweetest pleasure in luxury who least need oe,
This is a position that the Stoic would have been prepared to
accept and still nearer akin to his own beliefs would have
been the two sayings: ‘Self-sufficiency is the greatest of all
riches,’? and ‘the greatest fruit of self-sufficiency is freedom’.3
In another aphorism the idea is combined with the other
Stoic notion of living according to nature: “Ihe man who
follows nature and not vain opinions is self-sufficient in all
things.’4 All these sayings are perfectly consonant with
Epicurus’ own teaching, but he seems almost to be claiming
in them that he can satisfy the Stoic ideals too. At least he
shows that in practical precept there is no great gulf fixed
between the two creeds.

If one asks the reason of the great popularity of the
Epicurean morality in antiquity, there are probably two
main answers. In the first place there is no doubt that it
found favour by its misinterpretation: a gospel of ‘pleasure’,
hastily grasped without any attempt to follow out the master’s
interpretation of it, might seem to supply a cloak for a life
of sensual pleasure and was no doubt so used by some un-
worthy followers. Cicero’s invectives against his contem-
porary Piso, who professed himself an Epicurean, may not
have been justified in the particular case, but they show that
a degraded interpretation of Epicureanism was not unknown:
‘ag soon as he heard that pleasure was so highly praised
by the philosopher, he made no distinction... . but thought
he had found a preceptor in vice’.5 There were ‘epicures’
in antiquity to give a false currency to Epicureanism.
But to its more serious followers it probably appealed as
against Stoicism in that, while it commended a mode of life
not less noble than that of its rival, it was based on common

t Ep. iii, § 130. 2 Clem. Alex. Strom. vi. 2; C.B. fr. 70; U. 476.
3 Sent. Vat. C.B. fr. lxxvii.

4 Porph. ad Marc. 27, p. 2073 CBo7r- 4653 U. 202.

5 Cic. in Pis. 28. 69.

— a

ee ee

of

CONCLUSION 533

sense. There is a type of mind, common at least among
the practical Romans, to which the semi-mystic pantheism
of the Stoic would have been revolting, and the matter-of-
fact theory of Epicurus, based not on any high-flown con-
ception of duty, but on the observation of what men do in
fact aim at in life, must have made a strong appeal. And it
is surely this foundation in experience which entitles Epi-
cureanism to a high place among ‘pleasure’ systems: he does
not, as some modern types of Utilitarian have done, set up
‘pleasure’ as a moral end—the common sense of mankind
seems to turn instinctively away from that—but starting
from the root-fact that men naturally choose pleasure and
avoid pain by an immediate instinct, he asks what theory of
life can be built upon that fact, and pursuing his argument
fearlessly reaches a standard which at least, on the self-regard-
ing side, is worthy of admiration and respect.

To the modern mind on the other hand it is probably the
physical side of Epicurus’ speculations—the Atomism whose
history it has been the purpose of this book to trace—which
will make the strongest appeal. The moral theory, even in
the days of the Utilitarian school, would have seemed crude
and possibly narrow—it made no provision for that false but
popular offshoot of a ‘pleasure-theory’, Collective Hedonism
—and to-day, as one contemplates it, apart from gleams
of suggestive thought here and there, it appears ‘stale and
unprofitable’. But the physical theory is very much alive:
its main idea is a shrewd guess which anticipated in its
general conception the accepted basis of modern scientific
inquiry, and if its details are reached by conjecture and
inference without the verification by experiment which is
the test of all scientific work to-day, yet they are worked out
with a real penetration and in some particulars have
startlingly anticipated modern problems and even modern
discoveries. The poem of Lucretius, where Epicurus’ sys-
tem is most connectedly and most lucidly set out for us, is
read not merely for the beauty of its poetry and the fire of
its evangelistic passion, but even to-day for the interest and
subtlety of the theories which it expounds.

534 EPICURUS

‘The weaknesses of the theory as an explanation of the
world and of life are obvious and spring in the main from
two great flaws. In the first place Epicurus has attempted
to extend what was a reasonable theory of the physical con-
stitution of things beyond its proper sphere. By attempting
to explain psychology on a material basis he exposed himself
to the difficulties which must beset any materialist theory
which attempts to grapple with the things of the mind and
the spirit: it can point to a material counterpart to thought
and sensation, but when it attempts to cross the gulf and to
say that physical movement zs thought and consciousness,
it is doomed to failure. Epicurus seems to have been con-
scious himself of this difficulty and to have known that in
the theories of the ‘nameless’ element in the soul and the
atomic ‘swerve’ he was pressing his materialism almost to
breaking point: but it did not break and just for this reason
it is inadequate. Secondly his basic trust in sensation creates
difficulties almost as great as his rigid materialism: he is
hard put to it to explain the apparent errors of sensation by
the intrusions of opinion, and, though he acknowledges it
less, to justify on a purely sensational foundation the con-
clusions of the mind as to the ‘ultimate realities’ of the
physical universe. The active ‘apprehension’ of the senses
and still more the ‘active apprehension’ of the mind are
frail planks on which to build a far-reaching system of the
universe.

But just because he was so rigid in the application of his
principles and refused ever to cross the bridge and to seek
the aid which might have been given him by rationalism or
a spiritual view of the world, his system attains a complete-
ness and consistency which proves it to be the work of a great
thinker. Taking his stand on a single fundamental idea he
has raised on it an edifice of thought which, for its penetra-
tion sometimes, and always for its fearlessness and for its
coherence, is deserving of more study and consideration than
the modern histories of philosophy have often given to it.

ne eee ee eee

APPENDIX I
On the theory of Anaxagoras

i Be has always been recognized that the central doctrine of the theory

of Anaxagoras is contained in the famous fragments * preserved by
Simplicius: ‘there is a portion of everything in everything’, and ‘each
thing is and was most manifestly those things of which it has most in
it’. This is alike his statement of the ultimate constitution of things
and his answer to the problem of the phenomena of change. But the
difficulties which beset his theory arise the moment an attempt is
made to interpret this statement. What are the ‘things’ of which every-
thing has a portion and how are they combined in a manner which
will account for change? Four main answers? have been given to this
question and must be carefully considered.

1. The simplest view, which is that taken by Simplicius3 and
Lucretius 4 and most modern historians of philosophy, is that by ‘things’
Anaxagoras meant simply corporeal substances. A piece of bread, to
take Anaxagoras’s own illustration from nutrition, can become flesh,
blood, hair, nerves, tissues, 8zc., because, though by far the largest
portion of the particles which compose it are particles of bread, it
also contains particles of all other substances, and among them particles
of flesh, blood, &c. When we eat the bread, these latter particles come
away and join the flesh, blood, &c., in our bodies. To this straight-
forward interpretation many objections may be brought. Lucretius
argues naively that in that case when we grind corn, we ought to
come across particles of flesh, blood, &c. Burnet,® putting what is
really the same objection with more penetration, maintains that such
a view is inconsistent with Anaxagoras’ own principle 7 that matter is

* In Arist. PAys. A. 2. 184 (27. 2); D.A. 41. ,

+ I have not referred at length to the view of P. Leon, published in
Class. Quart. xxi, pp. 133 ff., because it is founded mainly on one fragment,
whose treatment is much disputed, and leads in my opinion to a fantastic
theory which does not affect the main issues.

3 In Arist. Pays. I’. 4. 203 a; D.A. 45.

41, O75 tH. ‘ i ; D.B. at 6 E.G. P.3, p. 263.

7 See D.B. 3, 6. Incidentally I cannot agree with Burnet that in 3
Zeller’s rowf is a convincing correction of rd pj. The whole expression
Tous ovdx elvat ‘to cease to be by being cut’ seems to me odd Greek, the
construction ov« €oTw . . . odK efvas (instead of ju} efvav) is surely impossible,
and the general argument of the passage—‘just as you cannot pass from the
greatest to the all, so you cannot pass from the least to nothing’—is spoilt by
the intrusion of the idea of cutting.

538 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

infinitely divisible: ‘if everything were made up of minute particles
of everything else, we could certainly arrive at a point where every-
thing was “unmixed”, if only we carried division far enough’. But
it is not necessary to go so far afield: if this were what Anaxagoras
meant, we could convict him at once by the general principle from
which he starts. Consider more closely what would happen in the case
of nutrition and suppose for the sake of simplicity that there are 100
ultimate substances. The piece of bread then contains particles of all
these 100, the bread-particles prevailing and giving the character to
the whole. When we eat it, the particles of flesh and blood come away:
we need not go farther, for then we shall have three examples, the new
flesh, the new blood, and the remaining composition of 98 elements,
in no one of which are there now ‘portions of everything’. The notion
at the very outset defeats its own object and it is impossible that
Anaxagoras can have meant anything so simple.

2. Burnet, following the lead of Tannery,” has propounded a more
subtle explanation of Anaxagoras’ meaning. He holds that the ‘things’
of which Anaxagoras says that everything has a portion are not Cor-
poreal substances, but ‘qualities’-—or rather, as he now states his view,
the ‘opposites’ of Anaximander and the Milesians. He further draws
attention to the fact that Anaxagoras speaks of the ‘seeds’ 3 (oméppara)
of things, i.e. minute particles of which they are composed, to which the
commentators obviously refer under the famous title of éjovopepevar.4
He rightly argues then that the theory of structure must be re-
ferred from whole objects to the ‘seeds’ which compose them, ‘seeds’
homogeneous in substance with one another and with the whole
which they compose. Anaxagoras’ position may then be stated thus:
he 5 ‘held that, however far you may divide any of these things—and
they are infinitely divisible—you never come to a part so small that it
does not contain portions of all the opposites. On the other hand,
everything can pass into everything else just because the “seeds”, as
he called them, of each form of matter contain a portion of everything,
that is, of all the opposites, though in different proportions’. The theory
is attractive, but I cannot believe that it is more than at best a partial
representation of what Anaxagoras meant.

t E.G. P3, pp. 263 ff. The statement of his view has been somewhat
modified since the first edition, but the idea remains substantially the same.

2 Science helléne, pp. 283 ff.

3 D.B. 4.

4 e.g. Simpl. lc., Aet. i. 3.5; D.A. 46.

5 £.G.. P35 pa 204.

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 539

Burnet supports his view mainly by three of the fragments, which
run in his own translation as follows:

1. Frag. 8. The things that are in one world are not divided nor
cut off from one another with a hatchet, neither the warm from the
cold nor the cold from the warm.

2. Frag. 15. The dense and the moist and the cold and the dark
came together where the earth is now, while the rare and the warm
and the dry (and the bright) went out towards the further part of the
aether.

3. Frag. 4,§ 2. But before they were separated off, when all things
were together, not even was any colour distinguishable; for the mixture
of all things prevented it—of the moist and the dry, and the warm and
the cold, and the light and the dark, and of much earth that was in it,?
and of a multitude of innumerable seeds in no way like each other.

It is clear enough that in these fragments there is mention of the
‘opposites’ of the Milesians, but do they prove Burnet’s view of the
constitution of ‘all things’ according to Anaxagoras? In the first place
it must be observed that no one of these three passages concerns the
constitution of individual things, still less, as they ought to, on Burnet’s
theory, the constitution of the ozépyata, of which things are composed,
but the first two deal with the structure of individual worlds and the
third with the state of things which prevailed in the original petypa
before the separating out of the dwoxpivopeva. It is clear then that no
one of them can be quoted as, at any rate, any direct support of the
view that the ‘things’ of which everything has a portion are opposite
qualities. But this argument must not be pressed, for, as I hope to
show, there is a very exact and indeed necessary parallel between the
structure of the original petyya and that of the ‘seeds’ of things. It
is more important to observe that in the third of these fragments there
is added to the list of Milesian ‘opposites’ ‘earth and a multitude of
innumerable seeds in no way like each other’. Now ‘earth’ has no
natural ‘opposite’, rather it makes us think of the other Empedoclean
elements; and the ‘innumerable seeds’ are not opposite to each other,
but different: it is obvious that the idea of the ‘opposites’ will not cover
the contents of the wetypa. ite

But to test Burnet’s view effectively, it is necessary to Inquire more
closely into the nature of the ‘opposites’ and to ask in practice how the
theory would work. In his first edition he boldly followed ‘Tannery

« The modification of Burnet’s view since the first edition enables him now

to construe the very straightforward genitive xal yfjs woAAjs eveovons, of
which previously he could ‘make nothing’.

sso ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

in asserting that they were qualities. He admits that Anaxagoras had
not the conception of quality, but ‘had Anaxagoras possessed it, all
this could have been made much clearer: it is only obscure because he
is obliged to call the primary opposites things’. Now it seems a
sufficient answer to this view that if Anaxagoras had not the conception
of qualities, he could not have meant qualities, but he may have been
striving after an idea he could not reach, and it will be well to test the
idea in application. We may take a case which at first sight seems
strongly to favour the ‘quality’ theory, Sextus’ * famous instance of the
way in which Anaxagoras contrasted the evidence of the senses with
the inference of thought: ‘Anaxagoras opposed to the impression that
snow is white the consideration that snow is congealed water: now
water is black: snow then must be black too’. Work this out on
Burnet’s view: water is composed of a large number of ozépyara,
in each of which all the opposites are combined, but blackness prevails:
however far you divided, you could not find a particle or a ‘seed’ which
was white. Now by no amount of rearrangement or recombination
could these ‘seeds’ produce anything but what not only ‘is’ but appears
black: for in each one of them and therefore in any whole which they
might compose blackness must prevail. Io produce snow you would
need another kind of seeds in which the proportions are different and
whiteness prevails and such substitution could not be accomplished by
rearrangement. So far from advancing matters, the ‘quality’ view
leads to an impasse as great, if not greater, than does the old view. The
‘things’ cannot in this sense be ‘qualities’.

In the modification of his view which he has since propounded,
Burnet only once3 speaks of ‘opposite qualities’, but elsewhere con-
sistently of ‘the opposites’, connecting Anaxagoras’ theory directly
with the notions of the Milesian school. Now ‘the opposites’ of Anaxi-
mander are simply corporeal substances, moist substance and dry sub-
stance, cold matter and hot matter, &c. If then Anaxagoras meant
merely the Milesian opposites, when he spoke of things, his theory
of the ultimate constitution of things was even less satisfactory than
it is assumed to be on the ‘old view’. For in the first place, the ‘seeds’,
which are no ultimate particles like the atoms of Leucippus and Demo-
critus, are themselves infinitely divisible, and in the process of division
we should arrive at a point where the hot substance and the cold
substance, the moist substance and the dry substance were separate,
and should reach things which no longer contained everything. In

t £.G, P2,.p..289. 2 Pyrrh, Hypot.i. 33; D.A. 97.

3 BGP By Pe ORs hl 20

a

i
i
i

a

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 541

other words, Burnet’s modification is open to exactly the same objec-
tion as he brings against the ‘old view’; it will not stand the test of
infinite division. Moreover if ‘things’ be confined to opposites, their
combinations even in different proportions will not be sufficient to
account for the infinite variety of things: Anaxagoras himself in
Frag. 4 shows clearly enough that in the original pretyyza there were
many ‘things’ besides the ‘opposites’-—‘much earth and innumerable
seeds in no way like each other’.

And indeed, unless we are to reject all the evidence of the com-
mentators and historians of philosophy, it is abundantly clear that
Anaxagoras, even if he included in ‘things’ the Milesian ‘opposites’,
meant also much more—an endless series of substances corresponding
to each of the concrete things of normal existence. A few pieces of
evidence must be quoted. The context of Simplicius’ ‘ famous quota-
tion is typical: ‘all the dwovopeph? are uncreated and imperishable, but
they appear to come into being and pass away only owing to combina-
tion and separation, since all things are in all things and each receives
its character owing to that which prevails in it. For that appears as
gold in which there is much gold-substance (ypvovov), although as a
matter of fact all things are in it. At any rate Anaxagoras says, “‘in
everything there is a portion of everything and each single thing is
and was most manifestly that of which it has most in it”’. “This is clear
enough: ‘gold-substance’ is not one of the ‘opposites’, still less is it
a quality: it is concrete matter corresponding exactly to the gold of
experience. In another passage3 Simplicius is equally explicit with
regard to the process of nutrition: ‘seeing that all things are separated 4
out from each of the things which are now separated from one another,
as for instance, flesh and bone and so on from bread, as though these
were all formerly in it and mixed together, as the result of this he sur-
mised that all things were formerly mixed together before they were
separated apart’. Here we seem to have a perfectly clear statement of
exactly what Burnet denies: ‘it once was usual, he says,° to represent
the theory of Anaxagoras as if he had said that wheat, for instance,
contained small particles of flesh, blood, bones, and the like’. The
‘usual’ view is certainly nearer to Simplicius’ understanding of Anaxa-
goras than Burnet’s theory. Many more pieces of evidence might be

: In Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (27. 2); D.A. 41. seed

2 I prefer to leave this word untranslated for the present, as It will be fully
discussed later. 3 Simpl. in Arist. PAys. I’. 4. 2033 D.A. 45.

4 These compounds of xpivw and their importance in the theory will be
discussed. later. SAB OG. £3; p. 263.

542 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

quoted,’ but perhaps the most interesting is another fragment? of
Anaxagoras himself, because it is one of the few extracts which deal
with the ‘seeds’"—which is just what is required. He is talking about
the constitution of other worlds on the same lines as our own: ‘this
being so, we are bound to suppose that there are many elements of
all kinds in all the worlds3 and seeds of all things having all kinds of
shapes and colours and tastes’. Here then are qualities and so far from
all the ‘seeds’ having all of them, each ‘seed’ has its own peculiar
qualities distinct from others—a contradiction of Burnet’s theory as
direct as is Simplicius’ affirmation of what Burnet denies that Anaxa-
goras meant.

Burnet’s view then, in either of its forms, appears to be contradicted
by the evidence, and in neither form can it in practice lead to a working
hypothesis of the ultimate constitution of things: in trying to escape
from the difficulties which beset Tannery’s theory, he has now done
no more than limit the range of the ‘old view’ and leave it exposed to
the same objections. The ‘things’ which are in everything must be
concrete substances, particles in fact corresponding to the things of
sensation: so far the ‘old view’ is right. But in two respects at least it
requires amendment and modification. In the first place, Burnet has
clearly shown that it is not so much the structure of whole things on
which attention must be concentrated, but rather that of the ‘seeds’
of which they are composed. In the second place, if Anaxagoras’
theory is to be regarded as more than a very loose piece of thinking,
the ‘old view’ must in some way be reconciled with ‘infinite division’.

3. An ingenious attempt to get over the difficulties of the theory
was made by Giussani.4 He explains that according to Anaxagoras
Gpovopépeva is in the first place absolutely complete: division may be
carried to infinity, yet however small the particles into which we might
divide, for instance, a piece of gold, we should always find gold and
nothing else. On the other hand the piece of gold and all its particles
contain ‘everything’. How can this be? Because the particles of
‘things’ are so infinitely small that they not merely are not perceptible
but never could be: just as, in the colour grey, it would be impossible
to separate the black and white of which it is composed. So far, though
it is still open to the objection that if things are really divisible, we
should in theory, at any rate, ultimately reach particles of pure gold,

t See especially Aet. i. 3.5; D.A. 46; Arist. de Cael, P. 3. 302 a; D.A. 43.

2 D.B. 4, § 1.

3 ovyKpwopeva, “compound bodies’, but here used specially of the com-
pound worlds. 4 Lucretius, Book I, Excursus III, pp. 147 ff.

rs

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 543

bread, flesh, &c., Giussani’s view is valuable: I think Anaxagoras
certainly meant his particles to be far below the ken of the senses.
But how then are we to explain the phenomena of change? Because,
says Giussani, a piece of bread, for example, appears to us as bread not
because it contains more ultimate particles of bread than a piece of
flesh: there are just the same number of particles of every kind in it.
It appears as bread because the bread-particles are gathered together
in it into perceptible lumps, whereas the particles of all other things
are scattered all in amongst each other, never more than very few
of the same kind being together at a time. When we eat the bread,
the effect of the blow of the teeth is to cause a separation (didxptots)
of the bread-particles and a gathering together (ovyxpuots) of the flesh
and blood-particles, so that the whole now appears as flesh and blood.
The theory is immensely ingenious, but it cannot be right. It is not
really consistent with the notion of infinite divisibility, odyxpuots and
Sudxpuots are not used in this*way by Anaxagoras, the two fragments *
on which Giussani relies are misinterpreted by him, we have to sup-
pose too arbitrary an incident in the process of eating, and above all
Anaxagoras distinctly says, ‘each thing is those things of which it has
most in it’. Giussani’s brilliance, here as elsewhere, has led him too
far away from the evidence on which he is commenting.

4. A very original and penetrating explanation has recently been
given by A. L. Peck.? His view is complicated and not easy to sum-
marize, but its essential argument may be represented thus. Anaxa-
goras’ specific interest was in physiological change, which the doctrine
of the dpovojepf was intended to explain: this doctrine is in close con-
nexion with his view of the original pet?ypa. In the beginning? all
things were so small that nothing was visible: everything was aTreLpov,
‘that is, it was as yet nothing in particular, there was no order about
it. But there were in the original mixture (1) the ‘opposites’, (2)
the ‘elements’ earth, air, water, fire, which always remain dzrewpa,
(3) the ‘seeds’, or ‘parts’. jofpa is a technical term, ‘a part or portion’
of organic things (p. 70) of which omépya is a synonym. O[oLojrepes
means not, as it has hitherto been translated, ‘having parts like to the
whole’, but simply ‘having like parts’: the opovopep7) are ‘the things
which have like parts’, ie. have a portion of everything. But the
arrépya. or jtozpa is not merely static, but capable, under the direction of
_ pots, and nourished by the ‘opposites’, of development and growth,
just like the seed of a plant or an animal. Thus in the piece of bread

: D.B. 3 and 6.

2 Class. Quart. xx, no. 2, April 1926, pp. 57—7!- 3 D.B. 1.

544 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

there were seeds of all things, but ‘mind decreed that the Seed or Part
of Bread should develop and actually produce the Bread which it was
capable of producing’ (p. 62); bread is now in that thing 76 «patodv.
But when the bread is eaten and passes into the constituent parts of
the body, ‘mind has decreed that here, in the body, at this particular
place, such Parts as Flesh, Blood, and Hair shall be in control’, i.e.
their seeds develop and now overcome the bread-seeds. .
With parts of this exposition, and especially with the attempt to
link the doctrine of the djzovowepf with the description of the original
uetyya I am in great sympathy, but I do not think its conclusions can
be accepted as a whole. (1) Like Giussani’s theory it appears to me to
go considerably beyond the evidence. In particular the conception of
the growth and development of the ozépya under the direction of
vods, which is the central point of Peck’s explanation, has no warrant
in any of the fragments or notices. The notices of the ‘domination’
(xparetv) of one part or the other must be explained by the famous
dictum ‘each thing is and was most manifestly those things of which
it has the most (aAetora plural) in it’. This points clearly to the
numerical superiority of one or other of the ‘things’, and is surely an
impossible way of expressing the ‘development’ of one or other of the
seeds. (2) The sense given to the word djototepés, ‘alike in parts’, i.e.
having parts of all things, is very improbable: (a) it divorces the meaning
of Anaxagoras from the meaning which Aristotle? himself gave to the
word. I agree with Mr. Peck that in some of his comments Aristotle
passes from his own sense to Anaxagoras’ sense, but I do not think he
could do so without a word of warning if the senses were so widely
divergent; (4) it surely makes the word almost meaningless: if ‘all
things have a part of all things’, then all things will ‘have similar parts’,
and it is unnecessary to coin so strange a word to express a property
which is common to everything. On p. 70 Mr. Peck seems to try to
meet this difficulty by suggesting that it was only organic things of
which there were ‘parts’: if then he holds that Anaxagoras only meant
that ‘all organic things contain parts of all organic things’ he certainly
expressed it oddly by saying ‘there is a portion of everything in every-
thing’. The limitation would help to give a rational meaning to the
word opotopepes, but it wrecks the theory as a whole; (c) Mr. Peck
has really dealt the most fatal blow to his own theory on p. 66. ‘An
Ojovopepera is not divisible. “The whole doctrine falls to the ground
unless we maintain this.’ But nothing is clearer than that Anaxagoras
did not regard the cjovopepevae as ‘indivisibles’ beyond which you
t See below, pp. 551 ff.

oe eee i er ee ©

°K

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 545

cannot get. This was the view of the Atomists, but that Anaxagoras
held the theory of ‘infinite divisibility’ is clear not merely from the
evidence of Lucretius,! but of his own fragments: ‘there is not a least
of the small, but always a less’ And on Mr. Peck’s theory, if we
divided up a piece of bread, one would, just as much as on the traditional
view, arrive ultimately at a ‘seed’ of bread which was bread and nothing
else. His explanation seems to me to do valuable service in insisting
on the relation of the wetyya and the Omowoueph and the necessity of
concentrating on the problem of physical change, but it breaks down
on comparison with the evidence.

Is it possible then to give any other explanation of Anaxagoras’
theory which will explain how all ‘things’ in a concrete sense are
present in all things, and yet allow for infinite division and at the same
time take due account of the idea of the orépuara? I think it is and
that such a view can best be arrived at by an examination of Anaxa-
goras’ idea of the macrocosm and the creation of worlds. It is there
possible to see the problem ‘writ larger’, and moreover the view which
I wish to propound will be tested by its applicability to the theory as
a whole and not merely to one part of it.

In the beginning then ‘all things were together, infinite in number
and smallness: for even the small was infinite’,3 there was, that is to
say, as Anaxagoras calls it elsewhere, a ovupuéis 4 or petywas of an
infinite number of substances, each one of which, even the smallest,
consisted of an infinite number of divisible parts. Was this wetypa a
mere jumble of particles of ‘all things’ placed side by side in odvOcas, or,
as Anaxagoras says, ovyxpvots, yet each retaining its own individuality,
as in the atomic theory, or was there some closer coalition? Two
fragments throw light on this question: ‘when all things were together
no one of them was manifest (€v8nAov) owing to its smallness’ ;® ‘since
it is impossible for a least to exist, no one thing could be separated, or
exist by itself, but all things together’.7 That is to say, that however
small a particle of the wetywa you might take, and there was no limit
to the possibility of division, all things would always be present in it,
but they were not évdy\a, which means surely not merely ‘seen’,
but ‘capable of perception’. A very important comment on the notion
is furnished by Aetius,® who in speaking of the pdpia or portions of
‘things’ in things, says using the expression of a later age that they were
Adyw Gewpyra : you know, that is, that they are there, but you could

t i. 844. a DsBi 3.28. 6. 31D.Bar:
4 D.B. 4, § 2. s Simpl. in Ar. PAys. A. 4. 1873 D.B. 1.
6 D.B. 1. TB. 6. 8 1.3, SatDiA. 46)

3307 Nn

546 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

never perceive them. What then is the underlying notion? I believe
that in the terms petypa and odppiéts Anaxagoras was really striving
after the idea of a union closer than mere mechanical juxtaposition,
and more like our notion of chemical fusion, a union in which things
are not merely placed side by side, but are, as it were, completely
merged in a new substance: it is in his own terminology a ovppiéts
and not a ovyxpuois. In this petyya individual things could not be
distinguished, for from the nature of their fusion they were not dis-
tinguishable (ywpiord),? but “you know that they are there’ and their
presence iri greater or smaller quantities influences the character of the
whole. What then was the appearance and character of this original
yetypa? In the first place ‘no colour was perceptible: for the mixture of
all things prevented it’; 3 the fusion was so complete that the character
of no one thing could prevail to give a colour to the whole. Yet
even so the pe?yjza was not entirely homogeneous in all its parts: for
‘each thing is and was most manifestly those things of which it has
most in it’. Though in every part of it all things were present, yet in
some parts one thing would dominate and give the prevailing character
to its neighbourhood, and in others another thing. If this is so, we
should expect the appearance of the whole pe?ypa to be that of the
elements of which in the whole universe there were most: and this
is precisely what Anaxagoras says: ‘nothing was manifest owing to
its smallness: for mist and sky 4 prevailed, both being infinite: for these
are the greatest things in the sum total both in bulk and size’.

So far at least the description of the jze?ya seems to tally exactly
with the notion of a fusion of all things, each part of which and also
the whole take their character from the prevailing thing. And at
this point comes a curious confirmation of this idea. For there was

one element which did not enter this combination, but remained pure,

the corporeal substance vods,5 or, as we might say in the language of

: [ believe that I owe the suggestion of this view originally to Professor
J. A. Smith.

2 CED BS6: 3 D.B. 4, § 2.

4 dnp, the vaporous misty air which Anaximenes had selected as the one
ultimate constituent, and ai@yp, the bright clear air of the sky, which was one
of the ‘elements’ of Empedocles.

5 The famous passage (Phaedo 97) in which Plato expresses his dis-
appointment at finding that Anaxagoras’ vods was after all a physical existence,
and not, as he had hoped, a non-material motive cause makes it clear that
Burnet (E. G. P.3, p. 267) is right in regarding it as corporeal. Cornford too
(p. 153) from his own point of view arrives at the conclusion that it was a
‘soul-substance’.

El

Ps

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 547

a modern thinker, ‘mind-stuff’. Anaxagoras’ description of it and its
relation to other ‘things’ is of great importance for the present pur-
pose: ‘all other things have a portion of everything, but mind is an
infinite thing and self-governed (adroxparés) and is mixed with no
other thing, but exists alone by itself. For if it were not by itself, but
were mixed with anything else, it must have had a share of all things,
if it were mixed with anything: for in everything there is a portion
of everything, as I have already said. And the things mixed with it
would have prevented it from controlling anything as well as it does
alone by itself’ It is essential to work out this notion closely and see
its implications: how are we to conceive the position of vobs with
regard to the we?yya? It cannot be that it was outside the fetypay like
Empedocles’ Strife in the beginning of things, for firstly the wetyya and
vods were both infinite, and secondly, since being corporeal it could
only control things by contact, it must touch them. It must then have
been spread throughout the pe?yja without entering into combination:
as Anaxagoras says himself, ‘it is in’? things (é) but ‘it is not mixed
(uéwerxrac) with them’3 Here then is a strong confirmation of the
view that the ye?yya wasa fusion: for if it had been merely a juxta-
position (a¥yx«prors), then vods, spread about in it, was in fact just as
much ‘mixed’ as were any other ‘things’; but if it was a fusion, then
and then only could vods be in juxtaposition with any part of it, and
yet remain pure. This I believe to have been Anaxagoras’ meaning:
in the petyya individual substances were ‘lost’ in the close mixture,
vods was in the je?ywa but never entered the mixture, however much
it was disseminated through it.

It is now possible to follow the process of the creation of worlds.
The petyya in itself is static, but at any point in it at which there is
present a portion of vods, there results a ‘movement’ 4 («ivnots), which
takes the form of a rotation (7repixcdprors),5 first of all, as Anaxagoras
carefully explains, ‘of a small part, and then of more and more’: the
whirl and the amount of rotating matter is ever increasing. ‘The result
of this is that bits of the we?yya areseparated off (amroxptvovrat).© These
bits which are separated off are in fact the ‘seeds of all things, having
all kinds of forms and colours and savours (Sovds)’.7. What then
will be their constitution? In the first place they are not of course
‘ultimate molecules’, like the atoms, incapable of further division:
they, just like all other things in the universe, may be divided up into

t D.B. 12. oa) Bert 3D Be nee
4 D.B. 9. 5 D.B. 12. DDO 82 aks.
7 DB § 1. :

Nn2

548 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

smaller and smaller portions: they are in fact just the bits of the petypa
as they happen to be broken off by the rotation. Like the whole
petypa too they each of them contain all things and so would any
portions, however small, into which they might be broken, but they
differ in an endless variety of ‘forms and colours and savours’, differ
that is, in quality. How does this happen? “They differ in form no
doubt according as they happen to be broken off, and in colour and
savour and other qualities owing to the constitution of the original
petyya. For just as it, though in all its parts it contained all things,
yet was not entirely homogeneous, for in different parts different things
prevailed, so it is with the bits broken off from it. A bit which comes
from a part of the we?yya in which ‘the moist’ prevails will become a
‘seed’ of water, if it come from where ‘the hot’ dominates a seed of
‘fire’, and so on not only with the opposites, but with all concrete
substances, gold, bone, flesh, blood, bread, &c.: the effect of the whirl
is to break up tracts of the petypya into the ‘seeds of all things’.

The next stage in the process is that these ‘seeds’ are ‘separated
apart’? (Svaxpiverat), that is to say that from the miscellaneous jumble
of the whirl, the unlike seeds, or to speak more strictly, those unlike
in their prevailing ‘thing’, begin to move apart. Like then becomes
attached (apooxpiverat)3 to like, and the result is the formation of a
compound structure (svyxpudjievov),4 in which the majority of the
seeds will be those in which the same substance prevails and so deter-
mines the character of the compound, but each of these seeds still
contains all things, and there will be mixed with them, though not
‘manifest’, seeds in which other ‘things’ are dominant. But the com-
pound made up of ‘seeds’ is not itself a fusion but a juxtaposition. The
detailed process of the formation of a world contains nothing which
throws further light on the main question and has been sufficiently
considered in the text.5

It is not to the point here to enter into the details of Anaxagoras’
astronomical and biological speculations, nor of his interesting theory
of perception; there is nothing in them which at all prejudices the
account given of his general notion of creation, but they are not
essential for its understanding. It is time to return to the phenomena

« Note that a ‘seed’ is not a permanent entity: it is just a piece of the
original jetysa in which one ‘thing’ prevails and might at any moment be
broken up into smaller particles, each of which then becomes a ‘seed’.

anD. Bea 3 D. Bare: 4 D.B. 4, § 1.

s I agree with A. L. Peck (C. Q., l.c.) that Anaxagoras’ cosmology was
traditional and stands apart from his main theory.

—— ey 5
ee Se

Ps

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 549

of physical and physiological change which take place in a world after
its creation and to see whether any light is thrown on them by the larger
theory. There is unfortunately in none of the fragments or references
anything like a detailed account of the process: if there were, it would
be possible to arrive at certainty on the main issue. ‘There is however
enough material to start the inquiry and the analogy of the fuller
details of the larger process is of great value. It will have been observed
that in the description of the process of world-formation Anaxagoras
represented each stage by a carefully differentiated compound of
Kpivew (doxpivecbar, Svaxpivecbar, mpooKptvecbat, ovykpivecbar).
In Simplicius’? commentary on Aristotle’s Physics it appears that the
phenomenon of birth or production in the created world is also
described by its appropriate compound of xpivw, different from any of
those yet used. ‘He said that all things were mixed in everything and
that production (yéveois) took place by separating out (exxpwots).” A
little later on he explains its meaning more fully: ‘seeing therefore that
from each of the things now separated apart (Svakexpynevwr) all things
were separated out (€xxpwoeva), as for instance flesh and bone and
the rest from bread, as though all existed already in it and were mixed
together, from this he surmised that all existences were once mixed
together before they were separated apart’. Is it possible on the
analogy of the other compounds of xpiyw and from the idea already
formed of the aoxexpyzéva to form a notion of the nature of écxpusis?
It will be easiest to attempt it in a concrete instance and Simplicius’
example of food comes most readily to hand. What then is the con-
stitution of the piece of bread before it is eaten? It is made up of a very
large number of minute ‘seeds’ or particles in juxtaposition, each of
which contains ‘all things’ in fusion: these ‘seeds’ were in origin bits of
the petypa separated off (azoxpwopeva) and separated apart (Svaxpuwd-
eva) in the whirl, they subsequently came together (zpooxpibévra) and
formed a compound body (cuyxpwdevov). What is the character of
these ‘seeds’? Must it be said that in every one of them bread ‘pre-
vails’? In spite of a serious difficulty,? I think, emphatically not.
Though in the majority bread ‘prevails’, there are yet in the constitu-
tion of the bread ‘seeds’ of all things, of gold, fire, onions, &c. But
not by any means in equal numbers: there are undoubtedly most
‘bread-seeds’, a large number, though not so many, of flesh, blood,

« In Arist. Péys. I’. 4. 203; D.A. 45.

2 That of the use of the terms Guovowepy and dpovopéperar: I hope how-
ever to show that the usual interpretation of these words is mistaken: see

PP: 551-55.

sso ON “THEUPRVoa, OF ANAXAGORAS

and bone-seeds, of the things, that is, into which bread normally
changes, and some examples at least of every kind of ‘seed’. This is
the constitution one would expect out of a compound formed in the
whirl, and it is surely the meaning of the famous sentence from which
the whole controversy starts, ‘each thing is and was those things* of
which it has most in it’. Not enough stress has hitherto been laid on the
plural ‘those things. . . most’ (7Aeiora): it means surely that not only
has the bread a majority of ‘bread-seeds’, but also many corresponding
to those parts of the body which it may form when eaten: bread ‘is and
was’ bread, but also potentially flesh, blood, and bones. But these
secondary seeds in which flesh and blood, &c., prevail are so minute,
and perhaps we may also say with Giussani so scattered, that they do
not affect the character of the whole and could never be perceived.
Indeed they cannot yet be described as pieces of bone, flesh, &c., but
they are only, as Aetius? accurately calls them, ‘portions capable of
producing blood, &c.’ (udpia aiparos yevvytixd). And so it comes to
pass that when we eat the bread, the processes of biting and digestion
‘separate out’ the latent ‘seeds’ in which flesh and blood prevail from
the seeds in which bread prevails and then these join each other and
the pre-existent flesh and blood in the body. But such separation does
not, as in the ordinary view, cause the production of things which no
longer contain all things, for in every ‘seed’, in whatever compound
body it may be, there are always ‘portions of everything’ fused together.

Here then there is a complete parallelism between the macrocosm,
the normal substance of things, and the microcosm of the ‘seed’. Just
as in the original petypa. ‘all things were together’, but owing to their
great prevalence ‘in size and bulk’ mist and sky determined the appear-
ance of the whole, so in the ‘seeds’ all things are present in fusion, but
the character of each is determined by that of which there is most,
and in the compound body all the different kinds of ‘seeds’ are there,
but the character of the whole is that of the majority of the ‘seeds’.
Just as in the e?ypa the rotatory motion instituted by ‘mind’ caused
the ‘separating off’ of ‘seeds’ and like joined like, so now the extraneous
force of the process of eating and digesting food causes the ‘separating
out’ of the latent seeds in which flesh, blood, &c., prevail, which join
‘the like’ in the body. Nor of course is this a mere parallelism, but is
all due to the fact that the ultimate constitution of the ‘seeds’ is just
that of the petypa, for they are nothing but portions of it. The view

« Simpl. in Arist. Phys. A. 2.184; D.A.41. The manuscripts have é7w,

for which Usener’s drwy is universally accepted as against a possible érov.
ai, 3. 53. 0.A. 40.

i
i

Ss

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 551

I have put forward satisfies, I believe, the requirements with which
we started. It preserves the concrete nature of the ‘things’ of which
everything has a part; it preserves the possibility of infinite division
without reaching ‘things’ unmixed, for every ‘seed’ and every particle,
however minute, into which it might be divided, will still contain
all things fused together; it shows how the process of change may take
place by a ‘separating out’ of ‘seeds’ already existent and latent in the
previous body, and finally it accords, I believe, better both with the
extant fragments of Anaxagoras and the accounts of his system.

But, it will be urged, the fatal objection to this view is the applica-
tion by Aristotle and other later commentators to the theory of Anaxa-
goras of the words duovopepyjs and duovopépeva, which it will be noticed
I have hitherto neglected. These words must mean, it will be said,
that, according to Anaxagoras, each part of a whole compound body,
each ‘seed’, was exactly homogeneous in character both with all the
other parts and with the whole. Ifso, it is impossible that there should
be in bread, any ‘seeds’ in which anything else than bread prevails, for
they would not be dovoyep# either with the vast majority of the other
‘seeds’ or with the whole piece of bread. The objection is not, I think,
by any means fatal, but it is serious, and it is necessary in conclusion
to attempt to trace the meaning of these words and the idea which
they imply. In the first place it must be remarked that the ordinary
interpretation of their meaning is in any case a fatal one, because it
must involve a deadlock and make change impossible. If a// the parts
of a compound body are exactly homogeneous and have the same pre-
vailing ‘thing’, then nothing could ever change into something else
without a dissolution which would produce some things in which “all
things’ were not present. If bread prevails in every particle of a piece
of bread, flesh and blood can only be ‘separated out’ from it pure, and
then, as on the ‘old view’ of Anaxagoras’ theory, things exist which
do not any longer contain all things. As Burnet argues, and the least
reflexion must cause agreement, such cannot have been Anaxagoras’
meaning.

In other words the traditional idea of the homoeomeria cannot be
right and a new inquiry into its meaning is demanded. At the outset
a distinction must be drawn between the substantive (Juovopépeva) and
the adjective (duovopepis). Only the adjective is used by Aristotle in
his comments on Anaxagoras: the later commentators use the adjective
when they are reproducing Aristotle and they also give us the sub-
stantive as though, contrary to modern belief, it were a term employed
by Anaxagoras himself. It will therefore be best to consider them

552 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

separately. Now the word duovoeprs! had for Aristotle a very peculiar
sense apart from his comments on Anaxagoras in association with his
own physical theory. A substance that is in the Aristotelian sense
dpovopepys is the resultant of a pitts or fusion of the four elements
or orowxeta as opposed to the resultant of a mere ovvOeats: such are the
material substances of which things are composed. “Thus, as Burnet?
notes, the docomepfy in Aristotle’s biological theory, stand intermediate
between the elements and the developed organs: they are, to take the
example of the human body, bone, flesh, blood, &c., which are homo-
geneous in all their parts, as distinguished on the one hand from the
ototxeta, earth, air, fire, and water, which themselves have no com-
ponent parts, and on the other from the formed dpyava, such as the
hand, in which the parts are not dora. Now there is an @ priori
probability that when Aristotle applied a word of such distinctive
connotation to the theory of Anaxagoras, he intended to use it, if not
in exactly the same sense, at least, in a sense not widely different from
his application of it to his own theory. If the account given above of
Anaxagoras’ theory be at all correct, there was in fact a double reason
why Aristotle should have applied the epithet éjovopepyjs to the sub-
stances and the particles of substance which Anaxagoras conceived as
the underlying substratum of matter. In the first place the epithet
would denote just the class of reality which Anaxagoras wished to
express, the material substance of existing things and in particular the
flesh, bone, blood, &c., in which, with his physical bias, he was mainly
interested: in the second it would connote that these were the products
of a piéis—not, of course, a wifis of the elements, as Aristotle held
himself, but of a wetyua such as Anaxagoras conceived as the original
condition of the universe. This is what one would expect a priori:
it is necessary to inquire how far it is actually the case. There are three
main passages in which Aristotle uses the word in connexion with
Anaxagoras.

1. In the de Caelo3 Aristotle is contrasting Anaxagoras with Em-
pedocles in his account of the elements. ‘Empedocles’, he says, ‘main-
tains that fire and things in the same category with them# are the
elements of bodies and that all things are compounded of them. But
Anaxagoras says the opposite; for he makes the opotopeph elements,
I mean flesh and blood and each of the things in this class: but air and

See a paper by H. H. Joachim, Fournal of Philology, xxix. 72 ff.

a EVGS PS, pAzose 3 I. 3. 302.2; D.A. 43 (b).

4 The plural (rovrous) suggests that kat SSwp or something like it has
dropped out after zip.

2 mE ee een, <a

ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS 553

fire are mixtures of these and of all other seeds, for all of these are
composed of invisible ouovopepy of all kinds.’ This is exactly what we
should expect. He is in the first instance using Ojovopeph in his own
sense and describing the class of things to which Anaxagoras’ elements
belonged in opposition to the elements of Empedocles: in the second
he applies the term in the same sense to the Anaxagorean imper-
ceptible ‘seeds’ in compound things.

2. So in the Physics" in precisely the same way: ‘Of those who make
the elements infinite, Anaxagoras said that they were made of the
6pLovoepy —Aristotle’s own sense of the term again.

3. The passage from the Metaphysics? has caused much difficulty :3
‘Practically all the duovowep (just like fire and water), Anaxagoras
says, come into being by combination and perish by separation only,
but in no other sense 4 do they come into being or perish at all, but
remain everlasting.’ The critics, who stumble chiefly over the
parenthesis, have got into difficulties because they take dywovopeph to
refer here to the ultimate particles or else the ‘seeds’ in Anaxagoras’
theory. It surely does not, but as in the two previous passages means
‘the substances I call dovoepy’,i-e. the flesh, bones, &c., in the human
body. These, as I understand Anaxagoras’ theory, come into being and
perish owing to the combination and dissolution of ‘seeds’: but such birth
and death are only illusory, for the ‘seeds’ themselves do not perish, but
only enter into new combinations. Fire and water are, of course, on
Anaxagoras’ theory, compounds and so too are even the substances
Aristotle regards as duwovoepy, for they are all alike constructed by the
juxtaposition (ovyxpuots) of ‘seeds’. The meaning then is that in Anaxa-
goras’ theory both substances which Aristotle calls 6uovowepy and also
those which he regards as elements (fire and water) are compounds of
‘seeds’, created by combination and destroyed by separation. I do not
at all agree with Burnet that ‘the general sense is that Anaxagoras
applies to the djovopeph what is really true of the orovyeta’.5

t J’..4. 203.a; D.A. 45. 2 A. 3. 9844; D.A. 43 (a).

3. Seerk. CoP 3,po2655m. 2;

4 I donot think that Zeller’s dzA@s for dAAws, which is adopted by Burnet,
improves the sense.

5 Cf. Simpl. in Arist. P/ys. A..2. 184 (27. 2); D.A. 41 mdvra yap Ta
Gpovopeph, olov vdwp 7 mop 7 xpvadv, ayévnta pev elvar Kai addOapra,
paivecBat dé yivdpeva kal droAAvpeva ovyKpicer Kal Suaxpices wovov, Which
is obviously an echo of this passage of Aristotle, makes its meaning quite clear,
and it is interesting to note that there water and fire are actually grouped with
gold as duovopepH: on Anaxagoras’ theory there is no difference in their
constitution.

554 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

In passing from Aristotle to the doxographers it is impossible not
to be struck at once with the curious fact that what is now found for
the most part is not the Aristotelian adjective duovopepys, but the
substantive djovopépevat. It is used clearly in a slightly different sense
from Aristotle’s adjective and spoken of as if it were a technical term of
Anaxagoras’. “Two passages are of great interest and must be con-
sidered in detail.

1. Simplicius? commenting on the passage in the Physics: “Since
Anaxagoras postulates the djwovopéperar, and Democritus the atoms,
both regarded as infinite in number, as first-beginnings, he (Aristotle)
inquires first into the opinion of Anaxagoras and also explains the
reason which led Anaxagoras to such a supposition, and shows. . . that
each dpovoppeva, just as much as the whole, has all things present in it,
and that not merely infinite in number but infinite times infinite.’ Here
the duovopépeva are clearly something different from the cpovopepy
of Aristotle: they are not substances such as we know, but something
underlying them which can be compared with the atoms of Demo-
critus. In short they are the ‘seeds’ of which things are compounded
and Simplicius explains clearly enough—what I have attempted to
show is a necessary postulate for the explanation of change—that each
of them too contains portions of all things: the passage is in fact the
clearest and most convincing explanation of exactly what I believe
to have been Anaxagoras’ theory. The name djovopépeat, as applied
to the ‘seeds’, is appropriate enough as on the one hand the ‘seeds’, like
Aristotle’s 6jzovoepy, are the resultants of piéis, on the other they are
each of them ‘parts like to whole substances’: a thing that is dwovopepi}s
has ‘seeds’ which are dpovopéperat, for they are like to material sub-
stances: the adjective and substantive are correlative.

2. Aetius? after explaining that since Anaxagoras could not conceive
the possibility of anything being created out of the non-existent,
therefore supposed the existence in food of ‘particles capable of
creating’ blood and nerves and bones, &c., which are only Adyw bewpyra,
goes on to say, ‘from the fact then that the particles in the food are like
the substances produced he called them dpovopépevat, and he took the
6jLovopepevar as the material cause’. Burnet 3 comments: ‘Aetius, sup-
posing as he does that Anaxagoras himself used the term (dotopéperat)
gives it an entirely wrong meaning.’ As to Anaxagoras’ use something
will shortly be said, but the meaning is not ‘entirely’ wrong: the
Opotopeperat are so Called because they are like in substance to the

t In Arist. Phys. I’. 4. 203; D.A. 45b. 9.45. 32083. D AnaGe

32: GaP Sips 26401 3.

na ca!

oh.

ee ee eee ee

JS

ON THE THEORY OF -ANAXAGORAS 555

material things of sense which they compose, and though Aetius goes
too far, he is right in referring the term not only to the ‘bread-seeds’
in the bread, but also to its ‘flesh-’ and ‘blood-seeds’. In other words
his comment is an effective contradiction of the traditional view that
all the ‘seeds’ in the piece of bread must be ‘bread-seeds’. Aetius in
another passage? says ‘the djovojeph are of every kind of shape’: here
OjoLojep7 is loosely used in the sense of duwovopépevae and the statement
is exactly parallel to Anaxagoras’* own affirmation that the ‘seeds of
all things’ in the original petyya were of every form.

‘To these usages of djwovcopepevar by the doxographers in a way clearly
independent of, though not inconsistent with, Aristotle’s use of the
adjective djovoepyjs, we must add the no less startling, and quite
unique, application of the singular homoeomeria by Lucretius3 to
Anaxagoras’ theory as a whole for which he claims Anaxagoras’
authority. What then is to be said about the origin of these later uses?
Clearly the doxographers did not get them from Aristotle: for he uses
only the adjective in a sense applicable enough to Anaxagoras’ ideas,
but connected with his own biological theory. Did they then develop
the substantive and its meaning from Aristotle’s adjective? It is not
probable that in that case they would have diverged quite so far from his
usage: still less that they would have invented the rather strange
formation djovojepevae to express the essentially concrete substance of
the ‘seeds’. Where then did they get the word and its sense? There is
surely only one answer that Aetius and Lucretius are telling the truth,
that Anaxagoras did call his dpyai éuovopeépevat, that he did refer to his
theory as the homoeomeria, and that in all probability he spoke of
compound substances as ouovopepy. None of these terms of course
occurs in the extant fragments, but I cannot see how it is possible to
explain their later uses except on the supposition, which is confirmed
by the statements of the doxographers, that the terms were Anaxa-
goras’ own. Aristotle, I imagine, adopted from him the adjective
because it expressed exactly what he wanted to describe in his own
theory—a substance homogeneous in its parts with the implication
that it was the resultant of a wigis: in speaking of Anaxagoras’ theory
he used it to denote those substances to which it was applicable both
on his own theory and Anaxagoras’—the substances of which the
organs of the body and so on are composed. The later commentators
returned to Anaxagoras’ own use and spoke of the ‘seeds’ as duovoprepevat,
and the whole theory as duovopépera.

Od 4.47 5. 58. a D.B. 4, § 1: see p. 547.
3 i. 830, 834 ‘rerum guam dicit homoeomerian’.

556 ON THE THEORY OF ANAXAGORAS

Whether this surmise be correct or not, it is, I hope, clear that
there is nothing either in Aristotle’s use of djovopepys, or the later
usage of 6ovopepeva which is in any way a bar to the view here taken
of the general theory. djotopepevar denotes the ‘seeds’ containing a
fusion of all things, and like in substance to the bodies which they
compose, dpovoneph denotes bodies so formed, but there is nothing
in the evidence which necessitates the conclusion that in a// the
dpovopeperar of a given body, the same ‘thing’ prevailed: on the con-
trary the evidence tends to show that Anaxagoras conceived that in
any one body there were ‘seeds’ corresponding to every substance, but
they differed greatly in number, and the character of the body, present
and future, was determined by those ‘seeds’ ‘of which there were
most in it’,

ee ee

ft

APPENDIX II
Other Views of IIpoAnbus

‘Tue scantiness of the evidence as to the exact nature of Epicurus’
conception of apdAnyus has caused a certain divergence of opinion.
Though I have no doubt that the interpretation given in the text,
which is that of the great majority of modern critics, is right, it is
worth while to chronicle some of the other views.

1. Cicero, de Natura Deorum, i. 17. 44, speaking of the zpoArjpeis
which all men have of divine beings, describes them as insitae vel
potius innatae cognitiones. It might be thought at first sight that he
regarded them as ‘innate ideas’, concepts which are in the mind from
birth and are not due in any sense to experience. But the divergence
is more apparent than real: the Latin words do not necessarily imply
this, but only that the ‘anticipations’ ‘were implanted in or grew up’
within the mind and were not—directly at least—given it from
without. Cicero is capable of a good deal of misinterpretation of
Epicurus, but the notion of ‘innate ideas’ would be wholly repugnant
to Epicureanism and it is not necessary to suppose that he held it. See
Mayor’s note on the passage, and Tohte, Epikurs Kriterien der
Wahrheit, p. 17.

2. Steinhart, in the article on Epicurus in Ersch and Griiber’s
Encyclopaedia, understands the mpoAnpbets to be the images of individual
sense-perceptions, which remain in the mind and may be called up
at will for purposes of comparison. Tohte (op. cit., p. 16) has shown
that this view is sufficiently contradicted by the evidence of Diogenes
(x. 33), and in particular by the phrases Kafodu«y vonos and prin
Tob ToAAdKis €Ewhev davevtos, which must refer to a general concept
founded on the repeated image and not to an individual image. We
may add (1) that the operation which Steinhart conceives is simply
that of the memory of a particular sense-perception, pvjn Tob drag
zwbev davévtos, (2) that, as such, it could have no validity in cognition
as a ‘criterion’, for “one sensation cannot correct another’.

3. A more important divergence from the ordinary view has (1909)
been put forward by F. Merbach (op. cit., pp. 45 ff.), who, it must be
remembered (see p. 232, n. 2), also denies that Epicurus’ Canonice
was thought out in terms of his physical theory: he is thus not ham-
pered by the necessity of explaining the atomic psychology of its
details. He holds (1) that the essence of the zpdAnyis consists in the

558 OTHER VIEWS OF I/POAHYIS

connexion of name and thing: it would be of no value to us to have
general concepts stored in our mind, unless we could also name them:
(2) that we receive the zrpoArpers not from repeated sensations, but
from the instructions of parents, &c., in our childhood who tell us
the names of things; (3) that the zpdAnyus owes its validity as a test
of truth to the fact that cognition, in which we use it, is an essential
part of sense-perception and is therefore itself a department of aioOnots.
Merbach seems to me to have done good service in emphasizing the
place of mpéAnyus in cognition, and still more in showing its connexion
with the naming of things, and the assumption of the idea of wpoAnfus
in §§ 37, 38 of the Letter to Herodotus (see pp. 248, 267). But his
divorce of the Canonice from the physical theory is to my mind a root-
misconception of Epicurus and vitiates the details of his work, and he
entirely neglects the evidence of Diogenes’ definition, which he regards
as a patchwork, unintelligible because we do not possess the context
of the various explanations given of zpoAnyus. Moreover, to come
to his three main contentions, (1) admitting the importance of the
name, as a label of the concept, and the close connexion of the idea
of mpdAnyus with Epicurus’ theories both of the origin of language
and the requisites of scientific terminology, I yet think that the name
is not an essential part of Epicurus’ notion of zpéAnyus: even without
a name, it would be possible for the individual to refer a new sensation
to the general concept, and say ‘this is that’, which is the fundamental
element in cognition; (2) we receive names from the instruction of
others, but the concepts themselves, which are more important, must
be due to sense-experience: further, it is, I think, clear that Epicurus
regarded all the xpirnpa as closely connected in origin, aicOnors being
the ultimate source of all; (3) cognition is indeed an essential part of
sense-perception, but not of mere sensation, and could not be included
by Epicurus, except very loosely, under aic@nars: it is éraicOnua. If
the zrpoAripers had validity as part of sensation, they would be dAnfeis as
well as évapyets; but such validity, which did not rest on origin, would
be assumed, not inferred. he whole theory is interesting and has
called attention to important points, but it cannot, I think, be set up
against the ordinary view. Merbach approaches the question with too
great a desire to find in zpoAnyus the explanation of Ep. i, §§ 37, 38,
where it is not actually mentioned, and too little respect for Diogenes’
definitions, which must after all come from Epicurean sources.

a et el oe

APPENDIX III
On the Meaning of éemBor} rHs Svavolas !

Or all the technical terms of the Epicurean philosophy none is
nearly so obscure and elusive as émBodr) THs Suavolas. We are con-
fronted with it or its equivalent five? times in the Letter to Herodotus
and once} in the Kvpiar Adéar; Diogenes further tells us that the
‘Epicureans’ added it to Epicurus’ three criteria of truth: yet each
fresh context seems at first only to shed further obscurity on its
meaning. Nor can it be said that modern critics and historians of
philosophy have for the most part assisted much towards its elucida-
tion: finding it in a prominent place in the Epicurean philosophy they
have felt bound to give some equivalent for it, but most of them have
been content to make wild guesses5 without, as it seems, any careful
consideration of the contexts in which it occurs: yet the very diver-
gence of these guesses shows how little the phrase conveys a direct
indication of its meaning. Only two® scholars, so far as I know, have
made a really critical study of the subject, Tohte? and Giussani,*® and
they again differ widely in their conclusions. I should be loth to enter
the discussion, but that I feel bound to justify the views assumed in
my account of the Canonice and also believe that something may
yet be said, which may help towards a solution.

It will be convenient, before entering the details of the discussion,
to give in full the passages of Epicurus dealing with the subject, which

« ] have for convenience of reference reprinted this Appendix from
Epicurus, pp. 259-74-

2 §§ 38, 50, 51 (twice), 62. 3 XXIV.

wry. 31, 8.) : a

s We may instance Zeller, ‘sensible impression’; Uberweg, ‘intuitive
apprehension of the understanding’ (which is nearer to part of the right idea
than most conjectures) ; Ritter and Preller, ‘a form of zpéAnyus not differing
from images seen in delirium or sleep’; -Steinhart, ‘the free activity of the
imagination’.

6 Brieger’s contribution (Lehre von der Seele, pp. 19, 20) is so vague and
uncritical that it does not really come into question, though, as will be seen,
he has grasped one essential part of the full meaning. F. Merbach (de Epicuri
Canonica, pp. 28-35) has some interesting pages on the subject, in which he
agrees in the main with Tohte, but does not touch the crucial difficulty of
§ 62 of the Letter to Herodotus.

7 Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrheit, pp. 20-4.

8 Stud. Lucr. pp. 171-82.

560 ON THE MEANING OF

will frequently be required for reference, and to state summarily the
conclusions at which this note will arrive.
I. Letter to Herodotus:

A. § 38 éru te! Kata tas aicbycers Set mavta Typelv Kal anAds
<KaTa> Tas Tapovoas émBodds etre Siavoias lf drov SijmoTe TOV
Kpitnpiwv, dpoiws S€ kara Ta brdpxyovra 7AOn, Omws av Kal TO TpoT-
[évov Kal TO ddyAov exwpev ols onpewaopeba.

B. § 50 Kal iy av AdBupev fpavraciav emPAntiKds TH dvavola 7 Tots
aicOnrnpious ETE Hopdijs cre oupBeBnkorev, poppy €oTw avTn Tob
orepeviov, ywouevn Kata TO é&fs mUKvwa 7) eyKaTdAeypa TOO
elowAov.

C. § 51 7 Te yap Opodrns TOV davracpOv olovet! ev eixovt AapPa-
vopevwy 7) Kal” Sarvous ywopevw 7) Kat’ GAXas Twas emBodas THs dva-
voias 7) T&v Aour@v Kpitnpiwv odK av Tote bmHpxe Tots oval Te Kal
aAnbéar mpocayopevopevots, ef 11) HV Twa Kal Tovabra. tmpooBadddpeva.

D.§ 51 (immediately following the preceding) TO be SunpapTnpevov
ovK av Omri[pxev, et He) éAapBavopev Kal GAAnv Twa Kivnow ev jp av-
Tots ournpycevny pev <TH pavracruch emiBor >, didAnw 5é exovear.

E. § 62 eet 76 ve fewpovpevov av 7 Kat’ émBodAnv AapBavopevov
TH diavoia adnbés eorw.

II. KvprarAd€as xxiv et rw” €xBadeis adds aicbnow Kai pu7) Svarpy-
ceus TO dokalopevov Kata * TO mpoopevoy Kat TO Tapov 7dn KaTa THY
atoOnow Kal 7a, 70 Kal macav pavracricny emBodiy THS diavolas,
ovvrapagers Kat Tas Aowras alcOyoes TH Parsi d6€n, WoTE TO KpLTH-
ptov drav éxBadets.

To these passages of Epicurus must . added two others of great
importance:

Diog. Laert. x. 31 ev rolwwy T@ Kavove Aéyw € eotly 6 ’Exrixoupos
KpuTnpta THS adn Betas elvan TAS aicOncers Kal mpodnypers Kal Ta 7a0n°
ot O° ’Emuxovperot Kat Tas pavracticas émBords Tis Suavoias.

Clem. Alex. Strom. ii. 4, p-1 57 (Usener, fr. 255) mpornypy & d€ azo-

didwow émiBodnv emi tt evapyes Kal éml thy evapyh Tob mpdypatos
errivovay.

Briefly put, the line of argument which I propose to pursue Is as
follows: (1) The natural meaning of em Bohr) used of operations of the
senses or the mind is a ‘projection upon’, and so ‘attention to’, and,
with the added notion of the result, ‘apprehension’ and even views ;
(2) Epicurus in several of the crucial passages implies an ézBodx of

« For the text see my notes on the passages.

——— NN ———eEeEeEeEEeEoeeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEOoeeeeeee

se 7

EMIBOAH THS AIANOIAS 561

the senses, an ‘apprehension’ by ‘looking’ as opposed to passive seeing.
(3) émBoAr) ris Svavolas corresponds exactly to this and means firstly
(a) the immediate apprehension by an act of mental attention of certain
subtle ‘images’, too fine to be apprehended by the senses, and, in
particular, of the ‘images’ of divine beings; secondly (4) the immediate,
or ‘intuitive’ apprehension of concepts, and in particular of the ‘clear’,
i.e. self-evident concepts of scientific thought. With this preface,
which may be of assistance in the course of a rather intricate and
necessarily controversial argument, we may proceed to full discussion.
1. It was one of the cardinal principles of the Canonice™ (§ 38) that
words must be used in their first and obvious meaning, and though it
may well seem to us at times that Epicurus has hardly succeeded in
carrying out his principles, yet his intention suggests that the best start-
ing-point for inquiry is to ask what is the natural meaning of the word
emBoAr. Proceeding from such literal usages as émuBadAew Tas xetpas
it is natural to conclude that ém:BdAew (ror voovor the like) will mean,
like the commoner é7réyewv, ‘to project the mind towards’, ‘to turn the
attention to’ an object: so Diod. Sic. xx. 43 has mpds oddev éméBadre
thy didvovay, ‘he paid no attention to anything’. In an absolute sense
without the accusative we find tots Kowots mpaypaow émBadAev in
Plut. Cic. 4 as an equivalent of rem publicam capessere, and in a
famous passage of St. Mark, xiv. 72 kat émBadayv exAate. The verb
is used in this way in an Epicurean passage of some importance,
Aet. iv. 8. 10, p. 395 (Usener fr. 317) Aedxunmos Anudxpitos ’Emi-
Koupos T7)v alcbnow Kal TV vonow yivecbar eiddAwY eEwlev Tpoc-
vovTwy pndevi yap éemPBdArew pnderépav ywpls Tob mpoomimrovtos
etd@Aov, and again in Iambl. Protr. 4. 56 1) dius tots dparots
émuBadAev: for the moment we will suspend the question of the exact
sense in these rather technical places.
éBoAy, the substantive, should then mean ‘a projection towards’,
‘attention to’, and so with the added notion of the result of such
attention, ‘view’ or ‘apprehension’: the substantive is thus used by
lem. Alex. 644 émiBody tis aAnOelas, a ‘grasp’ or ‘apprehension’ of
the truth. The simple évBoA;) without further qualification occurs
six times in the Letter to Herodotus. (1) In § 35 Epicurus is speak-
ing of the reason for writing an epitome, ris yap aOpdas éemPoAjjs
nuxvov Sedpueba, Tis 8é Kad pépos ody dpoiws, ‘for we have frequent
need of the general view of the system, but not so often of the detailed
exposition’. (2) In § 83 again, summing up the uses of the Letter, he
says that even those who are working out the system in detail will be
; t Ep. 1,°§ 38.
3307 oo

562 ON THE MEANING OF

able els ras rovavras avahvovras émBodas Tas 7A€ laras TOV TrEpLodEL@V
imep Tis dAns Pvaews trovetaBat, ‘to carry out the greater part of their
investigations into the nature of the whole by conducting their analysis
with reference to such a survey as this’. (3) With these two passages
goes the earlier of two instances in § 36 Baduoréov pev obi en” éexeiva
Kal auvexOs ev TH prin 76 Tocodrov Tountéov, ap’ od 7 Te KUpLWTaTH
émBoml emi ra mpdypara éorar, ‘it is necessary to go back on the main
principles and constantly to fix in one’s memory enough to give one
the most essential comprehension of the truth’. The meaning in
these three passages is direct and clear. Slightly more technical are
(4) § 69, where he is speaking of the properties (ovpBeBnxd7a) of com-
pound things cal émPoAds pev éyovra idias mdvta Tabrd €or Kal
SvaArrbeus, ‘all these properties have their own peculiar means of being
perceived and distinguished’, and (5) §.70 Kat’ émuBodds 8° dv Twas...
éxaora mpooayopevbein, ‘as the result of certain acts of apprehension . ..
they might each be given this name’. Here we are clearly approach-
ing a more esoteric use, though still on the same lines, and the last
passage, (6)§ 36.70 tats émBodais d&ws Sivacba ypho8ar must wait for
the results of the general discussion. Similarly the passage in Clement
of Alexandria quoted above, in which it is stated that zpdAnyus Is an
émBodn towards an évapyés, must be kept over for the present.
émBody then would appear to mean an ‘act of attention’, and so ‘view’
or ‘apprehension’. Both Tohte and Giussani, however, believe that it
has also in Epicurus the ‘passive’ or ‘objective’? meaning of the ‘im-
pression’ resulting from such an act of apprehension. It is true that
there are close parallels in Epicurus’ technical phraseology for this
derivative passive sense: aic@nois is certainly used both for the act
of sensation or perception and also for the passive sensation or per-
ception received, and mpoAnyus, which should strictly mean the ‘act of
anticipation’ is never, I think, used in this sense by Epicurus,? but
always of the ‘general concept’ or ‘compound image’, which is the
basis of such an ‘act of anticipation’. But, although it is sometimes
possible that the passive sense rather than the active may be intended,
it is never3 necessary, and its indiscriminate introduction has, I believe,
done a good deal to confuse issues.

2. We may get much light on the meaning of émBod} THs Suavolas
if we ask first whether Epicurus contemplates any other kind of
émBody besides that of the mind. The answer is not far to seek,

x Giussani, loc. cit., p. 180.

2 It seems, however, to be so used in the Epicurean passage from Clem.
Alex. quoted above. 3 Except possibly in § 38: see p. 568.

- a

ENIBOAH THE AIANOIAS 563

though its importance seems not to have been sufficiently noticed: !
Epicurus clearly recognizes an émBod% of the senses. They are not
(at any rate, not always) the merely passive recipients of an impression,
but by an ‘act of attention’ they apprehend the images which are
flowing in upon them: they ‘look’ or ‘listen’ as opposed to merely
‘seeing’ or ‘hearing’. In that case it is clear that emBorn* will be
connected with the process of émyapripyos, the close view of the
evapynua, which is to check the rash inferences of 8d£a, and tell us with
certainty the true nature of the object. The passages in the Letter to
Herodotus which mention or imply this é78oA7 of the senses are four
in number, and it will be convenient to consider them in the order of
their increasing difficulty.

B. § 50. The clearest and easiest of the passages is that in which
Epicurus most emphatically and directly sums up his doctrine as to
the value of émBodr in general. The idea here seems exactly to bear
out what has been said. “The image which we obtain by an act of
attention or apprehension on the part of the senses (we must leave out
the mind for the moment) of the shape or property (e.g. the colour) of
an object, is in fact its shape (or property).’ This is exactly the idea
of émyaptipnors which Epicurus has just been expounding in the
preceding context. Our first passive sensation of a distant object is
‘true’, for the image is a faithful representation of the successive
‘idols’, but it is not until we have ‘looked at’ the close, clear view
(70 wapdv, TO évapyés) that we can be sure that the image exactly
reproduces the shape and colour of the object. ¢zuBod7 is required
for the confirmation (or non-confirmation) of the 5é€a founded on the
original passive perception.

E. § 62, though a very difficult passage from the point of view of
the ézBod) ris dvavotas, strongly confirms this notion of the émBody
of the senses. Epicurus is considering the motion of the atoms in
a moving compound body: by ‘looking’ we perceive that the motion
of a whole body is the sum of the motions of all its perceptible parts
in the same direction as the whole (e.g. an army). dda applies this
analogy to the motion of the atomic parts of a moving body and infers

« 'Tohte remarks it (p. 21) and points out that it is in distinction from the
ezriBoAn of the senses that Epicurus speaks explicitly of émuBoAy ris duavotas.
So also does Merbach (pp. 31, 32). Giussani seems not to realize it at all,
and is consequently driven to a very unnatural interpretation of some of the
passages in which it is referred to. P

2 This connexion, which seems to me both necessary and extremely im-
portant, has escaped both Tohte and Giussani.

Oo0o2

564 ON THE MEANING OF

that it will be the same, whereas ézBoA1) 77s Suavotas shows that it is
different. Here.ro Oewpovpevov (what is seen by ‘looking’ as opposed to
76 dpd.evov) is clearly equivalent in sense to 76 empAntiK@s AapPavo-
pevov Tots aicOnrypiors in B, and the general idea is the same as in the
previous passage. “The émBodyn of the senses gives us the certain
image of a odpmrwya (in this case movement) of a orepéuviov.

Weare now ina position to deal with the other two passages, where
the sense is slightly more obscure.

A. § 38. After speaking of the necessity for keeping the terminology
of our investigations in exact correspondence with the ideas which it
represents, Epicurus proceeds to consider the methods of investiga-
tion. For clearness’ sake we may extract the words which refer to the
émBoAr of the senses: xara Tas alaOrjceis det mavTa THpEwW Kat amA@s
<Kata> Tas Tapovoas émPords .. . Grou SyToTE TMV KpiTnpiwv,...
onus dv ...7O Mpoopevov . . . exwpev ois onpewwodpeba: ‘in order that
we may have certain indications by which to judge the image awaiting
confirmation (i.e. the original image of the distant object), we must keep
everything under the control of the senses (i.e. free from the additions
of 8d£a), and in particular of the close apprehension (ras 7apovoas
émiBodas is equivalent to Tas emBoAdas émt TO Tapov non Kata THY
aicbnow, cf. K.A. xxiv) of any of the standards of judgement’. “The
xpirijpva.’ here are clearly the individual senses, sight, hearing, &c., the
aic@nrnpia of B, which are indeed xpuripa because they are the instru-
ments of aicOyous: the expression is a little loose, but the meaning in
view of the parallel passages quite unmistakable. The general notion
of the passage is then exactly the same as that of the two preceding
quotations, but it is much more clearly and elaborately stated. The
émBoAy of the senses, the zpoopévov and the process of emrywapTupyats
are all brought into close connexion. The all-important matter for
scientific investigation in the region of perception is the pure sensa-
tion, and in particular the observation of phenomena in the close
view, which will give us the certainty that the sense-image corresponds
to objective reality.

C. § 51. Epicurus is here arguing for the exact resemblance of the

sense-images to the objects from which the ‘idols’ emanate. Extracting -

: Giussani (p. 177), not realizing the éBoAr} of the senses, takes KpuT7}pLa.
here to be ‘signs’ (onpeta as Epicurus ordinarily calls them), and, since he
naturally feels that ‘signs’ could not be standards of reference, does not insert
xatd, but leaves the é7BoAai both of the mind and of the xpur7jpra subordi-
nate to alo@yos in general: but apart from all other objections (see my notes
on the passage) the parallel of § 51 makes this impossible. -

a 7

EMNIBOAH THS AIANOIAS 565

again the portions relating to the émBoAr) of the senses, we get: 7 Te
yap dmodrns TOV pavtacpay olov ef ev eikdve AapBavopévwv ... Karas
Tas emBords TOV AowTav Kpurnpiwy odk dv ToTE UTIPXE TOLs OVGL TE KAL
aAnbéor mpooayopevomevors, €t 41) Hv TWa Kal ToLadTa mpooBardopeva
‘unless “idols” came to us, which are exact reproductions of the object,
we could not be certain of the exact resemblance of the images
obtained by the “apprehensions” of the senses’, that is, the images seen
by observation in the nearer view. The expression, as far as concerns
the émBoAr of the senses, is exactly parallel to what we have already
met: the present passage adds no new ideas, but once more confirms
our conclusion.

There is now no difficulty in interpreting the phrase of Iamblichus,
which was noted on p. 261, 1) dyus Tots dparots émyBdAAeu expresses
clearly enough the act of éiBod7 on the part of the sense of sight in
immediate relation to its own peculiar object, visible things. Before
leaving the ézr8oAx, of the senses, we may notice that the whole notion
of the act of attention on the part of the senses and the resulting
apprehension is clearly brought out by Lucretius, iv. 807-10 (as an
illustration of similar ‘attention’ on the part of the mind):

nonne vides oculos etiam, cum tenvia quae sunt
cernere Coeperunt, contendere se atque parare,
nec sine eo fieri posse ut cernamus acute?

The ideas of the émBodx and the ‘clear view’ could hardly be ex-
pressed more accurately. ;

3 (a). It is now time to pass to the consideration of the éBoAr
tis Svavoias, and it is clear that the first question to be asked is whether
there is any act performed by the mind in Epicurus’ psychology which
is analogous to the apprehension of an image by an act of attention on
the part of the senses? We are at once reminded of course of the
very subtle ‘idols’ which, being too fine to be perceived by the senses,
pass on into the mind and are there immediately apprehended by it,
the images seen in sleep, the visions of dead persons, above all the
‘images’ of the gods. In these cases there seems to be a very close
parallel: the act of apprehension by the mind is, as it were, a kind of
fine sense-perception, and moreover we are informed by Lucretius*
that such images are so fine, that, even when they have penetrated to
the mind, they cannot be perceived by it except by a special act of
attention, so that we see them most often in sleep, when the senses
are dormant and the mind is undisturbed. This seems to be exactly

* Compare iv. 757-76 with 800-15.

566 ON THE MEANING OF

what we should expect of the émBoX) rijs Svavolas, the perception of
what is really a sense-image by an act of attention on the part of the
mind. It is necessary to see how this notion tallies with the passages
in Epicurus: it will again be convenient to take them in the order
which will most naturally develop the idea.

(C -@®. § 51, the passage in which Epicurus is arguing for the exact
correspondence of the sense-images to the object from which they
come. We are now concerned with the list of ‘images’ whose likeness
is guaranteed by that of the idols. They are ‘the images perceived as a
kind of likeness (i.e. the normal images of sensation) or those occur-
ring in sleep, or owing to any of the other apprehensions of the mind
... It would be impossible to have clearer confirmation than this:
the images of sleep are perceived by one kind of émBoAy ris diavolasy
and there are others (such as the images of the gods and the visions
of the dead) perceived by other similar é7uBodaé. All of these, just
like the sense-images perceived by the émBodal tv aicOyrnpior,
require as the guarantee of their truth the correspondence of ‘idols’
to object.

B. § 50. ‘Any image which we obtain by an act of apprehension
on the part of the mind . . ., whether it is of shape or quality, is (i.e.
exactly represents) the shape (or quality) of the object.’ Is this true
of our present notion of the émBod) Tis Savoias? It certainly is
true of the images of the gods, for they are formed by a succession of
‘idols’ which come directly from the divine beings to the mind: the
‘idol’ is that which was once the ‘body’ of the god. It is equally true of
visions of the dead, for again they are caused by ‘idols’ which came
from their bodies when alive. But there are certain other kinds of
images similarly perceived by the mind, which cannot here be passed
over, for example, the avordcets, the strange, grotesque, compound
images which form themselves in the air, and the visions of delirium.
In neither of these cases does the ‘image’ correspond to an external
reality. Epicurus saved himself in such cases by arguing that the
image is ‘true’, because it corresponds to the ‘idols’, and it is a mistaken
inference of 5d£a to assume that the ‘idols’ in their turn represent actual
realities. But it would perhaps be the truest account of the case to say
that Epicurus is in the present passage thinking primarily of the other
kinds of ‘mental apprehensions’, and in particular, as Tohte? believes

x Sext. Emp. adv. Math. viii. 63 (Usener 253) 7) wev aicOnors im’ ciddAwv
Kwovpevn adnOns hv (dméxerto yap Ta cidwda), 6 Sé voids oldpevos STL
arepepviol eiow ’Epivues (he is taking the case of Orestes) ebevdodd€er.

a Op. cit., p. 23.

Pe

EIIBOAH THE AIANOIAS 567

he usually is, of the images of the gods. At any rate this passage again
is a strong confirmation of the present view.

A. § 38 contains nothing which is inconsistent with this interpreta-
tion. ‘The objects known to us by this mode of cognition, the im-
mediate apprehension by the mind, are necessarily dyAa, because they
are imperceptible by the sense-organs. Selecting then the portion of
the aphorism which concerns us, we get the principle: ‘in order that
we may have standards by which to judge the imperceptible, we must
keep all under the control of the senses, and in particular of the close
apprehension of the mind’. This suits well enough with our present
idea, but seems to suggest that it is not yet complete: for there seems
nothing in the perception by the mind of the subtle images to corre-
spond to ‘a judgement on the imperceptible by means of the close
view’, or at any rate to get it we should have to press facts a little. Here
then there is no contradiction of our present position, but a distinct
hint for the first time that the ésBoA1) tis Svavotas covers something
more.

D. § 51 and E. § 62 must still be left aside for the present, but we
are now in a position to consider the reference in Kvpiar Adéar xxiv,
and it will be seen to sum up admirably the account at present given
of the émuBodai both of the senses and of the mind. In xxiii, which is
closely connected with it, Epicurus has said: ‘if you reject all sensa-
tions, you will have no standard by which to judge even those which
you say are false’. In xxiv he pushes his argument still farther: ‘if you
reject any single sensation and fail to distinguish between the con-
clusion of opinion as to the appearance awaiting confirmation on the
one hand, and on the other the close view made by sense-perception
or feeling, or every kind of mental apprehension of an image, you will
confound all other sensations as well by your groundless opinion, so
that you will lose all standard of judgement’. This agrees excellently
with what has been said: alike in cases of sense-perception and mental
apprehension we must respect the validity of every sensation and attend
to the close view, carefully distinguishing between the vague image of
the indistinct view and the clear vision obtained by an act of apprehen-
sion. But here once again there is a suggestion of something more in
the ézBoAr) ris Svavoias than we have yet discovered: how does it
obtain a clear vision in contrast to an image awaiting confirmation?
and what is meant by ‘every émuBod7; of the mind’? Surely something
more than the apprehension of the various kinds of subtle image.

So far we have concluded that the émBod rijs Svavotas 1s a ‘mental
apprehension of an image perceived directly by the mind without the

568 ON THE MEANING OF

intervention of the senses’, and we might naturally suppose that
Epicurus insisted on its truth and, even if he did not quite class it as
a KpuTi}puov,' yet named it so frequently among the «pur7jpta, mainly in
order to support his theological contention that our mental vision of

the forms of the gods is evidence of their existence. This is in effect

the view of Tohte, except that he leans (unnecessarily, as I think) to
the passive interpretation, and would speak of the émuBod7 rH}s Suavolas
as an ‘impression received by the apprehension of the mind’. And if
this were all the evidence we had, we might be content with his
explanation. But it has already been noted that this view does not
seem to cover the full meaning required either in A. § 38 or in
K.A. xxiv: we have, moreover, been compelled at present to leave
over D. § 51, as there seems nothing in what has been said to explain
it, and an examination of E. § 62 in its context will show at once that
it can have nothing whatever to do with mental apprehension of
subtle images. If a complete explanation of éuBoA7) Tis Siavoias is to
be discovered, it will be necessary to make further inquiry.

3 (4). We must ask then, can the émBodA? tis Suavotas grasp or
apprehend anything else besides these subtle images, exactly analogous
to the images of normal sense-perception? At this point the passage
quoted above? from Clement of Alexandria becomes of crucial im-
portance. ‘Epicurus’, he says, ‘explains “‘anticipation” as an appre-
hension of something clear or of the clear thought-image of the thing.’
Now from our knowledge of the nature of zpdAnyus this is not difficult
to explain: the ‘act of anticipation’—for zpoAnyus3 is here used, con-
trary to Epicurus’ usual custom, in an active sense—is the apprehension

_of the general or compound image, made up of many individual sense-
‘images. This ‘apprehension’ must be mental—must be an émuBody} ris
dtavoias, for the general image can only be perceived by the mind
and not by the senses, and what now is its object? Not a sense-image,
nor anything analogous to it, but a concept. An éziBod1) Tis Svavolas
then can grasp a concept, and with ithis new notion in mind we may
turn to the examination of the difficult passage in the Letter to
Herodotus, which has been left over for consideration.

E. § 62. The particular question at issue in the context is: What is
the nature of the atomic motions in a compound body? ‘We know’,
says Epicurus in effect, ‘that the perceptible parts of a moving body are
all moving in the same direction as the whole body: this is the truth
guaranteed to us by an émBody tev aicOnrypiwv (76 Bewpodpevov is

t D.L. x. 31, quoted on p. 560.

2 p. 560. 3 "See p. 247, a. ie!

CO

Se

EMIBOAH TH AIANOIAS 569

clearly that which is grasped by the senses when “looking” at the
close view, i.e. by an émuBodr}). By analogy we apply the same idea in
thought to the imperceptible atomic parts and suppose that they too
are all moving in the same direction as the whole: this is the work of
opinion (da) combining images and forming what Epicurus would
call technically an émivowa kar’ dvadoyiav. But we know as the result
of scientific investigation that the atoms are really in a constant state
of vibratory motion (dacs) in all directions, and this conclusion must
be true as against our previous supposition, because it is obtained by an
e7rtBody) THs Svavoias.’ What does this mean? how do we know this
fact by an émiBod ris Stavolas and why is it therefore certainly true?
Giussani, largely on the strength of this passage, but influenced also
by his general theories of the process of thought in Epicurus, has
argued fora far wider sense of ézBod) THs Svavoias than that proposed
by Tohte. “The érBoAt) ris Savotas for Epicurus comprehends both
what Tohte supposes, but not that alone, and zpdAnjus, as Brieger
wishes, but not it alone, and scientific concepts in general, including
the concepts of those d3yAa—be they real or coniuncta or eventa—which
do not give off “idols”. In fine the émBod) 7Hs Svavolas is mental
representation in general.’ The one fatal objection to this all-em-
bracing view of the éBodr} is to my mind just this passage (§ 62) on
which it is based. Seeing that all mental operations, including 8é&a
itself, are carried on, according to Epicurus, by visualized images or
‘mental representation’, it is impossible that Epicurus could have said
that ‘everything that is grasped by mental representation is true’.
Giussani went farther, I think, in this last clause than he really meant,
and wished to distinguish the ‘concepts of science’ from the images
formed by opinion, but that is just the crux of the whole matter.
Turn once more to the instance in § 62. We have a problem:
What is the motion of the atoms in a moving compound body? Two
solutions are offered, one that they are all moving in the same direc-
tion as the whole, the other that they are moving in imperceptible
little trajects in all directions. The former is the solution of opinion
based on the analogy of the perceptible, and it is false: the latter is
the solution of émBoA7 tis Svavoias, and it is true. Why? What is
the difference in process by which the two solutions are aimed at?
‘Opinion’, Epicurus himself tells us—for we may now make use of D.
§ 51—‘is a movement of the mind closely connected with the emuBody
Tis Svavoias, but distinct from it?? What is the distinction? Why is
one liable to produce false results, while the other can only give us what _

t Loc. cit., p. 179 ji”.

57° ON THE MEANING OF

is true? If we could answer that question with certainty, we should
have solved not merely the particular problem before us, but much
of the difficulty of the Epicurean theory of knowledge. With some
hesitation I venture to give an answer. So far what we know of
émBod Tis Suavotas in the secondary sense is that it can apprehend
concepts, as in pdAnyus (Clem. Alex.), and that its operation Is In
some way parallel to that of the émBoAn trav aicOnrnpiwy in the process
of émyuapripnors (A. § 38 and K.A. xxiv). Let us attempt to apply
these ideas to the problem of atomic motion. Adéa frames the theory
that the atoms in the moving compound all move in the direction
of the whole body, as do the perceptible parts of the body. How
is this theory to be tested? According to the ordinary rule of the
Canonice in dealing with anda by reference to the senses. But in
this case, either the senses would give us no criterion of judgement,
or, as in the case of celestial phenomena, several possible theories
might meet with no dvriaprvpyors and be equally true. Scientific
theory requires a greater accuracy than this, and as a matter of fact
Epicurus does not test the Sofafdpevov by reference to the senses, but
by reference to an émPoM) ris Siavolas. Scientific thought then about
the ultimate realities is conducted on some different lines, and results
in a ‘one and only’ truth. I suggest that in Epicurus’ view the con-
cepts of science are built up step by step by the juxtaposition (ovvGears)
of previous concepts, each in their turn grasped as ‘clear’ or self-
evident by the immediate apprehension of the mind (éBoAn tis
Svavoias). What is important here is to show that this conclusion is
forced upon us by the passage in question. Epicurus refers the
Soéalduevov not to the senses, but to ‘that which is grasped by émuBoAy
ris Svavolas’. What is it that is thus apprehended? Clearly the ‘vision’
or ‘image’ or ‘concept’ of the atoms still, even inside the moving com-
pound body, themselves moving in every direction. And how is that
vision (évapyés) formed? Clearly by the juxtaposition of the previous
concept of the movement of free or uncompounded atoms. (itself
similarly formed by the apprehensipn of other ‘clear visions’ in juxta-
position) with the concept of atoms enclosed in a moving dfpouspa;
such a juxtaposition can only make one new image or concept—only
form one picture and not several alternative pictures—and that con-
cept, because it is ‘clear’ or, as we might say, ‘self-evident’, is imme-
diately or, as we should say, ‘intuitively’ apprehended by thé attentive
mind in an émvBoArj. And the moment that concept is apprehended,
is seen to be true, we know that the previous d0éafdyevov, founded
on an arbitrary analogy, is false. Here then is an exact illustration of

aman

ENMNIBOAH THX AIANOIAS 571

what I conceive to be Epicurus’ idea of the process of scientific
thought. Moreover, we now see that this process is in reality exactly
parallel to the emapripyois. The d0€alduevov of thought is tested,
just as is the S0éa{éuevov with regard to a sense-impression, by the
apprehension—now mental—of a ‘clear’ image, seen, as it were, in
the nearer view: that apprehension declares against the supposition
of opinion, and at the same time, as the near view should, gives the
one and only truth. Finally, it is now possible to say that the difference
between opinion and mental apprehension is that whereas Sdéa
arbitrarily combines many kinds of concepts with each other or with
the images of sense, éBodx) THs Svavoias immediately apprehends a
new concept as the necessary result of the combination of concepts,
themselves similarly apprehended. éziBoAr} ris Suavotas then, as it plays
its part in the highest mental operation of scientific thought, is the
immediate ‘apprehension by the mind of the concepts of scientific
truth’, which is conceived of as a chain of necessarily connected and
self-evident visualizations.

It remains to test this idea by reference to the other passages in
Epicurus.

B. § 50 deals solely with the form and qualities of orepéwa. The
secondary sense of éuBodi ris Scavoias has no place here, and we may
say confidently that Epicurus is thinking solely of the primary sense of
the mental apprehension of ‘subtle images’. C. § 51 is similarly
concerned with the theory of ‘idols’. Again the ‘mental apprehension’
involved there is solely the semi-sensational apprehension of the subtle
images, But in A. § 38 the new conception supplies exactly the lack
which was felt on the first examination of the passage. In it the
parallel between the two kinds of ézBod7, that of the senses and that of
the mind, is very prominent, as also is the conception of the zpoopévov
and émyaptpyors. Including the second meaning of émBodr ris Sua
voias it is possible to complete the parallel: émBoAr ris Svavoias Is a
test by which to judge the dyAa, not merely because some adnAa give
us direct mental impressions, but because by the process of the ‘near
view’ of scientific concepts, hypotheses about the imperceptible may be
tested and the truth ‘clearly’ perceived. The passage 1s given a fullness
of meaning which was before notably lacking. Once again in K.4.
xxiv the secondary sense is, though not perhaps so clearly, included.
The dopovpevov of scientific inquiry is, like the distant view, a
mpoopevov: as opposed to it is the ‘near view’, 70 sapov 76n Kara THY
emBodjv ris Suavolas. If these be not kept distinct, science, like
everyday life, will be confounded with groundless opinion.

572 ON THE MEANING OF

I do not of course wish to substitute this new conception of the
éniBom) Tis Savotas for that of Tohte, but to add it to it: ‘mental
apprehension’ is of course concerned with the subtle images, but also
with the concepts of science. If we now turn back to Giussani’s
summary, and exclude the rash generalization of the final clause, we
shall see that it precisely represents the conclusion we have reached,
only that we now know the reason for the inclusion of all its parts.
‘The émBod} rijs Suavolas comprehends both what ‘Tohte supposes (for
there it is the immediate apprehension of an image perceptible only
by the mind), but not that alone, and zpdAnyus, as Brieger wishes
(for the act of zpéAnyus is again an immediate apprehension by the
mind of an image that can exist only in the mind and is itself a criterion
of truth), and (what Giussani wishes, but does not clearly express
or explain) scientific concepts (for in their case émuBody is the act of
apprehension ins the nearer view of clear and self-evident concepts).’
But émBor1) THs Svavoias is not ‘mental apprehension in general’, for
that would include also the operations of 5d£a, which are liable to
error. The result then of this long investigation is to confirm what
I believe Giussani really meant, only I hope that the process of
investigation has put his theory on a firmer basis: for parts of my
argument I.cannot, I fear, claim complete émyapripyos in the
authorities, but I fully believe there is no dvryaprupyats; and as |
may certainly claim that the whole subject is dénAov, that is as much
as can be demanded.

There remain over certain additional problems which are closely
connected with the main question.

1. It is not difficult now to see that émBodai in § 36 is used in
a technical sense, but also in the widest possible meaning, including
all émuBodAai both of the alcPyripia and of the dudvora. “Che most
essential thing’, for a scientific inquirer, ‘is to be able to conduct
acutely his acts of observation or apprehension, both with the senses
and in the mind.’ Similarly we can now say that the passage from
Aetius quoted on p. 561 is technical, and concerns éiBoAai both of
the senses and of the mind.

2. It will be noticed that in some of the extracts? there is prefixed
to émBoAr Tijs Stavoias the epithet davracrixy. “The question has often
been raised whether the ¢davraorixr émBorr THs Suavotas differs from
any other form of émBoAx Tis dvavoias, and if so, what the difference
is. Both Tohte and Giussani, though for different reasons, deny the
difference, Tohte because it is obvious that the only ém:Bod7 he con-

t §§ 31, 51 fz.; K.d. xxiv.

—— s

So

_

I

a 2

EMIBOAH THE AIANOIAS 573

ceives—the direct apprehension of the subtle images—is always
necessarily davractixy, Giussani because, since all thought is con-
ducted by visual images, it is impossible to imagine an emBorn (or
even a dd€a) which is not davraotixr. I should be inclined to agree
in denying the difference, of course for Giussani’s reason, but I also
think that in the passages where the epithet is used, Epicurus is think-
ing primarily of the émBoAy of the subtle davtacia of the gods, &c.,
and not of that of scientific concepts, for it is more obviously and
immediately davraorixy).

3. A more difficult and important problem is the question why
‘the Epicureans”! made the davraorixr) émBodr THs Suavoias a criterion
of truth, with its almost equally difficult corollary, why Epicurus, after
his constant coupling of it with the other criteria, did not. I hope
that the previous discussion has thrown some light on this point. In
justice to ‘the Epicureans’ we must in the first place notice how
exceedingly close Epicurus himself comes to calling it a criterion. In
E. § 62 he affirms that the conclusions reached (or, as we should
rather say, the images grasped) by ézBodr) Tis Suavotas are always
true: in B. § So he states similarly that the image of the form of
a concrete object apprehended by ézuBodAs) ris dvavoias is in fact its
form: in A. § 38 he speaks of the émBodai ‘of the mind or of any of
the xpitipia’ (used here, as we have seen, in an active sense, of the
senses which make the émiBodAat, i.e. aioOnrjpia), and in C. § 51 even
more explicitly of ‘the émBoAai of the mind or of the rest of the
Kpitypra’: finally in Kvpiar Adéar, xxiv the davractuny émBodn ris
dcavotas is ranked alongside with aioOyors and the ay. The cumula-
tive impression of these passages is certainly that of a tacit acceptance
of émBodd) THs Suavolas as a KpwTipov, and one feels that ‘the Epi-
cureans’ had but a very small step to take. Yet Epicurus never in
so many words states that the émiBoAr} is a Kperjpuov of truth and his
authoritative list of the «pur/pua does not contain it. Can we explain
his reluctance to make this identification as contrasted with the
Epicureans’ apparent insistence upon it? I think I can give an
answer. Epicurus did not include the émBoA7* mainly, I believe, for
two closely allied reasons: (1) that he felt uneasy about the ‘truth’ of

DLL. x. Fis ‘

2 Notice that all the passages in the Letter to Herodotus give us just as
much justification for the inclusion of the emBoAy of the senses as a criterion,
as they do for that of the émBoAr) rHs Svavolas: the passage in the Kvpuae
Aédéai alone places the ¢davractixh emBor) ris Svavoias on a different
footing.

574 ON THE MEANING OF

certain of the images directly apprehended by the mind, about the
visions, that is, of delirium, the cvordcers and some of the images of
sleep; (2) that in spite of all his insistence on the truth of aic#ya1s,
he felt similarly uneasy about the passive sensation, and in particular
about the ‘distant view’. In other words, to put these two difficulties
together, Epicurus did not wish to raise in any form the question of
‘truth’ involved in the relation of the image, the ‘idol’ and the real
object, for any such ‘stirring of the mind’ might have imperilled his
whole system. There are plenty of similar indications of the same
hesitation at different points in his psychology. On the other hand,
where their Master feared to tread, the Epicureans rushed in and
included the émiBoAr) ris Svavotas’ in the criteria. Their reasons were,
I believe, somewhat as follows: (1) They strongly maintained the
truth of the ‘image’ on the ground of its correspondence to the
‘idols’: it was then necessary to admit that the ‘idol’ of the “distant
view’ (e.g. the small round tower) was untrue as a representation of
the concrete object: émyapr¥pyois and the ‘near view’ obtained by
émBoXy is then the only method of securing full truth, i.e. complete
correspondence of object, ‘idol’ and image. (2) Similarly in the region
of thought the only method of distinguishing the certain concepts of
science from the false hypotheses of dda, was by insistence on the
truth of ideas obtained by ézr:BoAr) rHjs Suavoias. (3) They were anxious
(as Tohte has suggested) to maintain the certainty of the knowledge
of the gods as obtained by the immediate mental apprehension of their
images. ‘The Epicureans had already been denounced on the ground
of atheism, and it was necessary to rebut the charge.

4. In conclusion we must consider certain expressions in Latin
authors, which appear to have a connexion with the émBody) ris
Svavotas. In one passage of Cicero and two (possibly three) in Lucre-
tius such an echo seems clear: we must ask whether it is the result
of mere coincidence or of translation, and if the latter, what is the exact
relation of the Latin passages to Epicurus’ theory.

(a) Cic. de Nat. Deor. i. 20. 54 ‘si immensam et interminatam in
omnis partis magnitudinem regionum videretis, in quam se iniciens
animus et intendens ita late longeque peregrinatur, ut nullam tamen
oram ultimam videat, in qua possit insistere’. ‘The mind is here ‘pro-
jecting and straining itself towards (or into)’ the infinity of space.

« It seems odd at first sight that they did not also put in émPod) trav
aicOnrnpiwv, but the reason clearly is that it was already included under
aic@nows, whereas in Epicurus’ list there was no mental xperyprov at all,
under which émBoAn Tis Suavoias might be subsumed.

EIIIBOAH THE AIANOIAS 575
(4) Lucr. ii. 1044-7:
quaerit enim rationem animus, cum summa loci sit
infinita foris haec extra moenia mundi,

quid sit ibi porro quo prospicere usque velit mens
atque animi iactus liber quo pervolet ipse.

‘The mind is here similarly ‘projecting itself freely’ into infinite space
to ask what there is outside our world.

(c) Lucr. ii. 739-44. The poet has stated that the atoms are
colourless, and wishes to forestall the objection that we can have no
mental pictures which can give us knowledge of such atoms:

in quae corpora si nullus tibi forte videtur
posse animi iniectus fieri, procul avius erras.
scire licet nostrae quoque menti corpora posse
verti in notitiam nullo circumlita fuco.

We can ‘project our mind’ to bodies without colour: they can form
a concept in our mind,
(d) Lucr. il. 1080 would, if Winckelmann’s conjecture

in primis animalibus znice mentem

be right, offer us another example of the similar idea, ‘turn your
attention to the animals’, but (a) im with the ablative animalibus as
compared with zm with the accusative in the other passages is not
satisfactory, or indeed natural, (4) I doubt if the sense is right, as we
may see subsequently. The MS. text indice mente should probably be
kept.

(ec) To these passages we must add, though the expression is
different, another already quoted in connexion with the ézBoAy
(iv. 802-17), and note especially:

et quia tenvia sunt, ist quae contendit,* acute

cernere non potis est animus; proinde omnia quae sunt

praeterea pereunt, mist si ad quae se ipse paravit. (802-4)
and

et tamen in rebus quoque apertis noscere possis,

si non advertas animum, proinde esse quasi omni

tempore semotum fuerit longeque remotum. (811-13)

It is clear in the first place that none of these passages (except the
last, which has no phrase which can be a direct translation of émBoAy

« Compare Cicero’s ‘animus . . . se iztendens’ in (a) above.

576 MEANING OF EIIBOAH TH2 AIANOIAL

rhs Svavolas) is concerned with the direct mental apprehension of
subtle images. ‘Tohte! therefore, who restricts émBody THs dvavotas to
this sense, though he admits that the Latin amimi imtectus, &c., is a
translation of Epicurus’ term, yet concludes that ‘Lucretius and Cicero
have used these expressions in another sense from that in which
Epicurus used the corresponding Greek’. But Giussani* has rightly
insisted that the very oddness of the Latin phrases, the coincidence
between the expressions of Cicero and Lucretius, and the occurrence
of Cicero’s term in a passage where he is obviously following his
Epicurean text carefully, will make it certain that the Latin expressions
were an intentional and careful translation of Epicurus’ technical term.
Giussani, who of course approached the whole problem from the point
of view of Lucretius, was in fact largely influenced by the apparent
width of ideas embraced in these Latin passages to conclude that
émBod) THs Svavoias is a wide term for ‘mental representation in
general’. As we have seen, that contention will not hold and must
be limited. Is there anything in these Latin passages which is incon-
sistent with our general conclusion about the éBoAyt

In (a) and (4) the idea is the same, the ‘projection of the mind’
into the infinity of space: here we have exactly the notion of the
émBodr, as we have explained it: it is the mental examination of
a scientific concept. The Epicurean parallel is E. § 62. In (c) we
have a particularly interesting instance of the same idea: we can have
an émtBod7 of the colourless atoms, for again it is an image based on
ampdornibus (notities, il. 745, is always Lucretius’ technical translation of
mpdrnipis). In (d) I think Winckelmann’s emendation cannot be right,
for we should not have an émBoAx) Tis Suavoias of ‘animals’ either as
a direct mental apprehension of a subtle image, or as a scientific
concept (though we might of course have an ordinary mpdAnyus of
‘animal’). Lucretius would more naturally have said simply, ‘look at
animals’, as he practically does in il. 342 ff. If mice mentem is right, it
is a loose use of the phrase. Finally, in (e) we have an instance without
a technical term of the general idea of the. BoA) tHs Suavolas in the
primary sense of the apprehension of subtle (tenvia) images.

It may fairly be said then that the Latin passages, so far from
creating any difficulty or being in any way inconsistent with Epicurus’
phraseology, strongly confirm the general view we have taken, and
especially the second sense of érBoAr) THs Suavoias as the apprehension
of a scientifically verified concept.

ie Des a 2p. 171.

EE |

APPENDIX IV

On the meaning of dyxos cacumen and glomeramen

THE word éyxos occurs in six distinct passages in the course of the
Letter to Herodotus, which in view of Giussani’s theory that it is
a technical term equivalent in sense to the ‘molecule’ of chemistry, it
will be as well to examine in detail. In the first three of these passages
Epicurus is dealing with the processes of sense-perception, in the first
two with sound, in the third with smell.

1. Sound, he says (§ 52), is caused by an effluence (pedpa), i.e. a
stream of material particles, given off from the things which originate
the sound. It then becomes necessary for him to explain how several
or many percipients can hear the same sounds at once: this is caused,
he explains, because this effluence is split up into ‘particles each
resembling the whole’ (eis djovopepets dyKous diaomreiperar), that is,
the original mass is subdivided, and smaller ‘particles’ go off in every
direction, yet each ‘particle’ so exactly retains the characteristics of
the whole that when it reaches its percipient it produces the same
effect.

2. Continuing the same discussion he rejects (§ 53) the theory of
Democritus that the voice-particles make an impression of themselves
in the air, which is in its turn brought to the ear of the percipient, and
reasserts his own belief that ‘the blow which takes place inside us,
when we emit our voice, causes a squeezing out! of certain particles
(6yxor), which produce a stream of breath of such a character as to
afford us the sensation of hearing’. Here the dyxou are the particles
which unite to form the efuence, not those into which the effuence
subsequently splits up, but the idea is not radically different.

3- In the immediately following discussion of smell (§ 53) we meet
the same notion again: ‘we must suppose that smell too, just like hear-
ing, could never bring about any sensation, unless they were certain

particles (6yxor) carried off from the object of suitable size to stir this -

sense-organ’. “The particles here are thrown off by the object and in
this case directly penetrates the sense-organs of the percipient.

In all these three examples, which must be taken together, there is
clearly no question of any idea comparable to that of a ‘molecule’, or
indeed of any special or technical sense of the word. The dyxou are

t &OAufuy, a correction of the manuscript readings éxAdOnv and éxAjOnv
which has been made independently by several scholars—first probably by
Brieger—may be regarded as certain.

3307 Pp

578 ON THE MEANING OF

merely particles of matter, agglomerations of atoms, of greater or less
size, endowed with no special characteristics or powers, nor constituted
by any particular atomic formation. ;

4. In the instances which it will be convenient to consider next
(§§ 56, 57) the word dyxos has a very distinct technical sense—that in
fact from which Giussani starts his theory. It is the passage already
discussed (Chap. III, pp. 284-7) concerning the ‘least parts’ in the atom.
Epicurus, as was seen there, argues from the analogy of the perceptible
object: ‘We must not suppose that in a limited body there can be
infinite particles (yxou) or particles of every degree of smallness.’
Throughout these two sections the word recurs several times, but
always in the sense of a particle into which a body can be divided, and
subsequently in the more technical sense of the minimum visibile, the
smallest particle in the visible object, which is perceptible only as
a part of that object, and to which are ultimately compared in § 58
the wépara of ‘least parts’ of the atom. It is in this sense that Lucretius
uses cacumen in i. §99 and 749, but neither in Epicurus or Lucretius is
there the faintest hint of Giussani’s notion of the least particle which
possesses the qualities of the ‘thing’: the meaning is merely that of
the ‘least visible particle’. It might be noticed incidentally that this
conception is in itself of something much larger than the modern
chemical ‘molecule’ which would never be visible.

5. Soin § 54 Epicurus is explaining that change in things is caused
by the alteration in arrangement of the component atoms and says:
‘it is essential that the bodies which shift their position (sc. the atoms)
should be imperishable and should not possess the nature of what
changes, but parts (dyxor) and configurations of their own’. Here by
anticipation of § 58 dy«ou is again used in a technical sense, but now
of the ‘least parts’ of the atom, which in the more exact discussion of
§ 56 and § 57 he calls mépara, as opposed to the dyxou of perceptible
things, the minima visibilia with which the mépata are composed, In
this sense cacumen was probably used by Lucretius in a line which has
dropped out after i. 599 (compare the use of extremum in the parallel
passage, i. 752). But this time the d6yxo. would be something far
smaller than either Giussani’s ‘molecules’ or those of modern chemistry.

6. The last passage (§ 69), again in a quite different context, is
perhaps even more clearly decisive against the ‘molecule’ theory.
Epicurus is explaining his notion of properties (see p. 302) and after
saying that the whole body of a thing owes its own permanent existence
to its properties, adds as a precaution against a misunderstanding, ‘not
in the sense that it is composed of properties coming together to form

yl

OrKOX ‘CACUMEN’ AND ‘GLOMERAMEN’ 599

it, as when, for instance, a larger structure is put together out of the
particles which compose it, whether first particles or parts of the whole
smaller than itself, whatever it is’ (Stay e€ adrav trav oyKewv jeilov
dOpotopa overs 7}rou TOV TpPwTwWY 7) TOV Tod SAov peyeddv Todd8e Twos
eAatrévwy). It is manifest that here the oykot are particles of matter
of any size which go to compose a larger body: to restrict them to the
minima visibilia they have to be qualified with the epithet ‘the first
particles’, and the more general sense is explained by the perfectly
vague phrase ‘parts of the whole smaller than itself’, oyKos is Clearly
a quite indefinite word to be used of a particle of any size. In both
cases here the dyxou would be very much larger than the molecules of
chemistry, and in the latter case larger than Giussani’s molecules,

There does not then seem any justification for the idea that oyKos=
‘molecule’ in Giussani’s sense: in some of the cases where it occurs in
the Letter to Herodotus it is used in the technical sense“of the minima
uisibilia, or by analogy of the least parts of the atoms: in the others it
is an indefinite term for particles of matter of any size and any stage
of atomic aggregation.

As to glomeramen it is a very rare word in Lucretius and in no case
seems to be used either as a translation of dyxos or as an equivalent
in idea of ‘molecule’. In ii. 454 it is used to denote merely the ‘round
drops’ which make up a stream of water, which Lucretius compares
to the individual round seeds in a handful of poppy-seed: there is no
trace of a meaning like the least parts, which retain the character of
water. In ii. 686 atoms of different shape are said to unite glomeramen
in unum, ‘into one mass’, in order to form a single thing, which explains
why the same pasture-land can rear animals of different nature like
cows and horses. This is a little nearer perhaps, but again it is quite
vague and means no more than an ‘aggregate’. In v. 726 glomera-
minis is used of the round ball of the moon, than which few things
could be farther from the notion of a ‘molecule’. Similarly the verb
conglomerart is used in iii. 210 of the soul gathering itself up, as it were,
into a ball in a particular part of the body (as is the simple g/omerari in
iil. 541), and in iy. 871 he speaks of the glomerata vaporis corpora,
‘aggregated nuclei of hot matter’. There is no sense approaching
‘molecule’ here. Lucretius’ equivalent for dy«os in the technical sense
is, as we have seen above, cacumen: for the idea which is expressed in
dyKos in its indefinite sense he uses indifferently elementa, corpuscula,
particulae, as well as, no doubt, in these instances glomeramina: but
none of these words liave any technical meaning, much less that which
Giussani wishes to discover.

Pp2

APPENDIX V

On the relation of the ‘nameless’ element and the ‘mind’

I wave assumed in the text of the chapter on the Soul that both
‘spirit? and ‘mind’ alike are composed of all four soul-elements, and
that in both alike sensation or consciousness is started by the ‘fourth
element’ and communicated to the other three: ‘spirit’ and ‘mind’ are
thus wholly alike in material composition and differ only in place and
function. I am entirely confident that this was the doctrine both of
Epicurus himself and of his followers. Recent German critics of the
Epicurean theory have however held a different view: this view has,
to my mind, been answered most completely by Giussani (Studi
Lucreziani: Psicologia Epicurea, pp. 183-217), but seeing that the
problem is one of great importance for the understanding of Epicurean
psychology, and that, while the arguments of the German critics are
scanty and vague, Giussani’s reply is rather diffuse and admits, I think,
of some additional support, I have thought well to resume the con-
troversy as briefly as possible. I shall attempt first to state the German
theory and its consequences, then to deal with the arguments used by
its supporters, then to add some general considerations which make
for the view I believe to be right. The great bulk of my material
is due to Giussani.
‘There are two varieties of the German view:

1. That supported by Woltjer (Lucretii philosophia cum fontibus
comparata, pp. 69 ff.), by Eichner (Adnotationes ad Lucretit Epicuri
interpretis de animae noctura doctrinam, a work I have not myself
read), and most explicitly by Tohte (Epikurs Kriterten der Wahrheit).
According to these critics the “nameless element’ or ‘fourth nature’ is
confined to the ‘mind’; the ‘spirit’ consists of the three other soul-
elements, the ‘mind’ of these plus the ‘fourth nature’.

2. That originally put forward by Reisacker (Epicuri de atomorum
natura) and more recently maintained by Brieger (Epikurs Lehre von
der Seele), who formerly held the first view. On this theory the
‘nameless element’ and the ‘mind’ are identical: ‘the spirit’ consists
of the three other soul-elements: the ‘mind’ of the ‘nameless element’
alone. Seeing however that Brieger' believes that in the breast the
‘mind’, consisting solely of the ‘fourth nature’, yet moves ‘among the

Solas

EEE

* a .

‘NAMELESS’ ELEMENT AND ‘MIND’ 581

coarser elements’ of the soul, there is not in effect much difference
between the two views and they may safely be treated together, and
Brieger’s exposition, which is the most argumentative, regarded as
typical of the rest.

The real importance of this theory lies in the effect which it neces-
sarily has on the account which is to be given of the process of sensation.
If the ‘fourth nature’, which is universally acknowledged to be the
sole element which has the capacity of sensation in itself, is not present
in the ‘spirit-atoms’ in the sense-organs, it is obvious that the sense-
organs have not of themselves direct and immediate perception. The
process must be worked out on different lines, and must now be under-
stood as follows. When the external stimulus? (be it a body in passive
sensation or an ‘idol’ or effluence in sense-perception) touches one
or more of the spirit-atoms (i.e. wind, heat, and air) on the surface of
the body, these atoms are set in movement, but the movement is
entirely mechanical and insensible. The movement is by their means
communicated to the breast and there stirs the ‘nameless element’
(approaching it, of course, through the medium of the other three
soul-elements in the breast, which according to Tohte are, according
to Brieger are not, themselves a portion of the mind). The ‘nameless
element” is thus stirred by movements which are now ‘sense-bearing’
and thus translates the insensible movement of the spirit-atoms into
sensation. It then, reversing the current of movement, ‘retelegraphs’
a second and now sensational movement to the ‘spirit-elements’ and
they in their turn communicate it to the sense-organ or the portion
of the body where the original contact took place: then, when this
cumbrous process is complete, the body feels or the sense-organs per-
ceive. ‘The original contact produces a movement which is nothing
in the sensible world; the real sensation lies in the mind, and it is only
after the return of the now ‘sensationalized’ movement that in an
indirect and secondary sense local sensation occurs.

‘The view of the German scholars rests practically on the evidence
of one passage in Plutarch, and certain coincidences of language in
Lucretius’ exposition in Book III. It will be best first to deal with
these arguments. .

1. Plutarch, adv. Coloten, 20, 1118; U. 314 76 yap & kpiver Kai
pvnpovever Kai Pure? kal pce? Kal dAws TO Ppdvymov Kal AoyoruKdv €K
Twos dyow akaTovoudorou mouoTyTOos emuyivecbar. Epicurus is here re-
ported as attributing to the ‘nameless element’ certain functions which
are undoubtedly functions of the mind: therefore, it is argued, the two

t See Tohte, p. 6; Brieger, p. 17.

582 RELA TEORRwOr 1) HE ‘NAMELESS’

are identified. The conclusion is quite unjustified. ‘The ‘nameless ele-
ment’ is the only aloOyruxédv per se and is therefore the ultimate cause
of sensation and consciousness both in spirit and in mind. Plutarch
is therefore quite right in attributing to it these functions of the mind,
the movements of which it does in fact initiate. But he says nothing
to preclude our also assigning to it the initiation of sensation in the
‘spirit-atoms’ in the body and sense-organs. He is thinking here solely
of the mind and not of the spirit: his account is quite correct as far as
it goes, but incomplete: it is not intended to be a summary of all the
functions of the ‘nameless element’.
2. (a) Lucr. iii. 138-42:
caput esse quasi et dominari in corpore toto

consilium quod nos animum mentemque vocamus.

idque situm media regione in pectoris haeret.

hic exsultat enim pavor ac metus, haec loca circum

laetitiae mulcent: hic ergo mens animusquest.

compared with
ili, 241-6:
quarta quoque his igitur quaedam natura necessest
attribuatur. east omnino nominis expers};

sensiferos motus quae didit prima per artus.

In the former passage the origin of certain feelings or emotions is
attributed to the mind: in the latter the ‘fourth nature’ is said to ‘send
abroad the motions which bring sensation throughout the limbs’:
therefore, argues Brieger,’ mind and ‘fourth nature’ are identified.
It is hardly necessary to point out that in the former passage Lucretius
is speaking of emotions, as distinct from mere passive sensations, and
they are, of course, the function of the mind; in the latter he is
speaking of immediate sensation in the body (per artus), which is due
to the presence of the ‘fourth nature’ in the ‘spirit’. As Giussani?
argues, it does not follow, because the emotion of joy or fear starts
in the mind, that the mind also initiates my sensation when I burn
my finger.
(4) Luer. ii. 138, 139:

caput esse quasi et dominari in corpore toto
consilium quod nos animum mentemque vocamus.

meee) 2p. 202 fin.

fr

ELEMENT AND THE ‘MIND’ 583

compared with
279-81:
sed tibi nominis haec expers vis facta minutis
corporibus latet atque animae quasi totius ipsa
proporrost anima et dominatur corpore toto.

Both mind and ‘fourth nature’ are said dominari corpore toto: they
are therefore identical. Giussani replies that dominari! is used in
slightly different senses: in the former passage it means ‘holds sway’,
‘is monarch’, in the latter ‘is diffused’: for this latter sense he compares
vi. 224, where thunderbolts having struck a house dominantur in
aedibus ipsis; also ii. 958 Jeti dominantam in corpore motum, and iii. 705,
where the particles of soul (animi is used here in a loose sense, as so
often, when Lucretius is not distinguishing ‘spirit? and ‘mind’: see
421-4) in nostro dominantur corpore. It is hardly necessary, I think,
to make so great a distinction in meaning: the mind ‘is lord in the
whole body’, because it is the seat of emotion, thought, and will, the
‘fourth nature’ ‘is lord in the whole body’, because it is everywhere
the cause of sensation: but they are not for that reason identical.
(c) Lucr. ill. 396-401: :

et magis est animus vitai claustra coercens

et dominantior ad vitam quam vis animai.

nam sine mente animoque nequit residere per artus

temporis exiguam partem pars ulla animai,

sed comes insequitur facile et discedit in auras.

et gelidos artus in leti frigore linquit.

compared with
252-5:
nec temere huc (i.e. to the ‘fourth nature’) dolor usque
potest penetrare neque acre
permanare malum, quin omnia perturbentur
usque adeo <ut) vitae desit locus atque animai
diffugiant partes per caulas corporis omnis.

In the former passage it is said that if the mind is destroyed, the
spirit cannot remain in the limbs and life departs: in the latter that
a severe hurt penetrating to the ‘fourth nature’ will cause the life to
depart and the spirit to leave the body: therefore, once again, mind and
‘fourth nature’ are identical. Both statements of Lucretius are true,
but are no evidence of identity. If the mind is destroyed, the body is
left without regimen and consilium: it could not interpret any sensations,

1 p. 202 supra.

584 RELATION OF THE ‘NAMELESS’

or think or feel or will: in other words it would have no consciousness
and so must die. The ‘fourth nature’ is deep* hidden within the other
three soul-elements and they in their turn among the body-atoms: a
hurt then which actually penetrated to the ‘fourth nature’ and dislo-
cated its structure, would have caused so great disruption in the whole
concilium as to destroy life. The causes differ in the two cases, though
the result is the same. Woltjer? objects that the amputation of a limb,
which nevertheless leaves the patient alive, ought, if this account of the
second passage is right, to cause death. No, for though with the rest
of the ‘spirit’ in the limb some portion of the ‘fourth nature’ is actually
lost, the act of amputation did not produce a hurt which dislocating
the whole structure, penetrated to and caused disruption in the ‘fourth
nature’: the limb was taken off whole (Giussani3 seems to me not fully
to appreciate Lucretius’ point here).
3. Lucr. lil. 273-4:
nam penitus prorsum latet haec natura subestque
nec magis hac infra quicquam est in corpore nostro.

It is perhaps hardly worth while to mention Woltjer’s* idea that this
refers to the position of the ‘fourth nature’ (i.e. the mind) in the breast,
the central portion of the body, which he is obliged to support by
altering infra in 274 to intra. It does of course refer to the position
of the ‘fourth nature’ alike in spirit and mind as hidden deep beneath
the other soul-elements, which meaning infra, recalling penitus latet
exactly expresses.

Certain general considerations may now be suggested which tell
strongly against the identification.

1. The evidence of the authorities.

(a) Epicurus. There is nothing in the Letter to Herodotus which
makes for the identification of the ‘nameless element’ and the mind,
but a good deal which is against it. Epicurus makes no distinction
between the mind and the spirit, as he would be almost bound to, if
there were a difference of material structure between them as well as
of function. On the other hand he mentions the ‘nameless element’
immediately after the other two, as if it were an essential part of the
general structure of the soul, which is, as he says, distributed through
the whole structure. (The scholium on § 67 which distinguishes the
rational and irrational elements is quite silent as to any material differ-
ence between them.)

t See Lucr. iii. 273, 274. 2 Op. cit., p. 69.
3 pp. 196, 197. 4 Op. cit., p. 69.

iv wee

> air me ele he

7s

ELEMENT AND THE ‘MIND’ 585

(2) The evidence of Lucretius is quite unmistakable: he carefully
explains the constitution of the ‘soul’ (mind and spirit) of the four
elements and distinguishes animus and anima only in function. Besides
the passages discussed above we may call attention to

(1) iii. 136, 137, where he states that mind and spirit ‘form of them-
selves a single nature’—an impossible expression, if they were
materially different.

(2) 231, where haec natura means as is clear from 228 mentis
natura animaeque and is stated to consist of all the four
elements.

(3) 262 ff., where he explains that the ‘first-beginnings’ (i.e. atoms)
of all four elements in the soul ‘course to and fro among
themselves with the motions of first-beginnings, so that no
single one can be put apart, nor can its powers be set in play
divided from others by empty space, but they are, as it were,
the many forces of a single body’—a most explicit statement
of the invariable union of all four elements.

(4) 269-72:

sic calor atque aer et venti caeca potestas
mixta creant unam naturam et mobilis illa

vis, initum motus ab se quae dividit ollis,
sensifer unde oritur primum per viscera motus.

an even clearer expression of the same idea.

(5) 275, where it is stated that the ‘fourth nature’ is the ‘soul of the
soul’ (animae anima). On Brieger’s theory it might be called
the soul of the mind (animi), but certainly not of the ‘spirit’
(animae), in which it is not even present. This is repeated
in 280.

In fact Brieger? has to admit that the evidence of Lucretius is
against him and tries to discredit it on the ground of the ‘contradiction’
between 136-60 and 231-57 (see 2 (a) above). He believes that
Lucretius ‘invented’ the idea of the presence of the ‘fourth nature’
in the anima, but not only is Lucretius always scrupulous in following
the authority of his master, but the whole of this passage on the nature
of the soul bears the marks of very careful writing, which with
Lucretius means very careful reporting of his text (the MeyaAn ’Exvrop)
no doubt, as usual).

(c) The evidence of other writers is equally clear.

Aetius, iv. 3. 11 (=Stob. Eel. Phys. 41); U. 315 "Emixoupos (riv

 p. 13.

586 RELATION OF THE ‘NAMELESS’

uxt) Kpaua ex TerTdpwv, ek rood TrupwSovs, €K 7oLod depwdous, eK
ToLod mVEvJLATLKOD, EK TETAPTOV TLVOS dKaTovop.aotou* TOUTO 8’ nv avT@
76 aicOnrucdv ...76 8° dxarovdpmacrov Ti ev Tpiv epzrovety atobnow:
ey oddevt yap TOV dvopalopévwy orouxelwr elvar atobnow. Here not
merely is the ‘nameless element’ stated to be a portion of the soul, but
it is said to be the sole source of aicfyots, which is the function of
the spirit, not the mind. Brieger strangely enough without comment
claims this passage in support of his own view.

2. If the German view is correct, there is no reason why objects*
which touch only body-atoms should not be felt just as much as those
which touch the spirit-atoms. For they too could start a mechanical
insensible movement which might be transmitted to the mind and
there translated into sensation, just as much as could the spirit-atoms:
indeed there is no possible point in supposing these insensible soul-
atoms to be distributed over the body at all. Therefore

3. The argument against the theory of Democritus that soul- and
body-atoms are disposed alternately in the body, is quite futile, for
the three grosser soul-elements have no more power of sensation than
the body-particles, unless they contain the ‘fourth-nature’. In fact

4. The ‘spirit’ is not really a part of the soul at all, for it is itself
entirely devoid of sensation, except what it indirectly receives from
the mind, just as the body does.

5. After the mind has, on the German view, ‘retelegraphed’ the
new motion of sensation, why do we not feel the sensation or perceive
the image at any part or all parts of our body? the movement would
spread through the ‘soul-atoms’ wherever they were, and there is
nothing to direct the current of sensation to the proper point, the
place, that is, of the original contact.

6. By far the most important consideration. “The German theory
really destroys altogether the idea of local sensation. According to
it all sensation really takes place not at the point of contact or in the
sense-organs, but in the mind. But it is a cardinal point in Epicurean
psychology that sensation is local and not in the mind. For this we
have the direct statement in Plac. Phil. iv. 23 of Lrwucot ra ev 7aOy
év tots memovOdar ToToLs, Tas S€ alcbryces ev TO WYEMOVUK®. °Ent-
Koupos S€ Kal Ta 7d0n Kat Tas aicbyjoers ev Tots TeTovOdat TéroLs,
76 S€ Hyepovixov arabes. Nothing could be more explicit than this:
‘all sensation occurs in the places affected, but the mind has no sensation
(ara8os, the passive sensation of pleasure and pain due to external con-
tact)’. “Tohte? is reduced to stating that this is an error of Plutarch’s,

t See Lucr. iii. 381 ff. 2 p. 6.

te

Pf

ELEMENT AN.D THE ‘MIND’ 587

and that the ‘falsity of the statement is obvious’: it is of course an exact
reproduction of Epicurus’ doctrine. This localization of sensation is
emphatically afirmed by Lucretius, especially in 359-69, where he
states with ironical scorn that ‘to say that the eyes can see nothing,
but that the mind looks out through them as when doors are opened,
is madness, seeing that the feeling in the eyes cries out against it’. The
feeling that it is the eyes which see, that the sensation is localized, is
an immediate zd@os, which according to the very first principles of the
Canonice cannot be gainsaid; yet it is just this ‘madness’, which the
German critics wish us to accept as true Epicurean doctrine by denying
the presence of the ‘fourth nature’ in the soul-atoms in the sense-
organs and the whole body.

APPENDIX VI
Other Views of the Constitution of the Epicurean Gods

I HAve attempted in the text to put forward the account of the
constitution of the gods, as Epicurus conceived them, which seems to
me most in accordance at once with the scanty and unsatisfactory
evidence which we possess and with the general principles of Epicurean
physics, and have followed in the main the theory first outlined by
Lachelier and subsequently elaborated by W. Scott and Giussani. But
so widely divergent have been the views of critics both as to the nature
of the Epicurean gods and as to the interpretation of the famous pas-
sages in the de Natura Deorum and in the scholium on Diogenes, that
it is necessary to examine some of the more important suggestions, if
only to show—what I readily admit—that any theory which may be
propounded is perforce tentative.

1. The first serious attempt to explain how the gods, being atomic
compounds, could yet be immortal, was made by Schémann (Opuscula,
iv. 336-59). His theory is not based on any very profound under-
standing of Epicureanism and shows little respect for the authorities
and still less for their text, but it is worth considering partly because
it brings out the difficulty of the problem and partly because it has
recently been revived by Masson (Lucretius, Epicurean and Poet,
pp. 273 ff.). Schémann starting with the general notion of the extreme
fineness of texture of the forms of the gods and the statement of Cicero
that they had not body but ‘a kind of body’ (quasi corpus), argues that
since the images thrown off by the gods are perceptible by the soul,
they, and therefore the bodies which give them off, must be like in
texture to the soul. The ‘bodies’ of the gods are therefore composed
of round, smooth, and very fine atoms. But this is not enough to make
them immortal: the divine body must indeed be a concretio, but differ
from other ovyxpicets. ‘This Schémann suggests may have been the
case because the component atoms were all of the same shape (p. 341,
n. 15)—an opinion which he bases on the mention by Plutarch of the
dpovdTytes (sc. bodies made of similar atoms), as the fourth class of
immortal things—and being all of the same shape would therefore
be able to adhere in a strong permanent combination. Among many
reasons which make it impossible to accept this view may be mentioned
the following: (1) Its total disregard of evidence. (a) Schémann finally
- admits that he cannot understand the Cicero passage, and practically
abandons it, except that he takes it to deal with the perception of the

ee

oy

EPICUREAN GODS 589

divine images and not with the’ constitution of the divine body.
Incidentally he takes ad numerum to mean ‘so that they could be
counted’ and similitudine to refer to the likeness between the texture
of the divine images and the recipient soul. (4) The statement of
Diogenes as to the two classes of gods he maintains is wholly impossible:
he gets rid of it by ‘emending’ ods pev .. . ods 8é to od pev .. . yyworods
de and then takes card djoctSevay to mean ‘owing to the similarity’ be-
tween divine bodies and the soul, like similitudine in Cicero. That this,
and with it the interpretation of Plutarch’s uoudrnres, is impossible, is
sufficiently proved by Scott’s references to Aristotle and Philodemus,
which show the notion in both cases to be that of bodies havin
‘identity of like’ material. (2) An atomic compound of only one kind
of atoms is not an impossibility, but we can gather from Lucretius,
li, 586-8, that it would have practically no ‘powers’ (vis) at all—
which is improbable even for Epicurean gods. (3) No atomic com-
pound could be more subtle than. the ‘fourth nature’ in the soul, as
is clear from the descriptions both of Epicurus and Lucretius. If the
soul is far from immortal, how could the gods be immortal, whose
texture so closely resembles it? (4) There is no reason for supposing
that a compound of atoms of one kind should have any greater stability
than any other compound—certainly it is impossible that it should be
immortal. If it were made of round atoms, it would not even be
stable to start with: once again the soul, its counterpart, is so little
capable of cohesion, that it cannot remain together at all except in
the aréyalov of the body.

In fact Schémann’s theory is at variance both with the evidence and
with many fundamental principles of Epicurean physics. Yet it has
been revived again by Masson with no further support than laudation
and the quotation from Munro of the misinterpretation of a passage in
Philodemus.*

2. Hirzel (Untersuchungen xu Ciceros philosophischen Schriften, i.
46-84) approached the question from the point of view of the inter-
pretation of Cicero. He accepts Diogenes’ distinction between the
two classes of gods: these were, he interprets, the real gods who exist
Kat aptOov in the intermundia, and the images, which float about the

1 unte yap atopuovs vouilew tovs Oeods pire ovyKpices, Gomperz,
Herc. Stud. 121, p. 136. Munroand Masson take this to be an exposition of
atomic doctrine: a glance at the passage shows that it is really the objection
of an opponent, which is subsequently answered. Even if the words meant
what Masson supposes them to mean, they do not support Schémann’s view,
for according to it the gods are indubitably ovyxpicets.

590 THE C@we tt UTION OF THE

world, are perceived by men, and accepted by them as gods. He then
supposes that this distinction caused confusion in Cicero’s mind, that
he identified the images of the gods which came to us with the gods
themselves and in the second part of his description is speaking not of
the gods but of these images (he reads of course ad nos following
Lambinus for ad deos). The obvious objections* to this theory are (1)
the improbability of this double doctrine of Epicurus (see pp. 459-61),
(2) the difficulty of accounting for the nature of the ‘real gods’ in
the intermundia on any consistent atomic basis, (3) the very serious
charge of blundering made against Cicero, who was evidently trying
to follow his Epicurean texts as carefully and closely as possible, (4) the
extreme improbability that so careful a description of the process of
perception of the images of the gods should be given, when it would
differ in no way from the process of normal sense-perception. But
Hirzel did good service to the elucidation of the problem in connecting
the ad numerum of Cicero and the kar’ apufov of Diogenes with the
distinction made by Aristotle between existence kar’ dpiOwov and
Kar’ €tdos, and in pointing out that so/iditate quadam is an independent
ablative of quality and is not to be construed with cernatur.

Mayor in his edition of the de Natura Decorum follows Hirzel,
except that he needlessly emends ‘nec soliditate quadam nec eadem ad
numerum si?’, and believes that the gods car’ apOuov in the intermundia
are the popular anthropomorphic deities, while those of the image-
streams are the esoteric divinities of the Epicureans, vague influences
comparable to modern ideas of the ‘stream of tendency which makes
for righteousness’. His view seems open to all the objections which
can be brought against Hirzel’s, with the additional disadvantage that
he has introduced a most un-Epicurean conception, which is im-
measurably remote alike from what is described in the texts and the
whole current of Atomic thought.

3. The theory of R. Philippson? stands rather by itself in that it deals
not so much with the atomic constitution of the gods as with the means
of their cognition by men, and with the interpretation of the Diogenes
scholium and the passage in the de Natura Deorum. It is highly
ingenious and contains many fruitful suggestions, but it seems to me f
to rest upon somewhat arbitrary assumptions as to the Epicurean
psychology, which he does not sufficiently work out on atomic lines,

« See the criticisms of Scott, p. 227, and Giussani, pp. 230-4.

2 Zur Epikurischen Gétterlehre. Hermes, li, 1916, pp. 568 ff.: see also
his dissertation “de Philodemi libro qui est wepi onuetwy Kal onueioewv’,
Berlin, 1881.

Sf

EPICUREAN GODS 591

and to involve unnatural interpretations of the passages concerned. It
is difficult to do justice to the theory in a summary, but, as it has
attracted some notice, it is necessary to express an opinion on it.

Philippson holds in the first place that there are, according to
Epicurus, two distinct departments of mind (vods), Sudvoua (Lat. mens)
the faculty which perceives the single ‘idols’, and Adyos the faculty
of reason, whose operations are described as Aoytop.ds, emAoyiop.os,
dtadoyropids, Siaddyropa and its result as émtvova (€vvova is similarly
the image resulting from sense-impressions and as such is used as an
equivalent of zpdAnyus (D.L. x. 32) ). It has already been pointed out
that this distinction is too rigid: 8udvova is no doubt used in connexion
with ‘mind-perceptions’ especially in the famous ertBodr THs Svavoias,
but it is also used in cases where reason is concerned: Adyos is not
used by Epicurus except in the phrases Sud. Ad you Jewpytds or Pewpia,
which must be subsequently examined, though its derivatives are cer-
tainly applied to rational operations of the mind.

Men’s cognition of the gods has, according to Philippson, two
sources. In the first place there is the direct perception of their ‘idols’
by dcdvova, in the second, they are known by reasoning, which makes
certain inferences, e.g, that from the wonders of the heavens and their
orderliness? (incidentally Philippson seems not to notice that in the
eyes of Epicurus and Lucretius, to whom he refers, this is a false
inference, a yevdis Sdéa): similarly according to Sextus3 the im-
mortality and complete happiness of the gods is deduced ‘by an infer-
ence from men’ (xara tiv a6 Thv avOpurrwv werdBacw). Of these two
sources it is 5udvora which gives the ‘concept’ 4 (zpdAnyus) of the gods,
derived from the succession of idols, and reason reinforces that im-
mediate knowledge by argument (émAoyiopids), as for instance in the
double syllogism recorded in the de Natura Deorum,; ‘the human
form is the most beautiful’, ‘man alone has reason’: ‘the gods are
beautiful and have reason:’ ‘therefore the gods are most like men’.

It is then this cognition of the nature of the gods by means of reason-
ing as opposed to the direct ‘apprehension’ of the idols which Philippson
supposes to be expressed in the phrase Adyw Pewpyrovs both in the
scholiast and in the parallel passage of Aetius:® he translates ‘durch

* Chap. Vill,’ p. 423, nu: 3. :

2 Sext. adv. Math. ix. 26 and 44. 3 Ibid. 45, 46.

4 Also referred to in Ep. iii, § 123 as 4) xow2) Tod Oeod vonais.

5 i. 18. 48.

§ Aet.i. 7. 343 U. 355 "Eixoupos dvOpwroeSeis ev Tovs Deovs, Asya
dé mdvras Dewpyrods dia rH AerrTopéperay THs TOv cidwAwWY dvoews.

592 THE GORRPITUTION OF THE

Vernunft erkennbar’. I find it impossible to accept this view. Adyw
Oewpyrds is a traditional phrase in Greek philosophy for what is men-
tally conceived as opposed to what is sensationally perceived, but it
does not carry with it the idea of a process of reasoning or inference.
When for instance the ‘seeds’ of Anaxagoras are spoken of as Adyw
Oewpyrd? it is not meant that the conception of themis reached bya train
of thought, but that we can only ‘imagine’ them and never see them.
And if the passages in which 814, Adyou Pewpy7ds, &c., occur in Epicurus
himself be examined the same result is reached. In § 62 of dra Adyou
ewpyrot xpdvor as opposed to 6 eAdytaros ovvex7is xpovos and are clearly
the instants, the minima of time, which can be mentally conceived,
or contemplated, as opposed to the continuous periods, however small,
which alone can be noticed by the senses. In § 59 Epicurus comes
nearer to Philippson’s notion: from the analogy, he argues, of the
minima of perception (the extrema cacumina of Lucretius) we infer
similar minima of extension in the atom 77 da Adyou Oewpia emi TOV
dopdtwv. This may no doubt fairly be translated ‘in our contemplation
of the unseen by means of thought’, but again the reference is not to
a chain of argumentation resulting in a conclusion, but, as always in
Epicurus’ material psychology, to the contemplation of a mental
picture: all mental processes are to him acts of visualization. It is
indeed significant that the word coupled with Adyw or d:a Adyov in all
these instances is fewpntds or Gewpia: that is not a word which denotes
the result of a process of reasoning, it is the mental equivalent of the
aicOnrds and aicbnots of sensation.

To sum up: while no doubt inference by reasoning played some part
in forming the conception of the nature of the gods in the system of the
later Epicureans and even possibly of Epicurus himself, it is not the
source of our knowledge of their existence. This is the direct informa-
tion given by the ‘idols’ which enter the mind and it is to this ‘mental
perception’ that Adyqw Aewpyrods refers both in the scholiast and in
Aetius. If this contention be right, it cuts at the root of Philippson’s
view of the two crucial passages, but it is necessary to follow his inter-
pretation in further detail because it involves, to my mind, further
improbabilities.

1. Schol. ad Ep. K.4.1; D.L. x. 139.? (a) Philippson rightly rejects

Philippson incidentally would place the emphasis on wdvras; ‘by reason they
cannot be known as individuals but only universally as a class’, a very un-
natural interpretation.

t See Part I, Chap. I, p. 37.

2 For the text see Chap. IX, p. 446, n. 1. -

a ee

Fs

EPICUREAN GODS 593

emendation of ots péev .. . ots 8€, yet also refuses to believe that
Epicurus supposed two categories of gods. He therefore proposes to
translate ‘partly . . . partly’ (teils . . . teils), for which he quotes certain
parallels elsewhere in Greek. But in those passages there could be no
mistake as to the meaning intended, here it would be to say the least
ambiguous and any straightforward reader would take the meaning to
be that there were two classes of gods. (b) He rejects Scott’s interpreta-
tion of kar’ dpubjudv as opposed to Kar’ €fSos (‘in numerical identity’...
‘in form’), and takes the opposition to be kar’ dpuOudv évand kat’ efSos
ev, which he would translate ‘one as an individual’ and ‘one as a member
of a class’ (‘das der Art nach Selbige’). This is a less natural interpreta-
tion. (c) The clause ods Se. . . amroteteAcopévwv he takes not as
describing the constitution of the gods but the method of their cogni-
tion; the ouvex7s émippevars is not that of the atoms which come to-
gether to form the bodies of the gods, but that of the ‘idols’ to the mind
of the percipient. (d) émi 76 adré amoreteAeopeve he takes to mean
either ‘which lead to the same result’ or ‘which are of the same con-
figuration’: neither of these interpretations seem to me natural; (e) he
regards dvOpwroeWets as a later addition to the scholium, probably
with justice.

‘We thus get the meaning, if I interpret Philippson rightly; ‘Epicurus
says elsewhere that the gods are cognizable by reason, partly as having
individual existence, partly as like in form (i.e. as members of a clan),
thanks to the unceasing flow of the idols which are of the same con-
figuration’, that is to say, reason tells us (a) that the gods exist as
individuals (as opposed for instance to the general idea of a divine
spirit held by the Stoics), (4) that the gods are like in form as we gather
from the succession of similar ‘idols’. The advantage of this version
would be that it would enable one to take é« ris auveyots émipptcews
in its more natural sense of the flux of ‘idols’ from the gods to men’s
minds. But apart from the difficulties in detail referred to above I
think the interpretation is made impossible by the sense given to
Adyw Gewpnrovs and by the connexion of this with the second clause.
‘The information given by the constant influx of idols is certainly not
information given Aéyw in Philippson’s sense, though I think it is
so in reality. ;

2. Cic. N. D. i. 19. 49.1 Philippson does not differ from the inter-
pretation given in the text of the first clause down to orepéuvia appellat
and agrees that soliditate quadam . . . numerum is to be taken as descrip-
tive and not with cernatur. After that he differs widely, (a) zmaginibus

t For the text see Chap. IX, p. 445, n. I.
3307 Qq

594 CONSTITUTION OF EPICUREAN GODS 7

similitudine et transitione perceptis, he renders ‘by images grasped by
induction’. Similitudine et transitione is a translation of weraBdoet kal?
ovdTyTa, a phrase which he? believes to have been used by the later
Epicureans to express the inductive method, ‘inference according to
similarity’. The sense then will be that we know the gods by images
which we form by inference from the succession of similar idols. As
regards this startling interpretation, even if it beadmitted that werd Baors
wasso used in later Epicurean logic, yet (1) if Cicero had peraBaoet kad”
Spovdtyra before him, he translated it very oddly by the ‘hendiadys’
similitudine et transitione, (2) perceptis is the ordinary word for sense-
perception and not for comprehension as a result of inference, (3) the
parallel passage in N. D. i. 39. 109 /luentium frequenter transitio fit
visionum shows conclusively that transitio meant to Cicero the suc-
cession of ‘idols’ passing from the persons of the gods to the mind.
() The clause cum infinita ... ad deos affluat. Philippson keeps ad deos
and takes the clause rightly in my view to apply not to the flux of
‘idols’ to the mind but to the flow of matter to form the bodies of the
gods. Rejecting, again, as I think, rightly, Scott’s idea of the ‘pre-
formed’ images, he would exclude imaginum as a gloss and substitute
rerum. I have, I hope, shown in the text that emendation is not
necessary, if a slight misunderstanding on Cicero’s part be assumed,
and that in any case rerum would not have been the word he would use.
Philippson has made a valuable contribution to the study of Epi-
curean psychology in calling attention to the meaning of the various
terms employed by Epicurus and the Epicureans for the different
mental processes, but he has not succeeded in solving the puzzle as to
the nature of the constitution of the gods and his interpretations of the
two crucial passages seem to me to rest on untenable suppositions.

None of the views here considered appear to satisfy the conditions
or the evidence as nearly as that of Scott and Giussani. It may be
_ that both of them, and especially Giussani, have elaborated the notion
beyond what the extant information strictly warrants, and it is cer-
tainly true that the notion reached on their lines is grotesque and
fantastic even for Epicurus, but as far as the evidence now available
can take us, I believe that Epicurus’ conception of the constitution
of the gods cannot in its main outline have been far removed from the
account which they have given.

t The evidence is set out in his dissertation, p. 34.

f

BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY

I. GENERAL
Beare, J. I., Greek Theories of Elementary Cognition, 1906.
Burnet, J., Early Greek Philosophy, 3rd edition, 1920.
Cornford, F. M., From Religion to Philosophy, 1912.
Gilbert, O., Die meteorologische Theorien des griechischen Altertums, 1907
Gomperz, T., Greek Thinkers (vol. i, translated by L. Magnus, 1901).
Lange, F. A., Geschichte des Materialismus, 1873.
Natorp, P., Forschungen zur Geschichte des Erkenntnissproblems im Altertum,
1884.
Ritter, H., and Preller, L., Historia Philosophiae Graecae, 4th edition, 1869.
Schwegler, A., Geschichte der griechischen Philosophie, 1870.
Ueberweg, F., Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, 1871.
Zeller, E., Philosophie der Griechen, 1856.

II. Tue Aromists
Text:
Diels, H., Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker, 31d edition, 1912.
Heraclitus—Bywater, I., 1877.
Commentaries, €5c.:
Brieger, A., Die Urbewegung der Atome und die Weltentstehung bei Leukipp
und Demokrit, 1884.
Dyroff, A., Demokritstudien, 1899.
Goedeckemeyer, A., Epikurs Verhalinis xu Demokrit, 1897.
Lafaist, M., Dissertation sur la Philosophie atomistique, 1833.
Lasswitz, K., Geschichte der Atomistik, 1890.
Liepmann, H. C., Die Mechanik der Leucipp-Democritischen Atome, 1885.
Mabilleau, L., Histoire de la Philosophie atomistique, 1895.
Natorp, P., Ethika des Demokritus, 1893.
Pillon, F., L’Evolution de 2 Atomisme, 1892.

III. Epicurus
Texts:
Bailey, C., Epicurus, 1926.
Hicks, R. D., Diogenes Laertius (Loeb), 1925.
Usener, H., Epicurea, 1887.
von der Mihll, Epicurus (Teubner), 1922.
Sententiae Vaticanae—Wotke, C., in Wiener Studien, 1888.
Metrodorus—Kérte, C., 1890.
Diogenes Oenoandensis—William, I. (Teubner), 1907.
Philodemus, &¢.—Gomperz, W., Herculanische Studien, 1865.
Scott, W., Fragmenta Herculanensia, 1885.
Editions of separate treatises in Teubner Series.

Qq2

596 BRIEF BIBLIOGRAPHY

Translations :
Bignone, E., Epicure, 1920.
Ernout, A., in Introduction to Commentary on Lucretius, i, il, 1925-
Hicks, R. D., Diogenes Laertius (Loeb), 1925.
Kochalsky, A., Das Leben und die Lehre Epikurs, 1914.

Commentaries, Sc.:

Bailey, C., Epicurus, 1926.

Bignone, E., Epicuro, 1920.

Brieger, A., De Atomorum Motu Principali (in Martin Hertz zum Geburts-
tage), 1888.

Brieger, A., Epikurs Brief an Herodot, 1882.

Brieger, A., Epikurs Lehre der Seele, 1893.

Cronert, W., Colotes und Menedemos, 1906.

Giussani, C., Studi Lucreziani, and other essays in edition of Lucretius,
1896.

Guyau, M., La Morale a’ Epicure, 1904.

Hicks, R. D., Stoic and Epicurean, 1910.

Joyau, E., Epicure, 1910.

Masson, J., Lucretius, Epicurean and Poet, 1907.

Merbach, F., De Epicuri Canonica, 1909.

Schémann, G. F., De Epicuri Theologia, 1864.

Taylor, A. E., Epicurus, 1911.

Thomas, P.-F., De Epicuri Canonica, 1889.

Tohte, 'T., Epikurs Kriterien der Wahrheit, 1874.

von Arnim, H., Epikurs Lehre von Minimum, 1907.

Wallace, W., Epicureanism, 1880.

Woltjer, J., Lucretii Philosophia cum Fontibus Comparata, 1877. .

a

Bis Og

I. GENERAL

Accidents (see ovpnrwya), Epicurus’
conception of, 300-9, 353; sensation
an accident of compounds, 357, 3933
the soul not an accident of body, 387.

‘accompaniments’, see properties and

oupBeBnkos.

Alcmaeon of Croton, 53.

Anaxagoras, 12; theory of, 34-43, 44,
gr f., 56 £., 63, 69, 72. 134, 137, 140,
and A ppendixi; relation to Leucippus,
71, 78, 81, 83, 87,92, 93,97,99, 100-2,
107; to Democritus, 109, 111, 121,
rg0f., 153 f.; to Epicurus, 222, 278,
368; Lucretius’ criticism of, 41 f.,
344.

Anaximander, 12; theory of, 14-16, 18,
19, 21, 22, 29, 38, 42, 47, 49, 92, 98-
100, 102, 106, 538, 540.

Anaximenes, 12 ; theory of, 16-18, 29,
47> 99, 100, 102, 106, 373.

anthropomorphism of Epicurean gods,
468-9.

‘anticipation’ (apéAnyis), 238, 245-75
249, 250, 252, 254, 267-9, 306, 319,
419 f., 440, 474, Appendix ii, 568.

‘anticope’, 333 335) 349» 350-

apprehension, mental (ém:BoAy ris Sia-
POLAS, J:U-)5 251. 254, 262; 265,
266, 269, 288, 293, 3145 331, 334.
356 371, 402, 410, 414, 428-30, 440,
446 f., 455, 530, 534, Appendix iii;
of senses (émBoA} trav aicbytypiwr),
9-V-)) 2435 411, 429, 530, 534, 563 ff.,
ree

Aristippus, 489, 524 f.

Aristotle, and Atomism, 68, 70, 217;
Epicurus’ relation to, 219, 220, 226,
234, 301, 406, 450.

Atomism, period of, 1 f.; development
of, 2-4; antecedents of, 9-63; Indian
Atomism, 64f.; Leucippus (9.v.),
founder of Greek Atomism, 66 ff.;
as reconciliation of the One and the
Many, 69 ff.; as developed by Demo-

critus (7.v.), 116 ff.; by Epicurus

(q-v.), 275 ff.; relation of Epicurus

to earlier Atomism, 226, 275, 359,

368, 390, 423, 529-31.

Atoms, ancient and modern concep-

tions of, 4 f.:

Leucippus’ theory of, 69 ff.; infinite in
number, 76; homogeneous, 773 in-
divisible, 78 f.; size, shape, position,
and arrangement, 79-82; motions
and combinations, 82-903 in cos-
mic whirl, go ff.; soul-atoms, roz.

Democritus’ theory of, 117 ff.; infinite
in number, 117; unchangeable and
indivisible, 123 ff.; size, 125 f.,
284 f., 288; shape, 127 f.; question
of attribution of weight, 128 ff.,
144 ff.; arrangement, 80, 586;
combination in compounds, 116,
128, 136 f,, 168f., 345 f.; motion
83, 129 ff., 311, 317 f.; in cosmic
whirl, 88, 94, 138 ff.; soul-atoms,
156 ff.; movement in sensation,
162 ff.

Epicurus’ theory of, 275 ff.; atoms as
primary substances, 281; unchange-
able, 282f.; indivisible, 283 f.;
properties of size, shape, and
weight, 126, 284-90, 303; pro-
perties as cause of qualities in
things, 291; in compound bodies,
292 f., 339-58 4353 Without quali-
ties or sensation, 290-2, 3543
infinite in number, 297 f.; motion,
83, 129 f., 310-38; in formation of
worlds, 359-83; in composition of
soul, 384-437; mature of soul-
atoms, 395f.; arrangement in
body, 396; movement in sensation,
241, 398 ff.; in the mind, 235, 263,
403 ff.; in act of will, 433-75 cer-

tainty of concept of atoms, 426-30};
in structure of gods, 445-67.
‘automatic’, the, in Democritus, 139-43.

598

‘Blow’, the, in atomic movement, 327—
30.

‘boundless’, the (76 dzretpov), 14, 15, 16,
18, 42, 44, 48, 92, I17.

Cacumen, 342 and n. 3, Appendix iv,
592.

Canonice, Epicurus’, 232-74, 4275 5303;
applied to heavenly bodies, 370-2;
on cause of error, 422, 425 f.; Mer-
bach on, 557 f.; place of emBody rHs
Siavolas in, 559, 5613 on localization
of sensations, 587.

cause, efficient, 46-52; Leucippus, 84;
Democritus, 121; Epicurus, 275, 290;
final, Democritus, 121, 140; Epi-
curus, 370 f.

chance, Empedocles, 51; Democritus,
121, 139-43, 187, 197; Epicurus,
324-7.

change, phenomena of, 35, 46, 89, 125.

‘cheerfulness’, as aim of conduct,
Democritus, 113, 188 ff., 523.

Cicero, 230, 438, and see Index III.

clinamen, 316-17 Nn. 3.

cognition, Epicurus, 239-47) 2545 267,
423 ff., 558, 567, and see mpdAniis,
“anticipation” and émBoAy rijs Savolas,
‘mental apprehension’.

Colotes, 222, 230.

Colour, Empedocles, 54; Anaxagoras,
623; Democritus, 80, 113, 128, 168-70,
172, 184, 353; Epicurus, 300, 308 f.,
337> 353 ff.» 393, 530.

concept, seé mpodAnyiis, 245-7; 306, 419,
448, 557 f., 562, 568, 572, 576; of the
gods, 440f., 5913 as criterion of
truth, 238, 419, 486.

conciliatus, 435.

concilium, 293, 303 N. 2, 320, 3375
347-50, 356, 360, 366f. 375, 413
Nn. 2, 435, 5845 sensation in, 357,
393 f.; cf. dOpovcpa and ovyxprots.

condensation, 16, 23, 44.

‘confirmation’, 255, and see émpaprv-
pyats.

coniunctum, 303 N. I.

consilium, 583.

contingency, see chance.

contraries, perception by, Anaxagoras,

56.

INDEX I

‘convention’ (vdyuos, 9-V-), qualities
dependent on, Democritus, 105, 165,
178 ff., 184, 189.

Cosmology, Heraclitus, 21; Empedo-
cles, 32; Anaxagoras, 40 f.; Leucip-
pus, 90-101, 106; Democritus, 143-8;
Epicurus, 359-67

courage, Democritus, 187, 202; Epi-
cUrUS, 510, 514, 523+

criteria, of truth, Democritus, 183;
Epicurus, 236, 238-52, 271, 486,
559, 5733 Of choice, Democritus,
189 f.; Epicurus, 486 f.

Cyrenaics contrasted with Epicureans,

192, 489, 492, 500, 524, 526.

Death, 502; fear of, 471, 502 f., 510.

decay, theory of, Leucippus, 88 f.;
Democritus, 147; Epicurus, 351-3,
367, 463.

democracy, Democritus on, 211; decay
of, influence on Greek philosophy,
218 ff.

Democritus, position in Atomic school,
1-4, 46, 51, 234, 3383 life, 109-12;
writings, 112-17; relation to Leucip-
pus, 67-9, 81, 101, 102, 105f., 108;
on chance and necessity, 49 85, es
I4I, 318, 321, 3253; atomic theory,
117 ff., and see atoms; on worlds,
146-8, 363; on our world, 149-53,
375; on heavenly bodies, 149-51; on
shape of earth, 152; on thunder,
earthquakes, floods, &c., 153 f.; on
zoology and physiology, 154 f.; on
the soul, 156-61, 387, 388; soul and
mind, 160, 402; on sensation, 162 f.;
on the senses, 162-72; touch, 162;
taste, 163-53 sight, 104, 165-70, 411;
hearing, 170-2, 404, 405, 577; smell,
172, 404; on the mind, 172-4; on the
gods, 175-7, 438, 442 f.; on theory of
knowledge, 177-85, 236; on qualities,
105, 178 ff., 184, 292, 301, 353, 3545
Ethics, 186-213; compared with
Epicurus’ ethics, 522 f.; determinism,
120 ff., 186-8; cheerfulness, 188-93,
523; its attainment, 193-8; prudence
and education, 198-200; self-control,
200; desire, 201; wisdom, courage,
justice, 202; frugality, 203 f.; family

GENERAL

life, 206; friendship, 207; justice and
law, 208-10; the State, 210 f.; philan-
thropy, 212; summary, 212-14;
Democritean tradition, 217f.; in-
fluence on Epicurus, 148, 220 f., 226,
272> 339> 427, 442, 522, 529-313
Epicurus’ opposition to, 226, 353,
363, 405 f.; Epicurus’ development of
his theory, 275, 278, 287, 299, 310.

desire, Democritus, 201; Epicurus,
491 ff.

destiny, see necessity.

determinism of Democritus, 120 ff.,
186-8; opposition of Epicurus to,
318-21, 529; and cf. necessity.

differences of atoms, cf. properties, 79—
81, 86, 128.

Diogenes of Apollonia, 66.

Diogenes Laertius, see Index III.

Diogenes of Oenoanda, 228, 316, 318,
382, 509.

discidium, 303 and n. 2.

dissolution, see decay.

Earth, Leucippus, 96 f., 99 f.; Demo-
critus, 114, 1523; Epicurus, 360, 365.

earthquakes, Democritus, 153.

eclipses, Empedocles, 99 f., 151; Leucip-
pus, 98-100; Democritus, 152; Epi-
curus, 258.

education, Democritus on,
Epicurus on, 234, 504.

effluence, 58; Leucippus, 103 f., 105;
Democritus, 167 f., 171, 172, 1743
Epicurus, 242, 404, 577, 581; cf.
emanation and ‘idol’.

Eleatics, 27; Leucippus and, 67, 69, 70,
72, 76, 79, 100, 106 f., 118; Demo-
critus and, 119, 120, 125; Epicurus
and, 279, 315, 529.

element and elements (orovyeia), 11, 29,
72, 913; the four elements, 1, 11, 15,
28-30, 33, 38, 47, 53 f., 65, 341.

emanation, 53, 54, cf. effluence.

emotions, Epicurus theory of, 431 f.

Empedocles, 11, 12; on theory of four
primary substances, 28 ff., 71, 72, 743
of Love and Strife, 31 ff., 40, 50,
52, 82 f.; of sensation, 53-5; of vision,
53 ff., 57, 103, 167, 406; of thought,
55 f.; theory of knowledge, 60 f.; on

197 f.;

599
eclipses, 99 f., 151; Leucippus’ rela-
tion to, 88, ror, 107; Democritus’
relation to, 121, 147; Epicurus’ rela-
tlon to, 278, 368.

Epicurus, position in Atomic school,
I-4, I0, 42, 46, 52, 54, 66, 73, 79,
83, 88, ror, roa, 115, 116, 119, 122,
126 f., 129, 133, 143, 148, 151, 155,
157, 161, 165, 168, 173, 175, 176,
177, 182, 185, 186, 188, 189, 191,
193 ff., 201, 206, 207, 213, 214, 220;
historical circumstances, 217-21; life,
221-7; writings, 227; style, 227,
269-71; authorities for, 228-31.

Canonice, 232-74; distrust of
education and logic, 234 f.; belief in
reality of external world, 236 f.;
criteria of truth, 238-52, 271, 486,
559, 5733 sensation, 238-44; ‘antici-
pation’, 245-75 feeling, 248-50;
mental apprehension, 251 f.; investi-
gation of rpd8nAa, 253-7; of peréwpa,
257-60; multiplicity of causes, 260-2;
investigation of a8nAa, 262-7; validity
of thought, 263-7; language, 267-71;
infallibility of sensation, 271-4.

Atoms and space, 275-99, and see
atoms, space, 278-81, 293-6; infinity
of space, 297-9.

Properties (cupBeBnxdra) and acci-
dents (cuumrdpara), 300-9; time an
accident, 305-7.

Motion of atoms, 310-38; free
atoms, 310-16; the swerve, freedom
and destiny, 316-27; the blow, 327-
30; motion in compound bodies,
330-8.

Compound bodies, 339-58; three
kinds of compounds, 341; formation
gradual, 341-4; internal structure of
compound, 345-7; unity of com-
pound, 347-51; growth and decay,
351-3; qualities of things, 353-7;
change, 3553 sensation in compounds,
357-8. ;

Cosmogony, 359-83; formation
and dissolution of world, 359-67;
infinity of worlds, 361 f.; the earth,
365 f.; celestial phenomena, 367-75;
terrestrial phenomena, 375, 3763
creation of animals, 376, and men,

ad

600 INDEX I

Epicurus (contd.) :
377 £.; early civilization, 378-80; lan-
guage, 380-2.

Psychology, 384-437}; the soul an
atomic compound of four elements,
385-400; sensation initiated by
‘fourth nature’, 400-1; sense-per-
ception, 401-21; opinion, Aarts
thought, 422-31; the emotions, 431 f.;
the will, 432-7.

Theology, 438-81; the gods, per-
ception of by men, 439-41; their
nature and immortality, 441-67;
their life, 467 f.; anthropomorphism,
468 f.; blessedness of gods, 469-72;
the gods unrelated to the world,
472-7; religion and piety, 478-81.

Ethics, 482-528; pleasure the end,
483-7; criterion of pleasure, 487 ff.;
psychology of pleasure, 491 ff.;
pleasure of equilibrium, 495 f.; plea-
sure of the mind, 498 ff.; fear, 501 f.;
death, 502; the blessed life, 505 ff.;
virtue and the virtues, 508-15; public
life, 515-17; friendship, 517-20; love,
520 f.; family life, 521 f.; summary
and criticisms, 522-8.

Generalsurvey of Epicurean ati
529-34-

See also mpodAnyus, Appendix ii;
émBody THs Svavoias, Appendix iil;
dyKos; Appendix iv; ‘nameless ele-
ment’ and the mind, Appendix v;
Epicurean gods, Appendix vi.

equilibrium, in universe = icovopuia,
452, 461-7; in body and mind =
evordbera, 491 ff., 526.

eternity of universe, Democritus, 120,
123; Epicurus, 453, and see immor-
tality.

Ethics, Democritus, 113, 122, 186-213;
Epicurus, 482-528, 531 ff.

Family life, Democritus, 206; Epicurus,
Toe ting Sey

fear, Epicurus, characteristic mental
pain, so1—s, 510 ff.

feeling, see maOos.

foedera naturat, 317, 433-

‘fourth nature’ (= ‘nameless element’
of soul), 390-5, 530, 5345 sensation

in, 393f. 398, 400, 409, 485; in
spirit and mind, 402, Appendix v;
as source of emotion, 431; of will, 434.

free will and detexeulicinta 122; and
Epicurean ‘swerve’, 318-23, 327,
433-7) 522, 530; and mpovora, 475.

friendship, Democritus, 207 f.; Epi-
CUurUS, 517-20, 523, 527-

frugality, Democritus, 203 f.; Epicurus,
224, 494-6.

fusion, 45; in theory of Anaxagoras,
38-41, 43, 87, Appendix i.

glomeramen, 342 n.2 and n. 3, Appendix
iv.

Gods, Democritus, 175-7; perception
. ot; 176 f.5 Epicurus, 251, 438- 81;
perception of, 438-41; constitution
of, 441-67, Appendix vi; life of,
467-76; fear of, 233, 471+ 473» 479»
502-5.

Growth, Leucippus, 88 f.; Democritus,
147; Epicurus, 351 f., 367.

Harmony, Heraclitus, 19, 22; Empe-
docles, 31; soul nota ‘harmony’, 386 f.

hearing, Empedocles, 55, 61; Democri-
tus, 170-2; Epicurus, 242, 404-6.

heavenly bodies, Heraclitus, 373; Leu-
cippus, 98-100; Democritus, 149-52,
175; Epicurus, 258-62; size of, 371 f.;
phases of moon, 373, 441.

hedonism, egoistic, Epicurean, 508, 51 5,
525 f.; ser.

hedonistic calculus, Epicurean, 488,
490, 497, 508, 526.

Heraclitus, position in early specula-
tion, 11 f., 27, 28, 31, 33, 44, 61, 71,
91, 109, 226; theory of, 18-23; idea
of necessity, 49 f.; reason and the
senses, 58 f.; the soak 102.

Hermarchus, ae 225, 226.

Herodotus, 228.

Hesiod, 221.

Foe: Democritus’ criticism of, 115,
173-

homoeomeria, Anaxagoras, 34-43: cf.
Omo.opepera.

‘Idols’ (see ei8wAov), Leucippus, in
vision, 104 f.; Democritus, treatise,
1143; in visions 165-8; in other senses,

GENERAL

171-4; of the gods, 176; in thought,
181; Epicurus, treatise, 227; in
sensation, 242 f.; in mental activity,
251, Appendix iii; in vision, 256 f.,
407-22; of compound bodies, 351;
not thrown off by atoms and space,
427; of the gods, 176, 440-70 passim,
Appendix y.

image, of perception, distinguished from
‘idols’, 242, 319, Appendix iii; of the
gods, 440-70 passim, Appendix v.

imperturbability, 505, 522, 531, see
arapagia and tranquillity.

inane, 295 N. 1, 303 n. 4: Cf. Kevev.

Indian Atomism, 64 f.

intermundia, 449, 451, 455, 467 n. 1,
468, 589 f.

‘interworlds’ (interspaces), 362, 364, 4 51,
452, 467, 468, 477, 479.

Justice, Democritus, 202, 208 f.; Epi-
curus, treatise, 227; nature of, 379,
510-14, 527.

juxtaposition, contrasted with fusion,
38f., 87; of atoms, Democritus, 137 f.;
Epicurus, 345.

Knowledge, theory of, early views,
28, 46, 58-63, 236; Leucippus, ro f.;
Democritus, 177-85; Epicurus, 236—
40, 271-3.

Language, origin of, 115, 267-9, 380-2;
relation to thought (Epicurus), 248,
267, 381.

Leucippus, position in Atomic school,
2,9, 45> 46, 64, 69, 106-8; life, 65-7;
writings, 67 f.; atomic theory, 69-90,
and see atoms; space, 69-90 passim;
cosmogony, 90-8; heavenly bodies,
98—100; the soul, rox f.; respiration,
103; theory of vision, 103 f.; thought,
104 f.; theory of knowledge, ros f.;
relation to Democritus, 109, 111,
115-16, 213; in atomic theory, 117—
37 passim; in cosmogony, 146, 149 f.,
153; in theory of soul, 156-60; of
sensation, 162, 165 f., 168, 170; rela-
tion to Epicurus, 220, 226, 287, 529.

lightning, Democritus, 153, 175; Epi-
curus, 258, 374.

601

limit of pleasure, 495 f., 526.

logic, Epicurus’ distrust of, 3, 234. £5
300; Epicurean developments of,
3, 229.

love, Empedocles, alternating with
strife, 31-3, 40, 50, S25 FljsS ee TST;
147; Epicurus, love of the sexes,
520 f,

Lucretius, criticism of predecessors of
Atomists, ro f.; of Heraclitus, 23; of
Empedocles, 33; of Anaxagoras, 41;
as authority for Atomists and Epi-
curus, see Index III. :

Many, the, see the One.

Mathematics, treatise of Democritus,
114; Epicurus’ dislike of, 234.

Melissus, 12,44; influence on Leucippus,
67, 71, 74 f., 76; on Democritus, 119,
120.

‘membrane’, atomic, Leucippus, go f.,
95> 96 f., 99, 150.

Menoeceus, 228.

‘mental apprehension’, see apprehension.

Metrodorus, 222, 224, 225, 226, 228.

Milesians, 12, 18 f., 48, 50, 58, 67, 75,
109; see also. Anaximander, Anaxi-
menes, Thales.

Milky Way, Democritus’ theory of,
wont.

mind, see voids, early theories, 52-8;
Anaxagoras, 40, §2, 61, 83, 93, 121,
140, 546 f.; Leucippus, treatise on,
68; Democritus, treatise on, 113;
identifies mind and soul, 160 f., 172 f.,
181; Epicurus, theory of, 319 f., 5913
distinguished from spirit, 402-4;
mind in perception, 413-17, 4473 in
interpretation, 421-3; in thought,
423-31; in emotions, 431-2; in act
of will, 432 ff.

minimae partes (of atom), 286 f., 315,
342, 425, 448, 529, 978.

minimum of extension, 43, 78, 286,
2945 315.

— of movement, 315, 335:

— of time, 315, 335 f.

minimum visibile, 78, 342, 578 f.

mixture, Anaxagoras, seé petypua, pikus,
ovppueis, 38, 51, 56, 57s 615 71, 87,
92 93, Appendix i.

602

Mochus, 64 f.

modern philosophy, parallels to ‘Social
Contract’, 379, 5123 Utilitarianism,
526, 528, 533-

modern science, parallels to, 279, 280,
3123 atomism, 4, 88, 97, 342) 533>
5775 evolution, 14, 377; natural law,

q.V., 120 f.; ‘mind-stuff’, 156, 321 f.; -

atomic movement, 314 f., 332 f., 3383
anthropology, 378; sensation, 394,
418, 436; sight, 413.

Monism, 11, 12-27, 29, 33 f., 35 f., 42,
44, 63, 69 f., 72, 85, 101, 106 f., 119,
134.

moon, Leucippus, 98 f.; Democritus,
147, 149-52, 156, 1753 Epicurus,
258, 365) 371) 373, 441-

moral theory, see ethics.

motion, Anaximander, 15; denied by
Parmenides, 26, cf. 70; caused by
Mind, Anaxagoras, 40, 513 eternal
motion, cause of, Milesians, 48;
Leucippus and Democritus, 133-5;
motion of atoms, Leucippus, 82-6;
Democritus, 129-33; Epicurus, 310—
38; motion of atoms in compound
bodies, 330-8, 355; movement of
soul atoms, 393 f., 397-9, 418; in act
of will, 434-6; movements of creation
and destruction, 463.

myth, Epicurus’ rejection of, 10, 370,
374 378, 438.

‘Nameless element’, see ‘fourth nature’.

natural law, 49, 51, 85, 120, 21, 122,
321; and cf. necessity.

Nausiphanes, 129, 217 f., 222, 226, 227,
289, 311.

necessity, early views, 49 f.; Leucippus,
68, 85, 91, 932 97; Democritus, 120-3,
133 f., 141-3, 186, 188, 318 f., 321;
Epicurus contravenes, 324, 363, 433-
72 529-

notities = ‘anticipation’, mpodnyus, 9.V-;
247, 419 N. 6, 474, 576.

One, the, and the Many, 19, 22, 26, 44,
69, 70 f., 76, 87, 107, 119.

opinion, see Sdéa, Epicurus, 254 f., 286,
421 f., 424, 425, 428, 569.

INDEX I

‘opposites’ the (Anaximander), 14-16,
22, 38, 48; Anaxagoras and the
‘opposites’, 538 ff.; perception by
opposites, 56, 58.

Pain, Epicurus, 189, 249 f., 483 ff.

Parmenides, 12, 44, 67, 69, 77, 91, 1073
theory of, 24-7, 50, 52, 60, 70, 74,
g1, 295; relation to Empedocles, 28,
30 31, 34, 613 to Anaxagoras, 35 f.;
to Epicurus, 278 f.

Philodemus, 218, 229, 438, and see
Index III.

physiology, 10, 217; Anaxagoras, 57;
Democritus, 154 f.; Epicurus, 376 ff.

planets, Leucippus, 98; Democritus,
treatise, 113, 149, 152.

plants, Epicurean view of, 376 f.

Plato, theory of vision, 167; relation to
Democritus, 181, 195, 213; contrasted
with Epicurean view, 219 f., 234, 301,
312, 381, 406, 526.

pleasure, relation to cheerfulness of
Democritus, 189 ff.; Epicurus, 249 f.,
379, 483 ff., 530-3; cinetic and static
pleasures contrasted, 492-6, 510,
523-6 ; pleasures of the mind, 498-505.

Pluralism, 11, 27-45, 69, 106 f.; cf.
Anaxagoras, Empedocles.

Plutarch, 230, 438, and see Index III.

primary substance, theories of Monism,
Il, 13, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22; of Plural-
ism, 27, 28 f., 333 particles of Anaxa-
goras, 40, 42-4, 453 pre-Atomic con-
ceptions, 46-8; homogeneous sub-
stance of atoms, 77, 87.

properties (see ouuBeByxos), cf. accidents,
qualities; Leucippus and Democritus,
105, 164, 353; Epicurus, contrasted
with accidents, 300-9; of atoms, 284,
290, 303; of compound bodies, 562 f.

providentia (mpdvora), 475.

prudence (¢pdvnas, g.v.), Democritus,
187, 196 f., Epicurus, 506, 509, 516.

psychology, of Anaxagoras, 57f.; of
Democritus, 157 ff.,181 f.; Epicurean,
49122, 244,26 5,2935319,384-437548 5,
498, 5275 530, 5345 of pleasure, 491 ff.

public life, Democritus, 208-12;
Epicurus, 515-17, 523.

Pyrrho, 218, 226.

GENERAL 603

Pythagoreans, 53, 65, 72, 74, 98, 101,
106, 111, 368.
Pythocles, 223, 225, 228, 234.

Qualities: cf. properties; Indian atom-
ism, 65; Leucippus and Democritus,
1053; primary and secondary, 113,
116, 164, 168, 3533; Epicurus, 290-3,
300, 353-7, 529-30.

Rarefaction, 16, 23, 44.

ratio (Aoytopds), 423 N. 3.

reason, contrasted with the senses, 59,
236 f.

regimen, 583.

religion, relation to philosophy, 10,
13, 24, 43, 46-51; Democritus and
Epicurus opposed to its beliefs, 121 f.,
369 f.; theory of, Democritus, 175-7;
Epicurus, 438-8r.

rhetoric, Epicurus’ distrust of, 3, 234.

Seeds, Anaxagoras, 35, 38, 43, 62, 92,
93, Appendixi; Democritus, 142,155;
Epicurus, 343 f.

self-control, cf.temperance, Democritus,
200.

self-sufficiency, Democritus, 20 53 Stoic
and Epicurean, 220, 531 f.

Semen, 343.

Seneca on Epicurus, 230, and see Index
Ill.

sensation, Empedocles, 52 f.; Anaxa-
goras, 56 f.; Parmenides, 59; Leucip-
pus, 103-6; Democritus, treatise, 113;
theory of, 116, 159 ff., 162 ff., 353;
validity of, 179-85; Epicurus, theory
of, 232, 390 ff., 498, 581 ff.; criterion
of truth, 238 ff.; validity of, 231,
271-4, 527 f., 529, 534; atoms with-
out sensation, 292; sensation an
‘accident’ of compound bodies, 357;
as basis of ethics, 484.

sensationalism, weakness of, 273, 368,
"aot

sense-perception, early theories of,
58; Leucippus, 73, 82, 105; Demo-
critus, 164; Epicurus, validity of,
151, 275, 285; in relation to heavenly
bodies, 368, 370, 372, 3743 theory of,
401 ff.; and mental apprehension, 293,
447; and ethics, 484; pleasures of, 488.

senses, validity of questioned, Hera-
clitus, 23, 24; Parmenides, 26, 595
Empedocles and others, 28, 46, 58,
60; Anaxagoras, 61 ff.; Atomists and
this problem, 69; Democritus 174,
177-85, 236; Nausiphanes, 218;
Epicurus, 272 f.; and see sensation.

Sextus Empiricus, 230, and see Index III.

shape, as a property, see properties, and
cf. differences.

shape of atoms, Leucippus, 88, 94, 102,
127; Democritus, 127 f., 163, 168 f.;
Epicurus, 287-9, 354f., 530; of
things, Democritus, 168, 184 f.

sight, theory of, Empedocles, 53-5;
Leucippus, 103-5; Democritus, 165—
70, 184; Epicurus, treatise on, 227;
theory of, 242 f., 271, 406-13.

similitudo, 445.1, 594.

simulacra (ei8waAa), 407.

size, as property, see properties, and
cf. differences; of atoms, Leucippus,
94; Democritus, 125-8, 163; in
relation to weight, 130-2; of com-
pounds, 184f.; Epicurus, 284-7,
290, 300.

smell, Empedocles, 55; Leucippus, 80,
89; Democritus, 172, 353; Epicurus,
242, 354, 404-6.

Social Contract, parallels in Epicurus,
379) 512.

Socrates, 111, 191, 217, 220.

Soliditas, 445 N. 1, 590, 593.

soul, early theories, 17, 47, 57, 101 f.;
Leucippus, 102 f.; Democritus, trea-
tise, 1133 theory of, 156-61; relation
of to body, 194f., 200; Epicurus,
theory of, 384-403; ‘fourth nature’
in, 391 f.; relation of to body, 396-
401; mortality of, 4or.

soul atoms, nature of, Leucippus, 1023;
activity of in sensation, 164-6, 170;
position of, 173; Epicurus, activity
of in sensation, 244, 586.

sound, 89, 170 f., 243, 300, 353, 354+

space, or the void, denial of, Parmenides,
25,74; by Monists, 33, 70; Leucip-
pus, theory of, 75, 76 f., 87, 92, 118;
Democritus, 134; Epicurus, 278-81,
293-9, 305; certainty with regard to,
426 ff.; eternity of, 452.

604

spirit, distinguished from mind, 402-4,
Appendix vy.

spontaneity and the ‘swerve’, 325.

stars, Leucippus, 98 f.; Democritus,
147, 149-523 Epicurus, 365, 441.

State, the, see public life.

Stoics, 22; 59, 156, 219 f., 280f., 301,
397s 319) 475, 531 f.

strife (Empedocles), alternating with
love, see Love; of opposites (Anaxi-
mander), 14, oe ZOy Age

sun, Leucippus, 98 f.; Democritus, 147,
149-52, 156, 175, 255 f.; Epicurus,
365, 371, 441-

‘swerve’ of atoms, Epicurus, 143, 310,
316-28, 356, 529, 534; relation of to
free-will, 433-7, 522.

Taste, Empedocles, 55; Leucippus, 80,
89; Democritus, 113, 128, 163-5,
170, 172; Epicurus, 242, 271, 300,
353 £., 404) 530.

teleology attacked, 359, 476.

temperance, cf. self-control, 509 f., 514,
5232 525:

Thales, 12, 13, 28, 43, 45) 46, 47, 107.

theology, see'religion.

thought, opposed to sensation, 25, 46, 57,
69, cf. reason; early views, 55, 58, 615
Leucippus, 104-6; Democritus, 161,
172-4, 180-5; Epicurus, 248, 259,
263 ff., 423 ff.; relation of ieeguage to
thought, 268, 381 f.

thought-image, Leucippus, 105; Epi-
curus, 263, 384-437.

thunder, Leucippus, roo; Democritus,
153; Epicurus, 258.

time, Epicurus’ view of, 305-9.

touch, Empedocles, 55; Anaxagoras,
56; basis of sensation, 58, 162, 241,
404; theory of, Democritus, 163, 164,
184; Epicurus, treatise, 227, 271, 404.

tranquillity (évapagia) of the mind, 500,
502, 505, 512, 515 f.; of body and
mind, 506, 509, 510, 526.

transitio, 445 N. 1, 447, 449) 594-

ENDEX I

Ultimate reality, cf. primary substance,
Epicurus’ views about, 426-30.

universe, Leucippus’ and Epicurus’
notions of contrasted, 363; infinity
of, 76, 120, 299, 3593; unchangeable,
277 f.

Utilitarianism, Epicurean theory com-
pared to, 526, 528 and n., 533+

Virtue, Democritus, 198,209; Epicurus,
487, 508, 525; Epicurus’ attitude to
the virtues, 508-15.

vision, see sight.

void, see space.

wvoluntas, 319, 437-

volition, see free will.

Weight, as property, see property; of
atoms, Democritus, relation of to
size, 128; theory of, 129-32; in
cosmic whirl, 144-6, 164, 184; Epi-
curus, weight a property of the atom,
284, 289 f., 300, 365, 529; cause of
motion, 83, 129, 298, 313, 328-

whirl, Anaxagoras, 41; Leucippus, 9o—
7, 98, 106; Democritus, 132, 135,
137, 138-46, 289; Epicurus, 363,
365.

will, see free will.

world, our, Parmenides, 26; Empedo-
cles, 31 f.; Anaxagoras, 41; early
theories, 45,91; Leucippus, 91-8; De-
mocritus,' 149-55; Epicurus, 359 ff.;
cf. cosmology.

worlds, Anaximander, 15; Anaxagoras,
40, 51; Leucippus, go f.; Democritus,
1363 creation of, Democritus, 138 ff.;
Epicurus, 361 ff.; worlds infinite in
number, 361, 467.

Xenophanes, 21, 24, 27 f., 47, 373-

Zeno, 12, 67, 72 f.
zoology, 154, 377-

605

II. GREEK WORDS

adnros 142, 248, 253, 255 n. 1, 257,
259 N. 2, 5, 266 n. 1, 423, 446, 560,
567, 569, 570, 571, 572.

ddvaiperos 73, 78, 124 n. 6, 130 n. 8.

adiadopos 124.n. 6, 128 n. 1.

abapBin 192, 193, 218

GOporcwa 138, 337, 570, 579.

abpo.cpds 363.

aicbnos 56 n. 3, 168 n. 2, 182 n. 1,
183 n. 3, 238 N. 1, 2, 241 N. 1, 243 0. 3,
247 N. I, 249, 266 n. 1, 269, 308 n. 1,
384, 404, 420, 424 N. I, 440 N. 2, 486,
498, 502 n. 6, 558, 560 ff., 586.

. aioOnrypia 243, 266 n. 1, 560, 564, 572,
573-

aicOnrixdr 398, 586.

aicOnros 175, 179 N., 237 Nn. I.

dxarovépactov 392, 581, 586.

axpov 286.

adynddv 249 n. 4, 484 n. 3.

aAdoiwars 89 n. 2, 172, 182 n. I.

Goyos 239, 384.

dpepis 78 0. 4, 79, 124, 284, 315 n. 5, 316
Ler.

aueTraBatos 286.

avéyxn 49, 68 n. 2, 85 n. 3, 122 n. I,
Eoq ie 5, 186 f.,. 318 no1, 325.n.\5.

dvabupiacis 20 Nn. 4, 102.

avadys 279, 294. 3, 303.

avriKoTy 314 1. I, 329, 330 2. I, 333,
R35 ef.

avriaptupeiv 371, 426.

avrysaptipnais 255 0. 1,259, 570, 572.

doxAnata 493, 496.

drrabeva 78 n. 3, 306 n. 5.

amaOys 124, 134 0. I.

Gretpov (7d) 14, 90, 92, 117.

Gmeipos 34 N. I, 81 N. 3, 120, 124 n. 6,
288 Nl. 4, 297 N. 2, 299, 494 2. 3,
495 0. 4,496 n. 1, 543.

Grows 124 N. 6, 134.N. I.

dmovia 471, 491 nN. 6, 499, 526.

aroxpiveobar 549.

amoppota (atoppoy) 53, 167.

amorimwots 167, 406, 442 N. 4.

Gppovia 19 N. 2, 192 N. 4.

Grapatia 188, 191, 192 N. 4, 193, 218, |

220, 262, 369, 441, 471, 499, 500, 505,
ce

aropos (or drouov) 73, 78, L17,.124 10,
TSO nD. 2, 28x, 284 ny Sek Gb le dese
314.0. 3, 316 N. 3, 317 N. 2, 331 D. 3.

adrdpreva 205 nN. 2, 220, 531.

adrapKifs ESF N34

avréuarov (7rd) 139 n. 1.

aPPapros 176 n. 3, 471 N. 2, 473. I.

Bdpos 130, 131 n. 4, 284n. 5, 289 n. 6,
290 N. I, 311. 5, 329 Nn. I, 330. I.

Bapurns 130.

Bpddos 314 n. 1, 335 n. 7.

yéveors 89 N. I, QIN. 2, 341, 347.

dev 118.

Scabvyy 79.

SiaxpivecBar 548, 549.

didxprots 39, 89 N. I, 341, 543.

didAAa€éts 30.

didvoia 161 N. 1, 233, orm. 35 5725591
(see émBodn).

SidpOpwois 326 n. 1, 364.

didornua 74, 77, 79, 295, 341

dixn 50, 193 nN. 1, 202 n. 7.

din 90, 92, 138, 139.

Sivos 94.

ddéa 105, 244, 246 n. 3, 248, 254, 259
N. 2, 421, 423 0. 3, 560, 563, 569, 572,
574s 591.

Sogaldpevov 424, 560, 570, 571.

elOwdov 104, 165, 171 N. 3, 172, 243 N. 3,
332 ND. 3, 335 D. 3, 406 n. 6, 407, 424
N. I, 439 N. 3, 446 0. 1, 493 N. 2, 455
Mees, 500 f.. 591 16.

eiuapuern 49, 50, 318 n. I, 2.

eléis 303 n. 4.

exOriBew 94 0. 5.

ExOAupis 405 N. 3, 577 0. I.

éxxpiveobar 549.

éxmtpwos 22 N. I, 23 N. I.

éudaars 56, 104, 166, 167, 406 n. 6.

evdpyea 243 0. I, 253 0. I, 255 nN. 3,

259, 269.

evdpynpa 243 0. 1,306,371, 410,422, 563.

606

evapyns 242, 243, 246, 247 0. 1, 260, 269
N. 3,419 N. 3, 422, 438, 440, 558, 560,
562, 570.

évdera 491, 494.

&vdnAos 37, 545-

evvonua 269.

évvoua 439 1. 3, 591.

EVOTHTES 453-

érraicOnua 238 N. 2,241 N., 440 n. 2, 558.

érraicOnats 420.

émPadArew 104, 243, 424.0. 1, 561.

em PAntiK@s 243 N. 2, 257, 560.

émiBoAy) 247 N. I, 254 N. I, 266, 302,
334 N. 2, 410, 419 N. 3, 560 ff.

émBody Tav alcOnTnpiwy 243, 411, 429,
566 ff.

émuBody THs Suavoias 243 N. 2, 247 N. I,
251, 265, 269, 371, 402, 414 N. I, 416
N. 2, 421, 428, 429, 434 N. I, 440, 446,
559 ff., 59r.

émOupia 201 1. 4.

emtpaptupety 254, 422.

émipapTupyois 255 n. 2, 259, 411, 413,
425, 563, 564, 570, 571, 572, 574.

émivowa 247N. I, 248, 259, 419 nN. 3,
423 N. 3, 424, 560, 569, 591.

émippuots 446 N. 1, 455 1. 4, 593-

eddamovia, 192 N. 6, 195 N. I, 211 N. 5,
493:

€veoTovv 209.

evEeoT@ 192.

edOupin 113, 188, 195 n. 6. -

eVOupos 192.1.

evorabera 491 n. 6, 526.

evotabés (76) 491 n. 6.

nyepovixov (70) 403, 586.

HSovy 41, 188, 192 N. 2, 194 N. I, 2,
195 N. 3, 200 N. 2, 249 N. 4, 483 n. 1,
484 n. 3, 488 n. 3, 494. 3, 495 0. 4,
498 n. I.

— kaTaoTnpatiky 491.

— kunpatixy 486 n. I.

Ogos (= position) 80, 89 n. 1, 305,
(= convention) 115, 268, 38r.

Oewpntos 286, 315 n. 6, 334, 439 2. 3,
446 n. 1: see Adyos.

idéa (= atom) 118.
icovopiia 261, 278, 361 0. 3,452, 461 n. 1,
462, 465 n.

tm DEX IT

kar’ apOov 589, 59°, 593-

kar’ €ldos 599, 593-

KATAOTHLATLKOS, see 700v7.

kevov (76) 68 0. 3, 74, 77, 79 D- 2, 92
N. 3, 117, 119, 284 D. 3, 295, 297 0. 2,
299, 303 N. 4, 314 ND. 4.

Kevos 493, 496 N. I.

xinos 48 N. 1, 139 N. I, 254 N. I, 306
N. 5, 315, 316 N. 3, 491, 498 n. 1, 547,
560.

Kéapos 15. 5; 7,48, 490. 1,91 0. 2, 359.

xpirjpiov 189, 238 n. 1, 266 n. 1 (=
aicbnrjpiov), 558, 560 ff.

AoyiKov 76 160.

Aoytopds 194 N. 5, 268, 423, 424, 495
Nn. 4, 591.

Adyos 23 1. I, 37 N. 3, 49 D. 3, 59, 68»
N. 2,85, 385, 423 De 35 592s

Aoyw Oewpntos 439 N. 3, 446 n. I, 3,
453 . 2, 545-54, 591, 592-

pravov 77.

pavorns 16 n. 4.

péyeOos 284.0. 5, 297 0. 2, 315 0.5.
peiypwa 40, 539 ff.

perdBaots 285, 448, 591, 594.
perdbeats 355.

peraxdopia (7a) 343, 362, 467 Nn. I.
prerdotaots 326 nN. 1, 364, 365.
peréwpa (7d) 253, 258, 367,423,425 0. 3.
pigs 347, 552-4.

pripn 246 0. 3, 557-

poipa 36, 39, 48, 50, 543.

popta 301, 545, 550.

pd8os 261 n. 3.

vaotds 78, 117.

vonos 172, 246 N. 3, 423 D. 3, 424 0. I,
557, 561.

vopos (= convention) 105, 165, 178,
n. 8, 292, 5113 (= law) 209 n. 2,°3;
210 Nem, ge

vovs 40, 56 n. 3, 57, 160, 161 n. 1, 181
Nn. 3, 195 0.5, 319, 414, 425 ene
546 ff., 566 n. 1, sor.

SyKos 156 N. 1, 286, 342, 405, 577 ff.
Opoeidera 446 n. 1, 451, 589.
Oporouepera 35, 453 n.2, 538 ff.
Spoudrntes 453, 588, 589.

~~ 3.

Dor’

GREEK WORDS

Sparés 308 n. 1, 561, 565.
Ope€is 201 N. 4, 204 0. 5, 495, 520 n. 3.
ovaia 117, 177, 345 N. 3, 391.

mdfos 105, 164, 168, 189, 238 n. 1, 248—
50, 266 n. 1, 270, 306 n. 5, 381, 431,
485, 486, 498, 527, 560, 586, 587.

maduos 133 N. I, 331 N. 3, 332, 339.

mdAats 407,

mapeyKAivew 317 nN. 2.

mapéykNois 317 N., 323 N. I.

mapeyKAuTiKH 316 N. 3.

mapov (7d) 560,

mépas (= minima pars) 286, 299, 315,
(= limit) 495 n. 4, 578.

meptAnmros 314.0. 4.

mepimaAagis 88.

mepimaAdocecOar 133 Nn. I.

mrepimrexeaOar 86 n. 3, 345.

mepuTAoKy} 331 D. 3, 339, 341, 345.

mA€eKTLKOS 331 1. 3, 339.

mAnyy 131 N. 4, 290 n., 328.

mAHO0s 94, 124. 6, 297 n. 2.

mrAnpys 78, 281, 284 n. 2.

mvedua 388 ff.

mToKtApos 495.

mourns 284.N. 5, 391.

mopos 348 Nn. 3.

mpodnros 253, 422.

mpornus 238, 245-7, 269, 306, 319, 419,
440, 441, 448, 484 n. 1, 486, 557 ff.,
562, 568, 570, 572, 576, 591.

mpévota 50, 474, 475,479 N. I.

mpoodogaldpevov 254, 334 N. 2, 372, 422
HT.

mpooxpivecba 548.

mpoopevov 254, 266 n. 1, 269, 372, 422,
560, 564, 571.

puopes (pv0uds) 79, 102 n. 6, 168 n. 3.

odpé 486 n. 1, 487, 491 n. 6, 498 n. 1,
500 n. 2.

aonpetov 258, 371, 423, 590 0. 2.

onperodabat 424, 560.

gots 940. 4.

OTepua 39, 343, 344 N. 7, 537 ff.

oreydlecOar 331 1. 3, 339.

oréyalov (7d) 340, 350, 589.

arepeuriov 243 N. 3, 244.0. 1, 257, 48,
560, 571.

607

orotxeiov (= element) rr n. 2, rg n. 3,
29, 453 M. 2, 552, 553 (= first prin-
ciple), 336, 502.

ovyxKpivecBat 542 n. 3, 549.

ovyKpiots 38, 39, 89 n. 1, 2722815. Z4Ns
943 ff.,.589 ni 1,

ovpPeBnKds 105, 140, 30r, 303 N. I, 307,
308 n. I, 353, 560, 562.

ouppévew 94 n. 6, 136, 345 n. 3.

ovpperpnors 490.

ouppmerpia 192 N. 4, 195 n. 6.

ovppukis 38, 545.

oupmdbera 405, 418.

ovuTTwpA 301, 304, 306 n. Seva sas
357, 387, 399.

obrOcas 424, 425, 427, 545, 552.

ovvilno.s 412 and n. 6..

avoracts 414, 440, 566.

ovorna 347.

oxfpwa 80, 127 n, 2, 284n. 5.

oxnuatiois 288 n. 4,

odpa (odpara) 281, 289 n. 6, 297 n. 2,
298 N. 4, 301 N. 4, 303 N. 4, 345 n. 3,
385, 487 n. 3.

Takis 80, 89 n. 2, 139i Ni. 15, 305,

Taos 412.

TaXOS 314. N. I, 335 N. 1.

TEKUNpLov 258, 423.

TOmos II7, 119, 294, 298 n. 4, 299.

Tpom7 79, 168. °

Tuxn 51, 121, 187, 197 N. 4, 317 n. 2,
325 n. 3-8.

Surv 95.

bmépBacts 449.
bmepoxy 130 n. 8, 144,
bmoAnibis 441. :

fawopevoy 62, 181 n. 3, 182 n. 1, 259
N. 5,265,284. 5, 317N.,422, 425 N, 3.

davracia 164, 242, 244 N. 3, 249 n. 2,
410, 414, 417, 439 N. 3, 560.

ddvracpa 381.

pavracpudes 560, 565.

pavraoriny (€miBodry) 254 n. 1, 421, 560,
572, 573.

d0oyyos 268.

d0opa 89 n. 1, 341.

pornos 172, 182 n. 1, 196, 197 n. 4,
494, 506.

guaoroyia 217, 503.

608

vos (= nature of things, ultimate
matter), 10, 15 DoeA, 7 Latent or 04,
1gO N. 3, 227, 2S; qccateeyene,
439 0. 3.

— (= nature opposed to chance, con-
vention, education, &c.), 105, 115,
187 Nn. 3,192.7, 197N. 9,198 Nn. 1, 2,
202 0. I, 267,381) 490 Mat so, 532.

— avadys (= space), 279, 294 N. 3, 303.

INDEX II

xia 166, 7 Le
Xpdvos 314 N. 4, 315, 334-
xapa 294.

eGdos 422 Ni. I.

yuyn 57, 101, 156, 160, 161 n. I, 173,
181 0. 3, 194 Ds 4, 5, 195 No 1, 6,202
N,.4, 202.0. 3, 2030. 3, 209.01, ay aa0s
384, 498 n. I, 505 0. 4.

III. PASSAGES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO

AELIAN
Hist. Nat. xii. 16: 155.
XH. LS Lees
AETIUS
Pgs. U4 US.
1. 3. 4: 17.
1. 3. 5! 363 37» 538, 542s 545s 550 554:
1. 3. ae 131, 132, 284, 290 n.
i. 4. fee 143-
i. A ? 94.
i. 7. 16: 177.
1. 7. 34! 439 D- 3, 443, 453, 591-
i 2 eng ka ens =
i E2105 02059032.
i. 14.4: 555.
ios. 82 COS me te
Ree Ge ire
TE ORE QS, He)
22270 > AQ:
Tyee 0, Pos
li. 4. 9: 148.
il. 15. 6: 98
Il. 20507 5 50
HM SOG cE bike
Ie) DOC iste
11) 35995) 210e
ili. 3. 10: 68 n. 3, 100.
Hi agepure wigs

il. 02s ena oe

NTIS aye in

EVioctetea rags

IV. 3c) 0: 202.

LVc Zul aieEOns

IV. 3. IE: 389, 390) 391, 585.
We Sle HAS HEP:

iv. 4.6: 161, 402.

iv. 4. 7: 156, 159.

IV. 5. I: 161 D. I.

iv. 7. 4: 160.
2: 238 N. 2, 420N. 4.
Gi 10d, 172,
IO: 104, 172, 423 0. 3, 424, 561.
Oe foie
8: 105.
14: 59.

Versace

iV. 19. 13: 170, 17.

Vv. 19. 6: 154.

Vii 20g s ar
AGATHEMERUS

dot. St Deze
ALBERTUS Macnus

De Lapide, i. 1. 4: 155, 156.
ALEXANDER APHRODISIENSIS

De Anima, ii. 22, p. 156: 509.

De Fato, 31, p. 100: 475.

De Mixtura, 2, p. 591: 137-

in Arist. de Sensu, B. 438 a: 104, 165,

406.
Metaph. AS 4. 985 Beles
n. 6, 84, 86.

A. 6. 988 a: 15.
Meteor. A. 6. 324 b: 152.
An 8.345 aceE See
Quaestiones, ii. 23, p. 137: 153-
AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS
XXX. 4. 3) 234.
ANAXAGORAS
Fragments:
Diels B. 1: 40, 543, 545,
23 At.
3? 35> 36 37> 537 D- 7, 5439
545+
4, § 1: 41, 538, 542, 5479
5485 555- |
4, § 2: 545, 546.

PASSAGES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 609

ANAXAGORAS (cont.) De Sensu, 2. 437 b: 54.
Fragments: 2. 438 a: 166,
Diels B. 6: 37, 537 n. 7, 543) 545 2.438 b: 406.
N. 2, 546 n. 2. 3: 439 a: 406.
9: 40, 547. 4.442 a: 162.
10: 537. Hist. Animal. ix. 39. 623: 155.
RL? 547. . Metaphys. A. 3. 983 b: 13.
12: 40, 41. A. 3. 984 a: 34, 553.
13:41, 547) 548. A. 4.985 b: 66, 68, 75, 77,
14: 41, 548. 78, 79, 84.
Tg: 4%. A. 5. 986 b: 24.
16: 41. I. 5. 1009 b: 172, 182.
21 a: 62. 4. 6. 1016 b: 450.
ANONYMI Z. 13. 1039 a: 137.
Hermippus, 122: 176. I. 2. 1054 a: 450.
ARISTOTLE A. 2. 1069 b: 15
De Anima, A. 2. 404 a: 102, 133, 160, A. 6. 1071 b: 84
£73, 081. Meteor. B. 1. 354: 99
404 b: 57. B. 7. 365 a: 153
AOR USERS, KY, 102, Phys. A. 4. 187 a: 15
156, 157. A. 5. 188 a: 118
3. 406 b: 157. B. 4. 195 b: 121, 139, 142.
5- 409 a: 157, 158. B. 4. 196 a: 139, 142.
AL Waterss 26. Br aato7 as GAs,
B.7. 419 a: 166. Bs. Tos be gx.
De Caelo, A. 7.275: 71. TrA 208 As 7 Ty 553.
B. 13. 295 a: 95. T5204 bi: 15.
I’. 2.300 b: 82 n. 6, 132 A. 7. 24a 134.
Exp 3e 302 A242, Sees ARRIAN
4. 303 a: 80, 86, 88. Epictet. Dissert. i. 23. 5: 521.
A. 2. 308 a: 144. ATHENAEUS
309 4: 130, 138, 144, | Epit. ii. 46: 112.
145. Xil. 546 €: 487, 488, 492, 494 Nn. 2.
6. 313 a: 94. Xll. 547 a: 508.
De Gen. Animal. E. 8.789 b: 133. Xili. 588 a: 504.
De Gen. et Corr. A. 1. 315 b: 77, 81, | AuLus GELLIUS
82, 89, 105, 183. il, 8324s.
A. 2. 316 a: 168.
Aw7 ff. 124. CENSORINUS
Aare I2RiDs L285 162 4.9: 154.
H-12,85 0". CICERO
A. 8. 324 b: 70. De Comp. Verb. 24: 115.
A. 8. 3254: 68, 70, De Divin.ii. 17. 40: 451, 467 n. 1,
82, 86, 87, 88, 125. 468.
Ai 3. 32/5b: 82, 124, W266 57 Lsins
177. WGAs D3G ict Se
A.8. 326 a:130,144. | De Fato, 10. 22: 317.
A. 8. 326 b: 134. 20. 46: 131, 134.
B. 6. 334.4: 50. De Finibus, i. Bg 209.
De Mundo, 4. 395: 412. i, 6. 17: 130.
De Respir. 4. 471 b: 158. i, 6. 19: 317.

3307 10g

610

CICERO (cont.)

De Finibus i. 6. 20:
i. 7, 228
» 9. 303

150.
235.
423 N. 3, 485,

i
i
i
i
i
1
i

lQaaias
1 Ay AM oils

1. 15. 493 510.
§19..622¢3.

» 20.1015 it oo

+ Qe Terao

= DSi n7ipied Oallends
Li 2One ze RUOG

- 27. 88: 507.
130.98) 498)

v. 29. 87:
De Nat. Deor.i. 8. 18: 362 n. 9, 467 |

484 n. 1.

192.

N. 1, 473.

aOn22 a AvAs

+ 16. 43, 44: 439, 440.

» 17-44: 440 0. 4, 557-

. 18. 46: 468.

. 18. 47: 468.

- 18. 48: 591.

. 19. 49: 148 N. 3, 251,

ASO) iy Cp A ae

61, 470, 593-

1g. 50: 442, 461-7,

468 n. 5.

2 574s

: 141.

Suge is

Behe als oe

PSA SO Mut.

- 10534450. 2,449,
456, 470.

> 39 LOS: AAO.

+ 38. 106: 470.

- 39-109: 448 n. 6,
456 n. I, 462, 466,
470 0. 3, 594-

-41. 114: 459.

PAG UZO sm 7/7514 23's

+ 44. 123: 438, 450,

_ 478.

EDs ENO LSE 2 ae

ll. 65. 162: 477.

tte ete ete ete ee ee te

pnt bee bee ee be be me
Te jens CE Se eS .
N
wn

be ee ee

me ete eee

ee

De Officiis, iii. 33. 117: 497.
De Oratore, i. 11. 49: 115.

* Fragments marked with an asterisk are quoted from Stobaeus, Ec/. Bks.

li, ili, iv.

INDEX III

In Pisonem, 16. 37: 488.
28. 69: 532.

Orator, 20. 67: 115.

Pro Archia, 7. 16: 198 n. 4.

Tusc. Disp. i.

CLEMENS

Paed. i. 6: 202.
Protr. 68: 175.

Strom. i.

ii.
Hi. oy Kathe

Rea eo

-Tg0 20s"

li. 139: 189.

- 417: 489.

- 151: 198.

~ 88: £36.

« BASF es

1. 32% LEG, Tate =

SURE

DEMOCRITUS
Fragments:
Diels B. 2: 196.

IO. 225 391.
1242.
: 141,
: 487.
250s H. 2,
> 493, 494-
- 114: 112.
ALEXANDRINUS

ee

64: 67.
4: 245, 247,419, 560, 568.

*3: 199, 210.

4: 189, 193.
6-8: 114, 178.
9: 178, 183.
II: 180.

Ist ora.

Loy.
43, 45, *46: 203.

7

PASSAGES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 611

DEMOCRITUs (cont.)
Fragments:
Diels B. *49: 211.

*88: 204.

92, 94, 96, 97: 208.

98, 99: 207.

100, ror: 208.

102: 196.

103: 207.

105: 195.

106: 208.

107: 207.

10g: 208.

I1IO, Irr: 206.

117: 178.

*119: 187; 197.

125: 179.

140: 192.

157: 210.

159: 201.

164: 94, 171.

165: 163.

166: 176.

Gy sir92-

PE7Ia Ags:

*r742 192;

*176: 187.

*178: 194.

*179, *180: 198.

*181: 210.

*182: 192.

*183: 198.

*186: 207.

187: 194.

*188: 189.

*189: 192.

*IQ1: 195, 199.

*194: 195.

#197: 187.

*199-206: 197.
3307 ‘

2

Diels B. *200, *202: 197.

Dioporvus

*205, *206: 205.
#207)! 194,
*208: 200.
*210: 187.
*211: 200.
*213, "ara: 202,
"215, *216: 193.
*219: 204.
"224: 201.
*227, "228, "229+ 204.
"230: 30),
Fag gnr gos
*234: 200.
*235: 194.
T2ens2or.
*240, *241, *243: 201.
*242: 1975 202.
*2452 209.
"2402208
*ZAYS LEO) 20K.
*2482 250.
*249: 211.
#250; "2650 21 U6
*2'521012 20;
MZ G Ato Dis
T2552 i.
#2562 202%
*257-9: 209.
*261: 208.
#262: 209.
*2642 203:
S205: 20:6
*269: 187.
*270: 206.
Lar Sy pra OY Jo
"27302 "27d "29 se aa7e,
*277, 4278, ©2702 206.
*280: 207.
*284: 201.
*285: 196 Nn. 4.
*286: 196.
#291, "2943 200%
*295, *296: 205.
SICULUS

MV IE? 1r2
XX. 43: 561.
DioGEnEs LAERTIUS (see also Epicurus)
1p Ds 207.5
ll, I: 14, 99.

ix. 8, 9:

Rok 2

20.

612

DroGENES LAERTIUS (cont.)
ix. 30: 66, 67, 75, 90.

AG ib oJ
: 109, ITO; TIX.

IX, 38: T10, IDE.

MMM MM MMM OM MO

2) LOO se igs

II7, 119, 124, 126, 132, 146,

133, 138, 190, I9I, 192.

5 58 225.

6: 234, 487, 505.

92 5172 532°

10: 478.

II’ 224, 517.

13: 66, 217 0. 2, 227, 269.

14: 218.

16-21: 517.

22: 497.

30: 236.

- 31: 235, 238, 248, 250, 251, 267,
417, 419, 425, 447, 486, 559, 560,
568, 572, 573:

X. 32: 255, 415, 420 Nl. 2, 423 N. 3;

x

1 HMMM RO MOM

4245 427, 440, 517, 591.

- 33: 246, 269, 419) 557-

- 342 249, 253, 255, 486.

IL7? 423 D. 3, SOL, 515.
118: 506, 518, 520, 521.
120: 423 N. 3, 519, 520.
121: 518.

135° 477-

136: 493.

137: 483, 500.

. 138: 508, 509.

DIOGENES OENOANDENSIS

(ed.

William) Fragments
x, col. ili: 382.

xxiil, col. ii: 316.

xxv, col. ili: 509.

Xxxili, col. ili: 318.

oa UE X Ii

EMPEDOCLES
Fragments:
Diels B. 2:

£32 30>

17: 28, 319 32, OI.
21 tgs

27, 20: G1e

30: 32, 50:

31, 359.37: 32-

S72) 59 ae

103 2%I.
105, 108: 55.
109: 54.
EPICURUS
Ep. i (D.L. x) § 35: 561-
§ 36: 562, 572.

§ 37: 232, 236, 259
N. 4, 267, 268, 558.

§ 38: 119, 227, 232,
236,241,250,2550.,
258 N. 3, 259, 2
267, 269, 275, 343,
402, 411, 416 n. 2,
424, 431, 558, 559
560, 561, 562 n. 3,
564, 567, 568, 570,
571, 573-

§ 39: 273, 278, 279)
294, 298, 423 0. 3-

§ 40: 281, 294, 423
N. 3.

: 281, 284, 296,
2975 325 2.

§ 42: 288, 298, 313
nieiae

1 820, 310, Sais;
331, 339 345-

§ 45: 361, 423 D. 3,
467.

_

7

PASSAGES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 613

EPICURUs (cont.) Ep. i (D.L. x) § 67: 307, 386, 395,
Ep. i (D.L. x) § 46: 410, 314, cee 402.

407, 408, 412 N. 3.
§ 47: 310, 332, 335,

348 n. 3, 409, 446 |

Ds

§ 48: 408, 414.

§ 49: 264 n. 1, 406,
AIT, 416 nN. 2, 417,
423 0. 3.

§§ 50-2: 236.

§ 50: 254, 257, 402,
410, 411, 416 Nn. 2,
422, 559, 560, 566,
571, 573-

QeRES SrA, 258 mm." 35
259, 402, 411, 414,
4r6)N.-2) 427, 422,
428, 559, 560, 564
nN. I, 566, 568, 569,
571) 573-

§ 52: 249, 405, 416, |

420; 577-

§ 53: 249, 404, 405,
577:

§ 54: 282, 284, 289,
290, 291, 355, 578.

§§ 55-9: 73, 79) 285.

§ set 287.

§ 56: 81, 282 n. 1, 283,
342, 448, 578.

§ 572 § 58: 234, 578.

§ 59: 592.

§ 60: 83.

GS J6rs 82590295, 200,
310, 311, 314, 329,
330 332, 337) 348
#53

NO2sP25T aN.) 5, 293
N. I, 296, 310, 315,
333) 402, 416 n. 2,
429, 446, 559, 560,
563, 567, 568, 569,
573> 576, 592.

§ 63: 385, 388, 390
N. 4) 391, 394, 396,
423 D3:

§ 64: 396, 399.

§ 65: 340, 396, 400.

§ 66: 340.

> 301, 308, 423
Tia t's

§ 69: 302, 562, 578.

§ 70: 304, 562.

S 72267, 305.

§ 73: 305, 306, 364,
423 nN. 3.

§ 74: 343, 362.

§ 75: 267, 380, 423

my te

§ 76: 267, 369, 380,
A23 The3s

§ 77: 369.

§§ 78-80: 260 n. 4.

§§ 78-82: 233.

§ 7829233, 416 n. 2,
504.

§ 80: 371.

§ 83: 561.

Ep. ii (D.L. x) § 84: 423 n. 3.

§§ 85-8: 258 n. 3.
§ 85: 262, 368, 423

ile Qe

§ 86: 260, 265, 368.

§ 87: 10,259, 260n. 4,
Hope, QUPOy Qe eh.

§ 885259; 200) Deed,
860, 362, 375.

§ 89: 66, 326, 343,
362, 364, 367.

S 904260, 1. 2, 303%

§ gt: 258, 371.

§ 92, § 93: 260 n. 2.

§ 94: 373.

§ ror, S102 i974.

§ 104: 424 Nn. 3.

§ nro 42gonas:

\ 1963 260m. 48

Ep. iit (D.L. x) § 122: 504.

§§ 123-7: 233.

§ 123: 438, 440) 471,
502, 591 nN. 4.

§ 124 s4Ar, 502, 503.

§ 26). 503-

§ 127: 493) m. 2.

§ 128: 483, sor n. 6,
Bos.

§ 129: 486 n. 3, 489,
497-

614 INDEX III
EPIcurRus (cont.) Sent. Vat. (C.B.) xxxili: 507.
Ep. iii (D.L. x) § 130: 490, 491, 532. | XXXIV #, 519.
§ixgr: 325, 524. xli: 505.
§'xg22i4ggume 4) 506, xlvii, xlvili: 507.
509, 524. las 520;
§ 133: 325, 497. li: 518.
§ 134: 318, 325, 438, Ivili: 516.
506. Lex: 522.
§ 135: 507. Leeann,
Kbpia Adga (apud D.L. x, §§ 139-54). Ixvi: 518.
1: 233,438, 471, 502. Ixxvil: 532.
1st2g5,ROos lxxvili: 518.
lil: 249, 495. Ixxxi: sor.
Iv: 497. Fragments (C.B.) 2: 512.
Vi 509 n. 5. 3: 477.

V1: 501 nN. 7, 511. 10: 487.

Vil: 515. Il: 491 0. 6, 500.
Vili: 489 n. 2. 14: 279.

ix: 495. Sas 19: 478.

XA TOWN 62s LL AID.

Bale Fels) 24: 504.

Ell: 490, 504. 263 224.

XV: 496. 30: 497, 517-
XV1: 325, 423 nN. 3, 506 n. 4. R29 TBE.
XVil: 513. R32 223.

xviii: 416 N. 2, 491, 495. | 445 223; 220.

XIX: 423 N. 3, 495. | ZuN 2255 522.

XX: 416 N. 2, 423 1. 3 494, 507. 37> 39% 224.
Md Agr. 40: 225.
Xxil: 236. AI: 224.

' XXili: 236, 240. Pe pee Ne
XXIV: 236, 240, 250, 252, 253, 44: 498.
255 N., 416, 560, 564, 568, Ag: 532.
57°, 571) 573- SO s1 8.
XXV: 505. 56: 469.
XXIK: 493 0. 2, 3. 57: 478.
ERX? 3.792) 5128 58: 477.
pico ot 5120. 1, 513. j 59: 488.
SMT STS 93052 62: 489 n. 2.
B8EN XXXV: 512. 65: 497-
VE 5 Ech 66: 505.
XXXVI? 514, 517. 67: 496.
22 SSB EP) FO 532).
xl: 501 n. 7, 511, 519 n. 4. 732 SOL.
Sent. Vat. (C.B.) Xt 423 n. 3. 74: 423 N. 3.
se aie 77% 325.
prilisgar. 79: 508.
XXU1: 520. 80: 513.
a avicigs Ol 8r: 513, 514.
2S: NENS Tye) 822 y12 ms 3.

XXVill: 518. 84, 85, 86: 516.

in

PASSAGES QUOTED

EPIPHANIUS
Adv. Haer. iii. 2. 9: 193.
ETYMOLOGIUM GENUINUM
S.V. yAadé: 155.
S.V. decxeAov: 166 n. I.
ETYMOLOGIUM ORION
253) $2 113, 196.
EvusEBIUS
Chron. Cyrill. c. Ful. 1. 13: 109.
Prep. Evang. xiv. 21: 487.
XIV. 23'y 82, 726,

XIV. 27: 450 n., 473.

XV. 5: 480.

GALEN
De Elem. Sec. Hipp. i. 2: 126.

De Facultat. Natur.i. 14: 376 n. 2.
De Medic. Empir. 1259. 8: 178 n. 8,

179, 184.
Hist. Philos. 3: 67.
7: 130.
GNOMOLOGION Cop. Par.
1168 f. 1154: 225, 477, 516.

HERACLITUS
Fragments:

Bywater 43: 22.

Diels B. 1: 19, 59.
10: 19.
12:20 n. 4.
£7: FS.
30: 20, 21, 49.
SUZ Tr
40: 18.
46: 23 n. 8, 59.
Sts 53+ 19-
60: 20.
go: 21.
91: 19.
94: 21, 49.
Iola: 59.
107: 58.
108: 18, 22.
126s 22.
129: 18.

HERCULANENSIA

Fragmenta (W. Scott), pp. 167-73,

198: 469.
Pap. 176, col. 18: 225, 522.

am

OR REFERRED TO

Volumina, i. vi. 1: 480.
i. vi. 13, 14: 469.
i. vi. 13-17: 469.
li. 1, 127: 224.
ii. ii. 107, 108: 478.
HERMIAS
in Plat. Phaedr. 76: 520.

| Hesycurus

$.V. eveoTw: 192.
HIERONYMUs
Comm. in Isaiam, xi. 38: 500.

| Hippocrates

29. fit: r6n'ny irs

| HrprpoLtytTus

* To save space references are mostly
_- which the quotations made will be found.

Refat 2.6. 13 14, 7.
DOuzal te; 48s
ee ee Ale oy
i. 12: 68, 82 n. 6,85.
i. 13: 118, 132, 146, 149.
1 TANS
Philosoph. 22. 3: 3625 451, 467.
HORACE
Ars Poet. 296: 114.
Ep. i. iv. 16: 488.
1. Vi. t> 193.
ii. i. 194: 112.

IAMBLICHUS
Protr. 4. 56: 561.
Vit. Pythag. 14: 64.

JULIAN

Epe37 2 Ti2.
JUVENAL

Sat xlearirn2.

LACTANTIUS
De IraDet, ws. 58473.
nee Geely ha oleae ie
Inst. Div. iii. 17. 16: 474.
Wl. £7. 2209 Gace
I UK AQ ESL Leen LO.
Vil, 8. 38 474 te Ae
Vil, 7. Oi G4, AVA Deed.
LEUCIPPUS
Fragment, Diels B. 2: 68, 85.
LUCRETIUS
*De Rerum Natura:
i. 59: 343.
Vaal.

615

given to sections of the poem, within

616

LUCRETIUS (cont.)
*De Rerum Natura
1, 140: §17.
146-264: 82, 120, 276, 277, 343,
5 kis
358-69:
37-97
418-48: 279, 294.
449-82: 303-7.
483, 4: 281. |
551-64: 283.
599-634: 72 n. 3, 282 n, 1, 285,
286, 350, 475, 578.
635-920: 10, 264n. 1.
635-704: II N. 3, 20, 23, 58, 277,
348. |
705-829: LI 0.145927, 335 725 578-
830-920: 35, 37 42, 72, 82, 344,
537 5452 555~
951-87: 297, 313 n. 2.
~ 988-1007: 298.
_ 1008-51: 141, 297, 298, 352, 3595

290.
280.

Nip Mf Tale, te
1052-82: 311 N. 4, 319 D. I.
ll. 62-293: 310.
80-141: 133, 290 N. 1, 310, 311,

328, 331 1. 2, 332, 333 339 3405
346, 348.

142-64: 315.

165-6: 328.

169-81: 4740. 1.

184-215: 328.

216-93: 129, 289, 290 Nn. 1, 311,
313, 314, 316-20, 327 nN. 2, 434.

294-307: 278, 463.

308-32: 332.

342: 576.

381-477: 163, 331 N. 2, 342 n. 2,
345> 346, 354, 389, 396, 404,
579:

478-521: 81, 127, 287 n. 3, 288,
389 n. 8.

522-80: 288, 463, 464 n. 2.

646-51: 472.

686: 579.

730-864: 291, 292, 308, 344, 354—
6, 393, 575) 576.

865-990: 155, 2925 323, 3445 357,
3585 393, 486 n. T, 583.

TOAAS7 > 55a

1048-66: 326, 361.

INDEX III

il.

iil. 1

- 46-109: 407, 410.

- 55-109: 326, 367.

1077-89: 361, 462 n. 4, 575. ‘.

1105-74! 147) 351, 352, 363, 367,
462 N. 4, 464 N. 3, 465 N., 475,
491.

8-24: 467 n. 1, 468.

31-93: 402, 471 N. I, 502 Ne 2.

94-135: 385, 387, 388, 402, 403.
136-76: 352, 385, 402, 403, 431,

4325 582, 585.

177-230: 344, 388 nN. 2, 395, 579-

231-322: 162, 388-95, 397, 398
N. I, 399, 582-5.

323-49: 394 N. I; 399.

370-95: 157, 158 1. 3, 396, 586.
396-416: 400, 403, 583.
416-829: 401.

434-44: 396 n. 3.

541: 579+
5553396 0. 3.

558-79: 350 3945 397 0. 4.
634-69: 160, 400 Nn. 3.

679-712: 397.

806-23: 452, 453.

830-1094: 112, 148, 401, 503, 513.

129-142: 414.

176-229: 409.

244-55: 413.

379-468 : 253.

469-79: 240, 419 n. 6.

563-4: 405.

615-72: 404.

673-705: 172, 405.

722-47: 172, 414, 415.

749-76: 414, 415, 416 n. 2, 417,
Sogn. 1.

777-817: 1735 Ald, 414, ALG Mae
417, 418, 565, 575.

823-57: 476.

858-76: 491, 579.

877-906: 432, 434.

1036-277: 344, 520.

110-45: 419 nN. 6, 441.

146-94: 247, 416, 419 n. 6, 439,
446, 449, 468, 474.

195-234: 474.

235-415: 147, 367, 389, 395, 452,
462 n. 4.

416-508: 344, 363, 364, 365.

509-770: 258 nor.

i
A

PASSAGES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO 617

*De Rerum Natura: TTepi bedv, col. r: 480.
V. 526-33: 261 n. 2, 463. col. 9: 448.
534-63: 365, 366. Rhet. fr. incert. ii. 48: 218.
564-91: 258, 372. lil 7: 59 n. 8.
614-49: 149. iv. 10: 218.
795-50: 373, 579. | apud Vol. Herc. ii. 127: 224.
772-1457: 376. iv. 93: 234.
783-924: 154, 376, 377, 378. | PHILOPONUS
925-1029: 378, 379, 512. in Arist. De Anima, Prooem.: 102.
1028-90: 247, 376, 378, 382, 419 | A. 2. 404a: 160, 182 n. 1.
n. 6. | A. 2. 4oga; rey,
TOgI—160: 378, 379, 496, 517. | PLaTo
1161-240: 176, 251,273, 378,438, | Leges, x. 889b: 51.
439, 441, 443) 447, 470, 477, | Phaedo, 97b: 546 n. 5.
479. | Respublica, 357b: 493 n. 2.
1241-457: 380. Timaeus, 45b: 54, 167, 406.
Vi. 29-31: 326. ' 46a: 406.
68-78: 480. 62d: 312.
160-378: 344, 349, 375, 389, 583. 67c: 406.
379-422: 375. PLINIUs
423-50: 21 n. 3. Nat. Hist. ii. 14: 176.
497-526: 344. XVUli. 341: TIO.
848-78: 344, 375. PLUTARCH
879-905: 344, 376. Adversus Coloten, 3. 1108: 226.
906-1089: 376. 4. T1108: 118.
4. 1109: 271, 272.
MELIssus So LILO; ey) 12K)
Fragments: 128.
Diels B. 1: r19. $2 11x ts 292 ens,
3: 76. 3552479, 518.
Ty S75 7A . LO. S102" 447.
8: 44. EO, LETOs 36m.
METRODORUS 28s LIr7: 224.
Fragment (Korte), 543: 460. 19. 1118: 238.
20. 1118: 389, 391,
OLYMPIODORUS 431, 581.
in Plat. Phileb. 274: 491. 25. 1121: 256, 257.
ORIGENES 27. 1122: 485, 486
Contra Celsum, v. 47: 510. N. I, 492.
27 TUS sicad Te
PAPYRUS Biatiag tO.
Hibeh (Grenfell and Hunt), 16: 153. 82, E2682 10.
PARMENIDES BA» FI2YRNG 12.
Fragments: An seni sit ger. res pub. 5: 49x.
Diels B. 1: 24, 60. Comm. Not. 45.2, 5: 301 D. 4.
43102 25. Consol. ad Apollonium, 15. 109: 503.
8: 26, 50. Contr. Epic. Beat. 2. 1087: 498.
PHILODEMUS 3. 1088: 495.
ITepi cdceBeias, 28: 480. 4. 1088: 499, 500.
83: 453. 4. 1089: 491.
II0: 480 n. 4. 5. 1089: 499.

7ys yy

618 INDEX III
PLUTARCH (cont.) | Sexrus EMPIRICUS
Contr. Epic. Beat. §. 1090: 494. adv. Math. 1. 3: 222.
6. 1090; 512 N. 3. 1. 49% 235:
8. 1092: 479. Vil? 177+
13. 1095: 234. Vil. 90> 62.
15. 1097a: 518, 519. Wid, 116: 171.
Te GOONS 22a vil. 122: 60.
17. 1098: 488. Vue 126: 23, 59+
18. 1099: 499, 516. Wil 0S Se 178.
23. 1103: 497. vil. 136: 165, 178, 183.
28. 1105: 518. Vil. 137% 178.
De Audiendis poet. 14, 37: 516. vil. 138: 180.
De Fac. in Orbe Lunae, 16. 929¢: 151. vil, 140: 183, 188.
De Fratr. Amor. 16. 487: 222. VU. 203: 239, 244, 249, 250
De Libid. et Aegr., fr. 2: 201. , ae.
De Occulte Vivendo, 4. 1129: 492 0. 2. Vil. 206-9: 256.
De Prim. Frig. 7. 947: 17. Vil. 207: 244.
De Sollertia Anim. 7. 964: 317, 327- Vil! 212: 255.
Epit. iv. 13: 406. Vii. 213: 259.
Plac. Philos. i. 3. 26: 289. Vil. 2165 253.
1.7.73 472. : Vil. 267: 400.
iv. 23: 586. Vil. 349: 161 n. I.
Strom. 2: 15, 92. Vil. 369: 179.
Quer OrmeyAs wWili. 6: 181.
5: 265159. Vill. 9: 237, 255.
7: 120, 150. Vill. 63: 415, 566.
Vit. Crassi, 2: 412 n. 6. IX. 19: 176.
Vit. Pyrrhi, 20: 516. IX. 24: 175.
PORPHYRIUS IX. 25: 439 D. 3.
ad Marcellam, 27, p. 207: 532.- ix. 26: 591.
28, p. 208: sor. IX, 42: 439 N. 3.
30, Pp. 209: 498. 1X. 44, 45, 46: 591.
31, Pp. 209: 505. X. 219: 306.
PROCLUS XK, 228% ZOgih eas
in Remp. ii. 113: 113, 159. xi. 96: 484 n. I.
X1. 169: 233.
Pyrrh. Hypot. i. 33: 62, 540.
SCHOLIA SIMPLICIUS
in Arist. Eth. Nic. iii. 13: 493. in Arist. de Caelo, A. 7. 725: 79, 82
in Dionys. Thrac. p. 482: 170. rie ;
in Epic. Ep. i, § 67: 403, 431. A.8.121: 311, 0.4.
Ep. i, § 74: 362. A. 10.2792 2107,
K.A. 1: 442, 446, 592. 127, 132, 136,
K.A. xxx: gor. 345.
Mais is Ser, A. (10. 280m erex;
de Beneficiis, iv. 4.1: 477. 148.
Ep. 7. 11: 225. I. 1.299: 128, 130,
2A 23 ROD. 328.
88. 43: 218. : Pf. 2. 300b283,.531,
92. 6: 492. 134.
106. 5: 301 N. 4. | in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (22. 27)s/245

PASSAGES QUOTED OR REFERRED TO

SIMPLICIUS (cont.)

in Arist. Phys. A. 2. 184 (23. 33)3 2

49-
A. 2, 184 (24. 13):

48

A. 2. 184 (24. 26):

17, 48.

An on 184 (29.2):

16,
16,

36,

37> 537> 538) 541,

Geos 54 aks

A. 2. 184 (28. 4):
67, 75, 78, 81, 82 |

MiGs Laz.

66, |

A. 2. 184 (28. 15): 118,

127, 128.

A.2. 184 (42. 10): 131;

134. #
A. 4. 187: 545.
B. 3. 195: 139.
B. 4. 196: 143.

TD. 4.203: 36, 537) 541,

5492 554+
2ZITS295.

- 2133 296.

= 2342-73, 78-

@NNNBSE
won rn Hn

STOBAEUS
Bed. i, 16.3: 54-

« 2922 S85, 376.
Yee UE dla ee
. 2652 71, 130; 133-

li, il, iv (see Democritus): 187-212.

Floril. i. 39: 194.
Xvli. 23: 496.
XVil. 34: 224.
xlili. 139: 513, 514.
STRABO, XVi, Pp. 757: 64.
SuIpAs
s.v. Anpoxpitos: 109, III, 112.
s.v.’Emixoupos: 217.

THEMISTIUS
Paraphr. Arist. Phys. A. 4. 214:
n

-2

280

Zita 2a2g5O.

‘THEOPHRASTUS
De Caus. Plant. ii, 11.7: 155.
vi. 1. 6: 164.

De Sensu, 1: 52.
Be eal,
7* 539 54+
Sr 5g.
9:
LO, OLAS hs
ays 50%
28, 29: 56, 57.
30: 57-
| 49: 162, 163, 177.
50: 166, 167.
ere roy.
52: 166, 174, 411.
53? 174) 411.
54: 166.
Bigs 170; 172.
GOs X7Ls
3 ties
61: 130, 144, 168.
63: 164.
r28
65: 164.
67: 165.
69: 174.

TZETZES
Chil. ii. 980: 67.

XENOPHANES
Fragment, Diels B. 23: 24-

ZENO
Fragment, Diels B. 1, 2: 72.

619
