REPORT OF DR. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, AND OTHER COMMISSIONERS, charged by the King of France, with the examination of the animal magnetism (English translation of the Bailly report)
========================================================================
PUBLIC DOMAIN. London, 1785. English. Public domain scan (Internet Archive). Complete contemporary English translation of the 1784 Bailly report.

========================================================================

m v % 8 n *  LL N e * wy *% ä = .  v * tes n 2 4 * A 1  * » -  | * 4  ”  | 4 : n  "oy 5 -  * *

OF

Da. BENJAMIN FRANKLIN,  A | | AND OTHER |  COMMISSIONERS,  | e | |

K I N of F RAN C E,

.

"wired Tus BXAMINATION or run

ANIMAL. MAGNETISM,  6 Now PRACTISED AT PARIS.

TRANSLATED PROM THE FRENCH: N

4 8 |  HISTORICAL INTRODUCTION.

| | — INE

L O N D WM: N:  * FOR" J. JOHNSON, (vo. 52) r. PAUL'S  0 W a rand. . |

£4

£  To

.

\

HE ſubject of the following  pamphlet has excited the ex-  tremeſt attention in France, has for  years filled their Journals and Mer-  cures, and has employed ſome of their

beſt pens and their brighteſt wits.

By, ſome it has been applaud-  ed as the greateſt of philoſo-  phical diſcoveries, and by others de-

cried as the juggle of an unprinci-

pled impoſtor. The Engliſh nation

has too much. curioſity for every  thing that occupies the neighhour

kingdom, from whom we have long  ſince been uſed to receive the laws of  politeneſs. and etiquette, and who have  lately ſeemed to take the lead of us in  philoſophical diſcovery, for the pre-

ſent tranſlation not to prove an -ac-

r preſent to a large and reſpecC-  5 table

- 4 4 7 wing <4 <4 + * r * ig ,  2 : $4 | ; l #3. =  a . 4 .  W % * ws * mf " 10 4 N g *  4 1 - 5 - [

0 i

N

table claſs 9 our countrymen. It has  been thought proper, in order thatthe  moſt uninformed reader may find in  this little compilation, every ſpecies of  information upon the ſubject, to pre-  fix to it a brief account of the pro-  greſs of this .  NM. Meſmer, the inventor of the  animal magnetiſm, is a German phy-  ſician. The firſt thing by which  he diſtinguiſhed himſelf, appears to  have been the publication of a Dif-  ſertation upon the Influence of the  Stars on the Human Body, printed at  Vienna 1766, and publicly defended  by him as a theſis in that univerſity.  WS 1774 father Hehl, a German phi-  loſopher, ſtrongly recommended the  uſe of the loadſtone in the art of me-  dicine. M. Meſmer became very  early a convert to the principles of  this writer, and actually carried them  into practice with diſtinguiſhed ſuc-  ceſs. In the midſt however of his  attention to the utility” of the load-  tones

1 :  — EW. E y |?  | :

| Ronde, he was led- to the ad of  a a new ſetof principles, which he con-

ceived to be much more general in  their application and importance. In

conformity to theſe principles he laid

aſide the uſe of the loadſtone, and

proceeded with his cures in the method  which he afterwards publiſhed to the  world. This apoſtacy involved him

in a quarrel with father Hehl and the  celebrated Ingenhouz, by whom he  wy formerly: been patronized; and  heir credit in Vienna was extremely  high, and their exertions againſt him  indefatigable, his fyſtem almoſt im-

mediately ſunk into general diſrepute.

To parry their oppoſition he appeal-

ed in 1776 to the academy of ſciences

at Berlin. Here however his prin-  ciples were rejected as © deſtitute of  foundation and unworthy the ſmalleſt  attention.” - Undiſmayed by . theſe  important miſcarriages, he made a  progreſs through - ſeveral towns of  Germany, ſtill practiſing the methods

211 A 3 | of

3 * .. ̃ Üi.4ꝛæJ—̃˙k̃ bVupñ W ¼ d 22 on 5 mg  FIR a . * Fg 4 : 3, vo} ID  - % > mY o  ' . 9  >  . j 4  - * N P  e- .  %  %

ef the animal magnetiſm, and from  time to time publiſhing an account of

the cures he effected, which did not

fail to be followed by a detection from

his enemies. In the 'mears time, re-

ſolved, as it ſhould ſeem, if poſſible

not to deprive his country of the be-

1 onnaire des Merveilles de la Nature,  from which work many of the fob

—

nefits of ſo valuable a diſcovery, he

i teturned a ſecond time to Vienna, and

made another effay with no gone

| any than the former.

' Decided in his conduér by theſe

uninterrupted defeats, he left Germany  and arrived at Paris in the beginning

of the year 1778. Here one of the  irſt connexions he formed was with

M. A. J. 8. D., author of the Dicti-

lowing particulars are extracted. It

is obſerved by this writer, that * in  ſpite of the apparent cautiouſneſs and

reſerve of M. Meſmer, and even in

fpite of the little ſucceſs of his' firſt

* he r refuſe him

is , On

W

credit for fincerity 3 in his conduct, and  folidity in his reaſonings; and he was  convinced, that the failure did not  originate in the fault of his agent,  but the indiſpoſition of the ſubjects  upon which it was employed.“ In  April 1778, M. Meſmer retired to  Creteil with the patients he had col -

lected, and in a fe months almoſt all -

of them returned to Paris perfectly

reſtored, One of them in particular

was a paralytic, deprived of the uſe  of her limbs, and who now walked  with all the eaſe and firmneſs in the  world. In November M. A. J. 8. D.  introduced M. Meſmer to the houſe

of a family of diſtinction, and who  were actuated with the extremeſt

curioſity reſpecting all diſcoveries

for their object. Here he made an

experiment ſo remarkable that it 18

mantel to Extract it e at

_

KX (M 1 There |

r

1 128, 5 | 8  compan⁰¹ in the ſaloon, M. Meſtmer

being F 0

- touched: ſucceſſively ſeveral perſons,

ſome of whom had Neryes extremely, _  ürritable, without prodhicing any. ef-  fect ſufficiently conſiderable to deſerve

to be aſcribed to the animal magne-

tiſm. The operation Was n  the ſucceſs was the ſarnee.

18 922 4 Ln

. The : governor} of the children  of the family, a man of a very robuſt

and muſcular conſtitution, little in-

clined to credulity, and fortified in  his ſcepticiſm by what he had juſt  ſeen, had complained for ſome time  of a pain in his ſhoulders. As he  was beyond diſpute the leaſt ſuſcep-  tible perſon in the company, he pro-  poſed himſelf by way of gaſeonade  for the ſubject of a laſt experiment.  M. Meſmer refuſed to touch  this gentleman, but conſented to di- |  rect upon him the magnetiſm; from |  a ſmall diſtance. In complianggwith |  | abe doctor 8 inclinarions, the governor  turned

turned his e and 1 MuMefiner,: ;  ſever: or eight feet from his ſubject,  Preſented his finger. This continued  for two minutes, the governor reply-  ing to the repeated queſtions of the  doctor with much humour and irony.  M. Meſmer then nodded his head ſig-  nificantly to the company, and in the  mean time guided his finger upwards,  downwards, and a little circularly.  The patient ſaid: that he felt a kind  of ſhuddering in the ſuperior part of  the back; he however aſcribed it to  the action of the fire near which he  ſtood, and accordingly removed 10  another part of the room. The ex-  periment was reſumed, the ſenſation  augmented, and the patient, laid he  could compare it to nothing better,  than a ſtream of boiling Water, cir-  culating in the veins of his back and  ſhoulders. The impreſſion became  ſo ſtrong that he refuſed to ſubmit to  the experiment any longer. He was  perſuaded however the maſter of the  1 | 5 houſe . 4

| ſupportable; that he wiolently broke -  away from our graſp. It was ſuc-

N

— held one of his arms, i  ſelf the other. In the proceſs of the  | nt the heat became ſo in-

ceeded by a'/profuſe , iy in 2  the part affected. |

4 M. Meſmer then TIN the fond  finger 'of each hand upon the cheſt

but leſs violent, was produced in this

und was ſucceeded by a perſpiration  of the forehead. The patient then

preſented his forefingers and thumbs,  ' the reſt of his hand being clenched;  M. Meſmer did the ſame very near to  the Patient, but without touching  him. He complained ſucceſſively of

4 mmuddering, itching and ſtiffneſs itt.

the palms of his hands; theſe were  | ſucceeded uy! a local enn,

tion.“  'To this eilatiatds cperimntns we  wil beg leave to add the following  from

the ſame himſelf. At this diftance

1

from the Journal de _ No. 44;  1784. 92 51948  We M. Meſrner' being > hb

meſſieurs Camp —— and UE —  near the great canal at Meudon, pro-  poſed to them to go alternately to the  other ſide of the canal, while he re-  mained where he was. He then di-  rected them to thruſt their cane into  the water, in the mean time doing

M. Camp was ſeized - with a fit  of the aſthma; and M. 'E—— with  a Pain in the liver to Which he was  Fubje&t. * Many perſons have been  unable to ſubmit to this e ener |  without fainting ways  „ One evening M. Meliriertwalked  with fix perſons in the gardens of the  - prince de Soubiſe. He performed the  -magnetical operation upon a tree, and  a little time after three ladies of the  company fainted away. The ducheſs  de , the only remaining lady,  ſupported herſelf upon the tree, with-  A | | RY | | Out

1  A, 1

* N 3 a 2 * — * a 3 138 5 Gra N o  * ne * "IRS ONT * E 9 * 9 C 7 * *  * , 4 - 6 — y * = —  Tho - To  * * -

EW v 0

= 0 * —

a +

* . o :

% &  | % %.  *  *

out being able to quit it.. The count  de Monſ ——, unable to ſtand, Was  obliged to throw himſelf upon n  The effects upon M. Ang., a gen  tleman of a very muſcular 3  were more terrible. M. Meſmers  ſervant, who was ſummoned to re-  move the bodies, and who was inured  to theſe ſcenes, found himſelf un-  Were obliged to remain in this ſitua-  tion for a conſiderable time.“ Theſe  inſtances are cited by M. Thouret,  pe oa & Doutes, p. 686.  M. Meſmer was from tlie firſt de-  Gm of ſubmitting his ſyſtem to the  | examination of the faculty of medi-  cine; but he would not ſubmit to a  regular and authentic committee ap-  pointed for that purpoſe, apprehen-  ſive as he ſaid of the baleful ef-  | fois of the ſpirit of ſociety. This  exception occaſioned a miſunder-  ſtanding between him and the faculty,  . oor examination Was never made.  2 | hed 2 N. 2

„ 1  In Wande the ſucceſs of M. Meiner  | was the reverſe of what it had been  in Germany. His patients increafed .  rapidly. His cures were numerous  and of the moſt aſtoniſhing nature.  Ile was obliged to form a number of *  pupils under his inſpection to ad-  miniſter his proceſs. In 1779 he  _ publiſhed a Memoir reſpecting the  Diſcovery of the Animal Magnetiſm,  and promiſed a complete ſyſtem upon

the ſubj ect, which ſhould make as  great a revolution in philoſ6phy; às it  Had already done in medicine. Struck  with the clearneſs and accuracy of his  reaſonings, the magnificence of his  pretenſions, and the extraordin d  unqueſtionable cures he performed,  ſome of the greateſt phyſiclans and  moſt enlightened philoſophers © 'of  France became his converts. Ambng  theſe M. Court de Gebelin Particus  larly diſtinguiſhed himſelf, a writer,  | who had attained the higheſt  | —_— by has reſearches into an-

| \ : tiquity,

'T XIV "P

tiquity, and and who. was, if poſſible,  Kill e diſtinguiſhed for the ele-  | gance of his taſte, the beauty of his  conceptions and the richneſs of - his  fancy. The houſe of M. Meſmer at  Oreteil was crowded, with patients,  A numerous company Was, daily aſ-  ſembled at his houſe at Paris, where |  the operation was publicly performed; |  and M. Deſlon, one of his pupils, is 5  ſaid to have cleared £100,000. He  was patroniſed by people of the firſt  rank, and, as M. Thouret obſerves,  the animal magnetiſm became A  mode, an affair of bon ton, an  _ intereſt, extremely precious and  warmly e by the * :  world.  6 the mean time 55 new ſyſtera  was by no means deſtitute of enemies,  Some of the firſt pens in France were  drawn to oppoſe it, and among others  that of M. Thouret, regent-phyſician

of the faculty. The faculty indeed

ee eee eee  the

8 5 0 3  14 >

OWE Fs;  the extremeſt jealouſy. At length |  it was thought to deſerve the atten»  tion of government, and a committee,  partly phyſicians, and partly members

of the royal academy of ſciences, with _  | doctor Benjamin Franklin at their

head, were appointed to examine „  M. Meſmer refuſed to have any com-  munication with theſe: gentlemen;  but M. Deſlon, the moſt conſiderable  of his pupils, conſented to diſcloſe to  them his principles, and aſſiſt them  in their enquiries. Their Report forms  the principal piece in the enſuing  pamphlet. M. Meſmer however has  appealed from. their deciſion to the 4!  arliament-of Paris.

in the mean time it com aa dr  be concealed that the ſyſtem of the  animal magnetiſm is to be regarded  as an impoſture, and it may therefore  be aſked, Why it ſhould be thought

neceſſary to give to the public a

tranſlation of papers, which may be  thought intereſting n 0

T  n have been witneſſes of 4 the 2  pPoſture. 10 this enquiry " vera

he ri anſwers may be' a un  One at which we have e  hinted is the univerſal attention it has  excited at Paris, where it ſeems t6  Have divided the public ſpeculations  with the celebrated and incomparable

- diſcovery” of the aeröſtatic globe.

There are ſurely few people of 4  - Hiterary turn among us, who will con-  feſs themſelves void of curioſity re-  1 what engages all tile faculties  of our neighbours, or W will fiot  confeſs that their lit "purſuits  are commoinly at leaſt as 1ntereſting  and inſtructive a f ubject of enquiry;  as their politics. een de

: _ ©" Secorialy, the Report of the corn .

miſſioners and the enquities reſpects  ing the animal magnetiſm 1 in general

may be conſidered as: relating not  - merely to a "temporary, and ee  af Hypotheſis, but to the general aui  mot important queſtion reſpecting

—

ey | 9s

L w 1 :

the ibis of the imagination upon  the animal frame, a queſtion peculi-  arly intereſting. to the metaphyfician,  and of the laſt conſequence in medi-  _ cine. Upon this ſubject the Report  ſeems to throw new light, and to  have a tendency to add preciſion and  accuracy to our notions in e  10 a  But the argument upon which we  would place the principal ſtreſs is the  eſſential importance of this fact in the  hiſtory of the human mind. Per-  haps the hiſtory of the errors of  mankind, all things conſidered, is.  more valuable and intereſting than  that of their diſcoveries. Truth is  uniform and narrow; it conſtantly  exiſts, and does not ſeem to require  ſo much an active energy, as a paſſive  aptitude of ſoul in order to encounter  it. But error is endleſſly diverſified;

it has no reality, but is the pure and  ſimple creation of the mind that in-  vents it. In thi is field the ſoul has

: : o  4 b  -> 8  [ | | ]  | ) % £4 L

enough to expand herſelf; to   difplay all her boundleſs faculties, and  all her beautiful and intereſting ex-

travagancies and abſurdities. It is

obſerved of civil hiſtory, that it is

properly the record of human calami-  ties; the ſame thing may be obſerved

of ecclefiatiical hiſtory, it is the record

of our errors. For this reaſon a  well written eccleſiaſtical hiſtory, a  ſpecies of compoſition that we ſuſpect  does not yet exiſt, would perhaps  be the, moſt infirudtive TIN in the”

world.  But there is an additional ron,

.. which gives the error of the animal  - magnetiſm a particular claim to our

attention. The ſame error was ſtarted,

3f M. Thouret be in the right, two

centuries ago. It is therefore worth

our curioſity. to enquire, what diffe-

rent inſtruments were neceſſary to

deceive mankind in an ignorant and  an enlightened age, in the commence-  ment of the d and the cloſe

of

E

of the eighteenth century; in a .  to run a parallel between the borrowed  ſyſtem of Meſmer, and the original  one of Paracelſus, Maxwel and ſir

Kenelm Digby. And as every pub-  lication ought to be as complete as  poſſible within itſelf, we have deſtined  to affift' the reader in this enquiry,  the enſuing paper of the ſociety of  medicine reſpecting M. Thourets Fe  formance.

p. 8. The following extract of a ny  from the beſt authority from  Paris, has been received while  theſe papers are in the preſs.  It relates to the particulars of a  fact alluded to at the N  of page 1

— Meſiner has pb to . |  parliament of the report of the royal  commiſſioners, and requeſted that  they would appoint a new commiſ-  ſion, to examine — not his theory: -  and practice, but a plan, which ſhall

N 5

1 - $4  1 is 2 . L WM a+ * 11  i *

"Ta 1.

| exhibit the only pollibis means of  infallibly demonſtrating the exiſtence

and utility of his diſcovery. The

petition was printed: many thought  the parhiament would do nothing in  it. But they have laid hold of it to  _ clinch Meſmer, and oblige him to ex-  poſe all directly; ſo that it muſt ſoon  be ſeen whether there is any diffe-  rence between his method and Deſ-

1 lon 8.—I give you their

+266 Arret, of the 6 Sept. 1784.  1 3 The parliament ordains that  Meſſ mer Hall be obliged to expoſe, be-  fore four doctors of the faculty of  medicine, two ſurgeons and two  maſters in pharmacy, the doctrine,  Which he profeſſes to have diſcovered,  and the methods which he pretends  muſt be adopted for the application  of his principles : they likewiſe. or-  dain that a report of his communi-  _ cations ſhall then be delivered to the  attorney general, to be laid before

Feet for their ſentence.” -.

. 55 REPORT

—

. * b 0 7 «Bo

[;

© a Fe MR Is of Pa Royal 08e) bs |  Medicine, appointed toexamine a Work,  entitled, EnqQuiRIEs AND DovusrTs  RESPECTING THE ANIMAL MAGNE-  ISM, BY M. TwouRET, Regent Phy-

- fician of the Faculty of Paris, and Mem-  ber of the Society. Lo which are ſub- -  joined, by the Tranſlator, Notes, chiefly  extracted from M. 8 8 Fer- |  ; formance. :

\HE underwritten werecharged bythe  4 royal ſociety of medicine, with the  examination of a work of M. Thouret,  member of the ſociety, entitled, Enqui-  ries and Doubts reſpecting the gurl  Magnetiſm.

In the attentive peruſal of this work, it  is obvious to remark, that it has two very  diſtinEt objects; one of them, Which is in  a manner hiſtorical, is to explain the coin-  eidences of the animal magnetiſm, as ĩt was  known to the ancients, with that which is  _admitted by the moderns: the other con-  rains critical reflections and doubts in re-  gard to the evidences upon which the  An 1s. N the uncertainty of

| which

N

|

1  1  1  1  1  1  1  =_  1

Fg "441.

which M. Thouret undertakes to dif; play; |  8 We will endeavour to lay before the bie N

an idea of his performance.

The animal magnetiſm held a principal |

rank among the ſyſtems, which were em-  "braced in that period of literary hiſtory,  when ſuppoſitions were admitted to hold

the place of facts; and this hypotheſis  vaniſhed, together with: many others, when  experimental philoſophy began to diſſipate  the impoſtures of the imagination, and to  afford an accurate meaſure of the value of  arts and ſciences.

The object of this ſyſtem was a fluid ex-  tremely ſubtle, upon which vere beſtowed  the magnificent titles of ſoul of the world,

_ *fpirit. of the univerſe, and univerſal mag-  5 Ends fluid ; and which was pretended to be  . diffuſed through the whole ſpace occupied

by the material creation, to animate the

ſyſtem of nature, to penetrate all. ſubſtances,

and to be the vehicle to animated bodies in

general, and their ſeveral regions in parti-  eular, of certain forces of attraction and  repulſion, by means of which they ex-  plained the phenomena of nature. |

Nor were they contented to admit,” or

rather to imagine, the fluid we have de-

ſeribed; they flattered themſelves that  they were able, in certain methods, to  tender themſelves maſters of this fluid, "and

7 0 2 its EE Even this did  5 not

/

11 |  not termibate their chimerical pretenſions:  they affirmed that this fluid, in which  they admitted a ſpecies of flux and reflux,  exerted an important degree of action upon  the nerves, and had a grand analogy with  the vital principle; that its effects, under  the guidance of {kill and illumination, ex-  tended to very great diſtances, without the  intervention of any foreign ſubſtances;  that it was poſſible to impregnate with it,  either certain powders, in the manner of  fir Kenelm Digby, who aſſerted that he  had done this, or fluids, or different parts  of the bodies of animals; that this agent  was like light refleted by mirrors, and  that ſound and muſic augmented its in-  tenſity. | POOR  The partiſans of the animal magnetiſm,  who wrote in the ſeventeenth century, did  not yet confine their hopes within theſe  limits: the art of directing the fluid, which  they had brought down from heaven, and  which, according to them, acted in fo -.  diſtinguiſhed a manner upon the human  body, might be expected to have a conſi-  derable ſhare in the medical ſcience, or  rather to ſuperſede that ſcience, as it had  hitherto exiſted; they did not fail to aſſert,  that in cauſing it to circulate in a proper  manner, the reſtoration of diſeaſed organs  | was infallible, as "m the preſeryation $f |  a „ the

+) 8 Hp  9391 $ ”  x >

:

— - — — — - * — * — —  — — — Sr r e eo > — —  * — *  < — —  — — — _- — — — — —— — -  ”

: : 1  - CY — —— — — —EAE' — — — * "ve  N 4

- K 2 * * Fe 4 7  * — 8 Tag Tee WI 2 SY i * N 9 p - . q 4  80 * % = 6  5 . * 5 \ 4  > | 8  -  : , —

a -  _ 0  f

the health of thoſe who were yet unat-

tacked with any diſeaſe (7). ..

Such was the origin of an external and  _ univerſal medicine, of a ſpecies entirely

new, and which-boaſted of having the ad-  vantage of curing diſeaſes, without obliging  any drugs to be ſwallowed by the diſeaſed.”  Soon after poles were diſcovered in the

a

*

Wy 1 WVGS 1 5  (1) «It muſt be confeſſed however, that the man-  ner of directing the pretended magnetiſm, is different in  theſe ſyſtems. The ancients, as well as M. Meſmer,

regarded this fluid as univerſally diffuſed, as pervading

the bodies of animals, and as capable of being rendered

the vehicle of the moſt ſalutary influences. But, in  order to call it into action, they did not, like M.  Meſmer, deſire to touch, or ſo much as to approach the  patient. Their method conſiſted in a different order of  proceeding. To give a ſuitable direction to the uni-

verſal ſpirit, they were obliged. to employ real parts,  either extracted or evacuated, of the individual upon  -whom they propoſed to direct the magnetiſm. The  different humours of the human body, whether natural,

as the blood, 'the urine, the excrements, or contrary to  nature, as the pus bred in wounds; in fine, the ſolid

parts of the frame, as the fleſh, the nails, the hair, in a

ſtate of ſeparation from the body, afforded, according to  the ancient doctrine, the ſuitable and neceſſary means

of employing the magnetiſm. Theſe different parts, fo

long as they remained in a ſtate of integrity, were ſup-

ſed to be united in the link of a common vital princi-

ple with the individual who had furniſhed them. The  union was operated by the intervention of the univerſal  . ſpirit, and in acting upon them, the phyſician was faid

to act alſo upon the perſon to whom they had belonged;

an action, which, as it was independent of contact, and

Was not ſuperſeded by diſtance, Was regarded as mag-  netic. Thouret. 3 A

= *  7 * s  4

human

” TS ESP:  human body, that is, points, towards which  it appeared that the action of this imagi-  nary fluid ought to be directed, cures and  evacuations were operated without the af.  fiſtance of pharmacy, ſenſations of various  kinds were excited in the patients; and  notwithſtanding the diſtinguiſhed effects  aſcribed to this agent, it was aſſerted, that  0 the moſt feeble and delicate might

ubmit to its proceſs without danger. The  proceſs had yet another uſe, that of diſco-  vering the ſeat of the diſtemper; a thing  frequently fo difficult to be aſcertained,  but which was pointed out by the fluid by  a ſort of inſtinctive intelligence, and with  abſolute demonſtration. It perfected the .  - concoction of the humours; nervous dle |  tempers in particular, rarely reſiſted its in-  fluence; it was favourable to tranſpiration.  In fine, and this laſt remark is of particular  importance, it had a powerful action upon -  the moral principles of our frame. A  propenſity, that could ſcarcely be reſiſted,  was the baſis of the attachment and gra-  titude, which were vowed by the patients  to thoſe Who had employed upon them  this method of cure. Several, and in this  number was Maxwel, even gave us to un-  derſtand, that it was poffible, in certain  circumſtances of human life, to make an

3 A  proper uſe of khis vehicle of inflye  This pickure of, the animal magnetiſm,  as it was invented and applauded by the  ancients, is faithfully extracted from the  performance of M. Thouret. The prin-  cipal authors, to which he has recourſe in

the progreſs of his enquiry, are Paracelſus,  Van Helmont, Goclenius, Burgravu

Libavius, Wirdig, Maxwel, Santanelli,

Tentzel, Kircher and Borel (3). The entire  (2) © Far be it from me, lays Maxwel, < to lead  you to improper actions. If from the peruſal of my

works, you become acquainted with the means of ſuch  actions, you will do me the juſtice not to divulge them.

El have ſeen,” adds he, * the moſt incredible effects,  and the greateſt advantages from a right uſe of this  method. I have alſo ſeen infinite evils occaſioned by.  the abuſe of it. Indeed, it is ſcarcely prudent to treat of  theſe ſubjects, on account of the dangers that may reſult  from it. If we were to expreſs ourſelves in a manner  univerſally intelligible, fathers could never be ſure of  their daughters, nor huſbands of their wives; women  would be deprived of their ſelf-government in ſpite of  the moſt judicious and obſtinate refiſtance,” Maxwel,

de medicina magneticu, apud Thouret. '  (3) Paracelſus Arecolus' Philippus Theophraſtus  Bombaſtus de Hohenheim is to be regarded as the in-  ventor of the magnetical ſyſtem. He was born at a  village near Zurich in Switzerland in 1493, and died  . 541. His profeſſion was that of a phyſician, and he  obtained great reputation by the uſe of mercury and

opium; medicines that were unknown, or not employed

. byxhe phyſicians of thoſe times. But beſide this, he

was a proficient in alchymy, aſtrology, and magic. He

Was acquainted with the -philoſopher's ſtone, and the

N W : ( : „ | uni-

1

OED * * 5 *  ; " TY? 7 *

| VCC  paſſages are extracted, and M. Thouret has  diſplayed in this performance, as he had  already done in ſo many others, an erudi-  tion, the moſt various, the moſt preciſe,  and the moſt extenſive, n

univerſal medicine, And he invented an elixir, in the  uſe of which a man could not fail to live to the age of  a thouſand year s. JJ  Van Helmont was the immediate ſucceſſor of Para-  celſus in the purſuit of the magnetical ſcience, and wrote  an expreſs treatiſe De Magnetiea V ulnerum Curatione.  All the other perſons enumerated, lived in the ſeven-  teenth century. | | <3  « To Maxwel, we are particularly indebted for the  moſt complete and copious treatiſe upon the ſubject, in  which he has endeavoured to ſupport its declining credit  by calling in the affiſtance of that theory of the univerſal  ſpirit, which he derived from the earlieſt philoſophers of  antiquity, and in which we are preſented with the exact  counterpart of the ſyſtem of M. Meſmer.  « Another inhabitant of this iſland, the learned and  illuſtrious fir Kenelm Digby, is well known for his  invention of the ſympathetic powder; which it was only  neceſſary to apply to the linnen which had imbibed the  blood or pus of a wound, or to the arm or ſword of him  who inflicted it, provided they were ſtill ſtained with the  blood of the wounded: perſon. It was neceſſary how-:  ever, that the wound ſhould be kept perfectly clean, and  protected from the air. A  „There was a ſympathetic ſweating powder, in-  vented ſo lately as the year 1745. The means of ap-  | plying it was, by mixing it with the urine of the perſon  diſeaſed, hd keeping it boiling over a fire, as long as  you wiſhed the perſpiration to continue. During the  operation, the patient was to keep his bed, to be co-  vered up warm, and to drink ſeveral large baſons of tea.  Tha medicine was never known to fail of its effect.?  ; Fel. © | . - . 8 4  - w W EF B 4 | | It | j.

—

8 F  It is eaſy to ſee, how analogous is the ye  tem we have deſcribed to that of M.  Meſmer. To demonſtrate this analogy,  M. Thouret has conſidered ſeparately each  of the propoſitions publiſhed and avowed  by the latter. They amount to twenty-  ſeven, and the reſult of this examination  is, that they are all poſitively announced i in  ſome of the authors whoſe names have  been recited. PS |  Every part of Meſmer 8 tem, even  down to the experiments of the ring and  the ſword, have been found by M. Thouret  in the works of theſe writers (4). It is  therefore certain, that the aſſertions of M.  Meſmer, which are repreſented by him as  principles of his own, do not lob to  im; and that this theory, in the room of  being an attractive novelty, is an ancient  ſyſtem, abandoned by the learned near a  century ago. |  In aſcending indeed to 5 original ly  tems which were formed upon the ſubject, |

- ” * -

” 4 .) The experiments of the ring and Rad, are to  be God] in Kircher's Magnes, five de arte magnetica.  They are both well known: “ That of the ſword conſiſts  in the balancing it upon the point of one of the fingers,  the conſequence of which will be a very rapid rotatory

| motion, provided the perſon be properly magnetiſed. That  of the ring is performed by a perſon initiated in the ani-  mal . holding it ſuſpended By a thread in the

inſide of a wine glaſs, when it will invariably NOIR the |  hour of the * 4 Thouret., "#3 55 8  Ta HAY 5 55 | | we

1

we are unable to diſcover atiy thing but  ſuppoſitions deſtitute of proof, and for that  reaſon devoted to oblivion. ' The parts of  this hypotheſis were not connected together”  by any other tie, than that of the imagi-  nation. The ſteps that were propoſed in  order to its eſtabliſhment, were the v

fame that had been employed in favour of  the art of cure, now by enchantments; and  now by exorciſms. It has been always by  ſenſations that they have pretended to prove  the exiſtence of theſe different agents; and  if this kind of proof were ſufficient, there  is not one of them which would not have  been demonſtrated, - Sound philoſophy, has

therefore refuſed credit, as well to this

ſpecies of proof, as to the magnetiſm, ſuch  as it was propoſed by Maxwel, Goclenius  and Santanelli, and ſuch as we haye deſcribs |  ed it in the opening of this report.  Has the animal magnetiſm of M. Med- :  mer any better claim to our confidence?  M. Thouret, without replying to this  queſtion in a poſitive manner, has permits  ted to himſelf, in the ſecond part of his  work, certain reflections reſpecting it,  which he has propoſed ſimply as doubts,

and which relate entirely to what M. |

Meſmer has publiſhed, or authentically

advanced. 120 may be e to bim, ay bs

M. 0 8  FY « Tha 5

.N

[ 18 1* |

- Tug. FP hat the touch 3 employed  in his method for a conſiderable time, and  on regions extremely ſenſible, ſuch as thoſe  of the ſtomach, is of itſelf capable of pro-  ducing effects, by communicating a vivid  impulſeto the nerves of the plexuſes which  are there ſituated, and which have an inti-  mate connection with the whole nervous  ſyſtem; that authentic records preſent us  with a great number of facts of this kind,  and that in conſequence, the ſenſations,  which originate in the application of the  touch, do not prove the exiſtence of —  rate fluid or agent.  2. That the heat produced by the bald  and the motion communicated to the air,  may occaſion very ſtrong impreſſions upon  4 perſon extremely ſenſible, and whoſe  Sbber are in a ſtate of convulſion, without  theſe impreſſzont being e to prove  a new agent.  3% That in ſubdoing the e  dy ſolemn preparations, by extraordinary  proceedings, by the confidence and enthu+

5 faſm inſpired by magnificent promiſes, it

is poſſible to exalt the tone of ſenfible and  nervous fibres, and afterwards to direct, by  the application of the hands, their impulſe  _ togfards certain organs, and to excite in

tdbem evacuations or excretions, without

there reſulting any addition to the ſciences,  5 rue * 9 or medicine.

= That 5

"T +1

4. That the partiſans of the hn  _ magnetiſm do not produce what they ca  criſes, that is, a ſtate of convulſions, but  in ſubjects extremely irritable, extremely  nervous, and above all, in women, whoſe  ſenſibility has been already excited by the  * we have deſcribed. x |  F. That among theſe diſpoſing cauſes,  paniculr ſtreſs is to be laid upon the pre  ence of a perſon already in a ſtate of con-  vulſion, or ready to fall into that ſtate;  that juſt as an organ attacked with ſpaſ-  modic affections, eaſily propagates theſe  affections to the other organs, in like mans.  ner are they tranſmitted from one man to  another; that we have therefore no reaſon  to be ſurpriſed, if in the halls, where the

retended magnetical operations are per-  . Portes, ſpaſms, and even convulfions are  diffuſed with extreme alacrity; and that  hiſtory furniſhes a great number of facts,  of convulſions propagated through whole  villages, or towns, in a manner Fa more  aſtoniſhing than that of which the animal  magnetiſm preſents us with an example.”

6. That hiſtory has alſo rant to.  us a great number of cures operated by.  fear, by joy, or the-commotion of any vio-  lent paffion ; which proves beyond*eon-  troverſy, the power of n6ryoup ines ee.  aa Rm” |

- 2  4 , 0 - 9 0 ” 4% 3 & F©% > 7 OE 4  . . N  *  4 . 7  190 0  8 R

829 8.»  4

DI ù .  7. That in different ages, two famous  empirics, Valentine Greatrakes of the king-  dom of lreland, and Gaſſner of Ratiſbon,  produced upon different perſons effects  which appeared ſurpriſing, and have had  their admirers; that they employed only  ». the inſtrumentality of the touch, either  upon the nape of the neck, or the limb  affected; and that it has been univerſally  acknowledged, that they acted only upon

8. That

the imagination (5)  (5) © Valentine Greatrakes, eſq; was a native of  Afane, in the kingdom of Ireland. We are told, that  one day he was conſcious to a wonderful internal revo-  | lution, and at the ſame time heard a voice like that of  2 genius, which cried inceſſantly for a long time: 1  << endow you with the faculty of curing diſeaſes,” Im-  gortuned by this ſalutation, from which he could in no  way diſtract his attention, he determined to make an  experiment of the truth of the intelligence. The voice  had firſt announced to him the giſt of curing the king's  evil. He made an experiment upon this diſtemper, and  fucceeded, He afterwards touched perſons attacked  with an epidemical fever, that raged in his neighbour-  hood; the voice had announced to him the gift of curing  tis diſeaſe. In fine, he was enabled to cure every ſpe-  cies of diſeaſe; and he ſucceeded in all caſes; except  where, as he obſerved, the malady was too deeply rooted,  the patient laboured under a particular indiſpoſition -  td this method of cure. The exterior of this man was  extremely ſimple. His cures were accompanied with  no degree of pomp and ceremony, unleſs we ſhould call  ſuch, his aſcribing his ſucceſs to God, publicly expreſſing  his gratitude, and-inviting the patient to join with him  in the act of thankſgiving. But he made a very exten  dave uſe ol me operation of touch. The diſtemper fled

4 4  MA

defors

—

F

| [ 13 U 5 |  8. That in many inſtances, the partiſans  of the magnetiſm ſeem to beſtow a greater  by . attention

before him, and he was able, we are told, to diſlodge it  from its ſeat, and remove it to parts the leaſt uſeful,  If its progreſs: appeared to be ſuſpended in any part, he  redoubled his frictions upon that part, to remove the  obſtacle. . In this operation nature, excited by the  ſtroking, ſeemed frequently to operate criſes, and it pro-  duced ſtools, vomitings and perſpirations. Thouret.  '« Greatrakes cured not only internal diſeaſes, but

alſo external ones, ſuch as wounds and ulcers. The  | ſecond Villiers, duke of Buckin

ham, was one of his  atients, His atteſtations were = by Boyle, Wil-  Eins, Whichcot, Cudworth and Patrick. He was  born in 1628, received the giſt of healing 1662, and  removed to London 1666.” Des Maizeaux, Vie te  St. Evremond. | *  „The cures of Gaſſner are of a much later date,  and are not above ten or- twelve years old. This  German, having in his youth been afflicted with an ill  ſtate of health, which reſiſted the efforts of all the phy-  ſicians, ſuſpected that his diſtemper might have a ſuper-  natural cauſe, and derive from the influence of the devil.  His conjecture was verified by his ſucceſs in expelling '  the devil, having adjuted him in the name of | Jeſus  Chriſt. From that moment he enjoyed the molt perfect  health for ſixteen years. Encouraged by this event, he  laid aſide the ſtudy of medicine, to which his diſtemper  had prompted him, and procured all the authors who  had treated of exorciſm. He began with healing his  pariſhioners in an obſcure town upon the borders of  Swifzerland and the Tirol, and his reputation increaſed  ſo much, that, in the two laſt years of his reſidence there,  he had between four and five hundred patients who'ap-  plied to him. He then made a progreſs through ſeveral  of the Swiſs cantons, and ſettled at Ratiſbon in 1994.  He diſtinguiſhed diſeaſes into two claſſes, the natural  and the demoniac, the laſt of which were much the  moſt numerous. Over the former he pretended to no

F

| power.

£ {LY

attention. to excite ſurpriſe in the ſpecs

wore, than 1 8 effects in — P.

48

power. His cures were db with much  and 114 and it was obſerved, that he mack powp  rubbed his

previouſly to his touching the patient. He performed  dis cures in the name of Thrill

_ diſeaſed in his holy name; if their faith failed, the cure  did not take place, He gave the ſick, when he diſmiſſed  them, balm and oil, which he. eee le as ſpiritual  medicaments, together with certain waters and powders,  and a little ring, inſcribed with the name of Jeſus, to  prevent a relapſe.” Thouret.

Thouret conſiders the ſyſtem of Gaſſner as

having had an influence on that of * Mefmer,  Aftrology and poſſeſſions were extremely current in  Germany; and as Gaſſner had taken poſſeſſion of, and  ruined the latter pretenſion, Meſmer had recourſe to the  former. It ſhould however be remembered, that Meſ-  mer had written and publiſhed his thefis upon aſtrology  | before the pretenſions of Gaſſner were heard of.

\ Theſe inftances are produced by Thouret, as diſtin-  guiſhed proofs of the efficacy both of the touch and the  imagination. In proof of the contagion of convulſive  affections, he cites the convulſions of Saint Medard, and  the poſſeſſions of Loudun. © The former of theſe took

place in 1732s. and made their appearance as ſoon as  any of the re

patron faint. They were expoſed in the an triumph-  ant manner, and covered with ridicule by Hecquet, in  his Natural Hiſtory of Convulfions, e- pretended  " poſſeſſions of Loudun (1740) originated in an infamous  ſcheme of avarice and revenge againſt the unfortunate

-Urbain Grandier, rector of Loudun, who became the

victim of the machinations of his enemies. The phy-  ficians of Montpelier, charged with the examination of  the affair, diſcovered the whole ſecret of the poſſeſſions

to conſiſt in ſactitious and pretended convulſions.”  A Thouret. 23

ands upon his girdle and handkerchief |  , and by the faith of the

- « tients;

[

igious were approached to the tomb of their

*

1  tients; the ſpaſms and convalfions which  they produce being the ſource of un-  doubted evil, were it only by the habitude

of that ſtate which they are calculated to  induce, while the advantages of this me-  thod are not equally demonſtrated. 5  That certain local diſeaſes not being  of the number of thoſe upon which the  animal magnetiſm acts, and certain perſons,  by ze confeſſion of M.. Meſmer, not  being ſuſceptible of its action, it may be  ſuſpected, that the partiſans of this ſyſtem  have contrived for themſelves this reſource,  in order to account for their failure of  ſucceſs in certain caſes.  10. That to pretend to the diſcovery of  a means which ſhall extend to every kind  of diſeaſe, that is, to an univerſal medi-  eine, is an illuſion which cannot be ex-  cuſed in an enlightened age.  11. That the known effects of bent  bility are ſufficient to explain, without  any new agent, the phenomena which  M. Meſmer produces by a method which  he has not yet imparted to the public.  12. That M. Meſmer, in ſuppoſing a  . particular agent, has adopted a rout con-  trary to the intereſts of his diſcovery, 'in  following the example of thoſe who have  exerted their efforts to give credit to a  ſyſtem, worthy upon every account. of _ |  hs fg into . it has e 2 242

The 2

e 1  The ſodiety may judge of the pets 7  3 from this extract: it is proper  here to call to mind, that the royal ſo-  ciety, acquainted with the zeal of M.  Thouret, and his indefatigable enquiries  into every thing that concerned the mag.  netiſm, charged him in their ſeſſion of the  twelfth of March 1784, with the cok  lection from the authors, as well ancient  as modern, of all that had been written re-  Fpefting the animal magnetiſm. This  collection, which is ſufficiently, complete |  to ſatisfy every. reaſonable. defire, and of  "which M. Thouret communicated the |  to the ſociety, compoſes the firſt part. of

dis work, and is to be conſidered as his

report to the ſociety upon that ſubject.  We are of opinion, that the ſociety is ex-  tremely indebted; to him in that reſpect.  The ſecond part contains judicious reflec-  tions and ſagacious doubts. We think  both of them worthy of being printed  with the approbation and privilege of the

Iis0ciety.

The ſociety, charged by the king with  the examination of all new inventions and  ſecret methods of healing diſeaſes, has not  beheld without inquietude, the ſpecies of  vogue acquired by the animal magnetiſm ;  whoſe procedures, whatever be their  merit, have been and are adminiſtred to  the . and paid for by the public,

"66.4 8 without ;

without having previouſly, in obedience  to the expreſs proviſions of the laws of  the kingdom, undergone the examination  of the vhyſical profeſſion ; an abuſe, againſt  which the ſociety, as in duty bound, has  exclaimed ever ſince its introduction. They  have a right to take much pride to them-  ſelves,” that one of their members is pub-  liſhing ſo learned enquiries upon a ſubject,  which has not been hitherto treated but  in anonymous compoſitions, which are, for  the greater part, deſtined more for the  amuſement than the inſtruction of their  readers. The work of M. Thouret, full  of depth and ſagacity, will enlighten thoſe  who are impartial in their enquiries, and  will greatly tend to the ſolution of a  queſtion, upon which the public intereſt  requires that ſentence ſhould be pro-  nounced as ſoon as poſſible, _—_

Louvre, July the gth, 1784.

(Signed) SGrorrxov,

DE$SPERRIERES,  eee  )JEFOURCROY,

. CruamMBoN,  Vicg DAzrr, ©

gs oo ERRTE

ye

*  . ” =,  5 * 7 * 4 i ” % <  1 8 * 8 5  3 * } ? — pak pA .  8 -£ ST I» * a —  ; 9 x 44 9 , X's a 4 4  "5 = „  - ; , . 9 . 8 3 wy. 4  © * 9 # 4 bh x3 4 -

9  3

r  q . ; 4 | b | * 7  COMMISSIONERS, &c.

H E king named, on \ the wat of  March- 1784, four phyſicians of the  faculty of Paris, meſſieurs Borie, Sallin,  dArcet, Guillotin, to enter into the ex-  mination, and to lay before him an ac-  count of the animal magnetiſm practiſed  by M. Deſlon: and upon the petition of  theſe phyſicians, his majeſty: joined with  them, 7 the purpoſe of this n  he members of the royal academy. of  iences, meſſieurs Franklin, le Roy, Bailly,  & Borie, Lavoiſier. M. Borie having died  n the commencement of, the buſineſs, his  mjeſty appointed M. Majault, doctor of  e faculty, to replace him,  M. Meſmer has deſcribed the agent 3  Fofeſſes to have diſcovered, and to nk  e has given the appellation of animal  i $netiſtn, 1 in the following manner. It  C2 eee 40G

( 20 J  is a fluid anivdally diffuſed jithe vehi-  t cle of a mutual influence between the  s celeſtial bodies, the earth and the  * bodies of animated ,beings; it is fo  “ continued as to admit of no vacuum;  ** its ſubtlety does not admit of illuſtra-

** tion; it is gapable of receiving, ropa.  „ gating and communicating all the im-  J preſſions that are incident to motion;  © 1t is ſuſceptible of flux and reflux. The  * animal body is ſubje& to the effects of  * this agent; and t effects ate  *© mediately 1 by the agent ;ofif-  eating itſelf into the ſubſtance of the  *© nerves, We particularly diſcever in the  human body qualities analogous to thoſe  © of the loadſtone; we diſtinguiſh in i

*© poles different and oppoſite. Thee actio  . and the virtue of the animal magnetiſ  e ate capable of being communicated fron  one body to another, animated or in  t animate; they exert themſelves to con  4e $derable diſtances, and without the lt  Is aſſiſtance from any intermediate bodies

% this action is increãſed and reflected  ** mirrors; it is communicated, prop

„ gated and augmented by ſound and i  virtue itſelf is capable of being acc,

% mulated, eoncentfated and trans fertq b.  <6 Thoug ” the fluid be univerſal, all 2  1 5 mal bodien are not equally e

4%  *

111

* 1  1

(fa,

ei of it; | there even are : ſome, though very  „ few, of ſo oppoſite a nature; as by the  14 mere preſence to ſuperſede its eff  upon any other contiguous bodies.  | © The apimal magnetiſiy' is capable of -  # Ks curing imimediatel diſeaſes of the nerves, |  "il © and factiately oth r diſtempers; it inn  probes the action of medicines; it  4 K 8 and directs the falutaty'e criſes  "" © &' 48 to ſubjeck thetu totally to thie  he 1 Foy of the judgment; * means  or of- it the 'phyſi yſician becomes acquainted.  CY © with the ſtate of health of each indi-  1 vidual; and decides with certainty u  the cauſes, the nature and the progreſs  1 of the mot complicated diſtempers;  ii revents their increaſe, 'and” effects  their Spe _ without at any time  *« expoſing atient, Whatever be his  at mr fox. He os ſtitution, to alarming in-  nr cules or unpleaſing conſequences®,”  In the influetice of the magnetiſm, nature  © holds out to s 4 ſovereign inſtrument  '* for ſecuring the health and lengthening  the exiſtence of mankind +.” f  Such-is' the agent, with the examination  of which the commiſfioncrs have been

„11501 17 7 2714 p 44+ 6.  e 7 Ts 8 1, 4538 v3 017.18

9 » Men by M. Moſer. een the biene of  the Animal Magnetiſm, 779, pages 74 and foll lowing.  + Ibid; Advertiſemen page vi.

_ a4 [treaty ee a MOR dgegel,  7 9

4 *

: 5 .  Setter 8 1 15 "PEI  | : » 'S

"4

$12 25

| charged, and whoſe properties are avowed  by M. Deſlon, who admits. all the princi-

ples of M. Meſmer. This theory forms  the baſis of a memoir, which was read at  the houſe of M. Deſlon, on the ninth day  of May, in the preſence of M. the lieu-

tenant general of the police, and the com-

miſſioners. Itꝭ is aſſerted in this memoir,  that there is but one nature, one diſtemper  and one remedy; and this remedy is the  animal magnetiſm. This phyſician, at the  fame time that he acquainted; the com-  miſſioners with the doctrine and proceſs  of the. magnetiſm, inſtructed them in its  practice by diſcovering to them the poles,  and ſhewing them the manner of tonching  the diſeaſed, and ere in regard to them  the magnetic fluid.

M. Deflon undertook to the commiſſion-

ers, in the firſt place, to evince the exiſtence

of the anima magnetiſm; ſecondly, to  communicate eo them his knowledge re-  ſpecting this;.difcovery ;. and thirdly, to  prove the utility..of this diſcovery as

ab pes the animal magnetiſm in the cure of

=> - diſeaſes,  A Þ No 2  3 9

After haviog thus made We c-

0 5 =quainted' with the theory and practice of

"the animal magnetiſm; it was neceſſary to  'oblerve its effects. For this purpoſe the  commiſſioners adjourned. themſelves, and

« _ of them repeatedly witneſſed the

public

dion is. introduced;  thumb of each patient between the fore-

T4]  public method of M. Deflom. They faw.  in the centre: of a large apartment a cir-  cular box, made of oak, and about a foot  or a foot and an half deep; which is called  the bucket z the lid of this box is pierced  with a number of holes, in which are  inſerted branches of iron, elbowed and  moveable. The patients are arranged in  ranks about this bucket; and each has his

branch of iron, which by means of the

elbow may be applied immediately to the  — affected; a cord paſſed round their

ies connetts them one with the other :  ſometimes a ſecond means of communica-  by the inſertion of the

finger and thumb of the patient next him;  the thumb thus inſerted is preſſed by the  perſon holding it ; the impreſſion received  by the left hand of the patient; communi-

cates through his right, and thus ak  — the whole cirele: 8

6 fortè is placed in one corner of  we apartment, and different airs are played  with various degrees of rapidity 3 vocal  muſic is nN added ts the inſtru-

mental: 11

The perſons who ſuperincent the pro-  ceſs; have each of them an iron rod in his  1 frum ten to n. inches 1 in length. |

1177 01. SDS 2

5 Baquet, The Jiaineteriof this * is uſually latge

| Enough to admit of fifty perſons ſanding round its cix-

E amfetence. wha nee | |  e M.

t |  M. Deſlon made to the /commiſſioriers  _ the following declarations. 1ſt. That this  rod is a conductor of the magnetiſm, has  the power of concentring it at its point,  and of rendering its emanations more con-  fnderable. adly. That ſound, conform-  ably to the theory of M. Meſmer, is alſo  a conductor of the magnetiſm, and that  to communicate the fluid to the piano  forte, nothing mote is neceffary than to  approach to it the iron rod; that the  perſon who plays upon the inſtrument  furniſhes alſo a portion of the fluid, and  that the magnetiſm is tranſmitted by the 5  ſounds to the ſurrounding patients. 3uly.  That the cord: which is paſſed round the  bodies of the patients is deſtined, as well :  as the union of their fingers, to  the effects by communication. 4thly./Phat  the interior part of the bucket ĩs ſo n  ſtructed as to concentre the magnetiſm,  and is a grand reſervoir; from which the  fluid is diffuſed through the apt of  Irom! that are inſerted in its lidvꝓ.  The commiſſioners in the progreſs 0  che examination diſcovered,” by means  of an electrometer and a needle of iron  not touched with the loadſtone, that  the bucket contained no ſubſtance either  electric or magnetical; and from the  detail that M. Deſlon has made to them  reſpecting W interior "CORR of the  wy 57 FN . bucket,

* —

5 i 4  p | * *  © # :  £ #7

* X. % * ” 4 5 *

(Ss)

bucket, - they cannot infer any Phyſical 5  agent, capable of contributing to the n

puted effects of the magnetiſm.

The patients then, arranged

M1164  in con  ſiderable number and in ſueceſſive mpks

round the bucket; derive; the, , magnetic  virtue at once from all; theſe, conveyances :  from the branches of i 8 which tranſmit  to them that uf the hueket ; ffom the cf  which is paſſed round their thodięs, and  the union of their fingr 8, Which com-  municate to them that 2 their neighboursas  and from the ſound of the piano forte, r  of a muſical voie, what diffaſes, at, through ;  the air. The patients ate hHeſide magne-  tiſed directly, by means of finger ot a bar =  of iron, i guided before the faxe, above t  behind the head, and over the furtace of the  parts affected] the diſtinctipn, af the,poles  {till obſerved; they are al ſoacted apondby  a look; and by having their attention en  cited. Butefpeciallyi they are magnetiled  by the application of the hands, and. by  the preſſure of the fingers: upon the hypo  chonders and the regionsg of the Jower :  belly j an application frequently gontinued  for a long time, ſometimes for ſe  hours. bre tho 0 L 120071 1  In this ſituation the tients 8  ſpectacle extremely varied in proporti  to their different habits Aiden |  of „ are = tranquil, and un

conſcious

T 26  + bondibus to: any ſenſation ; others cough;  pit, are affected with a flight degree of

pain, a partial or an univerſal burning,

and pexrſpirations; a third claſs are agi-  | tated and tormented with convulſions;  | Theſe convulſions are rendered extraordi-  nary by their frequency, their violence?  wy $40 e eee As ſoon as one perſon  is convulſed, others preſently are affected  by that ſymptom. The commiſſioners  faw acceſſes of this kind, which laſted  . upwards of three hours; they were ac«  . . companicd with expectorations of a thick  . 8nd viſcous water, brought away by. the  violence of the efforts. des Une theſe  | expectorations were accompanied with ſmall  Auantities of Es and there is among  _ _ bthers a lad, a patient, who has fre-

uently brought up blood in conſide-  _ Yable abundance. Theſe convulſions are

cC.haracteriſed by precipitate and involuntary

| motions of all the limbs or of the whole  by a contraction of the throat, by  WT: fudden affections of the hypochonders and  the epigaſtrium by a diſtraction and wild⸗  neſs in the eyes, by ſhrieks, tears; hiccup-  pings, ab in laughter. They are  Either preceded or followed by a ſtate of  uor and reverie, by a ſpecies of de-  Jection and even drowſineſs. Phe leaſt  unforeſeen noiſe occaſions ſtarting; and it  ewes e obſerved, that nn of

the

7  6  „„ SAS ' Bad {1%  2 1 1 %

=

the key and the time, in the airs played  upon the piano forte, had an effect upon  the patients; ſo that a quicker motion  agitates them more, and renews the vi-  vacity of their convulſionns.  I bere is an apartment lined with quilting,  which was originally deſtined for the pa-  tients in whom the magnetiſm produced  convulſions, and is denominated the apart-  ment of criſes ; but M. Deſlon has not  Judged proper to make any uſe of it; and  all the patients, whatever be the accidents  of their ſituation, are placed together in  the apartment of public. proceeding.  Nothing can be more aſtoniſhing than  the ſight of theſe convullions; he that has  not had it, can have no idea of it: and in  bebolding it, a man is not leſe ſtruck with  the profound repoſe of one clafs. of pati-  ents,; than with the violenee which agitates  another; he obſerves with admiration  the various accidents that are repeated,  and the ſympathies that are developed. He  fees ſome, patients ſeck each other with  eagerneſs; and in approaching ſmile,  converſe, with all the demonſtrations of at-  tachment, and ſoothe their mutual criſes.  They are entirely under the government of  the perfon who diſtributes the magnetic  virtue: in vain they may. appear to be in  - a ſtate of the extremeſt TE finchs, 'his  voice, a look, a ſign from him rouſes —  „

141]

It is oſable not to recogniſe in, theſe +  "re; bf da, Wee an, S influence, |  pon the patients, making itſelf  05 15 them, and of Which he who ſu-  Nad the proceſs, appears 19 be the  17 5 ; £5 18S  bele convu aſt affeQions are iin pro-  ,perly f ſtiled criſes in the og of the ani-  mal me betiſm! 4 cording o this "doc .  trine idee eh they, 152 regar eds 8 falutary _  cxiſis „ of the fame Kind as thoſe which  bature produce, or Which a ſkilful phyſi-  "cian'has the art to excite” to faellitlle the  eure of diſeaſes. 'The commiffioners Will  adopt this expreſſion in the followi ing e-  Port; and, wherever they employ | le No  cliffs, 18, they will always underſtand the  "convullive, drowly or lethargie affections,  produced by the means of the animal  ma netiſm, nay Hh 1 ah EEE a65 50s, | Des  he comimiffioners obſerved,” what f in  "the number of patients in the fats of crifis,  ere were always many women and few  men: that! it was one or two Hours befote  "theſe criſes took place; and that, when  one had taken lace, all the others com-  menced ſucceſſibely, and without any con-  Aderable interval. But after having made  theſe. reneral remarks, the comtilfioners 3  were "Pe e dily of Opinion, | that the public of  "; 25 8 could got be made the ſcene of  e 8 Lo eee of

11770 7 rn * the  | 71 * 15

5

;

— — — ̃ é-0l1— p — ——_—_ = a _ a

N ads 29, | ds eto ne  the. effects is one obſtacle ; too many Fas  are ſeen at once fur any one of them to be  ſeen well. Beſide, the patients of rank.  who repair hither upon account of their.  health, might be diſpleaſed with the en-  quiries of the commiſſioners; the very act  of watching them might appear a nuis,  ſance; and the recollection of this might  be burdenſome, and impede the commiſ-  ſioners in their turn. They therefore  reſolved, that as their frequent attendance  at the public proceſs was unneceſſaty, it,  would be ſufficient for a few, of them to

go from time to time, to confirm the for-

mer general obſervations, io make new ones  in caſe an opportunity ſhould occur for  that purpoſe, and to n them to the  commiſſion aſſembled. ns 54  After having obſerved theſe. effects 3  the public proceſs, it behoved them, in th  next place, to endeavour to diſcover an

cauſes, and enquire into the proofs of -th

exiſtence and utility of the magaetiſm  The queſtion of its exiſtence is firſt. ii  — that of its utility it were idle  examine, till the other ſhall have been full  reſolved. The animal magnetiſm ma  indeed exiſt without being uſeful, art  : cannot be uſeful if it do not exiſt.  — Of conſequence the firſt objea; H  tention with the commiſſioners, ar  direct tendency of their firſt experiment  oug|

—

| go 30 8  ought to be the aſcertaining this exiſtence,”  Again, this was itſelf an o object of confide-' _  rable comprehenſion, and had need of  being ſimplified. The animal magnetiſm”  embraces the whole compaſs of nature;  it is the vehicle, we are told, of the influ-  ence exerted upon us by the celeſtial bodies;  the commiſſioners were of opinion, har.  they ought, in the firſt place, to leave this  moreextenſiveinfluenceout of the queſtion,  land to conſider only that part of the fluid  which is diffuſed over the earth, without  troubling themſelves with hence it comes;  Wn a word, to evince the action it exerciſes  pon us, around us, and within the ſphere  of our inſpection, before they tlio.  o examine its relation to the univerſe.  The moſt certain method of determining  Whe exiſtence of the animal magnetic fluid,  2 ny have-been, to have rendered its pre-

e capable of being perceived by the  neſs ; but much time was not neceſſary to  Wonvince the commiſſioners that this fluid is  Woo ſubtle to be ſubjected to their obſer-  Wation. It is not, like the electrical fluid,  Wminous and viſible; its action is not, like  De attraction of the loadſtone, the object  our ſight; it has neither taſte nor ſmell ;  Ws procels is ſilent, and it ſurrounds you  W& penetrates your frame, without your

ing informed of its preſence by the ſenſe  touch, If e en it exiſt in us

4 \ | N 2  1 t B 1 —  7 % *  i i of a  ? ;  4 P  : « —  | ; ,  i  |

ET DEE Rd * |  und around us, it is after a manner per.  fectly inſenſible. There are perſons among  thoſe who profeſs the magnetiſm, who pr”  tend that it may ſometimes be ſeen pathing  from the extremity of the fingers, which  ſerve it for conductors, or who believe that  they feel its paſſage when you guide your  finger before their face, or along their  hand, In the firſt of theſe caſes, the ema-  nation perceived is merely that of tranſ-   piration, which becomes completely viſible”  when viewed through a ſolar microſcope z  in the ſecond, the impreſſion of cold or  freſhneſs which is felt, an impreflion by >  ſo much the more perceptible the warmer  one is, reſults from the motion of the air  which follows the finger, and the degree  of whoſe temperature is always below. that  of animal heat, When, on the other hand,  the finger is approached to the ſurface of  the face, which is colder than the finger,  and it is held at reſt, the conſequence is a  ſenſation of heat, which is no other than  the communication of the animal heat.

It is alfo pretended that this fluid has a  ſmell, and that it is perceived when either  the finger or an iron conductor is. brought  into contiguity With the noſtrils; it is eben  ſaid, that the ſenſation is different, accord-  ing as the finger or the rod of iron is di-  rected parallel with, or oppoſite to the  poles, N- Deſlon. made the, experiment

8 upon

9

| T1 32 277 85  upon ſevetal of the commiſſioners; th  - cotnmiffioners themſelves have repeated  it upon different ſubjects; not one has ex-  perienced this difference of ſenſation ; and  if, by. giving a.cloſe attention, any ſcent”  has been perceived, it has been that of the  iron, when the rod has been preſented  rubbed and heated; or that of the ema-  nation of the tranſpiration, when the finger  has been preſented, a ſcent frequently  combined with that of the iron with which  tbe finger itſelf has been impreſſed. Theſe  effects Rae been erroneouſly attributed. to  the magnetiſm, but they may be traced i in  12 To natural and definite cauſes.  ndeed M. Deſlon has never 7  By theſe tranfient impreſſions, he did  not think they were to be offered in evi-  dence; on the contrary he expreſsly af-  ſured the commiſſioners, that he could not  demonſtrate to them the exiſtence of the  magnetiſm, otherwiſe than by the action  of this fluid, producin; certain changes if

animated bodies. This exiſtence is fo

2 much the more difficult to be demonſtrated  by effects, which ſhall be incontrovertible,  and whoſe cauſes ſhall be unequivocal ; by  authentic facts, in caſes Where moral cir-  cumſtances cannot exert their influence: in  'a word, by proofs calculated to convince  and compel the underſtanding, the only  pres: which can yield any ſolid nnn

L iQ.

8 *

1 )

to perſons l proficient i in the tudy of  nature.

The action of the ROTO upon atil-  mated bodies may be obſerved in two dif-  rent ways; either as it conſiſts in that  action continued” for a long time, and in  its falutary effects in the treatment of diſ-  eaſes, or in its momentary effects upon the  animal ccoOmy and the SEES  changes there produced. M. Deſlon in-  ſiſted that the former of theſe methods  ſhould be employed principally, and nearly  excluſively ; the commiſſioners have been  of a different opinion, and their reaſons are  as follow.

The majority of diſeaſes have their ſear  in the interior part of our frame. The  collective experience of a great number of  centuries has made us acquainted with the  ſymptoms, which indicate and diſcriminate  them; the ſame experience has taught the  method in which they are to be treated.  What is the object of the efforts of the  phyſician in this method? It is not to op-  poſe and to ſubdue nature, it is to aſſiſt her  in her operations. Nature, ſays the father  of the medical ſcience, cures the diſeaſed;  but ſometimes ſhe encounters obſtacles,  which conſtrain her in her conrfe, an  uſeleſsly . conſume her ſtrength. T *  phyſician is the miniſter of nature; an at-  tentive ier der, = ſtudies the method in

which _

EE

9

| 2 Hott. a $55 F  Wah de Pede. If Wat welded 48  firm, ſtrong, regular and well directed, the  hyſician looks on in filence, and bewares  of diſturbing it by. remedies which would  - IS : C PLS . Na 2 0 WW . Shi  at leafl en, if the method be em-  barraſſed, he facilitates it; if it be too flow  or too rapid, he accelerates or retards it.  Sometimes, to accompliſh his object, he  confines himſelf to the regulation of the  diet: ſometimes he employs, medicines,  The action of a medicine, introduced  into the human body, is à new force, com-  bined with the principal force by which  our life is maintained: if the remedy follow  the ſame route, which this force Has al-  ready opened for the expulſion 5 diſeaſes,

it is uſeful, it is falutary ; if it tend to open  different routes, and to turn aſide this in-  terior action, it is pernicious. _ In the  mean time it muſt be confeſſed that this  ſalutary or pernicious influence, real as it  is, may frequently eſcape common obſer-  vation. L The natural hiſtor Of man Pre-  ſents.us in this repect with very Anger  phenomena. It may be there ſeen that re-  gimens the molt oppoſite, .haye not 15  vented the attainment of an advanced old  age, We may there ſee men, attacked  according to all appearance with the ſame  diſeaſe, recovering in the purſuit of op-  poſite regimens, and in the uſe of remedies  totally, different from each other; nature is  5» 55

*

.  in theſe inſtances. ſufficiently powerful to  maintain the vital principle in ſpite of the  improper regimen, and to triumph at once  over the diſtemper and the remedy. If it  have this power of reſiſting the action of  medicine, by a ſtill ſtronger reaſon it.muſt  have the power of operatin without me-  dicine. Kn he experience of the efficacy of  remedies is always therefore attended with  ſome uncertainty; in the caſe of the mag-  netiſm the uncertainty has this addition,  the uncertainty of its' exiſtence. How  then can we decide upon the action of an  agent, whoſe exiſtence is conteſted, from  the treatment of diſeaſes; when the effect  of medicines is doubtful; whoſe ONE  is not at all problematical 7

The cure which is principally cited in  favour of the magnetiſm” is that of M. le  baron de ——; all claſſes are acquainted  with its hiſtory. We ſhall not here enter  into a diſcuſſion of the facts; we ſhall not

enquire' whether the remedies precedingly  r might have contributed to this  cure. On the one hand the very critical  ſituation of the patient is admitted, and on  the other the inefficacy of all the

means of medical ee the magnetiſm

has been employed and M. je baron de

— has completely recovered. "But

might not a natural criſis have ſingly ape-  rated this recovery? A woman: of low

. frank

.

rank and extremely poor, who lived at the  Gros-caillou, was attacked in 1779 with a  malignant fever in all its ſymptoms; ſne  reſolutely refuſed every aſſiſtance, ſhe only  defired that a veſſel which ſhe had near her  ſhould be kept conſtantly . repleniſhed  with water: - ſhe remained quiet upon the  ſtraw which ſerved her for a bed, drinking  water continually and doing nothing more.  The diſeaſe developed itſelf, paſſed ſuc-  : ceſſively through its different ſtages, and  terminated in a complete cure L. Made-  moiſelle G-—>, who lived at the leſſer  | royal mews, had two indurations formed  1 her ** breaſt, which gave her great  pain; a ſurgeon recommended to her  the uſe of the Eau du Peintre as an ex-  cellent diſſolvent; at the ſame. time in-  forming her, that if this remedy did not  ſucceed in a month, it would be neceſſary  to extirpate them by inciſion. The young  lady, terrified at this ſentence, conſulted  M. Sallin, who gave it as his opinion that  the indurations were ſuſceptible of reſo-  lution; M. Bonvart, who was alſo con-  ſulted, confirmed che opinion of M. Sallin;  Before enterin g:-upon any courſe 25 d

” The 1 of this fat v was laid i in detail .  fore the faculty of medicine at Paris, in an aſſembly de  prima menſis, by M. Bourdois de la Mothe, phyſician  of the charity of Saint-Sulpice, who viſned a the 12 5  158 N every . |

3 |  they preſcribed diſſipation; fifteen days  7 — N ſeized the opera wk  violent cough, and ſo profuſe an expecto-  ration, that ſhe was obliged to be carried  home; ſhe ſpit in the ſpace of four hours  about three pints of a viſcid lymph; one  hour after this M. Sallin examined the  breaſt, he diſcovered no trace of indura-  tion. M. Bouvart, called in the next  day, proved on his part the happy effect  of this natural criſis. If mademoiſelle  G—— had taken Eau du Peintre, the ho-  nour of her cure would haye been attri-  buted to this medicine. WER  The uninterrupted obſervation of a

roves, and the profeſſors of phyſicacknow-  pe 50 that nature alone and without our  interference, cures a great number of per-  ſons. If the magnetiſm were abſolutely  inactive, the patients, who undergo this  method of cure, might be confidered as  abandoned to nature. It would be abſurd  to chuſe a method of deciding upon the  exiſtence of this agent, which, by attri-  buting to it all the oures performed by na-  ture, would tend to, prove that it had  an action uſeful and curative, when in rea-  lity it might have no action at all.  Upon: this head the commiſſioners; are  of the opinion. of M. Mefmer. He re-  jected the cure of diſeaſes, when this me-  thod of proving the magnetiſm was pro-  3 20 D you

— — - 8  S r e

2 8 Oi N

1 38 }

poſed to him by a member of the academy  of ſciences : © It is a miſtake,” replied 12

* to imagine that this kind of  10 unanſwerable; it cannot be 3

. ed that either the phyſician or the me-  * dicine_ cauſes the my of. the pa-

Sitia 5  The treatment I Fi can then

farniſh: nothing but a reſult, always un-

certain, often deceitful; nor can this un-  certainty be diflipated, and all the cauſes of  alluſion anten e but by an infinity of  cures, perhaps by the experience of ſucceſ-  five centuries. The object and import -  ance of the commiſſion demand means of  a ſpeedier deſcription. It was the duty

of the commiſſioners to confine themſelves  to arguments purely phyſical, that is, to

the momentaneous effects of the fluid u

the animal frame, excluding from theſe  effects all the illuſions which might mix

with them, and aſſuring themſelves that

they could proceed from no other cauſe  than the animal magnetiſm.

They propoſed to make experiments  upon eagle ſubjects, who might be willing

to ſubmit to the various experiments

which they ſhould invent; and who, ſome  vf them by their ſimplicity, and others by  Wer intelligence, thould., be 8 1 8 of

Q M. Meſmer, Hiſtorical Abridgemeat pages 5737

1 39 |

iving an exact and faithful account ac-  count of their ſenſations.” Theſe experi-  ments we ſhall not confine ourſelves to  relate i in the order of time, but ſhall follow  the order of the facts they were intended  to elucidate. 5 0

The commiſſioners in the firſt place

reſolyed | to make their firſt 9 ng 3

| upon themſelves, and perfonally to'ex  rience the action of the magnetiſm. The  were extremely curious to become icy  quainted by their own ſenſations with the  effect aſcribed to this agent. They there-  fore ſubmitted themſelves to theſe effects,  and in ſuch'a diſpoſition, that they would  not have been ſorry to have undergone  Tome accidents and a partial deran gement  of health, which being evidently produced  by the operation of the magnetiſm, ſhould  have enabled them to decide this import-  ant queſtion upon the ſpot, and with their  own teſtimony. But in fubmitting them-  ſelves to the magnetiſm in this manner, the  commiſſioners Fave 1 5 one 'neceſ.  fary precaution. There is not an indivi-  dual, in a ſtate of the fulleſt health, who,  if he paid a cloſe attention to the dint,  | would not be ſenfible to an” in nity  of interior motions and Rn, ei-  ther of a pain N 8 oe bor LI  heat in gere 5 his b |  run variations ng 5 at all Fe  re inde ependent « of _— magnetiſin. .To  Ant D on ws

_—

2

C  turn and fix in this manner ones attention  upon oneſelf, is not perhaps itſelf entirely  without its effects. There is ſo intimate  a connection, whatever be the vehicle of  that connection, between the volitions of

the ſoul and the motions of the body, that  it is not eaſy to preſcribe limits to the in-  fluence of attention, which appears to be  nothing more than a train of volitions,  directed, conſtantly and without interrup-  tion, to the ſame object. When we re-  collect that the arm is moved by the will  as it pleaſes, how can we be certain, that  the attention being fixed upon ſome inte-  rior part of our frame, may not excite ſome  Might emotion in it, direct the heat to-  wards it, and ſo modify its actual ſitua-  tion as to produce in it new ſenſations ?  The firſt thing therefore, to which the  commiſſioners were bound to attend, was  not to obſerve too minutely what paſſed  within them. If the magnetiſm were a  real and operative cauſe, there was no need  that it ſhould be made an object of thought,  in order to its action and manifeſting it-  ſelf; it ought, ſo to expreſs ourſelves, to  compel and arreſt the attention, and to  render itſelf perceptible to a mind that  ſhould even be diſtracted from it by deſign,  But in determining to make experi-  ments upon themſelves, the commiſſioners  poanimouſly reſolved to make thoſe ex-  . periments private, without admitting any  | . ſtranger ,

9 -  .

K 3  ſtranger, except M. Deſlon, by whom the  operation was to be e or ſuch  perſons as they ſhould chuſe; in like  manner they engaged not to ſubmit to the  magnetiſm at the public proceſs, in order  that they might diſcuſs freely their obſer-  vations, and be in all events the ſole, or  at leaſt the firſt judges of the ſymptoms  obſerved. $34 pt e

In purſuance of theſe determinations, a a  particular apartment and a ſeparate bucket  were deſtined for their uſe in the houſe of  M. Deflon, and the commiſſioners repaired  thither once in the courſe of every week.  The operation was continued in each ex-  periment for two hours and a half, the  branch of iron being in contact with the  left hypochonder, ſurrounded with a cord  of communication, and forming from time  to time the chain of fingers and thumbs.  They were magnetiſed either by M. Deſlon,  or, in his abſence, by one of his pupils;  ſome of them for a longer time and more  frequently than others, and thoſe With  whom this was the caſe were the com-  miſſioners who appeared from conſtitution  and habit the moſt-ſuſceptible. The ope-  ration was performed ſometimes with the  finger and. the rod of iron preſented and  guided along the different parts of* the  body, ſometimes by the application of the

hands and the preſſure of the fingers, either  "ni ; | upon

0  F

7 the hypochonders, or upon the pit

— . FIX RSS  —

| late them, becauſe t

4

Not one — 55 the commiſſioners felt any  Aalation, or at leaſt none which ought to  be aſcribed to the action of the magnetiſm.  Some of the commiſſioners are of a robuſt  conſtitution ; z others have more delicate

Habits, and are ſubject to interruptions of

their health: one of theſe laſt, was ſenſible  pf a flight pain at the pit of the ſtomach,

in conſequence of a conſiderable preſſure

that was employed upon that part. This  pain continued all that and the next day,  and was accompanied with a ſenſation of  fatigue and dejection. Another felt, in the _  afternoon of one of the days in which the  experiments were performed, . flight 3 irri-  tation of the nerves, to which he i is very

AubjeR. A third, endowed with a ſtill

greater ſenſibility, and eſpecially with an

extreme reſtleſſnefs of the Nerves, Was  ſubject to a higher degree of Far an

a more perceptible irritation; but theſe  lefler accidents. are the reſult, of perp tual  and ordinary variations in the ſtate o their

health, and are of conſequence foreign to

the operation they had undergone, or pro-

| ceed only from the preſſure employed upon

the region of the ſtomach. The com-

miſſioners do not ſpeak of theſe flight

details, but from a 215 fidelity; they

* have impoſed it  as

(481)  as a law upon themſelves | conſtantly and  in every particular to ſay the truth. 2  The commiſſioners could not avoid being  ſtruck with the difference of the private  experiment made upon themſelves from  the public proceſs. All was calm and  filence in the one, all reſtleſſneſs and agi -  tation in the other; there multiplied  ſymptoms, violent criſes, the ordinary ſtate  both of body and mind interrupted and  overthrown, and nature wrought. up tothe  higheſt pitch; here the body free from  pain, and the mind from anxiety, nature  preſerving her ordinary courſe and her  equilibrium, in a word the abſolute pri-  vation of every kind of effect: the ſtu-  pendous influence, which creates, ſuch. an  aſtoniſhment in the public proceſs, appears  no longer; the magnetiſm ſtripped of its  energy ſeems perfectly ſupine and inactive.  The commiſſioners, having at firſt ſub-  mitted to the experiment only once a week,  were deſirous to aſcertain-whether a conti-  nuity of experiment would. produce any  effect; they ſubmitted to it three days  ſucceſſively, but their inſenſibility was the  ſame, and the magnetiſm appeared with  reſpect to them perfectly impotent. This  experiment, made at once upon eight dif-  ferent ſubjects, ſeveral of whom were  ſubject to habitual derangements of health,  authoriſes the concluſion that the nc  pe RE JV

1 |   netiſin/ has little or no action in a ſtate of  health, or even in a ſtate of leſſer infirmity.  We then reſolved to make experiments  upon perſons really diſeaſed, and we choſe  them ont of the lower class.  Seven of theſe were aſſembled at Paſſy,  at the houſe of Dr. Franklin; the opera-  tion was performed upon them by M.  Deflon in the preſence of all the com-

The widow Saint-Amand, aſthmatic,  having the belly, legs and thighs ſwelled;  and dame Anſeaume, who had a ſwelling  upon her thigh, felt no ſenſation ; the  little Claude Renard, a child of fix years  of age, ſcrophulous, almoſt confumptive,  Having the knees ſwelled, the legs bent  Gn, and the articulation nearly de-  prived of motion, a very intereſting child,  and poſſeſſing a greater degree of under-  ſtanding than is uſual at his age, was like-  wife conſcious to no ſenſation; any more  than Genevieve Leroux, nine years of age,  ſubject to convulſions, and to a diſorder  greatly reſembling that which is called  St. Vitus's Dance. Frangois Grenet ex-  perienced ſome effects; he had a diſtemper  in his eyes, particularly in the right, in  which he had ſcarcely any fight, and in  which there was 'a conſiderable tumour.  When the operation was directed towards  the left eye, by approaching and movin  * | ko

en  backward and forward the thumb very  near and for a conſiderable time, he was  ſenſible of a pain in the ball of the eye,  and the eye watered. When the operation  was directed to the right eye, which was  the moſt diſordered, he felt no ſenſation  in it; he felt the ſame pain in the left  eye, and nothing in any other part of the  be S (  9 Charpentier, who had been th. own  down againſt a log of wood by a;cow two  years before, had experienced the moſt un-  fortunate conſequences from this accident;  ſhe loſt. her fight, recoyered it afterwards  in part, but remained in a.ſtate.of habitual,  infirmities; ſhe declared that ſhe had two  ruptures, and the belly of ſo great ſenſi-  bility, that ſhe could not bear the preſſure

e AAA

| The operation was performed upon this  woman as upon the reſt by the applica,  tion and the preſſure of the fingers; the  preſſure was extremely painful to her:  afterwards, in directing the finger towards

the rupture, ſhe complained of a pain in  her head; the finger being placed; Do:  - ' 1 : 85 \ ＋

33 ĩ = ws

her face, ſne ſaid ſhe could not draw her  breath. Upon the repeated motion of the  finger upwards and downwards, ſhe had  ſudden ſtarts of the head 'and ſhoulders,  like thoſe which are commonly occaſioned  by ſurpriſe mixed with terror, for inſtance  that of a perſon who has ſome drops of  cold water ſuddenly thrown in his face.  She appeared to have the ſame ſtartings  Wikia tier eyes were cloſed. The fingers  — held Lin Po her noſe, while her eyes  were ſhut, ſhe complained of a kedlatler  of faintneſs ſo long as they were continued  there. The ſeventh ſubject, Joſeph En-  nuye, experienced ſenſations of a fimilar  nature, but much leſs confiderable.  Of theſe ſeven patients four felt no  ſenſation at all; three experienced ſome  effects from the operation. Theſe effects  deſerved to engage the attention of the  commiſſioners, and demanded an Accurate  examination. of  The ' commiſſioners, 10 obtain Rapid  light, and to define their ideas upon this  part of the ſubject, reſolved to make the  | ment upon patients, placed in other

circumſtances, and ſelected from the polite”  world; ſuch as could not be ſuſpected of  ſimiſter views, and whoſe underſtanding  made them capable of enquiring into and  giving a faithful account of their ſenſa-  dans. Meſdames de Band de V=—,  1

15  meſſieurs “1 and R — were ad-  mitted to the private bucket together with  the commiſſioners ; they were intreated to  remark their ſenſations, without Sing  upon them too regular an attention. M.  M—— and madame de V=— were the  only perſons who experienced any fenſa-  tion. M. M. had an indolent tumour  over the whole articulation of the knee,  and a conſtant pain in the patella, He  declared, during the operation, that he felt  nothing in any, part of his body, except in  the moment that the finger was guided  before the diſeaſed knee; he then thought  that he felt a ſlight degree of heat in the  blace, in which he has habitually the ſen-  lation of pain. Madame de v *

oY

tacked with a nervous diſorder, was ſeveral  times upon the point of falling aſleep  during the operation. The experiment  having continued for an hour and nineteen  minutes without interruption, and for the

reater part by the application of the hands,  fie was ſenſible to nothing but a ſen-  fation of irritation and dejection. Theſe  two ſubjects underwent the experiment  only once. M. R, whoſe diſtemper  was the remainder'of an obſtruction in the  liver, the conſequence of a very violent  diſorder of that kind ill cured, underwent  the operation three times and felt nothing.  Madame de B-—, ſeverely attacked with  e 15 obſtructions,

*** —ͤ—é— — ————  — — I — — —-— q 2 —

— — — — na 5 rr a  Sn re —— ons a — ——t— — — — — ————— ———— —— ——————— —O — —  — — — — * 8 — — ͤ—— — —

I 48]

obſtructions, underwent the experiment

- conſtantly at the ſame time with the com-

mithoners, and felt nothing; it is neceſſary

to . obſerve, that ſhe ſubmitted to the

magnetiſm with an extreme tranquility,  which. originated in the higheſt degree of  incredulity. 3

Experiments were made at other times  485 different ſubjects, but without the

iſtance of the bucket. One of the com-  miſſioners, i in a violent head-ach, had the  operation performed upon him by M. Deſ-  lon for half an hour; one of the ſymptoms  of his diſorder was an extreme cold in his  feet. M. Deſlon brought his foot near  that of the patient, the foot was never the  1 and the head- ach laſted its ordi-

nary term. The patient, having placed  himſelf near a fire, obtained from it the  falutary effects which heat has conſtantly  procured him, without experiencing, either

during that day or the night following, |  any effect from the magnetiſm. _

Dr. Franklin, though the weakneſs of  his health hindered him from coming to  Paris, and afliſting at the experiments  which were there made, was magnetiſed  by M. Deſlon at his own houſe at Paſſy.  The aſſembly was numerous; every perſon  who was preſent underwent the operation.  Some ſick perſons, who had come with  M. Deſlon, were ſubject to the effects the

- the

wa... —C— . * * 22 * * Y 1  * »7 ade: E ** x ad * e * s 4  ; 7

T magnetiſm in the ſame manner. as at  the public proceſs; but madame de B—,  Dr. Franklin, his two relations, his ſecre-  tary, and an American officer, felt no ſen-  ſation, though one of Dr. Franklin's re-  lations was convaleſcent, and the American  officer had at that time a regular fever.  The experiments we have related, furniſh  a number of facts, calculated to illuſtrate,  and fit to be compared with each other,  and from which the commiſſioners were  at liberty to deduce certain inferences. Of  n ſick perſons five only appeared to  feel any effec from 'the operation, nine  felt no fe at all. The commiſſioner,  who had the head-ach and coldneſs in the  feet, derived no benefit from the mag-  netifin, nor did his feet recover their  natural heat, This agent has not therefore  the property which has been attributed to it  of communicating heat to the feet. The  magnetiſm has alſo been ſaid to have the  property of diſcovering the Rc and  particularly the ſeat of diſeaſes, by the  pain, which the action of this fluid. infal-  libly occaſions in that part. Such an ad-  vantage would be of great conſequence  the fluid which was the inſtrument of 1  would be a valuable means in the hands 9  the phyſician, often deceived by 3  ſymptoms : but Frangois Grenet felt n  ſenſation, '1 no N but in the eye kalt  affected.

A

— om  - —— A I i gr re

A ho #1

affected. If the redneſs and tumour of the

'other eye had not furniſhed external ſymp-  toms, in judging from the effect of the  magoetiſm we ſhould have been led to

conclude that it was undiſtempered. M.  R

and madame de B—, both at-  tacked with obſtructions, and madame de  B — with great ſeverity, as they were

_ conſcious to no ſenſation, would have re-  ceived no intelligence, either reſpecting the  ſpecies, or the ſeat of their diſeaſe, And  yet obſtructions are among the diſorders,

which are ſaid to be particularly ſubject to  the action of the magnetiſm ; fince ac-  cording to the new theory the free and  rapid circulation of this fluid through the  nerves, 1s a means of opening the channels  and deſtroying the obſtacles, that is, the

obſtructions, which it encounters in its

paſſage. It is at the ſame time ſaid that

the magnetiſm is the touchſtone of health:

if therefore M. R

and madame de

| B—— had not 5 the derange-

ments and the ſufferings inſeparable from

obſtructions, they would have had a right  to believe that they enjoyed the beſt health  in the world. The ſame thing may be  ſaid of the American officer: the mag-

netiſm therefore announced as the diſ-

eoverer of diſeaſes completely failed of |

its . n | oF  N $5 "TH, 1 5 f The

The heat that M. M felt in the  patella, is an effect too ſlight and fugitive  to authoriſe any concluſions. It may be  ſaſpected that it proceeded from the cauſe  already deſcanted on, a too great attention  to obſerve what paſſes within us: the ſame  attention would diſcover ſimilar ſenſations  at any other time, when the magnetiſm  was not employed. The drowfineſs ex-  perienced by madame de V=— muſt un-

doubtedly be aſcribed to the regularity and  fatigue of preſerving the ſame ſituation;  if ſhe was ſenſible to any vaporous emo-  tion, it muſt be remembered that it is a  known property of nervous affections, to  have much dependency upon the attention  that is paid them; to renew them it is  only neceſſary to hear them ſpoken of, or  to think of them. It is eaſy to judge  what ought to be expected from a woman,  whoſe nerves are extremely irritable, and  who, being magnetiſed for an hour and  nineteen minutes, had during that time  no other ſubject of reflection than that of  the diforders which are habitual to her.  She might have had a nerveus criſis more  conſiderable than that we have deſcribed,  without our having a right to be ſurpriſed  at it. 8 1 755  There remains then only the effects  produced upon dame Charpentier, Fran-  cois Grenet and Joſeph Ennuyé, which

"BW | can

52 1]

can be ſuppoſed to derive from the opera-  tion of the magnetiſm. In comparing  theſe three particular facts to the reſt, the  commiſſioners were aſtoniſhed that threo  ſubjects, of the lower claſs ſhould be the  only ones who felt any thing from the  operation, while thoſe of a more elevated  rank, of more enlightened underſtandings,  and better qualified to deſcribe their ſenſa-  tions, have felt nothing. Without doubt  Frangois Grenet experienced a pain and a  watering in the eye when the thumb was  approached very near to it; dame Char-  pentier complained, that in touching her  ſtomach the preſſure correſponded to her  rupture; and the preſſure might have been  in part the cauſe of what ſhe felt; but the  commiſſioners ſuſpected that theſe ſenſa-  tions were augmented by moral cauſes.  Let us repreſent to ourſelves the ſitua-

tion of a perſon of the lower claſs, and of

conſequence ignorant, attacked with a  diſtemper and defirous of a cure, introduced

company, partly compoſed of phyſicians,  where an operation is performed pov  him totally new; and fram which he pe  ſuades. himſelf before hand that he is 7 5  to experience prodigious effects. Let us  add to this that he is paid for his compli-  ance, that he thinks Fi ſhall contribute  more to our ſatisfaction by profeſſing to  experience

23

n _— * , ;  an 1 N b o  N *. R * » be % %  * * * YI - * a7 JE * 9 o * *  * AW "I *  o *

with ſome degree of ceremony to a large

1  experience ſenſations of ſome kind; and  we ſhall have definite cauſes to which to  attribute theſe effects; we ſhall at leaſt  have juſt reaſon to doubt whether theis  true cauſe be the magnetiſm... {1

Beſide this it may be enquired, why the  magnetiſm produced theſe effects upon  perſons, who knew what was done to them;  and might imagine they had an intereſt-in  ſaying what they ſaid, while-it took no ſort  of hold upon the little Claude Renard;  upon an organifation endowed with all the  delicacy of infancy, ſo irritable, ſo ſuſceps  tible? The ſound underſtanding and inge-  nuous temper of this child evinoe the veta-  city of his relation. Why too has this  agent produced no effect upon Geneviève  Leroux, who was in a perpetual ſtate ot  convulſion? Her nerves were certainly  ſufficiently irritable, how comes it that the  magnetiſm did not diſplay its power,  either in augmenting; or diminiſhing her  convulfions? Her indifference and impaſ-  ſibility induced the belief, that the reaſon  of her having felt nothing, was the idiot=  iſm which did not permit her to judge  that ſhe ought to have felt any thing.  From theſe facts the commiſſioners. are  at liberty to obſerve, that the magnetiſm  has ſeemed to have no exiſtence for thoſe  ſubjects, who have ſubmitted to it with  any degree of incredulity; that the com-  Zungen E 3 miſſioners,

*

i 5 54 ]  Hiche hes 2 even thoſe who have their  nerves moſt irritable, ' having expreſsly  turned their attention to other objects, and  having armed themſelves with that philo-  ſophic doubt which ought always to ac-  company enquiry, have felt none of thoſe  ſenſations, Which were experienced by the  three patients of the lower claſs ; and th  have à right to ſuſpect that theſe ſenſa-  tions, ſuppoſing their reality, were the  fruits of anticipated perſuaſion, and might  be operated by the mere force of imagina-  tion. Of this ſuſpicion another claſs of  experiments has oak the reſult, Their  ſubſequent reſearches were directed towards  a: new object; it was neceſſary to deſtroy |  or confirm the ſuſpicion they had formed,  to determine to What degree the power of  the imagination can influence our ſenſa-  tions, and to demonſtrate whether it can  be the cauſe, in Whole or in part, of the  effects attributed to the magnetiſm.  At this time the commiſſioners heard of  the experiments, which were made at the  houſe of M. the dean of the faculty by M.  Jumelin, doctor of phyſie; they were de-  ſirous of ſeeing theſe experiments, and  they met M. Jumelin in a body at the  " houſe of M. Majault, one of the commiſ-  ſioners. M. Jumelin declared to them  that he was a diſciple neither of M. Meſ-  N nor o M; wee nah he had learned

3 nothing

( 58 +1  nothing reſpecting the animal magnetiſm .  from them, but had formed his principles  and digeſted his proceſs from what he  had heatd upon the: ſubje& in converſa-  tion. His principles conſiſt in regarding  the animal magnetic fluid, as a fluid which  circulates in the human body, and which

flows from it, but which is eſſentially the

tame with the principle of animal heat;

like all other fluids he conceived. that it  tended to an equilibrium, and that it  therefore paſſes from the body in which  the greateſt quantity of it reſides, into that  which has the leaſt. His method does  not differ from that of meſſieurs Meſmer  and Deſlon leſs than his principles; like  them he performs the operation with the  finger and the rod of iron as conductors,  and by the application of the hands, but  without any diſtinction of poles.

Eight men and two women ſubmitted  to the operation in the firſt experiment,  and felt nothing; at length a woman, who  Waits in the hall of M. Alphonſe le Roy,  doctor of phyſic, having been magnetiſed  in the forehead, but without touching her,  ſaid that ſhe felt the ſenſation of heat.  M. Jumelin guiding-his hand, and pre-  ſenting the five extremities of bis fingers  over the whole of her face, ſhe ſaid that

- (he felt as it were a flame; that pal fied from  PF to . ; * in t .  ſhe

1 36 ]

ſhe ſaid that ſhe felt heat; magnetiſed upon  the back ſhe made the ame declaration:  the alſo ſaid that ſhe felt hot in every ler  of her body, and that her head ached.

The commiſſioners, obſerving that, of  eleven perſons that underwent. the experi-  merit; one only had been ſenſible: to the  magnetiſm of M. Jumelin, were of  opinion that this perſon had experienced  certain ſenſations, only becauſe ſhe had  probably an imagination more eaſily ex-  cited than the 1 the opportunity was  favourable for clearing up the point. The  ſenfibility of this woman being perfectly  eſtabliſhed, the buſineſs was ole to pro-  tect her from the illuſions of the imagi-  nation, or at leaſt to leave her imagination  without any thing to direct its operations.  The commiſſioners propoſed to blindfold  her, in order to obſerve what her ſenſa-  tions would be, when ſhe could no longer  know any thing reſpecting the conduct of  the experiment, She was accordingly  blindfolded and magnetiſtd; the pheno-

mena no longer anſwered to the places  towards which the magnetiſm was direct-

ed. Magnetiſed ſucceſſively upon the  ſtomach and in the back, ſhe felt only a

heat in her head, a _ in both TORT®  00 left ear. |

The bandage was ad: from ber  de, and M. n having ya gs  ands

U 867 71  hands upon the nders, ſhe - faid  that ſhe felt heat; after a few minutes the  ſaid that ſhe was ready. to faint, and ſhe  fainted in effect. When ſhe was tolerably  recovered, the experiment was reſumed,

ſhe was blindfolded, M.] umelin was remov-

ed, ſilence recommended, and the woman was  induced to believe that the qperation was  performing. The effects were the ſame,  though no operation, either near or diſtant  was performed; the felt the fame heat, the  ſame pain in her eyes and in her ears 3 be-  ſides which the Kue t in ene, eg

Jong 5: güne ed -

After a Ingrter! Jef an Wien a ſign was  made to M. Jumelin . her in

the ſtomach, ſhe felt no ſenſation; in the

back, it was the fame thing. The ſenſa-  tions diminiſhed inſtead of augmenting.

The pains in her head continued, the heat  N back and loins ceaſd.

We re in this inſtance certain effects  produced, and theſe ſimilar to thoſe which   werveperencad by the three ſubjects, re-  Aing whom the -experimient-.has:already  dern dstallefl, But the' former and the F1  latter were obtained in different methods; I  it follows that this diffetence is of no cn |  ſequence. The proceſs of meſſieurs Meſ-  mer and Deſlon, and an oppoſite. proceſs |  have produced the ſame The |  ; e aa is therefore K

It B  . N

1 782  wah 11 may FOE obſerved e eile be

woman was permitted to ſee the operation, 5

the placed her ſenfations preciſely in the  | towards which it was directed; that

on the other hand when ſhe did not ſee  the operation, ſhe placed them at hazard,  and in parts very diſtant from thoſe which

were the object of the magnetiſm. It was  natural to conclude! that theſe ſenſations,

real or pretended, were determined by the  Imagination; | Of this we were convinced  When we ſaw that being entirely at reſt,  the preceding ſenfations having ceaſed, and  the bandage being fixed over her eyes, this  woman experienced all the ſame effects,  though no operation was performed; but

the r aeg was complete, when

After à remiſſion of a quarter of ab hour,

der imagination being undoubtedly cooled

and worn down; the effects, in the room

of erde at the moment  in ehh the 6  Reed. BI Ant 11911; Df 80010

© ©

ion Was! actually re-

ou 1 lle was . felted! Wirhdia- faintnefs, .

onen are ſometimes liable to this ac-  ent being tight  dor otherwiſe — — N  tion of the hands upon the hypochonders  e capable of iy aces the fame effect  a woman bannt. ſuſceptible; but  af ere is no nell of having recourſe to this

3 K the appearance. The

dee From: their

weather :

-

I v1.  tler was extremel 7 TRE the woman  had unqueſtionably felt ſome emotion in  the beginning of the experiment, ſhe had  made an effort upon herſelf to ſubmit to  a new and unknown operation, and it is.  by no means extraordinary that an effort,  continued for a longer time than the  conſtitution will bear, | ſhould; eng. a ;  property to faint. _ |

This ſwoon ' had therefore: a W  Rae cauſe, but the ſenſations, Which  ſhe experienced when no operation was  performed upon her, could be only the

reſult of imagination. In ſimilar experi-

ments, which M. Jumelin made in the  ſame place the next day, the commiſſioners  being preſent, upon a man WhO was  blindfolded, and upon a woman who wWas  not blindfoided, e reſult was preciſely  the ſame; it was Coins their anſwers  were determined by he queſtions that  were put to them, that is, the queſtion

inted out where the ſenſation was ex-  | pected to be; in the room of directing the

magnetiſm upon them, all that was done  was the exalting and directing their ĩimagi-  nation. A child of five years of age being  afterwards magnetiſed, felt nothing but  the heat which he —_ lt: es con-

tracted at play. ae 41s

Theſe experiments! a peg ſatdeienghy  | important: to the comenlſoners for them  5 to

ll 8e.

| 8 2 tepetition of them, in 228 to  obtain further light into the ſubject, and  M. Jumelin had the complaiſance to com-  ply with their requeſt. It would be to  no purpoſe to object, that the method of  De Was a bad one; —  ent moment it was not pr to  bring the magnetiſm, but the imagination  to the proof. 4 01 |  The commiſſioners dend to blindfold  fabjects who had alfeady undergone the  magnetical operation, for 0” moſt part  not to magnetiſe them at all; but to put  to them intetrogations, ſo; framed, as to  i 7 rk te them theit anſwers. This  mode of proceeding was not caleulated to  deceivo them, it only miſled their imagi-  nation. In reality, When no operation was  performed upon them, their ſole anſwer  ought to have been, that they felt no ſen-  ation s and Mhen the operation was per-  formed, the impreſſion they felt, not the  manner in whieh: they rene  ovight; to have dictated their replies.  The commifſſieners adjourned cee  tothe houſe of, M. Jumelig they began  wath an experiment upon his ſervant. They  Ren bandage over His eyes, prepared for  1 and Which they erer. in  ſucceeding experiments. The ban-  8 made of two calottes of elaſtic  gunz Whoſe NG was filled with  0 N edredon;

"T 61 ; bl "Fe

edredon ; the whole incloſed and ſown up

in two pieces of ſtuff of à circular form:

Theſe pieces of ſtuff were then faſtened

to each other, and to two firings which

were tied in a knot at the back part of the

head. Placed over the eyes, left in

their interval room for the noſe; and the

entire liberty of reſpiration, without the

perſon blindfolded being permitted to re-

ceive even the ſmalleſt particle of light,  either through, or above, or below the  bandage. Theſe precautions having been

contrived, with an equal view to the con-

venience of the ſubject, and the certainty  of the reſult, the a of M. Jumelin  was perſuaded that the operation was per-

forming upon him. Upon this he felt an  almoſt univerſal ſenſation of heat, and  certain emotions in the region of the belly;  together with an extreme heavineſs ; B

degrees he grew drowſy and appeared upon

the point of falling aſleep. This experi-

ment proves what we have already fark, .

that the ſymptom of drowſineſs" is t

effect of ſituation and wearineſs, not of

the magnetiſm.

The ſame perſon being afttomaids mags |

netiſed with his eyes uncovered, ' and a rod  of ion being preſented to his 3  he experienced ſenſations of pricking  bandage being then re 4 —  curaſtance repeated, he was conſcious to

9 no

N k 2 4 7 * - 1 » 0 >  8 10 ; N —— * 5 * d * err * 22 * 2 . _ * *  * * ad) o YEY «EY ö 1  * 4 LY . * 9 F 4 *  * ***  * on *  q N

no ſenſation. The rod of iron was then

removed, and the patient being interro-

gated if he felt nothing in his forehead,  he declared that he felt ſomething move  backward and forward from one ſide of it

to the other. e

M. B——, a man of learning, and  particularly acquainted with the ſcience of  medicine, was then blindfolded, and pre-  ſented us with the ſame ſpectacle, feeling  certain ſenſations when he was not acted  upon, and often feeling nothing when the  operation was performed. Theſe ſenſa-  tions went to ſuch a length, that, previ-  ouſly to the being magnetiſed in any man-

ner, but believing that the operation had  been performing for ten minutes, he felt  a heat in his loins which he compared to  that of a ſtove. It is evident that M.  B—— had a very ſtrong ſenſation, ſince,  in order to convey an idea of it, he thought  it neceſſary to have recourſe. to ſuch a  _ compariſon; this ſenſation however he  owed ſolely to imagination, which was the  only agent concerned in the affair.

The commiſſioners, particularly thoſe or >

the faculty of medicine, made an infinite  number of experiments upon different ſub-  jects, whom they either magnetiſed them  ſelves, or perſuaded that they underwent

the operation. They performed the ope-  ration indifferently, either oppoſite to, or  TE re bp, r

"LT 63 J

in the alle e of the poles or at ght

angles with them, and in each caſe obtained  the ſame effects; experiencing in all theſe

experiments no other difference, than that

90 an imagination more or leſs 9 225

8 * M. Sigault, doctor 4 the faculty of. Paris *  known for his invention of the operation of the ſymphyſis

of the oſſa pubis, made a number of experiments, tend-

ing to prove that the magnetiſm is merely an imagi-  nary power. The following is the detail which he made  in a letter, dated July the 3oth, 17844 ene og  one of the commiſſioners.

„ Having given the perſons who inhabited — *  << houſe in the Marais, to underſtand that I vas a pupil  « of M. Meſmer, I produced various effects upon the  woman of the houſe. The magiſterial tone and the  « ſerious air I affected, together with certain geſtures,  „ made a very great impreſſion upon her, which ſhe

at firſt was 72 irous to conceal from me; but havi

« guided my hand upon the region of the heart, I felt |

<« that it palpitated. The Rate of opprefion in which  ' <<. ſhe appeared likewiſe: indicated a contraction of the  < cheſt. Other ſymptoms were connected with theſe;  <. her face became convulſed, her eyes wandered, ſhe  at length fell into a ſwoon, then threw up her dinner,  ce had ſeveral ſtools, and was reduced to à ſtate of  „ wealcneſs and ſinking, perfectly incredible. I re-

peated the ſame trick upon ſeveral perſons, and ſue-

ce ceeded more or leſs, according to their different  degrees of ſenſibility and credulity.

A celebtated artiſt, maſter of — to the chil  =— dren of one of our. princes, complained for ſeveral  % days of an extreme head-ach ; he acquainted; me  «©: with it upon the Pont-royal ; ; having perſuaded him  that I was initiated in the myſteries af M. Meſmer,  I expelled his head- ach almoſt inſtantaneouſiy by the  < means of a few geſtures, to his great aſtoniſiment.

n l 1  . | RO 3037 »# {+44  f -  % 12 *

e

—— — * — — > 2222 — 7— —  "1 l —_ Z S = —_—  — . "%. — ., EY 2 «- lem

Fhbey were therefore e  imagination alone is capable of producing

4 I produced the ſame effects upon the apprentice of  4 A hatter in the ſame diſtemper. The lad felt nothing  in ee e I then laid u  « hand upon his falſe ribs, bidding him at the ſame time  lock in my face. He immediately felt a contraction  cc of the cheſt, palpitations of the heart, yawnings, and  & an extreme dejection. He doubted no longer of the

c power I d over him. I then guided my bogey |

46 over che part affected, and aſked him what he fe  $$ He'replied that his pain diſlodged itſelf and deſcended.

< Laffured him that I would guide it towards his arm,

sand make it come out at his thumb, at the ſame time  ueezing it with conſiderable force. He took me

15

e At that period he ſtopped me in the ſtreet to tell me  ce that his pain was returned. This effect ſeems to be  et the ſame with that produced by certain dentiſts upon  & che mental faculties of thoſe, who go to them to have a  Further wy being in the parlour of a convent,  rue du Colombier, fauxbourg Saint Germains, a  «- young lady ſaid to me: I underſtand, far, that yu are  . a pupil of M. Meſmer. I am fo, replied I; and  I can the magnetical operation upon you,  « notwithſtanding the intervention of the grate. At  & the ſame time I preſented my finger; ſhe was terri-  < fied, trembled extremely, and beſought me for God's  <6 ſake to proceed no farther. Her emotion was ſuch,  <« that, if I had perſevered in my experiment, ſhe would  * infallibly have fallen into convulſions.”

M. Sigault relates that he had himſelf felt the power  of imagination. One day, the operator having under-  tuen to perform upon him the magnetical operation  to convince him of. its reality, at the moment he had  determined to touch him, he felt a contraction of the

cheſt; and à palpitation of the heart. But having im-

mediately compoſed himſelf, the geſtures and the proceſs

of the magnetiſm were employed in vain, and made no

7

impreffion upon him.

various

"XY

ie, convinced that the

*

U 69 Þ  various ſenſatious, and cauſing the patient.  to experience both pain and heat, and even  a very conſiderable degree of heat, in all  parts of the body, and they concluded that  it of courſe entered for a conſiderable ſhare.  into the effects attributed to the animal  magnetiſm. It muſt at the ſame time be |  admitted, that the proceſs of the magnetiſm |  produces in the animated, body changes, =  more diſtinguiſhed, and derangements more.  conſiderable, than thoſe we have juſt re-  ported. None of thoſe ſubjects, whom  we have hitherto deſcribed as the imaginary  objects of the magnetical operation, were  ſo far impreſſed as to produce convulſions;  it was therefore a new ſubject for the ex-  periments of the commiſſioners, to enquire, .  whether by the mere energies of the ime-  gination it were poſſible to produce criſes,  ſimilar to thoſe which we have ſtated in the  , nn pon  Many experiments were thought of for.  the deciſion of this queſtion. . When a  tree has been touched according to the  principles and method of the magnetiſm,  every perſon who ſtops under it, ought to  experience in a greater or leſs degree the |  effects of this agent; there have even been |  ſome in this ſituation who have ſwooned; -  or experienced convulſions: We commu-  nicated our ideas upon this ſabjet to M,  Deſlon, who replied, that the experiment  153511 | F ought

a

*

1 66

eught to ſucceed, provided the ſubject  were extremely ſuſceptible; and it was

agreed that it ſhould be made at Paſſy in

the preſence of Dr. Franklin. The neceſ-

ſity that the ſubject ſhould be ſuſceptible,

led the commiſſioners to conceive, that to  render the experiment deciſive and unan-  ſwerable, it was neceſſary that it ſhould be  made upon a perſon of M. Deſlon's choice,  and of whoſe ſuſceptibility to the opera-

tions of the magnetiſm he was already con-  vinced. M. Deflon therefore brought  with him a boy of about twelve years of  age; an apricot tree was fixed upon in the  orchard of Dr. Franklin's garden, -confi-  derably diſtant from any other tree, and  calculated for the preſervation of the mag-  netical power which' might be impreſſed  upon it. M. Deſlon was led thither alone  to perform the operation, the boy in the  mean. time remaining in the houſe, and  another perſon along with him. We

could have wiſhed that M. Deflon had not  heen preſent at the ſubſequent part of the  experiment, but he declared that he could  not anſwer for its ſucceſs, if he did not  direct his cane and his countenance to-  wards the tree, in order to augment the  action of the magnetiſm. It was therefore  refolyed, that M. Deſlon ſhould' be placed

2 the greateſt poſſible diſtance, and that

tween

3

1 67 ]  tween him and the boy, in order to aſcer-  tain the impracticability of any ſignals  being made by M. Deſlon, or any intelli-  gence being maintained between them.  Theſe precautions in an experiment the  efſence of which muſt be authenticity, are  indiſpenſible, without giving the perſon  with reſpect to whom they are ecptoyeda  right to think himſelf offended: ©  Tbe boy was then brought into the  orchard his eyes covered with the bandage,  preſented ſucceſſively to four trees upon  which the operation had not been per-  formed, and at to embrace each of  them for the ſpace of two minutes, the  mode of communication which had been  preſcribed by M. Deſlon himſelf. |  M. Deſlon, preſent, and at a an  able diſtance, directed his cane towards the  tree which had been the object 1 His  22 120 :  At the firſt tree the boy being interro-  at the end of a minute, e that  e perſpired in large drops; he coughed,  foie, a — complained of = Cight pain in his  head ; the diſtance of the tree which had  been ee was about 0 ſeven  =

At the frat tes ** felt the d  of ſtupefact ion and pain in his bad; the  . e 1 Ae” ty  ö . 2 255 98 Ta - 1 A.

_—

1 68  At the third tree the ſtupefaction and  Ve reer increaſed conſiderably; he ſaid

PE that he believed he was approaching to the

tree which had been magnetiſed ; the we  tance was then about thirty eight feet.  In fine at the fourth tree which had 12  hivn rendered the obje& of the operation,  and at the diſtance, of. about twenty four  feet from the tree which had, the boy  fell into a criſis; he fainted away, his  limbs ſtiffened, and he was carried to a  neighbouring graſs- plot, where M. Deſlon  5 — to his ann tecoviteg  m  The reſult of this experiment is nia  contrary. to the theory of the animal mag-  netiſm. M. Deſlon accounted for it by  obſerving, that all the trees by their very  nature, participated of the magnetiſm, and  that their magnetiſm was beſide reinforced  by his preſence. But in that caſe a perſon  ſenſible to the power of the 1  could not hazard a walk in a garden with

out the riſt of convulſions; an aſſertion con ·

futed by the experience of every day. The  ee dere of M. Deſlon had no greater in-  fluence here, than in the coach, in which

the boy came along with him, was placed 5

oppoſite to him, and felt nothing. "If he

h bad experienced no ſenſation even under  the tree which was magnetiſed, it might  - * been ſaid that at leaſt * that * a

. L 69: J 1  he had not been ſufficiently ſuſeeptible:  but the boy fell into a criſis under a tree  which was not magnetiſed; the criſis was  therefore the effect of no phyſical or ex-  terior cauſe, but is to be aſcribed ſolely to  the influence of imagination. The expe-  riment is therefore entirely concluſive: the  boy knew that he was about to be led to a  tree upon which the magnetical operation  had been performed, his imagination was  ſtruck, it was exalted by the ſucceſſive  ſteps of the experiment, and at the fourth  tree it was raiſed to the height neceſſary  to produce the criſis. . 15  Other experiments were made calculat-  ed to ſupport this, and the reſult was the  ſame. One day when the commiſſioners  were all together at Paſſy at the houſe of  Dr. Franklin, and M. Deſlon with them,  they previouſly intreated the latter to bring  ſome of his patients with him, ſelecting 1  thoſe of the lower claſs, who were moſt  ſuſceptible to the magnetiſm. - M. Deflon |  brought two women; and while he was  employed in performing the operation  upon Dr. Franklin and ſeveral perſons in  another apartment, the two women were  ſeparated, and placed in different rooms.  One of them, dame P——, had films  over her eyes; but as ſhe could always fee  a little, the bandage already deſcribed was  employed. She was perſuaded that M.  13233 ith. Deilon

"7 » i

Dellen had been brought into the robm to

perform the magnetical operation; ſilence  vos recommended; three commiſſioners  were preſent, one to interrogate, another  to make minutes of the tranſaction, and  the third to perſonate M. Deflon. The  converſation was pretended to be addreſſed  to M. Deſlon; he was deſired to begin the  operation; the three commifſioners in the  mean time remained perfectly quiet and  folel _ occupied in obſerving her ſymptoms...  e end of three minutes the patient  to feel a nervous ſhuddering; ſhe  had 8 ſucceſſively a PR in the back of  her head, in her arms, a creeping in her  hands, that was her ex preflion, ſhe grew  Riff, ſtruck her hands violent together,  roſe from her ſeat, ſtamped with her feet:  the ctiſis had all the 3 ſymptoms.  Two other commiſſioners, who were in  the adjoining room with the door ſhut,  heard the ſtamping of the feet and the  clapping of the hands, and without ſeeing  any thing were witneſſes to this waste ex-  40 6 rn Rs AE | |  The two e ee we hive men-  toned were with the other patient, made-  moiſelle B —, who was ſubject to net-  vous diſtempers. No bandage was em-  40 upon her, but her eyes were at li-  berty; the was ſeared with her face to-  , nds @ door ty" was hat, and per.  bh ſuaded

1 2

„ T %  ſuaded that M. Deflon was on the othet  | ſide, employed in performing upon her the  magnetical operation. This had' ſcarcely  taken place a minute, before ſhe began to  feel the ſymptom of ſhuddering; in another  minute ſhe had a chattering of the teeth  and an univerſal heat; in fine in the third  minute ſhe fell into à regular criſis. Her  reſpiration was quick, ſhe ftretched out  both her arms behind her back, twiſting  them extremely, and bending her body  forward: her whole body trembled; the  chattering of her teeth became ſo loud that  it might be heard in the open air; ſhe bit  her hand, and that with ſo much forte,  that the marks of the teeth remained per-  fectly viſible. Nin 1  It is proper to obſerve that neither of  theſe ſubjects were touched in any man-  ner; their pulſe was not even felt, that it  might not be poſſible to ſay that the an  netic fluid was communicated ; the criſes  however were complete. The commil-  ſioners, who had been deſirous to know  the effect of the influence of the imagina«  tion, and to appreciate the ſhare it might  have in the magnetical criſes, had now  obtained all that they deſired. It is in-  poſſible to ſee this influence diſplayed in a  clearer or more incontrovertible/ manner  than in. theſe two experiments. If the  ſubjects have declared that their criſes were  - Þ Os, F4' ſtronger

ſtronger in the public treatment, it muſt  be aſeribed to the power of communica-  tion poſſeſſed by the numerous emotions,  and that in general every individual ſymp-

"T 72 )

tom has been increaſed. by the Ccontem-

4 1 5 of fimilar ſymptoms.

We had occaſion to try a ſecond expe-

7 riment. upon dame P. —, and to expe-

rience how much ſhe: was under the do-

minion of her imagination. The expe-  rĩment of the magnetic baſon was propoſ-  ed: this experiment conſiſts in diſcovering

among a number of baſons one that has

been magnetiſed. They are ſucceſſively  preſented to a patient ſuſceptible to the  magnetiſm ; he ought to fall into a criſis,

or at leaſt to experience ſenſible. effects,

when the | magnetic. baſon is preſented: to  him, he ought to be perfectly indifferent

to all the reſt. All that was neceſſary

according to the recommendation of M.

Deflon, was to preſent them to him in the  direction of the poles, i in order that he who  preſents the baſon may not himſelf mag-  netiſe the patient, and that there may be

no other effect than that of the retten  of the baſon itſelf.

Dame P was fant for to the e

to the houſe of M. Lavoiſier, where M.  Deſlon was; ſhe began with falling into a  criſis in the anti- chamber, before ſne had

ou either the comm n or M. Deſlon,  | and

. 4 . : 1  * 8

ä 1

and merely from the knowledge ſhe had  that ſhe was about to ſee him; a diſtin-

guiſhed effect of the infigence of 0p  nation.  When ſhe had * e be |  ſhe was led into the room deſtined for the  experiment. Several china baſons were  preſented to her which had not an mag  netiſed; at the ſecond baſon ſhe began to  feel the uſual ſymptoms, and at the fourth  fell into a complete criſis. It may be ob-  | jected that her actual ſtate was a 4. — of  ctiſis, that it had begun in the anti- cham-  ber, and was renewed by its own ſingle  energy; but a circumſtance which is 5  ſive, is that having aſked for ſomething to  drink, the baſon which had been vo  tiſed by M. Deſlon himſelf was preſented  to her; ſhe drank with perfect calmneſs

and ſaid that ſhe felt herſelf much better.  The baſon and the magnetiſm had there-  fore failed of their effect, ſince the criſis  was tranquilized in, the Sham. of bang  augmented.

om time after, 4555 M. Majault era  mined the films ſhe had over her eyes, the  magnetic baſon was preſented to the back  of her head, and continued there for twelve  minutes; ſhe was unconſcious of the ope-  ration and felt no effect from it; ſhe 4d  even at no time been more tranquil, be-  cate her imagination was diverted, 1  x

*

n the examination that was mak- |  ing into the diſorder of her eee  The commiſhoners were e that  while this woman had been left alone in  the anti- chamber, different perſons unac- |  quninted with the animal magnetiſm had

approached her, and the convulſive emo-  tions had recommenced. She was deſired  2 obſerve that the magnetical operation  | was not performed upon her; but her  imagination was ſtruck to ſuch a degree  tat ſhe replied : If you did nothing to  me, 1 ſhould not be in the condition in  which Jam. She knew that ſhe had been  ſent for in order to be made the ſubject of  the experiments; and the approach of 40  perſon towards her, or the flighteſt noi  _ attrated her attention, excited the idea of  the e e and ne Wer con-  vulſions. e 23148  _ - The "TION in en t to its acting  with conſiderable ſtrength, has often need  that you ſhould eck ſeveral cords at a  time. It has a correſpondence with each  of the ſenſes; and its reaction may be ex-  pected to de in proportion, both to the  number of ſenſes applied to, and of ſen-  fations received: the commiſſioners were  led to chis obſervation by the following  experiment. M. Jumelin' had ſpoken to  them. of a young lady, twenty years of age,  __ he had — of the faculty of

++

bn 2

#4

171

by the influence of the wighetiſin 5  q e commiſſioners repeated the experiment  at his houſe, the young lady — to  ſubmit to it, and to ſuffer nn: of to 4  blindfolded. 5, 9 *  The firſt phject: ob the e ons |  to endeavour to obtain the ſame" effect  without performing the operation; but,  though in this ſituation ſhe felt or believed)  ſhe felt the effects of the magnetiſm, we  were not able to ſtrike her imagination,  with the force that was neceſſary for the  ſucceſs of the experiment. The operation  was then really performed, the bandage  not being removed; and the ſucceſs was the |  ſame. The bandage was then taken away  her imagination was now attacked at once  through the different channels of fight and  hearing, and the effects were more con-  ſiderable ; but though ſhe complained of a  heavineſs in her head, an obſtruction in  the ſuperior part of the noſtrils, and a  number of the ſymptoms Which ſhe nad |  felt under the operation of M. Jumelin, -/  ſhe did not loſe the faculty of f 9 tg She  obſerved herſelf, that Nic. hand by whie  ſhe was magnetiſed in the — ought  to deſcend to the level of the noſe, recol-  lefting that that was its fituation at the  time in which ſhe had felt the loſs of her  voice. What ſhe demanded was accord-  ingly 3 and in three quarters of  = 2 a mi- 5

*

| „  a minute ſhe was dumb; nothing was now  to be heard from her but low and inarti-  culate ſounds, though the exertion of the  muſcles of the throat for the formation  of ſound, and that of the tongue and the  lips in order to articulation were viſible.  This ſtate laſted only a minute: it is ob-  vious to obſerve that, finding herſelf pre-  ciſely in the ſame eircumſtances, the ſe-  duction of the underſtanding and the ef-  fect of that ſeduction upon the organs of  ſpeech: were the. ſame. But it was not  enough that the ſhould be expreſsly in-  formed that ſhe was magnetiſed, it was  alſo neceſſary that the ſenſe of ſeeing rene, |  yield her a teſtimony, ſtronger, and capa-  ble of greater effects; it was neceſſary th an  a geſture be! with which the was already ac-  _ © quainted+ſhould, re-excite her former  | ideas It ſhould ſeem that this experi-  ment is admirably calculated to difplay the  manner in which the imagination acts, the

degrees by which git is exalted, and the

different exterior ſuceours it requires in  order to plying itſelf i in It r-  ere 7 ee

be power, which the ſenſe! of Sehe"  __— over the imagination, explains  the effects attributed by the} doctrine ak ?  the rnagnetiſm to the eyes. The eyes

poſſeſs in an eminent degret the power *

maguetiſing; _ and- W as the  1 2 com- 5

ur]  commiſſioners were informed, have com-  monly: no effact, except upon a ſubject  who has been previouſly maſtered by the  employment of the eyes. The reaſon af  this is very ſimple; it is the eyes that con-  yey the moſt energetic cxprefſions of paſ-  ſion, it is in them that is developed all that  the human character has of the commands.  ing or the attractive. It is natural theres,  fore that the eyes ſhould. be the ſource of  a very high degree of power; but this  power confiſts merely in the aptitude they  poſſeſs of moving the imagination, and  that in a degree mare or leſs ſtrong in pros  der x to the actiyity of the ĩmagination.

s for this teaſon, that the Whole  proceſs of the magnetiſm commences  trom the eyes of the operator; and their  influence is ſo powerful and leaves traces  ſo ſtrong and lively, that a woman, newly  arrived at the houſe. of M. Deſldn, having  encountered a look of one of his pupils,  who had performed the operation upon  her, juſt as ſne was recovering from a  cri, had her eyes ſet in her head fur three  quarters of an hour. For a long time ſua  was haunted with the remembrance of this  look.; ſhe always ſaw before her this. very  eye fixed to regard her; and the bote it  uninterruptedly in her imagination. fleep».  ing as well as Waking for three days. We  fs from this inſtance, what ARE.

5 3 9 E

Ys t 78 T 2  kunmpebde of ding that can preſerve one  impreſſion for ſo long a time, that is, can  renew, of itſelf, and by its ſingle power,  the ſame ſenſation regularly and without |  Interruption, for three days. .  The experiments, which we have als.  ready reported, are uniform in their na-  ture, and contribute alike to the ſame  deciſion; they authoriſe us to conclude  that the imag

nagination is the true cauſe of  the effects attributed to the magnetiſm.  But the partiſans of this new agent will  perhaps reply, that the identity of effects  does not always prove an identity of cauſes.

They will grant that the imagination is  capable of exciting theſe © impreſſions  without the magnetiſm ; but they will  maintain that the magnetiſm is alſo capa-  ble of exciting them without the imagi-  nation. The commiſſioners might eaſi ly  deſtroy this aſſertion by applying the  — * of all Bl ore and the laws of  natural philoſophy: of which the firſt, is  to admit no new cauſes without an abſo-

lte neceflity. When the effects obſerved

are capable of having been produced by  à known cauſe, and a cauſe whoſe exiſt-  enes other phenomena have already eſta-  dbliſhed, ſound philoſophy teaches 4 the  effects ought to be aſcribed; to that cauſe;  and when on the other hand we are ac-  ** with the diſcovery of a cauſe

hitherto |

„

hitherts: unknown, ſound philofophy re-  quires that its exiſtence be made out by  effects, Which do not to *  known cauſe, and which cannot be  explained but by the new! cauſe. It  therefore properly belongs to the partiſans  on the magnetiſm, to bring. forward other  8, and to diſcover effects which ſhalt  entirely ſtripped of the illuſions obthe -  —— dh But as facts are more demon  ſtrative than reaſonings, and as their ev  dence is more univerſally ſtriking,- the  commiſſioners have been deſitous of eſta-  bliſhing by experiment, what the mag  netiſm could do in nere "the ima  ring” v 21 gen 2d 651  For this ex they e choice!  of two rooms, contiguous! to each other  and united by a door of communication.  The door was taken away, and a frame af  wood ſubſtituted in its place, with tranſs  verſe bars, and (covered with a» double  texture of In one ofi theſe rooms)  was a commiſſioner, who undertock 16  make minutes of the tranſaction, and a  lady, Who was given out to be juſt arrived  from the country, and to have a ſuit of  linen, which ſhe wanted to have made up.  Mademoiſelle: B a ſempſtreſs by pro-  feſſion, who had been already employed  in the experiments at Paſſy, and whoſe.  ſenſibility to the magnetiſm was well  EIS: * | 23 known,

3 - —  wo 2 ——  — — *

8e J

known, was ſent for. Every thing was

arranged againſt her arrival in ſuch a man-  ner, that there was but one ſeat upon which

ſhe could place herſelf, and that ſeat ſtood

within the e of the nn of commu-

ni cation 0  The Cate were in 2 58 athar  ber and one of them, a phyſician,

who had upon former occaſions performed

the magnetical operation with ſucceſs, had  undertaken to magnetiſe mademoiſelle

B=— through the paper partition. It is

a principle in the theory of the magne-  tiſm that this agent paſſes through doors,  walls, &c. A partition of paper could

therefore be no obſtacle; beſide M. Deſlon

had poſitively e A that the magnetiſm.

Mademoiſelle. Was accordin gly  ingmetiſcd during half an hour, at the

diſtance of a foot and an half, and in a di-

rection oppoſite to that of the poles, in  conformity to the rules taught by M.  Deſlon; and which the commiſſioners had

ſeen practiſed at his houſe. During the  operation ſhe converſed with much gaiety,

and, in anſwer to an enquiry concerning

ö _ health, ſhe readily replied, that the:

| was perfectly well: at Paſſy ſhe had fallen  into a criſis in the courſe of three minutes;

in the preſent inſtance ſne underwent the  ee of the magnetiſm nen any:

. f | effect

7 ö , ,

through pa ROY" ant ao to

\

** * a 9 1 —  * 5 4 w* > , * © * 1 - 1

effect for thirt oy FE The only, rea-  rence muſt be that here ſhe

on of this di

was ignorant of the operation, and that at  Paſſy ſhe thought it had been performed.

aberiVuta to etiſm,”

W NG imag ination ceaſes 5 Ln :  forth it has tis Lönger the ſmalleſt ay |

Only one obſekti 10n can be üg

this experiment; it is chat wi 1 |

B—— might not, be repared to re  the tagnenic | Aiſial ad il be laſs ful  ceptible to its operation than uſual,  commiſſioners" orefaw W Gbhecten, 855  for that reaſon malle the following es  6 Mink. As! ſoon as they had ceafed t  mag netiſe the patient through the pape  partition, the fare cee palſed  to the other apärtinent; be found no  difficulty in engaging mademoiſelle .

to ſubmit to the 'magnetical operation. Te  Was accotdingly repeated in preciſely the

fame manner as in the former inſtance, at  he Uiſkince of à foot and an half, and by  the intervention of geſtures only, together  Wich the employment of the tight finger

| = the rod of iron, If he had applied  the

hands, and touched the hypochonders,  it might have been objected that any diffe-

| 10200 of effect, Was to be aſcribed. to che

amediate'in  0 $7 Hp the

The 1 pra co pclufion is, that the.   imag re fi he 1 all the _— i.

4 .

Oe ona — ̃ . — _—_—__— = —  — %

_ bs * 1 ——

— ů w! 2  LE — —

= — —

. tr —

2 —

— a -  .

ad * 2 — —ä —  — — —  — A A I AA A EIS IIS  LET — a te eg re ee  — — :

[ 82 1

the Itter 1 But che only. dicke  rence: between the two, 0 Was,  that in the Jones: ademoiſell Er 177727  was Sn ein direction .o po ſite to  that of 5% poles, an d conformable 415 he  rules of the 1 —.— OY ory; and, an the  ſecond ſhe 3 was Danes in the ere 4  of the poles, or i 50 ie. traofverſs |! ine. Or  ahi account N to.the. principles of

the magnetiſm. no e leck ought . e

been produced. . 920 21. n

In three miputes however We felt a  ſenfation af Niesen and ſuffo tion; to  29 05 ſucceeded an intetrupted hiccup,.

be en of the teeth, 8 contraction 3

roat, and an ext. pain in,  — ſhe was reſtleſs * 527 8 K

complained of a pain in the loins ; no and

uickneſs on the floor; afterwa  ret her arms behind her, t twiſti 8  them Fare as at Paſly; in a word, the  convulfive criſis was complete and accom-  panied with all the regular ſymptoms.

then ſhe ſtruck her foot with Ad

All theſe accidents appeared in conſequence |  of a+ proceſs. of twelve Ainet though  the 1277 proceſs emp loyed f or * mi-

nutes a little before 1 5 been ineffectual,  The. only, ee of difference that re-

mains, is the Pa that. Was afforded i in the  Jer inſtance to the APA ; K* this

ere  4 "a |

a 2

0 5  therefore the difference of * LA is to  be aſcribed... lit;

If the criſis originated. in 1 the 3 |

pY the imagination, it was the i imagination

alſo that put a ſtop to it. The commiſ-  ſioner who, magnetiſed her, obſerved that  it was time to have done ; at the ſame time  preſenting. to her his two forefingers i in  the form of a croſs; and it is p to  obſerye that in ſo doing he Ws d her  in the direction of the poles, in ihe  manner as he had done through the, whole  experiment z no actual alteration had there-  fore been made, and the proceſs being con-  tinued, the impreſſions ought alſo to have  continued. e the  operator was ſufficient to e the cri-  ſis; her heat and, the pain in 1  immediately alleviated, The diſorder of  her frame was in this manher followed  from place to place, announcing at the  ſame time that it was going to dilappear.

In this manner in obedience to the voice  to which the imagination was ſubjected,  the contraction of the throat ceaſ then

the accidents; of the breaſt, laſtly thoſe of  the ſtomach and the arms. The whole

ired only three minutes; after Which

W B declared that ſhe no

longer felt any ſenſation, but was perfectly

reſtored to her W W

19 8111 bo | 8 2 Theſe

"  w *%

5 11390

5

0684] *

99 Theſe laſt experiments, as well as ſevo-

ral of thoſe that were made at the houſe 6f  M. Jumelin, have the double advantag of  demonſttating at once the efficacy of the  ichäglnatiop, and the dimpotence of the  © "mndgnetifn,” in regard ol the ſymptotms  | hic ce en el 07 ct en It  If ebe ymptoms ate more conſiderable  and the ctiſes more violent at the public  proceſs; it is becauſe” various cauſes! arc  combined with the imagination,” to ope-  Atte, to multiply and to Enlarge its effects.  They begin oh ſab@uing! the minds of  the patients by the employment of the  eyes; this is followed Byiche touch, the  app lication” of the hands; it is proper to  0 in this place tlie phyſical effects of  this method of procedure.  The {ytnptoms are mort or leſs conſider-  able: the lefs are hiceuphings, qualms of the  "ſtomach and purgings; the greater are the  convulſions to 'whieh" they have given the  denomination of criſes. The parts upon  which the touch is employed, are the hy-  pochonders, the pit of the ſtomach, and  lometimes the ovaria, when the patient is a  woman. The hands and the fingers are  preſſed with a greater or leſs ſtrels upon  . regions. tt  he colon, one of the larger inteſtines,  runs through both the regions of the  0 and the region of the epi-  gaſtrium

= * * oy *  R * mn a tf 1  I 9 r 3  2 * * * 1 S bo

—  jo mich og them. It is placed

immediately undet᷑ the integuments. It is

therefore upon this inteſtine that the preſ-  ſure; falls, an inteſtine full of ſenſibility

and irritability. A repeated voluntary

effort, without aſſiſtance from any other

cauſe, excites the muſcular. action of this

inteſtine, and ſometimes procures evacua-  tions. Nature, as it were by inſtinct, indi-  cates this manceuvre to perſons h ypochon-  driacally affected. The proceſs of the  magnetiſm is nothing more than this very

manœuvre; and thè evacuations it is cal-

culated to produce are further facilitated in  the magnetical proceſs, by the frequent

and almoſt habitual uſe of a real laxative,

the cream of tartar, in their drink.

But while the motion which is 8 h

excites principally the irritability of the

colon, this inteſtine. offers other pheno-

mena. It ſwells in a greater or leſs degree,  and, ſometimes; diſtends itſelf to a con-

ſidetabſe volume, At ſuch times it com-  municates to the diaphragm ſuch an irri-

tation, that this organ becomes more ot  leſs convulſed. It is this convulſion to  which they have given; the appellation of  criſis in the animal magnetiſm. One of  the commiſſioners had occaſion to ſee a  woman, ſubject to a kind of ſpa ſmodic

vomitings, with which ſhe was i280 ſeveral

times in the courſe of SET, day. Her

a+ 4

o  — — ' — TQÄ —  e ˙ m — —  —

— ̃ P1—— NR  — - — 2 ——

P ˙ w on rn ne  — — —

a8 8 3 | efforts

— .  — —  — ü-

—— — —

. * -  —— —

— ͤ—ũĩũ4 —— —  — *  n — —

— 2 —

| *  —  = 2

*

— „

. .. ˙ ö co —_  — —

'  LI  .

—

* ;  efforts produced nothing but a kürbid and  viſcdus water, -fAmilar' to that which is  brought up by the patients in the eriſis of  the magnetical operation, The convulſion  had its ſeat in the diaphragm, and the

region of the colon was ſo ſenſible, that  the ſlighteſt touch upon that part, a ſtrong  commotion of the ait, the ſurpriſe cauſed  by 'a ſudden noiſe ſufficed- to excite (the  convlfion. This womat had therefore

iſes without the*afliſtance of the

by the ſin gle irritability of the  colon and diaph rage; and the women  who are magnetiſed, obtain their criſes  from the i cape and Lake the fame  | irritability.” Ae

The ap plication of 0 hands u n the  dengel Gs yfical effects not Teſs re-  markable. The application is made di-  realy | upon that organ, Sometimes 2  ſtrong continuous comprefſion is operated,  ſometimes à number of flight and ſuc-  ceſſive compreſſions, ſometimes a diſcom-  pofare of the ſtomach by a rotatory motion  of the rod of iron in contact with the part,  or by the ſucceſſive and rapid paſſage o  the thumbs over it one after the other.  Theſe methods conyey almoſt immediatel  to the ſtomach an irritation, more or lef  ſtrong and durable, in roportion as 'the  ſubject is more or leſs uſceptible,* 'The  part is alfo ee diſpoſed for the re-  n _ception

1 Es £

. 8 5  ception of this irritation by being 45  compreſſed. This compreſſion prepares it  to act upon the diaphragm and to come.  municate to it the impreſſions it receives,  It is irritated, the diaphragm is alſo irri-  tated, and from thence reſult, in'the fame  manner as by the action of the colon, th  nervous accidents which had been already  ſtated. In women who are peculiarly ſul-  ceptible, the mere Sn ten of the two  hypochonders, without their being acted  upon in any other manner, occaſions a  contraction of the ſtomach and fits of  ſwooning. This happened in the caſe of  the woman magnetiſed by M. Jumelin,  and it, often happens from no other cauſe  than an improper degree of tightneſs in  their dreſs. Theſe caſes are not followed  by the criſis, becauſe the ſtomach is com-  refſed, without being irritated, and the  8 remains in its natural ſtate,  The ſame methods employed upon the  ovaria in the female ſex, beſide their par-  ticular effects, produce with great 8 19805  the above accidents. The empire and ex-

tenfive influence of the uterus over the  | animal economy is well Known.  The intimate connection of the colon,  5 the ſtomach and the uterus with the dia-  > phragm is one of the cauſes of the effects  * dis + 4 2 | 948 | GL 193; £179  > aſcri to the magnetiſm, The 5

of the lower belly, which are the ſu

15  64 o

— 2  4 —

18 7

*

cauſes a diarrhea, melancholy is the origin

* "YL GE. N  . , . .  OE, GORE i N M's W  G * Ly " ies Ct a: \ » 42

q * # 4 Ak

7

of thele operations, anfwer to the diffetent  plexuſes which conſtitute a regular nervous  centre in this part, by means of Which,  leaving every particular ſyſtem out of the  queſtion, re moſt certainly, exiſts 4  9 mpathy, communication or corteſpofl-  ace between all the parts of the 2515

ſuch an action and reaction, that the ſenſa-

tions excited in this centre affect the other

1 343 . l 210 $4 n 1 Jet «>  parts of the body, and reciprocally à ſen.

ſation experienced in any | part affect and  calls into play the nervous centre, Which  often tranſmits the impreſſion back again  to all the parts of the body.

= 1

The truth thus ſtated not only explains  the effects of the magnetic touch," but  alſo the phyſical effeRts of the imagination,  It has dees conſtantly remarked, that the  affections of the ſoul make their firſt cor-  poreal impreſſion upon the nervous centre,  which commonly leads their ſubject to  deſcribe himſelf as baving a weight upon  his ſtomach, or a ſenſation of I |  The' diaphragm enters into this buſineſs,

from whence originate the ſighs, the tears  and the expreſſions of mirth. The viſcera  of the lower belly then experience a re-  action; and it is by this automatous pro-  ceſs that vue are enabled to account for the  phyſical diſorders produced by the imagi-  nation. Surpriſe occaſions the colic, terror |

To

of eee ya Hiſtory 'of G  medicine preſents tô us an infinity of ex-  amples of the power of imagination and  the mental affections. The terror” oe.  fioned by 4 fire, a" violent degree of deſire,  a ſtrong and undeubting hope, a fit ef  choler have reſtored the uſe öf his limbs  to one wo has been erippled with the  gout or to i patalytie perſon; a ſttong and  unlooked for degree of joy has diſſipated  a quartan age of two months ta  cloſe attention ĩs a remedy for the hiccup;  and perſons, Who by ſome aceident _  been deprived” of the faculty of i  have recovered it in conſequence o —  of the vettement emotions of the foul,  This läſt aſfertion is ſupported” by the  teſtimony of hiſtory, and the commiſſioners  have themſelves witneſſed a ſuſpenſion of  this faculty, occafioned fingly by the ima-  gination. The action and reaction of the  phyſical upon the moral ſyſtem, and of the  moral upon the phyſical have been ac.  knowledged! ever fince the phenomena of  the medical ſeience have been femarked,  that isever ftice the origin of the ſeienee.  Tears, laughter} 'covghs,” hiccups, and  in general all the effects which are 6bſerved  in what have been ſtiled criſes in the  animal magnetiſm, dd therefore originate  either in the interruption of the functions  of the diaphragm Us a phyſical vehicle,  ' ſuch

— —m— — — —  -

— bac) ins: cu R |  * 22 { EDO POST EO WP CPE FIERY 6 a  [ 9 * *  > \ * Yr J —

ſuch as the touch and the preſſure; or from

the power with which the imagination is

endowed of acting upon this organ mg

interrupting its functions  + If. it be objected that the touch i is not  always neceſſary to theſe effects, it may. be  replied, that the imagination. may be ſuf, |  ese fertile in ,reſources to produce  Iby its ſole E eſpe·  8240 the imagination exerted in a public  proceſs, called into play at once 8  methods in Which it is itſelf Pu oy  aud by the effects obſeryed in thoſe. who  2 it. It has been already ſeen what  were its effects in the experiments made by  the commiſſioners upon iſolated, ſubjects  it; may eaſily be conceived in what degree  thoſe "effets muſt be multiplied. in the caſe  of a number of patients collected together  in a public proceſs. Theſe patients are  aſſembled: in a narrow ſpace, if the ſpace  be compared with the number of patients;  the air of the apartment is heated, although

care be employed to renew it; and it is

always more or leſs impregnated with

meppbitic gas, which bas the property of

acting immediately upon the head and  the netxous ſyſtem., When the introduc.  tipn of asg! is added, it affords another  means of acting upon and exciting e  een Bat to! mont off a1 18115

f A

11 {; iy it 2 1  if! Faikxüg * V torr oh 53

98 4

18 |

* * a * N * * o  e 4 ta. a.  WT 8 . "gr" 28) 8 g  ww” þ

"R PIR TL] *  1 . ; - * * -  In the public -proceſ;

7 12 2 4 oY - . TY __ N ah  N — * * T* 7  * 1  » * 9

15  magnetiſed at the ſame time, and they ex-  porience at firſt no effects but ſuch as are  ſimilar to thoſe, obtained by the com-  miſſioners in various experiments. It is  even acknowledged that for the moſt

the criſes do not. commence! in leſs than  the ſpace of two hours. By little and little  the impreſſions are communicated from  one to another, and reinforced, in the ſame  manner as the impreſſions which are made  by theatrical repreſentation, where the im-  preſſions are greater in proportion to the  number of the ſpectators, and the liberty  they enjoy of expteſſing their ſenſations.  The applauſe, by which the emotions of  individuals are announced, occaſions + ond  neral emotion, Which every one partakes  in the degree in which he is ſuſceptible.  The ſame obſervation” has been made in

artnies upon a day of battle, here the

enthuſiaſm of courage, as well as the im-  preſſions of terror, are gropagated with ſo

amazing rapidity. The drum, the ſound

ofthe military muſical inſtruments, the  noiſe of the cannon, the muſquetry, tho

ſhouts of the army, and the genetal diſorder  impreſs, the organs, have à uniform effect  upon the underſtanding, and exalt the  imagination in the ſame

manifeſtation of a fingle ſenſation imme  5 T1625 | WEE , Giately

; |  f 1 * 1 * 2 * ?

e degree. In this  equilibrium of inebriation, the external

|

1

|

|

|

|  : 1

| |

- — — — — —ꝝ—— —ů— —— — - = —  . *  » % —

rr R i

81 þ& « r nat N e n dl A N

"I N FE _— V1 * n n RY wem  x » - % * * 6  |

=

adler, td —— Toy 5 it op e  them; toy. The ſame cauſe is deeply  concerned in rebellions ; the multitude  are governed by the imagination; the indi-  viduals in a numerous aſſembly are more  ſubjected to their ſenſes, and leſs capable  of ſubmitting to the dictates of reaſon;  and here fanaticiſm is the preſiding qua-  lity, its fruit is the tremblers of the  Cevennes “. 3h vas: been uſual to forbid  l nn |; Yoo nga: eee

„ Marſhal Villars, Cs ee in a  the troubles of the Cevennes, could. in qprang  „ this kind, which I ſhould n. not have believed, if they  e had not paſſed before my eyes; I ſaw a conſiderable.  town, of which the whole female part without  « ception appeared to be poſſeſſed by the devil. T ey  c trembled and propheſied publicly in the ſtreets. ' One  <<" had the raſnneſs to tremble and propheſy for an hour  % together i in my preſence, But of all thee abſurdities  <« the rs was that, which was related to me  « 5 BF the biſhop of Alais, and which I wrowe to M. de  amillard in the following terms. |  * UM. de Mandagors, lord of the manor of that  7 name, e. of Alais pollefling the firſt appoint-  ents in

** e town and a h having even been  for ſome time ſubdelegate de Baville, was the  « fſubject of this — ogy Mo ſixty yeats of age,  <, temperate..in his manners, poſſeſſed of a fine under-  cc r and had written ak publiſhed many per-  «© formahces. Some of them 1 have read, and, [  I knew what I have juſt learned reſpecting him, I  * dee them as Gitinguihed by a very Yiggraus  pgs > meth |

propheteſs WIT benty ſeven or twenty Ant  ar: Ne ibout months 80 5

4  Nine

N MUD -:  numerous aſſemblies in ſedivieus towns,  as) A _ learning ancontagion o

| 0 NRCC „ ONE Fares! nnn eaſily

A. 343 76 * Has Py FA 144 415 37}  | = carried before the biſho of Aa, 1 in tetrogated  her before ſevera 4 aſties. The creatufe, after  «having heard Ig he ſaid, replied with a modeſt air,  «exhorte him no longer eee e the true childten  f and then addreſſed him f an entire ho |  * 10 a cod ap gong of which he could not 8  65 ſand a word: Xa we have formerly ſeeñ the duke  * de la Fert6; ben tis head drank a0 glaſſes, talk  „ Engliſh before the inhabitants of that country. I  8 22 heard them ſay, I underſtand very well that he  „ ſpeaks Engliſh, but I cannot comprehend a word  « that he ſays. It would have been ſomewhat difficult  that they ſhould hayeidone ſo, for he never a -  word of "Engliſhiin' his life. This girl talked,  and Hebrew in the &yle-of the duke de la Ferté.  „ Vou will take! it for 1 that M. 9 Alais  40 ſent the girl to priſon. After ſeveral months, the  2 girl appearing to be entirely ridded of her abſurdities  by the attention and advice of the ſieur de Mandagors,  « who frequently viſited her in her confinement, ſhe  vas ſet at liberty, and the conf we of that 4 .  SG; 00. ap liberties that the a.  taken with her, was an im ——  n But the fact: eee is the  « reſignation. made by the ſieur M of all  his employments in favour of his ſon, at the ſame  © time ſaying to ſeveral individuals, and among others  4 to; the biſhop, that it was by expreſs commiſſion from  | * (Cod that he had had 4 of the |  pheteſs, and that the child which ſhould be  would be the true ſaviour of the world. The con-  '«. ſequence of all this in any other country than France,  „ would have been merely the ſending W * the ma  „ and his fair patroneſs to bedlam. TED  <, ſuggeſted to me to have him arreſted. I pr  « previouſly to confer with M. de Baville, Tock oye of  #* the 28 ordering in the mean time that he and

2 fi 1 17 « the

'

e 1  | afily communicated:  ample acts upon the moral of our  Frame, — net imitation bene phy-  ical part: the minds of individuals are  calmed by difperſing them; the ſame  method puts a Hop to their ſpaſmodic  ions, a s in their na-

af ture: we have Had: a recent example of  this in the, young ladies of Saint Roch,  who were in this manner cured of the

l aus 8537/11 IT |

where ex-

1 1.3 15 e N  8 dia watched, lo that r |  4 not be able to eſcape. My opinion was, that,

in dde midſt of a country of madmen, what relates to  * a madman of ſuch importance ought to make as little  note as poffible; and that it was therefore neceflary |  4 to endeavour to get him out of the country by de  4 means, and then to take him into cuſtody. Your  -< 'torafhip will eaſily conceive that to declare publicly  ee for à prophet- 2 mayor of Alais, the lord of anexten-  4 five manor, an ancient ſubdelegate of the intendant,  an author, and a man hitherto eſteemed for his pene-  tration and ſagacity, in the midſt of a country ac-  “ cuſtomed to venerate and reſpect him, was a meaſure  better calculated to revolt che minds of the inhabi-  & rants" khan to correct them, It would the rather  < have had this tendeney, that; except the folly of be-  . heving that God had communded him to have carnal

© knowledge ef this young woman, his converſation is  nas full of reaſon and good ſenſe, as was that 1  * Quixote upon all other ſubje@s but wes mh  < errgntry. M. de Baville was mp  children of M. Mandagors condut © 125 8  & noiſe to one ef this 2 where he was con-  fine, and the propheteſs taken from him and ſent  1 to prilon ie au Mar6chal Due de Villars, come

LT dens or

4

3; 23.4 bob convulſions  WES of

and Ab i dba ea nt  8 *

ee

convulſions with which they v wits uſted _  hen together“. 9 1 |  The magnetiſm this or rather ae

operations of the imagination; are equally  dicobera dle at the theatre, in the

and in all numerous aſſemblies, as dt  the acting indeed by different  means; but producing ſimilar effects. The  bucket” is furrounded with a crowd of  patients; - the ſenſations! are continually  communicated — recoilimunicated? ” it

10 2% . —4

1 On the wy W the the firft com-  Macs 1 in the * mn church of Saint Roch  a few yeats 4 e evening ſervice  made Abe bx baten the — 22  ſtreets. Scarcely were the children returned to. =”  church, and had refiimed theit ſeats, before à young girl  fell ill and had con ul ions. e |  itſelf with ſo much rapidity, that in the ſpace of half an  hour fifty, or ſixty girls from twelve to nineteen  of age were ſeized with the ſame convulſions ; that!  with 4 Contractien of the throat; an inflation of "thi  RKomach, le. Beg 2 he and ſpaſms more or leſs  confjderabl | idents reappeared, in ſome i  ſtances in he i "the week; MI the followi  Sunday, being Tiembled with the dimes ef Sainte  :whoſe b 5 N nM wn} nog AE .  them a convullions, mo  pe follo ale doe) they had not had the precaution  to ſend away each child n t to her relations.  3 xeon er pe Br  ſchools. us ſeparati re  keeping 9 5 together I n ſmall _— —  weeks ſufficed to diſſipate entirely this epidemical con-  vulſive affection. See for other inſtances of the ſame

kind the Natural Hiſtory of Convulſions by M. Hegqust.  Dane ought

838 Dr * 9 ub is  "EY * * 2 *

Ko as

1970 be ex that the nery to

f bo t length 2 85 AY 191 200 hs  they are accordingly Gr anc the  woman of moſt ſenſibility in the (Company  _ gives, the Bgval. Immedi y the cords,  . every where ſtretched 54 ſame 85  and in, penfect Ade teſpond 19; bo

Aber Abe © er med tiplied ; they  mutually ſeigtorce other, and

. Fenderag violent, In the mean time the  Wen > witneſſes of theſe. Emotions,

partake of them in proportion to their

nſibility; and thoſe wit m  mor 1018 greateſt, and jr rp  excited> become: themſelves the. 1 iubjedts ot  * Teige 5 gogo T4; e n D

This propenſity to 15 . partly na⸗  3 and partly acquired, becomes in each  ex habitual. The ſenſations: Having been  Kelt once or -oftener, nothing is now neceſ-  _ Gary, hut to recal the memory of them, and  to exalt the ĩmagination to the ſame degree,  In örder to operate the ſame effects. This  Vill never.he.difficult, When the ſubjeck is

Placed an the ſame circumſtances. The

- Public ApS: no longer eſſary, you

_ have; only to touch the h , nde and  to conduct the finger and the rod of iron

before the eee the figns are well

Kaen Even theſe are not neceſſary, 4  is ſufficient that the patients be. blin

— folded, -made to believe that theſe. figns are

115 S a T e

a hs.

repeated upon them, and that they *

magnetiſed ; the ideas are reexcited, the  ſenſations are reproduced, the imagination,

employing its accuſtomed inſtruments and  reſuming its former routes, gives birth to

the ſame phenomena. Theſe caſes happen

exactly to the patients of M. Deſlon, who  fall into a criſis without the bucket, and

without being excited with the enn  of the public proceſs.

Compreſſion, imagination, imitation are

therefore the true cauſes of the effects at-

tributed to this new agent, known by the  appellation of animal magnetiſm, this fluid,  which is ſaid to circulate through the

human body, and to be communicated from

individual to individual. Such is the reſult  of the experiments of the commiſſioners,  and the obſervations they made upon the

means employed and the effects produced.

This agent, this fluid has no exiſtence.

Chimerical however as it is, the idea is  by no means novel. Some authors, par-  ticularly phyſicians of the laſt age, have  expreſsly treated of it in various perform  ances. The curious and intereſting en-  quiries of M. Thouret have convinced the  public, that the theory, the operations and

the effects of the animal magnetiſm, pro-

poſed in the laſt age, were nearly the ſame  with thoſe revived in the preſent. The

| matten chen is no more than an old  ü H 4 *

How often has the pretended ſcience of

falſhood. The theory indeed is now pre-  ſented, as was neceflary in a more en-  lightened age, with a greater degree. of  pomp; but it is not leſs erroneous. Hu-  man nature is formed to ſeize, to quit  and to reſume the miſtake which is flatter-  ing to its wiſhes. There are errors which  will be eternally dear to the ſublunary ſtate.

aſtrology vaniſhed and reappeared ! The  magnetiſm is calculated to lead us back to  it. Its profeſſors have been deſirous of  connecting it with the celeſtial influences,  that it might have the ſtronger ſeduction,  and attract mankind by the two hopes that  are neareſt their heart, that of looking into  futurity, and that of prolonging their  exiftenes;/4 5 52 e  There is room to believe that the imagi-  nation is the principal of the three cauſes  which we have aſſigned to the magnetiſm,  It appears by the experiments we have re-  lated that it ſuffices alone to produce the  criſes. - The preſſure and the touch ſeem  to ſerve it as preparatives; it is by the  touch that the nerves begin to be excited,  imitation communicates and extends the  impreſſions. But the imagination is that  active and terrible power, by which are  operated the aſtoniſhing effects, that have  excited ſo much attention to the public  proceſs. The effects ſtrike all the world,

I

4

the

„  the cauſe is enveloped in the ſhades of  obſcurity. When we conſider that theſe  effects ſeduced in former ages men, vene-  rable for their merit, their illumination  and even their genius, Paracelſus, Van  Helmont and Kircher, we ceaſe to be  aſtoniſhed, that perſons of the preſent day,  learned and well informed, that evena great  number of phyſicians. have, been the dupes  of this ſyſtem. Had the commiſſioners  been admitted only to the public proceſs,  where there is neither time nor oppor-  tunity of making deciſive experiments,  they might themſelves have been led into  error. It was neceſſary to have liberty to  inſulate the effects, in order to diſtinguiſh  the cauſes; it was neceſſary to ſee as they  have done the imagination act, if we may  be allowed the expreſſion, partially, and  produce its effects one by one and in  detail, to have an idea to what the accumu-  lation of thoſe effects might amount; to  conceive the extent of its power, and to  account for all its prodigies. Such an ex-  amination demanded a ſacrifice of time,

and a number of ſyſtematical reſearches,

which we have not always the leiſure to  undertake for 'ouf private inſtruction or  private curioſity, nor even the power pro-

perly to purſue without being like the

commiſſionets charged with the 1  " . . - * 5 | | „ N « ©

Ss »  2 . * 1  E. '

„

of the ſoveteign, and honoured with the  confidence of the public. =  M. Deſlon is not much averſe to the  admiſſion of theſe principles. He declared  in dur ſeſſion held at the houſe of Dr.  Franklin the 19th of June, that he thought  he might lay it down as a fact, that the  imagination had the greateſt ſhare in the  effects of the animal magnetiſm; he ſaid  that this new agent might be no other  than the imagination itſelf, whoſe power

is as extenſive as it is little known: he  affirmed that he always acknowledged the  concern of this faculty in the treatment of  his patients, and he affirmed with equal  confidence that many perſons have heen  either entirely cured or infinitely amended

in the ſtate of their health under his di-  rection. He remarked to the commiſſioners.  that the imagination thus directed to the

3 relief of ſuffering humanity, would be a

moſt: valuable means in the hands of the  medical profeſſion ; and perſuaded of the

M. Deſlon had already ſaid in 1780. ( Granting  for a moment that M. Meſmer poſſeſſes no other  _- «ſecret than that of employing the imagination in the  extenſive production of the moſt ſalutary effects, will  < it not ſtill be true, that his invention is an extremely  valuable one? For in reality, if the phyſic of the  e imagination be more falutary than the other kinds  e of medicine, what good reaſon can be alledged, why

1  W

e phyſic of che imagigation ſhould not be brought

1 into general uſe?” Obſervations on the Animal  Magnetiſm, pages 46 and 47. +  3 reality

J

[26217]

reality of the power of the imagination,  he invited the commiſſioners to embrace  the opportunity which his practice af-  forded to ſtudy its procedure and its effects.  If therefore M. Deſlon be ſtill attached to  his firſt idea, that theſe effects are to be  aſcribed to the agency of a fluid, which is

communicated from individual to indi-

vidual by the touch or under the guidance  of a conductor, he cannot however avoid  conceding to the commiſſioners that only  dne cauſe is requiſite to one effect, and  that ſince the imagination is a ſufficient  _ cauſe, the ſuppoſition of the magnetic fluid  is uſeleſs. + It cannot be denied that we

are ſurrounded with a fluid which peculi-

arly belongs to us; the inſenſible perſpi-  ration forms around us an atmoſphere of  inſenſible vapours: but this fluid has no  agency but ſuch as is common to other  atmoſpheres; cannot be communicated  by the touch but in infinitely ſmall quan-  tities; is not capable of being directed  either by conductors, or by the eyes, or  by the will; is neither propagated by  ſound, nor reflected by mirrors; and is in  no caſe er TER gh the effects cons  to it.

It remains for us to enquire, W  the criſes or convulſions, excited by the  methods of the pretended magnetiſm in  bard aſſemblies round the bucket, be W

o

E

of any utility, or be calculated to cure of  -rclieve the patients. The imagination of  fick perſons has unqueſtionably a very  frequent and conſiderable ſhare in the cure,  of their diſeaſes. With the effe& of it  we are unacquainted otherwiſe than by  general experience; but, though it has

not been traced in poſitive experiments,  it ſhould ſeem not to admit of a reaſonable  doubt. It is a known adage, that in phyſic  as well as religion, men are ſaved by faith;  this faith is the produce of the imagina-  tion: in theſe caſes the imagination acts  by gentle means; it is by diffuſing tran-  quility over the ſenſes, by reſtoring the  harmony of the functions, by recalling  into play every principle of the frame.  under the genial influence of hope. Hope  is an eſſential conſtituent of human life;  the man that yields us one contributes to  reſtore to us the other. But when the  imagination produces convulſions, the  means it employs are violent; and ſuch  means are almoſt always deſtructive. There  are indeed a few rare caſes in which they  may be uſeful; there are deſperate diſ-  eaſes, in which it is neceſſary to overturn  every thing for the introduction of an order  totally new. Theſe critical ſhocks are to  be employed in the medical art in the  ſame manner as poiſons. It is requiſite  that neceſſity ſhould demand, and economy  , ee 5 employ

V  employ them. The need of them is mo-  mentary; the ſhock ought to be ſingle.  Very far from repeating it, the intelligent  pbyſician exerts himſelf to invent the means  ei Hoo, indiſpenſible evil which  as thus been produced; but in the public  proceſs of the magnetiſm the criſes are  repeated every day, they are long and vio-  lent. Now fince the ſtate introduced by  theſe crifes is pernicious, the habit cannot  be other than fatal. How indeed can it  be conceived, that a woman, attacked for  inſtance with a pulmonary diſtemper, can  undergo with impunity a crifis, fome of  | whoſe ſymptoms are a convulſive cough and  compulſory expectorations; or can ſafely:  fatigue, perhaps ſhatter the lungs by violent  and repeated efforts, when ſo great pains are  neceſſary to convey to the wounded frame  the ſanative and the balfaniic ? How can  we imagine that a man, be his diſorder  what it will, can need in order to his re-  covery the intervention of criſes, in which  the fight appears to be loſt, the members  ſtiffen, he ſtrikes his breaſt with precipi-  tate and involuntary motions; criſes in a  word, that are terminated. by an abundant  ſpittingof viſcous humours and even blood?  The blood thus diſcharged is neither  vitiated nor corrupted, it flows from veſ—  ſels from which it is torn by the violence  of effort and. contrary to the intention of

. 9 nature;

* 104 1 A  nature; theſe effects are therefore to be  regarded as a real not a ſalutary evil,  evil additional to the dintemper be it what  it will. |  Nor is this the only danger with which  they are attended, Man is inceſſantly  enſlaved by cuſtom; nature is modified by  habit only in a progreſſive manner, yet ſhe  is often ſo completely modified, as to ſuffer:  an entire metamorphoſis, and to be ſcarcely  capable of being known for the ſame.

Who will aſſure us that this ſtate of criſes,

_ at. firſt voluntarily induced, ſhall not be-  come habitual? And ſhould the habit thus  contracted frequently reproduce the fame  ſymptoms, in ſpite of the will, and almoſt;  without the affiſtance of the imagination,  how dreadful the fate of an individual,  ſubjected to ſo violent effects, tormented,  as well morally as phyſically, with their  unfortunate impreſſion, whoſe days ſhould  bedivided between apprehenſion and agony, /  and whoſe life ſhould be an uninterrupted.  ſtate of ſuffering ! Nervous diſtempers of  this deſcription, even when natural, are:

the opprobrium of the medical ſcience ;

- how little ought it to be the object of art

to produce them] The art, which thug:  interferes with all the functions of the ani<  mal œconomy, urges nature out of her  proper courſe, and multiplies the victims  of TORY is to be I as perni-

r 85 e

5 105 PV:  cious. Its effects are the more to be  prehended, ſince it not only aggravates tho

diforder of the nerves by renewing their

ſymptoms, and cauſing them to degene-  rate into habit; but if a diſtemper of this  kind be contagious, as it may be ſuſpected  to be, the method of provoking nervous  convulſions and of exciting them in pub-  lic aſſemblies is a means to diffuſe them in  great towns, and even to afflict with them  generations to come, ſince the diſeaſes and  the habits of parents are tranſmitted to  their poſterity, - . 20  The commiſſioners having We  themſelves, that the animal magnetic fluid  is capable of being perceived by none of  our ſenſes, and had no action either upon  themſelves or upon the ſubjects of their  ſeveral experiments; being aſſured, that the  touches and compreſſions employed i in its  application rarely occaſioned favourable  changes in the animal œconomy, and that  the impreſſions thus made are always hurt-  ful to the imagination; in fine having de-  monſtrated by decifive experiments, that  the imagination without the magnetiſm  produces convulfions, and that the mag-  netiſm without the imagination produces  nothing; they have concluded with an  unanimous voice reſpecting the exiſtence  and the utility.of the magnetiſm, that the  exiſtence of the fluid is abſolutely deſtitute  6 4 of

pernicious effects“.

ol proof, that the fluid having no exiſtence

can conſequently have no uſe, that the

violent ſymptoms obſerved. in the public

procels are to be aſcribed. to the compreſ-  on, to the imagination called into action,

and to that propenſity. to mechanical imi-  tation, which leads us in ſpite of ourſelves  to the repetition of what ſtrikes our ſenſes.  And at the ſame time they think them-

ſelves obliged to add as an important ob-  ſervation, that the compreſſions and the re.  peated action of the imagination employed

in producing the criſes may be hurtful,

that the ſight of theſe criſes is not leſs

dangerous on account of that imitation  which nature ſeems to have impoſed upon  us as a law, and that of conſequence every

public proceſs, in Which the means of the  animal magnetiſm ſhall be employed, can-  not fail in the end of producing the moſt

—

* 4 2 68 ' I ery 1 1 RY f  ff it be abjected to the commiſſioners that this de-

eiſion concludes reſpecting the magnetiſm in general,

iünſtead of relating ſingly to the magnetiſm practiſed by

M. Deſlon, the commiſſioners reply that the inten-

tion of the king was to haye their ↄpinion upon tho

animal magnetiſm, and that in conſequence they have  not ed the bounds of their commiſſion. Again  they reply that M. Deſlon has appeared to them ac-  quainted with what are called the A of the mag ·  netiſm, and that he certainly poſſeſſes the means of pro-

de criſes which are  * aſcribed to it. (SEE RS ©. 2h 6 on

The

- Paris, the 1 ith day of Auguſt, 1784.

(signed) B. FranxiiN,  | FREY 1 MAjAUIlT, WY  Ln Roy, ©  SALLIN,  \ BAILLY,   D'Arcer,  DE Bory,  GviLLoTIN,  LAvoIsIER.

Ihe principles of M. Deſlon are the very ſame with  thoſe included in the twenty ſeven propoſitions. diſſe·  minated from the preſs by M. Meſmer in 1779. If M.  Meſmer now announces a more extenſive theory, it was  not neceſſary for the commiſſioners” to be acquainted -  with the theory to decide upon the exiſtence and utilit  of the magnetiſm, it was ſufficient: to eſtimate the ef.  feats. It is by the effects that the exiſtence of a cauſe  is eſtabliſhed, it is by the effects alſo that its utility muſk  be demonſtrated. The phenomena are le: from  obſervation long before we can arrive at the theory  which connects and explains them. The theory of the  loadſtone does not yet exiſt, and its phenomena are  aſcertained by the experience of ſucceſſive ages, The  theory of M. Meſmer is in this caſe indifferent and ſu-  perfluous ; the methods employed, the effects produced,  this is what it was neceſſary to examine. Now it is  eaſy to prove that the eſſential practice of the magnetiſc  is known to M. Deſlon. e Ba  M. Deſlon was for many years the pupil of M. Meſ-  mer. Conſtantly during that time he ſaw the proceſs  of the animal magnetiſm, and the means _—_— in  exciting and directing it. M. Deſion himſelf admi-

niſtered the magnetiſm in the preſence of M. Meſmer ;  ſe

ted from him he operated the ſame effects. Being  rwards reconciled they united their patients; the  g $ ons

Bus og ing of all theory that wherever it ſhall  object to excite convulſions they may become habitual

one {i * N witticue. AtinAion unzertebk the

management of them, and of conſequence the methods

_ were the ſame. "The method which is followed at this  day by M. Deſlon can be no other than the method of

M. Meſmer.

e effects are not leſs correſpondent. There are  eriſes * frequent, and accompanied by ſimilar

ſymptoms, at the houſe of M. Deſlon and at the houſe  f M. Meſmer; the effects do not therefore belong to the

method of an individual, but to the practice of the mag-  netiſm in general. The experiments of the commit-  ſioners demonſtrate that the effects obtained by M.  Deſlon are due to compreſſion, to imagination and to  imitation. Theſe are therefore the cauſes of the mag-  netiſm in general. The obſervations ef the commiſ-  fioners have convinced them that theſe convulſive criſes |  and: thefe violent means cannot be uſeful in medicine

any otherwiſe than as poiſans, and they have Judged

the

and pernicious, they may be epidemically diffuſed, we

even extend to future generations.

The commiſſioners were of conſequence. obliged 10

en that not only the meaſures in a particular  mode of proceeding, but the meaſures of the magnetiſm  | — b 720 the 808 en the moſt

of _  you:
