Cyprus as I Saw It in 1879 (Samuel White Baker, 1879)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1879 Macmillan first edition (https://archive.org/details/cyprusasisawiti00bakegoog). Baker's survey of Cyprus in the first year of British administration — topography, antiquities and the island's people from the explorer of the Nile.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Google 


This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 

to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 

to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 

are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 

publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 
We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.   Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at|http: //books  .google  .com/I 


ITRACT  OF  RULES: 


^is  Book  must  be  returned  fn 
twp  weeks.  f/* 

Do  nbt  turn  down  leaves. 

If  tlie  book  Is  damaged  while 
In  your  possession,  you  must 

p«y. 

Be  sure  to  take  up  your  receipt 
when  you  return  a  book. 

if  not  returned   when  due,  the 


iUTHE 


not  returned   when  due,  the    /  "T — x  T" 

chi!:;i?r.--.VeKe;s-"s!  J  Public  Library. 


\ . 


r 


CYPRUS 


.3n 


AS  I  SAW  IT  IN  J879. 


1 


^*« 


'  •* 


Vi     \  t      \i   1 


] 


CYPRUS 


AS   I   SAW  IT  IN    1879. 


BY 

SIR  SAMUEL  WHITE  BAKER,  M.A.,  F.R.S.,  F.R.vS.A.,  F.R.G.S.,  &c. 

Author    of    "rtmailTar    '*  The   Albert    rTyaHMa,"  ^'' The    Nile    Tribntanes    of 
Ah*^9uar    "  Eight    Years   in    Ceylon^    "  The  Rifle  and  Hound    in    Ceylhn,*' 


MACMILLAN     AND    CO. 

1879. 

The  Right  0/  Translation  is  Reserved. 


LONDON : 
R.   CLAY,    SONS,   AND  TAYLOR, 
BRSAD   STREBT  HILL,   RC. 


\ 


CONTENTS. 


t 


TAGS 

INTRODUCTION ix 


CHAPTER  I. 

ARRIVAL  AT  LARNACA I 


1^  CHAPTER  11. 

THE  GIPSY- VANS  ENCOUNTER  DIFFICULTIES 15 

Hi 

'^  CHAPTER  III. 

^       ROUTE  TO  NICOSIA 37 


CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  MESSARIA 67 

"CHAPTER  V. 

START  FOR  THE  CARPAS 98 

CHAPTER  VI. 

CAPE  ST.  ANDREA I3I 

CHAPTER  VII. 

KVRENIA  AKD  THE  NORTH  COAST .      I71 


I 


vi  Contents. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

PAGB 

kOUTE  TO  BAFFO 219 


N 


CHAPTER  IX. 

FROM  BAFFO  TO  LIMASOL 244 

CHAPTER  X. 

THE  WINE  DISTRICT  OF  LIMASOL 267 

CHAPTER  XI. 

FROM  LIMASOL  TO  THE  MOUNTAINS 293 

CHAPTER  XIL 

THE  MONASTERY  OF  TROODITISSA 309 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

WOODS  AND  FORESTS 327 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

REMARKS  ON  IRRIGATION 347 

CHAPTER  XV. 

LIFE  AT  THE  MONASTERY  OF  TROODITISSA 361 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

SOMETHING  ABOUT  TAXATION 379 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

« 

THE  DISTRICT  OF  LIMASOL  AND  LANDOWNERS 401 


CoNTEN*rs.  vii 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

PACE 

ON   POLICE,  WAGES,  FOOD,  CLIMATE,  ETC 420 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

POLITICAL  REFLECTIONS 436 

CHAPTER  XX. 

CONCLUSION 454 

APPENDIX 461 


INTRODUCTION. 

I  DO  not  intend  to  write  a  history  of  Cyprus,  as 
authorities  already  exist  that  are  well  known,  but  were 
generally  neglected  until  the  British  occupation  rescued 
them  from  secluded  bookshelves.  Even  had  I  pre- 
sumed to  write  as  a  historian,  the  task  would  have 
been  impossible,  as  I  am.  at  this  moment  excluded 
from  the  world  in  the  precincts  of  the  monastery  of 
Trooditissa  among  the  heights  of  ancient  Olympus  or 
modern  Troodos,  where  books  of  reference  are  un- 
known, and  the  necessary  data  would  be  wanting. 
I  shall  recount  my  personal  experience  of  this  island 
as  an  independent  traveller,  unprejudiced  by  political 
considerations,  and  unfettered  by  the  responsible  posi- 
tion of  an  official.  Having  examined  Cyprus  in  every 
district,  and  passed  not  only  a  few  days,  but  winter, 
spring,  and  summer  in  testing  the  climatic  and  geo- 
graphical peculiarities  of  the  country,  I  shall  describe 
*'  Cyprus  as  I  saw  it  in  1879,"  expressing  the  opinions 
which  I  formed  upon  the  spot  with  the  results  of 
my  experience. 


X  Introduction. 

Although  I  have  read  many  works  upon  this  island, 
I  have  no  books  with  me  except  that  interesting 
record  of  the  discovery  of  antiquities  by  General  di 
Cesnola,  and  the  invaluable  compilation  for  the  Intelli- 
gence Branch,  Quartermaster- General's  Department, 
Horse  Guards,  by  Captain  Savile,  i8th  Royal  Irish 
Regiment.  It  is  impossible  to  praise  the  latter  work 
too  highly,  as  every  authority,  whether  ancient  or 
modern,  has  been  studied,  and  the  information  thus 
carefully  collected  has  been  classed  under  special 
headings  and  offered  to  the  reader  in  a  concise  and 
graphic  form  which  renders  it  perfect  as  a  book 
of  reference.  I  must  express  my  deep  appreciation 
of  the  assistance  that  I  have  derived  from  Captain 
Savile's  work,  as  it  has  directed  my  attention  to  many 
subjects  that  might  have  escaped  my  observation, 
and  it  has  furnished  me  with  dates,  consular  reports, 
and  other  statistical  information  that  would  otherwise 
have  been  difficult  to  obtain.  The  study  of  M. 
Gaudrey  s  able  report  to  the  French  government 
upon  the  agricultural  resources  and  the  geological 
features  of  Cyprus,  before  I  commenced  my  journey, 
guided  me  materially  in  the  interesting  observations 
of  the  various  formations  and  terrestrial  phenomena- 
The  experiences  of  the  late  British  Consul,  Mr. 
Hamilton  Lang,  described  in  his  attractive  volume, 
together  with  those  of  Von  Loher,  I>octors  Unger 
and  Kotschy,  have  afforded  me  an  advantage  in 
following  upon  footsteps  through  a  well-examined  field 
of  discovery. 


Introduction.  xi 

Before  I  enter  upon  a  description  of  my  personal 
examination  of  the  island,  it  will  be  advisable  to  trace 
a  brief  outline  of  the  geographical  position  of  Cyprus, 
which  caused  its  early  importance  in  the  history  of 
the  human  race,  and  which  has  been  accepted  by 
the  British  government  as  sufficiently  unchanged  to 
warrant  a  military  occupation  in  1878,  as  a  strategical 
point  that  dominates  the  eastern  portion  of  the 
Mediterranean,  and  supplies  the  missing  link  in  the 
chain  of  fortified  ports  from  England  to  the  shores 
of  Egypt. 

In  the  world's  infancy  oceans  were  unknown  seas 
upon  which  the  vessels  of  the  ancients  rarely  ventured 
beyond  the  sight  of  land ;  without  the  compass  the 
interminable  blue  water  was  a  terrible  wilderness  full  of 
awe  and  wonder.  The  Phoenicians,  who  first  circum- 
navigated Africa  by  passing  through  the  then  existing 
canal  between  Suez  and  the  Nile,  coasted  the  whole 
voyage,  as  did  in  later  years  the  famous  Portuguese, 
Vasco  di  Gama,  and  stations  were  formed  along  the 
shores  at  convenient  intervals.  Hanno  the  Cartha- 
ginian coasted  to  an  uncertain  and  contested  point 
upon  the  western  shores  of  Africa,  but  no  ocean  com- 
mercial port  was  known  to  have  existed  in  the  early 
days  of  maritime  adventure.  The  Mediterranean 
offered  peculiar  advantages  of  physical  geography  ;  its 
great  length  and  comparatively  narrow  width  embraced 
a  vast  area,  at  the  same  time  that  it  afforded  special 
facilities  for  commerce  in  the  numerous  ports  and 
islands  that  would  form  a  refuge  in  stress  of  weather. 


xii  Introduction. 

The  countries  which  surrounded  this  great  inland  sea 
were  rich  ;  the  climate  throughout  its  course  combined 
the  temperate  with  almost  tropical,  according  to  the 
changes  of  seasons ;  accordingly,  the  productions  of  the 
earth  varying  upon  the  northern  and  southern  coasts, 
were  all  that  could  be  required  for  the  necessities  of 
the  human  race.  In  this  happily  situated  position 
commerce  was  first  cradled,  and  by  the  interchange  of 
ideas  and  natural  productions,  artificial  wants  were 
mutually  created  among  the  various  countries  around 
the  great  sea  margin  ;  the  supply  of  these  new  re- 
quirements and  exchange  of  commodities  established 
trade.  With  the  development  of  commerce,  wealth  and 
prosperity  increased  ;  nations  became  important  through 
the  possession  of  superior  harbours  and  geographical 
positions,  and  the  entire  maritime  strength  and  com- 
mercial activity  of  the  ancient  world  was  represented 
by  the  Mediterranean.  The  Phoenicians  of  Tyre  and 
Sidon  were  the  English  of  to-day ;  the  Egyptians  and 
the  Greeks  were  followed  as  the  world  grew  older  by 
the  Venetians  and  Genoese,  and  throughout  the  world*s 
history  no  point  possessed  a  more  constant  and  un- 
changeable attraction  from  its  geographical  position 
and  natural  advantages  than  the  island  of  Cyprus, 
which  in  turn  was  occupied  by  Phoenicians,  Greeks, 
Egyptians,  Persians,  Romans,  Byzantine  rulei's,  Sara- 
cens, Byzantine  rulers  again,  English,  Lusignans, 
Venetians,  Turks,  and  once  more  English  in   1878. 

The  advantages  which  had  thus  possessed  a  mag- 
netic  influence  in   attracting  towards  this  island  the 


I NTRODUCTION.  xiil 

leading  nations  of  the  world  were  in  ancient  days 
undeniable.  When  vessels  directed  their  course  only 
by  well-known  landmarks,  or  by  the  position  of  certain 
stars,  it  was  highly  necessary  for  a  maritime  power  to 
occupy  a  continuous  chain  of  stations,  where,  in  case  of 
danger  from  a  superior  force,  a  place  of  refuge  would 
be  near.  Cyprus  from  its  peculiar  geographical  posi- 
tion commanded  the  eastern  portion  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean. The  harbour  of  Famagousta  was  only  a  few 
hours'  sail,  with  a  favourable  wind,  to  the  coast  of  Asia 
Minor.  The  bays  of  Larnaca  and  Limasol  were  road- 
steads with  a  safe  anchorage,  and  Paphos  (Baffo)  was 
a  convenient  harbour  upon  the  south-western  porticHi 
of  the  island,  capable  of  protecting  a  considerable 
number  of  the  small  vessels  of  the  period.  Thus 
Cyprus  possessed  two  harbours  upon  the  south  coast 
in  addition  to  good  roadsteads  ;  while  upon  the  north, 
Cerinea  (Kyrenia)  and  Soli,  although  never  large,  were 
serviceable  ports  of  refuge,  exactly  facing  the  coast 
of  Caramania,  plainly  visible.  The  lofty  mountains 
of  the  Carpas  range  which  overhang  these  harbours 
command  the  sea  view  at  an  elevation  of  between 
three  and  four  thousand  feet,  from  which  the  approach 
of  an  enemy  could  be  quickly  signalled,  while  the  un- 
mistakable peaks  of  the  rugged  sky-line  formed  land- 
marks by  which  vessels  could  steer  direct  to  the 
desired  ports.  The  same  advantage  of  descrying  an 
enemy  at  a  distance  from  the  shore  exists  in  many 
parts  of  Cyprus,  owing  to  the  position  of  the  heights ; 


xiv  Introduction. 

and  the  rocky  nature  of  the  coast  (with  the  exception 
of  a  few  points  such  as  Limasol,  Morphu  Bay,  &c.), 
rendered  the  landing  of  a  large  force  extremely 
difficult  As  a  strategical  point,  there  was  no  more 
formidable  position  than  Cyprus ;  it  formed  a  common 
centre  within  immediate  reach  of  Alexandria  and  all 
the  coasts  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor.  It  was  not  only 
a  milit3Lry  place  d'armes,  such  as  Malta  and  Gibraltar 
now  are,  dependent  upon  maritime  superiority  for  the 
necessary  provisions,  but  it  was  a  country  of  large 
area,  comprising  about  3500  square  miles,  with  a  soil 
of  unbounded  fertility  in  a  high  state  of  cultivation,  a 
population  sufficiently  numerous  for  all  requirements 
of  the  island,  and  forests  of  timber  that  was  in  great 
request  for  the  architect  and  ship-builder.  In  addition 
to  these  natural  sources  of  wealth,  the  mineral  pro- 
ductions were  celebrated  from  the  earliest  history,  and 
the  copper  of  Cyprus  was  used  by  the  Phoenicians  in 
the  manufacture  of  their  celebrated  bronze. 

The  Chittim  wood  of  Scripture,  imported  to  Syria 
from  Cyprus  (the  ancient  Chittim),  was  probably  a 
species  of  cypress  at  that  time  composing  the  forests 
which  ornamented  a  considerable  portion  of  the  surface. 
There  are  two  varieties  of  cypress  in  the  island :  that 
which  would  have  been  celebrated  grows  upon  the  high 
mountains,  and  attains  a  girth  of  from  seven  to  nine 
feet,  the  wood  being  highly  aromatic,  emitting  a  per- 
fume resembling  a  mixture  of  sandal-wood  and  cedar ; 
the   other  cypress   is  a  dwarf   variety   that    seldom 


Introduction.  xv 

exceeds  twenty  feet>  in  height,  with  a  maximum 
circumference  of  two  feet;  this  is  a  totally  different 
wood,  and  is  intensely  hard,  while  the  former  is 
easily  worked,  but  durable.  The  derivation  of  the 
name  Cyprus  has  been  sought  for  from  many 
sources ;  and  the  opinions  of  the  authorities  differ. 
English  people  may  reflect  that  they  alone  spell 
and  pronounce  the  word  as  "Cyprus."  The  name 
of  the  cypress-tree,  which  at  one  time  clothed  the 
mountains  of  this  formerly  verdant  island,  is  pro- 
nounced by  the  inhabitants  "  Kypresses,*'  which 
approximates  closely  to  the  various  appellations  of 
Cyprus  in  different  languages.  The  Greek  name 
is  Kypros,  and  it  is  probable  that  as  in  ancient 
days  the  "  chittim-wood "  was  so  called  from  the 
fact  of  its  export  from  Chittim,  the  same  link 
may  remain  unbroken  between  Kypros  and  the  tree 
Kypresses. 

The  geographical  advantages  which  I  have 
enumerated  are  sufficient  to  explain  the  series  of 
struggles  for  possession  to  which  the  island  has 
been  exposed  throughout  its  history;  the  tombs  that 
have  been  examined,  have  revealed  the  secrets  of 
the  dead,  and  in  the  relics  of  Phoenicians,  Persians, 
Assyrians,  Egyptians,  and  the  long  list  of  foreign 
victors,  we  discover  proofs  of  the  important  past, 
until  we  at  length  tread  upon  pre-historical  vestiges, 
and  become  lost  in  a  labyrinth  of  legends.  From 
the   researches   of    undoubted    authorities,   we  know 


xvi  Introduction. 

that  Cyprus  possessed  a  written  character  pecu- 
liarly original,  and  that  it  was  occupied  by  a 
people  highly  civilised  according  to  the  standard  of 
the  early  world  at  so  primitive  an  era,  that  all 
records  have  disappeared,  and  we  are  left  in  the 
darkness  of  conjecture. 

The  changes  in  the  importance  of  certain  geo- 
graphical positions,  owing  to  the  decline  and  fall  of 
empires,  which  at  one  time  governed  the  destinies 
of  the  Eastern  world,  have  been  strikingly  exhibited 
on  the  shores  of  the  Mediterranean ;  Tyre,  Sidon, 
Carthage,  Cyprus,  had  lost  their  significance  upon 
modem  charts,  even  before  the  New  Worlds  ap- 
peared, when  America,  Australia,  and  the  Eastern 
Archipelago  were  introduced  upon  the  globe.  The 
progress  of  Western  Europe  eclipsed  the  Oriental 
Powers  which  hitherto  represented  the  civilisation 
of  mankind,  and  two  points  alone  remained,  which, 
shorn  of  their  ancient  glory,  still  maintained  their 
original  importance  as  geographical  centres,  that  will 
renew  those  struggles  for  their  possession  which 
fill  the  bloody  pages  of  their  history — Egypt  and 
Constantinople. 

No  country  had  been  more  completely  excluded 
from  the  beaten  paths  of  British  travellers  than  the 
island  of  Cyprus,  and  England  was  startled  by  the 
sudden  revelation  of  a  mystery  connected  with  the 
Treaty  of  Berlin,  that  it  was  to  become  a  strategical 
point  for  a  British  military  occupation ! 


Introduction.  xvii 

On  the  4th  June,  1878,  a  **^  Convention  of  Defensive 
Alliance  between  Great  Britain  and  Turkey"  was 
signed,  which  agreed  upon  the  following"  articles: — 

Article  I. 

"  If  Batoum,  Ardahan,  Kars,  or  any  of  them,  shall  be  retained 
by  Russia,  or  if  any  attempt  shall  be  made  at  any  future  time  by 
Russia  to  take  possession  of  any  further  territories  of  His  Imperial 
Majesty  the  Sultan  in  Asia,  as  fixed  by  the  definitive  treaty  of  peace, 
England  engages  to  join  His  Imperial  Majesty  the  Sultan  in  defending 
them  by  force  of  Arms. 

*'  In  return.  His  Imperial  Majesty  the  Sultan  promises  to  England 
to  introduce  necessary  reforms,  to  be  agreed  upon  later  between  the 
two  Powers,  into  the  government,  and  for  the  protection  of  the 
Christian  and  other  subjects  of  the  Porte  in  those  territories ;  and  in 
order  to  enable  England  to  make  necessary  provision  for  executing 
her  engagement^  His  Imperial  Majesty  the  Sultan  further  consents  to 
assign  the  island  of  Cyprus  to  be  occupied  and  administered  by 
England. 

Article  II. 

"  The  present  Convention  shall  be  ratified,  and  the  ratifications 
thereof  shall  be  exchanged,  within  the  space  of  one  month,  or  sooner 
if  possible. 

"  In  witness  whereof  the  respective  Plenipotentiaries  have  signed 
the  same,  and  have  affixed  thereto  the  seal  of  their  arms. 

"  Done  at  Constantinople,  the  fourth  day  of  June,  in  the  year 
one  thousand  eight  hundred  and  seventy-eight. 


0 


"A.  H.  LAYARD. 


"  SAFVET,'' 


XVlii  I NTRODUCTION. 

It  was  eventually  agreed  betweien  the  contracting 
Powers  : — 

"That  England  will  pay  to  the  Porte  whatever  is  the  present 
excess  of  revenue  over  expenditure  in  the  island;  this  excess  to 
be  calculated  and  determined  by  the  average  of  the  last  five  years." 

and  : — 

"  That  if  Russia  restores  to  Turkey  Kars  and  the  other  conquests 
made  by  her  in  Armenia  during  the  last  war,  the  island  of  Cyprus 
^vill  be  evacuated  by  England,  and  the  Convention  of  the  fourth 
June,  1878,  will  be  at  an  end." 

I  knew  nothing  of  Cyprus,  but  I  felt  sure  that  the 
Turks  had  the  best  6f  the  bargain,  as  they  would 
receive  the  usual  surplus  revenue  from  our  hands, 
and  be  saved  the  trouble  and  onus  of  the  collection  ; 
they  would  also  be  certain  of  a  fixed  annual  sum, 
without  any  of  those  risks  of  droughts,  famine,  and 
locusts,  to  which  the  island  is  exposed,  and  which 
seriously  affect  the  income. 

Although  there  would  only  be  a  wildly  remote  chance 
of  Russia  ever  relinquishing  her  Asiatic  prey,  the  bare 
mention  of  the  words  ''will be  evacuated  by  England'' 
was  a  possible  contingency  and  risk,  that  would  effec- 
tually exclude  all  British  capital  from  investment  in 
the  island.  I  could  not  discover  any  possible  good 
that  could  accrue  to  England  by  the  terms  of  the 
Convention.  If  Cyprus  had  been  presented  as  a 
"  bonus "  by  the  Porte  to  counterbalance  the  risk 
we  should  incur  in  a  defensive  alliance  for  the 
protection   of    Asia    Minor,    I    could    have    seen   an 


I NTRODUCTION.  XIX 

addition  to  our  Colonial  Empire  of  a  valuable  island, 
that  would  not  only  have  been  of  strategical  value, 
but  such  that  in  a  few  years,  money  and  British  settlers 
would  have  entirely  changed  its  present  aspect,  and 
have  created  for  it  a  new  era  of  prosperity. 

If  England  had  purchased  Cyprus,  I  could  have 
understood  the  plain,  straightforward,  business-like 
transaction,  which  would  have  at  once  established 
confidence,  both  among  the  inhabitants,  who  would 
have  become  British  subjects ;  and  through  the  outer 
world,  that  would  have  acknowledged  the  commence- 
ment of  a  great  future. 

But,  if  we  were  actually  bound  in  defensive  alliance 
with  Turkey  in  case  of  a  war  with  Russia,  why  should 
we  occupy  Cyprus  upon  such  one-sided  and  anomalous 
conditions,  that  would  frustrate  all  hopes  of  commercial 
development,  for  the  sake  of  obtaining  a  strategical 
position  that  would  have  been  opened  to  our  occu- 
pation as  an  ally  at  any  moment?  On  the  other 
hand,  if  we  distrusted  Turkey,  and  feared  that  she 
might  coquet  with  Russia  at  some  future  period, 
I  could  see  a  paramount  necessity  for  the  occupation 
of  Cyprus,  and  even  Egypt ;  but  we  were  supposed  to 
be,  and  I  believe  were,  acting  in  absolute  and  mutual 
good  faith  as  the  protector  of  Asiatic  Turkey,  in 
defensive  alliance  with  the  Sultan.  In  that  position, 
should  we  have  entered  into  a  war  with  Russia,  there 
was  no  necessity  for  the  occupation  and  responsibility 
of  any  new  position,  as  every  port  of  the  Ottoman 


XX  Introduction. 

dominions,  even  to  the  Golden  Horn  of  Constan- 
tinople, would  have  welcomed  our  troops  and  fleets 
with  enthusiasm. 

Turkey  is  a  suspicious  Power,  and  the  British 
government  may  have  had  to  contend  with  difficulties 
that  are  unknown  to  the  criticising  public  ;  it  may  have 
been  impossible  to  have  obtained  her  sanction  for  the 
occupation  under  other  conditions.  The  possibility 
of  future  complications  that  might  terminate  in  a 
close  alliance  between  the  conquered  and  the  victor, 
may  have  suggested  the  necessity  for  securing  this 
most  important  strategical  position  without  delay, 
upon  first  conditions  that  might  subsequently  receive 
modifications.  At  first  sight  the  political  situation 
appeared  vague,  but  I  determined  to  examine  the 
physical  geography  of  Cyprus,  and  to  form  my  own 
opinion  of  its  capabilities. 


CYPRUS 

AS    I    SAW   IT    IN    1879. 


CHAPTER  I. 

ARRIVAL   AT    LARNACA. 

On  the  morning  of  the  4th  January  we  sighted 
Cyprus  at  about  fifty  miles  distance,  after  a  smooth 
voyage  of  twenty-six  hours  from  Alexandria.  The 
day  was  favourable  for  an  arrival,  as  the  atmospherical 
condition  afforded  both  intense  lights  and  shadows. 
The  sky  was  a  cobalt  blue,  but  upon  all  points  of  the 
compass  local  rain-clouds  hovered  in  dark  patches  near 
the  surface,  and  emptied  themselves  in  heavy  showers. 
The  air  was  extremely  clear,  and  as  we  steamed  at  ten 
knots  each  hour  brought  out  in  prominent  relief  the 
mountain  peaks  of  Cyprus  ;  Olympus  was  capped  with 
clouds.  Passing  through  a  rain-cloud  which  for  a  time 
obscured  the  view,  we  at  length  emerged  into  bright 
sunshine ;  the  mists  had  cleared  from  the  mountain 
range,  and  Troodos,  6,400  feet  above  the  sea-level, 
towered  above  all  competitors. 

We  were  now  about  ten  miles  from  the  shore,  and 
the  general  appearance  of  the  island  suggested  a  recent 

B 

57 


^ 


2  Cyprus  Ix\  1879.  ichap. 

snowfall.  As  the  sun  shone  upon  a  bare  white  surface, 
the  sterile  slopes  and  mountain  sides  were  utterly 
devoid  of  vegetation,  and  presented  a  sad  aspect  of 
desolation,  which  reminded  me  of  the  barren  range  on 
the  shores  of  the  Red  Sea. 

First  impressions  are  seldom  correct,  but  the  view 
of  Cyprus  on  arrival  from  the  south  was  depressing, 
and  extinguished  all  hopes  that  had  been  formed  con- 
cerning our  newly-acquired  possession.  This  was  the 
treasure  acquired  by  astute  diplomacy  ! 

For  about  twenty  miles  we  skirted  this  miserable 
coast,  upon  which  not  a  green  speck  relieved  the  eye ; 
at  length  we  sighted  the  minaret  which  marked  the 
position  of  Larnaca,  the  port  or  roadstead  to  which 
the  mail  was  bound ;  and  in  the  town  we  distinguished 
three  or  four  green  trees.  We  cast  anchor  about  half 
a  mile  from  the  shore.  Nine  or  ten  vessels,  including 
several  steamers,  were  in  the  roadstead,  and  a  number 
of  lighters  were  employed  in  landing  cargoes. 

Disappointment  and  disgust  were  quickly  banished 
by  the  reflection  that  at  this  season  (January)  there 
was  nothing  green  in  England  :  the  thermometer  in 
that  dreary  land  would  be  below  freezing-point,  while 
on  the  deck  where  we  stood  it  was  64''  Fahr.  We 
were  quickly  in  a  boat  steering  for  the  landing-place. 

All  towns  look  tolerably  well  from  the  sea,  especially 
if  situated  actually  upon  the  margin  of  the  water.  The 
town  represented  a  front  of  about  a  mile,  less  than  five 
feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea,  bordered  by  a  masonry 
quay  perpendicular  to  the  surface,  from  which  several 
wooden  jetties  of  inferior  and  very  recent  construction 
served  as  landing-places. 

The  left  flank  of  Larnaca  was  bounded  by  a  small 
Turkish  fort,  absolutely  useless  against  modern  artillery; 


I.J 


Arrival  at  Larnaca. 


upon  the  walls  the  British  flag  was  floating.  We 
landed  upon  the  quay.  This  formed  a  street,  the  sea 
upon  one  side,  faced  by  a  row  of  houses.  As  with  all 
Turkish  possessions,  decay  had  stamped  the  town  : 
the  masonry  of  the  quay  was  in  many  places  broken 
down,  the  waves  had  undermined  certain  houses,  and 
in  the  holes  thus  washed  out  by  the  action  of  water 
were  accumulations  of  recent  filth.  Nevertheless, 
enormous  improvements  had  taken  place  since  the 
English  occupation.  An  engineer  was  already  em- 
ployed in  repairing  the  quay,  and  large  blocks  of 
carefully  faced  stone  (a  sedimentary  limestone  rock  of 
very  recent  formation)  were  being  laid  upon  a  bed  of 
concrete  to  form  a  permanent  sea-wall.  The  houses 
which  lined  the  quay  were  for  the  most  part  stores, 
warehouses,  and  liquor-shops.  Among  these  the 
Custom  House,  the  Club,  Post  Office,  and  Chief 
Commissioner's  were  prominent  as  superior  buildings. 
There  was  a  peculiar  character  in  the  interior  economy 
of  nearly  all  houses  in  Larnaca;  it  appeared  that 
heavy  timber  must  have  been  scarce  before  the  town 
was  built,  as  the  upper  floor  was  invariably  supported 
by  stone  arches  of  considerable  magnitude,  which 
sprang  from  the  ground-floor  level.  These  arches 
were  uniform  throughout  the  town,  and  the  base  of 
the  arch  was  the  actual  ground,  without  any  pillar  or 
columnar  support ;  so  that  in  the  absence  of  a  powerful 
beam  of  timber,  the  top  of  the  one-span  arch  formed  a 
support  for  the  joists  of  the  floor  above.  In  large 
houses  numerous  arches  gave  an  imposing  appearance 
to  the  architecture  of  the  ground  floors,  which  were 
generally  used  as  warehouses.  Even  the  wooden 
joists  were  imported  poles  of  fir,  thus  proving  the 
scarcity  of  natural  forests.  .  The  roofs  of  the  houses 

B    2 


4  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^chap. 

were  for  the  most  part  flat,  and  covered  with  tempered 
clay  and  chopped  straw  for  the  thickness  of  about  ten 
inches.  Some  buildings  of  greater  pretensions  were 
gaudy  in  bright  red  tiles,  but  all  were  alike  in  the 
general  waste  of  rain-water,  which  was  simply  allowed 
to  pour  into  the  narrow  streets  through  innumerable 
wooden  shoots  projecting  about  six  feet  beyond  the 
eaves.  These  gutters  would  be  a  serious  obstacle  to 
wheeled  conveyances,  such  as  lofty  waggons,  which 
would  be  unable  in  many  cases  to  pass  beneath.  The 
streets  are  paved,  but  being  devoid  of  subterranean 
drains,  a  heavy  shower  would  convert  them  into  pools. 
Foot  passengers  are  protected  from  such  accidents  by 
a  stone  footway  about  sixteen  inches  high  upon  either 
side  of  the  narrow  street  Before  the  English  occu- 
pation these  hollow  lanes  were  merely  heaps  of  filth, 
which  caused  great  unhealthiness ;  they  were  now 
tolerably  clean  ;  but  in  most  cases  the  pavement  was 
full  of  holes  that  would  have  tested  the  springs  and 
wheels  of  modern  vehicles. 

I  had  heard,  prior  to  leaving  England,  that  hotels, 
inns,  &c.,  were  unknown  in  Larnaca ;  I  was,  therefore, 
agreeably  surprised  on  landing,  to  find  a  new  hotel 
(Craddock*s)  which  was  scrupulously  clean,  the  rooms 
neatly  whitewashed,  and  everything  simple  and  in 
accordance  with  the  requirements  of  the  country. 

The  miserable  reports  in  England  respecting  the 
want  of  accommodation,  and  the  unhealthiness  of 
Cyprus,  had  determined  me  to  render  myself  indepen- 
dent ;  I  had  therefore  arranged  a  gipsy  travelling-van 
while  in  London,  which  would,  as  a  hut  upon  wheels, 
enable  us  to  select  a  desirable  resting-place  in  any  por- 
tion of  the  island,  where  the  route  should  be  practicable 
for   wheeled  conveyances.      This  van  was  furnished 


M 


Arrival  at  Larnaca. 


with  a  permanent  bed  ;  shelves  or  wardrobe  beneath  ; 
a  chest  of  drawers ;  table  to  fall  against  the  wall  when 
not  in  use,  lockers  for  glass  and  crockery,  stove  and 
chimney,  and  in  fact  it  resembled  a  ship's  cabin,  nine 
feet  six  inches  long,  by  five  feet  eight  inches  wide. 

I  had  another  excellent  light  four-wheeled  van 
constructed  by  Messrs.  Glover  Brothers,  of  Dean 
Street,  Soho :  both  these  vehicles  had  broad  and 
thick  iron  tires  to  the  wheels,  which  projected  f  inch 
upon  either  side  beyond  the  felloes,  in  order  to  afford 
a  wide  surface  to  deep  soil  or  sandy  ground  without 
necessitating  a  too  massive  wheel. 

The  vans  with  all  my  effects  had  left  London  by 
steamer  direct  for  Cyprus,  I  therefore  found  them, 
upon  my  arrival  from  Egypt,  in  the  charge  of  Mr. 
Z.  Z.  Williamson,  a  most  active  agent  and  perfect 
polyglot;  the  latter  gift  being  an  extreme  advantage 
in  this  country  of  Babel-like  confusion  of  tongues. 

I  was  now  prepared  to  investigate  Cyprus  thoroughly, 
and  to  form  my  own  opinion  of  its  present  and  future 
value. 

The  day  after  my  arrival  I  strolled  outside  the  town 
and  exercised  my  three  spaniels  which  had  come  out 
direct  from  England.  The  dogs  searched  for  game 
which  they  did  not  find,  while  I  examined  the  general 
features  of  the  country.  About  three-quarters  of  a 
mile  from  the  present  town  or  port  are  the  remains 
of  old  Larnaca.  This  is  a  mere  village,  but  posses- 
ses a  large  Greek  church.  The  tomb  of  Lazarus, 
who  is  believed  to  have  settled  in  Cyprus  to  avoid 
persecution  after  his  miraculous  resurrection  from 
the  grave,  is  to  be  seen  in  the  church  of  St.  George 
within  the  principal  town. 

From  this  point  an  excellent  view  is  obtained  of 


6  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

the  adjacent  country.  A  plain  of  most  fertile  soil 
extends  along  the  sea-coast  towards  the  east  for  six 
miles,  and  in  breadth  about  four  miles.  The  present 
town  of  Larnaca  stands  on  the  sea-board  of  this  plain, 
which  to  the  west  of  the  port  continues  for  about  four 
miles,  thus  giving  an  area  of  some  ten  miles  in  length, 
forming  almost  a  half  circle  of  four  miles  in  its  semi- 
diameter  ;  the  whole  is  circumscribed  by  hills  of  low 
but  increasing  altitudes,  all  utterly  barren.  Through 
the  plain  are  two  unmistakable  evidences  of  river- 
action  which  at  some  remote  period  had  washed  down 
from  the  higher  ground  the  fertile  deposit  which  has 
formed  the  alluvium  of  the  valley.  Within  this 
apparently  level  plain  is  a  vestige  of  a  once  higher 
level,  the  borders  of  which  have  been  denuded  by  the 
continual  action  of  running  water  during  the  rushes 
from  the  mountains  in  the  rainy  season.  This  water 
action  has  long  ceased  to  exist.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  that  in  the  ancient  days  of  forest-covered  moun- 
tains, the  rainfall  of  Cyprus  was  far  greater  than  at 
present,  and  that  important  torrents  swept  down  from 
the  hill-sides.  We  see  evidences  of  this  in  the 
rounded  blocks,  all  water-worn,  of  syenite  and  gneiss, 
which  are  intermingled  with  the  bits  of  broken  pottery 
in  the  vale,  alike  relics  of  the  past  and  proving  the 
changes  both  in  nature  and  in  man  since  Cyprus  was 
in  the  zenith  of  prosperity. 

A  level  plateau  about  eighteen  feet  above  the  lowest 
level  of  the  plain  shows  the  original  surface.  The 
soil  of  the  entire  valley  is  calcareous,  and  is  eminently 
adapted  for  the  cultivation  of  the  vine  and  cereals. 
As  the  rain  has  percolated  through  the  ground,  it  has 
become  so  thoroughly  impregnated  with  sulphate  of 
lime  that  it  has  deposited  a  series  of  strata  some  six 


I.]  Arrival  at  Larnaca.  7 

or  seven  feet  below  the  surface,  which  form  a  flaky- 
subterranean  pavement.  The  ancients  selected  this 
shallow  soil  of  a  higher  level  for  a  burial-ground,  and 
they  burrowed  beneath  the  stratum  of  stony  deposit 
to  form  their  tombs.  One  of  the  chief  occupations  of 
modern  Cypriotes  appears  to  be  the  despoiling  of  the 
dead ;  thus  the  entire  sides  of  the  plateau-face  for  a 
distance  of  about  two  miles  are  burrowed  into  thou- 
sands of  holes  to  a  depth  of  ten  and  twelve  feet  in 
search  of  hidden  treasures.  If  the  same  amount  of 
labour  had  been  expended  in  the  tillage  of  the  surface, 
the  result  would  have  been  far  more  profitable.  A 
small  proportion  of  the  land  upon  the  outskirts  of  the 
town  was  cultivated,  some  had  been  recently  ploughed, 
while  in  Other  plots  the  wheat  had  appeared  above 
the  surface.  Water  is  generally  found  at  eight  or 
nine  feet  below  the  level,  but  this  is  of  an  inferior 
description,  and  the  town  and  environs  are  well 
supplied  by  an  aqueduct  which  conveys  the  water 
from  powerful  springs  about  seven  miles  to  the  west 
of  Larnaca,  near  Arpera.  This  useful  work  was  con- 
structed according  to  the  will  of  a  former  pacha,  who 
bequeathed  the  sum  required,  for  a  public  benefit 

Large  flocks  of  sheep  were  grazing  in  various  por- 
tions of  the  uncultivated  plain.  At  first  sight  they 
appeared  to  be  only  searching  for  food  among  the 
stones  and  dust,  but  upon  close  examination  I  found 
a  peculiar  fleshy  herb  something  like  the  stone-crop 
which  grows  upon  the  old  walls  and  rocks  of  England. 
This  'plant  was  exceedingly  salt,  and  the  sheep  de- 
voured it  with  avidity,  and  were  in  fair  condition. 
The  wool  was  long,  but  of  a  coarse  wiry  texture,  and 
much  impaired  by  the  adherence  of  thistles  and  other 
prickly  plants.      The  musical  sound  of  distant  bells 


1 


8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


I  CHAP. 


denoted  the  arrival  of  a  long  string  of  camels,  laden 
with  immense  bales  of  unpressed  cotton  on  their  way 
to  the  port  of  Larnaca.  Each  animal  carried  two 
bales,  and  I  observed  that  the  saddles  and  pads  were 
in  excellent  order,  the  camels  well  fed,  and  strongly 
contrasting  with  the  cruel  carelessness  of  the  camel 
owners  of  Egypt,  whose  beasts  are  galled  into  terrible 
sores  from  the  want  of  padding  in  their  packs.  The 
cotton  had  been  cleaned  upon  the  plantation,  but  it 
would  be  subjected  to  hydraulic  pressure  and  packed 
in  the  usual  iron-bound  bales  for  shipment,  upon 
arrival  in  the  stores  of  Larnaca. 

It  was  impossible  to  resist  a  feeling  of  depression 
upon  strolling  around  the  environs  of  the  town  and 
regarding  the  barren  aspect  of  the  distant  country. 
Every  inch  of  this  fertile  plain  should  be  cultivated, 
and  numerous  villages  should  be  dotted  upon  the 
extensive  surface.  **  Thorns  also  and  thistles  shall  it 
bring  forth "  was  a  curse  that^  appeared  to  have 
adhered  to  Cyprus. 

It  was  unnecessary  to  seek  for  the  chief  cause  of 
unhealthiness ;  this  was  at  once  apparent  in  the  low 
swamps  on  the  immediate  outskirts  of  the  town.  In 
ancient  days  the  shallow  harbour  of  Cittium  existed 
on  the  east  side  of  modern  Larnaca ;  whether  from  a- 
silting  of  the  port,  or  from  the  gradual  alteration  in 
the  level  of  the  Mediterranean,  the  old  harbour  no 
longer  exists,  but  is  converted  into  a  miserable  swamp, 
bordered  by  a  raised  beach  of  shingles  upon  the  sea- 
board. The  earth  has  been  swept  down  by  the  rains, 
and  the  sand  driven  in  by  the  sea,  while  man  stood 
idly  by,  allowing  Nature  to  destroy  a  former  industry. 
All  the  original  harbours  of  the  country  haye  suffered 
from  the  same  neglect. 


1.3  '  Arrival  at  Larnaca.  9 

There  was  little  to  be  seen  in  the  neighbourhood. 
The  site  was  pointed  out  where  the  troops  were  en- 
camped in  the  tremendous  heat  of  July  in  the  close 
vicinity  of  the  swampy  ground,  upon  pestiferous  soil, 
and  the  usual  tales  of  commissariat  blunders  were 
recounted.  Close  to  the  borders  of  this  unhealthy 
spot,  but  about  twenty  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
lowest  morass,  stands  the  convent  belonging  to  the 
Sisters  of  Charity,  which  includes  a  school,  in  addition 
to  a  hospital.  Great  kindness  was  shown  by  these 
excellent  ladies  to  many  English  sufferers,  and  their 
establishment  deserves  a  liberal  support  from  public 
contributions. 

I  walked  through  the  bazaar  of  Larnaca ;  this  is 
situated  at  the  west  end  of  the  town  near  the  fort, 
close  to  which  there  is  a  public  fountain  supplied  by 
the  aqueduct  to  which  I  have  already  alluded.  Brass 
taps  were  arranged  around  the  covered  stone  reser- 
voir, but  I  remarked  a  distressing  waste  of  water,  as 
a  continual  flow  escaped  from  an  uncontrolled  shoot 
which  poured  in  a  large  volume  uselessly  into  the 
street.  Within  a  few  yards  of  the  reservoir  was  a 
solitary  old  banian  tree  {^ficus  religiosa),  around  which 
a  crowd  of  donkeys  waited,  laden  with  panniers  con- 
taining large  earthen  jars,  which  in  their  turn  were  to 
be  filled  with  the  pure  water  of  the  Arpera  springs. 

Although  the  crowd  was  large,  and  all  were  busied 
in  filling  their  jars  and  loading  their  respective  animals, 
there  was  no  jostling  or  quarrelling  for  precedence,  but 
every  individual  was  a  pattern  of  patience  and  good 
humour.  Mohammedans  and  Cypriotes  thronged  to- 
gether in  the  same  employment,  and  the  orderly 
behaviour  in  the  absence  of  police  supervision 
formed  a  strong  contrast  to  the  crowds  in  England. 


lo  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[  CHAP. 


The  Mosque  being  within  a  few  feet  of  them,  the 
Mussulmans  could  perform  their  ablutions  at  the 
threshold.  Around  the  font,  women  were  inter- 
mingled with  a  crowd  of  men  and  boys.  The 
girls  and  lads  were  regular  in  features  and  good- 
looking,  though  dirt  and  torn  clothing  of  various 
gaudy  colours  gave  a  picturesque,  but  hardly  an 
attractive,  appearance  to  the  group.  The  bazaar  was 
entered  at  right  angles  with  the  quay ;  the  streets 
were  paved  with  stones  of  irregular  size,  sloping  from 
both  sides  towards  the  centre,  which  formed  the  gutter. 
Camels,  mules,  bullock-carts,  and  the  omnipresent 
donkeys  thronged  the  narrow  streets,  either  laden  with 
produce  for  the  quay,  or  returning  after  having 
delivered  their  heavy  loads.  The  donkeys  were  very 
large  and  were  mostly  dark  brown,  with  considerable 
length  of  hair.  In  like  manner  with  the  camels,  they 
were  carefully  protected  by  thick  and  well  stuffed 
packs,  or  saddles,  and  were  accordingly  free  from 
sores.  They  appeared  to  be  exceedingly  docile  and 
intelligent,  and  did  not  require  the  incessant  bela- 
bouring to  which  the  ass  of  other  countries  is  the 
victim.  Large  droves  of  these  animals,  each 
laden  with  three  heavy  squared  stones  for  building, 
picked  their  way  through  the  narrow  streets,  and 
seemed  to  know  exactly  the  space  required  for  their 
panniers,  as  they  never  collided  with  either  carts  or 
passengers. 

The  shops  of  the  bazaar  were  all  open,  and  con- 
tained the  supplies  usually  seen  in  Turkish  markets 
— vegetables,  meat,  and  a  predominance  of  native 
sweets  and  confectionery,  in  addition  to  stores  of 
groceries,  and  of  copper  and  brass  utensils.  An 
absence  of  fish  proved  the  general   indolence  of  the 


i^  Arrival  at  Larnaca.  ii 

people  ;  there  is  abundance  in  the  sea,  but  there  are 
few  fishermen. 

An  hour  s  stroll  was  quite  sufficient  for  one  to  form 
an  opinion  of  Larnaca.  A  good  roadstead  and  safe 
anchorage  offer  great  advantages,  but  until  some  pro- 
tection shall  be  afforded  that  will  enable  boats  to  land 
in  all  weathers  Larnaca  can  never  be  accepted  as  a 
port.  There  is  shoal  water  for  a  distance  of  about 
two  hundred  yards  from  the  shore,  which  causes  a 
violent  surf  even  in  a  moderate  breeze,  and  frequently 
prevents  all  communication  with  the  shipping.  The 
quay  was  in  many  places  undermined  by  the  action  of 
the  waves,  and  it  would  be  necessary  to  create  an 
entirely  new  front  by  sinking  a  foundation  for  a  sea- 
wall some  yards  in  advance  of  the  present  face. 
There  would  be  no  engineering  difficulty  in  the  for- 
mation of  a  boat-harbour,  to  combine  by  extensive 
pile-jetties  the  facility  of  landing  in  all  weathers. 
A  very  cursory  view  of  Larnaca  exhibited  a  true 
picture  of  its  miserable  financial  position.  The 
numerous  stores  kept  by  Europeans  were  the  result 
of  a  spasmodic  impulse.  There  was  no  wholesome 
trade  ;  those  who  represented  the  commercial  element 
were  for  the  most  part  unfortunates  who  had  rushed 
to  Cyprus  at  the  first  intelligence  of  the  British  occu- 
pation, strong  in  expectations  of  a  golden  harvest. 
The  sudden  withdrawal  of  the  large  military  force 
left  Larnaca  in  the  condition  of  streets  full  of  sellers, 
but  denuded  of  buyers.  The  stores  were  supplied 
with  the  usual  amount  of  liquors,  and  tins  of  preserved 
provisions  ;  none  of  the  imported  articles  were  adapted 
for  native  requirements  ;  an  utter  stagnation  of  trade 
was  the  consequence,  and  prices  fell  below  the 
cost  of  home  production.     The  preceding  year  had 


12  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


been  exceptionally  sickly ;  many  of  the  storekeepers 
were  suffering  from  the  effects  of  fever,  which,  com- 
bined with  the  depression  of  spirits  caused  by  ruined 
prospects,  produced  a  condition  of  total  collapse,  from 
which  there  was  only  one  relief — that  of  writing  to 
the  newspapers  and  abusing  the  Government  and  the 
island  generally. 

There  must  always  be  martyrs — somebody  must  be 
sacrificed — whether  burnt  at  the  stake  for  religious 
principles,  or  put  in  a  bell-tent  in  the  sun  with  the 
thermometer  at  110°  Fahr.  simply  because  they  are 
British  soldiers — it  does  not  much  matter — but  the 
moment  your  merchants  are  slain  upon  the  altar,  the 
boiling-point  is  reached. 

The  store-keepers  sat  despondingly  behind  their 
counters  while  the  hinges  of  their  doors  rusted  from 
the  absence  of  in-comers.  It  was  impossible  to  rouse 
them  from  their  state  of  mercantile  coma,  except  by 
one  word,  which  had  a  magnetic  effect  upon  their 
nervous  system — "  Custom  Hotise^ 

'*  I  suppose  you  have  no  difficulty  at  the  Custom 

House,  Mr. in  this  simple  island  }  "     This  was 

invariably  the  red  rag  to  the  bull. 

'*  No  difficulty.  Sir  !  —  no  difficulty  }  —  it  is  the 
difficulty — we  are  absolutely  paralysed  by  the  Custom 
House.  Every  box  is  broken  open  and  the  contents 
strewed  upon  the  ground.  The  duty  is  ad  valorem 
upon  all  articles,  and  an  ignorant  Turk  is  the  valuer. 
This  man  does  not  know  the  difference  between  a 
bootjack  and  a  lemon-squeezer:  only  the  other  day 
he  valued  wire  dish-covers  as  '  articles  of  head-dress,* 
(probably  he  had  seen  wire  fencing-masks).  If  he  is 
perplexed,  he  is  obliged  to  refer  the  questionable 
article  to  the  Chief  Office, — this  is  two  hundred  yards 


I.] 


Arrival  at  Larnaca.  13 


from  the  landing  place  : — thus  he  passes  half  the  day 
in  running  backwards  and  forwards  with  trifles  of 
contested  value  to  his  superior,  while  crowds  are  kept 
waiting,  and  the  store  is  piled  with  goods  most 
urgently  required/'     .... 

I  immediately  went  to  see  this  eccentric  repre- 
sentative of  Anglo-Turkish  political-and-mercantile- 
combination,  and  found  very  little  exaggeration  in  the 
description,  .except  that  the  distance  was  187  paces 
instead  of  200  which  he  had  to  perform,  whenever  the 
character  of  the  article  was  beyond  the  sphere  of 
his  experience.  As  this  happened  about  every  quarter 
of  an  hour,  he  could  not  complain  of  a  sedentary 
employment.  A  few  days  after  this,  migratory  birds 
arrived  in  Cyprus  upon  the  inhospitable  shore  opposite 
the  Custom  House  in  the  shape  of  two  Liberal  M.P*s. 
from  England,  —  who  visited  the  island  specially  to 
form  an  honest  opinion  free  from  all  political  bias. 
Whether  these  gentlemen  were  undervalued  by  the 
eccentric  official  to  whom  I  have  alluded,  or  whether 
he  suspected  Liberals  as  opponents  to  be  regarded 
and  treated  as  spies,  we  never  could  determine;  but 
utterly  disregarding  their  innocent  exterior,  he  sub- 
jected them  to  the  extreme  torture  of  the  Custom 
House,  and  dived  and  plunged  into  the  very  bowels 
and  bottoms  of  their  numerous  small  packages, 
rumpling  clean  linen,  and  producing  a  toilettic  chaos. 
To  the  honour  of  these  members  of  the  Opposition 
they  never  brought  the  question  before  the  House 
upon  their  return  to  England,  neither  did  they  make 
it  the  foundation  of  an  attack  upon  the  Government. 

An  excess  of  zeal  is  not  uncommon  among  igno- 
rant officials  newly  raised  to  a  position  of  authority  : 
thus  Larnaca   was   outdone    by    the  Custom    House 


14  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  I. 


representative  at  Limasol  in  vigilance  and  strict  atten- 
tion to  the  administrative  tortures  of  his  office.  I 
have  heard  of  cases  of  crockery  being  unpacked 
upon  the  beach  and  spread  out  to  be  counted  and 
valued  upon  the  loose  stones  of  shingle ! 

The  unfortunate  European  traders  of  Larnaca  were 
shortly  relieved  of  their  Custom  House  troubles  by 
the  total  absence  of  imports.  The  native  Cypriote 
does  not  purchase  at  European  shops ;  his  wants  are 
few ;  the  smallest  piece  of  soap  will  last  an  indefinite 
period ;  he  is  frugal  to  an  extreme  degree ;  and  if  he 
has  desires,  he  curbs  such  temptations  and  hoards  his 
coin.  Thus,  as  the  natives  did  not  purchase,  and  all 
Europeans  were  sellers  without  buyers,  there  was  no 
alternative  but  to  shut  the  shutters.  This  was  a 
-"  species  of  commercial  suicide  which  made  Larnaca  a 
place  of  departed  spirits ;  in  which  unhappy  state  it 
remains  to  the  present  hour.  Even  the  club  was 
closed. 


«. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE   GIPSY-VANS    ENCOUNTER   DIFFICULTIES. 

My  gipsy- van  was  not  of  doubtful  character.  I  had 
purchased  it  direct  from  the  gipsies  in  England,  and  it 
had  been  specially  arranged  for  the  Cyprus  journey  by 
Messrs.  Glover  Bros,  of  Dean  Street,  Soho,  London, 
It  had  been  painted  and  varnished  with  many  coats 
both  inside  and  out,  and  nobody,  unless  an  experienced 
gipsy,  would  have  known  that  it  was  not  newly  born 
from  the  maker's  yard.  Originally  it  had  been  con- 
structed for  shafts,  as  one  horse  was  considered  suffi- 
cient upon  the  roads  of  England,  but  when  it  arrived 
in  Cyprus  it  appeared  to  have  grown  during  the  voyage 
about  two  sizes  larger  than  when  it  was  last  seen.  As 
the  small  animals  of  Larnaca  passed  by,  where  my 
lovely  van  blocked  up  the  entire  street,  and  forced  the 
little  creatures  upon  the  footpath,  they  looked  in  com- 
parison as  though  they  had  just  been  disembarked 
upon  Mount  Ararat  from  the  original  Noah's  ark,  re- 
presented by  the  gipsy-van  !  The  Cypriotes  are  polite, 
therefore  I  heard  no  rude  remarks.  The  Cypriote 
boys  are  like  all  other  boys,  therefore  they  climbed  to 
the  top  of  the  van,  and  endeavoured  by  escalade  to 
enter  the  windows.  On  one  occasion  I  captured  half 
a  boy  (the  posterior  half)  who  was  hanging  with  legs 
dangling  out   of  the  window,   his  "forlorn-hope"   or 


1 6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


advance  half  vainly  endeavouring  to  obtain  a  resting- 
place  upon  vacuity  within  (as  the  fall  slab-table  was 
down).  I  had  no  stick  ;  but  the  toes  of  his  boots  had 
imprinted  first  impressions  upon  the  faultless  varnish. 
What  became  of  that  young  Cypriote  was  never 
known. 

Even  in  Cyprus  there  are  municipal  laws,  and  now 
that  the  English  are  there  they  are  enforced  ;  there- 
fore my  huge  van  could  not  remain  like  a  wad  in  a 
gun-barrel,  and  entirely  block  the  street.  A  London 
policeman  would  have  desired  it  to  "  move  on  "  but — 
this  was  the  real  grievance  that  I  had  against  Larnaca 
— the  van  could  not  "  move  onl'  owing  to  its  extreme 
height,  which  interfered  with  the  wooden  water-spouts 
from  the  low  roofs  of  the  flat-topped  houses.  This 
was  a  case  of  *'  real  distress."  My  van  represented 
civilisation :  the  water-spouts  represented  barbarism. 
If  a  London  omnibus  crowded  with  outside  passengers 
had  attempted  to  drive  through  Larnaca,  both  driver 
and  passengers  would  have  been  swept  into — I  have 
not  the  slightest  notion  where ;  and  my  van  was  two 
feet  higher  than  an  omnibus ! 

I  determined  that  I  would  avoid  all  inferior  thorough- 
fares, and  that  the  van  should  pass  down  Wolseley 
Street,  drawn  by  a  number  of  men  who  would  be 
superior  in  intelligence  to  the  Cypriote  mules  and  be 
careful  in  turning  the  corners. 

Ldid  not  see  the  start,  as  a  person  with  an  '*  excess 
of  zeal  "  had  started  it  with  a  crowd  of  madmen  with- 
out orders,  and  I  was  only  a  late  spectator  some  hours 
after  its  arrival  opposite  Craddocks  Hotel.  It  rather 
resembled  a  ship  that  had  been  in  bad  weather  and  in 
collision  with  a  few  steamers.  How  many  water-spouts 
it  had  carried  away  I  never  heard.     The  fore-axle  was 


11.]  Gipsy- VANS  encounter  Difficulties.  17 

broken,  as  it  appeared  that  in  rounding  a  corner  it  had 
been  dragged  by  main  force  upon  the  curbstone  about 
sixteen  inches  high,  from  which  it  had  bumped  vio- 
lently down.  It  had  then  been  backed  against  a 
water-spout,  which  had  gone  completely  through  what 
sailors  would  term  the  "  stern.*'  One  shutter  was  split 
in  two  pieces,  and  one  window  smashed.  Altogether, 
what  with  bruises,  scratches,  broken  axle,  and  other 
damages,  my  van  looked  ten  years  older  since  the 
morning. 

Fortunately  among  the  Europeans  who  had  flocked 
to  Cyprus  since  the  British  occupation  was  a  French 
blacksmith,  whose  forge  was  only  a  few  yards  from 
Craddock's  Hotel,  where  my  wrecked  vessel  blocked 
the  way.  I  had  a  new  fore  axle-tree  made,  and 
strengthened  the  hinder  axle.  I  also  fitted  a  bullock- 
pole,  instead  of  shafts,  for  a  pair  of  oxen  ;  the  springs 
I  bound  up  with  iron  wire  shrunk  on  while  red-hot. 
I  took  out  the  stove,  as  it  was  not  necessary,  and  its 
absence  increased  the  space  ;  and  I  inserted  a  venti- 
lator in  the  roof  in  place  of  the  chimney.  When  re- 
paired, the  van  looked  as  good  as  new,  and  was  much 
stronger,  and  well  adapted  for  rough  travel.  The  only 
thing  it  now  wanted  was  a  road! 

The  highways  of  Cyprus  were  mere  mule-tracks. 
The  only  legitimate  road  in  existence  was  of  most 
recent  construction,  which  represented  the  new  birth 
of  British  enterprise,  from  Larnaca  to  the  capital,* 
Nicosia  (or  Lefkosia),  about  twenty-eight  miles.  The 
regrettable  paucity  of  stone-hammers  rendered  it  im- 
possible to  prepare  the  metal,  therefore  huge  rounded 
blocks,  bigger  than  a  man's  head,  had  been  thrown  down 
for  a  foundation,  upon  which  some  roughly  broken  and 
a  quantity  of  unbroken  smaller  stones  had  been  spread. 

c 


1 8  Cyprus  in  1879, 


[CHAP. 


Of  course  there  was  only  one  method  of  travelling 
upon  this  route  with  the  gipsy-van  :  this  was  to  avoid 
it  altogether,  but  to  keep  upon  the  natural  soil  on  the 
side  of  the  newly-made  level. 

My  second  van  was  most  satisfactory,  and  was  light 
in  proportion  to  its  strength  and  capacity-  This  was 
arranged  specially  for  luggage,  and  was  entirely  closed 
by  doors  at  either  end,  which  were  secured  by  bolts 
and  locks.  Above  the  luggage,  and  about  two  feet 
six  inches  below  the  roof,  a  sliding  deck  formed  of 
movable  planks  afforded  a  comfortable  sleeping-berth 
for  a  servant.  In  the  front  a  projecting  roof  sheltered 
the  driving  seat,  which  was  wide  enough  to  accom- 
modate four  persons.  I  had  fitted  a  pole  instead  of 
shafts,  as  public  opinion  decided  against  mules,  and  it 
was  agreed  that  oxen  were  steadier  and  more  power- 
ful for  draught  purposes.  After  a  careful  selection,  I 
obtained  two  pairs  of  very  beautiful  animals,  quite  equal 
in  size  to  ordinary  English  oxen,  for  which  I  paid 
twelve  shillings  per  diem,  including  the  drivers  and 
all  expenses  of  fodder,  I  also  engaged  the  necessary 
riding  mules,  as  the  vans  were  not  intended  for  per- 
sonal travelling,  but  merely  for  luggage  and  for  a  home 
at  night.  Our  servants  consisted  of  Amarn  (my  Abys- 
sinian, who  had  been  with  me  eight  years,  since  he  was 
a  boy  of  nine  years  old  in  Africa),  a  Greek  cook  named 
Christo,  who  had  served  in  a  similar  capacity  upon 
numerous  steamers,  and  a  young  man  named  Georgi, 
of  about  twenty-one,  who  was  to  be  made  into  a 
servant.  This  young  fellow  had  appeared  one  day 
suddenly,  and  solicited  employment,  while  we  were 
staying  at  Craddock's  Hotel ;  he  was  short,  thickset, 
and  possessed  a  head  of  hair  that  would  have  raised 
the  envy  of  Absalom  :  in  dense  tangle  it  would  have 


„3  Gipsy- VANS  encounter  Difficulties.  19 

defied  a  mane-comb.     Georgi  had  a  pleasant  expres- 
sion of  countenance  which  did  not  harmonise  with  his 
exterior,  as  his  clothes  were  in  a  ragged  and  jfilthy 
condition,  his  shoes  were  in  tatters,  and  trodden  down 
at  the  heel  to  a  degree  that  resembled  boats  in  the  act 
of  capsizing;  these  exposed   the  remnants   of  socks, 
through  the  gaps  of  which  the  skin  of  his  feet  was 
exhibited  in  anything  but  flesh-colour.     It  is  dangerous 
to  pick  up  a  "  waif    and    stray,"  as  such   objects    of 
philanthropy  frequently  disappear  at  the  same   time 
as  the  forks  and  spoons.     In  reply  to  my  questions, 
I   discovered  that  Georgi  was  in  fact  the  "prodigal 
son ; "  •  he  had  not  been  leading  the  fast  life  of  that 
historical    character,   but    he   had    left   his    home   in 
Mersine  (on  the  coast  of  Asia   Minor)  owing  to  an 
unfortunate  disagreement  with   his   father.     In   such 
domestic  estrangements,  rightly  or  wrongly,  the  fathers 
generally  have  the  best  of  the  situation,  and  Georgi, 
having  left  a  comfortable  home  (his  father  being  what 
is   called  **  well  to   do "),    had   taken   ship,    and,  like 
many  others,  had  steered  for  Cyprus,  where  he  arrived 
unknown,  and  quickly  experienced   the  desolation  of 
an  utter  stranger  in  a  foreign  town.     Georgi  became 
hungry  ;    whether   he   had   sold  his  good  clothes  to 
provide  for  the  coats  of  his  stomach  I  cannot  say,  but 
the  rags  in  which  he  first  appeared  to  me  were  utterly 
unsaleable,  and  few  people  would  have  ventured  upon 
an  engagement  with  so  disreputable  a  person.     How- 
ever, I  liked  his  face  ;    he  could  speak  Turkish  and 
Arabic  fluently  :  Greek  was  his  mother-tongue,  and 
he  had  a  smattering  of  French.     I  sent  for  the  tailor, 
and  had  him  measured  for  a  suit  of  clothes  to  match 
those  of  Amarn — a  tunic,  waistcoat,    knickerbockers, 
and  gaiters  of  navy-blue  serge.     In  a  few  days  Georgi 

c  2 


20  Cyprus  in  1879. 


CHAP. 


was  transformed   into   a  respectable-looking  servant, 
with  his  hair  cut. 

We  left  Larnaca  on  the  29th  of  January.  A  native 
two-wheeled  cart  conveyed  the  tents  and  superabund- 
ant baggage.  The  oxen  made  no  difficulty,  and  the 
gipsy-van  rolled  easily  along.  An  enterprising  photo- 
grapher, having  posted  himself  in  a  certain  position 
near  the  highway,  suddenly  stopped  our  party,  and 
subsequently  produced  a  facsimile,  although  my  dogs, 
who  were  in  movement,  came  out  with  phantom-like 
shadows.  These  useful  companions  were  three  spaniels 
—''Merry,"  "Wise,"  and  "Shot;"  the  latter  had  a 
broken  foreleg  through  an  accident  in  the  previous 
year,  but  he  was  an  excellent  retriever,  and  could 
work  slowly.  The  others  were  younger  dogs,  whose 
characters  were  well  represented  by  their  names  ;  the 
first  was  an  untiring,  determined  animal,  and  Wise 
was  a  steady  hunter  that  would  face  the  worst  thorns, 
and  was  a  good  retriever. 

This  party  was  now  in  movement,  and  I  intended 
to  make  a  preliminary  detour  from  the  Nicosia  route 
to  visit  the  springs  of  Arpera,  about  eight  miles  distant, 
which  supply  the  town  of  Larnaca. 

In  every  country  where  I  have  travelled  I  have 
observed  a  human  weakness  among  the  population  on 
the  question  of  "  game ;  "  there  is  a  universal  tendency 
to  exaggeration ;  but  the  locality  of  superabundance 
is  always  distant  from  the  narrator.  As  you  proceed 
the  game  recedes ;  and  you  are  informed  that  "  at 
about  two  days'  march  you  will  find  even  more  than 
you  require."  Upon  arrival  at  the  wished-for  spot 
you  are  told  that  "  formerly  there  was  a  large  quantity, 
but  that  times  and  seasons  have  changed  ;  that  about 
three  marches  in  your  front  will  bring  you  to  a  hunter's 


ii.j  Gipsy-vans  encounter  Difficulties.  21 

paradise,'*  &c.  As  Cyprus  was  an  island  of  only  140 
miles  in  length,  there  would  be  a  limit  to  these  boundless 
descriptions ;  but  I  had  already  heard  enough  to  assure 
me  that  the  usual  want  of  veracity  upon  this  subject 
was  present  in  the  accounts  I  had  received.  The  news- 
paper correspondents  had  just  contributed  ridiculous 
reports  to  their  several  employers.  Because  the 
market  of  Larnaca  was  well  supplied  with  woodcocks, 
red-legged  partridges,  and  hares,  at  low  prices,  these 
overworked  gentlemen  of  the  pen  rushed  to  a  con- 
clusion that  the  island  teemed  with  game:  forgetful 
of  the  fact  that  every  Cypriote  has  a  gun,  and  that 
numbers  were  shooting  for  the  consumption  of  the 
few.  Larnaca  was  the  common  centre  towards  which 
all  gravitated.  As  the  rate  of  wages  was  only  one 
shilling  a  day,  it  may  be  imagined  that  sport  afforded 
an  equally  remunerative  employment,  and  game  was 
forwarded  from  all  distances  to  be  hawked  about  the 
public  thoroughfares.  The  fact  is,  that  game  is  very 
scarce  throughout  Cyprus,  and  the  books  that  have 
been  written  upon  this  country  are  certainly  not  the 
productions  of  sportsmen. 

I  had  read  in  no  mean  authority  that  *'  the  surface 
of  the  ground  was  covered  with  heather " — positively 
there  is  no  such  plant  in  Cyprus  as  heath  or  heather.,. 
As  we  passed  the  outskirts  of  Larnaca,  we  were  intro- 
duced to  the  misery  of  the  plain  of  Messaria;  the 
so-called  heather  is  a  low  thorny  bush  about  twelve 
inches  high,  which  at  a  distance  has  some  resemblance 
to  the  plant  in  question.  Brown  is  the  prevailing 
colour  in  this  portion  of  the  island,  and  the  aspect 
was  not  cheerful  as  we  slowly  marched  along  the 
native  track  or  highway  towards  Arpera,  carefully 
avoiding  the    new    government    macadamised    road. 


\ 


22  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


It  is  a  melancholy  neighbourhood.  A  few  graves  that 
had  been  robbed  were  open,  forming  pitfalls  for  the 
unwary ;  other  yawning  holes  had  discovered  ancient 
tombs  by  the  soakage  of  a  recent  heavy  shower,  which 
had  washed  in  the  roof  and  exposed  the  cavity.  We 
passed  a  small  mosque  where  there  is  the  tomb  of  a 
saint  many  feet  below  the  level  of  the  surface,  and  we 
shortly  came  in  view  of  the  salt  lake  about  a  mile  and 
three-quarters  from  the  town  of  Larnaca.  We  halted 
about  two  miles  from  the  town  upon  the  high  ground 
to  admire  the  aqueduct  which  crosses  the  valley  from 
the  village  of  Cheflik  Pacha.  This  is  a  very  important 
work.  The  masonry  is  about  thirty-six  feet  above  the 
lowest  portion  of  the  valley,  which  it  spans  in  thirty-two 
arches,  covering  a  distance  of  about  four  hundred  and 
twenty  yards  from  height  to  height.  The  water  flows 
in  an  open  canal  of  cement  along  the  surface,  but  upon 
the  ground  level  it  is  protected  by  a  covering  of  stone 
and  lime,  until  it  reaches  the  town  of  Larnaca.  A 
stream  of  fresh  water  flows  through  the  valley  beneath 
the  arches  of  the  aqueduct,  at  a  right  angle,  and  is 
artificially  separated  from  the  salt  lake  below  by 
means  of  a  dyke  of  earth  which  conducts  it  direct 
to  the  sea.  This  was  rendered  necessary  by  the 
floods  of  the  rainy  seasons,  which  carried  so  large  a 
volume  of  fresh  water  into  the  lake  as  to  resist  the 
power  of  evaporation  during  the  summer  months. 
The  salt  lakes  of  Larnaca  are  several  miles  in  extent, 
and  are  computed  by  the  late  British  consul,  Mr. 
Watkins,  to  possess  a  productive  power  of  20,000,000 
okes  (2f  lbs.)  per  annum.  M.  Gaudry,  in  his  clever 
work  upon  Cyprus,  attributes  the  formation  of  salt 
to  the  fact  of  the  sea-water  percolating  through 
the   sand,   and  thus  filling  the  lake; — this  theory  is 


II.  J  Gipsy-vans  encounter  Difficulties.  23 

disputed,  and  I  incline  to  the  native  belief,  "  that  the 
salt  lies  within  the  soil,  and  is  taken  into  solution  by 
the  water,  which  deposits  the  same  amount  upon  the 
dry  surface  when  exhausted  by  evaporation."  In 
support  of  this  opinion,  I  adduce  a  proof  in  the  fact 
of  the  small  freshwater  stream  which  flows  from  the 
higher  ground  through  the  arches  of  the  aqueduct, 
depositing  salt  as  its  surface  contracts  during  the 
dry  season. 

A  strong  efflorescence  of  true  chloride  of  sodium 
is  left  upon  the  sides  of  its  bed  and  upon  the  bottom 
as  the  water  becomes  exhausted  ;   this  must  be  the 
salt  which  the  fresh  water  has  robbed  from  the  soil  of 
the  valley  through  which  it  flows.     In  many  portions 
of  Cyprus  I  have  observed,  a  few  days  after  a  heavy 
shower,  a  considerable  amount  of  salt  upon  the  sur- 
face.    I    know   many   instances   of  fresh-water  lakes 
being  divided  from  the  sea  by  only  a  few  yards   of 
sandy  beach,  and    I   do  not  accept  as  fact    that  salt 
water  percolates  through  the  sand  and  forms  the  salt 
of  Larnaca  lake.     The  salt  lakes  of  Ceylon,  in   the 
south   district   of   Hambantotte,   are  immensely   pro- 
ductive, and  they  have  no  communication  with  the  sea, 
but  are  in  a  similar  position  to  those  of  Cyprus  at 
Larnaca  and  Limasol — near  the  sea,  but  depending 
for  their  water-supply  upon  natural  springs  and  rain. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  springs  are  salt,  and 
the  rain-water  dissolves  the  salt  that  is  naturally  con- 
tained   within    the    soil.       M.    Gaudry    observed    a 
portion  of  the  plain  near  Trichomo  covered  with  an 
efflorescence  of  soda,  which  by  analysis  yielded  about 
two-thirds  of  sulphate  of  soda,  with  a  large  proportion 
of  sulphate  of  magnesia  and  other  salts.     Many  wells 
in  Cyprus  are  salt,  or  brackish.     The  lowest  ground  of 


24  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

the  marshy  plain  near  Famagousta  contains  salt  to  a 
degree  sufficient  to  destroy  the  young  cereals,  should 
rain  not  be  abundant ;  and  during  the  drought  of  this 
year  (1879),  they  were  the  first  to  perish,  although  in 
a  damp  locality. 

Salt  is  a  government  monopoly  in  Cyprus,  and  is 
one  of  the  most  important  sources  of  revenue.  In 
the  reign  of  the  Lusignan  dynasty,  and  from  a  much 
earlier  date,  the  produce  of  the  salt  lakes  formed  one 
of  the  chief  articles  of  export,  and  arrangements  were 
made  for  regulating  the  amount  of  water  to  ensure  the 
requisite  evaporation.  At  the  present  time  consider- 
able uncertainty  attends  the  collection  of  salt,  as  a 
violent  rainfall  floods  the  lakes  and  weakens  the  solu- 
tion. There  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  few  years'  ex- 
perience and  attention  will  enable  the  authorities  to 
improve  upon  the  present  arrangement,  and  that  not 
only  will  the  annual  supply  be  assured,  but  the  foreign 
demand  will  be  extended. 

We  passed  the  valley  beyond  the  aqueduct  and, 
ascending  the  steep  incline  upon  the  opposite  side, 
followed  the  rutty  native  track  parallel  with  the  water- 
course; we  halted  for  the  first  night  opposite  the 
village  of  Cheflik  Pacha.  This  is  an  unhealthy  place, 
as  it  lies  in  a  valley  where  a  mill  is  turned  by  a  stream 
from  the  aqueduct  and  the  surplus  water  forms  a  marsh 
after  irrigating  in  a  careless  manner  some  fields  and 
gardens.  Lemon  and  orange-trees  of  the  largest  size 
were  crowded  with  fruit,  and  exhibited  in  the  midst 
of  a  treeless  and  desolate  country  the  great  necessity, 
Water,  and  the  productive  powers  of  the  soil  when 
regularly  supplied. 

I    was   careful   not   to   descend   into   the   irrigated 
bottom,  therefore  we  had  halted  on  the  highest  point. 


II.  1 


Gipsy- VANS  encounter  Difficulties.  25 


a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant.  It  is  impossible  to  be 
too  careful  in  the  selection  of  a  camping-ground ;  the 
effect  of  fever-germs  may  be  the  result  of  one  night's 
bivouac  in  an  unhealthy  locality;  and  a  new  country 
is  frequently  stamped  as  pestilential  from  the  utter 
carelessness  of  the  traveller  or  officer  in  command 
of  troops. 

As  a  general  rule  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of 
water  should  be  avoided.  A  clear  stream  is  a  tempting 
object,  and  the  difficulty  of  carrying  water  for  the 
supply  of  troops  is  important ;  but  it  is  less  than  the 
necessity  of  carrying  the  sick.  If  once  the  fever  of 
malaria  attacks  an  individual  he  becomes  unfitted  for 
his  work ;  the  blood  is  poisoned,  and  he  is  the  victim 
of  renewed  attacks  which  baffle  medical  skill  and 
lead  to  other  serious  complications.  Avoid  the  first 
attack.  This  may  generally  be  effected  by  the  care- 
ful selection  of  the  camping-ground.  Never  halt  in  a 
bottom,  but  always  on  a  height.  Throughout  my 
journey  in  Cyprus  neither  ourselves  nor  servants 
suffered  from  any  ailment,  although  we  visited  every 
portion  of  the  country,  and  I  attribute  this  immunity 
from  fever  mainly  to  the  care  in  our  selection  of 
halting-places. 

The  first  necessity  in  the  evening  halt  was  fire. 
This  is  one  of  the  troubles  of  central  Cyprus — there 
is  no  fuel.  The  two  vans  and  the  native  cart  were  in 
a  line — the  bell-tent  was  quickly  pitched  for  the 
servants,  who  now  for  the  first  time  experienced  the 
comfort  of  an  arrangement  I  had  made  when  in 
England.  I  had  seven  deal  battens,  each  seven  feet 
long,  four  inches  deep,  by  two  and  a  half  inches  broad. 
These  were  laid  upon  the  ground  twelve  inches  apart ; 
seven  planks,  each  one  fopt  wide,  were  placed  across 


26  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


the  battens  to  form  an  impromptu  floor.  Upon  this 
platform  was  laid  a  non-conductor  of  simply  doubled 
hair-felt,  sewed  into  a  thin  mattress  of  light  canvas. 
There  was  very  little  trouble  in  this  arrangement ;  the 
men  were  kept  well  off  the  ground,  and  the  hair-felt 
not  only  preserved  their  bodily  heat  from  escaping, 
but  it  prevented  the  damp  of  the  earth  from  ascending. 
This  mattress  was  ten  feet  long,  therefore  it  could  be 
rolled  up  to  form  a  bolster  at  one  end ;  and,  during  a 
hot  sun,  it  was  intended  for  a  cover  to  the  roof  of 
the  gipsy  van. 

The  first  day's  start  is  always  in  the  afternoon,  and 
the  march  is  short.  We  had  only  made  three  miles, 
and  it  was  nearly  dark  when  we  halted.  The  absence 
of  fuel  necessitates  the  great  trouble  of  carrying  a 
supply  of  charcoal,  and  it  destroys  the  pleasure  of  the 
cheerful  night-fires  that  usually  enliven  the  bivouac  in 
wild  countries.  The  plants  and  herbs  that  grow  in 
Cyprus  are  all  prickly;  thus  groping  in  the  dark 
for  the  first  inflammable  material  to  produce  the 
fire-foundation  is  unpleasant.  There  is  a  highly 
aromatic  but  very  prickly  species  of  wild  thyme  :  this 
is  always  sought  for,  and  at  all  times  responds  to 
the  match. 

The  first  night  is  always  novel,  in  spite  of  old 
experiences.  We  pricked  our  hands  in  raking  up 
thorny  plants,  but  a  useful  implement,  which  combined 
the  broad  hoe  on  one  side  with  a  light  pick  on  the 
other,  lessened  our  labour,  and  we  produced  a  blaze ; 
this  was  bright  but  transient,  as  the  fuel  was  unsub- 
stantial. The  dinner  was  quickly  warmed,  as  it  con- 
sisted of  tins  of  preserved  meats ;  and,  climbing  up 
the  ladder,  the  gipsy  van  presented  such  a  picture 
of  luxury   that  if  the    world  were  girded  by  a  good 


ii.i  Gipsy- VANS  enxounter  Difficulties.  27 

road  instead  of  a  useless  equator  I  should  like  to  be 
perpetually  circum-vanning  it. 

On  the  following  morning  the  thermometer  marked 
40°.  The  natives  were  early  at  work,  ploughing  land 
that  was  to  remain  fallow  until  the  following  season. 
The  oxen  were  sleek  and  in  good  condition,  and  not 
inferior  in  weight  to  the  well-known  red  animals  of 
North  Devon.  Although  the  native  plough  is  of  the 
unchanged  and  primitive  pattern  that  is  illustrated  on 
the  walls  of  Egyptian  temples,  it  is  well  adapted  for 
the  work  required  in  the  rough  and  stony  ground 
of  Cyprus.  I  was  surprised  to  see  the  depth  which 
these  exceedingly  light  implements  attained,  with 
apparent  ease  to  the  pair  of  oxen ;  this  was  not 
less  than  eight  inches,  and  the  furrows  were  regular, 
but  not  turned  completely  over.  The  ploughshare 
is  not  adapted  for  cutting  the  roots  of  weeds  by  means 
of  a  flat  surface  and  a  sharp  edge,  but  the  rounded  top 
of  the  native  iron  passes  beneath  the  soil  and  breaks 
it  up  like  the  wave  produced  by  the  ram-bow  of  a 
vessel.  The  plough,  when  complete,  does  not  exceed 
forty  pounds  in  weight,  and  it  is  conveniently  carried, 
together  with  the  labourer,  upon  the  same  donkey, 
when  travelling  from  a  distance  to  the  morning's  work. 
European  settlers  in  Cyprus  should  be  cautious  before 
superseding  the  native  plough  by  the  massive  Euro- 
pean pattern  ;  there  are  certain  soils  where  the  power- 
ful iron  plough,  or  even  the  double  implement,  might 
be  worked  with  advantage,  but  as  a  general  rule  I 
should  advise  an  agriculturist  to  wait  patiently  at  the 
commencement  of  his  operations,  and  to  gain  practical 
experience  of  the  country  before  he  expends  capital  in 
the  purchase  of  European  inventions.  There  can  be 
no   doubt  that   by   degrees,  important   improvements 


28  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


may  be  introduced  that  will  benefit  the  Cypriote 
farmer,  although  it  will  be  long  before  his  primitive 
method  will  be  abandoned.  The  great  difficulty  in 
Cyprus  consists  in  reducing  the  soil  to  a  fine  surface  ; 
huge  lumps  of  tenacious  earth  are  turned  up  by  the 
plough,  which,  under  the  baking  influence  of  the  sun, 
become  as  hard  as  sun-dried  bricks.  The  native 
method  of  crushing  is  exceedingly  rude  and  ineffective. 
A  heavy  plank  about  sixteen  feet  long  and  three  inches 
thick,  furnished  with  two  rings,  is  dragged  by  oxen 
over  the  surface  ;  which  generally  remains  in  so  rough 
a  state  that  walking  over  the  field  is  most  laborious. 
There  are  many  stone  columns  lying  useless  among 
the  heaps  of  ruins  so  common  in  Cyprus,  that  would 
form  excellent  rollers,  but  the  idea  of  such  an  imple- 
ment has  never  entered  the  Cypriote  head.  The 
plough,  smoothing-plank,  and  the  ancient  threshing- 
harrow,  composed  of  two  broad  planks  inlaid  with 
sharp  flint  stones,  are  the  only  farm  machinery  of 
the  cultivator.  As  in  the  days  of  Abraham  the  oxen 
drew  this  same  pattern  of  harrow  over  the  corn,  and 
reduced  the  straw  to  a  coarse  chaff  mingled  with  the 
grain,  so  also  the  treatment  in  Cyprus  remains  to 
the  present  day.  The  result  is  a  mixture  of  dirt  and 
sand  which  is  only  partially  rejected  by  the  equally 
primitive  method  of  winnowing. 

Mr.  Hamilton  Lang  gives  an  amusing  description  of 
the  strictly  conservative  principles  of  the  Cyprian  oxen, 
which  have  always  been  fed  upon  the  straw  broken  by 
the  process  described  in  threshing  by  the  harrow  of 
sharp  flints.  This  coarse  chaff,  mixed  with  cotton-seed, 
lentils,  or  barley,  is  eaten  by  all  animals  with  avidity, 
and  the  bullocks  positively  refused  Mr.  Lang's  new  food, 
which  was  the  same  straw  passed  through  an  English 


iij  Gipsy-vans  encounter  Difficulties.  29 

threshing-machine  and  cut  fine  by  a  modern  chaff-cutter. 
This  fact  is  a  warning  to  those  who  would  introduce 
too  sudden  reforms  among  men  and  animals  in  a  newly- 
acquired  country;  but  if  Mr.  Hamilton  Lang  had 
sprinkled  salt  over  his  chaff  I  think  the  refractory 
appetites  of  the  oxen  might  have  been  overcome. 
A  pair  of  oxen  are  supposed  to  plough  one  "  donum  " 
daily  of  fifty  paces  square,  or  about  half  an  acre. 

Having  watched  the  various  teams,  and  conversed 
with  the  ploughmen  by  the  medium  of  the  cook 
Christo,  who  spoke  English  and  was  an  intelligent 
interpreter,  I  ordered  the  vans  to  move  on  while  I 
•  walked  over  the  country  with  the  dogs.  There  was 
no  game  except  a  wild-duck  which  I  shot  in  the  thick 
weeds  of  a  neighbouring  swamp.  Larks  were  in  great 
quantities,  and  for  want  of  larger  birds  I  shot  enough 
for  a  pilaff,  and  secured  a  breakfast.  The  route,  which 
could  be  hardly  called  a  road,  had  been  worn  by  the 
wheels  of  native  carts.  These  were  narrower  than  our 
vans,  and  one  of  our  wheels  was  generally  upon  a 
higher  level,  threatening  on  some  occasions  to  overturn. 
The  country  around  us  was  desolate  in  its  aridity.  We 
passed  through  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  city  over  which 
the  plough  had  triumphed,  and  literally  not  one  stone 
was  left  upon  another.  A  few  stone  columns  of  a  rough 
description,  some  of  which  were  broken,  were  lying  in 
various  directions,  and  I  noticed  a  lower  millstone 
formed  of  an  exceedingly  hard  conglomerate  rock ; 
these  pieces  were  too  heavy  to  move  without  great 
exertions,  therefore  they  had  remained  in  situ. 

After  a  short  march  of  three  miles  we  arrived  at 
the  steep  banks  of  the  river  a  mile  above  the  village 
of  Arpera.  The  bed  of  this  river  was  about  forty  feet 
below  the  level  of  the  country,  and  here  our  first  real 


30  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


dif5ficulty  commenced  in  descending  a  rugged  and  pre- 
cipitous track,  which  at  first  sight  appeared  destructive 
to  any  springs.  The  gipsy-van  was  conducted  by  the 
owner  of  the  fine  pair  of  bullocks ;  but  this  fellow 
(Theodoris)  was  an  obstinate  and  utterly  reckless 
character,  and  instead  of  obeying  orders  to  go  steadily 
with  the  drag  on  the  wheels,  he  put  his  animals  into 
a  gallop  down  the  steep  descent,  with  the  intention 
of  gaining  sufificient  momentum  to  cross  the  sandy 
bottom  and  to  ascend  the  other  side.  If  the  original 
gipsy  proprietor  could  have  seen  his  van  leaping 
and  tossing  like  a  ship  in  a  heavy  sea,  with  the 
frantic  driver  shouting  and  yelling  at  his  bullocks' 
while  he  accelerated  their  gallop  by  a  sharp  applica- 
tion of  the  needle-pointed  driving  prick,  he  would 
have  considered  it  the  last  moment  of  his  movable 
home.  I  did  the  same;  but,  to  my  astonishment, 
the  vehicle,  after  bounding  madly  about,  simply  turned 
the  insane  driver  head  over  heels  into  the  river's 
bed,  and  the  bullocks  found  themselves  anchored  in 
the  sand  on  the  opposite  side.  Glover  Brothers  blue 
van  was  driven  by  a  fine  fellow,  Georgi,  who  was  of 
a  steady  disposition ;  and  this  very  handy  and  well 
constructed  carriage  made  nothing  of  the  difficulty. 
Georgi  was  a  handsome  and  exceedingly  powerful  man, 
upwards  of  six  feet  high,  of  a  most  amiable  disposition, 
who  always  tried  to  do  his  best ;  but  the  truth  must 
be  told,  he  was  stupid :  he  became  a  slave  to  the 
superior  intellect  of  the  hare-brained  rascal  of  the 
gipsy-van.  Why  amiable  people  should  so  frequently 
be  stupid  I  cannot  conceive  :  perhaps  a  few  are  sharp ; 
but  Georgi,  poor  fellow,  had  all  in  bone  and  muscle, 
and  not  in  brain. 

There  is  great  advantage  in  travelling  with  more 


21. 


Gipsy- VANS  encounter  Difficulties.  31 


than  one  vehicle,  as  in  any  difficulty  the  numerous 
animals  can  be  harnessed  together  and  their  combined 
power  will  drag  a  single  cart  or  carriage  through  any 
obstacle.  Thus  one  by  one  the  vans  were  tugged  up 
the  steep  bank  on  the  opposite  side,  and  after  a  drag 
across  ploughed  fields  for  nearly  a  mile  we  halted  on 
the  edge  of  a  cliff  and  camped  exactly  above  the  river. 
Although  the  bed  was  dry  below  this  point,  we  found 
a  faint  stream  of  clear  water  above  our  position,  which 
was  subsequently  absorbed  by  the  sand.  The  cliffs 
were  not  perpendicular,  but  were  broken  into  steep 
declivities  from  successive  landslips :  the  sides  were 
covered  with  the  usual  prickly  plants,  but  the  edges 
of  the  stream  were  thickly  bushed  with  oleanders 
which  afforded  excellent  covert  for  game. 

In  travelling  through  Cyprus  there  is  a  depressing 
aspect  in  the  general  decay  and  ruin  of  former  works. 
I  strolled  with  my  dogs  for  some  miles  along  the  river 
banks,  and  examined  the  strong  masonry  remains  of 
many  old  water-mills.  I  found  a  well-constructed 
aqueduct  of  wonderfully  hard  cement  at  the  bottom 
of  a  cliff  close  to  the  present  bed  of  the  river :  this 
must  at  a  former  period  have  passed  below  the  bed, 
and  the  deepening  of  the  stream  has  exposed  and 
washed  away  the  ancient  work.  There  was  no  game 
beyond  a  few  wild  red-legged  partridges,  although  the 
appearance  of  the  country  had  raised  my  expectations. 

On  the  following  morning  I  rambled  with  the  dogs 
for  many  hours  over  the  range  of  hills  which  bounds 
the  plain  upon  the  north,  and  from  which  the  river 
issues.  These  are  completely  denuded  of  soil,  and 
present  a  glaring  surface  of  hardened  chalk,  in  the 
crevices  of  which  the  usual  prickly  plants  can  alone 
exist.      Some    of    the    hill-tops    exposed    a   smooth 


32  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


natural  pavement  where  the  rain  had  washed  away- 
all  soluble  portions  and  left  the  bare  foundation 
cracked  in  small  divisions  as  though  artificially  inlaid. 
Now  and  then  a  wretched  specimen  of  the  Ptnus 
Maritinuiy  about  six  feet  high,  was  to  be  seen  vainly 
endeavouring  to  find  nourishment  in  the  clefts  of  the 
barren  rocks.  I  do  not  believe  the  tales  of  forests 
having  formerly  existed  upon  the  greater  portion  of 
Cyprus :  it  would  certainly  be  impossible  for  any 
species  of  tree  to  thrive  upon  the  extensive  range  of 
hills  near  Arpera,  which  are  absolutely  valueless. 

In  many  places  the  surface  glistened  with  ice-like 
sheets  of  gypsum,  which  cropped  out  of  the  cold  white 
marls  and  produced  a  wintry  appearance  that  increased 
the  desolation.  I  walked  for  some  hours  over  successive 
ranges  of  the  same  hopeless  character.  Great  numbers 
of  hawks  and  several  varieties  of  eagles  were  hunt- 
ing above  the  hill-tops,  and  sufficiently  explained  the 
scarcity  of  game.  The  red-legged  partridges  found 
little  protection  in  the  scant  cover  afforded  by  the 
withered  plants,  and  I  saw  one  captured  and  carried  off 
by  an  eagle,  who  was  immediately  chased  by  two  others 
of  the  same  species,  in  the  vain  hope  that  he  would  give 
up  his  prize  ;  he  soared  high  in  air  with  the  partridge 
hanging  from  his  claws.  On  the  same  day  I  saw 
another  capture,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  the 
partridge  forms  the  usual  food  of  these  large  birds  of 
prey.  The  British  government  has  already  protected  the 
game  by  establishing  a  close  season  and  by  a  tax  upon 
all  guns ;  but  there  will  be  little  benefit  from  the  new 
law  unless  a  reward  shall  be  offered  for  the  destruction 
of  the  birds  of  prey  which  swarm  in  every  portion  of 
the  island — eagles,  falcons,  kites,  hawks,  ravens,  crows, 
and  last,  but  in  cunning  and  destructive  propensity  not 


ijj  Gipsy-vans  encounter  Difficulties.  33 

the  least,  the  "magpies/'  These  birds  exist  in  such 
lumbers  that  unless  steps  are  taken  to  destroy  them  it 
.vill  be  hopeless  to  expect  any  increase  of  game.  When 
a  magpie  wakes  in  the  early  morning  his  first  thought 
is  mischief,  and  during  the  breeding  season  there  is  no 
bird  who  makes  egg-hunting  so  especially  his  occupa- 
tion. Upon  the  treeless  plains  of  Cyprus  every  nest  is 
at  his  mercy. 

From  the  base  of  the  barren  hill-range  a  fertile 
plain  slopes  towards  the  sea  for  a  width  of  about  four 
miles,  having  received  the  soil  that  has  been  washed 
from  the  denuded  heights.  This  rich  surface  is  culti- 
vated with  cereals,  but  there  are  considerable  portions 
which  are  covered  with  a  dense  mass  of  thistles,  as  the 
land  is  allowed  to  rest  for  a  couple  of  years  after  having 
been  exhausted  by  several  crops  without  manuring. 
On  the  lowlands  of  Cyprus  nearly  every  plant  or  bush 
is  armed  with  thorns.  I  have  generally  observed  that 
a  thorny  vegetation  is  a  proof  of  a  burning  climate 
with  a  slight  rainfall.  In  the  scorching  districts  of  the 
Soudan  there  is  hardly  a  tree  without  thorns  to  the 
tenth  degree  of  north  latitude,  at  which  limit  the  rain- 
fall is  great  and  the  vegetation  changes  its  character. 
The  Cypriotes  of  both  sexes  wear  high  boots  to  the 
knees  as  a  protection  from  the  countless  thistles,  and 
not  as  an  armour  against  snakes^  as  some  writers  have 
assumed.  These  boots  are  peculiar  in  their  construc- 
tion ;  the  soles  are  about  an  inch  in  thickness,  formed 
of  several  layers  of  leather,  which  are  fastened  together 
by  large-headed  nails  from  beneath  ;  these  are  directed 
in  an  oblique  line,  so  as  to  pass  through  the  edge  of 
the  upper  leather  and  secure  it  to  the  sole  exactly  as 
the  shoe  of  a  horse  is  fitted  to  the  hoof.  The  nails 
are   long  and   thin,   and   are  riveted  by  turning  the 


34  Cyprus  in  1879.  fCHAP. 

points  round  and  hammering  them  like  a  coil  upon  the 
leather  ;  the  heads  of  these  nails  are  nearly  as  large  as 
a  shilling,  and  the  boots  are  exceedingly  clumsy ;  but 
they  increase  the  height  of  the  wearer  by  a  full  inch. 

My  amiable  driver  of  the  blue  van,  Georgi,  ac- 
companied me  in  my  walk,  and  fired  several  useless 
shots  at  wild  partridges.  We  now  arrived  at  the  spot 
where  the  water  is  led  by  a  subterranean  aqueduct  to 
Larnaca.  This  principle  is  so  original,  and  has  from 
such  remote  times  been  adopted  in  this  arid  island, 
that  it  merits  a  detailed  description.  The  ancient 
vestiges  of  similar  works  in  every  portion  of  Cyprus 
prove  that  in  all  ages  the  rainfall  must  have  been 
uncertain,  and  that  no  important  change  has  taken 
place  in  the  meteorological  condition  of  the  country. 

In  a  search  for  water-springs  the  Cypriote  is  most 
intelligent,  and  the  talent  appears  to  be  hereditary.  If 
a  well  is  successful  at  an  elevation  that  will  enable  the 
water  to  command  lower  levels  at  a  distance,  it  may 
be  easily  understood  that  the  supply  of  one  well 
representing  a  unit  must  be  limited.  The  Cypriote 
well-sinker  works  upon  a  principle  of  simple  multi- 
plication. If  one  well  produces  a  certain  flow,  ten 
wells  will  multiply  the  volume,  if  connected  by  a 
subterranean  tunnel,  and  provided  the  supply  of  water 
in  the  spring  is  unlimited. 

It  appears  that  Cyprus  exhibits  an  anomaly  in  the 
peculiarity  of  a  small  rainfall  but  great  subterranean 
water-power ;  some  stratum  that  is  impervious  retains 
the  water  at  depths  varying  according  to  local  condi- 
tions. The  well-sinker  commences  by  boring,  or 
rather  digging,  a  circular  hole  two  feet  six  inches  in 
diameter.  The  soil  of  Cyprus  is  so  tenacious  that  the 
walls  of  the  shaft   require   no   artificial  support ;  this 


IJ.3  Gipsy-vans  encounter  Difficulties.  35 

much  facilitates  the  work,  and  the  labourer,  armed 
with  a  very  short-handled  pick,  patiently  hacks  his 
vertical  way,  and  sends  up  the  earth  by  means  of  a 
basket  and  rope,  drawn  by  a  primitive  but  effective 
windlass  above,  formed  of  a  cradle  of  horizontal 
wooden  bars.  The  man  in  charge  simply  turns  the 
windlass  without  a  handle,  by  clutching  each  successive 
bar,  which,  acting  as  a  revolving  lever,  winds  up  the 
rope  with  the  weight  attached. 

The  rapidity  of  the  well-sinking  naturally  depends 
upon  the  quality  of  the  soil ;  if  rock  is  to  be  cut 
through,'  it  is  worked  with  a  mason's  axe  and  the  cold 
chisel.  Fortunately  the  geological  formation  is  prin- 
cipally sedimentary  limestone,  which  offers  no  great 
resistance.  At  length  the  water  is  reached.  The 
well  is  now  left  open  for  a  few  days  that  an  opinion 
may  be  formed  of  the  power ;  if  favourable,  another 
precisely  similar  well  is  sunk  at  a  distance  of  fifteen  or 
sixteen  yards  in  the  direction  towards  the  point  required 
by  the  future  aqueduct  The  spring  being  satisfactory, 
the  work  proceeds  with  vigour.  We  will  accept  the 
first  well  as  forty  feet  in  depth ;  if  the  surface  of  the 
earth  were  an  exact  level,  the  next  well  would  be  an 
equal  depth ;  but  as  the  water  retains  its  natural  level, 
the  vertical  measurement  of  each  sHaft  will  depend 
upon  the  formation  of  the  upper  ground.  The  object 
of  the  well-sinker  is  to  create  a  chain  of  wells  united 
by  a  subterranean  tunnel,  in  order  to  multiply  the 
power  of  a  unit  and  to  obtain  the  entire  supply  of 
water  ;  he  therefore  sinks  perhaps  ten  or  twenty  wells 
to  the  same  level,  and  he  cuts  a  narrow  tunnel  from 
one  to  the  other,  thus  connecting  his  shafts  at  the 
water-line,  so  as  to  form  a  canal  or  aqueduct.  Pre- 
cisely as  the  mole  upheaves  at  certain  intervals  the  earth 

D  2 


36  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap.ii. 

that  it  has  scraped  from  its  gallery,  the  well-sinker  clears 
his  tunnel  by  sending  up  the  contents  through  the 
vertical  shafts  fifteen  yards  apart,  around  the  mouth  of 
which  a  funnel-shaped  mound  is  formed  by  the  debris. 

These  preliminary  walls  being  completed  and  the 
water-volume  tested,  the  neighbourhood  is  examined 
with  the  hope  of  discovering  other  springs  that  may 
upon  the  same  principle  be  conducted  towards  the 
main  line  of  the  proposed  aqueduct.  It  is  not  un- 
common to  find  several  chains  of  wells  converging 
from  different  localities  to  the  desired  water-head,  and 
as  these  are  at  higher  levels,  a  considerable  hydraulic 
power  is  obtained,  sufficient  in  many  instances  not 
only  to  fill  the  tunnels,  but  to  force  the  water  to  a 
greater  elevation  if  required. 

The  water-head  being  thoroughly  established,  the 
sinking  of  a  chain  of  wells  proceeds,  and  the  tunnels 
are  arranged  at  a  given  inclination  to  conduct  the 
water  to  the  destined  spot.  This  may  be  many  miles 
distant,  necessitating  many  hundred  wells,  which  may 
comprise  great  superficial  changes ;  hills  that  are  bored 
through  necessitate  deep  shafts,  and  valleys  must  be 
spanned  by  aqueducts  of  masonry.  In  this  manner 
the  water  is  conducted  from  the  springs  of  Arpera 
near  the  spot  where  the  river  issues  from  the  narrow 
valley  among  the  hills,  and  supplies  Larnaca,  about  eight 
miles  distant  from  the  first  head.  The  British  authori- 
ties propose  to  substitute  iron  pipes  for  the  present 
aqueduct ;  but  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  new  scheme 
will  be  an  independent  and  additional  work,  that  will 
in  no  way  interfere  with  the  important  gift  of  Cheflik 
Pacha,  which  has  existed  for  nearly  two  centuries,  and 
which,  if  kept  in  repair,  will  supply  the  necessary 
volume. 


CHAPTER  IIL 


ROUTE      TO      NICOSIA. 


Having  proved  that  any  further  progress  west  was 
quite  impracticable  by  vans,  I  returned  to  the  new  main 
road  from  Larnaca,  and  carefully  avoiding  it,  we  kept 
upon  the  natural  surface  by  the  side  drain,  and  travelled 
towards  Dali,  the  ancient  Idalium. 

The  thermometer  at  8  a.m.  showed  37°,  and  the 
wind  was  keen.  The  road  lay  through  a  most  desolate 
country  of  chalk  hills  completely  barren,  diversified 
occasionally  by  the  ice-like  crystals  of  gypsum  cropping 
out  in  huge  masses.  In  one  of  the  most  dreary  spots 
that  can  be  imagined  the  eye  was  relieved  by  a  little 
flat-topped  hut  on  the  right  hand,  which  exhibited  a 
sign,  **The  Dewdrop  Inn."  The  name  was  hardly 
appropriate,  as  the  earth  appeared  as  though  neither 
dew  nor  rain  had  blessed  the  surface ;  but  I  believe 
that  whisky  was  represented  by  the  *'  Dewdrop,"  and 
that  the  word  was  intended  to  imply  an  invitation, 
"  Do-drop-in."  Of  course  we  dropped  in,  being  about 
an  hour  in  advance  of  our  vans,  and  I  found  the  land- 
lord most  obliging,  and  a  bottle  of  Bass's  pale  ale  most 
refreshing  in  this  horrible-looking  desert  of  chalk  and 
thistles  that  had  become  a  quasi- British  colony.  This 
unfortunate  man  and  one  or  two  partners  were  among 


38  Cyprus  in  1879.  fCHAP. 

those  deluded  victims  who  had  sacrificed  themselves 
to  the  impulse  of  our  first  occupation,  upon  the  prin- 
ciple that  "  the  early  bird  gets  the  worm."  Instead 
of  getting  on,  the  partners  went  off,  and  left  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  "  Dewdrop  ^'  in  a  physical  state  of 
weakness  from  attacks  of  fever,  and  the  good  indus- 
trious man  with  little  hope  of  a  golden  future. 

Passing  on  after  a  conversation  with  our  landlord, 
which  did  not  cheer  me  so  much  as  the  pale  ale,  we 
continued  through  the  same  desolate  country  for  about 
two  miles,  and  then  turned  off  on  the  left  hand  towards 
Dali.  We  passed  through  a  narrow  valley  of  several 
hundred  acres  planted  in  vineyards,  and  we  counted 
four  olive-trees,  the  first  green  objects  or  signs  of  trees 
that  we  had  seen  since  Larnaca  !  We  then  continued 
through  white  barren  hills  for  another  two  miles,  and 
descended  a  steep  hill,  halting  for  the  night  upon  hard 
flat  gypsum  rock  opposite  a  village  named  "  Lauran- 
china,"  above  the  dry  bed  of  a  torrent,  twelve  miles 
from  Larnaca. 

On  the  following  morning,  after  a  slight  shower,  we 
started  for  Dali.  The  narrow  valleys  were  more  or 
less  cultivated  with  vines,  and  about  three  miles  from 
the  halting-place  we  entered  the  fertile  plain  of  Dali. 
This  is  about  six  miles  long,  by  one  in  width,  highly 
cultivated,  with  the  river  flowing  through  the  midst. 
As  far  as  we  could  see  in  a  direct  line  groves  of  olives, 
vineyards,  and  ploughed  land,  diversified  by  villages, 
exhibited  the  power  of  water  in  converting  sterility 
into  wealth. 

I  always  make  a  rule  that  the  halting-place  shall  be 
at  a  considerable  distance  from  a  village  or  town  for 
sanitary  reasons,  as  the  environs  are  generally  unclean. 
All  travellers  are  well  aware  that  their  servants  and 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  39 


general  entourage  delight  in  towns  or  villages,  as 
they  discover  friends,  or  make  acquaintances,  and 
relieve  the  tedium  of  the  journey ;  therefore  an  an- 
tagonistic influence  invariably  exists  upon  the  question 
of  a  camping-ground.  It  is  accordingly  most  difficult  to 
believe  the  statements  of  your  interpreter  :  he  may  have 
old  friends  in  a  town  to  which  you  believe  him  to  be 
a  stranger ;  he  may  have  the  remains  of  an  old  love, 
and  a  wish  to  meet  again  ;  or  he  may  have  a  still  more 
powerful  attraction  in  the  remembrance  of  an  agreeable 
cafe  where  he  can  refresh  himself  with  liquor,  revel 
in  cigarettes,  and  play  at  dominoes.  It  is  therefore 
necessary  to  be  upon  your  guard  when  approaching 
a  town,  which  should  be  looked  upon  as  the  enemy's 
camp. 

My  amiable  bullock-driver,  the  big  Georgi,  had 
always  assured  me  that  **  game  abounded  in  the  im- 
mediate neighbourhood  of  Dali ;  '*  of  course  I  knew 
that  the  happy  hunting-ground  contained  some  special 
interest  for  himself.  Upon  arrival  on  the  outskirts  I 
ordered  the  vans  to  pass  on  the  outside  of  the  town,  and 
I  would  seek  a  camping-place  up-stream.  Instead  of 
this  I  was  assured  that  we  should  pass  through  the  town, 
and  find  a  lovely  grove  of  olive-trees  by  the  river-side, 
the  perfection  of  a  halting-place.  For  the  first  time  I 
now  discovered  that  Georgi's  wife  and  family  lived  in 
Dali,  and  that  he  was  not  such  a  fool  as  he  looked. 

In  a  few  minutes  we  were  descending  a  lane  so 
narrow  that  the  gipsy  van  only  cleared  the  walls  of 
the  houses  on  either  side  by  three  or  four  inches. 
This  lane  had  been  paved  centuries  ago  with  stones 
of  all  sizes,  from  a  moderate  grindstone  to  that  of  a 
football.  When  people  had  wished  to  build  a  new 
house^  they  had   taken   up   a   few  stones  to  make  a 


40  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[  CHAP. 


foundation ;  the  street  was  a  series  of  pitfalls  filled 
•with  mud  and  filth,  including  miniature  ponds  of 
manure-coloured  water.  The  surface  appeared  im- 
passable ;  the  projecting  water-spouts  from  the  low 
roofs  stuck  out  like  the  gnarled  boughs  of  trees. 
Here  was  a  pretty  mess ! — all  because  Georgi's  wife 
was  in  town.  It  was  impossible  for  anything  larger 
than  a  perambulator  to  turn,  and  as  the  springs 
yielded  to  the  uneven  ground,  the  van  bumped  against 
the  walls  of  the  houses  and  threatened  destruction. 
**  Halt ! "  was  the  only  word,  and  as  the  drag-shoe 
was  on  the  wheel,  we  stopped.  At  this  moment 
of  difficulty  a  priest  and  some  old  women  appeared 
with  earthen  vessels  smoking  with  burning  olive- 
leaves  ;  they  immediately  passed  the  smoke  beneath 
the  nostrils  of  the  oxen,  then  around  the  van,  and 
lastly  ourselves.  At  the  same  time  some  good 
young  women  threw  orange-flower  water  over  my 
wife  and  myself  from  pretty  glass  vases  with  narrow 
necks  as  a  sign  of  welcome.  The  incense  of  the 
priests  was  supposed  to  avert  the  '* evil-eye"  from 
the  gipsy  van  and  our  party.  I  felt  much  obliged 
for  the  good  intention,  but  I  did  not  mind  the  *'  evil 
eye  "  so  much  as  the  water-spouts.  In  my  experience 
of  travelling  I  never  met  with  such  kind  and  courteous 
people  as  the  inhabitants  of  Cyprus.  The  Dali 
population  had  already  blocked  the  narrow  streets 
from  curiosity  at  our  arrival,  and  *  soon  understanding 
the  cause  of  our  dilemma,  they  mounted  the  house- 
tops and  tore  off  the  obstructing  water-spouts  ;  where 
these  projections  were  too  strong,  they  sawed  them  off 
close  to  the  eaves.  A  crowd  of  men  pushed  the  van 
from  behind,  and  guided  the  oxen,  while  others  assisted 
by  digging  up  the  large  paving-stones  that  would  have 


^  III.3  Route  to  Nicosia.  41 

tilted  it  against  the  house- walls.  In  this  manner  we 
arrived  without  serious  accident  upon  the  bank  of  the 
river  which  ran  through  the  town.  There  was  an  open 
space  here  which  was  crowded  with  women  and  girls, 
who,  with  feminine  curiosity,  had  assembled  to  see  the 
English  lady.  Among  these  was  the  prettiest  young 
woman  I  have  seen  in  Cyprus,  with  a  child  in  her 
arms.  Her  large  blue  eyes  and  perfect  Grecian  features 
were  enhanced  by  a  sweet  gentle  expression  of  coun- 
tenance. She  seemed  more  than  others  delighted  at 
our  arrival.  This  was  Georgi*s  wife  ! — and  I  at  once 
forgave  him  for  deceiving  us  and  yielding  to  the  natural 
attraction  of  his  home. 

We  were  not  quite  out  of  our  difficulty.  Several 
hundred  people  had  assembled,  and  all  spoke  at  once, 
raising  their  voices  in  the  hope  that  we  should  under- 
stand their  Greek  better  than  if  spoken  in  a  moderate 
tone ;  (why  people  will  speak  loud  if  you  do  not 
know  their  language  I  cannot  understand :)  but 
as  we  were  utterly  ignorant  of  their  meaning  we  were 
not  confused  by  their  differences  of  opinion  respecting 
our  direction.  It  ended  in  our  crossing  the  stony  bed 
of  the  river,  through  which  a  reduced  stream  only  a 
few  inches  deep  flowed  in  the  centre,  and  having  with 
difficulty  gained  the  opposite  bank  a  hundred  yards 
distant,  we  soon  arrived  in  a  sort  of  natural  eel-trap 
formed  by  a  narrow  avenue  of  gigantic  olive-trees, 
the  branches  of  which  effectually  barred  our  progress 
and  prevented  the  vans  from  turning. 

A  temporary  loss  of  temper  was  a  natural  con- 
sequence, and  having  ridden  in  advance  for  about 
half  a  mile,  I  returned  and  ordered  a  retreat.  We 
took  the  bullocks  out,  and  by  hand  backed  the  wheels, 
until  by  shovels  and  picks  we  could  clear  a  space  for 


42  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


turning.  We  then  re-crossed  the  river,  and  disregard- 
ing all  native  advice,  struck  into  the  country,  and 
halted  near  a  small  grove  of  olives  close  to  the  new 
English  road  to  the  military  station  "  Mattiati." 

It  was  the  4th  of  February,  and  the  temperature  in 
the  morning  and  evening  was  too  cold  (43°)  for  pleasant 
camping.  In  spite  of  a  chilly  wind,  crowds  of  women 
and  children  surrounded  our  vans  and  sat  for  hours 
indulging  their  curiosity,  and  shivering  in  light  clothes 
of  home-made  cotton-stuffs.  The  children  were  gene- 
rally pretty,  and  some  of  the  younger  women  were 
good-looking ;  but  there  was  a  total  neglect  of  personal 
appearance  which  is  a  striking  characteristic  of  the 
Cypriote  females.  In  most  countries,  whether  savage 
or  civilised,  the  women  yield  to  a  natural  instinct,  and 
to  a  certain  extent  adorn  their  persons  and  endeavour 
to  render  themselves  attractive ;  but  in  Cyprus  there 
is  a  distressing  absence  of  the  wholesome  vanity  that 
should  induce  attention  to  dress  and  cleanliness.  The 
inelegance  of  costume  gives  an  unpleasant  peculiarity 
to  their  figures — the  whole  crowd  of  girls  and  women 
looked  as  though  they  were  about  to  become  mothers. 
The  coarse  and  roughly-tanned,  uncared-for  high  boots 
with  huge  hobnails  were  overlapped  by  great  baggy 
trousers.  Above  these  were  a  considerable  number 
of  petticoats  loosely  hanging  and  tied  carelessly  at  the 
waist,  which  was  totally  unsupported  by  any  such  as- 
sistance as  stays.  A  sort  of  short  jacket  that  was  of 
no  particular  cut,  and  possessed  the  advantage  of  fitting 
any  variety  of  size  or  figure,  completed  the  attire.  The 
buttons  that  should  have  confined  the  dress  in  front 
were  generally  absent,  and  the  ladies  were  not  bashful 
at  their  loss,  but  exposed  their  bosoms  without  any 
consciousness  of  indelicacy.     There  was  no  peculiarity 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  43 


in  the  arrangement  of  the  hair,  but  each  head  was  tied 
up  in  a  cloth,  either  white  or  some  gaudy  colour,  which, 
once  gay,  had  been  sobered  in  its  hues  by  dirt.  In 
spite  of  this  neglected  exterior,  the  women  had  re- 
markably good  manners ;  they  seldom  approached  my 
wife  without  presenting,  with  a  graceful  gesture,  some 
wild  flowers,  or  a  little  bunch  of  sweet  herbs,  which 
they  had  purposely  gathered,  and  we  were  quickly 
made  rich  in  quantities  of  double  narcissus,  marigolds, 
and  rosemary.  Upon  our  arrival  at  a  town  or  village 
the  girls  and  boys  would  frequently  run  to  their 
gardens  and  provide  themselves  with  either  a  single 
flower,  or  rosemary,  with  which  they  would  await  us 
in  the  street  and  ofier  them  as  we  passed  by. 
Throughout  Cyprus  we  have  received  similar  well- 
meant  attention,  and  the  simplicity  and  delicacy  of 
the  offering  contrasts  in  an  anomalous  manner  with 
the  dirty  habits  and  appearance  of  the  people.  Even 
Georgi's  pretty  wife  was  untidy  about  the  hair,  al- 
though she  was  in  her  best  attire  ;  and  a  close  inspection 
of  all  women  and  girls  showed  that  their  throats  and 
breasts  were  literally  covered  with  ancient  and  modern 
fleabites.  Their  dwellings  are  extremely  filthy,  and 
swarm  with  vermin,  as  the  fowls,  goats,  or  even  a  cow 
or  two,  generally  increase  the  domestic  party.  It  is 
well  known  that  Paphos  in  Cyprus  was  the  supposed 
birthplace  of  Venus,  and  that  the  island  was  at  one 
time  celebrated  for  the  beauty  of  women  and  immor- 
ality :  the  change  has  been  radical,  as  I  believe  no 
women  are  more  chaste,  and  at  the  same  time  less 
attractive,  than  the  Cypriotes  of  the  present  time. 
They  are  generally  short  and  thickset ;  they  are 
hardly  treated  by  the  men,  as  they  perform  most  of 
the   rough  work  in   cultivation   of  the   ground,  and, 


44  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


from  the  extreme  coarseness  of  their  hands,  they  can 
seldom  be  idle  ;  the  men,  on  the  contrary,  are  usually 
good-looking,  and  are  far  more  attentive  to  their 
personal  appearance. 

Dali  was  an  interesting  spot  to  any  agriculturist 
The  soil  was  exceedingly  rich,  as  it  had  been  formed, 
like  all  valleys  in  Cyprus,  by  the  alluvium  washed 
down  from  the  surrounding  hills ;  these  were  from 
three  to  six  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the 
plain,  and  were  composed  of  the  usual  hard  species 
of  chalk  and  gypsum ;  thus  the  deposit  from  their 
denudation  by  rains  supplied  the  chief  constituents 
for  the  growth  of  vines  and  cereals. 

There  is  a  depressing  absence  of  all  recent  improve- 
ments in  journeying  through  Cyprus;  even  at  Dali, 
where  the  water  from  the  river  was  used  for  irrigation, 
and  large  farms  in  the  occupation  of  the  wealthy 
landowner,  M.  Richard  Mattel,  were  successfully  cul- 
tivated, I  could  not  help  remarking  the  total  neglect 
of  tree-planting.  The  ancient  olive-groves  still  exist 
by  the  river's  side,  and,  could  they  speak,  those  grand 
old  trees  would  be  historians  of  the  glorious  days  of 
Cyprus ;  but  there  are  no  recent  plantations,  and  the 
natives  explained  the  cause  in  the  usual  manner  by 
attributing  all  wretchedness  and  popular  apathy  to 
the  oppression  of  the  Turkish  rule.  This  wholesale 
accusation  must  be  received  with  caution ;  there  can 
be  no  doubt  of  the  pre-existing  misrule,  but  at  the 
same  time  it  is  impossible  to  travel  through  Cyprus 
without  the  painful  conviction  that  the  modern  Cypriote 
is  a  reckless  tree-destroyer,  and  that  destruction  is  more 
natural  to  his  character  than  the  propagation  of  timber. 
There  is  no  reason  for  the  neglect  of  olive-planting, 
but  I  observed  an  absence  of  such  cultivation  which 


III.  J 


Route  to  Nicosia.  45 


must  have  prevailed  during  several  centuries,  even 
during  the  Venetian  rule.  It  is  difficult  to  determine 
the  age  of  an  olive-tree,  which  is  almost  imperishable ; 
It  is  one  of  those  remarkable  examples  of  vegetation 
that  illustrates  the  eternal,  and  explains  the  first 
instincts  of  adoration  which  tree-worship  exhibited  in 
the  distant  past.  I  spent  some  hours  with  the  olive- 
trees  of  Dali ;  they  were  grand  old  specimens  of  the  ever- 
lasting. One  healthy  trunk  in  full  vigour  measured 
twenty-nine  feet  in  circumference ;  another,  twenty- 
eight  feet  two  inches.  Very  many  were  upwards  of 
twenty  feet  by  my  measuring-tape  ;  and  had  I  accepted 
the  hollow  or  split  trees,  there  were  some  that  would 
have  exceeded  forty  feet.  There  can  be  little  doubt 
that  these  olives  throve  at  the  period  when  Idalium 
was  the  great  city  in  Cyprus ;  they  may  have  exceeded 
two  thousand  years  in  age,  but  any  surmise  would  be 
the  wildest  conjecture.  It  may  not  be  generally 
known  that  the  olive,  which  is  of  slow  growth  and  a 
wood  of  exceeding  hardness,  remains  always  a  dwarf 
tree  ;  a  tall  olive  is  unknown,  and  it  somewhat  re- 
sembles a  pollard  ilex.  When  by  extreme  age  the 
tree  has  become  hollow  it  possesses  the  peculiar  power 
of  reproduction,  not  by  throwing  up  root-shoots,  but  by 
splitting  the  old  hollowed  trunk  into  separate  divisions, 
which  by  degrees  attain  an  individuality,  and  event- 
ually thrive  as  new  and  independent  trees,  forming  a 
group  or  "family-tree,'*  nourished  by  the  same  root 
which  anchored  the  original  ancestor. 

The  gnarled,  weird  appearance  of  these  ancient 
groves  of  such  gigantic  dimensions  contrasted  sadly 
with  the  treeless  expanse  beyond,  and  proved  that 
Cyprus  had  for  very  many  centuries  been  the  victim 
of  neglect.     The  olive  is  indigenous  to  the  island,  and 


46  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^chap. 

the  low  scrub  jungles  of  Baffo,  the  Carpas  district, 
and  other  portions  abound  with  the  wild  species, 
which  can  be  rendered  fruitful  by  grafting.  In 
selecting  trees  for  the  extension  of  forests,  there  is 
a  common-sense  rule  to  guide  us  by  observing  those 
varieties  which  are  indigenous  to  the  country ;  these 
can  be  obtained  at  the  lowest  cost,  and  their  success 
is  almost  assured,  as  no  time  need  be  lost  from  the 
day  of  their  removal  to  the  new  plantation.  Such  trees 
as  are  rendered  fruitful  by  grafting  offer  peculiar  ad- 
vantages, as  the  stocks  already  exist  upon  which 
superior  varieties  may  be  connected.  The  principal 
food  of  the  Cypriotes  consists  of  olives,  beans,  bread, 
and  onions ;  they  seldom  eat  what  we  should  call 
"  cooked  food ; "  whether  this  is  owing  to  the  scarcity 
of  fuel,  or  whether  it  is  natural  in  this  climate  to  avoid 
flesh,  I  cannot  determine :  some  say  the  people  are  too 
poor,  and  cannot  afford  mutton  at  twopence  a  pound, 
while  at  the  same  time  they  will  not  kill  the  oxen  that 
are  required  for  purposes  of  draught;  they  refuse 
the  milk  of  cows,  and  only  use  that  of  sheep  or 
goats.  The  fact  remains  that  the  country  people 
seldom  eat  butcher's  meat,  but  subsist  upon  olives, 
oil,  bread,  cheese,  and  vegetables. 

Under  these  circumstances  it  would  be  natural  to 
suppose  that  the  accepted  articles  of  consumption 
would  be  highly  cultivated  and  superior  in  quality; 
but  the  reverse  is  the  fact.  The  olive-oil  is  so  inferior 
that  foreign  oil  is  imported  from  France  for  the  use  of 
the  upper  classes ;  the  olives  are  of  a  poor  description, 
and,  as  a  rule,  few  vegetables  are  cultivated  except  in 
the  immediate  vicinity  of  town  markets,  the  agricul- 
tural population  or  country  people  being  too  careless  to 
excel  in  horticulture,  and  depending  mainly  upon  the 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  47 


wild  vegetables  which  the  soil  produces  in  abundance. 
If  the  people  are  too  inert  to  improve  the  qualities 
and  to  extend  the  cultivation  of  vegetables,  it  is  easy 
to  comprehend  their  neglect  of  the  tree-planting  so 
necessary  to  the  climatic  requirements  of  this  island. 

The  oil-press  is  similar  to  the  old-fashioned  cider- 
mill  of  England.  The  fruit,  having  been  dried  in  the 
sun,  is  placed  in  a  circular  trough  in  which  the  stone 
wheel  revolves,  driven  by  a  mule  and  pole.  When 
sufficiently  crushed,  and  reduced  to  a  paste,  it  is 
divided  into  basketfuls ;  these  are  subjected  to 
pressure  by  the  common  vertical  screw,  and  the  oil  is 
expressed,  but  is  not  clarified.  It  is  generally  rancid 
and  unfit  for  European  consumption.  In  travelling 
through  Cyprus  the  medicine-chest  may  dispense  with 
castor-oil,  as  the  olive-oil  of  the  country  is  a  good 
substitute.  By  the  government  report,  the  yield  of 
oil  in  1877  was  estimated  at  250,000  okes  (of  2f  lbs.) 
valued  at  about  nine  piastres  per  oke,  but  during  the 
same  year  foreign  olive-oil  to  the  value  of  ;^  1,706  was 
imported.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  special 
attention  should  be  bestowed  upon  the  improvement 
of  the  olive  cultivation  in  Cyprus,  and  grafts  of  the 
best  varieties  should  be  introduced  from  France  and 
Spain  ;  in  a  few  years  an  important  improvement  would 
result,  and  the  superabundant  oil  of  a  propitious  season 
would  form  an  article  of  export,  instead  of  (as  at 
present)  being  converted  into  soap,  as  otherwise  un- 
saleable. 

Our  crowd  of  female  admirers  was  happily  dispersed 
by  a  slight  shower  of  rain,  and  by  clouds  which 
threatened  a  downpour ;  the  men  remained,  and  a 
swarthy-looking  thoroughbred  Turk  promised  to 
accompany  me    on    the   morrow  and    show   me   the 


48  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[  CHAP. 


neighbourhood.  I  was  informed  in  a  mysterious 
whisper  by  a  Cypriote  **  that  this  man  was  a  notorious 
robber,  whose  occupation  was  gone  since  the  arrival  of 
the  British ;  *'  he  had  formed  one  of  a  gang  that  had 
infested  the  mountains,  and  his  brother  had  murdered 
a  friend  of  Georgi  (the  van-driver),  and  was  now  in 
gaol  at  Rhodes  for  the  capital  offence.  The  Turk 
was  very  intelligent,  and  thoroughly  conversant  with 
the  various  methods  of  breech-loading  firearms ;  he 
examined  several  rifles  and  guns  belonging  to  me,  and 
at  once  comprehended  the  mechanism,  and  explained 
it  to  the  admiring  crowd.  When  this  individual  left 
our  camp  in  the  evening,  the  story  that  I  had  heard 
in  outline  was  corroborated  by  the  driver  Georgi,  who 
asked  me  to  exert  my  influence  to  procure  the  hanging 
of  the  murderer  now  at  Rhodes,  as  the  Turkish 
authorities  would  never  execute  a  Turk  for  the  murder 
of  a  Greek  unless  influenced  by  foreign  pressure.  It 
appeared  that  the  Cypriote  had  informed  against  one 
of  the  gang  for  cattle-stealing,  accordingly  several 
members  of  the  fraternity  picked  a  quarrel  with  him 
at  a  drinking-shop  one  evening  at  Dali,  and  stabbed 
him  fatally.  My  new  acquaintance,  the  Turk,  was  not 
present  during  the  fray,  and  I  could  not  promise 
Georgi  the  intervention  he  desired. 

On  the  following  morning  seven  natives  of  Dali 
appeared — all  Greeks — accompanied  by  the  ex-robber, 
whom  I  regarded  as  "  a  wicked  man  who  had  turned 
away  from  his  wickedness,"  with  whose  antecedents  I 
had  no  concern.  They  had  brought  their  guns,  which 
were  at  once  submitted  to  me  for  an  opinion  of  their 
merits,  with  a  vain  expectation  that  I  should  pronounce 
them  to  be  "  English."  I  was  to  be  guided  to  a  spot 
about  an  hour  s  march  distant,  where  partridges  and 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  49 


hares  were  said  to  abound,  and  it  appeared  that  an 
impromptu  shooting-party  had  been  arranged  especially 
for  my  amusement. 

I  am  not  very  fond  of  such  sporting  meetings,  as 
the  common  guns  of  the  people,  which  are  constantly 
missing  fire  when  required  to  shoot,  have  an  awkward 
knack  of  going  off  when  least  expected  ;  my  mind 
was  somewhat  relieved  when  the  tactics  were  explained, 
that  we  (nine  guns)  were  to  form  a  line  of  skirmishers 
about  two  hundred  yards  apart,  commanding  a  mile 
of  country. 

There  is  a  great  advantage  in  sport,  as  the  search 
for  game  leads  a  traveller  into  all  kinds  of  places 
which  he  would  otherwise  leave  unseen.  It  is  a  great 
enjoyment  to  stroll  over  a  new  country  accompanied 
by  good  dogs,  and  combine  at  the  same  time  sport 
and  exploration. 

Upon  arrival  at  the  summit  of  the  hill  range  which 
we  had  passed  on  our  left  when  we  had  arrived  at 
Dali,  I  was  well  repaid,  and  the  necessity  of  judging 
a  country  from  a  hill-top  instead  of  from  a  highroad 
was  well  exemplified.  I  looked  down  upon  the  highly- 
cultivated  and  fertile  valley  of  Lymbia,  surpassing  in 
extent  the  plain  of  Dali,  and  although  the  successive 
ranges  of  hills  and  mountains  were  bleak  and  barren 
in  their  whiteness,  the  intervening  valleys  were  all 
occupied  either  by  vineyards  or  by  fields  in  tillage. 
Even  the  ravines  upon  the  steep  hill-sides  which  had 
been  scored  out  by  the  rainfall  of  ages  were  artificially 
arranged  to  catch  the  melted  earth  in  its  descent 
during  heavy  storms,  and  to  form  terraces  of  ri(!h 
alluvium. 

A  succession  of  rough  walls  composed  of  the  large 
rocks  which  strewed  the  surface,  were  built  at  convenient 

E 


5o  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tGHAP 


intervals  across  the  ravines,  forming  a  series  of  dams 
or  weirs.  The  soil  of  Cyprus  is  peculiar  in  dissolving 
very  quickly  during  a  shower,  and  the  water  rolls 
down  the. steep  inclines  carrying  so  much  earth  in 
solution,  that,  should  its  course  be  checked,  it  deposits 
an  important  quantity,  sufficient  in  a  few  seasons  to 
form  a  surface  for  a  considerable  area.  The  walls 
of  the  dams  are  continually  raised  as  the  earth  attains 
a  higher  level,  and  the  ground  thus  saved  is  a  complete 
gain  to  the  proprietor. 

The  few  partridges  were  very  wild,  and  saved  my 
dogs  the  trouble  of  hunting  by  showing  themselves 
at  a  couple  of  hundred  yards;  the  only  chance  of 
shooting  them  depended  upon  stray  birds  passing 
within  shot  when  disturbed  by  the  long  line  of  guns. 
I  only  bagged  one  partridge  and  a  hare,  and  the 
rest  of  the  garty  had  the  miserable  total  of  two  birds. 
This  was  a  fair  example  of  the  sport  on  the  bare 
hill-sides  of  Messaria. 

The  new  road  to  Mattiati  was  unfit  for  vans  ;  I  there- 
fore rode  over  to  visit  the  camp  of  the  20th  Regiment, 
eight  miles  distant,  and  after  luncheon  with  the  officers 
of  that  regiment  I  accompanied  their  party  to  Lithro- 
dondo,  the  Colonel  having  kindly  lent  me  a  fresh  horse. 
My  aneroid  showed  an  increased  elevation  of  330  feet 
in  the  eight  miles  from  Dali  to  Mattiati.  After 
leaving  the  Dali  plain  the  road  passes  through  the 
usual  hills  of  hard  chalk,  but  about  two  miles  from 
the  entrance  an  important  change  was  exhibited  in 
the  geological  structure.  Eruptive  rocks  had  burst 
through  the  chalk,  producing  interesting  metamorphic 
phenomena.  The  hills  no  longer  fatigued  the  eye  by 
the  desolate  glare,  but  the  earth  was  a  rich  brown 
diversified   with   patches  of  bright   chocolate   colour. 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  51 


The  greenstone  cropped  out  through  the  surface  in 
large  masses,  accompanied  by  a  peculiar  dun-stone 
precisely  similar  to  that  of  Knowles  Hill  in  South 
Devon.  In  a  cutting  through  a  hill-side  by  the 
government  new  road  veins  of  bright  yellow  ochre 
were  exposed,  also  red  ochre  in  considerable  quan- 
tities. I  took  samples  of  the  yellow,  which  appeared 
to  be  of  a  good  quality  ;  but  I  believe  the  commercial 
value  is  too  insignificant  to  support  the  charges 
of  land-transport  and  the  subsequent  freight  from 
Larnaca. 

Mattiati  is  about  1300  feet  above  the  sea-level. 
The  troops  were  camped  in  wooden  huts  on  low  hills 
about  forty  feet  above  a  flat  valley,  where  olive-trees 
throve  in  considerable  numbers.  I  should  not  have 
selected  Mattiati  as  a  sanitary  station ;  the  plain 
showed  evident  signs  of  bad  drainage,  and  the  rich 
deep  soil  would  become  a  swamp  after  heavy  rains. 
Upon  the  low  hills  within  a  mile  of  the  station  were 
vast  quantities  of  scoriae  or  slag  from  ancient  smelting- 
furnaces,  and  the  remains  of  broken  pottery,  mingled 
with  stones  that  had  been  used  in  building,  proved 
that  important  mining  operations  had  been  carried  on 
in  former  ages. 

From  Mattiati  to  Lithrodondo  the  country  is  broken 
and  little  cultivated ;  there  was  no  longer  a  sign  of 
cretaceous  rock,  but  the  bold  range  of  mountains  rose 
before  us  crowned  by  Makheras,  4730  feet,  apparendy 
close  above  us,  dark  in  plutonic  rocks  and  sparsely 
covered  with  myrtles  and  other  evergreens.  As  we 
neared  the  base  of  the  mountains,  the  vegetation  in- 
creased, and  passing  the  dirty  village  of  Lithrodondo,  we 
entered  upon  a  succession  of  hills  divided  by  numerous 
small   torrent-beds,    the    steep  banks  of  which   were 

E  2 


52  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^chap. 

thickly  fringed  with  oleanders,  mastic,  myrtles,  and 
other  shrubs,  which  formed  an  inspiriting  change  from 
the  weary  treeless  country  we  had  left  behind.  Beyond 
Lithrodondo  are  extensive  vineyards ;  but  it  was  late, 
and  I  was  obliged  to  turn  back  towards  Dali,  fifteen 
miles  distant. 

Wherever    I    had   been   since   my  departure   from 
Larnaca  the  natives  had  complained  of  the  effects  of 
fever  to  which  they  are  subjected  during  the  summer 
months  ;   but  they  were  unanimous  in  declaring  that 
**  the  general  sickness  of  the  last  year  was  exceptional, 
and  that  the  fevers  were  not  of  a  dangerous  nature." 
It  is  well  known  that  upon  our  first  occupation  of  the 
island  in  July,  1878,  all  troops,  both  English  and  Indian, 
suffered  to  a  degree  that  would  have  rendered  them 
unfit  for   active    service.      It  is  true  that  the  actual 
mortality  was  not  excessive ;  but  the  strength  of  an 
army  must  be  reckoned  by  the  effective  force,  and  not 
by  numbers.     There  can  be  no  doubt  that,  owing  to  a 
season  declared  by  the  inhabitants  to  be  exceptionally 
unhealthy,  and  the  unfortunate  necessity  for  a  military 
occupation  during  the  extreme  heat  of  July  and  August, 
the  troops  being  overworked,  badly  fed,  and  unpro- 
tected from  the  sun,  the  newly-acquired   island    was 
stamped    with  a  pestilential    character,    and    Cyprus 
became  a  byeword  as  a  fever-smitten  failure.     I  shall 
give  my  personal  experiences,  untinged  by  any  pre- 
judice.   The  natural  features  of  the  country  produced  a 
sad  impression  upon  my  first  arrival  in  a  scene  where 
the  depressing  influence  of  a  barren  aspect  must  to  a 
certain  extent  affect  the  nervous  system  ;  but  a  careful 
examination  of  the  entire  surface  of  the  island  sub- 
sequently modified  my  first  impressions,  with   results 
which  these  pages  will  describe. 


^iSB 


HI.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  53 


There  was  no  object  in  prolonging  my  visit  to  Dali ; 
the  tombs  of  ancient  Idalium  had  already  been  ran- 
sacked by  the  consuls  of  various  nations  ;  and  had  I  felt 
disposed  to  disturb  the  repose  of  the  dead,  nominally 
in  the  interests  of  science,  but  at  the  same  time  to  turn 
an  honest  penny  by  the  sale  of  their  remains,  I  should 
have  been  unable  to  follow  the  example  of  the  burrow- 
ing antiquarians  who  had  preceded  me ;  a  prohibition 
having  been  placed  upon  all  such  enterprises  by  the 
English  government. 

It  is  supposed  that  Idalium  is  one  of  the  largest  and 
richest  treasuries  of  the  dead  in  Cyprus.  For  several 
centuries  the  tombs  had  been  excavated  and  pillaged 
in  the  hopes  of  discovering  objects  of  value.  The 
first  robbers  were  those  who  were  simply  influenced 
by  the  gold  and  other  precious  ornaments  which  were 
accompaniments  of  the  corpse ;  the  modern  despoilers 
were  resurrectionists  w^ho  worked  with  the  object  of 
supplying  any  museums  that  would  purchase  the 
funeral  spoil. 

It  is  a  curious  contradiction  in  our  ideas  of  propriety, 
which  are  measured  apparently  by  uncertain  intervals 
of  time,  that  we  regard  as  felonious  a  man  who  dis- 
inters a  body  and  steals  a  ring  from  the  fingers  of  the 
corpse  a  few  days  after  burial  in  an  English  church- 
yard, but  we  honour  and  admire  an  individual  who 
upon  a  wholesale  scale  digs  up  old  cemeteries  and 
scatters  the  bones  of  ancient  kings  and  queens,  princes, 
priests,  and  warriors,  and  having  collected  the  jewellery, 
arms,  and  objects  of  vanity  that  were  buried  with  them, 
neglects  the  once  honoured  bones,  but  sells  the  gold 
and  pottery  to  the  highest  bidder.  Sentiment  is 
measured  and  weighed  by  periods,  and  as  grief  is 
mitigated  by  time,  so  also  is  our  respect  for  the  dead, 


54  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


even  until  we  barter  their  ashes  for  gold  as  an  honour- 
able transaction. 

The  most  important  object  of  antiquity  that  has  been 
recently  discovered  by  excavations  at  Dali  is  the  statue  of 
Sargon,  king  of  Assyria,  707  B.C.,  to  whom  the  Cypriote 
kings  paid  tribute.  This  was  sent  to  the  Berlin  Museum 
by  Mr.  Hamilton  Lang,  and  is  described  in  his  interest- 
ing work  upon  Cyprus  during  the  term  of  several  years' 
consulship. 

The  ruins  of  ancient  cities  offer  no  attraction  to  the 
traveller  in  this  island,  as  nothing  is  to  be  seen  upon 
the  surface  except  disjointed  stones  and  a  few  fallen 
columns  of  the  commonest  description.  The  destruc- 
tion has  been  complete,  and  if  we  wish  to  make 
discoveries,  it  is  necessary  to  excavate  to  a  considerable 
depth  ;  but  as  all  such  explorations  are  prohibited,  the 
subject  remains  fruitless.  General  di  Cesnola,  whose 
work  upon  the  antiquities  of  Cyprus  must  remain 
unrivalled,  describes  the  tombs  as  from  forty  to  fifty- 
five  feet  beneath  the  present  surface,  and  even  those 
great  depths  had  not  secured  them  from  disturbance, 
as  many  that  he  opened  had  already  been  ransacked  by 
former  explorers. 

On  the  7th .  of  February  the  thermometer  at  eight 
A.M.  was  only  40°.  The  oxen  were  put  into  their 
yokes,  and  after  a  discussion  concerning  the  best  route 
to  Lefkosia,  it  was  agreed  that  Georgi  should  be  the 
responsible  guide,  as  he  was  a  native  of  the  country. 

When  travelling  on  horseback  through  the  district 
of  Messaria  there  is  no  difficulty  of  roads,  provided 
you  know  the  country  thoroughly,  as  you  may  canter, 
in  the  absence  of  enclosures,  in  any  direction  you  may 
please ;  but  the  Cypriotes  have  an  awkward  habit  of 
leading  their  watercourses  straight  through  any  route 


ITT] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  55 


that  may  exist  for  wheeled  conveyances,  and  you 
suddenly  arrive  at  a  deep  ditch  and  high  bank, 
which  block  the  thoroughfare.  Georgi  had  assured 
us  that  no  difficulty  would  delay  us  between  Dali  and 
the  high  road  from  Larnaca  to  Lefkosia,  which 
we  should  intersect  about  half-way  between  the  two 
termini.  Instead  of  this,  after  travelling  for  a  couple 
of  miles  along  a  good  hardened  track,  we  arrived  -at 
a  series  of  trenches  which  effectually  stopped  all 
progress.  Each  van  had  a  pickaxe  and  shovel^ 
therefore  we  all  set  to  work  in  rapid  relief  of  each 
other  to  level  the  obstructions,  and  by  this  hard 
exercise  the  thermometer  appeared  to  rise  quickly 
from  the  low  temperature  of  the  morning.  The 
oxen  were  good,  and  by  dint  of  our  united  exertions 
in  heaving  the  wheels  and  pushing  behind^  we  dragged 
the  vans  through  the  soft  ground  that  had  filled  the 
ditches,  and  then  slowly  travelled  across;  ploughed 
fields  and  alternate  plains  of  a  hard  surface  covered 
with  abominable  thistles. 

We  passed  on  our  left  a  large  farm  that  exhibited 
a  wonderful  contrast  to  the  general  batrreaaess  of  the 
country.  The  fields  were  green  with  young  wheat 
and  barley,  and  numerous  scikyeeahs  ox  cattle-wheels 
for  raising  water  supplied  the  rnean^  of  unfailing 
irrigation.  I  believe  this  ^property  belonged  to  Mr. 
Mattel,  and  there  could  be  uq  stronger  example  of 
the  power  that  should  'foe  developed  throughout  this 
island  to  render  it  ind<ependent  of  precarious  seasons. 
It  is  a  simple  que^stion  oJf  a.  first  outlay  that  is 
absolutely  necessary  to  ensure  Ae  crops.  Throughout 
the  barren  plain  of  Messaria  water  exists  in  unfailing 
quantity  within  a  few  yards  of  the  parched  surface — 
thus  at  the  same,  time  that  the  crops  are  perishing 


56  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


from  the  want  of  rain,  the  roots  are  actually  within 
a  few  feet  of  the  desired  supply.  The  cattle-wheels 
of  Cyprus  are  very  inferior  to  the  sakyeeah  of  Egypt, 
but  are  arranged  upon  a  similar  principle,  by  a  chain 
of  earthenware  pots  or  jars  upon  a  rope  and  wheel, 
which,  revolving  above  a  deep  cistern,  ascend  from  the 
depth  below,  and  deliver  the  water  into  a  trough  or 
reservoir  upon  the  surface.  From  the  general  reservoir 
small  watercourses  conduct  the  stream  to  any  spot 
desired.  This  is  the  most  ancient  system  of  artificial 
irrigation  by  machinery,  and  it  is  better  adapted  for 
the  requirements  of  this  country  than  any  expensive 
European  inventions.  As  I  shall  devote  a  chapter 
specially  to  the  all-important  question  of  irrigation, 
I  shall  postpone  further  remarks  upon  the  cattle-wheel ; 
but  the  farm  in  question  which  formed  a  solitary  green 
oasis  in  the  vast  expanse  of  withered  surface  was  a 
sufficient  example  of  the  necessity,  and  of  the  fruitful 
result  of  this  simple  and  inexpensive  method.  It  is  a 
mere  question  of  outlay,  and  the  government  must 
assist  the  cultivators  by  loans  for  the  special  erection 
of  water-wheels.     But  of  this  more  hereafter. 

At  about  six  miles  from  Dali  we  struck  the  road 
between  Larnaca  and  Lefkosia  (or  Nicosia).  The 
newly-established  mail-coach  with  four  horses  passed 
us,  with  only  one  passenger.  We  met  it  again  on  the 
following  day,  with  a  solitary  unit ;  and  it  appeared 
that  the  four  horses  on  many  occasions  had  no  other 
weight  behind  them  than  the  driver  and  the  letters. 
With  this  instance  of  inertia  before  their  eyes,  certain 
lunatics  (or  wise  contractors)  suggested  the  necessity 
of  a. railway  for  twenty-eight  miles  to  connect  the  two 
capitals  !  The  mail  had  an  ephemeral  existence,  and 
after  running  fruitlessly  to  and  fro  for  a  few  months. 


„J3  Route  to  Nicosia.  57 

it  withdrew  altogether,  leaving  an  abundant  space  in 
Cyprus  for  my  two  vans,  without  the  slightest  chance 
of  a  collision  upon  the  new  highway,  as  there  were 
no  other  carriages  on  the  roads,  excepting  the  few 
native  two-wheeled  carts. 

We  halted  five  miles  from  Lefkosia,  where  a  new 
stone  bridge  was  in  process  of  construction  and  was 
nearly  completed.  We  had  already  passed  a  long  and 
extremely  narrow  Turkish  bridge  across  the  river  about 
four  miles  in  our  rear.  By  pacing  I  made  the  new 
bridge  twenty-nine  feet,  the  same  width  as  the  road, 
and  I  could  not  help  thinking  that  a  much  less  ex- 
pensive commencement  would  have  been  sufficient  to 
meet  the  requirements  of  the  country.  In  Cyprus  the 
rainfall  is  generally  slight  and  the  earth  is  tenacious, 
and  in  dry  weather  exceedingly  hard  ;  if  half  the  width 
of  the  road  had  been  carefully  metalled  in  the  first 
instance,  a  great  expense  would  have  been  saved  at  a 
time  when  the  island  was  sadly  in  want  of  money  ;  the 
natural  surface  of  the  firm  soil  would  have  been  pre- 
ferred by  all  vehicles  except  during  rain,  when  they 
would  have  adopted  the  metalled  parallel  way.  It  is 
easy  to  criticise  after  the  event,  and  there  can  be  no 
doubt  that  upon  our  first  occupation  of  the  island  a  much 
greater  traffic  was  expected,  and  the  road  between  the 
two  capitals  was  arranged  accordingly.  We  halted  for 
the  night  at  the  new  stone  bridge,  which,  as  usual  in 
Cyprus,  spanned  a  channel  perfectly  devoid  of  water. 
On  the  following  morning  we  marched  to  Lefkosia, 
and  passing  to  the  left  of  the  walled  town,  we  reached 
the  newly-erected  Government  House,  about  a  mile 
and  a  half  distant,  where  we  received  a  kind  and 
hospitable  welcome  from  the  High  Commissioner, 
Sir  Garnet,  and  Lady  Wolseley. 


58  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


The  position  of  the  new  Government  House  was 
well  chosen.  The  character  of  the  dreary  plain  of 
Messaria  is  the  same  throughout ;  flat  table- topped 
hills  of  sedimentary  calcareous  limestone,  abounding 
with  fossil  shells,  represent  the  ancient  sea-bottom, 
which  has  been  upheaved.  The  surface  of  these 
table-heights  is  hard  for  a  depth  of  about  six  feet, 
forming  an  upper  stratum  of  rock  which  can  be  used 
for  building ;  beneath  this  are  marls  and  friable  cre- 
taceous stone,  which  during  rains  are  washed  away. 
The  continual  process  of  undermining  by  the  decay  of 
the  lower  strata  has  caused  periodical  disruption  of  the 
hard  upper  stratum,  which  has  fallen  off  in  huge  blocks 
and  rolled  down  the  rough  inclines  that  form  the  sides. 
As  the  water  during  heavy  rains  percolates  through 
the  crevices  of  the  upper  stratum,  it  dissolves  the  softer 
material  beneath,  and  oozing  through  the  steep  incli- 
nation, carries  large  quantities  in  solution  to  the  lower 
level  and  deposits  this  fertilising  marl  upon  the  plain 
below.  In  this  manner  the  low  ground  of  the  rich 
but  dreary  Messaria  has  been  formed  through  the 
decay  and  denudation  of  the  higher  levels,  and  the 
process  will  continue  until  the  present  table-topped 
hills  shall  be  entirely  washed  away.  The  stone  of  the 
upper  surface,  which  forms  a  hard  crust  to  the  friable 
strata  beneath,  is  in  many  places  merely  the  roof  of 
caverns  which  have  been  hollowed  out  by  the  action 
of  water  as  described. 

"The  Government  House  was  erected  upon  one  of 
these  flat-topped  hills  in  a  direct  line  about  1900  yards 
from  the  nearest  portion  of  Lefkosia.  It  was  a  wooden 
construction  forming  three  sides  of  a  quadrangle.  The 
quarters  for  the  military  staff  were  wooden  huts,  and 
the  line  of  heights  thus  occupied  could  not  fail  to  attract 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  59 


the  eye  of  a  soldier  as  a  splendid  strategical  position, 
completely  commanding  Lefkosia  and  the  surrounding 
country.  From  this  point  an  admirable  view  was  pre- 
sented upon  all  sides.  The  river  Pedias  (the  largest 
in  Cyprus),  when  it  possessed  water,  would  flow  for 
about  270°  of  a  circle  around  the  base  of  the  position, 
the  sides  of  the  hill  rising  abruptly  from  the  stream. 
The  dry  shingly  bed  was  about  120  yards  in  width, 
and  although  destitute  of  water  at  this  point,  sufficient 
was  obtained  some  miles  higher  up  the  river  to  irrigate 
a  portion  of  the  magnificent  plain  which  bordered 
either  side.  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  was  endeavouring 
to  put  a  new  face  on  the  treeless  surface,  and  had 
already  planted  several  acres  of  the  Eucalyptus  glo- 
bulus and  other  varieties  on  the  lower  ground,  while 
date-palms  of  full  growth  had  been  conveyed  bodily 
to  the  natural  terrace  around  the  Government  House 
and  carefully  transplanted  into  pits.  This  change  was 
a  considerable  relief  to  the  eye,  and  the  trees,  if  well 
supplied  with  water,  will  in  a  few  years  create  a  grove 
where  all  was  barrenness. 

The  view  from  each  portion  of  the  terrace  is  exceed- 
ingly interesting,  as  it  commands  a  panorama  for  a 
distance  of  nearly  thirty  miles.  On  the  north  is  the 
range  of  mountains,  about  twelve  miles  distant,  which 
form  the  backbone  of  Cyprus,  and  run  from  east  to 
west,  attaining  the  height  of  3400  feet  This  is  a 
peculiar  geological  feature  in  the  island,  as  it  is  the  only 
instance  of  compact  (or  Jurassic)  limestone.  Through 
my  powerful  astronomical  telescope  1  could  plainly 
distinguish  every  rock,  and  the  Castle  of  Buffavento 
upon  the  summit  of  the  perpendicular  crags  afforded 
an  interesting  object,  although  invisible  to  the  naked 
eye.    The  South  and  east  presented  a  miserable  aspect 


6o  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP 


in  the  brown  desert-like  plain  of  Messaria,  broken  by 
the  numerous  flat-topped  hills  to  which  I  have  already 
alluded.  On  the  west  the  important  mountain-range 
which  includes  Troodos  bounded  the  view  by  the 
snow-capped  heights  of  the  ancient  Mount  Olympus, 
between  which  several  chains  of  lower  hills  formed  a 
dark  base  of  plutonic  rocks,  which  contrasted  with  the 
painful  glare  of  the  immediate  foreground.  The 
highest  points  of  this  range  are  Troodos,  6590  feet, 
Adelphe,  5380  feet,  Makhera,  4730  feet.  These  are 
the  measurements  as  they  appear  upon  the  maps  ;  but 
the  recent  survey  by  the  Royal  Engineers  has  reduced 
the  height  of  Troodos  by  250  feet.  A  green  patch  at 
the  foot  of  the  Carpas  range  denoted  the  position  of 
Kythrea,  about  twelve  miles  distant  east,  watered  by 
the  extraordinary  spring  which  has  rendered  it  famous 
both  in  ancient  and  modern  times  ;  and  almost  at  our 
feet,  or  a  mile  in  a  direct  line,  the  fortified  capital, 
Lefkosia,  presented  the  usual  picturesque  appearance 
of  a  Turkish  town.  A  combination  of  date-palms, 
green  orange-gardens,  minarets,  mosques,  houses  quaint 
in  their  irregularity  and  colouring,  and  the  grand  old 
Venetian  Cathedral,  St.  Sophia,  towering  above  all 
other  buildings,  were  enclosed  within  the  high  masonry 
walls  and  bastions,  comprising  a  circuit  of  three  statute 
miles. 

The  position  of  Lefkosia  has  been  badly  chosen,  as 
it  lies  in  the  flat,  and  must  always  have  been  exposed 
to  a  plunging  fire  from  an  enemy  posted  upon  the 
heights.  It  was  fortified  in  the  time  of  Constantine 
the  Great,  but  in  1570  the  Venetians  demolished  the 
old  works  and  constructed  the  present  elaborate  forti- 
fications. Although  the  walls  are  in  several  places 
crumbling  into  ruins,  they  are  still  imposing  in  appear- 


HI  J  Route  to  Nicosia.  6i 

ance,  and  present  a  clean  front  of  masonry  flanked  by 
eleven  bastions,  and  entered  by  three  gates,  those  of 
Baffo,  Famagousta,  and  Kyrenia.  The  original  ditch 
can  be  traced  in  various  places,  but  the  counterscarp 
and  glacis  have  been  destroyed ;  therefore  the  soil  has 
washed  in  during  the  rainy  seasons,  and  to  an  unpractised 
eye  has  obliterated  all  traces  of  the  former  important 
work.  On  the  other  hand,  the  disappearance  of  the 
glacis  renders  the  height  of  the  walls  still  more  impos- 
ing, as  they  rise  for  thirty  or  forty  feet  abruptly  from 
the  level  base,  and  at  a  distance  maintain  the  appear- 
ance of  good  condition. 

It  is  difficult  to  imagine  the  reason  which  induced 
the  Venetians  to  reproduce  Lefkosia  after  they  had 
demolished  the  original  fortifications ;  but  it  is  probable 
that  they  had  already  erected  the  cathedral  before  the 
expected  Turkish  invasion  rendered  the  improved 
defences  necessary.  Although  in  the  early  days  of 
artillery  shell-fire  was  unknown,  both  the  Turks  and 
Venetians  possessed  guns  of  heavy  calibre  far  exceeding 
any  that  were  used  in  Great  Britain  until  recent  years. 
The  marble  shot  which  are  still  to  be  seen  in  Fama- 
gousta are  the  same  which  served  in  the  defence  of 
that  fortress  in  1 5  7 1 .  These  are  nearly  eleven  inches 
in  diameter,  while  in  the  fort  of  Kyrenia  the  stone 
shot  are  still  existing,  nineteen  inches  in  diameter, 
composed  of  an  exceedingly  hard  and  heavy  meta- 
morphic  rock.  The  long  bronze  guns  which  threw 
the  smaller  stone  shot  of  from  six  to  eleven  inches, 
would  command  a  far  more  extensive  range  than  the 
interval  of  the  heights  which  dominate  Lefkosia  ;  and 
even  should  battering  have  been  ineffective  at  that  dis- 
tance against  walls  of  masonry,  the  plunging  fire  would 
have  destroyed  the  town  and  rendered  it  untenable. 


62  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Traces  are  still  visible  of  the  Turkish  approaches 
when  the  town  was  successfully  carried  by  storm  on  the 
9th  of  September,  1570,  after  a  siege  of  only  forty-five 
days.  The  short  duration  of  the  attack  compared  to 
the  length  of  time  required  in  the  siege  of  Famagousta, 
which  at  length  succumbed  to  famine,  and  not  to  direct 
assaults,  is  a  proof  of  the  faulty  strategical  position  of 
the  fortress  of  Lefkosia. 

Most  Turkish  towns  are  supplied  with  water  by 
aqueducts  from  a  considerable  distance,  which  would 
naturally  be  cut  by  an  enemy  as  the  first  operation. 
The  water  is  brought  to  Lefkosia  from  the  hills  at 
some  miles'  distance,  and  is  of  excellent  quality ;  but 
the  wells  of  the  town  must  be  contaminated  by  sewage, 
as  there  is  no  means  of  effective  drainage  upon  the 
dead  level  of  the  town,  unless  the  original  ditch  is 
turned  into  a  pestilential  cesspool.  The  filth  of  cen- 
turies must  have  been  imbibed  by  the  soil,  and  during 
the  process  of  infiltration  must  in  successive  rainy 
seasons  have  found  its  way  to  the  wells.  In  case  of 
invasion,  Lefkosia  could  never  have  resisted  a  prolonged 
siege,  as  in  the  absence  of  the  aqueduct  a  garrison 
would  quickly  have  succumbe:d  to  disease  when  depen- 
dent for  a  water-supply  upon  the  wells  alone.  When 
the  Turks  captured  the  city  by  assault,  the  population 
far  exceeded  that  of  the  present  time  (16,000),  and  the 
greater  portion  were  massacred  during  several  days  of 
sack  and  pillage.  Some  thousands  of  girls  and  boys 
were  transported  to  Constantinople.  Richard  L  of 
England  occupied  Lefkosia  without  resistance,  after 
his  victory  over  Isaac  Comnenus. 

Although  experienced  in  the  illusion  of  Turkish 
towns,  I  was  more  than  disappointed  when  I  visited 
the   interior   of   Lefkosia.     The  new  Chief  Commis- 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia.  63 


sioner,  Colonel  Biddulph,  R.A.,  C.B.,  had  already 
improved  certain  streets,  and  the  eye  was  immediately 
attracted  to  points  which  bore  the  unmistakable  stamp 
of  a  British  occupation ;  but  nothing  can  be  eflFected 
in  the  arrangement  of  such  a  town  without  an  unlimited 
purse  and  a  despotic  power.  It  is  almost  as  hopeless 
as  London  in  the  incongruity  of  architecture,  and  the 
individual  indulgence  of  independent  taste,  which 
absolutely  dismays  a  stranger.  The  beautiful  Gothic 
cathedral  of  the  Venetians  has  been  converted  into 
a  mosque  by  the  conquerors,  and  two  exceedingly 
lofty  and  thin  minarets  have  added  an  absurd  embel- 
lishment, resembling  two  gigantic  candles  capped  by 
extinguishers,  as  though  the  altar-tapers  had  been 
taken  for  the  models.  The  neighbouring  church  of 
St.  Nicholas  has  been  converted  into  a  granary.  In 
all  Turkish  towns  the  bazaars  are  the  most  interesting 
portion,  as  they  illustrate  the  commercial  and  agri- 
cultural industries  of  the  country.  Those  of  Lefkosia 
formed  a  labyrinth  of  the  usual  narrow  streets,  and 
resembled  each  other  so  closely  that  it  was  difficult  to 
find  the  way.  The  preparation  of  leather  from  the 
first  process  of  tanning  is  exhibited  on  an  extensive 
scale,  which  does  not  add  to  the  natural  sweetness  of 
the  air.  Native  manufactures  for  which  the  town  is 
celebrated,  that  are  more  agreeable,  may  be  purchased 
at  a  moderate  price  in  the  shape  of  silk  stufis ;  and  a 
variety  of  mule-harness,  pack-saddles,  and  the  capacious 
double  bags  of  hair  and  wool  that,  slung  across  the 
animal,  are  almost  indispensable  to  the  traveller. 
There  were  a  few  shops  devoted  to  European  articles 
which  were  hardly  adapted  to  the  country,  and  were 
expensive  in  a  ridiculous  degree.  The  narrow  streets 
were  muddy  from  the  recent  rain,  and  the  temperature 


64  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

was  at  55^  but  the  inhabitants  were  sitting  at  the 
various  cafes  in  the  open  air  smoking  and  drinking 
their  steaming  coffee  as  though  in  summer.  From 
natural  politeness  they  invariably  rose  as  we  passed 
by,  and  at  one  place  I  was  immediately  furnished  with 
a  string  that  I  might  measure  a  large  vine-stem  which 
during  summer  must  afford  a  dense  shade.  I  found 
the  main  stem  of  this  unusual  specimen  was  twenty- 
two  inches  in  circumference. 

The  only  agreeable  walk  in  Lef kosia  is  the  circuit 
of  the  ramparts,  as  the  high  elevation  admits  of  fresh 
air  and  an  extensive  view.  From  this  we  looked 
down  upon  numerous  gardens  well  irrigated  by  the 
surplus  water  of  the  aqueduct,  and  the  remarkably 
healthy  orange  and  lemon  trees  were  crowded  with 
their  loads  of  ripe  fruit.  There  are  many  good  and 
roomy  houses  in  the  town,  each  furnished  with  a 
considerable  garden,  but  as  they  are  surrounded  with 
high  walls,  it  is  difficult  to  form  an  opinion  of  their 
actual  dimensions.  The  house  occupied  by  the  Chief 
Commissioner  is  large  and  well  constructed,  the 
staircase  and  landing  airy  and  capacious,  with  an 
entrance-hall  open  at  the  extreme  end  and  well 
arranged  for  the  burning  climate  during  summer.  All 
houses  are  paved  with  slabs  of  gypsum,  which  abound 
in  many  parts  of  the  island,  and  are  sold  at  a  remark- 
ably low  price,  as  the  blocks  laminate,  and  are  divided 
into  sheets  of  the  required  thickness  with  a  minimum 

of  labour. 

The  Turkish  Pacha  (Rifat)  still  remained  at 
Lefkosia,  as  he  was  responsible  for  the  transfer  of 
various  movable  property  to  Constantinople.  The 
interesting  Venetian  cannon  of  bronze  that  were 
utterly    valueless     as     modern     weapons    had    been 


III.] 


Route  to  Nicosia. 


65 


conveyed  away  both  from  Lefkosia  and  Famagousta. 
One  of  these  was  a  double  octagon,  or  sixteen-sided, 
and  would  have  been  a  valuable  specimen  in  the 
collection  at  the  Tower  of  London.  Many  of  the 
curious  old  Venetian  cannon  had  recently  been  burst 
into  fragments  with  dynamite,  to  save  the  trouble  of 
moving  the  heavy  guns  entire. 

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  prime  object  in 
selecting  a  central  position  for  the  capital  of  Cyprus 
was  a  regard  for  safety  from  any  sudden  attack ;  but 
upon  any  other  grounds  I  cannot  conceive  a  greater 
absurdity.  The  capital  should  be  Limasol,  which  will 
become  the  Liverpool  of  Cyprus.  Lefkosia  is  com- 
pletely out  of  the  commercial  route  ;  it  is  valueless  as 
a  military  position,  and  it  offers  no  climatic  advantage, 
but,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  frightfully  hot  in  the  summer 
months,  and  is  secluded  from  the  more  active  portions 
of  the  island.  It  ts,  simply  because  it  was;  but  it 
should  remain  as  a  vestige  of  the  past,  and  no  longer 
represent  the  capital.^ 

There  is  no  position  throughout  the  plain  of 
Messaria  adapted  for  a  permanent  government  estab- 
lishment   as    head-quarters.      The   depressing    effect 

I  The  census  of  Nicosia,  taken  on  31st  January,  1879,  represents 
the  population  as  follows  : — 


No.  of 
Houses. 

Sexes. 

Reugioxs. 

Remarks. 

Males. 

Females. 

i 

13 
H 

28 

e. 

1 
121 

^ 

166 

i 

3 

Above 
»5- 

Under 
15. 

Above 
37,18 

Under 
X4- 

2,463 

3.773 

1,900 

1,806 

5,251 

S.628 

11,197 

".197 

66  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  Ill 


of  that  horrible  landscape,  embracing  the  extensive  area 
from  Trichomo  and  Famagousta  to  Larnaca,  Lefkosia, 
and  Morphu,  is  most  demoralising,  and  few  Europeans 
would  be  able  to  resist  the  deleterious  climate  of 
summer,  and  the  general  heart-sinking  that  results  in 
a  nervous  despondency  when  the  dreary  and  treeless 
plain  is  ever  present  to  the  view.  There  is  no  reason 
why  officials  should  be  condemned  to  the  purgatory 
of  such  a  station  when  Cyprus  possesses  superior 
positions  where  the  great  business  of  the  future  will  be 
conducted.  The  new  road  already  completed  from 
Larnaca  to  Lefkosia  must  be  carried  on  to  Morphu, 
and  thus  connect  the  north  and  south  extremities  of 
the  plain ;  Kyrenia,  sixteen  miles  distant,  must  be 
connected  with  Lefkosia ;  branches  must  then  be 
extended  to  Kythrea  and  to  Famagousta;  and  sub- 
sequently, from  the  latter  town  a  direct  road  must  be 
continued  parallel  with  the  south  coast  to  Larnaca. 
Such  roads  may  be  constructed  for  about  ;^350  per 
mile  at  the  low  rate  of  labour  in  Cyprus,  considering 
the  presence  of  stone  throughout  the  district,  and 
their  completion  will  open  the  entire  plain  of  Messaria 
to  wheeled  communication  with  four  ports,  to  north 
and  south. 


CHAPTER    IV. 


THE    MESSARIA. 


Having  passed  a  week  with  our  kind  hosts,  Sir  Garnet 
and  Lady  Wolseley,  at  Government  House,  which 
formed  a  most  agreeable  contrast  to  the  friendless 
life  that  we  had  been  leading,  the  vans  once  more 
started  en  route  for  Kythrea,  Famagousta,  and  the 
Carpas  district.  I  had  hired  a  good,  sure-footed  pony 
for  my  wife  and  a  powerful  mule  for  myself,  and, 
having  given  the  vans  a  start  of  several  hours,  we 
followed  in  the  afternoon. 

The  treeless  expanse  of  the  Messaria  produces 
nothing  but  cereals  and  cotton  ;  teams  of  oxen  were 
at  work  in  all  directions  ploughing,  and  otherwise 
preparing  the  thistle-covered  surface,  and  the  atmo- 
sphere was  so  delusively  clear  that  Kythrea,  twelve 
miles  distant,  appeared  close  to  us.  Upon  these 
boundless  flats  an  object  may  be  seen  as  distinctly 
as  though  upon  the  water,  and  we  soon  descried  in 
the  far  distance  a  dark  spot,  which  the  binocular  glass, 
if  at  sea,  would  have  pronounced  to  be  the  stern  of  a 
vessel  that  had  lost  her  masts,  keeping  the  same  course 
as  ourselves ;  this  was  the  gipsy-van,  which  should 
have  already  arrived  at  Kythrea,  where  I  had  expected 
to  have  found  the  camp  arranged,  dinner  cooked,  and 

F    2 


68  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


everything  ready  for  our  reception.  Something  had 
happened,  as  the  other  van  was  not  in  sight. 

It  was  impossible  to  dignify  the  route  by  the  name 
of  a  "  road/*  as  it  presented  an  uneven  surface  and 
occasionally  branched  into  several  independent  tracks, 
which  re-united  after  an  eccentric  course  of  a  few 
hundred  yards  ;  these  were  caused  by  droves  of  mules 
which  in  wet  weather  had  endeavoured  to  select  a 
better  line  than  the  deeply-trodden  mud  in  the  central 
road.  Fortunately  the  surface  was  now  hard,  and  we 
cantered  on,  fully  expecting  some  disaster  to  at  least 
one  of  our  vehicles.  Upon  our  arrival  we  found  a 
crowd  of  people  yelling  and  shouting  their  utmost, 
while  they  were  engaged  in  company  with  four  oxen 
harnessed  in  dragging  and  pushing  the  blue  van  up  a 
new  road  which  they  had  scarped  out  of  the  preci- 
pitous bank  of  a  river  about  forty  feet  deep ;  this 
accounted  for  only  one  van  being  in  sight,  as  the 
other  was  in  the  dry  bed  of  the  river.  These  good 
people  had  been  working  for  several  hours  in  making 
a  road  where  none  existed ;  and  assured  me  that  the 
large  bridge  over  the  Pedias  was  unsafe  for  so  great 
a  weight,  and  therefore  it  was  advisable  to  cross  at 
the  present  spot.  The  banks  consisted  of  the  alluvium 
of  ages  free  from  stones,  therefore  it  was  easy  to  cut 
an  incline ;  but  as  many  tons  of  earth  had  been  removed, 
the  operation  had  required  much  labour,  and  many 
hands  had  collected  from  the  adjacent  villages  upon 
seeing  the  dilemma. 

The  blue  van  was  in  the  middle  of  the  crowd  ;  the 
oxen  answered  to  the  inspiriting  shouts,  and  more 
especially  to  the  ceaseless  pricks  of  the  driving  sticks, 
and  presently  it  was  dragged  safely  to  the  level  of  the 
opposite   bank.     A   few  alterations  in  the  new  road 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  69 


were  necessary  for  the  larger  gipsy-van,  and  taking 
the  drag-shoe  off  the  blue  van,  we  were  thus  enabled 
to  secure  both  the  hind-wheels  for  the  steep  descent. 
By  careful  management,  after  one  or  two  narrow 
escapes  from  capsising,  we  succeeded  in  landing  the 
Noah's  Ark  safely  by  its  fellow,  amidst  the  cheers  of 
the  good-natured  crowd. 

The  delay  had  been  great,  and  the  evening  was 
drawing  near  :  we  were  about  seven  miles  from  the 
upper  portion  of  Kythrea,  where  we  had  proposed 
to  camp,  and  the  route  was  partly  across  country, 
to  avoid  layers  of  natural  rock  which  in  successive 
ridges  made  it  impossible  for  the  vans  to  keep  the 
track.  Several  deep  watercourses  intervened,  which 
required  the  spade  and  pickaxe,  and  it  was  quite 
dark  when  we  were  obliged  to  halt  about  a  mile 
from  Kythrea. 

On  the  following  morning  Mr.  Kitchener,  Lieutenant 
of  the  Royal  Engineers,  called  at  our  camp,  and  was 
kind  enough  to  pilot  us  to  the  celebrated  springs  about 
three  miles  above  the  village.  This  able  and  energetic 
officer  was  engaged,  together  with  Mr.  Hippersly  of 
the  same  corps,  in  making  the  trigonometrical  survey 
of  the  island,  and  they  were  quartered  in  a  comfortable 
house  on  the  outskirts  of  the  town.  With  this  excellent 
guide,  who  could  explain  every  inch  of  the  surrounding 
country,  we  started  upon  a  most  interesting  ride. 
The  entire  neighbourhood  was  green  with  abundant 
crops  of  cereals,  some  of  which  at  this  early  season 
were  eighteen  inches  high.  The  effect  of  irrigation 
could  be  traced  for  several  miles  into  the  plain  and 
along  the  base  of  the  mountain  range,  until  by  de- 
grees the  green  became  more  faint,  and  gradually  but 
surely   merged  into  the   dead   brown  which  denoted 


70  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[  CHAP. 


barrenness,    where    the    water-power    was    expended 
by  absorption. 

It  was  impossible  to  form  any  idea  of  the  extent  of 
Kythrea  from  the  outside  view.  A  succession  of  large 
villages  with  fields  highly  cultivated  covered  the  surface 
at  the  base  of  the  mountains,  but  the  true  Kythrea 
was  partially  concealed  by  the  curious  ravine  through 
which  the  water  of  the  springs  is  conducted  by  aque- 
ducts until  it  reaches  the  lower  ground.  For  a  distance 
of  three  miles  this  ravine  is  occupied  by  houses  and 
gardens,  all  of  which  are  supplied  by  the  stream,  which 
turns  thirty-two  water-mills  in  its  course.  The  water- 
wheels  in  Cyprus  are  horizontal  turbines,  and  I  have 
only  met  with  one  over-shot  wheel  in  the  island ;  this 
is  on  the  estate  of  M.  Mattei  at  Kuklia, 

The  range  of  mountains  exactly  above  the  village 
exhibits  a  peculiar  example  of  the  effect  of  water-wash 
for  about  two  hundred  feet  from  the  base.  From  the 
heights  at  Government  House,  twelve  miles  distant,  I 
had  observed  through  the  telescope  a  curious  succession 
of  conical  heaps  resembling  volcanic  mounds  of  hard- 
ened mud ;  these  rose  one  above  the  other  along 
the  base  of  the  hills  like  miniature  mountain-ranges. 
Even  when  near  Kythrea  I  could  not  understand  the 
formation,  until  we  found  ourselves  riding  through  the 
steep  ravine  which  holds  the  watercourse  and  ascend- 
ing by  a  narrow  path  among  the  countless  hills  that  I 
have  described.  Both  sides  of  the  gorge,  and  also 
the  deep  bottom,  are  occupied  by  houses  with  fruitful 
gardens,  rich  in  mulberry,  orange,  lemon,  apricots, 
olives,  forming  groves  of  trees  that  in  summer  must 
be  delightful.  Sometimes  after  clambering  up  steep 
and  stony  paths  which  had  originally  been  paved  we 
entered  into  villages,  the  roofs  of  the  houses  below  us 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  71 


upon  our  left,  and  the  doors  of  others  upon  our  right, 
so  close  to  the  narrow  path  as  scarcely  to  admit  the 
passage  of  a  loaded  mule.  The  water  rushed  along  the 
bottom  in  a  rapid  stream,  plunging  from  the  adit  below 
one  turbine  to  a  temporary  freedom  in  a  natural  channel, 
from  which  it  was  quickly  captured  and  led  into  an 
aqueduct  of  masonry  to  another  mill  at  a  lower  level. 
All  the  inhabitants  had  turned  out  to  see  an  English 
lady,  and  the  usual  welcome  was  exhibited  by  sprinkling 
us  with  rose  and  orange-flower  water  as  we  passed  ; 
the  omnipresent  dogs  yelled  and  barked  with  their 
usual  threatening  demonstrations  at  the  heels  of  our 
animals,  and  some  from  the  low  roofs  of  the  houses  were 
unpleasantly  close  to  our  heads.  We  were  now  among 
the  conical  mounds,  along  the  steep  sides  of  which  a 
path  of  about  twelve  inches  width  appeared  to  invite 
destruction,  as  the  loose  crumbling  material  rolled  down 
the  deep  incline  beneath  the  hoofs  of  the  sure-footed 
horses  and  mules.  These  creatures  had  a  disagreeable 
habit  of  choosing  the  extreme  edge  of  the  narrow 
ledge,  instead  of  hugging  the  safer  side ;  and  although 
no  great  precipice  existed,  the  fall  of  thirty  feet  into 
the  rocky  stream  below  would  have  been  quite  as 
effectual  as  a  greater  depth  in  breaking  necks  and 
limbs.  We  again  entered  a  village,  where  a  large 
plane-tree  formed  the  centre  of  a  small  open  space, 
faced  on  either  side  by  a  cafe;  the  situation  being 
attractive  during  summer  from  the  dense  shade  afforded 
by  the  spreading  branches.  There  were  many  people 
sitting  in  the  open  shed,  who  as  usual  rose  and  made 
their  salutations  as  we  passed.  The  path  became 
worse  as  we  proceeded,  and  we  at  length  emerged 
from  the  long  string  of  contracted  villages  and  skirted 
the  precipitous  sides  of  the  ravine,  which  formed  one 


i 


72  Cyprus  in  1879. 


CHAP. 


of  the  innumerable  gorges  between  the  conical  mounds 
of  marls  and  alluvium  that  had  been  washed  from  a 
higher  level  and  worn  into  heaps  by  the  action  of 
rain  upon  the  unstable  surface. 

About  a  mile  beyond  all  villages  we  skirted  the 
stream  along  a  steep  bank,  from  which  point  we  looked 
down  upon  the  roofs  of  houses  more  than  a  hundred 
feet  below,  and  we  at  length  halted  and  dismounted  at 
a  rocky  termination  of  the  gorge,  from  whence  issued 
suddenly  the  celebrated  spring  of  Kythrea. 

The  mountains  rose  abruptly  upon  either  side,  and 
a  dry  ravine  above  the  rocks  upon  which  we  stood 
exhibited  the  natural  channel  by  which  in  heavy  rains 
the  surface-water  would  be  conducted  to  the  lower 
stream-bed.  A  rough  arch  of  masonry  and  a  tunnel  in 
the  rock  for  about  forty  feet  formed  the  embouchure, 
from  which  the  water  issued  into  a  carefully  constructed 
stone  aqueduct,  which  led  directly  to  the  first  mill  of  the 
Kythrea  series,  about  a  hundred  and  twenty  yards  dis- 
tant. The  temperature  was  considerably  warmer  than 
the  air,  but  I  had  no  thermometer  to  mark  the  difference. 

The  aqueduct  would  have  carried  at  least  one-third 
more  than  the  present  volume,  which  was  about  twenty- 
six  inches  deep,  and  three  feet  in  width.  The  water 
was  beautifully  clear  and  the  current  rapid,  but  I  had 
no  means  of  measuring  the  velocity. 

The  stone-work  of  the  aqueduct,  always  moist  from 
the  percolation,  must  form  a  charming  exhibition  of 
maidenhair  ferns  during  summer-time,  as  the  crevices 
were  all  occupied  by  plants,  whose  leaves,  even  at  this 
season  (February),  were  several  inches  in  length. 

We  strolled  up  the  dry  ravine  above  the  spring,  and 
ascended  the  hill  to  an  extensive  plateau,  upon  which 
grew  two  or  three  caroub-trees  ;    here  was  a  sudden 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  73 


change  ;  the  soil  was  red,  and  we  entered  the  compact 
grey  limestone  (Jurassic)  which  forms  the  Carpas  range. 
On  the  extreme  verge  of  the  plateau  of  red  soil  we  had 
an  admirable  example  of  the  formation  of  the  conical 
mounds  of  earth,  two  or  three  of  which  already- 
existed,  while  others  were  in  process  of  development 
from  the  melting-away  of  the  soil  during  heavy  rains. 
As  the  surface  dissolved  under  the  action  of  rainfall, 
it  flowed  down  the  steep  inclinations,  until  a  base  was 
formed,  at  the  expense  of  the  upper  area ;  by  degrees 
gullies  were  created  in  the  rear,  and  these  would  rapidly 
become  deeper  under  the  action  of  running  water,  until 
they  reached  the  lower  level  of  the  base.  A  circle  thus 
formed,  an  apex  would  be  the  natural  result  of  the 
denudation  and  decay  of  the  upper  surface  which  would 
produce  a  cone.  A  sudden  shower  compelled  us  to 
take  refuge  beneath  a  caroub-tree  whose  dense  foliage 
saved  us  from  a  thorough  soaking.  The  ground  having 
become  slippery,  we  returned  upon  our  narrow  and 
soapy  route  with  some  caution,  but  the  careful  animals 
who  were  well  accustomed  to  these  dangerous  paths 
carried  us  safely  to  our  camp. 

It  is  extraordinary  that  the  water-power  of  Cyprus  has 
of  late  years  been  so  neglected  by  the  authorities,  as  the 
island  must  from  ancient  times  have  mainly  depended 
upon  its  springs  in  the  absence  of  dependable  seasons. 
Kythrea  is  an  example  of  the  importance  that  was 
attached  to  a  stream  of  running  water,  as  the  town  was 
established  by  the  Athenians,  and  in  former  ages  an 
aqueduct  of  masonry  extended  for  twenty-five  miles  to 
Salamis ;  in  the  neighbourhood  of  which  ruins  of  the 
old  work  are  still  existing.  If  the  seasons  of  Cyprus 
have  undergone  a  change  since  the  forests  have  been 
destroyed,   I  can  see  no  reason  for  the  innumerable 


74  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[  CHAP. 


vestiges  of  ancient  water-works  throughout  the  country. 
Wherever  an  important  spring  existed,  there  was  a 
settlement  of  corresponding  extent  and  value,  which 
suggests  that  the  rainfall  was  even  then  as  uncertain  as 
at  the  present  day.  Every  spring  became  a  centre 
of  attraction.  The  ruins  of  the  ancient  Kythrea  have 
been  partially  excavated  by  the  indefatigable  General  di 
Cesnola,  but  with  unimportant  results,  as  the  ground 
is  under  artificial  irrigation,  and  is  in  the  highest 
cultivation,  therefore  it  cannot  be  disturbed. 

The  chief  industry  of  modern  times  which  adds  to 
the  importance  of  Kythrea,  is  the  production  of  silk, 
from  the  great  abundance  of  mulberry-trees  which 
supply  the  necessary  food  for  the  silkworms  ;  but  it  has 
suffered  to  a  considerable  degree,  in  common  with  most 
silk-growing  districts  in  Cyprus,  by  the  want  of  foresight 
of  the  producers  ;  these  people  have  within  the  last  few 
years  sold  the  seed  in  such  extravagant  quantities  to 
the  traders  of  Beyrout  as  to  leave  the  island  with  a 
short  supply.  The  result  of  this  sacrifice  for  the  sake 
of  ready  money  is  a  serious  reduction  in  the  general 
produce,  and  in  many  portions  of  the  island  the  mul- 
berry-trees are  flourishing  without  a  silkworm  to  feed 
upon  them.  The  thirty-two  flour-mills  of  Kythrea  are 
worked  by  a  fall  of  400  feet  between  the  head-water  of 
the  spring  to  the  base  of  the  lowest  mill  at  the  foot  of 
the  mountains.  It  appeared  to  me  that  much  water  is 
wasted  by  an  absence  of  scientific  control.  A  series  of 
reservoirs  would  store  the  excess  during  the  hours  when 
the  mills  are  idle  (similar  to  the  mill-ponds  in  England), 
but  as  there  is  no  municipal  law  upon  this  important 
subject,  the  all-important  stream  is  much  neglected. 
There  is  a  general  demand  forgrinding-power  through- 
out Cyprus  ;  the  corn  is  brought  from  great  distances  to 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  75 


the  mills  of  Kythrea  at  a  considerable  expense  of 
transport ;  I  have  met  droves  of  mules  laden  with 
wheat  and  barley  on  their  way  from  Larnaca,  to  which 
distant  spot  they  would  again  return  when  their  loads 
should  have  been  reduced  to  flour.  In  the  face  of  this 
difficulty  a  general  want  of  energy  and  of  the  neces- 
sary capital  is  exhibited  by  the  total  neglect  of  wind- 
power,  in  a  country  where  a  steady  breeze  is  the  rule, 
with  few  exceptions.  Throughout  the  great  plain  of 
Messaria  windmills  would  be  invaluable,  both  for 
grinding  purposes  and  for  raising  water ;  nothing 
would  be  more  simple  than  the  combination  of  the  wind- 
vane  with  the  cattle-pump  ;  but  this  great  and  almost 
omnipresent  power  is  absolutely  ignored. 

On  our  return  to  camp  in  the  evening,  I  resolved 
to  have  a  quiet  day  with  my  dogs  on  the  following 
morning,  when  I  could  stroll  at  my  leisure  over  the 
mountains,  and  enjoy  myself  thoroughly  according  to 
my  own  tastes,  sometimes  obtaining  a  shot  at  game, 
and  observing  every  object  in  nature. 

It  was  15th  February,  and  with  a  native  guide  and 
interpreter  who  spoke  Arabic,  which  was  my  medium 
of  dialogue,  I  started  to  cross  the  mountain-range  upon 
the  east  of  the  well-known  five-knuckled-top  named 
**  Pentadactylon.''  At  the  expense  of  repetition  I 
cannot  help  extracting  from  my  diary  the  exact  words 
of  description  rough  from  the  first  impulse  :  "  The  base 
of  this  range  is  an  extraordinary  example  of  the  action 
of  rainfall  in  melting  and  washing  down  into  conical 
mounds  several  hundred  feet  high,  what  was  originally 
a  high  level  of  continuous  but  alternating  strata  of 
marls  and  alluvium  that  had  descended  from  the 
higher  mountains.  These  vast  masses  are  in  a  chaotic 
confusion   of   separate    heaps,   which    at    a    distance 


76  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


resemble  volcanic  cones.  We  rode  up  precipitous  paths 
edging  upon  deep  chasms  between  these  conical  hills, 
and  emerged  upon  metamorphous  rocks  and  shale 
mingled  in  curious  irregularity.  The  strata  of  shale 
were  in  some  instances  nearly  vertical,  proving  the 
disturbance  that  had  been  occasioned  by  a  subsequent 
upheaval.  About  200  feet  above  this  formation  we 
entered  upon  the  dark  grey  Jurassic  limestone,  and  the 
soil  became  a  rich  red  like  that  of  South  Devon.  The 
rock  scenery  was  very  imposing  as  we  increased  our 
altitude  and  arrived  upon  plateaux  of  considerable 
extent.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  these  natural 
terrace-like  surfaces  and  various  hollows  accumulate 
the  rainfall  of  a  great  area,  and  that  some  vast 
subterranean  caverns  in  the  limestone  form  natural 
reservoirs,  which  supply  the  celebrated  springs  of 
Kythrea  throughout  the  year.'* 

I  believe  these  few  words  contain  the  real  secret  of 
the  springs,  which  have  been,  and  still  are,  considered 
to  have  a  mysterious  origin.  Some  people  indulge 
in  the  theory  that  the  water  is  forced  by  hydraulic 
pressure  at  the  superior  altitude  of  Caramania  in  Asia 
Minor,  and  passing  by  a  subterranean  conduit  far 
beneath  the  bottom  of  the  intervening  channel,  it  as- 
cends at  the  peculiar  rock-mouth  of  Kythrea.  This  is 
simple  nonsense,  and  can  only  be  accepted  by  those 
who  adore  the  unreal,  instead  of  the  guide,  "  common- 
sense.'*  The  actual  volume  of  the  outflow  at  Kythrea 
has  never  been  calculated,  although  the  problem  is 
most  simple  ;  but  a  cursory  examination  is  sufficient 
to  explain  the  origin  of  the  supply  which  a  certain 
superficial  mountain  area  collects  and  stores  during 
the  rainy  seasons  :  to  yield  gradually  through  some 
small  aperture  or  leak  in  a  grand  subterranean  reservoir. 


IV.] 


The  Messaria,  *]^ 


In  all  countries  where  water  is  scarce,  unfailing  springs 
are  objects  of  veneration,  and  are  clothed  not  only 
with  undying  verdure,  but  with  a  continuous  growth 
of  legends  :  from  the  day  when  Moses  smote  the  rock 
in  the  wilderness,  and  the  stream  gushed  forth  to  the 
thirsty  Israelites,  to  the  present  hour,  water,  which  is 
man's  first  necessity,  will  in  drought-smitten  countries 
be  hailed  with  more  than  usual  reverence.  The 
devout  Mussulman  sinks  a  well  and  erects  a  fountain 
for  the  public  good,  and  his  friends  bury  his  body  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  his  last  act, 

"  Rest,  weary  pilgrim,  rest  and  pray 
For  the  kind  soul  of  Sybil  Grey, 

Who  built  this  Cross  and  Well." 

Christian  and  Mahommedan,  and  all  creeds  and  races, 
men  and  animals,  yield  unanimously  to  the  great  want, 
which  in  a  thirsty  land  alone  will  bring  the  lion  and 
the  lamb  to  drink  in  the  same  stream.  I  have  myself 
seen  in  moonlight,  animals  of  various  and  conflicting 
natures  revelling  in  the  rest  of  nature's  armistice, 
drinking  in  crowds  at  the  solitary  pool ;  the  only 
source  of  water  in  the  desert. 

The  Cypriotes  in  their  natural  love  of  the  marvellous 
insist-  upon  the  mystery  attached  to  the  Kythrea 
springs,  but  they  attach  no  importance  to  the  extensive 
subterranean  water-stores  of  the  Messaria  plain,  simply 
because  they  do  not  see  it  issue  from  the  ground :  still 
the  fact  is  there,  the  water  in  vast  quantities  always 
exists,  and  were  it  tapped  at  a  higher  level,  it  would 
flow  (as  it  actually  does  in  certain  places),  and  exhibit 
the  same  principle  upon  a  much  larger  scale  than  the 
romantic  and  picturesque  mountain  springs  of  Kythrea. 

As  we  increased  our  altitude  the  scenery  improved 


78  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


in  interest :  we  were  no  longer  in  barren  mounds  of 
water-washed  debris^  but  the  rich  soil  among  the  dark 
grey  rocks  gave  birth  to  numerous  shrubs,  including 
the  evergreen  mastic,  arbutus,  and  the  dwarf  cypress. 
Although  the  route  was  only  marked  by  the  continual 
tracks  of  the  lime-burner  s  mules,  our  sturdy  animals 
mounted  the  steep  rocky  ascents  with  comparative 
ease,  and  skirted  the  deep  water-worn  ravines  without 
missing  a  footstep.  Heaps  of  rough  crumbling  rocks 
resembling  cairns  attracted  my  attention  on  all  sides ; 
these  were  the  rude  lime-kilns,  and  at  an  elevation  of 
about  a  thousand  feet  above  Kythrea  we  came  upon 
the  families  of  lime-burners  who  for  several  genera- 
tions have  resided  in  these  heights,  either  in  caves,  or 
rude  huts,  according  to  the  conditions  of  the  locality. 
Women  and  girls  were  hard  at  work  with  strong 
grubbing-axes,  digging  out  the  roots  of  brushwood 
from  among  the  rocks  and  making  them  into  faggots, 
as  fuel  for  burning  the  grey  limestone.  The  work 
was  most  laborious,  and  I  was  struck  by  the  great 
thickness  of  the  roots  of  comparatively  small  shrubs. 
Upon  regarding  the  surface,  no  bushes  appeared 
sufficiently  substantial  for  the  use  of  fuel,  but  in  fact 
they  had  for  centuries  been  cut  and  hacked  to  a 
degree  that  reduced  them  superficially  to  mere  saplings, 
while  the  ancient  roots  had  increased  in  size.  The 
great  piles  of  limestone  were  only  partially  reduced  to 
lime  by  the  rough  method  and  the  scant  fuel  employed, 
but  I  admired  the  industry  of  these  poor  people,  who 
were  working  like  the  Israelites  for  Pharaoh,  "  making 
bricks  without  straw."  Some  of  the  girls  were  pretty, 
but  in  figure  they  were  mere  rag-dolls  in  locomotion. 

The  lime  was  conveyed  by  donkeys  to  the  lower 
country,   and   we   presently  arrived  at  a   snow-white 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  79 


heap  lying  in  the  centre  of  the  path  ; — ^it  was  explained, 
that,  during  the  heavy  shower  of  yesterday,  a  donkey 
was  carrying  his  usual  burthen  of  quick-lime,  when  he 
was  overtaken  by  the  rain,  which  slaked  the  load,  and 
it  was  necessary  to  immediately  abandon  it,  to  save 
the  animal  from  burning. 

After  an  hour  and  a  halfs  scramble  we  turned  to 
the  right  beneath  a  perpendicular  cliff  of  exquisite 
colouring  on  our  left,  combining  the  bright  red  which 
denoted  the  presence  of  iron,  with  the  dark  purple 
and  the  silvery  grey  of  the  Jura  limestone.  On  our 
right  was  a  deep  and  precipitous  ravine,  sparsely 
covered  with  evergreen  shrubs.  In  this  spot,  meta- 
morphic  rocks  lay  in  rough  and  huge  blocks  of  various 
shapes  and  colours,  and  while  examining  these  I  was 
struck  by  the  presence  of  the  rare  and  peculiar  green 
marble  known  as  verde  antica.  In  the  immediate 
neighbourhood  I  discovered  great  masses  of  the  same 
stone,  but  minus  the  green  base,  exhibiting  at  the  same 
time  the  characteristics  of  irregular  mosaic  in  the 
angular  fragments  of  white,  black,  and  various  coloured 
pieces  which  appeared  to  be  artificially  inlaid.  These 
marbles,  especially  the  true  verde  antica^  would  be 
exceedingly  valuable  if  cut  into  slabs  and  exported, 
and  there  would  be  little  difficulty  in  constructing  a 
feasible  route  for  camels,  which  would  convey  with  ease 
large  slabs  secured  in  frames  slung  upon  either  side. 

A  few  yards  above  this  spot  we  arrived  at  a  solitary 
cypress-tree,  which  in  density  of  foliage  resembled  a 
yew-tree  in  an  English  churchyard.  Close  to  this 
rare  object  was  an  aperture  in  the  rocks  upon  the 
right  hand ;  a  few  roughly-hewn  steps  enabled  us  to 
descend  into  a  narrow  cave,  where  water  dripped  from 
the  roof,  and  formed  a  feeble  stream,  which  was  led 


8o  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


through  crevices  to  a  cistern  some  yards  below.  This 
cistern  was  within  a  few  feet  of  the  cypress-tree,  and 
accounted  for  its  superior  growth,  as  the  roots  had 
been  duly  nourished.  About  a  hundred  feet  above 
this  spot  were  the  ruins  of  an  ancient  Greek  church, 
that  had  no  doubt  been  associated  with  the  holy 
dripping  fountain,  and  the  solitary  tree  had  been 
spared  from  the  ruthless  axes  of  the  lime-burners 
through  some  superstition  connected  with  the  spot. 
On  arrival  at  the  crumbling  ruins  of  the  church  we 
dismounted  from  our  animals,  and  put  them  in  the 
rude  stable  of  the  lime-burners  who  had  located 
themselves  among  the  walls  of  the  once  religious 
buildings,  which  they  had  converted  into  huts.  Animals 
could  go  no  farther ;  we  therefore  continued  the  ascent 
on  foot,  to  the  delight  of  my  dogs,  who  seemed  to 
think  it  looked  more  like  business. 

There  was  a  large  growth  of  the  usual  shrubs, 
arbutus,  mastic,  and  dwarf-cypress,  and  the  surface 
of  the  ground  was  so  completely  covered  with  masses 
of  rock  that  walking  was  most  difficult.  Notwithstanding 
the  apparent  barrenness  of  the  locality,  we  arrived  at 
a  tolerably  even  surface  of  rich  brown  soil  in  a  hollow 
near  the  shoulder  of  the  mountain ;  this  had  recently 
been  cleared  for  cultivation  by  the  lime-burners  to  the 
extent  of  about  two  acres,  and  I  remarked  that  both 
pine-trees  and  cypresses  as  thick  as  a  man's  thigh  had 
recently  been  felled  and  burnt  in  spite  of  the  govern- 
ment stringent  regulations.  In  these  out-of-the-way 
localities  the  natives  can  laugh  at  laws  and  special 
enactments. 

Upon  arrival  at  the  crest  of  the  mountain,  which 
formed  a  shoulder  for  a  peak  of  silvery  rocks,  about 
100  feet  above   me,  my   aneroid   showed    1830   feet 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  8i 


above  Kythrea.  From  this  point  the  view  was 
superb,  and  extended  north  and  south  from  sea  to 
sea.  There  was  an  extraordinary  contrast  upon  these 
two  divisions  formed  by  the  wall-Hke  Carpas  range 
upon  which  we  stood :  to  the  south  all  was  brown  and 
desolate  excepting  the  few  miles  of  green  belonging 
to  Kythrea  beneath  our  feet.  The  town  of  Lefkosia 
stood  out  in  bold  relief,  the  cathedral  and  even  the 
fortress  walls  affording  distinct  outlines  in  the  clear 
atmosphere ;  the  salt-lakes  of  Larnaca  showed  plainly 
in  the  distance,  backed  by  the  blue  sea,  and  the 
mountain  of  Santa  Croce  with  the  monastery  upon 
its  summit  was  a  well-known  landmark.  This  side 
of  the  mountain  range  was  not  inviting,  and  if  it  had 
been  exhibited  before  the  occupation  there  can  be 
little  doubt  of  an  unfavourable  impression.  We  turned 
"right-about-face"  to  the  north.  This  was  indeed  a 
wonderful  change  of  aspect  1  We  looked  down  from 
the  picturesque  and  precipitous  wall  of  mountains 
which  stretched  far  away  to  the  qast  and  west;  the 
sides  were  fovered  with  evergreens,  through  which 
the  bold  crags  protruded  in  rugged  points ;  the  dark 
indentures  upon  the  steep  slopes  marked  deep  ravines 
in  which  streams  of  water  now  rippled,  while  all  on 
the  south  were  stony  and  exhausted.  The  strip  of 
land  between  the  sea  and  the  northern  base  of  the 
Carpas  range  was  hardly  three  miles  wide ;  this  was 
covered  with  well-rounded  caroub-trees,  whose  dark 
green  foliage  gave  a  rich  appearance  to  the  shore, 
broken  by  countless  rocky  bays  and  coves,  filled  with 
the  cobalt  waters  of  the  Mediterranean.  This  was  a 
lovely  scene ;  I  could  not  believe  that  I  was  in  Cyprus 
— that  whitey-brown-paper-coloured,  desert,  smitten, 
God-forsaken  isle !     Upon  the  left,  about  eight  miles 

G 


82  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


distant,  lay  the  town  and  important  port  of  Kyrenia, 
with  an  apparently  very  little  harbour,  the  houses 
surrounded  by  gardens,  and  ornamented  by  date- 
palms  backed  by  a  perfect  forest  of  caroub-trees 
which  extended  for  some  miles.  On  the  extreme 
summit  of  the  crags  upon  our  left,  overlooking 
Kyrenia  and  forming  an  unmistakable  landmark  for 
all  sailors,  was  the  castle  of  Buffavento,  cutting  the 
blue  sky-line  3240  feet  above  the  sea.  Exactly 
opposite,  at  about  sixty  miles  distance,  were  the 
snow-capped  mountains  of  Caramania,  which  in  the 
transparent  atmosphere  seemed  to  be  within  a  day  s 
long  march.  Far,  far  away  along  the  north-eastern 
shore,  and  also  towards  the  west,  all  was  lovely  :  I 
could  only  regret  that  all  vessels  and  strangers  must 
arrive  in  the  unfortunate  ports  of  the  Messaria,  instead 
of  gaining  such  favourable  first  impressions  as  would 
be  induced  by  the  lovely  picture  of  Cyprus  from 
the  north. 

While  I  had  been  admiring  the  view,  my  dogs  had 
been  hunting  the  dense  bushes  to  very  little  purpose, 
and  although  we  scrambled  for  more  than  two  hours 
over  the  mountain,  we  only  moved  ten  or  twelve  red- 
legged  partridges,  which  rose  upwards  of  a  hundred 
yards  in  front  of  the  gun  ;  it  was  quite  impossible  to 
obtain  a  shot.  With  an  empty  bag,  but  with  a  new 
impression  of  the  country  since  my  view  of  the  land- 
scape in  the  north,  I  turned  homewards,  and  reached 
camp  late  in  the  afternoon,  my  spaniels  having  no 
doubt  a  low  opinion  of  Cyprus  sport,  and  of  the 
unfair  advantages  taken  by  the  ever-running  red-legged 
partridges. 

On  1 6th  February  a  painful  conviction  was  estab- 
lished that  Cyprus  was  unfitted  for  wheeled  carriages 


IV] 


The  Messaria.  83 


and  springs.  Although  the  plain  appeared  flat  and 
without  natural  obstacles,  the  ground  had  been  com- 
pletely traversed  by  deep  trenches  for  the  purpose  of 
checking  and  conducting  surface  water  to  the  fields 
in  the  event  of  a  heavy  shower.  Our  course  should 
have  been  directly  across  the  plain  to  intersect  the  road 
from  Lefkosia  to  Famagousta,  but  a  glance  at  the  in- 
tervening country  showed  the  impossibility  of  moving 
the  vans  through  the  miles  of  green  crops  which  were 
nourished  by  innumerable  watercourses,  each  of  which 
must  be  levelled  before  we  could  advance.  It  was 
therefore  necessary  to  retrace  our  steps  to  within  a 
mile  and  a  half  of  Lefkosia,  to  the  point  where  the 
main  route  branched  to  Famagousta.  This  was  a 
great  waste  of  time,  but  there  was  no  other  way  of 
avoiding  the  difficulty.  Accordingly  we  started,  and 
after  a  few  miles  we  cut  across  country  to  the  high 
road,  while  the  vans  slowly  crawled  along  the  uneven 
way  until  they  reached  the  turning-point.  We  halted 
at  a  very  desolate  spot,  where  sheep  were  housed  in 
large  numbers.  Several  spacious  pens  were  surrounded 
with  thorns,  reminding  me  of  the  cattle  zareebas  of 
Africa,  and  a  small  flat-topped  building,  built  of  stone 
and  mud,  formed  the  usual  accommodation  for  man 
and  beast.  A  well  of  clear  but  brackish  water  supplied 
this  rude  establishment,  which  was  surrounded  by  a 
boundless  extent  of  undulating  ground,  more  or  less 
cultivated  with  cereals,  which,  although  only  a  few 
inches  above  the  surface,  looked  weak  and  perishing. 

The  vans  did  not  arrive  until  late ;  in  the  mean- 
while we  had  sat  outside  the  building  in  the  cold  air, 
fearing  to  venture  beneath  the  roof,  owing  to  the 
swarms  of  fleas  which  are  sure  to  be  "at  home" 
in    all    the    miserable    dwellings    of  this   island.     At 

G  2 


84  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


length  the  gipsy-van,  which  had  been  in  sight  for  a 
full  hour,  drew  up  on  the  flat  surface  in  front  of  the 
shepherd's  hut,  and  real  comfort  was  at  once  at  hand. 
Although  the  space  within  was  limited,  the  furniture 
was  so  carefully  arranged  that  we  had  plenty  of  room 
to  move  about.  The  fall-slab  table  was  usually  down, 
and  was  only  required  for  writing ;  the  chest  of 
drawers  was  American  walnut :  a  good  solid  and  well- 
seasoned  wood,  which  did  not  provoke  the  temper  like 
English  furniture  by  the  drawers  sticking  when  in  the 
act  of  opening,  and  leaving  you  in  a  hopeless  position 
with  a  detached  handle  in  either  hand.  This  good 
American  chest  was  only  three  feet  two  inches  high, 
therefore  it  formed  a  convenient  toilette-table  beneath 
a  window,  which,  curtained  with  muslin  and  crimson 
cloth,  had  an  exceedingly  snug  appearance ;  and  a 
cushioned  s^at  upon  either  side  upon  the  lid  of  a 
locker  combined  comfort  with  convenience.  We  had 
a  tiny  little  movable  camp-table  that  could  be  adjusted 
in  two  minutes,  and  would  dine  two  persons,  provided 
that  no  carving  was  performed,  and  that  the  dishes 
were  handed  round.  The  bed  was  athwart-ship  at  the 
far  end  beneath  the  stern- window,  but  at  such  a  height 
from  the  floor  that  several  broad  shelves  beneath  con- 
tained gun-cases,  ammunition,  clothes,  boots,  tins  of 
preserved  provisions,  and  in  fact  everything  that, 
although  necessary,  was  to  be  kept  out  of  sight.  The 
only  mistake  in  the  arrangements  was  a  very  large  and 
gorgeous  open-brass-work  Egyptian  lantern,  with  glass 
of  various  colours  and  outlandish  patterns  in  Arab- 
esque. In  the  evening  we  formed  an  irregular  light- 
house, as  two  ordinary  carriage-lamps  were  fixed  above 
and  on  either  side  the  entrance  door,  while  the  gor- 
geous   many-coloured   lantern   swung   from   the  roof 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  85 


inside,  and  flashed  red,  green,  and  yellow  signals  in 
wild  confusion.     I  knew  this  piece  of  finery  would  not 
last  long,  as  it  would  insist  upon  running  against  every- 
body's  head,  its  large  size  bringing  it  into  constant 
collision  ;  but  it  looked  well,  and  ornamented  the  van. 
As   it  burnt  several  candles  the  lantern  became  hot, 
which  somewhat  warmed  the  cabin,  and  was  a  welcome 
increase  of  temperature,  for  although   the   floor  was 
protected  by  oil-cloth,  upon  which  were  double  layers 
of  Scinde  rugs,  the  extreme  thinness  of  the  walls  made 
it  unpleasantly  cold  with  the  thermometer  outside  at  40^ 
The  servants  were  saved  an  immense  amount  of  trouble 
by  the  presence. of  the  gipsy- van,  which  at  the  time 
they  hardly   appreciated ;  they  had   no   tent-pitching 
upon  the  halt,  neither  unpacking  of  boxes,  nor  arrang- 
ing of  beds,  nor  any  of  the  usual  work  connected  with 
a  daily  camp.     It  is  impossible  for  the  inexperienced 
to  appreciate  the  comfort  of  such  a  vehicle  where  the 
roads  are  practicable,  especially  in  bad  weather,  when 
you  are  perfectly  certain  that  your  home  is  weather- 
proof and  your  bed  dry.     Those  who  have  experienced 
the  misery  of  a  halt  in  pouring  rain,  when  everybody 
and  everything  has  been  sodden  to  the  bone,  when  the 
ground  is  slush  that  will  not  hold  a  tent-peg ;  the  night 
dark ;  the   fuel   will   not   burn ;  the   matches   expend 
themselves  in   vain   phosphoric  flashes,  but  will   not 
ignite ;  the  water  that  has  run  down  your  neck  has 
formed  reservoirs  within  your  boots  ;  the  servants  are 
reduced  to  the  inactivity  of  sponges ;  and — the  tents 
MUST  be  pitched.     The  heavy  soaked  canvas  that  can 
hardly  flap  In  the  strong  wind  is  at  length  spread  over 
the  cold  soft  ground;  the  camp-beds,  though  wet  as 
tripe,  MUST  be  arranged ;  and  down  go  the  iron  legs, 
sinking  to  an  unknown   depth  into  the  sodden  soil ! 


86  Cyprus  in  1879. 


I  CHAP. 


Oh,  misery,  misery  !  happily  unknown  to  those  who 
stay  at  home.  All  this  may  be  avoided  in  a  country 
where  practicable  routes  exist  by  travelling  with  a 
gipsy- van.  Of  course  you  do  not  personally  travel 
within  your  van  :  it  simply  forms  a  movable  home  that 
accompanies  you  upon  the  march,  and  is  always  there 
when  required,  while  you  ride  independently  upon 
your  animal.  We  live  and  learn ;  and  I  have  from 
experience  modified  my  ideas  of  a  gipsy- van  ;  for  a 
roadless  country  such  as  Cyprus  practically  is — I 
should  have  no  springs.  If  you  are  obliged  to  travel 
bodily  within  your  vehicle,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
springs  relieve  the  spine,  and  various  indescribable 
portions  of  your  anatomy ;  but  if  your  simple  "  hut 
upon  wheels  **  Is  to  be  dragged  along,  over,  and  through 
all  kinds  of  obstacles,  there  can  be  no  use  whatever  in 
springs,  which  by  their  elasticity  allow  your  vehicle  to 
sway  from  side  to  side,  and  to  seriously  threaten  the 
centre  of  gravity,  when  in  a  dangerous  place,  by  oscilla- 
tion. The  cap- waggon  of  South  Africa  will  go  any- 
where. The  two-wheeled  cart  of  Cyprus  is  a  wonder- 
fully simple  affair  that  may  be  dragged  up  or  down 
the  side  of  a  mountain  by  a  couple  of  oxen  ;  the  high 
wheels  and  light  but  strong  body  surmounting  all 
obstacles ;  these  carts  do  not  carry  more  than  twelve 
or  fourteen  hundredweight,  but  in  an  expedition  I 
should  much  prefer  them  to  the  heavy  waggons  of 
South  Africa,  which,  with  three  thousand  pounds, 
require  ten  or  twelve  oxen.  The  heavier  weight  in  a 
difficulty  of  soft  ground,  or  in  crossing  a  river,  would 
be  serious,  but  if  the  vehicles  are  numerous,  and  the 
weight  distributed  accordingly,  it  stands  to  sense  that 
an  enormous  advantage  is  secured  by  the  presence  of 
ten  oxen  in  five  light  carts,  all  of  which  can  be  applied 


iv.j 


The  Messaria.  87 


to  drag  a  single  cart  out  of  a  serious  dilemma,  instead 
of  remaining  hopelessly  fixed  in  soft  mud,  anchored  by 
a  weight  of  a  ton  and  a  half,  as  in  the  case  of  an 
African  baggage- waggon.  High  and  broad  wheels  are 
the  first  necessity,  with  a  compound  axle  of  wood  and 
iron,  the  unequal  elasticity  of  which  relieves  the  shock. 

I  invariably  found  that  during  the  day  I  hated  my 
van,  and  in  the  evening  I  blessed  it.  It  certainly  de- 
layed us  on  the  march,  and  as  we  rode  some  miles  in 
advance  we  noted  the  obstacles  that  would  cause  a 
stoppage,  and  generally  halted  to  assist  when  the 
"  tortoise "  should  arrive.  All  this  was  of  course 
annoying  in  a  country  where  a  horse  would  have 
cantered  cheerily  along  and  have  accomplished  forty 
miles  a  day  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the  van  was  never 
intended  for  grande  vitesse ;  neither  is  express  tra- 
velling the  proper  method  of  obtaining  an  accurate 
knowledge  of  a  new  country.  Thus  we  crawled  along, 
making  twelve  or  thirteen  miles  per  diem  through  a 
most  uninteresting  country,  the  usual  scene  of  treeless 
waste,  but  dotted  over  with  extensive  villages  of 
mud-built  houses,  and  the  inevitable  white  arched- 
roof  Greek  churches. 

The  only  incidents  that  occurred  in  this  land  of 
apathy  were  occasioned  by  our  guide,  who  generally 
lost  his  way,  and  spent  some  hours  in  finding  the  vans 
at  the  halting-place  in  the  evening ;  this  was  not  im- 
proving to  the  temper,  and  of  course  I  laid  the  blame 
upon  Cyprus  generally,  and  abused  the  island  almost 
to  the  superlative  degree  adopted  by  the  *'  newspaper 
correspondents." 

The  1 7th  February  was  a  day  of  considerable  bodily 
exercise,  as  we  arrived  at  a  series  of  watercourses  as 
deep  and  broad  as  military  trenches  for  sapping  up  to 


88  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

a  fortress.  We  had  no  sooner  levelled  an  embank- 
ment, and  with  great  difficulty  dragged  the  vans  across, 
than  we  encountered  a  new  and  similar  obstruction. 
At  length  we  arrived  within  half  a  mile  of  the  large 
village  Arshia,  which,  being  well  irrigated,  opposed  a 
perfect  network  of  barriers  in  the  shape  of  artificial 
water-channels.  The  oxen  became  disheartened,  and 
the  pair  which"  drew  the  blue  van  driven  by  our 
favourite  Georgi  determined  to  strike  work  just  as 
he  was  applying  the  sharp  driving  prick  to  their 
posteriors  in  ascending  a  steep  bank,  through  which 
we  had  cut  a  passage  from  the  deep  water-course 
beneath.  Instead  of  keeping  a  straight  course,  these 
pig-headed  bullocks  made  a  sharp  turn  to  the  right  up , 
the  incline.  Down  went  one  upon  its  knees  in  rage 
and  despair !  while  round  went  the  other  in  an  opposite 
direction  ;  crash  went  the  pole  in  two  pieces !  and  the 
blue  van,  having  vainly  endeavoured  to  right  itself  like 
a  lady  about  to  faint  when  no  one  is  at  hand  to  save 
her,  tottered  for  a  moment,  and  turned  over  with  a 
crash  that  betokened  general  destruction.  My  Abys- 
sinian lad,  Amarn,  was  only  just  in  time  to  escape,  as 
he  had  been  endeavouring  to  support  the  van  on  the 
impending  side  when  it  suddenly  capsised,  and  he 
would  have  been  flattened  like  a  black-edged  mourning 
envelope  had  he  not  actively  sprung  out  of  the  way. 

All  hands  set  about  righting  the  ship — ^which  was 
upon  her  beam-ends,  and  the  wheels  uppermost. 
The  first  thing  necessary  was  to  discharge  cargo; 
this  we  quickly  effected,  as  there  were  doors  in  front 
and  behind,  and  the  numerous  packages  were  soon 
piled  upon  the  wayside.  No  sooner  was  the  van 
empty,  than  my  dogs,  who  had  been  watching  the 
operation  in  bewilderment,  jumped  in,  and  no  induce- 


I  v.] 


The  Messaria.  89 


ment  would  persuade  them  to  quit  the  comfortable 
vehicle,  which  they  supposed  had  been  specially 
cleared  for  their  convenience  ;  the  doors  were  accord- 
ingly shut,  and  they  were  locked  up.  We  now  passed 
ropes  beneath  the  van,  and  secured  the  ends  to  the 
bottom  of  the  wheels,  which  rested  upon  the  ground ; 
the  other  ends  were  thrown  over  the  cap-roof  and 
manned,  while  the  rest  of  the  party  endeavoured  to 
raise  the  van  bodily.  All  working  together,  we 
righted  it  immediately,  the  astonished  dogs  were 
liberated,  and  we  soon  replaced  the  contents.  I  sent 
a  messenger  to  Arshia  to  purchase  if  possible  a  piece 
of  wood  sufficiently  long  to  form  a  pole,  and  in  the 
meantime  I  employed  my  tools  and  myself  in  splicing 
the  broken  pole  sufficiently  to  enable  us  to  creep  a 
little  nearer  to  the  village,  as  we  were  far  from  water. 

It  was  nearly  dark  by  the  time  I  had  completed  my 
work,  and  the  bullocks  were  once  more  fastened  to  the 
van.  In  this  way  we  approached  within  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  of  the  village  and  halted  for  the  night.  I  made 
a  capital  pole  from  the  stem  of  a  young  fir-tree  which 
I  procured  from  the  natives,  and  lashed  it  securely  to 
the  rough  but  strong  splinter-bar  of  dwarf-cypress. 

On  the  following  morning  at  daybreak  I  made  a 
few  alterations  in  the  work  of  the  preceding  night,  and 
having  thoroughly  secured  the  new  pole,  we  started  for 
Kuklia,  about  thirteen  miles  distant.  After  passing  a 
few  more  watercourses,  we  arrived  at  the  best  ground 
we  had  seen  in  Cyprus,  and  the  vans  travelled  with 
ease  at  upwards  of  three  miles  an  hour.  Through- 
out this  march  I  observed  that  the  water  in  the  va- 
rious wells  and  open  pits  was  hardly  five  feet  from 
the  surface,  although  the  country  was  suffering  from 
an    absence   of  rain.      Notwithstanding   this   natural 


90  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


advantage,  there  were  only  two  farms  upon  which  the 
cattle-wheels  were  used  for  purposes  of  irrigation, 
which  proves  the  lack  of  enterprise  and  capital 
throughout  this  miserable  district. 

There  were  many  important  villages  upon  the 
higher  ground,  which  overlooked  the  lower  plain 
through  which  the  river  Pedias  was  supposed  to  flow. 
These  heights  were  about  a  hundred  and  fifty  feet 
above  the  lower  level,  and  continued  to  increase  their 
elevation  for  many  miles,  until  they  formed  the  horizon 
on  the  south-west  and  west.  The  soil  was  extremely 
fertile,  but  as  usual  covered  with  stones,  the  debris 
of  decayed  limestone  of  the  post-tertiary  period,  such 
as  is  found  throughout  the  Messaria.  The  flat  valley 
below  was  about  thirteen  miles  across  due  north,  and 
was  bounded  by  the  Carpas  range,  which  extended 
to  the  east  beyond  telescopic  view.  In  our  front  was 
a  cheering  scene,  towards  which  we  hastened  with  all 
speed ;  as  sailors  rush  on  deck  at  the  first  cry  of 
"  Land  ahead ! "  we  hurried  forward  at  the  unusual  sight, 
*'  Green  trees  !  ^  Groves  of  tall  cypress,  poplars,  and 
other  varieties,  springing  from  a  base  of  exquisite 
verdure,  formed  a  rare  and  unmistakable  landmark. 
This  was  Kuklia,  our  halting-place,  the  property  of 
Monsieur  Richard  Mattei. 

Upon  arrival  at  the  village  we  selected  a  pretty 
spot  upon  elevated  ground  which  overlooked  the 
entire  country,  and  from  which  we  could  faintly  dis- 
tinguish Famagousta,  twelve  miles  distant.  Upon 
our  right,  within  a  hundred  and  twenty  yards,  was 
an  aqueduct  of  masonry  supported  upon  arches,  which 
conveyed  a  powerful  stream  to  turn  a  large  overshot 
water-wheel  in  the  valley  immediately  below.  The 
surplus  water,  after  having  worked  the  mill,  was  used 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  91 


for  the  irrigation  of  extensive  cotton-grounds,  beyond 
which  it  flowed  into  the  marshes  and  formed  a  swamp. 
On  the  opposite  side  of  this  narrow  valley  were  heights 
and  undulating  ground,  corresponding  to  those  upon 
which  we  stood — ^all  treeless  and  cold ;  while  upon 
our  right,  close  to  the  aqueduct,  was  the  bright  green 
of  high  cultivation,  and  groves  of  tall  trees  which 
towered  above  gardens  of  oranges  and  lemons  now 
bending  beneath  the  burden  of  yellow  fruit.  The 
village  was  disappointing,  as  the  houses  were  of  a 
low  order  and  much  neglected  ;  the  lanes  were  occu- 
pied by  the  usual  filth  and  noisy  dogs ;  but  the  agree- 
able view  of  bright  green  fields  and  real  thriving 
trees  was  a  delightful  change,  and  exhibited  a  picture 
of  what  Cyprus  might  become  when  developed  by 
capital  and  enterprise.  While  the  camp  was  being 
arranged  I  took  my  gun  and  strolled  with  the  dogs 
into  the  narrow  valley  below  the  mill.  The  water- 
wheel  was  at  work,  and  the  people  were  engaged  in 
cleaning  cotton,  as  the  machinery  was  adapted  for 
both  purposes  of  grinding  corn  or  of  ginning  cotton 
when  required.  There  were  plenty  of  snipe  in  the 
marshes  below  the  cotton-fields,  for  which  rushes,  low 
bushes  of  tamarisk  and  other  shrubs,  afforded  excellent 
cover.  I  quickly  bagged  two  couple  and  my  first 
Francolin  partridge,  and  was  just  in  time,  before  dark, 
to  assist  the  dinner. 

At  sunrise  on  the  following  morning  the  view  was 
interesting,  as  the  sea  glittered  brightly  to  the  south, 
while  the  bold  rocks  and  wall-like  sides  of  the 
Carpas  mountains  stood  out  in  sharply-defined  edges 
and  varying  colours  on  the  north.  To  the  east  we 
looked  over  the  broadest  portion  of  a  dead  flat  created 
by  the  deposit  from  inundations  of  the  eccentric  river 


92  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Pedias,  which,  although  dry  at  the  present  time,  perio- 
dically floods  the  country  and  converts  the  valley 
into  an  extensive  lake.  It  was  about  twenty  miles 
across  this  broad  flat  to  the  important  town  of  Tri- 
chomo,  and  the  ruins  of  Salamis  were  discernible  with 
the  telescope  about  midway,  close  to  the  seashore. 

There  was  an  extent  of  several  miles  of  marsh 
around  the  heights  of  Kuklia,  in  some  portions  of 
which  cotton  was  cultivated  in  considerable  quantities, 
but  I  was  surprised  at  the  inferiority  of  the  quality, 
and  at  the  apparent  weakness  of  the  plants  where  the 
water-supply  was  plentiful.  On  closer  examination  I 
observed  great  carelessness  in  the  absence  of  drainage  ; 
the  plants  were  allowed  to  perish  in  stagnant  water, 
which  soured  the  land.  Upon  a  longer  acquaint- 
ance with  M.  Mattei's  farm,  I  found  the  same  fault 
generally.  Many  portions  of  valuable  land  were 
chilled  and  rendered  fruitless  by  too  much  water, 
which  remained  in  the  ground  for  want  of  the  most 
simple  drains.  I  shot  plenty  of  snipe  in  the  fields  of 
barley,  although  they  were  not  supposed  to  be  under 
irrigation.  M.  Mattei  is  well  known  as  the  largest 
landed  proprietor  in  Cyprus,  and  the  representative  of 
agricultural  progress ;  but  his  bailiff"  at  Kuklia  could 
hardly  have  expected  a  prize  at  an  exhibition,  although 
every  facility  exists  for  creating  a  perfect  model-farm. 
The  springs  which  supply  the  water-power  were  dis- 
covered in  three  different  positions  about  three  miles 
distant.  The  usual  chains  of  wells  (already  described) 
were  sunk,  and  at  a  convenient  spot  they  converged 
into  a  single  line,  until  a  lower  level  introduced  the 
channel  to  the  surface.  The  water  was  then  received 
into  a  stone  aqueduct,  and  led  with  great  judgment  in 
a  half  circle  beneath  the   higher   ground  which  was 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  93 


occupied  by  the  village,  at  a  level  which  not  only 
enabled  it  to  command  the  extensive  flats  beneath, 
but  eventually  passed  beyond  the  village,  and  turned 
an  overshot  wheel  of  more  than  twenty  feet  diameter. 
This  great  work  was  at  the  sole  expense  of  the  pro- 
prietor. After  a  considerable  outlay  and  perfect 
success  in  the  engineering,  it  is  to  be  regretted  that 
greater  care  is  not  bestowed  upon  the  land  ;  although 
the  gardens  contain  a  mass  of  fruit-trees,  large  groves 
of  figs,  and  relieve  the  eye  by  their  cheerful  aspect, 
only  enough  has  been  attained  to  exhibit  the  great 
power  that  exists  for  producing  a  still  greater  abun- 
dance under  proper  administration. 

Having  examined  the  neighbourhood  thoroughly,  I 
changed  the  position  of  our  camp  and  halted  a  mile 
and  a  half  up  the  aqueduct  on  the  higher  side  of  the 
village,  at  a  point  where  the  water  first  issued  from 
its  subterranean  channel  into  the  conduit  of  masonry 
and  cement.  We  thus  secured  a  supply  in  its  original 
purity,  before  it  should  be  contaminated  by  any  wash- 
ing of  clothes  in  passing  through  the  village  in  an 
open  channel,  which  from  its  convenience  offered  an 
irresistible  invitation.  Such  a  tempting  stream,  run- 
ning through  a  canal  upon  a  broad  wall  of  masonry 
open  to  all  comers  would,  in  any  European  country, 
have  been  the  natural  resort  of  boys,  who  would  have 
revelled  in  the  freedom  of  nakedness  and  the  delight 
of  bathing  in  forbidden  waters ;  but  in  Cyprus  I  have 
never  once  seen  a  person  washing  himself  in  public. 
This  is  not  from  any  sense  of  indecent  exposure, 
but  from  their  absolute  dislike  to  the  operation.  I 
had  subsequently  in  my  service  a  remarkably  fine  man 
who  was  always  carefully  dressed,  and  in  fact  was  quite 
a  dandy  in  exterior,  but  during  the  hot  weather  when 


94  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


he  on  one  occasion  saw  my  Abyssinian  Amarn  swim- 
ming in  the  sea,  he  declared  that,  "  rather  than  bathe, 
he  would  prefer  to  cut  his  throat/' 

I  had  arranged  the  camp  close  to  a  hawthorn-tree, 
which  was  already  green  in  its  first  spring  leaves,  and 
had  formed  blossom-buds  that  would  open  in  a  few 
days.  There  were  a  considerable  number  of  the  same 
species  scattered  in  the  vicinity,  but  they  had  been 
defaced  by  the  mutilations  usual  throughout  Cyprus. 
If  a  man  requires  a  stick  or  a  piece  of  wood  for 
any  purpose,  he  hacks  unsparingly  at  the  first  tree ; 
whether  it  belongs  to  him  or  to  another  proprietor. 
The  ground  sloped  gradually  to  the  lowest  level  of 
the  hollow  about  four  hundred  yards  distant,  all  of 
which  was  in  cultivation ;  the  broad-beans  were  in 
blossom,  and  a  species  of  trefoil  was  already  eight  or 
nine  inches  high  (22nd  February) ;  this  was  in  an- 
ticipation of  a  lack  of  natural  pasturage. 

It  was  pitiable  to  see  the  wretched  condition  of  the 
cattle  throughout  this  district;  the  absence  of  rain 
had  prevented  the  growth  of  the  usual  herbaceous 
plants,  and  the  animals  were  forced  to  seek  unnatural 
food  produced  in  the  stagnant  swamps;  these  were 
full  of  skeletons  and  carcasses  of  oxen,  that  afforded 
bones  of  contention  for  the  numerous  village  dogs 
who  acted  as  scavengers.  When  the  droves  of  oxen 
returned  from  pasture  every  evening,  many  were  in  a 
state  of  weakness  that  scarcely  allowed  them  step  by 
step  to  ascend  the  rising  ground ;  all  were  reduced  to 
mere  skin  and  bones,  and  it  would  have  been  a  mercy 
to  have  put  them  out  of  their  misery.  I  was  assured 
that,  "  the  few  whose  constitution  could  hold  out  for 
another  six  weeks  would  recover  when  the  trefoil 
should  be  fit  to  cut.'* 


IV.] 


The  Messaria.  95 


I    daily   walked   over   the   adjoining   country,  and 
there  was  little  difficulty  in  discovering  the  origin  of 
M.  Matters  water  sources.      Upon  the  heights  behind 
our  camp,  a  plateau  of  many  miles  in  extent,  with  an 
almost  imperceptible  inclination  towards  the  south-east, 
received  the  rainfall,  in  addition  to  the  subterranean 
drainage  of  the  hills  in   the   far  distance.     A  great 
portion   of  this   area   was   uncultivated,  as  the  sedi- 
mentary limestone  was  generally  close  to  the  surface  ; 
this  was  covered  with  the  usual  prickly  shrubs  that 
some  writers  have  misnamed  **  heath,"  together  with 
the  highly  aromatic  herbs  that  seem  to  delight  in  a 
thirsty  soil ;  among  these  is  a  thorny  species  of  wild 
thyme,  that  is  a  favourite  food  for  hares.     In  some 
places  the  soil  was  red,  forming  a  strong  contrast  to 
the  white  surface  around,  and  in  such  spots  the  earth 
had   been   already   ploughed   in   preparation   for  the 
forthcoming   season.      The   large   area  at   a    higher 
altitude  formed  an  example  of  a  principle  that  may  be 
accepted  as  the  rule  throughout  the  island.     In  walk- 
ing over  this  extensive  surface,  there  was  occasionally 
a  hollow,  drum-like  sound  beneath  the  feet,  denoting 
subterranean  cavities  in  the  porous  and  soluble  strata 
beneath  the  harder  upper  stratum.     It  was  a  natural 
consequence   that  a  substratum  impervious  to  water 
should  form  a  bed  at  a  certain  level  to   retain   the 
drainage  :  by  tapping  this  bed  at  any  point,  the  water 
would   be   discovered  ;    but   by  piercing  the   surface 
below  this  level,  the  hydraulic  pressure  would  force 
the  water  into  a  running  stream. 

This  M.  Mattei  has  accomplished,  not  as  a  new 
invention,  but  as  the  application  of  a  rule  well  known 
to  the  Cypriotes  from  ancient  times ;  and  I  repeat  my 
argument,  that,  "  the  hereditary  ability  of  these  people 


96  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


in  discovering  and  utilising  springs  is  a  proof  that  a 
scarcity  of  water  has  been  a  chronic  difficulty  in  this 
island  from  remote  periods,  and  that  no  important 
change  has  been  occasioned  by  the  sensational  de- 
struction of  forests  influencing  the  rainfall,"  &c.,  &c., 
&c.  In  my  opinion,  the  whole  of  the  now  desolate 
Messaria  district  may  be  rendered  fruitful  and  per- 
manently abundant  by  the  scientific  employment  of  a 
water-power  which  already  exists,  although  unseen 
and  undeveloped. 

It  was  quite  impossible  to  proceed  to  Famagousta 
with  the  vans,  and  there  was  no  object  in  courting 
their  destruction  by  a  desperate  advance  at  all  hazards, 
as  we  should  have  in  any  case  been  obliged  eventually 
to  renew  the  difficulty  when  retracing  our  route.  I 
therefore  cantered  in  upon  my  mule,  with  the  guide 
who  always  lost  his  way,  Hadji  Christo.  This  man 
was  a  great  ruffian,  and  had  laws  existed  for  the 
prevention  of  cruelty  to  animals,  I  would  have  prose- 
cuted him ;  nominally  he  had  the  charge  of  the  mule 
and  two  ponies,  but  he  illtreated  these  poor  animals, 
and  the  donkeys  also,  in  a  disgraceful  manner.  How' 
ever,  I  had  no  other  guide,  and  although  I  knew  him 
to  be  in  partnership  with  some  Will-o'-the-wisp,  I  was 
obliged  to  follow  him.  It  was  an  easy  course  for 
saddle-animals,  as  the  cathedral  of  Famagousta  formed 
the  prominent  point;  therefore  a  steeple-chase  might 
have  been  the  direct  cross-country  way.  There  was 
no  change  in  the  usual  features  of  the  barren  landscape. 
We  kept  upon  the  high  ground  on  the  right,  looking 
down  upon  the  dreary  flat  for  twenty  miles  to  our  left. 
Occasionally  we  passed  villages,  all  of  which  were 
mere  copies  of  each  other  in  filth  and  squalor.  The 
dogs  barked  and  snapped  ineffectually  at  our  heels,  as 


IV. 


The  Messaria.  97 


we  cantered  through ;  the  civil  and  ever-courteous 
people  turned  out  and  salaamed ;  and  we  quickly 
accomplished  the  twelve  miles  and  approached  the 
walls  of  Famagousta.  Nothing  that  I  saw  in  Cyprus 
has  impressed  me  so  much  as  the  site  of  this  powerful 
fortress  and  once  important  city.  I  lunched  with  Captain 
Inglis,  who  as  chief  commissioner  of  the  district,  most 
kindly  received  me,  and  I  rode  home  afterwards ;  my 
guide,  Hadji  Christo,  in  spite  of  my  assurances  that  he 
had  mistaken  the  route,  persisted  that  there  were  many, 
and  not  one ;  and  after  plunging  into  muddy  marshes 
instead  of  keeping  to  the  high  ground,  we  were 
completely  lost  near  sundown,  when  I  happily  extri- 
cated myself  from  the  difficulty  by  insisting  upon  his 
riding  behind  and  leaving  me  alone  to  find  the  track. 
We  arrived  at  nightfall,  after  making  eighteen  miles  out 
of  twelve — a  profitable  enterprise  hardly  appreciated 
by  our  tired  animals.  Famagousta  is  too  important 
for  a  cursory  description  ;  I  shall  therefore  reserve  it 
for  a  future  chapter,  when  on  our  return  from  the 
Carpas  district  we  pass  some  days  in  its  immediate 
neighbourhood. 


H 


CHAPTER  V. 


START   FOR   THE   CARPAS. 


I  DETERMINED  to  leavc  my  two  vans  in  charge  of  the 
head-man  of  Kuklia,  as  the  drivers  declared  it  would 
be  impossible  to  proceed  into  the  roadless  Carpas  with 
any  wheeled  conveyance  heavier  than  the  native  two-  j 

wheeled  cart.  They  had  accordingly  entered  into  a 
contract  to  supply  me  with  vehicles  which  the  man 
of  ability  Theodori  assured  me  could  travel  to  the 
extreme  eastern  limit  of  the  island,  Cape  St.  Andrea, 
"as  he  had  been  there  himself,  and  knew  the  way." 
Georgi,  who  knew  nothing  of  this  portion  of  the 
country,  believed  all  that  Theodori  said,  and  did  his 
bidding.  Having  lightened  the  loads  by  leaving  all 
that  was  not  absolutely  necessary  safely  locked  within 
the  vans,  we  started  on  ist  March  with  camels,  in 
addition  to  two  native  carts,  taking  the  route  direct 
east,  across  the  extensive  flat  which  at  this  time  was  i 

dry  and  hard.  There  was  nothing  of  interest  in  the 
day's  march ;  the  travelling  was  easy  along  the 
hardened  level  surface  ;  we  had  a  clear  view  of  the 
cathedral  and  higher  forts  of  Famagousta,  and  we 
passed  near  the  ruins  of  Salamis,  easily  distinguishing 
the  solitary  pillars  that  had  supported  the  ancient 
aqueduct  which  led  the  water  from  distant  Kythrea. 


CHAP,  v.]  Start  for  the  Carpas.  99 

Although  everything  was  thoroughly  dried  up,  it  was 
easy  to  imagine  the  effect  of  an  inundation  of  the 
Pedias  river,  which  had  formed  this  delta  of  alluvium, 
precisely  as  the  Nile  on  a  more  extensive  scale  has 
produced  the  Delta  of  Egypt.  There  were  a  few 
wretched  villages  upon  the  flat,  which  were  necessarily 
on  the  poorest  scale,  as  they  existed  at  the  mercy  of 
a  sudden  inundation.  The  unhealthiness  of  this  locality 
must  be  extreme  during  wet  weather,  as  it  is  only 
suitable  to  the  constitutions  of  frogs  and  ducks.  Upon 
arrival  at  higher  ground  on  the  opposite  side  of  the 
plain  I  looked  back  upon  the  agueish  area  over  which 
we  had  passed,  and  I  had  little  doubt  of  the  great 
engineering  necessity  that  must  be  the  first  step  to 
a  sanitary  reform  in  this  pestilential  neighbourhood. 

As  the  river  Pedias  is  a  mere  wayward  torrent  that 
never  flows  as  a  permanent  stream,  but  only  comes 
down  in  impulsive  rushes  from  the  mountains  during 
heavy  rains,  it  has  no  power  to  cleanse  its  original  bed, 
such  as  would  result  from  a  constant  and  clear  current ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  the  heavy  floods  from  the  upper 
country,  being  the  result  of  a  sudden  rainfall,  are 
surcharged  with  earth  washed  down  from  the  higher 
ground  and  thickly  held  in  solution.  This  vast  mass 
of  soil,  which  adds  a  corresponding  weight  to  each 
gallon  of  water,  is  carried  forward  according  to  the 
velocity  of  the  stream,  and  is  ready  to  deposit  upon 
the  instant  that  the  propelling  power  shall  be  with- 
drawn. So  long  as  the  river  is  confined  between  narrow 
banks,  the  high  rate  of  the  current  is  sufficient  to 
force  forward  the  thickened  and  heavy  fluid ;  but  the 
instant  that  the  banks  are  over- topped  and  the  river 
expands  over  an  increased  area,  the  rapidity  is  reduced, 
and  the  water,  no  longer  able  to  contain  the  earth  in . 

II  2 


loo  Cyprus  in  i879. 


[CHAP. 


solution,  deposits  alluvium,  and  produces  a  delta, 
which  must  necessarily  increase  upon  every  future 
inundation.  The  result  must  end  either  in  forming  a 
bar  at  the  mouth  of  the  river,  or  (as  in  the  Pedias)  in 
the  total  silting  of  the  embotichure,  which  extinguishes  all 
traces  of  a  broad  channel,  but  leaves  a  series  of  deep 
marshes  scored  by  innumerable  ditches,  to  be  in  their 
turn  filled  with  mud  when  the  next  flood  shall  extend 
over  the  wide  surface  and  increase  the  deposit. 

This  is  the  position  of.  the  Pedias,  and  until  im- 
proved I  cannot  foresee  a  good  sanitary  prospect  for 
Famagousta,  which  is  situated  on  the  borders  of  the 
swamp.  There  can  be  only  one  engineering  method 
of  preventing  the  silt,  by  confining  the  river  between 
artificial  banks,  within  a  channel  sufficiently  narrow  to 
ensure  a  current  whose  velocity  would  carry  the  heavy 
fluid  directly  into  the  sea.  Even  should  this  be 
accomplished,  and  the  river  be  securely  banked,  the 
deposit  of  mud  will  then  take  place  within  the  sea, 
and  will  assuredly  form  a  bar ;  which  will  probably 
affect  by  silt  the  neighbouring  harbour  of  Famagousta 
in  the  same  manner  that  the  ancient  port  of  Salamis 
has  been  completely  obliterated.  In  any  case  the 
engineering  difficulty  will  be  costly  and  uncertain ; 
but  if  Famagousta  is  to  be  restored  to  its  former 
importance  as  a  first-rate  harbour,  arsenal,  and 
military  station,  the  management  of  the  Pedias 
river  must  be  seriously  considered. 

We  arrived  at  Trichomo  at  about  3  p.m.  The  town 
is  built  upon  the  sides  and  summit  of  high  ground 
within  a  mile  of  the  sea.  The  sight  of  a  narrow 
iron  chimney  emitting  puffs  of  steam  showed  that 
some  progress  was  exhibited  by  the  presence  of  an 
engine — this  was   employed   in    working   cotton-gins. 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  ioi 


The  houses  were  the  usual  sun-baked  bricks  of  clay 
and  chopped  straw,  and  although  the  town  was  large, 
there  was  no  building  of  sufficient  importance  to 
attract  attention.  We  rode  through  the  streets 
determined  as  usual  to  avoid  the  smells  of  a  close 
proximity  and  to  seek  a  camping-place  some  distance 
upon  the  opposite  side.  After  passing  through  the 
town  and  descending  a  hill,  we  then  ascended  a  steep 
slope  which  opened  upon  a  wild  country  of  rocky 
ground  covered  with  the  usual  prickly  plants  and 
scrub  cypress,  which  had  evidently  been  cut  for  fuel 
until  it  had  become  mere  brushwood.  There  was 
a  square  mud  hut  on  the  left  hand  standing  in  an 
extensive  orchard  of  fruit-trees  watered  by  a  cattle- 
wheel,  and  as  this  was  the  last  habitation  within  view, 
we  halted,  and  awaited  the  arrival  of  the  carts  and 
camels.  From  the  summit  of  the  hill,  about  two  hun- 
dred yards  beyond  this  spot,  the  view  was  exceedingly 
good ;  the  sea  lay  about  half  a  mile  distant,  with  several 
houses  and  gardens  near  the  shore.  The  town  was  in 
our  rear,  and  to  the  east  was  a  fine  extent  of  wild  country 
covered  with  bush  and  dwarf-cypress,  which  formed 
a  marked  contrast  to  the  naked  surface  we  had  left 
behind.  The  rugged  wall  of  the  Carpas  range  was 
now  only  ten  miles  distant  on  our  left,  and  continued 

parallel  to  our  route It  was  late  when  the  carts 

arrived,  and  we  now  missed  the  usual  luxury  of  the 
gipsy-van.  I  determined  to  save  the  servants  the 
trouble  of  erecting  our  tent,  therefore  for  the  first 
time  in  Cyprus  we  occupied  the  native  dwelling. 
This  was  a  square  hut  built  of  stone  and  mud,  with 
the  usual  hard  mud  roof.  From  its  large  size  it  was 
evident  that  animals  shared  the  room  with  the  pro- 
prietors.    An  old  man  and  a  corresponding  old  woman 


I02  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


gave  us  a  welcome,  and  immediately  commenced 
sweeping  out  the  floor  for  our  accommodation ;  this 
might  have  been  thirty  feet  by  eighteen  in  width. 
After  a  cloud  of  dust  had  risen,  and  by  degrees 
subsided,  we  took  possession ;  the  carts  and  camels 
arrived ;  beds  had  to  be  unpacked  and  set  up,  and 
the  servants  began  to  reflect  upon  the  advantages 
of  the  van  which  saved  them  the  present  trouble. 
It  was  already  dusk,  but  the  beds  were  made,  and 
Christo  the  cook  (who  was  a  capital  fellow  for  speed 
in  preparing  a  dinner)  was  enveloped  in  savoury 
steam,  when  the  usual  inmates  of  the  hut  quietly 
invaded  us.  Cocks  and  hens  marched  in,  and  went 
to  roost  upon  some  sticks  within  a  corner ;  two  or 
three  dogs  arrived,  evidently  with  the  intention  of 
staying  through  the  night ;  a  donkey  at  length  walked 
composedly  through  the  entrance  door  and  steered  for 
his  accustomed  corner.  We  had  caused  serious  incon- 
venience to  an  unknown  quantity  of  animals,  all  of 
whom  had  to  be  turned  out,  except  the  poultry. 
What  a  good  thing  is  dinner !  The  neat  tiny  table 
was  spread  and  the  candles  lighted ;  the  dishes 
were  simple  but  excellent ;  we  were  thoroughly 
comfortable  in  this  rude  dwelling;  but — it  might 
have  been  fancy — I  thought  something  tickled  my 
legs.  There  was  no  mistake,  something  did  actually 
not  only  tickle,  but  bite.  Something  ?  It  was  every- 
thing and  everybody  in  the  shape  of  fleas !  The  hut 
was  hopping  with  countless  swarms  of  these  detest- 
able vermin,  from  which  in  our  impregnable  van  we 
had  hitherto  been  free,  owing  to  its  great  height 
from  the  ground.  Whether  the  unusual  sweeping 
of  the  floor  had  created  a  temporary  aberration  of 
intellect  or  stupefaction  among  these  crowds,  I  cannot 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  103 


determine,  but  whatever  the  nervous  shock  might  have 
been  that  had  caused  a  short  suspension  of  activity, 
they  had  now  completely  recovered,  and  I  shall  never 
forget  the  night  passed  in  Trichomo.  It  was  the  first 
and  the  last  venture  upon  native  hospitality  through- 
out our  sojourn  in  Cyprus,  and  we  in  future  adhered 
either  to  the  tent  or  the  gipsy-van. 

On  the  following  morning  we  started  at  8.30.  The 
sky  was  overcast,  and  in  any  country  but  this  we 
should  have  expected  rain.  We  had  now  fairly 
emerged  upon  a  district  entirely  different  from  the 
hateful  Messaria,  which  has  given  Cyprus  an  unfor- 
tunate reputation.  We  were  quickly  among  thickets 
of  scrub  and  low  brushwood  which  should  have 
teemed  with  game.  My  spaniels  delighted  in  the 
change,  and  worked  the  bush  thoroughly  as  we 
proceeded  along  the  route,  occasionally  flushing  two 
or  three  red-legged  partridges.  Passing  over  the 
higher  ground  with  the  sea  in  view  upon  our  right, 
we  descended  after  a  march  of  about  three  miles  to 
the  shore,  where  the  path  skirted  the  sea  along  broken 
rocks,  against  which  in  bad  weather  the  waves  would 
dash  with  sufficient  violence  to  bar  the  road.  The 
white  cliffs  and  hill-tops  to  our  left  were  covered  with 
dwarf-cypress,  and  formed  a  lovely  foreground  above 
the  sea,  perfectly  calm  beneath.  The  ride  was  ap- 
parently short,  although  we  had  been  in  the  saddle 
three  hours,  as  the  eye  had  been  gratified  by  a  constant 
change  of  scenery ; — from  rocks  washed  by  the  blue 
water  to  hills  covered  with  a  dense  foliage  of  ever- 
greens, and  deep  sequestered  valleys,  with  occasional 
gaps  in  the  range  of  heights  through  which  glimpses 
of  the  sea  in  rocky  coves  burst  suddenly  into  view. 
Some  of  these  inlets  were  exceedingly  picturesque,  as 


I04  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


reefs  extended  from  the  shore,  overhanging  cliffs  having 
from  time  to  time  fallen  in  huge  crags  and  formed 
natural  breakwaters  to  the  beach.  These  narrow  gaps 
between  the  hills  were  generally  occupied  by  a  streamlet 
in  the  centre,  which  had  cut  its  way  far  below  the  level 
of  the  ground,  the  steep  banks  of  which  were  fringed 
with  oleanders,  myrtles,  mastic,  and  other  evergreens, 
down  to  within  a  few  yards  of  the  breaking  waves. 
Nothing  could  be  prettier,  and  upon  arrival  within 
sight  of  Volokalida,  about  a  mile  and  a  half  distant 
in  the  extreme  end  of  a  narrow  valley,  I  directed  my 
wife  to  a  camping-place  near  the  village,  beneath  some 
large  and  prominent  caroub-trees,  while  I  dismounted, 
and  with  my  delighted  dogs  commenced  a  ramble  over 
the  low  woods  which  covered  the  sides  and  hill-tops 
to  our  right  and  left.  The  walk  was  enjoyable ;  we 
had  made  fourteen  miles  from  Trichomo,  and  upon 
reaching  the  perfectly  flat  tableland  which  formed  the 
summit  of  the  hills  I  had  a  splendid  sea-view  ex- 
tending for  many  miles  along  the  coast.  The  first 
object  that  attracted  my  attention  was  a  large  steamer 
stranded  in  a  cove  about  a  mile  distant.  She  looked 
perfectly  snug,  but  as  only  her  lower  masts  were 
standing,  and  funnel  gone,  there  could  be  no  doubt  of 
her  misadventure.  My  binocular  glass  quickly  showed 
that  a  portion  of  her  bulwarks  was  carried  away,  and 
as  no  chain  was  visible  to  an  anchor,  she  was  in  fact  a 
wreck.  As  I  made  my  way  through  the  thick  bushes 
Merry  presently  opened  upon  a  scent,  and  Wise 
running  in  among  the  rocks,  flushed  a  fine  francolin 
partridge,  which  I  shot.  I  then  got  a  quail  and  a 
hare,  and  had  no  other  chances,  although  the  appear- 
ance of  the  country  would  have  suggested  an  abun- 
dance of  game.     Upon  nearing  the  seashore  I  saw  that 


^^ammmmmmmmmm^^^^^m''^^^^^'^i^^mmmmmtm^mt^fmmmmmmf^mmif^mmmm^am^mmmmmft 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  105 


extensive  sand-dunes  had  invaded  the  heights  for  many 
hundred  yards,  completely  choking  the  vegetation  and 
forming  clumps  or  mounds  of  sand,  topped  by  tufts  of 
the  shrubs  that  lay  buried  deep  beneath.  I  walked  along 
the  fatiguing  ground  until  I  reached  the  shore  exactly 
opposite  the  abandoned  wreck,  which  lay  within  ^  cove, 
into  which  she  had  evidently  been  run  for  security; 

My  dogs  found  several  hares  among  the  clumps 
upon  the  sand-dunes,  which  gave  them  some  exercise 
and  amusement,  but  I  did  not  obtain  a  shot. 

Upon  my  arrival  at  the  camping-place  I  found  my 
wife  surrounded  by  a  large  crowd  of  women  and 
children  beneath  a  shady  tree,  all  of  whom  had 
brought  presents  of  eggs  and  bouquets  of  wild  flowers. 
It  was  difficult  to  persuade  these  good  simple  people 
that  we  did  not  require  presents  as  an  etiquette  of 
introduction  ;  they  would  insist  upon  placing  their 
little  offerings  upon  the  ground,  and  leaving  them 
if  we  declined  to  accept  them.  The  principal  wild 
flowers  were  cyclamen,  narcissus,  and  anemone.  The 
cyclamen  completely  covered  the  ground  throughout 
all  the  low  woods  and  thickets.  I  could  only  find  two 
varieties,  the  snow-white,  with  claret-coloured  centre, 
and  the  rose-colour ;  but  the  blossoms  were  quite  equal 
in  size  to  those  usually  grown  in  our  glass-houses 
in  England.  We  had  passed  through  several  hundred 
acres  of  open  ground  that  were  as  white  from  the 
abundance  of  narcissus  as  an  English  meadow  might 
be  yellow  from  the  presence  of  buttercups. 

Our  camp  was  pitched  upon  a  small  level  plateau 
of  rock,  in  the  centre  of  which  was  a  well,  cut 
completely  through  the  stone  from  top  to  bottom. 
It  appeared  to  be  about  twenty-five  feet  deep,  but  was 
devoid  of  water  and  contained  a  considerable  amount 


io6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


of  rubbish.  The  people  assured  me  that  a  dead  Greek 
lay  beneath,  as  a  few  years  ago  some  Turks  had  killed 
one  of  their  people  and  thrown  him  into  the  well ;  they 
had  concealed  the  body  by  stones  and  rubbish,  and  no 
further  steps  had  been  taken  in  the  matter.  As  a  large 
crowd  of  children  of  both  sexes  were  sitting  round  us 
doing  nothing  but  stare,  I  set  them  to  work  to  clear 
the  surface  ground  from  loose  stones  and  to  sweep  the 
plateau  clean  with  boughs  from  the  wild  cypress. 
When  this  was  finished  I  gave  them  a  scramble  for 
several  handfuls  of  copper  coins  upon  the  cleared 
area,  to  impress  them  pleasantly  upon  their  work  of 
cleanliness ;  this  new  game  became  very  popular,  and 
might  be  introduced  by  the  British  government  with 
a  certainty  of  gaining  the  admiration  of  the  Cypriotes, 
especially  during  the  collection  of  taxes  ;  the  latter 
being  an  Anglo-Turkish  game  which  is  not  yet 
sufficiently  appreciated. 

The  women  were  of  the  same  type  that  we  had  seen 
in  other  districts,  but  they  appeared  sickly,  and  many  of 
the  children  were  extremely  delicate.  There  was  the 
usual  protuberance  of  the  abdomen  to  which  I  have 
before  alluded  ;  and  I  found  upon  examination  of  the 
children  that  an  enlargement  of  the  spleen  was  a 
chronic  complaint.  This  is  due  to  repeated  attacks 
of  ague.  I  drew  the  attention  of  the  people  to  the 
so  general  mistake  in  this  island  of  selecting  a  site  for 
their  villages  in  the  most  unhealthy  localities.  We  were 
now  camped  upon  a  height  about  eighty  feet  above  the 
valley,  which  resembled  a  basin  beneath  our  feet ;  the 
village  was  on  the  lower  level  of  this  basin,  and  as  near 
the  level  of  the  sea  as  possible.  In  heavy  rains  the 
valley  became  a  temporary  swamp,  and  it  seemed  un- 
accountable that  human  beings  endowed  with  common 


V.J 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  107 


sense  should  have  selected  the  low  ground  instead  of  the 
immediate  heights.  The  explanation  was  "  that  as  the 
village  was  built  of  mud-bricks,  the  houses  had  been 
erected  as  near  as  possible  to  the  source  of  the 
material,  mvd!''  to  avoid  the  difficulty  of  carriage 
in  the  absence  of  carts. 

The  people  were  as  usual  dressed  in  cotton  stuffs 
of  home  manufacture,  and  were  ignorant  of  such  a 
material  as  flannel;  the  children  were  only  half-clad, 
and  shivering  ;  their  food  was  generally  raw,  com- 
prising olives,  oil,  onions,  and  wild  vegetables,  such 
as  artichokes,  wild  mustard,  and  a  variety  of  trash 
that  in  England  would  only  be  regarded  as  **  weeds." 
There  were  some  pretty  intelligent  little  girls  and 
boys ;  some  of  these  were  chewing  mastic  gum,  a 
white  leathery  substance  which  they  gathered  from 
incisions  in  the  bark  of  this  common  shrub.  My  wife 
found  fault  with  the  neglect  of  cleanliness,  as  their 
teeth,  although  even,  were  totally  uncared  for.  On 
the  following  morning  they  all  assembled  and  exhibited 
a  show  of  nice  white  teeth,  as  they  had  followed  her 
advice  and  cleaned  them  with  wood-ashes  and  their 
forefingers,  in  lieu  of  a  toothbrush.  We  saw  these 
children  again  a  month  afterwards  upon  our  return, 
and  they  ran  across  the  fields  to  meet  us,  at  once 
opening  their  mouths  to  show  that  they  had  not 
forgotten  the  lesson,  and  that  their  teeth  were  properly 
attended  to.  I  pitied  all  these  poor  people :  they  are 
downtrodden  and  miserable  in  mind  and  body.  Instead 
of  squeezing  them  for  taxes  they  should  be  supported 
and  encouraged  by  government  assistance  in  every 
manner  possible.  Centuries  of  oppression  and  neglect 
in  addition  to  a  deceptive  climate  have  rendered  them 
the  mere  slaves  of  circumstances,  but  they  exhibit  a 


io8  Cyprus  in  1879 


[CHAP. 


patience  and  stolid  endurance  which  is  beyond  all 
praise ;  and  when  Cyprus  shall  belong  absolutely  to 
Great  Britain,  so  that  the  Cypriotes  shall  feel  that 
they  are  British  subjects,  they  will  become  the  most 
amenable  and  contented  people  in  the  Empire. 

The  usual  difficulty  exists  in  passing  through  this 
island  which  is  felt  by  most  English  travellers  in  wild 
countries.  The  sick  invariably  assemble,  believing 
that  your  medical  knowledge  will  produce  miraculous 
cures ;  and  the  lame,  halt,  and  blind  besiege  you  : 
even  cripples  from  their  birth  are  brought  by  their 
hopeful  mothers  to  receive  something  from  your 
medicine-chest  that  will  restore  them  to  strength.  It 
was  in  vain  that  I  explained  to  these  afflicted  people 
that  spleen-disease  required  a  long  course  of  medicine, 
and  could  not  be  cured  in  a  day.  It  was  equally  in 
vain  that  I  assured  them  that  raw  vegetables  were 
unwholesome  for  children,  and  that  sea-bathing  was 
invigorating  to  the  system :  they  hated  bathing  ;  so 
did  the  children  ;  and  they  liked  raw  vegetables.  I 
was  obliged  to  give  them  some  trifle  which  could 
neither  do  harm  nor  good  ;  and  they  went  away 
contented. 

I  now  discovered  from  the  head-men  of  the  village 
the  cause  of  the  wreck  which  was  lying  in  the  bay. 
An  Austrian  steamer  was  conveying  1200  Circassians 
from  Constantinople  to  some  port  on  the  coast  of  Asia 
Minor,  when  the  wild  horde  of  emigrants  mutinied 
and  threatened  to  murder  the  chief  officers.  The 
captain  accordingly  ran  the  vessel  ashore  upon  this 
coast,  having  ordered  the  engineer  to  blow  up  the 
boilers. 

A  great  number  of  the  mutineers  perished  in  the 
attempt   to   land,    but   the  captain  and  officers   were 


^9^^np 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  109 


hospitably  received  by  the  people  of  Volokalida  and 
forwarded  to  Famagousta.  The  vessel  was  pierced 
amidships  by  a  rock  that  had  completely  impaled  her, 
otherwise  she  might  have  been  saved  and  repaired. 

We  left  this  village  on  March  4th,  a  heavy  but 
welcome  shower  on  the  preceding  day  having  laid 
the  dust  and  freshened  the  vegetation.  The  route 
lay  through  a  hilly  and  rocky  country  covered  with 
the  usual  evergreens.  We  quickly  lost  our  way  and 
arrived  at  a  complete  cul-de-sac  in  the  corner  of  a 
narrow  swampy  valley.  Retracing  our  steps  we  met 
two  men  mounted  on  donkeys,  who  with  extreme 
civility  turned  from  their  own  direction  and  became 
our  guides.  We  passed  over  a  hill  of  solid  crystallised 
gypsum,  which  sparkled  in  the  sun  like  glass,  and 
after  a  march  of  about  ten  miles  through  a  lovely 
country  we  ascended  to  the  plateau  of  Lithrankomi 
and  halted  at  the  monastery.  The  priest  was  an 
agreeable,  well-mannered  man,  and  as  rain  had  begun 
to  fall  he  insisted  upon  our  accepting  his  invitation  to 
await  the  arrival  of  our  luggage  under  his  roof.  We 
visited  his  curious  old  church,  which  is  sadly  out  of 
repair,  and  the  mosaic,  of  a  coarse  description,  which 
covered  an  arched  ceiling,  has  mostly  disappeared. 

This  was  the  most  agreeable  position  that  I  had 
seen  in  Cyprus.  A  very  extensive  plateau  about  400 
feet  above  the  sea  formed  a  natural  terrace  for  seven 
or  eight  miles,  backed  by  the  equally  flat  hill-tops 
which  rose  only  half  a  mile  behind  the  monastery. 
These  were  covered  with  the  Pinus  maritima,  none  of 
which  exceeded  twenty  feet  in  height,  and  resembled  a 
thriving  young  plantation  in  England.  From  the  flat 
pine-covered  tableland  I  had  a  very  beautiful  view  of 
the  sea  on  either  side  this  narrow  portion  of  the  island, 


no  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


and  of  the  richly-wooded  slopes  both  north  and  south, 
cut  by  deep  and  dark  water-riven  gorges,  with  white 
cliffs  which  descended  to  the  shore.  Villages  and 
snow-white  churches  lay  beneath  in  all  directions,  and 
the  crops  had  a  far  more  favourable  appearance  than 
those  of  the  Messaria,  as  this  portion  of  the  country 
had  experienced  a  superior  rainfall. 

It  is  much  to  be  regretted  that  the  total  absence  of 
roads  excludes  this  district  from  general  communication. 
We  were  struck  by  the  fantastic  scenery  of  deep 
ravines,  rocks  covered  with  evergreens  of  varying 
colours,  and  handsome  caroub-trees  which  would  have 
ornamented  an  English  park ;  .  mulberry-trees  were 
very  numerous,  but  at  this  season  they  were  barren  of 
leaves  ;  the  only  want  lay  in  the  absence  of  oranges  and 
lemons,  which  the  priest  assured  me  would  not  thrive 
in  this  locality.  For  the  last  two  months  I  had 
cordially  detested  Cyprus,  but  I  was  now  converted  to 
a  belief  that  some  portions  of  the  country  were 
thoroughly  enjoyable,  provided  that  a  traveller  could 
be  contented  with  rough  fare  and  be  accustomed  to 
the  happy  independence  of  a  camp-life  with  a  good 
tent  and  hardy  servants.  The  temperature  was  a 
little  too  low  for  out-door  existence,  as  it  averaged  48° 
at  7  A.M.  and  54°  at  3  p.m.,  which  is  the  hottest  hour 
of  the  day  ;  but  we  were  all  well,  and  free  from  colds  ; 
the  servants  had  plenty  of  warm  blankets,  and  the 
false  floor  that  I  had  arranged  added  greatly  to  their 
comfort  when  camping  upon  the  sodden  ground. 

I  had  become  convinced  that  "  the  man  of  ability  " 
Theodori  had  deceived  me,  and  that  it  would  be 
impossible  for  the  two-wheeled  carts,  or  any  other 
conveyance,  to  travel  through  this  country.  Our  last 
two  marches  had  proved  that  not  only  would  the  delay 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  i  i  i 


be  serious,  but  the  luggage  would  be  destroyed  by  the 
extreme  jolting  over  rocks  and  ruts,  which  had  already 
injured  several  of  our  boxes  and  broken  some  useful 
articles.  Every  package  seemed  to  assume  an  in- 
dividual vitality  and  to  attack  its  neighbour  ;  the  sharp- 
cornered  metal  boxes  endeavoured  to  tunnel  through 
the  cases  of  wine  and  liquors,  which  in  retaliation 
bumped  against  and  bruised  their  antagonists,  and  a 
few  marches  had  already  caused  more  mischief  than  a 
twelvemonth's  journey  by  camels.  The  priest  assured 
me  that  it  would  be  madness  to  attempt  a  march 
beyond  Gallibornu,  about  eleven  miles  in  advance,  and 
that  he  doubted  the  possibility  of  the  carts  reaching 
that  point,  which  certainly  had  never  been  visited  by 
any  wheeled  conveyances.  The  honest,  strong,  but 
unintelligent  driver  Georgi  was  innocent,  and  he  was 
at  the  time  as  ignorant  as  myself  that  the  true  object 
of  the  "man  of  ability"  Theodori  was  to  deal  in 
cattle,  which  was  his  reason  for  persisting  in  ac- 
companying me  into  the  Carpas  country  and  declaring 
that  the  route  was  practicable  for  carts.  We  left 
Lithrankomi  on  5th  March  after  a  shower  which  made 
the  earth  slippery  and  the  dangerous  portions  of  the 
route  rather  exciting  for  the  carts.  The  first  two  or 
three  miles  lay  along  the  level  terrace  commanding  a 
splendid  view  of  the  sea  about  four  miles  distant.  We 
passed  through  several  villages,  and  the  crops  looked 
well.  At  length  we  emerged  upon  a  wild  portion  of 
the  plateau  which  resembled  a  park,  the  surface  being 
green  and  diversified  by  ornamental  clumps  of  ever- 
greens ;  upon  our  left  was  the  cliff-like  higher  terrace 
which  formed  the  table-top  from  which  the  usual  huge 
blocks  had  been  detached  and  fallen  like  inverted  cot- 
tages to  the  lower  level.     The  view  on  our  right  was 


112  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


exceedingly  interesting,  as  we  had  now  arrived  upon 
the  extreme  verge  of  the  terrace,  which  broke  down 
suddenly  into  a  horseshoe-shaped  amphitheatre,  the 
steep  sides  covered  with  bushes  and  trees,  to  the 
bottom  of  a  valley  some  300  feet  below,  which  drained 
through  a  narrow  and  richly-wooded  gorge  into  the 
neighbouring  sea. 

This  scooping-out  of  the  country  was  due  to  the 
action  of  water,  and  the  same  process  was  gradually 
wearing  away  the  upper  plateaux,  which  by  absorbing 
rain  became  undermined  as  it  percolated  through 
and  dissolved  the  marly  substratum.  The  foundation 
of  the  rock  surface  being  softened  by  the  water, 
oozed  in  the  form  of  mud,  and  was  washed  down 
the  steep  declivities,  followed  by  the  breaking-down 
of  the  unsupported  upper  stratum.  This  district  was 
an  admirable  illustration  of  the  decay  and  denudation 
of  surface  which  has  produced  the  plain  of  Messaria, 
to  which  I  have  already  alluded,  but  as  no  sufficient 
area  exists  at  a  lower  level  the  deposit  of  soil  is 
carried  to  the  sea.  We  now  arrived  at  a  dangerous 
pass  that  defied  all  attempts  to  descend  by  carts.  A 
succession  of  zigzags  at  an  inclination  of  about  one 
foot  in  two  and  a  half  led  down  the  soil  of  a  cliff  into 
a  succession  of  exceedingly  narrow  valleys  about  three 
hundred  feet  below.  In  many  places  this  narrow  path 
had  been  washed  away  by  the  same  natural  process 
that  was  gradually  reducing  the  upper  level,  and  in 
the  sharp  angles  of  the  zigzags  there  were  awkward 
gaps  with  only  a  few  inches  of  slippery  soil  rendered 
soapy  by  the  mornings  rain,  a  slip  of  the  original 
path  having  crumbled  down  the  precipice  below. 
The  animals  were  wonderfully  careful,  and  although 
a    nervous    person    might    have    shuddered   at   some 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  i  i  3 


awkward  points,  both  mule  and  ponies  were  thoroughly 
self-confident  and  safely  carried  us  to  the  bottom. 
But  the  carts  ?  These  were  making  a  circuit  of  some 
miles  across  country  in- the  endeavour  to  discover  a 
practicable  route. 

Although  the  way  was  difficult,  it  was  the  more 
agreeable  as  the  scenery  was  extremely  picturesque. 
The  narrow  valleys  were  without  exception  cultivated, 
which  formed  a  striking  contrast  to  the  exceedingly 
wild  heights  by  which  they  were  surrounded,  and  I 
remarked  that  not  a  yard  of  available  land  was 
neglected,  but  that  small  and  precipitous  hollows 
were  banked  by  rough  stone  walls,  to  retain  the 
soil  that  would  otherwise  be  washed  away,  and  to 
form  terraces  of  insignificant  extent  for  the  sake  of 
cultivation.  Our  animals  could  amble  at  five  or  six 
miles  an  hour  along  these  narrow  bottoms,  which  made 
up  for  the  delay  in  descending  the  bad  places.  My 
dogs  were  in  the  best  spirits,  as  they  had  moved  a 
considerable  number  of  partridges  during  this  morn- 
ings march,  and  they  heard  the  peculiar  loud  "  chuck- 
a-chuck,  chuck-a-chuck,"  of  the  red-legs  in  all  directions. 
As  we  advanced  the  hills  increased  in  height,  and  we 
passed  through  a  valley,  bordered  on  the  right  by 
abrupt  cliffs,  forming  a  wall-like  summit  to  the  ex- 
ceedingly steep  slope  beneath,  which  had  been  created 
by  the  dibris  from  the  wasting  face  of  rock.  This 
flat-topped  height  may  have  been  about  500  feet 
above  the  valley,  and  the  white  cliff,  which  was 
quite  perpendicular  from  the  summit  for  about  one 
hundred  feet  to  the  commencement  of  the  steep  green 
slope  beneath,  was  in  one  place  artificially  scarped, 
and  had  been  cut  perfectly  smooth  like  the  wall  of 
a  stone  building.     In  the  centre  of  this  smooth  face 

I 


114  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


we  could  plainly  distinguish  a  square-cut  entrance, 
to  which  an  exceedingly  narrow  ledge  cut  in  the  rock 
formed  a  most  dangerous  approach,  more  adapted  for 
wild  cats  than  for  human  occupants.  I  halted  to 
examine  this  with  a  good  glass,  and  I  could  perceive 
that  the  greatest  care  had  been  taken  in  the  formation 
of  a  smooth  perpendicular  front,  and  that  the  narrow 
ledge  which  formed  the  approach  was  a  natural  feature 
that  had  been  artificially  improved.  There  were 
several  similar  lines  observable  at  unequal  distances 
nearly  parallel  with  each  other :  these  were  the  natural 
limits  of  overlying  strata  in  the  sedimentary  rock, 
which,  as  the  general  surface  had  fallen  through  decay, 
still  preserved  their  character,  and  formed  ledges.  My 
guide  assured  us  that  the  entire  cliff  was  honey- 
combed by  internal  galleries,  which  had  been  con- 
structed by  the  ancients  as  a  place  of  refuge  that 
would  contain  several  thousand  persons,  and  that  a 
well  existed  in  the  interior,  which  from  a  great  depth 
supplied  the  water.  I  have  never  seen  a  notice  of  this 
work  in  any  book  upon  Cyprus,  and  I  regret  that  I 
had  no  opportunity  of  making  a  close  examination  of 
the  artificial  cave,  which,  from  the  accounts  I  received, 
remains  in  a  perfect  state  to  the  present  moment 

It  was  a  wild  route  to  Gallibornu,  through  a  suc- 
cession of  small  valleys  separated  by  wooded  heights, 
and  bounded  by  hills,  either  bare  in  white  cliffs,  or  with 
steep  slopes  thickly  covered  with  evergreens.  We 
passed  a  few  miserable  villages,  one  of  which  was 
solely  inhabited  by  gipsies,  who  came  out  to  meet 
us  clad  in  rags  and  extremely  filthy,  but  the  faces 
of  the  women  were  good-looking.  We  crossed  nu- 
merous watercourses  in  the  narrow  bottoms  between 
the  hills ;  their  steep  banks  were  fringed  with  bushes 


v.]  Start  for  the  Carpas.  i  1 5 

which  formed  likely  spots  for  woodcocks,  but  my  dogs 
found  nothing  upon  the  route  except  a  few  partridges 
and  francolin,  although,  as  usual,  they  hunted  through- 
out the  march.  After  crossing  a  series  of  steep  hills, 
and  observing  a  marked  contrast  in  the  habits  of  the 
people,  who  cpnstructed  their  dwellings  upon  the 
heights  instead  of  in  the  unhealthy  glens,  we  arrived 
in  the  closely  pent-in  valley  that  forms  the  approach 
to  Gallibornu.  This  village  is  of  considerable  extent, 
and  is  inhabited  exclusively  by  Turks.  We  entered 
the  valley  through  a  narrow  gap  between  the  hills, 
which  on  our  left  formed  perpendicular  cliffs,  with 
the  usual  steep  slopes  of  debris  near  the  base.  The 
upper  cliffs,  about  400  feet  above  the  lower  level, 
were  marked  with  numerous  parallel  ledges  and  were 
full  of  blue-rock  pigeons,  which  built  their  nests  in  the 
clefts  and  crevices  ;  the  summits  of  these  heights  were 
the  table-tops  which  characterise  this  formation. 

It  was  difficult  to  select  a  camping-place,  as  the 
valley  would  become  mud  in  the  event  of  heavy 
rains.  We  had  experienced  daily  showers  since  we 
left  Volokalida,  and  the  lower  grounds  were  damp  ; 
I  disliked  the  immediate  neighbourhood  of  a  village, 
and  the  only  available  spot  was  rather  dangerous,  as 
it  was  situated  upon  a  flattish  knoll,  so  near  the  base 
of  the  cliff  that  enormous  blocks  of  stone  many  tons 
in  weight  lay  in  all  directions,  which  had  fallen  from 
the  impending  heights.  I  examined  these,  and  found 
some  that  were  comparatively  recent ;  I  had  also 
observed  upon  our  entrance  to  the  valley  that  a  great 
portion  of  the  cliff  face  had  lately  fallen,  forming  an 
avalanche  of  rocks  that  would  have  destroyed  a 
village :  this  my  guide  informed  me  was  the  result  of 
last  year's   excessive  rain.      I   examined   the   heights 

I  2 


ii6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


above  us  with  my  glass,  and  observed  some  crags  that 
Polyphemus  would  have  delighted  to  hurl  upon  Acis 
when  courting  his  Galatea ;  but  as  no  Cyclops  existed 
in  this  classical  island  I  determined  to  risk  the 
chances  of  a  rock-displacement  and  to  pitch  the  tent 
upon  a  flat  surface  among  the  fallen  blocks.  As  a 
rule  such  localities  should  be  avoided.  It  is  impossible 
to  calculate  the  probable  downfall  of  a  crag,  which, 
having  formed  a  portion  of  the  cliff,  has  been  under- 
mined by  the  breaking  away  of  lower  rocks,  and, 
overhanging  the  perpendicular,  may  be  secure  during 
dry  weather,  but  may  become  dislodged  in  heavy  rain, 
when  the  cement-like  surroundings  are  dissolved  :  the 
serious  vibration  caused  by  thunder  might  in  such 
conditions  produce'  an  avalanche.  We  dug  a  deep 
trench  round  the  tents,  as  the  weather  looked  overcast 
and  stormy. 

The  village  of  Gallibornu  was  about  half  a  mile 
beyond  our  camp  at  the  extreme  end  of  the  valley,  but 
situated  on  the  heights.  The  people  were  extremely 
civil,  and  it  would  be  difficult  to  determine  the 
maximum  degree  of  courtesy  between  the  Turks  and 
Greeks  of  Cyprus.  I  strolled  with  my  dogs  up  the 
steep  hill-sides,  and  the  Turks,  seeing  that  I  was  fond 
of  shooting,  promised  to  accompany  me  on  the  following 
morning  to  some  happy  hunting-ground,  which,  from 
my  Cyprian  experience,  I  believed  was  mythical. 

On  waking  the  next  day  I  found  the  Turks,  true  to 
their  promise,  already  assembled  by  the  servants*  tent, 
and  eight  men  were  awaiting  me  with  their  guns. 
They  had  a  sporting  dog  to  assist  them,  which  they 
described  as  "very  useful  for  following  a  wounded 
hare  ;  only  it  was  necessary  to  be  quick  in  securing  it, 
otherwise  the  dog  would  eat  it  before  your  arrival.*' 


v.i 


Start  for  the  Carp  as.  i  i  7 


I   advised  them  to  leave  this  **  useful  dog  *'  behind,  as 
hostilities  might   be   declared   by  my   three    English 
spaniels  in  the   event  of   his  swallowing  a  wounded 
hare.     This    being   agreed    to,   we    all    started,  and, 
crossing  the  valley,  entered  a  gorge  upon  the  other 
side.    We  now  ascended  naked  hills  of  pure  crystallised 
gypsum  ;  the  strata  were  vertical,   and   the   perfectly 
transparent  laminae  were  packed   together  like  small 
sheets  of  glass  only  a  few  inches  in  width.     It  was  * 
easy  to  walk  up  the  steep  slopes  of  this  material  without 
slipping,  as  the  exterior  edges,  having  been  exposed  to 
the  weather,  had  become  rough,  and  were  exactly  like 
coarse  glass  placed  edgeways.     We  spread  out  into  a 
line  of  skirmishers  extending  up  the  hills  upon  both 
sides  of  the  gorge,  and  quickly  arrived  in  very  likely 
ground  covered  with  dwarf-cypress.      Here  the  dogs 
immediately  flushed  partridges,  and   a   Turk   having 
wounded    one,    a    considerable    delay   took  place    in 
searching  for  it  at  the  bottom  of  a  deep  wooded  hollow, 
but  to  no  purpose.     We  now  arrived  at  lovely  ground 
within  a  mile  of  the  sea,  forming  a  long  succession  of 
undulations,   covered,   more   or   less,   with   the  usual 
evergreen  brushwood  as  far  as  the  eye  could  reach. 
This  uneven  surface,  broken  by  many  watercourses, 
was   about   eighty   feet   above    the    water-level,    and 
descended    in    steep    rocky    ledges   to  within   a  few 
hundred  yards  of  the  sea,  where  the  lower  ground  was 
flat  and  alternated  in  open  glades  and  thick  masses  of 
mastic  scrub ;  the  beach  being  edged  by  drift  sand- 
dunes  covered  by  the  dense  jungle  of  various  matted 
bushes. 

There  was  a  fair  amount  of  game  in  this  locality, 
and  had  the  Turks  shot  well  we  should  have  made  a 
tolerable  bag ;  but  they  did  not  keep  a  good  line,  and 


ii8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


many  birds  went  back  without  being  shot  at,  while 
others  were  missed,  and  altogether  the  shooting  was 
extremely  wild.  The  sun  was  hot  by  the  time  we  had 
concluded  our  beat ;  I  had  shot  five  brace  and  one 
hare,  including  some  francolins ;  and  the  rest  of  the 
party  had  collectively  bagged  three  brace.  It  was 
late  in  the  season  for  shooting,  but  the  birds  were  not 
all  paired,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  in  the  month  of 
September  this  portion  of  the  island  would  afford  fair 
sport,  although'  no  great  bags  could  be  expected.  I  was 
surprised  at  the  absence  of  woodcocks ;  throughout 
my  rambles  in  Cyprus  I  had  only  seen  one,  although* 
they  were  cheap  in  the  market  of  Larnaca.  The  fact 
is  that  every  bird  shot  by  the  natives  is  sent  straight 
for  sale ;  therefore  an  immense  area  is  hunted  for  the 
small  supply  required  by  the  Europeans  in  the  prin- 
cipal towns.  Upon  our  return  homewards  we  passed 
through  a  considerable  space  occupied  by  ancient 
ruins.  Among  the  masses  of  stones  and  broken 
pottery  were  two  stone  sarcophagi,  which  appeared  to 
have  been  converted  into  drinking-troughs  for  cattle. 
As  with  all  the  ruins  of  Cyprus,  nothing  of  interest 
exists  upon  the  surface,  and  the  tombs  having  been  for 
many  centuries  excavated  and  despoiled,  it  is  probable 
that  the  sarcophagi  had  been  brought  to  light  by 
treasure-seekers  many  years  ago. 

As  we  approached  Gallibornu  by  a  mountain  path 
the  Turks  assured  me  that  we  should  find  good 
drinking-water ;  we  were  all  thirsty,  including  the 
dogs,  who  had  drunk  nothing  for  some  hours.  At 
length,  at  a  considerable  elevation  between  two  hills, 
we  reached  a  spring,  and  I  was  shown  a  well  where 
the  water  was  only  a  few  feet  from  the  surface.  The 
Turks  now  pointed  to  the  perpendicular  face  of  a  cliff 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  119 


and  desired  me  to  follow  them;  at  the  same  time  I 
could  not  understand  their  attempted  explanations 
either  by  word  or  pantomime.  We  kept  on  an  ex- 
tremely narrow  path  which  skirted  the  steep  side  of 
the  slope,  and  presently  arrived  at  a  ledge  about 
sixteen  inches  wide  upon  the  perpendicular  face  of 
the  cliff,  which  descended  sheer  for  a  considerable 
depth  beneath..  I  was  requested  to  leave  my  gun 
against  a  rock  and  to  follow.  It  was  all  very  well 
for  these  people,  who  knew  exactly  where  they  were 
going,  but  I  had  not  the  slightest  idea  of  my  desti- 
nation, unless  it  should  be  the  bottom  of  the  cliff, 
which  appeared  to  me  most  probable,  if  I,  who  was 
many  inches  broader  in  the  shoulders  than  my  guides, 
should  be  expected  to  join  in  the  game  of  "  follow  the 
leader  *'  upon  a  narrow  ledge  against  the  face  of  the 
rock  which  afforded  no  hold  whatever.  I  was  not  so 
fond  of  climbing  as  I  had  been  thirty  years  ago,  and  to 
my  infinite  disgust  the  ledge,  which  was  already  horribly 
small,  became  narrower  as  we  proceeded.-  There  was 
a  nasty  projecting  corner  to  turn,  and  at  this  point  I 
saw  my  guides  look  down  below,  and  I  fancied  they 
were  speculating  upon  the  depth.  Instead  of  this,  the 
leader  began  to  descend  the  perpendicular  face  by 
small  ladder-like  steps  hewn  in  the  rock,  and  in  this 
manner  gained  another  ledge  not  quite  six  feet  below. 
We  all  reached  this  precarious  shelf,  and  the  guide, 
having  turned,  continued  for  some  twenty  or  thirty 
yards  in  an  exactly  contrary  direction  to  the  ledge 
above  us,  by  which  we  had  just  arrived  ;  we  were  thus 
retracing  our  steps  upon  a  similar  ledge  at  a  lower 
level.  Suddenly  the  leader  stopped,  and  stooping  low, 
crept  into  a  square  aperture  that  had  been  carefully 
cut  out  of  the  rock  face  to  form  an  entrance.     This 


120  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


passage  inclined  slightly  inwards,  and  after  a  few 
paces  forward,  with  the  body  curved  in  the  uncomfort- 
able form  of  a  capital  C,  we  arrived  in  a  spacious 
gallery  cut  into  a  succession  of  arches,  the  centre  of 
which  was  six  feet  high.  A  small  window,  about  three 
feet  by  two,  was  cut  through  the  rock  to  admit  light 
and  air,  from  which  I  could  with  a  rifle  have 
completely  commanded  the  glen  below  and  the 
approach  to  the  left.  There  was  no  ledge  beneath 
the  window,  but  simply  the  sheer  precipice  of  the 
smooth  cliff,  and  there  was  no  other  approach  to  this 
extraordinary  place  of  refuge  except  that  by  which  we 
had  arrived.  The  gallery  was  neatly  cut,  and  extended 
for  an  unknown  distance :  several  other  galleries,  arched 
in  the  same  manner  and  of  the  same  Size,  branched  off 
at  right  angles  with  that  we  had  entered.  I  was  led 
to  a  well,  which  was  represented  as  being  deep,  and  I 
was  informed  that  the  hill  was  perforated  with  similar 
galleries,  all  of  which  communicated  with  each  other. 
I  much  regretted  that  we  were  unprovided  with 
candles ;  one  of  the  Turks  lighted  a  match,  but  it 
only  served  to  increase  the  uncertainty  of  the  sur- 
rounding darkness. 

This  must  be  a  similar  cave-refuge  to  that  we  had 
passed  about  four  miles  distant  when  on  our  way  from 
Lithrankomi  to  Gallibornu,  and  it  deserves  a  minute  in- 
vestigation. As  I  could  see  nothing  beyond  about  thirty 
feet  from  the  window,  owing  to  the  darkness,  I  cannot 
give  any  account  of  the  actual  dimensions,  which  may 
be  much  inferior  to  the  unlimited  descriptions  of  my 
informants.  Upon  my  return  to  camp  I  had  the 
benefit  of  my  interpreter,  and  the  story  was  repeated 
that  no  one  knew  the  extent  of  the  excavations,  either 
of  these  galleries  or  those  we  had  passed  during  our 


V.3  Start  for  the  Carpas.  121 

journey.  I  have  never  seen  a  very  large  natural  cave 
in  Cyprus,  although  the  caverns  beneath  the  superficial 
stratum  of  sedimentary  rock  are  so  general  The 
presence  of  these  hollows,  and  the  soft  nature  of  the 
calcareous  stone,  has  suggested  artificial  caves  to  the 
ancients,  both  for  tombs  and  for  places  of  refuge. 
Before  the  invention  of  gunpowder  it  would  have  been 
impossible  to  reduce  a  fort  such  as  I  have  described, 
except  by  starvation.  A  mine  sunk  vertically  from 
above  would  in  the  present  day  destroy  the  subterranean 
stronghold  at  the  first  explosion. 

It  rained  more  or  less  every  day  during  our  stay 
at  Gallibornu,  and  thunder  rolled  heavily  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood ;  but  in  the  narrow  valley  between  lofty  hills 
the  sky  view  was  so  limited  that  it  was  impossible  to 
judge  of  the  impending  weather.  The  earth  was  too 
slippery  for  camels,  which  I  had  engaged  with  an 
excellent  Turk,  who  for  some  years  had  been  a 
zaphtieh,  therefore  it  was  necessary  to  wait  patiently 
until  the  surface  should  become  dry.  I  amused  myself 
with  wandering  over  the  hills  with  my  dogs,  examining 
the  rocks,  and  shooting  sufficient  game  for  our  own 
use.  I  could  generally  bag  enough  for  my  lad  to  carry 
home  conveniently  over  this  rugged  country,  and  a 
hare  or  two  in  addition  to  partridges  were  more 
appreciated  when  stewed  than  when  carried  up  the 
precipitous  hills.  I  never  tasted  any  game  so  delicious 
as  the  Cyprian  hares;  they  are  not  quite  so  red  or 
curly  as  the  European  species,  but  the  flesh  is  ex- 
ceedingly rich,  and  possesses  a  peculiarly  gamey 
flavour,  owing  to  the  aromatic  food  upon  which 
they  live.  It  is  difficult  to  obtain  a  shot  in  the 
thick  coverts  of  mastic  bush,  and  without  dogs  I 
do  not  think  I  should  have  shot  one,  as   they  were 


122  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

generally  in  dense  thickets  upon  the  mountain  sides, 
through  which  beaters  could  have  hardly  moved. 

The  high  cliffs  above  us  formed  an  excellent 
example  of  an  old  sea-bottom,  showing  the  various 
strata  of  sedimentary  deposits  at  different  periods. 
I  made  a  collection  of  fossil  shells,  which  were  in 
great  numbers  but  in  limited  variety,  and  chiefly 
bivalves. 

Although  the  village  of  Gallibornu  was  more  im- 
portant in  size  than  many  we  had  passed,  there  was 
a  total  lack  of  supplies.  It  was  impossible  to  purchase 
bread,  and  we  were  obliged  to  send  messengers  to 
considerable  distances  to  procure  flour,  which  we 
subsequently  employed  a  woman  to  bake.  The 
people  generally  were  very  poor  throughout  the 
country,  and  the  cultivated  area  appeared  insufficient 
for  the  support  of  the  population.  Every  yard  of 
land  was  ploughed,  but  the  entire  valley  of  Galli- 
bornu was  fallowed,  and  did  not  possess  one  blade 
of  corn,  as  the  soil  required  rest  after  the  yield  of 
the  previous  season.  None  of  these  people  have 
an  idea  respecting  a  succession  of  crops  in  scientific 
rotation,  therefore  a  loss  is  sustained  by  the  impover- 
ishment of  the  ground,  which  must  occasionally  lie 
inactive  to  recover  its  fertility.  There  is  absolutely 
no  provision  whatever  for  the  cattle  in  the  shape  of 
root-crops  or  hay,  but  they  trust  entirely  to  the 
bruised  barley-straw  and  such  seeds  as  the  cotton 
and  lentil.  At  this  season  the  Carpas  district 
possessed  an  important  advantage  in  the  variety 
of  wild  vegetables  which  afforded  nourishment  for 
man  and  beast;  the  valleys  teemed  with  wild  arti- 
chokes and  with  a  variety  of  thistles,  whose  succulent 
stems  were  a  favourite  food  for  both  oxen  and  camels. 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  123 


The  leaf-stems  of  the  artichokes  were  peeled  and  eaten 
raw  by  the  inhabitants,  but  as  these  people  are  accus- 
tomed to  consume  all  kinds  of  uncooked  vegetables 
and  unripe  fruits  few  civilised  persons  would  indulge 
in  the  Cypriote  tastes.  We  found  the  artichoke  stems 
uneatable  in  a  raw  state,  but  remarkably  good  when 
peeled  and  stewed,  with  a  sauce  of  yolk  of  egg  beaten  up 
with  oil,  salt,  pepper,  and  lemon-juice ;  they  were  then 
quite  equal  to  sea-kale.  There  is  a  general  neglect  in 
the  cultivation  of  vegetables  which  I  cannot  under- 
stand, as  agriculture  is  the  Cypriote's  vocation ;  it  can 
hardly  be  called  laziness,  as  they  are  most  industrious 
in  their  fields,  and  expend  an  immense  amount  of 
labour  in  erecting  stone  walls  to  retain  a  small  amount 
of  soil  wherever  the  water-wash  from  a  higher  elevation 
brings  with  it  a  deposit.  The  insignificant  terraces 
thus  formed  by  earth  caught  in  its  descent  while  in 
solution  appear  disproportioned  to  the  labour  of  their 
construction,  and  the  laborious  system  would  suggest 
an  extreme  scarcity  of  land  suitable  for  agricultural 
operations.  I  believe  this  to  be  the  case,  and  that 
a  serious  mistake  has  been  made  in  assuming  that 
the  Crown  possesses  large  areas  of  land  that  may 
eventually  become  of  great  value.  There  are  govern- 
ment lands,  doubtless,  of  considerable  extent,  but  I 
question  their  agricultural  importance,  and  whenever 
the  ordnance-map  of  the  island  shall  be  completed 
a  wild  confusion  will  be  discovered  in  the  discrepancy 
of  title-deeds  with  the  amount  of  land  in  possession 
of  the  owners.  I  have,  whilst  shooting  in  the  wild 
tracts  of  scrub-covered  hills  and  mountains,  frequently 
emerged  upon  clearings  of  considerable  extent,  where 
the  natives  have  captured  a  fertile  plot  and  cleared  it 
for  cultivation,  far  away  from  the  eyes  of  all  authorities. 


124  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


I  believe  that  squatting  has  been  carried  on  for  many 
years,  as  during  the  Turkish  administration  a  trifling 
annual  present  would  have  closed  the  eyes  of  the 
never-too-zealous  official  who  by  such  an  oversight 
could  annually  improve  his  pay.  Land  suitable  for 
cultivation  cannot  possibly  be  in  excess  of  the  demand, 
when  plots  of  only  a  few  yards  square  are  carefully 
formed  by  the  erection  of  stone  walls  to  retain  the 
torrent-collected  soil. 

We  were  pestered  with  beggars  throughout  this 
district,  and  even  the  blind  saw  their  opportunity ;  their 
number  was  distressing,  and  they  could  not  account  in 
any  way  for  the  prevalence  of  ophthalmia.  Some  en- 
deavoured to  explain  the  cause  by  referring  it  to  the 
bright  reflection  from  the  sea,  to  which  they  were  so 
frequently  exposed ;  I  assured  them  that  sailors  were 
seldom  blind,  and  they  proved  the  rule.  Dirty  habits, 
dwellings  unwashed,  heaps  of  filth  lying  around  their 
houses  and  rotting  in  their  streets,  all  of  which  during 
the  hot  dry  summer  is  converted  into  pojsonous  dust, 
and,  driven  by  the  wind,  fills  the  eyes,  which  are  seldom 
cleansed — these  are  the  natural  causes  which  result  in 
ophthalmia. 

The  new  camels  were  ready,  and  with  six  of  these 
animals  we  left  Gallibornu  and  felt  relieved  to  have 
parted  with  the  carts,  as  for  several  marches  they  had " 
caused  great  delay  and  inconvenience.  Although 
Theodori  had  deceived  me  by  agreeing  to  conduct  us 
direct  to  Cape  St.  Andrea  I  did  not  like  to  discharge 
the  thick-headed  but  innocent  Georgi,  therefore  I 
offered  to  pay  them  a  certain  sum  which  they  them- 
selves named,  per  day,  for  the  keep  of  their  oxen, 
provided  they  should  return  with  their  empty  carts  to 
Lithrankomi  (one  march)  and  await  my  return  there ; 


V.J  Start  for  the  Carpas.  125 

after  which,  we  would  resume  the  original  contract, 
and  their  oxen  would  once  more  draw  the  vans  from 
their  station  at  Kuklia. 

This  was  an  extra  expense,  as  the  camels  were  now 
engaged  in  lieu  of  carts,  notwithstanding  that  I  should 
have  to  pay  for  the  oxen  ;  on  the  other  hand,  these 
animals  were  beautiful  specimens  of  their  kind,  and 
were  thoroughly  accustomed  to  the  gipsy- van,  therefore 
it  was  advisable  to  retain  them.  The  two  owners  were 
delighted  with  the  arrangement,  and  we  started  for  Cape 
St.  Andrea,  while  they  were  to  return  to  Lithrankomi. 

The  country  was  now  thoroughly  enjoyable  ;  the 
recent  daily  showers  had  freshened  all  vegetation,  and 
the  earth  was  a  carpet  of  wild  flowers,  including  scarlet 
ranunculus,  poppies,  a  very  pretty  dwarf  yellow  cistus 
resembling  bunches  of  primroses,  cyclamen,  narcissus, 
anemones — purple,  white,  and  a  peculiarly  bright  yellow 
variety. 

The  route  from  Gallibornu  was  extremely  wild  and 
picturesque,  combining  hills,  glens,  and  occasional  short 
glimpses  of  the  sea  between  the  gorges  which  cleft  the 
precipitous  range  upon  our  right.  The  rounded  and 
sparkling  tops  of  gypsum  hills  were  common  for  the  first 
few  miles ;  emerging  from  these,  we  threaded  a  ravine, 
and  arrived  upon  the  sea  beach,  and  continued  for  a 
-  considerable  distance  upon  the  margin  of  the  shore ; 
the  animals  scrambling  over  fallen  rocks  and  alternately 
struggling  through  the  deep  sand  and  banks  of  sea- 
weed piled  by  a  recent  gale.  We  now  entered  upon 
the  first  pure  sandstone  that  I  had  seen ;  this  was  a 
coffee-brown,  and  formed  the  substratum  of  the  usual 
sedimentary  limestone  which  capped  the  surface  of  the 
hill-tops.  The  appearance  was  peculiar,  as  the  cliffs  of 
brown  sandstone  were  crusted  for  a  depth  of  about 


126  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


eight  or  ten  feet  by  the  white  rock  abounding  with 
fossil  shells,  while  the  substratum  of  hard  sand  was  per- 
fectly devoid  of  all  traces  of  organic  matter.  The 
upheaval  of  a  sea-bottom  was  clearly  demonstrated. 
As  the  sandstone  had  decayed,  vast  fragments  of  the 
surface  rock  had  broken  down  when  undermined  and 
had  fallen  to  the  base  of  the  steep  inclines,  from  the 
interstices  of  which  a  dense  growth  of  evergreens 
produced  an  agreeable  harmony  of  colouring,  combin- 
ing various  shades  of  green  with  brown  cliffs  and 
white  masses  of  disjointed  limestone.  The  deep  blue 
of  the  sea  was  a  beautiful  addition  to  this  wild  scenery, 
and  after  threading  our  way  sometimes  between  narrow 
gorges,  at  other  places  along  sequestered  glens  which 
exhibited  young  crops  of  cereals  and  cultivated  olive- 
trees,  we  at  length  arrived  at  a  halting-place  upon  the 
seashore,  where  a  well  of  excellent  water  about  ten 
feet  from  the  surface  had  been  sunk  upon  the  sea- 
beach  within  fifty  yards  of  the  waves. 

This  was  the  best  camping-ground  we  had  had  in 
Cyprus ;  for  the  first  time  we  stood  upon  real  turf, 
green  with  recent  showers,  and  firmly  rooted  upon  a 
rich  sandy  loam.  A  cultivated  valley  lay  a  few  hundred 
yards  beyond  us,  completely  walled  in  by  high  hills 
covered  with  wild  olives,  arbutus,  and  dwarf-cypress, 
and  fronted  by  the  sea.  Some  fine  specimens  of  the 
broad-headed  and  shady  caroub-trees  gave  a  park-like 
appearance  to  the  valley,  through  which  a  running 
stream  entered  from  a  ravine  among  the  hills,  and,  wind- 
ing through  deep  banks  covered  with  myrtles  and 
oleanders,  expended  itself  upon  the  shingly  beach  in  the 
centre  of  the  bay.  This  sheltered  cove,  about  300 
yards  across  the  chord  of  the  arc,  formed  rather  more 
than  a  semicircle  by  the  natural  formation  of  the  coast, 


v.i 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  127 


and  was  further  improved  by  a  long  reef  of  hard 
sandstone,  which  extended  from  either  point  like  an 
artificial  breakwater. 

At  first  sight  the  little  bay  was  a  tempting  refuge, 
but  upon,  closer  examination  I  observed  ominous  dark 
patches  in  the  clear  water,  which  betokened  dangerous 
reefs,  and  other  light  green  portions  that  denoted 
sandy  shallows.  The  cove  is  useful  for  the  native 
small  craft,  but  would  be  unsuitable  to  vessels  of  more 
than  seven  feet  draught  of  water.  I  had  observed 
that  francolins  were  more  numerous  since  we  had 
arrived  upon  the  sandstone  formation,  and  the  cock 
birds  were  calling  in  all  directions ;  the  locality  was  so 
inviting  that  we  felt  inclined  to  remain  for  a  few  days 
in  such  a  delightful  spot ;  but  the  season  was  too  far 
advanced  for  shooting,  and  I  therefore  confined  myself  to 
killing  only  what  was  absolutely  necessary  for  our  food, 
and  I  invariably  selected  the  cock-birds  of  francolins. 
I  do  not  think  these  birds  pair  like  the  partridge,  but 
I  believe  the  cock  is  polygamous,  like  the  pheasant, 
as  I  generally  found  that  several  hens  were  in  his 
neighbourhood.  It  is  a  beautiful  game  bird,  the  male 
possessing  a  striking  plumage  of  deep  black  and  rich 
brown,  with  a  dark  ring  round  the  neck.  It  is  quite  a 
different  variety  to  the  mottle-breasted  species  that  I 
have  met  with  in  Mauritius,  Ceylon,  and  the  double- 
spur  francolin  that  I  have  shot  in  Africa.  It  is 
considerably  larger  than  the  common  partridge,  but 
not  quite  so  heavy  as  the  red-legged  birds  of  Cyprus, 
although  when  flying  it  appears  superior.  The  flesh 
is  white  and  exceedingly  delicate,  and  it  is  to  be 
regretted  that  so  valuable  a  game  bird  is  not  introduced 
into  England.  I  generally  found  the  francolin  in  the 
low  scrub,  although  I  have  pften  shot  it  either  in  the 


128  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


cultivated  fields  or  in  the  wild  prickly  low  plants  upon 
the  open  ground  which  have  been  misnamed  heather. 
The  habits  of  this  bird  have  nothing  in  common  with 
those  of  the  red-legged  partridge,  as  it  is  never  found 
upon  the  bare  rocky  hill-sides,  which  are  the  general 
resort  of  the  latter  annoying  species,  and  although  the 
scrub  bush  may  contain  both,  there  is  a  marked 
difference  in  their  character.  The  red-leg  is  a  deter- 
mined runner,  and  therefore  a  bad  game  bird  for  the 
shooter,  as  it  will  run  ahead  when  first  disturbed  and 
rise  far  beyond  shot  range,  instead  of  squatting  like 
the  grey  partridge  and  permitting  a  sporting  shot. 
The  francolin  is  never  found  upon  the  bare  hill-sides, 
neither  is  it  a  runner  in  the  open,  although  it  will 
occasionally  trouble  the  dogs  in  the  bush  by  refusing 
to  rise  until  they  have  followed  it  for  some  distance, 
precisely  as  pheasants  will  run  in  covert  until  halted 
by  the  "  stops  '*  or  by  a  net.  I  am  not  sure  of  the 
power  of  resistance  to  cold  possessed  by  the  francolins, 
as  they  are  seldom  met  with  upon  the  higher  mountains 
in  Cyprus,  but  are  generally  found  upon  the  inferior 
altitudes  and  low  grounds :  still  the  hazel-huhn  of 
Austria  is  a  species  of  francolin  which  resists  the 
intense  cold  of  a  central-European  winter. 

Only  one  march  remained  to  the  extreme  eastern 
limit  of  Cyprus,  Cape  St.  Andrea,  distant  fourteen 
miles.  The  country  was  exactly  similar  to  that  which 
we  had  recently  passed  through,  and  although  alike, 
it  could  hardly  be  called  monotonous,  as  the  eye  was 
never  fatigued.  The  few  inhabitants  were  poor  to  the 
last  degree ;  the  dwellings  were  mere  hovels.  We 
passed  deep  holes  in  the  ground,  the  sides  of  which 
were  baked  by  fire,  so  as  to  resemble  earthen  jars 
about  ten  feet  deep   and  seven  in   diameter,  with   a 


v.] 


Start  for  the  Carpas.  129 


small  aperture ;  these  were  subterranean  granaries,  the 
sure  sign  of  insecurity  before  the  British  occupation. 
The  flat-topped  hovels  had  the  usual  roofs  of  clay  and 
chopped  straw,  and  projected  two  or  three  feet  as  eaves 
beyond  the  walls,  which  were  of  stone  and  mud, 
exhibiting  the  crudest  examples  of  masonry.  The 
projecting  eaves  were  curiously  arranged  by  hooks  of 
cypress,  like  single-fluked  anchors  laid  horizontally, 
which  retained  beams,  upon  which  the  mud  and  straw 
were  laid ;  the  heavy  weight  of  the  earthen  roof  upon 
the  long  shanks  of  these  anchors  prevented  the  eaves 
from  overbalancing.  Enormous  heaps  of  manure  and 
filth  were  deposited  opposite  the  entrance  of  each 
dwelling,  and  in  the  Christian  villages  the  most  absurd 
pigs  ran  in  and  out  of  the  hovels,  or  slept  by  the  front 
door,  as  though  they  were  the  actual  proprietors. 
These  creatures  were  all  heads  and  legs,  and  closely 
resembled  the  black  and  white  representative  of  the 
race  well  known  to  every  child  in  the  Noah's  Ark. 

It  was  rather  disheartening  to  approach  the  extremity 
of  the  island,  and  upon  entering  a  long  narrow  valley 
our  guide  assured  us  that  although  no  apparent  exit 
existed,  we  should  ascend  a  precipitous  path  and 
immediately  see  the  point  of  Cape  St.  Andrea,  The 
valley  narrowed  to  a  point  without  any  visible  path. 
A  few  low  hills  covered  with  bush  were  backed  by 
cliff'-like  heights  of  about  300  feet  also  clothed  by 
evergreens.  Upon  our  right,  just  below  the  steep 
ascent,  were  sand-dunes  and  the  sea.  We  now  observed 
the  narrow  streak  of  white  upon  the  hillside^  amidst  the 
green  which  marked  the  path-  We  had  left  the  brown 
sandstone,  and  once  again  were  upon  the  white  cal- 
careous rock.  Our  animals  could  barely  ascend  the 
steep  incline,  and  several  times  we  halted  them  to  rest ; 

K 


130  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CKAP.V. 


at  length  we  reached  the  summit,  the  flat  rocky  table 
above  the  valley.     The  view  was  indeed  lovely  ;  we 
looked  down  upon  the  white  monastery  of  Cape  St, 
Andrea,  two  miles  distant,  and  upon  the  thin  eastern 
point   of    Cyprus   about   the   same   distance    beyond, 
stretching  like  a  finger  from  a  hand  into  the  blue  sea : 
the  elevation  from  the  high  point  upon  which  we  stood 
gradually  inclining  downwards  to  the  end  of  all  things. 
A  short  distance  from  the  cape  were  two  or  three  small 
rocky  islands  and  reefs  protruding  from  the  sea,  as 
though     the    force     of     the    original    upheaval    had 
originated    from    the  west,  and    had  expended   itself 
at   the   extreme  east,  where    the   heights   above    the 
sea-level  had  gradually  diminished  until  the  continua- 
tion became  disjointed,  and  the  island  terminated  in 
a  sharp  point,  broken  into  dislocated  vertebrae  which 
formed  islets  and  reefs,  the  last  hardly  appearing  above 
the  waves.     This  ended  Cyprus  on   the   east.     The 
lofty  coast  of  Asia  Minor  was  distinctly  visible. 


CHAPTER    VL 


CAPE    ST.    ANDREA. 


The  promontory  of  Cape  St.  Andrea  at  the  broadest 
portion  is  about  five  miles,  and  from  this  base  to  the 
extreme  end  is  nearly  the  same  distance.  The  whole 
surface  is  rocky,  but  the  interstices  contain  a  rich  soil, 
and  at  one  time  it  was  covered  with  valuable  timber. 
There  is  no  portion  of  the  island  that  presents  a  more 
deplorable  picture  of  wholesale  destruction  of  forests, 
as  every  tree  has  been  ruthlessly  cut  down,  and  the 
present  surface  is  a  dense  mass  of  shrubs  and  young 
cypress,  which  if  spared  for  fifteen  years  will  again 
restore  this  extremity  of  Cyprus  to  prosperity.  I 
examined  the  entire  promontory,  and  ascended  the 
rocky  heights,  about  500  feet  above  the  sea  upon  the 
north  side.  It  was  with  extreme  difficulty  that  I  could 
break  my  way  through  the  dense  underwood,  which 
was  about  seven  or  eight  feet  high,  as  it  was  in  many 
places  more  than  knee-deep  in  refuse  boughs,  which 
had  been  lopped  and  abandoned  when  the  larger  trees 
had  been  felled.  The  largest  stumps  of  these  departed 
stems  were  not  more  than  from  nine  to  twelve  inches  in 
diameter :  these  were  the  dwarf-cypress,  which  would 
seldom  attain  a  greater  height  than  twenty  feet  at 
maturity. 

K  2 


132  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^chap. 

Fine  caroubs  had  shared  the  fate  of  all  others, 
and  many  of  the  old  stumps  proved  the  large  size  of 
this  valuable  tree,  which,  as  both  fruit-producing  and 
shade-giving,  should  be  sacred  in  the  usually  parched 
island  of  Cyprus.  At  an  elevation  of  about  350  feet 
above  the  sea  a  spring  of  water  issues  from  the  ground 
and  nourishes  a  small  valley  of  red  soil,  which  slopes 
downwards  towards  the  monastery,  two  miles  distant. 
The  shrubs  were  vividly  green,  and  formed  so  dense 
a  crest  that  several  partridges  which  I  shot  remained 
sticking  in  the  bushes  as  they  fell.  I  never  saw  such 
myrtles  as  those  which  occupied  the  ravines,  through 
which  it  was  quite  impossible  to  force  a  way.  The 
principal  young  trees  were  Pinus  maritima,  dwarf- 
cypress,  mastic,  caroub,  arbutus,  myrtle,  and  wild  olive. 
The  name  Cupressus  horizontalis  has  been  given  to  the 
dwarf-cypress,  but  in  my  opinion  it  is  not  descriptive 
of  the  tree  :  a  cypress  of  this  species,  if  uninjured,  will 
grow  perfectly  straight  in  the  central  stem  for  a  height 
of  twenty  feet  without  spreading  horizontally.  It  is 
probable  that  the  misnomer  has  been  bestowed  in 
ignorance  of  the  fact  that  an  uninjured  tree  is  seldom 
met  with,  and  that  nearly  every  cypress  has  been 
mutilated  for  the  sake  of  the  strong  tough  leader, 
which,  with  one  branch  attached,  will  form  the  one- 
fluked  anchor  required  for  the  roofs  of  native  dwellings 
already  described.  I  n  the  absence  of  its  leader  the  tree 
extends  laterally,  and  becomes  a  Cupressus  horizontalis. 
The  wood  of  this  species  is  extremely  dense  and  hard, 
and  when  cut  it  emits  a  resinous  and  aromatic  scent ; 
it  is  of  an  oily  nature,  and  extremely  inflammable.  The 
grain  is  so  close  that,  when  dry,  it  somewhat  resembles 
lignum  vitae  (though  of  lighter  colour),  and  would  form 
a   valuable   material  for  the  turner.     There  are  two 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  133 


varieties  of  cypress  in  this  island ;  the  second  has 
been  erroneously  called  a  "  cedar ''  by  some  travellers, 
and  by  others  "juniper."  This  tree  is  generally  met 
with,  at  altitudes  varying  from  three  to  six  thousand 
feet,  upon  the  Troodos  range;  it  seldom  exceeds  a 
height  of  thirty  feet,  but  attains  a  girth  of  six  or  even 
seven.  The  wood  is  by  no  means  hard,  and  possesses  a 
powerful  fragrance,  closely  resembling  that  of  cedar  (or 
of  cedar  and  sandal-wood  combined),  which  may  have 
given  rise  to  the  error  named.  It  splits  with  facility,  and 
the  peculiar  grain  and  brownish-red  colour,  combined 
with  the  aroma,  would  render  it  valuable  for  the  cabinet- 
maker in  constructing  the  insides  of  drawers,  as  insects 
are  believed  to  dislike  the  smell.  The  foliage  of  this 
species  exactly  resembles  that  of  the  Cupresstts  horizon- 
talis.  The  cedar  may  possibly  have  existed  at  a 
former  period  and  have  been  destroyed,  but  I  should 
be  inclined  to  doubt  the  theory,  as  it  would  surely  have 
been  succeeded  by  a  younger  growth  from  the  cones, 
that  must  have  rooted  in  the  ground  like  all  those 
conifers  which  still  would  flourish  were  they  spared  by 
the  Cypriote's  axe.  The  native  name  for  the  cypress 
is  KypreseSy  which  closely  resembles  the  name  of 
the  island  according  to  their  pronunciation  Kypris. 
The  chittim-wood  of  Scripture,  which  was  so  much 
esteemed,  may  have  been  the  highly  aromatic  cypress 
to  which  I  have  alluded. 

After  a  ramble  of  many  hours  down  to  the  monastery 
upon  the  rocky  shore,  along  the  point,  and  then  re- 
turning through  the  woods  over  the  highest  portions 
of  the  promontory,  I  reached  our  camp,  which  com- 
manded a  view  of  the  entire  southern  coast  with  its 
innumerable  rocky  coves  far  beyond  telescopic  distance. 
From  this  elevation  I  could  distinguish  with  my  glass 


134  Cyprus  in  1879. 


LCHAP. 


the  wreck  of  the  stranded  steamer  in  the  bay  at 
Volokalida.  We  were  camped  on  the  verge  of  the 
height  that  we  had  ascended  by  the  precipitous  path 
from  the  lower  valley.  As  the  country  was  a  mass 
of  dry  fire-wood  we  collected  a  large  quantity,  and 
piled  two  heaps,  one  for  the  camel -owners  and  the 
servants,  and  another  before  the  door  of  our  own 
tent  to  make  a  cheerful  blaze  at  night,  which  is  a 
luxury  of  the  bivouac  seldom  to  be  enjoyed  in  other 
portions  of  this  island.  While  we  were  thus  engaged 
an  arrival  took  place,  and  several  people  suddenly 
appeared  upon  the  summit  of  the  pass  within  a  few 
yards  of  our  tent.  An  old  woman  formed  one  of  the 
party,  and  a  handsome  but  rather  dirty-looking  priest 
led  the  way  on  a  remarkably  powerful  mule.  Upon 
seeing  us  he  very  courteously  dismounted,  and  I  at 
once  invited  him  to  the  tent.  It  appeared  that  this 
was  the  actual  head  of  the  monastery  and  the  lord 
of  all  the  promontory  who  was  thus  unexpectedly 
introduced.  Cigarettes,  coffee,  and  a  little  good 
cognac  quickly  cheered  the  good  and  dusty  priest 
(who  had  travelled  that  day  from  some  place  beyond 
Rizo-Carpas),  and  we  established  a  mutual  confidence 
that  induced  him  to  give  me  all  the  information  of 
his  neighbourhood. 

I  had  observed  hundreds  of  cattle,  goats,  sheep,  and 
many  horses,  donkeys,  &c.,  wandering  about  the  shrub- 
covered  surface  during  my  walk,  and  I  was  now  in- 
formed that  all  these  animals  were  the  property  of 
the  monastery.  These  tame  creatures  are  the  objects 
described  in  some  books  upon  Cyprus  as  "  the  wild 
oxen  and  horses  of  the  Carpas  district,  the  descendants 
of  original  domestic  animals "  !  The  monastery  of 
Cape  St.  Andrea  forms  an  exception  to  all  others  in 


VI.3 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  135 


being  perfectly  independent,  and  beyond  all  control 
of  bishops.  This  wild  country,  far  from  all  roads, 
and  forming  the  storm-washed  extreme  limit  of  the 
island,  was  considerately  out  of  the  way  of  news,  and 
the  monk  was  absolutely  ignorant  of  everything  that 
was  taking  place  in  the  great  outer  world.  He  had 
heard  that  such  mischievous  things  as  newspapers 
existed,  but  he  had  never  seen  one,  neither  had  that 
ubiquitous  animal  the  newspaper-correspondent  ever 
been  met  with  in  the  evergreen  jungles  of  Cape  St. 
Andrea.  His  monastery  was  his  world,  and  the  poor 
inhabitants  who  occupied  the  few  miserable  huts  within 
sight  of  his  church  were  his  vassals.  Although  the 
bell  of  the  monastery  tolled  and  tinkled  at  the  required 
hours,  he  informed  me  that  "  nobody  ever  attended 
the  service,  as  the  people  were  always  engaged  in 
looking  after  their  animals."  During  the  conversation 
a  sudden  idea  appeared  to  have  flashed  upon  him, 
and  starting  from  his  seat,  he  went  quickly  to  his 
mule,  and  making  a  dive  into  the  large  and  well-filled 
saddle-bags,  he  extracted  an  enormous  wine-bottle  that 
contained  about  a  gallon ;  this  he  triumphantly  brought 
to  us  and  insisted  upon  our  acceptance.  It  was  in 
vain  that  we  declined  the  offering;  the  priest  was 
obdurate,  and  he  placed  the  bottle  against  the 
entrance  of  the  tent,  which,  if  any  one  should  have 
unexpectedly  arrived,  would  have  presented  a  most 
convivial  appearance. 

Upon  questioning  the  good  monk  respecting  the 
destruction  of  forests  upon  his  domain,  he  informed  me 
that  *'  during  the  Turkish  administration  he  had  been 
annually  pillaged  by  hundreds  of  vessels  which  arrived 
from  the  neighbouring  coasts  of  Asia  Minor  and  of 
Egypt  for  the  express  purpose  of  cutting  timber  to 


136  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


be  sold  by  weight  as  fire-wood  at  their  various  ports. 
He  had  protested  in  vain,  there  were  no  police,  nor 
any  means  of  resistance  at  Cape  St.  Andrea,  therefore 
the  numerous  crews  had  defied  him  ;  and  small  presents 
from  the  owners  of  the  vessels  to  the  Pacha  at  head- 
quarters were  sufficient  to  ensure  immunity."  I  asked 
him  *'  why  they  wasted  so  much  excellent  fire-wood, 
and  left  the  boughs  to  hamper  the  surface  ? "  He 
replied,  "  that  as  the  wood  was  sold  by  weight,  the 
dealers  preferred  to  cut  the  thick  stems,  as  they  packed 
closely  on  board  the  vessels,  and,  being  green,  they 
weighed  heavy ;  therefore  they  rejected  the  smaller  wood 
and  left  it  to  rot  upon  the  ground.*'  He  declared  "  that 
on  several  occasions  the  crews  had  quarrelled,  and  that 
from  pure  spite  they  had  set  fire  to  the  thick  mass  of 
dried  boughs  and  lighter  wood  which  had  spread  over 
the  surface,  and  destroyed  immense  numbers  of  young 
trees."  I  bad  observed  that  large  tracts  had  been 
burnt  during  the  preceding  year.  He  was  delighted 
at  the  English  occupation,  as  his  property  would  now 
be  protected,  and  in  a  few  years  the  trees  would  attain 
a  considerable  size. 

Having  passed  an  interesting  afternoon  with  the 
new  ecclesiastical  acquaintance,  and  tasted,  immediately 
after  his  departure,  the  contents  of  his  enormous  bottle 
(which  was  as  instantly  presented,  as  a  ^'  great  treat," 
to  the  servants),  we  lighted  our  big  bonfires,  and 
enjoyed  the  blaze  like  children,  although  the  showers 
of  red  sparks  threatened  the  destruction  of  the  tent  in 
the  absence  of  Captain  Shaw  and  the  London  Fire 
Brigade.  After  this  temporary  excitement  in  this 
utter-lack-of-incident-and-everyday- monotonous-island, 
the  fires  gradually  subsided,  and  we  all  went  to  sleep. 
There  is  no  necessity  in  Cyprus  for  sentries  or  night- 


vi.i  Cape  St.  Andrea.  137 

watchers,  the  people  are  painfully  good,  and  you  are 
a  great  deal  too  secure  when  travelling.  As  to 
'*  revolvers ! "  I  felt  inclined  to  bury  my  pistols  upon 
my  first  arrival,  and  to  inscribe  *'  Rest  in  peace '' 
upon  the  tombstone.  It  would  be  just  as  absurd  to 
attend  church  in  London  with  revolvers  in  your  belt 
as  to  appear  with  such  a  weapon  in  any  part  of 
Cyprus.  Mine  were  carefully  concealed  in  some 
mysterious  corner  of  the  gipsy- van ;  where  they 
now  lie  hidden. 

We  had  been  two  days  at  Cape  St.  Andrea,  and  it 
was  necessary  to  right-about-face,  as  we  could  go  no 
farther.  The  monk  proposed  to  guide  us  to  Rizo- 
Carpas,  the  capital  of  the  Carpas  district ;  therefore 
on  14th  March  we  started. 

This  ride  of  fourteen  miles  was  the  most  interesting 
we  had  made  since  our  arrival  in  the  island.  After 
returning  upon  our  old  route  for  about  nine  miles,  we 
struck  off  to  the  right  (north)  and  ascended  a  steep 
gorge  between  precipitous  wooded  heights,  where  the 
light  green  foliage  and  the  exceedingly  bright  red 
stems  of  numerous  arbutus  contrasted  with  the  dense 
masses  of  dark  greens  which  entirely  clothed  the 
surface.  Upon  arrival,  about  600  feet  above  the  sea 
we  obtained  a  splendid  view,  as  a  table-topped  hill 
of  nearly  equal  height,  with  the  usual  steep  cliff-like 
sides  all  covered  with  verdure,  stood  prominently  in 
the  foreground,  and  the  deep  valleys  upon  either  side, 
abounding  in  rich  caroub-trees  and  olives,  led  directly 
to  the  sea,  about  six  miles  distant  and  far  below.  We 
now  crossed  the  watershed,  and  the  view  increased 
in  beauty  as  it  embraced  a  complete  panorama,  with 
the  sea  upon  three  sides,  to  the  north,  south,  and  east, 
with  the  mountains  of  Asia  Minor  in  the  far  distance. 


138  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


We  arrived  at  Rizo-Carpas,  which  is  situated  in  a 
gently-sloping  vale  about  450  feet  above  the  sea-level, 
but  surrounded  upon  all  sides  by  superior  heights,  from 
which  the  coast  of  Caramania  is  distinctly  visible 
during  clear  weather.  The  valley  and  slopes  are 
highly  cultivated  with  cereals,  and  plantations  of 
mulberry-trees  for  the  support  of  silkworms  ;  numerous 
caroub-trees  throughout  the  district  give  an  agreeable 
and  prosperous  appearance.  Athough  there  is  no 
actual  town,  native  dwellings  are  dotted  over  the  face 
of  the  country  for  some  miles,  ornamented  by  three 
churches,  which  present  an  air  of  civilisation  and 
prosperity.  The  inhabitants  were,  as  usual,  very  polite, 
and  as  Lady  Baker  and  myself  were  sitting  upon  a 
rug  beneath  a  tree  which  we  had  selected  for  the 
evening*s  halt,  and  waiting  for  the  arrival  of  our  camels, 
a  crowd  of  women  and  children  arrived  with  the 
ugliest  and  most  witch-like  old  hag  that  I  have  ever 
seen.  This  old  creature  had  brought  fire  and  dried 
olive-leaves  in  a  broken  pot,  with  which  she  imme- 
diately fumigated  us  by  marching  round  several  times, 
and  so  manipulating  her  pot  as  to  produce  the 
largest  volume  of  smoke.  This  custom,  which  is  so 
general  throughout  Cyprus,  is  supposed  to  avert  the 
evil-eye  ;  but  I  imagine  that  it  originated  during  a 
period  when  the  plague  or  some  other  fatal  epidemic 
was  prevalent  in  the  island,  and  fumigation  was 
supposed  to  act  as  a  preventative. 

There  is  no  medicinal  property  in  the  olive-leaf,  but 
as  the  tree  is  practically  undying,  I  attribute  the  use  of 
the  leaves  as  incense  to  be  symbolically  connected 
with  the  blessing  of  a  long  life  expressed  to  a 
welcomed  guest.  It  is  one  of  those  vestiges  of  tree- 
worship  which  may  be  traced  in  almost  every  country, 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  139 


both  savage  and  civilised,  and  may  be  seen  exhibited 
in  Egypt,  where  the  almost  everlasting  species  of  aloe 
is  suspended  above  the  doorway  of  a  house  as  a  talis- 
man or  safeguard  to  the  family  within  :  the  idea  thus 
expressed,  "  As  the  plant  never  dies,  may  your  family 
last  for  ever."  We  got  rid  of  the  old  hag  and  her 
smoky  offering,  and  she  became  lost  in  the  crowd 
which  thronged  around  us  ;  this  was  composed  of  the 
ugliest,  dirtiest,  shortest,  and  most  repulsive  lot  of 
females  that  I  ever  saw :  it  was  painful  to  look  at 
them. 

There  was  a  general  complaint  that  the  silk- 
worms had  deteriorated,  and  that  the  mulberry-trees 
had  suffered  from  a  disease  which  had  killed  great 
numbers.  It  appeared  to  me  that  the  decay  of  the 
trees  was  a  sufficient  reason  for  the  inferiority  of  the 
silkworms.  This  was  a  serious  loss  to  the  inhabitants, 
as  Rizo-Carpas  was  celebrated  both  for  the  quality 
and  quantity  of  its  silk-production. 

From  the  watershed  a  few  hundred  yards  behind 
our  camp  we  had  a  good  view  of  the  northern  coast 
below,  which  extended  in  a  series  of  rocky  bays  and 
prominent  points  to  the  west,  while  the  entire  country 
from  the  shore  to  the  rising  ground  formed  a  rich 
picture  of  caroub-trees  and  plots  of  cultivation.  The 
hills  upon  which  we  stood,  about  450  feet  above  the 
sea,  were  the  continuations  of  the  long  Carpas  range, 
where  the  force  of  the  upheaval  had  become  expended 
towards  the  east.  As  we  looked  westward  the  line  of 
hills  gradually  heightened,  until  the  well-known  points 
of  the  compact  limestone  were  clearly  distinguished 
among  the  rugged  outlines  of  the  greater  altitudes. 

There  was  nothing  of  interest  to  induce  a  longer 
stay    in    Rizo-Carpas,    therefore    we   started    on  the 


140  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


following  morning  upon  our  return  journey,  and  after 
a  lovely  march  of  twenty  miles,  partly  along  an 
elevated  plateau  which  commanded  a  view  of  both  seas 
north  and  south,  and  then  descending  some  700  or  800 
feet  by  a  steep  and  interesting  pass,  we  arrived  at 
Lithrankomi,  after  passing  through  Gallibornu. 

To  my  astonishment  the  oxen  and  their  drivers, 
instead  of  awaiting  me  at  Lithrankomi,  were  still  at  the 
latter  village,  and  hearing  that  we  had  passed  through, 
they  came  on  to  join  us,  but  only  arrived  some  hours 
later,  at  nightfall.  I  discharged  my  camels  that  even- 
ing, as  the  carts  would  begin  their  new  contract 
on  the  following  morning. 

I  rose  early  on  the  next  day,  as  we  had  a  long  march 
of  twenty-two  miles  before  us  to  Trichomo ;  but  as  the 
oxen  had  been  resting  for  many  days,  and  I  had  been 
paying  highly  for  their  food  while  they  had  been  doing 
nothing,  I  knew  they  must  be  in  first-rate  condition, 
and  in  spite  of  bad  roads  they  would  accomplish  the 
distance.  There  was  always  a  difficulty  in  inducing 
the  carters  to  start  early,  but  this  morning  there 
was  a  greater  delay  than  usual,  and  I  myself  went 
to  superintend  the  loading  of  the  carts.  I  could 
hardly  believe  my  eyes!  In  Georgi's  cart  the  oxen 
had  been  yoked.  There  was  a  black  creature  about 
half  a  foot  shorter  than  its  fellow,  and  composed  of 
skin  and  bones.  The  horns  of  this  animal  were  antiqui- 
ties :  a  drawn  appearance  about  the  head  and  face,  and 
deeply  sunken  eyes,  denoted  extreme  age.  The  fellow 
ox  I  recognised  after  some  time  as  our  old  friend  in 
reduced  circumstances ;  it  had  been  going  through  a 
course  of  wild  artichokes  and  prickly  thistles  since  I 
had  seen  it  last,  which  had  brought  it  into  racing  con- 
dition by  the  loss  of  at  least  a  hundredweight  of  flesh  ; 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  141 


the  poor  beast  looked  starved.  Georgi  had  accord- 
ingly saved  the  whole  of  the  allowance  I  had  paid  for 
food  of  the  best  quality,  which  he  had  pocketed  while 
his  animal  was  turned  out  to  graze.  **  Where  are  my 
oxen  ?  '^  I  inquired  of  the  conscious  Georgi ;  who 
wisely  remained  silent.  I  now  turned  to  Theodori's 
team,  and  I  at  once  perceived  that  he  also  had  ex- 
changed one  of  the  superb  oxen  which  I  had  hired, 
and  upon  which  I  had  depended  for  drawing  the 
gipsy- van  ;  but  the  new  purchase  was  a  very  beautiful 
animal,  although  inferior  in  height  to  its  companion, 
which  had  much  fallen  off  in  condition,  having  been  fed 
upon  the  same  unnutritious  food.  I  had  been  regularly 
done,  as  the  animals  for  which  I  had  paid  highly  had 
not  only  been  neglected,  but  had  been  exchanged. 

I  very  quickly  explained  to  the  proprietors  that  they 
had  no  right  whatever  to  exchange  the  oxen  which  I 
had  engaged,  and  for  which  I  was  paying  in  my 
absence,  therefore  I  should  refuse  to  accept  them,  as 
the  contract  was  broken  ;  and  I  immediately  ordered 
the  camels  to  be  loaded  with  the  contents  of  the  carts. 
Fortunately  the  discharged  animals  were  grazing  within 
a  few  yards  of  our  camp. 

My  servants  now  explained  that  Georgi  the  thick- 
headed had  been  done  by  his  dear  friend  and  com- 
panion Theodori,  "the  man  of  ability,"  who  had 
accompanied  me  into  the  Carpas  with  the  sole 
intention  of  cattle-dealing.  It  appeared  that  after 
my  departure  from  Gallibornu,  Theodori  had  sug- 
gested  to  his  friend  that  a  saving  might  be  effected 
in  the  keep  of  four  animals  by  reducing  them  to  two, 
and  he  advised  that  they  should  at  once  sell  each 
one  ox,  and  arrange  to  purchase  new  animals  by  the 
time  that  I  should  return  ;  they  would  by  this  method 


142  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP, 


pocket  half  the  sum  which  I  had  agreed  to  pay  daily 
for  four  oxen  during  my  absence  at  Cape  St.  Andrea. 
They  subsequently  came  to  the  conclusion  that  their 
remaining   oxen   should    live    upon     their    wits   and 
thistles,  instead  of  causing  an  expense  in  the  purchase 
of  cotton-seed,  lentils,  and  tibbin  (broken  barley-straw). 
Theodori    informed   Georgi    that    he    knew   of    two 
beautiful    animals   that    might    be   obtained     by   the 
exchange  of  two  of  their  oxen  with  a  small   sum  of 
money  in  addition,  and  he  would  arrange  the  matter 
if  Georgi  would   part  with  the  dark  cream-coloured 
ox  with    black   points   (his     best).       Of    course    the 
innocent-minded,    broad-shouldered,  herculean  Georgi 
knew  that  his  friend  would  protect  his  interests,  and 
he  left  the  matter   in    his  hands.      The  unmitigated 
rascal  Theodori  knew   that  the   beautiful  fat  red  ox 
that  he  wished   to  purchase  was  some  years  younger 
than  the  old  well-trained  oxen  which  formed  his  pair, 
and   therefore   it   would   he    more    valuable ;    he  ac- 
cordingly agreed  to  give  one  of  his  oxen  and  one  of 
Georgi*s  for  a  pair  from  the  proprietor  of  the  fat  red 
animal,  who  consented  to  the  exchange,  receiving  the 
two  fine  animals  which   I   had  hired  and  giving  the 
valuable  young  red  ox  together  with  the  miserable  old 
creature  that  I   had  seen  that  morning  in  the  yoke. 
This  worn-out  old  skeleton  was  to  be  Georgi's  share 
of  the  bargain !     I   told  Georgi  that  my  dogs  would 
not  eat  the  animal  if  it  should  die,  as  it  was  too  thin. 
My  servants   burst   out   laughing   when  Christo   the 
cook  translated  the  account  of  the  transaction.     The 
shameless  scoundrel  Theodori,  who  was  present,  smiled 
at  the  relation  of  his  shrewdness ;  and  the  big  Georgi 
burst  out  crying  like  a  child  at  the  loss  of  his  fine  ox, 
the  duplicity  of  his  friend,  and  the  want  of  sympathy 


Yi] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  143 


of  the  bystanders,  who  made  a  joke  of  his  misfortune. 
I  was  very  sorry  for  poor  Georgi,  as  he  was  really  an 
excellent  fellow ;  he  had  been  only  foolish  in  trusting 
to  the  honour  of  his  friend,  like  some  good  people  who 
apply  for  assistance  to  Lord  Penzance  ;  however,  there 
was  no  help  for  it,  and  he  departed  crying  bitterly. 

My  servants  were  fond  of  the  man,  and  their  hearts 
began  to  soften  after  they  had  enjoyed  the  first  hearty 
laugh  at  Georgi*s  expense,  and  Christo,  who  was 
always  the  factotum,  shortly  came  with  a  sug- 
gestion, that,  "If  I  would  write  an  order  for  the 
immediate  return  of  Georgi's  bullock,  on  the  plea  that 
as  I  had  hired  the  animal  no  one  had  a  right  to 
exchange  it  until  the  expiration  of  my  contract,"  there 
would  be  no  difficulty,  as  "  the  purchaser  would  be 
afraid  to  retain  the  animal  upon  seeing  Georgi  armed 
with  a  written  paper."  '*  But,"  I  said,  "  what  is  the  use 
of  my  writing  in  English,  which  no  one  can  under- 
stand ? "  Christo  assured  me  that  it  would  have  a 
better  effect  if  nobody  could  read  the  contents,  as 
Georgi  could  then  say  anything  he  pleased.  I  wrote  an 
order  for  the  return  of  the  ox  as  belonging  tempo- 
rarily to  me  by  contract,  and  Georgi  having  wiped 
his  eyes,  immediately  set  off  on  foot  towards  Galli- 
bornu,  full  of  confidence  and  hope. 

Theodori  declared  that  it  would  be  impossible  for 
his  oxen  to  reach  Trichomo  in  one  day ;  I  therefore 
loaded  the  camels,  and  advised  him  to  await  Georgi^s 
return  ;  should  they  re-appear  at  Kuklia,  where  the 
vans  were  lying,  I  would  re-engage  them  as  far  as 
Lefkosia,  and  in  the  meantime  I  would  pay  them  for 
the  daily  keep  of  their  animals,  who  were  to  be  well 
fed,  and  to  discontinue  the  course  of  wild  artichokes 
and  thistles. 


144  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


We  took  a  different  route  upon  leaving  Lithrankomi, 
by  keeping  upon  the  high  plateau  instead  of  the  lower 
valleys  through  which  we  had  arrived  on  our  way  from 
Volokalida.  We  accordingly  left  this  village  some 
miles  to  the  south,  but  as  we  were  passing  through  a 
broad  cultivated  plain,  a  portion  of  which  had 
recently  been  ploughed,  we  observed  a  crowd  of 
women  and  girls  who  were  engaged  with  baskets  in 
collecting  wild  artichokes,  which  the  plough  had 
dislodged.  As  we  approached  a  sudden  rush  was 
made  in  our  direction,  the  baskets  were  placed  upon 
the  ground,  and  a  race  took  place  over  the  heavy  soil 
to  see  who  would  be  the  first  to  greet  us.  We  dis- 
covered that  these  were  our  friends  of  Volokalida, 
who  had  walked  across  the  hills  in  a  large  party  to 
collect  wild  vegetables ;  they  seemed  delighted  to  see 
us,  and  insisted  upon  shaking  hands,  which,  as  they 
had  been  grubbing  in  the  freshly-turned  groomd,  was 
rather  a  mouldy  operation.  We  shook  hands  with 
about  thirty  members  of  this  primitive  agricultural 
society,  and  were  glad  to  waive  an  adieu  before  tlie 
arrival  of  the  older  women  in  the  rear,  who  with  their 
heavy  nailed  boots  were  running  towards  us,  plung- 
ing about  in  the  deep  ground  in  clumsy  attempts  at 
juvenile  activity.  A  few  of  the  young  women  were 
very  pretty,  but,  as  usual  in  Cyprus,  their  figures  were 
ungainly,  and  their  movements,  hampered  by  baggy 
trousers  and  enormous  high  boots,  were  most  ungraceful. 

On  arrival  at  Trichomo  we  pitched  our  tent  at  some 
distance  from  the  dwelling  in  which  we  had  fed  some 
thousand  fleas  upon  our  former  visit ;  and  on  the 
following  morning  I  determined  to  go  straight  to 
Famagousta,  about  twelve  miles  distant. 

The  route  from  Trichomo  is  for  the  most  part  along 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  145 


the  seashore,  but  occasionally  cutting  off  the  bends 
by  a  direct  line.  The  plain  is  a  dead  level,  as  it  has 
been  entirely  deposited  by  the  floods  of  the  Pedias 
river.  We  rode  tolerably  fast,  the  sun  being  hot  and 
the  country  most  uninteresting ;  we  had  left  the  shrub- 
covered  surface  of  the  Carpas  with  its  romantic  cliffs 
and  deep  valleys  rich  in  verdure,  and  once  more  we 
were  upon  the  hateful  treeless  plain  of  Messaria. 
During  our  sojourn  in  the  Carpas  district  the  rainfall 
by  our  gauge  had  been  i'28  inches,  but  in  this  un- 
attractive region  there  had  only  been  one  or  two  faint 
showers,  hardly  sufficient  to  lay  the  dust.  The  crops 
about  five  inches  above  the  ground  were  almost  dead, 
and  the  young  wheat  and  barley  were  completely 
withered. 

About  four  or  five  miles  from  Famagousta  we 
arrived  at  the  ruins  of  ancient  Salamis.  The  stringent 
prohibition  of  the  British  authorities  against  a  search 
for  antiquities  in  Cyprus  had  destroyed  the  interest 
which  would  otherwise  have  been  taken  by  travellers 
in  such  explorations.  As  I  have  before  remarked, 
there  are  no  remains  to  attract  attention  upon  the 
surface,  but  all  ancient  works  are  buried  far  beneath, 
therefore  in  the  absence  of  permission  to  excavate,  the 
practical  study  of  the  past  is  impossible,  and  it  is  a 
sealed  book.  Fortunately  General  di  Cesnola  has 
published  his  most  interesting  volume,  combining 
historical  sketches  of  ancient  times  with  a  minute 
description  of  the  enormous  collection  of  antiquities 
which  rewarded  his  labours  during  ten  years'  research  ; 
so  that  if  our  government  will  neither  explore  nor  per- 
mit others  to  investigate,  we  have  at  least  an  invaluable 
fund  of  information  collected  by  those  whose  consular 
position  during   the   Turkish    rule   enabled   them   to 

L 


146  Cyprus  in   1879.  [chap. 

make  additions  to  our  historical  knowledge.  Mr. 
Hamilton  Lang  has  also  published  his  experiences  of 
a  long  residence  in  the  island,  during  which  his 
successful  excavations  brought  to  light  valuable  relics 
of  the  past  which  explain  more  forcibly  than  the  leaves 
of  a  book  the  manners,  customs,  and  incidents  among 
the  various  races  which  have  made  up  Cyprian  history. 
General  di  Cesnola,  after  quoting  the  legend  which  con- 
nects the  origin  of  Salamis  with  the  arrival  of  a  colony 
of  Greeks  under  Teucer  (the  son  of  Telamon,  king 
of  the  island  of  Salamis)  from  the  Trojan  expedition, 
continues,  ''  Of  the  history  of  Salamis  almost  nothing 
is  known  till  we  come  to  the  time  of  the  Persian  wars ; 
but  from  that  time  down  to  the  reign  of  the  Ptolemies 
it  was  by  far  the  most  conspicuous  and  flourishing  of  the 
towns  of  Cyprus."  1  *  *  »  «*  Onesius  seized  the  govern- 
ment of  Salamis  from  his  brother,  Gorgus,  and  set  up 
an  obstinate  resistance  to  the  Persian  oppression  under 
which  the  island  was  labouring,  about  500  B.C.  In  the 
end  he  was  defeated  by  a  Persian  army  and  fell  in 
battle,  and  it  was  about  this  time,  if  hot  in  consequence 
of  this  defeat,  that  the  dynasty  of  Teucer  was,  for  a 
period,  removed  from  the  government  of  Salamis.  As 
to  the  length  of  this  period  there  is  great  obscurity. 
It  seems,  however,  to  be  certain  that  with  the  help 
of  the  Persians  a  Tyrian  named  Abdemon  had  seized 
the  throne,  and  not  only  paid  tribute  to  Persia, 
but  endeavoured  to  extend  the  Persian  power  over 
the  rest  of  the  island.  To  Salamis  itself  he  invited 
Phoenician  immigrants,  and  introduced  Asiatic  tastes 
and  habits."  Following  upon  this  usurpation  came 
the  revolt  and  the  restoration  of  the  Teucer  dynasty, 
under   Evagoras,  B.C.   374,    and  eventually   upon  the 

^  Loc,  cit,  p.  199, 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  147 


partition  of  the  empire  of  Alexander  the  Great  it  fell 
to  the  lot  of  Antigonus,  after  the  severe  contests 
between  Demetrius  and  Menelaus. 

Like  all  ancient  sea-ports  of  importance,  Salamis 
was  the  object  of  continual  attacks,  and  by  degrees 
its  prosperity  declined.  In  addition  to  the  damage 
and  loss  by  sieges,  it  was  seriously  affected  by  an 
earthquake,  and  a  portion  disappeared  beneath  the 
sea.  The  sand  has  submerged  a  large  area  of  the 
ruins  which  face  the  sea,  but  General  di  Cesnola  was 
able  to  trace  the  ancient  wall  for  a  distance  of  6850 
feet.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the  earthquake  may 
have  altered  the  conditions  of  the  harbour,  which  in 
former  days  was  of  considerable  importance.  It  has 
now  entirely  changed,  and  the  bay  near  the  shore  is 
extremely  shallow,  although  good  anchorage  exists 
in  the  roadstead  in  ten  to  sixteen  fathoms. 

The  high  masonry  piers  which  had  supported  the 
arches  of  the  ancient  aqueduct  from  Kythrea  looked 
like  spectres  of  past  greatness  among  the  silent  ruins, 
made  doubly  desolate  by  the  miserable  aspect  of  the 
withered  plain  around  them.  A  short  distance  from 
these  is  the  church  of  St.  Barnabas,  raised  upon  the 
site  where  it  is  believed  that  the  body  of  the  Saint  was 
discovered,  together  with  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew. 
How  the  Saint  and  the  Gospel  had  been  preserved  in 
the  damp  soil  of  that  neighbourhood  must  be  left  to 
the  imagination. 

Passing  through  the  ruins  of  the  old  town  with  the 
line  of  the  wall  distinctly  visible  upon  the  sea  front,  we 
shortly  arrived  at  the  spot  where  the  river  Pedias 
should  have  an  exit  to  the  sea.  No  sign  of  a  river- 
bed existed,  but  a  long  series  of  swamps,  composed 
chiefly  of  bare  mud,  would  during  wet  weather  have 

L  2 


148  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


made  a  considerable  ditour  necessary ;  they  were  now 
dry,  with  the  exception  of  two  or  three  holes  full  of 
muddy  water,  which  were  unconnected  with  any  per- 
ceptible channel.  A  long  stone  causeway  proved  that 
occasionally  the  hardened  mud  upon  which  we  rode 
would  become  a  lake,  but  from  the  numerous  tracks  of 
animals  the  earth  was  preferred  to  the  uneven  and 
slippery  pavement  of  the  artificial  road.  The  enor- 
mous quantity  of  mud  brought  down  by  the  Pedias 
during  its  fitful  inundations  had  completely  obliterated 
all  signs  of  an  ordinary  river-bed,  and  the  deposit  had 
produced  a  surface  that  was  scored  in  numerous  places 
by  the  rush  of  water,  without  in  any  way  suggesting 
that  we  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  largest  river 
in  Cyprus.  The  width  of  this  muddy  swamp  was 
about  two  miles,  and  terminated  by  a  shallow  lake  upon 
our  left.  We  were  now  within  a  mile  and  a  quarter  of 
Famagousta,  and  the  ground  began  to  rise.  It  struck 
me  that  an  eminence  upon  our  right  was  superior  to  the 
height  of  the  city  walls,  and  I  rode  up  to  examine  the 
position.  There  was  no  doubt  that  it  commanded  the 
lower  portion  of  the  fortress,  and  that  a  direct  shell- 
fire  could  be  plunged  into  the  rear  of  the  guns  which 
protect  the  entrance  of  the  harbour.  In  the  event 
of  modifications  being  introduced  when  restoring  the 
defensive  works  of  Famagousta,  it  would  be  necessary 
to  erect  a  powerful  detached  fort  upon  this  position, 
which  would  be  an  immense  addition  to  the  defences 
of  the  city,  as  it  would  enfilade  the  approaches  upon 
two  sides. 

The  walls  of  Famagousta  are  most  imposing  ;  they 
are  constructed  of  carefully-squared  stone  joined  with 
cement  of  such  extreme  hardness  that  the  weather 
has  had  no  destructive  effect.     The  perimeter  of  the 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  149 


fortress  is  about  4(X)0  yards  ;  the  shape  is  nearly  a 
parallelogram.  The  fosse  varies  in  depth  and  width, 
but  the  minimum  of  the  former  is  twenty-five  feet,  and 
of  the  width  eighty  feet,  but  in  some  places  it  exceeds 
one  hundred  and  forty.  This  formidable  ditch  is  cut 
out  of  the  solid  rock,  which  is  the  usual  calcareous 
sedimentary  limestone,  and  the  stone  thus  obtained 
has  been  used  in  the  construction  of  the  walls.  The 
rock  foundation  would  render  all  mining  operations 
extremely  difficult.  The  fire  from  the  ramparts  is 
increased  by  cavaliers  of  great  size  and  strength,  capa- 
ble of  mounting  numerous  heavy  guns  at  a  superior 
altitude.  The  only  entrance  from  the  land  side  is  at 
the  south-west  corner  ;  this  is  exceedingly  striking,  as 
the  fosse  is  about  1 40  feet  wide,  the  scarp  and  counter- 
scarp almost  perpendicular,  being  cut  from  the  original 
rock. 

A  narrow  stone  bridge  upon  arches  spans  this 
peculiar  ditch,  the  communication  depending  upon  a 
double  drawbridge  and  portcullis.  Immediately  facing 
the  entrance  outside  the  fortress  is  an  old  Turkish 
churchyard,  through  and  above  which  the  closed 
masonry  aqueduct  is  conducted  into  the  town.  Fol- 
lowing the  course  of  the  aqueduct  along  a  straight  line 
of  sandy  heights  which  somewhat  resemble  a  massive 
railway  embankment,  we  arrived  at  a  mosque  in  which 
is  the  venerated  tomb  of  the  Turkish  soldier  who  first 
planted  the  flag  upon  the  walls  of  Famagousta  when 
captured,  in  1571,  from  the  Venetians.  This  tomb  is 
in  a  small  chamber  within  the  building  and  is  covered 
with  green  silk,  embroidered ;  but  as  the  city  was 
never  taken  by  assault,  and  capitulated  upon  honour- 
able terms  after  a  protracted  defence,  the  fact  of 
establishing  the  Turkish  flag  upon  the  walls  after  their 


150  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


evacuation  by  the  garrison  would  hardly  have  entitled 
the  standard-bearer  to  a  Victoria  Cross ;  however  he 
may  have  otherwise  distinguished  himself,  which  en- 
tailed/^^/-;;^r/^w  honours,  perhaps  by  skinning  alive 
the  gallant  Venetian  commandant  Bragadino,  whose 
skin,  stuffed  with  straw,  was  taken  in  triumph  to  Con- 
stantinople hanging  at  the  yard-arm  of  the  victorious 
general's  ship. 

Quitting  the  mosque,  we  continued  along  the  aqueduct, 
always  upon  the  same  sandy  heights,  which  gradually  in- 
creased, until  we  arrived  at  a  position  about  200  yards 
from  a  windmill.  This  formed  a  prominent  object  at  the 
back  of  the  large  village  of  Varoschia,  situated  upon 
the  slope  beneath  facing  the  sea,  about  a  quarter  of 
a  mile  distant.  I  selected  the  highest  position  for 
a  camp  ;  this  was  close  to  the  •  aqueduct  and  about 
600  yards  ;^  from  the  entrance  of  the  fortress.  I 
counted  the  embrasures  of  six  guns  that  could  have 
been  brought  to  bear  exactly  upon  our  tent,  but  at  the 
same  time  I  remarked  that  we  commanded  the  lower 
portion  of  the  fortress,  and  could  fire  into  the  rear  of 
the  batteries  upon  the  sea-wall  within  the  water-gate 
at  a  most  destructive  range.  This  position  would 
require  a  detached  fort  with  a  line  of  works  along  the 
heights  flanked  by  a  small  fort  at  the  extremity. 
Three  detached  forts  upon  as  many  points  which  now 
exist  would  render  Famagousta  impregnable,  should 
the  present  works  be  repaired,  and  improved  by  some 
slight  modifications. 

I  had  been  through  the  fortifications  upon  a  former 
occasion,  when  I  had  the  advantage  of  Captain  Inglis 
the  chief  commissioner  s  guidance,  but  they  are  so 
extensive  and  of  such  exceeding  interest  that  many 
days  might  be  expended  in  a  study  of  the  details. 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  151 


Upon  entering  the  fortress  by  the  drawbridge  we 
passed  through  the  arched  and  dark  way  beneath  the 
ramparts,  and  emerged  into  a  narrow  street,  which 
was  swept  and  free  from  the  usual  impurities  of  a 
Turkish  town,  thus  exhibiting  proofs  of  a  British  oc- 
cupation. A  perfect  labyrinth  of  narrow  lanes,  bordered 
by  most  inferior  dwellings,  confused  a  stranger,  but 
with  the  assistance  of  a  guide  I  reached  the  residence 
of  the  chief  commissioner  and  the  various  officers 
attached  to  the  establishment  Beyond  this  all  modern 
buildings  ceased,  and  Famagousta  was  presented  as  it 
must  have  appeared  after  the  sack  and  utter  destruction 
by  the  Turks  in  1571.  It  looked  as  though  a  town 
had  been  shattered  and  utterly  destroyed  by  an  earth- 
quake, whose  terrible  tremblings  had  shaken  every 
house  to  its  foundation,  and  left  nothing  but  shapeless 
heaps  of  squared  stones.  O  Turk !  insatiable  in 
destruction,  who  breaks  down,  but  never  restores, 
what  a  picture  of  desolation  was  here !  Three  cen- 
turies had  passed  away  since  by  treachery  the  place 
was  won,  and  from  that  hour  the  neglected  harbour  had 
silted  up  and  ceased  to  be  ;  the  stones  of  palaces  rested 
where  they  fell  ;  the  filth  of  ages  sweltered  among 
these  blood-sodden  ruins ;  and  the  proverb  seemed  ful- 
filled, "  The  grass  never  grows  on  the  foot-print  of  the 
Turk."     I  never  saw  so  fearful  an  example  of  ruin. 

Although  the  town  was  in  this  hideous  state,  the 
fortifications  were  in  very  tolerable  repair,  and  had 
guns  been  mounted  an  enemy  would  quickly  have 
acknowledged  their  formidable  importance.  Time 
appeared  to  be  almost  harmless  in  attacks  against  these 
vast  piles  of  solid  masonry.  The  parapets  in  the 
angles  of  the  embrasures  were  twenty-five  and 
twenty-seven  feet  in  thickness.  From  these  we 
looked  down  forty-five  and  fifty  feet  into  the  ditch 


152  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


beneath.  As  we  walked  round  the  ramparts  and 
various. bastions  we  remarked  the  enormous  strength 
of  the  commanding  cavaliers  to  which  I  alluded  from 
the  outside  appearance  of  the  forts.  There  were 
also  vast  subterranean  works,  store-houses,  magazines, 
cannon-foundries,  and  all  the  appliances  of  a  first-class 
fortified  town  and  arsenal ;  but  these  were  of  course 
empty,  and  with  the  exception  of  a  small  chamber 
near  the  water-gate,  which  contained  a  number  of 
rusty  helmets. and  breastplates,  there  was  no  object 
of  interest  beyond  the  actual  plan  of  the  defences. 

The  water-gate  was  approached,  by  a  winding 
entrance  beneath  a  powerful  circular  bastion  from  an 
extremely  narrow  quay,  from  which  the  remains  of  a 
once  powerful  mote  projected  about  1 20  yards  into  the 
sea  and  commanded  the  inner  harbour.  This  was 
now  a  mere  line  of  loose  and  disjointed  stones.  A 
citadel  that  is  separated  from  the  main  fortress  by  a 
wet  ditch  which  communicates  with  the  sea  by  an  adit 
beneath  the  wall  commands  the  harbour  on  the  east 
side.  This  ditch  is  as  usual  scarped  from  the  rock, 
and  otherwise  of  solid  masonry ;  should  the  fortress 
have  been  successfully  carried  by  assault  on  the  land 
side,  a  vigorous  defence  might  have  been  maintained 
in  this  independent  citadel  until  either  reinforcements 
should  arrive  by  sea,  or  an  escape  might  be  effected  to 
friendly  vessels. 

It  is  commonly  asserted  that  Famagousta  under  the 
Lusignans  and  Venetians  "counted  its  churches  by 
hundreds  and  its  palatial  mansions  by  thousands."  It 
would  certainly  have  been  impossible  that  they  could 
have  existed  within  the  present  area,  as  a  large  extent 
must  have  been  required  for  barrack  accommodation 
for  the  garrison,  parade-grounds,  &c.  There  are  ruins 
of  several  fine  churches  with  the  frescoes  still  visible 


VM 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  153 


upon  the  walls.  The  Cathedral  of  St.  Nicholas  is  a 
beautiful  object  in  the  Gothic  style.  Although  dis- 
mantled and  converted  into  a  mosque  by  the  Turks, 
the  roof  is  in  good  repair,  and  its  magnificent  propor- 
tions remain,  but  they  are  marred  by  the  stopping  of 
the  windows  with  rough  stones  and  mortar.  The 
total  length  of  the  cathedral  is  172  feet  6^  inches. 
Length  of  apse  (included  in  above)  30  feet  9  inches  ; 
breadth  of  apse  32  feet  3  inches ;  breadth  of  cathedral 
74  feet  I  inch;  circumference  of  pillars  15  feet 
3  inches,  there  being   12  pillars  in  all. 

On  the  outside  walls  are  the  marks  of  various 
cannon-shot  which  appear  to  have  been  successfully 
resisted  by  the  soft  but  tough  sedimentary  limestone, 
which  is  of  similar  quality  to  that  used  in  the  construc- 
tion of  the  fortress.  I  observed  that  the  impact  of 
the  shot  has  been  confined  to  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  the  blow,  and  that  the  concussion  has  not 
been  communicated  to  the  adjoining  stone,  but  has 
expended  itself  in  crumbling  the  opposing  surface  to 
the  depth  in  which  it  was  eventually  imbedded  It 
would  be  interesting  to  try  some  experiments  upon 
those  walls  of  Famagousta  (which  may  already  require 
repair  or  alteration)  with  modern  heavy  artillery,  as 
should  this  stone  exhibit  unusual  powers  of  resistance 
it  may  become  valuable.  Nothing  would  be  easier 
than  to  fire  a  few  rounds  from  a  ship  s  battery  to  prove 
the  question. 

The  courtyard  of  an  ancient  Venetian  palace  now 
forms  the  British  parade-ground.  This  faces  the 
cathedral  entrance,  and  is  ornamented  by  piles  of 
marble  cannon-shot,  which  are  upwards  of  ten 
inches  in  diameter;  these  were  the  Venetian  relics  of 
the  siege  of  157 1. 


154  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


From  Cape  Greco  to  Cape  Elaea,  south  to  north,  is 
about  twenty-five  miles ;  these  points  form  the  bay, 
nine  miles  in  extreme  width.  Although  open  to  the 
east  and  south-east,  Famagousta  is  the  only  real 
harbour  in  Cyprus  that  can  be  available  for  large 
vessels,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  a  very 
moderate  outlay  would  not  only  restore  its  ancient 
importance,  but  would  make  those  additions  of  modern 
times  that  are  required  for  a  first-rate  and  impregnable 
coaling-station  and  arsenal. 

It  was  blowing  a  fresh  gale  from  the  south-east 
when  I  was  standing  on  the  ramparts  facing  the 
sea  above  the  water-gate,  and  an  admirable  example 
was  displayed  in  the  wave-breaking  power  of  the  long 
line  of  sunken  reefs  which  form  a  continuation  of  those 
natural  breakwaters  above  the  surface  that  have  formed 
the  harbour.  A  tremendous  surf  exhibited  a  creamy 
streak  along  the  margin  of  comparatively  still  water 
within  the  reefs  for  about  a  mile  parallel  with  the 
shore,  comprising  an  area  of  about  700  yards  width 
at  the  extremity  of  the  sunken  rocks,  and  500  from 
the  existing  breakwater  exactly  opposite  the  water- 
gate.  Within  this  secure  haven  several  native  vessels 
were  snugly  at  anchor,  but  ships  of  war  would  hardly 
venture  among  the  varying  shallows  caused  by  cen- 
turies of  silt ;  such  large  vessels  generally  anchor  in 
seventeen  fathoms  about  a  mile  from  the  shore,  but 
they  are  completely  exposed  to  wind  from  east 
and  south-east.  The  inner  harbour  is  formed  by  the 
artificial  connection  of  raised  heads  of  projecting  reefs 
by  stone  jetties.  At  right  angles  with  this  complete 
defence  of  limestone  rock  is  a  wall  or  jetty  from  the 
shore,  which  for  a  distance  of  1 70  yards  incloses  the 
basin  of  perfectly  still  water  within.     The  entrance  to 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  155 


this  snug  little  port  is  about  forty  yards  rn  width,  and 
the  depth  is  most  irregular,  varying  from  dry  silt 
close  to  the  south  end  of  the  reefs  up  to  twelve 
feet  beneath  the  walls  of  the  fortress.  There  were 
many  small  coasting-vessels  and  caiques  which  trade 
between  the  various  ports  of  Syria  and  Asia  Minor, 
all  having  sought  shelter  from  the  bad  weather  within 
the  port ;  and  the  picture  presented  during  the  strong 
gale  was  thoroughly  illustrative  of  the  natural  advan- 
tages and  the  future  requirements  of  the  harbour. 
The  long  line  of  reefs  which  form  the  outer  protection 
would,  were  they  exposed  in  their  whole  length,  re- 
present an  irregular  incline  from  about  twelve  feet 
above  the  sea  level  at  the  southern  end  to  three 
fathoms  below  water  at  the  northern  extremity.  A 
wedge  laid  with  its  broad  base  to  the  south  would 
represent  the  inclination  of  this  long  line  of  useful 
reef,  which  can  be  converted  into  a  sea-wall  by  simply 
fiUing-in  with  blocks  of  concrete  to  a  sufficient  height 
above  the  extreme  water-mark.  The  ancient  jetty 
which  connects  the  small  islands  that  form  the 
northern  head  of  the  reef  is  in  itself  an  example 
of  the  necessity  of  such  an  extension  throughout 
the  line.  A  natural  headland  terminating  in  dis- 
connected rocks  upon  the  north  boundary  of  the 
reef  about  half  a  mile  above  the  fortress  is  a  secure 
protection  from  the  sea,  but  it  admits  the  silt.  This 
has  completely  filled  in  a  considerable  portion  of  the 
original  harbour,  and  were  this  sea-communication 
destroyed  by  connecting  the  various  reefs  with  the 
main  headland,  the  evil  would  be  at  once  prevented, 
and  the  inclosed  area  might  be  cleansed  by  dredging. 
This  would  not  only  add  to  the  accommodation  of 
the  inner  harbour  by  a  considerable  extension,  but 


156  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


it  would  afford  an  admirable  position  for  a  series  of 
docks,  and  yards  for  the  repairing  of  vessels.  I 
walked  through  the  whole  of  this  confined  mass  of 
rocks,  silt,  and  water  only  a  few  inches  deep,  and 
was  much  impressed  with  the  capabilities  of  the 
locality.  Such  powerful  dredgers  as  are  used  in 
the  Suez  Canal  would  clear  away  the  deposit,  with 
an  outlay  that  could  be  calculated  by  the  cubic 
contents,  and  the  large  margin  that  must  generally 
be  allowed  in  all  estimates  for  harbour  works  would, 
in  the  case  of  Famagousta,  be  superfluous. 

There  are  two  enemies  to  be  resisted — the  sea,  and 
the  silt.  The  latter  has  been  and  still  is  brought 
down  by  the  Pedias  river ;  this  has  entirely  blocked 
the  ancient  harbour  of  Salamis,  and  partially  destroyed 
that  of  Famagousta.  The  engineer  has  to  repel  these 
enemies,  and  he  possesses  a  great  advantage  in  the 
fact  that  Famagousta  has  already  existed  as  a  most 
important  harbour,  therefore  he  is  not  experimenting 
upon  an  unknown  bottom.  The  line  of  reefs  affords 
the  engineer's  chief  desideratum,  *'  a  sound  foundation," 
and  the  materials  for  his  concrete  blocks  are  close  at 
hand  in  the  chaotic  mass  of  stone  now  choking  with 
ruins  the  area  of  the  city,  in  the  neighbouring  ruins  of 
Salamis,  and,  nearer  still,  in  the  native  rock  from  which 
Famagousta  has  been  quarried.  The  island  of  Santorin, 
from  whence  the  pozzolano  is  supplied  for  hydraulic 
cement,  is  only  three  days  distant.  Few  places  possess 
in  so  high  a  degree  the  natural  advantages  for  becoming 
a  first-class  harbour,  and  it  has  been  computed  that 
about  300  acres  of  water  can  be  converted  into  a  wall- 
locked  basin,  with  an  entrance  from  the  south  that 
would  be  secure  during  all  weathers.  The  Bay  of 
Famagousta  is  extremely  deep,  exceeding  1 50  fathoms. 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  157 


which  affords  an  additional  facility  for  getting  rid  of 
the  contents  of  the  lighters,  as  the  mud  from  the 
dredgers  could  be  discharged  at  sea  without  danger  of 
its  return. 

All  competent  persons  who  have  examined  the 
present  harbour  are  unanimous  in  the  opinion  that  "  a 
very  moderate  outlay  would  secure  a  first-class  port, 
which  would,  as  an  impregnable  coaling-dep6t  and 
arsenal,  complete  the  links  of  the  chain  of  fortresses 
which  are  the  guardians  of  the  Mediterranean.  In 
a  war  with  any  maritime  Power  the  first  necessity 
is  an  uninterrupted  line  of  fortified  coaling-stations,  at 
intervals  not  exceeding  five  days'  steaming  at  ten 
knots.  A  naval  war  will  depend  entirely  upon  the 
supply  of  coal,  which  will  in  all  probability  be  declared 
"  contraband  of  war."  In  the  absence  of  a  dependable 
chain  of  stations  throughout  the  worlds  the  action  of  the 
most  powerful  cruisers  will  be  extremely  limited,  as 
they  will  be  rendered  helpless  when  their  supply  is 
reduced  to  the  minimum  sufficient  to  carry  them  to 
a  friendly  port. 

Where  oceans  must  be  traversed,  the  difficulty  will 
be  increased,  as  the  coal-capacity  of  the  vessel  will 
only  command  a  given  mileage ;  she  will  therefore 
be  in  her  weakest  condition  after  a  long  voyage,  and 
as  her  fighting  power  must  depend  upon  her  steam, 
precisely  as  the  strength  of  man  depends  upon  his 
food,  she  must  be  absolutely  certain  of  obtaining  a 
supply  of  coal  in  every  sea  where  her  presence  is 
required. 

Should  the  most  powerful  vessel  afloat,  after  a 
long  cruise  during  which  she  has  encountered  head- 
winds and  weather  that  had  caused  delay  and  a  great 
consumption  of  fuel,  be  reduced  to  only  a  few  hours 


158  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[  CHAP. 


steaming,  she  would  be  at  the  mercy  of  an  inferior 
antagonist  whose  bunkers  might  be  well  filled.  The 
commerce  and  the  colonies  of  Great  Britain  demand 
the  presence  of  our  vessels  in  every  sea  ;  the  greater 
part  of  that  enormous  carrying-power  is  now  repre- 
sented by  steamers  which  have  replaced  the  sailing- 
vessels  of  old  :  therefore  in  the  event  of  war  we  must 
possess  coaling- dep6ts  which  in  case  of  necessity 
could  meet  the  demands  of  any  of  our  ships,  whether 
naval  or  commercial. 

The  attention  of  the  usually  far-seeing  public  is 
seldom  directed  to  this  important  question  of  coaling- 
stations,  but  an  examination  of  a  recently  constructed 
globe  will  discover  the  apparently  insignificant  red 
dots  which  represent  the  dominant  power  of  England 
in  every  portion  of  the  world.  The  smallest  island 
may  become  the  most  impregnable  and  important 
coaling-dep6t.  It  is  the  fashion  for  some  modern 
reformers  (happily  few)  to  suggest  a  curtailment  of  the 
British  Empire,  on  the  principle  that  "by  pruning  we 
should  improve  the  strength  of  the  national  tree."  If 
there  are  rotten  boughs,  or  exhausting  and  useless 
shoots,  the  analogy  might  be  practical ;  but  if  we 
examine  carefully  a  map  of  the  world  it  would  puzzle 
the  Royal  Geographical  Society  to  determine  the  point 
that  we  should  abandon.  An  example  of  temporary 
insanity  was  displayed  in  the  evacuatioh  of  Corfu, 
which  would  under  our  present  foreign  policy  have 
become  invaluable  as  a  powerfully  fortified  coaling 
station,  commanding  the  entrance  of  the  Adriatic  and 
the  neighbouring  seas.  It  is  this  unfortunate  pre- 
cedent which  is  paralysing  all  the  natural  elasticity  of 
commercial  enterprise  in  Cyprus,  as  .  the  inhabitants 
and   English  alike  feel  their   insecurity,  and  hesitate 


VI.l 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  159 


before  the  uncertain  future,  which  may  depend  upon 
a  party  vote  in  the  distant  House  of  Commons. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  Cyprus  or  Crete  was 
requisite  to  England  as  the  missing  link  in  the  chain  of 
our  communications  with  Egypt.  As  a  strategical  point, 
Cyprus  must  be  represented  by  Famagousta,  without 
which  it  would  be  useless  for  the  ostensible  purpose 
of  its  occupation.  Many  persons  of  great  practical 
experience  would  have  preferred  Crete,  as  already 
possessing  a  safe  harbour  in  Suda  Bay,  with  a  climate 
superior  to  that  of  Cyprus,  while  according  to  our 
assumed  defensive  alliance  with  Turkey  in  the  event 
of  a  renewed  attack  by  Russia,  we  should  have 
acquired  the  advantage  of  Cyprus  whenever  required, 
without  the  expense  or  responsibility,  and  we  should 
in  addition  have  established  a  station  on  the  coast  of 
Asia  Minor  at  the  secure  harbour  afforded  by  the  Gulf 
of  Ayas  at  Alexandretta. 

These  geographical  questions  are  a  matter  of  opinion, 
but  now  that  we  actually  have  occupied  Cyprus  it 
is  absolutely  necessary  to  do  something.  Without 
Famagousta,  the  island  would  be  worthless  as  a 
naval  station ;  with  it,  as  a  first-class  harbour  and 
arsenal,  we  should  dominate  the  eastern  portion  of 
the  Mediterranean,  entirely  command  the  approach 
to  Egypt,  and  keep  open  our  communications  with 
the  Suez  Canal  and  the  consequent  route  to  India. 
In  the  event  of  the  Euphrates  valley  line  of  railway 
becoming  an  accomplished  fact,  Cyprus  will  occupy 
the  most  commanding  position.  But,  all  these  advan- 
tages will  be  neutralised  unless  Famagousta  shall 
represent  the  power  of  England  like  Malta  and 
Gibraltar.  The  more  minutely  that  we  scrutinise  the 
question  of  a  Cyprian  occupation,  the  more  prominent 


i6o  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


becomes  the  importance  of  Famagousta ;  with  it, 
Cyprus  is  the  key  of  a  great  position;  without  it, 
the  affair  is  a  dead-lock. 

There  is  unfortunately  a  serious  drawback  in  the 
extreme  unhealthiness  of  this  otherwise  invaluable 
situation,  Famagousta,  which  would  at  present  render 
it  unfit  for  a  military  station.  There  are  several 
causes,  all  of  which  must  be  removed,  before  the 
necessary  sanitary  change  can  be  accomplished.  The 
vast  heaps  of  stones,  all  of  which  are  of  an  extremely 
porous  nature,  have  absorbed  the  accumulated  filth 
of  ages,  and  the  large  area  now  occupied  by  these 
ruins  must  be  a  fertile  source  of  noxious  exhalations. 
During  the  rainy  season  the  surface  water,  carrying 
with  it  every  impurity,  furnishes  a  fresh  supply  of 
poison  to  be  stored  beneath  these  health-destroying 
masses,  which  cannot  possibly  be  cleansed  otherwise 
than  by  their  complete  obliteration.  It  may  be  readily 
understood  that  the  high  ramparts  of  the  walls  to 
a  certain  extent  prevent  a  due  circulation  of  air,  which 
increases  the  danger  of  miasma  from  the  ruin-covered 
and  reeking  area  of  the  old  Venetian  city.  Should 
the  harbour  works  be  commenced,  all  this  now  useless 
and  dangerous  material  will  be  available  for  con- 
structing the  blocks  of  concrete  required  for  the 
sea-wall,  and  the  surface  of  the  town  will  be  entirely 
freed  from  the  present  nuisance  without  additional 
expense.  The  few  modern  buildings  should  be  com- 
pulsorily  purchased  by  the  Government,  and  entirely 
swept  away,  so  that  the  area  inclosed  by  the  fortification 
walls  should  represent  a  perfectly  clean  succession 
of  levels  in  the  form  of  broad  terraces,  which  would 
drain  uniformly  towards  the  sea.  Upon  these  purified 
and   well-drained   plateaux   the   new   town   could    be 


VI.]  Cape  St.  Andrea.  i6i 

erected,  upon  a  special  plan  suitable  to  the  locality, 
and  in  harmony  with  the  military  requirements  of 
a  fortified  position.  The  value  of  the  land  thus 
recovered  from  the  existing  ruin  would  be  consider- 
able, and,  if  let  on  building  leases,  would  repay  the 
expense  of  levelling,  draining,  and  arranging  for 
occupation.  In  this  manner  one  of  the  prime  causes 
of  the  present  unhealthiness  would  be  removed  ;  by  the 
same  operation,  the  ditch  of  the  citadel  would  be 
pumped  dry,  and  all  communication  shut  off  from  the 
sea,  which  now  produces  a  stagnant  and  offensive  pool, 
breeding  only  reeds,  mosquitoes,  and  malaria. 

We  now  arrive  at  the  most  formidable  origin  of  the 
Famagousta  fever — the  marshes  caused  by  the  over- 
flow of  the  Pedias  river.  The  description  that  I  have 
already  given  of  the  delta  formed  by  the  deposit  of 
mud  during  inundations,  and  the  total  absence  of  any 
exit  for  the  waters  by  a  natural  channel,  will  convey  to 
the  minds  of  the  most  inexperienced  an  extreme  cause 
of  danger.  I  can  see  only  one  practicable  method  of 
surmounting  this  great  difficulty.  The  Pedias  river 
must  be  conducted  to  the  sea  through  an  artificial 
channel,  and  it  must  (like  the  Rhone)  be  confined 
between  raised  banks  of  sufficient  height  to  prevent 
any  chance  of  overflow,  and  of  a  width  arranged  to 
produce  a  rapid  current,  that  will  scour  the  bed  and 
carry  the  mud  to  deposit  far  beyond  the  shore.  This 
work  would  be  expensive,  but,  on  the  other  hand,  the 
collateral  advantages  would  be  great.  The  land,  which 
is  now  almost  valueless,  owing  to  the  uncertainty  of 
inundations,  would  be  rendered  fruitful,  and  by  an 
arrangement  of  cattle- wheels  the  irrigation  could  always 
be  ensured,  as  the  water  exists  within  five  feet  of  the 
present  surface.     At  this  moment,  neither  drains  are 

M 


•FT — "— : m T^ 


162  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


made,  nor  any  control  of  nature  is  exercised  by  the 
fever-stricken  population,  who  trust  entirely  to  the 
uncertain  chances  of  the  seasons.  We  have  an 
example  in  the  original  fens  of  Lincolnshire,  which, 
by  a  system  of  drainage,  have  been  brought  into 
agricultural  value;  a  series  of  large  and  deep  open 
ditches,  such  as  are  seen  in  every  marsh  or  river- 
meadow  throughout  England,  would  not  only  drain 
the  surface  of  the  Famagousta  delta,  but  would 
supply  the  water,  to  be  raised  by  cattle-lifts  and  wind- 
pumps,  for  the  purposes  of  irrigation.  There  is  much 
work  for  the  agricultural  engineer,  but  if  this  important 
enterprise  is  seriously  commenced  the  future  results 
will  well  repay  the  outlay. 

Some  persons  have  attributed  the  cause  of  un- 
healthiness  to  the  existence  of  the  trenches  made  by 
the  Turks  during  the  siege  in  1571,  which  are  con- 
sidered to  emit  malarious  exhalations.  I  do  not  think 
so ;  all  these  low  levels,  surrounded  by  high  banks 
which  protect  the  crops  from  wind,  are  most  carefully 
cultivated  with  beans,  cereals,  cotton,  and  garden  pro- 
duce, and  I  do  not  believe  that  successful  gardens  are 
malarious,  but  only  those  localities  where  water  is 
allowed  to  become  stagnant,  in  which  case  cultivation 
must  be  a  failure.  Many  of  these  rich  bottoms  were  at 
one  time  valuable  as  "  madder  "  grounds,  and  Consul 
White  states  that  in  1863  good  madder-root  land  at 
Famagousta  was  worth  ;^90  per  acre.  It  may  not  be 
generally  known  that  the  indelible  dye  called  "  Turkey 
red  "  was  formerly  produced  from  the  madder-root,  but 
that  it  has  been  entirely  superseded  by  the  chemical 
invention  known  as  **  alizarine,"  which,  by  reducing  the 
price  in  a  ruinous  degree,  has  driven  the  vegetable  sub- 
stance out  of  the  market,  and  the  madder  is  no  longer 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  163 


cultivated.  This  chemical  discovery  has  lowered  the 
rich,  deep,  sandy  loams  of  Famagousta  and  of  Morphu 
to  a  mere  average  agricultural  value,  and  has  com- 
pletely destroyed  an  important  local  industry. 

The  madder-root  required  three  years  before  it 
arrived  at  maturity.  From  Consul  RiddgU's  report 
in  1872,  the  amount  of  madder  exported  reached  330 
tons,  of  which  250  tons  were  shipped  for  Great  Britain. 
The  same  authority  reports  in  1873,  "  The  falling-off, 
however,  in  the  quantity  sent  to  Great  Britain  is 
remarkable,  being  only  230  cwts.  (11 J  tons)."  This 
disappearance  of  a  special  agricultural  industry  has 
been  an  enormous  loss  to  the  proprietors  of  the 
madder-lands. 

The  fruit-orchards  and  gardens  of  Famagousta  are 
the  finest  in  the  island.  The  land  is  extremely  rich, 
and  of  a  bright  chocolate  colour,  but  the  trees  are, 
as  usual  in  Cyprus,  planted  too  close  to  each  other, 
which  interferes  with  the  necessary  light  and  circu- 
lation of  air.  These  gardens  commence  just  outside 
the  walls,  and,  running  parallel  with  the  sea  below 
the  large  village  of  Varoschia,  extend  for  about  two 
miles  along  the  shore.  Oranges,  lemons,  pomegranates, 
apricots,  figs,  prickly  pears  and  mulberry-trees,  are 
the  chief  products,  and  it  was  here  that  we  obtained 
the  largest  and  best  oranges  that  I  had  tasted  in  the 
island ;  generally  this  fruit  is  much  inferior  to  the 
varieties  imported  into  England.  The  pomegranates 
of  Cyprus  are  very  celebrated,  and  are  exported  to 
Egypt,  but  it  is  a  fruit  that  is  not  generally  appreciated 
by  Europeans.  There  are  extensive  gardens  inland, 
but  they  do  not  convey  the  idea  of  "gardens"  as 
understood  by  Englishmen,  but  are  merely  dense 
groves   of  various   fruit-trees,   irrigated   by   a   cattle- 

M    2 


i64  Cyprus  in   1879.  [chap. 

wheel,  and  planted  with  an  utter  disregard  of  all  taste 
or  arrangement. 

The  large  village,  or  town  of  Varoschia  is  an 
important  adjunct  to  Famagousta,  from  which  it  is 
hardly  separated.  It  was  originally  founded  by  the 
Venetian  ^Ihristians,  who  were  expelled  from  Fama- 
gousta after  the  Turkish  conquest.  There  is  a  large 
Greek  Church,  extensive  bazaars,  and  several  manu- 
factures of  pottery,  for  which  the  locality  is  celebrated. 
We  saw  a  vessel  loading  in  the  harbour  entirely  with 
these — jars,  water-bottles,  dishes,  &c. — but  the  earthen- 
ware is  of  a  coarse  description,  and  the  quality  of  the 
clay  does  not  admit  of  sufficient  porosity  for  the 
purpose  of  cooling  water  or  of  filtering,  like  the 
Egyptian  ware ;  at  the  same  time  it  is  not  sufficiently 
impervious  for  the  retention  of  wine  or  oil  without  a 
considerable  loss  by  absorption.  Varoschia  has  been 
always  celebrated  for  a  large  production  of  a  high 
quality  of  silk,  but  the  quantity  has  fallen  off,  as  in 
all  other  parts  of  the  island.  There  are  some  good 
houses  in  this  thriving  and  busy  little  town,  and  it  is  said 
that  decent  accommodation  may  be  had  ;  but  I  preferred 
the  cleanliness  and  independence  of  our  own  tent. 

Varoschia  is  not  much  healthier  than  Famagousta, 
as  it  suffers  from  the  same  cause,  in  addition  to 
an  enormous  accumulation  of  filth  on  the  heights 
at  the  rear  of  the  town.  If  this  were  carefully 
stored  to  manure  the  numerous  gardens,  it  would  be 
profitably  utilised ;  but  it  belongs  to  nobody  in  par- 
ticular, and  is  a  public  nuisance.  A  fine  should  be 
inflicted  upon  the  municipal  authorities  in  the  sanitary 
interests  of  the  population,  and  the  refuse  of  the 
neighbourhood  should  be  periodically  collected  into 
heaps  and  burned.     Captain  Inglis  and   the   various 


VT.] 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  165 


British  officials  moved  their  quarters  from  Famagousta 
to  the  healthy  village  of  Derinia,  about  three  miles 
distant,  during  our  stay  near  Varoschia.  The  new 
station  is  to  the  south-west  of  the  port,  and  completely 
beyond  the  influence  of  the  marshes,  the  elevation 
being  about  250  feet  above  the  sea.  Should  this 
locality  become  a  permanently  healthy  settlement,  the 
sanitary  difficulty  of  our  position  will  be  considerably 
modified,  as  the  troops  might  be  quartered  at  Derinia 
in  time  of  peace,  and  even  during  war  they  would 
be  immediately  within  call. 

A  lake  exists  about  three  miles  inland  from  Fama- 
gousta, which  is  between  four  and  five  miles  in 
circumference ;  the  water  is  fresh,  but  exceedingly 
shallow  and  impure,  the  edges  covered  with  high 
reeds,  which  extend  for  several  hundred  yards  from 
the  shore.  This  lake  swarms  with  varieties  of  water- 
fowl, which  can  only  be  shot  by  wading  and  waiting 
concealed  in  the  high  cover  of  rushes  and  tamarisk,  as 
they  are  exceedingly  wary.  Commander  Hammond, 
of  H.M.S.  Torch,  bagged  thirty-five  ducks  to  his  own 
gun  upon  one  occasion,  by  thus  challenging  the  fever 
and  remaining  hip-deep  in  the  muddy  water  for  some 
hours.  I  did  not  feel  disposed  to  risk  the  chances  of 
malaria,  as  the  effluvium  from  the  mud  was  sufficiently 
offensive  even  when  walking  round  the  margin,  and  I 
already  felt  some  warning  symptoms  of  the  heavy 
atmosphere  of  Famagousta,  which  might,  if  neglected, 
have  terminated  in  ague.  I  shot  a  fine  specimen  of 
the  glossy  ibis,  and  I  otherwise  contented  myself  with 
watching  the  variety  of  ducks,  coots,  teal,  and  other 
water-fowl  through  my  glass,  as  they  enjoyed  them- 
selves in  flocks  upon  the  surface  of  the  lake  at  a  great 
distance. 


1 66  Cyprus  in   1879. 


tCHAP. 


Having  exhausted  the  sights  of  Famagousta,  we 
started  on  the  22nd  of  March  for  Kuklia,  twelve  miles 
distant,  where  we  had  left  our  vans  in  charge  of  the  head- 
man during  our  absence  in  the  Carpas  country.  Upon 
our  arrival  we  found  them  untouched  or  unharmed,  and 
we  were  met  not  only  by  the  headman  himself,  but  by 
our  two  bullock-drivers  Georgi  and  Theodori,  who  had 
come  from  Lithrankomi.  Georgi  had  recovered  from 
the  despair  which  had  overpowered  him  when  we  last 
parted,  and  he  was  almost  triumphant  when  he  related 
the  success  of  his  mission  to  Gallibornu  with  the 
mysterious  paper  written  in  English,  that  I  had  given 
him  in  order  to  terrify  the  purchaser  of  his  bullock. 
He  had  exhibited  this  awe-inspiring  epistle,  which 
nobody  could  either  read  or  understand,  and  Georgi 
had  taken  advantage  of  his  opportunity  to  threaten 
the  sharp  cattle-dealer  with  a  long  list  of  imaginary 
punishments  that  would  be  inflicted  by  English  law 
should  he  refuse  to  return  the  bullock,  which  had  been 
hired  for  a  special  service  by  an  Englishman.  The 
paper  was  closely  scrutinised,  and  being  in  an  unknown 
character,  Georgi  felt  his  advantage,  and  expounded 
the  contents  so  forcibly  that  he  worked  upon  the  fears 
of  the  inhabitants  of  GallibornQ,  who "  insisted  that 
the  Turk  should  compromise  the  affair  and  return  the 
handsome  bullock,  receiving  in  exchange  his  own  half- 
starved  old  animal,  in  addition  to  a  present  of  half  a 
sovereign.  Georgi  was  only  too  delighted  to  immedi- 
ately clench  the  bargain.  I  advised  him  in  future  to 
manage  his  own  cattle-dealing  instead  of  confiding  in  his 
able  friend  Theodori,  and  I  ordered  the  oxen  to  be  put 
in  the  yokes  at  once,  and  to  draw  the  vans  to  our  old 
camping-place  beneath  the  hawthorn-tree.  Upon 
arrival  at  the  spot  a  great  change  had  taken  place  ; 


VI.J 


Cape  St.  Andrea.  167 


the  hawthorns  were  a  mass  of  blossom,  and  scented 
the  air  for  a  considerable  distance  ;  the  groves  of  fig- 
trees  had  broken  into  leaf;  the  trefoil  had  grown  to 
a  height  of  two  feet,  and  numerous  cattle  were  tethered 
in  the  rich  field,  to  feed  upon  the  few  square  yards  that 
each  owner  had  purchased  at  a  high  price  to  save  his 
animals  from  starvation.  A  field  of  broad-beans  that 
we  had  left  in  early  blossom  twenty-four  days  before 
now  produced  our  well-known  vegetable  for  dinner, 
and  I  observed  that  the  native  children,  with  their 
usual  liking  for  uncooked  food,  were  eating  these 
indigestible  beans  raw ! 

There  had  been  no  rain  since  our  departure,  and 
every  crop  that  was  not  irrigated  was  absolutely  des- 
troyed. The  aspect  of  the  country  was  pitiable ;  it 
should  have  been  at  this  season  a  waving  sea  of  green 
barley  and  young  wheat,  but  it  was  a  withered  desert 
— with  a  few  patches  of  verdure  like  oases  in  a  thirsty 
wilderness.  This  terrible  calamity  extended  throughout 
the  entire  district  or  plain  of  Messaria,  and  exhibited 
a  sad  example  of  the  great  necessity  of  Cyprus — "  an 
organised  system  of  artificial  irrigation.'* 

We  remained  some  days  at  Kuklia,  during  which  I 
strengthened  the  gipsy-van  by  lashing  the  frame-work 
with  raw  bulFs-hide  and  securing  the  blocks  of  the 
springs  to  the  axles  with  the  same  material.  It  is 
worthy  of  note  "  that  a  fresh  hide  should  never  be 
used  for  lashing,  but  a  skin  that  has  been  already  dried 
should  be  soaked  for  twenty-four  hours,  and  then  cut 
into  a  strip  as  carefully  and  as  long  as  the  size  will 
permit.  When  thus  prepared,  it  should  be  re-soaked 
for  four  or  five  hours,  and  used  while  wet  as  a  lashing, 
drawn  as  tight  as  possible.  The  power  of  contraction 
is  enormous,  and  when  dry  the  skin  becomes  as  hard 


1 68  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


as  wood :  but  a  fresh  hide  has  not  the  same  contractive 
power,  and  will  stretch  and  become  loose  when  subject 
to  a  severe  strain."  It  was  a  great  comfort  to  return 
to  the  luxury  of  the  gipsy-van,  which  looked  the 
picture  of  neatness ;  the  gorgeous  Egyptian  lantern 
had  ceased  to  exist  as  an  object  of  value,  as  it  had 
several  times  been  upset  and  thrown  completely  off 
its  hook  by  the  jumpings  and  bumpings  of  the  vehicle 
when  forcibly  dragged  over  the  steep  banks  and 
watercourses.  It  was  now  reduced  to  an  "  antique,*' 
and  looked  as  though  it  had  been  recovered  from  the 
ruins  of  an  ancient  temple. 

The  post  was  kindly  forwarded  from  Famagousta 
by  the  chief  commissioner,  and  we  revelled  in  news- 
papers, which  during  our  stay  in  the  Carpas  had  been 
a  complete  blank.  Our  cook  Christo  had  also  received 
letters  which  disconcerted  him.  After  dinner  at  about 
8.30  P.M.  he  suddenly  appeared  at  the  tent  door 
with  a  very  large  breakfast-cup  in  his  hand.  "  I 
beg  your  pardon,  sir,  but  Tm  sorry  to  say  my  mother 
has  just  fallen  down  and  broken  her  leg!"  was  his 
first  announcement ;  and  he  continued,  "  she  is  an 
old  woman,  past  fifty,  sir,  and  a  broken  leg  is  a  very 
bad  thing ;  I  have  come  to  ask  for  some  brandy,  and 
I've  brought  a  cup." 

*'  Your  mother  broken  her  leg,  Christo  ?  Why, 
where  is  she  ? "  I  replied. 

**  She  is  at  Athens,  sir,  and  I  want  a  drop  of  brandy, 
as  I  have  just  received  the  letter,  and  I  am  very 
anxious  about  her." 

I  now  discovered  that  the  brandy  was  not  intended 
for  his  mothers  leg,  but  for  his  own  stomach,  to 
comfort  his  nerves  and  to  allay  his  filial  anxiety.  He 
had  a  good  dose  that  quickly  restored  his  usual  spirits. 


VI.] 


Cape  St.  Andre.n.  169 


as  I  heard  him  relating  stories  in  the  servants  tent 
which  created  roars  of  laughter. 

Christo  was  an  excellent,  hard-working  fellow,  who 
having  passed  his  life  at  sea,  was  exceedingly  handy, 
and  combined  the  usual  good  qualities  of  a  sailor 
with  the  art  of  cookery  and  a  certain  knowledge 
which  enabled  him  to  act  as  interpreter.  He  was  as 
clever  in  lashing  up  a  van  with  raw  hide  as  in  pre- 
paring a  dinner  at  the  shortest  notice,  and  his  may- 
onnaise  would  have  raised  the  envy  of  many  a 
professor  in  England.  His  English  varied  like  his 
dishes,  and  upon  certain  days  there  was  a  considerable 
vagueness  in  his  language,  while  at  other  times  he 
expressed  himself  clearly.  Upon  one  of  these  foggy 
intervals  I  asked  him  '*  Why  the  people  had  made  so 
much  noise  during  the  night  ?  "  and  he  replied,  that 
**  A  little  hen-horse  had  made  one  child  in  the 
stable ! "  He  intended  to  explain  that  a  pony  had 
foaled  in  the  stable.  When  he  first  joined  us  he 
frequently  rambled  and  confused  his  genders,  and 
termed  all  females  "  hens,"  which  at  times  had  almost 
as  ludicrous  an  effect  as  the  mistakes  of  my  African 
cook,  who  invariably  called  "  cocks  and  hens '' — 
"  bulls  and  women.*'  I  never  had  so  useful  a  man 
in  travelling,  as  he  excelled  at  tent-pitching  and 
arranging  the  luggage  on  pack-animals,  and  took 
the  lead  in  everything;  in  addition  to  which  he 
showed  a  great  interest  in  interpreting,  which  is  a 
rare  quality  in  a  dragoman. 

We  selected  a  road  upon  higher  ground  for  our 
return  to  Lefkosia,  and  thus  avoided  the  watercourses 
which  had  caused  so  much  vexation  and  delay  upon 
our  former  journey.  The  first  night's  halt  was  at 
the  long  stone  bridge  across  the  Pedias  river,  about 


i7o  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[.CHAP.  VI. 


twenty  miles  from  Kuklia,  opposite  the  village  of 
Kythrea  at  four  miles  distance — this  was  only  con- 
structed eight  years  ago,  and  it  was  already  rendered 
impassable  by  the  overflow  of  the  torrent,  which  had 
carried  away  a  considerable  portion.  On  the  following 
morning  we  arrived  at  the  capital,  and  were  once 
more  hospitably  received  by  Sir  Garnet  and  Lady 
Wolseley. 


\ 


CHAPTER  VII. 

KYRENIA   AND    THE  NORTH    COAST. 

The  change  from  camp-life  to  the  luxury  of  Govern- 
ment House,  with  the  charm  of  the  society  of  Sir 
Garnet  and  Lady  Wolseley  and  officers  of  the  staff, 
was  a  most  agreeable  interlude  in  the  usually  mono- 
tonous journey  through  Cyprus.  The  view  from  the 
verandah  had  changed,  and  was  certainly  not  charming, 
as  the  few  green  tints  that  had  looked  hopeful  on  our 
former  visit  had  turned  to  brown ;  but  the  house 
within  more  than  compensated  for  the  cheerlessness 
of  the  exterior  landscape.  A  picnic  excursion  to  the 
castle  of  St.  Hilarion  had  been  arranged  for  the  29th 
instant  by  Colonel  Greaves,  C.B.,  chief  of  the  staff, 
who  kindly  included  us  in  the  invitation.  This  point 
was  seldom  visited,  as  it  was  situated  3240  feet  above 
the  sea  upon  the  sky-line  of  the  crags  above  Kyrenia, 
and  the  ride  there  and  back  covered  a  distance  of 
about  thirty  miles  from  Lefkosia.  The  energy  of 
English  ladies  rather  astonishes  the  people  of  this 
country,  where  inertia  is  considered  to  be  happiness, 
and  although  our  animals  were  ordered  to  be  saddled 
punctually  at  6  a.m.  the  owner  in  Lefkosia  was  sceptical 
as  to  our  actual  start  at  so  early  an  hour ;  therefore 
much   time  was  lost  on  the  morning  in  question  in 


172  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


sending  messengers  vainly  to  and  fro  for  the  missing 
mule  and  pony ;  and  8  a.m.  arrived  before  their  ap- 
pearance. The  party  had  started  two  hours  earlier. 
Colonel  White,  ist  Royal  Scots,  who  was  the  chief 
commissioner  at  Lefkosia,  had  kindly  waited  to  ac- 
company us.  As  St.  Hilarion  was  only  a  short  distance 
to  the  left  of  the  Kyrenia  road,  I  had  determined  not 
to  return,  but  to  send  the  camels  and  luggage  on 
direct  We  left  all  unnecessary  luggage  locked  up 
within  the  vans,  which  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley  kindly 
permitted  us  to  leave  at  head-quarters.  We  took 
leave  of  our  good  and  big  friend  Georgi  and  his 
sharp  companion  Theodori,  who  returned  to  Dali, 
where  Georgi  would  meet  the  only  Venus  that  I  have 
seen  in  Cyprus,  his  wife  ;  but  even  that  pretty  Venus 
was  ruined  by  high  boots  and  baggy  trousers. 

Crossing  the  dry  bed  of  the  Pedias  below  the 
Government  House,  we  struck  a  line  over  the  open  and 
withered  plain  to  a  direct  route  to  Kyrenia.  At  a 
distance  of  about  five  miles  from  Lefkosia,  the  broad 
and  well-trodden  road  became  lost  in  a  variety  of  inde- 
pendent paths,  which  at  length  converged  into  one 
narrow  route  that  ascended  a  curious  formation  of 
water-washed  and  utterly  denuded  hills,  composed  of 
sandstone,  claystone,  and  peculiar  deposits  of  sedi- 
mentary rock,  which  in  places  resembled  an  artificial 
pavement.  In  many  places  the  strata  were  vertical, 
exhibiting  the  confusion  that  had  been  created  by  the 
upheaval.  Having  passed  through  a  succession  of  ups 
and  downs  for  about  three  miles,  sometimes  winding 
through  narrow  gorges  where  the  soil  was  covered 
with  an  efflorescence  of  salt,  at  other  places  clamber- 
ing over  loose  rocks  and  entering  narrow  glens,  we 
arrived  in  a  plain  at  the  foot  of  the  bold  and  bluff 


vn.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  173 

range  of  the  Carpas  mountains.  The  path  led  to  a 
village  almost  concealed  amongst  dwarf- cypress  and 
pines,  at  a  spot  where  the  ascent  commenced  to  a 
deep  gorge  forming  a  gap  between  the  heights  upon 
either  side,  through  which  the  road  was  being 
rendered  accessible  for  wheeled  conveyances  to 
Kyrenia. 

We  had  quitted  the  Messaria  and  its  misery ;  thank 
Heaven,  we  once  more  looked  upon  green  trees,  and 
magnificent  cliffs  of  compact  grey  limestone  tinted 
with  various  colours  according  to  the-  presence  of 
metallic  substances,  instead  of  wearying  the  eyes  with 
the  depressing  brown  of  a  withered  surface.  The 
road  was  improving  under  the  hands  of  several 
working  parties,  and  the  animals  stepped  along  at  a 
cheerful  pace.  On  the  left  hand  were  exceedingly 
steep  slopes,  ascending  for  several  hundred  yards  to 
the  base  of  cliffs,  which  rose  in  many  places  almost 
perpendicular  to  the  height  of  more  than  2000  feet 
above  the  sea.  Upon  our  right  we  skirted  a  deep 
ravine,  the  bottom  and  sides  of  which  were  completely 
covered  with  mastic  shrubs,  and  myrtles.  Above  this 
gorge  the  cliffs  rose  in  imposing  grandeur  to  about 
3000  feet,  the  clefts  being  filled  with  evergreens ;  and 
in  some  unapproachable  heights  which  man  had  not 
invaded  the  Pinus  maritima  ornamented  the  grey  crags 
with  its  foliage  of  pale  green. 

We  should  have  turned  off  to  the  left  towards 
St.  Hilarion,  but,  without  a  guide,  we  overshot  the 
path,  and  having  ridden  about  three  miles  through 
the  gorge,  always  ascending,  we  suddenly  burst  upon 
the  magnificent  view  of  the  northern  side.  At 
this  moment  a  few  heavy  drops  of  rain  fell  from 
inky  clouds    which    had    been    gathering   among   the 


174  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


mountains,  and  I  thought  it  advisable  to  forego  the  ex- 
cursion to  St  Hilarion,  and  to  push  on  towards  Kyrenia, 
three  miles  distant,  though  apparently  almost  at  our  feet. 
The  dark  clouds  above  us  added  to  the  beauty  of 
the  scenery.      We  looked  down  upon  the  blue  sea, 
and  the  snow-covered  mountains  of  Caramania  in  the. 
northern   distance,  with    the   beautiful    foreground  of 
perpendicular  green  cliffs  upon  our  right,  up  to  nearly 
3000  feet,  and  the  abrupt  mountain  sides  upon  the  left, 
which  formed  the  entrance  to  the  gorge.     The  narrow 
strip  of  three  miles  between  the  sea  margin  and  the 
point  upon  which  we  stood  was  a  green  forest  of  caroub- 
trees,  almost  to  the  water's  edge.     The  town,  and  its 
striking  feature  the  Venetian  fort,  stood  out  in  clear 
relief   against  the  background  of   the   sea.     To   the 
right   and    left,    farther   than    the    eye    could   reach, 
were  trees  of  caroubs,  varied  by  almonds,  mulberries, 
and  occasional   date-palms,  interspersed  with   highly 
irrigated  fields  of  emerald  green.     The  beautiful  old 
monastery   of    Bellapais,   erected    by   the    Templars, 
although  in   reality  half   ruined,  appeared   from  this 
distance  like  some  noble  ancestral  mansion,  surrounded 
by  all  that  could  make  a   landscape   perfect :    trees, 
water,  mountains,  precipices ;    above    which   towered 
the  castle  of  Buffavento  upon    the   craggy  sky-line ; 
while  to  the  left,  cutting   with  keen  edges  the  dark 
cloud  that  hovered  over  it,  were  the  walls  and  towers 
of  St.  Hilarion  ;  where  by  this  time  we  should  have 
been  eating  luncheon  with  a  charming  party.     Pit-pat 
came  the  heavy  drops ;  and  still  drinking  in  the  mag- 
nificent view,  we  descended  the  stony  and  steep  path 
towards  Kyrenia.     When  we  arrived  near  the  base, 
after  a  descent  of  about  a  mile  and  three-quarters,  a 
perfectly  straight  road  of  a  good  width  led  direct  to 


vii.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  175 

Kyrenia,  through  a  forest  of  the  shady  and  ever  green 
caroub-trees.  By  this  time  the  shower  had  cleared 
away,  and  only  a  few  light  clouds  hovered  over  the 
high  point  of  St.  Hilarion,  and  having  had  nothing  to 
eat,  we  began  to  wish  for  balloons  to  make  a  direct 
ascent  to  the  well-provided  party  on  the  heights  above 
us,  who  were  enjoying  the  hospitality  of  Colonel 
Greaves.  We  comforted  ourselves  with  the  idea  that 
we  had  at  all  events  been  wise  in  foregoing  pleasure 
when  upon  the  march,  as  the  camels  had  been  ordered 
to  start  from  Lefkosia,  and  it  would  be  advisable  that 
the  camp  should  be  arranged  without  delay.  We  ac- 
cordingly dismounted  about  half  a  mile  from  Kyrenia, 
and  having  tied  the  animals  beneath  a  wide-spreading 
caroub,  we  selected  another  tree,  beneath  which  we  sat 
to  await  the  arrival  of  the  camels  and  servants ;  in  the 
meantime  I  sent  the  muleteer  into  the  town  to  buy  us 
something  to  eat.  After  about  an  hour  he  returned, 
with  a  bottle  of  Commandoria  wine,  a  bunch  of  raw 
onions,  a  small  goat's-milk  cheese,  a  loaf  of  brown 
native  bread,  and  a  few  cigarettes,  which  the  good, 
thoughtful  fellow  had  made  himself  for  my  own  private 
enjoyment.  Many  years  of  my  life  have  been  passed 
in  picnicking,  and  when  really  hungry,  it  is  astonishing 
how  vulgar  diet  is  appreciated ;  we  regretted  the  loss 
of  our  friends,  but  we  nevertheless  enjoyed  the  simple 
fare,  and  having  looked  at  our  watches,  we  speculated 
upon  the  probable  arrival  of  the  camels  and  luggage, 
and  waited  patiently  beneath  the  tree. 

There  is  a  limit  to  all  endurance,  and  when  5  p.m. 
arrived  without  a  sign  of  camels,  we  came  to  the  con- 
clusion that  something  had  gone  wrong.  It  was  in 
vain  that  I  had  searched  the  pass  with  my  binocular ; 
only   the    white   thread   between    the    green    shrubs 


^ 


176  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


appeared,  that  denoted  the  path ;  and  this  was 
desolate. 

At  length  I  observed  something  moving  on  the 
crest  of  the  pass :  mules  or  horses !  then  a  parasol ! 
somebody  was  coming;  most  likely  returning  to 
Kyrenia  from  the  picnic  ?  Presently  a  mule,  saddled 
but  without  a  rider,  came  galloping  down  the  road. 
This  we  stopped,  and  secured ;  it  looked  like  a 
practical  result  of  a  good  luncheon  and  champagne 
cup.  Shortly  after  this  first  appearance  a  dismounted 
English  servant  came  walking  down  the  road  after  his 
mule,  which  he  was  happy  to  recover  from  our  hands. 
He  had  neither  seen  nor  heard  anything  of  our  camels 
or  people,  but  his  master,  the  chief  commissioner  of 
Kyrenia  (Dr.  Holbeach,  60th  Rifles),  was  approaching, 
together  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Stevenson,  all  of  whom 
were  returning  from  St  Hilarion.  At  length  the 
distant  parasol  drew  nearer,  and  by  degrees  we  could 
distinguish  the  party  as  they  emerged  from  the  pass 
upon  the  broad  straight  road. 

As  there  are  no  highwaymen  in  Cyprus,  I  had  no 
hesitation  in  walking  suddenly  out  of  the  green  wood 
upon  the  road-side  and  intercepting  them  as  they 
arrived  in  front  of  our  position  ;  I  explained  that  we 
were  "waifs  and  strays'*  upon  the  wide  world  of 
Cyprus  without  baggage  or  servants,  or,  in  fact,  what 
Shakespeare  calls  "  sans  everything.*'  Mr.  Holbeach 
with  much  kindness  and  hospitality  captured  us  as 
vagrants,  and  insisted  upon  escorting  us  to  his  house. 
Mrs.  Stevenson  was  good  enough  to  supply  Lady 
Baker  with  a  few  little  necessaries  for  the  night, 
and  Mr.  Holbeach,  having  thoughtfully  made  up  an 
impromptu  little  dinner-party  of  all  named,  we 
passed  a  most  pleasant  evening,  although   I  fear  that 


yii.j  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  177 

our  sudden  invasion  of  his  bachelor  s  quarters  must 
have  caused  him  some  inconvenience. 

On  the  following  morning,  we  enjoyed  the  splendid 
view  from  the  covered  balcony  at  the  back  of  Mr. 
Holbeach's  house,  which  showed  the  richest  foreground 
in  Cyprus  in  the  dark  green  of  caroub-forest  and 
gardens  of  fruit-trees  intermingled  with  plots  of  barley 
already  in  the  ear.  This  rich  front  was  backed  by  the 
wall  of  dark  limestone  cliffs  two  miles  distant,  3000 
feet  elevation,  with  the  castles  of  Buffavento  and 
St.  Hilarion  perched  left  and  right  on  the  giddy 
summits  of  the  highest  crags,  which  in  the  clear  atmo- 
sphere apparently  overhung  our  position.  We  then 
breakfasted,  took  leave  of  our  hospitable  host,  and 
rode  back  to  Lefkosia  to  inquire  into  the  cause  of 
the  delay. 

On  arrival  we  found  a  string  of  mules  just  starting, 
as  the  camels  that  had  been  engaged  yesterday  had 
never  appeared.  I  sent  off  the  servants  and  animals, 
with  orders  to  pitch  the  tent  upon  the  site  of  the 
old  camp  of  the  42nd  Highlanders,  within  a  mile 
of  Kyrenia ;  we  then  once  more  encroached  upon  the 
kindness  of  Sir  Garnet  and  Lady  Wolseley  for  the 
night.  On  the  following  morning  \ye  rode  to  Kyrenia, 
sixteen  miles,  and  found  tents  pitched  in  a  delightful 
situation,  and  the  camp  swept  and  arranged  in  perfect 
order.  There  could  not  have  been  a  better  site  for  a 
military  camp,  as  the  ground  was  firm  and  sloped 
gradually  towards  the  sea,  above  which  the  elevation 
may  have  been  about  1 20  feet  The  beautiful  caroub- 
trees  afforded  a  dense  shade  for  individual  tents  and 
for  unlimited  numbers  of  men.  The  ground  had  been 
well  drained,  and  every  care  had  been  taken  to  ensure 
the  health  of  the  troops ;  but  in  spite  of  all  sanitary 

N 


178  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^chap. 

arrangements  they  had  suffered  severely  from  fever, 
by  which,  although  only  four  had  actually  succumbed, 
and  now  lay  in  the  lonely  little  cemetery  close  to  our 
tents,  the  regiment  had  been  demoralised,  and  was 
withdrawn  from  this  lonely  position  completely  fever- 
smitten.  I  made  close  inquiries  among  the  natives,  and 
all  agreed  that  the  past  year,  having  been  unusually 
wet,  had  been  exceptionally  unhealthy,  and  the  in- 
habitants had  suffered  almost  to  the  same  degree  as 
the  Europeans.  It  was  painfully  clear  that  when  the 
rainfall  was  sufficiently  plentiful  to  produce  abundant 
harvests  it  at  the  same  time  ensured  a  crop  of 
fevers. 

We  remained  ten  days  in  our  Kyrenia  camp,  and 
we  were  both  sorry  to  leave,  as  the  neighbourhood  is 
exceedingly  beautiful  and  full  of  interest ;  there  is 
certainly  no  portion  of  Cyprus  that  can  equal  it  in  the 
picturesque,  or  in  the  extreme  richness  of  genuine 
forest-trees  and  foliage. 

The  town  is  small  and  most  irregular:  an  old 
Turkish  graveyard  forms  a  boundary  upon  the  out- 
skirts opposite  the  fort,  precisely  similar  in  position 
to  that  of  Famagousta.  Within  300  paces  of  this 
point  are  the  principal  houses,  mostly  well  built  of 
stone  and  surrounded  by  high-walled  gardens  fruitful 
in  oranges,  lemons,  almonds,  apricots,  figs,  and  the 
fruits  commonly  known  throughout  the  island.  The 
houses  are  generally  one  story  above  the  ground-floor, 
with  a  wide  balcony  that  forms  an  open  face  to  the 
first-floor  of  five  or  six  arches,  which  support  the  roof 
upon  that  side.  This  is  a  convenient  plan  for  the 
climate,  as  it  admits  fresh  air  to  all  the  rooms  which 
open  into  the  balcony  ;  in  fact  it  is  an  open  landing  to 
the  staircase.    A  few  date-palms  ornament  the  gardens, 


VII.J 


Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  179 


the  presence  of  these  graceful  trees  being  a  sure  sign 
of  the  preponderance  of  Turks  in  the  population. 

The  fort  of  Kyrenia  is  a  great  curiosity,  as  it  forms 
a  portion  of  the  harbour,  being  situated  like  the  nose 
in  a  pair  of  spectacles,  the  basins  being  the  eyes  right 
and  left.  The  actual  defences  are  intact,  although  the 
inner  accommodation  for  barracks,  magazines,  &c., 
&c.,  require  great  repairs  and  alteration.  The  walls 
are  of  solid  squared  masonry,  the  stones  jointed  with 
the  usual  imperishable  cement,  and  rise  to  the  great 
perpendicular  height  of  upwards  of  seventy  feet  sheer 
from  the  bottom  of  the  fosse.  There  is  only  one 
entrance,  by  a  narrow  bridge  upon  arches,  across  the 
extremely  wide  and  deep  ditch,  terminating  near  the 
gateway  by  a  drawbridge,  which  admits  an  entry  in 
the  face  of  the  immense  wall,  with  portcullis  and  iron- 
bound  hinged  gate.  The  ramparts  overlooking  the  town 
and  harbour  on  the  west  face  are  147  yards  in  length, 
exclusive  of  the  tower,  and  the  embrasures  of  solid 
masonry  measured  at  the  angle  are  generally  twenty- 
four  feet  in  thickness.  The  fort  is  nearly  square,  and  is 
flanked  at  each  corner  by  a  circular  tower  which  would 
completely  enfilade  the  ditch  by  several  tiers  of  guns. 
This  powerful  fortress  is  washed  by  the  sea  upon  two 
sides  (the  north  and  east),  and  the  foundations  upon 
the  native  rock  are  protected  from  the  action  of  the 
waves  by  reefs  and  huge  fragments  of  natural 
detached  masses  which  characterise  this  portion  of 
the  coast.  As  I  stood  upon  the  parapet  facing  north 
I  obtained  an  admirable  view  of  the  original  harbours 
to  my  left  and  right,  and  although  they  could  never 
have  admitted  large  vessels,  I  was  struck  by  the  great 
importance  of  this  sole  place  of  refuge  upon  the 
northern   coast    of    Cyprus,   which    in   former    times 

N    2 


i8o  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


had  suggested  such  a  formidable  arrangement  for 
defence.  The  fort  was  constructed  by  the  Venetians, 
but  there  are  fallen  masses  of  much  older  works  that 
now  lie  at  the  foot  of  the  sea-face,  and  add  to  the 
natural  reefs  in  defending  the  foundations  from  the 
breaking  water. 

The  style  of  this  fortress  suggests  a  date  anterior  to 
Famagousta^  as  it  is  devoid  of  cavaliers  and  depends 
for  its  defence  upon  the  simple  flanking  fire  of  the 
four  towers  and  the  great  height  and  thickness  of  the 
walls.  It  is  supplied  with  fresh  water  by  an  aqueduct, 
and  is  provided  with  immense  reservoirs  of  masonry 
to  contain  a  sufficient  quantity  during  a  prolonged 
siege,  when  the  outer  aqueduct  might  be  destroyed  by 
the  enemy.  There  are  extensive  subterranean  caves 
and  dungeons,  but  these  have  not  yet  been  explored. 
Above  this  fine  old  specimen  of  Venetian  fortifications, 
upon  the  high  platform  of  the  tower  facing  the 
harbour,  was  a  flag-staff,  upon  which  a  small  bundle 
of  rags  fluttered  in  the  strong  wind,  as  though  they 
had  been  arranged  to  frighten  the  jackdaws  from 
building  within  the  crevices  of  masonry.  It  appeared 
that  this  miserable  remnant  of  tattered  bunting  had 
once  represented  a  British  Union  Jack !  and  the 
colourless,  poverty-stricken  thing  flapped  and  cracked 
as  it  tore  itself  into  the  finest  threads  of  misery  in  the 
gale,  too  truly  representing  the  result  of  our  ambiguous 
position  according  to  the  terms  of  the  Cyprian 
occupation.  I  felt  ashamed  that  such  an  exhibition 
should  meet  the  eye  of  any  foreign  ship  upon  entering 
the  harbour  of  Kyrenia,  and  I  was  informed  "  that  it 
was  the  only  flag  that  was  possessed  by  the  authorities." 
As  all  the  revenue  of  the  island  was  handed  over 
to  the  Porte  excepting  a  bagatelle  insufficient  for  the 


VII.] 


Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  i8i 


requirements  of  the  country,  the  really  overworked 
and  energetic  servants  of  the  Crown  were  absolutely 
obliged  to  practise  a  most  rigid  economy,  commencing 
with  their  own  salaries,  equally  vexatious  to  them- 
selves and  unworthy  of  our  high  position. 

The  curious  collection  of  old  cannon  had  all  been 
removed  by  the  Turks,  but  one  iron  piece  remained, 
which,  being  almost  worthless  as  metal,  had  been  left 
behind  when  the  bronze  guns  had  been  shipped  to 
Constantinople.  This  was  a  great  curiosity,  as  it 
somewhat  resembled  a  hand-bell  about  five  feet  in 
length ;  the  bell  which  formed  the  mouth  to  receive  the 
ball  was  only  two  feet  in  length,  although  the  muzzle 
was  sufficiently  wide  to  admit  the  stone  projectile 
of  nineteen  inches  diameter.  The  portion  which 
resembled  the  handle  of  a  bell  was  the  continuation 
which  formed  the  narrow  chamber  for  the  powder; 
this  was  about  three  feet  long  and  eight  inches  thick.  ^ 
There  were  no  trunnions  to  this  singular  old  gun,  but 
it  may  have  been  lashed  to  some  lever  which  could  be 
raised  or  depressed,  and  it  was  evidently  intended  for 
firing  into  shipping  from  the  fort  walls,  to  command 
the  harbour  at  a  short  range.  It  had  been  cast  with 
concentric  rings,  which  I  examined  carefully,  as  at  first 
I  imagined  they  had  been  wrought-iron  shrunk  on  to 
the  casting:  this  was  not  the  case,  but  the  extra 
thickness  of  metal  at  the  rings  added  sufficient 
strength.  The  large  stone  shot,  formed  of  a  pecu- 
liarly hard  metamorphous  rock  (a  conglomerate  of 
matter  that  had  been  fused  by  heat),  were  to  be  seen 
in  various  positions  within  the  fortress.  A  few  were 
on    the    parapet    above    the   drawbridge,   as  though 

^  These  measurements  are  from  memory,  excepting  the  diameter 
of  muzzle,  which  I  took  on  the  spot 


1 82  Cyprus  in  1879, 


[CHAP. 


prepared  for  rolling  over  upon  an  assaulting  party, 
I  found  this  quality  of  rock  upon  the  mountains 
within  two  miles  of  Kyrenia. 

There  were  evidently  two  harbours,  which  included 
the  small  bay  upon  either  side  of  the  present  fort ; 
that  upon  the  west  was  the  most  important,  as  the 
depth  of  water  is  greater,  and  it  shows  evident  signs 
of  having  received  peculiar  attention.  The  remains 
of  the  ancient  moles  still  exist,  and  afford  considerable 
protection ;  but  the  sea  has  broken  through  in  several 
places  and  washed  away  the  upper  tiers  of  stones. 
These  moles  were  carefully  constructed  by  laying 
the  masonry  upon  a  foundation  of  hydraulic  cement, 
which  connected  the  various  natural  rocks ;  the  layer 
of  cement  still  exists,  while  the  squared  blocks  of  the 
original  surface  may  be  seen  at  the  bottom,  where  they 
have  been  deposited  by  the  waves.  Like  all  defensive 
works  in  historical  countries,  those  of  Kyrenia  have 
undergone  continual  changes  and  modifications,  as 
from  time  to  time  alterations  may  have  been  sug- 
gested by  successful  attacks.  In  a  ruined  tower 
which,  completely  isolated  within  the  sea,  commanded 
the  entrance  of  the  harbour  on  the  west,  I  observed 
that  an  ancient  column  of  white  marble  from  some 
old  building  has  been  used  as  a  key  to  prevent  the 
large  squared  stones  from  yielding  to  the  constant 
vibration  caused  by  the  breaking  waves.  Each  tier 
of  stones  has  been  cut  at  the  central  edge  to  form 
a  half-circle  where  the  edges  of  the  adjoining  blocks 
were  connected ;  those  have  been  similarly  shaped 
to  produce  a  complete  circle  when  faced  together. 
The  squared  stones  in  the  lower  and  upper  tiers 
have  been  perforated  in  a  circle,  so  that  when  several 
courses  of  masonry  were  completed,  the  hole  repre- 


viij  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  183 

sented  a  shaft  of  about  twelve  inches  diameter,  sunk 
from  top  to  bottom;  the  marble  column  has  been 
inserted  from  the  top,  and  has  tied  each  course 
effectively  together;  the  havoc  occasioned  in  this 
tower  of  solid  squared  blocks  is  the  work  of  man ; 
the  stones  have  until  recently  been  removed  for 
the  purposes  of  building. 

Kyrenia  could  never  have  been  a  perfectly  safe 
harbour  in  all  weathers,  as  the  entrance  is  open  to  the 
north.  There  is  a  slight  turn  to  the  east,  which  might 
have  protected  a  few  small  vessels  during  a  northerly 
gale,  but  this  portion  is  now  silted  up,  and  it  should  be 
cleared  by  dredging.  The  houses  rise  above  the 
harbour  from  the  water's  edge  to  the  cliffs,  forming  a 
horseshoe  shape.  Mr.  Holbeach  had  just  completed 
a  small  quay  of  masonry,  and  a  very  moderate  outlay 
would  restore  the  ancient  mole  and  render  Kyrenia  an 
important  port  for  the  trading  vessels  of  Syria  and 
Asia  Minor.  When  a  good  carriage-road  shall  be 
completed  to  the  capital,  Lefkosia,  only  sixteen  miles 
distant,  the  value  of  Kyrenia  as  a  commercial  harbour 
will  be  much  enhanced.  There  are  also  important 
towns  with  a  considerable  population  within  eight  or 
nine  miles  of  Kyrenia  on  the  west :  Carava  and 
Lapithas  would  offer  markets  for  a  great  extension 
of  trade,  and  Morphu  would  be  brought  within  the 
same  commercial  circle.  There  is  a  peculiar  advantage 
throughout  the  ports  of  Cyprus  in  the  presence  of 
stone  quarries  upon  the  spot  where  the  material  is 
required ;  this  is  specially  marked  at  Kyrenia,  where 
the  solid  rock,  with  its  tombs,  cave-dwellings,  and 
ancient  quarries,  is  on  the  actual  borders  of  the  sea, 
within  a  few  yards  of  the  existing  harbour.  There 
would   be    no    great    difficulty    in   converting    these 


1 84  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


quarries  into  a  dock,  should  a  demand  for  stone  be 
sufficient  to  repay  the  outlay  for  cutting  the  supply, 
according  to  the  example  already  exhibited  and  left 
to  us   by  the  ancients. 

The  quarries  of  Kyrenia  form  the  chief  curiosity  of 
the  locality.  The  rock  is  the  sedimentary  limestone 
mixed  with  a  proportion  of  sand  that  is  the  character- 
istic geological  feature  around  the  coast  of  Cyprus ; 
but  in  these  quarries  the  stone  is  perfectly  solid  and 
free  from  fissures,  which  enables  the  mason  to  obtain 
blocks  of  any  size.  From  prehistoric  times  the  rock 
of  Kyrenia,  which  rises  about  forty  feet  above  the 
sea-level,  has  been  worked  out  upon  the  most  careful 
method ;  every  block  has  been  cut  from  the  parent 
mass  by  measurement,  and  no  broken  edges  have  been 
permitted  to  destroy  the  symmetry  of  the  adjoining 
stone.  The  work  was  commenced  from  the  top,  or 
surface  of  the  rock,  and  a  smooth  cliff  face  has  been 
produced  as  the  first  operation ;  upon  completion  the 
surface  has  been  lined  out  parallel  with  the  perpendicu- 
lar face,  and  the  blocks  have  been  carefully  chiselled 
and  removed  by  wedges  driven  horizontally  from 
beneath.  In  this  manner  the  rock  has  been  worked 
until  it  resembled  a  flight  of  steps,  which  remain  in 
many  places  perfect  to  the  present  hour.  The  entire 
fortress  and  town  have  been  constructed  from  these 
quarries,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  when 
Kyrenia  was  originally  founded  by  the  Dorian 
colonists  under  Cepheus  and  Praxander  the  stones 
were  obtained  from  the  existing  site.  There  is  a 
considerable  difference  in  the  quality  of  the  rock, 
which  has  been  remarked  by  the  original  builders, 
as  a  passage  has  been  cut  through  the  first  cliff 
face  nearest  to  the  town,  and  the  desired  level   for 


^im^^'^^'m^tm^mm^a^trmm 


viij  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  185 

wheeled  conveyances  having  been  obtained,  the  work- 
men have  discovered  a  superior  stone  as  they  pro- 
ceeded into  the  bowels  of  the  quarry.  They  have 
accordingly  neglected  much  of  the  nearer  portion, 
and  have  excavated  a  large  square,  always  pushing 
forward  towards  the  west,  which  is  now  terminated 
by  a  worked  perpendicular  face  and  a  series  of  steps 
incomplete,  precisely  as  it  remained  when  the  last 
chisel  relinquished  the  labour. 

This  quality  of  rock  in  all  parts  of  Cyprus  is 
cavernous,  and  the  natural  caves  have  suggested  to 
the  ancients  an  artificial  extension  both  for  dwellings 
and  for  cemeteries.  The  rock  is  easily  worked  by  the 
mason's  pick,  and  near  the  town  I  observed  an  old 
fort-ditch  which  had  been  originally  excavated  for  the 
double  object  of  quarrying  building  stone  at  the  same 
time  that  it  served  the  purpose  of  defence.  There 
would  be  no  great  difficulty  in  connecting  the  ancient 
quarry  with  the  harbour  by  cutting  a  canal  through  the 
soft  rock  and  extending  the  depth  of  the  ancient  ex- 
cavations. It  is  well  known  to  all  quarrymen  that  the 
stone  should  be  placed  in  a  building  according  to  the 
position  in  which  it  lay  when  forming  the  original 
rock.  Within  the  fortress  of  Kyrenia  there  are  many 
examples  of  neglect,  where  the  masons  have  either 
inverted  or  placed  the  stones  sideways,  in  which  case 
the  action  of  the  weather  has  completely  honey- 
combed and  reduced  the  material  to  an  appearance  of 
decayed  coral.  I  observed  instances  of  similar  neglect 
with  the  same  results  in  portions  of  the  fortress  of 
Famagousta. 

The  tombs  are  easily  distinguished  from  the  cave- 
dwellings  with  which  the  rocks  are  perforated,  as  they 
are  merely  chambers  of  a  few  feet  square  sufficient 


i86  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


for  the  reception  of  a  limited  number  of  bodies  ;  the 
dwellings  have  been  carefully  chiselled,  and  arranged 
with  a  bench  cut  from  the  solid  rock  around  the 
apartment. 

The  remains  of  ancient  fortifications,  including 
ruined  towers  and  ditches,  prove  that  in  former  times 
Kyrenia  was  of  far  greater  extent  than  would  be 
implied  by  its  present  small  proportions.  In  like 
manner  with  Famagousta  this  powerful  fort  has  been 
considered  as  a  position  to  be  occupied  exclusively  by 
Turks.  The  population  of  the  town  is  now  about  600, 
but  the  Greek  element  is  increasing  since  the  British 
Convention  ensured  their  protection. 

Our  camp  was  daily  visited  by  the  women  of  both 
Turks  and  Cypriotes,  who  came  to  indulge  their 
curiosity,  and  my  wife  had  some  difficulty  in  receiving 
the  increasing  circle  of  acquaintance.  The  want  of 
a  female  interpreter  was  at  first  acutely  felt,  as  the 
conversation  was  much  restricted  when  Georgi  was 
the  only  medium.  After  a  few  days  this  shyness  on 
the  part  of  the  Turkish  ladies  wore  off,  and  Georgi, 
who  was  a  good,  painstaking  young  fellow,  became 
a  favourite ;  some  of  these  ladies  were  exceedingly 
gracious,  and  took  off  their  veils  when  in  the  tent  with 
Lady  Baker  and  myself,  and  conversed  upon  various 
subjects  with  much  intelligence.  A  few  were  decidedly 
pretty ;  all  were  studiously  clean  and  well  dressed,  and 
they  formed  a  marked  contrast  in  appearance  and 
general  style  to  the  Cypriote  women ;  the  breed  was 
superior,  their  hands  were  delicate  and  well  cared  for, 
but  disfigured  by  the  prevalent  habit  of  staining  the 
nails  and  palms  with  henna.  This  plant  is  called 
skenna  by  all  Turks  and  Cypriotes,  and  it  is  im- 
ported from  Syria  for  the  purpose  of  dyeing  the  hair. 


vH.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  187 

and  also  the  feet  and  hands  of  Turkish  women.  It  is 
not  a  production  of  Cyprus,  as  has  been  erroneously 
stated  by  some  authors;  I  made  particular  inquiries 
in  all  portions  of  the  island,  and  of  all  classes,  upon 
this  subject.  The  henna,  or  shenna,  is  only  to  be 
met  with  in  some  few  gardens,  where  it  is  cultivated 
as  an  ornamental  shrub,  in  the  same  manner  that  the 
arbutus  may  be  seen  in  the  shrubberies  of  England. 
The  Turkish  women  are  very  particular  in  dyeing 
their  hair,  and  use  various  preparations.  The  shenna 
produces  a  glossy  red,  which  some  years  ago  was  the 
fashionable  tinge  in  England.  There  is  also  a  small 
seed  of  a  plant  which  is  prepared  by  roasting  until 
burnt,  like  coffee,  and  then  reducing  to  powder,  which 
is  formed  into  a  paste  with  oil ;  this  is  a  well-known 
dye,  which  turns  the  hair  into  a  deep  black.  There 
was  a  sudden  rush  for  information  when  the  British 
occupation  of  Cyprus  was  announced  to  the  startled 
public,  and  books  were  rather  hurriedly  put  together, 
compiled  from  various  authorities,  which,  although 
yielding  valuable  information  upon  many  points, 
unfortunately  perpetuated  errors  by  reproducing 
erroneous  statements.  The  asserted  existence  of 
henna  as  **an  indigenous  shrub  which  originated  the 
name  of  Cyprus,"  is  an  instance  of  such  mistakes, 
similar  to  the  descriptions  of  **  ^^^^^-covered  surface," 
when  no  such  plant  exists  upon  the  island. 

The  longer  I  remained  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Kyrenia  the  deeper  was  my  regret  that  the  arrivals 
of  strangers  should  take  place  in  the  southern  ports, 
instead  of  receiving  their  first  impressions  of  Cyprus 
by  an  introduction  to  this  lovely  coast.  I  was  never 
afloat  on  the  northern  side,  but  the  view  must  be 
strikingly  impressive,  as  the  trees,  ever  green  almost 


i88  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


to  the  water's  edge,  shadow  the  rocky  coves,  and 
clothe  the  surface  to  the  base  of  the  mountains,  whilst 
at  a  short  distance  from  the  land  these  must  appear  as 
though  rising  abruptly  from  the  sea.  The  castles  upon 
the  extreme  summits  form  unmistakable  landmarks, 
resembling  sentries  on  either  side  the  fort  and  harbour 
of  Kyrenia. 

On  6th  April  the  general  rendezvous  was  the 
monastery  of  Bellapais,  three  and  a  half  miles  distant 
from  Kyrenia,  in  response  to  the  invitation  of  Major 
McCalmont,  7th  Hussars,  on  the  staff  of  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley,  who  had  taken  immense  trouble  for  the 
gratification  of  his  guests  by  sending  tents,  baggage, 
and  sleeping  accommodation  for  two  nights,  in  addition 
to  every  kind  of  necessary  refreshments. 

The  route  from  Kyrenia  lay  through  a  country  of 
the  brightest  shades  of  green,  parallel  with  the  sea, 
about  a  mile  and  a  half  distant,  towards  which  a  suc- 
cession of  deep  ravines,  which  formed  river-beds  in 
the  rainy  season,  drained  from  the  mountains  at  right 
angles  with  the  path.  This  side  of  the  Carpas  range 
formed  a  strong  contrast  with  the  parched  southern 
slopes,  as  every  garden  and  farm  was  irrigated  by 
water  conducted  from  the  mountains  in  artificial 
channels,  which  would  otherwise  have  been  absorbed 
and  lost  in  the  wide  and  stony  stream-beds  if  left  to 
its  natural  course.  We  passed  through  sombre  groves 
of  very  ancient  olives  of  immense  girth  ;  then  through 
villages  concealed  among  a  luxuriant  growth  of  fruit- 
trees,  the  almonds  being  already  large,  and  eaten 
eagerly  by  the  inhabitants,  although  still  unripe.  The 
oranges  in  heavy  crops  weighed  down  the  dark  green 
branches,  the  deep  yellow  fruit  contrasting  brightly 
with  the  foliage,  and  the  fields  of  barley  that   had 


i 


VII.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  189 

benefited  by  artificial  irrigation  looked  like  green 
carpets  spread  between  the  neighbouring  villages  and 
gardens.  Having  crossed  several  deep  and  wide 
stream-beds,  in  one  of  which  the  water  still  trickled 
in  a  clear  but  narrow  channel,  we  commenced  a  steep 
ascent  among  scattered  but  numerous  caroub-trees, 
which  gave  a  park-like  appearance  to  the  country,  and 
upon  gaining  an  eminence  we  came  suddenly  upon 
the  view  of  Bellapais.  The  monastery  was  not  more 
than  600  yards  distant,  but  a  deep  hollow  intervened 
between  the  opposing  heights,  which  necessitated  a 
circuit  of  more  than  a  mile  before  we  could  reach 
the  village.  It  would  be  impossible  to  select  a  more 
beautiful  position  for  a  house  than  the  flat  summit  of 
the  height  upon  which  we  stood.  The  valley  at  our 
feet  nursed  a  rippling  stream  deep  in  the  bottom  of  a 
precipitous  gorge,  the  rough  sides  clothed  with  myrtles, 
which  now  occupied  basket-makers  who  were  com-^ 
pleting  their  work  upon  the  spot  where  they  cut  their 
wands  of  this  tough  wood  in  lieu  of  willow.  The 
fine  old  Gothic  building  stood  before  us  on  the  oppo- 
site height  upon  the  extreme  edge,  surrounded  by 
trees  of  various  kinds,  including  tall  poplars  which 
unfortunately  were  not  yet  in  leaf.  This  grand  old 
pile  was  an  impressive  contrast  to  the  scene  around  ; 
there  were  neat  villages  with  flat-topped  roofs  of  clay, 
down  in  the  vale  far  beneath,  with  the  intense  blue 
sea  washing  the  rocky  shore :  there  was  also  the 
adjoining  village  at  the  rear,  occupying  the  same 
plateau  as  the  monastery,  with  its  rich  gardens  and 
groves  of  orange-trees ;  the  ruined  walls  and  towers 
of  Buffavento  upon  the  highest  crags  dominated  our 
position  by  more  than  2,500  feet,  and  the  castle  of 
St.  Hilarion  stood  upon  a  still  higher  elevation  on  the 


iQo  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


western  sky-line  behind  Kyrenia.  There  was  nothing 
modern  that  appeared  compatible  with  the  style  and 
grandeur  of  Bellapais.  When  this  monastery  was 
erected,  Cyprus  must  have  been  a  flourishing  and 
populous  country  worthy  of  such  architecture,  but  the 
present  surroundings,  although  harmonising  in  colour- 
ing, and  in  a  quiet  passiveness  of  scene,  in  no  way 
suggested  a  connection  with  a  past  that  gave  birth 
either  to  the  Gothic  building  or  to  the  important 
castles  of  Buflfavento  and  St.  Hilarion. 

Having  skirted  the  amphitheatre  upon  the  monastery 
level,  we  passed  through  an  orange-garden  and  entered 
the  courtyard.  The  church  occupies  the  right  side, 
and  the  wall  is  fronted  by  cloisters  which,  supported 
upon  arches,  form  a  quadrangle.  A  stone  staircase 
ascends  from  the  cloisters  to  the  refectory  upon  the 
left;  this  is  in  considerable  ruin,  but  must  originally 
have  formed  an  imposing  hall.  Upon  the  flat  roof 
of  the  cloisters,  which  is  perfect  for  three  sides  of  the 
quadrangle,  a  magnificent  view  is  obtained  through 
the  fine  old  Gothic  open  window,  which  looks  down 
sheer  to  the  great  depth  below,  and  commands  the 
entire  country  seaward.  Descending  into  the  court- 
yard to  the  northern  cloister  we  pass  two  large 
sarcophagi  of  white  marble.  One  of  these  has  been 
elaborately  worked  in  rich  garlands  of  flowers  and 
very  grand  bulls'  heads,  together  with  nude  figures,  all 
of  which  have  been  much  damaged.  These  sarcophagi 
have  been  used  as  cisterns  for  containing  water,  as  the 
tap  is  still  visible.  Immediately  opposite  is  the  entrance 
to  the  great  hall,  which  is  in  good  repair,  as  a  new 
cement  floor  was  added  by  the  British  authorities,  with 
the  intention  of  converting  it  into  a  temporary  hospital 
when  the  troops  were  suffering  from  fever  at  Kyrenia. 


VIL] 


Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  191 


This  hall  is  102  feet  long  and  33  feet  wide,  with 
a  height  of  upwards  of  30  feet.  Nothing  can  exceed 
the  beauty  of  the  view  from  the  windows  of  this  grand 
entrance,  and  in  the  deep  recesses  we  found  Sir 
Garnet  and  Lady  Wolseley  enjoying  the  scene,  while 
our  host,  Major  McCalmont,  welcomed  his  guests  in 
this  splendid  vestige  of  the  Knights  Templars.  The 
abbey,  which  belonged  to  the  Latin  Church,  was  built 
during  the  Lusignan  dynasty  by  Hugh  III.  in  about 
1280  A.D.  and  was  destroyed  by  the  Turks.  The 
castle  of  Buffavento,  upon  the  summit  of  the  mountain, 
3240  feet  above  the  sea,  is  of  far  more  ancient  date, 
and  is  interesting  from  the  fact  of  its  having  during 
the  conquest  by  Richard  Coeur  de  Lion  succumbed 
to  the  assault  conducted  in  person  by  that  king.  The 
castle  of  Kyrenia  had  already  fallen,  and  the  wife, 
daughter,  and  treasures  of  Isaac  Comnenus  fell  into 
the  hands  of  the  victorious  English,  led  by  the  gallant 
Guy  de  Lusignan  in  the  absence  of  Richard  I.,  who 
was  at  that  time  incapacitated  through  illness,  which 
detained  him  at  Lefkosia.  This  fortification  was 
probably  the  original  defence  of  the  town,  and  could 
have  had  no  relation  to  the  present  work,  which  is 
of  a  far  later  date,  and  was  constructed  specially  for 
an  armament  of  heavy  guns. 

Captain  Savile  (loist  Royal  Irish),  in  his  admirable 
compilation  from  all  the  principal  works  that  have 
been  written  upon  Cyprus,  states : — 

"  Richard  was  now  able  to  turn  his  thoughts  to  his 
neglected  crusade;  he  returned  to  Limasol,  and  sent 
Isaac's  daughter,  with  his  own  wife  and  sister,  on  before 
him  to  St.  Jean  d*Acre.  On  5th  June,  1191,  Richard 
himself  sailed  from  Cyprus,  leaving  the  island 
in   charge  of  Richard   de   Canville    and    Robert  de 


192  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Turnham,  with  injunctions  to  keep  the  army  in  Syria 
well  provided  with  provisions. 

"  Isaac  was  placed  in  silver  fetters  and  taken  with 
King  Richard  to  Syria,  where  he  was  handed  over  to 
the  Hospitallers,  since  Knights  of  Rhodes,  for  safe 
custody,  and  was  by  them  confined  in  the  Castle  of 
Margat,  near  Tripoli,  where  he  died  shortly  afterwards. 

"  Several  insurrections  subsequently  occurred  in 
Cyprus,  but  were  all  suppressed  by  the  decisive  and 
prompt  action  of  Robert  de  Turnham. 

'*  The  Templars  now  entered  into  negotiations  with 
King  Richard  for  the  purchase  of  Cyprus,  and  they 
eventually  obtained  it  from  him  for  the  sum  of  100,000 
Saracenic  golden  besants ;  it  was  further  arranged  that 
40,000  golden  besants  should  be  paid  at  once,  and  the 
remainder  as  soon  as  it  could  be  derived  from  the 
revenues  of  the  island." 


According  to  a  high  authority,  De  Mas  Latrie  (see 
UHistoire  de  rile  de  Chypre,  vol.  ii.  p.  7),  the  above 
sum  would  now  represent  about  ;^304,ooo  sterling. 

Richard  had  at  once  appreciated  the  importance  of 
Cyprus  as  a  base  of  operations  that  would  secure  a 
supply  of  provisions  within  two  days'  sail  of  his 
salient  point  of  attack,  and  to  which  he  could  retreat 
in  the  event  of  failure.  The  geographical  position 
remains  the  same,  but  unfortunately  Cyprus  is  no 
longer  capable  of  furnishing  supplies  for  a  large  army, 
and  the  hay  necessary  for  the  cavalry  was  obliged  to 
be  imported  at  great  cost  immediately  upon  the  British 
occupation  in  1878. 

The  Templars  quickly  became  disgusted  with  their 
bargain,  and  after  only  ten  months'  rule,  during  which 
the  island  was  in  a  state  of  chronic  revolt,  they  en- 
deavoured to  persuade  King  Richard  to  cancel  the 
agreement   of  purchase. 


vn.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  193 

Captain  Savile  continues  : — 

"  Richard  expressed  his  willingness  to  take  over 
the  island,  but  refused  to  return  the  40,000  besants. 
King  Guy  de  Lusignan  now  came  forward,  and  having 
arranged  with  the  Templars  that  in  the  event  of 
his  being  made'  king  of  Cyprus  he  would  refund 
to  them  what  they  had  paid,  went  to  Richard  and 
asked  him  for  the  island  as  compensation  for  the  loss 
of  the  crown  of  Jerusalem,  engaging  also  to  pay  the 
same  sum  that  the  Templars  had  agreed  to.  This 
offer  was  accepted,  and  Guy  intrusted  to  his  Chan- 
cellor, Pierre  d'Engoulesme,  Bishop  of  Tripoli,  the  task 
of  raising  the  money.  The  sum  of  60,000  besants  was 
collected  by  means  of  loans  from  the  citizens  of  Tripoli 
and  from  the  Genoese,  and  was  paid  by  Guy  to 
Richard,  who  asked  for  the  remaining  40,000  besants ; 
but  Guy  then  pleaded  poverty,  and  it  is  stated  that  the 
English  king  did  not  urge  this  claim  further.** 

Guy  de  Lusignan  at  once  took  possession  of  the 
island  (May  1192),  but  it  appears,  according  to  De 
Mas  Latrie,  that  he  never  actually  assumed  the  title  of 
King  of  Cyprus.  His  reign  was  but  short,  lasting  only 
one  year  and  eleven  months  ;  but  from  all  accounts  he 
governed  wisely,  and  restored  order  and  tranquillity  in 
the  island.  One  of  his  first  measures  was  the  estab- 
lishment of  a  feudal  system,  and  he  endowed  with 
portions  of  land,  according  to  rank,  about  300  knights 
and  200  esquires,  who  formed  the  nucleus  of  the 
nobility  and  privileged  bodies  in  Cyprus. 

The  Lusignan  dynasty  thus  commenced  in  1192, 
continued  until  1489,  and  terminated  with  Queen 
Catherine  Cornaro,  when  Cyprus  was  annexed  by  the 
Venetian  Republic. 

I  did  not  ascend  to  the  castle  of  Buffavento,  which 
towered  above  the  monastery  about  two  miles  distant, 

o 


194  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


but  I  observed  with  the  telescope  that  every  inch  of 
ground  that  could  be  cultivated  was  green  with 
barley,  even  to  extreme  heights  which  appeared  inac- 
cessible. Small  terraces  had  been  arranged  by  heaping 
up  stones  among  the  numerous  declivities  to  save  the 
soil  from  falling  below,  and  to  catch  the  wash  that 
might  be  added  by  some  passing  shower.  This  was 
the  result  of  enormous  labour,  far  disproportioned  to 
the  value  of  the  crops  ;  yet  in  the  face  of  this  perilous 
industry  there  are  persons  who  declare  that  the 
Cypriotes  are  an  idle  race,  and  that  "  land  exists  in 
superabundant  acreage  sufficient  for  double  the  amount 
of  population."  If  this  theory  is  correct  the  Cypriotes, 
who  climb  to  these  dizzy  heights  to  build  some  walls 
among  the  precipices  that  will  act  as  an  agricultural 
trap  to  catch  some  few  square  yards  of  soil,  must  be 
simply  madmen  ;  but  I  have  not  found  them  wanting 
either  in  brains  or  industry  when  working  independ- 
ently for  their  own  profit;  where  they  are  positively 
wanting,  is  in  ready  money.  All  strangers  who  take  an 
interest  in  agriculture  must  be  struck  with  the  extra- 
ordinary pains  taken  by  the  natives  to  save  the  soil 
from  water-wash,  to  which  I  have  already  alluded ;  but 
this  peculiarity  is  the  more  striking  when  we  observe 
the  dangerous  positions  to  which  they  have  been 
driven  by  a  desire  to  increase  their  lands. 

In  a  ride  from  our  camp  to  St.  Hilarion  I  carefully 
remarked  throughout  the  extremely  rugged  nature  of 
the  route  that  no  plot,  however  minute,  had  been 
neglected.  In  one  rocky  nook  buried  among  the 
cliffs  was  a  little  cottage,  with  hanging  gardens  all 
terraced  by  exceedingly  high  walls,  yet  affording  the 
smallest  superficial  area  for  cultivation.  This  is 
discernible  with  a  powerful  telescope  from  the  base 


VII.3  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  195 

of  the  mountains,  although  to  the  naked  eye  it  appears 
like  a  cluster  of  barren  rocjcs,  tinged  with  the  green  of 
fruit-trees  growing  from  the  clefts.  If  such  labour 
had  been  expended  to  produce  a  picturesque  effect  the 
object  might  be  appreciated,  but  that  it  should  be 
profitable  is  beyond  belief. 

The  summit  of  St.  Hilarion  is  3340  feet  above  the 
sea,  from  which,  in  a  direct  line,  it  is  not  three  miles 
distant.  The  cliffs  are  quite  perpendicular  in  some 
places  for  several  hundred  feet,  and  the  greatest  care 
has  been  taken  to  perch  the  towers  and  walls  upon 
the  extreme  verge.  Although  from  the  base  of  the 
mountains  at  Kyrenia  the  castle  appears  to  occupy  an 
impregnable  position,  it  can  be  easily  approached  by 
one  of  those  rough  paths  in  the  rear  which  can  be 
scrambled  over  by  the  Cyprian  mules.  I  am  afraid 
that  my  willing  animal  grumbled  somewhat  at  my 
weight,  as  it  was  obliged  to  halt  for  breath  seven 
or  eight  times  before  we  reached  a  secluded  little 
dell  among  the  mountain  tops,  from  which  the  path 
ascended  by  steep  zigzags,  directly  through  the  en- 
trance of  the  old  fortification.  This  narrow  dell,  hidden 
among  the  surrounding  crags  about  2800  feet  above 
the  sea,  was  entirely  cropped  with  barley,  and  the  people 
who  owned  the  plot  resided  in  a  cave  that  had  been 
arranged  for  a  habitation  for  themselves  and  animals. 

On  the  ridge  before  we  descended  into  this  vale  the 
view  was  magnificent,  as  two  lofty  crags  formed  a 
natural  frame  for  the  picture  within.  Between  these 
rugged  peaks  of  silvery  grey  limestone,  tinted  by 
ferruginous  rocks  with  various  shades  of  red  and  brown, 
we  looked  down  a  precipice  beneath  our  feet  upon  the 
blue  sea,  the  snow-capped  mountains  of  Caramania  in 
the  distance,  and  the  rich  border  of  our  own  shores 

o  2 


196  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


covered  with  green  trees,  gardens,  fields,  and  clustering 
villages  :  in  the  centre  of  which  was  the  fort  and 
harbour  of  Kyrenia.  I  could  just  distinguish  our 
white  tents  among  the  caroub-trees  far  beneath.  To 
complete  this  superb  landscape  there  should  have  been 
a  few  sails  upon  the  sea  ;  but  all  was  blue  and  barren, 
without  signs  of  life.  The  castle  of  St.  Hilarion 
stood  before  us  on  the  left  as  we  faced  the  sea,  and  the 
towers  occupied  the  peaks  within  less  than  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  of  our  position.  Continuing  along  the 
narrow  vale,  a  mountain-top  upon  our  left  hand,  which 
sloped  to  the  path  upon  which  we  rode,  appeared 
slightly  higher  than  the  extreme  summit  of  the  castle 
peak  ;  the  sides  of  this  steep  slope  were  covered  with 
dwarf- cypress  and  occasional  young  pines,  and  it  was 
clear  that  St.  Hilarion  would  be  commanded  by  a 
battery  upon  these  heights,  or  even  by  the  fire  of 
modern  rifles.  Ascending  the  zigzag  path  among 
blocks  of  fallen  stone,  which  had  rolled  from  the 
partially  dismantled  walls,  we  entered  the  gateway,  and 
at  once  perceived  the  great  extent  of  the  old  fortress. 
The  entire  mountain-top  is  encircled  by  a  high  wall, 
flanked  at  intervals  by  towers,  and  crenellated  for 
archers  or  cross -bowmen.  Although  the  opposite 
mountain  would  by  artillery  fire  completely  command 
the  inner  and  lower  portion  of  the  works,  which  we 
had  now  entered,  the  distance  would  have  been  far 
beyond  the  range  of  catapults  or  arrows  at  the  time 
when  the  defences  were  erected.  The  error  appeared 
to  have  been  in  the  great  area  of  the  fortifications, 
which  would  have  necessitated  a  garrison  of  at  least 
4000  men,  entailing  a  large  supply  of  provisions  and 
of  water.  There  was  no  trace  of  a  well  throughout 
the  works,  but  I  observed  the  remains  of  water-pipes 


vn.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  197 

in  numerous  directions,  which  appeared  to  have  con- 
ducted the  rainfall  into  reservoirs.  The  nearest  water 
was  by  the  caves,  occupied  by  the  peasants  in  the 
glen,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  distant.  Nothing 
would  have  been  easier  than  an  investment,  which 
would  sooner  or  later  have  reduced  the  garrison  to 
starvation,  as  the  precipices  upon  the  north,  w^est, 
and  east,  which  rendered  the  position  impregnable 
from  those  directions,  at  the  same  time  prevented  an 
exit,  and  effectually  barred  all  egress  either  for  sorties 
or  escape.  The  first  court  upon  entering  the  gateway 
comprised  several  acres,  but  there  was  no  level  ground, 
and  the  natural  slope  of  the  mountain  was  inclosed  by 
walls  and  parapets  upon  all  sides,  until  at  convenient 
places  the  earth  had  been  scarped  out  for  the  erection 
of  buildings,  which  had  either  been  barracks  or 
magazines.  These  were  all  of  stone  and  hard 
cement,  and  were  now  used  as  stables  for  various 
animals  by  the  few  peasants  of  this  wild  neighbour- 
hood. Passing  through  galleries,  from  which  an 
occasional  window  showed  a  deep  chasm  of  many 
hundred  feet  beneath,  and  continuing  until  we 
entered  a  tower  which  terminated  the  passage  upon 
a  perpendicular  peak  that  enfiladed  the  outer  line  of 
defence,  and  at  the  same  time  from  its  great  height 
commanded  the  main  approach,  we  descended  a  rude 
flight  of  steps,  and  presently  entered  a  grand  hall 
supported  upon  numerous  arches  which  appeared  to 
connect  two  peaks  of  the  mountain.  Descending 
from  this  solid  work,  we  entered  upon  a  plot  of  grass 
which  sloped  towards  a  precipice  of  rock  that  com- 
pletely closed  this  side  of  the  fortress.  Several  cypress- 
trees  grew  among  the  stones,  which  assisted  us  in 
ascending  from  this  steep  and  dangerous  slope,  until 


198  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


by  a  passage  which  led  into  a  quadrangular  courtyard 
of  grass  we  emerged  into  an  imposing  portion  of  the 
ruin  which  commanded  the  west  face.  This  was  a 
wall  built  upon  the  extreme  edge  of  a  precipice,  which 
looked  down  a  giddy  depth,  and  afforded  a  lovely 
view  lengthways  of  the  narrow  strip  of  caroub- forest 
and  verdure  along  the  mountain  range  to  the  margin 
of  the  sea.  The  guide  knew  every  inch  of  these 
labyrinth-like  works,  and  upon  my  expressing  a 
desire  to  ascend  to  the  earth  on  the  summit,  he 
commenced  a  scramble  over  loose  stones,  large  rocks, 
and  occasional  slippery  grass,  holding  on  to  the  now 
numerous  dwarf-cypress,  until  we  reached  a  narrow 
saddle  of  the  peak,  over  which  a  man  could  sit  astride 
and  look  down  to  the  right  and  left  into  the  depth 
below.  It  was  necessary  to  cross  this  saddle  for  about 
ten  or  twelve  feet  to  gain  the  wider  pathway  formed 
by  the  natural  rock,  which  was  terminated  after  a  few 
yards  by  the  castle  tower.  This,  as  may  be  imagined, 
was  built  upon  the  verge,  and  formed  an  artificial  peak  to 
the  precipices  upon  all  sides.  The  view  was  superb,  as  it 
commanded  a  panorama  of  mountains,  valleys,  the  sea, 
precipices,  and  all  that  could  make  a  perfect  landscape. 

Sitting  down  to  rest  upon  the  solid  rock  upon  the 
left  of  this  castle  entrance,  I  observed  that  it  was 
composed  of  white  marble.  The  exterior  had  a 
greyish  coating  from  the  action  of  the  weather,  but 
this  could  be  scraped  off  with  a  knife,  which  exposed 
the  white  marble  beneath.  I  remarked  that  the  cement 
of  the  masonry  was  mixed  with  small  fragments  of 
the  same  material,  and  subsequently  I  discovered 
blocks  of  this  substance  in  the  immediate  neighbour- 
hood of  Kyrenia. 

There  was  a  peculiarity  in  the  walls  and  towers  of 


,v>^  -r.    :: — .-^■w 


VII.]  Kykenia  and  the  North  Coast.  199 

the  fortress  of  St.  Hilarion :  the  stones  were  of  such 
small  dimensions  that  few  exceeded  forty  or  fifty  pounds 
in  weight,  except  those  which  formed  the  principal 
halls  or  other  buildings  upon  the  secure  plateaux  within 
the  outer  works.  The  masons  had  apparently  depended 
upon  the  extreme  tenacity  and  hardness  of  their  cement, 
which  bound  the  mass  into  a  solid  block.  Upon  a 
close  examination  I  discovered  the  reason.  As  the 
towers  and  many  of  the  walls  were  built  upon  the 
extreme  edge  of  various  precipices,  it  would  have  been 
impossible  to  have  erected  a  scaffolding  on  the  outside, 
in  the  absence  of  which  it  would  have  been  difficult 
to  have  raised  heavy  weights ;  the  builders  were  there- 
fore obliged  to  limit  the  size  of  stones  to  the  power 
of  individuals,  who  would  be  obliged  to  supply  the 
material  by  the  simple  handing  of  single  stones  as  the 
work  proceeded.  By  this  crude  system  the  mason 
would  stand  upon  his  own  wall  and  receive  the  stones 
as  his  work  grew  in  height. 

The  origin  and  date  of  this  interesting  fortress  are 
uncertain,  but  it  is  known  that,  like  other  eagle-nests 
upon  this  craggy  range,  it  formed  a  place  of  refuge 
to  some  of  the  Latin  kings  of  Cyprus.  As  in  ancient 
times  the  port  of  Kyrenia  had  been  an  object  of  frequent 
attacks,  the  lofty  fortresses  of  St.  Hilarion  and  Buffavento 
offered  immediate  asylums  in  the  event  of  a  retreat 
from  the  invaded  harbour.  In  close  proximity  to  the 
sea  these  elevated  posts  commanded  an  extended  view, 
and  the  approach  of  an  enemy  could  be  discerned 
at  a  distance  that  would  afford  ample  warning  for 
preparing  a  defence.  Both  St.  Hilarion  and  other 
mountain  strongholds  upon  this  range  were  dismantled 
by  the  Venetian  Admiral  Prioli  about  a.d.  1490, 
shortly  after  the  annexation  of  the  island  by  Venice, 


200  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


The  return  ride  down  the  mountain  side  was,  if 
possible,  more  beautiful  than  the  ascent,  as  the  lights 
and  shadows  were  rendered  acute  by  dark  but  quickly 
passing  clouds ;  occasional  light  mists  curled  round 
the  highest  peaks  like  veils  of  gauze  and  then  dissolved 
in  the  clear  air.  These  atmospherical  changes  intensified 
the  colouring  and  brought  out  the  varying  tints  of  grey 
and  purple  rocks  into  a  strange  prominence,  while  every 
wild  flower  appeared  to  thrust  itself  suddenly  into 
observation :  the  purple  cistus  seemed  magnified  to 
the  size  of  roses,  and  a  bright  gleam  of  gold  from  the 
masses  of  prickly  bloom  now  in  fullest  blaze  mingled 
with  the  general  green  surface  of  mastic  and  arbutus. 
As  we  neared  the  base  of  the  mountains  the  dark 
green  rounded  tops  of  a  forest  of  caroub- trees  were 
occasionally  broken  by  the  white  bloom  of  sweet- 
scented  hawthorns ;  and  to  the  delight  of  my  ear,  the 
first  notes  of  the  cuckoo  that  I  had  heard  in  Cyprus 
recalled  the  spring  of  England !  It  is  a  curious 
arrangement  of  our  nervous  system,  that  a  sound  so 
simple  in  itself  should  invest  the  scene  with  a  tenfold 
pleasure,  and  should  conjure  up  uncalled-for  recollec- 
tions of  places,  friends,  and  a  life  of  years  long  past : 
but  so  it  was  ;  and  for  the  moment  I  longed  to  be  at 
home. 

The  mules  and  camels  were  ready  to  start  on  the 
lOth  April.  I  had  engaged  a  well-known  fine-looking 
muleteer  named  Katarjii  liani,  who  had  contracted, 
for  twenty-nine  shillings  a  day,  to  supply  the 
riding  mules  and  baggage  animals  sufficient  for  our 
party  from  Kyrenia  to  any  portion  of  the  island  I 
might  wish  to  visit.  My  plan  was  arranged,  to  include 
a  circuit  of  the  north  and  west  to  Baffo;  thence  to 
Limasol ;  by  which  time  the  hot  weather  would  be 


VII.] 


Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  201 


drawing  near,  and  we  should  seek  a  setdement  as  near 
the  clouds  as  possible  upon  Troodos ;  the  snow  was 
still  deep  upon  the  northern  summit  of  this  mountain, 
which  formed  the  prominent  object  in  the  range. 

Our  new  muleteer  liani  was  about  six  feet  two  inches 
high,  and  not  being  sufficiently  tall,  he  added  nearly 
three  inches  more  by  enormous  heels  to  a  pair  of  well- 
fitting  high  boots ;  these,  fastened  below  the  knee,  just 
showed  sufficient  clean  grey  stocking  to  prove  that  he 
possessed  such  hose  ;  which  are  luxuries  seldom  in- 
dulged in  by  the  peasantry.  The  boots  were  carefully 
blackened  and  polished,  and  were  armed  with  long 
spurs.  His  trousers  were  the  usual  roomy  pattern, 
containing  sufficient  stuff  to  clothe  a  small  family  of 
English  children  ;  above  these  dark-blue  bags  he  wore 
a  kind  of  Jersey  frock  of  thick  silk  fitting  tight  to  his 
figure  ;  the  junction  between  this  purple-striped  garment 
and  his  waistband  was  concealed  in  the  many  windings 
of  a  long  shawl  which  passed  several  times  round  his 
centre ;  in  this  he  wore  a  German-silver-handled  knife 
or  dagger  of  pure  Birmingham  or .  Sheffield  origin. 
His  figure  was  very  perfect,  and  he  was  as  thoroughly 
*'  set-up  '*  as  though  he  had  been  in  the  hands  of  a 
drill-serjeant  from  his  cradle.  He  carried  a  long  stick 
like  the  shaft  of  a  lance,  with  which  he  could  poke 
a  refractory  mule,  but  which  he  always  used  when 
mounting  by  resting  one  end  upon  the  ground,  and  with 
the  left  hand  upon  the  saddle  he  ascended  with  the 
ease  of  a  spiritualist  "  floating  in  the  air."  liani  was 
very  polite  to  ladies,  and  he  knew  their  ways.  He 
seldom  advanced  without  an  offering  of  some  lovely 
flower  or  a  small  sprig  of  sweetly-scented  herb,  which 
he  invariably  presented  with  a  graceful  bow  and  a 
smile  intended  to  represent  a  combination  of  humility, 


202  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


amiability,  gentility,  and  as  many  other  "  ilitys "  as 
could  be  squeezed  into  his  expressive  features.  It  is 
hardly  necessary  after  this  description  to  say  that  liani 
was  a  very  tall  humbug,  pleasant  in  manner  when  he 
had  his  own  way.  He  was  lazy  to  such  a  degree  that 
he  invariably  fell  asleep  upon  his  mule  after  smoking 
innumerable  cigarettes.  In  these  cases  his  long  body 
swayed  to  the  right  and  left,  and  occasionally  nodded 
forward  to  an  extent  that  sometimes  awoke  him  with 
the  jerk  ;  after  which  spasmodic  return  of  conscious- 
ness an  immediate  relapse  took  place,  and  he  fell 
asleep  again.  As  he  rode  directly  before  me,  as  guide, 
this  chronic  somnolency  was  most  annoying,  and  I  had 
to  drive  his  mule  into  a  faster  walk  by  poking  its 
hind-quarters  with  my  stick.  The  animal  would  then 
break  into  a  sudden  trot,  which  would  awaken  the 
rider  to  the  fact  that  he  had  been  dreaming ;  upon 
which  he  burst  into  some  peculiar  song  that  was  in- 
tended to  prove  that  he  was  wide  awake  ;  but  after  a 
few  bars  the  ditty  ceased  ;  the  head  once  more  nodded 
and  swung  from  side  to  side;  the  mule  relaxed  its 
pace.  .  .  .  liani  was  asleep  again ! 

In  another  sense  he  was  very  wide-awake.  He 
had  represented  to  me  that  he  was  the  proprietor  of 
the  seven  camels  and  five  mules,  but  I  quickly  dis- 
covered that  he  was  only  the  owner  of  a  completely 
worn-out  old  camel  and  four  mules :  he  had  hired 
the  other  animals  at  a  considerably  lower  rate  than 
I  had  agreed  to  pay  him,  therefore  I  should  have 
the  difficulty  of  several  discontented  owners  instead  of 
one.  However,  we  had  started  before  this  fact  was 
explained  by  my  factotum  Christo. 

The  route  lay  along  the  sea-shore  through  a  forest 
of   caroub-trees    and    olives,   occasionally   varied    by 


VII.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  203 

patches  of  cereals.  Upon  our  right  to  the  sea-margin 
were  tolerable  crops  of  barley,  most  of  which  had  been 
irrigated  by  water  conducted  from  the  hills.  At  about 
four  miles  distance  from  Kyrenia  the  caroubs  and  olives 
of  all  growths  exhibited  the  effects  of  north-easterly 
gales,  as  they  inclined  to  south-west ;  and  those  nearest 
to  the  sea,  which  acted  as  screens,  and  received 
the  full  unbroken  force  of  the  wind,  were  seriously 
damaged.  As  we  proceeded  towards  Lapithus  the 
trees  became  widely  scattered,  the  slopes  were  steeper, 
and  the  strip  of  level  ground  to  the  sea-margin  narrowed 
to  only  half  a  mile.  The  mountains  rose  rapidly  from 
this  base,  and  an  extra  deep  tinge  of  green  showed 
the  effect  of  streams,  which  in  this  happy  spot  of 
Cyprus  are  perennial.  Many  little  villages  were  dotted 
about  the  mountain  sides  with  groves  of  olives  and 
other  fruit-trees,  which  appeared  to  be  in  danger  from 
the  impending  cliffs,  huge  masses  having  fallen  and 
rolled  to  various  distances  at  the  bottom.  The  country 
reminded  me  of  the  prettiest  portions  of  South  Italy. 
.  At  eight  miles  from  Kyrenia  we  arrived  at  the 
thriving  town  of  Karava,  built  upon  the  mountain 
slope  and  watered  by  powerful  streams  diverted  into 
artificial  channels  from  the  parent  bed.  The  large 
population  of  this  neighbourhood  is  principally  en- 
gaged in  the  production  of  silk,  for  which  the  locality 
has  long  been  famous.  Every  garden  that  surrounded 
the  houses  was  rich  in  mulberry-trees,  together  with 
oranges  and  lemons  and  the  luxuriant  foliage  of  the 
almond.  We  rode  along  steep  paved  lanes  within 
the  town,  through  which  the  water  was  rushing  in 
refreshing  streams,  until  we  at  length  reached  the 
precipitous  edge  of  the  ravine,  which  in  the  rainy 
season  becomes  an  important  torrent.     Although  some 


204  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


flour-mills  are  worked,  I  observed  a  terrible  waste 
of  water-power,  which  might  be  turned  to  account  for 
machinery.  I  heard  the  usual  excuse  for  this  neglect, 
"  The  people  have  no  money  ! " 

We  had  ridden  fast,  and  were  far  ahead  of  the 
baggage  animals ;  we  accordingly  halted  to  lunch 
beneath  a  shady  caroub-tree  near  the  edge  of  the 
ravine,  about  fifty  feet  below.  A  French  game-bag, 
with  net  and  numerous  pockets,  always  contained 
our  meals,  which  consisted  of  a  cold  fowl,  some  eggs 
boiled  hard,  and  a  loaf  of  native  brown  bread  or 
biscuits.  This  was  luncheon  and  breakfast,  as  we 
never  indulged  in  more  than  two  meals  a  day,  merely 
taking  a  cup  of  cafi  au  laity  or  cocoa,  in  the  early 
morning,  and  our  lunch  or  breakfast  at  any  hour  that 
travelling  made  convenient.  This  depended  upon  the 
attraction  of  some  pretty  spot  or  wide-spreading  tree 
that  suggested  a  halt. 

We  now  remounted  and  rode  to  Lapithus,  a  mile 
and  a  half  distant,  and,  avoiding  the  town,  selected  a 
camping-place  on  the  flat  ground  within  300  yards  of 
the  sea. 

There  was  little  difference  between  Lapithus  and 
Karava.  A  succession  of  mountain  streams  nourished 
the  higher  grounds,  and  having  fertilised  the  gardens 
and  plots  of  cereals,  were  subsequently  led  into  the 
fields  below. 

Lapithus  has  been  celebrated  from  an  ancient  date 
in  like  manner  with  Kythrea,  owing  to  the  unfail- 
ing supply  of  water  from  its  mountain-springs,  and, 
under  the  Ptolemies,  B.C.  295,  it  became  one  of  the 
four  provinces  into  which  Cyprus  was  divided.  Lapi- 
thus, north  ;  Amathus,  south  ;  Salamis,  east ;  Paphos 
(now  Baffo),  west. 


VII.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  205 

On  the  following  morning  our  muleteer  liani,  having 
indulged  in  cigarettes  and  sleep,  was  not  ready  to  start 
at  the  proper  hour,  neither  were  the  animals  forth- 
coming. We  accordingly  started  on  foot  and  threaded 
our  way  through  paved  lanes,  which  twisted  and 
turned  in  various  directions  according  to  the  positions 
of  the  houses  and  innumerable  gardens.  The  people 
were  very  civil,  and  directed  us  in  the  right  direction, 
although  evidently  surprised  at  our  journeying,  on  foot, 
which  is  most  unusual  even  among  the  poorer  classes. 
We  walked  for  more  than  a  mile  through  the  town : 
the  air  was  fresh  and  enjoyable,  the  thermometer  was 
53°  at  7  A.M.  Streams  of  clear  water  gushed  through 
the  lanes  in  many  places,  which  had  created  the  flourish- 
ing aspect  around.  With  such  a  picture  of  prosperity 
before  us,  due  entirely  to  the  presence  of  never-failing 
streams,  it  seemed  incredible  that  the  great  central 
district  of  Messaria  should  be  left  to  the  chance  of 
seasons  when  the  means  of  artificial  irrigation  lie  close 
beneath  the  surface. 

Upon  quitting  Lapithus  the  country  on  the  west 
was  almost  devoid  of  trees,  and  we  walked  for  four 
miles  and  a  half  before  we  could  procure  a  shade.  At 
this  distance  we  halted  to  await  the  mules  beneath  a 
clump  of  three  caroub-trees  close  to  the  road  side. 
Beneath  this  group  were  several  masses  of  rock  which 
appeared  to  have  rolled  at  some  remote  period  from  the 
mountain  side,  as  blocks  of  all  sizes  strewed  the  ground 
in  every  direction.  I  was  at  once  struck  with  a 
beautiful  block  of  dark  green  marble,  and  upon  exa- 
mining the  neighbourhood  I  discovered  many  pieces 
of  the  same  material,  all  of  which  had  evidently 
fallen  from  the  mountain's  side,  thus  proving  that  the 
parent  mass  would  be  found  in  sitti  were  the  high  cliffs 


2o6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


rCHAP. 


investigated.  The  mules  arrived,  and  I  directed  the 
attention  of  liani  to  the  fact,  in  order  that  I  might 
procure  a  specimen  by  sending  him  to  the  spot  upon  a 
future  occasion.  We  now  entered  upon  groves  of 
caroub-trees,  and  the  ground  was  covered  with  blocks 
of  limestone  and  of  marbles.  As  we  proceeded  the 
shore  became  exceedingly  narrow,  as  the  base  of  the 
ste,ep  mountain  sprang  from  within  a  short  distance  of 
the  sea.  The  quantity  and  varieties  of  marbles  in- 
creased, the  dark  green  was  present  in  large  blocks, 
and  several  masses  of  bright  rose-colour  suggested 
that  rare  and  valuable  qualities  might  be  profitably 
worked  and  exported,  as  great  facilities  existed  in  the 
presence  of  snug  little  coves  within  only  a  few  yards, 
where  in  the  summer  months  native  vessels  of  twenty 
or  thirty  tons  might  anchor  in  security. 

The  country  now  became  exceedingly  wild  and 
rugged.  The  sea  was  in  many  places  exactly  below 
us  as  we  skirted  the  cliffs  and  occasionally  crossed  the 
beaches  of  narrow  coves.  The  high  mountain  upon 
our  immediate  left  was  the  western  terminus  of  the 
Carpas  range,  and  exhibited  peculiar  geological  features, 
eruptive  rocks  having  burst  in  some  places  through  the 
limestone  and  created  great  disturbance.  The  route 
was  exceedingly  interesting  and  beautiful,  rocks  of 
every  shade  of  colour  were  mingled  with  bright  green 
foliage,  the  sea  was  an  emerald  green  in  the  shallow 
coves,  and  dark  blue  within  a  few  hundred  paces 
of  the  shore,  while  a  brisk  breeze  curled  the  waves 
and  tipped  their  crests  with  a  glistening  white.  The 
path  at  length  turned  to  the  left  and  led  through  a 
gap  that  rounded  the  mountain  base,  and  formed  the 
extreme  end  of  the  Jurassic  limestone,  which  only 
exists  in    Cyprus  in  the  peculiar  wall-like  Carpasian 


viij  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  207 

range  running  from  west  to  east  upon  the  northern 
coast. 

We  crossed  a  stream  of  water  at  the  bottom  of  the 
gorge  which  winds  through  the  narrow  glen  that 
terminates  the  range ;  and  ascending  upon  the  opposite 
side,  we  at  once  entered  upon  steep  slopes  composed 
of  marls  interspersed  with  an  exceedingly  bright  rose- 
coloured  marble  in  veins  of  about  two  feet  thickness. 
This  would  probably  develop  considerable  blocks  if 
quarried  to  a  greater  depth. 

Continuing  for  about  two  miles  along  the  glen,  which 
was  cultivated  with  barley  in  all  available  localities,  we 
several  times  crossed  the  stream  in  its  winding  course, 
and  my  dogs  hunted  the  steep  myrtle-covered  banks 
in  expectation  of  game ;  but  nothing  moved,  and  the 
croaking  of  numerous  frogs  was  the  only  sign  of  life. 
The  glen  now  widened  to  a  valley  about  a  mile  and 
three-quarters  in  diameter,  surrounded  upon  all  sides 
by  heights,  and  we  commenced  one  of  the  steepest 
ascents  in  Cyprus,  up  the  face  of  the  slope  about  1000 
feet  above  the  bottom.  The  zigzags  were  upon  a 
surface  of  white  marl,  which  during  wet  weather 
would  become  as  slippery  as  soap,  and  be  impassable 
for  loaded  animals.  Many  times  our  mules  were 
forced  to  halt  and  rest,  but  they  were  good  and  sure- 
footed beasts,  that  could  always  be  depended  upon. 

At  length  we  gained  the  summit,  which  was  a  total 
change  of  scene.  Instead  of  descending  upon  the  other 
side,  as  I  had  expected,  we  had  arrived  at  a  plateau 
eight  or  nine  miles  in  length  from  north  to  south,  and 
an  invisible  distance  from  east  to  west.  The  soil  was 
a  rich  reddish  chocolate,  forming  a  grateful  contrast  to 
the  glaring  white  marls  that  we  had  just  quitted,  and 
which  composed  the  steep  hills  that  surrounded  the 


2o8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


lower  basin.  A  growth  of  young  pines  and  other 
evergreen  shrubs  ornamented  the  surface,  and  at 
about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  from  the  summit  of  the  pass 
by  which  we  had  arrived  we  halted  at  a  well  of  pure 
water  among  a  small  grove  of  olive-trees.  Although 
we  were  at  least  1000  feet  above  the  valley,  the  water 
was  only  ten  feet  from  the  coping-stone  by  measure- 
ment. There  could  be  little  doubt  that  the  perennial 
stream  in  the  deep  glen  was  the  result  of  the  drainage 
of  this  extensive  table-land,  corresponding  with  similar 
heights  upon  the  other  side. 

Having  breakfasted  by  the  well  of  deliciously  cold 
water,  we  remounted,  and  continued  our  route  along 
the  extensive  table-land.  This  was  cultivated  in  many 
places,  but  as  we  advanced  for  two  or  three  miles  the 
country  became  exceedingly  wild,  and  we  entered  a 
wood  of  Pinus  maritimay  composed  of  young  trees  of 
several  years'  growth,  and  older  stems  that  had  been 
mutilated  in  the  disgraceful  manner  that  characterises 
all  Cyprian  forests.  There  was  not  one  perfect  tree 
above  eight  years  growth  ;  but  every  stem  had  been 
cut  off  about  six  feet  from  the  top  for  the  sake  of  the 
straight  pole.  Trees  of  fifteen  years  or  more  had 
been  mercilessly  hacked  for  the  small  amount  of  tur- 
pentine that  such  trunks  would  produce,  and  the  bark 
had  been  ripped  off  for  tanning.  Great  quantities  of 
mastic  bushes  covered  the  surface  between  the  pines, 
and  even  these  exhibited  the  continual  attacks  of  the 
woodcutter  s  grubbing-axe,  which  had  torn  up  the  roots, 
in  addition  to  the  stems,  for  the  requirements  of  the 
lime-burner.  The  red  soil  is  so  propitious  to  the  growth 
of  pines  that,  in  spite  of  the  unremitting  destruction, 
the  ground  was  covered  with  young  plants,  self-sown 
from  the  fallen  cones.      If  these  young  forests  were 


yii.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  209 

protected  for  twelve  or  fourteen  years,  the  surface 
would  again  be  restored  to  the  original  woodland  that 
once  ornamented  this  portion  of  the  island.  Under 
the  present  conditions  of  Cyprus  all  wholesome  laws 
and  enactments  are  practically  ridiculed  by  the  in- 
habitants, as  there  are  no  foresters  or  keepers  to 
enforce  the  orders  of  the  government.  A  governor 
may  sit  upon  the  top  of  Olympus  and  issue  wise 
decrees  like  Jupiter,  but  unfortunately  he  does  not 
possess  the  thunderbolts,  as  the  country  is  so  poor  that 
it  cannot  afford  to  pay  the  salaries  necessary  for  the 
support  of  foresters  and  the  officers  required  for  this 
special  department.  I  myself  met  droves  of  donkeys 
and  mules  loaded  with  wood  and  accompanied  by  their 
owners  with  their  destructive  axes,  all  wending  their 
way  through  the  forest  to  the  town  of  Morphu,  which 
is  thus  supplied  with  fuel  for  baking,  cooking,  lime- 
burning,  and  all  other  purposes. 

It  is  impossible  to  feel  amiable  when  passing  through 
these  desolating  scenes,  where  nature,  originally  so 
beautiful,  has  been  defaced,  and  the  people,  instead  of 
deriving  pleasure  from  natural  beauties,  are  obtuse  to 
all  the  surroundings,  which,  according  to  educated  taste, 
would  ensure  appreciation.  I  felt  inclined  to  upset  the 
donkeys,  capture  their  proprietors,  and  ...  I  could 
not  have  hung  them  upon  the  trees  that  they  had 
defaced,  for  no  bough  had  been  left  that  would 
have  supported  their  weight  .  .  .  and  there  was  no 
rope. 

While  these  vindictive  and  statesman-like  thoughts 
boiled  within  me,  the  naturally  courteous  people  made 
their  graceful  salaams  as  we  passed,  and  studiously 
conducted  their  heavily-laden  donkeys  out  of  the  path 
to  make  way  for  our  advance,  that  otherwise  would 

p 


2IO  Cyprus  in  1879.  [cuap. 

have  been  effectually  choked  by  the  throng  of  bush- 
and-faggot-laden  animals,  which  looked  like  **  Birnam- 
wood    marching    to    Dunsinane."      In    my    heart    I 
immediately  forgave  the   poor   people  ;    I    knew  that 
the  man  with  the  axe  who  marched   behind  was  as 
ignorant,  and  not  so  strong,  as  his  donkey  who  carried 
the   load.     They  had   been   both   subjects   of  a   bad 
government,  and  it  was  not  their  fault  that  they  were 
despoilers.     You  might  as  well  blame  the  wind   for 
the  destruction  of  venerable  trees  ;  or  the  locusts  for 
devouring    the    crops ;    they   were    ungoverned,    and 
unfortunately  the   instinct   of    uncivilised   man   is   to 
destroy.     I  shall  say  more  upon  this  important  subject 
when  we  arrive  among  the  last  remaining  forests  of 
the  Tr5odos  mountains. 

We  rode  onwards,  always  through  the  same  wilder- 
ness of  old  tree-stems  hacked,  and  young  trees  that 
would  be  hacked  ;  at  length  we  saw  on  a  cleared  space 
in  the  distance  what  I  imagined  to  be  a  long  brown 
rock  lying  upon  the  surface  ;  but  upon  riding  out  of  the 
path  to  examine  this  object  I  found  it  was  a  splendid 
trunk  of  a  pine-tree  more  that  two  feet  in  diameter. 
Why  this  had  been  spared  for  so  many  years  I  cannot 
say,  but  its  size  suggested  reflections  upon  the  original 
forests  that  must  have  covered  the  surface  and  have 
ornamented  the  once  beautiful  island  of  Cyprus  ;  now 
denuded,  and  shorn  of  every  natural  attraction. 

I  again  became  angry ;  visions  of  the  past  primaeval 
forests  appeared  before  me,  all  of  which  had  been 
destroyed  :  and  as  formerly  we  hung  a  man  in  Eng- 
land for  cutting  an  oak  sapling,  I  thought  that  the 
same  cure  for  timber-destroying  propensities  might 
save  the  few  remaining  forests  in  this  island.  While 
indulging  in  this   strain    of  unphilanthropic    thought, 


VII.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  2 1 1 

we  overtook  another  throng  of  wood-laden  donkeys 
and  their  proprietors  :  again  they  smiled,  courteously 
salaamed,  and  vacated  the  path  for  us,  little  knowing 
what  my  inward  thoughts  had  been.  Of  course  I 
smiled,  salaamed  as  courteously  in  return,  and  forgave 
them  at  once ;  and  we  proceeded  on  our  way  condemning 
Turkish  rule,  the  impecuniosity  of  our  own  govern- 
ment, the  miserable  conditions  of  our  present  occupation, 
which  rendered  Cyprus  neither  fish,  flesh,  nor  fowl, 
and  thus  by  degrees  I  lashed  myself  into  the  worst 
possible  frame  of  mind,  until  ...  we  overtook 
another  throng  of  polite  donkeys  and  their  proprietors, 
who  salaamed  and  got  out  of  our  way.  Upon  suddenly 
emerging  from  the  forest  upon  the  edge  of  a  steep  slope, 
we  looked,  down  upon  the  barren  sand-coloured  plain 
of  Messaria.  Our  guide  liani,  who  had  been  asleep  and 
awake  for  at  least  eight  miles,  suddenly  burst  out 
into  a  ditty,  and  explained  that  a  village  in  the  plain 
below  was  Morphu,  the  home  of  his  wife  and  family. 

Even  from  this  elevated  point  of  view  Morphu 
looked  a  long  way  off.  The  sleepy  liani  was  suf- 
ficiently wide  awake  to  steer  for  his  wife,  and  we  had 
made  a  long  march  already.  I  doubted  the  possibility 
of  the  loaded  camels  ascending  the  steep  slope,  which 
had  severely  tried  our  mules,  and  I  felt  sure  that 
liani's  old  camel  would  either  knock  up  or  tumble 
down  with  his  load,  should  he  attempt  the  ascent.  It 
was  of  no  use  to  reflect,  and  as  Morphu  lay  before  us 
in  the  now  barren  and  sun-smitten  plain,  we  touched 
our  animals  with  the  spur  and  pressed  on.  Descend- 
ing for  some  miles,  we  passed  a  garden  of  olives,  that 
must  have  been  upwards  of  a  thousand  years  old, 
upon  our  right ;  and  still  inclining  downwards,  through 
ground  cultivated  with  cereals  completely  withered  by 

V  2 


212  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


the  drought,  we  at  length  arrived  at  the  broad  but  per- 
fectly dry  bed  of  the  river.  Crossing  this,  we  steered 
for  a  grove  of  ancient  olive-trees,  which  I  at  once 
selected  for  a  camping-place,  on  the  outskirts  of  the 
town.  We  were  now  twenty-three  miles  from  Lapi- 
thus,  and  I  felt  sure  that  our  baggage  animals  would 
not  arrive  till  nightfall. 

As  we  sat  beneath  one  of  these  grand  old  olive-trees 
alone,  liani  having  taken  his  mules  to  his  home,  and 
probably  at  the  same  time  having  advertised  our 
arrival,  throngs  of  women  and  children  approached 
to  salaam  and  to  stare.  I  always  travelled  with 
binocular  glasses  slung  across  my  back,  and  these 
were  admirable  stare-repellers ;  it  was  only  necessary 
to  direct  them  upon  the  curious  crowd,  and  the  most 
prominent  individuals  acknowledged  their  power  by 
first  looking  shy  and  conscious,  and  then  confusedly 
laughing  and  retreating  to  the  rean 

We  bad  arrived  at  2.20  p.m.,  and  we  waited  be- 
neath the  olive-trees  until  8  p.m.,  when  the  advance 
camels  at  length  came  in  after  dark.  It  was  9.30 
before  the  tents  were  pitched  and  the  camp  arranged. 
The  great  delay  had  been  occasioned  by  liani's  old 
camel,  which  had,  as  I  had  expected,  rolled  down  the 
steep  hill  with  its  load,  and  having  nearly  killed  itself, 
had  mortally  wounded  the  sacred  copper  kettle,  which 
every  traveller  knows  is  one  of  his  Penates,  or  house- 
hold gods,  to  which  he  clings  with  reverence  and 
affection.  This  beautiful  object  had  lost  its  plump 
and  well-rounded  figure,  and  had  been  crushed  into  a 
museum-shaped  antiquity  that  would  have  puzzled 
the  most  experienced  archaeologist.  Metal  water- 
jugs  upon  which  the  camel  had  rolled  had  been 
reduced  to   the   shape   of  soup-plates,  and   a   general 


O^PSMa^ns^^vavivT-vic^i^^  j.  .    ■    u-«^  .^^. 


vii.j  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  213 

destruction  of  indispensable  utensils  had  inflicted  a 
loss  more  than  equal  to  the  value  of  liani  s  animal. 

The  following  morning  (12th  April)  exhibited  the 
extraordinary  change  of  climate  between  the  northern 
and  southern  sides  of  the  Carpas  mountain-range. 
The  average  temperature  of  the  week  had  been  at 
7  A.M.  57i°,  3  P.M.  66^^  At  Morphu  the  thermo- 
meter at  7  A.M.  showed  62°,  and  at  3  p.m.  83°!  It 
was  precisely  the  same  on  the  following  day. 

It  was  a  distressing  contrast  to  the  beautiful  Kyrenia 
and  the  interesting  north  coast  to  have  exchanged  the 
green  trees  and  rippling  streams  for  the  arid  and 
desolate  aspect  of  the  Messaria.  The  town  of  Morphu 
has  no  special  interest;  like  all  others,  it  consists  of 
houses  constructed  of  sun-baked  bricks  of  clay  and 
broken  straw,  with  flat-topped  roofs  of  the  same 
materials.  There  are  fruitful  gardens  irrigated  by 
water-wheels,  and  formerly  the  extremely  rich  sandy 
loam  of  the  valley  produced  madder-roots  of  ex- 
cellent quality,  which  added  materially  to  the  value 
of  the  land.  This  industry  having  been  completely 
eclipsed  by  the  alizarine  dye,  Morphu  has  to  depend 
upon  silk  and  cereals  for  its  agricultural  wealth.  The 
population  is  composed  almost  entirely  of  Greeks. 
There  is  a  monastery  and  a  large  school. 

I  rode  to  the  bay,  about  four  miles  and  a  half  distant, 
passing  many  villages,  which,  as  we  neared  the  sea, 
were  in  the  midst  of  magnificent  crops  of  barley  and 
wheat,  resulting  from  artificial  irrigation  by  the  water 
that  percolates  beneath  the  sandy  bed  of  the  dry  river 
at  a  certain  level,  which  has  been  led  into  numerous 
channels  before  it  can  reach  the  natural  exit  at  its 
mouth.      It  must  be  exceedingly    unhealthy,  as,    for 

• 

several  square  miles  upon  the  .  sea  margin,  the  country 


2  14  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


is  an  expanse  of  marsh  and  bulrushes,  abounding  with 
snipe  during  the  winter  months.  On  13th  April  I 
walked  over  the  greater  portion  of  this  locality  with 
my  three  spaniels,  but  the  snipe  had  departed,  and  we 
did  not  move  a  bird. 

On  the  right  side  of  Morphu  Bay  to  the  east,  by 
Kormachiti,  there  are  extensive  sand-dunes,  forming 
deep  drifts,  which  extend  for  several  miles  inland  at 
the  foot  of  the  hill-range  that  we  had  descended. 
These  exhibit  the  prevailing  wind  (north).  Many 
people  upon  observing  sand-dunes  attribute  the  most 
distant  limit  of  the  sand  to  the  extreme  violence  of  the 
wind ;  but  this  is  not  the  case.  It  is  the  steady  pre- 
valence of  moderately  strong  winds  that  causes  the 
extension  of  sand-drifts.  The  wind  of  to-day  deposits 
the  sand  at  a  certain  distance  from  the  shore.  The 
wind  to-morrow  starts  the  accumulated  sand  from  that 
dep6t  to  form  a  new  deposit  about  equidistant ; 
and  thus  by  slow  degrees  the  dunes  are  formed  by  a 
succession  of  mounds,  conveyed  onwards  by  an 
unchanging  force ;  but  the  maximum  power  of  a  gale 
would  be  unable  to  carry  thousands  of  tons  of  heavy 
sand  to  form  a  hill-range  at  the  extreme  distance  from 
the  original  base  of  the  material.  At  Hambantotte,  in 
the  southern  district  of  Ceylon,  there  is  an  extraordinary 
example  of  this  action,  where  during  one  monsoon  a 
range  of  mounds  is  formed  which  might  be  termed 
hills ;  when  the  monsoon  changes,  these  by  degrees 
disappear,  and,  according  to  the  alteration  in  the  wind, 
a  range  of  hills  is  formed  in  an  exactly  opposite 
direction. 

I  was  glad  to  escape  from  Morphu  ;  the  wind  from 
the  dry  plain  was  hot,  and  brought  clouds  of  dust. 
We  were  surrounded  by  throngs  of  people  during  the 


VII.]  Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  215 

day,  many  of  whom  were  blind,  including  young 
children.  The  13th  April  was  the  Greek  Easter 
Sunday,  and  we  could  not  start,  as  liani  declared  that 
the  mules  had  run  away  during  the  night,  and  could 
not  be  found ;  we  knew  this  was  only  an  excuse  for 
remaining  at  Morphu,  and  he  at  length  confessed  that 
the  mules  were  caught,  and  we  could  start  in  the 
afternoon  if  I  would  allow  him  to  wait  until  he  should 
have  received  the  sacrament  together  with  his  wife. 
Having  thus  brought  the  theological  and  the  domestic 
guns  to  concentrate  their  fire  upon  me,  I  was  obliged 
to  yield,  and  liani  appeared  in  such  a  jovial  frame  of 
mind  in  the  afternoon,  and  smelt  so  strongly  of  spirits, 
that  I  suspected  his  devotions  had  been  made  at  the 
raki-shop  instead  of  the  altar. 

On  14th  April  we  started,  and  were  thankful  to  leave 
Morphu.  The  route  lay  across  the  plain  westward, 
and  in  some  parts  we  rode  along  the  sea  margin,  eagerly 
hurrying  our  animals  to  turn  the  corner  of  the  hills 
and  escape  from  the  hot  and  dreary  plain.  The  breeze 
was  northerly,  and  a  heavy  surf  broke  upon  the  coast, 
exhibiting  the  exposed  position  of  Morphu  Bay  from 
north  to  west.  On  the  eastern  side  the  beach  is 
sandy  and  the  water  deepens  rapidly,  affording  good 
and  safe  anchorage  near  the  shore  ;  but  should  the 
wind  change  suddenly  to  west  or  north,  the  position 
would  be  dangerous.  The  bay  is  the  most  striking  of 
all  the  numerous  indentations  on  the  shores  of  Cyprus. 
The  bold  points  of  Cape  Kormachiti  and  Cape 
Kokkino  form  the  chord  of  an  arc  twenty-one  miles  in 
length,  from  the  centre  of  which  the  bay  enters  the 
land  about  eleven  miles.  It  would  be  impossible  to 
land  from  boats  even  during  a  moderate  breeze  from  the 
west  to  north  without  considerable  danger ;  but  I  can 


2i6  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


see  no  difficulty  in  arranging  a  floating  breakwater 
that  would  afford  shelter  for  small  vessels  and  add 
materially  to  the  importance  of  the  roadstead.  These 
are  the  necessary  improvements  which  require  an  out- 
lay, and  unfortunately  under  the  existing  conditions  of 
our  occupation  the  revenue  that  would  be  available 
for  public  works  is  transferred  to  the  treasury  of 
Constantinople  ;  thus  the  Turk  still  hampers  progress, 
as  he  governs  Cyprus  in  the  uniform  of  the  British 
official.  We  rounded  the  base  of  the  hills,  which  rose 
rapidly  from  the  shore,  and  crossed  several  small 
streams  thickly  fringed  with  tamarisk,  that  would  be 
impassable  during  sudden  storms  of  the  rainy  season. 
Several  villages  were  distinguished  by  their  bright 
green  appearance  among  the  hills,  which  denoted 
the  existence  of  springs  or  rivulets,  and  as  we  pro- 
ceeded we  observed  that  all  crops  in  the  low  ground 
had  benefited  by  artificial  irrigation. 

After  a  ride  of  two  hours  and  a  half  we  arrived  at 
Caravastasi,  and  halted  in  a  very  stony  field  at  the 
back  of  the  village,  beneath  an  old  caroub-tree  that 
had  grown  thick  and  shady  by  the  merciless  hacking 
of  its  taller  boughs,  which  had  reduced  it  to  a  pollard. 
The  village  of  Caravastasi  consists  only  of  eight  or 
ten  houses,  but  is  rendered  important  by  a  Custom- 
house. It  is  situated  on  the  most  inland  point  of 
Morphu  Bay,  and  is  slightly  sheltered  on  the  west 
by  a  promontory,  which  forms  a  neat  little  cove  for 
the  protection  of  small  vessels ;  but  it  is  completely 
open  due  north.  Nothing  would  be  easier  than  to 
construct  a  small  harbour,  by  extending  a  pier  or 
breakwater  from  the  end  of  the  promontory  in  the 
required  direction  ;  and  the  present  unimportant  village 
would  become  only  second  in  importance  to  Kyrenia. 


VII.] 


Kyrenia  and  the  North  Coast.  217 


The  positions  of  ancient  sea-port  ruins  attest  the 
value  that  attached  to  certain  geographical  points  in 
former  days,  and  although  the  vessels  of  those  periods 
may  have  been  much  inferior  to  ships  of  modern  times, 
they  were  sufficiently  large  for  the  commerce  of  the 
country  and  for  the  capabilities  of  the  harbours.     The 
trade  of  Cyprus  will  always  be  carried  by  vessels  from 
twenty  to  one  hundred  and  fifty  tons,  and  there  should 
be  no  difficulty  in  providing  shelter  for  ships  of  this 
small  draught  of  water.     The  ruins  of  Soli,  on  the 
west  of  the  present  village  of  Caravastasi,  prove  that 
the  Athenians,  who  founded    the  original   city,  were 
thoroughly  cognizant  of  the  value  of  a  position  which 
is  the  only  spot  upon   the  whole   northern   coast  of 
Cyprus  that   will   afford    shelter  or  a    landing-place, 
excepting    the    harbour   of    Kyrenia.       In   the   early 
period   of   Cyprian   history   Soli   represented   one   of 
the    independent     kingdoms    when    the    island    was 
divided  into  ten,  Amathus,  Cerinea  (Kyrenia),  Citium, 
Chytri,     Curium,     Lapithas,     Marium,     Nea-Paphos, 
Salamis,  and  Soli.     The  Phoenicians,  from  their  own 
southern   position,  naturally  selected   the   ports  most 
convenient   for   their   trade,   and   accordingly   settled 
on  the  south  coast  of  Cyprus,  their  chief  towns  being 
Amathus,  Citium,  and  Paphos ;  these  were  important 
commercial  ports  at  a  time  when  Cyprus  was  in  its 
zenith  of  prosperity,  and  were  sufficient  for  the  re- 
quirements of  the  period.     If  the  British  occupation 
is  intended  to  be  permanent  it  will  be  highly  necessary 
to  determine  the  classes  of  harbours  that  should  be 
provided,  as  it  would  be  a  useless  extravagance  to 
expend   large   sums   upon   the   construction   of  ports 
beyond    the    necessities   of    the    trade.      As    I    have 
already  expressed  an    opinion  that  the  commerce  of 


2i8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  VII. 


Cyprus  will  be  represented  by  vessels  of  moderate 
tonnage,  the  necessary  protection  for  such  vessels  may 
be  obtained  at  an  equally  moderate  outlay,  and  both 
Soli  and  Kyrenia  may  be  made  available  as  safe 
harbours  for  all  traders  upon  the  northern  coast. 
Famagousta  would  become  the  arsenal  and  dockyard 
for  ships  of  war ;  Larnaca  and  Limasol  would  be  safe 
roadsteads  for  all  classes,  and  could  easily  be  arranged 
to  protect  small  trading-vessels  ;  while  Baffo  would, 
like  Kyrenia  and  Soli,  be  restored  to  its  original 
position.  All  rudimentary  harbour-works  would  be 
planned  with  a  view  to  future  extension,  as  might 
be  rendered  necessary  by  the  development  of  trade. 

Colonel  White,  ist  Royal  Scots,  who  had  been 
appointed  chief  commissioner  of  the  Lefkosia  district 
from  his  former  similar  position  at  Larnaca,  arrived  at 
Caravastasi  upon  the  same  day  as  ourselves.  This 
very  painstaking  and  energetic  officer  was  exploring 
his  district  and  investigating  all  the  nooks  and  corners 
of  the  mountainous  frontier  which  bounded  his  autho- 
rity ;  he  was  accordingly  assailed  with  complaints  and 
lamentations  concerning  the  endless  water  disputes 
among  the  villages ;  those  of  the  lower  ground  declar- 
ing that  the  streams  to  which  they  were  entitled  by 
the  rights  of  centuries  had  been  diverted  to  other 
channels,  that  the  Turkish  authorities  had  been  bribed 
by  the  opposing  litigants  ;  with  the  usual  long  list  of 
grievances,  the  discussion  of  which  I  shall  defer  to  a 
special  chapter  upon  "  Irrigation.'' 


CHAPTER    VIII. 


ROUTE    TO    BAFFO. 


Our  tent  was  pitched  upon  rising  ground,  which 
formed  the  direct  slope  from  the  sea,  a  quarter  of  a 
mile  distant,  to  the  mountain-top  about  1 500  or  2000 
feet  above  us ;  the  insignificant  village  of  Caravastasi 
was  upon  the  sea-beach  in  our  immediate  front. 

From  our  commanding  position  I  had  observed  a 
peculiar  mound  with  a  cliff-face  half  a  mile  to  the  west, 
which  exhibited  the  unusual  colour  of  a  bright  lemon 
yellow  in  close  conjunction  with  red  of  various  shades. 
Upon  crossing  numerous  fields  of  barley,  which  the 
reapers  had  just  attacked  (14th  April),  I  descended 
a  ravine  at  the  foot  of  this  peculiar  formation,  which 
I  carefully  examined. 

Since  we  had  crossed  the  plain  of  Morphu  and  quitted 
the  compact  limestone  of  the  Carpas  range  we  had 
entered  upon  an  interesting  geological  change.  Eruptive 
rocks  had  burst  through  the  marls  and  calcareous  sedi- 
mentary limestone  of  the  coast  and  had  produced  very 
curious  examples  of  metamorphous  rocks,  where  the 
marls  and  limestone  had  been  in  immediate  contact 
with  the  plutonic.  The  cliff  above  me  was  about 
fifty  feet  high,  as  I  stood  at  its  base  within  a  shallow 
gorge  that  formed  a  brook  during  the  rainy  season. 


2  20  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


The  bottom  upon  which  I  stood  was  a  mass  of  dSbris 
of  bright  colours,  varying  from  pure  white  to  different 
shades  of  yellow  and  red.  This  material  appeared  to 
have  fallen  recently,  as  the  blocks  did  not  exhibit  the 
dull  exterior  that  would  have  resulted  from  atmo- 
spherical  exposure.  I  climbed  up  the  steep  face  of 
crumbled  matter  with  some  difficulty,  as  the  sharply 
inclined  surface  descended  with  me,  emitting  a  peculiar 
metallic  clink  like  masses  of  broken  porcelain.  On 
arrival  at  the  top  I  remarked  that  only  a  few  inches  of 
vegetable  mould  covered  a  stratum  of  white  marl  about 
a  foot  thick,  and  this  had  been  pierced  in  many  places 
by  the  heat  that  had  fused  the  marl  and  converted  it 
into  a  clinker  or  sharply-edged  white  slag,  mixed  with 
an  ochreous  yellow  and  bright  red.  I  had  never  met 
with  anything  like  this  singular  example  of  igneous 
action  upon  marls.  In  the  neighbourhood  there  were 
considerable  masses  of  the  same  clinker-like  material^ 
exhibiting  a  honeycombed  appearance,  that  would  have 
been  well  adapted  for  millstones.  The  natives  in- 
formed me  that  all  the  millstones  of  the  northern  coast 
were  imported  from  Athens.  I  had  heard  while  at 
Kythrea  that  the  stones  for  the  very  numerous  mills 
of  that  neighbourhood  were  supplied  from  Alexan- 
dretta,  and  that  none  of  native  origin  were  employed. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  some  of  the  specimens  I 
examined  of  this  material  combined  the  requirements 
of  extreme  hardness,  porosity,  and  sharpness  of  interior 
edges  around  the  honeycombed  cavities.  I  walked  over 
the  mountain,  and  quickly  lost  the  marl  in  masses  of 
plutonic  rocks  that  had  been  upheaved  and  entirely 
occupied  the  surface.  Although  vast  blocks  lay  heaped 
in  the  wildest  confusion,  they  exhibited  the  peculiar 
characteristics    of   all   Cyprian    rocks  (excepting    the 


y„,3  Route  to  Baffo.  221 

calcareous  limestone)  in  their  utter  want  of  compact- 
ness. I  have  never  seen  in  Cyprus  any  hard  rock 
(except  Jurassic  limestone),  whether  gneiss,  syenite,  or 
others,  that  would  yield  an  unblemished  stone  to  the 
mason  s  chisel  of  ten  feet  in  length  by  a  square  of  two 
feet.  This  peculiarity  is  not  the  result  of  decay,  but 
the  entire  mass  has  been  fractured  by  volcanic  dis- 
turbance and  by  the  rapid  cooling  of  molten  matter 
upheaved  from  beneath  the  sea. 

Red  jasper  is  abundant  in  this  locality,  and  is 
generally  found  in  small  pieces  embedded  in  the  marls. 
I  discovered  a  very  compact  specimen  weighing  about 
200  lbs.,  which  I  left  at  a  house  in  Caravastasi  until  I 
might  have  an  opportunity  of  conveying  it  to  Larnaca. 
Upon  crossing  the  mountain  I  arrived  at  a  charming 
valley  among  the  hills  at  an  elevation  of  about  1200 
feet  above  the  sea,  at  the  narrow  entrance  of  which, 
between  the  sides  of  the  gorge,  was  a  Turkish  village. 
I  was  quickly  observed,  and  being  quite  alone,  with 
the  exception  of  my  dogs,  a  Turkish  woman,  to 
whom  I  made  a  salaam,  ran  into  a  neighbouring 
house  and  sent  her  husband  with  a  chair,  that  I 
might  sit  beneath  an  almond-tree.  A  few  Turks 
gathered  round  me  and  insisted  with  much  politeness 
that  I  should  enter  the  house  of  the  owner  of  the  chair. 
It  was  a  rough  dwelling,  but  I  was  kindly  welcomed, 
and  cheese,  bread,  and  curds  were  quickly  arranged 
before  me,  together  with  a  gourd-shell  of  clear  cold 
water,  from  the  spring  which  issued  from  the  rocks  in 
the  gorge  about  fifty  feet  below  the  house.  To  the 
disappointment  of  my  host  I  was  obliged  to  decline  all 
his  offerings,  except  a  draught  of  cold  water,  as  I  had 
breakfasted  before  leaving  the  camp.  The  Turk  now 
showed  me  his  gun,  which  he  explained  was  of  little 


22  2  Cyprus  in  1879. 


(CHAP. 


use,  as  he  could  not  afford  a  game  licence,  but  he 
offered  to  show  me  a  spot  where  hares  were  abundant. 
The  shooting-season  was  long  since  closed,  therefore 
partridges  and  francolins  were  sacred,  but  I  should 
have  had  no  scruples  in  bagging  a  hare  for  a  stew. 
My  guide  conducted  me  over  very  likely  ground  down 
into  ravines  with  bush-covered  sides,  then  upon  the 
hill-tops,  and  among  patches  of  cultivation  where  the 
hares  had  played  sad  havoc  in  nibbling  the  wheat  and 
barley ;  but  we  found  none.  My  dogs  hunted  every 
bush  in  vain,  and  the  burning  sun  had  dried  out  every 
vestige  of  scent.  I  believe  the  hares  escape  the  sun 
by  taking  refuge  beneath  the  rocks,  otherwise  we  must 
have  moved  at  least  one  or  two.  My  guide  was  much 
disappointed,  but  as  game  was  absent  he  hunted  for 
wild  asparagus,  which  grew  in  considerable  quantities 
beneath  the  thick  clumps  of  bushes  upon  the  hill-sides. 
By  the  time  that  we  arrived  in  camp  he  had  collected 
sufficient  for  a  good  dish.  This  variety  is  not  quite 
so  thick  as  good  cultivated  asparagus,  but  it  is  superior 
in  flavour,  although  slightly  bitter. 

We  rode  to  Lefka,  about  three  miles  distant.  This 
is  one  of  those  happy  lands  of  Cyprus  which  is  watered 
with  unfailing  streams  from  the  Troodos  range,  that 
have  enforced  prosperity.  The  town  is  important,  and 
is  situated  upon  the  sides  of  the  hills,  which  form  a 
valley,  through  which,  in  rainy  weather,  a  river  flows  ; 
at  other  seasons,  like  all  Cyprian  torrents,  the  bed  is 
dry.  The  houses  of  Lefka  are  almost  concealed  by 
the  luxuriant  foliage  of  the  gardens  and  orangeries. 
We  rode  through  narrow  lanes  streaming  with  water 
and  shaded  with  the  elm,  ash,  maple,  and  innumerable 
fruit-trees.  Mills,  turned  by  water,  the  masonry  of  the 
aqueducts  being  ornamented  with  the  graceful  maiden- 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  223 


hair  ferns,  enlivened  the  otherwise  dull  lanes  by  an 
exhibition  of  industry.  The  orange-trees  and  lemons 
were  literally  overweighted  with  fruit,  which  in  some 
instances  overpowered  the  foliage  by  a  preponderance 
of  yellow.  Lefka  supplies  the  whole  western  district 
with  lemons,  in  addition  to  the  market  of  the  capital, 
Lefkosia.  As  usual,  I  observed  that  the  fruit-trees 
were  ridiculously  crowded,  thus  preventing  the  admis- 
sion of  the  necessary  air  and  light.  I  forbear  at  pre- 
sent to  describe  the  fruit,  as  none  existed  at  this  season, 
excepting  oranges  and  lemons,  and  I  wish  to  introduce 
my  readers  to  every  scene  and  object  precisely  as  they 
met  my  eye  in  travelling  through  the  country.  The 
lemons  are  some  of  the  best  I  have  ever  tasted,  but 
the  oranges  are  full  of  seeds,  with  thick  skins,  and 
although  juicy  and  refreshing  in  this  hot  climate,  they 
would  be  rejected  in  the  English  market. 

A  very  cursory  view  of  Lefka  was  sufficient  to 
explain  its  agricultural  importance,  and  to  (for  the 
hundredth  time)  awaken  the  reflection  that  most 
portions  of  the  island  might  equal  such  exceptional 
prosperity,  if  special  attention  were  bestowed  upon  the 
development  of  artificial  irrigation. 

On  1 6th  April  we  left  Caravastasi,  and  rode  over 
almost  the  worst  road,  but  one  of  the  most  picturesque 
in  Cyprus.  It  was  a  succession  of  the  steepest  ups 
and  downs  through  and  over  mountain  spurs,  to  cut 
off  the  promontories  which  projected  into  the  sea  at 
right  angles  with  our  route.  It  seemed  impossible 
that  loaded  animals  should  be  able  to  traverse  such 
steep  and  dangerous  defiles,  and  I  made  up  my  mind 
that  Iiani*s  ancient  camel  would  terminate  its  career, 
together  with  that  of  our  possessions  upon  its  back,  by 
rolling  several  hundred  feet  into  the  dark  angle  of  some 


2  24  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


precipitous  ravine.  Even  liani  kept  awake,  and  pre- 
sently I  heard  a  faint  exclamation  from  behind,  and 
upon  turning  round  I  discovered  Lady  Baker  upon  the 
ground,  the  saddle  having  twisted  beneath  her  mule  in 
descending  a  steep  and  rocky  gulley ;  fortunately  she 
fell  upon  the  wall-side  of  the  path,  instead  of  upon  the 
edge  of  the  precipice ;  and  she  was  unhurt. 

Although  the  route  was  abominable  it  was  most 
interesting.  As  the  drainage  of  the  mountains  was  at 
right  angles,  we  crossed  a  succession  of  heights  which 
afforded  short  glimpses  of  the  sea  some  600  feet  be- 
neath, with  the  perpendicular  rock-bound  coast  below 
us,  and  then  alternately  descended  into  the  depths  of 
the  intervening  gullies.  This  peculiarity  exhibited  to 
perfection  the  geological  formation.  We  had  entered 
upon  trap  rocks  and  the  greenstone,  all  of  which  showed 
traces  of  copper.  Notwithstanding  the  wild  and  dan- 
gerous route,  every  available  plot  of  ground  was  cul- 
tivated, although  no  villages  were  perceptible.  The 
peasants  carried  their  light  ploughs  upon  donkeys  from 
considerable  distances,  and  with  these  exceedingly  use- 
ful implements  they  ploughed  inclines  that  would  have 
been  impossible  to  cultivate  with  any  European  imple- 
ment except  the  hoe.  At  length  we  descended  to 
the  sea-beach,  and  marching  through  heavy  sand  for 
about  a  mile,  we  arrived  at  Pyrgos,  our  halting-place, 
twelve  miles  from  Caravastasi. 

This  is  one  of  the  wildest  portions  of  Cyprus. 
There  is  no  village,  but  the  position  is  simply  marked 
by  the  presence  of  one  building  above  the  sea-beach, 
which  has  been  a  dep6t  for  the  spars  and  poles  of 
pine  that  have  periodically  been  delivered  from  the 
mountains  by  the  torrents,  when  heavy  rains  have 
swollen  them  sufficiently  to  enable  them  to  force  the 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  225 


timber  towards  the  sea.  As  the  mountains  upon  this 
portion  of  the  coast  descend  in  many  places  actually 
to  the  shore,  while  in  no  places  are  they  more  than 
half  a  mile  distant,  the  rivulets  are  numerous,  as  there 
is  no  time,  or  area,  sufficient  for  their  absorption  by 
the  soil.  Within  a  hundred  and  fifty  paces  of  the 
timber  store  beautiful  streams  of  clear  water  issued 
from  the  ground  in  three  different  places,  which  con- 
verged into  a  brook  abounding  with  water-cresses,  and 
this,  after  passing  through  a  small  and  thick  jungle  of 
tamarisk-bushes,  formed  a  pool  above  the  sea-beach 
which  overflowed  upon  the  shingle,  and  met  the  waves. 
We  ascended  the  stream  for  a  short  distance,  until, 
tempted  by  two  or  three  large  plane-trees,  we  halted 
for  luncheon  beneath  their  shade.  The  river,  which 
occasionally  flooded  sufficiently  to  bring  down  heavy 
timber  when  felled  among  the  mountains,  flowed 
through  an  extremely  rich  but  narrow  valley,  which 
extended  into  a  glen  between  their  precipitous  slopes 
until  it  became  a  mere  ravine.  The  mass  of  moun- 
tains in  this  district,  which  form  a  succession  of  wild 
and  impassable  steeps,  is  marked  upon  Kiepert's  map 
as  **  unexplored.''  They  were  originally  pine-forests, 
but  the  destruction  of  timber  has  been  carried  to 
such  an  excess  that  comparatively  few  trees  remain, 
With  my  glass  I  could  distinguish  large  trunks  that 
lay  rotting  upon  the  ground,  where  they  had  pitched 
among  the  stems,  and  roots  of  trees  that  had  been 
already  felled  ;  these  had  been  rolled  from  the  steep 
heights  above,  but  having  been  caught  in  their  descent 
to  the  torrent  below  by  the  opposing  stumps,  they  had 
been  abandoned,  and  other  trees  had  been  felled  in 
their  stead,  where  the  inclination  was  more  favourable 
for  their  transport. 

Q 


226  Cyprus  IN   1879. 


[CHAP. 


This  portion  of  the  coast  should  be  thoroughly 
explored  by  practical  miners,  as  it  is  rich  in  minerals. 
I  procured  some  fine  specimens  of  pyrites  of  copper, 
which  the  natives  mistook  for  silver  ;  and  should  a 
mineralogical  investigation  be  made  by  the  authori- 
ties, I  feel  sure  that  the  metallic  wealth  of  Cyprus 
will  be  discovered  between  Caravastasi  and  Poli-ton- 
Krysokhus. 

It  was  late  before  our  baggage  animals  appeared, 
and  when  they  at  length  arrived,  liani's  venerable 
camel  was  missing.  It  appeared  that  this  worn-out 
old  creature  had  been  performing  acrobatic  feats  in 
tumbling  throughout  the  difficult  journey,  and  had 
rolled,  together  with  its  load,  down  several  places  that 
had  threatened  its  destruction.  It  had  delayed  the 
march  several  hours,  as  it  had  been  many  times  re- 
leased from  difficulties  by  unloading,  reloading,  and 
dividing  the  heavier  portions  of  baggage  among  the 
other  camels  which  received  a  smaller  pay.  At  length, 
upon  arriving  upon  the  deep  sand  of  the  beach,  about 
a  mile  distant,  it  had  fallen  down,  and  given  up  everj^- 
thing  except  the  ghost. 

It  was  a  natural  annoyance  to  the  owners  of  the 
other  camels  that  liani  should  be  paid  highly  for  a  use- 
less animal,  while  they  had  to  carry  its  load  divided 
among  them  assisted  by  a  division  of  the  smaller 
weights  among  the  servants  riding  mules.  The  even- 
ing was  passed  in  grumbling  :  everybody  was  in  a 
bad  humour.  It  was  declared  impossible  to  pitch 
the  tent  upon  the  sandy  beach  by  the  pool  of  fresh 
water,  as  there  was  no  holding-ground  for  the  tent- 
pegs.  I  quickly  instructed  them  in  making  faggots 
of  tamarisk-boughs  which,  tied  to  the  ropes  and  buried 
in  the  sand,  were  much  more  secure  than  pegs  in  the 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  227 


hardest  soil ;  and  the  tent  was  at  length  arranged.  A 
small  species  of  curlew  tempted  its  fate  by  visiting  the 
fresh- water  margin  just  before  our  dinner-hour;  I 
bagged  it ;  and  as  the  cook  was  in  a  bad  humour, 
I  made  a  fire  of  driftwood,  with  which  the  beach  was 
strewed,  and  when  the  glowing  embers  had  succeeded 
to  the  flame  and  formed  a  red-hot  heap,  I  cut  two 
forked  sticks,  which,  placed  on  either  side  upright  in 
the  sand,  supported  my  bird  upon  a  long  skewer  of 
green  tamarisk-wood.  A  little  salt,  pepper,  and  a 
smear  of  butter  occasionally,  produced  a  result  that 
would  have  beaten  Christo's  best  attempts. 

On  the  following  morning  we  were  all  once  more  in 
good  humour ;  the  old  camel  had  not  died,  but  had 
been  brought  into  camp  late  at  night.  It  now  formed 
the  object  for  everybody's  joke,  and  its  owner  liani 
was  recommended  to  "  try  and  sell  it,"  or  *'  to  make  it 
a  present  to  a  friend,"  or  "  to  ride  it  himself;  "  the  latter 
course  would  have  been  a  deserved  punishment.  liani 
escaped  further  remarks  by  jumping  upon  his  mule  and 
riding  ahead,  and  we  followed  our  guide  without  delay 
along  the  deep  sandy  beach. 

We  rode  for  fourteen  miles  along  cliffs  bordering 
the  sea,  with  the  deep  hollows  occasioned  by  the 
natural  drainage  causing  a  continual  series  of  ups 
and  downs,  which  reminded  me  forcibly  of  the  coast 
of  South  Devon  between  Torquay  and  Dawlish. 
The  difference  lay  in  the  rocks,  which  were  all 
plutonic,  and  in  the  scenery  upon  our  left,  which 
was  a  wild  and  confused  mass  of  mountains,  scarred 
by  deep  and  dark  ravines,  while  the  more  distant 
summits  exhibited  the  still-existing  pine-forests  ;  these 
had  disappeared  from  the  slopes  which  faced  the 
coast,  and  had  afforded  facilities  for  exportation.     We 

Q  2 


228  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


halted  in  a  deep  glen  between  exceedingly  steep 
hills,  through  which  a  torrent-bed  had  cut  its  course 
directly  to  the  sea.  In  this  secluded  spot,  far  from 
all  villages  or  inhabitants,  we  arranged  to  encamp 
upon  a  flat  and  inviting  plot  of  turf,  which  in  Cyprus 
is  rarely  met  with.  Some  tolerable  elms  and  other 
trees  formed  a  dense  shade  in  a  deep  and  narrow 
portion  of  the  glen  beneath  the  over-hanging  cliffs, 
and  a  beautiful  spring  of  water  issued  from  the  rock, 
received  in  a  stone  cistern  beneath.  An  arch  of 
masonry  inclosed  the  spring,  which  some  kind  person 
had  thus  carefully  arranged  for  the  public  good ;  this 
was  richly  clothed  with  maiden-hair  ferns.  The 
surplus  water,  after  overflowing  the  stone  basin, 
formed  a  faint  stream,  which  trickled  over  the  rocks 
between  cliffs  only  a  few  feet  apart,  until  it  emerged 
from  this  narrow  cleft  and  joined  the  sea.  I  walked 
down  this  natural  alley  to  the  beach  and  bathed,  to 
the  astonishment  of  my  guide  liani  and  another 
Cypriote,  who  rushed  to  the  top  of  the  cliff  as  though 
they  thought  I  contemplated  suicide;  these  people 
having  a  natural  horror  of  cold  water.  The  name  of 
this  secluded  glen  was  Symboli. 

On  the  following  morning  we  started  for  Polis, 
fourteen  miles  by  an  easy  route  along  the  coast.  The 
mountains  upon  our  left  were  very  precipitous,  and 
exhibited  the  same  character  of  complete  wilderness 
which  had  marked  them  for  the  last  two  marches ; 
the  only  difference  apparent  was  an  increase  in  the 
remaining  pines,  which  fairly  clothed  their  summits 
and  ravines.  The  sea  was  perfectly  calm,  and  for 
the  first  time  during  our  stay  in  Cyprus  we  observed 
many  shoals  of  fish  playing  upon  the  surface  close  to 
the  beach.     Two  cormorants  were  in  the  bay,  and  I 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  229 


made  some  fortunate  shots,  killing  one  with  the  rifle 
at  upwards  of  200  yards,  and  disabling  the  other  at 
about  250.  There  appeared  to  be  more  signs  of  game 
in  this  part  of  the  countrj^  as  the  cock  francolins  were 
crowing  in  many  directions  throughout  our  route,  until 
we  arrived  at  Polis,  or,  in  full,  **  Poli-ton-Krysokhus." 

This  place  was  formerly  important  as  one  of  the 
principal  mineral  centres  of  the  island,  and  the  large 
accumulations  of  scoriae  in  several  mounds  near  the  coast 
prove  that  mining  operations  were  conducted  upon  an 
extensive  scale.  A  concession  had  recently  been  granted 
to  a  small  private  company  for  the  working  of  copper 
in  this  neighbourhood,  and  should  the  existence  of 
metallic  wealth  be  proved  there  can  be  no  doubt 
that  capital  will  be  embarked  in  mining  enterprises, 
and  the  locality  will  recover  its  former  importance. 
On  the  other  hand,  all  mining  adventures  should  be 
conducted  with  the  greatest  caution.  A  common 
error  is  committed  by  sanguine  speculators  in  follow- 
ing the  footsteps  of  the  ancients,  upon  the  supposition 
that  because  in  former  ages  a  locality  was  productive, 
it  should  remain  in  the  same  profitable  condition. 
Nothing  can  be  more  erroneous  ;  it  is  generally  poor 
gleaning  after  the  Phoenicians.  The  bronze  of  those 
extraordinary  miners  and  metallurgists  was  renowned 
above  all  other  qualities ;  they  worked  the  copper- 
mines  of  Cyprus  and  the  tin-mines  of  Cornwall,  but 
the  expenses  of  working  a  mine  in  those  days  bore  no 
comparison  with  the  outlay  of  modern  times.  Slaves 
were  employed  as  a  general  rule :  forced  labour  was 
obtainable  ;  and  the  general  conditions  of  the  labour- 
market  were  utterly  at  variance  with  those  of  the 
present  day.  The  ancient  miners  would  seldom  have 
abandoned  their  veins  of  ore  until  they  were  completely 


230  Cyprus  in  1879.  fCHAP. 

exhausted,  and  the  vast  heaps  of  scoriae  which  now 
mark  the  sites  of  their  operations  may  be  the  remains 
of  works  that  were  deserted  as  worn  out  and  unpro- 
ductive. It  is  true  that  traces  of  copper  are  visible 
in  many  places  throughout  the  metamorphous  rocks, 
and  the  greenstone  from  Soli  to  Poli-ton-Krysokhus, 
but  it  remains  to  be  proved  whether  the  metal  exists 
in  sufficient  quantities  to  be  profitably  worked.  It  is 
generally  believed  that  zinc  was  formerly  produced 
at  Soli,  where  vestiges  of  ancient  mining  operations 
are  to  be  seen  upon  the  surface,  but  for  many  cen- 
turies the  works  have  been  abandoned. 

A  very  careful  scientific  examination  of  the  island 
has  been  made  by  various  explorers — M.  Gaudry, 
Unger,  and  Kotschy :  their  reports  are  not  encourag- 
ing, but  at  the  same  time  it  must  be  allowed 
that  they  were  not  practical  miners.  The  work  of 
M.  Gaudry  must  always  be  accepted  as  a  most 
valuable  authority  upon  the  geology,  mineralogy,  and 
general  agricultural  resources  of  Cyprus,  but  it  will 
be  remarked  by  all  practical  men  that  the  explorations 
of  the  country  have  been  superficial ;  no  money  has 
been  expended ;  and  is  it  to  be  supposed  that  the 
surface  of  the  earth  will  spontaneously  reveal  the 
secrets  of  the  interior  ? 

Under  the  present  administration  it  is  quite  im- 
possible to  say  too  much  in  praise  of  the  energy  and 
painstaking  devotion  to  the  interests  of  Great  Britain 
and  to  those  of  this  island  by  the  High  Commissioner 
and  every  officer,  from  the  commissioners  of  districts 
to  the  subordinate  officials ;  but  according  to  the  terms 
of  the  Convention  with  the  Porte  the  island  is  as 
completely  denuded  of  money  as  the  summits  of  the 
cretaceous   hills  have   been   denuded  of  soil   by  the 


vjiio 


Route  to  Baffo.  231 


destructive  agency  of  weather.  It  is  painful  to  an 
English  traveller,  whose  life  may  have  been  passed  in 
practical  development,  to  survey  the  country  as  it  now 
is,  to  reflect  upon  what  it  has  been,  and  to  see  that 
even  under  the  auspicious  reputation  of  an  English 
occupation  nothing  can  be  done  to  awaken  resources 
that  have  so  long  lain  dormant.  Money  is  wanted — 
money  must  be  had.  Without  an  expenditure  of 
capital,  riches  may  exist,  but  they  will  remain  buried 
in  obscurity. 

A  responsible  official  would  reply — "  We  will  give  you 
a  concession,  we  will  give  you  every  possible  encourage- 
ment." The  capitalist  will  ask  one  simple  question, 
*Ms  Cyprus  a  portion  of  the  British  Empire  upon 
which  I  can  depend,  or  is  it  a  swallow's  nest  of  a 
political  season,  to  be  abandoned  when  the  party- 
schemes  have  flown  ?  " 

Any  number  of  questions  may  be  asked  at  the 
present  moment,  but  in  the  absence  of  all  definite 
information  no  capitalist  will  embark  in  any  enter- 
prise in  Cyprus,  which  may  be  ultimately  abandoned 
like  Corfu  ;  and  the  value  of  all  property  would  be 
reduced  to  a  ruinous  degree. 

The  mining  interests  of  Cyprus  must  remain  for  the 
most  part  undeveloped  until  some  satisfactory  change 
shall  be  effected  in  the  tenure  of  the  island  that  will 
establish  confidence. 

Polis  was  a  straggling  place  situated  upon  either 
side  of  a  river,  through  the  bed  of  which  a  very 
reduced  stream  was  flowing  about  three  inches  in 
depth.  A  flat  valley  lay  between  the  heights,  both 
of  which  were  occupied  by  numerous  houses  and 
narrow  lanes,  while  the  rich  soil  of  the  low  ground, 
irrigated    by   the   water   of  the   river  withdrawn   by 


232  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


artificial  channels,  exhibited  splendid  crops  of  wheat 
and  barley.  Groves  of  very  ancient  olive-trees  existed 
in  the  valley,  and  we  halted  beneath  the  first  oak- 
trees  that  I  had  seen  in  Cyprus.  These  were  wide- 
spreading,  although  not  high,  and  I  measured  the  girth 
of  one  solid  stem — eighteen  feet. 

We  had  hardly  off-saddled,  when  crowds  of  women 
and  children  collected  from  all  quarters,  with  a  few 
men,  to  stare  at  the  new-comers  ;  not  at  me  personally, 
but  at  my  wife.  They  were,  if  possible,  more  filthy 
than  the  average  of  Cyprian  women,  and  a  great  pro- 
portion of  the  children  were  marked  with  recent 
attacks  of  small-pox.  I  regretted  that  I  had  not  a 
supply  of  crackers  to  throw  amongst  and  disperse  the 
crowd  that  daily  pestered  us  ;  any  lady  that  in  future 
may  travel  through  Cyprus  should  have  a  portmanteau 
full  of  such  simple  fireworks.  It  was  in  vain  to  explain 
that  the  people  were  a  nuisance  if  too  near  :  when  driven 
to  a  moderate  distance,  they  would  advance  shyly,  by 
degrees  ;  two  or  three  children  would  come  forward 
and  sit  down  a  few  paces  in  front  of  the  main  body ; 
after  a  few  minutes  several  others  would  overstep  this 
frontier  and  sit  down  five  or  six  yards  in  advance  of 
the  last  comers,  and  by  this  silent  system  of  skirmish- 
ing we  were  always  surrounded  in  twenty  minutes  after 
the  original  crowd  had  been  dispersed.  I  did  not  mind 
them  so  long  as  they  were  not  in  personal  contact,  and 
were  free  from  recent  small-pox  ;  but  some  of  the  red- 
pitted  faces  were  full  of  warning. 

There  was  nothing  of  interest  to  detain  us  at  Polis, 
and  we  started  early  upon  the  1 9th  April  towards  Baffo. 
The  valley  through  which  the  river  Aspropotamo  had 
deposited  a  layer  of  fertile  alluvium  divided  the  moun- 
tain range,  leaving  the  plutonic  rocks  to  the  east ;  and 


v„i^j  Route  to  Baffo.  233 

on  the  western  side  we  ascended  a  steep  path  over 
cretaceous  limestone,  broken  and  disturbed  at  intervals 
by  the  protrusion  of  -eruptive  rocks.  As  we  increased 
our  altitude  we  looked  down  upon  a  picturesque  view 
of  the  bay  of  Krysokhus,  with  two  sails  upon  its  blue 
waters  beneath  the  dark  cliffs  of  the  western  shore. 
The  ancient  Marium  or  Arsinoe  showed  no  vestiges 
except  in  the  modern  village  of  Polis,  which,  from  the 
distance,  looked  better  than  the  reality,  as  the  foliage 
of  numerous  trees  shadowing  the  terrace-built  houses 
upon  either  side  the  rich  green  valley,  backed  by  the 
lofty  range  of  pine-covered  mountains,  completed  a 
lovely  landscape. 

An  hour  had  passed,  but  still  we  ascended ;  the  path 
was  as  usual  rugged,  and  we  already  looked  down 
upon  the  sea  and  valley  at  least  2000  feet  beneath, 
I  had  serious  misgivings  concerning  the  camels  and 
their  loads.  General  di  Cesnola  had  examined  the 
whole  of  this  country  in  his  search  for  antiquities,  but 
the  neighbourhood  of  the  ancient  Arsinoe,  where  much 
had  been  expected,  was  almost  unproductive. 

The  path  still  rose ;  until  at  length  we  arrived  upon 
an  extensive  plateau  about  2400  feet  above  the  sea. 
The  soil  was  chocolate-colour,  and  the  surface  was 
covered  with  large  stones  of  the  sedimentary  limestone 
that  surrounds  the  coast,  and  which  forms  the  flat- 
topped  hills  of  the  Messaria.  In  many  places  the 
natives  had  built  these  into  walls  around  their  fields, 
in  order  to  clear  the  ground  required  for  cultivation. 
We  passed  several  villages,  all  squalid  and  miserable, 
although  the  rich  soil  exhibited  green  crops  far  superior 
to  anything  we  had  met  with  in  the  lower  country. 
Extensive  gardens  of  mulberry  explained  the  silk- 
producing  power  of  this  neighbourhood,  and  almonds, 


234  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


figs,  apricots,  &c.,  throve  in  great  numbers  and  lux- 
uriance. This  peculiarly  fruitful  plateau  occupies  an 
area  of  about  eight  miles  from  north  to  south,  and  four 
from  east  to  west.  We  halted  at  the  large  Turkish 
village  of  Arodes,  from  which  we  looked  down  upon 
the  sea  and  the  small  rocky  island  opposite  Cape 
Drepano,  on  the  western  coast,  almost  beneath  our  feet 
This  portion  of  Cyprus  is  eminently  adapted  for  the 
cultivation  of  fruit-trees,  as  the  climate  and  soil  com- 
bine many  advantages.  The  elevation  and  peculiar 
geographical  position  attract  moisture,  while  the  lower 
ground  upon  the  east  is  parched  with  drought.  The 
evaporation  from  the  sea  below  condenses  upon  the 
cooler  heights  immediately  above  and  creates  re- 
freshing mists  and  light  rain,  which  accounted  for  the 
superiority  of  the  crops  compared  with  any  that  I  had 
seen  elsewhere.  Shortly  after  halting  at  Arodes  we 
experienced  these  atmospherical  changes.  The  ther- 
mometer at  Polis  had  been  57°  at  7  a.m.,  and  it  was 
only  56**  at  3  p.m.  at  this  altitude  of  2400  feet. 
Although  the  sky  had  been  clear,  mists  began  to 
ascend  from  the  chasms  and  gullies  along  the  abrupt 
face  of  the  mountain  which  overhung  the  sea ;  these 
curled  upwards  and  thickened,  until  a  dense  fog  rolled 
along  the  surface  from  the  west  and  condensed  into  a 
light  shower  of  rain.  The  Turkish  inhabitants  of  the 
village  were  extremely  civil,  and  made  no  complaints 
of  scarcity  from  drought,  as  they  fully  appreciated  the 
advantages  of  their  locality.  The  hawthorn-trees 
were  only  just  budding  into  bloom,  while  those  in  the 
low  country  had  shed  their  flowers,  and  had  already 
formed  the  berries.  In  future  an  extensive  growth  of 
fruit  may  supply  the  market  of  Alexandria,  but  at 
present  the  total  absence  of  roads  would  render  the 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  235 


transport  of  so  perishable  a  material  upon  the  backs  of 
mules  impossible.  I  had  sent  back  our  three  riding 
mules  to  meet  and  to  relieve  the  camels,  and  by 
this  precaution  the  baggage  animals  arrived  at  a 
convenient  hour. 

The  route  to  Baffo  or  Ktima,  which  is  now  the 
principal  town,  lay  across  the  plateau  for  about  five 
miles  to  the  verge  which  formed  the  table-land,  from 
which  margin  we  looked  down  upon  the  deep  vale 
below,  bounded  by  the  sea  at  a  few  miles  distance. 

We  dismounted  and  walked  down  the  long  and 
steep  pass,  the  mules  being  led  behind.  The  entire 
face  of  the  perpendicular  cliffs  was  cretaceous  lime- 
stone, but  the  scaly  slopes  of  a  hill  upon  our  left,  about 
a  mile  and  a  half  distant,  formed  a  loose  heap  of  shale, 
which  had  slipped,  either  during  earthquakes  or  heavy 
rains,  in  great  masses  to  the  bottom. 

After  a  long  and  tedious  descent  we  reached  the 
base  of  the  pass,  and  halted  in  a  broad  river-bed  full 
of  rocks  and  stones  of  all  sizes^  which  had  been 
rounded  by  the  torrent  of  the  rainy  season.  There 
was  no  water  except  in  small  pools  that  had  been 
scraped  in  the  sand  for  the  benefit  of  the  travelling 
animals.  Having  watered  our  mules  and  remounted, 
we  ascended  the  steep  banks  of  the  stream  and 
continued  towards  the  sea,  feeling  a  sensible  difference 
in  the  temperature  since  we  had  descended  frcMn  the 
heights. 

The  country  was  exceedingly  pretty,  as  ft  doped 
gently  downwards  for  three  or  four  miles,  the  surface 
ornamented  with  caroub-trees,  until  we  at  length 
reached  the  sea-beach  and  crossed  the  sandy  mouth  of 
the  river  s  bed.  The  crops  of  cereals  were  perished 
by.  drought   in   the  absence  of  irrigation;  but   upon 


236  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


continuing  our  route  parallel  with  the  beach  we 
observed  an  immediate  improvement,  as  the  water 
was  conducted  by  artificial  channels  to  the  various 
fields.  This  arrangement  had  been  effected  by  erect- 
ing a  temporary  dam  in  the  river  s  bed  far  among  the 
mountains,  ar\d  thus  leading  the  stream  into  the  con- 
duit for  many  miles.  Small  brooks  intersected  our 
path  along  the  coast,  and  in  several  places  I  remarked 
the  ruins  of  ancient  aqueducts.  .  .  .  There  was  no- 
thing of  peculiar  interest  upon  this  route ;  the  land 
inclined  upwards  from  the  sea  for  six  or  seven  miles  to 
the  foot  of  the  mountain  range,  all  of  which  was  either 
cultivated  with  cereals  or  was  covered  with  caroub- 
trees  and  olives.  Many  villages  were  dotted  over  the 
surface ;  these  were  green  with  mulberry  and  various 
fruit-trees.  With  the  sea  upon  our  right,  and  the  waves 
dashing  briskly  upon  the  rocky  shore,  the  scene  was 
agreeable  ;  but  the  sun  was  hot,  and  we  were  not 
sorry  to  see  the  distant  minarets  of  Ktima  after  a 
ride  of  seventeen  miles  from  Arodes. 

We  passed  the  ruins  of  ancient  Paphos  upon  our 
right,  and  shortly  afterwards  ascended  the  rocky  slope 
upon  which  the  capita]  of  the  district,  Ktima,  is 
situated.  It  is  a  large  town,  and  as  we  rode  through 
the  bazaar  the  narrow  street  was  almost  blocked  with 
huge  piles  of  oranges  that  had  been  imported  from 
Jaffa,  the  season  for  the  Cyprus  fruit  being  nearly 
over. 

liani  was  exceedingly  stupid  in  selecting  camping- 
ground,  therefore  upon  arrival  at  a  new  place  we 
invariably  had  to  explore  the  neighbourhood,  like 
migratory  birds  landed  upon  strange  shores.  We 
accordingly  rode  through  the  considerable  town  of 
Ktima  amidst  the  barking  and  snapping  of  innumerable 


vni.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  237 


dogs,  who  attacked  our  British  spaniels,  keeping  up  a 
running  fight  throughout,  the  way,  until  we  emerged 
upon  open  country  beyond  the  outskirts. 

We  were  now  once  more  upon  a  flat  table-top,  about 
a  hundred  feet  above  the  plain  between  us  and  the  sea, 
a  mile  and  a  half  distant.  The  edge  of  the  table-land 
formed  a  cliff,  choked  from  its  base  with  huge  fallen 
blocks  of  sedimentary  limestone,  from  the  crevices  of 
which  trees  grew  in  great  profusion,  reminding  one  of 
hanging  coverts  upon  hill-sides  in  England.  Descend- 
ing a  steep  but  well-trodden  path  between  these 
cottage-like  masses  of  disjointed  rock,  we  arrived  at 
the  prettiest  camping-ground  that  I  had  seen  in 
Cyprus.  This  had  formed  the  camp  of  the  Indian 
troops  when  the  occupation  had  taken  place  in  July, 
1878,  and  unfortunately  in  this  charming  spot  they 
had  suffered  severely  from  fever. 

The  sea  and  the  town  and  port  of  Baffo  lay  befor6 
us,  but  immediately  in  front  of  the  rocky  and  tree- 
covered  heights  that  we  had  descended  were  great 
numbers  of  park-like  trees  which  I  had  never  before 
met  with.  These  were  of  large  size,  many  exceeding 
fourteen  feet  in  girth,  with  a  beautiful  foliage  that 
threw  a  dense  shade  beneath.  The  name  of  this  tree 
is  Tremithia,  and  it  bears  a  small  fruit  in  clusters  of 
berries  which  produce  oil  :  this  is  used  by  the  in- 
habitants for  the  same  purposes  as  that  obtained  from 
olives.  I  had  met  with  the  bush  in  a  wild  state  for 
the  first  time  at  Lapithus,  and  had  been  attracted  by 
the  aromatic  scent  of  the  young  leaves,  but  I  was  not 
aware  that  it  grew  to  the  size  of  a  forest-tree.  Springs 
of  pure  water  issued  from  the  rocks  in  the  cliff-side 
within  a  few  yards  of  our  position ;  these  were  caught 
in  large  reservoirs  of  masonry  from  twenty  to  thirty 


238  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


feet  square  and  six  feet  deep,  from  the  bottom  of 
which  the  .water  could  be  liberated  for  the  purposes  of 
irrigation.  We  selected  a  position  upon  a  terrace 
beneath  a  number  of  these  splendid  tremithias,  which 
afforded  a*  shade  during  all  hours  of  the  day.  The 
little  stream  rippled  just  below,  passing  by  the  roots 
of  the  trees  that  sheltered  us,  and  watered  a  rich  and 
dark  green  plot  of  about  two  acres  of  —  neither 
roses,  nor  violets,  but  something  far  better,  which 
at  once  delighted  our  cook  Christo  —  onions!  Ac- 
cording to  his  practical  ideas  the  Garden  of  Eden 
would  have  been  a  mere  wilderness  in  the  absence  of 
a  bed  of  onions ;  but  at  length  we  had  entered  upon 
Paradise ;  this  was  a  charming  place !  For  some 
distance  beyond  this  captivating  plot  the  tremithias 
(which  at  a  distance  resembled  fine-headed  oaks)  orna- 
mented the  surface  and  gave  a  park-like  appearance 
to  the  country ;  but  beyond  them  the  plain  was  a 
gentle  slope,  highly  cultivated  towards  the  sea.  Long 
before  the  arrival  of  our  baggage  animals  we  had 
visitors  ;  Captain  Wauchope,  the  chief  commissioner  of 
the  district,  and  several  officers  in  official  positions, 
were  kind  enough  to  call.  An  old  man  and  his  wife, 
the  proprietors  of  the  onions,  who  lived  close  by, 
brought  us  some  rush- bottomed  chairs  with  much 
civility ;  and  as  the  day  wore  on  a  long  string  of 
visitors  appeared,  including  the  Bishop  and  some  of  the 
native  officials;  and  we  were  of  course  surrounded 
with  the  usual  throng  of  women  and  children :  these 
were  cleaner  and  better  looking  than  those  we  had 
hitherto  encountered. 

The  camels  did  not  appear  until  late  in  the  evening, 
as  they  had  descended  the  steep  pass  from  the 
table-land  of  Arodes  with  much  difficulty,  and  liani's 


VII  J. , 


Route  to  Baffo. 


"antique  "had  again  foil.  "  ^^9 

When    h  ''■  ""* 

t^e  wJiue  stones  as  tJiev T  ^  ^"^  ^^^^^«  ornamented 
^he  crevices  of  fallen  tr";r'  "'^  ^"^-^^  fr- 
--e  cIepre33,-„^  Wngla,  iT^  '  "^^^  ^  "  ^^ft  the 

;-"  craft  of  aStrtv^"^^^^  a   few 

of  anaent  Pap^^^    buf 'th      '"  ''"'■"  ^'^°  *^«  ruins 

ZT'\  ""-  ^^'"'"^rcia    1  r.  "^  ""*'"g  'o  denote 

.     „^P'^'n  VVauchope  Jall^ '"^"^      I"   the  afternoon 

nol-  '^"  ^"'"«-     As  I  h^"^  ."'^^"^^  ^°  accompany  us 

noth,„    of  interest  upon     u  ^"^°'""  "^P^^^"^'*'  there  is 

f;oughout  Cyprus   T"   '^.^  '^^^'^  of  ancient  cities 

appropriated  many  a^fs T^^"?  "°^^^  ^"^^"^  has  been 

'^;  ^aiue.  and  beyonfa  f    ""^.^^  those  who  understood 

°;  squared  stone  there  ^^^,f^"^"  columns  and  blocks 

^«ention.      Even   Gen!.     i    "*=''*">'  "^^hing  to  attract 

^3'n  upon  the  site  of  !    ^'   ^^^"°'a  excavated    in 

f «  antiquity  promised'"'''^'''  ^^P^^^'  ^^^^^^  fro'"   its 

;7«  two  fine  monoliths  , if  Y^""^^"'  ^^'^^'''     There 

^f^dation   of  squarld      ^^'°^^*'''h'''^^^'"^"Pon 

^■^jy  had  formed  the  en ^     ^'°"^''   ^PP^^'"^'^  ^  though 

P'"ars  of  g-rey  granite  r^  ^^""^^  '°  ^  ^^'"P^^ '  these  w^^ 

^^^«n  feet  hig-h  and  th^    r  '°  ^^P''^^^  ^^^"t  twenty- 

three  feet  two  inches  in  diameter 


240  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


There  were  stony  mounds  in  many  directions,  and 
fallen  pillars  and  columns  of  granite  and  of  coarse 
grey  and  whitish  marble;  but  beyond  these  ordinary 
vestiges  there  was  nothing  of  peculiar  interest.  As 
there  is  no  authority  equal  to  General  di  Cesnola  upon 
the  antiquities  of  Cyprus,  I  trust  he  will  excuse  me  for 
inserting  the  following  interesting  extract  from  his  work, 
upon  The  Great  Centre  of  the  Worship  of  Venus  : — 

**  Although  this  spot  [Paphos]  was  the  scene  of 
great  religious  events,  and  was  otherwise  important 
in  the  island,  yet  neither  are  there  more  than  a  very 
few  ruins  existing  above  ground,  nor  have  the  ex- 
plorations I  have  directed  there  at  different  times 
succeeded  in  bringing  to  light  anything  of  interest 
I  believe  that  this  absence  of  ruins  can  be  accounted 
for  in  the  following  manner.  Paphos  was  several 
times  overthrown  by  earthquakes.  The  last  time  the 
temple  was  rebuilt  was  by  Vespasian,  on  whose  coins 
it  is  represented ;  but  as  nothing  is  said  of  the  re- 
building of  the  city  it  is  supposed  that  it  was  left  in 
ruins ;  probably  therefore  during  the  long  period  that 
Cyprus  was  under  the  Roman  and  the  Byzantine  rule 
a  great  deal  of  the  decorative  and  architectural  material 
of  Paphos  was  transported  to  the  other  city  called  Nea- 
Paphos,  and  used  for  its  embellishment.  In  the  Acts 
of  the  Apostles  it  is  spoken  of  as  the  official  residence 
of  the  Roman  proconsul  Paulus  Sergius,  and  was 
therefore  the  capital  of  the  island.  By  the  time  of  the 
Lusignan  kings  Palaeo-Paphos  had  disappeared,  and  its 
ruins  under  their  reign  were  extensively  explored  in 
search  of  statuary  and  other  objects  of  art,  with  which 
to  decorate  the  royal  castle  built  in  its  vicinity.  There 
is  scarcely  any  ancient  tomb  to  be  found  of  a  date 
previous  to  the  Roman  period  which  had  not  been 
opened  centuries  ago.*' 

In  page  207  General  di  Cesnola  gives  an  illustration 
of  **  stone  feet  with  a  Cypriote  inscription,  from  the 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  241 


temple  of  Paphos,"  which  would  suggest  from  their 
appearance  that  ^'oui  was  not  uncommon  even  within 
the  temple  of  Venus.  In  continuation  he  writes,  page 
210 : — 

**The  great  temple  of  Venus  was  situated  on  an 
eminence,  which  at  present  is  at  a  distance  of  about 
twenty-five  minutes'  walk  from  the  sea.  Some  parts 
of  its  colossal  walls  are  still  standing,  defying  time  and 
the  stone-cutter,  though  bady  chipped  by  the  latter. 
One  of  the  wall-stones  measured  fifteen  feet  ten 
inches  in  length,  by  seven  feet  eleven  inches  in  width 
and  two  feet  five  inches  in  thickness.  The  stone  is 
not  from  Cyprus,  but  being  a  kind  of  blue  granite, 
must  have  been  imported  either  from  Cilicia  or  from 
Egypt. 

"  The  temple  as  rebuilt  by  Vespasian  seems  to  have 
occupied  the  same  area  as  the  former  temple,  and  was 
surrounded  by  a  peribolos,  or  outer  wall.  Of  this 
a  few  huge  blocks  only  are  now  extant.  On  the  west 
side  of  this  outer  wall  there  was  a  doorway  still 
plainly  visible.  Its  width  was  seventeen  feet  inine 
inches.  The  two  sockets  for  the  bolts  upon  iwhich 
the  door  swung  are  of  the  following  dimensions : 
length  six  inches,  width  four  and  a  half  inches,  depth 
three  and  a  half  inches.  The  south-east  wall,  I  ascer- 
tained, by  excavating  its  whole  length,  was  690  feet 
long.  The  length  of  the  west  side  I  could  only  trace 
as  far  as  272  feet,  its  continuance  being  hidden  beneath 
the  houses  of  Kouklia.  The  length  of  the  other  two 
sides  I  was  unable  to  ascertain  for  similar  reasons. 
The  walls  of  the  temple  itself,  made  of  the  kind  of 
stone  previously  mentioned,  but  not  in  such  huge 
blocks,  I  was  able  to  trace  correctly,  by  dint  of 
patience ;  and  though  very  little  is  seen  above  ground, 
yet,  strange  to  say,  the  four  corner-stones  are  still 
standing.  The  north-east  corner-stone  is  cased  in 
a  house  in  Kouklia,  forming  part  of  its  wall;  that 
of  the  north-west  stands  in  a  cross-street  of  the  village 

R 


242  Cyprus  in  1879. 


ECHAP. 


by  Itself.  Some  European  travellers  have  mistaken  it 
from  Its  present  shape  for  the  emblematic  cone  of 
Venus.  The  south-east  corner  stands  also  by  itself 
in  an  open  field,  where  the  Christian  population  of 
Kouklia  burn  lamps  and  little  wax-candles,  but  in 
honour  of  whom,  or  for  what  purpose,  I  did  not 
inquire.  The  fourth  corner-stone  likewise  forms  part 
of  a  modern  dwelling-house. 

"  The  temple  was  oblong  and  of  the  following 
dimensions :  the  eastern  and  western  walls  measure 
221  feet,  and  the  two  other  sides  167  feet.  I  cannot 
vouch  for  the  exact  measurement  on  account  of  the 
difficulties  I  had  to  encounter,  nevertheless  the  differ- 
ence can  be  of  some  inches  only.  The  corner-stone  of 
the  north-west  side  has  a  hole  in  it  thirteen  inches  in 
diameter  ;  a  similar  hole  also  exists  in  the  south-west 
corner  of  the  outer  wall.  As  the  temple  at  Paphos 
possessed  an  oracle,  these  strange  holes,  which  go 
through  the  entire  stone,  may  have  been  connected 
with  it.  This  at  least  was  the  opinion  of  Dr. 
Friederichs  when  he  came  to  pay  me  a  visit  at 
Paphos. 

"  From  this  spot,  if  a  person  stand  upon  this  huge 
perforated  stone,  he  can  produce  a  clear  and  fine  echo 
of  a  phrase  of  three  or  four  words,  pronounced  in  a 
hollow  tone  of  voice." 


It  is  quite  possible  that  the  tricks  of  acoustics  may 
have  been  practised  by  the  priests  who  officiated  at 
oracular  shrines,  which  would  have  awed  the  ignorant 
multitude ;  as  in  sacred  groves  a  tree  might  have  been 
made  to  speak  by  the  simple  contrivance  of  a  man 
concealed  within  the  hollow  stem,  which  to  outward 
appearance  would  have  been  considered  solid.  The 
devices  of  priestcraft  to  bring  grist  to  their  mill  are 
not  yet  obsolete,  as  will  be  seen  in  many  of  the 
monasteries  of  Cyprus. 


VIII.] 


Route  to  Baffo.  243 


All  the  grandeur  of  ancient  days  was  now  represented 
by  the  heaps  of  stones  and  the  rock  caverns  which 
mark  the  site  of  Paphos.  What  became  of  Venus 
after  her  appearance  upon  this  shore  may  be  left  to 
the  imagination ;  why  she  is  represented  by  the  ex- 
ceedingly plain  women  of  modern  Cyprus  surpasses 
the  imagination.  Perhaps  the  immorality  connected 
with  the  ancient  worship  of  the  goddess  of  beauty  and 
of  love  invoked  a  curse  upon  the  descendants  in  the 
shape  of  "  baggy  trousers,  high  boots,  and  ugliness : " 
to  which  dirt  has  been  a  painful  addition. 


R  2 


CHAPTER   IX. 


FROM    BAFFO   TO   LIMASOL. 


We  left  Ktima  on  23rd  April  for  Limasol.  The 
weather  was  now  perfect  for  out-door  life,  the  ther- 
mometer 52"*  at  7  A.M.,  and  70''  at  3  p.m.  The  route 
was  agreeable,  the  crops  were  well  irrigated  by 
numerous  streams  led  from  the  mountains,  and 
the  country  generally  was  green  and  well  wooded. 
After  a  march  of  fourteen  miles,  during  which  we  had 
passed  the  ruins  of  several  ancient  aqueducts,  we  arrived 
at  a  running  stream  which  issued  from  a  narrow  valley 
between  cliffs  and  hills  and  emptied  itself  upon  the 
sea-beach.  A  number  of  tamarisks  formed  a  jungle 
near  the  mouth,  and  the  banks  were  a  bright  rose- 
colour,  owing  to  the  full  bloom  of  thickets  of  oleanders. 
This  was  a  charming  halting-place,  and  as  the  beach 
was  strewn  with  dry  timber  that  had  been  brought 
down  from  the  mountains  during  the  season  when  the 
stream  was  powerful,  we  should  have  a  good  supply 
of  fuel  in  addition  to  fresh  water.  The  route  had 
been  along  the  flat  parallel  with  the  sea  from  Ktima, 
and  I  noticed  a  wonderful  change  in  the  pace  of  the 
camels,  as  I  had  summoned  liani  when  at  the  capital 
of  the  district  before  the  Cadi  at  the  Konak,  and  the 
chief  commissioner  had  added  his  voice  to  the  threats 


CHAP.  IX.3  From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  245 

and  monitions  he  had  received  concerning  his  future 
conduct  regarding  early  starting  and  attention  to  my 
orders.  Captain  Wauchope  had  kindly  furnished  me 
with  an  excellent  Turkish  zaphtieh,  or  mounted  police- 
man, whose  red  jacket  and  fez  commanded  a  certain 
respect.  This  man  was  mounted  upon  a  strong,  well- 
built,  and  exceedingly  active  pony,  or  small  horse,  which 
led  the  way,  as  our  new  guide  thoroughly  knew  the 
country. 

While  all  hands  were  pitching  the  tent  upon  a  sandy 
turf  within  a  few  yards  of  the  sea-beach  I  took  the 
dogs  for  a  ramble  up  the  thickly-wooded  valley  along 
the  Jbanks  of  the  stream,  as  I  had  observed  a  number 
of;  blue-rock   pigeons  among  the  white'  cliffs, .and   I 
thought  I  might  perhaps  find  a  hare  for  the'  evening 
stew.     I  killed  some  pigeons,  but  did  not  move  a  hare, 
although  the  dogs  worked   through   most   promising 
ground,  where  green  crops  upon  the  flat  bottom  sur- 
rounded by  thick  coverts  afford  both  food  and  shelter. 
We  were  returning  to  camp  when  I  suddenly  heard 
Merry  and   Shot    barking    savagely    in    some   thick 
bushes  upon  the  steep  bank  of  the  stream.     At  first 
I    thought  they  had   found   a  hedgehog,  which   was 
always  Shot's  amusement,  as   he  constantly  brought 
them   into   camp   after  he  had  managed  to  obtain  a 
hold  of  their  prickly  bodies.     The  barking  continued, 
and  as  I  could  not  penetrate  the  bush,  I  called  the 
dogs    off      They    joined    me    almost    immediately, 
looking  rather  scared.     It  now  occurred  to  me  that 
they  might  have  found  -a  snake,  as  a  few  days  ago 
I  had  heard  Merry  barking  in  a  similar  manner,  and 
upon  joining  him  I  had  discovered  a  snake  coiled  up 
with  head  erect  in  an  attitude  of  defence.     I  had  killed 
the  snake  and  scolded  the  dog,  as  I  feared  he  would 


246  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


come  to  an  untimely  end,  should  he  commence  snake- 
hunting  in  so  prolific  a  field  as  Cyprus.  Since  that 
time  all  the  dogs  hunted  the  countless  lizards  which 
ran  across  the  path  during  the  march,  and  Shot  was 
most  determined  in  his  endeavours  to  scratch  them 
out  of  their  holes. 

I  had  called  my  three  dogs  together,  and  we  were 
walking  across  a  field  of  green  wheat,  when  I  suddenly 
missed  Shot,  and  he  was  discovered  lying  down  about 
fifty  paces  in  our  rear.  Merry,  who  usually  was  pluck 
and  energy  itself,  was  following  at  my  heels  and  looking 
stupid  and  subdued.  This  dog  was  indomitable,  and 
his  fault  was  wildness  at  the  commencement  of  the 
day;  I  could  not  now  induce  him  to  hunt,  and  his 
eyes  had  a  peculiar  expression,  as  though  his  system 
had  suffered  some  severe  shock.  Shot  came  slowly 
when  I  called  him,  but  he  walked  with  difficulty,  and 
his  jaws  were  swollen.  I  now  felt  sure  that  the  dogs 
were  bitten  by  a  snake,  which  they  had  been  baying 
when  I  heard  them  in  the  bush  about  five  minutes 
before.  We  were  very  near  the  camp,  and  the  dogs 
crept  home  slowly  at  my  heels.  Upon  examination 
there  was  no  doubt  of  the  cause ;  Shot  had  wounds 
of  a  snake's  fangs  upon  his  lip,  under  the  eye,  and 
upon  one  ear ;  he  must  have  been  the  first  bitten,  as 
he  had  evidently  received  the  greatest  discharge  of 
poison.  Merry  was  bitten  in  the  mouth  and  in  one 
ear,  both  of  which  were  already  swollen,  but  not  to  the 
same  degree  as  Shot,  who,  within  an  hour,  had  a 
head  as  large  as  a  small  calf's,  and  his  eyes  were 
completely  closed.  I  had  not  the  slightest  hope  of 
his  recovery,  as  his  throat  had  swollen  to  an  enormous 
size,  which  threatened  suffocation.  I  could  do  nothing 
for  the  poor  dogs  but  oil  their   mouths,  although   I 


IX.]  From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  247 

knew  that  the  poison  would  assuredly  spread  through- 
out the  system.  The  dogs  had  been  bitten  at  about 
3.40  P.M.  At  8  P.M.  (our  dinner-hour)  Shot  was  a 
shapeless  mass,  and  his  limbs  were  stiff ;  the  skin  of 
his  throat  and  fore-part  of  his  body  beneath  his  curly 
white  and  liver-coloured  hair  was  perfectly  black  ;  his 
jowl,  which  now  hung  three  inches  below  his  jaws, 
was  also  inky  black,  as  were  his  swollen  tongue  and 
palate.  Merry's  head  and  throat  were  swollen  badly, 
and  he  lay  by  the  blazing  fire  of  logs  half  stupefied 
and  devoid  of  observation. 

On  the  following  morning  Shot  was  evidently  dying  ; 
he  did  not  appear  to  suffer  pain,  but  was  in  a  state 
of  coma  and  swelled  to  such  a  degree  that  he  resem- 
bled the  skin  of  an  animal  that  had  been  badly  stuffed 
with  hay.  Merry  was  worse  than  on  the  preceding 
night,  and  lay  in  a  state  of  stupor.  I  carried  him 
to  the  sea  and  dipped  him  several  times  beneath  the 
water;  this  appeared  slightly  to  revive  him,  and  he 
was  placed  in  a  large  saddle-bag  to  be  carried  on  a 
mule  for  the  day's  march.  Shot  had  been  quite 
unconscious,  and  when  the  men  prepared  an  animal 
to  carry  him,  it  was  found  that  he  was  already  dead. 
This  was  a  little  after  8  A.M.,  and  he  had  been  bitten 
at  about  3.40  p.m.  :  about  16^  hours  had  elapsed. 
My  men  dug  a  grave  and  buried  the  poor  animal, 
who  had  been  a  faithful  dog  and  an  excellent  retriever. 
From  Merry's  appearance  I  expected  that  we  should 
have  to  attend  to  his  remains  in  the  same  manner 
before  the  evening. 

Snakes  are  very  numerous  in  Cyprus,  but  I  cannot 
believe  in  any  great  danger  if  these  generally  hated 
creatures  should  be  avoided.  If  dogs  will  insist  upon 
hunting  and  attacking  them,  they  must  be  bitten  as  a 


248  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


I 

I" 

I 


natural  consequence ;    in  this  fatal  case  there  can  be 
no  doubt  that  the  dog  Shot  was  the  first  to  discover 
and  attack  the  snake,  and   Merry,  upon  hearing  him 
bark,  joined  in  the  fight.     It  is  quite  unnatural  for  any 
of  the  serpent  tribe  to  attack,  except  for  the  purpose 
of  devouring  their  natural  prey.     As  a  general  rule, 
the  food  of  snakes  consists  of  rats,  mice,  frogs,  or  toads, 
beetles,   and   other  insects ;   the    pythons  and   larger 
serpents  feed  upon  such  animals  as  hares,  birds,  and 
the  young  of  either  antelopes,  deer,  pigs,  &c.  Although 
a  snake  if  trodden  upon  might  by  a  spasmodic  impulse 
inflict  a  bite,  it  would  nine  times  out  of  ten  endeavour 
to  escape.     The  idea  of  any  snake  wilfully  and  malici- 
ously premeditating  an  attack  upon  a  man  is  quite  out 
of  the  question,  unless  it  has  been  either  teased  or 
excited  by  a  dog  when  hunting.     The  same  principle 
will  hold  good  in  the  case  of  animals.     No  snake  that 
feeds  only  upon  rats,  mice,   and  such  small  animals 
would  seek  to  attack  a  dog,  or  any  creature  that  was 
not  its  natural  prey,  and  the  actual  danger  from  such 
reptiles  is   quite   insignificant      The  stories  that  are 
circulated  of  accidents  are  mostly  exaggerated,  or  are 
perpetuated  by  constant  repetition,     I   have  been  in 
snake   countries   such  as   Ceylon   and  Africa  during 
many  years,  the  greater  portion  of  which  has  been 
passed  in  practical  explorations,  and  I  can  safely  say 
that  I  never  thought  of  snakes  until  they  met  my  eye, 
and  no  person   that    I    ever  knew   was   killed   by  a 
poisonous  bite.     In  Cyprus  there  are  several  varieties. 
I  have  only  seen  three,  a  black  species  which  is  harm- 
less, a  mottled  variety  also  non-poisonous,  and  a  grey 
snake  that  is  supposed  to  be  deadly ;  there  may  be 
more,  but  I  have  never  met  with  them.     The  stony 
nature  of  the  country,  and  the  bush-covered  surface 


jx.]  From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  249 

of  the  hills,  together  with  the  dryness  of  the  climate, 
are  all  favourable  to  the  development  of  snakes  and 
lizards.  The  latter  are  exceedingly  numerous,  and  are 
most  valuable  destroyers  of  insects ;  there  are  several 
varieties,  but  the  most  common  is  the  bright  copper- 
coloured  species  with  a  smooth  skin.  The  chameleon 
also  exists. 

Although  we  had  never  taken  the  presence  of  snakes 
into  serious  consideration,  the  horrible  effect  of  the 
bite  upon  the  dogs  made  every  one  on  the  alert  during 
the  march  over  the  rocky  and  bushy  country  from  our 
camp  to  Evdimu.  Our  guide  scorned  a  beaten  track, 
and  after  having  kept  the  regular  path  along  the  sea- 
coast  for  a  mile,  he  struck  directly  up  the  mountain, 
which  descended  in  a  steep  cliff  to  the  shore,  against 
which  the  waves  dashed  with  violence.  The  country 
was  exceedingly  wild  for  some  miles  as  we  ascended 
through  bush  of  young  pines,  dwarf-cypress,  and  mas- 
tic, occasionally  passing  pines  of  larger  growth,  which 
had,  as  usual,  been  mutilated.  We  moved  partridges 
in  several  places,  but  these  were  old  birds  packed 
in  considerable  numbers:  a  bad  sign  at  this  season, 
when  they  should  have  been  sitting  upon  eggs.  At 
an  elevation  of  about  1000  feet  above  the  sea  we 
came  upon  a  park  of  caroub-trees,  in  which  was  a 
spring  of  water ;  large  flocks  of  goats  and  cattle, 
together  with  many  mules  and  horses,  were  roaming 
through  this  verdant  district,  which  afforded  abundant 
pasturage  in  the  shape  of  wild  artichokes,  a  variety  of 
succulent  thistles,  and  many  plants  suitable  to  the 
native  animals  in  the  absence  of  actual  grasses.  This 
is  a  distressing  want  throughout  Cyprus ;  when  the 
country  is  green,  the  verdure  is  produced  by  cultfvated 
crops  of  cereals,  which  quickly  change  to  yellow  as 


250  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


they  ripen ;  all  the  natural  productions  of  the  earth 
are  what  in  England  we  should  term  "  weeds  " — there 
IS  no  real  grass,  except  in  some  rare  localities  where 
a  species  of  "couch-grass'*  (the  British  farmer's 
enemy)  crawls  along  the  surface,  being  nourished  by 
its  knotty  roots,  which,  penetrating  into  the  deep  soil, 
are  enabled  to  escape  the  burning  sun. 

Upon  reaching  the  summit,  about  1 200  feet  above 
the  sea,  we  looked  over  the  richest  landscape  that  I 
had  seen  in  Cyprus.  A  succession  of  broad  valleys 
and  undulating  hills  gradually  ascended,  until  in  the  far 
distance  they  terminated  in  elevated  plateaux  upwards 
of  2000  feet  above  the  sea.  The  whole  of  this  district, 
as  far  and  no  doubt  much  farther  than  the  eye  could 
reach,  was  richly  wooded  with  caroub-trees  and  occa- 
sional olive-groves,  while  the  distant  villages  were 
marked  by  the  peculiar  light-green  of  mulberry-clumps 
and  other  fruit-trees.  The  bottoms  of  the  numer- 
ous valleys  were  dark  with  well-irrigated  crops  of 
cereals,  and  contrasted  strongly  with  those  of  the 
higher  ground,  which  had  depended  solely  upon  the 
uncertain  rainfall. 

There  were  beautiful  sites  for  country  residences 
throughout  this  scene,  and  it  appeared  strange  that 
no  house  was  visible  except  the  ordinary  mud-built 
dwellings  in  the  native  villages.  The  route  over  this 
country  was  abominable,  as  it  was  a  succession  of  the 
steepest  ups-and-downs  into  valleys  many  hundred  feet 
in  depth,  which  necessitated  a  scramble  up  a  rocky  zig- 
zag for  a  similar  height  above,  to  be  repeated  after  we 
had  crossed  each  shoulder  that  formed  a  spur  from  the 
distant  mountains,  the  drainage  being  at  right  angles 
to  our  path.  Every  plateau  exhibited  the  same  lovely 
view  of  the  sea,  cliffs  of  snow-white  cretaceous  rock, 


IX.1 


From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  251 


green  hills,  and  deep  vales,  through  which  a  stream  of 
water  had  given  birth  to  a  thick  growth  of  foliage. 
After  a  march  of  fourteen  miles  we  halted  in  a  deep 
dell  beneath  shady  caroubs,  a  few  yards  from  a  brook 
of  clear  water  which  irrigated  some  of  the  richest  crops 
I  had  seen  in  Cyprus.  When  the  camels  arrived 
Merry  was  very  bad,  and  his  skin  beneath  the  hair 
had  turned  black  ;  he  lapped  water  with  difficulty, 
as  his  tongue  and  mouth  were  swollen  to  a  great 
size  and  were  also  black.  As  the  dog  could  not 
eat  I  poured  a  quantity  of  olive-oil  down  his  throat 

The  large  village  of  Evdimu  was  about  a  mile 
above  us,  and  was  distinguishable  from  the  heights. 
A  new  and  important  church  was  in  process  of  con- 
struction, upon  which  some  Italian  workmen  were 
employed,  and  an  air  of  prosperity  in  this  neighbour- 
hood contrasted  favourably  with  most  portions  of  the 
island.  The  cock-birds  of  francolins  were  crowing 
in  all  directions,  and  when  rambling  with  Wise,  my 
now  solitary  dog,  vainly  searching  for  a  hare,  I  found 
several  pairs  of  red-legged  partridges,  which  of  course 
at  this  season  I  respected. 

The  march  on  the  following  day  was  a  continuation 
of  the  same  beautiful  country,  until  we  at  length  reached 
the  table-top  of  a  stupendous  cliff  perpendicular  to  the 
sea,  which  washed  its  base.  The  path  was  in  many 
places  only  a  few  feet  from  the  edge,  and  afforded  a 
magnificent  view.  The  table-land  upon  which  we  rode 
was  covered  with  evergreen  shrubs  and  young  pines, 
and  the  same  rich  landscape  that  we  had  admired  on 
the  previous  day  extended  towards  the  mountains 
of  the  interior.  The  road  had  been  as  rough  as  could 
be  imagined,  and  we  now  descended  the  last  steep 
incline   from    the   heights,  which   led   into   the   plain 


252  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^ckxp, 

below.  The  salt  lake,  which  adds  an  important  amount 
to  the  revenue  of  Cyprus,  lay  beneath  us  upon  the 
right,  in  the  heart  of  the  peninsula  of  Akrotiri ; 
immediately  below  were  the  ruins  of  ancient  Curium, 

but  to  us  invisible 

We  arrived  at  the  town  of  Episkopi.  Captain 
Savile  thus  describes  it : — 

"A  pleasantly  situated  village,  standing  on  the 
Episkopi  or  Lycos  river,  and  very  abundantly  sup- 
plied with  water. .  The  houses  are  surrounded"  with 
fruitful  gardens,  and  there  are  fields  of  grain  and 
cotton  in  the  vicinity.  The  inhabitants  have  how- 
ever very  small  holdings,  and  are,  as  a  rule,  miserably 
poor.  In  former  days  Episkopi  was  a  rich  city,  and 
contained  in  the  Venetian  times  large  manufactories; 
of  its  ancient  greatness  now  remain  the  ruins  of  an 
aqueduct,  immense  storehouses  or  vaults,  and  several 
ruined  Greek  churches.  The  spurs  from  Mount 
Troodos  extend  nearly  down  to  the  shore,  and  the 
road  follows  the  coast-line,  traversing  a  very  beautiful 
country  ;  the  ground  in  spring  is  covered  with  flowers 
and  aromatic  herbs,  and  the  ravines  are  filled  with  a 
luxuriant  growth  of  cypresses,  wild-olives,  and  flowering 
shrubs." 

There  was  nothing  to  induce  a  delay  in  Episkopi, 
but  an  addition  may  be  made  to  the  above  description 
in  stating  that  the  river  which  has  fertilised  the  spot 
and  made  it  famous  originates  in  the  Troodos  range. 
Later  on,  during  the  summer  months,  I  often  rested 
at  the  faintly  dripping  source  of  its  first  mountain 
affluent  near  the  top  of  Troodos,  which  by  degrees 
acquires  strength  from  the  Olympus  drainage  to  form 
an  important  stream. 

We  passed  quickly  through  Episkopi  with  its  fruitful 
gardens,  narrow  streets,  and  yelling  curs.     Poor  Wise 


IX.J 


From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  253 


was  now  alone,  and  we  could  no  longer  exhibit  a  com- 
bined front  of  three  British  lions  to  the  snapping  curs 
of  Cyprus,  therefore  the  dog  Wise-ly  kept  close  to 
the  heels  of  our  guide  s  pony  and  just  before  me, 
which,  without  the  ignominy  of  retreat,  secured  his 
position  from  all  assailants.  We  passed  below 
the  ancient  aqueduct,  which  conveyed  a  powerful 
volume  of  water  to  the  turbine-wheel  upon  our 
right;  and  at  length  emerging  from  the  town,  we 
entered  once  more  upon  the  plain,  and  steering  for  a 
large  square  tower  which  we  had  remarked  when  at 
the  summit  of  the  heights,  we  shortly  arrived  at  the 
thriving  village  of  Kolossi,  about  a  mile  and  three- 
quarters  distant. 

This  large  village  was  a  waving  sea  of  barley,  some  of 
the  finest  that  Ihad  seen,  and  due  to  artificial  irriga- 
tion. An  ancient  aqueduct  of  masonry  turned  a  mill 
close  to  the  large  square  tower  that  we  had  previously 
observed.  We  halted  for  luncheon  beneath  an  olive- 
tree  a  few  yards  distant  from  the  aqueduct,  in  a 
garden  of  fruit-trees  which  were  in  the  brightness  of 
a  spring  foliage. 

The  square  tower  of  masonry  must  have  formed  a 
portion  of  defensive  works  that  have  disappeared,  as 
there  is  no  flanking  protection,  but  the  tower  rises 
above  the  plain  to  a  height  of  about  sixty  feet  like 
a  huge  block  of  stone.  It  is  said  to  have  been  erected 
by  the  Knights  Templars,  and  is  of  great  solidity; 
but  such  experienced  soldiers  would  hardly  have 
constructed  so  important  a  work  without  due  regard 
to  the  first  rules  of  fortification. 

'After  luncheon,  the  camels  having  arrived,  I  would 
not  allow  them  to  unload,  but  directed  them  straight  t6 
Limasol.    Of  course  their  owners  declared  the  distance 


254  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


to  be  a  long  day  s  march,  but  as  the  map  showed  it  to 
be  six  miles,  I  insisted. 

From  Kolossi  the  country  was  perfectly  open  and 
cultivated ;  the  peasantry  were  engaged  in  reaping 
barley,  which  was  carried  away  upon  donkeys'  backs 
instead  of  being  conveyed  by  carts.  The  usual 
caroub-trees,  although  plentiful  upon  the  rising 
ground  in  the  distance,  were  few  and  far  between, 
and  from  this  to  Limasol,  which  was  now  in  view, 

the  beauty  of   the  landscape  had  departed I 

dislike  the  approach  to  a  large  town  in  a  semi-wild 
country  ;  the  charming  simplicity  and  independence 
of  travelling  is  destroyed,  and  the  servants  become 
more  or  less  demoralised  by  a  love  of  new  associations 
which  produces  a  neglect  of  duty.  liani  was  with  us 
in  addition  to  our  guide  the  zaphtieh,  therefore,  as  an 
utter  stranger  to  the  locality,  I  ordered  them  to  lead 
us  to  a  convenient  camping-ground.  As  we  approached 
the  town  there  were  the  usual  minarets  and  date-palms, 
and  several  vessels,  including  steamers,  were  lying  in 
the  roadstead.  We  halted  near  the  entrance  in  a 
forsaken  garden,  where  the  walls  were  broken  down 
and  the  unwatered  orange-trees,  although  in  faint 
blossom,  were  parched  and  faded.  Two  very  large 
apricot-trees  promised  a  shade  for  the  tent,  but  the 
sakyeeaky  or  water-wheel,  together  with  two  powerful 
English  lifting-pumps  that  were  connected  with  a 
large  reservoir  and  aqueduct  of  masonry,  were  in 
the  last  stage  of  rust  and  rottenness.  I  was  not 
prepossessed  with  the  aspect  of  the  spot,  as  it 
reminded  me  strongly  of  an  English  property  in 
charge  of  the  Court  of  Chancery.  The  baggage 
animals  with  the  tents  arrived  while  our  people 
were    employed    in    clearing    a    space    beneath    the 


IX.] 


From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  255 


trees  from  the  innumerable  stones,  which,  as  usual 
throughout  Cyprus,  covered  the  surface.  The  ser- 
vants were  busily  engaged  in  erecting  the  tent,  when 
a  long,  lanky  individual,  with  a  repulsive  countenance, 
marched  through  the  little  crowd  and  haughtily  inquired 
"  who  we  were,  and  what  business  we  had  there  ?  " 

This  was  the  first  instance  of  incivility  that  I  had 
met  with  in  our  journey  through  the  island.  The  man 
was  a  Turk,  and  was  not  the  proprietor,  but  only  the 
agent  for  this  wretchedly-neglected  property.  The  un- 
fortunate owner  was  sleeping  with  his  fathers,  or 
he  would,  I  feel  sure,  have  welcomed  us  with  true 
Turkish  politeness  and  hospitality  but  having  de- 
parted this  life,  some  legal  difficulties  had  occasioned 
trouble,  and  the  estate  was  in  the  hands  of  the 
uncivil  agent,  who,  of  course,  being  nobody,  assumed 
the  airs  of  somebody,  and  endeavoured  by  rudeness 
to  exhibit  his  importance.  We  were  travel-stained 
and  dusty  as  millers,  therefore  our  personal  appearance 
had  not  impressed  him  favourably ;  he  was  in  a  thread  • 
bare  long  black  cloth  habit  that  combined  the  cloak, 
dressing-gown,  and  frock-coat  in  a  manner  inexplicable, 
and  known  only  to  Turks.  This  garment  was  trimmed 
in  the  front  edges  with  rather  mangy-looking  fox-skin  : 
loose  pegtop  trousers  of  greasy-looking  cloth,  dirty 
and  threadbare,  completed  the  costume  of  the  great 
curiosity  of  Cyprus,  "  a  rude  person." 

I  was  not  at  the  time  aware  that  he  understood 
Arabic,  and  happily  I  addressed  Amarn  in  that 
language,  expressing  my  surprise  that  in  this  country, 
where  we  had  travelled  so  widely  and  found  civility  upon 
all  sides,  we  should  be  subjected  to  such  rudeness. 
My  servants,  who  were  more  annoyed  than  myself, 
spoke  rather  loudly,  and  assured  him  that  if  he  was  a 


256  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Turk,  their  master  was  a  pasha  of  his  Sultan,  and  we 
would  at  once  quit  his  miserable  neglected  ground  and 
mention  his  inhospitality  to  the  chief  commissioner.  By 
this  time  the  rear  baggage  animals  had  appeared,  and 
the  imposing  array  of  luggage  and  people  seemed  to  im- 
press him  with  the  fact  that  we  were  neither  gipsies 
nor  .vagabonds.  I  explained  to  him  that  we  should  not 
have  presumed  to  intrude  within  a  walled  garden,  but 
as  the  old  walls  had  disappeared  and  the  place  was  in 
an  open  and  ruinous  condition,  we  had  trespassed  inno- 
cently. He  disappeared  with  an  apology,  but  upon  the 
first  opportunity  after  we  had  examined  the  neighbour- 
hood of  Limasol  we  changed  our  camp  to  a  good 
position  on  the  eastern  outskirts  of  the  town.  This 
side  was  rich  in  caroub-trees,  and  had  grass  existed 
it  would  have  formed  a  park  :  the  ground  sloped  from 
the  mountains,  about  six  miles  distant,  gradually  to 
the  sea,  the  surface  was  richly  wooded  by  caroubs 
throughout,  and  the  soil  was  cultivated  with  barley, 
which  was  already  in  the  hands  of  reapers.  There  were 
six  caroub-trees  in  a  line  which  connected  their  shade, 
and  we  soon  cleared  the  cultivated,  but  withered,  surface 
of  the  large  clods  of  earth,  which,  having  been  turned 
up  by  the  plough,  had  baked  beneath  the  sun  into  the 
hardness  of  bricks ;  these  were  arranged  in  a  square  to 
mark  the  limits  of  the  camp,  while  the  interior  area  was 
pounded  to  produce  an  even  floor;  from  this  position 
we  looked  upon  the  sea,  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile 
distant,  and  upon  the  town  of  Limasol  upon  our  right. 
No  town  in  Cyprus  exhibited  the  results  of  a  British 
occupation  to  the  same  extent  as  Limasol.  The  chief 
commissioner.  Colonel  Warren,  R.A.,  was  an  officer  of 
great  energy  and  ability,  and  he  had  grappled  vigor- 
ously with  every  difficulty  and  cleansed  the  Augean 


IX.]  From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  257 

stables  thoroughly.  The  town  is  about  a  mile  and  a 
half  in  length,  and  faces  the  sea  in  a  position  somewhat 
similar  to  that  of  Larnaca.  The  quay  is  washed  by 
the  waves,  which  in  stormy  weather  dash  against  the 
houses,  at  which  times  it  is  impossible  to  land  from 
boats,  and  crews  must  remain  on  board  their  vessels 
safely  anchored  in  the  roadstead.  Although  not  so 
extensive  as  Larnaca,  Limasol  is  more  compact,  and 
the  houses  and  gardens  are  superior.  Owing  to  the 
active  authority  of  the  chief  commissioner,  the  streets 
were  scrupulously  clean,  and  all  the  refuse  of  the 
town  was  conveyed  to  a  safe  distance.  A  public  market 
had  been  recently  arranged,  covered  with  corrugated 
galvanised  iron,  in  which  the  departments  for  meat, 
vegetables,  &c.,  were  kept  separate,  and  the  appearance 
and  organisation  resembled  a  market-place  in  England. 
The  various  open  places  within  the  town,  instead  of 
being  receptacles  for  filth,  as  is  usual  throughout  the 
East,  had  been  carefully  planted  with  young  trees, 
most  of  which  were  exhibiting  their  first  spring  shoots 
and  leaves.  The  quay  which  faced  the  sea,  although 
exposed  to  the  undermining  action  of  the  waves,  had 
been  repaired  and  was  in  fair  condition ;  from  this  a 
tolerable  pier  projected,  upon  which  piles  of  goods 
were  being  disembarked  from  the  steamer  that  had 
just  arrived  from  Larnaca.  Two  small  tugs  ran  upon 
alternate  days,  thus  affording  facilities  for  passengers 
and  goods  between  Limasol  and  Larnaca,  which  was  a 
great  convenience  recently  established  to  avoid  the 
difficulty  of  the  roadless  land  journey.  H.M.S.  Torch 
was  in  the  roadstead,  together  with  about  twenty  vessels 
of  various  flags  and  tonnage.  Some  of  these  were 
loading  wine  for  Trieste,  and  it  was  interesting  to 
watch   the  system    adopted  to  save  the  difficulty  of 

s 


258  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


embarking  the  heavy  casks  in  lighters,  In  the  absence  of 
cranes  or  winches.  The  barrels  when  full  were  slightly 
inferior  in  weight  to  their  displacement  of  sea- water ; 
they  accordingly  floated  almost  level  with  the  surface, 
and  were  formed  into  a  chain  of  two  casks  abreast  and 
about  fifty  yards  in  length.  Thus  arranged,  they  were 
towed  by  boats  until  alongside  the  vessel,  when  they 
were  easily  hoisted  up  on  board.  As  boats  could  not 
lie  against  the  perpendicular  wall  of  the  quay  except 
during  a  perfect  calm,  there  was  considerable  trouble  in 
carrying  on  the  commerce  of  the  port  according  to 
modern  requirements ;  but  the  inventions  of  necessity 
had  simplified  many  difficulties  at  the  expense  of  in- 
creased manual  labour.  Boats  lay  a  few  yards  off  the 
shore,  and  were  loaded  by  men  who  walked  shoulder- 
deep  with  the  packages  upon  their  heads.  I  saw 
lighters  discharging  planks  and  baulks  of  timber,  by 
shooting  them  into  the  sea  with  sufficient  force  to 
follow  the  direction  given  towards  the  shore,  while  the 
receivers  stood  in  the  water  to  capture  them  upon 
arrival. 

The  shops  and  stores  along  the  quay-face  closely 
resemble  those  of  Larnaca,  but  there  was  more  activity 
among  the  people.  The  streets  of  the  bazaar  were 
thronged  with  mules  and  donkeys  bringing  the  produce 
of  the  interior  to  the  shipping  centre,  and  the  crush  of 
animals  had  been  carefully  modified  by  the  arrange- 
ments instituted  by  Colonel  Warren,  who  had  estab- 
lished a  large  walled  court,  or  stable-yard,  into  which 
all  empty  mules  and  asses  were  driven,  instead  of 
being  allowed  to  block  the  thoroughfare ;  each  beast 
paid-  some  trifle  for  this  accommodation,  which  added 
to  the  fund  for  municipal  improvements. 

The  public  offices  were  very  inferior,   that  of  the 


^^■^  From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  259 

chief  commissioner  himself  being  a  small  white- 
washed room,  which  exhibited  an  utter  disregard  of 
personal  comfort  in  the  interests  of  government 
economy.  There  is  a  curious  old  fort  within  the 
town  which  has  been  altered  and  added  to  until  it  has 
become  an  absurdity ;  this  would  be  utterly  useless  as  a 
defence,  and  the  Turkish  guns  having  been  removed, 
it  is  now  converted  into  a  prison ;  beneath  the  ground 
there  are  dungeons  which  are  no  longer  used. 

The  roadstead  of  Limasol  is  formed  by  the  pro- 
jection of  the  Akrotiri  peninsula,  which  affords 
protection  from  the  west  and  south-west,  but  it  is 
directly  exposed  from  the  east  to  the  south.  The 
anchorage  is  safe,  with  good  holding-ground  in  ten 
fathoms.  The  peculiar  shaped  peninsula  of  Akrotiri 
is  about  seven  miles  wide,  and  the  lake  in  its  centre, 
when  full,  has  a  width  of  about  four  miles  ;  but  during 
the  exhaustive  heat  of  summer  it  evaporates  to  the 
dimensions  of  a  mere  pool,  and  leaves  its  deserted  bed 
encrusted  with  a  deposit  of  salt.  This  lake  has  no 
connection  with  the  sea,  and  its  maximum  depth  is 
under  three  feet ;  the  salt  is  formed  upon  the  same 
principle  as  that  of  the  Lake  of  Larnaca,  and  certainly 
not  by  the  percolation  of  sea-water  through  the  sand, 
as  the  Limasol  lake  is  considerably  above  the  sea- 
level.  There  is  a  lighthouse  at  Cape  Gatta,  which 
can  be  seen  at  a  distance  of  fifteen  miles,  as  from  its 
elevated  position  the  lamp  is  190  feet  above  the  sea. 
From  this  point  to  Limasol  the  beach  is  low  and 
sandy,  and  has  always  been  accepted  as  the  most 
favourable  point  for  a  disembarkation  of  troops. 
With  historical  facts  before  us  there  is  small  excuse 
for  the  blunder  committed  in  landing  our  army  of 
occupation,    during    the    extreme    heat    of    July,    at 

s  2 


26o  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


Larnaca  instead  of  Limasol.  At  the  former  port 
there  is  not  a  tree  to  throw  a  shade,  and  the  miserable 
aspect  of  the  surrounding  country  must  have  had  a 
most  depressing  effect  upon  the  nervous  system  of 
officers  and  men,  while  at  Limasol  the  country  is 
agreeable  and  the  shady  caroubs  exist  almost  to  the 
sea-shore,  in  numbers  that  would  have  sheltered  an 
army  of  three  times  the  force  represented.  I  cannot 
conceive  of  more  deliberate  cruelty  inflicted  upon  all 
grades  than  an  unnecessary  exposure  to  the  burning 
summer  sun  of  Cyprus  in  bell-tents,  when  shady  trees 
existed  in  so  convenient  a  locality  as  Limasol.  If  the 
root  of  the  offence  could  be  traced  it  would  probably 
be  discovered  that  the  advice  had  been  given  by  some 
persons  interested  in  the  possession  of  property  at 
Larnaca,  where  rents  of  houses  rose  from  nil  to  a 
fabulous  amount  upon  the  disembarkation  of  the 
troops.  "Altogether  this  military  enterprise  of  occu- 
pation was  effected  with  the  usual  British  confusion 
and  lack  of  arrangement. 

The  commissariat  of  course  broke  down,  although 
special  pains  had  been  taken  to  supply  the  troops 
with  luxuries  that  to  a  simple  mind  are  inconceivable  ; 
thus  copper  warming-pans  in  great  numbers  were  sent 
out  !  As  the  thermometer  was  above  100°  Fahr., 
these  fiery  furnaces  were  hardly  appreciated.  It  is  a 
reflection  upon  the  want  of  resource  exhibited  by  the 
authorities  that  these  peculiar  utensils  were  not  sent 
out  as  regimental  stew-pans,  as  there  was  a  dearth  of 
cooking-pots,  and  the  warming-pans  might  have  added 
materially  to  the  comforts  of  the  insides,  instead  of  the 
outsides  of  the  men,  by  reducing  the  gutta-percha-like 
texture  of  Cyprian  bullocks  into  a  savoury  stew.  An- 
other comfort  thoughtfully  supplied  by  some  more  than 


IX.l 


From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  261 


usually  insane  authority,  who  no  doubt  had  passed  a 
severe  competitive  examination,  was  exhibited  in  count- 
less coal-boxes  of  cast-iron !  These  curious  devices 
were  about  three  feet  six  inches  long  by  two  feet  and 
a  half  deep,  and  the  same  in  width.  To  my  i^eas  they 
were  only  suitable  for  gigantic  foot-pans  or  hip-baths, 
or  as  an  aquarium  for  a  young  seal ;  but  their  real 
object  was  to  contain  coal  for  the  supply  of  ^  the 
various  tents !  What  is  to  become  of  our  country, 
exclaims  the  British  taxpayer,  if  this  frightful  waste  is 
to  continue  ?  What  traveller  or  explorer  ever  carried 
with  him  a  copper  warming-pan  and  a  gigantic  coal- 
box,  weighing  nearly  two  hundred  pounds  ?  And 
these  useless  abominations  are  to  hamper  the  opera- 
tions of  our  troops,  and  to  wear  out  our  sailors  in 
the  labour  of  the  disembarkment  of  such  disgraceful 
lumber !  Should  we  unhappily  in  some  future  political 
annexation  send  a  military  force  to  Spitzbergen,  we 
shall  probably  omit  the  warming-pans  and  fuel,  but 
supply  a  shipload  of  refrigerators  and  "  Family  Ice 
Machines." 

A  number  of  these  cast-iron  coal-boxes  had  been 
converted  into  cisterns  by  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley,  which 
surrounded  the  wooden  Government  House  at  Lef  kosia, 
and  were  kept  full  of  water  in  case  of  fire.  So  practical 
a  general  would  have  been  the  first  to  condemn  the 
palpable  absurdity  of  coal-boxes,  even  had  coals  been 
required ;  surely  they  could  have  been  laid  upon  the 
bare  ground  by  the  tent  side,  instead  of  causing  the 
inconvenience,  labour,  and  ridicule  of  importing  such 
outrageous  nonsense. 

When  the  famous  military  invasions  of  Cyprus  took 
place  in  historical  times  there  were  certainly  neither 
warming-pans  nor  coal-boxes,  either  with  Richard  Coeur 


262  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


de  Lion  of  England  in  1191,  or  with  the  Turks  under 
Lala  Mustafa  in  1570. 

Both  these  experienced  warriors  selected  Limasol 
for  the  point  of  disembarkation,  and  landed  their  troops 
and  horses  upon  the  sandy  beach  in  Akrotiri  Bay. 
Richard  I.  was  on  his  way  to  the  third  crusade ;  but 
his  fleet  having  been  dispersed  by  a  storm,  several 
vessels  had  been  driven  on  the  south  coast  of  Cyprus, 
where,  instead  of  receiving  the  hospitality  usually 
exhibited  to  shipwrecked  mariners,  his  people  were 
robbed  and  thrown  into  prison  at  Limasol  by  the  king, 
Isaac  Comnenus.  One  of  the  principal  vessels  of  the 
fleet  which  conveyed  Berengaria,  daughter  of  the  King 
of  Navarre,  who  was  the  betrothed  of  Richard  and 
was  accompanied  by  his  sister  the  Queen  Dowager 
of  Sicily,  took  shelter  in  Akrotiri  Bay  and  anchored. 
It  appears  that  the  wily  Isaac  Comnenus  endeavoured 
to  persuade  the  ladies  to  land,  in  the  hope  of  effecting 
their  capture,  and  probably  extorting  a  heavy  ransom  ; 
but  suspicion  being  aroused,  the  ship  set  sail  and  was 
shortly  met  by  Richard's  own  vessel. 

Upon  hearing  that  his  shipwrecked  crews  had  been 
detained  and  imprisoned  Richard  immediately  steered 
for  Limasol,  and,  with  his  well-known  impetuosity  of 
character,  lost  no  time  in  disembarking  his  troops,  and 
shortly  brought  the  Greek  army  to  action  under  Isaac 
Comnenus  and  utterly  defeated  them.  The  Latin 
inhabitants  of  Limasol  had  already  thrown  open  their 
gates,  and  Richard,  after  his  victory,  returned  laden 
with  spoils,  including  the  imperial  standard,  which 
was  eventually  hung  in  St.  Edmund's  Chapel,  Suffolk. 

This  first  battle  took  place  at  Kolossi,  near  to 
Limasol.  After  the  flush  of  victory  an  additional 
warlike  impulse  was  given  to  his  forces  by  the  arrival 


IX.] 


From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  263 


of  the  chivalrous  Guy  de  Lusignan,  ex-king  of 
Jerusalem,  accompanied  by  the  Princes  of  Antioch 
and  Tripoli.  The  marriage  of  Richard  with  Beren- 
garia  took  place  at  Limasol ;  she  was  there  crowned 
Queen  of  England  by  the  Bishops  of  York  and 
Evreux,  Richard,  who  did  not  prolong  his  honey- 
moon when  an  opportunity  of  fighting  was  at  hand, 
immediately  collected  his  forces,  and,  together  with  Guy 
de  Lusignan,  marched  for  the  interior,  where  Isaac 
Comnenus  had  re-organised  his  army.  Guy  de 
Lusignan  with  a  division  of  the  troops  marched  upon 
Famagousta,  which  surrendered  without  resistance, 
while  Richard  attacked  the  Greek  army  under  Isaac 
Comnenus  in  the  plain  of  Messaria.  Owing  to  the 
disparity  of  force  the  battle  was  for  some  time  doubt- 
ful, and  at  length  the  two  leaders  engaged  in  personal 
encounter,  resulting  in  the  capture  of  Isaac  Comnenus 
and  the  total  discomfiture  of  his  army.  The  city  of 
Lefkosia  at  once  threw  open  its  gates  to  the  victorious 
Richard, 

The  next  disembarkation  of  troops  at  Limasol,  on 
jst  July,  1570,  under  the  Turkish  general  Lala  Mustafa, 
was  upon  a  much  larger  scale,  as  the  expedition  com- 
prised 70,000  infantry,  30,000  cavalry,  and  200  cannon. 
With  this  force  Lefkosia  was  assaulted,  and  taken  after 
a  few  weeks'  siege ;  and  the  inhabitants  were  subjected 
to  inconceivable  atrocities,  20,000  of  both  sexes  being 
mercilessly  butchered  during  the  sack  which  followed 
the  capture  of  the  town.  The  Turkish  forces  then 
marched  upon  the  great  stronghold  of  Cyprus,  Fama- 
gousta. This  powerful  fortress  was  invested  by  land 
and  sea,  and  although  defended  by  only  7000  Vene- 
tian troops,  under  their  gallant  commandant.  General 
Bragadino,    it   sustained   a  vigorous   siege   for   more 


264  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


than  ten  months,  until  the  heroic  garrison  was  reduced 
by  sickness  and  starvation.  During  this  time  an 
extraordinary  apathy  was  exhibited  by  Venice,  which 
should  at  all  hazards  have  determined  upon  the  relief 
of  this  important  position.  On  23rd  January,  1571, 
the  only  effective  expedition  entered  Famagousta 
with  1600  men,  provisions  and  ammunition,  with  a 
squadron  commanded  by  the  Venetian  Marc  Antonius 
Quirini ;  but  on  the  ist  August  following,  the  provisions 
and  ammunition  having  been  completely  expended,  it 
became  absolutely  necessary  to  negotiate  the  terms  of 
capitulation.  A  detailed  description  of  this  interesting 
siege  is  given  in  the  work  of  Richard  Knolles,  The 
General  History  of  the  Turks^  published  in  London 
in  1638. 

The  conditions  of  surrender  stipulated  that  "  The 
garrison  should  march  out  with  five  guns  and  the 
horses  of  the  commanders,  and  should  be  conveyed  to 
Candia  in  the  ships  and  at  the  expense  of  the  Turks ; 
that  the  inhabitants  should  be  free  to  quit  the  town 
and  take  their  property,  and  that  those  who  preferred 
to  remain  should  be  unmolested  both  as  regards  their 
persons  and  their  goods."  ^ 

General  di  Cesnola  writes,  page  39  : — 

"  These  conditions  were  eagerly  accepted  by  the 
treacherous  Mustafa ;  hostages  were  exchanged ; 
Turkish  vessels,  as  stipulated,  entered  the  port  of 
Famagousta,  and  took  on  board  all  those  who  wished 
to  leave  the  island ;  nothing  remained  but  the  formality 
of  delivering  the  keys  of  the  city  to  the  victor. 

"  On  5th  August  General  Bragadino,  accompanied 
by  his  lieutenants  Baglioni,  Martinengo,  and  Quirini, 
went  to  the  Turkish  camp,  and  was  politely  received 
by  Mustafa.      After   the   delivery   of  the   keys,  and 

^  Captain  Savile's  Cyprus^  p.  22. 


IX.l 


From  Baffo  to  Limasol.  265 


when  General  Bragadino  had  risen  to  take  leave,  the 
vile  Turk  asked  him  for  special  hostages  for  the  safe 
return  from  Candia  of  the  Turkish  vessels  which  were 
to  convey  him  and  his  men  thither ;  Bragadino  refused 
this,  as  not  having  been  stipulated  in  the  accepted 
conditions  of  his  surrender.  Then  Mustafa  accused 
him  of  bad  faith,  and  of  having  put  to  death  fifty 
Turkish  pilgrims  after  he  had  surrendered,  which  was 
indignantly  denied  by  Bragadino.  The  pasha,  becoming 
enraged,  ordered  the  four  Venetians  to  be  put  to  death, 
and  in  a  few  minutes  Generals  Baglioni,  Martinengo, 
and  Quirini  were  executed  in  the  presence  of  Braga- 
dino, for  whom  a  more  terrible  death  was  reserved. 
The  executioner  cut  off  his  nose  and  ears ;  three  times 
he  was  made  to  lay  his  head  upon  the  block,  as  if 
to  be  beheaded,  then,  heavily  chained,  was  thrown 
into  a  dark  dungeon,  and  left  for  nine  days  in  that 
miserable  condition. 

"  On  the  tenth  day,  by  order  of  Mustafa,  Bragadino 
was  brought  out  of  prison  and  made  to  carry  earth 
for  the  repair  of  the  fortifications  during  several  hours, 
after  which,  more  dead  than  alive,  the  heroic  soldier 
was  tied  to  a  stake,  and,  in  the  presence  of  the  ferocious 
Mustafa,  was  flayed  alive.  His  skin,  stuffed  with  hay, 
was  sent  with  the  heads  of  the  other  three  Venetians 
as  presents  to  the  Sultan." 

The  two  most  important  conquests  of  Cyprus  have 
thus  commenced  from  the  port  of  Limasol,  which 
is  destined  to  become  of  primary  importance  as  the 
great  commercial  representative  town  of  this  now 
poor  island. 

We  remained  sixteen  days  at  Limasol,  during  which 
time  we  had  the  pleasure  of  the  society  of  Colonel 
and  Mrs.  Warren  and  their  young  family,  which  we 
thoroughly  appreciated  after  the  exile  from  civilised  life 
and  ladies  since  we  had  quitted  Kyrenia  and  Lefkosia. 
The  leading  officials  and  some  Grieek  merchants  of  the 


266  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  IX. 


town  were  good  enough  to  call  frequently,  and  kindly 
afforded  much  information ;  at  the  same  time  they  did 
not  conceal  their  disappointment  at  the  terms  of  the 
occupation,  which,  by  draining  the  island  of  its  revenue, 
completely  paralysed  the  good  intentions  of  the 
English  government ;  the  best  resolutions  being 
valueless  unless  supported  by  the  necessary  capital. 

Although  I  received  every  politeness  from  the 
inhabitants,  who  appeared  to  think  I  had  some  official 
mission,  it  was  not  difficult  to  trace  a  general  tone 
of  complaint  and  dissatisfaction,  which  was  perfectly 
natural  under  the  existing  reghne.  Although  nothing 
could  exceed  the  pains  taken  by  Sir  Garnet  Wolseley 
and  all  his  officials  to  introduce  reforms  for  the  general 
welfare  of  the  people,  the  task  was  simply  impossible 
where  various  interests  were  conflicting,  and  no  hybrid 
government  could  at  once  destroy  existing  abuses  and 
at  the  same  time  establish  laws  suitable  to  all  classes. 
This  general  reform  required  an  independent  ad- 
ministration, untrammelled  by  mongrel  relations  with 
the  Turk,  and  equally  free  from  the  vexatious  labyrinths 
of  English  jurisprudence.  I  do  not  wish  to  catalogue 
the  long  list  of  grievances  which  have  been  entrusted 
to  my  unwilling  ears,  but  there  are  some  which  are 
so  utterly  destructive  to  the  interests  of  the  country 
and  the  government,  that  I  have  no  hesitation  in 
describing  them. 

The  great  trade  of  Limasol  is  wine,  as  the  district 
exhibits  the  industry  first  encouraged  by  the  Venetians ; 
this,  as  the  great  money-producing  cultivation,  opposed 
to  Mussulman  prejudices,  has  been  burdened  with 
extortionate  taxation  and  restrictions,  which  have  not 
yet  been  relieved  by  the  British  administration. 


CHAPTER  X. 

THE   WINE   DISTRICT   OF   LIMASOL. 

In  the  fifteenth  century  the  Cyprian  vines  were 
selected  for  the  now  celebrated  vineyards  of  Madeira ; 
nothing  can  better  exemplify  the  standard  of  industry 
and  consequent  prosperity  than  the  vine,  when  we 
regard  the  identical  plant  in  the  hands  of  the  Portu- 
guese and  in  its  original  home  in  Cyprus  under  the 
Turkish  administration.  The  first  historical  notice  of 
the  vine  occurs  when  Noah,  stranded  upon  Mount 
Ararat,  took  advantage,  upon  the  first  subsidence  of  the 
waters,  to  plant  a  vineyard  ;  and,  according  to  the  curt 
biblical  description,  it  grew,  produced,  and  the  wine 
intoxicated  the  proprietor,  all  within  a  few  days.  It 
may  not  have  occurred  to  the  wine  trade  that  this 
biblical  fact  proves  that  the  consumption  of  wine  had 
been  among  the  first  assumed  necessities  of  the  human 
race;  if  Noahs  first  impulse  upon  landing  suggested 
the  cultivation  of  the  vine,  he  was  restoring  to  the  world 
a  plant  that  had  been  considered  so  absolutely  impor- 
tant that  he  must  have  provided  himself  with  either 
buds  or  cuttings  in  great  quantities  when  he  selected 
his  animals  for  the  Ark  before  the  Deluge.  If  this  is 
true,  the  use  of  wine  must  have  been  pre-historical, 
and  its  abuse   historical ;    the   two  purposes   having 


268  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


continued  to  the  present  day.  It  may  therefore  be 
acknowledged  that  no  custom  has  been  so  universal 
and  continuous  as  the  drinking  of  wine  from  the  earliest 
period  of  human  existence.  The  vine  is  a  mysterious 
plant ;  it  is  so  peculiarly  sensitive  that,  like  a  musical 
instrument  which  produces  harmony  or  discord  at  the 
hands  of  different  performers,  the  produce  of  the  same 
variety  is  affected  by  the  soil  upon  which  the  plants 
are  grown.  Thus  ten  thousand  young  vines  may  be 
planted  upon  one  mountain,  all  of  the  same  stock ;  but 
various  qualities  of  wine  will  be  produced,  each  with  a 
special  peculiarity  of  flavour,  according  to  the  pecu- 
liarities of  soil.  The  same  estate,  planted  with  the 
same  vines,  may  produce  high  class  wines  and  others 
that  would  hardly  command  a  market,  if  the  soil  varies 
according  to  the  degrees  of  certain  localities.  It  would 
now  be  impossible  to  produce  Madeira  wine  in  Cyprus, 
although  the  plants  might  be  imported  and  cultivated 
with  the  greatest  attention.  When  the  vines  were 
shipped  from  Cyprus  and  planted  in  Madeira  during 
the  rule  of  the  Venetians,  it  must  not  be  supposed  that 
those  vines  had  ever  produced  wine  of  the  well-known 
Madeira  flavour  and  quality ;  that  flavour  was  the 
result  of  some  peculiarity  in  the  soil  of  the  new  country 
to  which  the  vines  had  been  transplanted,  and  there 
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  rich  and  extremely  luscious 
variety  known  in  Cyprus  as  "  Commanderia  "  was  the 
parent  vine  of  the  Madeira  vineyards. 

It  is  well  known  that  the  costly  experiments  of  a 
century  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope  have  verified  the 
fact  that  the  vine  is  the  slave  of  certain  conditions  of 
soil,  which  impart  to  this  extremely  delicate  and  sen- 
sitive plant  a  special  flavour  that  is  incorporated  with 
the  wine,  and  can  never  be  eradicated.     The  vines  of 


X.I 


The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  269 


the  Cape,  although  of  infinite  variety,  produce  wines 
with  a  family  taint  which  is  a  flavour  absorbed  from 
the  soil.  Any  person  who  knows  Constantia,  the 
luscious  wine  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  will  at 
once  detect  the  soup f on  of  that  flavour  in  every 
quality  of  wine  produced  in  the  colony.  It  may  there- 
fore be  accepted  that  the  flavour  of  wines  depends 
upon  the  soil ;  thus  it  would  be  impossible  for  a 
vine-grower  to  succeed  simply  by  planting  well- 
known  superior  varieties  of  vines,  unless  he  has  had 
practical  experience  of  the  locality  to  be  converted 
into  vineyards. 

This  fact  is  thoroughly  exhibited  in  Cyprus,  where 
the  peculiarities  of  soils  are  exceedingly  remarkable, 
and  cannot  fail  to  attract  attention,  each  of  these 
qualities  of  earth  producing  a  special  wine. 

If  a  planter  establishes  a  vineyard  he  will  naturally 
select  a  certain  variety  of  vine,  and  a  corresponding 
situation  that  will  ensure  a  marketable  quantity  of 
wine ;  thus  in  Cyprus  a  comparatively  small  area  of 
the  island  is  devoted  to  the  cultivation  of  the  grape, 
which  is  comprised  chiefly  within  the  district  of 
Limasol.  No  wine  is  made  in  the  Carpas  district, 
nor  to  the  north  of  the  Carpasian  range  of  Jurassic 
limestone;  there  are  no  vineyards  of  importance  in 
the  western  district ;  or  yet  in  the  plain  of  Messaria, 
except  upon  the  western  border,  in  the  neighbourhood 
of  Dali,  towards  the  Makhaeras  mountain. 

Although  there  are  many  varieties  of  Cyprus  wines, 
there  is  one  prevailing  rule  :  the  white  commanderia, 
a  luscious  high-flavoured  wine,  is  grown  upon  the  red- 
dish chocolate-coloured  soil  of  metamorphous  rocks. 
The  dark  red,  or  black  astringent  wines,  are  produced 
upon  the  white  marls  and  cretaceous  limestone.     The 


270  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP: 


quantity  produced  is  large,  and  the  dark  wines  can  be 
purchased  retail  in  the  villages  for  one  penny  the 
quart  bottle ! — and  in  my  opinion  are  very  dear  at 
the  money. 

According  to  the  official  returns  kindly  supplied  to 
me  by  Mr.  Robson,  the  chief  of  customs,  the  following 
list  represents  the  declared  duty-paid  production  from 
1877  to  1879. 

Spirits —         Commanderia —        Black  Wines — 
Okes  2f  lbs.  Okes  2}  lbs.  Okes  2}  lbs. 

1877-1878  .      .      155,45^  117,000  2,500,000 

1878-1879  .      .      430,000  300,000  6,000,000 

Spirit  is  valued  at  about  2  J  Piastres  the  Oke  \  The  rate  of  exchange 
Commanderia    ,,      ,,2        99  v     f     9  Piastres  to  i^.  = 

Black  Wines      „       „     ij      jf  >»     J      ;£i8o  steriing. 

It  will  be  observed  that  an  immense  difference  is 
represented  in  the  yield  of  the  two  years.  This  is  to 
be  accounted  for  by  the  superabundance  of  rains  in 
1 8 78- 1 8 79,  which  caused  a  great  quantity,  but  bad 
quality,  of  juice,  and  the  wine  of  this  vintage  is  so 
inferior  that  a  large  proportion  is  turning  to  vinegar, 
and  can  be  used  for  no  other  purpose. 

The  habit  of  calculating  by  low  quantities,  as  "  okes," 
as  the  French  reckon  in  *'  francs/*  is  at  first  sight  per- 
plexing to  the  English  mind,  and  conveys  an  erroneous 
impression  of  the  actual  results.  If  the  population  of 
Cyprus  is  about  200,000,  the  maximum  wine-crop 
of  6,000,000  okes  would  only  yield  30  okes,  or  60 
ordinary  wine-bottles,  to  each  person  during  the  year. 
The  local  consumption  is  exceedingly  small,  which  can 
only  be  accounted  for  by  the  general  poverty  of  the 
population. 

The  exports  are  directed  principally  to  the  various 
ports  of  the  Levant,  Constantinople,  Smyrna,  Alex- 
andria, in  addition  to  Trieste,  and  parts  of  Southern 


X.I  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  271 

Italy.  Some  of  the  dark  wines  are  shipped  to  Mar- 
seilles, for  the  well-known  establishment  at  Cette,  where 
they  are  used  for  mixing  with  other  wines.  It  should  at 
once  be  understood  that  no  quality  of  Cyprus  wines  is 
suitable  to  the  English  market,  as  they  are  generally 
shunned  even  by  the  English  residing  in  the  island, 
where  their  extreme  cheapness  might  tempt  people 
into  the  bad  taste  of  consuming  them.  At  the 
same  time,  these  wines  are  well  appreciated  by  the 
native  population,  especially  the  dark  astringent 
qualities. 

The  difficulty  of  introducing  a  new  wine  is  well 
known  to  English  wine-merchants,  and  the  mysteries 
of  the  trade  would  somewhat  astonish  the  innocent 
would-be  connoisseur.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  palate  must  be  educated  to  enjoy  fine  dry  wines, 
precisely  as  the  ear  must  be  instructed  before  it  can 
appreciate  classical  music.  There  is  a  harmony  in  the 
senses  of  hearing,  smell,  and  taste  which  is  the  result 
of  civilised  life  ;  this  may  be  right  or  wrong  physically, 
as  the  nerves  become  more  delicate  and  sensitive,  which 
may  affect  the  brain  more  or  less  directly.  There  can  be 
no  doubt  that  it  affects  the  stomach.  Certain  civilised 
persons  prefer  game  in  a  state  approaching  to  decomposi- 
tion ;  I  have  seen  savages  who  enjoy  flesh  when  actually 
putrid,  and  above  all  horrors,  fish  when  stinking !  Such 
food  would  disgust  the  civilised  man  who  prefers  his 
game  ''  high,"  and  would  perhaps  kill  other  civilised 
people  whose  palates  and  stomachs  have  been  educated 
to  avoid  impurities.  In  the  same  manner  the  palate 
must  be  educated  for  wines  or  other  drinks.  I  gave 
an  old  priest  a  bottle  of  Basss  pale  India  ale;  he 
could  not  drink  half  a  glassful  but  rejected  it  as  picro 
(bitter) ;  the  same  old  man  enjoyed  his  penny-a-bottle 


272  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


black  Cyprus  wine,  reeking  of  tar  and  half-rotten 
goat-skins,  in  which  it  had  been  brought  to  market — a 
stuff  that  I  could  not  have  swallowed  !  It  must  therefore 
be  borne  in  mind  when  judging  of  Cyprian  wines,  that 
"  English  taste  does  not  govern  the  world/'  Although 
the  British  market  would  be  closed  to  the  coarse  and 
ill-made  wines  of  Cyprus,  there  are  other  markets 
which  accept  them  gladly,  and  would  absorb  them  to  a 
high  degree,  were  they  improved  by  superior  cultivation 
and  manufacture. 

At  the  same  time  that  the  produce  of  Cyprus  is  now 
unsuitable  to  the  English  market,  there  is  no  reason 
why  it  should  be  excluded  at  a  future  time,  when 
scientific  culture  shall  have  enhanced  the  quality.  It 
should  be  remembered  that  the  poorer  classes  of 
Great  Britain  would  be  immensely  benefited  by  a 
beverage  that  should  be  within  their  reach  in  price, 
and  at  the  same  time  be  sufficiently  invigorating  with- 
out the  direct  intoxicating  properties  of  spirits  or  the 
sleepy,  heavy,  and  thirst-increasing  qualities  of  beer. 
If  Cyprus  is  at  some  future  time  to  become  a  British 
colony,  the  wine  trade  will  be  the  principal  source  of 
industry,  and  should  be  developed  by  the  govern- 
ment with  every  possible  encouragement  to  the  pro- 
prietors of  vineyards.  An  improved  quality  of  wine 
will  not  necessitate  an  additional  price,  but,  on  the 
contrary,  the  wine-growing  resources  of  the  island  are 
so  irrepressible  that  they  have  withstood  the  oppres- 
sion of  the  past  and  present,  and  when  relieved  of  this 
incubus,  not  only  should  the  quality  improve,  but  the 
price  should  be  reduced.  In  this  case,  should  the 
Cyprian  produce  be  favoured  by  a  nominal  import 
duty  in  England,  the  wine  will  be  within  the  reach  of 
the  poorer  classes,  and  may  ameliorate  that  crj^'ing  evil 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  273 

of  our  country,  *^  intoxication,"  by  weaning  the  spirit- 
drinker  to  a  more  wholesome  drink. 

It  must  never  be  supposed  by  the  most  sanguine 
that  Cyprian  wines  will  be  fashionable  among  the 
upper  classes  in  England.  I  do  not  think  they  will 
ever  surpass  Marsala  or  many  of  the  Cape  wines. 
English  people,  as  a  rule,  object  to  cheap  wines,  or  at 
least  they  are  reserved  concerning  the  price,  should 
cheap  wine  be  upon  their  table.  It  is  a  dangerous 
thing  to  mention  the  cost  of  any  wine,  even  to  your 
nearest  friend ;  although  he  might  have  enjoyed  it 
when  he  thought  it  must  have  tost  you  yis.  the  dozen, 
he  will  detect  some  unpleasant  peculiarity  when  you  may 
foolishly  have  confided  to  him  that  it  only  cost  you  36^., 
or,  worse  still,  24s.  He  will  possibly  suggest  to  you 
on  the  following  morning  that  "  something  disagreed 
with  him  during  the  night,  but  he  does  noi  think  it 
was  the  24s.  wine."  Here  is  the  fault  of  Iialf-edtuated 
palates ;  they  expect  too  much,  and  are  guided  by 
fancies.  The  same  person  might  be  beguiled  into  the 
belief  that  the  24^.  wine  was  very  superior  if  he  had 
been  deceived  by  an  assurance  that  it  cost  *]2S,  There 
are  really  very  few  amateurs  who  could  value  un- 
known wines  by  the  test  of  their  own  palates;  but 
the  chilly  climate  of  England  is  adverse  to  light 
wines,  and  necessitates  a  full  body,  with  considerable 
strength. 

The  sherries  are  always  fortified  by  an  addition  of 
between  30  to  40  per  cent,  of  alcohol  before  they 
are  shipped  to  England,  without  which  they  would 
be  unsaleable  ;  as  to  our  taste,  they  would  be  empty 
and  vapid.  We  must  therefore  make  a  considerable 
allowance  when  judging  of  Cyprus  wines  in  their 
present    extremely   rude    and    uncultivated   position. 


2  74  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Nothing  IS  added,  and  the  following  concise  description 
will  account  for  their  disagreeable  peculiarities. 

There  are  no  roads  in  Cyprus  in  the  mountainous 
wine-producing  districts,  therefore  all  agricultural  pro- 
ducts must  be  conveyed  upon  the  backs  of  mules  up 
and  down  the  steepest  and  most  dangerous  rocky 
tracks,  apparently  more  fitted  for  goats  than  other 
animals.  A  mule  will  travel  in  this  rough  country 
with  a  load  of  250  lbs.  This  serious  difficulty 
of  transport  will  account  for  the  rude  and  ancient 
method  of  conveying  wine  in  goat-skins.  "  No  man 
will  put  new  wine  into  old  bottles,*'  referred  to  this 
system  of  employing  skins  instead  of  casks,  or  other 
receptacles  that  could  be  cleaned  and  rendered  taste- 
less. The  goat-skin  would  quickly  rot,  unless  it  was 
prepared  by  a  species  of  tar ;  thus  not  only  is  the 
naturally  unpleasant  flavour  of  the  skin  imparted  to  the 
wine,  but  the  mixture  of  tar  renders  it  completely 
abominable  to  any  palate  that  has  not  been  educated 
to  receive  it.  Let  any  person  conceive  the  result  of 
pouring  ten  or  twelve  gallons  of  Chateau  Lafitte 
into  an  old  and  dirty  goat-skin  thoroughly  impregnated 
with  tar,  and  carrying  this  burden  upon  one  side  of 
a  mule,  balanced  by  a  similar  skin  on  the  other  side 
filled  with  the  choicest  Johannisberger.  This  load, 
worth  at  least  ;^7o  or  ;^8o  at  starting,  would  travel 
for  two  days  exposed  to  a  broiling  sun,  and  would  lie 
for  several  days  before  it  would  be  turned  into  the  vat 
of  the  merchant  at  Limasol.  By  that  time,  according 
to  civilised  taste,  it  would  be  perfectly  valueless  and 
undrinkable ;  if  the  best  wines  in  the  world  can  be 
thus  destroyed  by  a  savage  means  of  transport,  what 
must  the  effect  be  upon  such  inferior  qualities  as  the 
crude  produce  of  Cyprus  ?  Common  sense  will  suggest 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  275 

that  the  first  step  towards  improvement  will  be  the 
completion  of  roads  throughout  the  wine  districts, 
that  will  enable  the  two-wheeled  native  carts  to  convey 
the  wine  in  barrels  direct  from  the  growers  to  the 
merchants'  stores  at  Limasol. 

We  will  now  commence  at  the  beginning,  "the 
cultivation  of  the  vine,"  and  trace  its  progress  until 
the  wine  is  ready  for  the  consumer. 

As  I  have  already  described,  the  commanderia  and 
the  black  wines  are  produced  by  the  two  different 
qualities  of  soils,  but  there  is  no  difference  in  the 
altitudes.  The  new  British  road  from  Limasol  to 
Platraes,  thirty  miles,  cuts  directly  through  the  principal 
vine  districts  of  the  country.  From  the  deep  valley 
and  roaring  torrent,  up  to  the  mountain-tops  ex- 
ceeding 4000  feet  above  the  sea-level,  the  country 
is  green  with  vineyards  in  the  middle  or  latter  end 
of  May  ;  not  a  yard  of  available  land  is  lost.  When 
the  shoots  are  about  three  feet  long  and  have  shown 
the  embryo  bunches,  a  number  of  men  enter  the  vine- 
yard with  switches  and  knock  off  the  tender  ends  of 
the  runners,  which  in  a  gentler  method  of  cultivation 
would  be  picked  off  with  the  finger  and  thumb-nail. 
Sometimes  goats  are  turned  in  to  nibble  off  the  shoots 
in  order  to  save  labour,  and  at  the  same  time  to  feed 
the  animals ;  they  of  course  damage  the  vines,  but  the 
Cypriote  thinks  the  system  pays.  The  young  vines  are 
never  staked  and  tied  as  in  Europe,  but  are  allowed 
to  take  their  chance,  and  the  heavy  bunches  in  many 
instances  rest  upon  the  dusty  ground. 

There  is  seldom  rain  after  May,  but  a  few  showers 
are  favourable  at  this  particular  season  when  the  young 
bunches  are  in  blossom.  In  the  best  vineyards  atten- 
tion is  given  to  clearing  away  the  weeds  after  rain, 

T  2 


276  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


but  usually  the  vines  are  left  to  nature  after  the 
grapes  have  formed,  as  the  hot  sun  and  drying  wind 
are  sufficient  to  keep  down  adverse  vegetation. 

The  grapes  ripen  towards  the  middle  or  end  of 
August.  The  commanderia  grapes  are  collected  and 
spread  upon  the  flat  mud-plastered  roofs  of  the  native 
houses,  and  are  exposed  for  several  days,  until  they 
show  symptoms  of  shrivelling  in  the  skin,  and  the  stalks 
have  partially  dried  :  they  are  then  pressed.  By  this 
time  many  of  the  grapes  that  have  been  bruised  by  this 
rough  treatment  have  fermented,  and  the  dust  and  dirt 
of  the  house-top,  together  with  flies  and  other  insects, 
have  adhered  to  the  impure  heap.  It  has  been 
imagined  by  some  travellers  that  the  grapes  are  pur- 
posely dried  before  pressing  ;  on  the  other  hand,  I  have 
been  assured  by  the  inhabitants  that  their  only  reason 
for  heaping  and  exposing  their  crop  upon  the  house- 
tops is  the  danger  of  leaving  it  to  ripen  in  the 
vineyard.  None  of  the  plots  are  fenced,  and  before 
the  grapes  are  sufficiently  ripe  for  pressing  they  are 
stolen  in  large  quantities,  or  destroyed  by  cattle,  goats, 
mules,  and  every  stray  animal  that  is  attracted  to  the 
fields.  The  owner  of  the  vineyard  accordingly  gathers 
his  crop  by  degrees,  a  little  before  the  proper  time, 
and  the  grapes  are  exposed  upon  the  house-tops  to 
ripen  artificially  in  the  sun.  In  this  manner  the  quality 
is  seriously  damaged  ;  but  the  natives  will  not  acknow- 
ledge it  any  more  than  the  Devonshire  farmers,  who 
leave  their  apples  in  heaps  upon  the  ground  for  many 
weeks,  rotting  and  wasp-eaten,  before  they  are  carried 
to  the  pound  for  the  grinding  of  cider.  The  grapes, 
having  been  trodden  by  men  with  large  boots,  are 
pressed,  and  the  juice  of  the  commanderia  is  placed  in 
jars  capable  of  holding  from  seventy  to  one  hundred 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  277 

gallons.  The  refuse  of  skins  and  stalks  is  laid  upon 
one  side  to  ferment  for  the  manufacture  of  raki,  or 
spirit,  by  distillation.  The  fermentation  of  the  juice 
proceeds  in  the  earthen  jars,  and  is  guided  according 
to  the  ideas  of  the  proprietor  ;  when  he  considers  that 
it  has  continued  to  a  degree  sufficient  for  the  strength 
and  quality  of  the  wine,  it  is  checked  by  the  addition 
of  powdered  gypsum.  Here  is  one  of  the  patent 
errors  of  the  manufacture  of  commanderia  as  a  wine 
suitable  to  English  tastes.  The  grape-juice  is  natur- 
ally so  rich  in  saccharine,  that  it  is  luscious  and 
vapid  to  an  excess ;  this  superabundant  amount  of 
sugar  would  be  converted  into  alcohol  in  the  natural 
process  of  fermentation  if  unchecked,  and  by  the 
chemical  change  the  wine  would  gain  in  strength  and 
lose  in  sweetness.  Should  this  process  be  adopted,  the 
result  would  no  longer  represent  the  wine  now  accepted 
as  commanderia,  which  finds  a  ready  market  in  the 
Levant,  owing  to  its  peculiar  sweetness  and  rich  fla- 
vour, although  disagreeable  to  Europeans  ;  there  would 
accordingly  be  a  risk  attending  such  experiments, 
which  the  grower  would  consider  unnecessary,  as  he 
already  commands  the  sale. 

The  large  jars  in  which  the  wine  ferments  are  porous 
and  unglazed ;  the  usual  waterproofing  is  adopted, 
in  the  shape  of  tar,  with  which  the  inside  is  thickly 
coated.  There  are  many  jars  of  a  century  old,  which 
have  lost  the  flavour  by  extreme  age,  and  have  become 
liquid-proof  by  the  choking  of  the  pores  with  the  crust 
deposited  by  the  wine ;  these  are  highly  prized,  and 
the  wine  after  fermentation  is  left  upon  its  own  lees  to 
ripen ;  or,  according  to  our  ideas,  it  is  entirely 
neglected.     It  is  never  racked  into  other  vessels. 

There  is  an  unusual    peculiarity  in   commanderia; 


278  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


instead  of  the  colour  becoming  paler  by  great  age, 
it  deepens  to  an  extraordinary  degree.  The  new 
wine  is  the  ordinary  tint  of  sherry,  but  it  gradually 
becomes  darker,  until  after  forty  or  fifty  years  it  is 
almost  black,  with  the  syrup-like  consistence  of  new 
honey.  Wine  of  this  age  and  quality  is  much 
esteemed,  and  is  worth  a  fancy  price.  I  was  pre- 
sented with  several  bottles  of  the  famous  old  Cyprus 
growths  of  commanderia,  morocanella,  and  muscadine, 
by  the  kindness  of  Mr.  Lanites,  who  is  largely  inter- 
ested in  the  trade  at  Limasol.  The  old  commanderia 
was  sufficiently  sweet  to  occasion  a  roughness  in  the 
throat,  and  each  quality  was  far  too  luscious  for 
English  taste,  but  might  have  been  agreeable  to 
sip  like  Tokay,  by  soaking  a  sponge  biscuit.  The 
utterly  rude  method  of  producing  native  wines, 
which  can  scarcely  be  dignified  by  the  term  "  manu- 
facture," is  a  sufficient  explanation  of  their  inferior 
quality,  but  at  the  same  time  it  is  a  proof  of  the  great 
wine-producing  power  of  Cyprus,  where,  in  spite  of 
ignorance  and  neglect,  an  extensive  commerce  has 
been  established,  which  adds  materially  to  the  revenue 
of  the  island.  If  these  badly-made  wines  have 
founded  an  important  trade,  there  is  every  reason 
to  expect  a  corresponding  extension  when  scientific 
principles  shall  have  resulted  in  a  superior  quality. 

The  black  wines  receive  even  less  care  than  the 
commanderia ;  the  grapes  are  trodden,  and  are  thrown 
into  receptacles  to  ferment,  together  with  the  skins  and 
stalks.  This  bruised  mass,  after  lying  a  certain  time 
exposed  to  fermentation,  is  pressed,  and  the  muddy 
juice  is  stowed  in  the  large  tarred  jars  to  ripen  for 
a  few  months,  which,  according  to  Cyprian  taste,  are 
sufficient  to  prepare  it  for  consumption.     The  stalks 


X.] 


The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  279 


and  black  skins,  being  extremely  rich  in  tannin,  have 
imparted  to  the  wine  a  powerful  astringency  and  the 
exceedingly  dark  colour  which  so  disagreeably  dis- 
tinguish this  common  quality.  The  growers  imagine 
that  the  extra  amount  of  tannin  is  preservative,  without 
which,  their  wine  might  deteriorate  during  the  rough 
treatment  to  which  it  is  subjected  by  transport  and 
exposure ;  and  to  their  specially-educated  palates 
this  astringency  is  agreeable,  combined  with  the 
strong  flavour  of  tar,  which  completely  excludes  it 
from  the  consumption  of  Englishmen.  Neither  the 
commanderia  nor  any  other  quality  of  wine  is 
subjected  to  the  process  of  "fining;"  when  issued 
from  the  stores  of  the  merchant,  therefore,  a  really 
bright  clear  wine  is  never  met  with.  The  black 
wines  could  be  considerably  improved  by  allowing 
them  to  settle  in  large  vats,  and  by  a  series  of 
rackings  into  other  vessels,  as  they  become  clearer 
by  depositing  their  impurities.  I  have  tried  this 
experiment  upon  a  small  scale  with  success,  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  simple  manual  labour 
of  drawing  off  the  clear  wine  to  enable  it  to  fine  itself 
by  precipitating  the  albuminous  matter  that  has  been 
fixed  by  the  superabundant  tannin,  would  render  the 
"  mavro,"  or  black  wine,  drinkable  ;  always  excepting 
the  presence  of  tar,  which  can  at  once  be  avoided  by 
the  substitution  of  casks  for  the  earthen  jars  and 
goat-skins. 

At  the  expiration  of  the  vintage  the  vines  remain 
uncared-for  throughout  the  autumn  and  winter,  cattle 
and  goats  invade  them  ad  libitum  so  long  as  their 
leaves  are  attractive,  and  no  operation  is  performed 
until  the  month  of  March.  At  this  time  they  are 
pruned  close  to  the  stocks,  which  are  generally  about 


•  

28o  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


one  foot  above  the  ground,  and  two  eyes  are  supposed 
to  be  left  upon  each  spur.  But  I  have  watched  the 
cultivators  during  the  process,  and  observed  the  usual 
neglect ;  sometimes  the  spurs  were  shaved  off  com- 
pletely, without  a  bud  for  next  years  shoot,  and  at 
others  too  many  buds  were  left,  that  would  weaken 
and  disfigure  the  parent  stem.  The  instrument  for 
pruning  was  similar  to  a  very  small  reaping-hook,  with 
a  handle  about  a  foot  in  length,  and  the  delicate 
operation  was  conducted  with  a  rapidity  that  rendered 
the  necessary  care  impossible.  After  the  clearing  of 
the  refuse  the  land  is  carefully  ploughed  and  cleaned. 

I  visited  some  large  wine-stores  in  Larnaca,  where 
casks  of  about  300  gallons  each  were  arranged  in  long 
parallel  rows,  all  filled  with  commanderia  of  various 
ages    and  corresponding  prices. 

Having  now  traced  the  liquor  from  the  original 
vineyard  into  the  merchant's  store,  it  will  be  in- 
teresting to  examine  the  network  of  obstructions  and 
extortions  to  which  the  unfortunate  wine-grower  is 
exposed  before  he  can  deliver  his  produce  into  the 
hands  of  the  merchant,  either  at  Limasol  or  elsewhere 

Consul  Riddell  reported  officially  in  1875  as 
follows  : — 

"  The  wine  trade  of  Cyprus  was  last  year  ex- 
ceptionally large,  owing  to  the  abundant  produce  of 
the  vineyards  in  1874.  The  outcome  of  grapes  and 
wines  in  1875  ^^^  ^ot  exceed  an  ordinary  average, 
and  growers  still  complain  loudly  that  the  imposts 
upon  wines,  reckoning  from  the  grape  to  the  vat,  are 
so  heavy — amounting  to  about  35  or  40  per  cent. — and 
their  imposition  and  collection  so  very  arbitrary  and 
unequal,  that  many  vineyards  are  being  abandoned. 

"  The  government,  it  is  said,  have  under  considera- 
tion the  anomalous  state  of  the  wine  trade  in  Cyprus, 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  281 

with  a  view  to  relieve  and  redress  the  many  grievances 
of  which  consumers  complain,  and  in  the  meanwhile 
the  collection  of  the  imposts  is  suspended.  Should 
the  result  prove  to  be  the  elaboration  of  a  fair, 
reasonable,  and  consistent  scale  of  duties,  the  revival 
of  the  wine  trade  may  be  reasonably  looked  forward 
to,  and  under  sound  regulations  and  intelligent 
fostering  the  trade  would  undoubtedly  become  a  large 
and  profitable  one  to  this  island." 

In  1876,  the  year  following  the  promised  reform, 
Consul  Pierides  reports  : — 

• 

"  The  quantity  of  all  sorts  of  wine  produced  was 
much  below  that  of  1875.  The  principal  shipments 
were  made  to  Trieste  and  Venice.  The  collection  of 
the  imposts,  which  was  for  a  short  time  suspended,  has 
recommenced,  and  the  manner  in  which  it  is  conducted 
is  still  arbitrary  and  vexatious,  while  remonstrances 
have  hitherto  been  of  no  avail.  It  is  time  for  the 
government  to  put  an  end  to  these  grievances,  which 
indeed  threaten  to  destroy  one  of  the  best  resources 
of  the  island.*' 

In  1877  Consul  Watkins  reports  : — 

"The  manufacture  of  wine  here  is  greatly  on  the 
decrease ;  for,  owing  to  all  sorts  of  unreasonable 
regulations,  and  to  the  vexatious  mode  of  their 
application,  cultivators  now  prefer  making  their  grapes 
into  rasins." 

Here  we  have  consecutive  official  reports  from  three 
different  British  consuls  during  1875- 1877.  The 
British  occupation  took  place  in  1878 — I  am  writing 
in  1879 — and  although  the  grievances  of  the  Cyprian 
wine-growers  were  sufficiently  aggravated  to  call  for 
the  vigorous  reports  and  protests  of  three  different 
British    consuls   during    the   Turkish   administration, 


282  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

no  amelioration  of  their  condition  has  been  effected 
during  twelve  months  of  British  rule. 

Captain  Savile,  in  his  excellent  digest  of  all  that 
concerns  this  island,  writes  :— 

"  The  grievances  connected  with  the  culture  of  the 
vines  and  the  manufacture  of  wine  which  are  alluded 
to  in  the  consular  reports,  existed  as  long  ago  as  1863, 
and  were  then  mentioned  by  Consul  White,  who  says 
that  the  peasants  were  even  then  beginning  to  find  it 
more  profitable  to  sell  their  grapes,  or  to  make  them 
into  raisins,  rather  than,  by  turning  them  into  wine,  to 
subject  themselves  to  the  duty  lately  imposed  over  and 
above  the  tithe  and  export  duties,  which  were  collected 
in  a  very  harassing  manner.  The  growers  have  had 
to  pay,  under  the  tax  called  *  dimes,'  an  eighth  part  of 
the  produce  of  grapes  to  the  treasury  ;  but  this  could 
not  be  taken  in  kind,  so  a  money  value  was  fixed  yearly 
by  the  local  medjlis,  or  fixed  tribunal ;  but  as  the  assess- 
ment was  based  on  the  market-price  at  the  chief  town 
of  the  district,  instead  of  the  value  at  the  place  of 
growth,  this  tax,  instead  of  being  about  12^  per  cent., 
in  reality  amounted  to  over  20  per  cent.  Then  again 
when  the  wine  was  made,  an  excise  duty  of  10  per 
cent,  was  levied,  and  on  export,  a  tax  of  8  per  cent, 
had  to  be  paid.  The  natural  consequence  of  these 
excessive  impositions  has  been  the  diminution  of  a 
culture  for  which  the  island  is  particularly  adapted. 
Consul  Lang  suggests  that  it  might  be  wise  to  free  this 
production  from  all  tax,  except  a  proper  export  duty." 

How  easy  it  is  to  be  generous  at  the  expense  of 
others  ! — here  are  (including  Consuls  White  and  Lang) 
no  less  than  five  British  consuls  who  have  been  pro- 
testing against  this  instance  of  oppression  and  injustice 
since  the  year  1862,  and  it  would  naturally  have  been 
expected  that  one  of  our  first  acts  upon  assuming  the 
government  of  Cyprus  would  have  been  to  abolish  an 
abuse  that  had  excited  the  remonstrances  of  our  own 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  283 

representatives.  The  fact  is  that  we  were  reduced  to 
a  financial  ebb  of  the  gravest  character  by  the  absorp- 
tion at  Constantinople  of  an  unfair  proportion  of  the 
revenue,  and  our  government  was  not  in  a  position 
to  risk  a  reduction  of  income  by  such  an  important 
change  in  the  system  of  taxation.  The  Cypriotes  have 
nevertheless  derived  a  collateral  advantage  from  the 
change  of  rulers,  as  the  extreme  grievances  to  which 
the  consular  reports  allude  were  aggravated  by  the 
farmers  of  taxes,  who  no  longer  exist.  These  people 
were  extortioners  of  the  worst  description,  and  the 
bribes  and  extra  payments  extracted  from  the  vine- 
growers  are  represented  in  the  gross  sum  mentioned 
as  amounting  to  40  per  cent,  upon  the  general  produce 
of  the  vineyard.  The  reforms  already  established  by 
the  abolition  of  the  nefarious  system  of  tax-farming 
have  relieved  the  vine-growers  from  the  most  serious 
oppression,  but  sufficient  abuses  remain  to  demand 
a  radical  change,  if  the  industry  for  which  Cyprus  is 
specially  adapted  by  nature  is  to  be  encouraged. 

As  I  have  described  in  outline  the  rude  method  of 
cultivation  and  the  manufacture  of  wine  from  the  first 
bursting  of  the  young  vines,  I  will  now  examine  the 
system  of  arbitrary  interference  to  which  the  vine- 
grower  is  exposed  through  the  successive  stages  of 
his  employment. 

The  first  tax  is  perfectly  fair,  as  it  is  calculated 
according  to  the  rateable  value  of  the  land,  which 
is  divided  into  three  classes.  These  qualities  of  soil 
vary  in  the  valuation  from 

No.  I  =  500  piastres  the  donum  (about  half  an  acre)  to 
No.  3  =  100        „  „ 

The  malliea^  or  annual  tax  upon  these  valuations  per 
donum,  is  2  per  cent. 


284  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


When  the  grapes  are  nearly  ripe,  they  must  be 
valued  before  the  proprietor  has  a  right  to  gather  his 
crop.  He  is  obliged  to  present  himself  at  the  govern- 
ment office  at  Limasol,  many  miles  from  his  estate,  to 
petition  for  the  attendance  of  the  official  valuer,  called 
the  "mahmoor,"  upon  a  certain  day.  This  may  or 
may  not  be  granted,  but  at  all  events  one  or  two 
days  have  been  expended  in  the  journey. 

Should  the  mahmoor  arrive,  which  he  frequently 
does  not,  at  the  appointed  time,  the  medjlis,  or  council 
of  the  villages,  appoints  a  special  arbitrator  to  repre- 
sent their  (the  vine-growers)  interests,  and  he  accom- 
panies the  government  official  during  his  examination 
of  the  vineyards.  After  a  certain  amount  of  haggling 
&.nd  discussion,  an  approximate  weight  of  grapes  is 
agreed  upon,  the  mahmoor  declaring  the  ultimate 
amount  far  above  the  actual  crop  per  donum  :  and  the 
tax  is  determined  according  to  their  quality,  resolved 
into  two  classes  : — 

No.  I,  the  commanderia,  and  other  superior 

varieties,  pay        .        .        .         25  paras  the  oke. 
No.  2,  all  other  grapes    .         .         .         .         1 6      „  „ 

But  these  taxes  are  modified  according  to  the  abun- 
dance and  quality  of  the  grapes  in  each  successive 
season,  being  sometimes  more  or  less  than  the  figures 
given.  The  crop  is  generally  ripe  towards  the  end  of 
August,  and  the  tax,  having  been  determined,  may  be 
paid  during  the  following  January,  March,  or  May. 

The  grapes  having  been  officially  valued,  and  the  rate 
of  taxation  established,  the  proprietor  may  gather  his 
crop,  and  press  it  for  wine.  The  rows  of  enormous 
jars  are  at  length  filled  :  eventually  the  wine  is  ready 
for  sale. 


X.] 


The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  285 


Now  comes  the  necessity  for  a  second  journey 
to  Limasol,  perhaps  thirty  or  forty  miles  distant,  to 
petition  for  the  government  official  to  measure  the  con- 
tents of  the  jars  ;  without  such  an  examination,  no  wine 
can  be  removed  from  the  stores. 

This  is  another  loss  of  time  to  the  grower,  and 
occasions  an  expense  for  himself  and  mule  for  the 
journey. 

The  jars  are  at  length  measured;  but  before  any 
wine  can  be  removed  a  general  examination  of  the 
quality  of  the  district  produce  must  be  completed,  and, 
an  average  value  having  been  determined,  the  tax 
of  10  per  cent,  must  be  paid  ad  valorem. 

After  these  necessary  forms  have  been  gone  through, 
with  the  attendant  vexatious  delays  and  expensive 
journeys,  entailing  loss  of  time  for  men  and  mules, 
the  vine-grower  wishes  to  carry  his  wine  to  market. 

Before  a  drop  can  be  removed  he  must  present 
himself  at  the  official  quarters,  either  at  Kilani  or  one 
other  village,  to  obtain  a  teskeri^  or  permit,  for  the 
quantity  that  he  wishes  to  convey.  After  this  trouble 
and  delay  he  returns  to  his  home  with  the  official 
permit  to  remove  to  a  specified  place  (generally 
Limasol)  a  fixed  quantity  of  wine,  which  is-  calculated 
by  the  load;  one  load  equals  128  okes  of  2f  lbs. 
avoirdupois,  and,  packed  in  goat-skins,  is  carried  by 
two  mules. 

The  vine-grower  himself  weighs  his  wine  when  the 
skins  are  filled,  and  he  starts  upon  his  long  journey 
over  steep  mountain  rocky  paths  to  Limasol,  where 
he  will  sell  his  load  to  the  wine-merchant,  who 
subsequently  will  ship  it  to  the  various  ports  of 
the  Mediteranean. 

The  sun  is  burning;    and  the  wine,  contained   in 


286  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


tarry  goat-skins,  is,  after  a  few  hours'  exposure  to  the 
heat,  about  the  temperature  of  the  hottest  bath  ;  thus 
absorbing  the  vile  smells  of  the  primitive  but  secure 
package.  The  owner  is  well  aware  that  the  value  of 
his  wine  will  depend  upon  the  flavour,  therefore  he 
hurries  his  mules  forward,  in  order  to  deliver  it  as 
quickly  as  possible  to  the  merchant,  before  it  shall  be 
contaminated  by  the  skins. 

Upon  arrival  at  Limasol  it  may  be  late,  and 
nothing  can  be  done.  His  wine  must  be  weighed  by 
the  government  official  at  the  public  weighing-place, 
specially  assigned  for  the  wine  trade  ;  and  he  drives 
his  laden  and  tired  mules  to  the  yard.  Here  he  finds 
some  hundreds  of  mules  and  their  proprietors  in  a 
similar  position  to  himself;  however,  there  is  no  help 
for  it,  and  they  must  be  patient  through  the  night 
while  their  wine  is  imbibing  the  hateful  flavour  of 
the  goat-skins.  In  the  meantime  they  must  pur- 
chase food  for  their  mules  and  seek  quarters  for 
themselves. 

When  the  morning  appears  the  government  official 
has  enough  to  do,  and  as  a  certain  time  must  be  oc- 
cupied in  weighing  a  given  quantity,  the  day  wears 
away.  Every  man  has  to  present  his  teskeri,  or 
permit,  for  removal  from  his  village  to  Limasol  of  a 
specified  quantity  of  wine,  and  his  load  must  weigh 
that  prescribed  weight  upon  delivery.  His  scales  may 
not  have  been  exactly  in  harmony  with  those  of  the 
government  official ;  but-  should  the  quantity  exceed 
the  teskeriy  the  owner  must  pay  double  the  amount 
of  taxation. 

In  the  meantime,  during  the  wrangles  concerning 
discrepancies  in  weight,  mules  are  arriving  with  their 
loads,  their  owners  all  desirous  of  despatch,  and  the 


X.] 


The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  287 


hours  fast  wearing  away.  The  next  day  is  probably 
a  Greek  holiday,  and  all  the  merchants  stores  are 
shut  (there  is  a  Greek  holiday  at  least  once  a  week, 
— ^generally  twice).  The  unfortunate  vine-grower,  after 
waiting  patiently  in  despair,  discovers  that  he  must 
wait  still  longer.  At  length,  after  vexations  and 
delays,  he  draws  a  sample  of  wine  into  a  gourd-shell 
from  his  skins,  and  hands  it  to  the  merchant ;  who, 
having  made  a  wry  face  and  spat  it  out,  advises  him  to 
'*  throw  his  wine  into  the  sea,  as  it  is  undrinkable," 
having  remained  too  long  in  the  goat-skins  exposed  to 
the  sun.  A  most  respectable  informant  related  to  me 
the  total  loss  of  a  large  quantity  of  first-class  wine 
from  the  delay  thus  occasioned  at  Limasol.     .     .     . 

The  refuse,  after  pressing  the  grapes,  is  calculated  to 
yield  upon  distillation  a  proportion  of  100  okes  of 
spirit  for  every  ten  loads  (1280  okes)  of  wine.  This 
pays  a  tax  of  eight  paras  the  oke,  which,  added  to  the 
10  per  cent,  upon  the  wine,  makes  a  total  of  15  per 
cent,  upon  wine  and  spirit  included. 

The  vine-grower,  irrespective  of  the  size  of  his  vine- 
yard, is  allowed  200  okes  'duty  free  for  his  own 
consumption ;  and  when  his  jars  are  measured  to 
determine  the  contents  for  taxation  an  allowance  is 
deducted  for  the  muddy  deposit  at  the  bottom. 

It  will  at  once  be  seen  by  this  enumeration  of  the 
delays  and  vexations  occasioned  by  this  arbitrary 
system,  that  it  is  barely  possible  for  the  vine-grower 
to  calculate  the  actual  cost  of  his  wine,  as  the  loss  of 
time,  expense  of  journeys,  and  uncertainty  of  the 
amount  of  delays  are  entirely  beyond  his  control.  It 
is  therefore  extremely  difficult  to  discover  the  exact 
financial  position  of  the  cultivator,  but  from  the  data 
in  my  possession  it  is  nearly  a$  follows  : — 


288  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


One  donum  of  land,  which  is  supposed  to  measure  a  square  of 
fifty  yards,  would  be  about  half  an  English  acre ;  and  this  area  is 
calculated  to  yield  an  average  of  one  load  and  a  half  of  wine 
=  192  okes  =  5281bs. 

The  value  of  the  ordinary  wine  of  the  country  will  average  about 
90  piastres  the  load,  wholesale  price  ;  therefore  one  donum  will  repre- 
sent a  gross  value  of  i^  load  at  90     .        ,  =  I3S  piastres  (Cr.) 

Against  this  annual  produce  the  natives 
calculate  as  follows: — 

Piastres. 

Per  donum — Expenses  of  cultivating  the 

land,  ue.  ploughing,  weeding,  &c.      .  25 

Pruning  vines 10 

Gathering  crop 10 

Feeding  labourers 10 

Carriage  of  wine  to  market    ,        .         -25 

Total  government  dues,  including  malliea .  2  5 


(Dr.)  105        13s  (Cr.) 


This  leaves  a  balance  in  favour  of  the  producer  of  only  30  piastres, 
about  5^.  per  donum. 

But  it  must  be  remembered  that  in  the  above  calcu- 
lation his  own  personal  labour  has  not  been  considered  ; 
neither  the  wear  and  tear  of  implements,  jars,  loss 
by  accidents  of  seasons,  when  the  wine  turns  sour, 
neither  is  any  margin  allowed  for  extraneous  casualties. 

At  first  sight  the  position  appears  impossible,  as  a 
stranger  would  ask  the  pertinent  question,  "  Why,  if 
vineyards  do  not  pay,  does  the  owner  continue  the 
occupation  ?  Why  does  he  not  substitute  some  other 
form  of  cultivation  ?  "  The  answer  is  simple.  Where- 
ever  the  conditions  of  the  locality  permitted,  they  have 
already  done  so ;  but  vineyards  are  cultivated  where 
no  other  crops  could  grow ;  upon  the  sides  of  inclines 
so  steep  that  it  is  even  difficult  to  stand  ;  and  these 
positions,  although  peculiarly  adapted  for  the  cultivation 
of  the  vine  by  reason  of  the  soil,  would  be  absolutely 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  289 

worthless  for  other  uses.  The  vine  requires  little  water 
after  the  young  grapes  have  formed,  and  the  burning 
sun-light  which  is  favourable  for  their  development 
would  destroy  all  cereals  upon  those  steep  inclinations, 
where  a  casual  shower,  instead  of  soaking  into  the 
earth  and  nourishing  the  crops,  rushes  quickly  over 
the  surface  and  drains  superficially  into  the  deep  vale 
below.  The  land  of  the  vineyards  is  wine  land,  and 
adapted  specially  by  the  quality  of  the  soil  and  the 
peculiarity  of  climate  for  the  production  of  grapes. 
In  addition  to  the  impossibility  of  converting  this  land 
to  other  purposes  of  cultivation  would  be  the  loss  to 
the  proprietor  of  all  his  plant,  buildings,  jars,  &c.,  &c., 
which  would  become  valueless. 

This  is,  as  well  as  I  can  describe  the  grievances,  the 
real  position  of  the  vine-grower.  Although  since  the 
British  occupation  he  has  escaped  the  extra  extortion 
of  the  tax-farmer,  he  is  still  the  slave  of  petty  vexations 
and  delays,  which  strangle  him  in  red-tape  and  render 
his  avocation  a  misery  ;  without  profit,  leaving  only  a 
bare  subsistence.     What  is  to  be  done  } 

The  first  necessary  change  is  a  system  of  roads,  only 
sufficiently  wide  to  admit  of  the  native  two-wheeled 
carts,  with  sidings  every  half  mile  to  enable  them  to 
pass  when  meeting.  Our  usual  English  mistake  has 
been  made,  in  the  only  two  metalled  highways  that  the 
engineers  have  constructed  in  Cyprus,  "that  every- 
thing must  be  English ; "  thus  we  have  two  costly 
roads  of  great  width  from  Larnaca  to  Lefkosia,  and 
from  Limasol  to  Platraes,  which  are  entirely  unsuit- 
able to  the  requirements  of  the  country ;  and  as  there 
are  no  branch  roads  in  communication,  the  people 
are  hardly  benefited,  as  they  cannot  reach  the  main 
artery  with  wheeled  conveyances. .   The  military  road 

u 


290  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


from  Limasol  might  as  well  be  a  railway  without  any 
branch  traffic,  as  it  is  entirely  independent  of  other 
roads  :  thus,  should  carts  be  established  to  convey  the 
wine  of  the  district  to  Limasol,  they  must  be  loaded 
by  mules  that  will  bring  the  produce  from  the  roadless 
vineyards  in  the  usual  manner  by  goat-skins,  and  the 
wine  will  be  tainted  as  before.  A  network  of  cheap 
useful  cart-tracks  can  be  easily  made  throughout  the 
wine  districts,  and  they  must  be  made  before  any 
improvement  in  the  quality  of  the  wines  can  take 
place.  The  goat-skins  and  the  tarred  jars  must  be 
thrown  aside  before  any  change  can  be  expected : 
these  cannot  become  obsolete  until  the  necessary  roads 
for  the  conveyance  of  casks  shall  be  completed. 

If  we  regard  the  present  position  of  the  vine- 
grower,  we  must  advise  him  thus  : — "  The  first  necessity 
is  to  improve  your  quality,  and  thus  ensure  a  higher 
price.  It  costs  no  more  either  in  labour  or  in  plant 
to  produce  a  good  wine  than  to  continue  your  present 
rude  method  of  production.  You  may  double  the 
value  of  your  wine  by  an  improved  system,  without 
adding  materially  to  your  expenses  ;  you  will  then 
have  a  large  margin  for  profit,  which  will  increase  in 
the  same  ratio  as  the  quality  of  your  wine." 

The  grower  will  reply,  "  We  must  have  roads  for 
carts  if  we  are  to  substitute  barrels  for  goat-skins. 
So  long  as  the  mule-paths  are  our  only  routes  we 
must  adhere  to  the  skins,  which  we  acknowledge  are 
destructive  to  the  quality  of  the  wine  and  reduce 
our  profits.     Give  us  roads." 

This  is  a  first  necessity,  and  it  is  simply  ridiculous 
to  preach  reforms  of  quality  to  the  cultivators  so  long 
as  the  present  savage  country  remains  roadless.  It 
is   the    first   duty   of    the   government    to   open   the 


X.]  The  Wine  District  of  Limasol.  291 

entire  wine  district  by  a  carefully  devised  system  of 
communication :  for  which  a  highway  rate  could  be 
established  for  repairs. 

If  this  simple  work  shall  be  accomplished  the 
goat-skins  will  disappear ;  or  should  some  cultivators 
cling  to  the  ancient  nuisance,  a  tax  could  be  levied 
specially  upon  wine  skins,  which  would  ensure  their 
immediate  abolition,  A  new  trade  would  at  once 
be  introduced  to  Cyprus  in  the  importation  of  staves 
for  casks,  and  the  necessary  coopers.  The  huge  jars 
that  are  only  suggestive  of  the  "  Forty  Thieves " 
would  be  used  as  water-tanks,  and  the  wine  would 
ripen  in  casks  of  several  hundred  gallons,  and  be 
racked  off  by  taps  at  successive  intervals  when  clear. 
The  first  deposit  of  tannin  and  fixed  albumen  would 
remain  at  the  bottom  of  No.  i  vat,  the  second  deposit 
after  racking  in  No.  2 ;  and  the  wine  which  is  now 
an  astringent,  cloudy,  and  muddy  mixture  of  impurities, 
would  leave  the  vine-growers  store  bright,  and  fit 
for  the  merchants  vats  in  Limasol,  and  command  a 
more  than  double  price.  This  is  a  matter  of  certainty 
and  not  conjecture.  Should  the  black  wines  be  care- 
fully manufactured,  they  will  be  extensively  used  for 
mixing  with  thin  French  wines,  as  they  generally 
possess  strength  and  body  in  large  proportion  to  their 
price. 

It  will  be  universally  agreed  that  the  making  of  the 
roads  is  the  first  necessity ;  but  if  the  island  is  in  such 
financial  misery  that  so  important  a  step  must  be 
deferred,  the  grievances  of  the  vine-growers  should 
be  immediately  considered.  The  first  question  to  the 
cultivator  would  be,  '*  What  reforms  do  you  yourself 
suggest  ? "  He  replies,  "  Fix  an  annual  rate  per 
donum,  and  leave  us  free  to  send,  our  wine  wherever 

u  2 


292  Cyprus  in  1879. 


(CHAP.X. 


we  choose,  without  the  abominable  vexations  and 
delays  caused  by  the  present  arbitrary  system ;  let 
the  tax  per  donum  include  every  charge  for  which  we 
shall  be  liable  :  we  shall  then  know  at  once  the  limit 
of  our  liability.**  I  cannot  see  any  practical  difficulty 
in  such  an  arrangement;  a  highway  rate  might  be 
an  extra  when  the  roads  should  be  completed.  A 
small  export  duty  at  the  various  ports  would  become 
a  material  source  of  increase  to  the  revenue  when  the 
wine  trade  became  invigorated  and  extended  by 
government  encouragement,  and  although  such  a  duty 
would  indirectly  affect  the  grower  in  the  price  which 
the  merchant  would  pay  for  the  new  wine,  it  would  be 
a  collateral  tax  that  would  not  be  felt  individually. 

Unless  the  present  oppressive  system  shall  be 
abolished  the  wine  trade  of  Cyprus  will  languish,  and 
an  industry  that  may  be  profitably  extended  to  an 
important  degree  will  share  the  fate  of  a  commercial 
and  agricultural  depression  which  has  resulted  from 
the  vague  conditions  of  the  British  occupation,  and 
from  which  no  recovery  can  be  expected  until  con- 
fidence in  the  future  prospects  of  the  island  shall  be 
established. 


CHAPTER   XL 

FROM    LIMASOL    TO    THE    MOUNTAINS. 

The  barley  harvest  was  in  active  operation,  and  the 
fields  around  our  camp  were  crowded  with  men,  women, 
and  children,  all  hard  at  work,  but  producing   small 
results  compared  with  an  equal  expenditure  of  Euro- 
pean labour.     Their  sickles  were  large  and  good,  but 
a  great  proportion  of  the  crops  were  either  broken  off 
by  hand  or  were  dragged  out  by  the  roots,  and  the 
earth  that  adhered  was  carelessly  dusted  off"  by  a  blow 
against  the  reaper's  boots.     In  this  dry  climate  there 
was  no  necessity  for  piling  the  sheaves,  but  the  small 
bundles  were  at  once  laden  upon  donkeys  and  also 
conveyed  in  the  two-wheeled  carts  to  the  threshing- 
ground,  upon  which  it  would  remain  until  valued  for 
taxation   by   the    government    official.       In    the    dry 
atmosphere  of  Cyprus,  Syria,  Egypt,  &c.,  the  straw 
breaks   easily,  and   beneath   the   sharp   flints   of  the 
ancient   threshing-harrow   in    present   use   is   quickly 
reduced  to  the  coarse  chaff  known  as  "  tibbin,'*  which 
forms    the    staple    article    of   food    for    horses    and 
all    cattle.       Taking   advantage   of    the   numbers    of 
people  congregated  in  the  fields,  some  itinerant  gipsies 
with  a  monkey  and  performing  bears  were  camped 
beneath    the    caroub-trees,   about   half    a   mile    from 


294  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


our  position.  The  bears  were  the  Syrian  variet)'. 
Throughout  Cyprus  the  gipsies  are  known  as  tinners 
of  pots  and  makers  of  wooden  spoons,  which  seems 
to  be  the  normal  occupation  of  their  tribe  throughout 
the  world  ;  they  have  also  a  character  for  a  peculiar 
attachment  to  fowls  and  any  other  small  matters  that 
belong  to  private  individuals  which  may  be  met  with 
during  their  wanderings. 

The  beans  of  the  caroub-trees  were  already  large, 
and  promised  a  good  crop  in  spite  of  the  dry  weather. 
The  roots  of  these  evergreens  penetrate  to  a  great 
depth,  and  obtain  nourishment  from  beneath  when  the 
surface  soil  is  perished  by  drought.  I  have  never  seen 
a  caroub  overthrown  by  the  wind,  although  the  extremely 
large  head  that  is  at  all  seasons  covered  with  leaves 
must  offer  a  great  resistance.  The  fruit  of  this  tree 
{Ceratonia  siliqua)  is  already  an  important  export  from 
Cyprus,  and  if  the  cultivation  is  encouraged  there  can 
be  no  doubt  of  aa  enormous  extension  of  the  trade. 
The  tree  is  indigenous  to  the  island,  but  in  its  wild 
state  is  unproductive  ;  it  simply  requires  grafting  to 
ensure  a  crop.  The  wild  young  trees  are  generally 
transplanted  into  the  desired  positions,  and  then  grafted 
from  the  cultivated  species,  but  there  is  no  reason  why 
they  should  not  be  grafted  in  situ.  The  olives,  which 
are  also  indigenous,  might  be  treated  in  a  similar 
manner  to  render  the  crown-lands  productive,  which 
are  now  mere  jungles  of  shrubs  and  trees  in  their 
natural  state.  I  shall  reserve  further  remarks  upon 
this  subject  for  a  chapter  specially  devoted  to  "  Woods 
and  Forests." 

The   caroub   at   present    commands    an    extensive 

.  market.      The   fruit   is   usually   known   commercially 

as   the    "  locust-bean ; "    the    taste    is  a  compound  of 


xi.^  From  Limasol  to  the  M.ountains.  295 

treacle  and  Spanish  liquorice,  and  would  generally 
be  appreciated  by  children,  monkeys,  pigs,  and  cattle. 
The  Cassia  fistula  of  Ceylon  resembles  it  somewhat 
in  flavour,  but  the  Ceratonia  siliqua  is  free  from  the 
medicinal  properties  of  the  former  tree.  Since  the 
government  monopoly  was  abolished  in  1827  the 
trade  has  received  an  impetus,  and  this  extension 
due  to  freedom  is  an  example  to  our  present  govern- 
ment in  their  relations  to  the  oppressive  system 
connected  with  the  wine  trade. 

According  to  the  consular  reports  the  crop  of  1872 
was  about  10,000  tons,  which  sold  free  on  board  at 
£\  lOj-.  per  ton.  At  that  time  the  chief  purchaser 
was  Russia,  and  the  locust-beans  were  exported  to 
various  positions  upon  the  Black  Sea.  In  1875 
England  became  a  large  consumer,  and  I  believe 
the  well-known  "Thorley's  Patent  Food  for  Cattle " 
contains  a  considerable  amount  of  this  nutritive  sub- 
stance. The  influence  upon  the  market  of  a  demand 
from  England  raised  the  exports  in  1875  to  18,000 
tons.  A  fluctuation  took  place  in  1876,  and  although 
the  crop  was  deficient,  the  prices  fell  to  £2  13J.  dd. 
per  ton  free  on  board.  This  reaction  was  probably 
due  to  the  large  stocks  on  hand  in  England,  purchased 
at  a  high  rate,  from  £\  \os.  to  ^5  per  ton,  which  had 
driven  Russian  competition  out  of  the  market ;  there- 
fore the  1876  gathering  found  but  few  purchasers.  In 
1877  the  yield  was  13,500  tons,  and  the  price  rose 
from  £2  13^.  td,  to  £'^  55-.,  and  at  length  to  £6^  per 
ton,  free  on  board. 

The  average  produce  of  a  tree,  taking  the  mean 
of  all  sizes,  would  be  about  84  lbs.  or  three- 
quarters  of  a  hundredweight ;  allowing  the  mean 
crop  of  five  years   to    be    13,000   tons,    this    would 


296  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


give  the  number  of  productive  trees  in  Cyprus  as 
346,666,  or  in  round  numbers  350,000,  which,  at  eight 
trees  to  the  acre  =  43>750  acres  of  caroub-trees.  I 
do  not  think  as  a  rule  that  a  larger  number  than  eight 
trees  are  to  be  found  upon  an  acre,  as  it  is  the  custom 
to  cultivate  cereals  upon  the  same  ground,  therefore 
the  caroubs  are  thinly  planted.  This  calculation 
cannot  be  accepted  as  exhibiting  the  actual  position 
of  the  trees,  as  a  very  large  proportion  are  not 
planted  in  order,  but  grow  independently  and  pro- 
miscuously, and  are  productive  simply  as  originally 
wild  trees  that  have  been  grafted.  Should  Cyprus 
belong  bonci'fide  to  England,  machinery  for  crushing 
and  pressing  the  locust-beans  will  be  established  on 
the  spot,  which,  by  compressing  the  bulk,  will  reduce 
the  freight  and  materially  lessen  the  price  when 
delivered  in  England.  In  travelling  through  Cyprus 
nothing  strikes  the  observation  of  the  traveller  more 
forcibly  than  the  neglect  of  tree-planting.  The  caroub 
is  an  indigenous  production  volunteering  its  services 
to  man,  and  producing  an  important  revenue;  there 
are  immense  tracts  of  land  which  by  their  rocky 
nature  are  unfit  for  the  general  purposes  of  husbandry, 
at  the  same  time  the  rich  soil  in  the  interstices  is 
eminently  adapted  for  the  cultivation  of  the  caroub. 
Such  lands  are  at  the  present  moment  abandoned 
to  a  growth  of  jungle,  among  which  this  irrepressible 
tree  dominates  all  other  vegetation,  but  in  its  wild 
state  remains  unproductive.  The  neighbourhood  of 
Limasol  is  for  many  miles  richly  ornamented  by  these 
welcome  shade-producers,  and  presents  an  example 
of  what  other  portions  of  the  island  might  become. 

During   my  stay  at   Limasol   I   was  several   times 
invaded    by  a  crowd  of   people  from  a  neighbouring 


XI.]  From  Limasol  to  the  Mountains.  297 

village,  with  complaints  upon  an  assumed  injustice 
connected  with  their  water-supply.  It  was  in  vain 
that  I  assured  them  of  my  unofficial  capacity ;  they 
were  determined  to  have  their  say,  and,  according  to 
their  threat,  to  '^telegraph  to  Victoria^'  unless  they 
could  obtain  redress.  I  referred  them  to  Colonel 
Warren,  R.A.,  the  chief  commissioner  of  their  dis- 
trict, who  had  already  been  sufficiently  perplexed  with 
their  case.  It  appeared  that  a  stream  flowing  from 
the  mountains  had  nearly  two  centuries  ago  been 
diverted  into  an  artificial  channel  by  the  inhabitants 
of  Kolossi  and  others  for  the  purpose  of  irrigating  the 
various  lands  in  succession,  according  to  the  gradations 
of  their  levels.  This  water  had  become  a  right,  and 
the  value  of  all  lands  thus  irrigated  had  been  appraised 
in  proportion.  According  to  their  story,  some  years 
ago  a  Greek  who  commanded  capital  purchased  an 
estate  at  Kolossi,  and  having  made  a  journey  to  Con- 
stantinople, where  he  remained  for  some  years,  he  took 
the  opportunity  of  bribing  some  high  officials  to  obtain 
for  him  an  irade  from  the  Sultan,  giving  him  the  entire 
right  to  the  water-supply,  which  had  for  so  great  a 
length  of  time  been  the  acknowledged  property  of 
the  neighbouring  landholders.  This  trade  was  issued 
upon  the  plea  that  all  natural  waters  {i,e.  streams) 
belong  to  the  Sultan.  A  wide  field  for  litigation  was 
thus  opened,  and  the  Greek,  having  more  than  the 
usual  allowance  of  "  the  wisdom  of  the  serpent,"  lost 
no  time  in  investing  large  sums  in  the  corruption  of 
all  those  who  would  be  summoned  as  local  witnesses 
whenever  the  case  should  be  brought  before  the  ordi- 
nary tribunals.  The  result  was  that  after  great 
expense  in  the  costs  of  litigation,  an  appeal  to  the 
superior  court  during   the  British  administration  had 


298  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


been  favourable  to  the  plaintiffs,  and  the  Greek  pro- 
prietor was  held  to  be  legally  in  possession  of  all 
water-rights,  to  the  exclusion  of  the  original  owners. 
He,  however  offered  to  supply  them  with  water  for 
their  farms  at  a  fixed  rate  ;  whereas  they  had  hitherto 
enjoyed  that  free  right  for  upwards  of  a  century. 
This  loss,  or  abstraction,  of  so  important  a  supply, 
upon  which  the  actual  existence  of  the  farms  de- 
pended in  seasons  of  drought,  not  only  impoverished 
the  cultivators  during  the  present  year  of  famine,  but 
reduced  the  value  of  their  land  to  an  enormous  extent, 
as  farms  with  a  water-supply  are  worth  more  than 
quadruple  the  price  of  those  which  are  dependent  upon 
the  seasons.  Of  course  I  could  not  help  the  poor 
people ;  it  appeared  to  my  uneducated  sense  of  equity 
to  be  the  maximum  of  injustice.  The  question  hung 
upon  the  Sultans  right  to  the  natural  water-supply, 
which  I  believe  has  been  officially  declared  invalid ; 
by  what  other  right  the  monopoly  of  the  water  had 
been  conveyed  away  from  the  original  proprietors 
I  could  not  understand.  The  Greek  was  not  enjoying 
his  victory  in  absolute  peace  of  mind,  as  the  neighbour- 
ing farmers  avenged  their  legal  defeat  by  cutting 
holes  in  the  embankments  of  his  watercourses,  and 
thereby  nightly  flooding  their  own  fields,  which,  as 
the  channels  extended  for  many  miles,  would  have 
required  the  presence  of  more  than  all  the  police  of  the 
district  to  discover  the  offenders.  Upon  one  occasion 
upwards  of  forty  of  these  people  appeared  mounted 
upon  mules  around  my  camp,  to  urge  my  intercession 
on  their  behalf,  declaring  their  perfect  faith  in  the 
honour  and  good  intentions  of  the  English  authorities, 
but  at  the  same  time  lamenting  their  ignorance  of 
the  native  language,  which  threw  the  entire  power  into 


XI.] 


From  Limasol  to  the  Mountains.  299 


the  hands  of  the  dragomans  (interpreters),  of  whose 
character  they  spoke  in  terms  which  it  is  to  be  hoped 
were  highly  exaggerated.  The  people  begged  me  to 
ride  over  to  the  locality,  to  see  with  my  own  eyes  the 
position  of  affairs ;  which  I  arranged  to  do  sine  die, 
and  after  advising  them  to  exercise  a  temporary 
patience,  I  got  rid  of  the  deputation  without  suggest- 
ing "  that  under  the  existing  agrarian  dispute  they 
should  let  their  farms  to  some  enterprising  Irish 
tenants  from  Tipperary." 

I  mention  this  incident,  which  is  one  of  many  others 
upon  the  same  subject,  to  exhibit  the  complications 
that  have  always  arisen  from  the  contention  upon 
water-rights,  that  will  require  some  special  legis- 
lation.    .     .     . 

The  weather  was  becoming  warm  at  Limasol,  the 
thermometer  ranging  from  yd"  at  7  a.m.  to  83°  at 
3  P.M.  There  was  a  trouble  in  the  water-supply, 
as  that  for  drinking  purposes  had  to  be  conveyed 
by  donkeys  from  a  distance  of  three  or  four  miles. 
The  market  in  the  town,  although  well  arranged 
externally,  was  governed  by  peculiarly  restrictive 
municipal  regulations ;  the  price  of  meat  and  several 
other  articles  being  fixed  at  a  common  standard ! 
According  to  this  absurd  rule  inferior  mutton  would 
fetch  an  equal  price  with  the  best  quality :  the  natural 
consequence  ensued,  that  only  inferior  meat  was 
introduced,  to  the  exclusion  of  all  other.  The  supply 
of  fish  was  extremely  irregular,  and  they  were  generally 
small  and  dear.  Upon  some  occasions  we  purchased 
good  red  mullet,  also  a  larger  fish  of  the  bass  species ; 
but  there  were  only  a  few  fishermen,  who  required 
an  opposition  to  induce  activity  and  moderate  prices. 
Their  nets  were  made  of  exceedingly  fine  twine,  and 


300  Cyprus  in   1879.  ^chap. 

the  smallness  of  the  mesh  denoted  a  scarcity  of  the 
larger  species  of  fish. 

A  number  of  Maltese  settlers  were  arriving,  to 
whom  lands  had  been  granted  by  the  government  in 
the  neighbourhood  of  Limasol ;  this  excellent  arrange- 
ment will  have  the  effect  of  infusing  a  new  spirit  among 
the  people  by  the  introduction  of  fresh  blood,  and  the 
well-known  fishermen  of  Malta  will  of  themselves,  be 
a  boon  to  the  large  towns,  where  a  regular  demand 
may  be  depended  upon  at  a  reasonable  price. 

There  was  nothing  to  induce  a  longer  stay  at 
Limasol,  and  I  resolved  upon  Trooditissa  monastery 
as  the  position  for  a  mountain  residence  during  the 
summer  months.  Upon  Kiepert's  map,  which  is  the 
best  I  have  seen  of  Cyprus,  this  point  was  placed 
among  the  angles  in  the  various  crests  and  ridges  of 
the  Trood'os  mountain,  and  was  marked  by  measure- 
ment as  4340  feet  above  the  sea-level.  The  new 
government  road  extended  from  Limasol  to  Platraes, 
from  which  a  good  mule-path  led  to  the  camp  prepared 
for  the  20th  Regiment  and  the  Royal  Engineers  at 
an  altitude  of  5740  feet.  It  appeared  to  me  that  in 
north  latitude  35°  this  was  an  unnecessary  elevation. 
My  old  residence  at  Newera  Ellia  in  Ceylon  was  6210 
feet  above  the  sea  in  north  latitude  6°  30^  and  in  that 
low  latitude  we  had  sharp  frosts  at  night.  Any  heights 
approaching  6000  feet  in  north  latitude  35*^  would, 
I  imagined,  become  disagreeably  chilly  in  the  morning 
and  evening,  at  seasons  when  in  the  low  country  the 
heat  would  still  be  too  oppressive  for  a  return  from 
the  mountain  sanatorium. 

The  mean  temperature  at  Limasol  from  ist  May 
to  1 8th  had  been  at  7  a.m.  65°,  at  3  p.m.  78TT^^  during 
which  interval  there    had  been  sudden  variations  of 


XI.] 


From  Limasol  to  the  Mountains.  301 


temperature,  ranging  from  a  minimum  of  56''  to  84^  On 
the  nth  May,  having  engaged  twenty-three  mules  for 
our  tents,  baggage,  and  party,  we  started  from  Limasol 
for  Trooditissa.  The  dog  Merry,  that  had  been  bitten 
by  the  snake,  had  lain  for  days  in  a  state  of  stupor, 
black  and  swollen  ;  I  had  poured  quantities  of  olive- 
oil  down  his  throat,  as  he  could  not  eat,  and  at  length 
I  gave  him  a  dose  of  two  grains  of  calomel,  with  three 
grains  of  emetic  tartan  After  this  he  slowly  recovered  ; 
the  ear  that  was  bitten  mortified,  and  was  cut  off,  but 
the  dog  was  sufficiently  restored  to  accompany  us  upon 
the  march,  together  with  his  companion  Wise.  We 
were  now  about  to  enter  the  great  vine-growing  dis- 
trict of  Cyprus,  which  produces  the  large  exportations 
that  form  the  chief  industry  of  Limasol. 

At  a  distance  of  a  mile  from  our  camp  we  entered 
the  new  government  road  which  connected  Limasol 
with  Platraes,  thirty  miles  distant.  The  country  quickly 
assumed  an  agreeable  character ;  undulations  and  water- 
courses were  more  or  less  covered  with  trees,  and  the 
road  scarped  out  of  the  steep  sides  exhibited  the 
cretaceous  formation  similar  to  that  between  Larnaca 
and  Lefkosia.  Wild  lavender  was  just  blooming  upon 
many  portions  of  the  way,  while  along  the  rocky 
courses  of  ravines  the  oleanders  were  in  the  richest 
blossom.  The  road  was  furnished  with  mile-posts, 
and  the  mules  ambled  along  at  a  little  more  than  five 
miles  an  hour.  I  found  considerable  fault  in  the  low 
gradients  (one  in  thirty),  which  had  produced  a  road 
unnecessary  for  the  vehicles  of  the  country,  at  a  pro- 
portionate outlay ;  it  was  altogether  too  good,  and 
would  have  been  excellent  trotting-ground  for  a  light 
phaeton  and  pair.  AS  there  was  no  such  vehicle  in 
the  island,  the  beautifully  traced  highway  exhibited  a 


302  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


model  of  engineering  that  was  scarcely  appreciated  by 
the  natives,  who  invariably  took  the  short  and  direct 
cuts  to  avoid  the  circuitous  zigzags  in  descending  the 
numerous  valleys  and  in  rounding  the  deep  ravines. 
After  a  ride  of  twelve  miles  through  a  beautiful 
country,  well  wooded,  and  comprising  a  succession  of 
wild  hills  and  deep  gorges,  which  formed  torrents  in 
the  wet  season,  we  arrived  at  a  river  flowing  in  a 
clear  but  extremely  shallow  and  narrow  stream 
beneath  cliffs  of  cretaceous  limestone.  The  banks 
were  richly  clad  with  rosy  oleanders,  myrtles,  mastic 
shrubs  ;  and  the  shade  of  several  fine  old  plane-trees 
in  full  foliage  invited  us  at  once  to  halt  immediately 
upon  the  edge  of  the  rippling  stream.  This  spot  was 
known  as  Zigu,  where  an  ancient  stone  bridge,  with 
pointed  arches,  crossed  the  ravine  about  a  hundred 
paces  above  the  new  wooden  bridge  erected  by  the 
Royal  Engineers.  This  wa^  a  most  charming  spot  for 
luncheon,  and  the  dense  shade  of  the  planes  was  far 
more  agreeable  than  the  shelter  of  a  wooden  military 
hut  that  stood  upon  the  height  above  and  by  no  means 
improved  the  beauty  of  the  view.  Our  dogs  seemed 
to  enjoy  the  change,  and  raced  up  and  down  the 
river  s  be^,  delighted  with  the  cold  water  from  the 
mountains,  fresh,  from  the  highest  springs  of  Troodos. 
Some  cold  roast  pigeons,  young  and  fat,  and  some 
hard-boiled  eggs,  formed  our  luncheon,  together  with 
bread  and  cheese.  These  were  quickly  despatched, 
and  the  carpets  being  spread  beneath  the  trees,  an 
hour's  nap  was  good  for  man  while  the  mules  rolled 
and  then  dozed  in  luxury  upon  the  turf-like  surface 
of  the  glen.  I  was  awakened  by  the  clatter  of  horse's 
hoofs,  and  Mr.  Allen,  the  chief  officer  of  the  police  of 
Limasol,  appeared,  having   most   kindly  ridden  after 


XI.]  From  Limasol  to  the  Mountains.  303 

us  with  the  post  just  arrived  from  England.  Unfor- 
tunately not  a  crumb  of  luncheon  remained,  the  dogs 
having  swallowed  our  leavings.  We  now  saddled, 
and  continued  the  journey  upon  the  firm  surface  of 
the  new  road. 

When  about  fourteen  miles  from  Limasol  we  entered 
upon  a  grand  scene,  which  exhibited  the  commence- 
ment of  the  wine-producing  district.  The  road  was 
scarped  from  the  mountain  side  several  hundred  feet 
above  the  river,  which  murmured  over  its  rocky  bed 
in  the  bottom  of  the  gorge.  We  were  skirting  a  deep 
valley,  and  upon  either  side  the  mountains  rose  to  a 
height  of  about  1400  feet,  completely  covered  with 
vineyards  from  the  base  to  the  summit ;  this  long 
vale  or  chasm  extended  to  the  Troodos  range,  which 
towered  to  upwards  of  6000  feet,  at  a  distance  of 
about  fourteen  miles  immediately  in  our  front.  The 
vines  were  all  green  with  their  early  foliage,  and  the 
surface  of  the  hill-sides  was  most  cheering,  contrasting 
with  the  yellow  plain  we  had  left  at  Limasol. 

The  good  road  rendered  travelling  delightful  after 
the  stony  paths  that  we  had  traversed  for  some  months 
in  Cyprus,  and  the  time  passed  so  rapidly  that  we 
could  hardly  believe  the  distance  marked  upon  the 
nineteenth  milestone,  where  it  was  necessary  to  halt 
for  the  arrival  of  our  baggage  animals.  After  waiting 
till  nearly  dark  we  found  they  had  quitted  the  new 
road  and  preferred  a  short  cut  across  country, 
which  had  led  them  to  the  village  of  Menagria  down 
in  the  glen  nearly  a  mile  below  lis.  We  walked  down 
the  steep  hill  and  joined  the  party,  pitched  the  tent, 
and  made  ready  for  the  night. 

On  the  following  morning,  instead  of  adhering  to 
the   new  road,  we   descended  to  the   bottom   of  the 


304  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


gorge  and  crossed  the  river  near  some  water-mills,  as 
the  bridge  was  not  yet  completed  in  the  distant  angle 
of  the  glen.     We  now  ascended  an  exceedingly  steep 
hill  from  the  river  s  bed,  which  severely  tried  our  animals, 
until,  after  passing  a  succession  of  cereal  crops  and 
vineyards,  we  arrived  at  the  summit,  about  1200  feet 
above   the   valley.     From    this    point   the   view   was 
magnificent.      The    pine-covered    sides    of    Troodos 
appeared    close    before    us,    and    a   valley    stretched 
away  to   our  right   richly   clothed  with   trees   below 
the    steep    vine-covered    sides    of    the    surrounding 
mountains.     Keeping  to  our  left  and  passing  through 
several  insignificant  villages,  we  commenced  a  most 
dangerous  descent,  with  an  occasional  deep  precipice 
on  the  right  of  the  extremely  narrow  path,  until  we 
reached  a  contracted  but  verdant  glen.     This  was  a 
remarkable   change  :    we   had   suddenly   entered   one 
of  those   picturesque  vales   for  which   Devonshire  is 
famous.     The    vegetation    had    changed    to    that    of 
Europe,  as  we  were  now  nearly  3000  feet  above  the 
sea.     Apple  and  pear  trees  of  large  size  were  present, 
not  in  orchards,  but  growing  independently  as  though 
wild.     Dog-roses    of    exquisite    colour   were    in    full 
bloom,  and  reminded  us  of  English  hedges.     Beautiful 
oak-trees   scattered   upon   the   green   surface  gave  a 
park-like    appearance    to    the    scene,  and    numerous 
streams   of    clear  water   rippled   though    the   myrtle- 
covered   banks,  over   the   deep   brown    rocks   of  the 
plutonic  formation,  which  had  now  succeeded  to  the 
cretaceous  limestone. 

It  was  a  curious  geological  division,  limited  by  the 
glen  :  on  the  left,  the  hills  and  mountains  were  the 
usual  white  marls  and  cretaceous  limestone  ;  while  on 
the  right  everything  was  plutonic  or  granitic,  including 


XI.] 


From  Limasol  to  the  Mountains.  305 


gneiss,  syenite,  and  metamorphous  rocks  of  various 
characters.  The  soil  of  the  glen  was  red,  and  the 
villages,  built  of  sun-baked  bricks  of  this  colour, 
harmonised  with  the  dark  g^een  of  rich  crops  of  wheat 
that  had  been  irrigated  by  the  never-failing  water- 
power.  We  had  now  rejoined  the  English  road,  which 
passed  along  the  bottom  of  the  glen,  and  which  was  yet 
incomplete ;  several  gangs  of  men  were  working  at 
intervals,  and  in  the  scarps,  where  deep  cuttings  had 
been  necessary,  I  remarked  a  considerable  amount  of 
ironstone. 

A  few  miles  through  this  interesting  scenery  brought 
us  to  the  village  of  Mandria,  where  a  strong  working 
party  was  engaged  in  erecting  a  wooden  bridge  upon 
masonry  piers.  We  now  turned  off  to  the  left,  over 
rough  but  richly- wooded  hills,  leaving  the  English 
road,  which  extended  direct  to  Platraes,  as  our  course 
was  altered  towards  the  large  village  of  Phyni,  situated 
at  the  foot  of  the  Troodos  mountain.  There  could 
hardly  be  a  worse  or  more  dangerous  path  over  the 
high  and  precipitous  hills ;  these  were  once  more 
cretaceous,  and  in  wet  weather  must  be  as  slippery  as 
soap.  In  many  places  the  path  was  hardly  nine  inches 
wide,  with  a  deep  gorge  beneath  for  at  least  150 
feet.  At  length  we  passed  over  the  crest,  and  looked 
down  upon  Phyni,  in  the  vine-covered  dell  below. 
As  far  as  the  eye  could  reach  upon  all  directions 
for  many  miles,  hill-sides,  valleys,  and  mountains 
exceeding  4000  feet  were  entirely  covered  with  vines  ; 
not  a  yard  of  soil  was  unoccupied  by  this  important 
branch  of  cultivation.  Immediately  before  us,  on  the 
other  side  of  Phyni,  in  the  dark  hollow,  was  the  base  of 
Troodos,  from  which  the  mountain  rose  so  steeply  that 
it  appeared  impossible  to  ascend  with  mules.     A  narrow 

X 


3o6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


line  was  pointed  out  upon  the  thickly  bush-covered 
sides  of  the  mountain,  and  we  were  informed  that  we 
should  reach  Trooditissa  monastery  by  that  path. 
I  thought  there  must  be  some  mistake  in  the  interpre- 
tation ;  however  we  dismounted,  and  preferred  walking 
down  the  steep  zigzags  that  led  to  Phyni,  half  hidden 
in  masses  of  bright  green  foliage  of  various  fruit-tt"ees, 
now  exactly  at  our  feet. 

This  was  a  very  peculiar  village,  as  the  broad  flat 
roofs  of  the  houses  formed  terraces  ;  upon  these  you 
could  at  once  walk  from  the  steep  hill-slope,  into  which 
the  houses  were  inserted  by  scarping  out  a  level  space 
for  a  foundation.  The  effect  was  remarkable,  as  the 
house-roofs,  in  lines,  seemed  like  flights  of  steps  upon 
the  mountain  side.  We  halted  at  the  first  decent- 
looking  dwelling  and  rested  beneath  the  shade  of  an 
apricot-tree  within  a  small  courtyard.  The  people  at 
once  assembled,  and  the  owner  of .  the  house  brought 
us  black  wine  and  raki  of  his  own  make ;  the  latter 
he  was  now  engaged  in  distilling,  and  some  pigs  were 
revelling  in  the  refuse  that  had  been  thrown  in  a  heap 
below  the  window  of  the  store.  This  man  was  proud 
of  his  wine,  as  it  was  tolerably  free  from  the  taste  of 
tar  ;  the  jars,  having  been  more  than  fifty  years  in  con- 
stant use,  had  lost  the  objectionable  flavour.  We  were 
thirsty  and  hot,  therefore  the  wine  was  not  disagree- 
able, and  we  lunched  beneath  the  apricot. 

After  an  hours  rest  the  real  up-hill  work  com- 
menced. We  crossed  a  broad  channel  of  running 
water  beneath  groves  of  green  trees,  and  entered  a 
path  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  village ;  this  skirted  a 
deep  and  precipitous  gorge,  through  which  the  river 
flowed  from  the  high  and  dark  ravine  that  cleft  the 
mountain  from  the  summit  to  the  bottom.     A  water- 


XL]  From  Limasol  to  the  Mountains.  307 

mill  was  at  work  below  us  on  the  right ;  and  always 
ascending  along  the  side  of  the  ravine,  with  the  rush- 
ing sound  of  the  stream  below,  we  arrived  after  half 
a  mile  at  the  base  of  the  apparently  impossible  route. 
Right  and  left,  right  and  left,  went  the  short  and 
sharp  zigzags,  the  path  covered  with  rolling  stones 
and  loose  rocks,  which  clattered  under  the  feet  of 
the  tired  mules  and  rolled  down  the  steep  inclines. 
The  sound  of  the  stream  below  became  fainter,  and 
the  narrow  angle  of  the  deep  cleft  grew  darker,  as 
we  ascended.  We  looked  down  upon  the  rounded 
tops  of  various  trees,  including  the  rich  verdure  of 
planes,  which  skirted  the  banks  of  the  hidden  stream, 
and  we  entered  upon  pines  rising  from  an  under- 
growth of  beautiful  evergreens,  including  the  fragrant 
tremithia,  the  light  green  foliage  of  the  arbutus, 
with  its  bright  red  bark  contrasting  strongly  with 
the  dark  shade  of  the  dense  and  bushy  ilex.  The 
mastic  was  there,  and  as  we  increased  our  altitude 
the  Pinus  laricio  and  Pinus  maritiina  varied  the 
woods  by  their  tall  spars,  beneath  which  a  perfect 
garden  of  flowers  almost  covered  the  surface  of  the 
earth ;  these  included  the  white  and  purple  cistus,  dog- 
roses,  honeysuckle,  and  several  varieties  unknown  to 
me.  Among  the  ornamental  dwarfs  were  a  quantity  of 
the  Sumach,  which  is  an  article  of  export  from  Cyprus 
for  the  use  of  the  tanner  and  dyer. 

The  view  became  very  beautiful  as  we  ascended, 
until  at  length,  after  a  couple  of  miles  of  the  steepest 
zigzags,  we  turned  a  corner  of  the  rocks  and  looked 
down  the  great  depth  at  our  right,  below  the  path, 
upon  the  long  white  thread  of  a  waterfall,  which  for 
some  hundred  feet  of  a  severe  incline,  broken  by 
occasional   plunges,  issues   from   the  rocky  cleft,  and 

X  2 


3o8  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap.xi. 

forms  the  river  in  the  ravine  below,  *'  There  is  the 
monastery  of  Trooditissa ! "  exclaimed  our  guide. 
About  2CO  feet  above  our  level,  snugly  nested  among 
splendid  walnut-trees  in  the  dark  angle  of  the  moun- 
tains, were  the  grey  and  brown  gables,  half  concealed 
by  the  rich  foliage  of  plane-trees,  walnuts,  mulberry, 
and  other  varieties. 

About  half  a  mile  from  this  point  of  view  the  mules 
scrambled  up  one  of  the  worst  portions  of  the  route, 
and  we  arrived  at  a  clear  and  cold  spring  issuing  sud- 
denly from  the  rocks  through  a  stone  spout,  protected 
by  an  arch  of  masonry :  this  was  received  in  a  rude 
wooden  trough  formed  from  the  trunk  of  a  hollowed 
pine,  and  overflowed  across  the  path  to  water  some 
terraced  gardens  immediately  below.  A  walnut  and 
a  fig-tree  intermingled  their  branches  above  the  arch, 
and  formed  an  agreeable  shade  to  shelter  weary  tra- 
vellers, who  might  sit  by  the  welcome  spring  after 
toiling  up  the  rough  mountain  side.  About  eighty 
yards  beyond,  by  a  level  path,  we  reached  the  widest- 
spreading  walnut-tree  that  I  have  ever  seen  ;  the  new 
foliage  was  soft  and  uninjured  by  the  wind,  producing 
a  dense  shade  over  an  area  sufficient  for  numerous 
tents.  This  magnificent  specimen  of  vegetation  grew 
upon  the  edge  of  an  abrupt  descent,  perpendicular  to 
a  series  of  gardens,  all  terraced  out  to  a  depth  of  about 
150  feet,  to  thie  bottom  of  a  narrow  gorge ;  thus 
one-half  of  the  branches  overhung  the  steep,  while 
the  other  half  shaded  a  portion  of  the  monastery 
courtyard. 

We  halted  and  dismounted  beneath  this  grand  old 
tree,  where  the  picturesque  but  not  clean  old  monk, 
with  some  of  his  ecclesiastics,  were  ready  to  meet  us 
with  a  courteous  welcome. 


CHAPTER  XII. 

THE    MONASTERY    OF    TROODITISSA. 

The  monastery  of  Trooditissa  had  no  architectural 
pretensions  ;  it  looked  like  a  family  of  English  barns 
that  had  been  crossed  with  a  Swiss  chalet.  The  roofs  of 
six  separate  buildings  of  considerable  dimensions  were 
arranged  to  form  a  quadrangle,  which  included  the 
chapel,  a  long  building  at  right  angles  with  the  quad- 
rangle, which  had  an  upper  balcony  beneath  the  roof, 
so  as  to  form  a  covered  protection  to  a  similar  arrange- 
ment below,  and  an  indescribable  building  which  was 
used  by  the  monks  as  their  store  for  winter  provisions. 
The  staircases  were  outside,  as  in  Switzerland,  and 
entered  upon  the  open-air  landings  or  balconies  ;  these 
were  obscure  galleries,  from  which  doors  led  to  each 
separate  apartment,  occupied  by  the  monks  and  fleas. 
The  obscurity  may  appear  strange,  as  the  balconies 
were  on  the  outside,  but  the  eaves  of  the  roof  at  an 
angle  of  about  48°  projected  some  feet  as  a  protection 
from  the  winter's  snow,  and  occasioned  a  dark- 
ness added  to  the  gloom  of  blueish  grey  gneiss  which 
formed  the  walls  and  the  deep  brownish  red  of  the 
tiled  roof. 

The  great  walnut-tree  overshadowed  a  portion  of 
the  mule  stables  that  formed    a  continuation  of   the 


3IO  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


building,  and  faced  the  exterior  courtyard,  which  was 
inclosed  upon  two  sides  of  the  square,  in  the  centre 
of  which  was  an  arched  entrance  to  the  inner  court. 
This  doorway  was  beneath  a  covered  gallery,  and  the 
ground  floor  formed  a  well-protected  verandah,  from 
which  a  magnificent  view  was  commanded  down  the 
great  gorge  towards  Phyni,  overlooking  the  lower 
mountain  tops  to  a  sea  horizon  beyond  the  peninsula 
of  Akrotiri  and  the  salt  lake  of  Limasol. 

The  covered  gallery  above  this  verandah  was  sup- 
ported by  stone  pillars  with  exceedingly  rude  capitals, 
upon  which  long  beams  of  the  native  pines,  laid  hori- 
zontally, supported  the  joists  and  floors.  1 1  was  a  dull 
and  dirty  abode,  and  at  first  sight  I  was  disappointed. 
The  angle  of  the  mountain  in  which  the  monastery 
stood  was  formed  by  a  ravine  which  intercepted  the 
principal  gorge  at  almost  a  right  angle,  thus  a  path 
which  continued  at  the  same  level  from  the  courtyard 
to  the  other  side  of  the  ravine,  represented  the  letter  V 
laid  horizontally.  From  the  walnut-tree  across  the 
broad  base  of  the  letter  would  be  about  a  hundred 
yards,  to  a  series  of  cultivated  terraces  upon  an  equal 
level. 

This  might  have  been  made  a  lovely  station,  as  no 
less  than  three  springs  of  water  issued  from  the 
mountain  side  in  various  positions  :  the  first  already 
mentioned  ;  the  second  on  the  further  side  of  the 
letter  Vj  beneath  another  splendid  walnut-tree  ;  and  the 
third  upon  the  same  level  beyond,  which  fell  into  a 
trough  beneath  a  large  trellis,  upon  which  some  vines 
were  trained  to  produce  a  shade. 

The  terraces  formed  an  angular  amphitheatre,  the 
outer  courtyard  of  the  monastery  being  the  highest 
level,  looking  down  upon  tree-tops  of  planes  and  pines 


XII.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  311 

throughout  the  dark  gorge  to  Phyni.  The  gardens 
appeared  much  neglected  ;  they  were  overcrowded 
with  fruit-trees,  including  filberts,  mulberry,  pears, 
apples,  figs,  walnuts,  plums ;  the  only  grape-vine  was 
represented  upon  the  trellis  ;  the  position  was  too  high 
for  apricots.  ^ 

An  Englishman's  first  idea  is  improvement,  and  I 
believe  that  upon  entering  heaven  itself  he  would 
suggest  some  alteration.  This  was  not  heaven,  but, 
as  a  monastery,  it  was  the  first  step,  and  a  very  high 
one  for  this  world,  being  4340  feet  above  the  sea. 
We  began  by  cleaning,  and  I  should  have  liked  to 
have  engaged  Hercules,  at  the  maximum  of  agricul- 
tural wages,  to  have  cleaned  the  long  line  of  mule 
stables,  a  dignified  employment  for  which  the  hero- 
god  was  famous ;  the  Augean  were  a  joke  to  them. 
Piles  of  manure  and  filth  of  every  description  con- 
cealed the  pavement  of  the  capacious  outer  yard  of 
the  monastery.  The  narrow  path  by  which  we  had 
arrived  from  the  spring  was  a  mere  dung-heap,  from 
which  the  noxious  weeds  called  docksy  of  Brob- 
dignagian  proportions,  issued  in  such  dense  masses 
that  an  agricultural  meeting  of  British  farmers 
would  have  been  completely  hidden  by  their  great 
enemy.  The  priests  or  monks  had  filthy  habits ; 
it  would  have  been  impossible  for  civilised  people 
.to  have  existed  in  this  accumulation  of  impuri- 
ties, therefore  we  at  once  set  to  work.  I  had  a 
spade  and  pickaxe,  and  we  borrowed  some  other 
tools  from  the  monks,  among  which  were  strong 
grubbers  (which  combined  the  hoe  and  the  pick). 
There  were  a  number  of  people  belonging  to  the 
monastery,  including  some  young  embryo  priests,  that 
we   might  accept  as  deacons ;  these  I  set  to  work  with 


312  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


the  pickaxe  at  one  shilling  a  day  wages.  The  boys 
who  were  being  educated  for  the  Church  I  employed 
in  removing  all  the  loose  stones  which  choked  the 
surface  of  the  ground,  and  subsequently  in  sweeping 
and  scraping  the  courtyard.  I  gave  them  sixpence  a 
day  if  they  worked  from  early  morning,  or  three- 
pence if  they  came  at  noon  after  their  lessons.  There 
was  a  shepherd's  family,  upon  the  hill  about  250  feet 
above  the  monastery,  of  seven  handsome  children,  two 
boys  of  nineteen  and  seventeen,  and  five  girls.  These 
were  hard  at  work,  even  to  a  pretty  little  child  of  four 
years  old,  who  carried  her  stones,  and  swept  with  a 
little  broom  with  all  her  heart  (this  was  little  Athena). 
Of  course  they  were  all  paid  in  the  evening  with 
bright  new  threepenny  pieces  which  they  had  never 
seen  before.  Even  the  priests  worked  after  a  few 
days,  when  the  spirit  of  industry  and  new  shillings 
moved  them,  and  in  the  history  of  the  monastery  there 
could  never  have  been  such  a  stirring  picture  and 
such  a  dust  as  we  made  in  cleansing  and  alterations. 
Nearly  a  month  was  occupied  in  this  necessary  work, 
by  which  time  the  place  was  entirely  changed.  I  had 
made  a  good  road  as  an  approach  from  the  spring, 
with  a  covered  drain,  dignified  by  the  name  of  an 
"  aqueduct,"  which  led  the  water  when  required  to  a 
little  garden  that  I  had  constructed  close  to  the  tent, 
where  a  nondescript  slope  had  become  a  receptacle  for 
filth.  I  had  cut  this  down  from  the  road,  and  mixed 
the  earth  with  the  accumulated  dirt  and  manure,  which 
I  levelled  off  in  successive  layers,  so  that  the  stream  led 
from  the  spring  would  irrigate  my  beds  in  succession. 
This  garden  was  carefully  fenced  against  the  intrusion 
of  goats  and  donkeys,  to  say  nothing  of  pigs,  and  it 
was  already  sown  with  tomatoes,  cucumbers,  melons. 


xno  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  313 

barmia,  and  beet-root.  The  priests  had  a  grand  bed 
of  onions  upon  a  terrace,  which  was  usually  occupied 
by  the  pigs,  goats,  and  donkeys,  as  they  had  been  too 
lazy  to  arrange  a  fence. 

The  docks  in  the  monastery  gardens  were  at  least 
six  feet  high ;  I  had  these  cut  and  collected  to  thatch 
the  sides  of  a  peculiar  shed  (in  which  I  am  writing  at 
this  moment),  which  was  a  great  comfort  and  formed  a 
very  original  retreat,  combining  a  seat  in  an  amphi- 
theatre with  a  modern  summer-house.  This  was  an 
oblong,  of  fifteen  feet  by  twelve,  erected  within  three 
feet  of  the  tent  beneath  the  walnut-tree  upon  the 
extreme  verge  of  the  abrupt  incline.  I  laid  a  founda- 
tion of  stones,  which  I  covered  with  pounded  earth  and 
water,  to  produce  a  level  with  the  tent.  I  then  placed 
horizontally  a  beam  of  wood,  secured  from  slipping 
with  stakes  driven  to  the  heads  into  the  bank  upon 
the  edge  of  the  incline.  Upon  this  a  row  of  large 
stones  was  cemented  together  with  mud  to  form  a 
margin  level  with  the  floor,  from  which  the  abrupt 
inclination  at  once  leapt  to  the  lower  terraces  and  the 
deep  gorge,  continuing  for  upwards  of  4000  feet  to 
the  sea ;  this  was  visible  beyond  the  inferior  mountain 
tops. 

There  was  nothing  pretty  in  the  arrangement  of 
this  "  rachkooba,"  as  it  would  be  called  in  Africa ;  it 
was  a  simple  square  of  upright  poles,  connected  with 
canes  secured  across,  thatched  inside  with  ferns,  and 
upon  the  outside  with  docks,  fastened  down  with  the 
peeled  willow-like  shoots  of  mulberry-trees.  The 
mulberry-trees  for  silkworms  are  always  pollarded 
annually,  and  they  throw  out  shoots  about  seven  or 
nine  feet  in  length  every  season ;  the  wood  is  exceed- 
ingly  tough,   and    the    bark    of    these   wands  when 


314  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


stripped  is  serviceable  for  tying  plants  or  securing 
fences  in  lieu  of  cord.  For  lack  of  silkworms  the 
monastery  mulberry-trees  had  several  seasons  of  growth, 
and  the  shoots  were  serviceable  for  our  work.  The 
ceiling  of  our  opera-box  was  cloth,  with  a  curtain  of 
about  three  feet  suspended  along  the  front,  which 
broke  the  morning  sun  as  it  topped  the  high  ridge  of 
the  mountain  on  the  other  side  of  the  gorge,  about 
a  thousand  feet  above  us.  The  shed  was  carpeted 
with  mats  and  furnished  roughly  with  a  table  and 
chairs;  hat-pegs  were  suspended  around,  made  from 
the  red-barked  wood  of  the  arbutus,  simply  cut  so 
that  by  inverting  the  branch  with  the  stem  attached  to 
a  cord,  the  twigs,  cut  at  proper  lengths,  would  form 
convenient  hooks. 

From  this  cool  hermitage  we  looked  down  upon  the 
dense  foliage  of  rounded  mulberry-tops  and  the  fruit- 
trees  of  the  gardens  within  the  gorge,  while  exactly  in 
our  front,  a  hundred  yards  across  the  deep  ravine, 
was  the  rocky  steep  of  the  mountain  side,  densely 
clothed  with  ilex  and  arbutus,  until  the  still  higher 
altitudes  banished  all  underwood,  and  the  upper 
ranges  of  Troodos  exhibited  a  surface  of  barren 
rocks  clothed  with  tall  pines  and  cypress,  2000  feet 
above  us. 

By  the  time  we  had  completed  our  permanent 
camp  a  certain  degree  of  improvement  had  taken 
place  in  the  people,  as  well  as  in  the  actual  cleanliness 
of  the  locality.  Everybody  washed  his,  or  her,  face 
and  hands.  The  customs  of  the  monks  had  so  far 
reformed  that  the  immediate  neighbourhood  was  no 
longer  offensive.  When  strangers  with  mules  arrived 
the  road  was  immediately  swept,  and  upon  Saturday 
evenings  a  general  embellishment  took  place  in  honour 


XII.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  315 

of  the  approaching  Sunday.  The  young  clergy  were 
remarkably  good  and  active  ;  they  worked  in  my  little 
garden  at  a  shilling  a  day,  went  on  errands  to  Platraes 
and  the  camp  at  Troodos,  and  made  themselves 
generally  useful  for  a  most  moderate  consideration. 
I  can  strongly  recommend  all  young  curates  who  are 
waiting  in  vain  for  livings  to  come  and  work  upon  the 
holy  soil  of  Trooditissa  at  one  shilling  per  diem  ;  and 
should  they  (as  curates  frequently  are)  be  poor  in  this 
world's  goods,  but  nevertheless  strong  in  amorous 
propensities,  and  accordingly  desirous  of  matrimony, 
they  will  find  a  refuge  within  the  walls  of  this  monas- 
tery from  all  the  temptations  of  the  outer  world,  far  from 
garden-parties,  balls,  picnics,  church-decorations  assisted 
by  young  ladies,  and  all  those  snares  of  the  Evil  One ; 
and  the  wholesome  diet  of  the  monks,  including  a 
course  of  soaked  broad-beans  and  barley  bread,  with 
repeated  fastings  upon  innumerable  saints'  days,  will 
affect  them  sensibly,  both  morally  and  physically ; 
under  .this  discipline  they  will  come  to  the  conclusion 
that  a  wife  and  large  family  upon  an  income  of  ;^500 
a  year  in  England  would  not  confer  the  same  happi- 
ness as  one  shilling  a  day  with  the  pickaxe,  broad- 
beans  and  independence,  at  Trooditissa,  which  is  true 
"  muscular  Christianity." 

It  was  extraordinary  to  see  the  result  of  a  life-long 
diet  of  beans  and  barley-bread  in  the  persons  of  the 
monks,  who  very  seldom  indulged  in  flesh.  The  actual 
head  of  the  monastery  was  a  handsome  man  of  seventy, 
perfectly  erect  in  figure,  as  though  fresh  from  military 
drill,  and  as  strong  and  active  as  most  men  of  fifty. 
The  younger  priests  were  all  good-looking,  active, 
healthy  men,  who  thought  nothing  of  a  morning's 
walk    over    the    fatiguing    rocky   paths   to   Troodos 


3i6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


and  back  (twelve  miles),  to  be  refreshed  on  their 
return  by  an  afternoon's  work  in  their  gardens.  The 
head  of  the  Church  was  an  especial  friend  of  ours, 
and  was  a  dear  old  fellow  of  about  seventy,  with 
a  handsome  face,  a  pair  of  greasy  brass  spectacles 
bound  with  some  substance  to  retain  them  that  was 
long  since  past  recognition,  and  swelled  feet  that 
prevented  him  from  walking  beyond  the  precincts  of 
the  monastery,  which  he  had  never  quitted  for  twelve 
years.  The  feet  looked  uncommonly  like  the  gout, 
but  I  can  hardly  believe  in  the  co-existence  of  that 
complaint  with  dry  beans  and  barley-bread,  although 
the  truth  must  be  confessed,  that  the  monks  are  fond 
of  commanderia,  or  any  other  production  of  the 
vineyard.  There  was  one  exceedingly  disagreeable 
monk  with  whom  we  held  a  most  remote  acquaintance, 
and  whose  name  I  willingly  conceal ;  he  has  been  seen 
upon  several  occasions  to  sit  down  upon  an  imaginary 
chair,  the  real  article  of  furniture  being  eighteen 
inches  distant,  and  the  stunning  effect  of  arriving 
suddenly  in  a  sitting  posture  upon  the  hard  stones 
of  the  courtyard  disabled  him  from  rising ;  and  even 
when  assisted  his  legs  were  evidently  affected  by  the 
shock.  His  enemies  declared  (as  they  always  do) 
that  he  was  the  victim  to  an  over-indulgence  in  the 
raki  and  wine  of  Phyni.  We  generally  knew  him 
by  the  alias  of  '*  Roger,"  in  memory  of  the  Ingoldsby 
Legendsy  where 


« 


Roger  the  Monk 
Got  excessively  drunk, 

So  they  put  him  to  bed, 
And  tucked  him  in." 


There  was  no  friend  to  bestow  such  care  upon  our 
Roger,  he  therefore  lay  helplessly  upon  the  bare  stones 


XII.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  317 

until  refreshing  sleep  restored   his  eyesight  and  his 
perpendicular. 

Our  particular  friend  the  head  of  the  Church  was  a 
very  different  character,  and  was  a  most  simple-minded 
and  really  good  religious  man.  I  employed  a  photo- 
grapher of  the  Royal  Engineers  (kindly  permitted  by 
Major  Maitland,  R.E.)  specially  to  take  his  picture,  as 
he  sat  every  morning  knitting  stockings,  with  a  little 
boy  by  his  side  reading  the  Greek  Testament  aloud,  in 
the  archway  of  the  monastery.  This  was  his  daily 
occupation,  varied  only  when  he  exchanged  the  work 
of  knitting  either  for  spinning  cotton,  or  carving 
wooden  spoons  from  the  arbutus  :  these  he  manu- 
factured in  great  numbers  as  return  presents  to  those 
poor  people  who  brought  little  offerings  from  the  low 
country.  Never  having  mixed  with  the  world,  the 
old  man  was  very  original  and  primitive  in  his  ideas, 
which  were  limited  to  the  monastery  duties  and  to 
the  extreme  trouble  occasioned  by  the  numerous  goats 
which  trespassed  upon  the  unfenced  gardens,  and  in- 
flicted serious  damage.  The  chapel,  which  was  under 
his  control,  was  of  the  usual  kind,  and  at  the  same  time 
rough  and  exceedingly  gaudy,  the  pulpit  being  gilded 
throughout  its  surface,  and  the  reredos  glittering  with 
gold  and  tawdry  pictures  of  the  lowest  style  of  art, 
representing  the  various  saints,  including  a  very  fat 
St.  George  and  the  meekest  possible  dragon.  Our 
old  friend  had  never  seen  a  British  sovereign  with 
the  St.  George,  and  was  vastly  pleased  when  he  dis- 
covered that  his  saint  and  ours  were  the  same  person, 
only  differing  in  symmetry  of  figures  and  in  ferocity 
of  dragons. 

There  was   one  very  extraordinary  effigy  in   bas- 
relief    upon    silver-gilt    about    two    feet    six    inches 


3i8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


high,  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  to  which  peculiar  mira- 
culous properties  were  attributed.  The  possession 
of  this  relic  formed  the  principal  attraction  of  the 
monastery.  About  a  quarter  of  a  mile  above  the 
present  establishment  there  is  a  small  cave  concealed 
among  the  ragged  masses  of  rock  that  crust  the  moun- 
tain side  ;  this  has  been  formed  by  one  rock  which 
leans  across  another,  and  each  end  has  been  walled 
up  artificially,  so  as  to  form  a  stone  chamber  of  about 
twelve  feet  in  length  by  seven  in  width,  with  a  small 
entrance.  According  to  the  account  given  by  the 
old  monk,  this  cave  was  the  origin  of  the  present 
monastery  through  the  following  accident.  Among 
these  wild  mountains,  where  no  dwelling  of  any  kind 
exists,  it  has  always  been  the  custom  after  the  melting 
of  the  snows  in  early  spring  to  pasture  the  numerous 
flocks  of  goats,  which  are  at  that  season  driven  up 
from  the  parched  herbage  of  the  low  country  to  the 
fresh  herbs  of  the  cooler  altitudes.  Three  or  four 
hundred  years  ago  a  shepherd,  having  lost  his  goats 
at  night,  was  surprised  at  the  appearance  of  a  light 
among  the  rocks  high  up  on  the  mountain,  and  with 
superstitious  awe  he  related  his  discovery  to  his 
fellows.  For  some  time  the  mysterious  light  was 
observed  nightly,  and  various  conjectures  were  on  foot 
as  to  its  origin,  but  no  one  dared  to  venture  upon 
an  examination. 

At  length,  the  authorities  of  the  Church  having  been 
consulted,  it  was  resolved  that  a  priest  should  accom- 
pany the  party  of  investigation  and  the  matter  should 
be  thoroughly  cleared  up. 

It  was  a  difficult  climb  to  the  pathless  crags  at 
night,  but  the  light  was  glimmering  like  ''the  star 
that   the   wise    men    saw    in    the    east,"  and  though 


XII.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  319 

occasionally  lost  at  intervals,  it  guided  the  party  on 
their  way.  Upon  arrival  at  the  cave,  there  was  no 
inhabitant.  A  lamp  burnt  before  a  small  effigy  of 
the  Virgin  Mary  suspended  against  the  wall  of 
rock,  but  no  trace  of  human  foot  or  hand  could  be 
discovered. 

Such  is  the  legend ;  and  the  inexplicable  mystery 
caused  much  excitement  and  agitation  in  the  minds 
of  the  Church  authorities.  At  length  it  was  deter- 
mined that,  as  the  apparition  of  the  light  was  mira- 
culous, it  was  incumbent  upon  the  people  to  erect  a 
monastery  upon  the  site  of  the  appearance,  contiguous 
to  the  now  sacred  cave. 

This  was  an  extreme  difficulty,  as  the  inclination 
formed  an  angle  of  about  60°,  and  the  mountain  was 
hard  gneiss  that  could  only  have  been  scarped  by 
expensive  blasting.  However,  it  was  hoped  that  a 
blessing  would  attend  the  good  work ;  therefore,  in 
spite  of  all  obstacles,  it  was  commenced,  and  masons 
were  engaged  from  the  village  of  Phyni  to  arrange  a 
foundation. 

There  was  no  water  nearer  than  the  torrent  in  the 
deep  hollow  half  a  mile  below,  therefore  extreme 
labour  was  required  in  mixing  the  mortar  for  the 
walls;  the  jars  in  which  the  necessary  water  was 
conveyed  upon  men's  shoulders  up  the  precipitous 
rocks  appeared  to  be  influenced  by  some  adverse, 
but  unseen,  agency,  as  they  constantly  slipped  from 
their  hold  and  broke.  During  the  night  the  work 
which  the  masons  had  accomplished  in  the  day  fell 
down,  and  was  discovered  every  morning  as  a  heap 
of  ruin ;  the  building  could  not  proceed.  In  this 
perplexity  the  Church  was  relieved  by  a  supernatural 
mterposition.     Early  one  morning  a  jar  of  pure  water 


320  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


was  discovered  in  the  sharp  angle  of  the  hollow 
between  the  hills,  exactly  below  the  rachkooba,  where 
I  am  now  writing.  It  was  evident  to  the  priestly 
mind  that  an  angel  had  placed  this  jar  of  water  to 
denote  the  spot  where  some  hidden  spring  might  be 
developed,  which  would  be  a  favourable  site  for  the 
new  monastery.  They  dug,  and  shortly  discovered 
the  expected  source. 

It  was  therefore  resolved  that  instead  of  erecting 
the  monastery  close  to  the  effigy  in  the  cave,  where 
bad  luck  had  hitherto  attended  their  efforts,  it  would 
be  more  advisable  to  commence  the  building  upon  a 
favourable  spot,  where  a  level  already  existed,  in  the 
angle  between  two  mountain  slopes  within  a  few  yards 
of  the  spring ;  it  would  be  easier  to  convey  the  small 
effigy  to  the  new  building  than  to  erect  the  monastery 
close  to  the  effigy.  Accordingly  the  work  was  com- 
menced :  the  walls  no  longer  fell  during  the  night, 
and  the  unseen  agency  was  evidently  propitious. 

Upon  completion  of  the  monastery  the  original 
effigy  was  enshrined,  and  Trooditissa  became  famous 
as  a  holy  site.  Years  passed  away,  and  the  reputation 
of  the  establishment  was  enhanced  by  the  arrival  of 
a  lady  of  high  position  from  Beyrout,  together  with 
her  husband,  as  pilgrims  to  the  now  celebrated  mountain 
cave.  The  lady  was  childless,  and  having  presented 
a  handsome  offering,  and  kissed  the  rock  entrance  of 
the  cave,  in  addition  to  the  effigy  within  the  monastery, 
she  waited  in  the  neighbourhood  for  a  certain  number 
of  months,  at  the  expiration  of  which  she  gave  birth 
to  a  son.  The  monks  claimed  this  boy  as  their  lawful 
prize,  and  he  was  brought  up  as  a  priest ;  but  there  is 
some  discrepancy  in  the  accounts  which  I  could  not 
well  understand,  as  it  appears  that  his  parents  insisted 


xii.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  321 

upon  his  restoration,  and  that  an  angelic  interposition 
at  length  prevented  litigation.  It  may  be  well  imagined 
that  the  result  of  the  lady  s  pilgrimage  spread  far  and 
wide ;  the  reputation  of  the  monastery  reached  its 
zenith,  and  all  the  unfruitful  women  flocked  to  the 
shrine  to  kiss  the  cave  and  the  picture  of  the  Virgin 
within  the  church ;  at  the  same  time  offering  a  certain 
sum  for  the  benefit  of  the  establishment.  The  friction 
of  constant  and  oft-repeated  kissing  at  length  began 
to  tell  upon  the  sacred  effigy,  and  it  became  almost 
worn  out ;  it  was  therefore  determined  that  a  beautiful 
silver-gilt  Virgin  and  Child  should  be  supplied  by  a 
first-rate  artist  which  should  cover  the  original  relic 
within.  This  was  remarkably  well  executed  by  Cornaro, 
and  a  small  aperture  like  a  keyhole  of  a  door  has 
been  left,  which  is  covered  by  a  slide ;  this  is  moved 
upon  one  side  when  required,  and  enables  the  pilgrim 
to  kiss  through  the  hole  a  piece  of  rather  brown-look- 
ing wood,  which  is  the  present  exhausted  surface  of 
the  efiigy. 

Although  decayed  by  time  and  use,  the  miraculous 
property  remains  unchanged.  This  was  exhibited  a  few 
years  ago  in  a  remarkable  manner,  where  a  childless 
lady  had  become  old  in  barren  expectation  ;  but  a  visit 
to  Trooditissa  produced  the  desired  result,  and  conferred 
much  happiness  upon  the  once  despairing  wife,  who 
now  became  a  mother.  In  addition  to  a  monetary 
offering,  this  lady  had  presented  the  Virgin  with  a 
handsome  belt  with  massive  silver-gilt  buckles,  which 
she  had  worn  during  pregnancy.  This  offering  is  now 
suspended  around  the  present  effigy,  and  for  a  small 
consideration  any  lady  applicant  is  allowed  to  fasten 
it  round  her  waist  The  effect  is  infallible,  and 
quite  equals  that  of  the  rock  and  silver  Virgin.     This 

y 


[ 


322  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


remarkable  inductive  power  may  perhaps  be  some  day 
explained  by  philosophers,  but  it  is  now  exceedingly 
dangerous,  and  unfortunate  results  have  occurred,  when 
in  a  sudden  impulse  of  devotion  young  maidens  have 
kissed  the  rock  entrance  to  the  cave,  or  imprudently 
pressed  their  lips  upon  the  sacred  effigy. 

During  my  sojourn  at  Trooditissa  no  arrivals  of 
despairing  wives  occurred,  but  in  the  exhausted  con- 
ditions of  the  finance  throughout  the  island,  it  would 
have  been  the  height  of  folly  to  have  desired  an 
increase  of  family,  and  thereby  multiply  expenses  ; 
possibly  the  uncertainty  respecting  the  permanence  of 
the  English  occupation  may  deter  the  ladies,  who  may 
postpone  their  pilgrimage  to  the  monastery  until  their 
offspring  should  be  born  with  the  rights  of  British 
subjects. 

I  have  described  the  origin  of  the  ecclesiastical 
retreat  at  Trooditissa  as  nearly  as  possible  according 
to  the  viva-voce  history  related  by  the  monks.  It  is 
impossible  to  gauge  the  opinions  of  the  world,  as  indi- 
viduals differ  as  much  in  nervous  structure  and  in 
theological  creeds  as  they  do  in  personal  appearance  ; 
some  may  accept  the  monks'  belief  implicitly,  while 
others  may  suggest  that  the  original  occupant  of  the 
cave  was  some  unknown  hermit  secluded  from  the 
world,  whose  solitary  lamp  burning  before  the  Virgin 
had  attracted  the  attention  of  the  shepherds  from 
the  mountain  opposite.  The  old  man  may  have  fallen 
down  a  precipice  and  died,  leaving  his  lamp  still 
alight ;  but  it  would  be  unfair  to  interfere  with  the  ori- 
ginal legend,  which  must  remain  with  the  usual  clouds 
and  uncertainties  that  obscure  the  tales  of  centuries. 

About  250  feet  above  the  monastery  the  ridge  of  a 
spur  afforded  a  level  space  beneath  some  tall  pines 


XII.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  323 

which  threw  a  welcome  shade,  and  would  have  been  a 
convenient  camping-ground.  This  spot  was  occupied 
by  the  roughest  of  log-huts,  which  had  been  erected  by 
a  shepherd  as  his  summer  residence  when  the  goats 
should  be  driven  from  the  low  ground  to  the  mountain 
pasture.  This  man  was  originally  a  Turk,  and  formed 
one  of  a  peculiar  sect  known  in  Cyprus  as  Linobambaki 
(linen  and  cotton).  These  people  are  said  to  be  converts 
to  Christianity,  but  in  reality  they  have  never  been 
troubled  with  any  religious  scruples,  and  accordingly 
never  accommodate  their  principles  to  the  society  of 
their  neighbourhood.  In  a  Turkish  village  the  Lino- 
bambaki would  call  himself  by  a  Turkish  name,  as 
Mahomet,  or  Hassan,  &c,  while  in  a  Christian  com- 
munity he  would  pass  as  Michael  or  Georgy,  or  by 
other  Greek  appellations.  The  name  '*  linen  and  cotton" 
applied  to  them  is  expressive  of  their  lukewarmness 
and  time-serving,  their  religious  professions  fluctuating 
according  to  the  dictates  not  of  conscience,  but  per- 
sonal interest  It  is  supposed  that  about  1500  of  these 
people  exist  in  various  parts  of  Cyprus ;  they  are 
baptised  in  the  Greek  Church,  and  can  thus  escape 
conscription  for  military  service  according  to  Turkish 
law.  The  goatherd  upon  our  mountain  had  been  a 
Turkish  servant  (shepherd)  in  a  Greek  family,  and 
had  succeeded  in  gaining  the  heart  of  his  master's 
daughter,  whom  he  was  permitted  to  marry  after  many 
difficulties.  This  woman  must  have  been  very  beauti- 
ful when  young,  as,  in  spite  of  hard  work  and  exposure, 
she  was  handsome  at  forty,  with  a  pair  of  eyes  that  in 
youth  might  have  been  more  attractive  than  the 
mysterious  light  in  the  hermit's  cave.  It  is  one  of  the 
blessings    of  fine  eyes  that  they  are    almost   certain 

to   descend   to  the  children.      Property   may    vanish, 

Y  2 


324  Cyprus  in  iSyg, 


[CHAP. 


litigation  may  destroy  the  substance  of  an  inheritance  ; 
but  the  eyes,  large,  soft,  and  gentle,  which  can  occa- 
sionally startle  you  by  their  power  and  subdue  you  by 
a  tear,  are  the  children's  entail  that  nothing  can 
disestablish.  Even  when  time  has  trampled  upon 
complexion,  the  eyes  of  beauty  last  till  death. 

The  children  of  this  Linobambaki  and  his  hand- 
some wife  were  seven — two  boys  of  about  nineteen 
and  seventeen,  and  five  girls  from  fourteen  to  one 
and  a  half — all  of  whom  had  the  eyes  of  the  mother 
developed  most  favourably.  I  cannot  well  describe 
every  individual  of  a  family :  there  were  the  two 
handsome  shepherd  youths  who  would  have  made 
level  ground  of  mountain  steeps,  through  their  power 
and  activity. 

•*  Right  up  Ben  Lomond  could  he  press, 
And  not  a  sob  his  toil  confess." 

These  young  fellows  matched  the  goats  in  clambering 
up  the  rocks  and  following  their  wayward  flocks 
.throughout  the  summits  of  the  Troodos  range;  and 
their  sisters  the  little  shepherdesses  were  in  their  way 
equally  surprising,  in  hunting  runaway  goats  from  the 
deepest  chasm  to  the  sharpest  mountain-peak. 

I  hardly  know  who  was  our  greatest  favourite. 
There  was  **  Katterina ''  (about  fourteen)  too  old  to  make 
a  pet  of,  but  a  gentle-charactered  girl,  always  willing  to 
please  and  never  out  of  temper,  and  even  in  the  big, 
hateful,  beauty-destroying,  high  hob-nailed  boots  she 
could  run  up  the  mountain  soil  and  clamber  like  a 
monkey.  Then  came,  I  believe,  our  best  favourite, 
the  bright,  large-eyed,  sparkling  child  *'  Vathoo,"  who 
was  the  real  beauty  of  the  family,  about  ten  years  old  ; 
she  was  full  of  life  and  vigour,  a  perfect  goat  upon  the 


XII.]  The  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.  325 

mountains,  with  a  most  lovely  face  that  would  have 
charmed  Murillo  as  a  subject,  with  an  extreme  per- 
fection of  features,  a  bronzed  complexion,  but  hardly 
the  soft  expression  required  for  a  sacred  picture ;  in  fact 
Vathoo  was  a  perfect  little  gipsy  beauty,  with  perhaps 
more  devil  than  angel  in  her  impulsive  character. 

Then  came  the  real  gentle  little  face  with  gazelle-like 
eyes,  "  Baraksu,"  about  eight  years  old  :  followed  by  a 
minimum  shepherdess,  "  Athena,"  of  nearly  five  years 
old,  who  climbed  the  rocks,  shouted,  and  threw  stones 
at  her  refractory  flock,  as  though  an  experienced  goat- 
herd of  forty.  The  youngest  was  just  able  to  stand ; 
with  a  pair  of  the  biggest  black  eyes,  and  a  natural 
instinct  for  gorging  itself  with  unripe  fruits  and  hard 
nuts,  which,  added  to  its  ^maternal  sustenance  that  it 
was  still  enjoying,  proved  the  mill-like  character  of 
its  infantine  digestion.  For  two  months  we  thought 
this  young  Hercules  was  a  promising  boy,  until  by 
an  accident  we  discovered  it  was  a  "young  lady" 
Linobambaki !  When  we  arrived  at  Trooditissa  these 
children  were  in  rags  and  filth,  but  under  the  tutelage 
of  my  wife  they  quickly  changed,  and  the  never- 
failing  fountain,  assisted  by  a  cake  of  soap  supplied 
occasionally,  effected  a  marked  improvement  in  all 
complexions. 

They  were  remarkably  well-mannered  after  the  first 
natural  shyness  had  worn  away,  and  formed  a  contrast 
to  children  of  a  low  class  in  England  in  never  mis- 
behaving when  intimate.  All  these  little  creatures 
were  employed  in  cleaning  and  improving  the  place ; 
even  the  minute  Athena  might  be  seen  carrying  a  great 
stone  upon  her  small  shoulder,  adding  her  mite  to  the 
work,  and  rubbing  the  galled  spot  as  she  threw  down 
her  load.  '  The  bright  threepenny  pieces  were  in  great 


326  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  XII. 


favour,  and  the  children  invariably  hastened  to  their 
mother  with  their  earnings  at  the  close  of  the  after- 
noon.    When  the   camp  and  monastery  surroundings 
were  in  perfect   order  there  was  no  longer   any  re- 
munerative  employment   for   the   family,    except   the 
uncertain  and  occasional  work  of  collecting  wild  flowers 
for  the  tent  and  table.     The  myrtles  bloomed  in  early 
July,  and   in    the   deep  ravine    by  the   waterfall    the 
oleanders  were  then  still  in  blossom.     Several  plants 
which  were  strange  to  me  were  added  to  the  collection  ; 
the  days  were   generally  passed  by  the   children   in 
minding  the  numerous  goats  until  the  evening,  when 
each   child   brought  some  simple  offering  of  flowers. 
We  bought  sheep  from  the  low  country  at  about  six 
or  seven  shillings  each,  and  Vathoo  was  the  special 
shepherdess  of  our  small   flock,    for   which  she  was 
responsible ;  they  were  invariably  driven  out  at  4  a.m. 
and  brought  home  at  8  to  avoid  the  sun,  and  again 
taken  out  from  4  p.m.  till  7. 

In  this  simple  manner  we  passed  our  time  at 
Trooditissa;  my  amusements  were  my  small  garden, 
writing  an  account  of  Cyprus,  and  strolling  over  the 
mountains :  the  latter  occupation  being  most  unprofit- 
able, as  I  destroyed  all  my  boots  upon  the  horrible 
surface  of  loose  stones,  in  which  there  was  little 
geological  interest,  as  they  were  all  gneiss  and  syenite, 
cracked  and  starred  during  a  process  of  subaquean 
cooling.  The  deplorable  aspect  of  the  otherwise 
beautiful  mountains  was  occasioned  by  the  wholesale 
and  wilful  destruction  of  pine-trees,  which  is  the 
Cypriote's  baneful  characteristic,  and  as  this  is  one  of 
the  most  important  subjects  in  the  modern  history  of 
the  island,  I  shall  devote  the  following  special  chapter 
entirely  to  the  question  of  "  Woods  and  Forests." 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

WOODS     AND     FORESTS. 

The  climate  of  Cyprus  is  extreme  in  temperature 
during  the  months  of  June,  July,  August,  and  until  the 
close  of  September ;  throughout  the  greater  portion  of  the 
island  the  treeless  surface  absorbs  the  sun's  rays,  and 
during  the  night  radiates  the  heat  thus  obtained,  which 
raises  the  thermometer  to  90*'  before  sunrise  :  while  at 
noon  it  occasionally  marks  100"*  beneath  the  shade.  A 
treeless  country  must  either  be  extremely  hot  or  cold, 
according  to  the  latitude ;  and  without  a  certain  pro- 
portion of  forest  there  will  be  an  absence  of  equilibrium 
in  temperature.  Most  persons  will  have  observed  the 
effect  of  heat  radiation  from  rocks,  or  even  from  the 
walls  of  a  building  that  have  been  exposed  to  a 
summers  sun  during  the  long  day.  At  about  six  p.m., 
when  the  air  is  cool,  the  sun-heat  stored  by  absorption 
escapes  from  its  imprisonment,  and  thermometers  would 
exhibit  a  difference  of  many  degrees  if  placed  at  two 
feet  from  the  ground,  and  at  fifty  ;  the  rocks  and  earth 
have  been  heated  like  an  oven.  Trees  will  affect  the 
surface  of  the  soil  in  the  same  manner  that  an  umbrella 
protects  an  individual  from  the  sun,  and  upon  lofty 
mountains  they  exercise  a  marked  influence  upon  the 
rainfall.      Should  the  summits  be   naked,    the   rocks 


328  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


become  heated  to  a  high  degree,  and  should  clouds 
pass  overhead,  the  vapour  would  not  condense,  but, 
on  the  contrary,  it  might  disperse  upon  contact  with 
the  heated  surface.  If  the  summits  were  clothed  with 
forests,  the  rocks  and  soil,  being  shaded  from  the  sun, 
would  remain  cool,  and  the  low  temperature  of  earth 
and  foliage  would  condense  the  vapour  and  produce 
rain.  It  is  well  known  that  trees  exert  a  direct 
influence  upon  meteorological  phenomena,  therefore 
should  forests  be  totally  destroyed,  a  change  may  be 
expected  in  the  temperature,  attended  by  a  corre- 
sponding decrease  in  the  rainfall.  It  is  obvious  that 
should  a  country  be  entirely  covered  with  trees  and 
jungle,  it  will  be  too  damp  and  unhealthy  for  the 
occupation  of  man ;  and  should  it  be  absolutely  barren 
of  forest,  it  will  possess  a  minimum  rainfall ;  therefore 
in  all  countries  that  are  expected  to  develop  agricultural 
resources,  the  due  proportions  of  woods  and  forests 
require  special  attention. 

In  ancient  days  there  can  be  no  question  that  Cyprus 
was  rich  in  timber,  and  that  the  mountainous  districts 
were  thickly  clothed  to  their  summits  with  valuable 
wood  varying  in  species  according  to  altitude.  At  the 
risk  of  repetition  I  must  describe  the  qualities  which 
now  exist,  and  which  were  no  doubt  exported  from 
the  island,  and  became  widely  known  and  appreciated 
in  the  early  days  of  Cyprian  prosperity. 

Oaks. — There  are  several  varieties  of  oak,  but  large 
park-like  timber  of  this  species  is  exceedingly  scarce, 
and  although  met  with  occasionally  in  grand  spreading 
trees  with  trunks  of  large  girth,  they  are  only  sufficient 
to  prove  the  destruction  that  has  befallen  their  race. 
It  is  most  probable  that  the  oak  was  largely  exported 
for  ship-building ;  but  as  an    available   forest-tree  it 


XIII.] 


Woods  and  Forests.  329 


may  be  said  to  have  disappeared.  The  ilex  is  the 
most  common  of  all  woods  upon  the  Troodos  range 
and  upon  other  mountains,  but  the  natives  have  made 
such  constant  attacks  upon  this  quality  for  the  manu- 
facture of  charcoal  that  it  is  seldom  met  with  as  a 
forest-tree.  It  is  extremely  hardy,  and  through  con- 
tinual hacking,  it  has  grown  into  dense  bushes  which 
are  generally  about  eight  feet  high  ;  but  in  very  remote 
localities  among  the  mountains  I  have  found  it  in  the 
shape  of  timber  growing  to  the  height  of  forty  feet. 
There  is  a  third  variety  with  a  prickly  leaf  resembling 
holly,  of  an  intensely  dark  green. 

Pines, —  I  have  only  met  with  three  varieties — the 
Pinus  maritima,  Pinus  laricio,  and  the  stone  pine. 
The  latter  is  very  rare,  but  may  be  seen  at  Platraes. 
The  natives  invariably  pick  the  cones  of  this  species 
when  green  for  the  sake  of  the  small  edible  nuts 
afforded  by  the  seeds. 

The  Pinus  laricio  is  a  handsome  tree  with  a  dark 
foliage  and  branches  that  droop  regularly  from  the 
summit,  widening  towards  the  base.  It  is  difficult  to 
determine  the  maximum  size  that  would  be  attained 
by  this  species,  as  the  Cypriotes  seldom  allow  any  tree 
to  remain  uninjured.  The  usual  size  of  the  Laricio 
on  the  Troodos  range  is  about  fifty  feet  in  height, 
with  a  girth  of  six  feet,  but  I  have  frequently  seen 
specimens  of  nine  feet  in  girth,  and  about  seventy  to 
eighty  feet  in  height. 

The  Pinus  maritima  has  a  lighter  foliage  and  the 
branches  are  more  spreading,  but  the  size  is  about  the 
same  as  the  Laricio.  Both  these  species  are  rich  in 
tar  and  turpentine. 

Cypress, — There  are  two  varieties — the  dwarf,  which 
covers  the  flat-topped  limestone .  hills  of   the  Carpas 


330  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


district,  and  the  fragrant  species  which  grows  upon  the 
heights  of  Troodos  and  all  that  range  which  extends  to 
Poli-ton-Khrysokus. 

The  dwarf-cypress  attains  a  height  of  about  twenty 
feet,  and  is  exceedingly  hard  and  durable.  The  fragrant 
species  varies  from  thirty  to  thirty-five  feet,  with  a 
stem,  of  six,  to  sometimes  eight  feet  in  circumference. 
The  wood  is  highly  aromatic,  and  I  have  already 
described  it  as  resembling  a  mixture  of  sandal-wood 
and  cedar.  This  tree  is  known  by  the  Cypriotes  as 
kypresseSy  while  the  dwarf  variety  is  known  as  the 
"  wild  cypress,"  and  is  called  by  them  "  aoratu!' 

Plane  {Platanus). — This  tree  is  generally  found  in 
the  ravines  among  the  mountains,  on  the  borders  of 
streams,  and  would  grow  to  a  large  size,  but  its  straight 
young  stems  are  much  sought  after  by  the  natives  for 
.  various  purposes,  and  it  is  seldom  allowed  a  chance  of 
arriving  unscathed  at  maturity.  Its  light  green  foliage 
is  highly  ornamental,  mixed  with  the  dark  shades  of 
the  ilex  in  the  deep  bottoms  of  the  gorges;  and 
wherever  a  never-failing  stream  is  met  with  the  plane 
may  be  expected. 

The  elm,  ash,  maple,  walnut,  mulberry,  peach, 
apricot,  apple,  pear,  filbert,  fig,  plum,  cherry,  orange, 
lemon,  pomegranate,  are  common,  but  as  they  do 
not  come  within  the  category  of  trees  indigenous 
to  the  natural  forests  of  the  island,  I  shall  not 
include  them. 

Olive. — The  wild  olive  forms  a  considerable  portion 
of  the  low  scrub- woods  of  the  Carpas  district,  and  the 
young  trees,  when  transplanted  and  grafted,  become 
the  accepted  olives  of  cultivation.  There  is  no  reason 
why  the  wild  olive  should  not  be  grafted  in  its  natural 
position  the  same  as  the  caroub. 


XIII.] 


Woods  and  Forests.  331 


Caroub. — This  tree  has  already  been  described,  but 
although  not  valuable  as  timber,  owing  to  the  short 
length  of  its  trunk,  it  should  receive  the  special 
attention  of  the  government,  as  its  produce  should  be 
extended  to  the  utmost  limit  of  the  capabilities  of  the 
island.  If  the  wild  trees  were  grafted  wherever  they 
are  met  with,  whole  forests  would  quickly  be  produced 
with  a  minimum  of  labour,  and  vast  tracts  of  rocky 
soil,  worthless  for  other  cultivation,  would  be  brought 
into  value,  at  the  same  time  that  the  surface  would 
be  covered  with  the  much  desired  vegetation. 

Tremtlkta. — The  wood  of  this  tree  is  of  no  value, 
but  the  berries  are  used  as  a  substitute  for  olive-oil ; 
as  it  grows  in  large  quantities  as  a  shrub,  simply 
because  it  is  not  allowed  the  chance  of  arriving  at 
maturity,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  a  few  years  of  forest 
supervision  will  add  this  shady  and  highly-ornamental 
tree  to  the  list  of  those  common  to  the  island.  The 
arbutus,  myrtle,  and  the  mastic  are  trees  of  so  small 
a  growth  that  they  cannot  be  classed  with  "Woods 
and  Forests." 

One  of  the  first  acts  of  the  British  administration 
was  a  stringent  prohibition  against  the  felling  of  any 
tree  throughout  Cyprus,  or  the  cutting  of  any  wood 
for  the  burning  of  charcoal.  This  law  for  the  preserva- 
tion of  woods  and  forests  extended  to  trees  upon 
private  property  of  individtials  / — thus  the  owner  of 
a  garden  could  not  cut  down  one  of  his  own  caroub- 
trees  if  they  were  too  thickly  planted  ;  or  if  he  required 
a  piece  of  timber  for  making  or  repairmg  his  water- 
wheel.  An  act  for  the  protection  of  crown  forests 
was  highly  necessary,  but  no  laws  are  of  value  unless 
the  machinery  exists  for  enforcing  them,  and  at  the 
present  moment  the  stringent  enactment  against  the 


332  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


destruction  of  trees  may  be  evaded  like  any  of  the 
Ten  Commandments,  because  there  is  absolutely  no 
staff,  nor  special  officers  for  the  supervision  of  woods 
and  forests.  This  important  subject  requires  a 
separate  department,  and  nothing  can  be  more  simple 
if  administered  by  persons  qualified  by  education  for 
the  development  of  trees  suitable  to  the  island.  The 
poverty  of  the  local  government,  owing  to  the  miserable 
conditions  of  our  tenure,  which  send  the  cream  to 
Turkey,  and  suckle  the  necessary  staff  upon  the  thin 
skimmed-milk,  does  not  permit  the  real  improvement 
of  the  forests.  It  is  simply  ridiculous  to  make  laws 
without  the  active  weapons  to  enforce  authority;  we 
may  as  well  rest  satisfied  with  the  game  laws  in 
England  and  dismiss  our  keepers,  as  prohibit  the 
cutting  of  wood  in  Cyprus  without  supervising  the 
forests  by  a  staff  of  foresters.  If  the  words  "  Thou 
shalt  not  steal,"  even  from  a  divine  command,  were 
sufficient  to  prevent  felony  and  petty  larceny,  it  would 
be  folly  to  incur  the  expense  of  police ;  but  we  know 
that  practically  all  laws  must  be  upheld  by  force,  re- 
presented by  the  authorised  guardians  of  the  state. 
At  this  moment  in  Cyprus  the  law  proclaims,  "  Thou 
shalt  not  cut  a  tree,"  while  practically  you  may  cut 
as  many  as  you  like  in  the  mountain  forests,  as  there 
is  no  person  authorised  to  interfere  with  your  acts. 
Some  miserable  offender  may  be  pounced  upon  in  his 
own  garden,  near  one  of  the  principal  tbwns,  where 
the  law  should  never  have  been  enforced,  as  interfering 
with  the  individual  rights  of  private  property ;  but  in 
the  situations  where  the  prohibition  is  of  the  first 
importance,  there  is  literally  not  an  officer  or  man  to 
prevent  the  usual  depredations.  Why  'i  The  answer 
must  be  accepted.     There  is  no  money,  and  we  cannot 


XIII.]  Woods  and  Forests.  333 

afford  an  independent  department  of  "  Woods  and 
Forests."  If  the  country  is  to  continue  in  this  slip- 
shod form  it  is  a  disgrace  to  England.  There  is  time 
to  save  the  forests  from  absolute  destruction,  and  in 
my  own  opinion,  before  anything  is  done  beyond  the 
necessary  roads  and  irrigation  loans,  every  possible 
attention  should  be  concentrated  upon  the  protection 
and  development  of  forest-trees. 

The  position  at  this  moment  is  as  follows.  Through- 
out the  entire  mountain  range  there  are  not  5  per  cent, 
of  pines  free  from  mutilation. 

The  whole  of  Troodos,  and  the  mountain  districts 
from  near  Lithrodondo  to  as  far  west  as  Poli-ton- 
Khrysokus,  are  naturally  adapted  for  the  growth  of 
pines  and  cypress,  which  love  the  soil  of  the  plutonic 
rocks,  and  drive  their  roots  deep  into  the  interstices, 
deriving  nourishment  where  nothing  else  would  thrive. 
Upon  the  highest  altitudes  there  is  not  a  dwarf  shrub 
to  cover  the  surface  of  the  loose  coffee-coloured  rocks, 
where  in  the  winter  the  snow  accumulates  to  a  depth 
of  twenty  feet,  yet  there  we  find  the  pines  and  cypress 
in  their  greatest  vigour;  but  even  to  these  solitary 
heights  the  Cypriote  has  penetrated  with  his  un- 
sparing axe,  and  has  created  a  desolation  that  must 
be  seen  to  be  understood.  There  is  no  sight  so  exas- 
perating as  this  uncalled-for  destruction ;  it  is  beyond 
all  belief,  and  when  the  amount  of  labour  is  considered 
that  must  have  been  expended  in  this  indiscriminate 
attack  upon  forest-trees  that  are  left  to  rot  upon  the 
ground  where  they  have  fallen,  the  object  of  the 
attack  is  at  first  sight  inconceivable.  The  sight  of 
a  mountain  pine-forest  in  Cyprus  would  convey  the 
impression  that  an  enemy  who  had  conquered  the 
country  had   determined  to   utterly  destroy   it,  even 


334  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


to  the  primaeval  forests  ;  he  had  therefore  felled,  and 
left  to  rot,  the  greater  portion  of  the  trees  ;  but  finding 
the  labour  beyond  his  means,  he  had  contented  him- 
self with  barking,  ringing,  and  hacking  at  the  base 
of  the  remainder,  to  ensure  their  ultimate  destruction. 

The  extreme  heights  of  Troodos,  shoulders  and 
head,  are  about  6300  feet  above  the  sea,  from  which 
altitude  the  pines  and  cypress  descend  to  within 
1 500  feet  of  the  level.  There  are  rough  native  mule- 
paths  throughout  the  mountains,  and  the  sure-footed 
animals  will  carry  a  man  with  ease  where  walking 
would  be  most  fatiguing,  owing  to  the  loose  rocks 
and  smaller  stones,  which  cover  every  inch  of  the 
surface.  I  have  walked  and  ridden  over  the  greater 
portion,  but  in  all  cases  I  have  been  overcome  with 
anger  and  dismay  at  the  terrible  exhibition  of  wanton 
and  unwarrantable  desolation.  If  a  hurricane  had 
passed  over  the  country  and  torn  up  by  the  roots  nine 
trees  out  of  every  ten  that  composed  the  forest,  the 
destruction  would  be  nothing  compared  to  that  of  the 
native  Cypriote,  who  mutilates  those  which  he  has 
not  felled ;  the  wind  would  only  upturn,  but  would 
spare  those  whose  strength  had  resisted  the  attack. 
Magnificent  trees  lie  rotting  upon  the  ground  in 
thousands  upon  thousands,  untouched  since  the  hour 
when  they  fell  before  the  most  scientifically  applied 
axe.  I  never  saw  a  higher  example  of  woodcraft. 
The  trunks  of  pines  two  feet  in  diameter  are  cut 
so  carefully,  that  the  work  of  the  axe  is  almost  as 
neat  as  that  of  a  cross-cut  saw.  These  large  trees 
are  divided  about  four  feet  from  the  ground,  as  that 
is  a  convenient  height  for  the  woodman,  and  spares 
his  back  from  stooping  to  his  blow.  Each  cut  with 
the   axe  is   nearly  at   a   right   angle  with    the   stem. 


XIII.]  Woods  and  Forests.  335 

and  so  regularly  is  the  cutting  conducted  completely 
round  the  tree,  that  at  length  only  two,  or  at  the 
most  three  inches  of  wood  remain  to  support  the 
trunk,  which  in  the  absence  of  wind  remains  balanced 
to  the  last  moment,  until  overthrown  by  the  wedge. 

Upon  first  arrival  in  the  country  it  is  difficult  to 
comprehend  the  reason  for  this  general  destruction  ; 
but  as  a  gipsy  in  Turkey  will  burn  down  a  handsome 
tree  in  order  to  make  his  wooden  spoons,  so  the 
Cypriote  will  fell  a  large  pine  for  the  sake  of  the  base 
of  five  or  six  feet  in  length  that  will  afford  him  a 
wooden  trough  either  for  water  or  to  feed  his  pigs. 
A  great  number  of  the  larger  trees  are  cut  and 
partially  scooped  for  four  or  five  feet  before  their 
destruction  is  determined  upon,  as  the  carpenter  wishes 
to  prove  the  quality  of  the  heart.  Many  are  rejected, 
and  the  operation  proceeds  no  further ;  but  the  tree 
remains  mutilated  for  ever. 

Other  trees  are  felled  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining 
tar.  Before  they  are  absolutely  cut  down  they  are 
tapped  by  cutting  a  deep  incision  nearly  into  the 
centre  of  the  heart,  like  a  huge  notch,  and  they  are 
left  for  a  time  to  prove  whether  the  tar  will  run,  as 
exhibited  by  the  production  of  the  resin.  If  unfavour- 
able, the  tree  is  left  thus  cut  to  the  heart  and 
blemished.  Nearly  every  tree  is  thus  marked.  If 
the  signs  of  tar  are  propitious,  the  tree  is  felled,  the 
branches  are  lopped,  and  the  trunk  cut  into  sections 
and  split.  All  pieces  are  then  arranged  longitudinally 
in  a  rude  kiln  formed  of  loose  stones  and  earth,  in 
which  they  are  burned,  and  the  tar  as  it  exudes  is 
led  by  a  narrow  gutter  formed  of  clay  into  the 
receptacle  prepared. 

Should  a  straight  pole  be  required  for  any  special 


33^  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAF. 


purpose,  a  large  pine  is  felled,  and  the  tapered,  pointed 
top  is  cut  off  to  a  convenient  length,  the  great  spar 
being  rejected  and  left  to  decay  upon  the  ground.  I 
have  never  seen  pit-saws  used,  but  as  a  rule,  should  a 
beam  or  stout  plank  be  required,  a  whole  tree  is  adzed 
away  to  produce  it,  and  great  piles  of  chips  are  con- 
tinually met  with  in  the  forests,  where  some  large  trunk 
has  thus  perished  under  the  exhausting  process.  I  was 
rather  surprised,  when  the  military  huts  were  conveyed 
at  an  immense  expense  of  transport  to  the  mountain 
station,  that  a  few  pairs  of  English  sawyers  had  not 
been  employed  to  cut  the  inexhaustible  supply  of 
seasoned  wood  now  lying  uselessly  upon  the  ground, 
that  would  have  supplied  all  necessary  planks  and 
rafters,  &c. 

Fires,  either  accidental  or  malicious,  are  not  uncom- 
mon, and  I  have  seen  hill-sides  completely  destroyed. 
At  a  certain  season  the  pines  change  their  foliage  and 
the  ground  becomes  thickly  covered  to  the  depth  of  a 
couple  of  inches  or  more  with  the  dry  and  highly  in- 
flammable spines.  Should  these  take  fire,  the  conflag- 
ration in  a  high  wind  becomes  serious,  and  spreads  to 
the  trees,  which  perish. 

Nothing  would  be  easier  than  to  defend  the  interests 
of  the  woods  and  forests  by  an  efficient  staff  of 
foresters,  who  should  be  Highlanders  from  Scotland 
accustomed  to  mountain  climbing,  or  English  game- 
keepers, who  would  combine  the  protection  of  forests 
with  that  of  game.  These  men,  under  the  command 
of  a  certain  number  of  officers,  should  be  quartered  in 
particular  districts,  and  would  quickly  acquire  a  know- 
ledge of  the  localities.  The  higher  mountains  would 
be  their  home  during  the  summer  months,  from  which 
points  the  sound  of  an  axe  could  be  heard  from   a 


XIII.] 


Woods  and  Forests.  337 


great  distance,  and  from  the  commanding  elevation 
a  depredator  could  be  distinctly  identified  with  a  good 
telescope.  The  Cypriotes  are  easily  governed,  and 
should  a  fev/  severe  examples  be  made  public  when 
the  destroyers  had  been  taken  in  the  act,  an  exceed- 
ingly small  staff  of  foresters  would  be  sufficient  to 
insure  order  and  protection. 

The  pine  and  cypress  are  the  trees  most  generally 
attacked,  and,  as  I  have  already  shown,  there  is  no 
difficulty  whatever  in  their  preservation  should  the 
requisite  staff  of  officials  be  appointed.  It  should, 
however,  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  preservation 
of  woods  and  forests  is  a  simple  matter  compared 
with  the  absolute  necessity  of  their  extension ;  it  is 
therefore  desirable  to  examine  the  capabilities  of  the 
island  for  tree-culture. 

When  Cyprus  was  first  occupied  by  British  troops 
the  English  newspapers  were  full  of  superficial 
advice  suggested  by  numerous  well-meaning  corre- 
spondents who  were  utterly  devoid  of  practical 
experience  in  tree-planting,  and  a  unanimous  verdict 
was  given  in  favour  of  the  Eucalyptus  globulus^  and 
other  varieties  of  the  same  tree,  irrespective  of  all 
knowledge  of  localities  and  soils. 

The  absence  of  money  would  be  the  only  excuse 
for  any  delay  in  experimental  tree-culture.  The  seeds 
of  the  eucalyptus  were  sent  out  in  considerable  quan- 
tities to  the  various  chief  commissioners  of  districts 
for  cultivation,  as  though  these  overworked  and 
ill-paid  officers  were  omniscient,  and  added  the  prac- 
tical knowledge  of  horticulture  to  their  military 
qualifications.  Every  commissioner  that  I  saw  had 
a  few  old  wine  or  beer  cases  filled  with  earth,  in 
which    he    was    endeavouring     to    produce    embryo 

z 


338  Cyprus  in  1879, 


[CHAP 


forests  of  the  varieties  of  eucalyptus,  to  be  planted 
out  when  germinated — how,-  when,  or  where,  he 
could  not  tell.  Of  course  all  these  attempts  ended  in 
failure.  There  should  have  been  an  experienced 
gardener  specially  appointed  for  the  purpose  of  raising 
and  planting  out  the  young  trees  adapted  for  the 
various  soils  and  altitudes  of  the  country,  and  such 
trees  should  have  been  ready  for  their  positions  at 
the  commencement  of  the  winter  months  in  November. 
The  commissioners  worked  in  this  new  occupation 
with  the  same  praiseworthy  energy  that  distinguished 
them  throughout  all  the  trying  difficulties  of  their 
appointment  as  rulers  in  a  strange  country,  where, 
without  a  knowledge  of  the  language  or  customs, 
they  were  suddenly  called  upon  to  confer  happiness 
and  contentment  upon  an  oppressed  population  by 
administering  Turkish  laws  in  the  essence  of  their 
integrity. 

The  Cypriotes  had  expected  to  see  England  and 
the  English  as  their  rulers  ;  but  like  the  well-known 
saying,  **  Scratch  a  Russian  and  you  discover  the 
Tartar,"  they  might  have  "  scratched  an  Englishman 
and  have  found  the  Turk,"  in  the  actual  regime  that  we 
were  bound  to  maintain  according  to  the  conditions 
of  the  British  ocucpation. 

The  native  mind  could  not  understand  the  reason 
for  the  stringent  rule  prohibiting  the  cutting  of  trees, 
and  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  our  govern- 
ment contemplated  some  selfish  advantage,  and  that 
the  forests  were  eventually  to  be  leased  to  a  company. 
When  they  shall  see  tree-planting  commenced  by  the 
government  upon  an  extensive  scale  they  will  believe 
in  the  undertaking  as  intended  for  the  welfare  of 
the  island. 


XIII.] 


Woods  and  Forests,  339 


Whenever  this  important  and  necessary  work  shall 
be  organised,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  "common  sense" 
will  be  employed  in  the  selection  of  trees  adapted  for 
the  various  localities,  and  that  no  absurd  experiments 
will  be  made  upon  a  large  scale  by  introducing 
varieties  foreign  to  the  island  until  they  shall  have 
been  tested  satisfactorily  in  botanical  nurseries  estab- 
lished at  various  altitudes. 

There  are  various  local  difficulties  that  must  be 
considered  in  addition  to  soil  and  climate ;  the  most 
important  is  the  presence  of  vast  numbers  of  goats 
throughout  the  mountains,  that  would  utterly  destroy 
certain  varieties  of  young  plants.  There  can  be  no 
doubt  that  the  climate  and  soil  are  specially  adapted 
for  the  introduction  of  the  common  larch,  which  would 
grow  quickly  into  value  for  the  much-needed  poles  for 
rafters  and  beams  for  the  flat-topped  roofs ;  but  this 
tree  is  eagerly  devoured  by  sheep,  goats,  and  cattle, 
and  would  be  destroyed  in  its  first  stage  unless 
protected  by  fencing.  It  will  be  a  safe  rule  to  adopt 
the  native  trees  as  a  guide  to  future  extension,  as  the 
varieties  of  such  classes  as  are  indigenous  will  as- 
suredly succeed.  The  two  existing  pines  are  shunned 
by  goats  even  when  in  their  earliest  growth,  and  they 
are  so  ineradicable  that  were  the  forests  spared  and 
allowed  to  remain  without  artificial  planting,  in  ten 
years  there  would  be  masses  of  young  trees  too  thick 
for  the  success  of  timber.  The  rain,  when  heavy, 
washes  the  fallen  cones  from  the  highest  points,  and 
as  they  are  carried  by  the  surface  water  down  the 
steep  inclines  they  hitch  among  the  rocks  and  take 
root  in  every  favourable  locality.  Here  we  have  two 
native  trees  that  will  plant  themselves  and  flourish 
without  expense,  invulnerable  to  the  attacks  of  goats, 

z  2 


340  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


and  only  demanding  rest  and  time.  '  On  the  other 
hand,  they  might  be  planted  at  regular  intervals  with 
so  small  an  outlay  that  their  artificial  arrangement 
would  be  advisable. 

The  cypress  may  be  extended  in  a  similar  manner. 

The  presence  of  several  varieties  of  oak  would 
naturally  suggest  the  introduction  of  the  cork-tree  and 
the  species  which  produces  the  valonia,  which  forms 
an  important  article  of  trade,  and  is  largely  used  in 
England  by  the  tanner.  This  cup  of  the  acorn  of  the 
Quercus  cegilops  is  extremely  rich  in  tannin,  and 
ranges  in  price  from  ;^20  to  £2P  P^^  ^^^  delivered  in 
an  English  port.  It  is  exported  largely  from  the 
Levant,  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  its  intro- 
duction to  Cyprus  would  eventually  supply  a  new 
s  ource  of  revenue. 

The  climate  and  soil  of  the  Troodos  mountains 
would  be  highly  favourable  to  the  cork-tree,^  which 
would  after  thirty  or  forty  years  become  extremely 
valuable.  The  box  might  be  introduced  from  the 
mountains  of  Spain,  also  the  Spanish  chestnut,  which 
for  building  purposes  is  invaluable,  as  not  only  practi- 
cally imperishable,  but  fire-proof.  It  is  not  generally 
known  that  the  wood  of  the  Spanish  chestnut  is  so 
uninflammable  that  it  requires  the  aid  of  other  fuel 
to  consume  it  by  fire ;  it  might  be  used  with  great 
advantage  in  massive  logs  for  upright  pillars,  to 
support  beams  of  similar  wood  in  warehouses. 

Although  the  walnut  cannot  be  classed  with  forest- 
trees  indigenous  to  Cyprus,  it  flourishes  abundantly  at 
a  high  elevation,  ranging  from  about  2500  to  5000  feet 

*  The  cork  oak  is  mentioned  in  some  works  on  Cyprus  as  indi- 
genous to  the  island  j  this  is  a  mistake.  The  ilex  is  plentiful,  but  not 
the  cork-tree. 


xrii.] 


Woods  and  Forests,  341 


above  the  sea.  At  Trooditissa  monastery  there  are 
trees  that  were  planted  by  the  hands  of  the  old  monk, 
my  informant,  only  twenty  years  ago,  which  are  equal 
in  size  to  a  growth  of  fifty  years  in  England.  The 
planting  of  walnuts  should  certainly  be  encouraged,  as 
the  wood  is  extremely  valuable ;  at  the  same  time  that 
the  crop  yields  an  annual  revenue. 

The  preservation  and  extension  of  the  woods 
and  forests  throughout  the  mountainous  districts  of 
Cyprus  are  a  simple  affair,  which  only  requires  capital 
and  common  sense  combined  with  the  usual  necessary 
experience.  There  are  other  portions  of  the  island 
which  require  a  different  treatment. 

It  is  the  fashion  to  accredit  every  portion  of  Cyprus 
as  tree-bearing  in  its  early  history,  but  if  the  student 
will  compare  the  large  population  reported  to  have 
existed  at  that  time  with  the  superficial  area  of  the 
island,  it  will  be  plainly  seen  that  a  very  large  pro- 
portion must  have  been  under  cultivation,  otherwise 
supplies  must  have  been  imported.  I  have  before 
mentioned  my  opinion  that  the  hard  bare  surface  of 
the  denuded  cretaceous  hills  could  never  have  borne 
timber,  neither  do  I  believe  in  the  traditions  concern- 
ing forests  in  the  plain  of  Messaria,  for  the  simple 
reason  that  it  must  have  been  the  cereal-producing 
area  of  the  island. 

The  ancient  forests  must  have  existed  where  the 
vestiges  remain  to  the  present  day,  in  which  localities 
the  natural  inclination  of  the  soil  is  to  produce  trees, 
which  are  still  represented,  in  spite  of  the  hideous 
destruction  perpetrated  by  the  inhabitants  during  many 
centuries.  These  positions  include  the  entire  Carpas 
district,  together  with  the  long  range  of  compact  lime- 
stone  mountains   forming   the   northern   wall   of  the 


342  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


island,  the  northern  coast  and  western,  comprising  the 
country  between  Poli-ton-Khrysokhus,  and  Baffo,  and 
the  central  and  coast-line  from  Baffo  to  Limasol,  with 
exceptions  of  lands  here  and  there  cultivated  with  cereals. 
The  greater  portion  of  the  mountains  that  are  now 
occupied  with  vineyards  were  originally  forests,  which 
have  been  cleared  specially  for  the  cultivation  of  the 
vine.  I  have  seen  ground  at  an  elevation  of  4800  feet 
where  the  vineyards  originally  existed  upon  cleared 
forest  soil,  which,  having  been  abandoned,  is  relapsing 
into  its  former  state,  becoming  more  or  less  covered 
with  pines  as  birds  may  have  dropped  the  seeds,  or 
the  cones  may  have  been  driven  from  higher  altitudes 
by  wind  and  rain. 

The  question  that  must  now  be  determined  is  this : 
"What  portions  of  the  island  are  to  be  restored  to 
forest  ? "  Any  person  who  has  carefully  examined 
the  country  can  reply  without  hesitation,  "  Plant  all 
useless  lands  with  trees ;  those  useless  lands  are 
already  more  or  less  covered  with  bush  or  woods, 
and  denote  their  own  position,  in  the  Carpas,  the 
Troodos,  and  all  mountain  and  hill  ranges." 

Where  ancient  forests  have  disappeared  in  favour  of 
cultivation,  it  would  be  folly  to  convert  an  improve- 
ment into  the  original  wilderness.  That  question  is 
easily  simplified,  and  when  the  department  of  Woods  and 
Forests  shall  be  established,  a  few  years  of  energy  will 
produce  a  new  picture  in  a  country  where  the  growth 
of  timber  proceeds  quickly. 

But  the  last  necessary  reform  still  remains  un- 
noticed ;  this  should  determine  the  amount  of  caroubs, 
mulberry,  and  fruit-trees  that  should  be  compulsorily 
planted  by  all  proprietors  of  land  in  proportion  to  their 
acreage ;  and  this  is  absolutely  necessary. 


XIII.] 


Woods  and  Forests.  343 


As  I  have  described  in  many  portions  of  our 
journey  through  Cyprus,  the  simple  action  of  an 
insignificant  stream,  or  of  a  solitary  cattle- wheel,  forms 
an  oasis  in  the  rainless  desert  of  the  Messaria,  and 
the  eye  that  has  been  wearied  with  the  barren  aspect 
of  a  treeless  surface  is  gladdened  by  the  relief  of 
a  sudden  appearance  of  groves  of  oranges,  lemons, 
and  other  shady  trees,  the  result  of  a  supply  of  water. 
Whenever  such  welcome  spots  are  met  with  upon  the 
miserable  plain,  the  question  invariably  arises,  "Why 
should  such  fruitful  and  delightful  positions  be  so 
rare?  The  soil  is  fertile,  the  climate  is  favourable, 
all  that  is  required  is  water,  and  energy." 

If  a  Cypriote  is  asked  the  question,  he  invariably 
replies  "  that  during  the  Turkish  administration  the 
fruit-trees  increased  their  troubles,  owing  to  the 
vexatious  and  extortionate  taxation  of  the  crops, 
therefore  they  were  glad  to  be  quit  of  them  alto- 
gether." Your  question  No.  2  follows,  **  Why  do  you 
not  plant  trees  now  that  the  English  have  occupied  the 
country  ? ''  The  reply  is  stereotyped,  "  We  are  not  sure 
that  you  will  remain  here  permanently,  and  if  you 
abandon  the  island  the  Turks  will  resume  the  old 
system  with  even  greater  oppression  than  before.*' 
This  is  an  unanswerable  dilemma,  which  no  doubt 
retards  improvements  ;  but  there  is  a  third  difficulty 
which  is  invariably  brought  prominently  forward  when 
any  suggestions  are  made  for  an  extension  of  agricul- 
tural enterprise :  "  We  have  no  money."  This  is 
absolutely  true,  although  I  have  heard  the  assertion 
contested  by  certain  authorities.  The  people  as  a 
rule  are  miserably  poor,  and  cannot  afford  to  run  the 
risks  of  experiments,  especially  during  the  present 
uncertainty  connected  with  the   British  occupation. 


344  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


The  opinions  that  I  personally  offer  are  based  upon 
the  assumption  that  England  can  never  recede  from 
the  position  she  has  assumed  in  Cyprus,  which  she 
must  continue,  for  better  or  for  worse,  as  a  point  of 
honour.  Any  abandonment  of  the  protection  we  have 
afforded  to  the  inhabitants  would  tend  to  aggravate 
their  position,  should  they  return  to  the  authority  of 
the  Porte,  and  their  only  hope  would  lie  in  the 
occupation  of  our  empty  bed  by  France,  who  certainly 
requires  a  coaling  dep6t  towards  the  east  of  the 
Mediterranean.  Should  we  wash  our  hands  of  Cyprus, 
and  evacuate  it  in  a  similar  manner  to  Corfu,  we 
should  become  the  laughing-stock  of  Europe,  and  no 
future  step  taken  by  England  in  the  form  of  a  "  pro- 
tectorate "  would  ever  be  relied  upon.  Had  we 
retained  Corfu  to  the  present  moment,  no  doubt 
would  have  existed  as  to  any  change  in  our  intentions 
respecting  Cyprus,  but  the  precedent  established  by 
our  retirement  from  that  grand  strategical  position  has 
borne  its  fruit  in  the  want  of  confidence  now  felt  by 
all  classes  in  the  permanence  of  our  new  acquisition. 

It  will  be  admitted  that  a  general  want  of  elasticity 
has  succeeded  to  the  first  bound  of  expectation  that 
was  raised  by  the  sudden  announcement  of  a  British 
occupation  ;  the  government  cannot  be  held  responsible 
for  the  disappointment  of  rash  adventurers,  but  their 
true  responsibility  commenced  when  they  assumed  the 
charge  of  the  inhabitants  of  Cyprus.  The  first  year 
of  the  new  administration  has  been  marked  by  a 
minimum  ra^infall  that  has  caused  the  destruction  of 
all  crops  dependent  upon  the  natural  water-supply  of 
seasons,  and  this  partial  famine  of  the  first  year  of 
our  occupation  is  generally  regarded  as  a  disaster. 
Although   disastrous,    I   believe   the   serious  warning 


XIII,] 


Woods  and  Forests.  345 


will  operate  with  wholesome  effect,  by  opening  the 
eyes  of  the  authorities  to  the  absolute  necessity  of 
directing  special  attention  to  the  requirements  of  the 
people,  who  after  centuries  of  oppression  have  become 
apathetic  and  inert,  which  unfits  them  for  the  spon- 
taneous action  that  should  be  exerted  against  the 
dangerous  exigencies  of  their  climate.  The  govern- 
ment of  Cyprus  must  be  to  a  certain  extent  paternal, 
and  the  planting  of  trees  that  will  eventually  benefit 
not  only  individuals,  but  the  island  generally,  and 
ultimately  the  revenue,  should  be  made  compulsory,  in 
proportion  to  the  area  of  the  various  holdings,  due 
assistance  being  accorded  to  the  proprietors  by  way 
of  loans. 

The  eucalyptus  is  suitable  for  many  localities  in  the 
lowlands  of  Lamaca  and  Famagousta,  and  it  might 
be  profitably  introduced  throughout  such  swampy  soils 
as  the  neighbourhood  of  Morphu  and  other  similar 
positions  with  good  sanitary  results ;  but  such  trees 
will  represent  the  woods  and  forests  of  the  low 
country  without  a  productive  income  to  the  population ; 
whereas  by  an  enforced  cultivation  of  fruit-trees  upon 
every  holding  the  island  would  in  a  few  years  become 
a  garden,  and  the  exportation  of  fruit  to  Egypt,  only 
thirty  hours*  distant,  would  be  the  commencement  of 
an  important  trade,  alike  beneficial  to  the  individual 
proprietors  and  to  the  island  generally. 

At  the  present  time,  and  for  many  years  past, 
Alexandria  has  been  supplied  with  all  fruits  from 
Jaffa,  Beyrout,  and  various  ports  on  the  coast  of  Syria, 
but  there  is  no  reason  why  Cyprus  should  not 
eventually  monopolise  the  trade,  if  special  attention 
shall  be  bestowed  (by  the  suggested  department  of 
Woods  and  Forests)  upon  the  qualities  and  cultivation 


346  Cyprus  in  tSyg. 


CHAP.  XIII. 


whenever  an  arrangement  for  an  extension  of  planting 
shall  be  carried  out.  I  have  never  seen  any  fruits  of 
high  quality  in  Cyprus,  but  they  are  generally  most 
inferior,  owing  to  the  neglect  of  grafting,  and  the 
overcrowding  of  the  trees.  The  cherries  which  grow 
in  the  villages  from  2500  to  4500  feet  above  the  sea 
are  taken  down  to  Limasol  and  the  principal  towns  for 
sale,  but  they  are  small  and  tasteless,  although  red  and 
bright  in  colour.  They  grow  in  large  quantities,  and 
are  never  attacked  by  birds  which  render  the  crop 
precarious  in  England,  and  necessitate  the  expense 
of  netting;  should  the  best  varieties  be  introduced, 
every  natural  advantage  exists  for  their  cultivation. 

The  apricots  are  not  much  larger  than  chestnuts, 
and  would  be  classed  as  "  wild  fruit,*'  from  the  extreme 
inferiority  of  size  and  flavour ;  but  there  is  no  reason 
except  neglect  for  the  low  quality  of  a  delicious 
species  of  fruit  that  seems  from  the  luxuriant  growth 
of  the  tree  to  be  specially  adapted  to  the  soil  and 
climate.  It  is  useless  to  enumerate  the  varieties  of 
fruits  that  are  brought  to  market ;  all  are  inferior, 
excepting  grapes  and  lemons.  The  productions  of 
the  gardens  exhibit  the  miserable  position  of  the 
island,  which  emanates  from  a  want  of  elasticity  in  a 
debased  and  oppressed  population  too  apathetic  and 
hopeless  to  attempt  improvements. 

England  can  change  this  wretched  stagnation  by 
the  application  of  capital,  and  by  encouraging  the 
development  of  the  first  necessity,  water;  without 
which,  all  attempts  at  agricultural  improvements,  and 
the  extension  of  tree-planting  in  the  low  country, 
would  be  futile.  I  shall  therefore  devote  the  following 
chapter  to  the  subject  of  artificial  irrigation,  and  its 
results. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


REMARKS   ON    IRRIGATION. 


The  ancient  prosperity  of  Cyprus  must  have  been 
due  to  artificial  irrigation,  which  ensured  a  maximum 
of  production,  similar  to  the  inundated  lands  of  Egypt 
In  the  latter  country  the  Nile  is  a  "Salvator  Mundi," 
without  which  Egypt  would  be  a  simple  prolongation 
of  the  Nubian  and  Libyan  deserts,  in  the  absence 
of  a  seasonable  rainfall.  The  difference  between  the 
great  cereal-producing  portion  of  Cyprus  and  the  Delta 
of  Egypt  is,  that,  although  the  plain  of  Messaria  has 
been  formed  chiefly  through  the  action  of  the  Pedias 
river  and  other  periodical  mountain  streams,  which 
have  deposited  a  rich  stratum  of  soil  during  inunda- 
tions, the  rivers  are  merely  torrents,  or  simple  conduits, 
which  carry  off  the  waters  of  heavy  storms,  or  intervals 
of  rain,  and  act  as  drains  in  conveying  the  surplus 
waters  during  floods ;  while  at  other  times  they  are 
absolutely  dry. 

If  the  Nile  were  controlled  by  a  series  of  weirs  or 
dams,  with  sluices  to  divert  the  high  waters  of  the 
period  into  natural  depressions  within  the  desert,  to 
form  reservoirs  at  high  levels  for  the  supply  of  Egypt 
in  seasons  of  scarcity,  the  command  of  the  water-supply 
would  be  far  preferable  to  the  chances  of  rain  in  the 


348  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


most  favoured  country.  Water,  like  fire,  should  be 
the  slave  of  man,  to  whom  it  is  the  first  necessity; 
therefore  his  first  effort  in  his  struggle  with  the 
elements  should  reduce  this  power  to  vassalage. 
There  must  be  no  question  of  supremacy  ;  water  must 
serve  mankind. 

Many  years  ago  I  published,  in  the  Nile  Tributaries 
of  Abyssinia,  my  ideas  for  the  control  of  the  Nile  and 
the  submersion  of  the  cataracts  by  a  series  of  weirs, 
with  water-gates  for  the  facility  of  navigation ;  which 
with  certain  modifications  will  some  day  assuredly  be 
carried  out,  and  will  render  Egypt  the  most  favoured 
country  of  the  world,  as  absolute  mistress  of  the  river  : 
which  is  now  at  the  same  time  a  tyrant  and  a  slave. 
The  Pedias  of  Cyprus  may  during  some  terrific  rainfall 
assume  proportions  that  would  convey  a  most  erroneous 
impression  to  the  mind  of  a  stranger,  who,  upon  regard- 
ing the  boiling  torrent  overspreading  a  valley  of  some 
miles  in  width  in  its  impetuous  course  towards  ancient 
Salamis,  might  conclude  that  it  was  a  river  of  the  first 
importance.  The  fact  is  that  no  river  exists  in  Cyprus  : 
what  should  be  rivers  are  mere  channels,  watercourses, 
brooks,  torrents,  or  any  of  the  multifarious  names  for 
stream-beds  that  may  be  discovered  in  an  English 
dictionary.  At  the  same  time  that  the  natural  channels 
are  dry  during  the  summer  months,  through  the  want  of 
power  in  the  water-head  to  overcome  the  absorption  of 
the  porous  soil  throughout  its  course,  it  must  not  be 
forgotten  that  a  certain  supply  exists  at  the  fountain 
head,  within  practicable  distance,  which  might  be 
stored  and  led  from  the  mountains  to  the  lower 
lands  for  the  purposes  of  irrigation.  When  we  reflect 
that  in  the  proverbially  wet  climate  of  England  there 
is   a  considerable  difficulty  in  assuring   a   supply  of 


XIV.]  Remarks  on  Irrigation.  349 

wholesome  water,  and  that  the  various  water  com- 
panies have  made  enormous  profits,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  in  a  neglected  island  like  Cyprus  there  should 
be  distress  in  the  absence  of  abundant  rain.  The  un- 
initiated in  England  seldom  appreciate  the  labour  and 
expenditure  that  has  supplied  the  response  to  the 
simple  turning  of  a  tap  within  an  ordinary  house. 
If  they  would  follow  the  artificial  stream  from  the 
small  leaden  pipe  to  the  distant  reservoir,  they  would 
discover  that  a  glen  or  valley  has  been  walled  in 
by  a  stupendous  dam,  which  imprisons  a  hill-rivulet 
before  it  can  have  descended  to  the  impurities  of 
habitations,  and  that  the  pressure  of  waters  thus  stored 
at  an  elevated  level  forces  a  supply  to  a  town  at 
a  distance  of  many  miles.  This  same  principle  might 
be  adopted  in  numerous  localities  among  the  mountains 
of  Cyprus,  where  the  streams  are  perennial,  but  are 
now  exhausted  by  the  absorption  of  the  sandy  beds 
before  they  have  time  to  reach  the  villages  in  the 
lower  lands.  Iron  pipes  might  be  laid  to  convey  a 
water-supply  to  certain  districts,  upon  which  a  rate 
would  be  levied  per  acre  and  the  crops  would  be 
ensured. 

The  government  at  the  present  moment  obtains 
a  revenue  in  kind,  or  in  a  money  valuation  of  the 
corn  taken  at  the  threshing-floor ;  thus  in  the  absence 
of  a  crop  through  drought,  or  other  accident,  the 
revenue  suffers  directly  together  with  the  owner: 
no  crop,  no  revenue.  The  main  strength  of  a  country 
lies  in  an  annual  income  free  from  serious  fluctuations, 
and  the  extreme  instability  of  Cyprus  is  the  result  of 
the  peculiar  uncertainty  of  seasons  which  is  a  special 
feature  in  its  meteorological  condition.  It  is  there- 
fore   incumbent  upon    the  government,  as  an  act  of 


350  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


self-preservation,  to  take  such  measures  of  precaution 
as  will  render  certain  the  supply  of  water,  which 
is  all  that  is  required  to  ensure  the  average  produce 
of  the  soil,  and  thereby  to  sustain  the  revenue. 

I  do  not  indulge  in  engineering  details,  but,  from 
the  experience  I  have  gained  by  a  personal  exa- 
mination of  the  localities,  I  am  convinced  that  no 
difficulty  whatever  exists  that  would  not  be  overcome 
with  a  very  moderate  outlay.  The  mountains  are 
admirably  situated,  with  a  watershed  upon  all  sides, 
thus  offering  the  greatest  facilities  for  reservoirs 
and  pipes  that  would  radiate  in  every  direction. 
This  subject  will  demand  a  careful  inquiry  by 
hydraulic  engineers,  as  it  is  a  special  branch  of  the 
profession  that  requires  wide  experience,  and  large 
sums  may  be  fruitlessly  expended  through  ignorance* 
where  a  trifling  amount  well  administered  might 
achieve  great  results. 

One  of  the  first  necessary  steps  in  an  examination 
of  the  subterranean  water-supply  of  Cyprus  will  be 
"borings"  that  will  test  the  existence  of  artesian 
springs.  There  are  in  many  portions  of  the  island 
extensive  plateaux  at  high  altitudes  that  would  absorb 
a  considerable  rainfall,  in  addition  to  a  large  superficial 
area  of  mountains  and  hills  that  would  exert  the 
requisite  pressure  to  force  the  water  above  the  sur- 
face of  a  lower  level  upon  boring,  should  it  now  lie 
beneath  some  impervious  stratum.  Boring  will  alone 
solve  this  question.  Should  artesian  wells  be  practic- 
able in  certain  localities,  an  immense  blessing  will 
be  conferred  upon  the  island. 

In  the  meantime  the  native  method  already 
described,  of  connecting  chains  of  wells  from  different 
springs  converging  to  a  main  channel  or  subterranean 


XIV.]  Remarks  on  Irrigation.  351 

tunnel,  is  an  original  form  of  Cyprian  engineering 
thoroughly  understood  by  the  population,  which 
should  be  strenuously  encouraged.  It  is  a  common 
fault  among  English  people  to  ignore  the  value  of 
native  methods,  and  to  substitute  some  costly  ma- 
chinery which  requires  skilled  labour  and  expense 
in  working;  this  must  in  time  get  out  of  order  and 
necessitate  delay  and  extra  outlay  in  repairs ; 
generally  at  a  period  when  the  machine  is  most 
required. 

It  is  a  curious  fact  that  the  shadoof  or  lever  and 
bucket  worked  by  hand,  which  is  so  generally  used 
throughout  Egypt,  is  unknown  in  Cyprus,  where  in 
many  localities  it  would  be  easily  worked  when  water 
is  within  five  to  eight  feet  of  the  surface.  This 
•arrangement  only  requires  a  pole  of  about  twenty  feet 
in  length  supported  upon  an  upright  post,  so  as  to  play 
like  a  pump-handle  by  the  balance  of  a  weight  attached 
to  one  end  to  counterbalance  the  pail  of  water  sus- 
pended to  a  long  stick  and  short  rope  at  the  other 
extremity.  In  Egypt  the  weight  at  the  short  end  is 
merely  a  mass  of  clay  tempered  with  chopped  straw 
beaten  together  to  represent  about  150  lbs.  or  what- 
ever may  be  required  ;  this  adheres,  and  forms  a  knob 
to  the  end  of  the  lever. 

A  man  holds  the  long  thin  stick  suspended  at  the 
other  extremity  to  which  the  bucket  is  attached,  and 
pulls  it  down  hand  over  hand  until  the  utensil  is  im- 
mersed in  the  water ;  when  full,  it  is  so  nearly  counter- 
balanced by  the  weight  at  the  end  of  the  lever  that 
a  very  slight  exertion  raises  it  to  the  desired  level, 
where  it  is  emptied  into  a  receiver.  Many  years 
ago,  when  at  Gondokoro,  I  arranged  a  double  shadoof 
of  parallel  levers  and  two  galvanised  iron  buckets  of 


352  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


four  gallons  each,  worked  by  two  men.  I  timed  the 
labour  of  this  simple  machine,  and  proved  that  the  two 
men  delivered  3600  gallons  within  an  hour.  The  men 
exerted  themselves  to  a  degree  that  could  not  have 
been  continued  throughout  the  day,  and  the  buckets, 
of  English  make,  were  far  more  capacious  than  the 
simple  leather  stretched  upon  a  hoop  of  sticks  that  is 
used  in  Egypt ;  but  there  is  no  reason  for  such  inferior 
adjuncts.  It  may  be  safely  assumed  that  with  proper 
appliances  the  double  shadoof,  worked  by  two  men, 
will  deliver  2000  gallons  an  hour  for  a  working  day  of 
six  active  hours,  or  a  total  of  1 2,000  gallons.  In  Cyprus 
the  wages  of  a  labourer  are  one  shilling  a  day,  there- 
fore the  cost  of  raising  1 2,000  gallons  would  be  only 
two  shillings,  provided  the  water  is  only  five  feet  from 
the  surface.  There  are  many  portions  of  the  Messaria 
plain  where  the  water  is  even  nearer,  but  the  shadoof 
could  work  profitably  at  six,  and  even  at  eight  feet, 
and  it  possesses  the  advantage  of  such  extreme  cheap- 
ness of  original  cost  that  the  outlay  is  insignificant. 

Where  fuel  is  expensive,  and  cattle  and  human  labour 
cheap,  the  ancient  Egyptian  water-wheel  will  deliver 
a  supply  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  steam.  It  has  the 
merit  of  being  always  ready  ;  there  is  no  delay  in 
lighting  fires  and  getting  up  the  steam ;  there  is  no 
expensive  engineer  who  may  be  sick  or  absent  when 
required ;  but  the  wheel  is  turned  either  by  night  or 
day  by  mules  or  oxen,  driven  by  a  child.  Wind 
vanes  might  be  attached  to  this  principle,  and  could 
be  connected  on  favourable  occasions. 

The  peculiarity  throughout  the  lower  levels  in 
Cyprus  (specially  exhibited  in  the  plain  of  Messaria) 
of  a  water-supply  within  a  few  feet  of  the  surface,  at 
the  same  time  that  the  crops  may  be  perishing  from 


XIV.]  Remarks  on  Irrigation.  353 

drought,  is  in  favour  of  the  general  adoption  of  the 
Egyptian  wheel.  Although  this  simple  construction 
is  one  of  the  oldest  inventions  for  raising  water,  and  is 
generally  understood,  I  may  be  excused  for  describing 
it  when  upon  the  important  topic  of  irrigation. 

A  large  pit  is  sunk  to  about  three  feet  below  the 
level  of  the  water,  and  should  the  earth  not  be  suffi- 
ciently tenacious  for  self-support,  the  sides  are  walled 
with  masonry  ;  this  pit  would  usually  be  about  twenty 
feet  long,  four  feet  wide,  and  twenty  feet  deep  for  a 
first-class  wheel.  When  the  wooden  wheel  of  about 
seventeen  feet  diameter  has  been  fixed  upon  its 
horizontal  shaft,  it  is  arranged  with  a  chain  of  large 
earthen  jars ;  those  of  Egypt  contain  about  three 
gallons  each,  but  the  Cyprian  pots  are  very  inferior, 
scarcely  exceeding  the  same  number  of  quarts. 

These  jars  are  secured  upon  a  double  line  of  stiff 
ropes  formed  in  Cyprus  of  the  long  twisted  wands  of 
myrtle,  which  are  exceedingly  tough,  and  are  sub- 
stitutes for  willows  in  basket-work.  When  completed, 
the  chain  resembles  a  rope  ladder,  with  the  numerous 
jars  sufficiently  close  together  to  represent  spokes 
separated  by  about  sixteen  inches.  This  is  suspended 
over  the  edge  of  the  wheel;  and  hangs  vertically ;  the 
lower  portion  of  this  necklace-like  arrangement  being 
about  three  feet  below  the  water,  or  as  near  the  bottom 
as  is  possible  with  safety  to  the  jars. 

When  the  wheel  turns  the  necklace  of  pots  must  of 
necessity  obey  the  movement,  and  as  they  dip  suc- 
cessively and  fill  in  the  deep  water,  they  in  turn  rise  to 
the  surface  with  the  revolutions  of  the  wheel ;  upon 
passing  the  centre  they  invert,  and  empty  their  con- 
tents into  a  large  trough  connected  with  a  reservoir 
capable  of  containing  many  hundred  hogsheads.     A 

A   A 


354  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


circular  chain  or  ladder  of  twenty  feet  diameter  will 
contain  about  twenty  jars  of  three  gallons  each — 
equalling  a  delivery  of  about  two  and  a  half  gallons 
per  jar,  as  there  is  generally  a  loss  of  water  during 
the  movement ;  therefore  one  complete  revolution  of 
the  wheel  would  deliver  fifty  gallons  into  the  reservoir. 

The  wheel  is  turned  by  a  simple  contrivance  of 
wooden  cogs  and  drivers,  worked  by  a  long  revolving 
lever,  to  which,  for  a  powerful  machine  such  as  I  have 
described,  a  pair  of  mules  or  oxen  would  be  necessary. 
A  child  sits  upon  the  pole  or  lever  and  keeps  the 
animals  to  their  work. 

There  is  no  specified  limit  to  the  depth  at  which 
this  instrument  can  work,  as  it  must  depend  upon  the 
length  of  chain  and  the  number  of  jars,  which  of 
course  increase  the  weight  and  strain  upon  the 
machinery  and  animals.  In  Cyprus,  where  the  water  ^ 
is  generally  near  the  surface,  the  advantages  are  ob- 
vious, and  I  feel  convinced  that  no  modern  invention 
is  so  well  adapted  for  the  Cypriote  cultivator. 

The  cost  of  erection  of  such  a  machine  complete, 
together  with  the  sinking  of  the  pit,  is  calculated,  at  an 
average  of  localities,  as  ;^I2;  a  pair  of  oxen  will 
cost  j^io  :  thus  the  water-wheel  in  working  order  will 
amount  to  ;^2  2.  One  wheel  will  irrigate  eighty 
doriums,  or  about  forty  acres  of  cereals,  but  the  same 
instrument  would  only  suffice  for  about  six  acres  of 
garden  ground,  which  requires  a  more  constant  supply 
of  water.  It  may  therefore  be  understood  that  in 
calculating  the  power  of  a  water-wheel,  various  con-  \ 
ditions  must  be  considered,  and  I  shall  confine  myself 
to  the  farm,  upon  which  it  will  be  necessary  to  establish 
one  water-wheel  or  sakyeeah  for  every  forty  acres ; 
this  entails  a  first  outlay  of  eleven  shillings  per  acre, 


xiv.j  Remarks  on  Irrigation.  355 

and  at  once  ensures  the  crop  and  renders  the  farmer 
independent  of  the  seasons.  But  including  the  cost 
of  constructing  the  numerous  water-channels  of  clay 
to  conduct  the  stream  to  the  desired  fields,  together 
with  the  expense  of  erecting  the  reservoirs  of  masonry 
upon  a  sufficient  scale,  I  should  raise  the  original  out- 
lay for  irrigation  by  cattle- wheels  to  20^.  per  acre  (;^i). 
This  would  include  the  services  of  a  pair  of  oxen  for 
other  work  when  the  sakyeeah  should  not  be  required.^ 
According  to  this  calculation,  which  exceeds  by  a  large 
margin  the  figures  given  to  me  by  several  native 
farmers,  the  owner  of  a  hundred  acres  must  only 
expend  ;^  100  to  ensure  his  annual  crops  !  To  us  this 
appears  nothing,  but  to  the  Cypriote  it  is  everything. 
Where  is  he  to  obtain  one  hundred  pounds  ?  To  him 
the  sum  is  enormous  and  overpowering. 

In  times  of  scarcity,  which  unfortunately  are  the 
general  conditions  of  the  country,  owing  to  the  de- 
ficiency of  rain,  the  farmer  must  borrow  money  not 
only  for  the  current  expenses  of  his  employment^  but 
for  the  bare  sustenance  of  his  family  ;  he  has  recourse 
to  the  usurer,  and  henceforth  becomes  his  slave.  The 
rate  of  interest  may  be  anything  that  can  be  imagined 
when  extortion  acts  upon  one  side  while  poverty  and 
absolute  famine  are  the  petitioners.  The  farm,  to- 
gether with  the  stock,  are  mortgaged,  and  the  expected 
crops  for  a  stipulated  number  of  seasons  are  made  over 
to  the  usurer  at  a  fixed  sum  per  measure  of  corn,  far 
below  the  market  price.  Another  bad  season  adds  to 
the  crushing  burden,  and  after  a  few  years,  when  the 
unfortunate  landowner  is  completely  overwhelmed  with 

^  The  wheel  I  have  described  is  double  the  power  of  those  in 
general  use  in  Cyprus,  where  a  single  animal  works  the  sakyeeah^  and 
it  would  irrigate  a  larger  acreage. 

A  A   2 


356  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


/^ 


debt,  perchance  one  of  the  happy  years  arrives  when 
propitious  rains  in  the  proper  season  bring  forth  the 
grand  cereal-producing  power  of  Cyprus,  and  the 
wheat  and  barley,  six  feet  high,  wave  over  the  green 
surface  throughout  the  island.  The  yield  of  one  such 
abundant  crop  almost  releases  the  debtor  from  his 
misery  ;  another  year  would  free  him  from  the  usurer  ; 
but  rarely  or  never  are  two  favourable  seasons  consecu- 
tive ;  the  abundant  harvest  is  generally  followed  by 
several  years  of  drought.  This  pitiable  position  may 
be  quickly  changed  by  government  assistance  without 
the  slightest  risk. 

The  first  necessity  is  capital,  and  the  usurer  must 
disappear  from  the  scene.  I  do  not  think  that  an 
agricultural  bank  will  be  practically  worked,  as  the 
value  of  money  in  the  east  is  above  6  per  cent., 
which  is  the  maximum  that  the  Cyprian  cultivator 
should  pay.  The  government  must  advance  loans 
for  the  special  erection  of  water-wheels,  or  other 
methods  of  irrigation,  at  6  per  cent.,  taking  a  mort- 
gage of  the  land  as  their  security;  this  loan  upon 
water-works  to  take  precedence  of  all  others.  The 
government  can  borrow  at  4  per  cent.,  and  will  lend 
at  6,  which  is  not  a  bad  beginning  for  a  national 
bank.  The  water-wheels  can  be  constructed  in  a  few 
weeks,  and  their  effect  would  be  immediate;  there 
would  be  no  doubtful  interval  of  years,  but  the  very 
first  season  would  leave  the  cultivator  in  a  position 
to  repay  the  loan ;  at  the  same  time,  the  government 
would  reap  the  direct  benefit  of  a  certain  revenue 
from  the  irrigated  and  assured  production  of  the 
land.  ' 

This  is  no  visionary  theory;  the  fact  is  already 
patent  in  the  few  farms  belonging   to  wealthy  land- 


XIV.]  Remarks  on  Irrigation.  357 

owners  that  I  have  already  described,  as  exhibiting 
the  simple  power  of  a  few  water-wheels  to  produce 
abundance,  while  upon  the  margin  of  such  verdant 
examples  the  country  is  absolutely  desert,  parched 
and  withered  by  a  burning  sun,  yielding  nothing 
either  to  the  owner  or  to  the  revenue,  while  at  the 
same  time  the  water-supply  is  only  four  or  five  yards 
beneath  the  feet  of  the  miserable  proprietor,  who 
has  neither  capital  nor  power  to  raise  it  to  the 
surface. 

There  is  no  necessity  for  the  government  to 
embark  in  any  uncertain  enterprise,  neither  should 
they  interfere  with  the  native  methods  of  irrigation ; 
and  above  all  things,  no  money  should  leave  the 
island  to  fill  the  pockets  of  English  contractors  in 
the  purchase  of  pumps,  or  other  inventions.  All 
that  is  required  by  the  Cypriote  is  capital ;  lend  him 
the  money  at  6  per  cent. :  the  government  will  be 
saved  all  trouble,  and  the  profit  to  all  parties  will 
be  assured.  The  money  expended  in  the  erection 
of  water-wheels  or  other  works  will  circulate  through- 
out the  island  in  the  payment  of  native  labour,  and 
will  relieve  the  wants  of  many  who,  in  the  absence 
of  land,  must  earn  their  livelihood  by  manual  labour. 

'*  Water ! "  is  the  cry  throughout  this  neglected 
island  ;  it  has  been  the  cry  in  Eastern  lands  from 
time  immemorial,  when  in  the  thirsty  desert  Moses 
smote  the  rock,  and  the  stream  gushed  forth  for 
multitudes;  when  Elijah  mocked  the  priests  of  Baal 
with,  **  Call  him  louder  ! "  in  their  vain  appeal  for  rain, 
and  the  *'  little  cloud,  no  bigger  than  a  man  s  hand," 
rose  upon  the  horizon  in  answer  to  his  prayer.  In  the 
savage  tribes  of  Africa,  the  "  rain-maker "  occupies 
the  position  of  priest  and  chief.       In    England,    the 


358  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


clergy  offer  prayers  for  either  rain  or  for  fine  weather. 
In  Cyprus  the  farmer  places  the  small  picture  of  the 
Virgin  upon  his  field,  before  which  he  lights  his  tapers, 
which  the  wind  extinguishes;  at  the  same  time  the 
water-supply  is  close  beneath  his  feet^  and  the  expen- 
diture of  a  few  pounds  sterling  would  produce  a 
permanent  blessing  and  uninterrupted  prosperity  by 
practical  common  sense  and  labour,  without  any 
miraculous  interposition  in  his  behalf. 

There  are  few  countries  where  such  facilities  exist 
for  irrigation,  and  the  work  should  be  commenced 
without  delay.  Should  next  year  be  one  of  drought 
like  the  spring  of  1879,  the  greatest  misery  will  befall 
the  population ;  there  is  already  sufficient  disappoint- 
ment in  the  want  of  progress  since  the  British  occu- 
pation, and  the  feeling  will  be  intensified  should  the 
assistance  of  government  be  withheld  in  this  crying 
necessity  of  artificial  irrigation. 

The  Cypriote  well-sinker  is  wonderfully  clever  in 
discovering  springs,  and  I  have  already  described  the 
method  of  multiplying  the  water-power  of  one  source 
by  securing  and  concentrating  the  neighbouring  sources. 
This  work  only  requires  money,  and  the  inhabitants, 
without  further  assistance  than  loans  secured  by  a 
water-rate  upon  the  district,  will  rapidly  develop  the 
natural  supply.  There  should  be  a  special  commission 
appointed,  in  each  of  the  six  districts  of  Cyprus,  to 
investigate  and  report  officially  upon  this  subject. 
In  forming  the  commission,  care  should  be  taken 
that  the  native  element  should  predominate,  and  that 
no  enthusiastic  English  engineer,  blooming  with  new 
schemes,  should  thrust  into  shadow  the  Cyprian 
intelligence  upon  the  working  of  their  own  systems. 
If  I  were  an  English  engineer  employed  in  any  work. 


XIV.]  Remarks  on  Irrigation.  359 

I  should  probably  have  the  natural  failing  of  enforcing 
my  own  opinions;  but  from  many  years'  experience 
I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  inhabitants  of 
a  country  are  generally  better  qualified  than  strangers 
for  giving  practical  opinions  upon  their  own  locations. 
There  is  plenty  of  intelligence  in  Cyprus ;  the  people 
are  not  savages,  but  their  fault  is  poverty,  the  natural 
inheritance  of  Turkish  rule;  and  we,  the.  English, 
have  the  power  to  make  them  rich,  and  to  restore  the 
ancient  importance  of  the  island.  In  England,  at  the 
time  that  I  am  writing,  money  is  not  worth  2  per  cent, 
owing  to  the  general  depression  of  trade  ;  the  money- 
market  has  been  in  this  plethoric  or  dropsical  state  for 
the  last  three  years,  and  there  appears  to  be  no  hope 
upon  the  commercial  horizon  of  a  favourable  change. 
In  Cyprus  the  resources  are  great,  but  the  capital  is 
wanting,  and  the  strange  anomaly  is  presented  that 
the  exchange  of  the  British  for  the  Turkish  flag  has 
not  increased  public  confidence.  Something  must  be 
done  to  change  the  present  stupor ;  if  Cypriotes  were 
Candians  (Cretans)  their  voices  would  be  forcibly 
heard,  and  the  Turkish  rule  beneath  the  British 
uniform  would  be  quickly  overthrown.  The  Cypriote, 
down-trodden  for  centuries,  is  like  sodden  tinder  that 
will  not  awaken  to  the  spark  :  he  is  what  is  called 
"  easily  governed ; "  which  means  an  abject  race,  in 
which  all  noble  aspirations  have  been  stamped  out  by 
years  of  unremitting  oppression  and  injustice ;  still,  like 
the  Cyprian  ox,  he  ploughs  the  ground.  It  is  the 
earth  alone  that  yields  the  world's  wealth  :  if  we  have 
no  other  thoughts  but  avarice,  let  us  treat  the  Cypriote 
as  we  should  his  animal,  and  make  him  a  wealth- 
producer.  England  has  acquired  the  reputation  of 
the  civiliser  of  the  world ;  it  is  in  this  character  that 


360  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  XIV. 


we  were  expected  to  effect  a  magic  change  in  the 
position  of  Cyprus  ;  instead  of  which  we  have  hitherto 
presented  a  miserable  result  of  half-measures,  where 
irresolution  has  reduced  the  brilliant  picture  of  our 
widely- trumpeted  political  surprise  to  a  dull  "  arrange- 
ment in  whitey -brown  "...  which  is  the  pervading 
tint  of  the  Cypriati  surface  in  the  absence  of  artificial 
irrigation. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

LIFE   AT   THE   MONASTERY   OF   TROODITISSA. 

The  life  at  our  quiet  camp  at  Trooditissa  was  a 
complete  calm :  there  could  not  be  a  more  secluded 
spot,  as  no  human  habitation  was  near,  except  the 
invisible  village  of  Phyni  two  miles  deep  beneath,  at 
the  mountain  s  base.  The  good  old  monk  Ndophitos 
knitted,  and  taught  his  boys  always  in  the  same  daily 
spot :  the  swallows  built  their  nests  under  the  eaves 
of  the  monastery  roof  and  beneath  the  arch  which 
covered  in  the  spring,  and  sat  in  domestic  flocks 
upon  the  over-hanging  boughs  within  a  few  feet  of 
our  breakfast-table,  when  their  young  could  fly. 
Nightingales  sang  before  sunset,  and  birds  of  many 
varieties  occupied  the  great  walnut-tree  above  our 
camp,  and  made  the  early  morning  cheerful  with 
a  chorus  of  different  songs.  There  was  no  change 
from  day  to  day,  except  in  the  progress  of  the 
gardens ;  the  plums  grew  large  :  the  mulberries 
ripened  in  the  last  week  of  July,  and  the  shepherd's 
pretty  children  and  the  monastery  boys  were  covered 
with  red  stains,  as  though  from  a  battlefield,  as  they 
descended  from  the  attractive  boughs.  It  was  a  very 
peaceful  existence,  and  I  shall  often  look  back  with 
pleasure   to  our   hermitage  by  the  walls  of   the   old 


362  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


monastery,  which  afforded  a  moral  haven  from  all  the 
storms  and  troubles  that  embitter  life.  On  Sundays 
we  sent  a  messenger  for  the  post  to  the  military  camp 
at  Troodos,  about  five  and  a  half  miles  distant,  and 
the  arrival  of  letters  and  newspapers  restored  us  for 
a  couple  of  days  to  the  outer  world :  after  which  we 
relapsed  once  more  into  the  local  quiescent  state  of 
complete  rest.  It  must  not  be  supposed  that  we  were 
idle ;  there  were  always  occupations  which  by  degrees 
I  hope  improved  the  place,  and  to  a  certain  degree 
the  people.  Occasionally  I  asked  the  old  monks  to 
sit  and  smoke  their  cigarettes  in  our  "  rachkooba,*' 
when  they  sipped  their  hot  coffee,  and  explained 
difficult  theological  questions  to  my  intense  edifica- 
tion ;  of  course  I  always  listened,  but  never  argued. 
My  particular  friend  old  N^ophitos  treated  me  to 
long  stories  which  he  imagined  must  be  new  and 
interesting,  especially  the  history  of  Joseph  and 
his  brethren,  which  he  several  times  recounted  from 
beginning  to  end  with  tears  of  sympathy  in  his  eyes 
at  Joseph's  love  for  the  youngest  brother  Benjamin. 
The  Garden  of  Eden,  the  Deluge,  including  the 
account  of  Noah's  Ark,  and  several  equally  modern 
and  entertaining  stories,  I  always  listened  to  with 
commendable  attention.  Yet  even  in  this  solitude, 
where  the  chapel-bell  on  Saturday  night,  and  at 
daybreak  upon  Sunday  mornings,  was  in  harmony 
with  the  external  peaceful  surroundings,  and  it  ap- 
peared as  though  discord  could  never  enter  the  walls 
of  Trooditissa,  the  old  monks  had  their  cares  and 
difficulties. 

The  principal  cause  of  trouble  was  **  servants  ! "  I 
was  quite  surprised,  as  I  thought  we  were  nearer 
heaven  in   this   spot  than  in   any   earthly   locality  I 


XV.]    Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     363 

had  ever  visited;  but  even  here  the  question  of 
"servants"  was  an  irritation  to  the  nerves  of  the 
patient  monks.  My  own  servants  were  excellent, 
and  never  quarrelled  or  complained ;  they  appeared 
to  have  been  mesmerised  by  the  placid  character  of 
their  position,  and  to  have  become  angelic ;  especially 
in  not  fatiguing  themselves  through  over-exertion. 
With  the  monks  the  case  was  different  In  this 
quiet  retreat,  where  man  reigned  alone,  as  Adam  in 
the  Garden  of  Eden  ;  where  the  cares  and  anxieties 
of  married  life  were  unknown  within  the  sacred  walls 
of  celibacy,  a  single  representative  of  the  other  sex 
existed  in  the  ubiquitous  shape  of  a  "  maid  of  all 
work ; ''  and  as  Eve  caused  the  first  trouble  in  the 
world,  so  the  monastery  "  maid  "  disturbed  the  other- 
wise peaceful  existence  of  N^ophitos. 

This  maid's  name  was  "  Christina,"  and  she  received 
the  munificent  sum  of  one  hundred  piastres  per 
annum  as  wages,  which  in  English  money  would  be 
fifteen  shillings  and  sixpence  every  year.  The  world 
is  full  of  ingratitude,  and  strange  to  say,  Christina 
was  dissatisfied,  which  naturally  wounded  the  feelings 
of  the  good  monks,  as  in  addition  to  this  large  sum  of 
money  she  received  her  food  and  clothes ;  the  latter 
consisting  of  full  trousers,  and  a  confusion  of  light 
material,  which,  having  no  shape  whatever,  I  could  not 
describe.  Christina,  though  young,  was  not  pretty,  and 
she  was  always  either  crying  or  scolding,  which  would 
of  course  spoil  any  beauty ;  while  at  the  same  time 
she  was  either  washing  all  the  clothes  belonging  to 
the  wh6le  establishment  of  monks  (a  very  disagree- 
able business),  or  hanging  them  out  to  dry  near  the 
spring;  or  she  was  sweeping  the  monastery;  or 
arranging  the  very  dirty  rooms  of  the  establishment ; 


364  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


or  baking  all  the  bread  that  was  required ;  or  cooking 
the  dinner ;  or  repairing  all  the  old  clothes  which  the 
monks  wore  when  they  were  only  fit  for  a  paper-mill. 
As  there  was  no  special  accommodation  in  the  shape 
of  a  laundry,  Christina  had  to  collect  sticks,  and  make 
a  huge  fire  beneath  a  copper  cauldron  in  the  open  air, 
into  which  she  plunged  all  the  different  vestments  ' 
of  the  monks  and  priests,  and  stewed  them  before 
washing.  This  was  a  Cyprian  "  maid  of  all  work," 
whose  gross  ingratitude  troubled  the  minds  of  her 
"  pastors  and  masters ; "  and  one  day  a  peculiar  mental 
disturbance  pervaded  the  whole  priestly  establishment 
and  caused  a  monasterial  commotion,  as,  after  a 
violent  fit  of  temper  attended  by  crying,  Christina  had 
declared  solemnly  that  she  "  would  stand  it  no  longer," 
and  "  she  wished  to  better  herself !  " 

Whenever  there  was  a  difficulty  the  nionks  came  to 
me ;  why,  I  cannot  imagine.  If  the  shepherd's  goats 
invaded  their  gardens  and  destroyed  the  onions  and 
the  beet-root  crops,  they  applied  to  me.  Of  course  I 
advised  them  to  **  fence  their  gardens,"  and  they  went 
away  satisfied,  but  did  not  carry  out  the  suggestion  ; 
so  in  due  time  their  crops  were  devoured.  They  now 
told  me  that  they  always  had  a  difficulty  with  women  ! 
This  new  theory  startled  me  almost  as  much  as  the 
novelty  of  the  old  monks'  stories.  They  explained 
that  young  women  wouldrit  work^  and  old  women 
couldnt  work.  It  had  not  occurred  to  them  that  a 
middle-aged  woman  might  have  combined  all  that 
they  desired.  Knowing  their  strict  moral  principles, 
I  had  suggested  an  "  old  woman ''  as  the  successor 
of  Christina  ;  as  I  explained  to  them  that,  to  be  in 
harmony  with  the  establishment,  a  woman  of  a 
"certain  age"  as  general  servant   would   not  detract 


XV 


J    Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     365 


from  the  religious  character  of  the  place.  However 
I  might  argue,  the  old  monk  hesitated ;  but  while 
the  monk  wavered,  Christinas  '* monkey  was  up," 
and,  taking  her  child  in  her  arms,  she  started  off 
without  giving  a  "month's  notice,"  and  fairly  left 
the  monastery,  with  monks,  priests,  deacons,  servants 
and  the  dogs  all  aghast  and  barking.  There  was 
nobody  to  wash  the  linen,  to  bake  the  bread,  to 
sweep  the  rooms,  to  cook  the  dinner,  to  mend  the 
clothes !  Christina  was  gone,  and  the  gentle  sex 
was  no  longer  represented  in  the  monastery  of 
Trooditissa. 

I  was  sorry  for  Christina,  but  I  was  glad  the  child 
was  gone ;  although  I  pitied  the  poor  abandoned  and 
neglected  little  creature  with  all  my  heart  As  a  rule, 
"maids  of  all  work"  should  not  be  mothers,  but  if 
they  are,  they  should  endeavour  to  care  for  the  un- 
fortunate child.  This  wretched  little  thing  was  about 
two  years  old — a  girl ;  its  eyes  were  nearly  closed  with 
inflammation  caused  by  dirt  and  neglect ;  it  was  naked, 
with  the  exception  of  a  filthy  rag  that  hung  in  tatters 
scarcely  below  its  hips ;  and  as  its  ill-tempered  and 
over-worked  mother  alternately  raved,  or  cried,  the 
child,  which  even  at .  this  age  depended  mainly  upon 
her  nursing  for  its  food,  joined  in  a.  perpetual  yell, 
which  at  length  terminated  in  a  faint  and  wearied 
moan,  until  it  laid  itself  down  upon  the  bare,  hard 
stones,  and  fell  asleep.  It  was  a  sad  picture  of 
neglect  and  misery;  the  shepherd's  pretty  children 
shunned  it,  and  in  its  abandoned  solitude  the  little 
creature  had  to  amuse  itself  The  face  looked  like 
that  of  an  old  careworn  person  who  had  lost  all 
pleasure  in  the  world,  and  the  child  wandered  about 
alone   and   uncared  for;    its  only  plaything  was  my 


366  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


good-tempered  dog  Wise,  who  allowed  himself  to 
be  pulled  about  and  teased  in  the  most  patient 
manner.  I  cured  the  child's  eyes  after  some  days' 
attention,  and  my  wife  had  it  washed,  and  made  it 
decent  clothes.  This  little  unusual  care,  with  a  few 
kind  words  in  a  strange  language  only  interpreted 
by  a  smile,  attracted  the  poor  thing  to  the  tent, 
where  it  would  sit  for  hours,  until  it  at  length 
found  solace  in  the  child's  great  refuge,  sleep.  It 
would  always  follow  Lady  Baker  to  and  fro  along 
the  only  level  walk  we  had,  from  the  tent  to  the 
running  spring,  ;and  would  sit  down  by  her  side 
directly  she  arrived  at  our  favourite  seat — a  large 
flat  rock  looking  down  upon  a  precipitous  descent 
to  the  ravine  some  500  feet  below,  and  commanding 
a  view  of  the  low  country  and  the  distant  sea.  It 
was  an  obstinate  and  perverse  little  creature,  and 
it  insisted  upon  climbing  upon  rocks  and  standing 
upon  the  extreme  edge  overhanging  a  precipice. 
If  it  had  been  the  loved  and  only  offspring  of  fond 
parents,  heiress  to  a  large  estate,  it  would  of  course 
have  tumbled  over,  in  the  absence  of  nurses  and 
a  throng  of  careful  attendants,  but  never  having 
been  cared  for  since  its  birth,  it  possessed  an  in- 
stinctive knowledge  of  self-preservation,  and  declined 
to  relieve  its  mother  of  an  extra  anxiety.  It  was  an 
agreeable  change  to  lose  the  sound  of  a  child's  con- 
stant wailing,  and  I  suggested  to  the  monks  that  its 
presence  was  hardly  in  accordance  with  the  severe 
aspect  of  the  establishment.  There  was  some  mystery 
connected  with  it  of  which  I  am  still  ignorant,  as  I 
never  ask  questions ;  but  it  is  at  the  least  ill-judged 
and  thoughtless  on  the  part  of  "  maids  of  all  work " 
to  engage  themselves  to  any  situation  where  the  kissing 


XV.]    Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     367 

of  a  rock,  or  a  holy  effigy,  may  lead  to  complications. 
It  was  of  no  use  to  moralise ;  Christina  was  gone, 
together  with  the  child;  there  was  absolute  quiet  in 
the  monastery;  neither  the  scolding  of  the  mother, 
nor  the  crying  of  an  infant,  was  heard.  The  monks 
looked  more  austere  than  ever,  and  remained  in  un- 
washed linen,  until  they  at  length  succeeded  in 
engaging  a  charming  substitute  in  a  middle-aged 
maid  of  all  work  of  seventy-five ! 

About  the  20th  July  the  swallows  disappeared,  and 
I  have  no  idea  to  what  portion  of  the  world  they 
would  migrate  at  this  season.  In  the  low  country  the 
heat  is  excessive,  and  even  at  the  altitude  of  Troodi- 
tissa the  average,  since  the  ist  of  the  month,  had  been 

at  7  A.M.  70^""— 3  P.M.  77VV'. 

The  birds  that  had  sung  so  cheerfully  upon  our 
arrival  had  become  silent.  There  was  a  general 
absence  of  the  feathered  tribe,  but  occasionally  a  con- 
siderable number  of  hoopoes  and  jays  had  appeared 
for  a  few  days,  and  had  again  departed,  as  though 
changing  their  migrations,  and  resting  for  a  time  upon 
the  cool  mountains. 

I  frequently  rambled  among  the  highest  summits 
with  my  dogs,  but  there  was  a  distressing  and  unac- 
countable absence  of  game  ;  in  addition  to  which 
there  was  no  scent,  as  the  barren  rocks  were  heated  in 
the  sun  like  bricks  taken  from  the  kiln.  The  under- 
growth up  to  4500  feet  afforded  both  food  and 
covert  for  hares,  but  they  were  very  scarce.  A  pecu- 
liar species  of  dwarf  prickly  broom  covers  the  ground 
in  some  places,  and  the  young  shoots  are  eagerly 
devoured  by  goats ;  this  spreads  horizontally,  and 
grows  in  such  dense  masses  about  one  foot  from  the 
surface   that   it  will   support   the  weight  of  a  man. 


368  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP 


When  grubbed  up  by  the  root  it  forms  an  impervious 
mat  about  three  or  four  feet  in  diameter,  and  supplies 
an  excellent  door  to  the  entrance  of  a  garden,  to  pre- 
vent the  incursions  of  goats  or  fowls.  The  Berberris 
grew  in  large  quantities,  which,  together  with  the 
foliage  of  the  dwarf  ilex,  is  the  goat's  favourite  food. 
Not  far  from  the  village  of  Prodomos,  upon  the  neigh- 
bouring heights,  I  found,  for  the  first  time  in  Cyprus, 
the  juniper,  which  appeared  to  be  kept  low  by  the 
constant  grazing  of  the  numerous  herds. 

The  walking  over  the  mountains  is  most  fatiguing, 
and  utterly  destructive  to  boots,  owing  to  the  inter- 
minable masses  of  sharp  rocks  and  stones  of  all  sizes, 
,  which  quite  destroy  the  pleasure  of  a  lengthened 
stroll.  The  views  from  the  various  elevated  ridges 
are  exceedingly  beautiful,  and  exhibit  the  numerous 
villages  surrounded  by  vineyards  snugly  clustered  in 
obscure  dells  among  the  mountains  at  great  elevations 
above  the  sea.  Prodomos  is  about  4300  feet  above 
the  level>  and  can  be  easily  distinguished  by  the 
foliage  of  numerous  spreading  walnut-trees  and  the 
large  amount  of  cultivation  by  which  it  is  surrounded. 

There  was  no  difficulty  in  gaining  the  highest  point 
of  the  island  from  our  camp,  as  a  zigzag  rocky  path 
led  to  the  top  of  a  ridge  about  600  feet  directly  above 
the  monastery,  which  ascended  with  varying  incli- 
nations to  the  summit  of  Troodos,  about  2100  feet 
above  Trooditissa ;  by  the  maps  6590  feet  above  the 
sea,  but  hardly  so  much  by  recent  measurement. 

The  moufflon,  or  wild  sheep,  exists  in  Cyprus, 
but  in  the  absence  of  protection  they  have  been 
harassed  at  all  seasons  by  the  natives,  who  have 
no  idea  of  sparing  animals  during  the  breeding 
season.      The    present    government   have    protected 


XV.]    Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     369 

them  by  a  total  prohibition,  under  a  penalty  of  ten 
pounds  to  be  inflicted  upon  any  person  discovered 
in  killing  them.  In  the  absence  of  all  keepers  or 
guardians  of  the  forests,  it  would  be  difficult  to 
prove  a  case,  and  I  have  no  doubt  that  the  natives 
still  attempt  the  sport,  although  from  the  extreme 
wariness  of  the  animals  they  are  most  difficult  to 
approach.  The  authorities  should  employ  some 
dependable  sportsman  to  shoot  a  certain  number  of 
rams  which  are  now  in  undue  proportion,  as  the 
ewes  with  young  lambs  have  been  an  easier  prey 
to  the  unsparing  Cypriotes. 

Absurd  opinions  have  been  expressed  concerning 
the  numbers  of  moufflon  now  remaining  upon  the 
island,  and  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  venture 
upon  a  conjecture,  as  there  is  a  very  large  area  of 
the  mountains  perfectly  wild  and  unoccupied  to  the 
west  of  Kyka  monastery,  extending  to  Poli-ton- 
Khrysokus,  upon  which  the  animals  are  said  to  be 
tolerably  numerous.  There  are  some  upon  the 
Troodos  range,  but  from  all  accounts  they  do 
not  exceed  fifteen. 

On  2nd  July  I  started  at  4  a.m.  with  a  shepherd 
lad  for  the  highest  point  of  Troodos,  hoping  by 
walking  carefully  to  see  moufflon  among  some  of 
the  numerous  ravines  near  the  summit,  which  are 
seldom  invaded  by  the  flocks  of  goats  and  their 
attendants.  I  took  a  small  rifle  with  me  as  a 
companion  which  is  seldom  absent  in  my  walks, 
and  although  I  should  have  rigidly  respected  the 
governmertt  prohibition  in  the  case  of  ewes,  or  even 
of  rams  at  a  long  shot  that  might  have  been  un- 
certain and  hazardous,  I  should  at  the  same  time 
have    regarded    a    moufflon    with    good    horns   at    a 

B    B 


370  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


range  under  150  yards,  in  the  Abrahamic  light  of 
''  a  ram  caught  in  a  thicket "  that  had  been  placed 
in  my  way  for  the  purpose  of  affording  me  a 
specimen. 

On  arrival  at  the  top  of  the  ridge  above  the 
monastery  the  view  was  superb.  We  looked 
down  a  couple  of  thousand  feet  into  deep  and  narrow 
valleys  rich  in  vineyards ;  the  mountains  rose  in 
dark  masses  upon  the  western  side,  covered  with 
pine  forests,  which  at  this  distance  did  not  exhibit 
the  mutilations  of  the  axe.  At  this  early  hour  the 
sea  was  blue  and  clear,  as  the  sun  had  not  yet 
heated  the  air  and  produced  the  usual  haze  which 
destroys  the  distant  views :  and  the  tops  of  the  lower 
mountains  above  Omodos  and  Chilani  appeared  almost 
close  beneath  upon  the  south,  their  vine-covered 
surface  producing  a  rich  contrast  to  the  glaring 
white  marls  that  were  cleared  for  next  year  s  planting. 
The  top  of  Troodos  was  not  visible,  as  we  continued 
the  ascent  along  the  ridge,  with  the  great  depths 
of  ravines  and  pine-covered  steeps  upon  either  side, 
but  several  imposing  heights  in  front,  and  upon  the 
right,  seemed  to  closely  rival  the  true  highest  point. 

As  we  ascended,  the  surface  vegetation  became 
scanty ;  the  rocks  in  many  places  had  been  thickly 
clothed  with  the  common  fern  growing  in  dense  masses 
from  the  soil  among  the  interstices ;  the  white  cistus 
and  the  purple  variety  had  formed  a  gummy  bed  of 
plants  which,  together  with  several  aromatic  herbs, 
emitted  a  peculiar  perfume  in  the  cool  morning  air. 
These  now  gave  place  to  the  hardy  berberris  which 
grew  in  thick  prickly  bushes  at  long  intervals,  leaving 
a  bare  surface  of  rocks  between  them  devoid  of  vegeta- 
tion.     There  was  little  of  geological  interest ;  gneiss 


XV.]     Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     371 

and  syenite  predominated,  with  extremely  large  crystals 
of  hornblende  in  the  latter  rock,  that  would  have 
afforded  handsome  slabs  had  not  the  prevailing  defect 
throughout  Cyprus  rendered  all  blocks  imperfect 
through  innumerable  cracks  and  fissures.  A  peculiar 
greenish  and  greasy- looking  rock  resembling  soap- 
stone  was  occasionally  met  with  in  veins,  and  upon 
close  examination  I  discovered  it  to  be  the  base  of 
asbestos.  The  surface  of  this  green  substance  was 
like  polished  horn,  which  gradually  became  fibrous, 
and  in  some  specimens  developed  towards  the  ex- 
tremity into  the  true  white  hairy  condition  of  the 
well-known  mineral  cotton. 

We  were  near  the  summit  of  the  mountain,  and 
arrived  at  an  ancient  camp  that  had  been  arranged 
with  considerable  judgment  by  a  series  of  stone  walls 
with  flanking  defences  for  the  protection  of  each  front. 
This  was  many  centuries  ago  the  summer  retreat 
of  the  Venetian  government,  and  it  had  formed  a 
sanatorium.  This  extends  to  the  summit  of  the 
mountain,  where  fragments  of  tiles  denote  the  former 
existence  of  houses.  In  the  absence  of  water  it 
would  have  been  impossible  to  adopt  the  usual  custom 
of  mud-covered  roofs,  therefore  tiles  had  been  carried 
from  the  low  country.  It  is  supposed  that  the  stations 
fell  into  decay  at  about  the  period  of  the  Turkish 
conquest. 

A  rattle  of  loose  stones  upon  the  opposite  side  of 
a  ravine  suddenly  attracted  my  attention ;  and  two 
moving  objects  at  about  230  yards  halted,  and  faced 
us  in  the  usual  manner  of  inquiry  when  wild  animals 
are  disturbed  to  windward  of  their  enemy.  The 
rocks  were  bare,  and  their  cafe-au-lait  colour  exactly 
harmonised   with   that    of    the   two   moufflon,   which 

B  B   2 


372  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


I  now  made  out  to  be  fine  rams  with  large  and 
peculiar  heads.  Motioning  to  my  shepherd  lad  to  sit 
quietly  upon  the  ground,  upon  which  I  was  already 
stretched,  I  examined  them  carefully  with  my  glass. 
Had  they  not  been  moving  when  first  observed  I 
should  not  have  discovered  them,  so  precisely  did 
their  skins  match  the  rocky  surface  of  the  steep 
inclination  upon  which  they  stood.  They  remained 
still  for  about  two  minutes,  affording  me  an  excellent 
opportunity  of  examination.  The  horns  were  thick, 
and  rose  from  the  base  like  those  of  the  ibex,  turning 
backwards,  but  they  twisted  forward  from  the  first 
bend,  and  the  points  came  round  towards  the  front  in 
the  ordinary  manner  of  the  sheep.  Like  all  the  wild 
sheep  of  India  and  other  countries,  the  coat  was 
devoid  of  wool,  but  appeared  to  be  a  perfectly  smooth 
surface  of  dense  texture.  It  was  too  far  for  a  certain 
shot,  especially  as  the  animals  were  facing  me,  which 
is  always  an  unsatisfactory  position  even  when  at  a 
close  range. 

I  put  up  the  200  yards  sight,  and  raised  the  rifle  to 
my  shoulder,  merely  to  try  the  view  ;  but  when  sighted 
I  could  not  clearly  distinguish  the  animal  from  the 
rocks,  and  I  would  not  fire  to  wound.  My  shepherd  lad 
at  this  moment  drew  his  whistle,  and,  without  orders, 
began  to  pipe  in  a  wild  fashion,  which  he  subsequently 
informed  me  should  have  induced  the  moufflon  to  come 
forward  towards  the  sound ;  instead  of  which,  they 
cantered  off,  then  stopped  again,  as  we  had  the  wind, 
and  at  length  they  disappeared  among  the  rocks  and 
pines.  It  would  be  almost  impossible  to  obtain  a  shot 
at  these  wary  creatures  by  approaching  from,  below, 
as  they  are  generally  upon  high  positions  from  which 
they  look  down  for  expected  enemies,  and  the  noise 


XV.]    Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     373 

of  the  loose  rocks  beneath  the  feet  of  a  man  walking 
up  the  mountains  would  be  sure  to  attract  attention. 
The  only  chance  of  success  would  be  to  pass  the  night 
on  the  summit  of  Troodos,  and  at  daybreak  to  work 
downwards. 

I  made  a  long  circuit  in  the  hope  of  again  meeting 
the  two  rams,  during  which  I  found  many  fresh  tracks 
of  the  past  night,  but  nothing  more. 

The  summit  of  the  mountain  was  disappointing,  as 
the  haze  occasioned  by  the  heat  in  the  low  country 
obscured  the  distant  view.  It  was  8.10.  a.m.,  and  the 
air  was  still  deliciously  cool  and  fresh  upon  the  highest 
point  of  Cyprus,  which  affords  a  complete  panorama 
that  in  the  month  of  October  or  during  early  spring 
must  be  very  beautiful.  Even  now  I  could  distinguish 
Larnaca,  Limasol,  Morphu,  all  in  opposite  directions, 
in  addition  to  the  sea  surrounding  the  island  upon 
every  point  except  the  east.  The  lofty  coast  of 
Caramania,  which  had  formed  a  prominent  object  in 
the  landscape  when  at  Kyrenia,  was  now  unfortunately 
hidden  within  the  haze. 

From  this  elevated  position  I  could  faintly  hear 
the  military  band  practising  at  the  camp  of  the  20th 
Regiment,  invisible,  about  a  mile  distant  among  the 
pine-forests,  at  a  lower  level  of  700  feet.  There 
were  no  trees  upon  the  rounded  knoll  which  forms 
the  highest  point  of  Cyprus  :  these  must  have  been 
cleared  away  and  rooted  out  when  the  ancient  camp 
was  formed,  and  the  pines  have  not  re-grown,  for 
the  simple  reason  that  no  higher  ground  exists  from 
which  the  rains  could  have  washed  the  cones  to 
root  upon  a  lower  level. 

I  now  examined  every  ravine  with  the  greatest 
caution  in  the  hopes  of  meeting  either  the  two  rams, 


374  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


or  other  moufflon,  but  I  only  came  across  a  solitary 
ewe  with  a  lamb  about  four  months  old ;  which  I  saw 
twice  during  my  walk  round  the  mountain  tops.  Upon 
arriving  during  my  descent  at  the  highest  spring  of 
Troodos,  where  the  cold  water  dripped  into  a  narrow 
stream  bed,  I  lay  down  beneath  a  fine  shady  cypress, 
and  having  eaten  two  hard-boiled  eggs  and  drunk  a 
cupful  of  the  pure  icy  water  mixed  with  a  tinge  of 
Geneva  from  my  flask,  I  watched  till  after  noon  in 
the  hope  that  my  two  rams  might  arrive  to  drink. 
Nothing  came  except  a  few  tame  goats  without  a  goat- 
herd ;  therefore  I  descended  the  abominable  stones 
which  rattled  down  the  mountain  side,  and  by  the  time 
that  I  arrived  at  our  camp  at  Trooditissa,  my  best 
shooting  boots  of  quagga  hide,  that  were  as  dear  to 
me  as  my  rifle,  were  almost  cut  to  pieces. 

There  was  a  terrible  picture  of  destruction  through- 
out the  forests  of  Troodos.  Near  the  summit,  the  pines 
and  cypress  were  of  large  growth,  but  excepting  the 
cypress,  there  were  scarcely  any  trees  unscathed,  and 
the  ground  was  covered  by  magnificent  spars  that  were 
felled  only  to  rot  upon  the  surface. 

I  was  not  sorry  to  arrive  at  the  shepherd's  hut  upon 
the  ridge  overhanging  the  monastery  upon  my  return. 
The  good  wife  was  as  usual  busy  in  making  cheeses 
from  the  goat's  milk,  which  is  a  very  important  occupa- 
tion throughout  Cyprus.  The  curd  was  pressed  into 
tiny  baskets  made  of  myrtle  wands,  which  produced 
a  cheese  not  quite  so  large  as  a  man's  fist.  I  think 
these  dry  and  tasteless  productions  of  the  original 
Cyprian  dairy  uneatable,  unless  grated  when  old  and 
hard  ;  but  among  the  natives  they  are  highly  esteemed, 
and  form  a  considerable  article  of  trade  and  export. 
Cesnola  mentions  that  2,000,000  (two  million)  cheeses 


XV.]    Lii^'E  AT  THE  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     375 

per  annum  are  made  in  Cyprus  of  this  small  kind, 
which  weigh  from  half  a  pound  to  three-quarters.  I 
have  frequently  met  droves  of  donkeys  heavily  laden 
with  panniers  filled  with  these  small  cheeses,  which, 
although  representing  important  numbers,  become  in- 
significant when  computed  by  weight. 

During  our  stay  at  Trooditissa  we  occasionally  ob- 
tained eels  from  a  man  who  caught  them  in  the  stream 
at  the  base  of  the  mountains ;  this  is  the  only  fresh- 
water fish  in  Cyprus  that  is  indigenous.  Some  persons 
have  averred  that  the  gold-fish  dates  its  origin  from 
this  island  ;  this  is  a  mistake,  as  it  is  not  found  else- 
where than  in  ornamental  ponds  and  cisterns  in  the 
principal  towns.  It  is  most  probable  that  it  was  intro- 
duced by  the  Venetians  who  traded  with  the  far  East, 
and  it  may  have  a;rrived  from  China. 

The  streams  below  the  mountains  contain  numerous 
crabs  of  a  small  species  seldom  larger  than  two  inches 
and  a  half  across  the  shell,  to  a  maximum  of  three 
inches ;  these  are  in  season  until  the  middle  of  June, 
after  which  they  become  light  and  empty.  When 
alive  they  are  a  brownish  green,  but  when  boiled  they 
are  the  colour  of  the  ordinary  crab,  and  are  exceedingly 
full  in  flesh,  and  delicate.  The  shell  is  extremely  hard 
compared  to  the  small  size,  and  the  claws  must  be 
broken  by  a  sharp  blow  with  the  back  of  a  knife  upon 
a  block. 

We  frequently  had  them  first  boiled  and  then 
pounded  in  a  mortar  to  a  paste,  then  mixed  with 
boiling  water  and  strained  through  a  sieve ;  after 
which  cream  should  be  added,  together  with  the  re- 
quired seasonings  for  a  soup.  I  imagine  that  the 
common  green  crabs  of  the  English  coasts,  which  are 
caught  in   such    numbers   and    thrown   away  by  the 


3/6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


fishermen,  would  be  almost  as  good  if  treated  in  the 
same  manner  ior  potage. 

The  calm  monotony  of  a  life  at  Trooditissa  was 
disturbed  every  now  and  then  at  distant  intervals  by 
trifling  events  which  only  served  to  prove  that  peculiar 
characters  existed  in  the  otherwise  heavenly  atmo- 
sphere which  showed  our  connection  with  the  world 
below. 

One  night  a  burglar  attempted  an  entrance ;  but  the 
man  (who  was  a  carpenter)  having  been  previously 
suspected,  was  watched,  and  having  been  seen  in  the 
middle  of  the  night  to  place  a  ladder  against  the  outer 
gallery,  by  which  he  ascended,  and  with  false  keys 
opened  a  door  that  led  to  the  store-room  of  the 
monastery,  he  was  suddenly  pounced  upon  by  two 
strong  young  priests  and  fairly  captured.  On  the 
following  morning  the  monks  applied  to  me,  and  as 
usual  I  vainly  pleaded  my  unofficial  position.  I  was 
either  to  do  or  to  say  something.  If  the  man  was 
sent  to  Limasol,  thirty-five  miles  distant,  the  monks 
would  have  the  trouble  and  expense  of  appearing  as 
prosecutors  ;  the  robber  would  be  imprisoned  for  per- 
haps a  couple  of  years,  during  which  his  family  would 
starve.  I  could  offer  no  advice.  I  simply  told  them 
that  if  any  robber  should  attempt  to  enter  my  tent 
I  should  not  send  him  to  Limasol,  but  I  should  en- 
deavour to  make  the  tent  so  disagreeable  to  him  that 
he  would  never  be  tempted  to  revisit  the  premises 
from  the  attraction  of  pleasing  associations.  I  ex- 
plained to  the  monks  that  although  a  severe  thrashing 
with  stout  mulberry  sticks  would,  if  laid  on  by  two 
stout  fellows,  have  a  most  beneficial  effect  upon  the 
burglar,  and  save  all  the  trouble  of  a  reference  to 
Limasol,  at  the  same  time  that  the  innocent  wife  and 


xvo    Life  at  the  Monastery  of  Trooditissa.     377 

family  would  not  be  thrown  upon  their  relatives,  they 
must  not  accept  my  views  of  punishment  as  any 
suggestion  under  the  present  circumstances. 

About  half  an  hour  after  this  conversation  I  heard 
a  sound  of  well-inflicted  blows,  accompanied  by  cries 
which  certainly  denoted  a  disagreeable  physical  sensa- 
tion, within  the  courtyard  of  the  monastery,  and  to  my 
astonishment  I  found  that  my  interpreter  and  willing 
cook  Christo  had  volunteered  as  one  of  the  executioners, 
and  the  burglar,  having  been  severely  thrashed,  was 
turned  out  of  the  monastery  and  thrust  down  the  path 
towards  the  depths  of  Phyni.  Christo  was  a  very 
good  fellow,  and  he  sometimes  reminded  me  of  a 
terrier  ready  to  obey  or  take  a  hint  from  his  master 
upon  any  active  subject,  while  at  others,  in  his  calmer 
moments,  he  resembled  King  Henry's  knights,  who 
interpreted  their  monarch's  wishes  respecting  Thomas 
a-Becket 

On  6th  June  we  had  been  somewhat  startled  by  the 
sudden  appearance  in  the  afternoon  of  a  man  perfectly 
naked,  who  marched  down  the  approach  from  the 
spring  and  entered  the  monastery-yard  in  a  dignified 
and  stage-like  attitude  as  though  he  had  the  sole  right 
of  entree.  At  first  sight  I  thought  he  was  mad,  but 
on  reference  to  the  monks  I  discovered  he  was  perfectly 
sane.  It  appeared  that  he  was  a  Greek  about  forty- 
five  years  of  age,  who  was  a  native  of  Kyrenia,  and 
for  some  offence  twenty  years  ago  he  had  been  ordered 
by  the  priests  to  do  penance  in  this  extraordinary 
manner.  His  body,  originally  white,  had  become 
quite  as  brown  as  that  of  an  Arab  of  the  desert ;  he 
possessed  no  clothing  nor  property  of  any  kind,  not 
even  a  blanket  during  winter  ;  but  he  wandered  about 
the   mountains  and   visited   monasteries   and    certain 


378  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  XV. 


villages, '  where  he  obtained  food  as  charity.  He 
would  never  accept  money  (probably  from  the  absence 
of  pockets),  neither  would  ^e  venture  near  Turkish 
villages,  as  he  had  several  times  received  a  thrashing 
from  the  men  for  thus  presenting  himself  before  their 
women,  and  it  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  Cypriotes  had 
not  followed  the  Turkish  example,  which  would  have 
quickly  cured  his  eccentricity.  He  was  a  strong,  well- 
built  man,  with  good  muscular  development ;  his  head 
was  bald  with  the  exception  of  a  little  hair  upon  either 
side,  and  he  was  interesting  to  a  certain  extent  as  an 
example  of  what  a  European  can  endure  when  totally 
exposed  to  the  sun  and  weather.  Sometimes  he  slept 
like  a  wild  animal  beneath  a  rock  among  the  mountains, 
or  in  a  cave,  when  such  a  luxurious  retreat  might  offer 
a  refuge ;  at  other  times  he  was  received  and  sheltered 
by  the  priests  or  people.  This  individual's  name  was 
Christodilos,  and  according  to  my  notes  taken  at  the 
time,    he   is   described   as    *'  originally   a   labourer   of 

Kyrenia ;  parents  dead  :  one  brother  and  two  sisters 

1*  •      >» 
ivmg. 


^ 


CHAPTER   XVI. 

SOMETHING   ABOUT   TAXATION. 

The  monastery  gardens  of  Trooditissa  at  the  close 
of  July  exhibited  the  great  fruit-producing  power  of 
the  soil  and  climate  at  this  high  altitude,  but  at  the  \ 
same  time  they  were  examples  of  the  arbitrary  and 
vexatious  system  of  Turkish  taxation,  which  remains 
unchanged  and  is  still  enforced  by  the  British  authori- 
ties. I  shall  describe  this  in  detail,  and  leave  the 
question  of  possibility  of  development  under  such 
wholesale  tyranny  to  the  judgment  of  the  public.  It 
is  difficult  to  conceive  how  any  persons  can  expect 
that  Europeans,  especially  Englishmen,  will  become 
landowners  and  settle  in  Cyprus  when  subjected  to 
such  unfair  and  irritating  restrictions. 

^0  produce  can  be  removed  from  any  garden  until  it 
sJiall  have  been  valued  for  taxation  by  the  government 
official  appointed  for  that  purpose^  at  the  rate  of  i  o 
per  cent,  ad  valorem. 

At  first  sight  this  system  appears  incredible,  but 
upon  an  examination  of  the  details  our  wonder  ceases 
at  the  general  absence  of  cultivated  vegetables  and 
the  propagation  of  superior  qualities  of  fruits.  If  the 
object  of  the  government  were  purposely  to  repress  all 
horticultural  enterprise,  and  to  drive  the  inhabitants  to 


380  Cyprus  in  1879.  jchap. 

the  Nebuchadnezzar-like  grazing  upon  wild  herbs,  the 
present  system  would  assuredly  accomplish  the  baneful 
end.  The  Cypriotes  are  called  indolent,  and  are 
blamed  by  travellers  for  their  apathy  in  contenting 
themselves  with  wild  vegetables,  when  their  soil  is 
eminently  adapted  in  the  varying  altitudes  and  cli- 
mates for  the  production  of  the  finest  qualities  of 
fruits  and  green-stuffs.  I  will  imagine  that  an  English- 
man of  any  class  may  be  placed  in  the  following 
position  of  a  cultivator,  which  he  assuredly  would  be, 
if  foolish  enough  to  become  a  proprietor  in  Cyprus. 

I  am  at  this  moment  looking  down  from  the  shade 
of  the  great  walnut-tree  upon  the  terraced  gardens 
and  orchards  beneath,  which  are  rich  in  potatoes  of 
excellent  quality,  onions,  beet-root,  &c. ;  together  with 
walnuts,  pears,  apples,  plums,  filberts,  figs,  and  mul- 
berries. The  pears  and  plums  are  of  several  varieties, 
some  will  ripen  late,  others  are  now  fit  to  gather,  but 
nothing  can  be  touched  until  the  valuer  shall  arrive  ; 
he  is  expected  in  ten  days;  by  which  time  many  of 
the  plums  will  have  fallen  to  the  ground,  and  the 
swarming  rats  will  have  eaten  half  the  pears.  The 
shepherds'  children  and  the  various  monastery  boys 
live  in  the  boughs  like  monkeys,  and  devour  the  fruit 
ripe  or  unripe,  from  morning  till  evening,  with  extra- 
ordinary impunity ;  women  who  arrive  from  the  low 
country  with  children  to  be  christened  place  them 
upon  the  ground,  and  climb  the  pear-trees;  neither 
colic  nor  cholera  is  known  in  this  sanctified  locality. 
The  natives  of  the  low  country  who  arrive  at  the 
monastery  daily  with  their  laden  mules  from  villages 
upon  the  other  side  of  the  mountains,  en  route  to 
Limasol,  immediately  ascend  the  attractive  trees  and 
feast  upon  the  plums  ;  at  the  same  time  they  fill  their 


XVI.]  Something  about  Taxation.  381 

handkerchiefs  and  pockets  with  pears,  &c.,  as  food 
during  their  return  journey.  **  There  will  not  be  much 
trouble  for  the  valuer  when  he  arrives,"  I  remarked  to 
the  monks,  "if  you  allow  such  wholesale  robbery  of 
your  orchards." 

**  On  the  contrary,"  they  replied,  "  the  difficulty  will 
be  increased ;  we  never  sell  the  produce  of  the  gardens, 
which  is  kept  for  the  support  of  all  those  who  visit  us, 
but  we  have  much  trouble  with  the  valuation  of  the 
fruits  for  taxation.  It  is  hard  that  we  shall  have  to 
pay  for  what  the  public  consume  at  our  expense, 
but  it  will  be  thus  arranged.  .  .  The  valuer  will  arrive, 
and  he  will  find  some  trees  laden  with  unripe  fruit, 
others  that  have  been  stripped  by  plunder;  the  pota- 
toes, &c.,  will  be  still  in  the  ground.  We  shall  have 
a  person  to  represent  our  interests  in  the  valuation  as 
a  check  upon  the  official ;  but  in  the  end  he  will  have 
his  own  way.  We  shall  explain  that  certain  trees  are 
naked,  as  the  fruit  became  ripe  and  was  stolen  by  the 
boys.  *  Then  you  ought  to  have  taken  more  care  of 
it,'  he  will  reply ;  '  how  many  okes  of  plums  were  there 
upon  those  trees  ?  *  We  shall  have  to  guess  the 
amount.  *  Nonsense ! '  he  will  exclaim  to  whatever 
figure  we  may  mention,  *  there  must  have  been  double 
that  quantity :  I  shall  write  down  1 500  (if  we  declared 
1000),  which  will  split  the  difierence.'  ^ 

"  We  shall  protest,"  continued  the  monks,  "  and  this 
kind  of  inquisitorial  haggling  will  take  place  concerning 
every  tree,  until  the  valuer  shall  have  concluded  his 
labour,  and  about  one-third  more  than  the  actual 
produce  of  the  orchards  will  have  been  booked  against 

^  "Splitting  the  difference"  is  the  usual  method  of  arranging  an 
Oriental  dispute,  as  instanced  by  Solomon's  well-known  suggestion  of 
dividing  the  baby. 


382  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


us;  upon  which  we  must  pay  a  tax  of  10  per  cent., 
at  the  same  time  that  the  risks  of  insects,  rats,  arid 
the  expenses  of  gathering  remain  to  the  debit  of  the 
garden.  In  fact,"  said  the  poor  old  monks,  "our 
produce  is  a  trouble  to  us,  as  personally  we  derive  no 
benefit;  the  public  eat  the  fruit,  and  the  government 
eats  the  taxes." 

There  were  curious  distinctions  and  exceptions  in 
this  arbitrary  form  of  taxation :  if  a  fruit-tree  grew 
within  the  monastery  courtyard  it  was  exempt ;  thus 
the  great  walnut-tree  beneath  which  we  camped  was 
free.  It  was  really  cheering  to  find  that  we  were 
living  under  some  object  that  was  not  taxed  in 
Cyprus ;  but  the  monk  continued,  and  somewhat 
dispelled  the  illusion  ..."  This  tree  produced  in  one 
year  20,000  walnuts,  and  it  averages  from  12,000  to 
1 5,000  ;  but  when  the  crops  of  our  other  trees  are 
estimated,  the  official  valuer  always  insists  upon  a  false 
maximum,  so  as  to  include  the  crop  of  the  courtyard 
walnut  in  the  total  amount  for  taxation." 

The  potatoes,  like  all  other  horticultural  productions, 
are  valued  while  growing,  and  the  same  system  of 
extravagant  estimate  is  pursued. 

This  system  is  a  blight  of  the  gravest  character 
upon  the  local  industry  of  the  inhabitants,  and  it  is 
a  suicidal  and  unstatesmanlike  policy  that  crushes 
and  extinguishes  all  enterprise.  What  Englishman 
would  submit  to  such  a  prying  and  humiliating  posi- 
tion ?  And  still  it  is  expected  that  the  resources  of  the 
island  will  be  developed  by  British  capital !  The  great 
want  for  the  supply  of  the  principal  towns  is  market- 
gardens.  Imagine  an  English  practical  market-gardener 
fresh  from  the  ten-mile  radius  of  Covent  Garden,  where 
despatch  and  promptitude  mean  fortune  and  success  : 


xvio  Something  about  Taxation.  383 

he  could  not  cut  his  cauliflowers  in  Cyprus  until  his 
crop  of  unblown  plants  had  been  valued  by  an  official ! 
and  while  he  might  be  waiting  for  this  well-hated 
spirit  of  evil,  his  cauliflower-heads  would  have  expanded 
into  coral-like  projections  and  have  become  utterly 
valueless  except  for  pig-feeding.  I  cannot  conceive 
a  more  extravagant  instance  of  oppression  than  this 
system  of  taxation,  which  throws  enormous  powers  of 
extortion  into  the  hands  of  the  official  valuer.  This 
person  can  oppose  by  delays  and  superlative  estimates 
the  vital  interests  of  the  proprietors;  if  the  property 
is  large,  the  owner  will  be  only  too  glad  to  silence  his 
opposition  by  a  considerable  bribe;  the  poor  must 
alike  contribute,  or  submit  to  be  the  victim  of  delays 
which,  with  perishable  articles  such  as  vegetables,  re- 
present his  ruin.  Is  it  surprising  that  the  villages  of 
the  desolate  plain  of  Messaria  are  for  the  most  part 
devoid  of  fruit-trees  ?  We  are  preaching  to  the 
Cypriotes  the  advantage  of  planting  around  their 
dwellings,  as  though  they  were  such  idiots  as  to  be 
ignorant  that  "  he  who  sows  the  wind  will  reap  the 
whirlwind."  If  they  plant  fruit-trees  under  the  present 
laws  they  are  planting  curses  which  will  entail  the 
misery  of  inquisitorial  visits  and  the  most  objection- 
able and  oppressive  form  of  an  unjust  taxation.  As 
the  law  at  present  stands,  the  amount  of  fruit  is  ridi- 
culously small,  and  the  quality  inferior,  while  cultivated 
vegetables  are  difficult  to  obtain.  Can  any  other  result 
be  expected  under  the  paralysing  effect  of  Turkish 
laws  ?  which  unfortunately  British  officials  have  the 
questionable  honour  of  administering. 

I  have  heard  officials  condemn  in  the  strongest 
terms  the  laws  they  are  obliged  to  enforce.  There 
are  few  persons  who  are  obtuse  to  the  sense  of  injustice, 


384  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


but  at  the  same  time  the  suggestion  has  been  expressed 
that  an  extreme  difficulty  would  be  experienced  should 
the  taxes  be  collected  in  any  other  form  than  dimes. 
I  cannot  see  the  slightest  truth  in  this  disclaimer  of 
responsibility  for  Turkish  evils,  and  I  believe  the  pre- 
sent difficulty  might  be  overcome  with  little  trouble 
by  a  system  of  rating  the  land  ad  valorem. 

The  soil  and  general  value  of  properties  in  Cyprus 
vary  as  in  England  and  other  countries  according  to 
quality  and  position.  There  is  land  contiguous  to 
market  towns  of  much  higher  value  than  the  same 
quality  of  soil  in  remote  districts  ;  there  are  farms 
supplied  with  water  either  naturally  or  artificially,  which 
are  far  more  valuable  than  others  which  are  dependent 
upon  favourable  seasons.  Land  which  formerly  pro- 
duced madder  was  of  extreme  value,  and  should  have 
been  adjudged  accordingly;  but  why  should  not  all 
properties  of  every  description  throughout  Cyprus  be 
rated  and  taxed  in  due  proportion  ?  The  valuation 
should  be  arranged  by  local  councils.  The  vineyards 
which  produced  the  expensive  wines  should  be  rated 
higher  than  those  of  inferior  quality.  Gardens  should 
be  rated  according  to  their  distance  from  a  market ; 
fields  in  proportion  to  their  water-supply  and  the 
quality  of  the  soil.  The  Cypriotes  do  not  complain 
of  the  amount  of  10  per  cent,  taxation  under  the 
name  of  dimes,  but  they  naturally  object  to  the 
arbitrary  and  vexatious  system  of  inquisitorial  visits, 
together  with  the  delays  and  loss  of  time  occasioned 
by  the  old  Turkish  system.  *'  Rate  us,  and  let  us 
know  the  limit  of  our  responsibility" — that  is  the 
natural  desire  of  the  inhabitants.  If  the  industries 
of  the  country  are  to  be  developed  they  must  be  un- 
fettered ;   but   if  weighed   down   by   restrictions   and 


XVI.]  Something  about  Taxation.  385 

vexatious  interference,  they  will  hardly  discover   the 
benefit  of  a  change  to  British  masters. 

Some  people  in  Cyprus  make  use  of  an  argument 
in  favour  of 'the  present  system  of  dimes  or  collecting 
in  kind  by  tenths,  which  does  not  commend  itself  by 
logical  reasoning.  They  say,  "  if  you  rate  the  land 
ad  valorem^  and  establish  a  monetary  payment  of 
10  per  cent.,,  you  will  simply  burden  the  poor  land- 
holder with  debt  during  a  season  of  drought,  when  his 
property  will  produce  nothing.  According  to  the 
present  system  he  and  the  government  alike  share  the 
risk  of  seasons ;  if  the  land  produces  nothing,  there  can 
be  no  dimes.''  It  does  not  appear  to  have  occurred 
to  these  reasoners  that  in  such  seasons  of  scarcity  the 
taxation  could  be  easily  reduced  as  a  temporary 
measure  of  relief  according  to  the  valuation  of  the 
local  medjlis  or  council ;  but  I  claim  the  necessity  of 
artificial  irrigation  that  will  secure  the  land  from  such 
meteorological  disasters,  and  will  enable  both  the 
cultivator  and  the  government  to  calculate  upon  a 
dependable  average  of  crops,  instead  of  existing  upon 
the  fluctuations  of  variable  seasons. 

The  district  of  Larnaca  will  offer  a  fair  example  of 
the  usual  methods  of  taxation,  and  as  the  figures  have 
been  most  kindly  supplied  by  the  authorities  of  the 
division,  they  can  be  thoroughly  relied  upon. 

The  revenues  of  the  district  (Larnaca)  are  derived 
from  the  following  sources  : — 

1.  Dimes  (/>.  tenths  of  the  produce) — in  some  instances  may  be 

paid  in  kind. 

2.  Property  Tax — 4  piastres  per  1000  upon  the  value  of  immovable 

property,  such  as  buildings,  land,  trees ;  this  is  classed  as 
ist  class  Verghi. 

3.  Charge  upon  Income  derived  from  Rents — 40  piastres  per  looo  ; 

classed  as  2nd  class  Verghi. 

C  C 


386  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


4.  Charge  on  Trade  Profits — 30  piastres  per  1000 ;  3rd  class  Verghi. 

5.  Exemption  from  Military  Service — this  tax  levied  upon  Christians 

only,  at  the  rate  of  5000  piastres  for  180  males. 

6.  Duty  upon  Sale  of  Horses,  Mules,  Donkeys,  Camels,  and  Cattle — 

I  piastre  in  every  40  upon  price-;  also  tax  on  goods  weighed 
by  public  measurer. 

7.  Tax  on  Flocks  of  Sheep  and  Goats — 2  J  piastres  per  head.     This 

is  not  levied  until  the  animal  shall  be  one  year  old. 

In  1877  the  amount  received  was — 


Piastres. 

Par 

I. 

Dimes 

822,000 

2. 

Property  Tax 

221,897 

24 

3. 

Rent  Charge 

20,089 

32 

4- 

Tax  on  Trade-Profits    . 

65,340 

20 

5. 

Military  Exemption 

153,333 

25 

6. 

Sales  of  Animals,  Measures,  &c. 

450,000 

7. 

Sheep  and  Goats 

• 

200,000 

1,932,661 

21 

The  return  of  sheep  and  goats  in  the  district  of  Larnaca  during 
the  year  1878,  and  comprising  36  villages,  was  rendered  as  47,841. 

The  following  taxes  are  payable  by  inhabitants  of 
Scala  and  the  neighbourhood  : — 

January,  1879. 

1.  The  tithe  of  agricultural  produce,  including  silk,  payable  in  some 

cases  in  kind,  in  others  in  money. 

2.  Tax  in  lieu  of  military  service,  5000  copper  piastres   for  180 

Christian  males. 

3.  Veighi  (fl),  4  per  1000  on  the  purchasing  value  of  houses,  land, 

or  immovable  property. 

4.  Verghi  (^),  4  per  cent,  on  the  rent  of  immovable  property,  or 

houses  not  occupied  by  their  owners. 

5.  Verghi  (^),  3  per  cent,  on  profits  and  professions. 

6.  Tax  on  sheep,  2^  silver  piastres  each. 

7.  Tax  on  goats,  2    silver  piastres  each. 

8.  Tax  on  pigs,  3  silver  piastres  each. 


XVI.]  Something  about  Taxation.  387 

9.  Tax  on  wood  and  charcoal.  Wood  for  carpenters*  uses  pays 
20  per  cent,  on  the  value  at  the  place  of  production,  and  a 
further  5  per  cent,  on  the  amount  of  the  tax  on  coming  into 
the  town. 

Firewood  pays  12  per  cent,  on  the  value  at  the  place  of 
production,  and  a  further  5  per  cent,  as  above. 

Charcoal  pays  2  piastres  per  100  okes. 

10.  Tax  on  goods  weighed,  ^  para  per  oke.     (In  the  case  of  wood 

and  charcoal,  hay,  chopped  straw,  lime,  and  onions,  the  tax 
begins  at  a  weight  of  50  okes,  and  at  a  rate  of  5  paras  for 
50  okes.) 

11.  Tax  on  grain  measured,  2  paras  per  kilo  paid  by  the  buyer,  and 

2  paras  per  kilo  paid  by  the  seller.  If  measured  for  the 
sole  convenience  of  the  owner,  2  paras  per  kilo. 

12.  Octroi.     Every  load  brought  from  the  villages  to  the  town  pays 

a  tax  of  one  oke  per  load,  or  in  money,  according  to  the 
market  rate  of  the  goods. 

13.  Tax  on  the  sale  of  mules,  horses,  donkeys,  oxen,  and  camels  in 

the  town,  i  para  per  piastre  of  the  price. 

14.  Property  tax  (municipal)  paid  by  owners: — 

On  houses  let  to  tenants,  5  per  cent,  per  annum. 

On  houses  inhabited  by  the  owners,  3  per  cent,  per  annum. 

15.  Tax  on  camels  (M.)  2s,  each  per  annum. 

16.  Tax  on  carts  (M.)  belonging  to  and  working  in  Lamaca  and 

Marina  townships,  i/.  each  per  annum. 

17.  Corvde.     Forced  labour  on  roads  four  days  a  year. 

18.  Shop  licences  (M.)  in  classes,  10/.,  5/.,  2/.,  i/.,  10s, 

19.  Wine  licences  (C.H.)  in  classes,   25  per  cent,  12^  per  cent, 

6J  per  cent  on  rental. 

20.  Licences  to  merchants,  bankers,  &c,  (M.)  in  classes,  10/.,  5/., 

2/.,  i/. 

21.  Monopolies.    Salt,  gunpowder. 

22.  Custom  House  duties  8  per  cent  on  imports,  i  per  cent  exports. 

Custom  House  duty  on  wine,  10  per  cent 
Custom  House  duty  on  imported  tobacco,  75  per  cent ;  on 
home  grown,  or  imported  unmanufactured,  lod,  sl  pound. 

23.  Stamps,   transfer  and  succession  duties.      Mubashin^.      Voted 

to  remain  in  force  until  March  ist,  1879. 


C  C   2 


388 


Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


DISTRICT  OF  LARNACA, 

July\%,  1879. 

Claude  Delaval  Cobham,  B.C.L.,  M.A.  Oxon,^  Commissioner, 
Robert  Fisher,  BarHster-at'LcnOy  Assistant' Commissioner, 
Richard  H.  Tyacke,  Captain  ff.M.  ^Zth  Regiment,  L.  CM.  P. 


Villages. 


Akapnou . 
Alamino  . 
Aletriko    . 
Anaphoti  . 
AngiLsid':S 
Aradtppo 
Arpera    . 
Bakjalar  . 
Barsada    . 
Chellia     . 
Hagiaanna 
Hagiotheodoro 
Iskannou 
Kalavasso 
Kalokhorio 
Katodry  . 
Kato  Lefkara 
Kiti .    .    . 

KlVlSIL    . 

Klavia   . 
Kophinou 
Lakia  .    . 
Livadia  . 
Maroni     . 
Mazoto    . 
Meltni     . 
Menevi     . 
Menoia    . 
Ora      .     . 
Panolefkara 
Pila      .     . 
Psematismeno 
Pyraa  .    . 
RtMJa .    . 
Shcrojikia 
softalar 
Tatlisou 
Tersephano 
Tokhni     . 
Tuzla,  &C.,  &c 
Vavla  .     . 
VoroklifU 
Vromoloschia 


0 
o 


38 

2ZO 

x8i 
ao6 
326 

12 

348 
30 

38 

18 

440 

555 
60 

85 

71 
39Z 
205 

43 
299 

36 
X06 
234 
232 

45 
4a 
59 

91 
249 

227 

184 

46 

Z2 
331 

48 
215 

190 

458 
1.450 

58 
148 

200 


it. 


.CI 

Of 


.S3 


82 

83 

205 

87 

226 

i8z 

237 

169 

273 

156 

i,i6x 

z,i6i 

35 

25 

104 

88 

X28 

36 

59 

39 

473 

236 

196 

xq6 

520 

364 

365 

86 

357 

258 

364 

436 

384 

no 

0 

X63 

0 

390 

31 

64 

64 

362 

36. 

240 

155 

380 

280 

108 

Z08 

30 

15 

X48 

53 

334 

334 

x,i84 

979 

338 

208 

X96 

X42 

190 

104 

85 

as 

345 

845 

75 

0 

837 

0 

63 

63 

412 

173 

6,950 

5,350 

177 

'73 

353 

253 

68 

50 

• 

• 

3 

•35 

^ 

0 

u 

;s 

# 

0 

i,924P 

1x8 

4.36a 

t 

3.127 
4.154 

X16 
0 

X8.486 

0 

X.033 

x6 

5.469 

— 

1,190 

92 

2,117 

30 

3.171 

837 

xo,  130 

0 

5.356 

156 

X^ 

179 

0 

8.613 

6 

7,603 

42 

8,699 

IIO 

1,823 

Z62 

x,8io 

359 
0 

6,231 
1,786 

0 

5,838 

85 

5.6to 

0 

3.860 

0 

2,876 

5 

1,874 

95 

1.630 

0 

6,772 

205 

35.932 

130 

8,956 

54 

5.081 

86 

3.89a 

0 

1.064 

xoo 

6,113 

75 

1.797 

837 

2.530 

0 

2,582 

339 

10,312 

x,6oo 

4 

51.323 
4.508 

0 

3,950 

z8 

5.516 

•0 

^ 

s . 

& 

a- 

M 

s  2 

^ 

eg^  . 

1,027 

_^ 

X»222 

a.950 

2.444 

3,  "5 

2,527 

3.332 

3,ZIX 

2,255 

15,333 

9.695 

500 

1.350 

4,138 

2,085 

338 

2,782 

333 

— 

3.400 

5.545 

2,973 

x,6o5 

4,916 

3.947 

x.soo 

6,2ZO 

3.30s 

— 

3.611 

5,360 

6,000 

4.715 

0 

3,003 

0 

7,163 

388 
888 

3,817 

5.055 

3.340 

3.305 

1,697 

4.194 

4,167 

1,361 

805 

1,907 

555 

1,510 

4,555 

1,805 

14.166 

with  K.L. 

3,000 

7,67a 

3,616 

1,673 

x,6ii 

3,755 

222 

— 

3,583 

1.32s 

0 

1,585 

0 

1,442 

3,250 

4.437 

2.694 

1.717 

40.276 

6.335 

2,223 

1,475 

3,500 

4,262 

a.638 

*v48o 

r« 


3.166 
2.774 
3.446 
4.C00 
5.766 
2,565 
36 

14.714 
810 

405 
97< 

11,371 
3.003 

22,161 
846 

11,415 
8,668 

7,425 
627 

354 
4.644 
3.333 
2.871 
5.843 
1,071 

6.959 
1,253 
4.116 
7,92a 

37.255 
1.678 

7,176 

11.278 

8,XXt 

3.700 
3,897 
3.106 

3'o 

2.776 
7,202 
4,295 
3*503 


Villages  wholly  Christian  are  in  italics. 
Villages  wholly  Moslem  are  in  small  capitals. 
Mixed  villages  are  in  Roman  type. 
The  statistics  are  correct  up  to  January  x,  1879. 


xvL]  Something  about  Taxation.  389 

There  are  other  taxes  according  to  the  laws  of 
succession  upon  the  death  of  an  individual  which  I 
give  in  the  same  words  as  furnished  to  me  by  the 
authority: —  • 


Memorandum  of  the  Defter  Hakkani  about  the  Transfer 

IN  Succession  of  Property. 

When  a  man  dies  his  properties  must  be  duly  transferred  to  his 
heirs,  who  must  apply  to  the  authorities  within  six  months,  in  order 
to  have  the  transfer  made. 

The  transfer  is  made  by  giving  a  new  Kotshan  (Title),  to  the 
heirs  in  exchange  for  the  Kotshan  of  the  deceased. 

The  right  to  the  inheritance  is  stated  by  the  laws  as  follows : — 

ist,  To  the  son  or  daughter ;  in  want  of  which,  2nd,  to  the  grandson 
and  granddaughter ;  in  want  of  which,  3rd,  to  the  father  and  mother  ; 
in  want  of  which,  4th,  to  the  brother  from  the  same  father  and 
mother;  in  want  of  which,  5th,  to  the  sister  from  the  same  father 
and  mother ;  in  want  of  which,  6th,  to  the  brother  from  the  same 
mother ;  and  in  want  of  which,  7th,  to  the  sister  from  the  same 
mother. 

The  grandson  and  the  granddaughter  from  right  to  the  inheritance 
of  the  share  belonging  to  their  father,  who  may  have  died  before  the 
death  of  their  grandfather ;  they  inherit  together  with  their  uncles 
and  aunts  as  another  direct  son  or  daughter  of  the  grandfather. 

In  all  above  stated  degrees  of  inheritance,  except  in  the  ist  and 
2nd,  the  husband  or  wife  has  right  to  the  fourth  share  of  the  land  left 
by  the  husband  or  wife. 

This  is  for  property  in  land  (Arazi), 

As  to  the  freehold  property  (Emlak),  the  male  inhabitants  two- 
thirds  and  the  female  one-third ;  but  it  is  very  difficult  to  enumerate 
the  various  shades  of  division  which  are  always  made  by  the  cadis 
according  to  the  Cheni  law ;  there  is  no  Nizam  law  in  this  respect. 

All  system  of  endorsement  on  Kotshan  is  abolished. 

The  duty  on  transfer  in  succession  of  a  freehold  property  is  half 
the  fees  on  transfer  by  sale. 

In  transferring  by  sale  the  fees  are  i  per  cent,  on  the  value,  if  this 
freehold  property  is  a  real  one  (Emlaki  Serfi) ;  and  3  per  cent,  if  it 
is  vacouf  freehold  property  (Emlak  Meocoofi). 


390  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Besides  this  3  piastres  as  price  of  paper,  and  i  piastre  as  clerks' 
fees  (Riataki)  are  paid  for  every  new  Kotshaa. 

The  lands  (Arazi)  pay  5  per  cent,  indifferently  on  transfer  by  sale 
and  on  transfer  by  succession. 

The  custom  is  to  value  lands  at  one  year  s  rental,  or 
value  of  products. 

If  a  house  is  occupied  by  the  owner  no  tax  on 
rental  is  demanded  ;  the  only  tax  demanded  in  that  case 
being  that  on  the  proportionate  value. 

The  proportionate  values  of  real  properties  are  not 
assessed  for  a  fixed  period.  Therefore  the  value, 
once  assessed,  can  remain  the  same  for  many  years, 
or  it  can  be  altered  in  the  annual  inspections  of  the 
Vakouat  Riatibs  according  to  an  increase  or  decrease 
of  value  that  may  take  place  on  account  of  repairs,  a 
general  rise  of  value,  or  partial  or  entire  destruction 
by  fire,  rain,  &c. 

The  poverty  of  the  agricultural  classes  was  so 
generally  acknowledged  even  by  the  Turkish  admin- 
istration that  it  was  absolutely  necessary  to  relieve 
them  by  some  external  assistance;  it  was  therefore 
resolved  in  1869  to  create  an  "Agricultural  Bank  and 
a  Locust  Fund;"  the  principles  of  this  establishment 
are  sufficiently  original  to  attract  attention. 

In  1 87 1  the  Turkish  government  issued  a  decree 
that  all  cultivators  of  the  ground  should  pay  to  the 
authorities  a  sum  of  money  equal  to  the  price  of  one 
kilo  of  wheat  and  one  of  barley  for  every  pair  of 
oxen  in  their  possession,  in  order  to  create  a  capital 
for  the  new  bank..  The  number  of  oxen  would 
represent  the  scale  of  every  holding,  as  they  would 
exhibit  the  proportion  of  ploughs  required  upon  the 
farm,  and  thus  yield  an  approximate  estimate  of 
the  area. 


XVI.]  Something  about  Taxation.  391 

This  arbitrary  call  upon  the  resources  of  the  im^ 
poverished  farmers  was  an  eccentric  financial  operation 
in  the  ostensible  cause  of  assistance,  but  it  produced 
a  capital  of  169,028  piastres,  The  rate  of  interest 
upon  loans  to  individuals,  or  for  particular  districts, 
for  the  purpose  of  destroying  locusts  was  8  per 
cent,  previous  to  the  year  1875,  ^^^  was  increased 
to  12  per  cent,  since  that  period.  Receipts  for 
all  sums  borrowed  for  the  public  benefit  of  locust 
destruction  were  signed  by  the  head-men  and  members 
of  councils  of  villages. 

At  first  sight  the  establishment  of  an  agricultural 
bank  sounded  propitious  as  a  step  in  the  right  direc- 
tion, but,  according  to  the  conditions  of  all  loans,  it 
became  usurious,  and  saddled  the  unfortunate  farmers 
after  a  few  bad  seasons  with  debts  that  could  never 
be  paid  off.  If  X  borrowed  ;^iooo,  he  received  only 
^880,  as  the  year's  interest  was  deducted  in  advance, 
but  he  was  afterwards  charged  compound  interest  at 
12  per  cent,  upon  the  whole  ;^  1000.  Compound  in- 
terest at  1 2  per  cent,  means  speedy  ruin. 

Upon  an  examination  of  the  accounts,  the  whole 
affair  represents  apparently  large  figures  in  piastres, 
which  when  reduced  to  pounds  sterling  presents  a 
miserable  total  that  proves  the  failure  of  the  enter- 
prise. As  I  have  already  stated,  a  "  bank  "  could  not 
succeed  in  Cyprus  if  it  were  established  specially  to 
benefit  the  agriculturist;  money  can  always  command 
10  per  cent.,  while  the  farmer  should  obtain  the  loans 
necessary  for  irrigation  at  a  maximum  of  6  per 
cent,  if  he  is  really  to  be  encouraged.  This  can 
only  be  accomplished  through  a  Government  or 
National  Bank,  expressly  organised  for  the  purpose 
of   developing    the    agricultural    interests.      As    the 


392  Cyprus  in  1879^ 


[CHAP. 


government  can  obtain  any  amount  at  4  per 
cent,  the  National  Bank  could  well  afford  to  lend 
at  6,  especially  as  the  loan  would  be  secured  by 
a  first  mortgage,  to  take  precedence  of  all  other 
claims  upon  the  property. 

The  '*  Locust  Fund  "  was  an  adjnirable  institution 
which  has  achieved  great  results.  There  can  be  little 
doubt  that  throughout  the  world's  history  man  has 
exhibited  a  lamentable  apathy  in  his  passive  submission 
to  the  depredations  of  the  insect  tribe,  whereas  by  a 
system  of  organisation  he  would  at  the  least  have 
mitigated  the  scourge  which  has  in  many  instances 
resulted  in  absolute  famine.  At  one  time  the  plague 
of  locusts  was  annually  expected  in  Cyprus  as  a  natural 
advent  like  the  arrival  of  swallows  in  the  usual  season, 
and  when  the  swarms  were  extreme  the  crops  were 
devoured  throughout  the  island,  and  swept  completely 
from  the  surface,  entailing  general  ruin.  The  cultiva- 
tion of  cotton,  which  should  be  one  of  the  most 
important  industries,  has  been  much  restricted  from 
the  fear  of  locusts,  as  they  appear  in  May,  when  the 
tender  young  plants  are  a  few  inches  above  the  ground 
and  are  the  first  objects  of  attack. 

It  is  related  that  when  under  the  Venetians,  Cyprus 
annually  exported  30,000  bales  or  6,600,000  lbs.  of 
cotton.  In  1877  the  consular  reports  estimated  the 
entire  produce  of  the  island  at  2000  bales  of  200  okes 
per  bale,  or  1,100,000  lbs.,  equal  to  only  one-sixth  of 
the  original  Venetian  export. 

The  steps  taken  to  destroy  the  locusts  have  so  far 
diminished  their  numbers  that  in  certain  districts  the 
production  of  cotton  might  be  largely  extended.  M. 
Mattel,  and  Said  Pacha  when  governor  of  Cyprus, 
combined  to   make  war  upon  the   locust  swarms   by 


r 


,tf        I         r-»     -  •     •      •    »       ^, 


XVI.] 


Something  about  Taxation. 


393 


means  of  a  simple  but  effective  method,  which  will 
render  their  names  historical  as  the  greatest  benefactors 
in  an  island  that  has  seldom  known  aught  but  oppressors. 
The  idea  originated  with  Signor  Richard  Mattei, 
who  is  the  largest  landed  proprietor  in  Cyprus.  It 
is  much  to  be  regretted  that  professional  entomologists 
can  seldom  assist  us  in  the  eradication  of  insect 
plagues;  they  can  explain  their  habits,  but  they  are 
useless  as  allies  against  their  attacks.  M.  Mattei  had 
observed  that  the  young  locusts  invariably  marched 
straight  ahead,  and  turned  neither  to  the  right  or  left ; 
he  had  also  remarked  that  upon  arrival  at  an  obstacle 
they  would  endeavour  to  climb  over,  instead  of  going 
round  it  Under  these  peculiarities  of  natural  instinct 
a  very  simple  arrangement  sufficed  to  lead  them  to 
destruction.  Pits  were  dug  about  three  or  four  feet 
deep  at  right  angles  with  the  line  of  march,  and  screens 
of  cotton  cloth  edged  at  the  bottom  with  oil-skin  were 
arranged  something  after  the  fashion  of  stop-nets  for 
ground  game  in  covert-shooting  in  England.  This  wall, 
with  a  slippery  groundwork,  prevented  the  insects  from 
proceeding.  As  they  never  turn  back,  they  were 
obliged  to  search  sideways  for  a  passage,  and  were 
thus  led  into  the  pits  in  millions,  where  they  were 
destroyed  by  burying  the  masses  beneath  heaps  of 
earth.  If  a  few  gallons  of  petroleum  were  sprinkled 
over  them,  and  fire  applied,  much  trouble  would  be 
saved.  This  is  a  crude  method  of  insect  destruction 
which  could  be  improved  upon,  but  great  praise  is  due 
to  the  efforts  of  M.  Richard  Mattei  and  Said  Pacha 
for  having  devoted  their  energies  so  successfully  to 
the  eradication  of  a  scourge  which  proved  its  ancient 
importance  from  the  Biblical  registration  of  a  curse 
upon  the  Egyptians. 


394  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


There  is  a  reward  given  by  government  for  the 
destruction  of  locust  eggs.  Each  female  deposits 
two  small  cases  or  sheaths  ^beneath  the  ground,  con- 
taining thirty  or  forty  eggs  in  each.  The  position 
is  easily  distinguished  by  a  shining  slimy  substance. 
A  certain  sum  per  oke  is  given,  and  the  people  gladly 
avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  of  earning  money 
at  the  same  time  that  they  destroy  the  common  enemy. 

The  British  administration  is  keenly  alive  to  the 
importance  of  this  warfare,  and  I  have  frequently  met 
commissioners  of  districts  galloping  in  hot  haste,  as 
though  in  pursuit  of  a  retreating  enemy,  towards  some 
quarter  where  the  appearance  of  locust  swarms  may 
have  been  reported,  in  order  to  take  immediate 
measures  for  their  destruction. 

Unfortunately  the  locust  is  not  the  only  enemy  of 
cotton  cultivation,  but  the  (to  my  mind)  abominable 
system  of  dimes,  or  tenths  of  produce  to  be  valued 
while  growing,  restricts  the  cultivator  to  an  inferior 
variety  that  will  remain  within  the  pod,  instead  of 
expanding  when  liberated  by  ripening. 

The  cultivation  of  cotton  differs  according  to  the 
many  varieties  of  the  plant.  Pliny  described  the 
*'  wool-bearing  trees  of  Ethiopia,"  and  I  have  myself 
seen  the  indigenous  cotton  thriving  in  a  wild  state  in 
those  parts  from  whence  they  were  first  introduced  to 
Egypt,  during  the  reign  of  Mehemet  AH,  grandfather 
of  the  Khedive.  It  is  well  known  that  although  com- 
paratively a  recent  article  of  cultivation  in  Egypt,  it 
has  become  one  of  the  most  important  exports  from 
that  country.  Cotton  of  the  first  quality  requires  a 
peculiar  combination  of  local  conditions.  Water  must 
be  at  command  whenever  required  during  the  various 
stages  of  cultivation ;  and  perfectly  dry  weather  must 


XVI J  Something  about  Taxation.  395 

be  assured  when  the  crop  is  ripe  and  fit  to  gather. 
The  collection  extends  over  many  days,  as  the  pods 
do  not  burst  at  the  same  period.  Some  of  the  most 
valuable  kinds  detach  easily  from  the  expanded  husk 
and  fall  quickly  to  the  ground,  which  entails  constant 
attention,  and  the  quality  would  deteriorate  unless  labour 
is  always  at  hand  to  gather  the  cotton  before  it  shall 
fall  naturally  from  the  plant. 

It  will  be  therefore  understood  that,  although  many 
soils  may  be  highly  favourable  to  the  growth  of  fine 
qualities  of  cotton,  there  is  an  absolute  necessity  for 
a  combination  of  a  peculiar  climate,  where  neither 
rain  nor  dew  shall  moisten,  and  accordingly  deteriorate 
the  crop.  Egypt  is  specially  favoured  for  the  produc- 
tion of  first-class  cotton,  as  in  the  upper  portions  of 
the  Delta  rain  is  seldom  known ;  but  the  extreme 
carelessness  of  the  people  has  reduced  the  average 
quality  by  mixing  the  seeds,  instead  of  keeping  the 
various  classes  rigidly  separate. 

The  dry  climate,  combined  with  the  fertile  soil 
of  Cyprus,  would  suggest  a  great  extension  of 
cotton  cultivation,  when  artificial  irrigation  shall  be 
generally  developed,  but  so  long  as  the  present 
system  of  collecting  the  dimes  is  continued,  the 
farmer  cannot  produce  the  higher  qualities  which 
require  immediate  attention  in  collecting.  During 
the  delay  in  waiting  for  the  official  valuer,  the 
pods  are  bursting  rapidly,  and  the  valuable  quality 
is  falling  to  the  ground ;  the  cultivator  is  therefore 
confined  to  the  growth  of  those  inferior  cottons 
that  will  adhere  to  the  pods,  and  wait  patiently  for 
the  arrival  of  the  government  authority. 

Consul  Hamilton  Lang,  in  his  interesting  work 
upon    Cyprus,    suggests    that    the    duty    should    be 


396  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


collected  upon  export,  to  relieve  the  farmer  from 
the  present  difficulty,  which  would  enable  him  to 
cultivate  the  American  high  qualities.  It  is  almost 
amusing  to  contrast  the  criticisms  and  advice  of 
the  various  British  consuls  who  have  for  many 
years  represented  us  in  Cyprus  with  the  ideas  of 
modern  officials.  There  can  be  no  doubt  concerning 
consular  reports  in  black  and  white,  and  equally 
there  can  be  no  question  of  existing  ordinances 
under  the  British  administration  ;  but  what  appeared 
highly  unjust  to  our  consuls  when  Cyprus  was  under 
Turkish  rule,  is  accepted  as  perfectly  equitable 
now  that  the  island  has  passed  into  the  hands  of 
Great  Britain. 

For  many  years  I  have  taken  a  peculiar  interest 
in  cotton  cultivation,  and  in  1870  I  introduced  the 
excellent  Egyptian  variety,  known  as  *'  galleen,'*  into 
Central  Africa,  and  planted  it  at  Gondokoro,  north 
latitude  4*''54',  with  excellent  results.  In  the  first  year  this 
grew  to  the  height  of  about  seven  feet,  with  a  propor- 
tionate thickness  of  stem,  and  the  spreading  branches 
produced  an  abundant  crop  of  a  fine  quality,  which 
detached  itself  from  the  seeds,  immediately  reducing 
the  operation  of  the  cleaning-machine  or  **  cotton- 
gin*'  to  a  minimum  of  labour.  I  have  been  much 
struck  with  the  inferiority  of  Cyprian  cotton  ;  scarcely 
any  of  the  crop  finds  its  way  to  England,  but  is 
exported  to  Marseilles  and  Trieste.  Should  Consul 
Lang  s  suggestion  be  carried  out,  and  the  duty  be 
taken  upon  export  to  relieve  the  grower  from  the 
vexatious  delays  of  the  inquisitor  or  government 
valuer,  there  can  be  no  question  of  immediate  im- 
provement. There  is  no  more  trouble  or  expense  in 
producing  a  first-class  cotton  than  in  the  commonest 


XVI.]  Something  about  Taxation.  397 

variety,  when  climate  and  soil  are  so  peculiarly  favour- 
able as  in  Cyprus.  If  the  government  continues 
the  system  of  ad  valorem  taxation,  common  sense 
will  suggest  that  the  highest  quality  would  alike  be 
favourable  to  the  revenue  and  to  the  cultivator; 
therefore,  in  the  interests  of  the  country  and  of 
individuals,  every  encouragement  should  be  afforded 
to  the  farmers  to  ensure  the  best  of  all  species  of 
produce  throughout  the  island.  The  excellent  com- 
pilation of  Captain  Savile,  officially  and  expressly 
printed  for  the  service  of  the  government,  contains 
the  following  passages  : — 

'*  According  to  all  accounts  the  taxation  of  the 
inhabitants  of  Cyprus  has  under  Turkish  administra- 
tion been  carried  out  in  a  most  severe  and  oppressive 
manner,  and  the  imposts  upon  certain  articles  of 
agriculture  and  commerce  have  been  so  heavy  that 
their  culture  and  export  has  in  some  cases  been  almost 
abandoned 

"  The  cultivation  of  vines  for  the  manufacture  of 
wine  has  been  so  heavily  and  unjustly  taxed,  that  a 
great  part  of  the  vineyards  have  of  late  years  been 
turned  to  other  and  more  profitable  purposes,  or  else 
have  been  abandoned,  and  consequently  a  branch  of 
agriculture  for  which  the  island  is  especially  suited 
and  a  remunerative  article  of  commerce  is  neglected 
and  allowed  to  decline.  An  extensive  development 
of  vineyards  and  manufacture  of  wine  should  be 
encouraged,  and  with  this  object  it  has  been  suggested 
that  it  might  be  wise  to  free  this  production  from  all 
except  export  duty. 

'*  Allusion  has  already  been  made  to  the  injurious 
effect  of  the  collection  of  the  tithe  (dimes)  upon  cotton 
at  the  time  when  the  crop  is  gathered,  instead  of  at 
the  time  of  shipment,  and  it  has  been  explained  how 
the  former  method  prevents  the  farmers  from  growing 
the  best  and  most  remunerative  varieties  of  the  plant ; 


398  Cyprus  in  1879.  ^chap. 

this  is  a  matter  that  requires  the  attention  of  the 
authorities  when  the  re-adjustment  of  the  taxes  is 
considered/' 

Captain  Savile's  useful  book  is  an  echo  of  consular 
statements  and  reports  written  in  England  for  govern- 
ment information  without  any  personal  experience  of 
the  island;  but  from  my  own  investigations  I  can 
thoroughly  endorse  the  views  expressed,  and"!  only 
regret  that  the  miserable  conditions  of  our  occupation 
have  rendered  such  necessary  reforms  most  difficult, 
as  the  poverty  of  the  present  government  of  Cyprus 
cannot  afford  to  run  the  risk  of  experimental  lessons 
in  taxation. 

When  criticising  and  condemning  existing  evils,  it 
must  be  distinctly  understood  that  I  do  not  presume 
to  attach  blame  to  individual  authorities  of  the  local 
government :  I  denounce  the  arbitrary  and  oppressive 
system  of  Turkish  rules,  which,  although  in  some 
instances  mitigated  by  our  administration,  still  remain 
in  force,  and  are  the  results  of  the  conditions  that 
were  accepted  when  England  resolved  upon  this 
anomalous  occupation.  I  have  to  describe  Cyprus  as 
I  saw  it  in  1879,  and  in  this  work  I  endeavour  to 
introduce  the  public  to  the  true  aspect  of  the  situation 
"  as  I  saw  it ;  '*  other  people  have  an  equal  right  with 
myself  to  their  own  opinions  upon  various  subjects, 
but,  should  we  differ  upon  certain  questions,  we  shall 
at  least  be  unanimous  in  praise  of  the  extreme  de- 
votion to  a  most  difficult  task  in  a  contradictory 
position,  exhibited  not  only  by  the  governor,  and 
commissioners  of  districts,  but  by  all  British  officers 
entrusted  with  authority.  If  Cyprus  were  free  from 
the  fetters  of  the  Turkish  Convention,  and  the  revenue 
should  be  available  for  the  necessary  improvements, 


xvT.]  Something  about  Taxation.  399 

with  commercial  and  agricultural  reforms,  the  same 
energy  now  bestowed  by  the  governor  and  other 
officials  would  rapidly  expand  the  resources  of  the 
island.  We  are  prone  to  expect  too  much,  and  must 
remember  that  at  the  time  I  write,  only  twelve  months 
have  elapsed  since  the  day  of  the'  British  military 
occupation.  No  officers  understood  either  the  Ian-  \ 
guage,  or  laws,  of  the  people  they  had  to  govern ; 
they  were  for  the  most  part  specially  educated  for  the 
military  profession,  and  they  were  suddenly  plunged 
into  official  positions  where  agricultural,  legal,  com- 
mercial, and  engineering  difficulties  absorbed  their 
entire  attention,  all  of  which  had  to  be  comprehended 
through  the  medium  of  an  interpreter.  It  is  rare 
that  the  most  favoured  individual  combines  such 
general  knowledge  ;  Turks  and  Greeks,  antagonistic 
races,  were  to  lie  down  contented  like  the  lion  and 
the  lamb  under  the  blessing  of  a  British  rule :  all 
animosities  were  to  be  forgotten.  The  religion  of 
Mussulmans  would  remain  inviolate,  and  the  Greek 
Church  would  hold  its  former  independence :  freedom 
and  equality  were  to  be  assured  when  the  English 
flag  replaced  the  Crescent  and  Star  upon  the  red 
ensign  beneath  which  Cyprus  had  withered  as  before 
a  flame ;  the  resources  of  the  country  were  to  awaken 
as  from  a  long  sleep,  and  the  world  should  witness  the 
marvellous  change  between  Cyprus  when  under  Turks, 
and  when  transferred  to  Englishmen.  **  Look  upon 
that  picture,  and  on  this ! "  The  officers  of  our 
army  were  the  magicians  to  effect  this  transformation, 
not  only  strangers  to  the  climate,  language,  laws, 
customs,  people,  but  without  money:  as  the  island 
had  been  robbed  of  revenue  by  the  conditions  of 
the  Turkish  Convention, 


400  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP.  XVI. 


In  spite  of  the  many  abuses  which  still  exist,  and 
which  demand  reform,  there  could  not  be  a  more 
tangible  proof  of  the  general  efficiency  of  the  officers 
of  our  army  than  the  picture  of  Cyprus  after  the  first 
year's  occupation.  Although  the  government  has  been 
severely  pinched  for  means,  and  a  season  of  cruel 
drought  has  smitten  the  agriculturists ;  with  com- 
merce languishing  through  the  uncertainty  of  our 
tenure,  the  Cyprian  population  of  all  creeds  and  classes 
have  already  learned  to  trust  in  the  honour  and 
unflinching  integrity  of  British  rulers,  which  ensures 
them  justice  and  has  relieved  them  from  their  former 
oppressors. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 


THE    DISTRICT   OF   LIMASOL   AND   LANDOWNERS. 

The  port  of  Limasol  will  eventually  become  the 
chief  commercial  centre  of  Cyprus,  and  in  the  de- 
pression of  1879  caused  by  drought  and  general 
uncertainty  it  formed  a  favourable  exception  to  the 
general  rule.  It  may  be  interesting  to  examine  the 
position  of  the  revenue  during  the  years  inclusive  from 

1875  to  1878. 

Customs. 


Year. 

Revenue. 

Expenditure. 

Balance. 

1875 
1876 

1877 

1878 

Piastres. 
964,839 
819,139 
1,340,643 

1,553*363 

Piastres. 
164,663 
172,472 
169,506 

161,594 

Piastres. 

800,176 

646,667 

1,171,137 
1,391,769 

The  exports  from    Limasol   have   been  largely  in 
excess  of  imports  : — 


Year. 

Exports. 

Year. 

Imports. 

1875 
1876 

1877 

1878 

77,022 

59,895 
93,805 

101,457 

1875 
1876 

1877 
1878 

47,325 
50,920 

41,920 
99,714 

D   D 


402 


Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


The  principal  articles  of  export  from  Limasol  are 
wine  and  caroubs,  and  the  general  production  of  these 
items  has  been  as  follows  : — 


Year. 

Okes. 

Year. 

Tons. 

1 

1875 
1876 

1877 

1878 

Wine 

79 

4.811,732 
3,710,884 

2,208,617 
5,795,109 

1875 
1876 

1877 
1878 

Caroubs 

8,690 
6,080 
6,520 

4,345 

The  dilfiferent  descriptions  of  wine  and  spirits  pro- 
duced in  the  Limasol  district  during  the  last  four  years 
are  as  follows  : — 


Year. 

Raki.  or 

native 

Brandy. 

Wine— 

Comman- 

deria. 

Red 
Wioe. 

Okes. 

85,008 

56.434 

38,536 

133.55s 

Black 
Wine. 

1875- 
1876 
1877 
XS78 

Okes. 

496,711 
251,298 

181,269 

378,694 

Okes. 

173,946 
87,«;85 
4S»522 

180,103 

Okes. 
4,056,067 
2,815,567 
1,943,290 
5.102,757 

In  the  year  1878  the  goods  exported  from  Limasol 
may  be  approximately  represented  by — 


Cotton    .     . 

10,000  okes  for  Austria                valued  at 

£S^ 

Wool .     .     . 

9.500    „ 

,,  France 

ft 

560 

Rags  .     .     . 

77.600    „ 

„  Italy 

». 

700 

Sumach  in  leaf 

110,000    ,, 

„  Greece 

>. 

500 

Black  Wine 

1,850,000    „ 

„  Turkey 

f , 

25,000 

Command  eria 

i55»ooo    „ 

„  Austria 

., 

2,075 

Caroubs .     . 

-.«»'-f-IStdT.^ 

.1 

33,000 

Raisins .     . 

90.ooookesforjA7^'„«;,^n.n«.j 

t* 

850 

Skins    .     . 

9,800       „ 

„  Greece 

.» 

1,025 

Sundries    .     . 

.              a             « 

11.000 

;f  75.210 


I 

i 


XVII.]     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     403 

The  tobacco  produced  in  the  districts  of  Limasol 
and  BafFo  and  at  Lefka,  inclusive,  is  a  mere  trifle 
compared  to  the  capabilities  of  the  island: — 

In  1875  the  crop  amounted  to  1,395  okes. 

1876  „  ,,  1,280    ,, 

1877  »  „  857     » 

This  IS  only  worth  enumeration  as  an  example  of 
the  utter  insignificance  of  the  production,  which  should 
be  an  important  item  in  the  agricultural  wealth  of  the 
island.  The  greater  portion  of  the  tobacco  consumed 
in  Cyprus  is  imported  in  bales  from  Salonica,  and  is 
consigned  to  manufacturers  who  divide  and  classify 
the  leaves,  which  are  cut,  and  formed  into  packets 
bearing  the  Custom  House  stamps,  supplied  upon  pur- 
chase. Limasol  alone  imports  about  20,000  okes,  which 
are  forwarded  from  Larnaca,  where  the  duty  is  paid. 
No  export  duties  of  any  description  are  levied  upon 
goods  from  this  island. 

The  direct  benefit  to  the  Cypriotes  conferred  by  the 
British  occupation  was  exhibited  in  the  sudden  rise 
of  value  both  in  real  property  and  in  labour.  The 
rental  of  houses  within  the  principal  towns  was  trebled, 
and  it  would  be  difficult  to  establish  an  average  price 
of  land  either  in  towns,  or  upon  the  outskirts,  as  the 
prices  demanded  have  been  in  most  instances  fictitious, 
representing  the  desires  of  the  seller,  but  in  no  way 
verifying  the  actual  selling  value.  I  have  only  heard 
of  a  few  small  plots  that  have  changed  hands  at  quad- 
ruple their  former  estimate,  and  as  a  rule  there  are 
few  buyers  during  this  period  of  uncertainty  respecting 
the  permanence  of  our  occupation  ;  but  owners  hold 
out  in  the  hope  of  an  ultimate  decision  in  favour  of 
British  absolute  possession.     In  the  town  of  Limasol 

D  D  2 


404  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


there  has  been  a  decided  rise  in  the  general  value  of 
*  property,  which  is  due  to  the  steady  improvement  of 
the  trade,  and  does  not  represent  a  mere  speculative 
impulse  as  in  Larnaca,  which  has  suffered  by  a  subse- 
quent reaction.  The  municipal  receipts  of  Limasol  have 
increased  from  £201  in  the  twelve  months  ending  30th 
September,  1878,  to  ^1718  in  the  ten  months  of  1879. 
This  has  certainly  been  due  to  the  energy  of  Colonel 
Warren,  R.A.,  the  chief  commissioner  of  the  district,  to 
whom  I  am  indebted  for  all  statistics  connected  with 
the  locality. 

The  position  of  a  district  chief  commissioner  was  by 
no  means  enviable  in  Cyprus.  The  pay  was  absurdly 
small,  and  he  was  obliged  to  institute  reforrris  both  for 
sanitary  and  municipal  interests  which  necessitated  an 
outlay,  and  increased  the  local  taxation.  The  popu- 
lation had  been  led  to  expect  a  general  diminution  of 
imposts  upon  the  suddenly-conceived  British  occu- 
pation, and  the  Cypriotes  somewhat  resembled  the 
frogs  in  the  fable  when  the  new  King  Log  arrived  with 
a  tremendous  splash  which  created  waves  of  hope  upon 
the  surface  of  the  pool,  but  subsided  into  disappoint- 
ment ;  they  found  that  improvements  cost  money,  and 
that  British  reforms,  although  they  bestowed  indirect 
benefits,  were  accompanied  by  a  direct  expenditure. 
The  calm  apathy  of  a  Cypriote  is  not  easily  disturbed  ; 
he  is  generally  tolerably  sober,  or  if  drunk,  he  is 
seldom  the  '^  worse  for  liquor,"  but  rather  the  better, 
as  his  usual  affectionate  disposition  may  be  slightly 
exaggerated,  instead  of  becoming  pugnacious  and 
abusive  like  the  inebriated  Briton.  There  are  no 
people  more  affectionate  in  their  immediate  domestic 
circle,  or  more  generally  courteous  and  gentle,  than 
the  Cypriotes,  but  like  a  good  many  English  people, 


IB— ^      r"1i   I    .ri"  < 


xvii.]     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     405 

they  have  an  aversion  to  increased  taxation.  Thus, 
although  the  British  commissioners  of  districts  vied 
with  each  other  in  a  healthy  ambition  to  exhibit  a 
picture  of  paradise  in  their  special  localities,  the  people 
grumbled  at  the  cost  of  cleanliness  and  health  within 
their  towns,  and  would  have  preferred  the  old  time 
of  manure-heaps  and  bad  smells  gratis  to  the  new 
regime  of  civilisation  for  which  they  had  to  pay. 

The  Greek  element  is  generally  combustible,  and 
before  the  first  year  of  our  occupation  had  expired 
various  causes  of  discontent  awakened  Philhellenic 
aspirations ;  a  society  was  organised  under  the  name 
of  the  "  Cypriote  Fraternity,"  as  a  political  centre  from 
which  emissaries  would  be  employed  for  the  formation 
of  clubs  in  various  districts  with  the  object  of  inspiring 
the  population  with  the  noble  desire  of  adding  Cyprus 
to  the  future  Greek  kingdom.  Corfu  had  been  re- 
stored to  Greece;  why  should  not  Cyprus  be  added 
to  her  crown  ?  There  would  be  sympathisers  in  the 
British  Parliament,  some  of  whom  had  already  taken 
up  the  cause  of  the  Greek  clergy  in  their  disputes 
with  the  local  authorities,  and  the  Greeks  of  the 
island  had  discovered  that  no  matter  what  the  merits 
of  their  case  might  be,  they  could  always  depend 
upon  some  members  of  the  House  of  Commons  as 
their  advocates,  against  the  existing  government  and 
their  own  countrymen.  Under  these  favourable  con- 
ditions for  political  agitation  the  "  Cypriote  Fraternity  ** 
has  commenced  its  existence. 

I  do  not  attach  much  importance  to  this  early  con- 
ceived movement,  as  Greeks,  although  patriotic,  have 
too  much  shrewdness  to  sacrifice  an  immediate  profit 
for  a  prospective  shadow.  The  island  belongs  at  this 
moment   to  the  Sultan,  and  the  English  are  simply 


4o6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


tenants  under  stipulated  conditions.  Before  Cyprus 
could  belong  to  Greece  it  must  be  severed  from  the 
Ottoman  Empire,  and  should  England  be  sufficiently 
wayward  to  again  present  herself  to  the  world  as  the 
spoiled  child  of  fortune,  and  deliver  over  her  new 
acquisition  according  to  the  well-remembered  pre- 
cedent of  Corfu,  the  monetary  value  of  all  property 
in  Cyprus  would  descend  to  zero,  and  the  **  Cypriote 
Fraternity,"  if  householders  or  landowners,  would 
raise  the  Greek  standard  over  shattered  fortunes. 

The  total  of  population  within  the  entire  district  of 
Limasol  in  1879  represented  23,530,  comprising  12,159 
males  and  11,371  females,  of  all  ages. 

The  following  list  is  the  official  enumeration  of 
animals  and  trees  within  the  same  province  : — 

Animals. 

Cattle.      Mules.       Horses.     Donkeys.        Pigs.        Goats.  Sheep. 

6,006       1,812       1,129       4,026       2,138      19,896      ii;790 

Trees. 

Caroubs.  Olives.  Walnuts. 

267,779  114,413  957 

Natural  pine  and  Cyprus  forests,  with  oak,  &c.,  not  counted. 

Vineyards. 

Cultivated  land.  Uncultivated  land. 

40,642  donums.         114,650  donums.  21,180  donums. 

According  to  this  official  statistical  representation 
the  cultivated  land  would  be  in  proportion  to  the 
population  about  five  donums,  or  two  and  a  half  acres, 
per  individual. 

The  question  of  ownership  of  lands  will  eventually 
perplex  the  government  to  a  greater  extent  than  many 
persons  would  imagine,  and  the  difficulty  attending 
the  verification  of  titles  will  increase  with  every  year  s 
delay. 


XVII.]     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     407 

Before  the  British  occupation,  land  was  of  little 
value,  and  an  extreme  looseness  existed  in  the 
description  of  boundaries  and  landmarks.  In  the 
absence  of  fences  the  Cypriote  can  generally  en- 
croach upon  any  land  adjoining  his  limit,  should  it 
belong  to  the  state.  Every  season  he  can  drive  his 
plough  a  few  paces  further  into  his  neighbour's  hold- 
ing, unless  prevented,  until  by  degrees  he  succeeds  in 
acquiring  a  considerable  accession.  The  state  is  the 
sufferer  to  an  enormous  extent  by  many  years  of 
systematic  invasion.  Forest  land  has  been  felled  and 
cleared  by  burning,  and  the  original  site  is  now  occu- 
pied by  vineyards.  The  bribery  and  corruption  that 
pervaded  all  classes  of  officials  prior  to  the  British 
occupation  enabled  an  individual  to  silence  the  local 
authority,  while  he  in  many  instances  more  than 
doubled  his  legal  holding.  The  absence  of  defined 
boundaries  has  facilitated  these  encroachments.  Ac- 
cording to  an  official  report  this  difficulty  is  dwelt 
upon  most  forcibly  as  requiring  immediate  investi- 
gation. The  vague  definition  in  title-deeds,  which 
simply  mentions  the  number  of  donums,  affords  no 
means  of  proving  an  unjust  extension ;  such  terms 
are  used  as  **  the  woods  bounded  by  a  hill,"  or  "  the 
woods  bounded  by  uncultivated  land,*'  and  this  in- 
definite form  of  expression  leaves  a  margin  of  frontier 
that  is  practically  without  limit,  unless  the  invader  may 
be  stopped  by  arriving  within  a  yard  of  his  nearest 
neighbour.  My  informant,  Colonel  Warren,  R.A., 
chief  commissioner  of  Limasol,  assured  me  that  some 
holders  of  land  in  his  district,  whose  titles  show  an 
amount  of  ninety  donums,  lay  claim  to  ten  times  the 
area.  There  is  hardly  a  proprietor  who  does  not 
occupy  a  ridiculous  surplus  when  compared  with  his 


4o8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


title-deeds,  and  the  encroachments  are  even  now 
proceeding. 

This  system  of  land-robbery  was  connived  at  by 
the  officials  for  a  "  consideration ; "  old  title-deeds 
were  exchanged  for  new  on  the  application  of  the 
holder,  and  the  seals  of  the  venal  authorities  ren- 
dered them  valid,  at  the  same  time  that  hundreds 
of  acres  were  fraudulently  transferred  from  the  state. 

When  the  intention  of  a  British  occupation  was 
made  public,  a  general  rush  was  made  for  obtaining 
an  excess  over  the  amount  defined  in  the  title-deeds, 
by  the  swindling  method ;  and  the  extent  to  which  this 
plunder  was  extended  may  be  imagined  from  the  fact 
that  40,000  such  documents  were  awaiting  the  neces- 
sary signatures  when,  by  the  arrival  of  the  British 
officials,  the  Turkish  authority,  who  could  not  sign 
the  deeds  with  sufficient  expedition,  was  dismissed, 
and  the  false  titles  were  invalidated. 

The  monasteries  and  the  vacouf  (Turkish  religious 
lands)  lay  claim  to  lands  of  vast  and  undefined  extent, 
which  are  mystified  by  titles  and  gifts  for  charitable 
purposes,  surrounded  with  clouds  of  obscure  usages 
and  ancient  rules  that  will  afford  a  boundless  field 
for  litigation.  In  fact,  the  existing  government  has 
arrived  at  the  unpleasant  position  of  being  excluded 
from  the  land,  nearly  all  of  which  is  claimed  either 
by  individuals  or  religious  institutions. 

The  arrangement  of  this  most  serious  question  will 
stir  up  a  nest  of  hornets.  The  equitable  adjustment 
would  demand  a  minute  survey  of  the  various  districts, 
and  a  comparison  of  the  holdings  with  the  title-deeds  ; 
but  what  then  ?  It  is  already  known  that  the  holdings 
are  in  excess,  and  where  is  the  legal  remedy  that  can 
be   practically  applied  ?     If  the  actual  letter  of  the 


XVII.]     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     409 

• 

law  shall  be  enforced,  and  each  proprietor  shall  be 
compelled  to  disgorge  his  prey,  there  will  be  endless 
complications.  In  England,  twenty-one  years'  unin- 
terrupted possession,  with  occupation,  constitutes  a 
valid  title.  In  Cyprus  the  extended  holdings  have 
in  many  instances  been  inherited,  and  have  remained 
unquestioned  as  the  acknowledged  property  of  in- 
dividuals, while  in  other  cases  they  have  been  more 
recently  acquired.  The  question  will  comprise  every 
possible  difificulty,  and  can  only  be  determined  by 
a  special  commission  officially  appointed  for  a  local 
investigation  throughout  each  separate  district. 

This  will  be  a  labour  of  years,  and  the  innumerable 
intricacies  and  entanglements  will  test  the  patience  and 
honesty  of  interpreters  in  a  country  where  bribery  has 
always  opened  a  golden  road  for  an  escape  from 
difficulty,  while  our  own  authorities  are  entirely  igno- 
rant of  the  native  language.  It  is  this  lack  of  natural 
means  of  communication  viva  voce  which  increases 
the  already  awkward  position  of  high  officials  :  the 
•power  of  speech  belongs  to  the  dragoman  alone,  and 
a  great  gulf  exists  between  the  English  and  the 
Cypriote,  who  represent  the  deaf  and  dumb  in  the 
absence  of  an  interpreter.  The  old  song  **  We  have 
no  money,"  is  the  now  stereotyped  response  to  all 
suggestions  for  district  schools,  but  if  we  are  to  retain 
Cyprus,  one  of  the  most  urgent  necessities  is  the 
instruction  of  the  people  in  English.  It  is  not  to  be 
expected  that  any  close  affinity  can  exist  between 
the  governing  class  and  the  governed,  in  the  darkness 
of  two  foreign  tongues  that  require  a  third  person 
for  their  enlightenment.  In  many  cases  secrecy  may 
be  of  considerable  importance,  and  the  conversation 
should   be   confined  to  the   principals,  but  the  third 


4IO  Cyprus  in   1879. 


[CHAP. 


person  must  invariably  be  present  as  interpreter,  and 
unless  he  is  a  man  of  the  highest  integrity  he  will  not 
lose  an  opportunity  of  turning  his  knowledge  of  state 
secrets  to  account  for  his  own  advantage.    Throughout 
the  Levant  it  is  difficult  to  find  men  who  combine  the 
rare  qualities  necessary  for  a  confidential  dragoman  ; 
such   a    person   would    be   invaluable,   as    he   would 
represent  all  the  cardinal  virtues,  at  the  same  time 
that  he  must  possess  a  natural  aptitude  for  his  pro- 
fession, and  a  store  of  patience,  with  the  most  unruffled 
temper.    The  natives  dread  the  interpreter,  they  know 
full  well  that  one  word  misunderstood  may  alter  the 
bearing  of  their  case,  and  they  believe  that  a  little 
gold  judiciously  applied  may  exert  a  peculiar  gram- 
matical  influence   upon   the   parts   of  speech  of  the 
dragoman,  which  directly  affects  their  interests.    There 
are,  no  doubt,  men  of  honour  and  great  capability  who 
occupy  this  important  position,  at  the  same  time  it  is 
well  known  that  many  interpreters  have  been  found 
guilty ;  the  exceptions  proving  the  rule,  and  exhibiting 
the  extreme  danger  and  general  disadvantage  in  the 
ignorance  of  the  native  language.     It  cannot  be  ex- 
pected   that    the   English  officials  are   to   receive  a 
miraculous  gift  of  fiery  tongues,  and  to  address  their 
temporary  subjects  in  Turkish  and  in  Greek ;  but  it  is 
highly  important  that  without  delay  schools  should  be 
established  throughout  the  island  for  the  instruction  of 
the  young,  who  in  two  or  three  years  will  obtain  a 
knowledge  of  English.     Whenever  the  people  shall 
understand  our  language,  they  will  assimilate  with  our 
customs   and  ideas,  and  they  will  feel    themselves  a 
portion   of  our  empire  :    but  until   then  a  void   will 
exclude    them    from    social    intercourse    with    their 
English    rulers,    and    they    will    naturally    gravitate 


xvii.i     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     411 

towards   Greece,   through   the   simple   medium   of    a 
mother-tongue. 

Limasol  must  perforce  of  its  geographical  advantages 
become  the  capital  of  Cyprus.  As  I  have  already  de- 
scribed, the  port  may  be  much  improved.  The  neigh- 
bouring country  is  healthy,  and  well  covered  with  trees ; 
the  landscape  is  pleasing,  and  the  new  road  opens  a 
direct  communication  with  the  mountain  sanatorium. 
The  most  important  exports  of  the  island  are  pro- 
duced within  the  district,  and,  as  might  be  expected, 
the  result  of  commercial  enterprise  is  exhibited  in 
the  increased  intelligence  and  activity  of  the  Limasol 
inhabitants. 

It  is  highly  to  be  desired  that  this  favourable 
position  should  become  the  seat  of  government  Al- 
though the  troops  in  1879  are  camped  among  the 
barren  rocks  beneath  the  pine-forests  upon  Mount 
Troodos,  at  an  elevation  of  about  5800  feet  above 
the  sea,  there  is  no  necessity  for  a  station  at  so 
extreme  and  inconvenient  an  altitude  in  north  lati- 
tude 35^  The  general  unhealthiness  of  the  troops 
upon  the  first  occupation  of  the  island  during  the 
summer  and  autumn  of  1878,  determined  the  military 
authorities  to  arrange  the  new  camp  at  the  greatest 
altitude  practicable  with  a  regard  to  the  supply  of 
water,  but  the  experience  gained  in  1879  proves  that 
a  permanent  camp,  or  barracks,  may  be  equally  healthy 
at  a  lower  and  more  convenient  level.  This  fact  would 
establish  an  additional  advantage  in  the  selection  of 
Limasol  for  headquarters,  as  the  troops  would  be  in 
the  immediate  neighbourhood  at  all  seasons. 

Colonel  Warren,  R.A.,  who  had  been  the  prime 
mover  in  all  the  improvements  that  had  been  made 
in  Limasol  since  the  British  occupation,  was  promoted 


414  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


from  all  ghostly  comfort,  hastened  to  arrive  at  a 
pecuniary  compromise. 

The  monasteries  are  an  important  institution 
throughout  Cyprus,  and  there  is  a  decided  difference 
between  the  monks  of  these  establishments  and  the 
general  priesthood.  The  monks  are  supposed  to 
devote  their  lives  to  charitable  objects;  they  are 
not  allowed  to  marry,  and  they  have  a  superior 
education,  as  all  can  read  and  write.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  priests  are  grossly  ignorant,  and  it  is 
computed  that  only  a  quarter  of  their  number  could 
even  write  their  own  names.  These  are  allowed  to 
marry  one  wife,  but  they  cannot  re-marry  in  the  event 
of  her  decease ;  they  are  generally  poor  to  a  superla- 
tive degree,  and  are  frequently  obliged  to  work  for 
hire  like  common  labourers.  Should  a  man  desire 
to  become  a  priest,  it  is  only  necessary  that  he  should 
be  recommended  by  the  inhabitants  of  his  village 
as  a  person  of  good  reputation  that  would  be  suit- 
able for  the  office :  he  is  then  ordained  by  the 
bishop  upon  payment  of  a  fee  of  about  one  hundred 
piastres  (or  1 50),  and  he  is  at  once  at  liberty  to  enter 
upon  his  duties.  These  ordination  fees  are  a  tempta- 
tion to  the  bishops  to  increase  the  number  of  priests 
to  an  unlimited  extent,  and  the  result  is  seen 
throughout  Cyprus  in  a  large  and  superfluous  body 
of  the  most  ignorant  people,  totally  unfitted  for  their 
position. 

The  monasteries  vary  in  their  revenues,  as  they 
have  derived  their  possessions  at  different  periods  from 
grants  of  land,  or  private  gifts,  or  legacies.  In  like 
manner  with  the  bishops,  although  they  cannot  legally 
compel  the  villagers  to  pay  according  to  their  de- 
mands, they  assumed  a  power  which  by  long  sufferance 


xvii.j     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     415 

had  become  recognised  by  the  ignorant  peasantry, 
who  reluctantly  acceded  to  their  claims.  I  have 
myself  witnessed  an  altercation  between  the  monks 
and  shepherds  on  the  mountains  upon  a  question  of 
cheeses  and  goats,  which  the  former  claimed  as  annually 
due  to  the  monastery ;  it  appeared  that  prior  to  the 
British  occupation  they  had  been  able  by  threats  to 
extort  this  demand,  but  the  shepherds  had  now  deter- 
mined to  free  themselves  from  all  payments  beyond 
those  which  the  law  compelled,  and  they  resisted  the 
priestly  authority,  before  which  they  had  hitherto  re- 
mained as  slaves.  This  spirit  of  independence  that 
has  been  so  quickly  developed  by  the  equity  of  British 
rule  will  probably  extend,  and  may  seriously  interfere 
with  the  revenues  of  the  Church,  should  the  population 
determine  to  abide  by  their  legal  status  and  refuse 
the  ordinary  fees.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  either 
bishops,  monks,  or  priests  regard  this  change  with 
satisfaction,  and  in  their  hearts  they  may  sigh  for  the 
good  old  times  of  a  Turkish  administration,  when  the 
Greek  Church  of  Cyprus  was  an  imperium  in  im- 
perio  that  could  sway  both  the  minds  and  purses  of 
the  multitude, untouched  bylaws  or  equity^ and  morally 
supported  by  the  government 

The  most  important  monastery  in  the  island  is  that 
of  Kykou ;  this  is  situated  upon  the  mountains  at  an 
elevation  of  3800  feet  above  the  sea,  and  it  comprises 
an  establishment  of  sixty  monks,  with  a  gross  revenue 
from  various  properties  in  different  portions  of  the 
country  estimated  together  with  donations  at  about 
;^5000  per  annum.  The  monastery  of  Mahera  esti- 
mates its  revenue  at  ;^2O0o ;  that  of  Fameromeni  at 
Nicosia,  at  ;^2000  without  any  expenditure,  as  the 
three   monks,    together   with   one   servant,    are    paid 


4i6  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


by  the  extra  incomes  of  the  Church.  There  are 
many  monasteries  throughout  the  island,  and  all 
with  the  exception  of  Kykou  and  St.  Andrea,  at  the 
eastern  point  of  Cyprus,  pay  a  certain  portion  of  their 
revenue  to  the  bishop  of  the  diocese.  The  two 
monasteries  I  have  excepted  are  perfectly  independent 
of  all  ecclesiastical  control  in  revenue  and  finance. 
Considerable  caution  will  be  necessary  in  arranging 
the  land  question  with  these  numerous  establishments, 
which  have  hitherto  enjoyed  a  peculiar  independence. 
Up  to  the  present  time  the  income  of  the  bishops  has 
been  derived  from  the  annual  payments  from  monas- 
teries, by  the  canonical  tax  paid  by  every  church ;  from 
the  alms  (Zitia),  which  is  a  tax  levied  upon  all  crops  ; 
from  the  dish  exposed  for  offerings  in  church  while  they 
officiate,  and  from  various  ordination  fees  and  marriage 
licences.  From  the  inquiries  I  made  in  various  de- 
pendable quarters,  the  bishops  are  not  generally  be- 
loved either  by  the  monks,  priests,  or  public ;  but  this 
absence  of  appreciation  may  be  due  to  the  continual 
demands  upon  the  funds  of  monasteries  and  the 
pockets  of  the  peasantry,  more  than  to  any  personal 
peculiarities  of  character.  There  are  stories  of  neglect 
of  duty  and  misappropriation  of  funds  intended  for 
charitable  purposes,  which  I  should  decline  to  believe 
possible  among  ecclesiastics  of  such  devout  principles 
and  high  position.  The  Archbishop  is  much  beloved, 
and  is  loudly  praised  by  all  classes  of  the  inhabitants, 
to  whom  he  owes  his  election  as  supreme  head  of  the 
Church  after  the  following  manner :  — 

In  the  event  of  death,  the  vacant  see  of  Cyprus 
is  represented  by  the  Bishop  of  Baffo,  and  the 
new  archbishop  must  be  elected  by  the  people. 
The  bishop  occupies  the  position  of  president  of  an 


XVII.3     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.    417 

ecclesiastical  council,  to  which  representatives  are 
sent  from  every  district,  charged  with  the  votes  of 
the  inhabitants  in  favour  of  the  archbishop.  Upon 
his  election,  the  approval  and  confirmation  of  his 
appointment  must  be  obtained  by  an  imperial  decree 
before  the  archbishop  can  officiate.  In  the  same 
manner  every  bishop  is  elected  by  the  people  of 
the  district,  and  their  representatives  are  sent  to 
Nicosia,  where  the  archbishop  presides  over  his 
council,  or  court;  but  the  new  bishop  must  also 
be  confirmed  in  his  position  by  an  imperial  decree. 

Should  an  archbishop  be  guilty  of  any  crime, 
either  civil  or  ecclesiastical,  he  may  be  deposed  by 
the  head  of  the  Church  at  Constantinople,  acting 
in  conjunction  with  the  Turkish  government,  at  the 
request  of  the  inhabitants  of  Cyprus. 

Bishops  may  be  deposed  \  by  the  archbishop,  who 
would  in  such  a  case  assemble  the  Synod,  composed 
of  the  heads  of  clergy  in  his  presidency.  Before 
this  tribunal  a  bishop  would  be  summoned  to  appear 
in  case  of  an  accusation,  and  the  trial  would  take 
place  in  open  court ;  the  power  of  punishment  or 
absolution  remaining  in  the  hands  of  the  archbishop. 

The  Turkish  government  appears  to  have  held 
a  peculiar  position  in  relation  to  the  Greek  Church 
in  Cyprus,  as,  although  acting  in  conjunction  and  in 
harmony  with  the  customs  of  the  inhabitants,  it 
reserved  the  right  of  supreme  authority  in  special 
cases ;  thus  at  various  epochs  the  Turkish  govern- 
ment deposed  the  Archbishops  Chrissanthon  and 
Panareton,  hanged  the  Archbishop  Kipriano,  and 
banished  the  Archbishops  Joachim  and  Damaskino. 

From  the  universal  complaints,  there  can  be  little 
doubt  that  the  schools    that  should   be  established 

E   E 


41 8  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP, 


from  funds  specially  invested  for  that  purpose  in  the 
hands  of  certain  monasteries,  bishops,  &c.,  are  grossly 
neglected,  and  it  has  already  been  suggested  that  a 
commission  should  be  instituted  by  the  British  autho- 
rities, under  the  presidency  of  the  archbishop,  for 
a  rigid  investigation  of  the  resources  of  all  monas- 
teries and  the  acttial  revenue  of  bishoprics,  together 
with  the  disbursement  of  all  sums  that  should  have 
been  expended  either  for  education  or  for  charitable 
purposes. 

The  tithes  exacted  by  the  bishops  from  the  peas- 
antry add  seriously  to  the  imposts  of  ordinary  tax- 
ation, and  there  is  every  probability  of  a  reform  being 
demanded  by  the  inhabitants  at  the  hands  of  the 
British  administration.  When  under  Turkish  rule, 
the  Greek  Church  enjoyed  not  only  perfect  freedom, 
but  an  immunity  from  taxation,  as,  although  they  were 
legally  liable,  the  law  was  never  enforced  upon  the 
clergy.  The  English  government  has  determined  upon 
the  observance  of  all  laws  by  all  classes,  and  the  Church 
has  awakened  to  the  fact  that  there  is  no  exception. 

"  From  the  earliest  times  the  Greek  Church  of  Cyprus 
has  enjoyed  an  especial  degree  of  independence;  in 
the  reign  of  the  Emperor  Zeno,  a.d.  473,  exceptional 
privileges  were  conceded  to  the  Archbishop  of  Cyprus, 
who,  although  he  owns  the  supremacy  of  the  Patriarch 
of  Constantinople  over  the  orthodox  Greek  Church, 
claims  to  be  entirely  independent  of  him  as  regards 
Church  discipline ;  he  wears  purple,  carries  a  gold- 
headed  sceptre,  has  the  title  of  Beatitude,  signs  in  red 
as  the  Greek  Emperors  were  wont  to  do,  and  uses  a 
seal  bearing  a  two-headed  imperial  eagle.  It  is  said 
that  these  dignities  were  conferred  in  consequence  of 
the  fortunate  discovery  at  Salamis  of  the  body  of  St. 
Barnabas,  with  a  copy  of  the  Gospel  of  St.  Matthew, 


xviL]     District  of  Limasol  and  Landowners.     419 

which  precious  relic  was  sent  to  Constantinople,  and 
in  return  the  Emperor  confirmed  the  Church  of  Cyprus 
in  its  absolute  independence,  and  gave  the  archbishop 
the  above  privileges."^ 

St.  Paul  and  St.  Barnabas  visited  the  island  A.D.  45, 
and  the  conversion  of  Sergius  Paulus,  the  proconsul 
at  Paphos,  by  their  preaching,  was  the  first  seed  of 
Christianity  implanted  in  Cyprus  at  the  period  when 
the  inhabitants  were  steeped  in  heathenism  ;  but  some 
of  the  superstitions  at  present  existing  are  hardly  less 
degrading  than  pagan  rites,  and  in  the  kissing  of  tjie 
Virgin's  cave  at  Trooditissa  for  the  purpose  already 
described,  we  can  trace  an  affinity  with  the  ancient 
worship  of  Venus, 

^  Savile's  Cyprus,  p.  142. 


E    E    2 


/ 


/ 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

ON     POLICE,    FOOD,    CLIMATE,   &C. 

The  population  of  Cyprus  is  about  200,000,  of  which 
number  more  than  three-fourths  belong  to  the  Greek 
Church ;  nevertheless  the  minority  of  Turks  completely 
dominated  prior  to  the  British  occupation.  Although  the 
Cypriote  is,  as  I  have  described,  courteous,  gentle,  and 
affectionate  in  his  domestic  circle,  he  is  at  the  same  time 
cunning  and  addicted  to  petty  larceny,  and  in  all  your 
dealings  with  these  apparently  easy-going  people  you 
must  exercise  the  same  acuteness  that  is  so  absolutely 
necessary  in  England.  There  are  few  great  crimes 
in  proportion  to  the  population,  nor  do  we  ever  hear 
of  such  atrocities  as  those  classes  of  murders  which 
so  frequently  blacken  the  page  of  our  modern  history. 
Homicide  is  more  common  than  actual  murder,  and  is 
often  the  result  of  a  sudden  quarrel  where  knives  are 
drawn,  and  a  fatal  stab  in  passion  constitutes  the 
offence.  Sheep-stealing  is  the  prevalent  crime,  and  is 
carried  on  with  an  amount  of  hardihood  that  can  only  be 
accounted  for  from  the  difficulty  of  proof.  The  flocks  of 
goats,  &c.,  roam  over  the  wild  and  uninhabited  area  of 
the  high  mountains  and  frequently  stray  from  the  shep- 
herd  and  are  lost  for  two  or  three  nights  ;  by  the  time 
they  are  recovered  a  certain  number  may  be  missing, 


Ftf  <ii^nPifcJ 


^^^m  »^^y^^pP 


CHAP.  XVIII.]       Police,  Wages,  Food,  &c.  421 

and  It  is  hardly  possible  to  discover  the  thief,  as  the 
animajs  have  been  driven  to  a  great  distance.  Tracking 
would  be  out  of  the  question  over  the  rocky  surface, 
where  every  small  plot  of  naked  soil  is  trodden  into 
countless  footmarks  by  the  innumerable  goats  which 
browse  upon  the  mountain  slopes.  At  night  the  flocks 
are  generally  herded  within  a  circle  protected  by  a 
fence  of  thorny  bushes;  sometimes  these  folds  are 
invaded  by  thieves  during  the  darkness,  and  a  con- 
siderable number  are  driven  off.  As  the  locality  would 
be  generally  distant  from  the  principal  town,  and  the 
shepherd  cannot  forsake  his  flock  for  several  days 
to  prosecute,  the  thieves  frequently  escape,  and  this 
immunity  encourages  them  to  further  depredations. 
During  my  residence  within  the  precincts  of  the 
monastery,  the  fold  upon  the  hill  within  a  quarter 
of  a  mile  of  the  establishment  was  thus  robbed,  and 
the  thieves  were  never  discovered. 

The  police  or  zaphtiehs  are  generally  too  far  from 
these  wild  localities  to  be  of  any  service,  and  they  are 
at  present  too  few  for  the  proper  supervision  of  the 
island.  A  plan  is  I  believe  in  contemplation  to  extend 
this  body  upon  a  scale  that  will  render  the  force 
efficient  as  a  gendarmerie,  which  would  to  a  consider- 
able degree  relieve  the  necessity  for  a  permanent 
European  military  force.  There  can  be  no  better 
soldier  than  the  Turk  under  British  officers.  The 
Christians  in  Cyprus  have  an  objection  to  this  service, 
and  there  is  no  reason  why  a  military  force  to  combine 
the  duties  of  police  should  not  be  organised,  that  would 
be  thoroughly  acclimatised,  and  would  at  the  same 
time  be  maintained  for  less  than  half  the  expense 
of  English  troops.  There  is  nothing  to  fear  from 
the   Turkish   population   in   Cyprus,  and  they  would 


422  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


willingly  enlist  in  our  service,  and  could  always  be 
depended  upon  in  case  of  necessity.  The  force 
already  organised  is  an  admirable  nucleus,  and  could 
be  rapidly  increased ;  each  man  finds  his  own  horse 
and  receives  two  shillings  a  day  inclusive  ;  his  clothes 
and  arms  being  provided  by  the  government.  For 
service  in  the  trying  climate  of  Cyprus  the  Turk  is 
pre-eminent  I  do  not  see  any  need  for  the  presence 
of  British  troops  in  this  island.  Thq  fortresses  are 
all  dismantled,  the  natives  are  peaceful,  and  the  ex- 
tremely low  price  of  wine  and  spirits  is  terribly  adverse 
to  the  sanitary  condition  of  the  English  soldier.  The 
staunch  sobriety  of  the  Turk,  his  extreme  hardihood, 
which  enables  him  to  endure  great  fatigue  upon  the 
most  simple  fare,  and  his  amenity  to  discipline,  together 
with  an  instinctive  knowledge  of  arms  and  a  natural 
capacity  for  a  military  profession,  render  him  a  valuable 
material  for  our  requirements  in  organising  a  defen- 
sive force  in  Cyprus.  Should  it  be  determined 
that  a  certain  number  of  British  troops  shall  be 
retained,  they  can  be  spared  unnecessary  exposure,  and 
retire  to  the  mountain  sanatorium  during  the  summer 
months. 

The  wages  of  both  artisans  and  ordinary  labourers 
have  risen  considerably  since  the  British  occupation, 
as  might  have  been  expected.  Skilled  masons  and 
carpenters  can  now  command  from  3^.  td.  to  5^*.  per 
diem,  who  formerly  could  earn  a  maximum  of  35", 
Ordinary  masons  for  building  walls  can  even  now  be 
obtained  for  2s.  6d.  and  3^.,  and  agricultural  labourers 
receive  i^.  It  is  probable  that  should  extensive 
government  improvements  be  undertaken,  or  large 
contracts  be  made  by  private  individuals  for  public 
works,  the  rate  will  rise  from  one  shilling  to  eighteen 


XVIII.) 


Wages,  Food,  &c.  423 


pence,  as  the  demand  for  labour  shall  increase.  Should 
schools  be  established  and  education  become  general 
throughout  the  island,  the  result  will  probably  be 
exhibited  by  a  corresponding  advance  in  wages,  as 
individuals  will  estimate  their  value  at  a  higher  rate. 
At  present  there  is  no  organised  system  of  educa- 
tion for  the  peasantry,  and  the  few  schools  are  confined 
to  Nicosia,  Lamaca,  Limasol,  Baffo,  and  Morphu,  all 
of  which  are  supported  by  original  grants,  volun- 
tary contributions,  the  payments  of  pupils,  and  by 
certain  sums  annually  provided  by  the  bishops  and 
monasteries. 

The  rate  of  wages  should  in  all  countries  bear  a 
just  proportion  to  the  price  of  food,  and  should  the 
habits  of  the  Cypriotes  remain  unchanged,  and  their 
diet  retain  its  simple  character,  there  is  no  reason  to 
anticipate  a  rate  that  would  eventually  exceed  los.  or 
11^.  a  week.  If  we  determine  upon  low  wages,  we 
must  keep  down  the  price  of  food.  The  Turkish 
administration  had  peculiar  municipal  laws  upon  this 
subject  which  are  still  in  force  in  some  localities,  but 
have  been  abrogated  in  Limasol.  I  have  already 
mentioned  that  the  price  of  meat  was  fixed  at  a  certain 
sum  per  oke,  so  that  good  and  bad  sold  at  the  same 
figure,  and  resulted  in  the  inferior  qualities  being  sent 
to  market,  while  the  best  never  appeared.  Fish, 
fruits,  and  vegetables  were  rated  in  the  same  manner, 
and  the  municipal  authorities  ruled,  and  fixed  a 
standard  price  for  everything;  good  and  bad  all 
shared  alike.  By  this  extraordinary  legislation,  which 
to  the  English  mind  is  inconceivable,  the  finest  cauli- 
flowers and  the  most  common  varieties  would  sell 
exactly  at  the  same  price ;  no  matter  what  the  quality 
of  vegetables  might  be,  all  were  reduced  to  the  same 


424  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


level.  Fish  was  simply  fish.  The  best  varieties  and 
the  most  inferior  were  included  in  the  same  despotic 
law.  Salmon  and  stickleback,  turbot  and  sprat, 
herrings  and  soles,  would  (had  they  existed)  have 
been  sold  at  so  much  a  pound  independent  of  their 
qualities.  The  result  was  that  if  your  servant  went 
to  market  to  buy  a  fine  species  of  fish,  the  seller 
insisted  upon  his  taking  a  due  proportion  of  inferior 
trash  that  was  hardly  eatable.  '*  All  was  fish  that  came 
to  the  net ; "  little  and  big,  good  and  bad,  fetched  the 
same  price. 

Such  a  system  would  ensure  the  worst  of  everything ; 
what  gardener  would  devote  his  energies  to  producing 
fine  varieties,  if  a  common  field  cabbage  would  rival 
his  choicest  specimens  at  the  same  price,  but  at  a 
minimum  of  labour  ? 

It  was  evident  that  the  lowest  class  of  vegetables 
would  represent  the  garden  produce,  as  this  absurd 
rule  was  a  premium  for  indolence,  whereas  free  com- 
petition, that  would  have  assured  high  prices  to  the 
best  qualities,  would  have  stimulated  the  cultivators  in 
their  productions.  This  argument  was  so  indisputable 
that  the  chief  commissioner  (Colonel  Warren,  R.A.) 
determined  at  all  hazards  to  introduce  free  markets 
into  Limasol;  and  although  opposed  to  the  conser- 
vative ideas  of  his  municipal  council,  he  carried  out 
his  views  of  a  healthy  competition  and  free  and  un- 
restricted trade,  which  would  awaken  the  Cypriotes 
to  the  fact  that  labour  properly  directed  would  ensure 
the  best  qualities,  that  would  benefit  the  producer  by 
securing  the  best  prices. 

Self-evident  facts  in  an  English  community  may 
be  utterly  misconstrued  in  Cyprus.  The  Cypriote  has 
never  been  accustomed  to  unrestricted  freedom,  but 


k  •    .i^T-  »i    ^f  ■ 


—     ■    —       9 


XVIII.] 


Food  and  Produce. 


425 


like  his  own  ox  in  the  plough,  he  requires  a  certain 
amount  of  control,  and  his  energies  must  be  directed 
by  a  driver  or  ruler.  When  the  vegetables  were 
assured  of  a  certain  fixed  price  per  oke  regulated  by 
the  authorities,  he  knew  that  he  would  obtain  that 
amount  for  his  produce  whether  good  or  bad  ;  accord- 
ingly he  brought  his  goods  to  market.  But,  when  he 
found  that  his  inferior  vegetables  would  remain  unsold, 
or  would  realise  a  mere  trifle  should  a  competitors 
stall  present  a  superior  show,  he  withdrew  altogether 
from  the  market,  which  at  length  became  deserted ; 
and  the  few  who  maintained  their  positions  advanced 
their  prices  to  such  an  exorbitant  degree  that  vege- 
tables became  a  luxury  in  which  none  could  indulge 
but  the  rich.  The  fishermen  profited  by  the  reform 
and  only  caught  sufficient  for  the  minimum  demand, 
but  at  the  same  time  that  they  reduced  their  own  labour 
and  consequently  the  supply  of  fish,  they  also  took 
advantage  of  the  new  law  of  free  trade,  and  advanced 
their  prices  in  extortionate  proportion.  Instead  of 
the  self-evident  prosperity  that  would  benefit  all 
classes,  the  sudden  liberty  to  which  the  Cypriote 
was  unaccustomed  acted  diametrically  against  all 
English  expectations,  and  for  the  time  ruined  the 
market.  This  was  told  me  by  Colonel  Warren  him- 
self, and  the  failure  of  the  apparently  wholesome  re- 
form is  suggestive  of  the  danger  that  may  result  in 
the  too  sudden  enfranchisement  of  those  races  which 
from  a  long  series  of  oppression  are  unfit  for  perfect 
liberty. 

At  the  same  time  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the 
vexatious  and  arbitrary  systems  of  taxation  pursued  in 
collecting  the  "dimes'*  has  prevented  the  extension 
of   market  gardens,  and   were  this   tax  remitted,    I 


426  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


cannot  imagine  any  more  lucrative  occupation  than  the 
growth  of  vegetables  of  the  best  quality  for  the  free 
markets  of  the  principal  towns. 

Some  encouragement  is  necessary  in  promoting 
exhibitions,  or  horticultural  shows,  accompanied  by 
substantial  prizes,  in  various  localities;  and  I  should 
not  be  dismayed  by  the  failure  of  the  first  well-meant 
attempt  at  reform  in  Limasol. 

When  I  was  at  Limasol  in  May  the  price  of 
cauliflowers  was  2d.  the  oke  (2f  lbs).  Fish  was 
dear  at  2^.  the  oke ;  mutton  %d.  the  oke.  Beef  is 
seldom  eaten  by  the  Cypriotes ;  potatoes  are  good,  and 
are  usually  \d.  the  lb.  Flour,  best,  %d.  the  oke.  If 
a  sheep  should  be  purchased  alive,  and  be  killed  for 
home  consumption,  the  mutton  should  not  exceed 
yl.  per  lb.  for  the  best  quality,  leaving  the  skin,  head, 
&c.,  as  profit. 

There  are  two  varieties  of  sheep ;  the  fat-tailed 
species  supplies  the  best  mutton,  but  the  wool  of  both 
is  coarse,  and  is  exported  to  Trieste  and  Marseilles  to 
the  amount  of  about  400,000  lbs.  annually.  A  large 
trade  in  lamb  skins  is  a  necessary  result  of  the 
slaughter  of  a  considerable  proportion  of  lambs  every 
winter  and  spring,  owing  to  the  usual  scarcity  of 
pasturage,  which  limits  the  increase  of  the  flocks. 
The  entire  yield  of  skins  is  absorbed  by  Trieste  and 
Marseilles. 

A  sheep  in  good  condition  of  the  fat-tailed  species 
weighs  when  dressed,  without  the  head,  16  okes,  or 
44  lbs.  Fowls  in  the  country  can  generally  be 
purchased  for  i^.  each,  but  they  are  double  that  price  in 
the  market-towns.  Turkeys  fetch  about  4^.  or  5 j.  each  ; 
pigeons  6^. ;  fish  is  about  2  j.  the  oke,  or  8^.  the  lb.  ; 
milk  about  ^d.  a  quart;   eggs  from  24  to  30  for  is. 


XVIII.] 


Food  and  Produce.  427 


The  grapes  are  the  best  fruit  in  Cyprus ;  these  are 
really  good,  and  in  some  instances  would  compare 
favourably  with  the  hot-house  produce  of  England. 
The  best  varieties  can  be  purchased  at  the  vineyards 
for  less  than  \d.  the  lb.  The  above  prices  prove 
that  the  expense  of  necessaries  is  moderate,  and 
the  actual  cost  of  existence  low,  but  the  want  of 
good  servants  is  a  serious  disadvantage. 

At  some  future  time  Cyprus  will  become  the  resort 
of  delicate  persons  to  escape  the  winter  and  spring 
of  England,  as  the  climate  of  the  southern  portion  of 
the  island  is  most  enjoyable  during  the  cool  season. 
In  the  neighbourhood  of  Limasol  there  are  many 
excellent  sites  for  building,  in  picturesque  spots  within 
two  or  three  miles  of  the  town.  At  present  there 
is  no  adequate  comfort  for  invalids,  and  the  hotels  are 
hardly  adapted  for  persons  who  are  accustomed  to 
luxury.  The  commencement  is  attended  with  risk, 
and  it  would  be  dangerous  under  the  existing  conditions 
of  the  island  to  build  and  furnish  an  hotel  with  grounds 

•  

and  gardens  sufficiently  attractive  for  English  visitors. 
There  is  no  direct  communication  from  England,  which 
effectually  debars  Cyprus  from  an  influx  of  travellers. 
It  is  necessary  to  land  at  Alexandria  either  from 
Marseilles  or  Brindisi,  and  thence  to  re-ship  in  small 
and  uncomfortable  steamers,  which  are  by  no  means 
suitable  for  ladies  or  invalids.  The  extra  expense,  and 
above  all  the  trouble  and  delay  of  landing  in  Egypt 
and  again  embarking,  together  with  the  cost  of  hotel 
charges  at  Alexandria,  are  quite  sufficient  to  deter 
strangers  from  visiting  Cyprus.  The  first  necessary 
step  will  be  the  establishment  of  direct  communication 
from  Marseilles  and  Brindisi,  or  from  Trieste.  In  that 
case,  a  commencement   might  be   made  by  a  small 


428  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


company  of  friends  who  determine  to  visit  Cyprus 
annually,  and  to  arrange  an  hotel  upon  some  favour- 
able site  near  Limasol,  which  they  will  themselves 
occupy,  and  which  can  be  extended  according  to  future 
requirements.  English  people  are  somewhat  like  sheep 
in  following  each  other,  and  a  quiet  beginning  in  this 
simple  but  convenient  form  would  quickly  develop, 
and  Cyprus  would  be  linked  with  the  beaten  paths 
of  tourists.  The  neighbourhood  of  Kyrenia  is  the 
most  beautiful,  but  during  winter  it  is  exposed  to 
severe  north  winds  from  the  snowy  mountains. 

So  much  has  been  written  and  spoken  against  the 
climate  of  Cyprus  that  an  unprejudiced  account  may  be 
acceptable.  There  are  serious  disadvantages  to  those 
who  by  their  official  position  are  obliged  to  remain  in 
the  low  country  during  the  summer  months,  where  the 
extreme  heat  must  always  be  prejudicial  to  the  health 
of  Europeans.  From  the  middle  of  October  to  May 
the  climate  is  most  agreeable,  but  the  five  inter- 
vening months  should  be  passed  at  higher  altitudes, 
which,  cLS  I  have  already  described,  afford  a  variety  of 
climates. 

Neither  Lady  Baker  nor  myself  or  servants  had 
any  climatic  ailment  throughout  our  journeys  in  every 
portion  of  the  island.  A  horsekeeper  had  fever  while 
at  Famagousta,  but  he  was  a  native  who  had  suffered 
previously,  and  the  fit  was  a  return  of  chronic  ague ; 
my  own  people  never  required  a  dose  of  medicine 
although  we  were  living  in  tents  through  winter  and 
summer. 

The  water  is  generally  wholesome,  therefore  dysen- 
tery and  bowel  complaints  are  rare;  consumption  is 
unknown;  and  pulmonary  affections  are  uncommon. 
Fevers,  including  those  of  a  typhoid  character,  and 


xvTii.]  The  Climate.  429 

ague  from  malaria,  are  the  usual  types  ;  outbreaks  of 
small-pox  have  been  reduced  by  general  vaccination. 
The  improvement  in  sanitary  regulations  will  no  doubt 
diminish  the  occurrence  of  typhoid  fevers,  which  even 
now  are  rare  considering  the  filth  of  the  villages  and 
the  generally  dirty  habits  of  the  population. 

Hydrophobia  among  dogs  is  very  rare,  and  dis- 
temper among  puppies  is  unknown.  Pigs  are  the 
general  scavengers  in  the  Cypriote  villages,  and  the 
flesh  of  these  filthy  feeders  is  much  esteemed  by  the 
Christian  inhabitants  during  the  winter  months.  In 
the  monasteries,  which,  from  their  great  altitude  among 
the  mountains,  are  occasionally  snowed  up  and  excluded 
from  communication,  a  winter  supply  of  stores  is  laid 
up  during  the  autumn.  The  pigs  and  the  fattest  goats 
are  killed,  and  salted  in  a  most  peculiar  manner. 
Without  removing  a  bone,  the  animal  is  split  from 
the  neck  along  the  abdomen  throughout,  and  it  is 
laid  completely  open  like  a  smoked  haddock.  Every 
joint  is  most  carefully  dislocated,  even  to  the  shoulder- 
blade  bones,  and  remains  in  its  place.  The  flesh  is 
neatly  detached  from  every  bone,  and  in  this  form  the 
carcase  is  salted,  and  stretched  out  in  the  sun  to  dry. 
When  prepared  it  resembles  a  shield,  as  it  remains 
perfectly  flat,  the  back  presenting  a  smooth  surface, 
while  the  inside  represents  a  beautiful  specimen  of  com- 
parative anatomy,  every  joint  dislocated,  but  secured 
by  the  original  integument  to  the  socket,  and  every 
bone  cleanly  detached,  but  undisturbed  from  its  ori- 
ginal position.  The  dried  body  looks  like  a  surgical 
preparation  carefully  arranged  for  an  explanatory 
lecture. 

The  common  and  low  quality  of  food  of  the  lowe  r 
classes,  and  especially  of  the  agricultural  population, 


430  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


must  induce  a  want  of  stamina  which  is  unable  to  resist 
the  fever  in  malarious  districts,  and  this  results  in 
chronic  disease  of  the  spleen.  I  have  already  de- 
scribed the  general  protuberance  of  the  abdomen 
among  the  children  throughout  the  Messaria  and 
the  Carpas  districts,  all  of  whom  are  more  or  less 
affected  by  splenetic  diseases.  On  the  mountains  a 
marked  difference  is  observed,  as  throughout  the 
numerous  villages  at  high  altitudes  the  children  are 
as  healthy  as  those  of  England,  although  poorly  clad 
in  the  home-made  cotton-stuffs  of  the  country. 

I  have  already  remarked  the  absence  of  flannel  or 
other  woollen  material  worn  next  the  skin  ;  the  natives 
prefer  their  own  manufactures  to  those  of  Europe,  and 
as  they  grow  the  cotton,  which  is  spun  and  woven  into 
cloth  by  their  own  women,  there  is  no  actual  outlay  of 
coin.  Some  of  the  native  material  is  very  superior 
in  strength  to  the  machine-made  stuffs  of  Manchester, 
especially  a  blue  stout  cotton  with  a  thin  red  line 
that  is  in  general  request  both  for  men  and  women. 
The  only  woollen  stuff  that  is  manufactured  in  Cyprus 
is  confined  to  Nicosia,  where  the  dark  brown  and 
immensely  thick  capotes  are  made  for  the  winter  wear 
of  the  common  people.  A  cart-driver  during  the  halt 
in  a  winter  night  simply  draws  the  hood  over  his  head 
and  face,  and,  wrapped  in  his  long  and  impervious 
capote,  he  lays  himself  beneath  his  cart  and  goes  to 
sleep.  Coarse  woollen  saddle-cloths  and  bags  are  also 
made  at  Nicosia.  The  same  locality  is  celebrated  for 
manufactures  of  silk  and  gold  embroidery,  all  of  which 
is  performed  by  the  hands  of  women,  while  the  printing 
of  calicoes  and  the  production  of  morocco  leather  are 
local  industries  confined  to  the  labour  of  men. 

No    country    is    better    adapted    for    silk    culture 


XVIII.] 


Natural  Products.  431 


than  Cyprus,  where  the  mulberry-tree  grows  in  great 
luxuriance  to  the  altitude  of  5000  feet,  and  the  warmth 
and  dryness  of  the  climate  is  highly  favourable  to  the 
silkworm.  There  is  no  tax  upon  the  mulberry,  and 
should  artificial  irrigation  be  encouraged  by  the 
government,  this  tree  should  be  generally  planted 
throughout  the  Messaria  and  all  other  districts,  and 
a  special  impulse  should  be  directed  to  silk  deve- 
lopment. Formerly  the  production  of  silk  was  an 
important  export  to  France,  but  of  late  years  it  has 
decreased  to  a  mere  bagatelle.  In  the  spot  where 
I  am  now  writing  there  are  numerous  mulberries  in 
a  profusion  of  rich  foliage  sufficient  for  the  production 
of  two  pounds  of  silk  by  each  tree  ;  but  they  are 
entirely  neglected,  and  the  same  depression  in  the 
silk  cultivation  may  be  remarked  throughout  the 
island. 

The  numerous  wild-flowers,  together  with  the  blos- 
soms of  oranges  and  lemons,  are  highly  favourable  to 
bees,  of  which  there  are  several  varieties ;  but  there  is 
no  export  of  wax,  which  is  used  within  the  island  for 
the  manufacture  of  candles  and  tapers  for  the  various 
churches.  The  Cyprian  bee-hive  is  a  contrivance 
which  is  extremely  simple,  at  the  same  time  that  it 
possesses  the  great  advantage  of  sparing  the  bees 
when  the  comb  is  to  be  saved.  I  see  no  reason 
why  this  primitive  arrangement  should  not  succeed 
in  England,  and  thereby  save  countless  swarms  from 
destruction. 

The  hive  is  an  earthenware  cylinder  about  three  feet 
six  inches  or  four  feet  in  length,  by  ten  or  twelve  inches 
in  diameter ;  this  might  be  represented  by  a  common 
chimney-pot.  One  end  is  securely  stopped  by  a  wad 
of  straw,  neatly  made  in  a  similar  manner  to  the  back 


432  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


of  an  archery  target.  This  is  smeared  on  the  outside 
with  clay  so  as  to  exclude  the  air.  A  similar  wad  is 
inserted  at  the  other  extremity,  but  this  is  provided 
with  a  small  aperture  or  entrance  for  the  bees.  In 
a  large  apiary  twenty  or  thirty  of  these  rude  pipes 
or  cylinders  are  piled  one  upon  the  other  in  the  same 
manner  that  draining  tiles  are  heaped  in  England, 
and  they  are  protected  from  the  sun  and  rain  by  a 
shed,  open  only  to  the  front.  The  bees  learn  to 
recognise  their  several  hives  without  confusion,  al- 
though the  cylinders  are  exactly  alike  and  closely- 
packed  together. 

When  the  comb. is  fully  developed  and  the  honey- 
should  be  secured,  it  is  only  necessary  to  open  a 
hole  in  the  back,  by  removing  the  wad,  and  to 
blow  smoke  through  the  aperture;  the  bees  escape 
uninjured  from  their  ordinary  entrance.  The  oper- 
ator, whose  head  and  face  are  protected  with  the 
necessary  veil,  and  his  hands  with  gloves,  now  cuts 
out  the  honey  required,  leaving  a  certain  quantity 
as  food  for  the  bees,  who  will  return  to  their  hive 
when  re-adjusted. 

When  a  swarm  is  captured,  the  bees  are  placed  in 
an  earthenware  cylinder  which  has  been  rubbed  in  the 
inside  with  a  mixture  of  honey  and  wine.  The  shed 
is  a  very  important  portion  of  the  apiary,  as  it  adds 
materially  to  the  comfort  of  the  bees  by  protecting- 
them  from  the  extremes  of  weather. 

Although  the  cold  of  the  winter  seldom  attains 
freezing-point,  it  is  sufficiently  uncomfortable  when 
accompanied  by  rain,  and  all  creatures  that  are 
expected  to  thrive  require  protection.  The  climate 
varies  in  different  localities,  but  the  following  meteor- 
ological data,  that  were  carefully  registered  by  myself. 


f 


XVIII.] 


Temperature  and  Rainfall. 


433 


accompanied  by  those  kindly  furnished  me  by  Colonel 
White,  1st  Royal  Scots,  when  chief  commissioner  of 
Lefkosia,  will  afford  a  dependable  basis  for  any 
medical  opinion. 


Months. 


} 


Febniary,  in  the  plain  of  Mes- 
saria 

March,  in  the  Carpas  district  I 
and  ditto / 

April,  in  the  Kyrenia  district,  ( 
the  maximum  at  Morphu     .  j 

May,  in  Limasol  to  nth  inst . 
do.   Trooditissa,  4,340  ft.  to  ) 
31st  from  1 2th      ....  J 
June,  Trooditissa      .... 
July,  do.  .... 


Inches 
RainfaU. 


o-8o 

171 

nil. 

ditto. 
0-30 

o'i3 


Thermometer. 


■ 

< 
00 


IS 


46^ 

49 

57 

AT   7   A.M. 
64 

66 
7iTir 


57° 
60 

68 

78 
62 

7irxj 
78 


a 

•  art 
»< 


68** 
68 

83 
84 

73 

78 
84 


S 

zi 
£ 

c 


zr 

45 

47 

76 

42 

54 
65 


The  fall  of  i'i3  inch  of  rain  in  June  took  place  in 
one  hour  and  a  half,  and  none  of  the  rain  which  fell 
at  the  mountain  range  extended  to  the  low  country. 
It  will  be  seen  that  from  ist  February  to  the  end 
of  May  only  2*5 1  inches  fell  throughout  the  central 
and  eastern  divisions,  and  very  litde  that  was  measured 
in  the  Carpas  district  reached  the  Messaria.  There 
was  a  fall  of  about  170  inch  in  January  at  Larnaca 
which  I  had  no  opportunity  of  measuring,  but  inclusive 
of  this  quantity  the  total  rainfall  from  ist  January  to 
the  end  of  summer  would  not  have  exceeded  4*2 1 
inches  in  the  lower  country. 

F   F 


434  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


The  month  of  July  is  shown  to  be  the  highest 
temperature  at  Trooditissa,  but  although  the  maximum 
of  84"*  and  the  mean  at  3  p.m.  of  78**  may  appear  high 
at  the  elevation  of  4340  feet  above  the  sea  level,  the 
extreme  lightness  and  purity  of  the  air  so  far  modified 
the  heat  that  it  was  never  oppressive.  The  thermo- 
meter was  suspended  five  feet  from  the  ground  against 
the  trunk  of  the  shady  walnut-tree  four  feet  from  the 
tent  wall,  into  which  spot  the  sun  never  entered. 

The  water  that  issued  from  the  rock  by  a  stone 
spout  beneath  the  arch  showed  a  temperature  of  55°, 
and  never  varied  throughout  the  months  of  June,  July, 
and  August.  When  the  thermometer  was  above  So"* 
this  water  fresh  from  the  spout  appeared  icy  cold  in 
comparison. 

Colonel  White's  observations  at  Lefkosia  (Nicosia) 
for  the  month  of  July  exhibit  an  extremely  high  range, 
the  mean  at  9  a.m.  =  84xV°,  and  the  mean  at  9  p.m.  =  83" ; 
while  the  daily  maximum  attains  the  serious  degree  of 
a  mean  ==  io8xV»  the  highest  point  registered  being 
1 1 5°  in  the  shade. 

Such  a  temperature  will  destroy  the  health  of 
Europeans,  and  the  locality  is  not  suitable  for  head- 
quarters. The  governor  of  the  island  might  possibly 
escape  to  the  mountain  sanatorium,  but  the  other 
officials  will  sicken  in  their  various  overheated  offices. 

The  following  is  Colonel  White  s  original  register  : — 


Meteoroi-OGicai.  Register. 


METEOROLOGICAL  REGISTER  AT  NICOSIA, 

442   FEET  ABOVE  SEA  LEVEL. 

Instnimenls : — Casella's  maximum,  minimum,  and  ordinary  tliennaiDeten ; 
Negtetti  uid  Zambra's  large-size  aiierDid  baromeler  ;  39  feci  above  ground,  all 
under  deep  verandah,  shaded  from  Ihe  sun,  exposed  to  coolest  wind,  and  5  feet 
above  the  roof  of  the  house.     The  readings  taken  carefully. 


,,.M. 

9.™d.v. 

1 

1 

Wi^i. 

■6 

1 

;Wind. 

1 

j 

1 

it 

A 

£ 

i 

_^ 

a  1  = 

A     a 

.1 

i= 

" 

6 

£ 

z 

^ 

s  iz 

£ 

si 

^ 

^ 

'^t,        ' 

_i_ 

■teg.  .doB. 

in. 

— 

«,-6o 

^■fe      ! 

W. 

,ob|69 

'^'^ 

sl 

^■Si           ! 

ig'fio 

19-60           s 

S|ij 

=9;6. 

J9-6S 

S3 

s 

^'^ 

s^ 

=J*^      ! 

J960 

,;;<sl      , 

83 

zs 

s« 

»9ST              3 

|5 

^6s 

J9JI 

'S 

•9TO 

84 

»9;6a         I 

16 

j^-fe. 

83 

^■6, 

8s 

"9**»              S 

.8 

^96. 

S3 

ID,           75 

>9G. 

jg-6s 

f4 

-  ;- 

^■68 

84 

''■S 

:-g;6s 

>4 

!»9-6o 

El 

^■ss     ; 

■"           'J^ 

11 

1 

1960 

= 

= 

z 

=9-60         > 

i 

- 

= 

1960 

sr 

,!,;&           J 

.9-6! 

•9-6S 

w. 

"4    :6 

To»ls. 

>.6>o 

7;^.^ 

»^- 

"e^ 

~ 

1  *^ 

~\~ 

^^r 

CHAPTER  XIX 


POLITICAL    REFLECTIONS. 


In  the  foregoing  chapters  I  have  endeavoured  to 
describe  the  present  condition  of  Cyprus,  exhibiting 
the  actual  resources  of  the  island,  together  with  the 
numerous  disadvantages  resulting  from  a  peculiarity 
of  climate,  and  the  total  neglect  of  all  public  works 
during  the  Ottoman  rule  of  three  centuries.  It  will 
be  remarked  that  nothing  of  value  exists  beyond  the 
agricultural  productions,  which  are  now  precarious 
through  the  uncertainty  of  seasons  ;  the  metallic  wealth 
has  either  been  exhausted  by  the  ancient  miners,  or 
it  remains  to  be  developed  ;  the  forests  have  been 
destroyed ;  the  harbours  have  been  clogged  by  silt ; 
the  communications  are  confined  to  pack  animals  in 
the  general  absence  of  roads  and  bridges.  Yet,  not- 
withstanding this  neglected  condition  of  the  island, 
the  revenue  has  yielded  an  average  of  about  ;^  200,000 
annually,  or  as  nearly  as  possible  one  pound  sterling 
per  head  of  the  entire  population. 

An  increase  of  revenue  can  only  result  from  a 
corresponding  advance  in  material  prosperity,  which 
must  depend  upon  an  influx  of  capital  that  will 
develop  the  agricultural  resources  upon  which  Cyprus 
will  mainly  depend.     There  are  some  few  collateral 


CHAP.  XIX.]  Political  Reflections.  437 

profits  that  may  perhaps  increase,  such  as  the  sponge 
fisheries,  and  a  probable  discovery  of  red  coral  by 
the  employment  of  the  helmet-diving  apparatus.  At 
present  the  condition  of  the  sea-bottom  is  little 
known  ;  the  sponges,  of  an  inferior  quality,  are  collected 
by  dredging,  and  the  boats  pay  a  fixed  sum  for  a 
licence  according  to  the  size  and  construction  of  the 
dredging  apparatus,  varying  from  ;^5  to  ;^20  per 
annum ;  this  yields  a  small  annual  revenue  of  about 
;^i6c)0,  which  embraces  the  entire  coast  of  Cyprus. 
By  careful  management  the  salt  might  exhibit  an 
increase,  but  on  the  other  hand,  the  wine,  if  relieved 
from  the  present  extreme  taxation,  would  for  the  first 
two  or  three  years  ensure  a  considerable  reduction. 

No  increase  of  imports  can  be  expected  until  the 
general  advance  of  internal  prosperity  shall  enable 
the  population  to  extend  their  demand  for  foreign 
manufactures.  We  have  seen  that  the  peasantry  are 
contented  with  the  home-made  cotton  stuffs  which 
they  produce  without  an  expenditure  of  money ;  and 
the  habits  of  the  agricultural  classes  are  simple,  and 
independent  of  external  aid.  It  will  require  many 
years  before  the  customs  of  the  Cypriotes  shall  be 
changed  by  the  intercourse  with  strangers,  and  the 
increase  of  their  wealth,  commencing  from  the  zero 
of  poverty,  must  be  the  base  of  future  expectations. 
We  generally  remark  in  the  advancing  desires  of 
communities  that  women  exert  a  powerful  influence 
in  the  development  of  manufactures.  The  wholesome, 
and  to  a  certain  extent  civilising,  attention  to  personal 
appearance,  creates  a  demand  for  articles  of  dress  and 
other  little  vanities  which  encourage  trade,  And  by 
degrees  the  improvement  in  every  household  expands 
into   a   new  birth   of  external    relations  with  foreign 


438  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP* 


countries,  which  induces  an  increase  of  imports.  The 
women  of  Cyprus  are  completely  subjugated  to  their 
husbands,  and  although  exempt  from  the  cruelty  un- 
fortunately so  prevalent  among  a  similar  class  in 
England,  they  are  seldom  indulged  in  the  love  of 
finery  which  in  our  own  country  is  carried  to  an 
excess.  The  baggy  trousers  and  the  high  hob-nailed 
boots  of  the  Cyprian  Venus  will  hardly  excite  the 
ambition  of  British  manufacturers,  and  for  many  years 
the  females  will  remain  in  their  present  position. 
There  are  already  soap  manufactories  in  the  island, 
and  the  first  groundwork  for  improvements  in  personal 
habits  will  be  ensured  by  their  extension,  before  the 
exterior  fineries  of  more  civilised  communities  shall 
be  introduced.  We  may  therefore  omit  the  Cyprian 
female  from  the  class  that  would  benefit  the  island 
commercially,  but  she  will  perform  her  duty  in  a 
sensible  and  simple  manner  as  a  good  housewife, 
and  thereby  assist  in  the  prosperity  of  her  husband 
the  agriculturist.  The  more  pains  that  we  may  bestow 
upon  an  examination  of  the  resources  of  Cyprus,  the 
more  certain  becomes  the  conclusion  that  the  present 
and  the  future  depend  entirely  upon  agricultural 
development. 

This  fact  is  patent  to  all  who  can  pretend  to  a  know- 
ledge of  the  island,  and  the  question  will  naturally 
intrude,  "  Was  Cyprus  occupied  for  agricultural  pur- 
poses ?  "  Of  course  we  know  it  was  not :  but  on  the 
other  hand,  if  we  acknowledge  the  truth,  "  that  it  was 
accepted  as  a  strategical  military  point,"  it  is  highly- 
desirable  that  the  country  should  be  self-supporting, 
instead  of,  like  Malta  and  Gibraltar,  mainly  dependent 
upon  external  supplies. 

If  Cyprus  belonged  to  England  or  any  other  Power, 


XIX.] 


Political  Reflections.  439 


it  would  be  a  valuable  acquisition.  We  have  seen 
that  under  the  Turkish  administration  it  was  a  small 
mine  of  wealth,  and  remains  in  the  same  position  to 
its  recent  masters. 

We  pay  ;^96,ooo  per  annum  to  the  Turks,  out 
of  an  assumed  revenue  of  ;^  170,000.  Therefore, 
without  any  trouble  or  risk,  the  Turk  is  receiving 
3^  per  cent,  interest  upon  three  millions.  This  es- 
tablishes an  unfortunate  precedent  in  the  valuation 
of  the  island  should  England  eventually  become  a 
purchaser. 

If  Cyprus  can,  without  undue  taxation,  afford  a 
revenue  of  ;^  1 70,000,  it  is  palpable  that  a  large  margin 
would  be  available  for  those  absolutely  necessary 
public  works — irrigation,  the  control  of  the  Pedias 
river,  road-making,  harbour-works,  bridges,  extension 
of  forests  and  guardians,  and  a  host  of  minor  im- 
provements, such  as  district  schools  for  the  teaching 
of  English,  &c.  &c.  In  fact,  if  we  held  Cyprus  with- 
out purchase  as  a  conquered  country,  such  as  Ceylon, 
Mauritius,  or  other  of  our  colonies,  it  would  occupy 
the  extraordinary  position  of  a  colony  that  could 
advance  and  pay  its  way  entirely  by  its  own  sur- 
plus revenue,  without  a  public  loan !  This  is  a  fact 
of  great  importance — that,  in  spite  of  the  usual  Turkish 
maladministration,  the  island  has  no  debt,  but  that 
England  has  acknowledged  the  success  of  the  Turkish 
rule  by  paying  ;^96,ooo  per  annum  as  the  accepted 
surplus  revenue  of  this  misgoverned  island! — which 
holds  upon  these  data  a  better  financial  condition  than 
any  of  our  own  colonies. 

If  the  total  gross  revenue  is  ;^  170,000  a  year,  and 
we  can  afford  to  pay  ;^96,ooo  to  the  Porte,  and  at  the 
same  time  allow  the  home  government  to  boast  in  the 


440  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


House  of  Commons  of  "^  surplus^'  Cyprus  is   one 
of  the  most  lucrative  positions,  and   the  Turks   can 
fairly  claim  a  success  instead  of  admitting  the  blame 
of  mal-administration. 
.'-''     If  the  Turks  by  mismanagement  can  obtain  a  nett 

\      revenue  of  ;^96,ooo  a  year,  how  much  should  England 

I      obtain  by  good  management  ? 

'  The  fact  is  that,  as  usual,  the  English  government  has 

been  hoodwinked  in  their  hasty  bargain.  The  island 
can  pay  its  way,  and,  if  free  from  Turkey,  would  become 
most  prosperous ;  but  we  have  inherited  an  estate  so 
heavily  mortgaged  by  our  foolish  Convention,  that  the 
revenue  is  all  absorbed  in  interest,  which  leaves  nothing 
for  the  necessities  of  development.  The  commissioners 
of  districts  are  over- worked  and  ill-paid,  their  allowance 
of  interpreters  is  quite  insufficient  to  secure  the  neces- 
sary check,  and  their  position  is  incompatible  with  the 
importance  of  their  official  status.  There  is  no  money 
for  any  improvements,  and  the  boasted  surplus  will  just 
suffice  for  the  payment  of  salaries  and  the  absolutely 
necessary  items  of  carrying  on  a  government  more 
in  accordance  with  the  position  of  Greece  or  Denmark 
than  with  the  historical  reputation  of  Great  Britain. 

This  financial  embarrassment  has  disappointed  the 
expectations  of  the  inhabitants,  who  naturally  had 
anticipated  brilliant  advantages  from  the  reform 
between  Turkish  and  English  administrations.  My 
own  opinion  may  be  valueless,  but  it  is  shared  by 
many  ;  Cyprus  should  belong  absolutely  to  England, 
or  we  should  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  I  repeat 
the  dictum  expressed  in  the  introduction ;  if  England 
is  the  ally  of  Turkey  and  she  can  depend  upon  the 
integrity  of  that  defensive  alliance  against  Russia, 
there   is   no   need    for    any   station    that    incurs   the 


XIX.) 


Political  Reflections.  441 


obligations  of  Cyprus ;  all  the  Turkish  ports  would 
be  open  to  our  ships.  The  occupation  of  Cyprus 
would  therefore  suggest  that  a  far-seeing  government 
had  doubted  the  integrity  of  Turkey,  and  had  therefore 
determined  to  secure  a  pied-a-terre  in  a  strategical 
position  that  would  command  the  east  of  the  Mediter- 
ranean. Upon  this  point  opinions  will  again  differ, 
and  I  quote  the  words  of  one  of  the  most  experienced 
statesmen  and  an  ex-minister  of  the  Upper  House,  who 
writes  : — 

"  The  objections  to  Cyprus  as  a  military  and  naval 
station  are  shortly  these.  It  will  oblige  us  to  establish 
a  garrison,  and  therefore  to  increase  and  divide  our 
forces  in  the  Mediterranean.  There  must  be  barracks, 
hospitals,  store-houses,  &c.  After  all  this  expenditure 
Cyprus  will  weaken  rather  than  strengthen  our  power. 

**  Famagousta  may  be  made  a  good  harbour ;  but 
how  can  it  be  defended  }  The  ships  will  not  be,  as  in 
Malta,  defended  by  batteries  projecting  far  beyond  the 
anchorage ;  Famagousta  will  require  ships  of  war  to 
defend  it,  or  batteries  constructed  on  the  breakwater— 
a  most  costly  undertaking.  As  a  coaling-station  it  is 
not  wanted,  because  colliers  accompanying  the  fleet 
are  much  more  convenient.  If,  in  short,  we  are  supreme 
at  sea,  Cyprus  is  not  wanted ;  if  we  are  not  supreme, 
Cyprus  will  be  an  incumbrance.'* 

I  acknowledge  the  force  of  a  portion  of  the  argument, 
and  no  one  can  more  highly  respect  the  distinguished 
authority  I  have  quoted,  who,  as  an  ex- First  Lord 
of  the  Admiralty  of  practical  experience,  must  carry 
the  great  weight  of  his  ability  and  position ;  but  I 
would  suggest  that  Famagousta  is  underrated.  I  have 
already  described  that  powerful  fortress,  and'  in  its 
present  condition,  if  mounted  with  forty-ton  guns  upon 
the  sea-face,  I  doubt  the  possibility  of  an  attack  from 


442  Cyprus  in   1879.  ^cHAr. 

seaward.  The  natural  reefs  which  form  the  sea-wall 
afford  the  greatest  facilities  for  batteries  d-fieur-d'eau, 
as  their  solid  foundations  require  the  simple  levelling 
of  cement,  and  a  facing  of  steel  plates  would  complete 
an  impregnable  line  of  casemates  that  would  render 
the  approach  by  sea  impossible. 

The  advantages  of  attendant  colliers  is  great  as  a 
continuous  coal- supply  to  a  fleet,  especially  during  the 
blockade  of  an  enemy  s  port ;  but  for  a  cruising  fleet, 
or  for  independent  vessels,  the  speed  of  the  colliers 
would  be  insufficient,  and  a  line  of  coaling-stations 
at  intervals  of  five  days  steaming  is  in  my  opinion 
highly  important,  in  addition  to  the  necessity  of  docks 
where  ironclad  vessels  could  obtain  the  necessary 
repairs  after  a  naval  engagement.  It  is  a  serious 
result  of  modern  improvements  that  the  cumbrous 
and  complicated  ironclads  cannot  be  repaired  in  a 
few  days  after  an  action  with  the  enemy  by  their 
own  carpenters  and  crews,  like  the  wooden  vessels  of 
old,  but  that  docks  must  be  within  reach,  and  ^11  the 
appliances  of  the  engineers'  yards  and  an  arsenal. 
Without  this  advantage,  Famagousta  would  be  a 
useless  acquisition,  and  Cyprus  would  be  worthless 
as  a  strategical  position. 

In  my  opinion  the  entire  question  hangs  upon  the 
integrity  of  Turkey  as  an  ally.  England  has  done 
but  little  for  her,  and  we  may  expect  too  much.  The 
Turks  are  thoroughly  aware  that  an  Anglo-Turkish 
defensive  alliance,  and  the  "  Protectorate  of  Asia  Minor 
]^y  Great  Britain,'*  are  political  arrangements  based 
upon  self-interest,  for  which  they  owe  us  no  personal 
gratitude;  in  the  hour  of  their  distress  we  declined 
material  assistance,  but  seized  the  opportunity  for 
occupying  one  of  their  important  positions — Cyprus  ; 


xix.i 


Political  Reflections.  44, 


their  only  satisfaction  remained  in  the  knowledge  that 
they  had  **  done  us  "  in  the  bargain.  We  have  quickly 
discovered  the  painful  fact,  and  one  party  to  the 
alliance  already  feels  aggrieved,  and  seeks  for  an 
alteration  in  the  terms  of  the  Convention. 

I  cannot  conceive  any  more  dangerous  risk  to 
friendships  than  an  interference  in  the  private  affairs 
of  individuals,  or  in  the  public  administration  of  govern- 
ments. We  have  assumed  the  enormous  responsibility 
of  the  Protectorate  of  Asia  Minor  under  conditions 
which  we  must  know  will  never  be  fulfilled ;  Turkey 
promises  to  reform  the  abuses  of  her  internal  adminis- 
tration, &c.  &c.  !  Anybody  who  knows  Turkey  must 
be  aware  that  such  a  reform  is  impossible  :  the  honest 
administrative  material  does  not  exist  in  the  Ottoman 
Empire,  and  the  promises  of  the  Porte  have  been 
tolerably  exemplified  since  the  Crimean  war.  Under 
these  circumstances  the  Anglo-Turkish  alliance  is  in 
a  questionable  position.  We  have  assumed  the  Pro- 
tectorate of  Asia  Minor  conditionally ;  we  occupy 
Cyprus  conditionally  ;  and  should  Turkey  fail  to  per- 
form her  promises  in  the  government  of  her  Asiatic 
provinces,  we  have  a  back-door  for  an  escape  from 
our  onerous  engagement.  Unfortunately  English 
diplomacy  is  celebrated  for  back-doors.  In  the  Berlin 
Treaty  we  entered  Cyprus  through  a  back-door,  and 
we  may  possibly  retire  by  the  same  exit;  but  there 
is  little  doubt  that  the  Turk  does  not  believe  in  our 
professed  determination  to  defend  him  by  force  of 
arms  in  the  event  of  a  future  conflict  between 
Russia  and  the  Sultan  in  Asia  Minor.  Notwith- 
standing our  professed  sincerity,  the  Turk  has  become 
an  unbeliever  in  the  faith  of  treaties  and  political 
engagements ;     he    believes     most     thoroughly    that 


444  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


should  "  British  interests "  require  the  sacrifice  of 
honour,  England  will  somehow  or  other  manage  to 
slip  through  the  Ottoman  fingers,  and  escape  froni 
her  alliance  when  called  upon  to  meet  Russia  in 
the  field.  Of  course  the  ignorant  Turk  is  wrong, 
and  his  suspicions  are  unfounded. 

With  a  mutual  want  of  confidence  in  the  integrity 
of  an  alliance,  it  would  hardly  be  surprising  should  the 
Sultan  attach  more  importance  to  the  practical  force 
of  Russia  than  to  the  moral  rectitude  and  high 
political  principles  of  England.  The  power  of  Russia 
has  been  felt,  and  the  position  of  European  Turkey 
is  that  of  a  dislocated  and  dismembered  Empire,  which 
upon  the  next  explosion  will  reduce  the  Sultan  to  the 
small  extremity  on  the  Bosphorus  between  Constanti- 
nople and  the  lines  of  Tchataldja.  Turkey  will  cease 
to  be  a  European  Power,  and  upon  the  outbreak  of  the 
next  Russian  war  she  will  be  discovered  as  represented 
by  Asia  Minor,  in  which  the  claws  of  the  Eagle  are 
already  fixed  in  the  vital  points — Batoum,  Kars,  and 
Ardahan.  A  Russian  advance  from  those  positions 
will,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  alliance,  compel 
Great  Britain  to  exhibit  herself  as  the  champion  of 
Turkish  rights  in  armed  defence  of  Asia  Minor. 

When  we  reflect  upon  the  prodigious  responsibility 
of  such  an  alliance  with  a  crippled  Power  that  has  been 
completely  subdued,  the  victorious  army  of  the  Czar 
retired  from  the  gates  of  the  capital,  the  nation  bank- 
rupt beyond  all  hopes  of  liquidation,  the  various  states 
in  chronic  discontent  both  in  Europe  and  in  Asia, 
and  the  claims  of  Greece  threatening  to  explode  the 
combustible  materials,  we  may  well  appreciate  the 
back-door  that  has  so  frequently  afforded  a  retreat 
from  an  untenable  position. 


XIX.] 


Political  Reflections.  445 


If  it  is  necessary  for  England  to  form  a  defensive 
alliance  with  Turkey  as  a  crippled  Power,  with  Russia 
actually  established  in  Asia  Minor,  why  should  we 
have  waited  until  Turkey  was  mortally  stricken,  when 
by  an  earlier  alliance  we  could  have  at  least  saved 
Asia  Minor  in  its  integrity  ?  We  have  let  the  lion 
into  the  house  with  a  boast  that  we  will  turn  him 
out  in  the  event  of  further  roaring,  instead  of  having 
prevented  his  entry  in  the  first  instance. 

Under  all  the  circumstances  of  the  risk  and  respon- 
sibility assumed  by  England  in  a  defensive  alliance 
with  Turkey  under  the  title  of  a  Protectorate  of  Asia 
Minor,  the  Cyprus  Convention  is  highly  unfavourable 
in  its  conditions.  The  island  should  have  been  simply 
conveyed  from  Turkey  and  transferred  as  a  free  gift  to 
England,  as  a  position  necessary  for  her  occupation 
under  the  probable  contingencies  of  the  Anglo-Turkish 
alliance,  and  it  should  have  at  once  become  a  portion 
of  the  British  Empire.  Had  this  course  been  pursued 
a  mutual  confidence  would  have  been  established ;  on 
the  other  hand,  all  back-doors  would  have  been  sealed, 
as  we  should  have  been  bound  by  all  the  laws  of 
honour  to  defend  Turkey  to  the  last  extremity  in 
Asia  Minor. 

Russia,  in  Kars,  occupies  a  position  which  affords 
an  unbounded  horizon  for  political  intrigue.  The 
various  Turkish  Pachas  and  other  district  authorities 
throughout  Asia  Minor  have  witnessed  the  irresistible 
advance  of  Russia,  while  England  stood  afar  off,  and 
only  assisted  Turkey  with  her  good  counsel.  The 
same  authorities  now  see  Russia  in  possession,  while 
England,  who  has  not  assisted  during  the  bloody 
struggle,  appears  upon  the  scene  as  a  political  Paul 
Pry,  and   intrudes  upon  the  mysteries  that  surround 


446  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


Pachas,  Governors,  and  various  functionaries,  who,  from 
the  highest  to  the  lowest  official,  mainly  exist  upon 
extortion. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  explain  that  British  assist- 
ance in  such  a  form  will  be  most  unwelcome,  and 
will  increase  our  reputation  for  intermeddling  while 
in  the  hour  of  extremity  we  withhold  the  required  aid. 
Any  interference  on  our  part  with  the  administration 
of  Asia  Minor  will  cause  an  extreme  jealousy  and 
suspicion  throughout  all  classes  of  Turkish  officials, 
who  will  be  rendered  the  more  amenable  to  the  guiles 
of  Russian  intrigues  from  Kars  and  Ardahan.  A  very 
slight  knowledge  of  Turkish  character  would  induce 
the  natural  conclusion.  The  English  would  be  sus- 
pected of  coveting  Asia  Minor,  as  they  had  already 
obtained  Cyprus,  and  Russia  would  have  gained  her 
end  in  destroying  all  confidence  that  might  possibly 
have  existed,  and  thus  endanger  the  defensive  alliance. 

There  are  serious  risks  that  might  enforce  the  advance 
of  Russian  troops  beyond  the  defined  frontier.  Already 
there  are  reports  of  general  discontent  and  threatened 
disturbances.  In  the  event  of  a  mutiny  of  Turkish 
troops  on  the  Russian  border,  the  Russians  might 
be  invited  to  assist  by  the  Pacha  in  command.  Some- 
times such  revolts  are  factitious,  for  political  purposes. 
In  all  cases  the  position  of  Russia  in  Asia  Minor  is 
one  of  extreme  danger  to  Turkey,  and  it  is  far  from 
improbable  that  activity  on  her  side,  and  passiveness 
upon  ours,  may  terminate  in  a  friendship  between 
the  Russians  and  the  Turks  to  the  detriment  of 
British  interests,  and  to  the  confusion  of  the  assumed 
Protectorate.     This  document  distinctly  states  : — 

If  '*  Batoum,  Ardahan,  Kars,  or  any  of  them  shall 
be  retained   by  Russia,   and   if  any  further   attempt 


XIX.] 


Political  Reflections.  447 


shall  be  made  at  any  future  time  by  Russia  to  take 
possession  of  any  further  territories  of  his  Imperial 
Majesty  the  Sultan  in  Asia  as  fixed  by  the  definitive 
treaty  of  peace,  England  engages  to  join  his  Imperial 
Majesty  the   Sultan  in   defending  them  by  force   of 


arms/* 


In  a  despatch  from  Lord  Salisbury  to  Sir  A.  H. 
Layard,  dated  30th  May,  1878,  these  ominous  words 
are  contained  : — 

"  Even  if  it  be  certain  that  Batoum  and  Ardahan 
and  Kars  will  not  become  the  base  from  which 
emissaries  of  intrigue  will  issue  forth,  to  be  in  due 
time  followed  by  invading  armies,  the  mere  retention 
of  them  by  Russia  will  exercise  a  powerful  influence 
in  disintegrating  the  Asiatic  dominion  of  the  Porte." 

In  the  same  lengthy  despatch  the  conditions  are 
described  which  Turkey  must  fulfil  in  reforming  the 
abuses  of  the  present  administration,  &c.  &c.,  and 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  British  government 
contemplated  the  necessity  of  supplanting  a  con- 
siderable number  of  the  peculant  Turkish  officials  by 
experienced  English  officers,  whose  supervision  would 
ensure  the  necessary  reforms.  If  such  a  course 
should  have  been  accepted  by  the  Porte  there  could 
be  no  question  of  the  salutary  effect,  as  the  presence 
of  British  officials  in  actual  authority  throughout  the 
provinces  of  Asia  Minor  would  have  proved  to  the 
various  races  our  positive  determination  to  uphold 
their  rights,  and  to  defend  them  from  the  oppression 
and  extortion  to  which  they  had  been  subjected.  Such 
a  position  would  have  given  England  the  control  that 
is  absolutely  necessary  to  effect  the  reforms  in  the 
administration  of  Asia  Minor,  without  which  the  result 
will   be  anarchy  and   revolution  within  a   few  years. 


448  Cyprus  in  1879. 


[CHAP. 


fostered  by  Russia  precisely  in  accordance  with  the 
policy  that  has  terminated  in  the  disruption  of  Turkey 
in  Europe. 

In  the  same  despatch  of  30th  May,  1878,  Lord 
Salisbury  continues : — 

**  Her  Majesty's  Government  intimated  to  the 
Porte  on  the  occasion  of  the  Conference  at  Con- 
stantinople that  they  were  not  prepared  to  sanction 
misgovernment  and  oppression,  and  it  will  be  re- 
quisite before  they  can  enter  into  any  agreement  for 
the  defence  of  the  Asiatic  territories  of  the  Porte 
in  certain  eventualities,  that  they  should  be  formally 
assured  of  the  intention  of  the  Porte  to  introduce  the 
necessary  reforms  into  the  government  of  the  Christian 
and  other  subjects  of  the  Porte  in  those  regions.  It 
is  not  desirable  to  require  more  than  an  engagement  in 
general  terms ^  for  the  specific  measures  to  be  taken 
could  only  be  defined  after  a  more  careful  inquiry 
and  deliberation  than  could  be  secured  at  tlie  present 
juncture!^ 

The  italics  are  my  own,  for  the  weak  point  of  the 
Convention  is  exhibited  by  this  sentence. 

No  '*  general  terms  "  should  ever  be  mentioned  in 
a  communication  with  Orientals,  and  no  convention 
should  have  been  concluded  with  the  Porte  unless 
every  detail  had  been  previously  considered  and 
specially  agreed  upon  between  the  contracting  parties. 
When  this  Convention  was  made  public,  I  concluded 
that  the  British  government  contemplated  the  official 
employment  of  a  certain  number  of  their  own  officers 
to  carry  out  the  spirit  of  the  agreement,  without 
which  the  Convention  would  be  a  farce ;  at  the  same 
time  I  was  convinced  that  the  suspicions  of  the  Turkish 
government  and  the  stubborn  pride  of  the  race  would 
resist  any  such  direct  interference  upon  the  part  of 


XIX.]  Political  Reflections.  449 

England.  Under  these  conditions  Asia  Minor  would 
remain  exactly  where  it  was.  A  grand  scheme  which 
would  have  had  immense  political  results,  had  the 
Turks  accepted  our  interference  in  the  honourable  spirit 
of  our  intentions,  has  been  frustrated  by  their  want  of 
confidence,  and  the  Convention  remains,  containing  an 
agreement  of  stupendous  importance,  by  which  Eng- 
land is  committed  to  a  military  undertaking  of  the 
first  magnitude,  while  Turkey  risks  nothing  except  her 
''promises  of  reform  in  the  administration  of  her 
Asiatic  provinces."  *^. 

"  British  interests  "  in  this  transaction  are  represented  \ 
by    Cyprus,   which    we    occupy    as    tenants — paying    ' 
;^96,ooo  a  year  for  the  ruined  house,  and  leaving  Our- 
selves no  balance  from  the  revenue  for  the  necessary 
repairs. 

There  is  no  more  difficult  political  associate  than 
the  Turk ;  his  defensive  weapon  is  delay,  and  in 
moments  of  the  greatest  emergency  his  peculiar 
apathy  or  patience  never  forsakes  him.  Proud  and 
haughty  to  a  superlative  degree,  in  his  heart  he 
detests  all  extraneous  counsel  .and  interference,  and 
would  rather  glide  onward  to  destruction  than  grasp 
the  hand  stretched  out  to  save  him.  Turkey  has 
expected  much  from  England,  and  has  made  a  poor 
return  for  our  sacrifice  of  blood  and  treasure  during 
the  Crimean  war.  She  obtained  an  ephemeral  finan- 
cial reputation  through  the  aid  of  France  and  England 
in  becoming  guarantees  for  a  public  loan ;  upon  this 
false  position  she  traded  until  the  inevitable  bankruptcy 
plunged  her  into  ruin,  and  opened  the  gate  for  the 
entrance  of  her  enemies,  at  the  same  time  that  dis- 
honesty entailed  the  severance  of  friefids.  England 
has   from  mutual  interests  endeavoured   to  preserve 

G   G 


450  Cyprus  in  1879. 


tCHAP. 


her  from  absolute  dissolution,  and  the  Protectorate  of 
Asia  Minor  was  a  step  of  political  audacity  in  her 
favour  that  surprised  the  world.     This  extraordinary 
offer  of  material  aid  has  been  met  by  the  same  want 
of  confidence   that   has    marked   the   decline   of  the 
Turkish  Empire ;  the  only  extra  interference  in  Asia 
Minor  has  been  the  appointment  of  a  few  additional 
British   consuls.     These   gentlemen  will   report   long 
lists  of  abuses,  and  the  general  mal-administration  of 
the  Turkish  officials ;  they  will  be  hated  accordingly, 
and   being   absolutely  powerless   for  good,  they  will 
simply  keep  the  Foreign  Office  informed  of  what  was 
thoroughly  well  known  before.     Remonstrances  upon 
our  part  will  be  made  to  the  Porte,  who  will    deny 
the  accuracy  of  the  consular  reports,  and  ultimately 
a   special   commission   will   be   sent   out,   which    will 
prove  their  correctness ;  the  Porte  will  again  promise 
amendment,  but  will   not   sanction    the   appointment 
of  British  officials.     In  this  old-fashioned  course,  so 
thoroughly  understood  by  all  who  have  any  knowledge 
of  Turkey,  the  affairs  of  Asia  Minor  will  be  conducted, 
until  revolution  shall  bring  Russia  upon  the  scene  at 
the  most  favourable  opportunity  ;  and  England,  who 
has  been  thwarted  by  the  Power  she  has  endeavoured 
to   save,  will,   by   the   terms   of  the   Convention,  be 
compelled  to  appear  in  arms  as  the  defender  of  the 
remnant  of  the  Turkish  Empire. 

Common  sense  would  suggest  the  absolute  necessity 
of  special  and  clearly  defined  conditions  in  concluding 
an  alliance  with  Turkey  which  may  at  any  moment 
demand  our  military  interference.  If  we  are  bound 
to  assist  by  force  of  arms  in  the  defence  of  Asia 
Minor,  it  is  equally  necessary  that  Turkey  should 
be  bound  to  qualify  herself  for  resistance  to  an  attack 


i 


XIX.1 


Political  Reflections.  451 


from  Russia.  It  should  have  been  distinctly  agreed 
that  Turkey  should  raise  a  territorial  army  of  an  es- 
timated strength  for  the  protection  of  Asia  Minor,  and 
that  a  certain  number  of  British  officers  should  hold 
important  commands,  to  ensure  the  regular  payment 
of  the  troops  and  to  maintain  the  necessary  discipline. 
Had  such  conditions  been  defined,  and  the  civil  courts 
been  placed  under  the  supervision  of  British  officials, 
the  Protectorate  of  Asia  Minor  would  have  become 
a  practical  combination  that  would  have  been  an 
effectual  check  to  Russian  encroachments ;  but  as 
the  affair  now  stands,  the  alliance  is  fraught  with 
extreme  danger  to  ourselves.  I  cannot  conceive  the 
possibility  of  a  credulity  that  would  induce  experienced 
statesmen  to  believe  in  the  assurances  given  either  by 
Turkey  or  by  Russia.  The  history  of  the  past  is 
sufficient  to  prove  the  utter  fallacy  of  assertions, 
promises,  and  treaties  ;  Turkey  will  persist  in  mal- 
administration ;  Russia,  who  is  now  marching  upon 
Merv  in  spite  of  former  assurances,  as  she  advanced 
on  Khiva  under  similar  pretexts,  will  at  the  moment 
of  her  own  selection  assuredly  break  ^  through  her 
boundaries  in  Asia  Minor.  The  position  of  England 
will  be  contemptible.  We  have  thrown  down  the 
gauntlet  to  Russia  by  ai>  ostentatious  alliance  ^Irith 
Turkey,  but  we  hesitate  to  insist  upon  the  over- 
whelming necessity  of  British  official  and  military 
officers  to  organise  the  civil  administration  and  an 
army  of  defence  ;  thus,  when  the  sudden  emergency 
shall  arise,  Turkey  will  be  totally  unprepared  ;  the 
various  races  that  comprise  her  Asiatic  dominions 
will  already  have  been  poisoned  by  intrigue,  and  the 
only  defence  that  can  be  offered  to  a  Russian  advance 

G  G  2 


452  Cyprus  in  1879.  [chap. 

will  be  afforded  by  Turkish  neglect,  which  has  left 
the  country  devoid  of  roads. 

Under  these  inevitable  circumstances,  England  will 
probably  accuse  Turkey  of  neglecting  to  fulfil  the 
conditions  of  the  defensive  alliance,  and  the  "  back- 
door "  will  offer  a  convenient  exit  from  the  difficulty ; 
in  which  case,  Turkey  will  be  compelled  to  make 
terms  with  Russia  that  will  probably  terminate  in  a 
Russo-Turkish  alliance  against  England,  who  will 
be.  accused  of  having  treacherously  deserted  her 
after  breaking  a  solemn  engagement — and  obtaining 
Cyprus. 

This  may  be  a  gloomy  prospect,  but  it  is  not  one 
shade  darker  than  the  reality  of  the  position,  unless 
the  Porte  will  sanction  the  assistance  of  a  British 
administration  that  would  entirely  change  the  political 
aspect.  A  reform  of  administration  in  Asia  Minor  to  be 
effective,  should  be  based  upon  the  judicial  system  pur- 
sued by  the  English  in  the  courts  of  Cyprus — where 
the  Turkish  laws  remain  undisturbed,  but  they  are  ad- 
ministered under  the  supervision  of  specially  appointed 
officers.  For  the  most  part  Turkish  laws  are  based 
upon  pure  equity,  jand  leave  little  to  be  desired  beyond 
their  faithful  execution.  The  oppression  and  extor- 
tion prevalent  throughout  the  Turkish  dominions  are 
directly  contrary  to  the  laws,  and  are  the  result  of 
personal  tyranny  on  the  part  of  the  authorities. 

In  the  event  of  a  rupture  wjth  our  ally  that  would 
result  in  a  Russo-Turkish  combination,  Cyprus  would 
exhibit  its  importance  as  a  strategical  position  that 
would  entirely  command  the  coasts  of  Syria  and  the 
approach  to  Egypt.  As  I  have  already  stated,  the 
value  of  the  island  is  conditional  upon  the  permanence 


XIX.] 


Political  Reflections.  453 


of  the  Turkish  alliance ;  should  Turkey  and  England 
remain  friends  and  allies,  Cyprus  is  quite  unnecessary 
as  a  British  military  station ;  but  our  possession  will 
probably  entail  the  absolute  necessity  of  Turkish  good 
faith,  as  the  restored  arsenal  and  harbour  of  Fama- 
gousta  would  complete  a  position  that  would  dominate 
the  whole  of  the  Turkish  shores  upon  the  Mediterra- 
nean, and  in  conjunction  with  Greece,  which  would 
assure  the  refuge  of  Corfu  to  our  fleets,  the  naval 
power  of  Great  Britain  would  be  absolute  to  the 
east  of  Gibraltar. 


CHAPTER   XX. 


CONCLUSION. 


Trooditissa  Monastery,  Cyprus. 

It  is  the  22nd  August,  and  the  manuscript  oi  Cyprus 
as  I  saw  it  in  1879  has  already  been  forwarded  to 
England.  In  another  month  we  shall  be  en- route  for 
the  Euphrates  vid  Alexandretta,  and  through  Bagdad 
to  India  by  the  Persian  Gulf.  I  shall  therefore  be 
placed  at  the  serious  disadvantage  of  an  exclusion 
from  the  proofs,  which  may  require  alterations  and 
corrections ;  this  will  I  trust  excuse  me  should  any 
repetitions  be  apparent  that  would  otherwise  have  been 
detected  before  publication.  There  is  little  to  add 
to  the  description  I  have  given  that  would  be  of 
public  interest,  therefore  the  few  additional  details  are 
consigned  to  a  short  Appendix. 

The  seclusion  of  the  monastery  has  been  an  agree- 
able interval  that  has  formed  a  moral  harbour  from 
the  uncertain  seas  of  busy  life,  and  we  shall  leave  the 
quiet  spot  and  the  godd  old  monks  with  some  regret. 
A  great  change  has  been  effected  since  our  arrival  in 
early  May.  The  heaps  of  filth  have  given  place  to 
extreme  cleanliness ;  the  monks  wash  their  hands  and 
faces ;  even  the  monastery  yard  is  swept.  No  atom 
of  impurity  is  allowed  to  deface  the  walk  from  the 


CH.  XX.] 


Conclusion.  455 


cold  spring  to  the  great  walnut-tree.  My  little  garden 
has  flourished  and  produced  largely ;  the  melons  were 
of  excellent  flavour ;  the  tomatoes  and  other  vegetables 
were  good,  including  a  species  of  esculent  amaranthus 
which  is  a  substitute  for  spinach.  I  employed  a  man 
and  his  son  to  open  the  path  for  2f  miles,  from  the 
monastery  to  the  military  route  to  Troodos,  which 
much  improved  the  communication,  and  somewhat 
relieved  our  solitude  by  increasing  the  visits  of  our 
friends.  If  any  stranger  should  now  arrive  from 
England  at  Trooditissa  he  would  appreciate  the 
calm  and  cool  asylum  contrasting  with  the  heat  of 
the  lower  country ;  but  should  he  arrive  even  one 
short  month  after  our  departure,  I  fear  the  picture 
will  have  changed.  Throngs  of  mules  will  have 
defiled  our  clean  courtyard,  and  will  be  stabled  within 
our  shady  retreat  beneath  the  walnut-tree,  which  will 
remain  unswept.  The  filthy  habits  of  the  people,  now 
restrained  only  by  strong  remonstrance,  will  be  too 
apparent.  The  old  monks,  Ndophitos  and  Woomonos, 
(who  are  dear  old  people  when  clean)  will  cease  to 
wash,  and  the  place  and  people  will  certainly  relapse 
into  the  primaeval  state  of  dirt  and  holiness  in  which 
we  first  discovered  it. 

We  leave  in  friendship  with  all,  and  during  our 
sojourn  at  Trooditissa  of  more  than  three  months,  no 
quarrels,  or  even  trifling  disagreements,  have  occurred 
between  the  servants  or  the  people.  The  temporary 
storm  occasioned  by  the  abrupt  departure  of  Christina 
was  quickly  lulled  by  the  arrival  of  the  middle-aged- 
maid  of  all  work  of  seventy-five,  who  has  performed 
all  her  arduous  duties  with  admirable  patience.  Our 
own  servants  have  been  most  satisfactory  since  their 
first  engagement  upon  our  arrival  in  Cyprus  in  January 


456  CvpRUS  IN  1879. 


[CHAP. 


last ;  Georgi  the  "  prodigal  son,"  has  been  of  much 
service  as  interpreter,  and  is  an  honest  and  willing 
young  man,  but  there  is  a  peculiarity  in  his  physical 
constitution  exhibited  in  the  mutual  want  of  attachment 
between  his  person  and  his  buttons.  These  small  but 
necessary  friends  continually  desert  him ;  and  his  shoes 
appear  to  walk  a  few  inches  faster  than  his  feet,  leaving 
him  in  a  chronic  state  of  down-at-heel.  Collars  will 
not  assimilate  with  his  neck ;  whether  they  are  tied 
with  strings,  or  fastened  with  buttons,  the  result  is  the 
same,  and  Georgi's  exterior  when  all  or  three  parts 
of  his  buttons  have  deserted  him,  exhibits  a  looseness 
which  I  am  glad  to  say  by  no  means  applies  to  iiis 
character.  The  cook  Christo  is  an  excellent  fellow, 
always  willing  to  please,  and  good  in  his  profession ; 
added  to  which,  he  assumes  a  demeanour  of  importance 
which  is  irresistible,  and  makes  all  paths  smooth.  My 
Abyssinian,  Amarn,  is  always  the  same  quiet,  steady 
character,  who  performs  his  daily  work  with  the  calm 
regularity  of  the  stream  that  turns  a, mill-wheel,  and 
can  always  be  depended  on.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  me 
that  our  party  does  not  dissolve  upon  leaving  Cyprus, 
but  the  servants  accompany  us  on  the  Asiatic  shore. 

In  conclusion,  I  must  acknowledge  with  due  thanks 
the  valuable  assistance  that  I  have  received  in 
statistical  information  afforded  by  the  kindness  of  the 
High  Commissioner,  His  Excellency  General  Biddulph, 
R.A,  C.B.,  and  the  various  chief  commissioners  of 
districts,  including  Lieutenant-Colonel  White,  First 
Royal  Scots,  of  Lefkosia  ;  Lieutenant-Colonel  Warren, 
R.A.,  of  Limasol  (now  promoted  to  Chief  of  the 
Staff) ;  Claude  Delaval  Cobham,  Esq.,  M.A.,  of 
Larnaca  ;  Captain  Inglis,  of  Famagousta ;  .and  Captain 
A.  Wauchope,  42nd  Highlanders,  of  Baffb. 


XX.] 


Conclusion.  457 


In  taking  leave  of  Cyprus  I  must  express  my  share 
in  the  general  regret  at  the  departure  of  Sir  Garnet 
and  Lady  Wolseley,  from  whom  we  received  much 
kindness.  His  successor,  General  Biddulph,  R.A.,  is 
well  known  as  a  most  able  and  painstaking  officer, 
who  is  admirably  suited  for  the  responsible  position 
he  now  occupies,  but  all  will  remember  with  due 
appreciation  the  vigorous  administration  of  Sir  Garnet 
Wolseley,  who  was  selected  for  the  command  of 
Cyprus  in  the  difficult  period  of  the  first  British 
occupation. 


THE   END. 


APPENDIX. 


APPENDIX. 


Meteorological  Register  throughout  Journeys  in  Cyprus 
FROM  1ST  February  to  2ist  August,  1879. 


District. 


Messaria 
Carpa.s  . 
Kyrenia 
Baffo  . 
Limasol . 
Trooditissa 

do. 

do. 

do. 


and 


Month, 


February 
March    . 

April  .    . 
•To  May  ii 
1 1  to  31  May 
June  .    . 
July   .    . 
z  to  2x  August 


• 

• 

s 

• 

-< 

• 

• 

S 

00 

m 

0, 

• 

< 

^ 

^ 

1 

1 

i 

i 

• 

> 

0 

• 

c 

■  >4 

a 

s 

:^ 

s 

S 

e< 

deg. 

dcg. 

in. 

46 

57 

68 

37 

o-8o 

49 

60 

68 

45 

1-71 

at  7  A.M. 

57 

68 

83 

47 

O'OO 

64 

78 

84 

56 

o'oo 

56A 

6a 

73 

4a 

0*30 

66 

71  TO 

78 

54 

113 

71 A 

78 

84 

65 

0*13 

67 

74 

80 

62 

044 

4"5x 

Remarks,  &c. 


Max.  83**atMorphu. 

4.340  ft.  above  sea. 
One  shower,  z^  hour, 
do.  do. 

do.         15  min. 
The  mountain  showe^^ 
did  not  extend  to  thc 
low  country. 


It  will  be  remarked  that  August  at  Trooditissa  is  considerably 
lower  in  temperature  than  July. 

The  following  data,  from  ist  to  17th  August,  kindly  supplied  me 
by  Lieut-Colonel  White,  Chief  Commissioner  of  Lefkosia,  will 
exhibit  the  difference  between  that  station,  442  feet  above  the  sea 
level,  and  Trooditissa  Monastery,  4,340  feet. 


462 


Appendix. 


C/3 

O 


< 

H 
in 

O 


o 
o 
>-) 
o 

o 

H 


en 

M 
O 

m 

•< 

u 

M 


»-i       h 


I 


QO 


> 

< 

ft 

M 

B 
h 

as 

•unrH 

.s  1  1  1  M  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  i  1  1  1 

'mnuiuij^ 

4;  r<.  t^  i»  0.  t^  r^  t>.  r^  t»  t>- 1»  r<- 1^  c^  r«  r^ 

-a 

• 

*CDnaipre|i^ 

^«N*»,M-^-^«««^^»..«*,N*.^ 

a 

•pnoD 

fl  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  1  i 

.1 

*a3ioj 

mNC^mm    1    dMMM    1    MM  rO«  « 

•uopoaiiQ 

• 

^^?^^  Issues  I^^s:"^ 

•mnainiipi{ 

VaOOOOOQOOOQOQOOOOOOOOOOOQOQOQOQO 

•uinuiixvpi 

g):^:?^  n?2^  &g^2^^  t?^  g'S^ 

^^►^N«W>-ll-l»^»N«MWl-l«W»^« 

•i»qX  "WV 

CTOO  QOOOQOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOOOOOOOOOClO 
•0 

*i999aioj«g. 

0  ON  0  «  **•  «-•  OsO  OS  »0  M  W  N  0^^0  eo 
.  vo  ionO  vO  vO  ^0  ^'^O  vO  vO  ^0  vO  ^  i')  tn^O 

•3  On^OsONOvOvOsOsOnOsOvOnOsOsO^  On 

• 

X 

< 
OS 

•pnoD 

fl      1      1     1     1      t     1     1      1      1      1      1     ^1     i     1      1 

"4 

•93iOJ 

1  m  1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 

IIOIPUXQ 

1 1  ^'  1  ^j  1 1 1 1  M  1 1 1 1  i 

•nmuzniTif 

tj)  ^  to  ^>o  co'tfOO  0  N  0  co»n»^  M  ^►^ 

■mnniixv)^ 

bi)  e4  ^0  to  »nvO  «0  fO^O  vO  r*NO  tooo  ^  tnvp  to 

tToO  OOOOOOOOOOOOOOQOOOOOQOOOOOQOOOOO 
•T3 

•iaqx  'Wy 

tJD  M  >0  «^  tr»NO  to  mo  0  »>*vO  tOOO   '^  too  fO 
CTOO  OOQOOOOOQOOOQOQOOOQOOOOOOOOOQOOO 

*j9)9inoureg 

W  OsQ  M  ^rOQO  fOOsOO  W  N  M  «  ro «  0 
•  vO  too  0  0  0  too  0  0  0  0  0  0  too  t>> 

cj*...      ■••••.•.•■... 
•M  OsOsOnOnOsOsOsOsO^O^OsOsOsOnOnOvO^ 
MC4Cie4C<IMMe4C4C«e<dCIC<MMM 

•aiTBQ 

w  M  CO  ^  «'>0  t«»00  Ov  0  >-  N  CO  ^  too  r* 

Appendix. 


463 


01 
<4-i 


a 

I 

► 


•      O 


C/3 

o 


0^ 
H 

CO 


S 

o 
o 


(A 


?. 


I  8 
•3^ 


O    '2  '2 

'CO 

a 


"  a 


4> 

a 

o 


I 


■< 
Q 

M 
S 


•urey 


i  I  I  I  I  i  I  I  I  i)'  I  iT  I  I  I  I  I  I 


•ainanaipi 


CT  («•  t^  t^ O  vO  vO  t>.««*t^O  vO^O  «>i  r*  r*  r*  »*• 


■omaiixvpi 


s»oooo\oooo\o^a»osc5o*^o*^*^ 


•pnoQ 


^  I  I  I  I  i  I  I -- 1  I  I  i  I  I  i  i  I 


a 


Ok 


•aaioj 


i««w«e««i^N»*'^««««|    I    I 


'oopaaiiQ 


•    • .  • 


^5:»»»'^JJ&^5:'  I   I   I 


St 

MO 

•gg. 


■ttinunuipi 


tToo  00  00  00  00  00  00  QO  t^  t^  r^oo  00  00  00  QO  00 


'oinuipEBpi 


•»iU,  -wv 


oToo 00000000000600  t>>t^ c>.co 00 00 00 00 00 


■ispmojtBg 


CJ 


SQsN  0^0  't'^OoOOOOO  Q  «*•  «^0  rp«^ 
>0  t^  t^«0  NO  NO  u^  \ri\0  foGC  >0  *-n  vonO  »i 


•       •       • 


•pnojo 


;^00|    I    I    |C4Mi-i|    1001    100 


I 


■dojoj 


*aop3Mi0 


-  I  I  I  M  I  I  I  I  I  "  -  I  I  - - 


"^«3  I   I   I   I  I   I  I   I   I  &:>•  I  I  ^^' 


Ok 


00 


? 

^ 


*«muiTai|^ 


bi^OO  woo  ^OnO  »•  O^ou^r^N  »ONO  »o co 
4>  r<«  c««  fvvo  NO  NO  r<«  t^  r^NO  no  nO  r<«  «*<■  r>«  <<«  t^ 


innoipcvjv 


0^00  00  00  00  do  x^oo  00  00  »^  r^  cooo  00  00  00  00 


•J»qj,  'Uy 


in 


bflmfOi^O  O  ONM  W  i^NO   "VfmM  ONOO  NO  V 

C^oo  00  00  00  00  t»oo  00  00  tNi  t>»  r^oo  00  00  09  00 


'jsiauKUvg 


*  NO  t>«  t»  r«NO  Np  NO  «n  ono  r^oo  r^NO  w^no  i>» 

OhOvO\O^OnOnO\O^OnO^OsOsO^OnO^OsO^ 


*»j«a 


^  u^vO  t«»00  On  Q  •-•  «  fO  ^  ^OvO  »>»00  O^  O 


if 

o  ^ 

-e  I 

0      1-4 

>  o 


at 

U4 


a 


a 
o 

o 

a 

*^ 

o 

•3 

o 

a 

•^* 

•d 

s 

M 

3 

(A 
ti 

u 

•3 

a 

*3  i 

u 

'c3 


464 


Appendix. 


On 
QO 


H 

"—I 

CJ 

0 

1— 1 

&; 

f^ 

H 

^ 

in 

Q 

HH 

Q 

?: 

(d 

< 

ui 

HH 

< 

C/3 

E- 

0 
CJ 

en 


o 
H 


it 


OxN  ON- 


CO 


»o 


e  s 


so  vO  t^  ^ 


CO 


.S  « 

1=3 


fOcO>-i   W 


'S 


ts 

3 


•  •-< 


-m 

• 

pwm  JO  -ox  IBjox 

VO   •-«    ■^  t^  "- 

..        M        M.        ^        vw 
N4     »H 

1 

1 

M 

•sasnoH  Jo  -01,1  i«ox 

voOO   C^  t^  fO 
•-1  r-  0  vO  >© 

^      «k        •«         *k         «> 

M   M   M   C>)    C4 

»o 

CO 

M 
M 

• 

• 

a 
.J 

0 

*-« 

-sopi  JO  'oisj  i^iox 

0\  ^  rOOO  »0 
»OON  0    N  NO 

•k 

0 
to 

0 

N 

•surra  ;C 

On  0^  0   *^  ON 

t-*oo  vo  t^  »o 

moo  OS  N  0 

ONOO   u->0O   ro  ' 
^  «  NO  NO    0 

N 

vo 

f  X  jdpun  sdivpi 

c)  VO  •-•  M  0 
N  00   ON  rOOO 
W  N«   CO  -^00 

0 

m 

CI 

^I  49AO  SdlCJi^ 

ror>.  ro  N  ^ 
M  r<^  C)  ti->oo 

CO 

fO 

»o 

OS 

0 

in 

0 

ON 
CO 

10 

00 

c< 

•sssnoH  JO  -0^ 

vo  00  0  ON  0 

Christian. 

Jo-d^>^'lT;j.>X 

00   N   O^vrjO 
!>.  ON  ""WO   fO 

*H    •-•    ^VO    VT) 

00  00  t^  o>»o 

vo  0   ^  >^  ^'^ 

00  vo  w  r-  Tf 

10  ^  vo  t^  Os 

VV        fl^         •«         Vk 

M     IM     M     ^14 

t^.  N  t>.ON  N 
ONOO  vovo  i-i 
rOiON   0  \0 

•i«            C^            fl^            «k            «k 

«   «   N   CO1-* 

IN. 

M 

•sj-caX 

N.vO  t^>0  NO 
ONt^NO  10  •- 

NO  Th»^oo  0 

M       M        ^       *«>        a^ 

t«N 

s 

IN. 

tz  J3AO  sai^ij^ 

■^  N   »^0O   fO 
0   t>.i-i   Q   ON 
V0\0   M  0  00 

M       a^       0«      M       M 

N   «   N   COh* 

00 

00 

•sjauisip 
-qns  JO  surejsi 

Morphu 

Dagh 

Lefka 

Kythrea 

Nicosia 

*sasnoH^o  '©N 

OOnD  «  tN.NO 

►4   0   f)  "^   *^ 

OOvOnO   •^   N 

««          «            ffk          ^          V^ 

•M     >i4     h^     M     M 

00 

00 
CO 

OCT 

■S'3«II1A  JO  -ON 

1 

Appendix,  465 

The  following  official  estimate  of  revenue  and  expenditure  must 
be  accepted  as  only  approximate.  As  the  taxes  -are  at  present 
collected  by  dimes,  or  tenths,  the  amount  must  depend  upon  the 
agricultural  prosperity  of  the  island,  which  is  liable  to  considerable 
fluctuations,  and  during  the  present  year  of  semi-famine  will  result 
in  a  serious  diminution.  There  wuU  probably  be  a  sensible  decrease 
in  the  Customs  receipts,  as  the  import  of  European  goods  has  been 
checked  by  the  collapse  of  many  European  traders  who  had  arrived 
in  Cyprus  at  the  first  announcement  of  the  British  occupation,  and 
discovered  that  their  goods  were  unsuited  to  the  requirements  of  the 
extremely  poor  and  frugal  population.  The  greater  portion  of  the 
English  traders  have  already  retired  from  the  island;  the  Greek 
merchants  who  have  been  long  established  are  satisfied  with  small 
profits,  and  their  expenses  are  upon  a  proportionate  scale,  which 
renders  British  competition  quite  impossible.  The  Cypriotes  decline 
to  purchase  from  the  English  stores,  as  they  are  ignorant  of  the 
language,  and  the  goods  are  ill-adapted  to  their  wants.  The 
first  rush  of  commercial  activity  due  to  the  political  movement  in 
1878  has  subsided,  and  the  trade  will  be  represented  chiefly  by  the 
agricultural  exports  from  the  island  until  some  more  favourable 
conditions  of  our  occupation  may  induce  a  new  impulse,  and 
capitalists  iriay  venture  upon  investments  in  Cyprus. 

The  mines  of  umber  near  Lamaca  have  been  let,  and  it  is  by 

no  means  improbable   that  an  extension  may  in  a  few  years  be 

apparent   in   enterprises   of  this  description.     Copper  mines  near 

Khrysokhus  are  being  opened,  but  the  preliminary  operations  can 

aflford  no  clue  to  the  value  of  the  result.     The  umber  is  shipped 

exclusively  to  Holland  for  the  manufacture  of  paint,  and  the  produce 

of  Cyprus  is  considered  to  be  the  finest  quality.     Although  asbestos 

is  reported  to  exist  of  a  remarkably  long  fibre  and  soft  texture,  I 

have  never  met  with  it  except  in  the  coarse  form  which  is  common 

in  many  portions  of  the  island,  especially  on  the  Troodos  range, 

where  the  base  of  this  stone  is  a  shining  greenish  substance  of  a 

horny  texture,  which  gradually  terminates  in  bristles  of   asbestos. 

I  have  also  seen  it  in  thin  veins  of  metamorphic  rocks,  glittering 

like  silver,  and  when  scratched  with  a  knife,   it  resolves  into  a 

downy  condition  like  scraped  cotton.     All  these  mineral  resources 

require  a  special  and  minute  investigation. 


H   H 


466  Appendix. 


ESTIMATES  OF  REVENUE  AND  EXPENDITURE  IN 

CYPRUS  FOR  1878—79. 


Memorandum  on  the  Revenite  and  Charges  of  the  Island  of  Cyprus  for 
the  Five  Years  from  1873-4  to  1877-8,  under  Turkish  Adminis- 
tration^ with  an  Estimate  for  the  Year  1878-9,  including  the  Charges 
of  British  Administration  oftlie  Island, 

In  submitting  the  enclosed  statement  of  the  accounts  of  Cyprus  for 
the  past  five  years,  with  tlie  estimate  of  revenue  and  expenditure  for 
the  current  official  year,  1878-79,  I  propose  to  describe  briefly  the 
character  and  operation  of  the  several  taxes  of  the  island  in  the  past, 
and  the  considerations  that  have  guided  me  in  framing  the  estimate 
for  the  present  year. 

Dimes,  or  Tithes  on  Produce  of  the  Land, 

This  is  the  Government  share  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  and  con- 
stitutes by  far  the  largest  item  in  the  .revenue  of  the  island.  In  the 
year  1874  the  tithe  was  raised  to  an  eighth  part,  or  12J  per  cent,  on 
the  produce,  but  that  was  abandoned  in  1876^  and  the  tithe  is  all  that 
has  been  since  levied  with  the  sanction  of  the  Turkish  Government. 

The  unit  of  the  Turkish  revenue  system  is  the  village ;  then  th^ 
nahie,  or  group  of  villages ;  •  then  the  caza  {canton) ;  then  the  sandjak 
(arrondissemmt) ;  and,  lastly,  the  vilayet,  or  province,  under  a 
Governor-General,  Director  of  Finance,  and  Council  of  Administration. 
Throughout  these  several  stages — from  the  village  to  the  nahie,  caza, 
sandjak,  and  chief  place  of  the  vilayet — there  are  excellent  rules  for 
the  check  and  disposition  of  the  revenues,  but  they  are  not  observed. 
Indeed,  in  the  judicial,  as  in  the  revenue  and  financial  administration 
of  the  island,  the  organisation  of  establishments  and  rules  of  procedure 
are  comniendable  in  every  way,  but  the  rules  are  unknown  to,  or  ignored 
by,  the  officials  employed  to  administer  them. 


Appendix.  467 

The  tithes  are  farmed  by  the  Turkish  Government  to  merchants  and 
speculators  in  the  spring  of  each  year,  when  the  ripening  crops  enable 
all  concerned  to  estimate  the  extent  and  quality  of  the  year's  produce. 
The  sale  of  the  tithes  (by  villages,  n^ies,  or  cazas,  as  may  be 
preferred)  commences  in  March  and  ends  on  the  15th  June,  and 
whatever  tithes  then  remain  unsold  the  Government  undertakes  to 
recover  through  its  own  agents. 

When  the  sales  are  efifected  the  tithe-farmer  signs  a  bond  for  the 
amount,  payable  in  six  monthly  instalments,  commencing  from  the 
ist  August,  with  interest  on  instalments  not  paid  at  due  date.     Each 
tithe-farmer  is  required  to  have  a  sufficient  surety,  who  also  signs  the 
bond  and  is  jointly  and  equally  responsible  with  the  principal.     After 
conclusion  of  the  agreement,  the  tithe-farmer  proceeds  at  once  to 
watch  the  fields  in  which  he  is  interested  and  to  estimate  the  yield. 
He  sees  the  grain  cut,  threshed,  heaped,  and  insists  upon  its  remain- 
ing upon  the  threshing-floor  until  his  daim  is  satisfied — the  claim 
always  exceeding  the  stipulated  tenth.     For  wheat,  barley,  and  other 
grains,  arrangements  have  to  be  made  by  the  cultivators  for  transit  to 
the  nearest  port  of  embarkation,  on  .terms  more  or  less  unfavourable 
to  themselves.    Their  cattle  are  taken  away  for  transport  when  most 
required  in  their  own  fields,  and  they  have  to  bear  all  the  expenses  of 
transit,  except  the  expense  of  the  first  mile,  which  is  paid  by  the  tithe- 
farmers.     For  fruit,  vegetables,  and  other  perishable  articles,  the  tithe 
is  commuted  in  a  money  payment,  respecting  which  there  are  usually 
disputes,  determinable  by  the  local  Ka'imakam  or  head  Government 
official  of  each  caza.    The  awards  of  these  officials  are  always  in 
favour  of  the  tithe-farmers,  who  are  members  of  the  Administrative 
Councils,  or  otherwise  persons  of  influence  in  the  cazas  comprised  in 
their  respective  engagements.     Later  in  the  year,  or  about  the  15th 
August,  the  vineyards  are  similarly  visited  by  the  tithe-farmers  or 
their  representatives,  and  estimates  of  the  produce  are  made  by  them 
and  by  the  cultivators.     These  estimates  always  differ,  and  are  the 
subject  of  constant  disputes,   which  are  referred  to  the  Kaimakam, 
whose  award  is  generally  in  favour  of  the  tithe-farmer.     As  the  grape 
cannot  be  removed  until  the  claim  is  settled,  the  cultivator  submits  to 
the  exactions  of  the  tithe-farmers  rather  than  risk  the  deterioration  or 
loss  of  his  stock,  and  is  thus  practically  mulcted  in  proportions  far 
exceeding  a  tenth  of  the  entire  produce.     The  effect  of  these  illegal 
exactions  has  been  to  reduce  the  cultivation  of  the  grape  throughout 
the  island. 

But,  though  keen  in  their  dealings  with  the  peasantry,  the  tithe- 
farmers  are  slow  in  their  own  payments  to  the  Government  Treasury. 

H   H   2 


i- 

L 


468  ArPENDIX, 

These  payments  are  required,  under  their  bonds,  in  six  monthly 
instalments  from  the  ist  August ;  -grace  is  allowed  for  forty  days,  and 
the  instalments  are  required  to  commence  on  the  loth  September. 
They  are  delayed,  however,  on  various  pretexts,  and  reclamations  and 
remissions  of  revenue  are  often  unjustly  obtained  through  collusion 
with  the  local  Kai'makams  and  Malmudirs.  Thus,  the  tithe-farmer 
makes  his  bargain  with  the  Government  when  the  crops  are  ripening, 
recovers  his  claim  directly  they  are  gathered,  indefinitely  postpones 
his  own  obligations  to  the  Government  and  often  evades  them 
altogether.  Although,  under  his  bond,  interest  is  payable  on  overdue 
instalments,  it  is  never  enforced.  An  examination  of  the  accounts 
revealed  the  existence  of  considerable  arrear  claims  extending  over 
several  years,  and  for  the  most  part  irrecoverable  now.  Practically, 
the  tithe-farmer's  obligations  have  never  been  discharged  in  the  year 
to  which  they  belonged.  Of  the  collections  credited  in  the  year  1876- 
77,  nearly  one-half  was  on  account  of  the  claims  of  prior  years. 

These  facts  clearly  show  that  the  operation  of  the  tithe  system  has 
resulted  in  a  loss  of  revenue  to  the  State.  It  has  impoverished  the 
peasant,  involving  him  in  the  toils  of  the  money-lender  as  well  as  of 
the  tithe-farmer.  In  has  checked  the  productiveness  of  the  island, 
the  area  now  under  cultivation  being  less  than  a  third  of  all  the 
culturable  lands  of  Cyprus.  Some  modification  of  the  tax,  or  of  the 
machinery  for  its  collection,  would  therefore  seem  to  be  imperatively 
required. 

There  are  not  wanting  points  of  analogy,  as  of  difference,  between 
Cyprus  and  some  of  the  British  provinces  of  India,  and  a  suggestion 
has  been  made  to  substitute  the  Indian  system  of  a  fixed  money 
payment  for  the  tenth  of  the  produce  in  kind.  Curiously  enough,  the 
converse  proposition  has  lately  found  favour  in  India  in  connection 
with  the  agrarian  riots  in  the  Dekkan,  and  what  is  there  regarded  as 
the  bane  of  the  Indian  system  is  now  proposed  here  as  the  antidote 
of  the  Turkish  system.  Like  the  Cypriote,  but  in  a  greater  degree* 
the  Dekkan  peasant  is  poor,  indebted,  and  indifferent  to  the  im- 
provement of  his  land,  and  both  are  constantly  liable  to  the  eflfects 
of  drought  and  famine.  But  whilst  the  State  requires  from  the  former 
only  a  tenth  part  of  his  actual  crops,  the  Indian  peasant  is  liable  for 
the  full  money  rate  fixed  without  regard  to  the  rainfall  and  the  crops. 
As  between  the  State  and  the  peasant,  the  elastic  tithe  tax  would  seem 
to  be  preferable — its  evil  working  in  C)rprus  being  due  mainly  to  the 
irresponsible  and  unscrupulous  agencies  entrusted  with  the  collection 
of  the  tithes.  In  attempting  any  reform,  therefore,  care  should 
be   taken  at   the  outset  to  avoid  principles  or  methods  that  have' 


Appendix.  469 

contributed  in  India  to  evils  similar  to  those  that  have  to  be  rectified 
here.  The  direction  and  scope  of  the  reform  must  necessarily 
depend  upon  more  complete  information  than  is  at  present  available 
respecting  the  land  tenures  and  local  agricultural  customs  of  this 
island,  the  varieties  of  soil,  the  means  of  irrigation  actual  and 
possible,  and  the  conditions  and  habits  of  the  agricultural  classes 
generally- 

Information  on  these  essential  points  may,  however,  be  obtained 
before  the  termination  of  the  present  engagements  with  the  tithe- 
farmers  in  March  1879.  A  rough  field  survey  would  prepare  the 
ground  for  a  systematic  inquiry  into  rights  and  interests  in  each 
estate  and  village  throughout  the  several  districts  of  the  island. 
The  inquiry,  conducted  by  tlie  respective  commissioners  of  districts 
in  the  next  few  months  of  favourable  weather,  may  be  made  to 
embrace  the  following  points  : — 

1.  The  extent  of  the  several  holdings,  and  whether  held  under 
proprietary,  sub-proprietary,  or  occupancy  rights. 

2.  The  average  produce  of  each  estate  or  holding,  and  its  value, 
say  for  the  last  three  or  four  years. 

3.  The  areas  respectively  (i)  under  cultivation,  (2)  not  under 
cultivation  but  culturable,  (3)  unculturable  and  barren  waste. 

4.  In  the  case  of  culturable  lands  not  under  cultivation,  inquiry 
should  be  made  whether  this  is  the  result  of  the  oppressive  way  of 
collecting  tithes,  or  the  want  of  money  or  cultivators,  or  whether 
the  land  is  required  for  grazing  or  other  purposes. 

5.  The  character  of  the  soil  in  various  parts  of  the  island,  and 
the  respective  producing  capabilities. 

6.  The  arrangements,  existing  and  possible,  for  irrigation  by  wells, 
aqueducts,  and  tanks. 

7.  The  proportion  of  the  people  occupied  in  agriculture,  and 
the  proportion  in  other  pursuits  than  husbandry. 

8.  The  personal  condition  of  the  agricultural  classes,  whether  well 
housed,  well  clad,  with  good  cattle,  ploughs,  and  gear,  or  the  reverse. 

9.  The  standard  for  measuring  land.  The  area  of  each  estate 
or  holding,  after  measurement,  should  be  reduced  to  English 
standard  acres. 

The  result  ot  these  inquiries,  accurately  and  clearly  recorded, 
would  afford  valuable  data  for  determining  the  extent  to  which  the 
present  tithe  arrangement  may  be  modified  for  the  ensuing  financial 
year.  Whatever  modification  may  be  adopted  in  substance,  the 
tax  will  at  least  be  collected  without  injustice  or  oppression,  and 
the  cost  of  collection  will  be   covered  by  the   increased  revenue 


47^  Appendix. 

which  must  result  from  an  improved  administration.  The  proportion 
of  the  produce  heretofore  taken  in  Cyprus,  as  the  share  of  the 
Sovereign  power,  is  considerably  below  that  taken  in  other  Eastern 
countries.  In  India,  this  share  under  the  ancient  Hindoo  Rajahs 
was  one-sixth.  Under  the  Mohammedan  rule,  a  third  of  the  average 
produce  of  average  land  was  held  to  be  the  Government  share. 
Under  British  rule,  from  one-third  to  one-half  of  the  rental  is  the 
standard  of  assessment  at  the  present  day,  representing  a  much 
larger  proportion  than  a  tenth  of  the  produce  of  the  land.  And  in 
Cyprus  (as  has  been  shown  in  the  preceding  remarks),  although  the 
declared  share  of  the  State  was  only  one-tenth,  the  peasantry 
have  contributed  a  very  much  larger  proportion,  the  difference 
forming  the  perquisites  of  the  collectors  of  the  revenue.  Hence 
it  may  fairly  be  assumed  that  the  British  administration  may  take 
a  larger  share  than  one-tenth  of  the  produce,  without  imposing 
any  additional  burden  whatever  on  the  people.  It  may  rather  be 
hoped  that  any  increased  State  demand  upon  the  cultivator  will 
still  leave  him  a  larger  proportion  of  the  fruit  of  his  labours  than 
he  has  heretofore  enjoyed,  with  absolute  freedom  in  disposing  of 
it  to  the  best  advantage. 

A  further  increase  of  the  revenue  from  land  may  be  anticipated 
from  the  extension  of  cultivation.  With  light  assessments,  improved 
communications,  and  occasional  State  aid,  a  large  proportion  of  the 
culturable  fands,  now  lying  neglected,  may  be  gradually  brought 
under  cultivation,  stimulating  the  industry  of  the  people,  and  in- 
creasing the  productiveness  and  wealth  of  the  island. 

For  the  current  year,  however,  the  existing  arrangement  with  the 
tithe-farmers  must  be  accepted,  and  the  revenue  estimated  accord- 
ingly. The  year's  tithes  were  sold  for  82,088  Turkish  liras,  or 
nearly  74,000/.  sterling,  and  the  whole  amount  has  yet  to  be  col- 
lected. Already,  the  tithe-farmers  plead  inability  to  recover  their 
dues  from  the  cultivators.  The  truth  probably  is  that,  whilst  the 
British  administration  has  somewhat  checked  their  habitual  exactions, 
t  has  emboldened  the  peasantry  to  resistance  which  would  never 
have  been  attempted  under  the  Turkish  rule.  Due  justice  will  be 
done  between  the  parties,  but,  in  any  case,  the  Government  claim 
of  82,088  liras  is  covered  by  sufficient  seairity,  and  will  be  realised 
for  the  most  part.  During  the  earlier  months  of  the  current  year, 
before  the  British  occupation,  the  sum  of  1,306,321  piastres  was 
recovered  on  account  of  silk  tithes  and  tithes  of  prior  years. 
Adding  this  sum  to  the  unrealised  claims,  and  leaving  a  margin 
for  default,  the  receipts  for  the  year  may  be  taken  at  8,352,000 


Appendix.  471 

piastres,  or  72,000/.  sterling.  The  average  of  the  previous  five 
years  was  8,584,786  piastres,  and  they  included  three  years  of 
scarcity.  The  account  rendered  by  the  Ottoman  Government  for 
the  past  year,  1877-78,  exhibits  the  dimes  or  tithes  at  12,500,595 
piastres,  but  that  was  the  amount  of  the  year's  demand,  and  the 
actual  realisations  amounted  only  to  5,072,872  piastres.  Looking 
to  the  favourable  conditions  of  the  present  year  as  compared  with 
the  past  year,  the  estimate  of  72,000/.  sterling  may  be  accepted. 

Tithes  071   Vakouf  Lands, 

The  tenth  part  of  the  produce  of  vakouf  lands,  fields,  and 
gardens  is  appropriated  for  the  maintenance  of  mosques,  monas- 
teries, tombs,  and  other  religious  foundations.  The  tithes  on  vakouf 
lands  are  paid  to  the  Mutavelli,  or  local  administrators  of  the 
vakoufs,  who  remit  20  per  cent,  to  the  Minister  of  the  Evkaf  at 
Constantinople,  and  retain  the  balance.  The  Mutavelli  are  not 
required  to  account  to  any  Government  functionary  for  the  revenue 
of  vakouf  lands  beyond  the  annual  subsidy  of  20  per  cent,  to  the 
Evkaf.  It  is  understood,  however,  that  in  many  cases  the  objects 
and  purposes  for  which  these  vakouf  lands  were  assigned  have  long 
since  ceased  to  exist,  and  thus  not  only  are  the  pious  intentions 
of  the  founders  frustrated,  but  a  considerable  public  revenue  i§ 
diverted  into  private  channels.  The  legal  conditions  attached  to 
these  vakouf  lands,  and  to  the  lands  and  other  property  in  Cyprus 
claimed  for  the  Ottoman  Crown  and  State  (under  Article  IV.  of  the 
Convention  between  Great  Britain  and  Turkey)  are  at  present  the 
subject  of  a  special  inquiry,  and  the  result  will  have  an  important 
bearing  on  the  revenue  to  be  hereafter  administered  by  the  British 
Government  For  the  present  year,  the  tithes  on  vakouf  lands  have 
been  farmed  for  1,676  Turkish  liras  in  the  districts  of  Famagousta, 
Kyrenia,  Papho,  and  Limasol.  No  tithes  have  been  sold  in  the 
other  divisions.  As  the  tithes  on  vakouf  lands  do  not  belong  to  the 
general  revenues  of  the  island,  they  are  not  included  in  the  estimate 
now  submitted. 

Verghis, 

This  tax  is  divided  into  three  classes  : — 

1.  Emlak  verghisi,  or  impost  on  houses  or  immovable  property, 
at  4  per  thousand  on  the  purchasing  value. 

2.  Impost  of  4  per  cent,  on  the  rent  of  immovable  property,  or 
houses  not  occupied  by  their  owners.  The  rent  is  assumed  at  10 
per  cent,  of  the  value. 


472  Appendix. 

3*  Verghi  temetu,  or  impost  on  professions  and  trades,  at  3  par 
cent,  on  profits  and  salaries. 

Before  the  beginning  of  each  financial  year,  the  district  authori- 
ties prepare  statements  designating  the  contributions  required  firom 
each  village  and  town,  According  to  the  number  of  houses,  the 
number  and  means  of  the  population.  The .  assessment  is  made 
roughly,  and  the  tax  is  recovered  by  Moukhtars  of  villages,  selected 
by  the  inhabitants  and  confirmed  by  the  district  authorities.  All 
collections  are  forwarded,  as  recovered,  to  the  Treasury  of  the 
sandjak. 

All  sales  and  transfers  of  immovable  property,  with  the  title-deeds 
thereto  appertaining,  have  to  be  registered  in  the  Registration  Office, 
and  the  means  are  thus  partially  afforded  for  assessing  the  owners 
of  property  for  the  4  per  thousand  on  the  value,  and  the  4  per  cent, 
on  the  rental. 

But  the  3  per  cent,  on  professional  profits  and  salaries  is 
arbitrarily  fixed  for  each  village,  or  group  of  villages,  and  the 
Moukhtars  levy  the  personal  contributions  of  each  tax-payer  as  they 
think  fiL 

In  this  process  there  is  considerable  oppression  of  the  poorer  tax- 
payers, and  also  loss  of  revenue  to  the  State.  Both  would  be  obviated, 
or  at  all  events  mitigated,  by  entrusting  tlie  assessment  to  Government 
officers,  and  by  a  more  careful  and  exact  registration  of  property,  and 
of  profits  from  trades  and  professions.  The  revenue  firom  the  licence 
tax  in  towns  must  largely  increase  in  the  future. 

As  a  rule,  the  district  officers  endeavour  to  recover  the  verghis 
before  tax-payers  are  subjected  to  the  exactions  of  the  tithe-farmers 
for  payment  of  the  dimes  and  other  imposts.  In  some  of  the  Turkish 
vilayets,  the  Government  have  gone  so  far  as  to  forbid  the  local 
tribunals  from  condemning  the  tax-payers  to  pay  the  claims  of  third 
parties  until  they  have  assurance  that  the  verghis  have  been  paid. 

The  average  yield  of  the  verghis  tax  in  the  last  five  years  was 
3,521,083  piastres,  or  30,354/1  jper  annum.  The  account  of  the  last 
year  of  the  series  (1877-78)  showed  a  revenue  of  3,193,850  piastres, 
or  27,535/.  The  demand  for  the  current  year  is  3,380,246  piastres, 
of  which  only  518,545  piastres  have  been  recovered  up  to  the  present 
time.  The  slackness  of  the  Turkish  revenue  officials  in  collecting 
this  tax  is  due  partly  to  the  change  of  administration  and  uncertainty 
as  to  future  taxation  of  the  island,  and  partly  to  the  war  tax  and  other 
burdens  imposed  upon  the  people  during  the  past  year.  The  needful 
measures  have  now  been  adopted  for  effecting  recovery,  and  as  the 
tax  affects  property  and  the  well-to-do  classes,  it  is  hoped  that  about 


Appendix.  473 

2,000,000  piastres  will  be  recovered  in  the  next  six  months.  Adding 
this  sum  to  the  recoveries  already  effected,  the  revenue  of  the  entire 
year  is  estimated  at  2,552,000  piastres,  or  22,000/. 

Tax  on  Exemption  from  Military  Service. 

This  superseded  the  capitation  tax  formerly  levied  upon  Christian 
subjects,  and  other  subjects  of  the  Porte  who  were  not  Mohamme- 
dans, for  exemption  from  military  service.  It  is  a  tax  of  27!  piastres 
for  each  male  inhabitant  from  twenty  to  forty  years  of  age,  but 
practically  it  is  levied  upon  males  below  and  above  the  limits  of  age. 
^Returns  of  the  numbers  coming  under  this  impost  are  settled  between 
the  heads  of  villages  and  the  Moukhtars.  The  latter  are  required  to 
recover  the  money  and  pay  it  in  twelve  monthly  instalments  into  the 
chest  of  the  sandjak. 

The  rate  of  27!  piastres  is  equivalent  to  5^.  per  man  per  annum. 
There  is  no  apparent  reason  why  it  should  not  be  paid  at  once  and 
credited  in  the  Government  Treasury  immediately  on  payment 

This  tax  is  unpopular  and  offensive  to  those  whom  it  affects 
throughout  the  Turkish  dominions.  The  Greek,  Armenian,  Bul- 
garian subjects  of  the  Porte  have  protested  against  it  from  time  to 
time,  but  without  effect.  Were  these  declared  eligible  for  military 
service  on  the  same  terms  as  Mohammedan  subjects,  but  with  the 
option  of  providing  substitutes,  the  impost  would  be  relieved  of  its 
invidious  character,  and  perhaps  yield  a  larger  revenue  to  the  State 
than  heretofore.  This,  however,  equally  with  the  exoneration  tax, 
would  be  inappropriate  in  Cyprus  under  a  British  administration, 
which  does  not  require  any  considerable  proportion  of  the  population 
for  military  service.  It  is  matter  for  consideration,  therefore,  whether 
this  light  tax  may  be  continued  in  some  other  form. 

The  average  yield  of  this  tax  during  the  past  five  years  was 
eqivalent  to  12,270/.  a  year.  It  increased  last  year,  on  account  of  the 
war,  to  15,110/.  But  in  the  current  year  the  recoveries  have  been 
slack,  for  the  reasons  stated  above  in  regard  to  the  verghis,  and  the 
estimate  is  therefore  for  1,044,000  piastres,  or  9,000/. 

Tax  on  Sheep. 

There  is  a  regular  enumeration  of  the  sheep  and  goats  throughout 
every  village  in  the  island  during  the  month  of  March,  and  the  tax  is 
evied  at  the  rate  of  2  J  piastres,  or  about  6^.  per  head.  The  tax  is 
collected  by  the  Local  Government  officials,  and  with  proper  arrange- 
ments should  all  be  recovered  in  the  month  of  April,  but  there  are 
considerable  arrear  claims,  extending  back  to  several  years. 


474  Appendix. 

The  average  revenue  derived  from  this  tax  in  the  last  five  years  was 
9,854/.  per  annum.  The  recoveries  already  made  in  the  current  year 
amount  to  1,187,364  piastres,  or  10,235/.  The  estimate  for  the  entire 
year  is  taken  at  1,276,000  piastres,  or  11,000/.,  and  the  realisation  of 
this  sum  may  be  expected. 

Miscellaneous  Revenue, 

Under  this  head  are  comprised  various  small  taxes,  such  as  the  tax 
on  sales  and  transfers  of  landed  property,' on  contracts,  on  measure- 
ments, on  sale  of  cattle,  on  swine,  stamps,  judicial  fees  and  fines,  &c. 
The  average  yield  of  these  taxes  in  the  last  five  years  was  767,005 
piastres,  with  an  increasing  tendency  in  the  later  years.  The  amount 
recovered  in  the  first  six  months  of  the  current  year  was  743,775 
piastres.  The  estimate  for  the  entire  year  may  therefore  be  safely 
taken  at  1,102,000  piastres,  or  9,500/. 

Customs, 

We  now  come  to  the  indirect  taxes.     I  hope  on  a  future  occasion  to 

describe,  more  fully  than  time  will  allow  at  present,  the  effect  of  the 

existing  customs  tariff  in  the  past,  and  the  modifications  that  may  be 

made  under  British  administration  in  this  important  branch  of  the 

public  revenue,  and  in  the  excise  on   tobacco  and  spirits.     It  is 

sufficient  to  say  at  present  that  the  customs  revenue  is  derived  from 

a  duty  of  8  per  cent,  upon  imports  and  i  per  cent,  upon  exports,  and 

that  the  receipts  of  the  last  five  years  give  an  average  of  981,405 

piastres,  or  8,460/.    The  increased  population  and  trade  consequent 

upon  the  British  occupation  of  the  island  have  already  had  a  sensible 

effect  upon  the  revenue.     The  collections  in  the  first  four  months  of 

the  current  official  year  under  Turkish  rule  amounted  to  268,718 

piastres,  or  2,316/.     In  the  next  two  months  of  British  administration 

they  amounted  to  305,386  piastres,  or  2,632/.,  being  an  increase  of 

over  127  per  cent,  and  that  without  any  change  in  the  tariff  or  the 

customs    regulations.     A   continuance   of  this  rate  may  safely  be 

reckoned  upon  for  the  next  six  months,  and  the  revenue  of  the  entire 

year  is  therefore  estimated  at  1,554,400  piastres,  or  13,400/.     This 

estimate  takes  account  of  the  probable  early  abolition  of  all  export 

duties. 

Excise  071  Tobacco  and  Spirits, 

The  receipts  of  the  last  five  years  give  an  average  annual  revenue 
of  6,475/.  ^0^^  tobacco  and  4,546/.  for  spirits.  The  receipts  for  the 
first  six  months  of  the  current  year  amount  to  4,400/.  for  tobacco 
and  3,930/.  for  spirits.     The  estimate  for  the  entire  year  is  8,650/  for 


Appendix.  475 

tobacco  and  8,200/.  for  spirits,  and  it  is  expected  that  the  actual 
realisations  will  fully  cover  the  estimate. 

Revenue  from  Salt, 

A  considerable  revenue  was  derived  from  the  Government  monopoly 
of  the  salt  lakes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Larnaca  and  Limasol.  The 
salt  was  sold  for  local  consumption  and  for  exportation  to  the  coast  of 
Syria,  but  an  injudicious  increase  to  the  selling  price,  with  short 
weights  and  increased  cost  of  shipment,  diverted  the  supply  of  the 
Syrian  demand  from  Cypnis  to  the  salt  lakes  of  Tunis,  and  gradually 
reduced  the  revenue  from  this  source.  Owing  to  the  excessive  rains 
of  last  year,  and  the  influx  of  more  fresh  water  into  the  lakes  than 
could  be  evaporated  by  the  sun's  rays  during  the  summer,  the  lakes 
are  at  present  unproductive.  But  in  the  earlier  months  of  the  current 
year,  under  Turkish  administration,  the  sum  of  1,756,840  piastres  was 
recovered  and  credited  in  the  Treasury  on  account  of  previous  salt 
dues,  and  that  amount  is  accordingly  entered  on  the  estimate  with  its 
English  equivalent  of  15, 145/.  No  other  receipts  are  expected  in  the 
current  year,  and  the  revenue  from  salt  has  practically  ceased.  A 
considerable  outlay  will  be  required  to  repair  and  secure  the  salt  lakes 
against  the  irruption  of  the  drainage  of  the  surrounding  country. 

The  past  revenue  from  salt  should  be  excluded  from  the  com- 
putation of  the  payment  to  be  made  to  the  Porte  from  the  surplus 
revenues  of  Cyprus,  under  Article  III  of  the  Convention  of  4th  June, 
1878. 

To  sum  up.  Having  regard  to  the  revenue  arrangements  concluded 
before  arrival  of  the  British  in  Cyprus,  to  the  realisations  in  the  first 
four  months  of  the  current  year  under  Turkish  administration,  and  to 
the  altered  conditions  under  which  the  finance  of  the  remainder  of 
the  year  has  to  be  administered,  I  am  of  opinion  that  the  revenue 
may  be  safely  estimated  at  170,000/.,  as  below: — 


Tithes  on  land         .... 
Tax  on  property,  professions,  and  trades 
Tax  on  sheep  .... 

Tax  for  exemption  from  military  service 
Customs  duties        .... 
Excise  on  tobacco  and  spirits   . 
Salt  monopoly         .        .        .         . 
Miscellaneous  .... 


£ 

*J2,O0O 

22,000 

11,000 

9,000 

I3»400 
16,850 

«5.H5 

10,605 

170,000 


4/6  Appendix. 

In  future  years  even  though  the  revenue  from  the  salt  monopoly 
be  entirely  lost,  we  may  confidently  hope  for  such  an  expansion  of 
the  revenue  from  land,^  from  houses,  from  customs  and  excise  duties, 
as  will  ensure  a  total  income  of  more  than  200,000/.  a  year. 

Expenditure  of  Cyprus, 

The  estimate  of  expenditure  is  based  upon  the  actual  cost  of  the 
Turkish  and  native  establishments  now  maintained,  and  the  cost  of 
the  new  agencies  created  by  the  change  of  administration.  The 
account  of  expenditure  rendered  by  the  Ottoman  Government  for  the 
past  five  years  gives  an  annual  average  of  about  24,000/.  a  year. 
Deducting  from  this  rate  the  pay  of  officials  and  subordinate  estab- 
lishments no  longer  retained,  also  pensions  and  charitable  allowances, 
and  the  cost  for  six  months  of  the  old  Zaphtieh  or  police  force  (the 
corresponding  charge  for  the  reformed  police  force  being  added 
to  the  estimated  cost  of  British  establishments),  the  balance  of 
1,972,000  piastres,  or  17,000/.,  may  be  accepted  as  a  fair  estimate  of 
the  charges  for  native  establishments  in  the  island  during  the  cunent 
official  year.  The  charges  for  British  establishments  are  estimated  at 
35,000/,  and  they  include  expenses,  incidental  to  the  occupation  of  a 
new  country,  that  are  not  likely  to  recur.  It  will  be  possible,  in  the 
future,  to  reduce  the  scale  of  charges  for  British  and  native  establish- 
ments, as  further  experience  is  gained,  and  the  entire  machinery  of 
the  executive  administration  is  brought  under  effective  control. 

The  estimated  expenditure  for  Native  and  British  establishments 
may  be  broadly  divided  under  the  following  heads  : — 

Central  Administration —  £ 

Including  pay  of  ihe  Turkish  Governor  for  part 
of  the  year,  and  of  the  British  High  Com- 
missioner, Financial  and  Judicial  Commis- 
sioners, and  High  Court  for  remainder  of 

the  year 12,400 

District  Administration — 

Including  British  Commissioners  of  District?, 

Native  and  British  Establishments    .         .         13,500 

Military  Police 16,500 

Customs  and  Excise  Establishments .         .         .  5,000 

Prisons 3,000 

Miscellaneous 1,600 

52,000 

■^  The  island  of  Cyprus  is  140  miles  long  from  east  to  west,  with  an  avera^ 
breadth  of  30  miles.  This  gives  an  area  of  4,200  square  miles,  or  2,68S,co3 
acres.  Assuming  even  1,500,000  acres  to  be  culturable,  with  an  average  rental  of 
2J.  an  acre,  we  should  have  a  revenue  from  this  source  alone  of  150,000/.  a  year. 


Appendix.  477 

The  expenditure  ot  the  current  year  being  estimated  at  52,000/., 
and  the  revenue  at  170,000/.,  the  resulting  surplus  will  be  118,000/. 
An  examination  of  the  accounts  of  Cyprus,  for  the  five  years  pre- 
ceding the  British  occupation,  enables  me  to  affirm  that  the  average 
surplus  of  revenue  over  expenditure  in  that  period  was  less  than 
100,000/.  per  annum.  The  future  yearly  contribution  to  the 
Ottoman  Government  from  the  surplus  revenues  of  Cyprus,  under  the 
Convention  of  the  4th  June,  1878,  will  not,  therefore,  exceed,  and 
may  fall  short  of,  the  sum  of  100,000/.  Nearly  one  half  of  this  claim 
for  the  current  year  was  taken  by  the  Turks  from  surplus  revenue 
before  our  arrival.  We  shall  easily  make  up  the  balance  from  the 
revenue  now  in  course  of  collection.  And,  under  ordinary  con- 
ditions, the  current  revenue  will  not  only  cover  the  annual  payment 
to  the  Porte  and  the  expenses  of  administration,  but  also  provide  a 
fair  outlay  for  roads  and  sanitary  improvements. 

(Signed)  GEO.  W.  KELLNER, 

'    Financial  Commissioner  of  Cyprus, 
Nicosia,  Cyprus,  Septemlur  25,  1878. 


4/8 


Appendix. 


ESTIMATE  OF  REVENUE  AND  EXPENDITURE  FOR  THE  YEAR 

1878-79. 


No.  : 


5 
6 


8 


Revenue. 


Dimes  or  tithes  on  pro- 
duce of  land .     .     .     . 


I  Amount. 


So. 


Verghis,  or  tax  upon 
property,  professions, 
and  trades     .     .     .     . 

Tax  for  exemption  from 
Military  Service .     .     . 


Sheep  tax 


72,000 


Customs  Duties    .     .     . 

Excise  on  Tobacco  and 
Spirits 


22,000 


9,000 


11,000 


Salt  monopoly.    .     •     . 


Miscellaneous,  including 
■  tax  on  sale  and  transfer 
of  landed  property,  on 
measurements,  on  con- 
tracts, judicial  fees  and 
fines,  &Ck       .... 


13,400 
16,850 

15.  H5 


Grand  total  of  Esti- 
mated Revenue 


10,605 


170,000 


5 
6 


8 


Expenditure. 


Amount. 


Pay  of  the  Turkish  Go 
vemorof  Cyprus  for  part 
of  the  year,  and  of  the 
British  High  Commis- 
sioner for  remainder  of 
the  year;  also  Secret- 
arial Establishments  for 
the  entire  year. 

Finance    and    Accounts 
Establishments  .     .     . 


Law  and  Justice,  includ- 
ing Insular  High  Court 

Administrative  Estab- 
lishments of  the  six 
districts  of  Cyprus,  in- 
cluding cost  of  collec- 
tion of  district  revenues, 
establishments  of  dis- 
trict Judicial  Courts, 
&c 

Cost  of  Prisons   .     .     . 

Cost  of  Military  Police 
Force  a 

Customs  and  Excise  Es- 
tablishments .... 

Miscellaneous,  including 
Educational  Establish- 
ments ...... 


Total  of  Estimated 
Expenditure  .     . 

Surplus    .     .     .     . 

Grand  total  .     .     . 


9,000 
1,400 


2,000 


13.500 
3,000 

16,500 

5,000 

1,600 


Appendix. 


479 


DETAIL  ESTIMATE  OF  EXPENDITURE  FOR  BRITISH  AND 
NATIVE  ESTABLISHMENTS  IN  CYPRUS  FOR  1878-79. 

British  Establishmenis. 


Cost  of  the  Nicosia  Division 
Cost  of  other  five  divisions  of  Cyprus,  viz.,  Lam 
aca,  Famagousta,  Limasol,  Papho,  and  Kyrenia 
Financial  Commissioner 
Judicial  ditto 

Judicial  Clei^k,  and  contingencies 
Interpreter  of  High  Court     . 
Director  of  Customs 
Customs  and  Excise  Establishments 
High    Commissioner    and    office    establishments, 

travelling  expenses,  including  furniture,  400^. 
Travelling  allowances  for  High  Commissioner 
Re-organised  Police  Force  for  the  Island  of  Cyprus, 

including  pay,  rations,  and  clothing  . 

Temporary  translators  to  be  hereafter  absorbed  in 
Civil  Establishments  and  contingencies  in 
connection  therewith 

Miscellaneous 


£ 

J. 

d. 

1,844 

12 

0 

7,000 

0 

0 

666 

0 

0 

600 

0 

0 

200 

0 

0 

240 

0 

0 

510 

0 

0 

5,000 

0 

a 

S»7oo 

0 

0 

300 

0 

0 

1 1,000 

0 

0 

i,340 

0 

0 

600 

0 

0 

35.000 

0 

0 

Native  Establishments, 


Add, 
Expenses  of  Turkish  Establishment 

Deduct, 
Pay  of   Mutessarii   for  six  months, 
60,000  piastres ;  Zaphtiehs  for  six 
months,  500,000  piastres  ;  Pension- 
ers and  cortLSpondence  &c.     . 


Piastres. 
2,609,549 


637.549 


1,972, coo     17,000    o    o 

Total  cost  of  British  and  Native  Civil  Establishments 
in  Cyprus 52,000    o    o 


48o 


Appendix. 


ESTIMATES   OF   REVENUE  AND   EXPENDITURE   IN 

CYPRUS  FOR   1879-80. 


ESTIMATE  OF  REVENUE,  1879  80. 


Nature  of  Revenne, 


Estimate,  1879-80. 


Piastres.  JT 

Tithes '        8,640,000 

Verghis ^         3,400,  ocx3 

Military  exemption     .....  1,080,000 

Sheep  tax 1,220,000 

Miscellaneous 2,000^000 

Customs i         2,800,000 

Excise 2,128,000 

Total 21,268,000=  177,233 


ESTIMATE  OF  EXPENDITURE,  1879-80. 


Designation. 


Annual  Cost. 


Establishments  of  the  Central 
Administration. 

The  High   Commissioner,  Executive  and  Legis 
lative  Councils       ...*.. 
The  Department  of  Finance  and  Accounts 
The  Department  of  Law  and  Justice  . 

District  Establishments. 

The  District  of  Nicosia 
Larnaca 
Famagousta 
Limasol 
Papho 
Kyrenia 

Customs  and  Excise 
Police 
Prisons 

Miscellaneous   . 
Expenses  of  collection  of  taxes  hitherto  sold  to 
tax-farmers 

Total  of  Establishments  . 

Payment  under  agreement  with  the  Porte  (about) 
Interest  on  money  borrowed  for  Public  Works, 

shown  in  annexed  Schedule,  say     . 
Expenses  of  the  Survey  .  .         .         .         . 


Total  Expenditure  . 


£     f.     d. 


11,106  17  o 
2,127  o  o 
4,985  12    o 


4,453  8  o 

4,585  3  o 

3,035  8  o 

3.306  4  o 

2,959  o  o 

2, 131  o  o 

4,636  18  o 

23,241  14  o 

2,583  17  o 

I,(XX>  o  o 

5,000  o  o 


75,152  I  c 

96,000  o  o 

1,200  o  o 

1,990  o  o 

174,342  I  o 


Appendix. 


481 


SCHEDULES. 

ROUGH  DETAIL  OF  THE  ROADS  TO  BE  CONSTRUCTED  IK  THE 

FINANCIAL  YEAR  1879-80. 

From  Nicosia  to  cut  through  the  fortifications  at  the  Papho  Gate, 
making  a  raised  causeway  ever  ditch  and  a  road  connecting  it 
with  the  Government  Office  at  the  High  Commissioner's  resi- 
dence, and  with  the  main  road  from  Nicosia  to  Lamaca,  about 

2}  mUes 800 

From  Nicosia  to  Kyrenia,  about  16  miles    .        .        .        *        «  i,ioo* 

From  Vassilia  to  Hai  Grosch  (Kyrenia  district),  about  22  miles    .  1,600* 

From  Lamaca  to  Limasol,  about  40  miles 6,000* 

From  Limasol  to  Papho,  about  39  miles 5,000^* 

Chrysokou  to  Levka,  about  32  miles SiOOof 

Nicosia  to  Famagousta,  about  35  miles 4,ooot 

Famagousta  to  Trichomo,  about  15  miles    .        •        .        •        .  1,000^1 

To  improve  the  tracks  between  Trichomo  and  Carpas,  35  miles    .  2,700:^ 

Rebuild  culverts  on  Lamaca-Famagousta  road     .        .        •        •  200  X 

Improving  country  roads  in  Lamaca  district         •        •        •        .  900^ 
Gap  in  Mountain  road  from  Larnaca  to  Messaria,  to  make  it 

practicable  for  carts         . loo^t 

Total 28,400 

*  Not  finished  for  carts.  t  ^^t  commenced. 

X  Most  of  these  have  not  been  commenced,  August  1879. 


ROUGH  DETAIL  OF  NEW  BUILDINGS  TO  BE  CONSTRUCTED  IN 

THE  FINANCIAL  YEAR  1879  80. 


Estimated  cost. 

Rebuild  the  Konak  of  Nicosia 

„          Konak  and  prison  at  Papho. 

„          Mudirate  at  Chiysokou 

„          Custom-house,    Police    barracks, 

and  Konak  at  Limasol       .        .        .        . 

The  Mudirate  of  Kilani  to  be  rebuilt  at  Platraes 

Repairs  to  various  buildings  ,        .        •        . 

£ 
3,000 

600 

70 

1,500 
500 

330 

Total       .        .        .        .        . 

6,000 

I  I 


1 


482  Appendix. 


ESTIMATE  OF  REVENUE  AND  EXPENDITURE  FOR  THE 
FINANCIAL  YEAR  ENDING  31ST  MARCH,  1880,  FOR  THE 
DISTRICT  OF  BAFFO. 

Kindly  supplied  by  the  Chief  Commissioner y  Captain  A.  G.  Wauchope, 

i^ind  Highlanders, 

Revenue. 

No.  I— Tithes  of  Kuklia /i,i<» 

„          Baffo 2,800 

„          Khrysokus 3>4<^ 

»f     2 —     ,,          Silk  production 760 

,,          Caroub  production 333 

„     3— Sheep  tax ;tl»76o 

Swine  tax 250  2,010 

„     4 — Weighing  and  Measuring  tax 1 00 

„     5 — Court  Fees •  .        .  226 

Registration  of  Property 120 

Inland  Revenue  Stamps 80 

M    6 — Customs  and  Excise 1,000 

M     r—Verghi 3,747 

Askeria  (freedom  from  military  service)    .        .         .  708 

,,    8 — Miscellaneous 100 

;ffi6,484 

Expenditure. 

No.  I — British  Establishment,  including  Interpreters  .        .  ;f  1,330 

„          Narive           do.                             do.             .        .  540 
M    2 — Houses  for  Commissioner  and  Assistant  do.      .  £fy> 

Stationery 47 

Travelling  Expenses  of  all  officers  .        .        .    140  277 

„     3 — Petty  repairs  ^100,  Public  works  ;f  1 20    .        .        .  220 

,,    4 — Military  Police 3»200 

Prison  ji'114,  Daavi  Court  ;f  171      ....  285 

„     5 — Customs  and  Excise 280 

„    6— Tithing  Expenses 880 

„     7--Expenscs  of  Sheep  tax  ^57,  Pig  tax  ;f  15,  Weighing 

and  Measuring  £^ 120 

„    8 — Collecting  Locust  Eggs 120 


7»252 
Balance  of  surplus  Revenue        .        .  9,232 

;fi6,484 


Appendix.  483 


SILK  CULTIVATION  OF  BAFFO. 

"This  year  the  peasants  brought  to  the  market  34,000  okes 
of  Silk  (93,500  lbs.)  cocoons,  which  realised  to  them  about  6,800/. 
These  cocoons  were  bought  by  three  merchants  excepting  about 
2,500  okes  of  silk  wound  by  the  people  here.".  ..."  You  are  aware 
that  the  cocoon  before  being  in  a  fit  state  to  export  must  be  dried, 
and  during  the  process  a  great  shrinkage  takes  place,  which  varies 
considerably  according  to  the  original  quality  of  the  cocoon.  This 
year  the  cocoon  was  excellent  and  the  shrinkage  small;  3 J  wet 
cocoons  equalling  i  dry,  while  last  year  5  wet  equalled  i  dry. 

"  It  is  upon  the  dried  cocoon  that  the  tithe  is  fixed.  When  fthe 
cocoon  is  good  and  the  price  likewise,  there  is  very  little  winding 
done  here." 

"  It  is  computed  that  the  Caroub  trees  in  the  Baffo  district  number 
about  40,000.  Of  OUve  trees  I  cannot  give  you  anything  like  a  guess ; 
I  should  only  be  misleading  you." 

(Signed),        "A.  G.  WAUCHOPE." 

It  will  be  remarked  that  no  outlay  is  contemplated  for  road-making 
or  repairs  of  bridges,  nor  for  any  of  the  necessary  public  works,  as 
the  general  revenue  of  the  island  cannot  afford  the  local  expenditure. 
This  otherwise  prosperous  little  province  would  be  self-sustaining,  as 
sufficient  income  would  be  realised  for  the  annual  outlay  required  for 
road-making  and  other  improvements.  There  cannot  be  a  truer  ex- 
ample of  the  error  in  our  Convention  with  the  Porte  by  which  we  have 
agreed  to  the  surplus  revenue  exhibited  by  the  Turkish  system  of 
accounts  in  an  average  of  five  years.  The  Baffo  estimates  show  a  sur- 
plus of  9232/.  upon  the  financial  year,  but  there  is  the  forced  neglect 
of  all  necessary  improvements  owing  to  the  terms  of  our  occupation, 
which  rob  the  country  of  about  100,000/.  annually.  According  to 
the  figures  of  the  Baffo  forecast  of  revenue  and  expenditure,  Cyprus 
can  afford  to  pay  the  amount  of  rental  to  the  Porte,  but  this  is  to  the 
detriment  of  all  public  works,  which  will  render  material  progress 
impossible,  at  the.  same  time  that  the  incubus  of  Turkish  taxation 
will  be  permanent 


JUDICIAL  ADMINISTRATION, 

By  an  Order  in  Council  on  14  September,  1878,  powers  were  given 
for  the  administration  of  Cyprus  by  a  High  Commissioner  appointed 
by  Her  Majesty,  together  with  a  Legislative  Council  constituted  ac- 
cording to  Clause  VI. : — 

112 


484  Appendix. 

'*  The  Legislative  Council  for  the  said  island  shall  consist  of  the 
High  Commissioner  for  the  time  being,  and  of  such  other  public 
officers  and  persons  within  the  same,  not  being  less  than  four  or 
more  than  eight  in  number,  as  shall  be  named  or  designated  for  that 
purpose  by  her  Majesty.** 

In  Clause  XXI.  : — 

"  The  High  Commissioner  may  constitute  and  appoint  all  such 
Judges,  Justices  of  the  Peace,  and  other  necessary  officers  in  the  said 
island  as  may  lawfully  be  appointed  by  her  Majesty,  all  of  whom  shall 
hold  their  offices  during  her  Majesty's  pleasure." 

It  was  agreed  with  the  Porte : — 

''  I.  That  a  Mussulman  religious  tribunal  (MSik^mei  Sh^ri)  shall 
continue  to  exist  in  the  island,  which  will  take  exclusive  cognizance 
of  religious  matters,  and  of  no  others,  concerning  the  Mussulman 
population  of  the  island. 

'*  II.  That  a  Mussulman  resident  in  the  island  shall  be  named  by 
the  Board  of  Pious  Foundations  in  Turkey  (Evkaf )  to  superintend,  in 
conjunction  with  a  delegate  to  be  appointed  by  the  British  authorities, 
the  administration  of  the  property,  funds,  and  lands  belonging  to 
mosques,  cemeteries,  Mussulman  schools,  and  other  religious  estab- 
lishments existing  in  Cyprus." 

The  Turkish  law  courts  were  preserved  in  their  original  construc- 
tion under  the  supervision  of  the  Commissioners  of  the  six  districts : 
— Lefkosia,  Lamaca,  Famagousta,  Bafifo,  Limasol,  Kyrenia.  These 
courts  are  the  Idari  and  Daavi,  the  Temiz  or  supreme  court  sitting  in 
Lefkosia.  The  Idari  and  Daavi  courts  exist  independently  in  each 
district.  The  Cadi  is  Judge  in  the  Idari,  which  is  composed  of  three 
Mussulmans  and  two  Christians  elected  by  the  population,  and  this 
court  is  specially  presided  over  by  the  British  Commissioner,  and  all 
cases  in  detail  are  translated  and  entered  in  the  register.  The  Daavi 
Medjlis  or  court  consists  of  five  members — the  Cadi,  two  Mussul- 
mans, and  two  Christians. 

An  appeal  from  the  decisions  of  these  courts  can  be  made  to  the 
High  Court  of  Temiz  at  Lefkosia,  the  decision  of  which  is  final,  only 
subject  to  the  influence  of  Clauses  XXII.  and  XXIII.  in  powers 
granted  to  the  High  Commissioner  by  Order  in  Council  of  14 
September,  1878 : — 

''  XXII.  The  High^Commissioner  may,  as  he  shall  see  occasion,  in 
her  Majesty's  name  and  on  her  behalf,  grant  toany  offender  convicted 
of  any  crime,  in  any  court,  or  before  any  Judge,  Justice,  or  Magistrate 
within  the  said  island,  a  free  and  unconditional  pardon,  or  a  pardon 


Appendix.  485 

subject  to  such  conditions  as  may  at  any  time  be  awfully  thereunto 
annexed,  or  any  respite  of  the  execution  of  the  sentence  of  any 
such  offender  for  such  period  as  to  him  may  seem  fit." 

''  XXIII.  The  High  Commissioner  may,  as  he  shall  see  occasion,  in 
her  Majesty's  name  and  on  her  behalf,  remit  any  fines,  penalties,  or 
forfeitures  which  may  accrue  or  become  payable  to  her,  provided 
the  same  do  not  exceed  the  sum  of  fifty  pounds  sterling  in  any  one 
case,  and  may  suspend  the  payment  of  any  such  fine,  penalty,  or 
forfeiture  exceeding  the  sum  of  fifty  pounds  until  her  Majesty's 
pleasure  thereon  shall  be  made  known  and  signified  to  him." 


y 


MIGRATORY  BIRDS. 

The  birds  of  passage  that  visit  Cyprus  (excepting  swallows), 
exhibit  a  peculiarity  in  their  insignificant  numbers  compared  with 
their  migrations  upon  the  mainlands  of  Asia,  Southern  Europe,  and 
Africa,  The  bustards  that  are  so  common  in  Turkey  and  Asia 
Minor  are  seldom  seen.  The  grey  crane  firequently  passes  over 
Cyprus  without  resting  upon  its  long  flight,  and  in  the  month  of 
March  its  loud  cry  may  be  heard  so  far  in  the  blue  sky  that  it  is 
difficult  to  distinguish  the  flocks  of  these  large  birds  at  the  stupen- 
dous height  of  their  airy  road  towards  the  north.  Even  should  the 
cranes  condescend  to  rest  for  a  short  interval  during  an  imfiivourable 
wind,  they  leave  on  the  first  opportunity.  I  have  firequently  heard 
them  high  in  air  travelling  throughout  the  night — thus  during  night 
and  day  they  have  been  sailing  northwards  to  make  the  most  of  fair 
wind  and  weather. 

The  sand-grouse  is  to  be  seen  occasionally  on  the  plains  of  Mes- 
saria,  but  never  in  the  quantities  that  are  met  with  in  other  neighboiir- 
ing  countries.  Woodcocks  are  scarce,  and  those  which  are  shot 
must  have  halted  in  the  island  during  their  passage  en  route  for  other 
shores.  Snipe  are  very  numerous  in  the  marshes  of  Limasol  salt 
lakes,  Morphu,  Famagousta,  Kuklia,  and  Larnaca.  Quails  are  never 
plentiful,  and  are  inferior  in  condition  to  those  of  Egypt  and  Southern 
Europe.  Wild  ducks  are  to  be  seen  on  the  lake  near  Famagousta 
and  at  Limasol.  The  wood-pigeons,  and  doves,  together  with  fly- 
catchers, arrive  in  April,  but  never  in  large  numbers. 


486 


Appendix. 


RETURN  OF   VILLAGES,   POPULATION,  &c.,   OF   FAMAGOUSTA 

DISTRICT. 


> 

1 

6 

* 

a 

PorULATlON. 

1 

■ 

1 

• 

Naleieh  of  Famajg^ousta 
„           Carpos  .     . 
,,           Messaria     . 

9* 
36 
68 

20 
46 

66 

6 

13 

29 

685 

3,470 
4,861 

3,978 
7,168 

12,434 

4,663 
10,638 

17,29s 

1 

"3 

132 

48 

9,016 

23,580 

32,596 

*  Includes  Famagousta  town. 


The  taxes  for  the  year  1878  amounted  to 

(This  being  paid  in  Coimd  at  a  very 

variable  rate,  it  is  scarcely  correct 

to  reduce  the  amounts  to  sterling.) 

The  tithes  of  this  district  were  fanned  * 

out  in  1878  for  ...         

Revenue  therefore  was 


Piastres 
1,370,221 


11,418  10    4 


The  taxes  for  the  year  1879  amount  to 
This  does  not  include  indirect  taxes  such  as 
Customs,  say... 


25,000     o  0 

;^36,4i8  10  4 

£      J.  d- 

10,379     9  o 

1,000     O  0 

^11,379     9  0 


It  is  impossible  to  calculate  the  tithes  yet  for  this  year  (1879). 
From  Famagousta  the  chief  exports  are  com,  from   Messaria, 
donkeys,  fruit,  and  pottery,  the  two  latter  chiefly  from  Varoshia. 


Appendix.  487 


Cyprus:  Trooditissa  Monastery, 
4400  feet  above  the  sea, 
21  September^  1S79. 

Messrs,  Macmillan  6^  Co. 

My  dear  Sirs, 

If  I  am  in  time  to  secure  the  last  efforts  of  the  printer, 
perhaps  this  letter  in  its  integrity  may  convey  the  information  which 
the  autumnal  season  has  afforded.  The  difficulty  of  all  writers  upon 
strange  countries  lies  in  their  short  experience.  Each  month 
exhibits  the  changes  of  nature  in  seasons,  meteorological  phenomena, 
and  vegetation ;  thus  the  full  twelve  months  should  form  the  data 
for  a  detailed  description.  I  closed  my  account  of  Cyprus  in  August ; 
since  which  fruits  have  ripened  and  various  changes  have  developed — 
all  have  afforded  information. 

Taxation  in  kind,  and  Government  valuation  of  produce  while 
growing,  has  been  a  crying  evil  that  I  have  endeavoured  to  bring 
before  the  public  as  one  of  those  instances  of  injustice  which  stamps 
the  oppressive  system  of  the  Turkish  administration ;  this  unfortu- 
nately has  not  yet  been  abolished  by  the  British  Government.  I 
have  already  described  the  arbitrary  and  unjust  laws  that  fetter  the 
all-important  wine  trade,  which  is  the  principal  industry  of  Limasol ; 
but  since  I  forwarded  the  manuscript  to  England  I  have  myself 
witnessed  the  miserable  effects  of  the  present  laws  during  the  advance 
of  the  season  in  ripening  the  produce  of  the  vineyards. 

Three  weeks  ago  I  walked  for  some  hours  through  the  boundless 
extent  of  grape  cultivation  at  the  foot  of  the  mountains  below  the 
village  of  Ph3mi ;  at  that  time  the  crop  was  ripe,  and  should  have 
been  gathered. 

The  bunches  of  dark  red  were  equal  to  the  finest  hot-house  grapes 
of  England,  both  in  weight  and  in  size  of  berries ;  the  black  were 
about  the  average  of  the  Black  Hamburg ;  the  white  were  smaller 
and  about  the  size  of  the  common  "  sweet-water."  A  day  or  two 
ago  I  again  visited  the  same  vineyards ;  the  grapes  had  not  been 
gathered,  and  I  computed  that  at  least  one-third  of  the  crop  was 
destroyed  by  the  delay.  The  magnificent  bunches  of  dark  red  were 
for  the  most  part  shrivelled,  one-half  the  berries  upon  each  duster 
being  reduced  to  the  appearance  of  raisins,  and  utterly  devoid  of 


488  Appendix. 

juice,  while  many  of  the  other  varieties  were  completely  withered. 
The  explanation  given  by  the  people  was  simple  enough — "The 
official  valuer  had  not  appeared,   and  without  his  certificate  w 
grapes    could  be  gathered J^      There  are  only  three  valuers  to   an 
extensive  district,  and  it  is  physically  impossible  that  they  can  per- 
form their  duties,  even  were  they  inclined  to  attend  when  summoned 
to  each  village,  in  the  absence  of  some  special  inducement.    The 
actual  labour  of  walking  up  the  abrupt  inclines  upon  the  mountain 
sides  which  constitute  the  vineyards  is  most  formidable,  and  at  least 
four  times   the   staff  is  necessary,  of  young   and  capable  men,  if 
the  valuation  of  the  crop  is  to  be  taken  with  due  consideration  to 
the  interests  of  the  grower.     The  distressing  result  that  I  have  myself 
witnessed  in  the  partial  destruction  of  the  crops  can  admit  of  no 
excuse,  but  it  exhibits  a  painful  example  of  mal-administration  in  the 
ruin  attendant  upon  a  Turkish  system  of  taxation. 

Some  persons  may  suggest  that  the  dried  and  intithered  grapes 
would  be  saleable  as  raisins :  this  is  not  the  case.  Raisins  are  not 
merely  dried  grapes,  as  is  generally  supposed,  but  the  bunch  of  well- 
ripened  berries  is  dipped  in  a  strong  solution  of  potash,  and  is  then 
either  suspended  or  is  more  generally  laid  upon  a  mat  to  dry.  In 
Cyprus  the  growers  seldom  purchase  potash,  but  they  dip  their  grapes 
in  a  ley  produced  from  the  ashes  of  certain  woods. 

The  vineyards  at  this  season  are  swarming  with  a  species  of 
beccaficos,  and  the  population  are  busy  in  catching  these  delicious 
birds  with  sticks  smeared  with  bird-lime.  It  is  a  species  of  finch,  a 
little  larger  than  the  chaffinch,  the  plumage  a  brownish  grey ;  when 
plucked  the  body  is  much  larger  than  the  common  beccaficos,  but 
resembles  it  in  extraordinary  fatness  and  delicacy  of  flavour.  The 
natives  preserve  them  by  boiling  in  commanderia  wine,  and  they 
are  highly  appreciated.  These  must  be  added  to  the  migratory  birds 
of  Cyprus. 

The  acorns  are  nearly  ripe,  and  I  am  assured  by  the  monks  that 
even  these  insignificant  productions  pay  a  tax  of  6^.  per  kilo  (about 
32  lbs.),  and  the  crop  is  valued  accordingly  by  the  special  authority. 
There  are  three  varieties  of  large  timber  oaks  in  addition  to  the  "^^ 
and  the  prickly  holly-leaved  oak.  The  acorns  of  the  ilex  and  holly- 
leaved  species  are  small,  but  those  of  the  three  superior  species  vary 
in  size,  all  being  much  larger  than  those  of  England,  while  one 
variety  measures  nearly  three  inches  in  length.  This  is  used  as  food, 
with  no  other  preparation  than  simple  roasting,  and  is  considered  to 
be  superior  to  chestnuts.  The  Ancient  Britons  used  the  acorn  as  an 
article  of  food,  and  probably  it  was  ground  into  flour  after  the  bitter 
principle  had  been  extracted  by  soaking  in  running  water,  in  the 


Appendix.  489 

same  manner  that  many  varieties  of  wild  yams  are  treated  by  the 
natives  in  Africa.  In  addition  to  the  use  of  the  acorn  as  a  substitute 
for  chestnuts  by  the  Cypriotes,  the  large  species  when  roasted  black 
makes  excellent  coflfee  without  any  admixture  of  the  real  berry.  All 
the  varieties  can  be  used  for  this  purpose,  but  that  already  named  is 
preferred  as  superior  in  flavour.  The  English  poor  are  not  clever  in 
adaptation,  and  are  known  to  be  strong  in  prejudices  respecting 
articles  of  diet,  but  it  appears  strange  that  the  use  of  the  acorn  has 
been  entirely  neglected  as  an  aid  to  the  bulk  of  pure  coffee,  which 
would  effect  a  considerable  saving  in  the  household,  if  the  adultera- 
tion took  place  at  home. 

A  few  days  ago  I  was  conversing  with  the  old  monk  upon  the 
question  of  "  Chittim  wood,"  and  I  suggested  my  own  theory,  "  that 
Solomon  required  the  highly-scented  cypress  of  this  island  "  (for  the 
Temple.)  My  venerable  informant  declared  "  that  a  wood  exists  to 
this  day  in  C3rprus  which  is  supposed  to  be  the  original  species 
referred  to  in  Scripture ;  this  is  a  pine  which  is  only  found  upon 
the  mountains  between  Kyku  and  Khrysokhus.  The  grain  and 
surface  when  planed  are  exceedingly  close  and  smooth,  and  the 
timber  is  strong  and  durable,  far  exceeding  in  quality  all  other 
varieties.  The  native  name  for  this  tree  is  Kindro.  I  have  sent  a 
monk  to  gather  the  cones  of  this  tree,  which  I  shall  send  to  England 
for  seed,  together  with  a  sample  of  the  foliage. 

Sincerely  yours, 
SAMUEL  W.  BAKER. 


Sept.  24,  1879. 

JP.S. — My  messenger  has  just  returned  with  a  branch  and  cones  of 
the  tree,  which  is  only  found  upon  the  mountains  between  Kyku  and 
Khrysokhus.  There  is  no  longer  a  doubt  It  is  a  beautiful  species 
of  Cedar. 

S.  W.  B. 


INDEX. 


4 


INDEX. 


A. 


Acorns,   488 ;    coffee    made   from, 

489 
Adelphe  mountain,  60 
Agriculture,  27,  28,  73,  no,  in,  122, 

162,  194,  203,  207,  213,  223,  224, 

293.  407,  438.  469 
Agricultural    bank    and    locust   fund, 

390 

Agricultural   implements   of    Cyprus, 

27 
Agriculturists,  a8 
Ague,  106 

Akrotiri,  peninsolar,  259 
Alliance,  Anglo-Turkish,  443 
Amam,  author's  servant,  18 
Ancient  jetty  at  Famagousta,  155 
Ancient  ruins,  1 18 
Ancient  waterworks,   74;   aqueducts, 

244.  253 

Animals  in  Limasol,  statistics  of, 
406 

Animals,  taxes  on,  386,  387 

Antiquities  of  Cyprus,  54  (see  also 
Cesnola) 

Aqueduct  firom  Arpera  to  Lamaca,  S2; 
subterranean,  to  Lamaca^  34;  mak- 
ing, 35 ;  British  authorities  propose 
to  substitute  iron  pipes  for,  36;  at 
Kythrea,  72  ;  at  Kuklla,  90 ;  at 
Famagousta,  150 

Aqueducts,  ancient,  244ff  253 

Archbishopric  of  Cyprus,  416 

Arodes,  a  Turkish  ^lage,  234 

Arpera,  water  supplied  from  springs 
near,  7;  springs  and  the  Lamaca 
water  supply,  36 1 

Arshia,  88 

Artillery  shell-fire  unknown  in  early 
days,  61 

Asbestos,  465 

A^propotamo,  the  river,  232 


B. 


Bapfo,  218,  237  ;  estimate  of  revenue 
and  expenditure  for  the  district  for 
1879-80,  483;  silk  cultivation  of, 
483  ;  wild  olive-trees  plentiful  at,  46 

Baffo  gate,  Letkosia,  61.  (For  Baffo,  see 
also  Paphos) 

Bathing,  93,  228 

Bazaar  at  Lamaca,  9,  10;  at  Ktima,  236 

Beccaficos,  species  of  finch,  488 

Bee-hives,  431 

Beggars,  124,  21S 

BeUapais,  monastery  of,  174,  189,  190 

Bell-tent,  deeping  arrangements,  25 

Berengaria,  her  marriage  to  Richard  I. 
at  Limasol,  263 

BiddulphflGenerBi,  High  Commissioner 
of  Letkosia,  63;  improvements 
made  by,  63,  456 

Birds,  82,  91,  104,  113,  117,  121,  127, 
200^  222,  227,  249,  251,  367,  485, 
488 

Binds,  migratory,  485,  488 

Birds  of  prey  and  their  food,  32 

Blind  beggars,  124,  215 

Boots  of  the  Cypriotes,  33 

Box  (tree),  its  suggested  introduction 
into  Cyprus,  340 

Braeadino,  the  Venetian  commandant 
of  Famagousta,  150^  263,  265 

British  establishments,  estimate  of  ex- 
penditure for,  479 

Buflfavento,  174,  189,  191,  194,  199 

Buffinvento,  Castle  of,  59,  82 

Buildings  to  be  constmcted  in  1879*80, 
481 

Bustards,  485    ^< 


Cambls,  90 

Camp  of  20th  Regiment  at  lifattiati 
visited  by  author,  50 


494 


I NDEX. 


Camping-ground,  remarks  on  the  selec- 
tion of,  25,  38  ;  neighbourhood  of 
water  to  be  avoided,  25  ;  should  be 
on  a  height,  25 

Cannon,  Venetian,  64;  collection  of 
old  at  Kyrenia,  181 

Cape  St.  Andrea,  128,  131  ;  monastery 

of,  134 

Cape  wines,  268 

Caramania,  mountains  of,  82,  174 

Caravastasi,  216 

Caroub-trees,  72,  81,  174, 175.  177,  189, 
198,  200,  294,  331,  406,  483 

Carpas  district ;  wild  olive-trees  plen- 
tiful in,  46,  98- 130 

Carpas  range  of  mountains,  73,  81,  90, 
91,  lOI 

Carriages,  difficulties  of  locomotion, 
83»86 

Carts,  tax  on,  387 

Cathedral  of  St  Sophia,  63  ;  a  mosque, 

63 

Cattle,  their  neglected  condition,  94 

Cattle-wheels  of  Cyprus,  56 

Caverns,  subterranean,  76,  180 

Caves,  artificial,  114 

Caves  at  Gallibomii,  120 

Caves,  natural,  185,  318 

Cedar,  489 

Census  of  Lefkosia,  January,  1879,  65 

Census  of  population,  July,  1879,  464 

Cereals,  salt  destructive  to,  24 

Cesnola,  General  di,  on  the  tombs  of 
Cyprus,  54 ;  ruins  of  ancient  Kythrea, 
74 ;  ruins  of  Cyprus,  145  ;  antiqui- 
ties, 233,  239,  264 

Ceylon,  salt  lakes  of,  23 

Chefiik  Pacha,  his  aqueduct  from  Ar- 
pera  to  Larnaca,  36 

Chestnut,  Spanish,  its  proposed  intro- 
duction into  Cyprus,  340 

Children  of  the  Linobambaki,  323 

•*Chittim  wood,"  489 

Christo,   author's  servant,  18,  96,  97, 

143»  x68,  377 

Church  discipline  in  Cyprus,  417 

Church  of  St.  Nicolas,  Lefkosia,  con- 
verted into  a  granary,  63 

Churches  in  Famagousta,  152 

Churches,  taxes  of  the,  416 

Circassians  wrecked  at  Volokalida,  108 

Cittium,  the  old  harbour  of,  8 

Clergy,  marriage  of,  414 

Climate,  213,  420,  435 

Clothing  (see  Costume) 

Coal-boxes,  cast-iron,  260 

Coaling-station,  Cyprus  as  a,  442 

Cobham,  Mr.  C.  D.,  456 

Coffee,  acorn,  489 

Commanderia,  wine  of  Cyprus,  268, 
269,  276,  284,  402 


Commissioners  of  districts,  440 
Comnenus,  Isaac,  262,  263 
Comnenus,  Isaac,  victory  of  Richard  I. 

over,  62 
Constantine  the  Great  fortifies  Lefkosia, 

60 
Convent  near  Larnaca,  9 
"Cooked    food"    not    eaten   by  the 

Cypriotes,  46 
Copper  mines  near  Khrysokhus,  465 
Coral,  437 
Corfu  compared  with  Cyprus,  231,  34^ 

405 
Cork-tree,   its  suggested    introduction 

into  Cyprus,  340 
Cormorants,  228 
Com,  75,  203,  207,  213,  293 
Comaro,  Catherine,  Qaeea  of  Cyprus, 

193 
Corvee,  forced  labour,  387 

Costume,  42,  107,  201,  255,  430,  438 

Cotton,  392,  394 

Cotton  cultivation,  395  ;  Mr.  Hamilton 

Lang  on,  396 
Cotton-fields  at  Kuklia,  91,  92 
Cotton-gins,  100 

Cow's  milk  refused  by  Cjrpriotes,  46 
Craddock's  Hotel,  Larnaca,  4 
Crane,  485 

Crete,  compared  with  Cyprus,  159 
Crops,  no,  III 
"  Custom  House,"  the  Cypriotes'  red 

rag,  12 
Custom  House  duties,  387 
Custom  receipts,  465 
Customs^  474;  cost  of  establishments, 

478 
Customs  duty  on  wines  and  spirits,  270 
Cyclamen,  105 
Cypress-trees,  79,  103,  132,  197,  329 


D 


Dali,  plain  of,  entered,  38 ;  cultivation 
of,  38 ;  the  town,  39 ;  kindness  of 
the  population,  39  ;  priests  and  old 
women,  and  their  incense  of  burning 
olive-leaves  at,  40 ;  as  an  agricultural 
district,  44;  soil  of,  44;  olive-trees 

of.  45 
Dead,  despoiling  of  the,  by  the  Cypn- 

ctes,  7' 
Decay  of  former  works  in  Cyprus,  3' 
Defter    Hakkani,    memorandttm   oii 

about  the  transfer  in  succession  of 

property,  389 
Destruction  of  forests  {tee  Forests) 
**  Dewdrop  Inn,"  37 
Dimes,  282;  or  tithes  on  produce  of 

the  land,  466,  478 


Index. 


495 


Dipbmacy,  English,  443 

Dogs,  "Merry,^'  **Wise,"  and  "Shot," 

20 
Donkeys,  lo 
Doves,  485 

Drainage  of  Lefkosia,  62 
Drainage  of  the  delta  of  Famagousta, 

162 
,  Dress  {see  Costume) 
Dwelliiigs  of  the  Cypriotes,  43 


£ 


Education,  423 ;  establishments,  cost 

of,  478 
Egyptian  cotton,  396 

Egyptian  water-wheel,  352,  353 

Embroidery,  430 

English  diplomacy,  443 

Episkopi,  252 

Estimates  of  revenue  and  expenditure 

for  1878-79,  466 ;   for  1879-80,  480 
Eucalyptus  globulus   planted    by    Sir 

Garnet  Wolseley  at  Lamaca,  59 
Eucalyptus-tree,  337,  345 
European    traders  at   Lamaca,    their 

occupation  gone,  14 
Evdimu,  251 ;  salt  lake  at,  252 
**  Evil-eye,"  custom  of  the  Dali  priests 

to  avert  the,  40,  138 
Excise  on  tobacco  and  spirits,  474 
Expenditure,  estimates^of,  for  1 878*79, 

476,  479 
Expenditure  of  Llmasol,  401 
Exports,  437,  464 
Exports  of  Limasol,  401 


Fever  at  Famagousta,  origin  of,  161 

Fever,  complaints  of  the  natives  con- 
cerning the  effects  of,  52 

Finance  {see  Political  Reflections  and 
Revenue  and  Expenditure) 

Financial  position  of  Lamaca,  1 1 

Finch,  488 

Fire,  trees  destro3red  by,  336 

Fish,  228,  299,  374 ;  price  of,  423,  426 

Fleas,  83  ;  at  Trichomo,  102 

Flora  of  Cyprus,  70,  72,  78,  80,  90,  91, 
94.  95»  I04»  loSi  126,  132,  222-301, 
302,  307,  431 

Flour-mills,  204 

Flour-mills  of  Kythrea,  74 

Fly-catchers,  485 

Food,  420-435  ;  price  of,  423 

Food  of  the  Cypriotes,  46 ;  **  cooked,' ' 
not  eaten,  40,  107 

Foreign  influence  required  to  execute 
a  Turk  for  murder  of  a  Greek,  48 

Forests,  327 

Forests,  destruction  of,  131,  135,  208, 

225.  374 

Forests,  former  existence  of,  not  pos- 
sible, 32 

Forts,  fortresses,  and  fortifications,  60, 

70,  97»  I79»  185,  196 
Fossil  shells,  122 
Francolins,  104,  127,  222,  251  {see  also 

Birds  and  Game) 
Emit,   163,  178,   188,  223,    234,   304, 

346,  380,  428  (see  also  Grapes) 
Furniture  of  the  gipsy-van,  84 


Famagousta  gate,  Lefkosia,  61 ;  si^e 
of,  62 ;  fortress  and  city,  97  ;  effect 
of  Pedias  river  on  sanittiry  arrange- 
ments of,  100  ;  its  fortifications,  148, 
150;  the  town,  149,  151 ;  churches 
in,  152  ;  ancient  Venetian  palace, 
153  »  siege  of,  157 1,  153  ;  harbour, 
154;  ancient  jetty  at,  155  ;  mode  of 
improving  harbour,  156 ;  as  a  coal- 
ing dep6t  and  arsenal,  157  ;  its  un- 
h^thiness,  160 ;  suggestions  for  im- 
proving, 160 ;  origin  of  fever  at,  l6i ; 
madder-root  land  at,  162 ;  drainage 
of  delta,  162  ;  orchards  and  trees  of, 
163  ;  fortress  of,  185  ;  invaded  by  the 
Turks,  263  ;  its  capitulation,  264 ; 
return  of  population,  &c.,  486 ;  ex- 
ports, 486 

Ferns  at  Kythrea,  72 

Fever,  178,  428 


GallibornO,  114,  166,  172  ;  natural 
and  artificial  caves  at,  120 

Game,  31,  82,  91,  104,  113,  117,  121, 
127,  227,  249,  367  {see  also  Birds) 

Game,  scarcity  of,  21  ;  exaggerated 
reports  concerning,  21  ;  as  food  for 
the  birds  of  prey,  32  ;  laws,  32 

Gaudry,  M.,  theory  as  to  formation  of 
salt  in  lakes  at  Lamaca,  22 ;  observa- 
tions on  the  existence  of  salts  on 
plain  near  Trichomo,  23 ;  his  report 
on  the  resources  of  Cyprus,  230 

Geology,  51,  76,  79,  90,  109, 113,  117, 
125,  172,  173,  184,  205,  206,  219, 
221,  224,  230,  304,  371 

Georgi,  18,  30,  34,  39,  41,  98,  ill, 
124,  141,  166,  172,  456 

Gipsies,  294 

Gipsy  travellmc-van,  4,  15,  17,  30,  84, 
140,  167,  168,  169,  294 

Glover  Brothers,  of  Soho,  makers  of 
the  gipsy- van,  5,  15 


496 


I NDEX. 


Goats,  339,  367,  368,  374,  386,  406, 

415,  420,  429 
Goat-skins  to  contain  wine,  285,  286 
Goats'  milk,  374 
Goats,  tax  on,  386 
Government  House  at  Lefkosia,   58; 

strategical  position  of,  59 
Government  lands,  123 
Grain,  tax  on,  387 
Granaries,  subterranean,  129 
Grape,  cultivation  of,  at  Phyni,  487 
Grapes,  prices  of,  427 ;  destruction  of, 

tnrougn  lack  of  valuers,  488  {s£i  a/so 

Vineyards) 
Grass,  its  absence  in  Cyprus,  249 
Greek  Church,  the,   in  Cyprus,   412, 

418 
Greek  holidays,  287 
Greeks  and  Turks  in  Cyprus,  399 
Greenstone,  51 
Grouse,  485 

Gunpowder,  monopoly  of,  .387 
Guns  of   heavy  odibre    possessed  by 

Turks  and  Venetians  in  early  days, 

61 
Gun  tax,  32 
Guy  de  Lusignan  takes  possession  of 

island  of  Cyprus,  193  ;  his  reign,  193 
Gypsum,  32, 109 
Gypsum  paving  at  Lefkosia,  64 


H 


Harbour  of  Famagoosta,  153 ;  mode 

of  improving,  156 
Harbours,  6,  8,    154,   182,    183,  217, 

218,  239,  259,  411 
Hares  of  Cyprus,  121 
Head-dress  of  Cypriote  women,  4a 
Heath  and  heather,  absence  of,  21 
Henna  used  for  dyeing,  186 
Herbs,  95 

Herb  upon  which  sheep  feed,  7 
High  Commissioner,  duties  of,  484 
Highways  of  Cyprus,  17 
Hippersly,  Mr.,  09 
Holbeach,  Dr.,  his  house  and  work  at 

Kyrenia,  176,  183 
Honey,  431 

Horses,  71,  73,  78,  113,  169,  195,  406 
Horses,  tax  on,  387 
Houses,  tax  on,  387  ;  rental  of,  403 
Hut  at  Trichomo,  loi 
Hydrophobia,  429 


of  Sargon,  king  of  Assyria,  54  {sa 

also  Dali) 
liani,  Katarjii,  the  author's  maleteer, 

200,  205,  211,  215,  226,  236,  239 
Imports,  437,  464 
Imports  of  Limasol,  401 
Improvements  in  Cyprus,  absence  of, 

44 
Incense  of  the  priests  and  old  women 

at  Dali  supposed  to  avert  the  ''evil- 
eye,"  40 

Income,  tax  on,  derived  from  rents,  385 

Inglis,  Captain,  97,  4^6 

Inn,  the  **  Dewdrop,'  37 

Insect  destruction,  393 

Ironclads,  442 

Irrigation,  55,  56,  205,   2i6,  223,  238, 

^  297,  347,  360,  395,  469 

Irrigation,  necessity  of,  167  ;  its  history 

in  Cyprus,  347 


J 


JUDICIAL  administration,  483 
uniper,  368 


K 


KAndro,  a  species  of  pine,  supposed 

to  be  the  wood  used  by  Solomon  for 

the  Temple,  489 
Karava,  203 
Kellner,    G.    W.,   Financial  Commis- 

sioner    of  Cyprus,    his    estimate  of 

revenue  and  expenditure  for  1878-79^ 

466.477  I 

Kitchener,  Mr.,  accompanies  author  to 

springs  near  Kythrea,  69 
Kolossi,  253,  262 
Kotschy,  M.,  his  report  on  the  resources 

of  Cyprus,  230 
Ktima,  the  town  and  bazaar,  236,  239 
Kuklia,  89,  90,  92 ;  aqueduct  at,  90 ; 

water-mills  at,  90 
Kuklia,  farm  of  M.  Mattel  at,  92 
Kykou,  monastery  at,  415 
Kyrenia,  82,  174,  178;  the  fort,  17% 

'185  ;  the  harbour,  182,  183 
Kyrenia  gate,  Lefkosi,  61 
Kythrea,  60,  70 ;  motmtains  above,  7*^ 

72  ;  water-mills  of,  '-72;  aqnednot  at, 

72 ;  maiden-hair  ferns  at,  72 ;  spring 

of,  72 ;  General  di  Cesnola  on  ancient 

ruins  of,  74 


Idalium,  tombs  of,  53 ;  excavation 
and  pillage  of,  stopp^  by  English 
government,  53 ;  discovery  of  statue 


Lake,  fresh-water,  near  FamagoustB, 

165 
Lake,  salt,  at  Lamaca,  22;  Ceylon, 

23  ;  Evdimu,  252  ;  Akrotiri,  259 


Index. 


497 


Land,  384,  407,  408,  416,  469 
Land ;  at  Famagousta,  suggestions  for 
improving  its  value,  161 ;    available 
for  agriculture,  123  ;  value  of,  403 
Landowners,  401-419 
Lang,  Mr.  Hamilton,  his  description  of 
the  conservative    principles    of    the 
Cyprian  oxen,  28  ;  statue  of  Sargon 
sent  to  Berlin  Museum  by,  54 ;  his 
works  on  Cj^arus,    146;   on  cotton 
cultivation,  396 
Languages  used  in  Cyprus,  410 
Lapithus,  2CX4 

Larnaca  sighted,  2 ;  general  appearance, 
2;  improvements  during  English 
occupation,  3 ;  character  of  houses 
in,  3 ;  Craddock's  Hotel,  4 ;  the 
remains  of  old  town,  5 ;  fertility  of 
the  soil  around,  6 ;  soil  of  valley,  6  ; 
water  supply  of,  7  ;  swamps  around, 
cause  of  unhealthiness,  8 ;  convent 
near,  9  ;  bazaar  at,  9  ;  bad  as  a  port, 
II ;  its  miserable  financial  position, 
II;  "Custom  House"  officer  at, 
12 ;  European  traders  at,  14 ;  new 
road  from  to  Nicosia,  17 ;  salt-lakes 
of,  22 ;  view  of  salt-lakes  from  Ky- 
threa,  81  ;  wine  stores  at,  280  ;  sta- 
tistics of  districts,  388  ;  revenues  of 
the  district  of,  385 
Law  courts,  485 
Lazarus,  tomb  of,  supposed  to  be  in 

church  of  St.  George,  Larnaca,  5 
Lefka,  222 

Lefkosia,  Government  House  at,  57,  58; 
picturesque  appearance  of,  60 ;  forti- 
fied by  Constantine  the  Great,  60; 
demolished  and  reconstructed  by  the 
Venetians,  60  ;  siege  of,  in  1570,62  ; 
fiaulty  strategical  position  of  fortress 
of,  62  ;  water  supply  of, 62  ;  bad  drain- 
age of,  62 ;  occupied  by  Richard  I., 
62  ;  interior  of,  improved  by  Colonel 
Biddulph,    63  ;  its  architecture,  63 ; 
Cathedral  of  St.  Sophia  turned  into 
a  mosque,  63 ;  St.  Nicholas  Church 
now  a  granary,  63 ;  bazaars  of,  63 ; 
native  manufactiures  of,  63  ;  the  ram- 
parts, 64 ;  Commissioner's  house  at, 
64  ;  gypsum  pavement  of,  64  ;  value- 
less as  a  military   position  and   as 
capital    of  Cyprus,  65 ;     census  of 
January,  1879,  65  ;  depressing  effect 
of   the  landscape,   66  ;  view  of  the 
town  from  Kythrea,  81 ;  Sir  Garnet 
and  Lady  Wolseley  at,  170  ;  monas- 
tery at,  415 ;  meteorological  tables 
at,  435,  462,  463 ;  census  taken,  July, 
1879,  464 
Levelling  and  draining,  161 
Liberal  M.P.'s  at  Larnaca,  13 


Licences ;  shop,  wine,  387 ;  to  mer- 
chants, bankers,  &c.,  387 

Limasol;  Custom  Houj^e  representative, 
14,  26  ;  should  be  capital  of  Cyprus, 
65  J  lake  near,  259 ;  wine  district  of, 
267,  296;  port  of,  destined  to  be 
chief  commercial  centre,  400  ;  dis- 
trict of,  401-419  ;  and  its  neighour- 
hood  as  a  residence,  427 

Lime-burners,  78 ;  kilns,  78 

Limestone,  compact  (or  Jurassic),  59 

Lithrankomi  plateau  and  monasteiy, 
109 

Lithrodondo,  village  of,  51 

Linobambaki,  religious  sect  in  Cyprus, 

323 
Lizards,  246 

Locust-bean,  294 

Locusts ;  agricultural  bank  and  locust 

fund,  390,  392 
Lowlands  of  Cyprus,  vegetation  of,  33 
Lusignan,   Guy   de.    King  of  Cyprus, 

193,  263 

M. 

Madder,  384 

Madder-root  land  at  Famagousta, 
162 

Madeira,  vines  from  Cyprus  planted  at, 
267,  268 

'Magpies  as  birds  of  prey,  33 

Mahera,  monastery  at,  415 

"Mahmoor,"  vineyard  valuer,  284 

Maiden-hair  ferns  at  Kythrea,  72 

Mail-coach,  ephemeral  existence  of  the 
newly-established,  56 

Makheras  mountain,  5 1 

Mandrea,  305 

Marble  shot  of  Famagousta,  61 

Market  gardens,  425 

Marriage  of  clergy,  414 

Mattel,  M.  Richard,  farms  of,  44 ; 
system  of  irrigation,  55 ;  his  farm  at 
Kuklia,  92,  392 

Mattiati,  a  halt  near  the  military  station 
of,  42 ;  its  elevation,  50 ;  new  road 
to,  unfit  for  vans,  50 ;  from  to  Lith- 
rodondo, 51 

Meat,  prices  of,  299,  423,  426 

Men  (Cypriote),  their  treatment  of  the 
woman,  43;   as  tree-destroyers,  44, 

45 

**  Merry,"  "Wise,"  and  "Shot,"  au- 
thor's dogs,  20 

Messaria ;  sport  on  hill-sides  of,  50 ; 
dreary  plain  of,  58 ;  formation  of 
the  ground,  58 ;  the,  67 ;  exports, 
486 

Meteorological  register  at  Nicosia,  Au- 
gust 1879,  462  ;  June  1879,  463 

K    K 


498 


Index. 


Meteorological  register,  general  (Feb- 
ruary to  August,  1879),  461 

Meteorology,  432-435 ;  {sfg  Tempera- 
ture, Climate,  Rainfall) 

Migratory  birds,  485,  488 

Military  police  force,  cost  of,  1878-79, 

478 
Military    service,    tax    for    exemption 

from,  386,  473 
Milk,   cow's,   refused,   46 ;  sheep  and 

goat's  used,  46 
Mill -stones,  220 
Mills  ;   water,    of  Kythrea,    72  ;  flour, 

74  ;  wind,  75 
Mineralogy,  226,  229,  231,  465 
Mining  operations,   evidence  of,  near 

Mattiati,  51 
Monasteries;  Cape   St,  Andrea,   134; 

at  Bellapais,  at  Kyrenia,   174,   189, 

190 ;   at  Trooditissa,    361,   454  ;  .iat 

Kykou,  415  ;  at  Mahera  and  Lefkosia, 

415 
Monks  of  Trooditissa,  361 

Monopolies  of  salt  and  gunpowder,  387, 
monopoly  salt,  474 

Morphu,  213  ;  the  bay  and  its  improve- 
ment, 215 

Mosque  and  tomb  of  a  Turkish  sol- 
dier,  149 

Moufflon,  or  wild  sheep,  368,  372 

Mountains ;  Olympus,  60 ;  Troodos, 
60;  Makheras,  51,  60;  Adelphe, 
60 ;  above  Kythrea,  70 ;  Carpas 
Range,  73,  81,  90,  91,  loi ;  Penta- 
dactylon,  75  ;  their  altitude  near 
Kythrea,  80 ;  Santa  Croce,  81  ; 
Caramania,  82,  116,  139,  171,  174, 
219,  300,  233,  303,  334,  342,  368,  411 

Mulberry-trees,  74,  138,  139,  203,  233, 
313,  431 

Mules,  71,  73,  78,  113,  19s,  207,  224, 
274,  406 

Mules,  tax  on,  387 


N. 


Narcissus,  105 

Native  establishments,  estimate  of  ex- 
penditure for,  479 
Neophitos,  a  monk  of  Trooditissa,  362, 

455 
Nicosia,   en  route  to,    37  ;   new  road 

from  Larnaca  to,   1 7  {see  also  Lef- 

kosia) 

Nile,  river,  347 

O. 

Oak-trees,  328,  340,  488 
Ochre,  yello*^  and  red,  51 


Octroi,  387 

Oil,  olive,  of  Cyprus,  46;  {set  <d» 
Olive-oil) 

Oil-press,  47 

Olive-leaves  burnt  as  incense,  138 

Olive-oil,  of  Cyprus,  46 ;  yield  of  in 
1877,  47  ;  process  of  pressing  from 
the  fruit,  47  ;  a  good  substitute  for 
castor-oil,  47 

Olive-trees  of  Dali,  45  ;  growth  and 
age  of,  45 ;  peculiar  power  of  repro- 
duction,   45  ;  indigenous  to  Cypras, 

45  ;  wild  species  at  Baffo  and  Carpas, 

46  ;   selection  of  for  forests,  46 ;  of 
Baflb,  330,  406 

Olympus,  mountain,  i 
Orange-flower  water  sprinkled  over  au- 
thor and  his  wife  at  Dali,  as  a  sign  of 
welcome  by  the  inhabitants,  40 
Orchards,  163,  380  {see  also  Fruit) 
Oxen,  as  beasts  of  burden,  90,  140 
Oxen,  their  preference  to  native  chaff 
over  that  cut  by  the  English  method, 
29 


P. 


Paphos,  supposed  birthplace  of  Vf* 

nus,  43  ;  the  temple  ol  Venus,  240, 

241  {see  also  Baflb) 
Partridges  {see  Game 
Patience  of  the  Cypriotes,  108 
Paulus,  Sergius,  his  conversion  at  Pa* 

phos,  419 
Paving  at  Dali,  39 
Pedias,   river,   59,  92,   99,    145,   147, 

161 ;    sanitary  effect    of   on  Fama* 

gousta,   100 
Penance,  377 
Pentadactylon,  mountain   in  the  Mes- 

saria,  75 
Phoenicians,  the,  as  miners  and  metal- 
lurgists, 229 
I'hyni,  305,  306 ;  grape  cultivation  of, 

487 
Pierides,  Consul,  his  report  on  the  wine 

trade  of  Cyprus,  281 
Pigs,  129,  406,  429 
Pigs,  tax  on,  386 
Pine-trees,  329,  489 
Pinus  maritirna^  32,  109 
Plane-trees,  330 

Planting  {see  Forests,  destruction  of) 
Plants  and    herbs,   prickly   nature  of 

those  growing  in  Cyprus,  26 ' 
Plough,  primitive  pattern  of,  used  in 

CyprxLs,  27 
Police,  420-435  ;  cost  of,  1878-79,  478^ 
Polls  (Poli-ton-Krysokhus),  229,  231 
Political  reflections,  436-453      _ 


Index. 


499 


Population,  census  of  July,  1879,  464 
Population  of  Cyprus,.420 
Population  of  Limasol,  406 
Poultry,  prices  of,  426 
Priest  at  Lithrankomi,  109 
Priests,  134,  311,  313-361,  414 
Prisons,  cost  of,  1878-79,  478 
Professions  and  trades  tax,  472 
Property  tax,  385,  387,  471 
Property,   transfer  and  succession  of, 

389 
Provisions  imported    not  adapted  for 

native  requirements,  1 1 
Pumps,  351 
Pyrgos,  224 


Quails,  485 

Quarries  [s^d  Stone  quarries) 


R. 


Rainfall,  95, 115, 145,  178, 270,  275, 

433 
Rainfall,  influence  of  trees  upon,  327, 

328,  339»  348 
Rainfall  of  Cyprus,  ancient  and  i-mo- 

dern,  6 
Registers,  461-463 
Reports  on  the  wine  trade  of  Cyprus, 

280-282 
Revenue,  estimates  of  for   1879,   466- 

479 ;  jfor  1879-80,  480 ;  of  Cyprus 

and  Limasol,  401,  436,  439 
Revenues  of  Lamaca,  385 
Revenues  of  the  church  in  Cyprus,  413 
Richard  I.,  his  occupation  of  Leflcosia 

after  his  victory  over  Isaac  Comne- 

nus,  62  ;  at  .Cyprus,   191  ;  the  island 

sold  by  him  to  the  Templars,  192  ; 

262 ;  his  marriage  to  Berengaria  at 

Limasol,  263 
Riddell,  Consul,  his  report  on  the  wine 

trade  of  Cyprus,  280 
Rifat,   the    Turkish   Pacha,   Lefkosia, 

Rivers,  their  absence  in  Cyprus,  348 

Rizo  Carpas,  137 

Roads,  274,  289,  290,  301,  303,  335 

Roads  required,  from  Leikosia  to  Mor- 
phu,  60 ;  to  Kyrenia,  66  ;  to  Kythrea 
and  to  Farmagousta,  66 ;  from  Far- 
magousta  to  Lamaca,  66;  cost  of 
such,  66;  to  be  constructed  in  1879-80, 
481 

Rock  scenery,  76 

Ruins,  ancient,  118 

Russian  policy  {see  Political  reflections) 


S. 


St.  Andrea,  Cape,  128,  131  ;  monas- 
tery of,  494 

St  Barnabas'  Church,  Salamis,  147 

St.  Barnabas,  his  visit  to  Cyprus,  419 

St.  George's  Church,  Lamaca,  5 

St.  Hilarion,  castle  of,  at  Lefkosia, 
171,  174,  189,  195,  199 

St.  Nicholas  Church,  Lefkosia,  con- 
verted into  a  granary,  63 

St.  Paul,  his  visit  to  Cyprus,  419 

St.  Sophia  Cathedral,  00 

Salamis,  church  of  St.  Barnabas.  147 

Salamis,  ruins  of,  92,  98,  145  ;  its  his- 
tory, 146 

Salisbury,  Lord,  despatch  to  Sir  A.  H. 
Layard,  447,  448 

Salt  lakes  at  Lamaca,  22  ;  Ceylon,  23  ; 
Evdimu,  252  ;  Akrotiri,  259 

Salt ;  M.  Gaudry's  theory  as  to  forma- 
tion in  lakes,  22 ;  native  belief  as  to 
same,  23 ;  author  supports  the  latter 
opinion,  23  ;  existence  of,  upon  the 
surface  after  rain,  23  ;  in  springs  and 
wells,  23  ;  upon  the  plains  near  Tri- 
chomo,  23 ;  on  marshy  plain  near 
Famagousta,  24 ;  a  government  mo- 
nopoly, 24 ;  one  of  the  chief  articles 
of  export  in  early  times,  24 ;  mono- 
poly of,  387  ;  revenue  from,  475,  478 

Sand-drifts,  or  sand-dunes,  214 

Sand-dunes,  105 

Sanitary  arrangements,  want  of,  164 

Santa  Croce,  mountain  of,  81 

Santorim,  island  of,  156 

Sargon,  King  of  Assyria,  discovery  of 
statute  of  at  Dali,  54 

Savile,  Captain,  on  the  wine  trade  of 
Cyprus,  282  ;  on  taxation  and  cotton 
cultivation,  397 

Scala  and  neighbourhood,  taxes  pay- 
able by  inhabitants  of,  386 

Scenery,  59,  68,  70,  72,  78,  82,  103, 
104,  109,  109-111,  113,  117,  137, 
159,  174,  177,  188,   227,  250,  303, 

305»  307,  368,  370,  373 
Schools,  necessity  of,  409,  417 
**  Shadoof,"  or  water-wheel,  352 
Shells,  fossil,  122 

Sheep  and  their  food,  7,  83,  406,  421  ; 
wild,   368;  tax  on,  386,   473,  478, 
482  ;  price  of  mutton,  426 
Shenna,  used  for  dyeing,  186 
Shooting  party  at  Messaria,  50 
Shot,  stone,  of  Famagousta  and  Ky- 
renia, 61 
Shrubs ;    oleanders,    mastic,    myrtles, 

Shumach,  exports  of,  402 
Sickness  exceptional  in  1878,  52 


1 


500 


Index. 


Siege  of  Famagousta,  157 1,  153 

Silk,  203,  313,  430 ;  cultivation  of 
Baffo,  483 

Silk  and  silk -worms  at  Kythrea,  74 

Silkworms,  138,  139 

Smoothing  plank  used  in  agriculture, 
28 

Snakes,  245-049,  301 

Snipe,  485 

Soil,  native  method  of  crushing,  28  ; 
peculiar  in  dissolving  during  a  shower, 
50,  384 

Soil  of  valley  near  Lamaca  adapted 
for  vegetation,  6 

Soil,  tenacity  of,  advantageous  for  well- 
sinking,  34 

Soli,  one  of  the  ten  ancient  kingdoms 
of  Cyprus,  ruins  of,  217 

Spirits,  cu-stoms  duty  on,  270 ;  excise 
on,  474 

Spleen  disease,  106 

Sponge-fisheries,  437 

Springs,  73,  77,  96,  204,  237,  350  ;  at 
Arpera,  7,  36  ;  at  Kythrea,  72  ;  at 
Kuklia,  92 ;  salt,  23 

Stamp  duties,  387 

Statistics  of  animals,  trees,  and  vine- 
yards in  Limasol,  406 

Statistics  of  meteorology,  461,  462 

Statistics  of  taxation,  3S6,  388 

Statistics  of  the  cost  and  production  of 
vine,  288 

Statistics,  revenue  and  expenditure, 
466-480 

Statistics,  villages  and  population,  486 

Stone  quarries  at  Kyrenia,  183,  184 

Strat^cal  position  of  Cyprus,  452 

Subterranean  aqueduct  to  Larnaca,  34  ; 
caverns,  76,  180 

Sulphate  of  lime,  soil  near  Lamaca  im- 
pregnated with,  6 

Superstitions  connected  with  the  monas- 
tery of  Trooditissa,  320  322 

Swamps  round  Lamaca  cause  of  un- 
healthiness,  8 

Swine  tax,  482 

Symboli,  a  glen  near  "  Caravastasi," 
228 


T. 


Taxation,  283,  286, 385-400,  466-482 

Tax,  farmer's,  283,  286 

Taxes  paid  by  churches,  416 

Teeth,  107 

Temperature,  no,  213,  234,  235,  244, 

260,  299,  300,   327,   367,   433-435» 

462 
Templars,  Cyprus  purchased  by  the,  192 
Theodori,  author's  servant,  30,  98,  no, 

III,  141,  166 


Thorley's  cattle  food,  295 
Threshing  harrow  of  Cyprus,  28 
Tithe  fanning,  467-469 
Tithes,  466  ;  on  Vakouf  lands,  471 
Tobacco,  excise  on,  474,  478 
Tobacco,  produced  in  Cyprus,  403 
Tombs,  ancient,  118  ;  at  Kyrenia,  178 
Tombs'of  Cyprus,  as  described  by  Gene- 
ral di  Cesnola,  54  ,    _ 
Tombs  of  Idalium  {see  Idaliom) 
Trade,  425 

Trade,  depressed  state  of  in  Lamaca,  14 
TraveUing,  83.  89,  137,  169,  274^285 
Travelling-van,  4 

Trees,  70.  78,  80,  90,  91,  94,  109,  no, 
126,  132,  144,  163,  167,  178,  18S, 
189,  202,  212,  225,  232,  237,  302, 
307.  308,  33^  374,  406  {see  also 
Caroub,  Olive,  Box) 
Trees,  destruction  of  by  Cypriotes  44» 
45,  332-339 ;  absence  of  modern 
planting,  44 
Trees,  influence  of  upon  rainfail,  327- 

330»  340 
Trees,  olive  {see  Olive-trees) 

Trees  {see  Forests,  destruction  of) 

Tree- worship,  138 

Trichomo,    M.    Gaudry's   observations 

on  the  existence  of  salts  on  the  plains 

near,  23,  92,  100 ;  a  night  passed  in, 

103 
Trooditissa,  3C0 ;  life  at  the  monastery 

of,  361  ;  monastery,   309-3^6,  454; 

legends  of  its  origin  and   erection, 

319-322 ;      superstitions     connected 

with,  320-322 
Troodos  mountain,  I 
Turkish  policy  {see  Political  reflections) 
Turk  never  executed  for  the  murder  of 

a  Greek  unless  by  foreign  influence, 

48 
Turks  and  Greeks  in  C3rprus,  399 

U. 

Umber  mines  near  Lamaca,  465 
Unger,  M.,  his  report  on  the  resources 
of  Cyprus,  230 


V. 


Vakouf  lands,  tithes  on,  471 

Van  for  travelling,  4  ;   for  luggage,  18 

Varoschia,     150,     164;     earthenware 

manufactares  at,  164 
Vegetables,    122,    167;  price  of»  4231 

426 
Vegetation,  absence  of,  2  ;  of  the  low* 

lands  of  Cypnis,  33 
Venetian  cannon,  64 


Index. 


501 


Venetian  Republic  annex  Cyprus,  193 

Venetians  demolish  and  reconstruct  the 
fortifications  of  Lefkosia,  60 

Venus,  the  worship  of,  240,  419 

Verde  Antica,  79 

Verghis,  tax,  471  ;  yield  of,  472,  478 

Vines  from  Cyprus  planted  at  Madeira, 
267,  268 

Vine- stem  at  Lefkosia,  unusual  circum- 
ference of,  64 

Vineyards,  38,  267,  269,  275,  288,  342, 
384,  406,  487  (see  also  Grapes) 

Vineyards  near  Laurenchina,  38 

Volokalida,  104,  144 


W. 

Wages  of  artisans  and  labourers,  422 
"Walnut -trees  in  Cyprus,  34D,  406 
Warming-pans,  200 
Warren,  Colonel,  R.A.,  404,  407,  411, 

424,  456. 
Water  and  Water  Supply — 
Water,  7,  36,  73,  74,  89, 92,  208,  244, 
253.  297,  319,  346,  349,  352,  428, 
434  {see  also  Aqueducts,  Irrigation, 
Lakes) 
Water-fowl,  165 
Water-mills  of  Kythrea,  72  ;  at  Kuklia, 

90 
Waterspouts  of  Lamaca,  4 
Water,  springs  and  streams,  77 
Water-springs,  intelligence  of  the  Cy- 
priote in  search  of,  34 
Water  supply  of  Larnaca,  .7  ;    of  Lef- 
kosia, 02  ;  in  case  of  invasion,  62 
Water-wheels  of  Cyprus,  70,  352-354 
Waterworks,  vestiges  of  ancient,  74 
Watkins,   Consul,   his    report  on   the 

wine  trade  of  Cyprus,  281 
Wauchope,  Captain,   456 ;  estimate  of 


revenue  and  expenditure  for  BafTo, 

1879-80,    482;    silk    cultivation    of 

Baffo,  483  .1 

Well-sinker,  the  Cypriote,  34 
Wells  of  C3rprus,  existence  ol  salt  in, 

23  ;   of  Lefkosia,   contaminated  by 

sewage,  62 
White,     Lieut. -Colonel,     218,     456  ; 

meteorological  data,  433 ;    meteoro« 

logical  register  at  Lefkosia,  435,  462, 

463 

Williamson.  Mr.  Z.  Z.,  agent  at 
Lamaca,  5 

Windlass,  the  primitive  Cyprian,  35 

Windmills,  their  necessity  in  the 
Messaria,  75 

Wine,  175,  268,  269,  276,  284,  402 

Wine  district  of  Limasol,  267 

Wine,  export  of,  402 

Wines,  customs  duty  on,  270 

Wines,  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope^ 
268  ;  of  Cyprus,  267-292 

Wine  tax,  283 

Wine  trade  of  Cyprus,  Consul's  reports 
upon,  280,  281,  487 

Wolseley,  Sir  Garnet,  his  welcome  to 
the  author,  57,  266,  457 

Women,  dress  of,  144 

Women  of  Cyprus,  their  neglected 
dress,  42  ;  head-dress  of,  42  ;  manners 
of,  43  ;  their  dwellings,  43  ;  chastity 
of,  43,  186,  232,  243,  364,  438 

Wood-cocks,  485 

Wood-pigeons,  485 

Woods  and  forests,  {see  Forests) 

Woomonos  (monk),  455 

Wreck  of  an  Austrian  steamer  at  Volo- 
kalida, 108 


Z. 


Zaphkehs  (police),  421 


THE    END. 


LONDON': 
R.   CLAV,  SONS,  AND  TAVLOK. 
'BREAD  STREET  HILL,  B.C.- 


WORKS  BY  SIR  SAMUEL  W.  BAKER. 


ISMAILIA:  A  Narrative  of  the  Expedition  to  Central 
Africa  for  the  Suppression  of  the  Slave  Trade,  organized  by  Ismail, 
Khedive  of  Egypt.  With  Portraits,  Maps,  and  fifty  full-page 
Illustrations  by  Zwecker  and  Durand.  New  and  Cheaper 
Edition.     'Crown  8vo.     dr. 

**  A  book  which  will  be  read  with  very  great  interest." — Times, 

•*  Well  written  and  full  of  remarkable  adventures." — Pall  Mall  Gazette, 

**  Adds  another  thrilling  chapter  to  the  history  of  African  adventure." — Daily 

News. 

**  Reads  more  hke  a  romance  .  .  .  incomparably  more  entertaining  than  books 

of  African  travel  usually  are," — Morning  Post, 


THE   ALBERT  NTANZA  Great  Basin  of  the  Nile,  and 

Exploration    of  the    Nile    Sources.      Fifth    Edition.      Maps    and 
Illustrations.      Crown  8vo.    6s, 

"  Channingly  written,"  says  the  Spectator^  "  full,  as  might  be  expected,  of 
incident,  and  free  from  that  wearisome  reiteration  of  useless  facts  which  is  the 
drawback  to  almost  all  books  of  African  traveL" 


THE    NILE    TRIBUTARIES    OF   ABYSSINIA,    and 

THE    SWORD    HUNTERS     OF    THE    HAMRAN    ARABS. 
With  Maps  and  Illustrations.     Sixth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    6j. 

The  Times  says:  "It  adds  much  to  our  information  respecting  Egyptian 
Abyssinia  and  the  different  races  that  spread  over  it.  It  contains,  moreover,  some 
notable  instances  of  English  daring  and  enterprising  skill ;  it  abounds  in  animated 
tales  of  exploits  dear  to  the  heart  of  British  sportsman  ;  and  it  will  attract  even 
the  least  studious  reader,  as  the  author  tells  a  story  well,  and  can  describe  nature 
with  uncommon  power.' 


i» 


CAST  UP  BY  THE  SEA  ;  OR,  THE  ADVENTURES 

OF  NED  GREY.    With  Illustrations  by  Huard.    Sixth  Edition 
Crown  8vo,  cloth  gilt    df. 

"  An  admirable  tale  of  adventure,  of  marvellous  incidents,  wild  exploits,  and 
terrible  denouements." — Daily  News, 

**  A  story  of  adventure  by  sea  and  land  in  the  good  old  style." — Pall  Mall 
Gazette, 


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  LONDON. 


With  Two  Illustrations  and  Four  Maps,     %vo.     14J. 


CYPRUS: 


BY 


R.   HAMILTON   LANG, 

Z»a/tf  /^.//.  Consul  for  the  Island  of  Cyprus. 


"  We  can  heartily  commend  Mr.  Lang's  most  interesting  volume, 
with  its  admirable  maps,  both  general  and  special,  no  less  to  those 
who  contemplate  business  connections  with  the  island  than  to  the 
general  student  of  Cypriote  antiquities,  history,  and  topography. — 
Graphic, 

"  It  is  a  systematically  planned  monograph  on  Cyprus — its  people, 
products,  resources,  industry,  history,  art,  and  archeology,  founded 
partly  on  experience,  but  mainly  on  research.  Much  that  is  new  will 
be  found  here.* — Daily  News, 

"  The  fair  and  impartial  account  of  her  past  and  present  to  be 
found  in  these  pages  has  an  undoubted  claim  on  the  attention  of  all 
intelligent  readers." — Morning  Post, 

"  This,  we  venture  to  think,  is  really  the  most  important  contri- 
bution to  a  knowledge  of  our  new  dependency  that  has  been  published 
since  the  surprise  was  announced. — Nature, 


MACMILLAN  AND   CO.,  LONDON. 


BSDFOED  STUXST,   StRAND,   LONDON,  W.C. 
August^  1879. 

Macmillan  ^  Co:s  Catalogue  of  Works 
in  the  Departments  of  History^  Biography^ 
Travels^  Critical  and  Literary  Essays, 
Politics^  Political  and  Social  Economy^ 
Law^  etc. ;  and  Works  connected  with  Lan^ 
guage. 

HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  &c. 

Albemarle— FIFTY  YEARS  OF  MY  LIFE.  By  George 
Thomas,  Earl  of  Albemarle.  With  Steel  Portrait  of  the  first  Earl 
of  Albemarle,  eneraved  by  Jesns.  Third  and  Cheaper  Edition. 
Crown  8vo.     yj.  6d, 

*•  The  book  is  one  of  the  most  amusing  of  its  class,  .  .  .  Tluse  remi" 
niscences  have  the  charm  and  flavour  of  personal  experience^  and  they 
bring  us  into  direct  conicut  with  thepersom  they  describe  " — Edinburgh 
Review. 

Anderson.— MANDALAY  TO  MOMIEN ;  a  Narrative  of  the 
Two  Expedition^  to  Westei^i  China,  of  1868  and  1875,  under 
Colonel  E.  B.  Sladen  and  Cblonel  Horace  Browne.  By  Dr. 
Anderson,  F.R.S.E.,  Medical,  and  Scientific  Officer  to  the  Ex- 
peditions. With  nttmerous  M«ps  vend.  Illustrations.  8vo.  21/. 
"  A  handsome^  tvell4imed,  entertaining^  and  instructive  volume" — 
Academy. 

'M  pleasant,  u^fid,    carefulfy^WKitten^   and  important   work." — 

AXHENiKUM. 

Appleton. — ^Works  by  T.  G.  Appleton  :— 
A  NILE  JOURNAX^    IHustrajted  by  Eugene  Benson.    Crown 

8va    6s. 
SYRIAN  SUNSHINE.    Crown  8to.     dr. 

Arnold. — essays  in  criticism.  By  Matthew  Arnold. 
New  Edition,  Revised  and  Enlafged.    Crown  8to.     9^. 

Atkinson.— AN  ART  TOUR  TO  NORTHERN  CAPITALS 
OF  EUROPE,  including  Descriptions  of  the  Towns,  the  Museums, 
and  other  Art  Treasures  of  Copoihagen,  Christiania,  Stockholm, 

S,ooa8.79.  -  ^ 


1     MA  CMTLLAfSrS  CA  TALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Abo,  Helsingfors,  Wiborg,    St   Petersburg,   Moscow,   and  Kief. 
By  Jf.  Beavington  Atkinson.    8vo.     i2j. 

*'  Although  the  main  purtoseofthe  book  is  strictly  kept  in  vieWy  and  toe 
never  forget  for  long  thcU  we  are  travelling  with  a  student  and  connoisseur^ 
Air,  Atkinson  gives  variety  to  his  narrative  by  glimpses  of  scenery  and 
brief  allusions  to  history  and  manners  which  are  ahoays  welcome  when 
they  occur,  and  are  never  wordy  or  overdone.  We  have  seldom  mei  with 
a  book  in  which  what  is  principal  and  what  is  accessory  have  been  kept  in 
better  proportion  to  each  other, — Saturday  RfiVlsw. 

Bailey.— THE  SUCCESSION  TO  THE  ENGLISH  CROWN. 
A  Historical  Sketch.  By  A.  Bailsy»  M.A.»  Banister-at-Law. 
Crown  8vo.    is,  6d, 

Baker  (Sir  Samuel  W.)— Works  by  Sir  Samuel  Bakkk, 
Pacha,  M.A.,  F.R.G.S.  :— 

ISMAILIA  :  A  Narrative  of  the  Expedition  to  Central  Africa  "for 
the  Suppression  of  the  Slave  Trade,  oeganised  by  Isaaail,  Khediv« 
of  Egypt.  With  Portraits,  Map,  and  fifty  fuJI-ptfe  Illustrations 
by  ZwECKJBR  and  Durand.  New  and  Cheaper  £ditionk  With 
New  Preface.    Crown  8vo.    6f. 

V  ^^  ^^^  ««^  ^  ^^  ^"^  very  great  inUrest,  ^— TiME&  *<  Weil 
wriUen  and  full  of  remarkable  advtntures.*^ — Pall  Mall  Gazetts. 
**Adds  another  thrilUn^  chapter  to  the  history  of  African  adventure.** ^^ 
Daily  News.  ** Heads  more  like  a  romance,  . . .  incomparably  more 
entertaining  than  books  of  African  travel  usually  are," — Morning  Post. 

t HE  ALBERT  N'YANZA  Great  Basin  of  the  NUe,  and  Explora- 
tion of  the  Nile  Sources.  Fifth  Edition.  Maps  and  Illustrations. 
Crown  8vo.    ^. 

.  **  Charmingly  written;**  says  the  Spectator,  "A//,  as  might  he 
txpected^  of  incident,  and  free  from,  thai  wearisome  reileration  ^  useUss 
facts  which  is  the  drawback  to  almost  all  books  of  African  travd^** 

THE  NILE  TRIBUTARIES  OF  ABYSSINIA,  and  Ac  Sword 
Hunters  of  the  Hamran  Arabs.  With  Maps  and  lUostratioiis. 
Sixth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    dr* 

7^  Times  says  :  *^It  adds  much  to  our  informeUum  respecting  Egyptian 
Abyssinia  and  Uie  dijferent  reues  that  spread  over  it.  It  contains,  rnore^ 
over,  some  notable  instances  of  English  daring  and  enterprising  skill ; 
it  abounds  in  animated  tales  of  exploits  dear  to  the  heart  of  the  British 
sportsman  ;  and  it  will  attract  even  the  least  studious  reader,  as  the  autkaf 
tells  a  story  well,  and  eon  describe  nature  with  wuommon power,** 

Bancroft— THE  HISTORY  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES 
OF  AMERICA,  FROM  THE  DISCOVERY  OF  THE  CON. 
TINENT.  By  George  Bancroft.  New  and  thoroughly  Re- 
vised Edition*    Six  Vols.    Crown  8vo.    541. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC. 


Barker  (Lady).-^ Works  by  Lady  Barku  :^ 

A  YEAR'S  HOUSEKEEPING  IN  SOUTH  AFRICA.  With 
Illustrations.     New-  and  Cheaper  Edition;     Crown  8vo.     6j. 

"  IVe  have  to  thank  Lady  Barker  Jor  a  very  amusing  book^  over  which 
we  have  spent  many  a  ddigkifid  htmr^  and  of  which  we  tt/ill  not  take 
team  wUhoni  edkuUeigto  the  ineffably  droll  illustrations  which  add  so  very 
muck  ta  the  eufoyment  of  her  eUctr  and  sparkling  descriptions, " — Mo&NXNG 
Post. 

Bccsly.— STORIES  FROM  THE  HISTORY  OF  ROME.     By 
Mrs.  Beesly.     Extra  fcap.  8yo.     2s,  6d, 
"  A  little  book  for  which  every  cuUiuaied  and  intelligent  mother  will  he 
grateful  for.  ^ — ExAMiNEiu 

Bismarck—IN  THE  FRANCO-GERMAN  WAR.  An  Anthoriied 
Translation  from  the  German  of  Dr.  MoRiTZ  BusCH.     Two  Vols. 
Crown  8vo.     i8x. 
The  Times  says  .*—"  The  publication  of  Bismarck*s  after-dinner  talk^ 
whether  ^creet  or  not^  vnll  be  of  priceless  naigrafhiccU  valuer  and  English- 
men^ at  leasts  will  not  be  exposed  to  juarrd  wUh  Dr.  Busck  for  givinp  a 
picture  as  true  to  life  as  Boswdl  V '  Johetson  ^  of  the  foremost  practuat 
genius  that  Germany  hasproAiced  since  Frederick  the  Great. " 

Blackbume.— BIOGRAPHY  OF  THE  RIGHT  HON. 
FRANCIS  BLACKBURNE,  Late  Lord  Chancellor  of  Ireland. 
Chiefly  in  connexion  with  his  Public  and  PoKtical  Career.  By  his 
Son,  Edward  Blackburns,  Q.C.  With  Portrait  Engraved  by 
JsBNS.     8vo.     \2S, 

Blanford  (W.  T.>— GEOLOGY  and  ZOOLOGY  OF 
ABYSSINIA.    By  W.  T.  Blanford.    8vo.    21/. 

Bronte. — charlotte  BRONTE.  a  Monograph.  By  T. 
Wemyss  Reid.  With  Illustrations.  Third  Edition.  Crown 
8yo.    6r. 

Mr.  RAVs  little  volume,  which  is  based  larj^ely  on  letters,  hitherto 
unpublished,  from  Charlotte  BronU  to  her  school-fellow  and  lift-long 
fnend.  Miss  Ellen  Nussey,  is  meant  to  be  a  companion,  and  not  a  rival, 
ta  Mrs.  GaskeWs  well-knewn  **  L^e."  To  speak  of  the  advantage  of 
making  biography  autobiographical  by  the  liberal  use  of  correspondence  has 
she  was  by  nature  (as  Mr,  Reid  puts  it)*' a  hai>py  and  high-spirited  girl, 
and  that  even  to  the  very  last  she  had  the  faculty  of  overcoming  her 
sorrows  by  means  of  that  steadfast  courage  which  wis  her  most  preciuus 
^ssession,  and  to  which  she  was  indited  for  her  successive  victories  over 
trials  and  d&appointments  of  no  ordinary  character,** 

The  book  is  illustrated  by  a  Portrait  of  the  Rev,  Patrick  BronU,  several 
Views  of  Haworth  and  its  neighbourhood,  and  a  facsimile  ^  one  oj  the 
most  characteristic  of  Charlottes  letters. 

A  3 


4     MACMlLLAIsrS  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 


Brooke.— THE  RAJA  OF  SARAWAK :  an  Account  of  Sir 
James  Brooke,  K.C.B.,  LL.D.  Given  chiefly,  through  Letters 
or  Journals.  By  Gbrtrudb  L.  Jacob.  Witk  Portrait  and 
Maps.     Two  Vols.     8vo.     2^. 

**  They  who  read  Mhs  Jaedf^s  bcmk—and  all  skmdd  read  it:  all  who 
are  under  the  ddusion  that  in  our  time  there  is  Ho  scope  for  heroism^  and 
fio  place  for  romantic  adventure,  ond  no  place  for  enterprise  and  ambition 
— will  see  how  incident  is  crowded  upon  incident,  and  struggle  upon 
struck,  till  in  the  very  abundance  of  materials  that  come  to  her  hand 
ike  authoress  can  scarcely  stop  to  gii/e  sufficient  distinctness  to  her 
wonderful  narrative^ — AcAdehy. 

Brooke.— RECOLLECTIONS  OF  THE  IRISH  CHURCH. 
By  Richard  S.  Brooke^  P.D.,  late  Rector  of  Wyton,  Hunts. 
Crown  8vo.    41*.  td, 

Bryce. — Works  by  James  Bryce,  D.C.L.,  R^us  Ptx>fessor  of 
Civil  Law,  Oxford  : — 

THE  HOLY  ROMAN  EMPIRE.*  SUth  Edition,  Revised  and 
Enlaiiged.     Crown  8vo.     Is,  dd, 

*^ It  exactly  supplies  a  want:  it  affords  a  hey  to  much  which  men 
read  of  in  their  boohs  as  isolated  facts,  but  of  which  they  heme  hitherto 
had  no  connected  exposition  set  before  them^ — ^Saturday  Review. 

TRANSCAUCASIA  AND  ARARAT:  being  Notes  of  a  Vacation 
Tour  in  the  Autumn  of  1876.  Witli  an  Illustration  and  Map. 
Third  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     9j. 

'**Mr,  Bryce  has  written  a  lively  and  at  the  same  time  an  instructive 
description  of  the  tour  he  made  last  year  in  and  about  the  Caucasus.  When 
wdl'informai  a  jurist  travels  into  regions  sddom  visited,  anel  even 
walks  up  a  mounicdH  so  rarely  scaled  as  Ararat,  he  is  justified  in  think- 
ing that  the  impressions  he  brings:  home  are  worthy  of  being  communiccUed  ^ 
to  the  world  at  large,  especially  when  a  terrible  war  is  casting  a  lurid ^ow 
over  the  countries  he  has  lately  surveyed  "^-Athe^^VM. 

Burgoyne.  —  POLITICAL   and   military   episodes 

DURING  THE  FIRST  HALF  OF  THE  REIGN  OF 
GEORGE  III.  Derived  from  the  Life  and  Correspondence  of 
the  Right  Hon.  J.  Burgoyne,  LieuL -General  in  his  Majesty's 
Army,  and  M.  P.  for  Pr«ston.  By  E.  B.  de  Fonblanqub.  With 
Portrait,  Heliotype  Plate,  and  Maps.     8vo.     i6Lr. 

Burke.— EDMUND  BURKE,  a  Historical  Study.  By  JOHK 
Morlby,  B.  a.,  Oxon.     Crown  8vo.     7^.  6d, 

**  The  style  is  terse  and  incisive,  and  brilliant  with   epigram  and 
foint.     Its  sustained  power  of  reasoning,   its  wide  sweep  of  observation 
and  reflection,  its  elevated  ethical  and  social  tone,  stamp  it  as  a  work  of 
hi^h  excellence.'* — Saturday  Review. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC         5 

Burrows.— WORTHIES  OF  ALL  SOULS  :  Four  Centuries  of 
English  History.     Illustrated  from  liie  College  Archives.      By 
Montagu  Burrows,  Chichele  Professor  of  Modem  History  at 
Oxford,  FeUow  of  All  Souls.     8vo.     14J. 
**A  most  amusing  as  well  as  a  most  instructive  book. — Guardian. 

Campbell.— LOG-LETTERS  FROM  THE  "CHALLENGER." 
By  Lord  George  Campbell.  Witii  Map.  Fifth  and  cheaper 
Edition.    Crown  8vo.    dr. 

^*A  deligktfid  book,  wkich  jve  heartHy  commend  to  the  general  reader^* 
—Saturday  Review, 

"  We  do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  anything  so  fresh,  so  picturesque,  so 
generally  delightful,  as  these  log-letters  has  nfit  appeared  among  books  of 
travel  fbr  a  long  timeJ^ — Examiner. 

"^  more  lively  and  amusing  record  of  travd  we  have  not  had  the 
fortune  to  read  for  fome  time.  The  whole  book  is  pervaded  by  a  spirit  of 
life,  animation,  and /un,'*—^STAliDARD. 

Campbell.— MY  circular  notes  :  Extracts  from  Journals ; 

Letters  sent  Home ;  Ceolc^cal*  and  other  Notes,  written  while 

Travelling  Westwards  round  the  World,  from  July  6th,  1874,  to 

July  6th,  1875.     ^y  J'  F.  Campbell,  Author  of  **  Frost  and 

Fire."    Cheaper  Issue.     Crown  8vo.     6s, 

**  IVe  have  read  numbers  of  books  of  travel,  but  we  caA  call  to  mind 

few  that  have  given  us  more  genuine  pleasure  than  this,     A  more  a^eC' 

able  style  of  narrative  than  hu  itis  harcRy  possible  to  conceive.     We  seem 

to  be  accompanying  him  in  his  trip  round  the  world,  so  life-like  is  hit 

description  of  the  countries  he  tnsited." — Land  and  Water. 

Campbell. — ^TURKS  and  greeks.  Notes  of  a  recent  E»- 
cnrsion.  By  th^  Hon.  Dudley  Campbell,  M.A.  With  Colouriod 
Map.     Crowji  8vo.    y.  6d, 

CarStareS.-TT-WILLIAM  CARSTARES  :  a  Character  and  Career 
of  the  Revolutionary  Epoch  (1649—1715).  By  Robert  Story, 
Minister  of  Rosneatn.'    8va     I2x. 

Chatterton  :  A  biographical  study.  By  Daniel 
Wilson,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  History  and  English  literature  in 
University  College,  Toronto.     Crown  8vo.     6s,  6d. 

Chatterton  :  a  STQJRY  OF  THE  year  1770.  By  Professor 
Masson,  LL.I>.     Crown  «vo.    5j. 

Clark.— MEMORIALS   FROM  JOURNALS  AND  LETTERS 

OF    SAMUEL    CLARK,    M.A.,     formerly  Principal  of  the 

-   National  Society's  Training  College,   Battersea.      Edited    with 

Introduction  by  his  Wife.    With  Portrait.     Crown  Svo.    Js,  6d. 


i; 

■ 
I 


6    MACMILLAirS  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 


Combe.— THE  life  of  GEORGE  combe,  Autbor  of  "TTie 
Constitution  of  Man."     By  Charles  Gibson.      With  Three 
Portraits  engraved  by  Jeens.     Two  Vok.    Sra     321. 
**A  graphic  and  interesAng  aceount  of  the  hng Hfi andineUfai^bU 

iahours  of  a  very  reinarkaHe  man" — Scotsman. 

Cooper.— ATHENE  CANTABRIGIENSES.  By  ClXASLB 
Hbnry  Cooper,  F.S.A.,  and  Thompson  Cooper,  F.S.A. 
VoL  I.  8vo.,  1500—85,  i8j.  ;    VoL  IL,  1586—1609,  i8f. 

Correggic— ANTONIO  ALLEGRI  DA  CORREGGIO.  From 
the  Gennan  of  Dr.  Julius  Meyer,  Director  of  the  Royal  Gallery, 
Berlin.  Edited,  with  an  Introduction,  by  Mrs.  Heaton.  Con- 
taining Twenty  Woodbury-type  Illustrations.  Royal  8vo.  Qoth 
el^ant.     3IJ.  6d, 

Cox  (O.  V.)— RECOLLECTIONS  OF  OXFORD.  By  a 
V.  Cox,  M.A.,  New  College,  kte  Esquire  Bedel  and  Coroner 
in  the  University  of  Oxford.    Cheaper  Edition,    Crown  8vo.    dr. 

Cunynghame  (Sir  A.  T.)— MY  COMMAND  IN  SOUTH 

AFRICA,  1874—78.    Comprising  Experiences  of  Travel  m  the 
Colonies  of  South  Africa  and  the  Independent  States.     By  Sir 
Arthur   Thurlow  Cunynghame,  G.CB.,  then  Lieutenant- 
Governor  and  Commander  of  the  Forces  in  South  Africa.     Third 
Edition*    8vo.     I2f.  dd. 
The  Times  says  : — "//  is  a  volume  of  ^reai  interest^  ....  full  of 
incidents  which  vividly  illustrate  the  condition  of  the  Colonies  and  the 
character  and  habits  of  the  natives,  •  ,  ,  ,  It  contains  valuable  illus- 
trations of  Cape  watfarCy  and  at  the  present  mofnent  it  cannot  fail  to 
command  widC'Spread  attenHon^^ 

"Daily  News."— the  DAILY  NEWS'  CORRESPOND- 
ENCE  of  the  War  between  Germany  and  Frante,  1870^1.  Edited 
with  Notes  and  Comments.  New  Edition.  Complete  in  One 
Volume.     With  Maps  and  Plans.     Crown  8vo.   Ar. 

THE  DAILY  NEWS'  CORRESPONDENCE  of  the  War  between 

Russia  and  Turkey,  to  the  fall  of  Kars.     Including  the  letters  of 

Mr.  Archibald  Forbes,  Mr.  J.  E.  McGnhan,  and  other  Spedal 

Correspondents  in  Europe  and  Asia.     Secoikd  Edition,  -enlarged. 

-    ,  Cheaper  Edition.    Crown  8vo.     ^. 

\  FROM  THE  FALL  OF  KARS  TO  THE  CONCLUSION  OF 

PEACE.     Cheaper  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    6j. 

Davidson.— THE  life  OP  A  SCOTTISH  PROBATIONER  ; 
being  a  Memoir  of  Thomas  Davidson,  with  his  Poems  and 
Letters.  By  James  Brown,  Minister  of  St.  James's  Street 
Church,  Paisley.  Second  Edition,  reviled  sad  enlaigrd,  with 
Portrait     Crown  8vo.     7j.  inL 


HISTOJ^y,  flOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS.  ETC.        f 


■fci  11 


Deas.— THE  RIVER  CLYDE.  An  Histoqcai  Description  of  the 
Riae  and  Pliogiie^  of  the  Haztwar  -of  G4a9?ow,  and  of  the  Im<> 
wovcmcflt  of  the  River  from  Okagew  to  Fort  Glasgow.  By  J. 
DEA5,  M.  In&t  C.E.    8yo.     MU.M 

Denison.— A  history  of  cavalry  from  the  ear- 

LIEST  TIMES.  With  Lessons  for  the  Future.  By  Lieut -Col. 
Georgb  Denison,  Cotemanding  the  Governor-Generars  Boc^ 
Guard,  Canada,  Author  of  ">f  odem  Cayahy."  "With  Maps  and 
Plans.    Svo.     i^. 

Dilke.— GREATER  BRITAIN.    A  Reoord  of  Travd  in  Enffish- 

ipeaking  Countries  during  1866-7.     (Awerioa,  Australia,  India.) 

By  Sir  Charlxs  Wsntwortu  Dxlkk,  M.P.     Sisth  Edition. 

Crown  Svo.    6/. 

"  Many  of  the  mbjtcts  discussed  in  the$epages^^  mvs  th£  Daily  News, 

'*  are  of  the  widest  inttre^t^  and  such  as  no  man  who  cares  for  the  future 

of  his  race  and  rf  the  world  can  afford  to  treat  with  indifference,*^ 

Doyle.— HISTORY  OF  AMERICA.     By  J.  A.  Dotlk.     With 
Maps.     i8mo.     4J.  6d. 
**  Mr,  Dtyl^s  styU  is  cioar  and  simple^  his  facts  are  aeaetaiefy  stated^ 
And  his  hook  is  meritoriously  frm  frmn  pr^dice  on  f$iestions  wkoro 
partisanship  runs  high  amongst  us  J^^-'^M^tLUAit  Review. 

Dnimmond  of  Hawthomden :  the  STORY  OF  HIS 
LIFE  AND  WRITINGS.  By  Professor  Masson.  With  Por- 
trait and  Vignette  engraved  by  C.  H.  Jebns.  Crown  Svo.  10s.  6d. 

DufF. — WorJcs  by  M.  E.  Gjlant-Duff,  M.P.,  late  Under  SccreUry 
of  State  for  India : — 
NOTES  OF  AN  INDIAN  JOURNEY.  With  Map.  Svo.  lox.  6d, 
*'  Th€se  notes  are  full  of  pleasant  n  marks  and  iliustrations^  borrowed 

from  every  hind  of  source,** — Saturday  Review. 

MISCELLANIES  POLITICAL  AND  LITERARY.  Svo.  lor.  6d. 

Eadic— LIFE  OF  JOHN  EADIE,  D.D.,  LL.D.     By  James 
Brown,  D.D.,  Author  ot  "  The  Life  of  a  Scottish  Probabpner." 
With  Portrait.    Second  Edition.    Crown  Svo.     yj.  6d. 
"Ah  aNywtitten  and  characteristic  biography,** — ^TlMES. 

Elliott.— LIFE  OF  HENRY  VENN  ELLIOTT,  of  Brighton. 
By  JosiAH  Bateman,  M.  A.  With  Portrait,  ei^nived  by  Jebns. 
Extra  fcap.  Svo.    Third  and  Cheaper  Edition,     is, 

Elze.— ESSAYS  ON  SHAKESPEARE.     By  Dr.  Karl  Elze. 
Translated  with  the  Andior*s  sanction  by  L.    DoRA  Schmitt. 
Svo.      I2J. 
"  A  more  desirable  amtribution  to  ctitieism  has  not  recently  been  made,** 

— ATHEKiCUlf. 


%     MACMILLAJVS  CATALOGUE  OF  IVORKS  IN 
English  Men  of  Letters.    Edited  by  John  Mo&ley.     a 

Series  of  Short  Books  Xo  tell  people  what  is  best  worth  knowing 
as  to  the  Life,  Chazacter,  aad  Works  of  some  of  the  great 
English  Writers.     In  crown  8vo.     Price  zr.  6d.  each. 

I.  DR.  JOHNSON.    By  Leslie  Stephen. 

**  The  n€W  series  opens  well  with  Mr,  Leslie  SlephetCs  sketch  of  I>r^ 
Johnson,  It  could  hardly  hasue  been  done  better;  and  it  will  convey  to 
the  readers  for  whom  it  is  intended  a  juster  estimate  of  Johnson  than 
either  of  the  two  essays  of  Lord  Macaulay*^ — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

IL  SIR  WALTER  SCOTT.  ByR.  H.  Hutton. 
'*  The  tofte  of  the  volume  is  excellent  thtoughout" — ATHENiBUM. 
*'  IVe  could  not  wish  for  a  more  suggestive  introduction  to  Scott  and 
his  poems  and  novels.^^ — Examiner. 

in.  GIBBON.     By  J.  C.  MoRisoN. 

**As  a  clear,  thoufhtful,  and  attractive  record  of  the  life  and  works  of 
the  greatest  among  the  world* s  historians,  it  deserves  the  highest  praise,." — 
Examiner. 

IV.  SHELLEY.    By  J.  A  Symonds. 

"  The  lovers  of  this  great  poet  are  to  be  congratulated  on  having  as 
their  command  so  fresh,  cleat,  and  intelligent  a  presentment  of  the  sutject^ 
written  by  a  man  ofculequate  and  wide  culture,  '■^Atbxs/RVVL 

V.  HUME.    By  Professor  Huxley. 

*'  It  may  fairly  be  said  that  no  one  now  living  could  have  expounded 
Hume  with  more  sympathy  or  with  equal  perspicuity^* — Athen^um. 

VL  GOLDSMITH.    By  William  Black. 

^*  Mr,  Black  brings  a  fine  sympathy  and  taste  to  bear  in  his  criticism 
of  Goldsmith^  s  writings  as  well  gs  iff  his  sketch  of  theincidents  of  his  life" 
Athenaeum. 

VII.  DEEOE.    By  W.  MiNTO. 

*'  Mr»  Minted s  book  is  careful  and  accurate  in  all  that  is  stated,  and 
iaithjul  in  all  that  it  suggests,,    It  will  repay  reading  more  than  once, " 
-ATHENiEUM. 

VIII.  BURNS.     By  Principal  ShaiRP,  Professor  of  Poetry  in  the 
University  of  Oxford. 

^*Itis  impossible  to  desire  fairer  criticism  than  Prinripal  Shairp^s 

m  Bums'* s  poetry None  of  the  series  has  given  a  truer  estitnate 

either  of  character  or  of  genius  than  this  Utile  volume^  ....  and  all 
who  read  it  will  be  thoroughly  grateful  to  the  author  for '  this  monument 
to  the  genius  of  Scotland's  greatest  poet*'' — Spectator. 

IX.  SPENSER,  By  the  Very  Rev.,thc  Dean  of5t.  Paul's. 

y  Dr.  Church  is  master  of  his  subject,  and  writes  always  with  good 
taste,** — Academy. 

X.  THACKERAY.    By  Anthony  Trollope. 

"  Mr,  Trollopis  sketch  is  excellently  adapted  to  JuJU  the  purpose  of 
the  series  in  which  it  appears.** — Athen^um. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.         9 

English  Men  of  Letters. — continued. 
BURKE.    By  John  Mprley.  )  r»r     /       v 

MILTON.     By  Mark  Pattison.  \lNearfy  ready. 

Others  in  preparation. 

Eton  College,  History  of.    By  H.  C.  Maxwell  Lyte, 

M.A.      With  numerous  Illustrations  by  Professor  Delamotte, 
Coloured  Plates,  and  a  Steel  Portrait  of  the  Founder,  engraved 
by  C.    H.  Jeens.     New  and  cheaper  Issue,   with  Corrections. 
Medium  8vo.     Cloth  elegant    21s. 
"  Hitherto  no  account  of  the  College,  with  all  its  associations,  has 

appeared  which  can  compare  either  in  completeness  <tr  in  interest  with 

this,  .  ,  ,  It  is  indeed  a  book  worthy  of  the  ancient  renown  of  King 

Henr/s  College^ — Daily  News. 

**  We  are  at  length  presented  with  a  work  on  England's  greatest  public 

school y  worthy  of  the  subject  of  which  it  treats,  ,  .  ,  A  really  valuable  and 

authentic  history  of  Eton  College:" —K^vkblVUMH. 

European    History,    Narrated    in     a    Series    of    Historical 

Selections  from  the  best  Authorities.     Edited  and  arranged  by 

£.  M.  Sewell  and  C.  M.  Yonge.    First  Series,  crown  Svo,  6s,  ; 

Second  Series,  1088-1228,  crown  8vo.  6x.     Thlsd  Edition. 

*'  IVeknow  of  scarcely  anything,"  says  the  Guardian,  of  this  volunu, 

**  which  is  so  likely  to  raise  to  a  higher  level  the  average  standard  of 

English  education," 

Faraday. — MICHAEL  FARADAY.    By  J.   H.   Gladstone, 
Ph.D.,  F.R.S.    Second  Edition,  with  Portrait  engraved  by  Jeens 
from  a  photograph  by  J.  Watkins.    Crown  8vo.   4/.  -d^/. 
PORTRAIT.     Artist's  Proof.     5^. 

Forbes.— LIFE    and    letters    of    tames    DAVID 

FORBES,  F.R.S.,  late  Principal  of  the  United  CoUege  in  the 
University  of  St  Andrews.  By  J.  C.  Shairp,  LL.D.,  Principal 
of  the  United  College  in  the  University  of  St.  Andrews ;  P.  G. 
Tait,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Natural  Philosophy  in  the  Univcrsitv 
of  Edinbui^h;  and  A.  Adams-Reilly,  F.K.G.S.  8vo.  with 
Portraits,  Map,  and  Illustrations,  i6j. 

Freeman. — ^Works  by  Edward  A.  Freeman,  D.C.L.,LL.D.  :— 
HISTORICAL  ESSAYS.  Third  Edition.  8vo.  loj.  6^ 
Contents  :—/.  '*  The  Mythical  and  Romantic  Elements  in  Early 
EnHish  History;"  II.  ''The  Continuity  of  English  History;"  HI 
**The  Relations  between  the  Crowns  of  England  and  Scotland ;"  IV, 
••  St,  Thomas  of  Canterbury  and  his  Biographers;"  V,  **  The  Reign  of 
Edward  the  Third:"  VI,  "  The  Holy  Roman  Empire;"  VIL  '"The 
Franks  and  the  Gauls;"  VIII,  ''The  Early  Sieges  of  Paris;"  IX. 
''Frederick  the  hirst.  King  of  Italy;"  X,  •*  The  Emperor  Frederuk  the 
Second:"  XI,  ''Charles  the  Bold;"  XII.  " Presidential  Government. 


12    MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Goldsmid.— TELEGRAPH  AND  TRAVEL.  A  Narrative  of 
the  Formation  and  Development  of  Telegraphic  Communication 
between  England  and  India,  under  the  orders  of  Her  Majest/s 
Government,  with  incidental  Notices  of  the  Countries  traversed  hj 
the  Lines.  By  Colonel  Sir  Frederic  Goldsmid,  C.B.,  K.CS.L, 
late  Director  of  the  Government  Indo-European  Tel^raph.  With 
numerous  Illus.trations  and  Maps.  8vo,  2is, 
**  The  merit  of  the  work  is  a  total  absence  of  exaggeration,  wkich  does 

not,  however,  preclude  a  vividness  and  vigour  of  style  w^  always  character* 

istic  of  similar  narratives." — STANDARD. 

Gordon. — last  LETTERS  FROM  EGYPT,  to  which  are  added 

Letters  from  the  Cape.      By  Lady  Duff  Gordon.      With  a 

Memoir  by  her  Daugnter,  Mrs.  Ross,  and  Portrait  engraved  by 

Jekns.     Second  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     ^j. 

"  The  intending  tourist  who  wishes  to  acquaint  himself  with  the  country 

he  is  about  to  visit,  stands  embarrassed  amidst  the  riches  presented  for  hts 

choice,  and  in  the  end  probably  rests  contented  with  the  sober  usefulness  of 

Murray.     He  will  not,  however,  if  he  is  well  advised,  grudge  a  plcue  in 

his  portmanteau  to  this  book,** — Times. 

Gray. — CHINA.  A  History  of  the  Laws,  Manners,  and  Customs 
of  the  People.  By  the  Venerable  John  Henry  Gray.  LL.D., 
Archdeacon  of  Hong  Kong,  formerly  H.B.M.  Consular  Chaplain 
at  Canton.  Edited  by  W.  Gow  Gregor.  With  150  Full-page  Illustra- 
tions, being  FacsimUes  of  Drawings  by  a  Chinese  Artist.  2  Vols. 
Demy  8vo.  32J. 
**  Its  pages  contain  the  most  truthful  and  vivid  picture  of  Chinese  life 

which  has  ever  been  published, " — Athenaeum. 

**  The  only  elaborate  and  valuable  book  we  have  had  for  many  years 

trecUing  generally  of  the  people  of  the  Celestial  Empire," — ^ACADEMY. 

Green. — WoAs  by  John  Richard  Green  : — 

,  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  PEOPLE.  Vol.  I.— Early 
England — Foreign  Kings — The  Charter — The  Parliament.  With 
8  Coloured  Maps.  8vo.  idr.  VoL  II. — ^The  Monarchy, 
1461 — 1540  ;  the  Restoration,  1540 — 1603.  8vo.  idr.  Vol.  IT  I. 
— Puritan  England,  1603 — 1660^  the^  Revolution,  1660— 1688. 
With  4  Maps.    8vo.     i6j.  [Vol,  IV.  in  the  press. 

**Mr,  Green  has  done  a  work  which  probably  no  one  but  himself  could 
have  done.     He  has  read  and  assimilated  the  results  of  all  the  labours  of 
students  during  the  last  half  century  in  the  field  of  English  history,  and 
has  given  themxi  fresh  meaning  by  his  own  independent  study.    He  has 
fusai  together  by  the  force  of  sympathetic  imagination  all  that  he  hots  so 
collected,  and  has  ^ivcn  us  a  vivid  and  forcible  sketch  of  the  march  of 
English  histoty.     His  book,  both  in  its  aims  and  its  accomplishments^ 
rises  far  beyond  any  of  a  similar  kind,  and  it  will  give  the  colouring  to  the 
popular  view  to  English  history  for  some  time  to  f^iM^. ''—Examiner. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.       13 

J  Green. — continued. 

A  SHORT  HISTORY  OF  THE  ENGLISH  PEOPLE.     With 
^  Coloured  Maps,  Genealogical  Tables,  and  Chronological  Annals. 

fs.      Crown  8vo.    is,  6d.    Sixty-first  Thousand. 
^  '**  To  say  that  Mr,  Creen*s  hook  is  better  than  those  which  have  /fv- 

ceded  it,  would  be  to  convey  a  very  inadiquate  impression  of  its  merits.    It 
I  stands  alone  as  the  one  general  history  of  the  country,  for  the  sake  of 

which  all  others,  if  young  and  old  are  wise,  will  be  speedily  and  surely  set 

aside." 

STRAY  STUDIES  FROM  ENGLAND  AND  ITALY.  Crown 
8vo.  Zs,  6d.  Containing  :  Lambeth  and  the  Archbishops — The 
Florence  of  Dante — Venice  and  Rome— Early  History  of  Oxford 
— ^The  District  Visitor — Capri — Hotels  in  the  Clouds— Sketches 
in  Sunshine,  &^c 

**  One  and  all  of  the  papers  are  eminently  readable,^ ' — ATHSNiEUM. 

Guest.— LECTURES  ON  THE  HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND. 
By  M.  J.  Guest.    With  Maps.    Crown  8vo.    6;. 

Hamerton. — Works  by  p.  G.  Hamerton  : — 

THE  INTELLECTUAL  LIFE.     With  a  Portrait  of  Leonardo  da 

Vind,  etched  by  Leopold  Flameng.     Second  Edition.     Crown 

lof.  6</.    8vo. 

"  We  have  read  the  whole  book  with  great  pleasure,  and  we  can  re^ 

commend  it  strongly  to  all  who  can  appreciate  grave  reflections  on  a  very 

important  subject,  excdletUly  illustraied  from  the  resources  of  a  mind 

stored  with  much  recuUng  and  much  keen  obsetvation  of  real  life," — 

Saturday  Review. 

THOUGHTS   ABOUT   ART.     New  Edition,   revised,  with  an 

Introduction.     Crown  8vo.     %s.  6d. 
**  A  manual  of  sound  and  thorough  criticism  on  art^ — Standard. 

Hill. — THE  RECORDER  OF  BIRMINGHAM.  A  Memoir  of 
Matthew  Davenport  Hill,  with  Selections  from  his  Correspondence. 
By  his  Daughters  Rosamond  and  Florence  Davenport-Hill. 
With  Portrait  engraved  by  C.  H.  Jeens.    8Vo.     i6tf. 

Hill.— WHAT  WE  SAW  IN  AUSTRALIA.     By  Rosamond 
and  Florence  Hill,    Crown  8vo.     lOf.  6^. 
"  May  be  recommended  as  an  interesting  and  truthfiel  picture  of  the 
condition  of  those  lands  which  are  so  distant  and  yet  so  much  like  home." 
— Saturday  Review* 


14    MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Hodgson.-— MEMOIR  OF  REV.  FRANCIS  HODGSON, 
B.D.,  Scholar,  Poet,  and  Divine.  By  his  Son,  the  Rev.  James 
T.  Hodgson,  M.A.  Containing  numerous  Letters  from  Lord 
Byron  and  others.  With  Portrait  engraved  by  Jesns.  Two 
Vols.  Crown  8vo.  i8j. 
**  A  book  that  has  cuided  so  much  of  a  heaUky  nature  to  our  knowUdgt 

of  Byrotiy  and  that  contains  so  rich  a  store  of  delightful  correspondence, " 

— Athen^um. 

Hole A   GENEALOGICAL    STEMMA    OF    THE    KINGS 

OF  ENGLAND  AND  FRANCE.  By  the  Rev.  C.  HOLK, 
M.A.,  Trinity  College,  Cambridge.     On  Sheets  ix. 

A  BRIEF  BIOGRAPHICAL  DICTIONARY.  Compiled  and 
Arranged  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Hole,  M.A.  Seccmd  Edition. 
i8mo.     4r.  6d. 

Hooker  and    Ball.— marocco    and   the   great 

ATLAS:  Journal  of  a  Tour  in.  By  Sir  Joseph  D.  Hooker, 
K.CS.L,  C.B.,  F.R.S.,  &c.,  and  JohN  Ball,  F.R.S.  With  an 
Appendix,  including  a  Sketch  of  the  Geology  of  Marooco,  by 
G.  Maw,  F.L.S.,  F.G.S.  With  Illustrations  and  Map.  8vo.  2ix. 

Hozier  (H.   M.) — Works  by  Captain  Henry  M.   Hozier, 
late  Assistant  Military  Secretary  to  Lord  Napier  of  Magdala  : — 

THE  SEVEN  WEEKS'  WAR ;  Its  Antecedents  and  Incidents. 

New  and  Cheaper  Edition.     With  New  Preiace»  Maps,  and  Phms. 

Crown  8vo.     dr. 

"  All  thcU  Mr,  Hotter  saw  of  the  great  einents  of  the  war-^and  hs  saw 

a  large  shctre  of  them — he  dsscrihes  in  clear  and  vivid  languageJ*^^ 

Saturday  Review. 

THE  INVASIONS  OF  ENGLAND  :  a  History  of  the  Past,  with 
Lessons  for  the  Puture.     TvW)  Vols.     8vo.     28j. 

The  Pall  Mall  Gazette  says  : — **  As  to  all  invasions  executed,  or 
deliberately  projected  but  not  carried  out^  from  the  landing  of  yulius 
Casar  to  the  raising  of  the  Boulogne  camp.  Captain  Nomer  fumisku 
copious  and  most  interesting  particulars.** 

Hiibnen— A  ramble  ROUND  THE  WORLD  IN  1871.    By 
M.    Le  Baron   HObner,    formerly  Ambassador   and  Minister. 
Translated  by  Lady  Herbert.     New  and    Cheaper  Edition. 
With  numerous  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.    6s. 
**Itis  difficult  to  do  ample  justue  to  this  pleasant  narrative  of  trazfd 

,  ,  .  ,  it  does  not  contain  a  single  dull  paragraph.** — Morning  Post. 

Hughes. — ^Works  by  Thomas  Hughes>  Q.C,  Author  of  "Tom 
Brown's  School  Days." 
ALFRED  THE  GREAT.    New  Edition.    Crown  8va    6s. 


HTSTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.       15 
Hughes.*— t»ii/£«M^4£ 

MEACOIR  OF  A  BROTHER.  With  Portrait  of  Georgb  Hughes, 

cfter  Watts.     Engnived  by  J  bens.     Crown  8vo.      5x.     Sixth 

Edition. 

"  The  boy  who  can  read  this  booh  without  deriving  from  it  some  adcU- 

tionai  impulse  towards  Honourable^  manly,  and  ind^endent  conduct,  has 

no  good  stuff  in  him."— Daily  News. 

Hunt.— HISTORY  OF  ITALY.     By  the  Rev.  W.  Hunt,  M.A. 

Being  the  Fourth  Volume  of  the  Historical  Course  for  Schools. 

Edited  by  Edward  A.  Freeman,  D.C.L.     i8mo.     31. 
"  Mr.  HuKt  gives  us  a  most  compact  but  very  reculable  little  booh^  con-' 
taming  in  smalt  compass  a  very  complete  outline  of  a  complicated  and 
perplexing  subject,     ft  is  a  book  which  may  be  safety  recommended  to 
others  besides  schoolboys.'* —^onH  Bull. 

Irving.— THE  ANNALS  OF  OUR  TIME.  A  Diurnal  of  Events, 
Social  and  PoKtical,  Home  and  Foreign,  firem  the  Accession  of 
Queen  Vktona  to  the  Peace  of  Versailles.  By  Joseph  Irving. 
Fourth  Edition.     8vo.  half-bound,     its. 

ANNALS  OF  OUR  TIME.    Sunplement    From  Febc  28,  1871, 
t»  March  19,  1874.    8vol    41.  6/. 

ANNALS  OF  OUR  TIME.     Second  Supplement.     From  March, 
t874»  to  thtf  Oocttftacion  of  Cyprus.    8vo.      ^.  6d. 

"  Wo  hmfo  bgore  us  a  trusty  Md  ready  guide  to  the  events  of  the 
pmM  thirty  yours,  avaiiabU  otuaify  for  the  statesman^  tho  poUtictoM^  the 
publis  writer,  and  the  gmetat  rmder.** — ^Timbs. 

James.— Works  by  Henry  James,  Jun,    FRENCH  POETS  AND 
NOVELISTS.     Croivn  8vo.     81.  6d. 
QoST^xvfS  ^-Alfred  do  Afusset ;    Thiophile  Gautier ;   Baudelaire; 
Honori  de  Balxac  ;  George  Sand ;  The  Two  Amperes;  Turgemeff,  ^c, 

Johnson's    Lives    of    the    Poets. — The    Six   Chief 

Lives — Milton,  Dryden,  Swift,  Addison,  Pope,  Gray.  With 
Macaulay's  "  Life  of  Johnson."  Edited,  with  Preface,  by 
liATXHBW  Arnold.    Crown  8vo.    6f . 

Killen.— ECCLESIASTICAL  HISTORY  OF  IRELAND,  from 

the  EarHest  Date  to  the  Present  Time.     By  W.  D.  Killen,  D  D., 

Pnaidait  oC  Assembly's  CoUegs,  Bel&st,  and  Professor  of  Ecde* 

siastical  History.    Two  Vols.     8vo.     251. 

"  Those  who  hope  the  leisure  will  do  well  to  read  these  two  volumes. 

Tkeyare  /kit  of  interest,  and  are  the  result  of  groat  research.  .  .  .   Wo 

have  no  hesitation  m  recommaedmg  tho  work  to  all  who  wish  to  improve 

their  aequedntunee  with  Irish  hist^yj* — Spbctator. 


i6    MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Kingsley  (Charles). — Works  by  the  Rev.  Charles  Kingslsy, 
M.A.,  Rector  of  Everriey  aHd  Canon  of  Westminster.  (For 
other  Works  by  the  same  Author,  s€e  Theological  and  Belles 
Lettres  Catalogues.) 

ON  THE  ANCIEN  REGIME  as  it  existed  on  the  Continent  before 
the  French  Revolution.  Three  Lectures  delivered  at  the 
Royal  Institution.     Crown  8yo.     6s. 

AT  LAST :  A  CHRISTMAS  in  the  WEST  INDIES.  With  nearly 
Fifty  Illustrations.     Fifth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    dr. 

Mr,  kinpU^s  dream  of  forty  years  was  at  last  fulfilled^  wJun  he 
started  on  a  Christmas  expedition  to  the  West  Indies^  for  the  purpose  of 
becoming  personally  acquainted  with  the  scenes  which  ht  has  so  vividly 
describe  in  "  Westward  Ho  /"  These  two  volumes  are  the  journal  of  kis 
voyage.  Records  of  natural  history y  sketches  of  tropical  landscape^  chapters 
on  education^  views  of  society^  all  find  their  place.  '*  We  can  only  st^ 
that  Mr,  Kingsley s  account  of  a  '  Christmcu  in  the  West  Indies  *  is  in 
every  way  worthy  to  be  classed  among  his  happiest  productions*^ — 
Standard. 

THE  ROMAN  AND  THE  TEUTON.  A  Series  of  Lectures 
deUvered  before  the  University  of  Cambrid^  New  and  Cheaper 
Edition,  with  Preface  by  Professor  Max  Muller.  Crown  8vo.  6x. 

PLAYS  AND  PURITANS,  and  other  Historical  Essays.  With 
Portrait  of  Sir  Walter  Raleigh.  New  Edition.  Crown  8vo.   6f. 

In  addition  to  the  Essay  mentioned  in  the  title,  this  volume  contaims 
other  two — one  on  **Sir  Walter  Ralegh  and  his  Time,"  and  one  om 
Froudds  ^^  History  of  England:* 

Kingsley    (Henry).— tales    OF   OLD    TRAVEL.      Re- 
narrated  by  Henry  Kingsley,   F.R.G.S.     With  Eight  lUus- 
traticns  by  Huard.    Fifth  Edition.     Crown  8v6.     Jx. 
''  We  know  no  better  book  for  those  who  Toant  knowledge  or  seek  to 

rdresk  it.     As  for  the  '  sensational^  most  ncvds  are  tame  compared  with 

there  narratives^* — ^Athen^um. 

Lang. — CYPRUS :  Its  History,  its  Present  Resources  and  Future 

Prospects.    By  R.  Hamilton  Lang,  late  H.M.  Consul  for  the 

Island  of  Cyprus.  With  Two  Illustrations  and  Four  Maps.  8vo.  I4J. 

"  The  fair  and  impartial  account  of  her  past  and  present  to  be  found  in 

these  pages  has  an  undoubted  claim  on  the  attention  of  aU  intelligent 

readers.^ — Morning  Post. 

LaocOOn. — Tranalated  from  the  Text  of  Lessing,  with  PreSaoe  and 
Notes  by  the  Rifht  Hon.  Sir  Robert  J.  Phillimore,  D.CL. 
With  Photographs.    8to.    12s, 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.        17 
Leonardo  da  Vinci  and  his  Works. — Consisting  of  a 

Life  of  Leonardo  Da  Vinci,  b^  Mrs.  Charles  W.  Hsaton, 
Author  of  "  Albrecht  Diirer  of  Niimberg/'  &c.,  an  Essay  on  his 
Scientific  and  Literary  Works  by  Charles  Christopher 
Black,  M.A.,  and  an  account  of  his  more  important  Paintings 
and  Drawings.  Illustrated  with  Permanent  Photographs.  Royal 
Svo,  cloth,  extra  gilt     31J.  td, 

"  A  beautiful  volume,  bolh  without  and  within,  Messrs,  MaemiUan 
are  conspicuous  among  polishers  for  the  choice  binding  and  printing  of 
their  books,  and  this  is  got  up  in  their  best  style.  .  .  .  No  Enelisk 
publication  thai  we  know  of  has  so  thoroughly  and  attractively  collected 
together  aU  that  is  known  of  Leonardo." — Times. 

Liechtenstein,— HOLLAND  HOUSK  By  Princess  Marie 
Liechtenstein.  With  Five  Steel  Engravings  by  C.  H.  Jeens, 
after  Paintings  b^  Watts  and  other  celebrateid  Artists,  and 
numerous  Illustrations  drawn  by  Professor  P.  H.  Delamotts,  and 
engraved  on  Wood  by  J.  D.  Cooper,  W.  Palmer,  and  Tewitt  & 
Co.  Third  and  Cheaper  Edition.  Medium  8va  cloth  elegant 
i6s. 

Also,  an  Edition  containing,  in  addition  to  the  above,   about  40 

Illustrations  by  the  Woodbury-type  process,  and  India  Proofs  of 

the  Steel  Engravings.      Two  vols,   medium  4to.   half  morocco 

elegant     4/.  4/.  • 

"  PVhen  every  strictly  just  exception  shall  have  been  taken,  she  may  be 

conscientiously  congratulated  by  the  most  scrupulous  critic  on  theproduC" 

Hon  of  a  usefiU,  agreeable,  b€tuUifully»iilustrated,  and  attractive  Afok.** — 

Times.     '*  It  wimld  take  up  more  room  than  we  can  spare  to  enumerate 

all  the  iaUeresting  suggestions  and  notes  which  are  to  be  found  in  these 

volumes.  ....  The  woodcuts  are  admirable,  and  some  of  the  autographs 

are  very  interesting."^'PAi.h  Mall  Gazette. 

Lloyd— THE  AGE  OF  PERICLES.    A  History  of  the  Arts  and 

Politics  of  Greece  from  the  Persian  to  the  Peloponnesian  War. 

By  W.  Wat  kiss  Lloyd.    Two  Vols.  8vo.    21s. 

'*  No  such  account  of  Greek  art  of  the  best  period  has  yet  been  brought 

together  in  an  English  work.  ....  Mr,  Lloyd  has  produced  a  book  hf 

unusual  excellence  and  interest.'*^YKLL  Mall  Gazette. 

Macarthur.— HISTORY  OF    Scotland,    By  Margaret 

MacarthuRi  Being  the  Third  Volume  of  the  Historical  Couise 
for  Schools,  Edited  by  Edward  A.  Freeman,  D.CU  Second 
Edition.     i8mo.    2s. 

**  It  is  OH  excellent  summary,  unimpeachable  as  to  facts,  and  putting 
them  in  the  clearest  and  most  impartial  light  attainable."^Gv AtiDlAS. 
**  No  previous  History  of  Scotland  of  the  same  bulk  is  anything  like  so 
trustworthy,  or  deserves  to  be  so  extensrvdy  used  as  a  text-book^* — Globe. 

B 


i8    MACMTLLAIPS  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Macmillan  (Rev.  Hugh). — For  other  Works  by  same  Anthori 
sei  Theological  and  Scibntipic  Catalogues. 

HOLIDAYS  ON  HIGH  LANDS  ;  or.  Rambles  and  Incidents  in 

search  of  Alpine  Plants.     Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 

Globe  Svo.  cloth,     dr. 

**  Botanical  knowledge  is  blended  with  a  love  of  nature^  a  pious  m- 

tkusiasm,  and  a  richfdicity  of  diction  not  to  be  met  with  in  any  works 

of  kindred  character ^  if  we  except  those  of  Hugh  Miller^ — ^Telegraph. 

"Afr.    Macmillan*  s    glowing  pictures   of  Scandinavian    scenery  J* — 

Saturday  Review. 

Macready.— MACREADY'S   REMINISCENCES    AND   SE- 

LECTIONS  FROM  HIS  DIARIES  AND  LETTERS.    Edited 

by  Sir  F.  Pollock,  Bart.,  one  of  his  Executors.      With  Four 

Portraits  engraved  by  Jeens.    New  and  Cheaper  Edition.    Crown 

Svo.     7^.  6d. 

**  As  a  careful  and  for  the  most  part  just  estimate  of  the  stage  during 

a  very  brilliant  petiody  the  attraction  of  these  volumes  can  scarcdy  be 

surpassed,  ....  Readers  who  have  no  special  interest  in  theatrical 

matters  ^  but  enjoy  miscellaneous  gossip,  will  be  allured  from  page  to  page, 

attracted  by  famUiar  natnes  and  by  observations  upon  popular  actors  and 

authors. " — SPECTATOR. 

Mahaffy. — Works  by  the  Rev.  J.  P.  Mahaffy,  M.A.,  Fellow  of 
Trinity  College,  Dublin : — 

SOCIAL  LIFE  IN  GREECE  FROM  HOMER  TO  MENAN- 

DER.    Third  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged,  with  a  new  chapter 

on  Greek  Art.     Crown  Svo.    9x. 

"  //  should  be  in  the  hands  of  all  who  desire  thoroughly  to  understand 

and  to  enjoy  Greek  literature,  and  to  get  an  intelligent  idea  of  the  old  Greek 

life,  political^  social,  and  religious.^* — GUA&DIAN. 

RAMBLES  AND  STUDIES  IN  GREECE.     With  lUustmtions. 

Crown  Svo.     lOf.  6d,     New  and  enlarged  Edition,  wi^  Map  and 

IllustratioDft 
**A  singularly  instructive  and  agreeable  volume,** — ^ATHSNiSUic 

««  Maori."— SPORT  AND  WORK  ON  THE  NEPAUL  FRON- 
TIER ;  or,  Twelve  Years'  Sporting  Reminiscences  of  an  Indigo 
Planter.     By  "Maori."    With  Illustrations.     Svo.     14X. 

Margary.— THE  journey  of  Augustus  Raymond 

MARGARY  FROM  SHANGHAE  TO  BHAMO  AND  BACK 
TO  MAN  WYNE.  From  his  Journals  and  Letters,  with  a  brief 
Biographical  Preface,  a  concluding  chapter  by  Sir  Rutherford 
Alcock,  K.C.B.,  and  a  Steel  Portrait  engraved  by  Jeens,  and 
Map.  Svo.  los,  6d, 
"  754^/  is  a  manliness,  a  cheerful  spirit^  an  inherent  vigour  which 
was  never  overcome  by  sickness  or  debility,  a  tact  which  conquered  the 


I 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.       19 

^efudices  of  a  strange  and  susptcums  poptOaium,  a  quiet  self-relianee. 
a/wavs  comlnned  tvith  deep  rdigious  feeling,  unaUoyed  by  either  priggish^ 
ness,  cant,  or  su/erstition,  that  aught  to  commend  this  volume  to  readers 
sUttng  quietly  at  heme  who  feel  any  pride  in  the  high  esHmation  accorded 
to  men  of  their  race  at  Yarkand  or  at  Khiva,  in  the  heart  of  Africa,  or 
on  the  shores  of  Ijike  Seri-hul."— Saturday  Review. 

Markham.— NORTHWARD  HOI  By  Captain  Albert  H. 
Markham,  R.N.,  Author  of  "The  Great  Frozen  Sea,"  &c. 
Including  a  Narrative  of  Captain  Phipps's  Expedition,  by  a  Mid- 
shipman.    With  Illustrations.     Crown  8vo.     loj.  6d. 

Martin.— THE  HISTORY  OF  LLOYD'S,  AND  OF  MARINE 
INSURANCE  IN  GREAT  BRITAIN.  With  an  Appendix 
containing  Statistics  relating  to  Marine  Insurance.  By  Frederick 
Martin,  Author  of  "  The  Statesman's  Year  Book."    8vo.     14J. 

Martineau — biographical    sketches,    1852—1875. 

By  Harriet  Martineau.     With  Additional  Sketches,  and  Auto- 
biographical Sketch.    Fifth  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     6x. 
"Afifs  Martineat^s   large  literary  powers  and  her  fine  intellectueU 
training  make  these  little  sketches  more  instructive^  and  constitute  them 
more  genuinely  works  of  art,  than  many  more  ambitious  and  dij^e 
biographiis."'-FotiTmGHTvr  Review. 

Masson  (David).— For  other  Works  by  same  Author,  see  Philo- 
sophical and  Belles  Lettres  Catalogues. 

CH  ATTERTON  :  A  Story  of  the  Year,  177a  By  David  Masson, 
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Rhetoric  and  English  Literature  in  the  Uni- 
versity of  Edinburgh.    Crown  8vo.    $s, 

THE  THREE  DEVILS:  Luther's,  Goethe's,  and  Milton's;  and 
other  Essays.    Crown  8vo.    5^. 

WORDSWORTH,  SHELLEY,  AND  KEATS;  and  other 
Essays.    Crown  8vo.     5^. 

Mathews.— LIFE  OF    CHARLES    J.    MATHEWS.    Chiefly 
Autobiographical.    With  Selections  from  his  Correspondence  and 
Speeches.    Edited  by  Charles  Dickens. 
"  The  book  is  a  charming  one  from  first  to  last,  and  Mr,  Dickem 

deserves  a  full  measure  of  credit  for  the  care  and  discrimination  he  has 

exercised  in  the  business  rf  editing" — Globs. 

Maurice.— THE  friendship  of  books  ;  AND  OTHER 
LECTURES.     By  the  Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice.     Edited  with  Pre- 
face, by  Thomas  Hughes,  Q.C.    down  8vo.     lOf.  6d, 
"  The  high,  pure,  sympcUhHic,  and  truly  charitable  nature  of  Mr, 
Maurice  is  ddigktfuUy  znsible  throughout  these  lectures,  which  are  ex- 
cellently adapt^  to  spread  a  love  of  literature  amonqst  the  peopled — 
Daily  News. 


B  % 


20  MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF    WORKS  IN 

Mayor  (J.  E.  B.)— WORKS  edited  by  John  E.  B.  Matox, 
M.A.,  Kennedy  Professor  of  Latin  at  Cambridge : — 

CAMBRIDGE  IN  THE  SEVENTEENTH  CENTURY.  Part  U. 
Autobiography  of  Matthew  Robinson.     Fcap.  8to.     51.  6d, 

LIFE  OF  BISHOP  BEDELL.    By  his  Son.   Fcap.  8vo.    y.  6</- 

Melbourne.— MEMOIRS  OF  THE  RT.   HON.  WILLIAM, 

SECOND  VISCOUNT  MELBOURNK    By  W.  M.  Torrens, 

M.P.     With  Portrait  after  Sir.  T.  Lawrence.     Second  Edition. 

2  Vols.    8vo.    32J. 

"  As  f night  be  expected^  he  htu  produced  a  hook  which  wiil  command 

and  reward  attention.     It  contains  a  great  deal  of  valtiable  matter  and 

a  great  deal  of  auimated%  degant  ^oriting," — QUARTERLY  Review. 

Mendelssohn.— LETTERS   AND  RECOLLECTIONS.    By 

Ferdinand  Hiller.     Translated  by  M.  E.  Von  Glshn.     With 

Portrait  from  a  Drawing  by  Karl  MttLLER,  never  before  pab- 

lished.     Second  Edition.    Crown  8va     ^s,  6d. 

**  This  is  a  very  interesting  addition  to  our  knowledge  of  the  great 

German  composer.     It  reveals  him  to  us  under  a  new  light,  as  the  warm^ 

hearted  comrade,  the  musician  whose  soul  was  in  his  work,  andthehome^ 

loving,  domestic  man" — STANDARD. 

Merewether.— BY    SEA   AND    BY    LAND.    Being  a  Trip 

through  Egypt,  India,  Ceylon,  Australia,  New  ZeaEmd,  and 
America— all  Round  the  World.  By  Henry  Alworth  Mere- 
wether, one  of  Her  Majesty's  Connsd.     Crown  Sva     8r.  6d, 

Michael  Angelo  Buonarotti  ;  Sculptor,  Painter,  Architect 

The  Story  of  his  Life  and  Labours.    By  C.  C  BLACK,   M.A. 

Illustrated   by  20  Permanent    Photographs.    Royal   SvOb    doth. 

elegant,  3IJ.  6d, 

**  The  story  of  Michad  Angdos  life  remains  itderesHng  whatever  be  ike 

manner  oftdling  it,  and  supported  cu  it  is  by  this  beautifid  series  ofphoto- 

j^raphs,  the  volume  must  take  rank  among  the  most  spUndid  of  Christmas 

books,  fitted  to  serve  and  to  outlive  the  season  r — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Michelet— A  SUMMARY  OF  MODERN  HISTORY.  Trans- 
lated from  the  French  of  M.  Michelet,  and  continued  to  the 
present  time  by  M.  C.  M.  Simpson.    Globe  8vo.    4J.  (m. 

Milton.— LIFE  OF  JOHN  MILTON.  Narrated  in  connectioift 
with  the  Political,  Ecdesiastical,  and  Literary  History  of  his  Tune. 
By  David  Masson,  M.A.,  LL.D.,  Professor  of  Rhetoric  and 
English  Literature  in  the  University  of  Edinburgh.  With  Portnits. 
Vol.  L  i8j.  Vol.  IL,  1638— 1643.  8w-  «6/.  VoL  III. 
i643->i649.  8vo.  \%t.  Vols.  IV.  and  V.  i649~i66a  3Xft. 
Vol.  VI.  in  the  press. 
This  work  is  not  only  a  Biography,  but  also  a  contimtous  jPoHtical,  Rccie^ 

tiastical,  and  Literary  History  of  England  through  Milton* s  whole 


I 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.       21 

Mitford  (A.  B.)— TALES  OF  OLD  JAPAN.  By  A.  B. 
MiTFORD«  Second  Secretary  to  the  British  Legation  in  Japan. 
With  upwards  of  30  lUnstrations,  drawn  and  cut  on  Wood  by 
Japanese  Artists.     New  and  Cheaper  Edition.    Crown  8vo.  dr. 

"  These  very  ordinal  volumes  will  always  be  interesttn^  as  ntemanals 
of  a  most  exceptional  society^  while  regarded  simply  as  (ales,  they  are 
sparkling,  sensaOoftoL  and  dramatic,  and  the  originality  of  their  idea 
and  the  quaintness  of  (heir  language  give  them  a  most  captivating 
piquancy.  The  illustrations  are  extremely  interesting,  and  for  the 
curious  in  such  matters  have  a  special  and  particular  value,  -^Fall 
Mall  Gazettb. 

Monteiro.— ANGOLA  and  the  river  CONGO.     By 

Joachim  Monteiro.    With  numerous  Illustrations  from  Sketches 
taken  on  the  spot,  and  a  Map.    Two  Vols,  crown  8vo.     2is, 
"  Gives  the  first  detailed  account  of  a  part  of  tropical  Africa  which  is 

littU  kn4rttm  to  Englishmen The  remarks  on  the  geography  and 

wology  of  the  country  and  the  manners  and  customs  of  the  various  races 
inhabiting  it,  are  extremely  curious  and  interesting.  '—Saturday  Re- 
view.   *  *  J!ull  of  valuable  vtffnnation  and  much  picturesque  description. 
Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

MorlSOn.— THE  life  and  times  of  saint  BERNARD, 
Abbot  of  Clairraux.  By  Jambs  Cotter  Morison,  M.A.  New 
Edition.    Crown  8vo.    6s. 

Moseley.— NOTES  BY  A  NATURALIST  ON  THE  CHAL- 
LENGER :  being  an  Account  of  various  Observations  made 
during  the  Voyage  of  H.M.S.  Challenger,  Round  the  World, 
in  1872-76.  By  H.  N.  Moselev,  F.R.S.,  Member  of  the 
Scientific  Staff  of  the  Challenger.  8yo.  with  Maps,  Coloured  Plates, 
and  Woodcuts.    2.\s. 

Murray,— ROUND  ABOUT  FRANCE.  By  E.  C.  Grenville 
Murray.  Crown  8vo.  is.  6d. 
••  These  short  essays  are  a  perfect  mine  of  information  as  to  the  present 
condition  and  future  prospects  of  political  parties  in  France.  .  .  .  It  is 
at  once  extremely  interesting  and  exceptionallv  instructme  on  a  subject  on 
which  few  English  peopU  are  well  informed.  '—Scotsman. 

Napier.— macvey  napier'S   selected  corres- 

PONDENCE.     Edited  by  his  Son,  Macvey  Napier.     8vo,   14J. 
•'  This  exceedingly  interesting  work.  .  .  .  Mr.  Napier  has  certainly  been 
well  advised  in  JdmUting  the  general  public  to  the  knowledge  of  a  volume 
which  is  hardly  to  be  surpassed  in  point  of  interest  among  recent  publica- 
tions."—^^^AUi^^vu 


22  MACMILLAN^S  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Napoleon.— THE  history  of  napoleon  L    By  p. 

Lanfrey.    a  Translation  with  the  sanction  of  the  Author.    Vols. 

I.  II.  and  III.     8vo.  price  \25.  each.  [Vol,  IV,  in  the  press. 

The  Pall  Mall  Gazette  says  it  is  *^  one  of  the  most  striking 
puces  of  historical  composition  of  which  France  has  to  bocut^^  and  the 
Saturday  Review  calls  it**an  excellent  translation  of  a  work  on  every 
ground  deserving  to  be  translated.  It  is  unquestionably  and  immeasurably 
the  best  that  has  been  produced.  It  is  in /act  the  only  work  to  which  we 
can  turn  for  an  accurate  and  trustworthy  narrative  of  that  extraordinary 
career,  .  .  .  The  book  is  the  best  and  indeed  the  only  trustworthy  history 
of  Napoleon  which  has  been  written.** 

NichoL— TABLES    OF    EUROPEAN  LITERATURE  AND 
HISTORY,  A.D.  200—1876.    By  J.  NiCHOL,  LL.D.,  Professor 
of  English  Language  and  Literature,  Glasgow.    4to.     dr.  6d, 
TABLES    OF  ANCIENT   LITERATURE  AND  HISTORY, 
B.C.  1500— A.  D.  200.     By  the  same  Author.    4to.     j^.  6d, 

Oliphant  (Mrs.).— the  MAKERS  OF  FLORENCE :  Dante 
Giotto,  Savonarola,  and  their  City.  By  Mrs.  Oliphant.  With 
numerous  Illustrations  from  drawings  by  Professor  Delamottb, 
and  portrait  of  Savonarola,  engraved  by  Jbens.  Second  Editum* 
Medium  8vo.  Cloth  extra.  2ix. 
"  Mrs.  Oliphant  has  made  a  beautiful  addition  to  the  mass  ofSteratune 

already  piled  round  the  records  of  the  Tuscan  capital.*^ — TiMES. 

"  iVe  are  grateful  to  Mrs.   Oliphant  for  her  eloquent  and  beauti/Mi 

shetches  of  Dante^  Fra  Angelico,  and  Savonarola.     They  are  picturesque^ 

full  of  life,  and  rich  in  detail^  and  they  are  charmingly  illustrated  by  the 

art  of  the  engraver," — SPECTATOR. 

Oliphant— THE  DUKE  AND  THE  SCHOLAR;  and  other 
Essays.    By  T.  L.  Kington  Oliphant.    8vo.    ^s.  6d. 
"  This  volume  contains  one  of  the  most  beautiful  biographical  essays  me 
heme  seen  since  Macaulays  days.** — Standard. 

Otte. — SCANDINAVIAN  HISTORY.    By  E.  C.  Ottk.    With 
Maps.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     6s, 
"  We  have  peculiar  pleasure  in  recommending  this  intelligent  rhnmS 
of  Northern  history  as  a  book  essential  to  every  Englishman  who  interests 
himself  in  Scandinavia."—  Spectator. 

Owens  College   Essays  and  Addresses. — ^By  Pro- 

FESSORS  AND  LECTURERS  OF  OWENS   COLLEGE,    MANCHBSTKR. 

Published  in  Commemoration  of  the  Opening  of  the  New  College 
Buildings,  October  7th,  1873.    8va     14X. 

Palgrave  (R.  F.  D.)— THE  HOUSE  OF  COMMONS  ; 
Illustrations  of  its  History  and  Practice.  By  REGINALD  F.  D. 
Palgrave,  Clerk  Assistant  of  the  House  of  Commons.  New 
and  Revised  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     2s.  6d, 


J 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.       23 


Palgrave  (Sir  F.)— history    of   normandy   and 

OF  ENGLAND.  By  Sir  Francis  Palgrave,  Deputy  Keeper 
of  Her  Majesty's  Public  Records.  Completing  the  Histozy  to  the 
Death  of  William  Rufus.     4  Vols.  8vo.    4/.  41. 

Palgrave    (W.  G.)— A   narrative  of  a  year's 

JOURNEY  THROUGH  CENTRAL  AND  EASTERN 
ARABIA,  1862-3.  ^y  William  Gifford  Palgravb,  late  of 
the  Eighth  Regiment  Bombay  N.  L  Sixth  Edition.  WUh  Maps, 
Plans,  and  Portrait  of  Author,  engraved  on  steel  by  Jeens.  Crown 
8vo.    61*. 

*^  Ht  has  not  only  written  one  of  the  best  books  on  the  Arabs  and  one 
of  the  best  books  on  Arabia^  but  he  has  done  so  in  a  manner  that  must 
command  the  respect  no  less  than  the  admiration  of  his  fdlow-country^ 
men,** — Fortnightly  Review. 

ESSAYS    ON  EASTERN  QUESTIONS.     By    W.    Gifford 
Palgrave.    Sva     lor.  (id, 

"  These  essays  are  full  of  anecdote  and  interest.  The  book  is  decidedly 
a  valuahle  addition  to  the  stock  of  literature  on  which  men  must 
bcue  their  opinion  of  the  difficult  social  and  political  problems  sug^ 
gested  by  the  designs  of  Russia^  the  capacity  of  Mahometans  for' 
sovereignty y  and  the  good  government  and  retention  of  India,^ — 
Saturday  Review. 

DUTCH  GUIAJ<f  A.    With  Maps  and  Plans.    Svo.     gs, 

** His  pages  are  nearly  exhaustive  as  far  as  facts  and  statistics  go, 
while  they  are  lightened  by  graphic  social  sketches  as  wdl  as  sparkling 
descriptions  of  scenery."— Satvrday  Review. 

Patteson.— LIFE  and  letters  of  john  coleridge 

PATTESON,  D.D.,  Missionary  Bishop  of  the  Melanesian  Islands. 

By  Charlotte  M.  Yonoe,  Author  of  "  The  Heir  of  Redclyffe." 

With  Portraits  after  Richmond  and  from  Photograph,  engraved  by 

Jeens.   With  Map.    Fifth  Edition.    Two  Vols.    Crown  8vo.    12s, 

**Miss  Yong^s  work  is  in  one  respect  a  model  biography.     It  is  made 

up  almost  entirely  of  Pattesotis  own  letters.     Aware  that  he  had  left  hts 

home  once  and  for  all^  his  correspondence  took  the  form  of  a  diary  ^  and 

as  we  read  on  we  come  to  know  the  man,  and  to  love  him  almost  as  if  we 

had  seen  him" — ATHENiBUM.     ^*  Such  a  life,  with  its  grand  lessons  of 

unselfishness,  is  a  blessing  and  an  honour  to  the  age  in  which  it  is  lived  ; 

the  biography  cannot  be  studied  without  pleasure  and  profit,  and  indent 

we  should  think  little  of  the  man  who  did  not  rise  from  the  study  oj  ii 

better  and  wiser.     Neither  the  Church  nor  the  nation  which  produces 

such  sons  need  ever  despair  of  its  future,*' — Saturday  Review. 

Pauli. — PICTURES  OF  OLD  ENGLAND.  By  Dr.  Reinhold 
Pauli.  Translated,  with  the  approval  of  the  Author,  by  £.  C. 
Otte.     Cheaper  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    6s, 


24    MACMTLLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF    WORKS  11/ 

Payne.— A  history  of  European  colonies.    Bj 

E.  J.  Payne,  M.A.     With  Maps.     i8mo.    41.  6d, 
T^  Times  says: — "  We  have  seldom  met  with  a  historian  capable  0/ 
forming  a  more  comprehensive^  Jar-seeingy  and  unprejudiced  estimate  of 
events  and  peoples^  and  we  can  commend  this  Utile  worh  as  one  certam  to 
prove  of  the  highest  interest  to  all  thoughtful  readers,** 

Persia. — eastern  Persia.     An  Account  of  the  Journeys  of 
the  Persian  Boundary  Commission,  1870-1-2. — VoL  I.  The  Geo- 
graphy, with  Narratives  by  Majors  St.  John,  Lovbtt,  and  Euan 
Smith,  and  an  Introduction  by  Major-General  Sir  Frederic 
GoLDSMiD,  C.B.,  K.C.S.I.,  British  Commissioner  and  Arbitrator. 
With  Maps  and  Illustrations. — Vol.  II.    llie  Zoology  and  Geology. 
By  W.  T.  Blanpord,  A.R.S.M.,  F.R.S.     With  Coloured  Illus- 
trations.    Two  Vols.  8vo.     42J. 
**  The  v^umes   largely   increase  our   store   of    information   eibout 
countries  with  which  Englishmen  ought  to  be  familiar,     .... 
They  throw  into  the  shcuie  all  that  hithertp  has  appeared  in  our  tongue 
respecting  the  local  features  of  Persia^  its  scenery ^  its  resources^  even  its 
socicU   condition.      They  contain  also  abundant  evidence  of  EnglisA 
endurance,  daring,  and  spirit,'* — Times. 

Prichard.— the  ADMINISTRATION  OF  INDIA.  From 
1859  to  1868.  The  First  Ten  Years  of  Administration  under  the 
Crown.  By  I.  T.  Prichard,  Barrister-at-Law.  Two  VoU. 
Demy  8yo.     With  Map.    2IJ. 

Raphael.— RAPHAEL  OF  URBINO  AND  HIS  FATHER 
GIOVANNI  SANTI.  By  J.  D.  Passavant,  formerly  Director 
of  the  Museum  at  Frankfort  With  Twenty  Permanent  Photo* 
graphs.     Royal  8vo.     Handsomely  bound.     31J.  6cL 

The  Saturday  Review  says  of  them,  **  We  have  seen  not  a  few 
elegant  specimens  of  Mr,  Woodbury's  new  process,  but  we  have  seen 
none  that  equal  these,** 

Reynolds.— SIR  JOSHUA  REYNOLDS  AS  A  PORTRAIT 
PAINTER.  AN  ESSAY.  By  J.  Churton  Collins,  B.A. 
Balliol  College,  Oxford.  Illustrated  by  a  Series  of  Portraits  of 
distinguished  Beauties  of  the  Court  of  George  III.  ;  reproduced 
in  Autotype  from  Proof  Impressions  of  the  celebrated  Engravings* 
by  Valentine  Green,  Thomas  Watson,  F.  R.  Smith,  K. 
Fisher,  and  others.     Folio  half-morocco.    £^  5/. 

Rogers  (James  E.  Thorold).— HISTORICAL  GLEAN- 
INGS:  A  Series  of  Sketches.  Montague,  Walpole,  Adam  Smith, 
Cobbett.  By  Prof.  Rogers.  Crown  8va  4^.  td.  Second  Series. 
Wikli^  Laud,  Wilkes,  and  Home  Tooke.     Crown  8vo.    61. 


i 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC.        2$ 


RoutledgC— CHAPTERS  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  POPULAR 

PROGRESS  IN  ENGLAND,  chiefly  in  Relation  to  the  Freedom 

of  the  Press  and  Trial  by  Jury,  1660 — 1820.     With  application  to 

later  years.     By  J.  Routledge.     8vo.     i6jr. 

"  The  volume  abounds  in  facts  and  information,  almost  always  useful 

and  often  curious.^* — Times. 

Rumford. — COUNT  RUMFORD'S  COMPLETE  WORKS, 
with  Memoir,  *and  Notices  of  his  Daughter.  By  George  Ellis. 
Five  Vols.     8vo.    4/.  14J.  6d. 

Sceley  (Professor).  — lectures  and  ESSAYS.     By 

J.    R.    Seeley,   M.A.     Professor  of  Modem    History  in   the 

University  of  Cambridge.  8vo.  lar.  6d, 
Contents  : — Roman  Imperialism :  I.  Tk^  Great  Roman  Revolu" 
tion;  2.  Tke  Proximate  Cause  of  the  Fall  of  the  Roman  Empire ; 
The  Later  Empire,  —  Milton^ s  Political  Opiniotis  —  Milton's  Poetry 
— Elementary  Principles  in  Art — Liber cU  Education  in  Unrversitus 
—  English  in  Schools  —  The  Church  as  a  Teacher  of  Morality — The 
Teaching  of  Politics:  an  Inaugural  Lecture  delivered  at  Cambridge, 

Shelburne.— LIFE  OF  WILLIAM,  EARL  OF  SHELBURNE, 

AFTERWARDS    FIRST    MARQUIS   OF    LANSDOWNE. 

With  Extracts  from  his  Papers  and  Correspondence.     By  Lord 

Edmond  FiTZMAURiCE.     In  Three  Vols.     8vo.     Vol.1.  1737 — 

1766,  I2J.  ;  Vol.?II.  1766—1776,  I2J.  J  Vol.  IIL  1776 — 1805.  i6f. 

*^  Lord  Edmond  Fitzmaurice  has  succeeded  in  placing  before  us  a 

toealth  of  new  matter,  which,  while  casting  valuable  and  much-needed 

Hght  on  several  obscure  passages  in  the  political  history  of  a  hundred 

years  ago,  has  enabled  us  for  the  first  time  to  form  a  clear  and  consistent 

idea  of  his  ancestor,'^ — Spectator. 

Sime.— HISTORY  OF  GERMANY.     By  James  Sime,  M.A. 

i8mo.     3J.     Being  Vol  V.  of  the  Historical  Course  for  Schools 

Edited  by  Edward  A.  Freeman,  D.CL. 
"  This  is  a  remarkably  clear  and  impressive  History  of  Germany,  lis 
great  events  are  wisely  kept  as  central  figures ,  and  the  smaller  events  are 
carefully  kept  not  only  subordinate  and  subservient^  but  most  skilfully 
woven  into  the  texture  of  the  historical  tapestry  presented  to  the  eye," — 
Standard. 

Squier PERU:    INCIDENTS    OF    TRAVEL    AND    EX- 
PLORATION IN  THE  LAND  OF  THE  INCAS.     By  E.  G. 
Squier,  M.A.,  F.S.A.,  late  U.S.  Commissioner  to  Peru.     With 
300  Illustrations.     Second  Edition.     8vo.     2.1s. 
The  Times  says  : — "  No  more  solid  and  trustworthy  contribution  haa 
been  made  to  an  cucurate  knowledge  of  what  are  among  the  most  wonderful 
ruins  in  the  world.     The  work  if  really  what  its  title  implies,      fVhile  of 
the  greatest  importance  as  a  contributioH  to  Pet  uvian  archaology,  it  is  also  a 
thorot^hly  entertaifiing  and  instructive  narratizfe  of  travel.     Albt  the  least 
important feuturemustbeconsideredthennmeroujwdlexecuted  illustrations," 


26    MACMILLAN*S  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 

Strangford.— EGYPTIAN  shrines  and  Syrian  sepul- 
chres, indnding  a  Vbit  to  Palmyra.  By  Emily  A.  Beaufort 
(Viscountess  Strangford),  Author  of  "Ilie  Eastern  Shores  of 
the  Adriatic."    New  Edition.     Crown  Svo.    71.  (id. 

Tait.— AN  ANALYSIS  OF  ENGLISH  HISTORY,  based  upon 
Green's  "  Short  History  of  the  English  People,"  By  C.  W.  A. 
Tait,  M.A.,  Assistant  Master,  Chiton  College.      Crown  Svo. 

Thomas.— THE  life  of  JOHN  THOMAS,  Surgeon  of  the 
''Earl  of  Oxford"  East  Indiaman,  and  First  Baptist  Missionary  to 
Bengal.     By  C.  B.  Lewis,  Baptist  Missionary.    Svo.   lof.  dd, 

Thompson.— HISTORY  OF  ENGLAND.    By  Edith  Thomp- 
son.    Being  Vol.  II.  of  the  Historical  Course  for  Schools,  Edited 
by  Edward  A.  Freeman,  D.CL.     New  Edition,  revised  and 
enlarged,  with  Maps.     iSmo.      2j.  6//. 
"  Freedom  from  prejudue^  simplicity  of  styUf  and  accuracy  of  statC' 
menif  are  the  characteristics  of  this  volume.    It  is  a  trustworthy  text-hook^ 
and  likely  to  be  generally  serviceable  in  schools.** — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 
"  In  its  great  accuracy  and  correctness  of  detail  it  stands  far  ahead  of  the 
general  run  of  school  manuals.    Its  arrangement^  toOy  is  clear^  ami  its 
style  simple  and  straightforward, " — Saturday  Review. 

Todhunter.— THE    conflict    of    studies  ;    AND 

OTHER   ESSAYS   ON   SUBJECTS   CONNECTED  WITH 
EDUCATION.     Bv  Isaac  Todhunter,   M.A.,   F.R.S.,  late 
Fellow  and  Principal  Mathematical  Lecturer  01  St  John's  Collie, 
Cambridge.     Svo.     lor.  dd. 
Contents  :— /.   The    Conflict  of  Studies,     II,    Competitive   Exa- 
minations,     HI  Private  St%uly   of  Mathematics,      IV.  Academical 
Reform,     V,  Elementary  Geometry,     VI  The  Mathematical  Tripos, 

Trench  (Archbishop).— For  other  Works  by  the  same  Author, 

see  Theological    and   Belles   Lettres   Catalogues,  and 

page  30  of  this  Catalogue. 
GUSTAVUS  ADOLPHUS  IN  GERMANY,  and  other  Lectures 

on  the  Thirty  Years'  War.    Second  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged. 

Fcap.  Svo.    4J. 
PLUTARCH,  HIS  LIFE,  HIS  LIVES,  AND  HIS  MORALS. 

Five  Lectures.     Second  Edition,  enlarged.    Fcap.  Svo.     Jj.  6^. 
LECTURES  ON  MEDIEVAL  CHURCH  HISTORY.      Being 

the  substance  of  Lectures  delivered  in  Queen's  College,  London. 

Second  Edition,  revised.    Svo.     I2j-. 

Trench  (Maria). — ^the  life  of  st.  teresa.  By  maria 

Trench.     With  Portrait  engraved  by  J  bens.    Crown  Svo,  cloth 
extra.     %s,   td, 
**A  booh  of  rare  interest."— -Jon's  Bull. 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,  TRAVELS,  ETC,       27 
Trench  (Mrs.  R.)— REMAINS    OF    THE  LATE  MRS. 

RICHARD  TRENCH.  Being  Sdectiont  from  her  Toumals, 
Letters,  and  other  Papers.  Edited  by  Ajlchbishop  T&xnch. 
New  and  Cheaper  Issue,  with  Portrait    Svo.    dr. 

Trollope.— A  history  of  the  commonwealth  of 

FLORENCE  FROM  THE  EARLIEST  INDEPENDENCE 
OF  THE  COMMUNE  TO  THE  FALL  OF  THE  REPUBLIC 
IN  183 1.  By  T.  Adolphus  Trollopb.  4  Vols.  8va  Half 
morocca     2ix. 

Uppingham  by  the  Sea. — a   narrative   OF  THE 

YEAR  AT  BORTH.    By  J.  H.  S.    Crown  8va     y,  6d. 

Victor  Emmanuel  II.,  First  King  of  Italy— his 

life.     By  G.  S.  Godkin.     2  vols.,  crown  8vo.     idr. 
**  An  extrenuly  clear  and  tMieresting  history  of  one  of  the  most 
important  changes  of  later  times, ^* — EXAMINER. 

Wallace.— THE  MALAY  archipelago:  the  Land  of  the 
Orang  Utan  and  the  Bird  of  Paradise.      Bv  Alfred  Russel 
Wallace.      A  Narrative  of  Travel  with  Studies  of  Man  and 
Nature.     With  Maps  and  numerous  Illustrationa.     Sixth  Edition. 
Crown  Svo.    7^.  6a, 
"  The  result  is  a  vivid  picture  of  tropical  life,  which  may  he  rectd  with 
unflagging  interest,  and  a  sufficient  account  of  his  scientific  conclusions  to 
stimulate  our  appetite  without  wearying  us  by  detail.     In  short,  we  may 
safely  say  that  we  have  never  read  a  more  agreeable  booh  of  its  kind,**—' 
Saturday  Review. 

Ward.— A  HISTORY  OF  ENGLISH  DRAMATIC  LITERA- 
TURE TO  THE  DEATH  OF  QUEEN  ANNE.    By  A.  W. 
Ward,  M.A.,  Professor  of  History  and  English  Literature  im 
Owens  College,  Manchester.    Two  Vols.     Svo.    32J. 
**As  full  of  interest  as  of  information.      To  ststdents  of  dramatic 

literature  invaluable,  and  may  be  equally  recommended  to  readers  for 

mere  pastime^* — Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

Ward  (J.) — EXPERIENCES  OF  A  DIPLOMATIST.  Being 
recollections  of  Germany  founded  on  Diaries  kept  during  the  years 
1840—1870.  By  John  Ward,  C.B.,  late  H.M.  Minister- 
Resident  to  the  Iianse  Towns.    8vo.     \os,  6d, 

Waterton  (C.)— wanderings  in  south  America, 

THE  NORTH-WEST  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES,  AND 
THE  ANTILLES  IN  1812,  1816,  1820,  and  1824.  With 
Original  Instructions  for  the  perfect  Preservation  of  Birds,  etc., 
for  Cabinets  of  Natural  History.  By  Charles  Waterton. 
New  p:dition,  edited  with  Biographical  Introduction  and  Explana- 
tory Index  by  the  Rev.  J.  G.  Wood,  M.A.  With  100  lUustiations. 
Svo.     Cloth  elegant.    21s, 


28     MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF  WORKS  IN 


Wedgwood.— JOHN  WESLEY  AND  THE  EVANGELICAL 
REACTION  of  the  Eighteenth  Century.  ByJvuA  WsDGWOOD. 
Crown  8vo.    &r.  6d, 

Whewell.— WILLIAM  WHEWELU  D.D.,  Ute  Master  of 
Trinity  College,  Cambridge.  An  Account  of  his  Writings,  with 
Selections  from  his  Literary  and  Scientific  Correspondence.  By 
I.  ToDHUNTER,  M.A.,  F.R.S.     Two  Vols.     8vo.    25J. 

White.— THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  AND  ANTIQUITIES 
OF  SELBORNE.  By  (iiLBERT  White.  Edited,  with  Memoir 
and  Notes,  by  Frank  Buckland,  A  Chapter  on  Antiquities  by 
Lord  Selborne,  Map,  &c.,  and  numerous  Illustrations  by 
P.  H.  Delamotte.  Royal  8vo.  Cloth,  extra  gilt.  Cheaper 
Issue.    2 1  J. 

Also  a  Large  Paper  Edition,  containing,  in  addition  to  the  above^ 
upwards  of  Thirty  Woodburytype  Illustrations  from  Drawings 
by  Prof,  Delamotte.  Two  Vols.  4to.  Half  morocco,  elegant. 
4/.4f. 

**Mr.  DdamotUs  charming  illustrations  are  a  worthy  decoration  of  so 
dainty  a  book.  They  bring  Selborne  before  us,  and  really  help  us  to 
understand  why  WkUds  love  for  his  native  place  never  grew  cold  J* — 
Times. 

Wilson ^A    MEMOIR    OF    GEORGE    WILSON,    M.  D., 

F.R.S.E.,  Regius  Professor  of  Technology  in  the  Univenity  of 
Edinburgh.     By  his  Sister.    New  Edition.     Crown  8vo.    6j. 

Wilson  (Daniel,  LL.D.) — Works  by  Daniel  Wilson, 
LL.D.,  Professor  of  History  and  English  Literature  in  University 
College,  Toronto  : — 

PREHISTORIC  ANNALS  OF  SCOTLAND.  New  Edition, 
with  numerous  Illustrations.      Two  Vols,  demy  8vo.     361. 

"  One  of  the  most  interesting,  learned,  and  elegant  works  we  have 
seen  for  a  long  time,^* — Westminster  Review. 

PREHISTORIC  MAN  :  Researches  into  the  Origin  of  CivUization 
in  the  Old  and  New  World  New  Edition,  revised  and  enlarged 
throughout,  with  numerous  Illustrations  and  two  Coloured  Plates. 
Two  Vols.    8vo.     36/. 

**  A  valuable  work  pleasantly  written  and  well  worthy  of  attention 
both  by  students  and  general  readers.*^ — ACADEMY. 

CHATTERTON :  A  Biographical  Study.  By  Daniel  Wilson, 
LL.D.,  Professor  of  Historv  and  EngUsh  Literature  in  University 
College,  Toronta     Crown  ova    6/.  m. 


J 


HISTORY,  BIOGRAPHY,   TRAVELS,  ETC.       29 


Wyatt  (Sir  M.  Digby).— fine  ART  :  a  Sketch  of  its 
History,  Theory,  Practice,  and  application  to  Industry.  A  Course 
of  Lectures  delivered  before  the  University  of  Cambridge.  By 
Sir  M.  D16BY  Wyatt,  M.A.  Slade  Professor  of  Fine  Art. 
Cheaper  Issue.     8va     5/. 

*^  An  excellent  handbook  for  the  student  0/  art,"'-43tRAVHiC.  **  The 
hook  ahounds  in  va/uahte  matter,  and  wilt  therefore  he  read  with 
pleasure  and  profit  fy  lovers  0/ art,"-^l>AlLY  Nxws. 

Yonge  (Charlotte  M.>— works  by  Charlottk  M.  Yong«, 

Author  of  "The  Heir  of  Redely ffe,"  &c.,  &c.  :— 

A  PARALLEL  HISTORY  OF  FRANCE  AND  ENGLAND  : 
consisting  of  Outlines  and  Dates.     Oblong  4to.     p.  6d. 

CAMEOS  FROM  ENGLISH  HISTORY.  From  RoUo  to  Edward 
IL     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    Third  Edidon.     5/. 

Second  Series,   THE   WARS   IN  FRANCE.    Eztrft  fcap. 
8yo.    Third  Edition.    5/. 

Th»d  Series,    THE  WARS    OF   THE    ROSES.     Extra 
fcap.  8vo.     5^. 

**  Instead  of  dry  details ,*  says  the  NONCONFORMIST,  "  we  have  Umng 
pictures f  faithful,  vivid,  eutd striking,^ 

Fourth  Series.  [Nearly  ready, 

HISTORY  OF  FRANCE.    Maps.    i8mo.     y.6d. 

[Historical  Course  for  Schools. 


30  MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF 

POLITICS,  POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL 
ECONOMY,  LAW,  AND  KINDRED 
SUBJECTS. 

Anglo-Saxon  Law.— essays  IN.    Contents :  Law  Courts 
— Land  and  Family  Laws  and  Le{ 
Select  cases.     Mecuiun  8vo.     i&r. 


-—Land  and  Family  Laws  and  Legal  Procedure  generally.     With. 
Mecui 


Arnold.— THE  ROMAN  SYSTEM  OF  PROVINCIAL  ADMIN- 
ISTRATION TO  THE  ACCESSION  OF  CONSTANTINE 
THE  GREAT.  Being  the  Arnold  Prize  Essay  for  1879.  By 
W.  T.  Arnold,  B.  A.     Crown  8vo.    6f. 

Ball.— THE    STUDENTS    GUIDE    TO    THE    BAR.      By 
Walter  W.   Ball,  M.A.,  of  the  Inner  Temple,  Barrister-at- 
Law.     Crown  8vo.     2s,  6d, 
"  The  student  will  here  find  a  clear  statement  of  the  several  steps  by 

which  the  degree  of  barrister  is  obtained^  and  also  usejul  advice  abosei 

the  advantages  of  a  prolonged  course  of  ^reading  in   Chambers.*^* — 

ACADBMY. 

Bernard.— FOUR  LECTURES  ON  SUBJECTS  CONNECTED 

WITH     DIPLOMACY.     By    Montague   Bernard,  M.A., 

Chichele  Professor  of  International  Law  and  Diplomacy,  Oxford. 

8vo.    9^. 

*^ Singularly  interesting  lectures^  so  able^  clear,  and  attractme." — Speo 

TATOR. 

Bright  (John,  M.P.) — Works  by  the  Right  Hon.  John  Bright, 

M.P. 

SPEECHES  ON  QUESTIONS  OF  PUBLIC  POLICY. 
Edited  by  Professor  Thorold  Rogers.  Author's  Popular  Edition. 
Globe  8vo.    ys.  6d. 

*'Afr.  Bright^ s  speeches  will  always  deserve  to  be  studied,  as  an. 
apprenticeship  to  popular  and  parliamentarv  oratory ;  they  will  forsm 
materials  fir  the  history  of  our  time,  and  many  brilliant  passages^ 
verhaps  some  entire  speeches,  will  really  become  a  part  of  the  Ufvmg  liUra^ 
ture  of  England.^*-^KiLii  News. 

LIBRARY  EDITION.    Two  Vols.  8vo.    With  Portrait    251. 

PUBLIC  ADDRESSES.  Edited  by  J.  Thorold  Rogers.  8vo. 
14J-. 

Bucknill,— HABITUAL  DRUNKENNESS  AND  INSANE 
DRUNKARDS.  By  J.  C.  Bucknill,  M.D.,  F.R.S.,  late 
Lord  Chancellor's  Visitor  of  Lunatics.    Crown  8vo.    2f .  6d, 


WORKS  IN  POUTICS,  ETC.  31 

Cairnes. — Works  by  J.  E.  Cairnes,  M.A.,  Emeritus  Professor  ol 
Political  Economy  m  University  College,  London. 

ESSAYS  IN  POLITICAL  ECONOMY,  THEORETICAL 
and  APPLIED.  By  J.  E.  Cairnes,  M.A.,  Professor  of  PoliUcal 
Economy  in  University  College,  London.    8vo.  lor.  6</. 

POLITICAL  ESSAYS.     8vo.     iw.  (id. 

SOME  LEADING  PRINCIPLES  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY 
NEWLY  EXPOUNDED.    8vo.     14J. 

Contents  \—Part  I.  Value,  Part  II.  Labtmr  and  CapitaL  Part 
III,  International  Trade, 

"  A  work  which  is  perhaps  the  most  valuable  contrition  to  the  science 
made  since  the  publication^  a  quarter  of  a  century  since,  of  Mr.  MiiPs 
^Principles  of  Political  Economy.^  "—Daily  News. 

THE  CHARACTER  AND  LOGICAL  METHOD   OF  POLL 

TICAL  ECONOMY.     New  Edition,  enlarged.    8vo.     ^s.  6d. 
*'  These  lectures  are  admirably  fitted  to  correct  the  slipshod  generalizci* 
tions  which  pass  current  as  the  science  of  Political  Economy," — ^TlMES. 

Clarke.— EARLY  ROMAN  LAW.  THE  REGAL  PERIOD. 
By  E.  C.  Clarke,  M.A.,  of  Lincoln's  Inn,  Barrister-at-Law, 
Lecturer  in  Law  and  Regius  Professor  of  Civil  Law  at  Cam- 
bridge.   Crown  8vo.     5j. 

Cobden    (Richard).— speeches  ON  questions  OF 

PUBLIC  POLICY.  By  Richard  Cobden.  Edited  by  the 
Right  Hon.  John  Bright,  M.P.,  and  J.  £.  Thorold  Rogers. 
Popular  Edition.     8yo.     y.  6d, 

Fa^vcett. — Works  by  Henry  Fawcett,  M.A.,  M.P.,  Fellow  of 
Trinity  Hall,  and  Professor  of  Political  Economy  in  the  University 
of  Cambridge : — 

THE  ECONOMIC  POSITION  OF  THE  BRITISH 
LABOURER.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     5/. 

MANUAL  OF  POLITICAL  ECONOMY.  Fifth  Edition,  with 
New  Chapters  on  the  Depreciation  of  Silver,  etc.     Crown  8vo. 

I2J. 

The  Daily  News  says':  "It  forms  one  of  the  best  introductions  to  the 
principles  of  the  science^  and  to  its  practical  applications  in  the  problemt 
of  modern^  and  especially  of  English,  government  and  society.** 

PAUPERISM  :  ITS  CAUSES  AND  REMEDIES.    Crown  8vo. 

Ss.  6d. 
The  ATHSNiBUM  calls  the  work  **a  repertory  of  interesting  a$ul  well 
digested  information.** 

SPEECHES    ON    SOME    CURRENT   POLITICAL  QUES- 
TIONS.    8vo.     loj.  6d, 
''  ThiV  will  help  to  educate,  not  perhaps,  parties,  but  the  educators  of 
parties.* —Dail^  News. 


32  MACMILLAPrS  CATALOGUE  OF 

Fawcett. — cotUinued, 
ESSAYS  ON   POLITICAL  AND  SOCIAL  SUBJECTS.    By 
Prof^sor    Fawcett,    M.P.,     and    Millicsnt    Garrxti 
Fawcett.   8yo.     ioj.  6^. 
"  They  will  all  repay  the  perusal  of  the  thinHng  reader."— Daily 
News. 

FREE  TRADE  AND  PROTECTION :  an  Inquiry  into  the 
Causes  which  have  retarded  the  general  adoption  of  Free  Trade 
since  its  introduction  into  England.    Third  Edition.    8vo.    7/.  6d, 

"  No  greater  service  can  be  rendered  to  the  cause  of  Free  Trade  than  a 
clear  explanation  of  the  principles  on  which  Free  Trade  rests.  Pro- 
fessor Fawcett  has  dofie  this  in  the  volume  before  us  with  all  his  habiiual 
clearness  of  thought  and  expression." — Economist. 

Fawcett  (Mrs.) — Works  by  Millicent  Garrett  Fawcett. 

POLITICAL  ECONOMY  FOR  BEGINNERS.  WITH  QUES- 
TIONS.    New  Edition.     i8mo.     %s.  td. 

The  Daily  News  calls  it  ^Ulear^  compact^  and  comprehensive;^*  and 
the  Spectator  says^  ^*Mrs.  Fawcetfs  treatise  is  perfectly  suited  to  its 
'purpose.** 

TALES  IN  POLITICAL  ECONOMY.     Crown  8vo.    y. 

"  77ie  idea  is  a  good  one,  and  it  is  quite  wonderful  what  a  mass  oj 
economic  teaching  the  author  manages  to  compress  into  a  small  space...  TAo 
true  doctrines  of  International  7 rode.  Currency^  and  the  ratio  between 
Frodtiction  and  Population,  are  set  before  us  and  illustrated  in  a  mcuterfy 
manner" — ATHENiGUM . 

Freeman  (E.   A.),   M.A.,    D.C.L. — COMPARATIVE 

POLITICS.  Lectures  at  the  Royal  Institution,  to  which  is 
added  "  The  Unity  of  Histoiy,"  being  the  Rede  Lecture  delivered 
at  Cambridge  in  1872.     8vo.     14J. 

"  IVe  find  in  Mr,  Freeman*s  new  volume  the  same  sound,  careful, 
comprehensive  qualities  which  have  long  ago  raised  him  to  so  high  a  place 
amongst  historical  writers.  For  historical  discipline,  then,  as  well  as 
historical  information,  Mr,  Freematis  booh  is  full  of  value," — Pall 
Mall  Gazette. 

Goschen.— REPORTS  AND  SPEECHES  ON  LOCAL  TAXA- 
TION.   By  George  J.  Goschen,  M.P.    Royal  8vo.    5j. 
"  The  volume  contains  a  vast  metss  of  information  of  the  k^^hesttfolne." 
— ATHRNiCUM. 

Guide   to    the   Unprotected,  in  Every  Day  Matters  Re- 
lating to  Property  and  Income.     By  a  Banker's  Dauohtkr. 
Fourth  Edition,  Revised.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     31.  6d, 
**Many  an  unpniected  female  will  bless  the  head  which  planned  and 

the  hand  which  compiled  this  admirable  little  manual,  ...   '^his  book 

wcu  very  much  wanted,  and  it  could  not  have  been  better  done.'* — 

Morning  Star. 


WiPiRKS  IN  POLITICS,  ETC.  33 

Hamilton.— MONEY  and  value  :  an  Inquiry  into  the 
Means  and  Ends  of  Economic  Production,  with,  an  Appendix 
on  the  Depreciation  of  Silver  and  Indian  Currency.  By  Rowland 
Hamilton.    8vo.    12s, 

**  The  subject  is  here  dealt  toUh  in  a  luminous  style,  and  6y  presenHnf> 
it  from  a  new  point  of  view  in  connection  with  the  neUure  and  Junctions 
of  money,  a  genuine  service  has  been  rendered  to  commercial  science.*^ — 
British  Quarterly  Review. 

HarWOOd. — disestablishment  :  a  Defence  of  the  Principle 
of  a  National  Church-    By  George  Harwood,  M.A,    8vo.    12s, 

Hill. — Works  by  Octavia  Hiix  : — 

HOMES  OF  THE  LONDON  POOR.     Extra  fcap.  8to.     31.  6d. 
**She  is  clear,  practical,  and  definite,*^ — G1.0BE. 

OUR  COMMON  LAND ;  and  other  Short  Essays.     Extra  fcap. 
8vo.    3J.  (>d. 

Contents: — Our  Common  Land,  Distriei  Visiting,  A  More 
Excellent  Way  of  Charity.  A  Word  on  Good  Citizenship,  Open  Spaces, 
EffectucU  Charity,     The  Future  of  our  Commons, 

Historicus.— LETTERS  ON  SOME  QUESTIONS  OF 
INTERNATIONAL  LAW.  Reprinted  from  the  Times,  with 
considerable  Additions.  8vo.  y.' 6d,  Also,  ADDITIONAL 
LETTERS.    8vo.    2s,  dd. 

Holland.— THE  TREATY  RELATIONS  OF  RUSSIA  AND 
TURKEY  FROM  1774  TO  1853.  A  Lecture  delivered  at  Oxford, 
April  1877.  By  T.  E.  Holland,  D.C.L.,  Professor  of  Inter- 
national Law  and  Diplomacy,  Oxford.     Crown  8vo.     2s, 

Hughes  (Thos.)— THE  OLD  CHURCH  :  WHAT  SHALL 
WE  DO  WITH  IT?  By  Thomas  Hughes,  Q.C.  Crown 
8vo.    6f. 

J e von S.— Works  by  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  M.A.,  Professor  of 
Political  Economy  in  University  College,  London.  (For  other 
Works  by  the  same  Author,  see  Educational  and  Philo- 
sophical Catalogues.) 

THE  COAL  QUESTION  :  An  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Progress 
of  the  Nation,  and  the  Probable  Exhaustion  of  our  Coal  Mines. 
Second  Edition,  revised.     8vo.     loy.  (>d.     .   . 


36  MACMILLAN'S  CATALOGUE  OF 


Stephen . — continued. 

A  DIGEST  OF  THE  CRIMINAL  LAW.  (Crimes  and 
Punishments.)    8vo.     idx. 

•*  We  feel  sure  that  any  person  of  ordinary  intdligence  who  had  never 
looked  into  a  law-book  in  his  life  might,  by  a  few  dayi  careful  study  ol 
this  volume,  obtain  a  more  accurate  understanding  of  the  criminal  lam, 
a  more  perfect  conception  of  Us  different  bearings  a  more  thorough 
and  intelligent  insight  into  its  snares  and  pitfalls,  than  an  ordinary 
practitioner  can  boast  of  after  years  of  study  of  the  ordinary  text" 
books  and  practical  experience  of  the  Courts  unassisted  by  any  competent 
guide" — Saturday  Review. 

A  GENERAL  VIEW  OF  THE  CRIMINAL  LAW  OF  ENG- 
LAND.    Two  Vols.     Crown  8vo.  [New  edition  in  the  press, 

Stubbs.— VILLAGE  POLITICS.  Addresses  and  Sermons  on 
the  Labour  Question.  By  C.  W.  Stubbs,  M.A.,  Vicar  of 
Granboro'ugh,  Bucks.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     3J.  6d» 

Thornton. — Works  by  W.  T.  Thornton,  C.B.,  Secretary  for 
Public  Works  in  the  India  Office  : — 

ON  LABOUR :  Its  Wrongful  Claims  and  Rightfhl  Dues ;  Its 
Actual  Present  and  Possible  Future.  Second  Edition,  revised, 
8vo.     14T. 

A  PLEA  FOR  PEASANT  PROPRIETORS  :  With  the  Outlines 
of  a  Plan  for  their  Establishment  in  Ireland.  New  Edition, 
revised.     Crown  8vo.     *js,  6d, 

INDIAN  PUBLIC  WORKS  AND  COGNATE  INDIAN 
TOPICS.     With  Map  of  Indian  Railways.     Crown  8vo.    'Sx.  6d. 

Walker. — ^Works  by  F.  A.  Walker,  M.A.,  Ph.D.,  Professor  of 
Political  Economy  and  History,  Yale  College  : — 

THE  WAGES  QUESTION.  A  Treatise  on  Wages  and  the 
Wages  Class.     8vo.     14J. 

MONEY.    8vo.     i6s. 

**  /t  is  painstaking,  laborious,  and  states  the  question  in  a  clear  and 
very  intelligible  form.  .  .  .  The  volume  possesses  a  great  value  as  a  sort 
of  encyclopedia  of  kno7vledge  on  the  subject" — ^ECONOMIST. 

Work    about    the    Five    Dials.      With    an    Introductory 
Note  by  Thomas  Carlyle.     Crown  8vo.     6s, 
**j4  book  which  abounds  with  wise  and  practical  suggestions" — pALL 
Mall  Gazette. 


WORKS  ON  LANGUAGE.  yj 


WORKSCONNECTED  WITH  THE  SCIENCE 
OR  THE  HISTORY  OF  LANGUAGE. 

Abbott.— A  SHAKESPERIAN  GRAMMAR :  An  Attempt  to 
illustrate  some  of  the  Differences  between  Elizabethan  and  Modern 
English.  By  the  Rev.  E.  A.  Abbott,  D.D.,  Head  Master  of  the 
City  of  London  School  New  and  Enlarged  Edition.  Extra 
fcap.  8vo.  df. 
**  Valuable  not  only  as  an  aid  to  the  critical  study  of  Shakespeare, 

hut  as  tending  to  familiarixe  the  reader  with  Elizabethan  English  tn 

general. " — ATHENiCUM. 

Besant.— STUDIES  IN  early  FRENCH  POETRY.  By 
Walter  Besant,  M.A.    Crown  8vo.    8j.  6d, 

Breymann.— A  FRENCH  GRAMMAR  BASED  ON  PHILO- 
LOGICAL PRINCIPLES.    By  Hermann  Breymann,  Ph.D., 
Professor  of  Philology  in  the  University  of  Munich  late  Lecturer 
on   French  Language  and  Literature  at  Owens  College,    Man- 
chester.    Extra  Kap.  8vo.     4r.  6d, 
**  We  dismiss  the  vtork  with  every  feding  of  satisfaction.     It  cannot 
fail  to  he  taken  into  use  by  all  schools  which  endeavour  to  make  the  study 
of  French  a  means  towards  the  higher  «///wr^."— Educational  Times. 

Ellis.— PRACTICAL  HINTS  ON  THE  QUANTITATIVE 
PRONUNCIATION  OF  LATIN,  FOR  THE  USE  OF 
CLASSICAL  TEACHERS  AND  LINGUISTS.  By  A.  J. 
Ellis,  B.A.,  F.R.S.,  &c.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.    4r.  6c/. 

Fleay.— A  Shakespeare  manual.    By  the  Rev.  f.  g. 

Fleay,  M.  a..  Head  Master  of  Skipton  Grammar  School.    Extra 
fcap.  8vo.     4r.  6^. 

Goodwin.— SYNTAX  OF  THE  GREEK  MOODS  AND 
TENSES.  By  W.  W.  Goodwin,  Professor  of  Greek  Literature 
in  Harvard  University.     New  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     dr.  dd, 

Hadley.— ESSAYS    philological    and    critical. 

Selected  from  the  Papers  of  James  Hadley,  LL.D.,  Professor  of 
Greek  in  Yale  College,  &c   -Svo.     idr.' 

Hales.— LONGER  ENGLISH  PO^MS.  With  Notes,  Philo- 
logical  and  Explanatory,  and  an  Introduction  on  the  Teaching  of 
English.     Chiefly  for  use  in  Schools.     Edited  by  J.  W.  Hales, 

.  M.A.,  Professor  of  English  Literature  at  King's  College,  London, 
&c  &C.    Fifth  Edition.     Extra  fcap.  8vo.     4J.  td. 


38  MACMILLAIPS   CATALOGUE    OF 

Helfenstein  (James).— a  comparative  grammar 

OF   THE   TEUTONIC   LANGUAGES  :    Being  at  the  same 
time  a  Historical  Grammar  of  the  English  Language,  and  com- 

f rising  Gothic,  Anglo-Saxon,  Early  English,  Modem  English, 
celandic  (Old  Norse),  Danish,  Swedish,  Old  High  German, 
Middle  High  German,  Modem  German,  Old  Saxon,  Old  Frisian, 
and  Dutch.    By  James  Helpenstein,  Ph.D.    8vo.     i8r. 

MaSSOn  (Gustave).— a  COMPENDIOUS  DICTIONARY 
OF  THE  FRENCH  LANGUA(iE(French.EDglish  and  Ei^lish- 
French).  Followed  by  a  List  cf  the  Principal  Diverging  Deriva* 
tions,  and  preceded  by  Chronological  and  H  istorical  '1  ables.  By 
Gustave  Masson,  A^si^tant- Master  and  Librarian,  Harrow 
School.  Fourth  Edition.  Crown  8vo.  HaT- bound,  dr. 
*^  A  book  which  any  student^  whatever  may  be  the  de^ret  of  his  ad" 

vancement  in  the  lam^uage,  would  do  well  to  have  on  the  table  close  ai 

hand  while  lu  is  reading.  -  SilTUKDKY  Review. 

Mayor. — a  bibliographical  clue  to  latin  lite- 

RATURE.  Edited  after  Dr.  E.  Hubner.  With  large  Additions 
by  John  F^  B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  Professor  of  Latin  in  the  Univer- 
sity of  Cambridge.     Crown  8vo.     6;.  6d, 

**  An  extrimdy  useful  volume  that  should  be  in  the  hands  of  off 
scholars, "— Ath  ENiEU  M. 

Morris* — Works  by  the  Rev.  Richard  Morris,  LL.D.,  Member 
of  the  Council  of  the  Philol.  Soc,  Lecturer  on  English  Language 
and  Literature  in  King's  College  School  Editor  of  "  Specimens 
of  Early  English, "  etc.,  etc. : — 

HISTORICAL  OUTLINES  OF  ENGLISH  ACCIDENCE, 
comprising  Chapters  on  the  History  and  Development  of 
the  Language,  and  on  Word-formation.  Sixth  Edition.  Fcap. 
8vo.     dr. 

ELEMENTARY  LESSONS  IN  HISTORICAL  ENGLISH 
GRAMMAR,  containing  Accidence  and  Word-formation.  Thixd 
Fxlition.     i8mo.     zs,  bd, 

Oliphant.— THE  OLD  AND  MIDDLE  ENGLISH.  By 
T.  L.  Kington  Oliphant,  M.A.,  of  Balliol  College  Oxford, 
A  New  Edition,  revised  and  greatly  enlarged|  of  *'  Ihe  Souroes 
of  Standard  English."    Extra  fcap.  8vo.    9^. 

**Mr,  Oliphant' s  book  is^  to  our  mifid^  one  of  the  ablest  and  most 
scholarly  contributions  to  our  standard  English  we  have  seen  for  many 
^rtirj."— School  Board  Chronicle.  **  The  book  comes  nearer  to  a 
history  of  the  Jbngitsh  language  than  anything  we  have  seen  since  such  a 
history  could  be  written^  without  costfusiom  and  cotUradutioits^'--^ 
Saturday  Review. 


WORKS  ON  LANGUAGE.  39 

PcilC  (John,  M.A.)— AN  INTRODUCTION  TO  GREEK 
AND  LATIN  ETYMOLOGY.  By  John  Peile,  M.A., 
Fellow  and  Tutor  of  Christ's  College,  Cambridge.  Third 
and  revised  Edition.     Crown  8vo.     los.  (id. 

**TAe  book  may  be  accepted  as  a  very  valuable  contribution  to  tht 
science  0/ language.*^ — Saturday  Review. 

Philology.— THE  JOURNAL  OF  SACRED  AND  CLAS* 
SICAL  PHILOLOGY.     Four  Vols.  8vo.     izs.  6^.  each. 

THE  JOURNAL  OF  PHILOLOGY.  New  Series.  Edited  by 
John  E.  B.  Mayor,  M.A.,  and  W.  Aldib  Wright,  M.A. 
4J.  6d.    (Half-yearly.) 

Roby  (H.  J.)— A  GRAMMAR  OF  THE  LATIN  LANGUAGE, 
FROM  PLAUTUS  TO  SUETONIUS,  By  Henry  John 
Roby,  M.A.,  late  Fellow  of  St.  John*»  Collie,  Cambridge. 
In  Two  Parts.  Second  Edition.  Part  I.  containing  : — Book  L 
Sounds.  Book  II.  Inflexions.  Book  III.  Word  Formation.  Ap- 
pendices. Crown  8vo.  &r.  6d.  Part  II.-— Syntax,  Prepositions, 
&C.     Crown  8vo.    los,  dd. 

"The  book  is  marked  by  the  clear  and  practical  insight  of  a  master  in 
kis  art.  It  is  a  hook  which  would  do  honour  to  any  country,^* — 
ATHENiClTM.  ** Brings  before  the  student  in  a  methodical  form  the  best 
results  0/  WiOdem  philology  bearing  on  the  LcUin language  " — Scotsman. 

Schmidt— THE  rythmic  and  metric  of  THE 
CLASSICAL  LANGUAGES.  To  which  are  added,  the  Lyric 
Parts  of  the  ** Medea"  of  Euripides  and  the  *' Antigone"  of 
Sophocles;  with  Rhythmical  Scheme  and  Commentary.  By 
Dr.  J.  H.  Schmidt.  Translated  from  the  German  by  J.  W. 
White,  D.D.    8vo.    lar,  W. 

Taylor. — Works  by  the  Rev.  Isaac  Taylor,  M.A.:— 

ETRUSCAN  RESEARCHES.     With  Woodcuts.     8va     14J. 

The  Times  says: — '*  The  Uaming  and  industry  displayed  in  this 
volume  deserve  the  most  cordial  recognition.  The  ultimate  verdict  of 
science  we  shall  not  attempt  to  anticipate  ;  but  we  can  sajely  say  this^  that 
it  is  a  learned  book  which  the  unlearned  can  enioy^  and  that  in  the  de^ 
scriptions  of  the  tomb- builders^  as  well  as  in  the  mantellou*  loincidences 
and  unexpected  analogies  brought  together  by  the  autJiar^  readers  of  €ifery 
grade  may  take  delight  as  well  as  philosophers  and  scholars.^ 

WORDS  AND  PLACES ;  or.  Etymological  Illustrations  of 
History,  Ethnology,  and  Geography.  By  the  Rev.  Isaac  Taylor* 
Third  Edition^  revised  and  compressed.  With  Maps.  Globe 
8vo.    6j. 

GREEKS  AND  GOTHS  :  a  Study  on  the  Runes.    8vo.    9/. 


40  MA CMILLAN'S  CA  TALOGUE,  b»c. 

Trench. — Works  by  R.  Chenevix  Trench,  D.D.,  Archbishop  of 
Dublm.  (For  other  Works  by  the  same  Author,  see  Theological 
Catalogue.) 

SYNONYMS  OF  THE  NEW  TESTAMENT.    Eighth  Edition, 

enlarged.    8vo,  cloth.    Z2f. 
*^He  is,"  the  AxHENiBUM  says,   *'a  guide  in  this  department  of 
knowledge  to  whom  his  readers  may  entrust  themselves  with  confidence" 

ON  THE  STUDY  OF  WORDS.  Lectures  Addressed  (originany) 
to  the  Pupils  at  the  Diocesan  Training  School,  Windiester. 
Seventeenth  Edition,  enlarged.     Fcap.  8vo.     5;. 

ENGLISH  PAST  AND  PRESENT.  Tenth  Edition,  revised 
and  improved.    Fcap.  8vo.    5^. 

A  SELECT  GLOSSARY  OF  ENGLISH  WORDS  USED 
FORMERLY  IN  SENSES  DIFFERENT  FROM  THEIR 
PRESENT.     Fourth  Edition,  enlarged.     Fcap.  8vo.    4J. 

Whitney.— A  COMPENDIOUS  GERMAN  GRAMMAR.  By 
W.  D.  Whitney,  Professor  of  Sanskrit  and  Instructor  in  Modem 
Languages  in  Yale  College.     Crown  8vo.    6^. 

^^  After  careful  examination  we  are  inclined  to  pronounce  it  the  best 
grammar  of  modem  language  we  have  ever  seen,** — Scotsman. 

Whitney  and  Edgren.— a  COMPENDIOUS  GERMAN 

AND  ENGLISH  DICTIONARY,  with  Notation  of  Corrcspon- 
dences  and  Brief  Etymologies.  By  Professor  W.  D.  Whitney, 
assisted  by  A.  H.  Edgren.    Crown  8vo.    7/.  6d 

The  GERMAN-ENGLISH  Part  may  be  had  separately.    Price  5/. 

Yonge.— HISTORY  of  christian  NAMES.  By  Char- 
lotte M.  Yonge,  Author  of  "The  Heir  of  Reddyffc." 
Cheaper  Edition.     Two  Vols.     Crown  8vo.     12/. 


IL    CXAVy   SONS,  AND  TAYLOR,  PKlNTKItS,   U>MUON. 
