God and the State (Mikhail Bakunin (Benjamin R. Tucker, trans.), 1883)
==========================================================
Bakunin's unfinished polemic against God and the State; the founding text of collectivist anarchism. Translated by Benjamin R. Tucker. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/2916982.0001.001.umich.edu).

CARLO CAFIERO AND ELISEE REOLUa

TRANSLATED FBOM THX FRENCH BT

BSNJ. B. TUCKBB,

Editor oi* ** LmRTT***

SSYXNTH EPITION.


||iiii| iiii ,irtrpj| | i ii :j:\-V

' i

•#

God and the State

sr

MICHAEL BAKOUNINE.

WITH A PREFACE BV

CARLO CAFIERO AND ELISEE RECLTJS,

TRANSLATED B^ROIVI THE FRENCH BY

BENJ. K. TUCKER,

EdiTOK of •• LlBEBTX."

SEVENTH EDITION.

BOSTON, MASS.:
BENJ. R. TUCKER, PUBLISHER,

1890.


Editors' Preface.

One of us is soon to tell in all its details the story of the life of Michael
Bakounine, but its general features are already sufficiently familiar.
Friends and enemies know that this man was great in thought, will, per-
sistent energy ; they know also with what lofby contempt he looked down
upon wealth, rank, glory, all the wretched ambitions which most human
beings are base enough to entertain. A Russian gentleman related by
marriage to the highest nobility of the empire, he was one of the first to
enter that intrepid society of rebels who were able to release themselves
from traditions, prejudices, race and class interests, and set their own
comfort at nought. With them he fought the stern battle of life, aggra-
vated by imprisonment, exile, all the dangers and all the sorrows that
men of self-sacrifice have to undergo during their tormented existence.

A simple stone and a name mark the spot in the cemetery of Berne
where was laid the body of Bakounine. Even that is perhaps too much
to honor the memory of a worker who held vanities of that sort in such
slight esteem. His friends surely will raise to him no ostentatious tomb-
stone or statue. They know with what a huge laugh he would have
received them, had they spoken to him of a commemorative structure
erected to his glory; they know, too, that the true way to honor their
dead is to continue their work — with the same ardor and perseverance
that they themselves brought to it. In this case, indeed, a difficult, task
demanding all our efforts, for among the revolutionists of the present
generation not one has labored more fervently in the common cause of
the Revolution.

In Russia among the students, in Germany among the insurgents
of Dresden, in Siberia among his brothers in exile, in America, in
England, in France, in Switzerland, in Italy among all earnest
men, his direct influence, has been considerable. The originality of
his ideas, the imagery and vehemence of his eloquence, his untiring
zeal in propagandism, helped too by the natural majesty^ of his
person and by a powerful vitality, gave Bakounine access to all the
socialistic revolutionary groups, and his efforts left deep traces every-
where, even upon those who, after having welcomed him, thrust him out
because of a difference of object or method. His correspondence was
most extensive ; he passed entire nights in preparing long letters to his
friends in the revolutionary world, and some of these letters, written to
strengthen the timid, arouse the sluggish, and outline plans of propa-
gandism or revolt, took on the proportions of veritable volumes. These
letters more than anything else explain the prodigious work of Bakou-
nine in the revolutionary movement of the century. The pamphlets pub-
lished by him, in Russian, French, and Italian, however important they

4 Editors' Preface.

may be and however useful they may have been in spreadhig the new
ideas, are the smallest part of Bakounine's work.

The present mcMoir, ** God and the State," is really only a fragment of
a letter or report. Composed in the same manner as most of Bakounine's
other writings, it has the same literary fault, lack of proportion; more-
over, it breaks oflf abruptly : we have searched in vain to discover the end
of the manuscript. Bakounine never had the time necessary to finish all
the tasks he undertook. One work was not completed when others were
already under way. •* My life itself is a fragment," he said to those who
criticised his writings. Nevertheless, the readers of * * God and the State '*
certainly will not regret that Bakounine's memoir, incomplete though it
be, has been published. The questions discussed in it are treated deci-
sively and with a singular vigor of logic. Rightly addressing himself
only to his honest opponents, Bakounine demonstrates to them the empti-
ness of their belief in that divine authority on which all temporal author-
ities are founded ; he proves to them the purely human genesis of all
governments; finally, without stopping to discuss those bases of the State
already condemned by public morality, such as physical superiority,
violence, nobility, wealth, he does justice to the theory which would
entrust science with the government of societies. Supposing even that it
were possible to recognize, amid the confiict of rival ambitions and
intrigues, who are the pretenders and who the real savants, and that a
method of election could be found which would not fail to lodge the
power in the hands of those whose knowledge is authentic, what guaran-
tee could they offer us of the wisdom and honesty of their government ?
Cn the contrary, can we not foresee in these new masters the same follies
and the same crimes found in those of former days and of the present
time ? In the -first place, soience is not : it is becoming. The learned
man of today is but the know-nothing of tomorrow. Let him once
Imagine that he has reached the end, and for that very reason he sinks
beneath even the babe Just born. But, could he recognize truth in its
essence, he can only corrupt himself by privilege and corrupt others by
power. To establish his government he must try, like all chiefs of State,
to arrest the life of the masses moving below him, keep them in ignorance
in order to preserve quiet, and gradually debase them that he may rule
them from a loftier throne.

For the rest, since the *^ doctrinaires** made their appearance, .the true
or pretended "genius" has been trying his hand at wielding the sceptre
of the world, and we know what it has cost us. We have seen them at
work, all these «ot;anto : the more hardened the more they have studied;
the nartower in their views the more time they have spent in examining
some isolated fact in all its aspects ; without any experience of life,
because they have long known no other horizon than the walls of their
cheese ; childish in their passions and vanities, because they have been
unable to participate in serious struggles and have never learned the true
proportion of things. Have we not recently witnessed the foundation of
a whole school of ** thinkers," — wretched courtiers, too, and people of
unclean lives, — who have constructed a complete cosmogony for their
sole use? According to them, worlds have been created, societies have
developed, revolutions have overturned nations, empires have gone down
in blood, poverty, disease, and death have been the queens of humanity
only to raise up an ilite of academicians, the fUll-blown flower of which all

Editor!^ Preface, 6

other men are but the manure. That these editors of the Temps and the
Debate may have leisure to <' think" nations lira and die In ignorance ; all
other human beings are destined for death in order that these gentlemen
may become immortal I

But we may reassure ourselves: all these academicians will not have
the audacity of Alexander in cutting with his sword the Oordi^n knot;
they will not lift the blade of Charlemagne. Government by science is
becoming as impossible as that of divine right, wealth, or brute force.
All powers are henceforth to be submitted to pitiless criticism. Men in
whom the sentiment of equality is born suffer themselves no longer to be
governed ; they learn to govern themselves. In precipitating from the
heights of the heavens him from whom all power is reputed to descend
societies unseat also all those who reigned in his name. Such is the
revolution now in progress. States are breaking up to give place to a
new order, in which, as Bakounine was fond of saying, ** human justice
will be substituted for divind justice." If it is allowable to cite any one
name from those of the revolutionists who have taken part in this
Immense work of renovation, there is not one that may be singled out
with more justice than that of Michael Bakounine.

Carlo Cafiero.
SusiB Recltts.

Qod and the State.

God and the State.

Three elements or three fandamental principles constitute the essen
tial conditions of all human development, collective or individual, in
history: (2) human animality ; (2) thought; and (3) rebellion. To the
first properly corresponds social and private economy ; to the second,
science; to the third, liberty.

Idealists of all schools, aristocrats and bourgeois, theologians and meta
physicians, politicians and moralists, religionists, philosophers, or poets,
not forgetting the liberal economists, — unbounded vrorshippers of the
ideal, as we know, — are much oflfended when told that man, with his
magnificent intelligence, his sublime ideas, and his boundless aspirations,
is, like all else existing in the world, only a product of vile matter.

We may answer that the matter of which materialists speak, matter
spontaneously and eternally mobile, active, productive, matter chemically
or organically determined and manifested by the properties or forces,
mechanical, physical, animal, and intelligent, which necessarily belong to
it, — that this matter has nothing in common with the vile matter of the
idoalLsts. The latter, a product of their false theorizing, is indeed a
stupi i, inanimate, immobile thing, incapable of giving birth to the small-
est pi oduct, a caput mortuum, 8iU*ugly fancy in contrast to the beautiful
fancy which they call God; as the opposite of this supreme Being, matter,
their matter, stripped by them of all that constitutes its real nature,
necessarily represents supreme nothingness. They have taken away from
matter intelligence, life, all its determining qualities, active relations or
forces, motion itself, without which matter would not even have weight,
leaving it nothing but impenetrability and absolute immobility in space ;
they have attributed all these natural forces, properties, and manifesta-
tions to the imaginary being created by their abstract fancy; then,
interchanging rdles^ they have called this product of their imagination,
this phantom, this God who is nothing, " supreme Being," and, as a
necessary consequence, have declared that the real Being, matter, the
world, is nothing. After which they gravely tell us that this matter
is incapable of producing anything, not even of setting itself in motion,
and consequently must have been created by their God.

Who are right, the idealists or the materialists? The question once
clearly stated, hesitation becomes impossible. Undoubtedly the idealists
ore wrong and the materialists right. Yes, facts are before ideas ; yes,
the ideal, as Proudhon said, is but a flower, whose root lies in the material
conditions of existence. Yes, the whole history of humanity, intellectual
and moral, political and social, is but a reflection of its economic history.

All branches of modem science, of true and disinterested science, concur
in proclaiming this grand troth, fundamental and decisive: The social

Ood and the Staie. 7

world, properly speaking the human world, — in short, humanity , — is
nothing other than the supreme development, the highest manifestation of
animality, at least on our planet and as far as we know. But, as every
development necessarily implies a negation of its base or point of
departure, humanity is at the same time and essentially the deliberate
and gradual negation of the animal element in man; and it is precisely
this negation, rational because natural, at once historical and logical, as
inevitable as the development and realization of all the natural laws in the
world, that constitutes and creates the ideal, the world of intellectual and
moral convictions, ideas.

Yes, our first ancestors, our Adams and our Eves, were, if not gorillas,
very near relatives of gorillas, omnivorous, intelligent, and ferocious
beasts, endowed in a higher degree than the animals of any other species
with two precious faculties, — the power to think and the desire to rebel.

These two faculties, combining their progressive action in history,
represent the negative power in the positive development of human
animality, and create consequently all that constitutes humanity in men.

The Bible, which is a very interesting and here and there very profound
book when considered as one of the oldest manifestations of human
wisdom and fancy, expresses this truth very naively in its myth of original
sin. Jehovah, who of all the good gods adored by men was certainly the
most jealous, the most vain, the most fierce, the most unjust, the most
bloodthirsty, the most despotic, and the most hostile to human dignity
and liberty, — Jehovah had just created Adam and Eve, to satisfy we
know not what caprice, perhaps that he might have some new slaves. He
generously placed at their disposal the whole earth, with all its fruits and
animals, and set but a single limit to this complete enjoyment. He
expressly forbade them from touching the fruit of the tree of knowledge.
He wished, therefore, that man, destitute of all understanding of himself,
should remain an eternal beast, ever on aM-fours before the '* living" God,
his creator and his master. But here steps in Satan, the eternal rebel,
the first freethinker, and the emancipator of worlds. He makes man
ashamed of his bestial ignorance and obedience; he emancipates him,
stamps upon his brow the seal of liberty and humanity, in urging him to
disobey and eat of. the fruit of knowledge.

We know what followed. The good God, whose foresight, which is
one of the divine faculties, should have warned him of what would
happen, flew into a terrible and ridiculous rage : he cursed Satan, man, and
the world created by himself, striking himself so to speak in his own crea-
tion, as children do when they get angry ; and, not content with smiting our
ancestors themselves, he cursed them in all the generations to come, inno-
cent of the crime committed by their forefathers. Our Catholic and
Protestant theologians look upon that as very profound and very just,
precisely because it is monstrously iniquitous and absurd. Then, remem-
bering that he was not only a God of vengeance and wrath, but also a
God of love, after having tormented the existence of a few billions of poor
human beings and condemned them to an eternal hell, he took pity on the
rest, and, to save them and reconcile his eternal and divine love with his
eternal and divine anger, always greedy for victims and blood, he sent
into the world, as an expiatory victim, his only son, that he might be
killed by men. That is called the mystery of the Bedemption, the basis
of all the Chiistian religions. Still, if the divine Sayiour had saved ihe

8 Ood and the StaJte.

human world t Bat no ; in the paradise promised by Christ, as we know,
such being the formal announcement, the elect will number very few.
The rest, the immense majority of the generations present and to come,
will burn eternally in hell. In the meantime, to console us, God, ever
just, ever good, hands over the earth to the government of the Napoleon
Thirds, of the William Firsts, of the Ferdinands of Austria, and of the
Alexanders of all the Bussias.

Such are the absurd tales that are told and the monstrous doctrines
that are taught, in the ftiU light of the nineteenth century, in all the
popular schools of Europe, at the express command of the governments.
They call this civilizing the people. Is it not plain that all governments
are systematic poisoners, interested stupeflers of the popular masses ?

These are the base, and criminal means which they employ to keep the
nations in perpetual slavery, undoubtedly that they may be the better able
to fleece them. Of what consequence are the crimes of all the Tropm^nns
in the world compared with this crime of treason against humanity com-
mitted daily, in broad day, over the whole surface of the civilized world,
by those who dare to call themselves the guardians and the fathers of the
people?

And yet, in the myth of original sin, God admitted that Satan was
right ; he recognized that the devil did not deceive Adam and Eve in prom-
ising them knowledge and liberty as a reward for the act of disobedience
which he had induced them to commit ; for, immediately they had eaten
of the forbidden fruit, God himself said (see Bible) : ** Behold, the man
is become as one of the gods, to know good and evil; prevent him, there-
fore, Arom eating of the fruit of eternal life, lest he become immortal like
Ourselves."

Let us disregard now the fabulous portion of this myth and consider its
true meaning, which, by the way, is very clear. Man has emancipated
himself; he has separated himself /rom animality and constituted himself
a man ; he has begun his distinctively human history and development by
an act of disobedience and science, — that is, by rebellion and by thought.

The system of the idealists is quite the contrary of this. It is th6
reversal of all these human experiences and of that universal and com«
mon good sense which is the essential condition of all human understand-
ing, and which, in rising from the simple and long-recognized truth that
twice two are four to the sublimes t and most complex scientific consider-
ations, — admitting, moreover, nothing that has not stood the severest
tests of experience and observation of things and facts, — becomes the
only serious basis of human knowledge.

The^ gradual development of the material world, as well as of organic
and animal life and of the historically progressive intelligence of man,
Individually or socially, is perfectly conceivable. It is a wholly natural
movement from the simple to the complex, from the lower to the higher,
from the inferior to the superior ; a movement in conformity with all our
daily experiences, and consequently in conformity also with our natural
logic, with the distinctive laws of our mind, which, being formed and
developed only by the aid of these same experiences, is, so to speak, but
the mental, cerebral reproduction or reflected summary thereof.

Very flur Arom pursuing the natural order from the lower to the higher,
from the inferior to the superior, and from the relatively simple to
the most complex; instead of wisely and rationally accompanying the

Ood and the State. 9

progressive and real movement from the world called inorganic to the
world organic, vegetable, animal, and then distinctively human, — from
matter or chemical being to matter or living being, and from living being to
thinking being, — the idealists, obsessed, blinded, and pushed on by the
divine phantom which they have inherited from theology, take precisely the
opposite course. They go from the higher to the lower, from the superior
to the inferior, from the complex to the simple. They begin with God,
either as person or as divine substance or idea, and the first step that
they take is a terrible fall from the sublime heights of the eternal ideal
into the mire of the material world ; from absolute perfection into abso-
lute imperfection ; from thought to being, or, rather, from supreme being
to Nothing. When, how, and why the divine Being, eternal, infinite,
absolutely perfect, probably weary of himself, decided upon this desper-
ate salto mortale is something which no idealist, no theologian, no meta-
physician, no poet, has ever been able to understand himself or explain to
the profane. All religions, past and present, and all the systems of
transcendental philosophy hinge on this unique and Iniquitous mystery. »
Holy men, inspired law-givers, prophets, messiahs, have searched it for
life, and found only torment and death. Like the ancient sphinx, it has
devoured them, because they could not explain it. Great philosophers,
from Heraclides and Plato down to Descartes, Spinoza, Leibnitz, Kant,
Fichte, Schelling, and Hegel, not to mention the Hindoo philosophers,
have written heaps of volumes and built systems as ingenious as sublime,
in which they have said by the way many beautiful and grand things and
discovered immortal truths, but they have left this mystery, the principal
object of their transcendental investigations, as unfathomable as before.
The gigantic efforts of the most wonderful geniuses that the world has
tnown, and who, one after another, for at least thirty centuries, have
undertaken anew this labor of Sisyphu^, have resulted only in rendering
this mystery still more incomprehensible. Is it to be hoped that it will
be unveiled to us by the routine speculations of some pedantic disciple of
an artificially warmed-over metaphysics at a time when all living and
serious spirits have abandoned that ambiguous science born of a compro-
mise between the unreason of faith and sound scientific reason?

It is evident that this terrible mystery is inexplicable, —that is, absurd,
because only the absurd admits of no explanation. It is evident that
whoever finds it essential to his happiness and life must renounce his
reason, and return, if he can, to naive, blind, stupid faith, to repeat with -
TertuUianus and all sincere believers these words, which sum up the very
quintessence of theology :

Credo quia absurdum.

Then all discussion ceases, and nothing remains but the triumphant
stupidity of faith. But immediately there arises another question :

How comes an intelligent and well-informed man ever to feel the need of
believing in this mystery f

* I call it iniquitous because this mystery has been and still continues
to be the consecration of all the horrors which have been and are being
committed in the world ; I call it Iniquitous because all the other theolog-
ical and metaphysical absurdities which debase the human mind are but
Its necessary consequences,

10 CM and the State.

Nothing is more natural than that the belief in God, the creator, regn-
lator. Judge, master, cnrser, savioar, and benefactor of the world, should
still prevail among the people, especially in the rural districts, where it is
even more widespread than among the proletariat of the cities. The
j^ople unfortunately are still very ignorant, and are kept in ignorance by
'^he systematic efforts of all the governments, who consider them, not
without good reason, as one of the essential conditions of their own
power. Weighted down by their daily labor, deprived of leisure, of
ntellectual Intercourse, of reading, in short, of all the means and a good
portion of the stimulants that develop thought in men, the people gener-
'^ily accept religious traditions without criticism and in a lump. These
raditions surround them from infancy in all the situations of life, and,
artificially sustained in their minds by a multitude of official poisoners of
all sorts, priests and laymen, are transformed therein into a sort of mental
habit, too often more powerful than even their natural good sense.

There is another reason which explains and in some sort justifies the
absurd beliefs of the people, — namely, the wretched situation to which
they find themselves fatally condemned by the economic organization of
society in the most civilized countries of Europe. Reduced, intellectu-
ally and morally as well as materially, to the minimum of human exist-
ence, confined in their life like a prisoner in his prison, without horizon,
without outlet, without even a future if we may believe the economists,
the people would have the singularly narrow souls and blunted instincts
of the bourgeois if they did not feel a desire to escape : but of escape
there are but three methods, — two chimerical and a third real. The first
two are the dram-shop and the church, debauchery of the body or
debauchery of the mind ; the third is social revolution. This last will be
much more potent than all the theological propagandism of the free-
thinkers to destroy the religious, beliefs and dissolute habits of the
people, beliefs and habits much more intimately connected than is gener-
ally supposed. In substituting for the at once illusory and brutal enjoy-
ments of bodily and spiritual licentiousness the enjoyments, as refined as
they are abundant, of humanity developed in each and all, the social
revolution alone will have the power to close at the same time all the
dram-shops and all the churches.

Till then the people, taken as a \irhole, will believe ; and, if they have
no reason to believe, they will have at least the right.

There is a class of people who, if they do not believe, must at least
make a semblance of believing. This class comprises all the tormentors,
all the oppressors, and all the exploiters of humanity : priests, monarchs,
statesmen, soldiers, public and private financiers, ofilcials of all sorts,
policemen, gendarmes, jailers and executioners, monopolists, capitalists,
tax-leeches, contractors and propiletors, lawyers, economists, politicians
of all shades, down to the smallest vender of sweetmeats, air will repeat
in unison these words of Voltaire :

JtOoA did not exist, it would be neeestary to inTent him.

For, yon understand, ''the people must have a religion." That is the
safety-valve.

There exists, finally, a somewhat numerous class of honest but timid
Bonis who, too intelligent to take the Christian dogmas seriously, reject
them in detail, bat have neither the courage nor the strength nor th«

Chfl antf the f^fate. 11

necessary resolation to summarily renounce them altogether. They
abandon to your criticism all the special absurdities of religion, they turn
up their noses at all the miracles, but they cling desperately to the prin-
cipal absurdity, the source of all the others, to the miracle that explains
and justifies all the other miracles, the existence of God. Their God is
not the vigorous and powerful Being, the wholly positive God of theol-
ogy. It is a nebulous, diaphanous, illusory Being that vanishes into
nothing at the first attempt to grasp it; it is a mirage, an ignis fatuus that
neither warms nor illuminates. And yet they hold fast to it, and believe
that, were it to disappear, all would disappear with it. They are uncer-
tain, sickly souls, who have lost their reckoning in the present civiliza-
tion, belonging to neither the present nor the future, pale phantoms eter-
nally suspended between heaven and earth, and occupying exactly the
same position between the politics of the bourgeois and the socialism of
the proletariat. They have neither the power nor the wish nor the deter-
mination to follow out their thought, and they waste their time and pains
in constantly endeavoring to reconcile the irreconcilable.

In public life these are known as the bourgeois socialists. With them
discussion is out of the question. They are too puny.

But there are a few illustrious men of whom no one will dare to speak
without respect, and whose vigorous health, strength of mind, and good
intention no one will dream of calling in question. I need only cite the
names of Mazzini, Michelet, Quinet, John Stuart Mill.^ Generous and
strong souls, great hearts, great minds, great writers, and the first the
heroic and revolutionary regenerator of a great nation, they are all apostles
of idealism and bitter despisers and adversaries of materialism, and con-
sequently of socialism also, in philosophy as well as in politics.

Against them, then, we must discuss this question.

First let it be remarked that not one of the illustrious men whom I have
just named nor any other idealistic thinker of any consequence in oui
day has given any attention to the logical side of this question properlv
speaking. Not one has tried to settle philosophically the possibility of
the divine salto mortale from the pure and eternal regions of spirit into
the mire of the material world. Have they feared to approach this irre-
concilable contradiction and despaired of solving it after the failures of
the greatest geniuses of history, or have they looked upon it as already
sufficiently well settled? That is their secret. The fact is that they have
neglected the theoretical demonstration of the existence of a God, and
have developed only its practical motives and consequences. They have
treated it as a fact universally accepted, and, as such, no longer suscep-
tible of any doubt whatever, for sole proof thereof limiting themselves to
the establishment of the antiquity and this very universality of the belief
in God.

» Stuart. Mill is perhaps the only one whose serious idealism may be
fairly doubted, and that for two reasons : first, that, if not absolutely
the disciple, he is a passionate admirer, an adherent of the positive philos-
ophy of Auguste Comte, a philosophy which, in spite of its numerous
reservations, is really atheistic; second, that Stuart Mill was English,
and in England to proclaim one's self an atheist is to ostracize one's sell;
even at this late day.

12 €hd and the State,

Tbis imposing unanimity, in tiie eyes of many illustrious men and
writers, — to quote only the most famous of them, Joseph de Maistre
and the great Italian patriot, Giuseppe Mazzini, — is of more value than
all the'demonstrations of science ; and, if the reasoning of a small num-
ber of logical and even very powerful, but isolated, thinkers is against it,
so much the worse, they say, for these thinkers and their logic, for
universal consent, the general and primitive adoption of an idea, have
always been considered the most triumphant testimony to its truth. The
sentiment of the whole world, a conviction that is found and maintained
always and everywhere, cannot be mistaken ; it must have its root in a
necessity absolutely inherent in the very nature of man. And, since it
has been established that all peoples, past and present, have believed and
still believe in the existence of God, it is clear that those who have the
misfortune to doubt it, whatever the logic that led them to this doubt, are
exceptions, anomalies, monsters.

Thus, then, the antiquity and universality of a belief, though contrary
to all science and all logic, should be regarded as sufficient and unim-
peachable proof of its truth.

Why?

Until the days of Galileo and Copernicus everybody believed that the
sun revolved about the earth. Was not everybody mistaken ? What is
more ancient and more universal than slavery? Cannibalism, perhaps.
From the origin of historic society down to the present day there has
been always and everywhere exploitation of the compulsory labor of the
masses — slaves, serfs, or employees — by some dominant minority;
oppression of the people by the Church and by the State. Must it be
concluded that this exploitation and this oppression are necessities abso-
lutely inherent in the very existence of human society? These are
examples which show that the argument of the champions of the good
God proves nothing.

Nothing, In fact, is as universal or as ancient as the Iniquitous and
absurd; truth and justice, on the contrary, are the least universal, the
youngest features in the development of human society. In this fact, too,
lies the explanation of a constant historical phenomenon, — namely, the
persecution of which those who first proclaim the truth have been and
continue to be the objects at the hands of the official, privileged, and
interested representatives of "universal" and "ancient" beliefs, and
often also at the hands of the same popular masses who, after having
tortured them, always end by adopting their ideas and rendering them
victorious.

To us, materialists and revolutionary socialists, there is nothing aston-
ishing or terrifying in this historical phenomenon. Strong in our con-
science, in our love of truth at all hazards, in that passion for logic which
of Itself alone constitutes a great power and outside of which there is no
thought; strong In our passion for justice and in our unshakable faith in
the triumph of humanity over all theoretical and practical bestialities;
strong, finally, in the mutual confidence and support given each other by
the few who share our convictions, — we resign ourselves to all the con-
sequences of this historical phenomenon, in which we see the manifesta-
tion of a social law as natural, as necessary, and as invariable as all the
Other laws which goyem the world.

Ghd and the State. 18

This law Is a logical, iuevitable consequence of the animal origin of
human society ; and in face of all the scientific, physiological, psycholog-
ical, and historical proofs accnmulated at the present day, as well as in
face of the exploits of the Germans conquering France, which now ftir-
nish so striking a demonstration thereof, it is no longer possible to really
doubt it. But from the moment that this animal origin of man is
accepted, all is explained. History then appears to us as the revolution-
ary negation, now slow, apathetic, sluggish, now passionate and power-
ful, of the past. It consists precisely in the progressive negation of the
primitive animality of man by the development of his humanity. Man, a
wild beast, cousin of the gorilla, has emerged from the profound dark-
ness of animal instinct into the light of the mind, which explains in a
wholly natural way all his past mistakes and partially consoles us for
his present errors. He has gone out from animal slavery, and, passing
through divine slavery, a temporary condition between his animality and
his humanity, he Is now marching on to the conquest and realization
of human liberty. Whence it results that the antiquity of a belief, of
an idea, far from proving anything in its favor, ought, on the con-
trary, to lead us to suspect it. For behind us is our animality and be-
fore us our humanity ; human light, the only thing that can warm and
enlighten us, the only thing that can emancipate us, give us dignity,
freedom, and happiness, and realize fraternity among us, is never at
the beginning, but, relatively to the epoch in which we live, always at
the end of history. Let us, then, never look back, let us look ever
forward; for forward is our sunlight, forward our salvation; if it is
justifiable, and even useflil and necessary, to turn back to study oilr
past, it is only in order to establish what we have been and what we must
no longer be, what we have believed and thought and what we must no
longer believe or think, what we have done and what we must do never-
more.

So much for antiquity. As for the universality of an error, it proves
but one thing, — the similarity, if not the perfect Identity, of human nature
in all ages and under all skies. And, since it Is established that all peo-
ples, at all periods of their life, have believed and still believe in God, we
must simply conclude that the divine idea, an outcome of ourselves, is an
error hli^torlcally necessary in the development of humanity, and ask why
and how it was produced in history and why an immense majority of the
human race still accept it as a truth.

Until we shall account to ourselves for the manner in which the Idea of
a supernatural or divine world was developed and had to be developed in
the historical evolution of the human conscience, all scientific demonstra-
tion of Its absurdity will be In vain ; until then we shall never succeed In
destroying it In the opinion of the majority, because we shall never at-
ack it In the very depths of the human being where It had birth. Con-
demned to a fruitless struggle, without issue and without end, we must
ever content ourselves with fighting it solely on the surface, In Its Innu-
merable manifestations, whose absurdity will be scarcely beaten down by
the blows of common sense before it will reappear in a new form no less
nonsensical. Until the root of all the absurdities that torment the world
shall be destroyed, belief in God will remain Intact and never fall to bring
forth new ofllipriiig. Thus, at the present time, in certain sections o

14 Ood avff the State.

the highest society, Spiritism tends to establish itself npon the ruins of
Christianity.

It is not only in the interest of the masses, it is in that of the health of
our own minds, that we should strive to understand the historic genesis, the
succession of causes which developed and produced the idea of God in the
consciousness of men. In vain shall we call and believe ourselves atheists,
until we comprehend these causes, for, until then, we shall always suffer
ourselves to be more or less governed by the clamors of this universal
conscience whose secret we have not discovered : and, considering the
natural weakness of even the strongest individual against the all-powerful
influence of the social surroundings that trammel him, we are always in
danger of relapsing sooner or later, in one way or another, into the abyss
of religious absurdity. Examples of these conversions are frequent in
society today.

I have stated the chief practical reason of the power still exercised to-
day over the masses by religious beliefs. ^ These mystical tendencies do
not signify in man so much an aberration of mind as a deep discontent at
heart. They are the instinctive and passionate protest of the human
being against the narrownesses, the platitudes, the sorrows, and the
shames of a wretched existence. For this malady, I have already said,
there is but one remedy, — social Revolution.

In other writings I have endeavored to show the causes responsible for
the birth and historical development of religious hallucinations in the
human conscience. Here it is my purpose to treat this question of the
existence of a -God, or of the divine origin of the world or of man, solely
from the standpoint of its moral and social utility, and I shall say only
a few words, to better explain my thought, regarding the theoretical
grounds of this belief.

All religions, with their gods, their' demigods and their prophets,
their messiahs and their saints, were created by the credulous fancy
of men who had not attained the fUU development and full possession
of their intellectual faculties. Consequently, the religious heaven is
nothing but a mirage in which man, exalted by ignorance and faith,
discovers his own image, but enlarged and reversed, — that is, divin-
ized. The history of religions, of the birth, grandeur, and decline of
the gods who have succeeded one another in human belief, is noth-
ing, therefore, but the development of the collective intelligence and
conscience of mankind. As fast as they discovered, in the course of
their historically progressive advance, either in themselves or in ex-
ternal nature, a power, a quality, or even any great defect whatever,
they attributed them to their gods, after having exaggerated and en-
larged them beyond measure, after the manner of children, by an act of
their religious fancy. Thanks to this modesty and pious generosity of
oelieving and credulous men, heaven has grown rich with the spoils of the
earth, and, by a necessary consequence, the richer heaven became, the
more wretched became humanity and the earth. God once installed, he.
was naturally proclaimed the cause, reason, arbiter, and absolute disposer
of all things : the world thenceforth was nothing, God was all ; and man,
Ub reftl creator, after having extractedr him from the void, bowed down

Oixi and the State. 15

before him, worshipped him, and avowed himself his creature and his

slave.

Christianity is precisely the religion par excellence, because it exhibits
and manifests, to the fullest extent, the very nature and essence of every
religious system, which is the impoverishment, enslavement, and annihila-
tion of humanity for the benefit of divinity.

God being everything, the real world and man are nothing. God being
truth, justice, goodness, beauty, power, and life, man is falsehood, ini-
quity, evil, ugliness, impotence, and death. God being master, man is the
slave. Incapable of finding justice, truth, and eternal life by his own
effort, he can attain them only through a divine revelation. But whoever
says revelation says revealers, messiahs, prophets, priests, and legislators
inspired by God himself; and these, once recognized as the representa-
tives of divinity on earth, as the holy instructors of humanity, chosen by
God himself to direct it in the path of salvation, necessarily exercise
absolute power. All men owe them passive and unlimited obedience;
for against the divine reason there is no human reason, and against the
justice of God no terrestrial justice holds. Slaves of God, men must be
slaves also of Church and State, in so far as the State is consecrated by the
Church. This truth Christianity, better than all other religions that exist
or have existed, has understood, not excepting even the majority of the
old Oriental religions, which included only distinct and privileged nations,
while Christianity aspires to embrace entire humanity ; and this truth
Roman Catholicism, alone among all the Christian sects, has proclaimed
and realized with rigorous logic. That is why Christianity is the abso-
lute religion, the final religion; why the Apostolic and Roman Church is
the only consistent, legitimate, and divine church.

With all due respect, then, to the metaphysicians and religious ideal-
ists, philosophers, politicians, or poets : The idea of God implies the abdi-
cation of human reason and justice; it is the most decisive negation of human
liberty, and necessarily ends in the enslavement of mankind, both in theory
and practice.

Unless, then, we desire the enslavement and degradation of mankind, as
the Jesuits desire it, as the mdmiers, pietists, or Protestant Methodists
desire it, we may not, must not make the slightest concession either to
the God of theology or to the God of metaphysics. He who, in this mys-
tical alphabet, begins with God will inevitably end with God; he who
desires to worship God must harbor no childish illusions about the
matter, but bravely renounce his liberty and humanity.

If God is, man is a slave; now, man can and must be free; then, God
does not exist.

I defy any one whomsoever to avoid this circle ; now, therefore, let all
choose.

Is it necessary to point out to what extent and in what manner religions
debase and cormpt the people? They destroy their reason, the principal
instrument of human emancipation, and reduce them to imbecility, the
essential condition of slavery. They dishonor human labor, and make it
a sign and source of servitade. They kill the idea and sentiment of
human justice, ever tipping the balance to the side of trinmphant knaves,
privileged objects of divine indulgence. They kill human pride and

16 Ood and the State.

dignity, protecting only tlie cringing and liumble. They stifle in the
heart of nations every feeling of human fraternity, filling it with cru-
elty instead.

All religions are cruel, all founded on blood ; for all rest principally on
• the idea of sacrifice, — that is, on .the perpetual immolation of humanity
to the insatiable vengeance of divinity. In this bloody mystery man is
always the victim, and the priest — a man also, but a man privileged by
graca — is the divine executioner. That explains why the priests of all
religions, the best, the most humane, the gentlest, almost always have at
the bottom of their hearts — and, if not in their hearts, in their imagina-
tions, in their minds — something cruel and sanguinary.

None know all this better than our illustrious contemporary idealists.
They are learned men, who know history by heart ; and, as they are at the
same time living men, great souls penetrated with a sincere and profound
love for the welfare of humanity, they have cursed and branded all these
misdeeds, all these crimes of religion with an eloquence unparalleled.
They reject with indignation all solidarity with the God of positive
religions and with his representatives, past and present, on earth.

The God whom they adore, or whom they think they adore, is distin-
guished from the real gods of history precisely in this, — that he is not at
all a positive God, defined in any way whatever, theologically or even
metaphysically. He is neither the supreme Being of Eobespierre and J.
J. Rousseau, nor the pantheistic god of Spinoza, nor even the at once
innocent, transcendental, and very equivocal god of Hegel. They take
good care not to give him any positive definition whatever, feeling very
strongly that any definition would subject him to the dissolving power of
criticism. They will not say whether he is a personal or impersonal god,
whether he created or did not create the world ; they will not even speak
of his divine providence. All that might compromise. They content
themselves with saying God and nothing more. But, then, what Is their
God ? Not even an idea ; it is an aspiration.

It is the generic name of all that seems grand, good, beautiful, noble,
human. But why, then, do they not say man? Ah! because King Wil-
liam of Prussia and Napoleon III. and all their compeers are likewise
men : which bothers them very much. Real humanity presents a mixture
of all that is most sublime and beautiful with all that is vilest and most
monstrous in the world. How do they get over this ? Why, they call one
divine and the other bestial, representing divinity and animality as two
poles, between which they place humanity. They either will not or can
not understand that these three terms are really but one, and that to sep-
arate them is to destroy them.

They are not strong on logic, and one might say that they despise it.
That is what distinguishes them from the pantheistical and deisti'^al meta-
physicians, and gives their ideas the character of a practical idealism,
drawing its inspiration much less from the severe development of a
thought than from the experiences, I might almost say the emotions,'liis-
torical and collective as well as individual, of life. This gives their prop-
aganda an appearance of wealth and vital power, but an appearance onlyj
for life Itself becomes sterile when paralyzed by a logical contradiction.

God and the State. 17

This contradiction lies here : They wish God, and they wish humanity.
They persist in connecting two terms which, once separated, can come
together again only to destroy each other. They say in a single breath i
God is the liberty of man, God is the dignity, justice, equality, fraternity,
prosperity of men, — regardless of the fatal logic by virtue of which, if
God exists, all these things are condemned to non-existence. For, if God
is, he is necessarily the eternal, supreme, absolute master, and, if such a
master exists, man is a slave; now, if he is a slave, neither justice', nor
equality, nor fraternity, nor prosperity are possible. In vain, flying in
the face of good sense and all the teachings of history, do they represent
tlieir God as animated by the tenderest love of human liberty : a master,
whoever he may be and however liberal he may desire to show himself,
remains none the less always a master. His existence necessarily implies
the slavery of all that is beneath him. Therefore, if God existed, only in
one way could he serve human liberty, — by ceasing to exist.

A jealous lover of human liberty, and deeming it the absolute condition
of all that we admire and respect in humanity, I reverse the phrase of
Voltaire, and say that, if God existed^ it would be necessary to abolish him.

The severe logic that dictates these words is far too evident to require
a development of this argument. And it seems to me impossible that the
illustrious men, whose names so celebrated and so justly respected I have
cited, should not have been struck by it themselves, and should not have
perceived the contradiction in which they involve themselves in speaking
of God and human liberty at once. To have disregarded it, they must
have considered this inconsistency or logical license practically necessary
to humanity's well-being.

Perhaps, too, while speaking of liberty as something very respectable
and very dear in their eyes, they give the term a meaning quite different
from the conception entertained by us, materialists and revolutionary
socialists. Indeed, they never speak of it without Immediately adding
another word, authority y — a word and a thing which we detest with all
our hearts.

What is authority? Is it the inevitable power of the natural laws which
manifest themselves in the necessary concatenation and succession of
phenomena in the physical and social worlds? Indeed, against these
laws revolt is not only forbidden, — it is even impossible. We may
misunderstand them or not know them at all, but we cannot disobey
them ; because they constitute the fundamental conditions of our exist-
ence ; they envelop us, penetrate us, regulate all our movements, thoughts,
and acts; even when we try to disobey them, we only show their
omnipotence.

Yes, we are absolutely the slaves of these laws. But in such slavery
there is no humiliation. For slavery supposes an external master, a
legislator outside of him whom he commands, while these laws are not
outside of us; they are inherent in us; they constitute our being, our
whole being, physically, Intellectually, and morally : we live, we breathe,
we act, we think, we wish only through these laws. Without them we
are iioUiiiig, we are not. Whence, then, could we derive the power and
the wish to rebel against tU^lO?

18 God and the State.

In bis relation to nataral laws bat one liberty is possible to man, — that
of recognizing and applying thera on an ever-extending scale in confer*
mity with the object of collective and individual emancipation or human-
ization which he pursues. These laws, once recognized, exercise an
authority which is never disputed by the mass of men. One must, for
instance, be at bottom either a theologian or at least a metaphysician,
jurist, or bourgeois economist to rebel against the law by which twice two
make four. One must have faith to imagine that fire will not bum nor
water drown, except, isideed, recourse be had to some subterfuge founded
in its turn on some other natural law. But these revolts, or, rather, these
attempts at or foolish fancies of an impossible revolt, are decidedly the
exception ; for, in general, it may be said that the mass of men, in their
daily lives, acknowledge the government of common sense — that is, of
the sum of the natural laws generally recognized — in an almost absolute
fashion.

The great misfortune is that a large number of nataral laws, already
established as such by science, remain unknown to the popular masses,
thanks to the watchftdness of these tutelary governments that exist, as
we know, only for the good of the people.

There is another grave difficulty, — namely, that the major portion of
the natural laws connected with the development of human society, which
are quite as necessary and invariable as the laws that govern the physical
world, have not been duly established and recognized by science itself.*
Once they shall have been recognized by science, and then from science,
by means of an extensive system of popular education and instruction,
shall have passed into the consciousness of all, the question of liberty will
be entirely solved. The stubbomest authorities must admit that then
there will be no need either of political organization or direction or legis-
lation, three things which, whether they emanate from the will of the
sovereign or from the vote of a parliament elected by universal sufi^age,
and even should they conform to the system of natural laws, — which
has never been the case and never will be the case, — are always equally
fatal and hostile to the liberty of the masses from the very fact that they
Impose upon them a system of external and therefore despotic laws.

The liberty of man consists solely in this : that he. obeys natural laws
because he has himself recognized them as such, and not because they have
been externally imposed upon him by any extrinsic will whatever, divine
or human, collective or individual.

Suppose a learned academy, composed of the most illustrious represent-
atives of science ; suppose this academy charged with legislation for and
the organization of society, and that, inspired only by the purest love of
truth, it frames none but laws in absolute harmony with the latest discov-
eries of science. Well, 1 maintain, for my part, that such legislation and
such organization would be a monstrosity, and that for two reasons :
first, that human science is always and necessarily imperfect, and that,
comparing what it has discovered with what remains to be discovered, we
may say that it is always in its cradle. So that were we to try to force
the practical life of men, collective as well as individual, into strict and
exclusive conformity with the latest data of science, we should condemn

* Bakounine undoubtedly refers here to " economic laws " and ** social
science/' which, in fiict, is still only in Its iatBucy. -^ Editors* Note.

Ood and the State. Vb

society as well as individuals to suffer martyrdom on a bed of Pro(yrustes,
which would soon end by dislocating and stifling tliem, life ever remain-
ing an infinitely greater thing than science.

The second reason is this: a society which should obey legislation
emanating from a scientific academy, not because it understood itself the
rational character of this legislation (in which case the existence of the
academy would become useless), but because this legislation, emanating
from the academy, was imposed in the name of a science which it vener-
ated without comprehending, — such a society would be a society, not of
men, but of brutes. It would be a second edition of those missions in
Paraguay which submitted so long to the government of the Jesuits. It
would surely and rapidly descend to the lowest stage of idiocy.

But there is still a third reason which would render such a government
impossible, — namely, that a scientific academy invested with a sove-
reignty, so to speak, absolute, even were it composed of the most illus-
trious men, would infallibly and soon end in its own moral and intellectual
corruption. Even today, with the few privileges allowed them, such is
the history of all academies. The greatest scientific genius, from the mo-
ment that he becomes an academician, an officially licensed savant y inevi-
tably lapses into sluggishness. He loses his spontaneity, his revolutionary
hardihood, and that troublesome and savage energy characteristic of the
grandest geniuses, ever called to destroy old worlds and lay the founda-
tions of new. He undoubtedly gains in politeness, in utilitarian and prac-
tical wisdom, what he loses in power of thought. In a word, he becomes
corrupted.

It is the characteristic of privilege and of e^ry privileged position to
kill the mind and heart of men. The privileged man, whether politically
or economically, is a man depraved in mind and heart. That is a social
law which admits of no exception, a^ is as applicable to entire nations as
to classes, corporations, and individuals. It is the law of equality, the
supreme condition of liberty and humanity. The principal object of this
treatise is precisely to demonstrate this truth in all the manifestations of
human life.

A scientific body to which had been confided the government of society
would soon end by devoting itself no longer to science at all, but to quite
another affair ; and that affair, as in the case of all established powers,
would be its own eternal perpetuation by rendering the society con-
fided to its care ever more stupid and consequently more in need of its
government and direction.

But that which is true of scientific academies is also true of all constita-
ent and legislative assemblies, even those chosen by imiversal suffirage.
In the latter case they may renew their composition, it is true, but this
does not prevent the formation in a few years* time of a body of poli-
ticians, privileged in fact though not in law, who, devoting themselves
exclusively to the direction of the public affairs of a country, finally form
a sort of political aristocracy or oligarchy. Witness the United States
of America and Switzerland.

Consequently, no external legislation and no authority, — one, for that
matter, being inseparable from the other, and both tending t^the servi-
tude of society and the degradation of the legislators themselves.

20 God and the State.

Does it follow that I reject all authority? Far tvom me such a thought
In the matter of boots I refer to the authority of the bootmakers ; con.
cerning houses, canals, or railroads I consult that of the architect or en-
gineer. For such or such special knowledge I apply to such or such a
savant But I allow neither the bootmaker nor the architect nor the
savant to impost his authority upon me. I accept them freely and with
all the respect merited b\ their intelligence, their character, their knowl-
edge, reserving always my incontestible right of criticism and censure.
I do not content myself with consulting a single authority in any special
branch; I consult several; I compare their opinions, and choose that
which seems to me the soundest. But I recognize no infallible authority,
even in special questions ; consequently, whatever respect I may have for
humanity and for the sincerity of such or such an individual, I have no
absolute faith in any person. Such a faith would be fatal to my reason, to
my liberty, and even to the success of my undertakings ; it would im-
mediately transform me into a stupid slave, an instrument of the will and
interests of another.

If I bow before the authority of the specialists and avow my readiness
to follow, to a certain extent and as long as may seem to me necessary,
their indications and even their directions, it is because their authority is
imposed upon me by no one, neither by men nor by God. Otherwise I
would repel them with horror, and bid the devil take their counsels, their
directions, and their services, certain that they would make me pay, by
the loss of my liberty and self-respect, for such scraps of truth, wrapped
in a multitude of lies, as they might give me.

I bow before the authotity of special men because it is imposed upon me
by my own reason. I am conscious of my inability to grasp, in all its de-
tails and positive developments, any very large portion of human knowl-
edge. The greatest intelligence wo^ld not be equal to a comprehension
of the whole. Thence results, for science as well as for industry, the
necessity of the division and association of labor. I receive and I give, —
such is human life. Each directs and is directed in his turn. Therefore
there is no fixed and constant authority, but a continual exchange of
mutual, temporary, and, above all, voluntary authority and subordination.

This same reason forbids me, then, to recognize a fixed, constant, and
universal authority, because there is no universal man, no man capable of
grasping in that wealth of detail without which the application of science
to life is impossible all the sciences, all the branches of social life. And
if such universality could ever be realized in a single man, and if he
wished to take advantage thereof to impose his authority upon us, it
would be necessary to drive this man out of society, because his authority
would inevitably reduce all the others to slavery and imbecility. I do not
think that society ought to maltreat menof genius as it has done hitherto ;
but neither do I think that it should indulge them too far, still less accord
them any privileges or exclusive rights whatsoever; and that for three
reasons : first, because it would often mistake a charlatan for a man of
genius ; second, because, through such a system of privileges, It might
transform into a charlatan a real man of genius, demoralize him, and de-
grade him^ and, finally, because it would establish a master over Itself.

To sum up. We recognize, then, the absolute authority of science,
because the sole object of science Is the mental reproduction, as well-
oonsidered ftnd systematic as possible, ot the natural laws inherent in the

Ood and the State. 21

material, intellectual, and moral life of both the physical and the social
worlds, these two worlds constituting, in fact, but one and the same
natural world. Outside of this solely legitimate authority, legitimate be-
cause rational and in harmony with human liberty, we declare all other
authorities false, arbitrary, and fatal.

We recc^nize the absolute authority of science, but we reject the infal-
libility and universality of the savant. In our church, — if I may be per.
mitted to use for a moment an expression which I so detest : Church and
State are my two Htes noires, — in our church, as in the Protestant church,
we have a chief, an invisible Christ, science; and, like the Protestants,
more logical even than the Protestants, we will suffer neither pope, nor
council, nor conclaves of infallible cardinals, nor bishops, nor even priests.
Our Christ differs from the Protestant and Christian Christ in this, — that
the latter is a personal being, ours impersonal ; the Christian Christ, al-
ready completed in an eternal past, presents himself as a perfect being,
while the completion and perfection of our Christ, science, are ever in
the future : which is equivalent to saying that they will never be realized.
Therefore, in recognizing absolute science as the only absolute authority,
we in no way compromise our liberty.

I mean by this phrase, absolute science, the truly universal science
which would reproduce ideally, to its fullest extent and in all its infinite
detail, the universe, the system or co-ordination of all the natural laws
manifested by the incessant development of the world. It is evident that
such a science, the sublime object of all the efforts of the human mind,
will never be fully and absolutely realized. Our Christ, then, will remain
eternally unfinished, which must considerably take down the pride of his
licensed representatives among us. Against that God the Son in whose
name they assume to impose upon us their insolent and pedantic authority,
we appeal to God the Father, who is the real world, real life, or an only
too imperfect expression thereof, we being the immediate representatives,
we, real beings, living, working, struggling, loving, aspiring, enjoying,
and suffering.

But, while rejecting the absolute, universal, and infallible authority of
men of science, we willingly bow before the respectable, although rela-
tive, temporary, and restricted authority of the representatives of special
sciences, asking nothing better than to consult th^m by turns, and very
grateful for such precious information as they may extend to us, on con-
dition of their willingness to receive from us on occasions when, and con-
cerning matters about which, we are more learned than they. In general
we ask nothing better than to see men endowed with great knowledge,
great experience, great minds, and, above all, great hearts, exercise over
us a natural and legitimate influence, freely accepted, and never imposed
in the name of any authority whatsoever, celestial or terrestrial. We
accept all natural authorities and all influences of fact, but none of
right; for every authority or influence of right, oflacially imposed as
such, becoming directly an oppression and a falsehood, would inevi-
tably impose upon us, as I believe I have suflaciently shown, slavery and
absurdity.

In a word, we reject all legislation, all authority, and all privileged,
licensed, oflacial, and legal influence, even though arising ft:om universal
suffrage, convinced that it can turn only to the advantage of a dominaol

ff God and the State,

minority of exploiters against the interests of the Immense majority in
subjection to them.
Such is the sense in which we are really anarchists.

The modern idealists understand authority in quite a different way.
Although free from the traditional superstitions of all the existing posi-
tive religions, they nevertheless attach to this idea of authority a divine,
an absolute meaning. This authority is not that of a truth miraculously
revealed, nor that of a truth rigorously and scientifically demonstrated.
They base it to a slight extent upon quasi-philosophical reasoning, and to
a large extent on vaguely religious faith, to a large extent also on senti-
ment and poetic abstraction. Their religion is, as it were, a last attempt
to divinize all that constitutes humanity in men.

This is just the opposite of the work that we are doing. In behalf of
human liberty, dignity, and prosperity we believe it our duty to recover
froin heaven the goods which it has stolen and return them to earth.
They, on the contrary, endeavoring to commit a final religiously heroic
larceny, would restore to heaven, that divine robber, the grandest, finest,
and noblest of humanity's possessions. It is now the freethinliers* turn
to pillage heaven by the audacious impiety of their scientific analysis.

The idealists undoubtedly believe that human ideas and deeds, in order
to exercise a greater authority among men, must be invested with a divine
sanction. How is this sanction manifested? Not by a miracle, as in the
positive religions, but by the very grandeur or sanctity of the ideas and
deeds : whatever is grand, whatever is beautiful, whatever is noble, what-
ever is just, is divine. In this new religious cult every man inspired by
these ideas, by these deeds, becomes a priest, directly consecrated by God
himself. And.the proof? He needs none beyond the very grandeur of the
ideas which he expresses and the deeds which he performs. These are so
holy that they can have been inspired only by God.

Such, in a few words, is their whole philosophy : a philosophy of senti-
ments, not of real thoughts, a sort of metaphysical pietism. This seems
harmless, but it is not so at all, and the very precise, very narrow, and
very barren doctrine hidden under the intangible vagueness of these
poetic forms leads to the same disastrous results that all the positive
religions lead to, — namely, the most complete negation of human liberty
and dignity.

To proclaim as divine all that is grand, just, real, and beautiful in
humanity Is to tacitly admit that humanity of itself would have been
unable to produce it, — that is, that, abandoned to itself, its own nature
is miserable, iniquitous, base, and ugly. Thus we come back to the
essence of all religion, — in other words, to the disparagement of human-
ity for the greater glory of divinity. And from the moment that the
natural inferiority of man and his fundamental incapacity to rise by his
own effort, unaided by any divine inspiration, to the comprehension of
just and true ideas are admitted, it becomes necessary to admit also all
the theological, political, and social consequences of the positive religions.
From the moment that God, the perfect and supreme Being, is posited
UmXo lace with hamanity, divine mediators, the elect, the inspired of

€M and the State. 23

God spring from the earth to enlighten, direct, and govern Inhisi name the
liuraan race.

May we not suppose that all men are equally inspired by God? Then,
surely, there is no further use for mediators. But this supposition is
impossible, because it is too clearly contradicted by the facts. It would
compel us to attribute to divine inspiration all the absurdities and errors
which appear, and all the horrors, follies, base deeds, and cowardly actions
which are committed, in the world. But perhaps, then, only a few men
are divinely inspired, the great men of history, the virtuous geniuses, as
the illustrious Italian citizen and prophet, Giuseppe Mazzini, called them.
Immediately inspired by God himself and supported upon universal con-
sent expressed by popular suffrage, Dio e FopolOj such as these should be
called to the government of human societies. *

But here we are again, fallen back under the yoke of Church and State.
It is true that in this new organization, indebted for its existence, like all
the old political organizations, to the grace of God, but supported this
time — at least so far as form is concerned, as a necessary concession to
the spirit of modern times, and just as in the preambles of the imperial
decrees of Napoleon III. — on the pretended will of the people, the Church
will no longer call itself Church ; it will call itself School. What matters
it ? On the benches of this School will be seated not children only ; there
will be found the eternal minor, the pupil confessedly forever incompetent
to pass his examinations, rise to the knowledge of his teachers, and dis-
pense with their discipline, — the people. The State will no longer call
itself monarchy ; it will call itself republic : but it will be none the less
the State, — that is, a tutelage oflacially and regularly established by a
minority of competent men, men of genius, talent, or virtue, who will
watch and guide the conduct of this great, incorrigible, and terrible child,
the people. The professors of the School and the functionaries of the
State will call themselves republicans; but they will be none the less
tutors, shepherds, and the people will remain what they have been hither-
to, a flock. A warning to the shorn, for where there is a flock there
necessarily must be shepherds also to shear and devour it.
• The people, in this system, will be the perpetual scholar and pupil. In
spite of its sovereignty, wholly flctitious, it will continue to serve as the
instrument of thoughts, wills, and consequently interests not its own.
Between this situation and what we call liberty, the only real liberty,
there is an abyss. It will be the old oppression and old slavery under new
forms ; and where there is slavery, there is misery, brutishness, real social
materialism, privileged classes on the one hand and the masses on the
other.

In deifying human things the idealists always end in the triumph of a brutal
materialism. And this for a very simple reason : the divine evaporates
and rises to its own country, heaven, while the brutal alone remains actu-
ally on earth.

One day I asked Mazzini what measures would be taken for the eman-
cipation of the people, once his triumphant unitary republic had been
definitively established.

' In London I once heard M. Louis Blanc express almost the same idea.
"The best form of government,*' he said to me, ** would be that which
would invariably call men of vlrtaoas genia^ to the control of aitairs."

24 God md the Staie.

** The first measure," he answered, " will be the fonndation of schools
for the people."
'^ And what will the people be taught in these schools ?'•
** The duties of man, — sacrifice and devotion."

But where will you find a suflicient number of professors to teach these
things, which no one has the right or power to teach, unless he preaches
by example ? Is not the number of men who find supreme enjoyment in sac-'
riflce and devotion excessively limited ? Those who sacrifice themselves in
the service of a great idea obey a lofty passion, and, satisfying this personal
passioHy outside of which life itself loses all value in their eyes, they gen-
erally think of something else than building their action into doctrine,
while those who teach doctrine usually forget to translate it into action,
for the simple reason that doctrine kills the life, the living spontaneity, of
action. Men like Mazzini, in whom doctrine and action form an admi-
rable unity, are very rare exceptions. In Christianity also there have been
great men, holy men, who have really practised, or who, at least, have
passionately tried to practise all that they preached, and whose hearts,
overflowing with love, were full of contempt for the pleasures and goods
of this world. But the immense majority of Catholic and Protestant
priests who, by trade, have preached and still preach the doctrines of
chastity, abstinence, and renunciation belie their teachings by their ex-
ample. It is not without reason, but because of several centuries* expe-
rience, that among the people of all countries these phrases have become
by- words : ** -4s licentious as a priest; as gluttonous as a priest; as ambi-
tious as a priest ; as greedy, selfish^ and grasping as a priest.'' It is, then,
established that the professors of the Christian virtues, consecrated by
the Church, the priests, in the immense majority of cases, have practised
quite the contrary of what they have preached. This very majority, the
universality of this fact, show that the fault is not to be attributed to
them as individuals, but to the social position, impossible and contradic-
tory in itself, in which these individuals are placed.

The position of the Christian priest involves a double contradiction.
In the first place, that between the doctrine of abstinence and renuncia-
tion and the positive tendencies and needs of human nature, — tendencies
and needs which, in some Individual cases, always very rare, may indeed
be continually ignored, suppressed, and even entirely annihilated by the
constant influence of some potent intellectual and moral passion ; which,
at certain moments of collective exaltation, may be forgotten and neg-
lected for some time by a large mass of men at once; but which are so
fundamentally inherent in our nature that sooner or later they always re-
sume their rights : so that, when they are not satisfied in a regular and
normal way, they are always replaced at last by unwholesome and mon-
strous satisfactions. This is a natural and consequently fatal and irre-
sistible law, under the disastrous action of which inevitably fall all
Christian priests and especially those of the Roman Catholic Church.

But there is another contradiction common to the priests of both sects.
This contradiction grows out of the very title and position of master. A
master who commands, oppresses, and exploits is a wholly logical and
quite natural personage. But a master who sacrifices himself to those
who are subordinated to him by his divine or human privilege is a contra-
dictory and quite impossible being. This is the very constitution of
hypocrisy, so well personified by the Pope, who, while calling himself the

Ood and the State. 25

lowest servant of the servants of God, in token whereof, following the exam«
pie of Christ, he even washes once a year the feet of twelve Roman beg-
gars, proclaims himself at the same time vicar of God, absolute and
infallible master of the world. Do I need to recall that the priests of all
churches, far from sacrificing themselves to the flocks confided to therr
care, have always sacrificed them, exploited them, and kept them in tbe
condition of a flock, partly to satisfy their own personal passions am
partly to serve the omnipotence of the Church? Like conditions, lik^
causes, always produce like efifects. It will, then, be the same with thp
professors of the modern School divinely inspired and licensed by the State.
They will necessarily become, some without knowing it, others with fub
knowledge of the cause, teachers of the doctrine of popular sacrifice te
the power of the State and to the profit of the privileged classes.

Must we, then, eliminate from society all instruction and abolish ah
schools? Far from it I Instruction must be spread among the massed
without stint, transforming all the Churches, all those temples dedicated
to the glory of God and to the slavery of men, into so many schools ol
human emancipation. But, In the first place, let us understand each
other; schools, properly speaking, in a normal society founded on equal-
ity and on respect for human liberty, will exist only for children and not
for adults ; and, in order that they may become schools of emancipation
and not of enslavement, it will be necessary to eliminate, first of all, this
fiction of God, the eternal and absolute enslaver. The whole education
of children and their Instruction must be founded on the scientific devel-
opment of reason, not on that of faith ; on the development of personal
dignity and Independence, not on that of piety and obedience ; on the wor-
ship of truth and justice at any cost, and above all on respect for human-
ity, which must replace always and everywhere the worship of divinity.
The principle of authority. In the education of children, constitutes the
natural point of departure ; it Is legitimate, necessary, when applied to
children of a tender age, whose Intelligence has not yet openly developed
itself But as the development of everything, and cons€fquently of educa-
tion, implies the gradual negation of the point of departure, this principle
must disappear as fast as education and instruction advance, giving place
to increasing liberty.

All rational education is at bottom nothing but this progressive immo-
lation of authority for the benefit of liberty, the final object of education
necessarily being the formation of free men full of respect and love for
the liberty of others. Therefore the first day of the scholar's life, if the
school takes infants scarcely able as yet to stammer a few words, should
be that of the greatest authority and an almost entire absence of liberty ;
but its last day should be that of the greatest liberty and the absolute
abolition of every vestige of the animal or divine principle of authority.

The principle of authority, applied to men who have surpassed or
attained their majority, becomes a monstrosity, a flagrant denial of hu-
manity, a source of slavery and intellectual and moral depravity. Unfor-
tunately paternal governments have left the popular masses to wallow In
an ignorance so profound that it will be necessary to establish schools not
only for the people's children, but for the people themselves. From these
schools will be absolutely eliminated the smallest applications or mani«
festations of the principle of authority. They will be schools no longer;
they will be popular academt§9» In which neither scholars nor masters will

26 Ood and the State.

be known, where the people will come freely to get, If they need it, free
instruction, and in which, rich in their own experience, they will teach in
their turn many things to the professors who shall bring them knowledge
which they lack. This, then, will be a mutual instruction, an act of intel-
lectual fraternity between the educated youth and the people.

The real school for the people and for all grown men is life. The
only grand and omnipotent authority, at once natural and rational, the
only one which we may respect, will be that of the collective and public
spirit of a society founded on the mutual respect of all its members.
Yes, there is an authority which is not at all divine, wholly human, but
before which we shall bow with courage, certain that, far from enslaving
them, it will emancipate men. It will be a thousand times more power-
ful, be sure of it, than all your divine, theological, metaphysical, political,
and judicial authorities, established by the Church and by the State ; more
powerful than your criminal codes, your jailers, and your executioners.

The power of collective sentiment or public spirit is even now a very
serious matter. The men most ready to commit crimes rarely dare to defy
it, to openly affront it. They will seek to deceive it, but will take care not to
be rude with it unless they feel the support of a minority larger or
smaller. No man, however powerful he believes himself, will ever have
the strength to bear the unanimous contempt of society; no one can
live without feeling himself sustained by the approval and esteem of at
least some portion of society. A man must be urged on by an immense
and very sincere conviction in order to find courage to speak and act
against the opinion of all, and never will a selfish, depraved, and coward-
ly man have such courage.

Nothing proves more clearly than this fact the natural and inevitable
solidarity which binds all men together. Each of us can verify this law
daily, both on himself and on all the men whom he knows. But, if this
social power exists, why has it not suflSced hitherto to moralize, to human-
ize men? Simply because hitherto this power has not been humanized
itself; it has not' been humanized because the social life of which it is
ever the faithful expression is based, as we know, on the worship of divin-
ity, not on respect for humanity ; on authority, not on liberty ; on privi-
lege, not on equality ; on the exploitation, not on the brotherhood, of men ;
on iniquity and falsehood, not on justice and truth. Consequently its
real action, always in contradiction of the humanitarian theories which
it professes, has constantly exercised a disastrous and depraving infiu-
ence. It does not repress vices and crimes ; it creates them. Its author-
ity is consequently a divine, anti-human authority; its infiuence is
mischievous and baleful. Do you wish to render its authority and
influence beneficent and human? Achieve the social revolution. Make all
needs really solidary,^ and cause the material and social interests of each
to conform to the human duties of each. And to this end there is but one
means : Destroy all the institutions of Inequality ; establish the economic
and social Equality of all, and on this basis will arise the liberty, the
morality, the solidary humanity of all.

* French socialism long ago coined the words solidarUS and solidaire to
express ideas which there were no other single words to convey. The
noon, Anglicized into solidarity, now finds a place in English dictionaries,
but the equally essential adjective is thus far unrecognized by us* The
tramdator takes the liberty of adopting it.— Trandator.

God and the State. 27

Yes, the necessary consequence of theoretical idealism is practically the
most brutal materialism; not, undoubtedly, among those who sincerely
preach it, — the usual result as far as they are concerned being that they
are constrained to see all their efforts struck with sterility, — but among
those who try to realize their precepts in life, and in all society so far as
it allows itself to be dominated by idealistic doctrines.

To demonstrate this general fact, which may appear strange at first, but
which explains itself naturally enough upon further reflection, historical
proofs are not lacking.

Compare the last two civilizations of the ancient world, — the Greek and
the Eoman. Which is the most materialistic, the most natural, in its point
of departure, and the most humanly ideal in its results? Undoubtedly the
Greek civilization. Which, on the contrary, is the most abstractly ideal
in its point of departure, — sacrificing the material liberty of the man to
the ideal liberty of the citizen, represented by the abstraction of judicial
law, and the natural development of human society to the abstraction of
the State, — and which became nevertheless the most brutal in its conse-
quences? The Roman civilization, certainly. It is true that the Greek
civilization, like all the ancient civilizations, including that of Rome, was
exclusively national and based on slavery. But, in spite of these two im-
mense defects, the former none the less conceived and realized the idea of
humanity ; it ennobled and really idealized the life of men ; it transformed
human herds into free associations of free men ; it created through liber-
ty the sciences, the arts, a poetry, an immortal philosophy, and the prim-
ary concepts of human respect. With political and social liberty, it
created free thought.

At the close of the Middle Ages, during the period of the Renaissance,
the fact that some Greek emigrants brought a few of those immortal books
into Italy suflSced to resuscitate life, liberty, thought, humanity, buried in
the dark dungeon of Catholicism. Human emancipation, — that is the
name of the Greek civilization. And the name of the Roman civilization?
Conquest, with all its brutal consequences. And its last word? The
omnipotence of the Caesars. Which means the degradation and enslave-
ment of nations and of men.

Today even, what is it that kills, what is it that^ crushes brutally,
materially, in all European countries, liberty and humanity? It is the
triumph of the Caesarian or Roman principle.

Compare now two modern civilizations, — the Italian and the German.
The first undoubtedly represents, in its general character, materialism;
the second, on the contrary, represents idealism in its most abstract, most
pure, and most transcendental form. Let us see what are the practical
fruits of the one and the other.

Italy has already rendered immense services In the cause of human
emancipation. She was the first to resuscitate and widely apply the prin-
ciple of liberty in Europe, and to restore to humanity its titles to nobility,
— industry, commerce, poetry, the arts, the positive sciences, and firee
thought. Crushed since by three centuries of imperial and papal despot-
ism, and dragged in the mud by her governing bourgeoisie^ she reappears
today, it is true, in a very degraded condition in comparlsbn with what
she once was. And yet how much she differs from Germany I In Italy,
in spite of this decline,— temporary, let us hope, — one may live and
breathe humanly, surroimded by a people which seems to be bom Ibr

28 Ood and the State,

liberty. Italy, even bourgeoise Itaiy, can point you with pride to men like
Mazzini and Garibaldi. In Germany one breathes the atmosphere of an
immense political and social slavery, philosophically explained and
accepted by a great people, with deliberate resignation and content. Her
neroes, — I speak always of present Germany, not of the Germany of the
future ; of aristocratic, bureaucratic, political, and bourgeoise Germany,
not of the Germany of the proletairesj — her heroes are quite the opposite
of Mazzini and Garibaldi: they are William I., that ferocious and ingen-
uous representative of the Protestant God, Messrs. Bismarck and Moltke,
Generals Manteuffel and Werder. In all her international relations Ger-
many, from the beginning of her existence, has been slowly, systemati-
cally invading, conquering, ever ready to extend her own voluntary
enslavement into the territory. of her neighbors ; and, since her definitive
establishment as a unitary power, she has become a menace, a danger to
the liberty of entire Europe. Today Germany is servility brutal and
triumphant.

To show how theoretical idealism incessantly and inevitably changes
into practical materialism, one needs only to cite the example of all the *
Christian Churches, and, naturally, first of all, that of the Apostolic and
Boman Church. What is there more sublime, in the ideal sense, more dis-
interested, more separate from all the interests of this earth, than the
doctrine of Christ preached by that Church? And what is there more
brutally materialistic than the constant practice of that same Church
since the eighth century, from which dates her definitive establishment as
a power? What has been and still is the principal object of all her con-
tests with the sovereigns of Europe ? Her temporal goods, her revenues
first, and then her temporal power, her political privileges.

We must tio her the justice to acknowledge that she was the first to
discover, in modem history, this incontestable but scarcely Christian
truth that wealth and power, the economic exploitation and the political
oppression of the masses, are the two inseparable terms of the reign of
divine ideality on earth : wealth consolidating and augmenting power,
power ever discovering and creating new 'sources of wealth, and both
assuring, better than the martyrdom and faith of the apostles, better
than divine graces the success of the Christian propagandism. This is
a historical truth, and the Protestant churches, or rather sects, no
longer fail to recognize It. I speak, of course, of the independent
churches of England, America, and Switzerland, not of the subjected
churches of Germany. The latter have no initiative of their own ; they
do what their masters, their temporal sovereigns, who are at the same
time their spiritual chieftains, order them to do. It is well known that
the Protestant propagant^sm, especially in England and America, Is very
intimately connected with the propagandism of the material and commer-
cial interests of those two great nations ; and it is known also that the
object #f the latter propagandism is not at all the enrichment and mate-
rial prosperity of the countries into which it penetrates in company with
the Word of God, but rather the exploitation of those countries with a
view to the enrichment and material prosperity of certain classes, which,
in their own country, aim only at exploitation and pillage.

In a word, it is not at all diflScult to prove, history in hand, that
the Church, that all the CSiurches, Christian and non-Christian, by the
«ide of their spiritnalistic propagandism and probably to accelerate and

Ood and the State. 29

consolidate the success thereof, have never neglected to organize them-
selves into great corporations for the economic exploitation of the masses
under the protection and with the direct and special blessing of some di-
vinity or other ; that all the States, which originally, as we know, with all
their political and judicial institutions and their dominant and privileged
classes, have been only temporal branches of these various Churches,
have likewise had principally in view this same exploitation for the benefit
of lay minorities indirectly sanctioned by the Church; finally and in gen-
eral, that the action of the good God and of all the divine idealities on
earth has ended at last, always and everywhere, in founding the prosper-
ous materialism of the few over the fanatical and constantly famishing
idealism of the masses.

We have a new proof of this in what we see today. With the exception
of the great hearts and great minds whom I have before referred to as
misled, who are today the most obstinate defenders of idealism? In the
first place, all the sovereign courts. In France, until lately. Napoleon
III. and his wife, Madame Eug6nie; all their former ministers, courtiers,
and ex-marshals, from Eouher and Bazaine to Fleury and Pi^tri; the men
and women of the imperial official world, who have so completely ideal-
ized and saved France; their journalists and their savants, — the Cas-
sagnacs, the Girardins, the Duvernois, the Veuillots, the Leverriers, the
Dumas ; the black phalanx of Jesuits and Jesuitesses in every garb ; the
whole upper and middle bourgeoisie of France; the doctrinaire liberals, and
the liberals without doctrine, — the Guizots, the Thiers, the Jules Favres,
the Pelletans, and the Jules Simons, all obstinate defenders of the hour-
geoise exploitation. In Prussia, in Germany, William I., the present royal
demonstrator of the good God on earth; all his generals, all his officers
Pomeranian and other, all his army, wliich, strong in its religious faith,
has just conquered France in that ideal way we know so well. In Russia,
the czar and all his court; the Mouraviefi's and the Bergs, all the butchers
and pious proselyters of Poland. Everywhere, in short, religious or
philosophical idealism, the one being but the more or less free translation
of the other, serves today as the flag of material, bloody, and brutal force,
of shameless material exploitation; while, on the contrary, the flag of
theoretical materialism,^ the red flag of economic equality and social jus-
tice, is raised by the practical idealism of the oppressed and famishing
masses, tending to realize the greatest liberty and the human right of
each in the fraternity of all men on the earth.

Who are the real idealists, — the idealists not of abstraction, but of
life ; not of heaven, but of earth, — and who are the materialists?

It is evident that the essential condition of theoretical or divine ideal-
ism is the sacrifice of logic, of human reason, the renunciation of scitince.
We see, fhrther, that in defending the doctrines of idealism one finds him-
self enlisted perforce in the ranks of the oppressors and exploiters of the
popular masses. These are the two great reasons which, it would seem,
should be sufficient to drive every great mind, every great heart, from
idealism. How does it happen that our illustrious contemporary idealists,
who certainly lack neither mind nor heart nor good will, and who have
devoted their entire existence to the service of humanity, — how does it

80 Ood and the State.

happen that they persist in remaining among the representatives of a
doctrine henceforth condemned and dishonored?

They must be influenced by a very powerful motive. It cannot be logic
or science, since logic and science have pronounced their verdict against
the idealistic doctrine. No more can it be personal interests, since these
men are infinitely above everything of that sort. It must, then, be a
powerful moral motive. Which? There can be but one. These illustri-
ous men think, no doubt, that idealistic theories or beliefs are essentially
necessary to the moral dignity and grandeur of man, and that materialistic
theories, on the contrary, reduce him to the level of the beasts.

And if the truth were just the opposite I

Every development, I have said, implies the negation of its point of
departure. The basis or point of departure, according to the materialistic
school, being material, the negation must be necessarily ideal. Starting
from the totality of the real world, or from what is abstractly called
matter, it logically arrives at the real idealization — that is, at the human-
ization, at the full and complete emancipation — of society. Per contra
and for the same reason, the basismnd point of departure of the idealistic
school being the ideal, it arrives necessarily at the materialization of
society, at the organization of a brutal despotism and an iniquitous and
ignoble exploitation, under the form of Church and State. ThQ historical
development of man, according to the materialistic school, is a progressive
ascension; in the idealistic system it can be nothing but a continuous
fall.

Whatever human question we may desire to consider, we always find
this same essential contradiction between the two schools. Thus, as I
have already observed, materialism starts from animality to establish
humanity; idealism starts from divinity to establish slavery and condemn
the masses to an endless animality. Materialism denies free will and ends
in the establishment of liberty ; idealism, in the name of human dignity,
proclaims free will, and on the ruins of every liberty founds authority.
Materialism rejects the principle of authority, because it rightly considers
it as the corollary of animality, and because, on the contrary, the triumph
of humanity, the object and chief significance of history, can be realized
only through liberty. In a word, you will always find the idealists in the
very act of practical materialism, while you will see the materialists
pursuing and realizing the most grandly ideal aspirations and thoughts.

History, in the system of the idealists, as I have said, can be nothing
but a continuous fall. They begin by a terrible fall, from which they
never recover, — by the salto mortale from the sublime regions of pure and
absolute idea into matter. And into what kind of matter I Not into the
matt^ which is eternally active and mobile, flill of properties and forces,
of life and intelligence, as we see it in the real world ; but into abstract
matter, impoverished and reduced to absolute misery, as conceived by the
theologians and metaphysicians, who have stripped it of everything to
give everjrthing to their emperor, to their God ; into the matter which,
deprived of all action and movement of its own, represents, in opposition
to Uie divine idea, nothing btit stupidity, impenetrability, absolute inertia
$md Isnsot^U^.

Chd and the State. 81

The fall is so terrible that divLnity, the divine person or idea, is flattened
out, loses consciousness of itself, and never more recovers it. And in
this desperate situation it is still forced to work miracles I For from the
moment that matter becomes inert, every movement that takes place in
the .world, even the most material, is a miracle, can result only ftom a
providential intervention, ftom the action of God upon matter. And
there this poor Divinity, half-annihilated by its fall, lies some thousands
of centuries in this swoon, then awakens slowly, in vain endeavoring to
grasp some vague memory of itself, and every move that it makes in this
direction upon matter becomes a creation, a new formation, a new miracle.
In this way it passes through all degrees of materiality and bestiality, —
first, gas, simple or compound chemical substance, mineral, it then spreads
over the earth as vegetable and animal organization till it concentrates
itself in man. Here it would seem as if it must become itself again, for
it lights in every human being an angelic spark, a particle of its own
divine being, the immortal soul.

How did it manage to lodge a thing absolutely immaterial in a thing
absolutely material ; how can the body contain, enclose, limit, paralyze
pure spirit? This, again, is one of those questions which faith alone,
that prejudiced and stupid affirmation of the absurd, can solve. It is the
greatest of miracles. Here, however, we have only to establish the
effects, the practical consequences of this miracle.

After thousands of centuries of vain efforts to come back to itself.
Divinity, lost and scattered in the matter which it animates and sets in
motion, finds a point of support, a sort of focus for self-concentration.
This focus is man, his immortal soul singularly imprisoned in a mortal
body. But each man considered individually is infinitely too limited, too
small, to enclose the divine immensity ; it can contain only a very small
particle, immortal like the Whole, but infinitely smaller than the Whole.
It follows that divine Being, absolutely immaterial Being, Mind, Is divis-
ible like matter. Another mystery whose solution must be left to faith.

If God entire could find lodgment In each man, then each man would be
God. We should have an immense quantity of Gods, each limited by«ll
the others and yet none the less infinite, — a contradiction which would
imply a mutual destruction of men, an impossibility of the existence of
more than one. As for the particles, that is another matter; nothing
more rational, indeed, than that one particle should be limited by another
and be smaller than the whole. Only, here another contradiction con-
. fronts us. To be greater and smaller are attributes of matter, not of
mind as the Idealists understand it. According to the materialists, it is
true, mind is only the working of the wholly material organism of man,
and the greatness or smallness of mind depend on the greater or less ma-
terial perfection of the human organism. But these same attributes of
relative limitation and grandeur cannot be attributed to mind as the
Idealists conceive it, absolutely immaterial mind, mind existing Independ-
ent of matter. There can be neither greater nor smaller nor any limit
among minds, for there Is only one Mind, — God. To add that the infin-
itely small and limited particles which constitute human souls are at the
same time immortal , is to carry the contradiction to a climax. Bat this
is a question of faith. Let us pass on.

Here, then, we have Divinity torn up and lodged, in Infinitely small
particles, in an immense namber of beings of all sexes, liges, races, and

35^ Ood and the State.

colors. This is an excessive! j inconvenient and unhappy situation, for
the divine particles are so little acquainted with each other at the out-
set of their human existence that they begin by devouring each other.
Moreover, in the midst of this state of barbarism and wholly animal bru-
tality, these divine particles, human souls, retain as it were a vague
remembrance of their primitive divinity, and are irresistibly drawn to-
wards their Whole; they seek each other, they seek their Whole.
It is'Divinity itself, scattered and lost in the material world, which looks
for itself in men, and it is so brutalized by this multitude of human
prisons in which it finds itself strewn, that, in looking for itself, it
commits folly upon folly.

Beginning with fetichism, it searches for and adores itself, now in a
stone, now in a piece of wood, now in a dishcloth. It is quite likely that
it never would have succeeded in getting out of the dishcloth, if the other
divinity which was not allowed to fall into matter and which is kept in the
state of pure spirit in the sublime heights of the absolute ideal, or in the
celestial regions, had not had pity on it.

Here is a new mystery, — that of Divinity dividing itself into two
halves, both equally infinite, of which one — God the Father— stays in the
purely immaterial regions, and the other — God the Son — falls into matter.
We shall see directly, between these two Divinities separated from each
other, continuous relations established, from above to below and from
below to above; and these relations, considered as a single eternal and
constant act, will constitute the Holy Ghost. Such, in its veritable theo-
logical and metaphysical meaning, is the great, the terrible mystery of the
Christian Trinity.

But let us lose no time in abandoning these heights to see what is going
on upon earth.

God the Father, seeing, from the height of his eternal splendor, that
the poor God the Son, flattened out and astounded by his fall, is so plunged
and lost in matter that, having reached the human state, he has not yet
recovered himself, decides to come to his aid. From this immense num-
ber of particles at once immortal, divine, and infinitely small, in which
God the Son has disseminated himself so thoroughly that he does not
know himself, God the Father chooses those most pleasing to him, picks
his inspired persons, his prophets, his men of virtuous genius, the great
benefactors and legislators of humanity : Zoroaster, Buddha, Moses, Con-
fucius, Lycurgus, Solon, Socrates, the divine Plato, and above all Jesus
Christ (the complete realization of God the Son, at last collected and con-
centrated in a single human person), all the apostles. Saint Peter, Saint
Paul, and Saint John, Constantine the Great, Mahomet, then Gregory
VII., Charlemagne, Dante, and, according to some, Luther also, Voltaire
and Rousseau, Robespierre and Danton, and many other great and holy
personages, all of whose names it is impossible to recapitulate, but among
whom I, as a Russian, beg that Saint Nicholas may not be forgotten.

Then we have reached at last the manifestation of God upon earth. But
immediately God appears, man is reduced to nothing. It will be said that
he is not reduced to nothing, since he is himself a particle of God. Par-
don me I I admit that a particle of a definite, limited whole, however

Ood and the State. 33

small It be, is a quantity, a positive greatness. But a particle of the
infinitely great, compared with it, is infinitely small. Multiply billions of
billions by billions of billions, — their product, compared to the infinitely
great, will be infinitely small, and the infinitely small is equal to zero.
God is everything ; therefore man and all the real world with liim, the
universe, are nothing. You will not escape this conclusion.

God appears, man is reduced to nothing; and the greater Divinity
becomes, the more miserable becomes humanity. That is the history of
all religions ; that is the efffect of all the divine inspirations and legisla-
tions. In history the name of God is the terrible club with which men
variously inspired, great geniuses, have beaten down the liberty, dignity,
reason, and prosperity of men.

We had first the fall of God. Now we have a fall which interests us
more, — that of man, caused solely by the apparition of God manifested
on earth.

See in how profound an error our dear and illustrious idealists find
themselves. In talking to us of God they purpose, they desire, to elevate
us, emancipate us, ennoble us, and, on the contrary, they crush and%
degrade us. With the name of God they imagine that they can establish
fraternity among men, and, on the contrary, they create pride, contempt ;
they sow discord, hatred, war; they establish slavery. Eor with God
come thediflferent degrees of divine inspiration; humanity is divided into
men highly inspired, less inspired, uninspired. All are equally insignifi-
cant before God, it is true; but, compared with each other, some are
greater than others; not only in fact, —which would be of no conse-
quence, because inequality in fact is lost in the collectivity when it cannot
cling to some legal fiction or institution, — but by the divine right of
inspiration, which immediately establishes a fixed, constant, petrified
inequality. The highly inspired must be listened to and obeyed by the less
inspired, by the uninspired. Thus we have the principle of authority
well established, and with it the two fundamental institutions of slavery y
•— Church and State.

Of all despotisms that of the doctrinaires or inspired religionists is
the worst. They are so jealous of the glory of their God and of the tri-
umph of their idea that they have no heart left for the liberty or the dignity
or even the sufferings of living men, of real men. Divine zeal, preoccu-
pation with the ideal, finally di-y up the tenderest souls, the most compas-
sionate hearts, the sources of human love. Considering all that is, all that
happens, in the world from the point of view of eternity or of the abstract
idea, they treat passing matters with disdain ; but the whole life of real
men, of men of fieshand bone, is composed only of passing matters; they
themselves are only passing beings, who, once passed, are replaced by
others likewise passing, but never return in person. Alone permanent or
relatively eternal is humanity, which steadily develops from one generation
to another. I say relatively eternal, because, our planet once destroyed, —
and it cannot fail to perish sooner or later, since everything which has
begun must necessarily end, — our planet once decomposed, to serve un-
doubtedly as an element of some new formation in the system of the uni-
verse, which alone la really eternal, who knows what will become of our

34 Ood and the State.

whole liiiman development? Nevertheless, the moment of this dissolu-
tion being an enormous distance in the future, we may properly consider
humanity, relatively to the short duration of human life, as eternal. But
this very fact of progressive humanity is real and living only through its
manifestations at definite times, in definite places, in really living men, and
not through its general idea.

The general idea ii^ always an abstraction and, for that very reason, in
some sort a negation of real life. Science can grasp and name only the
general significance of real facts, their relations, their laws, — in short,
that which is permanent in their continual transformations, — but never
their material, individual side, palpitating, so to speak, with reality and
life, and therefore fugitive and intangible. Science comprehends the
thought of the reality, not the reality itself, the thought of life, not life.
That is its limit, its only really insuperable limit, because it is founded on
the very nature of thought, which is the only organ of science.

Upon this nature are based the indisputable rights and grand mission of
science, but also,its vital impotence and even its mischievous action when-
ever, through its official, licensed representatives, it arrogantly claims the
right to govern life. The mission of science is to establish the general
relations of temporary and real things ; in recognizing the general laws
inherent in the development of the phenomena of the physical and social
world, it fixes, so to speak, the unchangeable landmarks of humanity*s
progressive march by indicating the general conditions which it is neces-
sary to rigorously observe and always fatal to ignore or forget. In a
word, science is the compass of life ; but it is not life. Science is un-
changeable, impersonal, general, abstract, insensible, like the laws of
which it is but the ideal reproduction, refiected or mental, — that is,
cerebral (using this word to remind us that science itself is but a mate-
rial product of a material organ, the brain). Life is wholly fugitive and
temporary, but also wholly palpitating with reality and individuality,
sensibility, sufferings, joys, aspirations, needs, and passions. It alone
spontaneously creates real things and beings. -Science creates nothing ; it
establishes and recognizes only the creations of life. ' And every time that
scientific men, emerging from their abstract world, mingle with living
creation in the real world, aU that they propose or create is poor, ridicu-
lously abstract, bloodless and lifeless, still-bom, like the homunculw cre-
ated by Wagner, the pedantic disciple of the immortal Doctor Faust. It
follows that ike only mission of science is to enlighten life, not to govern
it.

The government of science and of men of science, even be they posi-
tivlsts, disciples of Auguste Comte, or, again, disciples of the doctrinaire
school of German communism, cannot fail to be Impotent, ridiculous,
inhuman, cruel, oppressive, exploiting, maleficent. We may say of men
of science, as such, what I have said of theologians and metaphysicians :
they have neither sense nor heart for individual and living beings. We
cannot even blame them for this, for it is the natural consequence of their
profession. In so far as they are men of science, they can take interest
In nothing except generalities, absolute laws, and have no consideration
for aoythlog dee.

God and the State. 85

Real and living individuality is perceptible only to another living iudivid-
nality, not to a thinking individuality, not to the man who, by a series of
abstractions, puts himself outside of and abov« immediate contact with
life ; to such men it can exist only as a more or less perfect example of
the species, — that is, of a definite abstraction. If it is a rabbit, for
instance, the finer the example, the more joyfully will the savant dissect
it in the hope of determining by this very destruction the general nature,
the law, of the species.

If there were no one to oppose it, should we not find, even in these
days, a number of fanatics capable of performing the same experiments
upon man? And if, moreover, the naturalists do not dissect living man,
they are stopped from doing so, not by science, but by the omnipotent
protests of life. Although they pass three-fourths of their existence in
study and in the existing organization form a sort of world apart, — which
impairs at once the soundness of their hearts and of their minds, — they
are not exclusively men of science, but are also more or less men of life.

Nevertheless we must not rely on this. Though we may be well nigh
certain that a savant would not dare to treat a man to-day as he treats a
rabbit, it remains always to be feared that the savants as a body may sub-
mit living men to scientific experiments, undoubtedly interesting, but
none the less disagreeable to their victims. If they cannot perform exper-
iments upon the bodies of individuals, they will ask nothing better than to
perform them on the social body, and that is what must be absolutely pre-
vented.

In their existing organization, monopolizing science and remaining thus
outside of social life, the savants form a separate caste, in many respects
analogous, to the priesthood. Scientific abstraction is their God, individ-
ualities are their victims, and they are the licensed sacriflcers.

Science cannot go outside of the sphere of abstractions. In this respect
it is decidedly inferior to art, which, in its turn, is peculiarly concerned
only with general types and general situations, but which incarnates them
by an artifice of its own. To be sure, these forms of art are not life, but
they none the less excite in our imagination the memory and sentiment of
life ; art in a certain sense individualizes the types and situations which
it conceives ; by means of the individualities without flesh and bone, and
consequently permanent and immortal, which it has the power to create,
it recalls to our minds the living, real individualities which appear and
disappear under our eyes. Art, then, is, as it were, the return of abstrac-
tion to life. Science, on the contrary, is the perpetual immolation of life,
fugitive, temporary, but real, on the altar of eternal abstractions.

Science is as incapable of grasping the individuality of a man as that of
a rabbit. Not that it is ignorant of the principle of individuality : it con-
ceives it perfectly as a principle, but not as a fact. It knows very well
that all the animal species, including the human species, have no real ex-
istence outside of an indefinite number of individuals, born and djring to
makQ room for new individuals equally fugitive. It knows that in rising
from the animal species to the superior species the principle of individu-
ality becomes more pronounced ; the individuals appear freer and more
complete. It knows that man, the last and most perfect animal of eartii,
presents the most complete and most remarkable individuality, because
of his power to conceive, concrete, personify as it were, in his social and
private existence, the aniversal law. It knows, finally, when it is not

86 God and the State.

vitiated by theological or metaphysical, political or judicial doctrinarisme,
or even by a narrow pride, when it is not deaf to the instincts and aspi-
rations of life, — it knows (and this is its last word) that respect for man
is the supreme law of Humanity, and that the great, the real object of his-
tory, its only legitimate object, is the humanization and emancipation,
the real liberty, the prosperity of each individual living in society. For,
if we would not fall back into the liberticidal fictions of the public wel-
fare represented by the State, fictions always founded on the systematic
sacrifice of the people, we must clearly recognize that collective liberty
and prosperity exist only so far as they represent the sum of individual
liberties and prosperities.

Science knows all these things, but it does not and cannot go beyond
them. Abstraction being its very nature, it can well enough conceive the
principle of real and living individuality, but it can have no dealings with
real and living individuals ; it concerns itself with individuals in general,
but not with Peter or James, not with such or such a one, who, so far as
it is concerned, do not, cannot have any existence. Its individuals, I re-
peat, are only abstractions.

Now, history is made, not by abstract individualities, but by acting
and living individuals. Abstractions advance only when borne forward
by real men. For these beings made, not in idea only, but in reality, of
flesh and blood, science has no heart. It considers them at most as mate-
rial for intellectual and social development. What does it care for the par-
ticular conditions and chance fate of Peter or James ? It would make
itself ridiculous, it would abdicate, it would annihilate itself, if it wished
to concern itself with them otherwise than as examples in support of its
eternal theories. And it would be ridiculous to- wish it to do so, for it
obeys its own laws. It cannot grasp the concrete ; it can move only in
abstractions. Its mission is to busy itself with the situation and the
general conditions of the existence and development, either of the human
species in general, or of such a race, such a people, such a class or cate-
gory of individuals ; the general causes of their prosperity, their decline,
and the best general methods of securing their progress in all ways.
Provided it accomplishes this task broadly and rationally, it will do its
whole duty, and it would be really unjust to expect more of it.

But it would be equally ridiculous, it would be disastrous to entrust it
with a mission which it is incapable of fulfilling, since its own nature
forces it to ignore the existence and fate of Peter and James. It would
continue to ignore them, but its licensed representatives, men not at all
abstract, but^pn the contrary in very active life and having very substan-
tial interests, yielding to the pernicious influence which privilege inevit-
ably exercises upon men, would finally fleece other men in the name of
science, just as they have been fleeced hitherto by priests, politicians of
all shades, and lawyers, in the name of God, of the State, of judicial
Eight.

What I preach, then, to a certain extent is the revolt of life against sci-
ence, or rather against the government ofsdence, not to destroy science, —
that would be high treason to humanity, —but to remand it to its place so
that it can never leave it again. Until now all human history has been
only a perpetual and bloody immolation of millions of poor human beings
in honor of some pitiless abstraction, — God, Country, power of the State,
national honor, historical rights, judicial rights, political liberty, public

God and the State. 87

welfare. Such has been up to today the natural, spontaneous, and inevi-
table movement of human societies. We cannot undo it ; we must submit
to it so far as the past is concerned, as we submit to all actual fatalities,
tve must believe that that was the only possible way to educate the human
race. For we must not deceive ourselves : even in attributing the larger
part to the machiavelian wiles of the governing classes, we have to recog-
nize that no minority would have been powerful enough to impose all
these horrible sacrifices upon the masses, if there had not been in the
masses themselves a dizzy, spontaneous movement which pushed them on
to continual self-sacrifice, now to one, now to another of these devouring
abstractions, the vampires of history, ever nourished upon human blood.

We readily understand that this is very gratifying to the theologians,
politicians, and jurists. Priests of these abstractions, they live only by
this continual immolation of the popular masses. Nor is it more surpris-
ing that metaphysics, too, should give its consent. Its only mission is to
justify and rationalize as far as possible the iniquitous and absurd. But
that positive science itself should have shown the same tendencies is a fact
which we must deplore while we establish it. That it has done so is due to
two reasons : in the first place, because, constituted outside of life, it is
represented by a privileged body, and, in the second place, because thus
far it has posited itself as the absolute and final object of all human devel-
opment. By a judicious criticism, which it can and finally will be forced
to pass upon itself, it would understand, on the contrary, that it is only
a means for the realization of a much higher object, — that of the com-
plete humanization of all the real individuals who are born, who live, and
who die, on earth.

The immense advantage of positive science over theology, metaphysics,
politics, and judicial right consists in this, — that, in place of the false
and fatal abstractions set up by these doctrines, it posits true abstrac-
tions which express the general nature and logic of things, their general
relations, and the general laws of their development. This it is which
will assure it forever a great position in society. It will constitute in a
certain sense society's collective consciousness. But there is one aspect
in which it resembles all the doctrines which preceded it : its only pos-
sible object being abstractions, it is forced by its very nature to ignore
real men, outside of whom the truest abstractions have no existence. To
remedy this radical defect the science of the future will proceed by a dif-
ferent method from that followed by the doctrines of the past. The latter
have taken advantage of the ignorance of the masses to sacrifice them
with voluptuousness to their abstractions, which, by the way, are always
very lucrative to those who represent them in flesh and bone. Positive
science, recognizing its absolute inability to conceive real individuals and
interest itself in their lot, must definitively and absolutely renounce all
claim to the government of societies, for, if it should meddle therein, it
would only sacrifice continually the living men whom it ignores to the
abstractions which constitute the sole object of its legitimate preoccu-
pations.

The true science of history does not yet exist; scarcely do we begin
today to catch a glimpse of its extremely complicated conditions. But
suppose it were definitively developed ; what would it give us? It would
exhibit' a faithftil and rational picture of the natural development of the
general conditions-— material and ideal, economical, political, and social,

38 Ood and the State.

religious, philosophical, Aesthetic, and scientific — of the societies TVhich
have had a history. But this universal picture of human civilization,
however detailed it might be, would never show anjrthing beyond generjil
and consequently abstract estimates. The billions of individuals who
have furnished living and suflfering matter with this history at once tri-
umphant and dismal, — triumphant through the immense hecatomb of
human victims ** crushed under its car," — these billions of obscure indi-
viduals, without whom none of the great abstract results of history would
have been obtained, — and who, bear in mind, have never benefited by any
of these results, — will find no place, not even the slightest, in our annals.
They have lived and been crushed for the good of abstract humanity,
that is all I

Shall we blame the science of history? That would be unjust and
ridiculous. Individuals cannot be grasped by thought, by reflection, or
even by human speech, which is capable of expressing abstractions only ;
they cannot be grasped in the present day any more than in the past.
Therefore social science itself, the science of the future, will necessarily
continue to ignore them. All that we have a right to demand of it is that
it shall point us with faithful and sure hand to the general causes of indi-
vidual suffering, — among these causes it undoubtedly will not forget the
immolation and subordination (still too frequent, alas !) of living indi-
viduals to abstract generalities, — at the same time showing us the gen-
eral conditions necessary to the real emancipation Of the individuals living in
society. That is its mission ; those are its limits, beyond which the action
of social science can be only impotent and fatal. Beyond those limits
begin the doctrinaire and governmental pretensions of its licensed repre-
sentatives, its priests. It is time to have done with these pontiff's, even
though they call themselves social democrats.

Once more, the sole mission of science is to light the road. Only life,
delivered from all its governmental and doctrinaire barriers, and given
fhll liberty of action, can create.

How solve this antinomy?

On the one hand, science is indispensable to the rational organization
of society ; on the other, it is incapable of interesting itself in that which
is real and living.

This contradiction can be solved only in oneway: science must no
longer remain outside of the life of all, represented by a body of breveted
savantSt but must take root and spread among the masses. Science, being
called upon to henceforth represent society's collective consciousness,
must really become the property of everybody. Thereby, without losing
anything of its universal character, of which it can never divest itself
without ceasing to be science, and while continuing to concern itself ex-
clusively with general causes, the conditions and fixed relations of indi-
viduals and things, it will take root in the immediate and real life of all
indlvidtiais. That will be a movement analogous to that which said to
the preachers at the beginning of the Reformation that there was no fur-
ther need of priests for man, who would thenceforth be his own priest,
every man, thanks to the invisible intervention of the Lord Jesus Christ,
Itothig &t last sucd^ed in swi^lowiiig his good Ood.

God and the State. 39

Bat here the question is not of Jesus Christ, nor of the good Qod, nor
of political liberty, nor of judicial right, — things all theologically or
metaphysically revealed, and all alike mentally indigestible. The world
of scientific abstractions is not revealed ; it is inherent in the real world,
of which it is only the general or abstract expression and representation.
Otherwise it forms a separate region, specially represented by the savants
as a body, in which case this ideal world threatens to take the place of a
good Gk)d to the real world, reserving for its licensed representatives the
office of priests. That is the reason why it is necessary to dissolve the
special organization of the savants by general instruction, equal for all in
all things, in order that the masses, ceasing to be flocks led and shorn by
privileged priests, may take into their own hands the direction of their
destinies.*

But until the masses shall have reached this degree of instruction, will
it be necessary to leave them to the government of scientific men? Cer-
tainly not. It would be better for them to dispense with science than
allow themselves to be governed by savants. The first consequence of the
government of these men would be to render science inaccessible to the
people, because the existing scientific institutions are essentially aristo-
cratic. An aristocracy of learning 1 from the practical point of view the
most implacable, and from the social point of view the most haughty and
insulting, — such would be the power established in the name of science.
This rSgime would be capable of paralyzing the life and movement of so-
ciety. The savantSy always presumptuous, ever self-sufficient and ever
impotent, would desire to meddle with everything, and the sources of life
would dry up under the breath of their abstractions.

Once more, life, not science, creates life ; the spontaneous action of the
people themselves alone can create liberty. Undoubtedly it would be a
very fortunate thing if science could, from this day forth,* illuminate the
spontaneous march of the people towards their emancipation. But better
an absence of light than a trembling and uncertain light, serving only to
mislead those who follow it. Not in vain have the people traversed a
long historic career and paid for their errors by centuries of misery. The
practical summary of their plEunflil experiences constitutes a sort of tradi-
tional science, which in certain respects is worth as much as theoretical
science. Last of all, a portion of the youth, those of the bourgeois stu-
dents who feel hatred enough for the falsehood, hypocrisy, injustice, and
cowardice of the bourgeoisie to find courage to turn their backs upon it,
and passion enough to unreservedly embrace the just and human cause of
the proletariat, — those will be, as I have already said, fraternal instruc-
tors of the people; thanks to them, there will be no occasion for the gov-
ernment of the savants.

» Science, In becoming the patrimony of everybody, will wed itself in a
certain sense to th6 immediate and real life of each. It will gain in
atility and grace what it loses in pride, ambition, and doctrinaire pedan-
try. This, however, will not prevent men of genius, better organized for
scientific speculation than the majority of their fellows, from devoting
themselves exclusively to the cultivation of the sciences, and rendering
great services to humanity. Only, they will be ambitious for no other
social influence than the natural influence exercised upon its stirroundings
by every superior intelligence, and for no other reward than the satlftfae-
tion of a noble enthuAiasia.

40 Ood and the State.

If the people should beware of the goveniment of the savants, all the
more should they provide against that of the inspired idealists.

The more sincere the believers and the priests of heaven, the more dan-
gerous they become. The scientific abstraction, I have said, is a rational
abstraction, true in its essence, necessary to life, of which it is the theo-
retical representation, or, if one prefers, the conscience. It may, it must
be absorbed and directed by life. The idealistic abstraction, God, is a
corrosive poison, which destroys and decomposes life, falsifies and kills
it. The pride of the savants, being nothing but a personal arrogance, can
be bent and broken. The pride of the idealists, not being personal, but
divine, is irascible and inexorable : it may, it must die, but it will never
yield, and, while it has a breath left, it will try to subject men to its God;
thus it is that the lieutenants of Prussia, the practical idealists of Ger-
many, would like to see the people crushed under the spurred boot of
their emperor. The faith is the same, and the end but little different.
The result of the faith is always slavery, and ftt the same time the triumph
of the ugliest and most brutal materialism. There is no need to demon-
strate this in the case of Germany ; one would have to be blind to avoid
seeing it.

Man, like all living nature, is an entirely material being. The mind,
the faculty of thinking, of receiving and reflecting upon dififerent external
and internal sensations, of remembering them when they have passed and
reproducing them by the imagination, of comparing and distinguishing
them, of abstracting determinations common to them and thus creating
general concepts, and finally of forming ideas by grouping and combining
concepts according to different methods, — intelligence, in a woiid, sole
creator of our whole ideal world, is a property of the animal body and
especially of the cerebral organism.

• We know this certainly, by the experience of all, which no fact has
ever contradicted and which any man can verify at any moment of his life.
In all animals, without excepting the wholly inferior species, we find a
certain degree of intelligence, and we see thg-t, in the series of species,
animal intelligence develops in proportion as the organization of a species
approaches that of man, but that in man alone it attains to that power of
abstraction which properly constitutes thought.

Universal experience,* which is the sole origin, the source of all our
knowledge, shows us, therefore, that all intelligence is always attached to
3ome animal body, and that the intensity, the power of this animal func-
tion depend upon the relative perfection of the organism. This result of
universal experience is not applicable only to the different animal species ;
we establish it likewise in men, whose intellectual and moral power
depends so clearly upon the greater or less perfection of their organism
as a race, as a nation, as a class, and as individuals, that it is not neces-
sary to insist upon this point."

» Universal experience, on which all science rests, must be clearly dis-
tinguished from universal faith, on which the idealists wish to support
their beliefs : the first is a real authentication of facts ; the second is only
a supposition of facts which nobody has seen and which consequently are
at variance with the experience of everybody.

* The idealists, all those who believe in the immateriality and immortal-
ity of the human soul, must be excessively embarrassed by the difference

Ood and the State. 41

On the other hand, it is certain that no man has ever seen or can see
pure mind, detached from^l material form, existing separately from any
animal body whatsoever. But if no person has seen it, how is it that
men have come to believe in its existence ? The fact of this belief is
certain, and, if not universal, as all the idealists pretend, at least very
general, and as such it is entirely worthy of our closest attention. A
general belief, however foolish it may be, exercises too potent a sway over
the destiny of men to warrant us in ignoring it or putting it aside.

The explanation of this belief, moreover, is rational enough. The
example afforded us by children and young people, and even by many men
long past the age of majority, shows us that man may use his mental
faculties for a long time before accounting to himself for the way in
which he uses them. During this working of the mind unconscious of
itself, during this action of innocent or believing intelligence, man,
obsessed by the external world, pushed on by that internal goad called
life and its manifold necessities, creates a quantity of imaginations, con-
cepts, and ideas necessarily very imperfect at first and conforming but
slightly to the reality of the things and facts which they endeavor to
express. Not having yet the consciousness of his own intelligent action,
not knowing yet that he himself has produced and continues to produce
these imaginations, these concepts, these ideas, ignoring their wholly sw5-
jective — that is, human — origin, he must naturally consider them as
objective beings, as real beings, wholly independent of him, existing by
themselves and in themselves.

It was thus that primitive peoples, emerging slowly from their animal
innocence, created their gods. Having created them, not suspecting that
they themselves were the real creators, they worshipped them ; considering
them as real beings infinitely superior to themselves, they attributed

in intelligence existing between races, peoples, and individuals. Unless
we suppose that the various particles have been irregularly distributed,
how is this difference to be explained? Unfortunately there is a con-
siderable number of men wholly stupid, foolish even to idiocy. Could
they have received in the distribution a particle at once divine and stupid ?
To escape this embarrassment the idealists must necessarily suppose that
all human souls are equal, but that the prisons in which they find them-
selves necessarily confined, human bodies, are unequal, some more capable
than others of serving as an organ for the pure intellectuality of soul.
According to this such a one might have very fine organs at his disposi-
tion, such another very gross organs. But these are distinctions which
idealism has not the power to use without falling itself into inconsistency
and the grossest materialism. For in the presence of absolute immateri-
ality of soul all bodily differences disappear, all that is corporeal, material,
necessarily appearing indifferent, equally and absolutely gross. The
abyss which separates soul from body, absolute immateriality from abso-
lute materiality, is infinite. Consequently all differences, although inejc-
plicable and logically impossible, which may exist on the other side of the
abyss, in matter, should be to the soul null and void and neither can nor
should exercise any influence over it. In a word, the absolutely immate-
rial cannot be constrained, imprisoned, and much less expressed in any
degree whatsoever by the absolutely material. Of all the gross and
materialistic (that is, brutal, using the word in the sense attached to it by
the idealists) imaginations which were engendered by the primitive igno-
rance and stupidity of men, that of an immaterial soul imprisoned in a
material body Is certainly the grossest, the most stupid, and nothing better
proves the omnipotence exercised by ancient prejudices even over the best
minds than the sight of m^n endowed with lofty intelligence still talking
ol this bizarre union.

42 Qod and the State.

omnipotence to them, and recognized themselyni as their creatures, their
slaves. As fast as human ideas develop, the gods, who were never any-
thing more than the fantastic, ideaj, poetical revelation of an inverted
Image, become idealized also. At first gross fetiches, they gradually be-
come pure spirits, existing outside of the visible world, and at last, in the
course of history, are confounded in a single divine being, pure, eternal,
absolute Spirit, creator and master of the worlds.

In every development, just or false, real or imaginary, collective or in-
dividual, it is always the first step that costs, the first act that is the most
difllcult. That step once taken, the rest follows naturally as a necessary
consequence.

The difficult step in the historical development of this terrible religious
insanity which continues to obsess us was to posit a divine world as such,
outside of the real world. This first act of madness, so natural from the
physiological point of view and consequently necessary in the history of
humanity, was not accomplished at a single stroke. I know not how
many centuries were needed to develop this belief and make it a govern-
ing influence upon the social customs of men. But, once established, it
became omnipotent, as insanity necessarily becomes when it takes pos-
session of man's brain. Take a madman, whatever the object of his mad-
ness, — you will find that the obscure and fixed idea which obsesses him
seems to him the most natural thing in the world, and that, on the con-
trary, the real things which contradict this idea seem to him ridiculous
and odious follies. Weill religion is a collective insanity, the more
powerful because it is traditional and because its origin is lost in the most
remote antiquity. As collective insanity it has penetrated to the very
depths of t)ie public and private existence of the peoples ; it is incarnate in
society, it has become, so to speak, the collective soul and thought.
Every man is enveloped in it from his birth ; he sucks it in with his
mother's milk, absorbs it with all that he touches, all that he sees. He is
so exclusively fed upon it, so poisoned and penetrated by it ii; all his
being, that later, however powerful his natural mind, he has to make un-
heard of effbrts to deliver himself from it and even then never completely
succeeds. We have one proof of this in our modem idealists and another
in our doctrinaire materialists, the German conservatives. They have
found no way to shake off* the religion of the State.

The supernatural world, the divine world, once well established in the
imagination of the peoples, the development of the various religious sys-
tems has followed its natural and logical course, conforming, moreover,
in all things, to the contemporary development of economical and politi-
cal relations, of which it has been in all ages, in the world of religious
fancy, the faithftil reproduction and divine consecration. Thus has tha
collective and historical insanity which calls itself religion been developed
since fetichism, passing through all the stages from polytheism to Chris-
tian monotheism.

The second step In the development of religious beliefs, undoubtedly
the most difficult next to the establishment of a separate divine world,
was precisely this transition from polytheism to monotheism, from the
religious materialism of the pagans to the spiritualistic faith of the Chris-
tians. The pagan gods — and this is their principal characteristic — were
first of all exelosiyely national gods. * Very numerous, they necessarily re-
tained a more or less material character, or, rather, they were so numeroudi

God and the State. 43

because they were material, diversity being oue of the principal attri-
butes of the real world. The pagan gods were not yet strictly the
negation of real things ; they were only a fantastic exaggeration of them.

We know how much this transition cost the Jewish people, constitut-
ing, so to speak, its entire history. In vain did Moses and the prophets
preach the one God ; the people always relapsed into their primitive idol-
atry, into the ancient and much more natural faith in several good gods,
material, human, and palpable. Jehovah himself, their sole God, the God
of Moses and the prophets, was still an extremely national God, serving
only to reward and punish his faithful followers, his chosen people, with
material arguments, often stupid, always gross and cruel. It does not
even appear that faith in his existence implied a negation of the existence
of the earlier gods. The Jewish God did not deny the existence of these
rivals ; he simply did not wish his people to worship them side by side
with him. Jehovah was' a jealous God. His first commandment was
this:

"I am the Lord thy God, and thou shalt have no other gods before
me."

Jehovah, then, was only a first draught, material and very rough, of
modern idealism. Moreover, he was only a national God, like the Sla-
vonic God worshipped by the generals, submissive and patient subjects
of the Emperor of all the Russias, like the German God proclaimed by the
pietists and the German generals, subjects of William I. at Berlin. The
supreme Being cannot be a national God ; he must be the God of entire
Humanity. Nor can the supreme Being be a material being; he must be
the negation of all matter, pure spirit. Two things have proved neces-
sary to the realization of the worship of the supreme Being : (1) a realiza-
tion, such as it is, of Humanity by the negation of nationalities and na-
tional forms of worship; (2) a development, already far advanced, of
metaphysical ideas in order to spiritualize the gross Jehovah of the
Jews.

The first condition was fulfilled by the Romans, though in a very nega-
tive way no doubt, by the conquest of most of the countries known to the
ancients and by the destruction of their national institutions. To them
we owe the establishment of the altar of a sole and supreme God on the
ruins of thousands of other altars. The Gods of all the conquered na-
tions, gathered in the Pantheon, mutually cancelled each other.

As for the second condition, the spiritualization of Jehovah, that was
realized by the Greeks long before the conquest of their country by the
Romans. Greece, at the beginning of her history, had already received
from the Orient a divine world which had been definitively established in
the traditional faith of her peoples. In this instinctive period, prior to
her political history, she had developed and prodigiously humanized tnis
divine world through her poets, and, when she actually began her history,
she already had a religion ready-made, the most sympathetic and noble of
all the religions which have existed, so far at least as a religion — that is,
a lie — can be noble and sympathetic. Her great thinkers — and no
nation has had greater than Greece — found the divine world established,
not only outside of themselves In the people, but also In themselves as a
habit of feeling and thought, and naturally they took it as a point of de-
parture. That they made no theology —that Is, that they did not wait in
Tain to reconcile dawning reason with the absurdities of such or such a

44 Ood and the State.

God, as did the scholastics of the Middle Ages — was already much in
their favor. They left the gods out of their speculations and attached
themselves directly to the divine idea, one, invisible, omnipotent, eternal,
absolutely spiritualistic and Impersonal. The Greek metaphysicians,
then, much more than the Jews, were the creators of a Christian god.
The Jews only added to it the brutal personality of their Jehovah.

That a sublime genius like the divinq Plato should have been absolutely
convinced of the reality of the divine ide^ shows us how contagious, how
omnipotent is the • tradition of the religious mania, even on the greatest
minds. Besides, we should not be surprised at it, since, even in our day,
the greatest philosophical genius which has existed since Aristotle and
Plato, Hegel, tried to replace upon their transcendental or celestial throne
the divine ideas, whose objectivity Kant had demolished -by a criticism
unfortunately imperfect and too metaphysical. It is true that Hegel went
about his work of restoration in so impolite a manner that he killed the
good God forever. He took away from these ideas their divine character
by showing to whoever will read him that they were never anything more
than a creation of the human mind running through history in search of
Itself. To put an end to all religious insanities and the divine mirage he
left nothing lacking but the utterance of. those grand words which were
said after him, almost at the same time, by two great minds who had
never heard of each other, — Ludwig Feuerbach, the disciple and demol-
Isher of Hegel, and Auguste Comte, the founder of the positive philosophy
In France. These words were as follows :

" Metaphysics are reduced to psychology." All the metaphysical sys-
tems have been nothing else than human psychology developing itself in
history.

Today it is no longer difficult to understand how the divine ideas were
bom, how they were created by the abstractive faculty of man. But in
the time of Plato this knowledge was impossible. The collective mind,
and consequently the individual mind as well, even that of the greatest
genius, was not ripe for that. Scarcely had it said with Socrates : " Know
thyself 1 " This self-knowledge existed only in a state of abstraction ; in
fact it amounted to nothing. It was impossible for the human mind to
suspect that it was itself the sole creator of the divine world. It found the
divine world before it ; it found it as history, as a sentiment, as a habit of
thought; and it necessarily made it the object of its loftiest speculations.
Thus was born metaphysics, and thus were developed and perfected the
divine ideas, the bases of spiritualism.

It is true that after Plato there was a sort of inverse movement in the
development of the mind. Aristotle, the true father of science and posi-
tive philosophy, did not deny the divine world, but concerned himself
with it as little as possible. He was the first to study, like the analyst
and experimenter that he was, logic, the laws of human thought, and at
the same time the physical world, not in its ideal, illusory essence, but in its
real aspect. After him the Greeks of Alexandria established the first
school of the positive sciences. They were atheists. But their atheism lelt
no mark on their contemporaries. Science tended more and more to
sepMrate itself from life. As for the negation of divine ideas pronounced
by the Epicureans and skeptics, it had no effect upon the masses.

Another school, infinitely more influential, was formed at Alexandria.
' ^is was the school of neo-Platonists. These, confounding in an impure

God and the State. 45

mixture the monstrous imaginations of the Orient witli the ideas of Plato,
were the tme precursors and later the elaborators of the Christian
dogmas.

Thus the personal and gross egoism of Jehovah, the no less brutal and
gross domination of the Romans, and the metaphysical ideal speculation
of the Greeks, materialized by contact with the Orient, were the three
historical elements which made up the spiritualistic religion of the Chris-
tians.

A God thus raised above the national differences of all countries and in
a certain sense the direct negation of them must necessarily be an imma-
terial and abstract being. But, as we have said, faith in the existence of
such a being, so difficult a matter, could not spring into existence sud-
denly. Consequently it went through a long course of preparation and
development at the hands of Greelt metaphysics, which was the first to
establish in a philosophical manner the notion of the divine idea^ a model
eternally reproduced by the visible world. But the divinity conceived and
created by Greek philosophy was an impersonal ^ivinity. No logical and
serious metaphysics being able to rise, or, rather, to descend, to the idea
of a personal God, it became necessary, therefore, to imagine a God who
was one and three at once. He was found in the brutal, selfish, and cruel
person of Jehovah, the national God of the Jews. But the Jews, in spite
of that exclusive national spirit which distinguishes them even today,
had become in fact, long before the birth of Christ, the most international
people of the world. Some of them carried away as captives, but many
more even urged on by that mercantile passion which constitutes one of
the principal traits of their character, they had spread through all coun-
tries, carrying everywhere the worship of tSheir Miovah, to whom they
remained all the more faithful the more he abfrnMried them.

In Alexandria the terrible god of the Jews mlRl the per«onal acquaint-
ance of the metaphysical divinity of Plato, already milch corrupted by
Oriental contact, and corrupted her still more by his own. In spite of his
national, jealous, and ferocious exclusivism, he could not long resist the
graces of this ideal and impersonal divinity of the Greeks. He married
her, and from this marriage was born the spiritualistic but non-spiritual
God of the Christians. The neo-Platonists of Alexandria were the prin-
cipal creators of the Christian theology.

Nevertheless theology alone does not make a religion, any more than
historical elements suffice to create history. By historical elements I
mean the general conditions of any real development whatsoever, — for
example, the conquest of the world by the Romans and the meeting of the
God of the Jews with the ideal divinity of the Greeks. To fecundate the
historical elements, to cause them to run through a series of transforma-
tions, a living, spontaneous fact was needed, without which they might have
remained many centuries longer in the state of unproductive elements.
This fact was not lacking to Christianity; it was the propagandism,
martyrdom, and death of Jesus Christ.

We know almost nothing of this personage, all that the gospels tell ae
being contradictory and so fabulous that we can scarcely seize upon a few
real and vital traits. But it is certain that he was the preacher of thi
poor, the friend and consoler of the wretched, of the ignorant, of the
slaves, and of the women, and that by these last he was much loved. He
promised eternal life to all who suffer here below, and tbe number is

46 Ood and the State.

immense. He was hanged, as a matter of course, by the representatives
of the official morality and public order of that period. His disciples and
the disciples of his disciples succeeded in spreading, thanks to the Roman
conquest and the destruction of national barriers, and propagated the
Gospel in all the countries known to the ancients. Everywhere they were
received with open arms by the slaves and the women, the two most
oppressed, most suffering, and naturally most ignorant classes of the
ancient world. For even such few proselytes as they made in the privi-
leged and learned world they were indebted for the most part to the influ-
ence of women. Their most extensive propagandism was directed almost
exclusively among the unfortunate, degraded by slavery. This was the
first important revolt of the proletariat.

The great honor of Christianity, its incontestable merit, a^d the whole
secret of its unprecedented and yet thoroughly legitimate triumph lies in
the fact that it appealed to that suffering and immense public upon which
the ancient world imposed a strict and cruel intellectual and political
servitude, denying it evpi the simplest rights of humanity. Otherwise it
never could have spread. The doctrine taught by the apostles of Christ,
wholly consoling as it may have seemed to the unfortunate, was too re-
volting, too absurd, from the standpoint of human reason, ever to have
been accepted by enlightened men. Accordingly with what joy the apostle
Paul speaks of the " scandale de la foi" and of the triumph of that divine
folie rejected by the powerful and the wise of the century, but all the
more passionately accepted by the simple, the ignorant, and the weak-
minded I

Indeed, there must have been a very deep-seated dissatisfaction with
life, a very intense thirst of heart, and an almost absolute poverty of
thought to secure the acceptance of the Christian absurdity, the most
monstrous of all absurdities.

This was not only the negation of all the political, social, and religious
institutions of antiquity ; it was the absolute overturn of common sense,
of all human reason. The living being, the real world, were considered
thereafter as nothing ; whereas far beyond existing things, even far be-
yond the ideas of space and time, the last product of man's abstractive
faculty rests in contemplation of his emptiness and absolute immobility,
that abstraction, that caput mortuum, absolutely void of all contents, the
true nothing, God, is proclaimed the only real, eternal, all-powerful being.
The real All is declared nothing, and the absolute nothing the All. The
shadow becomes the substance, and the substance vanishes like a
shadow.'

All this was audacity and absurdity unspeakable, the true scandale de la
foi for the masses ; it was the triumph of credulous stupidity over the
mind, and in some cases the irony of a mind wearied, corrupted, disillu-
sionized, and disgusted in honest and serious search for truth ; it was that

* I am well awaio that in the theological and metaphysical systems of
the Orient and especially in those of India, including Buddhism, we find
the principle of the annihilation of the real world in favor of the ideal and
of absolute abstraction. But it has not the added character of voluntary
and deliberate negation which distinguishes Christianity; when those
systems were conceived, the world of humB,n thought, of will and of lib-
erty, had not reached that stage of development which was afterwards
•mh in tibe Greek and Boman civilization*

Qod and the State. 47

necessity of shaking oflf thought and becoming brutally stunid so fre-
quently felt by surfeited minds :

Credo quia ahaUrdum.

I do not only believe in the absurd ; I believe in it exactly and especi-
ally because . it is absurd. In the same way many distinguished and
enlightened minds in our day believe in animal magnetism, Spiritism,
tipping tables, — and why go so far? — believe still in- Christianity, in
idealism, in God.

The belief of the ancient proletariat, like that of the modern, was robust
and simple. The Christian propagandism appealed to its heart, not to its
mind, to its eternal aspirations, its necessities, its sufferings, its slavery,
not to its reason which still slept and therefore could know nothing about
logical contradictions and the evidence of the absolute. It was interested
solely in knowing when the hour of promised deliverance would strike,
when the kingdom of God would come. As for theological dogmas it did
not trouble itself about them because it understood nothing about them.
The proletariat converted to Christianity constituted its material but not
its intellectual strength.

As for the Christian dogmas,* they were elaborated irfa series of theolog-
ical and literary works and in the Councils, principally by the converted
neo-Platonists of the Orient. The Greek mind had fallen so low that, in
the seventh century of the Christian era, the period of the first Council,
the idea of a personal God, pure, eternal, absolute mind, creator and su-
preme master, existing outside of us, was unanimously accepted by the
Church Fathers ; as a logical consequence of this absolute absurdity, it
then became natural and necessary to believe in the immateriality and
immortality of the human soul, lodged and imprisoned in a body only par-
tially mortal, there being in this body itself a portion which, while mate-
rial, is immortal like the soul and must be resurrected with it. We see
how difficult it was, even for the Church Fathers, to conceive pure mind
outside of any material form. And it should be added that, in general, it
is the character of every metaphysical and theological argument to seek to
explain one absurdity by another.

It was very fortunate for Christianity that it met a world of slaves. It
had another piece of good luck in the invasion of the Barbarians. The
latter were worthy people, full of natural force and, above all, urged on by
a great necessity of life and a great capacity for it ; brigands who had
stood every test, capable of devastating and gobbling up anything, like
their successors, the Germans of today ; but they were much less syste-
matic and pedantic than these last, much less moralistic, less learned, and
on the other hand much more independent and proud, capable of science
and not incapable of liberty, as are the bourgeois of modem Germany.
But, in spite of all their great qualities, they were nothing but barbarians,
— that is, as indifferent to all quesMons of theology and metaphysics as
the ancient slaves, a great number of whom, moreover, belonged to their
race. So that, their practical repugnance once overcome, it was not dif-
ficult to convert them theoretically to Christianity.

For ten centuries Christianity, armed with the omnipotence of Church
and State and opposed by no competition, was able to deprave, debase,
and falsify the mind of Europe. It had no competitors, because outside
of the church there were neither thinkers nor educated persons. It alone

iS God and the State.

thought, it alone spoke and wrote, it alone taaght. Though heresies
arose in its bosom, they affected only the theological or practical develop-
ments of the fundamental dogma, never that dogma itself. The belief in
God, pure spirit and creator of the world, and the belief in the immateri-
ality of the soul remained untouched. This double belief became the
ideal basis of the whole occidental and oriental civilization of Europe; it
penetrated all the institutions, all the details of the public and private life
of the classes and the masses ; in these it became incarnate, so to, speak.

After that is it surprising that this belief has lived until the present
day, continuing to exercise its disastrous influence upon select minds,
such as those of Mazzini, Michelet, Quinet, and so many others? We
have seen that the first attack upon it came from the renaissance of the
free mind in the fifteenth century, which produced heroes and martyrs like
Vanini, Giordano Bruno, and Galileo. Although drowned in the noise,
tumult, and passions of the Reformation, it noiselessly continued its in-
visible work, bequeathing to the noblest minds of each generation its task
of human emancipation by the destruction of the absurd, until at last, in
the second half of the eighteenth century, it again reappeared in broad
day, boldly waving the flag of atheism and materialism.

The human mind then, one might have supposed, was at last about to
deliver itself from all the divine obsessions. Not at all. The falsehood
of which humanity had been the dupe for eighteen centuries (speaking of
Christianity only) was once more to show itself more powerful than the
truth. No longer able to make use of the black tribe, of the ravens con-
secrated by the Church, of the Catholic or Protestant priests, all confl-
dence in whom had been lost, it made use of lay priests, short-robed liars
and sophists, among whom the principal rdles devolved upon two fatal
men, one the falsest mind, the other the most doctrinally despotic will, of
the last century, — J. J. Rousseau and Robespierre.

The first is the perfect type of narrowness and suspicious meanness, of
exaltation without other object than his own person, of mock enthusiasm
and hypocrisy at once sentimental and implacable, of the falsehood of
modern idealism. He may be considered as the real creator of the reac-
tion. To all appearance the most democratic writer of the eighteenth
century, he bred within himself the pitiless despotism of the statesman.
He was the prophet of the doctrinaire State, as Robespierre, his worthy
and faithful disciple, tried to become its high priest. Having heard the
saying of Voltaire that, if God did not exist, it would be necessary to
invent him, J. J. Rousseau invented the Supreme Being, the abstract and
sterile God of the deists. And it was in the name of the Supreme Being
and of the hypocritical virtue commanded by this Supreme Being that
Robespierre guillotined first the Hdbdrtists, and then the very genius of
revolution, Danton, in whose person he assassinated the republic, thus
preparing the way for the thenceforth necessary triumph of the Napole-
onic dictatorship. After the great recoil the idealistic reaction sought
and found servants less fanatical, less terrible, nearer to the diminished
stature of the actual bourgeoisie. In France Chateaubriand; Lamartine,
and ^->- it laost be added — Victor Hugo! the democrat, the republican,
the qoiuii-socialist of today I and after them the whole melancholy and

God and the State. 49

sentimental company of poor and pallid minds who, under the leadership
of these masters, established the modern romantic school. In Grermany
the Schlegels, the Tiecks, the Novalis, the Werners, the Schellings, and
so many others besides, whose names do not even deserve to be recalled.

The literature created by this school was the reign of ghosts and phan-
toms. It could not stand the sunlight; the clare-obscure alone permitted
it to live. No more could it stand the brutal contact of the masses. It was
the literature of the delicate, distinguished aristocrats, aspiring to heaven,
their country, and living on earth as if in spite of themselves. It had a
horror and contempt for the politics and questions of the day ; but, when
perchance it referred to them, it showed itself frankly reactionary ; took
the side of the Church against the insolence of the freethinkers, of the
kings against the peoples, and of all the aristocrats against the vile rabble
of the streets.

For the rest, as we have just said, the dominant feature of the school
of romanticism was a quasi-complete indifference to politics. Amid the
clouds in which it lived could be distinguished but two real points, — the
rapid development of bourgeois materialism and the ungov^nable out-
burst of individual vanities.

To understand this romantic literature the reason of its existence must
be sought in the transformation which had been effected in the bosom of
the bourgeoise class since the revolution of 1793.

From the Renaissance and the Reformation down to the Revolution, the
bourgeoisie J if not in Germany, at least in Italy, in France, in Switzer-
land, in England,'in Holland, was the hero and representative of the rev-
olutionary genius of history. From its bosom sprang most of the free-
thinkers of the eighteenth century, the religious reformers of the two
preceding centuries, and the apostles of human emancipation, including
this time those of the Germany of the past century. It alone, naturally
supported by the powerful arm of the people, who had faith in it, made
the revolution of 1789 and '93. It proclaimed the downfall of royalty and
the church, the fraternity of the peoples, the Rights of man and of the
citizen. Those are its titles to glory ; they are immortal I

Soon it split. A considerable portion of the purchasers of national
property, having become rich, and supporting themselves no longer on the
proletariat of the cities but on the major portion of the peasants of
France, these also having become landed proprietors, had no aspiration
left but for peace, the reestablishment of public order, and the founda-
tion of a strong and regular government. It therefore welcomed with
joy the dictatorship of the first Bonaparte, and, although always Vol-
tairean, did not view with displeasure the Concordat with the Pope and
the reestablishment of the official church in France : ** Beligion is so neces-
sary to the people I " Which means that, satiated themselves, this portion
of the bourgeoisie then began to see that it was needful to the maintenance
of their situation and the preservation of their newly-acquired estates to
appease the unsatisfied hunger of the people by promises of heavenly
manna. Then it was that Chat^ubriand began to preach.^

> It seems to me usefUl to recall at this point an anecdote, — <»ie, |)y the
way, well known and thorpughly nathentic,'^ which «he^ nvegrdefMr

50 Ghd and the State.

Napoleon fell. The Bestoration brought back into France the legitimate
monarchy and with it the power of the Church and of the nobles, 'Yho
regained the greater portion of their former influence, pending the arrival
of the opportune moment for recovering the whole.

This reaction threw the bourgeoisie back into the Revolution, and with
the revolutionary spirit that of skepticism also was reawakened in it;
again it became freethinking. It set Chateaubriand aside and began to
read Voltaire again ; but it did not go so far as Diderot : its debilitated
nerves could not stand nourishment so strong. Voltaire, on the contrary,
at once a freethinker and a deist, suited it very well.

Stranger and P. L. Courrier expressed this new tendency perfectly. The
" God of the good people " and the ideal of the bourgeois king, at once
liberal and democratic, sketched against the majestic and thenceforth
inoffensive background of the Empire's gigantic victories, — such was at
that period the picture of the government of society drawn by the bour-
geoisie of France. Lamartine, to be sure, excited by a monstrously and
ridiculously envious desire to rise to the poetic height of the great Byron,
had begun his coldly delirious hymns in honor of the God of the nobles
and of the legitimate monarchy. But his songs resounded only in aristo-
cratic salons. The bourgeoisie did not hear them. B^ranger was its poet
and Courrier its political writer.

The revolution of July resulted in lifting its tastes. We know that
every bourgeois in France carries within him the imperishable type of the
bourgeois gentleman, a type which never fails to appear immediately the
parvenu acquires wealth and power. In 1830 the wealthy bourgeoisie had
definitively replaced the old nobility in the seats of power. It naturally
tended to establish a new aristocracy. An aristocracy, of capital first of
all, but, on the whole, genteel, of good manners and delicate sentiments.
It began to feel religious.

This was not on its part simply an aping of aristocratic customs. It
was also a necessity of its position. The proletariat had rendered it a
final service in once more aiding it to overthrow the nobility. The bour-
geoisie now had no farther need of its cooperation, for it felt itself firmly
seated upon the shadow of the throne of July, and the alliance with the
people, thenceforth useless, began to become inconvenient. It was neces-
sary to remand it to its place, which naturally could not be done without
provoking great indignation among the masses. It became necessary to
restrain this indignation. In the name of what? In the name of the bour-
geois interest bluntly tonfessed? That would have been much too cynical.
The more uijust.and inhuman an interest is, the greater need it has of
sanction. Now, where find it, if not in religion, that good protectress of
all the well-fed and useful consoler of the hungry ? And more than ever the
triumphant bourgeoisie saw that religion was iQdispensable to the people.

After having won all its titles to glory in religious, philosophical, and
political opposition, in protest and in revolution, it at last became the

lighten the personal value of these warmers-over of the Catholic beliefs
and on the religions society of that period. Chateaubriand submitted to
a pnbUsher a work attacking faith. The^publisher called his attention to
the fact that atheism had gone out of fashion, that the reading public
oared no more A>r it, and that the demand, on the contrary, was for relig-
ions works. Chateaubriand withdrew, bat a few months later c«me back

With his " QmXW$ OF CeWSTUMTT."

Ood and the Stmte, 51

dominant class and thereby even the defender and preserver of the State,
thenceforth the regular institution of the exclusive power of that class.
The State is force, and for it, first of all, is the right of force, the trium-
phant argjiment of the needle-gun, of the chassepot. But man Is so sin-
gularly constituted that this argument, wholly eloquent as it may appear,
is not sufllcient in these days in the long run. Some moral sanction or
other is absolutely necessary to enforce his respect. Further, this sanc-
tion must be at once so simple and so plain that it may convince the
masses, who, after having been reduced by the power of the State, must
also be induced to morally recognize its right.

There are only two ways of convincing the masses of the goodness of
any social institution whatever. The first, the only real one, but also the
most difficult to adopt, — because it implies the abolition of the State, or,
in other words, the abolition of the organized political exploitation of the
majority by any minority whatsoever, — would be the direct and complete
satisfaction of the needs and aspirations of the people, which would be
equivalent to the liquidation of the existence of the bourgeoise class, or,
again, to the abolition of the State. Useless, then, to talk about it.

The other way, on the contrary, harmful only to the people, precious in
its salvation of bourgeois privileges, is no other than religion. That is
the eternal mirage which leads away the masses in a search for divine
treasures, while, much more crafty, the governing class contents itself
with dividing among all its members — very unequally, moreover, and
always giving most to him who possesses most — the miserable goods
of earth and the plunder taken from the people, naturally including their
political and social liberty.

There is not, there cannot be, a State without religion. Take the fre-
est States in the world, — the United States of America or the Swiss Con-
federation, for instance, — and see what an important part is played in all
official discourses by divine Providence, that superior sanction of all
States.

Consequently whenever a chief of State speaks of God, be he the em-
peror of Germany or the president of any republic whatsoever, be sore
that he is getting ready to shear once more his people-flock.

The French liberal and Voltairean bourgeoisie, driven by temperament
to a positivism (not to say a materialism) singularly narrow and brutal,
having become the governing class by its triumph of 1830, the State had
to give itself an official religion. It was not an easy thing. The bour-
geoisie could not abruptly go back under the yoke of Roman Catholicism,
between it and the Church of Rome was an abyss of blood and hatred,
and, however practical and wise one becomes, it is never possible to re-
press a passion developed by history. Moreover, the French bourgeoisie
would have covered itself with ridicule if it had gone back to the Church
to take part in the pious ceremonies of its worship, an essential condition
of a meritorious and sincere conversion. Several attempted it, it is true,
but their heroism was rewarded by no other result than a fruitless scan-
dal. Finally, a return to Catholicism was impossible on account of the
strange contradiction which separates the invariable politics of Rome
from the development of the economical and political interests of the
middle class.

In this respect Protestantism is much more advantageous. It is the
bourgeoise religion par excellence. It accords Just as much liberty as is

^l|f. Chd and the State.

i^^wtkf to t!i4 5dfi^edi8, and finds a way of reconcUing celesti^ aspira.
^1^ with the r^pect which terrestrial considerations deinand. Conse-
^n^nliy tt is especially in Protestant countries that commerce and itt-
d&kfetry have be^ dereloped. ^ \^ * ♦ *

fiat it was impossible for the French bourgeoisie to become Protestant.
To pass fk-om one religion to another, —unless it be done deliberately, as
hi the cai^e of the Jews of Russia and Poland, who get baptized three and
even four thnes in order to receive each time the remuneration allowed
Oiem,— to seriously change one's religion, a little faith is necessary.
Now, in the exclusively positive heart of the French bourgeois , there is
no room for faith. He professes the most profound indifference for all
questions which touch neither his pocket first nor his social vanity after-

ward.

He is as indifferent to Protestantism as to Catholicism. On the other
hand, the French bourgeois could not go over to Protestantism without
putting himself in confiict with the Catholic routine of the majority, which
would have been great imprudence on the part of a class pretendmgto

govern the nation. , ^

There was still one way left, - to return to the humanitarian and revo-
lutionary religion of the eighteenth century. But that would have led too
-far. So the bourgeoisie was obliged, in order to sanction its new State, to
create a new religion which might be boldly proclaimed, without too much
ildicule and scandal, by the whole bourgeoise class.

Thus was bom docm'naiVc Deism.

Others have told, much better than I could tell it, the story of the birth
and development of this school, which had so decisive and — we may well
add— so fatal^ influence on the political, intellectual, and moral educa-
tion of the bourgeoise yontb of France. It dates from Benjamin Constant
and Madame de Stael; its real founder was Royer-Collard ; its apostles,
Onizot, Cousin. Villemain, ahd many others. Its boldly avowed object
was the reconciliation of revolution with reaction, or, to use the language
of the school, of the principle of Uberty with that of authority and natu-
rally to the advantage of the latter.

This reconciliation signified : in politics, a Juggling with popular liberty
for the benefit of bourgtois^ rule, represeilted by the monarchical and con-
stitutional stater in philosophy, the deliberate submission of free reason
to the eternal principles of' faith.

We know that It was Especially elaborated by M. Cousin, the father of
trench eclecticism. A superficial and pedantic talker, incapable of any
original conception, of any idea peculiar to himself, but Very strong on
eoiAxnohpiace, Which he confounded with common sense, this lUustrious
fetaloBb^her learnedly prepared, for the use of the Studious youth of
t^mee, a metaphysical dish of his own making, the use of which was
iftad^ feoiiipaisory in all schools of the State undier the University : ^uch
wai it» indigestible nourishment to which several generations were
