This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project
to make the world's books discoverable online.
It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject
to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books
are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.
Marks, notations and other marginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the
publisher to a library and finally to you.
Usage guidelines
Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing this resource, we have taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:
+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.
+ Refrain from automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.
+ Maintain attribution The Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for informing people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.
+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liability can be quite severe.
About Google Book Search
Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web
at http : //books . google . com/|
Digitized by VjOOQIC
Digitized by VjOOQIC
Digitized by VjOOQIC
r.
'.\'
Digitized by Google ^ Wi
Digitized by VjOOQIC
Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


papers d i^t ^rtjaologkal Institute of ^merits.

AMERICAN SERIES.
V.


HEMENWAY
SOUTHWESTERN ARCH^OLOGICAL EXPEDITION.


CONTRIBUTIONS

TO THE

HISTORY OF THE SOUTHWESTERN PORTION
OF THE UNITED ._«TATES.

Bv a! F: BANDELIER^'i.'oC"- ; . .


CAMBRIDGE:
JOHN WILSON AND SON.

1890.


\
I

Digitized by VjOOQIC


The expense of publishing this volume is defrayed jointly
by Mrs, Mary Hemenway and by the Archaeological Institute
of America,


• -. ""^^j..


"HE \


•••••• ....••.• :


' *nr, I's- < ' d niden^


- • ••••••• • \


Fo'jr ^' on?. //


32225


Digitized by VjOOQIC


'"T^HE Historical Essays, by Mr. Bandelier, sent herewith to all mem-
X • bers of the Institute, form the fourth substantial volume of his
work already published under our seal, besides a number of essays and
statements included in the Annual Reports. These volumes, with his
earlier papers, written when in the employ of the Peabody Museum, fully
establish Mr. Bandelier's right to a foremost place among American
archaeologists.

After the disbandment of the Hemenway expedition, Mr. Bandelier
was thrown out of regular employment, and became dependent upon his
literary work for support. The Council thought it important to secure
the completion of Mr. Bandelier's " Final Report " on his investigations
among the Indians of the Southwest. (It will be remembered that
Part I. of this Report has appeared within a year). To this end, a small
appropriation was made by the Council last summer, and Mr. Bandelier
was re-engaged temporarily as our agent, being instructed to devote his
energies to the completion of his Report, with ajjttJjiAJt)^. td fCi2^% the
necessary investigations for this purpose in the field. *Sfn(5e '/his J^ppr© ■;/.•; ,•
priation was exhausted, the generosity of a lady, a meiijfe^ .<S['<!?6 Jnsti= • I \
tute, has enabled us to continue Mr. Bandelier's wori^'Wcj^niihths
longer. The Final Report, which thus sums up the;rii|y4i5iUts.pfIojgiiy
years' study and exploration, is rapidly approaching compret1o^.-*/'Pl?e
elaborate introduction and seven chapters, each a thorough archaeological
essay upon a distinct group of Indian tribes, have already been forwarded
to the Secretary of the Institute. A few months should suffice to
complete this truly monumental work. *The Council is unable at the
present time to make any further appropriation from its own funds.
We are obliged, therefore, to make an urgent appeal to our members
and friends for the means to continue Mr. Bandelier's engagement long
enough to enable him to complete this work. About one thousand
dollars ($i,ooo) are needed.

Please send checks to the President, Seth Low, Columbia College,
New York, N. Y.

Respectfully,

WILLIAM CRANSTON LAWTON,

Secretary.
Cambridge, January, 1891.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


. ..♦•.;••.•.: ♦..-.: ..:•••

•••••••• •

. •• • • •••• ••••

: • ••


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE OF AMERICA.


Council, 1890-91.

SETH LOW, President

CHARLES ELIOT NORTON, Vice- President,

GEORGE A. ARMOUR.

LEVI L. BARBOUR.

DAVID L. BARTLETT.

MARTIN BRIMMER.

FREDERIC J. DE PEYSTER.

ARTHUR L. FROTHINGHAM, Jr.

CHARLES L. HUTCHINSON.

FRANKLIN MACVEAGH.

ALLAN MARQUAND.

AUGUSTUS C. MERRIAM.

WILLIAM H. METCALF.

FRANCIS PARKMAN.

MARTIN A. RYERSON.

STEPHEN SALISBURY.

THOMAS D. SEYMOUR.

RUSSELL STURGIS.

CHARLEMAGNE TOWER, Jr.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


PREFACE.


THESE monographs are the first fruits of a work begun by
me while in charge of the documentary researches con-
nected with the Hemenway Expedition. It was my plan to
treat the history of the Southwest in sections, monographically.
The first four papers here published were to have been followed
by similar ones on the expeditions of Coronado, Chamuscado,
Espejo, and Ofiate, but the material which I accumulated for
the purpose is at present beyond my reach. To proceed
further may therefore entail a resumption of the main task ;
to wit, the collection of as much documentary information
as possible in the shape of faithful copies of original manu-
scripts, times of rest being employed for excursions over
the country in order to add to this material accurate topo-
graphical knowledge, oral information, and ethnological and
archaeological data, so that all these various resources may
be duly utilized in combination.

To write the history of the Southwest, or any portion
thereof, requires the accumulation of a vast amount of
material. That material, aside from what Indian traditions
afibrd, is mostly found in Spain. Only a limited number of
the documents contained in the Archives of the Indies have
as yet been published. It had been my wish, after copying
whatever the archives at Santa F^, Santa Clara, El Paso
del Norte, and Mexico contained, to visit Spain, and secure


Digitized by VjOOQIC


iv PREFACE.

copies of the large and well preserved mass of documentary
material there extant Sooner or later, this work will have
to be performed; for there are long periods in the history
of New Mexico, for instance, about which Mexican as well
as New Mexican archives contain almost nothing. The pe-
riod of New Mexican history between 1643 2ind 1680 is as
yet nearly a blank. Important papers on the organization of
the missions in the seventeenth century, like the relations of
(Fray Roque de Figueredo and of Fray Francisco de Escobar, '
have disappeared. They formerly existed at Mexico. From
the archives at Santa F^ nearly all the papers touching upon
the troubles with the Moqui Indians in the beginning of the
last century are missing. Without the help of the ecclesi-
astical archives at Santa Clara I should not have been able
to treat of the expedition of Villazur, or to establish the
identity of the founder of the present New Mexican family
of Archibeque with Jean TArch^v^que, the betrayer of La
Salle.

It is not immaterial whether or not such obscure periods
are fully known. They may not present striking events, but
they were the times during which important crises were pre-
paring. Thus the great rebellion of 1680 had its first germs
in the years between 1642 and 1676 ; the seeds of it were
sown even at an earlier date. Neither is it unimportant to
have a correct knowledge of all these events from a general
point of view. Had proper attention been paid to the true
state and course of Spanish colonization in New Mexico, —
to what Spain derived from that country, and what the
Spanish government thought of it, — millions fruitlessly in-
vested could have been saved. Had the relations between
the Spaniards and the Indians been critically studied in time,
much unproductive labor could have been spared, and invol-
untary injustice avoided. It is not too late yet.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


PREFACE. V

I therefore present the papers herein contained as a mere
beginning of a work temporarily interrupted. Should it be-
come possible to resume it, the plan above mentioned would
be followed. The time is past when history, to be of per-
manent use, can be treated otherwise than in a monographic
way. The greatest possible amount of detail is indispensable
to make it, not merely vivid, but also sufficiently accurate,
and therefore impartial. To be impartial is the only way to
become truthful, — and truth, for the sake of the past, pres-
ent, and future, is the end and aim of historical research.


AD. F. BANDELIER.


Santa Y% New Mexico,
June 12, 189a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


CONTENTS.


I.

Sketch of the Knowledge which the Spaniards in Mexico
possessed of the countries north of the province of
New Gaucia, previous to the return of Cabeza de
Vaca, in the Year 1536 3

II.

Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, and the Importance of his
Wanderings from the Mexican Gulf to the Slope of

THE PACinC FOR SPANISH EXPLORATIONS TOWARDS NeW

Mexico and Arizona . 24

III.

Spanish Efforts to penetrate to the North of Sinaloa,

BETWEEN the YeARS 1536 AND I539 6S

IV.
Fray Marcos of Nizza io6

V.

The Expedition of Pedro de Villazur, from Santa F^,
New Mexico, to the Banks of the Platte River, in
search of the French and the Pawnees, in the
YiAR 1720 176


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


HEMENWAY SOUTHWESTERN ARCHiCOLOGICAL
EXPEDITION.


CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE SOUTH-
WESTERN PORTION OF THE UNITED STATES.


By a. F. BANDELIER.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


HEMENWAY SOUTHWESTERN ARCHAEOLOGICAL
EXPEDITION.


CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE HISTORY OF THE SOUTH-
WESTERN PORTION OF THE UNITED STATES.


By a. F. BANDEUER.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by


Google


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS.


I.

SKETCH OF THE KNOWLEDGE WHICH THE SPANIARDS IN
MEXICO POSSESSED ©F THE COUNTRIES NORTH OF THE
PROVINCE OF NEW GALICIA, PREVIOUS TO THE RETURN
OF CABEZA DE VACA, IN THE YEAR 1536.

nPHERE is no evidence that Cort6s, when he subdued the
■*• tribes of Taraaulipas in 1522, obtained from those tribes
any intelligence whatever of countries farther north and in-
land. What was known or heard of the regions beyond the
mouth of the Rio Panuco concerned exclusively the coast of
the Gulf of Mexico and of the Atlantic Ocean.^ The same
may be affirmed of the first explorations made by order of
Cortds on the Pacific slope. TCiguatan, the place where
women, Amazons, were said to reside, was located on an
island by those who brought the news of the existence of
such a tribe.2

1 Compare (Hernando Cortes, Carta Quarto^ October 15, 1524, edition of
Lorenzana, 1828, p. 520 et seq.

2 Ibid.,, p. 534 : " Y asimismo me trajo relacion de los sefiores de la provincia
de Ciguatan, que se afirman mucho haber una isla toda poblada de mugeres, sin
varon ninguno y que en ciertos tiempos van de la tierra-firme hombres, con los
cuales han aceso ; y las que quedan preiiadas, si paren mugeres las guardan ;
y si hombres, los echande su compafiia ; y que esta isla esta diez jornadas de
esta provincia, y que muchos de ellos han Mo alia, y la han visto. Dicen me
asimismo, que es muy rica de perlas, y oro." f It is not unlikely that the island
alluded to is one of the group of the Tres Marias, in front of the harbor of
Mazatlan.)


Digitized by VjOOQIC


4 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

The legend of the Amazons, as I have elsewhere stated,^
was brought to America from Europe by the earliest explorers ;
nay, by Columbus himself. The difficulty of understanding
the speech of the aborigines, as well as the impossibility of
comprehending their social organization and kinship, caused
European discoverers to recognize myths of the Old World
as being actually realized in the New. Thus the Great Ad-
miral speaks, in his letter to the Treasurer, Rafael Sanchez,
of a certain island called Matenin, " the first one from Es-
paiiola toward the Indies," inhabited by women only, who
held intercourse at stated times with male Caribs, and who
protected their bodies in war with plates of copper.^ The
island of women not being found in the Gulf of Mexico nor
in the Caribbean Sea, the tale flitted over to the mainland,
as Spanish enterprise penetrated to the Isthmus, and finally
into Mexico. It reappeared on the west coast in 1522, where
Gonzalo de Sandobal heard of it, or imagined that he heard
of it, while in Colima.®

Cort6s found little time for following in person this Fata
Morgana. But his successor and enemy, the notorious Nuflo
Beltran de Guzman, reached Ciguatan, and found that he had

1 Historical Introduction to Studies among the Sedentary Indians of New Mexico
(in Papers of the Archaological Institute of America, American Series, vol. i.).
Also (7%/ Discovery of New Mexico by Fray Marcos of Nizza (in Magazine of
tVestern History, September, 1886). j Compare also I Joannes Eusebius Nierem-
berg, I S. J., Historia Natum Maxime PeregrimB, 1635, P* ^35 • ** Amazonas
aliqtias fuisse in novo orbe, fabula multis fuit, semifabula quondam Petro
Martyri."

^f Carta de Cristobal Coloni\M2irch 14, 1493 (^^ Coleccion de Viages y DescU'
brimientos que hicieron por Mar los Espaholes, by Navarrete, vol. i. p. 191):
" Estos [the Caribs] son los que se unen i, ciertas mugeres que habitan solas la
isla Matenin, que es la primera desde la Espanola £ la India. Estas mugeres
no se dedican k labor alguna propia de su sexo, pues usan de arcos y dardos,
segun se dijo de los anteriores, y se ponen por defensa laminas de cobre, de que
tienen grande abundancia."

• Cortes, Carta Quarta, p. 534. It is superfluous to quote later sources,
since they have gathered their information from Cortes and his reports.


Digitized by VjOOQIC j.

iJ


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 5

been pursuing a phantom. He was led to this discovery step
by step, and while nothing positive guided his advance, except
such information as was obtained piecemeal from Indians,
yet his expedition led to a considerable increase in geo-
graphical knowledge, and ultimately opened the road on
which New Mexico was to be discovered.)

Alongside of the Amazon myth, another importation from
the Old World contributed largely to impel the Spaniards
northward. This was the tale of the " Seven Cities."

The story that a Bishop of Lisbon fled to certain islands
west of Europe, in the eighth century, to escape aggressions
of the Arabs, and that on these islands he and his followers
founded seven distinct settlements, is older than the time of
Columbus. But it is vague and nebulous, and beyond the
name of the island or group of islands given as "Antillia"
{ante insula) ^ or islands lying before some unknown ** tierra
firme," nothing definite can be gathered.^ The story is
probably one of those legends, partly founded on fact, which
since the discovery of America appear to us as forebodings of
that great event, whereas previous to Columbus's first voyage
hardly any attention was paid to them.^ There is to a cer-
tain extent an analogy between Antillia and Atlantis, in the
circumstance that the latter tale, which is a reminiscence of
classical antiquity, speaks of a western continent submerged
and destroyed, whereas the former hints at the existence

1 For ample details on the sources whence the Antillia tale is derived, I refer
to the magnificent publication by \^r. Justin Winsor under the title Aboriginal
America.^ The reader will find in the first three sections of this valuable work
reference to every important source touching the Antillia of the fifteenth cen-
tury. Q[5regorio 02xz\2^0rigen de los Indios (2d edition, note by the Editor

(Barcialp. 189), says that the " Seven Cities *' were found on an island by the
Portuguese in the year 1448. Compare alsi Antonio de Yi^xx^Tz\listoria Gen-
eral de los Hechos de los Castellanos en las Islas y la Tierra firme dn Mar Oceano,
ed. 1730, Decada I. p. 4.

2 Except by one or the other of the cosmographers of the time.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


6 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

of fragments of firm land, which have in this century been
looked upon by erudite thinkers as remnants of the great
island once called Atlantis.^ In another direction the story of
Antillia appears correlated with the legends of Saint Brandan
and Saint Maclovius.^

There is always some foundation for reminiscences of this
kind. They are never absolute inventions. But at an age
when everything beyond the Pillars of Hercules was, for the
learned man even, a matter of doubt, it was impossible to
sift critically evidences the practical importance of which
could not then be realized. Therefore the Antillia story,
like all others of analogous import, attracted no attention
until it was perhaps too late to ascertain its original sources.'
Be this as it may, it is certain that the tale of the Seven
Cities turned up in Mexico among the Spaniards a very short
time, comparatively speaking, after the myth of the Amazons
had almost ceased to be an incentive to expeditions towards
the North.

There is a point here which requires careful attention.
Among the Nahuatl, and other tribes of Mexico and Central
America, the tale of " Seven Caves," from which certain tribes
were believed to have issued, is represented as being a part of
their folk-lore, ^olk-lore is a very fair source of historical in-
formation where it is accurately preserved ; and since we know
how such tales became an integral part of the ritual of esoteric

1 Compare among other^Brasseur de Bourbourg, \Popul Vuhy U Livre sacri
et Us Mythes de V Antiquiti Amiricaine^ i86i, Introduction, p. Ix. ; but more par-
ticularly yet his Relatioti des Choses de Yucatan de Diego de Landay Introduction,
pp. V. and viii.

2 In that all three treat of some island in the Atlantic Ocean. But the one dis-
covered by Saint Maclovius turned out to be the back of a gigantic fish. Garcia,
Origen de los Indiosy pp. 32, 33. The name of the island which he was seeking in
company with Saint Brandan was Ima.

• Garcia (see above) refers, as a source, to " vn manuscrito en pergamino
mui antiguo, i grave, que imprimi6 Fr. Juan Bosco." ^


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 7

clusters,^ we may also conceive how the Atlantis tale has sur-
vived as the property of a few, distorted and enlarged, but
still enclosing a nucleus of original truth.) In the case of the
Seven Caves, — Chicom-oztoc in the Nahuatl legend, Tulan
Zuiva in the Quiche tradition of Guatemala,^ — we should
first examine whether this legend antedates the Seven Cities
on American soil, or whether it appears subsequent to the
enterprises of the Spaniards which have made the "Seven
Cities of Cibola" so famous.

It is not sufficient to adduce that neither Cortes nor any
one of the direct conquerors of Mexico mentions the tale of
the Seven Caves. During the stirring times of military work,
as well as during the period of administrative organization
following upon the Conquest, it is evident that very little
solid information could be gathered touching genuine tradi-
tions of the Indians. Neither were the latter very communi-
cative, except in so far as local and private interests were
concerned. But when once the Conquest was established
and organization initiated, the time came when particular
attention could be paid to the recollections of the aborigines
concerning their past. To do this, there was a powerful
incentive.

The fact that a continent so completely separated from the
old one was found inhabited, and by a branch of mankind that
indicated, in their features as well as in their mode of life,
protracted residence in these hitherto unknown quarters of
the globe, appealed to speculation and investigation in the
highest degree. How the Indians could have reached the
new continent, — how and by what route they could have
attained the sites where they dwelt or the regions through
which they roamed, — these were points important to ascer-

1 The discovery of this important fact is due to Mr.\J''. H. Cushing.\

2 Brasseur de Bourbourg, Popol Vuh^ pp. 216^ 226, 228. '


Digitized by VjOOQIC


8 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

tain as accurately as possible, not only from the standpoint
of speculative curiosity, but especially from the standpoint of
religion, and for acquiring provisional notions about lands
remote and as yet unexplored.

(The earliest methodical investigations touching the creed,
beliefs, and myths, tradition included, of the Central Mexican
tribes are due to the endeavors of ^rchbishop Don Fray
Juan de Zumarraga. ) While this prelate, on the one hand,
earnestly strove to uproot aboriginal creeds, which were in-
compatible with civilization,^ on the other hand, he caused


1 Much censure has been expended on the action of this ecclesiastic regard-
ing bis destruction of idols, and other objects of worship pertaining to the an-
cient o^der of things in Mexico. I can but heartily indorse the able defence
which(l)on Joaquin Garcia Ycazbalcet^^has made against the accusations, and
particularly against the charge that Archbishop Zumdrraga had wantonly de-
stroyed Indian archives which were supposed to have been extant previous to
the advent of the missionaries, but which in truth never existed. I do not ven-
ture to translate the words of the distinguished biographer of Zumarraga. I
fear that the best translation might detract from the merits of words written
under the impulse of a conviction attained after years and years of study. But
I venture to copy here a few sentences of the work (Don Fray Juan de Zuntdv'
raga^ primer Obispo y Arzobispo de Mexico ^ 1881) which he has had the courage
to write : " Injusto parece que cuando debemos d alguien grandes beneficios,
paremos la consideracion en una falta que haya cometido, y nos empe&emos
en abultarla, d pesar de que despues la haya reparado con exceso. Tal sucede
con los primeros ap6stoles de nuestra tierra. No nos cansamos de censurar
el celo falso 6 necio, la ignorancia 6 el fanatismo que suponemos los im-
puls6 d destruir las antiguedades aztecas; pero no nos tomamos siquiera el
trabajo de averiguar si el hecho es cierto, ni queremos recordar que k ellos
se debi6 la abolicion de los sacrificios humanos, el establecimiento de la ver-
dadera religion, la defensa y conservacion del pueblo vencido. V despues de
todo, el cargo es falso 6 grandemente exagerado ; y el poco dafio que tal vez
llegarian d causar en pinturas verdaderamente importantes, qued6 bien com-
pensado con los escritos que les debemos." (pp. 366 and 367.) Further on
he very justly says ; '* Si algo leemos en las pinturas, y de algo sirven para
esclarecer uno d otro hecho historico, es porque sabemos de antemano el
hecho, y porque los misioneros nos dejaron el conocimiento de la lengua y
de muchos de los signos con que los aztecas representaban lo que podian, d
cuya obra ayudaron los int^rpretes de los primeros afios. Sin tales auxilios
las pinturas serian ininteligibles ; pru^ba lo que el codice de Dresde que no


\


Digitized by


Google


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 9

the myths, etc., to be carefully collected. This was the
origin of the " Historia de Los Mexicanos por sus Pinturas."
This collection of myths is certainly anterior to 1547, and
from itiFrancisco Lopez de Gomarajbas probably gathered
his interesting and valuable "Aper5u" of ancient Nahuatl
or specifically Central Mexican creed and belief. It may
be regarded as the exposition of Mexican myths and tradi-
tions which is freest from Christian tinge or Old World in-
fluence upon the minds of the natives.^ )

es Mexicano ni tiene interpretacion, permanece mudo, y ap^nas se sabe k
qu^ pueblo pertenece. La interpretacion de ciertos geroglificos aztecas es
hoy tan clara como la de una charada cuya solucion ya se conoce. Careci-
endo de todo antecedente, qu^ leeriamos al ver un deforme muiieco, sentado
en cuclillas, con rostro de perfil y ojo de frente, ceiiida la cabeza con una diade-
ma puntiaguda, y acompafiado de una pierna llagada 6 herida? Ahora decimos
sin vacilar que es el rey Tizoc, pero porque ya sabemos que asi se le represen-
taba. Y & pesar de eso, cuantas y cuantas interpretaciones muy acreditadas no
ban venido al suelo. £n la famosa pintura del * Viaje de los Aztecas/ todos,
y aun personajes tan graves como Siguenza, Clavigero y Humboldt, vieron la
historia de tiempos remotfssimos : el diluvio universal, la confusion de las len-
guas, la dispersion de las gentes, y qu^ s^ yo cuantas cosas mas, lo cual qued6
aceptado como cosa indudable, hasta que el Sr. Ramirez y despues el Sr. Orozco
y Berra probaron que no hay alii diluvio, ni torre de Babel, ni cosa que lo valga,
y que todo se reduce k la peregrinacion de los Mexicanos, no desde el misteri-
oso y lejano Chicomoztoc, sino puramente dentro de los Hmites del valle de
Mexico." (p. 367.) "En resumen: no fu^ considerable, ni en cantidad ni en
calidad, el daiio que los misioneros causaron en las pinturas aztecas : el que
hideron a los principios, supieron repararle cumplidamente, y no hay justicia
para acusarlos de ignorancia y fanatismo, por solo un momento de error muy
disculpable." (p. 371.) With equal justness and force the author treats of the
destruction of objects of worship, idols, etc. Not to make this note too prolix,
I simply refer the reader to pages 346, 347, and 348 of the work quoted.

I have dwelt so much at length on this subject, for the reason that I consider
the position taken by Senor Ycazbalceta in regard to the value of Mexican
pictographs for historical purposes as indeed the true one. In this connection
I may refer also to my paper, published in the volume of{ Proceedings of the
Twenty-seventh Meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of
Science, and entitled On the Sources for Aboriginal History of Spanish America^
and especially to pages 320, 323, and 324.N

1 This document was published by its^wner, Sefior Ycazbalceta, in No. 2 of
Volume II. of the Anales del Museo Nacional de Mexico^ 18S9. The title-page


Digitized by VjOOQIC


lO ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

In this report, the word " Chicomuxtoque " (Chicoraoztoc,
or seven caves) already appears. It appears as one of the
stations where the Mexican tribe on its migratory wander-
ings rested for a number of years.^ There is hardly any pos-
sibility that this tradition, recorded at a time when the two
races had hardly been in contact for more than one decen-
nium,*^ could already have been an echo of Old World myths.
The seven caves appear, therefore, as an aboriginal Ameri-
can conception, probably a geographical fact, incorporated
in historic tradition, preserved, as is customary among the
Indians within the esoteric clusters, orally as well as on
pictographs.^

The name " Chicomoztoc " is also found in the *' Anales
de Cuauhtitlan," — a chronicle that bears every sign of au-
thenticity, as far as its Indian origin is concerned, and which


indicates that Don Sebastian Ramirez, Bishop of Cuenca, and President of the
Royal Audiencia of New Spain, carried it to Madrid himself. The Bishop left
Mexico in 1536, consequently the material for the Historia must have been col-
lected before that date. At the close of the manuscript we read : " Fr. Bno de
San Franco, Franciscano ^ sacada de las pinturas de los A.exicanos = y el
Sto arpo. Zumarraga."

If, as^efior Alfredo Chavero) suggests, with a great deal of probability, this
is to indicate thatfrray Bernardino Rivera^ better known as Sahagun, was the
compiler of this narration, the basis of which are pictographs and, furthermore,
" Relacion de los viejos y de los que en tiempo de su ynfidelidad eran sacer-
dotes y papas, y por dicho de los seiiores y principales a quien se enseiiaba la
ley y criaron en los templos para que la deprendiesen, juntados ante mi y traidos
sus libros 7 figuras que segun lo que demostraban eran antiguas, y muchas
dellas teRidas la mayor parte vntadas con sangre humana,'* then the compila-
tion must have been made between the years 1529 and 1536. It is consequently
the oldest and most authentic collection of data touching the creed and tradi-
tions of the aborigines of Central Mexico we as yet possess.

1 Historia de los Mexicanos por sus Pinturas^ cap. xi. p. 93.

* About fourteen years at most.

' Compare note i, beginning on preceding page. The introductory passage
of the Historia^ therein quoted, recalls very much the method still observed
by the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, to preserve their myths and rituals
through oral teaching among the secret clusters.


...^ \


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 1

was composed about thirty years after the Conquest.^ A
great number of other sources from the sixteenth century,
as well as pictographs, might be enumerated ; (but I consider
the fact that the " Seven Caves " are mentioned in the docu-
ments above stated sufficient evidence to prove that there
existed in the mind of the Mexican Indians recollections of
a place where natural circumstances, possibly also sociological
causes, had at one time induced these ancestors to divide into
seven localized groups or clusters.^ )

This tale of the Seven Caves was well adapted to fit the
European tale of the Seven Cities, and we need not wonder
that the latter were soon heard of at the young Spanish town
of Mexico, and heard of through native Indian sources,

(Pedro de Castafieda) a soldier of Coronado's expedition,
and author of an interesting, though very partial, report on
that unlucky enterprise, furnishes what is possibly the most
detailed statement touching the legendary Seven Cities. He
says : " In the year 1530, Nuilo de Guzman, President of New
Spain, at that time owned an Indian, one of the natives of
the valley or valleys of Oxitipar, whom the Spaniards call
Tejos. This Indian told him that he was the son of a trader
deceased long ago, who, while his son was still a child, was
wont to travel over the interior of the country in order to sell
the handsome plumes that are used for head-dresses by the
Indians. In exchange he brought home a large quantity of
gold and silver, both metals being very common in that
region. He added, that once or twice he had himself ac-
companied his father, and had seen towns so large that he

1 It is greatly to be regretted that the publication of the Anales de Cuauktitlan.
which was begun in the Anales del MuseOy by the latdCDon Gumersindo MendozaJ
has not been continued after his death.

2 This is the most common interpretation, and through it the tale approaches
that of the " Seven Cities." That there may have been a gradual blending of
the two in the minds of the Indians, and of the Spaniards as well, is not at all
improbable.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


12 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

could compare them in size to Mexico and its suburbs. There
were seven of these towns, and there were whole rows of
streets inhabited by gold and silver workers. He said be-
sides, that in order to reach these seven towns it was neces-
sary to cross a desert for forty days, where there was no
vegetation except short grass about five inches in height, and
that the direction was to the north between both oceans." ^

While there certainly was a grain of truth in this Indian
story, the gross exaggerations are also apparent. If the fact
of its having been told to Nuno de Guzman rested on the
testimony of Castafieda alone, we might doubt even that ;
but it is also stated in contemporaneous documents else-
where. This tale exercised a decided influence upon the
enterprises which Guzman directed to the north along the
Pacific coast,2 a.nd in the course of which he did indeed find
Ciguatan. It turned out to be an Indian village of the kind
and class peculiar to Jalisco and Sinaloa. It is related that
the women which were met there were of different appear-
ance from those previously seen, and the Indian interpreters
were shrewd enough to repeat the stories about Amazons

1 Relation du Voyage de Cibola^ French translation by^Temaux-Compans^
Part I. chap. i. The Spanish original is in the Lenox Library at New York.
Ternaux was a very careless and unreliable translator ; but in default of the
original, which I cannot consult from here, I have to limit myself to the transla-
tion. Castafieda is usually reliable in regard to matters touching the Indians
and on geographical topics, but he is also very partial, and often slanderous, in
regard to the actions and motives of his countrymen. He must have had a sour
and passionate temper, and been much embittered by deceptions on the journey
to New Mexico.

2 Segunda Relacion AnSnima de la Jornada de Nuno de Guzman {Coleccion de
Documentos para la Historia de Mexico^ Ycazbalceta, vol. ii. p. 303) : " La
demanda que llevabamos cuando salimos a descobrir este rio era las Siete
Cibdades, porque el Gobernador Nufio de Guzman tenia noticia del las, e de un
rio que salia d la Mar del Sur, e que tenia cuatro 6 cinco leguas en ancho, i los
Indios tenian una cadena de hierro que atrayesaba el rio para detener las
canoas ^ balsas que por el viniesen, i era gente muy belicosa, i hallamos que
tengo dicho."


\:.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 3

which they had heard from the Spaniards themselves. At
Ciguatan they heard of Culiacan, and so Guzman advanced
step by step until some of his officers finally reached the
Mayo River, on the confines of Sinaloa and Sonora. This
occurred in 1530, and the year following^ a small post,
rather than colony, was founded at Culiacan in Sinaloa, and
from it incursions were made at intervals into Southern
Sonora, with the hideous object of securing slaves. This
was the work of two officers, men of exceptional cruelty,
which they displayed not only towards the Indians, but also

ifeircia del VW^tiRelacion de la Entrada de Nuno de Guzman (Ycazbalceta,
vol. ii. p. 259) : " Pasados diez dias, pasando por algunos pueblos todos de
guerra e ninguno apaciguado, Uegamos al pueblo de Ciguatlan, que dicen ser
las mujeres ; e en este pueblo hallamos todo lo mas mujeres, i no se pudo
alcanzar si vivian solas 6 tenian maridos, por cabsa de no tener lengua que las
entendiese bien, salvo que habia muy pocos hombres i todo mujeres." Tercera
Relacion AnSnima de la Jornada de Nuno de Guzman (Ibid., p. 451): •* Des-
pues por las lenguas se supo que estas mujeres decian haber venido por la
mar, y antiguamente guardar entre si tal orden que no tenian maridos ni entre
si los consentian, mas antes de cierto tiempo en cierto tiempo venian los
comarcanos k entrar con ellas y las que prenadas quedaban y parian hijos
los enterraban vivos, y las hijas criaban, y que de poco tiempo a esta parte
no mataban los nifios, mas los criaban, y cuando eran de diez anos 6 poco
mas los daban a sus padres. Desto no se pudo saber bien el secreto dello,
porque las lenguas no eran muy expertas." Very explicit and positive is the
Cuarta Relacion AnSnima de la Jornada de Nuno de Guzman (Ibid., p. 475) :
"Llegamos al pueblo de Ciguatlan, que es cabecera de ciertos pueblos al
derredor de el, do teniamos noticia y decian que eran las Amazonas. En
este pueblo y en otros que se corrieron al derredor no se hallo sino mujeres, y
muy poco 6 casi ninguno varon, y por esto se presumio mas ser las mujeres de
que se traia noticia ; y la cabsa porque no se hallaron varones entre ellas, era
porque se andaban acabdillando los varones para nos dar guerra en cierto cabo.
Esto es ansi, porque despues cuando volvimos de las sierras y despoblado que
no podimos pasar, los hallamos en sus casas con sus mujeres € hijos, sin hacer
diferencia de otros pueblos. Nunca se pudo hallar lengua aqui que los enten-
diese." This explains very well the contents of the source previously quoted.
The Indian interpreters, unable to understand the people, explained the fact
that only women were found at a certain place in a manner to suit the fancy of
those for whom they were to interpret, — a feature which happens almost daily,
more or less, wherever Indians are called upon to act as mediums t^tween white
people and members of their own race.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


14 archjEological institute.

towards their countrymen. Diego de Alcaraz and Lazaro
Cebreros were worthy followers of Guzman. It is due to the
Spanish authorities to state that the misdeeds of these two
individuals were not tolerated any longer than until it be-
came possible to restrain them. At the great distance at
which their post was situated from any governmental centre,
however, years ran by ere the superior authorities of New
Galicia were informed of the crimes which, under pretext of
serving the King, and even Christianity, the two officers were
perpetrating on the extreme northern confines of Spanish
colonization.^

As early as 1531, also, Nuiio de Guzman heard reports
of a big river, several leagues wide at its mouth, which the
Indians inhabiting its banks used to close by means of an
iron cable. This river was either the Yaqui, or, as might
be surmised from the exaggerations, the Colorado of the
West.2 Suffice it to say, that the Spaniards became well
acquainted with the rivers Mayo and Yaqui, and that the
most northern point to which the followers of Guzman had
penetrated in 1536 was the range of the Nebomes, or South-
ern Pimas, in the foothills of the Sierra Madre of Southern
Sonora.*

It was in this region that Cabeza de Vaca and his three

1 I shall have to return to the conduct of these officers in the essay on .Cabeza
de Vaca and his expedition, or rather wanderings. For the present, I merely
refer to Fray Antonio Tello, Historia de la Nueva Galicia (fragment published in
Ycazbalceta, vol. ii. p. 357). There are other sources also, which I shall quote
hereafter on this point.

2 The mention of this big river is found in Segunda Relacion Andnima de la
Jornada de Nuno de Guzman^ p. 303. See page 10, note 2. Since the Spaniards
had already discovered the Yaqui, it may be surmised that the Indian stories
thus related might have referred to the Colorado, as being the only really large
river in that region.

8 This is proven by the deposition of Diego de Guzman in Progreso del JUar-
ques del Valle y Nuno de Guzman y los Adelantados Soto y AlvaradOy sobre el
Descubrimiento de la Tierra Firme (Documentos de Indias, vol. xv. p. 333).


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 5

companions, Andrfes Dorantes, Maldonado, and the negro
Estevanico, fell in with their countrymen in the year 1536.
That event opened a new phase in the annals of Spanish
strides towards the North, and I regard it as necessary to
devote to it a special chapter. Ere I begin the critical ex-
amination of Cabeza de Vaca's remarkable journey in gs, how-
ever, it may not be out of place to cast a glance at the naval
expeditions attempted along the Pacific coast from Mexican
territory previous to Cabeza de Vaca's return, and also to
examine whether or not the Indians of Central Mexico pos-
sessed any knowledge of the distant North, which knowledge
they might have imparted to the Spaniards.

Previous to the year 1536, Cortes set on foot not less than
four distinct attempts to navigate the South Sea. The first
one, in 1522, failed on account of the supplies and building
material having been set on fire and destroyed in the port of
Zacatula, where the ships were being constructed.^

iftFrancisco Gonzalo de Oviedo y V^X^^sSHistoria General y Natural de
Indias, ed. 1853, ^o^* "^' P* 434* "^^^ matter 'of their destruction is told as
follows by the same authority (p. 462) : " Contado ha la historia como Her-
nando Cortes avia dado orden como se hiciessen quatro navios en la costa de
la Mar del Sur : es de saber, que por haber mucho tiempo que se avia comen-
9ado la labor, dellos € tan lexos dessotra mar del Norte, de donde se avia de
llevar todo 16 que convenia para perfeccionarlos (que hay de la una parte k la
otra doscientas leguas 6 mas por tierra, de fragosos puertos de sierras i con muy
grandes y caudalosos rios en el viage), no pudo ser menos de tardarse la obra,
pues que no avia de donde se proveyessen sino de Espana ^ con mucha dificul-
tad. £ otro impedimento ovo demas de lo que estd dicho, ^ fue que el gobema-
dor tenia en una casa en el puerto, donde los navios se hacian, todo el aderego
que para ellos era menester, assi como velas, clavos, xarcia, clavagon, ancoras,
pez, sebo, aze3rte, estopa, estoperoles, botamen ^ otras cosas, i una noche se puso
fuego sin saber como, e se quem6 todo ello, sin quedar cosa de que se pudiesse
aver provecho sino de las ancoras, que no se pudieron quemar, i aun de aquellas
se quemar on los cepos i despues fue menester que de nuevo se tornasse todo
k proveer con mayores gastos i mas dilacion de tiempo." From this it might be
concluded that not the ships themselves, but only the construction material, and
that only in part, was burnt It is copied by Oviedo verbatim from Cortes, Carta
Quarta (ed. Lorenzana, p. 572). But Lorenzana himself, in his article on the
Voyages of Cortez in the South Sea, says (p. 490) : '' Hizo dos caravelas, y dos


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 6 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

The three ships commanded by Alvaro Saavedra Ceron,
which sailed from Zihuatlan in November, 1527, were destined
for the Spice Islands, and were lost on the way thither.^

In 1532, Diego Hurtado de Mendoza sailed from Acapulco
with two vessels. The one commanded by him was lost, and
the other was thrown on the coast of Jalisco.^

In 1533, two other ships sailed from Tehuantepec. One of
these, in charge of Hernando Grijalva, came in sight of the
southern extremity of Lower California, and forthwith returned
to New Spain. The other was commanded by Diego Becerra
de Mendoza, a relative of Cort&. When at sea, the pilot,
Fortuno Jimenez, murdered the captain, landed the two
priests on the shores of Jalisco, and with the crew sailed as
far as the harbor of La Paz in Lower California, where the
natives surprised and killed him and twenty of his men.
The remainder hastily returned to Chiametla in Sinaloa.^

bergantines en dicho puerto de Zacatula, y habiendose pegado fuego al almazen,
todo se quem6." At all events, this first attempt resulted in nothing.

1 The original authorities on the voyage of Saavedra Ceron are numerous, and it
would carry me too far were I to refer ta them here in detail. There are, for in-
stance, in the fifth volume of ^avarrete*s p7/.ff«V?« de los Viajes y Descubrimientos
(pp. 440-476), not less than eleven original documents. Also in vol. xiv. of the
Documenios de Indias (pp. 65 et seq.) there is the Relacion o Derrote^o de la Nceve-
gacion que hizo el Bergantin que salio de Zacatula en Nueva Espanay para des-
cubrir la Costa del Mar del Sur, de Or den de Alvaro Sayavedra Ceron , Capitan
General, y de Don Hernando Cortes, Gobemador del dicho Reyno, 1527.

2 Consult on the voyage in question : Real Provisum sobre Descubrimientos en
el Mar del Sur, 1534, in vol ii. of Doc, para la Historia de Mexico, Ycazbal-
ceta, p. 35 et seq. Francisco Lopez de Gomara, Cronica GenercU de las Indias ^
ed. Vedia, vol. i. p. 423. iBernal Diez del Castillo, yerdadera Historia de los
Sucesos de la Conquista de" la Nueva Espaha, Also' iri' yed\2i*sj Historiadores
Primitivos de Indias, vol. ii. p. 291. Of course, Herrera, Historia General, De-
cada V. and VI.

• See above. Also, Relacion y Derrotero de una Armcuia de dos Navios, Con-
cepcion, Capitana, y San LasarOy que salio del Puerto de Santiago en el Mar del
Sur, de Orden de Heman Cartes, mandada por Grijalva y el Piloto Martin de
Acosta, Portugues, a descubrir en el Mar del Sur, 1533, in vol. xiv. of Doc. de
Indias, p. 128 et seq. I merely enumerate some of the leading sources of infor-
mation, the events not being strictly germane to the subject of this paper.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 17

The expedition which Cort6s commanded in person took
place in the year 1534. It proved, however, rather sterile in
results.^

None of these expeditions increased the knowledge of the
northern regions to any extent. And yet, in 1540, Cort6s
boldly asserted that he had informed ^ray Marcos of Nizza^
of what the latter reported concerning the coast of Sonora
and the Californian Gulf, accusing the friar of speaking
about what he never saw. The text of the " Memorial " in
which Cortes makes this strong imputation is even so ambig-
uous, that it may be construed as if Cortes had learned from
Indians of Lower California what Fray Marcos afterwards
reported upon New Mexico.^ The documentary historian of

1 There is a fair report on that expedition in Herrera, Historia (Decada V.
vol. ii. p. 197 et seq.). The date of Cortes's departure is in Cavo, Los Tres Siglos
(p. 79), although Herrera has it under date of 1535. Gomara {Cranica, p. 427)
says : " Tomo tierra primero dia de Mayo del afio de 1536." But the great con-
queror himself declares that his voyage to Lower California took place in 1534.
Memorial contra Don Antonio de Mendoza, June 25, 1540. Therefore I adopt
that date.

2 Cortes, Memorial (quoted in the Introduction to vol. ii. of Documentos para la
Historia de Mexico^ by Sr. Garcia Ycazbalceta, p. xxviii.) : ** Y al tiempo que yo
vine de la dicha tierra, el dicho Fr. Marcos hablo conmigo estando yo ya en la
Nueva Espafia, e yo le di noticia de esta dicha tierra y descubrimiento de ella,
porque tenia determinacion de enviarlo en mis navios en proseguimiento y con-
quista de la dicha costa y tierra, porque parescia que se le entendia algo de co-
sas de navegacion : el cual dicho fraile lo comunic6 con el dicho visorey, y con
su licencia diz que fue por tierra en demanda de la misma costa y tierra que yo
habia descubierto, y que era y es de mi conquista ; y despues que volvio el
dicho fraile ha publicado que diz que Uego a vista de la dicha tierra; la cual yo
niego haber el visto jii descubierto, antes lo que el dicho fraile refiere haber visto,
lo ha dicho y dice por sola la relacion que yo le habia hecho.de la noticia que
tenia de los Indios de la dicha tierra de Santa Cruz que yo truje, porque todo lo
que el dicho fraile se dice que refiere, es lo mismo que los dichos Indios a mi
me dijeron : y en haberse en esto adelantado el dicho Fr. Marcos fingiendo y
refiriendo lo que no sabe ni vio, no hizo cosa neuva, porque otras y muchas
veces lo ha hecho, y lo tiene por costumbre, como es notorio en las provincias
del Peru y Guatemala, y se dara de ello informacion bastante luego en esta corte,
siendo necesario." I intend to discuss these and similar accusations against
Fray Marcos of Nizza in their place.

2


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 8 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Mexico, Don Joaquin Garcia Ycazbalceta, very properly
remarks on this: "The charge against Father Nizza is a
grave one indeed, but it must be taken into account that it
was for the interest of Cortds to affirm that what was known
of those countries had become known through himself." ^
That the Indians of Lower California should have had some
confused notions of Arizona and Western New Mexico is
not unlikely, for they were in constant intercourse — Indian
fashion, and through the Seris — with the natives of Central
Sonora. It is also known that the Opatas of Sonora were
not unacquainted with Zufli.^ But I have as yet no proof
that in 1534 any information to that effect had been brought
home by the Spaniards.

It is very difficult to prove clearly, or to disprove, that the
natives of Central Mexico had knowledge of New Mexico pre-
vious to the coming of Europeans, and to the explorations of
the latter region by the Spaniards. We cannot even deter-
mine whether the points mentioned in the various tales of
migration which have been preserved include such as lay out-
side of the territory of the present States of Mexico. There
has been no lack of honest effort in interpreting the geograph-
ical portions of myths as well as of pictographs ; but nothing
has been discovered thus far which might decide the question
whether Central Mexican tribes ever knew the northern coun-
tries, and had preserved recollections of such knowledge. I
say this from the standpoint of actual results, which may be
modified in the future.

Under any circumstances, I will rather confess ignorance
than stoop to speculations for which I lack the adequate

1 Ihid, ** Grave es el cargo contra el P. Nizza ; pero debe tenerse en cuenta
que 4 Cortes le convenia sostener que lo que se sabia de aquella tierra se sabia

poril."

^T I refer, on this point, to my Discovery of New Mexico by Fray Marcos of
Ntzza, in the September number, 1886, of the Magazine of Western History,^


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 9

material ; and in this matter of knowledge by southern peo-
ples of regions in the distant North, with which they had
no communication at the time of the Conquest, the ground
is too insecure for me. The Seven Caves have been located
at different places, not infrequently as far north as New Mex-
ico ; but as yet, so far as I am aware, no greater certainty
has been reached than was attained three hundred years ago.
The traditions of the so called "Aztecs," "Toltecs," "Chi-
chimecs," and others, preserved to us by^xtlilxochitl\nd va-
riously expounded by many successive authorities, have not
yet been sifted with the critical attention which they deserve.
In fact, the true nature of an Indian tradition, the vehicles
that convey it from generation to generation, the modifica-
tions to which it becomes subjected while exclusively in
Indian hands, — these are material for careful study, which
recent researches in New Mexico (and at Zuili especially)
have at last initiated. We are but on the threshold of
American ethnology, and ethnology alone, considered as a
"method of research," can supply a key to the maze of
material which the Spaniards and their missionaries accumu-
lated, or which they enabled the natives to render intelligi-
ble to a public accustomed to methods of commemoration
highly in advance of any which the American Indian had
ever conceived.^

\\ do not reject the testimony of Indian sources, or myths
and traditions, concerning the past of their race. They all
have their positive value, but I hold that it is too early to
judge of them yet. Whenever the Indian has written in
Spanish, or in his native idiom with our letters, criticism may
be applied judiciously ; always allowing for the fact, that he
was using a new art, the art of writing, — one which his

1 In this latter class must be counted the numerous productions in Spanish,
as well as in aboriginal idioms, on historical topics, but unaccompanied by
pictorial signs, and dating from the sixteenth century mostly.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


20 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

ancestors, his parents, he himself perhaps, at first, viewed
with superstitious fear, as uncomprehended magic. In re-
gard to the pictographs, it is certain that some of them were
manufactured after the Conquest, not with the intention of
fraud, but with a view to a compromise between the new
method of recording and the old one, which the new teachers
were loath to comprehend, and which they refused to adopt.^
Of those among the pictographs which may be pre-conquis-
torial, the interpretation is as yet a battle-field. Where wise
men differ so much, the unwise can but abide the time when
they may perhaps agree.

I beg leave to call attention to only a few points which
seem to be essential. One of these is the fact, that in none
of the aboriginal calendars so far studied, in Mexico and Cen-
tral America, do the tokens or symbols show any reminis-
cence of animals typical of the Fauna of the North. Taking
the Mexican signs for the twenty days, for instance, we find
but two symbols that do not correspond either to animals,
plants, or elements found in the region, or to objects familiar
everywhere (like water, rain, etc.) The two signs in contro-
versy have not the slightest analogy with an idealized figure
of the buffalo, the mountain sheep, the bear, or the moun-
tain goat.2 Neither is there any authentic trace of any
knowledge or recollection of these very striking types among
the aborigines ^of Mexico, previous to the earliest Spanish
explorations.y

1 The histories written in Nahuatl, for instance, and accompanied by picto-
graphs ; or the pictographs with a text in Nahuatl and some Spanish phrase
incidentally.

2 The only two signs concerning the meaning of which there is any doubt
are Cipactli and Nahui Ollin. Neither of these two has the slightest or re-
motest analogy with any of the large mammals of the north. Cipactli is
usually taken for a marine animal, and the other for some astronomical sign, or
something of that sort.

* About the story that a tame buffalo had been kept at Tezcuco by the
Indians, it is hardly worth while to squander any time or space.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 21

On the other hand, it is certain that at the present day the
Nahuatl language has pervaded large portions of the northern
States of the Mexican Republic. It appears in Chihuahua
and in Sonora, in the shape of perverted dialects.^ It may
be said, that we do not know positively whether what is
regarded as the pure language is not perhaps a refinement of
the original idiom, resulting from greater stability and easier
subsistence ; but it is equally possible that the Nahuatl
may have crept northward in consequence of Spanish ad-
vance, through crowds of servants and sporadic colonies, as
was the case in New Mexico, where a number of Nahuatl
words have become naturalized in this manner.^

fRecent linguistic investigations, however, tend to prove
that a certain bond exists, through language, between tribes
inhabiting, even previously to the sixteenth century, portions
of Colorado, Arizona, Chihuahua, Sonora, Durango, and so on
to the South ; the Nahuatl of Central Mexico forming but one
link in a great chain extending from Oregon into Nicaragua.^
This is significant, and encourages us in the hope of finding
among the myths and traditions of the South information
concerning the North, and perhaps vice versa. How far the
indications may prove to be of geographical value, is a matter
beyond even surmise at the present time.

(Certain myths, embodied in folk-lore tales and rituals of
New Mexican tribes, find their counterpart in the mythology
and traditional lore of Mexico and Central America. Thus the

1 ComparevProzco y Berr2i\7eogra/{a de las Lenguas y Carta Etnogrdfica de
Mexico^ 1864, especially the large number of local names in a Nahuatl more or
less differentiated from that spoken in the valley of Mexico. See Part III., the
chapters devoted to the northern States of Mexico.

2 Such as Chalchihuitl, Tecolotl, Pichi-Cohuatl, Chiquihuitl, Xicara, and a
number of others that have permeated Pueblo idioms even, and supplanted
original terms in a measure.

* In this I follo\/Mr. A. S. Gatschetjin his Classification into Seven Linguistic
Stocks of Western Indian Dialects contained in Forty Vocabularies^ vol. vii. of
Reports of the U. S. Geographical Survey, p. 408.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


22 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

twin children of Zufli, Mai-tza-la-ima and A-hui-uta,^ repre-
sented in Tehua mythology by Tzi-o-ueno Ojua and Nana-ka-
tza-ma, in Queres rituals by Ma-se-ua and Oyo-ya-ua,* among
the Navajos by Nagaynezgani and Thobadjischeni,^ find their
analogues among the Quiche of Guatemala in Hunah-Pu and
Xbalanqu^.* There are traces of a similar pair of hero-gods in
Chihuahua.* Still, it must not be forgotten that this myth is
very widely spread over the American continent, that tribes
still farther north preserve similar tales,* and that the fact of
its being found in a great number of places distant from each
other rather indicates an ethnological instead of an historical
feature. Instances of that kind might be multiplied without
leading us to anything like certainty, or even probability. It
is yet too early, — I repeat it, — to expect more than dim indi-
cations of the direction in which daylight on this obscure
matter may appear at some future time. )

Hence we cannot hope to discover that the Spaniards ob-
tained any information touching distant northern countries
among the Indians of Central Mexico. As a general rule,
each tribe could only speak pertinently of the immediate
surroundings of its range, and give information about its

1 Compare F. H. Gushing, ZuHi Fetiches, Second Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology, p. 13 ^/ seq,

3 I have what I consider sufficient testimony to the effect that among the last
mentioned two tribes the mythical figures named are the equivalents of the Zuni
twiiy children.

8 jDr. Washington Mathews, )Some Deities and J^emans^of the Navajos, from
the October number of t\if\A{nerican Naturalist, vol. xx. ] Also, by the same
author, A Fart of the Navajo^ Mythology, from the {^merican Antiquarian of
April, 1883^

* Compare Foptd Vuh, Part I^ chap. 4 to 9, and Part II.

•(Gaspar Perez de Villagaran, p/j/<v-*« de la Nueva Mexico, 1 610, Cantos I.
and II. ^

« (bavid Cus\c\ii Ancient History of the Six Nations, 1848, Parts I. and Ily
(Erminnie A. Smith| Myths of the Iroquois, Second Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology. ) The analogy does not approach identity, still there is great
resemblance.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN^ HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 23

nearest neighbors, or its most formidable enemies. Had the
Spaniards, for instance, been in the slightest manner pre-
pared for the leading types of the Northern Fauna, they would
not have found it so difficult to picture to themselves those
animals when first heard of, and the stories about Fray Mar-
cos of Nizza mentioning camels and elephants in regions
beyond Zufti could not have found credence so easily.^ The
first news of " hunchback cows " was brought to Mexico by
Cabeza de Vaca, and it is to his wonderful journey and
its. consequences that the section next following will be
devoted,

1 Fray Marcos never wrote anything of that sort, but his statements were so
interpreted by the Spaniards, even by men of learning. Still, had he himself
heard of the mountain sheep previously, he could not have given the strange
description of a unicorn, as he understood it from Indians of the San Pedro
valley in Southern Arizona. The Indians, when they showed him a large skin
(probably several skins of mountain sheep sewed together), tried to make him
understand the nature of the animal. Compare Relacion del Descubrimiento cU
las Siete Ciudades (Doc, de Indias^ vol. iii. p. 341) : " Aqui en este valle, me truxe-
ren un cuero, tanto y medio mayor que de una gran vaca, y me dixeron ques de
un animal, que tiene solo un cuemo en la frente y queste cuerno es corbo hacia
los pechos, y que de alii sale una punta derecha, en la cual dicen que tiene
tanta fuerza, que ninguna cosa, por recia que sea, dexa de romper, si topa con
ella; y dicen que hay muchos animates destos en aquella tierra; la color del
cuero es imanera de cabron y el pelo tan largo como el dedo." This is
plainly a description of the mountain sheep, but misunderstood by Fray Marcos,
who had never seen the animal nor heard of it. In regard to " camels and ele-
phants," the letter of Fray Jer6nimo Ximenez de San Est^ban, Carta d Santo
Tomds de Villantieva, October 9, 1539 (in Ycazbalceta's Nueva Coleccion de Docu-
tnentos, 1886, p. 195) enlightens us: "Tambien dicen que en la tierra mas
adentro hay camellos y elefantes."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


24 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.


11.


ALVAR NUSTEZ CABEZA DE VACA, AND THE IMPORTANCE
OF HIS WANDERINGS FROM THE MEXICAN GULF TO
THE SLOPE OF THE PACIFIC FOR SPANISH EXPLORA-
TIONS TOWARDS NEW MEXICO AND ARIZONA.

IT is not my purpose here to dwell at great length on the
ill-fated expedition which, commanded by Pamphilo de
Narvaez, left San Lucar de Barrameda in Spain in June,
1527, landed in Florida, and was almost completely destroyed
by storms, through the hostility of Indians, hunger, and dis-
ease, within three years after its departure from the Spanish
shores.^ That tragedy has been written and rewritten by
pens much abler than mine, and all I can attempt here is to
present again, in another form and with some additional de-
tails, an account of the journey made by Cabeza de Vaca and
his three companions, from some point in Louisiana west of
the Mississippi River to Sonora on the Pacific slope, and to

^ It is of course impossible to be precise. The reports of the four survivors
are the only source of information on the ultimate fate of the expedition. The
expedition landed on the coast of Florida on Good Friday of 1528. Oviedo,^ij-
toria General J lib. xxxv. cap. i, p. 583. Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Naufra-
gios y Jornada que hizo a la Florida, I have not the original book, which was
published at Valladolid in 1555, and therefore quote the reprint by Vedia,
entitled Historiadores primitivos de IndiaSy vol. i. p. 518, cap. 3. Narvaez was
probably drowned. Oviedo, Historia^ vol. iii. p. 590. When Cabeza de Vaca
fell in with his companions, five years had elapsed. Ibid.^ p. 601 : "Que avia
cinco afios que lo avian dexado atras, donde se perdieron las barcas, que nunca
mas lo avian visto." Cabeza de Vaca, iVb«/9'^§7^j, cap. xvi. p. 529: "Fueron
casi seis anos el tiempo que yo estuve en esta tierra, solo entre ellos y desnudo,
como todos andaban." This brings the dispersion of the expedition, and the
reduction of its numbers to a very few men, to about 1530.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 25

present it with special reference to the geographical and other
information which the wanderers conveyed to Mexico. This
will involve also a discussion of the question whether Cabeza
de Vaca really discovered New Mexico or not. I may as well
state here, that the result of the latter inquiry will be nega-
tive, — that I shall prove that Cabeza de Vaca and his com-
panions never trod the soil of New Mexico, nor brought to
New Spain direct information touching the Pueblo Indians
of that territory. The negro Estevan, or Estevanico, was
the only one of the four who, three years later, entered upon
New Mexican territory. But he lost his life there at that
time, and what became known of the country afterwards,
and led to Coronado*s remarkable explorations, is due, not
to the ambitious and ill-advised African, but to Fray Marcos
of Nizza.^

Not much is known of Cabeza de Vaca beyond his career
in America, which was remarkably eventful and romantic. It
is stated, however, that he was a native of Xerez de la Fron-
tera in Spain, and that previous to the expedition of Pamphilo
de Narvaez he was living at Seville.^ He accompanied Nar-

1 Compare my publications on the subject, to which I shall refer in detail
later. I hope to be forgiven for referring to these essays of mine, which
have been of great service to me in the preparation of the present mono-
graph. They were written, one in 1885, the other in the summer of the year
following. They had been preceded by a publication on the same subject in
part, and in the German language, entitled Cibola^ which the Sunday edition of
the New Yorker Siaatszeitung printed in May, June, July, and October of 1885,
and in January, February, and March of 1886.

2 Researches in Spain could alone reveal something concerning the early
youth of Cabeza de Vaca, or concerning the later period of his life. There is at
my command merely the biographical notice in Vedia (Historiadores primitivos
de Indias^ 1852, vol. i. p. xviii et seq.)y the statements of Oviedo {Historia^ vol. iii.
p. 618), and those of Ternaux-Compans in his translation of the Naufragios en-
titled, Relation et Naitfrages d*Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, 1837 (Introduc-
tion). The biographical details are in another translation by the same, entitled,
Commentaires d^Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca (p. 3). As a specimen of the
unreliability of Ternaux, I quote his statement, " Alvar Nunez embrassa le
metier des armes." Everything proves rather the contrary.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


26 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

vaez in the quality of treasurer, quite a responsible office,
which shows that he was at that time already a person of
some consideration, or at least able to give a satisfactory ac-
count of himself.^ After his almost miraculous return to
Mexico, he went to Spain, in 1537, and was there appointed
"Adelantado" of the newly occupied regions of Paraguay.
Proceeding thither in 1540, he found himself soon in open
conflict with other officers. The disagreement became so
bitter, that he was finally arrested by some of his subordi-
nates, and forcibly dragged to Spain, where, however, he was
set free in the end, and even allowed a pension of two thou-
sand ducats. It seems he retired to Seville, where, if Enrique
de Vedia is correctly informed, he lived to the end of his days.*

1 The fact that he was treasurer of Narvaez's corps is everywhere stated. I
only refer here to one original document, the Relacion del Viaje de Panfilo de
Narvaez al Rio de las Paltnas hasta de la Punta de Florida, hecha por el Tesorero
Cabeza de Vaca (Doc.de Indias, vol. xiv. p. 265). The report proper is preceded
by a royal decree to Cabeza de Vaca, in which he is styled by the King " nuestro
factor del Rio de las Palmas e tierra que va a poblar Panfilo de Narvaez, a quien
habemos proveido de la governacion della."

2 On his career in Paraguay there is ample material in Oviedo, Herrera, and
Gomara. In addition to these, there is Cabeza de Vaca*s own statement, printed
in 1555, under the title of Comentarios de Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, Adelan-
tado y Gobernador del Rio de la Plata (reprint in Vedia, vol. i.). The state-
ment about the latter days of Cabeza de Vaca is from Vedia, Historiadores primi"
tivos (p. xxi) : " Fu^ tambien condenado Alvar Nunez k privacion de oficio y a
seis anos de destierro en Oran, con seis lanzas ; apel6, y en revista salio libre,
senalandole dos mil ducados de pension en Sevilla. Retirose d aquella ciudad,
en la cual fallecio ejerciendo la primacia del consulado con mucha honra y
quietud de su persona, ignorandose el aiio de su muerte." The Consulate of
Seville was quite a responsible office. It consisted of a " Prior " and one con-
sul, who were annually elected by those who traded with the Indies, freighters
and ship-owners. Their duty was to regulate and superintend the fitting out of
vessels, their cargo, and the trading with America in general. The election
took place annually. It was therefore an honorable office, but not a permanent
position. Compare in Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, 2d ed.,
1756, vol. iii. lib. ix. titulo vi. Temaux-Compans, in his Preface to Comment
taires (p. 3), also says he died at Seville, where he exercised the functions of
auditor. He quotes ^icolas de Techo, ylistoria Paraquarux, lib. i. cap. xiv.
adding, " J'ignore si ce renseignement est l5ien exact."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 2/

The year of his demise I cannot ascertain as yet, but it was
certainly later than 1564.^

In regard to Cabeza de Vaca's personal character, the
opinions of older writers differ ; still it is noteworthy that
the leading chroniclers, Herrera, Oviedo, and Gomara, speak
well of him.^ Were I to formulate a judgment, I would qual-
ify him as a well-intentioned man, rather visionary, ready
for any personal sacrifice, but out of place at the head of
an expeditionary corps. It was probably injudicious to in-
trust Cabeza de Vaca, who had never been a military man,
with such a difficult position as the one he occupied in
Paraguay. On the other hand, it is clear that the Crown
desired to reward him for all the hardships and sufferings he
had gone through in North America. But the position with
which he was rewarded was above his ability, and, like a great
many others, his failure to perform what he was incompetent
to undertake put an end to his career. It is stated that he
was at first sentenced to banishment at Oran. The fact
that this sentence was cancelled, and that he was completely
absolved, tends to show that he was rather a victim than a

1 I infer this from the Introduction to the Commentaires (p. 5) : " Trente-sept
ans se sont ^coul^s depuis cette longue et perilleuse expedition de la Floride,
durant laquelle Dieu k repandu sur moi des grices innombrables et si extraordi-
naires." If he counts the thirty-seven years from the beginning of the expedi-
tion, 1527, it brings the date of writing his commentaries to 1564; if from the
termination or his arrival at Mexico, he must have been alive yet in 1573. In
1536 he was already of mature age, for he says (Naufragios, p. 544) : "A ellos
[his three companions] se les hizo mal esto, excusandose por el cansancio y
trabajo ; y aunque cada uno de ellos lo pudiera hacer mejor que yo, por ser mas
recios y mas mozos."

^ It would require too much space to quote in detail. I merely refer to these
authors, and cite here also a writer who speaks strongly against Cabeza de Vaca
and his character. This is one of his own soldiers, a German^Ulrich Schmiedel, )
of Straubing. His book, of which I have but the French translation, under the
title, Histoire Vhitable ctun Voyage curieux fait par Ulrich Schmiedel de Straubing
dans VAmiriqtte ou le Nottveau Monde^ 1837, is in the Ternaux-Compans collec-
tion. He was a soldier under Cabeza de Vaca, of whose haughtiness and in-
efficiency he complains bitterly. See cap. xxxix., xl.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


28 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

cause of the disorders which occurred in Paraguay during his
administration.

Of the three companions of Cabeza de Vaca on the event-
ful wanderings to the Pacific slope, much less is known.
Andres Dorantes was a native of Bejar. Alonso del Castillo
Maldonado was a native of Salamanca. Estevan was not a
Moor, but a negro, •* an Arab negro," says Cabeza de Vaca
himself, " native of Azamor." ^

These four men may be considered as the sole survivors of
a considerable expeditionary corps destined for the conquest
and settlement of Florida. Cast on the shores of the Gulf of
Mexico, captured by Indians, they came together again, after
a separation of nearly six years, on the coast of Eastern Texas.
Previous to their meeting, they had had the most varied
experiences with the roving bands of Indians of Western
Louisiana and of that part of Texas bordering upon it. \ Ca-
beza de Vaca) at first roughly used by the savages, finally
became a pealer, and penetrated into the interior, that is,
towards the Red River of Louisiana. On these excursions
he saw the " hunchback cows," as he terms the buffalo in
his report, or " Relation." ^

1 Naufragios, p. 548. Oviedo (Hisioriay vol. iii. p. 618) makes an Arab of
him : " El quarto se llama Estevanico, de color, negro, alarabe, natural de
A9amor, en Africa."

2 Naufragiosy p. 529 ". " E ya con mis tratos y mercaderias entraba la tierra
adentro todo lo que queria, y por luengo de costa me alargaba cuarenta 6 cin-
cuenta leguas." Ibid.^ p. 532 : ** Alcanzan aqui vacas, y yo las he visto tres veces
y comido de ellas, y paresceme que seran del tamaiio de las de Espana ; tienen
los cuernos pequefios, como moriscas, y el pelo muy largo, merino, como una
bernia ; unas son pardillas, y otras negras, y a mi parescer tienen major y mas
gniesa came que las de aca. De las que no son grandes hacen los Indios mantas
para cubrirse, y de las may ores hacen zapatos y rodelas ; estas vienen de hacia
el norte por la tierra adentro hasta la costa de la Florida, y tiendense por toda
la tierra mas de cuatrocientas leguas ; y en todo este camino, por los valles por
donde ellas vienen, bajan las gentes que por alii habitan y se mantienen de ellas,
y meten en la tierra grande cantidad de cueros.'* That the buffalo descended
to very near the coast of Texas is also proved by Cavelier, Relation du Voyage


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 29

^Cabeza de Vaca appears to have been a successful trader.
He exchanged the products of the sea-coast, shells, shell-
beads, etc., for flint-flakes, red clay, hides and skins, and
other products of the regions inland.^ What proved to be
of greater ultimate value to him was that he became ac-
quainted with the Indian practice of medicine, he saw how
the sorcerer or medicine-man treated the sick, and he cer-
tainly acquired a practical knowledge of a number of useful

entrepris par feufMr, Robert CavelierSSieitr de la Salle ^ pour dicoievrir dans le
Golfe du Mixiqtie, V Embouchure du Fleuve de Mississippi, published by(Mr. Shea)
in 1858, pp. 11-14: ** Car on fit ensuite monter le vaisseau k Tentr^e d'une riviere
k laquelle on donna le nom de Vache, d cause qu*on y trouva quantity de ces
animaux." This was on the Rio Lavaca, near Matagorda Bay. ^aniel Coxe, ^
A Description of the English Province of Carolana, by the Spaniards called Florida,
and by the French la LouisianCy as also of the great and famous River Meschacebe or
Mississippi (Historical Collections of Louisiana^ French, vol. i. p. 226) : " When
you are ascended the river four or five leagues, when you come out of the agree-
able shade, you see a most beautiful country, only about six or eight miles dis-
tant, in which meadows the wild bulls and kine, besides other beasts, graze,
and in the heat of the day retire into these woods for shelter, where they chew
the cud." The followers of Hernando de Soto, although they reached the rim
of the plains west of the Mississippi and the buffalo country proper, did not see
the animal itself. Luis Hernandez de Bidema, Relacion de la Isla de Florida
(Doc. de IndiaSy vol. iii. p. 438) : " Tomamos otra guia, que nos llevo a una pro-
vincia, que se llama Hais, donde suelen acudir a tiempos algunas vacas ; y como
los indios nos vieron entrar por su tierra, comenzaron apellidar que matasen las
vacas que venian, y salieronnos a flechar e hicieronnos algun dano." The name
Hais recalls the tribe of the Ayays or Ays, about the Red River country and
Eastern Texas, as well as the central part of that state. Finally, Le Page du
Pratz, Histoire de la Louisiane^ 1758, vol. ii. p. 67: "On va ^ la chasse de cet
animal dans Thyver, et on s'ecarte de la Basse Louisiane et du Fleuve S. Louis,
parce qu'il ne peut y pendtrer, ^ cause de IMpaisseur des Bois, et que d'ail-
leurs il aime la grande herbe qui ne se trouve que dans les Prairies des terres
hautes."

1 Naufragios, cap. xvi. p. 529 : ** Lo principal de mi trato era pedazos de cara-
coles de la mar, y corazones de ellos y conchas, con que el los cortan una fruta
que es como frisoles, con que se curan y hacen sus bailes y fiestas ; y esta es
la cosa de mayor precio que entre ellos hay, y cuentas de la mar y otras cosas.
Asi, esto era lo que yo llevaba la tierra adentro ; y en cambio y trueco de ello
traia cueros y almagre, con que ellos se untan y tinen las caras y cabellos ; pe-
dernales para puntas de flechas, engrudo y canas duras para hacerlas, y unas
borlas que se hacen de pelos de venados, que las tinen y paran coloradas."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


30


ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.


substances which the savages employed in a purely empirical
way.^/

That the sufferings of the four castaways were almost su-
perhuman during this time cannot be doubted. We must re-
member, that they were among savages, and in a region which
those savages visited but temporarily, shifting their abodes
according to season in quest of the vegetable and animal
products which each season yielded,^ Nowhere, as long as

jTAlready on the island to which Cabeza de Vaca has given the name of Mai
Hado, the Indians attempted to persuade the Spaniards to become physicians.^
Naufragios^ p. 528 : " £n aquella isla que he contado nos quisieron hacer fisicos
sin examinarnos ni pedirnos los titulos, porque ellos curan las enfermedades so-
plando al enfermo, con aquel soplo y las manos echan de el la enfermedad, y
mandaronnos que hiciesemos lo mismo y sirviesemos en algo ; nosotros nos
reiamos de ello, diciendo que era burla y que no sabiamos curar, y por esto nos
quitaban la comida hasta que hiciesemos lo que nos decian. Y viendo nuestra
porfia, un indio me dijo a mi que yo no sabia lo que decia en decir que no
aprovecharia nada aquel lo que el sabia, ca las piedras y otras cosas que se crian
por los campos tienen virtud ; y que el con una piedra caliente, trayendola por
el estomago, sanaba y quitaba el dolor, y que nosotros, que eramos hombres,
cierto era que teniamos mayor virtud y poder.** This remark is characteristic of
the Indian.(A magic power, similar to the virtues of the plants, etc., is attributed
to man only because he is a higher being, and therefore supposed to have more
magic force naturally.y

2 Naufragiosj p. 528 : " Y como el tiempo que aqui estuvimos murio tanta
gente de ellos, en las casas habia muy gran hambre, por guardar tambien su cos-
tumbre y cerimonia ; y los que lo buscaban, por mucho que trabajaban, por ser
el tiempo tan recio, no podian haber sino muy poco ; y por esta causa los indios
que a mi me tenian salieron de la isla, yen unas canoas se pasaron a Tierra firme,
a unas bahias adonde tenian muchos ostiones, y tres meses del afio no comen
otra cosa, y beben muy mala agua. . . . Y asi estuvimos hasta en fin de abril, que
fuimos a la costa del mar, a do comimos moras de zarzas todo el mes." Ibid.^
p. 532 : " Cuando fueron cumplidos los seis meses que yo estuve con los cristianos
esperando a poner en efecto el concierto que teniamos hecho, los indios se fueron
a las tunas, que habia de alii donde las habian de coger hasta treinta leguas."
Oviedo, Hisioriay p. 601 : " Esta gente, despues que viene el verano, en fin de
mayo comen algun pescado, si les ha quedado de lo que escalan de los rios ave-
nidos ; e comiencan a caminar para comer las tunas, ques una fructa que en
aquella tierra hay en abundancia, e van mas de quarenta leguas adelante hacia
Panuco a comerlas." I might multiply evidences, but as they all prove the
same thing, namely, the erratic life led by the natives, I abstain from further
quotations.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 3!

they found themselves in the quadrangle bounded by the Gulf
on the south, the Mississippi on the east, the Red River on
the north, and the Trinity River on the west, did they come
in contact with agricultural people. Of what use, therefore,
could the emaciated Spaniards prove to their hosts and mas-
ters? These masters needed no help to till the land, and
the Spaniards were indifferent warriors without their own
weapons, very poor hunters with the bow and the arrow, and
inexpert fishermen. Besides, the numerous bands were often
at loggerheads, sometimes hereditary enemies. In trying to
improve their lot by deserting one horde and fleeing to an-
other, the fugitives frequently exchanged indifference and
toleration for brutal abuse.^

Cabeza de Vaca did not advance as far west as his com-
panions in misfortune until nearly seven years after the
first landing of the ill-fated expedition. His circumstances,
through his trading as well as through the experience he
acquired of Indian character and habits, had become at least
endurable. Wandering towards the Texan coast, he suc-
ceeded in meeting the other three at a point some distance
inland, whither the Indians were wont to go in order to
gather and eat the fruit of the prickly-pear, or Tuna. It
seems that the four had heard of each other at times, but
never had it been possible for them all to meet, as the In-
dians were wary and kept them apart. Thus Andres Do-
rantes had been alone for ten months, and Castillo and the
negro apart from him. Finally, the three met, and at last
also rejoined Cabeza de Vaca. This was in September, 1534,
and west of the Sabine River in Texas.^ Once together,

1 Therefore the significant remark [Naufragiosy p. 528), " Y mandaronnos que
hiciesemos lo mismo y sirviesemos en algoJ* (Italics are mine.) In regard to
the sufferings of the poor Spaniards, they are told at great length both by Ca-
beza de Vaca and the joint report contained in Oviedo. It would require too
much space to detail them here.

* Cabeza de Vaca had with him a companion, Lope de Oviedo, but he left him


Digitized by VjOOQIC


32 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

they began to form plans for their escape, which plans they
were able to carry out ten months later. They fled to another
horde, that spoke a different language, in the month of Au-
gust of 1535, and thence started on their peregrination. A
few days after, while with some Indians who were gathering
tunas, they came upon a little band of natives, who, not hav-
ing anything to eat themselves, gave them to understand that
farther on they would meet with a considerable horde which

soon, and thenceforward Cabeza de Vaca remained alone among the Indians
for some time. It was during this time that he began to peddle and to trade,
and this improved his position with the natives. NaufragioSy p. 529 : " Y por
esto yo puse en obra de pasarme a los otros, y con ellos me sucedio algo mejor ;
y porque me hize mercader, procure de usar el oficio lo mejor que supe, y por
esto ellos me daban de comer y me hacian buen tratamiento y rogibanme que
me fuese de unas partes a otras por cosas que ellos habian menester ; porque
por razon de la guerra que continuo traen, en la tierra no se anda ni se contrata.
. . . Y este oficio me estaba a mi bien, porque andando en el tenia libertad para ir
donde queria, y no era obligado a cosa alguna, y no era esclavo, y donde quiera
que iba me hacian buen tratamiento y me daban de comer, por respecto de mis
mercaderias, y lo mas principal porque andando en ello, y buscando por donde
me habia de ir adelante, y entre ellos era muy conocido: holgaban mucho
cuando me veian y les traia lo que habian menester, y los que no me conoscian
me procuraban y deseaban ver, por mi fama." In regard to the matter of meet-
ing, the two sources agree in the main. I select from the joint report as given
in Oviedo, Historia^ vol. iii. p. 6oi : ** Alii en aquellas tunas se tornaron k juntar
Castillo y el negro i Andres Dorantes, i se concertaron para se yr : e como
los indios nunca sosegaban ni estaban juntos, luego se yban cada uno por su
parte, i assi de nescessidad estos pecadores de chripstianos se apartaban con
sus amos. De forma que no podian efectuar su concierto i vol un tad (d lo menos
por estonces) i cada uno se fue por su parte con sus sefiores a comer aquellas
nueces, que avia muchas aquel ano ; pero Ilegados alii, vino Cabe9a de Vaca k
se juntar con essotros, que avia cinco anos que lo avian dexado atras, donde se
perdieron las barcas, que nunca mas lo avian visto : € alli se concertaron des-
pues que Cabe9a de Vaca Uego porque como es dicho estaban apartados i no
se podian comunicar sino en el tiempo de las tunas, aviendo que comer en el
campo : y estonces, estando muchas veces k punto para se yr, no parescia sino
que sus pecados se lo estorbaban, apartandolos k cada uno por su parte. Pas-
sados ya seys anos, € venia en el septimo ano el tiempo de aquella fructa de las
tunas, aunque cada uno destos chripstianos estaban apartados por si, cada qual
dellos escondidamente se fueron e aportaron la tierra adentro k cierta parte don-
de solian comer las tunas ; i los indios no yban alli estonces porque no las avia.
Y el Dorantes fue el primero que alli llego, e acaso hallo una gente de indios
que aquel mesmo dia avian alli venido, los quales eran grandes enemigos de los


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 33

was plentifully supplied with food. JAt nightfall the Chris-
tians indeed fell in with a camp of forty to fifty huts, and their
inmates approached the new-comers with signs bidding them
to cure the sick among their number through friction. The
Spaniards had observed that process before, and to humor
their hosts they proceeded to imitate it. To these manipula-
tions they added the sign of the cross, and also breathed upon
the sick, " and the Indians instantly felt relieved/' ^

otros con quienes avian estos chripstianos estado, i rescibieronle muy bien ; €
d cabo de tres 6 quatro dias que alii estaba, llego el negro que yba en su rastro,
^ Alonso del Castillo, que estaban juntos, i alii se concertaron de buscar a
Cabe9a de Vaca, que los esperaba adelante. £ vieron unos humos bien lexos,
^ acordaron que Dorantes y el negro fuessen d aquel humo, e quel Castillo
quedasse alii para asegurar los indios i que no creyessen que se yban : € dixeron-
les que yban por otro companero suyo, que creian estaba en aquellos huroos,
para lo traer alii a su compafiia, i que se quedasse Castillo hasta que volvies-
sen. Y ellos holgaron dello, y assi fueron e tovieron bien que andar hasta la
noche, que toparon con un indio que los llevo adonde Cabe9a de Vaca estaba,
e plugo k Dios que los indios se mudaron otro dia h, se pusieron mas cerca de
donde el Castillo avia qucdado, i alii se tomaron k juntar." Cabeza de Vaca
(in Naufragios^ p. 533) intimates that he knew of the vicinity of the other three ;
for the remainder he confirms the joint report: " Y d 13 dias del mes llegaron
adonde yo estaba Andres Dorantes y Estebanico, y dijeronme como dejaban 4
Castillo con otros indios que se llamaban anagados, y que estaban cerca de alii,
y que habian mucho trabajo, y que habian andado perdidos, y que otro dia ade-
lante nuestros indios se mudaron hacia donde Castillo estaba, y iban k juntarse
con los que lo tenian, y hacerse amigos unos de otros, porque hasta alii habian
tenido guerra, y de esta manera cobramos k Castilla.*' The date is fixed by the
joint report in Oviedo, Historiay pp. 602, 603. The meeting took place late m the
fall. "£ como era ya principio del invierno, ^ las tunas se acababan en los
campos con que avian de caminar, tovieron nescessidad de pasar alii aquel ano,
para aver algunos cueros con que se cubrir, que les decian que los hallarian ade-
lante : i pues estaban en camino ^ donde tenian mejor aparejo para quel sigui-
ente ano, venidas las tunas, pudiessen proseguir su propossito, sosegaron por
estonces dende primero de octubre hasta el mes de agosto del afio venidero."
That " ano venidero " was 1535, since in the year following they reached Culia-
can; so the meeting must have taken place in September, 1534. As to the part
of Texas where it occurred, it may be inferred from the subsequent statements
on the number of streams which they had to cross. It will be seen further on
that they crossed four rivers, and that these were the Trinity, Brazos, Colorado,
and Rio Grande ; hence the meeting must have taken place west of the Sabine
and east of the Trinity, or in Southeastern Texas.
1 Oviedo, Historiay p. 603 : " Llegado el mes de Agosto, ya estos tres hidalgos

3


Digitized by VjOOQIC


34 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

From this moment a new career lay open before the casta-
ways ; from wandering beggars and slaves among barbarous

tenian allegados algunos cueros de venados, i quando vieron tiempo aparejado,
huyeron con el tiento e secreto que les convino de la parte i. indios ques dicho
de susso." Cabeza de Vaca {Naufragios^ p. 533) gives the name of the tribe to
which they fled : '* Estos tienen otra lengua y Ilamanse avavares, y son aquellos
que solian llevar los arcos a los nuestros y iban k contratar con ellos ; y aunque
son de otra nacion y lengua, entienden la lengua de aquellos con quien antes
estabamos, y aquel mismo dia habian Uegado alia con sus casas." They were
not pursued, for, says Oviedo, Historian p. 603 : " E otro dia se mudaron € se vi-
nieron assi adelante a se juntar con otros indios, ^ los llevaron consigo, i yban d
comer los unos 6 los otros unos granillos que estonces maduraban ; € hay por
alii muy grandes monies de arboledas que llevaban essa fructa. £ alii se jun-
taron con los otros, ^ los chripstianos se passaron k ellos, porque era gente de
mas aca adelante € mas d propossito de su camino 6 intento.'* They were then
already determined upon pushing westward.

There is a discrepancy here between the statements of Cabeza de Vaca and
the joint report in Oviedo. The former says, ut suproy that there already they
were called upon by the Indians to cure their sick, whereas the latter speaks
of it as having happened only ten or twelve days later, and among a different
band. " £ alld fue donde primero comen9aran k temer e reverenciar k estos
pocos chripstianos 6 k tenerlos en mucho, 6 allegabanse k ellos i fregabanlos €
fregabanse k si mesmos, i decian por senas k los chripstianos que los fregassen
6 frotassen € los curassen, 6 los chripstianos lo hacian assi, aunque estaban
mas acostumbrados k trabaxos que k hacer miraglos. Pero en virtud de Dios
confiados, santiguandolos € soplandoles (de la manera que la hacen en Cas-
tilla aquellos que llaman saludadores). £ los indios en el momento sentian me-
joria en stts enfirmedades ; i dabanles de lo que tenian de corner,*^ (The Italics
are my own.)

About the treatment or manipulations performed by the four untrained doctors
Cabeza de Vaca says (Naufragios, p. 528) : "La manera con que nosotros cura-
mos era santiguandolos y soplarlos, y rezar un Pater Noster y un Ave Maria, y
rogar lo mejor que podiamos k Dios nuestro Sefior que les diese salud, y esperarse
en ellos que nos hiciesen algun buen tratamiento." That they added some other
methods peculiar to the Indian practice of medicine can hardly be doubted, for
the narrator in particular is too well informed on that subject not to have put in
practice some of his knowledge. Compare, for instance, on same page (cap.xv.) :
" La manera que ellos tienen en curarse es esta : que en viendose enfermos,
llaman un medico, y despues de curado, no solo le dan todo lo que poseen, mas
entre sus parientes buscan cosas para darle. Lo que el medico hace es dalle
Unas sajas adonde tiene el dolor, y chupanles al derredor de ellas. Dan caute-
rios de fuego, que es cosa entre ellos tenida por muy provechosa, y yo le he
expei'imentadoy y me suscedio bien de ello [Italics mine] : y despues de esto
soplan aquel lugar que les duele, y con esto creen que se les quita el mal."
Even the breathing was an Indian remedy.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 35

hordes, they became powerful medicine-men, who henceforth
commanded those at whose mercy they had been so long.^)

This being the fourth time that I discuss the story of Ca-
beza de Vaca's wanderings, I may be permitted to transcribe
here what, on a previous occasion and in a different tongue,
I have written on the subject of the strange cures which
he and his fellow travellers claim to have performed: —

" According to the pious tendencies of the time, Cabeza de
Vaca ascribes the numerous cures performed by him and his
friends to some miraculous intervention from above. The
truth of this modest interpretation I have not to discuss
here. Whatever may be the opinion of each one on this
point, and although there is hardly any doubt that the num-
ber and gravity of the cases may have been, unconsciously,
exaggerated, there is no reason to doubt the fact of the influ-
ential position thereby afforded to the Spaniards as supposed
physicians, and of the great importance this position had
during their subsequent journeyings. It is easy to become
a doctor and a wizard among Indians. [Whatever the latter
fails to comprehend appears to him as supernatural, and he
attributes it to some occult cause, either good or bad. In
the course of five years which I spent among the tribes of
the Southwest, among the sedentary tribes as well as among
nomads, I have often been called upon to assist patients, and
the simplest advice, the most commonplace remedy which had

1 This was very natural, it being a general custom among the Indians to re-
ward well the successful medicine-man. Cabeza de Vaca says so himself, Nau-
fragiosy p. 528. It is needless to quote here in regard to the fact, that henceforth
the Indians showed them the greatest attention, bordering upon superstitious
fear. Cabeza de Vaca says (p. 533), speaking in general : " Luego el pueblo nos
ofrescio muchas tunas, porque ya ellos tenian noticia de nosotros y como cura-
bamos, y de las maravillas que nuestro Sefior con nosotros obraba, que, aunque
no hubiera otras, harto grand eseran abrirnos caminos per tierra tan despoblada,
y darnos gente por donde muchos tiempos no la habia, y librarnos de tantos
peligros, y no permitir que nos matasen, y sustentarnos con tanta hambre, y poner
aquellas gentes en corazon que nos tratasen bien, como adelante diremos."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


36 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

a salutary effect, at once procured to me a practice, — which
I dropped as soon as possible. For, with the Indian, there
is but one step from the successful medicine-man to the
sorcerer, who kills and is killed in expiation ; and a single
unsuccessful treatment may have the gravest results for him
who has undertaken the cure."^)

Cabeza de Vaca and his friends had no faith in their own
skill and knowledge, but they were driven to the wall, and
must either attend to the patients thrust upon them, or bear
the most serious consequences of their refusal. They sub-
mitted to the inevitable, and attributed the good results to
Divine Providence.^ There is something touchingly modest
in this humility. But in proportion as their success became
more marked, the idea dawned upon them to make use of
the ascendency they were acquiring over their Indian hosts ;
not, as has been stated, for the purpose of gathering wealth,
which did not exist in the country and was least of all to
be obtained among savages ; but for the purpose of inducing
these savages to assist them in getting out of the country,
and if possible to Mexico.^


* La Dicotiverte du Noteveau Mixique, par le Moine Franciscain Frlre Mat'
cos de Nice en 1539 {Revue d* Ethnographie, 1886, p. 40).

2 Historiay vol. Hi. p. 603. Naufraj^ios^ p. 533.

8 Naufragiosy p. 533 : '* Y duro la fiesta tres dias por haber nosotros venido,
y al cabo de ellos les preguntaiiios por la tierra de adelante, y por la gente que
en ella hnbia." Ibid.y p. 541 : " A estos dijimos que queriamos ir £ la puesta
del soly y ellos respondieron que por alii estaba la gente muy lejos, y nosotros
mandabamos que enviassen d hacerles saber que nosotros ibamos alii, y de esto
se escusaron estos lo mas que ellos podian. . . . Mas no osaron hacer otra
cosa, y asi, enviaron dos mujeres, una suya, y otra que de ellos tenian captiva ;
y enviaron estas porque las mugeres pueden contratar aunque haya guerra ; y
nosotros las seguimos, y paramos en un lugar donde estaba concertado que las
esperasemos; mas ellas tardaron cinco dias; y los Indios decian que no debian
de hallar gente. Dijimosles que nos llevasen hacia el norte, respondieron de la
misma manera, diciendo que por alii no habia gente sino muy lejos; y que no
habia que comer ni se hallaba agua ; y con todo esto, nosotros porfiamos y di-
jimos que por alii queriamos ir, y ellos todavia se excusaban de la mejor manera


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 37

This thought was evolved but slowly, and in the mean time
they continued shifting their abode, in company with the
Indians; also moving from one horde to another occasion-
ally, in their new rdle of great "medicine-men,*' following
the coast at some distance, and travelling as nearly as pos-
sible to the west. In this manner they unconsciously drifted
away from the sea-shore, since the coast of Texas, from the
mouth of Trinity River on, bends around to the south, de-
scribing almost an arc of a circle.

They now came in sight of " mountains," among which
there was a chain that seemed to run directly to the north.
They had already crossed one river, now another one lay in
their path ; yet they were not very far from the coast, since
the Indians living near the foot of the mountains sent for the
coast people to come and witness the wonders performed by
the new-comers.^ They also judged that mountain range to

que podian, y por esto nos enojamos, y yo me sali una noche i, dormir en el
campo, apartado de ellos ; mas luego fueron donde yo estaba, y toda la noche
estuvieron sin dormir y con mucho miedo y hablandome y diciendome cuan
atemorizados estaban, rogandonos que no estuviesemos mas enojados, y que
aunque ellos supiesen morir en el camino, nos Uevarian por donde nosotros
quisiesemos ir ; y como nosotros todavia fingiamos estar enojados y porque su
miedo no se quitase, suscedi6 un caso estraiio, y fue que este dia mesmo adoles-
cieron muchos de ellos, y otro dia siguiente murieron ocho hombres. Por toda la
tierra donde esto se supo hobieron tanto miedo de nosotros, que parescia en ver-
nos que de temor habian de morir." This is quite in keeping with the Indian
character. Such superstition is very common, and the examples are very numer-
ous where a circumstance of this kind, a striking coincidence, has completely
cowed a whole tribe for a time. Touching the matter of presents, Cabeza de
Vaca says (p. 540) : " Y de todo ello nosotros tomabamos un poco, y lo otro
dabamos al principal de la gente que con nosotros venia, mandandole que lo
repartiese entre todos."

1 Until then, they had not seen any mountains. Cabeza de Vaca, Naufragios,
P- 533 .' " No vimos sierra en toda ella tanto que en ella estuvimos." From
Oviedo, (Hisioria, vol. iii. p. 605,) it would seem that they saw these "moun-
tains " in September : " Cerca de alii estaban las sierras, 6 se parescia una
Cordillera dellas que atravessaba la tierra derechamente al norte; e de alii los
llevaron i estos chripstianos otras cinco leguas adelante, hasta un rio que
estaba al pie de la punta donde comen9aba la dicha sierra. . . . E luego aquella


Digitized by VjOOQIC


38 archjEOLogical institute.

be no farther from the sea than about fifteen leagues.^ After
proceeding northward for some distance (eighty leagues),
they turned to the west.^ Here the Indians gave them a
few cotton mantles and a brass (?) rattle or bell, and here
again they had a river to cross. The mantles and the bell
(so the Indians stated) had come to them from the north.
In the mountains they found trees covered with edible nuts.^

noche enviaron k Uamar gente abaxo hacia la mar, y el dia siguiente vinieron
mucbos hombres e mugeres i ver estos christianos ^ su3 miraglos, € i traerles
cosas que les dieron.*'

1 Naufragios, p. 539 : ** Aqui empezamos d ver sierras, y parescia que venian
seguidas de hacia el Mar del Norte, por la relacion que los Indios de esto nos
dieron, creemos que estan quince leguas de la mar." The expression " Mar
del Norte " refers, not to the North, but to the Atlantic Ocean, and it is an
open question yet whether the ridges did not perhaps run east and west, in
place of from north to south as the statement in the preceding note would
indicate. The terms Norte. Sur, as often indicate the East and the West, in
old documents, as they do the other two cardinal points.

2 These details are from the joint report in Historian p. 606 : " E desta manera
fueron por la halda de la Sierra ochenta leguas, poco mas 6 menos, entrandose
por la tierra adentro derecho al Norte ; € alii toparon al pie de la sierra quatro
ranchos de otra nascion 6 lengua, que decian que eran de mas alii la tierra
adentro, i que yban de camino para su tierra, . . . ^ otro dia se metieron por
la sierra hacia el Hueste 6 Poniente." The Naufragios (p. 540) states : " Y de
aqui por la halda de la sierra nos fuimos metiendo por la tierra adentro mas de
cincuenta leguas . . . y atravesamos una sierra de siete leguas."

* This is stated by both sources, Naufragios^ p. 540, and Historia^ p. 606.
It was in that vicinity that they began to carry gourds along with them, that is,
rattles made of gourds. This was another imitation of Indian practice of medi-
cine, says Cabeza de Vaca (Naufragios^ p. 540) : ** Y cuando llegamos cerca de
las casas, sali6 toda la gente k recebirnos con mucho placer y fiesta, y entre
otras cosas, dos fisicos de ellos nos dieron dos calabazas, y de aqui comenzamos
a llevar calabazas con nosotros, y anadimos a nuestra autoridad esta cerimonia,
que para con ellos es muy grande." In regard to the edible nuts I shall be
more detailed further on, for the present I limit myself to the following from
Naufragios^ p. 540 : " Hay pqr aquella tierra pinos chicos, y las pifias de ellas
son come huevos pequenos, mas los pinones son mejores que los de Castilla,
porque tienen las cascaras mas delgadas; y cuando estan verdes, muelenlos
y hacenlos pellas, y ansi los comen ; y si estan secos, los muelen con cascaras, y
los comen hechos polvos.** I shall merely note here, that this does not at all
agree with the supposition, that these " Pinones " were the fruit of the New
Mexican Pinus edulis.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 39

Thpir fame had grown to such an extent, that the In-
dians followed them in throngs without distinction of tribe
or language. They were hospitably and reverently treated
everywhere.^ ( It is an interesting and ethnologically most
instructive spectacle, that presented by these four Chris-
tians, three white men and one black, lost and apparently
forsaken among savages, and yet travelling along protected
by the spell which unexpected success threw around them.
It explains how, in times long previous, Indian medicine-men
who had achieved great fame might finally wield a power
over distant tribes, safely travelling over an extensive terri-
tory. It is easy to conceive from this example, furnished to
us within historic times, how Indian diviners, magicians, or
prophets might become the guides of their own people and
lead them into distant lands.^ In this respect, the journey
of Cabeza de Vaca and his fellow sufferers is an important
hint for the obscure tales of wanderings of Mexican tribes
under the guidance of particular wizards, who afterwards
became mythical personages, and finally hero-gods.^ ^

During all these wanderings, they never met a buffalo, but
heard of the existence of the " cows " in regions farther north.
It is impossible to determine exactly the date when they at
last reached a river, on the banks of which, a few days' jour-
ney to the north, the buffalo was said to roam. Here they
found a few more substantial Indian lodges, inhabited by
people who raised calabashes and beans.* But no maize or

1 This is stated so frequently that I forbear quoting.

2 I refer here especially to the mysterious figures of Gukumatz, Quetzal-
cohuatl, Camaxtli, and others, in Mexico and Central America, Nemterequeteba
in New Granada, Pose-Ueve and Pusha-Iankia in New Mexico, and others.

* Compare, on the subject of Mexican hero-gods, my Archaological Tour into
Mexico^ pp. 168-200.

* Naufragiosy p. 542 : " Y llamamosles de las Vacas, porque la mayor parte
que de ellas mueren es cerca de alii ; y porque aquel rio arriba mas de cincuenta
leguas, van matando muchas de ellas." Thereabouts, he says they met " casas
de asiento " whose inhabitants had *' frisoles y muchas calabazas para comer y


Digitized by VjOOQIC


40 archjEological institute.

Indian corn had so far been met with by them, except in
very small quantities. On the other hand, buffalo robes were
rather plentiful, as far as the Indians could be understood.
Maize was cultivated far to the north and northwest, and to
the westward there lay beyond the river on whose banks the
Spaniards found themselves a desert expanse of considerable
breadth.^ Afraid to turn down this river towards the sea, and
equally in doubt as to the advisability of penetrating very
far to the northward, persuaded also that by continuing in
a westerly direction they must eventually reach the Pacific
Ocean and perhaps their countrymen, the Spaniards resolved
to follow this river, which was the last one encountered by
them on their journey previous to reaching Sonora.^

para tracr agua." Oviedo, Historia General^ vol. iii. p. 608 : " £ continuaron
su camino hasta sus casas, que estaban cinco 6 seys leguas de alii en aquel rio,
donde sembraban ; pero por la mucha gente que avia, e la poca tierra € muy
aspera, era poco lo que cogian ; ^ por aquel rio arriba los llevaron a quatro mana-
das de pueblos que avia. Tenian poco de comer, y esso eran fesoles € calaba9as
i poquito mahiz, e no tenian ellos en que guisarlo ; pero hacian macamorras
(que son como puches 6 poleadas) en unos calabo9os grandes."

1 Historia^ p. 609: "AUi les dixeron que adelante no avia mas harina ni
fesoles, ni cosa de comer, hasta treynta 6 quarenta jornadas mas adelante, que
era yendo de la parte donde se pone el sol hasta el norte, de donde aquellos
Indios avian avido 6 traido aquella simiente ; € que todos los Indios que hasta
alii avia, tenian mucha hambre, i que avian de yr por aquel rio arriba hacia el
Norte otras nueve 6 diez jornadas, sin cosa de comer, hasta atravessar el rio que
de alii avian de atravessar, todo lo demas avian de yr al Hueste 6 Poniente
hasta donde avia mahiz, ^ mucjio, I que tambien lo avia hacia la mano derecha
al Norte, i mas abaxo por toda aquella tierra debia ser d la costa, segun des-
pues paresci6 ; pero que era muy mas lexos." In Naufragios^ p. 542 : ** Tam-
bien nosotros quesimos saber de donde habian traido aquel maiz, y ellos nos
dijeron que de donde el sol se ponia, y que lo habia por toda aquella tierra ;
mas que lo mas cerca de alii era por aquel camino. Preguntamosles por donde
iriamos bien, y que nos informasen del camino, porque no querian ir alii ; dijeron-
nos que el camino era por aquel rio arriba hacia el norte, y que en diez y siete
jornadas no hallariamos otra cosa ninguna que comer, sino una fruta que Uaman
chacan. . . . Pasados dos dias que alii estuvimos, determinamos de ir k buscar
el maiz, y no quesimos seguir el camino de las Vacas porque es hacia el Norte y
esto era para nosotros muy gran rodeo, porque siempre tuvimos cierto que yendo
k la puesta del sol, habiamos de hallar lo que deseabamos."

* See previous note. That this river was the last one of any importance which


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 4 1

Marching slowly up its eastern banks, for fifteen or seven-
teen days, they crossed the river to the west,^ and after more
than twenty days of a wearisome journey in the direction of
the setting sun, at last, in the heart of a vast mountain region,
came to Indian settlements of some permanence. Some of
the houses were of sod with mud roofs, but the majority of
matting or tressed leaves. Here they found an abundance
of Indian corn, corn meal, beans, calabashes, and other forms
of food.2 From this point onward the villages were usually
two days' march from each other, and in each of them they
rested for a day or two.^ Everywhere they were received
as powerful medicine-men, feasted, and presented with gifts
by the inhabitants, who thrust their sick upon the Chris-
tians. From ten and more leagues* distance the patients
were brought, and the presents consisted, not only of food,
but especially of cotton mantles and also of some turquoises.*

they met east of the Yaqui is clear from the texts of Natifragios, pp. 542, 543 ;
and Historiay p. 610 et seq,

1 Cabeza de Vaca says positively (p. 542) : ** Por todas las diez y siete jor-
nadas que nos habian dicho. Por todas ellas el rio arriba nos dieron muchas
mantas de vacas . . . y ansi pasamos todas las diez y siete jornadas,y al cabo de
ellas atravesamos el rio, y caminamos otras diez y siete. A la puesta del sol,
por unos llanos, y entre unas sierras may grandes que alii se hacen," etc. His-
torian p. 609, speaks of fifteen : " i dende alii atravesaron al Hueste 6 Poniente."

2 Naufragios, p. 542 : " Acabadas estas jomadas, hallamos casas de asiento,
adonde habia mucho maiz allegado, y de ello y de su harina nos dieron mucha
cantidad, y de calabazas y frisoles y mantas de algodon. . . . Entre estas casas
habia algunas de ellas que eran de tierra, y las otras todas son de esteras de
canas." Historia, p. 609 : " fi llegado d las primeras casas, donde avia mahiz, que
seria mas de doscientas leguas de Culuacan. . . . Alii les dieron mucha cantidad
de mahiz € harina tostada e f^soles i calaba9as ^ otras semillas, i de las otras
cosas que solian tener. 1^ tenian estos Indios algunas casas pequefias de tierra,
fechas de tapias con sus terrados, las mas de petacas (petaca qui ere decir cesta) :
assi que serian como emplentas, 6 cosa texida de hojas de palmas 6 bexucos,
li otra traba9on semejante "

* Historia^ p. 609 : " Desta manera fueron mas de ochenta leguas e de tres d
tres dias ^ de dos k dos dias llegaban d pueblos, i descansaban un dia 6 dos en
cada pueblo."

* Ibid, Also Naufragios, p. 543.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


42 archjeological institute.

After traversing the mountains, (whose width they estimate
at eighty leagues,^) they arrived in a valley where the hearts
of deer were offered to them. To this valley they conse-
quently gave the name of Valley of the Hearts (Valle de los
Corazones).^ They remarked, that throughout the whole
of these mountains, while the men went mostly naked, the
women were very decently dressed, with a skirt made of
deer-skin reaching as low as the feet, while the chest was
covered with some kind of a cotton wrapper.^

Green stones, called turquoises and even emeralds by the
adventurous travellers, were in the hands of these Indians
of the mountains. As the Spaniards asked whence these
trinkets came, they were informed that they were brought
from the distant north, where people lived who dwelt in
very large houses, and with whom they occasionally traded
for the green stones in exchange for parrot plumes.*

1 Ibid.

2 Historia, p. 6io: "Pues passadas las sierras ques dicho, llegaron estos
quatro chripstianos . , , k trcs pueblos que estaban juntos i pequenos, en que
avia hasta veynte casas en ellas, las quales eran como las passadas e juntas . . .
k, este pueblo, 6 mejor diciendo pueblos juntos, nombraron los chripstianos la
Villa de los Cora9ones, porque les dieron alii mas de seyscientos cora9ones
de venados escaldados ^ secos." Naufragiosy p. 543.

• Historia^ p. 610: " Toda esta gente, desde las primeras casas del mahiz,
andan los hombres muy deshonestos, sin se cobrir cosa alguna de sus personas;
€ las mugeres muy hones tas, con unas say as de cueros de venados hasta los
pies, i con falda que detras les arrastra alguna cosa, i abiertas por delante
hasta el suelo y enla9adas con una correa. £ traen debaxo, por donde estan
abiertas, una mantilla de algodon i otra encima, i unas gorgueras de algodon,
que les cubren todos los pechos.**

* Naufragiost p. 543 : ** Dabannos tambien muchas cuentas y de unos corales
que hay en la mar del sur, muchas turquesas muy buenas que tienen de hacia
el norte ; y finalmente, dieron aqui todo quanto tenian, y d mi me dieron cinco
esmeraldas hechas puntas de flechas, y con estas flechas hacen ellos sus areites
y bailes : y paresciendome k mi que eran muy buenas, les pregunt^ que donde
las habian habido, y dijeron que las traian de unas sierras muy altas que estan
hacia el norte, y las compraban k trueco de penachos y plumas de papagayos, y
decian que habia alii pueblos de mucha gente y casas muy grandest' Historia
(p. 610) mentions the large houses and the turquoises, but is silent on the point


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 43

The Valley of the Hearts contained three small villages.^
Here they were visited by Indians from the Pacific coast,
whose homes were at a distance of twelve to fifteen leagues.^
As usual, they never travelled alone, crowds of natives escort-
ing them from place to place. Proceeding thirty leagues
farther, they reached a great river, the first one they had met
since they crossed the one near which the hunchbacked cows
were roaming. From what they subsequently learned, this
river had already been discovered by Nuflo de Guzman, and
was none other than the Yaqui of Sonora.^

It was about Christmas of 1535 when the Spaniards
reached the Yaqui. Heavy rains, which lasted two weeks,
caused them to stay there.* While among the Yaquis, they
saw two objects made of iron that could only be of Spanish
origin. Inquiring about them as well as it was possible, they
were informed that other people, like them, had come into
the country before, and had made cruel war upon the natives.
But the place where these white men might be found was
described as lying very far to the south, and indeed the Span-
iards found out that at least one hundred leagues separated

of the parrots' feathers. But on page 618, Oviedo refers, in his review of Cabeza
de Vaca's book, to the emeralds (?) and to the plumes, etc.
1 See note 3, page 42.

* Historia, p. 610.

» Cabeza de Vaca in Naufragios^ p. 1544 : " Desde aqui, que se llama el Rio
de Petatan, hasta el rio donde lleg6 Diego de Guzman, puede haber hasta ^l
desde donde supimos de cristianos, ochenta leguas ; y desde alli al pueblo donde
nos tomaron las aguas, doce leguas." Historian p. 610 : ** Hasta un rio que des-
cubrio Nuno de Guzman. . . . Despues de aqueste pueblo fueron trejmta leguas
hasta este rio ya dicho." The name Diego de Guzman is neither a misprint nor
a mistake made by Cabeza de Vaca. It was indeed Diego de Guzman, who, as
" capitan elegido y nombrado por el muy magniiico Senor Nufio de Guzman,"
reached the Rio Yaqui first. Proceso del Marques del Valley de Nuno de Guzman,
etCy Doc, de Indias, vol. xv. pp. 322 and 333.

* Historia^ p. 611 : " fi alli les llovi6 quince dias i les fiie for9ado parar y era
por nauidad." Naufragios, p. 543 : " En este pueblo estuvimos tres dias, y k una
Jornada de alli estaba otro, en el cual nos tomaron tantas aguas, que porque un
rio crescio mucho, no lo podimos pasar, y nos detuvimos quince dias."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


44 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

them from the abodes of their countrymen.^ All this dis-
tance had to be made by following the coast, at an average
distance of thirty miles. The country was torrid, but it was
winter, and they suffered less on account of the heat than
from lack of food, the inhabitants not having planted anything
of late.2

Without attempting to fix precisely dates that are but
vaguely indicated, I shall limit myself to the statement that
in the latter half of the month of April, 1536, near the banks

1 Historia^ p. 6i I : ** AUi vido Castillo k un indio una hevilleta de cinto 6 tala-
varte i un clavo de herrar colgado del poscue9o como por joyel, ^ tom6sele ; 6
preguntaronle los chripstianos que qu^ cosas eran aquellas, i respondi6 que
otros hombres, como aquellos chripstianos, avian llegado alii con caballos i lan-
9as y espadas; i seiialaban como los alan^eaban i los mataban d los indios. . . .
£ dende donde les llovio hasta los chripstianos avia cient leguas 6 mas.*' Nau-
fragios^ p. 543 : ** En este tiempo Castillo vi6 al cuello de un indio una evilleta de
talabarte de espada, y en ella cosido un clavo de herrar ; tomoselo, y pregunta-
mosle que cosa era aquella, y respondieron que unos hombres que traian barbas
como nosotros, que habian venido del cielo, y llegado d aquel rio, y que traian
caballos y lanzas y espadas, y que habian alanceado dos de ellos ; y lo mas di-
simuladamente que podimos les preguntamos qu^ se habian hecho aquellos hom-
bres, y respondieronnos que se habian ido k la mar, y que metieron las lanzas
por debajo del agua, y que ellos se habian tambien metido por debajo, y que
despues los vieron ir por cima hacia puesta del sol.*' Cabeza de Vaca, p. 544,
estimates the distance at ninety-two leagues.

* NcntfragioSf p. 544: "Andovimos mucha tierra, y toda la hallamos despobla-
da, porque los moradores de ella andaban huyendo por las sierras, sin osar tencr
casas ni labrar, por miedo de los cristianos. Fu^ cosa de que tuvimos muy
gran lastima, viendo la tierra muy fertil y muy hermosa y muy llena de agua y de
rios, y ver los lugares despoblados y quemados, y la gente tan llaca y enferma,
huida y escondida toda ; y como no sembraban, con tanta hambre, se mantenian
con cortezas de arboles y raices. De esta hambre k nosotros alcanzaba parte en
todo este camino, porque mal nos podian ellos proveer estando tan desventura-
dos, que parescia que se querian morir.*' Also Historiay p. 61 1 : " fi dende el
pueblo de Corafones hasta alli siempre fueron costeando, diez 6 doce leguas
metidos en tierra; y en aquellas cient leguas en algunas partes avia de comer y
en otras mucha hambre, que no comian sino corte9as de arboles € otras rai9es,
i malas Venturas, k causa de lo qual estaban tan llacos ^ sarnosos que era las-
tima verlos. £ causdbalo que decian que avian entrado por alli los chripstianos
tres veces, € les avian llevado la gente i destruydo los pueblos; y estaban tan
temori9ados ^ medrosos que no osaban parescer en ninguna parte, sino aqui uno
i aculla otro."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 45

of the Rio de Petatlan in Sinaloa, the wanderers at last came
within reach of the Captain Diego de Alcardz and twenty
soldiers, who were out on a slave-hunting foray.^ Alcaraz
had been unsuccessful so far. He, his escort, as well as the
Indians who accompanied him, were famished, and quite lost
in the labyrinth of woods and rocks. Their previous incur-
sions had frightened away the few aborigines who formerly
dwelt there.2 When Cabeza de Vaca and the negro, who had
gone ahead of the others in search of their countrymen, came
in sight of the little camp, Alcariz and his men felt at first
quite alarmed. When, however, they recognized the new-

1 I forbear entering into many details. The place is indicated by(Fray Anto-
nio TeliOt^isforia de la Nueva Galicia (Documentos, Ycazbalceta, vol. ii. p. 358) :
'* Y siguiendo sus huellas desde Yaquimi, en los Ojuelos, una Jornada mas ac4
de Sinaloa, alcanzaron al capitan Lazaro Cebreros." Still, this might not refer
to the first meeting, as Cebreros was not with Alcardz at the time. From the
original sources it is impossible to determine the exact locality. The Naufragios
(p. 544) say : '* Y otro dia por la manana alcance cuatro cristianos de caballo,
que recebieron gran alteracion de verme tan extraiiamente vestido y en compania
de indios, . . . y asi, fuimos media legua de alii, donde estaba Diego de Alcardz,
que era el capitan." Historia^ p. 612 : " £ Uegado donde los chripstianos esta-
ban, que serian hasta veynte de caballo, quedaron admirados y espantados de ver
al Cabe9a de Vaca, ^ mucho mas de oyrle, e aver passado por tantas tieiras ^
diverssas gentes e lenguas." The approximate date results from \Herrera, I^at-
toria General^ vol. iii. p. ii, Decada vi. lib. i : "I de todo lo demas aqui referi-
do hicieron declaracion, con juramento ante Elscrivano k quince de Maio de este
Ano ; i haviendo estado alii quince Dias descansando para caminar cien leguas."
From the first meeting to the arrival at Culiacan, nearly two weeks, if not more,
elapsed, so that it must have been about the end of April when they fell in with
Alcardz and his troupe. There existed in Spain a document giving the exact
date (IIistoria,-p.6i2)'. "fi assi estos otros les pidieron por testimonio de la
manera que venian e traian aquella gente de paz 6 de buena voluntad que los
seguian ; y ellos se lo dieron por fe i testimonio, el qual se envi6 a Sus Mages-
tades." Cabeza de Vaca says (Naufragios^ p. 545) : " Y pedi que me diesen por
testimonio el ano y el mes y el dia que alii habia Uegado, y la manera en que
venia, y ansi la hicieron."

^Naufra^'os)^'^. 544 :" Y despues de haberlo hablado, me dijo que estaba muy
perdido alii, porque habia muchos dias que no habia podido tomar indios, y que
no habia por donde ir, porque entre ellos comenzaba d haber necesidad y ham-
bre." Historiay p. 612 : " £ porque essa gente de espanoles avia dertos dias que
no podian aver un indio ni persona, i tenian nescessidad de bastimento para los
caballos."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


46 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

comers as their own people, and had listened to the wonder-
ful story of their woes and ultimate triumph over so many and
such formidable obstacles, instead of attending to the wants
of the sufferers, they at once bethought themselves of tak-
ing advantage of them and of their Indian retinue for the
most sordid purposes. Alcardz was out of supplies and lost
in the wilderness, and had he limited his demands to food, no
reproach could have fallen upon him. But as soon as the
four Spaniards were in his power he insisted upon their be-
traying the Indians, who had followed them thus far in good
faith, in order that his men might enslave them without resist-
ance.^ This Cabeza de Vaca and his companions indignantly
refused. Thereupon Alcariz determined to send them to the
Alcalde Cebreros, under guard. His object was to separate
the Christians from their Indian suite, so as to have his hands
free towards the latter. But Cabeza de Vaca informed the
natives of the impending danger, and the latter, leaving be-
hind provisions, hastily retreated from a spot where their
freedom and their lives were so gravely threatened.^ This

1 Cabeza de Vaca is bitter in his complaints. Naufragiosy p. 545 : " Alcar^
me rog6 que enviasemos k llamar la gente de los pueblos que estan d vera del
rio, que andadan escondidos por los montes de la tierra, y que les mandasemos
que trujesen de comer, aunque esto no era menester, porque ellos siempre tenian
cuidado de traernos todo lo que podian, y enviamos luego nuestros mensajeros
k que los llamasen, y vinieron seiscientas personas, que nos trujeron todo el maiz
que alcanzaban, y traianlo en unas ollas tapadas con barro, en que lo habian
enterrado y escondido, y nos trujeron todo todo lo mas que tenian, mas nosotros
no quisimos tomar de todo ello sino la comida, y dimos todo lo otro a los cristi-
anos para que entre si lo repartiesen ; y despues de esto, pasamos muchas y
grandes pendencias con ellos, porque nos querian hacer los indios que traimos
esclavos, y con esto, al partir, dejamos muchos arcos turquescos que traiamos,
y muchos zurrones y flechas y entre ellas las cinco de las esmeraldas, que no se
acord6 de ellas ; y ansi, las perdimos."

2 It is again Cabeza de Vaca who is outspoken about it. Naufragios, p. 545 :
" Dimos k los cristianos muchas mantas de vaca y otras cosas que traiamos ;
vimonos con los indios en mucho trabajo porque se volviesen k sus casas y se
asegurasen, y sembrasen su maiz. . , . Despues que habiamos enviado k los indios
en paz, y regraciadoles del trabajo que con nosotros habian pasado, los cristianos


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 47

further incensed the two officers, and Cebreros resorted to
harsh treatment. He dragged the four travellers into remote
portions of the wilderness, hoping thus to extort compliance
with his infamous demands. But they remained firm, and,
inured to still greater hardships than those to which they
were now exposed, offered a stolid resistance which convinced
Cebreros that all violence would prove fruitless. So he sent
them at last to the post of Culiacan, where the considerate
and kind treatment extended to them by the Alcalde Mayor
and commander, Melchior Diaz, a man as brave as he was
humane,^ put an end to one of the most remarkable peregrina-

nos enviaron (debajo de cautela) 4 un Cebreros, alcalde, y con ^1 otros dos ; los
cuales nos llevaron por los montes ydespoblados por apartarnos de la conversacion
de los indios, y porque no viesemos ni entendiesemos lo que de hecho hicieron ;
donde paresce cuanto se enganan los pensamientos de los hombres, que nosotroa
andabamos k les buscar libertad, y cuando pensabamos que la teniamos, sucedio
tan al contrario, porque tenian acordado de ir a dar en los indios que enviabamos
asegurados y de paz ; y ansi como lo pensaron, lo hicieron ; llevaronnos por aquellos
montes dos dias, sin agua, perdidos, y sin camino, y todos pensamos perescer dc
sed, y de el la se nos ahogaron siete hombres, y muchos amigos que los cristianos
traian consigo no pudieron llegar hasta otrodia amediodia adonde aquellanoche
hallamos el agua ; y caminamos con ellos veinte y cinco leguas, poco mas 6 me-
nos, y al fin de ellas llegamos i un pueblo de indios de paz, y el alcalde que nos
llevaba nos dejo alia, y ^1 pas6 adelante otras tres leguas, a un pueblo que se
llamaba Culiacan, adonde .estaba Melchor Diaz, alcalde mayor y capitan dc
aquella provincia."

^ See preceding note. Also Historia^ p. 613 : " Llegados pues estos chripsti-
anos, ocho leguas antes de la villa, d un valle Poblado de Paz, sali6 d ellos el
alcalde mayor de la villa, llamado Melchor Diaz, ^ los rescibio muy bien, i dando
gracias 4 Dios por las maravillas que con estos hidalgos avia obrado." Herrera,
Histaria General^ Dec. vi. p. 10 : " Aportaron con gran sed, i trabajos k Culia-
can, adonde era Melchor Diaz Capitan, i Alcalde Maior de aquella Provincia, que
con mucha humanidad los recibio con lagrimas," etc. Cabeza de Vaca himself
says (p. 546) : ** Y nos habl6 y trat6 muy bien ; y de parte del gobernador Nuno
de Guzman y suya nos ofresci6 todo lo que tenia y podia; y mostr6 mucho sen-
timiento de la mala acogida y tratamiento que en Alcardz y los otros habiamos
hallado, y tuvimos per cierto que si ^1 se hallara alii, se excusara lo que con
nosotros y con los indios se hizo." Melchior Diaz is a man less known and
therefore less appreciated than he deserves. Three years later, he was intrusted
by the Viceroy with the delicate and difficult task of pushing as far as Zuni
if possible, in order to verify the reports brought home by Fray Marcos of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


48 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

tions known in the annals of travel and adventure. Their
journey from the Gulf of Mexico to the Pacific slope in Sina-
loa had lasted ten months.^ It had been preceded by eight
years of untold hardships and constant danger from every
imaginable source. They arrived at Culiacan, as nearly as
I can ascertain, about the first days of May (old style).^ Fif-
teen days afterwards they left for Compostella, the chief
place at the time of the province of New Galicia.* Thence
they went to the city of Mexico, everywhere received and
treated with marked attention. The negro Estevan remained
in Mexico, whereas Cabeza de Vaca and the others sailed from
Vera Cruz for Spain on the loth of April (old style), 1537,
strongly recommended to the King by the Viceroy Don An-
tonio Mendoza.* Cabeza de Vaca never returned to North
America. Of his subsequent fate I have already spoken.*

Nizza. See, in the Appendix to Voyage de Cibola^ the Deuxtinu Lettre de Don
Antonio de Mendoza a CEmpereur Charles F., April 17, 1540, pp. 292-297. The
year following ( 1 540) he set out from the Sonora River valley and crossed South-
western Arizona into Southern California, where he died from a wound acciden-
tally received. Castafieda, Voyage de Cibola, p. 105.

1 Historia, p. 604.

2 Herrera, Hist, General^ Dec vi. p. 10. Cabeza de Vaca, Haufragios, p. 547.

• Naufragios^ p. 547.

* Antonio de Mendoza, Carta d la Emperatriz, participando que vienen d Es-
pana Cabeza de Vaca y Francisco Dorantes^ que se escaparon de la Armada de Panfilo
de Narvaezy d hacer Relacion de lo que eti ella sucediS, February 11, 1537 (Doc. de
Indicts, vol. xiv. p. 235) : " Y 4 suplicar d Vuestra Magestad, que teniendo respeto
& lo que en esto han trabajado y padecido, y 4 la voluntad que tienen de continu-
allo alld y aca, donde se les mandare, les haga algunamerced ; y por parescerme
cosa justa su gratificacion, y ser ellos personas tan honradas y en quien cabe,
escrevf esta para suplicaros d Vuestra Magestad les mande hacer en lo que se
les ofreciere toda la merced que hubiere lugar, porque demas de haber tambien
merecido lo que se les hiciere, sera animar k otros que la hagan lo mismo."
Cabeza de Vaca and Dorantes attempted to sail from Vera Cruz as early as Oc-
tober, 1 536, but the vessel was stranded, and so they waited until spring. At
last, on the loth of April, 1537, they sailed for Havana, reaching Lisbon on the
9th of August. Naufragios, pp. 547 and 549. Also Historia (p. 614) has the
date of 1539, which is an evident error.

^ Cabeza de Vaca never returned to Mexico. Dorantes,"Tiowever, appears to
have been there the year following.


Digitized byCjOOQlC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 49

This is a brief sketch of the journey, which, as will be here-
after seen, led to the ultimate discovery of New Mexico. It
remains to be investigated which route the adventurous wan-
derers took, and* that investigation will, in turn, determine
whether or not it is true, as has hitherto been admitted,
that Cabeza de Vaca was the first European to tread New
Mexican soil. I have already stated, as a result of previous
studies, that the prevailing notions are incorrect, and that he
never set foot on New Mexican territory as the term is un-
derstood to-day. I shall add here, that he never claimed, as
little as did his companions, to have seen or visited any of the
sedentary tribes whose peculiar culture and condition have
become so characteristic of New Mexico.

There are a few points in the itinerary above sketched
which are of decisive value in the discussion of it, and are
placed beyond all controversy by the statements of the trav-
ellers. These are : —

1. That they began their journey in Eastern Texas, and
near the coast.

2. That during their peregrination, they always remained
south of the range where the buffalo was wont to roam.

3. That the mean direction of their course was from east
to west.

4. That, until they entered the broad mountain chain
through whose gaps or valleys they emerged upon the slope
of the Pacific, they had constantly been travelling among and
with roaming savages, and that the first clusters of more
permanent settlements were met with by them in that great
mountain region, as well as to the west of it, near the shores
of the South Sea.

5. That the place where they received the first intimation
of the proximity of Spaniards was situated on the Yaqui River
of Sonora, and at no great distance from the coast

4


Digitized by VjOOQIC


50 archjEOlogical institute.

No. I and No. 5 give us the terminal points of the journey.
No. 2 limits the belt through which they travelled to a zone
in the southern part of the United States of to-day. It also
excludes all possibility of their having impinged upon South-
ern New Mexico, and particularly upon the region inhabited
by the Pueblo Indians.

To re-establish the itinerary with complete accuracy is
quite impossible. It was written, not as a journal, for they
had no means of recording anything on their trip, but as
recollections, sufficiently fresh, however, to admit of tolerable
accuracy, provided it was done in good faith. Nothing in
their reports indicates that they wilfully exaggerated or mis-
represented, taking into consideration their extraordinary
sufferings and the state of physical as well as mental exalta-
tion which the terrible strain upon body and mind cannot
but have produced. The wonderful cures which they relate
are no evidence of studied deception on their part. The in-
terpretation given by them to their unexpected success in the
art of healing and curing was in accordance with the spirit
of the times, and the conditions of knowledge at that epoch.
I therefore regard their relations as reliable in the main,
though of necessity sometimes confused, and often unsatis-
factory in precision and detail. This lack of prolixity speaks
in favor of their truthfulness.

It is worthy of note, that after the four castaways had met,
and had determined upon striving to reach the part of Amer-
ica where they might find settlements of their own people,
they did not, in all their wanderings, cross any river of such
proportions as might correspond to the width and depth of
the Mississippi, or of any other large stream in the central
and Southern States of the Union. One river particularly is
mentioned as being " wider than the Guadalquivir in Seville,
and they crossed it all up to the knee and thigh, and for a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 51

length of more than two lances up to the breast, but with-
out peril/* ^ Of this same character all the other rivers
which they crossed must have been, else they would have
mentioned any notable difference.^ They consequently did
not have to cross the Mississippi, but found themselves be-
yond its mouth even previous to their meeting. The last
remnants of the expedition to which they belonged perished
very probably in the neighborhood of the Mississippi Delta,
and somewhat west of it, and the survivors, completely at
the mercy of the Indians, were tossed to and fro between
bands moving no great distance from the coast or to the
west. Once united and bent upon their westward progress,
they took care to note, not only the size, but also the num-
ber, of the streams they had to cross, and this number is
given by them at four.^

They were the Trinity, the Brazos, the Colorado, and the

1 HistoHa^ p. 604 : " fi antes que el sol se pusiesse llegaron d un rio, que 4 su
parescer era mas ancho que Guadalquivir en Sevilla, € passaronlo todo d la
rodilla ^ al muslo,e obra de dos lan^as en luengo dlos pechos, pero sin peligro."
NaufragioSy p. 538 : '* Partimos de alii llevandolas por guia, y pasamos un rio
cuando ya vino la tarde, que nos daba el agua d los pechos; seria tan ancho
come el de Sevilla, y corria muy mucho." It is the general character of South-
western streams to have wide beds in proportion to their depth. It is note-
worthy also, that they lay stress upon this particular river for its size and the
depth of its current, as well as its velocity. Neither corresponds with the Mis-
sissippi nor with the Red River, taking into consideration (as far as the latter is
concerned) that they were still close to the coast, whereas the Red River empties
into the Mississippi at a distance of no miles north of the nearest point on the
shore. Neither did the expedition of Narvaez, as long as it was together, cross
the Mississippi. That they should have passed its mouth without noticing it
is quite possible, from the state of utter helplessness in which they were, com-
pletely adrift and at the mercy of wind and waves in their frail boats.

2 Only twice there is a qualification : Naufragiosy p. 540, " d la ribera de un
muy hermoso rio"; p. 541, "y al cabo dellas un rio muy grande, que nos daba
d los pechos."

^ Previous to their meeting, many bays, lagunes, and streams are mentioned.
All were, however, in the vicinity of the shore. Afterwards during their pere-
grinations we find only four rivers which they crossed, the last of the four being
the one near the region where the buffaloes were said to roam.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


52 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Rio Grande del Norte.^ All these streams are fordable dur-
ing the winter months, and it was in fall and winter that
the Spaniards performed their journey through Texas. In
another place I have written as follows on this subject, and I
have nothing to alter in the opinions there expressed : —

** They travelled five days, crossing a river * wider than
the Guadalquivir at Seville,' and quite deep. This was the
Trinity. Three days' march west of this river they began to

1 It must be borne in mind, that the average direction of their wanderings was
from east to west. Consequently, the streams which they crossed must have
flowed, on an average also, from north to south. The only country in the
southern part of North America where four water-courses of the particular kind
mentioned by Cabeza de Vaca and his companions would have to be crossed
successively on a journey from east to west is Texas, and they can only have been
the Trinity, the Brazos, the Colorado, and the Rio Grande. That the Nueces
should not be counted will appear from the direction they took, which carried
them to the mouth of the Pecos, consequently so far north that the Nueces
must have appeared to them as a mere creek. That the Pecos would not be men-
tioned becomes evident from what I shall develop further on, so that the Trinity
as the first, and the Rio Grande as the last, of the four rivers indicated are the
only identifications possible. The Trinity was the one described as being as large
as the Guadalquivir at Seville (see note I, page 51). The Erazos was the next, of
which Cabeza de Vaca says (Naufragios, p. 539) : " Y nosotros caminamos por el
rio arriba." And the joint report preserved in Oviedo (Historia, p. 604) : ** Hasta
un rio que estaba al pi^ de la punta, donde comen9aba la dicha sierra." The
river which the joint report in Oviedo (Historia^ p. 606) mentions as within a
mountainous region is the Colorado, which indeed traverses a series of heights
(appearing like low mountains in comparison with the extensive levels of Texas)
between Austin and San Saba. Of it Cabeza de Vaca says (p. 540) : '* Y atravesa-
mos una sierra de siete leguas y las piedras de ella eran de escorias de hierro ;
y d la noche llegamos k muchas casas, que estaban asentadas a la ribera de un
hermoso rio.*' This would also indicate volcanic rocks. Finally, the last river
mentioned {Naufragios, p. 542, Ilistoria, pp. 608, 609), after traversing (N^aufro'
gios, p. 541) a very dry expanse of mountainous country, was the Rio Grande.
At the end of this region, whose width is given at fifty leagues, he mentions
another river, *' muy grande, que el agua nos daba & los pechos." The joint
report does not mention it, and I have only accepted what is contained in both
sources. In case Cabeza de Vaca is right, then there were five streams, the first
of which was the Nechez, the second the Trinity, the Brazos the third, the Colo-
rado the fourth, and the Rio (Jrande del Norte the last. In either case, the
ultimate geographical result is the same.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 53

see mountains, one range of which seemed to sweep directly
northward. One day farther, or 'five leagues farther on/
they reached another river, *at the foot of the point where
the said mountains commenced.' That river was the Brazos,
and by * mountains ' the hills of Central Texas must be under-
stood. Cabeza de Vaca says he estimated the distance of
these mountains from the sea to be fifteen leagues (forty
miles). People from the coast came in one day to visit
them.

" Here they changed their direction, and moved northwards
along the base of a * mountain chain/ and partly away from
water-courses, eighty leagues according to the joint report,
fifty according to Cabeza de Vaca. The last estimate is more
likely, for the journey was painful and slow, and they expe-
rienced great scarcity of food, as well as of water. In this
manner they reached the vicinity of Fort Graham. Here
they changed their route, making towards sunset again.

"Including prolonged stays among Indian hordes, our
Spaniards consumed nearly two months in these wander-
ings, so that it was November when they began to move
westward again. Guided by sunrise and sunset, they con-
sequently followed a line south of west, it being now late in
the fall. The farther they advanced, the greater became that
southerly deflection. They crossed the Colorado, and finally
struck a large river, to which they gave the name *Rio de
las Vacas,' or River of the Cows, since the buffalo herds were
said to roam more than fifty leagues up the river.

" This is the last stream mentioned in either of the rela-
tions. It was evidently the Rio Grande.

*' Here both reports become extraordinarily diffuse, al-
though the joint narrative is less so than Cabeza de Vaca's
book. Still, it is easily discernible that the Spaniards struck
the Rio Grande without crossing the Pecos, therefore below


Digitized by VjOOQIC


54 archjEOLogical institute.

or very near the mouth of the latter. Refusing to go due
north where the ' cows ' were, they followed the eastern bank
for fifteen (the Nattfragios have seventeen) days. The moun-
tains were to the north, and during this tramp they suffered
much from hunger. At the end of fifteen or of seventeen
days they crossed the river to the west. The distance from
the mouth of the Pecos to Presidio del Norte (where the
Rio Conchos empties into the Rio Grande) is about two
hundred and fifty miles, a reasonable stretch for fifteen days
of wearisome and difficult foot travel. I conclude, therefore,
that they crossed the Rio Grande about Fort Seaton. There-
after their route lay towards sunset again, and no more water-
courses are mentioned/'^ That is, until they reached the
banks of the Yaqui.

In the sixteenth century, the buffalo never reached the
shores, of the Rio Grande del Norte.^ This seems to

\Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca^ the first overland Traveller of European Descent^
and his Journey from Florida to the Pacific Coast^ 1 528-1536. /in the Magazine
of Western History^u]y, 1886, p. 330 et seqJ^

3 There is abunoant proof of this. In 1581, Francisco Sanchez Chamuscado
with eight soldiers accompanied three Franciscan friars up the Rio Grande to
New Mexico, and they met the buffalo quite far to the east of that river, in the
great plains east of the Sierra de Sandia and the Sierra del Manzano. Testi-
nionio dado en Mejico sobre el Descubrimiento de doscientas leguas adelante, de leu
. Mincts de Santa Barbola, etc. (Doc, de IndiaSy vol. xv.). In the following year, An-
tonio de Espejo marched up the Rio Grande from near the mouth of the Con-
chos to Bernalillo in New Mexico, and found no trace of the great quadruped,
whereas upon his return down the Rio Pecos he saw large herds of them along
the latter stream. Relacion del Viage (same volume). In i590,Gaspar Castano
de Sosa marched up the Pecos River, after crossing the Rio Grande, and he saw
tracks of the buffalo only on the former. Memoria del Descubrimiento que GaS'
par Castano de Sosa, hizo en el Nuevo Mexico (same volume). In 1598, Oiiate
again followed the Rio Grande upwards, from a considerable distance below El
Paso del Norte, and saw no trace of the buffalo along its banks. Discurso de las
lomadas que higo el Campo de Su Magestad desde la Nueva Espaha d la Pravincia
de la Nueva Mexico {Doc, de IndiaSjVoX, xvi.). This is very natural, since the
banks of the river afford no room nor subsistence for the immense herds of .
cattle. Between El Paso and Presidio del Norte, the country is forbidding and
very sterile, with hardly any grass, and mostly rocky.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 55

militate against the assumption that that river was the last
stream which they met (of any importance) previous to their
striking Sonora. But the texts of both of the main sources
indicate that the ' cows ' were not on the river which they
followed for about seventeen days.^ It is certain that they
never saw the buffalo themselves, except Cabeza de Vaca,
who saw them in the Red River country, but the Indians on
the Rio Grande told them that they roamed " three days* dis-
tance from there." ^ It is well ascertained that the buffalo
used to descend along the Pecos to near the mouth of that
river.8 Therefore the Spaniards must have struck the Rio
Grande a little below its junction with the Pecos, and the
reports which they gathered concerning the vicinity of the
great quadruped applied to the Pecos,* owing to the near

1 Here a close comparison, not only of the texts of both sources, but of the state-
ments contained in each, is necessary. Nau/ragiosy p. 542 : " Y porque aquel rio
arriba mas de cincuenta leguas, van matando muchas de ellas." But further on
(cap. xxxi., same page) we find the following significant passage, the main por-
tion of which I italicize : '' Pasados dos dias que alii estuvimos, determinamos
de ir a buscar el maiz : Y no quesimos seguir el camino de las vacas porque es
hacia el norte ; y esto era para nosotros tnuy gran rodeo.** They therefore fol-
lowed the river for seventeen days : " Y ansi pasamos todas las diez y siete
jornadas, y al cabo de ellas atravesamos el rio.*' This shows that the river on
which were the " cows " was not the same as the one which the Spaniards fol-
lowed. Historia^ p. 609: "iS assi fueron por este rio arriba las nueve jornadas,
cada dia caminando hasta la noche, con grandissima hambre." The Indians on
that river told them, " que eran ydos & comer las vacas, tres jornadas de alia
en unos llanos entre las sierras que decian venian de arriba hacia la mar." The
plain which is here mentioned corresponds to the level through which the Pecos
flows in Northwestern Texas. The mountains are the Sierra Apache, Sierra
Guadalupe, Pahcut, and the others of that wild and arid region between the
Pecos and the Rio Grande, south of the New Mexican boundary.

2 Cabeza de Vaca alone gives a description of the ** cows." Already Oviedo
notices this, Historia^ p. 617. (See note above.)

• This results from the reports quoted in note 2, page 54. In 1684, Juan
Dominguez de Mendoza crossed over from the mouth of the Conchos to the
Pecos River, and on the loth of January, ten days after leaving the Rio Grande,
he saw the first signs of the buffalo. Diario del Viaje a la Junta de los Rios y
hasta el Rio de Pecos, MS., fol. 8.

* Otherwise Cabeza de Vaca would not have made the distinction between


Digitized by VjOOQIC


56 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

proximity of both rivers, of which, however, they saw but the
larger one. Furthermore, their journey up the river exposed
them to many hardships, owing to lack of food. The In-
dians had hardly anything to cat, still less wherewith to feed
guests,^ and while buffalo robes were plentiful, the animal
itself was said to exist " three days' journey from there in
plains among mountains which they said descended from
higher up towards the sea, and that they themselves went
thither also." These plains between mountains are the plains
through the western edge of which the Pecos approaches
the Rio Grande ; the mountains are the maze of arid chains
covering the triangle formed, in the extreme northwest of
Texas, by the Rio Grande and the Pecos.

The upper course of the Rio Brazos, perhaps on the thirty-
second parallel of latitude, appears therefore to have been the
most northerly point reached by the wanderers on their pere-
grinations. This is also the latitude of the southern boundary
of New Mexico ; but they struck that parallel at least four
degrees of longitude east of the southeastern corner of the
New Mexican territory, and thence declined to the southwest
to two and a half degrees farther south. As long as they
were east of the Rio Grande, or on the soil of the United
States of to-day, Cabeza de Vaca and his friends remained
far out of reach of New Mexico. In addition to the geo-
graphical and zoographical evidences above given, there is
further proof derived from the statements of the travellers
concerning the flora of the country, and the condition of the
aborigines with whom they came in contact. As long as
they were together on the coast, and even for some time
afterwards, they place much stress upon several nutritive
plants which were characteristic of the vegetation, and at the

the river on which the cows were, and the one whose banks they afterwards .
followed.

1 Naufragios^ p. 542. ffistoria, p. 608.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 57

same time prominent means of subsistence for the Indians.
Prominent among these are the mesquit {Prosopis juiiflord)
and the cactus, or prickly pear {Opimtia)} Neither of
these plants appears in Eastern Texas towards the Indian
Territory in any great abundance, and yet the natives were
wont to leave the coast and go inland in order to subsist
for months on the tuna or cactus fruit ; and the beans of the
mesquit are mentioned, time and again, as one of the prin-
cipal means of subsistence of these hordes during certain
periods of the year. Such statements can only apply to
Southern and Central Texas. .

Again, a small tree or shrub is mentioned bearing edible
nuts. At first glance, the Pifton, or Pinus edulis, may be
thought of, — a tree which is almost specifically New Mexi-
can; but the shell of these "Pifiones'* was soft and edible
also.^ This proves that the tree must have been a cedar,
the fruit of which is also used by the Pueblo Indians and
other tribes of New Mexico. This tree or shrub occurs in
Northern Texas.

The travellers strongly insist upon the almost total ab-

1 The descriptions are full and accurate. Not only the Tuna is mentioned,
but the name Mezquite, also Mezquisez, appears in both reports. Historian
p. 604, and possibly p. 609. Naufragios, p. 538 : ** Este Mezquisez es una fruta
que cuando est4 en el arbol es muy amarga, y es de la manera de algarrobas y
comese con tierra, y con ella esta dulce y bueno de comer."

2 That these cannot have been the New Mexican Piiiones is quite clear.
Naufragios^ p. 540: "Hay por aquella tierra pinos chicos, y las pinas de ellas
son como huevos pequeilos, mas los pinones son mejores que los de Castilla,
porque tienen las cascaras muy delgadas ; y cuando estan verdes, muelenlos y
hacenlos pellas, y ansi los comen ; y si estan secos, los muelen con cascaras, y
los comen hechos polvos." Historia, p. 606 : " E dieronles alii mucha cantidad
de pinones tan buenos y mejores que los de Castilla, porque tienen las cascaras
de manera que las comen con lo demas : las pinas dellos son muy chiquitas, ^ los
arboles llenos en aquellas serranias en cantidad." This does not at all agree
with the New Mexican ** Pinon." I am unable as yet to find out whether there
is a species of pinon in Texa^. At all events, if there is, it appears to be dif-
ferent from the northern kind.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


58 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

sence of maize or Indian corn as long as they remained to
the east of the Rio Grande. On the banks of that stream
they were finally told that to find corn in any abundance
it was necessary for them to go westward, and also to the
north, a long distance.^ What the Indians planted were
beans and calabashes, and even these grew only in small
quantities, as the soil was very poor.^ Had they ever come
in contact with the New Mexican Pueblos they would have
told a different story.

The Indians themselves whom the castaways met and
cured, and who voluntarily accompanied them as escort
from band to band, or from camp to camp, are plainly
described as being the merest savages. Nowhere is there
any mention of houses of mud or stone. Only lodges made
of boughs or leaves — the rudest huts — are spoken of.
These Indians led an erratic life, wandering to and fro at
will, or according to the necessities of life. Nothing in the

1 In the vicinity, or on the banks perhaps, of the Rio Grande, there was a
little corn, but there were no plantations of it. Naufragiosy p. 542 : " Pregunta-
mosles como no sembraban maiz ; respondieronnos que lo hacian por no perder
lo que sembrasen, porque dos anos atras les habian faltado las aguas y habia
sido el tiempo tan seco, que a todos les habian perdido los maices los topos, y
que no osarian tornar d sembrar sin que primei o hubiese llovido mucho ; . . .
tambien nosotros quesimos saber de donde habian traido aquel maiz, y ellos nos
dijeron que de donde el sol se ponia, y que lo habia por toda aquella tierra ;
mas que lo mas cerca de alii era por aquel camino." Historia, p. 609 ; " Alii
les dixeron que adelante no avia mas harina ni fesoles, ni cosa de comer, hasta
treynta 6 quarenta jornadas mas adelante, que era yendo de la parte donde se
pone el sol hasta el Norte, de donde aquellos indios avian avido 6 traido aquella
simiente; € que todos los indios que hasta alii avia, tenian mucha hambre . . .
todo lo demas avian de yr al Hueste 6 Poniente hasta donde avia mahiz, ^
mucho, e que tambien lo avia hacia la mano derecha al Norte.*' The first plan-
tations of corn they found in the Sierra Madre. Historia, p. 609: "£ fueron
mas de otras veynte hasta el mahiz por gente algo hambrienta, pero no tanto,
porque comian uno» polvos de hierbas, i mataban mucha caja de liebre." This
was while they were crossing Chihuahua from the Rio Grande to the mountains
in the west.

2 This is positively stated, and in so many places that it would be superfluous
to quote in detail.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 59

picture made of these nomads corresponds in the least to
the sedentary tribes of New Mexico. There is not even an
indication that the Spaniards, while east of the Rio Grande,
heard of the Pueblos and their strange, characteristic many-
storied dwellings.^

Cabeza de Vaca has given a list of tribes, which contains a
great number of names.^ I have not as yet been able to

1 The only place where they foand dwellings slightly more substantial was
on the Rio Grande. Historia^ p. 608 : " Las quales lo llevaron a un rio donde
hallaron gente i casas € assiento; i algunos fesoles i calaba9as que comian,
aunque may poco." Naufragios^ p. 542. It is not surprising that on the Rio
Grande there should have lived Indians in more permanent abodes. It was m
this vicinity that, forty-six years later, Espejo met the Jumanos Indians, of whom
he says {Relacion del Viagey Doc. de IndiaSt vol. xv. p. 168) : " En que parecia
habia mucha gente y con pueblos formados, grandes en que vimos cinco pueblos
con mas de diez mil indios y casas de azutea, bajas, y con buena traza de
pueblos.'' These Jumanos recollected the passage of Cabeza de Vaca and his
companions through their country: " Respondieron que de tres Christianos, y un
negro que auian passado por alii, y detenidose algunos dias en su tierra,'* etc. It
is very significant, also, that they mention houses of mud for the first time in the
Sierra Madre. Historian p. 609; '^ £ tenian estos indios algunas casas pequenas
de tierra." Naufragios^ p. 543 : " Entre estas casas habia algunas de ellas que
eran de tierra." Had these not been ^t first ones which the Spaniards saw on
the whole journey, they would scarcely have made such special mention of them.
It is also stated in Historia^ p. 610: "E tambien les parescio que aquellos terra-
dillos e andar las mugeres en habito tan honesto, lo aprendian i tomaban della
[from the coast of the Pacific]." This shows that until then they had not seen
aiw houses of earth or stone.

(Another point which is in itself almost decisive is the statement that until
they entered the Sierra Madre they nowhere saw pottery in use or in the hands
of the natives. On the Rio Grande, where they found the most substantial
dwellings, Cabeza de Vaca remarks) (A^aw/ra^iVj, p. 542): "Ellos no alcanzan
ollas, y para cocer lo que ellos quieren comer, hinchen media calabaza grande
de agua, y en el fuego echan muchas piedras de las que mas facilmente ellos
pueden encender, y toman el fuego ; y cuando ven que estan ardiendo, toraanlas
con Unas tenazas de palo, y echanlas en aquella agua que esti en la calabaza,
hasta que la hacen hervir con el fuego que las piedras llevan ; y cuando ven
que el agua hierve, echan en ella lo que han de cocer, y en todo este tiempo no
hacen sino sacar unas piedras y echar otras ardiendo para que el agua hierva
para cocer lo que quieren, y asi lo cuecen." Historia^ p. 608. Had the trav-
ellers met the New Mexican Pueblos, they would have seen pottery, and un-
doubtedly have mentioned it.

2 NaufragioSf cap. xxvi.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


6o ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

identify a single one of them. This is not surprising. Texas
was not explored by the Spaniards until one hundred and
fifty years later, and among roaming Indians it is extremely
difficult to recognize the name of a band or horde after such
a lapse of time. Besides, we do not know to what extent the
appellatives left us by Cabeza de Vaca, or those furnished by
yuan Dominguez de Mendoza.'Ki 1684,^ are genuine names or
only surnames, — to what extent they were recognized by the
tribe, or only applied to it by some neighbor, whether friend
or enemy.

It remains now to trace the course of the Spaniards on the
west side of the Rio Grande, and to see whether perhaps on
ithat side they penetrated into New Mexico.

I believe I have established that the crossing of the
stream which now divides the State of Texas from the Mexi-
can States of Chihuahua and Coahuila was effected at the
junction of the Rio Conchos with the Rio Grande, or near
Presidio del Norte in Chihuahua. . Thence onward their
course was westward, declining to the south. Presidio del
Norte itself is more than two degrees south of the New
Mexican boundary line ; it lies even outside the limits of
the territory as they were during the Spanish domination.^
It is therefore equally impossible that Cabeza de Vaca ever
could have trod New Mexican soil on the west side of the
Rio Grande. His route led him across the central portions
of the State of Chihuahua to the Pass of Mulatos in the
Sierra Madre. The time spent in traversing that arid
country — twenty days — agrees with the distance fairly

1 DiartOf MS., fol. 46. The list given of the tribes of Texas by ^Pedro de
Rivera) in his Diario y Derrotero de lo Visto y Caminado^ etc., 1736, p. 67, is to

some extent only a copy of the one by Dominguez de Mendoza.

2 These limits were the Boquillas, 40 leagues (108 miles) south of El Paso
Rivera. Diario, p. 27. In 1836 Pedro, Garcia Conde fixes the northern limits
of Chihuahua at lat. 32° 57'. Ettsayo Estadistico sobre el Estado de Chihuahua,
p. 7. Presidio del Norte is south of that line.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 6 1

well ; and the short description of the condition of the ab-
origines whom the Spaniards met on their passage is very
well put: "And from there they went to the west, or setting
sun, more than twenty days more, through people that were
famished, though not as much [as those previously spoken
of], because they ate powdered herbs, and killed a great
many hares." ^ In a straight line, the eastern flanks of the
Sierra Madre are not more than two hundred miles from
the mouth of the Conchos. It is self-evident that the route
taken was not a perfect air-line, and that consequently they
travelled a greater distance. They must have kept on the
north side of the Conchos River, else they would have
mentioned it. The country has some beautiful valleys, — at
least now, when such spots have been improved for sites of
ranchos, haciendas, and a few settlements. But by far the
greater portion of the country which the Spaniards then
traversed must have produced upon them the impression of
an arid waste.^ It was only when they ascended the foot-
hills of the Sierra Madre, and penetrated into the deep
gorges and valleys of that extensive mountain area, that a
fertile land met their eyes, and at last they found Indians
settled in small but more permanent villages, — Indians who
cultivated maize, who owned turquoises, although in small
quantities, and who traded parrot's feathers for green stones,
far in the north. The houses of these Indians were made
of palm-leaves tressed and plaited, and some of the buildings
had earthen walls and a dirt roof.^

1 Historia, p. 609. For a description of that part of Chihuanua as it was
sixty years after Cabeza de Vaca's passage, compared Juan de Onate,\9;Vf*/rx^ de
las JomadaSy pp. 236-243 ; also Caspar Perez de Villagran, Historia de la
Nveva Mexico, 1610, fol. 85-115. The sufferings of the Spanish corps com-
manded by Onate, and of the various reconnoitring parties sent out by him,
were dreadful.

2 The country was not inhabited ; bands of Indians, Conchos, Tarahumares,
Tobosos, etc., merely roamed through it.

« The joint report in Historia (p. 609) expressly says the houses were small :


Digitized by VjOOQIC


62 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE,

All this is significant, and enables us to identify the region,
though not the exact locality.

A species of large green parrot ^ inhabits the pine forests
of the Sierra Madre as far north as latitude 30°. I have
often seen it in the solitudes of the heart of this vast chain,
early in the morning, fluttering from tree-top to tree-top, and
saluting the dawn of day with its discordant cries and ani-
mated conversation. North of the Sierra Madre no species
of the parrot tribe is permanent, — hardly even an occasional
visitor.

Palms are found in the Sierra Madre and its tributary
chains. They are especially fan-palms, and the houses of
the aborigines of Sonora were often made of that material.^

" Casas pequeiias de tierra, fechas de tapias con sus terrados." Tapia means
sod^ not adobe.

i It is called " Guacamayo," or Macaw, by the natives. Whether or not it is
the green macaw, Ara ambigiis, catalogued by(Sr. Jesus Sanchez,\ln ti\^ Datos
para d Catalogo de las Aves que viven en Mixico y su Distribuciin Geogrdfica
(in Anales del Museo Nacional, vol. i. no. 2, p. 94), as extant in the Southern
Mexican States, I cannot, of course, determine I have seen the A. ambigus
in Oaxaca, and the green parrot in the heart of the Sierra Madre, west of the
Casas Grandes (on the summit of the Puerto de San Diego), but neither suffi-
ciently near me to permit a comparison.

2 At Arizpe, in the valley of Sonora, there is one specimen of the so called
date-palm. The fan-palm I have seen, together with the scrubby oak, at
Bacachi, in Eastern Sonora; and small specimens of the date-palm on the
crest of Bacatehac, between Granados, on the Upper Yaqui River, and the
village of Bacadehuachi, on the outskirts of the Sierra Madre. All these
places are northwest of Mulatos. That the huts of the natives of Sonora were
frequently of palm leaves, also of yucca, is well established already in the
sixteenth century. Castaiieda, Voyage de Cibolay p. 256: "On nomme cette
province Petatlan, parce que les maisons sont faites en Petates (nattes de jonc).
Cette mani^re de bdtir est la meme pendant deux cent quarante lieues, jusqu'i
Tentr^e du ddsert de Cibola." By "desert of Cibola" the eastern part of
Arizona, between the Little Colorado and the Rio Gila, is meant. The Jesuit
(Andres Perez de Ribas,yn his classical work on the Missions of Sonora, etc.,
entitled, Historia de los Trivmphos de Nuestra Santa Fee, etc., 1545, lib. i. cap. ii.
p. 6) : '* Estas [the houses] hazian, vnas de varas de monte hincadas en tierra,
entretexidas, y atadas con vejucos, que son vnas ramas como de 9ar5aparrina,
muy fuertes, y que duran mucho tiempo. Las paredes que hazian con essa


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 63

The interior of the Sierra Madre is strewn with remains of
Indian hamlets and cave dwellings, and with the traces of
small garden-beds. Not all of these ruins antedate the time
of Spanish occupation. The Jovas, a branch and dialect of
the Opatas,^ dwelt in scattered clusters in the interior of
the chain, almost due west of Presidio del Norte. Tyopari,
Satechi, Servas, now in ruins, were Jova and Opata villages,
two of which were still in existence one hundred and fifty
years ago.^ Some of the houses of these villages were of so

barazon las aforraaan con vna torta de barro, para que no las penetrasse el Sol,
ni los vientos, y encima tierra, o barro, con que hazian a90tea, y con esso se
contentauan. Otros hazian sus casas de petates." But he also mentions houses
of mud, and especially among such tribes as lived in the Sierra Madre or upon
its spurs (lib. vi. p. 386) : " Son sus casas de barro, y de terrado, k modo de las
que se hazen de adobes, y mejores, porque aunque el barro es sin mezcla de
paja, lo pisan, y disponen de manera, que queda duro como vna piedra, y luego
lo cubren con sus maderas fuertes, y bien labradas.'*

1 Descripcion Geografica de la Pravincia de Sonora, 1764, MS., cap. vi. art. i.
Orozco y Berra, Geografia de las Lenguas y Carta Etnografica de Mexico, p. 345;

* Descripcion Geografica, ut supra. All the villages indicated existed in
1678. Fathenjuan Ortiz Zapatay S. J., Relation de las Misiones que la Compahia
de Jesus tiene en el Reino y Provincia de la Nueva Vizcaya en la Nueva Espana
{Doc. para la Historia de Mexico, s^rie 3*, vol. ii. pp. 341, 366). Servas was
abandoned in 1690, it having been surprised and ravaged by the Jaiios and
Sumas Indians. Descripcion Geografica, cap. vii. art. v. The other two were still
in existence in 1764. The Jovas were looked upon as less civilized than their
cousins, the Opatas. It is interesting, however, to com])are the description of
their dress as given by the joint report in Historia (p. 610) with the description
of the dress of the Sisibotaris, a branch of the southern Pimas of Sonora, given
by Ribas in his Historia de los TrivmphoSy p. 385. Oviedo says : " Toda esta
gente, dende las primeras casas del mahiz, andan los hombres muy deshonestos,
sin se cobrir cosa alguna de sus personas; ^ las mugeres muy hoitestas, con
unas sayas de cueros de venados hasta los pies, e con falda que detras les
arrastra alguna cosa, i abiertas por delante hasta el suelo y enla9adas con unas
correas. £ traen debaxo, por donde estan abiertas, una mantilla de algodon ^
otra encima ^ unas gorgueras de algodon, que les cubren todos los pechos."

Ribas: "Porq los hobres se cubre lo necessario, c6 vna mata pequena
pintada de la cintura a la rodilla, y cuando haze frio vsan vnas matas grades de
algodon, y pita: pero las mugeres andan cargadas de vestidos, y haze tanto
ruido al entrar en la Iglesia, como si fuera Espanolas. Porq los faldellines
de q vsan Uega hasta el suelo ; q son, o de pieles de venados, ta bruiiidas, y
blandas como vna seda, y c5 varias pinturas de colores, o de algodo, o pita,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


64 archjEOLOCical institute.

called adobes, but in many instances the foundation alone
was of rubble, the superstructure of palm leaves, or yucca
slats, supported by posts of wood. It is more than likely
that Cabeza de Vaca and his friends fell in with these Jovas,
and that the " houses of sod with dirt roofs " were those of
Jova or Opata hamlets scattered through the valleys in the
mountain fastnesses between the sources of the Rio Aros and
the Rio de Mulatos, both of which, by the way, are tribu-
taries of the Yaqui, and belong, therefore, to the drainage of
the Pacific slope.

Through the gorges that wend their way from the eastern
to the western flank of the Sierra Madre, probably — nay,
almost certainly — through the pass called " Mulatos," the
Spaniards naturally drifted into the central portions of So-
nora, where the " Valley of the Hearts " was situated. This
locality having afterwards become a rather prominent land-
mark, its location is easily defined. It lay a short distance
from the village of Batuco in Sonora.^

Batuco lies northeast of Guaymas, at a distance of about
no miles in a straight line. The "Corazones" were nearer
to the coast, and "thirty leagues" from the Yaqui River.^
This estimate may be quite fair, for the inhabitants of the
Corazones were Southern Pimas or Nebomes. The range of

q tiene en abundancia en estos paeblos: y para mas honestidad se pone un
delantar de la cintura abaxo, ^ en muchas saele ser negro, y parece Mojas co
escapularios."

1 Castaneda, Cibolay p. 157: "En bas de la valine de Sonora est celui des
Corazones, habit^ par des Espagnols." Ibid., p. 221 : "Quand Ton fut arriv^ It
Batuco, des Indiens allies de la valine de Cora9ones vinrentau devant de Tarin^e
pour voir le general." Relacion del Suceso de la Jornada que Francisco Vazquez
hizo en el Descubrimiento de Cibola {Doc. de Indias^ vol. xiv. p. 318) : " Este valle
de los Corazones estd ciento cinquenta leguas del valle de Culiacan € otras
tantas de Cibola.*' Or about half-way between Culiacan and Zuni. Matias de la
Mota-Padilla (Historia de la Nueva GcUicia^ 1742, p. 118) says that the Corazones
were ten or twelve leagues south of the Sonora valley.

2 Historia^ p. 611.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 65

the Nebomes bordered on that of the Yaquis ; and we can
fairly locate the three hamlets where deer-hearts were offered
to the Spaniards at some place in the vicinity of "Matape."

The fact that the people of the Corazones were Pimas or
Nebomes is established beyond all doubt. After seeing the
kind reception tendered to them at Culiacan by Melchior
Diaz, and perceiving that this officer was a man of different
character from his two subordinates, Alcardz and Cebreros,
Cabeza de Vaca listened to his request to settle the Indians
from the Corazones who had accompanied him somewhere
in Sinaloa. He sent for them, and they came, establishing
themselves near the Rio del Fuerte, and the village of La
Concepcion de Bamoa was thus founded.^ At the present
day the Pima language is still spoken by its inhabitants, who
are the descendants of those whom Cabeza de Vaca and his
friends established there.^

It is needless for the purpose of this study to attempt to
trace the route taken by the adventurous men from the Cora-
zones to Culiacan. My main object is, as I believe, already
attained ; namely, to establish that nowhere, on their long and
painful journey, did Cabeza de Vaca, Dorantes, Castillo Mal-
donado, and Estevan, the negro, touch upon New Mexico ;
that therefore the wide-spread notion which ascribes to the
first named the discovery of that territory is without any

1 Ribas, Historia de los Trivmphos, p. 22: " Hizolo assi Cabe9a de Vaca, con
sus compaiieros, siedo agradecidos a los que les auian hecho fiel compafiia,
y escolta en tan peligroso viaje. Procuraron se les diese sitio donde poblas-
sen, y tuuiessen semeteras; y en el rio de Petatlan, quatro leguas (rio abaxo)
de donde oy esta la villa, en este puesto formaron vn pueblo llamado Bamoa,
que oy perseuera, y es de lengua y nacion poblada cien leguas mas la tierra
adentro." The fact is well stated in Historia, p. 611, and also in Naufragios^
p. 546. Fray Antonio Tello, Historia de la Nueva Galiciay p. 359: " Fundaron
k orillas del rio de Petatlan dos Pueblos, Uamados el uno Popuchi y el otro
Apucha." (Mota-Padilla,yrw/<7rw, p. 81. Ortiz Zapata, Relacion de las Misiones,
p. 406. Orozco y 'Bcvrz./Geografia de las Lenguas, p. 333.

* Geografia de las Lenguas, ut supra : " Hablan el pima."

5


Digitized by VjOOQIC


66 archjEological institute,

foundation whatever. Furthermore, the assertion that he
claimed to have discovered it, and to have seen its sedentary
inhabitants and their strange buildings, is absolutely gratu-
itous. Neither Cabeza de Vaca in his book, nor the three
Spaniards jointly in their official report, make the slightest
allusion to such a claim on their part. It may be, that the
large houses or villages of which they claim to have heard,
while in the Sierra Madre, and four degrees of latitude
south of the southern limit of the Pueblos in the sixteenth
century,^ were those of Pueblos; but it might also be that
the Jovas (whom, by the way, they could hardly understand)
referred to past reminiscences, alluding to the remains of
Casa Grande in Arizona, or to those of Casas Grandes in
Northwestern Chihuahua.^

Nevertheless, while the four Spanish travellers were not
the discoverers of the North American Southwest, their
reports still gave the first impulse to explorations of the
countries north of the present Mexican boundary, and to
their ultimate incorporation into the Spanish dominions. The
return of Cabeza de Vaca opened a new era in Spanish ad-
vance upon North American soil. It inflamed the hearts

1 The most southerly Pueblos in New Mexico were, as I shall prove on
another occasion, those of the Piros at Trenaquel and Qualacd, both in the
vicinity of the present town of San Marcial, on the Atchison, Topeka, and Santa
F^ Railroad ; and on the Rio Grande I found the ruins of Trenaquel in 1882.
San Marcial lies still 152 miles north of El Paso del Norte.

2 The Casa Grande in Arizona was a Pima town, and the Casas Grandes in
Chihuahua were probably Opata settlements. Both had been in ruins for long
years previous to the sixteenth century. The Southern Pimas, however, dwelt
in houses similar to those of these ruins as late as the middle of the seventeenth
century. Ribas, Historiay pp. 360, 371. There is a passage in Oviedo's synopsis
of the joint report that deserves to be noticed (Ilistoria, p. 610): "Decianles
aquellos indios que por toda aquella costa del Sur hacia el Norte (que mejor se
pnede € debe Uamar, no del Sur sino septentrional) avia mucha gente e mucha
comida e mucho algodon, 6 las casas grandes ; 6 que tenian muchas piedras
turquesas, quellos las traian de alld por rescate." This would indicate that the
great houses were those of Nebomes or Pimas, and not New Mexican Pueblos.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 67

of the adventurous people that had conquered Mexico, and
turned the attention of one of the greatest administrative
minds of all times, the Viceroy Don Antonio de Mendoza,
towards the distant north. How and in what manner the
impulse thus received was directed soon afterwards, is a fit
subject for another monograph.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


68 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.


III.


SPANISH EFFORTS TO PENETRATE TO THE NORTH OF
SINALOA, BETWEEN THE YEARS 1536 AND 1539.

THE reports of Cabeza de Vaca, as far as they circulated,
created a profound impression. We must remember,
that of such reports only two are so far known to us, both
written after Cabeza de Vaca had left Mexico for the mother
country.^ It is certain, however, that another relation of the
adventures and sufferings of the four wanderers had already
been made by them at Culiacan, and forwarded to the Viceroy
from that place ; but we do not know what it contains, unless
Herrera has derived from it portions of his information.^ At
all evemts, the arrival of the four castaways and the tale of
their marvellous deeds remained forever grafted upon the pub-
lic mind; and although their statements were far from being
detailed or very definite, they sufficed to direct attention to
the regions they had traversed, and to those of which they
had heard.

The right to discover and explore was not as free then as it
was at the time when Anglo-American pioneers began to
reconnoitre the Great West.^ Besides, New Spain had only

1 His book, Naufragiosy and the joint report in Oviedo.

^ Herrera, Historia General (Decada vi. lib. i. cap. vii. p. 11) : " I de todo
lo demas aqui referido hicieron declaracion, con juramento ante Escrivano a
quince de Maio de este ano." This would seem to indicate that Herrera
obtained his information from that document. Oviedo (Historia^ vol. iii. p. 614)
also speaks of a direct report to the King, but he himself followed the report to
the Audiencia of Santo Domingo.

3 Compare the Royal Ordinances of November 17, 1526, in Autos del Mar-
ques del Valley PanjUo de Narvaet^ etc. {Doe. de Indias, vol. icvi. p. 78). Even


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 69

a small Spanish population, and the means at the disposal of
that population were limited, as was natural on account of its
recent establishment. The rich mines, those which subse-
quently laid the foundations for enormous individual wealth,
were not yet discovered,^ and nothing of importance could be
attempted without both the sanction and the material assist-
ance of the Crown and its highest representatives. When,
therefore, the tales of Cabeza dc Vaca became known, they
excited a lively desire to explore the North, but nobody felt
safe to attempt it unless patronized by the government.

That government was in the hands of Don Antonio de
Mendoza, and of the Royal Audiencia, but not absolutely.
Under the Spanish regime nobody was absolute but the
monarch, and he was so hemmed in and hampered by the
very powers in society, state, and church by which he
was apparently supported, that he was himself in reality
the least independent of all. No functionary of the Indies,
whether the highest or the most insignificant, felt abso-
lutely secure in any of his actions. At the end of his term
of office, there was the " Residencia," or official inquest
into the manner in which he had performed his duties,
whereas the dreaded " Visita," or secret investigation, could
surprise him at any moment, while he was yet in full enjoy-
ment of dignity and power .2 And for such sudden interrup-

more stringent is the Codice de Leyes y Ordenanzas Nueuamente hechas por su
Magestad para la Gouemacion de las YndiaSj etc, (Ibid.^ p. 392, et seq.),

1 The mine, or vein or lode, of San Bernabe, at Zacatecas, was discovered
on the nth of June, 1548. Mota-Padilla, Historia de la Nueva Galicia^ p. 195.
In the same year, those of the Albarrada and the vein of Pinuco were dis-
covered. But the richness of the ores of Zacatecas had already been noticed,
and reported to the Viceroy, in 1546. Ibid,

* The following excellent definition of the terms " Residencia " and " Visita "
is given by Sr. Garcia Ycazbalceta in the " Noticia de las Piezas contenidas en
este Voliimen," Documentos para la Historia de Mexico, vol. ii. p. xxviii : " La
Visita se verificaba en cualquier tiempo por comision especial del soberano ; pero
sin suspender en el ejercicio de su empleo k la persona cuya conducta se trataba


Digitized by VjOOQIC


70 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

tions of the career of ofiScers of high standing, a pretext, if
not a legitimate cause, might always be found. Not that
in this respect Spain was an exception ; other countries and
other times have presented the same spectacle, modified by
local conditions. Spanish America was still "booming," and
American dignitaries had to keep a watchful eye on competi-
tors from abroad. At the same time, the Crown had begun to
establish a system of perpetual investigation, so to speak, in
the Indies, by exacting periodical reports, not from the heads
of the viceroyalties or from the great tribunals alone, but
from inferior officers, ecclesiastics, and sometimes from special
inspectors sent without the knowledge of the Viceroys and
Audiencias.^ It was a post of great honor and responsibility,
that of chief magistrate of New Spain or of Peru, but also a
dangerous post, and one which, properly considered, exposed
the incumbent to such perils that he was not to be envied for
securing it.

Don Antonio de Mendoza was fully aware of all this, and
did nothing except with mature consideration. He had a
powerful rival within his own territory, — no less a personage
than the conqueror of Mexico, Cortes himself. At Guatemala,
he had a former companion of Cortes, Pedro de Alvarado, a
man of great energy and popularity. Nuflo de Guzman, re-
cently recalled from his government, and now a prisoner in
Spain for his manifold crimes, was no friend of the Viceroy's ;
and although under a cloud, Guzman was personally nearer

de investigar. El proceso era rigurosamente secreto, sin comunicacion de los
cargos ni de las declaraciones de los testigos. El visitador no sentenciaba, sino
que remitia cerrado el proceso original al consejo de Indias, donde se pro-
nunciaba la sentencia sin apelacion. La Residencia, por el contrario, se tomaba
al dejar el empleo; era publico el proceso, y admitia muchos medios de
defensa."

1 An interesting statement in regard to such reports, from the most varied
sources, both civil and ecclesiastic, is found in Orozco y Berra, Apuntes para la
Historia dela Geografia en Mexico, 1881 (paragraph xi. pp. 155-176).


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 7 1

the Court and the Council of the Indies than Mendoza him-
self. To keep these three powerful men apart was a duty
which the Viceroy owed not only to himself, but also to
the Emperor whom he represented ; for either of them
would have brought calamity upon New Spain, had he suc-
ceeded in his endeavor to secure supreme authority. Cor-
tes would have jeoparded the interests of the Crown by
attempting to achieve the independence he originally cov-
eted ; Alvarado was not capable of administering a realm
so vast and complicated as Mexico and its dependencies;
and as for Guzman, his former career showed what might
be expected of him. But all three had their friends in
court, and any one of them might, at a given moment, ob-
tain an ascendency fatal to the Viceroy, as well as to the
future of the country.

The conduct of Cort6s towards Mendoza is in strange con-
trast with the conduct of Mendoza towards him. Whereas
the former stormed, and annoyed the Court with petitions and
complaints that could not fail, in the end, to weary even
his friends, Mendoza maintained an attitude almost of digni-
fied indifference. He seldom took notice of the accusations
of the Marques del Valle, and was more bent upon winning
over the latter's former lieutenant, Alvarado, than upon con-
ciliating or refuting the great conqueror himself. Alvarado
was under the influence of a severe check, which he deeply
felt ; the ill success of his expedition to Ecuador, in South
America. That enterprise had depleted his treasury; and,
indeed, it is noteworthy, and may be remarked here, that
most of those Spanish conquerors who had achieved wealth
in the discovery of the Indies at that time soon lost a large
proportion of it in new ventures. Alvarado alone was there-
fore no power, or at least but a small one; yet he might
become in time an invaluable auxiliary against both Cortes
and Guzman.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


72 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

The concession to Cortes to explore the coast of the Pacific
Ocean antedated the accession of Mendoza to the viceroyalty
of New Spain, by at least six years.^ There was nothing
to change in this. The Viceroy wisely forbore to interfere
with any expeditions which the Marqu6s set on foot by sea.
He saw that they invariably failed, and that the g^eat but dan-
gerous man was wasting his means and his energy. Only when
Cortes pretended to claim inland territory upon the strength
of discoveries along the coast of Lower California did matters
grow more serious ; but even then it was too late for the
Marques to accomplish anything, and the failure of Coro-
nado's expedition also put a damper on hopes and expecta-
tions directed towards the northern regions.^

Alvarado had obtained permission to set on foot maritime
explorations in the South Sea as early as 1526.^ He was
therefore also "in the field," — officially at least, — and even
a competitor of his former commander, Cortes. Mendoza
cautiously approached the Governor of Guatemala, and
brought him over to his side by degrees, the more easily
as Cortes took towards Alvarado an attitude openly hostile.*
The Viceroy thus kept his opponents at bay, by befriending
the least dangerous of them, and leaving them undisturbed in
their mutual disagreement. It is quite likely, that, in acting

1 This concession was at least implied in the documents emanating from the
King in the year 1523. Herrera, Hisioria^ Decada iii. lib. v. p. 153. The title,
however, of Captain General of the South Sea bears the date of July 6, 1529.
Titulo de Capitan General de la Nueva Espaha y Costa del" Sur, expedido a
Favor de Neman Cortes por el Emperador Carlos V. {Doc. de IndiaSj vol. iv.
p. 572). Mendoza was appointed Viceroy of New Spain in 1535. Cavo, Los Tres
Siglos en Mexico^ p. 80.

* The first direct complaint of Cortes against Mendoza bears date June
25, 1 540. This is the document in which the Marques del Valle claims for him-
self the discovery of the countries which Fray Marcos had actually discovered.

' Autos del Marques del Valle ^ etc.^ ut supra.

* Proceso del Marques del Valle y Nuho de Guzman y los Adelantados Soto y
Alvarado, sobre el Descubrimiento de la Tierra Nueva, 1 541 (Doc. de Indicu,
ToL XV. pp. 300-408).


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 73

thus, he but followed secret instructions, or at least a plan
which had the full assent of the highest powers.

Still he had to exercise the greatest caution. The viceroy-
alty was a much coveted office, and despite the confidence
which he enjoyed from the Emperor, his head, figuratively
speaking, was never safe. It is not surprising, therefore,
that he proceeded slowly and with the utmost circumspect-
ness, and did not hasten in the least to follow the vague
pointers which Cabeza de Vaca and his companions had given
to him about the North, by attempting immediately anything
on a larger scale.-^

Notwithstanding the rapid conquests of Guzman, progress
by the Spaniards towards the interior of Mexico was slow.
This was mostly due to the condition of the Indian tribes
occupying the region. Once beyond the Tarascos of Mich-
huacan, the whites met only with less domesticated groups.
These afforded no foothold for the establishment of colonies,
in which, of necessity, a small number of Europeans had
to form a pivot, around which were to revolve henceforth
clusters of natives. The powerful tribes of the Nayares,
occupying the Northwest of Guadalajara, and the Teules
Chichimecas, still nearer to the modern city last named,
defended the entrance to the mountain fastnesses of their
ranges with great tenacity. Their resistance was the more

1 Even the outfit which he gave to Andres Dorantes, and of which I shall
make mention hereafter, entailed but very little expense to the government.
Lettre de Don Antonio de Mendoza h V Empereur Charles Quint (Ternaux-Com-
pans, Cibola^ Appendix, p. 287): " J'eus de frequents entretiens avec lui ; je
pensai qu*il pouvait rendre un grand service ^ votre majesty, si je Texp^diais
avec quarante oa cinquante chevaux et tous les objets n^cessaires pour
decouvrir ce pays. Je depensai beaucoup d'argent pour I'exp^dition," etc.
Still, the actual expense cannot have been very great. Horses had already multi-
plied in Mexico, and the other supplies were meagre. In thinking of supplies,
one must not imagine anything corresponding to commissary stores, in the pres-
ent sense of that term. Supplies at that time meant not more than barely
enough to eat for a limited space of time.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


74 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

formidable, since they were not strictly sedentary groups,
although living in villages and planting corn.^ The very lack
of organization in these tribes was, at least for a time, an ele-
ment of resistance. They were conquered only after they
had been compelled to agglomerate, or temporarily consolidate,
and the last of their numbers held out until the year 1722.^
Of the linguistic status of these tribes we have but scanty
information. Orozco y Berra classifies the Coras or Nayares
with the Pima-Opata-Tarahumar group of languages ; conse-
quently, among the Numa or Shoshonis.^ But the idioms
have not yet been subjected to a scientific investigation. It
is also likely that many of the Indian dialects or languages
of the country are lost, although the assertions of Orozco y
Berra are to be taken in this respect also with a great deal of
allowance.*

The attitude of these tribes prevented the Spaniards, on
the one hand, from penetrating at once farther inland; on
the other, it rendered the Pacific coast the more valuable as a
pass, so to speak, through which colonization might creep up
beyond, and ultimately around, the hostile territory. On that
coast and north of Michuacan, dialects of the Nahuatl lan-
guage were spoken in Colima and Jalisco. The tribes were
autonomous, being independent of one another, and of any
other larger group of aborigines. The spread of Spanish
sway was easier since there were more facilities for mutual
understanding. The country also was less adapted to pro-
tracted resistance in the ways practised by the Indians, the

1 There are a number of original documents concerning both the Nayares and
the Teules Chichimecas. It would require too much space to refer to them in
detail.

2 In regard to the final reduction of the Nayares, compare Apostolicos A fanes
de la Compania de Jesus, 1754, lib. i. cap. vii. to the end of the book.

8 Geografia de Lenguas, pp. 279, et seq. The classification of the Pima-Opata-
Tarahumar idioms among the Shoshoni languages is due to Mr. A. Gatschet.
* Orozco y Berra, Geografia, p. 282.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 75

shore being scarcely inhabited. Farther north, in Sinaloa,
similar conditions prevailed. In short, it was only on the
confines of Sonora that the whites met with an opposition
capable of arresting their progress for some time. There
they found themselves confronted by a linguistic group,
which, while also subdivided into a number of tribes, still
could coalesce when required, and present a solid front to
aggressors. One branch of that stock, the Mayas, were of
a yielding disposition, but the northern group, the Cahita or
Yaquis, persevered in their attitude of determined hostility
for nearly a century, constituting a barrier which only the
courage and shrewdness of the celebrated Spanish captain,
Martin Hurdaide, was at last able to break down.^

The recent settlement of Culiacan, in Northern Sinaloa,
was the farthest point whither Spanish colonization had pene-
trated in 1536. As yet that station had attained but a lim-
ited development. It was a feeble frontier post. We have
seen, in the course of investigations concerning Cabeza de
Vaca's journey, what sort of people were the Spaniards
who represented civilization beyond Culiacan and in South-
ern Sonora. A report in regard to the doings of Alcardz
and Cebreros was sent to head-quarters (which at that time
were at Compostela, in Jalisco) and thence to Mexico, and
it became an urgent necessity to put a check upon such
and similar abuses. If Alcardz and his compeers were not
severely punished at once, it was only because of the dis-
tance, and the impossibility of filling their place by others.
The distance from Culiacan to the nearest post, Chiametla,
was great, and Chiametla itself but a mere hamlet, with a few

1 On the languages of Colima and Jalisco see the work of Orozco y Berra.
In regard to the relations between the Yaquis and the Spaniards, compare chiefly
Ribas, Historia de los Trvumphos de Nvestra Santa Fe^ etc^ 1645. ^^^ entire fifth
book of this valuable work is devoted to the Yaquis, and to the wars preceding
their submission to Spanish authority.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


76 archjeological institute.

armed men to guard it against surprise. Unoccupied deserts
lay between the two places, few Indians dwelt near the trails,
and those in the interior were seldom approachable. The
colony at Culiacan was maintained as a forlorn hope, with the
expectation that at some future day it might perhaps become
a valuable basis of operations.^

It seems that, at the time, the Spaniards had almost over-
awed even the warlike Yaquis. A single action of impor-
tance had been fought between the warriors of that powerful
tribe and the Spaniards. This occurred during the time of
Nuiio de Guzman's murderous incursions. The superiority
of the Spanish arms quickly decided the contest, and the
Yaquis had not had time since then to familiarize them-
selves with the new-comers to such an extent as to lose the
superstitious dread which this first engagement had cre-
ated. It seems, also, that the Spaniards at Culiacan dared
not penetrate much beyond the Sinaloa River, the Rio de
Petatlan — to-day called Rio del Fuerte — being usually the
ultimate limit of their raids. They rather pushed towards the
mountains, whither the Indians of the lower countries had
retreated. Few discoveries had been made of mines, but
there was hope of finding more by penetrating into the
mountains to the east, the Sierra Madre, where the Span-
iards understood that very rich ores existed. The post of
Culiacan was not fitted to become a starting point for inde-
pendent expeditions.

I have stated in the preceding monograph, that Cabeza
de Vaca and Castillo Maldonado left Mexico for Spain in
the winter of 1537. Andres Dorantes alone remained in the

^ In 1 57O1 Chiametla had about a dozen families ; Culiacan about twenty-five.
Informe al Rey par el Cabildo Ecclesiastico del Guadalajara^ 1 570 {Doc, para la
Historia de Mexico^ Ycazbalceta, vol. ii. p. 493). Chiametla is in the extreme
southern part of Sinaloa ; Culiacan in the northern, though not near the frontier
of Sonora.


\


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 77

country. From a letter of the Viceroy to the Emperor, (date
unknown, but probably of the year 1539,) it appears that
Dorantes made arrangements with Mendoza to conduct an
exploring party into the North, and that, after all the prep-
arations had been made, the matter was given up without
the Viceroy knowing why or wherefore. Mendoza had to be
very careful in assuming responsibilities, and it is probable
that the support given to Dorantes, to wit, forty or fifty
horses and the necessary supplies, was not adequate, it be-
ing evident that Dorantes was without means of his own. It
seems the latter got under way, but never achieved anything.
Mendoza candidly avers, " I spent much money in behalf
of the expedition, but know not how it came that it had
no results." All that remained of the extensive preparations
were the negro Estevanico, a few slaves recently purchased
by the Viceroy for the expedition, and some Indians from the
northern countries.

It seems that the Viceroy caused a certain number of
Indians from Northern Sinaloa (principally from the new
settlement of Bamoa) to be brought to the city of Mexico,
where they were taught the Spanish language and educated in
the Christian religion. This he had done in view of eventual
undertakings towards the north. The education of these
people is said to have been intrusted to a Franciscan mis-
sionary, Fray Marcos, born at the city of Nizza, which at that
time was included in the Duchy of Savoy. On account of
his origin, the friar, whose other name is never mentioned,
was and has remained known as Fray Marcos of Nizza.

Beyond the place of birth, nothing is known as yet of
the career of this ecclesiastic previous to his appearance in
the New World. This took place in 1531, when he went
to the island of Santo Domingo with six other monks, and
thence to Peru in the year following. He was present at the


>


Digitized by VjOOQIC


78 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.^

capture of the Peruvian war-chief, Atahualpa, at Caxamarca.
After remaining several years in Peru and Quito, he returned
to Mexico via Nicaragua and the Isthmus (probably with
Pedro de Alvarado). His first work in New Spain seems
to have been in Jalisco, where he oflSciated as missionary.
He soon assumed a position of prominence among the regular
clergy of his order in Mexico, to such an extent as to be
elected Provincial in 1540, or after a residence of only a
few years in the country.^ He had already written, ac-
cording to his translator and detractor, Temaux-Compans,
three works or reports on the Indians of Peru and Quito,
the accuracy of which was strongly impugned by Cortes.
The reasons for the severity of Cortes in regard to the
writings of a monk who never did him any harm become
plain, when we consider that Cortes was then claiming, as
discoveries of his own, the countries which Father Marcos
visited in North America. The conqueror of Mexico, after
his failures in California, shrunk from nothing, stooped to any-
thing, that might re-establish his waning prestige. At all
events, the Provincial of the Franciscan order in Mexico,
Fray Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo, issued to Fray Marcos the
following testimonial, under date of August 29, 1539, after the
latter's return from his trip in quest of the Seven Cities : —

" I, the undersigned, etc., certify that it is true that I have
despatched Fray Marcos of Nizza, a regular priest, pious,
endowed with every virtue and utter devotion ; that I have

1 The earliest biognmhy of Fray Marcos at my disposal is that b/ Fray
Geronimo de Mendieta,}/^/j/<?r»a Ecdesiastica Indiana^ written about 1598, but
published only in 1870 By Sr. Garcia Ycazbalceta (pp. 400, 541, 674, etc.). He
does not give the dates of the friar's arrival in America, in Peru, etc. y Tor-
quemada^ (Monarchia, vol. iii. p. 499) gives the date, " el qual partio para esta
Nueva Espaiw el ano de 1531." A short biography is also given by^^'ray Agustin
de Vetancurt, ^^^enologio Franciscano, edition of 1871, p. 117. He gives all the
dates above mentioned, also on page 174. As I shall have to treat of Fray
Marcos in a special article, I refrain from extensive quoting for the present.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 79

approved of him, I and my brothers, the Deputed Definers,
whose advice I take in important and difficult cases, and that
he has been approved and acknowledged as capable of making
this journey of discovery, not only on account of the qualities
above mentioned, but also owing to his knowledge in theology,
and even in cosmography and in navigation." ^

With the appearance of Fray Marcos upon the scene of
explorations in the North, a certain confusion sets in about
events immediately following, and he himself has been the
subject of misrepresentation for three centuries. It may
well be said, that for more than three hundred and thirty-
three years Fray Marcos of Nizza has been the worst slan-
dered man known in history.

The confusion to which I allude relates to the period
between the return of Cabeza de Vaca to Spain and Fray
Marcos*s remarkable journey in quest of the Seven Cities in
1539 > and it arises from the fact, that, while the documents
emanating from the Viceroy on the subject, as far as they are
known to me, attribute all the efforts made within the two
years mentioned to Fray Marcos himself, other sources speak
of efforts of the same kind made by other priests of the
same order, antedating the attempts of the Savoyan friar.
Strange it is, also, that the sources of the second class assert
that those friars were sent out by the same Viceroy who
distinctly affirms that he despatched Fray Marcos, and who
makes no mention of any other exploring party. I confess

i(jFray Antonio de Cibdad Rodrig4 Certificacion [Doc. de Indias^ vol. iii.
p. 328) : " Digo Yo . . . ques verdad que yo envie i, Fra. Marcos de Niza,
sacerdote, fraile, presbitero y religioso y en toda virtud y religion tal, que de mi
y de mis hermanos los definidores diputados para dellos tomar consejo en las
cosas arduas y diiicultosas, fu^ aprobado y habido por idoneo y suficiente para
hacer esta Jornada y descubrimiento, asi por la suficiencia arriba dicha de su
persona, como por ser docto, no solamente en la teologia, pero aun en la
cosmografia y en el arte de la mar." My translation is from the French version
of Ternaux-Compans in the Appendix to Voyage de Cibola^ p. 254.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


8o ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

that I find the dilemma almost a hopeless one, and must
limit myself to a statement of what all the sources afford on
the subject, rendering it literally, and thus enabling readers
to form their opinions independently of my own suggestions.

In his letter to the Emperor, Don Antonio de Mendoza
expresses himself as follows : —

** By the last vessels, on which Miguel Usnago has gone,
I wrote to your Majesty that I had despatched two ecclesias-
tics of the Order of Saint Francis to discover the cape of the
mainland which runs in the direction of the North. As this
journey has exceeded all my hopes, I will begin with enter-
taining your Majesty concerning it." The Viceroy then
treats at length of the different expeditions organized by
Cortes by sea. After mentioning the failure of Dorantes, he
continues : " Of all these preparations which I had made, I
had nothing left but a negro who came with Dorantes, a
few slaves I had bought, and Indians, natives of the country,
whom I had caused to be gathered. I despatched them with
the Friar Marcos of Nizza, and another ecclesiastic of the
order of Saint Francis. These friars had long resided in the
neighboring countries, were inured to hardships, experienced
in matters of the Indies, conscientious, and of good morals.
I requested their Provincial to grant them to me. They left
with Francisco Vazquez Coronado, Governor of New Galicia,
and went to San Miguel de Culiacan, the most remote place
in that government inhabited by Spaniards, and two hundred
leagues from Mexico. When the Governor arrived there with
the friars, he commanded some Indians whom I had given
to him to act as his guides to inform the natives that your
Majesty had forbidden that they should be reduced to slavery.
I induced them to be no longer afraid to come back to their
homes and live quietly. They had indeed been much ill-
treated in the beginning. He told them that your Majesty


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 8 1

had chastised the guilty ones. Ten days afterwards, these
Indians returned, to the number of about four hundred,
appeared before the Governor, and told him that they came in
behalf of all the inhabitants, to see and to know those who did
them so much good, allowing them to return to their homes
and plant corn ; for it was a long time that they had been scat-
tered through the mountains, hiding like wild beasts for fear
of being reduced to slavery. They added, that they and their
companions were ready to comply with the orders that would
be given them. The Governor consoled them, had supplies
distributed among them, and kept three or four of their num-
ber. The priests taught these to make the sign of the cross
and to pronounce the name of Jesus Christ, our Lord. These
people displayed much good will to learn. A few days after-
wards they were sent back to their homes with the assurance
that they would not be disturbed. Clothing, knives, ' Agnus,'
and other similar objects which I had sent for the purpose,
were given to them, and these Indians returned home well
pleased, saying that, at any time they were sent for, they
would come at once to obey the orders which they might
receive.

" When the journey of discovery was thus securely pre-
pared. Friar Marcos, his friend, the negro, other slaves, and
Indians whom I had given to them, left, after having spent
twelve days in making their preparations. I had also heard
of a province called Topira, situated in the heart of the
mountains, and had ordered the Governor to take informa-
tions in regard to that country. Considering that it was a
matter of importance, I determined upon setting out in person
to visit it. I had arranged with the ecclesiastic to rejoin him
in the mountains, at a town called Corazones, one hundred
and twenty leagues from Culiacan. When he reached that
province, he saw, as I stated in my letters, that there was lack

6


Digitized by VjOOQIC


82 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

of food. The mountains were so steep that he found no way
of crossing them, and was compelled to return to San Miguel.
So it seems that God, either through the choice that was
made of the road, or the difficulty of finding a path, has
opposed Himself to all those who intended to carry out the
enterprise with human power, and has reserved it for an
humble barefooted friar. He is beginning to penetrate into
the interior of the country, has been very well received, as he
has written below the instructions which I gave him, adding
an account of everything that happened on his last journey.
I shall not continue any further on the subject, and will tran-
scribe to your Majesty what he has himself reported," ^

1 Premihre Lettre de Don Antonio de Mendoza h VEmpereur Charles V. {0-
do/a, Appendix, p. 285, et seq.), I prefer to give the text also, in order to enable
the student to detect any error or misunderstanding on my part. My translation
only aspires to be literal, without regard to fluency or style in general, and this
observation applies equally to the other translations of documents in this
monograph.

" Par les demiers navires, sur lesquels est parti Miguel Usnago, j'ai ^crit k
votre majeste que j'avais exp^di^ deux religieux de Tordre de Saint-Frangois
pour d^couvrir le cap de la Terre-Ferme qui court dans la direction du Nord.
Comme ce voyage a surpass^ toutes les esp^rances, je vais commencer par en
entretenir votre majeste. . . . De tons les pr^paratifs que j'avais faits, il ne
me resta qu'un n^gre qui est venu avec Dorantes, quelques esclaves que j'avais
achetes, et des Indiens, naturels de ce pays, que j'avais fait rassembler. Je les
expediai avec Fr^re Marcos de Niza, et un autre religieux de Tordre de Saint-
Francois. Ces fr^res avaient longtemps habit^ les pays voisins; ils etaient
habitues k la fatigue, experiment's dans les affaires de Tlnde, conscientieux et de
bonnes moeurs. Je priai leur provincial de me les accorder. Ils partirent avec
Francisco Vazquez Coronado, gouvemeur de la Nouvelle Galice, et se rendirent
k San-Miguel de Culiacan, derni^re place de ce gouvernement, habitee par les
Espagnols et 'loign'e de deux cents Heues de Mexico. Quand le gouvemeur fut
arriv' dans cette ville avec les religieux, il ordonna k des Indiens que je lui
avais donnas de lui servir de guides et de dire aux naturels que votre majeste
avait defendu de les reduire en esclavage. Je les engageai k ne plus ^voir peur,
k regagner leurs demeures et a vivre tranquilles ; en effet, ils avaient 6xi fort mal
trait's dans le principe. II leur dit que votre majeste avait puni les coupables.
Dix jours apr^s, ces Indiens revinrent au nombre d'environ quatre cemts ; ils se
pr'sent^rent au gouvemeur, et lui dirent qu'ils venaient de la part de tous les
habitants pour voir et connaitre ceux qui leur faisaient tant de' bien, les


/


Digitized b!) Google


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 83

This literal translation is taken from the French version
made by Ternaux-Compans, that being the only copy at my
command. At the bottom of the page, in a foot-note, the
translator adds : " This letter was accompanied by the report
of Friar Marcos of Nizza, which we have given in this Ap-
pendix under No. 11."^

laissaient retourner chez eux, semer du mai's ; car il y avait bien longtemps qu'ils
• fuyaient dans les montagnes, se cachaient comme des b€tes sauvages dans la
crainte qu*on ne les fit esclaves. lis ajout^rent, qu'eux et tous leurs com-
patriotes etaient prSts i obeir aux ordres qu'on leur donnerait. Le gouverneur
les consola, leur fit distribuer des vivres, et en garda trois ou quatre avec luL
Les religieux leur apprirent ^ faire le signe de la croix, 3i prononcer le nom
de J^sus-Christ, notre Seigneur, et ces gens montrerent beaucoup de bonne
volonte pour s'instruire. Quelques jours apr^s on les renvoya chez eux en leur
disant de se tranquiliser. On leur donna des habits, des agnus, des couteaux et
d'autres objets semblables que j'avais envoy^s dans cette intention. Ces Indiens
s'en all^rent fort satisfaits, et * dirent que chaque fois qu'on les ferait appeler,
ils viendraient pour obeir aux ordres qu*on leur donnerait.'

" Quand le voyage de ddcouverte fut ainsi assur^, Frfere Marcos, son ami, le
nigre, d'autres esclaves et des Indiens que je leur avais donnes, partirent apr^s
avoir employ^ douze jours ^ leurs preparatifs. J'avais aussi entendu parler
d*une province nomm^e Topira, qui est situ^e au milieu des montagnes, et
j'avais donne I'ordre au gouverneur de prendre des informations sur ce pays.
Considerant que c'etait une affaire importante, je r^solus de partir en personne
pour la visiter. J'avais arr^te avec le religieux que je le rejoindrais dans les
montagnes, 4 une ville nommee Los Corazones, ^loign^e de cent vingt lieues de
Culiacan. Quand il fut arrive dans cette province, il vit ainsi que je Tai dit dans
mes lettres, qu'on y manquait de vivres. Les montagnes Etaient si escarp^es,
qu'il ne trouva aucun chemin pour les traverser, et il fut force de retourner ^
San Miguel. De sorte qu'il semble que Dieu, soit par le choix que Ton ait fait
de la route, soit par la difficult^ de trouver un chemin, ait voulu s'opposer 3i tous
ceux qui par les forces humaines ont essay^ de mettre fin ^ cette entreprise,
et que son desir est de le faire connaitre 4 un humble fr^re d^chauss^. II com-
mence a p^n^trer dans Tinterieur du pays ; il a ete parfaitement re9u, ainsi qu'il
ra ecrit au-dessous de I'instruction que je lui ai donn^e, avec tout ce qui lui est
arrive dans son dernier voyage. Je ne m'^tendrai pas davantage sur ce sujet, et
je transcrirai 4 votre majeste ce qu*il a rapporte lui-m6me."

1 *' Cette lettre etait accompagn^e de la relation du fr^re Marcos de Niza que
nous avons donnee dans cet appendice sous le no. ii." As the report of Fray
^rcos has been translated by Ternaux-Compans from the Italian of the work
ofVRamusio, Volume III., it is likely that the letter of Mendoza was also ren-
dered in French after the Italian. I have not the work of Ramusio.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


84 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

There is no date to the letter of Mendoza, but it was, at all
events, posterior to the 20th of November, 1538, and prior to
September of the year following.^

The statements of the Viceroy are not of that clearness
which we might desire. Yet it seems that he sent out no
monks to explore the country except Fray Marcos and his
companion. If Ternaux-Compans has faithfully translated, it
would appear that Fray Marcos made two attempts, — one
towards the Corazones in Sonora, which failed, and another
on which he reached Cibola, and of which we cannot speak
here. Neither does the Viceroy state whether he sent any
priest or priests along with Dorantes. There are doubtless
official documents extant, probably in Spain, which would
throw light on the subject, since Mendoza refers to other
letters of his to the Emperor ; but not having access to them,
I must try to solve the riddle with the material at hand.

Neither (Comara nor Bernal Diez del Castillo^ two contem-
poraneous writers, nor Herrera, who had access to the archives
and state papers, mentions any exploration except that by
Fray Marcos of Nizza.

An eyewitness of the times, and one who wrote in the
same year that Coronado made his famous journey to New
Mexico (1540-41), the celebrated missionary, iFray Toribio
de Paredes,) better known as ^otolinia,)gives the following
version of the explorations made in 1538: —

" In this same year the said provincial, Fray Antonio de
Ciudad Rodrigo, sent two friars by the coast of the South
Sea around to the north, through Jalisco and New Galicia,

^ Fray Marcos received the instructions of the Viceroy on November 20,
1538. He was at Mexico on the 2d of September, 1539. Consequently the
above letter must have been written between these two dates ; nay, after the
7th of March (old style), 1539, as the friar had already left Culiacan when
the Viceroy wrote, and the monk's departure from Culiacan took place on the
last mentioned date.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 85

with a captain who was on a voyage of discovery. As soon
as they were beyond the part of that coast that is discovered,
known, and conquered, they met with two roads, well open
and plain. The captain made the choice, and went by the
right-hand road that deflected towards the interior, and
after a few days' journey got into mountains so rugged that
his party could not cross them, and he was obliged to turn
back by the same road he had come. Of the two friars, one
fell sick, and the other, with two interpreters, took the road
to the left that led towards the coast, finding it always open
and plain, and in a few days* march reached a country in-
habited by poor people, who came out to receive him, calling
him a messenger from heaven, and as such they all touched
him and kissed his garments. From day to day he was
accompanied by three and four hundred persons, and some-
times by more, of whom, when it was time to eat, some went
out to hunt game, of which there was an abundance, chiefly
hares, rabbits, and deer ; and they, who are so expert in hunt-
ing, in a short time got all they wanted, and, giving first to
the friar, divided among themselves what they had. In this
manner he travelled more than three hundred leagues, and on
nearly the whole route had notice of a country inhabited by
many people who were clothed, and who have houses con-
structed of sod and of many stories. It is said that these peo-
ple are settled on the shores of a great river, where there are
enclosed villages, and at times the chiefs of those villages are
at war with the others ; and it is said that beyond that river
there are other villages, larger and more wealthy. What they
say that there are in the villages on the first shores are small
cows, smaller than those of Spain, and other animals different
from those of Castile ; good clothing, not only of cotton, but
also of wool ; and that there are sheep from which that wool
is taken. It is not known what kind of sheep they might be.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


86 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

These people use shirts and dresses with which they cover
their bodies. They have shoes that cover the whole foot, —
a thing thus far met with nowhere else. From these villages
also many turquoises are obtained, of which, and of all the
other things I mention here, there were some among the poor
people where the friar was. Not that such objects would
be produced in the land of the poor Indians, but because
they brought it from the large villages whither they at times
went to work and earn their living, as day-laborers are wont
to do in Spain." *

1 Historia de los Indios de la Nueva Espana (vol. i of the Documentos
para la Historia de Mexico^ by Sr. G. Ycazbalceta, Tratado III. capitulo v.
p. 171) : ** Este mismo afio envi6 este mismo provincial Fray Antonio de Ciudad
Rodrigo, dos frailes por la costa del Mar del Sur, la vuelta hacia el Norte
por Xalisco y por la Nueva Galicia, con un capitan que iba k descubrir ; y yd
que pasaban la tierra que por aquella costa estd descubierta y conocida y
conquistada, hallaron dos caminos bien abiertos ; el capitan escogi6 y se f u6 por
el camino de la derecha, que declinaba la tierra adentro, el cual it muy pocas
jornadas di6 en unas sierras tan dsperas, que no las pudieron pasar; le fu6
forzado vol verse por el mismo camino que habia ido. De los dos frailes
adoleci6 el uno, y el otro con dos interpretes tom6 por el camino de la mano
izquierda, que iba hacia la costa, y hallolo siempre abierto y seguido ; y d pocas
jornadas dio en tierra poblada de gente pobre los cuales salieron d el Uaman-
dole mensajero del cielo, y como tal le tocaban todos y besaban el habito : acom-
panabanle de jomada en Jornada trescientas y cuatrocientas personas, y a veces
muchas mas, de los cuales algunos en siendo hora de comer iban a caza, de
la cual habia mucha, mayormente de liebres, conejos y venados, y ellos que se
saben dar buena mafia, en poco espacio tomaban cuanto querian ; - y dando
primero al fraile, repartian entre si lo que habia. De esta manera anduvo mas
de trescientas leguas, y casi en todo este camino tuvo noticia de una tierra
poblada de gente vestida, y que tienen casas de terrado, y de muchos sobrados.
Estas gentes dicen estar pobladas d la ribera de un gran rio, d do hay muchos
pueblos cercados, y d tiempos tienen guerras los senores de los pueblos contra
los otros ; y dicen que pasado aquel rio, hay otros pueblos mayores y mas ricos.
Lo que hay en los pueblos que estdn en la primera ribera dicen que son vacas
menores que las de Espana, y otros animates muy diferentes de los de Castilla ;
buena ropa, no solo de algodon mas tambien de lana, y que hay ovejas de que
se saca aquella lana : estas ovejas no se sabe de que manera serdn. Esta gente
usan de camisas y vestiduras con que se cubren sus cuerpos. Tienen zapatos
enteros que cubren todo el pi^, lo cual no se ha hall ado en todo lo hasta ahora
descubierlo. Tambien traen de aquellos pueblos muchas turquesas, las cuales


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 87

There is much in the above statements of Motolinia that
recalls the report of Fray Marcos of Nizza on his journey
to Cibola in 1539. But in the very year Motolinia wrote,
Fray Marcos was Provincial of the Order, consequently his
immediate superior, and Fray Toribio would not have failed
to state that his Provincial had made the discovery, provided
he meant to allude to the journey of Fray Marcos, and not
to another expedition previous to it executed by another less
prominent monk of Saint Francis.

It is also noteworthy that Motolinia says the monk spoke
of the villages (by which the New Mexican pueblos are evi-
dently meant) only from hearsay, and that he did not see
them himself. Fray Marcos saw the Zufii villages. On the
other hand, many details recall the journey of Fray Marcos ;
as, for instance, the fact that his companion fell sick and
had to remain behind, the report about turquoises obtained
from the pueblos through trade and personal services, and
so forth.

Fifty-six years later, another great monk, Fray Ger6nimo de
Mendieta states in his " Historia Ecclesiastica Indiana" ^ : —

y todo le demas que aqui digo habia entre aquella gente pobre adonde lleg6 el
fraile ; no que en sus tierras se criasen, sino que las traian de aquellos pueblos
grandes adonde iban 4 tiempos 4 trabajar, y 4 ganar su vida como hacen en
Espana los jornaleros.*'

The copy of Motolinia's work at the Escurial, published under the title of
Ritos Antiguos, Sacrificios i IJolatrias de los Indios de la Nueva Espana y de su
Conversion a la Fiy y quienes Fueron los que Primero la Predicaron, has the
same text as above.

^ Published in 1870 by Don Joaquin Garcia Ycazbalceta (lib. iv. cap. xi.
p. 398, et seq.) : " En el mismo ano de treinta y ocho envi6 otros dos frailes por
tierra y por la misma costa del mar del sur la vuelta hacia el norte por Jalisco y
la Nueva Galicia. Y yendo estos dos frailes acompaiiados con un capitan, que
iba tambien 4 descubrir nuevas tierras (aunque con diferentes fines), ya que
pasaban la tierra que por aquella parte estaba descubierta, conocida y conquis-
tada, hallaron dos caminos bien abiertos. Y el capitan escogi6 ^1 de la mano
derecha, que parecia ir 4 la tierra adentro, el cual 4 muy pocas jornados di6 en
tan asperas sierras y pefias, que no pudiendo ir adelante, fu^ compelido 4 se
volver. De los dos frailes, el uno cay6 enfermo y tambien se volvi6, y el otro,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


88 archjEOLogical institute.

" In the same year of thirty-eight, he [Fray Antonio de Ciu-
dad Rodrigo] sent two other friars by land, and by the same
coast of the South Sea, to the north, through Jalisco and New
Galicia. And as these friars went in company with a cap-
tain who was also bent on discovering new lands (although
with different objects in view), when they came beyond the
country that was discovered, known, and conquered, they
found two open roads, and the captain selected the one
that led to the right, that appeared to go inland ; but after
a few days he found himself in the midst of rocks and moun-
tains so rough that, not being able to proceed, he was com-
pelled to turn back. Of the two friars, one fell sick and
returned also ; the other, with two Indian interpreters, took

con dos indios interpretes, tom6 por el camino de la mano izquierda, que iba
hacia la costa, hallandolo abierto y seguido, y k pocas jornadas, di6 en tierra
poblada de gente pobre, la cual sali6 al fraile, teniendolo y Uamandolo mensa.
jero del cielo, y asi salian i el a lo tocar y besar el habito, pensando que habia
caido del cielo. Acompaiiibanlo de Jornada en Jornada doscientas y trescientas
personas y d las veces cuatrocientas. Y aquellos que Jo acompanaban, un poco
antes de medio dia iban los mas de ellos d caza de liebres, conejos y venados
(de qu^ hay mucha abundancia en aquella tierta), y como ellos se saben dar
buena maiia, en poco espacio traian mucha comida, y dando de ella primero al
fraile, repartian entre si lo demds. De esta maYiera anduvo mas de doscientas
leguas, y cuasi en todo este camino tuvo noticia de una tierra muy poblada
de gente vestida, y que tienen casas de terrado, y no solo de un alto, sino de
muchos sobrados. Y otras gentes decian estar pobladas a la ribera de un gran
rio d d6 hay muchos pueblos cercados, y que d tiempo tenian guerra los sefiores
de los unos pueblos con los otros. Y que pasado aquel rio estaban otros pue-
blos mayores y de gente mas rica. Y que tambien por aquellas tierras habia
vacas mayores que las de E^pana, y otros animates muy diferentes de los de
Castilla. Y que de aquellos pueblos traian muchas turquesas, las cuales con
lo demas que estd dicho habia entre aquella gente pobre, no que en aquellos
pueblos se criasen, ni en aquellas sus tierras, sino que las traian de los otros
pueblos grandes, d do iban d tiempos d trabajar y d ganar su vida, como hacen
en Espana los jornaleros." I have condensed in my translation the words, " No
que en aquellos pueblos se criasen, ni en aquellas sus tierras?* Italics are mine.
Noteworthy is the difference between Motolinia and Mendieta. In regard to the
" cows,** the former says that they are smaller^ the other that they are larger^
than those of Castile. Query: Could this be a sign either that both authors
consulted the same source, and interpreted it differently, or that each consulted
a different source ?


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 89

the left-hand road, that went towards the coast, finding it
open and travelled ; and after a few days he came into a
country inhabited by poor people, that went to meet the
friar, taking him to be, and calling him, a messenger from
heaven; and so they came to touch him and to kiss his
clothes, thinking he had fallen from the skies. From one
day to another two or three hundred persons accompanied
him, and sometimes as many as four hundred. And these
who accompanied him used to go out a little before noon
to hunt hares, rabbits, and deer (of which there were many
in the country) ; and as these people are very expert, they
gathered much food in a very short time, of which they gave
the friar first, and divided the rest among themselves. In
this manner he travelled over two hundred leagues, and
on nearly the whole stretch had notice of a land much
populated by people who wore dresses, and had houses of
sod, not only with one, but of many stories. And it was said
that other people dwelt on the shores of a large river where
there are many enclosed villages, and that from time to time
the chiefs of one village had war with those of another, and
that beyond that river were other villages still larger, and
with rich people. And that also in- that country there were
cows larger than those of Spain, and other animals very dif-
ferent from those of Castile. And that from those villages
they brought many turquoises, some of which, and of the
other things there, were found among the poor people ; — not
because their country produced them, but because they ob-
tained them from the large villages, whither they went from
time to time to work and earn their living, as day-laborers do
in Spain."

The above looks suspiciously like a copy of MotoHnia ; but
there is an additional statement that deserves consideration.
Mendieta says, further on : —


Digitized by VjOOQIC


90 archjeological institute.

" There was, at the time, Provincial of this province of the
Holy Evangile, Fray Marcos of Nizza, a native of the very
city of Nizza in the Duchy of Savoy, a learned and pious man,
who, in order to satisfy himself of the truth of what that friar
had published, determined to suffer any exposure by taking
the lead, before any others should conclude to do it, and
so he went as quick as possible himself. And finding that
the report and indications of the friar were true, he returned
to Mexico, and confirmed what the other had said." ^

Lastly he says also: "This discourse has been made by
the friar who first discovered those lands and peoples, and
gave notice of them, having been sent by the Provincial,
Fr. Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo, in the year of thirty-eight, to
convert new people." ^

Mendieta was personally acquainted with Fray Marcos ; he
had seen him and spoken with him at Jalapa,^ in 1554, four

1 "Era tf la sazon provincial de esta provincia del Santo Evangelic Fr.
Marcos de Niza, natural de la misma ciudad de Niza, en el ducado de Savoya,
hombre docto y religioso, el cual, por certificarse de lo que aquel fraile habia
publicado, quiso ponerse 4 todo trabajo tomando la delantera, antes que otros
se determinasen, y fue con la mayor brevedad que pudo. Y hallando verdadera
la relacion y senales que habia 'dado el fraile por las comarcas donde habia
Uegado, di6 la vuelta d Mexico y confirm6 lo que el otro habia dicho."

2 " Este discurso se hi hecho por el fraile que primeramente descubrid
aquellas tierras y gentes, y di6 noticia de ellas, habiendo sido enviado por el
provincial Fr. Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo el ano de treinta y ocho k convertir
gentes de nuevo.** This passage may be interpreted in different ways.- It may
refer only to the journey of 1538, but it is more likely to refer to the whole
of what Mendieta states ; that is, to the different expeditions in quest of New
Mexico up to the year 1596. At least, Mendieta places it after his remarks on
the journey of Onate, who at the time he wrote was just preparing to start.
A monk who undertook hazardous explorations in 1 538 might still have been
alive in 1 596. Admitting that he was twenty-five years old in the former year,
or thirty (which was no unusual age for receiving orders), he was eighty-three or
eighty-eight when Mendieta wrote of him. There is therefore some possibility
that the latter might have derived his information on the journey of 1538 at first
hand, and independently of the statements of Motolinia.

* Page 541 : " Y de los grandes frios que pas6, lo halle cuando vine de
Espana, morador en Jalapa, gafo 6 tollido de pies y manos ; y sintiendo," eta


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 9 1

years before the death of the latter. The distinction made by
him between the discoverer of Cibola and the friar of 1538
is therefore significant. Had the latter been Fray Marcos, it
seems certain that Mendieta would have stated it. There is a
presumption, at least, that previous to the celebrated journey of
Fray Marcos the country north of Sinaloa had been partially
explored by a monk of the same order. Absolute certainty
cannot as yet be gathered from testimony of the sixteenth
century, as far as such testimony is within my reach. It still
leaves ground for suspicion, that Mendieta, and even Moto-
linia, may have attributed to another ecclesiastic a part of the
discoveries made by Fray Marcos. We must not overlook
that the latter, being a Savoyard, and treated as a Frenchman
by most of the brethren of his order, was exposed to jealousy
on the part of Spaniards. Still it appears probable that there
were two explorations, one of which did not reach farther
than about three hundred leagues (810 miles) north of Culi-
acan; that is, to the Gila River, or, at best, as far as the
Lower Colorado. It is likely that the explorer did not, and
could not, count the distances in an air line, so that all tends
to indicate that the journey of the year 1538, if performed by
some monk whose position was rather inferior at the time,
succeeded in reaching Southern Arizona. We should then
have a discovery of Arizona one year previous to that of
New Mexico by Fray Marcos of Nizza.

Fray Juan de Torquemada, in his celebrated " Monarchia
Indiana," has copied literally the manuscript of his pre-
decessor and teacher, Mendieta.^ Not one of the official
documents from the sixteenth century at my command men-
tions the expedition of 1538. Fray Marcos alone appears as
first explorer, and, in the century following, that monk even

* In the third volume, lib. xx. cap. Hi. pp. 499, 500 ; also, lib. xix. p. 372,
and lib. xxi. p. 610, et seq.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


92 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE,

becomes superseded in many writings by(Fray Agustin Rod-
riguez AS the discoverer of New Mexico ! It seems as if the
deeds of the Savoyard missionary, nay, those of Coronado
himself, had passed into oblivion. Fray Zarate-Salmeron,
in 1626, however, gives an abstract of Mendieta; and Fray'
Agustin dc Vetancurt, in 1692, refers to Fray Marcos of
Nizza in a superficial way as companion of Coronado in
1540.1

ifFray Ger6nimo de Zix^Xt-^T^xsitxon^elaciones de Todas las Cosas que en
d Nuevo Mexico se han Visto y Sabido assi por Mar como por Tterra, desde el A Bo
de 1538, Aasia el de 1626. (Copy of MS. at Mexico, paragraph 2.) I forbear
copying the paragraph. It is merely a condensed extract from the statements
of Mendieta, with one exception. Fray Zarate gives the number of the soldiers
that accompanied the two friars : " Estos dos Religiosos iban en compaiiia de un
capitan y 12 soldados, los quales iban en busca de minas." Query, Where
did Fray Zarate obtain these details, which are neither in Motolinia nor in
Mendieta ?

In regard to Vetancurt, consult his Menologio Frandscano^ under the 25th of
March, p. 117.

Two other authors of the seventeenth century speak of Fray Marcos as the
first and independent discoverer of the regions of New Mexico,^hile they are
silent about the expedition of 1538. One is\Paspar de Villagran)-^/j/<?rM! de la
Nveva Mexico, 1610, canto iii. fol. 15. Villagran distinctly attributes to Fray
Marcos a journey of two hundred leagues to the north of Culiacan ; that is, the
journey made by th^ friars of 1538 : —

" Assi determine luego de entrarse,
Por cosa de dozientas leguas largas,
Con solo vn companero confiado.
En aquel sumo bien que nos gouiema.*'

" Y por enfermedad que a el companero,
Sobrebino, que fuerga se quedase,
Y el se entro con diuino y alto esfuergo."

" Con cantidad de barbaros amigos.*'

The otherlLuis de CabrerMin his History of the Reign of Philip the Second,
speaks of a trip of discovery made by Fray Marcos in 1542 1 But Cabrera also
places the return of Cabeza de Vaca in 1540, and the journey of Coronado in
1544. There is consequently a constant error of four years in his dates, and
his year 1542 would therefore correspond to 1538. See, in volume of Recueil de
Pieces relatives h la Conquite du Mkxiqtu by Ternaux-Compans, the Extrait de
mistoire de Philippe //., Pot d^Espagne, p. 432.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 93

It is rather surprising, therefore, to find, in authors of the
eighteenth century, not only detailed references to the prob-
lematic journey of 1538, but many details not revealed by
writers of the sixteenth, and, lastly, the names of the two
monks who made the journey. I have not been able to
ascertain the sources whence the writers of the past century
drew their knowledge, and absolute reliance cannot as yet be
placed on what they say, considering the time that elapsed
between the occurrence and the date of their writings, and
the possibility of their confounding the accounts of the trip
of Fray Marcos with some of the earliest reports already
quoted. Nevertheless, the likelihood of an exploration pre-
ceding that of Fray Marcos is increased by what these writers
of the past century state.

The earliest of these writers is the Captain^Mateo Mange,\
a Spaniard, nephew of the Governor of New Mexico (and
afterwards of the province of Sonora), (^Domingo Jironza
Petriz de Cruzate.^ Mange resided in Sonora as an officer
of the Spanish forces for a long time, and he wrote a book
entitled (in brief) " Luz de Tierra Incognita," ^ which as yet
remains unpublished. The date of this document is 1720. In
it he says : —

" As in those times, primitive as they were, all was holy
ardor and fervor to attract heathens to the knowledge of
God and of his faith, the spirit was not content with work-

1 The full title of this book, two manuscript copies of which are at the city
of Mexico, — one in the National Library, and the other in possession of Sr.
Jos^ Maria Agreda, — is, Luz de Tierra Incognitay en la America Septentrional o
Indias Orientales de la Nueva Espana^ sacada de muchas Relaciones impresas i
Manuscriptas sepultadas estas en el Tumulo del Oluido que fios dexaron los primi-
tiuos Descubridores, etc.y dispuesto par el Capitan Juan Matheo Mange ^ Natiuo
del Reyno de Aragon, That Mange was a relative of Don Domingo Gironza,
is stated, among others, by Father (Francisco Xavier AlegreJ Historia de la
Campania de Jesus en Nueva Espana^T^^z, (published in that year by^Busta-
mante, ^ith a supplement,) vol. iii. p. 84 : " Ni de su sobrino el Capitan D.
Juan Mateo Mange.''


Digitized by VjOOQIC


94 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

ing within the boundaries of what had been discovered, but,
overstepping the limits of what was deemed possible, they
braved the obstacles which Northern America offered. He
who was most ardent in this field was Fray Marcos of Nizza, of
the Seraphic Order, who begged permission of his Provincial,
Fray Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo, and, as he did not obtain it
for himself, secured license for another one to go in his place,
— another friar, — while he would remain to administer the
missions of New Galicia, and in time be called to Chapter,
and other matters and urgent affairs of the Order. For these
reasons, and with the authorization of the Royal Audiencia of
Compostela, he despatched, in 1538, Fray Juan de la Asump-
cion and a lay brother, together with some Indians of various
nations and languages to serve as interpreters, in case gen-
tile Indians should be met with, whose idioms they would
know, in order to speak to them and to instruct them in the
faith.

" So they left for the north and northwest, following the
coast of the South Sea. There joined them eight Spaniards,
who went in search of mines. Passing through Jalisco and
Culiacan, countries which at that time were already discov-
ered, they reached the province of Sinaloa, where they met
two roads, wide and plain. They selected the one to the
right, but after two days' march fell in with such impassable
mountains and thickets that they were obliged to turn back,
taking the road to the left that they had forsaken. Having
travelled on it, to the north and northwest, for three days,
the lay brother was taken sick, and his superior sent him
back in charge of the miners, who also were returning, not
having found the mines which, from report, they were hoping
to find.

"The priest continued his journey to the northwest with
the Indians of his escort. They discovered many creeks and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 95

rivers, rich valleys and groves and forests, fields of maize,
cotton, beans, and squashes, and thousands of pagan In-
dians, who, although the interpreters did not understand
their speech, still came out to receive the father with crosses
in their hands. They wondered at his dress and at his mod-
esty, and it is possible that they may have taken their notions
of behavior from the time when Cabeza de Vaca and his com-
panions passed through those countries. On his peregrina-
tion, the friar was escorted daily by one hundred or two
hundred of those heathens, who went through the woods,
thickets, and mountains to hunt hares, rabbits, and deer^
quails, and other game, offering that game to the father that
he might select from it what pleased him best for him and
his companions. The rest they divided among themselves.

"In this manner the friar travelled about six hundred
leagues from Mexico towards the northwest, and arrived at
a large and unfathomable river, so deep that it impeded his
progress. There he inquired through signs, and was in-
formed that, after crossing the river, ten days beyond to the
north there was another greater one, whose banks were
settled by many people, the numbers of which they compared
to handfuls of sand, with houses of three stories or floors,
with enclosures around the villages, and dressed and shod
with buckskin and mantles of cotton ; but that they did not
go thither, as the people were their enemies and at war with
them. Only one Indian, a relative of theirs, whom they de-
scribed and pointed out, had been a captive there, and had
fled, travelling the ten days' journey at night, to avoid being
detected and recaptured. He [the friar] gave to the natives
of that river, which he did not dare to cross, knives, beads, and
ribbons, of the few that he had been able to carry, and found
among these Indians much docility and kindness. They are
well built, strong-limbed, and clear-skinned, decorated with


Digitized by VjOOQIC


96 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

iridescent shells and strings of red beads resembling coral, or
almost similar to it. They were painted black, blue, and red,
and the paint which they used seemed to be some metal.
Little maize was found, and some of it white, a proof of
their indolence. They are settled on the banks of that river,
which is in 34^ north latitude. Several villages of these na-
tions are composed of houses of sod, low, with many families
living in one, owing to its width. From there he returned
by the same road, and arrived at Compostela nine months
after his departure. Thence he went to Mexico," etc.^

This relation differs from those by Motolinia and Mendieta
on so many points, that, unless we suppose it to be a mere
compilation from the reports of Fray Marcos and those of
Oiiate on the Colorado of the West,^ or of Alarcon and
Melchior Diaz,^ we must admit that it is a valuable docu-

1 The text is the whole of chapter viii. (pp. 165 et seq.) of the manuscript of
the National Library of Mexico. I refrain from copying it, owing to its length,
and merely remark that the latitude of thirty-four degrees given by Mange would
correspond to latitude 32® 30'. The observations of two and three centuries
ago err, as there is abundant proof, by one and a half degrees on an average.
Subtracting this constant error from the determinations of those times, a fairly
accurate approximation is reached. Latitude 32^ 30' N. corresponds indeed
to the Gila River, or the Lower Colorado of the West.

2 The similarity with what Onate reported touching^e natives on the Lower
Colorado is very striking. Mange says (p. 167): "Son Yndios membrudos,
bien agestados y blancos adornados de conchas de nacar y sartas de quentas
Coloradas parezidas al coral o cassi semejantes." Compare the report on
Ofiate's journey in Zarate-Salmeron, Relaciones de Todas las Cosas^ para-
graph 56.

*f Fernando Alarcon,] A^^/a/ww de la Navigation et de la Dicoteverte (in Ap-
pendix to Cibolay No. IV.). The statement of Mange (p. 168), "Varios
pueblos destas naciones con casas de terrado bajas viviendo muchas familias
en una por ser anchas," recalls Castafieda de Najera, Relation du Voyage de
Cibola^ p. 49. Speaking of the journey of Melchior Diaz in 1540, and on which
that officer reached the Lower Colorado, the chronicler of Coronado's expe-
dition says : " Apr^s avoir fait environ cent cinquante lieues, il arriva dans une
province dont les habitants, d'une taille prodigieuse, sont nus, et habitent de
grandes cabanes de paille construites sous terre. On ne voyait que le toit
de paille que s'^levait au-dessus du sol : Tentree ^tait d'un cdt^ et la sortie de


Digitized byCjOOQlC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 97

ment. The name of the priest, to wit, Fray Juan de la
Asumpcion, can hardly have been invented. Still, I find
no Franciscan of that name on the lists or in the biograph-
ical sketches of the sixteenth century. Fray Antonio de
la Asuncion accompanied Sebastian Vizcayno on his voyage
of discovery to Cape Mendocino in 1602 ; and it might be
possible that Mange had been deceived, and taken the name
of that monk and part of his descriptions of the coast of Cali-
fornia for those of an earlier journey by land. Still, this is
unlikely. The whole looks genuine ; it agrees fairly well with
the older reports, and yet is sufficiently distinct from those of
Fray Marcos to suggest that it refers to independent facts
and occurrences. But the author fails to give his sources,
and this we can but deeply regret.

The next author who treats of the matter in question is
one of high standing, and had exceptionally good opportu-
nities in regard to the earliest attempts towards the north
of Mexico, having had access, at the city of Guadalajara,
to the papers of the Captain Don Pedro de Tobar, one of
Coronado's officers. This author is^Matias de la Mota-Pa-
dilla,^ whose "Historia de Nueva Galicia" was written in
1742. The versioa of Mota-Padilla differs again from all
the others, in that it gives the name of the priest as Fray
Juan de Olmeda: "This information was given by one of
the ecclesiastics, called Fray Juan de Olmeda, to Father Fray
Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo, who sent it, through him, to
the Venerable F. Fray Marcos of Nizza^ Commissary General,
who was of such a fiery spirit that he set out on foot and
without shoes on the journey, taking the said Father Olmeda
along with him. And having reconnoitred the provinces of
Marata, Acus, and Totonteac, and obtained information con-

I'autre. Plus de cent personnes, jeunes ou vieilles, couchaient dans chaque
cabane." Also in Relacion del Suceso de la Jornada que Francisco Vazquez hizo
en el Descubrimiento de Cibola^ 1541 (Doc. de Indias, vol. ziv. p. 321).

7


Digitized by VjOOQIC


98 archjEological institute.

cerning the province of Tzibola, he found it advisable to re-
turn to Mexico to give a detailed aocount to the Viceroy." ^

Fray Marcos was Vice Commissary General in 1538.^
His companion on the journey was not Fray Olmeda, but a
Savoyard lay brother called Fra Honorato.^ I cannot find as
yet any trace of that Fray Olmeda in the sources at my dis-
posal, as little as of Fray de la Asuncion, and yet neither of
these names can have been invented by those who mention
them.

Still more attention is due to the testimony of Father
Francisco Garc6s, of the College of the Propaganda Fide
of Quer6taro, who in the years 1775 and 1776 performed the
remarkable journey from Southern Arizona to the Moquis
alone. In this report he states: — •

1 Historia de la Conquista de la Provincia de la Nueva Galiciay published in
1870 (cap. xxii. p. Ill) : '* Estos religiosos fu^ron por la costa del mar del sur,
y dieron la vuelta hacia el Norte ; y habiendose inclinado a la mano izquierda,
L mas de doscientas leguas, les salieron It recibir muchos indios, de los que
tuvieron noticia que mas adentro estaba poblada la tierra de gente vestida, y
que tenian casas de muchos altos, y que habia otras naciones i las riberas de un
caudaloso rio, y que habia vacas y otros animales. Esta noticia di6 uno de los
religiosos, llamado Fr, Juan de Olmeda, al P. Fr. Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo,
quien con el mismo le remiti6 al V. P. Fr. Marcos de Niza, comisario general,
quien era de tanto espiritu, que k pi^ y descalzo se puso en camino para la Jor-
nada, Uevando consigo k dicho P. Olmeda ; y habiendo reconocido las provincias
de Marata, Acux y Tonteaca, y teniendo noticia de la provincia de Tzibola, tuvo
por conveniente volverse k Mexico, y di6 por extenso noticia al virrey." The
papers written by Don Pedro de Tobar are mentioned on p. 168. They were at
Culiacan.

2 Fray Marcos signs his Relacion of 1539, Vice-commissarius (Doc. de Indias^
vol. iii. p. 350). The Commissary at the time was Fray Juan de Granada.
Vetancurt, Menologia^ p. 461.

8 Fray Marcos de Niza, Relacion^ p. 330. Fray Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo,
Certtficacion, p. 329. That Honorato was a Savoyard results from the report
of the Licenciado de la Marcha, in Temaux-Compans, Recueil de Documents et
Mhnoires originaux sur VHistoire des Possessions Espagnoles dans V AmSrique^
1840, Rapport adresse ct VEmpereur Charles F., sur le Royaume de la Nouvelle
GalicCj February 18, 1551, p. 192. Speaking of a "Fr^re Norato," he says:
** Ce frfere, de nation Savoyarde, est attach^ au convent de Xalisco." Norato
is evidently but an abbreviation of Honorato.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 99

" This river [the Colorado of the West] is doubtless the
one of which, in the year 1538, they gave information to
the R. F. Fray Juan de la Asuncion, when he came into
the country by way of Sinaloa, by order of the R. F. Nisa,
in whose report it is said that, having travelled six hundred
leagues to the northwest of Mexico, he reached a river so
large that it impeded his passage ; and he adds, that the
Indians of this river told him that ten days' journey to the
north there was another, settled by many people, the numbers
of whom they indicated by handfuls of sand, that they had
houses of three stories, that their villages were walled in,
and the people clothed and shod with buckskin and cotton
mantles." ^

Fray Carets quotes here from some older document, and it
would seem as if that document was a report made by Fray

^ Diario y Derrotero que Siguid el M. R. P. Fr, Francisco Cards en su
Viaje hecho desde Ociubre de 1775, hasta ij de Seiiembre de 1776, cU Rio Colo-
rado para reconocer las Naciones que habitan sus MdrgeneSy y d los Pueblos del
Moqui del Nuevo-Mixico (in Vol. I. of the second series of the Documentos
para la Historia de Mixico, p. 364) : " Tambien este rio es sin duda del que
en el ano de 1538, le dieron noticia al R. P. Fr. Juan de la Asuncion cuando
entr6 por Sinaloa, por mandado del R. P. Nisa, en cuya relacion se dice ; ' Que
caminadas 600 leguas al norueste de Mexico, lleg6 4 un rio tan grande que le
impidi6 el paso, y afiade, que los indios de este rio le dijeron que diez jomadas
al norte habia otro mayor poblado de mucho gentio, cuya multitud esplicaban
con punos de arena ; que tenian casas de tres altos, que sus pueblos estaban
amurallados y que andaban vestidos y calzados de gamuza y mantas de algo-
don.' Mi pensamiento se funda en que viniendo este rio del nordeste, corre-
sponded segun me dieron noticia, las diez jornadas cabales hasta el rio Colorado,
que fu^ el grande que detuvo al padre y donde le dieron la noticia. Fiindome
tambien en la circunstancia de los vestidos, pues 4 mas de las naciones que h^
visto con gamuzas y mantas, me dijeron los jamajabs, que todas las del norte andan
vestidas. Las casas y pueblos amurallados se hacen creibles en vista del Moqui
en donde las casas tienen dos y tres altos, y por la parte de mi entrada, sin
puertas ni ventana alguna. Mas que casas parecian murallas ; tengo, pues, por
v^rosimiles las noticias de la relacion citada." I call special attention to the fact
that Father Garc^s uses quotation marks, therefore that he quotes from some
original relation. It cannot have been the Relacion of Fray Marcos which we
have, for that document contains nothing of the kind. It must therefore be


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ICMD ARCHjEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Juan de la Asuncion himself, or at least by Fray Marcos of
Nizza in his name. It is not at all likely that all this could
be invention or fabrication ; it is even improbable that an
original confusion with the report of Fray Marcos could be
perpetuated so long. The College at Quer^taro contained a
great many ancient papers touching upon Franciscan mis-
sions, which papers have now disappeared, and it is not un-
reasonable to suppose that among them there was a report of
either Fray Marcos or of the other.

Lastly, there is another mention, emanating directly from
thefcollege of Queretaro\and by one of the historians of that
institution, Fray Juan Domingo Arricivita^ In the Prologue
to his " Cr6nica Serdfica y Apost61ica," (1792,) we find : —

" In the year five hundred and thirty-eight, in January, by
order of the Viceroy, there started from Mexico the Fathers
Fray Juan de la Asuncion and Fray Pedro Nadal, who, travel-
ling about six hundred leagues to the northwest, reached a
deep river which they were not able to cross ; and Father
Nadal, who was versed in mathematics, observed the altitude
of the pole at thirty-five degrees. In the year following,
thirty-nine, Fray Marcos of Nizza came with three other
priests and with the military expedition, who, travelling north-
ward, reached the said river, which they called * of the Rafts,'
and it is the one that to-day they call Colorado, and, taking
the altitude, it was found to be in thirty-four degrees and one
half," etc.i

either the other report of that friar mentioned by him as having been written, or
else a report of Fray Juan de la Asuncion, or one written by Father Marcos in
the former's name" and behalf. I regard the testimony of Father Garces as
almost conclusive on this point.

1 Crdnica Serdfica y ApostSlica del Coieqio de Propaganda Fide de la Santa Cruz
de Queritaro (Pr6logo) : "El ano de quinientos treinta y ocho por Enero sali-
eron de Mexico, por orden del Sefior Virrey, los Padres Fr. Juan de la Asun-
cion, y Fr. Pedro Nadal; y caminando al norueste como seiscientas leguas,
llegaron d un rio muy caudaloso que no pudieron pasar ; y el Padre Nadal, que


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. lOI

The River of the Rafts (Rio de las Balsas) was not the
Colorado, but the Gila, as will be shown in a subsequent
monograph.

I omit here the allusion to the trip of the two friars named
made by Lieutenant-Colonel Jos6 Cortes, and by other still
more modern authors. They are but copies of one or the
other of the preceding statements, add nothing to them, and
have no weight for the principal question, — whether or not
the journey of 1538 was performed, and by whom.

I frankly confess, that, while all the evidence presented
above does not come up to the requirements of historical
certainty, and while I should not be surprised nor dis-
appointed if subsequently proof were furnished that the
story originated through a confusion with the reports of
Fray Marcos, the present condition of the case leads me to
believe, that the journey was really made, that Fray Juan
de la Asuncion was the man who performed it, and that he
reached as far north as the Lower Gila, and perhaps the lower
course of the Colorado of the West ; and that consequently
there was a discovery of Southern Arizona one year pre-
vious to that of New Mexico by Fray Marcos of Nizza.

The principal objection lies in the fact that the Viceroy
makes no mention of the journey in his letter quoted by me.
But we must not lose sight of the fact that he mentions other
communications to the Emperor, the text of which I have not,

era muy inteligente en las Mathematicas, observ6 la altura del P6]o en treinta y
cinco grados. El siguiente afio de treinta y nueve entro con otros tres Religiosos
el Padre Fr. Marcos de Niza en la expedicion militar ; y caminando al Norte,
llegaron al dicho Rio, que llamaron de las Balsas, y es ^1 que hoy Daman Colo-
rado, y tomada la altura se hall6 en treinta y quatro grades y medio, confir-
mando la identidad del Rio, el haber tratado los Padres con la nacion Jalchedon,
que en ^1 hallaron." "Thirty-five degrees" are equal to thirty-three and a half,
and '• thirty-four and a half " to thirty-three. Either agrees tolerably well with
the average course of the Gila and of the Lower Colorado.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I02 archjEOLogical institute.

and in which he says that he had sent '' two members of the
order of Saint Francis to discover the cape of the mainland
that runs in the direction of the north." This passage may
refer to Fray Marcos and his companion, but it may also
allude to two other monks. Furthermore, if we compare
the statement of Arricivita, that the monks left Mexico in
January, 1538, and the statement of Mange, that the trip
lasted nine months, with the time of departure of Fray
Marcos on his journey to the north, we notice that the
latter left only after the two monks are supposed to have
returned. At the end of November, 1538, Fray Marcos was
already in New Galicia, and the others are supposed to have
returned in October.^

There are additional and rather vague indications, which,
however, I cannot absolutely overlook here. Thus an Au-
gustine monk. Fray Ger6nimo Xim^nez de San Est^ban,
wrote to Saint Thomas of Villanueva on the 9th of Octo-
ber, 1539: "In September of last year there left this city a
friar of Saint Francis, a Frenchman by birth, in search of a
country of which the rulers of these parts have had informor
tioHy and which they have not been able to discovery^ The
Italics are my own. This may relate to the reports of Ca-
beza de Vaca, but also to some exploration subsequent to
the return of the latter, and prior to the departure of Fray
Marcos.

1 Fray Marcos acknowledged reception of the instructions of the Viceroy:
" En Tonala, k veinte dias del mes de Noviembre, de mil y quinentas e treinta
y ocho alios." Certificaciones (Doc, de Indias, vol. iii. p. 328). Mange, in Luz de
Tierra Incognita, p. 168 : " Desde aqui dio la buelta por el camino que lleu6 y
lleg6 a compostela d los nueve meses. Y desde alii pas6 a Mexico."

2 Carta de Fray Jerdnimo Ximinet de San Estiban d Santo Totnds de Villa-
nueva (in Nueva Coleccion de Documentos para la Historia de Mixico, by Sr. G.
Ycazbalceta, 1886, p. 194) : '* Este pasado mes de Setiembre hizo un ano que
parti6 un fraile de S. Francisco, frances de nacion, desta ciudad de Mexico en
busca de una tierra de que los gobernadores destas partes han tenido noticia,
y no la han podido descubrir." He plainly means Fray Marcos.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 103

/Humboldt) mentions Fray Pedro Nadal as one of the ex-
plorers of the country near the Gulf of California in the
sixteenth century ; but the great student of Spanish America
evidently relied upon Arricivita alone for his statement.^

Assuming the journey attributed to Fray Juan de la h&xxv^
cion to have taken place, it is easy to see that it did not extend
beyond Southern Arizona, probably not beyond the Gila. Pos-
sibly the friar may have seen the Lower Colorado, as the size
of the great river on whose banks he stopped would indicate.
The identification, however, of the Rio de las Balsas with
that stream would denote that it was the Gila. The Gila is
one of those typical Southwestern rivers that grow smaller in
proportion as they approach the mouth, unless sudden rises
occur. The latter take place in spring and the beginning of
summer, and that would have been the time when Fray Juan
reached its banks. The large houses inhabited by a number
of families would better agree with some of the tribes of the
Lower Colorado. At all events, whether it be the Gila or the
Colorado, the explorer did not go far beyond the parallel of
thirty-three, and he followed as near as possible the coast of
the Gulf of California. If there had been a journey of dis-
covery prior to that of Fray Marcos of Nizza, it took a some-'
what different route, and never penetrated farther north than
the southern half of Arizona Territory.

Admitting the trip of Fray Juan de la Asuncion to be
authentic, it would indicate, for the period of two years fol-
lowing upon Cabeza de Vaca's return, three distinct attempts
on the part of Don Antonio de Mendoza to explore the coun-
tries north of Sinaloa : —

The first, probably in 1537, by Dorantes, which was never
carried out

^ Essai Politique sur la Ntmvclle Espagne^ edition of 1825, vol. L p. 73.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I04 archjeological institute.

The second, by Fray Juan de la Asuncion, in 1538.

In the same year, an attempt to enter the region of
Topia, in Northwestern Durango, which attempt proved a
failure.^

The beginhings of the journey of Fray Marcos properly be-
long to the same year ; still I do not include them, as the trip
was actually made in the^ear following.

In all these attempts, the Viceroy proceeded with great cir-
cumspection. Aware of the delicate position in which he was
placed, he risked but little until the impressions conveyed by
Cabeza de Vaca's reports should be sufficiently confirmed.
The only considerable outlay was the fitting out of the expe-
dition under command of Dorantes ; and as this had failed, he
left it to monks to continue the work of reconnoitring. It
was the cheapest, and beyond all doubt the best means
within his reach. The enthusiastic missionary of the times
required but a modest outfit, and he, with a little tact, com-
manded the confidence, as well as the respect, of natives
prone to shrink from the man at arms, or to oppose his
approach. Mendoza was shrewder than Cort6s. The latter,
loath to disbelieve in his own star, squandered means and
energies in fruitless attempts at securing a foothold on the
coast of Lower California. His expeditions of 1535 and
1536 were disastrous, both in a monetary point of view and
in regard to his prestige.^ In 1538 there was a semblance
of reconciliation between him and Mendoza, but it proved
not to be sincere, and the conqueror of Mexico was obliged
to appeal to the court for assistance in his endeavors to

1 The "Topira" of Mendoza's letter Is manifestly "Topia." The mines of
Topia, very celebrated in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, are situated
in Eastern Darango, in the Sierra Madre. The Indians of that region were the
Acaxees.

2 Both expeditions virtually failed. The first was commanded by Cortes in
person, the other by Ulloa, and both only reached Lower California.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. I05

reach and to occupy California.^ In his bitter disappoint-
ment, he claimed for himself the merit of discoveries that
were, as we shall soon see, due to Fray Marcos of Nizza.
Mendoza could feel more and more at ease; Cortes was no
longer a source of danger either to him or to the Crown.
On the other hand, Alvarado openly ranged himself beneath
Mendoza's banner, and in 1538 anchored the vessels he had
constructed on the coast of Jalisco, holding them in readi-
ness for an undertaking in which the Viceroy and he were
to share.2 Still Mendoza would not risk anything, and, ere
he took a decisive step, thought it best to have the northern
country once more explored in an unostentatious but reliable
manner. For this purpose Fray Marcos of Nizza was se-
lected. Whether or not Fray Juan de la Asuncion had pre-
ceded him, it is certain that the Savoyard monk was intrusted
with the more important mission, and that the results of that
mission were in proportion to its importance.

1 Carta de Hernan Cortes^ al Consefo de Indtas^ Pidiendo ayuda para Continuar
sus Armadas^ y Recompensas, para sus Servicios^ etc*, September 20, 1538 (Doc*
de IndiaSy vol. iii. p. 535 et seq.),

2 The definitive agreement was made in 1540. Asiento y Capitulacion de Com-
pahia que celebraron Don Antonio de Mendoza Virrey de Nueva Espaha ; y el
Adelantado Don Pedro de Alvarado^ sobre el Descul>rimiento que este OfreciS
hacer en el Mar del Sur, etc., November 29, 1540 {Doc. de Indias, vol. xvi.
p. y^2etseq).


Digitized by VjOOQIC


106 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.


IV.


FRAY MARCOS OF NIZZA.

FOR more than three centuries the character of the man
whose name stands at the head of this monograph has
been strangely misrepresented, his actions mistold, his words
misconstrued. The result of it has been, that almost every-
thing connected with the early history of discoveries in the
North American Southwest has been correspondingly mis-
understood. It is my purpose to follow the path which for
the first time, in 1881, Mr. F. H. Gushing opened, when he
sought and found among the Indians of Zufii the truth about
Fray Marcos's remarkable journey,^ — a path which, upon
the basis of documentary research, I trod afterwards in 1885
and 1886,^ — and to present the tale of the first trip under-
taken to Cibola as accurately as possible, with the aid of
written and oral evidence, of printed books apd manuscripts,
as well as of geographical and ethnological facts. I do not
wish to be understood as presenting myself as the champion
of Fray Marcos. Wherein he has erred, where, and when, I
shall be careful to state ; but, aside from the fact that it is
certainly gratifying to be able to replace a much defamed
character in its proper light, it is a duty to science and his-
tory to re-establish what is true, and to explain what has for

^ In several publications in periodicals of which I have no copies at hand.

* First in German, in the " New York Statszeitung," Sunday issue, an article
headed Cibola ; then in French, in the " Revue d'Ethnographie," under the title
of La Dicouverte du Nouveau Mixique^ par le tnoine Franciscain Fray Marcos de
Nice ; lastly, in English, in the ''Magazine of Western History," llie Discovery
of New Mexico by Fray Marcos o/Nissza,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 107

a long time puzzled honest students, as well as intelligent
readers.

Fray Marcos was, according to the political configuration
of Southern Europe in his day, a Savoyard. Nizza then be-
longed to the Duchy of Savoy. He is mostly designated by
clerical contemporaries as a Frenchman.^ He was manifestly
a shrewd and very able man, of no ordinary attainments for
the period in which he lived, and wholly devoted to duty.
The great principle of his Order (and of the Catholic Church
in general), obedience, ruled all his actions. He obeyed
implicitly the Viceroy, as well as the Superiors of his own
brotherhood.

Having taken part in the memorable journey which cul-
minated in the conquest of Peru by Francisco Pizarro,^ he
was well adapted for a tour of exploration, from the stand-
point of personal experience and of practical knowledge of
the nature of Indians. Nevertheless, his acquaintance with
the natives of Peru and Quito exposed him to misleading
conclusions, of which I shall have occasion to speak. After
his arrival at Mexico, he was sent to the Northern Provinces.*
When Cabeza de Vaca suddenly appeared in Sinaloa, Fray
Marcos had already had some "frontier" experience in the
country. He knew Indians of Jalisco, and probably of Sina-
loa ; he was acclimatized, and in a measure familiar with the
ways of the aborigines.

His standing in the Order appears to have been high. The
position of Vice-Commissary was occupied by him in 1539,

i^Fray Jeronimo Ximenez de San Esteban.'^'^arAi d Santo Tomas de Villa-
nueva, October 9, 1539 (Nueva Coleccion de Docutnentosy p. 194) : "Kste pasado
mes de Setiembre hizo un ano que parti6 un fraile de S. Francisco, Frances de
nacion." Secular writers also have called him a Frenchman.

^ This is well known: he was present at Caxamarca, and at the death of
Atahualpa. Vetancurt, Menologio, p. 118.

• Mange, Luz de Tierra Incognita^ MS., cap. viii. p. 165. Don Antonio de
Mendoza, Premiire Lettre h VEmpereur Charles K, Cibola^ p. 288.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


io8 archjEOLOGical institute.

and he was elected Provincial in the following ycar.^ I have
already recorded the flattering testimony which his prede-
cessor, Fray Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo, gave him. That
such a man could have been a common impostor, as Cort6s
would make us believe, is hardly probable. We must remem-
ber that the Order of Saint Francis was at the time, and in
Mexico, in the period of its greatest moral and intellectual
growth. Men like Motolinia, Sahagun, Mendieta, and many
others, could not easily be imposed upon by one of their own
fraternity. The Archbishop of Mexico, Don Fray Juan de
Zumdrraga, would soon have punished Fray Marcos had
the latter combined with his manifest ability unreliability
and deceit. ' Neither would inordinate ambition have been
tolerated at a time when humility was regarded as the chief
ornament of a clerical subject.^ Fray Marcos must have
been not only capable, but above all considered as thoroughly
reliable.

In appealing to the religious zeal of the Franciscans, the
Viceroy acted very judiciously. He knew that it would
have jeoparded his own position had he engaged the credit
of the Crown in any doubtful enterprise. By securing monks
as explorers or scouts, he saved a great deal of expense, and
accomplished more. The friars were bound to report the
truth. No worldly interest was to bias their judgment, and
they travelled very economically. Accustomed to receive
charity, they knew also how to do charity to such as were
poorer than they. A double end could be attained : first,
an inexpensive and yet profitable journey ; secondly, an im-
pression could be made upon the feelings of unknown and
therefore doubtful tribes, through the meekness and plia-

1 That he was Vice- Commissary, I have already stated. His election as Pro-
vincial is a fact so well known as to require no proof.

^ All the decrees, letters, and clerical documents of the period establish this
as a rule of the Order.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 109

bility of the emissary. That Fray Marcos should have been
selected for such a task certainly speaks in his favor.

If, as the sources referred to in the preceding section would
lead us to suppose, Fray Juan de la Asuncion really per-
formed the journey to the Gila River, returning to Mexico
in October, Fray Marcos had received instructions to follow
in his tracks before the former s return.* These instructions
bear no date, but they were certainly written previous to De-
cember, 1538.^ They are so remarkable that I cannot refrain
from giving their translation. The Viceroy says : —

"First, as soon as you reach the province of Culiacan,
you will exhort and encourage the Spaniards residing in the
town of San Miguel to treat well those Indians who are at
peace, and not to require their services for excessive labor.
You will state to them, that, if they comply with this, his
Majesty will reward them for it, as well as for the sufferings
which they have already had to undergo, and that in me
they will find assistance to that effect ; but that if they
act to the contrary, they will be in disfavor and severely
punished.

"You will explain to the Indians that I sent you in the
name of his Majesty to tell [the Spaniards] to treat them
well, and that they may know the sorrow caused by the in-
formation received of the sufferings to which they have been
exposed, and that henceforward they shall be well treated,
and those who may do them harm will be chastised.

"You will also certify that they shall not any longer be

1 From the letter of Fray Jeronimo de San Estevan, Carta d Santo Tomas de
Villanueva^ it wojild appear that he left in September, 1538. Fray Juan de la
Asuncion returned in October.

* Fray Marcos received them at Tonala, in New Galicia, on the 20th of No-
vember, (old style,) 1538, therefore on the ist of December. Certificaciones^ Doc.
de Indias, vol. iii. p. 328. I shall always refer hereafter to this volume of the
collection whenever I quote from the report of Fray Marcos or accompanying
documents, and it is therefore unnecessary to mention it


Digitized by VjOOQIC


no ARCHJEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

made slaves, nor taken out of the country, but, on the con-
trary, will be left in it, free, without any harm or evil being
done to them. That therefore they shall lose all fear, and
begin to know God our Lord, who is in heaven, and the Em-
peror, whom He has placed upon the earth with His own
hand to rule and to govern it.

"And since Francisco Vazquez de Coronado, whom his
Majesty hath provided for Governor of that province, goes
with you to the town of San Miguel de Culiacan, you have to
inform me of how he provides for the affairs of that town in
what relates to the service of God our Lord, and the conver-
sion and good treatment of the natives of the province.

"And if, through the favor of God our Lord and the grace
of the Holy Ghost, you should find a road on which to pro-
ceed onward and penetrate farther inland, you shall take
along with you Esteban of Dorantes as a guide ; and I com-
mand him to obey you in all and everything you order him
to do, as if you were my own self ; and in case of disobe-
dience he will be severely punished, according to the penal-
ties imposed upon those who disobey persons holding from
bis Majesty power to command them.

"The aforesaid Governor, Francisco Vazquez, takes with
him the Indians who came with Dorantes, and others whom
it has been possible to collect from those parts, in order that,
should he and you deem it advisable, you may have some of
them accompany you. This you may do, making use of them
in such a manner as you may deem best suited to the service
of our Lord.

" You will always proceed as safely as possible, and inform
yourself first if they [the Indians] are at peace or at war with
each other, in order not to give them any cause for doing you
harm, lest it might become necessary to proceed against them
and chastise them. It would then result, that, in place of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 1 1

doing them good and bringing them enlightenment, the con-
trary would take place.

" You will be careful to note the kind of people, if they are
numerous or not, and if they are dispersed or live together;
the quality and fertility of the land, its climate, the trees
and plants, domestic or savage animals, the aspect of the
country, whether rugged or level, the streams, if large or
small, and the rocks and metals. And of whatever objects
it may be possible to bring or send samples, bring or send
them, in order that his Majesty be informed of everything.

" Inform yourself always if there is any knowledge of the
sea-coast, — of that of the north as well as that of the south ;
for it might be that the continent would grow narrower, and
some arm of the sea would enter inland. And if you should
reach the coast of the South Sea, you will bury, at the foot of
some strikingly tall tree on the beach of a bay, letters in which
you give information of what may seem to you proper; and
such trees you shall mark with a cross, in order that they be
recognized. The same thing you will do at the mouths of
rivers, and on the shores of what may be proper for seaports,
at remarkable trees near the water, making the same mark of
the cross and leaving letters ; for in case I should despatch
vessels, they will be directed to look for such signs.

"Always endeavor to send, through Indians, advice of how
you fare and how you are received, and with particular care
of what you find.

"And if God our Lord should grant that you find some
large settlement where it might appear to you to be desirable
to erect a monastery, and to send thither ecclesiastics fitted
for the work of conversion, you will send word thereof by
Indians, or return to Culiacan yourself. Send the message
with due secrecy, in order that everything be prepared with-
out commotion, and that, in the pacification of what may be


Digitized by VjOOQIC


112 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

discovered, the service of our Lord and the good of the people
of the country be properly secured.

" And although the whole earth belongs to the Emperor,
our master, you will, in my name, take possession of it for
his Majesty, making the marks and performing the acts that
may appear to you requisite for the occasion ; and to the
natives you will give to understand that there is a God in
heaven, and the Emperor upon this earth to rule and to com-
mand them, to whom all have to be subject and serve him,

"D. Antonio de Mendoza."^

Aside from the great wisdom of which this document gives
proof, there are several points contained in it that deserve
attention, as they exercised great influence upon the actions
of Fray Marcos and the results of his trip.

In the first place, there is the strict order to travel with
the greatest possible security. This meant that the monk
should not expose his life whenever it could possibly be
avoided.

Next, there are the directions upon the manner in which
he should investigate the countries traversed by him, and how
he should report upon his progress and discoveries, — even
sending or taking along specimens of the products of the
land. These instructions are worthy of expeditions of the
present day made for purely scientific purposes.

Last, though not least, they convey the information that
Fray Marcos was supplied with a guide, and that that guide
was none other but the negro Estevan, the former companion

1 The original of these instructions is In the volume above quoted, page 325,
Instruccion de Don Antmiio de Mendoza, Visor ey de Nueva Espana, I have
translated it as literally as possible. The French version of Ternaux-Compans,
contained in the Appendix to Cibola^ I have avoided, since it is a retranslation of
the Italian version in Ramusio, Terzo Volume delte NavigaHoni et Viaggi. Ter-
nanx-Compans varies occasionally from the original text Probably the variar
tions are due to the Italian that served for his translation.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 1 3

of Cabeza de Vaca. He is called here " Esteban of Dorantes,"
for the reason that he had remained with Dorantes after the
departure of Cabeza de Vaca and Castillo Maldonado. We
have seen in the preceding monograph that the Viceroy
speaks of Estevan as almost the only member remaining of
the expedition which the chief magistrate of New Spain had
organized in 1537.^

But Fray Marcos had still another companion. A country-
man of his, a Savoyard lay brother, Fra Honorato, was to go
with him. So says Fray Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo, in his
certificate of August 26, 1539;^ and, as we shall see further
on, Fray Marcos himself corroborates the statement in his
report.^ Of Fra Honorato I know as yet nothing, except
that he was a Savoyard,* that he accompanied his Superior
for a short distance, and that in 155 1 he was still alive,
being attached to the convent of Jalisco.*

It was on the seventh day of March of the year 1539 (old
style) that Fray Marcos left Culiacan with his guide, the lay
brother, and a few of the Indians of whom the Viceroy speaks

1 Premilre Lettre: "De tous les pr^paratifs que }*avais faits, il ne me resta .
qu'un nfegre qui est venu avec Dorantes."

* Certificaciones : " Fu^ con otro companero, fraile lego, que se llama Fra
Onorato, por mandado del Senor Don Antonio de Mendoza, Visorey," etc.

* Descubrimiento de las Siete CiudadeSy Relaciony p. 330.

* That Fra Honorato was a Savoyard rests on rather frail testimony. Still
I am convinced that he was from that country. The Provincial Fray Antonio
de Ciudad Rodrigo, who was a Spaniard, would not have used the particularly
Italian term " Fra " had the subject not been an Italian monk. Furthermore,
there is a mention of a " Frere Norato," who, as I believe, was the same one
who accompanied Fray Marcos. The Licentiate de la Marcha says in his
Rapport sur le Royaume de la Notevelle Galicey 155 1 [Recueil de Documents et
Mimoires Ortginaux sur I'Histoire des Possessions Espagnoles dans VAmSrique^
by M. Ternaux-Compans, 1840) : " Ce frfere de nation Savoyarde." I leave the
point undecided so far, but believe that Fra Honorato was the same as the Fra
Norato of a later date.

^ For these details I refer to the report of the (Licentiate de la Marcha,\just
quoted above.

8


Digitized by VjOOQIC


114 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

in his instructions as having come with Cabeza de Vaca.^
Herrera says of these Indians: "Francisco Vazquez, when
once the country was at peace, and the affairs of the town
of San Miguel arranged, sent to the villages of Petatlan and of
the Cuchillo, sixty leagues beyond San Miguel, six Indians of
that country, slaves whom the Viceroy had given to Fray Mar-
cos to keep him company. They had been kept at Mexico
to become proficient in the Spanish language, and attached
to the ways of the Christians." * The mission of these In-
dians had been entirely successful. They fully reassured the
people on the Rio de Petatlan, and a number of the latter
returned with them to see the Governor and Fray Marcos,
and express their joy at the restoration of peace and security.
When the monks departed, these Indians also joined their
company.^ Thus escorted. Fray Marcos found, as far as
Petatlan at least, the very best reception. Everywhere the
natives treated him with the utmost kindness, providing him
with food and building shelters for the night in desert places.
At Petatlan, however, he met with the first disappointment

* See Instrucciones and Reiacion,

2 Historia General, Decada VI. lib. vii. cap. vii. p. 155. (Fray Marcos de
'^\zL3^\Relacion, p. 330: "Y ciertos Indies, de los quel dicho Sr. Visorey
liberty y compr6 para este efecto."

* Mendoza, Premiire Lettre, p. 288 : " Dix jours apr^, ces Indiens revinrent
au nombre d'environ quatre-cents ; ils se present^rent au gouverneur, et lui
dirent qu'ils venaient de la part de tous les habitants pour voir et connaitre ceux
qui leur faisaient tant de bien, les laissaient retoumer chez eux, semer du mails ;
car il y avait bien longtemps qu'ils fuyaient dans les montagnes, se cachaient
comme des b€tes sauvages dans la crainte qu'on ne les fit esclaves. Ils ajou-
t^rent, qu'eux et tous leurs compatriotes ^taient pr6ts ^ ob^ir aux ordres qu'on
leur donnerait/* The same document says, however, that these Indians were
sent back previous to the departure of Fray Marcos. But he asserts {Relacion,
P* 330) : " Y con otra mucha cantidad de indios de Petatlan, que serian cin-
cuenta leguas de la dicha villa. Los cuales vinieron al valle de Culiacan,
significando gran alegria, por habelles certificado los indios liber tados, quel
Gobernador envio delante k hacelles saber su libertad y que no se habian de
hacer esclavos dellos ni hacelles guerra ni mal tratamiento."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 1 5

His companion, Honorato, fell sick, and he had to leave
him there and continue his way alone.^ He remarks in his
report: "And in compliance with the said instruction, I
continued my journey whither the Holy Ghost directed me,
although I did not deserve it."*

It is well to state here, that among the materials at my
command for this monograph, there is but a single report of
Fray Marcos, whereas it appears that he wrote two ; for in
this report he says, speaking of the islands of the Gulf of
California, "The names of which I put down in another
paper, where I give the names of the islands and settle-
ments." ' That " paper " has not yet reappeared, and I must
confine myself to the report which for a long time has been
known only through its translation into Italian by Ramusio,
and through the French translation by M. Ternaux-Com-
pans.* Subsequently the Spanish government caused the
Spanish original to be published,^ and I prefer to use it
rather than to follow the French version. Ternaux-Compans
is very severe in his comments on Fray Marcos ; ^ but whea
we compare his translation with the Spanish original, we can-
not refrain from wishing him to have been in that translation
as exact as Fray Marcos proves to be in his statements.

From Petatlan on, the negro Estevan, and the Indians
whom the Viceroy had sent from Mexico, became the only "^
companions of Fray Marcos ; or, rather, they constituted his

1 Fray Marcos, Relacion,

2 Ut supra : " Y conforme k la dicha instruccion, scgui mi viaje por donde
me gui6 el Espiritu Santo, sin merescello yo."

» Ut supra, p. 334 : " Cuyos nombres pongo en otro papel, donde asiento el
nombre de las islas y poblaciones."

* This is the version to which I have already alluded.

* Volume III. of the valuable collection of Documentos de Indias,

* Cibola, Introduction, p. vi.: "J'avoue que la conduite qu'il tint plus tard
au Nouveau M^xique ne me fait pas supposer qu'un homme aussi vain et aussi
\i%ix ait jamais pu se montrer bon historien."


X


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Il6 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

regular escort. But natives of the villages of Northern Sina-
loa attached themselves to the little caravan in numbers, and
their presence was very useful, in that they provided food for
the travellers, and insured them a friendly reception.^ The
aborigines who had come from the city of Mexico belonged
to the stock and tribe of the Sonoran Pimas or Nebomes ;
consequently they sproke a langirage affiliated with the Yaqui,
the Mayo, and above all with the Opata,^ so that these In-
dians were very useful interpreters. In this manner Fray
Marcos could, as far as the Gila River, hold conversations
with many of the natives, and was not limited, except in
the case of the Yaquis, Mayos, and Seris, to the imperfect
medium of signs. Furthermore, the recollections of Cabeza
de Vaca and of his useful career among the aborigines were
still fresh ; and the presence of the negro, whose strange
physical appearance could not fail to have greatly impressed
the natives, bore witness to the fact that the monk was kin-
dred to the mysterious " medicine-men " who, three years
previous, had done the Indians so much good.

The ethnography of Sonora was then very much the same
as, generally speaking, it is at this day. The Cahita stock,
the Mayos and Yaquis, occupied the banks of the two rivers
in Southern Sonora which still bear their names. The Ne-
bomes, or Southern Pimas, dwelt north of them, and towards
the mountains. Beyond the Pimas lived the Opatas, in the

^ Relaciotiy p. 330 : " Y con esta compania que digo, tome mi camino basta
allegar al pueblo de Petatlan, hallando en el camino muchos rescibimientos y
presentes de comida, rosas y otras cosas desta calidad, y casas que me hacian de
petates y ramas, en todas las partes donde no habia poblado/*

2 It is at present a well established fact that the Cahita language (to which
the Mayo and the Yaqui belong), the Pima, the Opata, and the Tarahumar, are
but branches of one and the same family. Between the Opata and the Pima the
difference is comparatively slight. There is much greater difference with the
Cahita idioms. But it is not unlikely that the Pimas from Bamoa (as the colony
planted in Sinaloa by the followers of Cabeza de Vaca was called) were able
also to converse in one of the Cahita dialects.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 1 7

valley of the Sonora River and in the western approaches,
nay, in the very heart, of the Sierra Madre. Intermediate
dialects, the Jovas and the Eudeves, ranged around the
Opatas almost in a semicircle from west to east, separating
them from the Pimas of the South. Uninhabited wastes lay
in and between the tribal ranges. The country north of the
sources of the Rio Sonora was deserted as far as the upper
course of the Arizonian Rio San Pedro. In the valley formed
by that stream, a branch of the Northern Pimas, the Sobay-
puris, had reared a string of little villages as far north as
the vicinity of the Arivaypa torrent. The banks of the Gila
east of the narrow canon of San Carlos were deserted, and
a wooded wilderness, traversed by beautiful streams of cool
and rushing water, extended north of the Gila for about two
weeks' march. It bordered upon the bleak plateau of the
little Colorado River, and the valleys and ridges of the Zufii
country. In the east, it abutted against the towering Sierra
Blanca; to the west, it lost itself in a maze of forbidding
mountains which encase the upper course of Salt River. That
wooded table-land was, in the sixteenth century as well as
to-day, roamed over by straggling bands of Apache Indians.

In giving here this sketch of the ethnography of the country
which Fray Marcos had to traverse, I anticipate in fact the
results of his explorations. But I have thought it necessary
to prepare the reader for the scene of the monk's travels
by mentioning countries and peoples which, as I shall after-
wards prove, were those seen and spoken of by the adven-
turous Franciscan. It may enable the reader to follow with
greater ease the narrative of the journey, and to understand
the nature of the intercourse which Fray Marcos was en-
abled to hold with the Indian population.

Little is said in the official report before me of the country
forming the confines of Sinaloa and Sonora. Still, we can


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Il8 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

gather that the route lay within easy reach of the sea-coast
He says : " On this whole stretch, which may be twenty-five
to thirty leagues on the other side of Petetean, I saw nothing
worthy of being recorded here, except that there came to me
Indians from the island in which the Marques del Valle has
been, from which Indians I ascertained that it was really an
island, and not, as some pretend, terra firtna. The distance
from this island to the mainland may be one half-league by
sea, more or less, and I saw that they crossed over on rafts
to the mainland, and from the mainland back to the island.
There also came to see me Indians from another isle larger
than the first one, and situated farther ahead. I learned
from them that there were thirty more islands — small ones —
settled, but destitute of food, except two, where they say that
they have maize. These Indians wore many conch-shells sus-
pended to their necks, in which there used to be pearls, and
when I showed them a pearl which I had taken along, they
said that there were some of these on those islands, but I
did not see any."^

I beg to call attention here, for the first time, to the careful
manner in which Fray Marcos discriminates between what
he has seen and what he has merely been told.

Twenty-five to thirty leagues north, or northwest rather,
from the "Rio del Fuerte," as the Petatlan River is called
to-day, carried the explorer into the country of the Mayos,
and very probably beyond the mouth of the river of that
name, as else the Indians from the Gulf of California would
not have reached him so easily. The islands referred to were,
therefore: —

I. The group of inconsiderable islets strung along the
coast of Lower Sonora between the mouths of the Mayo
and Yaqui Rivers.

* Relacion^ p. 331 : " fi yo les mostr^ una perla que llevaba para muestra,
J me dLzeron que de aquellas habia en las islas, pero yo no les vi ninguna."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. II9

2. The islands of the Seris, of which the " Isla del Tiburon"
and "Isla del Angel de la Guardia" are the principal ones.

1 cannot determine to what tribe the inhabitants of the
first group belonged. I doubt, however, if they were Sens.
The latter lived too far to the north.^ They probably were
Mayos, who either dwelt permanently on the smaller islands
first mentioned, or visited them frequently for the purpose
of fishing. He says also, "And I saw that they crossed
over to the mainland on rafts, and from the mainland back
to the island." This proves that Fray Marcos was on the
coast at, or a short distance north of, the mouth of the Mayo
River. It also reveals the ethnological fact, that Indians of
Southern Sonora — those of Cahita stock, or islanders who
were their near neighbors — were acquainted with coast navi-
gation by means of rafts.^

A desert — that is, uninhabited country — of four days'
march separated the point where he met the islanders
from the next Indian tribe. These natives were greatly
surprised at seeing a white man, as they never had seen
any before.^ Here he noticed that the word "Sayota" was

* Ribas, Historia de los Trivmphos de Nvestra Santa Fee, etc., 1645 (1*^- ^i*
cap. i. p. 358), speaks o£ the Seris as the " Heris." He mentions their place of
abode as near the mouth of the Sonora River : " Y a orillas de vn tan caudaloso
rio, como el de Hiaqui, que a la parte del Occidente desemboca en el mar, a
quarenta leguas de distancia de llanadas, en que ay noticias de gran gentio de
otra Nacion, que llaman Heris." He also mentions the Seris of the islands :
''Y dentro del mismo mar, en isla, se dize, que habitan otros de la misma
nacion."

2 This is, to my knowledge, the earliest mention of this fact. I transcribe
the text (Relacion, p. 331) : " Y vi que della pasaban d la tierra firme en balsas,
y de la tierra firme & ella, y el espacio que hay de la isla d la tierra firme, puede
ser de media legua de mar, poco mas 6 menos."

' Relaciofiy p. 331 : " HalW otros indios, que se admiraron de me ver, porque
ninguna noticia tienen de Christianos, d causa de no contratarse con los de atras
por el despoblado." This speaks against the assumption that they were Yaquis.
The latter knew of the Spaniards ; they had seen them, and even fought them,
during the raid of Diego de Guzman in 1533. Relacion de lo que he Descubierto
en la Costa de la Mar del Sur (in " Proceso del Marques del Valle y Nuiio de


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I20 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE,

frequently used, and he was told that it meant "man from
the sky," or " from heaven." ^ My linguistic knowledge is in-
sufficient to determine to what idiom of Sonora this word
may belong. At all events, the Pima Indians of the monk's
escort were able to interpret, and this shows that the lan-
guage must have been either their own or that of some tribe
with whom they had intercourse, and could therefore make
themselves understood. None of the Pima settlements lay
anywhere near the shores of the Gulf, unless the Guaymas
were of Pima stock, as respectable authority has affirmed.^
But in order to reach Guaymas from the Mayo River it was
necessary to pass through the Yaqui settlements. These
villages could not even be avoided without at least noticing
them, as they extended almost to the sea-shore.^ It is there-
fore presumable that these Indians were the Yaquis, and that
he met them near where their present towns of Bel6n and
Rahum stand.* Here also Fray Marcos was told that four

Guzman," Doc. de Indias^ vol. xv. p. 333) : " Porque este poblado, do fue la
refriega, llamase Yaquimi." Pray Antonio Tello, Historia de la Nueva GaUcia^

P- 357.

* Reladan^ p. 331 : " Y me llamaban Sayota, que quiere decir en su lengua
'hombre del cielo."*

2 The Guaymas are generally considered as belonging to the Seris, therefore
of Yuma stock; but the bitter hostility of the Seris against the Guaymas, which
ultimately culminated in the destruction of the latter, would hardly support the
assumption.

8 In the sixteenth century, and the first half of the seventeenth, the Yaquis
occupied the siiores of the river for an extent of twelve leagues, as far as its
mouth. Ribas, Historia de los Trvvmphos (p. 284) ; " En las doze ultimas, a la
mar, esta poblada la famosa Nacion de Hiaquis. . . . Quando los Hiaquis en su
Gentilidad poblaua este rio, era en forma de rancherias tendidas por sus riberas.
Y junto a sus sementaras, y el numero destas rancherias seria de ochenta, en
que auia treinta mil almas.'' There can be no doubt about the fact that the
Mayos were the tribe whom he met first at the time when he saw the islanders,
and it is not likely that he would have overlooked so powerful and important a
cluster as the Yaquis. This is in favor of the supposition that they were the
Yaquis and not the Guaymas.

* Both places are near the mouth of the Yaqui. P. Juan Ortiz Zapata,
S. J., Relacion de las Misiones que la Compahia de Jesus tiene en el Reino y Pro-


Digitized byCjOOQlC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 121

or five days' journey inland, near the foot of the mountains,
was a broad valley in which were large settlements of people
who dressed in cotton. When he exhibited samples which
he carried along as means of testing information on minerals
and metals, they pointed at gold, and said that the people of
that valley had vessels made of that material, and that they
wore nose and ear ornaments of the same ; also, that they
used golden implements to scrape the perspiration from their
bodies.^ Fray Marcos did not visit the said valley then, it
being his intention not to leave the coast.

Whether he gathered this information among the Yaquis
or among the Guaymas, it is evident that the cluster of vil-
lages here spoken of were those of the sedentary Nebomes or
Pimas, — an agricultural, pottery-making people, who dressed
in cotton and nicely prepared skins, and wore flashy trinkets.
They occupied valleys on the Upper Yaqui, and irrigated
by means of artificial canals. Their houses were large-sized
adobes, and the centre of a village was frequently occupied
by a particularly solid and extensive structure, the walls of
which were perforated with loopholes. Thither the inhabit-
ants retreated for defence in case of attack.^ None of the

vincias de la Nueva Vizcaya en la Nueva Espana, 1678 (Documentos para la ffis^
toria de Mexico^ 4th series, vol. iii. p. 378).

1 Relacion, p. 332 : " Y no tube nueva mas de que me dixeron que la tierra
adentro, cuatro 6 cinco jomadas do se rematan las cordilleras de las sierras, se
hace una abra liana y de mucha tierra, en la cual me dixeron haber muchas y
muy.grandes poblacioncs, en que hay gente vestida de algodon. Y mostrdn-
doles yo algunos metales que llevaba, para tomar razon de los metales de la
tierra, tomaron el metal de oro y me dixeron que de aquel hay vasijas entre
aquella gente de la abra, y que traen colgadas de las narices y orejas ciertas
cosas redondas de aquel oro, y que tienen unas paletillas del, con que raen y se
quitan el sudor.** The little scrapers which are mentioned here were formerly
in use also among the New Mexican Pueblos, or at least among some of them ;
but they were not made of metallic substances. Now they are in disuse, and it
would be difficult even to find a specimen.

2 Ribas (Historia^ p. 360) has given a full description of the dwellings, cus-
toms, and dress of the Nebomes or Pimas of Sonora.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


122 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

tribes of Sonora knew the use of metals : they distinguished
such material, and discriminated between the different kinds,
from external appearances only. The pottery of Sonora is
frequently yellow, and sometimes made of a micaceous clay
similar to the one used by the New Mexican Indians of the
Pueblo of Nambfe. Such vessels appear as if covered with
gold-dust, and their lustre is easily distinguishable from brass.
It was very natural for the coast people of Sonora, who made
no pottery themselves, and had no idea of the difference be-
tween metallic and earthen substances, to recognize in the
color and brilliancy of gold the hues of micaceous pottery.
On the other hand, Fray Marcos, who had been in Peru,
where gold and silver vessels were manufactured and used
by the aborigines, did not find it strange that a tribe of sed-
entary natives residing in a fertile mountain valley might be
acquainted with precious metals. But here again his con-
scientiousness does not allow him to speak of all this except
as from hearsay, and he very wisely and honestly leaves the
matter of the authenticity of the reports undecided.

Notwithstanding his intention to remain near the coast,
it seems that he began to trend towards the interior. This
would indicate that the Indians last seen by him were the
Yaquis, and not the Guaymas; for from the mouth of the
Yaqui River the coast deflects to the west, whereas his course
lay as much as possible to the north. At the end of three
days he arrived at a place called Vacapa, an Indian settle-
ment, which was forty leagues distant from the Gulf of Cali-
fornia. It is described as being situated in a fertile region, in
which the inhabitants raised crops by irrigation, and which
was therefore plentifully supplied with food. He arrived
there " two days before Passion Sunday," or about the middle
of April.^ The distance by air line from Culiacan to Matape

1 Relacion, p. 333.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 2 3

is three hundred and thirty miles. By the road which Fray
Marcos was compelled to take, he must have travelled nearly
five hundred ; and being on foot, and with delays and stop-
pages, it is not possible he could have reached the centre
of Sonora in less than a full month. I place some stress
on the location of Vacapa, not only because it is an im-
portant station on Fray Marcos's route, but because it has
been looked for in entirely different quarters, and has thus
confused to a great extent notions about the travels of the
Franciscan, as well as about the subsequent journey of Coro-
nado. I am convinced that the Vacapa of Fray Marcos was
"Matapa" or "Matape," an Indian village in Central Sonora.
There is only one Vacapa known in the annals of the Jesuit
missionaries, — to whom, as is well known, the Christianiza-
tion of the tribes of Sonora is due. St. Ludovic de Vacapa, or
San Luis Beltran de Bacapa, was situated in Southwestern
Arizona, near the Sonora line, and it formed, at the close
of the seventeenth century, a "rancheria," or temporary
village of lodges of the Pdpagos,^ that branch of the Pimas
which occupies the arid southwest of Arizona and the
equally arid northwest of Sonora. Misled by the similarity
of the name, the Vacapa of Fray Marcos has been identified
with this northern locality.^ Aside from the fact that the

1 San Ludovic de Vacapa is found on the map of Sonora and Arizona prepared
by Father Eusebius Kuehne, the great Jesuit missionary. Its distance from the
coast is given (according to the scale) at fifteen leagues only. It is further men-
tioned in the manuscript entitled Relaci&n Diaria de la Entrctda al Nortteste que
fue de hida y buelta de 309 Leguas desde 22 de Septiemhre kasta 18 de Octubre,
Descubrim^ del Desemboque del Rio Grande a la Mar de la California^ del
Puerto de Sta Clara, etc., 1698. Its author i/ F. Eusebius Kuehne [Kinomim-
self, but it is bound in with the Luz de Tierra Incognita of Mange. He sa^s of
it : ** Esta rancheria tiene mui buenos aguajes y tenia mucha mas gente la qual
ha pasado a la Concepcion de Caborca, a baptizarse."

2 Father Kuehne is responsible for this mistake. He says in his Relacion
Diaria of 1698, above quoted : " Esta es la nombrada rancheria del Bacapa, hasta
la qual llego el R. P. Fr. Marcos de Niza como lo trae en su tomo." Mange


Digitized by VjOOQIC


124 archjEOLOgical institute.

description of Vacapa does not at all agree with the nat-
ural features of the " Papagueria/' the latter being almost
completely devoid of irrigation ; the distance from Culiacan
to the Bacapa of the seventeenth century is at least six hun-
dred miles in a direct line. Considering the manner in which
Fray Marcos travelled, he could not possibly, in the course
of a month, have penetrated as far north.^ He says, further,
that from the coast to Vacapa the country was inhabited by
the same people.^ This would have been the case also in
Southwestern Arizona, provided the coast was habitable,
which is not the case there, and the difficulties would have
been insuperable on account of the lack of water. Lastly,
he sent Indians from Vacapa to the sea-coast to explore the
nature of the islands of which he had been told previously.
These Indians returned after a week's absence^ and in their
company came natives of the sea-shore. From any point of
the " Papagueria," the homes of the Seris, who inhabited the
main islands of the Californian Gulf, lie at least two hundred
miles away to the south ; whereas from Matape it is almost

{Luz de Tierra Incognita^ p. 173) makes no comments; but it is plain that he
follows the lead of his companion and friend, Kuehne.

1 We may gather an idea of the longest distances travelled by the friar on
this journey by what he says of his return trip, which he describes as having
been almost a flight. Relaciotty p. 349 ; " Y con el temor, despedime luego de
aquella gente de aquel valle, y anduve el primero dia diez leguas, y ansi anduve
d ocho y d diez leguas, sin parar hasta pasar el segundo despoblado." He
manifestly refers to about twenty-five miles a day as a forced march for him.
It is doubtful therefore whether, with his large escort, he could have made
over fifteen miles daily, and it is known that he stayed several days at Petatlan
among the Mayos and with the Yaquis (or the Guaymas?). Even without any
delays, he could not have reached Bacapa in the Papagueria in less than two
months. The circuits, detours, etc., which he would have been compelled to
make, chiefly in order to find water, would have lengthened his route much
more yet.

3 Page 332 : '' Y ansi anduve tres dias, poblados de aquella misma gente, de
los cuales fui rescibido como de los de atras, llegu^ d una razonable poblacion
que se llama Vacapa.''


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 25

exactly forty leagues (or no miles) to the coast beyond
Hermosillo, facing the Isla del Tiburon, and separated from
it by not more than fourteen miles of sea. The Seris held
not merely the islands, but also the shore, and it was an
easy matter for the messengers to go to them and return to
Matape inside of one week, whereas it is utterly out of the
question from San Luis de Bacapa except by sea. Matape
was a considerable settlement of Eudeves ; they spoke a
dialect of the Opata, an intermediate "shade" between the
Opata and the Pima.^ I feel justified, therefore, in identi-
fying the Vacapa of Fray Marcos with Matape of Central
Sonora, instead of locating it, as has been done only too
long, with an obscure gathering of Pdpago lodges much
farther north.

I have said that Fray Marcos had sent Indian scouts from
Vacapa to the seaboard in order to find out about the islands
of which he heard before, and that they came back in com-
pany with Indians from the coast. The latter certified to
Fray Marcos that there were as many as thirty-four islands
and islets close together, but that they were destitute of
vegetable food, and their inhabitants, as well as their kin-
dred on the coast, held intercourse with each other by means
of rafts. These people can only have been the Seris, a wild
and dangerous tribe, living from the hunt and from fisheries,
from rapine and occasional barter with the inland tribes, with
whom they exchanged fish, conch-shells, and other marine
products, for maize and commodities which the Indians on
the continent raised or manufactured.* I am not informed

1 The Eudcve is classified as a dialect of the Opata, It is needless to quote
authorities. As a specimen of the language, I only refer to the Lord's Prayer
contained in the work of ^rancisco V\v[itxi\€i\^uadro Descriptivo y Comparatvvo
de las Lengnas Indigenas de Mixico, vol. ii. p. 164.

5* Ribas, Historia, p. 358 : " Sustentanse de cd9a, aunque al tiempo de
cosecha de maiz, con cueros de Venados, y sal, que recogen de la mar, van d
rescatarlo &, otras Naciones." Of the hostility of the Seris towards all the other


Digitized by VjOOQIC


126 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

of the exact number of islands lying in the Gulf of California
directly west of Hermosillo, and known as the original (as
well as the present) haunts of the Serfs, but there are cer-
tainly over twenty of them. There can be no doubt that
these are the ones to which Fray Marcos refers, and it
strengthens the position which I have taken in identifying
Vacapa with Matape, where the Jesuit mission of " San Jos6
de Matapa" was afterwards founded in 1629.^

The Serfs brought to Fray Marcos "targets of cowhide,
very well made, large, so as to cover them from head to
foot, with openings above the handle to look through. These
shields are so strong that a crossbow shot could not go
through them." 2 If we substitute for cowhide the skins of
the mule-deer {Cariacus macrotus, the "Bura" of the Mexi-
cans), we shall easily understand this mistake of the friar.
The mule-deer is common in Lower California,^ and the Serfs
raided that peninsula often, or traded with its natives. They
also wore conch-shells on their foreheads, which, they said,
frequently contained pearls. Two of these Serfs attached
themselves to the Friar's retinue, remaining with him of
their own accord.*

So far, nothing had occurred to mar the success of the un-
dertaking. The only accident worthy of note had been the
loss of Fra Honorato. Everywhere the aborigines had re-
tribes it is needless to give further proof. They were a scourge to Sonora in
times before as well as after the sixteenth century.

1 This date is from the manuscript entitled Catalogo de los Partidos contenidos
. en los Rectorados de las Misiones de Sonora por el Aho de 1685.

^ Relacion, p. 334.

«[Dr. C. F. H. Ten Kate) Reizen en Onderzoekingen in Noord Amerika, 1885,
p. 73. Speaking of the maftimals of Lower California, he says : " Het grootste
zoogdier dezer bergen is het hert (Cariacus macrotus), dat in kleine kudden
rondowaalt en zelden gestoord wordt door den jager."

* Relacion, p. 335 : " Y dos indios de las islas dixeron que se querian andar
commigo siete 6 ocho dias. Y con ellos y con los tres pintados que digo, me
parti de Vacapa."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 2 ^

ceived Fray Marcos not only with kindness, but even with
veneration. The recollections of Cabeza de Vaca were still
fresh in their minds, and the sagacious provision made by
the Viceroy in causing Pima Indians educated at Mexico to
be placed at the disposal of the friar produced excellent re-
sults. Fray Marcos does not complain of the negro. Still,
a chronicler of Coronado's expedition,(jPedro de Castafieda,^
informs us that Estevan had made himself obnoxious to his
Superior and to the people of the country by his overbearing
manner, and especially by taking along with him on the road
the women who were given to him at the villages.^ However
this may be, two days after they had arrived at Vacapa, Fray
Marcos despatched the negro in advance to reconnoitre and
report. His instructions were, " To go to the north fifty or
sixty leagues, to see if in that direction there might be ob-
served something great, or some rich country and well set-
tled ; and if he found anything or heard of anything of that
kind, to stop, and to send me a message by some Indians.
That message was to consist of a wooden cross of a white
color. In case the discovery was of medium importance, he
was to send me a cross of one span in length ; if important,
the cross was to be two spans in length ; and if more im-
portant than New Spain, he should send me a large cross." ^
These instructions, as we have seen before, the negro was
bound to obey to the letter.'

1 Relation du Voyage de Cibola^ p. 20 : ** II parait que les religieux ne furent
pas contents du n^gre ; il emmenait les femmes qu'on lui donnait, et ne pensait
qu'4 s'enrichir. Mais comme il savait bien se faire entendre des naturels de
cette contr^e, et que ces Indiens le connaissaient, les religieux se decid^rent \
Tenvoyer en avant, pour qu'4 leur arri.v^e ils pussent traverser le pays pacific,
et qu'ils n'eussent plus qu'^ recueillir les renseignements qu*ils desiraient.'*

2 Relacion^ p. 332.

* Instruc clones : " Al cual mando que os obedezca en todo y por todo que
vos le manddredes, como k mi misma persona; y no haciendolo asi, que incurra
en mal caso y en las penas que caen los que no obedescen 4 las personas que
tienen poder de S. M. para poderlos mandar."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


128 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

On the afternoon of Passion Sunday, Estevan left Vacapa
with a certain retinue of Indians, and Fray Marcos remained
among the Eudeves.^ He had no fear, and no cause for
dreading anything. His manner, his tact, the presence of
his interpreters, and the fame of Cabeza de Vaca and his
companions, had won for him the confidence and attachment
of all the Indians through whom he passed. It need not sur-
prise us to see natives of other tribes, who, like the Seris,
were perpetually at war with their neighbors, travel long
distances to visit him, placing themselves voluntarily at the
mercy of their enemies, most of whom had just grounds for
revenge. It was the rumor which had spread, that a man
from heaven, or, to use Indian phraseology, "from above,"
a mighty medicine-man, had appeared, which caused an in-
voluntary truce. So, when he sent for the Seris, they came,
and their enemies regarded them as sacred, since they had
come at the bidding of the powerful wizard. Fray Marcos
took advantage of the disposition of his hosts everywhere
to make them acquainted with the rudimentary symbols of
Christian worship.^ He showed them the sign of the cross,
and here, as everywhere else, the Indian was at once struck
by the token. ^The cross is an original symbol of the Amer-
ican aborigines. It is used by them to indicate a star, and
the crosses of the morning and evening stars are particularly
distinguished, among the Pueblos of New Mexico at least, by
shape and color. The crucifix which the friar carried, and

1 Relacion^ p. 333 : " Y asi se parti6 el dicho Estevan, negro, de mi Domingo
de Pasion despues de comer, quedando en esta poblacion, que digo que se dice
Vacapa."

2 Antonio de Mendoza, Deuxihne Lettre h Charles V. {Cibola^ Appendix,
p. 292), speaking of the expedition of Melchior Diaz in the beginning of 1540:
" II me dit qu'apres etre parti de Culiacan, et avoir pass^ le rio de Petatlan, il
avait ^te constamment bien re9u par les Indiens. II avait ordre d'envoyer une
croix dans I'endroit oil il se rendait. Les indigenes recevaient ce signe avec
une profonde veneration; ils le pla9aient dans des maisons de nattes qu'ils coii>
struisaient expr^s."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 129

his manner of crossing himself, attracted the natives ; and
not only did they see no harm in imitating the gesture and in
manufacturing small crosses for themselves, but they consid-
ered it profitable, as a reinforcement of the charm which their
own primitive token of the cross was supposed to possess
under certain circumstances. Since the monk accompanied
every salutation, every address to others, with the gesture of
the cross, that figure hereafter remained as a manifestation
of peace and friendly welcome.^ / Further than this, however,
the impressions made by the friar could not go. We can
expect of him neither baptisms nor religious teachings. He
had no time for either, and, furthermore, his mission was to
explore and to prepare the ground for conversions. He was
not so much a missionary as an emissary.

Not only did the ferocious Seris come to visit him at Va-
capa, but three Indians from another tribe called on him also.
"On this day three Indians came to see me, of the kind called
' Painted Indians,' their faces and chests and arms decorated
with incisions. These live aroun4 by the way of the east,
and people of their number get as far up as the Seven Cities.
They said that they had come to see me because they had
heard of me, and, among other things, they gave me much
information concerning the Seven Cities and Provinces of
which the Indian' of Estevan has spoken, and their reports
were almost the same as those sent by Estevan."

I have here purposely anticipated in the narrative of Fray
Marcos, in order to interpolate the incident of the Painted
Indians. Previous to their coming (and to that of the Seris),
Estevan had sent to Vacapa Indian messengers " with a very
large cross, as tall as a man ; and they told me, by order of
Estevan, that I should now follow him at once, since he had
met people who gave him information of the greatest thing

1 Ibid,
9


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I30 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

in the world, and that he was with Indians who had been
there, of whom he sent me one ; and this one told me so
many things of the greatness of the country, that I refused
to believe it until I saw it myself, or obtained further proof.
He said that from where Estevan now was it was thirty
days' march to the first city of the country, which was called
Cibola. He further affirms and says, that in this first prov-
ince there are seven very large cities, all under one lord,
with houses of stone and lime, large, the smallest ones of
two stories and with a fiat roof, and others of three and four
stories, and that of the lord with five, all placed together in
order; and on the door-sills and lintels of the principal houses
many figures of turquoise stones, of which he said there was
a great abundance; and that the people of these cities are
very well clothed ; and many other particulars he told me, as
well about these Seven Cities as of other provinces beyond,
of which he said that each one was much more important
than the Seven Cities. In order to find out how he came to
know all this, I questioned him a great deal, and found him
very reasonable." ^

Well might Fray Marcos add to this promising piece of
news, " I gave thanks to our Lord." The Seven Cities, re-
garded as a dim vision ever since the time of Nufio de Guz-
man, were at last heard of, and in a manner that not only
rendered their existence certain, but also indicated a way to
reach them, and render his journey of the greatest value to
Christendom in general, and to Spain in particular. Still,
Fray Marcos did not hasten his departure, expecting that
Estevan would wait for him as directed.

Not only had he received notice of the Seven Cities ; the
name of one of these had been told, and that name was Cibola.

1 RelacioHy p. 333: "Y para saber del como lo sabia, tuvimos muchas de-
mandas y respuestas ; y hallele de muy buena razon."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 131

When we hear the name of a city, town, or village for the
first time, in some country where another language is spoken
than that of the people of the place mentioned or of the coun-
try in which it is situated, it becomes sometimes difficult to
recognize that place again when we hear it mentioned by its
proper designation, — its aboriginal name, so to speak. Thus,
any one not versed in geography might fail to recognize in
Aspinwall, Col6n ; in Ratisbonne, Regensburg ; in Leghorn,
Livorno. (Assuming merely for the present (what I shall sub-
sequently prove to be the case) that the Seven Cities were
the seven villages of Zuni in Western New Mexico, it does not
follow that "Cibola" was the true name of any one of them.
It may have been a word from some other of the many In-
dian idioms spoken between the Zuiii country and Central
Sonora, or it may have been a corruption of " Shi-uo-na," the
name in the Zufii language for the range or country of the
Zufii tribe. The latter suggestion, which is due to Mr.
Gushing, appears to me the most likely. It was even more
common in the sixteenth century to write Ciuola than Cibola,
and the corruption of Shiuona into Ciuola or Civola would
not be much greater than that of the French Geneve into
the Spanish Ginebra, or of the French Treves into the Ger-
man Trier ; or, particularly, the transformation of the old
Roman names of towns into modern languages, as, for in-
stance, Caesar Augusta into Saragossa, Maguntia into Maynz,
Colonia Agrippinae into Coeln or Cologne, — and innumerable
other cases of the kind. I incline, therefore, strongly to the
belief, that, as Mr. Gushing has suggested, Cibola is a corrup-
tion of the name given by the Zuiii Indians to their tribal range)

During the explorations which I carried on in Arizona and
Sonora for the Archaeological Institute of America, in the
years 1883 and 1884, I ^ook particular pains to follow the
probable route of Fray Marcos and of Coronado, I also in-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


132 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

quired among the Apaches, the Pimas, and the Opatas, for
any word or name that might sound like Cibola. The Ari-
zonian Pimas have Civano-Ki (the house of Civano) for the
celebrated ruin of Casa Grande oh the Gila.^ There is a
rock in the Sierra Madre, near the head-waters of the Upper
Yaqui River, called Civonaro-Ko (the rock which people avoid
or go around).* But neither of these terms, nor of the sites
which they designate, is sufficiently analogous to Cibola or to
the features of the region thus named. ^Still less is the term
"Cibolo," as applied to the buffalo in New Mexico, of any
weight. "Cibolo" is derived from Cibola ; it is a contraction
of the designation " cows of Cibola," which the Spaniards in
early times applied to the American bison.^ ?

Assuming Cibola to have been the Zufii country, the ques-
tion comes up, Who were the Indians, painted and tattooed,
who visited Fray Marcos at Vacapa.? These Indians lived
east of the latter place, and some of their kindred were neigh-
bors of Cibola. In my former publications on the journey of
Fray Marcos, I have thought of identifying these " striated "
Indians with the Pimas of the Gila River. I overlooked then,
not having at my command the original version of Fray Mar-
cos's report, the important feature of their being ** tattooed,"
and not merely painted.* I confess, therefore, that I am unable

^fSee my report in the Fifth Annual Report of the Arch ffological Instiinte of
Afnericay p. 80.^ Also, Ten Kate, Jferbeteringen en Aammllingen van Reizen en
Oriderzoekingen in Noord-Amerika, 1889, p. 8 : '* De casagrande wordt 00k
Siwannoki of Siwanki, *huis van Siwanno' genemd." This connection be-
tween Civano or Siva and the building was already noticed by Father Kuehne
or Kino. It is stated since by various Jesuit missionaries of the past century.

2 The " Civona-ro-co " is a rock jutting out over the rapid current of the
Yaqui River, about three leagues east of Huachinera in Northwestern Sonora.
It stands in the vicinity of numerous ruins of former Opata villages, as Quita-
mac, Batesopa, and Baquigopa.

8 This fact is well known. In the sixteenth century the word "Cibolo" was
not yet in use. " Vacas de Cibola," however, appears frequently.

^ The original has, '' Este dia me vini^ron tres Indies de los que llaman pin-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 33

to place them ethnographically. In the immediate vicinity of
Zufti, the Apaches and Navajos alone were wont to roam, and
neither of these tribes decorated their bodies with incisions.
It must be said, also, that the original text is much less
clear — that is, much less decisive — than the French transla-
tion attempts to make it ; and that, while it seems improbable
that the terms "labrados" and "pintados" apply to painting
of the body alone, (judging from analogy with the Jumanos
Indians, who really tattooed themselves,) there is still a possi-
bility that paint alone is meant. In that case, then, it is
more than likely that those *' Painted Indians " were the
Pimas of the Gila River in Arizona, or the Sobaypuris, some
of whom came in occasional contact with Zufti.

On the second day after Easter Sunday, Fray Marcos at
last left Vacapa with two Seris and the three Painted In-
dians, and also with his interpreters, although he does not
mention them, and followed the trail of the negro in a
northerly direction.^ After three days' march he reached the
village where Estevan had received the first intelligence of
Cibola. In three days' march from Matape, going north,
he must have reached the valley of the Sonora River, near
Babiacora, and the Indians there, who knew of Cibola, were
therefore the Opatas.^ From them he obtained further cor-
roboration of what Estevan had reported, — that Cibola was
thirty days' journey off; that the houses of these towns were

tados, labrados los rostros y pechos y brazos." Ternaux-Compans translates,
"lis avaient le visage, la poitrine et les bras peints." But "labrado" com-
monly signifies "tattooed" in a case like this.

i Relacion, p. 335.

2 The distance from Matape to Babiacora on the Sonora River is, by air line,
a little over sixty miles. Ures lies more to the northwest, whereas Babiacora is
almost due north. Along the route, the friar would have had to traverse the
villages of the Eudeves, like Alamos, and others. That the Opatas occupied
the Sonora River valley is well established. The Ures were Pimas. See Orozco
y Berra, Geo}(rafia de las LenguaSy p. 351 ; 2\'sxijj2J^2Xai^elacion de las Misiones,
1678, p. 352, " La lengua es Pima."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


134 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

as large and as high as stated ; that Cibola was the first of
the "Seven Cities"; and that besides the seven there were
other "kingdoms/* called Marata, Acus, and Totonteac. He
inquired why they went to countries so remote from their
homes, and " they told me that they went in search of tur-
quoises, cow-hides, and other objects ; and that in that pueblo
there were quantities of them. I also sought to ascertain
what they gave in exchange, and they replied, that it was the
sweat of their brows and their personal service; that they
went to the first city, which is called Cibola, and served there
in digging the ground and in other work, and that they re-
ceived skins of cows, of those which they have there, and
turquoises for their services. The folk of the villages all
wear turquoises, good and fine ones, hanging from their ears
and nostrils, and they say that there are many decorations
made with turquoises in the principal doorways of Cibola.
They told me that the manner of dress at Cibola is a cot-
ton shirt down to the ankle, with a button at the throat
and a long cord depending from it, and the sleeves of the
shirts of equal width from shoulder to wrist. This strikes
me as being like the dress of Bohemians. They say that
they also wear girdles of turquoises, and that over the shirts
some carry very good mantles, others cow-skins, well pre-
pared, of which they say that in that country there are
many, and they hold them in greatest esteem ; also that
the women are dressed like the men, and clothed from head
to foot/'i

1 Reladofiy p. 335. The statement that they earned their turquoises at Cibola
by the sweat of their brows — " con el sudor y servicio de sus personas '* — is
probably a misunderstanding on the Friar's part What the Opatas probably
intended to say was, that the turquoises were picked or dug from the rock with
considerable effort. At the Cerrillos, near Santa F^, where since time imme-
morial the Tanos, and later on the Queres, obtained their turquoises, stone
hammers and axes have been found rather plentifully, by means of which these
natives obtained the precious stones. "Where the Zunis obtained their tur-


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 35

I shall for the present merely call attention to the fact that
Fray Marcos relates from hearsay only, and not de visu. He
was very well received by the Opatas, who brought many of
their sick in order that he might cure them. All the Friar
could do for the invalids was to have them touch his garb, and
to bless them.^ Here he was shown skins of cows very well
tanned and dressed, which they said came from Cibola.^ But
here also he found out that Estevan, instead of obeying his
orders, had already left, in company with some of their own
people. This was an act of disobedience on the part of the
negro, and one which was to prove fatal to him in the end.


quoises is not yet positively ascertained ; but it is quite certain that no Indians
from another tribe went to Zuni to hire out their services in exchange for
trinkets, or any other object of barter. They may have gone to distant countries
to trade for them, or to dig for them themselves; but they certainly did not
perform any work as journeymen or as hired hands among utter strangers.

1 Ibid., p. 336: **Y traianme enfermos que los curase, y procuraban de
tocarme la ropa, sobre los cuales yo decia el Evangelio.'*

^ Ibid. : ** Dieronme algunos cueros de Vaca, tan bien adobados y labrados,
que en ellos parecian ser hechos de hombres de mucha pulicia, y todos decian
que venian de Cibola." It is not impossible that buffalo robes might have
found their way as far as Sonora through exchange and barter. The Zunis
themselves did not engage in regular buffalo hunts on the plains of Eastern
New Mexico, as some of the Rio Grande Pueblos were wont to do until
lately; still they had buffalo hides which they obtained from their eastern con-
geners. When Coronado reached Cibola, in the year after Fray Marcos's jour-
ney, Indians from as far east as Pecos came to visit him. They carried with
them, and presented to the Spanish commander, "des cuirs tannes, des boucliers
et des casques." Castaiieda, Cibola, p. 68. These objects were of buffalo hide,
for the chronicler adds : " On ne I'aurait jamais devin^ en voyant les peaux de
ces animaux, car elles ^taient couvertes d*un poil laineux et fris^ qui ressem-
blait ^ de la laine.*' That the people of Cibola, occasionally at least, dressed in
buffalo robes, is stated in Relacion del Suceso de la Jornada que Francisco Vaz-
quez hizo en el Descubrimiento de Cibola (Doc. de Indias, vol. xiv. p. 320) : " Se
visten de mantas de Hennegrien i de cueros de venados, ^ algunos de vaca."
Also by the Captain Juan Jaramillo, Relacion hecha por el . , , de la Jornada
que Habia Hecho d la Tierra nueva en Nueva Espana y al Descubrimiento de
Cibola, etc. {Doc. de Indias, vol. xiv. p. 308) : " Alcanzan ya algunos cueros de
vacas adobado con que se cobijan, que son a manera de hernias y de mucho
abrigo."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


136 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Thence on Fray Marcos came to villages daily for seven days
in succession, being everywhere received with open arms, the
people treating him to the best they had, and loading him with
presents, among which were cow-hides and turquoises. What
was more important to him was the detailed information he
received concerning Cibola. It is beyond doubt that he was
now marching up the Sonora River, through the picturesque
and fairly populous valley that extends at intervals on both
banks. Estevan did not fail either to send him word almost
daily, or to leave behind large crosses, planted in token that
he continued to receive encouraging news. But, withal, the
negro had deserted his master, and was hurrying on as fast
as he could towards Cibola. What may have prompted him
to such a course it is impossible to tell. The surmise lies
near at hand, that Estevan wished to secure for himself the
glory of the first discovery, and therefore disregarded the
commands of the Viceroy and the Friar's positive instruc-
tions. (Incidentally let it be remarked, that Fray Marcos
was so struck by the beauty of the Sonora valley that he
took formal possession of it.^ ) It is indeed a beautiful vale,
of the most varying aspects of landscape, with a charming
climate, and combining the grandeur of picturesque moun-
tain gorges with the softness of extremely fertile expanses.
Nothing is more striking than the contrast between the rich
vale extending from Aconchi to Sinoquipe and the gigantic
cleft, bordered by towering cliffs, which extends from Sino-
quipe as far north almost as Arizpe. The lonely traveller,
who is compelled to cross and recross the Sonora River in-
numerable times, as the bed of it occupies nearly the entire
bottom of the gorge, is in doubt as to what he shall most
admire, whether the height and form of the crags and pin-

^Rf/acwnSp. 337: "Aqui puse dos cruces y tom^ posesion, conforme d la
instruccion, porque me pareci6 ser aquella mejor tierra que la que quedaba
atras, y que convenia desde alii hacer auto de posesion."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 137

nacles, or the vivid hues of their strata, or the strange vege-
tation that often clings to the most precipitous walls. Fray
Marcos makes no mention of these beauties. This is ac-
counted for by the fact, that, if he felt at all disposed to re-
cord impressions of that kind, he would have assigned them
rather to the report "in which he gives the names of the
places," and not to the one which we have, and which might
be termed a " personal narrative " only.

The reasons for which I am quite satisfied that Fray Mar-
cos took the route of the Sonora River are the following.
From Matape, the most direct, and, in point of safety and
comfort, the most convenient route, was that of the valley
of the Rio Sonora. By striking the stream about Babiacora,
the river bed afforded an easy and almost direct road to the
north. In Northern Sonora the water-courses indicate the
routes of travel. There are two main streams which run
almost parallel with each other in a southerly direction,
the Sonora and the Yaqui; although the latter, taking its
origin under the twenty-ninth degree of latitude, flows to
the north first, approaching the line of the United States
to within seventy miles. From Matape the Sonora was by
far the most accessible. It also afforded advantages in the
nature of its population. To reach the Yaqui from Matape
entailed difficult, long, and dangerous journeys over desolate,
frequently waterless mountains. The Opatas on the Upper
Yaqui were cut up into small communities, at war with one
another and with other tribes.^ Along the Sonora, however,

1 The Opatas on the Upper Yaqui River, where the latter is called Rio de
Babispe, Rio de Huassavas, and Rio de Sahuaripa, were more distant from
each other than those on the Sonora River. This was a consequence of the
topography. There is but one considerable valley in that part of Sonora which
is irrigated directly by the large stream. This is the valley where Babispe and
Baserac are situated. The other vales are much smaller. The Opatas at Tami-
chopa, at Quitamac, and at Huassavas, still more those of Babispe, were divided
into independent communities, and are mentioned as distinct tribes in 1645 ^X


Digitized by VjOOQIC


138 archjEOLogical institute.

none of these obstacles arose. The Opatas there were al-
ways noted for the gentleness of their dispositions and for
a higher degree of culture.^ It was therefore very natural
that Estevan, and after him Fray Marcos, should select or
be directed to that long valley as the nearest and best route
towards Cibola and the distant north.

On the seventh day, the monk came to the last village,
which he describes as lying in a country well irrigated and
fertile.* This would agree either with the situation of Bacu-
achi, or with that of Mututicachi, on the upper course of the
Sonora River. Remains of Indian villages are still visible
higher up, as far as ** Los Fresnos," ten miles south of the
place where the stream rises, but they lie in a gorge. At
either of the two places first mentioned, however, a broad,
sunny valley expands, and especially at Bacuachi the water
supply is ample. Remains of older settlements are found
around and near the present village.^

Proceeding northward, the Friar entered upon an unin-
habited stretch of four days' march.* Although the term

Ribas, Historia de los Trivmphos (lib. vi. cap. i. p. 359) : "La Nacion de los
BatUcos, caminado al Norte, tiene tambien por confinantes muchas Naciones de
Gentiles amigos Cumupas, Buasdavas, Bapispes y declinando al Oriente, a los
Sunas." Castafieda, in Cibola^ p. 157, recognizes this state of things too. He
says: "Derriire cette province [the Sonora River valley] jusqu'aux mon-
tagnes sont batis un grand nombre de villages habitus par des Indiens, qui for«
ment une multitude de tribus 4 part, r^unis ^n petites nations de sept ou huit,
dix ou douze villages ; ce sont Upatrico, Mochila, Guagarispa, £1 Vallecillo, et
d'autres qui sont pres des montagnes, et que nous n'avons pas vus.**

1 Ribas, Historia^ p. 392 : ** La gente que en el esta poblada, es del mismo
natural que los Sisibotaris, y de las mismas costumbres, vestidos como ellos, y
mas que otras Naciones, sus casas mas durables y compuestas.'*

« Rdacion, pp. 336, 337.

< Beyond Mututicachi, and as high up as Janoverachi and Los Fresnos,
the river flows through a gorge, or, to say the least, through a narrow valley,
where there is but little room for cultivation, and only in few sites. On the
whole stretch of nearly thirty miles to Los Fresnos T heard only of burial places.
At Los Fresnos there are ruins, but the valley is a mere bay of small extent.

* Heiacion, p. 338 ; " Otro dia entr^ en el despoblado, y donde habia de a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 39

"desert" is used, it was not a treeless waste, but simply a
country without human abodes. Such is, indeed, the expanse
between the northern end of the valley of Bacuachi and the
upper course of the San Pedro River of Southern Arizona.
Mountain fastnesses, not treeless, but rugged and wild, sepa-
rate the site of Mututicachi from the present Palominas or
Ochoaville on the San Pedro. It is not likely that the Fran-
ciscan had to take the most direct route, which is a " short
cut" following the Sonora River to its source (the Ojo de
Agua del Valle), and thence along the eastern base of the
Sierra de San Josd to the upper course of the Arizonian San
Pedro. The distance he would have had to travel on this
trail is quite eighty miles, to the vicinity of the present settle-
ment of Fairbanks, near where the vestiges of former villages
of the Sobaypuris begin to appear. Estevan had already left:
the negro was hurrying northward.

At the village which I have located above in the vicinity
of Bacuachi, which village appears to have been the last one
of the Opatas in that direction, Fray Marcos secured further
confirmation of the details which the Indians previously gave
him concerning Cibola. In addition, he relates the following
singular occurrence: —

'* I wore a gown of gray cloth, of the kind called of Sara-
gossa, which the Governor of New Galicia, Francisco Vazquez
de Coronado, had caused me to wear. The lord of this pue-
blo and other Indians touched the garment with their hand,
and told me that there was much of the same kind at Toton-


comer, hall^ ranchos y comida bastante, junto d un arroyo, y a la noche balle
casas y asi mismo comida, y asi lo tuve cuatro dias que me duro el despoblado.**
The *• arroyo," or brook, would seem to indicate that he travelled along the Rio
Sonora. The term "arroyo" can hardly be taken here in the sense usually
applied to it in the Southwest, namely, as a mountain torrent only. Since that
•* arroyo '* had water in May, it must have been a permanent brook, and as such
the Sonora River appears near to its source.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I40 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

teac, and that the natives dressed in it. I laughed at their
remark, saying that it could not be, — that they probably wore
cotton mantles only. But they said, ' Do you think that we
do not know that what you wear is different from our dress ?
Know that at Cibola the houses are filled with the cloth
which we wear ; but at Totonteac there are a kind of small
animals, from which they take wherewith to manufacture
what you have on your body/ I was much astonished,
having never heard anything like it before, and inquired of
them further, and they said that the animals are of the size
of the two Castilian greyhounds which Estevan had with him ;
also that there are many of them in Totonteac. I could not
find out what sort of animals they were." ^

This passage in Fray Marcos's report has aroused con-
siderable speculation. The majority of surmises have been
that the people of Totonteac were a sheep or goat herding
people. The mountain sheep is not a small animal, and it
has no wool; the mountain goat is smaller, and its fleece
might correspond to a certain extent to the material de-
scribed, although the color is lighter. Neither of these ani-
mals was ever domesticated by Indians, nor is there any
trace that they were ever hunted for any other purpose than

1 Relaciottf p. 338 : *' £ yo Uevaba vestido un htfbito de pano pardo, que
Uaman de Saragoza, que me hizo traer Francisco Vazquez de Corouado, gober-
nador de la Nueva Galicia ; y el Sefior deste pueblo y otros indios tentaron el
hdbito con las manos, y me dixeron que de aquello habia mucho en Totonteac,
y que lo traian vestido los naturales de alii, de lo cual yo me rei, y dixe que no
seria sino de aquellas mantas de algodon quellos traian y dixeronme : ' Piensas
que no sabemos que eso que tu traes y lo que nosotros traemos es diferente ?
Sabe que en Cibola todas las casas estan llenas desta ropa que nosotros traemos
mas ; mas en Totonteac hay unos animales pequenos, de los cuales quitan lo
con que se hace esto que tu traes.* Yo me admire, porque no habia oido tal
cosa hasta que llegu^ aqui, y quiseme informar muy particularmente dello, y
dixeronme que los animales son del tamano de dos galgos de Castilla que
llevaba Esteban; dicen que hay muchos en Totonteac; no pude atinar que
genero de animales fuese."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 4 1

for their meat. Occasionally their hides or fleeces have
been used, but only now and then, as a matter of caprice or
temporary necessity. Of the supposed former existence of a
species of Guanacu or Vicufta in North America, other than
fossil remains, there is no evidence. It has been overlooked,
that, even at the present time, the Moquis of Arizona manu-
facture blankets out of the fur of the jack-rabbit and of the
cony {Lepus callotis and sylvaticus). The fur is cut into nar-
row strips, which are afterwards wound around a core pf yucca
fibre so as to form a cord, and out of such cords the blankets
are plaited or tressed rather than woven. The garment is
extremely warm and quite heavy, and in color as well as in
weight it bears tolerable resemblance to the gray " Saragossa
cloth " worn by the monk on that occasion. When Coronado
visited New Mexico in the following year, such blankets of
rabbit-hair were found among the Moquis (Tusayan), as well
as at Zuiii-Cibola, although they were most abundant in the
former tribe.^

Estevan had certainly disobeyed the commands of his
chief; he did not, however, forsake him altogether. He
had provided for Fray Marcos's journey through the unin-
habited stretch by causing the Indians to erect sheds at
stated intervals, where he expected the Friar to camp over

1 The comparison of the jack-rabbit with the Spanish greyhound holds good
in color, and to a certain extent in appearance. As to size, the greyhound is,
of course, taller ; but the comparison is, after all, well imagined, no other animal
of that region (the antelope excepted) being fleet and slender enough to assimi-
late to the greyhound in appearance. In view of the fact that rabbit-hair
mantles were extensively worn at Moqui (and also at Zuni) at the time, the
explanation suggested seems more than likely. In regard to the latter point, I
quote Castafieda (O^^/a, p. 163), speaking of Cibola: ** Ces naturels ont aussi
des esp^ces de pelisses en plumes ou en peaux de li^vres, et des etoffes en
coton." Relacion Postrera de Sivola (MS.) : **Tambien hacen mantas de pel-
lejos de liebres y de conejos, con que se cubren." I saw one of these robes at
Zuni, and found on the Upper Rio Gila, in a cave village, a piece of the cords
or twists out of which they are made.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


142 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

night. This was considerate, but cannot justify his dis-
obedience.^

One of the first things that struck Fray Marcos when he
arrived among the Sobaypuris was, aside from the well settled
valley, the number of turquoises worn as ornaments by the
people. Some had as many as three and four strings of
green stones around their neck ; others carried them as ear-
pendants and in their noses. The women were dressed in
good skirts and chemises. " Cibola was as well known here
as Mexico is in New Spain, or Cuzco in Peru ; and they de-
cribed fully the shape of the houses, the arrangement of the
villages, the streets and squares, like people who had been
there often, and who obtained there, in return for their ser-
vices, the objects of luxury and convenience which they pos-
sessed. I said to them that it could not be possible that
the houses were of such a kind as they represented ; and in
order to give me to understand it, they took soil and ashes,
poured water on them, and showed me how they placed the
stones and how they raised the structure, putting mud and
stone until it rose on high. I asked the men if the people
there had wings to ascend to these stories (of the buildings) ;
but they laughed, and described to me a ladder, as well as I
could have done it myself, and they took a pole, placing it on
their heads to show that that was the height from story to
story. I also heard from them about the cloth of Totonteac,
where they say that the houses are like those of Cibola, but
better and more numerous, and that it is a big thing without
any end to it/' ^

1 Relacion, p. 338, above quoted.

2 Jbid.^ p. 339: "Aqui habia tanta noticia de Cibola, como en la Nueva
Espana, de Mexico y en el Perd, del Cuzco ; y tan particularmente contaban la
manera de las casas y de la poblacion y calles y plazas della, como personas que
habian estado en ella muchas veces, y que traian de alU las cosas de pulicia,
que tenian habidas por su servicio, como los de atras. Yo les decia que no era


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 143

Again I refer to the fact, that the monk speaks from hear-
say only, and does not comment upon what he has heard.
As to the true ethnological bearing of these statements, I
withhold my opinion for the present.

Now comes a rather puzzling statement of Fray Marcos :
"Here I learned that the coast turns to the westward sud-
denly, for until the first uninhabited stretch it always trended
to the north ; and as the course of the coast and its turn is
a matter of much importance, I went to examine, and clearly
saw that at a latitude of thirty-five degrees it turns to the
west, by which I was no less overjoyed than by the good
news about the inland country."^

From the San Pedro Valley to the coast the distance is
very great; furthermore, the country is not favorable for
transit. In a direct line, two hundred miles separate the
head-waters of the San Pedro from the " Bahia de Tena-

posible que las casas, fuesen de la manera que me decian, y para darmelo k
entender, tomaban tierra y ceniza, y echabanle agua y senalabanme como ponian
la piedra y como subian el edificio arriba, poniendo aquello y piedra hasta po-
nello en lo alto ; preguntabales a los hombres de aquella tierra, si tenian alas
para subir aquellos sobrados ; reianse y senalabanme el escalera, tambien como
la podria yo senalar, y tomaban un palo y ponianlo sobre la cabeza y decian que
aquel altura hay de sobrado k sobrado. Tambien tuve aqui relacion del pafio
de lana de Totonteac, donde dicen que las casas son como las de Cibola y
mejores y muchas mas, y que es cosa muy grande y que no tiene cabo." The
description given of the manner in which *' adobes " were made is very exact,
and proves that the information is authentic. Previous to the importation of
cereals, the Pueblo Indians indeed made their adobes by mixing ashes with the
mud. Castaneda, Cibola^ p. 168: "lis n'ont pas de chaux, mais ils font un
melange de cendre, de terre et de charbon qui la remplacent tres bien. ... Ils
font de grands tas de thym et de jonc, et y mettent le feu ; quand cette masse
est reduite en cendre et en charbon, ils jettent dessus une grande quantite de
terre et d'eau, et melent le tout ensemble."

1 Relacion^ p. 339: "Aqui supe que la costa se vuelve al Poniente, muy de
recio, porque hasta la entrada deste primer despoblado que pas^, siempre la
costa se venia metiendo al Norte; y como cosa que importa mucho [saber]
volver la costa, quiselo saber, y asi fui en demanda della y vi claramente, que en
los treinta y cinco grados, vuelve al Oeste, de que no menos alegria tuve, que de
la buena nueva de la tierra."


Digitized byCjOOQlC


144 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

cates," or Adair Bay ; but the observation on the change in
the course of the shore is correct, although the latitude is,
of course, erroneously given. The Sonoran coast begins to
turn to the west-northwest in latitude 31°. Fray Marcos
was, among the Sobaypuris, in latitude 31*^ 40', about. His
error is, therefore, not only the common excess of one degree
and one half, (which is the average error of observations of
the time,) it is even two degrees greater.

He does not state how long a time he spent on the trip
towards the Gulf ; but after his return he proceeded down the
valley for five days. The villages in it were small, so much
so that he calls them "Barrios," a term equivalent to "wards"
of a larger town, and they were at short distances from one
another. The soil was fertile and well irrigated, and the peo-
ple knew Cibola from having been there.^ He even met a
man who was a native of Cibola. He was aged, and had fled
from there owing to some difficulty. That individual informed

^ The tenn "Barrio" is defined as follows in Covarrubias, Tesoro de la
Lengua Castellana, 1674, p. 86: "Barrio. Antiguamente los hombres de
]abran9a tenian sus caserias en ellas, y estas se dixeron barrio en Arabigo, de
Barr, campo, y assi vale tanto barrio como casa de campo : y porque no estavan
seguros de los ladrones, y robadores, juntaronse muchos barrios, y hizieron un
lugar distinto en los dichos barrios, aunque con juntos unos a otros, y estos se
Uamaron en Latin Vicos, y los moradores dellos vizinos, vezinos ; y el barrio
vezindad. Quando el trigo, o otra semilla no ha nacido igualmente, sino un
pedazo apartado de otro, dezimos auer nacido a barrios, aludiendo al asiento
que tuvieron primero los barrios, apartados uno de otro : y quando las barbas
nacen d mechones, se dize lo mismo dellos : y aunque entiendo ser el nombre
barrio Arabigo, y auerle dado su verdadera etymologia, en barr, campo, todavia
hemos de cumplir con los que le dan otro origen. El vulgo, de vario, porque se
distingue de las otra vezinadades. Los que profesan la lengua Griega ; dizen, que
de Baris, domus, o de pariquesis, i bariquesis, mudada la P. tenue en B. media :
los Hebreos del verbo Creare, por ser cada barrio de aquellas generaciones
distinta, o del mism© verbo, en quanto significa succidere, por estar cada
barrio dividido uno de otro." 1 1 place some importance on this definition,
since it explains the applicatioiriof the word to the distinct sections or quar-
ters of the pueblos, each of which was at one time occupied by a distinct gens
or clan.^


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 145

Fray Marcos "that the lord of those seven cities lives and
resides in one of them called Ahacus, and has placed others
in the other cities to command there for him ; • . . and he
told me that Cibola is a big city, in which there are many
people, streets and squares, and that in some parts of the
city there are very large houses, as high as eleven stories, in
which the principal men come together on certain days of the
year. They say that the houses are of stone and lime, as
others had already told me, and that the entrances and fronts
of the principal buildings are of turquoises. He also said to
me, that the other Seven Cities are like this one, and some of
them larger, and that the principal one of all is Ahacus. He
says that towards the southeast there is a kingdom called
Marata, in which there used to be many and large settle-
ments, all of which are of houses of stone and many-storied,
and that this kingdom was and still is at war with the lord
of the Seven Cities, through which warfare the kingdom of
Marata has declined greatly, although it still holds its own,
and is at war with the others. And he also stated that
towards the southeast lies the kingdom called Totonteac,
which he mentions as being the largest in the world, the
most populous, and the wealthiest, and that there they dress
in cloth made of the material out of which is manufactured
the gown I wear, and others of a thinner kind, and that it is
taken from the animals mentioned to me previously ; and that
the people are highly civilized, different from those I have yet
seen. He also said that there is another very large province
and kingdom named Acus. There is also Ahacus, and that
word, with aspiration, is the name of one of the Seven Cities,
the largest of them all ; and Acus, without aspiration, is a
province by itself. He stated that the costume of Cibola was
as it had been described to me ; that all those who dwell in
that city sleep in beds elevated above the floor, covered with

10


Digitized by VjOOQIC


146 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

sheets and bedding. He oflfered to go with me to Cibola, and
beyond, if I would take him along." ^

It would require too much space to give the remainder of
the friar's statements concerning what the Sobaypuris told
him about Cibola. It all confirmed what he had been told
before.^ But it is well to note the testimony given by him
to the veracity of the Indians, — how they described to him
the route which he had to take, the villages he would meet, the
places where he was to pass the night, and where he would
find food and water. He always found everything in accord-
ance with their statements. He also found that as much and
as carefully as he inquired after Cibola, examining his inform-
ants alone and in groups, cross-examining them, their sayings
always corroborated one another.^

In the most northerly village of the Sobaypuris he rested
three days, and here estimates the distance " from the place
where I received the first information about Cibola" at 112
leagues. Beyond that village lay a country completely de-
serted, which it would take fifteen days to cross, and at the

^ Relacion, p. 341. I copy only a part of the concluding sentence : "Tambien
dixo que hay otra provincia y reino muy grande, que se dice Acus, porque hay
Ahacus : y Ahacus, con aspiracion, es una de las siete cibdades, la mas prin-
cipal, Acus, es reino y provincia por si." The passage about Marata reads
(p. 340) : " Dice que 4 la parte del Sueste, hay un reino, que se llama Marata,
en que solia haber muchas y muy grandes poblaciones, y que todas tienen estas
casas de piedra y sobrados, y questos han tenido y tienen guerra con el Sefior
destas siete cibdades, por la cual guerra se ha disminuido en gran cantidad este
reino de Marata, aunque todavia esta sobre si y tiene guerra con estotros." The
statement that Totonteac was southeast ("d la parte del Sueste'*) is a manifest
slip of the pen.

2 Ibid., pp. 339-341.

' Ibid., p. 342 : " Desde el primer dia que yo tuve noticia de la cibdad de
Cibola, los indios me dixeron todo lo que hasta hoy he visto; diciendome
siempre los pueblos que habia de hallar en el camino y los nombres dellos," etc.
Page 343 : " Y no hacia sino tomar indios y preguntalles aparte a cada uno por
si, y todos se conformaban en una misma cosa." Estevan also sent him word
that he had found the natives absolutely reliable.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 47

end of which Cibola was situated.^ This is one of the most
important statements for locating Cibola, from the monk's
report, as well as the valley where Fray Marcos was then,
and Vacapa.

The Apache reservation of Arizona, often designated as the
White Mountain reservation, has been without permanent set-
tlements for the past four centuries at least. The Apaches
roamed and hunted through it; but their "rancherias" lay
aside from the trails which crossed from the Gila River to
Zufii. In fifteen days a European traveller can cross it on
foot; an Indian might do it in shorter time. Zufti lies, not on
the border of the timbered mountain region, but within three
days' march of its northern limit. It can even be reached
from Showlow in two days. South of the reservation, the
San Pedro valley, with its Sobaypuri villages, was the nearest
inhabited spot. The Pima villages on the Gila, west of Flor-
ence, are much farther off. From the Upper San Pedro
valley to Matape the air-line distance is nearly 260 miles.
Fray Marcos indicates the leagues which he actually walked
between the two points at 112, or 302 miles. The difference
of forty miles is easily accounted for by the detours which
he had to make. While this alone would not be sufficient
ground for identifying the localities named with the places
mentioned in Fray Marcos's report, it still renders that iden-
tification very plausible.

In the San Pedro valley the monk was shown a hide " one
and a half times the size of that of a large cow's ; and they
told me that it was that of a beast which has only one horn
on its forehead, and that this horn is bent down to the breast,


1 He took possession of the San Pedro valley. Page 342 : " Porque estaba
el despoblado cuatro leguas de aqui ; y desde el principio del hasta llegar a la
dudad de Cibola, hay largos quince dias de camino." Ternaux-Compans trans-
lates *' despoblado " by " desert,*' thus creating a false impression.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


148 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

whence it turns up in a point which they say is so strong
that it breaks everything which it strikes. Of these animals
they say that there are many in the country. The color of
the hide is like that of a he-goat» and the hair as long as a
finger." It is not difficult to recognize in this description the
skin and fur of the mountain sheep {flvis montana), but the
statements as to the great size of the animal and its single
horn are of course erroneous. The mountain sheep was once
very common along the Gila River. It penetrated as far
south as the twenty-ninth parallel, into Sonora ; and to-day
it exists in Chihuahua, south of the thirty-first (if not of the
thirtieth) degree of latitude. The description of a unicorn,
as given to Fray Marcos, was certainly but a misunderstand-
ing. The skull and horns of the mountain sheep are to-day
regarded by many Indians as the hardest substance known ;
and the dialect spoken by the Sobaypuris was sufficiently
distinct from that of the Southern Pimas to render a full
understanding of the picture given quite difficult. As to
the size, it is very clear that the hide in question could not
have been from one single animal, but several may have been
sewed together, as is not infrequently done.^

1 Relaciotiy p. 341 : " Aqui en este valle, me truxeron un cuero, tanto y medio
mayor que de una gran vaca, y me dixeron ques de un animal, que tiene solo un
cuerno en la frente y questo cuemo es corbo hacia los pechos, y que de alii sale
una punta derecha, en la cual dicen que tiene tanta fuerza, que ninguna cosa,
por recia que sea, dexa de romper, si topa con ella ; y dicen que hay muchos
animales destos en aquella tierra ; la color del cuero es a manera de cabron y el
pelo tan largo como el dedo " This statement, somewhat disfigured, is repeated
in a letter from the " Contador " Rodrigo de Albomoz to Alonso de la Tone,
Royal Treasurer at Espanola, dated October 18, 1739, and published by Oviedo
in Historia General^ vol. iv. lib. xl. cap. i p. 19. But the Contador adds : ** Di9e
que no son unicornios, sino otra manera de animales." The mountain sheep
was seen near the Gila by Castaiieda in 1540. Cibola^ P- ^59^ " On trouve beau-
coup de moutons et de chfevres sauvages ; ces animaux sont tr^s-grands, ils onl
de longues cornes. Des Espagnols assurent en avoir vu des troupeaux de
plus de centi mais qui s'enfuyaient aussitdt qu'on les apercevait** Page 54:
" L'arm^e arriva ensuite \ Chichilticale. Prfes de 1^, les sentinelles espagnoles


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. I49

After having rested among the Sobaypuris for three days,
Fray Marcos entered the " desert," to traverse which he had
been warned that fifteen days would be required. He had
learned that Estevan, when he preceded him on this last toil-
some trip, had gone in company with " three hundred men,
accompanying him and carrying provisions." Many also de-
sired to accompany the monk, and he allowed them to join
him. Their object was " to serve me, and because they ex-
pected to return wealthy." ^

(^Indian wealth is not, even to-day, what we regard as ma-
terial riches. We look to metallic treasures, or the cur-
rent equivalent thereof. The Indians' primitive standards
of wealth are natural products that have hardly any value
for us. There is first a conventional currency which we
consider as useless, — shell beads ! Then there are bright
stones, green and blue being the most favored colors ; green,
because the earth is green when enlivened by living and
thriving plants ; blue, because the sky is blue when it is
serene, and therefore smiles on mankind. Other tints and
hues, provided they are bright, are also appreciated. These,

virent passer un troupeau de moutons, et moi-mSme je les ai vus et suivis : ils
^talent tres-grands, avaient les comes et le poil tr^s-longs. Lorsqu'ils veulent
courir, ils penchent la tete en arriere, de sorte qu'ils ont les cornes couchees le
long du dos." This habit of the mountain sheep to bend the head back while
running, so that the points of their big horns turn upwards, may be the cause of
the description given to Fray Marcos of an animal with one horn on the fore-
head bending down to the breast and then turning up to a point. At Casas
Grandes, Chihuahua, I saw an ancient pestle, the upper part of which was
carved into a very well-made figure of the head of a mountain sheep. That the
animal is still found in the mountains of Northwestern Chihuahua and in the
Northern Sierra Madre is a well established fact.

1 Relacion, p. 342: **Y que conmigo tambien querian ir muchos, por ser-
virme y porque pensaban volver ricos." Page 343: "Pasados los tres dias,
se junt6 mucha gente para ir conmigo, de los cuales tom^ hasta treinta princi-
pales, muy bien vestidos con aquellos coUares de turquesas, que algunos dellos
traian k cinco y d seis vueltas ; y con estos tom^ la gente necesaria que llevase
comida para ellos y para mi, y me puse en camino."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I50 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

feathers, idols, and charms are the treasures, the wealth, the
primitive currency, of the Indian of the Southwest. But
this fact was discovered only after long contact with the
aborigines, and Fray Marcos took the expressions of riches
literally, and reported them as such. The Sobaypuris who
accompanied him were dressed in all their finery, especially
loading themselves with turquoises. It was manifestly their
intention to make an impression upon the people of Cibola.U

On the 9th of May the monk entered the uninhabited
country. There was no lack of water, however, on the
road. Estevan had provided in a measure for the safe
journey of his Superior. Huts or bowers had been con-
structed at the places where he knew the monk had to pass
the night. There was never any lack of food, as the Indians
who accompanied Fray Marcos were able to supply him with
an abundance of game. This is noteworthy, since had the
monk taken a route from the west (from Casa Grande, for
instance) he would have suffered both from lack of water
and from absence of game, whereas in passing through what
is now the Apache reservation neither game nor water failed.
Thus he travelled for twelve days with his Indian escort.^

It was therefore on the last day of May, 1539,^ that Fray
Marcos, when within two or three days' journey of Cibola,

1 Ibid,

2 Ibid. To reach Zufii from Casa Grande, or from the Gila in its vicinity,
requires long and difficult travel. The mountains are rough, and compel long
detours. The portion of the Lower Rio Salado between the Tempe Delta on
the west and Upper Salt River Valley on the east is almost impassable. The
mountains on both sides, the Superstition Range and the Mas-a-Sar, are rugged,
forbidding, and very scantily watered. Beyond the junction of the Arroyo Pinal
the headwaters of Salt River are extremely difficult to traverse; and had he
turned northward, avoiding the Sierra Ancha, in order to get into Tonto Ba-
sin, months would have been required to reach either Zuiii or Moqui from
the Gila.

* We have seen that he entered the desert on the 9th of May, old style,
that is, on the 19th, new style. Twelve days hence — that is, on the 2i-3ist of


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 5 1

according to the statements of his guides, was surprised at
meeting one of the Indians who had gone thither with the
negro. The man was on his return, and that return was a
precipitate flight. He brought sad tidings. Estevan had
reached Cibola, but the people of that place had killed him,
with many of his escort, and the survivors were fleeing for
their lives.

This well known catastrophe, which forms the turning
point in the hitherto extremely successful journey, deserves
to be closely investigated. In the first place, we must refer
to the tale told Fray Marcos by the fugitives themselves ;
next, we have to consider the traditions of the Zufii Indians
which Mr. Gushing has succeeded in gathering ; and, finally,
some reports obtained in the year following by the expedition
of Coronado to Zufti, and by that of Hernando de Alarcon
to the Colorado of the West. It is well to observe at once
that the Zufii is, so far as known, the only Southwestern
tribe which has preserved any recollection of the event, and
that the Zufti traditions are positive as to the fact that the
negro was killed at one of their villages, and by their own
people-

The friar tells the tale as follows : " He told me that, one
day previous to reaching Cibola, Estevan sent, as he was
wont to do always, his gourd, in order to show them in what
quality he was coming. The gourd had a few strings of
rattles and two plumes, one of which was white and the other
red. When they reached Cibola and presented the gourd
to the person whom the lord has placed there in charge, he
took it into his hand, and, seeing the rattles, with great wrath

May — he met the Indian fugitive. Relacion, p. 342: "Y por esta orden,
earning doce dias. . . . Aqui llego un indio, hijo de un principal de los que
venian conmigo, el cual habia ido en compania de Esteban, el negro, y venia
aquexado el rostro y cuerpo, cubierto de sudor, el cual mostraba harta tristeza
en su persona."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


152 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

threw the gourd on the floor, and said to the messengers
that they should forthwith leave the town, that he knew what
kind of people those [the strangers] were, and that they
should tell them not to enter the place lest they should all
be killed. The messengers returned and reported to Estevan
what had happened, who said that this was nothing, — that
those who at first displayed anger always received him in
the kindest manner. (So he continued his road until he
reached the city of Cibola, where he met people who re-
fused to allow him to enter, and placed him in a large house
outside, taking from him all he carried of objects for ex-
change, turquoises, and other things received from the In-
dians on the journey. There he was all night, neither food
nor drink being given to him nor to his escort. On the fol-
lowing morning this Indian [the one who was telling the
tale] felt thirsty, and went out of the house to get a drink
of. water at a stream near by, and a short while afterwards he
saw Estevan endeavoring to escape, pursued by the people
of the city, who were killing some of the people of his
company. Seeing this, this Indian concealed himself and
crept off stealthily up the said stream, and finally crossed
over to take the road through the desert."^/

The effect of these evil tidings uppn the Indians accom-
panying the monk was such that they refused to go any
further. The friar, determined upon proceeding as close
as possible to Cibola, then cut the cords of the bales and
bundles containing the objects which he carried along for
distribution to the natives of Cibola, and distributed the
whole of his wares among the terrified natives. In this
manner he succeeded in prevailing upon them to go ahead,
and as far as "a day's journey from Cibola." Here they

1 Relacion^ p. 343 et seq. I forbear copying the text, as it has been referred
to time and again in numerous publications.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 53

encountered two more fugitives, whose bleeding bodies and
frightened faces alone told the woful tale of the dangers
from which they had escaped. They at once began to weep
and lament, and the Indians who were with the Friar joined
in the wail. As far as Fray Marcos, who himself was moved
to tears by their sorrow, could understand, over three hun-
dred of the Indians from the San Pedro valley had perished
at the hands of the people of Cibola. All communication
between the Sobaypuris and Cibola, and especially commer-
cial intercourse, was henceforth impossible ; even a return to
the place hereafter forbidden. It took Fray Marcos a long
time to soothe them.^ At last he obtained from them the
following additional information.

"As Estevan arrived within a day's journey of Cibola he
sent his messengers to the lord of the place, informing him
of his coming, and that he intended to treat for peace with
him and cure the sick. When they gave the gourd to the
chief, and he saw the rattles, he threw down the gourd an-
grily, and said, * I know these people, for these rattles are not
of the make of our own. Tell them to return at once, else
not one of them shall remain alive.' And the messengers
returned to Estevan sorrowfully, hardly venturing to tell
him. But at last they informed him of what had happened,
and he said to them * that they should not be afraid, that he
would go there, for whenever the Indians, on his previous

1 Relacion, p. 345 : ** Y yendo por nuestro camino, una Jornada de Cibola,
topamos otros dos indios, de los que habian ido con Esteban, los cualea venian
ensangrentados y con muchas heridas ; y como Ilegaron, ellos y los que venian
conmigo comenzaron tanto llanto, que de lastima y temor, tambien d mi me
hicieron llorar ; y eran tantas las voces, que no me dexaban preguntalles por
Esteban, ni lo que les habia subcedido, y roguelles que callasen y supi^semos lo
que pasaba y dixeron: que: 'como callarian, pues sabian que de sus padres,
hijos y hermanos, eran muertos mas de trescientos hombres, de los que fueron
con Esteban ? Y que ya no osarian ir d Cibola como solian.' " The number of
the dead is probably exaggerated.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


154 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

travels, gave him evil words at the outset, it was a sure sign
that he would be well received by them.' So he went on,
and reached the city of Cibola about sundown, with all the
people of his escort, of whom there were about three hundred
men and many women. But they refused to let him enter the
city, and quartered him in a large and good house outside.
Besides, they took away from Estevan all he carried, saying
that the chief thus ordained it, and all that night they gave
us neither to eat nor to drink. The next day, after the sun
had risen to the height of a lance, Estevan went out of the
house and some of the principal men of his escort with him.
Forthwith there came many people from the city, and as soon
as he saw them he fled, and we with him. Then it was that
they gave us these wounds with their arrows, and we fell.
Others fell on top of us dead, and so we remained until night,
afraid to move. We heard a great uproar in the city, and saw
on the flat roofs many men and women who were looking ;
but we saw nothing of Estevan, and believe that he was killed
with arrows, like the rest of those who came with him, and
that we alone escaped." ^

Turning now to the Zufti traditions collected by Mr. Gush-
ing, I can only give them in substance, and do not pretend to
render them by any means literally.

One of these folk-tales states that, previous to the first
coming of the "Mexicans" (the Zufti Indian calls all the
Spanish-speaking people Mexicans), a black Mexican made
his appearance at the Zuiii village of Kia-ki-ma. He was
very greedy, voracious, and bold, and the people killed him
for it. After his death, the Mexicans, it is said, made their
appearance in numbers for the first time, and made war upon
the Zunis, conquering them in the end.

Another tradition relates that there came to Zufti a man

1 Ibid, There is no need of quoting this passage in detail.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 55

called " Nu-6," accompanied by two dogs. He rendered him-
self very obnoxious to the people, particularly through his
greed. So the wise men of the high order called "Ka-ka"
took him out of the pueblo during the night, and gave him
a powerful kick that sped him through the air back to the
south, whence he had come.

Both of these traditions locate plainly the killing of the
negro at one of the Zufii villages, the one called Kia-ki-ma,
the ruins of which are yet visible on a bluff situated at the
southwestern angle of the tall Mesa, or "Thunder Mountain,"
six miles southeast of the present pueblo of Zufti. Thus far
Zufli tradition.

In the year following the journey of Fray Marcos, Coronado
and his little army reached Cibola. One of the chroniclers
of the expedition, Castafteda, who was a soldier in Coronado's
command, relates as follows the death of Estevan.

"Estevan arrived at Cibola with a great many turquoises
and some handsome women with whom he had been pre-
sented along his route. He also had with him a great num-
ber of Indians who had been given him for guides at the
places where he passed, and who believed that under his
protection they might traverse the whole world without
having anything to fear. But as the Indians of Cibola are
more shrewd than those whom Estevan had with him, they
shut him up in a house outside of their village, and there he
was interrogated by the old men and the caciques on the
object of his coming to the country. After having ques-
tioned him for three days, they met together to decide upon
his fate. The negro having told the Indians that he was
going in advance of two white men sent by a mighty prince,
and who were learned in things of heaven which they in-
tended to teach them, these peioplc thought him to be the
guide or spy of some nation that wanted to conquer them.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


156 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE,

It especially struck them as incredible that he who was
black should come from a country of white men. Estevan
had asked for their treasures and their women, and it seemed
hard to them to consent to give them up ; so they agreed
upon killing him, which they accomplished without harming
in the least those who accompanied him. They only kept
a few boys, and sent back all the others, numbering about
sixty/' 1

The Captain Juan Jaramillo, an officer of Coronado, only
says that Estevan the negro was killed in the first village
of Cibola.^

1 Cibola^ p. 12: "Estevan arriva d Cibola avec une grande quantity de tur-
quoises, et quelques belles femmes dont on lui avait fait present le long de la
route. II menait un assez grand nombre d'Indiens qu'on lui avait donnes pour
guides dans les endroits oil il avait pass^, et qui croyaient que sous sa protection
ils pouvaient traverser la terre entiere sans avoir rien k craindre. Mais comma
les Indiens de Cibola ont Tesprit plus ouvert que ceux qu^Estevan emmenait
avec lui, ils I'enferm^rent dans une maison hors de leur village; et la il fut
interrog^ par les vieillards et les caciques sur le but qui Tavait conduit dans
leur pays. Apr^s Tavoir questionn^ pendant trois jours, ils se rassembl^rent
pour decider de son sort. Comme le negre avait dit aux Indiens qu*il pr^c^dait
deux hommes blancs envoy^s par un puissant prince, et tres-savants dans les
choses du ciel quMls venaient leur enseigner, ces gens penserent qu'il devait 6tre
le guide ou Tespion de quelque nation que voulait les subjuguer. II leur parut
surtout incroyable qu'il fut du pays des hommes blancs, lui qui ^tait noir. Este-
van leur avait demande leurs richesses et leurs femmes, et il leur semblait dur
d'y consentir. lis se ddcid^rent done k le tuer, ce qu*ils firent sans faire le
moindre mal ^ ceux qui Taccompagnaient. lis prirent seulement quelques
jeunes garfons, et renvoy^rent tons les autres, qui etaient au nombre d'environ
soixante."

It may not be out of place here to state that the birthplace of the negro
Estevan was Azamor, the Asimur of to-day, on the coast of Morocco. It lies at
the mouth of the river Morbeya, the Asama of the Romans. The Moors call
it also Muley bu Xaib. In 15 13 it was taken by the Portuguese, who occupied
it until 1540, when Sultan Mohammed reconquered J t. See Descripdon Historic^
de Marruecos y breve Reseha de sus DinastiaSy byf Fray Manuel P Castellanos J
' 1884, part i. chapter ix. pp. 1 18-124.

2 Relacion hecha par el Capitan Juan Jaramillo^ de la Entrada que habia
hecho a la Tierra Nueva en Nueva Espaha^ y al Descubritniento de Cibola^ yendo
por General Francisco Vazquez Coronado {Doc. de Indias^ vol. xiv. p. 308) : " Y
aqui mataron a Estebanillo negro, que habia venido con Dorantes, de la Florida,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 57

Previous to the departure of Coronado's expedition, and
after the return of Fray Marcos to Mexico, the Viceroy sent
the Captain Melchior Diaz to the north to investigate the
truth of Fray Marcos*s report Diaz could not reach Ci-
bola, but he gathered much information along the route.
He says, " Estevan the negro died in the manner in which
Fray Marcos has related it to your lordship ; therefore I make
no mention of it here." ^

Simultaneously with Coronado's expedition by land, the
Viceroy sent a flotilla to the Californian Gulf under the com-
mand of Hernando de Alarcon. This squadron was ordered
to keep as much as possible in communication with the land
forces, and at the same time to gather information relative
to Cibola whenever and wherever it was possible. The first
part of the programme became unrealizable through the force
of circumstances, but the second was faithfully carried out.
Alarcon anchored off the mouth of the great Colorado River,
and thence ascended that river in boats. The Cocopas, who
inhabited the banks near the mouth, knew nothing of Cibola ;
but higher up (probably among the Mojaves) he met an old
Indian who had been at Cibola. This Indian gave Alarcon
quite a fair description of the architecture, dress, mode of
life, etc., of the Pueblo Indians. In one of the conversations
Alarcon ordered some food placed before his guest, and
when the victuals were brought in on plates or dishes, the
Indian remarked that the chief of Cevola had similar ones,
but that they were green, and that he was the only one who
owned such. He had four of them, which a black man with
beard had given to him, along with a dog and other objects ;

y volvia con Fray Marcos de Niza." Castaiieda makes no direct mention of
the locality, but it is plain that he labors under the same impression.

\ Antonio de Mendoza^i9^«jr/?»i^ Lettre h VEmpereur Charles K, p. 296:
** Estevan, le n^gre, est mort de la mani^re que le p^re Marcos I'a conte k votre
seigneurie, c'est pour cela que je n'en parle point ici."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


158 archjEological institute.

that he did not know whence that black man had come, but
had been informed that the chief of Cevola caused him to be
killed. Previously the Indian incidentally remarked that the
chief of Cevola was in possession of a dog similar to the one
owned by Alarcon.^

Eager to follow the trail thus opened before him, Alarcon
kept the old Indian in his company, questioning him repeat-
edly and cautiously. According to his statements, Cibola
was about thirty days' march from that portion of the course
of the Colorado River (in the neighborhood of the Colorado
valley). To quote Alarcon's own language, " I asked him if
the inhabitants of that country had ever seen people similar to
us. He answered. No, excepting one negro, who wore on his
feet and arms something that sounded. Your lordship will
recollect that the negro who accompanied Fray Marcos had
rattles, bells, and plumes on his arms and legs ; that he car-
ried with him plates of different colors, and that he went
thither a year ago. I desired to know why he had been
killed. He said to me. The chief of Cevola having asked
him if he had brothers, the negro replied that he had an
infinite number of them; that they carried many weapons,
and were not far away now. On this report a great number
of chiefs had gathered in council and determined upon killing
the negro in order that he might not inform his brethren
about the country where the people of Cevola lived, and that

1 Relation de la Navigation et de la DScottverte faite par le Capitaine Fernando
Alarcon (in Cibola^ Appendix, p. 326) : " II me dit que le chef de ce pays avait
un chien semblable k celui que j'emmenais avec moi. Ayant temoign^ le d^sir
de manger, cet homme vit porter et rapporter des plats. II dit que le chef de
Cevola en avait de semblables, mais quMls ^taient verts, et que ce chef ^tait le
seul qui en poss^d&t, qu'il en avait quatre, et qu'un homme noir, portant de la
barbe les lui avait donnas avec ce chien et d'autres objets ; quMl ignorait par oti
cet homme noir ^tait arriv^, et qu'on lui avait dit que le chef de Cevola Tavait
fait tuer." This is also stated by Herrera, Historia General^ Dec. vi. lib. ix.
cap. zv.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 59

was the cause of his killing. They cut his body into many
pieces, which were distributed among the chiefs to satisfy
them of his death. He added, that the negro had a dog
similar to mine, but that the chief of Cevola caused it to be
put to death some time after." I will add here, that soon
after this conversation Alarcon learned, through Indians, of
the arrival of Coronado and his troop at Cibola.^

These are, as far as I can gather, the most authentic state-
ments as to the fate of Estevan at present obtainable. Of all
this material, the statements of Fray Marcos and the Zufli
traditions have, in my opinion, the greatest weight. The
former transmits the reports of eyewitnesses of the catas-
trophe. The Indians have preserved the recollections of
their forefathers, and although indistinct and nebulous, like
all folk-lore, they establish one fact : that Estevan the negro
was killed in one of the former villages of the Zuili tribe.
As to the manner in which, and the reason why, he was
killed, only the report of Fray Marcos tells us that the very
implement or charm upon which Estevan most relied — his
gourd or rattle — provoked the ire of the Zunis at the first,
and that afterwards his death was probably hastened by
precipitate flight. The number of those who accompanied
him was very likely exaggerated to the friar by the Sobay-
puris themselves ; but that a massacre of these also took
place seems to me beyond all doubt. What Castafteda re-
ports was gathered a year after the catastrophe, and written
down by him a quarter of a century later.^ Besides, it is
colored by the sour disposition of a malcontent. Coupling
the reports of Fray Marcos with the information secured by
Alarcon, it seems that Estevan was over confident and rash ;

1 Relation de la Navigation et de la Dicouvertey p. 331. Herrera, Historia^ ut
supra.

^ In his dedication of Cibola^ pp. 97, 98, he says, " Comme il y a plus de vingt
ans que cette expedition s'est faite."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


l6o ARCH^OLOGJCAL INSTITUTE.

that he placed too great reliance upon the success which Ca-
beza de Vaca, and himself in his company, had enjoyed on
their previous journey, and possibly irritated the Zuftis by
presenting a token that, in their eyes, represented the opposite
of "good medicine." That his death was determined upon
at once is very likely, and the explanation given by the old
Indian to Alarcon is the most rational. Once imprisoned,
as he virtually was, any attempt to flee could have no result
except safety in case of success, death in case of failure.
The negro had been overbearing and highly incautious — im-
pudent probably — at the outset; after the crisis came, he
fell into the other extreme, that of heedless precipitation.
The Zufiis might have cpared him had he acted with dignity,
instead of with uncalled for arrogance first, with pusillanim-
ity at the last.

At all events. Fray Marcos saw clearly that it would be im-
possible for him to enter Cibola after these occurrences. He
was sure to lose his life in the attempt, and then, as he very
reasonably remarks, " the knowledge of the country would be
lost." We must always bear in mind the instructions given
to him by the Viceroy, and under which lie had pledged him-
self to act. These instructions made of him an emissary, an
explorer and investigator, not a missionary. Death under
these circumstances could not even secure for him the much
coveted title of " martyr." The main object of his trip was
attained. Notwithstanding the killing of the negro, he had
found the Seven Cities and the way thither. Still he was
not satisfied; he craved yet to be able to report about the
much coveted land de visu if possible.

His Indians were unwilling to accompany him. They not
only resisted his entreaties, but threatened his life, in atone-
ment for the lives of their relatives slaughtered at Cibola.
He pleaded and remonstrated, but they remained stubborn.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 6 1

At last two of their number — "principal men," he says —
consented to lead him to a place whence he could see Cibola
from afar. "With them and with my Indians and interpreters
I followed my road till we came in sight of Cibola, which lies
in a plain on the slope of a round height. Its appearance is
very good for a settlement, — the handsomest I have seen in
these parts. The houses are, as the Indians had told me, all
of stone, with their stories and flat roofs. As far as I could
see from a height where I placed myself to observe, the set-
tlement is larger than the city of Mexico. I was sometimes
tempted to go thither, knowing that I did not risk more than
my life, and that life I had already offered to God on the day
when I began the journey. But finally I feared, considering
the danger, and that if I should die there would be no knowl-
edge of this land which, in my estimation, is the largest and
best of all yet discovered/* ^ Here, again, in sight of Cibola,
his Indian guides reiterated the statement that the village
now in view was the smallest one of the seven, and that To-
tonteac was much more important than the so called Seven
Cities. After taking possession of Cibola, Totonteac, Acus,
and Marata for the Spanish crown, raising a stone heap, and
placing a wooden cross on top of it with the aid of the na-
tives, and naming the new land the "New Kingdom of Saint
Francis," the friar turned back, "with much more fright
than food," as he very dryly but truthfully remarks.^

1 RelacioHy p. 347: "Con los cuales y con mis indios y lenguas, segui mi
camino hasta la vista de Cibola, la cual esta sentada en un llano, d la falda de
on cerro redondo. Tiene muy hermoso parescer de pueblo, el mejor que en
estas partes yo he visto : son las casas por la manera que los indios me dixeron,
todas de piedra con sobrados y azuteas, k lo que me paresci6 desde un cerro
donde me puse k vella. La poblacion es mayor que la cibdad de Mexico;
algunas veces fui tentado de irme k ella, porque sabia que no aventuraba sino la
vida, y ^sta ofresci d Dios el dia que comenc^ la jomada ; al cabo temf, con-
siderando mi peligro y que si yo moria, no se podria haber razon desta tierra,
que 4 mi ver es la mayor y mejor de todas las descubiertas/'

3 Ibid.^ p. 348 : " Y asi me volvf, con harto mas temor que comida, y an-

II


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 62 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

*

It appears that the people of Cibola, after the killing of
the negro, did not make any attempts to follow the fugitives.
This may account for Castafteda's version of the event.
Therefore the monk was enabled to execute his bold explo-
ration to the vicinity of Cibola, and his return to the discon-
solate Sobaypuri survivors without interference. After two
days of hasty flight, he overtook his Indians, and all together
crossed the Apache reservation ^^i^n. But his reception in
the valley of the San Pedro River Was quite different from
the one which he had experienced in going, for " the men as
well as the women displayed great sorrow at the loss of their
people at Cibola. So with fear I took leave of them at once,
and marched the first day ten leagues, and then eight and
ten leagues daily, without stopping, until I had crossed the
second desert stretch/'^ It was after his return to the valley
of the Sonora River that he bethought himself of the tale
about the valley situated within the mountains, of which he
heard while on the Gulf Coast, and he resolved now to visit
it. He saw " from the opening of the valley seven fair-look-
ing settlements in the distance. The valley appeared to be
pleasant and of good soil. Considerable smoke was rising
from the settlements. I was told that there is much gold
there and jewels, some of which are worn in the ears, while
of others they make little scrapers for the perspiration of their
bodies. The people do not allow anybody from this side of
the opening to trade with them. Nobody could tell me the

duve, hasta topar la gente que se me habia quedado, todo lo mas apriesa que
pude ; los cuales alcance a dos dias de Jornada, y con ellos vine hasta pasar el
despoblado."

1 Idid., p. 349. We are led to infer from the stress he places on the length
of the journeys performed by him now, when he manifestly hurried, that eight to
ten leagues (twenty-three to twenty-seven miles) were unusually long marches
in his estimation, and consequently that he moved less rapidly while going
towards Cibola. This has its bearing on the distances, therefore on the identi-
fication of the places also.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 163

reason why. Here I placed two crosses, and took possession
of the entrance and of the valley." ^

From this point he continued his return with all possible
haste. At Culiacan he failed to meet Coronado, who was at
Compostela. From the latter place he announced his return
by letters addressed to the Viceroy and to the Provincial,
Fray Antonio de Ciudad Rodrigo. On the second day of
September (old style) Fray Marcos appeared — in company
with the Viceroy, Don Antonio de Mendoza, Francisco Vaz-
quez de Coronado, and one " Oydor " of the Royal Au-
diencia, at the city of Mexico — before the notary ^of that
Audiencia, Juan Baeza de Herrera, and the royal notary,
Antonio de Turcios, and made solemn oath to the truth of
the report which has formed the basis of this paper. He
says at the close of the report : " There are many unimportant
details which I do not set down here. I only relate what I
saw and what I have been told in the countries which I have
travelled through, and what I learned concerning those of
which I heard." 2

It follows from the above given date, that Fray Marcos
returned to the city of Mexico previous to the thirteenth
(new style) day of September, 1539.'

Among the many calumnies heaped upon Fray Marcos of
Nizza there is one which I must refute before I enter into a
discussion of the results of his journey. It has for its author

1 IHd, Ternaux-Compans in his translation either corrupts the text, or else
the Italian version in Ramusio has corrupted it ; for he says : " Sept villages de
grandeur raisonnable et assez ^loign^s ; une belle valUe tris fratcke, et une jolie
ville d*oi^ ^ilevait beaucoup de fumie,^* (p. 281.) Not a word is said in the
Relacum of the ** town." The text reads : " Siete poblazones razonables, algo
lexos, un voile abaxo muy fresco y de muy huena tierra, de donde saltan muchos
humos?^ The Italics are mine. I have not Ramusio at my disposal now.

^ Legalivacion (Doc. de IndtaSf vol. iii. p. 351).

• Ibid,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 64 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

a private soldier of Coronado's army, the chroniclerfredro de
Castafieda.) Castafteda positively affirms that the Friar re-
mained on the south side of the last "desert/' sixty leagues
(162 miles) south of Cibola, and that he did not approach the
place any nearer, still less saw it himself. Castafieda charges
the monk with cowardice, in addition to mendacity.^

Should the assertion of Castafieda be true, then Fray Mar-
co's of Nizza deserves no credit whatever; for an explorer
capable of deliberately lying on such an important point as
that of seeing with his own eyes the ultimate point of des-
tination of a long and perilous journey, is truly an impostor.
But aside from the evidences furnished by his correct descrip-
tion of the route, the description of the view which he had
of Cibola proves that he really was near enough to the place
to see it as he describes it.

The Indian tradition of the Zufiis states that the negro was
killed at the village of Kiakima. There can be no connection
between the relation of Fray Marcos and that Indian folk-
tale. The Indians cannot have tampered with the writings
of the monk, nor can the monk have taught the Indians a
story preserved through the usual routine of their esoteric
clusters. If, therefore, his description of the place where
the negro was killed is as that village appeared when seen
from the direction from which he claims to have approached
it, — that is, if the landscape, as portrayed by him, is suffi-
ciently accurate, — he cannot have invented the scenery.
Details of architecture can be reported from hearsay with

1 Cibolay p. 13 : " Ccux-ci regagn^rent leur pays en fugitifs, et rencontr^rent
les trois moines dans le desert, ^ soixante lieues de Cibola. £n apprenant la
nouvelle de la mort d'Estevan, ces religieux furent si effray^s, que, ne se fiant
pas-m6me aux Indiens qui avaient accomT.agn^s le n^gre, ils ouvrirent leurs
coffres et leur partagerent tout ce qu'ils avaient, ^ Texception des ornements
qui servaient ^ c^l^brer la messe ; puis ils s'en retournirent en doublant leurs
journ^es de route, sans avoir appris autre chose du pays que ce que les Indiens
leur avaient racont^."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 65

reasonable accuracy ; but the correctness of a landscape
picture in words is a matter of personal experience and
feelings. Only what one has seen stamps itself upon the
memory in a manner sufficiently accurate to appear true
even centuries afterwards.

The ruins of Kiakima lie in a niche of the southwestern
corner of the huge mesa, called To-yo-a-lana, or Thunder
Mountain, that skirts the Zufii plain on the east side. Its
foundation or base is a hill of natural debris about eighty feet
high, and a little brook flows near the bottom of the hill ; west
of it stretches the Zufti plain, bleak and red. Fray Marcos
says the town lies in a plain on the slope of a round height.
M. Ternaux-Compans has translated the word " cerro " by
hill} But " cerro " means a steep and isolated elevation in
general, irrespective of its altitude. Even the gigantic vol-
cano of Popocatepetl is often designated as a " cerro." Seen
from the southwest, where wooded ridges skirt and border
the Zufii plain, Kiakima indeed appears as being on the slope
of a "round" cerro; for Thunder Mountain there appears in
its southern width, not at its full length. The description,
brief as it is, could not be more characteristic, and the monk
must have actually seen what he describes. No other Zufti
village could have presented such an appearance. We see
that the Indian tradition corroborates the statements of the
Franciscan, and that the latter is also supported by the evi-
dence of topography. Moreover, Kiakima was an inhabited
pueblo until after the uprising of 1680 ; and Thunder Moun-
tain, on the sides of which it is built, is more than once re-
ferred to in older manuscripts as "the rock of Kiakima." ^

1 "Elle est b&tie dans une plaine sur le penchant d'une coUine de forme
ronde."

2 Already, in 1635, the " Penol de caquimay " is mentioned in the Autos sohre
restablecer las Misiones de Zufii (MS.). Again, in the Peticion del Cabildo de
Santa Fi d Don Antonio de Otermin (MS.)» of October 3, 1680, in the collection


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 66 archjEOLOgjcal institute.

True it is that the description given by Castafleda of the
pueblo which Coronado took by storm in 1540, and of which
Qaramillo^ays that in it the negro had been killed, does not
agree with that of the friar. The chronicler of Coronado
speaks of it as built on a rock.^ But, as I shall prove in the
historical sketch of Coronado's expedition, that village was not
Kiakima, but Hauicu, fifteen miles to the southwest of the
former ; and Jaramillo, who wrote his report from memory
many years after the events, made the mistake.^ When a
local Indian tradition is as positive as it is in the present
instance, it usually deserves full credit. The assertion of
Castafieda is therefore unfounded, and the charge of men-
dacity might rather be made against him.

In regard to the charge of cowardice, I have already,
I trust, disposed of it. Fray Marcos displayed no lack of
courage in refraining from an attempt to penetrate to the
village. On the contrary, he acted with commendable judi-
ciousness and in strict obedience to his instructions. By
satisfying himself of the appearance of the country and place,
he had done his full duty under the circumstances. ' To go a
step further would have been foolhardy, and destructive to
the ends and aims of his mission. We should always bear
in mind that he was sent as an explorer, and not as a mis-
sionary. As the latter, it might have become his duty to
sacrifice his life, as many of his brethren deliberately have

of documents on Otermin's retreat to El Paso: **Como fue los Zufiis en el
pefiol de Caquima.*' Also, Relacion Anonima de la Reconquista (MS.). Kia-
kima is first mentioned in 1598 as one of the inhabited Zuni pueblos in Obe-
diencia y Vasaliaje a su Magestad por los Indios de la Pravincia de AguscoH
(Doc. de Indios, vol. xvi. p. 133), under the misspelling of ** Coaqueria." Vetan-
curt mentions it in Cronicay p. 320, as being inhabited in 1680. In lyS^Fray
Augustin Morfi ppeaks of it as abandoned, Descripcion Geografica (MS.). See
further on.

* Cibola, p. 42 : " Cibola est construit sur un rocher."

* Relacion Hecha, p. 307 ; " Y esto digo por haber tanto tiempo que aquello
pasamos, que podria ser enganarme en alguna Jornada, que en lo demas no."


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, ^t^

done ; as the former, his personal safety was indispensable.
Upon his safe return depended the future of Spanish colo-
nization in the North American Southwest.

I have already, in the course of this investigation, ad-
duced evidence to show that Cibola was the Zufii country
of New Mexico- I shall now present further proof, which I
hope will appear conclusive. It is derived from documentary
sources of undoubted authenticity, although subsequent to the
date of the journey of Fray Marcos.

Before quoting the remarks of (Melchior Diaz,)who is the
first authority in point of date, I must notice here a slur cast
upon Fray Marcos by an anonymous author who reported on
the campaign of Coronado in 1541, and who was manifestly a
member of the army commanded by Coronado, since his " Re-
lacion del Suceso de la Jornada ** was written in New Mexico.
He accuses the friar of being in error in applying the name
Cibola to a tribe, whereas it was properly but the name of a
range.^ On the contrary, the monk had perfectly well under-
stood the Indians, who spoke of Cibola as a " province," and
this is a further evidence of the origin of the word. I am
convinced, from what Mr. Cushing has told me, that the
origin of Cibola is "Shi-uo-na," the name of the range
claimed by the whole Zufli tribe, ancient and modern ; and
the conception of Cibola as given by Fray Marcos strongly
confirms this idea.

Melchior Diaz in his report confirms what the monk states
about Cibola, except that he says there were not quite as
many turquoises as Fray Marcos had been told. He adds,
" They [the people of Cibola] eat salt, which they gather from

^ Reiacton del Suceso^ p. 319: ''El padre Fray Marcos habia entendido o dio
a en tender que el circuito o comarca en que estan siete pueblos, era un solo
pueblo que llamaba el, Cibola, e toda esta poblazon e comarca Cibola." Taking
'* pueblo ** in its original sense of ** populus," Fray Marcos was perfectly right,
for the name Shi-uo-na is sometimes applied to the whole tribe.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i68 archjEological institute.

a lake situated two days' march from Civola."^ These are
the salt marshes south of Zufii, and their distance from the
Zufii region is quite accurately indicated by Diaz. The
same author also states, " After crossing the big desert,
seven towns are found, distant from each other about one
day's march ; all together are called Civola." ^ Here, again,
we have a confirmation of the fact that Civola was the name
of a tribal range, as Shiuona is to-day.

Next comes the well known Castafieda, and the indications
found in his chronicle to the efiect that Cibola is Zuni are
numerous. First, he states that the principal village of the
Cibola group is called " Macaque." ' Macaque reappears in
1598 as "Macaqui"* in the imperfect orthography of the
period. In 1680 it is mentioned as " Mazaquia," and as a
hamlet dependent upon the mission of Alona,^ on the site of

1 Mcndoza, Deuxihne Lettre, p. 295 1 " lis mangent du sel qu'ils retirent d'un
lac situ< k deux journ^es dc marche de la province de Civola." This salt lake
(well known) is again mentioned by yVC^i'ff^Si^istoria de la Nueva Mexico,
1610, canto xviii. fol. 164: —

** Y luego al Capitan Farfan mandaron

Que f uesse a descubrir ciertas salinas

De que grande noticia se tenia,

Y poniendo por obra aqud mandado,

Con presta diligencia y buen cuidado,

En brebe dio la buelta, y dixo dellas

Que eran tan caudalosas y tan grandes,

Que por espado de vna legua larga

Mostraua toda aquella sal de gruesso,

Vna muy larga pica bien tendida.''

• Deuxihne Lettre^ p. 293 : " Quand on a pass^ le grand desert, on trouve
sept villes, ^loigndes d'environ une journ^e de marche les unes des autres;
toutes r^unies ensemble se nomment Civola."

« This is in the original manuscript, which I was permitted to consult at
the Lenox Library of New York. Temaux-Compans has " Muzaque/* Cibola,

p. 163.

* Obedienciay Vassallaje de Aguscobi, p. 133.

» Vetancurt, Cronica de la Provincia del Santo Evangelio de Mexico, p. 320 :
"Con dos ald^as de visita, que cada cual tenia su pequefia iglesia llamadas
Mazaquia, en la entrada de la provincia de Zufii, y de Moqui, y Caquima, dos
leguas de Alona." The distance is somewhat exaggerated.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 69

which the present pueblo of Halona or Zufti is built. The
ruins of Ma-tza-ki lie three miles east of Zufti, at the end
of the plain, and on the southern banks of the Zufti River,
at the northwestern corner of the great Mesa.

The same author asserts, in his enumeration of all the New
Mexican pueblos visited by Coronado*s expedition, "Cibola
is the first province."^ In another place he speaks of the
** Rock of Acuco" as situated five days' march east of Cibola/^
It is needless to prove that Acuco is Acoma, called " Ha-ku-
kue" in the Zufti language. From Zufti to Acoma the dis-
tance in a straight line amounts to only about seventy-five
miles ; but the trails are very rough, especially for horses,
and often circuitous. Hernando de Alvarado and his twenty
men occupied five days in making the trip. The description
that Alvarado left of the route, moreover, agrees so perfectly
with the country through which runs that ancient and for-
merly much used trail, and with the ruins scattered along-
side it, that there cannot be the slightest doubt about
the identity both of Cibola with Zuni and of Acuco with
Acoma.^

1 Cibola, p. 181.

* Ibid,^ p. 69 : •' Cinq jours apr^s ils arriv^rent 4 un village nomm^ Acuco,
qui est construit sur un rocher."

• Relacion de lo que Hernando de Alvarado y Fray Joan de Padilla Descubri-
eron eft detnanda de la Mar del Sur {Doc. de Indias, vol. iii. p. 510) : " Partimos
de Granada [the name given to Hauicu] veinte y nueve de Agosto de 40 ; la
via de Coco [Acuco]; y andadas dos leguas, dimos en un edificio antiguo
como fortaleza, y una legua adelante hallamos otro, y poco mas adelante otro, y
adelante destos hallamos una ciudad antigua, harto grande, toda destruida,
aunque mucha parte de la muralla estaba enhiesta, la cual tenia seis estados en
alto, el muro bien labrado de buena piedra labrada, de sus puertas y alvanares
como una ciudad de Castilla. Media legua adelante desta obra de una legua,
hallamos otra ciudad destruida, la cerca de la cual debia ser muy buena, hasta
de un estado, de piedras berroqueRas muy grandes, hasta un estado, y de alii
arriba de muy buena piedra de canteria." Such ruins are indeed met with
near the old trail leading from Hauicu to Acoma, — a trail which was much
used in ancient times, and of which traces are still distinctly visible. It led as
far as Cia on the Jemez River, and portions of it are visible to-day between


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I70 archjeological institute.

Seven days northwest of Cibola lay the cluster of seven
pueblos which the chroniclers of Coronado (above all, Cas-
tafieda) call Tusayan.^ Usaya, Usayan, are names given
anciently by the Zuftis to the principal pueblos of Moqui.
There are other evidences to prove that Tusayan was indeed
the Moqui group of villages. This being so, Cibola lay seven
days' journey to the southeast of Moqui; that is, exactly
where Zufii lies in relation to the Moqui villages.

It is not surprising, therefore, if, in 1582 and i583,6\ntonio
de Espej A positively declares that Zufli is also called Cibola.
He found there three Indians from Mexico who had remained
behind at the time when Coronado evacuated New Mexico.
We know, indeed, that Coronado had to leave several of his
Mexican Indians at Cibola.^

the line of the Atlantic and Pacific Railroad and the Rio Puerco. Alvarado also
says about this trail, "Aqui se apartan dos caminos, uno para Chia y otro para
Coco ; tomamos este."

1 Cibola, p. 165: "A vingt lieues vers le nord-ouest, est une autre province
qui contient sept villages; les habitants portent le m6me costume, ont les
monies mceurs et la mSme religion que ceux de Cibola.*' Comparing this with
what he says of Tusayan on page 58 et seq., there remains no doubt of the fact
that he means Tusayan in the passage first quoted. In addition, there is the
statement of Jaramillo, who places Tusayan to the northeast {Relacion Hecka,
p. 308), and of the Relacion del Suceso, p. 320, which places it "al Poniente"
thirty or thirty-five leagues.

2 There are three versions. Two of them are authentic copies of Espejo's
report Both of the latter are contained in vol. xv. of the Documentos de Indias.
One bears the title of Relacion del Viage, que yo; Antonio Espejo, Ciudctdano
de la Ciudad de Mexico; Natural de la Ciudad de Cordoba, hize con ccUorce Sol-
dados y un Relijioso de la Or den de San Francisco; a leu Provinciasy Poblaciones
de la Nueva Mexico, a quien puse par Nombre, la Nueva Andalucia, a Contempla-
cion de mi Patria, en Jin del Ano de Mil e Quinientos e Ochenta e Dos, He says
(p. 117) : ^'Fuimos caminando cuatro jornadas, veinte y cuatro leguas hacia el
Poniente, donde hallamos al cabo dellas, una provincia que son seis pueblos, y
le llaman Am^, y por otro nombre Cibola, . . . donde supimos, haber estado
Francisco Vazquez Coronado y algunos capitanes de los que llevo consigo ; y
en esta provincia, hallamos puestos junto a los pueblos, cruces, y aqui hallamos
tres indios cristianos, que se dijeron llamar Andres de Cuyuacan y Caspar de
Mexico Anton de Cuadalaxara, que dijeron entraron con el dicho Gobernador
Francisco Vazquez Coronado," etc. Further on Espejo refers to " Aquico " as


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 7 1

Lastly, in i626,(Fray Geronimo de Zarate Salmeronjin his
narrative of the expedition of Juan de Ofiate to the Califor-
nian Gulf in 1604 and 1605, mentions positively Hauicu (one
of the Zufti villages) as the Civola of Fray Marcos and of
Coronado.^

Other proofs might be added, but they will appear in the
course of this and the following sections of the work. ( I be-
lieve myself to have proved the identity of Cibola with the
Zufii country. It remains now to see which of the seven
pueblos of the Zuftis were the " Seven Cities " of Cibola.^)

Six of them were still inhabited in 1 598. They were, be-
ginning in the southwest, Hauicu, or Ojo Caliente, at the
Zufti Hot Springs ; Chyanahue, two miles southeast from it ;
Kiakima and Matzaki, whose situation I have already given ;
Halona, on the site of the present Zufti pueblo ; and Pin-a-ua,
somewhat less than two miles from the latter to the west.
The seventh town of Cibola I am as yet unable to locate.*
These were the settlements whose fame had spread as far
south as the heart of Sonora, and the size and appearance of
which the Indians of this latter region, themselves dwelling in

one of the villages of Cibola. The name ** Am^ " is a misprint ; for in the other
versioni Copia de la Carta que Escribio Antonio de Espejo^ p. 180, he says plainly,
"Zuni, y por otro nombre Cibola." The distorted and corrupted version con-
tained infiiakluyt, The Principal Navigations, Voiages, TVaffiqves, and Discoueries
of the English Nation\[Q\, iii., has : " Veynte y quatro leguas de aqui, hazia el
poniente, dieron con vAa prouincia, que se nombra en lengua de los naturales
Zuny, y la Ilaman los Espannoles Cibola.'*

1 Relacion de Todas las Cosas, MS., paragraph 44: **E1 Pueblo mayor, y
Caveza de todos es el Pueblo de Civola que en su lengua se llama havico."

* Three of them are identified from the data on hand in 1540: Kiakima,
through tradition and the description of Fray Marcos; Hauicu, or Abacus,
and Matzaki, through Castaileda.

• Obediencia y Vasallaje de Aguscobi, p. 133. We easily recognize in " Agus-
cobi " Hauicu ; in Canabi, Chyanahue (about three miles east of Hauicu, with
a quite fairly preserved chapel); in Coaqucria, Kiakima; in ** Halonagu,"
Halona-kue, or Halona; in Macaqui, Matzaki. Aquinsa remains, and Mr.
Cushing is doubtful whether it was Pi nana or Kua-kyi-na. As for the seventh,
it might be Ketchipauan, near Hauicu, but there is no certainty.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


XJ2 ARCHjEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

small houses or huts of wood or sod, beheld with such amaze-
ment, and described to the friar in such glowing colors.

But he himself affirms that Cibola or Kiakima appeared to
be larger than the city of Mexico. From the remains still
extant, I should judge that the population of Kiakima did not
exceed one thousand souls. How many people did the young
city of Mexico, founded as a Spanish town in 1524, contain
fifteen years after its foundation ? Hardly one thousand ! ^
We must remember that the Indian pueblo was destroyed
and razed during the memorable siege of 1521 ; that only the
Spanish buildings presented a striking appearance;^ and
on the other hand, that a New Mexican Indian village, with
its terraced stories, always appears at a distance much larger
than it is in reality. Fray Marcos's impression, therefore,
that Kiakima was more important than Mexico, is easily ac-
counted for, and implies not the least wilful exaggeration on
his part. In this, again, as in every other matter where he
testifies as ocular witness, his personal sincerity admits of no
doubt.

As far as the details concerning architecture, dress, orna-
ments, and customs of the people of Cibola are concerned,
they are communicated by the friar only from hearsay. Like
the descriptions of the size of the villages, they contain
exaggerations. I must state, however, that such exagger-
ations are common with the Indian. He has seldom a real
conception of numerical proportions, and therefore uses com-
paratives, which the most candid investigator, if he has not
acquired long practice among the natives, is liable to take for
absolute statements. I was often informed by Indian friends

1 Compare on that point my article in the " Magazine of Western History,"
Tlu Discovery of New Mexico by Fray Marcos o/Nizza, p. 669. I add, that in
i556(Robert Thomson\tated that Mexico had not over fifteen hundred Spanish
households. Hakluyt's Voiages, vol. iii. p. 539.

T Cervantes-Salazar^ J//;r/Vr<7 en 1554, p. 137.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 73

that the pueblo of Acoma was the largest in New Mexico, that
it was exceedingly large ; and that Taos was a very impor-
tant pueblo in size; whereas Acoma has only six hundred
inhabitants, and Taos four hundred. With the Indians the
general effect is the main criterion. Still, the descriptions of
the Pueblo type of architecture given by the Opatas and the
Sobaypuris to Fray Marcos are in the main correct. Even
the fact that the lintels and door-sills were incrusted with
turquoises is substantially true, only that the green stones
were set in the wooden frames of the hatchways, as the first
floor had no entrances on the ground. But Fray Marcos was
unable to discriminate between the two forms. To him an
entrance into a building or room was a doorway, as he had
never seen anything else. That turquoises were always abun-
dant among the Pueblos is well known. They are so to-day.

I need not refer again in detail to the matter of the " cloth
of Totonteac"; but I note that Melchior Diaz gathered (on his
trip north, of which I shall treat in a subsequent monograph)
information on this point fully confirming that obtained by
Fray Marcos.^

Cibola being identified with Zufli, or rather with the Zufii
country, the question arises, What were Abacus, Acus, Ma-
rata, and Totonteac? Were they real or mythical regions,
existing tribes and places, or the creations of misunder-
standing or imagination? On this question the linguistic
and ethnological investigations of Mr. Gushing have shed
a sudden and important light.

Acus is Acoma. The Zuiiis call that pueblo Ha-ku, or
Ha-ku-kue ; the Navajos call it Ha-kus. The Acomas them-
selves name their village A-ko ; the tribe, Ako-ma.

1 Mendoza, Deuxihne Lettre, p. 294: "Us ^l^vent dans leurs maisons des
animaux velus, grands comme des chiens d'Espagne. lis les tondent, ils en
font des perruques de couleurs, semblables k celle que j'ai envoy^e k votre
seigneurie. lis en fabriquent aussi des <^toffes.*'


Digitized by VjOOQIC


174 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Abacus, which Fray Marcos distinguishes from Acus by
saying that the h is aspirated, and that Ahacus is one of
the villages of Cibola, whereas Acus is an independent cluster
or tribe, is Hauicu, the village near the Zufli Hot Springs, in
ruins since 1672.^

Marata is Ma-tyarta, or Mak-ya-ta. Here we strike an
interesting fact, — a fragment of Zufli history from a time
earlier than the coming of Europeans. Matyata, or Makyata,
is the name given by the Zufiis to a cluster of now ruined
pueblos which they declare to have been occupied by a branch
of their own people. After long dissensions and even war-
fare with the inhabitants of the Zufli basin, those of Matyata
were compelled to submit, and to join the former in their
settlements. The group of ruins called Matyata, or Makyata,
lies southeast of Zufli on the trail leading to Acoma; and
the condition of the ruins (described by Alvarado in 1540)
shows that their abandonment is more recent than that of
other ancient pueblos in that region.^

The Zufli Indian whom Fray Marcos met among the
Sobaypuris of San Pedro informed the monk that the
"Maratas" were still warring with the Zuflis, and holding
their own. But from 1540 no further mention is made of
the place or tribe. Coronado would surely have taken notice
of it had it still been in existence and the villages inhabited.
It seems therefore that Fray Marcos was informed of an oc-
currence then recently past, but well authenticated, — of a
war which had been brought to a conclusion but a few years
previous, perhaps, to his coming, and which his informant,
having remained without communication with Zufli for some
time, believed to be still in progress.

1 It was surprised and sacked by the Navajos. Compare Vetancurt, CrSnica,
p. 321, and MenologiOf p. 347. His date, 1670, is wrong. It should be 1672,
as may be shown from manuscripts in my possession.

3 Even at the present day the ruins are in quite a good state of preservation.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 75

Totonteac, according to Mr. Gushing, is a name given to a
cluster of ancient pueblos formerly belonging to the Moquis,
but already abandoned in the first half of the sixteenth cen-
tury. There were twelve of them, — exactly the number given
to Fray Marcos by his informants. The proper name seems
to have been Top-in-te-ua. It may be regarded as an ancient
(now disused) Zuiii name for their neighbors, the Moquis, in
the same manner as Tusayan.

With Cibola thus definitely located, the whole route of
Fray Marcos becomes very plain and clear. Whether we
now undertake to follow his advance or his line of retreat,
the principal stations remain the same. After the start from
Culiacan, Matape or Vacapa in Central Sonora proves to have
been the first station, — whether reached from the mouth of
the Yaquis, as I incline to believe, or from the Guaymas.
Passing onward, we are led into the valley of the Sonora
River, and, crossing the waste on the borders of Arizona,
into the valley of the Rio San Pedro. This is the last region
inhabited by village Indians before Zurii is reached, to ac-
complish which we must first pass through the wilderness
or "desert" of the White Mountain Apache reservation.
The Apaches themselves the friar did not see, although they
were there, as was subsequently ascertained ; and this is
accounted for by the numerous escort of Indians which ac-
companied both him and the negro Estevan.

Going backwards, he followed the same route ; and count-
ing backwards, we arrive at the same points. The rule
working equally well both ways, it must be true.

Through the regrettable fact that the other report of Fray
Marcos is still missing, we are of course deprived of much
positive and valuable ethnographic material which he has not
given in his " Personal Narrative," as it may be called. Still,
the ethnography of the countries which he has traversed and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


176 archjEological institute.

of which he has heard becomes dimly outlined. We first
meet the tribes on the Petatlan River, — the Guasaves, and
Vacoregues or Ahomes.^ Beyond, we find ourselves with
the two groups of Cahitas, the Mayos and the Yaquis.
Still farther along the sea-coast, it is possible he may have
visited the Guaymas. At all events, he saw the Seris. Once
inland, the Eudeves of Matape afford him hospitality, and
from them we reach the Opatas of the Sonora valley* In
Arizona we meet the Sobaypuris. Of the so called Pueblo
Indians we become acquainted with the sites and ranges of
the A-shi-ui or Zufiis, of the Moquis, and as far east into
New Mexico as the Queres of Acoma. The sketch is plain,
and the lines are well connected. It shows the ethnography
in the earliest times of discovery to have been substantially
the same as to-day, and is a frame which the remarkable
information left us by the members of the expedition of Coro-
nado has well filled out and still further extended.

There is but one point which seems to lie outside of this
ethnographic frame. This is the valley which Fray Marcos
went to see upon his return, and where, as he had been in-
formed, the inhabitants possessed and used metallic objects.
I have already explained in what manner the monk may
have been misled into the belief of the use of gold by some
Sonoran tribe, whereas it is abundantly proved that none of
them had any conception of the value of metallic substances.
As Fray Marcos gives no data to indicate from what point
he turned aside to visit that valley, but says that it lay
on the western spurs of the Sierra Madre of Sonora, I can
only surmise that it may have been some interior basin held
by a branch of the Nebomes or Southern Pimas, who were
the most cultured tribes of Sonora. In this case we might

1 Orozco y Berra, Geografia de las Lenguas y Carta Etnogrdfica de Mixko.
See the map, and pages 326-328.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 7 7

add the Nebomes to the Indian tribes of whom he has se-
cured information on his journey.

Ethnologically, the amount of information imparted in the
report is quite considerable. Much of it, however, especially
in regard to the New Mexican and Northern Arizona village
Indians, is stated as from hearsay. I have already mentioned
most of that information, and hold it unnecessary to recur to
it again. In regard to the tribes of Sonora he is less explicit,
and this may be accounted for by considering that the per-
sonal narrative is more properly a relation of how he sought
and found Cibola than anything else. Nevertheless, we find
valuable remarks concerning the Seris, their manner of navi-
gation, fishing products, and their personal decoration. The
same may be said of the Opatas and Sobaypuris. But im-
portant above all is the picture of primitive intercourse be-
tween distant stocks and tribes, of aboriginal commerce, in
these Southwestern regions, which the monk has traced.
(^It is quite likely that the proportions of this commercial
intercourse have been exaggerated by the friar's Indian in-
formants. It would even be very strange if they had not.
But the fact that it existed, that the Seris while at war with
the tribes of the mainland still traded with them, thus form-
ing a link between the Californian peninsula and Sonora,
and that the Opatas and the Northern Pimas even went
so far as Zufii to exchange the products of the South for
those of the North, is a very important feature. It may as
well be stated here, that until 1859 the New Mexican Pue-
blos made annual trading expeditions to Guaymas and into
the heart of Sonora, bartering buffalo robes, piflon, meat, and
other products for iridescent conch-shells and the bright
plumes of the parrot. ( Commerce in times previous to the ad-
vent of Europeans was an important factor in the formation,
not only of geographical notions, but, above all, of mytho-
logical ideas, in the creation of new modes of worship, and


Digitized by VjOOQIC


178 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

in the modification of established rites> The changes were
of course extremely slow, almost imperceptible ; still they
crept into the customs, beliefs, and creeds of the tribes. A
physical fact which the Indian is unable to explain becomes
a religious idea ; an historic occurrence, a mythological con-
ception. A geographical fact, conveyed through oral informa-
tion and not by ocular inspection, soon passes into the realm
of the supernatural. The statements of Fray Marcos about
this ancient intercourse are therefore of the greatest value.
They are a warning that the culture of the tribes, both South
and North, should be studied and judged with due allow-
ance for the influence which such intercourse has always
exercised!)

A journey of exploration yielding the results which that of
Fray Marcos presented to New Spain at his return, executed
and reported upon with the conscientiousness of which we
have seen such manifest proof, could not fail to create a
powerful impression. It placed the unknown North within
the pale of reality, and therefore within the reach of human
enterprise. The most immediate result was Coronado's cele-
brated dash into New Mexico. The two, the journey of Fray
Marcos and the expedition of Coronado, cannot be separated
from each other.

They are the culminating points of a series of events, be-
ginning withvGonzalo de Sandoval's report about the Ama-
zons^nd ending with the martyrdom of Fray Juan de Padilla
in Northeastern Kansas and the wonderful return of Andres
Docampo to Mexico many years afterwards. Their practical
result was, not only the discovery, but the exploration, of
New Mexico and the countries northeast of it as far as the
Arkansas River and beyond, at a time when the Atlantic
coast of North America was but rarely visited, and no Euro-
peans had set foot on the shores where now stand the most
populous cities of the New World.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 79


V.


THE EXPEDITION OF PEDRO DE VILLAZUR, FROM SANTA Ffi,
NEW MEXICO, TO THE BANKS OF THE PLATTE RIVER, IN
SEARCH OF THE FRENCH AND THE PAWNEES, IN THE
YEAR 172a

IN his work on the supposed expedition of Don Diego
de Pefialosa to Quivira, Mr. John Gilmary Shea writes :
** The Spaniards kept up expeditions to the Missouri, and
in 1 719 an expedition from New Mexico under Villazur,
guided by a Frenchman, reached the Missouri opposite the
towns of the Pananas (Pawnees) ; but the Indians, crossing
by night, surprised the Spaniards, killing the commander and
the guide, as well as Father John Mingues, the chaplain of
the expedition. The French in Illinois soon heard of this
a£Fair, and Indians brought in trophies of their success,
among them some of the vestments and church plate of the
chaplain. According to the French accounts, the Spanish
party were cut off by the Missouris, whom they mistook for
the Osages, a tribe friendly to them." ^

The above statement is quite accurate in the main, except
that the event took place, not in 17 19, but in the year follow-
ing, 1720. Neither was it on the Missouri River that Villazur
and his men were murdered, but on the Platte, and in all
probability on the southern fork of that stream, near where
Platte City stands to-day. It is the purpose of the following
pages to present ?ome further details concerning this Spanish
reconnoissance towards the north of New Mexico.

^ lite Expedition of Don Diego Dionisio de Pefialosa^ etc^ byy ohn Gilmary
Shea} 1882, p. 93.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


l8o ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

In the course of my researches in behalf of the Hemenway
Southwestern Archaeological Expedition, I found a number of
documents bearing upon the event which forms the subject
of this sketch.^ Careful copies of all these papers were made,
and they seemed to justify the attempt to publish a short
report on an occurrence to which as yet hardly any attention
has been given. The reconnoissance of Villazur was prob-
ably the last attempt made on a larger scale by the Span-
iards to penetrate to any distance, and with military forces,
north of the Arkansas River.

The earliest meeting between the French and the Span-
iards, in the regions west of the Mississippi Valley, took
place, as far as I am able to gather, in the year 1689. Alonzo
de Leon crossed over into Texas from Coahuila, and found
the vestiges of the ill-fated expedition commanded by Robert
Cavelier de la Salle. Six survivors from that unfortunate
force — five young men and one girl — were ransomed by
Leon from the Tejas Indians. Leon treated them very
kindly, and sent two of the youths to the city of Mexico to
give account of their experiences to the Viceroy, the Conde
de Galve.2 These two Frenchmen had both been implicated
in the murder of La Salle. They were Jacques Grollet, a

1 At the Territorial Library of Santa F^, at the office of the U. S. Surveyor
General, Santa Fe, and in the ecclesiastical archives of Santa Clara.

2 The original report of Leon is at Washington. I have not seen it; but in
the work ofVFray Isidro Felis Espinosa.Vr^r^wVa ApostolUay Seraphica de Todos
hs CoU^os de Propa^nda Fide de esta Nueva Espana^ 1746, there is a full report
of the occurrence (lib. v. cap^vi. pp. 409, 410). Another description is found in
the work off P. Andres Cavojp. J , I^s Tres Siglos de Mejico durante el Gobierno
Espanol, p. ^30. But Cavo says that only two of the Frenchmen surrendered to
Leon, L'Arch^v^que and Grollet : ** I^s otros tres no quisieron fiarse de los
Espanoles." Espinosa, on the other hand, fails to give the names of the two
principal ones above stated. He enumerates Pedro Muni (Pierre Meusnier),
Pierre Talon, a boy called Robert, and the girl, Madelaine Talon. The tale, —
except the names of the parties, is related b/Grollet\ himself in his deposition
contained in the Ynformaciones de Santiago Grolee y de Elena Gallegos^ 1699, MS.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 8 1

sailor from La Rochelle, aged twenty-four, and Jean TArch^-
v^que, a native of Bayonne, aged nineteen. It was the latter
who had, on the morning of the i8th of March, 1687, allured
La Salle into the fatal trap where death was lurking for the
celebrated explorer.^ I purposely call attention to L'Arch^-
v^que, since he played an important part in the tragedy of
1720 on the banks of the Platte River.

In 17CX), while Pedro Rodriguez Cubero was Governor of
New Mexico, news reached Santa F^ that the French had
destroyed a village of the Jumanos Indians on the eastern
plains,^ and in 1702 a campaign was made in that direction.^
Nothing resulted from the scare, and hardly anything save
loss of life through prowling Apaches was the fruit of the
ill-advised expedition.

In 1704 the Indians of the pueblo of Picuries abandoned
their village in Northern New Mexico and fled to the plains,
where they established themselves at a place called El Quar-

1 Compare ^arkman, jZ<z Salle and the Discovery of the Great West^ p. 403.
The Frenchmen themselves make no allusion to the murder. GroUet only says
in Ynformaciones \ '* Quedaron perdidos en tierra de indios infieles endonde
estuuieron perdidos sinco aiios.'' Archeveque is absolutely silent on the point,
except that he confesses ( Ynformaciones y Diligencias McUrimoniales de Pedro
Meusniery Frances, y de Lucia Madrid^ 1699, MS.) : " Porque el ano de ochenta
y quatro Salieron de Francia y el dho Pedro Meusnier venia en compania
de el General Monsieur de La Sala." The ages are gathered from the same
documents.

2 Relacion AnSnima de la Reconquista del Nuevo Mexico (archives at Mexico,
MS.) : *' £1 aiio de 1700 refiri6 un apache de los llanos que los franceses habian
destruido el pueblo de los Jumanos, y esta noticia, que el alcalde mayor del
pueblo de Taos comunic6 a Cubero, hizo temer k todos los del reino que los
franceses podian hacer suya esta tierra 6 dar mucho trabajo en alguna irrupcion
repentina."

8 Ibid. : " Fu^ por Julio de 1702 a la otra contra los apaches nombrados
faraones, y no logr6 de ella." In the Lidro de Entierros de la Mision de N. S.
de Los Angeles de Pecos (1695 to 1706, MS.), there is, under date of the ist
of July, 1702, the entry : " Mataron en los Jumanos a Francisco & quando los
ymbio el Sr Gouernador Dn Pedro Rodriguez Cubero de este Pueblo 56
Yndios.'' This would indicate that the expedition was on account of the
Jumanos also.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 82 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

telejo. Superstition was, from all indications, the cause of
this hasty movement. The Governor, Don Francisco Cuerbo
y Valdes, easily induced the fugitives to return.^

About the same time the Comanches made their first ap-
pearance in New Mexico, introduced at the pueblo of Taos
by the Yutes. The Yutes were at peace with the Spaniards
until about 1705, when a conspiracy was detected, into which
they, the Navajos, and other roaming tribes, had entered with
some of the Pueblos against the Spaniards.^ This strained
the relations of the latter with the Northern Indians, and the
Yutes soon took to stealing horses and running off stock.
From time to time some of the Spaniards even lost their
lives. The annoyance from that source became so great,
that in 1719 the Governor, Don Antonio Valverde Cossio,
determined upon a campaign into the northern and north-
eastern plains. It was directed chiefly against the Yutes,
and against such of the Comanches as had joined them. The
expedition is declared to have been successful. At all events,
Valverde penetrated to the Quartelejo, and even beyond. . I
have not yet been able to find the journal of his expedition ;
but from other statements it results that he marched con-
stantly north from Santa F6, leaving the high mountains to
his left and to the west, keeping on the plains, and thus
reached the Quartelejo at a distance of one hundred and
thirty leagues, or three hundred and fifty miles, east of north

^ This flight of the Indians of Picuries to the Quartelejo is mentioned in
several documents. I quote here only the witchcraft trial entitled Causa
Criminal contra Geronimo Dirucaca, Indio del Pueblo de Picuries ^ 17 13, MS.,
fol. 16, 17. The same document also fixes the date. In regard to the return
from the Quartelejo, it was effected in 1706 by the Sargente Mayor Juan de
Uribarri. Francisco Cuerbo y Valdes, Orden al Cap^ Francisco Valdes Soribas
sobre la Guerra contra los Moguls, 1706, MS.

2 Juan Paez Hurtado, Diligenzias sobre hauer Contraydo Amistad los Yndios
Xptianoscon los Ynfoles, 1704 and 1705, MS. The plot was a very dangerous
one.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 83

from Santa F^.^ This locates that point in Northwestern
Kansas, very near the southern boundary of Nebraska.

The disconnected and loose condition of the roaming tribes
constantly produced strange anomalies in the relations be-
tween the whites and the several bands, or hordes, of the same
stock. Thus, while the Southern Apaches, the Faraones,
were devastating the Spanish settlements and the sedentary
Fueblos,^ their northern congeners, the Jicarrillas, had con-

1 Junta y Parezeres sobre la Jornada al Reconacimiento de las Poblaciones Fran-
eesas al Noreste^ y sobre el Establecimiento de vn Presidio de veinte y cinco Plasas
en el Puesto del Quartelejo^ 1720, MS. The return of Valverde took place pre-
vious to November 30, 17 19: " En virtud de las consultas echas por Dfi Mauel
de Sft Juan, Gour que fue de la Nueva Viscaya, y vna mia de treinta de No-
viembre pasado, en que doi quenta a su Exa de la Jornada que acauaua de
ejecutar en poz de la Nazion Yutta y Cumanche, y en ella hago exprezion
de las Rancherias de Indios. . . . Lo Informado que me hallo y lo que es-
perimente en la Jornada q hize por el aiio passado en busca de la Nazion
Yutta y Cumanche, y sobre la situazion del Pressidio que manda hazentar en el
paraje del quartelejo, me conformo, etc. . • . y estos se situen en el puesto del
Quartelejo que dista de esta Villa como zientto y treinta leguas, poco mas, o
menos, conforme lo demarcado** The last word I italicize, since it indicates that
the statement as to the distance was not mere guesswork. In the same docu-
ment the Captain of the Indians of the Pueblos (an honorary title given by the
Spaniards) jgoseph Naranjo\ays : " Que por las esperienzias que le hazisten, y
quatro entradas que a echo a dhos paizes de Quartelexo, y alguna distanzia mas
adelante."

3 The depredations of the Faraones, under which name were included the
bands roaming over the plains southeast of Santa F^, are the subject of many
interesting councils of war and other measures by the Spanish authorities of
New Mexico. In 1702 Pedro Rodriguez Cubero made the useless campaign
against them which I have already mentioned. In March and April, 1704, Don
Diego de Vargas marched against them in the Sierra de Sandia without result,
since he fell sick and died at Bernalillo on the 8th of April. Autos de Guerra
de la Primera Campaha que el S^ Marq* de la Naua de Brazinas Gou^, etc.y Sale
em Persona a Hazer la Guerra offenstba a los Apaches Faraones desde la Sierra de
Sandia y Carnue^ etc,^ 1704, MS. Also, Carta de Testatnento de Don Diego iU
Vargas, April 7, 1704, MS. Under the Governor Don Juan Ignacio Flores
Mogollon, the incursions of the Faraones became very troublesome. Their
lairs were especially the Sierra de Sandia on the east, and the Sierra de los
Ladrones on the west side of the Rio Grande. Auttoy Junta de Guerra sobre
si Sele deue Azer la Guerra alos Yndios JentUes dela Nation Faraonay Or den Pd
que Seles requiera no executen Ningun Rouo, 17 14, MS. TesHmonio de las Juntas


Digitized by VjOOQIC


1 84 archjeological institute.

federated with the Spaniards against the Faraones, their
enemies, and especially against the Yates and Comanches.^
It was part of the object of Valverde to secure the " Ranche-
rias " of the Jicarrillas against the insults of their foes. One
of the main localities inhabited by these friendly Apaches
was the Jicarrilla, forty leagues (no miles) north of Santa
F6 ; but it seems that another band of them also dwelt at
the Quartelejo.2 This would reveal the strange fact, that

de Guerra que se formaron para haser la Campana a la Sierra de los Ladrones ;
y Rouo de un Espahol que Trajeron los Apaches, 17 15, MS. Junta de Guerra
sobre Muertes hechas por los Apaches en el Arroyo Hondo^ 17 15, MS. The mur-
ders had been committed within five miles of Santa F6. Also, Causa Criminal
contra el Cauo Lorenzo Rodriguez por el descuido que tubo en el Real de la
Cauallada, 17 15, MS.

1 Such conditions recurred frequently. Junta y Parezeres sobre la Jornada al
Reconocimiento tie las Poblaciones Framesets, 1720. Valverde says of the Apache
Jicarrillas : " Y son las que me reziuieron con la Ymajen de Maria Santissima."
In the same document : " Parezer del Capn Miguel Thenorio." Again Valverde
in the same document says (speaking of the Jicarrilla Apaches) : " Aunque estos
Apaches admitan (como lo tienen ofrezido) su reduzion y Cathequizmo, tienen
por enemigos a la Nazion Yutta y Cumanche, por la partte del Nordesste, y por
la del medio dia la Pharaona, q aunque apache de ordinario andan encontra-
das." The Jicarrillas remained friendly to the Spaniards for a long time. But
the Comanches drove them from their range at the Jicarrilla. Testimonio de lo
Acaesido en el Pueblo de Pecos^ Noticia del Tlieniente de Taos, de hallarse en el Rio
de la Gicarilla den tiendas de Cumanches Enemigos, etc., 1 748, MS. : " En el paraje
que llaman la Gicarilla, distante de Dho Pueblo de Thaos veinte leguas, cuio
sitio es mui comodo, asi de tierras como de aguas, pastos, y maderas, en el que
en tiepos pasados Estauan situados los Yndios Nacion Gicarillas, que heran
muchos y tenian Casas, Jacales, y otras chozas, de donde los Gentiles Cumanches
los despojaron, y mataron los mas de ellos, y los pocos que quedaron de Dhos
Gicarillas se han abrigado y mantenido de paz ynmediatos alos Pueblos de
Thaos, y de Pecos, con sus familias."

2 Junta y Parezeres sobre la Jornada : " Ha de zer nezezario el que las armas
lo defiendan y ampar^n de sus enemigos." In regard to the residence of
Apaches at the Quartelejo there are several proofs. In the document above
stated Captain Joseph Naranjo speaks of the Apaches as dwelling there ; and
Captain Miguel Thenorio says : " Y que lo vido esto y experimento en la
entrada que hizo al Quartelejo quando se fue a sacar el pueblo de los Picuries.
Gouernando este Reino el Genl Dn Franc<» Cueruo, y que en aquel entonces
los Apaches que alii se hallauan Rancheados, les dixeron," etc. The name
** Apaches del Quartelejo " is found besides in various documents of the past


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 85

ramifications of the Tinneh had pushed as far to the north as
Nebraska in the beginning of the eighteenth century. There
is nothing at all improbable in this. The buffalo attracted,
as well as guided, the roaming Indians to places and distances
far from their original homes.^ At all events, it was on his
campaign of 1719 that Valverde heard, not only of Pawnee
(Panana) villages situated on the Rio de Jesus Maria, sev-
enty leagues (190 miles) north of the Quartelejo, but of
French settlements, or at least of Frenchmen living with the
Pawnees. He at once reported this fact to Mexico, and the
Viceroy, Marques de Valero, promptly acted in the matter.^

1 must remark here, that the Pawnees were known to
the Spaniards in the seventeenth century.® Pawnee captives
were not unfrequently ransomed in New Mexico from the
Apaches and from the Yutes ; * and while no direct contact

century. Consult(Pedro de Rivera,|^/an> y Derroiero de lo CaminadOj visto y
observado en el Discurso de la Visita General de Presidios situados en las Provincias
Ynternas de la Nueva Espaha^ 1736, p. 33 ; ftf atias de la Mota Padilla^i^w/^Tria
de la Nueva Galicia^ 1742, p. 516. It is not unlikely that the name " Quartelejo "
may have originated from the temporary stay of the Picuries Indians at the
place. So it is mtimated by Fray Silvestre Velez de Escalante in his letter
to Father Augustin Morfi, Carta al Padre Lector Fray Agustin Morfi^ April 2,
1778, MS., p. 12.

^ Compare, for instance, the shiftings of the Quiviras (a band of the Teton
Sioux) from Northern Kansas into Southeastern New Mexico and Western
Arkansas, the spread of the Comanches during the eighteenth century into
Texas, the extension of the Apaches from New Mexico into Sonora and Chi*
huahua (the latter as a result of the Pueblo insurrection and of the pressure from
the advancing Comanches), the gradual receding of the Jumanos from Eastern
New Mexico into Central Texas, and many other instances of that kind. I quote
no sources, as it would carry me too far.

2 Junta y Parezeresj MS. Pareceres del Fiscal Mayor y del Auditor sobre la
Causa contra el Gobor Dh Antonio Balverde Cosio, y Sentencia^ etc.^ 1727, MS.
In the former document Captain Naranjo says : " Y quatro entradas c^ue a
echo a dhos paizes del Quartelexo, y alguna distancia mas adelante, como hasta
el Rio Grande, que le puzo por Nombre Jessus Maria que disttara del paraje
del quartelejo a dh5 Rio, como Settenta leguas, poco mas 6 menos."

• The name appears in church books.

^ Libro Mo de Difuntos de la Mission de Nuestra Senora del Pcuo del Rio del


Digitized by VjOOQIC


i86 archjEOLOGICal institute.

was had with them, beyond, perhaps, an occasional meeting
on the plains, still the tribe was known, and its range
approximately located.^

The action taken by the superior authorities at Mexico
consisted in directing Valverde to send an expedition to the
Pawnee villages, and also to examine as to whether it would
be advisable to establish a military post at the Quartelejo.^
The first part of these instructions admitted of no discussion,
the order being peremptory ; on the second point, a council
of war was held at Santa F6 on the 2d of June, 1720. Nine
leading officers and representative men of New Mexico took
part in it; and their opinion was unanimous to the effect
that it was not advisable to establish a post garrisoned by
only twenty-five men, as the Viceroy had directed, at such a
great distance from Santa F6 and the Spanish settlements in
general. Instead of the Quartelejo, the Jicarrilla was sug-
gested, as being nearer, and also fully provided with wood
and water, whereas the former lay in an arid steppe.^ * One

Norte^ 1685-1693, MS., fol. 47. Funeral notice of an old " Panana *' woman.
Another in 1707. Libra Tercero de Difuntos^ MS. Also in 1708. On the 6th
of January, 1693, a Panana boy, ten years old, was baptized at El Paso. Libro
tdo de Bautistnos^ MS., fol. 76. In 1725 a marriage of Panana with Yute was
also performed at £1 Paso. JJbro Segundo de Casamientos, MS., fol. 35. All
these Pawnees (for that the Pananas were the Pawnees admits of no doubt)
were certainly captives, bought or ransoftied by the Spaniards from the plain
tribes, or rescued from among the Pueblos then hostile to the Spaniards.

1 This results from intercourse with the Yutes, and the conversation with
Pawnee captives themselves.

^ The order of the Viceroy bears date January 10, 1720, and was received
by Valverde while at El Paso del Norte on the 4th of March of the same year.
Junta de Parezeres sobre la Jornada,

• Ibid»^ Parezer del Cap" Joseph Naranjo : " Y dicho paraje del quartelexo
no es al propositto, no tienen las conuenienzias que nezezitan para poder hazer
haziento de Presidio ni poblazon, y estas las tienen solo del Temporal, por la
poca agua y ninguna lefia de suerte que encogiendo sus Cozechas se retiran de
dho puesto." Parezer del Cap" Miguel Thenorio: " Y que en aquel entonces
los Apaches que alii se hallauan Rancheados, les dixeron que asi que leban-
tauan sus siembras (que estas por lo que se manifiesta son de temporal) se


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 187

officer who assisted at this council, and gave his opinion
with great precision and clearness, was "Captain" Juan de
Archibeque, or Jean TArchivfique, the betrayer of La Salle.^

A brief sketch of the life of this man up to this date may
not be amiss here. The documents therefor are mostly at
the Indian village of Santa Clara, where the ecclesiastical
archives formerly in the Custody of the Conversion of Saint
Paul of New Mexico ^ were mostly deposited at one time, and
where I found among others the matrimonial informations
{Diligencias Matrimoniales) of Archiveque himself, and of
his two companions, GroUet and Meusnier.^ The inventory
of the estate of Jean T Archevfique * exists among the archives

retirauan apartes donde poder resistir al rigor del Inbierno, por la falta de leila
que en aquel paraje ay.** Parezer del Cap" Josseph Dominguez : " Del puesto
del Quartelexo, lo escazo de Agua de dho Sittio, y ninguna leiia, y ser el
sentro de la Apacheria," Parezer del Capp** Seuastian Martin ; " Hallo y
reconozio el dho puesto ser muy escazo de aguas, y sin convenienzia alguna de
lena." This plainly proves that the Quartelejo was on the great plains.

1 Junta de Parezeres, Parezer del Capp"* Joan de Archibeqe. The final
words of his opinion are significant : ** Que en este Valle [of the Jicarrilla] en
la parte que fuere mas conveniente se sittue el Presidio de los veinte y sinco
hombres. . . . Y le seruira de mucho aliuio, assi a este Reino como adquirir
noticias con mas facilidad de la Nation de sus Paizanos los Frannezes.^ I itali-
cize the last words, since they show that he still publicly recognized himself as
a Frenchman, at least by birth. The change in name from Arch^veque to
Archibeque ^as already made by the Spaniards in 1689. Cavo, Los Tres Siglos
de Mexico^ p. 230. In the numerous papers concerning him in my custody, it is
variously written Archebec, Archibec, but the spelling Archibeque has finally
remained, and his descendants, of whom there are quite a number in New
Mexico, write their name Archibeque. He himself signed De Archeueque until
after 170a. In 17 19 he signed De Archiueque and De Archibeque. Ynfor-
macianes de Juan de Archibeque y de Doha Manuela de Roybal^ MS.

' It depended upon the " Provincia del Santo Evangelio de Mexico." Al-
though the Franciscan friars were really expelled from New Mexico about 1733,
secular priests taking their place, nevertheless there remained at the pueblo
and mission of Isleta a nominal ''Custodio" of the former province, Fray
Mariano de Jesus Lopez, who died there in 1848 from the accidental discharge
of a pistol.

* Meusnier married in 1699 one Lucia Madrid. He was then still a soldier.
Ynformaciones Matrimoniales de Pedro Meusnier Prances, etc., MS.

* Ynbentarias y Avtos de Uquidasion y Partision de el Caudal que quedo por


Digitized by VjOOQIC


l88 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

of the Surveyor General's office at Santa Ffe, and some addi-
tional information was obtained from the Territorial Library.
Jean TArchivSque was born at Bayonne, in Southern
France, in the year 1671. His parents were Claude TAr-
chiv^quc and Marie d'Armagnac. In 1684 he came to the
shores of Texas with La Salle and his expedition. It appears,
then, that when L'Archevfique played the odious part of a
decoy for La Salle's murderers in 1687, he was but sixteen
years of age. Joining the Indians after the assassination of his
great leader, he was picked up by Alonzo de Leon in 1689,
sent to Mexico, and finally to Spain with GroUet,^ whence the
two returned in 1692,^ and rejoined their comrade Meusnicr
at El Paso del Norte. L'Archiv^que and Meusnier became
soldiers under the victorious banners of Don Diego de Vargas,
the reconqueror of New Mexico.^ GroUet wandered to New
Mexico as a colonist.* In 1697, L'Arch^veque married, at
Santa F6, Antonia Gutierrez, widow of one Tomds de Ytta,

Finy Muerte del Capphjuan de Architteque entre sus Hijos y Herederos echas en
€sia Villa de Sta Fee por el Capph Dh Franco Bueno de Boharques Alcalde Mor
de Dhd Villa, 1720, MS.

1 Cavo, Los Tres Siglos, p. 236 : " En este afio [1692] volvio de Madrid, con
los dos franceses que dijimos, D. Andres Perez.*' Ynformaciones de Santiago
Grolee, 1699, MS. The names of Grollet's parents are also given in this docu-
ment, — Yvon Grollet and Marie Odan (possibly Odain).

a IHd,

« The date I have not yet been able to find ; but it was probably in the same
year, or the year following.

* He settled at Bernalillo on the Rio Grande, where his first child, a boy
named Antonio, was baptized on the 2d of April, 1703. Primer Libro de Bau-
tismos de Bernalillo, MS. In 1697 he appears in the list of the settlers to whom
Diego de Vargas distributed cattle and clothing. But while his name is on the
list, it appears that he received nothing himself. Repartimiento que hizo d
Gohernador Don Diego de Vargas a los Vezinos del Nuevo Mexico tanto de Generos
corno de Ganados Mayores y Menores, 1697, MS. The last mention I have found
of him so far is in the year 1705, when, being a resident of Bernalillo, and un-
der the name of Santiago Groli, he passed muster by order of the Governor
Cuerbo y Valdes, with one musket, his own weapons, three horses, and without
ammunition. Autos y Juntas de Guerra sobre las Invasiones que hacian los Nova-
jos, 1705, MS., fol. 18.


Digitized by


Google


^'


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, 1 89

who had been murdered near Zacatecas three years previ-
ously.^ Four years after his marriage, L'Arch^vfique pur-
chased a house and lot in Santa Fe ; about the same time his
wife died, leaving him two children.^ In 1702 we find him
at Acoma and at Zufti^ escorting Captain Juan de Uribarri,
sent to investigate the truth of the rumors of a conspiracy
among the Indians of those pueblos.^ He also went to the
Quartelejo in 1706. Retiring from military service, he be-
came a very successful trader. His trading expeditions ex-
tended over New Mexico and Sonora, and he repeatedly visited
the city of Mexico also. He was a " man of means," wrote
a good hand, and his advice and assistance were sought for
by the Governors, as well in military as in financial matters.*
On the i6th of August, 1719, L'Arch^v^que remarried ;

1 Ynfonnaciones de Juan de Archebec y Antid Gutierrez Viuda, 1697, MS.
Juan Paez Hurtado, Carta a Don Diego de Vargas, November 21, 1694, MS. It
appears that he had already applied for a marriage license in 1696 ; but the per-
mit was refused until the demise of Tomas de Ytta could be fully established.

2 The deed is at the Archives of the U. S. Surveyor General's office, where
I saw it. Concerning the death of his wife, Antonia, see Ynformadones dejuan
de Archibeque y de Doha Manuela Roybal^ 1719- In addition to the two legiti-
mate children, Miguel (from whom most of the present Archibeques descend,
and who had married a sister of his father's second wife) and Maria, married
to a son of Captain Francisco Casados, he left two illegitimate ofispring, —
Agustin and Juan. Ynbentario y Avtos de Liquidasion, fol. 2.

' Interrogatorios de varios Indios de los Pueblos de Laguna Acoma y Zuni, sobre
el supuesto Alzamiento de los Zuftis, 1702, MS. He acted as official witness
also.

* His estate yielded 6,118 pesos. See Yjuela de Partiziones entre los Hijos y
Herederos, in Ynbentarios y Avtos de Partision^ fol. 38. The widow received 417
pesos; each legitimate child, 2,346 pesos; the natural son, Juan, 545; Agustin,
200 ; Juan's mother, Maria de Mascarenas, a servant girl whom he maintained
as adoptive daughter, 200 ; and an old servant, Francisca de Velasco, 64 pesos.
That he was called to military councils of importance as early as 171 5 is shown
by official documents. Testimonio de las Juntas de Guerra que seformaron para
hazer la Campana a la Sierra de los Ladrones, 17 1 5, MS., fol. 6. In regard to the
importance of Archibeque as a trader, the Ynbentario gives sufficient evidence.
See, for instance, the letter of Santiago Sanchez de la Guerra to Miguel de
Archibeque, dated Chihuahua, December 15, 1720, fol. 18, and the Declarasion
de Miguel de Archiueque de lo que Comersio el Difunto su Padre, fol. 3a


Digitized by VjOOQIC


I90 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

this time his bride was Manuela, the daughter of Ignacio de
Roybal, and at the wedding, which was celebrated in the
church of the pueblo of San Ildefonso, the Governor Don
Antonio Valverde Cossio acted as groomsman.^ Captain Juan
de Archibeque stood high in New Mexico, as well as in the
neighboring province of New Biscay.

At the time when the council of war took place, the expe-
dition to the Pawnee villages was already organized. Val-
verde had been instructed to command it in person ; but for
some reason, which was afterwards deemed sufficient by the
superior authorities, he intrusted the command to his lieuten-
ant, Don Pedro de Villazur.^

I have not as yet been able to find anything touching upon
the previous life of this officer, beyond the fact that, in 1718,
he was already " Sargento Mayor " (Lieutenant Colonel) of
the forces of New Mexico.* This, and the fact that he exer-
cised the functions of Lieutenant Governor of the province in
1720, would indicate that he was a man of capacity and merit
in the military line proper. Nevertheless, the disaster which
occurred on the Platte River is usually attributed to utter
inefficiency on his part, and we shall see that the circum-
stances point in that direction. Villazur was perhaps an
officer of the regular army, and well fitted to command a
campaign against regular troops, but inexperienced in Indian
warfare. Be this as it may, he became commander of the
little force destined to reconnoitre the distant North, and
to win away from the French — with whom Spain was then
at war — the friendship of the Pawnees.

1 Ynfonnaciones de Juan de Archibeque y de Doha Manuela de Royhal^ 1 719.
The marriage date, etc., is in the Libra de Casamientos de San Ildefonso, M S., fol. 17.

2 Junta y Parezeres sobre la Jornada, Pareceres del Fiscal Mayor y del Auditor
tobre la Causa contra el Gobernador Don Antonio Balverde Cossio^ ^727, MS.

* Autos y Pareceres sobre el Pedimento de los Tanos de Galisteo Pidiendo Licencia
Para ir al Moqui a visitar a sus PanenteSf 1718, MS.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS, I9I

What the instructions were which Don Antonio Valverde
gave to his Lieutenant I am unable to say ; but it is evident
that the force placed under the command of Villazur was
rather insufficient for offensive operations against a tribe
as powerful and warlike as the Pawnees, in whose hands,
owing to intercourse with the French, fire-arms might be ex-
pected. Fifty armed Spaniards composed the corps.^ It is
true that servants accompanied some of these, that the train
had its Indians armed as usual with bows and arrows, and
that the assistance of the Apaches, of the Jicarrilla, and of
the Quartelejo was counted upon. Still, it was too small a
body of men for tl?e task. This seems to indicate that Vil-
lazur was to avoid hostilities as much as possible, and to ne-
gotiate rather than to attack. His own subsequent conduct
corroborates this impression.

A heavy mule train, laden chiefly with provisions, accom-
panied the soldiers. Only a limited number of articles for
exchange were taken along. They were chiefly intended for
the Apaches, who were to be coaxed into guiding and accom-
panying the expedition.^ On the other hand, the commander

1 Parecer del Fiscal Mayor ^ in the document given in note 2, page 192 : " Dize
que de la sumaria fulminada por el expresado Brigadier, esta constante, que el
dia catorze de Junio de setecientos y veinte, destaco un trozo de cinquenta sol-
dados del Presidio de Santa- Fee, que fue bajo del commando de Don Pedro de
Villazur, a fin de Executar la Referida Inspeccion." (fol. 3.) The term ** inspec-
tion " quite determines the character of the expedition, as also, on folio i of the
same document, the words "al reconocimiento del Rio Jesus Maria,** The latter
is in the preliminary declaration of the Viceroy at that time (1727), the Marques
de Casafuerte. That the Spaniards were to expect fire-arms among the Pawnees
had been found out by Valverde himself on his expedition of 1719. Parezer del
Sehor Auditor (same document) : " Dio quenta Don Antonio Balverde Cosio,
Gouernador del Nuevo Mexico, que en la Campalia a que salio, hallo un herido
de un fuzilazo, que dixo hauer reseuido de los Pananas, o Franceses.** That
Villazur was Lieutenant Governor of New Mexico in 1720 is amply proved.

*^ Autos sobre Commercio ilHcito con los Franceses del Oriente y de la Luisiana^
1724, MS. General Juan Paez Hurtado declares that Valverde "imbio fue
media pie9a de Vayeta, unos cuchillos velduqs y vnos sombreros pa regalar


Digitized by VjOOQIC


192 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUFE.

was careful to take with him a portion, at least, of his silver
ware. Several silver cups, half a dozen saucers, forks and
spoons, a silver candlestick, and an inkstand of the same
metal, were packed with his other personal effects.^ These
are insignificant details, still they are "straws" affording an
insight into the character of the man. Don Pedro de Villazur
may have been very brave, but he seems to have been rather
unacquainted with the character of the march which he
undertook.^

alos Indios Jentiles pa que les siruieran de guia." Captain Alonzo Rael de
Aguilar (the younger) deposes : ** Y una poca de vaieta, cuchillos y sombreros
con el animo de repartirlo entre los Indios Jentiles del Quartelejo pa grati-
ficarlos Pf lo q pudiera desalserse como de echo abrio lo q lleuaua en los
Indios Jentiles llamados Carlanes Pa regalar a los Indios q sacaron de guia."
Corporal Felipe Tamariz : *' Y que tambien vido lleuaua un tercio de tavaco,
una poca de bayeta, unos sombreros y unos cuchillos velduq5s para con ellos
gratificar a los Indios Principales de las Naciones Carlanes, Xicarillas y Quarte-
lexos a q le sirviesen de guia." Three more witnesses testify to the same effect.
In regard to the provisions and supplies, there b ample testimony in the same
document.

1 This is abundantly proved by the document above quoted. The Sargento
Mayor Don Alonzo Rael de Aguilar (the elder) says : " q lo q unicamente lleuaua
de plata eran unos platyllos, unos tazas, unos cucharas y tenedores un candelero
y un tintero.'* His son declares : " Y que no bido lleuassen mas plata q Dhos
quatro o seis platillos un candelero un tintero salvadera y algunas cucharas Pa
su Seruo." Felipe Tamariz : " Y q tambien vido lleuaua el rreferido Then**
Gral seis platos de plata, unas tasas y unas cucharas y candeleros de q se Yba
seruiendo." From hearsay two other witnesses, Diego Arias de Quifos and
Don Ignacio de Roybal (father-in-law of Juan de Archibeque), corroborate the
above.

* True it is that Diego de Vargas, the reconqueror of New Mexico, kept con-
siderable silver plate at Santa F^ {Carta de Tesiamento^ MS., and also Ynbei^
tario de los Uienes que se Hallaran del Senor Marques de la Naba de Brazinas ya
Difunto Gouernory Caph Genl quefue deste Reyno de la Nud Mexico, 1704, MS.) ;
but this was at his residence, and although he was careful on all his campaigns
to supply himself with necessities, he avoided everything superfluous. In his
Parecer, the Fiscal Mayor of New Spain says touching Don Pedro de Villazur:
*' Ni menos por ignorancia en el manejo de las armas, por haverse exercitado
mucho tiempo en diverssos empleos militares." This indicates that he was an
officer of the regular army. At the same time, the charge made by the Viceroy
Marques de Casafuerte in the same document, — " Y que por haver fiado esta
expedicion a Don Pedro de Villazur, su Theniente General, hombre poco experto


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 93

The fact that silver plate was taken along might perhaps
explain the silver ware secured as trophies by the Indians and
mentioned by Mr. Shea ; for it is very strange that, while the
French sources, and also, in i778,^Father Silvestre Velez de
Escalante)(a very high authority), speak of a " chaplain " of
the expedition, the documents gathered by me are absolutely
silent on that point ; and yet I can hardly refuse to believe
that Fray Juan Mingues, who in 1720 was priest of Santa
Clara, and lastly of Galisteo, did indeed accompany Villazur
and his men. For Fray Juan Mingues was a priest very well
known. Previous to 1 706 he had been in charge of the im-
portant parish of Santa Cruz de la Caftada.^ In the same
year he was sent to Zufli for a short time. After the death
of Fray Juan Garaycocchea,® we find him again at Santa
Cruz, Namb6, and Pojuaque between 1710 and 1715 ;* at San

en la milisia/' — is not a little strengthened by the fact that he carried with him
objects of useless display on such a long and difficult journey.

1 Pehalosa, p. 93. Journal Historique de V ^tablissement des Fran^ais d la
Louisiane^ p. 249: '* Except^ un religieux qui s'etait sauve sur son cheval.*' Carta
al Padre Lector Fray Agustin Morfi^ MS. The date of this important letter is
April 2, 1778. Father Escalante says (p. 12) : ** Que perecieron los mas, y entre
ellos el padre fray Juan Minguez, misionero de esta custodia." Father Esca-
lante had the best opportunity of knowing, as he had access to all the archives.
lie was an unusually brilliant, energetic, and devoted — also learned — man. I
have found him as priest in various New Mexican missions between 1775 and
1777. He died soon, however. His most striking achievement, outside of his
literary and religious work, is the trip made by him from Santa F^ to the San
Juan River, the Moquis, and to Zuni, in 1776. Compare in the first volume of
the second series of the " Documentos para la Historia de Mejico," the Diario y
Derrotero de los RR. PP. Fr, Francisco Atanasio Dominguez y Fr. Silvestre Velez
de Escalante ; Para descubrir el Camino desde el Presidio de Santa Fe del Nuevo
Mexico^ al de Monterey^ en la California Septentrional^ pp. 377 to end of volume.

a Peticion de los Pobladores de Santa Maria del Grado al P. Custodio Fr.
Agustin de Colina, 1706, MS. They asked the custodian to give them Fray
Mingues for parish priest. It was refused. In the reply, which bears date
January i, 1707, Father Mingues signs as **Pro Secretario" of the Custody.

' Libro de Entierros de Zuhi, MS. He remained at Zufii but a few months.

* Fragmentos de Partidas tie Santa Cruz, MS. at Santa Clara. Lidro de En-
tierros de las Misiones de Pofuaque y Nambe, MS. He officiated there in 17 12
and 1 7 13.

13


Digitized by VjOOQIC


194 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Ildefonso in 1717;^ at Santa Clara from that date on till
1720;^ and lastly, on the isth of June, 1720, at Galisteo,
which parish he turned over on that day to Fray Juan del
Pino.* After that date he disappears from the records. The
day previous, Pedro de Villazur had started with his men for
the villages of the Pawnees.

It was, indeed, on the 14th of June that the ill-fated cam-
paign was inaugurated.* The Captain Juan de Archibeque
accompanied it, probably as "homme de con fiance." He
took along his body servant, Santiago Giravalle; and not
less than ten horses and six pack mules had been contrib-
uted by the well to do trader for the occasion.^

On the 6th of September of the same year, a soldier by the
name of Felipe Tamariz, who had gone with the expedition,
reached Santa F6. He brought the news that the Spanish
camp had been surprised by the Indians near the Pawnee
villages, and completely annihilated. The commander, the
Captain Juan de Archibeque, and over forty Spaniards, were
killed, the camp equipage and everything else except a large

1 Libro de Casamientos de San Ildefonso ^ 1 700-1 781, MS.
3 Libro de Fabrica de la Mision de Santa Clara y MS.

' Libro de Entriegas y Fabrica de la Mision Nttestra de Senora de los Remedies
uie Galisteo, MS., fol. 12.

* The date is in Parezer del Fiscal Mayor: *'Esta constante, que el dia
catorze de Junio de setecientos y veinte, destac6 un trozo de cinquenta soldados
del Presidio de Santa Fee, que fue bajo del commando de Don Pedro de Villasur,
a fin de executar la referida inspeccion."

* Ynbentarios y Avtos de Liquidasion y Partision, fol. I . It is needless to give
other proof of the fact that Archibeque went along. That he was regarded as a
man of thorough knowledge of the country, and as such a good adviser to Villa-
zur, may be inferred from the fact that he had gone to the Quartelejo in 1706,
when Juan de Uribarri went thither to induce the Indians of Picuries to return
to their village. He says himself in Junta de Parezeres sobre la Jornada : " Que
en tiempo q se fue a sacar el pueblo de los Picuries que retirados y fujitiuos se
hallauan en el puesto del quartelexo, fue uno de los q entraron a esta funzion, y
que vido y reconozio dho puesto." The number of horses taken along by him,
or furnished by him to the military for the expedition, is in Ynbentarios, fol. 8
and 12. It is strange that only three of these horses were lost.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 195

proportion of the horses captured. Only the Indian auxil-
iaries and six or seven Spaniards had escaped.^ Nine days
afterwards the remaining horses came in. They had been
left at Taos by the fugitives.^

I have been able to ascertain the names of some of the
survivors. They are Felipe Tamariz, Antonio de Armenta,
Melchor Rodriguez, Manuel Thenorio de Alba, and Alonzo
Rael de Aguilar the younger. Four of these were in the
military service at the time. Among the servants who
escaped was Santiago Giravalle, the servant of Juan de
Archibeque.^

The journal of the expedition, which Don Pedro Villazur
certainly had caused to be kept, was lost with the rest
of the property in camp, and there is therefore no detailed
account of the journey.* The depositions of eyewitnesses,

1 Ynhentarios y Avtos, fol. I.

2 Ibid., fol. 8.

* These names are gathered from various sources. Felipe Tamariz appears
as the one who brought the news in Ynbentarios, fol. i : " Y de aber en dho dia
de la fha llegado a esta Villa Phelipe Tamariz Soldado de este Real presidio
y vno de los que fueron a dha Jornada Con la Mala notizia del desgraziado
Suzeso." He also testifies in Ynformaciones de Manuel Flores y de Ana Maria
de Vega, Viuda de Domingo Mendizabal, 1723, (MS.,) and in the Diligencias
Matrimoniales de Bernardino de Sena y de Dona Manuela de Ruibal Viuda de
Juan de Archibeque, \*J2.'jy (MS.,) together with Antonio de Armenta (soldier),
Manuel Thenorio de Alba (soldier), and Melchor Rodriguez (citizen). In re-
gard to the younger Rael de Aguilar, I find his testimony in Autos sobre Co-
mercio illicito con los Franceses (MS.) : " Y q tambien saue como testigo de vista
PF auer sido uno de los soldados q fueron al reconocimto de dhas poblasones de
franzesses." Santiago Giravalle appears in Ynbentarios, fol. 8, and in Ynforma^
clones de Bernardino de Sena^ etc.

* Ever since July, 1573, every Spanish expedition or exploration had to keep
a regular journal. This is expressly ordained in Ordenanzas de su Magestad
hechas para los nuevos Descubrimlentos, Conquistas y Pacificaciones {Documentos
iniditos de Indicis,vo\,TCi\,). On page 149 it is ordained: " Los descobridores
por mar d por tierra, hagan comentario € memoria por dias, de todo lo que
vieren y hallaren y les aconteciere en las tierras que descobrieren ; ^ todo lo
vayan asentando en un libro, y despues de asentado se l^a en publico cada dia,


Digitized by VjOOQIC


196 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

taken by order of the superior government in 1725,^ have also
disappeared from the archives of Santa F6, like a great many-
other papers of historical value. Still, the march of Villazur
can be approximately traced, and the Pawnee villages on the
Rio de Jesus Maria located with tolerable accuracy. I have
already stated that I would identify the Rio Jesus Maria with
the Platte, instead of with the Missouri.

Two facts are positively established. One is, that Villazur
passed through the Apache hordes at the Jicarrilla ; the other,
that he also passed through the Quartelejo.^ In other words,
he followed the route taken by Valverde when the latter
made his campaign of 1719. This indicates that after reach-
ing the eastern steppes he marched constantly to the east of
north, with the high mountain ranges to his left.^ In this

delante los que fueron a1 dicho descobrimiento porque se averigue mas lo que
pasare y pueda constar de la verdad de todello, firmandolo de algunos de los
principales, el cual libro se guardara a mucho recabdo para que cuando vuelvan
le traigan y presenten ante la Audiencia con cuya licencia hobieren ido." It
would have been almost a miracle if the journal of Villazur had escaped the
destruction of the camp.

1 The inquest had been committed to the Brigadier Don Pedro de Rivera.
He visited New Mexico in 1725, and took the depositions in the year following.
See Pareceres del Fiscal Mayor y del Auditor sobre la Causa contra el Gobemador
Antonio Valberde Cosio, 1727, MS.

2 This is plainly established by the witnesses testifying in Autos sobre Co-
tnercio illicito con los Franceses, by Alonzo Rael de Aguilar the younger, and by
Felipe Tamaris ; also by Manuel Thenorio de Alba, in the same document.

« I have substantiated this in note i, p. 183, and note 2, p. 185. In the
document closing tht Junta de Parezeres sobre la Jornada^ Valverde says : " Tant-
tee que de ocho a diez leguas de distancia de la Sierra que lleue Spre a la
mano Yzquierda hazia el poniente su derezera al norte." The direction of
north by east, or north-northeast, is furthermore confirmed by the reports from
French sources. The Journal Historique de la Louisiane says that the Span-
iards were guided too much to the north by the " Padoucas " (p. 249) : " Qui,
au lieu de les conduire ^ TEst-quart-nordest, donn^rent trop dans le Nord, en
sorte qu'ils arriv^rent sur les bords de la riviere des Cances aux environs du
Missouri." This is sufficiently plain. The " Riviere d^s Caucus " cannot have
been the Arkansas, for its junction with the Mississippi (not Missouri) lies
south of east from Santa F^. It was not the Missouri itself, hence it must have
been the Platte.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 97

manner he arrived at the Quartelejo, 350 miles from Santa
F6. Thence he had 190 miles more to make in order to reach
the Pawnee villages and the river in question. The total dis-
tance of 540 miles is more than twice the distance separating
Santa F6 from the Arkansas. It falls far short of the dis-
tance from the former place to the Missouri in the direction
of north-northeast. Between the Arkansas and the Missouri
the river Platte is the only large stream, and the number of
miles (or leagues which we may convert into miles) given by
Valverde and his officers corresponds closely to the approxi-
mate distance from Santa F6 to Platte City in a direct line.
I may add here that the Spanish estimates of distances are
usually quite exact.

The expedition left Santa F6, as already stated, on the
14th of June. On its way it visited the friendly Apaches,
and induced them to furnish, not only guides and a Christian
Pawnee captive, but also a band of auxiliaries, the number of
which I have not learned.^ Sixty-two days after his depart-
ure from the capital of New Mexico, therefore on the 15th of
August, Villazur sighted the villages of the Pawnees on the
north bank of the Platte. He at once sent the Christian cap-
tive as messenger to his people, but the man never returned.
In his message to the Indians, Villazur committed the im-
prudence of inquiring whether there were any Frenchmen
with them. On the same day, however, several Pawnees
came into the Spanish camp with a reply of some kind, but
there was -nobody to understand them and interpret for them.

1 This may be deduced from the Parezer del Auditor, He speaks of " Indios
confederados," fol. 5. These Indians must have been Apaches Carlanes, who,
it seems, dwelt on the Arkansas. Autos sobre Comer cio illicito con los Franceses,
The eyewitnesses and survivors of Villazur's expedition, the younger Rael de
Aguilar and Felipe Tamariz, both state that the ** Carlanes " guided the Span-
iards, and Manuel Thenorio de Alba adds : " Y los pasaron en balsas en un rrio
q esta en la tierra de dhos Carlanes," This river, for the crossing of which it
was necessary to construct rafts (balsas) must have been the Arkansas.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


ig8 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

Thereupon Villazur justly grew suspicious, and determined
upon retreating to another stream one day's journey from the
one on which the Pawnees were established. As night came
on, he made camp on the south side of the south fork of the
Platte in high grass.^

1 These details are gathered from the report of the Auditor (Parezer del Sr.
Auditor), and I give it textually : " Y hauiendo Uegado a avistar la poblazon de
los Pananas, en que hauitan Franceses, embio un Panana catholico, para que a
nacionales les expresase iban de paz. Quedose entre los suyos, y estos embi-
aron a unos Yndios, con respuesta, que no fue entendida, pero si perseuida su
reserva, y malicia. Determinaba el Teniente pasar el rio, que diuidia su campo
de la poblazon, y buscando vado, se supo que los Pananas hauian presso en el
rio, a uno, o dos de nuestros confederados : con lo que hizo junta de guerra,
en que se resoluio la retirada a otro rio, distante de este un dia de camino, y
vadeado se asento el Real, y se encomendo la Sentinela del Rio a los Yndios
confederados." The date is fixed by the Parecer del Fiscal Mayor ^ fol. 3:
"Donde hauiendo llegado, a los sesenta y tres dias, fueron insultados de los
Indios. . . . Por hauer sido esta [the engagement, " la faccion "] a los sesenta y
tres dias de la salida de dicha Villa." This places the date of the massacre
on the i6th of August, consequently they reached the Rio de Jesus Maria on
the isth.

The theory might be advanced, that Villazur marched more to the northeast ;
and that while the Pawnees may have been located on the Missouri, the action
proper took place on the Platte, near to its junction with the greater stream, or
in the vicinity of Omaha. The distance, however, is too great, even in an air
line, by over one hundred miles, and the Spanish indications of distances allude
to the routes travelled, and not to direct distances. Still, one fact is certain at
all events, that the rout occurred on the Platte, whether on its southern fork
near Platte City, as I for the present assume, or on the main river near Omaha,
is a matter to be decided hereafter, if the depositions of eyewitnesses ever come
to light again. In conjunction with this, I must mention here a notice (thus far
unauthenticated) which has been given me, to the effect that pieces of Spanish
armor had been found in Nebraska. If such should indeed be the case, then
it is important to ascertain what kind of armor it is, of about what century, and
where and under what conditions it was first discovered. If near Omaha, it
might tend to indicate that the expedition of Villazur reached the river Mis-
souri; if near Platte City, then Platte River must have been the site of the
Pawnee villages. At all events, the butchery proper took place on the Platte,
either on the main stream near its junction with the Missouri, or on the south-
ern fork not far from the union of both branches. For the present, and until
better informed, I assume the latter to have been the case. The mouth of
the Platte is east of northeast from Santa F6 ; that is, the very direction which
t\iG Journal Historique says the Spaniards failed to take.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 1 99

No worse position could have been chosen by Villazur for
his encampment. It afforded an Indian enemy every pos-
sible opportunity for crossing the river unseen, and hiding
in the tall prairie grass until daybreak, creeping up as near
as possible to the camp, and pouncing upon the Spaniards at
the most dangerous moment, which is always the hour about
sunrise. Villazur cannot have been other than a novice in
Indian warfare, else he would not have exposed himself and
his men to such imminent danger.

But it may well be asked, Why did not Archibeque and
the other officers cause this unfortunate disposition to be
changed ? In the first place, it must be taken into account
that the position had something enticing in the fact that the
river lay between them and the Pawnees. Again, we do not
know how far Villazur was accessible to advice. Officers of
his kind — regular officers — are not always willing to yield
to inferiors of much greater local experience. There is, how-
ever, one strange fact. The night watch was not committed
to Spanish soldiers ; it was left to the Indian auxiliaries ;
and the events of the day following prove that the entire
Spanish force went to sleep with the utmost unconcern.
This seems to indicate that over-confidence in the arma-
ment, and in the. number and reliability of the Indian con-
federates, had seized officers and men, and that their doom
was sealed under almost any circumstances.^

The official report on the investigation of the whole cam-
paign severely blames the action of Villazur in intrusting
the safety of the camp over night to Indian auxiliaries, in-
stead of placing Spaniards on duty. The "Auditor" says
in his "Opinion" that the Indians were tired and sleepy,
and thus excuses their neglect to call attention to a number

1 Parezer del Auditor ^ fol. 5 : " Y se encomendo la Sentinela del Rio a los
Indies confederados." Still, the guard of the horses seems to have been in-
trusted to Spaniards.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


200 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

of noises which were not merely suspicious, but absolutely
sure signs of the approach of danger. Thus it was ascer-
tained afterwards that a sound had been heard distinctly of
people swimming the river, and the barking or yelping of a
dog near by.^ It is therefore pertinent to ask, Were the

1 The Auditor is rather strong in his condemnation of Villazur (£oI. 6):
'* £s cierto, que quando Don Antonio por si huviese tenido la justa causa que
aleg6, para no pasar a esta expedicion, como ofreci6, no la tuvo para fiarla a
este teniente suyo, tan poco experto, como manifiesta la serie de este justificado
hecho; pues si huviese sido experto, no huviese querido, como quiso pasar el
rio, inroediato a los Pananas, para entrarse en su poblazon con su gente ; pues
sin tener amistad preuiamente asentada, y segura con ellos, entrarla sin este
seguro, era sacrificarla: mayormente quando estaba conocido el animo sos-
pechoso de los Pananas, assi en haver retenido el embiado de los Espafioles,
como en hauer embiado al campo de los Espafioles Yndios de las reservas, y
malicia, que se conocio. Lo segundo, se conoce su inexperiencia de hauer
embiado a los Pananas a preguntar, que gente vivia entre ellos, sin tener antes
asegurada su buena correspondencia : quando hauiendo entre ellos Franceses, y
en guerra su nacion con la nuestra, era forzoso, que no respondiesen a la pre-
gunta, sino con las armas. Lo tercero, que declarado mas el animo, con hauer
apressado en el rio a nuestros confederados y por esto resueltose en la junta de
guerra la retirada del otro rio, debio sobre este ponerse sentinela de nuestros
Espaiioles mas desvelados, y no confiarse a los Yndios, que fatigados con la
marcha de un dia, y naturalmente descuidados, era muy contingente, y necesario
se rindiesen al sueno, como se experiment6. Lo quarto, que una vez, que estaba
en paiz enemigo, debio poner piquetes Espanoles, que observasen el mouimiento
de los enemigos, ya declarados por sus acciones. Lo Quinto, que una vez que
se sintio ruido de nadadores en el rio, en el silencio de la noche, y que creyo era
de enemigos, debio augmentarse el cuidado, y ponerse sentinelas sobre el mismo
campo, para el aviso. Lo Sexto, que una vez, que el perro con su ladrido, les
dio el aviso de sus amos los enemigos, debio despertarlos del descuido en que
dormian, y mantener unida la esquadra, que estaba en la custodia de la cabal-
leria, que se les acerc6, y mandarla retirar como se hizo." The same facts are
related on folio 6 of the same document as follows : " Y se encomendo la Senti-
nela del Rio a los Yndios confederados. Y entrada la noche se oyo ruido de
nadadores en el Rio ; y con este aviso se dio a la esquadra que velaba las cabal-
lerias, para que estuviesen con cuidado. Despues se oyo ladrar un perro, de
que no se hizo aprecio." The fact that the Pawnees captured some of the
Indian allies is a suspicious sign, not only of the hostility of the Pawnees
towards the Spaniards, but of possible treachery on the part of the Apaches
themselves. Had the Pawnees been very hostile towards the latter, they would
have killed, and not taken prisoners, the one or two Carlanes whom they sur-
prised on the river banks.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 20I

Apaches really as faithful and trustworthy as Villazur con-
sidered them to be?

At all events, the night passed on without interruption of
any kind, and at daybreak the work of breaking camp began.
The horses and mules were within reach, under guard of a
small picket of Spanish soldiers. Don Pedro de Villazur's
horse was held by his servant, Melchor Rodriguez, and he
himself stood outside his tent not yet fully armed. All was
bustle, and to some extent confusion, incident upon departure
from the spot where they had enjoyed such a peaceful rest.
At this moment musketry shots and a flight of arrows issued
from the tall grass, and their effect was the more murderous
since the enemy had crept up as close as possible and taken
deliberate aim. Villazur called for his carbine ; but Domingo
Mendizabal, who ran to get it, never returned from the tent
where it lay ; and had Mendizabal been able to return, he
would no longer have found his master among the living.

The confusion at once became terrible. Volley of balls
and arrows followed upon volley. The picket rushed up, for
they were the only ones of the whole troop who were fully
armed. The Apaches crept to cover, and the Pawnees, see-
ing how effective their fire had proved, came up to close
quarters with their spears. Three times the guard repulsed
their attacks, but it was impossible to rescue the main body ;
the effects of the first onslaught had been decisive. Seeing
themselves sorely pressed by the enemy, unable to assist the
camp any longer, and joined by the Apaches, who had no
other thought than their own safety, the half-dozen Spaniards
took to flight also. The Pawnees could not pursue them,
as they were unmounted.

What happened in camp after the death of Villazur can
only be guessed at. It seems certain that the majority of
the men were killed almost at the first fire. One of the first


Digitized by VjOOQIC


202 ARCHAEOLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

%

who fell was the Captain Juan de Archibeque. He was
killed with his horse, which he had probably mounted ; his ser-
vant was seriously wounded in the chest, and left him only
when he saw that life was extinct. Of. the fate of the others
only so much is known, that they all perished then and there.
One eyewitness says that he saw four of his comrades fall
together. The engagement proper cannot have lasted longer
than a few minutes; the rest was a butchery, a massacre,
Indian fashion, of disabled and disarmed victims.^

1 The talc is told as follows by the Aaditor in his Parecer (fol. 6) : "Al
amanecer arrimaron las caballerias al Real los soldados de la esquadra, y al
remudar todos a un mismo tiempo los atacaron los Pananas y Franceses, que
emboscados, esperaron lograr el tiro al menor descuido. Acometieron con
fusiles, lanzas, y flechas, y al estruendo de los tiros, estampio la caballeria;
recojiola la esquadra que la cuidaba, y pudo en tres vezes, que esta esquadra
rechaso a los enemigos sacar tres heridos, de entre los muertos de nuestro
campo, que fueron quarenta y tantos, y con estos, y los Yndios amigos se salv6,
segun resulta de las declaraciones de seis testigos, y de estos los tres soldados,
que como inspect ores de esta triste tragedia depusieron en la sumaria/' In the
Yn/armacumes de Manuel Flores y de Ana Maria de Vega^ Viuda de Domingo Men-
dizabalf 1 723, (MS.,) the eyewitness Antonio Gonzalez, an Indian who spoke
Spanish, says : *' Qe hauiendoles dado Repentinamente los Pananas y Franseses
en la Reuolusion de la Uatalla Uio Caer Muertos a Dho Mendizabal y otros
quatro con los quales salia abrigado el declarante y que como Dios le ayudo se
escapo y dejo con los otros muertos." The witness Melchor Rodriguez says:
** Qe estando este declarante serca de la Tienda a donde estaua su amo el Genl
Dn Pedro de Villazur con el dho Mendisabal Yntespestiuamente al Salir el Sol
dieron la Carga Serrada Dhos Franseses y con el alboroto Qe se formo de annas
oyo dezir a dho Gl Mandaba a dho Mendisabal Qe le sacase la carauinas Qe lo
uio entrar en la tienda no Uio si sajio o alii le mataron por ser la Uateria delas
Ualas en dha Tienda." In a conversation with Ana Maria Vega the deponent
confirmed his statement.

The death of Juan de Archibeque is stated as follows by his body servant,
Santiago Giravalle, in Ynformaciones Matrimoniales de Bernardino de Senary de
Manuela de Ruibal, Viuda de Juan de Archibeque^ 1727 (MS.) : "Que lo vio lla
espirando, y que solo por milagro podia Uir porque estaba mui mal erido con
una erida en el pecho de un Valazo, fuera de otras eridas y en esto conforman
los que vinieron de dicha Campana, y que el avia escapado por dexar su amo lla
voqueando." That Giravalle had himself been seriously wounded is testified to
by Felipe Tamariz in the same document, and also by Manuel Thenorio. Both
assert that Giravalle had " siete heridas." The loss of the horse is stated in
Ynbentariosy Avtos de Liquidasion, fol. 8.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 203

Not one of the eyewitnesses whose statements I have
mentions the fate, or the name even, of Fray Juan Mingues.
Escalante, who wrote fifty-eight years after the occurrence,
says he was killed also. M. de Bois-Brillant, in his letter of
April, 1 72 1, reports (from hearsay of course) that the Spanish
priest accompanying the corps escaped on a horse.^ Certain
it is, that hereafter Fray Mingues is heard of no more in
New Mexico. On the other hand, it is very strange that not
even the official documents on the event, the final reports on
the investigation, mention the presence of a "chaplain" in
the doomed body of adventurous men.

The Spanish sources are unanimous and emphatic in
attributing the disaster to the French and the Pawnees.
The French sources make no mention of the presence of
their people, and ascribe the butchery to various tribes, —
some to the Missouris,^ some to the "Octotata and Passin-
chan."^ Until otherwise informed, I incline to the belief
that the Spanish authorities are reliable on this point, and
that the destruction of the Spanish corps was due to the Paw-
nees, guided, directed, and assisted by a limited number of
Frenchmen.

It is very natural that the result of this expedition should
have created the utmost excitement in New Mexico. Nearly
one half of the garrison of Santa F6 had perished.* The
Viceroy ordered an investigation. That investigation was
intrusted to the Brigadier Don Pedro de Rivera, Visitor

1 Journal Historique^ p. 249.

2 Shea, Penalosa, p. 93.

* Journal Historique^ p. 249 : " lis y avaient rencontre les nations Octotata et
Passinchan, qui les avaient tu6s tons, except^ un religieux que s'etait sauv^ sur
son cheval.'*

* The regular garrison of Santa F^ at that time was one hundred men. Of
these, forty went along under Villazur ; the other ten Spaniards were armed
citizens, like Archibeque, Rodriguez, etc. Autos sobre Comercio illicito con los
Franceses (Declaration of Diego Arias de Quiros).


Digitized by VjOOQIC


204 ARCH^OLOGICAL INSTITUTE.

General of the frontier garrisons in New Spain.^ The bulk
of the documents resulting from that court of inquiry have
disappeared from the Santa Yh, archives, but the final re-
sult has been preserved. It censures the Governor Don
Antonio Valverde Cossio for having intrusted the leader-
ship of the campaign (if campaign it may be called) to
his lieutenant, Don Pedro de Villazur, but admits mitigating
circumstances. Still, basing upon interesting precedents, it
holds the superior responsible for the blunders of his agent,
and sentences Governor Valverde to a fine of two hundred
" pesos " (dollars), one fourth of which was to be applied to
masses for the souls of those who had perished, and the
remainder towards completing the outfit of the missions re-
cently established at the Junta de los Rios in Chihuahua, at
the junction of the Rio Conchos with the Rio Grande del
Norte.^ This sentence was light, but it would hardly have
been fair to render one more severe. Don Antonio Valverde
did the best he could under the circumstances. He had con-
fidence in his lieutenant, and, furthermore, he gave him as
adviser and counsel the most experienced, the best, and the
most energetic resident of New Mexico whom he could in-
duce to go with the expedition. That man was Juan de
Archibeque. To make Valverde responsible to the extent
of all the loss of life, all the material damage caused, would
have been not only unjust, but impossible. Therefore a
nominal penalty was declared ; and soon after Don Antonio
de Valverde was displaced in the government of New Mexico
by Don Juan Domingo Bustamante.

The geographical results of Villazur's expedition are about
as valuable as those of the journey of Leyva Bonilla and

^ Pareceres del Fiscal Mayor y del Auditor ^ fol. i, 2, 4. The ord^f ^q|- the
investigation bore date 1723.
3 Ibid., fol. 9.


/


Digitized by VjOOQIC


SOUTHWESTERN HISTORICAL CONTRIBUTIONS. 205

Humafia in 1585 ;^ that is, they amount to hardly anything
beyond the few data enabling us to establish the locality of
the disaster. In other respects the results are very important
in a negative way. The loss of so many men crippled the
Spanish power at Santa Fe, and precluded all possibility of
subsequent expeditions. It gave the tribes of the plains a
more moderate idea of Spanish military power, and contri-
buted to produce that state of depression, resulting from
continuous Indian warfare, which made the people of New
Mexico so unhappy for a century and more, shaping their
national character into one of resignation to any evil, pro-
vided life could be secured.

Indirectly the defeat of Villazur has led to another result,
and one certainly opposite to what was originally intended.
It taught the Canadian French the road into New Mexico.
Not more than nineteen years after the occurrence, nine
French Canadians made their appearance, though all but
one of them soon returned to Canada. Unfortunately, that
- Frenchman, whose name was Louis Maria Colons Moro
(probably Moreau), conceived the criminal idea of inciting
the Pueblo Indians to insurrection, for which crime he was
deservedly shot at Santa F6 on the i8th of October, 1743.^
But the road to New Mexico had been found, and French-

1 This expedition, about which very little is known, not even the exact date,
although it probably began in 1585, had a yet more tragic end. Nearly every
one perished; only three lives were saved. I hope at some future time to
be able to write a somewhat satisfactory monograph on this dark and bloody
episode.

2 The originals of the cause against Colons are in my possession. Causa
Fulminada contra Luis Maria ColonSy Moro : Criollo de las Colonias de Franzia
de las Probinzias de Canada en 31 de Mayo del Aho de 1743, MS. He appears in
the documents as " Colons," but probably his name was Moreau. On folio i it
is stated : " Yntruso en este Re)mo el aiio de Mill Setezientos treynta y nuebe
que con otros ocho de su nacion que binieron de las Colonias de Franzia de
las partes de Canada." The death sentence and notice of execution are on the
title-page.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


2o6 archjEologjcal institute.

men continued to filter into the remote and isolated region.
They assimilated with the population without forgetting the
land whence they had come. The "Santa F6 trail*' owes its
establishment largely to such energetic sons of the Canadian
soil, and indirectly also to the efforts of Spanish enterprise
in the direction of the North. Of these efforts Villazur's
ill-fated expedition was the last, and one of the most tragic
instances.


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


><^


^


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


Digitized by VjOOQIC


>


Digitized by VjOOQIC


bi^uCli) 1914
