Google
This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online.
It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover.
Marks,  notations  and  other  maiginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you.
Usage  guidelines
Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  tliis  resource,  we  liave  taken  steps  to
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying.
We  also  ask  that  you:
+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for
personal,  non-commercial  purposes.
+  Refrain  fivm  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help.
+  Maintain  attributionTht  GoogXt  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  in  forming  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it.
+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liabili^  can  be  quite  severe.
About  Google  Book  Search
Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful. Google  Book  Search  helps  readers
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web
at|http: //books  .google  .com/I
.wGooi^lc
1
.wGooi^lc
.wGooi^lc
«B,Gooi^lc
.wGooi^lc
THE  ISLANDS
OP
TITICACA  AND  KOATI
.wGooi^lc
;cbi'G00'^IC
.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


THE  I8LAM)8

OP

TITICACA  AND  KOATI


ADOLPH  F;BAkDELrEB


NEWTOEK
1910


Copyright,  1010,  by
Thb  Hispanic  SocDtTT

or  AMEKtCA


;cbyG00'^lc


CONTENTS

The  Basin  of  Lake  Titioaca 1

Nona 23

The  Islands  of  Titicaca  and  Koati 39

Notes 55

The  Indians  op  the  Islaih)  of  Titicaca 59

Notes 129

The  Ancient  Bdins  on  the  Isiand  of  Titicaca 163

^\ Notes 241

, The  Ruins  on  the  Island  of  Koati 257

*■

Notes 285

AbORIQINAL  MtTBS  and  TbadITIONS  CONCEBNINQ  THE  ISLAMD

^ OF  Titicaca 291

-; Notes 331

0
List  of  Indiqbnous  Plants 341

^Index 343

EEEATA

P.  ivi,  L  10.

For  Victor  Paltsists  read  Victor  H.  Paltsits.
P.  xvi,  11. 11, 12.

For  Dr.  G.  Billings  read  Dr.  John  S.  Billings.


,  DamziowGoOglc


^


.wGooi^lc


LIST  or  ILLUSTRATIONS


The  peaks  of  Somta  (Hanko-nma  or  Illampu  and  Hanko-Kunu  or
Hibunpi)  from  the  port  of  Chililaya Frontispiece

PLATB I  FAOINO  PAO«

/Map  of  Lake  Titioaca 3

Plate  II
^Map  of  the  Island  of  Titicactt 6

PL4TB  III
The  iBthmiia  of  Challa,  Kea-KoUu  and  Koati 8

Plate  IV
Pucara 10

PiMTB  V

Hadenda  of  Challa,  etc 14

Plate  VI
n^rtn-Kala 18

Plate  VII
Eenna  tree,  etc 20

Plate  VHI
Wotem  Lake  and  Peruvian  coast 41

Plate  IX
bland  of  Koati ^

Plate  X
Indian  Aatliorities  of  Challa 46

Plate  XI
Indian  Pictograph 48


;cbyG00'^lc


viii  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

Pi^TH  Xn Monro  Pio«
Indian  Medi<nii«-maii 62

Platb  xin
Indian  Danceis,  Cfaayllpa 61

Platb  XIV
Indian  Dancers,  Eena-Kena 62

Pl^TK  XV
Indian  Dancers,  Pnmpiani,  etc 66

Pl^TE  XVI
Chiribuanos 72

Plate  XVn
Indian  Skulls 78

Plate  XVHI
Kea-KoUu  Chico 84

Platb  XIX
Kea-KoUu,  Ground-plane 88

Platk  XX
Kea-Kollu  Chico,  Qround-plaus 90

Plate  XXI
Indian  Pottery 94

Plate  XXII
Trephined  Skulls 98

Plate  XXIU
Primitive  Agricultural  Implements 102

Plate  XXIV
Collca-Pala,  Qronnd-plan 110

Plate  XXV
Ciria-Pata,  Oround-plan 112

Plate  XXVI
Graves  at  Ciria-Pata 118

Plate  XXVII
Pottery  from  Ciria-Pata 122


;cbyG00'^lc


LIST  OP  ILLUSTRATIONS  ii

PLATI TfTVllt  FAOUrO  PAQI

Driukiiig  Caps 124

Fun  ZXIZ
Seolptored  Stooe 186

PU.TH  TfTCTT

WoapoBB 168

Plati  XXXI
Drinkiiig  Cnps 172

PuTB  xxxn

Decorative  Objects 174

plati  xxxm

Pileo-Kayma,  Oronnd-plaus 176

Pl-»TE  XXXIV
Pileo-Kayma,  ATcliit«cttiral  Detaik 178

Platb  XXXV
Pilco-Kayma,  Architectnral  Details 180

Plati  XXXVI
Piloo-Karma,  ArcMtecturat  Details 182

PuTB  xxxvn

Pileo-KRjma,  Architectural  Details 184

platk  xxxvni

Fountain  of  the  Inca,  Ground-plan 186

Platb  XXXIX
Fountain  of  the  Inca,  Details 188

Plath  XL
Fountain  of  the  Inca 192

Plath  XLI
Metallic  Implements,  Pucara 196

Plate  XLII
Bains  at  Paeara 198

Platb  XLIII
Ground-plan,  Fueara  and  Ahijadero 200


;cbyG00'^lc


I  LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS

Plate  XLIV '^""^  '^"^
Fucara,  Qround-plan 202

Pl^TB  XLV
Incd  Pottery 204

Plate  XL VI
View  of  Kasapata 206

Plate  XLVII
EoBBpata,  Groimd-plaiis 208

Plate  XLVIII
Inca  Pottery  from  Kasapata 210

Plate  XLIX
Omam«nta,  Beads,  etc 212

Plate  L
Inea  Jar  with  Stand  of  Clay 214

Plate  LI
Potaherda  from  Kasapata 216

Plate  LIT
Kasapata,  Ground-plans 218

Plate  LIII
Kasapata  and  Sicnyn,  Graves 220

Plate  LIV
Potsherds,  Kasapata 222

Plate  LV
Ground-plan  of  Sacred  Rock  and  Surroundings 226

Plate  LVI
Details  from  Inean-Toqui  and  Chincana 228

Plate  LVU
Objecta  in  Silver 232

Plath  Lvm
Objects  in  Silver 238

Plate  LIX
Titi-Kttia  or  Sacred  Rock 240


;cbyG00'^lc


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS  xi

Plate  LX "<™o  '*•■
Orouod-planB,  Chincana  and  Sacred  Rock 257

Pun  LXI
Stone-ehest  with  Cover 259

Plati  Lxn
Andent  Poncfao 260

Plate  LXni
Chincana,  Details 262

Pl^TB  LXIV
Chincaiia,  Qeneral  View 264

Plati  LXV
Chincaoa,  Part  of  Ruins 266

Platb  LXVI
Objects  in  Copper  and  Bronze 268

Plate  LXVH
Inea  Vase 270

Plate  LXVIII
Chncaripn,  Gronnd-plan 272

Plate  LXIX
Andent  Poneho 374

Plate  LXX
Kona,  Groand-plan 276

Plate  LXXI
Island  of  Koati,  Map,  etc 278

Plate  LXXII
Roins  on  eastern  slope  of  Koati 280

Plate  LXXIII
Ruins  of  Inak-Uyn  on  Koati 282

Plate  LXXIV
Details  of  Inak-Uyn 291

Plate  LXXV

Graves  on  Eoati 293


;cbyG00'^lc


xii  LIST  OP  ILLUSTRATIONS

Plate  LXXVI
Painted  Bowl,  Eoati

Plate  LXXVII
Stone  Objects,  Eoati

Plate  LXXVIII
Objects  in  Gold,  Eoati  and  Titicaca

Platb  LXXIX
Pottery,  Koati  and  Titicaca

Platb  LXXX
Chicheiia,  Qroimd-plan

Plate  LXXXI
Stone  Objects,  Eoati  and  Copacavana

Platk  LXXXII
Tillage  of  Copacavana

Plate  LXXXHI
Stone  Seats,  Copacavana

Plate  LXXXIV
Copacavana,  Cborch

Plate  LXXXV
Hanascript  Map  of  Lake  Titicaca  from  1573 . . . .


;cbyG00'^lc


PREFACE

Thb  explorations  which  I  began  under  the  auspices  of  the
hite  Mr.  Hemy  Villard  of  the  dty  of  New  York  in  Jnly^
1892,  were  contiuned  nntil  April  1, 1894,  when  Mr.  Villard
gave  the  collections  I  had  gathered  for  him  to  the  American
Mnaenm  of  Natural  History  at  New  York.  After  that  date
my  work  was  entirely  for  the  Mnsenm.

In  July,  1894, 1  started  for  Bolivia  accompanied  by  my
wife— Fanny  Bitter  Bandolier.  Arriving  at  La  Paz  on
Angost  llthf  we  visited  first  the  mins  of  Tiahnanaco,  on  the
29th,  remaining  nineteen  days  on  the  site,  secnring  sped-
mens,  and  surveying  the  mins  for  the  purpose  of  making  a
general  plan  of  them.  We  also  took  notes  on  architectural
details.

Soon  after  our  return  to  La  Paz  we  made  another  excur-
sion, this  time  to  the  slopes  of  the  well  known  lUimani.
There,  at  an  altitude  of  13,000  feet,  we  explored  remains  of
terrac«d  garden  beds,  small  dwellings  of  stone,  and  burial
cysta,  above  the  hacienda  of  LIujo.

It  was  not  until  the  26th  of  December  that  we  could  carry
out  our  plan  to  visit  the  Island  of  Titicaca.  The  Prefect  of
La  Pa2,  Don  Qenaro  Sanjin£z,  gave  permission  to  the
steamer  plying  between  Pnno  and  Chililaya  to  touch  at  that
Island  for  us.  Bnt  we  had,  first,  to  obtain  from  the  owner
of  Ghalla  (the  principal  hacienda  on  the  Island),  authoriza-
tion to  reside  on  his  property  and  to  investigate  and  ex-
cavate on  the  premises.  Not  only  was  our  request  granted
at  onoe,  but  Don  Miguel  Garc^s,  the  owner,  accompanied  us
on  the  steamer  to  ChaUa,  installed  us  there  and  imparted
strict  orders  to  the  several  hundred  of  Aymard  Indians  liv-


;cbyG00'^lc


xiv  PBEPACE  ,

ing  on  his  property  to  treat  us  with  the  same  respect  as  him-
self or  any  other  member  of  his  family.  This  injonction
was  obserred  as  long  as  onr  friend  remained  with  ns.  After
his  departure,  it  was  only  by  dint  of  lavish  expenditure  of
money,  and  sometimes  by  assuming  an  anstere  attitude,  that
we  h^d  our  own  among  the  aborigines.  We  landed  at  Cballa
on  January  1, 1895,  and  remained  on  the  Island  of  Titicaca
until  April  15th,  with  the  intermission  of  one  week  (early  in
February)  which  we  spent  at  the  village  of  Copacavana  on
the  Bolivian  mainland,  where  we  witnessed  the  Indian  fes-
tivities on  the  occasion  of  a  church  celebration,  at  the  fa-
mous shrine  of  Copacavana.

With  this  sole  exception,  we  remained  three  months  and  a
half  on  Titicaca  Island,  completely  isolated  from  the  outer
world.  Civil  war  in  Pern  attained  its  climax  during  that
time  and  all  oommunication  between  Pnno  and  Bolivia  was
cut  off.  Onr  supplies  gave  out ;  not  even  coffee  could  be  had
at  the  iU-provided  pueblo  of  Copacavana.  Furthermore,  an
Indian  insurrection  broke  out  at  Tunguyu  (on  Peruvian  soil,
six  miles  from  Copacavana)  and  spread  with  great  rapidity
along  the  Bolivian  frontier,  threatening  to  involve  the  Boli-
vian Aymar^  and  endanger  life  and  property  of  the  inhabi-
tants of  Copacavana.

So,  having  completed  onr  surveys  and  excavations  on  the
Island,  we  retreated  to  Copacavana  and  thence,  as  the  situa-
tion grew  more  and  more  untenable,  to  Puno.  Don  Miguel
Oarc^  accompanied  us,  for  in  the  meantime  Lima  had  fallen
into  the  hands  of  the  Opposition  and  peace  was  beiug  re-
stored in  Peru.  At  Puno  we  prepared  for  a  return  to  the
]>land  with  means  for  navigating  the  Lake,  distinct  from
tiiose  of  the  natives  which  kept  ns  at  the  mercy  of  Indian  ill-
will.  The  house  of  Cazorla  Brothers  at  Puno  secured  for
ns  the  use  of  a  flat-bottomed  scow  propelled  by  wheels  driven
by  hand.  We  also  improved  our  stay  at  Puno  for  surveying
Boxd  photographing  (there  was  an  itinerant  photographer  at
Puno  at  the  time)  the  mine  at  Sillustani  on  Lake  TJmayo.


;cbyG00'^lc


On  May  26th  we  again  landed  at  ChaUa,  with  onr  hand-
wheeler  and  ample  proTisions.  On  the  I8th  of  Jnne  we  had
completed  onr  investigations  there  with  the  exception  of  the
photographic  work,  which  had  yet  to  be  postponed,  since  the
apparatns  was  still  in  the  hands  of  the  Bolivian  cnstom-
honae  ofiBcers  at  La  Paz.

We  next  moved  to  the  Island  of  Koati,  where  the  owner,
Dr.  Venceslao  del  Carpio,  had  given  ns  permission  to  survey
and  excavate.  There  we  remained  nntil  the  2d  of  July,
when  we  returned  to  Copacavana.  Our  collections  had  been
carried  to  Chililaya,  thanks  to  the  Very  Beverend  Father
Francisco  Martinez,  Commissary-Oeneral  of  the  Franciscan
order,  whose  authority  prevailed  in  our  favor,  npon  the  re-
luctant and  hostile  Indians.

Another  week  spent  on  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  with  the
photographic  apparatns  received  at  last,  one  more  day  on
Koati,  and  onr  seven  months'  work  on  and  about  these
Islands  came  to  an  end.  Only  those  who  have  resided  for
some  time  in  that  section  of  Bolivia  can  appreciate  the  ob-
stacles it  presents  to  scientific  investigation.  Cliniate,  na-
ture and  man  conspire  to  impede,  annoy  and  obstmct

On  Augnst  2d  we  landed  at  Chililaya  and  remained  till
the  29th  of  the  monUi,  carefully  packing  onr  cumbrous  col-
lections and  excavating  some  of  the  ancient  burial  sites  near
i^.  Mr.  Lonis  Ernst  of  Chililaya  had  been,  and  was,  onr
financial  mainstay  during  the  time,  and  we  have  been  the
recipient  of  many  courtesies  from  him,  as  well  as  from  the
late  Dr.  Bosquellas,  Captain  of  the  Port  of  Chililaya.  On
the  29th  of  August,  1895,  we  were  once  more  at  La  Paz,
thence  to  direct  onr  steps  to  the  Illimani  a  second  time,  and
later  on  to  Peru,  where  we  remained  during  part  of  the  year
1896,  preparing  the  substance  of  this  report

In  the  following  pages  I  cannot  pretend  to  more  than  a
picture  of  our  work  on  the  Islands  of  Titicaca  and  Koatii,
with  such  results  as  appear  to  me  worthy  of  presentation.
In  my  documentary  researches,  I  have  met  with  the  most


;cbyG00'^lc


xvi  FBEFACE

friendly  support:  in  Pern,  Bolivia,  and  in  the  United  States
since  our  return.  At  the  national  Archives  and  Library  of
Lima  the  Director,  Don  Bicardo  Palma,  and  his  ahle  assist-
ant, Carlos  Alberto  Bomero,  have  literally  showered  upon
me  favors  of  the  greatest  value.  At  La  Paz  my  intimate
friend  Don  Manuel  Vicente  BalUvian  has  opened  every  door
that  was  supposed  to  give  access  to  material ;  and  at  New
York,  the  friendship  of  Mr.  Wilberforce  Eames,  the  Super-
intendent of  the  Lenox  branch  of  the  New  York  Public
Library,  of  his  assistant,  Victor  Paltsists,  and,  at  the  Astor,
the  liberality  shown  by  the  General  Director,  Dr.  G.  Bill-
ings, have  been  invaluable.

In  conclusion,  I  gladly  pay  a  tribute  of  sincere  gratitude
to  onr  special  friend  at  La  Paz,  Mr.  Theodore  Boettiger,
head  of  the  firm  of  Harrison  &  Boettiger  of  that  city.  To
him  we  owe  countless  attentions  and  espedaUy  assistance
of  the  most  effective  nature.  Among  the  many  others,  at
La  Paz  also,  to  whom  we  remain  indebted  in  an  analogous
manner,  I  would  yet  specially  mention  Mr.  Frederick  G.
Euleri  To  name  all,  would  furnish  too  long  a  list,  however
much  we  should  like  to  express,  to  each  one  in  particular,
our  feelings  of  respect  and  esteem.

Ad.  F.  Bahdslub.

Nbw  Tobe  Cmr,  Januaiy  llth,  1905.


;cbyGoO'^lc


NOTICE  TO  READERS

Teb  Spanish  and  Indian  names  used  in  this  volmne  are  to
be  proDonncedf  not  according  to  the  English^  bnt  according
to  ^e  Continental  manner  of  pronnnciation,  the  ;  having  the
gattoral  sound  of  the  Spanish.

The  scale  of  plans  and  diagrams  is  reduced  from  the  orig-
inal in  every  instance,  as  well  as  the  size  of  the  illustrations
of  objects,  in  comparison  with  the  original.

The  flag  on  plans  and  diagrams  indicates,  in  every  case,
the  magnetic  and  not  the  true  North.  The  magnetic  decli-
nation not  having  been  accurately  determined  at  the  time  I
made  my  surreys,  I  preferred  not  to  assume  the  responsi-
bility of  adopting  an  approximate  deviation  of  the  needle,
which  at  the  time  was  supposed  to  be  about  12  degrees  to  the
east  of  north.

The  colored  plates  are  due  to  the  skilful  hand  of  my  friend
and  countryman  Mr.  Bndolph  Weber,  who  has  also  made
and  retouched  the  photographs  of  objects  and  reproduced
the  frequently  defective  landscapes  and  scenes  of  Indian
life.

Ad.  F.  Bandblieb.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASM  OF  LAKE  TITICACA


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


Plate  I

Map  ol  Lake  Titicaca  and  surronnditigs

B«dac«d  oopr  txota  fttlaa  of  P«rD,  by  A.  Baimondi


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


PabtI
THE  BASIN  OF  LAKE  TinCACA


IN  the  heart  of  the  western  part  of  South  America,  be-
tween the  15th  and  17th  degrees  of  latitude,  sonth  of  the
equator,  and  between  the  68th  and  70th  degrees  of  longi-
tude, west  of  the  meridian  of  Greenwich,  lies  the
extensive  water  sheet  of  Lake  Titicaca  at  an  aver-
age altitude  of  12,500  feet  above  the  level  of  the
sea,^  and  distant  in  a  straight  line  abont  300  miles
from  the  Pacific  Coast  and  at  least  2000  miles  from
the  Atlantic  shores  of  Brazil.  The  Bepnblic  of  Pern  claims
two-thirds  of  its  area,'  and  the  Kepnblic  of  Bolivia  the  re-
maining southeastern  third ;  but  the  boundary  line  is  rather
indefinite  between  the  two  countries,  across  Lake  Titicaca
as  well  as  on  the  mainland.  The  great  chain  of  the  Bolivian
Andes,  or  Cordillera  Real,  skirts  the  Lake  on  its  eastern
side.  This  mountain  chain,  from  the  towering  peak  of
-  Hanko-Uma  or  Illampu  (the  tallest  of  the  Sorata  group)  to
the  imposing  mass  of  the  Blimani  southeast  of  the  city  of
La  Paz,  runs  from  northwest  to  southeast,  and  the  Lake  in
the  same  direction  forms  a  deep  trough  west,  or  rather
southwest,  of  that  snowy  range.

The  irr^nlar  shape  of  this  elevated  inland  basin  of  water
is  best  understood  by  glancing  at  the  accompanying  map.
Its  length  from  northwest  to  southeast  is  abont  130  miles,
and  its  greatest  width  is  about  41  miles  between  the  Peru-
vian coast  at  Have  and  the  Bolivian  shores  at  Carabuco.  Such
figures,  at  the  present  stage  of  geographical  knowledge  of


;cbyG00'^lc


4  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

Bolivia,  can  only  be  approximations.'  Minute  indications
of  geographical  position,  altitude  and  dimensions  are  not
always  essential  in  an  anthropological  monograph;  bat
whenever  they  conld  be  secured  they  will  be  given,  if  only
as  a  respectful  tribute  to  the  labors  of  others.  Landscape
and  scenery,  the  nature  of  vegetation,  the  appearance,  rela-
tive distance  of  high  mountains  and  their  relation  to  the
cardinal  points,  hence  to  prevailing  atmospheric  corrents,
the  indentations  of  the  shores  and  the  distribution  of  afflu-
ents, are  more  important  to  archaeology  and  ethnology  than
geographical  data  of  mathematical  accuracy.

An  undulating  level,  gradually  slanting  from  the  height
of  the  Crncero  Alto  (14,666)  to  Puno  on  the  Lake-shore
(12,544),*  skirts  the  Lake  in  the  northwest  and  north.  The
elevated  ranges  of  Santa  Bosa  and  Vilcanota,  which  over-
shadow the  true  source  of  the  Amazon  Biver,"  are  not  visible
from  Puno.  North  of  that  port  the  Lake  makes  an  inroad
forming  its  most  northerly  lagune,  on  the  banks  of  whidi
are  the  approaches  to  the  settlements  of  Taraco  and  Hnan-
can6.  Navigation  on  Lake  Tltlcaca  does  not  toucb  these
points;*  steamers  ply  directly  between  Puno  and  the  Bo-
livian shore  at  Huaqui.  The  extreme  northwestern  shore
of  the  Lake  is  not  visible  from  the  Island  of  Titicaca  nor
from  the  mainland  of  Copacavana,  so  great  is  the  expanse
of  the  water  sheet  in  that  direction.

Puno,  a  Spanish  settlement  founded  in  the  seventeenth
century^  and  now  the  capital  of  a  Peruvian  department,
nestles  at  the  upper  end  of  a  large  bay  called  the  Lagxme  of
Chncuito.  Its  surroundings  are  typical  of  the  bleak  and
chilly  Puna  of  tiiese  regions.  Trees  are  scarce,  the  slopes
overgrown  with  a  scrubby  vegetation,  rocks  protrude  boldly
here  and  there,  and  the  sheet  of  bine  water  expanding  in  ad-
vance of  the  port  is  encircled  by  dreary  shores  and  reddish
cliffs.  The  Lagane  of  Cbacnito  terminates  between  two  nar-
row projections— the  Peninsula  of  Capachica  in  the  north
and  that  of  Chncoito  in  the  son^ On  its  southern  banks


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  T.ATCB  TITICACA  5

lie  villages  known  since  the  earliest  times  of  Spanish  ooloni-
zation— Ghncuito,  formerly  an  important  seat  of  provincial
govemment,  and  Acora,^  in  the  vicinity  of  which  are  many
aborigrinal  monmnents  partly  described  by(E.  G.  Sqnier.")
The  shores  are  bleak,  bat,  as  everywhere  on  the  Puna,  their
appearance  is  deceptive.  "While  destitute  of  arboriferous
v^etation,  they  are  not  unproductive.  Such  culture-plants
as  withstand  the  cold  climate  find  sufficient  soil  for  growth.
The  scarcity  of  level  ground  has  compelled,  and  still  compels,
people  to  go  to  the  slopes  for  cultivation.  Hence  "andenes,"
or  terraced  garden-beds  ("takanas,"  also  "patas,"  in
Aymara),  are  visible  everywhere  from  the  Lake,  presenting
an  appearance  of  symmetry  not  held  out  upon  closer  inspec-
tion. With  the  time-honored  system  of  rotation  observed
by  the  ]jadians,  the  great  number  of  these  terraced  patches
is  no  indication  of  a  former  dense  population.'"  Neither  are
they  exclusively  ancient,  many  belonging  to  Colonial  or  to
modem  times.

Beyond  the  narrows  at  Chncoito  the  large  Islands  of
Taqnili  and  Amantanf  stand  out  in  plain  relief.  The  former
Ues  nearly  in  front  of  the  straits,  the  latter  north  of  it.
Taqnili,  sometimes  used  as  a  place  of  captivity  for  political
offenders,  was  explored  to  some  extent,  more  than  a  decade
ago,  by  the  very  unfortunates  condemned  to  pine  on  its  un-
prepossessing shores."  Their  desultory  diggings  yielded
human  bodies,  cloth,  pottery,  copper  and  silver  trinkets ;  in
short,  usual  remains  of  the  * '  Chullpa '  *  kind ;  as  popular  ter-
minology improperly  designates  vestiges,  that  do  not  bear
either  the  stamp  of  Ouzco  influence,"  or  that  of  the  ancient
coast-people.  Amantanf  is  said  to  be  covered  with  similar
remains.  Pnno  itself  is  surrounded  by  ruins.  Many  are
scattered  over  the  heights  around  Lake  Umayo,  the  shores
of  which  bear  the  famous  constructions  of  SilluBtani;"  and
much  of  archaeological  interest  is  yet  buried  at  Mallqni-
Amaya,  the  hacienda  of  my  friend  Don  Agnstin  Torar.

Beyond  the  narrows,  the  main  Lake  spreads  out  before  us.


;cbyG00'^lc


6  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

In  the  ram7  season  it  presents  a  vast  expanse  of  graTish
water  under  a  darkened  sky,  and  it  is  not  nnusnal  to  witness
one  or  several  waterspouts  qt  a  time."  Thunderstorms  are
of  daily  and  idghtly  ocy^sfrence  during  summer  months,
from  November  to  April.  When  we  crossed  the  Lake,  on  the
night  of  December  Slst,  1894,  our  steamer,  the  "Yapura,"
was  struck  by  lightning.  There  was  no  peal,  only  a  quiver-
ing of  the  craft.  We  were  then  yet  inside  of  the  Lagnne  of
Chncuito.  Saint  Elmo  fires  appear  on  the  masts  of  tiie  ship
during  such  stormy  nights.

If  the  voyage  is  made  in  winter,  when  calm  and  dear  days
prevail,  then  the  view  is  different.  The  placid  watersheet
spreads  out  in  dazzling  bine,  traversed  here  and  there  by
streaks  of  emerald  green.  A  sky  of  incomparable  beanty
spans  the  heavens.  Not  a  breeze  raffles  the  mirror-like
waters.  On  the  gently  slopiug  shores  of  Peru,  the  principal
villages  are  barely  discernible;  Have,  in  the  vicinity  of
which  a  large  human  statue  of  stone  and  many  sacrificial
offerings  were  discovered  in  the  early  part  of  the  seven-
teenth century,'"  and  Pomata,  whither  the  Dominicans  (the
first  missionaries  of  these  sections)  withdrew  after  the  mis-
sions from  Chuottito  to  Copacavana  had  been  unjustly  taken
away  from  them;  Juli,"  concealed  by  its  promontory  of
gray  and  pate  green."  In  the  dim  distance  appear  some  of
the  "Nevados"  that  separate  the  Lake  region  from  the  vol-
canic ranges  above  Moquegna— the  Cavalluni,  the  Uilca-
conga,  and  others.  They  appear  as  patches  of  perpetnal
snow  rising  between  arid  ranges.  That  part  of  Peru  has  a
considerable  population  of  Aymard-speaking  Indians,  and
under  Spanish  jmle  was  very  thrifty,"  but  it  lacks,  abso<
lately,  the  picturesque  element  in  nature.  That  same  region,
however,  abounds  in  ancient  ruins  which  yet  await  explora-
tion."

Facing  the  prow  of  the  steamer,  in  the  sontheast,  there
advances  into  the  Lake  what  seems  to  be  a  long  promontory
capped  by  mgged  mountains  of  moderate  elevation. The


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  LAKE  TITICACA  7

northern  aid  of  this  projection  is  the  Island  of  Titdcaca,  and
its  sonthem  contumation  with  the  ragged  peaks  above  it,
the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana.  Throogh  the  narrow  Straits
of  Yampnpata,  which  separate  the  Island  from  the  Penin-
snla,  steamers  take  their  course.  Beyond,  dusky  ranges  skirt
the  farthest  horizon  to  the  southeast  and  east,  apparently
sweeping  around  in  a  semi-circle,  forming  the  eastern  shores
of  the  Lake  and  its  sontheastem  termination.  High  above
this  tmprepossessing  belt  of  bleak  elopes,  rocky  humps,  and
scattered  islets,  bristles  a  chain  of  gigantic  peaks  clad  in
eternal  enow.  Draped  with  formidable  glaciers  that  descend
far  below  the  snow  line,  tiie  twin  peaks  of  Sorata,  two  colos-
sal monuments,  connected  by  an  icy  crest,  constitute  its
northern  pillars.  Thence,  declining  to  the  southward,  it
sweeps  away,  until  a  glistening  pyramid,**  bold  and  steep,
the  Hnayna  Potosi  or  "Karka-Jaqne"  (Ka-Ka-a-Ka)  termi-
nates the  chain  as  visible  from  this  part  of  the  Lake.  North
of  the  Sorata  group,  a  more  distant  range  extends  along  the
whole  of  the  northeastern  horizon.  It  is  as  heavily  snow-
clad  as  the  other,  but  probably  not  as  elevated.  The  firat
cbam  is  the  Andes  of  Bolivia.  The  other  range— belong-
ing partly  to  Bolivia,  partly  to  Pern— comprises  the  Andes
of  Carabaya,  the  great  Ananea,  and  the  high  ranges  of
Snchez,  Altarani,  Lavanderfini,  SnndLuli,  and  AMrftTnw.Tii,
weet  of  Felechuco  and  north  of  Charassani.'*

Utter  monotony,  gray,  brown  and  black  in  winter,  of  a
greenish  hue  in  summer,  woold  be  the  characteristic  of  land-
scape on  Lake  Titicaca,  when  at  its  best  in  brilliant  sunlight,
were  it  not  for  the  long  ranges  of  snowy  peaks  that  bristle
along  fally  one  half  of  the  horizon  like  a  silver  diadem.
Bold  and  rog^ied,  every  peak  sharply  individualized  like
those  of  the  Central  Alps  in  Switzerland,  with  an  abundance
of  glaciers,  tiie  Andes  of  Bolivia  well  deserve  the  appellative
of  Cordillera  Real  (royal  range),  by  which  they  are
sometimes  designated.  When,  in  the  last  moments  of  sun-
set, the  lofty  peaks  and  bold  crests  assume  a  vivid  golden


;cbyG00'^lc


8  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

hne,  while  the  glaciers  at  their  base  tnm  parple  and  violet,
the  Andes  fairly  glisten.  Then  a  ghastly  veil  falls  over
them  and  they  torn  livid.  Newcomers  may  turn  away  think-
ing that  night  has  set  in;  but  in  a  few  minates  light  floods
the  snowflelds  again.  It  turns  red,  while  the  summits  be-
come living  flames  of  a  rosy  hue  as  intense  and  dazzling  as
any  Alpine  glow  in  Switzerland  or  Tyrol.  Snch  a  spectacle
is  not  unfrequent  on  the  Lake,  and  it  is  asnally  accompanied
by  the  presence  of  long  delicate  cirro-strati  above  the
Bonthem  horizon,  which  turn  fiery  red,  before  the  rosy  dis-
play begins  on  the  Cordillera.  Yet  we  saw  the  Alpine  glow
in  wondrous  beanty,  when  there  was  not  even  a  dondlet  in
the  sky."

The  educated  traveller  cannot  fail  to  be  deeply  impressed
by  the  majestic  beauty  of  these  mountains,  so  colossal  in
height  that  a  picture  of  the  Sorata  rfmge  is  clearly  reflected
in  the  waters  of  the  Lake.**  The  Indian,  however,  is  not
moved  by  si^ts  of  nature;  accustomed  to  depend  upon  it,
he  estimates  everything  from  the  utilitarian  standpoint  of
his  wants,  hopes  and  fears.

The  Aymara  Indian  calls  each  "Nevado,"  or  snowy  peak,
'  *  Achachila '  * ;  that  is, "  grandfather. ' '  They  apply  this  term
to  every  prominent  feature ;  still  the  importance  of  the  Acha-
chila is  not  always  in  proportion  to  its  size.  While  on  the
slopes  of  Illimani,  I  also  heard  the  Indians  of  Llujo  call  the
mountain ' '  Uyu-iri, ' '  feeder  or  fosterer  of  their  homes.  The
word  "niimani"  itself  is  a  corruption  of  "Hila-umani" —
"he  who  has  mnch  water,"  derived  from  the  fact,  that  the
water  courses  useful  to  them  descend  from  that  mountain,
and  that  precipitation  is  most  abundant  along  its  slopes.
On  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  the  great  lUampu  or  "Hanko-
Uma"  (white  water)  is  the  most  prominent,  as  it  almost  di-
rectly faces  the  Island,  and  therefore  is  more  particularly
known  to  the  Islanders.  Nevertheless,  my  inquiries  touching
the  name  of  it  (inquiries  made  for  the  purpose  of  eliciting
some  information  abont  tales  or  legends,  possibly  extant).


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  LAKE  TITICACA  9

vere  quite  ae  often  answered  by  "Ulimam"  also;  while  to
the  other  peaks,  the  term  "Knnn-Kolln"  (snow-heijj^t)  was
indiscriminately  applied.  The  Indian  of  the  Island  consid-
ers SQch  conapicnoDs  landmarks  as  fetishes,  chiefly  origi-
nators of  cold  and  angry  blasts.

Lake  Titicaca  does  not  derive  its  principal  water  sapply
from  the  great  Bolivian  chain.  Only  one  of  its  main
tribntaries,  the  Bio  de  Achacache,  descends  directly
from  the  Cordillera  Real.  The  Snehez  has  its  headwaters
in  Pern  (among  the  Andes  of  Carabaya) ;  also  tiie  Bamis,
in  the  narrow  defile  at  the  foot  of  the  Cordillera  of  Vil-
canota,  near  the  line  dividing  the  Department  of  Pono  from
that  of  Cnzco;^  and  tiie  other  streams  rise  either  in  the
range  dividing  the  basin  of  Titicaca  from  the  Padfio  slope,
or  sonth  of  the  Lake.

The  drain  of  the  Cordillera  of  Bolivia  is  diiefly  toward
the  Atlantic,  and  not  toward  the  Pa(ufic  slope.  Lake  Titi-
caca lies  at  the  foot  of  that  range  like  a  trough,  filled  with
slightly  braokLsh  water,*'  and  fed  only  to  an  extent  that
maintains  an  eqnilibriam  between  the  supply  and  the  ont-
flow  through  the  Desaguadero."

The  trou^  formed  by  Lake  Titicaca  is  mostly  very  deep.
Soundings  of  more  than  six  hundred  feet,  and  as  many  as
a  thousand  or  more,  are  not  uncommon.  The  Bolivian  or
northern  shore  is  lined  by  greater  depths  than  the  Pemvian
aide.*^  Bays  like  the  Lagune  of  Chncuito  near  Pimo,  the  in-
land basin  between  Tiquina  and  Chililaya,  and  probably
tbe  basin  of  Uinamarca,  are  comparatively  shallow,  bat  the
main  Lake  is  a  deft,  sinking  abruptly  at  the  foot  of  the
Andes  and  rising  gradually  to  the  western  shore.

A  discussion  of  the  numerous  theories,  that  have  been
advanced,  from  time  to  time,  regarding  the  origin  of  this
singnlar  inland  sea,  would  prove  useless.  There  are  indica-
tions of  a  former  connection  between  opposite  shores  of  the
Lake.  The  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  seems  to  have  been
connected,  at  one  time,  with  the  Peninsula  of  Santiago


;cbyG00'^lc


10  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Hnata.  The  channel  of  Tiqnina  has  an  average  deptii  of
only  140  feet.^^  The  southeastern  lagunes  or  bays  in  which
the  Lake  terminates,  show  a  greatest  depth  of  about  sixty
feet;  whereas  to  the  northward  along  the  Bolivian  shore,
depths  of  from  600  to  800  feet  have  been  recorded.  The  Strait
of  Tiquina,  that  narrow  channel  through  which  steamers  pass
after  leaving  the  Islands  of  Titicaca  and  Koati,  may  there-
fore have  opened  at  a  time  when  the  watery  basins  about
Chihlaya  existed  independent  of  the  main  Lake;  and  the
outflow  at  the  Desaguadero  may  have  been  a  result  of  the
breaking  of  a  barrier  that  formerly  united  the  Peninsula  of
Huata  with  that  of  Copacavana.

Such  problems  can  be  solved  only  by  a  close  stady  of  the
region  in  general,  and  this  study  has  not  as  yet  been  under-
taken. It  may  be  said  that  Lake  Titicaca,  in  most  of  its
features,  is  as  nnknown  as  the  least  visited  of  the  inner
African  lakes.  The  shores  are  so  indented  and  their  topo-
graphy is  so  complicated,  that  a  coasting  voyage  of  a  year
at  least  wonld  be  needed  to  achieve  a  complete  investigation.

We  have  as  yet  found  bat  faint  traces  of  geological  myths
among  the  folk-lore  and  traditions  of  the  Aymara  Indians
inhabiting  the  shores.  This  negative  result,  however,  is  not
final,  since  it  was  only  from  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  and  to
some  extent  from  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  that,  previ-
ous to  1897,  we  had  been  able  to  secure  scraps  of  what  may
be  called  folk-lore.  At  Tiahuanaco,  stories  are  told  con-
cerning a  time  when  the  sun  had  not  yet  risen  into  the
heavens,  but  none  of  them  bear  any  relation  to  the  condition
of  the  Lake  or  to  any  modifications  in  its  contours.  We
were  told  by  an  old  Indian  that  the  builders  of  the  edifices
of  stone  (now  in  ruins)  were  *'Gtentiles,"  and  were  de-
stroyed by  a  flood.  The  appearance  of  the  sun  in  the  heav-
ens is  said  to  have  occurred  after  this  supposed  destruction.
It  is  not  an  uncommon  belief  that  the  waters  of  the  O-ulf  of
Taraco  once  reached  as  far  inland  as  Tiahuanaco,  now  abont
five  miles  distant  from  the  shore. Some  of  the  explanations


;cbyG00'^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


1

I

II


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICAOA  11

of  the  name  are  even  based  on  this  hTpothesis,  saving  it  tiie
meaning  of  :*' dry  beach. "  "

Among  the  traditions  recorded  by  early  Spanish  chron-
iclers, that  of  the  appearance  of  a  white  man  on  the  shores
of  La^e  Titicaca  appears  to  be  connected  with  a  dim  recol-
lection of  geological  phenomena.  Ticiviracocha  (also
called  Tuapaca  and  Amanan)  is  represented  byfCieza'"}
as  having  come  from  the  sonth  and  as  having  been
endowed  with  such  power  that,  "he  converted  heights  into
plains  and  plains  into  tall  heights,  and  cansed  springs  to
6owoutof  bare  rocks.*'"  A  century  after  Cieza  had  writ-
ten his  chronicle,  an  Angastine  Monk,^ray  Antonio  de  la
Calancha,Vreferred  to  a  tradition  in  regard  to  a  disciple  of
Tonapa,  called  Taapac,  stating  that  the  Indians  of  the
Lake-shore  killed  him,  placed  his  body  on  a  raft,  or
b(Usa:  "and  thmst  that  craft  on  the  great  lagone  aforesaid;
and  so,  propelled  by  the  waves  and  breezes  ...  it  navi-
gated with  great  swiftness,  causing  admiration  to  the  very
ones  who  had  killed  him;  their  fright  being  increased  by  the
fact  that  the  Lake,  which  at  present  has  very  little  current,
at  that  time  had  none  at  all.  .  .  .  When  the  balsa  with  its
treasnre  reached  the  beach  at  Cadiamarca  where  the  Des-
agnadero  now  is  (this  tradition  is  well  established  tunong
the  Indians),  this  same  balsa,  breaking  throng  die  land,
opened  a  channel  that  previously  did  not  exist,  bnt  which
since  that  time  has  continued  to  flow.  On  its  waters  the
holy  body  went  as  far  as  the  pueblo  of  the  AuUagas."'  ..."
According  to  this  legend  (provided  the  tale  is  genuine  native
folk-lore,  as  the  author  asserts,  and  not  from  after  the  con-
quest) it  would  appear  that  the  opening  of  the  Desaguadero
oocnrred  within  the  scope  of  dim  recollection  of  man."

The  story  that  sun  and  moon  were  created  a/fer  the  inhabi-
tants of  Tiahuanaco  had  been  visited  by  a  diaaatrons  flood,
is  told  by  several  authors  from  the  early  times  of  Spanish
colonization ;  as  well  as  the  myth  that  both  orbs  rose  pri-
marily from  the  Lake,  or  from  some  point  of  its  surface."^


;cbyG00'^lc


12  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

The  fact  that  nearly  all  the  traditions,  so  far  aa  we  know,
aboat  the  earliest  times,  and  the  natural  phenomena  sup-
posed to  have  occarred  at  those  times,  centre  in  Tiahuanaco,
may  be  not  without  significance.  The  tale  preserved  to  ua
by  Calancha  points  to  a  time  within  range  of  ancient  folk-
lore in  Bolivia  and  Peru,  when  the  waters  of  the  Lake  had
no  outlet.  It  may,  however,  be  only  a  myth  of  observation.
According  to  Uigassiz^ere  are  indications  of  a  slow  grad-
ual sinking  of  the  level  of  the  Lake."  This  has  been  denied
by  others ;  and  I  beg  to  suggest  that  such  a  change  may  not
have  been  general.  Thus  the  Lagone  of  Uioamarca  and  tiie
G-ulf  of  Taraco  could  have  slowly  receded  from  their  shores
without  affecting  the  level  of  tiie  main  Lake.

Storms  on  Lake  Titicaca  are  violent,  and  the  waves,
though  short,  dangerous.  The  indigenous  balsa  is  a  clumsy,
alow,  exceedingly  primitive  craft,  but  it  cannot  sink.  If  cut
in  twain,  each  piece  floats  for  itself  and  can  afford  refuge  to
human  beings.'"  Swimming  is  out  of  the  question,  since  the
temperature  of  the  water  is  so  low  tia&t  liie  ewinuner  soon
gets  ntmibed  and  sinks.*'

Animal  life  on  tiie  Lake  is  seldom  seen  away  from  the
shores.  Gulls  {Larus  serranus)  now  and  then  follow  the
steamer,  and  an  occasional  diver  (Podtceps,  Tachyobaptus,
and  Centropehna)''  furrows  the  water  in  that  lively,  dash-
ing way  which  recalls  the  motion  of  a  diminutive  tug-boat.
On  expanses  covered  with  lake-reed  or  "totora"  (Malaco-
chaete  totora)  swarms  of  these  agile  swimmers  bustle  about
the  handsome  "choka"  {FtUica  gigantea),  a  stately  bird
of  black  metallic  plumage  with  bright  colored  head  and
erest  A  dark  green  stork-like  bird,  possibly  a  Tantalidae,'^
stalks  through  marshy  approaches  to  deeper  water.  In
the  main  Lake,  animal  life  appears  almost  extinct;  of  the
six  kinds  of  fishes,  officially  known,*"  not  one  appears  on  the
surface.  The  natives  claim  that  there  are  at  least  a  dozen
species  of  fishes  in  Lake  Titicaca.

As  we  approach  the  long  promontory  of  the  Peninsula


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICACA  13

of  Copacavana,  Titicaca  appears  in  its  insular  shape.  Be-
yond its  northwestern  outline  small  islets,— the  steep  and
yrass^jovered  dome  of  Koa,  flat  Payaya,  tiny  Chnju,
—elongated  Lanasaani,  rise  above  the  waters.'*  They
seem  like  scattered  remains  of  a  causeway  formerly  uniting
Copacavana  with  the  Bolivian  mainland  at  Huaidio,  of
vfaieh  there  remains,  on  the  south,  the  Island  of  Titicaca
and  its  surroundings  and  in  the  north  the  islands  of  Apin-
gfiila,  Pampiti  and  Campanario.*^

The  Straits  of  Yampupata,  which  divide  Titicaca  from  the
Copacavana  Peninsula  have  a  width  of  about  two-thirds  of  an
English  mile ; "  and  on  both  sides  of  the  Straits,  around  the
Island  of  Titicaca,  and  between  that  of  Koati  and  the  main-
land at  Sampaya,  the  Lake  has  a  depth  of  from  580  to  600
and  more  feet.  It  is  when  issuing  from  that  short  and  pic-
turesque channel  that  tiie  two  peaks  of  Sorata  are  se^i  to
greatest  advantage.  The  steep  and  bold  sbpes  of  the  Island,
with  conntlesa  andenes  traversing  them  horizontally,  and  the
precipitous  sides  of  the  mainland,  form  what  appears  like
a  mstic  portal,  above  and  beyond  which  the  truncated  pyra-
mid of  Hilampi  and  the  dome  of  Hanko-Uma  stand  out  in  in-
comparable grandeur.*'  The  Island  of  Koati,  in  the  midst
of  the  placid  waters  of  the  Lake,  breaks  the  sombre  monot-
ony of  the  Bolivian  shore  between  Ancoraymes  and  the
Peninsula  of  Huata.

At  Yampupata,  the  work  of  man  begins  to  appear  on
every  side.  The  bold  promontory  of  Chani  hides  from  view
the  celebrated  sanctuary  of  Copacavana,  but  the  hamlet  of
Yampupata,  with  its  houses  of  stone  and  its  humble  chapel,
nestles  close  to  the  rocky  point  terminating  the  Peninsula.
Traces  of  cultivation,  in  tiie  shape  of  andenes,  are  every-
idiere  seen.  We  pass  the  two  balsas  plying  between  Yam-
pupata and  Pnncn,  the  extreme  southerly  point  of  the  Island
of  !ntioaca.  The  Aymara  Indians,  who  manage  these  clumsy
ferries,  either  gloat  stolidly  at  the  steamer  as  it  sweeps
by,  or  if  they  are  in  numbers  and  in  festive  mood,  they


;cbyG00'^lc


14  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

break  out  in  rude  and  sometimes  very  nncivil  demonstra-
tions.

Even  on  the  little  Island  of  Chilleca  near  the  end  of  the
Straits,  traces  of  cultivation,  snch  as  potato  patches,  are  vis-
ible. On  the  main  Island  we  see,  at  one  glance,  the  ruin
called  "Pilcokayma"  (an  ancient  structure  attributed  to  the
Pemvian  Incas),  the  modem  hacienda  of  Yumani  with  its
tile-roofed  buildings;  cnltiTated  as  well  as  abandoned  an-
denes  on  the  indented  slopes;  a  grove  of  mostly  modem
trees  surrounding  the  so-called  "  Fountain  of  the  Inca,"
near  the  shore ;  and,  higher  up,  Indian  houses  scattered  here
and  there,  some  with  red  roofing  of  tiles,  others  witii  the  us-
ual covering  of  thatch.  As  we  glide  along,  hogging  the  Pe-
ninsula of  Copacavana,  we  see  that  almost  every  fold  of  that
steep  and  ragged  shore  bears  a  small  hacienda.  High  up  on
the  slope  of  one  of  these  folds,  the  village  of  Sampaya  clus-
ters picturesquely  between  terraced  garden-beds.  Opposite,
the  entire  length  of  the  Island  of  Koati  is  striated  with  an-
denes.  The  eastern  Bolivian  shore  is  so  distant  that  none
of  its  villages,  situated  near  but  not  on  the  shore,  are  visible.
The  northeastern  side  of  the  Strait  of  Tiquioa  is  rocky  and
almost  uninhabited;  the  southwestern  side,  although  nearly
as  steep,  is  extensively  cultivated.  The  reason  of  this  is
that  slopes  exposed  to  the  north,  in  this  hemisphere,  are
those  whidi  receive  directly  the  warmth  of  the  son.  The
two  villages  of  San  Pablo  and  San  Pedro  Tiquina<»  occupy
respectively  the  southern  and  northern  shores  of  the  nar-
rows near  their  southeastern  extremity.  From  here  the
most  souHierly  pillar  of  the  snowy  range,  the  "Nevado"  of
Blimani,*"  hitherto  invisible,  seems  to  rise  suddenly  and  di-
rectly out  of  the  water,  at  the  other  end  of  the  shallow
lagune  which  we  now  enter.  To  the  right  opens  the  basin  of
Uinamarca  dotted  with  islands  mostly  inhabited.  The
larger  ones,  Patapatani  and  Co&na,  also  Cumana,  divide
that  lagnne  from  the  bays  of  Hnarina  and  Chililaya.  On  the
left,  the  shore  bears  extensive  haciendas  like  Compi  and


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


•s

J


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICACA  15

Clrna,  also  the  hamlet  of  Hnatajata.  On  the  main  Lake,
and  as  far  as  the  passage  of  Tiqnma,  scarcely  a  craft  is  met,
bnt  now  the  water  becomes  enlivened  by  flotUlas  of  small
balsas,  each  raft  with  a  sail  of  reeds  and  managed  by  one
man  or  sometimes  by  two  men.  These  are  fishing  craf  ^  that
do  not  go  into  the  Lake  where  their  labor  wonld  hardly
prove  r^nnnnrative.  The  ooast  of  these  interior  basins  is
rich  in  totora,  *''  whereas  the  depth  of  the  Lake  along  the
shores  of  Koati  and  Copacavana  does  not  permit  the
growth  of  this  aquatic  reed  except  in  small  patchos.  The
Indians  of  Huatajata  and  of  the  islands  near  by,  are  to  a
great  extent  fishermen.  A  balsa  does  not  last  long,  bnt  a
new  one  is  easily  eonstmcted.  Uany  of  the  Lake  Indians
are  rather  fearless  navigators  and  undertake  comparatively
long  voyages,  tmsting  to  the  winds  to  direct  their  oonrse.
It  is  not  nnoommon  to  see  Indians,  from  Hnaicho  and
Ezcoma,  drift  across  the  widest  part  of  the  Lake  to  Have,
Jnii  or  Pomata.  From  the  Island  of  Titicaca  a  three  days'
voyage  to  Pano  is  by  no  means  a  rarity;  and  trips  to  Ajioo<
raymes  are  of  frequent  occarrenoe.  As  the  balsa  is  pro-
pelled much  more  by  sail  than  by  the  imperfect  oars,  the
direction  of  atmospheric  currents  is  watched  and  used  so  far
SB  possible.  Happily  these  currents  blow  with  considerable
regularity.  Thus  the  southeast  wind  nsoally  prevails  until
midday.  Afterward  the  wind  veers  to  the  northwest  and
blows  from  that  quarter  until  after  or  about  midnight

Thunderstorms  and  tempests  occur  very  often.  During
the  summer  months  they  are  of  daily  occurrence.  The  vio-
lence of  the  wind  depends  upon  localities,  upon  the  degree
of  shelter,  and  the  existence  of  a  funnel  tiirough  which  the
moving  air  must  rush  at  greater  speed  and  with  increased
power.  The  Straits,  both  of  Yampnpata  and  of  Tiquina,  are
exposed  to  violent  blasts,  and  so  is  the  vicinity  of  Copaca-
vana. The  middle  of  the  Lake,  which  the  people  call  the
"Pampa  de  Have,"  is  also  feared  on  accoont  of  the  power
which  the  wind,  coming  from  the  snow-capped  Andes,


;cbyG00'^lc


16  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

wields  over  this  shelterless  expanse.  Tempests  ahnost  in-
variably come  from  the  northwest  and  we  have  known  them
to  last  several  days,  the  mftvimnwn  violence  reoccnrrin^
daily  aboat  4  p.u.  Such  storms  are  mostly  dry  in  winter,
or  with  a  slight  fall  of  snow  or  hail,  chiefly  on  the  heights.
Bnt  snow  falls  every  year  on  the  shore  also.  In  Febmary
we  have  many  times  seen  the  ground  at  Copacavana  white
with  snow,  also  on  the  Island  and  the  Peninsala  of  Santiago
Hnata.  Li  June  we  had  light  snow-falls,  accompanied  by
tiionder  and  lightning  and  soft  hail,  on  the  Island  of  Koati.

Lightning  strokes  are  locally  frequent,  they  descoad  with
mnch  greater  frequency  at  certain  places  than  at  others.
Copacavana  is  one  of  these  dangerous  spots.  On  the  Island
of  Titicaca,  on  the  narrow  isthmus  where  the  hacienda  of
Challa  stands,  we  counted  as  many  as  twenty  lightning
strokes  in  little  more  than  half  an  hour.  All  of  them  stmck
either  the  water,  or  the  rocky  heights  of  Challa  Pata  and
Inak-Uyu  near  by.

To  give  the  results  of  meteorological  observations  at  one
point  only,  and  then  draw  conclusions  from  them  as  to  the
climate  of  the  Lake  in  general,  would  be  misleading.  A
glance  at  the  map  accompanying,  however  faulty  it  may  be,
will  show  that  the  indented  form  of  the  shore-line,  the  distri-
bution of  the  Cordilleras  in  regard  to  the  northern  and
southern  portions,  and  the  greater  or  less  distance  of  the
heights  bordering  on  the  Lake,  create  a  number  of  local  cli-
mates. Thus,  while  the  shores  exposed  to  the  north  are
warmer  than  those  exposed  to  the  south,  and  northern  ex-
posures those  in  whi(^  more  delicate  culture  plants  (like
maize)  can  alone  be  raised,  yet  some  sites  along  the  south-
eastern Bolivian  shore  enjoy  a  milder  climate  than  others,
near  by  or  on  the  opposite  side.  Hnarina,  for  example,  is
warmer  and  milder  than  Chililaya,  six  miles  distant  from  it
to  the  southwest.  The  reason  for  it  is  that  some  villages
on  that  side  are  built  against  the  coast-hills,  and  the  cold
blasts  from  the  Cordillera  blow  over  these  hills  and  di-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  T.AKTC  TITICACA  17

rectly  on  to  the  shore  opposite,  makiiig  it  chilly  and  dis-
agreeable  in  the  afternoons.

Thermometrical  observations  made  bnt  at  one  or  two
points  have  only  a  local  value  and  for  the  specified  period
of  time ;  bnt  it  may  still  be  of  interest  to  note  the  results  of
snch  observatdons,  made  by  my  wife,  chiefly  on  the  Island
of  Titicaca,  daring  several  months  of  the  year  1895.

For  the  month  of  January  the  mean  of  37  obser-
vations was  54"4o  degrees.  For  the  month  of  February,
the  mean  of  120  observations  was  55^o  degrees.  For  Mardi,
the  average  of  107  observations  was  54%o  degrees.  The
mean  for  these  three  months,  embracing  the  height  of  sum-
mer and  the  autumnal  equinox,  is  therefore  55  degrees,
Far. ;  and  the  variation  in  the  mean,  from  one  month  to  the
other,  amounts  to  barely  one  half  a  degree.  The  maxima
were,  in  January,  BSy^i  in  February,  65;  and  in  March,
64.  The  minima  were,  in  January,  47;  in  February,  45;
and  in  March,  43.  In  the  month  of  April  the  observa-
tions could  only  be  conducted  during  the  first  half  of  the
month,  and  at  three  distinct  localities,  according  as  we
moved  onr  domicil  in  the  interest  of  excavations.  Hence
averages  for  that  month  possess  no  value.  At  Ynmani,  a
point  several  hundred  feet  above  the  .Lake,  the  thermom-
eter reached  its  maximum  between  the  Ist  and  15th  of
April  at  59  degrees,  and  its  miniTnnm  at  45.  During  the
interval  between  the  26th  of  May,  when  we  returned  to
Titicaca  after  a  protracted  stay  at  Puno,  and  the  18th  of
Jmie,  the  extremes  were  respectively  60  and  39  degrees.
On  the  Island  of  Koati  the  extremes,  from  the  18th  of  June
to  the  1st  of  July  indnsive,  were  50  and  33  degrees.  While
the  above  figures  probably  represent  the  Tnnxima  of  £he
whole  year,  I  have  doubts  about  the  minima.  The  lowest
point  reached  by  the  thermometer  falls  below  freezing
point.  I  infer  this  from  the  fact  that,  on  the  morning  of
Angost  18th,  we  found  tiie  Bay  of  Hnarina  covered  with  ice
a  quarter  of  an  inch  thick. Should,  however,  the  figures


;cbyG00'^lc


18  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

given  represent  the  extremes  for  that  year  (the  difference
will  be  very  small),  the  annual  range  of  temperature  of
abont  32  degrees  shows  an  nnnsnally  equable  climate.  But
that  climate  is  also  constantly  hmnid,  hence  always  chilling.
It  rains  nearly  every  month.  In  January,  1895,  we  had  19
days  of  rain  (always  with  thnnderetonns) ;  in  February,  22 ;
in  March,  16 ;  in  April,  14 ;  in  May,  6 ;  in  June,  10 ;  in.  Jidy,  1 ;
and  in  August,  2.  All  these  months,  as  well  as  the  last
third  of  December,  1894,  were  spent  on  some  point  of  the
Lake-shore.  The  constantly  low  temperature,  together
with  frequent  precipitation,  renders  the  climate  disagree-
able, although  by  no  means  unhealthy.

Vegetation  exists  wherever  there  is  room  for  it,  but  it  is
seldom  handsome.  The  "kenua"  {Polylepsis  racemosa),
the  wild  olive  tree  (Buddleya  coriacea),  and  the  Sambucus
Peruvianus  are  abont  the  only  indigenous  trees.  These
grow  only  on  favored  sites  and  are  stunted  and  low.  The
beantifnl  and  richly  flowering  shrub  called  "cantuta,"— the
large  carmine,  yellow  or  white  flowers*'  of  which  are  so
abundantly  represented  on  ancient  textiles  and  on  pottery,
—thrives  in  sunny  localities.  The  potato  takes  the  lei^
among  indigenous  culture  plants,  next  comes  the  oca  (Oxa-
lis  tuberosa),  the  "quinua"  (Chenopodium  quinua),  and  in
sheltered  places  only,  maize  of  the  small  bushy  kind.  Since
the  sixteenth  century,  barley  and  the  common  large  bean**
have  been  added  to  this  modest  list  Kitchen  vegetables
would  grow  well  in  many  places  if  they  were  cultivated ;  but
the  Aymara  Indian  is  such  an  inveterate  enemy  of  innova-
tion that  all  attempts  at  introducing  new  plants  which
might  bring  about  a  wholesome  reform  in  his  monotonoos
diet,  have  failed.  Thus  on  the  islands  there  is  cabbage
growing  wild ;  on  Koati  we  have  seen  almost  arborif erooa
cabbage  plants.  The  garden  near  Challa  on  Titicaca  (er-
roneously designated  as  "Garden  of  the  Incas,")  is  filled
with  trees,  shrubs,  and  with  an  abundance  of  flowers.  It
has  beds  of  strawberries  that  ripen  annually;  but  every-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


■i

s

P  £
If


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  LA£E  TITICACA  19

thing  ifi  Badly  neglected,  now  that  the  owners  no  longer
reside  on  the  estate.  The  Indian  uses  the  dahlias,  the  for-
get-me-nots, the  beantifnl  roses;  he  sempnlonsly  plucks
and  devours  all  the  fruit;  hnt  not  a  single  effort  would  he
make  for  preserving  the  plants.  Only  the  strict  orders  im-
parted by  the  owners  have  saved  that  beantifnl  site  from
utter,  wanton  destrQction.  The  nseful  seeds  that  were  dis-
tribated  among  the  Indians  of  Titicaca  for  their  benefit
were  sown,  because  it  was  so  ordered,  and  they  germed,
grew  and  prospered.  The  Indians  made  use  of  the  proceeds
dnring  the  first  year;  afterward  no  more  attention  was
paid  to  the  plants.  I  might  state  that  one  of  the  causes  for|
this  lies  in  the  fact  that  few  people  on  the  face  of  the  earthj
are  so  possessed  by  greed  for  money  as  the  Aymara  ]
dian  of  the  Lake  region.  Only  what  can  procure  coin  at
once,  is  prized  by  him.  Hence  plants  and  trees,  however
prodnctiTe  in  the  course  of  time,  are  of  no  consequence  to
him,  as  they  do  not  immediately  yield  the  coveted  easli.
At  present,  vegetables  and  fruits  could  hardly  be  made
profitable  on  the  Islands,  for  there  is  no  market.  Naviga-
tion on  Lake  Titicaca  is  restricted  by  the  laws  of  Bolivia  to
Pnno,  Huaqui,  and  Chililaya,  and  no  intermediate  point
can  be  touched  without  special  permission  from  the  gov-
ernment. The  Islands  of  Titicaca  and  Koati,  belonging  to
Bolivian  waters,  are  therefore  cut  off  from  commonication
with  the  outer  world,  Copacavana  excepted,  which  is  too
small  a  village  to  offer  any  inducement.  Hence  culture
plants  other  than  the  potato,  oca,  quinua,  maize,  bean  and
barley  are  of  no  immediate  advantage  to  the  Aymara  In-
dian of  the  Lake.  Cupidity,  low  cunning,  and  savage
cruelty  are  unfortunate  traits  of  these  Indians'  character.
These  traits  are  not,  as  sentimentalism  would  have  it,  a  re-
sult of  ill-treatment  by  the  Spaniards,  but  peculiar  to  the
stock,  and  were  yet  more  pronounced  in  the  beginning  of  the
Coloiual  period  than  at  the  present  time."*  The  Aymard
Indian  is  not  at  all  stupid,  but  the  degree  of  intelligence  he


;cbyG00'^lc


20  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

possesses  seems  to  be  used  mostly  for  evil.  Saoh  traits  do
not  necessarily  strike  the  traveler,  bat  if  one  has  to  Uve
with  the  Indians  they  become  woefully  ai>parent.'*

In  the  coarse  of  the  pages  to  be  devoted  to  the  Islands  of
Titicaca  and  Koati,  many  other  points  relatuig  to  natnre
and  to  the  inhabitants  of  the  shores  and  Islands  will  be
mentioned.  The  picture  that  I  have  attempted  to  present
of  the  Lake  and  its  immediate  snrronndings  is  only  a  super-
ficial sketch.  It  is  not  a  gay  picture.  Natnre  is  mostly
cheerless  in  that  region.  Dismal  monotony  reigns  all
aronnd,  in  topography,  and  in  color  of  landscape ;  a  stunted
vegetation,  animal  life  distributed  by  local  groups  and  with
few  prominent  forms.  The  climate  is  as  monotonous  as
the  landscape,  in  the  sliji^t  variations  of  temperatnre  which
it  e^bits  throngbout  the  year;  cold,  moist,  and  abounding
in  threatening  phenomena,  dangerous  to  man  directly  and
indirectly."  There  are  no  means  for  rendering  comfort-
able the  shelter  which  one  builds,  for  the  Puna  has  scarcely
any  combustible  material  within  reach  of  the  native  except
llama  dung:  "taquia.""  The  only  redeeming  features
are:  The  sight  of  the  glorious  Andes,  and  the  magnificent
sky,  when  it  condescends  to  exhibit  itself  in  full  splendor.
These  redeeming  features,  however,  have  no  influence  on
the  Indian  ;B<  his  heart  is  untouched  by  beauties  of  nature.

That  nature,  so  uninviting  on  the  whole,  must  have,  for
ages,  exercised  a  steady  pressure  on  the  mind  of  the  Indian
who  was,  and  is  yet,  wholly  dependent  upon  it  Three
methods  of  subsistence  were  open  to  him,— hunting,  agricul-
ture and  fishery.  Hunting  was  limited  to  quadrupeds  of
great  fleetness  and  to  water-fowl.  Although  the  gaanaco
and  the  vicuna  were  formerly  abundant,  they  are  shy  and
swift,  and  it  was  only  in  communal  hunts  that  the  Indians
could  secure  such  game.''  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  in-
digenous deer,  or  "tamca."  '•  Birds  were  not  so  difficult  to
obtain,  and  an  abundance  of  edible  water-fowl  is  still  seen
in  many  places  on  the  shores. Agriculture  enjoyed  the  ad-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  LAKE  TITICACA  21

vantage  of  a  moist  climate,  and,  in  the  dry  season,  of  irriga-
tioiL  But  the  plants  that  conld  grow  were  of  bat  few  species
and  all  of  the  coarsest  kind  of  food.  The  cold  rendered  im<
possible  the  storing  of  the  potato,  in.  its  natural  condition.
There  is  not  enough  combustible  wherewith  to  dry  the  bolb
in  quantities,  hence  the  IJidian  resorted  to  the  expedient  of
freezing  the  potato  and  then  squeezing  all  the  liquid  out  of
it,  thus  preparing  the  insipid  "chunu,"  one  of  the  meanest
articles  of  vegetable  diet.'^  Maize  was  rarely  cultivated.
To  the  dweller  on  the  beach,  fishing  was  possible.  Yet  it
does  not  seem  to  have  been  extensively  practised.

^ns  the  primitive  inhabitant  of  the  Titicaca  basin  was,
as  his  neighbor  and  congener  of  the  I^ma  and  Cordillera,
weighed  down  by  a  hard  dimate  and  scanty  resources.  It
is  tree  that  the  Indian,  having  the  llama  at  his  disposal,
had  the  resource  of  commerce;  but  that  commerce  also
was  checked  by  division  into  tribes  resulting  from  Indian
social  organization."")  The  configuration  of  the  shores  fa-
vored segregation  into  smaU  groups,  at  war  with  each  other.
This  condition  of  affairs  survives  to-day,  in  the  regular
hostilities  between  the  Indians  of  neighboring  villages  as
veil  as  between  those  of  neighboring  haciendas.  Blood-
shed is  inseparable  from  Indian  festivals  and  from  certain
days  in  the  year.  Besides,  in  the  northwest  of  the  Lake,
the  Aymara  are  contiguous  to  another  linguistic  group,-  the
Qoichuas,  and  historical  folk-lore  is  filled  with  instances  of
warfare  between  tribes  of  tiie  two  powerfnl  and  numerous
stocks.""  In  the  east  and  southeast,  the  Aymara  spread  as
far  as  the  hot  regions  on  the  eastern  slopes  of  the  Andes
and,  there,  came  in  contact  with  savages  of  the  Amazonian
basin,  all  of  i^ich  were,  and  stiU  are,  cannibals.  The  char-
acter of  the  Aymari  Indians  could  not,  therefore,  develop
tmder  favorable  conditions.

On  the  whole  the  Indian  of  the  Titicaca  ba^in  is  a  being
well  fitting  the  nature  of  that  baain.  Even  the  Quichua,
althonj^  generally  of  a  milder  disposition  than  the  Ay-


;cbyG00'^lc


22  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

mara,  is  more  tadtani  and  far  less  approachable  than  his
oongeners  near  Gnzco.  These  Quichoas  show  ehaTacteristics
as  nnprepossessing  as  may  be  fonnd  anywhere  among  the
American  Indians,

The  accompanying  map  of  Lake  Titicaca,  althonji^  in-
complete, is  the  best  now  extant.  It  is  interesting  to  com-
pare it  with  the  one  made  in  1573  by  order  of  the  Viceroy
fDon  Francisco  de  Toledo,'^  copy  of  which  has  been  given  to
me  by  Don  Enriqne  Clamero  of  Pnno.  To  this  modest  but
exceedingly  well  informed  gentleman,  whose  data  on  the
Lake  and  its  environs  will  be,  when  pablished,  the  most
reliable  ones  concerning  the  r^on,  I  herewith  express
sinoere  thanks  for  many  an  act  of  kindness,  among  irtudL
the  gift  of  the  ancient  map  herewith  presented  is  by  no
means  the  least


;cbyG00'^lc


NOTES


THE  BASIN  OF  LAKE  TITICACA


'The  attitnde  of  Lake  Titieaw  la
tuimuQ;  giTen,  On  tha  adjoining
map  it  ia  stated  aa  3835  meters,  or
123^8  feet.  James  Oiton  gives  it  as
12,4B3  feet  (TAe  AKd«*  and  thtf
Amagon,  p.  <27),  aceoTding  to  tha
tailroad  anrvejs.  The  coireet  alti-
tod^  bowerer,  is  12,466.

'The  (7017  indellnite)  line  finnnna
tlmMigh  the  northweatem  point  of  the
Iihad  of  Titicaea,  leaving  that  Island,
Eoati,  and  the  parte  southeast  of
time  islanda,  as  well  as  the  Peninsula
of  Copaeavana  and  all  that  liee  east
of  the  channel  of  the  Deeagnadoro,
wiUdn  Bolirian  tfinitory.

'"It  apreada  over  2500  geograph-
ical aqriare  milee,  being  100  milea
loo^  irith  an  average  breadth  of
tWBBty-fivemilea"  (Orton:  ThtAndet
md  the  Amaton,  p.  427).  It  is  evi-
dat  that  the  author  speaks  otHj  at
the  main  lAke  and  doea  not  take  in
the  banna  at  each  extrenutj,  north-
weet  and  aontbeast.  Ignado  la
I*DaDt«  givea  the  following  flgoree;
"8a  major  di£metra  desde  la  deeem-
boeadnra  del  no  Bamis  haeta  nna
BiwiiaJa  no  lejoa  de  Ajgache  mide
1M,M0  mettoe;  el  ancho  en  sn  mi-
lime,  tornado  en  una  direction  per-
paidieDlar  &  la  longitad,  deeds  Cara-
boeo,  haata  la  deaemboeadnra  del  rio
Jeli  ea  de  68,524  metroe"  (EtUdia
Uonogr&fUio  del  Logo  THieaea;  bajo


tu  atpeeto  fUieo  t  Mvltfrwio,  in  Boletw
de  \a  Boeiedad  Qeogrdfiea  de  Lima,
Tomo  I,  p.  365).  These  figures  corre-
spond to  122  and  44  milss.  But  the
mouth  of  the  Bamia  is  not  the  eztreroo
northwestern,  nor  is  the  baj  near
Ajgachi  the  extreme  southeastern,
terminus  of  the  Lake.

'Theee  Aguree  are  taken  from  the
railroad  aorveTS  and  are  therefore
reliable.

•That  Bonree  ia  at  La  Baya,  169
milea,  by  rail,  northweat  of  Puno,  and
14,150  feet  above  the  level  of  the  sea.
The  altitudes  of  the  8anU  Bosa,  or
"Eonurona,"  and  of  the  Yilcanota
are  not  jet  known.  Modesto  Bosodre
aasigns  to  Vilcanota  17,825  feet,  and
to  the  other  17,590  feet  (Lot  Logo*  de
Titieaea,  in  Boletin  de  (a  Boeiedad
Oeogrifioa  de  Lima,  Tomo  III,  pp.  44-
45).  Pax-8oldan  gives  the  height  of
Tileanota  according  to  Pentland  at
5362  meters,  or  17,586  feet  (^(loe
Oeogrdfleo  del  Peri,  p.  14).  Orton,
in  a  foot-note,  sbts  of  Pentland 'h
meaanrements  of  the  Bolivian  Andes
that  "they  mnst  have  come  down  300
feet,"  as  he  determined  the  altitude
of  Titieaea  at  12,785  feet,  instead  of
12,466  (7Ae  Andet  and  the  Amamn,
p.  428).  Pentland's  flgores  for  the
Bommits  of  the  Cordillera  are  below
realitj.  It  is  much  to  be  desired  that
the  elevation  of  the  moat  prominent


;cbyG00'^lc


24


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


paakB  of  .the  westeni  or  eoMt  mig»  of
Pera  be  aecnratelj  datemduod.  It  ia
likely  (nsleai  some  hi^ior  peak  be
found  jet  in  northern  fern)  tlwt  Eon>-
pnna,  in  the  Pernvian  coast  canga
of  the  Department  Axeqnipe,  ia
the  culminating  point  of  tbe  conti-
nent. It  exceeds  £3,000  feet  in
bel(^t,  wheieaa  Acoueagna,  in  Chili,  is
but  6940  metera  (22,763  feet)  above
■ea  lereL  Pentland  also  determiiied
the  altitnde  of  Misti,  the  alnmbering
volcano  of  Areqnipa,  at  6600  meten,
or  81,048  feat,  whereas  it  ia  now  fully
ascertained,  throngh  the  careful  baio-
metrie  ofasemtions  of  Prof  eaaois  Pick-
eting and  BmI^,  that  Misti  is  only
10,250  feet  in  heighL  Its  neighbor,
Charchani,  is  1000  feet  higher.

'Points  on  the  Peravian  shore  can
be  reached  without  difficulty,  if  the
■teamers  are  ordered  to  touch  there,
bat  in  Bolirian  waters  they  are  not
even  allowed  to  stop  in  the  Lnke  or  off
from  the  shore.  These  stringent  reg-
nlations  have  their  canse  in  the  actiTe
contraband  going  on  all  along  the
frontier.

'  Manuel  de  Mendibtira  leaves  it  in
donbt  whether  1668  or  the  year  fol-
lowing {Dieeiimaric  Hittdneo-Biogrd-
]lM><MP0rti,  Tomo  III,  p.  226).  The
date  ia  that  of  the  establishment  of
Pnno  as  capital  of  a  department.
The  village  (pusblo)  of  Pnno  existed
prior  to  1548  (Poreoer  de  Don  Fray
Matiat  ie  Ban  Martin,  Obitpo  d«
Ckaroat,  tobre  ol  Saariipiao  de  m  son
him  ganadoe  lot  Biene*  adqmridot
por  lo*  Conqitistadoree,  in  Doewtientoa
iniditoK  para  la  Bittoria  de  BipaMa,
Vol.  LXXI,  p.  451).  Pedro  Qntierrai
de  Santa  Clara  (Sittoria  de  lot  gtte-
TToi  elvOet  del  PerU,  1S44  to  1548,
Madrid,  1905,  VoL  III,  pp.  44  and
408)  mentions  Pofio  as  a  village
(paeblo)  extant  in  1546.  There  is  no
doubt  about  the  identity  of  Pufio  with
Pnno,  as  the  former  is  described  as
on  the  lAke,  before  reaching  Chn-
cnito  (then  the  roost  important  set-
tlement) on  the  Cnzco  trail.


•Chncnito  is  to-day  a  village  of
about  800  inhabitants.  It  was  the  cap-
ital of  the  province  and  is  mentioned
as  such  at  an  early  date  in  Spanish
documents.  The  Indian  insnneetion  of
1780-1781,  injured  it  seriously.  Acora
has,  at  the  present  tira^  about  500  in*
habitants.  I  do  not  vouch  for  tbe
accuracy  of  these  flgurea;  they  are
taken  tiom  Modesto  Basadre  (Ahm>,
in  Boletin  de  la  Booiedad  Oeof/rdftca
de  Lima,  Tomo  III,  pp.  215-216).

■  Peni,  Inoidente  of  Travel  and  Ex-
ploration in  the  Land  of  the  Inoae,  pp.
350-364.

"Further  on,  when  treating  of  tbe
islands,  I  ehall  have  oecarion  to  refer
to  the  andent  system  of  rotation  in
tilled  tracts.  That  system  was  gen-
eral and  by  no  means  an  introdaetion
by  the  Ineas.  The  length  of  time
allowed  each  tract  for  rest  and  re-
cuperation differs  according  to  local-
ities, conditions  of  the  soil,  etc.

"  The  objects  secured  werc^  as
usual,  scattered,  so  that  I  have  not  as
yet  been  able  to  see  any  of  them.

"  I  make  this  statement  provision-
ally. The  pottery  from  Cosco  is  of  s
well-defined  t^pe  and  one  easily  reoog-
niied.  Whether  that  type  originated
in  the  Cnsco  valley  or  elsewhere  in  the
scope  of  territory  oocnpied  l^  In-
dians speaking  the  Qniohoa  bngnage
is  a  question  I  do  not  venture  to  cob-

"  Besides  Sillnstanl,  there  are  other
remains  at  Hatnn-Kolla  near  hj,  at
UBllqui-amayn,  and  a  number  of  other
Bites;  also  on  the  Peninsula  of  Capa-
chica. None  of  these  have  ever  been

The  beet  aoeonnt  of  SiUnstani  that
has  yet  been  written  is  that  of  Sqnier
{Per*,  pp.  376-384).  In  the  same
work  (p.  385)  there  is  a  very  good
picture  of  the  sculptured  etonea  at
Haton-Kolla.

The  picture  contained  in  the  voA
oOCharles  'Wiener^CPA'OM  et  BolMs,
1880,  p.  387),  as  well  as  hia  descrip-
tion of  the  ruins  of  Silluatani,  shows


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  T.ATTP.  TITICACA


25


that  the  Mthor  luu  nerer  visited  the
iit«.  It  loffieea  to  qaote  hia  text  on
p«g«  3S6:  "Tfoia  toon  en  granit
noir  dont  deux  encore  complitement
dttunt  I'Hdrent  mr  le  boid  de
I'MS."  There  ia  not  a  lingle  one  of
the  niuBerouB  <not  merelj  three}
towen  "on  tlw  edge  of  the  mten"
of  Lake  nmaTo.  They  all  stand  high
abort  it  and  at  some  distance.
Wsiier'i  pietnre  of  the  ChnllpBa  is  as
bseennte  as  his  deseription.

Tb«  same  can  be  said  of  the  pictnre
df  Billostani  in  the  Atlaa  of  RiTero
and  (Tsehaai}  (AntigHedade*  PenM-
not),  and  of  their  remarks  upon  the
mini;  with  the  difFerence,  bowerer,
tliat  no  pretense  to  ocnlar  inspection
ii  made  b^  these  anthors.

"We  witnessed  one  of  these
phsDomena,  from  the  port  of  Puno,  in
Iha  mnnth  of  Haj  of  last  ^ear.  I>on
fiui<iae  Qamero,  whose  intimate  ac-
qwintanee  with  the  I^Jte  haa  no
Sfcal,  assnred  us  that  he  had  seen  as
man;  as  fire  at  one  time.

'  Tbe  report  on  the  large  roonolitb,
KD^tnred,  diaeoTered  at  a  diatance
of  two  lefftuu,  from  the  village  of
IlaTc^  is  taken  from  the  work  of
FUlHr|PabIo  Josef  Arriag^  BJ.—
fxtirpdWoa  de  la  Tdolatria  del  Pirv,
Lima,  1621,  Cap.  a,  p.  53:  "Ari-
»do  tengo  a  Toestia  Sefioiia  la  dili-
gcDda,  qne  tengo  hacieDdo  contra
Tadioe  heehiaeroe,  7  principalmente
a  raion  de  m  Idolo  de  piedra  de  tree
ertados  ai  alto  007  abominable,  qne
dcseobri,  doe  legnaa  de  ette  pueblo  de
fiilari,  eetava  en  Tn  cerro  el  mas  alto,
qoe  aj  en  toda  ceta  comarca  en  vn
repeeho  qne  mira  hasia  donde  nace  el
Ml,  al  pie  del  esrro  a7  mncha  arbo-
Mt,  7  m  ella  algnnas  ehogas  de
Tadios  qae  la  gnardan,  87  tambien
noehas  sepnlturss  antignas  mn7
gnadea,  de  ontietros  de  Yndios  mu7
■nqitnoaamaite  labradas  ds  piedras
de  eneaxe,  que  dicen  sei  de  laa  eabe^aa
piindpalea  de  loa  Yndios  del  pneblo
de  HilaTi.  Estava  Tna  pla^uela  hecha
a  mano,  7  an  ella  Tna  estatna  de  pie-


dra  labiada  eon  doe  flgnras  monstrao-
sas,  la  vna  de  varon,  qne  mirava  al
nacuniento  del  sol,  7  la  otra  eon  otro
roatro  ds  mnger  en  la  misma  piedra.
— Ias  qnales  flgnras  tienen  vnas  cnle-
bras  grucBBaa,  qne  suben  del  pie  a  la
eabe^  a  la  mano  derecha,  7  iiqnierda,
7  aasl  mismo  tienen  otraa  flgnras
come  de  papas.  Estava  esta  Hnaca
dd  pecho  a  la  cabei^  descnbierta,  7
todo  lo  demas  debazo  de  tierra.  Tree
diss  tardaron  mas  de  treinta  peiao-
nas  en  deecabrir  todo  el  sitio  al  dene-
dor  deete  Tdolo,  7  se  ballaron  de  Is
vna  parte,  7  otra  adelante  de  los  dos
rostroa,  a  cada  parte  ma  piedra  qna-
drada  delante  de  la  Bstatna,  de  pidmo
7  medio  de  alto,  que  al  pareeer  serian
de  araa^  o  altares  mn7  tnen  pnestos,
7  arrancadas  de  sn  assiento  eon
mueha  diflenltad,  ae  hallA  donde
eetava  asentada  la  ara  de  la  eatatua,
con  Tnas  hogillas  de  ore  mD7  delica-
das,  esparddss  Tiias  de  otras,  qne  re-
locian  eon  el  80L— Hncho  trabaxo  6
paaado  en  arranear  eete  Tdolo,  7  dea-
haeello,  7  mas  en  deaeugafiar  a  loe
Yndioe."  I  regard  this  statement,
which  Arrisga  copies  from  a  letter,
addrened  b7  one  of  tbe  official  "Tiait*
on"  of  the  rites  and  idolatries  of
the  Indiana,  to  tbe  Bishop  of  La  Pas
in  1621,  as  fiill7  reliable  in  the  main.
There  ma;  be  some  exaggeration  in
the  dimensions  of  the  statue,  althou^
three  fathoms,  or  approximatel7  ei^-
teen  feet,  is  the  length  of  the  tallest
monolith  (iTisg  on  the  ground)  at
Tiahnanaco  also.  It  would  seem  as
if  the  stone  had  been  placed  ao  as  to
overlook  lAke  Titicaca,  for  the  range
of  hilla  behind  Have  (HUari)  domi-
nates tbe  view  in  that  direction.  The
interpretation  of  the  flgnree  is  of
course  subject  to  doubt.  It  is  not
impossible  that  fragments  of  tbs
carved  atones  might  7et  be  found  at
or  neai  the  site,  rihe  "burials"  ma7
hare  been  those  of  former  shamans,
around  the  idol  or,  tlie7  ma7  have  been
houses  with  htnise-burial^  as  on  tbe
Pnna  near  by.  )


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


Tfae^Angnatiiie  F.  Alonxo  Btunos)
iSiMtiria  As  CopwxAana,  edition
I860,  edited  t^f  Bana.J  p.  49)  meu-
tiona  the  eune  iflol,  bat  givea  it  onlj
n  loigtb  of  three  uid  e  half  Taraa
(ten  feet,  kboat).  He  ftlso  qnotee  the
viritoi  OsTcia  Coftdrado,  and  adds:
"Eetab«  en  el  eerro  llamado  TaeiiiDtli
fronteriao  k  Titleaca,  lo  adoraban  ma-
tne  una  loea  grande,  eomo  al  dioa  de
las  comidaa."  The  difference  in  lize,
between  Arriaga  '■  statement  and  that
of  Bamoe,  ia  noteworthy.

"The  flnt  miaeioiiarjr  of  the  Prov-
ince of  ChDcnito  (which  then  eztended
aa  far  as  Copacavana,  Zepita,  and  the
Deaagnadero)  was  Fray  TonUe  de  Ban
Uartiu  of  the  order  of  Bt.  Dominic
It  ia  stated  that  he  entered  the  prov-
ince in  1534,  which  is  an  error  in
date.  That  date  ia  from  Mendibfira
{DioiAoKaHo,  Tomo  VII,  p.  187).
That  Fray  San  Martin  wae  the
flret  missionary  is  aaeerted  by  ^Fray
Jnau  Helendei '^renfriM  Verdtulero*
de  laa  Yndiaa,  SMona  de  la  Provinoia
de  Km  Ivan  del  Pen  del  OrSen  de
Fredioadorea,  1081,  Tomo  I,  p.  ftl9) :
"EI  ConnSto  de  Santiago  de  Pomata
eet4  fnndado  en  nn  paeblo  de  Tndios
deete  nombre,  qne  es  de  los  me,B  prin-
cipalee  de  la  gr&de  Frovincia  de  Chn-
eaytn  k  las  orillaa  de  la  lagnna  de
Titieaea.  Bedoxole  i  la  Ffi  eon  todos
los  demas  de  so  distrito  el  Tlostrinmo
Don  Fray  Tom&s  de  San  Martin,  eo-
mensando  la  labor  de  sn  Fvangelica
Bonenteia,  6  introdnciendo  en  eete,  y
loe  demas  Ingares  de  aqaella  nomlwa-
dingima  Provincia,  machos  Praylea  de
an  Orden,  qae  acabando  de  eembrar,
el  grano  limpio  de  la  Divlna  palabra,
eogieron  para  la  Tgleaia  ana  cosecha
de  almas  isumerablee.  Tanimoe  (como
hemos  dicho)  Conoentos  en  eeta  Pro-
vineia  en  Chncoytn,  en  Jnli,  en  Copa-
eaoana,  y  en  los  demas  de  sue  pueblos
'^carias,  hasta  el  aBo  de  1509,  en  qae
deapojadoe  nnestros  Frayles  de  toda
la  ProTinda,  SQcedid  todo  aqnel  qnento
qne  ya  daiainoe  esorito  del  Yirrey  Don
0  de  Toledo,  y  el  modo,  y  loe


motivoa,  qne  tnuimoa  para  bolner  al
pueblo  de  Pomata"  (p.  399).  In
the  year  1665,  the  Convent  of  Saa
Pedro  Martir  de  Jnli  contained  twelv«
Dominican  friais,  and  at  the  chapter
celebrated  in  the  same  year,  the  ord^
received  the  "faonses"  (monaateriee)
of  Acorn,  Dave,  ZepitB,  TangT^n,  and
Copacavana  (p.  411).  In  regard  to
the  caaaee  that  led  to  the  separation
of  the  DominieauB  from  Chacnito,  I
refer  to  the  same  volome  (pp.  4U  and
446).  That  the  removal  of  the  Do-
minicans was  an  act  of  injoeUee  ia
admitted  by  the  aatliors  of  the  order
of  Augnstines,  which  order  snbee-
qnently  profited  by  it,  in  reeeiving  the
mission  of  Copacavana.  (See  Fray
Antonio  de  la  Calaneha;  CorSnica
Moralieada  del  Orden  de  San  A%gMtin
en  el  Perf,  1658,  Tomo  II,  Cap.  vn,  g.
35;  alsOifPray  Andrla  de  San  NieoUs^
ImAgen  de  If  J.  de  Copaeavana  Por^
tento  del  Suevo  Mundo  Ya  Conooida
en  Evropa,  1663,  Cap.  vi,  foL  33.)

"  Jnli  is  known  as  being  the'  plaes
where  the  Jesuits  eetablished  their
flirt  printing  press  in  Peru.

"  The  Province  of  Chacnito  em*
braced,  under  Spanish  role,  all  the
territory  between  Pnno  and  the  Deaa-
gnadero. See  map  of  1S73,  pablisbed
herewith.  Diego  de  Boblee  says  of
the  Indian  population  of  the  province;
"Los  frailee  Domlnicoe  de  Chieuito
han  tenido  tales  formae,  que  pn-
diendo  aqaellB  provincia  dar  maa  de
otro  tanto  de  lo  qne  da,  han  aneten-
tado  qne  Chienite  teit  taaado  en  may
poeo :  aiendo  en  aqneUa  provincia  dose
6  trexe  mil  indioa  tribntarios,  y  can
einqnenta  mil  de  todoe  edadea"  (Jfe-
moriol  aobre  el  Atiento  del  Peri,  ia.
Dootmentot  inSditot  del  Arohioo  d»
Inditu,  Tomo  II,  p.  36;  no  date  given,
bat  certainly  about  1570).  According
to  Lnie  de  Moralee  Figueroa,  the  num-
ber of  tribntary  Indians  of  Chncnito
was  17,779,  The  proportion  bting  1
to  3^  for  the  aggregate  popnlation,
the  latter  woald  have  been  at  that
date  aboat  62,000 (£elaoio»  de  lorn


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  T.Aine  TITICACA


27


2»diot  TrUmtario*  que  hay  al  prtaente
en  Miot  reinot  y  Provineiat  del  Peri;
tecka  poT  Mandado  del  SeHor  Marqaie
de  Caflete,  betnven  the  jean  ]S91  and
ISM;  contained  in  Volume  II  of  tbe
Belatrionet  de  lot  Vireyee  del  Peri,
Ifadrid,  1871,  p.  333).  If  we  compare
frith  thSM  figOTM  the  more  or  less  ex-
ACt  onM  gh«D  b7  Modesto  Basadre  in
hk  arti«l««Btitkd,Ptiflo,in  Volume  HI
of  the  Boletin  de  la  Soetedad  Oeogrdflea
de  Lima,  we  get  the  following  data:
IKatriet  of  ChQeuito,  7000  (p.  215);
Aeora,  7500  (p.  210) ;  Joli,  0500  (p.
365);  nare,  10,000  (p.  386);  Po-
mata,  3500  (p.  367) ;  Tongnyn,  gOOO
(p.  368);  Zepita,  9000;  Desagna-
dero,  1000  (p.  369);  Hoaculbmi,
eOOO  (p.  370);  Pieacoma,  1200;  and
Santa  Bon  abont  1600.  Total  for
these  eleven  dietricti,  nearly  C7,300,
aU  of  which  are  A^rsaii  Indiana,  the
whites  bang  in  almost  lusigniScaiit
minority.  To  this  ntunber  we  would
haTe  to  add,  for  a  fair  comparisoo,
the  Indian  habitants  of  the  Penin-
mla  of  Copacarana  and  of  the  Is-
landa  of  Titieaea  and  Koati,  which
■sunut  to  at  least  Ave  thousand,  if  not
more.  The  eoneloaion  is  reached  that
tbe  Indian  population,  of  that  district
at  least,  has  not  at  all  diminished
nnee  the  early  times  of  Spantah  eol-
oniaatian,  bnt  has  rather  increased.
While  this  is  no  surprise  to  me,
it  shows  how  nnjasti&ed  is  the  hue
and  cry  abont  extermination  of  the
Bative*  of  Pern  by  the  Spaniards.
I  eoold  easi^  fnmiA  more  examples
of  tbe  kind  from  all  over  Pera  and
Bolivia.

"Knina  exist  near  Pomata,  at
Tungayn,  at  Tanea-tanea,  etc.  Basa-
dre  mations  some  of  these  (Puno,  p.
218).  We  saw  pottery  from  Poinsta
wbieh  was  almost  identical  with  that
of  tbe  so-called  Chnllpas  in  Bo-
livia. Tbe  pottery  of  Tnngnyo,  how-
ever, is  of  the  type  called  Inea  or
Cnieo.  The  Uignel  Oarels  collection
'ns  a  nnmber  of  Tongnyn  speci-
This  gives  cobr  to  the  state-


ments that  Tnngoyn  was  a  village  or
station  of  tbe  Ineas;  a  sort  of  «t-
trance  to  the  Peninanla  of  Copaca-
vana.  See  Calaneha,  Cordniea  MoraK-
Koda,  Tomo  II,  Cap.  H,  foL  5:  "En  el
asiento  de  Tnnguyn  vienen  ft  estar
tan  vaiinaa  las  eostas  de  la  lAgnna,
que  bafia  al  promomtorio  de  nua  parte
i  otra  i  afirmau  los  Tndios  natorales,
qiie  estQo  el  Ynga  may  pnesto  en  plft-
tica  ronper  Is  tierra,  i  aier  Ingar  por
donde  las  agnas  se  comnnicasen,  i
aqni  tnvo  echada  nna  cerca  qne  to-
mava  de  costa  ft  casta,  1  en  ella  ans
paertai,  porteroa,  i  gnardaa.  ..."
Calaneha  mostly  copiee  from  tbe  book
of  Fray  Alonso  Bamos,  of  which  two
perfect  copies  exist  in  Bolivia.  V^y
Bafael  8<uu,')the  aged  Becolleet  mis-
sionary of  Bolivia,  has  given  what  be
calls  a  partial  reprint  of  Bamos  from
an  incomplete  copy  now  in  Spain.
This  book  bears  the  title,  Bittoria
de  Cofocabana,  y  de  la  MUagroea
Imdgen  de  «h  Virgen.  Third  edi-
tion, 1886.  He  says  (Cap.  vn,  p.  14) :
"El  haber  sacado  el  Inea  &  los  na-
turalee  de  la  Isla  trasladftndoloa  ft
Ynngnyo,  fni  por  que  quiso  poner  de
coatodios  del  f  amoBo  adoratorio  del  sol
ft  gentes  de  su  confianm.  .  ,  ,"  In
the  same  work  he  speaks  of  store-
honses  (frnmeros)  established  near
Loeca,  midway  between  Copacavana
and  Tnnguyo  (Cap.  zviii,  p,  47).

"The  name  Huayna  Potosi  (yonng
Potoei),  a  Qnieboa  word,  is  not  prop-
erly given  to  the  splendid  pyramid  of —
the  "Ea-Ka-a-Ka."  Tbe  latter  name
is  tonnd  as  early  as  1638,  in  the  flrst
volnme  «f  Calaneha;  "En  lo  que  ga»-
tavan  mas  saeriildos,  i  estremavan  el
eolto  era  en  el  cerro  niimani  CnU-
CBchata,  i  en  el  mas  frontero  del
pnebto  llamado  Cacaaes,  eete  por  ser
mny  eminente  i  eatar  siempre  nevado,
fo6  mny  venerado  de  todos  los  desta
Provinda  de  Omasnyo,  en  estos  cenos
lea  dava  respnestas  el  Demonio,  i  aran
eontiauos  sns  ortculos. ' '  Bat  the
word  "Ea-Ka-a-Ka"  itself  is  a  cor-
ruption of ' '  Eaika- "—  (or  "  Eaka* ' ')


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


"JaqiN,"  (rock  man).  The  altitude
of  the  Ka-Ea-a-Ka  ia,  aa  near  aa  can
be  aKertained,  20,320  feet;  the  ex-
tremea  being;  Miitehin,  20,170;  and
Conway,  20,560  (Sir  Uartin  Conwar:
2iote»  on  a  Map  of  Part  of  lft«  Cor-
diUera  Beat  of  BoUma,  in  OeograpK-
ieal  Jovnua,  May,  1000).

"  I  have  no  reliaUe  data  in  regard
to  the  altitadee  of  these  ranges,
fcat  thej  are  certainly  very  high,  judg-
ing from  the  maMea  of  perpetool
•now  that  coTera  them.  They  are  on
the  Peruvian  side,  known  aa  "Neva-
doe  de  CaTabaja"  and  pertain  to  the
D^artment  of  Pane.

"We  noticed  that  the  alpine  glow
oceorred  oftener  on  the  IlUmani  alone
than  on  the  whole  chain.  Most  bean-
tifully  this  splendid  phenomenon  ia
witneved  from  La  Pa^  either  from
tiie  bridge  epanmng  the  river,  or  the
Alameda  or  Prado.

"  This  has  been  denied,  but  we  eaw
the  reflection  too  often  and  too  dia-
tinctly  from  the  Island  of  Titicaca  to
entertain  any  donbt.

"The  Bio  de  Pnear&  that  riaes  at
the  base  of  Iia  Bay«  ia  a  branch  of
the  Bio  Bands  and  possibly  the  prin-
dpal  one.  Hence  I  consider  La  Baya
aa  the  true  eouree  of  the  Bamia.

"The  water  of  Lake  Titicaca  is
braekisb,  but  not  enough  so  aa  to  be
unpalatable.  We  di«nk  it  during  our
atay  on  the  laland  of  Koati  for  two
weeks  and  found  it  wholeaome  and
not  disagreeable.

"  According  to  La  Pnente^  the  Lake
recdTOB  mnch  more  water  than  ia  es-
pelled  through  the  channel  of  the  Dee-
agnadero,  and  he  accounts  for  the
nnifonn  level  of  the  lAke  by  evapora-
tion, which  according  to  Octavio
Pardo  ia  Sttj  millions  of  cubic  metera
in  twenty-four  hours.  In  regard  to
tbe  ontilow  at  the  Desaguadero,
Puente  adds:  "El  caudal  de  sua
agnaa  pnede  estimarse  4  la  salida  dd
lago  en  4822  metroa  cfitucos  por
ndnuto"  (Bstudio  Monogr&fioo  del
Lago  TttiAUKt,  in  Boietin  de  la  Boeia-


dad  G«ogriittca  de  Lima,  Tomo  I,  p.
382).

"Heaonrecl  deptha  along  the  Bolir-
ian  ahoML  immediate  proximity  of  i»
lands  and  beach  ezeeptad,  are  mootly
in  exceaa  of  600  feet.  The  weetem  or
Peruvian  half  ahows  aa  greateat
depth,  185.09  meters,  or  009  feet;
whereaa  dne  east  of  i^  near  the  prom-
ontory at  Huaicho,  deptha  of  252.5
meters  and  2S0.5  meters,  ot  838  and
841  feet,  are  recorded,  fnener  atatea:
' '  J  'eus  la  aatisf action  de  ponvoir
faire  use  sMe  de  sondagea  qui  me
donndrent  en  beaneonp  d'endroita
la  profondenr  de  530  matree"  (P4ro»
et  BoUcie,  p.  390).  How  far  thia
writer  ia  capable  of  stretching  tbe
truth  can  be  judged  by  the  following
passage  on  the  same  page:  "Ia  Cor-
diUdre  neigeuae  de  Sorata  aa  trouve  i.
phu  de  30  lieues  du  livage."  Sow
Eanko-Uma  ia,  in  a  direct  line,  not
tueitty-ftve Englith rnOei  from tha

Near  the  little  laland  of  Soa  (aeo
map)  a  depth  is  recorded  of  400  me-
ters, or  1812  feet.  I  do  itot  know  on
what  bads  that  statement  may  be
resting.  We  visited  Koa  and  it  ia
certun  that  tbe  water  is  very  deep
ther^  but  we  had  no  means  for  sound-

■*  Wiener  affirms  that  tbe  Straits  of
Tiqoina  have  a  depth  of  not  leaa  than
70  meters,  or  230  feet  (P6roit  et  Bolt-
vie,  p.  390).

""La  maa  repntada  y  adnitida  in-
terpretacion  es  la  que  ha  dado  el  8r.
Josi  Boeendo  Ontierres:  Thia  sns-
tantiro  que  ae  traduce  por  borde  6
libera;  y  Hitatuteo,  participio  pasado
del  verbo  deaecar.  £3  enigma  qneda
asi  decifrado;  Borde  deaecado.  Eata
inlerpretacion,  juste  ea  confesarlo,
est&  en  consonancia  con  la  natnraleza
del  terrene  y  aapeeto  fisieo  de  la  loea-
lidad"  (Puente:  Ettfidio  Monogrd-
fieo,  p.  381).  I  remain  perfectly
ne^ntral  in  regard  to  the  many  inter-
pretationi^  leaving  it  for  linguiata  ta
solve  the  problem. But  I  would  ra-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICACA


29


muk  here  that  the  name  Tiahn&naeo
doM  not  aeem  to  havi)  been  the  otvtnol
DM  of  the  mina.  In  the  w^k.  of  the
jMoit  Father \Barnab6  Cobop  entitled,
Bittoria  del  Nvevo  Mundo,  conclnded
in  1653  and  publiahed  at  Sevilla  in
1894^  there  ia  the  following  psBaage:
"El  nombre  que  tnvo  este  pueblo  an-
tei  qae  fneee  lefioreado  por  los  Incaa,
cm  Tagpieala,  tornado  de  la  lengaa
■Tntri,  qae  es  la  materua  de  nu  &a-
taiale^  7  qniere  deeir  'la  piedra  de
aamedio;'  porqae  tenian  por  opinion
kM  indioa  del  CoQao,  que  eate  pneUo
Wtaba  aimedio  del  mando,  j  que  dil
nUtaon  deopnes  del  Dilavio  loa  que
tonaran  &  poblat."  Another  writer
of  the  same  order  and  a  contempo-
ruj.  Father  (^nello  Olivaj'^BaBerts :
"P»m6  &  laa  partes  de  Tjjttj  Vanaen
par  ver  ma  edifldoa  que  antiguamente
TJ«iM>»T^  Chucara,  cnys  antignedad
atdie  nipo  determiikalla"  (Bittoria
del  Peri  y  FaronM  Ituignea  en  Santi-
Sad  Ae  la  Compaftia  de  Jetii,  1631,
Lib.  I,  Cap.  n,  p.  39;  at  preeent  pnb-
liahcd  bj  rabaeription  at  Lima).  In
Ajmari,  Tajpieala  liK&iflea  "stone
between"  or  "icTnidst  of."

"Seg^nda  Parte  de  la  Crdttiea  del
Peru,  Qvd  trata  del  Beflorto  de  Em  Jn-
ou  FvpangHif  ji  de  nu  OrandeM
Heeko*  y  Oobemaeion,  published  in
Madrid  in  1880,  in  SMiotica  Sit-
fono-UltTornqrina,  "by  Bfarcoe  Jimfinei
de  la  Elapada.  I  Cieia  ia  one  of  the  first
•ntbors  who  wrote  abont  traditions  of
the  CoIIao,  as  the  regions  northwest,
vert,  and  lontli  of  I^ke  Titicoea
ware  called.  It  is  worth;  of  notice,
howerer,  that  Cieaa  in  his  Frimera
Parte  d«  la  CrSniea  del  Peni  (in  VoL
II  of  the  SittoriadoTee  pnmitivoi  de
iadiM,  published  bj  Enrique  de  Te-
dia)  doea  not  refer  to  the  ertraordi-
Bai7  power  attributed  to  the  white
nea,  in  his  second  part.  He  idniply
Mft:  "Antes  que  loa  ingaa  relnaaen
niaatNi  nuehos  indios  destos  collas
qM  Imbo  «n  sn  prorinda  dos  grander
teAorsi^  el  nno  Umia  por  nombre  Za-
paaa  j  d  otnr  Cari,  7  que  eatos  oon-


qniitaron  mnehos  pneares,  qae  son  sua
fortalecaa:  7  que  d  nno  dellos  entr6
en  la  Uguna  de  TITICACA,  7  qne
hall6  en  la  isla  maTor  qne  tiene  aqnel
palade  gentss  blanem  7  que  tenian
barbae,  con  loa  enalea  peied  de  tal
manera,  que  los  pudo  matar  &  todos"
(Cap.  0,  p.  443;  aee  also  Cap.  or,  p.
446).  When  qnotiag  Cieia  I  shall  al-
waTV  refer  to  Vedia's  pablieation  of
the  first  port  of  his  writings.

"  This  was  after  the  son  had  risen
oat  of  tbe  I^ke  and  Island  of  Titi-
caea.  "Antes  qne  los  Incaa  rsinasen
en  estoa  reinos  ui  en  ellos  fueeeon  co-
noddos,  caentan  eatos  indios  otra  eoM
niQ7  mayor  qne  todaa  las  qne  ellos
dieen,  porqne  afirman  qoeatnTieron
mucho  tiempo  sin  Ter  el  sol,  7  qne
podedendo  gran  trabajo  eon  esta
folta,  hadan  grandee  votos  6  pl^iariaa
i  los  que  ellos  tenian  por  dioses,  pi*
diendolea  la  IQbre  de  qne  caredau;  7
qneetando  deeta  suerte,  aalid  de  la  iala
de  Titicaca,  qneetA  dentro  de  la  gran
lagnna  del  Cotlao,  el  sol  mn7  re-
gplandedente,  eon  que  todos  se  ale-
graron.  T  luego  qnerto  pas6,  dicen
que  da  h&oia  laa  partes  del  Mediodia
Tino  7  remanead6  nn  hombre  bianco
de  creddo  enerpo,  el  enal  en  sa  a>-
pecto  7  persona  mostraba  gran  antorl-
dad  7  Teneradon,  7  quests  varon,  que
ad  Tieron,  tenia  tan  gran  poder,  qne
de  loa  eerroa  baefa  llanuras  7  de  laa
llannias  hada  eerros  grandea,  ha-
dendo  fnentea  en  piedraa  Ti-raa;  .  .  .
T  este  tal,  euentan  los  indios  qne  &
mi  in«  le  dizeron,  qne  07eron  k  sns
paaadoe,  que  elloe  tambien  o7eron  en
los  eantaree  que  ellos  de  mn7  antigno
tenian,  qne  tv6  de  largo  bacia  el
Norta,  hadendo  7  obrando  eetas  ma-
ravillas,  por  d  eamino  de  la  eerrania,
7  qne  nnnea  jamas  lo  volvieron  &  *er
.  .  .  Oeneralmente  le  nombran  en  la
mayor  part«  Tidviracocha,  aunque
en  la  proTinda  dd  Collao  le  llaman
Toapaea,  7  en  otroa  Ingaree  dells  Ar-
nanan"  (Segvnda  Parte  de  la  Crdniea
del  Porii,  Cap.  t,  p.  5).  The  Tuapaea
ma7  be  the  same  as  the  Ta&pae  of


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


Cabuelui,  of  which  more  anon.  It  la
Iiot«irortli7  that  tlua  tale  hlnta  at  a
temporary  daAening,  not  at  a  primi-
tive  appearance  o<  tbe  boh.  A  oon-
temporaij  of  CSem  de  Leon,  and  one
who  had  Btm  better  opportnnitT'  for
gBthsriiig  original  inforipaition  relat-
big  to  the  Indiana  was  Unan  de  Be-
tauBML*^  He  apoke  Qnichna  flaentl;
and  redded  long  in  tbe  eomttTj,
whither  he  had  eome  with  the  con-
qoeat  and  where  be  married  an  Indian
girl  from  Cdko.  Betanioi  rdatea:
"T  en  estoe  tiempos  que  eeta  tterra
era  toda  aoehe,  dieen  que  lalid  de  una
lagnua  que  ea  en  eata  tierra  del  peru
en  la  proTineia  qae  dices  de  collasnyo
on  Sefioi  que  llunaron  Con  Tiei  Vira-
cocha,  d  cual  dieen  haber  aaeado  con-
iigo  derto  numero  de  gentea,  del  enal
nomero  no  ae  aenerdan.  T  Coma  eote
hnbieae  aalido  deata  lagnna,  faese  de
alii  4  nn  ritio  qnea  junto  i  eata  la-
gnna,  qnesti  donde  hoj  dia  ea  an  pue-
blo qoe  iTpwif^fi  Tiaguanaco,  en  eata
dieha  provintua  ja.  ^ha  Ad  Collao;
7  eomo  alii  fueae  fil  7  loa  hu^ob,  Inego
alii  en  eata  dicha  proviscia  ja  dieha
del  Collao;  j  como  alU  fueae  d  7  loa
BuyoB,  laego  alll  en  improriao  dieen
qne  hiio  el  aol  7  el  dia,  7  que  al  aol
mand6  que  anduriese  por  el  enrao  qne
anda;  j  Inego  dieen  que  biso  laa  ea-
trellaa  7  la  luna.  El  cnal  Con  Tid
Tiracoeha,  dieen  baber  salido  otia  yes
antea  de  aqnella,  7  que  en  eata  Tea
primera  qae  aalifi,  hiio  el  delo  7
la  tierra,  7  que  todo  lo  dej6  oseoro;
7  qne  eutoneea  hizo  aquella  gente  qae
bebia  en  el  tiempo  de  la  eacaridad
7a  dicha;  .  .  ."  (Buma  y  Narmeion
dt  lo*  Incat  qtu  lot  Indio*  LlamaroK
Capaocuna;  que  fvero*  MeHoret  en
la  eiudad  del  dueo,  y  de  todo  lo  A
eila  lubjeeto  .  .  ,  Agora  nuevamente
Trad'ooido  4  Beeopiiado  de  la  Lengva
India  de  lot  NatitraUe  del  Perv,  por
Juan  de  Betaiuoa;  Vecino  de  la  Gran
Cindad  del  Cnxco,  Cap.  1,  Parte  1,  p.  i;
in  tbe  aame  volome  aa  the  8eg%nda
Parte  de  la  Crtfniea  del  Peri,
of  Cieia). The  book  of  Betanzoi  ia


dedicated  to  the  Ticero7  Don  Antonio
de  Mendoia,  and  waa  flniabed  in  1660.
At  that  time,  and  when  Cieaa  waa  in
Peru,  the  traditiona  of  the  Indiana
could  not  7et  have  Buffered  much  al-
teration through  Chriatian  Influence,
and  hence  the  parlt7  of  theae  talea  aa
genuine  folk-lore  ia  Ter7  probaUcL
The  wen  known  anthorrBardlaao  de
la  T<^s,>B  meatteD  of  Infea  deaewrt  on
hie  mother 'b  Bid^  aaaerta  that  be
giTea,  in  Chapter  xnn  of  Book  I  of
the  flrat  Toloms  of  hia  CMneatorioa
BttOee  (original  edition,  Lisbon  1009,
folio  16),  the  true  traditiona  of  the
Indiana  of  tbe  Collao:  "Diien  pnaa
que  cemadas  las  agoaa  ae  iq)area<d6  Yn
bombre  en  Tiabuanaeu,  qne  eat&  al
mediodia  del  Coaco,  q  ta6  tan  pode-
roBo  qne  reparti6  el  mundo  en  quatro
parteo,  7  las  die  &  qnatro  hombrea  qne
llam6  BeTea,  ..."

**  Thia  ia  not  a  literal  tranolatlon;
hence  I  give  the  original  text  alao:
"Eeharon  el  coerpo  bendito  en  una
balaa  de  eno,  6  totora,  i  lo  arrojaron
en  la  gran  lagona  dieha  <  aerrifoidole
las  agnas  manaas  de  remeroe,  i  loa
blandos  vientoa  de  pilotoa  .  .  .  na<
Teg&  con  tan  gran  Telocidad  qae  dejA
eon  admiradon  eapantoaa  loe  mismoa
qne  le  mataron  aln  piedad;  1  creeifilea
el  eapanto,  porque  no  tiene  caal  eor-
riente  la  laguna  i  entoncea  uingnna , , .
Lleg6  la  balaa  con  el  rico  teooro  eai  la
plaja  de  Caehamarca,  donde  agora  ea
el  deaaguadero.  I  ea  mnj  aaentada  en
la  tradidon  de  loe  Indios,  qae  la
meama  balaa  rfiptendo  la  tierra  abrift
el  deaaguadero,  porque  antea  nfiea  te
tuTo  i  dsede  entonces  corre,  1  aobre  laa
aguas  que  por  alii  eneamind  ae  fai  d
aanto  euerpo  baata  el  pueblo  de  loa
Anllagaa  muchaa  leguaa  distantea  do
Chacuito  i  Titieaea  ada  la  corta
de  Arica  1  Chile  ..."  {CorSnica
Voraluroda,  Vol  I,  PP.3S7-338).  Ca<
laneha  extenBiTBl7  describea  the  action*
of  two  m7thieal  peraooa,  whom  ba
calla  aainta,  and  their  trarelB  aeroaa
tbe  South  American  continent  from
BrazU  to  Taiija  in  aouthem  BoliTia


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICACA


31


uid  thence  *fl  tar  aa  tlie  Titieaea  ba-
ain;  "Al  nno  llamarC  Tnonpa,  que
qoiers  deeir  gri  labio,  lelior  i  criodoT,
i  al  otTo  Taipac,  que  aigniilea  el  ijo
del  Ciiador,  aai  lo  teetiflca  el  Tadre
Ft.  AIoqbo  Bamoa,  en  aa  CopacaTann ;
i  eate  nonbrado  aai,  fu6  de  qnien  que-
daron  maa  memoriaa  de  eehoe  en  an
vida,  i  de  portentoa  en  ga  maerte  en
las  ProTindaa  del  Collao  [CoUao],
Omqiiito  i  1m  Chareaa ' '  (_Ibid.,  p,
S20),  Hencs  we  are  again  xeferred
to  the  hook  of  Bamoe  as  the  aoniee  of
the  information  imparted  to  Calaneha.
Indeed  in  the  Bittoria  de  Copaeabatut
of  Sana,  already  mentioned,  which
purports  to  be  (at  least  in  its  flnt
part)  a  reprint  of  the  work  of  Bamoa,
we  Bnd  that  the  bodj  of  Tafipac,  after
ha  had  been  kiQad  by  Indians  on  the
lalaud  of  Titieaea,  was  placed  on  a
balaa  and  set  adrift  on  the  lAke.  "Y
refleren  loa  antignoa:  qna  nn  redo
Tiento  lo  lkrf6  baeta  toear  en  tierra  de
Cbaeainarca;  qne  la  abri6  eon  la  proa,
hadendo  eoTrer  Us  agnas  hada  el
■ad,  fonnando  ad  d  Desagnadero,
qne  antes,  dicen  que,  no  lo  habia,  j
por  ese  nnero  lio  ta6  flotando  hasta
los  AnllagBs  .  .  ."  (Cap.  xvn,  p.
96).  Title  and  date  of  the  book  of
BunOB  are:  BUtoria  del  e£k1>re  y
wtOagmo  SanUuaio  de  la  Ti—igne
Tmdge*  de  HfiSfii  de  Copaeabona,
Uma,  I62L  The  traditions  referred
to  seem  to  be  folk-lore  of  the  Indiana
of  CopaeaTana  and  perhaps  of  the
laland  of  Titieaea.

"  It  is  strange,  however,  that  an  aa-
tbor  of  the  same  period  as  Calandia,
and  an  Indian  at  that,  Juan  de  Santa
Craa  Fadiaenti  Tamqni  Saleamaj'
hna,  irtiile  apeaking  of  Tonapa
and  hia  ndraeolous  deeds,  makes
no  mention  of  his  death,  still  leas
of  his  portentooa  opening  of  the
Desagnadero.  He  limits  Umsdf
to  Baying :  '  ■  Diien  qod  dicho
Tnnapa  pas6  aigniendo  al  rrio
de  Chaeamarea,  hasta  topar  en  la
nar"  (Sriaeio*  de  AntigHedadea
ante  S^M  del  PML Pobliihed  in


1879  by  the  Ministerio  de  Fomento  at
Madrid,  In  the  Tolnme  entitled:  Tres
Sahtoionee  de  Antiffiedadet  pervanat,
p.  240).  Howerer,  he  agrees  with
Bamos  in  that  the  route  taken  bj
Tonapa  from  Tiahoanaco  was  toward
the  Desagoadero.  Baleamafhna  was
an  Indian  from  the  soathem  part  of
the  aetoal  Department  of  Cnsco,  and
the  traditions  which  he  relates  are
Qaichoa  as  well  aa  ATmarA,  while
those  referred  to  bj  Bamos  and  Ca-
laneha are  ezdndrdj  A7iDar&  folk-
lore. This ma; explain the differ-

"It  wonld  be  mperflnona  to  qnote
extennTet;  in  support  of  a  statement
that  is  so  abundantlj  repeated  hy  al-
most erer;  Spanish  author.  The  be-
lief in  the  rising  of  the  eon  ont  of
Lake  Titieaea  was  perhaps  the  reeolt
of  dailj  observation,  for  it  may  ap-
pear to  the  Quidina  inhabitants  of
the  northwestern  extremit;  of  the
Lake  that  the  snn  does  actnal^  rise
oat  of  the  water.  Later  on  I  shall
again  refer  to  this  tale  of  the  origin
of  the  snn  and  moon  from  the  Island
of  Titieaea.

""El  profeeor  Alejandro  Agassis
ezandnando  atentamente  las  terraias
de  las  costsa  dd  Isgo,  ee  ha  persna-
dido  qne  d  nlTfil  de  las  agnas  ha  ba-
jado  de  121  metres  92*  &  91  metros
44"'  (Pnente;  Bttvdio  MoiwgrdlloQ,
p.  Ml).  My  friend  f^Agnatin  Tovar)
in  his  short  bnt  very  interesting  study
entitled:  Logo  Titieaea;  obeerva-
oione*  tobre  la  dismtmtoiofi  progrwiva
de  siw  Agvae,  in  BoUtin  de  la  Bwiie-
dad  Qeogr&fioa  de  Lima  (Tomo  Z,  pp.
163-167)  records  a  nomber  of  indica-
tions of  the  gradual  diminution  or
shrinking  of  the  great  wateidieet.
Thns  he  states  that,  thirty-three  years
ago,  the  Lake  readied  as  far  as  the
snbiirba  of  Funo,  where  to-day  enlti-
vated  plots  are  scattered  all  along,  the
water  having  receded  at  least  five  tma-
drat.  He  also  refers  to  a  tradition
current  among  old  Indians  to  the  effeet,
that  the  lAgnne  of  Umayo,  where  tite


;cbyG00'^lc


32


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


funoiu  ndnB  of  SUInatvii  stand,  ma
foTinflilT  eonnecMd  iritb  TitiCMft  bj
an  intermediate  lagime  called  Illpa.
TT11U170  is  Hre  legoas  from  the  shore
of  the  great  lAke.

"A  eaM  of  a  balaa  being  cat  in
twain  b;  one  of  the  Lake  eteamers
during  a  dark  ni^t,  in  the  Straits  of
Tampnpata,  iras  related  to  ns  b;  the
snrvivors.  They  iiinplj  held  on  to
the  pieces  and  were  saved.

'A  table  of  temperatares  of  the
water,  at  depths  from  8.36  meters  to
256.49  (26  to  841  feet),  has  been
giren  bj  Agastiz,  and  I  refer  to  it
from  Pnente  (EMtvdio,  p.  36S).  The
extremes  are  16  centigrade  at  30
meters  10*  (99  feet),  and  10.6  centi-
grade at  137  meters  10"  (490  feet).
The  greatest  difference  between  the
teroperatore  at  the  surface  of  the  wa-
ter and  the  bottom  tempetatore  was
at  46  meters  86'  (1S4  feet).

"  I  giTC  theM  technical  names  from
Pnente  (ffftwHo).

"I  nerer  saw  the  bird,  however
common,  near  enough  to  note  details.
It  ia  meet  likely  a  bandnrria,  which
Pnente  calls  Faletnelhu  Sidgieayi  and
Therittioiu  oaudatu«(E<(«dto,p.37e).
Tschndi  mentiomi  two  kinds  of  ibis,
the  bandnrria,  rA«ri«t(ctM  melanopiiM;
and  the  yanarnioo,  Ibia  ordo  {Peri,
1848,  VoL  II,  p.  100).

""En  el  lago  existen  sas  espedea
de  peecadoa  perteuecienteB  a  laa  fa-
mUiaa  de  los  Cyprittoidet  j  SiluToi-
det"  (Pnente:  Bttvdio,  p.  376).
Probab^  taken  from  A.  Agasaii  and
8.  W.  Garman:  £xpIoni(ion  of  Lake
Titicaca,  The  species  eaten  to-daj
are:  the  snehea,  TtiiAomyctenu  dw-
par;  the  nmanto,  Ore*tiat  otivieri,
and  especially  the  boga,  0.  Fentlandii.

"  I  refer  to  a  belief,  current  among
aU  the  Indians  on  the  Islands  of  Titi-
caca and  Eoati  and  on  the  Peninsulas
of  Copacavana  and  Tiquina,  of  the  ex-
istence, in  the  Lake,  of  a  large  aqua-
tic animal  described  as  resembling
either  a  seal  or  a  ses  cow.  When
treating  of  these  islands  I  shall  give


further  details.  We  never  saw  tUs
n^aterioQS  beaa^  bat  the  Qarefia  eci*
lection  eontaina  a  tooth  said  to  bara
been  taken  from  a  specimen.  It  ma^
b^  as  Professor  W.  Nation  snggested
to  me,  that  it  ia  a  gigantic  SihtrMf
but  the  fact  that  it  has  been  seen  aev*
eral  times,  according  to  the  Indiana,
"asleep  on  the  beach,"  would  indi-
cate a  seal-like  animaL

*A  grave  objection  to  the  former
axiatence  of  a  ridge  in  the  direction
indicated  lies  in  the  fact,  that  the
Lake  has  an  enormona  depth  along
that  line.

"In  No.  10  of  the  Seviita  of  La
P<us,  ToL  I,  No.  10,  there  is  an  article
entitled:  Piano  del  Logo  Titioaoa  by
J.  L.  H.  The  author  gives  the  width
of  the  Btrait  of  Tiquina  at  860  meters,
or  2820  feet,  a  little  over  half  as
English  mile.  Puente  (in  Eatitdio,  p.
378)  gives  it  at  629  meters.

"  The  altitude  of  Illampu  is,  accord-
ing to  Conway  (Notet  on  a  Map
of  Port  of  the  Cordillera  Beat),  21,-
490  feet  (taking  the  mean  of  three  de-
terminations). The  extremea  are:
Pentland,  21,286;  Conway,  21,710.
The  extinct  volcano  Sajima,  ia
the  western  Cordillera  of  Bolivia,  ia
probably  higher,  bot  not  as  high  aa
the  Sapo  and  Koropuna  in  the  Depart-
ment of  Areqnipa  in  sonthern  Pern.
The  proper  name  of  Dlampn  ia  Haa-
ko-Uma  ( white  water ) .  Dlampn  ia
a  corruption  of  "Hila-llampn"  (lit-
erally, much  line  anew).  I  owe  this
suggmtion  t«  Dr.  Macario  Escob&ri,
of  La  Poi,  Bolivia.  The  naoia
Eila-llampn,  or,  by  contraction,
niampn,  is  given  to  the  mountain
at  some  distance  from  it,  on  tbe  Puna.
The  northern  summit,  about  200  feet
lower,  is  called  Hilampi  (brother
with); also  "Hanko-Kunn" (white

■  The  church  of  San  Pedro  Tiqnina
is  quite  old.  8ans  notices  a  chapel
at  San  Pedro  Tiqnina  aa  early  as
1582.  The  mention  is  from  a  written
statement by the Indian Frandseo


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICACA


nio  Tnpasqtii  wlio  CArrad  and  fln-
iibed  Um  eelebratod  image  of  tbe
Yup%  ao  much  feiierat«d  at  Copa-
cataaa;  "ft  eatnbo  en  Tiqoena  la
Tti^vn  en  la  eapilla  de  San  Pedro  on
poeo  da  tiempo"  (BUtoria  de  Copa-
tabana,  p.  136).  Sati  Pablo  ma  as
timei  to  the  Angnstuie  convent  of  Co-
puanna  in  tbe  Mventeenth  eentarj.
Daring  tbe  great  Tnainn  npriaing  of
17B1  it  was  (like  moat  of  the  lettle-
menU  in  Uiat  region)  the  scene  of  a
boirible  Indian  ^tebeiy.

■  miniawi  ia  a  corruption  of  "Hila-
Uma-ni"  (mneh  water  poMeawe,  liter-
lUj).  At  Llnjo,  on  tbe  northwert-
tra  ilopM  of  the  moontain,  or  rather
cbuter  of  peoke,  the  Indians  assnrod
ni  that  it  was  properlj  called  "Jilli-
mani ' '  (Spanish  }),  bat  tbe;  also  called
it  Aehaehila  and  UTnirL  Tbe  latt«c
«•*  interpreted  to  as  as  aignifTing:
feeder  of  tbe  eropi;  becanse  the  wa-
ten  of  tbe  Tiiimp»i  irrigate  tbe  fields
of  the  natiTes  of  that  seetion.  Bnt
tins  etTmoIogj  appears  qnite  doabt-
foL  In  Degerifoion  y  relaeioit  da  la
Cwdod  de  La  Pat,  from  1SS9  (con-
tained in  tbe  second  Tolonio  of  tbe
Stiaeionea  geogrifiotu) ,  is  the  fol-
lowing: "Ha7  otra  adoradon  qua  se
Oama  Hillenuuin  (mimani},  qnes  una
una  alta  enbisrta  de  nieves  que  pei-
petoamente  ae  le  haeen,  7  asi  Eille-
■tana  qmere  decir;  'cosa  para  aiem-
pre,'  J  deata  causa  los  natorales  la
tiuen  en  adoradon"  (p.  71).  "Bn
erta  eordilleia  so  vma  continoando
Bmchan  sionas  naas  de  otras  7  cada
Bna  tiene  an  nombre;  j  la  qnes  mas
notable  ecrea  deata  dudad  se  Qama
Hilhmana,  ques  una  sierra  quo  per-
petnamente  eati  nerada,  7  asi  el  nom-
bre qoiere  dedr:  'eoea  perpotna'  "
(p.  TS).  I  nerei  heard  this  definition
isBoliTia.

The  amtnde  of  Ulimani  is  &1,1S0
fwt,  according  to  tiie  mean  of  six  de-
terminations, tbe  difCerence  between
tbe  extrenea  being  340  feet  (ConwB7:
VeUM,  ete.).  Sir  Martin  Conwn7  was
the  txtl  and  thus  far  the  onl7  one


who  reached  the  ennunit,  in  Septem-
ber, 1898.  A  nnmber  ot  yean  ago,
aome  Indians  from  the  haeienda  of
Tanimpata  attempted  the  ascent.  One
reached  the  upper  snowfields,  but
never  retomed.  Wiener  elaimi  to
have  ascended  as  high  as  20,112  feet,
to  the  second  peak,  which  be  called
"Pie  de  Paris"  {Ftrtnt  et  Bolivia,  p.
408).  Few  explorers  (if  any)  have
redded  so  long  in  dose  proximity  to
the  glaeiers  of  nii"<Bii1  as  we  did  in
1884,  1895  and  1888.  We  were  very
anxioni  to  ascertain  everything  relat-
ing to  ascensions  of  tbe  mountain,
and  have  been  assured  that  the  only
known  attempt  to  ascend  niimmii  (the
one  by  Indians  excepted)  was  made
by  Professor  Bod.  Falb  and  President
Pando  of  Bolivia  (then  a  youth),  who
readied  an  elevation  of  about  20,000
feet  and  were  still  at  a  coudderable
distance  from  tbe  sunimiL  Of  an  aa-
cenuon  b7  Wiener,  ftoiody  had  (my
Icnomltdge,  and  his  daim  was  derided
as  pure  invention,  both  here  and  at
La  Pas.  In  1877,  when  Wiener  states
he  made  his  ascendon,  Falb  had  al-
ready made  bia,  but  not  a  vroid  is
said  about  it  in  Wiener 'a  book  I
Without  positively  asserting  that  Wie-
ner's ascent  is  a  mytb,  I  am  forced  to
state  that  we  were  unable  to  find  any-
one who  knew  anything  about  it  or
believed  in  it,  in  Bolivia  and  all  along
the  TiiiwiftHi ,

On  the  lOth  of  October  of  1895
we  made  a  reconnoissance  from  the
haeienda  of  Cotafia.  Cotafia  Uea  at
81E0  feet,  aoeording  to  onr  baromet-
rie  obaervatiQus,  compared  and  re-
dneed  bj  Professor  S.  J.  Bailey  of  tbe
Harvard  Observatory  of  Arequipa,
\nener  has,  on  page  40S,  only  8006.
We  followed  tbe  route  taken  by  Falt^
but  having  been  delayed  until  6.30
Aji,  by  our  guide,  it  was  noon  when
we  arrived  at  Chua-ehua-ni  (altitude
13,670),  where  the  mules  had  to  re-
main. Thence  we  climbed  to  16,050
and  found  oursdvea  above  one  of  the
small  gladen  iaaoing  directly  from


;cbyG00'^lc


34


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


tha  app«r  enowfields.  It  woji  Blreadj
3  7.V.  and  we  were  not  pnipu«d  to
■pend  the  night  on  thnt  tpot.  Now,  it
ia  evidott  from  Wiener's  deecription
tb&t  he  took  the  same  route,  bnt  his
measorementa  giTO  flgnrea  ae  much  aa
2,000  feet  in  exeesi  of  oora,  which  aa
■tated  were  carefnllj  reduced  after
long  eomparieon  of  the  inatrument
with  the  borometen  of  the  Areqnipa
Obaemtorj,  The  deecription  of  the
aaeent  ia  alao  eompletelf  at  variance
with  the  tmth.  Furthermore  it  ia
inipoiaible,  even  if  atarting  at  2  a^.
as  Wiener  claims  to  have  done,  to
reach  the  altitnde  he  mentions  at  4.30
p.H.,  and  retnm  to  Qtucfau-naTa,
which  he  calls  the  "residence  of  the
lUcata"  (p.  412),  at  9  p.m.  of  the
oame  da;,  A  deocent  from  THirmmi
at  night  ie  franght  with  such  dangers
as  to  be  practieallj  impossible,  espe-
cially when  we  consider  that  there  are
no  gnides  to  be  obtained,  and  that  one
has  to  grope  his  way  eren  in  the  dny-
timo.  To  give  an  idea  of  the  mnrrel-
oos  rapidity  of  Mr.  Wiener's  ascent,
in  regions  where  the  rarifleatiaii  of
the  air  is  a  powerful  obstacle,  I  giro
his  own  figorea  (page  413):  Starting
from  an  elevation  of  16,092  feet  at
11  A.1C.,  he  ascended,  in  two  hours
and  thUtf-flre  minntee,  1770  feet;
thence  in  89  minute*^  1450  feet;
thence  again  in  38  minutee,  1200
feet;  and  flnallj  the  last  600  feet  in
an  hour  and  a  half.  The  time  noted
inelndes  that  need  for  observing  and
recording  the  hTpaometerl

'  The  main  use  of  the  totora  is  for
CDoatraeting  balsas.  Even  the  lai^eet
of  Bueh  craft  are  made  of  long  bos-
dlee  of  reeda;  they  form  the  hull  and
bulwarks.  Bot  the  totora  ia  also  a
nutritive  plant,  aa  the  tender  pointa
are  often  eaten  1^  the  Indians,  and
even  hj  Creolea,  in  the  shape  of  a
aalad,  with  red  peppers.  It  ia  said  to
be  of  fair  taate.  The  totora  grows
only  in  shallow  baya  and  inlets.  It  is
found  in  abundance  in  the  bay  of  Hna-
rina,  heaee  the  great  nnmbei  of  fish-


ing balsas  cruisliig  between  Chililaya
and  Tiquina.  All  along  the  ahorea  of
the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  the  wa-
ter is  deep  and  descent  from  the
beach  abrupt;  hence  but  rery  few  bal-
sas are  seen,  because  of  the  scarcity
of totora wherewith to eonatmet

"Of  the  genus  Cantvta.  The  most
prominent  is  the  red  variety,  C.  bnai-
toKa,  the  yellow  is  rare  and  the  vAil«
rarest  (see  A.  Baimondi:  Blemento*
de  Botdnioa  Aplicada  &  la  Medicma  jr
la  Induttria,  18S7,  p.  2S5;  also  Pn-
ente:  EtUtdia,  p,  3S7).

**  The  bean  la  of  the  Und  called
habat,  a  large  and  coarse  variety.
The  Indiana  eat  it  toasted.  That  this
kind  of  bean  is  not  indigenous  ia
shown  by  the  following  statement  of
Father  BemabS  Cobo,  HJ. :  ' '  Laa  h»-
bas,  Garbanzos,  Lentejas  y  Frijoles
petpiefioa,  Uamados  en  Espaila  Jndi-
hnelos,  ae  ban  traido  &  esta  tiarra  y
ae  dan  donde  quiera  copioaamente. —
En  algnnaa  partM,  eomo  en  la  di6eesis
del  Cuzco  y  en  la  de  Chutjoiabo,  ban
entrado  mucho  los  Indies  en  el  nso  de
las  Habas,  y  hacen  aementeraa  dellas,
particularmente  en  las  tierras  mas
friaa  que  tonpladaa,  donde  en^en
helarse  )oe  maitalea,  porqua  laa  Ha-
bas sufren  maa  los  hieloe  que  el  Mais
y  que  otraa  mnchas  legumlnres"  {Si»-
toria  del  Nuevo  Mundo,  Tomo  II,  p.
417).

*  Even  Ciexa  says  of  the  Collaos  in
general:  "T  qne  eran  vicioaoa  en
otras  costnmbres  malas"  (Primera
Parte  de  la  Crinitia  del  PerU,  Cap.  c,
p.  443).  Pedro  Piaarro  aaya:  "Estoa
indios  destas  provincias  del  Collao  es
gente  sucia,  tocan  en  muchos  pecados
abominahlOB  ..."  (£etaoHm  Set
Detaibrimiento  y  Conqtutta  de  lot
Beinoa  del  Peri,  1571,  in  ToL  T  of
Coleeoion  de  Domime%tot  inSdiUu
para  la  Hittorta  de  Espafla,  p.  280).
Snch  statements  could  be  easily  multi-
plied.

**  The  stranger,  who  lemaina  bnt  a
short  time  amftng  the  Aymar4ag la


.wGooi^lc


THE  BASIN  OF  T.Ainil  TITICACA


35


«uil7  muled  b;  tbeir  sabmittive
manneni,  tbeir  cringing  wajv,  and
«ap«eiall7  by  tbeir  hnmble  mode  of
greeting  tbe  wbitee.  Upon  doeer  bc-
qnaintanee,  bowever,  tbe  innate  fe-
rocity of  du>re«ter  cannot  remain
eoneesled.  Tbat  tbey  are,  at  tbia  day,
miiiMliiiiil  eannibabi  ia  mil  known
tbrongbont  Bolivia.  Fortber  on  I  may
refer  to  Mreral  very  recent  easee  of
^annihallrmij  not  in  One  district  only,
bat  in  Tariona  parti  of  tbe  territory
oerapied  by  tbe  Aymaii  etoek.

"Hailatorma  are  not  only  frequent
bnt  often  deatmetive.  Tbe  quantity
of  ban  tbat  folia  now  and  tben  on
eertain  apots  of  tbe  abore  ia  aatoond-
ing.  We  bave  BMn  it  remain  for  two
daya  after  tbe  atorm,  completely
wMteaing  tbe  gronnd  aa  if  covered
witb  beavy  enow.  Tbe  Aymari  name
for  bail  ia:  "cbij-cbL"

"  Tbe  eombnalible  moat  in  nae  ia
dried  animal  dnng.  Wbere  ttnnted
Ambbeiy  i*  witbin  reach,  as  on  the
Inland  and  on  aome  paita  <^  the  Penin-
anla  of  Copaeavana,  it  ia  need  in  pref-
ereaee  to  tbe  repulsive  tiqoia,  aa  tbe
otber  eombnstible  is  called.  Bnt  at
moot  plaeea  tbia  relief  is  not  at  band.

"Among  tbe  Aymar4  I  have  fonnd
tbe  nme  utter  lack  of  sense  or  taate
for  tbe  beantifnl  or  pietureeque  in
nature  tbat  had  itrnck  nte  among
Bortbem  Indiana.  Tbe  phenomena  of
Batnre  tbat  flU  man  witb  awe  and
ea«ae  bim  to  tremble  for  hia  ehattela
or  hia  person,  are  tbe  only  ones  tbat
affeet  tbe  mind  of  tbe  Indian.

*  Tbe  vieufia  and  the  goanaeo  were
botb  eommon,  in  andent  timea^  on  tbe
Aorta  of  tbe  Lake  or  rather  in  the
districts  near  these  aborea.  Among
Oe  animal  bones  collected  and  sent  to
the  Ifuaeom  by  na,  there  are  remnants
of  botb  of  tbeae  species  of  AueXenia.
In  addition  to  the  communal  hunt  or
"cbacn,"  single  bnnters  paraued  tbe
fleet  qnadnipeds,  uaing  tbe  holM,  or
"OiaL"  Ciexa  says  of  the  Collao:
' '  Beade  Ayarire  eomienian  loa  Collaa,  y
IlagsabavtaCaracoUo.  Al  orieote  tienen


las  monta&u  de  loe  Andes,  al  ponlente
las  cabecadss  de  las  sierras  neradas
7  las  vertient^a  dsllaa,  que  von  &  parar
en  la  mar  del  Sor  Sin  la  tierra  que
ocnpan  eon  mis  pueblos  y  labores,  bay
grandes  deepoblados,  y  qoe  eat4n  bien
llenos  de  gauado  lilveBtre"  (Ftimera
Parte  de  la  Crdnica  del  Per6,  Cap.
zdx,  p.  442).  Oaioilaso  de  la  Tega,
like  Cieu  and  others,  aaaerts  tbat  the
ehacu  was  aapecially  an  Inca  cnatoin  or
institntion  and  that  the  promiBcuona
hunt  of  tbe  aucbeniaa  waa  prohibited;
but,  as  usual,  he  contradicts  himself.  I
refer  to  tbe  following  passage:  "La
gents  plebeya  en  general  era  pobre  de
ganado  (sine  eran  loe  Collas  que  tenian
mncho)  y  por  tanto  padedan  neceem-
dad  de  came,  qne  no  la  comian  dno
de  merced  de  los  Curaeas,  &  de  algun
eonejo  que  por  mueba  fiesta  matanan.
.  .  .  Para  eoeorrer  eata  general  ne-
eessidad  mandana  el  Inca  baser  aque-
llaa  cacerias,  y  repartir  la  came  en
toda  la  gente  liomiui,  ..."  (Comen-
<arto*£ealej,TomoI,foL13S).  Henee
be  confesses  that  in  the  Collao  tbe
hunt  of  these  quadmpeds  was  free,
later  on  I  shall  refer  to  tbe  sedety
called "Chayllps,"  which  seemsto cor-
respond to  the  eeoteric  order  of  bunt-
ere  among  the  Now  Mexican  pueblos.
One  of  their  dances  is  called  tbe
"cbaen-ayllo,"  or  "cbokela"  and  is
a  eeremony  reealling  tb^  ancient
commonal  bunts.  Pedro  Piiarro  ex-
plidtly  says;  "Cada  aflo  badan  eer-
cos  en  qne  tomaban  destai  vicoiiaa  y
guanacos  y  las  tresqnilaban  para  la
laua  para  hacer  ropa  para  los  sefiores,
y  las  reses  que  morian  baeianlas  ee-
dna  mny  delgada  secandols  al  8ol
sin  ,  .  .  £n  estoe  deepoblados  habia
grandes  gauadoa  como  digo:  y  had-
anse  eetos  cereos  por  mandado  de  loe
sefiores,  ballandoee  ellos  presentee  al-
gnnas  veeee  y  recreindose  en  ellos"
(Betaoion  del  DeeeubrimieHto,  p.
280).  By  "sefiores,"  be  certainly
does  not  mean  the  chiefs  of  Coieo  ez-
duaively.
"  CervM  anMtieNtf,


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


"Tha  prepantion  of  thia  insipid
artide  in  andent  timea  waa  not  dif-
ferent from  the  proeew  now  naed.
Fraj  Diego  de  Hendosa  write*  as
toUowi;  "lam  papaa  que  en  eata  Be-
gion  se  dan,  son  de  las  qoe  ae  base  el
CbolSo,  amargBs,  que  llanian  Imqne
{"choqae,"  probably].  Saoanlaadela
tieira,  j  aobre  una  camada  de  paja,
Ifia  tienden  &  que  lea  de  el  I'do,
qoando  mas  rignroao  cae  de  nocbe;  7
de  dia  laa  ponen  al  Sol,  por  termino
aeflalado,  deapoee  laa  enbren  de  pajs,
J  pisan  reciamente,  eBtrnj&ndolaa,
luego  laa  ponen  al  Sol  &  que  loa  en-
JDgne am dexarlat hmiior algan, j

qnedan  de  tres  partes  la  ma

El  Chuiio  blaneo,  6  moraj,  de  rsgalo,
lo  beneflcian  &  las  eonientea  de  el
agua,  J  deq>iieB  lo  enjagsn,  j  Baionaa
coma  el  otrn"  (Chronica  d«  la  Pro-
vinoia  de  8.  Antonio  de  Loa  Charoaa
del  ordeti  de  nfo  teraphieo  P.  8.
Franeiieo,  «n  lot  Indiat  Oooidetttaiet,
Btgno  del  Peri,  1664.  Lib.  I,  Cap.  v,
p.  37).  The  same,  01  v^tj  nearly  tbe
same,  proceaa  ia  naed  to-day.  Por  the
common  or  bla^  chnfin,  amall  and  in-
different-looking potatoes  are  selected ;
for  the  white  or  "tunta,"  white  po-
tatoes with  thin  skins  are  set  apart.
In  case  of  the  common  chofin,  the  po-
tatoes are  cnuhed;  bat  in  making  the
tnnta  the  potatoes  remain  entire.
Both  kinds  are  first  thoronghly  soaked
and  the  black  chnfin  remains  in  pools
of  standing  water  for  a  long  time,  un-
til it  emits  an  almost  pestilential  odor.
They  are  next  spread  ont  to  freeie,
and  when  thoroagbly  frozen,  cmabed
to  express  erery  drop  of  liquid,  and
then  dried.  The  white  tnnta,  as
stated,  ia  not  emshed,  and  further-
more it  is  washed  in  running  water.
Tbe  process  haa  remained  substan-
tially the same aince pre-Spanish

** "  Conmerdan  nuoa  7  otros  qne  aus
antecesoree  viviA  eon  poco  6rden  antea
qns  loa  ingaa  loa  sefioreasen;  y  qne
por  lo  alto  de  loa  cerros  tenian  aus
poeblos  fnertee,  de  donde  so  daban


gnena,  y  que  eran  Tidosos  en  otraa
coatumbrea  mains"  (Gien:  CrAUoo,
Part  I,  Cap.  m^  p.  443).  I  limit
myadf  to  this  quotation,  sa  it  ex-
preaaea  more  or  laaa  what  all  otiiar
sources  state.

*I  purposely  omit  mentioning  in
the  text  the  Uroa,  a  amall  group  of
Indians  who  were  found  living  at  and
along  the  Desagoadeio  and  still  live
in  that  Tidnity.  The  language  of  the
Uros  has  been  stadied,  and  again
quite  recently  by(Dr.  M.  Uhle)of  Ber-
lin. Until  such  lingoiitic  reoearcliM
appear  in  print  we  Bhoald  witbbold
any  opinion  in  regard  to  thia  aingnlar
group  of  Indiana,  living  aa  they  do
completely  anrroonded  1^  people  of
another  linguiatie  atoek.  The  condi-
tion of  the  Qroa  seems  to  have  been
the  same  in  the  sizteenth  century  as
now,  although  they  are  considerably
intermingled  with  Aymari  blood
through  intermarriage.  In  the  ehnrdi
books  of  Tiahnanaco,  kindly  loaned  to
us  by  the  parish  priest,  Father  Eseo-
bari,  we  found  a  number  of  marriages
with  Uro  Indiana  (lAbro  de  Cat»adot
que  perteneee  S  ute  ptM&Io  de  Tia-
gvanaeo  eomienm  d  oeho  de  henero
de  1694.  X*  MSa  .  .  The  book  end*
1728).  Church  recorda  are  very  im-
portant, since  they  contain  the  names
of  a  number  of  ayllns,  or  elans.  In
three  instances  the  names  of  TTros  are
given,  together  with  the  name  of  the
dan  to  which  they  belong,  and  tbe
name  of  the  village  in  idiicfa  tbey
lived.  Thus,  from  Huarina,  Uros  are
mentioned  aa  bdonging  to  the  ayllu
Pocona;  from  the  Deaagnadero,  the
clan  Camana;  and  from  ChallacoUo,
the  clan  Coehisa.  Whether  these  dana
were  of  tbs  Vro  tribe  or  Aymari  Z
am  not  able  to  say.  Tbe  beat  descrip-
tion of  the  TTros  at  my  command  is
by  Calaneha:  "Estos  son  Indies  Vroi
Iwrbaros  sin  poliela,  renegridos,  dn
linpie^^  enemigoa  de  la  eomniiiea-
don,  i  nada  afectos  al  cnlto  de  nues-
tra  F6;  tienen  por  sustento  i  gran-
geria  pesear  en  la  lagnna  de  Faria


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  BASIN  OP  LAKE  TITICACA


37


qnifln  tiene  tTejnta  legnsa  de  dmui-
fereseia  proeedida  de  1ft  gran  UgniM
de  Cliaqiiito  UamadA  Titieaw  ....
1m  gae  aUtan  ea  tiem,  es  en  sepn]-
tnrai  debajo  de  tiena  por  el  frio,  i
qaando  viTen  en  la  lagoua,  aon  aiu
cans  Mbre  barbaeoaa  i  enect;  Tease  el
aKuentro,  qae  aiendo  tieira  donde
niSTa  i  grani^  daemtBn  en  sotanoB  i
riven  an  el  agna;  loa  Indlos  Troe  na-
een,  w  eriaa,  viven,  en  eeta  l&gnna
■obre  d  agna  en  la  enea,  que  acfi  Ua-
man  totondea,  son  mnj  espeaoi,  i
dvte  genero  de  jnneo  lirianos,  aqoi
aUUn  ain  mas  ropa  ni  cnbierta  (con
■or  tierra  niDj  fria)  qne  nnos  eabiiaB
d«tt«  enea.  Andan  alii  denodoe  6
caai  en  eamea,  eomen  mnehaa  Teiea
la  came  eruda,  1  el  peaeado  eaal  vivo,
i  lai  raiaea  dnta  totora  6  enea.  No
deDbran, ni tienen labranQaa  .  .  .


8u  lengna  ea  la  mas  eaenra,  eorta  i
b&rnara  de  qoantas  dene  el  Ferti  toda
gntnral,  i  aoi  no  ae  ptiede  eserinr  sin
gran  eanfnaion  .  .  .  Sob  idolatriaa
son  adorar  al  Sol  i  i  eeta  lagnna,
&  qoien  aien  adoraeionea  de  nunision,  i
le  ofrecen  eomidaa  de  Mai^  peio  elloa
ensniiBn  el  mismo  Dloa  qne  adoran
.  .  .  son  loboe  porqoe  se  comen  una
OTBJa  crnda,  i  baen  la  DSa  dd  dedo
polgar  de  la  mano  derBeha  tan  larga  i
tan  afliailn,  qne  deanellan  ain  neceaitar
de  enchiUo  ..."  (Cordnioa  Morali-
toda,  Tomo  I,  p.  3S0).  The  fends  be-
tween the  Qnichuas  and  the  Ayinar&a
and  the  tales  of  warfare  between  Za-
pana  and  Cari,  tbe  former  from  the
Pemvlan  Colloo  and  the  latter  from
Chnenito,  are  too  often  reported  in
older  sources  to  need  q»ecial  qnota-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


Paet  n


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

THEIB  FHTSICAL  ASPECT  AND  OENEBAL  CONDtnON


THE  shape  of  the  Island  of  Titicaoa,  the  largest  of  the
m&ay  that  dot  the  surface  of  the  great  Lake,  has  been
compared  to  that  of  an  elongated  toad;  and  Koati  has
been  said  to  resemble  a  whale.  In  both  instances  the  com-
parison is  fair.  The  longitudinal  axes  of  both  Islands  run
from  southeast  to  northwest;  and  Titicaca  appears,  as  al-
ready stated,  like  a  continuation  of  the  Bolivian  mainland
of  Copacavana  in  the  direction  of  the  northwestern  end  of
the  Lake,  near  Huancane.

I  refer  to  the  accompanjuig  maps  of  these  Islands,  exe-
cuted on  the  scale  of  2560  feet  to  the  inch,  for  an  idea  of  size
and  form.  Although  made  with  care,  I  cannot  guarantee
their  absolute  exactness.  The  theodolite  which  I  used  was
not  a  first-class  instrument,  and  had  suffered  at  Llujo  from
constant  use  among  large  deposits  of  iron  ore.^  While  sub-
sequent surveys  will  doubtless  correct  many  defects,  I  still
beheve  my  maps  to  be  sufficient  for  the  purpose  for  whidi
they  were  made,  namely,  to  illustrate  shape  and  size,  and
especially  the  topography  in  connection  wi^  the  location  of
ancient  ruins.

Koati,  where  its  extreme  northwestern  headland  of  Uila
Peki  (f,  of  the  adjoining  map)  approaches  the  nearest  point
on  Titicaca,  lies  about  four  miles  east-southeast  of  the  latter.
Koati  is  separated  from  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  at
Sampaya  by  nearly  two  miles;  but  Titicaca,  as  stated,  is


;cbyG00'^lc


42  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

only  two-thirds  of  a  mile  from  Tampupata  on  the  same
Peninsula.  The  greatest  length  of  Titicaca,  counting  from
the  Puncn  (28)  to  Sicnyn  (b),  is  seven  miles.  Its  greatest
width,  from  the  beach  below  the  steep  ridge  of  Kakajo-Kena
at  Chnllmi-Eiij^ni  (15)  to  the  eastern  foot  of  Kea-Kollu
(7),  is  not  quite  three  miles.  Koati  measures  one  and
three  fourtiis  miles  in  length  and  not  over  one  half  of  a  mile
at  its  greatest  width.  The  highest  points  on  Titicaca—
Chnllnn-Kayani  and  Palla-Kasa  (11)— rise  slightly  over
eiji^t  hundred  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Lake,  whereas
TJila-Ke  on  Koati  is  not  over  four  hmidred  feet  high.  The
highest  points  of  the  two  Islands  are,  respectively,  13,300
feet  and  12,900  feet  above  the  level  of  the  Pacific  Ocean.

The  surface  of  Titicaca  is  so  broken,  and  its  contour  so
indented,  that  a  trip  across  the  whole  length  of  the  Island
is  indispensable  for  obtaining  a  clear  idea  of  its  topography.
The  '*Puncu"  is  Qie  landing-place  for  visitors  reaching  the
Island  by  the  way  of  Copacavana.'  Set  ashore  there,  they
find  themselves  at  the  foot  of  steep  slopes  covered  with  a
stunted  vegetation,  and  traversed  laterally  by  innumerable
terraced  garden-beds,  or  andenes.  A  trail,  rather  steep  and
rocky,  leads  upward  to  a  denuded  crest.  Along  this  trail  a
magnificent  panorama  gradually  unfolds.  First  of  all,  one
finds  himself  looking  down  on  an  ancient  ruin,  the  stmcture
caUed  Pilco-Kayma,  flanked  by  smaller  buildings  and  by
terraces  that  sweep  around  folds  descending  to  the  beach.
The  waters  of  the  Lake  bathe  that  beach  in  long,  dark-blue
ripples ;  and  in  the  distance  rests  the  Island  of  Koati  with
its  reddish  headland.  Above  the  Promontory  of  Santiago
Huata  bristles  niampu,  "the  crown  of  the  Andes."'
Reaching  the  crest,  the  panorama  becomes  more  extensive
and  more  varied.  To  the  right,  the  buildings  of  the  hacienda
of  Yumani  (B)  nestle  close  to  the  rounded  top  of  a  bold
promontory.  Far  below  the  hacienda  rise  groves  of  trees
surrounding  the  garden  of  Yumani  and  the  so-called ' '  Foun-
tain of  the  Incas"  near  the  water's  edge. Indian  houses


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI  43

dot  undulating  slopes  in  the  north,  slopes  that  descend  ab-
roptly  toward  the  Lake  and  rise  abruptly  to  the  top  of
Palla-Easa  (11),  one  of  the  two  highest  summits  of  the
Island.  We  cross  the  crest,  and  a  view  spreads  ont  as  dif-
ferent from  the  one  described  as  shadow  from  sunlight.
The  side  from  which  the  trail  rises  is  the  sonny  side ;  beyond
the  crest  the  view  opens  to  the  southwest  and  sonth,  away
from  the  snn.  The  distant  horizon  is  encompassed  by  the
monotonons  shore-line  of  Pern.  The  main  Lake  expands
like  a  sheet  of  silver  beyond  Qie  crest  of  Kakayo-keoa,  and
the  red  hmnp  of  Condor-o-na-na-cha-ne  (14).  At  Qie  foot
of  this  long  and  narrow  promontory,  that  forms  the  south-
western wall  of  the  Island,  ties  the  southern  Bay  of  Kona,
scarcely  ever  ruffled  by  tempests.  From  the  trail  the  slope
descends  toward  this  bay  in  steep  grades,  terminating  in
narrow  strips  of  green  and  divided  by  grayish  ledges  of
rock  down  to  the  water's  edge.  The  trail  runs  on  to  the
northwest,  hugging  the  base  of  higher  points :  first,  Kum-
Pata  (10),  at  the  foot  of  which  opens  a  little  valley  affording
a  glimpse  of  the  northeastern  shore,  where,  at  the  Bay  of
pQcara,  the  conical  height  of  Kea-KoUn  (7)  rises;  further
on,  the  twin  heights  of  "Llalli-Sivi-Pata,"  or  Santa  Bar-
bara (12  and  9),  again  hide  the  sunny  side  from  view,  and
the  Bay  of  Eona  and  the  long  ridge  of  Kakayo-kena  with  its
dark  green  bottom  appear  on  the  left.  After  leaving  the
chister  of  hnts  at  Apachinanca  (q)  the  landscape  becomes
desolate  for  a  while ;  but  from  the  comer  of  Llalli-Sivi-Pata
on,  the  somber  western  x>ortions  of  the  Island  disappear  and
the  eye  rests  with  delight  on  the  graceful  summit  of  Kea-
KoUa,  the  bays  of  Eea  and  Challa,  and  the  inlets  of  Champu-
Uaya  (20)  and  Coyani  (25).  The  slopes  are  dotted  with
Indian  houses,  and  green  in  summer  with  cultivated  patches
and  terraces  and  long  lines  of  shrubbery  growing  ont  of  the
decaying  walls  of  abandoned  andenes.  Blampu  stands  out
b^ond  the  Lake,  and  the  snowy  ranges  of  CHiarassaru  loom
op  in  the  north. To  the  left  rise  the  heights  of  Challa-Pata,


;cbyG00'^lc


44  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Inak'tTyu,  and  the  Calvaiio  (6, 5, 4).  After  we  have  tamed
the  slope  of  Inak-Uyo,  the  sandy  iathmns  of  Gballa  lies  at
onr  feet,  with  the  house  of  the  hacienda  (the  hospitality  of
which  we  enjoyed  for  so  many  montiiB) ,  its  chapel,  and  some
straw-roofed  Indian  dwellings.  That  isthmus  leads  to  the
Peninsula  of  Uajran-Kala  (18,  19).  We  look  over  the
handsome  Bay  of  ChaUa,  the  peninsula  beyond,  the  Bay  of
Maynnani,  the  projections  of  Llaq'-aylli  and  Ye-j&-chi  (f  and
17),  and  the  little  Islands  of  Lanassani,  Kenata  and  Chnjn.
It  is  not  a  view ;  it  is  a  relief -chart  spread  oat  at  our  feet

To  reach,  from  Challa,  the  extreme  northwestern  point  of
the  Island  at  Sicayn,  the  trail  mast  be  followed  along  the
beach  by  the  once  beantifal  and,  with  all  its  decay,  attractive
garden  (23),  to  the  Isthmns  of  Kasapata  (e)  and  its  mins.
Directly  north  of  it  rises  the  Peninsola  of  Llaq'-aylli.  This
short  stretch  is  one  of  the  most  lovely  on  the  Island,  and  the
view  from  Kasapata,  across  the  Bay  of  Maynnani,  the
Isthmns  of  Challa,  and  beyond  the  northern  promontory  of
Kea,  is  enchanting.  Koati  lies  in  fnll  view,  and  the  great
Bolivian  Cordillera  closes  the  horizon.  Kasapata  is  the
last  inhabited  spot  in  that  direction.  Beyond  it,  and  as
far  as  the  crest  of  Muro-Kato  (3),  bare  rock  predominates
on  the  slopes  descending  from  the  Calvario.  The  basin  at
the  foot  of  what  is  called  the  "Sacred  Bock,"  or  "Bock  of
the  Cat,"  Titi'Kala  (a),  is  covered  with  shrubbery.  West
of  the  Sacred  Bock  a  green  slope  descends  to  the  northern
Bay  of  Kona,  and  here  the  view  changes  again  to  the
shadowy  side.  The  ridge  of  Kakayo-keoa  terminates  in  a
point  in  tiie  north  as  well  as  in  the  south.  The  waters  of
the  bay  are  always  placid,  for  the  Island  of  Kochi  protects
them.  Northwest  of  the  Sacred  Bock,  the  Promontory  of
Ticani  (2)  terminates  the  Island.  Its  rapid  slopes  bear
acmbby  vegetation,  except  on  the  south,  where  the  rocks  of
Tari-tnrini  (41)  stand  out  in  vertical  cliffs.  The  extreme
northwestern  projection,  Sicuyu,  is  low  and  partly  covered
by  thickets,  and  the  view  from  it  extends  far  to  the  north-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI  45

vest,  where  the  surface  of  the  Lake  meets  the  horizon.
Sicayn  is  a  forlorn  spot,  well  fitted  for  an  abode  of  the
dead.

Titicaca  is  perhaps  one  of  the  most  pictnreeqne  Islands
on  the  globe,  from  the  nnmber  of  bays,  inlets,  promcmtories,
and  bold  summits.  Besides  the  two  large  bays  of  Kona  and
the  one  of  Challa,  the  Island  connts  along  its  shores  twenty
larger  or  smaller  coves  and  inlets.  An  equal  number  of
sharply  defined  mountain-tops,  rising  from  400  to  800  feet
above  tlie  Lake,  give  to  its  surface  a  peculiarly  varied  as-
pect Hence  the  scenery  abounds  in  contrasts.  Surrounded
by  the  magnificent  water-sheet  of  the  Lake,  in  full  view  of
the  Andes,*  Titicaca  lacks  but  arborescent  vegetation  and
the  presence  of  civilized  num  with  his  resources  for  com-
fort, to  make  it  a  spot  worthy  of  being  counted  among  the
precious  sites  on  the  earth's  surface.

The  rocks  of  the  Island,  as  well  as  those  of  that  part  of
the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  that  lies  immediately  in  front
of  it,  belong  to  the  carboniferous  series.  Seams  of  coal
crop  out  at  various  points,  and  a  coal  mine  has  been  worked  ^
at  Yampupata  for  a  number  of  years.'' ''  At  Kea  I  saw  a
handsome  specimen  of  fossil  plants  of  the  carboniferous
age.  The  strata  on  the  Island  are  much  tilted,  and  lifted
up  toward  the  northwest,  as  far  as  I  could  notice.  Only  the
long  ridge  of  Kakayo-kena  is  formed  almost  exclusively  of
limonite,  and  that  mineral  crops  out  at  its  base  even,  in  the
bottom  of  southern  Kona.  But  I  should  not  be  surprised  if
other  minerals  were  found  also,  for  instance,  at  Kea-Kolln.
The  geological  structure  of  the  Island  h^s  not,  to  my  know-
ledge, been  closely  studied,  altiioughrD'Orbigny  ^levoted
some  attention  to  it*  '

It  may  be  said  that  the  greater  portion  of  the  Island  is
covered  with  scanty  vegetation,  scant  in  forms  and  scrubby
in  size.  No  part  of  it  appears  completely  dennded  except
the  northern  slopes,  from  the  vicinity  of  Challa  to  Sicnyu,
and  even  there  only  in  places,  as  on  the  rocky  slides  between


;cbyG00'^lc


46  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

Kea  and  the  foot  of  Inak-Uyn,  to  the  smmnit  of  that  height
and  its  nnghbors  of  Challa-pata  and  Calvario,  and  thenoe
to  Ticani,  Vertical  cliffs  rise  in  a  number  of  places ;  but
even  at  the  foot  of  rocky  slides,  in  cavities  at  the  water's
edge,  lovely  groups  of  ferns  are  seen.  The  only  indigenous
tree-form  is  the  kenna  (Polylepsis  racemosa),  found  in
small  groves  and  in  few  places.  This  tree  does  not  grow  to
any  considerable  height,  but  its  trunk  assumes  a  great  bulk
in  the  course  of  many  years  of  growth.  At  the  garden  of
Challa  there  is  a  very  ancient  kenua  tree,  the  diameter  of
which  is  quite  five  feet.

The  abundance  of  fresh  water  with  which  the  Island  is
supplied  fosters  the  growth  of  vegetation  to  a  degree  not
common  at  that  altitude.  Springs  are  nnmerous  and  the
water  of  excellent  quality.  In  summer,  when  rains  are
most  abundant,  lively  brooks  and  even  small  cascades
rush  down  the  steep  declivities.  Hence,  wherever  the
sun  can  strike  disintegrated  rock,  thos  moistened,  vegeta-
ble germs  may  thrive  and  tiny  groups  of  plants  will  arise.
Wherever,  on  steep  slopes,  a  thin  crust  of  soil  impinges  on
bare  rock,  the  "kara,"  a  tall  Yncoa  or  Dasylirion-like  plant
with  fieshy,  dentated  leaves  and  sharp  spines,  grows  in  pro-
fusion. The  popular  Spanish  name  for  this  singular  and
quite  abundant  vegetable  type  is  comida  de  oso  (literally,
bear  food).  It  is  especially  abundant  on  the  northern  slopes
of  the  Calvario  and  of  Ticani.  A  number  of  plants  grow
upon  the  Island,  which  are  used  by  the  Indians  for  medicinal
purposes,  or  are  known  to  them  as  having  medicinal  proper-
ties. Mrs.  Bandolier  collected  and  sent  to  the  Museum  a
number  of  plants,  gathered  under  the  direction  of  an  TnHiaTi
medicine-man  on  the  Island.  The  list  appended  contains
about  twenty  species  used  for  healing  and  for  sorcery,  two
practices  which  are  inseparable  among  the  Indians.  Be-
sides, there  are  some  which  the  Indians  do  not  care  to  indi-
cate to  the  stranger.  ^One  of  the  most  common  and  most
generally  used  of  these  medicinal  plants  is  the  verbena.  ^


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


The  Indian  authorities  (Ilaeata  and  Alcalde)  of  Clull»
on  Titicaca  Island


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI  47

Shrubbery  grows  mostly  along  the  lines  of  abandoned
andenes,  and  in  and  among  the  mins.  It  forms  the  dark-
green  lines  that  striate  the  eteep  slopes  of  the  Island  and
gives  them  a  peculiar  aspect  from  a  distance.  The  hand-
some shrub  of  the  conntry,  the  red  cantata,  is  fomid  at
Pncara  (m)  and  at  several  other  places  on  declivities  facing
the  north.  It  is  possible  that  this  beantifnl  shrub  was  trans-
planted thither  from  the  mainland  during  colonial  times.

In  shallow  bays  like  that  of  Challa,  and  in  the  inlets  form-
ing the  shores  of  sonthem  Kona,  the  useful  totora  grows  in
a  belt  of  varying  width.  It  is  only  at  Challa  that  its  growth
is  sufficient  to  permit  the  construction  of  balsas.  The  sup-
ply at  Kona  is  too  small,  hence  the  Indians  of  the  hacienda
of  Yumani  are  dependent  upon  those  of  Challa  for  the  mate-
rial for  the  ferry  on  which  they  cross  the  Tampupata
dbannel.

Animal  life  is  by  no  means  scarce,  but  mostly  aquatic  Of
quadrupeds  we  have  seen  only  a  field  rat.  But  it  is  well
known  that  a  species  of  wildcat,  called  "titi"  (and  "mulu-w
mnln"  on  the  flftwVH  of  the  Ulimani),  occasionally  comes
across  from  the  mainland.^  On  the  Island,  raids  by  the  titi
are  rare,  and  I  doubt  very  much  if  it  can  be  ri^tly  called  an
"aquatic  feline,"  as  the  people  of  the  country  sometimes
describe  it."  Birds  are  abundant  The  beautiful  '*alka-
mari,"  known  in  the  Peruvian  Sierra  under  the  name  of
' '  chinalinda,  * '  a  tall  buzzard  of  handsome  chestnut  plumage,
ii^te  breast,  and  bright  yellow  feet,  stalks  about,  and  al-
ways in  pairs.  It  allows  the  stranger  to  approach  quite
near  and  only  rises  to  fly  away  a  short  distance.  A  gray
eagle  soars  along  the  shore.  Stately  gray-and-black  night-
herons  stand  on  rocks  in  secluded  inlets.  The  Bay  of  Challa,
especially,  is  enlivened  by  flocks  of  divers,  and  by  handsome
chokas.  We  have  seen,  between  the  belt  of  totora  and  the
beach,  as  many  as  thirty  divers  chasing  each  other,  together
with  a  nnmber  of  chokas  tranquilly  swimming  among  the
bustling  crowd. From  time  to  time  the  beach  was  visited  by


;cb;GoO'^lc


48  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

a  pair  of  "hnallatas,"  the  stately  goose  of  the  Pima,"
white,  with  dark  wings— a  beantifnl  bird,  and  capable  of
domestication.'"  What  is  commonly  called  the  "caervo,"  a
species  of  cormorant,  is  most  abtindant  on  the  small  Islands
near  the  northern  extremity  of  Titicaca,  where  it  has  its
nests,  and  where  hnndreds  are  nsnally  seen  to  roost.
The  "leke-lefce,"  or  "lliclli"  {Charadrius  resplendens,
Tschndi),"  often  visits  the  sandy  beach  of  Ohalla  or
the  marshy  bottom  of  Pncara.  Lastly,  swarms  of  small
green  parrots  (Bolborhifnchw  andkola^^)  occasionally  aj)-
pear  (to  the  detriment  of  crops)  and  fill  the  air  with  dis-
cordant screams.  To  see  snch  a  flock  suddenly  arise  from
a  thicket  recalls  a  handful  of  emeralds  thrown  into  the  air.

Septiles  are  represented  by  toads,  and  by  small  lizards
seen  on  dry  and  rocky  spots  and  among  rains.  The  Indians
say  that  a  large  water-snake,  over  twelve  feet  in  length  and
of  proportionate  thickness,  which  they  oall ' '  yauiinka, ' '  fre-
quents the  rocky  shores  of  the  sonthem  Bay  of  Kona.  We
have  no  positive  evidence  of  the  existence  of  this  reqptile,"
nor  of  that  of  the  large  aquatic  animal  resembling  a  seal,**
which,  according  to  the  belief  of  the  Indians  and  many  of
the  white  and  mestizo  population,  exists  in  the  waters  of  the
Lake.  It  is  interesting  to  note  the  tenacity  of  this  belief,
which  can  be  traced  to  several  generations  and  to  a  number
of  different  sources  having  no  possible  connection.  We  are
reminded  by  it  of  certain  fantastic  animal  types  carved  on
metallic  objects  from  the  Island  of  Eoati,  as  well  as  of
pottery  from  the  village  of  Ancoraymea,  on  the  eastern
Bolivian  mainland,*"  also  of  the  ancient  wooden  goblet,
found  at  Santa  Maria,  representing  an  Lidian  spearing  a
huge  fish.

Fish  are  seen  often  in  the  clear  waters  of  the  Lake.  The
Indians  of  Titicaca  are  not  much  addicted  to  fishing,  bat
we  were  told  that  as  many  as  twelve  different  kinds  of  fish
are  found  in  the  Lake.  The  two  most  common  are  the  boga
(Orestias)  and  the  suchis.


;cbyG00'^lc


DaitizecbyGoO'^lc


Reduced  copy  of  Indian  pictograph  {church  ritiml),  from  "  Boletin  de  hi

Sociedad  Geografica  de  Lima.  Vol  T."

Original  presented  to  that  Society  by  Don  Abel  Mendez  of  Pimo,  Peru


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  EOATI  49

Lisects  are  not  nomeroas.  A  small  spider,  with  stael-
colored  abdomen  and  red  legs,  is  abundant  about  toc^  mtes
and  rnins.  I  saw  at  Sicnjn,  when  opening  burial  cysts,  a
gmall  scorpion.  Hymenoptera  are  more  nnmerona,  Lepi-
doptera  scarce,  and  limited,  so  far  as  we  saw,  to  Diumidae  of
the  ArgymoB,  Vanessa,  and  smaller  genera.  I  would  recall
here  the  remarkable  spedmen  of  pottery  sent  to  the  Museum
from  our  exoavationB  at  Easapata,  on  which  is  a  very  good
representation  of  a  crepuscular  moth  and  of  a  diurnal  but-
terfly common  to  warmer  cUmates.  The  execution  of  the
painting  of  these  bptterflies  is  so  true  that  it  could  have
been  done  only  from  natnre ;  that  is,  by  capturing  the  speci-
men and  spreading  it  out  after  the  manner  of  modem
collectors.  Of  Coleopterawe  have  seen  only  very  few  speci-
mens. Insects  which  are  disagreeably  prominent  through
their  intnuion  upon  man,  like  PedtctUus  capitis  and  espe-
cially Pedicvius  vestimenti,  also  Pvlex  irritans,  are,  to  the
disgust  of  him  iriio  must  associate  with  the  Indians,  pain-
fully abundant  on  Titicaca  Island.

Having  already  inferred,  in  the  preceding  chapter,  to  the
climate  in  general,  I  would  beg  to  add  only  a  few  statements
relative  to  the  physical  appearance  of  the  Island  of  Koati,
Although  the  air-line  distance  from  the  eastern  end  of
Koati  to  its  western  termination  is  but  one  and  three  fourths
miles,  the  Island  is  more  than  two  miles  long,  if  the  sinuosi-
ties of  the  crest  are  followed.  The  shape  is  tiiat  of  a  gable-
roof.  The  western  termination  is  a  butte  of  red  rock,  nearly
two  hundred  feet  hi^,  and  the  eastern  end  is  formed  by
similar  rocks  abruptly  terminating  over  a  low  sandy  projec-
tion. "With  the  exception  of  that  i)oint  and  the  triangular
low  projection  of  Uito-pampa  (e),  the  beach  all  along  is
narrow  and  mostly  covered  with  drift  and  boulders.  The
slopes  are  steep,  slightly  folded,  and,  on  the  north  side,
covered  with  a  bushy  vegetation  and  rather  tall  grass.
Along  the  crest,  single  kefina  trees,  and  even  clusters,  are
not uncommon. Wild olive trees also occur. On the


;cbyG00'^lc


50  THE  ISLAXDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

whole,  Koati  has,  on  its  northern  slope,  a  better  flora  than
Titioaca.  The  southern,  in  many  places,  never  receives
direct  sonlight,  and  therefore  is  mnoh  colder.  In  Jtme
we  noticed  thin  ice,  for  whole  days,  in  shady  recesses
along  the  southern  shore.  The  only  sonrce  of  fresh  water
on  the  Island  is  a  small  spring  at  the  western  end  of  Uito-
pampa,  and  its  supply  is  inaofficient  even  for  half  a  dozen
persons.  Hence  the  inhabitants  must  drink  the  water  of  the
Lake,  which  is,  as  stated  before,  slightly  briny.  Animal  life
on  Koati  is  similar  to  that  on  Titicaca,  but  less  abundant.

WbUe  treating  of  Koati,  I  will  briefly  describe  its  actnal
condition  (1895)  in  r^r^rd  to  population  and  products.  The
permanent  population  of  Koati  is,  in  reality,  reduced  to
about  twelve  or  fifteen  Aymara  Indians  of  both  sexes.
Their  dwellings,  with  one  exception,  all  lie  on  the  sonthem
or  shadowy  side  of  the  Island.  At  times,  however,  the
Indian  population  increases  to  thirty  and  forty  through
accessions  from  the  village  of  Sampaya  on  the  mainland,  to
which  pueblo  the  Indians  of  Koati  belong.  The  Island  is
owned  by  Dr.  W.  del  Carpio  of  La  Paz,  who  visits  his  prop-
erty once  or  twice  a  year,  leaving,  at  the  time  we  visited  it —
1895— its  management  mainly  in  the  bands  of  the  Indian
authorities  of  Sampaya.  Latercourse  between  Koati  and  the
mainland  is  therefore  irr^nlar.  "When  the  Indians  have  to
go  to  the  village  or  to  Copacavana,  a  balsa  or  two  will  cross
and  recross ;  but  if  they  have  no  cause  for  making  the  trip,
the  visitor  on  Koati  may  remain  cot  off  from  all  the  world
for  several  weeks.  Sometimes  even  money,  unless  offered
in  excessive  quantities,  cannot  induce  the  Aymara  Indian  to
confer  a  legitimate  favor."

Caltnre  plants  on  Koati  are  limited  to  potatoes,  oca,
quinna,  and  maize.  The  northern  part  of  the  Island  is  espe-
cially adapted  to  the  cultivation  of  Indian  com.  Bi  1895
the  Indians  had  on  the  Island  some  domestic  animals,  among
them  one  llama.  Since  then  conditions  are  somewhat  im-
proved.  An  attempt  by  the  owner  to  plant  eucalyptus  trees


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI  51

on  the  Bonthem  side,  and  in  front  of  the  bnildings  of  the
hadenda,  gives  hope  for  a  favorable  result  The  eonstrac-
tion  of  the  bnilding  at  a  point  as  chilly  as  the  slope  above
Uito-pampa  appears  at  first  incomprehensible;  but  the
proximity  of  the  mainland  and  the  convenient  landing-place,
oving  to  shallowness  of  the  water  (whidi  elsewhere  aronnd
Koati  is  of  great  depth),  explain  the  selection.

In  the  conrse  of  this  study  I  shall  again  refer  to  Koatt,  bnt
I  DOW  revert  to  the  Island  of  Titioaca,  where  the  popnlation
is  mach  more  munerons,  the  resources  are  more  varied,  and
the  relation  to  the  Indian  popnlation  of  the  mainland  of
greater  importance.

The  Island  of  Titioaca  belongs  to  the  jurisdiction  of
Copacavana,  hence  to  Bolivia,  in  administering  judicial  and
ecclesiastical  matters.  Originally  the  whole  Island  was  the
property  of  the  Garces  family  of  Pono,  in  Peru.  The  resi-
dence of  the  owners  was  Challa.  A  number  of  years  ago  the
southern  extremity  became  property  of  the  Bolivian  family  of
Guarachi,  so  that  the  Island  is  now  divided  into  two  hacien-
das, the  much  lai^r  one  of  Challa  belonging  to  Peruvians,
and  the  smaller  southern  portion  owned  by  Bolivians.  The
Island  is  permanently  inhabited  only  by  Indians,  for  the
owners  reside  there  but  a  short  time  in  the  year.  The  local
authorities  are  Lidians,  namely,  an  alcalde  and' an  ilacata  at
Challa,  and  another  alcalde  and  another  ilacata  at  Yumani.
The  Indiam  are  estimated  at  800,  all  told,  of  which  by  far
the  greater  number  belong  to  the  northern  hacienda.  It
cannot  be  said  that  there  is  a  village  on  the  Island.  There
is  a  group  of  houses  at  Challa,  another  cluster  at  Kea  and
on  surroanding  eminences,  a  scattered  group  at  Pucara,
houses  here  and  there  on  the  slopes,  and  hamlets  at  Yumani
and  ITacuyn  (22).  A  considerable  portion  of  the  soil  is,  not-
withstanding the  steepness  of  the  slopes,  cultivated  or  at
least  tillable,  thanks  to  the  system  of  terraced  garden-beds
adopted  by  the  Indians  since  time  immemorial,  or  rather
forced  upon  them  by  the  natore  of  the  groimd. There  are


;cbyG00'^lc


52  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

also  paatnrages,  like  the  bottom  of  Pncara,  the  graaay  swell-
ings  of  Ciriapata  and  Marcnni  (g  and  19).  The  western
portion  of  the  Island,  especially  the  long  and  elevated  ridge
of  Kakayo-kena,  is  nninhabited,  although  patches  of  ground
are  oceaaionally  cultivated  even  there.

The  crops  raised  are:  Potatoes,  oca,  qninua,  beans  of  the
large  and  coarse  kind  called  habas,  and  a  little  maize.  Of
the  now  neglected  gardens  I  have  already  spoken.  Potatoes
being  the  main  staple,  the  mannfaotnre  of  chnnu  is  also  the
chief  industry.  The  products  are  carried  on  donkeys  and
by  carriers  as  far  as  the  Pnncu,  thence  by  balsa  to  Yampu-
pata  on  the  mainland,  and  to  Copacavana  on  the  ba<dm  of
donkeys  or  on  the  backs  of  men.  What  the  hacienda  of
Challa  gives  to  its  owners  is  sometimes  carried  to  Puno  by
balsas  in  a  three  days'  voyage;  and  what  the  <3uarachi
family  needs  at  La  Paz  is  taken  to  that  city  on  pack  animals
from  Yampupata.

Domestic  animals  abound  on  the  Island.  The  Indians
have,  as  usual,  a  good  supply  of  ugly  mongrel  dogs,  which
they  feed  as  little  as  possible.  There  are  some  domestio
fowl,  many  donkeys,  and  occasionally  a  diminutive  mule.  A
horse  is  sometimes  seen.  Sheep  exist  in  large  floc^.
Vicious  and  powerful  bulls  are  used  for  ploughing  with  the
preadamite  plough,  and  even  the  mast^,  much  more  the
stranger,  is  not  safe  from,  these  savage  and  treacherous
brutes.  The  cows  are  ill  fed  and  uncared  for ;  but  still  they
give  milk,  which  is  converted  into  a  very  fair  cheese  and
sent  to  Puno.  A  sporadic  cat,  few  rats  and  mice,  some
very  familiar  swine,  a  few  ducks  and  geese,  and  a  very
ill-natured  turkey,  together  with  the  guinea-pig  (called  in
Bolivia  "rabbit"— conejo,  and  in  Peru  '*cuy")i  constituted,
during  our  stay  on  the  Island,  the  remainder  of  domesticated
animals.  As  Pediadus  vestimenti  to  the  Ladian'g  garb,  and
capitis  to  his  hair,  so  is  the  goinea-pig  to  the  In^an's
kitchen.  These  extremely  reprodnctive  animals  render  ex-
istence in  a  cooking-place  desperately  lively  for  the  nuac-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


mi,  one  of  the  leading  medicioe-mrai  (La^'ka)
OD  Titicticii  Island


^..Goot^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI  63

costomad  visitor.  Sleep  in  Buch  a  place,  with  the  maiiy-
hned,  Tat-foot«d,  and  taillees  rod^its  bustling  about  and
chattering  with  liieir  teeth,  is  impoeeible,  onlees  one  is  extra-
ordinarily tired.

Although  there  is  an  abnndance  of  water-fowl,  ducks  in-
cluded, on  and  abont  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  the  Indian  does
not  take  advantage  of  it  as  a  supply  of  meat;  bat  he  fre-
quently hunts  for  the  eggs.  The  yolk  is  green  and  the  taste
decidedly  fishy  and  unpalatable;  but  the  Indian  relishes
Buch.  food.  It  is  chiefly  on  the  small  islands  near  the  north-
western extremity  of  Titicaca  that  thonsands  of  birds  roost,
and  thither  the  Indian  goes  in  his  balsa,  retuming  some-
times with  a  fall  load  of  eggs  and  also  of  young  birds.
These  Islands  (see  map)  are  six  in  niunber,  the  smallest  of
which  is  Chujn,  and  the  largest  Kodii,  or  "Kuji-huata."
Lanassani,  which  is  the  most  eastem^  is  low  and  flat  and  has
at  its  eastern  extremity  a  still  lower  extension,  which  fea-
ture has  s^^en  rise  to  the  belief  that  an  ancient  dyke  for-
merly connected  it  with  the  main  Island.  We  could  not  find
anything  to  support  this  belief ;  but  noticed  some  faint  ves-
tiges of  walls  and  terraces  on  the  island  indicating  that  in
andent  times  it  may  have  been,  at  least  temporarily,  inhab-
ited.

West-northwest  of  Lauassani  lies  Kenata.  It  has  the
shape  of  a  triangnlar  pyramid,  and  on  its  steep  slopes  are
traces  of  ancient  terraces.  We  did  not  land  on  Chujn,  but
passed  near  enou^  to  be  able  to  scan  its  sides.  Ko  vestiges
of  ancient  remains  could  be  seen.  Payaya,  which  is  farthest
from  Titicaca  to  the  north,  is  low  and  flat,  like  Lanassani,
and  we  saw  what  appeared  like  remnants  of  walls.  Koa  is
by  far  the  tallest.  It  has  the  shape  of  a  cupola ;  slopes  are
very  steep,  in  many  places  vertical  On  its  eastern  side
grottoes  have  been  washed  out  by  the  water,  and  one  of
them  has  a  handsome  portal  with  two  openings.  Graceful
ferns  drape  them.  One  of  these  entrances  is  the  doorway  to
a  long  winding  passage,  the  floor  of  which  is  covered  with


;cbyG00'^lc


54  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

water  for  some  distance.  This  passage  has  not  yet  been
explored,  as  the  fear  that  it  might  be  the  home  of  some
aquatic  animal  has  deterred  every  one  from  penetrating  to
more  than  a  hundred  feet.''  It  is  believed  this  natural  gal-
lery traverses  the  whole  island  and  has  an  exit  on  the  oppo-
site western  aide.  We  were  shown  the  almost  inaccessible
cleft  where  that  exit  is  supposed  to  be.  Eochi  is  by  far  the
largest  of  the  cluster.  We  did  not  visit  it,  owing  to  the  late
hour  of  the  day,^^  bnt  we  saw  it  very  near  and  from  all
sides.  It  appeared  bleak  and  denuded,  and  Don  Miguel
Ctorces  informed  us  that  it  contained  no  vestiges  of  antiquity
and  that  its  slopes  were  exceedingly  slippery.  It  is  near  ^
Koa  that,  according  to  Baluarte,  the  extraordinary  depth  of
400  meters  (1312  feet)  is  said  to  have  been  noted.  I  do  not
know  on  what  authority  this  statement  is  made,  but  Koa
has  the  reputation  of  being  surrounded  by  the  deepest
waters  of  the  Lake.

The  lower  islets,  Lauassani  and  Payaya,  are  covered  with
dense  shrubbery  and  abound  in  handsome  flowering  plants.
These  islands  struck  us  as  bearing  more  abundant  and
vigorous  vegetation  than  most  sites  on  Titicaca.  The  grass
especially  is  rank  and  tall.  Hence  small  flocks  of  sheep  are
sometimes  carried  to  them  and  left  to  pasture  for  months.
They  need  no  herder  and  no  care  whatever,  feed  and  water
being  both  abundant,  and  some  shelter  being  afforded
either  by  the  shrubbery  or  by  the  rocks  and  cliffs.

These  islets  are,  as  stated,  the  home  of  thousands  of
aquatic  birds.  Koa  especially,  with  its  numerous  rocky
shelves,  is  inhabited  by  countless  families  of  black,  slender-
necked  cormorants.  When  we  approached  the  island,  on  the
eastern  side,  every  ledge  and  projection  was  occupied  by
nests  filled  with  eggs  or  with  young  birds.  Six  Indians  had
attached  themselves  to  our  crew  for  the  purpose  of  robbing
the  nests.  On  our  homeward  voyage  to  Challa  we  met  a
balsa,  the  only  occupant  of  which  was  paddling  his  craft
toward  the  Island  of  Kenata  on  a  similar  errand.


;cbyG00'^lc


NOTES


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


t  PHTBICAL  ASPXCT  AMD  O


'^e  gronp  of  mtoB  called,  re-
spBeH-veij,  Condor-konofis,  EBpanit*,
and  Torno  Knpvia,  wbove  th«  hsciendA
of  Lhijo,  and  12,900  fact  abore  the
•ea,  are  trallt  on  femiglnotii  rock
witii  an  abundance  of  limonite,  in
Dodnlea  and  otherwise.  The  eompua
of  my  theodolite  became  so  Boiish
affected  tberebj  that  I  had  to  have  it
remagnetiMd  at  L«  Paa.  It  waa  done
aa  well  as  povible,  but  not  with  the
accoraej  that  woold  hare  been  ob-
tained elMwbere.

'Squiar  givM  the  plan  of  an  an-
cient edifice  through  the  remaina  of
which  the  trail  from  the  PnncD
passed  at  tUs  time  (Ptfm,  p.  889).
There  are  fiOnt  Testigee  lef^  but  It
would  not  be  poisible  now  to  MCOg-
niie  the  plan  still  obtainable  in
Sqider  "s  time.  I  fear  that  mj  gifted
predeceosor  oeeasionall;  lo<Aed  at
thiags  on  Titicaea  with  rather  im-
iginatiTe  ^es;  for  instance,  the
"line  of  an  ancient  road  supported
br  terraces  of  large  stone*"  (p.  8SS)
cannot  be  found  any  more,  and  I
doabt  very  mncb  if  it  ever  existed.
With  these  exceptionj,  hia  description
of  tbe  tnul  aeroM  the  Island  Is  very
good.

*  I  borrow  this  beantif  nl  and  ap-
propriate term  from  Sqnier (Psnt).


The  plate  which  faees  page  S68  of
bis  book  gives  a  fair  idea  of  the  ap-
pearance of  the  motutain  as  well  as
of  the  scensrj  in  generaL

*  From  the  northern  haU  of  the  Is-
land Illimani  is  not  viable,  bnt  from
tbe  knoU  in  front  of  the  hadenda  of
TnmanL  I  consider  the  panorama
from  that  spot  to  be  one  of  the
most  magnificent  moontatn  views  in
America  or  Europe.  The  eye  «m>
biacM,  in  almost  a  semicirde,  tbe
Cordillera  of  Charassani  as  well  aa
tbe  whole  of  tiie  Bolivian  raagf^
from  IQampa  to  nUmanL

'The  mine  was  opened  and  worked
bj  a  Scotchman,  Hr.  Alexander  Don,
tmt  the  conditions  of  trade  and  com*
mere*  were  such  that  it  had  to  be
dosed.  fDavid  Forbe^  (Report  on  lh«
0«Aogy  of  South  AnleTitsa,  1861,  pp.
48,  40)  mentions  carboniferoos  for-
mations on  both  sides  of  the  Lake.
Since  Ua  time  it  has  become  a  wdl-
known  fact.

*I  have  not  at  mj  command  the
works  of  ^'Orbignj  and  Oabb'^and
hence  quote  them  from  the  essay  of
Puente  bo  often  referred  to  (Btt%tdio
Monogrdfieo  dd  Logo  Titieaoa,  pp.
384,  387).  In  regard  to  the  qnalitr
of  the  coal  we  beard  various  opinions.
Many  claim  that  it  is  exceUent,  and


;cbyG00'^lc


56  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


others  declare  the  reverse.  It  has  not
as  ret  been  fairly  teeted.
■-  '  The  eziatenM  of  this  wildcat  baa
been  denied,  but  we  baTS  atmndant
proof  of  it.  Among  others,  it  is  men-
tioned br  Pnente:  "En  los  eerroa
que  radean  la  lacuna  se  halla  el  gato
montle,  Titi,  mas  grande  que  el  do-
tttMiea,  de  color  patdo,  aliatado
como  la  pid  del  tigre  real,  qne  tits
de  la  eaza  de  avea  qne  le  propordona
el  lagp"  (fftudto,  p.  387).  Further
on  I  slwll  refer  to  the  connection  of
tbat  animal  with  some  traditions  re-
garding the  Island.

'If,  aa  pDsnta  states  (see  note
7),  tbe  titi  feeds  alee  on  water-
fowl, it  would  aeeonnt  for  the  belief
that  it  is  arapUUone,  a  statement
which  was  grarelr  repeated  in  the  La
Fas  newspapers  in  1S95.

'  CUoephaga  m«lant>ptera,  or  Ber-
niela  melanoptera.  In  the  PemTian
Sierra  it  is  called  "bnachna."  We
fonnd  this  beautiful  bird  also  at  the
foot  of  the  gladers  of  Dlimani,  in
altitodn  eiceeding  13,000  feet.

"There  are  two  domesticated  hna-
llatas  at  Uacnya,  a  group  of  buildings
above  the  hacienda  of  YumanL

"^wTi,  VoL  II,  p.  100.

"fProfeoBor  W.  Nation^  SeePoente,
fitldto,  p.  374.

"Fra^  AndrA  de  8.  Nicolas
(Jffl^en  de  N:St  de  Copooabawi)
mentions  a  belief,  that  the  shrine  on
Titieaca  was  goarded  by  large  makea,
Cobo  (Sittoria  del  Nuewt  M*ndo,  IT,
p.  62)  states:  "Contaban  los  Indioa
viejoe  qne  era  goardado  eae  aantoario
per  una  aierpe  6  colebra  grande;  j
pndo  ser  haberlee  hecho  el  Demonio
flse  engaflo  para  cebarlos  mis  en  £1
que  les  hacia  en  lo  principal;  m&s,  lo
qne  70  entiendo,  ee  que  el  deeir  qne
oercaba  toda  la  isla  una  culebra
entendisron,  jr  ee  debe  entender,  per
el  agua  de  la  lagnua  que  cifie  la  Isla,
la  coal  en  los  dias  daros  retoeada  con
loa  rayoB  del  Sol,  hace  que  en  la
playa  las  olas  psreican  culebras  pin-
tadas  de  Tarios  7  diversos  celoros."


This  effect  of  light  is  often  seen  on
the  Lake  and  from  the  Inland.

"  The  usual  deacription  recalls  a
sea-cow.  Don  Miguel  Oarefe  has  in
his  collection  a  tooth  supposed  to
have  been  taken  from  the  dead  bodj
of  such  a  creature,  found  in  some  re-
mote comer  of  the  beach  near  Copa-
earana.  There  lives  at  Challa  an  In-
dian who  lost  his  mind  npon  ee^ng
the  animal  on  the  beach.  Ter7  large
Siluridae  are  known  to  eiiet ,  dae-
where.  I  refer  among  othen  to  the
enormous  specimen  caught  yean  ago
in  tbe  Lake  of  Neuchatel,  in  Switser-
land.  It  is  TeT7  curious  that  nearly
all  those  who  have  seen  the  mjate-
rloQS  beaat  have  noticed  it  on  the
beach,  asleep.  Upon  being  aronaed
it  plunged  into  the  water  and  disap-
peared. Those  that  were  seen  at
Tiqnina  in  the  month  of  Mmj  of
1SQ5  were  deecribed  to  us  as  follows:
Length  about  twelve  feet,  head  like
that  of  a  bear  with  a  tuft  of  hair  of
moderate  length  (not  a  mane,  aa  baa
been  stated),  body  covered  with  short
and  amooth  hair  of  a  coffee-brown
color.  The  animal  approached  the
shore  toward  evening,  and  was  neither
shy  nor  savage.  At  Huariua  I  was
told  by  the  prindpal  inhatutanta  that
whole  families  of  these  animals  have
been  seen  in  sheltered  covee,  sunning
themselvei^  and  that  it  was  wdl
known  to  the  Indians  and  older  in-
hatntants.  Several  apparitions  of  Oto
mTsterions  creature  on  the  beach,  at
diverse  places,  but  always  about  tbe
petiinwilaa  of  Copacavana  and  Santi-
ago Huata,  have  been  related  to  na
hj  parties  having  no  connection  with
each  other.

"  I  allude  to  the  heads  forming
handlea  of  goblets  or  pitchers,  moetly
painted,  which  we  obtained  chiefly
from  the  singular  aite  of  Kea-Kollu
Ghieo  (1),  and  more  particularly  to
the  three  pieces  of  gold-leaf  in  the
shape  of  two-legged  animals,  obtained
at  Koati.  The  latter  may  be  anything
from  a  hippopotamna  to  a  condor.


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI  57

"Tean  mgo  Koati  waa  inhabited  him  that  b«  did  not  ventore  to
b7  two  parties  who  exposed  them-  awaken  the  creatore,  but  he  Mw  it
Mlvea  to  the  grare  mupidoii  of  mak-  near  enough  to  deecribe  Ite  sh^te  and
ing  counterfeit  monej.  When,  how-  color;  and  both  agree  with  the  de-
arer, Bolirian  troopa  were  Bent  to  seripdon  bj  parties  who  claim  to
March  the  Island  for  proof,  nothing  haxe  seen  the  animal  at  Tiqnina  and
eonld  be  fonnd.  The  craft  that  within  six  feet  of  the  beach,
landed  the  detachment,  returned  to  "It  wae  in  Jone  that  we  were
Bome  remote  point  on  the  mainland ;  finally  enabled  to  visit  the  emaller
and  the  little  band  of  eoldien  with  islands.  The  positiTe  orders  of
their  officers  found  themselreB  in  the  Miguel  Oarcis  to  have  a  balsa  ready
woret  of  pligbts.  There  was  no  food  for  ns  at  ony  Ume  were  ntterly  die-
on  Koati  and  no  waj  of  getting  out  obeyed,  by  Ms  own  manager  of  the
of  the  Island.  At  last  it  became  pos-  property  as  well  as  bj  the  Indians,
■ible  to  commnnieate  with  the  shore  It  was  only  when,  through  the  Und-
and  to  secure  relief.  ness  of  Oarc^  and  of  Don  Abel  Men-

"It  ■waa  at  Koa  that,  about  sixty  de^  we  obtained  a  handwheel-boat  at

years  ago,  an  Indian  saw,  asleep  on  Pnno,  that  we  were  able  to.  make  the

rocks  in the  grotto,  a  beast  resem-  voyage.
bUog  a  cow. Tbe  sight  so  frightened


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


THK  INDIAirS  OF  THE  BLAND  OF  TITICACA


.wGooi^lc


M rf


DamziowGoOi^lc


yon* ^


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


Pabt  III
THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TTTICACA


"IjiEW,  if  any,  of  the  preaent  inhabitants  of  the  Island  of
J/  Titicaca  are  direct  desoendants  of  the  Indians  who
ooenpied  it  at  the  time  of  the  oonqnest.  After  Pizarro  had
established  himself  at  Cnzoo  in  the  latter  part  of  1533,  he
sent,  early  in  December  of  that  year,  two  Spaniards  to  reoon-
noiter  the  Lake  re^on,  of  which  he  had  already  heard.*
The  two  scouts  remained  absent  forty  days  and  retamed
with  the  following  information :

' '  The  two  Christians  that  were  sent  to  see  the  province  of
the  CoUao  delayed  forty  days  on  their  jonmey,  from  which
they  returned  to  the  city  of  Cuzco,  where  the  Governor  was.
They  gave  him  an  aoconnt  and  report  of  everything  they
had  learned  and  se^i,  as  will  be  related  below.  The  country
of  the  CoUao  is  distant,  and  far  away  from  the  ocean,  so
much  so,  that  the  natives  inhabiting  it  have  no  knowledge  of
it  (the  sea).  The  land  is  very  hig^,  somewhat  level  and,
besides,  imusually  cold.  There  are  no  trees,  nor  is  there  any
firewood,  and  wlutt  of  the  latter  they  may  ase,  is  gotten  by
them  in  exchange  of  goods  with  those  who  dwell  near  the
sea  called  Ingri,  and  reside  also  along  the  rivers  in  the  low-
land, where  the  coontry  is  warm ;  and  they  have  firewood.
From  these  they  obtain  it  against  sheep  and  other  animals
and  vegetables ;  for  the  rest  of  the  country  is  sterile,  so  that
all  sustain  themselves  on  roots  of  plants,  on  herbs,  maize,
and  some  little  meat.  There  are  in  this  province  of  Gxe
CoUao  many  sheep,  but  the  people  are  so  submissive  to  the


;cbyG00'^lc


62  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

lord  to  whom  they  owe  obedience  that,  without  his  permis-
sion or  that  of  the  principals  or  governors  that  are  in  the
conntry  by  his  command,  none  are  killed,  and  not  even  the
lords  and  caciques  ventore  to  slaughter  and  eat  any,  unless
it  be  with  his  lieense.  The  conntry  is  well  settled  because  it
is  not  destroyed  through  war  as  are  the  other  provinces.
Their  settlements  are  of  moderate  size  and  the  houses
small,  with  walls  of  stone  coated  with  earth  (clay),  and
thatched  with  straw.  The  grass  that  grows  in  that  conn-
try is  sparse  and  short.  There  are  a  few  streams,  but
small  ones.

"In  the  middle  of  the  province  ia  a  big  lake  about  a  hun-
dred leagnes  in  size  nearly,  and  around  this  lake  is  the  most
peopled  conntry.  In  the  center  of  the  lake  are  two  small
islands,  in  one  of  which  is  a  mosque  temple  and  house  of  the
BOB,  which  is  held  in  great  veneration,  and  in  it  they  go  to
present  their  offerings  and  perform  their  sacrifices  on  a
large  stone  that  is  on  the  island^  called  Thichicasa,  which,
either  because  the  devil  conceals  himself  there  and  speaks  to
them,  or  because  it  is  an  ancient  custom  as  it  is,  or  for  some
other  reason  that  has  never  been  found  out,  they  of  the
whole  province  hold  in  great  esteem  and  offer  to  it  gold  and
silver.  There  are  [on  this  Island]  more  than  six  hundred
Indian  attendants  of  this  place,  and  more  than  a  thousand
women,  who  manufacture  Chioca  [chicha]  to  throw  it  on
this  rock.'"

After  this  first  hasty  visit  by  the  Spaniards  (either  late
in  December,  1533,  or  in  the  first  days  of  January,  1534),  it
is  not  impossible  that  Titicaca  as  well  as  Koati  were  aban-
doned by  the  Indians  of  Inca  descent.'  Cieza  states:  "On
large  islands  that  are  in  the  lake  they  (the  Indians  living
on  the  shore)  plant  their  crops  and  keep  their  valuables,
holding  them  to  be  safer  there  than  in  the  villages  along  the
road. ' ' This  was  in  1549,  fifteen  years  after  the  first  visits

What  transpired  during  these  fifteen  years  is  vaguely  in-
dicated by  various  sources. Thus  the  name  of  the  fiirst


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


i I

% I


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 63

Spaniard  who  visited  the  Island  is  given  as  Blesoas,  an
officer  of  Pizarro.'  It  is  not  clear,  however,  if  Dlescas  was
one  of  the  first  two  explorers  or  whether  he  commanded  a
larger  party  sent  afterward  to  seize  the  gold  and  silver  sup-
posed to  have  acctuntUated  on  the  Island.'  A  modem
Boorce,  claiming  to  base  on  the  earliest  manuscript  inf  orma-
tioD,  asserts  that  a  visit  to  Gopacavana  was  made  by  Gon-
zalo  Pizarro  in  1536,  and  that,  on  that  occasion,  the  Lidians
were  apportioned  according  to  the  system  of  "Enoo-
miendas."^  If  any  reliance  conld  be  placed  on  the  sonrce
alluded  to,  Diego  de  Ill^cas  would  have  been  at  Gopacavana
in  1536,  in  company  with  Belalcazar  and  Pedro  Anznrez  de
Campo-redondo,  bnt  it  is  well  known  that  Belalcazar  was  in
Ecnador  at  the  time,  and  that  Anzurez  returned  to  South
America  in  15381"

In  1536  the  Spaniards  were  blockaded  at  Gnzco  by  the
bdiana  for  ten  months.  Hence,  while  it  might  be  barely
possible  that  a  small  detachment  had  stayed  on  the  Lake,
cat  off  from  oommnnication  with  Gonzalo  and  Hernando
Pizarro,  but  on  friendly  terms  with  the  Aymar4  Indiana,  it
is  very  doubtful.  No  mention  is  made  of  it  in  any  contempo-
raneous document  at  my  command.*

A  work  of  considerable  iniportanoe  on  Peruvian  antiqui-
ties, bnt  written  more  than  a  century  after  the  conquest,  by
the  Jesuit  Father  BemabS  Gobo,  contains  the  statement  that
Francisco  Pizarro  sent  three  Spaniards  to  the  Lake  to  visit
the  Island  and  take  from  it  a  statue,  half  gold  and  half
silver,  which  they  are  said  to  have  brought  to  Cnzco."  If
th}s  is  true,  it  must  have  happened  subsequent  to  the  first
visit,  else  it  would  have  been  alluded  to  in  the  report  from
1534.  Neverfheless,  Gobo  favors  the  (then  general)  belief
that  the  main  ceremonial  objects  were,  upon  the  coming  of
the  Spaniards,  concealed  or  thrown  into  the  Lake.  The
.  Augustine  Fray  Alonzo  Bamos,  who  was  a  resident  of  Gopa-
cavana at  the  same  time  as  Gobo,  bnt  wrote  fully  thirty
years  before  him,  states:  "To  what  we  have  already  said


;cbyG00'^lc


M  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

abont  [the  temple  of]  Titicaca  we  shall  add  that  it  was  the
most  frequented  one  in  the  realm  and  with  great  riches,
which,  according  to  common  belief,  the  Indians  threw  into
the  Lake  when  the  first  Spaniards  entered  the  Island  with
the  captain  Illescas."'*  Vizcarra  affirms  in  regard  to  the
Island  of  Koati:  "And  when  the  Captains  Alznres  (An-
znres]  and  the  Blescas,  with  the  Franciscan  Fathers,  came
to  the  peninsula  [Copacavana],  although  they  attempted  it
in  1536,  they  conld  not  reach  it  [Koati]  from  la<^  of  time,
and  becanse  they  thoa^t  it  was,  as  well  as  that  of  the  snn
[Titicaca],  deserted  and  waste.""  After  the  blockade  of
Cozco  had  been  raised  and  the  bloody  dissensions  between
Ahnagro  and  Pizarro  terminated  through  the  death  of  the
former,  Francisco  Pizarro  himself  came  to  Cnzco  in  1538,^^
while  his  brothers  Hernando  and  Qonzalo  invaded  the  CoUao
with  the  avowed  intention,  says  the  treasurer  Manuel  de  Es-
pinall,  of  going  to  an  island  called  "Titicacao,"  said  to  con-
tain much  gold  and  silver.^*  Their  attempt  seems  to  have
failed,  for  the  younger  Almagro,  in  his  aocnsation  against  Pi-
zarro (1541 )  acctises  Hernando  Pizarro  of  an  attempt  to  hunt
for  the  treasure  in  the  Lake,  in  which  attempt  ten  Spaniards
were  drowned  t  ^^  It  shows  that  five  years  after  the  first  visit
the  gold  and  silver  believed  to  have  existed  at  the  shrines  of
Titicaca  and  Koati  were  already  looked  for  in  the  waters  of
the  lagune  and  not  any  more  on  the  Islands.  I  am  loath  to
admit  as  yet  that  any  visit  was  made  to  the  Islands  between
1534  and  1538,  and  incline  to  the  belief  (until  otherwise  in-
formed) that  the  Quichua  attendants  of  the  shrines,  after
secreting  the  principal  fetishes,  abandoned  both  isles,  the
Aymara  Indians  alone  remaining.  What  the  first  Spanish
explorers  of  Titicaca  reported  on  the  numbers  of  its  Indian
occupants  (1600)  must  be  taken  with  due  reserve."

/'It  appears,  therefore,  that  the  Islands  were  occupied,  as  a
place  of  worship  mainly,  at  the  time  of  the  conquest,  and
long  previous,  but  that  a  part  of  the  population  abandoned
it  very  soon  after  the  first  visit  by  the  Spaniards. Informa-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 65

tion  oonceming  the  Island  from  tunes  anterior  to  1533  rests,
of  coarse,  exclusively  on  tradition.'^

In  1550  Pedro  de  Cieza  finished  the  first  part  of  his  valu-
able Cronica  del  Peru,  in  which  he  mentions  folklore  to  the
effect  that  "white  men"  with  long  and  flowing  beards  had
"once  npon  a  time"  inhabited  Titicaca  and  were  ex-
terminated by  (Aymard)  Indians  from  the  Collao."  A
contemporary  of  Cteza.  and,  like  him,  a  soldier -^edro  Gu-
tierrez de  Santa  ClaraWhas  preserved  what  he  claims  to
be  genuine  Indian  lore,  according  to  which  the  inhabitants  of
the  Island,  many  centuries  prior  to  the  sixteenth,  invaded
the  mainland  and  established  themselves  at  Hatun-CoUa,
near  Pnno.  According  to  the  same  source,  the  Inca  tribe
were  originaUy  Islanders  and  made  war  on  the  people  of
Cnzeo,  which  warfare  began  about  in  the  fourteenth  cen-
tury.^" I  merely  allude  here  to  these  very  uncertain  tales,
having  to  treat  of  them  in  another  chapter  of  this  mono-
graph and  with  greater  detail.  The  same  is  the  case  with
the  (mnch  better  founded)  statements  concerning  the  occu-
pation of  the  Island  by  the  Inca,  in  the  latter  half  of  the
fifteenth^'  century,  which  will  be  discussed  in  the  archaeo-
logical sections.  Suffice  it  to  mention  here  that  at  the  time
when  the  Inca  first  visited  the  Island  they  found  it  inhabited
by  Aymar&  of  the  Lupaca  branch,  or  rather,  i^o  spoke  the
Lupaca  dialect  of  the  AymarS  idiom.  It  seems  that  these
were  partly  driven  to  the  mainland,  while  some  Quichua  and
a  number  of  women  established  themselves,  or  were  estab-
lished, around  the  shrine  and  at  other  sites,  chiefly  for  cere-
monial purpoaes.'"

After  the  Spaniards  had  become  complete  masters  of
northern  Bolivia,  in  1588,  it  becomes  difficult  to  trace  the
condition  of  the  Island  until  the  end  of  the  century.  On  the
map  made  by  order  of  the  Viceroy  Don  Francisco  de  Toledo
in  1573  (herewith  published)  the  "Embarcadero,"  or  place
where  people  from  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  were  wont
to  embark  in  order  to  cross  over  to  Titicaca  Island,  is  indi-


;cbyG00'^lc


66  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

cated ;  hence  it  may  be  12ie  Island  was  inhabited  at  the  time.
From  the  same  time  (1571-1574) /^nan  Lopez  de  Vela&co^
cosmographer  royal,  conveys  the  information  (obtained  at
second  or  third  hand)  that  in  the  "great  lagone  of  Chncnito,
in  the  language  of  the  Indians  Titicaca,"  there  are  '*many
islands  peopled  by  natives,  who  navigate  it  in  their  canoes
and  plant  their  crops  on  the  islands,  and  keep  in  them,
guarded  as  in  a  stronghold,  the  most  predoos  things  they
have ;  and  so,  ancientiy,  in  the  time  of  the  Incas,  there  was
a  temple  of  the  son,  great  and  very  rich."  While  the  Connt
de  ta  Gk>mera  was  CK>vemor  of  Chncnito  (end  of  the  sixteenth
and  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  centnry)  he  caused  "all
the  uncultured  Indians  to  be  removed  from  the  islands."*^
Whether  this  measure  was  limited  to  the  islands  in  the
vicinity  of  Chncnito  or  whether  it  was  also  extended  to  Titi-
caca and  Koati  is  not  certain.  At  the  dose  of  the  sixteenth
century  the  Dominican  Fray  Qregorio  Garcia,  a  resident  of
Fern  and  Bolivia  for  a  number  of  years,  describes  the
islands  as  deserted,  which  might  indicate  that  they  were  de-
populated under  pressnre  of  official  measures.^'  On  the
other  hand,  the  Angnstine  Antonio  de  la  Calancha,  about
thirty  years  later,  published:  "On  the  islands  which  its
archipelago  embraces,  and  espedally  on  the  largest  one  of
Titicaca,  there  are  great  numbers  of  Indians,  either  as  f  ngi-
tives  from  the  Doctrine,  or  on  account  of  being  troubled  by
the  Corregidores  and  Caoiqnes,  or  as  fishermen  for  their
own  sustenance,  and  not  a  few  of  them  in  order  to  continue
in  their  idolatrous  practices.""  Thus,  although  the  Island
may  have  been  abandoned  for  a  number  of  years,  at  the
dose  of  the  sixteenth  and  in  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
teenth century,  it  was  reoccupied  afterward  by  Indians,  but
tiiere  seem  not  to  have  been  any  white  settlers  on  it  until  the
eighteenth  centnry,  or  perhaps  later.  I  have  as  yet  been
unable  to  find  out  if  the  Island  was  inhabited  at  the  time  of
the  great  uprising  of  1780.
The  historical  notices  presraited  above  are  meager,  but


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 67

they  indicate  that  few,  if  any,  direct  descendants  of  the
Indiana  who  occupied  Titicaca  in  the  early  part  of  the  six-
teenth century  can  be  looked  for  on  the  Island  tOKlay.
'  'While  the  great  majority  of  the  Islanders  are  to-day  Aymara
by  language,  and  regard  themselves  as  snch,  it  is  not  un-
likely that  Quichua,  even  Uro,  and  perhaps  Chachapoyas
elements'*  are  mixed  with  them,  and  the  statement  of  the
actual  owners  of  Titicaca,  that  its  present  ^dian  popula-
tion is  of  comparatively  modem  origin  and  has  settled  on
it  from  varions  places,  should  not  be  lost  sight  of.

While  the  women  on  the  Island  are  usually  of  the  low
stature  of  other  female  Indians,  there  are  among  them  some
of  middle  hei^t  and  more  slender  than,  for  instance,  the
Pneblo  Ibdian  women  of  New  Mexico.  Among  the  men
there  are  some  tall  and  well  formed  figures,  witii  pleasant
faces;  many  are  of  low  statnre  and  have  sinister  counte-
nances. It  Is  not  unusual  to  meet  an  Indian  with  a  remarkably
low  forehead  and  abnormally  elongated  skulL  It  is  known
that  flattening  of  the  forehead  was  carried  on  for  at  least
half  s  century  after  the'  Spanish  authorities  had  perempto-
rily forbidden  the  practice.*"

The  Indiana,  not  only  of  this  Island  but  of  the  Puna  in
general,  are  rather  a  hardy  race.  Nevertheless,  diseases  are
S8  frequent  among  them  as  among  onrselves.  With  us,  care
is  taken  to  keep  the  upper  extremities  of  the  body  cool  and
the  feet  especially  warm.  The  Aymara  Indian  goes  bare-
footed, tmdgee  for  hours,  nay  for  whole  days,  in  the  ice-cold
waters  of  the  Lake  up  to  the  knees,  while  on  the  head  he
carries  a  pointed  woolen  cap  with  ear-laps  drawn  down,  and
a  hat  over  that  cap.  Over  his  shirt  or  jacket  he  wears  a
poncho,  more  or  leas  thick  and  more  or  less  ragged  and
dirty,  that  reaches,  when  very  long,  as  far  as  the  knees.
Thus  only  the  upper  part  of  the  body  is  protected  and  the
feet  are  bare.  It  is  true  that  their  feet  gradually  obtain  a
natural  protection  through  the  skin  being  thickened  and
hardened  hy  constant  exposure. Usnally,  the  ^dian  wears


;cbyG00'^lc


68  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

a  sandal  of  leather.""  Shoes  or  gaiters  are  worn  only  on
festive  occasionB  and  are  qnite  dmnsy.  The  soles  are  abont
an  inch  in  thickness,  the  heels  three  inches  high,  the  uppers
thick,  often  decorated  with  painted  rivets  and  strings,  and
in  the  soles  are  ponderous  nails  with  ronnded  heads.  This
festive  foot-gear  of  the  Aymara  pr^ents  a  striking  but  not
gracef nl  appearance.

The  Aymara  of  Titicaca,  and  probably  the  whole  tribe,
suffer  from  colds,  coaghs  and  Inng  diseases. ■''  Protracted
exposure  to  the  cold  waters,  snch  as  a  long  voyage  on  the
Lake  during  stormy  weather  In  an  onprotected  balsa,  pro-
dncea  sometimes  an  ailment  which  we  snccessfnlly  cured
with  nitrate  of  potash."  Skin  diseases  we  found  to  be
common  on  the  Island.  Dnring  onr  stay  Mrs.  Bandelier
was  besieged  by  men,  women,  and  children  begging  for  re-
lief from  what  they  erroneously  call  itch.  All  our  supply  of
Peruvian  balsam  became  exhausted,  for,  if  applied  together
with  sulphur,  the  treatment  was  invariably  successful.  This
contagious  disease  began  to  show  Itself  at  the  end  of  Janu-
ary, and  by  the  middle  of  March  over  thirty  of  both  sexes
and  aU  ages  had  been  cured.  It  is  certain  that  smallpox  and
measles  occur,  althon^  we  had  no  cases  during  onr  stay
there.  It  is  equally  true  that  the  former,  espedally,  makes
the  same  havoc  among  the  Indians  of  Titicaca  as  arnon^
northern  tribes.  A  number  of  less  dangerous  diseases  have
come  under  onr  observatioa  and  have  usually  yielded  to  the
contents  of  our  medicine  chest,  specially  prepared  at  Lima.
From  consumption  down  to  toothache,  nearly  the  entire
scale  has  been  represented."  A  very  common  ailment  is
indigestion,  produced  by  a  happy  combination  of  coarse
food  and  excess  of  alcoholic  liquids.  Beside  exposure  to
cold  and  moisture,  the  mode  of  living  is  the  chief  cause  of
the  ailments  to  which  these  people  are  subjected.  Their
houses  are  mostly  of  stone,  the  more  or  less  shaped  blocks
being  laid  in  common  adobe  mnd.'<*  They  are  usually  of
one  room  only,  and  I  noticed  the  same  distribution  of  the


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 69

home  into  three  buildings  or  more,  which  I  had  previooaly
noted  among  the  Indians  of  central  and  sonthem  Mexico.*^
A  residence  nsnally  consists  of  at  least  three  small  rectan-
gular and  thatch-roofed  boildings,  each  with  its  door  and
without  any  windows.  One  of  these  buildings  is  the  kitchMi,
another  is  officially  regarded  as  the  dormitory,  and  there
are  one  or  more  storehouses.  This  arrangement  prevalU  in
the  Bolivian  as  well  as  in  the  Peruvian  Puna.  Around
Joliaca  and  up  the  valley  toward  Ayaviri  the  numerous
dwellings  of  the  aborigines,  each  sorronnded  with  several
onthoQses  of  almost  the  same  size  and  shape,  are  scattered
over  the  level  expanse  like  so  many  tiny  hamlets."

Living  in  close,  low,  and  usually  very  filthy  abodes  is  not
hygienic.  Furniture  is  limited  to  the  most  primitive.  In-
stead of  a  bedstead,  there  is  a  so-called  "gallo,"  or  bench,
made  of  adobe.  On  this  bench  the  ponchos  of  the  inmates
are  spread,  and  there  they  sleep,  sometimes  with  a  straw
mat  tmder  the  poncho.  Not  unfrequently  the  dormitory  is
united  with  the  cooking-place,'*  and  then  the  family  shares
the  room  with  nmnerous  guinea-pigs,  domestic  fowl,  or
dogs,  and  even  with  swine  of  tender  age.'*

In  the  kitchen  of  the  hacienda  buildings  at  ChaUa  there
dwelt  the  "IJnya-siri,"  or  Indian  warden  of  the  house,  with
his  consort,  a  number  of  guinea-pigs,  two  white  rabbits,  and
an  occasional  chicken.  Chairs  are  not  common,  but  still
they  are  found  and  are  invariably,  as  well  as  the  tables,  of
the  low  kind  so  conmion  ten  years  ago  among  the  Pueblo
Indians  of  New  Mexico."

In  the  house  of  our  "compadre"  at  Kea-kolln,  where  we
spent  a  number  of  "pictnreaqae"  days,  a  table  had  been
built  with  two  ponderous  stone  slabs  supporting  a  heavy
stone  plate.  Such  a  home  is  not  without  some  attempts  at
decoration.  The  walls  have  niches,  and  these  niches  some-
times  contain  a  carved  image  and  a  few  modest  flowers.  A
saucer  containing  fat  stands  before  the  object  of  worship,
and  a  burning  wick  timidly  protrudes  from  the  vessel.


;cbyG00'^lc


70  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Gmcifxes  are  not  rare,  although  not  generally  displayed.
Pamted  images  we  do  not  remember  to  have  seen  in  Indiui
homes  on  the  Island." It  lies  so  utterly  * '  out  of  the  world ! ' '

The  valnables  of  the  Indian  are  stored,  or  hidden  away
rather,  in  the  store-rooms,  and  it  is  more  than  indiscreet  to
attempt  to  enter  one  of  these.  Hence  a  store-room  is  only
known  to  ns  from  the  ontside,  or  as  far  as  the  casually
opened  door  permitted,  in  which  case  one  or  more  of  the
family  would  surely  block  the  way  as  thorouj^y  as  possi-
ble. Mistrust  is  one  of  the  leading  traits  of  Aymara  char-
acter, a  mistrust  which  is  partly  the  consequence  of  frequent
abuses  committed  by  political  and  ecclesiastical  authorities.
It  is  also  due  in  part  to  the  possible  oonoealment,  in  such
places,  of  objects  of  ancient  worship  and  especially  of
sorcery.  I  would  say  here  that  tito  Aymara  Indian  is  as
mistrustful  of  his  own  people  as  he  is  of  a  stranger.'^

The  kitdien  furniture  rednces  itself  to  a  hearth  of  clay,
called  "kere,"  provided  with  a  firehole,  and  one  or  more
holes  on  which  to  place  cooking  vessels.  There  are  no  chim-
neys or  flues  in  Indian  honees."^  As  the  brushwood  is  often
green,  or  the  substitute  of  taquia'*  is  nsed,  the  dingy  place
becomes  filled  with  a  pungent  smoke  injurious  to  the  eyes.
The  cooking  vessels  are  of  clay  mostly;"*  an  iron  kettle  or
pan  is  regarded  as  a  first-class  treasure  and  stolen  from  the
nnsophisticated  stranger  as  often  as  possible.  The  pottery
is  not  made  on  the  Island  but  at  various  places  of  the  Puna,
as,  for  iustanoe,  at  Ancoraymes,  on  the  northern  shore  of
the  Lake ;  and  it  is  bon^t  either  at  the  Copacavana  fairs  or
on  an  occasional  voyage  by  balsa  to  that  village  or  to  Adba-
cadie.  It  may  be  said  that  the  kitchen  and  household  fur-
niture of  the  Islanders,  and  inhabitants  of  the  Puna  in.
general,  display  the  same  combination  of  ancient  and  modem
as  that  of  the  sedentary  Indians  of  the  southwestern  United
States  and  of  Mexico,*'  the  preponderance  being  slightly
in  favor  of  modem  implements.  Ancient  vessels  are  occa-
sionally met  with,  but  they  are  seldom  well  cared  for. It  is


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 71

chiefly  the  larger  jars  that  are  preserved  for  the  Btoring  of
grain  and  for  the  preservation  of  chieha."

The  most  impoiiant  household  atensil,  from  andent
times,  is  the  grinding  slab  with  its  grinder,  both  of  stone,
called  in  common  parlance,  and  in  Peru  and  Bolivia,  the
batdn.  Father  Gobo  a&ja  of  this  indispensable  utensil:
"For  grinding  their  com  and  bread  they  have  in  their
houses  smootii  and  broad  slabs  on  which  they  pour  out  a
amaU  quantity  only,  and  when  that  is  ground,  as  mudi
again.  They  grind  it  by  placing  on  this  slab  a  stone  made
in  the  shape  of  a  half-moon,  about  two  palms  in  length  and
one  in  width,  not  round,  but  somewhat  elongated,  with  three
or  foTir  inches  of  edge.  They  take  hold  of  the  horns  with
their  hands  and,  lowering  and  lifting  alternately  the  arms,
move  it  edgewise  from  one  side  to  the  other  over  the  maize,
and  by  means  of  this  labor  and  difficulty  grind  it,  as  well  as
anything  else,  althouj^  now  most  of  them  use  our  mills.
This  instrument  we  have  called  batan  .  .  .  but  the  Indians
caU  it  'maray,'  Tiftming  the  lower  stone  'callacha'  and  the
upper  'tanay.*  ""

The  batan,  whether  ancient  or  modern^  has  nothing  of  the
elaborateness  of  the  "metate"  used  in  Mexico  and  adjacent
oonntriea.  It  is  simply  a  ponderous  slab,  unadorned  and
seldom  even  rou^y  shaped.  Any  suitable  flat  rock  is
selected  for  the  purpose,  but  by  preference  an  andent  batfin
is  taken  from  some  neighboring  ruin.  The  crusher  is  usually
a  small  oval  boulder,  picked  up  among  the  drift  Whereas
the  metate  is  worked  on  the  incline,  the  batan  is  used  in  a
horizontal  position  and  indiscriminately  for  grinding  red
pepper,  maize,  dried  meat,  and  quinua,  or  coffee  when  the
latter  can  be  procured.  Mortars,  andent  as  well  as  modem
(the  latter  manufactured  at  Viacha  out  of  white  stone),
some  with  pestles  and  others  with  simply  a  rounded  pebble,
are  frequently  met  with,  and  are  used  for  grinding  herbs
and  other  condiments.**

An  Indian  kitchen  containing  the  hearth,  several  "ga-


;cbyG00'^lc


72  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  EOATI

loB,"  pots  and  pans,  bmshwood  or  taqnia,  and  the  batan,
and  occupied  by  a  number  of  homan  beings,  a  colony  of
guinea-pigs,  a  dog  or  two,  and  the  like,  is  one  of  the  most
crowded  places  on  tiie  globe.

Indian  architecture  in  the  Sierra,  hence  on  the  Island
also,  displays  a  marked  tendency  to  exclnsion  of  fresh  air.
The  doors  are  not  only  low  but  even  the  sill  is  raised.
Windows  there  are  none,*"  hence  li^t  is  excluded  as  well
as  air,  unless  the  door  be  open.  I  must  say,  however,  that
the  same  is  the  case  in  most  of  the  hacienda  buildings  on  the
Puna.  The  rooms  are  much  more  spacious  than  those  in
Indian  abodes  and  the  ceilings  higher,  but  the  windows  have
no  panes ;  they  are  closed  with  rude  shutters,  and  he  who
most  work  during  the  day  in  these  apartments  has  to  open
the  door  and  sit  in  the  humid  cold,  muffled  in  vicuna  blankets
and  overshoes  (if  he  has  any),  in  order  to  be  able  to  write
or  draw.

The  constant  cold  prevailing  in  these  re^ons**  is  the
main  reason  for  excluding  air,  from  the  houses  of  the  abo-
rigines as  well  as  from  those  of  the  better  classes.  Against
this  chilly  air  there  is  no  way  of  protection,  since  there  is
no  timber,  hence  no  clean  combustible,  in  the  land.  Both
the  Indian  and  the  white  are  driven  out  of  the  house  into
sunshine,  if  there  is  any,  and  as  long  as  it  lasts.  Should  it
be  a  rainy  day,  or  at  night,  crowding  is  the  only  way  for  the
Indian  to  obtain  warmth,  and  if  to  that  crowding  the  addi-
tional heat  of  a  close  kitchen  can  be  added,  life  is  rendered
at  least  supportable.  Leaving  the  door  open,  to  let  out  the
smoke  or  from  force  of  habit,  the  Indian  family  agglomer-
ates, either  in  the  dark  or  by  the  dim  light  of  a  rare  tallow
dip  until  one  after  the  other  falls  asleep.  Usually  the  door
of  the  dormitory  is  closed  at  night  but  rarely  locked,  al-
though the  doors  of  store-rooms  are  fastened.*''  Then
everybody  slumbers,  men,  women,  girls  and  children,  on
"gallos,"  on  ponchos,  covered  or  uncovered,  but  never  un-
dressed. The  Indian  sleeps  to-day  very  much  as  Cobo  de-


;abyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 73

Boribes  it  from  early  times:  "Everywhere  they  sleep  in  the
same  clothes  in  which  they  go  abont  in  the  daytime,  except
that  the  males  take  off  the  TacoUa  and  the  women  the
lAicUa;  and  when  they  rise  in  the  morning  all  the  dressing
they  have  to  do  is  to  shake  and  arrange  their  hair  .  .  .  '"^
The  dress  of  to-day  still  preserves  some  primitive  featares
frith  the  addition  of  breeches  and  sometimes  a  jacket  as  well
as  a  shirt  for  the  men,  and  of  a  chemise  and  skirts  for  the
women.  The  andent  costmnes  are  described  as  foUowB:
\Cieza  de  Leonymentions  the  pointed  caps  of  the  men,  called
by  him  "chncos,"**  whereas  "llnchn."  is  the  name  now
given  to  them  on  the  Island  and  on  the  Peninsnla  of  Copa-
cavana  as  well  as  at  La  Paz.  Cobo,  who  gives  the  most  de-
tailed description,  bnt  who  wrotb  nearly  a  century  after
Cieza,  says  of  the  costume:  "Their  dress  was  simple  and
limited  itself  to  only  two  pieces,  also  plain  and  withont  lin-
ing or  folds  (plaiting) ;  the  men  wear  below,  in  place  of
breeches  or  nnderwear,  a  scarf  a  little  wider  than  the  hand
and  thin,  and  so  tied  aronnd  the  loins  as  to  give  an  appear-
ance of  decency  .  .  .  this  they  call  guara,  and  only  nse
it  after  they  are  fourteen  and  fifteen  years  of  age.  Over
the  guaras  they  pnt  a  vestment  without  sleeves  or  collar,
which  they  call  %mcu,  and  we  call  it  undershirt,  as  it  has
the  cat  of  onr  shirts ;  and  each  one  is  woven  separate,  since
they  do  not,  as  we  do,  weave  large  pieces  and  then  cut  off
from  these  for  their  garments.  The  texture  is  like  a  piece
of  thick,  coarse  stuff,  its  width  is  three  and  a  half  palms,
and  its  length  two  ells.  The  opening  for  the  head  and  neck
is  left  so  that  there  be  no  need  of  cutting  it  open,  and,  once
taken  from  the  loom,  all  that  is  reqnired  is  to  fold  it  and
sew  the  sides  with  the  same  thread  with  which  it  was  woven,
just  as  one  ae^ra  a  bag,  leaving  in  the  upper  part  of  each
side  opening  enongh  to  stick  through  the  arms.  This  garb
commonly  reaches  as  low  as  the  knee  or  three  or  four  fingers
(in<dies)  above  it.
"The  cape  is  less  intricate. They  make  it  of  two  pieces.


;cbyG00'^lc


74  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

'with  a  seam  in  the  middle,  two  and  a  quarter  ells  long,  uid
one  and  three  quarter  ells  broad.  It  has  fonr  oomers  or
enda  like  a  mantle  or  blanket,  and  for  tMs  reason  we  call  it
mantle,  bnt  the  name  vrbidi  the  Indian  gives  it  is  jfocoUa.
They  throw  this  over  the  shoulders,  and  when  they  dance,
work,  or  do  anytliing  in  which  it  might  be  an  obstacle,  they
tie  it  with  two  ends  over  the  left  shoulder,  leaving  the  ri^t
arm  free.  Beneath  this  mantle  and  above  the  underwear,
they  carry  a  bag  or  wallet  hanging  from  the  neck,  named
chuspa,  one  palm  in  length,  more  or  less,  and  proportionately
wide.  This  bangs  down  to  the  girdle  below  the  right  arm,
and  the  strap  to  which  it  is  hong  passes  over  the.  left
shoulder.  This  bag  replaces  to  them  our  pockets.  This  is
the  common  and  nsual  costume  of  the  males,  arms  and  legs
being  bare,  and  this  costume  they  make  of  wool  in  the  moun-
tains and  of  cotton  in  the  hot  lands.'"*"

Of  the  female  dress  the  same  author  speaks  as  follows:
"It  consists  of  two  mantles:  one  of  these  they  wear  like  a
tunic  without  sleeves,  as  wide  above  as  below,  and  covering
them  from  the  neck  to  the  feet  There  is  no  slit  in  it  for
putting  through  the  head,  and  they  wrap  themselves  np  in
it  in  the  following  manner :  they  wrap  the  body  in  it  from
under  the  arms  downwards,  and  pulling  up  the  edges  over
the  shoulders,  they  join  and  fasten  them  with  their  pins.
From  the  girdle  down  they  tie  and  dnch  the  body  with  a
scarf,  broad,  thick  and  handsome,  called  chutnpi.  This  tonic
or  wrapper  is  called  anocu;  it  leaves  the  arms  free  and  naked
and  it  remains  open  on  one  side  so  that,  although  the  edges
overlap  a  little,  when  they  walk  they  flutter  and  open  from
the  chwnnpi  or  scarf  down,  showing  part  of  the  leg  and
thigh.  .  .  .  The  other  mantle  is  called  Uiclla;  this  is  thrown
over  the  shoulders  and,  gathering  the  edges  over  the  breast,
they  fasten  them  by  means  of  a  pin.  These  are  their  man-
tles or  mantillas,  which  oome  down  as  far  as  half  the  limb,
and  they  take  them  off  i^en  they  work  or  when  they  are  at
home.


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 75

"Their  pins  vith  which  they  fasten  the  dreBsea  are  called
fvptu,  and  they  are  very  queer  and  as  long  as  a  third  of  an
ell  and  less,  and  the  smallest  of  half  a  span  and  as  thick  as
small  bones.  At  the  top  they  have  a  thin  and  roond  plate
of  the  same  metal,  as  large  as  a  real  of  eight  (half  a  quarter
or  twelve  and  a  half  cents) ,  more  or  less  according  to  the  siae
of  the  tupu,  irith  the  edges  so  thin  and  so  sharp,  that  they
eat  many  things  with  them.  Most  of  these  tupus  or  topos
have  many  trinkets  of  gold  and  silver  dangling  from  the
heads.  In  these  pins  they  place  their  greatest  pride.  An-
ciently they  were  made  of  gold,  of  silver  and  copper ;  to-day
the  most  of  them  are  of  silver  with  some  carvings  and  paint-
ings on  the  heads,  made  with  special  curiosity.

"To  adorn  their  heads  consists  in  carrying  the  hair  vet7
long,  washed  and  combed;  some  wear  it  loose  and  others
plaited.  They  tie  it  with  a  ribbon,  more  or  less  as  wide  as
a  finger,  of  many  colors  and  striking,  which  they  call  vincha,
that  crosses  the  forehead.  On  the  head  they  put  a  piece  of
very  fine  cumbi,  called  pampacona,  and  this  piece  of  cloth
they  do  not  wear  its  fnll  width,  but  folded,  so  as  to  be  only
one  sixth  of  an  ell  wide.  One  edge  comes  down  over  the
forehead  and  the  other,  twisting  it  around  the  head  so  as  to
leave  the  hair  free  on  the  sides,  faUs  down  over  the  back  of
the  neck.

"On  the  chest,  from  one  shoulder  to  the  other,  they  used
to  wear  necklaces  of  certain  beads  called  chaquiras,  which
were  made  of  bones  and  sea  shells  of  various  colors.  They
neither  wore  ear-pendants  nor  perforated  their  ear-laps."'*

Of  the  ancient  costumes  of  the  males,  the  pointed  cap,
poncho  and  breech-clout  have  remaiaed.  The  pins  and
needles  are  also  used.'*  The  men  have  adopted,  besides
shirt  and  jacket,  a  wide  kind  of  breeches,  open  behind  from
the  knee  down— the  so-called  calzdn,"  known  in  Peru  also
as  characteristic  of  the  Aymard  dress.  A  bright  colored
scarf,  sometimes  with  striking  designs,  fastens  this  species
of  breeches  about  the  waist,  and  the  trousers  are  turned  in-


;cbyG00'^lc


76  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

side  out  when  they  are  at  work  or  in  a  specially  bellicose
mood.  Scanty  protection  of  the  lower  extremities,  careless
and  nndean  dress,  and  the  pointed  cap  with  the  small,  nar-
row-brimmed and  roimd-topped  felt  hat,  are,  for  the  men,
the  essential  components  of  an  every-day  Aymari  coatome
on  the  Islands  as  well  as  along  the  shores  of  the  Lake  and  on
thePona.

This  costome  is  not  very  hygienic,  in  the  climate  in  which
it  is  worn.  The  houses  are  certainly  not  hygienic,  nor  is  the
maimer  of  living.  Custom  and  habit  keep  the  Indian  in  the
old  road  he  stiU  travels ;  althongh  improvements  have  been
made  since  the  conquest,  not  only  in  dress  but  chiefly  in
household  ntensils  and  in  implements.  Thus  the  houses
have  doors,  often  of  rawhide  only,  but  still  doors  made  to
close  and  with  wooden  hinges,  some  also  with  hinges  of  iron.
Lumber  being  an  unknown  quantity  in  the  Puna,  the  Indian
seizes  upon  every  empty  box  in  which  the  alcohol  which  fur-
nishes him  with  most  of  his  spiritual  nourishment  is  trans-
ported, and  with  the  aid  of  the  few  iron  tools  he  has  either
bought  or  atol^,  and  a  stone  as  hammer,  he  manufactures
a  door.  Of  the  same  material  he  occasionally  makes  a  low
table  and  perhaps  an  equally  low  stool  with  high  square
back,  called  by  courtesy  a  chur.

All  these  are  advances;  and  for  their  scantiness  we  must
not  blame  too  severely  the  Spanish  colonist  nor  the  former
colonial  government  I  cannot  sufficiently  insist  upon  the
extraordinary  situation  of  the  Spanish  colonies.  Imxwrta-
tion  was  difficnlt,  and  transportation  still  more,  to  the  inte-
rior of  as  secluded  a  region  as  Bolivia  and  the  environs  of
its  great  Lake.  Hence  advances  could  be  made  but  very,
very  slowly.  If  the  Creole  met  with  great  obstacles,  hovr
much  greater  were  they  for  the  Indian  who,  besides,  looked
npon  every  innovation,  every  unknown  and  uncomprehended
implement  or  source  of  comfort,  with  snepicion  and  super-
stitions aversion.

During  primitive  times,  the  Aymara  Indiana  needed  no


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 77

other  inBtrament  in  order  to  nuumfactnre  garmenta  and
dresses,  or  to  mend  them,  tiiac  a  needle  which  they  called
"ciracona,"  made  of  a  spine  (thorn)  as  long  as  half  a
"geme"  (five  and  a  half  inches),  as  tiiick  as  one  of  onr
darning  needles,  perforated  at  one  end  and  very  pointed."*
Copper  and  bronze  needles  ("yanri")  were  nsed  also.*'  To*
day  they  have,  on  the  Island  and  elsewhere,  sewing  needles,
pack  needles,  metallic  pins,  and,  at  Sampaya  on  the  main-
land, as  well  as  at  Copacavana,  the  sewing  machine.  The
maol  of  stone  nsed  for  breaktng  clods  of  the  often  very  hard
soil  is  still  in  nae;  bnt  the  "chonta,"  a  first  consin  to  the
Mexican  "coa,""  with  a  heavy  blade  of  steel,  has  long  ago
supplanted  the  hoe  of  stone,  copper  or  bronze.  The  wooden
plonj^,  drawn  by  treacherous  bolls  (not  by  cows),  is  in
general  nse.  Knives,  forks,  spoons,  and  ladles  are  of  metal
in  many  Indian  abodes.  Iron  axes  and  hatchets,  iron
shovels,  and  occasionally  planes,  saws,  bits  and  angers,  are
foond  in  possession  of  the  Indians  and  they  know  how  to  nse
them.  Still  the  aborigine  yet  grasps  a  stone  in  preference
to  a  hanmier,  and  he  ties  in  preference  to  naUing.^''  He
steals  modem  tools  as  diligently  as  he  can,  and  no  nail  is
safe  from  him,  no  end  of  rope  or  leather  strap,  even  if  they
belong  to  a  parcel  or  to  a  saddle,  and  if  the  removal  en-
dangers the  safety  of  parcel  or  rider.  Bnt  after  he  acquires
Bodi  civilized  implements  and  auxiliaries  he  does  not  take
any  care  of  them.  The  owners  of  Challa  have  repeatedly
given  tools  to  their  Indians.  The  latter  used  them  rather
deftly,  but  after  a  year  or  so  the  saw  was  blnnt  and  rusty,
and  the  hatchet  had  lain  in  the  mnd  so  long  that  when  a
neighbor's  offspring  dug  it  out  of  the  mire  it  became  trans-
formed into  a  harmless  toy.  Then  they  will  beg  or  steal
from  a  stranger's  scanty  supply  of  tools,  to  neglect  these
in  torn,  as  soon  as  they  have  no  immediate  use  for  them.°"

This  carelessness  is  exhibited  toward  everything.  The
Indian  puts  on  a  new  shirt  and  wears  it  day  and  night  nntU
it  is  a  disgnsting  rag;  thai  he  tries  to  get  another  one.


;cbyG00'^lc


78  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Ever^  article  of  clothing  he  serves  in  the  same  wa^.  He
likes  animals,  but  does  not  ^ve  them  any  care.  With  very
few  exceptions,  perhaps  not  a  single  one,  the  Indian  houses
are  dilapidated.  Sweeping  with  a  very  unhandy  wisp  of
ichhu-grass  is  done  mostly  on  the  day  previous  to  a  feast,
that  is,  only  a  few  times  each  year.  The  accnmnlation  of
rubbish,  it  seems,  propagates  heat.  Personal  cleanliness  is
on  the  same  level."*

In  addition  to  the  improvements  already  enumerated,  I
have  to  mention,  as  an  advance  made  since  the  Spanish  occa-
pation  in  articles  of  household  use  and  fumitare,  the  ao-
called  gallo  or  sleeping  platform  of  adobe.  la  olden  times
the  family  slept  on  the  floor.'"  The  tile  roof,  not  rare  on
the  Island,  is  another  improvement.

The  Indians  on  the  Island  are  not  serfs.  It  would  be
more  appropriate  to  call  them  "renters."  In  case  of  a  sale
they  are  not  obliged  to  remain  on  the  land.  Those  of  the
men  who  have  lands  in  charge  for  cultivation  cannot  hire
themselves  out  to  others  without  permission  of  the  proprie-
tor; such  as  have  no  lands  in  charge  may  work  for  others,
and  it  is  not  rare  to  find  young  men  and  boys,  from  the
Island,  at  La  Paz  as  servants  or  hired  hands.  The  Indians
have  no  real  estate  of  their  own,  but  occnpy  sites  where
their  houses  stand,  and  work  little  plots  and  fields  for  whicb
they  pay  no  direct  rental.  The  compensation  g^ven  the
owners  consists  in:

(1)  Cultivation  of  certain  arable  lands  exdnsively  for  the
benefit  of  the  owners,  or,  as  it  is  called,  for  the  "hacienda."

(2)  Personal  attendance,  without  compensation,  at  the
houses  of  the  owner,  either  when  they  dwell  on  the  Island
or  at  Puno,  La  Paz,  or  elsewhere.  The  men  while  per-
forming such  a  service  are  called,  "pongo";  the  women,
*'mit'-ani.""

(3)  Other  special  services,  snch  as  selling  of  the  prodnoe
("Aljiri")  at  Copacavana,  guarding  the  house  ("unya-
siri  * ') ,  herding  of  sheep  and  cheese-making. These  services


;cbyG00'^lc


...A^  ;:u:-uf.  -.ir-tt'-l  hiiu  ■.!.:1^


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


Plate  XVU

Male  and  female  Ajinarfi  skulls  from  Titicaca  Island. The  male
skull  aitiflcialty  flattened


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 79

are  not  entirely  gratnitons,  but  compensated  to  a  certain
extent  in  prodncts,  tbat  is,  in  sheep,  dieese,  milk,  and  the
like.  Money  is  neither  received  nor  paid  except  when  some
of  the  products  of  the  hacienda  are  sold,  in  which  case  the
proceeds  are  received  by  the  ilacata  who  keeps  the  accounts
for  the  owners  and  settles  with  them  and  their  "mayor-
dome,"  or  overseer,  who  is  the  agent  of  the  proprietors  on
the  Island,  although  in  the  case  of  Cballa  he  remains  most
of  the  time  at  Copacavana.  Ynmani  has  no  mayordomo,  as
one  of  the  owners  resides  there  during  folly  one  half  of  the
year.  The  Indians  are  also  obl^ed  to  transport  the  crops  or
products  belon^g  to  the  hacienda  to  where  the  owners
reside,  or  to  Copacavana,  which  is  the  nearest  market

Of  these  four  kinds  of  servitude  only  one,  that  of  pongo  or
nut'-^ni,  may  become  vexations.  The  pongos  alternate  every
fortnight  Every  fortnight  a  new  set  goes  from  the  Island
either  to  Pnno,  or  to  Copacavana  if  one  of  the  family  re-
sides there,  or  to  La  Paz,  or  Sapahaqui,  to  attend  at  the
houses  of  their  landlords.  This  may  become  annoying  at
times,  since  it  may  fall  upon  one  whose  duties  would  lie
nearer  to  borne.  But  on  the  whole  the  proprietors  of  Titi-
caca  treat  their  renters  with  a  consideration  akin  to  sacrifice
of  their  own  interests.  This  is  especially  the  case  in  the
working  of  the  lands  of  the  haciendas  and  in  the  gathering  of
crops.  "We  had  ample  opportunity  to  convince  ourselves  of
how  much  the  Indians  abuse  the  negligence  of  the  owners,
or  rather  their  careless  good  nature;  how  little  they  did
for  the  lands  of  the  hacienda,  and  how  the  crops  raised  on
them  were  stolen  under  the  very  eyes  of  the  overBeer.  As
for  transportation  of  prodncts  from  the  Island,  it  is  usually
done  by  Indians  who  are  called  to  Pnno  or  other  places  of
residence  of  the  owners,  hence  it  is  not  an  extra  duty,  prop-
erly speaking.

According  to  Bolivian  and  Peruvian  laws  the  Indian  is,
at  least  in  theory,  a  citizen."  Hence  he  might  vote.  Such
an  exercise  of  the  "  ri^ts  of  a  free  and  enlightened  citizen ' '


;cbyG00'^lc


80  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

we  have  not  had  the  pleasure  of  witnessmg;  but  from  de-
scriptions it  wonld  be  about  as  imposing  an  affair  as  voting
in  many  parts  of  the  interior  of  Mexico,  where  the  Indian
receives  for  his  patriotic  action  a  compensation  that  inevita-
bly culminates  in  alcohol.  The  Indians  from  Titicaca  would
have  to  vote  at  Copacavana ;  but  whether  they  exercise  this
right  or  not,  and  under  what  pressure,  we  have  not  yet  been
able  to  ascertain.

Communal  tenure  of  lands  was  abolished  in  Bolivia,  bat
the  laws  remained  so  far  a  dead  letter."*  In  the  case  of  the
Island,  it  is  private  property,  and  the  Indians  are  only
renters;  there  is  no  communal  tenure,  though  some  features
of  it  remain.  Thus  every  year  in  antomn  (southern  hemi-
sphere) a  distribution  of  plots  for  cultivation  is  made.  On
Titicaca,  the  ilacata  proceeded  to  make  this  distribution,  on
the  ninth  of  March,  1895,  among  the  Indians  pertaining  to
the  hacienda  of  Challa.  Every  one  who  has  a  family,  or  re-
quires land,  is  allotted  a  tract  of  tillable  soil  proportionate
to  his  wants.  This  tract  he  cultivates  for  one  year  only.
Then  it  is  left  to  rest  for  a  term  of  four  years,  while  he
receives  in  exchange  a  new  plot  that  has  been  recuperating
about  that  length  of  time.  The  rule  is  not  the  same  in  all
localities.  There  are  districts  or  valleys  where  lands  rest
three,  seven  or  ten  years.  It  results  from  this  that,  while
the  surface  of  the  Island  (wherever  rocks  do  not  protrude)
appears  to  have  been  "anciently  cultivated,"  that  cultiva-
tion has  been  far  from  simoltaneons.  Only  a  small  pro-
portion was  tilled  at  any  given  time,  the  other  portions
lying  idle  to  recuperate.  This  system  of  rotation  is  a
very  ancient  one,  and  there  is  no  doubt  it  was  general  all
over  the  Sierra  long  before  the  Cuzco  Indians  overpowered
the  mountain  tribes.**  The  lands  on  the  Island  may  l»e
classified  as  follows,  starting  from  the  basis  that  the  entire
real  estate  is  vested  in  owners  of  originally  Spanish  extrac-
tion:

(1)  Vacant  expanses  and  pasturage,*"  the  latter  Tised  by


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 81

the  flocks  of  the  hacienda,  but  the  animals  of  the  Indians
obtaining  their  share  of  them  with  the  knowledge  and  con-
sent of  the  owners.

(2)  Lands  cnltivated,  for  the  ezclnsive  benefit  of  the
proprietors,  by  the  Indians  in  common  and  without  com*
penaatioQ.

(3)  Individual  plots  distribnted  among  the  Indians  an-
noally  and  improved  by  them  for  their  own  benefit  without
payment  of  rent.

(4)  The  sites  of  the  homes  of  the  Indians  which  they
occupy,  without  rent,  as  long  as  they  please,  or  as  long  as
they  have  no  reason  for  abandoning  their  dwellings.
Should  they  make  a  change,  they  can  move  to  another  site
without  being  molested  or  compelled  to  ask  for  permission,
as  long  as  they  do  not  inconvenience  a  neighbor  or  impinge
on  cultivated  expanses  or  pasturages.

Thus  the  Indian  has  on  the  Island  no  real  estate  of  his
own,  but  he  may  exchange  the  plot  annually  allotted  to  him
for  cultivation  for  that  of  another  Indian."

Political  jurisdiction  is  vested  in  the  Corre^dor  of  Copa-
cavana ;  and  the  courts  of  Bolivia  mie  in  matters  of  serious
crimes.  The  curacy  of  Copacavana  is  the  ecclesiastical
authority ;  but  the  Indians  still  maintain,  as  everywhere  on
the  Pona  and  in  the  Sierra,  an  organization  of  their  own,
one  handed  down  to  them  from  pre-colonial  times,  and''
which  is  based  npon  the  clan  as  a  unit.  The  clan  in  Quichua
as  well  as  in  Aymari,  in  Peru  as  well  as  in  Bolivia,  bears
the  name  of  "ayliu."  It  is  the  well-known  consanguine
cluster,  all  the  members  of  which  acknowledge  an  official
and  traditional  relationship,  governing  themselves  inde-
pend^tly  of  other  clans,  while  the  tribe  is  but  a  shell,  pro-
tecting and  holding  together  a  number  of  clans  through
common  consent.^^

The  rapid  but  irregular  expansion  of  the  sway  of  the  Inca
tribe  of  Cnzco  did  not  modify  these  primitive  organizations
wherever  conquered  inhabitants  were  suffered  to  remain.


;cbyG00'^lc


82  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

The  ayllns  remained  as  before,  as  well  as  two  larger  groups,
each  of  which  embraced  several  clans.  These  groups  existed
at  Cuzco  as  geographical  divisions,  called,  respectively,
Upper  and  Lower  Cuzco— "Hanan"  and  "Hurin-Cuzco."**
Under  the  names  of  "Aran-Saya"  and  "Ma-Saya,"  analo-
gons  divisions  are  met  with  among  the  AymarA  everywhere,
and  were  foond  among  them,  together  with  the  ayllu,  by  the
Spaniards.  At  the  present  day  the  village  of  Tiahuanaco  is
divided  into  Aran-saya  and  Ma-saya,  the  former  embradng
what  lies  north,  the  latter  what  lies  south,  of  the  central
square.  In  the  older  church  books  of  Tiahuanaco  the  two
"aayas"  are  noticed  occasionally,  the  ayllu  always."  At
present  the  ayllns  are  much  scattered,  not  in  consequence
of  depopulation,  but  of  wider  dispersion  tiirou^  inter-
course. A  number  of  Indian  families  settling  in  another
village  became  tiiere  an  ayllu  named  after  the  place  they
came  from,  a  custom  also  observed  in  former  times;'"  thus
there  is  an  "Ayllu  Tiahuanaco"  at  Coni,  at  the  foot  of
Ulimani.  The  Indians  of  Titicaca,  at  least  those  of  Challa,
belong  (according  to  their  own  statement)  to  the  cluster  of
Aransaya  of  Copacavana.  They  are  divided  into  two  local-
ized clans :  the  ayllu  of  Challa  and  the  ayllu  of  Kea.  About
the  organization  of  the  Indians  of  Yumani  I  could  not  ascer-
tain anything  beyond  that  they  have  their  own  officers.
They  were  even  more  reticent  than  the  Indians  of  Challa.
A^lomeration  on  haciendas  has  been  a  disturbing  factor  in
original  gronpiog  and  government.  To-day  the  owners  of
haciendas  believe  that  they  appoint  the  Indian  functionaries
without  consulting  the  wishes  of  their  Indians.  These
officers  are :  An  ilacata,  an  alcalde,  and  at  least  two  campos.
The  ilacata  represents  the  administrative  power.  He  dis-
tributes the  lands  for  cultivation.  He  receives  the  products
of  tracts  cultivated  for  the  benefit  of  the  owners  and  over-
sees certain  labors  done  in  common.  The  alcalde  is  the
executive  officer.  All  cases  of  strife,  conflict,  acts  of  vio-
lence come  under  his  jurisdiction. He  also  heads  the  men  In


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 83

case  of  warfare.  So  the  former  corresponds  to  the  gov-
ernor, the  latter  to  the  war-captain,  of  the  New  Mexico
pnebios.  On  the  Island  these  two  principal  ofiScers  are  ao*
cepted  rather  than  appointed  by  the  proprietor  on  or  about
the  first  of  January  of  each  year;^*  also  the  campos,  who
are  Bubaltems  and  assistants,  watching  the  fields  and  the
manner  in  which  they  are  attended,  the  housing  of  the  crops,
their  transport,  the  dispatching  of  pongos,  and  the  like.  All
these  officers  have  their  staffs  of  office,  with  silver  heads  if
possible,  but  no  distinctive  costume.

I  have  said  that  the  owners  accept  the  officers  proposed.
The  natives  of  Challa  told  me  emphatically  that  there  ex-
isted a  council  of  old  men,  and  that  this  council  proposed
the  ilacata,  alcalde  and  campos  to  be  appointed  each  year.
The  existence  of  such  a  body  was  denied  by  the  owners.
Probably  both  sides  were  right,  each  from  their  own  stand-
point. A  council  certainly  exists,  but  it  does  not  propose
the  men  of  its  choice  directly;  it  elects  them  t  We  had  proof
of  this  while  on  the  Island,  in  the  fact  that  the  Indians,
among  themselves,  were  quietly  speaking  of  somebody  as
next  ilacata,  whereas  the  owner  himself  had  not  yet
thought  of  any  one.  In  cases  of  great  importance  a  pub-
lic meeting  may  be  called,  at  which  even  women  have  vote
and  voice.

The  term  ilacata  is  an  Aymard  word,  whereas  alcalde  is
Spanish.  We  endeavored  to  find  out  how  the  alcalde  was
called  in  Aymara,  but  without  result.'"  In  the  docu-
ments concerning  the  great  Indian  uprising  of  1780  and  fol-
lowing years,  of  which  Jose  Gabriel  Condorcanqui,  or  Tupac
Amaru,  was  a  conspicuous  figure  in  the  beginning,  both  the
Indian  alcaldes  and  the  ilacatas  are  mentioned.^'  Among
northern  Peruvian  Indians,  the  gobernadores  seem  to  repre-
sent the  Bolivian  ilacata.  The  alcalde  was  and  is  the  police-
magistrate  of  his  tribe,  or  comunidad,''*  hence  he  seems  to
be  the  connterpart  of  the  caftan  a  guerra  of  the  pueblos  of
New  Mexico  and  northern  Mexico;  whereas  the  campos


;cbyG00'^lc


84  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

are  algua^es  or  constables,  similar  to  the  tementes  of
northern  viUage-Iudians.  That  the  alcalde  is  a  leader  in
warfare  was  plainly  shown  on  the  16th  of  March,  1895,  when
the  Indians  along  the  Peruvian  shores  had  risen  and  were
threatening  Copacavana.  It  was  the  alcalde  to  whom  the
Corregidor  of  Copacavana  gave  orders  to  come  to  the  relief
with  armed  men,  and  similar  orders  were  imparted  to  all
the  Indian  alcaldes  within  the  jurisdiction.  The  ilacatas  re-
mained quietly  at  home,  and  we  were  assured  that  they  had
nothing  to  do  with  the  warlike  preparations.

With  the  mtermingling  and  shifting  of  clans,  the  changes
wrought  therehy  and  the  formation  of  new  ones,  it  is  not
easy  now  to  detect  primitive  castoms  in  r^ard  to  marriage,
naming  of  childrrai  and  interment  (it  seems  certain,  how-
ever, that  marriage  originally  was  exogamous,  with  descent
ia  the  female  lineJ^^On  the  Island,  regular  marriage
through  the  Church  is  officially  required,  but  the  Indians  do
not  follow  the  precept.  Baptism  is  more  rigidly  observed,
and  one  reason  for  this  may  be  the  greater  cheapness  of  the
ceremony.  Marriages  are,  according  to  the  character  of
the  parish  priest,  often  expensive.  The  complaint  raised
against  the  clergy  on  that  score  Is  unhappily  too  well  justi-
fied. It  Is  true  that  with  the  advent  of  the  Franciscans  at
the  convent  of  Copacavana,  a  laudable  change  has  taken
place;  stin  the  Indians  have  remained  rather  loose  in  their
marital  relations,  and  little  punishment  is  meted  out  to  the
unfaithful  husband  or  wife.  As  to  chastity,  the  natives  are
like  Indians  everywhere  else,  and  like  the  population  of
these  countries  in  general.^"  Not  a  single  marriage  hav-
ing been  performed  while  we  were  on  the  Islands,  we  caauot
give  any  details  from  personal  knowledge.  We,  however,
took  part  as  god-father  and  god-mother  in  an  Indian  bap-
tism, which  was  carried  out  strictly  according  to  the  rules
of  the  Church.  As  presents,  we  had  to  give  the  mother  (not
to  the  father)  chocolate,  rice,  sngar,  two  skirts— one  for
herself  and  another  for  the  baby— and  two  chemises  for  the


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


^  I


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 85

child.  The  father  being  the  sheep  herder  of  the  Island,  we
were  excused  from  adding  fresh  meat  to  the  gifts,  but  made
up  for  it  in  the  number  of  chemises.

We  diligently  inqtdred  about  aboriginal  personal  names,
but  were  invariably  told  there  were  none,  many  personal
names  in  Aymara  having  tamed  into  family  names  since
the  conquest.^^  That  primitive  ceremonies  are  yet  secretly
performed,  both  at  marriage  and  at  the  birth  of  a  diild,  is
beyond  all  doubt,  for  we  have  seen  too  many  evidences  of
the  power  sorcery  and  ancient  ceremonials  still  exert  over
the  Indian  in  every  phase  of  life.  But  it  is  not  possible,  in  a
single  year's  contact,  to  gain  the  confidence  of  so  reticent  a
tribe  aa  the  Aymara.  In  regard  to  bnrials  we  were  more
fortunate.  In  the  first  place,  we  witnessed  at  least  a  part  of
the  bnrial  of  an  adult  at  Challa ;  bat  saw  only  what  can  be
seen,  with  slight  modifications,  among  the  New  Mexico  pue-
blos, in  church.  The  body  was  wrapped  in  ponchos;  but
what  transpired  in  the  churchyard  while  the  body  was  being
interred,  we  were  not  allowed  to  witness.  At  Tiahnanaco,
however,  we  were  reliab^.  informed  that  when  a  child  dies,
a  vessel  containing  water,  some  food,  and  a  small  wisp  or
broom,  are  put  into  the  grave  with  the  body.  The  belief  is
that  it  takes  the  soul  several  days '  travel  to  reach  heaven,
and  that  the  broom  is  required  for  sweeping  the  road  in
order  to  reach  the  last  resting  place.^^  While  on  the  Island
we  were  assured  that  on  the  death  of  an  Indian  peculiar
ceremonies  are  performed  around  the  body,  and  that  when
that  body  has  been  removed  from  the  house,  ashes  are
strewn  on  the  floor  inside  the  door-sill,  and  the  house  is
locked  from  the  oatside.  After  burial  the  people  examine
the  floor  carefully.  This  is  done  by  "old  men,"  and  seldom
do  they  fail  to  discover  foot-prints  of  men,  women  and
roosters.  The  former  are  looked  upon  as  prognosticating
further  deaths  in  the  family,  and  the  latter  as  indicating  the
presenceof  evil  spirits  whom  they  call"  deuiis."  Itisinter-
esting  to  compare  these  practices  with  those  in  use  among


;cbyG00'^lc


86  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

the  pnebloB  as  well  as  vith  ancient  Pemvian  customs  men-
tioned by  early  chroniclers.^*

So  far  as  onr  observation  goes,  organization,  marriage
and  other  customs,  on  the  Island,  seem  to  be  like  those  we
saw  and  heard  of  at  other  places  in  Bolivia.  There  are
local  variations,  but  the  main  features  are  the  same.  In
another  work  I  shall  record  data  obtained  elsewhere  in
Bolivia,  and  that  throw  mn<^  more  light  on  all  these  ques-
tions. For  the  present  I  confine  myself  to  what  we  observed
and  learned  on  the  Island  and  in  its  neighborhood.

If  we  resume  the  foregoing,  we  find  (1)  the  sune  disposi-
tion of  buildings  constituting  the  Ijidian  home  as  in  central
and  southern  Mexico;  (2)  a  degree  of  development  in  art
and  industry  about  on  a  level  with  that  of  the  New  Mexico
pueblos  half  a  century  ago;^"  (3)  communal  tenure  of
lands;  (4)  a  system  of  clanship  ante-dating  Spanish  occu-
pation, with  indications  that  the  original  gentes  may  have
partly  disappeared,  whereas  new  clans  have  sprung  op,  tak-
ing their  names  mainly  from  localities;  (5)  officers,  elective
in  the  clan,  but  nnder  ostensible  control  of  the  government,
and  of  the  landowners  where  the  Indians  live  on  large
estates,  as  on  the  Island ;  these  officers  corresponding  to  the
governor,  war-captain,  and  assistants  of  the  New  Mexico
village;  (6)  marriage  customs,  officially  regulated  by  the
Church.  (Here  I  shoald  add  that  in  flie  seventeenth  century
the  aylla  may  have  already  lost  control  of  marital  rules,**
marriages  becoming  indiscriminately  indogamous  and  ex-
ogamous.')  The  distribution  of  estates  depends  upon  the  will
of  the  parents,  and  there  is  not,  as  among  the  pueblos,  as
strict  a  division  between  what  belongs  to  the  mother  and
what  pertains  to  the  father ;  and  yet  it  is  asserted  that  the
wife  controls  whatever  is  housed,  or  contained  in  the  house  I
We  noticed  that  we  never  obtained  articles  of  the  household,
such  as  ancient  pottery  used  in  a  kitchen,  except  with  consent
of  the  women.  (7)  Burial  rites  resembling  those  of  the  Mexi-
can and  New  Mexico  sedentary  Indians  at  the  present  time. )


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 87

The  life  of  the  liidian  on  the  Island  is  seeminglT'  monoto-
nons.  Agricnltnre  is  his  chief  occupation.  He  plants  maize
in  October  and  harvests  it  in  May.  Barley  is  sown  in  Janu-
ary and  Febmary,  and  matures  in  May  also.  Potatoes,
which  are  the  important  staple,  are  planted  in  August  and
Sept^nber,  so  are  the  oca,  and  the  quinna,  but  early  pota-
toes are  already  harvested  in  January  and  Febmary,
whereas  oca  and  quinna  can  only  be  gathered  in  May.  This
cycle  of  crops  recurs  with  unvarying  regularity  year  in  and
year  out,  and  this  is  the  narrow  circle  within  which  the  lead-
ing occupations  of  the  Islanders,  and  of  the  Indians  in  gen-
eral, are  kept  alive.  Personal  service  to  the  owners  bears
the  same  character  of  monotonons  periodicity.  But  as  these
duties  require  absence  from  home,  and  at  places  where  there
LB  more  to  be  seen  and  heard  (as,  for  instance,  La  Paz  and
Puno),  the  Indian  of  Titicaca  has  become  more  wide-awake
and  crafty,  more  malicious,  than  many  of  the  Indiana  of
other  localities  of  the  Puna ;  his  wits  are  sharper,  and  he  is
by  no  means  the  clumsy  being  as  which  he  may  appear  at
first  glance.  Wbile  at  home,  little  sociability  can  be  noticed.
They  hardly  gather  except  on  feast-days.  Life  is  much  the
same  as  in  a  pueblo  of  New  Mexico.

The  young  men  associat«  more,  and  chiefly  at  night.
Many  of  them,  or  of  such  as  are  married  bat  still  young,  go
on  trading  expeditions  to  Yungas,  to  the  hot  regions  beyond
the  snowy  Ulimani."  They  take  with  them  mnles  and  don-
keys laden  with  products,  mostly  chunu  and  oca,  also  barley,
and  trade  them  off  for  coca,  coffee,  and  sweet  tropical
fruit.  These  they  sell  either  at  Copacavana  or  on  the
Island,  keeping  a  respectable  lot  for  tiiemselves.  Such  trips
fnmish  food  for  discussion  at  home.  An  occasional  voyage
to  the  eastern  Bolivian  shore,  to  bay  pottery  and  peaches,
the  former  at  Ancoraymes,  the  latter  from  the  vicinity  of
Sorata,  is  another  source  of  talk  outside  of  the  every-day
treadmill.  Gossip  is  as  rank  and  rife  among  them  as  in  any
civilized  community,  and  as  the  Aymara  Lidian  is  naturally


;cbyG00'^lc


88  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

of  a  quarrelsome  and  rancorous  disposition,  sqxiabbles  in
words  and  deeds  are  not  nncommon.  For  such  dissensions
there  is  always  ample  pretext.  When  crops  are  being  gath-
ered, stealing  is  diligently  practiced.  They  are  as  dishonest
towards  each  other  as  towards  the  owners  of  the  Island,  and
we  know  of  an  instance  of  an  old  man,  who  had  to  sit  up
night  after  night  in  the  bitterest  cold  and  in  the  open  field,
to  gnard  his  potato  crop.

During  our  stay  we  had  occasion  to  heal  a  gronp  of
Indians,  all  of  the  cluster  of  Kea,  who  had  Hi-treated  each
other  on  the  most  futile  pretexts.  But  the  great  occasion
for  displaying  prowess  is  with  tiieir  neighbors,  the  Indians
of  the  hacienda  of  YumanL  The  latter  are  as  pugnacious  as
tiiose  of  Challa  and,  although  mndi  less  numerous,  provoke
hostilities  now  and  then  by  trespassing  upon  their  neigh-
bors'  lands.  The  results  are  regnlar  engagements  with
slings  and  stones,  women  supplying  the  men  with  projec-
tiles, which  they  carry  in  their  skirts.  A  number  are  badly
wounded  and  now  and  then  some  are  killed,  for  the  Indian  is
dangerously  expert  with  the  sUng.  Such  engagements  end
invariably  in  the  rout  of  the  Yumani  warriors,  but  still  they
are  renewed  annually.  Among  the  Aymara,  hostilities  be-
tween villages  are  common  occurrences,  and  a  number  of
persons  are  killed  every  year  in  fights  between  pueblos  or
haciendas,  or  on  festive  occasions.

There  is  no  school  on  the  Island.  An  old  man,  who  speaks
Quichua  as  well  as  Aymara,  teaches  some  of  the  children
church  hymns  and  Catechism  in  their  own  language.  There
is,  as  far  as  we  could  ascertain,  one  Indian,  an  old  man,  who
is  able  to  read  and  write.  He  does  this  lying  on  the  floor,
with  his  face  down.  His  cbirography  is  as  original  as  his
orthography  is  picturesque.  Some  of  the  Indians  still  pre-
serve a  kind  of  picture-writing,  of  which  the  annexed  plate
is  a  specimen.  It  is  very  difficult  to  obtain  such  pictographs.
The  Indians  refuse  even  to  exhibit  them,  and  our  tenders  of
money  could  not  induce  them  to  show  us  one  of  these  curious


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


9S


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 89

picto^rrapba.  Their  import  is  wholly  religions ;  they  are  the
Catechism,  and  dmrch-prayers,  pictorially  represented.
The  one  herewith  presented  belonged  to  Don  Abel  Mendoz
of  Pono,  who  sent  it  to  the  Cteographical  Society  at  Lima,
and  the  copy  is  a  photolithographic  publication  in  that
society's  Bulletin."*  Nobody  has,  as  yet,  been  able  to
secnre  a  literal  translation,  bnt  it  seems  certain  that  they
all  relate  to  church  ritual  and  are  of  post-Golnmbian  ori-
gin."* For  keeping  their  accounts  with  the  hacienda,  the
Indians,  on  the  Island  as  well  as  on  the  flanks  of  lUimani
and  elsewhere  in  the  Sierra,  still  use  a  simple  "qnippu"  or
knotted  string,  also  sticks  with  notches.  We  have  seen  the
former  in  use  at  Llnjo."'

Councils  are  held  on  matters  of  interest  to  the  whole
commmiity,  but  i^ere  and  when  we  conld  not  ascertain.
The  affairs  of  the  little  commonwealths  on  the  Island  are
discussed,  and  liidians  are  by  no  means  indifferent  to  the
outside  world  either.  We  noticed,  during  our  stay  among
them  while  the  civU  war  in  Fern  was  going  on,  with  what
interest  the  Indians  followed  the  course  of  events  and  how
surprisingly  well  informed  they  were  of  military  move-
ments. When  Chilian  troops  once  trespassed  on  Bolivian
territory  and  an  invasion  of  Bolivia  by  them  was  feared,  we
obtained  the  news  through  our  Indians  at  Challa  and  at  once
noticed  that  the  occurrence  was  not  by  any  means  a  matter
of  indifference  to  them.  While  the  liidian  nprising  along
the  Pemvian  border  continued  and  negotiations  were  being
carried  on  secretly  between  the  insurgents  and  the  Indiana
on  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana,  we  now  and  then  noticed
fire-signals  on  the  mainland  both  west  and  east,  and  it  was
not  very  reassuring  to  see  a  response  flaring  up  on  the
summit  of  Kea-Kollu,  the  most  convenient  height  for  Uiat
purpose  on  the  Island.  Of  sign-language  we  have,  as  yet,
not  seen  any  trace.

The  condition  of  the  Indian  of  the  Puna  appears  to  be
poverty,  nay,  indigence. One  who  arrives  on  the  great


;cbyG00'^lc


90  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

central  plateau  and  sees  the  Indian  trundling  along  with
bare  feet  or  at  best  only  with  sandals,  his  body  protected  by
a  ragged  poncho,  following  his  donkey,  as  shaggy  and  un-
conth  as  the  master,  or  a  Uama;  sees  him  devouring  an
unappetizing  meal  of  chiinu  and  oca  or  roasted  beans  on
the  road,  and  sees  the  dingy,  close,  nndean  home  where  the
same  kind  of  meal  is  taken,  is  led  to  deplore  the  fate  of  the
aborigine.^*  And  yet,  the  Indians  own  more  wealth  in
money  than  many  of  the  landholders  in  Bolivia,  but  this
money  they  hide  most  anxiously.  Frequent  spoliations,
especially  since  the  separation  of  South  America  from
Spain,  is  one  reason  why  the  liidian  hides  his  wealth.  He
keeps  it  for  certain  festive  occasions,  on  which  he  lavishly
spends  for  display  in  dances  and  in  orgies.  He  hoards  also
for  another  purpose.  The  Indian  is  slowly  accumulating
even  firearms.  On  the  Island,  revolvers  are  by  no  means
rare,  neither  is  ammunition.  The  disconnected  state  of
Indian  society,  their  segregation,  maintained  also  after  the
Spanish  occapation,  render  an  uprising  very  improbable;
but  should  they  ever  be  able  to  coalesce,  the  situation  of
Bolivia  and  of  the  Pemvian  Sierra  might  become  exceed-
ingly critical.

These  are  the  main  reasons  why  the  Indian  is  so  ex-
tremely anxious,  as  I  have  previously  stated,  to  secare
money.  He  uses  it  also  as  currency  in  his  daily  transac-
tions. But  there  is  a  substance  which  he  prizes  even  more,
for  certain  reasons,  than  gold  or  silver,  and  this  is  coca.
The  dried  leaves  of  EryihroxUon  Coca,  a  product  of  the
hot  lands,  are  in  many  cases  a  greater  incentive  for  the
Indian  to  sell  or  to  work  than  money."*  Such  has  been  onr
experience  elsewhere.  Coca  is,  to  the  older  men  among
them,  more  indispensable  than  food  or  drink.  I  need  not
treat  here  of  the  qualities  attributed  to  this  plant,  whether
real  or  imaginary;  but  its  leaves  are,  if  not  another  cur-
rency, like  sheU-beads  among  northern  Indians,  often  a
much  surer  resource  than  silver  or  gold. The  use  of  coca


;cbyG00'^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 91

is  more  common  and  more  widely  distribnted  among
the  male  Indians  than  it  was  before  the  time  of  Fizarro,
because  the  coca-plant  was  then  cnltivated  to  a  limited  ex-
tent only,**  and  the  coca-producing  regions  have  become
more  accessible.  What  has  been  pablished  about  planta-
tions of  coca  on  Titicaea  Island  for  the  benefit  of  the  Inoa-B
is,  at  beat,  very  doubtful.*'

Both  money  and  coca  are  indispensable  to  the  Indians  for
religious  purposes.  As  religions  performances  constitute
an  important  part  of  th^  exterior  life,  and  as  their  modes
of  thinking  and  the  moflves  of  their  actions  are  dependent
upon  religious  beliefs,^  I  shall  have  to  approach,  though
timidly,  this  importynt  field  as  far  as  we  were  able  to
scrutinize  it  while  on  the  Island  of  Titicaca  and  at  Copa-


The  Indian  of  Bolivia  is  a  Catholic ;  at  least  nominally.
He  clings  with  utmost  tenacity  to  his  local  church  and  cer-
tain sanctnaries,  to  the  images  they  contain,  and  to  every
vestment  and  ornament.  This  attachment  is  manifested  in
the  presence  of  the  stranger  and  to  any  one  who  would  en-
deavor to  deride  or  profanate  snch  objects.  But,  in  case  of
a  general  uprising,  I  doubt  very  much  (and  in  this  I  am
confirmed  by  the  opinion  of  reliable  parish  priests)  whether
the  Indians  woald  not  return  openly  to  a  paganiran  which
at  heart  they  still  profess  and  in  secret  actually  practise.
The  great  Indian  rebellion  of  1781  would  have  culminated
in  such  a  retum.*^  The  Aymara  Indian,  especially  the
younger  generation  and  the  sorcerers,  are  fetish-worship-
era  to-day,  while  they  follow  the  rites  of  the  church  also.
The  latter  is  done  sincerely,  inasmuch  as  the  Indian  at-
tributes to  these  rites  and  ceremonies  power  in  eases  when
the  ceremonials  of  his  primitive  creed  are  powerless;  in
other  words :  he  sincerely  believes  Catholic  rites  and  pray-
ers to  be  "big  medicine"  for  certain  things,  whereas  he
still  dings  to  the  other,  and  with  still  greater  tenacity  per-
hai>e. I  can  but  repeat,  on  this  point,  what  I  have  already


;cbyG00'^lc


92  THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

published  in  regard  to  &e  tribee  of  the  soathwestem  United
States  and  of  northern  Mexico:  "It  is  vain  to  deny  that  the
soathwestem  Indian  is  not  an  idolater  at  heart,  bnt  it  is
equally  preposterous  to  assume  that  he  is  not  a  sincere
Catholic.  Only  he  assigns  to  each  belief  a  eertaia  field  of
action,  and  has  minntely  circumscribed  each  one.  He  liter-
ally gives  to  God  what,  in  his  judgment,  belongs  to  God,  and
to  the  devil  what  he  thinks  the  devil  is  entitled  to,  for  the
Indian's  own  benefit.  Woe  unto  him  who  touches  his  an-
cient idols,  but  thrice  woe  to  him  who  derides  his  church
or  desecrates  its  ornaments.'"'  Substituting  "Aymara  of
Bolivia  and  Peru"  for  "sonthwestem  Indian,"  and  this
statement  stands  as  well  for  South  America  as  for  those
parts  of  the  northern  hemisphere  about  which  it  was
written.

The  Indian,  so  far  as  we  could  observe,  firmly  believes  in
a  spiritual  being— spiritual  in  the  sense  that  it  is  invisible
to  his  eyes— which  being  is  tiie  Christian  God,  "Dios"  or
"Dius,"  and  for  which  he  has,  at  least  on  the  Island,  no
other  name."  The  Indian  professes  great  devotion  to  the
patron  saint  of  his  chapel,  and  on  the  Island  "Our  Lady  of
the  Light,"  the  miraculons  image  of  Copacavana,  certainly
stands  higher  in  his  estimation  than  the  invisible  "Dins."
He  attends  church  nearly  every  Sunday.  The  balsas  that
cross  to  Yampupata  and  recross,  are  filled  with  men,
women  and  children  on  Saturdays,  who  go  to  pray  at  tiie
sanctnary  of  "Nnestra  Senora  de  Copacavana,"  and  at  the
same  time  to  sell  their  products  at  the  Sunday  fairs.  They
make  vows,  and  discharge  the  obligations  thereby  incurred;
they  are  anxious  to  have  their  children  baptized;  they  sob
and  howl  and  sigh  at  church  in  a  heartrending  manner,  and
if  they  can  steal  a  piece  of  the  kostia,  it  will  invariably  be
used  for  some  medicinal,  that  is,  witchcraft,  purpose.  At
Tiahuanaco  we  were  told  that  the  Indians  believe  that
when  a  child  dies  unbaptized  it  returns  to  the  body  of  the
mother,  causing  it  to  swell,  a  process  which  they  call


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 93

"limbo,"  and  to  prev^it  this  they  use  the  hostia.  They
confess  themselves  regularly  for  some  years,  then  again
drop  the  "habit."  They  regard  God  and  the  eaints  usually
as  beneficent  or  rather  as  neefoL  Certain  diseases,  how-
ever, are  attributed  to  an  ill  wind  produced  by  God,  and
others  to  an  ill  wind  due  to  some  saint;  hence  the  "pacha
ayre"  and  the  "santo  ayxe.""  In  some  districts  or  vil-
lages, no  image  of  a  saint  is  tolerated  in  their  bouses,  out
of  dread  of  that  "ill  wind"  of  the  saints.  Of  retribution
after  death  they  have,  as  far  as  we  could  ascertain,  no  idea.
Of  the  existence  of  evil  spirits  they  are  firmly  convinced.
On  the  Island,  it  is  "Supay"  who  sweeps  over  the  land  in
the  hail-storm,  and  when  their  crops  are  destroyed  by  hail
they  say  that  Supay  has  preyed  on  them  with  his  hordes  of
other  fiends.  How  often  were  we,  at  night,  startled  by  the
hgubrious  sotmd  of  the  "Pu-tu-tu,"  a  cow-hom,  which  the
Indians  blew  on  the  approach  of  clouds  threatening  hail,
in  order  to  oblige  Supay  and  his  associates  to  take  another
conrse  in  their  devastating  career."  At  Tiahnanaco  and
vicimty  it  is  "Anchancho"**  who  plays  the  part  of  the
spirits  of  evil,  and  when  they  fear  his  approach  in  a  threat-
ening storm,  they  also  blow  their  pu-tu-tus  and  shout  at  the
top  of  their  voices:  "Pass  on,  pass  onl"  On  the  Island,
there  seems  to  be  greater  indifference  than  on  the  mainland
toward  some  church  practices,  as,  for  instance,  they  care
very  little  for  an  official  blessing  of  the  crops.  Mass,  how-
ever, is  exacted  by  them  on  the  feast  day  of  their  pa-
tron saint.  When  the  agents  of  the  owners  of  Challa,
throngih  a  very  ill-timed  measure,  attempted  to  prevent  the
Qsoal  celebration  on  the  twenty-fifth  of  July  of  1895,
onr  mtervraition  alone  prevented  a  serious  outbreak.  We
noticed,  however,  that  it  was  more  the  opportunity  of  cele-
brating the  day  with  dances  of  old  and  immoderate  drink-
ing that  would  have  been  missed  than  the  religious  cere-
mony.
We  could  not  detect,  in  the  midst  of  the  host  of  witchcraft


;cbyG00'^lc


94  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

.  practices  and  reminiscences  of  ancient  beliefs,  any  prefer-
ence to  a  worship  of  either  sun  or  moon.  The  definition  of
Indian  fetishism  given  by  Mr.  Cashing  applies  also  to  the
AymarS:  "The  A-shi-wi,  or  Znnis,  snppoae  the  aim,  moon,
and  stars,  the  sky,  earth,  and  sea,  in  all  their  ph^iomena
and  elements,  and  all  inanimate  objects,  as  well  as  plants,
animals,  and  men,  to  belong  to  one  great  system  of  all-
conscions  and  interrelated  life."^  One  thing  struck  as,
namely,  the  belief  that  both  snn  and  moon  were  created
beings,  and  this  is  primitive  belief,  anterior  to  influences
of  a  ChriBtian  origin."^  What,  however,  the  Aymara  of
the  Island  pays  particular  attention  to  are  the  "Adia-
cbilas,"  literally  "grandfathers,"  spirits,  dwelling  at  all
conspicnons  places,  in  all  striking  objects,  and  who  are
supposed  to  exert  a  constant  influence  npon  man.""  This
belief  in  the  "  Achachilas"  ia  nothing  else  but  the  fetishism
so  well  characterized  by  Mr.  Cnshing,  and  which  I  have
traced  among  every  Indian  tribe  with  which  I  came  in  con-
tact.

Every  conspicuous  object  in  nature  is  believed,  by  the
Aymara,  to  harbor  its  own  spiritual  nnclens  or  essence,
that  plays  an  active  part  in  the  life  of  its  surroundings,  man
included.  This  Indian  conception  may  be  illustrated  by  ex-
amples that  came  under  our  observation.  While  we  were  at
Challa,  the  Indians  received  orders  to  tear  down  some  walls
forming  the  southern  side  of  a  court,  and  to  erect  on  the
site  a  store-house  of  adobe.  The  first  part  of  this  work  was
performed  without  any  ceremony,  and  this  greatly  incensed
the  warden  or  "unya-siri"  who  happens  to  be  one  of  the
leading  medicine-men  on  &e  Island.  He  chided  the  work-
men and  insisted  that,  in  order  to  prevent  disaster  to  the
new  edifice,  they  should,  before  proceeding  to  demolish  the
walls,  have  burnt  incense  in  each  of  the  four  comers ;  should
have  prayed  (begging  for^venesa)  in  each  comer,  and
finally,  in  the  centre,  prostratii^  themselves,  kissing  the
earth  and  looking  up  to  tiie  sky,  with  both  hands  raised  in


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


I'otter)'  from  graves  of  Aymcwi  (ChaUp*)  origin  itt  nuions  parta  of  tlto

Iiiland. The  two  vases  at  the  bottom  may  have  been  brought

from  the  maioland,  posrably  from  Tiahuanaco


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 95

prayer.  On  the  following  morning  the  fomidationa  of  the
new  stmctare  were  to  be  laid,  and  for  that  purpose  they
had,  the  night  before,  prepared  as  many  tiny  bundles  as
there  were  comers,  and  an  extra  one  for  the  centre.  Each
bundle  contained :  The  fetus  of  a  llama,**  the  fetns  of  a  pig,
a  piece  of  llama-tallow,*'"'  leaves  of  a  plant  not  found  on  the
Island  and  called  by  them  "nira-ko-na,"  and  coca  leaves.
These  bundles  are  prepared  by  men  only,  and  at  night,  and
the  parties  are  chosen  the  evening  before  by  the  ilacata,
which  shows  that  this  officer  has  certain  religious  functions
also.  When  all  the  workmen  had  gathered  on  the  site,  the
one  who  directed  the  work,  the  maestro,  or  architect  (a  plas-
terer from  the  Peninsnia  of  Copacavana),  spread  before
bim  a  "llik'Ua,"  or  square  piece  of  embroidered  cloth,  made
like  a  poncho,  but  smaller.  Every  Indian  took  three  coca
leaves,  arranging  them  in  the  shape  of  a  trefoil,  and  depos-
ited them  on  the  llik'lla,  while  the  master  of  ceremonies  was
pronouncing  the  following  prayer:  "Children,  with  all  your
heart,  put  coca  into  your  mouths  [each  took  a  mouthful  of
coca-leaves] ;  we  must  give  to  the  virgin  earth,  but  not  with
two  hearts;  with  one  heart  alone."  After  this  ceremony
they  set  to  work.  In  the  afternoon  when  they  had  again
gathered  they  all  took  off  their  hats,  and  the  director  said :
"Children,  we  shall  ask  of  0od  (Bius-at)  and  of  the  Acha-
chila  and  the  grandmother,'*"  that  no  evil  may  befall  us.'****
Then  they  buried  the  bundles,  in  each  of  the  four  comers
and  in  the  centre,  adding  to  them  "aji"  (red  pepper),
sugar,  and  salt.  After  this  the  master  again  spoke  as  fol-
lows : '  'Let  all  of  you  together  take  coca  [they  put  coca  into
their  mouths],  throw  coca  on  the  ground  [upon  this  they
began  to  scatter  coca  into  the  trench  made  for  the  founda-
tion}, ^ve  them  their  dues!"  The  old  men  responding:
"Diua  pagarat-kat,  uauanakal"— May  Qod  reward  you  for
it,  children  I  After  this  they  threw  earth  on  the  bundles.  In
this  ceremony  the  Christian  God  and  the  fetishes  are  both
appealed  to. The  articles  offered  in  sacrifice  represent


;cbyG00'^lc


96  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

olden  as  well  as  modem  times.  Thus  the  llama-fetos  and
Uama-tallow,  the  "uira-kooa"  and  the  coca  are  andoit  the
others  are  modem.

The  above  ceremony  of  invocation  and  sacrifice  is  called
"tincat"  (giving  the  "tinea"),  and  it  is  practised  on  almost
every  similar  occasion.  While  we  were  excavating  at  Kasa-
pata,  a  new  honse  was  erected  near  this  site,  and  we  were
told  that  the  same  sacrifice  had  been  performed  before  work
was  began.  On  the  first  day,  all  the  men  who  took  partinthat
"house-raising"  wore  wreaths  of  flowers  aronnd  their  hats
andcaps.  AtTiahaanacowewereassnredthathonse-bnilding
is  a  communal  undertaking  of  the  aylln,  or  of  those  of  its
members  that  are  related  to  the  family  for  which  the  building
is  erected,  and  that  the  only  compensation  for  such  assistance
is  chicha  and  food.  The  custom  is  undoubtedly  primitive.*"'

Another  ceremony,  which  we  only  partly  witnessed,  how-
ever, took  place  on  the  Island  during  the  days  of  Carnival,
February  24th,  25th,  and  26th  of  1895,  and  it  is  annually
repeated.  Already  on  the  24th  preparations  were  going  on  in
the  practice  of  the  drum  here  and  there.  On  the  following
day,  the  Indiana  of  Ohalla  with  the  alcalde  at  their  head
brandishing  a  Peruvian  flag,  and  with  his  hat,  as  well  as
those  of  most  of  the  other  participants,  wreathed  with  flow-
ers, went  in  procession,  to  the  sound  of  drum  and  flute,  to
the  fields  at  "Kea,"  there  to  exchange,  for  about  half  an
hour,  throws  of  peaches  wiUi  the  people  of  that  settlement,
and  offer  to  the  soil  the  tinea  above  mentioned.  They
bnmed  this  offering,  burying  the  ashes  in  the  fields  with
appropriate  invocations,  and  sprinkling  the  ground  with
alcohol  and  red  wine.  Afterward  they  dug  out  small  quan-
tities of  whatever  fruit  had  been  raised,  which  was  taken
home  to  be  kept  until  the  following  season.  The  idea  is,  to
give  to  the  earth  (which  also  is  "Achachila")  a  remunera-
tion or  compensation  for  its  favors."*  The  most  instruc-
tive examples  of  Achachila  worship  that  we  were  allowed  to
witness  were  those  performed  previous  to  our  excavations


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITIOACA 97

for  antiqnitieB,  and  without  which  no  such  work  is  expected
to  be  snccessf  ol.  We  had  to  go  through  this  ordeal  at  three
Afferent  places— on  Titicaca,  on  Koati,  and  at  Cachilaya,
near  Chililaya,  on  the  mainland.  I  shall  limit  myself  to  a
description  of  the  performances  on  Titicaca,  as  the  others
showed  bnt  slight  variations.

At  the  laying  of  the  comer-stone,  the  architect  or  superin-
tendent officiated,  but  for  the  ceremony  initiating  excava-
tions a  medicvne-man,  or  shaman,  was  required.  At  Challa
we  had  the  desired  dignitary  at  the  very  house  of  the
hacienda  and  in  the  person  of  its  nnya-siri,  or  warden,
Manuel  Mamani,  whose  portrait  accompanies  these  pages.
He  informed  me  (my  wife  was  at  first  excluded  from  the
deliberations,  though  afterward  she  was  permitted  to  see
Bome  of  the  preliminaries)  that  the  articles  needed  for  the
conjuration  were:  Coca,  uira-koa,  Uama-taUow,  the  two
fetuses,  a  piece  of  the  skin  of  the  "titi,"  or  wild-cat,  grape-
brandy,  wine,  and  especially  "muUu."  For  this  ceremony
the  latter  is  a  fetish  of  white  alabaster  representing  a  bull
or  cow,  and  resembling,  both  in  color  and  in  shape,  certain
well-known  fetishes  of  New  Mexico.""*  The  fetus  could
not  be  procured,  but  the  other  substances  were  ready  on  the
day  appointed,  and  in  the  afternoon  a  walk  was  taken  with
theconjurertotwo  of  the  places  where  we  intended  to  begin,
Easa-pata,  and  the  pasturages  of  Ciria-Fata  (g).  There,
Manuel  Mamani  squatted  on  the  groond,  took  off  his  hat,
and  greeted  the  "Achachilas"  as  follows:  "Good  after-
noon, Achachilas:  Kasapata  AchachUa,  Llak'ayUi  Acka-
chila,  Chincana  AchachUa,  Calvario  AchachUa,  Santa  Maria
Achachila,  Ciriapata  AchachUat  We  have  greeted  all  of
yoQ  whom  a  viracocha  [the  common  designation  for  a  white
stranger]  has  sent  me  to  greet ;  for  him  [on  his  accomit]  I
have  come,  as  he  cannot  speak  to  thee.  Forgive  me  for
asking  of  ttiee  a  favor."  Then  he  took  coca,  made  two  tre-
foils of  ooca-leaves  and  placed  them  into  as  many  balls  made
of  llama-tallow  (untu),  wine,  nira-kona,  a  piece  of  cat's  fur,


;cbyG00'^lc


98  THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

and  mnlln,  rasping  with  his  knife  from  the  alabaster  fetish.
Then  making  two  holes  at  some  distance  from  each  o&er,
he  placed  one  of  the  balls  in  each  of  tbem,  covering  the  hole
with  a  stone.  This  was  an  "official  notice"  to  the  Acha-
chilas  of  the  main  ceremony^  that  was  to  take  place  the  night
following.  Ordinarily,  this  preliminary  is  performed  the
evening  before,  and  the  sorcerer  then  goes  to  dream  abont
the  moat  eligible  spot.  The  Aymara  believes  ia  dreams  as
firmly  as  all  other  Indians ;  bnt  in  our  case  the  dreaming
part  was  deemed  tmnecessary,  as  we  had  already  deter-
mined upon  the  locality.  After  nightfall,  Mannel  stealthily
crept  into  onr  rooms.  Squatting"**  by  the  side  of  a  candle
he  formed  twenty  balls  like  those  he  had  made  in  the  after-
noon, with  the  addition,  however,  of  brandy.  He  also  made
two  larger  ones,  in  the  centre  of  which  he  placed,  in  lien  of
the  nsnal  trefoil,  a  bnnch  of  coca  leaves.  With  these  twenty-
two  pellets,  the  remainder  of  a  bottle  of  brandy,  and  a  bottle
of  red  wine,  onr  procession  of  conjurers  crawled  np  to
Kasa-pata  in  the  darkness  of  the  night,  over  cliffs  and  slip-
pery rocks,  and  with  more  than  one  tumble.  The  greatest
care  was  taken  to  avoid  dwellings,  and  a  secluded  spot
selected  for  the  operation.  The  medicine-man  repeated  the
formula  of  the  afternoon  and  sprinkled  wine  and  afterward
brandy  in  the  direction  of  each  of  the  five  Achachilas  named,
saying:  "All  thy  presents  I  have  now  brought. "  With  this,
he  counted  out  the  twenty  balls  one  by  one,  each  being
counted  as  a  quintal,  or  hundredweight,***^  and  adding:
"Thou  hast  to  ^ve  me  with  all  thy  heart"  Then  a  fire
was  built,  and  the  twenty  baUs  were  placed  on  it.  Manuel
threw  into  the  flames  a  substance  which  he  refused  to  show
us  and  which  caused  the  fire  to  spit  and  to  cra<^e.  At  this
sound  everybody  had  to  run  off  a  short  distance  while  he
exclaimed : ' '  The  Achachilas  are  eating  I ' '  After  the  fire  had
gone  out  he  returned  to  the  place  and  covered  it  with  stones.
Then  he  went  with  the  two  larger  balls  to  another  spot  and
dug  a  hole,  saying : ' '  The  virgin  earth  is  now  invited,  here  is


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA  99
thy  burial  of  treasure,"'""  and  placed  both  balls  into  the
hole.  "The  very  things  of  the  Inca  thon  hast  to  bring  forth.
Now,  with  thy  permission  we  will  take  leave.  Forgive  me. ' '
With  this  the  performance  was  at  an  end  and  we  groped  our
way  back,  over  the  steep  and  wet  rocks,  without  a  single  star
on  tiie  dark  firmament.  By  midnight  we  were  home  again,
bruised  and  tired,  and  the  next  morning,  the  Indians,  satis-
fied tbat  we  had  the  "Achachilas"  in  our  favor,  went  to
work,  convinced  that  the  yield  would  be  abundant.  Never-
theless at  noon  on  the  following  day,  while  our  laborers  took
a  recess  for  lunch,  another  medicine-man  among  them  poured
out  wine  and  alcohol  in  the  direction  of  the  five  Achachilas,
after  each  one  of  the  laborers  had  taken  a  pinch  of  coca,  and
said :  * '  Achacbila,  do  not  make  me  suffer  much  work,  we  are
those  who  work  under  pay;  to  this  viracocha  thou  hast  to
retom  what  he  paid  to  us,  for  this  thou  art  beckoned  [in-
vited].*' If  an  !bidian  is  offered  a  glass  of  wine,  or  when-
ever he  partakes  of  their  favorite  beverage,  alcohol  diluted
to  about  sixteen  or  seventeen  degrees,  he  first  pours  out  a
little,  as  libation.  The  well-known  offering  by  the  Peruvian
and  Bolivian  Indians,  at  the  "apachitas,"  is  also  to  the
spirits.  Every  pass,  and  the  mountain  peaks  around  it,  are
"Achachilas,"  and  every  Indian  places  a  stone  and  some
coca  leaves  in  a  comer  or  sx>ot  along  the  trail  in  order  to
influence  the  spirits  in  his  behalf.  The  next  one  adds  his
votive  offering,  and  thus  heaps  of  pebbles  and  leaves  gradu-
ally accanmlate.'"*  They  have  their  counterparts  in  the
"tapn*'  of  the  New  Mexico  Tehnas,  the  little  stone  heaps
aroond  many  of  the  pueblos  in  general,  and  in  the  Apache
reservation  of  Arizona.  According  to  pueblo  interpreta-
tion, each  stone  lying  on  twigs  in  one  of  these  heaps  signifies
a  prayer.  The  Quichuas  and  Aymaras  claim  it  to  be  a  sacri-
fice. A  sacrifice  is  always  accompanied  by  a  wish,  whether
expressed  in  a  formal  prayer  or  not,  hence  the  fundamental
idea  is  the  same  in  South  America  as  in  the  southwest  of
North  America.'"


^3««^'  „,„.„Googlc


100 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

From  what  precedes  it  is  clear  that  the  number  of  Acha-
chilas  is  immense.  Every  summit,  every  gorge,  every  spring,
in  short,  every  site  more  or  less  prominent  is  thought  to  be
inhabited  by  snch  a  spirit.  Meteorological  phenomena  also
are  inclnded,  such  as  lightning,  the  rainbow  and  the  clouds.
One  of  their  devices  for  rain-making  consists  in  "calling  the
rain-clouds."  It  resembles  the  pueblo  practice  of  invoking
the  "Shiuana"  and  beckoning  to  them  to  come.  Near
Tiahuanaco,  there  is  a  height  whither  the  Indians  repair
whenever  they  need  rain,  to  sacrifice  coca  and  to  call  the
clouds.  The  rainbow  ("knrmi" )  is  Achacbila,  and  at
Tiahuanaco  they  forbid  children  to  gaze  at  it  lest  it
might  kill  them."'  In  short,  the  Achachilas  are  the  "Gna-
cas"  or  "Huacas"  of  Peru;  they  are  analogous  to  the
"Shiuana,"  and  "Kopish-tai"  of  the  Queres,  and  to  the
"Ojua"  of  the  Tehuas,  in  New  Mexico.'"

Whether  the  Indians  have  other  fetishes  besides  the
"Mulln"  above  referred  to,  I  am  nnable  to  tell.  All  our  en-
deavors to  elicit  information  on  that  score  were  in  viun.
The  queries  were  eluded,  not  answered.

Where  the  idea  prevails  that  nature  is  occupied  by  a  mul-
titude of  spiritual  individualities  more  or  less  potent,  it  re-
sults that  whatever  man  suffers,  be  it  from  disease  or
through  accident,  is  attributed  to  evil  spiritueU  agencies.  In
many  instances  there  is  a  singular  blending  of  ancient  with
Christian  notions.  Thus,  at  Tiahuanaco,  we  were  informed
that,  when  lightning  strikes  a  house,  it  is  abandoned  for  the
day  and  nig^t  following,  for  they  believe  that  "Santiago"
(Saint  James)  has  stumbled  or  made  a  mistake.'"  The
doors  are  draped  in  black.  The  next  day  twelve  boys,  per-
sonifying the  twelve  apostles,  are  fed  in  the  building.  Once
the  meal  over,  these  boys  go  home  without  looking  hack;  if
they  turn  around  to  look,  lightning  will  strike  one  of  than
soon  after.  After  their  departure,  the  owner  of  the  house
and  his  wife  return  accompanied  by  a  shaman,  or  medi-
cine-man, who,  after  joining  their  hands,  covers  tiieir  heads


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 101

with  a  black  poncho  and  utters  a  prayer  to  "Pachacamac"
(I  have  my  doubts  about  this  word)  in  behalf  of  the  future
safety  of  the  house.  To  this  prayer  the  sorcerer  replies  in
a  changed  tone  of  voice  explaining  the  lightmng-stroke  as  a
nuHtake  that  shall  never  occur  again.  Huge  stones  are
dreaded  as  swallowing  people  occasionally.*^*  When  the
priest  of  Tiahuanaco  once  found  it  advisable  to  have  such
a  stone  removed,  he  obtained  assistance  only  with  the  great-
est difficulty,  and  after  its  removal  the  Indians  sacrificed
coca  and  alcohol  to  appease  "Anchancho"  and  indnce  him
not  to  take  revenge  upon  them  for  the  removal.

In  the  valuable  essay  on  Zoni  fetishes  already  quoted,  Mr.
Gushing  says:  "In  this  system  of  life  the  starting  point  is
man,  the  most  finished  yet  the  lowest  organism,  actnally  the
lowest,  because  the  most  dependent  and  least  mysterious.
In  just  88  far  as  an  organism,  actual  or  imaginary,  resem-
bles his,  it  is  believed  to  be  related  to  him,  and  correspond-
ingly mortal.  In  just  as  far  as  it  is  mysterious  is  it  consid-
ered removed  from  him,  further  advanced,  powerful  and
immortal.  It  thus  happens  that  the  animals,  because  alike
mortal  and  endowed  with  similar  physical  functions  and
OT^ans,  are  considered  more  nearly  related  to  man  than  are
the  gods ;  more  nearly  related  to  the  gods  than  is  man,  be-
cause more  mysterious,  and  characterized  by  spedfic
instincts  and powers  which  man does  not of  himself


The  truth  of  this  is  also  exemplified  among  the  Aymari.
They  attribute  to  animals  not  only  the  gift  of  presage,  but
also  the  faculty  of  intercession.  Innumerable  are  the  beliefs
in  manifestations  of  evil  omens.  The  owl,  that  unlucky  bird,
one  of  the  most  slandered  in  this  world,  must,  of  course,
head  the  list,  especially  the  large  species  or  "nrcu"  (Biibo
nutgeUanicus).  But  the  smaller  lechuza^"  are  also  noted
for  the  ominous  significance  of  their  cry.  When  Indians
see  an  owl  flying  in  the  night  they  throw  salt  at  it  with  the
left  hand. Domestic  fowl  also  play  a  conspicuous  part.


;cbyG00'^lc


102 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

■Whenever  a  hen  erowa  like  a  rooster,  or  a  rooster  cackles
like  a  hen,  or  when  a  rooster  crows  at  the  honr  of  evening
prayers,  it  is  a  bad  omen  and  the  bird  is  forthwith  killed.
On  the  mainland,  a  little  bird  which  they  call  "tiolas"  is
much  dreaded,  being  charged  with  the  disagreeable  habit  of
taking  away  the  "fat  of  the  heart"  while  flying  past  a  per-
son, and  thus  causing  his  or  her  death.  Another  very  nn-
popnlar  bird  Is  called  "coohi-pachi,"  and  its  voice  bodes  no
good.''^  Among  qnadmpeds,  the  skonk  and  the  fox  are,  on
the  mainland,  suspicionsly  watched,  and  if  a  f  os  crosses  our
path  accidentally,  we  had  better  prepare  for  ill  luck.  Among
domestic  quadrupeds  it  is  the  guinea-pig  or  cuy,  formerly,
at  least,  much  used  in  sacrifice  and  divining.*"  In  case  one
of  these  lively  creatures  whines  at  night  or  chuckles,  it  is
killed  at  once  and  its  body  thrown  away,  as  it  is  a  conejo-
brujo  (rabbit-witch)  and  will  carry  sickness  into  the
family.  The  barking  of  dogs  in  a  dark  night  is  also  an  evil
omen.  The  alcalde  of  Challa,  a  man  not  by  any  means
gifted  with  an  exalted  imagination,  and  still  less  a  coward,
when  returning  from  our  room  to  his  home  one  dark  night,
was  terribly  frightened  by  the  sudden  barking  of  the  dog
of  the  hacienda.  He  swore  he  would  never  visit  ns  any
more  after  sunset,  as  the  dog  had  seen  a  f^ost,  and  he
thought  to  have  noticed  a  dark  figure  near  our  door.

Belief  in  f  obvious  animals  is  also  current.  If  the  * '  marine
monster"  previously  mentioned  should  not,  in  course  of
time,  prove  to  be  some  large  aquatic  animal,  we  may  classify
it  among  the  mythical  beasts,  although  the  belief  in  its  ex-
istence is  of  rather  recent  origin.  The  fabulous  animal
most  generally  believed  in,  however,  is  the  carbuncle.  As
everywhere  else,  the  "carbuncle"  is  described  as  a  cat,  hav-
ing on  its  forehead  a  blood-red  stone  which  shines  at  night
On  the  Island  it  is  confounded  with  the  titi,  and  that  name
is  also  given  to  it."*  "We  were  told  that  the  carbuncle
dwelt  in  the  snows  of  the  high  peak  of  Sajama,  near  Oruro,
and  impeded  approach  to  the  summit  of  that  mountain.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 103'

Spiders  are  nsed,  by  some  sorcerers,  for  prognostics.
From  the  movements  of  the  legs  of  the  insect,  ibe  diviner
draws  his  inferences,  in  a  similar  manner  as  the  Opata
Indians  of  Sonora  prognosticated  from  the  motions  of  the
cricket.***'

We  lack  yet  most  of  the  information  desirable  in  regard
to  the  role  of  animals  as  intercessors.  Bot  we  were  x>osi-  '
tively  informed  that  the  group  of  dancers  called  "Chayll'-
pa,"  and  of  which  I  shall  hereafter  speak,  have  among
other  duties  that  of  conjuring  drouth.  They  go  to  the  sum-
mit of  the  height  called  Calvario  (4),  which  is  denuded  of
sU  vegetation,  gather  small  stones  and  throw  them  into  tiie
Lake.  Bat  they  also  catch  toads  and  throw  them  into  the  .
water,  there  to  intercede  for  rain."'  Among  the  objects  of
stone  found  on  the  Island,  on  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana,
and  chiefly  on  Koati,  are  frogs  of  stone,  and  we  diligently
inquired  of  the  Indians  whether  these  had  been  perhaps
rain-intercessors  after  the  manner  of  those  used  by  the
pueblos  to-day.  "We  never  received,  any  other  but  an  eva-
sive reply.

Another  indication  of  intercession  by  animals  is  found  in
the  dance  called  chacu-ayllu,  or  chokela,  danced  by  the
ChayU'pa.  In  this  dance  the  vicuna  plays  the  same  part  as,
in  symbolic  dances  of  the  pueblo  Indians,  the  eagle,  the  deer,
and  the  motmtain-sheep.  The  chaca-ayllu  is  an  ancient
eeremonial,  the  signification  of  which  as  a  "  hunter  's-dance ' '
is  no  longer  understood.

The  Ohayll'pa,  whenever  they  appear  in  full  costnme,
wear  the  skin  of  a  young  vicnna,  head  included,  han^ng
down  their  backs.  The  "Kena-Kena,"  another  group  of
dancers,  wear  a  sleeveless  jacket  made  of  the  skin  of  a
jaguar.  Animal  forms  are  also  represented  in  the  fetishes
called  "MuUu,"  so  extensively  peddled  about  the  country
by  the  curious  guild  of  Indian  medicine-men  and  shamans
known  as  "Callahuaya."

The  Callahuaya  speak  the  Quichua  language."' Their


;cbyG00'^lc


104 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

borne  is  fhe  province  of  Mnnecas,  east  of  the  Lake,  which
province  is  partly  inhabited  by  Qoichna-speaking  aborig-
ines.*" On  the  Island  they  are  sometimes  called  Chunchos,
bat  they  have  nothing  in  conmion  with  these  forest  Indians
except  inarannch  as  they  pretend  (and  it  is  probably  trae)
that  some  of  their  medicinal  herbs  are  gathered  in  the
montoHa,  or  forests,  where  the  wild  tribes  (often  called
Chunchos  collectively)  dweU  and  roam.  The  Callahnayas
are  great  and  intrepid  traveling  peddlers ;  they  extend  their
jonmeyings  to  the  eastern  as  well  as  to  the  western  sea-
coast,  and  one  is  as  likely  to  meet  a  Callahnaya  in  Bnenos
Ayres  as  to  find  him  offering  his  wares  at  La  Paz,  Copaea-
vana  or  on  Titicaca  Island.  Their  costume  differs  from
that  of  the  Aymara,  in  that  they  wear  pantaloons  and
broad-brimmed  hats.  A  poncho  with  more  or  less  intricate
patterns,  and  always  dirty,  falls  down  from  the  neck  as  far
as  the  knee,  over  the  nsnally  dilapidated  breeches.  Two
big  bags,  like  saddle  bags,  and  a  wallet  with  ooca  and  other
ingredients,  handsomely  woven,  but  stiff  with  grease,  com-
plete the  oflScial  costmne  of  the  wandering  Callahnaya.  We
met  them  everywhere.  Between  Pnno  and  Sillustani  we  saw
these  quaint  figures  walking  single  file,  wending  their  way
in  silence  from  Indian  village  to  Didian  village,  from  iso-
lated dwelling  to  isolated  dwelling,  everywhere  tolerated
and  everywhere  received  with  undemonstrative  hospitality.
A  close  study  of  the  Callahuayas  at  their  home  is  mnch
needed,  and  would  reveal  a  host  of  interesting  detaUs  on
aboriginal  medicine  and  witchcraft.  As  yet  we  can  only
speak  of  these  singular  and  raiterprising  peddlers  from
what  we  saw  of  them  far  from  the  district  which  they  in-
habit.'"

Objects  peddled  by  the  Callahuayas  are  mostly  herbs,  but
these  are  not  all  indigenous.  We  bought,  from  a  Callahnaya
who  came  to  the  Island  and  offered  his  wai^s  at  Challa,  the
following  remedies:  (1)  Against  melancholy:  "yerba  de
amante";  (2)  against  rheumatic  cold:  "uturuncu,"^'^  to


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 105

be  mbbed  in;  (3)  against  headache:  "yerha  de  GastUla*'
and  sternutative  powder  of  hellebore.  Hence,  of  these  four
substances,  at  least  one  came  from  some  dmg^st.  That
8ucb  was  the  case  was  further  proven  by  the  fact  that  the
Indian  'wizard  himself  called  the  powder  rape.

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  Callahnaya  had  other  medi-
cine more  efficient  and  certainly  indigenons,  bnt  these  he
was  carefnl  not  to  show  ns.  He  was  very  soon  taken  in
charge  by  some  of  the-  Indians  of  Ohalla  and  remained
several  days  on  the  Island,  without  showing  himself  any
more  about  tiie  hacienda  buildings.  Bnt— and  this  seems  to
be  the  principal  treasure  in  which  the  Callahuayas  deal— he
had  for  sale  a  number  of  fetishes  made  of  white  alabaster.
This  mineral  is  said  to  be  abundant  in  the  region  of  Charas-
sani,  where  the  Callahnayas  are  at  home.  We  purchased
ench  of  them  as  he  showed  ns,  and  they  were  all  sent  to  the
Musenm.  One  represents  a  snail,  others  clenched  fists,  and
these  are  said  to  create  contentment  and  i^ve  wealth.  They
were  all  besmeared  with  llama-tallow,  "nntn,"  the  same
substance  that  is  indispensable  for  incantations.  Other  ac-
cessories were  gold  and  silver  tinsel,  and  red  and  black
beans.  These  fetishes  are  sold  not  only  to  the  Indians  (and
perhaps  less  to  these),  bat  to  mestizos,  and  even  to  whites
occasionally,  as  faith  in  the  cures  and  supernatural  gifts  of
the  Callahnayas  is  very  common  and  deeply  rooted  in  all
classes  of  society,  though  seldom  confessed.

We  certainly  saw  only  such  fetishes  as  the  Callabuaya
deemed  safe  to  exhibit,  and  not  the  most  interesting  ones.
The  latter  are  more  particularly  called  Mullu,  and  are  of
ancient  origin  and  nse.  The  word  is  Quichua,  but  has  been
adopted  into  the  Aymara  language.  A  Mullu  is  usually  an
animal  figure,  like  the  one  used  by  Manuel  Mamani  in  the
ceremonies  preceding  our  excavations.  It  is  "good"  for  a
great  many  things,  and  the  Callahnayas  also  sell,  secretly,
human  fibres.  We  sent  to  the  Museum  a  small  one,  found
on  the  surface  of  the  slopes  of  Ticani  (2),  and  of  a  whitish


;cbyG00'^lc


106 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

stone  apparently  arenaceons.  When  I  showed  this  figure  to
one  of  the  wizards  on  the  Island,  his  eyes  sparkled^  and  he
displayed  intense  desire  to  obtain  it,  saying:  "If  it  were
Callahnaya,  then  it  would  be  worth  a  great  deal  I"  This
significant  remark  caosed  ns  to  interrogate  him  eantionsly,
and  thns  we  ascertained  that  fetiehes  in  tiie  form  of  men
and  of  women  are  still  in  use.  We  further  found  out  that,
while  the  white  fetishes  served  for  good  purposes,  the  Ga-
'  llahnayas  had  fetishes  of  black  or  at  least  dark-oolored
stone,  which  were  used  for  evU  sorcery.  Here  our  inquiries
came  to  an  end,  as  Mamani  denied  any  knowledge  of  "black
art."

Accessory  information,  however,  was  obtained  in  another
way.  A  friend  of  ours,  the  Franciscan  Father  Juan  Maris-
cal,  on  one  of  his  intrepid  tonra  among  the  then  rebellious
Indians  of  the  Peruvian  boundary,  saw  a  whole  arsenal  of
implements  for  witchcraft,  which  he  tried  to  secure  for  us,
but  the  owner  refused  to  give  them  up.  Our  frigid  conld
barely  more  than  glance  at  them.  He  noticed,  however,
human  figures  and  other  strange  objects  of  wood  and  stone,
and  also  of  rags,  but  was  not  permitted  to  examine  them
closely  as  soon  as  the  party  having  them  in  charge  under-
stood the  priest's  intention.  On  the  hacienda  of  Cnsijata,  a
short  distance  from  Copacavana,  a  number  of  objects  for
evil  sorcery  were  found,  previous  to  our  coming  to  Bolivia.
One  of  the  chief  means  for  mortally  hurting  anybody
throu^  witchcraft  is,  to  make  a  human  figure  out  of  grains
of  Indian  com,  and  pierce  it  with  thorns.  In  order  to  sepa-
rate a  loving  couple,  two  such  figures  are  tied  togetiier  with
'  hairs  (not  far)  of  a  cat,  and  buried,  witii  a  live  toad  along-
side of  them.'*"

It  will  be  noticed,  that  not  only  is  witchcraft  (good  and
evil)  extensively  practised  among  the  Indians  of  Aymara
stock,  hence  on  the  Island  also,  but  that  they  have  symbolic
figures,  of  which,  however,  we  saw  very  few.  But  any  one
visiting  Bolivia  can,  if  he  looks  at  the  roofs  of  Indian


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 107

houses,  at  once  desciy  a  primitive  symbol  placed  there
alongside  of  the  crosses  mth  which  nearly  every  gable  of
an  Indian  home  is  decorated.  This  symbol  is  a  snake,  and
represrats  lightning.  We  had  noticed  this  figure  without
seeing  in  it  more  than  an  accidental  ornament  until  at
Challa  the  chapel  of  the  hacienda  was  being  repaired.  Its
low  tower  had  been  finished;  the  cross  alone  was  lacking.
To  hmnor  the  Indians,  we  promised  to  obtain  a  cross  at
Copaeavana,  of  iron  or  brass,  and  donate  it  to  them.  As
our  trip  to  Copaeavana  became  delayed,  onr  servant  (a
Bolivian  mestizo,  who  afterward  gave  us  tmtold  trouble
through  his  intemperance  and  dishonesty)  volunteered  to
make  such  a  cross,  with  the  aid  of  our  carpenter's  tools,
out  of  an  old  box  unserviceable  for  packing,  and  an  aged
tin  can.  He  kept  his  promise  and,  on  completing  the  orna-
ment, stated  that  he  wonld  have  to  add  two  figures  of
snakes,  to  be  fastened  diagonally  over  the  cross.  TJpon  ask-
ing the  wherefore  of  this,  we  were  told,  by  him  as  well  as
by  the  Indians,  that  the  snake  was  a  protection  against
lightning,  and  its  symbolic  pictare.  Figure  (p.  108)  shows
the  symbol  in  the  test

a  and  a  is  the  symbol  for  lij^tning,  and  intended  to  repre-
sent a  snake.

b,  b,  b,  are  called  hands  {memos)  and  also  stand  for  light-
ning. As  far  as  I  could  xmderstand,  the  snake  rather  repre-
sents the  downward  ray,  or  thunderbolt.

The  snake  symbol  is  the  more  singular  since  that  reptile
is  rarely  met  with  on  the  high  and  cold  table- landa,  the  only
striking  species  being  the  aquatic  "yauriQca,"  already
mentioned.*'^

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  dances  of  the  Aymara  are
symbolic,  although  in  many  cases  their  tme  significance  is
now  only  known  to  a  few  Indians.  Their  dancing  is  clearly  ■
a  religious  act,  and  if  the  performances  are  accompanied  by
demonstrations  of  boisterous  delight  and  by  excessive  im-
bibing, this  does  not  militate  against  their  intrinsically


;cbyG00'^lc


108


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


serious  character.  The  orgies  into  which  nearly  all,  if  not
all,  the  Indian  dances  degenerate  are  not  the  result  of  deg-
radation and  growing  vidonsness  since  the  advent  of  tiie
Spaniards,  as  is  often  pretended;  ihey  are  andent  cnstoms,
in  which  the  intemperance  displayed  takes  the  character  of
Ubations.^*'  It  may  be  that  the  Indian  of  the  Pona  dances
for  mere  enjoyment  also,***  but  we  know  thatevery  reli^ons
festival,  and  every  public  celebration  in  general,  is  aocom-


I)anied  by  Indian  dancing.  The  variety  of  dances  is  great,
among  the  Aymara  as  well  as  among  the  Qnichua.  Some  of
these  are  common  to  all  districts ;  many  are  danced  only  in
certain  localities.  Some  are  performed  at  loi^  intervals  of
time,  others  on  every  occasion,  for  reasons  which  only  a
protracted  study  of  the  Aymara  will  reveal,  a  study  that,
_lite  the  work  of /Mr.  Frank  H.  Cnshingymong  the  Zunisl^of
Dr.  "Washington  Matthews^^mong  the  Navajos^and  ofO^iss
Alice  Fletcherjamong  tribes  of  the  central  plains,  mnst  be
carried  on  with  much  tact  and  patience.
It  was  not  possible  during  our  stay  in  the  Lake  basin  and


^'


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 109

on  certain  islands  to  penetrate  deeply  into  the  nature  of
cemnonies  identified  with  the  innermost  nature  of  the  In-
dian and  bis  most  hallowed  reminiscences.  I  can  present,
therefore,  bat  an  incomplete  introduction  to  the  subject.
The  Aymard  are  much  more  reticent  on  these  points  than
northern  tribes.  Besides,  t^ie  true  meaning  of  many  dances
is  either  lost  or  known  only  to  few,  and  these  few  are  just
those  whose  confidence  it  is  most  difficult  to  gain.

Comparatively  few  dances  are  performed  on  the  Island,
and  these  are  also  danced  at  Copacavana.  Hence  what  I
ehall  say  in  regard  to  the  Island  will  apply  to  the  Peninsula,
Bo  far  as  ascertained.  We  heard  that  others  are  performed
at  Copacavana  besides,  and  have  no  reason  to  doubt  it.
They  differ  from  those  of  the  pueblo  Indians.  The  proces-
sion, sometimes  men  alone,  sometimes  men  and  women,  files
in  with  less  regularity,  and  with  a  step  that  is  rather  a
dnmay  trotting.  As  there  were  always  several  groups  danc-
ing at  the  same  time  and  chan^g  places  with  each  other,
it  was  very  difficult  to  watch  the  figures.  (Each  group  of
dancers  has  a  number  of  musicians,  who  do  not,  as  in  Mew
Mexico,  stand  still  and  play  their  discordant  and  noisy  in-
struments, but  join  the  others  in  the  dance.  The  figure  is,
sometimes,  a  meandering  back  and  forth  in  single  file;  gen-
erally, however,  and  when  there  are  women  in  the  group,
they  describe  a  circle,  with  one  man  or  a  pair  in  the  center
irtiirling  about  like  tops,  the  women  especially.  We  have
often  wondered  at  the  length  of  time  a  woman,  encumbered
with  her  many  skirts  and  the  bundle  of  blankets  on  her  ba<^
can  endure  that  vertiginous  gyration.  The  dancer  often
falls  to  the  ground,  and  while  it  ia  sometimes  from  iutoxica^
tion,  it  is  also  from  sheer  dizziness!)  No  better  idea  can  be
gathered  of  the  general  character  of  these  performances
than  at  one  of  the  great  festivals  at  the  sanctuary  of  Copa-
cavana, for  instance  on  the  first  and  second  of  February.
We  went  to  Copacavana  on  the  day  previous  and  when,  on
the  picturesque  trail  from  Tampupata  to  the  village,  we  de-


;cbyG00'^lc


110 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

scended  into  the  bottom  by  the  Lake-side,  lond  shonting,  sing-
ing, the  rumbling  of  big  drams,  and  firing  of  muskets  was
heard.  Ahead  of  as  on  the  road,  a  procession  of  white  figares
with  gaudy  head-dresses  was  moving  toward  the  village.
They  were  dancers  going  to  the  festival.  In  front  walked
the  "Chnnchu-Sicuri,"  their  heads  adorned  with  tall  um-
brella-like contrivances,  each  of  the  canes  composing  the
frame  carrying  a  tuft  of  red,  yellow  and  green  plumes.  This
head-dress  is  light,  but  at  least  three  feet  high.  All  these
dancers  were  men.  They  wore  the  gray  and  laced  jackets
so  common  on  the  markets  of  La  Paz,  and  over  them  a
sleeveless  bodice  of  jaguar-skin  similar  to  a  cuirass.  A
skirt,  made  of  white  cotton  and  nicely  plaited,  sometimes
stitched  handsomely,  floundered  about  their  limbs.  The
leaders  carried  the  Bolivian  tricolors  and  lances,  and  their
head-dress  consisted  of  a  stiff  hat,  with  three  tiers  of  parrot
plumes,  in  the  national  colors:  red,  yellow  and  green. ^**
The  noise  made  by  this  group,  with  flutes  and  drums  of  all
sizes  and  descriptions,  fright^ied  our  animals,  althou^
they  were  old  and  decrepit  Following  tiie  Chunchu-sicnri,
a  second  procession  wended  its  way  to  the  village.  This
was  the  antuent  and  honorable  cluster  of  "Chirihnanos."
Their  dress  consisted  of  the  usual  festive  garb  of  the
Aymard:  jacket,  trousers,  white  shirt,  and  an  occasional
vest.  Over  these  was  draped  a  white  mantle,  graceful  when
new,  but  already  much  worn.  Over  this  mantle  a  broad
band  of  parrot  feathers,  beautifully  worked,  was  fastened
a  drum.  On  the  head  they  wore  a  black  hat,  but  this  post-
Columbian  head-gear  was  disgoised  by  a  profusion  of
mostly  drooping  plumes,  white  and  red.  With  the  first  of
tiiese  two  groups  a  few  women  jo^ed  along,  joining  in  the
discordant  shouts  and  arrayed  in  their  most  select  accoutre-
ments: a  number  of  gaudy  skirts  and  the  little  bundle  of
blankets  on  the  back.  These  women  accompanied  the
Chunchu-sicuri,  the  Chirihnanos  not  allowing  women  to
dance  with  them. Forcing  our  animals  past  this  noisy  pro-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


1 1


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DaitizecbyGoO'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICAGA Ul

cession,  we  reached  Gopacavana  and  saw  the  devotion  with
vhich  each  cluster  approached  the  sanctnary.  They  were
admitted  to  chnrdi  to  offer  their  respects,  and,  upon  sally-
ing from  it,  began  to  dance,  pound  their  dmms,  and  blow
their  flutes  in  each  of  the  four  comers  of  the  square  or
plaza  successively.  It  may  not  be  out  of  place  here  to  give
an  idea  of  the  appearance  of  this  square  on  the  evening  be-
fore the  festival.

At  each  of  the  four  comers,  which  are  also  the  four  en-
traDces,  an  altar  had  been  erected.  Two  poles,  about  twenty
feet  in  height,  were  set  into  the  ground  and  decorated  with
colored  cloth  and  ribbons,  and  connected,  on  the  side  to-
wards the  street,  by  blankets  and  ponchos  stretching  from
one  pole  to  the  other  so  as  to  form  a  ba(^:ground.  This
background  was  further  supported  by  two  intermediate
poles.  At  ri^t  angles  to  the  former  were  set  on  each  side
two  other  masta  of  equal  height,  and  these  sides  were  also
dosed,  leaving  open  only  the  front.  In  the  quadrangular
recess  thns  formed  stood  the  altar,  simply  a  table  covered
with  cloth,  blankets,  or  ponchos,  on  which  the  image  is
placed,  and  loaded  with  offerings  and  ornaments,  some-
times of  the  crudest  kind.  Across  the  opening,  from  pole
to  pole,  ropes  are  stretched  at  a  considerable  hei^t  above
the  ground,  and  from  these  ropes  dangled  silverware,  some-
times of  great  value ;  plates,  trays,  cups,  all  from  the  early
times  of  Spanish  colonization,  massive,  and  of  qnaint  work-
manship. Between  them  hung  purses  filled  with  money,
ancient  coins,  spoons,  in  short,  all  that  could  be  used  for
representing  metallic  wealth.  We  have  seen  some  very  re-
markable pieces,  that  would  be  worthy  of  any  museum  of
colonial  antiquities.  These  treasures  are  the  property  of
private  individuals,  sometimes  of  Indians,  who  keep  ^em
carefolly  concealed  between  festival  and  festival.  There  are
also  parties  who  loan  or  rent  their  plate  for  such  occasions.

The  four  altars,  although  alike  in  the  main,  vary  in  de-
tails.  In  f  nmt  of  them  gather  the  Indian  dancers,  one  group


;cbyG00'^lc


112 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

after  another,  they  bow  to  the  image,  and  then  dance  to  the
sound  of  their  wretched  instruments,  finally  in  the  center  of
the  square  also.  None  of  these  dances  can  compare  with
those  of  the  New  Mesico  pueblos  for  symmetry.  Every-
thing seems  to  be  carried  on  in  a  much  looser  way.  Already
on  the  evening  before  the  festival  the  Indians  begin  to  drink,
and  only  the  nature  of  the  beverage  has  changed  since  an-
cient tinffis;  alcohol,  diluted  from  forty  degrees  to  sixteen
or  seventeen,  taking  the  place  of  the  primitive  ehicha.  Dur-
ing tiie  night,  one  or  several  trusty  Indiuis  keep  watch  at
each  of  the  altars.  To  keep  awake,  they  drink,  play  the
flute,  and  the  dancers  return  to  the  plaza  from  time  to  time
to  repeat  their  performances  and  to  distnrb  the  slumbers
of  the  inhabitants  with  their  horrid  noise.  As,  late  in  the
evening,  new  groups  come  in,  they  add  their  din  to  that  of
their  predecessors,  so  that  the  first  night*  or  rather  the  night
before  the  feast,  is  already  a  torture  on  account  of  the  truly
infernal  nproar.  The  mnsical  instruments  of  the  Aymara
are  more  varied  than  those  of  the  pueblos.  They  have  a
great  variety  of  drams,  from  the  smallest  to  the  largest,
and  from  the  most  andent  type,  similar  to  the  tambourine,
to  the  military  drum,  big  and  small.  The  Pan-flute,  called
in  its  tiniest  form  "kena-kena,"  and  in  its  tallest  (nearly
of  the  size  of  a  fnll  grown  man)  "zampofia,"  is  most
numerously  represented.  Nearly  every  Indian  carries  a
darinet-Iike  instrument  or  a  fife  as  hia  constant  companion
when  traveling.^'^  These  instruments,  on  a  great  feast-
day,  are  represented  by  hundreds,  and  each  group  of  play-
ers blows  and  beats  as  hard  as  possible,  regardless  of
harmony  with  the  tune  executed  by  their  next  neighbors.

The  second  day  of  February  was  the  great  day  of  the
festival.  At  daybreak  hosts  of  dancers  poured  into  the
square,  and  the  fifes,  kenas,  zamponas,  and  drums  made  a
deafening  noise.  The  members  of  each  group  first  knelt  on
the  steps  at  the  entrance  of  the  churchyard  and  then  filed
into  church,  taking  off  their  head-gears. Upon  returning  to


;cbyG00'^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


PL4TB  KXV

1.  OrouDd-pUo  of  Ciriftpata. 2.  Small  bonsM  (probRblr  Ine»)  nt  CiriApftU


;cbyG00'^lc .


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 113

the  square,  they  began  their  noisy  perfonnances  at  the  cor-
ners and  in  the  center.  The  following  gronpe  of  costnnred
dancers  made  their  appearance:  (1)  The  Sena-kena,  or
Kenaicho.  These  vere  the  most  nnmerons,  and  all  able-
bodied  young  men.  With  them  came  a  ntmaber  of  women
and  girls.  The  costume  of  the  men  is  striking:  A  short
jacket  of  cloth,  black  or  brown  or  gray  (the  latter  hue  pre-
dominating), ont  sqnare  above  the  waist  and  mostly  with
braids  across  the  breast;  the  usoal  breeches,  and  beneath
them  often  drawers  with  common  white  lace.  All  wear  over
the  jacket  a  tiger-  (jagaar-)skin  in  the  form  of  a  cnirass.
Many  of  them  also  carry  a  broad  band  like  a  talbart  of  red,
green  and  yellow  parrot-plnmeB,  and  on  the  head  a  narrow-
brimmed  black  hat  of  felt  or  plnsh,  snrmonnted  by  an  arch
of  plumes.  From  the  band  of  this  hat  dangles,  down  the
back,  a  train  of  tinsel,  ribbons,  and  small  mirrors.  Nearly
every  Eena  plays  his  fife,  never  the  Pan-flnte,  and  many
have  drams.  (2)  The  Chayllpa.  Their  distinctive  dress
consists  in  a  white  cotton  mantle  hung  edgewise  across  the
shoulders,  one  of  the  ends  reaching  nearly  to  the  knee,  and
over  this  mantle,  tiie  skin  of  a  yonng  vicuna,  its  head  pro-
vided with  eyes  of  glass,  and  profusely  decorated  with  tin-
sel, ribbons,  and  tiny  mirrors.  A  black  felt  hat  with  a  load
of  drooping  plumes,  red  and  white,  and  a  crown  of  similar
plumage  completes  the  costume.  (3)  The  Ohirihuanos  (al-
ready described).  Each  is  provided  with  a  big  dmm.  (4)
The  Inca-sicuri.  Costume:  velvet,  cloth  and  silk,  gold  and
silver  embroidery,  imitating  the  supposed  dress  of  the  Incas,
and  clearly  of  colonial  origin.^"  (5)  The  Chnnchn-sicnri
(already  described).  They  all  beat  small  drums  and  play
flutes  or  fifes.  There  are  two  bands  of  these  each  with  a
leader,  whose  distinctive  mark  is  a  hat  with  a  triple  row  of
brij^t  plmnes,  and  a  long  spear  or  lance  which  he  brand-
ishes sometimes  quite  offensively.  (6)  The  C9iaca-na-ni.
They  dance  along  with  the  Eenacho,  and  wear  the  same
costume,  without  tiger-skins.


;cbyG00'^lc


114 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

(Add  to  these  gronpB  a  great  number  of  independent  per-
fonners,  male  and  female,  in  festive  Indian  dress,  and  hosts
of  spectators,  hundreds  of  big  and  little  drmns,  hundreds  of
flutes,  from  the  tiniest  to  the  biggest,  and  perhaps  more
fifes  yet,  the  instruments  rumbling,  thundering,  rattling,
screeching,  howling  imd  screaming,  without  any  r^^rd  to
rhythm  or  harmony;  hundreds  of  ugly  voices  sin^^ng
monotonons  melodies;  now  uid  then,  here  and  there,  a  yell
or  a  whoop ;  all  the  performers  more  or  less  intoxicated  and
drinking  harder  and  harder  towards  nightfall— the  sc^ie  is
indeed  very  picturesque,  very  strange  and  brilliant  in  hues;
bnt  at  the  same  time  the  din  and  nproar  is  so  deafening,  so
utterly  devoid  of  the  slightest  redeeming  feature,  that  it
forms  one  of  the  weirdest  and,  at  the  same  time,  most  sick-
ening displays  imaginable.^'*  Once  started,  this  moving
crowd,  ever  changing  like  a  kaleidoscope,  keeps  on  the  dis-
tressing roar,  night  and  day  withoat  intermission,  for  never
less  than  two  days  and  two  nights,  sometimes  as  long  as  a
whole  week!  We  had  the  excruciating  "pleasure"  of  en-
during three  of  these  festivals  at  Copacavana,  the  firat  of
which  lasted  three  days  and  as  many  nights,  only  inter-
rupted by  hard  showers.  The  second  and  third  were  oon-
tinned  for  three  days,  but  the  nights  were  less  noisy.  At
Tiahuanaco,  however,  tiie  festival  lasted  five  days  and  four
niffhts,  the  din  never  ceasing  during  thai  time.^

The  Aymara  dances  which  we  have  seen  lack,  as  stated,
the  decorum  of  paeblo  dances.  Hence,  much  of  tiieir  origi-
nal symbolic  character  appears  to  be  lost."*  They  all
degenerate  into  an  orgy,  drunkenness  prevailing  among
both  sexes  after  the  first  afternoon.  Once  at  this  stage,  the
naturally  quarrelsome  character  of  the  Aymard  crops  out
and  most  Indian  festivals  in  Bolivia  end  in  bloodshed.  It
may  ev^i  be  said,  that  no  Ibidian  festivity  is  satisfactory
withoat  one  or  more  homicides.  Feuds  between  nMghbor-
ing  hadendas  are  often  fought  out  on  such  occa^ons,  for
the  Bidian  often  carries,  besides  his  sling  (for  which  the


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 115

women  provide  ronnd  pebbles  in  their  skirts)  a  dangerons
weapon  in  the  shape  of  a  whip  terminating  at  the  upper  end
of  the  handle  in  a  small  tomahawk  of  steel.  Whenever
such  fights  take  place  it  is  not  rare  to  see  men  swallowing
the  brains  oozing  ont  of  the  fractured  skulls  of  the  womided,
and  women  dipping  chonn  in  the  pools  of  blood,  and  eating
it,  when  well  soaked,  with  loathsome  ferocity.

Two  peculiar  performances  took  place  on  the  second  of
February  at  Copacavana.  One  began  before  sundown,
causing  the  uproar  to  subside  somewhat  for  about  an  hour.
Two  processions  marched  into  the  square  from  opposite
sides.  Each  was  beaded  by  a  litter  of  wood  borne  on  the
shoulders  of  f onr  or  six  Indians.

On  each  litter,  and  on  an  old  carved  chair  decorated  with
boughs  and  other  cheap  ornaments,  sat  an  "Inca,"  that  is,
a  young  Indian  in  the  toggery  of  the  "Inca-sicnri,"  and
armed  with  a  sling.  When  the  two  files  met,  both  "Incas"
rose  in  their  litters  and  a  di^ogne  began,  treating  of  the
historic  strife  between  Haascar  and  Atahuallpa  and
abounding  in  challenges  and  insults;  one  of  the  "Incas"
personifying  Hnascar,  the  other  Atahnallpa.  From  words
they  came  to  throire  with  slings,  pelting  each  other  with
roots  instead  of  stones.  The  action  was  quite  lively  and
lasted  until  one  of  the  "Incas"  gave  up,  considerably
braised  and  bleeding.  After  the  combat,  both  stepped  down
from  their  litters  and  mingled  with  tiie  crowd,  dancing  side
by  side.  This  performance  is,  of  conrse,  post-Columbian.
It  is  one  of  the  many  semi-theatrical  performances  invented  '
as  a  substitute  for  the  idolatrous  and  often  obscene  primi-
tive ceremonials.

The  other  took  place  after  nightfall  and  in  the  darkest
oomer  of  the  square,  where  not  even  the  numberless  fire-
crackers, rockets,  and  other  luminous  displays  shed  a  spark
of  light.  It  was  the  "Mimula,"  an  ancient  round  dance  in
which  both  sexes  take  part,  and  which  is  now  only  per-
formed at  ni^t. Hence  we  could  not  discern  any  partic-


;cbyG00'^lc


116 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

nlars,  l>eyoDd  a  ntunber  of  fignres  moving  about  on  a  small
space  and  to  some  indifferent  tone  that  did  not  even  seem
to  be  primitive."'

None  of  the  groups  of  dancers  heretofore  ennmerated  have,
like  the  New-Mexican  pueblos  and  the  Yaqnis  of  Sonora,
their  particular  jesters  or  clowns.  But  olomsy  mimicries
were  executed,  during  the  day,  by  mestizos  wearing  masks.
There  is  a  special  group  of  clowns  that  appears  on  the  scene
everywhere  and  at  every  festival,  even  in  public  processions
at  La  Paz.  These  are  the  "morenos";  not  Lidians,  but
mestizos,  "cholos,"  young  men  who  are  not  unfrequently
paid  for  their  performances.  We  saw  them  first  at  La  Paz,
afterwards  at  Tiahuanaco,  and  lastly  at  Copacavana.  The
dress  of  the  morenos  is  nsnally  very  costly,  being  the  cos-
tume of  the  eighteenth  century,  bright-colored  frocks  of
velvet  or  silk,  richly  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver,  vests
to  fit,  knee-bree<dies,  hats,  and  low  shoes  and  masks,  hideous
rather  than  comicaL  With  them  go  small  boys  wearing
ugly  masks  of  devils,  and  frequently  a  condor,  that  is,  a
performer  arrayed  in  the  plumage  of  that  bird  and  with
a  mask  imitating  its  head.  If  the  morenos  were  less  ad-
dicted to  bard  drinking,  their  pranks  and  jests  might  be
more  palatable.  At  Copacavana,  however,  they  performed
in  a  rather  dignified  way.  Their  costumes  were  plainer,  and
each  played  a  small  flute  or  fife.  They  evidently  have  noth-
ing in  common  with  the  primitive  dances  of  flie  Indiana.*  ••

At  Tiahuanaco,  the  liidian  dancers  belonged  to  the  plain
**Sicuri,"  distinguished  from  the  others  by  a  towering
head-dress  of  gray  plumes  of  the  American  ostrich, ^'^  and
to  the  Kenacho,  with  some  Chacanani.  The  Kenacho  had  in
their  company  women  who  wore  tbe  peculiar  hats  repre-
sented by  Mr.  Squier."*  At  Copacavana  female  perform-
ers wore  simply  their  "nice"  clothes,  and  each  had  the
characteristic  bundle  slung  aronnd  the  neck.  We  have  not,
as  yet,  been  able  to  obtain  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  this
custom,  ^u<d)  seems  to  be  ancient.


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 117

On  the  Inland  of  Titacaca,  the  25th  of  July,  feast  of  the
pntron  saint  of  Challa,  ooold  be  only  partially  celebrated.
Bat  we  coaxed  the  Indians  into  dancing  during  the  after-
noon. Before  noon  a  gronp  reaembling  the  Chirihoanos  in
costume,  but  called  "Pnsipiani,""'  came  to  the  chapel  to
dance  and  play  their  fifes  and  drums  before  the  boilding.
The  Chayllpa  followed,  and  later  on,  besides  these  two
clnsters,  the  Eenacho  and  the  Chacanani  presented  them-
selves. Witiiin  a  very  short  time  the  courtyard  of  the
hacienda  was  filled  with  dancers,  with  or  without  offidal
costmne,  and  with  the  same  din  and  uproar,  though  propor-
tionately less,  than  at  other  places  and  larger  gatherings.
The  wonted  disregard  for  symmetry  and  harmony  prevailed,
showing  that  discordant  noise  and  irregular  motions  are
inherent  to  most  aboriginal  dances  of  Bolivia ;  those  of  Pern
we  have  not  yet  witnessed.

The  existence  of  numerous  groups  of  dancers,  groups  that
are  permanent  associations  and  represented  over  a  wide
range  of  territory  in  villages,  conmiunities,  and  on  estates,
leads  to  the  inference  that  there  might  exist,  among  these
Indians,  a  special  organization  controlling  these  associations
and  upholding  them  in  the  midst  of  slowly  encroaching
civilization.  But  to  obtain  an  insight  into  this  organization
is  as  difficult  as  it  was  among  the  Indians  of  New  Mexico,
until  the  classical  researches  of  Mr.  Gushing  removed  the
veil  with  which  the  aborigine  shrouded  his  primitive  re-
ligious customs.  The  study  of  these  features  is  an  enormous
virgin  fidd,  that  claims  the  attention  of  students.  We  found
the  Aymara  as  reticent  on  snch  topics  as  any  other  Indian
tribes  and  even  more  difficult  of  approach.  Proficiency  in
their  language  is,  of  course,  the  first  condition,  and  this  we
had  not  yet  been  able  to  acquire.  Besides,  with  the  excep-
tion of  a  few  commnnities,  who  still  live  according  to  ancient
cnstoms,  long  residence  and  familiarization  with  the  Indians
in  Bolivia  may  not  be  even  as  profitable  as  in  the  North.
Adoption  in  an  Aymar^  tribe  is  ont  of  the  question  for


;cbyG00'^lc


us THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  EOATI

Beveral  reasons:  First,  there  is  among  the  Indians,  bitter
hatred  against  all  that  are  not  of  their  stock.  An  ethno-
logical observer  wonld  be  at  once  liable  to  snspicion  as  a
spy;  for  the  Aymara  has  many  thin^  to  conceal  from  the
white  man.  The  local  anthorities  and  the  landowners  them-
selves are  likely  to  take  nmbrage  at  investigations,  the  pur-
pose of  which  many  would  fail  to  nnderstand,  and  hence
misconstrue.  Furthermore  the  Indian  himself  has  changed
many  of  his  cnstoms,  and  it  is  a  question  how  far  a  life  of
sacrifice  and  privations  conld  he  rewarded,  except  in  places
where  the  AymarA  preserved  most  of  his  primitive  habits
through  rigid  seclusion.  There  are  a  few  communities
where  a  discreet  and  practical  student  might  do  important
ethnologic  work.

Beside  the  dances  mentioned,  we  have  heard  of  a  number
of  others  which  it  did  not  fall  to  our  lot  to  witness.  At
Llujo  on  Hallow-eve,  the  Indians,  nnbeknown  to  us,  danced
the  "  Anqni-auqui"  at  their  chapel.  It  was  accompanied  by
prayers  and  offerings  to  the  deceased.  The  people  were
pining  for  rain,  and  they  believe  that,  when  the  bones  of  the
ancient  inhabitants  are  disturbed,  drouth  follows.'**'  We
had  begun  our  excavations,  and  the  Indians  were  mortally
afraid  of  the  consequences.  On  the  night,  however,  of  the
day  mentioned  it  began  to  rain  and  thereafter  rained  abun-
dantly. The  Indians  thus  became  reconciled  to  our  doings,
and  we  never  had  better  laborers  and  more  willing  ones
than  at  Llnjo.'*'  Whether  the  auqui-auqui  had  anything  to
do  witii  their  intercessions  we  conld  not  ascertain.  That  the
chacu-ayllu  is  a  rain-dance  was  at  least  not  denied  by  our
old  wizard  on  Titicaca  Island.

(The  first  indication  of  an  organization,  are  the  ofBcers
called  '*Irpa,"  in  Spanish  maestros  de  bayles  (literally,
teachers  of  the  dances).  These  officers,  according  to  yihai
was  stated  to  us  at  Tiahuanaco,  are  appointed  for  life,  but
on  Titicaca  we  were  assured,  by  the  Indians  themselves,  that
the  irpas  are  selected  for  each  dance  (by  whom  they  did  not


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 119

say),  and  that  every  band  of  dancers  is  divided  into  two
groups,  each  with  its  director;**'  one  group  representing
Aran-saya  and  the  other  Ma-saya.  At  Tiahuanaeo  it  was
asserted  that  each  of  these  clusters  danced  on  its  own  side
of  the  square,  the  Aran-sayas  on  the  north,  the  Ma-sayas
on  the  south,  and  that  if  one  section  trespassed  upon  the
ground  of  the  other,  bloody  conflicts  would  ensue.  We
noticed  snch  a  division  in  church,  but  at  the  dances  the  con-
fusion became  so  great,  at  Tiahuanaeo  as  well  as  at  Copa-
cavana,  that  it  was  impossible  to  ascertain  anything.  The
Indians  of  Titicaca  belong^  to  the  cluster  of  Aran-saya
of  the  Peninsula  of  Gopacavana,  there  could  be  no  division
on  the  Island.  The  irpas  are  not  remunerated  for  their
work.  It  is  an  honorary  office,  as  well  as  that  of  "alf^rez"
banner-bearer,  or  godfather  to  the  festival,  an  introduction
from  colonial  times.

The  dances  of  the  Aymara  being  a  part  of  their  primitive
religions  ceremonies,  and  but  superficially  connected  with
the  chnrch,"'  any  association  directing  and  conducting
them  must  be  a  part  of  their  primitive  religions  organiza-
tion. I  need  not  allude  here  to  chnrch-officials  among  the
Indians,  like  the  fiscales,  but  there  is  one  office,  at  least,  con-
nected with  the  church,  and  little  noticed,  that  possibly
recalls  certain  functionaries  among  northern  Indians  who
are  more  particularly  keepers  of  <mcient  beliefs  and  rituals.
We  first  heard  of  this  office  on  Titicaca.  It  is  called
Preste,"*  and  its  incumbent  was  an  old  man,  acknowledged  '
to  be  a  potent  wizard.  It  was  whispered  that  he  was  a
lineal  descendant  of  the  ancient  "gentiles,"  or  "Chotlpas."
This  preste  is  appointed,  by  the  Ilacata  and  the  old  men,  or
mayores,  for  five  years.  His  duties  consist  ostensibly  in
caring  for  the  church,  and  overseeing  preparations  for
feasts  and  the  like;  hence  our  aged  friend  Mariano  Machn,
the  preste  of  Challa,  wandered  to  Copacavana  as  frequently
as  it  was  indispensable  on  account  of  these  duties,  but  not
oftener,  and  not  out  of  devotion. We  were  assured  by  one


;cbyG00'^lc


120 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

of  tiie  other  shamanB  that  this  preste  had  also  tha
obligatioii  of  doing  penance  for  his  people!  I  ^ve  these
statements  as  we  received  them,  and  do  not  goarantee  their
veracity,  althoogh  the  same  office  was  mentioned  to  us  at
other  places.

The  existence  of  wizards,  sorcerers,  and  medicine-men
among  the  Aymara  Indians,  has  been  frequently  mentioned
in  the  preceding  pages.  It  was  natural  that,  once  informed
of  their  existence,  we  should  endeavor  to  obtain  as  much
information  as  possible  in  regard  to  them;  and  it  is  easy  to
believe  that  this  was  a  very  delicate  and  difficult  tadc  On
general  principles,  and  from  what  I  had  seen  among  the
Peruvian  Indians,  we  were  prepared  to  find  the  shamans  in
Bolivia  also,  and  the  first  somewhat  detailed  statements  in
regard  to  them  were  obtained  at  Tiahuanaco,  though  not
from  Indians.  There,  the  term  brujo  (sorcerer)  appeared
to  be  a  household  word  applied  to  all  Indian  medicine-men.
There  also  we  were  told  of  the  belief  among  the  Indians
that  bones  of  dead  "gentiles"  could  be  introduced  into  the
bodies  of  persons  through  evil  witchcraft  and  taken  out  by
some  brujo  throng  suchmgl  Later  on,  in  the  coarse  of
conversation  with  people  of  the  country  who  spoke  Aymara
and  appeared  well  versed  in  the  customs  of  the  Indiims,  we
were  informed  that  the  tities  of  those  who  officiated  as  di-
viners were  "Lay-ka"  and  "Yatiri."'"  Some  become
"Yatiri"  because  they  have  been  struck  by  lightning  and
survived,  therefore  looked  upon  as  endowed  with  supernat-
ural gifts;  a  belief  mentioned  by  older  chroniclers  and  pre-
vailing all  over  the  mountainous  districts  of  Pern.***  We
were  assured  that  the  layka  consulted  the  coca,  throwing  its
leaves  tike  cards  or  dice  when  they  wanted  to  discover
hidden,  lost,  or  stolen  property,  and  that  they  also  used
playing  cards.  One  of  their  performances  was  described  to
ns  as  follows:  The  layka  gather  at  night  in  some  house  and
begin  to  drink.  At  midni^t  the  light  is  put  out,  after  pre-
viously consulting  the  cards,  and  then  the  owl  ("jur-cn,**  or


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 121

"nrcn'*)  is  called.  The  bird  answers  at  onoe,  and  its  cry  is
interpreted  by  the  wizards  as  confirming  the  conclusion  at
which  they  arrived  by  means  of  the  cards."M

On  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  compelled  to  live  for  months
with  the  Indians,  we  obtained  more  precise  data.  The  in-
cantation to  which  we  consented  in  order  to  obtain  an  idea
of  such  ceremonies,  led  ns  to  know  that  Manuel  Mamani,
warden  of  the  hacienda  bnildiags  (nnya-siri),  was  one  of
the  chief  layka  on  the  Island.  Toward  the  end  of  oar  last
stay  at  Challa  he  acknowledged  it.  But  direct  questioning
Id  regard  to  his  art  and  rank  among  the  wizards  proved  use-
less. It  made  him  offish  and  oansed  him  to  avoid,  for  a  time,
the  familiar  evening  talks  at  our  room.  Neither  gifts  of  .^
coca  nor  of  money  conid  prevail  npon  him  to  speak.  With
other  Indians  the  resnlt  was  still  worse.  The  preste,
who  had  been  pointed  out  to  ns,  and  by  Mannel  Mamani
himself,  as  a  very  powerful  shaman,  shmmed  us  from  the
moment  be  suspected  we  might  interrogate  him.  Hence  it
was  only  through  very  indirect  methods,  and  by  comparing
indications  thus  secured  with  statements  freely  made  by
whites  and  mestizos,  that  we  were  finally  able  to  learn  some-
thing. We  found  out  that  there  were  at  least  three  principal
wizards  on  Titicaca,  and  that  (this  from  their  own  confes-
sion) they  were  subordinate  to  medicine-men  of  higher  au-
thority residing  at  Sampaya  on  the  Peninsula  of  Copaca-
vana.  But  it  was  also  stated,  and  by  Indians,  that  at
Huaicho  there  resided  some  powerful  magicians  whom  they
obeyed.  This  would  indicate  that  the  religious  organization
of  the  Aymara  of  that  region  is  independent  of  the  two  par-
tialities of  Aran-saya  and  Ma-saya.  Among  some  of  the
whites  and  mestizos,  a  certain  Indian  family  [and  particu-
larly one  man],  residing  at  Tiquina,  was  in  very  bad  repute,
as  mighty  sorcerers  dreaded  on  the  Peninsula,  the  Islands,
and  on  Peruvian  territory  adjacent  to  Copacavana.  But
we  found  out,  through  the  Indians  themselves,  that  although
that  personage  was  indeed  a  noted  shaman  who  frequently


;cbyG00'^lc


122 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

abused  the  crednlit;'  of  mestizos  and  even  of  whites,  his
influence  was  not  so  great  with  the  Indians.  Casual  obser-
vations, hints  caught  here  and  there,  the  testimony  of  resi-
dents at  Copacavana  and  Pane  satisfied  us  that  the  influ-
ence of  the  shamans  is  as  great  among  the  Aymax^  as
among  northern  Indians,  and  tliat  it  amounts  to  nearly
absolute  control  of  their  actions  and  thoughts.  We  became
convinced  that  among  these  wizards  there  is  a  proper
organization,  that  there  are  degree  of  rank,  that  some
limit  their  performances  to  a  certain  sphere,  others  to  an-
other. On  the  evening  of  our  last  day  at  Challa  we  obtained,
at  last,  some  positive  information.  The  Indians  had  been
celebrating,  and  at  our  expense,  which  we  readily  allowed
for  obvious  reasons.  On  the  day  before,  two  of  the  highest
medidne-men  from  Sampaya,  as  it  was  afterward  acknow-
ledged to  us,  came  to  Challa  under  pretext  of  a  friendly
visit,  and  in  the  forenoon  (while  the  aborigines  were  still
undecided  whether  they  would  rejoice  or  do  mischief)  the
IndianB  gathered  around  these  wizards  to  see  them  consult
the  coca.  We  were  not  allowed  to  look  on.  The  response
must  have  been  favorable,  for  onr  offers  to  defray  the  ex-
pense of  the  celebration  were  accepted,  and  the  dances  took
place  in  the  afternoon.  At  night  the  house-warden,  being
moderately  intoxicated,  caUed  at  our  room  to  receive  his
^t  of  coca,  and  we  found  him  Inclined  to  intimate  talk.
We  approached  him  first  on  the  subject  of  the  dances  and
elidted  the  following  information,  which  I  consider  mostly
reliable;  hut  while  it  is  probably  true  in  regard  to  tlw
Island  and  Copacavana,  there  may  exist  variations  else-
where.

Manuel  Mamani  of  Challa,  our  informant,  stated  that
among  the  inhabitants  of  Titicaca  the  following  dances  and
groups  of  dancers  exist :  The  Mimula,  which  is  seldom  per-
formed ;  the  Pusipiani,  the  Ohacanani,  the  Chayllpa.

These  four  groups  he  distinctly  and  emphatically  de-
clared to  be  (mcient  and  primitive. The  Mimula  and  Pusi-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 123

piflni,  he  further  asserted,  were  branches  of  the  highest  of
ofl,— the  Ohirihnanos,— which  were  not  on  the  Island,  but
had  their  headquarters  at  Sampaya,  their  leaders  and  hi^-
est  shamans  being  layka  from  the  Mamani  family.

Besides  these  five  ancient  groups,  there  were  the  following
more  modem  ones :  The  Kenacho,  or  Kena-kena;  the  Sicuri,
the  Inca-sicnri.  The  latter  three  clnsters  he  represented  as
being  less  important  His  statement  as  to  the  Chirihnanos
being  the  oldest  and  the  last  three  named  the  most  recent
and  least  important,  was  repeated  to  us,  spontaneously,  by
Dr.  del  Carpio,  the  owner  of  Koati,  who  has  good  oppor-  •
tunity  of  securing  information,  since  the  headquarters  of
the  Chirihuanos  are  in  the  near  neighborhood  of  his  prop-
erty."'

We  could  not  eli<nt  from  our  Lidian  other  information  in
r^^rd  to  the  Chirihnanos,  Mimula  and  Pnsipiani.  As  he
himself  belonged  to  the  last-named,  hence  to  a  branch  of  the
Chirihnanos,  it  is  evidoit  that  he  did  not  wish  to  talk  "out
of  school."  But  in  regard  to  others  he  was  more  commu-
nicative, as  the  Indian  always  is  about  matters  that  do  not
directly  concern  him.

He  told  us  that  it  was  the  duty  of  the  Chacanani  "to
fight,"  and  that  the  Koiacho,  or  Kena-kena,  have  the  same
office,  but  as  a  recent  and  "younger"  branch  of  the  Oha-
canani.  The  Chayllpa  he  represented  as  being  hunters,
hence  they  dance  the  chacu-ayllu.  But  he  also  stated  that
the  Chayllpa  are  charged  with  the  duly  of  "making,'*  or
procuring,  rain,  by  using  frogs  and  toads  as  intercessors,
and  by  collecting  little  stones  on  the  rocky  summit  of  the
Calvario  and  throwing  them  into  the  Lake.  In  addition  to
these  duties,  the  Chayllpa  are  expected  to  "make  peace
when  the  Chacanani  and  Kenacho  begin  to  fight."

Assuming  the  above  statements  to  be  true  (and  from  onr
present  knowledge  I  must  regard  them  as  true  in  the  main,
at  least  so  far  as  concerns  the  Island),  these  different
groups  of  dancers  form  as  many  esoteric  societies. Upon


;cbyG00'^lc


124 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AM)  KOATI

being  closely  interrogated  on  their  origin,  onr  informant
gave  evasive  answers,  repeating,  however,  that  the  layka
of  Sampaya  were  the  beads  of  tiie  Chirihnanos;  that  he
himself,  as  Fnaipiani,  was  the  leader  of  the  latter  on  the
Island  (there  may  have  been  some  exaj^ration  in  this) ;
and  that  initiation  in  any  of  the  closters  depended  upon  the
pleasure  of  the  "old  men"  exclusively.  We  asked  several
times  lAether  the  parents  of  a  child  might,  throng  some
vow,  or  pledge,  destine  that  child  to  become  a  member  of
any  sodety  of  dancers.  He  either  did  not  understand  the
query,  or  was  wary  enough  to  suspect  the  true  import  of  it:
at  all  events  he  emphatically  asserted,  that  neither  the  par-
ents  nor  the  party  himself  could  decide  or  choose.^*'  But
he  also  made  the  somewhat  strange  statement  that  the  "old
m^i"  had  power  to  transfer  from  one  group  to  another!

There  is  much  in  this  iii&t  recalls  the  esoteric  societies
discovered  by  Mr.  Onsbing  among  the  pneblo  Indians  of
New  Mexico,  which  certainly  existed  among  the  ancient
Mexicans  and  other  tribes.  Thus  the  Chacauani  and  Ke-
nacho  appear  to  be  the  warriors,  the  Chayllpa  the  hunters.
I  mention  such  analogies  only  as  hints,  and  as  problems  for
further  careful  investigation.

At  all  events,  the  existence  of  these  groups,  their  organi-
zation and  duties,  are  kept  very  secret  That  their
functions  are  connected  with  beliefs  and  rites  antedating
Spanish  times,  appears  manifest  Not  only  the  perfor-
,  mances  of  the  Chayllpa  as  procurers  of  rain,  but  other
features  indicate  this.  While  the  mannfactore  of  costumes
and  toggery  is  partly  carried  on  in  broad  daylight,  the  days
and  nights  preceding  a  big  dance  are  marked  by  doings  to
which  outsiders  are  not  admitted;  the  layka  are,  at  such
times,  often  absent  from  their  homes  or  at  least  are  not
accessible  to  strainers.  The  dance  itself  seems  to  be  but
the  display,  not  the  object,  of  the  performance.  Its  con-
nection with  festivals  of  the  Catholic  church  is  a  veil  under
cover  of  which  the  Indian  performs  ancient  ceremonies.***


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICAOA 125

These  embody  etimologic  features  of  great  antiqTiity  and
considerable  interest.  I  can  only  urge  the  necessity  of
Btndying  the  aborigines  of  this  part  of  South  America  ac-
cording to  the  methods  so  saccessfnlly  employed  within  the
last  twenty-five  years  among  northern  Indians.

The  great  variety  of  shamans  scattered  over  Bolivia
among  the  Indians  of  all  tribes  and  stocks,  as  well  as  among
all  Indians  of  Fern,  renders  their  classification  difficnlt.  On
the  Island,  there  was  a  shaman  over  whom  a  cloud  seemed
to  hover.  He  was  mentioned  as  being  "chama-kani,"  and
regarded  with  mistmst  because  he  had  "dealings  with  the
owl.""^  We  tried  to  ascertun  whether  the  medicine-men,
the  healers  and  cnrers  proper,  or  doctors,  so-called,  were
distinct  from  the  diviners  or  prophets.  It  stmck  us  that
our  medicine  chest  and  the  household  remedies  of  my  wife
were  bo  frequently  pat  in  requisition,  and  that  even  the
layka  Manuel  Mamani  preferred  to  ask  for  our  medicaments
rather  than,  at  least  openly,  use  remedies  of  his  own.  It
seemed  as  if  he  had  no  knowledge  of  aboriginal  medicine.
Still  this  same  man,  who  usually  accompanied  us  and  par-
ticularly assisted  Mrs.  Bandolier  in  her  gathering  of
medicinal  plants,  displayed  on  such  oocasions  a  very  inti-
mate acquaintance  with  herbs  and  their  application  in
sundry  eases.  His  knowledge  was  indicated  by  what  he
refused  to  teU  or  avoided  to  acknowledge,  as  well  as  by  what
he  freely  told.  Thus  we  teamed,  from  other  sources,  of
plants  which  we  saw  and  of  which  he  refused  to  give  even
the  names.  On  the  other  hand  he  revealed  to  us,  oncon-
sdonsly,  many  strange  beliefs  and  customs,  relating  to
medicine.  Whenever  one  of  ns  accidentally  hurt  himself
by  falling  against  a  stone,  he  would  enjoin  us  to  take  a  small
piece  of  the  rock,  reduce  it  to  powder,  dilute  it  with  water,
and  drink  it,  lest  the  same  rock  might  hurt  ns  again.  He  it
was  who  told  ns  about  the  ailment  called  "larpata,"  a
child's  disease,  caused  by  the  sight  of  a  corpse.  In  the  list
of  medicinal  plants  sent  in  by  my  wife,  a  nomber  of  species


;cbyG00'^lc


126 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

nsed  in  witchcraft  are  noted.  Whatever  remains  of  the
aborii^I  practice  of  medicine  among  the  Aymara  is  kept
secret,  and  this  is  doubly  strange,  since  the  more  snspidotis
"art"  of  foretelling  by  means  of  the  coca  is  practised  laf
Indian  sorcerers,  not  for  Indians,  alone,  but  frequently  for
the  benefit  of  mestizos  as  well  as  of  whites.  Singnlar
coincidences  of  prophecy  with  fact  have  been  related  to  as.
These  oracles  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are  obtained
further  illustrate  belief  in  the  "  Achachilas,"  so  often  men-
tioned here.  The  conjurer  takes  certain  coca  leaves,  perfe(H
in  form,  which,  when  thrown,  fall  with  the  lustrous  side
upward.  Such  leaves  are  to  represent  the  "Achachilas,"
of  the  localities  where  the  object  or  subject  of  the  consulta-
tion is  at  the  time,  or  where  a  certain  action  takes  place
directly  connected  witii  the  matter  at  issue.  We  know  of
an  instance  where  the  object  of  the  performance  was  to
obtain  information  in  regard  to  military  movements  con-
nected with  political  disturbances  in  Peru  and  Bolivia.  The
consultation  of  the  coca  took  place  at  Copacavana,  and  the
shaman  was  an  Indian  of  that  Peninsula.  He  selected
three  coca  leaves  as  representing,  respectively,  La  Paz,
Areqoipa  and  Funo,  the  first  through  the  "Achachila"  of
lUimani,^^'  the  second  that  of  the  Misti,"'  and  the  third  of
some  height  near  Funo.  That  most  of  the  diviners  or  layka
are  imposters  cannot  be  affirmed.  They  to  a  great  extent
are  sincere,  but  at  the  same  time  there  are  some  -who  abuse
credulity,  especially  of  those  who  are  not  Indians.  Upon
the  Indian  mind  these  predictions,  or  oracles,  exercise  an
astounding  influence,  mnch  greater  than  a  wonderful  core.
Hence  the  diviners,  among  the  Aymara,  assume  a  position
superior  to  that  of  the  medicine-men.  ( Our  later  investiga-
tions have  fully  established  that  the  shamans  are,  amoi^;
the  Aymara,  organized  into  several  main  esoteric  clusters.)
But  it  is  not  the  place  to  enter  into  details  of  researches
carried  on  after  our  work  on  the  Islands,  in  other  sections
of  Bolivia.


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 127

That  fhe  Indian  punishes  evil  sorcery  as  craelly  as  he
bows  slavishly  to  what  he  considers  legitimate  magic  art,
applies  in  full  force  to  the  Aymar&.  When  the  Indians  of
Tiingiiya  hrohe  out  on  the  Pemvian  frontier,  they  sacked
the  bouse  of  the  Governor,  a  white  man.  On  that  occasion
they  discovered  two  innocent  dotts,  but  they  had  been  hidden
beneath  the  floor.  It  satisfied  the  natives  that  they  were
objects  of  black  sorcery  and  raised  their  fury  to  sach  a
pitch,  that  the  honse  was  actoally  torn  to  shreds.  We  saw
the  wreck  soon  after,  and  I  never  saw  snch  complete  anni-
hilation throng  the  hand  of  man.  In  1893  an  Indian  on  the
Island,  well  known  to  us,  took  it  into  his  head  that  a  certain
woman  was  a  dangerous  witch.  He  seized  the  mtfortunate
on  a  favorable  opportonity,  thmst  her  into  a  burning  brush
pile  until  she  was  completely  roasted  and  then— ate  her  up!
Acts  of  cannibalism,  by  the  way,  are  not  imcommon  among
the  Aymara  of  Bolivia,  and  many  of  them  are  well  known  to
the  authorities  who,  however,  either  deny  or  confess  they
are  impotent  against  such  customs.  Where  an  Indian  stock
has  preserved  so  many  of  its  ancient  customs  and  beliefs,
it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  authentic  traditions,  mythical
and  historical  lore,  are  still  to  be  gathered.  Since  the
AymarS  possess  an  esoteric  organization  like  that  found
among  the  aborigines  of  the  North  American  southwest,  it
is  chiefly  among  their  esoteric  clusters  that  we  must  look
for  ancient  historical  lore.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


NOTES


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TmCACA


"rb«  Mtrlieat  prial«d  boUm  of
Titieutt  Iiland  thns  far  known  b
from  the  jen  1S34.  Still  it  ia  poan-
bl«  tluit  inmon  about  tbe  Island  and
it(  Mwred  aite  bad  gone  bejond  the
limit*  of,  actual  Pem.  ^e  report
made  bj^Jnan  de  Bamano^Seeretaty
of  ChatlM  V,  to  the  Emperor  (1526)
on  the  esplotationa  along  the  Soath
American  weat  eoaat  aa  far  aa  Ta-
camo,  in  1525,  meations  a  atory  told
the  Bpaniarda,  by  people  from  fur-
ther aonth,  about  the  eoontrj  inland
and  a  Mrtain  ialand  near  the  eoaat
with  the  effigy  of  a  woman  (Selooion
de  lot  primerot  deioubrivtientot  de
FrtMouco  Fitam  y  Diego  da  Almagro,
from  Codex  CXX  of  the  Imperial  li-
brary of  Vienna,  in  Coleeoion  d«
DoatBitnta*  inidito*  para  ta  Bittoria
de  Stpoia,  ToL  T,  p.  200):  "Hay
una  lala  en  la  mar  jnnto  i  lea  pneblo*
donde  tienen  nna  eaaa  de  oradon
hecha  4  manera  de  tlenda  de  earapo,
toldada  de  may  rieaa  mantaa  labra-
daa^  idonde  tienen  nna  im&jea  de  nna
mnger  con  nn  nifio  en  loa  btaioB  qne
tiene  por  nombre  Maria  Meeela:
euando  algnno  tiene  alguna  enfer-
medad  en  algnno  miembro,  baeele  nn
miembro  de  plata  6  de  oro,  y  ofre-
eeaela,  y  le  aaeriflean  deUnte  de  la
imigea  dertaa  orejaa  en  dertoa
tiempoa."  The  "aheep"  here  men-
tionad  were  the  naau,  and  the  offer-


inga  of  tbeae  anlotali  took  place  in  tbe
Bierra,  not  on  the  coast,  wbere  the
llama  cannot  lire  for  any  length  of
time.  The  offering  of  parte  of  the
hnn»n  body  imitated  in  gold  reoalla
the  little  gold  and  ailTeT  f  etiahea  ao
numeronaly  found  in  the  aoil  of  the
Island,  The  Spaniards  ccnld  hardly
be  expected  to  have  understood  the
nativea  at  that  time.  Even  an  Indian
interpreter  conld  not  impart  to  Enro-
peans  then  already  a  correct  idea  of
what  he  was  told  in  hia  own  language;
No  Indian  had  had  time  to  become
auffldently  familiar  with  Spanish,  at
least  on  the  coast  of  South  America.
Hence  tbe  confusion  in  deacriprioa
and  location.  The  notice  printed  in
1S34  is,  geogrspliieally,  more  definite,
though  lUll  muddled,  and  the  de-
seriptiTe  part  briatlea  with  exaggera-
tioDB,  by  meaoB  of  which  the  Indians
Bometimea  boped  to  get  rid  of  the
atrangera  by  aending  tbem  on  an  ad-
venturons  jonrnt^  far  away.  The
document  is  the  (azeeedingly  rare)
folio,  La  Conqititta  del  Pent,  Uamada
la  n*eaa  CatttOa,  Sevilla,  1631  (with-
out paging).  The  author  ia  not
known,  but  be  mnat  have  been  a
companion  of  PiiarTO.  He  laya,  on
the  last  page:  "Se  4  diio  el  (^dqne
4  ay  otroa  muehos  indioa  de  aqnelU
tiem  de  CaoUo  [Collao]  y  J)  ay  vn
rio  mny  grande  en  d  qi  ay  Tna  yila


;cbyG00'^lc


130


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


dSde  Aj  eiertw  caaae:  7  qua  entra
elUs  Mto  vnSi  may  graode  toda  en-
bieita  de  oro  j  taa  p&j&a  heebsa  de
oro;  por<|  los  indioa  not  trnzeron  nt
manojo  dellu  j  q  laa  Tigss  j  enaato
en  In  ctwa  »j  todo  es  oro ;  j  J)  tieiie  el
melo  empedrado  con  gnuioa  da  oro
poi  fundir:  j  J}  tiene  dentro  de  ella
mncho  oro  por  f  undir.  Y  eoto  07  deciT
al  cacique  7  a  nu  iudiot  ({ ion  de  aqnella
tierra  eetAdo  presente  el  gonemador.
Diio  mas  el  eaciqne  Q  el  oro  4  aael
de  aijl  rio  no  lo  eogi  en  bataaa:  aiit«a
_Jfu«)gen  en  Tiiaa  aeequlaa  J}  hacen
•olir  da  a^l  rio  qae  Una  la  tierra  <|
tienen  eaoada:  7  aaal  mesmo  qnitan
el  agna  de  aJjlla  seequia  eomo  eat*
laoada  y  eogan  el  oro  7  loa  granoi  H
Lallan  4  aon  mnchoa:  7  eato  70  lo  07
Kuchaa  Teses:  poT4J  a  todoe  loa  indioa
de  la  tieira  de  CoUao  i}  lo  pregnn-
tnnsn  deziS  qae  esto  era  aara  Ter-
dad. ' '  Thia  information  was  obtained
prerioua  to  September,  1633,  aa  the
eaeiqaa  mentioned  waa  Atanbnallpa.
The  river  with  which  Lake  Titieaea  ii
confounded  was  probabl7  the  Cara-
baTa,  eontbeaet  of  Cveco,  in  Peru.
The  gold-bearing  district  of  that
name  waa  known,  and  the  Spaniarda
began  to  work  ita  "placera"  before
15U.  Oleaa:  TerMT  Libro  de  la*
gverTM  oMIm  dst  Perw,  M8S.  at
Lenox  Librar7,  Cap.  ozi>,  fol.  190:  "7
en  el  inter  que  tai  aqnel  viaje  Diego
Centeno  deapachA  cartas  al  rico  7
inn7  nombrado  rio  de  CaraTia  para
qae  los  Espafiolea  qne  en  ana  rireraa
aacaban  metal  de  oro  dexaaeu  por
entoneea  aqnel  oflcio  y  vinleeen  4  aer-

r'  al  Be7  uaando  el  milltar."
OviedoTwho  wrote  from  liearaa7  of
flODqnerori  returned  to  Spain,  is  more
Bobm  and  podtiTe  than  the  two  an-
terior ones  (HwtOTHt  gmenU  y
wiliinil  de  Ifiditu,  Vol.  IT,  lib.  xlth,
Cap.  n,  p.  261).  "Aquella  tierra  de
Collao  tiene  bnena  dispasicion  4  sitio:
h^  en  ella  una  laguna  qae  tiene  qna-
lenta  legnaa  de  cireunferengia,  7  ea
dnl^  6  f  ondable  6  de  mncho  pcseado :
7  en  noa  isleta  que  dentm  ae  hate,


tiene  aqadla  gente  la  principal  easa
de  ana  7dolatTia8  7  nerifidoa,  7
es  de  mneha  veneradon  entreUo^  t
van  alii  como  en  romeria  deade  mii7
lexoa  tierra."  I  plaee  bia  testimon7
here,  aa  he  obtained  the  information
preTiooa  to  1540.

'The  flrat  Tialt  t^  Spaaiarda  to
the  shorea  of  Titicaca  Lake  took
place,  aa  stated,  lata  in  December  of
1533,  but  the  date  of  their  viait  to
the  lalatid  ia  not  known.  It  moat
have  been  in  the  last  daja  of  that
Tear  or  earl7  in  Jannaij,  1534.  The
information  coneeraing  thia  recon-
noiaaauee  of  the  Lake,  Ita  sborea,  and
the  Islands  is  official,  and  embodied
in  the  report  which  the  aeeretary  of
Pixarro,  /^edro  Sancho, )  wrote  at
Janja  Jnfy  15,  1534,  addreasing  It,  in
the  name  of  I^zarro  and  the  ro7al
fnnctlonariea  with  him,  to  the  Em-
peror. The  original  of  this  inrahi-
able  doeoment  maj  be  lost,  bnt  an
Italian  tnuialation  of  it  waa  pob-
liahed  b7  [Bamnaio^  (Terao  vohtm*
Delle.  XaviffaUoiri  et  Vioffgi),  was
printed  in  1556,  and  Incorporated
verbatim  in  the  aecond  and  third  edi-
tions of  1565  and  1606.  The  trans-
lation was  made  directlj  from
the  original— "Qnesta  translatione  6
eanata  dall'originale"  (foL  414).
It  states  (foL  413):  "Nel  paeae  di
Collao  non  n  ha  notitia  del  mar& — &
6  paese  piano,  per  quel  cho  n'i  eonoa-
dnto,  A  grande,  A  molto  f  reddey  A  vi
Bono  molti  flume,  de  quali  ae  caoa
oro.  Dieono  gl  'Indian!  easer  in  eaao
Tn  lagune  grande  d'aeqna  dolee  in
meaio  della  quale  lono  due  laole,  per
aaper  I'esaer  di  qnesto  paeae,  A  al
gonemo  ano,  mand6  il  Qonemator*
dno  Chriatiani  aeeio  gH  rapportaa-
aerou  d'esao  lunga  informatiane,  eiie
si  partiron  da  Ini  nel  prindpio  di
Deeembre. ' '  The  brief  notice  in
Oriedo  seems  to  be  taken  from  thia
text.  A  retranslation  from  Italian
into Spanish waa  made by the l»te

^n  Joaquin  Qarcia  Yeaibaleetajud
ntAfi in thA  annflniliT  tA  hif  Biw*


Sprinted  in  the  appendix  to  I


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 131

lU  Tenion  of  Preieott'i  Conqueit  of

Ptri,  6$erita  en  Inglet  por(w.  S.
Preteoti^  Traducida  ol  CtuteUano
for  JoagHin  Qareia  Yeaabaleeta,
Mezicc,  leSO,  1  one  the  date  eon-
eerniiig  this  vary  r&re  work  to  m7
friend  Mr.  CharlM  Paul  MeKie  of
Englewood,  to  nbom  I  am,  besides,
indebted  for  otber  valnnble  iiiforiii&-


Ths  title  of  the  report  of  Bancho
{above  quoted)  ia:  Relatione  per  Sua
Maewla  di  gpel  ehe  n«l  con^uuto  4'
paeifioatione  di  gveete  prouineie  della
numui  Catlifflia  t  waeetMO,  f  deHa
gualitd  del  paetv  dopo  cite  el  Capitano
Fernando  FUarro  (i  parti  f  ritcrnS
a  tua  Maetta.  It  rapporto  dtl  oon-
qaittame»to  di  Cateamalea  4"  I"  P*^
fiime  del  Cacique  Atabdlipa,  ete.
(Bamiuia,  1566,  III).  The  report  ia
tipied:  Franeeaeo  Pixarro,  Aluaro
Bieehelme  Antonio  Nanarro,  Oania
di  SalEedo  and  Pero  Suicbo,  and
bean  date  aa  stated,  Zanxs,  July  16,
1531.  TlM  part  of  it  tmuUted  in
the  text  is  on  foL  413:  "I  doe
Chriatiani  ehe  fimnio  mandatl  a
Tedere  la  prooineia  di  Collao  tarda-
rono  40  giomi  nel  lor  viaggro,  doppo
ritomnti  alia  citti  dd  Cneco,  diioe
rtana  il  Ooaematore,  gli  dierona
■noaa  A  relatioaa  di  tntto  quel  che
haaeoan  intoo  &  vednto,  che  6  qaesta
dw  qui  diaotto  d  diehiari.  II  paeee
di  CoQao  £  lontano  k  appartato  molto
dal  mare,  tanto  che  le  geiiti  natiue
ehe  habitamo  non  hanuo  notitia
d'esM:  i  paeae  molto  alto,  ft  medio
eremente  piano,  A  eon  tntto  a6,  6
faor  di  modo  freddo. — Non  y'6  in
(MO  eela>  ne  legna  d  'abmcciare,  ft
i|ndla  ehe  perd6  vsa,  han  In  baratto
di  mereantia  eon  qnelli  ehe  habitano
tieino  al  mare,  ehiamati  Ingri,  ft  ehe
haUtano  aneo  al  baaao  preeao  le  Sn-
maney  done  6  paeae  ealdo  ehe  qnesti
hanno  Ic^na,  et  ai  baratta  eon  peeore
ft  altro  beetlame,  ft  legnmi,  perche
nel  reato  11  paeae  6  aterile,  ehe  tntti
eon  ndiM  d  1i«rb<^  et  lierb<^  Mais,  ft


qnalehe  poea  nme
non  perche  in  quella  pronineia  di
Collao  non  afa  bnona  qnantit&  di  pe-
eore, ma  perehe  la  geate  6  tanta
Boggetta  at  Siguore  achidenepreatare
obedienia,  che  aensa  ana  licenia,  6  dd
principale,  6  Oonematore  ehe  per  auo
eomandamento  sta  nella  terre,  non
n'vudde,  poato  qoe  ancora  i  Signorii
ft  Caciqni  non  ardizcano  anunaziare
ne  mangiare  niuna  te  non  6  con  tal
lieenza.— n  paeae  i  l>en  popolato,
perehe  non  6  diatmtto  dalla  guerra,
come  sono  I'altre  pronlde,  le  sue
terre  aono  di  mediocre  grandezsa,  ft
le  eaae  niedole,  le  mora  di  pietra  ft
terra  ioaieni^^  coperte  di  paglia. —
Zj'herba  che  nasce  in  qoeate  paeae,  6
rara  ft  corta.  Vi  sono  alcuni  flnmi
per6  pie^oli:  nel  mezio  della  pro-
oineia 6  Tn  gran  lago  di  grandeixa  di
preaao  cento  leghe,  ft  all'intomo  di
qneate  lago  i  il  pin  popolato  paeae^
in  meuo  d'eaao  aono  due  piccioM
Isolette,  nell'ma  delte  qnali  6  vna
moaeliea  ft  easa  del  Sole,  laqnale  6
teodta  in  gran  veneratione,  A  in  eaaa
vanno  a  fare  le  lore  offerte  ft  aacrifl-
cij  in  ma  gran  pietra  ehe  6  neQIaola
che  la  chiamano  Thichieasaf  done  6
perche  il  Dlanoto  tI  si  naaeonde^  ft  gli
paria  6  per  coatmne  antieo,  come
gU^  6  per  altro  ehe  non  a '6  mai
chiarito,  la  tengono  tutti  qnelli  della
prouineia  in  grande  atime,  ft  gli  offe-
riaeono  oro  A  argento,  ft  altre  coae.
VI  Bono  meglio  di  aeeento  Indian!  al
■emitlo  di  ^neeto  laogo,  ft  pin  di
mille  donue,  che  fauno  CMeea  per
gettaria  aopra  qndla  pietra."

*  See  note  10.

'Primera  Porte  da  la  Crdniea  del
Peri,  Tedia,  II.  Cap,  Cin,  p.  4«,
f 'Fray  AlonEo  Samoa  OaTilan^JTu-
Mria  de  Copaeabana,  edited  by
Father  Bafael  Sana;  the  original,  to
which  I  ahaU  refer  with  greater  detail
in  the  last  part  of  this  monograph,
ia  from  1621.  Part  I,  Cap.  XV,  p.  21:
"A  lo  dicho  ya  iobre  el  de  Titicaca
afiadirlmoa  que  era  el  mas  visitado
del  rtino  ;  de  tamafias  riqneui,  laa


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


qn«  M  ttma.  eomon  eeluuoii  lo*  iodioi
a  lE  lagnna  cnando  entrsTon  s  U  Ula
lo«  piimenw  tapaSLoiea  eon  el  ci^tu)


'from  the  above  it  eeema  that
DleBcaa  had  with  him  more  than  ono
soldier,  wheraaa  the  flnrt  Tidt  waa  bj
onl^  two  men.  About  the  supposed
Tiait  of  lUescas  to  CopacaTOoa  in  1S36
see  note  S.

'  The  sonree  here  mentioned  is  a
donbtful  one  in  bo  far  as  the  author,

fan  eipelled  inonk  bj  the  name  of
J.  Tizearra  Pi^from  Ia  Paz,  Bolivia,
pretends  to  give  a  HyDopaia  of  a  work
.written  and  pnblitdied  hi  1628  b^
(jPray  Baltasar  de  Salaa  (an  Angus-
tine),  nndei  the  following  title ;
Esscertat  Aymdrv—Aymira  tohre  de
lo$  Origenet  de  toe  Oentet  deete  Nuov-
Orve  Me  Mrl.  diriaido  a  la  C:M:  de
Don  Felipe  Qvarto,  N:  Portnttmo
Bey  de  lai  Bfpaflae,  y  Moiuireha
ynvietUtimo  deite  Nttevo  Oroe:  por
an  hemilde  tierva  Don  Fray  Baltdiar
de  Sdlaa,  fixo  auffvttiniano :  Qvien  fito
empremir  zsta  pastc  deede  lot  folios
141  faata  lot  tSS  oonlc*  ItoenoKM  mvy
oonformee  a  Deoreto  del  IS  de  Mono
■  de  lets,  Expetito  en  Soma  por
N:S:S:P:  VBBANO  OCT  A  70,
etc.  The  remainder  of  the  so-c&lled
facsimile  ia  manifestly  from  the  pen
otVixearra.  At  the  bottom  of  this  title-
page  stands:  AnUeryiae  EaoSioina
Planliniana,  ApudBaUhoiarem  et  lodn-
nemMoretot.—M.DCXZ.VItl.  The
title  given  hj  Vizearra  to  his  produc-
tion is:  W:T:  Copamabana  de  lot
Jneai  Documentot  Anto-lingvittieot  i
itografadot  del  Ay7n&rvi-Aym6,Ta  Pro-
tdgonot  de  lot  PreHtmerioanot,  Ia
Pai,  J901.

The  whole  is  such  an  incongmons
mass  of  more  or  lees  disjointed  ab-
stracts from  Salas,  pretended  fae-
einul«a,  ridicolons  and  badlj  executed
wood-cnts,  and  notes  and  diacnssions
bj  Tiicam  which  create  the  impres-
sion of  being  the  work  of  an  utterly
dioordered  brain,  that  at  first  sight
one  throws  away  the  book  in  disguat


Still  there  can  hardly  be  any  donU
of  the  eiictanee  of  the  work  of  8aUa
or  at  least  of  a  fragment,  in  the
hands  of  "VizearTa.  The  latter  is  be-
lieved (at  Iia  Paz)  to  have  obtain«d
(hew  ia  not  definitely  known)  a  nnm-
ber  of  ancient  doemnesta  tonching
Copaeavana,  which  he  carefully  con-
ceals. The  book  of  8alas  had  to  be
shown  to  the  vicarial  chapter  of  La
Pas,  and  in  conaeqnenee  of  it  that
ecclesiastic  anthority  issued  the  fol-

"Obtuvimos  para  eopiar  y  reimprimir
el  Memorial  bist^rico-IingolBtico  del
Padre  Solas,  impreeo  en  110  fojas  d
alio  mil,  aeieientoB  y  veintiocho.  Dicbo
fascfcnlo  ae  lee  de  pig.  141  &  255,  in-
clnsive;  y,  el  mismo  que,  adjnnto  A
eoatro  legajoe  mannscritos,  y  ea-
tampados  eon  el  preeente  en  eonjnato,
han  merecido  el  siguiente  auto.  .  .  .
"Ticaria  Capitnlar  de  la  diteeaia  de

La  Pas,  i  veintiaeia  de  Eoero  de

mil  novecientos  y  nno.

"No  conteniendo  nada  opneeto  A  la
doctrina  Cattilica,  segun  la  precadanta
censura  de  S  :8 ;  el  Can6nigo  Doc-
toral, e!  libra  'Copaeabana  de  las
Ineas'  partx  priickb— Qne  ae  pro-
pone rdmprimir  el  Praabltero  oeenr-
rente,  eoncMeee  la  liceueia  que  para
el  efecto  ae  solicita.
■  <  Maehicado.

' '  Larrea-Secretario. ' '

Hence  the  work  of  Satas  exists,  al-
though probably  not  intacL  If  the
abstracts  that  Tiscarra  claims  to  give
are  gennine,  then  Balas  most  have
been  as  insane  aa  his  modern  editor.
But  no  reliance  can  be  placed  npon
qaotations  even.  I  limit  myself  to
referring  to  pages  iv-vii,  whore  he
states  that  BartolomS  Las  Caaas  came
to  Pern  in  1525(1),  six  yean  before
Pitarro,  and  that  he  held  a  long  par-
Iey-~in  SiwnuA— with  an  Indian  giil
in  the  vicinity  of  Coxcol  For  other
evidences  of  an  utterly  deranged
mind,  the  book  bristles  with  them,
and,  what  is  worst,  it  is  next  to  im-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 133

ciaeo  de  U  Cnu  Aleoiir,  j  Tnj
Fnueo.  de  STa  An*  I*  Boca,  7  Fr.
Matteo  de  XmniUft,  j  Ft.  Aloneo  de
Alcsfikee.  Con  otroe  eaarentn  Teeinoe
de  Eapafis,  venidiM  an  doe  annadaa.
La  una  de  Quito  pot  el  CeoMceo  y  el
Aricaza.  Ia  otra  de  Lima  pw  Are-
kTpa  J  el  Lnpaka  .  .  ."  There  are
six  more  of  these  "Bepartimieiitoe"
mentioned,  all,  however,  on  the  Peni-
fian  and  Bolivian  mainland.  One  ia
from  the  year  1557,  three  from  ISSS
and  two  from  1539.  At  the  end
■tanda  the  following:  "De  todo  lo
que  certiDeo  en  Copaeavana  7  Julio
de  1620:  kit  Tnj  FrancdBCo  de  Oam-
boa."  The  mention  of  the  preeence
of  FrxMneitaan*  at  Copaearana  in  1536
ia  lomewhat  mirpriiiDg.  One  of  the
chroniglen  of  the  Franeisean  order  in
Fern,  ^Fra7  Diego  de  Mendotaj^  in
Chrdnusa  de  la  Provinoia  ie  8.  Anto-
nio it  loa  Charoa*  del  Oritn  dt  NSo
terapliioo  F.  8.  Franoitoo,  on  la*  Jn-
dia$  Oooidentale;  Beyno  del  P«rd,
Madrid,  1064,  Lib.  I,  Cap.  n,  p.  10,
BtatM  that  Fra7  Martoi  of  Niua
came  to  Pern  in  1532  and  was  preeent
at  the  affair  of  Canunarea  with  hia
six  companions  of  the  order:  "Tino
eon  eeia  Beligioaoa  uneatroe  por  sn
Comiasario  al  Pom,  aSo,  de  mil  7
qninientoa  7  trelnta  7  dot,  7  w  hall6
COD  mi  compafieroa,  7  loa  Beligioaoa
de  Nneatro  Padre  B:Domingo  en  la
priiion,  7  mnerte  de  Athahnalpa,  6
Atabalipa  Be7  Inga,  legnn  el  mesmo
da  teatimonio,  7  Id  reflere  el  Obiepo
de  Chiapa. ' '  Thia  reference  ie  to  the
notoriona  book  of  (Laa  Caaaa^  Breitii-
tima  relaoknt  dela  dettruyoiin  delat
Tndiat.  I  qnote  from  the  Italian
and  Spaniah  Teraion  pnbUahed  in
4^  at  Venice,  b7(Oia«omo  Caatel-


poaaible  to  diaeiiminate  between  what
ia  from  Salae  and  what  from  the
other.  Nerertlieleaa  I  nnnot  diaeard
■baolnlelf  aome  of  the  material  pob-
liihed  b7  Yiscarra  and  ahall  have  to
refer  to  it  oeeBaionaIl7,  alwaTa  with
doe  reaervB.  There  ia  no  doubt  that
he  haa  incorporated  in  the  hopelMalf
eonfoaed  text  of  hia  work  soma  rtate-
nienla  based  upon  doctmientary  ari-
deaee,  but  manipulated  and  altered
them  in  such  a  manner  as  to  throw
a  elood  on  their  authenticitj.  Eow-
erer,  the  core  ma7,  in  eome  cases,  be
separated  from  the  mbbiah  nnder
which  Vizeam  (and,  perhaps,  Balaa
himaelf  f)  has  bnried  it.  One  of  these
eases  is  the  following:  On  pagea  324
and  525  he  dtes  a  document  attrib-
nted  to^EVa7  Franeiseo  de  Oamboa,'}
Angnatine,  dated  Copacavana,  Jnl7,
1620,  in  which  that  ecelesiaatic  ia
made  to  State:  "D07  116  Yo  FTa7
Ftandsco  de  Oamboa,  religioso  Er-
mitajio  do  8:  Angustin,  que  hnbe
reeogido  cnarentjdoa  Expiedientee  en-
tre  proeesadoB  abeneltoa,  7  entre  enr-
santee,  de  las  'Fundacionee  de  En-
comieadas'  para  Doctrinaa  de  Indlos
Cnll&waa."  Thna  far  probabl7  Oam-
boa. What  folTows  recalls  TiaeaiTa,
although  there  ma7  be  some  original
pansgea.  "Entre  loa  maa  antiguM
7  prindpalea  de  ellM,  eziaten  T&rioe
de  mncha  importanda  para  loa
AtfALis  de  cooFAKavAKA— eu7os  tra-
snniptoe  loa  ffice  eserebir  aegun  el
pieeente— INVKMTAUO  de  kjoommk-
DAB.— "e£.)  Comarcas  deLInca  Ceopa-
kawa,  eran  dete  el  alio  mill  7  qui-
nientoa  7  treinta  7  tela.  En  el  enal
aiio  1536,  fneron  radnddas  4  una  sola
Doetrina  de  las  Sacraa  Cmeea,  por
CMnla  flrmada  7  aellada  de  mano
pr6pia  de  Don  Pedro  AnanreE  7  Hen-
riqnea  de  Campo-redoado ;  Don  Diego
Dlaseaa,  eon  seaenta  areabueeroa;  Don
Sebastian  Belalcaiar,  eon  eeaenta  area-
boeeroa.  Con  loa  Padrea  de)  Ordeo  de
B:Franeiaeo  tree  Sacerdotee,  7  doe
Laicos^  Cfl  de  saber:  Fro7  FrancisBO
de  k>s  Angalea  Horabi,  7  Fr.  Tna-


lani  |nnder  the  title  of  letoria  6
SfAHMima  Belationt  deUa  ZNttrat-
tioM  doll' Indie  OetndentaU,  p.  114:
"Yo  fra7  Marcos  de  Niea  de  la  orden
de  Sant  Frandaeo,  eomisaario  sobre
meroa  Christianoa  entraron  en  las
pronincias  dd  Ferii,  qne  tai  de  los
primeroa  religioMC,  qna  eon  los  pri-


;cbyG00'^lc


134


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


mtros  ChriBtUnoa  entraron  en  laa
dichaa  prooineiaB,  digo  dimdo  tevtimo-
nio  Terdadero  de  algniuu  easas,  que  70
con  mia  ojiw  ri  en  aijlla  tUira.  ..."
Among  the  ocearreacea  Fimf  Marcoa
MW,  no  mention  is  made  bj  hiro  of
the  CaiHinarea  epiaode,  4iDt  (p.  116)
he  daima  (par.  14):  "Item  soy  tea-
tigo,  ft  dojr  teatimoniD,  qae  tin  dar
cansB,  ni  oeeasion  aqueUofl  Yndioa
aloa  Espaftolea,  toego,  qoe  entraion
en  ana  tierraa,  despaea  de  auer  dado
el  major  Cadqne  Atabolipa,  que  era
Sefior  de  toda  U  tieira  maa  de  doe
millonea  de  010  aloa  SapafiolM,  j
aaiandolee  dado  toda  la  tieira  en  mi
poder  Bin  reaistenida,  laego  qaemaron
al  dicho  Atabalipa.  .  .  ."  The  as-
anmptlon  that  Praj  Marco*  waa  in
Pern  with  hia  six  companions  already
in  1682  la  therefore  gratnitona.  It  ia
also  verj  donbtfol  if  any  Franeiscan
monka  eould  have  been  in  Bolivia  in
1638.  The  coart  ma  then  blockaded
bj  the  Indiana,  and  there  ma  no
eommnnieatioD  vith  the  interior.
Fr^  Frandaca  de  la  Cma  was  at
Lima  in  1536,  according  to  Father
Bemabi  Cobo,  B.J.:  SUtona  de  la
FunAuiitm  ie  Lima,  from  1639,  Lima,
1882.  "EI  principto  que  tavo  en  esta
cnidad  la  6rden  del  aerUco  padre  8an
Fnneiaco  pas6  de  eeta  manera;  al
miamo  tiempo  qne  ac  fnnd6  la  ^vdad,
en  el  repartimiento  de  solarce  qne  el
Marqnia  Fitarro  hiso  entre  loa  pobla-
dorea,  BeSal6  ritlo  para  eonyento  de
San  Frandaeo  en  la  coadra  en  qne
ahora  est4  fnndado  el  de  Santo  Do-
mingo, .  .  .  Y  coma  entoncee  ae
hallase  preaente  nn  fraile  Franeiieo
de  la  Cnii,  Icvanti  an  £1  ana  peqnelLa
capilla  6  nunada,  j  en  elta  dijo  miaa
J  predie6  algnnsa  Tccea  al  pneblo;
anaentdae  eete  Bellgioio  dentro  de
brere  tiempo,  J  no  qnedando  otro  de
■u  6rden  deja  jermo  7  deaamparado
aqnel  Ingar  6  solar.  .  .  ."  Farther
on  it  ia  stated:  "Tom6  [Fianciaco
PinuTo]  poseaion  de  aat«  aitio  7  did
prindpio  al  edifleio  del  Uonasterlo  el
ailo  de  mil  qninientos  eoarenta  7  aeia


[ehonld  be  1S36],  7  fa6  an  primer
Guardian  el  padre  fray  Frandaeo  de
Santa  Ana,  el  cnal  hnbo  de  Mcar  eat«
■itio  de  poder  de  ciertoa  vednoa
poderoaoH  que  ae  batuan  entrado  en
61  7  ediScado  casaa  7  hoertaa,  j  loa
primeroe  qne  en  &  ediHearou  fneron
Ciistfibal  Borgoe,  Frandaeo  de  Oodoy
7  Antonio  Picado  aecretario  del
Marqujs  PiiKrro."  Two  of  the
Frandscass  mentioned  in  the  book  of
Yizcarra  eonld,  therefor^  hardfy
have  been  at  Copacavana  in  the  year
1638.  (I  do  not  reject  the  posdbili^
of  thdr  having  been  there  a  few
Tears  later.)  It  ia  not  to  be  orer*
looked,  alao,  that  the  fint  misnonary
on  the  L&ke-ehore  was  the  Dominican
Fray  Tomfis  de  San  Martin,  accord-
ing to  Uelendec  (See  note  rdative  to
it  in  Fart  I.)  While  there  is,  proba-
bly, eonaiderable  trntb  in  the  state-
ments ef  Father  Frandaeo  de  0am-
boa,  it  is  evident,  as  I  ahaH  show
further  on,  that  the  dat«a  are  not
reliable  or  have  been  tampered  with
b7  Tiaearra,  tither  from  incompe-
tene7  or  intentionall7.  Whatever
ma7  be  the  date  of  the  "Eneo-
mienda ' '  of  Copaeavana,  it  eatab-
lisbea  the  fact  that  there  were,  proba-
bl7  about  1538  or  1639,  eeven  a7Uoa
at  Copaeavana  and  on  the  T^jgnda.
Aeeording  to  Diego  Oarcia  de  Tillalon
{Sobrg  reftitwoiott  de  indtoa,  in  Doo*-
nienio'  inidito*  tobre  la  Biitoria  d»
ChiU,  Vol  XII,  p.  204),  Francisco  de
la  Camara  waa,  if  not  the  flrat,  at
least  one  of  thellrat"Eneomenderoa"
of  Copaeavana.

'Tisearra:  Copacaeaita  de  loa  Ja-
eai,  p.  324— /nvetriortv  de  Enoomieu'
dot;  "£n  d  cnal  afio  1S36,  fneron
rednddaa  4  ana  sola  DocniNA  de
laa  Sacraa  Ckdcks,  por  Cfidola
flrmada  7  sellada  de  mano  prdpia  de
Don  Pedro  Anzurea  7  Henriqoea  de
Campo-redondo ;  Don  Diego  Illeacaa,
eon  seaenta  arcabnceroe;  Don  Sebas-
tian de  Belaleaaar,  con  sisenta  area-
buceros.  Con  loe  Padres  [see  «t
ntpnt]. Con  otroa  eoarenta  veeinaB


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 135


da  EqwflA,  Tenidoa  en  dos  arniad&a.
La  niui  de  Quito  poi  el  CeoMco  7  el
ArieaiK.  Ia  otr*  de  lima  por  Are-
^pa  y  el  LnpaJta.  .  .  ."  On  p.  S9
he  giTee  an  abetraet(t)  from  a  doea-
ment  dated  Koatj,  Jnne,  1618,  and
ttgnei  by  Fraf  Balt&sar  de  Salaa  and
otbera,  in  which  it  is  asaerted  that  in
153S  the  FranciHcans  aforementioned
planted  aerentj-five  eroaoea  along  the
Idke^ore  from  Copacavana  to  Po-
mata.  The  croaeea  were  of  wood
bnmght  from  Arieaxa  (now  Lare-
eaja).  Thia  ia  aecompaiiied  hj  a
note:  "Beaovamoa  laa  Cmeea  de  ein-
enoita  afioa  atraa."  If  the  qaota-
tion  ia  from  an  sathentie  text  it
throws  an  nnfaToiable  lig:ht  npon  the
rdisbility of Pather SaUa'a atate-

Had  there  been  one  hnndred  and
iiztj  Bpaniarda  at  CopaeaTana  in
1536,  tbeT'  wonld  have  been  compelled
hj  dntj  and  honor  to  go  to  the  relief
of  CnxEo,  where  Hernando  and  Gon-
nlo  PiEam)  were  then  in  the  worat
of  pUghta.

The  proof  that  ndther  Ansorea
nor  Belaleaiar  were  anjwhere  near
Peni  in  1536  ia  eaailf  fnmishei
Abont  Belaleaxar  no  docnmentar^  evi-
dence need  be  qnoted,  for  It  ia  well
aatabliabed  and  biown  that  he  waa
Borth  of  Pern,  in  Ecuador,  at  the
time.  Aa  to  Anmrea,  he  retomed  to
Pam  ia  1538 1  (Satpotioion  de  Her-
WM  Jimtfiuaaeeroa  de  la*  detaveneneiai
da  Pworro  y  Almagro,  in  Doo»mento§
i*Sdito9  para  la  Btttaria  de  Chile,
ToL  Til,  p.  256.)  He  had  been  Bent
to  Spain  t^  Piaarro,  whence  he  re-
turned eailj  in  the  above  Tear  (Anto-
nio de  Herrera:  Sittoria  general  de
loe  See^o*  de  lot  Caetellanot,  etc.,
edition  of  1720,  Deeada  vi,  p.  61).
Henee  he  eovdd  not  be  at  Copaeavana
with  an  armed  force  in  1636.

'The  onlj  place  whence  a  Bpaniah
troop  eould  have  reached  the  Lake  in
1538  wonld  have  been  Areqnipa,  but
the  date  ef  the  foundation  of  the
fret Bpaniah eatablialunent  in that


vaUej  is  yet  in  doubt,  1S35  and  1537
being  varionalj  mentioned.  The
Spanish  town  waa  offidaUy  founded
in  1540.

"Sietoria  del  JTvevo  Mmdo,  VoL
IT,  p.  C9:  "Sea  to  nno  6  lo  otro,  la
eetatna  fn6  llevada  &  la  dudad  del
CoECo  por  el  Marques  DiFrandaco
Pizarro,  que  envi6  &  tree  eepafioloa  por
ella."  I  And,  aa  yet,  no  eonflrma-
tion  of  thia  atatemeut.

'^Sittoria  de  Copaeabana,  edition
Sana,  1860,  Cap.  XT,  p.  21.  (See  note
«.)

" Copooovana  de  lot  Ineai,  33:  "T
enando  llegaron  &  la  Penlnanla  loa
Capitauea  Alznree  j  loa  Illescaa,  eon
loa  Padrea  franeiscanos,  aonqne  in-
tentaron  en  1536,  no  podieron  Ilcigar
&  eata,  por  falta  de  tiempo,  y  porque
la  creyeron  eomo  &  la  del  Sol  eetar
jerma  y  demerta."  Be  gives  no  an-
thoritiee  for  thia  statement,  and  it  is
probably  one  of  hia  naual  anrmiaeo.

"  Mannel  de  Eapinalli  Selooton
heeha  al  Smperador  de  lo  auoedida
entT9  Piaarro  y  Almagro,  in  Doo.  de
India;  Vol  III,  p.  192,  June  15, 1530 :
"En  eete  medio  tiempo,  vino  &  la
dieha  dndad  del  Cnseo  el  gobema-
dor  D:  Fraoeiaeo  Pixarro.  ..."
He  further  states:  "En  este  medio
tiempo,  vino  k  la  dndad  del  Cnico
el  dicho  Obiapo."  The  Bishop  men-
tioned waa  Fray  Vicente  de  Tal-
verde.  In  hie  tetter  to  the  Emperor,
dated  March  20,  1530,  Talverde  aays:
"Yo  llegn£  k  esta  dudad  Dd  Cuxeo
nn  Innea,  28  de  Noviembie  1538,
donde  hail6  al  gobemador  I>:Fran-
daco  IHiarro.  ..."  It  ia  not  un-
likely, therefore,  that  it  waa  in  1538
Piaajro  aent  the  three  men  alluded  to
by  Cobo  (see  note  10)  to  get  a  atatue,
half  diver,  half  gold,  from  the  laland
of  Eoati.

"Belaeion  heeha  al  Bmperador,  p.
102. (See  note  preceding.)

"Aimagro  the  Yonnger:  A<m»aoioit
eontra  Son  Fran«ifoo  Pitarro  &  B:M:,
in  Doe.  de  India*,  ToL  XX,  p.  330:
"Queriendo  entrar  en  la  dicha  lagnna


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


da  Titiea  aliog6  eiertoa  Mp&llolee  por
loa  h&cer  entiBr  en  la  dicfaa  Ugmu"
(p.  46S).  DeolaraUon  by  /oon  £odrv
guei  Barragan:  "Lo  otro,  quel  dieho
HenutDdo  PUarro  por  ir  4  robar  el
oro  7  plate  qnestaba  en  la  Ugnna  do
Titiaea,  w  acgaron  en  la  dicha  lagnna
dies  ombrea  de  loi  qne  lleb6  conaigo  k
buocai  la  dlcba  plata  por  in  culpa  6
eaiuB  por  el  dieho  robo,  6  por  lea  man-
dar  aoometer  &  eoaas  peligroaas  en  la
dieha  agua."  Cobo:  Eittoria  del
Naevo  Mundo,  17,  p.  M.  (See  note
following.)

"Tbat  the  principal  sacred  objectn
were  aeeretad  before  the  time  the
Spani^rda  appeared  in  anj  number
at  Copacafana,  ii  Tariotulj  atated,
from  hearaay.  Qaiellano  de  la  Vega
(ConiMtano*  rtfolai,  1809,  YoL  I,  Lib.
n^  Cap.  ixT,  tol  80),  hoaever,
qnoteflCF.  Blaa  Valera^  "74  Inego
que  loa  Yndioe  anpieron  la  entrada  de
loa  Eepafiolee  en  aqnella  tierra,  j  ij
juan  tomando  para  af  quanta  riqaesa
hallanan;  la  eeharoa  toda  en  aqnel
gran  lago. ' '  On  what  anthoritj
Father  Valera  (bom  in  Pern,  1561,
according  to  Saldamando)  made  thia
atatement,  ia  not  aaid.  Cobo,  Eit-
toria del  NMevo  Mundo,  IT,  p.  64:
' '  Porqney  eatando  on  dia  en  gran
fleata  7  regocijo,  enentan  qne  ojfaon
UDBB  triataa  Toeei,  7  de  ahf  i  an  rato
se  metiiS  poT  eatre  ellos  nn  eierro  A
todo  corter,  de  lo  cual  loa  agoreroa
pronoaticaroD  la  noticia  que  loa  ea-
paliolea  tenlan  de  su  aautnario  7
tMoroa  qae  en  A  habia  7  la  breve
Tenida  qne  hatdan  de  haeer  &  &,  como
en  efeeto  paa6;  ae  dieron  tan  buena
mano  en  eaeonderloa,  qne  nnnca  ban
pareddo.— Preatimeae  que  loa  traala-
daron  &  otraa  ialaa;  annqne  otroa
dieen  qua  loa  miniatroa  qae  &  la  aason
aqnl  eataban,  6  loa  enterraron  6  eeba-
ron  &  la  lagnna,  poiqne  no  lea  goia-
aen  loa  eapaHolea. ' '  Alaa  Samoa :
Eittoria  tie  Copaoabana,  edition  of
1860,  p.  21.  I  do  not  qnote  Calaneha,
■ince  he  copiea  moctl7  from  Bamoa.

"PHmera  Parte  de  ia  Crdnioa  del


Peri,  Tedia,  II,  p.  443,  Cap.  o:
"Antaa  qne  loa  Ingaa  reonaaeD,
enentan  mncboa  isdioa  deatoa  collaa
que  hnbo  en  an  provinda  dM  giandea
aeHorea  el  nno  tenia  por  nombre
Zapana  7  d  otro  Cari,  7  qne  eatoa
eonqniataron  mnchoa  poearea,  que  aon
ana  fortalecaa;  7  qae  el  nno  entrA  en
la  lagnna  de  Titicaea,  7  que  hall6  en
la  iala  ma7or  que  tiene  aquel  palnda  .
gentea  blancaa  7  qne  tenian  barbae,
con  loa  enalea  pelefi  de  tal  manera,  qua
loa  pado  matar  &  todoa."  In  Be-
gvnda  Parte  de  la  Crdnica,  also  called
Del  BeRorio  de  lot  Ineat,  Madrid,
1S80,  Cap.  IT,  p.  i,  he  not  onl7  con-
flrma  hia  pTerioaa  atatement  bat  givea
tbe  aonrce  whenee  it  waa  obtained  I7
him.  '  *  Chirihnana,  gobemador  de
aquelloa  puebloe  que  aon  del  Empera-
dor,  me  contd  lo  que  tengo  eecripto.
.  .  ."  Hence  the  tale  might  be  nn-
Contaminated  Indian  lore.

"  Bi*t(*ria  de  lot  guerrae  etvUei  del
Peri,  Vol.  ILI,  Cap.  xux,  p.  421,  et
teq.  Analogona  talea  are  eontaiiied
in  the  anonTmons  Conqttiita  y  Pobla-
eion  del  Peri,  in  Dtxmme^toi  iniditot
de  Chile,  to  which  I  aball  alao  refer
in  detail  in  the  laat  chapter  of  thia
monogn^h.

"The  approximate  date  of  the  oe-
cnpation  of  Titicaca  hj  the  Cuioo  peo-
ple ia  about  1475.  (Bee  the  two  eh^
tera  following.)

"  Tbia  ia  concorrentlj  atated  bjr  tbe
Anguatine  monka  who  wrote  on  Titi-
caca in  the  flrat  half  of  the  aenn-
teenth  century.  Bamos,  fiiatoria,  etc,
p.  5,  speaking  of  Tupac  Ynpanqnl,  to
whom  the  occupation  of  the  Idand
ia  attributed:  "Laego  ae  declar6  ao-
berano  abaotnto  de  la  iala,  7  mand6
aalir  de  ella  i  aua  babitsntes  uatn-
ralea,  7  sin  darlee  andieneia  loa  tras-
lad6  id  pneblo  de  Tnngn70,  pnea  n»
eran  loa  maa  morales  ni  loe  maa  apa-
rentes  a  ana  intentoa"  (p.  14).  "El
habet  aacado  el  Inca  &  loa  natnraks
de  la  iala  traalad&ndoloa  k  TongoTO
t\i6  porqne  quiso  poner  de  enatodios
del  famoso  adoratorio  del  aol  k  gentas


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 137


de  an  conJima."  Fny  Antonio  de
la  CalanchA  (CorAnoa  MoraUModa,
Vol  II,  lib.  I,  C»p.  n)  merely  eopiee
BamoB,  &nd  so  does  Fiaj  Andrte  de
San  NIeoUs:  Imigen  de  If.  8.  de  Co-
paetnana,  ete^  Madrid,  1663.  The  Je-
suit Cobo,  who  wrote  at  length  on  the
Island  (which  he  visited  from  Copaea-
Tana),  also  rtatea:  "Lb  gente  qne
hatntaba  la  isla  de  Tmc^CA  en  natn-
lal  de  Tongnjo,  A  la  coal  euvi6  el  luea
it  ID  pneblo,  reaerrando  algnnoa  viejoa
que  diMen  raifin  j  enteraMn  en  loe
Mcretoa  da  la  iala  4  loe  qne  de  nnero
hiM  la  hatrataaen.  Forqne,  en  Ingar
de  aqnella  gente  deapoedda,  metU
otra  tmidA  del  Cmco,  de  qoien  tenia
la  tatiafaeeioTi  j  erfidito  qne  la
gravedad  del  eaao  requirla."  That
the  original  inbabitanta  of  Titieaca
were  Collaa,  that  is,  ATinari,  is  as-
serted by  both  Augtwtines  and  Je-
snits.  I  merely  refer  t(t  Bamoe,  HiM-
torio,  p.  4,  and  to  Cobo,  Hilt,  del  If.
Mrnido,  TV,  p.  S5.  Father  Lndovieo
Bertonio,  S.J.,  aMsrts  that  the  Lnpa-
eas  oceapied  the  western  Lake-shoTe
(Jrt*  y  OrammatiM  mvy  oopitua
dela  Lengva  Aymara,  1603,  reprint
bA.PlatEmaii]i,\l879,  p.  11),  and  the
nme  is  intimated  by  Bama«  (pp.  11
and  27).

The  (act  of  the  wtabUahnwnt  of
wom«n  who  had  to  de*ota  at  least
part  of  their  existence  to  ceremonial
ptupoM*  is  variously  stated.  Bamoe:
Sitt.,  p.  S,  et  »eq.;  AneDo  Oliva,  Sia-
loria  del  Perv,  etc.,  1631,  published
at  Lima,  without  date,  aboot  1SB3.

"  If  the  statements  of  Calancha  are
reliable,  the  islands  were  inhabited  in
1589.  Cordniea  Moraiitada,  Tol.  II,
Cap.  Xtv,  foL  78:  "A  otroa  Beligioeos
eometieron  el  entrar  &  dotrinar  en  las
islas,  de  que  tanto  dej&mos  dieho,  que
est&n  en  la  gran  lagnna  Titieaca,
donde  avia  gran  mnltitud  de  Indioe;
algnnoa  eon  titnlo  de  sua  labranfas,  6
comercios,  mnehoe  por  hnir  de  la  doe-
trina,  i  do  el  trabajo,  otros  por
asistir  en  sas  guacas,  i  adoratorioa
aedpafiando  &  sua  idolo^  i  todo*,  6


los  mas,  tenian  de  pristianoi  aola-
mente  ser  bautiiados."  The  Angna-
tines  took  possession  of  the  mission
of  Copacavana  in  1589,  and  the  above
paasage  relates  to  their  actions  imme-
diately after  they  had  Mtablished
themselns  there.  Bee  alsofliopes  de
Yelaseo^  Oeografia  y  PAoripowm
wniversal  de  iat  Indiat  (written  in
Jhe  years  1571  to  1574,  published  by
[jnato  Zaragoia,YCadTid,  1894).

In  regard  to  the  decree  of  the
Conde  de  la  Gomera,  reference  to  it
is  found  in  Bamos:  HiMtoria,  p.  20:
"Siendo  Oobemador  de  Clracnito  el
Conde  de  la  Oomera  hiio  sacar  todos
loB  indios  incultos  de  las  islas.  .  .  ."
The  province  of  Cbncnito  did  not  em-
brace Copacavana,  nor  the  Islands  of
Titieaca  and  ^oati,  which  pertained
to  OmasnyM;  it  is  therefore  unlikely
that  the  decree  of  the  Corregidor  of
Chncuito  should  have  affected  the  In-
dians of  that  district

"Orl^m  de  loe  Indioe  de  el  Nueva
Mundo,  edition  of  1720,  p.  76:  The
Ingone  of  Titieaca  "tiene  Islas,  que
antiguamente  ae  babitaron,  i  labnrou,
aora  est&n  desiertas."  This  passage
Is  also  in  the  first  edition,  published
in  1607,  so  that  the  information  is
from  the  end  of  the  sixteenth  or  the
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  centnry.

■  Corfinioa  Morali$ada,  ToL  II,  f  oL
31:  "En  las  Yslas  i}  contiene  su
archipelago,  i  como  mayor  en  la  de
Titieaca,  ay  gran  eantidad  de  Tndios,
6  fugitives  de  la  dotrina,  6  agravia-
dos  de  los  Corregidores,  i  Cariqnes,  6
Pescadores  para  grangerias,  i  no  avri
pocoB  para  asistir  l>  la  mperstieion  de
sua  idolatrias."  The  aecond  volume
of  Calancha 's  work  was  published  in
16S3.

"There  is  to-day  on  the  shores  of
the  Copacavana  Peninsula  a  site  bear-
ing the  name  Chachapoyaa.  That
some  Indians  from  that  remote  north-
em  part  of  Pen  may  have  been  car-
ried along  with  the  Inea  war-partiea
to  the  Lake-bann  is  not  Impossible.
Bamos:  Si»torio,p.9i  "P«ro,  apeesx


;cbyG00'^lc


138


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


de  esa  6ideii  imperial,  Ub  mas  eatan
perdidas  que  ni  loa  apellidoa  m  ballan,
aanque  exiBten  todavia  las  estanciaa
de  loB  ChachapOTaa,  Cafi&r«a,  Canas  j
algima  otra. ' '  He  asaerta  that  the
Indiaos  from  Chachapojras  were
among  Tupac  Ynpanqni  '■  f  oDowen.

"  TofMf  Fnmero  de  lot  OrdetumiM
del  P»f%i,  17S2;  Ordenantiu  de  Tih
ledo,  November  6,  1673,  Lib.  II,  Tit
U,  Old.  Tm,  foL  145:  "Itih,  mando,
que  niDgun  Indio,  ui  India  apriete  las
cabezae  de  las  criaturas  reden  uaeidaa,
eomo  lo  BBoleu  bazar  para  haierlaa
mas  largaa,  porqne  de  averlo  beeho  ee
lee  a  Tecreeido,  7  leerece  dafio,  j
Tieuen  a  morir  dello  .  .  ."  Thirteen
yean  leter,  tbe  Corregidor  of  the
provinee  at  Collaeuae  (Department  of
Arequipa,  Pem),\Joau  de  Ulloa  Uo-
gollon,1in  Ida  leport  dated  January
20,  1586:  Belacion  de  la  Prwiaoia  de
lo$  Colloffvat,  etc,  in  Jtelootonet  jreo-
grdflcat  4t  Jndiat,  VoL  II,  p.  40:
"EEtoa  Collaguas,  antes  de  la  visita
general  que  se  hiio  por  mandamiento
del  ezcelentlsimo  -riiey  don  Franeiaeo
de  Toledo,  tralan  en  la  cabeza  nnoa
que  llamaban  en  sn  lengna  Cbocob,  k
maDsra  de  aombreroa  luuy  altos  tin
falda  ninguna,  7  para  que  m  padieeen
tener  en  la  cabeca,  se  la  apretaban  i
loe  uifios  reeien  nacidoe  tan  recia-
meute,  que  se  la  atmsaban  7  adelgnza-
ban  alta  7  prolongada  lo  m&a  que
podlan,  para  memoria  que  habian  las
cabeias  de  tener  la  forma  alta  del
Tolcan  de  donde  aslieroD.  Eato  lea
esU  7a  piohebido  por  ordenanza."
Of  the  Indiana  of  "Cavana"  he  mys;
' '  Estoa  son  mnj  dlf erentes  an  1&
eabeia  &  loi  Collaguas,  porque,  reden
naddoB  loa  nifios  6  ioIm^  h  la  atan  7
]a  bacen  chata  7  ancba,  muy  fea  7
deeproporcioneda;  la  ciial  ee  atan  eon
onaa  euerdas  blancae  k  manera  de
meehaa,  7  dando  mnchas  Toeltas  alre-
dedor,  quedan  las  cabezae  eusaneha-
das.  Eatilee  prohibido  7a  esto  por
ordeniuiia.  Condeenae  bieu  en  la
heehnra  de  las  cabesas  el  quee  natural
de  Cavsua  7  el  quee  Collagna,  que,


como  est&  dieho,  las  Gollaguas  so
ahnaau  la  cabeza  larga  7  eatoe  Cava-
naa  ancha  7  ehata."  The  Indians  of
CaTana  are  Quiehoaa,  those  of  Colla-
goa  spoke  the  ATmarA  languag»
(p.  43).  The  Indian  8aleama7hua,  in
his  Belaoion  de  Antigiiedadet  deite
SejfW  del  Ptm,  written  probaUy
about  1613,  but  pnblisbed  in  the  orig-
inal text  at  Madrid  in  1870,  in  Tret
Selaeionea  de  Antig^dadet  pentaniu,
attributea  the  custom  to  the  commands
of  the  Inoa  irar-chief  Lloque  Ynpan-
qui  (p.  253).  This  is  pnrefy  an  imag-
inary stat«neDt  and  explanation  of
the  origin.  Says  Cobo  (Btetoria  del
Nuevo  MiUido,  IT,  176):  "Unas  na-
cionee  las  haeian  anchas  de  frent^
Bpret4ndolas,  pai&  darles  esta  forma,
con  Unas  tabliUas  fuertemeute  liadas.
Los  Collas  formaban  la  cabeza  larga
y  puntiagnda  ...  7  para  dar  erta
flgnra  &  las  cabeiaB  de  loe  ni&os,  las
liaban  y  apretaban  cod  reodas,  7  Us
traian  ad  baata  edad  de  cnatro  6
einco  aAos,  que  7a  quedaban  endnre-
eidaa  7  amoldadae  i  bu  tocado,  largaa,
ahuaadaa  7  sin  eolodrillo."  Ee  af-
flrma  to  ha*e  yet  seen  some  old  men
with  deformed  skullB.

"That  the  sandal  ("aymnqoe"  on
the  coast  of  Peru,  and  "ojata"  in
A7inaT6  of  Bolivia)  waa  the  primitiT«
foot-gear  of  the  Indians  needs  no
references  to  early  informatian.  It  la
well  known  and  eatablished.

"  Pnlmonar7  affections  were  alsa
noticed  b7  us.  We  know  of  two  easea^
one  of  which  a  bo7  about  sixteen  7e»>«
(Mj  the  other  a  young  married  woman.
("The  disease  is  looked  npon  aa
venereal  by  the  Indians,  but  our  cure
doea  not  support  the  belief.  Of  vene-
real affections  we  saw  some  traces,
although  the  Indian  conceals  such  idl-
ments  as  ranch  as  possible.  Tb«T
certunly  exist  among  them,  bnt  I  be-
lieve them  to  be  less  frequent  and  Imb
violent  in  the  Sierra  than  on  the
coast.  "I

*  It  'ma7  not  be  devoid  of  intereat
to  note  what  Father  Cobo,  from ths


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 139


ttkndpoint  of  knowledge  of  tbe  Mren-
tMnUi  eentiiTT',  Myi  about  the  phjideal
propcrtiea  of  the  Indian  IHMoria  del
Snew  Ifmido,  ni,  p.  23  el  mq.):
"Sob  todos  naturklineiita  Semfttieoi
de  eomplexito ;  7  como  la  floma  natn-
nl  haee  blanda  j  hiiineda  la  aiutatieia
da  Ia«  miambroi  del  cnerpo,  tienen
mnj  ¥f"''*i  7  delieadas  eaniea,  7  ad,
M  eauan  preirta  7  no  son  para  tanto
tnbajo  como  loa  hombrei  de  Enropa ;
kace  mil  labor  en  el  eampo  on  hombre
en  Eipafia  que  enatro  indioa  act  .  .  .
Jooto  eon  mt  flsm&ticoa  son  en  ex-
trvno  grado  aangniuoa  de  donde  les
nacB  wr  exeeaivameiite  «&lidoe,  como
M  prneba  en  qua  en  el  tienpo  de
mijorM  frioa  7  hieloa,  d  ee  lee  toea
la  mano,  w  lee  haUari  dempra  ealor
Dotable;  7  en  la  poea  ropa  que  Tisten,
qae  no  les  aure  de  nlngtbi  abrigo,
■lia  que  de  enbrir  nu  euerpoe.
Coando  van  eamino,  daermen,  annqne
tea  en  ma7  frioa  piramoa,  donde  lea
toma  la  noebe,  al  delo  deacnbierto;
7  aeonteee  eaer  eobre  elloe  an  pabno
jfl  niere  7  dormir  eutre  ella  eon  tanto
repoao  como  d  eatDvieran  ea  blandas
7  regaladaa  eamaa.  Echaae  tambien
de  Ter  m  excedva  ealor,  en  que  tienea
uuM  esUimagoa  mis  redoe  que  de
Aveatnu,  aeglin  la  eantidad  7  ealidad
de  los  nianjarea  qae  gartan.  Porqne,
dqjado  aparte  qne  son  0107  groseros  7
reeioa  ma  mantenimientoa,  loa  comen
erdinariamente  eati  erDdoe7dnaBs6ti,
7  eon  todo  eso  loa  digieren  nin7
prerto:  7  d  bien  enando  comen  &  an
coda  son  mn7  pareoB  en  la  eomida,
eon  todo  eno,  eomlendo  &  eoata  ajena,
•on  niios  loboa. ' '

Coneeniing  the  diseases  moat  eom-
mon  among  the  Indians  of  the  Bolidan
table-land,  the  Stilacion  de  (a  Pro-
•tneia  de  los  Pacajei,  in  Bel.  geo-
gr&fioa*  de  India;  Vol.  II,  p.  SB,
from  abont  15S6,  has  the  following:
"Las  enfermedades  qne  tenlan  anti-
n  vimelas,  sarampion,  c&-
I  de  sangre,  7  qoe  al  presente
tienen  las  mi^nin  j  tienen  m&a  otraa
«nfermed«dea, qne son baba^ qne


Uaman  Ouanti,  7  mal  de  eoruon,  7
algonaa  terdana*  7  eoartanaa  qne  lei
procede  de  entiar  en  loa  Ynngas  poT
Coca,  qnee  tiena  ealiente.  Y  pan  el
retnedio  deataa  enfermedades  no  tenlan
mtdieo^  s6lo  nsaban  de  la  langrla  eon
on  pedemal  7  de  una  Terba  qne  ha7  en
esta  proTinda  que  se  dioe  Akato,  &
manera  de  7erba-bueiia,  la  eoal  eondan
Terde,  7  molida  la  beblan;  7  de  otra
7eTbR  qne  se  dice  Chu()uicatll.a  qoea
k  manera  de  anlagaa,  eon  que  ae  lahn-
maban  para  las  ealentnraa;  7  deepnes
qne  entraron  los  espafiolee  turieron
conodraiento  de  nsa  resina  qne  se  dice
Tabvta,  4  manera  de  trementina,  qnea
para  sacar  frios  7  dolores."

"  This  is  alTead7  recorded  in  the
report  of  J11I7,  1B34:  Setatione  per
Bita  Maetta,  ete.  Bamuio,  III,  fol.
413:  "Le  ene  terre  sono  di  mediocre
graadena,  A  le  ease  picdole,  le  mora
di  pietra  A  terra  insieme,  eoperte  di
paglia."  Cieia:  Primera  Parte  de
ta  CrAniea,  etc,  Cap,  zclz,  p.  442:
"Ijm  pneUoa  tienen  loe  natorales  jnn-
toi,  pegadaa  las  eases  anas  con  otras,
no  ma7  grandei,  todas  hechas  de  piedra,
7  por  eobertora  paja,  de  la  qne  todoe
en  lagar  de  teja  snelen  osar. "  Cobo:
Eitt.  del  N.  Mwido,  rV,  p.  166;  "En
la  Sierra  bae«n  las  casaa  de  piedra  7
barro  7  lae  eubren  de  paja.  Ia  piedra
ee  toeea  7  paeata  sin  6rden  7  eonderto,
mas  qne  la  Tan  asentando  7  jnntando
eon  pelladas  de  barro."  These  de*
seriptiona,  from  1634,  1550,  and  1653,
respectiTel7,  agree  fairl7  well  with
the  present  appearance  of  Indian
dwellings,  less  the  few  modem  im-
nroTements  mentioned  in  m7  text
\  "  Arehaeologiool  BeeonnoiuanM  into
Mexico,  second  edition,  p.  129. )

"  Cobo,  in  Hietoria,  etc,  IV,  p.  163,
describes  the  Tillages  of  the  Bierras
ver7  well,  also  on  pp.  166  and  167,  bat
does  not  mention  store-honsea.

"Cobo:  Eittoria,  etc.,  IV,  p.  171:
"I«  cama  qne  naan  los  de  la  sierra  7
tierra  fria,  ea  ana  manta  gmesa  de
lana,  llamada  Ckubi,  tendida  en  el
soelo;  U  mitad  !••  airre  de  eolehoA  7


;cbyG00'^lc


140


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


Branch  of


otra  mitad,  que  doblan  poi  1m  pite,
de  eobettoT  6  f  reuda,  j  saeleo  dormir
metidoa  en  nn  Chiul  todoB  los  d«  nna
easa,  padres  6  hijoa,  annqoa  loa  qne
van  entrando  An  polioia,  por  la  honeati-
dad,  apartan  ji  eamaa  ...  En  todaa
porta  dneRnen  con  el  miano  Testida
qua  traen  de  dia,  excepto  qne  loa
Taronet  se  qoitan  la  TaeoUa  7  Ui
mnjerea  la  Uiella."  Thia  enatom  of
aleqtiag  together  on  one  Fonelio,  so
to  aaj,  is  alre&djr  mentioiied  in  the
eixteentli  eenturj.  The  lieenelada
^Joan  de  Hatienio,)one  of  the  moat
diatingniahed,  and  at  the  aame  time
moat  atadioM  in  matten  of  the  In-
dian, of  the  membera  of  the  rojal
Andienda  of  La  Plata  (now  Soi^
Boliria),  who  came  to  Pera  in  IGSO,
atatea  in  Oobivnut  del  Porfi  oon  todOa
iat  eOKH  pvrteMoimte*  A  &  y  &  .
kittoria,  MBS.  at  ILenox  Bn
N.  y.  Pob.  Utinxj,  '  '
^  poiqae  de  dormir  en  el  anelo  lea  i
enfermedadea  qne  ae  manda  qua  ten-
gan  barbacoaa  en  qne  dnerau  j
poTqne  el  Padre  y  la  Uadre  7  niJoB  7
liijaa  aatan  ea  vn  boijo  todoa  jnntoe
7  doermen  jnntoa  qne  ae  haga  en  ^da
eaia  o  boijo  nn  apartamTO  en  qne
eaten  las  liijaa  7  no  eomo  beatiaa."
Like  inan7  aalntar7  meatorea  of  the
Bpaniah  gorenunent,  thia  one  re-
mained a  dead  letter  in  the  inte-
rior. We  aaw  man7  famiHea  on  the
Itlanda  living  and  sleeping  togethsr
in  one  room  and  partl7  on  the  floor,
so  to  Ba7,  "ta  a  heap."

"The  gninea-pig  ("007"  in  Pern,
"«0M^"— the  Spanish  for  labUt—
in  Bolivia)  ia  indigenona;  the  liog  ia
imported  from  Enrope.  Oeeaaionally
a  cross  of  the  domestio  pig  with  the
javaU  of  tlie  forest  ia  met  with.  There
waa  sneh  a  tpedmen  on  the  laland.
It  recalled  the  Enropeau  wild  boar  in
appearance  and  its  meat  waa  far  anpe-
rioi  to  that  of  the  common  hog.

"  Compare  Final  Btport  of  Invatti-
ffOtioM  amtmg  (k«  Indiaiu  of  the
ftMtkwMlern  United  State*,  VoL  I,
p.  26S,  and  ArehaeoloffiMl  Beaottnoii-


«MM,  p.  142.  We  saw,  at  Challa,  on
the  Island,  in  the  dwelling  of  the
Alcalde  Mariano  Manii"^,  a  fonr-
legged  stool  of  stonc^  weU  made.  It
waa  imbedded  in  the  wall  and  said
to  have  been  toond  in  the  ^ea  niaa
of  Eaiap«ta./p«dro  Piaarroj|eseribaa
aa  f oUowa  tbMaat  naad  b7  Afahnallpa
{Belaoion  del  iJeaoabrlmteiito  jr  Coa-
gaiffa  de  lo*  Seiaoj  del  Peri,  etc,  in
DoMtaeato*  para  la  Eittoria  de  B«-
paXa,  Vol.  T,  p.  249):  '<Ertaba  sen-
tado  eete  seSor  en  nn  duo  de  madera
de  altor  de  poeo  mas  de  an  palmo;
eete  duo  era  d«  madera  colorada  mQ7
linda,  7  tenlanle  sieropre  tapado  con
nna  manta  mn7  delgada,  annqne  eetn-
vieee  tl  sentado  en  iL  "  Francisco  de
Zeres;  Verdadera  SeJaokm  d«  ia  Co*-
gwitto  del  Perv  y  Provineia  del  Cwaoo,
1534,  reprint  of  1891,  Madiid,  p.  82:
"Y  d  tlrano  eataba  k  la  pnerta  de  an
aposento  sentado  en  nn  asiento  bajo. ' '
Cobo:  EUtoria  del  Hittvo  Jfvndo,  IT,
p.  272:  "No  tenlan  en  ana  easaa  sillas
eacaiio*  ni  gfciero  de  asientoe,  porqne
todoa,  hombree  7  mnjeret^  ae  aentaban
en  el  aacdo,  aaeaudo  los  Caeiqnea  7
grandee  aefiorea,  que  por  man»d  7
privilegio  del  Inea  nsabaa  de  adenta
dentio  7  fnera  de  ens  eaaaa,  al  enai
llamaban  DuHOj  7  era  nn  banqniUo
de  madera  labrado  de  ana  pieaa,  largo
doe  palmas  7  alto  nno,  semejante  en
la  hechnra  k  on  animal  qne  tnvieae  laa
piemaa  eortas,  U  cabeia  baja  7  ta
cola  aKa,  porqne  eomnnmente  la  daban
flgora  de  ■"'*"»'  Tenia  la  snperfleia
alta  eilneava,  para  qne  ajnstaae  eoa
la  parte  por  donde  se  astenta  «1
hombre."  With  the  eueption  of  the
■tatflmeut  that  the  right  to  nae  toA
stools  waa  Tested  In  the  "Inea"  and
delegated  by  him  to  minor  ehie^
the  statement  b;  Cobo  ia  vafaiabla.
The  worda  "dnho"  or  "dno"  Mva
neither  A7maT4  nor  Qnichna.

In  the  private  eoBection  of  Mr.
Oeorge  0.  Heje  at  New  Tork  CHt7  is
a  good  apeeimen  of  a  wooden  aeat
from  Poerto  Bico,  and  tbei«  a
at  t"  ■


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITIOACA 141


of  Nstnral  BMotj,  both  from  Tniki
Iilaiid.  It  wemB  thei«fore  that  tbcae
ftooli,  or  low  chairs,  were  in  nae
among  a  number  of  tribei,  both  in
North  and  Bonth  America.  Among
maaj  other  aeetiona  I  only  mantion
bare  Nicaragua.  Oriedo:  Hittoria
general  y  witwral,  edition  of  ISSS,
ToL  IT,  pjL  109  and  111,  et  t«q.

"We  were  usored,  at  Tiahnanaco,
that  the  Ajinsri  wonld  not  tolerate
image*  of  cainta  in  their  luMuei,  from
faar  of  the  "Santo  Ajn"  or  ill-wind
from  the  eainta,  a  epeciea  of  diMMe.
/"  Although  in  appearanee,  the
Indian  trarta  his  home  and  chattel!  bf
not  locking  the  door  of  the  former,
tbU  ia  not  the  remit  of  eonfldenee
in  hie  own  people.  In  the  flnt  plaee,
there  are  hardlj  locks  to  be  Men  in
the  TillagM  of  the  aboriginea,  and,
beaidee,  he  tmata  to  the  magie  power
of  primitive  eeremoniala  that  accom-
panied the  eonstmetion  of  the  bnild-
ingf,  and  to  the  "Achachila"  or
"Paecarina"  (see  later,  test  and
uotee).  Bnrglary,  therefor^  ia  aa
good  aa  unknown.  What  he  owna
ootaide  of  the  home  and  ia  not  in
care  of  apedal  fetiibee  he  gnarda
earefnilj  against  robbeiy,  from  hia
own  people  even  more  than  from
whitea  or  meetiKW.V

"Cobo:  EiMtoria]  ete,  IT,  p.  170:
"En  todaa  lu  eaeae,  por  peqnefiaa
qne  eean,  hay  an  fog6n  detraa  de  la
pnerta,  el  eoal  ea  de  heebnra  de  nn
homilla  peqneHo,  no  ma*  alto  qm  nn
palmo,  eerrado  por  todaji  partei,  eon
peqne&a  boea  por  donde  atixan  el
foego,  7  por  la  parte  alta,  dos  6  trea
agnjeroa  redondoi,  donde  aaientan  laa
ollaa."  Thia  Is  the  here  of  to^lay,
whieh  ia  naoalfy  Imilt  l^  the  women,
and  done  qnlte  rapidly,  too.  Whether
the  kere,  in  ita  present  fonn,  is  still
of  th«  primitiTe  tjpe,  it  another  qnes-


**Gobo:  ififtoria,  etc.,  IT,  p.  170:


■  qne  de  dos  6  tres  maneras;
ollas  de  barro  sin  Tidiiar,  en  qne  an-
tigDamentfl  pintabaa  diversas  fignrai,
eomo  tambien  en  los  cintaroa  7  demas
Taaijas;  platos  de  ealabassa  seeaa,  del
tamafio  de  peqneBas  porcelana%  barro
7  de  madera;  los  de  palo  se  dieen
MncA,  7  los  de  barro  Fvm;  j  candaa
medianaa  de  bam  qne  Uaman
CaukB."  Ikt  ehna  Is  a  bowl  or  a
taneer.

o^PittoI  Btport,  I,  p.  eS9;  ^foha«-
oloffieal  SeeonnoiMaKoe,  p.  138.

•■  Cobo,  But.  del  Vwtfoo  Mundo,  IT,
p.  168 :  ' '  Los  mantenimientos  qne  en-
eienan  son  Hais,  Oiofio  7  Qninna,  qne
todas  estas  trea  eosas  les  sirren  de
pan,  annqne  no  todas  siempre  k  todoa,
Bnelen  las  gnardar,  6  dentro  de  ana
easas  en  tinajaa  grandee,  6  en  algnn
apartadijo  qne  para  «tto  hacen,  6
fnara  dellaa  en  anas  peqnefiaa  trojea
qne  hacen,  bien  defendidu  del  agna."
Formerly  they  kept  their  better  cloth-
ing also  in  Teasels  of  ela7.  (P.  171.)
' '  Todo  esto  goardaban  en  tinajaa,  qne
no  tuTleron  otraa  arcai^  banles  ni  ea-
eaparates."  Hence  clothing  found  in
large  elay  veesels  is  not  alwa7a  an  in-
dication of  ceremonial  usage.

"Biftoria  M  Vawo  Mundo,  IT,
p.  170.

"Ibid.:  "Para  moler  cons  pe-
qnelias  tienen  otra  piedra  al  modo  de
mortero,  algo  cdncava,  7  mnelen  en
ella  con  otra  pequefia  y  largnilla  de  la
anerte  qne  los  pintores  mnelen  los
eolores."  Spedmena  of  these  imple-
ments are  contained  in  the  eolleetions
sent  by  na  from  the  Islands  and  other
parts  of  BoUTia. See  plates,  etc

■Cobo,  IT,  p.  166:  "No  tnriAron
enrioeidad  en  haeer  portadas  grandee
7  labradas:  todas  eran  puertas  pe-
qnefiaa 7  lianas,  7  laa  maa  tan  bajaa  7
Mtreehaa,  qne  pamcen  boeas  de
homos.  Pot  donde,  cnando  Tamoa  i
eonfeasar  sns  enfermoa,  no  podemos
entrar  elno  doblando  el  enerpo  y  &  caal

"C^eia,  Primera  Forte,  etc.  Cap.


;cbyG00'^lc


142


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


xox,  p.  442:  "Iioa  diaa  j  noehM  ion
ciai  ignalee,  j  en  Mta  oomkrea  haee
mu  frio  qua  en  ningniu  otra  da  las
delPerf."

"Cobo,  IT,  p.  167;  "Lo  t«re«TO,
que  ni  casas  de  noblea  ni  de  pleberos
tenian  pnertaa  fljaa  7  asentadaa  para
abrii  7  eemi:  lolo  nsabBii  de  nncw
eafUzM  6  unoe  eon  qua  tapa-
bau  U  pnerta  cnando  eerraban;  7  si
ibaa  faeta  7  no  qnedaba  nadie,  arri-
maban  al  eafiizo  alganas  piedraa,  7  no
naaban  de  mu  Gerrsdnraa,  Uave  nl  de-
fenra."  This  (ftside  from  other  taa-
tiiDon7)  sbows  that  the  door  is  a
Enropean  introductiaD.

"flirtorio,  IT,  p.  171.

"The  wowl  "choco"  ia  Qoiehna.
(Pray  Tonaa  Babio:^Jrto  y  Fooabwlo-
na  3»  la  Lengva  Qwiehua,  edition  of
175^  fol.  16S— "Chbucco,  Binete,  6
Capaeete  de  Indios. ' '  Cieza :  Pri-
mara  Parte,  Cap.  ni.  Cobo :  SUtoria,
IT,  p.  176.  Pedro  PiEarroi  Btlaeitm,
p.  261.  TTUoa  Uogollon:  Selaaon  de
la  Provinoia  de  lot  Collaguaa,  p.  40.

-Bittoria  dal  Niievo  Mmtdo,  TV,
p.  1S9  at  aag.  Tacolla  and  ehnapa  aie
both  Quiehna  words.  Torrea  BnUo:
Arte  y  VomAyAano,  foL  106,  Part  I,
for  Tacolla,  p.  85  (or  Hnaraa,  and
p.  8S  for  Chospa  or  Chhaapa.

"  The  UielU,  or  Uielle,  ia  aJao  caUed
"aguajo"  andi^  at  the  preaent  time,
a  small  piece  of  handaomelf  woven
«loth,  like  a  handkerchief,  or  what
in  French  ia  named  foulard.  The
cnmbi  or  pampacona  is  TOt  Been  in
Bolivia  on  the  heads  of  women  from
•outiL'of  La  Pas  and  elsewhere.  The
vincha,  or  nineha,  is  worn  aa  a  head-
band by  the  women  aroond  Cliaraa-
Sani;  it  ia  from  one  to  two  inches  wide
,  and  beautiful  in  color  and  deaign.
/  Finger-ringa  are  not  unfrequentl7
found  in  mins;  compare  the  speed-
mens  from  the  Island  flgnred  in  this
monograph.  The  latter  are  of  copper
and  of  bronia.  A  liandsome  ring,  of
enamded  bronie,  was  found  t?  na  on
the  upper  slopes  of  Xllimanl  in  a
mined  Tillage^


'The  ancient  needle  of  eopper  vt
broBxe  is  called  "yanri."  It  is  not
in  use  at  present.  The  large  [uds —
topo,  or  tumi— are  now  mostly  mttda
in  the  shape  of  ^Kwns,  and  are  some-
timea  of  silTer  or  gold.  Tbe  neatiM
women  ("cholas")  of  Bolivia  waaor
ear-rings,  sometjinea  very  long  and
costly  ones.

"  The  word  calzAn  is,  aa  well  known,
Spanish.

"Cobo,  fiUtt>ria,  IT,  p.  163:  "Pai»
obrsr  eatoa  veatidoa  y  ropaa,  7  aim
para  remendarlaa,  no  tienen  neeeaidad
de  m&g  instrumentoa  que  de  niw
aguja,  qne  alios  llaman  dmenna,
hecha  de  una  espina  larga  medio  jeme^
gmaaa  eoma  las  nuestras  eolchoneraa^
horadada  al  eabo  7  may  puntisgndA;
porque  con  ella  7  Mlo  de  lo  miamo  qoe
son  los  veattdoa;  laa  coaen  y  remiendan,
porqne  no  Dsan  para  remendar  afiadir
parte  de  sn  palio  aobre  la  rotnia,  eomo
nosotros,  sino  qne  van  larciendo  eon
nn  hilo  de  la  misma  laua  lo  que  de  la
nrdiembre  ae  ha  gaitado."  A  nnza-
bar  of  such  needles  made  of  thoma  or
apinea  were  aent  by  ue  to  the  Ameiir
can  Muaeum  of  Natural  History  ftt
thia  city.

"Tauri  is  also  the  ATmari  noma
for  copper.  Bertonio,  FooabKlario,  I^
p.  124.

"Cobo  (MviUma,  IT,  p.  190)  doe*
not  mention  agricultural  implementa
of  atone,  bnt  onr  nnmerons  Anda  of
atone  hoea  and  clod-breakeia,  on  &•
Islands,  in  the  CordUlera,  etc.,  prora


He  t


on]7  of  eopper  and  wooden  tools.
"Los  inatrnmentoa  de  ana  labnmaaB
eran  poeos,  y  eaoa  de  palo  6  eobre  y  ds
ningnn  artiflcio.  El  arado  6  aaadfin
era  nn  instromente  llamado  TacQa,  da
hn  palo  tan  gmeeo  como  U  mullecs  j
largo  poco  maa  de  dos  codos,  k  manera
de  canco.  For  donde  lo  aidan  eetattw
toreido  como  esyado,  y  en  la  ptinta
ataban  otro  palo  da  euatro  dadoa  d«
ancho  7  nno  de  canto  de  otra  madera
mas  recia;  y  eomo  un  palmo  antaa  del
remata  della  tenian  Mido  aa  gaaaha


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 143


del  Iwgoi  de  im  jema,  donde  badan
i^ena  eon  el  pit  iiqnierdo.  Fnen
d«U  ni«rt«  da  antdoa  tenimn  otio  in-
itmmetito  de  un  pslo  corro,  que  bada
forma  de  haznela  de  earpintero  6  de
ttanoeafre,  eon  que  qnebiantavan  loe
terronee,  eKardabau  7  mulian  la
tJeira;  7  eatoa  doe  inatnunentoa  eran
1m  prineipalea  eon  que  labraban  loe
eampD*.  Para  eeeardar  loe  eembradoa
J  haeer  loe  hojOB  en  que  enterrabau
el  Mail  al  aembrarlo,  DHiban  de  Lam-
PH,  que  loa  MexiouioB  llaman  Coaa,  7
m  nn  instnunento  eomo  atada,  lalvo
qne  el  liiarni  era  de  cobre,  dno  llaao
eomo  pala  eorta  de  homo. ' '

■Cobo,  Hittoria,  IV,  p.  208:  "EI
teebo  7  emtrierta  de  todo*  eatoR  adifl-
dM  era  de  Tigaa  grandee  do  davaidn,
mb  que  atadaa  eon  BogaB,  f  por  tejaa
HiCHO  largo  mn7  bien  aaentado."

*We  found  mncb  ancient  rope,
made  of  icbbn-grasa,  in  mined  hoDsei
of  tbe  Puna.  Tbonge  of  Llama-hide
and  woolan  ropoi  were  also  aaed.  To-
da7  Um7  etill  oas  rawhide  in  prefer-
enee  to  hemp.  What  I  ■a7  of  tbe
lalanda  eoneeming  modem  toola  we
•Dfaeeqaentl7  notiead  on  the  nuunland

**  The  complaint  orer  the  nndeanli-
neaa  of  the  Ajmari  ia  general  in  ear]7
•ODreea. No  qnoUtiona  are  required.

*S«e  note  33.

"  The  pongo  (from  ptMot:  door,  or
dooiwa7,  ainee  the  ancient  bonaea  had
DO  doora)  ie  in  realitr  not  ao  nnieh  a
doorkeeper  (except  at  night)  aa  a  gen-
eral drudge.  There  are  two  kinda  of
"pongoa"  in  moet  hooaea  of  wliltea
or  meatisoa:  tbe  "aala-pongo,"  who
ia  doorkeeper  and  waiter,  and  the
"eocina-pongo,"  who  earriee  water,
eleana  np,  waahee  diahee  and  belpa  the
eook.  The  "mit'-ini"  Is  nsaaU7  a
faniale  cook,  alao  a  maid  of  all  work.

"  Simon  Bolirar,  Deereto,  Cnteo,
Jal7  4,  1825,  in  Coleeoion  ofioial  de
L*yet,  Deeretot,  Betoliuwnei,  4-ea,  de
la  Bepublioa  BolMana,  Vol.  I,  p.  34:
"Qn«  la  Conetitodon  de  la  Bepobliea
no  eoDoee  derignaldad  entre  loe  cin-


dadanoe."  Thia  i«  an  indirect  recog-
nition of  the  citiienahip  of  the  In-
dians, conflrmed  in  the  aeeond  decree,
of  aama  date.  On  December  2Zd
of  the  same  7ear  Bolivar  decreed  (p.
101) :  "Qoe  proclamadaa  por  la
Aatunblea  de  eataa  provinciaa  sn  abao-
hita  independencia,  libertad,  6  ignal-
dad  dnl,  dejaron  de  ecaiatir  laa  claaea
priTil^iadaa. ' '  Preddent  Andrte
Santa  Crns  of  BoliTia  (Deereto,  Vol.
II,  p.  2S),  speaking  of  the  Indians,
ealla  them  "Stendo  eatoa  dudadanoa
•mpleadoa  en  el  cnltivo  de  laa  tiema^ ' '

**  Changea  in  polic7  in  regard  to
Indian  laada  have  been  frequent,  and
I  withhold  from  quoting  authoritiM.

"The  terradng  of  dopes  for  pur-
poeea  of  tillage,  and  eepeciall7  the
rotation  in  cnltirated  patchea  for  the
aake  of  letting  the  land  recuperate,
are  eostoms  that  t


land-tilling  tribes  of  Pern  sad  Boliria
long  previODS  to  the  conqneat.  Bajs
/Oareilasso  de  la  Vagal  in  Cvmentario*
ruUet,  I,  fol.  100;  "T  por^  eran  tan
eetjrilee  por  falta  de  ri^o,  no  las
aibranan  mas  de  rn  aflo  o  doa,  7  hiego
repartil  otra^  porqne  deaeansaaaen  laa
primeraa."  (Like  Cieca,  he  attrib-
ataa  eTer7  kind  of  improvement,  alao
in  agriciUtDre,  to  the  Inca.  This  is
not  the  ease.  The  custom  of  rotation
antedstea  the  time  of  Inca  raids,  as
well  as  the  conatmetion  of  terraces  on
slopes.  The  latter  needs  no  further
proof  than  the  existence  of  snch  an-
denea  in  sections  whither  the  Incaa
never  penetrated,  where  the7  are  aa
abundant  as  elsewhere,  and  the  exiit-
ence,  on  the  Islands,  of  terraces  at-
tributed to  the  "Chiillpa"ar  ATmsri,
and  positivd7  stated  to  be  from  timea
long  anterior  to  the  first  vidt  of  Ineas
to  Titieaca.  Inca  terraces  on  the
Islanda  can  be  eaail7  reeogmied  from
their  superior  workmanahip.  1 1n  re-
gard to  periodical  rediatribimon  of
landa,  the  Vlieendado  Falcon,jiii  his
Bepreetntaoion  Jteoka  en  Ooneilio
Froimeial,  tobre  lot  iaHot  y  ntoUttia*


;cbyG00'^lc


144


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


flM  le  hocen  &  lot  Indiot,  Doo.  d«
JndiM,  VII,  p.  466,  mT*:  "Tatnbieii
es  necourio  advertir  qoe  oe  engafiAu
loB  que  diiwa  que  d  luga  daba,  j  qni-
taba  laa  tierraa  &  qnian  queria,  f  aon
loa  caciqnea,  lo  cnal  no  paaa.  aai,  sino
fne  AH  ^  entrada  ;  eonqtiiata  .  .  .  j
no  haM  al  easo  que  en  alyinaa  tierras
haata  bo7  se  reparian  laa  tierraa  por
«l  cnraca  k  1m  indios,  porqne  esto  e«
por  coetombie  qoe  hahia.  en  aqnellaa
provincifis  de  antee  del  tiempo  del
Iiiga7dez61oselIngaeii  eUa."  This
alludee  to  rotation  and  redistrlbntion
aa  a  enatom  anterior  to  tbe  estab-
liebment  of  Inea  Bwa7.  The  well-
knownf Licendado  Polo  de  Ondognrdo,^
in  Belaciim  de  lot  ftmdamento*  aoerea
d«I  notable  dano  qut  retuita  dt  no
gvardar  d  lo»  Indio*  tut  fuero*.  Doe.
de  India*,  XVII,  p.  32,  Jane  26,  1571,
atatee;  "T  eetaa  tienae  dividian  en
oada  m  aila  e  dividen  hoy  dia  en  la
mayor  parte  del  rrejno,  e  70  me  4  ha-
llado  preeente  i  la  cUuiaion  en  mnncboe
t  prineipaJmente  en  la  proTineia  del
Gollao  y  en  la  del  Chncnyto,  j  en  eate
qointo  preeapueeto  pado  entrar  por
regla  general  ynfalible  qne  nyngnno
poaeyo  por  merced  del  inga,  la  qnal
eomo  eata  diebo,  tampoeo  dinidian  loa
beredeiofl  ny  podian  diaponei  della  en
uyngnna  manera."

■The  principal  paetniagee  on  the
Island  are  the  low  groonda  at  Pacari
(m.)  and  the  gnaty  ewelUnga  of  Ciri-
apata.  Tbe  cattle  of  the  Indiana  mn
looae  all  over  the  Island.

**  The  aame  eystem  preraile  nearly
all  over  Bolivia,  aa  I  shall  have  occa-
sion to  show  in  my  other  work  on  the
eoontry.

"  What  to-day  ia  deaignated  by  the
Spanish  name  of  "  comnnidades "
and  "estancioa"  are  tribet,  each  com-
posed of  a  number  of  ayllu.  The  word
aylln  is  both  Aymarft  and  Qoichna.

"This  division,  abont  which  I  hope
to  give  moTe  data  in  a  anbeeqnent
work,  ia  ao  frequently  mentioned  in
the  early  aonreea  that  no  donbt  can
ramain eonceniing its eiistenee at


Cusco.  At  the  present  time  it  exists
in  Bolivia  nnder  the  respective  namea
of  Aran-saya  and  Ha-saya.  AJthon^
it  is  stated  the  Incas  introduced  it
among  the  Aymari,  it  is  far  from
certain.  A  singular  statement  is  f  onnd
in  Bamos'  fi'utoria  dtf  Copaedbana,
1860,  p.  B5,  in  connection  wiUl  the
finding  of  the  eroHS  of  CBrabaeu((aea
my  paper  in  the  Amer^n  Ai^hny-
pOlogUt,  VoL  VI,  No.  6n  "Entre  loa
Urinsayas,  que  son  loe  natnrales  de
un  Ingar,  solia  mandar  el  Inca  indios
de  su  confiansa  para  amalgamarlee
mejoi  en  las  coetumbres  del  imperio
J  para  velar  aobre  la  fidelidad  de  loa
nuevoB  conqniatados;  a  estoa  feraate-
roa  lea  llamaban  Ananaayaa:  doa  par-
dalidadea  que  se  miraban  con  reeelo  y
mnehas  veeea  venian  a  las  manos^  eomo
jndioB  y  aamaritanos.  .  .  .  Loa  0riB-
sayaa  dijeron  a  los  Ananaayaa,  qna
eran  unoa  pobree  advenediaos  ain  tierra
ni  patria  propia,"  etc  This  would
indicate  that  the  division  antedated
the  appearance  of  the  Ines  on  the
eastern  ahorea  of  Titieaea.

'Also:  lAbro  de  Cattadoi  (tim  Per-
tenece  a  ett«  Pueblo  de  Ttoffumaeo,
1694  to  1728,  MS8.

"  Ibidem.  An  ' '  Inca-ayllo ' '  ia
mentioned,  aa  from  aeveral  distinct
localities.  Even  among  the  Inea  at
Cnico  there  was  at  leaat  one  aylln
with  the  name  of  a  locality,  the
"Aylln  Tome-Bamba"  (from  Tnmt-
pampa,  in  Ecuador),  and  said  to  hav«
descended  from  Hnajna  Capae  (Diego
Femandei:  Primera  y  Segwida  Part9
de  la  Bittoria  del  Perti,  1571,  reprint
of  1S76,  at  Lima,  p.  358).  OareUaeBO
de  la  Vega,  in  Comentarioe,  I,  fol.  £63.
confirms.  In  th«  Decoripeion  de  la
tierra  del  BeparUmiento  de  loe  Bitca-
nae  Antamarcat,  of  1586  (Bel.  geo-
grdflcae,  etc.,  II,  p.  198),  it  ia  stat«d:
' '  Primeramente,  se  responde  al  primer
capttulo,  qne  eata  provineia  6  repaiti-
miento  tiene  por  nombre  Bucamab
Antahabcas,  de  nn  pueblo  Ilamado
aa(,  i  donde  eetaban  poblndos  en
tiempo  de  sn  gentilidad  nn  ayUo 6


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 145

que  tiene  ni  Cri&dor,  tbm  dlian,  qn«
tal  Cairo,  otroa  qne  tal  fneute,  otroa
qoentan  de  bus  Paeuiiuts  maehaa
fAbalsB,  7  patnliu."  The  Quichna
PscBTinA  u,  in  mljabuiee,  the  same  as
the  Haehnia;  and  tbe  Achachila  of
theATmari.  (Cap.  n,  p.  12.)  "Alaa
Paearinaa,  que  ea  da  donde  dloa  dicen
qne  deadeudeii,  revereueiaii  tamblen.
Que  eomo  no  tienen  16,  ui  eonoei-
mianto  de  eu  primer  origen  de  nnw-
troa  prinaroB  padrea  Adan  j  Eva,
tieuan  m  cata  pnnto  muehos  arrores,
7  todoa  eapeeialmaita  laa  eabexaa  de
Ajlloa  aaban,  j  nombraii  bub  Psca-
rinaa."  At  an  eu'l7  day  tliiH  belief
in  deseent  of  the  elani  from  loealitiM
is  mentioned.  I  quote,  for  example,
(jnan  de  Betanios^  Svma  y  Natracion
de  Im  Incat,  ISSVMadrid,  18S0,  p.  5:
CriBt6bal  de  Molina  (tranilation  hj
Markham  in  Saelelmtft  Sooitty  Publt-
eatitmt,  original  st  lima) :  An  aecount
of  the  Fablet  and  Site*  of  the  Ineaa,
pp.  4  to  9.  While  deseent  or  origin
of  the  A7IIU  ia  placed  at  apeeifle  loeali-
tiea,  it  ia  dear  that  it  ia  attribated
to  eertain  objeeU,  animate  or  inani-
mate dtoated at the placM men-

"  The  election  of  oleaJdea  about  the
txtt  at  Jannar7  waa  inatitnted  in  the
Tiee-ro7alt7  of  Pem  by  Bon  Fran-
eiMO  de  Toledo  In  1575.  Ordenatuiu
da  Peru,  Vol.  I,  Lib.  n,  foL  135:
"Qne  el  dia  de  sflo  nuero  se  jnnten
para  la  aleedon. ' '

"Properly  "hilaeata."  The  word
alcalde  ia,  of  eonne,  Spaniih.  The
olllee  ia  not,  aa  represented  in  lome
Bonreee,  an  "Inca"  inatitntioB.

"  Carta  d«  lot  prinoipolu  de  Sioa-
*i«a  d  la  Com/umidad  de  Callapa,  May,
I7S1,  Arehmo  'boiimano,  Doeumentoa,
p.  20S;  alio  Informe  of  Fray  Matiaa
Borda,  p.  220.,

"  The  alcalde  ia  not  a  survival  of
the  "cadque."  The  latter  olSee  was
abolished  by  decree  of  Bolivar,  July  4,
1S25.  In  early  timea,  when  the  office
of  alcalde  naa  flnt  established  among
tha  Indiana,  he  waa  in  fact  the  chief


pardalidad  qne  ahora  le  dice
Aatamarcas,  y  eatin  redneidos  an  otro
pueblo  que  se  dice  Ia  Vera  Cmi
de  Canaua;  y  Pneato  qne  en  eate
Bombre  de  Antamarcas  Bncanaa  ae
eomprehenden  todoe  loa  fndioa  deate
repartimiento  y  provineia,  hay  eu  ella
enatro  ayUoe  6  pareialidadea,  qae  ee
Bombran  aal:  Antamarea,  Apeara,
Omipscha,  Hnehaeayllo.  Antamarea
qniere  decir  pneblo  de  colnt^  7  no
tioMn  loB  indioa  noticis  poi  qn6  aa
haya  Qamado  aal ;  Bneona  qniere  dacir
dedo;  Apeara  qniere  decir  fortaleza,  y
par  ier  el  pneblo  cereado  de  pared
yfoMaeqneddeon  ertenombre  .  .  .  ;
Omapscfaa,  qne  ea  otra  parcialidad,
qniere  decir,  en  lengoa  antigua  de  loa
propios  indioa  partieolar,  tierra  de
■goal,"  ete.  We  have  in  tbie  in-
Btauce  indications  of  three  ehangei
■mong  the  ayllns  of  the  district  of  the
Antamarcas— change  in  locality  since
the  conqneot;  change  of  name,  from
the  original  Aymar4  to  the  Qoichtu,
probably  in  tliree  cases.  Omapacha  is
half  Aymarfi,  half  Qoichna.  The  in-
terpretation by  Es;H>da  in  note  (a)
has  no  basis;  hence  a  combination  of
two  langnagaa  in  one  end  the  same

At  some  fntnre  day  I  hope  to  be
able  to  present  more  concrete  data
rdati*e  to  tha  aylln  in  Pem  and  Bo-
livia. Suffice  It  to  Bay  here,  that  the
aylln  is  *the  dan,  modiHed  in  its  fea-
tures by  time  and  contact  with  Euro-
pean elements.  But  I  cannot  refrain
from  quoting,  on  the  sabjeet  of  origin,
a  high  anthority,nPatheT  Pablo  Joseph
Arriaga,^  SJT.:  Brtirpaeion  da  (a
TdotatriJ  del  Pirv,  Lima,  1621,  Cap.
m,  p.  40:  "No  saben,  qne  proeedemos
todoa  de  naeetros  prlmeros  padres,  7
ossi  eatan  persnadidoe  no  solo  qua  los
IJepafioIee  proceden  de  vn  prindpio,  y
los  negroB  de  otro,  tlno  que  cada  Ayllo,
y  paitdalidad  de  loa  Yndios  tiene  bq
principio,  y  Pacarina,  qua  eUos  Ilaman
particular,  y  la  nombran,  y  la  adoran,
7  ofrecen  socrifldos;  llsmaJidola  Cs-
ma^  qae  as  eriador,  7  eada  vno  dixe


;cbyG00'^lc


146


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


polica  eommiariouar  of  th*  pueblo.
Ordmunwof  para  lot  Iitdiot,  bj  tha
viceioj'  Toledo  (Ontenanea*  del  P«rw,
Lib.  n,  Tit  I  and  n,  foL  135  to  134).
This  implie*  the  militaij  command  in
«ue  of  war,  among  the  Indiana,  m
that  the  alcalde  ia  in  reality  tlie  mr-
chief  of  hi*  tribe.

"It  ia  hardlj  tbe  place  to  enter
into  a  diacuuioQ  of  the  cuitoma  of
■neeeadon  and  inheritance  which  are
■o  deeiuTe  in  regard  to  the  question
of  endogamoni  and  ezogamoni  niai-
riage.  /Grideneet  in  favor  of  exogamj
are  niifaieroua  among  older  somtea.
Even  the  Cnzeo  Indiana  (the  Inca}
mem,  aa  I  shall  eatablish  elaewheie,
to  have  had  descent  in  the  female
]in&  I  limit  myself  to  onoting  from
the  Ordinances  of  Toledoy(Or(I«naa«(ic
i«l  Pan,  Lib.  n,  Tit  A,  fol.  144) :
"  Primeramente,  porjj  entre  loa  indios
ae  aeoatnmbra  qne  cnando  la  India  da
vn  Ayllo,  6  lepartimiento  se  casa  eon
Indio  de  otro  repartlmiento,  &  Ajllo,
7  el  marido  se  mnere  dexando  hljos  6
bijaa,  loa  Caciques  Principalea  euya
era  la  India  antes  qne  se  easese  la
conipelen  &  bolver  al  repartimiento,
J  Ayllo  adonde  era  antes,  j  llavar
conaigo  loa  hijoa  que  have  del  marido.
Ordiho,  y  mando,  que  &  India  de  td
repartimiento,  parelalidad,  7  A7II0
qne  se  caaare  con  Indio  de  otro,  deien
los  hijoa  que  en  ella  hnriere  harido  m
marido  en  el  repartimiento,  pareiali-
dad,  7  A7II0  donde  an  padre  era  triba-
tario,  porqae  allt  le  han  de  aer  elloa,
7  ella  se  passe  i  sa  repartimiento,  6
A7II0,  ai  sns  Cssiqnes,  6  Principalea
la  pidieren  dezfindola  eatar  algnn
tiempo  eon  ans  bijos  baata  que  el
menor  deUoa  eea  de  edad  de  ocho
afios  para  arriba,  porque  no  lea  hags
falta  au  Buaencia  al  tiempo  antes."
The  title  of  this  aectlon  ia  still  more
ConelnaiTe:  "Que  los  bijos  eigan  7
reeonoacan  el  A7II0,  7  Parcialidad  de
sn  Padre  7  no  «1  de  la  Madre."  fit
proTU  that  nurriage  was  esogamons,
and  alao,  that  snceeaidon  in  the  male
line waa a change introduced by


Spanish  legialation  at  the  end  of  the
sixteenth  eentnr7.  Whenever  a  eon-
qnering  people,  by  laws  or  decree^
explieitl7  either  aanetiona  or  abn>>
gates  customs  of  the  conquered,  aneh
sanction  or  abrogation  ia  the  beat  evi-
dence of  the  eriatence  of  anch  eoatom^
at  the  Ume  when  the  change  was  or-
dained. )


Taca  de  Caatro:  Carta  al  Emperador,
November  24,  1&42  (Cartaa  de  India;
p.  491);  "En  la  prooincia  que  he
dicbo  .  .  .  qne  ae  Uama  del  Collao  .  .  .
aanido  como  Kj  Tndies  que  tienen  por
eoatnnbre  de  vsar  el  pecado  abomina-
ble entrelloa,  7  andan  vestidoa  de
&bito  de  yndiaa:  tengo  aqui  preeoa
machos;  hazene  ha  joaticia  €  ponerae
ha  remedio  en  esto.  Algunoa  dizen,
en  sua  diebos,  questan  dlpntadoa  par*,
eate  abominable  pecado,  para  los  pasa-
jeros  7iidiofl  que  v6n  por  aquella  pro-
ninda,  porqne  no  entiendan  eon  laa
7ndias. ' '  There  are  aeveral  conflrma-
tions  of  this  statement.  Even  Qeza,
who  ia  BO  decidedl7  partial  to  the  In-
dians («speciall7  the  I  oca)  aaja
(Primera  Porte  ds  la  CrSniea,  Cap.  CI,
p.  44S)  :  "Destoe  ae  tiene  que  abor-
reclan  el  pecado  uefando,  pueeto  qne
dicen  que  algnnos  da  loa  nisticos  que
andaban  guardando  ganado  lo  "«»>«"i
aecretamente,  7  los  qua  ponian  en  los
templos  por  inducimiento  del  demonto,
como  7&  tengo  eontado."  The  latter
refera  to  the  coast  people  (Cap.  lxit,
p.  416).  Pitarro;  Selaeio*  itH  Dttnt-
brimimto,  p,  280:  "Estoa  indioa
destaa  provinciaa  del  Collao  es  genta
sneia,  tocAn  en  muchos  peeadee  abo-
minables,  andaban  muchoa  varonee  en.
hfibitoB  de  mugeres  7  en  mnchaa  idoln-
trlaa. ' '  M7  inqoiries  on  this  point
were  always  answered  in  the  negative,
and  I  never  observed  anything  that
led  me  to  suspect  that  sneh  a  habit
might  exist  at  the  present  time;.  It
certainly  existed,  thirteen  yeara  Mgo,
among  ths  New  Mexican  pueblos  and
was openly practised, in isolated


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 147


«u«L  in  the  dxteenth  eantnr^.  Com-
parapupur  PerM  de  TillagranA Hi*-
toria^df  Itt  Nttwa  Mmioo,  J6I0.

To-d«7  there  ezistt  among  the
Ajsuui  tbe  euBtom  of  what  might  be
named  a  "trul  year"  before  mar-
riage. Tliat  thifl  ia  an  ancient  habit
ii  proTen  hj  it  being  mentioned  anta-
lior  to  its  prohibition  bj  Sp&uiah  de-
ereea.  Pedro  Piiarro,  who  wrote
about  1&70,  aaaerts  that,  prerioiu  to
nwiriage,  indiMTiminate  interconrae
wag  permitted  with  the  girls  (Beta-
eion,  pp.  347  and  379).  Tbe  decree
promnlgated  bj-  Toledo  ia  eonclnuTe
(OTdaummu  del  PerO,  foL  128,  et
uq.):  "I-ntNiporqaantoaycoitmnbre
entre  loa  Indioe  eaai  generalmente,  no
eanrae  dn  primers  averse  eonoddo,
tratado,  A  eonvenado  algon  tiempo,  j
heeho  Tida  maridable  entre  si,  eomo
B  Terdaderamente  lo  fuesaen,  y  les
pareee,  que  ai  el  marido  no  conoce
primero  i  la  mnger,  j  pot  el  eo&trario,
que  deapues  de  eaaadoi  no  paeden
tener  pas,  eontento  j  amistad  entresi. ' '
It  might  be,  that  this  trial-jear
is  preceded  by  some  proviaioiial
ceremony,  bvt  the  marriage  after
primitive  cuatom  takes  place  at  the
expiration  of  the  twelve  months.
That  the  trial  year  is  what  I  have
called  it,  remains  proven  by  the  fact
that,  at  its  close,  the  parties  may  yet
■eparate  and  the  fact  of  temporary
anion  is  not  binding  upon  either  party.
If  they  eontlnne,  however,  to  live  to-
gether as  man  and  wife,  without  hav-
ing their  primitive  and  the  church
ceremonials  performed,  they  are  looked
apon  as  transgreeaors.  The  Coiutitu-
eionea  synodole*  del  Arfobitpada  A»
lot  Beyea,  en  et  Perv,  1613,  reprint  of
1722,  p.  79,  Lib.  IIII,  Cap.  n,  foL  79,
ordain:  "Porqne  el  Demonio  ha  Intro-
dueido  entre  loa  Tndios,  J)  qnando
tratan  de  eaaarae  con  algona  India  se
amaneeban  primero  con  ella,  viviendo
en  ofenaa,  .  .  .  ;  Mandamos:  qne  loa
Coras,  mny  de  ordinaiio  en  aos  ser-
mones,  les  ezorten  y  amonesten  aer
aboao  7  grave  peeado  lo  qne  baeen  y


qua  averiguen  qnienea  son  eulpados  en
ello,  y  la  tal  averignadon  la  remitan
al  TJicario  para  qne  loa  caatlgne."
Arriaga:  B^irpaeion  de  la  Idolatria,
etc.,  p.  34:  "Otro  abiuo  esmnycomnn
entre  todos  los  Yndioa  oy  en  dia,  qne
antea  de  casarse,  se  an  de  eonocer
primero,  y  jnntaise  algonas  veies,  y
assi  ea  caao  mny  raro,  el  casarse,  uno
es,  primero,  Tincunacnspa,  eomo  elloa
dicen,  j  estar  tan  assentadoa  en  eate
engalio,  que  pidiendome  en  vn  pneblo,
por  donde  passava,  vn  Tndio,  qne  le
casase  con  vna  Tndia  con  qnien  estava
eoDcertado  de  easarM,  vn  hermano  de
eOa  to  eoDtradeda  grandemente,  y  no
dava  otra  causa,  aino  que  uonea  se
aoiaa  eonoddo,  ni  jontadoee,  y  de
otro  Tndio  at  yo  qae  aviendose  eaaado
no  podia  ver  a  an  mnger,  y  le  dava
mala  vida,  por  qne  dizo  que  era  de
mala  condicion,  pues  nadie  la  avia
<]nerido ni eonoddo antes que ae

"  Arriaga :  Bxtirpaciott,  Cap.  vi,
p.  32.

"The  deaeription  of  mertnary  ens-
toma  by  Cieta  {PHmera  Parte,  Cap.
C,  p.  443)  presents  a  distorted  picture,
from  inanffldent  observation,  the
writer  merely  passing  through  the
CoUao,  in  1549.  The  Belaoion  de  lot
Faoajet,  1586,  (Sel.  geogrdf.  II,  p.
01) :  "Y  at  difunto  le  enterraban  con
loa  mejores  veatidos  y  ofreclan  mncha
comida  y  Aeda  ..."  Arriaga,  Ex-
tirpaeion.  Cap.  VI,  p.  34:  "Heehanles
mny  d  ^w'"*"  ^<*d^Tp  ente  ch^<*ha  en  la
sepultnra,  porque  bevan,  y  mny  al
descublerto  enando  lea  hasen  lae  hon-
ras,  eomidaa  eocidas,  y  asMdas  tobre
la  sepaltnra,  para  que  coman.  .  .  ."
The  Licenciado  Fernando  de  SantUlaa
(Solocion  det  Origen,  Veteendeneia,
Politioa  y  Oobienut  ie  loa  heat,  date
about  1566,  Madrid,  1879,  in  Tree  Be-
laeionet  de  AntigUedadea  pervanaa,
p.  35)  afBrms  it  to  have  been  a  gen-
eral custom:  "Tenlan  y  Cretan  tam-
bien  que  los  mnertos  ban  de  resadtar
eon  ana  cuerpoa  y  volver  t,  poseer  lo
que  dejaroB,  y  por  eso  lo  niandaban


;cbyG00'^lc


148


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


ecbar  cousigo  «n  las  hnaeaa,  7  loa
pontaD  4  loa  mnertoi  todo  lo  major
que  teniaii,"  etc.  The  broom  may  be
a  modem  sabetitate  for  a  weapon.

"  Aixiaga,  Ssctirpaoion,  p.  JH:  "Bb-
parcen  en  algnnaa  partes  haiina  de
Uajz,  o  de  Qniniut  por  la  eaea,  para
Ter  camo  elloe  dizen  ta  buelTO  el  di-
fniito,  por  lae  piaadaB,  qne  A  de  deiar
•efialadaa  en  la  hariua. '  *

"filial  Report,  I,  p.  208  et  teq.

"  Thia  is  clearly  bIiowh  in  the  IA}>ro
de  Catiadoi,  of  Tiagvanaoo  (UB&).

"Belooion  de  la  Fronnoia  de  lot
Faoajee,  p.  59:  "T  el  dia  de  hoj  ran
&  PotosI  7  &  otnw  partes,  eomo  son  las
Ynngaa,  donde  ae  coge  la  Coca  j  baesn
otroa  mneboa  eervidoa  qne  no  haeian
entoneee."  (P.  61.)  "Las  easaa  de
lot  eadqaea  7  tambos  tuaron  largaa  7
cnadradas,  7  la  madera  traian  de  los
Tnngaa. ' '  Deioription  y  Belacion  ie
la  Ciudad  de  La  Paa,  lfi86  (Sel.  ffeo-
grdf.  II,  p.  78):  "Entran  en  los
valies  calientes,  asl  donde  se  da  maiz
eomo  eoea,  trigo  7  dam&s  eosaa  qne
tengo  referidaa,  7  traen  del  ganado
qne  tienen,  que  son  loa  eameros  deeta
tierra,  7  lana  deOoa  7  Tsstidos  qne
deata  lana  hacen  7  la  aal  qne  ba7  en
BU  tierra,  7  cod  eata  compran  hariendo
tfoeqae  del  mats  7  la  coca  7  demia
"cosas  qae  en  bq  tierra  f  altan. ' '

*■  VoL  V,  18B6,  flrat  quarter,  p.  120.

"  We  ofFered  qoita  a  reasonable
amount  of  money  at  Bampa7a  for  tbe
privilege  of  seeing  and  copTing  one  of
these  pietograpba  drawn  on  sheepskin,
bnt  in  Tain.  I.  I.  von  Tschndi  (5H-
tm  duTok  Sad-Amerika,  1S69,  Vol.  V,
p.  314)  gives  a  fsesiniilB  of  one  of
these  CatechismB,  which  he  foond  at
Copaeavana,  adding  an  explanation,

*  And  also  sent  two  to  the  Mnsenm.
For  the  ose  of  a  knotted  string  (in  an
analogoos  manner  as  the  New  Ueiiean
Indians  used  It  in  1680  in  order  to  in-
form all  the  pneblos  of  the  date  flxed
forihe  npriaing  against  the  Spaniards)
l^  the  Aymari  at  Copoeavana  in  1781,
see  Fray  Matfaa  Borda:  Informe  (Ar-
ehivo  boHmano,  p.  206). The  Indian


messenger  from  Tlqiiiiia  carried  a  cord
or  string  with  a  knot  in  it— "7  el
eitado  undo,  deeatado  qne  fneee,  taa-
bien  Bignificaiia  nna  especie  de  carts
6  auto  oerrado,  que  (H  eolo  tenia  la
f aeultad  de  abrir,  6  desatar  ..."  Am
soon  as  the  knot  wa*  untied,  the  In-
dians attacked  the  Sanctuary  (p.  811).

"In  primitiTe  times  the  two  rasals
were  qnite  regular.  Cobo:  Hiitona
del  Nuevo  Mundo,  lY,  p.  174:  ".Oo-
mian  dos  Teies  al  dia,  k  las  ocbo  6
nueve  de  la  maftana,  y  &  la  tarda,  eon
nna  6  dos  boraa  del  aol ' '

"The  nse  of  coca  as  medium  of
exchange  la  already  mentianed  in  tbs
sixteenth  eentaT7.  OaieilaaBD  de  la
Tega:  Cornea (arios,  I,  foL213:  "Ade-
lante  diremos  eomo  la  Ileuan  a  Potod,
y  tratan  7  contratan  con  ella. ' '  Also
SeEnefon  de  lot  Paoajet,  p.  63:  "Y
aal  el  farato  principal  qne  hay  en  eata
pro*inda  entre  los  indios  y  eapafioles,
ea  reecatar  Coca  por  cameroa  y  eomida
que  lea  Uevan."

■Bishop  Tieente  de  Talrerde:
Carta  al  Bmperador  sobre  amnios  do
stt  igleaia  y  etrat  de  la  gobemaoioit
general  de  aquel  pait,  in  Doo.  de  In-
diae.  III,  p.  08:  "Coca  ....  7  vale  ea
eeta  tierra  &  peso  de  oro  7  ea  la  prin-
cipal renta  de  loa  dieonoa. ' '  The
date  of  this  letter  i^  Cnaea,  March  2X>,
1530.  The  nse  of  eoea  (mastiealian
of  the  leaves,  especiall7)  was  mack
moi«  general  in  Sonth  and  CentiBl
America  than  is  nsnally  believed.  It
extended  from  Nicaragua  southward.
Oviedo:  HUtoria,  VoL  I,  p.  206:  "De
la  hisrva  qne  los  indios  de  Nieaiagna
llaman  yaat,  ti  en  la  gobemaeion  da
Venezuela  ae  dice  hado,  y  en  el  P«r&
la  llaman  coca,  6  en  otras  partes  la
nombran  por  otros  nombres  diversaa,
porque  son  las  lenguas  dif erentes. ' '
In  Colombia  its  nse  was  oommon
(liidem,  II,  p.  300).  Lfieaa  Feman-
dei  de  Piedrahita:  Bietoria  genenU
de  lot  Con^iitai  del  Nvevo  Seytto  da
Oranada,  1688,  p.  20.  "Porqna  lo
mas  de  la  noche  gastaban  a  nasear
Eayo,  qne  es  la  Tsrva,  qua  an  si  PasA


;cb/G00'^IC


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 149


UaniHD  Coea,  j  sou  eiertas  hoju  eomo
lu  del  Zomaqae."  Antonio  JuUan:
La  Perla  d«  la  Amerioa,  Madrid,  1787,
p.  25  et  JSg.rCieu  (Primffra  Parte,
p.  440),  while  inclining  to  ttie  belief
tlwt  tbe  eocB  was  qjeciallj  reaBrred
for  the  high  ehiefi  and  the  worship
of  the  Inea  tribe  at  Ciueo,\  aayt
BererthelcM:  "En  el  Perfi  en  todo  se
Ds£  f  nea  traer  eata  coea  en  la  booa,  7
deade  la  »i«ftTia  haata  one  se  Tan
i  dormir  la  traen,  nn  la  ediar  della. ' '
Pedro  Pizarro:  Betaoion,  p.  £70:  "k
otroa  hacer  eoger  coca,  qne  era  nna
rerb*  qnelloa  traian  en  la  boca  mny
prsBciada  7  con  qne  ^^'^^"  todoa  ku
■aeriflcioa  6  idolatriaa  .  . .  Tenlanla  en
nmeho  porqne  lunban  della  loa  SeSorea
J  i  quien  ellOB  la  dabttn,  j  no  oomnn-
mente  ..."  Thia  would  indicate  tbat
coca  and  its  use  were  a  priTilege  of  a
certain  elasa.  Ita  ebaracter  sa  an  ob-
ject for  aaeriflee  and  ita  raiitj  at
Cozeo  may  have  giren  It  that  appear-
ance, it*  nae  (as  the  abore  qnotationa
ihow)  was  free  and  general.  Bantl-
Dan:  Belaeion,  p.  116:  "En  tiempo
del  inga  eran  D1117  pous  laa  chiearas
[of  coca]."
-I ahaU nfer to that tradition

"In  1781,  the  horrible  manacrea
perpetrated  inaide  of  the  chorehei,  and
repeated  at  A;o-a70  and  Idohom  in
1899,  ahow  how  littl^  at  heart,  the
ATmari cares  for  tbe  Christian  re-

"  Knot  Report,  I,  p.  223.

"  The  term  Paehacamac  we  heard
at  Tiahoanaeo.  It  is  a  Qnichna  im-
portation and rarely need bj the

"  Theee  tenne  ere  poBt-conqoiatoTial,
but  they  show  the  Indian's  ideas  on
these  points.  Arriaga  (ifrtirpaoion.
Cap,  Ti,  p.  33)  giTea  an  iUnctratioD  of
how  they  made  use  of  the  Apostle
Santiago  to  incorporate  Mm  in  their
own  cirele  of  epiritnal  beings  1  ' '  En  el
nombre  do  Santiago  tienen  tambien
snperaticion  y  anelen  dar  eete  nombre
al  vno  de  los  Chnchna  [twiiu]  eomo  &


hijoa  del  rayo  qne  snelen  namar  San-
tiago. No  entiendo  qne  ser&  por  el
nombre  Boanerges,  qne  lea  posso  al
Apoatol  Santiago,  7  a  en  hermano
S:jDan  Christo  nneatro  Belior,  llaman-
dolee  Bayo^  que  esto  qniere  deair  hijos
del  tmeno,  segun  la  f rase  Hebrea,  sino
6  porqne  ee  STr&  eatendido  por  ae&  la
f  raaa^  o  eoneeja  de  loe  muehaehoa  de
Espafia,  qne  qnando  trnena,  diien  qne
corre  eavallo  de  Santiago,  6  porqne
Teran,  qne  en  las  gnerres  que  tenian
loe  Espafioles,  qnando  qnerian  disparar
loa  Areabuies,  que  loa  Yndios  llaman
Tllapa,  o  Bayo,  apeUidaran  primero
Santiago,  Santiago. ' '  A  very  inatme-
tive  incident  is  related  by  the  same
anthority  (Cap,  xm,  p.  79):  "El
octavo,  da  la  intercesaioD  de  lua  San-
tos, 7  adoraeion  de  las  imagenes,
porqae  ellos  diaen  qne  son  nuestraa
Hnacas,  y  tienen  aeerea  de  esto  algn-
nas  Tezee,  como  en  otras  eoeaa,  moehaa
ignorancias.-~Como  socedid  en  Tn
pneblo,  donde  avia  qnatro  imigenee  de
Santos,  y  mny  buenaa  de  la  voeaclon
de  qnatro  Cofradias,  7  ae  averignd,
qne  algunoa  no  se  aneomendaran  a
aqnelloa  Santoa,  ni  lea  haslan  oracion,
porqne  deiian,  qne  aqnellos  Santos,  7a
eran  soyoe,  y  ellos  los  avian  comprado,
y  ami  iran  a  otro  pneblo  a  viaitar
otroB  Santos,  por  las  razonee  contra-

"The  "Pn-tn-tu"  is  also  used  dur-
ing a  lunar  eclipse  and,  in  general,  as
a  signal  of  warning  in  any  oceorrenee
or  phenomenon  that  Inspires  awe  or
fear  to  tbe  Indian  of  Bolivia.  We
had  no  almanac  at  Challa  and  none
conld  be  procured  far  or  near,  to  we
were  not  aware  beforehand  of  the
lunar  eclipse  of  March  10,  1805,  and
could  not  witness  the  earemonials
which  the  Indians  ma7  have  per-
formed, but  the  sound  of  the  pntutu
disturbed  na.  Shouting  and  beating
of  dmme,  eoneh-ibella  and  trompeta
of  clay  and  copper,  et«.,  took  the
place  of  tbe  cow-horn  in  primitive
timea.  80  in  tbe  caee  of  eetlpsea.  Ar-
riaga: SaUrfooion,  Cap.  n,  p. 38:


;obyGoO(^lc


150


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


"Lo  que  TsaTan  ftDtiKnunente  en  loi
ElipMa  de  la  Iitina,  qD«  llMnan  Qni-
Li.utHUAi}Dni(  la  Luna  m  moere,  o
QuiLLA  ToTATAN,  ]a  LniiB  M  eHCoreee
vaan  tambiea  aora,  a^tando  loa  per*
toa,  tocando  tambores,  7  dando  gritoa
|>ar  todo  «1  pueblo,  paia  qne  reandte
la  Inna  .  .  .  tocanan  trompetaa,  cot-
Comentarioi,  foL  4S;  "AI  eclypse  de
la  lona  .  .  .  toeauan  trompetaa,  cor-
netai,  caracoles,  atabalea,  7  atambores,
J  quaatOB  iostrumentoe  podian  auer
que  bisiessen  nijdo;  atanan  loB  perros
giandea  7  chico^  dauaulea  muchos
palos  para  que  aullaBsen,  7  llamaHBeu

7Bupa7  is  a  Qoichua  term  for  evil
qiiritB  collectivel7,  but  aD7  demon  or
fiend  ia  Supa7  also.  As  little  as  the
Indians  had  007  conception  of  a  su-
preme Qod,  as  little  did  tbe7  hare  a
notion  of  a  supreme  devil.')

"I  cannot  And  tbii  word  in  Bar-

"ZuHi  Fetiehea,  p.  9.

"  It  would  cany  me  entir^  too
far,  were  I  to  enter  into  a  discnsaion
of  tbia  queation.  That  both  sun  and
moon  were  looked  upon  as  created  be-
inga  resnlta  from  every  tradition  or
so-called  creation  myth  as  reported  in
the  sixteenth  centur7.  Compare,  for
instance,  Cieia:  Segunda  Parte  de  la
CrSniea  del  Petii,  Cap.  t,  pp.  a  and  6,
and  Cap.  ZZX,  p.  119;  Betaoios:
Buma  y  NarraoUm,  Cap.  I,  pp.  1  and  2 ;
Santillan:  fielooton,  p.  13;  Eelaeion  de
tat  oottntnbres  antig^iat  de  los  Natu-
rolM  del  Pirti,  of  about  I61S,  and
anonTmona;  Tree  Eelaeionet  de  Jn-
Ugitedadei  peruanaa,  p.  13S;  Oard-
lasBo  de  la  Vega:  Comeniariot,  I,  Lib.
n,  fol.  S5.  <  It  was  not  tbe  orba  to
which  a  certain  worship  waa  offered,
but  to  tbe  tpiriWal  heinga  thai  dwelt
in  IheiR,  to  tbe  Acbachilas,  Machulas
or  Pacarinas  believed  to  reside  both
in  the  sun  and  the  moon.  Sun-wor-
ship, so-called,  was  b7  no  means  gen-
eral, but  limited  to  the  Inca  of  Cnico,
Neither  did  these  look  npon  the  sun
as  the  supreme  God. It  was  one  of


the  fetiahea  most  applied  to,  but  not
for  ereTTthing.'^  In  this  respect  the
list  of  places  01  worahip  or  shrines,
at  Cuice  and  anrroundings,  given  by
Cobo  (Hiltorio,  IV,  pp.  7  to  47)  U
ver7  instructive,  Aniaga  (fxttrpo-
otem.  Cap.  u,  p.  11)  atatee:  "En
muchas  partes  (eepecialmente  de  la
nerra)  adoran  al  Sol,  con  nombre  de
Pnncbao,  que  signiflca  el  dia,  7  tam-
bien  debs  jo  de  an  propio  nombre
Ynti.— ¥  tabien  K  la  Luna,  que  ca
Quilla  ...  El  adorar  estaa  cosas  no
ea  todos  los  dias,  aino  el  tiempo  eeiia-
lado  para  bacerlas  fiestas,  7  caando  ee
ven  en  alguna  necesidad  6  enf  ermedad,
d  ban  de  hacer  algnn  camino,  levantan
las  manos,  7  se  tiran  las  cejas,  y  las
Boplan  hada  airiba,  hablando  con  d
Sol  6  con  Libiac,  Ilamandole  au  Haee-
dor,  7  81^  criador  7  pidiendo  qne  le
aTude."  (Pedro  Piiarro  waa  e7e-wit-
ness  of  the  ceremonials  at  Cuica,  and
states  that  the7  were  performed  dail7
in  tbe  square,  not  only  to  the  ann,  but
to  the  bodiea  of  their  dead  chiefs'
(Belocton,  p.  264).

It  ma7  not  be  inappropriate  to  add
here  that  Pedro  Gutierrex  de  Santa
Clara  {HiKtoria  de  laa  Guerraa  CMitiei
del  Peni,  111,  Cap.  LVI,  p.  48S)  states;
' '  En  toda  esta  tierra,  tamafio  como  ea, ,
que  los  Ittgas  sefiores  avian,  7  todos
los  Tndios  qne  en  ella  habitauan,  ado-
rauan  doa  diosee,  qne  el  vno  ae  deiia
Cons  7  el  otro  Pachacama,  como  a
dioses  prindpales;  y  por  aceeaorea
tenian  al  Sol  y  a  la  Luna  (diciendo)
qne  eran  marido  y  muger  7  que  estoa
eran  multiplicadores  de  toda  la  tierra;
bien  ea  verdad  qne  Cona  y  Pachacama
badan  estaa  operacione%  maa  qne  no
los  vian,  7  a  estoa  doa  af,  cada  dia  7
cada  noehe."  This  might  (if  true)
recall  the  "sun-fatber"  and  "moon-
mother"  of  the  New  Ueiico  pneblost

"While  both  son  and  moon  ere
"Acbachilas,"  among  tbe  A7niari,
tbe  fetishes  chiefly  applied  to  wars
(and  are)  the  tall  peaks  of  the  Ad-
deo.  This  wne  also  the  ease  in  tliosa
■actions of Pern where the 111DW7'


;cbyG00'^lc


TEE  INDIANa  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 151


moonttiiia  firs  of  grMt  beiglit  uid
itrikiiig  fippearajicB.  Aiao  in  Ecuador.
Bttaeio*  keclta  par  mi.  Fray  0«rwitmo
d«  AgMar,  dt  la  Dotnna  jr  Pit«bIo  d»
CagnoMqiki  y  QuUca,  etiu,  1582,  in  Bel.
gtQgrdficaa,  III,  p.  126:  "Los  ritoi  j
ceremoiiiaB  que  tenian  MrtoB  natnralM
J  loa  dfl  Qnilcfi  «a  el  tiempo  de  m
infldelidad,  adonban  a!  cielo  j  6  loa
eerroa  m4a  altoa  y  aevosoa;  hadan
Mcrifieio  de  mail  bianco,"  etc  Fraj
Jnao  de  Pai  Maldonado:  Belaeion  del
Puthlo  de  8ant-Andret  Xuiuei  (no
date,  bnt  from  tlie  latter  part  of  the
aixteentti  eentnij).  Ibidem,  p.  ISl;
"Kl  dicho  volcan  del  Chimbaraio  esti
derte  poeblo  nna  legoa  y  media;  aalen
dfl  trcB  6  enatro  arrojoa  de  agua  qne
Qeran  dlferentca  rlaa.  Y  alrededor
dd,  al  pi£  de  la  niere,  baj  ho?  dia
algnnoB  ediflcios  eaidoe,  donde  acndia
toda  la  tiwre  alrededor  i  ofreeer  .  .  .
Keen  los  indioe  que  el  volcan  del
ChimboTuo,  es  el  Taron,  y  el  de  Ton-
gnregua  ee  la  hembra,  j  que  m  comn-
niean  yendo  Chinboraxo  4  tot  i  en
mnger  j  la  mugei  al  marido,  j  qne
tienen  eoa  ajnmtamieiitoa  .  .  .  En  lo
que  adoran  m  en  el  Sol  7  en  la  Luna
7  en  eetoa  diclioa  do*  voleanea. ' '  An-
tonio Bello  Oayoao;  Selacio*  qite  enbio
a  maiidar  «w  Mageitad  h  kiMiete  detta
CUidad  de  Cuenca  ji  de  toda  fu  Pro-
vinoia,  1581,  Ibidem,  p.  179:  "Adon-
ban  b1  sol  7  la  Inna,  7  en  particalaT
algonoe  adoiaban  en  laa  lagnnaa  7  en
cerroB  BcGaladoa. ' '

Similar  teatiDion7  eonld  be  addnced
from  almoet  ereiy  part  of  Pern,  but
it  would  be  too  Tolnminona.  The  qaea-
tion  is  as  to  the  Inca  of  Cusco,  and
in  thia  respect  the  writings  of 'CriaUS-
val  de  Holin£^  ^Fablee  and  Bitee  of
Ute  Ineae)  are  Ter7  iutereeting.  Like
Pedro  PiEBTTO  (note  96),  Vhe  states
that  the  fetishes  of  the  son,  of  thnnder
and  lightning,  were  alwa7S  worsbiped
together  (pp.  16,  20,  21,  24,  etc),  at
least  in  the  pnblic  square.^  Cieia
(Segwnda  Parte,  p.  40)  professes  to
give  the  fipprozimate  text  of  an  invo-
cation, in  which  the  head-chief  was


addressed  as  follows:  "Ob  Inca
graude  7  poderoso,  el  Sol  7  la  Luna,
la  Tierra,  los  montes  7  los  firbolee,  las
piedras  7  toa  padres  te  guarden  de
infortonio  7  hagan  pr^spero,"  etc
The  Bvtocion  de  lot  eottumbrei  an-
tiguoM  de  lot  nalumkt  del  FiHi,  pp.  137
to  140,  although  not  Ter7  reliable,
ahonld  also  be  considered.  V  Even  Oar-
dlaaso  de  la  Tega  inTolnntarily  admits
that  the  Inca  wonhiped  inntunerable
fetishes.  ^  Comentario*  I,  foL  75;
"Too  de  los  priudpalBS  idoloe  Q  los
Be7es  Ineas  7  sns  vasallos  tnuieron,
fne  la  Imperial  dndad  el  Coaco,  ^  la
adorauan  loe  Tndioe  como  cosa  sa-
grada."  Beaidea  the  sun  (to  which
he  of  eoDTM  aaaigns  the  flrst  place),
he  mentiana  (foL  70  et  teq.)  the
fetishes  of  the  moon  and  of  several
stare,  of  thunder  and  lightning,  and
of  the  rainbow.  Finally  he  gives  an
explanation  of  the  term  "huaca"  that
is  exactly  the  Achaehila  colt  as  we
found  it  among  the  Aymaii  (fols.  29
and  30).  Ee  says;  "laa  muchaa,  y
dinersas  signifleaciones  qne  tiene  este
nombre  Huftea :  el  qoal  .  .  .  quiere
dezir  ydolo,  como  Jupiter,  Marte,
TenuB."  It  would  be  too  long  to
quote  the  remainder  of  Chapter  it,
Book  II,  in  which  he  ennmeratea  tha
manifold  objects  to  which  the  name
was  given.  The  dearest  and  most
positive  statement,  however,  is  found
In  Arriaga:  ExtiTpaoion,  Cap.  n,  bnt
it  is  also  too  lengthy  to  be  incorpo-
rated here.

The  fact  that  the  Aymari  of  the
Bolivian  Puna  and  Lake  badn  re-
garded as  their  prindpal  fetishes  the
snnuiuts  (strongly  individualized)  of
the  Andes,  repeatedly  mentioned  (De«-
cripdon  y  Belaeion  de  la  Ciudad  de
La  Pae,  p.  71);  "Hay  otra  adoracion
que  se  llftma  Hillftntamna  [Tllimani,
properly  Hilanmani],  quea  una  sierra
alta  cabierta  de  nieves  qne  perpetoa-
mente  se  hscen,"  etc  Speaking  of
the  Indians  of  Pucaranl,  a  village
situated  south  of  the  Lt^e  and  be-
tween it  and  La  Pas,  Fray  Antonio


;cbyG00'^lc


152


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


de  Ib  CalanolM  (CorAiiea  ItorMaada,
J,  Lib.  on,  Cmp.  zm,  p.  867)  wts:
"Lofl  Idolo*  qne  ftdotatun  eatoa  Indio*
ttwa  lot  fronteiiiM  eerroa  uerados,
daudo  maa  adoraeion  al  qae  tenia  mu
alteza.  En  loa  que  gastavan  maa  aa-
erifcioe,  i  eetremavaii  el  ealto  era  en  el
ceTTO  Tlliypflni  Collcachata,  i  en  el  xuba
frontero  del  paeblo  llamado  Cacaaea,
Mte  por  m  lany  eminente  i  eatar
riampre  uevado,  fae  mnj  Tenerado  de
todoa  loa  deata  proTinda  de  OmasoTO,
en  eatoa  cerroa  lea  dava  reepoeataa  el
Demonio,  i  enw  continaoB  aoa  oraeu-
loB."  OmasaToa  ia  the  district  to
wliich  CopacBTana  pertained  and  per-
tains to-day,  hence  the  statementa  of
Calaneha  applj  dlreetlj  to  the  Indiana
of  the  Islands.  I  woold  alao  otMerre
that  on  the  Island  we  heard  the  name
Illimani  applied  to  the  peaks  o(  80-
ntal  Ttaj  are  certainlj  the  moat
prominent  pointa  of  the  Cordillera  as
wen  from  Titicaca  and  eepeelally  f rom
Eoati,  whereas  Illimani  is  onljr  Tisible
at  a  few  points  and  at  a  great  dis-
tance. The  Earka-Jaqne  (Ka-Ka-
a-Ea,  or  Hnajna  Potwrf)  is  quite
prominent  also,  thongh  not  as  much  as
the  Hanko-TTma  (nUunpn)  »nd
Hilampi  (Hanko-Eonii),  the  twin
peaks  of  the  Borata  chain.  From
statements  hj  Miguel  Cabello  de  Bal-
boa (JftwMMnM  ontAarttAi,  IS86,
U88.,  at  the  Lenox  Branch,  New  Tork
Pnblio  Library)  andfF.  Bamos  aaTilan\
{Hittoria  del  eeltbre  y  mHagTOto  Ban-
tmtrio  de  la  Tniigne  Tmagen  de  Nfti
8Hi^  Capaeavma,  Uma,  1621,  Cap.
ii),lit  might  be  inferred  that  the
adoption,  hj  the  loot,  of  the  eon-
father  as  a  anperiof  fetish,  occmred
abont  four  or  live  eentnries  prerions
to  the  eonqaeat.^  I  hope  to  treat  this
matter  in  a  special  paper,

"Called  "soUu"  in  cnrrent  speech.
The  proper  signiflcation  is  the  fetus
of  an  abortion.  Bertonio:  Fooohrio-
rio,  H,  p.  327:  "Abortiuo,  mal  pa-
rido."  In  Qniehna  it  is  clearer  jet.
Torres  Babio;  ^rfs  y  Vooalmlario,
toL  100: "Cosa  abortada."  The  nee


of  the  anHa  of  a  pig  is,  of  eoiuM^
poet-conqniatoriaL

"Called  "nntn."  A  common  offer-
ing in  primitiTe  times.  Arriaga:  E%-
tirpaoion.  Cap.  iv,  p.  26;  "Bira,  qoe
ea  aebo  de  loa  Cameros  de  la  tierm
ea  tambien  ofrendfu"  "Biia,"  or
"vira,"  ia  the  Qnichua  term.

'"They  nse  the  term  "afanilita,"
from  the  Spanish  "abnelita."  Also
aometimea  ' '  ahnichn. "

"'The  translation  of  theae  inroea*
tione  ia  not  literal.

*"  Bamoa:  Sittoria,  p.  72,  edition  of
1860:  "Era  eoatombre  maj  eomnn
eutre  eatas  gentea  el  jnntar  &  loe  ago-
reroB,  para  que  despnea  de  tomar  aa
ehicha,  coca  y  otraa  neeedadea,  dedg-
nasen  el  lugar  j  la  flgnra  de  la  easa
6  ehoca  que  penaaban  haeer.  Miraban
al  aire,  eeenehaban  pfijaroe,  eomo  an»-
picea,  inrocaban  &  ana  lares  6  al  de-
monio, eon  cantarea  tristei^  al  eon  de
tamborilea  deetempladoB:  j  prouosti-
cando  el  buen  6  mal  anceso  empeiabaa
la  constmccion,  poniendo  A  Teeea  coca
maaeada  en  el  dmimto  j  aoa  aaperjtoa
de  ehicha  .  .  .  Alin  ahora  no  ban  aea-
bado  de  perder  esaa  abnsianea  al  fabri>
car  SOS  casitaa ;  pnee  dempre  angnraa
4  su  modo,  echan  su  ch^^^^^  6  aguar-
diente por  lo«  rinconea^  festejan  an
conelnsion  eon  regular  bomehera  j
■oe  eonseenencias. "  Arriaga,  Sxtir-
paoion,  p.  37:  "En  hazer  ana  Caaaa
denen  come  en  todas  laa  demas  eoeas
mnchaa  anperaticiones,  eombidando  de
ordinario  a  loa  de  en  Ayllo,  roeian  ttat
ehicha  loa  cimientos  como  ofreeiendola,
J  sacriflcandola  para  que  no  ae  eaigan
las  paredes,  y  deepaee  de  heeha  la  casa
tambien  la  aaperjan  eon  la  miama
ehicha."  Bee  also:  'miagomes:  Carta
paitorat  de  Exortaoion  «  tnttrweetoii
oontra  Uu  Idolatriaa  de  loa  wdiot  del
Argobitpado  de  Lima,  1641,  foL  47.
He  copiea  Arriaga  teztnaDj.

**  Arriaga,  Bxtirpaoion,  Cap.  n,  p.
11:  "A  Mamapaeha,  qne  ee  la  tiena
tambien  revereneian  eapedalmente  laa
mujeres,  al  tiempo,  que  ban  de  aem-
brar,  7  hablan  con  ella  didendo  qM


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 153


k»  a  boena  ecaeeha,  j  Atimnun  por
«ao  dueba,  j  mail  moUdo,  6  por  m
mano,  6  por  medio  de  los  heehisenM."
Tiltagomei;  Bxortacion,  p.  39.  Fer-
nando de  SantiDaii:  Belaoion  del  OH-
gen  Dtiomd«iK)ia,  ete^  p.  81:  "£3
Mcrifleio  qoe  hadaii  k  la  tuna  no  era
tan  ordinario  bI  en  tanta  cantidad,
Coando  eafan  maloe,  en  aqnel  Ingar
dedau  que  U  tiena  eataba  enojada,  j
derramaban  ehieha  j  qoemaban  ropa
para  aplaearia.  Tenian  4  la  tierra  por
wipedal  abogada  de  laa  mnjerea  qae
mtin  de  paito,  7  mando  habian  de
parir,  le  ^  »'■'«"  •acrifleioi. ' '  Polo  de
Oadegardo:  Belaeiojt  da  lot  fnada-
mentot  aeeroa  dtfl  rotable  daHo  que
Tuuita  dt  no  puardar  d  lot  indio*  tuf
/uero*,  June  26,  1571  IDoe.  d«  Induu,
Xrn,  p.  S3):  "e  otroa  <^e  la  hieieaen
■1  Pachamama  para  que  jnatiflcase  la
tierra  al  tiempo  que  se  eembraTa. ' '

*"  Cbieflj  the  bear.  The  prtaent
■hspe  of  the  fetish  in  Bolivia— a  cow
or  bnll— 18,  of  eoorae,  modem.

*"  Thia  sqaatting  poatnre  of  the  In-
diana is  well  deeeribed  bj  Cobo:  Hit-
toria  d«l  Nuevo  Uundo,  IV,  p.  174.

"QDinloI  ia  of  conrae  a  Spaniah
word.  The  Indiana  use  it,  In  their
ineantationj,  to  deaignate  aaj  verj
large  quantitr,  nndetermined.

""The  incantation  took  place  on
tbe  si^t  of  Jannaij  27,  1805,  after
ten  o'clock.

Id  times  anterior  to  the  arrivml  of
the  Spaniards  it  waa  alao  the  eostom,
when  the  food  offered  to  the  idols  waa
bnrned,  for  those  present  to  remain
motionless,  with  heads  bowed,  so  as
not  to  see  the  process  believed  to  go
□n— that  of  eating,  hj  the  spirits.
Pedro  Pixarro  (Selaeion  del  Deto»-
brtnii«nto,  p,  265)  deB«ribM  as  followa
the  e«reinanial  attending  the  offering
to  a  fetiah  which  he  calls  that  of  the
■on:  "nn  bolto  peqneBo  tapado  qne
deelan  qae  era  et  Bol.' '— ' '  Al  Elol
tenian  pnesto  en  mitad  de  la  plasa
nn  eaeafio  peqncAo,  todo  gnameddo  de
mantas  de  pluma  muj  pintadaa  7
maj delicadaa, 7 aqoi ponian aste


bolto,  J  el  nn  hachaco  de  ana  parte  7
el  otro  de  la  otra.  Teniendo  laia
hachas  dereehas  pnei^  daban  de  comer

6  este  Sol  por  la  drden  que  tengo
dieha  la  daban  k  los  mnertoe,  7  da
beber.  Poes  cnando  qaemaban  la
comida  al  Sol  levant4baae  nn  indlo  7
dalM  nna  toi  que  todos  le  oian ;  7  oida
la  TOs  todos  eoantos  habia  en  la  [daia

7  faera  de  ella  qne  la  oian,  ee  senta-
ban  7  sin  hablar  ni  tooer  ni  menearse
estaban  eallados  haata  que  se  aonsoniia
la  comida,  qne  eeliabaji  en  el  fnego
que  tenian  heebo,  qae  no  tardaba
mucho  por  aer  la  lella  ma7  seca."
This  was  a  dail?  function  in  the
square  of  Ciueo.  PiEairo  witnessed
it  hinuelf,  and  a  nnmber  of  times.
It  ia  fnndamentallj  tbe  same  as  the
command  given  to  ns  by  the  t^'bthbti
to  retire  while  the  Aehaehilaa  were
"eating,"

*"  The  apachitas  or  apachetas  (also
written  apachectaa)  are  very  common
in  the  mountains,  especially  on  monn-
tain  passes.  Oareilaaso  saya  of  them
(Comentario*,  I,  fol.  SB):  "y  aad
hiego  qua  auian  enbido  la  eneeta,  se
deseargauan,  y  al^ando  los  ojos  al
eieb,  y  basandolca  al  snelo,  7  ha-
dendo  laa  miamaa  oatentaeionee  de  ado-
racion,  qne  atrfia  diximos  para  nSbrar  al
Paehaeamac,  repetian  doe  tree  veses
el  datino  Apaeheeta,  y  en  ofrenda  se
tiranan  de  las  eejaa,  7  que  arancaasen
algnn  pelo,  6  no,  lo  soplaoan  bacia  el
delo,  y  echauan  la  yema  Uamada
Cnea  que  llenaoan  en  la  boea,  que
elloB  tanto  preedan,  como  diEiendo
que  le  of  resdan  lo  raas  presdado  qae
llmanan,  y  k  mas  no  poder,  ni  tenei
otra  coaa  mayor,  ofrescian  algon
paliQo,  6  algunas  pajuelaa,  si  las  ba-
Qauan  por  all!  cecca,  y  no  las  ba-
llando,  ofrescian  algun  gnijarro,  7
donde  no  lo  ania,  echauan  vn  puDado
de  tierra,  7  destaa  ofrendaa  aula
grandee  montonea  en  laa  cumbrea  de
laa  oueetas."  Arriaga:  S«tirpamii»,
p.  37 :  "  Cosa  mn7  vaada  era  antigna-
mente,  y  aoia  no  lo  ea  menoa,  qaando
auben  algonaa  caastas  o  Cerroa,  o  se


;cbyG00'^lc


154


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


cftuftn  en  d  eamiiio,  llwftndo  a  AlffnuA
piedrs  gTftnde,  que  tieaen  ja  eeCaladn
para  este  efeeto,  eacnpir  eobre  ella  (j
por  esBo  Uamftn  i  erta  piedrm,  j  &
e«ta  ceremonia  Toeaoca)  Coca,  6  maiz
maacado  otraa  vezet  dexan  alii  las
Tjuta%  6  eal^do  viejo,  o  la  Hnaraea

6  TXiaB  Mignillaw  Q  ntajiozilloB  d6
hieho,  o  paza,  o  poueu  otna  piediae
peouellas  encuna,  y  con  eoto  dii!fl"j
qne  m  lea  qnita  el  eansando.  A  e«toa
montoDcillo*  de  piedra  nieleii  llamar,
cotTompieDdo el vocablo, Apachitaa,

7  dizen  algnnM,  qne  loa  acloran,  7  no
Mu  aino  laa  piedraa  qae  an  ido  amon-
tonando  eon  eeta  ■aperetieion,  ofre-
ciendoles  a  qnien  lea  quita  el  ean-
■ancio  7  le  B7nda  &  llerar  la  csrga
que  esM  M  Apacheta  ..."  Tha
apachetaa,  therefore,  are  aeenmala-
tiona  of  prayer  offeringB  made  to  a
■pirit  euppoaed  to  reaide  at  the  placs
where  they  are  raiaed.

"  If  I  freqaentl7  alliide  to  sneh
analogies,  it  ia  withoat  the  alightest
Ideaof  tracing  relationohipa.  Similar-
ity or  even  identity  of  eoatomB  ia  not
nifficient  to  prove  original  connection.

"■Thia  belief,  common  to  the
A7mar&  of  Bolivia,  bIbo  existed,  and
probabl7  exist*  to-da7,  among  the
Qnichoa.  Oarcilaaso:  CometitaHo*  (I,
foL  77):  "Uaman  al  arcs  CDTOHO,
y  con  tanerlo  en  esta  veneradon,
qnando  le  veTan  ea  el  ayre,  cenaoan
la  boca,  7  poniau  la  mano  delante,
porqne  dedan,  que  ai  te  deocubrian
loB  dientes,  loa  gaatanan  y  empodre-
cian."  Cobo:  HutoHo  (lY,  p.  149):
"Tambien  tenian  por  mal  agiiero  7
qne  era  para  morir  6  para  algon  otio
dailo  grave,  euando  vian  el  Arco  del
Cido,  7  4  vecea  por  buen  pron6fltieo.
Bevsrendabaulo  macho  y  no  le  oeaban
miiar,  6  ya  que  le  miraban,  no  lo
osaban  apontar  con  el  dedo,  euten-
diendo  que  se  morir&n;  y  &  aqnella
parte  donde  lea  pareda  que  caia  el
pi£  del  arco,  la  tenian  por  lugar  hor-
rendo  y  toneroso,  entendiendo  que
habia  alU  alguna  Onaea  6  otra  eoaa
digna  do  temor  y  revereneia."


""The  AehaAQaa  are  also  the"  pae-
earinaa"  or  ancestor!  of  a^n  and
tribea.  In  regard  to  the  New  Mezieo
pnebloB,  compare  Final  Beport,  I,
p.  312.

""The  baptismal  name  "Santiago"
BO  common  in  Mexico  and  New
Mexico,  is  seldom  met  In  Bolivia
among  Indians,  whereas  Diego  is
heard  very  frequently.  See  Arriaga:
Sxtirpaeion,  p.  83;  Idem:  Conttit*'
eione*  qve  d«xa  el  viiitador  mi  Id*
putbltu,  p.  130.

*"  This  is  a  very  ancient  belief  and
connected  with  some  of  the  earliest

"*Z«fH  Fetickw,  p.  9.

"  Cobo :  HiMtoria,  IT,  p.  149 :
"Cnando  olan  eantar  Lechnza^  Bnhoa
6  otraa  aves  eztralias,  le  tenian  por  mal
agiiero  y  pmagio  de  su  muerte  6  de
la  de  sua  hijos  6  vecinoB  7  particalar-
mente  de  la  de  aqnel  en  cnya  caaa  6
Ingar  cantaban  6  anllaban."  About
the  use  made  of  the  owl  to-day  for  cer-
tain Indian  witchcraft  practices,  in-
formation wiU  be  imparted  in  a  anfaoe-
quent  work.

"  Cobo :  Hittoria,  TV,  p.  149 :
"Item,  cnando  otan  eantar  al  Bniae-
fior  6  at  Sirguero,  lo  tenian  por  pro-
n6atieo  de  que  habian  da  renir  c<m
algonos."

'"Saeriflcea  of  guinea-pigs  were
common  In  Pern  before  the  eonqnest,
aa  is  generally  stated  by  earlier  an-
thoTS.  Cieza:  Begunda  Parte,  pp.
116,  119;  Belaeion  de  la  Seligion  y
Silos  iel  Ferv,  heeJia  por  lot  prime-
rot  Beligiotoi  Agiutwot  que  aUi
patavKm  para  la  oonrertum  de  loa
naturotM,  in  Poo.  de  India*,  m,  pp.
21,  29,  30,  H  <*  •«9-;  Qardlasso:
Comentarva,  I,  foL  34.  Arriagn:
jEztirpooion,  Cap,  iv,  p.  24:  "H  8«-
eriflcio  ordinario  es  de  Cnyee,  de  lo«
qnales  se  sirren  mal,  no  aolo  pais
sacrifldos,  sino  para  adlnnar  por
ellos,  y  para  enrar  eon  elloa  eon  mil
embnatea."  Cap.  m,  p.  19:  "Eaea*
rienc,  o  Cnyricnc,  es  el  que  mira
enyes,  y  abriendolea  con  la  vlia  adi-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 155


liitm  por  ello«,  mirsndo  da  que  parte
sale  Huigre,  o  que  parte  w  menea  de
lu  attmUa."  I  refrain  from
further  qootatioiu.

""The  Btory  of  the  "earbiuele-eat"
on  the  Island  U  told  by  MTwal  an-
tbora,  Angoatine  monki^  from  the  be-
ginning of  the  aeranteenth  eeatnrj.
Bamoe:  Hutoria  de  CopaotAa*a,  p.
10:  "Porqae  dieen  loe  indioe  que  en
tieoipoe  pasadoe  ee  Ti6  en  U  pe&a  nu
gato  eon  gran  reaplendor,  paeandoae
en  ella  ordinariamente  •  .  .  pndiera
■er  qne  el  tal  gato  fnese  el  animal
Uamado  Carbtmco,  qne  loe  de  Onamieo
diMn  haber  Tisto  algnnos  de  elloe  por
el  resplendor  qne  deopiden  de  noehe
eon  la  pledra  earlmneo  6  Bubl,"  etc.
Calaneha  (  Cordaiaa  If  omliaoda,  1 1,  Lib.
I,  Cap,  n)  eopie*  textnall^.  Fr.  Andrte
de  8.  Nicolaa  (Irndgen  de  li:8:  (U
Copaeaoama,  foL  28)  farlea  iomewliat
from  Bamoe  hj  stating;  "ae  belni6  t
dexar  ver  en  ignn  de  gato  m6UeL,
eorriendo  por  O,  y  deBpidieodo
feego. ' '  Whether  a  dti  or  wildcat  of
wwtem  and  northern  Bolivia,  nich  as
oecanonallj  infurt  the  Peninsula  of
CopacavaDa,  could  erosa  the  straits
of  Yamputata  swimming  I  do  not
attempt  to  disenss.  While  the  idea
of  a  "earbnnele"  is  eertainly  a  Enro-
pean  modifleation,  the  story  of  awild-i
eat  appearing  on  the  Saered  Boek]
appe«n  to  be  primitive  and  might
have,  together  with  the  eavitiee  en  the
rock  resembling  eats'  heads,  contrib-
uted to  the  name  of  the  Island.

"■This  enatom  appears  to  be  an-
cient Arriaga:  Sxtirpaoion,  Cap.  tu,
p.  196:  "Paeharicnc,  o  Pacbaeatlc,
o  I^cbaenc,  as  otro  adlvina  por  loa
pies  de  vnas  arafias,  que  Uaman  Pae-
cha,  J  tambien  Oroeo,  y  son  mny
grandee  y  pelndaa.  <^iando  le  eon-
tnltan  para  algnna  com,  va  a  boacar
en  loB  agngeroa  de  las  [wredea,  o  de-
bezo  de  algnsas  piedras,  vna  de  estas
arsilBi,  CU7B  eepecie  es  eonocida,  7
poniendola  sobre  nna  manta,  o  en  el
■oek),  la  penrigue  eon  vn  palillo,  haata
-que  te  qniebran  tos  pies,  y  Inego  mira


que  pies  6  manos  le  faltan,  7  por  alii
ndinina."  See  also  Cobo:  BMoria,
IV,  p.  134.  We  saw  no  large  spiders
on  the  lalanda,  but  at  Atanallani,
cloae  to  tbe  upper  base  of  Illimani,  a
small  Mygale  was,  together  with  cen-
tipedea,  not  nnfreqiieatl7  taken  ovt  of
andent  graves  bj  017  wife.

"*  In  regard  to  raln-makiiig  it  Is
evident  that  the  ceremonials  aecom-
panning  it  are  primitive,  that  is,  pre-
Columbian,  with  some  modifleations
brought  about  bj  contact  (aod  pro-
hibition also)  since  the  conquest.  Tbe
tenacit7  with  which  the  Indian  dung
end  clings  to  his  original  rites  and
ceremouiea  indncea  him,  when  these
are  to  be  anpereeded  b7  strange  onee,
to  adapt  them,  within  limits,  to  tbe
latter.  About  original  pmetiees  of
rain-making  I  And  so  far  hardly  any
detailed  statements  eicept  in  Catan-
cha  (Confntea  UomliModa,  I,  p.  867),
and  tbe  directions  contained  In  Ar-
riaga:  Extirpamon,  p.  80,  for  qnee-
tioning  sorcerers:  "Decimoaexto:  Qne
Hnaca  adoran  para  que  el  mali  ereiea
bien,  7  no  ae  coma  de  gusano,  de  qne
lagnnaa  traen  eantaros  de  agua  para
rociar  la  chacara,  7  pedir  Uuvia,  a
que  lagnnas  tiran  piedras  para  qne
no  se  eecan,  7  veng&n  lluvias. ' '  Com-
pare also,  for  the  practices  when
dronth  had  set  in,  and  807  Indian,
male  or  female,  was  auspected  of
having  prevented  rain  b7  committing
■ome  offense— probabl7  evil  ndtcfa-
eraft,  as  among  the  pueblos -f-San-
tillan:  fielocitm^Vtc,  p.  38.

"And  one  of 'their  own,  tbns  far
unstudied.  It  ma7  prove  to  be  some
dialect

■"I  treat  more  in  detail  of  the
CallahuaTa  in  a  subaeqnent  volume  on

'"Mnfieeas  is  inhabited,  in  Its
southern  parts,  by  ATmari,  in  the
north  b7  QuichnaL  The  CallahnaTB
live  In  the  village  of  Corva  near  Cha-
rs ssanL

"Taebudi  Ba7B  it  is  Fetit  parOali*
(the  ocelot). Die  KttAua  Spraehe,


;cbyG00'^lc


156


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


WdrterbwA,  p.  108.  Bertanio  (Voaa-
bvlarva  1612,  II,  p.  383)  hu  "Ttu-
EUNocA,  I ;  Timmiooo.— Tigw.  • '
HflDM  the  word  luui,  from  tbe  QokbnA
of  lonthem  Pern,  penetrated  into  the
northweetem  Ajmaxk.  Cobo  (HUto*
ria,  U,  p.  339)  ealla  the  tiirr«
(jaguar)  ntumnen.  AcoBta  (EUtoria
natural  y  moral  de  India*,  edition  of
1608,  p.  279)  ealU  the  ant-eater  "oto-
roneo."  The  nse  of  the  "ntnmnca"
in  aboriginal  medidoe  ia  ancient.

*"  Tillagomei  (Baataeion,  foL  41)
■aya:  "Annque  aon  raroa  laa  qae
matan  eon  heehiaos."  Bat  Arriaga
(^SxtirpoMon,  p.  21)  deeeribea  a  elaaa
of  Borcerera  who  killed  by  sucking
the  blood  of  the  peiaon,  at  night
(▼ampirea),  and  1878  the7  were  nn-
merooB  at  hia  time  and  did  a  great
deal  of  harm:  "Dice  el  Cnra  de  vn
poeblo  que  pocoa  aiioa  antes  ATian
muerto  dentro  de  qnatro  m«MB,  maa
de  Betenta  muehachoB  de  doM  i  dies
y  echo  afioo,  y  de  eatoa  i  tub  muger
en  Tna  aemaua  qoatro  hijoa,  j  ^  aora
que  ee  avian  deacnbierto  eatoe  male-
fieioB  aoBpediava,  que  ellos  loa  avian
muarto,  por  que  no  aabia  de  que  en-
fermedad  morian."  Cobo  (Hittoria,
IT,  p.  ISl)  deacribea  an  act  of  mal-
feaaanee  through  witcbcraft  recalling
to  a  certain  extent  the  one  described
in  the  text;  "Fan  que  vinieee  i  mal
6  moHeM  £1  qne  aborredan,  veatian
eon  an  ropa  y  vestidos  alguna  eatatna
que  hadan  en  nombre  de  aqaella  per-
sona, y  la  maldedan  eolgandola  de
alto  y  escnpiendola ;  7  uimismo  ha-
dan eetatnae  peqnefiaa  de  eeta  6  de
barro  6  de  maaa  j  laa  ponian  en  el
fuego,  para  que  alii  bc  derritieae  la
cera,  6  ae  endnredeee  el  barro  y  maaa
6  hideae  otroa  efectoa  que  elloa  pre-
tendlan,  ereTendo  que  por  eate  modo
quedaban  veugadoa  y  hadan  mal  i
BUB  enemigoa."

'"  Compare  aketcfa  annexed  with  the
one  given  \yy  Salcamajhna:  Anti-
gHediadet  deste  Seyno  del  Pint,  p.  257,
plate.

"*  Intemperance  wot,  and  i^  one  of


the  worat  vieea  of  the  Indiana  of  the
Peravian  and  Boli*ian  monntaina.  It
ia  almoat  anperflnona  to  quote  on  the
BubJecL  I  limit  mTaelf  to  gOTom-
mental  and  ecelesiaatic  edieta  ieaned
against  the  abuse  of  intoxieating
drinks  (cMcha  especially)  t^  the  abo-
rigines. Ord«natuat  del  Feri,  Vice-
roy Toledo,  1575,  foL  129,  Ub.  U,
TiL  n,  Ord.  xviii.  CoaaUfooiimes
aimodale*  de  Lima,  1613,  p.  86.
Amopg  the  casea  which  are  not  to  be
absolved  in  confeaaion  by  prieata  but
are  reterred  for  the  prelate  is:  "De
loa  Eapallolea  qne  vendieren  diieha
de  aora  aola,  i  meselada  eon  yaea,  6
gnarapo  de  miel  de  pnrga  del  primer
barro  6  mosto."  CotuUUteioitet  tyno-
daUa,  1636,  p.  16,  Cap.  v.  In  primi-
tiTc  timea  every  one  of  the  nnmeroaa
feetivala  was  a  protracted  orgie  (aa
it  is  to-day).  Arriaga:  Extirpaoion,
p.  100:  "Pnee  qnitallea  laa  boiaebe-
raa,  que  son  las  qoe  crian,  fomentan,
y  conaervan  laa  Tdolatriaa. "  Jdam,
CmMtiUieione»,  etc.,  p.  131.
( "*  The  primitive  dancee  were,  ao  to
Bay,  weeded  out  in  conaeqaenea  of  the
strict  inveetigatiou  into  idolatry  in
Pern,  that  began  at  an  early  day  and
eulminated  in  the  metbodical  work
partly  directed  by  Arriaga  in  the
early  pert  of  the  eeventeenth  centiiry.
One  of  the  results  was,  to  eliminate
fiem  public  displaya  what  aeemed  of-
fenaive  to  Christian  ideas  and  to  gen-
eral propriety.  Thia  reduced  some  of
these  dances,  at  least,  to  harmleaa
diversions  in  appearance.  Whether,
in  primitive  timee^  there  were  dancea
that  were  not  ritoaliatic,  is  donbtfuL
I  incline  to  the  belief  that  every
choreographic  performance  waa  a
eeremouiaL  TArriaga  (f^rpoeio*  p.
46)  ia  of  the  same  opinion:  "Qnando
les  avian  haxer  eataa  fleataa  todos  ea-
tendian,  que  no  avia  maliriw  en  eUa%
rino  que  eran  ana  regodjos,  y  danqaa
antignaa  y  qnando  mueho,  que  era  vna
vana  saperatieion,  en  que  no  avift
mucho  que  reparar."  That  all  tbe
dancea  were  accompanied  by  e


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 157


libationa,  wMeh  were  also  religions
acts,  is  stated  (p.  46):  "Pero  en  lo
qua  an  tenido  mnclioa  major  deaeniclo,
7  remiBaion  ee  en  coiueotiT,  7  diidniD-
lar  fua  borachonui,  7  laa  juntas  quo
baien  pais  eilaa,  eepedalmente  en  Isa
miAffai,  one  llntnan  pan  hoier  ma
eliaoraa,  o  eaaaa.  Porqae  e«  eraa  tnnj
nada  liuer  todo  lo  que  hazen  por  via
de  comnnidad.  Y  la  Tnion  de  ertaa
juntaa  ea  ri«iiipTo  el  berer  haata  eaer,
7  de  tal  madre,  de  mas  de  loa  in-
esetoB,  eatmpoa,  j  otraa  mncbaa  tor-
peeaa,  k  proeodido  riempre  U  Ydola-
tria  en  loa  aiglos  pasBdoa."  Wo  have
not  seen  a  single  dance  that  was  not
ilTmboUe^  althoQgh  probabljr  0017  the
medicine-men  (who  are  always  pres-
ent, though  not  notioed  b7  the  simple
sptetator,  since  there  are  no  exterior
tokniB  17  which  the7  might  be
known) know their original aigBi£-

"The  nae  of  plimiage  in  dances  is
primitive;  onl/  the  shape  of  the  head-
onuunenta  has  changed.  The  hat,  for
inatane<^  is  modern.  The  color  of  the
plnmage  is  that  of  the  BoUrian  tri-
color, bnt  this  is  bronght  abont  also
bj  the  prevalence  of  the  colors  in  the
larger  parrot  plnmes  in  use.

•^  Cobo  (_Hi*tona,  IV,  pp.  228  and
229)  gives  the  most  detailed  descrip-
tion of  ancient  mnsieal  instromenta  in
Pern  and  Bolivia:  "Tenian  para  ello
mnehoa  inatnunentoa  mfisieos,  los
cnales  nnnea  tocaban  sine  en  los
bailee  7  borracheras,  7  todos  hsdnn
el  son  poeo  suave,  7  menos  artifieioBO,
pnes  qnalqniera  que  ae  pooe  k  toear-
los,  i  la  primeia  lecdon  qneda  maes-
tro. El  instrnmento  mia  general  es  el
atambor,  que  elloa  llantan  Ha&near;
badanloB,  grandes  7  peqaefloe,  de  nn
palo  hneeo  tapado  por  ambos  cabos
eon  caero  de  Llama,  come  pergamino
delgado  7  seeo.  Loe  majorea  son
eomo  nneetras  eajas  de  gaerra,  pero
maa  largos  7  no  tan  bien  hechos;  los
meuores  eon  eomo  una  eajeta  peqnetla

DoestroB  tamborinea. ' '


"Toeanlo  eon  nn  boIo  palo,  el  ctial
i  veeas  por  gala  eeti  enUerto  de  hilo
de  lana  de  diferentea  eolores  7  tam-
bien  aoelen  pintar  7  engalanar  los
atambona.  TAeanlo  asi  hombres
eomo  mnjeres;  j  haj  baileB  al  a6n  de
nno  solo  7  otros  en  qoe  eada  ono  lleva
BQ  atambor  peqneSo,  bailando  j  to-
eando  jnatamente.  Tambien  nsan
derta  auerte  de  adofes,  nombradas
Haaneartin7a;  pifano,  llamado  Pin-
eollo.  Antara  ea  otro  ginaro  da  flanta
corta  7  aneha.  Qaenaqnana  ee  nna
eafia  sola  eomo  llaata,  para  cantar
endeebas.  Qnep*  es  ana  saerte  de
trompeUlla  qne  haien  de  nn  ealabaio
largo,  U*an  tamlnen  en  sob  bailee
to«ar  nn  instrnmento  eompnesto  de
mete  llaatillBB,  poco  mis  6  menos,
paeataa  eomo  caGonee  de  6rganoB,
juntas  7  deaigualeB,  qne  la  ma70T
seri  larga  de  on  palmo  y  laa  donia
van  deacrecjendo  por  sn  orden:  11a-
man  i.  aate  instrnmento  ATarlehie,  7
tdcanlo  pneeto  sobre  el  labio  el  lablo
bajo  7  Boplando  en  las  dichas  llanti-
lias,  con  mie  hacen  on  eordo  7  poco
doles  soniao.  Tocan  asimismo  cara-
eolea  7  otroa  inatnunentoe  de  menos
enenta. ' '  He  fnrther  mentions  rat-
tle^ of  beans  ("lacapa"),  of  copper
and  of  silver  ("chanrara"),  and
snails  ("chnm").  This  list  of  mn-
sieal instnunents  is  confirmed  hj  the
archaeological  finds  as  well  as  1^
several  other  earlier  anthors.

"*  The  models  for  these  modem
"Inca"  eostomea  are  indirectly  those
that  served  to  Herrera;  Hitloria  ge-
neral, etc.  (title-page  to  fifth  decade).
Herrera  copied  them  from  the  four
aboriginal  paintings  made  b7  order
of  Don  Fraudsco  de  Toledo  and  sent
to  the  King  in  1572.  Hence  the  cos-
tumes were  painted  nearl7  fort7  7ears
after  the  eonqaeetl  Informaeione*
aeerea  del  Se^orio  y  Gohiemo  de  lot
Inoat,  published  Madrid,  1682.  This
interesting  document  contains :  La  FS
y  Te$timonio  tpta  va  puetta  M  loa
ouotro  poAos;  de  la  verilleacion  que
H  hiso  oon  kw  /ndios,  de  la  prntwra


;cbyG00'^lc


158


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  EOATI


4  InKUytia  VeOtf,  p.  260.  "Por  b
coal,  todoa  j  ead&  una  d«llot  dijetou
^«  todo  lo  que  eoU  eseripto  y  pintado
«ii  loe  dieboa  co&tro  pa&M,  ui  en  lot
bnltos  de  1cm  Ingaa  eomo  en  Us  dm-
d«Uu  d«  SOB  nrnjerea  4  aylloa  <  biito-
riu  de  Ua  een«fu,  «eepto  lo  qoa  no
ae  lea  leyd."  The  plcttma  of  Inoa
ddefs  are,  of  coane,  largely  imsgi*
nuj,  u  vsU  as  the  eoatumei.  But
tlM7  bave  sorvlTed  and,  from  the  (act
that  tiivj  were  made  to  be  verifled  bf
tbe  Indiana,  undue  importance  ia  often
attached  to  them.  Silk,  velvet,  gold
and  ^ver  lace  vrere  known  to  tbe
Indiana  in  1572,  through  what  thej
saw  of  Spanish  dreaa,  and  it  is  natoral
that  the  nadvea  should  clothe  tbe
anpposed  portraits  of  their  ancient
chi^tains  in  the  beet  of— European —
flnerj.  Hence  it  ifl  well  to  be  cantioaB
and  not  accept  the  pietorea  for  more
than  what  thej  can  b&  Tbe  same
with  the  "indgnla.*'  This  naturally
applies  to  the  costame  as  seen  in  the
performance  described  in  the  text.

■"Judging  from  the  deacriptioni  of
eje-vritneeeea,  primitiTe  dances  at  the
time  of  tbe  Spaniards'  first  arrival
most  have  been  more  disgusting  Tet.
Compare,  for  instance,  Betanioa:
Ahim  y  NarracioK,  Cap.  331,  pp.  83
and  84.  Cieaa:  Segunda  Parte,  Cap.
XII,  p.  122:  "Yeatabau  enestaflesta
de  Hatun  Bann  quince  6  viente  dias,
en  los  coaka  ae  bacian  grandea  t&qois
7  borracberaa  j  otras  fleataa  i  an
naanta;  lo  cnal  pasado,  daban  fln  el
•aerificio,  metiendo  loa  bu]toa  de  los
Idolos  en  los  temples,  j  los  de  los
Incas  mnertos  eo  sna  casaa."  Pedro
Pisarro:  Selaeion  del  Deaeubrimiento,
p.  Z77;  "Puea  dir6  de  los  vicioa  qnee-
toe  orejonM  tenian  j  m&ldadee:  eran
taxij  dados  &  la  Injuria  7  al  beber:
tenian  acceso  carnal  cod  las  hermanas
7  con  las  mugeres  de  ana  padres,  como
no  fuesen  bus  mismaa  madrea,  7  ann
algunoB  habia  que  con  ellas  mismaa.
,  .  .  Emborraehibanse  mu7  &  menudo,
7  eetando  borrachos  todo  lo  que  el
demonio  lea  train &  la  volontad  ha-


dan."  Also  p.  347.  AH  that  oq>
ean«d  among  the  Inea.  Of  the  !■•
diana  in  the  district  of  La  Pas,  the
DMeripUon,  1586,  p.  72,  states:  "Laa
eoatnmbres  de  la  gente  deste  adento
7  provinda  ea  cad  como  laa  demas
deste  reino,  porque  todos  de  ordinarie
ee  emborraehan  con  una  bebida  qua
hacen  del  mail  ...  el  coal,  aunque
parece  simple,  bebeu  tanta  eanddad,
qne  loa  embomeha.  .  .  .  Bedunda
destas  bonaeheras  qne  cometca
mochoe  eatnproa  I  ineestoa  eon  madre^
hijas,  hermanas,  sobrinas  7  cnfiadai^  7
vuelven  4  bus  ritoi  7  adoracionee."

*"  Compare  note  129.

™  We  saw  the  'Wim^lln  again  at  La
Paz,  in  the  street,  but  alao  after  daik,
about  ten  o'clock.  It  vraa  aang  and
danced  117  men.

"The  "morenos,"  aa  I  ahall  eatab-
liah  elsewhere,  are  a  surrival  of  theat-
rical pla7S  and  outdoor  performances
introduced  b7  the  Church  with  the
view  of  gTsdnBll7  subatitutiug  then
for  objectionable  Indian  daikesa.

'^  Shea  americatut.

"  Pent,  p.  306.

■"From  "puai,"  "four"  in  Ay
marfi,  and  "ppiaila,"  to  perforata
with  the  poaaeeaive  affimm  "  nL "
The  flute  in  queation  haa,  indeed,  four

""The  cnstom  Is  common  all  over
the  higher  portions  of  Bolivia.  If  tbe
Indians  have  too  much  rain,  tbe7  ex-
pose a  akull  (of  the  Chnllpaa)  to  the
air,  and  eometimeB  place  between  ita
teeth  a  cigarette.

■"  But  the7  stiU  were  loath  to  touch
the  eknlls  themselvee.

"*  Further  information  about  tha
' '  Irpa ' '  vrill  be  given  in  a  subeequMrt

■"  A  good  example  of  how  the  In-
dians used,  and  perbapa  to-da7  atUl
uae^  church  fonetlona  to  shroud  thtai
ancieut  rites  is  given  b7  Arriaga;
Bxtirpaoion,  Cap.  vin,  p.  45;  "T  ea
eosa  cierta,  7  averignada,  qne  en
mucbaa  partes  con  achaqne  de  la  ficatft
del  Corpus,  baien  la  ilesta  de  Onw^-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OF  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 159

quoting,  th«  more  m,  aa  it  win  be
tTMtad  St  greater  length  eljewber*.

>"T)u»  hna  been  etated  to  iu  at
Tariona  places  in  BoliTia.  It  is  al-
luded to  bj  Cobo:  BUtoTia  del  Nmevo
ilundo,  IV,  14».

"  I  cannot  etjinologlae  more  than  a
few  of  the  namea  of  the  daneea:  The
word  "PoaipiBni"  tneana,  aa  alreadj
■tated,  perforated  fonr  timea.  Eena-
kena  ia  the  name  of  the  Ante  placed
hy  the  dancers  of  that  name.  Bicnri
eomee  from  "&eo,"  the  pan-flate  of
reeds— Bertonlo:  FocabHlano,  U,  p.
3IS:  "Sieo— Vnas  flantUlas  atadaa
eomo  ala  de  organo."  Chirilnianos
derivea  from  "diiriri,"  or  from
"cUri."  The  former,  according  to
Bertonlo,  p.  84,  II,  signifies  a  talker;
the  latter  is  a  word  nsed  Bometimea  to
ezpreaa  darkneaa.  Aa  a  personal  name
—therefore,  posaiblj,  ' '  HoaTna, ' '
"jotith"(1)— it  appears  alreadj  in
Cieut:  Segvnda  Parte,  Cap.  IV,  p.  4.
After  relating  some  andent  etoriee
abont  Titicaca  Island,  he  sajs : ' '  Chiii-
huana,  gobemador  de  aqudlos  pneUoB,
que  son  del  Empeiador,  me  eontfi  lo
que  tengo  eacripto. "

''About  the  manner  of  snceession
to  the  Tarions  "degrees"  (if  aneb  a
term  is  permitted)  of  mediclDe-men,
tlw  statements  of  older  Spanish
writers  varj.  What  we  learned  con-
cerning it  later  on  will  be  recorded
elBBwhere.  The  Belaeion  andnima,  p.
172,  aafs:  "Loa  miniatroa  ma;y>rM
■iempre  venian  por  via  de  elecdon  j
Buflciencia;  loa  de  la  aegtinda  j  tereera
diferencla  slcaniaban  los  oflcioa  por
una  de  tree  vias;  6  por  via  de  beren-
cia,  6  por  via  de  eleccion,  6  por  haber
nacido  con  alguna  aefial  singular  7
rara,  no  nsada  en  loa  demis  hombres.
como  es  tener  aeis  dedoe  en  laa  manos,
brazoa  maa  largos  de  lo  ordinario,  6
haber  nacido  en  el  mismo  tiempo  en
que  cajd  cerca  de  aquel  lugar  algnn
TBjo,  6  haber  nacido  de  pite,  6  otroe
sefialee;  aunque  lo  de  la  Iterencia
qnitfile  la  misma  reptblica  con  an
r^." Arriaga,  Bitti^aeio*,  Cap,  in.


nita  que  dlximos  arriba,  que  es  por
eatAees.  Y  en  la  Provinda  de  Chin-
ehaeoha,  qnando  ee  riait6,  a»  aTerignfi,
qua  neravan  en  la  proeeaaion  del  Cor-
pus doa  Corderoe  da  la  Uerra  vivoa
eada  mo  en  aos  »"■^^^)  por  via  de
fissta  J  de  danfa,  j  M  sopo,  que  real-
mente  eran  of renda%  j  sacrifldos  ofre-
ddoa  a  doe  laguna^  que  eon  Vrcoeo-
eha,  7  Cboeloeoha,  de  donde  diian,  que
salieron,  7  tniieron  origen  laa  Ua-
Buu."— "Como  tambien  ee  aTerignd
en  Hnaroehirf,  por  el  doctor  Fran-
dseo  de  Avila,  que  para  adorar  vn
Tdolo  en  llgora  de  mnger  llamado
Chupizamor,  7  Hamayoc,  hasian  fiesta
t,  m  imagen  de  nuestra  Sefiora  de  la
Asondon,  7  para  adorar  vn  Tdolo
Taron  llamado  Hoaf-Hnaf,  hanas
fiesta  a  n  Eoot  Hovo. ' '  That
soeh  priaitiTe  ceremonials  nia7  be
eonneeted  with  the  dances  performed
at  chnreh  featiTala  b>-da7  is  not  nn-
Bkelf.  At  an7  rate,  there  is  little
direct  relation  between  the  daneee  and
the  ehnreb  ritual  with  which  it  fa  made
to  coincide.

"*  Also  Prioate :  SodatitU  oeeonomiu.

"  The  lA7-ka  are  varionalr  allnded
to  b7  Arriaga:  Exlirpa«ion,  p.  17;
"Eatos  que  comonmente  llamamos
Heehiaeros  .  .  .  con  nombre  gennal
se  n»m«ii  Vmn,  7  I«ieca  .  .  ."  Also
b7  VUlagomex:  B^^rtaeion  oonlrn  la
Idolatria,  fols.  41  and  5S:  Bflaeiom
aitfinima,  etc.,  p.  171,  calls  them  "lal-
«a«."

TJ»«  word  "YaUri"  is  fonnd  in
Bamoa:  SUtorUi  it  Copaeabana,  p.  75,
and  ifl  said  to  bam  been  the  name  of
an  idol  invented  hj  Hoajna  Capac
and  worabiped  by  him  chiefl7  on  the
Island  of  Apingnila,  near  the  north-
western shores  of  Titicaea  Lake:
"Llevado  de  derto  espiritu  innova-
dor  determin6  ofrecer  todos  aqoelloB
saerifieios  &  un  solo  Idolo,  que  Ilaman
Yatiri,  como  ai  dijere,  al  que  todo  lo
sabe,  T"»"'^""<"  qns  aolo  &  eae  se  le
invocaae  ..."

"■This  is  so  freqnentt7  mentioned
in  older  soorces  tbat  I  refrain  from


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

foDdian  MtoB  ofidoa  eon  el  primer
linaje  de  McerdoU,  na&ndolM  todoa
jnatM  nnui  miamaa  peraoiwi,  7  otrot
andkban  dirididoB,  atendienclo  eadft
nno  al  toyo ;  li  bien  lo  mu  eomnn  en
lo  prinero,  que  los  saeerdotea  enm
jantamento  eonfcoorea,  mMieoe  7
hechleerra"  (p.  132).  "El  ollew  da
Bortllegoa  tuTieroii  estoa  indioi  no  ■olo
por  Udto  7  permitida,  nia  tamUeB
por  6til  7  neeesario  en  !■  lepAbliea.
.  .  ,  TodoB  ciuuitoe  entendlui  en  erto
enn  gente  InAtil,  pobre  7  de  bajR
narte,  eomo  loe  demu  hecliieeroa,  4
loe  eoalea  e1^i&  el  Caeiqna  de  cada
pueblo,  deapoea  qoe  lea  faltaban  las
fuenaa  para  trabajar,  prec«dlendo  i
esta  eleecion  diTerVBH  eeremoniaa  7
ritoo,  qne  lea  mandaban  haeer  loa
diehoa  Cadqneo. ' '

(The  statement,  that  the  offieea  woa
eometimea  bereditar7  mean,  not  an
obUgatory  oacMWioD  from  father  tft
■on,  but,  a*  among  the  New  Had«a
pnebloa,  adoption  of  a  proquctiTe  nie-
eeaaor,  who  may  be  the  child  of  the
incnmbeat  if  tiie  latter  oeM  in  him
■peoial  aptitude  for  the  offlee.  It  ia  aba
intereating  to  note,  that  some  of  the
roedidne-men  (ahamana)  embodied  in
their  circle  of  knowledge  that  of  all
the  other  gpedal  branchea,  where**
tlie  majoritj  were  limited  to  a  letMT
aphere  of  action.  This  indieatea  aao-
tarie  soeietieB,  ai  tlte  knowledge  of
each  group  waa,  of  neeeaait7,  kept
aeeret,  from  the  people  aa  well  as  froa
other  dnatera,  the  principal  shaman*
excepted,  who,  as  it  is  said  to-da7  is
BoUvia  of  the  Haeha  Tata,  "know  it
all."-)

■"Vniagomei:  Bacortacion,  toL  15:
"S  en  laa  Iteatas  del  Corpoa  Ohrioti,
6  en  otraa  fteetaa  de  la  Igleda  Ungi-
endo  loa  Indioa  que  haeS  ioataa  de  loa
Chriatianoa,  an  adorado,  6  adoran
oevltamente,  i  ana  idoka,  6  an  Iweho
6  baeen  otros  ritos."  This  is  one  of
the  qneriea  ordered  to  be  made  in  offi-
cial examinations  of  aoreerera  and
other  Indiana  supposed  to  know  about
witeheraft  and  primitiTe  earanonial^


Hoacaa.  Ia  piimera  e*  por  tneeaion,
qne  el  hijo  lo  hereda  del  padre,  7  tf  el
heredero  no  (tiene)  tso  de  raioo,
antra  en  an  Ingar  el  pariente  mas
eereano,  haata  qoe  el  ligitlmo  heredero
■ea  nifldente  pan  el  olido.  Ia  ae-
gnnda  manera  ee  por  eleecion,  qnando
falta  el  primer  modo  por  via  de  beren-
da,  o  qnando  lea  parece,  lo*  otroa
miidstro*  eligen  d  qne  jnagan,  qne
aerft  maa  a  propodto,  eon  pareoer  de
loa  CoraCB*  7  Gsdquea.  Y  qnando
aeonteee,  qne  alguno  berido  dd  Ta70
quede  vivo,  annque  ^  qnede  lastimado
eata  7a  eomo  divlnamente  degido  par*
el  miniaterio  de  Isa  Hnacaa.  El  ter-
eero  modo  ea,  qne  elloa  miamo*  se
toman  el  ofido,  7  Be  introdneen  en  el,
q>ecialmente  de  loa  ofldoa  menorea  de
adivinoe,  cnranderoe,  por  sola  an  to-
hintad,  7  antoridad,  7  eato  ee  ordinario
en  lo*  viejoB,  7  viejaa,  qoe  por  ganar
de  eomer,  7  eomer  eOoa  diien  Ti^ifa-
raTCn,  qne  ea  eeatria  oatwa,  se  basen
olkialea  en  eetoa  miniaterioa. ' '  Laatl7
I  wiU  add  the  te8timon7  of  Cobo:
HUtoTia,  IT,  p.  130:  "Loa  dipntados
para  este  ofido  Be  degian  deata  ma-
nera;  d  nada  en  d  campo  algnn
raron  en  tiempo  de  tampeatad  7  true-
Boa,  tanian  enenta  eon  O,  7  deapoea
qoe  era  ja  Hejo,  le  mandaban  qoe
•ntondieae  en  eato  .  .  .  Item,  los  qne
aacian  da  mnjerea  qoe  aflimaban
haber  eonceUdo  7  parido  dd  Tmeno,
7  loa  que  "»"*»"  doa  6  tree  jnntoa
de  nn  viantre,  7  finalmente,  aqoelloa
en  qnieoea  la  Natnralesa  ponia  maa
de  lo  comon,  didendo  qoe  acAao  7
tin  miaterio  loa  selLalaba,  todoe  eatoa
eran  conaagradoa  por  aacerdotea
cuando  viejoa;  porqne  todoa  6  loa
mia  que  tenian  este  ofido,  lo  nan
7  DO  se  admJtlap  4  Q  aino  enando
Uegaban  k  edad,  qne  no  podian  ejer-
dtar  otroa  trabejoa  .  .  .  TamUen  ha-
tda  otroa  mnehoa  qne  trataban  «n
•char  snertea,  4  loa  cnalM  andabn  el
ofido  de  eonfeaorea  7  de  enrar  anper-
atidosamente. Mnchaa  veeea  ae  eon-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  INDIANS  OP  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 161


*  Inf ormatioii  mboot  the  "Chama-
kui"  (he  who  owm  d&rkneM)  vill
be  giTen  elMwhere.

■"That  TiiiTnani  ig  a  powerful
"Aehaehilk"  haa  alreedj  been  rtated
(Bote  »8).

'"Ifiati  and  all  the  Toteaaoea  in
general  were  regarded  (and  are  to-day
in  eeeret)  aa  fetishes  of  hlg^  rank.
In  regard  to  Hiati  it  was  plainly
■hown  during  the  terrible  eruption  o(
the  Ornate,  near  Moqaegna  (•ontham
Pern),  In  1600.  When  the  arnption
was  at  Its  height,  the  dtj  of  Are-
qoipa  plnngcd  in  daAne■^  voleanie
uhss  falling  steadily,  the  earth  shak-
ing, and  tremendons  thnnder  bellow-
ing, while  B  Inrid  light  faintly  illn-
Biinatad  the  southeastern  sldee,  the
Indiani^  dressed  in  red,  UUed  their
Aeep,  fowl,  and  gninsB-pigs,  and  be-
gan to  daaee,  sing,  and  drink  iniinod-
eiatdy.  Some  of  thdr  wiiards,  after
meziAetng  Hamas  to  the  volcano,  were
sdd  to  have  claimed  "that  they  spoke
to  the  deril,  who  informed  them  of
the  eatastrophea  that  ware  to  take
plac^  and  how  the  Toleano  of  Omata


had  attempted  to  eoufederate  with
that  of  Areqoipa  to  destroy  the  Span-
iards, and  that,  aa  the  one  of  Are-
qoipa (Histi)  replied  be  eonld  not
enter  into  the  agreement  since  he  was
a  Christian  and  named  Saint  Frands,
the  Tokano  of  Ornate  nndertook  it
alone."  Sittoria  del  Colegia  dt  la
Coatpofiia  d0  Je*6t  de  Areqitipa  y
Bmwtaton  del  Volean  de  OnuUe,
MSB.  at  National  Arehives  at  Lima,
1000,  Tol.  XXI,  fol.  24:  "Mataron
loe  eameroa  galfinas  y  eonejos  de  la
tierra  que  tenian  y  hizieron  grandee
vanqnetes  vailes  y  Torracheras  Tistien-
doae  para  esto  de  Colorado  y  aAn  se
dijo  qne  algnnos  hecbiceroa  sacriflca-
ron  cameros  al  Volcan  porqne  no  los
bnndieee  y  que  hablaron  con  el  de-
monio  qne  lee  dexia  las  tempestades
que  ania  de  aner  y  eomo  el  Tolean  de
ornate  se  ania  qaerido  eoneertar  eon
d  de  ara^  para  deatndi  i  loa  eapafio-
lea  7  qne  eomo  ol  de  are^  reapondiease
qoel  no  podia  venir  en  ello  par  aer
^ano  J  Uamarse  S;Frandb  qusl  de
Ornate  solo  se  esfor^ua  por  aallr  eon
eat«  yntento. "


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  ANCIENT  ETJINS  ON  THE  ISLAND
OP  TITICAOA


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


PabtIV


THE  ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND
OF  TITICACA


THE  Indians  who  inhabit  the  Island  divide  the  rains
into  two  classes,  one  of  which  they  call  CMUlpa,  and  the
other  Inca. They  assign  to  each  class  a  different  ori^n.

As  stated  in  the  preceding  chapter,  traditions  preserved
by  writers  of  the  sixteenth  and  seventeenth  centuries  men-
tion two  distinct  stocks  as  oocnpants  previous  to  advent  of
the  Spaniards.  Hence  the  classification  by  tiie  Indians  of
to-day  is  not  an  imaginary  one.

Geographical  distribution  of  the  rains  on  Titicaca  is  best
onderstood  by  means  of  the  annexed  map.  The  survey  was
made  by  me  for  the  purpose  of  illustrating  this  distribution.
I  do  not  pretend,  however,  to  have  indicated  all  the  ancient
remains  extant.  There  mnst  be  more,  espetnally  of  the
class  called  Chullpa,  but  their  reduced  size  and  utter  decay
render  it  difficult  to  trace  theuL  Again  the  artificial  ter-
races, or  andenes  (in  Aymara,  "pata"),  are  so  extensively
worked  at  present  that  in  a  great  nomber  of  cases  it  is  not
possible  to  tell  which  of  them  are  ancient.  According  to  the
Indians,  small  and  scattered  houses,  of  one  or  only  a  few
rooms  and  mde  workmanship,  are  Chullpa;  the  larger  build-
ings, with  fairly  constructed  walls,  good-sized  doorways  and
niches  are,  as  welt  as  the  better  built  andenes,  Inca.  A  safer
criterion  is  the  character  of  the  artefacts  associated  with
eacli  class  of  ruins.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  there  are  two
distinct  types  in  pottery. One  type  seems  to  be  modeled


;cbyG00'^lc


166 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

after  the  well-known  earthenware  of  ancient  Cnzco.  It
shows  chaste  fono,  a  good  quality  of  clay,  solid  burning,
and  especially  a  striking  and  often  beantifnl  decoration  in
paint.  This  is  the  Inca  type,  as  the  Indians  on  Titicaca
claim.  The  other  corresponds  to  the  ceramics  found  in  all
the  so-called  Ohullpas  of  Bolivia.  It  is  much  mder  in
shape  fmd  design,  the  clay  is  not  as  well  burnt,  and  the
decoration  more  primitive.  Other  artefacts,  such  as  those
in  metal  and  stone,  are  no  longer  abundant  enough  to  per-
mit of  a  strict  classification,  but  the  objects  of  silver  and
gold  are  regarded  as  belonpng  to  the  Inca  type.  We  were
unable  to  find  textile  fabrics,  but  through  purchase  of  the
magnificent  *' ponchos"  contained  in  the  collection  of  Don
Afignel  Qarces  of  Puno,  the  Museum  has  come  in  possession
of  five  specimens  that  are  clearly  of  Inca  origin.^

Thus  it  seems  that  the  classification  suggested  by  the
aborigines  of  the  Island  is  home  out  by:  the  appearance  of
the  ruins,  the  testimony  of  tradition,  and  the  character  of
some  of  the  artefacts,  hence  we  may  adopt  it  in  onr  de-
scriptions.

'nie  Island  has  many  burial  sites,  and  the  majority  of
these  belong  to  what  the  Indians  call  Chullpa.  There  are
also  graves  which  they  declare  to  be  ^ca,  and  which  are
somewhat  different  from  the  former.  I  regret  to  say  that
we  have  not  been  fortunate  enongh  to  secnre  skulls  from
so-called  Inca  graves,  except  at  the  place  called  Kasapata.
where  we  obtained,  from  seven  stone  cysts,  fragments  of
children's  bones,  including  broken  sknlls.  At  Sicuyu  we
hoped  to  have  secured  one  skull  of  an  adult  woman,  but  it
was  only  the  cast,  or  lump  of  earth  left  after  the  sknll  had
decayed.  This  lump  fell  to  powder  as  soon  as  exposed  to
the  air,  and  we  did  not  even  have  time  to  take  a  mould  of  it.

In  regard  to  the  distribution  of  the  scMjalled  Chnllpa
remains  I  may  state  that  artificial  terraces  and  burials  are
found  nearly  everywhere,  where  the  nature  of  the  ground
permitted. Bnt  in  regard  to  the  terraces,  "andenes,"  or


DaitizecbyGoqglc


ANCIENT  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 167

"patas,"  it  is  mostly  impossible  to  affinn  that  any  par-
ticnlar  group  of  them  is  exchtsivelff  Chullpa.  In  such  eases
I  limit  myself  to  repeat  the  statements  of  the  Indians  with-
out endorsement.  The  southeastern  extremity  of  the  Inland
—that  part  of  it  belonging  to  the  hacienda  of  Tnmani— is
thickly  striated  with  andenes,  principally  on  the  eastern
side.  In  and  about  these,  bnrial  cysts  of  the  type  called
Chullpa  are  scattered  in  nombers ;  hence,  probably,  the  In-
dian assumed  that  the  terraces  belonged  to  the  same  class.
We  found  few  vestiges  of  small  houses,  thon^  the  cause
of  this  may  be  their  destruction  in  modem  times  for  pur-
poses of  cnltivation.  The  Indian  is  not  piously  inclined
toward  the  remains  of  his  forefathers.  The  mins  of
clearly  defined  Inca  origin  between  the  landing  at  the  Pnncu
(28)  and  the  foot  of  the  promontory  on  which  stands  the
hacienda  edifice  of  Ymnani  (b),  the  numerous  andenes  ac-
companying them,  and  present  cultivation  according  to
ancient  methods,  make  it  impossible  to  assert  anything  more
than  that  the  so-called  ChnUpa  remains  occur  in  many
places ;  chiefly  in  the  form  of  burials.  Between  Ymnani  and
Pncara  it  is  nncertain  whether  Inca  vestiges  exist;  hence
the  supposition  that  the  terraces  on  Palla-kasa  (11),  on  the
little  platean  of  Apachinaca  (q),  and  the  northern  flanks  of
Kumpata  (r  and  10)  are  Chullpa,  is  not  unlikely.  We
made  excavations  at  (q)  and  at  (r)  and  opened  stone  cysts,
of  the  type  designated  as  Chnllpa,  that  contained  skulls
(male)  artificially  flattened,  and  pottery  of  the  coarser  class.
Of  buildings  there  are  but  few  traces,  and  these  so  damaged
by  the  Indians  that  only  their  site  can  be  detected.  Heaps
of  mdely  broken  stones  indicate  small  edifices,  square  or
ronnd,  hence  Chullpa  pattern.'

The  bottom  of  Pncara  bears  traces  that  appear  of  Jnca
origin ;  still,  there  are  also  vestiges  of  Chullpa  burials.  On
the  slope  descending  from  the  sonth  into  the  grassy  bottom
that  bears  the  name  of  el  Ahijadero  (place  for  raising  or
propagating  animals,  cattle  or  sheep,  in  reality  a  pastur-


;cbyG00'^lc


168 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

ag6),  are  fonndf  with  Challpa  tombs,  andenes  of  Inca  type
and  Chnllpa  terraceB.  North  of  the  bottom,  and  to  the  west,
rise  steep  heights,  on  the  tops  and  slopes  of  which  the
Chnllpa  andenes  predominate,  if  not  exchtsively  repre-
sented. These  heights,  which  require  special  mention,  are
the  prominent  peak  of  Kea-Kollu  (hill  or  mountain  of  Kea
(7),  and  its  lower  companion  of  Little  Kea-Kollo,  Kea^
Kolln  Chico.*  The  abrupt  rocky  point  of  Like-Like  (8)
bears  vestiges  of  terraced  garden-beds,  but  it  is  not  i>os8ible
to  determine  to  which  class  they  belong.

Kea-Kolln  (see  accompanying  photograph)  is  a  dome-
shaped  height  rising  about  six  hundred  feet  above  the  Lake.
Its  lower  slopes  are  steep  and,  in  places  toward  the  north
and  northeast,  terminate  in  low  cliffs.  Andenes  on  the
middle  and  upper  slopes  are  so  numerous  as  to  make  the
mountain  appear  girded  by  numberless  concentric  belts.  As
will  be  seen  by  the  plat  of  the  top  of  Kea-Kolln,  they  are
neither  regular  nor  symmetric.  The  andenes  are  of  varying
widths  and  heights.  Some  are  only  two  or  three  feet  tall,
others  nearly  twenty.  They  follow  the  sinuosities  of  the
slope.  Frequently  there  are  short  and  narrow  projectionB,
like  bastions ;  either  in  front  of  longer  andenes,  or  connect-
ing one  terrace  with  another.  The  survey  of  the  upper
part  of  Kea-KoUu  was  therefore  a  very  tedious  work,
and  very  much  like  that  of  the  ruins  near  Llujo,  at
the  foot  of  Tlli»"ft.-ni,  The  stonework  on  the  andenes  is  rude.
The  merely  broken  stones  are  laid  in  mud  and  with  little
care.  Some  of  the  walls  are  smooth,  others  rongh,  and  none
have  the  finish  of  terraces  attributed  to  the  Incas,  althou^
the  pnrpose  was  the  same,  that  of  making  a  steep  slope
available  for  cultivation.  [We  were  unable  to  find  traces  of
irrigation,  nor  would  irrigation  be  necessary ."^

Shrubbery  and  ichhu-grass  now  cover  slopes  and  terraces
wherever  rocks  do  not  protrude.  The  irregularly  elliptic
summit  is  rocky,  yet  the  "kara,"  or  Dasylirion-like  plant
called  in  Spanish  comida  de  oao (bear's  food),  grows


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


Plati  XZZ
Objects  from  various  parts  of  Tificaca  Island
1.  Bola-Htone  <IiliiiI)  of  hematite. S.  Bola-stone  (L1iiii),uii<iBa&l  shape.
3.  Head  of  warelnb  of  stone.  4.  Bronse  head  of  vrarolnb  with  hatchet


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 169

abundantly  among  the  rocks.  On  the  northern  slope  the
andenes  gradoally  disappear;  bnt  on  the  other  sides  they
oontinne  down  in  many  places  as  far  as  the  base.  Cultiva-
tion having  taken  hold  of  the  lower  slopes  lately,  there  may
be  many  recent  patas  among  those  near  the  base,  toward  the
pass  of  Kea  and  on  swellings  in  the  west  and  northwest.
The  upper  half  of  the  moontain  is  one  iiregnlarly  terraced
height,  and  as  bashes  grow  on  the  edge  of  each  anden,  these
btmdreds  of  terraces  appear  from  a  distance  like  horizontal
stripes  of  darker  green.

Beside  andenes,  Kea-Kolln  has  buildings  and  graves.
The  buildings  (see  plans)  are  small  and  quadrangular,  with
walls  varying  in  thickness  from  one  to  two  feet.  The  stones
are  laid  in  mud,  but  not  in  regular  conrsea.  The  rooms
were,  to  all  appearance,  not  communicating.  In  those  build-
ings that  are  not  built  against  the  rock  there  are  from  three
to  five  rooms  and  probably  more.  Shrubbery  has  played
great  havoc  with  the  structores,  so  that  details  are  mostly
nndistinguishable.  The  rubbish  shows  that  the  houses  were
all  one-storied.  The  larger  ones  stand  on  the  rim  of  plat-
forms, affording  good  lookouts.  Excavations  proved  nse-
leas,  as  they  have  long  ago  been  rifled  of  everything  by  the
Indians.  The  sites  of  these  bnildi^s  are  indicated  on  the
general  plan.

Other  structures  are  small  honses,  bnilt  against  the  slope,
with  seldom  more  than  three  rooms.  We  examined  closely
whether  it  was  indeed  the  rock  that  formed  the  rear  wall,
and  not  the  walled  front  of  a  higher  anden,  and  invariably
found  it  to  be  the  former.  Not  even  its  sinuosities  had  heea
corrected,  as  will  be  seen  on  the  plans.  The  rooms  in  this
class  of  buildings  are  usually  somewhat  smaller  than  in  the
others,  and  the  walls  thinner.  The  longest  of  these  roek-
hoQBes  measnres  thirty-three  feet,  whereas  the  longest  of
the  others,  bnilt  on  a  projecting  point,  is  as  long  as  forty-
nine. The  width  was  probably  between  seven  and  ten  feet.

At  the  places  marked  on  the  plan  of  the  top  of  Eea-Kollu


DaWecb/GoOt^lc


170 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

are  baried  houses  that  seem  to  contain  but  a  single  room
each.  One  of  these,  of  which  the  entrance  had  been  made
accessible,  showed  very  good  workmanship.  It  was  made  of
approximate  paraUelopipeds  of  andesite  laid  in  conrses,
and  superior  in  appearance  to  the  walls  of  neighboring
edifices.  The  Indians  declared  it  to  be  Inoa.  Shmbbery
had  so  completely  overgrown  the  place  that  it  would  have
required  several  days  to  clear  it.  We  had  made  arrange-
ments to  explore  the  site  thoroughly,  when  my  wife  was
attacked  by  severe  influenza.  For  several  weeks  previous,
our  own  supply  of  provisions  had  almost  given  out;  tea,
without  sugar,  and  potatoes  were  onr  only  food.  The  In-
dian dwelling  which  we  occupied  on  the  middle  flanks  of
Kea-KoUu  afforded  slight  shelter  against  the  nightly  recur-
ring rain.  To  return  to  the  hacienda  of  Challa  was  im-
practicable, since  the  family  of  the  owners  was  expected  to
take  refuge  there  from  political  persecution  in  Perti.  Still
I  could  not  expose  my  wife's  health  and  life  in  the  cold  and
moist  hut  afforded  to  us  by  the  Indians,  and  so  we  removed
to  Ynmani,  breaking  off  work  at  Kea-Kollu.  It  was  not
even  possible  to  obtain  laborers.  Influenza  had  also  broken
out  among  our  hands,  and  they  attributed  it  to  the  bones  of
the  dead  which  we  were  removing.  So  we  had  to  abandon
the  interesting  relic  to  later  visitors.  To  all  appearances,
this  little  building  is  like  the  one  still  standing  on  the  slopes
of  Ciriapata,  also  declared  by  the  bdiaus  to  be  Inca,  aod
of  which  I  shall  treat  hereafter.

Graves  are  very  irr^ularly  distributed  over  the  upper
parts  of  Kea-KoIIu.  There  are  some  on  the  summit,  in  soft
ground  between  bare  rock,  also  on  the  artifidal  terraces,  or
andenes.  They  are  like  those  in  other  parts  of  the  Island.
The  stone  covering  them  is  usoally  one  to  two  feet  below  the
surface;  the  cysts  are  lined  with  rude  masonry,  and  they
were  mostly  empty!  What  we  found  in  a  few  of  them  were
skulls,  the  male  ones  with  flattened  forehead,  the  females
with  mudi  less  or  no  deformity  at  all. Sometimes  we  found


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  BXIINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 171

but  one  skoll  and  skeleton,  again  two,  in  the  same  oyBt.  The
bodies  had  all  been  folded,  but  lay  mostly  on  the  side,  and  it
vas  easy  to  notice  that  the  hands  had  been  joined  across
the  chest.  Of  artefacts,  only  a  little  pottery  of  the  coarser
kind  was  found.  The  Indians  have  rifled  all  these  sites,
first  only  in  view  of  obtaining  precions  metal;  lately,  with
the  advent  of  foreign  visitors,  also  for  the  sake  of  finding
pottery,  for  which  they  have  sometimes  received  exorbitant
prices.  Hence  we  obtained  only  leavings,  and  abandoned
Eea-Kolln  after  completing  its  survey,  in  order  to  b^^in  at
Eea-KoUn  Chico,  or  Little  Kea>KolIu,  where,  according  to
the  Indians,  a  richer  yield  might  be  expected.  As  I  stated
before,  it  was  onr  intention  to  retnm  and  open  np  the  small
bnilding  mentioned,  in  order  to  stndy  its  architectural
features.  Upon  oar  subsequent  return  to  the  Island  ex-
cavations became  impossible  through  the  behavior  of  our
Bolivian  servant.

Judging  from  existing  remains,  and  from  what  we  were
told  of  similar  ones  formerly  extant  on  its  slopes,  but  now
completely  obliterated,  the  colony  on  Kea-Kollu  may  have
contained  about  two  hundred  inhabitants.  They  dwelt  in
scattered  houses  and  cultivated  the  terraces.  These  ter-
races recall  to  some  extent  the  banquitos  of  Sonora  and
of  northwestern  Chihuahua,*  with  the  difference  that  in
Mexico  the  ground  was  mostly  redeemed  from  the  beds  of
mountain  torrents,  as  the  slopes  are  either  rocky  or  covered
with  high  timber,  whereas  on  the  Island  there  is  no  growth
of  v^etation  strong  enouf^  to  impede  Indians  from  clear-
ing; and  the  cherty  deposits  so  common  in  Sonora  do  not
occur.

In  none  of  the  older  sources  at  my  command  have  I  found
any  reference  to  Kea-KoUu  and  surroundings,  hence  no
evidence  that  it  was  ever  occupied  by  the  Inoas.  The  more
singular,  therefore,  is  the  accumulation  of  ancient  artefacts
and  haman  remains  which  we  found  on  the  low  eminence
called  Little  Kea-Kollu,  west  of  south  of  the  main  height,


;cbyG00'^lc


172 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

and  soQth  of  the  pass  leading  from  the  settlement  of  Kea  to
Puoara.  It  is  mnch  lower  than  Kea-Kolln  proper  (see
photograph)  and  forms  part  of  an  arc  encompassing  the
bottom  of  Pncar^  on  the  west  and  north.  On  the  slopes  of
this  pass,  toward  Pneara,  stand  andenes,  some  of  them  so
well  made  tiiat  the  Indians  say  they  are  Inca ;  and  there  are
remains  designated  as  Chnllpa  (andenes  and  bnrials)  abont
the  heights  of  Santa  Barbara  (12)  and  at  Titin-IJayani,  near
Eea  (29).  At  the  latter  place  we  excavated  a  nnmber  of
graves,  obtaining  sknlls,  pottery  of  the  coarser  kind,  and
one  skoll  trephined  on  the  forehead.

The  hill  of  Little  Kea-EoUn  bears  some  low  shrabbery
along  the  rim  of  its  summit.  This  summit  is  a  triangular
level,  sixty-fonr  feet  in  its  greatest  width,  and  seventy-four
in  greatest  length.  A  few  rocks  crop  out  on  the  surface,
and  the  soil  is  thin.  In  its  southwest  comer  the  remains  of
a  wall,  about  ten  feet  long,  were  dug  up  by  us.  Near  it,  a
disturbed  cyst  appeared.  On  the  southern  slope,  another,
partly  rifled,  cyst  was  opened.  It  is  nearly  round,  and  its
diameter  twenty-one  inches.  The  sod  over  it  was  fifteen
inches  thick,  beneath  was  clumsy  masonry  in  three  courses
of  large  blocks,  rudely  broken  and  superposed,  forming  a
pit  thirty-foar  inches  in  depth,  so  that  the  bottom  of  the  cyst
lay  forty-nine  indies  below  the  surface.  In  this  cyst  was
found  a  flattened  male  sknll,  with  decaying  bones,  and  frag-
ments of  coarse  pottery.  On  the  opposite  comer  and  on  the
northern  slope  two  more  cysts  were  discovered,  one  of
which  is  represented  on  plate  XX.  Its  form  was  trape-
zoidal, and  the  casing  consisted  of  five  rough  slabs  set
vertically  into  the  ground.  It  was  sixteen  inches  below  the
surface  and  the  bottom  eighteen  inches  lower.  The  greatest
length  was  thirty-six  inches,  greatest  width  twenty-one
inches,  least  ten  inches.  In  this  grave  we  found  a  deformed
skull  and  a  golden  bangle.  Thns  there  were,  in  all,  five
graves  and  part  of  a  wall,  on  or  near  the  top  of  Kea-Eolla
Chico. The  upper  slopes  of  this  hill,  however,  are  covered


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


^wGooqli"-


/,  :t;,.,\


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  BTJINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICAOA 173

with  from  one  to  three  feet  of  loam,  and  in  it  there  was  an
accTunoIation  of  human  remains,  especially  in  the  south-
eastern  comer.  The  skeletons  were  so  near  each  other  that
it  was  not  possible  to  determine  what  belonged  to  each
sknll.  They  had  been  packed  as  closely  as  possible,  all  bent
and  lying  mostly  on  the  side,  with  hands  folded  across  the
chest.  There  were  male  and  female  skeletons,  but  no  bones
of  children.  Among  these  remains  and  a  short  distance
from  them,  always  inside  of  the  zone  indicated  on  the  plan,
were  found  artefacts  of  almost  every  description,  weapons
and  textures  excepted.  We  obtained  pottery,  copper  imple-
meats,  stone  hammers  for  breaking  clods,  pins  ("tmnis,"
or  "topos"))  a  ^^'^  tiny  specimens  of  gold,  among  them  a
bangle,  fragmemts  of  sculptured  slabs,  hoes  ("chonta")  of
stone,  etc  Beside  perfect  specimens  of  earthenware,  many
sherds  were  exhumed.  The  pottery  was  mostly  of  the
eoareer  type,  but  we  obtained  several  gaudily  painted  speci-
mens with  plastic  decoration  recalling  some  previously
secured  at  Tiahnanaco.  Here  also  was  dug  up  a  spoon  of
bone,  beantifnlly  carved,  used  for  taking  lime  or  dialk  with
coca.  What,  however,  appeared  to  .m.Tuost  valuable  were  a
niunber  of  m<de  skulls  with  circular,  irepkining.  One  of
these  had  two  orifices  close  to  each  other,  and  the  bone  was
scraped  so  as  to  form  a  common  basin  for  both.  We  were
unable  to  secnre  the  slightest  information,  from  the  In-
dians, in  regard  to  this  locality.  Nobody  remembered  any
mina  on  it  except  those  we  had  discovered,  there  was  no
name  for  the  place  other  than  the  current  one  of  Kea-KoUn
Chico,  and  nobody  recalled,  or  wanted  to  recall,  any  tradi-
tion, legend,  or  lore  connected  with  the  site.  Onr  first  im-
pression was  that  the  bodies  bad  been  thrown  together  after
some  massacre,  but  we  could  not  discover  any  marks  of
lesions,  with  the  exertion  of  one  sknU  that  had  an  incision
near  the  ocdpnt,  as  if  the  party  had  been  struck  from  behind
with  the  sharp  end  of  a  topo.  In  short,  no  clue  to  the  cause
or  purpose  of  this  strange  gathering  of.  human  skeletons


;cbyG00'^lc


174 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAGA  AND  EOATI

and  artefacts  cotilcl  be  obtained.  Aa  to  the  "trephined"
sfcuUa,  not  one  of  our  men  professed  to  know  how  or  for
what  purpose  the  operation  had  been  performed.  "What
they  insisted  npon  was,  that  the  plaoe  and  its  contents  were
ChnUpa.  The  golden  bangles,  however,  se^n  to  be  Inca.  I
merely  add,  that  the  male  skalls  are  deformed  like  those
taken  from  the  stone  cysts,  said  to  be  Chollpa.  Among  the
stone  objects  were  mortars,  grinders  and  cmshers.  Whorls
were  found  and  bone  implements  for  weaving,  bnt  not  a
single  weapon!  Tnrqnoise  beads  came  out  of  cyst
No.  1.  Other  cylindrical  beads  were  dng  np  in  the  loose
earth,  as  well  aa  a  natural  concretion,  resembling  a  crondi-
ing  llama,  which  the  Indians  eyed  so  longingly  that  we  sus-
pected it  to  be  "Mulln,"  that  is,  a  fetish  of  some  kind.

I  may  be  permitted  here  to  state  what  we  snoceeded  in
learning  about  trephining  among  the  Indians  of  the  Sierra
in  Peru  and  Bolivia.  My  researches  among  printed  or
mannscript  sources  of  early  times  have  be^a  fruitless  np  to
date.  Bnt  we  have  been  assured,  by  parties  not  unworthy
of  credit,  that  the  practice  of  trephining,  and  afterward
closing  the  orifices  with  a  piece  of  gourd,  is  still  in  vigor
among  the  Indians  of  high  Pern.  We  were  told  that  the
operation  is  and  was  performed  by  persons  without  any
instmction  in  surgery,  and  in  order  to  remove  splinters
from  broken  skulls.  !bi  regard  to  the  instruments  used,  our
informants  knew  nothing,  but  they  declared  to  have  seen
individuals  who  survived  the  operation  for  many  years,
with  a  piece  of  mate  (gourd  or  squash)  in  their  skulls,  over
which  the  skin  had  been  stitched  together.  A  friend  of
mine,  Don  Antonio  de  Ocampo,  told  me  that  in  one  of  his
rambles  at  Ancon,  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  he  stumbled  over
something  that  proved  to  be  a  skull  i^ch  protruded  from
the  soil.  Picking  it  up,  he  saw  that  a  foreign  substance  'was
inserted  into  the  bone.  It  turned  out  to  be  a  thin  disk  of
mate  closing  an  orifice.'  The  skulls  we  found  at  Kea-
Kollu  Chico  differ  from  many  other  trephined  ones  in  that


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Plate  XXXn

Uetallio  objects  of  personal  decoration  from  Titwacft  Island

1,  2.  Wrist  bMids. 3 Gorget 4.  ito«Mt-psndknt


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 175

tlie  opening  is  circular  and  snrroTmded  by  a  depression.
This  depression  seems  to  indicate  the  insertion  of  a  thin
plate,  as  mentioned  in  the  acconnt  g^ven  ns  of  the  operation,
as  well  as  in  Senor  Ocampo's  description  of  the  specimen
from  Ancon.  It  might  be  objected  that  the  sknlls  of  Kea-
Eolln  are  perhaps  not  ancient  The  misshaping  of  akolls
was  rigidly  prohibited  by  the  Viceroy  Don  Francisco  de
Toledo  in  1575.*  Later  decrees,  and  a  stringent  search  for
idolatrous  practices  in  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury, finally  abolished  the  custom.  Hence  the  crania  from
Kea-Kolln  Chico  mnst  be,  if  not  of  the  period  before  the
conquest,  at  least  quite  old.  Trephining  is  a  very  andent
practice,  and  the  artefacts  that  accompany  skulls  are,
nearly  all,  of  the  type  which  the  Indians  declared  to  be  pre-
bicaic.

The  process  of  artificial  deformation  of  skvUs  so  gen-
erally found  all  over  the  Ptma  and  on  the  Island,  among
the  so-called  Chnllpa  remains,  is  described  by  older  authors.
It  was  noticed,  at  the  very  earliest  times  of  Spanish  occupa-
tion, among  the  Indians  of  the  so-called  CoUao,  to  which
region  the  islands  of  the  Lake  belonged.

Cieza  writes  of  the  "long  heads  and  without  occiput,"  of
the '  *  Collas, ' '  as  produced  by  artificial  shaping  from  * '  child-
hood on."^  A  detailed  description  of  the  process  we  find
in  the  work  of  Cobo :  * '  The  Collas  shaped  the  head  long  and
pointed,  to  such  an  extreme  as  to  cause  astonishment  at
seeing  the  old  people  whom  I  yet  saw  with  this  custom  from
the  days  of  paganism.  They  did  this  because  they  wore
woolen  bonnets  called  Chucos,  like  mortars  or  hats  without
brims,  very  high  and  pointed,  and  in  order  that  these  should
fit  better  tiiey  shaped  the  head  after  the  mold  of  the  head-
gear and  not  the  latter  after  the  head;  and  in  order  to  give
this  shape  to  the  heads  of  children  they  tied  and  bonnd  them
tight  with  bands,  keeping  them  thus  tied  until  they  were
four  or  five  years  of  age,  after  which  the  heads  had  become
hard  and  had  taken  the  form  required  for  the  bead-dress,


;cbyG00'^lc


176 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

that  is,  long,  flat,  and  withont  occipnt.  They  said  that  they
formed  the  heads  in  this  way  in  order  to  make  them
healthier  and  better  adapted  to  work,  and  the  first  bonnet
was  manof  actared  with  many  ceremonies  and  superstitions,
as  well  at  the  spinning  of  the  wool  as  at  the  weaving."^

The  shores  between  Kea  and  the  sandy  Feninsnla  of
Challa  (a),  and  the  slopes  descoiding  to  that  shore  from  the
backbone  of  the  Island,  contain  Challpa  vestiges.  Bnt  this
slope  is  broken;  the  little  bays  of  Coyani  (25)  and  Champa^
TJaya  (20)  are  bordered  by  strips  of  tillable  groand,  divided
by  steep  rocks,  so  that  the  vestiges,  of  which  many  have
disappeared  throngh  cnltivation,  are  few  and  limited,  as
far  as  we  conld  see,  to  terraces  and  scattered  graves.  The
main  crest  of  the  Island,  between  Santa  Barbara  (12)  in  the
southeast,  and  Muro-Kato  (3),  show  but  few  traces  of  an-
cient remains.  The  range  of  bald  heights  ^:tendiQg  north-
west of  Challa,  from  Inak-Uyu  to  Challa-Pata  and  the
Calvario  (6,  5,  and  4),  is  said  to  have  supported  ruins  that
are  no  longer  visible.

"Challa"  means  sand,'  and  the  isthmus  fully  deserves
the  name.  It  is  a  narrow  strip  of  white  sand.  On  the
north,  it  ahnte  against  a  low  rocky  hutte  called  "CoUca-
Fata,"  beyond  which  a  long  peninsula,  shaped  like  a  foot,
extends  eastward.  CoUcapata  (h)  is  the  gateway  to  the
grassy  and  fertile  swellings  of  Ciriapata  (g)  and  Harcnni
(19),  which  run  out  in  the  point  of  Uajran-Kala  (18).  It
is  at  Ciriapata  and  CoUcapata,  that  we  found  the  greatest
number  of  burial  sites  declared  by  the  Indians  to  he  Chullpa.
On  CoUcapata  are  a  number  of  stone  cysts  of  which  we
opened  twenty-three,  finding  only  four  intact  ones.  With
little  difference,  a  few  inches  in  extension  and  depth,  they
are  like  those  described  from  Kea-Kollu  Cbico.  Most  of
them  had  been  rifled  by  the  Indians  long  ago,  and  the  posi-
tions of  such  skulls  as  are  left  leads  to  the  suspicion  of
rebnrial.  Artefacts  were  limited  to  pottery  of  the  coarser
kind  and  some  stone  implements. Large  snaUs,  called


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Plate  XXXlIt

i.  General  plan  of  the  ruins  of  Pilco-Eayma. 2.  Plan  of  ground  floor  of

bnilding. 3.  Plan  of  upper  story. 4.  Side  nevr  of  northern  front.

5.  Onthouaes  with  platform. 0,  7-  Plans  of  outhonsM


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


/^r.^

/...v,.,. ^


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  KXJINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 177

"churi,"  were  also  found  in  some."  The  four  well-pre-
served cysts  had  no  covers,  and  the  grave  proper— the  pit
walled  in  with  mde  bloi^s  and  slabs— began  at  a  depth
varying  between  sixteen  and  eigjtteen  inches,  whereas  tiie
depth  of  the  cysts  ranged  from  eighteen  to  thirty-two.
Three  shapeless  stone  heaps  indicated  as  many  "Chnllpa"
hmldings,  and  tiie  declivities  toward  the  Lake  are  naturally
graded,  bat  supported  by  artificial  walls  transforming  them
into  andenes.  A  wall  of  stone,  nearly  three  feet  in  thick-
ness, crossing  the  summit  of  the  hill,  was  uncovered.  "We
followed  it  for  a  length  of  fifty-eight  feet.  It  showed  better
workmanship  than  that  of  the  walls  at  Eea-KoUu,  still  the
Indians  insisted  upon  it  being  "Chnllpa."  Aside  from  tiie
three  stone-heaps,  the  long  wall,  the  andenes  and  graves,
Collcapata  presented  nothing  of  interest.

A  narrow  neck,  nearly  at  the  level  of  the  Lake,  connects
Collcapata  with  Ciriapata.  This  peninsula  has  some  of  the
best  pasturages  and  most  fertile  lands  on  the  Island.  Hence
the  ^dians  have  cultivated  it  and  cultivate  it  to-day.  Its
gentle  slopes  to  the  south  and  east  are  striated  by  ancient
andenes  as  tortuous  as  any  on  Kea-Kollu.  Their  height
varies  so  much  that  no  average  can  be  given.  Only  one  of
the  face  walls  exceeds  ten  feet  in  elevation  and  the  majority
of  the  rest  are  lower  than  six  feet.  On  one  of  the  first  steps
ascending  from  the  direction  of  Collcapata  stands  a  mined
edifice,  small  and  mde.  Beneath  slabs  left  of  the  floor  we
found  a  quantity  of  human  bones.  Higher  up  on  the  slope
is  a  well-made  building  which  the  Indians  say  is  "Inca."
Its  workmanship  would  confirm  their  statements.  The
higher  plane  of  Ciriapata  formerly  supported  a  cluster  of
stone  buildings.  Twenty  can  still  be  traced,  of  which  eigh-
teen are  almost  obliterated.  Two  of  the  buildings  appear
to  have  been  dome-shaped.  They  also  were  broken  into  and
rifled,  years  ago,  bat  enough  is  left  to  establish  their  form.
The  interior  having  been  disturbed,  it  is  filled  with  rubbish
to  snch  an  extent  as  to  render  it  impossible  to  measure  the


;cbyG00'^lc


178 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

inside  elevation.  From  the  top  of  the  opening  of  "a"  to
the  mbbish  below  is  an  interval  of  three  feet;  at  "b"  it  is
thirty-four  inches  only.  Interior  diameters  are:  "a,"  five
feet  nine  inches;  "b,"  twelve  and  a  half  feet.  The  mound
formed  by  each  being  from  six  and  a  half  to  eight  feet  in
height,  it  is  presumable  that  the  room  inside  was  abont  six
feet  high.  The  dome  shape  of  both  results  from  successive
overlapping  of  stones.  Each  structure  has  its  doorway
with  a  mde  lintel ;  in  "  a  "  the  lintel  is  twenty-six  inches  long
and  eight  inches  thick ;  in  "  b "  thirty-one  inches  by  six.  The
entrance  to  "a"  is  tapering,  measuring  eighteen  inches
below  and  sixteen  above,  its  present  height  twenty  inches.
In  "b"  the  opening  is  quadrangular,  twenty-one  inches  in
width  and  seventeen  inches  in  height.  We  excavated  these
ChuUpas  to  a  depth  of  several  feet,  without  result  They
had  been  thoroughly  cleaned  out,  but  the  Indians  denied  any
knowledge  of ' '  finds ' '  made  in  them.

Itemains  of  walls  connecting  rubbish  heaps  are  visible
besides.  Bnt  since  the  Indians  have  torn  up  andenes,  de-
stroyed buildings,  and  built  enclosures  and  new  andenes,  it
is  impossible  to  form  an  idea  of  how  the  cluster  appeared
when  it  was  intact.  In  many  instances  we  could  not  even
distinguish  the  new  from  the  old.  Nevertheless  I  believe
that  the  plan  indicates  nearly,  if  not  all,  the  ancient  remains
yet  extant.  It  is  possible  that  I  have  included  walls  and
andenes  that  are  recent  or  at  least  not  pre-Spanish.  I  be-
lieve it  safe  to  state,  in  r^ard  to  this  settlement,  that  it
consisted  of  dispersed  small  houses,  of  one  room  each,  con-
nected with  stone  enclosures  and  terraces.  Ciriapata  was
the  largest  Chnllpa  settlement  on  Titicaca,  and  I  would,
under  my  present  impression,  place  the  maximum  of  its
former  population  at  five  hundred  souls.

There  is  a  spring  on  the  plateau,  hut  it  is  hardly  used  at
present.  There  are  much  more  abnndant  sources  of  water-
of  a  superior  quality  on  the  Isthmns  of  Challa,  at  the  foot  of
Challapata. The  advantages  afforded  at  Ciriapata  to  agri-


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


i  °

3


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 179

cultural  Indians  are  sufficient  fertile  soil,  eastern  exposition,
hence  smishine  and  warmth,  and  good  lookouts.  On  the
sonth  shores  of  Ciriapata  the  totora  grows  large  enoa^  for
the  construction  of  balsas,  and  here  indeed  is  the  only  point
OQ  the  Island  where  balsas  can  be  manufactured.  Also,  if
the  ancient  dwellers  on  Ciriapata  had  llamas,  there  could  be
no  better  grazing  ground  for  these  animals,  and  to-day  the
sheep  of  Chal!a  are  mostly  herded  on  this  peninsula.  "With
the  exception  of  north  and  northwest,  the  range  of  view  is
extensive.  It  would  not  be  surprising,  therefore,  if  the  most
populous  settlement,  on  Titicaca,  of  Indians  who  were  not
Inca,  had  been  established  on  this  peninsula.

The  condition  of  the  remains  just  described  led  to  expect
that  undisturbed  graves  might  yet  be  found.  We  were
strengthened  in  our  hopes  by  the  Indians,  although  they
invariably  added  that  the  site  had  been  overhauled  "long
ago."  We  made  excavations  at  four  places.  The  result  of
our  work  was  the  opening,  emptying,  and  measuring  of
eighty-five  stone  cysts:  seventeen  in  one  place;  six  in  an-
other ;  two  in  another ;  and  a  fourth  group,  of  sixty.  It  is
needless  to  describe  each  grave.  The  accompanying  plates
give  an  idea  of  their  size,  appearance  and  distribution.
Some  of  the  cysts  had  covers,  consisting  of  a  large  slab  al-
ways covered  by  sod.  There  were  seldom  any  surface  In-
dications, we  had  to  test  the  ground  every^rfiere,  in  order  to
find  graves.  Their  distribution  is  irregular;  they  lie  at
uneqnal  distances  from  each  other,  and  children's  tombs  are
scattered  among  those  of  adults.  Their  depths  vary  be-
tween fifteen  inches  (child)  and  fifty  (adult),  including  a
layer  of  soil  from  six  to  fourteen  inches  in  thickness.  The
clnster  is  in  an  open  quadrangle  formed  by  a  mined  wall,
which  is  mostly  modem,  though  its  foundations  appeared
to  be  ancient.  Many  of  the  graves  were  empty,  still  we
obtained  pieces  of  coarse  pottery  and  one  Llivi,  Aylln,  or
grooved  stone,  for  holas.^^  The  yield  on  the  whole  iras
unimportant,  only  two  of  the  cysts  containing  tall  red  and


;cbyG00'^lc


180 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

black  clay  cups,  which  the  Indians  call  kero.  The  dnster  of
six  graves  lay  close  to  a  bench  of  rocks  overgrown  with
bnshes,  and  forming  the  face  of  an  anden.  This  rock  over-
lapped the  rear  wall  of  three  eysta.  The  soil  raider  the  rock
was  about  nine  inches  deep,  and  the  side  of  the  cyst
descended  two  feet  more.  It  will  be  seen  that  some  of  these
graves  are  approxirnately  round  or  oval,  and  that  their
sides  are  encased  sometimes  by  vertical  plates,  mostly,  how-
ever, by  from  two  to  four  courses  of  uncut  blocks,  with  or
without  a  thin  seam  of  mud  between  them.  The  covers  were
gone,  and  the  yield  was  broken  and  decayed  skulls,  a  little
coarse  pottery,  and  a  bit  of  gray  obsidian.  In  one,  three
skeletons  with  sknlls  were  disinterred  at  a  depth  of
eight  inches,  and  still  lower  three  more  skeletons  so  com-
pletely decayed  that  hardly  anything  could  be  saved.
Enough  was  left,  however,  to  show  that  the  bodies  had  been
folded  and  the  arms  pressed  against  the  chest.  Near  these
graves,  a  hoe  (chonta)  of  stone  and  a  fragment  of  another
stone  implement  were  taken  out  of  loose  earth.

On  a  narrow  terrace,  two  very  small  cysts  were  opened
that  contained  nothing.  Their  deptb  below  the  surface  was
only  six  and  eight  inches  respectively.  At  site  2,  on  an
ancient  anden  facing  the  south,  and  within  an  area  bounded
north  and  west  by  old  stone  walls,  fifty-eight  graves  were
found ;  and  two  more  close  by.  Of  these  fifty-eight  graves,
forty-seven  clustered  on  a  space  covering  not  quite  thirty-
seven  hundred  square  feet,  near  to  a  small  mined  stmcture
on  the  edge  of  the  anden.  Of  these  sixty  cysts,  five  were  of
children.  The  cysts  had  been  partly  opened  and  disturbed ;
hence,  while  it  is  likely  that  they  all  originally  had  stone
covers,  not  all  of  these  were  in  place,  and  a  number  of  the
cysts  were  empty  or  partly  rifled.  The  depth  of  the  covers
below  the  surface  varied  between  nine  and  fifteen  inches.
The  stone-work  on  the  cysts  is  mostly  like  that  of  the  others,
but  there  are  in  this  group  some  well-laid  and  fairly
rectangular  casings. Here  the  yield  was  better,  consiatinj;


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 181

of  sknlls  (the  skeletons  had  disintegrated),  earthenware
and  other  objects.  In  some  we  found  only  ceramics,  in
others  a  skeleton,  with  from  one  to  seven  piec^  of  pottery,
all  of  the  mder  kind.  From  one  cyst,  a  skull,  a  stone-
mortar,  and  a  pot  were  taken  ont  at  a  depth  of  twenty
inches.  In  a  cyst  ten  inches  beneath  the  surface,  and  twenty-
four  inches  deep,  a  vessel  of  clay  in  the  shape  of  a  duck  lay
three  feet  nnder  the  surface.  There  was  rarely  a  grave
withont  something  in  it  The  best  constructed  one,  a
rectangle  twenty-fonr  by  seventeen  inches,  its  wall  laid  in
courses,  was  empty  to  a  depth  of  forty  inches,  then  only  a
few^  bones  and  the  bottom  of  a  vessel,  charred,  came  to  light.
A  polygonal  cyst,  twenty-four  by  twenty-one  inches,  inside
measures,  twelve  inches  below  the  ground  and  twenty-fonr
inches  deep,  yielded  a  painted  pitcher,  a  painted  bowl,  the
bottom  of  a  larger  bowl  filled  with  charcoal  and  blackened
by  fire,  but  no  human  remains.  Another  contained  frag-
ments of  one  male  and  one  female  skeleton,  at  a  depth  of
thirty-two  inches ;  and  twelve  inches  lower,  seven  pieces  of
coarse  reddish  toy-pottery,  a  tiny  piece  of  silver,  one  tar-
qnoise  bead,  two  copper  rattles,  and  four  topos,  or  tomis,
two  of  which  were  of  silver.  On  the  top  of  all  this,  and  with
the  decayed  skulls,  lay  a  well-made  circular  grinding  slab.
Charcoal  was  found  in  nearly  all  the  cysts,  and  fragments
of  pottery  blackened  by  fire.  The  greatest  number  of  sknlls
in  one  grave  was  three.  The  male  skulls  are  artifidally
flattened,  female  skulls  showing  no,  or  hardly  any,  deform-
ity. I  must  note  also  that  flint  flakes  were  found  in  one
cyst,  and  in  another  the  upper  part  of  the  skull  of  some
animal,  which,  however,  was  lost  through  carelessness  of
our  servant.  In  one  pit  there  were  five  skulls,  but  it  after-
ward turned  out  that  these  had  been  taken  out  elsewhere
and  reburied.

There  is  a  ruined  "Chullpa"  in  close  proximity  to  this
cluster  of  graves.  We  could  only  make  out  its  approximate
size  and  probably  circular  shape. At  or  near  the  surface


;cbyG00'^lc


182 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

we  obtained  in  loose  earth,  a  few  implements  or  fragments
of  implements  of  stone,  mostly  agricQitnral ;  also  the  half
of  a  handsome  stone-mortar  that  may  have  been  dropped  by
accident  Here  also  the  Indians*  rnthless  ransacking  has
made  research  difficult  and  conclnsions  doubtful.  Be-bnrial
has  certainly  taken  place,  and  as  careless  as  could  be,  when
done  by  barbarians  who  upturned  the  ground  only  in  search
of  metal  and  striking  pieces  of  pottery.  Destruction  of
ruins  on  Titicaca  is  mostly  due  to  the  cupidity  of  its  Indian
inhabitants.

There  are  more  burial  sites  at  Ciriapata,  and  we  in-
vestigated several  other  points  but  only  to  find  that  they
bad  been  rifled  long  ago,  jnst  as  the  Indians  told  ua.  The
same  is  probably  the  case  with  the  remainder  of  the  penin-
sula. On  the  eminence  called  Marcnnl  (19)  traces  of  an-
denes  exist,  but  there,  as  well  as  further  to  the  east,  toward
the  point  of  TJajran-Kala  (18),  the  ground  was  either
cultivated  or  used  as  pasturage  and  we  conld  not  think  of
disturbing  it.  It  seems  that  this  peninsula  was  more  or  lees
covered  with  scattered  habitations  of  the  CHiullpa  type,
making  it  probable  that  Collcapata,  Ciriapata,  Marcnni,  and
Uajran-Kala,  together,  harbored  the  largest  **Chullpa"
population  of  any  part  of  the  Island.

One  small  building  consists  of  two  (approximate)
rectangles,  one  larger  and  one  smaller.  It  is  not  the  size
of  the  building  that  attracts  attention  bnt  the  neatness  of
the  stone  work.  The  total  length  of  its  front  is  nine  feet
four  inches ;  its  greatest  width,  six  feet  nine,  and  its  height
above  the  ground  (it  is  partly  buried)  five  feet.  The  door-
way is  eighteen  inches  wide,  and  only  one  foot  of  the  eleva-
tion is  open.  The  lintel  (of  well  cut  stone)  measures  five
inches  in  thickness  and  thirty  inches  in  length.  The  walls,
eighteen  inches  thick,  are  well  built,  the  comers  sharp,
though  not  squared,  and  the  fadng  quite  smooth.  It  recalls
the  best  specimens  of  Inca  work  on  the  Island.  Its  presence
in  a  duster  of  much  ruder  buildings  attracts  attention.  IJn-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  EUINS  ON  THE  ISIiAND  OP  TITICACA 183

fortnnately,  the  Indians  penetrated  into  it  from  above,
causing  the  roof  to  fall  in,  as  well  aa  through  the  door.  It  is
probably  rifled  of  everything,  and  ravaged,  throngh  caving-
in  as  well  as  by  vegetation,  which  has  converted  the  neat
little  structnre  into  a  blooming  bnsh  with  ugly  thorns.  We
saw  that  it  would  be  unprofitable  to  excavate  there,  and
limited  ourselves  to  measurements.  The  Indians,  as  al-
ready stated,  affirm  that  the  building  is  "Inca."  We  eould
not  learn  of  any  other  structure  of  the  kind  in  that  viianity.
Betoming  to  Challa  and  proceeding  northwestward
along  the  Lake  to  the  garden  of  Challa  with  its  terraces  of
!bica  origin,  thence  to  Kasapata  past  the  mined  andenes  of
Santa  Maria,  we  find  no  clear  vestiges  of  the  ChuIIpa  on
our  path.  In  continuation  of  the  isthmus  on  which  the  Inca
ruins  of  Kasapata  stand,  rises,  as  its  northerly  prolonga-
tion, the  height  of  Llaq'-aylli  (f )  which  terminates  in  the
sharp  point  of  Y6-Jachi  (17).  The  top  of  Llaq'-aylli  is  about
four  hundred  feet  above  the  Lake,  and  its  northern  point  is
somewhat  lower.  Both  bear  considerable  shrubbery,  and
on  them  also  lines  of  bushes  indicate  numerous  ancient
andenes.  We  were  unable  to  determine  to  what  class  these
andenes  belong.  We  found  no  structures,  although  the
top  of  Llaq'-aylli  recalls  some  features  of  Ciriapata.  We
were  repeatedly  told  there  was  nothing  on  Y^jachi,  and
indeed  saw  no  traces.  Hence  I  am  inclined  to  believe  that
the  Ghnllpa  remains  do  not  extend  further  than  Kasapata.
Beyond  that  point  the  fertile  soil  thins  out,  slopes  are
rocky,  and  the  graves  on  the  extreme  northwestern  point
of  the  Island,  the  low  promontory  of  Sicuya  (3),  differ
from  those  described  as  ChuUpa.  The  southwestern  wing
of  the  Island,  the  bottoms  of  Kona  and  the  long  ridges  of
Kakayo-Kena  (19)  are  covered  with  ancient  terraced
garden-beds,  but  we  have  seen  no  traces  of  other  structures^
notwithstanding  that  in  those  sections  the  modem  Indian
did  less  damage.  The  andenes  may  be  partly  Chullpa,  but
there  is  a  wide  and  fair  trail  or  road— Quivini  (3a)— lead-


;cbyG00'^lc


184 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

ing  np  to  the  Kakayo-kena  from  the  bottom  of  Kona.
Hence  I  beheve  that,  while  Chullpa  remains  may  yet  be
found,  in  the  shape  of  burials,  in  these  sections,  they  were
not  inhabited  to  any  extent  comparable  with  sites  above
described.

We  find  the  distribution  of  Chnllpa  remains  on  Titicaca
to  be  as  follows :  They  occupy  chiefly,  if  not  exclusively,  the
southern  three-fourths  of  the  Island,  and  the  principal
settlements  seem  to  have  been  Ciriapata,  the  upper  slopes
of  Kea-Eoilu,  the  crest  at  Apachinaca  and  along  Enmpata
and,  possibly,  the  southern  parts  of  the  present  hadenda  of
Ynmani.  The  latter  I  infer  from  what  we  saw  of  an-
tiquities and  what  could  be  observed  in  spite  of  modem
cultivation.

The  settlements  were  not  compact.  They  consisted  of
scattered  houses  of  small  size,  and  mostly  of  one  room  only.
On  Kea-KoUn  the  dwellings  are  partly  built  against  the
rock,  and  have  more  than  one  apartment,  sometimes  as
many  as  six.  We  found  no  trace  of  fortifications,  but  the
fact  that  the  clusters  occupy  points  of  observation  mi^t
indicate  that  the  inhabitants  did  not  always  feel  secnre.
The  smaller  houses,  with  one  room  only,  recall  the  Obollpas
on  the  Bolivian  mainland  near  Chililaya,^'  and  the  many-
roomed  buildings  resemble  the  dwellings  on  the  slopes  of
TlliTTiftm  near  the  perpetual  snow-line.^'

The  great  number  of  andenes  with  which  the  dwellings
are  connected,  and  the  implements  found  at  Eea-Kolln
Chico  and  elsewhere  show  that  the  people  were  land-tillers;
but  the  presence,  in  graves  even,  of  the  stones  called
"llivi,"  or  "ayllu,"  which  were  used  after  the  manner  of
the  Argentine  bolas,  indicates  that  they  hnnted,  not  only
water-fowl,  but  probably  also  quadrupeds  on  the  main-
land. The  llivi  were  also  their  main  implements  of  war-
fare.

Their  pottery  is  mder  and  coarser,  in  material  as  well
as  in  decoration,  than  that  of  the  so-called  Inca  type.


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


Plate  XXXVII

Details  of  ruins  of  Piloo-Kaymft

Speoimena  ot  niches  '


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 185

Plastic  decoration,  often  cmdely  painted,  prevails.  Among
the  most  strikiDg  vessels  are  certainly  the  black  and  red
caps  or  goblets  called  kero,  found  abundantly  in  the  stone
cysts  of  Chullpa  bnrials.  Of  these  we  know  that  they  were
drinking  cups,  and  nsed  in  ceremonials.  It  is  even  stated
that  they  served,  under  Inca  stray,  as  accessories  to  hwnan
sacrifice,  and  were  buried  with  the  bodies  of  victims.'*  The
same  was  the  case  with  the  keros  of  wood,  of  wbidi  at  least
three  were  found  in  rents  of  rocks  above  Santa  Maria  (i).
Whether  these  wooden  goblets  are  to  be  classed  as  Chullpa
I  am  not  able  to  decide.  X  know,  however,  that  they  are  met
with  at  Tiahnanaco  and  other  places  on  the  Bolivian  main-
land, both  north  and  sonth  of  the  Lake,  and  that  their  shape
is  distinct  from  that  of  the  usual  drinking  vessels  from
Cnzco.*'  If  the  black  wooden  kero  from  Santa  Maria,  sent
by  UB  to  the  Museum,  is  Chullpa,  then,  since  the  carving  on
it  represents  a  man  spearing  a  large  fish,  it  would  indicate
that  the  Chullpa  also  engaged  in  fishing,  and  that  they  nsed
a  harpoon-like  instrument,  beside  others,  perhaps,  of
which  we  may  have  no  knowledge  as  yet."  The  keros  of
clay  are  often  decorated  with  human  faces  in  relief,  but
these  are,  with  rare  exceptions,  angular  and  rude,  and  can-
not compare  with  the  beautiful  heads  from  the  Peruvian
coast.  Otherwise  plastic  art,  jndg^g  from  irfmt  we  were
able  to  collect,  limited  itself  to  fairly  made  vessels  in  the
shape  of  ducks  and  to  a  few  carvings  in  stone.

While  excavating  at  Kea-Kolln  Chico,  an  Indian  from  the
small  settlement  of  Kea  brought  us  a  slab  of  black  stone,
which  he  had  found  on  the  slopes  of  Ticani  (2),  one  of  the
faces  of  which  was  covered  with  carvings.  Th^e  carvings
represent  intricate  figures.  The  origin  of  the  stone  we
could  not  ascertain,  beyond  what  I  have  stated.  It  may  be
ancient,  or  it  may  be  of  more  recent  date  and  belong  to  the
class  of  pictographs  now  used  by  the  Indians  to  represent
church  rituals  graphically.

Of  textile  fabrics  from  the  Chullpa  we  were  unable  to


;cbyG00'^lc


186 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

secure  any.  Moistnre  has  destroyed  everytiung  of  that
kind.  Bat  the  Indians  claimed  to  be  able  to  assure  ns  that
the  Chnllpa  dressed  in  clothes  made  of  llama  wool.  As  we
obtained,  at  Kea-Kolln  Gbico,  instruments  for  weaving
made  of  bone,  there  is  nothing  improbable  in  this  state-
ment.*'

That  the  people  called  Chullpa  on  the  Island  worked
metal,  is  shown  by  the  pins  found  in  one  of  the  graves  at
Ciriapata.  These  pins  were  of  copper  and  of  silver.  The
scarcity  of  metallic  objects  in  the  burials  is  no  evidence
that  they  were  originally  rare,  since  the  eagerness  of  the
modem  Indian  to  obtain  ancient  objects  of  metal  is  very
great,  and,  as  I  have  repeatedly  stated,  the  majority  of  the
graves  have  been,  if  not  completely  rifled,  at  least  searched
long  previous  to  our  coming.

Of  household  articles,  we  found  the  grinding  slab  or
hatdn  at  various  places,  and  its  crusher  or  grinder.  Mor-
tars were  also  found,  and  they  are  of  the  same  type  as
those  of  Cuzco,  though  not  as  elaborately  carved.

It  is  also  worthy  of  note  that  the  artefacts  in  general
ascribed  to  the  Chullpa  on  the  Island  are  identical  with
those  of  the  Chullpa  on  the  Bolivian  mainland  as  far  as  we
know.  I  refer  to  the  vicinity  of  Chililaya  and  Hnarina,  and
the  sections  of  Llujo,  Goana  and  Goni,  near  the  snows  of
niimauL'^

The  word  Chullpa  is  often  applied,  on  the  shores  of  the
Lake  and  in  the  Puna  in  general,  to  tower-like  stmctores,
some  of  the  handsomest  of  which  are  those  of  Sillnstani,
of  Accra*"  and  of  the  Peninsula  of  Huata.  Elsewhere  I
have  shown  that  the  Siltustani  edifices  were  not  burial  tow-
ers, which  is  also  likely  in  the  case  of  Huata.'"  The  mode
of  burial  which  Cieza  de  Leon  describes  as  general  in  the
GoUao  and  on  the  southern  shores  of  Lake  Titicaca**  is
not  found  on  the  Island.  All  the  graves  seen  by  ns— and
we  saw  upward  of  three  hundred— are  m  the  ground,  and
stone  cysts  mostly,  with  a  rude  slab  or  block  as  cover.  This


tlFOCO-GOOt^lC


.wGooi^lc


ii


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 187

mode  of  burial  is  like  that  observed  by  as  at  Chililaya,  on
the  Island  of  Cojata  and  on  the  lUimani  slopes.  The  ntun-
ber  of  graves  on  Titicaca  is  large,  but  does  not  indicate  a
so-called  Chollpa  population  in  excess  of  the  number  of
present  inhabitants.''

The  artificial  deformity  of  the  heads  being  the  same  as
was  found  in  practice  among  all  Aymara-speaking  tribes  at
the  time  of  the  conquest,  it  also  supports  the  assertions  of
early  chroniclers,  that  the  Island  of  Titicaca  was  originally
inhabited  by  a  branch  of  the  Af/mard  tribe.

From  the  size  and  disposition  of  structures  that  were
probably  dwellings  we  may  conclude  that  the  homes  of
these  people  were  dingy  and  calculated  for  shelter  and
warmth  almost  exdnsively.  In  the  absence  of  combust-
ibles, crowding  and  exclusion  of  air  had  to  protect  from  the
prevailing  cold.  Not  enough  is  left  of  these  structures  to
enable  us  to  decide  whether  their  inmates  used  chimneys,
but  there  is  at  least  no  trace  of  them,  nor  of  flues.  The
Indians  emphatically  stated  that  id  none  of  the  Chullpas
bad  they  ever  seen  contrivances  of  the  kind.  This  agrees
with  what  we  noticed  on  the  mainland,  among  the  ruins
scattered  over  the  Puna.

But  the  Island  of  Titicaca  contains  ruins  of  a  different
character,  which  the  Indians  ascribe  to  the  Inca.  By  this
word,  only  the  Inca  tribe  of  Cuzco,  in  Peru,  can  be  meant.

The  distribution  of  these  so-called  Inca  ruins  differs  from
that  of  the  former  class  in  that  they  are  limited  to  fewer
localities.  They  may  be  said  to  constitute  four  groups:
The  southeastern,  composed  of,  first,  almost  obliterated
structures  near  the  landing  of  Pnncu  (26),  the  buildings
and  terraces  at  Pilco-Kayma  (a),  and  the  so-called  foun-
tain of  the  Inca,  with  andenes,  at  the  foot  of  the  promontory
on  which  the  hacienda  buildings  of  Yumani  have  been
erected ;  together,  probably,  with  andenes  on  that  promon-
tory; second,  the  ruins  at  Pucara  and  the  "Ahijadero";
third,  the  cluster  of  ruins  at  Easapata  and  at  the  foot  of


;cbyG00'^lc


188 THE  IStiANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Llaq'-aylli ;  and  fourth,  the  rains  on  the  northwestern  end
of  the  Island,  embracing  Mnro-Kato  (3),  the  Sacred  Bock
and  annexes  (a),  the  min  called  Ohincana  (b),  the  almost
obliterated  vestiges  at  Chncaripn-pata  (c),  the  andenes  of
Chucaripn  (d),  and  the  promontory  of  Sicuyu  (3),  with
whatever  faint  traces  may  exist  between  that  point  and  the
Sacred  Bock,  and  on  the  flanks  of  the  conical  height  of  Ticaiu.

There  are  also  Inca  remains  in  the  soathem  bottom  of
Kona  (p),  but  these,  together  with  the  andenea  in  tiie
grassy  basins  north  and  south,  and  those  on  the  slopes  of
Kakayo-kena,  also  the  road  called  Qni-vini  (30),  attract  less
attention  from  the  fact  that  no  buildings  have  as  yet  been
found  among  them.

All  the  other  groups  show  traces  of  edifices.  The  first
three  are  mostly  built  on  or  surrounded  by  fertile  soil;  the
fourth  group  lies  on  partly  sterile  ground.  All  are  provided
with  good  water,  and  in  connection  with  each  we  find  sys-
tems of  terraced  garden-beds,  superior  in  construction  to
the  Chullpa  patas.  The  first  group  affords  a  good  view  of
the  eastern  shore  of  Copacavana,  the  straits  of  Tiqoina,
and  the  Island  of  Koati.  The  second  lies  in  a  well-shel-
tered bottom.  The  third  embraces  a  magnificfflit  range  of
view  toward  the  east,  nortii,  and  northwest.  The  fourth
commands  the  north,  part  of  the  northwest,  southwest,  and
portions  of  the  south.  It  may  be  said  that  the  first  group
commanded  the  eastern  shore  of  tiie  Peninsula  of  Copa-
cavana and  the  Peninsula  of  Huata ;  the  third  the  line  of
the  eastern  Bolivian  mainland  and  the  main  Lake ;  and  the
fourth  the  Peruvian  coast  from  Pnno  to  Yungnya;  so  that,
from  these  sites,  the  shores  of  Lake  Titicaca  could  be
watched  in  sections.

Nothing  indicates,  however,  that  the  possibility  of  sur-
prise or  ambush  was  dreaded  by  the  Inca.  Landings  mif^t
be  effected,  under  cover  of  darkness,  at  points  out  of  si^t
of  any  of  these  Inca  settlements.  Either  the  people  vrho
selected  the  sites  had  no  grounds  for  fear,  or  noctamal  at-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


fl


.2 9


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICAOA 189

tacks  were,  hj  the  Indians  of  Bolivia  and  Pern,  not  nsnally
made."  For  creeping  op  and  hiding  in  close  proximity
to  the  buildings  nntil  dawn,  there  were  ample  opportunities.
This  indicates  that  the  Island  was  not  exposed  to  danger
while  under  Inca  sway.

A  distinctive  feature  of  the  settlements  called  Inca,  aside
from  superior  construction  and  finish,  is  the  lesser  number
and  greater  size  of  the  buildings.  From  one  to  three  larger
edifices  and  not  over  five  or  six  smaller  ones  compose  each
duster.  The  main  buildings,  while  far  from  being  very
large,  are  still  superior  in  size  to  anything  of  ChuUpa  type.

Another  feature  is  the  traces  of  wide  trails  that  connect
the  several  establishments  with  each  other.  We  must  not
fancy,  however,  that  these  were  highways  suc^  as  we  find
in  civilized  countries.  For  the  greater  part  of  their  length
they  are  simply  well-trodden  trails;  such,  for  instance,  as
those  leading  up  to  the  "Cerro  de  Montezuma"  near  Casas
Qrandes  in  €3iihuahua,  northern  Mexico.''  The  section  of
the  ancient  road  called  Quivini— Chullun-Kayani  (15)— is
from  seven  to  ten  feet  wide  on  the  slope,  but  it  is  impossible
to  detect  how  much  of  that  width  belongs  to  the  road  and
how  much  to  the  terraces  along  which  it  ascends.  It  con-
nected the  summit  of  Kakayo-kena  with  the  clnster  about
the  Sacred  Bock,  but  the  main  portion  of  it,  across  the
undnlating  slopes  between  the  northern  bottom  of  Kona  to
the  Sacred  Bock,  and  Chncaripu,  seems  to  have  been  an
Indian  trail  simply  worn  out  by  frequent  travel.  So  it  is
the  case  with  the  road  from  Pncdra  to  the  northwestern
end  of  the  Island,  and  with  the  trails  that  connected  the
southern  (first)  group  with  Pucara.  The  latter  was  prob-
ably along  the  line  of  that  which  now  leads  to  Challa,  but
deviated  from  it  to  follow  the  ridge  instead  of  descending
to  the  Challa  Isthmus.  Mr.  Sqnier  saw  some  of  tiiis  an-
cient road,  but  included  in  the  description  of  it  features
that  are  not  artiflciaL*"  Besides  Quivini,  the  best  pre-
served specimens  are  the  fragments  of  the  road  descending


;cbyG00'^le


190 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

from  MuTo-Kato  toward  mins  called  Mama^Ojlia.  On  the
heights,  however,  all  tracee  vanisL

Another  distinctive  feature  of  Inca  mins  on  the  Island
are  particnlarly  well  constracted  andenes,  with  artifidal
drainage  of  the  slopes  in  two  places.  The  water  was  gath-
ered in  troughs  behind  the  anden,  which  troughs  emptied
through  narrow  condnits  into  an  artificial  baain,  whence  it
is  led  hj  stone  channels  down  the  slope  into  tiie  Lake.  Snch
is  the  case  at  the  "Fountain  of  the  Inca"  of  Yumani  (n)
and  at  the  garden  of  Challa  (23).  At  the  Chincana  (&)
something  analogous  may  have  existed,  although  there  ia
at  present  merely  a  spring  surrounded  by  a  stone  encloanre.
Such  contrivances  indicate  considerable  advance,  bat  we
must  not  exaggerate  by  fancying  these  places  to  have  been
improved  artistically.  They  are  naturally  picturesque,  as
many  others  on  the  Island,  and  the  superabundtMce  of
water  compelled  the  Indians  to  resort  to  drainage.  The
gardens  themselves,  with  a  number  of  imported  shade  and
other  trees,  flowers— dahlias,  forget-me-nots,  pinks,  roses,
etc.— and  strawberries,  are  from  colonial  times,  and  they
have  given  to  the  sites  their  main  charm.  If  we  divest  tiie
garden  of  Challa  of  these  originally  Spanish  beautifying
elements,  the  view  remains:  clusters  of  indigenous  stunted
kenoa-trees,  and  monotonous  andenes  as  the  only  work
performed  by  the  Incas.  The  same  is  the  case  at  Yumani.
Only  the  utilitarian  point  of  view— not  landscape  gardening
as  fabled- determined  the  Indian's  choice,  and  the  rever-
ence which  the  Peruvian  aborigine,  like  all  Indians,  paid  to
springs  and  groves  was  a  part  of  their  Huaca,  Faccarioa,
or  Machula  worship."

The  works  above  described,  and  attributed  to  the  Inca,
appear  greatly  superior  to  the  achievements  of  the  so-
called  Chullpa.  It  remains  to  investigate  how  far  this
superiority  is  upheld  in  other  lines,  and  we  must  therefore
attempt  a  descriptiou  of  the  main  ruins  and  cast  a  glance
at  the  artefacts  found  in  connection  with  them.


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  EUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 191

Mr.  Sqnier  has  pvea  a  plan  of  the  rains  at  the  Pniicu,
a  short  distance  above  the  landing.  As  these  vestigea  have
almost  disappeared,  I  refer  to  his  description,  plan,  and
pictare."^  These  snaall  strnctnres  overlooked  approach  to
the  Island  from  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana.  The  path
vhich  now  leads  up  to  the  backbone  of  the  Island  (see
map),  rises,  as  already  stated,  continnonsly,  though  not
steeply.  Soon  the  traveler  sees  below  him  on  the  right  the
reins  known  as  Pilco-Kayma.

The  Pilco-Kayma  is  a  qnadrangnlar  stractnxe  of  stone
connected  with  a  system  of  handsomely  constmcted  andenea
that  skirt  the  abrupt  shores  of  the  Lake  and  extend  in
curves  400  feet  to  the  sonth-sontheast,  and,  by  airline,  800
feet  to  the  north.  From  the  level  on  which  the  main  ruin
stands,  terraced  garden-beds  rise  irregolarly,  running  in
undulating  lines  as  far  as  the  extreme  northern  end  of  the
whole  system  of  terraces.  Above  tiiat  end,  other  handsome
andenes  rise,  forming  eleven  nearly  parallel  gradients,
altogether  little  more  than  a  hundred  feet  deep,  while  their
front  toward  the  Lake  is  not  over  two  hundred  feet  in
length.  Beyond  these  andenes  follow  others,  out  of  sight
from  the  main  ruin,  which  extend  northward  toward  Yu-
mani.  Most  of  these  are  under  cultivation,  and  they  may
even  be  partly  modem.

In  tiie  rear  of  the  Kayma,  the  ground  rises  rapidly  and
rocks  bulge  out  in  irregular  steps,  bearing  patches  of  soil
which  were  also  cultivated.  The  andenes  in  front  of  the
building  are  well  made,  and  overlook  the  waters  of  the
Lake  from  a  hei^t  of  about  sixty  feet  Descent  is  abrupt
and  the  beach  very  narrow.

A  little  over  one  hundred  feet  north-northwest  of  the
Kayma  stands  a  small  building,  seventeen  feet  long  by
thirty  in  depth,  on  the  southern  comer  of  a  terrace
deiusely  overgrown  by  shrubbery.  The  length  of  this  ter-
race is  one  hundred  and  twelve  feet,  and  its  northern  end
bears  another  small  edifice,  more  ruined  than  the  former


;cbyG00'^lc


192 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

and  of  about  equal  dimensions.  The  rear  wall  of  the  anden
on  which  these  two  etructures  stand  is  of  very  fair  con-
struction and  has  eight  trapezoidal  niches.  It  will  be  seen
that,  while  the  dimensions  of  tiie  niches  are  nearly  (not
absolutely)  equal,  there  are  differences  in  detail  of  form
or  design.  Thus,  one  has  a  lintel,  and  tiny  recess,  which  the
others  hare  not  Between  every  two  of  the  large  niches  is
a  smaller  one  in  the  shape  of  a  lozenge,  the  deep  middle
recess  of  which  is  lined  by  fonr  thin  plates  of  stone  set  on
edge,  and  as  many  small  pebbles  formiiig  the  comers.  This
wall  presents,  therefore,  quite  an  ornamental  appearance.
Its  height  is  eight  feet.  The  masonry  of  the  buildings  is
equally  well  made,  and  one  has  a  number  of  small  interior
niches.

Below  this  upper  tier  runs  an  esplanade  four  feet  wide
and  three  feet  high,  faced  with  stones  and  fairly  leveled.
All  these  structures  are  now  overgrown  with  shrubbery
that  plays  sad  havoc  with  them.  The  purpose  of  the  two
buildings  and  of  the  terraces  connected  is  conjectural.  Mr.
Squier  offers  no  explanation.  The  interior  would  be  per-
fectly plain  except  for  the  niches,  to  which  a  practical,  not
an  ornamental,  purpose  must  be  ascribed.  These  side-
buildings,  and  another,  which  I  yet  have  to  describe,  appear
like  outhouses  or  isolated  store-rooms,  rather  than  dwell-
ings or  structures  of  a  ceremonial  or  military  character.

Abont  twenty  feet  to  the  west,  and  higher  up  the  slope,
stands  a  larger  bnildiug  which  is  better  preserved.  In
places  its  walls  are  as  tall  as  eight  feet,  and  three  feet  thick,
with  two  interior  niches  in  the  western  and  three  in  the
northern  wall.  The  doorway  is  thirty  inches  wide  and  its
stone  frame  well  made,  but  it  has  no  linteL  There  is  as  little
left  of  the  roof  as  in  any  of  the  others,  la  front  of  this
structure  lies  a  ruined  platform  about  six  feet  wide.

This  edifice  stands  on  higher  ground  than  the  Pilco-
Kayma  proper,  and  it  leans  against  the  same  rocky  rise  as
that  building. It  wiU  be  seen  that  the  Kayma  is  not  sym-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


I!


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 193

metrically  built.  It  forms  a  qaadrangle  with  sides  of  un-
equal length.  The  north  vail,  withoat  its  two  additions,
measures  forty-nine  feet;  the  western  wall,  forty-four;  the
southern,  for^-five;  and  the  eastern  or  Lake-front,  fifty.
The  cause  of  these  irregularities  lies  partly  in  the  nature
of  the  ground  which  slants  considerably  to  the  eastward.
It  is  another  evidence  that  the  builders,  notwithBtanding
certain  advances,  conld  not  remove  serious  natural  oIk
stacles,  hence,  as  in  New  Mexico  and  at  Mitia,  in  Mexico,'"
adapted  their  buildings  to  the  ground,  instead  of  leveling
the  ground  for  the  building.

The  waUs,  exterior  as  well  as  interior,  of  the  Pilco-Kay-
ma,  vary  in  thickness  between  eighteen  and  forty-two
inches,  and  at  small  distances  from  each  other.  The  ma-
sonry is  fair,  the  stones  are  laid  in  irregnlar  courses,  some-
times breaking  joints,  and  the  blocks  are  of  every  imaginable
size,  merely  broken,  not  cut  or  hewn.  Thin  seams  of  mud
form  their  binding;  hence  their  appearance  is  not  as  pre-
possessing as,  for  instance,  the  stone  walls  at  Cacha,  nearer
to  Cnzco,  or  the  so-called  "hoase  of  Atahualpa"  at  Oaja-
marca.  But  since  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  over
tiiese  rongb  walls  there  has  been  a  coating  of  day,  painted
besides,  we  may  consider  the  present  appearance  of  the
building  as  merely  the  skeleton  of  its  ori^nal  state.

The  lower  story,  as  we  may  call  it,  is  divided  into  eleven
apartments,  three  interior  courts,  and  one  space  on  the
Lake-front,  in  regard  to  which,  tiiere  being  no  roof  and
only  a  considerable  amount  of  rubbish  left,  I  do  not  venture
to  decide  whether  it  was  a  room,  or  an  open  passage,  or
small  court.  The  western  end,  surmounted  by  a  part  of
what  is  an  upper  story,  is  completely  dark  and  very  little
detail  can  be  observed.  The  three  middle  courts,  as  will  be
seen  at  a  glance  by  comparing  the  plan  of  the  upper  story
with  that  of  the  lower,  are  small,  filled  with  thorny  shrub-
bery, and  they  have  niches  as  well  as  doorways  leading  into
rooms  on  the  west. Both  the  northern  and  southern  courts


;cbyG00'^lc


194 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

open  to  the  outside.  The  middle  court  commnmcates  with
one  single  room  to  the  west  of  it  (I  refer  to  the  plan  for
dimensions  and  details.)  The  height  of  the  rooms  decreases
from  east  to  west.  Those  on  the  Lake-front  measure  from
fifteen  to  fifteen  and  a  half  feet  to  the  top  of  the  ceiling.  The
exterior  hei^t  of  the  building  along  that  front  is  nearly
twenty-two  feet,  leaving  seven  feet  for  the  thickness  of
the  roof,  which  is  of  slabs,  mad  and  stones.  It  is  not  cer-
tain that  its  present  thickness  was  the  original  one,  and  it
would  seem  to  have  been  less  rather  than  more.  At  the
northern  doorway,  the  total  elevation  of  the  structure  is
reduced  to  about  eighteen  feet,  and  at  the  western  end  of
tiie  northern  wall  to  eight.  Still  the  height  of  the  apart-
ments, while  less  in  western  rooms,  does  not  keep  step  with
the  decrease  in  exterior  elevation.

The  three  rooms  along  the  eastern  front  that  are  still
intact  have  the  same  kind  of  ceilings.  They  consist  each  of
four  tiers  of  successively  overlapping  stones  to  a  hei^t  of
fifty-eight  inches.  The  uppermost  tier  supports  four  large
slabs  forming  the  apex  of  this  primitive  vault.  We  could
not  measure  exactly  the  surface  of  this  apex,  hence  the
figures,  so  far  as  dimensions  are  concerned,  are  not  abso-
lutely accurate.  The  masonry  inside  is  not  much  better
than  that  outside,  and  it  is  plain  that  it  was  plastered  over
and  painted.  The  ceilings  of  the  western  rooms,  so  far  as
we  could  see,  correspond  to  the  description  given  by  Mr.
Sqoier:  "Their  ceiling  is  formed  by  fiat  overlapping
stones";  but  the  "great  regularity"  with  which  they  are
said  to  be  laid  we  were  unable  to  find.  The  plates  forming'
the  apex  are  far  from  equal  in  size  and  seem  to  have  been
picked  out  rather  than  shaped.  Doorways  with  niches  and
rude  cornices,  and  larger  and  smaller  niches,  give  to  the
outer  walls  a  clumsily  ornate  appearance.  The  northern
doorways  appear  to  have  been  the  main  entrances  to  the
lower  story,  being  on  the  most  convenient  side.  Niches  are
plentiful,  and  those  in  the  rooms  on  the  Lake-front  are


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 195

taller  and  more  elaborate.  Fnrther  in,  they  become  small
and  plain.  There  are  no  fireplaces,  chimneys,  or  fines ;  not
even  a  smoke  escape,  which  is  strange  enongh  in  a  cold
climate.  Some  of  the  doors  and  larger  niches  taper  toward
the  top ;  the  others  are  fairly  rectangular.

In  two  of  the  rooms  (see  plan  of  lower  story),  a  heavy
boolder,  resting  on  the  floor,  is  imbedded  and  has  been  in-
cluded in  tiie  wall.  Above  one  of  these  boolders  is  a  niche.
The  boulders  are  so  large  that  it  would  have  required  sev-
eral men  to  remove  them ;  still  it  is  strange  that  people  who
were  able  to  move  incomparably  more  ponderous  masses,  as
shown  at  SUlustani  and  Cuzco,  should  have  left  smaller
blocks  in  situ,  building  over  and  around  them.  The  pur-
pose of  making  a  rude  mass  an  integral  part  of  the  side  of
a  room  is  not  clear  to  me.  The  work  of  carrying  the  boulder
to  the  spot,  would  have  been  much  greater  than  that  of
laying  the  wall.  The  boulders  show  no  trace  of  workman-
ship. They  may  have  been  placed  there  for  some  purpose,
but  it  strikes  me  as  more  rational  that  they  were  found
there  originally  and  included  in  the  masonry.

The  whole  of  the  lower  story  has,  so  far  as  we  could
find,  only  two  airholes  aside  from  doorways,  and  to  these
tiny  openings  the  name  of  window  can  not  be  given.  They
are  so  constructed  as  to  permit  tiie  admission  of  a  thin
stream  of  air,  but  of  very  little  light,  as  the  opening  is  not
straight,  but  in  one  forms  an  angle,  in  the  other  almost  a
"T."  Both  are  in  the  rooms  toward  the  Lake,  hence  in
those  that  are  lighted  and  ventilated  by  tall  doorwaj^.
None  of  the  other  apartments  in  the  rear  have  anything
but  low  doorways  to  illuminate  them;  they  are  dark,  dingy
caverns.

The  little  outhouse  resembles  the  other  smaller  bmldii^,
only  it  is  not  as  large  and  has  no  niches.  It  is  a  continua-
tion of  the  southern  wall  of  the  Kayma,  and  has  the  hand-
somest masonry  of  the  whole  group.  The  doorway  in
particular  is  very  carefully  made.


;cbyG00'^lc


196 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

In  T^i^ard  to  the  upper  tier,  which  is  much  more  in  rains
Oian  the  lower,  I  refer  to  the  plan.  It  will  be  seen  that  it
covers  but  one  half  of  the  ground  floor.  On  the  northern
side  are  portions  of  walls  as  tall  as  nine  feet,  the  others
are  lower,  and  the  eastern  front  is  much  deteriorated;
hence  architectaral  details  offer  less  interest  The  two
rectangular  additions  in  the  rear  are  abont  on  a  level  with
the  floor  of  the  upper  story ;  they  are  in  rains  and  filled  with
shrubbery.  Lmnediately  behind  them  rise  the  rocky  steps
of  the  slope,  some  of  which  have  been  used  as  andenes,
wherever  the  ledge  was  capped  by  a  sufficient  thi<^es8  of
soil.

The  site  itself,  on  which  the  Pilco-Kayma  forms  the  cen-
tral stractare,  is  fairly  picturesque.  The  terraces  and
slopes  afforded  ample  space  and  soil  for  cultivation.  Water
is  near  at  hand.  It  receives  the  greatest  amount  of  sun-
shine obtainable,  being  op^i  to  the  east  and  northeast,
and  protected  against  cold  blasts  from  both  north  and  west.
It  is,  for  these  great  altitudes,  comparatively  rich  in
natural  advantages.

The  magnificent  view  from  the  Pilco-BIayma,  the  un-
paralleled beauty  of  the  Sorata  group  of  the  Andes,  which
nowhere  else  on  the  Island  appears  so  grand  and  majestic,
inspires  almost  reverential  admiration.  Every  one  of  oar
visits  to  this  site  was  a  sonroe  of  new  and  deep-felt  pleasure,
aside  from  archaeological  interest  How  far  this  impressed
and  impresses  the  liidian,  whether  Aymara  or  Quichna,
CoUa  or  Lupaca  or  Inca,  may  be  judged  from  his  character
and  primitive  beliefs.  If  the  scenery  affected  his  mind  at  all,
it  was  throngh  the  appalling  nearness  of  the  gigantic  peaks,
each  of  which  was  to  him  the  home  of  some  powerful  spirit,
and  not  a  "sense  of  nature's  beauty,"  of  which  there  is  no
trace  In  his  character,  either  in  ancient  or  modem  tames.

It  is  clear  from  the  size  of  the  edifices  that  the  number  of
their  former  inhabitants  cannot  have  been  great.  The
Pilco-E^yma,  admitting  that  all  the  rooms  were  occapied.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Plate  XLI

Artefacts  of  Bronze  (Inca  make)  from  the  laUod  of  Titaoaoa

1.  Bar  or  lever  of  bronze, 2.  Cbiael  or  engraTing  tool  erf  broDBe. 3.  Bn

needle  or  Yauri. 4.  EngraTer's  tool  (T)  of  bronze. 5.  Celt  or

chieel  of  bronze. G.  As  of  bronze. T.  Broose, knife


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 107

could  shelter  at  most  a  hnndred  people  by  dint  of  crowd-
ing. The  Dothoases  might  have  lodged  as  many  more.  What
tiie  original  purpose  of  the  building  may  have  been  is  diffi-
cult to  imagine.^

The  fiinnous  slopes  between  the  Pileo-Kayma  and  Ynmani
are  covered,  as  already  stated,  by  andenes  showing  ancient
and  recent  cultivation.  I  have  mentioned  the  fact  that  the
nmnber  and  extent  of  these  garden-beds  does  not  indicate  a
correspondingly  large  agricultural  population.  The  system
of  rotation  in  lands  requires  a  very  large  surface  in  com-
parison with  the  number  of  the  people.  We  find  no  traces
of  Inca  buildings  tmtil  we  reach  the  lower  slopes  of  the
promontory  of  Yumani,  where,  not  far  from  tiie  water's
edge,  shapeless  rubbish  designates  the  spot  on  which,  ac-
cording to  the  present  owners  of  Yumani,  "another
Kayma"  formerly  stood.  Not  even  the  approximate  size
of  the  structure  can  he  determined,  so  completely  have
treasure-seekers  overthrown  its  remains.  On  the  southern
slope  of  the  Ynmani  height,  however,  stand,  in  fair  state  of
preservation,  the  vestiges  called  "Foontain  of  the  Inca,"
improved  and  beautified  after  the  seventeenth  century
through  the  addition  of  trees  and  plants  not  indigenous  to
South  America.  What  renders  the  Fountain  and  its  num-
erous and  well  constructed  andenes  attractive  is  not  due
to  Indians.

From  the  plan  it  will  be  seen  that  the  water,  gathered  in
tiie  rear  of  the  upper  andenes,  finds  its  egress  into  a  wide
niche  with  a  small  basin,  and  through  four  openings  left
purposely  between  the  blocks  out  of  which  the  rear  wall  of
the  niche  is  built.  The  term  "spouts"  is  therefore  inap-
propriate, as  there  are  no  conduits  cut  in  the  stone,  still  less
spouts  that  protrude.  The  stones  are  fairly  laid  in  mud,  and
the  opoiings  are  at  unequal  distances.  A  coating  of  whitish
concrete  formerly  covered  the  wall  from  which  the  water
issues.  Traces  of  this  coating  still  exist,  and  to  it  must  he
attributed  the  statement  that  conduits  are  cut  in  the  stone.


;cbyG00'^lc


198 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AN©  KOATI

The  basin  in  front  is  not  deep,  and  from  it  the  water,  which
IB  beautifully  clear  and  of  excellent  quality,  finds  egress,
through  a  covered  channel,  to  the  lower  level  of  the  next
anden,  and  thence  down  the  slope  in  a  narrow  canal  of
stones  forming  on  the  way  little  falls  of  from  one  to  two
feet.  The  height  of  the  slope,  from  the  beach  to  the  Foun-
tain, is  110  feet,  and  the  horizontal  distance  nearly  300  feet.
All  along  the  inclined  channel,  steps,  made  of  rude  and  very
unequal  stone  plates  three  feet  wide  at  the  top,  but  only
two  feet  further  down,  lead  to  the  narrow  and  sandy  beach.
On  both  sides  of  this  path  numerous  andenes  extend  in
carves,  those  on  one  side  not  being  always  on  the  level  of
those  on  the  other.  The  facing  of  these  terraces  is  well
made,  and  superior  to  any  on  Ciriapata  and  similar  sites.
Below,  where  the  water  issues  on  t^e  beach,  the  anden  is
high.  Stone  steps  lead  up  to  it  at  more  than  one  place,  and
tall  and  well  made  niches,  not  exactly  equal  in  size,  adorn
the  front,  both  right  and  left  of  the  channel.  We  saw  no
trace  of  buildings.  The  whole  is  a  system  of  terraced
garden-beds  combmed  with  a  well-planned  arrangement  for
drainage.  The  basin  is  too  small  for  a  bath.  In  the  wall
to  the  left  of  it,  are  two  niches  of  small  size,  capable  of
holding  a  pitcher.  Terraces,  niches,  basin  and  steps,  have
been  repaired  by  the  owners  of  Yumani  at  'rorions  times.
Some  details  may  not  be  original;  the  main  features  cer-
tainly are.  The  water  is  not  from  a  spring.  It  is  the  drain-
age of  the  steep  slopes  of  a  crest,  extending  from  Pallakasa
to  Kenuani  (13),  of  part  of  the  latter  peak,  and  of  the
southern  declivities  of  Yumani.  The  crest  and  tops
mentioned  are  bare,  and  the  grade  is  steep,  hence  the
waters  rush  down  the  slopes.  Some  years  ago  the  owners
of  Yumani  had  to  open  the  rear  of  the  anden  in  which  the
fonntain  is  constructed,  because  the  latter  stopped  running.
They  found  an  ancient  wooden  channel,  partly  decayed,  the
decay  obstructing  the  outflow.  This  channel  is  said  to  ex-
tend nearly  as  far  as  the  Pilco-Kayma,  hence  it  receives  the


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


«kGoo'^Ic


ANCIENT  KUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 199

waters  of  a  considerable  length  and  height  of  slope  and
drains  it,  insuring  stability  to  the  ground.  Were  it  not  for
this  drain,  the  soil  woald  turn  into  mire  and  eventnally  be
washed  away.  The  Fountain  of  the  Inca  ia  therefore  sim-
ply an  arrangement  for  draining  the  declivity  in  its  rear.
The  channel  throngh  the  garden  and  to  the  Lake,  if  primi-
tive,  was  not  intended  for  irrigation,  as  the  water  in  it
flows  at  a  lower  level  than  the  andenes  on  both  aides,  and
it  cannot  be  turned  onto  any  of  the  terraces.

Beyond  Yumani,  except  the  almost  undistingnishable
remains  at  the  northern  base  of  its  promontory,  Inca  ruins,
if  they  ever  existed,  have  disappeared.  I  hold  it  to  be  likely,
that  Pncara,  on  the  margin  of  the  grassy  pasturage  called
"Ahijadero,"  at  the  base  of  Kea-Kolln,  is  the  next  site  of
Inca  remains,  on  our  way  from  Yumani  to  the  northwestern
extremity  of  the  Island.

Pncara  (m)  is  sadly  wrecked.  What  remains  does  not
even  allow  suggestions  of  a  reconstruction.  The  bottom  of
the  "Ahijadero**  is  in  many  places  marshy  and  traversed
by  dykes  dividing  it  into  irregular  sections.  The  elevation
of  these  causeways  above  the  ground  is  from  a  few  inches  to
six  feet,  one  side  being  nearly  always  higher  than  the  other.
Their  width  varies  also,  five  and  thirteen  feet  being  the
extremes  noticed  by  us.  The  rims  or  borders  are  lined  with
rows  of  stones  in  single  file,  and  in  the  case  of  the  widest  of
these  causeways,  another  row  divides  it  longitudinally  also
(see  diagrams).  The  dykes  are  built  of  earth  and  gravel,
with  some  stones,  so  as  to  make  them  harder  than  the  sur-
rounding level.

The  Indians  could  give  us  no  information  in  regard  to
these  causeways,  neither  could  the  owners  of  the  Island,  nor
anybody  else  familiar  with  Titicaca.  They  had  escaped
attention  thus  far,  as  their  appearance  is  not  striking.  Our
first  impression  was  that  they  were  ancient  irrigating
canals.  But  it  soon  became  apparent  that  this  was  not  the
case. The  "Ahijadero"  is  a  marshy  pasturage,  its  north-


;cbyG00'^lc


200 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

western  section,  at  the  foot  of  Eea-KoUn,  a  swamp.  The
central  and  soathem  parts  are  drier  because  higher.  The
djkes  in  question  cannot  have  had  anything  to  do  with
cultivation,  for  the  bottom  was  not  anciently  cultivated.
These  contrivances  seem  therefore  to  have  been  made  in
order  to  enable  circulation.  It  is  tiie  only  suggestion  I  can
offer.  There  are  two  groups  of  them,  one  of  which  touches
Inca  andenes  on  the  slope  of  Little  Kea-Kolln,  the  other
traverses  nearly  the  whole  length  of  the  bottom,  from
a  deep  ravine  on  the  flanks  of  Santa  Barbara  to  the  beach.
Up  that  ravine,  the  Indians  aay,  an  ancient  trail  or  road
leads  to  the  Sacred  Bock.  The  ravine  is  so  much  eroded
that  we  cannot  affirm  having  seen  vestiges  of  the  trail,  and
higher  up  so  many  trodden  paths  cross  the  slopes  that  it  is
impossible  to  distinguish  the  old  from  the  new.  The  lower
end  of  the  long^t  dyke  tapers  out  almost  in  front  of  Pn-
cara.  Hence  it  is  possible  that  the  causeways  were  built  for
the  purpose  of  facilitating  intercourse  between  Puoara  and
the  northwestern  end  of  the  Island,  the  bottom  of  the
' '  Ahi jadero ' '  being  formerly  more  swampy  than  it  is  to-day,
and  water  covered  perhaps  the  entire  expanse  as  far  as  the
base  of  Kumpata  (r).  Similar  causeways  are  fonnd  in  tiie
southern  bottom  of  Kona,  of  which  mention  will  be  made
further  on.

The  rains  proper  consist  of  what  at  first  sight  appears  as
a  long  and  solid  wall  forming  an  "L,"  the  eastern  wing  of
which  is  taller  but  much  shorter  than  the  southern.  Its
thickness  is  not  easy  to  determine,  as  it  has  been  cban^d
by  removal  as  well  as  through  additions,  but  it  seems  to
vary  between  four  and  a  half  and  six  feet  The  masonry  is
fairly  laid  and  snperior  to  Cbullpa  work.  The  soathem
wing  is  still  standing,  partly,  on  a  length  of  four  hundred
feet ;  there  are  traces  of  its  former  extension  westward  for
qnite  a  distance  along  the  base  of  Kumpata.  Its  height
varies  between  four  and  eight  feet.  In  it  are  a  number  of
large  niches,  a  tall  one  alternating  with  a  smaller,  the


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


E%A1»  XLIU
0«n4TaJ  plui  ot  tbe  bgM«n  of  AUontefD  vUiMiiU  at  Piicwa


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 201

former  going  down  to  the  ground.  There  are  two  openings
that  may  have  been  gateways,  but  they  mi^t  also  be  due  to
Temoval.  Yet  I  believe  that  at  least  tite  smaller  one  was  an
entrance.  The  eastern  wing  seems  to  have  been  part  of  a
btiilding.  Its  length  is  ninety-eight  feet  from  the  comer  to
a  doorway,  thronj^  which  stone  steps  lead  np  to  a  M^er
plane  on  the  slope  of  Uacuyn.  In  this  wall  are  two  tall  and
qnite  elaborate  niches,  and  two  openings  the  largest  of
which  measures  four  feet  in  height,  twenty-six  inches  at
the  base  and  twenty-four  at  the  top,  whereas  the  other  is
smaller  and  not  tapering.  Both  have  stone  lintels.  The
greatest  elevation  of  this  wing  is  nearly  thirteen  feet,  the
tallest  niche  measuring  eight  and  a  half  feet  in  height.
Both  openings  stand  five  feet  above  the  ground.  Here  de-
struction has  been  very  great.  Enclosures  for  cattle  and
swine  have  been  built  out  of  the  material  by  the  Indians,
and  the  space  in  front  is  so  completely  converted  into  pig-
sties, and  the  like,  that  it  is  nseless  to  conjecture  what  might
have  stood  there  formerly.  As,  furthermore,  we  could  not
obtain  any  ioformation  about  the  place,  I  can  only  con-
jecture  that  there  stood  at  Pucara  '*once  upon  a  time"  a
stmcture,  one  wall  of  which  was  about  a  hundred  feet  in
lengtii  and  had  two  openings  like  windows,  to  the  east.
Why  these  openings  were  made  on  the  side  where  the  slope
crowds  the  walls,  is  strange,  unless  they  were  doorways  to
facilitate  access  from  the  rear.

Tall  andenes  with  tall  niches  line  the  slope  of  Kuru-
pata  in  the  rear  of  the  soutiiem  wing,  and  on  the  lowest
declivity  of  TJacuyu,  160  feet  from  tiie  eastern  wall  or
building,  lies  an  anden  (d),  with  at  least  five  ruined
niches,  while  its  front  is  otherwise  in  a  fair  state  of  pre-
servation. From  the  anden  a  wall,  partly  in  ruins,  advances
to  the  edge  of  a  lower  terrace,  shutting  it  off  on  the  south.
This  anden  also  is  well  constructed.  On  the  southern  side
a  little  chamber  has  been  bnilt  with  two  doorways,  one
below  and  the  other  above,  and  with  stone  steps  of  which


;cbyG00'^lc


202 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

only  traces  remain,  from  the  lower  to  the  npper.  Both  door-
ways are  carefully  made  and  do  not  taper  like  the  niches.
The  face  of  Qie  lower  anden  has  recesses  and  farther  south
stands  a  similar  structure  on  the  same  level.  We  could  only
glance  at  the  latter.  Higher  up  on  the  slope  of  Knmpata
stand  more  andenes  declared  to  he  Inca  hy  the  natives,  as
well  as  those  on  Little  Kea-Kolln.  It  is  probable  that
cultivation  was  limited  to  these  points,  in  addition  to  what
is  said  to  be  Chnllpa,  of  which  there  are  numerous  vestiges.
This  mixtnre  of  !bica,  Chnllpa,  and  modem  terraces,  and
consequent  changes,  renders  discrimination  very  difficalt
Among  the  artefacts  from  Pncara,  articles  in  copper  and
bronze  predominate.  From  here  we  obtained  tiirough  pur-
chase (excavations  being  impossible  as  the  slopes  were
covered  with  ripening  croi>s)  the  finest  specimens  of  knives.
Among  them  is  one  with  a  handle  terminating  in  a  well
modeled  hand.  This  implement  was  cast,  not  hanmiered.
We  also  obtained  heavy  bars  made  of  bronze,  said  to  be
agricultural  implements,  and  the  only  star-headed  weapon
(one  side  terminating  in  an  axe-blade)  that  we  saw  or
heard  of  on  the  Island.  It  is  singular,  that  none  of  the
older  sources  at  my  command  mentions  Uie  nuns  at  Pncara
or  any  ruin  resembling  it.  It  is  true  that  P*ucara  lies  away
from  the  line  of  travel  from  the  southern  to  the  northwest-
em  end  of  the  Island,  and  this  may  be  the  reason  also  why
Mr.  Squier  makes  no  mention  of  the  place;  but  the  mis-
sionaries of  the  seventeenth  century  might  be  expected  to
have  at  least  heard  of  Pncara  I  Nevertheless,  neither
Ramos,  nor  Cobo,  nor  Calancha,  all  of  whom  visited  the
Island,  allude  to  the  site,  whereas  on  other  ruins  they  are
very  explicit.'"  What  the  object  of  the  constructions  at
Pncara  might  have  been  is,  therefore,  a  matter  of  specula-
tion. The  elaborateness  displayed  in  several  of  the  andenes
indicates  that  some  importance  was  placed  upon  that
establishment,  an  indication  supported  also  by  the  exist-
ence of  andent  trails  and  dykes. It  evidently  stood  in


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


till

I  1  i«

M  It
f!
Jl


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


ANCIENT  RtHNS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 203

direct  relation  to  the  northwestern  clusters  of  Inca  build-
ings, and  was  probably  occopied  at  the  same  lime.

On  the  way  to  the  Bica  rains  at  Kasapata,  the  garden  of
Challa  (23)  attracts  attention.  It  is,  on  a  smaller  scale,  a
second  Fonntain  of  the  Inca.  The  few  andenes,  traversed
by  a  channel  filled  with  limpid  water  as  at  Tnmani,  are  even
better  boilt  than  those  of  the  Fountain.  There  is  at  the
Ghalla  garden  a  greater  number  of  kenna  trees ;  and  above
the  garden,  on  the  slope,  stands  qnite  a  grove  of  these
bulky  pldnts.  Most  of  them  mnst  be  qnite  old,  especially
the  one  in  the  garden  of  which  a  photograph  is  appended.
In  the  grove  are  remains  similar  to  those  at  Ynmani.  Ex-
cept a  channel  and  most  of  the  andenes,  all  improvements
were  made  since  the  conquest  and  probably  dnring  the
eighteenth  centnry.  Of  bnildinga  there  are  no  traces.  The
same  is  tme  of  the  site  called  Santa  Maria  (i),  where
rained  terraces  yielded  to  ns  potsherds  of  the  so-called
Inca  type.  Still  higher  up,  on  the  northern  declivities  of  the
Calvario  (4),  black  goblets.of  wood  were  found  in  crevices
of  the  rock.

Kasapata  (e)  stands  near  an  isthmus,  at  the  foot  of  the
promontory  of  Llaq'-aylli.  Mr.  Squier  made  a  plan  of  part
of  these  ruins,*'  the  importance  of  which  plan  consists  in
giving  lines  of  structures  south  of  what  is  called  "Temple
of  the  Sun."  To-day  no  traces  of  them  remain  beyond  one
well  preserved  anden  and  vestiges  of  others.  I  am  not  sore,
however,  that  these  terraces  are  ancient,  as  the  whole  is
under  cultivation,  hence  I  have  not  indicated  them  on  the
general  plan  of  Kasapata.  The  most  prominent  building  is
the  one  to  which  the  Indians  give  the  name  of  "Temple  of
the  Sun."  It  appears  to  have  contained  but  a  single  large
hall.  Its  outside  length  is  166  feet,  its  width  on  the  west
thirty-six,  on  the  east  forty.  The  walls,  which  are  fairly
bnilt  and  laid  in  mud,  are  three  feet  tiiick,  and  rise  not  over
six  feet  above  the  ground  in  their  present  condition.  Three
doorways,  slightly  tapering,  stand  close  to  each  other  in


;cbyG00'^lc


204 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

the  western  half  of  the  northern  front.  They  are  of  nneqnal
size.  Inside,  the  western  and  eastern  walls  have  each  four
small  niches,  and  the  soathem  side  has  two.  Oliierwise  the
interior,  aa  well  as  the  exterior,  is  plain.  It  nmj  be  that
there  was  a  doonray  to  the  sonth,  as  indicated  on  Mr.
Sqnier's  plan,  bnt  we  conld  not  find  the  two  eastern  door-
ways  on  the  northern  front  marked  in  his  diagram.  We
fonnd  five  window-like  openix^  elevated  from  the  ground
fonr  and  one  half  feet  and  of  about  the  width  of  those  at
Pncara,  bnt  not  aa  tall,  possibly  because  the  upper  part  of
the  wall  is  destroyed.  The  northern  front  has  stepping-
stones  for  scaling  the  walla.  Whether  this  indicates  the
former  existence  of  an  upper  story  we  could  not  ascertain.
There  is  no  trace  of  a  superatmcture,  still  less  of  the  roof.
Why  this  building  should  be  called  a  "temple"  I  cannot
imagine.  Some  of  the  historians  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury, who  saw  the  edifice  in  a  better  state  of  preservation,
assign  to  it  an  entirely  different  purpose.

It  stands  on  a  plateau,  or  esplanade,  250  feet  wide,  oc-
cupying the  highest  place  close  to  the  isthmus  on  the  west,
and  terminating  abmptly  both  east  and  west.  Farther
down,  the  declivity  on  each  side  shows  traces  of  ancient
andenes.  One  hundred  and  sixty  feet  to  the  north  of  the
"temple"  an  ancient  wall,  partly  rebuilt  of  late,  traverses
the  isthmus  from  east  to  west.  North  of  it  the  plateau
extends  in  slightly  varying  width  for  another  160  feet  to
the  base  of  Llaq'-aylli;  so  that  this  ancient  wall  divides
the  neck  into  two  equal  sections.  The  base  of  Llaq'-aylli
is  formed  by  a  handsome  anden  224  feet  long,  part  of
which  shows  traces  of  former  buildings  which  the  Indians
boast  of  having  destroyed  for  the  sake  of  treasure-hunt-
ing. Of  these  buildings  there  remain  part  of  the  founda-
tions—two  sides  only,  so  that  no  accurate  idea  can  be
gathered  of  size— and  an  interesting  doorway,  very  well
made.  The  details  of  tbis  doorway,  which  opens  on
andenes  of  the  slope  of  Llaq'-ayUi,  are  given  on  this  plan.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


i  &


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


t...


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 205

The  masonry  is  far  handsomer  than  any  at  Pilco-Kayma  or
Pacara,  and  the  lintel,  consisting  of  a  single  thin  slab,  is
particularly  well  cat  It  is  a  gateway  rather  than  a  door,
its  walls  measnring  at  least  five  feet  in  thickness.  In  Mr.
Sqnier's  time,  already,  the  northern  part  of  the  esplanade
was  a  greensward,  nearly  in  the  midst  of  which  lies  a  huge
block,  radely  chipped."*  The  Indians  call  it  a  block  of
sacrifice,  and  say  that  its  lower  side  is  elaborately  carved.
We  did  onr  utmost  to  induce  them  to  overtom  the  stone,
bat  in  vain.  So  that,  while  the  upper  surface  indeed  shows
traces  of  artificial  changes,  we  cannot  affirm  the  same  of
the  lower.  At  the  base  of  Llaq'-aylli  is  another  large  stone
resembling  a  seat,  the  back  of  which  has  a  groove.  This  is
believed  to  have  been  a  sacrificial  block  also.  The  groove  is
artifidal,  and  there  is  no  doubt  about  human  sacrifices  on
Titioaoa.  The  description  which  Bamos  gives  of  them  may
lead  to  the  snrmise  that  the  block  first  described  served
such  a  purpose.  He  states:  "They  placed  them  on  a  large
slab,  the  face  tamed  up  to  heaven,  and  palling  tiiem  by  the
neck  placed  over  it  a  slab  (1)  or  smooUi  stone  somewhat
broad,  and  with  another  stone  they  pounded  on  it  so  hard,
that  within  a  short  time  they  took  their  life  away  from
them.""  Elsewhere  he  remarks  that  the  victims  were
sometimes  smothered,  by  staffing  their  months  with  ground
coca;  and  again  that  they  were  killed  by  cutting  tiieir
throats.*'  The  fact  of  human  sacrifices  seems  established
by  nearly  all  the  older  sources,'"  yet  it  is  not  safe  so  far  to
assert  tbat  the  blocks  at  Kasapata  were  sacrificial  stones.

Of  the  andenes  covering  the  slopes  of  Llaq'-aylli  I  have
already  spoken.  I  have  also  mentioned  that  at  Kasapata
we  initiated  our  excavations  on  the  Island.  These  excava-
tions having  revealed  interesting  featores,  I  shall  devote
some  space  to  an  account  of  them.

The  first  work  was  done  at  a  spot  determined  by  the
indications  of  Manuel  Mamani  the  wizard,  and  in  order  to
humor  him;  bat  we  soon  found  that  he  either  had  littie


;cbyG00'^lc


206 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

knowledge  of  the  nuns,  or  that  he  desired  ns  to  waste  oar
time,  profitably  for  himself  and  other  Indians,  bnt  with
little  result  for  ourselves.  We  found  that  we  had  stmck
only  a  mined  anden  that  yielded  broken  pottery,  whorls,
and  especially  animal  bones  partly  boiled  and  gnawed.
Some  copper  also  was  found.  We  abandoned  the  place,
after  making  a  trench  eighteen  feet  long,  five  feet  wide,  and
eight  deep  at  the  npper  side,  and  probing  the  sod  all  aroond,
without  result.  We  then  moved  on  to  the  opposite  slope  of
the  isthmus  and  there  very  soon  brought  to  light  the  founda-
tions of  some  building.  The  eastern  end  of  it  waa  gone,  i^e
stones  having  been  removed  to  make  room  for  cultivation,
but  the  end  abutting  against  the  eastern  edge  of  the  plateau
was  intact.  Here  we  discovered  three  rooms,  the  middle
one  being  forty  feet  long  and  at  least  eighteen  feet  wide.
The  rooms  to  the  right  and  left  of  it  had  been  so  disturbed
that  no  idea  could  be  obtained  of  their  size.  The  northern
one  was  separated  from  the  middle  by  an  alley  about  twenty
inches  wide,  and  the  thickness  of  the  walls  was  three  and
four  feet,  respectively.  On  the  south  of  the  central  apart-
ment were  two  parallel  alleys  not  over  eighteen  inchee  in
width,  the  wall  separating  them  being  four  and  a  half  feet
thick,  while  the  side  of  the  sonthem  room,  or  remainder  of
a  room,  was  only  three  feet  thick.  Of  these  two  alleys  one
runs  dear  through  to  the  base  of  the  plateau,  the  other
makes  an  angle,  so  as  to  oicompass  the  central  hall  on  two
sides,  without  communicating  with  the  alley  that  separates
the  northern  apartment  from  the  esplanade.  The  founda-
tions were  set  in  the  ground,  not  over  four  feet  and  mostly
only  two.  The  masonry  was  fairly  done,  and  though  the
angles  are  not  absolutely  correct,  yet  they  are  approxi-
mately so. No  floor  of  any  kind  could  be  detected.

Inside  of  the  rooms  thus  uncovered  the  amount  of  arte-
facts was  comparatively  small,  but  the  narrow  alleys  and
the  space  south,  where  all  traces  of  walls  had  been  ob-
literated, were  densely  packed  with  potsherds. This  pot-


;cbyG00'^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


\


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 207

teiy  is  mostly  decorated  with  intricate  designs  in  vivid
colors,  far  superior  to  those  on  the  so-called  Chnllpa  pot-
tery. Wherever  shapes  could  be  recognized  they  showed
more  attractive  forms.  The  clay  and  burning  find  their
equals  only  in  red  and  black  goblets  taken  ont  of  OhuUpa
cysts,  whereas  the  decoration  is  much  more  artistic  It
was  clear  that  we  had  before  us  a  higher  development  of
ceramic  art,  completely  distinct  from  that  on  the  coast,  and
corresponding  in  every  way  to  what  may  be  called  the  Cozco
or  Inca  type  of  pottery.  Buder  specimens  were  also  f  omid
alongside  of  necks  of  jars  and  fragments  of  huge  nms
painted  in  brilliant  hues  with  very  elaborate,  mostly  geo-
metrical designs.  Of  plastic  ornaments,  the  cat's  head
placed  on  urns  and  pitchers  as  knobs,  heads  of  water-fowl
as  handles  to  flat  sancers,  were  qnite  common.  Some  of  the
plain  vessels  or  sherds  were  covered  with  soot,  and  char-
coal was  taken  ont  here  and  there.  Bones  of  animals,  among
which  the  Indians  at  once  recognized  the  indigenous  deer,
the  vicuna  and  the  llama,  were  found  with  the  sherds,  also
copper  implements,  mostly  topos,  and  one  of  silver.  Snch
pieces  were  nsually  buried  at  a  level  lower  than  the  founda-
tions. The  majority  of  objects  came  from  the  alleys  which
were  packed  with  what  appeared  to  be  refuse  from  the
buildings.  It  might  be  that  when  the  ground  at  Kasapata
was  first  tilled  again,  broken  pottery  and  rubbish  were
heaped  up  in  the  narrow  alleys ;  but  this  is  scarcely  prob-
able, as,  if  tiie  cultivators  wished  to  get  rid  of  such  obstacles,
they  had  the  easier  way  of  throwing  them  into  the  Lake,
instead  of  reburying  them  where  they  would  remain  in  the
way  of  the  hoe  or  plow.  Hence  we  con(dnded  that,  while
we  had  brought  to  light  at  least  three  rooms  of  an  ancient
structure,  or  perhaps  three  ancient  houses,  we  had  also
nncovered  the  place  whither  refuse  was  thrown.  Among
the  animal  bones  many  had  been  boiled  or  cooked.  Of  stone
implements  few  were  taken  out,  and,  while  the  presence
of  charred  and  smoked  pottery  as  well  as  of  animal  remains


;cbyG00'^lc


208 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

indicates  cooking,  not  a  household  article  of  etone,  like  the
grinding  slab  or  mortar,  was  met  with.  This  may  be  due  to
the  Indian  custom  of  securing  such  articles  for  present  use.
Of  human  remains  there  was  not  a  trace.

After  probing,  without  result,  the  whole  length  of  the
slightly  inclined  plane  on  which  the  excavation  had  been
made,  and  thus  confirming  the  statements  of  the  Indians
that  this  locality  had  been  thoroughly  ransacked  a  long
time  ago,  we  moved  on  to  the  Esplanade.  The  part  of  it
fronting  the  "temple"  did  not  seem  promising,  as  it  ap-
peared either  to  have  been  excavated  long  before  or  to
contain  nothing.  The  latter  proved  to  be  the  case.  An  old
Indian  living  on  the  site  told  us  that  faint  traces  of  walls
were  seen  formerly  on  the  part  of  the  plateau  adjoining
the  transverse  wall  in  front  of  the  "temple."  We  accord-
ingly began  there,  and  soon  had  the  pleasure  of  bringing  to
light  vestigea  of  three  buildings  not  indicated  on  the  plan  of
Mr.  Squier.  Hence  they  must  have  been  destroyed,  their
fomidations  covered  up,  and  forgotten  long  ago.  Even
these  foundations  are  partly  obliterated.

Contiguous  to  the  transverse  wall  we  found  a  building  of
four  compartments.  The  two  middle  ones  are  narrower
than  the  eastern  (a),  and  the  western  seems  to  have  been  a
court.  The  western  wall  of  the  latter  is  almost  destroyed.
The  length  of  the  first  tiiree,  which  probably  formed  the
building  proper,  is  sixty-four  feet,  that  of  the  annex,  thirty.
Width  on  the  eastern  end  is  eighteen,  on  the  western  six-
teen, and  there  is  a  trace  of  a  continuation  of  the  former
along  the  edge  of  the  terrace.  The  second  or  middle  room
has  a  recess.  We  excavated  this  quadrangle  thoroughly  to
a  depth  of  four  feet  at  least,  so  as  to  reat^  the  hud  yel-
lowish marl  with  chert  and  pebbles,  called  "chillu,"  that
forms  the  usual  substratom.  No  human  vestiges  of  any
kind  may  be  expected  in  this  very  compact  formation.  We
found  handsome  fragments,  among  them  necks  of  very
laige  jars,  but  there  was,  on  the  whole,  less  pottery  than  in


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


Platk  XL\'n

Dimd-plui  of  Kanpaibt  and  Ukq'^arlU. 2.  T^Mbo  or  soMwUed  t«iq>le
of  EampaU. 3.  Nichos  in  wall  of  Tuubo. i,  5.  Ste^piDg-
stoues  in  wall  of  Ttmbo. 6,  Doorwaf  in  Tambo.
7.  "Window  or  npp«T  entrance  in  Ttunbo


.wGooi^lc


£^

3

V%sa-

ll^r

4

2

DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 209

the  previons  excavation.  In  the  two  western  rooms  five
hollow  cylinders,  quite  thick,  of  clay,  of  different  sizes,  were
foond.  The  perforation  is  like  a  funnel,  flaring  at  the  top
and  with  a  comparatively  small  orifice  at  the  bottom.  Their
original  position  is  indicated  on  the  plan.  Our  first  im~
pression  was  that  they  were  hearths,  but  we  soon  recognized
them  as  bases,  or  stands,  for  large  jugs  and  jars,  the  bot-
toms of  which  are  conical,  in  which  the  Indians  preserved
chicha,  and  underneath  which  a  fire  was  sometimes  kindled
in  order  to  accelerate  fermentation.^^  Necks  of  such  jars
were  foond  close  by.  These  bases,  or  stands,  were  all
placed  against  the  walls,  either  main  or  transverse.  In
room  2  of  the  same  building  were  two  grinding  slabs  with
their  grinders.  A  part  of  the  room  was  paved  with  slabs ;
the  first  artificial  floor  we  met  in  the  ruins.  A  copper  knife
and  some  beads  of  azurite  were  also  obtained  here.

No  human  remains  of  any  kind  were  found  in  the  first
three  apartments,  but  in  the  last  eight  stone  cysts  came  to
light.  One  was  that  of  an  adult,  while  the  other  seven  were
of  children.  This  feature,  and  the  fact  that  hardly  any
artefacts  occurred  in  this  compartment,  led  ns  to  infer,  that
it  was  probably  an  annex,  or  enclosure,  and  not  a  room
proper.  The  depth  of  tiie  childrem's  graves  beneath  the
surface  varied  between  seven  and  eighteen  inches.  The
larger  (^st,  manifestly  the  grave  of  an  adult,  was  a  foot
under  ground ;  counting,  in  every  case,  to  the  cover  of  the
cyst.  The  six  small  graves  were  different  from  any  of  those
called  Chnllpa.  They  were  chests  made  of  stone  plates  set
on  edge,  rather  neatly  fitted,  and  from  six  to  ten  inches
high.  The  covers  were  thin  slabs.  In  each  of  these  graves
was  the  skeleton  of  a  chUd  unaccompanied  by  artefacts.  We
conld  preserve  very  few  of  the  vestiges  and  these  only  in  a
broken  state.  SkoUs  lay  invariably  on  the  west  side,  the
feet  on  the  east,  and  the  hands  had  been  folded  across  the
breast.  From  the  dimensions  of  the  cysts  it  is  apparent
that  the  seven  bodies  were  about  of  the  same  size,  hence  the


;cbyG00'^lc


210 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

children  more  or  less  of  the  same  age.  Within  the  same
coxirt  or  annex  we  foondj  in  loose  earth,  bnt  hla<^ened  by
fire,  a  handsome  spoon  or  ladle  of  clay,  a  handsomely
painted  sherd,  and  a  spinning-whorl.

The  larger  cyst  contained  the  remains  of  at  least  one
adolt.  Fragments  of  homan  bones  and  one  molar  was  all
we  foond,  and  these  at  nineteen  inches  below  the  cover.
The  cyst,  while  nearly  circular  and  resembling  many  of  the
Chnllpa  burials,  was  constructed  with  greater  care.  The
existence  of  this  grave  so  close  to  those  of  the  childrra
might  lead  to  the  inference  that  a  family  had  been  buried
there;  bnt  the  nearly  equal  size  of  the  seven  smaller  skel*
etons  and  the  proximity  of  the  stones  represented  as
' '  sacrificial ' '  by  the  Indians,  together  with  the  statements  of
chroniclers  that  for  human  sacrifices  children  were  taken  in
preference,  favor  a  Bupposition  that  the  seven  little  graves
were  those  of  as  many  victims.  Possibly  an  examination  of
the  few  fragments  of  bones  and  skulls  which  we  could
transmit  to  the  Museum  may  lead  to  some  clue.  These
eight  graves  the  Indians  emphatically  declared  to  be  Inca.*'

We  continued  examining  the  plateau,  and  found  the
foundations  of  another  group.  Two  rooms  or  halls  came  to
light,  one  of  which  may  have  been  originally  connected  with
the  western  annex,  and  the  other  is  an  approximate  rectangle
measuring  forty-seven  by  twenty  feet,  with  walls  of  un-
equal thickness.  This  apartment,  or  building,  stands  on
the  western  rim  of  the  esplanade  and  is  connected  with  the
terrace  north  of  it  by  a  wall  forty-eight  feet  long  and  about
two  feet  thick.  Here  we  found  two  more  grinding  slabs
and  potsherds  with  handsome  designs,  but  not  as  many  as
in  the  previous  excavations.

The  most  diligent  probing  and  digging  on  the  esplanade
did  not  reveal  more  until  we  came  to  the  northeastern  cor-
ner. There  a  wall  was  uncovered  which  may  have  originally
run  along  the  whole  eastern  border  of  the  plateau.  Pot-
sherds, some  with  beautiful  designs,  were  scattered  throosh


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


1 1?
^  if-


11


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 211

the  BoU.  Thirty-six  feet  south  of  the  rocks  which  tenmnate
the  lowest  terrace  of  Llaq'-aylli  (4)  our  men  found  what
seemed  to  be  another  grave.  Its  npper  rim  was  struck  at  a
depth  of  twenty-one  inches,  and  over  it  was  a  mde  slab
thirty-foar  by  eighteen  inches,  and  four  inches  thick.  Un-
derneath this  cover  was  earth  containing  two  large  bones,
then  a  mixture  of  earth  and  stone,  more  bones,  and  coarse
sherds.  Further  digging  proved  that  it  was  not  a  grave,
but  a  tank,  suggestive  of  a  bath.  We  laid  open  a  rectan-
gular sink,  twenty-one  inches  beneath  the  surface,  from
thirty-six  to  forty  inches  deep,  eight  feet  long  inside,  two
feet  wide  at  the  northern  and  nineteen  inches  at  the  south-
em  end,  lined  with  a  well  built  wall  of  stone  one  foot  in
average  thickness.  On  the  eastern  side  there  protruded
from  this  wall,  at  two  feet  below  its  rim,  two  stepping-
stones.  The  floor  was  of  stone-flags,  a  foot  thick  on  an
average,  and  beneath  them  nothing  but  soil.  What  seemed
to  indicate  a  bath  was  a  channel,  made  of  smaller  stones
and  emptying  into  the  southern  end  of  the  tank.  This
channel  was  from  four  to  six  inches  wide,  and  thirteen  and
a  half  feet  long.  Its  depth  to  the  bottom  paved  with  plates
of  stone  nicely  joined  was  six  inches  below  the  level  of  the
gronnd.  The  sides  were  about  four  inches  thick.  It  issued
from  a  circular  space  three  feet  in  diameter,  one  foot  deep,
also  paved. Further  investigations  revealed  nothing.

We  were  naturally  led  to  the  supposition  that  we  had
before  us  an  ancient  bath,  with  its  channel,  through  which
the  water  entered  the  tank,  and  the  stepping-stones  to
facilitate  going  in  and  out  of  it.  I  must  call  attention  to  the
proximity  of  this  contrivance  to  the  so>called  block  of  sacri-
fice, the  circular  depression  or  head  of  the  channel  lying
twenty-four  feet  from  it,  between  it  and  the  tank.  Without
expressing  any  opinion,  I  note  this  coincidence,  calling  at-
tention to  the  cnstom  of  human  sacrifices,  and  to  the  ob-
jection tiiat  for  filling  the  tank  the  channel  was  unnecessary,
since  the  water  had  to  be  brought  from  the  Lake,  there


;cbyG00'^lc


212 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

being  no  trace  of  a  reservoir  or  spring,  and  the  Indians
disclaiming  any  knowledge  of  one  or  the  other.  Around
this  place  nothing  more  was  discovered  except  loose  stones
bnried  in  the  sod,  and  potsherds,  but  the  Ijadians  asserted
that  many  rocks  had  been  removed  by  them  from  all  over
the  surface.

The  group  of  ruins  described  is,  of  all  the  so-called  Inca
remains  on  the  Island,  the  most  extensive  cluster  of  some
compactness,  the  only  one  which  might  be  called  a  small
ancient  village.  At  least  the  northern  half  of  the  esplanade
and  the  lower  terrace  of  Llaq'-aylli  were  at  one  time  covered
with  buildings.  What  we  found  in  our  excavations  justifies
the  opinion  that  the  buildings  were  occupied  by  households,
as  well  as  the  structures  on  the  eastern  declivity.  What
the  bnilding  was  to  which  the  name  of  "Temple  of  the
Sun"  has  been  given,  is  the  question.  We  know  little  of
the  Inca  edifices  called  "temples.""  But  it  is  not  to  be
overlooked  that  Bamos,  Calancha,  and  Cobo  place  the
"Temple  of  the  Sua"  close  to. the  Sacred  Rock,  not  at  Kasa-
patal  In  regard  to  the  latter  site,  Cobo,  who  visited  the
Island  previous  to  1619,  says,  after  locating  the  Temple  of
the  Son  about  a  mile  from  Kasapata  by  air  line,  that  Tnpac
Tnpanqui,  the  Inca  chieftain  to  whom  he  attributes  the
occupation  of  the  Island,  formed,  for  the  Mitimaes,  who  in
their  greater  number  were  Incas,  a  nuddle-sized  pueblo
half  a  league  in  advance  of  the  temple,  and  in  it  he  had  a
dwelling  erected  for  himself.'^  Bamos,  who  wrote  about
the  same  time,  completely  independent  of  Cobo,  states:
"Copacabana  once  regulated,  the  same  monarch  established
another  middle-sized  village  on  the  Island,  about  half  a
league  from  the  Sacred  Bock;  and  there  constructed  his
royal  palace,  the  rums  of  which  are  probably  those  that  are
seep  in  front  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun  on  a  hiU  toward  the
east."*^  The  italicized  part  is  from  the  pen  of  the  modem
editor,  Father  Sans,  because  Calancha,  who  made  abundant
use  of  the  work  of  Bamos,  omits  it,  stating:  "Tnpac  Tnga


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


PliATE  XLIS

Personal  ornaments  from,  various  partn  of  Titicaca  Island,

chiefly  from  Kasnpata

Tbirty-one  Beads  of  stone,  shell,  turquoise,  and  lazulite  (also  possibly

nephrite). a.  Toy  pit«her. b.  BronEO  flpimits  (pendant)

MiginaUy  trom  TiahnauMO


;cbyG00'^lc


'^ % fe


•  I


IS  9


i  ^ f I


DamziowGoOi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  RinNS  ON  THE  ISIjAND  OP  TITICACA 213

f oanded  a  middle-Bized  pueblo,  almoat  half  a  league  previous
to  coming  to  the  rock,  and  in  it  reared  his  royal  palace,
poor  in  its  architecture,  but  very  rich  in  the  treasure  of
its  income."*'  The  distance  agrees  with  the  position  of
Kasapata,  and  if  the  large  house  there  was  the  edifice
designated  by  these  authors  as  a  "palace,"  it  deserves
Calancha's  epithet  of  "poor"  in  architecture.  It  was  a
public  edifice  of  some  kind,  and  I  ventnre  the  sujj^estion
that  it  was  a  "tambo"  or  place  for  quartering  visitors,
also  military  escorts  such  as  an  important  war  chief
would  have  with  him.  The  edifice  has  nothing  "palatial,"
and  for  a  place  of  worship  its  interior  lacks  the  essen-
tial feature  of  tall  and  elaborate  niches.*'  To-day  it  is  a
long  hall,  capable  of  accommodating  a  number  of  people
that  would  crowd  together  at  night,  as  Indians  are  wont
to  do.

The  belief  tiiat  the  houses  at  Kasapata  were  those  of  an
Inca  settlement  is  supported  by  the  nature  of  the  artefacts
found;  especially  by  the  pottery.  Cuzco  ceramics  are  char-
acteristic and  easily  recognized.  Isolated  spedmens,  widely
scattered,  are  not  sufficient  evidence  of  former  occupation
of  the  site  by  their  makers ;  bnt  at  Kasapata  nearly  all  the
pottery  bears  the  same  specific  type,  that  of  Cnzco,  and  we
may  with  reasonable  safety  admit  that  a  settlem^it  of
Cnzco  Indians  existed  in  sufficient  nnmbers  to  manufacture
the  ware  on  the  site.  In  the  case  of  the  Island,  the  evidence
from  Spanish  sources  is  conclusive  that  its  occupation  by
the  Inca  took  place  during  the  term  of  office  of  the  third
last  war  chief,  counting  back  from  the  first  Spanish  landing
and  from  Hnascar  as  the  last.  Hence  the  settlement  at
Kasapata  must  have  taken  place  within  less  than  a  hundred
years  previous  to  1531,  and  probably  within  less  than  sev-
enty years,  that  is,  in  the  last  quarter  of  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury.** It  is  not  likely  that  in  such  a  short  lapse  of  time
the  type  of  ceramics  could  have  undergone  as  radical  a
change  as  that  from  ChuUpa  pottery  to  Inca;  hence  it  is


;cbyG00'^lc


214 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

likely  that  the  settlement  at  Kasapata  was  mainly  one  of
Indians  who  came  to  the  Island  from  Cnzco,  not  long
previous  to  the  Spanish  conqnest

Proceeding  northwestward  from  Kasapata,  we  reach
that  group  of  Ijidian  mins  to  iriiich  clings  most  of  the
legendary  lore  of  Titicaca.  The  northwestern  end  of  the
Island  is  its  bleakest  part.  On  the  trail  from  Kasapata  to
Muro-kato,  where  vestiges  of  abori^nal  occupation  are
again  met,  the  slopes,  while  not  utterly  devoid  of  verdure,
are  mostly  rocky.  Seams  of  coal  crop  out  in  places,  and  ^
carious  erosions  attract  attention.  The  "kara"  predom-
inates among  plants,  and  its  fleshy,  serrated  leaves,  and  the
black  trunks  of  decaying  specimens,  cast  a  somber  hue.  The
grand  chain  of  tite  Bolivian  Andes  has  dropped  out  of  si^t,
and  the  eastern  shore,  dark  and  monotonous,  bounds  the
horizon.  On  very  clear  days  distant  peaks  belonging  to
the  snowy  range  of  Charassani,  and  in  the  far  north  the
Nevados  of  Kunu-rona  and  Vilcanota  in  Peru  loom  up
in  faint  outline.  The  general  impression  is  one  of  chilling
monotony.  The  narrow  path  gradually  rises  from  Kasa-
pata to  about  three  hundred  and  seventy  feet  above  the
Lake.  To  the  left  are  the  bald  crests  of  the  Calvario.
Animal  life  seems  to  remain  behind  as  and  finally  to  dis-
appear.

Half  an  hour's  slow  walking  brings  us  in  sight  of  the
ao-called  Sacred  Bock,  or  Titi-kala— literally:  rock  of  the  "*
wildcat,  for  "titi"  is  the  Aymara  name  for  that  feline  in
the  Lake  district.  The  point  from  which  the  rock  is  first
seen  lies  on  the  eastern  slope  of  Muro-kato  (3).  Titi-kala,
though  not  as  tall  as  ridges  south  and  north  of  it,  is
peculiarly  situated.  It  is  the  highest  point  on  the  neck  of
land,  and  from  it  both  the  eastern  and  western  shores  of  the
Lake  can  be  scanned  for  quite  a  distance.  Tradition  re-
corded in  the  seventeenth  coitury  and  repeated  at  this  day,
says  that  Titi-kala  was  formerly  covered  with  plates  of
silver  and  gold  in  order  that,  when  the  sun  rose,  the  rock


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


PUTl  L

Inca  vessel  of  clay  viUi  stand  of  unburnt  day  tiom  Kaaapata


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 215

might,  from  both  shores,  appear  as  in  a  blaze  of  light  which
sboald  be  a  signal  to  the  Lidians  along  the  Lake  to  bow  in
worship.**  This  pleasing  romance  is  not  confirmed  by  the
report  of  the  first  Spanish  visitors  (Jnly  15,  1534).  They
merely  say  of  the  rock:  "They  go  to  make  their  offerings
and  perform  their  sacrifices  on  a  large  stone  titat  is  on  the
Island,  called  Thichicasa,  which,  either  becanse  the  devil
conceals  himself  there  and  speaks  to  them,  or  becanse  it  is
an  ancient  cnstom  .  .  .  ,  or  for  some  other  reason  which
may  never  be  found  ont,  they  of  the  whole  province  hold  in
great  esteem  and  offer  to  it  gold  and  silver.  There  are  [on
this  Island]  more  than  six  hundred  Indian  attendants  of
this  place,  and  more  than  a  thousand  women,  who  mann-
facture  Chicca  (chicha)  to  throw  it  on  this  rock.  .  .  ."*'
It  is  likely  that,  if  the  sacred  cliff  had  had  snch  a  valuable
coating  as  later  chroniclers  report  from  hearsay,  the  first
Spaniards  would  either  have  seen  it  or  heard  of  it,  and  they
would  not  have  failed  to  make  mention  of  it  upon  their
return  to  Cuzco.  The  face  of  Titi-kala  is  turned  to  the
west,  and  the  sun  does  not  strike  it  at  sunrise;  the  gentle
slope  of  it  descends  to  the  east,  and  the  rock  has  in  fact
nothing  striking  at  first  sight.

At  that  point  (10)  our  attention  was  arrested  by  a  ruined
wall.  What  is  left  of  it  does  not  suggest  good  workman-
ship. Piles  of  rude  stones  and  pillars  of  uncut  rock  form
a  line  of  d^ris  to  the  crest  of  Mnro-kato.  They  indicate
that  Itan-pata,  as  this  wall  is  called  to-day,  was  not  in-
tended for  defense.  It  rises  for  a  length  of  546  feet,  then
crosses  thirty-five  feet  of  level,  and  descends  steeply  384
feet  more  to  the  west  over  beetling  rocks  and  thorny  shmb-
bery,  terminating  at  the  edge  of  a  group  of  very  handsome
andenes.  The  wall  therefore,  together  with  the  andenes  of
Chncaripn,  as  they  are  called  (d),  divided  this  end  of  the
Island  from  the  rest.  On  the  crest,  outside  of  the  wall,  are
faint  vestiges  of  two  quadrangular  structures.  They  are
like  gnardhooses  to  an  entrance,  bnilt  after  the  manner  of


;cbyG00'^lc


216 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

those  on  the  coast  of  Pera  and  in  the  north,  that  is,  a  nai^
row  passage  forming  an  elbow.

Descending  from  (10),  the  remains  of  an  ancient  road,
called  Incan-taqtii  or  Inca-road,  are  soon  enconntered.  This
road,  where  measurable,  has  a  width  not  exceeding  ten  feet
It  is  lined  with  small  enrbstones,  and  has  steps  built  of
fairly  smoothed  slabs.  The  width  of  the  steps  varies.  On
a  length  of  forty  feet  and  a  vertical  fall  of  ten  we  coanted
twelve.  The  bottom,  which  the  Indiana  call  Mama-ojlia  (we
also  heard  the  name  Inak-nyn),  lies  east  of  the  plateau  on
which  the  Sacred  Sock  stands  and  slopes  gently  to  the
Lake.  It  is  mostly  terraced  and  bears  the  vestiges  of  at
least  four  small  buildings.  Three  of  them  stand  west  of
the  trail,  the  largest  one  is  on  the  east  and  somewhat  lover
(6).  To  this  last  building  the  name  Afama-ojlia  is  more
particularly  given.  The  structure  measures  sixty  by
twenty-nine  feet;  its  walls  are  about  thirty  inches  thick,
and  it  is  in  fact  a  rectangnlar  platform  raised  four  feet
above  the  surrounding  level  with  about  a  foot  of  walls
above  its  surface,  which  is  of  clay  or  earth.  This  wall  en-
closes three  sides  only,  as  on  the  sonth  the  platform  joins
a  higher  terrace.  It  presents  the  appearance  either  of  an
esplanade  with  a  low  parapet,  or  of  a  hall  without  niches,
doorways,  or  windows.  Popular  lore  makes  of  it  the  mins
of  a  "house  of  nuns,"  or  cloister,  whereas  it  recalls  the
large  building  at  Kasapata,  and,  with  its  three  smaller
companions,  also  the  onthouses  at  Pilco-kayma.  Others
have  told  ns  that  these  buildings  were  the  dwellings  of
people  guarding  the  approaches  to  the  Sacred  Bod.
Beyond  them  the  trail  winds  along  the  rocky  slopes  of
Mnro-kato  for  a  short  distance,  and  here  again  are  a  feff
well  made  stone  steps,  sometimes  called  by  the  Indians
Kenti-pnncn,  and  said  to  have  been  one  of  the  gateways
through  which  the  enclosure  of  the  Sacred  Bock  was  tn-
tered.*"  In  the  bottom,  previous  to  reaching  the  httle
houses,  the  road  or  trail  crosses  a  fillet  of  clear  water  run-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


a  =1
I  I-
I  if


■»  .i


i
f


«b.Goo'^le


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 217

ning  in  a  well  made  channel  of  stone.  Above  Kenti-poncu
large  nodoles  of  limonite  appear,  two  of  which,  each  about
three  feet  long,  have  the  outline  of  huge  mocassins.  These
marks  are  called  "Tracks  of  the  Sun,"  or  of  bub  and
moon,  the  largest  being  those  of  the  moon,  according  to
some  Indians.  They  existed  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and
Father  Cobo,  who  recognizes  them  as  natural,  says  the
Indians  ascribe  to  them  supematoral  origin.'^.  Hence  the
tradition  may  antedate  the  conquest  A  short  distance
above  them  the  trail,  which  here  is  simply  worn  out  by
travel,  lands  on  the  terraced  edge  of  the  greensward  in
front  of  the  Sacred  Bock.

This  area  covers  an  approximate  surface  of  two  hundred
and  fifty  by  one  hundred  and  eighty  feet  From  it  we  again
obtain  a  view  to  the  west.  We  overlook  the  northern  Bay
of  Kona,  darkened  by  the  tall  ridge  of  E^ayo-kena  and
the  green  bottom  below.  The  long  and  narrow  Island  of
Eochi  lies  athwart  the  bay.  In  the  northwest  tiie  slopes  of
Ticani  appear,  almost  precipitous,  but  still  green.  The
summit  of  Ticani  is  bald,  beyond  it  the  vertical  rocks  of
Turi-turini  shut  off  the  view.

The  impression  created  by  the  dreary  Bolivian  shores  in
the  east,  and  the  monotonous  coast  line  of  Peru  in  the  west
is  almost  dismal.  It  is  the  least  accessible  part  of  Titicaca,
the  one  most  distant  from  the  mainland.  Its  western  slopes
are  partly  tillable,  and  good  water  is  plentiful.  Close  to
the  Sacred  Bock  is  a  handsome  spring;  there  is  another  at
the  Chincana,  one  at  the  andenes  of  Chucaripu,  besides
several  others  near  by.

The  level  in  front  of  the  rock  has  been  disturbed  by
desultory  excavating.  From  the  statements  of  Bamos,  and
of  Cobo,  I  gather  that  this  level  was  a  free  space,  with,  per-
haps, a  wall  of  enclosure.*"  There  are  stone  heaps  on  it,  as
well  as  on  the  slope  of  Muro-kato.  They  look  like  rubbish
from  former  diggings  rather  than  remains  of  edifices  that,
under  any  circumstances,  could  only  have  been  very  smalL


;cbyG00'^lc


218 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

TiTi-KAiA  is  an  oatcrop  nmniiig  approximately  from
northwest  to  soiitheaBt  for  a  distance  of  one  hundred  and
ninety  feet,  then  one  hundred  and  thirty  feet  from  west-
northwest  to  east-Bontheast.  Its  greatest  elevation  above
the  sward  is  not  over  twenty-five  feet.  The  material  is
reddish  carboniferons  sandstone,  the  strata  being  tilted  at
a  considerable  angle.*"  Hence  the  eastern  slope  of  the
rock  is  a  slide,  whereas  its  western  face  is  cnt  off  sharply
and  contains  a  number  of  natural  cavities.  One  of  these,
the  largest  one,  may,  by  dint  of  imagination,  be  thought  to
resemble  a  crown.  Above  it  are  smaller  cavities,  like  rudely
carved  cats'  heads.  From  these,  it  is  said,  the  Island  and
finally  the  Lake  obtained  their  name,  "kaka"  (rock)  having
been  substituted  for  "kala"  (stone).  Another  etymology
derives  the  word  Titikaka  from  the  Quichua  term  "titi,"
lead,  and  "kaka,"  which  signifies  rock  in  that  idiom  also.
Still  another  interpretation  considers  Titicaca  to  be  a  cor-
ruption of  "Inticaca":  "Eock  of  the  Snn.'""'  On  the  level
in  front  are  some  prismatic  stones  of  andesite— a  rock  not
in  situ  on  the  Island— that  are  very  well  cut  and  seem  to
have  formed  parts  of  some  wall.  Similar  blocks  exist  at
Yampupata,  on  the  Copacavana  Peninsula,  on  which  an-
desite is  fonnd  in  abundance.  Whether  the  first  mentioned
blocks  belonged  to  some  edifice  that  faced  the  Sacred  Bock
or  to  remains  still  extant  on  the  northwestern  end  of  the
level,  is  unknown.

The  latter  ruins  are  very  much  destroyed.  They  form
a  quadrangle,  the  southeastern  comer  of  which  is  occupied
by  a  hump  nearly  as  tall  as  Titi-kala  and  over  sixty  feet
in  length.  The  low  and  niched  wall  connecting  the  eastern
comer  of  this  outcrop  with  the  face  of  Titi-kala  is  ninety
feet  long,  to  which  length  must  be  added  ten  feet  built
against  an  entering  angle  of  the  latter.  There  the  cliff  of
Titi-kala  shuts  off  the  level  on  a  length  of  sixty-four  feet.
Then  follows  a  wall  forty-eight  feet  long,  because  the  rock
recedes  to  the  east. The  space  between  is  filled  by  rubbish


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


i^


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 219

and  shrabbery,  rendering  it  diflBcnlt  to  distinguish  de-
tails.

By  removing  as  far  as  possible  a  mass  of  bnilding
material  in  the  shape  of  fairly  broken  blocks  of  stone,  an
alley  two  feet  in  width  was  discovered  mnning  between
walls  three  feet  high,  the  outer  of  which  was  two  and  the
inner  not  quite  four  feet  thick.  We  could  not  follow  this
alley  to  its  western  end,  rubbish  and  shrubbery  rendering
it  impossible.  Bnt  w^  saw  that  the  wall  (or  walls)  termi-
nated in  what  appeared  to  be  a  large  niche  or  room  with  a
front  of  at  least  fourteen  feet,  the  southern  side  of  which
was  flanked  by  foimdations.  This  front  was  in  line  with
the  western  margin  of  the  area,  and  that  margin  showed
traces  of  either  a  rim  of  masonry  or  of  a  number  of  com-
partments like  those  of  the  wing  of  some  building.  Sixteen
feet  further  west  and  at  a  lower  level  were  similar  traces
that  seemed  to  indicate  a  long  building  with  a  number  of
cells  or  rooms.  The  whole  was  so  disturbed  that  this  was
all  we  conld  detect  On  the  west  side  of  the  area  are  also
traces  of  a  wall  running  from  the  edge  of  the  big  western
outcrop  to  the  sonthwestem  comer,  so  that  the  whole  may
have  been  either  an  enclosure  or  a  bnilding  with  a  court  in
the  middle,  or  an  L-shaped  structure  occupying  the  north
and  west  sides  of  a  court.  The  last  seems  most  probable.
The  Indians  asserted  that  they  knew  of'  the  existence  of  a
building  on  this  spot  and  had  seen  traces  of  cells  on  the
northern  side."

The  situation  of  these  ruins  fairly  agrees  with  the  state-
ments about  the  position  of  the  so-called  "Temple  of  the
Snn"  by  Eamos.  It  is  stated  by  Cobo  that  the  structure
stood  "on  the  east  side,  and  forty  paces  from  the  rock.'*"'
Bamos  says:  "On  the  side  of  a  level,  about  thirty  paces
from  the  rock,  are  the  houses  of  the  sun,  of  thunder  and
lightning,  which  the  Indians  greatly  respected.  Further  on,
in  the  ravine  that  faces  the  road  from  Juli  to  Pomata,  was
the  store-house  of  the  sun  ,  .  .  vulgarly  called  Chingana,


;cbyG00'^lc


220 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

which  is  to  say,  'a  place  where  people  lose  themselves.'  ""
The  Chiucana  stands  northwest  of  the  ruins  which  I  have
gust  described,  hence  it  is  not  nnlikely  that  these  are  the
remains  of  the  Temple  of  the  Sun!  In  that  case  the  edifice,
or  cluster  of  edifices,  cannot  have  extended  beyond  the
enclosed  area  jast  described,  and  this  area  measures  100
feet  by  112.  The  entrance  on  one  side  is  su^estive  of  a
court  and  not  of  a  building,  so  that  the  "temple"  probably
consisted  of  two  wings,  one  on  the  southwest  and  another
on  the  northwest,"*  It  may  be  that  the  well  cut  blocks  of
Andesite  mentioned  above  came  from  these  structures.

The  suggestion  that  the  "temple"  occupied,  with  its  an-
nexes, one  or  two  sides  of  the  quadrangular  space  in  front
of  the  rock,  and  now  turned  into  a  greensward,  is  supported
by  the  evidence  of  the  first  two  Spanish  visitors  to  the
Island.  They  report:  "In  the  center  of  the  lake  are  two
small  islands,  in  one  of  which  is  a  mosque  temple,  and  house
of  the  sun  which  is  held  in  great  veneration  and  tn  if  [  I]
they  go  to  present  their  offerings  and  perform  their  sacri-
fices on  a  large  stone  that  is  on  the  island,  called  Thichicasa,
where,"  etc''  (Italics  are  mine.)  The  stone,  iidiicii  is
the  same  as  the  Sacred  Bock,  coald  not  be  inside  of  the
"temple,"  bat  was  connected  with  the  buildings.  Hence
the  level  in  front  of  the  rock  was  an  open  square,  one  side
of  which  was  occupied  by  the  hallowed  cliff,  and  possibly
two  sides  by  the  Tranple  of  the  Sun  and  accessories.

The  surroundings  of  Titi-kala  have  long  ago  been  searched
and  rifled.  The  Garc^  collection,  now  at  the  Museum,  con-
tains gold  and  silver  fignrines  from  this  vicinity.  The
concarrent  testimony  of  the  former  owners  of  the  collection,
as  well  as  of  Indians  from  the  Island  who  excavated  for
these  owners,  is  that  most  of  the  figures  of  llamas,  if  not  all,
came  from  this  neighborhood,  as  also  the  small  pins  of  gold
and  of  silver.  The  latter  were  probably  with  textile  fabrics
burnt  in  sacrifice,  the  pins  showing  traces  of  fire."

In  this  connection  I  must  refer  to  a  discovery  made  on


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


a  a

V.

If


.wGooi^lc


1

1 .

1

ii

-I.

€

<'

I

DamziowGoOi^lc


^


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 221

the  sonthem  elope  of  Moro-kato,  near  "Chacaripu-pata."
A  few  inches  below  the  surface  was  fotmd  a  stone  chest,
now  at  the  Knseam,  which  contained  a  most  remarkably
beantifol  poncho.  Somewhere  in  that  neighborhood  another
chest  was  exhnmed  that  still  remains  on  the  Island,  and
also  contained  a  poncho.  In  fact,  five  of  the  six  handsome
tissues  of  the  Garc^  collection  were  obtained  from  this  end
of  Titicaca,  but  three  of  them  were  dng  ap  so  long  ago  that
the  exact  locality  camiot  be  ascertained.

I  do  not  place  great  reliance  on  local  names  given  by  the
Indians  of  the  Island.  Hence  I  simply  record,  without  any
guarantee,  the  name  of  Tican-aychi  stated  to  us  as  that  of
the  ruins  connected  with  the  Sacred  Bock,  and  of  T'ana
for  those  lying  north  of  Mnro-kato  in  general.  The  latter
name  would  thus  apply  collectively  to  Titi-kala,  to  the  bot-
tom of  Mama-ojlia,  and  to  the  promontory  of  Sicnyu.

About  four  hundred  and  fifty  feet  northwest  of  the  Sacred
Eock,  on  the  upper  western  declivity,  lies  the  complicated
structore  which  already  in  the  beginning  of  the  seven-
teenth century  was  known  as  Chincana,  or  "place  where
people  lose  themselves."  To-day  it  is  called  the  "palace";
whereas  Ramos  and  Cobo  declare  it  was  a  dispensa,  or
store-honse.'*  It  consists  of  two  wings  built  on  a  rapid
slope  descending  to  the  Lake,  from  the  shores  of  which  its
lowest  walls  are  about  three  hundred  and  fifty  feet  distant.
It  will  be  seen  that  its  southern  wing  stands  on  higher
ground  than  the  northern,  that  that  wing  has  at  least  two,
and  probably  three,  open  ooarts,  and  that  several  of  the
passages  are  still  covered,  whereas  one  at  least  was  origi-
nally without  roof.  The  thickness  of  the  walls  of  this  wing
varies  greatly,  the  extremes  being  two  and  six  feet,  and
similar  variations  occar  from  one  room  to  another,  in
places.  The  walls  are  still  of  an  average  height  of  six  to
eight  feet,  showing  that  comparatively  little  deterioration
has  taken  place,  althongh  there  is  shrubbery  around  it  and
in  nearly  every  comer.


;cbyG00'^lc


222 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

At  first  sight  it  seems  as  if  this  wing  had  been  two-
storied,  bat  on  closer  examination  we  notice  that  the  west-
ern rooms,  sonth  of  the  uncovered  passage  way,  simply
stand  on  lower  ground  than  the  eastern.  The  western  rooms
have  an  elevation  of  more  than  twelve  feet  (see  accompany-
ing plans),  and  what  remains  of  the  roof  shows  that  it
was,  like  that  of  the  tallest  apartments  of  the  Pilco-kayma,
made  of  successively  projecting  slabs  so  as  to  form  a  primi-
tive vault.  Other  roofs  show  the  same  kind  of  ceilings.  In
long  covered  gangways  and  narrow  chambers  the  ceilings
are  flat,  as  in  the  inner  rooms  of  the  Pilco-kayma.  The
irregular  angles  of  the  edifice  result  from  the  inability  of
its  builders  to  accommodate  the  ground  to  the  strnetore.
This  also  explains  the  variations  in  thickness  of  walls.  It
looks  as  if  the  building  had  been  erected  at  different  periods,
additions  being  made  as  required.  The  stone-work  is  like
that  of  the  lilcorkayma,  of  Pucara,  and  of  Kasapata;  that
is,  superior  to  the  Chullpa  typo,  but  inferior  to  that  of
handsomely  built  audenes.  Lintels  are  formed  by  a  single
stab.  One  of  these  is  six  feet  long  and  one  foot  thick.  Some
lintels  are  rough,  others  but  slij^tly  clupped  on  the  edges.
The  doorways  vary  in  width  between  two  and  (in  a  sin^e
instance— the  ^itrance  to  an  open  court)  eight  feet.  Some
taper,  others  have  vertical  sides.  One  doorway  terminates
in  a  primitive  arch.  The  true  arch  is  nowhere  found.
Niches  are  plentiful  but  neither  as  tall  nor  as  elaborate  as
at  the  Kayma  or  at  Pucara.  The  whole  complex  structure
has  but  qne  small  air-hole,  to  which  the  name  of  window
cannot  in  justice  be  given.  The  Chincana  must,  therefore,
have  been  a  very  nneomfortable  abode.  Among  the  niches
there  is  one  quite  tall,  which  terminates  in  a  primitive  arch.
In  this  nidie  are  still  traces  of  a  clay  coating  painted  red
and  yellow,  like  the  ruins  of  Tambo  Colorado,  near  Pisco,
on  the  coast.  In  general,  the  Chincana  reminds  one  of  that
ruin  in  size  and  arrangement.

A  wall  runs  from  the  northwestern  comer  of  the  southern


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


HI

I.  21


i t


iiGooi^le


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 223

mng  in  a  northerly  direction,  making  an  angle  to  the  west.
This  wall  is  the  highest  part  of  the  rain;  it  is  fonr  feet  thick
and  has  a  snccession  of  niches  on  both  sides.  Its  length  is
seventy-two  feet  From  the  northwestern  comer  it  descends
to  the  west  fifteen  feet,  to  meet  the  northeastern  comer  of
the  northern  wing.

The  latter  is  smaller  than  the  aonthem,  bnt  wherever  its
walla  are  not  reduced  to  rubbish  heaps  they  appear  more
substantial.  The  rooms  are  more  regular  in  shape,  their
angles  being  truer.  It  stands  lower  than  the  other  wing,
and  the  second  tier  of  rooms  is  about  eight  feet  lower  than
the  first.  It  is  bnilt  on  a  rather  steep  incline,  and  at  the
lower  end  reduced  to  shapeless  heaps  of  debris.  Clearly
defined,  however,  is  a  long  alley  leading  from  the  western
end  of  the  ruin  to  the  two  upper  exits,  one  of  which  is  into
the  snnken  part  of  the  edifice,  and  the  other  into  a  space
between  both  wings.  This  passage  has  on  one  side  a  well-
built  wall  eight  feet  high  and  four  feet  thick.  The  ascent
is  partly  on  an  inclined  plane,  partly  on  short  steps  of
stone.  The  peculiarity  of  this  passage  consists  in  that  it
presents  the  same  features  as  many  gangways  found  in
ruins  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  namely,  at  irregular  distances
short  walls  project  alternately  from  one  side  and  the  other,
as  if  for  interception  and  protection  in  case  of  assault  from
the  side  of  the  Lake.  It  is  one  of  the  few  traces  of  defensive
contrivances  noticed  by  us  on  tite  Island.  There  are  two
lower  exits  from  this  lane.  One  is  an  open  sally  upon  the
edge  of  a  terrace,  the  other  a  graded  way,  now  in  ruins,
tnming  to  the  south  and  passing  between  the  lowest  com-
partments and  a  tall  rectangular  structure  on  the  extreme
comer  of  the  wing.  This  structure  is,  unfortunately,  in
ruins,  but  it  sn^ests  a  watchtower  or  guardhouse  over-
looking approach  from  the  Lake.  The  only  air-hole  or
window,  in  the  northern  wing,  opens  toward  the  Lake-side.

The  area  between  the  two  wings  is  sloping  and  consider-
ably broken. Immediately  below  the  niched  wall  connecting


;cbyG00'^lc


224 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

them  are  a  few  mined  andenea.  Then  follows  an  open
space  containing  a  spring  endosed  by  walls  that,  appar-
ently, have  never  been  mnch  hi^er  than  three  or  fonr  feet
Close  by  this  spring  is  a  seat  of  stone.  Further  down,
traces  of  walls  extend  northward,  from  the  southern  wing,
toward  the  middle  of  the  slope.  A  sluice  has  formed  at  the
base  of  the  northern  wing,  which  may  be  recent,  but  it  is
also  possible  that  its  formation  is  andent  This  is  sug-
gested by  a  low  wall  running  out  some  distance  from  the
southeastern  comer  of  the  southern  wing,  and  by  two
slabs  of  rock,  one  of  which  is  still  in  place,  while  the
other  has  been  moved.  The  one  still  in  place  is  four
feet  tall,  its  loigth  five  feet  two  indies,  thickness  fif-
teen inches.  The  other  measures  four  feet  seven  indies,
by  four  feet,  and  is  twelve  inches  thick.  They  appear  like
parts  of  a  gateway.  There  is  also,  east  of  these  slabs,  a
piece  of  wall  indicating  that  the  ravine  was  originally  lined
with  stones.  Of  the  space  between  the  two  wings  of  the
Chincana  Bamos  says:  "In  its  center  it  had  an  orchard  of
rows  of  (disos  (Alnus  acuminata),  the  constant  freshness
of  which  maintained  a  perpetual  spring  issuing  there.  In
the  shade  of  these  trees  the  Inca  constructed  curious  baths
for  the  sun  and  its  worship.'""  Cobo  expresses  himself  in
nearly  the  same  terms."  It  may  be,  therefore,  that  the  ra-
vine was  a  drainage-channel  from  the  spring  to  the  Lake.
At  present,  the  surroundings  of  the  spring  are  wet,  but  not
euouf^  to  moisten  more  than  the  small  endosnre  around
the  basin.  Beyond  the  southern  wing  are  vestiges  of  an-
denes.  North  of  the  Chincana  the  rock  crops  out,  and  the
flanks  of  Ticani  are  but  scantily  overgrown.  That  height
descends  to  the  Lake  in  steep  declivities,  on  which  ex-
cavations by  the  owners  have  disdosed  well-built  andenes.
To-day  the  Chincana  is  called  "Palace  of  the  Inca."  It
looks  like  a  communal  dwelling  of  moderate  size.  One  hun-
dred  and  fifty  bdians  might  have  found  room  tu  it  for
shelter. But  only  for  shelter/ The  apartments  are  so  dark,


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 225

80  ai-ventilated,  that  they  offered  not  as  much  comfort  as
an  agglomeration  of  Indian  hats  to-day.  The  plan  shows
how  much  space  is  oocnpied  by  courts,  passages  and  gang-
ways, in  proportion  to  rooms  or  cells.

About  ei^t  hundred  feet  soatheast  of  the  Ghincana,
separated  from  it  by  nadnlations  of  the  gronnd  on  a  steep
incline,  with  a  few  scattered  andenes  of  small  extent,  lies
the  plateau  called  Chncaripn-pata,  an  irregular  quadrangle,
originally  level,  now  completely  overturned  tiirongh  ex-
cavations. This  quadrangle  appears  to  have  been  a  plat-
form  lined  by  walls  and  surrounded  by  lower  terraces  on
three  sides,  whereas  in  the  northeast  it  abnts  against  a
higher  plane  on  the  flanks  of  Mnro-kato.  The  northeastern
side  of  this  platform  measures  at  present  182  feet,  the  north-
western 258,  the  southwestern  192,  and  the  sontheastem  only
188 ;  but  these  are  not  original  dimensions.  Very  few  traces
of  buildings  remain  on  this  plateau,  which  overlooks  the  Lake
and  the  Peruvian  coast,  dominating,  so  to  speak,  the  whole
northern  Bay  of  Kona.  On  the  east  comer  is  an  entrance
twenty  feet  wide,  and  there  are  traces  of  an  alley  along
the  northwestern  side  of  the  platform.  But  its  actual  con-
dition is  such  that  I  do  not  venture  to  state  more  than  that
it  is  a  terrace  or  esplanade  said  to  have  been  oocnpied  by
buildings  of  which  I  could  not  obtain  any  description.

It  is  the  more  to  be  regretted  that  so  little  is  left  on  this
site,  as  most,  if  not  all,  the  pottery  contained  in  the  Oarers
collection,  some  of  the  silver  figurines,  and  most  of  the  ob-
jects in  gold,  were  found  at  Chncaripn-pata  or  between  it
and  the  Sacred  Bock,  and  always,  according  to  the  Indians,
quite  near  the  surface.  I  have  mentioned  the  magnificent
poncho  found  near  Chucaripn-pata  in  a  stone  chest.  A
silver  mask  was  disinterred  higher  up,  on  the  slope  of
Mnro-kato  and  on  the  same  side.  With  it  was  found  a
human  jaw,  which  hints  at  the  possibility  of  it  having  been
a  mortuary  mask.  The  pottery  is,  like  the  fragments  ez-
hnmed  at  Kasapata,  of  Ouzco  type,  very  handsome  in  colors


;cbyG00'^lc


226 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

and  in  design.  From  the  same  place  we  obtained,  tbroti^
purchase,  a  golden  tope,  or  tomi,  and  several  small  articles
of  copper  or  bronze."*

More  than  an  approximate  plan  would  be  not  only  useless
bnt  perhaps  misleading,  as  the  wreck  of  ancient  walls  is
complete  and  their  material  has  been  nsed  for  modem  en-
closares,  so  mixed  with  old  ones  that  it  is  impossible  to
distingnish  the  ancient  from  the  new.

The  distance  of  Chncaripu-pata  from  the  Sacred  Bock  is
a  little  over  five  hundred  feet.  In  order  to  find  a  mention
of  the  former  in  Spanish  sources,  we  must  therefore  seardi
for  references  to  some  structure,  or  cluster  of  structures,
distant  about  five  hundred  feet  southwest  of  the  latter.  I
have  so  far  failed  to  find  any  such  references.

From  this  point,  the  view  on  the  dark  green  bottom  of
northern  Kona,  overshadowed  partly  by  the  ridge  of  Ka-
kayo-kena,  has  a  somber  cast.  The  waters  of  the  bay  are
quiet,  because  sheltered,  and  of  a  dark  blue  tint  The
Island  of  Kochi  has  nothing  soft  in  its  contonrs.  It  is  a
sharp  ridge,  like  Kakayo-kena,  of  which  it  seems  to  be  a
northwestern  continuation.  From  the  margin  of  the  prom-
ontory of  Chucaripu-pata  we  see  the  reentering  curve
described  by  the  slope  of  Mnro-kato  and  descry  on  that
slope  the  handsome  andenes  of  Chucaripu,  800  feet  south
of  east  of  Chucaripu-pata.  They  are  the  most  regular  sys-
tem of  terraces  on  the  Island.

The  facing  of  these  andenes,  the  elevation  of  whidi  varies
between  two  and  thirteen  feet,  is  exceedingly  well  dcme.
The  stones  are  so  carefully  broken  that  they  might  pass  for
a  modem  wall,  laid  in  adobe  mud  in  place  of  mortar.  Ascent
from  one  anden  to  the  other  is  effected  in  places  by  stone
steps  built  along  the  fronts  of  terraces,  or  by  stepping-
stones,  or  on  inclined  planes.  The  stepping-stones  are  like
those  at  Kasapata.  The  terraces  are  level,  and  shmbbery
grows  along  edges  and  sides,  so  that  from  a  distance  its  ap-
pearance is  striking,  from  the  regularity  of  dark  green  lines.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Ill


til
III

111

la


si  J

' llol


•§■2  1
S £  5

Si*
5f


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 227

On  many  of  these  terraces  a  layer  of  black  soil,  from
three  to  six  inches  thick,  and  entirely  difEerent  from  the
soil  of  its  snrronndings  or  of  the  Island  in  general,  is
noticed.  It  is  a  rich  loam.  The  story  goes  that  the  Incas
had  it  brought  from  the  transandine  regions  of  Tungas  in
order  to  grow  coca  on  Titicaca.  As  Cobo  remarks,  the  at-
tempt failed  on  account  of  the  climate.  Bnt  his  description
of  the  site  where  that  trial  is  said  to  have  been  made  does
not  agree  with  Chncaripn,  so  that  there  is  little  foundation
for  the  story,  whether  told  in  the  seventeenth  century"  or
in  the  nineteenth.  It  may  be  that  an  attempt  was  made  to
raise  coca  on  the  Island,  previous  to  the  conquest,  but  it
wonld  only  show  that  those  who  made  it  had  not  the  least
idea  of  the  influence  of  climate  and  altitude  upon  vege-
tation.

Artificial  objects,  such  as  topos  and  tnmis,  some  of
precious  metal,  have  been  found  on  these  andenes,  but  we
heard  neither  of  buildings  nor  burials.  In  the  northwest
corner  is  a  ruined  enclosure  with  a  spring,  and  the  ground
in  the  northwest  and  southwest  is  constantly  moist.  Of
channels  for  irrigation  we  saw  no  trace,  atmospheric
hmnidity  and  natural  drainage  from  the  rocks  above  sup>
plying  ample  moisture.  This  group  of  terraced  garden*
beds,  connected  with  the  mined  wall  that  crosses  the  crest
of  MuTo-kato  as  already  described,  are  the  last  ancient
remains  in  this  part  of  the  Island.  But  the  northern  ex-
tremity of  Titicaca,  the  low  promontory  of  Sicnyu  (s),
bears  some  vestiges  which,  though  disturbed  by  treasure-
hunters,  deserve  a  passing  notice.  On  that  promontory
some  of  the  golden  figrarines  in  the  Garces  collection  are
said  to  have  been  fonnd.

The  northern  slopes  of  the  conical  height  of  Ticani  are
rather  bare,  there  is  low  shmbbery  and  grass,  bnt  rocks,
ledges,  and  steps  appear  everywhere.  The  little  Bay  of
Arcn-puncu  (16)  is  encased  by  low  cliffs.  Cultivation  has
been  possible  on  these  slopes  by  forming  andenes,  and  while


;cbyG00'^lc


228 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

some  of  these  seem  to  be  modem,  others  are  uadoabtedly
ancient.  Sicuyu  is  a  low  promontory,  covered  with  shrab-
bery  and  the  rabbish  of  stmctores  of  some  kind.  We  spent
there  a  whole  afternoon  and  later  on  two  days,  excavating,
bnt  conld  not  discover  anything  capable  of  giving  an  idea
of  the  edifices,  so  thoroughly  Imd  they  been  torn  down  by
the  Indians.  These  Indians  assured  ns  that  they  had  torn
down  walls  of  buildings,  which  they  believed  were  reared
by  the  Incas,  among  them  one  that  seemed  to  be  a  store-
honse.  What  our  investigations  revealed  was  that  nearly
the  entire  promontory,  on  its  upper  plane,  which  stands
twenty  feet  above  the  Lake,  contains  stone  cysts,  mostly  in
parallel  rows  and  differing  from  the  cysts  of  ChuUpa  type,
whereas  they  closely  resembled  the  seven  graves  of  children
discovered  at  Kasapatal  In  the  first  place,  they  are  all
quadrangular ;  then  they  are  encased  by  thin  slabs  set  np-
right  in  t^e  ground,  and  most  of  them  had  covers.  They
are  much  more  regular  in  size,  form  and  arrangement,  than
"Chnllpa"  burials.  But  our  search  for  hmnan  remains  was
fruitless.  Only  from  one  grave  the  mould  of  a  skull  was
obtained,  the  bones  having  completely  disappeared  with  Qie
exception  of  the  right  temporal,  and  even  that  crombled  very
soon.  As  to  the  cranial  mould,  as  soon  as  the  earth  of
which  it  consisted  began  to  dry  it  fell  to  pieces.  We  do  not
know  how  many  individuals  were  buried  together  in  a  eyst,
and  as  to  artefacts,  not  even  a  potsherd  was  found  in  or
about  the  graves.  But  the  resemblance  of  the  cysts  to  those
at  Kasapata  gives  color  to  the  statemoit  that  they  were
Inca  burials.  It  is  a  lonely  site.  The  view  on  the  Bolivian
shore  is  extfflisive  and  dismal.  The  Island  of  Apingnila,
on  whidi  Inca  remains  are  said  to  exist,  and  its  neighbor,
Pampiti,  where,  it  is  alleged,  Huayna  Capac,  the  last  of  the
Inca  head  chiefs,  previous  to  Atahnalpa  and  Hnascar,  i»er-
formed  fearful  hnman  sacrifices,"  are  seen  from  Sicnyn
in  a  line  with  the  longitudinal  axis  of  Titicaoa ;  and  some-
body told  ns  that  here  Huayna  Cai>ac  had  taken  the  balsas


;cbyG00'^lc


DaitizecbyGoO'^lc


Plate  LVI
Architectural  details  from  the  Chincana
on  luoan-Taqui,  or  luca  path. 1,  2,  3.  Doorwaya. 4.  BiuU
S,  6.  Stone  ceitiuga  over  room  and  paseagewa;  (see  teit)


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 229

to  carry  him  over  to  Apingiiila  and  Pampiti."'  "Se  non
ivero,"  etc

If  now  we  cast  a  retrospectiye  glance  at  the  duster  which
the  wall  of  Moro-kato  and  the  andenes  of  Chitoaripn  divide
from  the  remainder  of  the  Island,  we  ohserve  that  it  con-
tained a  greater  number  of  single  boildings  than  any  of  the
others  attributed  to  the  Inca,  and  also,  probably,  the  most
extensive  ones.  I  may  be  permitted  to  recapitulate  the
principal  points  contained  in  the  foregoing  description.
From  some  point  on  the  eastern  side  of  Muro-kato  a  well-
made  road,  or  wide  path,  with  steps,  descended  into  a  bot-
tom at  the  southern  base  of  the  Sacred  Bock,  passing  close
by  a  group  of  small  buildings,  each  of  one  apartment  only.
The  road  then  ascends  to  a  level,  on  the  eastern  margin  of
which  the  Sacred  Bock  stands.  This  level  seems  to  have
been  snrroonded  by  a  wall  outlining  a  terrace.  Many  an*
cient  votive  offerings  were  disinterred  here,  and  in  front  of
the  Sacred  Bock  are  vestiges  of  foondations.

The  rock  has  a  natural  concavity  and  other  marks  that
must  have  forcibly  struck  the  Indian  mind.  These  marks
bear  resemblance  to  the  head  of  the  indigenous  cat,  and  the
name  of  the  rock  is  derived  from  the  Aymara  name  of  this
animal.  In  close  proximity  are  traces  of  former  edifices.
A  few  blocks  of  andesite  of  good  workmanship  are  lying
near  by.  Andesite  is  not  on  the  Island,  but  on  the  Peninsula
of  Copacavana  I  The  Sacred  Boc&  is  so  situated  as  to  afford
an  excellent  view  of  both  shores,  east  and  west.  On  this
site  the  Indian  to-day  is  still  impressed  with  superstitious
awe.  This  was  noticed  by  Mr.  Sqnier.'*  It  is  asserted  that
no  bird  of  any  kind  passes  beyond  the  wall  of  Mnro-kato ;
the  reason  for  it  lies  probably  in  the  scantiness  of  vegeta-
tion.*" On  the  western  slope,  and  not  far  from  the  Sacred
Bock,  is  a  fairly  preserved  edifice,  which  tradition  describes
as  a  residence  and  again  as  a  storehouse.  This  edifice  is  so
built  aa  to  surround  a  copious  spring  of  water,  and  the
slope  on  that  side  is  covered  with  vegetation. On  the  same


;cbyG00'^lc


230 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Bide  a  qoadrangnlar  platform,  conunandmg  an  extensive
view,  bears  faint  traces  of  andent  buildings.  Excavations
have  brongbt  to  ligbt,  besides  pottery  similar  to  that  of
Cuzco,  figures  of  gold  and  silver  Boch  as  the  older  authors
assert  were  used  as  ofFeringa  in  pre-Columbian  times.
Near  by,  tissues  of  exceptional  beauty  in  texture,  design,
and  color  have  been  found;  and  at  least  two  of  these  were
buried  in  well  made  chests  of  andesite.  On  the  last  prom-
ontory  of  the  Island  are  graves  different  from  Chullpa
graves.  Shapeless  ruins  of  buildinga  are  also  foimd  there.
Add  to  these  features  the  andenes  of  Chucaripu,  and  the
i^ole  northwestern  group  of  mine  on  Titicaca  Island
presents  every  condition  essential  to  IJadian  residence,  while
at  the  same  time  tradition  designates  it  as  having  beoi  a
place  of  aboriginal  worship.

The  wall  of  Muro-kato  does  not  seem  to  have  been  erected
for  defense.  Neither  are  there  any  traces  of  other  purely
military  constructions.  The  only  bnilding  showing  some
defensive  features  is  the  Chincana.  I  have  already  stated
that  some  authors  from  the  early  part  of  the  seventeenth
century  mention  the  Chincana  as  a  "storehouse,"  whereas
to-day  it  is  called  a  "palace."  It  is  certainly  not  a  palatial
building.  On  the  contrary,  with  its  dingy  cells,  narrow  and
tortuous  passages,  it  is  more  unfit  for  abode  than  the  Pilco-
kayma,  and  has,  furthermore,  the  notable  disadvantage  of
fronting  away  from  the  snn.  Still  there  is  <me  feature  that
might  suggest  an  abode  or,  perhaps,  that  portions  of  it  were
used  as  a  place  of  worship.  One  of  the  smaller  cells,  to
which,  when  intact,  light  and  air  had  access  only  throu^
the  doorway,  had  the  floor  paved  with  rough  mosaic-work
made  of  small  and  bright  pebbles.  Such  pebbles  are  found
on  the  beach  below  Ciriapata,  on  the  east  side.  The  mosaic
was,  of  course,  torn  up  by  the  Indians,  who  kept  some  of
the  pebbles  and  left  the  rest.  We  sent  a  number  of  tiiem  to
the  Museum.  It  is  doubtful  if  the  Indian  would  take  the
trouble  of  decorating  the  floor  of  a  store-room  I An  indica-


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 231

tion  that  the  Chincana  was  also  nsed,  partly  at  least,  as  a
residence  is  the  prozimity  of  a  spring.  Ohromclers  state
that  a  bath  for  the  sun  had  been  constrocted  there.  Bat
the  spring  is  simply  an  enclosed  pool,  too  narrow  for  bath-
ing purposes,  and  there  are  no  vestiges  of  tanks  or  sinks.

I  again  call  attention  to  the  precautions  taken  against
hostile  approach  from  the  Lake-side.  Such  precautions
would  not  have  been  nsed  unless  the  bnildlng  contained
something  valuable  or  sacred.  For  the  alimentation  of  the
inmates  of  all  the  buildings  around  the  Sacred  Bock,  a
storehoQse  of  more  modest  proportions  was  ample.  Never-
theless, it  is  possible  that  the  Chincana  may  have  been  a
magazine  as  well  as  a  dwelling.  ^Tbere  is  still  another  pos-
sibility: Statements  in  regard  to  the  location  of  special
places  of  worship  are  too  positive  to  admit  of  much  doubt
that  they  stood  in  the  imtnediate  proximity  of  the  Sacred
Bock;  but  the  same  is  not  the  case  with  another  structure,
inhabited  by  female  attendants  of  the  shrine,"  women  who
lived  in  seclusion,  like  nuns,  with  the  difference  that  chastity
was  not  obligatory  upon  them,  sexual  interoonrse  being
allowed  under  special  conditions  and  only  with  men  from
the  Inca  tribe.'''  Hence  such  places  were  kept  under
vigilance  to  avoid  intrusion.  The  occupations  of  these
women  consisted  in  the  manufacture  of  objects  nsed  in
worship,  such  as  ceremonial  dresses,  and  in  brewing
chicha.""  Such  a  house  existed  on  Titicaca,  and  of  all  the
ancient  structures  still  discernible  on  the  Island,  the  Chin-
cana is  the  only  one  suggesting  it.**  In  that  case,  it  served
for  residence,  as  well  as  for  storing  valuable  objects  des-
tined as  offerings,  and  this  justified  some  precautionary
measures  against  eventual  attempts  at  spoliation.  It  is
tme  that  the  Indians  state  that  the  house  occupied  by  these
women  was  the  one  which  they  call  Mama-ojlia ;  but  neither
its  size  nor  its  arrangement,  which  shows  no  divisions  into
apartments,  favor  that  opinion,  whereas  the  Chincana  con-
tained at  least  twenty  rooms. It  has  a  number  of  courts.


;cbyG00'^lc


232 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

large  and  small,  that  afforded  room  for  spuming,  weaving,
cooking,  and  other  work  for  which  the  ding7  cells  were
inadequate;  and  shows  features  ans^stive  of  protection
against  illicit  access.

I  regret  to  be  unable  to  offer  more  data  than  those
presoited.  The  report  on  the  first  visit  to  the  Island  lam-
tions  the  seolnded  women  on  the  Island,  giving  their  nmn-
ber  at  the  much  exaggerated  figure  of  more  than  a  thousand,
whereas  there  is  not,  in  all  the  Inca  structures  on  the
Island  put  together,  room  for  such  a  number  of  people  of
both  sexes.  They  state  that  the  occapation  of  these  women
was  to  brew  chicha  and  asperge  with  it  the  Sacred  Bock.^
But  no  mention  is  made  of  the  abodes  wherein  the  women
dwelt.  Other  Spanish  authors  who  give  accounts  of  the
ancient  strnctures  from  actual  observation  are  of  the  seven-
teenth centnry.  Hence  these  writers  obtained  their  in-
formation about  the  original  condition  and  purpose  of  tbe
edifices  at  second  or  third  hand.  Some  old'  Indian  may  have
been  able  to  give  them  data  from  direct  recollections,  but
it  is  doubtful  whether,  after  three  quarters  of  a  centnry,
such  recollections  were  suffidently  clear.  At  the  same  time
it  is  evident  that  Bamos,  Calancha,  Father  Andres  de  San
Nicolas,  as  well  as  the  Jesuits  Cobo  and  Oliva,  visited  Titi-
eaca  but  occasionally  and  saw  only  certain  portions  of  it
Else  how  could  they  be  silent  in  regard  to  such  ruins  as  the
Pilco-kayma  and  Fuoaraf

I  b^  to  return  once  more  to  the  suggestion  tliat  the
Chincana  may  have  been  an  abode  for  women  living  in
compulsory  retirement  Of  tbe  six  beautiful  pondios
acquired  by  tbe  Museum  with  the  Oarers  collection,  five
were  found  buried  in  tiie  vicinity  of  Chucaripn-pata  and
Titikala.  The  tissnes  are  of  extraordinary  beauty  and
solidity,  patterns  as  well  as  colors  are  exceptionally  fine.
Concurrent  testimony  of  the  Spunidi  chroniclers  is  to  tbe
effect  tliat  such  work  was  mostly  performed  by  women  liv^
ing  in  seclusion  and  that  it  was  part  of  their  duties.'*)


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Platb  LVll

Objects  in  mlver  found  in  vicinity  of  Saor^d  Bock

1,  2.  Topos  or  TumiB  of  siWer. 3,  4,  5.  Silver  pins. 0,  T.  Female  flgurei

8,  9.  Uale  Iguiee  of  silrer,  nsed  h  offerb^s


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  EUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 233

H^ice  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  five  ponchos  in  qnesUon
Tere  voven  on  the  Island  of  Titicaca  unless  one  or  the
other  was  brought  thither  from  Cnzco.  It  is  also  likely
that  their  age  is  not  mnch  greater  than  foor  centariesJ'
The  loom  actually  in  nse  among  the  Aymar&  is  primitiTe
and  consists  of  fonr  stakes  planted  in  the  gronnd,  and  at
this  the  woman,  kneeling  and  squatting,  weaves  with  im-
plements like  those  fomid  in  Chullpa  mins."  In  the  case
of  the  large  ancient  ponchos,  it  is  diatiactly  stated  that
each  required  a  larger  frame  placed  upright,  and  great
length  of  time.  The  colors  were  ^yen  to  the  wool  before  it
was  spun,  and  the  thread  twirled  by  hand,  men  sometimes
assisting  the  women  in  this  work."

I  still  have  to  allude  to  several  large  stones,  all  of  ande-
site,  one  of  which  is  to-day  at  the  hacienda  of  Challa,  in  the
courtyard  of  its  buildings,  and  the  others  are  found  at  the
garden  of  the  same  hacienda.  The  former  measures  five
feet  in  length  by  two  in  width.  Its  least  thickness  is  ei^t,
its  greatest  thirteen  inches.  The  shape  is  best  understood
from  the  sketch.


^d^'


The  other  three  are  prismatic  slabs  of  various  length,
rangii^  from  five  to  eight  feet.  These  slabs  were  brought
from  Kasapata  by  the  Indians,  with  the  aid  of  only  a  few
ropes  and  rollers  of  wood,  over  narrow  and  sometimes  qoite
steep  and  rocky  paths,  distances  of  a  quarter  and  half  a
mile  respectively.  This  is  instructive  for  the  manner  in
which,  at  other  places,  much  larger  blocks  may  have  been
moved  in  ancient  tunes. Authors  from  the  seventeenth


;cbyG00'^lc


234 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

century  state  that  admission  to  the  particularly  sacred
sections  on  Titicaca  Island  was  obtained  through  tliree
gateways  called,  respectively:  Pumapnnca,  Kentipunco,
and  Pillcopuncn,  or  "door  of  the  puma,"  "door  of  tiie
hunumng-bird,"and'*door  of  hope."  Such  is  the  informa-
tion given  by  Bamos.  Cobo  speaks  of  a  single  gate,  which
he  calls  Intipunca,  or  "gate  of  the  sun."  The  former  says
that  the  three  gates  were  twenty  paces  distant  from  eadi
otiier.  Cobo  places  the  gateway  of  Intipuncu  some^ere
on  the  crest  of  Mnro-kato.'*  It  has  been  su^^ested  that  the
large  block  and  slabs  above  alluded  to  are  from  some  sodi
gateway;  but  their  being  found  at  Kasapata  does  not  favor
the  assumption.

It  remains  to  cast  a  glance  at  the  vestiges  in  the  south-
western portion  of  the  Island,  in  the  two  bottoms  of  Kona,
north  and  south,  and  on  the  flanks  of  the  tall  ridge  of  Ea-
kayo-kena.  These  remains  consist,  so  far  as  we  eonM
observe,  of  terraces,  or  andenes,  and  of  the  road,  called
Qnivini  (30),  that  leads  to  the  eammit  of  Chullun-kayani.
Of  the  andenes  little  is  to  be  said.  The  Indians  affirm  that
they  are  all  Inca,  and  well  may  it  be.  Of  the  road,  I  have
already  spok^i.  At  the  foot  of  the  eastern  declivity  of  the
trough  (as  which  the  bottoms  of  Kona  appear),  in  its  sonth-
eastem  comer,  there  is  a  fairly  leveled  terrace  with  niches.

On  the  platform  not  the  slightest  trace  of  buildings  can
be  detected,  and  not  a  potsherd  nor  other  artefact  of  any
kind  is  to  be  found.  Excavations  proved  fruitless.  Never-
theless, the  impression  becomes  strong  that  this  artificially
encased  rise,  with  the  remains  of  a  descent  on  the  eastern
side,  may  have  been  leveled  for  the  purpose  of  erecting  on
i|;  some  edifice.  The  outline  of  the  terrace  is  not  regular
and  shows  the  customary  adaptation  to  natural  features,
bnt  the  walls  are  well  constructed  and  the  two  niches  (of
nneqnal  size)  very  fairly  made.  Each  of  these  niches  has  a
ceiling  composed  of  slabs,  like  some  at  the  Chincana  and
PUco-kayma. From  the  comers  on  the  west  project  walls


;cbyG00'^lc.


ANCIENT  BIJINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 235

tliat  appear  like  cODtiniiations  of  the  northern  and  sonthem
sides  of  the  platform.  In  some  of  the  ravines  that  ran
parallel  with  those  between  which  the  platform  stands  are
similar  facings,  bnt  much  damaged.  West  of  the  min,  the
slopes  of  Kakayo-bena  are  covered  with  terraces,  and  the
marshy  bottom  is  traversed  by  causeways  similar  to  those
at  Pncara.

The  niches  so  common  on  the  Island  in  ruins  of  Inca  type,
inside  of  buildings  as  well  as  in  outer  walls,  deserve  some
attention.  In  the  interior  of  btiildings  the  small  niche  evi-
dently served  the  same  purpose  as  in  Indian  houses  of  to-
day, being  a  substitute  for  our  closets,  cupboards,  and
wardrobes.  In  them  articles  of  household  use  were  kept,"
and  in  many  of  the  large  niches  also.  (Bnt  at  the  Pilco-
kayma,  for  instance,  the  niches  of  the  eastern  apartments
are  so  tall  and  ornamental  that  it  seems  probable  they  were
either  seats  or  destined  to  contain  objects  of  worsliip.  We
know  from  descriptions  that  taller  idols  were  sometimes
kept  in  such  recesses.'^  None  of  them  are  long  or  deep
enough  to  suggest  they  mij^t  have  served  as  sleeping  plat-
forms. The  large  niches  in  facings  of  terraces  or  walls  of
enclosores  (as  at  Kona  and  Pncara)  are  more  difficult  to
account  for.  The  Indian  is  too  ntititarian  to  manufacture
anything  without  some  practical  purpose.  In  the  case  of
Kona,  for  instance,  recesses  do  not  seem  to  have  been  merely
ornamental.  I  suggest  that  niches  tall  enough  for  a  human
being  to  stand  in  might  have  been  made  for  shelter  from
the  showers  which  are  most  frequent  in  the  months  when
the  Indian  is  engaged  in  bis  field-work.  They  may  have
not  only  served  as  shelter  for  human  beings,  but  also  for
harvested  crops,  against  drenching  rains.  This  does  not
exclnde  the  possibility  of  fetishes  having  been  kept  in  such
niches  also,  fetishes  destined  to  protect  and  foster  the
crops,  although,  so  far  as  we  know,  such  Huacas  were  of
small  size.'*')

How  many  of  the  andenes  on  the  slopes  of  Kakayo-kena


;cbyG00'^lc


236 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

are  due  to  the  Incas  is  impossible  to  detenmne.  We  sav,
when  on  the  saminit  of  the  great  ridge  of  that  name  (Chn-
llnn-Kayam  in  particular)  traces  of  what  might  have  been
remains  of  small  edifices  similar  to  watch-towers,  bat  our
Indians  pretended  not  to  know  anything  abont  them,  hence
we  are  nnable  to  say  if  these  vestiges  are  andent  or  recoit.
The  existence  of  watch-towers,  on  so  excellent  a  lookont  as
this  crest,  wonld  not  seem  improbable.  The  watch-tower  is
common  in  ancient  architecture  of  the  Nortii  American
southwest,  and  it  served  for  military  purposes  as  well  as
for  simply  goarding  the  crops.

It  is  snperflnons  to  enter  into  more  detail  abont  Inca
mins  on  Titicaca  Island.  They  indicate  a  degree  of  cnltore
so  superior  to  what  we  have  become  acquainted  with  under
the  name  of  Chullpa,  and  the  artefacts  accompanying  them
show  a  type  so  closely  corresponding  to  that  from  the
valley  of  Cnzco,  that  the  belief  expressed  by  the  IJidians  of
to-day,  ascribing  them  to  the  Incas,  amounts  to  a  certunty.
I  beg  to  observe,  however,  that  while  the  buildings  were
erected  for  and  under  the  direction  of  Incas,  they  do  not
show  the  nice  work  displayed  in  remains  at  and  around
Cnzco,  Cacha,  Ca  jamarca  and  other  places  of  the  Pemvian
Sierra.  Some  blocks  which  were  brought  over  from  the
Peninsula  of  Copacavana  indicate  that  in  some  instances
the  same  perfection  was  reached,  but  the  majority  of  walls
are  of  a  ruder  make.  It  may  be,  therefore,  that  while  the
nicer  work  was  done  by  men  of  the  Inca  tribe  of  Cnzco,
the  main  labor  was  performed  by  hands  who  were  not  as

filfnl,  and  this  is  partly  corroborated  by  tradition.
The  earliest  descriptions  of  Titicaca  Island,  subsequent
to  the  report  of  1534,  the  one  by  Gieza  of  Leon,  and  the
other  by  Oviedo,  the  latter  from  the  testimony  of  con-
querors, are  short  and  v&gaeT)  The  former  says : '  *  The  great
lagnne  of  the  CoUao  bears  the  name  of  Titicaca,  from  the
temple  that  was  constructed  in  the  same  lagune,  abont
which  the  natives  held  a  very  vain  opinion. These  Indians


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 237

say  that  their  ancestors  affirmed  as  certain,  as  they  also
did  of  other  fables  of  which  they  speak,  that  light  failed
them  for  many  days,  and  that,  while  all  were  in  darkness
and  obscnrity,  the  snn  came  ont  (rose)  from  this  Island  of
Titicaca  with  great  splendor,  for  which  reason  they  held
the  island  to  be  sacred  and  the  Ingas  made  in  it  the  temple
of  which  I  have  spoken,  that  was  mnch  esteemed  and  vene-
rated among  them,  in  honor  of  their  son,  placing  in  it
virgin  women  and  priests  with  great  treasures ;  of  which,
although  the  Spaniards  at  various  times  have  obtained  a
great  deal,  it  is  still  believed  that  the  most  is  there  yet."^*
I  note  that,  as  this  was  written  in  1550,  it  indicates  that
previons  to  that  year  the  Island  had  been  repeateeUy  visited
by  Spaniards.  Oviedo  tells  ua :  "  That  conntry  of  Collao  is
veiy  well  situated  and  has  a  good  disposition.  In  it  there
is  a  lagnne  that  has  forty  leagues  of  circumference  and  is
sweet  and  .  .  .  and  in  an  islet  within,  the  people  have  their
principal  house  of  worship  and  idolatry,  and  it  is  held  in
great  veneration  among  them,  and  from  distant  lands  they
go  thither  in  pilgrimage."  This  was  written  previous  to
1547."

[The  concurrent  testimony  of  all  the  sources  from  the  six-
teenth century,  at  my  command,  is  to  the  effect  that  Titi-
caca was  a  shrine,  sacred  to  the  Licas  of  Cuzco  as  well  as  to
the  Indians  on  the  shores  of  the  Lake.  This  is  also  clearly
expressed  by  authors  from  the  century  following,  hence
more  remote  from  the  time  of  the  conquest.

(The  object  of  particular  worship  on  the  Island  is  stated
as  having  been  TitikcUa,  or  the  Sacred  Rock,  and  that  wor-
ship is  said  to  have  been  due  to  some  connection  of  the  rock
with  the  sun,  nay,  that  the  sun  was  the  deity  to  which  the
main  adoration  was  directed.  fHence  to-day  Titicaca  is
often  called  "Island  of  the  Sun,"  and  Koati,  its  smaller
neighbor,  the  "Island  of  the  Moon."  )  The  Temple  of  the
Sun,  as  we  have  seen,  stood  close  by  the  Sacred  Bock,  and
with  it  other  chapels,  dedicated  to  thunder  and  lightning.


;cbyG00'^lc


238 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Nevertheless  that  rock,  and  not  the  sun,  was  the  principd
fetish  of  the  Island.  It  is  stated  that  "pilgrims"  were  not
allowed  to  touch  the  face  of  the  cliff,  but  only  to  gaze  at  it
from  the  margin  of  the  little  plane  in  front  of  Titikala.
Inca  chieftains  and  those  officiating  as  attendants  to  the
shrine  alone  could  approach  closer.  It  is  also  asserted
that  the  face  of  the  rock  was  decorated  with  plates  of
precious  metals  and  rich  tisanes,  and  that  an  altar  waa
placed  inside  of  its  main  natural  recess.  It  is  farther
stated  that  the  "pilgrims"  were  subject  to  penance  and  con-
fession, repeatedly  even,  before  they  were  admitted  to  the
margin  of  the  sacred  enclosure.  The  elaborateness  of  this
cult  is  so  far  ^ihanced  as  to  claim  that  the  Peninsula  of
Copacavana  was  occupied  by  the  Incas  for  the  sole  purpose
of  sanctifying  and  controlling  access  to  the  Island,  checkii^
those  who  would  attempt  to  tread  its  soil  unprei>ared  or  in
an  unworthy  condition."' )

To  deny  a  priori  the  truth  of  such  reports  would  not  be
critical  research,  but  to  accept  them  wtconditionMy  is  an-
other question.  All  these  reports  suffer  from  the  failings
of  their  time,  that  is,  from  lack  of  means  of  comparison
with  other  peoples  and  countries,  and  an  inclination  to  ac-
cept without  reserve  all  that  was  told.  I  believe  we  may
safely  apply  to  these  descriptions  the  testimony  of  tiie
mins  themselves.  The  terms  "gorgeous,"  "splendid,"
"sumptuous,"  so  lavishly  bestowed  upon  the  monuments
on  Titicaca,  appear  as  great  exaggerations.  The  same  was
the  case  with  ceremonials.  Barbaric  display,  dftraling  in
color,  and  striking  throngh  the  weirdness  peculiar  to  liidlan
performances,  cannot  have  but  powerfully  impressed  Eu-
ropean spectators."'
/The  central  object  of  this  worship  was,  as  stated,  not  the
snn,  bat  the  Sacred  Bock.  Hence  it  was  Achachila  cult  of
the  AymarS,  with  notable  Inca  display,  introduced  not  a
century  before  the  conquest.  As  accessories  to  the  principal
shrine,  there  existed  chapels  dedicated  to  other  fetishes.^


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Puts  Lvm
1.  Alpaca  of  silver. 2.  IJama  pf  sUver  witb  oapaiison  and  naili  of  (old


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 239

Kamofi  mentions  three  atatues  on  Titicaca  called,  respec-
tively, Apu-ynti,  Chosip-ynti,  and  Tntipguanqui,  which
words  he  translates  as  the  Son-chieftain,  Sun-son,  and  the
Brother-sun.  Of  this  Trinity  he  states  that  it  was ' '  only  one
God."*'  Cobo  describes  a  statue,  half  gold,  half  silver,
of  the  size  of  a  woman,  of  whic^  he  was  told  that  it  repre-
sented the  moon  and  stood  on  the  Island  of  Koati.  But  he
adds:  "Although  others  will  have  it  that  this  fignre  and
statue  was  called  Titicaca,  and  they  say  it  represented  the
mother  of  the  Incas."^  In  regard  to  such  ceremonial  ob-
jects the  most  complete  disagreement  exists  between  the
chroniclers,  whereas  they  agree  in  that  the  Sacred  Rock
was  the  center  of  attraction  and  at  the  same  time  the  seat
of  oracnlar  utterances.*'  This  worship  at  the  "Bock  of
the  Cat"  and  the  consequent  fame  of  the  Island  of  Titicaca
among  the  Indians,  was  of  great  antiquity  in  Bolivia,  Titi-
caca being  a  noted  shrine  of  the  Aymard  long  before  the
Incas  took  possession  of  it.  In  this  connection  I  have  to  add
a  word  of  cantion.

(it  seems  certain  that  when  the  Incas  took  possession  of
the  Island,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  fifteenth  cwitnry,  they
found  it  inhabited  by  jdymord-speaking  aborij^es,  to
which  the  name  "Chullpa"  is  given  by  .the  present  genera-
tion. It  is  furthermore  asserted,  that  these  Aymara  Indians
were  mostly  removed  by  the  Incas  to  the  mainland.  But
upon  the  arrival  of  the  Spaniards  in  the  basin  of  Lake
Titicaca  the  shrine  was  abandoned  by  the  Inca  and  the
Island  gradually  reoccupied  by  Indians  of  Aymara  stock,
who  lived  there  for  at  least  a  century  after  the  manner  of
their  forefathers.  Hence  not  all  of  what  is  included  under
the  head  of  "Chullpa"  is  pre-conquistorial.  Even  the
artificial  deformation  of  the  head,  so  frequently  alluded  to
in  these  pages,  was  practised  as  late  as  the  seventeenth
century.  A  number  of  antiquities  from  Titicaca  may  be  of
later  date  than  the  time  of  the  conquest,  and  more  recerd
than  the  Inca  remains. Nevertheless,  even  when  posterior


;cbyG00'^lc


240 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

to  the  sixteenth  centnry,  they  are  of  an  ancient  type,  and
fair  representatives  of  the  art  and  industry  of  the  people  m
their  primitive  condition,  prior,  not  only  to  the  advent  of
the  Spaniards,  hat  also  to  that  of  the  Ineas  and  tlidr
occupation  of  Titicaca  Island.^

I  now  torn  to  the  Island  of  Koati,  Titicaca 's  smaller
neither,  and  to  its  mins.  Whereas  there  is  good  evidoace
that  Titicaca  enjoyed  a  certain  repntation  as  a  shrine
previous  to  the  time  when  the  Incas  established  themselves
on  its  soil,  Koati  rose  into  prominence  only  throng  ths
establishments  which  the  Incas  founded  there.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


r:.  -  \


V" y


DamziowGoOi^lc


NOTES


THE  ANCIENT  EUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND
OF  TITICACA


■The  word  "CbnUpft"  aignUea  the  'Meaning "Little (tbe

bag, or nek, nuide of iebbn gram eMico) Kea-Eollu." "Kea"  is  th«

of  the  monntaiii-ieBioiu,  in  which  the name of a plant, bnt I would not

dead were placed. See Bertonio: venture  to  aMtrt  it  to  be  related  to

Voedbulano,  II,  p.  92:  "Chnllpa:— the  name  of  the  hei^t.

Bntierro o  Bemn  donde  metian  rai  *Bee  the  intareotiog  and  Talnable

difnntos." I,  p.  430;  "Sepnltnra,— woik  of  mj  friendlDr.  Charles  Lum-

o wron eomo iaanga donde ponian holt^y/nknown  ItaHeo,  and  my  final

el difnnto: ChnDpa, Tel Aaaneo." Bepoi^,  II,  Part  xm,  pp.  502,  604  et

From the bag, or sack, the name  ~ '

wBs  gradually  tranaferred,  popnlarlj,

to  the  bnildinga  in  which  they  were

found  and  finally  to  the  people  who

once  occupied  them. The  Indian  wix-

ard  on  Titieaea,  to  whose  etatements  I

referred  m  freely  in  Fart  III,  told  na

the  "Chnllpa"  drened  in  teztnrea  of

llama  wool. Pedro  I^zarro  (S«laoUn,

p.  281) layB  the  inhatritanta  of  the

Collao "viaten de ropa de Una


'BelatioM  per  Bva  Uaetta,  1634,
(Bamnaio,  II,  Bamoaio  III:  1SS6,  fol.
413):  "le  sue  terre  lono  di  me^oere
grandeua,  k  le  eaae  picciole,  le  mure  di
pietra  k  terra  inaieme,  coperte  di  pag-
lia."  £elaoum  de  la  Provinoia  de  lot
Faoaja,  p.  62:  "La  forma  y  manera
de  laa  caaas  aon  redondaa,  de  quince
piee  de  redondo,  peqoefiaa  .  •  ■  y  una
puerta  pequella  taacia  la  parte  de
donde  aale  el  aol,  ain  tener  ninguna
caaa  eon  aposento  doblado."


leg.;  Part  xit,  p.  664.

'In  the  book  of(8.  8.  smi\TraveU
i»  Peru  and  Meaieo,  1860,  on  page
241,  he  mention*  a  collection  of
PeruTiau  antlquitiee  at  Cuzco  in  which
were  "innumerable  weapons  of  war.
.  .  .  One  of  them  eonaiited  of  •  piece
of  metal  with  prominent  knobe  around
it,  and  a  hole  in  the  middle  trtiich
•eemed  designed  for  the  handle.  The
Doctor  [Bennett]  bad  examined  many
■knlla  of  embalmed  bodiea  which
seemed  to  have  been  broken  by  thia
instrument,  and  were  aetvaUjf  repaired
witA  oolobath."  (Italics  are  mine.)
If  the  statement  is  reliable,  it  recalls
dosing  of  the  trephined  oriJBee  with  a
piece  of  gourd  or  mate.

*  Ordertaneat  del  Peri,  Lib.  II,  Tit.
IX,  Ord.  vm,  fol.  146.

'Primefo  Parte  de  Ut  CrSnioa  del
FerU,  Cap.  □,  p.  443:  "En  las  cabeus
trtten  pneetos  unos  bonetes  &  manei*
de  morteros,  heehos  de  en  laaa,  que


;cbyG00'^lc


242


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


nombraii  CbiicM;  j  tieuenloa  todoa
mny  largaa  j  am  colodnllo,  porque
desde  niHos  se  ka  qnebrantut  j  pouen
como  qnieren."  TillAgomec:  Exorta-
oioK  eontra  la  Idolatria,  etc.,  foL  G8,
Edicto:  "Si  algnnos  an  amoldado  6
smoldau  laa  cabe^as  de  sub  mncha-
ehoa  &  la  forma  qne  loa  Indios  ''"i"?"
Cantmna,  6  Palta  Vmnt"

*Biatoria  del  Nvew  Mando,  TV,
p.  175;  Abo,  Belacion  de  la  Province
de  lot  Collagvat,  p.  40;  and  Salea-
DMThna:  Belaeion  de  AntigUedadee
dute  Seyno  del  Piri,  p.  353.

•Properly  Cchalla  (gee  Bertonio;
V<>oabi^rio,  I,  p.  67),  modemued  to
Challa.  Voealmtario  de  tat  voces
mtxatet  de  Aymara  al  Cattellano  y
0(MAtM>,  La  Pai,  1894,  p.  4:  "Cballa


"One  of  the  nometooa  speciea  of
biiima,  found  on  tre«a  in  the  eaatem
■eetions  (Amaxoiiian  baain  and  eastern
■lopes  of  the  Aiidee)  of  South  Amer-
ica, where  thej  Uve  on  treee.

"  The  bola  waa  in  general  nee
among  the  Indiana  of  the  Peruvian
monntains,  although  more  in  the  aec-
.tiona  which  now  constitute  Bolivia.
(Praneiseo  de  XeTtz\(VeTdadera  Bela-
cion de  la  eonguitta  del  Perv,  p.  89)
gives  an  interesting  list  of  the
weapons  used  by  the  people  of  Atan-
bnallpa  at  Cajamarca,  bnt  he  only
mentiona  stonea  ahaped  like  egge  and
burled  by  alings.  The  anonymona
doenment,  8*ee$o*  oettrridot  e»  la
eonquigta  del  Peri  ante*  de  la  Oegada
del  Lyeeneiado  La  Qaaoa,  Doe.  de
India*,  XLU,  p.  381,  has  an  excellent
description  of  the  bolas,  aa  need  bjr
the  Indians  at  Cnsco  in  I53G:  "qne
k  echaban  los  yndioB  peleando  unas
sogas  de  Nierroa  de  ovejaa  eehu  tres
rflmales  qae  sola  la  soga  en  eada
Tamat  una  piedra  atada  y  con  aqoella
manera  los  mas  de  loa  caballos  qne  no
abia  quien  peleasa  e  a  loa  cabaUeroa
lee  ansi  misnio  los  liaban  con'aquellaa
eogas  qnellos  Ilaman  ailloa,  qne  no
eran  seflores  de  riendas  ni  espadas  ni
laoEa  ni  aefiorss  de  si  aqnel  dia  fyxie-


ron  mucho  fruto  loa  peonaa  qne  eon
taa  eqtadas  eortaban  de  aqndlaa  st^aa
eon  gran  trabazo,  que  apenaa  podian
por  ser  de  vemzoB  i  mny  oliadaa."
This  statement  is  by  an  eye-witiMsa
and  participant  in  the  so-called  ai^e
of  Cutco  by  the  Indiana  in  1536,  and
a>  good  a  deeeription  as  conld  be  de-
aired.  The  bolaa  themaelvea  were,
then,  attached  or  connected  by  tendoaa
of  Uamaa.  Alao:  Pobladon  y  eon-
quieta  del  Pirn,  DoeatneiiUn  iiiAKtM
de  ChiU.  The  name  "ayllo"  if
Quichua.  Torree  Bnbio:  Arte  y  Fcea-
liOano,  fol.  150:  "AyHu  6  Uvi,-
Cierto  instnunento  para  trabar  1m
pica,  y  caiar  animales."  Among  the
Aymari  "llini"  is  in  nse.  In  the
short  roeabnlary  appended  to  tlw
woik  of  Aniaga,  Extirpacion  de  ta
Idolatria,  etc,  foL  134,  he  definea
Aillo,  o  Libis,  as  foUowa:  "Tn  endel
con  tree  ramalea,  y  a]  eabo  de  eada
vno  vna  bolilla  de  plomo  sirve  para
caqar  pajaroa,  o  animalea  enredaa-
dolea."  After  theae  deacriptiona  I
merely  refer,  for  confirmation  and
minor  detaila,  to  Calancfaa;  CorfimiM
Uoriaitada,  II,  fol.  2;  and  Cobo:  Si*-
toTia  del  Ntievo  Uundo,  TV,  p.  196.

"  And  on  the  Puna  in  general,  alao
on  the  eaatem  slopes,  abont  Pahehneo
and  CharaeaanL

"  Alao  on  the  Peniuania  of  Hnata,
and  in  the  broken  country.

"Samoa  (Hitoria  de  CopoeaibMo,
edition  of  1860,  p.  45),  is  connect  km
with  sacrifices  of  dtildreo,  states:
"Mnchas  vecee  eolian  sacriAcar  astaa
tiemas  vtctimaa  ahog&ndolas^  deapoM
de  haberlea  dado  bisn  do  cwnv  y
beber,  llen&ndolaa  la  boea  de  eoea
molidja  y  deteni6ndoIea  d  rcsndlo;
despnaa  las  enterraban  con  ciertoa
viaajes  y  ceremonias.  Otras  veca  laa
degollaban,  y  eon  sn  sangre  as  tefiiaa
el  rostro;  enterraban  con  elloa  ba
vasoe  en  qne  antes  lea  hacian  beber,  y
por  «so  en  taa  sepnlturas  se  snelu
hallar  mnehoa,  que  euando  son  ds  ma-
dera  Ilaman  Qnero,  y  6  loa  de  plata
Aqnillas." Torre*  Bobio  has  (AHe.


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 243


fol.  98):  "Quheru-Vaao  i«  madera
en  que  vavian  la  Chicha";  foL  75:
' '  Aquilla— Vaso  de  plata. ' '  Ber-
tonio :  Foco&uIarMi,  11,  p.  24 :  "  Aquilla
— Taao  de  plata  para  bener,  que  tam-
bien  HamHii  Quero,  7  si  es  a  manera
de  ta^a,  Vichn. ' ' Idem,  p.  290.

■*  There  are,  at  the  Ajnericiui  Ma-
Mnm  of  Natural  Hurtoiy  (New  York)
two  wooden  keroa,  purported  to  have
come  from  Ciuco,  with  inlaid  SganB,
painted,  and  partly  vbtj  well  dec-
orated. In  regard  to  these  drinking
goblets  it  is  stated  t^  Cobo,  Hittoria
del  Nuwo  Mttndo,  IT,  p.  169:  "Los
mas  comunes  son  de  madera,  de
hechnra  de  naestroe  eubiletet  de  vidrio,
maa  ancbos  de  arriba  qne  de  abajo,
<jne  hacen  nn  enartiUo  de  vino.  Pin-
tanlos  por  de  fnera  eon  derto  bnmis
muy  relnciente  de  varies  eolores,  con
diferentes  labores  y  pintnras;  y  &
eatoB  vasoB  de  palo  Uaman  QueroB. ' '
The  two  gpecimenB  mentioned  recall
the  above  description.  They  alao  have
bita  of  tin  inemstated  with  the  fl^;-
ures.  QBertoniOi^Y"  VooabvlaTio,  II,
p.  290,  gives  vari^is  names  in  Aymari
for  varieties  of  keros,  among  them:
' '  Chaantacata  Qnero— Taso  que  en  los
estremos  tiene  enesxado  eetafio."

"Cobo,  in  Historta,  IV,  p.  227,
describes  a  way  of  fishing  with  a
"fiaga,"  wbieb  is  a  (tbree-pronged)
harpoon  or  a  fishing  spear.  He  says:
"Indies  hay  qne  en  los  rios  mansos  y
hondos  se  eeban  &  nada  con  nna  Asga
en  la  mano  derecba,  nadando  iiSIo  con
la  iiqmerda  con  gran  ligereEB,  y  la-
bnllendo  traa  el  pescado,  lo  lignen
hasta  alcanzarlo,  y  clav&ndolo  eon  la
Osga,  lo  sacan  atravesado  4  la  orilla."
He  fails  to  indicate  the  region  where
this  was  practised.  Swimming  in  Lake
Titieaca  is  by  no  means  safe  and
eould  hardly  be  sustained  for  longer
than  ten  or  at  most  twenty  n^ntes.

"The  so-called  Chnllpa  people,
being  nothing  ebe  than  the  primitive
Aymari,  and  it  being  well  established
that  the  latter  wore  clothing— a  tact
also established by onr own finds


elsewhere  in  Bolivia— there  is  no  need
of  special  reference  to  anthorities.

"  And  to  various  other  seetiona  of
Bolivia  which  we  explored.

"Bqnier:  P«™,  pp.  302  and  363,
picture  of  CJiullpas  at  Acora.

*8ee  the(^nterioan  Antkropologut,
January-March,  190G:  The  aboriginal
Svitie  at  SUhutani,  F«ru.'\The  towers
at  Kalaki,  on  the  AonJ  of  Hnata,
fronting  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana
were,  like  those  of  SiUnstaoi,  prob-
ably store-houses.

"Prtnwro  Parte  de  la  Crdnioa,
Cap.  c,  p.  443.

"Furthermore,  not  all  of  these
graves  are  pre-Spanish.  As  shown  in
Part  III,  the  Island  continued  to  be
inhabited  by  Aymari,  who,  for  a  cen-
tury after  the  conquest,  at  least,  lived
on  it  after  the  fashion  of  prinutive

"  Most  of  the  engagements  between
the  first  Spaniards  in  Pern  and  the  In-
dians were  fought  in  the  daytime,  even
when  the  latter  were  the  aggressors.

"Final  Report,  II,  pp.  506 and  568.

'Pent,  p.  335:  "The  path  skirla
the  flanks  of  the  abrupt  hills  forming
the  island,  apparently  on  the  line  of
an  ancient  roajl  supported  bj  terraces
of  large  stones,  at  an  elevation  of
between  two  and  three  hundred  feet
above  the  lake,  the  shores  of  which
are  procipitona. "  There  is  no  trace
of  such  terracM,  but  there  are  ledges
of  natural  rock  cropping  out  here  and
there.  Andenes  are  plentiful,  but
they  are  low  and  bear  no  relation  to
the  path,  whether  ancient  or  modem.
The  Inca  remains  at  the  Puneu  are
not  mentioned  by  any  of  the  early
authors  at  my  command.

"Arriaga:  ExtiTpa^itM,  p.  11:  "A
los  Puquios,  que  son  los  manantlales,
y  fuentes  hemos  hallado  que  adoran
de  la  misma  manera,  especialmente
donde  tienen  falta  de  agna,  ptdien-
dolee  qne  no  se  seqnen."

"  Perv,  p.  333.

"  Art^eologieal  Eeetmnoieeaitee  into
Meaioo,  chapter  on  Mitla.


;cbyG00'^lc


241


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


*  Nom  of  the  deseriptiou  of  the
Iilsnd  of  the  Mventeenth  centurf
at  mj  commuid  mentioiu  the  Pilco-
KsTina.  "Pilco"  BeemB  to  be  a  oor-
m[Aion  of  ' '  Pirca ' ' — wall,  in  Qoiehtui
as  well  aa  in  Ajmari.  Bertonio,  in
Fooabvlario,  II,  p.  49,  asTS  of
' '  Eajma ' '  that  it  means  ' '  cor-
rompido, ' '  decayed— and  is  applied
to  food  and  drink;  The  eilance  of
the  Angnatines  and  Jesnita  who  vii-
ited  the  Island  in  the  second  decade
of  the  seventeenth  eentary,  about  the
PileO'KaTniB,  is  a  matter  of  surprlae
to  me,  since  it  is  one  of  the  best  pre-
served and  most  atriking  ruins  on
Titicaea.

**  See  note  above.

"Peru,  p.  36S.  Id  aaagning  to
the  promontorj'  of  Uaq'-ajlli  an  ele-
vation of  20CN)  feet,  the  distinguished
explorer  haa  been  mistaken.  No  point
of  the  Island  rises  more  than  BOO  feet
above  the  Lake.

"Sqoier:  P«nt,  p.  368.  Bock  (a)
on  the  diagram  on  the  page  quoted  is
manifeetlj'  the  one  deeignated  to  ns
as  a  aacrifldal  atone.  Of  other  blocks
alluded  to  by  Mr.  Elqnier  and  which
he  calls  "Inti-Huatana"  there  is  only
the  one  that  looks  like  an  arm-chair.

^HUtoria  de  Copaoabana,  p.  44:
"£I  6rden  que  gnaidabau  loi  aaoer-
dotes  en  sacrifloarlos  era  este.  Ponf-
anloa  aobre  una  gran  losa,  echados  los
roetroe  bJ  eielo,  vneltoe  al  sol,  y  tiron-
dolee  del  cnello  ponlanlee  aobre  61  una
teja  6  piedra  lisa  aJgo  anehs  y  con
otra  les  daban  eneima  tales  golpee  que
en  breve  lee  quitalian  la  vida;  y  asi
mnertoe  los  dejaban  dentro  de  la
misma  guaca  .  .  ."

**  Ibidem,  p.  45.  It  seems  also,  that
bnman  sacrifices  continued  to  be  made
after  the  conquest.  In  secret.  On
page  36  be  mentions  tliat,  in  I59S,
and  between  Sicadca  and  Omro,  a
girl,  ten  yean  old,  bad  been  rescued
from  a  tomb  where  she  bad  been
bnried  by  the  Cnraeas  of  Sicasica.
This  manner  of  sacrifice  is  etill
in vigor to-day, and it is made


at  places  where  '
unearthed.  Cobo:  Biatoria,  etc.,  IT,
p.  64:  "Los  sacrifleiDS  que  en  este
adocstorio  se  haeian  eran  mny  fie-
qnentes  y  eoatosoe,  derramando  tanta
sangre  de  inoeentee  j  ofreciende  tan
grandee  teeoros. ' '  He  mentions  four
modes  of  aacrifieing  people:  Stiangn-
latioQ,  cutting  of  the  throat,  buiying
alive,  and  tearing  oat  the  heart.  The
latter  statement  is  snspieione,  aa  Cobo
was  for  a  number  of  years  in  Mexico.
Fray  Andr^  de  8.  Nicolas,  in  Ivi&ge%
de  N:B:  de  Copaeavana,  foL  3D,
states  that  tlie  victims  were  mostly
adults,  and  describes  the  sacrifiees  as
follows :  ' '  Ponian  i  los  mnchadios
Bobre  una  losa  grande,  alll  dispneBta;
y  aui^ndoles  dado  i  beber  m  brenaje
becho  da  maii,  que  Ilaman  ■'*'■''>■",  los
priuauan  de  Hentido,  y  luego  les
Ueuauan  la  boca  de  yerba,  qne  par
nombre  de  la  Coca  es  eonoddo  (enye
VBO  vn  ConcQIo  Limense  jnatamente
ha  condenado)  y  poniendolea  minndo
al  Sol,  apretanan  ens  gargantaa  eon
vna  piedra  liaa,  y  algo  aneha,  y  eon
otra  les  danan  tales  gelpes,  qne  dentro
de  poco  los  priuaoan  de  Is  vida."
Calancha,  in  Cordnioa,  U,  foL  18  et
$tq.,  repeats  Bamos  in  the  main,  bat
he  is  positive  that  adult  girls  were
sacrificed  on  the  Island,  thoogb  he
insiBts  that  the  majori^  of  vietinM
were  children.

When  Hernando  and  Qonaalo  I^-
larro  made  their  raid  into  Bolivia  in
I53S  or  1S39,  they  lost  one  of  their
men  who,  as  they  afterward  leaned,
had  been  sacrificed  in  a  shrine  on  the
Deeagnadero.  Btlaoion  del  tUio  del
Cveeo,  p.  179:  "Y  de  los  qne  prendie-
Ton  ae  supo  como  el  Cristiano  tornado
6  mnnoB  le  habian  aacrificado  en  nn
adotntorio  que  tenlan  en  pasando  el
deeagnadero."

*  It  is  not  true,  as  Gareilasso  de  la
Tega  and  the  author  of  the  anony-
moue  Selaewn  assert,  that  the  Inea
did  not  practice  human  saciificea.
Even  Cieia  admits  it :  Segwnda  Pari*,
Cap.  zxv,  p.  100;  "No  digo  yo  qne  no


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 245


sacriAcabui  y  que  no  mstaban  hombrea
7  nifioa  en  loa  tftle*  BacriAcioa;  pero
no  era  lo  que  oe  dice  ni  con  mueho."
( AJao  Cap.  xxvm,  pp.  113, 169,  at  teq.)
Ju&n  de  Betansoa:  Suma  y  Narraoion,
Cap.  ZI,  p.  66:  "Y  eato  hecba,  mandd
Inea  Tapanqm  4  loi  aefiorea  del  Cnieo
qoe,  p«Ta  de  allf  4  diei  diu,  tuTieaen
apareJAdo  mncho  proTeimiento  de
nuu(,  ovejaa  j  eorderoe,  7  Bnsimiemo
mocliB  ropa  flna,  7  eisita  nima  de
niBoe  7  nifiae,  qne  elloa  lUman  Capv-
eoha,  todo  lo  enal  era  park  haeei
■acTifldo  al  mL  T  aiendo  Icm  diec
dias  enmplidM  f  (tU>  ja  toda  jnato,
Inea  Ynpaaqui  mandfi  haeer  vn  gran
fn^o,  an  el  enal  foego  mandfi,
deepuei  de  haber  heeho  degollai  la«
ovejaa  7  coTderoa,  qne  fneoen  echados
en  61,  7  laa  demaa  ropas  7  mafi,  of  re-
eUndoIo  todo  al  aol;  7  loa  niAoa  7
tiiflaif  qoe  aTurf  habian  imitado,  ea-
tando  bien  veatidoa  7  adereiadoa,
mandiSlea  entemur  rivoa  en  aqnslla
casa  .  .  ."  CriatiSTKl  de  Ifolina:
FabU*  and  Bite*  of  f\e  Inoat,  p.  54:
"The  Ceapaeeooli*  waa  inatitntod  b7
Paohacntee  Tnea  Ynpanqni,  and  waa
SB  follows:  The  provineea  of  Colla-
onyn,  Chiucha-aDTO,  Anti-at^n,  and
Cnnti-an7n  bnnight  to  this  clt7  from
each  lineage  or  tribe  one  or  two  male
and  female  children  aged  about  ten
T^ara.  .  .  .  The  children  and  the  other
aacriflcee  walked  aroond  the  statnea
of  the  Creator,  the  Bon,  the  Thnnder,
and  the  Hoon,  which  were  placed  in
the  iqnare,  taking  two  tnma.  ...  Bo
the  children  were  strangled  and  bnried
with  the  filver  figarea  of  aheep,"  etc
(p.  B5>.  "After  this  praTer  they
strangled  the  children,  flrat  giving
them  to  eat  and  drink,  that  they
might  not  enter  the  preaenee  of  the
Creator  discontented  and  hungry.
From  others  they  took  oat  the  hearts
while  yet  alive,  and  offered  them  to
the  Hnacaa  whUe  yet  palpitating,"
etc  The  Indian  SaleainB7hna,  in
^elooion  de  Antigveiadet,  etc,  p.  359,
attribntea  the  introdnction  of  the
sacriflcea  of  children  above  described


to  one  of  the  earlieet  head-chiefa  men-
tioned b7  him:  "Diien  que  en  tiempo
deate  (UaTta  Capac)  loa  tmbentaron
el  BscriSeio  de  Capac  Hneha  Coeny,
enterrsndolea  4  loa  mnchaehoe  ain
mancha  7  eonoro  7  plata,  7  lo  mismo
an  embentado  el  Arpar  con  sangre
hnmana  como  eon  corderoa  blancoo,"
etc

"That  there  waa  constant  mann-
factnring  of  ehieha  going  on  on  Titi-
cBca  is  already  asserted  b7  the  first
two  Spaoiarcls  wbo  visited  it  in  De-
camber,  1633:  Belatione  per  Bva
Uaetta,  1534,  Bamuaio,  II,  foL  41S;
"Yi  sono  megli  di  aeoento  Indian!  al
aeruitio  di  qneato  Inogo,  ft  piu  di
miUe  donne,  ehe  fanno  Chisea  per
gettarla  aop»  qnella  pietra  Thiehi-

"Ylotima  saerifieed  together  were
also  bnried  ekse  to  each  other.

"The  RelatioM  per  Swt  Maetta,
foL  413,  states;  "doe  picdols  lao-
letta,  neil'vna  delle  quali  t  vna  mos-
chea,  &  eaaa  del  Bole,  la  qoale  6  tenuta
in  gran  veneratione,  &  in  eaaa  vanno
a  fare  k  loro  offerte  ft  aacrilleij  in  vna
gran  pigtra  ehe  i  nell'Isola  che  la
^■h^iiiT^^Tin  Th^^hicawii"  (Italics  mine.)
This  statement  bj  persona  who  aaw
the  ceremonials  on  the  Island  in
pHmitive  condition  indicates,  as  I
shall  still  further  develop,  that  the
"moeqne,  and  house  of  the  son"  in-
cluded what  is  called  the  Sacred  Bock
to-day,  hence  the  "temple  of  the  aun"
cannot  have  been  at  Kasapata.

-EUtoria  del  N*evo  Mmdo,  IT,
p.  58 :  "  De  loa  Mitlmaea,  qne  la
ma7or  parte  eran  de  la  aaogre  7  linaje
de  loa  Incas,  tormd  on  moderado
puebb  media  legua  antes  del  templo,
y  en  41  mand6  labiar  eaaa  de  en  habi-

"Bittoria  de  Copaoabana,  1860,  p.
16:  "Arreglado  yi  Copacabana,  el
mismo  monarea  form6  otro  paeblo
moderado  en  la  isia,  corao  4  media
legoa  de  la  peEa  sagrada;  7  aUi  labr^
su  real  palaeio."  Bo  far  Bamoa,  but
his  editor.  Father  Bans,  adds:  "cn7aa


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


minBa  Bon  probsblemente  laa  qae  m
Ten  f  rente  del  Templo  del  Sol  an  nna
Colina  a)  lado  de  Oriento. ' '  6vm  shAres
the  impresaioD  that  the  edifice  at  Kaaa-
pata  was  the  ' '  temple  of  the  nin. ' '

"Cordntoa  MortUitada,  II,  toL  6:
' '  TnpBc  Tuga  f ondd  on  moderado
pueblo  ciai  media  legat.  antaa  de
llegar  fc  la  pefia,  i  en  61  labr6  m  real
palacio,  pobro  en  la  BTquiteetnra  de  bd
edifieio,  pero  riqnlBimo  en  el  teeoro  de

"  This  is  corroborated  by  Cobo :
Eittoria,  etc.,  IT,  p.  65:  "T  on
enarto  de  Ic^a  antes  de  llegar  al  tern-
pill,  nn  grandioao  Tambo  6  meaon  para
hospedaje  de  peregrinoa  .  .  ."  Al-
thoQgh  Cobo  places  that  tambo  at
only  a  quarter  of  a  leagne  from  the
Sacred  Bock,  it  ia  plain  that  the  site
of  Kasapata  is  meant  hj  him.  "Maro
Eato, ' '  where  the  cluster  of  edifices
connected  with  the  ihrine  begins  in
the  loath  or  southeast,  is  only  a  short
distance  away,  and  Bhows  no  traces
of  an  edifice  large  enough  for  accom-
modating any  number  of  lodgers,
even  transient  ones  as  ' '  pilgrims ' '
would  be.

"  That  Tnpac  Tnpanqui  was  the
Inea  chief  who  first  visited  the  Island
is  stated  by  the  majority  of  authors.
Cieia:  Segitnda  Parte,  p.  199;  "Pa-
eando  adelante  Inca  Ynp&nqui  cneo-
tan  que  Ttsit6  loa  mfis  pneblos  que
eonfinan  con  la  gran  lagnna  de  Ttti-
eaea  .  .  .  Entrti  en  la  gran  laguoa  de
TiticBca  y  mir6  laa  islaa  qne  en  ella
ee  haeen,  mandando  bacer  en  la  mayor
de  ellas  templo  del  eol  y  palacioe  para
6^  J  sua  deecendientes. ' '  Retacian  dt
la  Provincia  de  lot  Paeajet,  p.  58.
Hamos:  SUtoria,  Cap.  m,  it,  Tn,  etc.
Cobo:£i«torta,IT,Lib.Xin.  Andrfade
S.  Nicolas,  Im&gen,  etc.,  f .  25.  AneUo
Oliva;  Hiatona  del  Perv,  etc.,  1631,
p.  61,  attributes  the  first  visit  to  the
Island  to  Topa  or  Viracocha  Inca,  but
he  is  himself  in  doubt  as  to  the  au-
thenticity of  the  Information,  and  it
looks  as  if  he  had  interpolated  two
supposed  war-chiefs  in  his  catalogue.


To  my  knowledge,  Mr.  Sqnier  haa
been  the  first  and,  thus  far,  only  one
to  allude  to  the  eomparatiTdy  modeni
origin  of  the  Inea  bnildinga  on  Titi-
caca  and  EoatL  Pent,  p.  371;  "As-
siuning  the  truth  of  these  traditions^
most,  if  not  all,  the  edifices  on  the
island  were  built  some  time  between
1425  and  1470,  ^ieh  was  the  period
when  Tupac  Yupanqol  reigned. ' '
Tnpae  Tnpanqni  was— and  neariy  all
the  early  sources  agree  in  this— the
third  last  Inea  war-ehlef,  taking
Hnaaear  as  the  last  one  prerions  to
the  conqueat;  Atanhnallpa  was  the
tetter's  contemporary  and  an  intruder
from  the  North.  Hence  Tupac  Yn-
panqui  must  hsTe  been  in  office  be-
tween 14S0  and  1500,  and  the  visit  to
Titieaca  took  place  within  theae  limits
of  time.  The  ertraordinary  longerity
attributed  to  some  of  theae  ehie^
cannot  be  accepted  as  B  basis  for  de-
termining the  length  of  a  term.  Eren
allowing  for  a  generation  as  much  as
forty  years,  the  beginning  of  the
term  of  Tupac  Yupanqai  wooM  be
about  the  middle  of  the  fifteenth
century  only.  With  him  traditions
of  the  [oca  assume  a  more  poaitiTe
shape.

*•  The  rock,  nnfortunatdy  for  tbCM
statements,  is  so  situated  that  it  le-
eeives  no  light  at  sunrise  and  Tery
little  direct  sunlight  during  the  Te-
mainder  of  the  day.

"fielalioNe  per  Sva  Maetta,  foL
413.

"Cobo,  in  Hittoria  del  Xaevo
If  undo,  IT,  p.  S2,  calls  that  entrance
"Kenti  poncu,"  says  it  was  "dos-
eientoB  pasos  distante  de  la  pefia,"
and  adds:  "A  nn  lado  de  la  puerta
sobredicha  se  Ten  dertoe  edificioa
Tiejos,  que,  s^on  los  indios  cnentan,
eran  aposentos  de  los  nunistros  y  air-
vientes  del  templo ;  y  al  otro  lado  hay
eeCalee  de  nn  gran  edifieio,  que  era  el
recogimiento  de  las  Maicaooh&s,  mn-
jeres  eansagTadas  al  Sol,  las  euales
Servian  de  hacer  los  brevajes  y  telas
de  eurioeidad  que  en  aqnel  ministerio


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 247


del  sdoratorio  se  gastaban."  Bamoi,
in  Sittoria  de  Copaeabana,  pp.  10  and
11,  mentions  ttiree  gate^&ja,  the  Dear-
eat  of  which  he  plaeee  200  itepe  from
the  rock,  and  calls  the  flrat  or  most
distant  of  theos  entraneea  "Puma-
puncn, ' '  the  middle  one  "  Kenti-
paneu,"  and  the  la»t  "  Pillcopnncu. "
He  saT*  the  three  nere  M  twentj-
pacee  from  each  other.  ^Fraj  San
Nicolas Vjmdi/en,  etc.,  foL  S3)  agreee
with  Cobo.  Admiuion  to  the  closter
of  bnildings  nuroonding  the  rock  was
to  be  preceded  by  a  "confeMion."
That  a  certain  confewion  was  in  prac-
tice among  the  FeruTian  aborigines
■eema  certain,  alio  that  it  reaolted  in
expurgation  and  abaoltition.  On  this
point  Arriaga  (Extirpation,  Cap.  lu,
p.  18)  is  positive  and  detailed:  "Au-
cachic,  qoe  en  si  Cnzeo  llaman  Ichnria,
es  el  Confeaor,  eat«  oflelo  no  anda
Bolo  aino  qne  elempre  ea  anneso,  al
Tillae,  t>  al  Uaesa  sobre  dieho.  Coo-
flesa  a  todoe  loa  de  sn  A7II0,  avnque
sea  BU  mnger,  7  hijo.  Estas  eon-
fesiones  aon  aiempre  sn  la<  lleetaa  de
■ns  Hnacaa,  j  qnando  an  de  jr  eamiiio
largo.  T  son  tan  cuidadosos  en  su
ofleio,  qae  6  topado  70  algtinoa  mu-
chaeboa  qne  nnnca  ae  arian  eonfesado
con  Sacerdote  algnno  de  Dioa  noeetro
Beitor,  7  as  avian  eonfeeado  7a  tree  6
qnatro  vbem  eon  eetoe  miaiatroe  del
Demonio  .  .  ."  (P.  28,  Cap.  v.)
' '  Durante  el  a7nDo  M  eonfievan  todoa
Yndioe  7  Tndiaa  eon  loB  qne  tienen
este  olleio,  aentadoa  en  el  anelo  el  qae
076,  7  el  qne  se  eonfieasa  en  lugaree
qne  enelen  tener  en  el  eampo  diputa-
doB  para  eate  efecto.— No  eonfleesan
peeados  interiores,  sine  de  haver  bnr-
tado,  de  aver  mal  tratado  a  otroa,  7
de  tener  mas  que  nia  mnger  (porque
tener  vna  annqne  aea  eatando  amance-
bado,  no  lo  tienen  por  peeado)  acn-
■anae  tambien  de  tea  adnlterios,  pero
la  simple  fomicadon  de  ningnns
manera  la  tienen  por  peeado,  acnsanse
de  aner  acndido  a  rererenciai  el  Dioe
de  loB  Eapaiiolea,  7  de  no  auer  aendido
a  laa  Hoaeaa  el  Heehiiero  les  dice  que  se


emiende,"  etc.— "T  ponen  Bobre  vna
piedra  liana  de  loa  polvoa  de  of  rendaa,
7  hate  qae  loa  aople,  7  con  vna  piedre-
;uela  qne  llaman  Fasca,  qne  quiere
dezir  perdon,  que  la  lleva  el  Yndio,  o
la  tiene  el  que  eonfleasa  le  refriega  la
eabeqa,  con  maia  bianco  molido,  7  eon
agua  le  lavan  la  cabe^  en  algnn
aiT070  6  donde  se  jontan  loa  rios,  qne
llaman  Tineuna.— Tiene  poi  gran
peeado  el  esconder  los  peeados,  quando
se  eonflsaaan,  7  haee  grandea  dili-
gencias,  para  averignallo  el  Con-
feasor.— Y  para  esto  en  diveraas  par-
tes tienen  diversaa  ceremonias.  En
vnaa  en  Ilegando  el  Yndio  al  confeeaor
dice  07dme  loa  Cerroa  de  al  derredor,
las  llanadaa,  loe  Condorea  qne  l>ola7i,
los  Bnhos  7  Leebn^aa,  qne  qniero  eon-
feaaar  mis  peeados.  Y  todo  eato  diie
teniendo  vna  qnenteeilla  de  moUu
metida  en  vna  espina  eon  doe  dedoa
de  la  mano  dereeha,  levantando  la  ee-
pina  hazia  arriba,  dlie  ans  peeados,
7  en  acabando  la  d&  al  confeeaor,  7
el  la  toma  7  hincando  la  espina  en
la  manta  la  aprieta  haata  qae  se
qniebre  la  quenta,  7  mira  en  qnantas
partes  se  qnebnj,  7  si  se  qnebrl}  en
tree  4  eido  buena  la  confesion  7  A
•e  qniebra  en  doe,  no  i  side  buena  la
confession,  7  dice  qne  tome  a  con-
f  essar  sob  pecadoa. ' '

"  En  otraa  partes  para  veridear  coto
migno  toman  vn  manojillo  de  biebo  de
a  donde  ae  deriv6  el  nombre  do  Ichuri,
que  es  el  que  coje  pajaa,  7  lo  divide
el  confeasor  en  doe  parUe,  7  v4  sa-
cando  vna  paja  de  vna  parte,  7  otra
de  otra,  haata  ver  si  quedan  parM,  que
entonces  ea  buena  la  confession,  7  si
no  es  mala.— En  otraa  lo  devinan  por
la  aangre  de  loa  euyea,  7  en  vn  pueblo
cerca  de  aqui  atandole  las  manoa  atraa
al  penitente,  qnando  aeaba  de  eonfea-
sar,  7  apretandoaelas  con  vn  coidel  le
haiia  el  confeaor  deiir  la  verdad.— O7
diio  delanta  de  mi  vn  Yndio  al  Visita-
doT,  que  dandole  el  confeeaor  con  ra
palo  le  apretava  a  qne  eonfeasase  to-
dos  BUS  pecadoa,  7  otro  que  dandole
con  vna  aoga. I^dea  por  penitencia


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


loB  ajnnoa  eobredichaa  de  no  comer
Bal,  ni  agi,  ni  donnir  eon  soa  mugeres,
J  ruo  dixo  qoe  le  avian  dado  est«
ajnino  por  Beys  inMM."

"Fuera  de  las  fleatas,  vaan  tambien
el  confeaeane,  qnondo  eetan  enfer-
mos, ' '  etc.  I  have  been  thns  prolix  in
quoting  Arriaga  becanae  he  is  more
detailed  on  the  Bnbjeet  than  any  other
anthoT,  and  because  he  made  it  a  mat-

r'  of  minute  inveatigation.
rhiB  custom  of  ' '  conf eesioD ' '
among  the  Femrian  Indiana  was  not
"diecovered"  in  eonseqtienee  of  tbe
official  search  into  the  rUes  and  eeie-
noniala  of  that  i>eople  institnted  in
the  beginning  of  the  aerenteenth  cen-
tarjr.  FnUj  mxtj  jears  prerioiu,
aboDt  1560,  the  Augustine  monks  who
established  missions  in  the  region  of
Huamachnco,  noticed  the  rites  of  con-
fe6Sion.\  Says  the  BeioMon  de  la  JBe-
It^n  V  ritot  del  Fetii,  Doo.  de  Indiai,
III,  p.  44:  "Cosa  ea  de  eapanto,  qoe
estoa  indioB  tambien  tenian  eonfeaion
Tocal  J  Bs  eonfesaban,  la  cual  ae
desenbri6  deata  manera;  andando  nn
padr«  par  nna  xalca  6  tierra  de
mncha  nievo,  vido  qne  entre  la  niere
eataba  nn  indio  aseutado,  j  llam6  6,
SOB  janaconas  y  eriados  j  mand61es
qne  tmxeeen  aqnd  indio,  7  comensfile

6  anadir  qne  le  dijeee  qne  qo^  faacia  en
aquella  ^rm  6  xalca,  que  asl  la
lUman  en  la  lengoa  del  Perd  •  •  ■  T
dizo  qne  algnn  fdolo  6  guaea  habia
poT  alii,  puea  qne  eataba  asf,  que  debia
de  adoiar  li  mochar,  7  atrayfindole  con
algunaa  amenasas,  dixo  que  61  diria
por  qu£  estaba  eiU,  7  que  era  par
penitencia  qne  le  habia  dado  el  alea,
ques  el  hecMcero;  7  preguntfile  qne
por  qii6  era  aquella  penitencia,  7  dizo
que  canf  eafindoee,  7  asf  dixo  quien  era
el  alca  A  sacerdote,  7  Uamdlo,  que  era
nn  indio  Tiejo,  7  de  aqni  ae  deeon-
brieron  mnehea.  T  la  manera  de  ea
eonfeaion  era  qne  decian  ana  00H&8,
que  en  la  lengna  qaierei)  decir  eulpaa,

7  coDfcaaban  ai  habian  hnrtado  algo  6
refiido,  sine  habian  serrido  bien  i  sn
principal  6  caciqne,  sino  tenido  acata-


miento  al  Zopai  7  damonio  7  &  la
gooca  6  Idolo,  cnmplido  con  lo  qne  le
mandaba  el  demonio.  "—Father  Cria-
t6bal  Molina:  Fablet  and  BUm  of  Oe
Tneat,  p.  15:  "According  to  the  ae-
counts  they  give,  all  the  people  of  tbe
land  eonfeaaed  to  the  sowerers  vbo
had  charge  af  the  hnaeas."  Molina
obtuned  hia  information  at  Cnaeo,
about  fifty  Tears  prior  to  Arriaga.

"Hittoria  del  Nuem  Mtutdo,  TV,
p.  fl2:  "Bntre  esta  puerta  7  loe  edifi-
cioe  dichoB  eataba  una  pefla  tItb,  par
la  cnal  paaa  el  camino  qne  va  al
santoario,  7  en  ella  estin  dartai
sefiales  qne  pareeen  del  ealiado  de
loB  indios,  grandlsimas,  las  ensiles
creian  loi  indios  viejos  ser  pisadaa
milagroaas  qne  alll  qoedaron  da
aquellos  maa  qua  tenebnwoa  tiempos
de  an  gentilidad,  aiendo  eoma  sob
agnajes  de  la  misma  pefia."  Sqnier:
Pent,  p.  339:  "The7  "^  formed  in
outline,  by  hatd,  fermginooa  vaiB^
around  nUeh  the  loek  has  been  worn
awa7,  leaving  them  in  relief."

"HiMtoria  de  Copaoabana,  p.  8:
"Al  lado  do  una  planieie,  Mmo  k
treinta  pasce  de  la  pefia,"  ate.
Cobo:  Hittoria,  IT,  p.  61:  "La  pefia
tan  venerada  eataba  desenbieita,  7
junto  i  ella  el  templo,  con  tal  diepo-
aicion,  que  Tenia  A  caei  Is  dieha  pefia
eomo  en  sn  cimenterio,  6  por  mejor
decir,  en  la  eapilla  mayor  d61,  aunqne
dwcnbierta,  pnes  era  el  Ingar  de  mas
veneraeion."  This  is  alread7  stated
in  the  BelotioM  p«f  8va  Uanta,
1S34,  foL  413,  irtiidL  statement  I  re-
gard as  conclnsiTe.

*  Compare  the  description  b7  Cobo :
Eistoria,  IT,  p.  61:  "El  canTszo  ea
de  pefta  Tiva,  cu7aB  rertientea  U^an
i  comonicaiBs  eon  el  agoa  en  ana
ensenada  que  la  lagnna  haee."  Bnt
Cobo  makes  the  miatake  of  placing
the  face  (frente)  of  tbe  rock  to  the
north  instead  of  to  the  west  That
face,  or  cliff,  looka  to  the  Pemriaa  or
weatem  ahore  of  the  Lake.

"Selooton  (MArima,  p.  161.  In
regard  to  a  derivation  from  tbe  Qo*'


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  EUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 249


ehna  "Titi"— tin,  I  fronld  remark
that  the  DAme  is  Aymaris  and  not
Qnichnfi;  (2)  thst  there  is  neither
tin  HOI  lend  nor  nntimonj  on  the
Island,  and  (3)  that  the  rock  is  red-
diah-brown  and  hae  not  the  •lightest
resemblance  in  color  with  an^  of
these  metala.

"  Bamos :  H'Utoria  d«  Capaoabaius,
p.  8:  "Al  lado  de  ana  planicie,  como
k  treinta  pasoe  de  la  peSa,  eetan  las
ealatO)  dd  aol,  del  tmeno  7  del  re-
Umpago,  a.  qoienee  loa  indioa  respeta-
ben  mncho."  I  italieiaa  the  word
"ealaa."  It  ma^  be  a  misprint  from
' '  easaa. ' '  Shonid  it,  howorer,  be
"ealas,"  it  maj  indicate  exeava-
tions,  or  diggings.

"  See  above.  Cobo,  while  otherwise
earefnl  in  his  deeoiiptioDs,  confounds
the  directions  of  the  compass.  On  the
side  towaid  Bolivia  (the  north  and
east)  the  Sacred  Bock  presents  an  al-
most unintermpted  slope  on  which  ab-
solutely no  trace  of  mine  is  seen.
Neither  is  there  any  appropriate  site
for  a  building.

"  Bittoria,  p.  8.

"  See  plans.

*  Belatione  per  Bva  Ma«Mta,  toL
413.

'Bamos:  Hi$tOTia,  p.  8:  "En  la
flflii^i^ft  d^  esta  isla  se  han  baUado
inncbos  idolillos  de  oro,  7  cnrioeos
vBsoe  de  barro;  venae  ann  laa  eataa  o
raetroa  de  eicavadonee  que  se  han
heeho  para  bosear  Ids  tesoros  qne  en
ans  sepnleros  enterraban  los  antignoe.
Ahora  todo  cet6  cnbierto  de  pajonal  7
maleza."  There  is  no  iebho  graas  on
the  level  immadiatelj  in  front  of  the
rock  and  the  description  would  rather
apply  to  the  site  called  Chncaripn-
pata,  contlgnons  almost  to  the  level
in  question.  Calancha:  Cordniea,  etc.,
II,  foL  4:  "Tiene  de  tierra  una  gran
panpa,  6  Ilanada  que  siirid  de  eemen-
terio  es  de  tierra  faeU  .  .  .  En
aqueeta  panpa,  6  Ilanada,  se  an  sl-
lado  mnchos  idoloe  de  oro  y  vaaos
enrioBOf  de  barro  con  otraa  menuden-
eiaa  del  tiempo  antigno. Tenae  laa


catas  qne  se  an  dado  por  bnscar  los
tesoros,  qne  en  sds  sepnleros  enter-
TSTAD  los  Tndios,"  etc.  Calancha
manifestly  copied  from  Bamos.
Cobo  {EUtoria,  etc.,  IT,  p.  61)  is  one
of  these  iriio  state  that  the  Bacred
Boek  was  covered  with  handsome
pieces  of  cloth,  and  adds:  "Delante
de  la  dicha  peiia  y  altar  se  ve  nna
piedra  redonda  al  modo  de  baein,  ad-
mirablemente  labrada,  del  tamaflo  de
una  piedra  de  moUno  mediana,  con
sn  oriflcio,  que  ahora  sirve  al  pi£  de
nna  crua,  en  qne  echaban  la  chicha
para  qne  el  Sol  bebiese."  Of  this
stone,  drcnlar  in  form,  we  did  not
hear.  The  sacriflee  01  offering  of
chicha  is  mentioned  already  in  1534
(Selatione  per  3va  Mattta,  foL  413) ;
"che  fanno  Chicca  per  gettarla  sopra
quella  pietra  Thichieasa. ' '  Cobo
(SMtoria,  etc,  p.  61)  saya  the  rock
was  "cnbierta  con  una  cortina  de
0iimbj,  el  maa  antil  y  delicado  qne
j&mfis  se  vid,  y  todo  el  cAncavo  d^la
cnbierto  de  i*m<na«  de  oro."  About
the  word  ' '  cnrabi ' '  Torrea  Bubio
(Arte,  etc.,  fol.  78)  has  "Ceompl  o
compi— Topa  preeioea."  That  such
handsome  textures  were  need  for  sac-
riflee is  frequently  stated.  (Qarei-
lasso:  Commtarioa,  I,  foL  34.)  Treat-
ing of  the  objects  offered  to  the  snn,
he  asserts:  "y  ropa  de  Teetir  de  la
mny  flna,  todo  lo  coal  quemauA  en
higar  de  enelenso,  y  lo  ofrecian  en
hazimlento  do  graeias."  Betanzos:
jSwna  y  NarTooion,  Cap.  xv,  p.  103:
"La  cnal  fiesta  mandfi  que  se  hiciese
en  la  plaaa  do  agora  ea  el  espital,  tm
la  eiudad  del  Cuico  ...  en  la  cnal
fiesta  mandd  que  se  faieieeen  grandes
sacrificios  i  los  Idolos,  do  se  lea
quemase  6  Hacriflcaoe  mnchos  ganados
6  eomidas  6  ropa,  7  en  las  tales
gua«as  fueseo  ofreddos  mnchaa  joyaa
de  oro  y  plata."  This  was  in  the
month  of  Hay,  according  to  the  au-
thor. (Also  p.  105.)  Uolina:  Fable*
and  Site$,  etc.,  p.  34:  "They  bnm  in
sacriflee  a  sheep,  and  a  vast  quantity
of  clothes  of  many  colonn." Also


;cbyG00'^lc


250


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


pp.  45,  46,  et  Mg.  Informaeion  de
Id*  Idoialria*  de  lot  Inau  i  Indiot  y
de  eomo  le  enterraban,  1571,  Doo.  de
IttOiat,  XXIV,  pp.  133,  140,  164.  Ar-
riagtl:  Sxtirpa<ton  de  la  YdoUttria,
Cap.  Tm,  p.  44:  "Tambien  no  na  a
reparado  hasta  aora,  en  que  tnTieesen
las  camiMtas  antigvas  d«  cnmbi,  qoe
ofiedan  &  ma  Haacaa,  o  veetian  a  waa
Halqnia,  o  qne  se  ponian,  para  eolu
fiMtM  J  aacrilleioa  de  laa  Hnaeaa."
Bamoa;  Copaeabema,  p.  16.  Cobo:
Hittoria  del  Nuevo  il%ndo,  IV,  p.  84.
Ab  to  the  gold  and  ailTer  figurines
of  men,  women,  and  llamas  that  were
(and  still  are,  tbongh  in  a  lesser
qnantitj)  dag  ap  on  the  level  of
Tican-ayehi  in  front  of  the  Saered
Bock  and  at  Chncaripu-pata,  they
were  votive  offerings,  and  wlut  the
AymarA  to-day  caU,  if  it  represents  a
man,  "Eollke-jaqne"  (silver  man);
if  a  vomao,  "EoUke-hn&rmi"  (silver
woman).  When  the  fignrines  are  of
gold,  "Knri"  or  "Cori"  (gold)  is
sabntitnted  for  "Eollke"  (sUver).
BooDgh  is  contained  in  quotations
preceding  to  establish  that  thsj  were
found  at  an  early  day  on  the  Island
and  on  the  sitea  above  mentioDed.
Already  the  Selatione  per  Sva  Maeeta,
foL  413,  states;  "A  gU  offeriseono
oro  k  argento,  A  altre  cose."  These
offerings  were  made  to  the  Bock —
"in  vna  gran  pietra  ehe  6  nell'IsoU
ehe  la  ehiamano  Thietdeasa. "  Gar-
eilasso:  Com«ntarxot,  I,  foL  80:  "Of-
reeian  eada  afio  mncho  oro,  y  plata."
Bamos:  ffiftoria  de  Copacabana,  p.
11.  The  same  author  mentions  that
Hnayna  Capae,  who  died  when  the
first  Spauiuds  reached  the  coast  of
Ecuador,  went  to  the  island  of  Apio-
gOila  to  make  offerings  to  a  new
fetish  called  "Yatiri"  (this  is  proba-
bly a  misunderstanding,  since  "Ya-
tiri" is  the  title  of  a  class  of  sha-
mans) ;  he  was  dissuaded  from  it  and
went  to  the '  neighboring  island  of
Pamplti:  "Obatinado  sin  embargo,
en  sn  caprieho  erey^  oir  nn  orfienlo  de
sns  IdtHoa  que  le  mandaban  llevase  a


Dtra  parte  los  Baerifldos  de  oro  j
plata,  llamas,  eoaaa  preeiosas,  y  ana
de  nifios;  pero  no  alll  sino  en  Paaprti,
otra  isla  inmediata."  It  is  mmared
that  flgniea  like  those  dug  up  on  Titi-
eaca  exist  buried  either  on  Apiagnila
or  its  smaller  neighbor  Psjnpiti,  or
PaapitL  The  flgnres  vrere  not  idols
or  fetishes,  but  substitutes  for  live
beings,  men  or  flTi^Tpftlif;  that  should
have  been  sacrificed.  Sinee  the  In-
dians continued  to  perform  primitiTe
ceremonials  on  the  Islands  for  about
a  centory  after  the  conquest,  it  is  not
impoBBible  that  a  part  of  these  offer-
ings are  post-eonqnistorial,  although
after  primitive  models.

" BUtoria  de  Copaeabtnui,  p.  12:
"En  la  barranca  que  esti  al  frente
del  camino  entre  Jul!  j  Pomata,  es-
tuvo  la  despensa  del  sol  .  .  .  llamada
vnlgarmente  Chingana,  que  quiere  de-
sir  lugar  donde  ee  pierden."  Cobo:
Hitloria,  etc.,  IV,  p.  S2:  "T  eerea
del  tempio  se  ven  hdnas  de  la  despensa
del  Sol,  euyos  retretes  imitan  al  labe-
rinto  de  Creta."

"BamoBi  Hutoria,  ete^  p.  6;  "Lo
que  se  tiene  por  eierto  ee,  que  il
mismo  hiio  plantar  nnaa  estaeaa  de
moUes  J  alisoa."  Tree-plautiiig  hy
the  Indians  in  primitive  times  is  very
doubtful.  As  oftoi  as  I  have  be^
shown  such  groves  I  found  them  to  be
of  natural  growth.  The  Spaniards,
however,  had  trees  (for  shade  and
fruit)  planted  in  Peru  at  an  early-
date.  Cutting  down  of  indigenans
fruit-trees  was  prohibited  at  Lima  by
ordinance  of  the  first  town-eonneil,
Januaij  SO,  1535,  under  heavy  penal-
ties; also  February  6,  1535  (JDibro
primera  de  cabildo$  de  Lima,  Jiimn,
lS88,pp.l8andl»).  On  October  SMb
of  the  same  year  it  waa  ordained  that
every  resident  of  Lima  who  owned
land  should  plant  at  ones  from  fifty
to  three  hundred  trees  on  his  prop-
erty (JdMi,  p.  44);  the  penalt?  tor
not  doing  so  was  one  mark  in  gold.
Among  the  Ordinanoes  of  Toledo  from.
1574  there  are  two,  in  one  of  whlc^  it


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 251


U  ordained  th&t  tha  alealdea  of  Indian
Mnunniiities  have  trees  planted:
"Itxm,  tendrin  lea  AlcUdee  cardado
de  mandar,  que  en  laa  parUs,  j
lugsm  que  havien  temple  para  ello
en  laa  qnebradaa,  j  n.jexm  de  las
eieqaiaa,  6  Bioe,  m  planten  arbolea
altsoa,  7  sauEea,  6  fmtalea  de  eaatilla,
puea  ea  negocio  de  qne  we  les  tagat,  j
racrBM  tauto  proTe«ho  4  los  natonjea
dMl«  B«7DO."  And  in  the  oTdinanee
follawing,  the  cutting  of  treee  at  the
fctot  is  prohibited  to  the  Indian*  (Or-
deiumMoa  del  F«t^,  Lib.  II,  Titulo  ix,
fol.  146,  Ord.  xiT  and  xt).  AJao,  foi
GuiM :  TertimYO  de  lot  Avto*  heehot
Pot  el  J*eM  de  Iflet  tobre  la  Plants  de
iae  Arboledat  e*  el  frno  de  la  Far-
roqvia  de  Ban  SebaetS  por  oomition
del  Ytigne  Comldo  de  la  DM  ChhIihI,
159D,  M8S.  in  poaseBsion  of  Don  Car-
lo* A.  Bomero  at  Lima,  foL  3^

-Hiatoria,  etc,  IV,  p.  62.

"It  might  be  (this  ia  merelj  a  mg-
geation  of  miae)  that  Chnearipa-pAta
waa  a  builal  dte  for  thoM  vrho  died
in  attendance  of  worship  on  the
Iiland.  This  might  explain  the  ab-
•enee  of  veetiges  of  bnildingg.  Some-
thing Uki>  it  i*  iuinoated  bj  Ba-
moa  Biitoria,  etc.,  p.  11:  "Tenae
aflh  las  eataa  6  rastios  de  excava-
dones  qne  ae  an  hecho  pars  tnuear
las  tesoToe  qne  en  mu  sepnleroa  cmter-
raban  loa  autignoa."  Calaneha:  Cot6-
ntoa,  II,  foL  4:  "Venae  laa  eatas  qne
te  an  dado  por  bnacar  loe  teaoToe,  que
en  SOS Mpnleroa  enterravan  los  Tn-

"Cobo:  Hittoria,  etc.,  IV,  p.  68.
Bamoa : Copaeabana,  p.  6.

"Apingfiila  in  to-daj  aometimes
called  the  ' '  island  of  the  devil. ' '
From  Titieaea  it  is  plainly  Tiaible,
as  a  low  truncated  cone  anrmounted
hj  a  eolunm  or  pillar.  Pampiti  (or
Paapiti)  is  clpse  to  it  on  the  south,
and  ia  low  and  flat.  As  far  as  I
know,  the  episode  of  the  voyage  of
HwiTDa  Capac  to  ApingQila  ia  only
mentioned  hy  three  authora,  all  An-
gustines: Bunoa:  Cap.  XXIU; Calan-


eha; Corditiea,  II,  Cap.  m,  and  Fray
8.  Nicolas:  tmdgen,  Cap.  n,  foL  87.
While  the  latter  has  been  guided,  in
writing  his  book,  by  Bamos  and  Ca-
laneha, he  haa  enhanced  on  both  in
the  follawing  passage  relative  to
Apinguila;  "Unltiplicd  Quaina  Capae
otro  Templo  en  Apingaela,  Isla  no
menoB  bien  cercana  k  la  dicha  Titi-
eaea, y  dedieole  al  Idolo  latiii,  qui-
tando  en  impnroa  aaerificios  tantas
vidas  k  loa  aoyoe,  que  perdiendo  por
esso  el  primer  nombre,  se  halld  con
aquel  de  Vilacota,  que  slgniAca  Lago,
6  mar  de  sangre,  en  la  lengna  natural
de  aqnella  tierra. "  "  Uilacots ' '
meana  "lake  of  blood,"  or  bloody
lake,  in  Aymari.  Neither  Bamos  nor
Calaneha  mention  the  erection  of  a
"temple"  on  ApingCila,  and  the  lat-
ter only  applies  the  name  "Vilacota"
te  portiona  of  the  I^ke  aronnd  the
two  islands.  The  whole  story  appeara
to  me  auspicious.

**  The  voyage,  although  long  and
tediona,  could  be  performed  in  balsas.
The  Indians  aometimes  make  longer
ones,  though  iuvolontarily,  wh«i  east-
erly or  northerly  stormk  prevail  on  the
Lake.

**P»rK,  p.  336:  "At  almoet  the
very  northern  end  of  the  Island,  at
its  most  repulsive  and  onpromising
part,  trtiere  there  ia  neither  inhab-
itant nor  trace  of  cnlton,  where  the
soil  is  rocky  and  bare,  and  the  eliffs
ragged  and  broken  ...  is  the  spot
most  celebrated  and  most  sacred  in
Peru. ' '

•  The  only  bird  we  saw,  daring  the
time  of  our  investigations  about  the
Sacred  Bock  was  the  alkamari  (called
in  Peni  "ehinalinda"),  a  handsome
bnziard,  always  stalking  and  flying
about  in  pairs.

"Selatione  per  8va  Maetta,  fol
413 :  "&  pin  di  mille  donne,  che
f  anno  Chieca  per  gettarla  aopra  qneUa
pietnt  Thichleasa. "  The  nmnber  is,
of  comae,  either  exaggerated,  or  it
may  be  that  the  Spaniards  were  fol-
lowed to  the  Island  by  a  large  eon-


;cbyG00'^lc


252


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


conrw  from  the  mainland,  which  wu
often  the  ease,  elsewhere,  when  white
men  appeared  for  the  first  time  and
in  imall  nnmben.

"  The  title  of  ' '  virgimi  of  the
flun,"  freqtientlf  given  to  these  doia-
tered,  or  rather  reohtto,  fenialei  is
not  appropriate,  and  it  ma^  not  be
amisfl  to  enter  here  into  a  preliminaT;^
diBcaaaion  of  the  natnre  of  the  eoa-
tom.  When,  in  1S32,  the  Spaniards
moved  npon  Cajamarea,  the^  met  the
lint  one  of  tixe  honsea  occupied  bj
women  in  the  Sierra  at  Caxaa.  The
anonTmons  folio  printed  at  Sevilla
in  1934,  and  entitled.  La  Congvwta
del  Pent  Uamada  la  N%eua  CaifiUa,
has  the  following:  ' '  Uegaron  al
pneblo  <1  era  gride;  j  en  onaa  easaa
moy  aHaa  hallaiA  mneho  majs;  y  eal-
gado,  otraa  eetan&  llenas  de  Una  7
mas  de  qninientae  mngeree  J]  no  hBzi&
otm  coea  sine  ropas  j  vino  de  may*
para  la  gente  de  goerra:  en  aqnellaa
eaaas  hania  mneho  de  aqnel  vino."
Francisco  Xeres  {Verdod^ra  Belaeioit
de  la  Conqititta  d«l  Pen,  pp.  S2  et
teq.)  is  more  detailed:  "7  qne  se
hall6  en  aqnel  pueblo  de  Cazas  una
easa  grande,  fnerte  7  eereada  de
tapiaa,  eon  ans  puertas,  en  la  coal
eataban  mnchaa  mnjeree  hilando  7
tejiendo  ropas  para  la  hneste  de  Ata-
balipa,  sin  tener  varones,  mfts  de  loe
porteroB  qne  Us  gnnrdaban,  7  qne  t
la  entrada  del  poeblo  habla  dertoa
indioa  ahoreadoa  de  loe  pite;  7  aupo
deete  prineipaJ  qne  AtabaJipa  los
uiand6  matai  porqne  one  delloe  entrd
en  la  easa  de  las  mnjeree  i  dormir
eonnna;  BleiiaI,7(t[>doB  loe  porteroe
qne  conaintieron,  ahorc6."  Of  Caja-
marea, the  Congitista  (foL  2)  saye:
"En  el  pneUo  aoia  mn7  poea  geta/
H  serii  qnatroeStoe  o  qohdetos  indioe,
j}  gnnrdanan  Us  pnertas  de  Us  easas
del  oaciqne  Atabalipa/q  estaiA  llenas
de  mngeree  ^  hasian  ehieha  para  el
real  de  AtalMlipa."  Xerez:  Vtrda-
d«ra  BAieion,  p.  79:  "Entie  U  sierra
7  wta  plasa  grande  cet6  otra  plaaa
mta  peqaefia; eereada  toda  de  apo-


Mntoe;  7  en  elloe  habU  mndisa
mnjeree  para  el  servieio  de  aqneate
Atabalipa."  In  his  report  on  the
jonmej  to  Pachaeamae,  written  No-
vember, I63S,  (Hernando  Pissrro)
speaks  as  follows  of  the  reetsae
women  (Carta  &  la  Audienda  de
Banto  Domingo,  Bibhoteoa  de  Aatorm
etpafiolee,  VoL  SIX,  Obraa  de  Qwia-
tana,  p.  497);  "En  todos  eatoa  pue-
blos hay  caeas  de  mnjeree  eneerrada^
tienen  gnardas  i  Us  pnertas,  goaidaa
caetidad;  si  algnn  indio  tiene  parte
en  algnna  de  ellaa,  mnere  pot  eDo;
eetas  easaa  son  onaa  para  el  sacriflejo
del  sol,  otraa  del  Cueo  viejo,  padre
de  Atabaliva:  el  sacrifieio  qne  haeen
es  de  oveJBi^  6  haeen  ehieha  para
verter  por  el  anelo:  hay  otraa  easaa
de  mnjetes  en  eada  poeblo  de  estea
prineipalee,  aaimismo  gnardndas,  qne
eet&n  reeogides  de  loe  caciqnes  eo-
marcanoe,  para  cnando  pasa  d  aefior
de'  U  tierra  aacan  de  alii  las  mejores
para  preeent&rseUs,  i  sacadas  aqndlaa,
meten  otraa  tantas:  tambien  ti^wn
eargo  de  hacer  cliicha  para  eoando
pasa  U  gente  de  gnerra:  de  estas
easaa  saeaban  Indias  qne  nos  pn-
santaban."  Of  the  coast  Piarro
states  (p.  497):  "Asimiamo  tienen
easas  de  mnjeree."  Mignel  de  EU«(e
(La  Belaeion  del  Viaje  ^m  Mao  el
Seffor  Capita*  Henutndo  Pitarro,  etc.,
in  Xeres,  pp.  121-149)  make*  no
mention  of  the  women,  bnt  Oviedo
(Biitoria  general,  TV,  p.  213)  reeorda
a  criticism  on  the  atetementa  of
Piiarro  by  Diego  de  Molina,  wbo
eame  to  Santo  Domingo  in  1S3S,  hav-
ing been  s  participant  in  the  eon-
qneet.  Uolina  told  him:  "Deeia  qne
aqnellaa  mugerea  eaataa  que  dice  la
carta  ee  bnrla,  qne  no  son  eaataa;
pero  qnee  verdad  qne  Us  goardaa
hombree  caatradoe."  To  theee  stata-
menta  from  the  earliest  day«  of  tba
conqneat,  that  of  Pedro  Piaarro  moat
be  added.  He  also  was  one  of  the
first  conqnerors,  although  he  wrote
inlS71.  He  sUtes  (BebKion,  p.  £68) :
"En  Mte  bnhio  donde  digo  eatab*  ti.


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA 253


Bol,  donni&n  coUdiano  maa  de  dodeii'
tae  mngOTM  liiJBa  de  indios  piinei-
pales:  donman  en  el  anelo,  7  al  baita
del  Sol  tanian  puesto  im  eaea£o  alto
mvj  rico  de  mucha  plumeria  Ae  toT-
usBol,  J  fingian  eUaa  donnir  alii  7  que
d  Sol  se  ayuntaba  eon  ellaa."

"Tratar^  ahois  de  lo  qne  eon  estu
Duunaeonaa,  7  eote  oombTe  qne  tlaken
de  mamaconaa  era  eoatombre  entre
eete  linage  dwtoa  orejonea  que  eran
mncha  geute  7  tenidoB  entre  elloa  por
eaballeroa,  en  especial  los  que  andv
bau  traaqniladoe,  porque  otroa  habia
qoe  traian  el  cabello  lafgo  earriente
nn  eortarlo  jam&a,  atmqne  deeian  qne
eran  parientea  los  nnoa  de  loa  otroe,
riendo.  el  prindpio  de  elloa  dos  ber-
manM  7  qne  el  nno  habia  tornado
tnje  de  audar  tnacpilladD  7  el  otio
eon  el  cabello  largo:  de  la  generaeion
de  lo*  qne  se  traaqnilaban  eran  loa
■efioiea  de  eete  reioo  7  en  mas  tenidoB
loa  hijoa  6  hijaa  de  estoe.— Teulan  U-
bertad  d«eqne  eran  de  edad,  de  eae<^er
&  qoien  era  an  volnntad  &  Ilegarae
para  lo  aerrir  7  nombrane  &  m  ape-
lUdo,  7  dende  ehieoa  ens  padrea  los
••Satabaii  7  dedieaban  6  paia  el  Sol

6  al  Sefior  qoe  i  la  auon  reinaba,  6
para  algono  de  los  mrnrtoB  qoa  tengo
dieho,  aefialabanloe  k  sn  Mrrieio;  7  loa
qne  eran  paia  el  Sol,  estaban  en  sns
easas,  qoe  eran  muj  grandee  7  nin7
eercadaa,  oenp&ndoae  laa  mogerea  en
bacer  ghieha,  qne  era  una  mauera  de
brebaje  qne  baeian  del  mail  que  be-
bian  eoino  noaotroa  el  vino,  7  en  gniaer
de  comer  anaf  para  el  Sol  eoroo  para
loa  qne  le  serrian:  habian  de  eatar
lecogidaa  de  nocbe  todaa  sin  lalir
fuera  destoa  eereadoa  7  eaaaa,  que
tanian  ronchoa  porteroa  que  laa  gnar-
datmn  7  nna  tola  pnerta  que  en  eataa
cases  7  cereado  t1  70:  no  babia  de
dormir  ni  qnedai  de  uoehe  niugnn
▼aron  so  pena  de  la  vida  porqne  ai
se  snpiera  (vi  U  6rden  qne  era  eomo
tengo  dieho)  el  qne  todo  lo  diapenaaba

7  mandaba  en  tna  ritoa  loe  hieieTa
matar,  porqne  i  eete  obedeacian  7
twnj»" en sua eeiemoaiM 7 ritoa.


De  dia  podian  lalir  eataa  mngeref,  7
Mtas  se  Ilamaban  mamaconaa :  laa  qne
eran  para  el  wrvicio  «Bteban  angt  eomo
tengo  dieho,  en  otroa  Ingaree  IDD7
eereadoa  teniendo  pnertaa  7  porteros
qne  Us  gnardaban:  oenp&banae  anai-
mesmo  en  lo  mesmo  qne  tengo  dieho
hadan  laa  del  Sol,  7  en  serrir  A  laa
hermanaa  de  loa  lugas.  Lm  qne  esta-
ban eon  los  muertiM  tenian  mas  li-
bertad,  porqne  annqne  estaban  encer-
radaa  en  sua  easas  no  estaban  tan
opremidas  eomo  las  demaa  7a  diehas.
Ihi  todo  este  reino  del  PiiA  habia
esta  6rden  de  mamaeonaa  en  pro-
vineiaa,  jnntindoae  en  la  nuiToi  pro*
Tineia  7  eabeaa  qne  dloa  tenian
seBalada,  tra7endo  aUl  todaa  laa  hijaa
de  los  indios  prineipalea;  7  en  sns
miamoa  pneblos,  annqne  foesen  peqne-
fios  tenian  eaaaa  de  reeogimiento  para
reeoger  laa  hijaa  que  nadan  de  todos
los  indios:  en  siendo  de  edad  de  dies
afioe  eetas  ee  oenpaban  en  a7ndar  i
haeer  las  sementeras  del  Sol  7  del
Inga  7  en  haeer  ropa  delgada  pan
los  seflorea,  digo  en  hilar  lana  porqne
el  tejella  Taronea  no  qneriau.  Ad
miamo  estas  se  oenpaban  en  hacer
ebicha  para  los  indios  qne  enltivaban
las  tierras  del  Sol  7  del  Inga,  7  para
d  paaaban  gnamidones  de  gente  do
gnerra  por  en  tierra  dallea  de  comer
7  desta  diictia.  Ia  drden  qne  tenian
para  dar  mogerM  k  loa  indios  7  re-
novar  estaa  mamaconaa,  era  qne  de
aSo  k  alio  el  gobemador  qne  gober-
naba  laa  prorineias  qne  el  Inga  tenia
pnestos,  qne  eran  orejonea  ,  ,  ,  ante
eada  a&o  jnntaba  todaa  eataa  mama-
eonaa en  U  plasB  7  Us  qne  eran  7a
ma70Tea  para  easar  les  deda  eseogie-
aen  loa  maridoa  que  qnerian  de  sn
pneblo,  7  llamados  k  loa  indios  lea
pn^nntaban  qne  eon  qn6  indias  as
qnerian  easar  de  aqnellas,  7  por  esta
6rden  cada  afio  iba  easando,  sneando
Ua  ma7or«a  7  metiendo  otraa  de  edad
de  diea  aSoa  eomo  tengo  dieho.  Si
aeaao  habia  algnna  India  destas  qne
fneae  mn7  hermos^  U  enriaban  al
BeSor. Eataa se Ilamaban mama-


;cbyG00'^lc


251


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


eonu:  eato  era  mnj  eomnn  en  todo
este  reino  del  Piili."
f  Thna  far  statementa  of  parties  iriio
Rkw  Indian  Boeie^  in  Pern  irtiile  in
its  primitire  condition.  It  shorn  th&t
tli«  mam&ctmu  (literallj,  mothers,
from  ' '  mama ' '— mothei— and  the
plural  "cona")  were  in  fact  a  tHbvt»
in  Miomen  eseacled  by  the  Cvmoo  tribe,
and,  secondly,  that  chastity  on  their
part  was  onlj  relative,  not  absolute.
The  bnildinga  in  which  nch  women
were  kept  under  gaaxA  were  neither
more  nor  lev  than  storehonsea  shel-
tering a  tribute  in  women,')

Juan  de  Betanioa  ffiojf  have  come
to  Pern  with  PiEarro,  but  it  ia  more
prudent  to  suppose  that  be  came  to
Pern  at  an  earlj  day,  and  certainly
prior  to  1542.  In  his  Swma  y  Narra-
eUm,  Cap.  xm,  p.  S5,  he  mentions
that  women  and  men  of  the  settle-
ments around  Cnico  in  the  fifteenth
centnry  were  reqnired  to  manufacture
clothing  for  the  Cuaeo  tribe:  "Man-
daron  que  Inego  en  sos  tierras  fnesen
juntas  muehaa  mujerea,  6  pueatas  en
eaaaa  y  eorralee  lee  fueee  repartida
mueha  Una  flna  6  de  diversoa  colorea,
y  que  anaimeamo  tneeen  pneatoe  y
armadoB  mnchoa  telarca,  6  que  ansf
hombrea  eomo  mujeres,  eon  toda  la
m&s  bierednd  que  fuese  posible,  hieie-
een  la  ropa  que  lea  habia  cabido  .  .  .
T  eata  ropa  anal  hecha  i  acabada,
fu6  traida  &  la  ciudad  del  Cozeo."
While  (p.  127)  he  uses  the  term
' '  mamaconas ' '  to  designate  women
destined  to  attend  certain  idols  or
fetishes,  he  does  not  mention  any
forcible  or  voluntary  recluaion  on
their  part.  But  what  we  possess  thus
far  of  the  work  of  Betanaoe  is  un-
fortunately a  fragment.

Cieia,  who  came  to  Peru  at  least
eight  year*  later  than  Betanios,  is
perhaps  the  most  uncritical  panegyrist
of  ao-ealled  Inca  "civiliiation"  of
the  aiiteenth  century.  In  Segvnda
Forte  de  la  CrSnioa,  p.  106,  he  treats
of  the  recluse  women  in  the  fallowing
manner:  "A.  laa  pnertas  deataa  casus


eataban  puestoa  porteros  que  teniaa
cargo  de  mirar  por  laa  virgunes,  qna
eran  mnchaa  hijaa  de  seiiorea  prin-
cipales,  las  mAs  hermosas  y  apusataa
que  BO  podian  hallar;  y  estaban  en  el
tempio  haata  aar  viejaa)  y  si  algona
tenia  conocimiento  con  Taron,  la  mata-
bau  6  la  enterraban  vira,  y  lo  mismo
hacion  &  £L  Estas  mnjeres  eran
llfttn<ifift»  mSJnaconaa;  no  entendiaa
en  mas  de  tejer  y  pintar  ropa  de  laaa
para  serricio  del  tempio  y  en  haew
chJcha,"  etc.  Prerionsly  (p.  68),
among  the  tribnt«  exacted  by  the
Inca,  he  enumerates:  "y  de  mngeres
y  mnchachos;  loa  eualea  ae  sacabaa
del  pueblo  sin  ningnna  pesadomla^
porqne  si  nn  hombre  tenia  nn  sob)  hijo
6  hija,  eate  tal  no  le  tomaban,  pero  ai
tenia  fares  6  cuatro,  tom&balea  para
pagar  el  serricio. ' '  Still  pivrioas
(p.  33)  we  find  the  folloiring  state-
ment: "No  habia  ningnno  dellos  qna
BO  tuvieoe  mfia  de  aeteeientas  mogeres
para  serrido  de  su  eaaa  y  para  so
pasatiempo;  y  asi,  todos  ellos  tavie-
Ton  muohoa  hijoa  que  habian  eo  Mas
que  tenian  por  mngsres  6  mancebas,
y  eran  bien  tratadaa  poi  &  y  estima-
daa  de  loa  indioa  natnralea;  y  aposoi-
tado  el  rey  en  sn  palacio,  6  por  donde
quier  qua  iba,  erad  miwuia*  y  guarda-
daa  todas  por  los  porteros  y  camayoa^
qnea  norabre  de  goardianea;  y  si  al-
gnna  nsaba  con  varon,  era  caatigada
con  pena  de  muerte,  dindole  &  fl  la
misma  pena."  It  should  not  be  aver-
looked  that  Cieta,  out  of  ignorance
of  the  rules  of  Indian  relationsbip  in
Pern,  bIbo  Baaerta  that  the  chiefs  inTa-
riably  married  their  sisters;  also  that
in  one  of  the  forgoing  paragiaphs
he  uses  the  term  "Tirgins"  qnite  a
priori.  Oarcilaseo  de  la  Vega  (Co-
tMDtario*,  I,  foL  78)  deniea  there
were  any  women  inaide  of  the  homes
of  worahip  at  Cuaco,  thus  contradict-
ing CiezB.  While  hia  work  is  mock
posterior  to  that  of  Cieca,  he  was  at
Cnaco  iriien  the  latter  made  a  eou-
paratively  short  viait  to  that  (tbon
already  Spanish) town. Be asaerta


;cbyG00'^lc


ANCIENT  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA 255


(ComenfarMx,  I,  fol.  TS):  "Tampoeo
entTMii  mngeres  en  ella,  Bun^  toeBoen
las  bijaa  7  mngerea  del  mismo  Bej."
Fcuther  on :  "  aalao  q  en  la  casa  del
Sol  no  aoia  seniicio  de  mugeiee. ' '  In
Book  lY,  Cap.  I  and  n,  foL  81  and
82,  he  treats  at  length  of  the  "tIt-
gins,"  makiiig  the  significant  remark:
"Porqne  Koiendo  de  tener  hijos  el
Sol  como  ellos  iin&giDauBii,  no  era
TBzd  q  fneran  bastardoB,  mezclados  de
■agre  dinina  7  hmnana.  For  tito
aaian  de  aer  legitimaa  de  la  sangre
Beat  <1  era  la  misma  del  Sol.' '  When
OareilaBso  states  the  "Tirgina"  lutd
to  have  ehildrm,  it  is  not  meant
fignratiTel7.  Fedro  Fisarro,  while
stating;  "Eneete  bnlilo  donde  digo
eetaba  el  Sol,  dormian  eotidiano  mas
de  doeientas  mogeree  hijas  de  indiof
prineipalee, "  adds:  "7  fingian  ellas
donnii  alU  7  qne  el  Sol  se  a7nntaba
con  ellas. ' '  (  For  the  preaant  I  limit
mTSelf  to  theM  indications  gathered
ttoja  earliest  soorces.  The7  seem  to
establish,  as  already  observed,  that
the  mamaeonas,  indoding  those  on
Titieaca  Island,  were  not  vestala,  and
that  the  institDtion  was  a  part  of  the
Inca  STstem  of  tribnte.  It  ma^  be
that,  as  some  of  the  recluse  women
were  occaBionaDy  sacrificed,  they  were
kept  virgins  for  that  pcrpoee,  aa  ia
indicated  by  Bamos  \BUtoTia,  etc.,  p.
12  et  teg.:  "Sabidij  ee  que  &  seme-
janza  de  las  Teatales  de  Boma,  tnvo
el  Feni  viijenes  dedicadas  al  sol,
habiendo  mncbas  caaaa  de  ellaa  en  el
imperio,  7  por  lo  menoa  nna  en  cada
provincia;  en  que  habia  doe  claaes
de  donc^aa,  nnas  llamadas  asi,  7
otros  Mamaeonas,  que  eran  laa  maes-
tras  de  noviciea:  estas  eran  admitidaa
a  loe  ocho  afios  7  tc  criabaa  en  reco-
jimiento  haata  los  quince  o  dies  7
aeia.  En  esa  edad  las  saeaban  para
desposarlas  con  el  Inca  o  con  sns
capitanes  favoritos,  aunqne  etrto  se
hacia  rara  vez  en  las  fiestas  mni  prin-
cipales  7  con  firden  espreao  del  eobe-
rano.  Cuando  dcepnes  se  ensangrentd
el culto, algnnas tambien laa aacri-


ficaban  al  sol. ' '— ' '  Cnaodo  despnes
en  las  fiestas  principalea  aacabao  al-
gunaa  para  ofrecerlaa  en  aacrificio  al
Bol,  eaas  mas  infellees  Ifljeniaa  eran
degolladas."  (P.  16.)  "Cnando  es-
taa  nifias  dedicadas  al  sol  llegaban
a  edad  fiorida  debian  gnardar  pei-
petna  virjinidad,  mientrtu  el  Inea  no
lag  etcojete,  jniet  era  el  intirprete
toberano  y  el  repretentante  vivo  del
tol." (Italics  mine.)

*  In  addition  to  the  te8timon7  pre-
sented, I  refer  to  Bamos,  p.  13.

<*  The  Chineana  is  the  00)7  build-
ing, of  Inca  origin,  on  the  Island
capable  of  accommodating  a  larger
number  of  people;  the  ruin  at  Kasa-
pata  excepted,  which,  as.shown,  was  a
"tambo."  V'Hie  house  of  the  women
had  to  be  wise  to  the  places  of  wor-
ship or  ahrinea,  and  there  is  no  VMtlge
of  any  edifice  In  that  Ticinit7  that
eonld  have  been  suitable  for  the  pnr-
pose\

"Hfelafvme  per  8va  Maetta,  lot
413.

"  See  foregoing  notes.

"  I  believe  to  have  shown  that  the
first  occnpation  of  the  Island  b7  Incaa
occurred  between  1450  and  1500,  hence
the  conatructiona  date  from  that
period,  if  it  ia  true  they  were  made
during  the  term  of  office  of  Tupac
TupanqnL

"  See  annexed  photograph.

"Cobo:  Eutoria,  etc.,  IV,  p.  202:
"La  tinta  dan  &  la  lana  y  algodon
en  pelo,  antea  de  hilarlo,  y  despnes  de
aacada  del  Telar  la  pieza  no  naan
darie  ninguna."

"Bittoria,  etc.,  IV,  pp.  57  and  62.
Bamos,  p.  10.

"Cobo:  HittOTia,  eW.,  IV,  p.  169.

"Pedro  Piiarro;  Selacion  del  Dee-
eubrimiento,  p.  266;  Oarcilasso:  Co-
mentarioe,  I,  fol.  76;  and  others.

"Arriaga;  Extirpacion,  Cap.  n.

"  FrimeTa  Parte  de  la  Crdniaa  del
Feri,  Cap,  cm,  p.  443.

"  Eittoria  general,  IV,  p.  261.

"The  Selalione,  etc.,  of  1534,
foL  413,  already  statea  the  sacrifices


;cbyG00'^lc


256


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


were  nude  "in  vna  gran  pietm."
Cieta:  Fnmera  Pfflrtfl,  p.  446;  Gawi-
lasBo:  CotMntariot,  I,  foL  80;  Bnmoe:
ff««loria,  -p.  i  et  aeq.;  Cobo:  SittorUt,
IT,  p.  GBl  The  latter  etatei;  "Como
qoiera  que  haya  sido  el  Prmeii»o  7
origen  deete  eantnario,  61  tenia  0107
grande  antig&edad  7  aiempTe  fu6  mnjr
venerado  de  laa  gentea  del  Oollao,
antes  que  fueran  aojetadoe  per  loe
Be7e0  Ineas." Also,  p.  5T.

"Aside  from  the  deseriptions  of
the  eeremoniale  bf  anthon  who  eaw
them  after  the  eonqnert,  like  Cieza
{Segunda  Parte,  Cap.  xziz  and  xxx),
e7e-witi]eMes  like  Pedro  Pitorro  (Be-
lacu>n,  p.  276)  give  «  fair  picture  of
the  impreari<ine  made  upon  them  by
the  oeremoniala  trtien  leen  for  the  fliet

"BUtoria,  p.  03.  This  statement
should  be  taken  with  reeerre.

**  Ibidem,  p.  69.

'Relatione  per  Bva  Maetta,  (oL
413;  Pedro  Piurro:  Selaoioit,  p.  260.
lAter  authoritiea  concur.  Already
Ciexa  mentions a  number  of places


where  oracles  were  expected  and  be-
lieved in,  by  the  Indians — Primen
Parte,  p.  421,  Pachaeamac;  p.  426,
Cajamaica;  p.  432,  Jaaja,  and  otben;
Begwitda  FarU,  p.  109,  near  Cueo;
p.  110,  Tileanota;  p.  Ill,  Ancoeagna;
p.  112,  Ebropvna.  BOaeio^  y  detian-
eion  del  vwdo  ipu  Bite  valle  de  Chi*-
eka  y  ttu  eomareanoi  m  gobentabax,
etc.  Doe.  de  Etpaia,  ToL  L,  p.  221:
"Los  YnngBB  no  adoraban  al  Sol  nie
it  OnacBfl,  y  no  A  todas  lino  aqoelhi
qne  daban  reapnesta,  y  no  aiempi^
■ino  coando  laa  habian  meneeter."
This  report,  which  bean  date  Febn-
ary  22,  1558,  is  1v  the  Dominicu
Fn^  Cristabal  de  Cwtrolthe  EOa-
oioa  d»  la  BeUgitm  y  Bitot  dei  Ferv,
about  1S60,  by  AngnstiBe  monk*:
{Doe.  de  Indiat,  III,  pp.  16,  18,  19,
21,  26,  27,  28,  et  teq.  This  doeimieitt
treats,  as  already  stated,  of  Hnama-
chneo;  also,  abovt  PachacsniM,
Xerei!  F^rdad^ra  Selooion,  aad
Hernando  Pizarro:  Carta.  It  is  not
necessary  to  qnote  authors  of  a  lata
date.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


II


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


THE  EUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


i

V


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


Cs^et  of  andente  with  cover  wfaieh  contained  ancient  poocbo  (see  text)
from  tlie  vicinity  of  Muro-Kato


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


PabtV
THE  RUmS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI

AND  A  GliAKCE  AT  ANTIQUITIES  OP  COPACAVANA


THE  longitndinal  axes  of  Titicaca  and  Koati  are  ap-
proximately parallel,  and  tiiere  are  analogies  between
tbei  two  Islands  that  bear  npon  the  distribution  of  aborigi-
nal establishments  on  their  surface.  The  northwestern
extremity  of  each  Island  is  narrow  and  rocky,  especially
that  of  Eoati.  Uila-Peki,  the  "Bed  Head"  of  Koati  (see
map  of  the  Island,  /),  is  a  sheer  cliff  of  red  sandstone,  and,
seen  from  the  Lake,  it  is  very  conspicuous.'  On  the  sonth-
eastem  end  of  Koati  there  are  cliffs  also  but  they  are  not
as  striking  as  the  bold  promontory  in  the  northwest.  The
two  main  groups  of  Inca  ruins,  still  extant  on  Koati,  are
found  at  luak-Uyu  (house  of  women)  on  the  northern  slope,
and  on  the  crest  called  "Bed  Head."  The  former  ruin  (a)
recalls,  in  situation,  the  Pilco-Kayma  on  Titicaca ;  the  other
(b)  Kasapata.

So-called  Chnllpa  remains  are  few  on  Koati.  "What  we
were  able  to  discover  were  burial  cysts.  A  few  of  them
differ  from  those  on  Titicaca  in  that  they  are  double ;  that
ia,  two  graves  superposed  and  separated  by  a  cover  con-
sisting of  at  least  two  slabs.  They  are  of  a  somewhat  better
make  than  those  at.Ciriapata  and  elsewhere.  Most  of  them
had  been  searched  previously,  so  that  the  yield  was  poor,
and  the  pottery  as  well  as  the  few  skulls  secured  were  of
Chnllpa  type.  We  found  tiiese  graves  on,  or  close  to,  the
crest  of  the  Island. This  crest  bears,  along  the  whole  line,


;cbyG00'^lc


260 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

the  vestiges  of  a  wall  of  varying  width,  that  seems  to  have
been  mostly  conBtrueted  ont  of  rocky  debris  that  formerly
covered  the  slopes.  From  this  wall,  others  descend  like
ribs,  chiefly  on  the  east  side.  Andenes,  ancient  and  modem,
run  along  the  flanks  of  Koati,  bnt  it  is  chiefly  the  northeast-
em  slope,  the  one  exposed  to  the  son,  that  bears  marks  of
onltivation.  The  sonthwestem  declivity  is  so  much  in  the
shade  as  to  be  notably  colder  than  the  other.  Hence  Inca
stractnres  lie,  either  on  the  crest,  like  those  near  Uila-Peki,
or  on  the  eastern  slope,  as  Inak-TTyu.  Of  Chnllpa  buUdings
we  saw  no  traces.

In  connection  with  the  wall  on  the  crest  we  noticed
vestiges  of  a  quadrangular  building.*  The  fonndations
indicate  a  stmctare  measuring  thirty-siz  by  thirty  feet,
and  the  only  side  wall  still  defined  is  about  four  feet  thick.
Another  rain  stands  at  c.  Three  rooms,  divided  from  each
other  by  (now  ruined)  partitions  two  feet  in  tiuckneas,
occupy  the  sonthem  end  of  a  fairly  made  anden  (c).  Their
aggregate  length  is  fifty-eight  feet,  their  width  nineteen.
We  could  not  obtain  any  information  concerning  these
structures;  the  Indians  did  not  even  have  a  name  for  the
sites.  AH  they  said  was,  that  they  were  Inca.  Not  a  pot-
sherd was  found  about  them  and  excavations  proved  fruit-
less. Indians  from  the  Island  and  from  Sampaya  had  long
ago  lifled  both  localities,  although  they  claimed  to  know
nothing  abont  them.

The  ruin  which  has  attracted  the  attention  of  visitors  to
Koati  is  the  one  called  Inak-Uyu  (map,  a).  Squier  calls  it
"Palace  of  the  Virgins  of  the  Sun,'**  but  believes  that  it
was  a  "Temple  of  the  Moon."  "Wiener  does  not  seem  to
have  visited  the  Island,  else  he  conld  not  have  written:
"The  monuments  of  the  Island  of  Koati  are  in  a  state  of
complete  destruction."*  Inak-Uyu  is,  on  the  contrary,
one  of  the  best  preserved  ancient  buildings  on  the  two
Islands.  Certain  portions  are  torn  down,  bnt  the  lines  of
walla  can  everywhere  be  traced,  and  the  facades  bear,  in


;cbyG00'^lc


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


I


.wGooi^lc


L:


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI  261

places,  a  thick  coating  of  plaster,  made  of  mnd  with  ichhu-
grass,  that  gave  to  the  walls  an  appearance  of  neatness
and  finish  which  the  rough  stonework  now  exposed  is  lack-
ing. Father  Sans,  following  Bamos,  calls  Inak-Uya  a
"Temple  of  the  Moon,"  Cobo,  agreeing  with  Bamos  and
Calancha,  states  (speaking  of  the  deeds  of  Tnpac  Ynpan-
qni) :  "Bnt,  not  satisfied  with  what  had  been  done  for  the
adornment  and  lustre  of  this  sanctoary  (Titicaca),  thinking
yet  that  he  was  not  complying  fully  with  Ms  obligations
and  was  not  attending  with  sufficient  care  to  the  worship  of
the  sun  if  he  did  not  assign  to  it  a  woman,  and  even  women,
for  its  use  and  service,  he  determined  upon  doing  it.  "While
in  this  frame  of  mind  he  found  a  good  opportunity  which
was  the  Island  of  Coata  or  Goyata,  so  billed  after  Co;b
which  is  the  same  as  queen,  and  he  constructed  on  it  a
sumptuous  temple,  in  which  he  placed  the  statue  of  a
woman,  from  the  belt  upwards  of  gold,  and  from  the  belt
down  of  silver,  which  was  of  the  size  of  a  woman  and  rep-
resented as  being  the  image  of  the  moon.  So  that  besides
the  live  women  that  on  Titicaca  were  dedicated  to  the  sun
for  its  service,  this  idol  was  dedicated  to  it  also  under  the
name  of  its  spouse,  in  representation  of  the  moon,  al-
though others  claim  that  this  figure  and  statue  was  called
Titicaca,  and  say  that  it  represented  the  mother  of  the
Incas.  Be  it  one  or  the  other,  the  statue  was  carried  to  the
city  of  Cnzco  by  the  Marqnis  D.  Francisco  Pizarro,  who
sent  three  Spaniards  for  it.  In  presence  of  this  diversity
of  opinions  it  is  difficult  to  arrive  at  any  conclusion.""

The  situation  of  Inak-Uyu  is  very  handsome.  Standing
on  the  slope  of  the  Island,  it  gets  the  full  benefit  of  whatever
light  and  heat  the  sun  affords  in  these  altitudes.  The  view
is  not  as  extensive  as  from  many  points  on  Titicaca,  but
the  peaks  of  Sorata  are  seen  to  much  greater  advantage.
The  building  occupies  part  of  the  highest  one  of  fonr  ter-
races, carefnlly  leveled,  and  these  terraces  descend  towards
the  jjake  in  regular  steps,  each  faced  by  a  wall  of  very  good


;cbyG00'^lc


262 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

workmanship.  The  platfonns  are  respectively  from  seven
to  nine  feet  in  height  and  irregularly  qnadrangnlar,  for  as
they  take  up  the  whole  ravine  they  adapt  themselves  to  its
sinuosities.  Their  aggregate  deptii,  from  the  southern  wail
of  Inak-Uyn  to  the  northern  margin  of  the  fourth  platform,
is  340  feet,  and  the  total  elevation,  thirty-fonr.  From  the
base  of  the  lowest  platform  to  the  Lake  shore,  the  distance
is  about  100  feet  more  and  the  difference  in  level,  sixty-
three;  so  that  the  rear  wall  of  the  ruin  stands  ninety-seven
feet  above  the  lake  and  is  horizontally  440  feet  distant  from
it.  On  both  sides  of  the  ravine  slopes  are  covered  with
ancient  andenes,  in  the  same  manner  as  near  Ynmani  and
the  Pilco-Kayma.  The  Indians  call  the  first  platform  and
the  buildings  on  it  Inak-Uyn,  the  one  next  following  Kalich-
Pata.  The  wall  of  the  latter  is  the  best  spedmen  of  andent
masonry  found  either  on  Titicaca  or  on  Koati,  and  many
of  its  well  cut  blocks  (which  are  fitted  without  any  binding
or  mortar)  are  said  to  have  been  carried  to  Jtdi  for  the
constmction  of  one  of  its  churches.  At  the  foot  of  the  same
wall  (which  is  provided,  besides,  with  good  steps  leading  up
to  the  terrace)  stand  two  buildings  of  smaller  size,  one  in
each  comer,  that  recall  the  outhouses  at  the  Pilco-Kayma.
They  are  reduced  to  low  walls,  so  that  only  size  and
outline  can  be  ascertained.  From  the  face  of  the  foorth
terrace,  descent  to  the  beach  is  by  steps  also,  but  the
andenes  are  less  regular,  much  narrower,  and  considerably
higher.

The  main  edifice  occupies  the  approximate  north,  south,
and  west  sides  of  the  uppermost  platform.  The  western  or
central  part  has  a  front  of  178  feet,  and  its  width  is  twenty-
four.  It  is  divided  into  thirteen  compartments,  most  of
which  would  have  to  be  freed  from  rubbish  in  order  to  dis-
cover details,  a  work  of  long  time  and  considerable  expense
whidi  it  is  hardly  worth  while  to  undertake.  Among  these
thirteen  subdivisions  are  a  number  of  narrow  ones  similar
to  gangways,  and  one  of  these,  at  the  southern  end,  is  so


;cbyG00'^lc


liE/.J

..lit  m---'i


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


Plate  LXm

Architectural  details  from  the  Chincanft
Doorways  and  niches,  etc.  (see  text)


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  263

mnch  lower  than  the  roof  of  the  room  adjoining  that  it
appears  almost  subterraneous.  The  two  central  rooms  are
best  preserved.  A  hall  or  passage,  to  which  we  could  find
no  entrance,  separates  them.  These  rooms  are  the  most
striking  features  of  the  edifice.  The  doorways  by  which
they  are  entered  are  each  thirteen  feet  and  four  inches
wide,  and  in  the  rear  wall  are  very  elaborate  niches,  the
finest  on  either  island.  They  are  still  partly  plastered,  and
their  greatest  widths  are  respectively  twelve  and  a  f  onrth  and
twelve  and  a  half  feet,  their  greatest  height  being  fourteen.
They  are,  therefore,  exceptionally  symmetrical,  in  general
dimensions,  whereas  in  detail  they  differ.  Their  depth  is
six  feet  in  one  and  six  feet  three  inches  in  the  other.  The
innermost  recesses  are  respectively  three  and  a  half  and
four  feet  deep.  Besides  these  very  prominwit  niches,  each  of
the  two  rooms  has  four  smaller  ones,  two  on  the  south  and
two  on  the  north  side.  The  other  compartments  of  this  part
of  the  building  are  in  a  state  of  dilapidation,  although  the
walls  stand  to  a  considerable  height.  The  roofs  are  gone,
and  while  it  seems  as  if  the  building  had  had  two  stories,  it
is  impossible  to  determine  their  elevation.  It  appears
to-day  as  if  the  two  large  doorways  were  the  only  entrances
to  this  section  from  the  front,  but  the  plan  given  by  Mr.
Squier,  and  made  when  the  structure  was  in  a  better  state
of  preservation,  shows  entrances  to  each  of  the  southern
rooms  and  also  communicating  doors,  of  which,  at  present,
nothing  is  seen.  He  also  marks  several  flights  of  steps  that
are  either  destroyed  or  covered  by  rubbish.  A  comparison
of  his  plan  wilii  ours  is  therefore  indispensable,  as  .well  as
with  the  plan  given  byfttivero'^and  Tschudi.  "With  the  ex-
ception of  discrepancies- in  dimensions  (almost  inevitable
in  measurements  made  by  different  parties)  and  the  error,
common  to  all  older  surveys,  of  assuming  right  angles,
whereas  Indian  ruins  are  rarely  rectangular,  the  three  plans
will  be  found  to  agree  fairly  well,  and  the  two  diagrams
anterior  to  ours  restore  many  details  no  longer  found.  The


;cbyG00'^lc


264 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

same  can  be  said  about  the  two  wings  of  the  building.  Our
plan  gives  the  same  subdivisions,  the  same  interior  arrange-
ment, as  those  of  onr  predecessor,  bnt  we  found  them  in  a
far  more  advanced  stage  of  decay.  Eadi  of  these  wings
has  a  niched  doorway  in  the  middle  (about)  of  its  front,
flanked  by  two  large  niches,  one  on  each  side.  The  south-
ern wing  resembles  the  main  body,  inaranuch  as  it  has  a
series  of  rooms;  the  northern  is  divided  by  a  curiously
irregular  court,  one  wall  of  which  forms  almost  a  curve.
That  court  occupies  the  comer  of  the  terrace  on  the  north.
The  south  wing  has  an  annex,  part  of  which  stands  on  the
platform  of  Ealich-Pata,  hence  on  a  lower  level.  On  oar
plan  we  have  indicated  ihirty-nine  compartments  of  every
description,  including  rooms,  haUs,  passages,  and  low  gang-
ways covered  with  roofs,  besides  the  irregular  court  of
which  the  people  rightly  say  that  it  has  "eleven  comers."

The  rooms  are  not  large,  Uie  largest  one  measuring  twenty-
two  by  fourteen  feet.  Small  niches  are  found  everywhere,
but  only  the  two  middle  apartments  of  the  central  section
have  tall  and  ornate  recesses.  These  two  apartments  must,
therefore,  have  served  for  some  special  purpose.  The  walls
are  of  very  unequal  thickness,  varying  between  two  and  eight
feet.  Their  height  also  is  unequal  now,  owing  to  decay,  still  we
foimd  cornices  at  an  elevation  of  thirteen  feet  The  cornice
consists  of  three  slabs  snccesBively  overlapping  or  project-
ing, and  together  two  and  a  half  feet  thick.  In  another
place,  a  lower  story,  eleven  and  a  half  feet  high,  is  crowned
by  a  wall  of  six  feet,  making  the  total  elevation  sevcmteen
and  a  half  feet.  It  looks  as  if  most,  though  probably  not
all,  of  tbe  building  had  been  two  stories,  thus  TpalriTig
Inak-TJyu  the  largest  single  building  on  either  of  the  two
Islands,  as  far  as  can  be  seen.

In  the  whole  stracture  we  noticed  a  single  tiny  airhole,
and  that  was  connected  with  a  very  elaborate  niche  in  the
shape  of  a  lozenge,  similar  to  the  nidies  near  the  Piloo-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI  265

Kayma.  Lozenge-shaped  recesBes  are  in  all  three  fa^des
of  Inak-Uyn,  and  they  increase  the  ornamental  effect  Un-
less there  were  openings  in  the  npper  story,  of  which  there
is  now  no  trace,  the  rooms  of  Inak-tJya  (except  the  two
front  ones)  must  have  been  as  dark  as  any  on  Titieaca.  We
fonnd  no  communication  of  any  kind  from  the  lower  story
to  the  npper.  Adjoining  a  comer  of  the  central  part,  there
is  a  small  structure  on  a  lower  level,  descent  to  which  is  by
a  flight  of  four  steps  three  and  a  half  feet  deep.  West  of  it
are  walls  indicating  either  rooms  or  small  enclosnres.  The
former  seems  more  probable,  and  it  is  also  possible  that  a
portion  of  the  space  between  the  rear  wall  and  the  andeu
was  bnilt  over.  At  least  we  noticed  a  row  of  slabs  set  in  the
wall  at  five  and  one  half  feet  above  the  ground,  and  at  one
end  of  them  a  beam  protruded.  The  slabs  project  about  six
inches,  and  between  every  two  of  them  is  inserted  a  smaller
stone  or  pebble.  Whether  this  indicates  a  ceiling  or  some
contrivance  for  ascent  it  is  not  possible  to  decide.

Only  on  the  narrow  and  almost  underground  passages
are  roofs  still  extant.  These  consist  of  flat  stones  laid  along-
side of  each  other ;  as  at  the  Kayma  and  at  the  Chincana.  I
would  call  special  attention  to  the  passage  ways  of  Inak-
Uyu.  They  are  lower  than  the  floor  of  adjacent  apartments
and  yet  not  really  subterraneous.  They  are  surprisingly
narrow.  One  of  them  is  only  two  feet  wide,  the  others
nowhere  exceed  four  feet.  They  seem  long  recesses  rather
than  corridors.  There  are  at  least  f  onr  diagonally  opposite
each  other.*  I  also  call  attention  to  a  curions  niche  in  one
of  the  rooms,  which  has  the  form  of  a  crescent-shaped  an-
cient knife  with  a  short  handle.  Of  the  W-shaped  windows
mentioned  by  Mr.  Sqnier  there  is  as  little  left  as  of  pointed
gables.^  We  cannot  afSrm,  still  less  deny,  their  former
existence.

Although  the  sontheastem  comer  is  considerably  ruined,
it  is  clear  that  the  three  wings  of  the  edifice  were  connected.


;cbyG00'^lc


266 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

The  dimensioDB  are,  therefore,  on  the  side  towards  the
terrace:  sonthem  wing,  seventy-seven  feet,  central  part,
178  feet,  northern  wing,  retreating  part,  fifty-aii  feet,  to
which  succeeds  a  room  advancing  twenty  feet  to  the  east  and
with  a  facade  twenty-two  feet  in  widtli,  so  that  the  northern
side  of  the  structure  is  nearly  symmetrical  with  the  south-
em.  The  distance  between  the  comers  of  outhouses  along
the  edge  of  the  platform  is  134  feet  Adding  to  these
twenty-two  feet  for  the  length  of  the  northern,  and  twenty-
eight  for  that  of  the  southern  projection,  we  find  that  the
southern  and  northern  wings  are  six  feet  wider  apart  on  the
eastern  end  of  the  terrace  than  on  the  western.  Hence,
while  there  is  a  certain  symmetry,  the  building  still  shows
the  usual  imperfections  of  "rule  of  thumb."

Koati  has  been,  as  well  as  Titicaca,  the  seat  of  desultory
excavations.  It  does  not  appear  that  the  Island  was  visited
in  1533,  althongji  alluded  to  in  the  report  of  July,  1534.»
Statements  concerning  a  possible  visit  to  Koati  in  1538,  by
order  of  Francisco  Pizarro,  are  vagae  and  contradicted  by
docnments  that  purport  to  be  from  the  time,  Father  Cobo
states.  He  says:  "He  [the  IJica  chieftain  Tupac  Tnpan-
qui]  found  a  good  occasion  [place]  to  carry  out  his  inten-
tion, which  was  the  Island  of  Coati  or  Coyata,  thus  called
from  Coya  which  is  the  same  as  queen.  And  he  erected
(worked)  in  it  a  sumptuous  temple  where  he  plaoed  the
statue  of  a  woman,  of  gold  from  the  waist  up  and  from  the
waist  down  of  silver,  which  (statue)  was  of  the  size  of  a
woman  and  represented  the  image  of  the  moon.  .  .  .  Some
say  that  this  figure  and  statue  was  called  Titicaca,  and  also
that  it  represented  the  mother  of  the  Incas.  Whichever
may  be,  the  statue  was  carried  to  the  city  of  Guzco  by  the
Marquis  D.  Francisco  Pizarro,  who  sent  three  Spaniards
for  it"*  Bamos  says  the  idol  at  Koati  was  "after  the
shape  of  a  Coya"  and  of  gold,  bat  he  makes  no  mention  of
its  translation  to  Cuzco  by  the  conquerors.  In  the  volumi-
nous set  of  documents  embodying  the  accusation  of  Almagro


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  267

the  younger  against  Pizarro,  Hernando  Pizarro  is  accnsed
of  attempting  to  "rob  the  gold  and  silver  that  was  in  the
lagnne  of  Titaca  [Titicaca],"  and  that  in  consequence  of  it
ten  Spaniards  were  drowned.  No  mention  is  made  of  the
metallic  treasure  heing  on  an  island.^"  That  an  attempt
of  some  sort  was  made,  is  as  good  as  proven  by  other
sonrces  from  the  time,  also  that  it  occurred  in  1539.^'
.  If  the  documents  collected  and  published  in  abstracts  by
iJ.  M.  Vizcarra^in  1900  are  not  spurious,  we  may  conolnde
that  no  attempt  was  made  by  the  Spaniards  to  reach  Koati
in  the  year  1539  even.  The  reason  why  is  given  as  follows :
"And  when  there  came  to  the  peninsula  the  captains  Al-
zures  and  the  lUescas  with  the  Franciscan  Fathers,  althon^
they  intended  it  in  1536,  they  could  not  get  to  it  by  reason
of  lack  of  time  and  because  they  thought  it  was,  like  that  of
the  son,  deserted  and  abandoned."**  The  date  of  1536  is,
as  I  have  already  shown,  doubtful,  to  say  the  least.  I  hold
(until  otherwise  informed)  the  year  to  be  1539."

As  far  as  the  sources  at  my  command  go,**  an  ofScial
search  of  the  Island,  or  rather  of  the  Peninsula  of  Copa-
cavana  and  insular  dependencies,  took  place  in  1617.  The
object  seems  to  have  been  the  gathering  of  buried  metallic
wealth,  to  be  employed  in  the  construction  of  a  basilica  at
the  sanctuary  of  Our  Lady  of  Copacavana.  It  is  not  devoid
of  interest  to  note  the  results  of  this  search.  According  to
inventory,  Titicaca  Island  yielded  thirty-three  "plates"  in
gold  weighing  nine  ponnds  and  ten  ounces,  Koati  180  ob-
jects representing  a  total  weight  of  eleven  pounds  fifteen
ounces  three  grains,  and  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana
eighty-four  objects  weighing  eleven  pounds  fifteen  ounces.
To  these  were  added  367  in  silver,  weighing  419  marks  and
seven  onnces.  The  silver  was,  in  part,  obtained  from  other
islands  also.  The  total  value  of  these  objects  in  gold  and
silver  did  not  exceed  12,000  pesos  and  70  maravedis.**

The  report  on  the  visit  to  Koati  is  stated  as  bearing  the
date  of  June  3, 1618,  and  having  been  executed  and  signed


;cbyG00'^lc


268 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

on  the  Island."  It  is  certified  to  by  Fray  Baltaaar  de
Salas,  author  of  the  strange  chronicle  of  Copacavana  men-
tioned in  the  third  part  of  this  monograph.  It  contains  a
fancifnl  description  of  the  mun  mins  on  Koati  (rendered
worse  by  changes  and  additions  from  the  pen  of  Tlzcarra)
and  the  report  on  some  few  diggings  made  by  direction  of
the  ecclesiastic  visitors.

The  first  indication  of  some  valne  which  we  meet  is  that
in  1610  Koati  was  inhabited  by  "three  or  fonr  families  of
from  ten  to  twelve  yomiiger  souls.'*  Hraice  the  Island  was
occupied  in  the  first  decade  of  the  seventeenth  centnry.  The
dwellings  of  these  Indians  stood  on  one  of  the  terraces
below  I^k-T7yn.  The  description  of  the  mins  allndes  to
three  doorways  "antemnral  of  the  temple,"  and  says  that
the  "castle  of  the  virgins"  was  to  accommodate  "two  hun-
dred sools  consecrated  to  the  sun;  (and  had)  fourteen
compartments  of  lower  and  npper  stories,  with  as  many
turrets  of  house  idols,  on  a  platform  300  ells  long  by  200  in
width.  * '  A  t«nple  of  "  the  moon '  *  is  also  mentioned.  There
are  a  few  vague  indications  of  features  visible  at  the  pres-
ent day."

The  diggings  brought  to  light  a  stone  cheat  apparently
similar  to  the  chests  found  on  Titicaca  and  which  contained
human  remains  supposed  to  be  those  of  a  female.  It  was
accompanied  by  "various  amulets,  Mppos  and  coins  of  gold
and  silver." The  latter  were  manifestly  bangles.*"

There  is  no  doubt  that  the  official  investigation  of  1618
really  occurred,  but  statements  about  details  are  so  involved
in  fanciful  rhetoric  and  modem  addition  and  interpretation
that  littie  more  than  the  fact  of  the  visit  can  be  relied  npon.
It  should  not  be  overlooked,  that  Father  Cobo  was  at  and
near  Copacavana  in  1617,  but  makes  no  allusion  to  the  pre-
tended visit  of  1618,  although  it  was  already  being  oi^an-
ized.  Also  that  neither  Bamos  nor  Calancha  nor  S.  Nioolas
have  a  word  to  say  concerning  Fray  Baltasar  de  Salas."
This  does  not,  however,  justify  denial  of  the  visit.""


;cbyG00'^lc


l.iri;I.l  iim-.iliT  1.


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


PiiATC  LZVI

Objeoto  in  copper  or  beonse  from  TitioMa  lelaikt

1,  2  ,3.  Copper  bADglea. 4,  S,  6,  7,  S.  B«adfl. 9,  10,  I].  BfttUes.

12.  Finger-riiic  of  bronse. 13,  14.  Pandantt.

13.  Bronte  implement,  posaibly  kwl


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


•  \


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  269

Yet,  Cobo  allndes  to  an  attempt  to  search  Koati  for
treasure  made  in  1617:  "The  report  I  heard  while  being  in
this  province  in  the  year  one  thousand  and  six  hundred
and  sevoiteen  is,  that  there  are  ffygpt  riphes  (wealth)  on
the  island  of  Coatd,  whither  at  the  time  certain  Spaniards
went  in  a  bark  (boat)  and  could  not  find  anything.""

In  modem  times,  Koati  and  its  ruins  have  becoi  and  are
overturned  and  ravaged  at  intervals.  The  Indians  from
the  village  of  Sampaya  on  the  mainland  and  two  former
occupants  of  the  isle,"  have  done  much  damage  to  the  ruins
and  we  were  advised  not  to  excavate  the  interior  of  Inak-
Uyn,  or  of  any  other  building  in  general,  since  they  were
completely  ransacked,  a  statemoit  supported  by  appear-
ances, l^e  terraces  in  front  of  the  buildings  were  said  to
have  suffered  less,  but  of  these  platforms  only  one  was
available— Kalich-pate.  The  others  were  covered  with
ripening  maize  and  could  not  be  disturbed.  After  probing
the  soil  on  the  flanks  of  the  ravine  at  various  places  we
moved  on  to  that  torraoe.

The  first  diggings  disclosed  two  stone  cysts  both  of  which
were  very  well  made.  Only  one  of  them  contained  some-
thing, the  other  was  empty.  The  first  was  rectangular,
measuring  thirty-six  inches  by  twenty-one,  inside.  It  had
no  cover  and  was  found  forty  inches  below  the  surface.  Its
depth  being  twenty-seven  inches,  the  bottom  lay  more  than
five  and  a  half  feet  beneath  the  surface.  The  sides  consisted
each  of  five  regularly  laid  courses  of  prismatio  stones,
breaking  joints,  and  the  best  work  we  have  seen  in  any  cyst
with  the  exception  of  the  grave  Ciriapata,  on  Titicaca,  con-
spicuous for  its  rectangular  shape.  From  the  cyst  on  Koati
five  clay  vessels  of  Chullpa  type  were  obtained.  The  other
was  forty-two  inches  below  the  ground  and  thirty-two
inches  deep,  polygonal,  and  measured  thirty-three  and
thirty  inches  across.  The  Indians  declare  that  these  cysts
are  Chullpa ;  and  their  great  depth  beneath  the  sod  indicates
that  th^  were  made  at  an  earlier  date  than  the  platforms.


;cbyG00'^lc


270 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

These  were  the  only  barials  on  Kalit^-Pata.  Escavationa
were  then  continned  on  the  appennost  terrace.  The  groond
was  opened  to  a  depth  of  two  feet,  on  an  area  of  about  2O0
square  feet.  Lower  down  nothing  was  fonnd.  But  in  that
space  of  200  feet  square  a  surprising  number  of  objects
were  brought  to  light.  They  had  been  tiirown  together
without  order,  as  at  Kea-KoUu-Chieo  on  Titicaca,  but  there
were  no  human  remains  among  them,  and  the  objects  were
all  declared  by  the  Indians  to  be  Inca.  Prominent  among
them  were  two  bowls,  most  beautifully  decorated  in  paint,
and  wHh  handles  representing  each  a  pnma  with  open
mouth  and  the  body  of  a  snake.  The  heads  of  the  animals
with  teeth,  tongue,  and  palate,  are  very  well  executed.  These
bowls  are  the  handsomest  specimens  of  Inca  ceramics
which  we  have  seen  so  far,  and  they  are  alike  in  size  and
decoration.  Several  other  fine  specimens  of  pottery  were
exhumed,  together  with  six  hollow  silver  figurines,  repre-
senting women,  which  the  Indians  call  "Collque-Hoarmi,"
or  silver  women;  and  three  figures  of  a  non-descript
animal,  of  thick  beaten  gold  (not  gold-leaf)  with  finely
executed  incisions  bearing  a  remote  resemblance  to  some
of  the  carvings  on  the  great  gateway  of  Tiahuanaco.^  A
large  number  of  stones  and  stone  implements,  fetishes,  etc,
of  all  shapes  and  sizes,  were  taken  out,  among  which  the
following  deserve  particular  mention:

A  human  head  of  andesite,  which  rock  is  found  only  on
the  Peninsula,  and  not  on  the  Islands ;  Urn  head  appears  to
have  been  without  body."

Several  toads  of  stone.  Of  such  toads  Bamos  states:
"Also  they  placed  on  the  rocks  some  small  idols  of  toads
and  other  filthy  animals,  believing  that  by  this  they  would
'  obtain  water.""'  The  quotation  shows  that  they  were
"intercessors  for  rain,"  like  similar  figures  used  for  that
purpose  by  the  pneblo  Indians  of  New  Mexico."

Two  objects  that  appear  at  first  sight  to  be  smoking-
pipes. What  these  pipe-like  articles  were  used  for,  except


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


3  i
i


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


A-^i»


DamziowGoOi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI  271

for  Bmokmg,  I  am  tmable  to  surmise.  In  regard  to  smokmg
among  the  aborigines  before  the  conquest,  I  find  the  follow-
ing in  the  edition  of  the  work  of  Bamos  arranged  by  Father
Sans:  "It  is  true  that  the  Incas  were  very  fond  of  agricul-
tare,  and  at  Airagnanca,  a  village  of  Omasuyos,  an  old
Indian  showed  me  a  plant  called  Topasaire,  the  leaves  of
which  the  Indians  use  like  tobacco,  assuring  me  that  the
Incaa  ,had  caused  it  to  be  brought  from  a  great  distance."
This  passage,  however,  may  he  from  the  pen  of  tiie  editor,
hence  modern,'^  as  Calancha  has  no  reference  to  it.  The
topasaire  is  a  species  of  wild  tobacco,  for  tobacco  in  Qui-
ehua  is  "sayri,"  and  was  known  in  Peru  before  the  con-
quest as  a  medicinal  plant.*'  Sayri  was  taken  in  the  form
of  powder  (snuff)  "to  free  the  head."**  Peru  has  at  least
three  varieties  of  indigenous  tobacco,  according  to  Bai-
mondi,"*  bat  all  three  grow  in  warmer  climates.  Of  smok-
ing I  find  no  trace  as  yet,  and  still  the  stone  objects  foond
in  this  "cache"  on  Eoati  can  hardly  have  been  anything
else  bnt  pipes.

A  great  nnmher  of  minerals,  fossils,  probably  used  as
fetishes.  Among  the  minerals  are  beautiful  pieces  of
mamillary  dialcedony,  among  the  fossils,  trilobites,  etc.

Coiled  snakes  of  stone,  that  is,  concretions  which  seem  to
have  been,  with  a  few  slight  artificial  touches,  converted
into  shapes  recalling  the  coiled  snakes  of  stone  from
Mexico.

Fragments  of  silver  leaf  were  found  in  considerable
abundance.  As  stated,  these  objects  were  heaped  together
in  the  soil,  without  order  or  regularity,  just  as  the  deposits
of  human  remains  and  artefacts  at  Kea-Kollu-Chico.  Of
many  of  them  it  may  safely  be  assumed  that  they  were
votive  offerings.  In  regard  to  others  it  is  not  easy  to  sur-
mise why  they  were  buried  there.**  Hardly  had  we  made
these  discoveries  when  the  Indians  of  the  Island  gathered
on  the  spot  and  began  to  dig  at  random  all  aronnd,  with  a
greed  that  be^ars  description. We  had  found  silver,  gold.


;cbyG00'^lc


272 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

and  handsome  pottery,  and  that  was  snffident  for  them  to
take  hold  of  the  premiBes  and  onst  ns  if  possible.  They
f orthmth  sent  numers  to  Copacavana  informing  the  owner
of  our  find,  at  the  same  time  exaggerating  its  importance.
He  prohibited  further  diggings  by  them,  bnt  we  saw  that
there  was  nothing  more  to  do,  as  the  enpidity  of  the  aborig-
ines and  their  jealousy  wonld  leave  as  no  peace,  and
eventnally  provoke  a  conflict  with  the  owner  himself.  So
we  abandoned  further  work,  with  the  deepest  r^^ret  The
Indians  confessed  afterward  to  Dr.  del  Carpio,  the  pro-
prietor of  Koati,  that  they  found  more  gold  and  silver,
among  it  a  number  of  what  they  called  rayos  or  tiiander-
bolts.  These,  according  to  description,  must  be  slices  of
metallic  leaf  cut  in  the  form  of  snakes."  I  recall  here  the
snake-like  additions  to  crosses  on  housetops,  described  in
Part  in.  Dr.  Carpio  writes  to  me  from  Copacavana,  that
he  caused  further  excavations  to  be  made  on  Kalich-Pata,
and  that  a  few  articles  of  gold  and  silver  were  found
similar  to  those  which  we  obtained,  also  pottery  and  stones,
but  in  no  considerable  quantities.

The  finds  on  this  platform  of  Kalich-Pata  seem  to  indi>
eate  that  Inak-Uyu  was  a  shrine  where  sacrifices  took  place
like  those  performed  before  the  Sacred  Bo<^  on  Titicaca.

Of  textures  no  considerable  piece  was  found  on  Koati,'*
for  the  same  reason  as  on  Titicaca,  namely,  excesnve
moisture.  On  the  crest,  a  female  figurine  of  massive  silver
was  found  by  us  in  a  stone  cyst,  and  a  few  shreds  of  rather
coarse  cloth  were  attached  to  the  feet  of  that  figurine.  It
hints  at  the  probability  that  this  "silver  woman**  had
originally  been  wrapped  in  clotL  This  recalls  Ihe  custom,
mentioned  by  Oobo,  of  dressiog  or  clothing  fetish^  or  idols,
at  certain  times  and  on  certain  occasions.**

The  other  ruin  of  importance  on  Koati  stands,  as  already
mentioned,  on  the  neck  immediately  in  the  rear  of  the  ex-
treme northwestern  point  of  the  Island;  the  bold  prom-
ontory of  Uila-Peki,  or  Bed  Head. The  neck  is  a  plateau.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Platb  Lxvin
Jnca  andenee  aad  details  of  Chucaripa


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  BUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI  273

not  quite  three  htmdred  feet  long,  from  south  to  north,  and
not  over  seventy  feet  across.  The  declivity  on  the  west  is
very  steep,  and  even  sheer  toward  the  end.  On  the  eastern  ■
side  the  slope  is  not  as  rapid,  and  terraces  go  down  to
almost  the  water's  edge.  These  terraces  sweep  around  to
the  northward,  abutting  against  precipitous  cliffs.  Seen
from  the  height  of  Chicheria  Pata  (a),  the  tali  and  well
built  andenes  present  a  striking  appearance.  The  big  wall
along  the  whole  length  of  the  crest  of  the  Island  terminates
against  the  sonthem  end  of  these  ruins.  The  Bed  Head
itself  bears  some  andenes,  but  its  top  is  quite  small,  and  we
saw  no  traces  of  buildings  on  it.  What  this  northwestern
extremity  of  Koati  had  in  the  shape  of  buildings,  seems  to
be  confined  to  the  remains  now  called  "La  Chicheria,"  a
Spanish  term  of  the  country,  used  to  designate  a  place  for
raising  and  endosing  goats  and  she^.

Father  Sans,  the  editor  of  Bamos,  regards  these  ruins  as
those  of  a  house  for  secluded  women,  calling  it  "Acda-
gnasi,"  or  "house  of  the  selected.""  Neither  Calancha
nor  Gobo  makes  any  mention  of  the  place,  hence  the  designa-
tion may  or  may  not  be  appropriate.  The  ruins  are  partly
obliterated,  mu<^  more  so  than  the  cluster  at  Inak-Uyn,  the
Pilco-Kayma,  and  the  Chincana.  If  I  were  to  compare  them
with  any  ruins  on  Titicaca  t  would  select  the  Easapata
cluster,  to  whidi  they  bear  considerable  resemblance.

The  analogy  in  location  between  these  two  ruins,  the
Chicherfa  of  Koati  and  Kasapata  on  Titicaca,  is  note^
worthy.  A  glance  at  the  general  plans  must  satisfy  any  one
of  the  truth  of  this  remark.  Both  occupy  the  highest  plane
of  a  neck  of  land,  both  are  divided  into  two  groups  sepa-
rated by  a  level,  and  even  the  size  and  arrangement  of  what
is  left  of  the  bnildings  display  much  similarity.  The
northern  group  of  the  Chicheria  recalls  the  eastern  of
Kasapata,  and  the  southern  the  western,  with  the  so-called
"temple."  The  long  rectangular  edifice  adjoining  the
court  called  to-day  "Canchdn  de  los  Bailes  de  los  Incaa""


;cbyG00'^lc


274 THE  ISl4AM)S  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

(enclosed  area  of  the  dances  of  the  Incas),  on  the  west  is,
on  a  Bmaller  scale,  a  copy  of  the  "temple,"  or,  as  we
should  call  it,  the  tambo,  of  Kasapata.  The  proportions  of
length  to  width  are  nearly  the  same  (abont  one  to  five).
They  are,  nnlike  all  the  other  edifices,  long,  narrow,  and
devoid  of  ornamental  niches.  If  we  compare  the  plan  of
the  buildings  uncovered  by  excavation  at  Elasapata  with
the  northern  gronp  of  the  Chicheria,  we  find  more  analogies
yet.  In  short  it  seems  as  if  the  two  clusters  bad  been  oon-
structed  for  the  same  purpose.  In  that  case  the  Chicheria
would  have  been,  on  Koati,  a  small  Inca  settlement  and  this
seems  very  likely.  Its  situation  is  such  as  to  command  an
extensive  view  and  it  is  the  spot  on  that  Island  that  lies
nearest  to  Titicaca.  It  is  probable  that  it  was  the  original
landing-place,  where  visitors  to  Koati  found  quarters  dur-
ing their  stay.

Excavations  at  the  Chicheria  yielded  as  good  as  nothing.
The  liidians  had  cleaned  it  out  completdy.  On  the  western
slope  were  a  few  graves  with  pottery  and  skulls  of  Chullpa
type.  The  walla  of  the  ruin  have  been  sadly  wrecked,  and
the  southern  part  especially  transformed  as  much  as  pos-
sible into  lots  for  goats  and  sheep.  Hence  it  may  be  that  I
have  left  out  on  the  plan  vestiges  which  are  ancient,  because
I  regarded  them  as  modem  on  account  of  transformation.
Of  ornamentation  noUiing  remains,  if  it  ever  existed.  There
is  one  small  niche,  perhaps  two,  and  two  doorways,  both  in
the  same  building.  At  the  edge  of  the  middle  level  stands
a  small  rectangular  structure  recalling  the  well-made  small
houses  of  Ciriapata,  Kea-KoUu,  and  the  one  in  the  bottom
of  Mama-Ojlia,  close  to  the  Sacred  Bock.  The  masonry  of
the  Chicheria,  as  far  as  seen,  is  like  that  of  Kasapata,  and
the  walls  have  about  the  same  thickness.

From  what  precedes  it  becomes  apparent  that  on  Koati
we  find  the  same  architectural  features  of  Inca  origin  as  on
Titicaca.  But  at  Inak-Uyu,  not  only  are  details  better  pre-
served, but  there  is  greater  elaborateness  and  decoration.**


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


/-.J-,.,.


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  275

Inak-Uyn  was  probably  the  largest  and  most  handsome
edifice  which  the  Incas  caused  to  be  reared  on  either  Island.
Tradition  has  it  that  it  is  also  more  recent  than  most,  if  not
all,  of  the  stmctnres  on  Titicaca.  It  is  stated  that  after  the
bicaa  had  established  an  elaborate  ceremonial  on  Titicaca
they  caused  the  boildings  at  Inak-Uyn  to  be  constnicted  as
accessories  to  the  former."  Our  investigations  have  shown
that  so-called  Chnllpa  remains  on  the  Island  of  Koati  are
limited  to  a  few  scattered  bnrial  sites.  The  reason  for  this
may  have  been  the  distance  from  the  mainland,  absence  of
good  water,  for  Koati  has  only  one  spring  {on  the  south
or  shady  side)  and  that  spring  is  insufficient  even  for  a
small  family.  Of  Chnllpa  buUdings  there  is  no  trace,  for
the  two  smallest  mins  have  scarcely  any  resemblance  to
Chnllpa  stmctnres.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  the  Ay-
mara  paid  little  attention  to  this  Island  previous  to  the
coming  of  the  Incas,  and  that  only  the  latter  made  of  it  a
shrine.  But  that  shrine  was  an  accessory  to  the  principal
one  at  the  Sacred  Eock.

In  the  preceding  chapter  I  have  suggested  that  the  date
of  the  Inca  establishments  on  Titicaca  was  approximately
1475.  In  regard  to  Koati  a  still  later  date  must  be  adopted,
and  it  is  therefore  doubtful  whether  the  ancient  buildings
on  that  Island  had  in  1533  been  in  existence  fifty  years."'

I  have  called  attention  to  a  certain  resemblance  between
the  buildings  at  Inak-Uyn,  their  location  and  surroundings,
and  the  duster  of  the  Pilco-Kayma  on  Titicaca.  Both  mins
stand  near  the  eastern  shores,  and  both  occupy  about  the
same  position  in  relation  to  the  peaks  of  Sorata.  Both
edifices  face  directly  not  sunrise,  but  the  Nevados  men-
tioned. The  two  principal  apartments  in  each  ruin  (with  the
most  elaborate  entrances  and  the  tall  and  prominent  nidies,
such  as  no  other  ancient  building  on  either  Island  contains)
open  toward  these  peaks,  not  to  the  east  I  From  the  Kayma
it  is  distant  Illimani,  the  extreme  southern  pillar  of  the
Andes,  behind  which  both  sun  and  moon  first  appear  above


;cbyG00'^lc


276 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

the  horizon.  From  Koati,  sunrise  lieB  sonth  of  the  Sorata
gronp.  The  fact  that  both  bnildings  are  provided  with
exceptional  niches  shows  that  certain  sections  of  them
served  for  some  kind  of  worship,  whereas  the  remainder
may  have  been  reserved  for  attendants,  male  or  female.
The  Pilco-Kayma  was  not  the  adoratory  of  the  snn;  eo
much  appears  certain.  Neither  do  the  old  chroniclers  men-
tion any  adoratory  of  the  moon  on  the  Island  of  Titicaca."
The  agreement,  in  position  and  disposition,  between  tiie
only  apartments  of  each  ruin  that  bear  marks  of  having
been  destined  to  religions  purposes  is  significant,  and  if  the
Pilco-Eayma,  as  appears  likely,  was  not  a  "temple  of  the
moon,"  the  same  was  the  case  with  Inak-Uyti.  I  venture  to
suggest  that  both  buildings  were  constructed  for  the  same
purpose,  selection  of  the  sites  being  governed  by  their  pom-
tion  witii  regard  to  the  most  prominrait  and  awe-inspiring
object  of  nature  within  view,  far  and  near,  the  majestic
"Crown  of  the  Andes."  The  "Boyal  Cordillera,"  as  the
Bolivian  Andes  are  sometimes  called,  has  three  specially
prominent  landmarks,  prominent  through  elevation,  striking
form,  and  massiveness.  These  are,  in  the  north  the  Sorata
group,  in  the  center  the  Ka-Ka-a-Ka  ("Karka-Jaque"),
and  in  the  south  Illimani.  Intermediate  summits,  wbUe
bold,  are  less  imposing.  Of  these  three  pillars  of  the  chain
we  know  that  Illimani  was  the  object  of  special  worship  od
the  part  of  the  inhabitants  of  its  surroxmdings ;  Hila-una-ni
(as  its  true  name  seems  to  be)  being  regarded  as  the  most
powerful  fetish  by  the  Indians  around  La  Paz.*>  At  the
base  of  Ea-Ka-a-Ka,  the  tribes  of  Pvcardni  had  their
special  shrine  with  a  large  stone  idol.*"  To  the  Indians  of
the  shores  of  Lake  Titicaca  (especially  of  the  two  Islands)
Illampu  and  its  twin  brother  are  as  impressive  as  the  two
first-named  are  for  their  vicinity.  Therefore  it  is  not  im-
possible that  among  the  people  on  the  Lake  the  Sorata
peaks  were  the  most  prominent  fetishes  together  with  Titi-
kala,  and  that  the  Incas,  who  already  had  adopted  the  Acha-


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


1.  Oround-plan  of  miDS  in  the  bottom  of  southern  Koaa.
>•  Ceiiiitfa  of  niolies


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI  277

cMla  cnlt  of  the  Sacred  Bock,  still  farther  yielded  in  regard
to  those  mountains,  hy  establishing  shrines  where  they  are
seen  to  greatest  advantage.^'  These  points  are  certainly
Pilco-Kayma  and  Inak-Vyul

[This  suggestion  by  no  means  conflicts  with  the  statements
uiat  at  Hak-Uyn  a  colony  of  female  attendants  to  worship
had  been  established.  On  the  contrary,  the  situation  of
Eoati  and  its  comparative  ioaccessihility  render  it  very
probable.  Snch  females  were,  as  we  have  seen,  not  exda-
sively  dedicated  to  the  aim,  neither  were  they  consecrated
to  the  moon.  Every  place  of  worship  of  importance,  every
prominent  settlement,  had  a  house  of  snch  women.  Thns,
for  example,  they  were  established  at  Irma  (known  as
Pachacamac),  on  the  coast,  where  the  principal  shrine  was
not  dedicated  to  the  snn,  but  to  some  particular  oracle  of
that  valley.**  (^The  Incas  did  not,  as  often  alleged,  "en-
force" snn-worship  wherever  they  extended  their  sway,
they  merely  added  to  already  existing  shrines  of  great
importance  places  of  worship  dedicated  to  their  own  tribal
cult."")

( In  the  preceding  chapter  I  have  stated  that  Titicaca  is
frequently  called  "Island  of  the  Snn,"  and  Koati  "Island
of  the  Moon."  (It  is  abundantly  proved  that  the  Incas  did
not  worship  the  sun  as  sun,  nor  the  moon  as  moon.  They
considered  both  to  be  material  and  created  objects.  But  it
appears  also  that  tbey  conceived  each  orb  to  be  the  rest-
dence  or  abode  of  some  spiritual  being,  and  there  are
indications  that  the  sun  was  looked  upon  as  Father  and  the
moon  as  Mother,  one  being  the  husband  and  the  other  the
wife.*"  This  is  exactly  the  primitive  belief  of  the  pueblo
Indians  of  New  Mexico.  1  Hence  we  find,  in  descriptions  of
Inca  idols,  a  certain  contradiction.  Sometimes  it  is  stated
that  the  figure  of  the  snn  was  a  circular  or  elliptical  plate,
again  that  it  was  a  human  figure,  just  according  as  the  sun
or  the  Sim-father  is  meant.

It  is  very  likely  that  on  Titicaca  a  chapel  existed,  in


;cbyG00'^lc


278 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

vbich  stood  an  effigy  of  the  ann-father,  and  on  Koati  one
containing  a  statue  of  the  moon-mother.  The  circnmspect
remark  of  Cobo  that  some  say  the  latter  was  the  "mother
of  the  Incas"^'  is  significant.  The  reverence  paid  to  both
was,  on  Titicaca  and  on  Koati,  a  specific  Inca  ceremonial
Hence  Sans  states  that  on  the  Island  the  "great  temple  of
six  doorways"  was  closed  to  all  Indians  that  were  not  Incas,
and  to  the  Collas  especially.*"  Bnt  there  are  indications
that  to  the  Sacred  Bock  on  Titicaca,  even  the  idols  of  the
Incas  were  made  to  give  special  tokens  of  respect  Father
Sans,  the  editor  of  Ramos,  describes  a  ceremony  performed
on  Titicaca  which,  if  his  statements  are  accurate,  is  a  very
good  illustration  of  what  I  have  saggested  in  regard  to  the
worship  paid  to  the  spirits  inhabiting  snn  and  moon.  He
says,  "when  celebrating  the  solar  feasts,  particularly  those
of  Gaparaime  (Capao-Baymi)  and  of  the  Intipraime  (Yn-
tip-Baymi),  which  months  we  shall  explain  when  treating
of  the  calendar,  those  of  the  partiality  of  the  Incas  placed
all  their  idols  on  litters,  called  'rampas,'  decorating  them
with  many  flowers,  plumage,  and  plates  of  gold  and  silver;
and  with  great  and  many  dances  carried  them  to  the  Island
in  procession;  tiiere  they  pnt  them  in  a  large  square  called
'Ancaypata,*  where  the  festival  was  celebrated.  There
was  the  great  temple  of  six  doors,  where  no  Colla  Indian
was  allowed  to  enter  or  assist  at  the  fea8t.\

"After  having  placed  the  idols  they  toofe  oflE  their  foot-
gear, their  mantles,  and  prostrating  themselves  before  them
they  worshiped,  the  principal  one  beginning  and  the  others
following,  all  taking  off  their  'Llantos'  or  diadems.  First
they  worshiped  the  statne  of  the  sun,  then  that  of  the  moon,
afterward  that  of  thunder  and  the  other  idols ;  since  each
one  had  its  particular  effigy.  The  sun  they  represented  in
the  form  of  an  Inca  of  gold,  of  so  much  jewelry  and  bril<
liancy  as  to  cause  awe;  the  moon  as  a  qneen  of  silver;
thunder  as  an  Indian  of  silver,  also  very  brilliant.  When
the  prostrations  and  adorations  were  over  they  raised  their


;cbyG00'^lc


I/-/. I  ,(■..■.■■1


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


Plate  LXXI

1.  Map  of  the  Island  of  KostL 2.  LoikgitmdiB«l  s&d  tnyimtM
profile  of  EoAti


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  279

hands,  making  with  the  lips  as  if  kissing  them,  jnst  as  chil-
dren do  when  they  wave  a  kiss  to  some  beloved  person.
Therenpon  followed  the  dances,  banquets,  and  amnsements,
which  were  the  end  and  aim  of  all  their  efforts;  and  to^y
even  they  have  not  improved  mtich.***^

The  sqnare  called  "Aucaypata"  mnst  have  been  in  the
immediate  vicinity  of  the  Sacred  Hock,  and  the  word  is  a
Qnichna  name,  for,  very  probably,  the  level  at  the  foot  of
the  cliflf,  or  the  eqnare  called  by  the  Aymard  "Tican-
Aychi."  The  procession  started  from  Copacavana,  hence
there  was,  at  Copacavana  also,  a  statne  of  the  sun-father
and  one  of  the  moon-mother ;  aside  from  that  of  the  princi-
pal idol  caUed  Copacavana  and  described  as  a  head  like  that
of  a  sphinx  without  hands  or  feet"  The  two  effigies  were
regarded  as  those  of  man  and  wife,  and  superior  to  other
Inca  idols,  bnt  their  peregrination  to  the  Islfuid  was  a
tribute  of  respect  to  the  shrine  established  there,  hence  to
the  rock  which  constituted  that  skrinet  This  proves  that
the  supreme  oracle  on  Titicaca  was  believed  to  reside  in
that  rock."'

A  similar  visit,  bnt  from  the  Island  of  Koati  to  that  of
Titicaca,  is  described  by  Cobo:  "The  priests  and  ministers
of  this  adoratory  and  of  that  of  Coata  had  a  great  deal  of
interconrse,  and  there  were  many  and  freqaent  missions
from  one  Island  to  the  other,  with  great  reciprocity,  feign-
ing the  ministers  of  one  and  the  other  sanctuary  that  the
wife  of  the  son,  as  according  to  their  opinion  the  moon
might  do  it,  sent  her  respects,  which  the  snn  returned  with
demonstrations  of  attachment  and  mntoal  love;  and  in  this
they  employed  mnch  time,  and  a  great  number  of  balsas
that  went  back  and  forth  between  the  two  Islands ;  and  in
order  to  represent  this  natnrally,  the  principal  minister
in  one  of  the  adoratories  dressed  himself  like  the  snn,  and  in
the  other  an  Indian  woman  played  the  part  of  the  moon.
They  sainted  each  other,  and  she  who  represented  the  moon
caressed  him  who  represented  the  snn,  asking  of  him  with


;cbyG00'^lc


280 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

many  flatteries  to  appear  eveiy  day  dear  and  bemgn  and  to
never  conceal  its  rays,  so  that  he  might  fertilize  the  planta^
tiona  nntil  the  time  when  rains  would  become  necessary.
Besides  this,  she  asked  that  he  might  preserve  the  Inca,
his  life  and  health,  and  that  of  those  who  with  such  faith
and  devotion  occnpied  themselves  in  his  service  and  wor-
ship. He  of  the  sun  responded  with  loving  words  and  in  a
satisfactory  manner;  and  in  snch  vanities  and  crazy  doings
the  wretches  spent  the  time  of  their  blind  and  idle  existence,
and  all  terminated  in  drinking,  which  was  their  greatest
bliss."  Bamos  allndes  with  less  detail  to  the  same  cus-
tom."

It  appears,  therefore,  that  Koati  was  in  constant  inter-
course with  the  religions  establiBhrnents  on  Titicaca.  The
pilgrims  who  visited  the  latter  Island  went  from  it  to  Koati
and  the  crossing  was  effected  not  from  the  Peninsula  of
Copacavana  (Sampaya),  as  to-day,  bat  from  some  point  cm
Titicaca.  As  the  pilgrims  had  to  go  first  to  the  Sacred
Bock,  their  jonmey  to  Eoati  started  necessarily  from  there
or  from  Kasapata.  Bnt,  from  either  place,  a  voyage  by
balsa  is  almost  twice  as  long  as  from  Titicaca's  eastern
shores  t  The  most  convenient  point  for  embarking  wonld
have  been  the  little  Bay  of  Pncara.  It  is  hoice  possible
that  in  view  of  these  frequent  voyages  the  buildings  at
Pncara  were  erected,  for  Pucara  is  as  well  the  natural  port
for  Koati  on  Titicaca  as  the  foot  of  the  crest  on  which  tiie
buildings  now  called ' '  Chicheria ' '  stand  is  the  landing-place
nearest  to  Titicaca  on  the  Island  of  Koati.

This  frequent  intercourse  formerly  carried  on  between
Koati  and  Titicaca  may  enable  as  to  form  some  idea  of  the
probable  object  of  those  buildiogs  on  the  latter  Island,  to
which  their  present  condition  affords  no  clue.  The  re-
semblance between  Inak-Uyn  and  Pilco-Kayma  in  position
and  arrangement,  not  in  size,  leads  to  the  inference  ttiat
both  may  have  been  shrines  dedicated  to  the  "Achachila"
worship  of  the  peaks  of  Sorata."' The  Chicheria,  while


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Plato  LXXII
Rnint  on  eutam  slops  of  Koati


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


:::«^


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  281

TesembUng  arcfaitectnral  vestiges  at  Kasapata  and  prob-
ably destined  to  the  same  end,  hints  at  the  possible  purpose
of  the  buildings  at  Pacara.  The  latter  stood  near  a  land-
ing-place on  Titicaca,  for  the  frequent  communications
from  one  to  the  other  Island.

The  number  of  residents  on  Koati  during  the  time  the
Incas  maintained  their  establishments  there  was  certauily
greater  than  it  is  to-day.  The  buildings,  admitting  that
Inak-IJyu  had  two  stories,  may  have  contained  as  many
as  two  hundred  permanent  occupants.'*  If,  as  is  stated  by
some,  most  of  these  attendants  were  females,  the  number
may  have  been  even  somewhat  greater.  For  an  abode  of
secluded  women,  Koati,  espedally  the  site  of  Inak-Uyn,  was
very  well  chosen.  The  long  wall  that  ran  along  the  crest
barred  access,  and  the  little  ruin  {d,  on  map)  served  as  a
lookout ;  the  Chicheria,  and  especially  the  Bed  Head,  cov-
ered  a  vast  extent  of  horizon.  Distance  from  the  mainland
at  Sampaya  is  more  than  three  times  that  from  Yampupata
to  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  and  whereas  there  are  said  to
exist  Inca  ruins  not  far  from  the  village  of  Sampaya  on  the
heights,  I  find  no  evidence  that  there  was  any  settlement  or
landing  in  front  of  Koati,  on  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana.

The  settlements  on  Titicaca  and  on  Koati  made  by  the
Incas  for  the  purpose  of  worship,  are  intimately  connected.
But  they  do  not  stand  alone.  To  them  pertained  also  what-
ever establishments  the  Incas  had  on  the  Peninsula  of
Copacavana.  Unfortunately,  circnmstances  did  not  permit
US  to  investigate  the  ruins  on  that  Peninsula  as  it  shonld  be
done.  We  know,  by  ocular  inspection,  that  ruins  of  Inca
type  exist  at  Cnsijata,  about  a  mile  to  the  east  of  Copaca-
vana." From  sources  which  seem  to  ns  worthy  of  cre-
dence we  ascertained  that  Locca,  on  the  Peruvian  boundary,
three  miles  from  Copacavana,  bears  traces  of  ancient  Inca
occnpation."*  At  Yunguyn  the  abundance  of  handsome
pottery  of  Cuzco  type  corroborates  the  statements  that  on
certain  sites,  now  ocoupied  by  dwellings  and  church  stmc-


;cbyG00'^lc


282 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

tores,  Inca  rums  were  fonnerly  extant.*^  At  Yampnpata
blocks  of  cat  stone,  (andesite),  like  those  near  the  Sacred
'Rock,  were  taken  oat  of  nondescript  rains.  Lastly  the  site
of  Copacavana  itself  was  partly  ocoapied  by  Inca  boild-
inga.'"  From  all  these  places  the  Mnaeom  has  received,
throngh  OS,  antiquities  of  Inca  type.  There  are,  on  the
Feninsala  of  Copacavana,  seats  cat  in  the  rock.  A  large
clnster  of  these  lies  at  the  very  doors  of  the  village.  The
Aymara  Indians  of  to-day  call  them  "Inti-Kala,**  stone  of
the  son.  Among  the  Spanish-speaking  inhabitants,  tiie
term  "Tribonal  of  the  Inca"  is  cnrrent,  and  to  the  eoriooB
lookoat  on  the  rocky  sonunit  west  of  the  place  the  name
"Gallows  of  the  Inca"  is  given."'  In  short,  Uiere  is  no
donbt  that  Copacavana  was  an  ancient  settlement,  with
possibly  more  inhabitants  than  the  two  Islands  together,
and  not  of  as  exclasivety  Cuzco  or  Inca  character.  Tradi-
tion has  it  that  "colonists"  from  varions  Peravian  tribes
had  been  settled  there,'**  and  what  gives  some  color  to  this
assertion  is,  among  others,  the  name  of  Chachapoyas,  ap-
plied to  a  site  on  the  western  shore  of  the  Peninsala.*'
Several  family  names  of  Indians  abont  Copacavana  are
clearly  Qaichoa,  and  may  even  be  called  specifically
"Inca,"  like  "Inca-Mayta,"  "Sinchi-Boca,"  and  "Sacso."
Of  the  latter  there  is  conclnsive  evidence  that  they  are  of
Inca  descrait,  the  original  personal  names,  as  was  very
often  the  case  among  Indians  in  Spanish  America,  having
been  converted  into  family  appellatives.*'  Hence  the
existence  of  an  Inca  settlement  on  that  Peninsala  cannot  be
doubted.  If  snbseqaent  researches  shonld  confirm  tbe
troth  of  tbe  statement,  made  by  Cobo  and  contemporaries,
that  the  very  narrow  neck  of  land,  seiparating  at  Tongoyn
the  northwestern  body  of  the  Lake  from  the  liagane  of
Uina-Marca,  was  traversed  by  a  wall  constructed  by  the
Inca  (and  this  is  not  impossible),*"  that  wall  barred  ac-
cess to  the  Peninsula  from  the  mainland  and  made  of  it
and  of  the  two  lalanda  a  completely  secluded  cluster  in


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


i  a


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OP  KOATI  283

the  midst  of  vast  regions  inhabited  by  IJidians  speaking  the
AjTna,Tk  language.

/Very  little  is  known  as  yet  of  the  archaeology  of  Bolivia
and  sontheastem  Peru.  Bat  of  Inca  settlements,  beyond
that  on  Copacavana  and  the  Islands,  there  are  few  archi-
tectnral  remnants.  Hence  we  may  regard  the  clusters  at
Copacavana,  on  Titicaca,  and  on  Koati  as  possibly  the  last
outposts  of  permanent  Inca  occnpation  in  the  direction  of
the  southeast.  Inca  sway,  overawing  tribes  into  tribute
and  occasional  military  assistance,  may  have  gone  farther ;
and  through  inroads,  barter,  or  exchange,  articles  of  Inca
manufacture  have  penetrated  beyond  the  territory  swayed
over.  It  must  be  remembered  that  independent  Qniehna
tribes  OGcnpied  soathem  Bolivia."^  It  is  also  worthy  of
note  that  between  Copacavana  and  Cacha  near  Sicnani,
where  Inca  structures  appear,  there  are  comparatively
few  traces  of  permanent  occupation  by  the  conquering
Cnzco  tribe.  It  is  asserted  that  the  Islands  of  Apinguila
and  Pampiti,  on  the  Peruvian  side  of  the  Lake,  near  Huan-
cane,  contain  Inca  ruins,  but  these  remains  are,  according
to  Spanish  chroniclers  after  local  traditions,  those  of  places
of  worship  also,  established  by  the  Incas  on  the  two  rather
inaccessible  islands,  in  the  beginning  of  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury." Inca  establishments  on  the  Lake  bore  chiefly  a
religious  character,  and  were  maintained,  on  Titicaca  and
vicinity,  alongside  of  a  worship  of  much  older  date,  which
the  Incas  not  only  suffered  to  exist,  but  actually  adopted,
even  subordinating  their  tribal  worship,  on  certain  occa-
sions, to  a  cult  extant  previous  to  their  coming.  This  is
still  further  exemplified  on  the  Peninsula  of  Copacavana.
The  worship  of  the  Sun-father  and  Moon-mother  is  stated
as  having  been  established  at  that  place,  also;  bat  the
fetishes  "Copacavana,"  "Copacati,"  and  others,  remained
for  the  Aymard  the  principal  idols,"*  just  as  the  Sacred
Rock  was  the  main  shrine  on  Titicaca.

This  concession,  made  by  conquerors  to  the  religious  be-


;cbyG00'^lc


284 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

liefs  of  the  conqnered,  appears,  on  the  part  of  the  former,
as  an  act  of  nimsaal  wisdom.  It  consolidated  the  snpremacy
of  the  Incas  far  more  than  any  military  establishment.  It
is  also  stated  that  the  Incas  were  induced  to  worship,  on
Titicaca,  by  very  ancient  traditions  irtiich  made  that  Island,
and  especially  tiie  rock  of  Titi-Eala,  as  sacred  to  them  as
to  any  Aymara  tribe.  An  investigation  of  this  entails  the
treading  of  very  unsafe  ground,  the  field  of  aboriginal  lore,
of  traditions  and  myths.^


;cbyG00'^lc


NOTES


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI


AND  A  QLAKOK  AT  ANTIQUITIBS  0
PABTV


■The  Tcrtieal  height  of  the  cliff  ia
170  feet  By  Totmding  the  "head,"
a  iMUsa  or  boat  from  Titieaca  lalaod
Teiy  aoon  reaches  a  point  on  the  eut
■hore  where  aecent  to  the  mine  ia
quite  gradual  From  the  west,  ascent
ia  more  abmpt.  The  view,  especially
of  Titieaes,  ia  magniflcenL

*Ttw  spot  on  which  this  Tain
•tands  is,  within  a  few  feet,  the
highest  on  KoatL  The  Ajmaxi  call
it:  "Uila-K4,"  from  "nila"— red.
The  view  ia  even  more  eztenaive  than
that  from  the  "Bed  Head"  and  in
the  dajlime  approach  to  the  Island
can  be  observed  in  every  diieetion.
Uila-E6  ia  alio  one  of  the  "Acha-
ehilas"  of  Eoati.  The  others  are
I&ak-TTyQ,  Inea  Parqoi,  Taj -Save,
Uito  Pampa  (the  beaeh  in  front  of  the
hacienda),  LMnbamanl,  Cheje-Puju,
Vincalla,  Chojn  TTintn,  Cantntini,
Acha  Conde,  Isea  Cnnde,  Tara-E«,
Uiehin  Fata,  Tnnaa  Pata,  Uirta
Eocho,  Uaytir  Pata,  Haeha  Pntunen,
lata  Pampa,  AAofhtei  Pata,  Area
Pnnen,  Calvaiio  Pata.  I  give  these
names  as  they  were  told  m,  without
gnaranteeing  their  exactneaa,  and  be-
eanae  every  one  of  these  "Achaehi-
las"  had  to  be  addressed  during  the
incantations  ("tinka")  that  pre-
ceded OUT  excavations.


'Pent,  p.  386:  "The  principal
monument  of  antiquity  on  the  Island,
and  which  lends  to  it  its  chief  inter-
est, is  the  ediilee  called  the  Palace  of
the  Virgins  of  the  Sun,  but  which
mi^t  probably  better  be  called  the
temple  of  the  Moon,"  BiTem  and
Tschudi(^nti|7de<IadesparHanat,185I,
test,  p.  297)  treat  of  these  mina
without  having  aeen  them,  else  they
eonld  not  have  Stated:  "Sn  arqnitee-
tnra  [that  of  ruins  on  Titicaca]  es
inferior  &  la  de  laa  minaa  del  ediflcio
nuts  deetmido  de  la  isla  de  Coati,  en
la  misnw  lagnna,  sin  que  se  pueda
deecubrii  si  tjx6  nn  palaeio,  6  nn
templo."  What  remains  of  Ifiak-Uyn
is  better  preserved  in  part  than  most
of  the  ruins  on  Titicaca,  the  outer
coating  of  clay  still  being  visible  in

*PiTOH  tt  Bolivie,  p.  441.

*BMoria  de  Copacabana,  p.  66,
et  teq.,  edition  of  1880, 1«  Pas.  EU-
toria  del  ^Netio  Mimdo,  TV,  p.  69.

'Peru,  p.  332.  He  deaeribeg  a
■ingle  one  of  these  narrow  passages,
the  one  with  a  tiny  airhoIcL  It  la  not
' '  vaulted, ' '  bnt  covered  with  flat
etonea  or  slaba.

'  Pern,  pp.  361  and  362.

'Belatione  Per  Bva  Maetta,  toL
413: "in messo d'esso sono due


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


piedole  bolettc^  ndl'Tna  delle  qnkli
t  Tsa  moaehea,  A  eua  d«l  Bole."
Abo,  lot  410.  The  Bpudards  had
alrea^r  kewrd  of  the  "due  Isole"  at
Casta,  btit,  it  appaan,  riiited  oiHj
Titicaea.

*  I  have  qnoted  thia  paoeage  re-
peatedly, bnt'  refer  to  it  again  here,
on  aeeoimt  of  the  word  "Co]rat&."
^le  stTmotogT  of  the  name  Eoati  is
not  nnfreqnently  derived  from
"CoTa"  which  is  said  to  be  "queen."
That  thla  name  was  applied  to  the
wife  of  the  head  war-chief  is  posl-
tivtij  stated  b7  Qardlasw)  (Comen-
tarioM,  I,  foL  85),  together  with  the
notice  that  the  wife  bad  to  be  the
jitter  of  her  boaband;  "eon  sn  her-
tnaua  major,  legltima  de  padre  j
madre,  j  eeta  era  sa  legltima  moger
ll«Twn«iil»  CoTa,  que  ee  tuito  eomo
B^n%  a  ESmpeTBtris. "  (Jnan  de
Betansoi,powe>Ter,  who  Uved  at  Cosm
alreadj  twenty  jean  prerions  to  the
birth  of  OarrilaMO  and  was  married
to  an  Jnea  woman,  poaitivelT  states
(AtMUi  *  Narraeion,  p.  113) :  "4  la
enal  mujer  llaman  elloe  Pi  Hi  Marmi  y
per  otro  nombre  Mamanguomi;  j  la
gante  eomnn,  coma  i  tal  mnjer  princi-
pal del  Sefior,  Haitian  cnando  ansi  la
entran  &  saladai,  Pooaxa  Iwtidkwri
Capao  Coya  Quaeo-Chacuyac  qne  dies
'Hija  del  Sol  6  sola  rejna  amigable
4  loe  pobree.'  "  He  repeats  the  word
"PiliDiliDarmi"  on  page  115,  calling
her  "mojer  priacipaL"  The  deriva-
tion of  "Koati"  I  do  not  venture  to
investigate  as  jet.  It  seems  probable
that  Coja  waa  onlj  an  andaaring  title
and  not  an  official  one.  It  appears
first  in  Cieia:  Segunda  Parte,  Gap.  x,
p.  33,  and  thence  haa  passed  into
many  older  and  modem  books.  Cieza
is,  however,  bj  no  means  as  reliable
an  authority  as  Betanzoa.  He  waa  at
Cnzeo  bnt  a  abort  time,  and  was  not
in  anj  manner  proAdent  in  the  Qni-
chua  language.  The  Indians  of
Sampaya  piononnced  "Ko&ti,"  not
EoatL  The  word  ia  (like  Titlcaca)
Aymaii,  and  not  Quiehoa.


"JniMtoioa  oantnt  D<m  1
Pitarro  &  S.  M.  ^or  Don  Diego  de
AUiumn,  Doe.  de  India*,  XX,  pp.  S31
and  45S.

"lUan  Snares  de  Garvnjal,  C»U
al  Smperador,  November  3, 153B,  Doe,
d«  Inditu,  III,  pp.  200  and  SOL

"  Copaedbana  Ae  \o»  Inoat,  p.  33.
See  Parts  UI  and  IV  of  thia  nKmo-

"  Everything  pointa  to  1S3B  u  the
year  when  the  Peninsula  of  Cop*ea-
vana  was  visited  by  Oonaalo  Pilam
and  hia  ofOcers,  wiUi  an  armed  force.

"There  eziat  certainly,  in  Spanish
archives,  papers  relative  to  the  ^vr-
ince  of  Omasuyoa,  from  the  aeeond
half  of  the  sixteenth  eentmy,  bvt  I
am  unatde  to  eonsntt  thenL  C«^aea-
rana  and  the  Islands  pertained,  as
to-day,  to  that  administratiTa  diafarici.

"Tiscarra:  Copiioabaiui  de  lot
Ineai,  pp.  70  to  73.  He  elaioM  Us
to  be  taken  literally  from  the  /xvea-
tario  No.  1,  signed  by  the  "  Joatieias
mayores"  h«ii««ii«  and  Qalvsa.  One
of  the  "golden  plates"  was  smsjimI
Its  weight  being  nine  onneea  and  one
grain,  it  was  found  to  eontain  four
ounces  eight  grains  in  gtdd,  three
ouDces  six  grains  silver,  and  one  omea
three  grains  copper  (p,  44).

"Copaeabana  de  lo*  Ineai,  p.  54.
Vizcarra  says  the  report  is  signed  by
twelve  persons  snd  that  it  bean  three
eedeeiaBtie  seals.

"  Ibidem,  pp.  30  to  65.

"  Tfrtdent,  p.  51.

"Andres  de  8.  Nicolas,  InUtgen,
etc.,  Prdlogo:  "no  obstante  al  aner
ya  eaerito  desta  Eflgie-  soberana,  los
Padres  Pray  Alon^*  Bainoa  OanDaa;
Haestro  Pray  Fernando  de  Talverde,
Maestro  Fray  Antonio  de  la  Calaiwha,
Padra  HipAlito  Ifanccio,  y  agora
poeo  hk  el  Padre  Fray  Qabrid  ds
Leon:  foera  da  loe  qne  en  sas  obtaa
han  hecho  memoria  de  tan  prodigiMO
Betrato."  Not  only  is  Father  Sales
not  mentioned,  but  there  is  not,  either
in  Samoa,  Calaneha,  or  8.  Nicolas,  any
allusion  to  the  olBdal  aeareh  of  I81S.


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI


"TbeM  chrouiden  might  (t)  not
have  eonridered  the  Tcsnlta  of  the
visit  to  be  of  anfBciODt  importanee
for  B  mention.

"Hittoria  del  Niuvo  Mundo,  IT,
p.  M:  "Im  famft  que  jo  oi  evtuido
en  Mta  pToriDda  el  ^o  de  mil  7
MiadentM  7  dies  7  nete,  ee  que  ht7
gran  riqneca  ea  U  ial>  de  CoatA;  k
la  enal  fneroa  entoOMs  ciertoa  eapa-
liolea  en  nn  bareo  7  no  pndieron  hallar

"The  latter  even  had  parte  of  the
walls  scraped  to  aaeertain  whether  the
plaster  contained  pntveriaed  precious
metaL The  parties  were  not  Boliv-

"  The  reaemUanee  is  not  yvcj
marked,  still  it  recalls  to  a  certain
extent  the  Tiahnanaeo  carvingn  on
both  sides  of  the  central  flgnre  on  the
gatews7.  There  is  the  following
curious  passage  in  Yiicarra:  Copaca-
bana,  p.  171:  "Gran  sorpreea  hemes
reeifaido  al  eneontrar  einoeladoe  en
planchas  de  tnmbaga  loe  monetmos
deaeriptea  por  el  sancto  Job  .  .  .
CuTBS  (ormaa  eacnlpidaa  en  bajo  re-
lieve, (oo  de  las  miiterioaas  btetiaa
Behemoth  7  Leviath&n. "  This  Is
from  Viicarra  himself.

"Bamos:  Copaeabotta,  p.  47:
"Eete  Idolo  Copacabana  estaba  ea  el
mismo  pneblo,  por  el  lado  de  Tlquina
...  41  era  de  una  piedra  acnl  vistoea,
7  no  tenia  mai  que  la  flgnra  de  nna
eara,  <«mo  una  cabeza  de  esflnje,  sin
pite  ni  manoe.  Estaba  como  mirando
a  Titieaea,  como  dios  inferior  que
miraba  al  principal."  This  fetioh  or
idol  seems  to  have  been  A7mar&,  not
Qnichna  or  Incaii.:  The  large  head
found  b7  na  on  Eoati  does  not  fnll7
agree  with  the  deaeriptlon  of  Bamoe.
It  is  of  trachyte  or  andesite,  and  not
'  *  asnl  vistoea. ' '

"7Wd.,  p.  71,  edition  of  1880;
"Tambien  ponian  sobre  las  pefiaa
nnoe  idolitoe  de  eapos  7  de  otros  anl-
males  inmundoe,  creTendo  qua  con  eso
7a  aleanzaban  agua."

"FintU  Btport,  I,  p.  312.


"Sisloria  de  Copoonbana  1890,
p.  9.

"In  the  note  that  follows  I  shall
refer  to  what  Oarcilano  ea7s  abont
the  nse  of  tobacco  in  primitive  times
of  Pern.  Cobo;  Siatoria,  etc.,  I,  p.
403:  "A  la  rais  del  tabaco  silvcstie
llaman  loe  indioe  del  Perii,  Coro,  de
la  cnal  naan  para  muchas  enferme-
dadca.  Contra  la  deteneion  de  orina
dar  &  beber  en  cantidad  da  doa  gar-
banzoa  de  sns  polvoe,  en  un  jarro  da
agua  mii7  ealiente,  en  a7iinaa,  por
tree  6  enatro  dias.  Tomados  estos
polvoB  en  moderada  cantidad  por  las
narices,  qoitan  el  dolor  de  cabesa  7
jaqueca  7  aclaran  la  vista:  7  el  coci-
miento  deata  rail  hecho  con  vino,
eehando  en  fl  un  poco  de  Sal  de
compas  7  at&ear  eandl  .  .  .  Beblda
de  ordinario  el  agoa  desta  nls,  vale
contra  loe  doloree  de  bubas,"  p.
405;  "De  otra  7erba  Uamada  Topa-
aayri  hncen  otioe  polvoe  en  el  PerA
para  estomndar,  que  son  mis  eflcacei
para  esto  que  las  del  Tabaco. ' '

"Oareilaaso,  CDmentorio*,  I,  foL
51:  "De  la  7enui  6  planta  que  los
!BspaSolei  llaman  talMuo,  7  loa  lodioa
Sa7ri,  vsaron  mncho  para  mochas
eoeas;  tomaua  lot  polvoe  por  laa
narieea  para  deseargar  la  eabe^"
Also  foL  212.

"Antonio  Baimondi:  BUmento*  de
Botinioa,  Parte  n,  p.  158.

"  Even  the  shreds  of  silver-leaf
ma7  have  been  offerings.  Pedro  Pi-
larro  {BelacUm,  p.  273)  mentions
gold-leaf,  bat  not  as  an  object  of
sacrifice.  At  Chavin  de  Hnantar.not
far  from  Hn&nnco  in  eastern  Peru  an
altar  made  of  adobe  was  found  b7
"^Mr.  Beer^  a  French  erplorer,  which
altar  waa'covered  with  silver-leaf  torn
to  shreds.  Silver-leaf  is  mentioned  b7
Caloneha  as  an  offering  of  the  coast
Indians,  Coriruca  moralieada,  I,  p.
413:  "I  eada  afio  ofreeisn  oja  de
plata,  chicha  i  espinco. ' '

"It  ma7  be  that  b7  theee  the
coarse  imitations  of  planus  were
meant,  of  wbUt  several  were  after-


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


wards  produced  at  I«  Paz  as  eorning
from  KoatL  These  onuunents  aie
found  in  eopper,  silver  and  gold,  and
wore  worn  on  headdresses  of  the
samemateriaL

"Nor  have  we  heard  of  anj  find
of  that  nature  on  KoatL

"Eittoria  del  Nuevo  Mutdo,  IV,
p.  84.

"From  "  aellani  "—select,  and
"hnasi  "—boose.  Torres  Bmbio:
Arta  y  Voeabiilano,  fols.  125  and
117,  et  teq.

""Enetosnie  of  the  dancea  of  the
Ineaa."  The  phrase  majr  be  of  some
significance.  The  space  looks  like  a
•qnare  where  pnblie  dances  eonld  be
performed.  In  connection  we  might
ask;  Was  not  the  open  platean  be-
tween the  tambo  called  now  "temple
of  the  sun"  at  Kasapata  and  the
mini  at  the  base  of  iJaq'-aflll  per-
bape  pat  to  the  same  use  on  Tlticacat

"  Poaaiblj,  nay,  probably,  owing  to
more  recent  date  of  erection  as  well
as  to  fewer  visits  to  the  Island.

"Bamos:  Eitt.  de  Copaeabcma,
1880,  p.  M:  "Como  los  geutllea  j
poetaa  dieron  majeree  i  sns  dioses,
asi  Tops  Ynga  Yupanqoe  quiso  darle
Coya  al  Sol,  y  eaa  fu«  U  Inna:  4  la
enal  dedicti  un  famoao  templo,  con
ministros  j  doneellas  4  sa  eerrieio,  en
la  peqnefia  isla  de  Coati,  en  Me
miemo  lago,  do*  legoas  al  Oilente  de
Titicaca;  .  .  .  Entre  on  bosqne  de
esoB  frondosoa  irbolea,  en  ona  qne-
bradita  eerca  de  la  playa,  erigi6
Tupanqoe  el  adoratorio  Inuar,  en
enya  ara  puso  nn  bnlto  de  oro,  4  la
traza  de  ima  Coye,  qne  representaba
k  la  eaposa  del  SoL"  Frmy  Andrte
de  8.  Nieolaa:  Imdgen,  toh  27:
"Para  complemento  de  las  falsedades
del  famoso  adoratorio  decret6  el
Tupac,  qne  en  otra  isia,  apartada  vna
legna  de  la  primera,  se  fabricaase
templo,  consagrado  6  1&  Lona,  con  el
nombre  de  Coata."  /Qotierrea  de
Banta  Clara:  |ff iff oriitSle  lot  gverroM
eiutle*  da  Pern,  HI,  Cap.  im,  p.  486:
"j  PO'  iuesoTes  tenian  al  Sol  y  a  la


Lona  (dieiendo)  que  e
mnger  y  qne  eetos  eran
MS  de  todA  la  tierra."

"  Inea  chronology  is  far  from
tmstworthy  prerions  to  the  time  of
the  chief  Tnpae  Ynpanqni,  but  from
his  time  on  a  reasonable  approzinia-
tion  to  datM  becomes  poBsible.

"Cobo  (HittoHo,  et^  IV,  p.  fl£)
makes  no  mention  of  any  shrine
dedicated  to  the  moon  on  Titicaca,
nor  doee  he  mention  the  Pileo-Eayma
at  aU. Neither  does  Bamoo.

"DMcripoion  y  Btlaoum  de  la  Cia-
dad  de  La  Foe,  p.  71.

"Calaneha:  Cordttica,  I,  p.  807:
"En  los  qne  gsstavan  mas  saeri£eiM,
i  eetremsyan  el  eulto  era  en  d  eerro
Tllim»iit  Collcachata,  i  en  el  mas
frontero  del  Pueblo  Cacaaca,"  etc

"CHeaa:  Segmtda  Parte,  Cap.
xxvm;  "Machos  fneron  loa  tamploe
qne  hobo  en  eete  leino  del  Perfi,  y
algnnos  se  tienen  por  mny  antigaos,
pon]De  fnemn  fnndados  Antes,  eon.
mndios  tiempos,  que  los  Incaa  reins-
sen,  asi  en  la  semxia  de  loe  altos,
como  en  la  serrania  de  lo«  llanos;  j
reinando  los  Ineas^  se  edifleaion  ^
nneyo  otros  moebos  en  donde  so
haeian  me  fieetaa  6  saerifieios."

"This  is  already  hinted  at  in  X»-
lottone  per  Bva  Maeita,  foL  413:  "A
in  esaa  vanno  a  fare  le  loro  offeite  *
aacriflcij  in  vna  gran  pietra  tite  6
nell'Isola  ehe  la  ehiamano  Tbicbi-
casa,  done  6  perehe  il  Siavolo  tI  si
nascond^  Jb  gH  parla,  &  per  eoetnme
antieo,  como  gli^  6  ftx  altro  die  non
a'6  mai  eharito,  la  tengono  tntti
qnelli  dells  pronineia  in  grande  stima,
&  gli  efFecieeono  oro  A  argento,  ts
altre  cose."  Cieca:  Primera  PvrU,
Cap.  cm,  p.  US:  "La  gran  Isgnna
del  CoUao  tiene  por  nombre  Titicaca,
por  el  templo  qne  eatnvo  edifeado  en
la  misma  lagnna;  de  donde  los  nata-
nles  tnvieron  por  opinion  nna  vaaidad
may  giaade,  y  es,  qne  enentan  eetos
indios  qne  sns  antiguoa  lo  aSrnuron
por  cierto,  como  hideron  otraa  bnrle-
rfaa qne dieen, qne eareciwon i»


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  RUINS  ON  THE  ISLAND  OF  KOATI


Inmbre  mnchos  dias,  j  que  eatsndo
todoa  puMtoa  en  tinieblu  7  obaenri-
dad,  Bali6  dvta  ial&  de  Titiuea  el  aol
mnj  TeBpIftndecieiite,  pot  lo  coal  U
tnTieron  por  eoaa  aagrada."  In  re-
gard to  Pachaeamae,  the  (act  ia  too
well  eatabliahed  to  lequire  additional
tettimoaj.

"Cieia:  Frimdra  Parte  (p.  US):
"j  loa  ingBB  hieieron  en  ella  el
templo  que  diga,  que  t\i6  entre  elloa
111117  eatimado  7  Tenerado,  i  boms  de
nt  aoL ' ' See  note  13.

'See  note  38.

"IV,  p.  59.

-Hitt.  d«  CopaoaJMtna,  1S80,  p.  31.

"Bamofl:  Copaoabana,  1800,  p.  48.

"SeUxUone  Per  Bva  Maetta,  foL
413.  The  Btoij  told  bj  Anello  OUva
(Eiftoria  del  Perv,  etc.,  p.  33}  mttf
be  of  Indian  origin,  bvt  it  ia  haidl^
primitive.

'Hittoria,  etc^  IV,  p.  63:  "Loa
■aeerdotca  j  minktroa  deate  adorato-
rio  J  del  de  Coati  tenian  asvj  grande
eomonieacion,  j  habiA  ronehaa  j  mjxj
frementea  misioiies  de  la  una  lata  &
la  otra  con  grandes  retomos,  flngiendo
Itm  ministroa  del  an  lantaario  j  del
otro  que  la  mnjer  del  Sol,  aal  como  lo
pudiera  4  aa  parecer  hacei  la  Luna,  le
enviaba  ina  reeandoe;  log  cnalea  el
Sol  le  retomaba  eon  caricisa  de  tiema
aflcion  7  reciproco  amor;  j  en  eeto
gastaban  mucho  tiempo,  ocvpando  en
to  miniaterio  gran  eanlidad  de  balsaa,
que  iban  j  tomaban  de  niia  iila  i
otrn;  J  para  repnaentar  eeto  al  -riTo,
•e  eomponla  en  el  nn  adoratorio  el
ministio  major,  que  repreaentaba  la
persona  del  Sol,  7  en  el  otro  nna
India,  que  hacia  el  peraonaje  de  la
Lima.  Brind&banse  el  uno  al  otro,  j
la  que  repreeentaba  6  la  Lnna  acari-
eiaba  al  que  flgnraba  al  Sol,  pidi£n-
dole  con  caricias  M  les  mottraaae  eada
dia  daro  j  apaeible  7  que  nnnca
oenltaae  ana  rayoa,  para  que  fertill-
zasen  loe  tembradoa  haata  el  tiempo
en  qne  fneaen  neceearlaa  las  Uoriaa.
Demia  duto,  lo  pedia  qne  conieirase


en  Tida,  aalnd  7  lepoao  al  Inea  7  &
log  demia  qne  con  tanta  f  e  7  devoelon
M  oenpaban  en  an  aervido  7  colto;  7
el  que  en  nombre  del  Sol  ae  flngla,
reapondla  eon  n^^aladaa  palabraa,
■nfleientea  k  utiafacer;  7  en  eate
deavanio  7  loenra  gaataban  loa  mise-
rables  el  tiempo  de  an  eiega  7  ocioaa
Tida,  7  todo  paiaba  en  tMber,  qne
era  an  major  felicidad."

"  This  i^  of  eonrae,  a  mere  ing-
geation.

**!  base  thia  estimate  on  the  prea-
ent  eoudition  of  the  mina  and  on  the
ntnation  of  Illak-Ujn.  It  ia  not
]ikel7  that  there  were  an7  buildings
except  thoee  now  seen.

■This  ia  eepeeiallj  indicated  b7
some  walla  included  in  thoae  of  the
present  hacienda  and  t^  a  tank  made
of  one  block  of  stone,  cirenlar  in
form,  and  in  eziatenee  at  Cusijata.
This  tank  ia  a  work  of  great  patience,
but  not  TegnlnTl7  shaped.  Bee  de-
scription in  Sqnier:  Pem,  p.  325,  with
illnstTBtion.  The  dimensiona  given
b7  Ur.  Bqnier  fairlj  agree  with  onr


"This  ia  also  atated  by  Bamos:
Copaoabana,  1860,  p.  27:  "Antes  de
llegar  a  Copaeabana  poso  el  Inea  en
el  Ingar  de  Loc«a  nnoa  gnneroa,  qne
llomaban  Golcaa,  donde  ae  almaeena-
ban  vlverea  para  el  anstento  de  loa
peregrinos,  de  los  ministroa  7  del
ejereito."  The  Coleaa  or  Colleaa
were  niaetl7  cirenlar.

■  Cobo:  Siwtoria,  etc,  IV,  p.  58.

■  Bamos;  Eiitoria,  etc.,  edition  of
1800,  pp.  47  and  52.

"Bamos:  Biitoria,  1860,  p.  31.  I
am  in  doubt  aa  to  whether  the  great
slab  Ijing  across  the  gap  in  the  reeka
of  Seroeani  baa  been  placed  there  bj
hand  of  man  or  whether  it  is  natnraL

"Bamos:  Copatsabana,  pp.  0  and
10,  et  teq.  Cobo:  Siitoria,  etc,  IV,
p.  58.

*■  Bamoe,  p.  9.

"Jnst  as,  in  Peru,  the  namea  Bva-
moK, Condorcanqni, Tapa7adu, etc.

■It is mentioned bj Cobo: Sit-


;cbyG00'^lc


290


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


toria,  IT,  p.  B8:  "y  Mgon  los  indioa
cneutan,  tnvo  el  InoA  Tdnntad  d«
abrir  U  tiwra  j  qn«  el  agos  de  una
put*  7  otia  oeicaM  6  ceiraM  aate
promoDtorio,  j  qne  hioiMe  el  afeeto
que  1a  cerca."  Of  the  wall  there  are
wrersl  nentioiw,  bj  Cobo  aa  well  ••


"  The  allmdona  to  ' '  Inca  coii-
qneata"  are  not  rery  reliable.

"Our  information  about  theae
mina  is  from  heanajr.  The  atate-
Beots abont the viait of Hnajna


Capae  to  the  lalanda  are  In  S
(1860,  Cap.  xzm,  pp.  42  to  44).
laneha  and  8.  Nicolaa  copied
The  Jeanit  writeia  make  no
of  it.  Neither  is  there  anj
to  bnildingi^  in  the  woiki  of
Angostiiiea.  The  whijle  matter
rather  vague  and  doubtful.

"Bamoa:  Copaedbana,  1860,  p-  4
"Tambien  era  d«  piedra  de  nna
gnra  nTHafiw^  todo  enaartiiadA
onlebraa  .  .  .  Lo  Imploraban  parm
ilunaa  en  tiempo  aeeo."


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


2

3

5

4

;;-,!_■
6

7

J J.  -*-

„

e

DamziowGoOi^lc


Flatb  LXXIV

Arcbiteetonl  details  of  rains  of  the  ISak-U;u

1,  2,  3.  Stone  steps. 4,  3.  Oruktueiited  niche  and  section. 6,  7.  Ceiling  and

niohe. 8,9,  10,  11.  Details  of  walls


;cbyG00'^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TBADITI0N8
CONCEENING  THE  ISLAND  OP  TITICACA


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


3  I


DamziowGoOi^lc


/::;^


.wGooi^lc


Past  VI


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS
CONCERNING  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA


(  r  I'ltLbJ  moat  anthentio  sonrces  for  aboriginal  Indian  tradi-
JL  tions  are  aonga,  oratdona,  and  tales,  known  to  the  mem-
here  of  religions  or  other  aooietieB  of  which  every  tribe  has
at  least  mdiments.  Such  societies  sometimeB  preaerre
records  from  very  remote  times,  through  oral  transmission.
The  anbstance  changes  bnt  little  in  the  oonrse  of  centuries,
but  form  may  suffer  modifications  which  chstort  the  origi-
nal picture  or  even  ahroud  it  almost  completely.

On  the  Island  of  Titicaoa  the  changes  which  its  Indian
population  has  nodergone,  and  the  promiacuouB  origin  of
the  present  inhabitants,  made  it  very  doubtful  if  any  origi-
nal folklore  was  still  to  be  found.  Esoteric  clusters  exist,
bat  they  are  not  orig^ally  from  Titicaca.  Their  present
members  may  have  been  bom  there,  but  the  lore  with  which
they  are  acquainted  is  not  indigenous  to  the  Island ;  at  least
in  all  likelihood.  Its  original  occupants,  Inca  as  well  as
AymarA,  forsook  Titicaca  soon  after  the  Spanish  conquest,
and  the  Island  was  repeopled  only  after  several  decades^

Therefore,  at  the  very  beginning  of  our  residence  on  Titi-
caca Island  we  were  assured  that  there  was  no  trace  of
ancient  folklore  in  the  recollections  of  its  inhabitants.  Not-
withstanding these  assertions,  we  obtained  several  tales
whidi,  while  liable  to  objections,  still  refer  to  pre-Spaniah
times  and  conditions.  In  so  far  as  their  main  secrets  of
magic  and  their  most  important  dances  are  concerned,  the


;cbyG00'^lc


294 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

^dians  of  Titicaca  confessed  they  were  derived  from  two
points  on  the  shores  of  the  Lake— Sampaya  and  Hnaicho.
It  is,  therefore,  possible  that  the  folktales  which  we  gath-
ered on  the  Island  have  come  from  one  or  both  of  these
points.  It  is  also  possible  that  what  the  Indian  of  to-day
gjves  as  primitive  traditions  were  related  to  his  ancestors
by  Spaniards  and  especially  by  priests,  and  from  data  pre-
served by  writers  of  the  sixteenth  centnries.  I  shall  record
the  few  tales  gathered  by  ns,  adverting  that  it  was  only
little  by  little  and  with  relnctance  that  the  Indians  became
somewhat  conminnicative  on  these  topics.  Their  reticence
might  lead  to  suppose  that  what  they  told  contains  some
authentic  and  primitive  elements.

TThe  belief  that,  in  times  far  beyond  distinct  recollection
of  man,  the  snn  first  rose  from  tJie  Sacred  Bock,  or  Titi-
Eala,  was  mentioned  to  ns  by  several  Indians  on  the  Island,
one  of  whom,  an  aged  blind  man,  also  stated  that  the  moon
was  created  there.  The  large  nodules  of  limonite,  which  are
said  to  be  tracks  of  the  sun  and  moon,  bear  some  rela-
tion to  this  belief.  One  of  onr  informants,  an  old  wiiard,
told  ns  that  "the  snn  rose  into  the  heavens  from  the  Saisred
Bock,  in  the  shape  of  a  big  flame."  Bat  he  also  added  that
"the  snn  was  the  child  of  a  woman"  whom  he  called
"Mama-OjIIia,  who  was  the  mother  of  Manco  Capac."
Abont  the  origin  of  the  moon  he  professed  to  be  ignorant

''In  very  ancient  times,"  said  he,  "the  Island  was  in-
habited by  gentlemen  (caballeros)  similar  to  the  vira-
cochas"  (name  given  to  whites  by  the  Indians  to-day).
Whence  these  "gentlemen"  came  he  knew  not  "They  had
interconrse  with  the  women  of  the  people,  and  the  children
were  deposited  in  caves,  where  they  were  kept  alive  by
water  dripping  from  the  rock  of  the  ceiling.  After  a  certain
time  the  mothers  went  to  look  after  their  offspring  and
found  them  alive  and  well.  These  children,  who  bad  thos
been  exposed,  became  the  Inga-Re  (Incas),  and  they  drove
out  the  gentiemen  and  held  the  Island  thereafter."  "Whither


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  295

the  expelled  "viracochas"  retreated,  the  tale  sayeth  not.^
The  narrator  mentioned  the  names  of  two  women  who  ao-
qnired  some  note  on  the  Island^  one  of  whom  he  called
"Maria  Ka,"  the  other  "Mama  Chocnayllo. "  About  the
Inca  he  remembered  the  names  of  Manco  Capac,  Viraoocba,
Huayna  Capac,  Boca,  Hnascar,  and  Atahnallpa,  saying  of
Hnascar  that  the  Spaniards  killed  him  near  the  Island.'

In  a  subsequent  conversation  the  wizard  stated  that
Atanhnallpa  lived  on  the  Island  and  Hnascar  at  Cnzco,  and
that  after  the  time  of  the  "Inga-Be"  the  Lake  once  dried  np
BO  completely  that  people  from  Hnaicho  came  over  on  foot
and  killed  the  "Challpa"  then  living  on  Titicaca.  From
one  or  the  other  Indian  we  obtained  at  least  partial  con-
firmation of  this.  AU  seemed  to  agree  that  the  son  had
made  its  first  appearance  on  the  Sacred  Bock,  and  that  the
* '  Inga-He ' '  originated  on  the  Island.

While  we  were  at  the  pneblo  of  Tiqoina,  the  parish  priest,
r  Father  Nicanor  VizcarraArelated  to  ns  the  following  tale
which  had  been  told  him  by  an  liidian  from  Copacavaiia :

"The  Peninsula  of  Copacavana  was  inhabited  prior  to
the  time  of  ihe  Inca  by  a  tribe  of  rade  Indians  who  owned
flocks  of  llamas.  Every  evening  the  herders  returned  the
flocks  to  the  care  of  the  chief  of  the  tribe,  and  among  their
nmnber  was  a  dumb  girl.  For  Several  months  this  girl
failed  to  pnt  in  an  appearance.  The  fact  of  the  matter  was
that  she  had  given  birth  to  a  male  child  in  some  cave  on  the
Peninsnla,  and  that  a  finale  deer  was  narsing  it  The
fatherless  boy  grew  np  in  that  cave/ his  mother  visiting  him
daily  toward  evening.  This  went  on  for  a  number  of  years,
until  at  last  somebody  followed  her  stealthily.  He  saw  her
approach  the  cave.  A  boy  mshed  ont  of  it  to  embrace  her
and  she  retnmed  his  caresses.  When  this  boy  reached  the
age  of  manhood  he  begged  his  mother  to  give  him  a  clnb
and  to  make  him  three  slings.  With  the  aid  of  these
weapons  he  soon  became  powerful,  and  this  was  the  origin
of  the  Licas."*


;cbyG00'^lc


296 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI

Thia  tale  has  a  slight  resemblance  to  the  Montezama
story  as  told  in  New  Mexico.*  Bnt  the  bringing  np  of  the
child  in  a  cave,  and  with  the  assistance  of  a  female  deer,
also  irecalls  the  legend  of  Saint  C^enoveva  and,  in  a  way,
that  of  Bomnlns  and  Bemns  I  Legends  of  the  saints,  also
bits  of  classical  history,  were  f  reqnently  told  the  Indians  by
priests  of  the  Catholic  Chnrch."  The  tales  from  Titicaca
and  Tiquina  agree,  as  we  shall  see  further  on,  with  Titicaca
lore  as  represented  by  the  majority  of  older  sources  in
more  than  one  respect,  only  the  story  of  the  hind  is  found
nowhere  else.  Hence  we  may  be  permitted  to  ask,  is  it  per-
haps a  post-conquistorial  aggregate  to  primitive  tales  t

Turning  now  to  the  earliest  mentioiu  of  Titicaca  lore  by
Spanish  writers,  I  must  premise  that  the  first  report  on  the
Island,  the  one  so  often  quoted  by  me  (of  July  15,  1534),
makes  no  mention  of  ancient  lore.*  (^Cbnzalo  Fernandez
de  Oviedo  y  Vald^s^ho  for  many  years  oarefoUy  collected
the  data,  written  and  oral,  which  his  contemporaries
brought  back  from  the  New  World,  and  especially  from  such
sections  of  it  as  were  not  known  to  him  by  personal  inspec-
tion, makes  no  mention  of  Titicaca  lore,  limiting  himself  to
a  brief  statement  of  a  Cuzco  tradition,  according  to  which
the  Incas  had  come  to  Onzco  from  the  outside  and  were  not
oripnally  from  that  valley.'

Pedro  Pizarro  was  an  eye-witness  of  the  conquest  and
took  an  active  part  in  it.  His  report  on  Peru  was  finished
in  1571,  but  is  the  result  of  observation  and  experiences  in
that  conntry  since  1532.  I  therefore  place  him  here,  as  one
of  those  who  held  earliest  communication  with  the  natives
and  saw  Peruvian  society  while  it  was  yet  in  its  prinutive
condition.  He  briefly  remarks :  "These  Indians  say  that  an
Inga  was  the  first  lord.  Some  say  he  came  from  the  island
of  Titicaca,  which  is  an  island  in  a  lagoon  of  the  Collao.
.  .  .  Other  liidians  claim  that  this  first  chief  came  forth  at
Tambo.  This  Tambo  is  in  Condesuios,  six  leagues,  more  or
less,  from  Cuzco."')


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


Plate  LXiVII

Objects  of  stone  from  Inland  of  Koati,  resembling  tobacco-pipes,
and  excavated  at  laaic-Uyu


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  297

Ii  1542  the  Licentiate  Cristdval  Vaca  de  Castro,  then  de
facto  Governor  of  Pern,  institated  the  first  official  inquiry
into  ancient  lore  of  the  Cnzco  liidians,  the  proceedings  of
which  are  given  in  a  document  entitled:  Discurso  sobre  la
Descendencia  y  Qobierno  de  los  Ingas,  uid  published  by  the
lataDon  Marcos  Jimenez  de  la  Espada.  jThat  investigation,
earned  on  with  a  great  deal  of  care  and  mnch  sound  dis-
crimination^ contains  no  aUnsion  to  lore  abont  Titicaca,
bnt  places  the  origin  of  the  Inca  at  Pacaritambo  (Tambo)
near  Cnzco.*  Aside  from  the  valne  this  document  has  for
specific  "Inca"  history,  it  is  important  for  mentioning  the
name  of  an  author  who  is  of  jgreat  importance  in  connection
with  Peruvian  Indian  lore-Unan  de  Betanzos)  He  was  one
of  the  two  Spaniards  who  controlled  the  examination  of
the  Indian  witnesses,  being  in  1542  already  "one  of  the
persons  who  knew  very  well  the  general  language  of  this
kingdom,  and  who  wrote  down  what  was  declared  by  means
of  the  Qmpos."'"

Betanzos  is  generally  looked  npon  as  one  of  the  earlier
companions  of  Pizarro.'^  He  spent  the  rest  of  his  life  at
Cozco,  having  married  an  Indian  girl  from  the  Inca  tribe.
He  wrote  a  Docirina  chripsHana  accompanied  by  two  vo-
cabularies, previous  to  1550,  and  which  are  still  unpublished
at  the  National  Ardtives  at  Lima.  While  at  work  on  the
Docirina,  etc.,^'  he  also  composed  a  history  of  the  Inca
entitled :  8uma  y  Narracion  de  los  Incas,  finishing  it  about
1551."  The  manuscript  was  intact  in  the  early  part  of  the
seventeenth  century,^*  bnt  was  lost  sight  of  afterward
until,  in  1875,  the  indefatigable  and  judicious  student  of
Spanish-American  history.U'imenez  de  la  EspadajVound  the
first  eighteen  chapters  of  it  at  the  Library  of  the  Escu-
riaL"  Of  the  rest  of  the  book  no  trace  has  as  yet  ap-
peared. Fortunately  the  fragment  published  contains  what
is  of  greatest  importance  here :  the  early  traditions  of  the
Indians  of  Cuzco  and  especially  of  the  Collas  or  AymarS,
gathered  by  Betanzos  within  ten,  or  at  most  fifteen,  years


;cbyG00'^lc


298 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

after  1532.  At  snch  an  early  date  Indian  folk-tales  and
myths  conld  not  have  been  mnch  contaminated  throngh  con-
tact with  the  whites  and,  while  there  are,  in  some  of  the
traditions  recorded  by  Betanzos,  inklings  of  extra- American
influence,  the  snbstanee  appears  to  be  authentic  and  primi-
tive. The  connection  of  Betanzos  with  the  Inca  throng
marriage,  winle  of  great  advantage  in  many  respects,  ex-
posed him  to  a  serions  danger;  the  same  that  lessened  the
valne  of  works  written  half  a  centary  later  by  Indian  writers
in  Mexico  and,  in  a  still  higher  degree,  the  value  of  the  book
of  G^rcil^sso  de  la  Vc^.  His  informants,  being  Inca,  told
only  their  aide  of  the  ^tory,  with  a  tendency  to  extol  to
the  conquerors  (whose  favor  they  were  beginning  to  court)
the  importance  of  their  tribe  and  of  its  culture.  E<v«n
traditions  and  myths,  when  told  by  people  thus  inclined,
lose  some  of  their  purity.  But  Betanzos  has  also  preserved
to  us  traditions  that  originated  away  from  Inca  influence.
He  tells  OS :

"In  ancient  time,  they  say,  the  country  and  province  of
Pern  was  in  darkness,  having  neither  light  nor  day.  There
were,  at  that  time,  certain  people  in  it,  which  people  had  a
certain  ciaet  who  commanded  them  and  to  whom  they  were
subjected.  Of  the  name  of  the  people  and  of  the  chief  who
commanded  them  they  have  no  recollection.  And  in  those
times,  when  all  was  night  in  this  land,  they  say  that  from  a
lagune  in  this  country  of  Pern,  in  the  province  of  GoUasnyo,
tiiere  came  a  chief  called  Con  Tici  Viracoeha  who,  th^  say,
had  with  him  a  certain  number  of  people,  whidi  number
they  do  not  recollect  And  after  he  had  sallied  from  tfaie
lagnne,  he  went  from  there  to  a  site  that  is  close  to  this
lagnne,  where  to-day  is  a  village  called  Tiagoanaco,  in  the
aforesaid  province  of  the  Collao.  And  as  he  went  thither,
he  and  his  own,  forthwith  there  improvisedty,  they  say,  that
he  made  the  sun  and  day,  and  ordered  the  son  to  move  in
the  course  it  now  moves  and  afterward,  they  say,  he  made
the  stars  and  the  moon. Of  this  Con  Tid  \^raco(dia  they


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


PUTB  LXS'\Tn
Objects  in  gold  from  the  Islaode  of  Titicaca  and  Koati
1,  3.  Bdngles  at  gold-leaf  from  the  Tioini^  of  the  SKoreil  Bock. 3,  4.  Golden  pins  &
the  level  in  front  of  the  Sacred  Bock. S,  6.  Llamaa  of  gold  from  above  sile.
T.  Human  figure,  of  gold  (offering)  from  same  place. S.  Aniraftl  fig-
ure of  solid  gold-leaf  from  the  lalHid  of  EoaU  (sea  Uai).


;cbyG00'^lc


f


T


frn


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ABOBIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  299

a&j  he  had  appeared  once  before,  on  which  occasion  he
made  the  sky  and  the  earth,  leaving  everything  in  obscnrity,
and  then  he  made  the  people  who  lived  in  darkness  as  afore-
told,  which  people  did  some  sort  of  wrong  to  this  Viracocha,
and  being  angered  by  it,  he  turned  to  come  ont  again  this
last  time  and  came  forth  as  on  the  first  occasion,  and  those
first  people  and  their  chief  he  converted  into  stones,  in  pun-
ishment for  the  anger  they  had  caused  him."*'

The  substance  of  the  above  is  that  there  was,  at  the  time
of  first  contact  between  the  Spaniards  and  the  liidians  of
southern  Peru  and  adjacent  parts  of  Bolivia,  a  tradition  to
the  e£Fect  that  there  had  been  two  snccessive  "creations,"
and  both  by  the  same  being,  represented  as  a  man  endowed
with  supernatural  faculties.  After  the  first  creation,  that
personage  came  out  of  Lake  Titicaca  and  went  to  Tiahua-
naco,  where  he  dispelled  the  darkness  (in  which  he  had  left
the  world  after  his  first  creative  effort)  by  making  the  snn,
moon,  and  stars,  and  regulating  their  coarse  in  the  heavens.
Thus  far  the  tales  connected  with  Titicaca  Island."  It  is
well  to  note,  that  the  manuscript  of  Betanzos  has  "Titi
Viracocha,"  not  "Ttci"  as  Espada  changed  it,  in  order  to
conform  with  later  spellings.  It  would  have  been  preferable
to  retain  the  spelling  of  the  original.

Contemporary  with  Betanzos,  although  not  participants
in  the  conquest,  were  two^  writers,  whose  role  in  South
America  was  very  similar -tPedro  de  Cieza  (of  Leon))'  and
Pedro  Gutierrez  de  Santa  Clara.  Both  were  soldiers  and
made  the  campaigns  of  the  civil  wars  among  the  Spaniards.
Gutierrez  arrived  in  Peru  at  least  three  years  earlier  than
Cieza  and  remained  in  the  country  (probably)  longer  than
uie  latter.  But  be  finished  his  voluminous  work  only  after
1603,"  whereas  Cieza  completed  the  First  Part  of  his
Chronicle  in  1550,  and  the  remainder  between  that  year  and
1560.^  Hence  he  deserves  precedence,  in  that  he  wrote
under  more  recent,  hence  more  vivid,  impressions.  But
Cieza  is  by  no  means  an  infallible  guide. He  was  certainly


;cbyG00'^lc


300 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

a  close  observer  and  a  painstakiiig  recorder,  bnt,  as  is  the
case  with  many,  he  lacked  time  and  knowledge  of  the  Indian
languages.  He  freely  acknowledges  the  latter.*'  Hence
his  information  on  Indian  traditions,  compared  with  that
of  Betanzos,  is  in  reality  "second-hand."  Bnt  it  agrees
qnite  well  with  that  famished  by  the  latter,  thus  corroborate
ing  in  a  measure  its  authenticity.  It  is  also  possible  that  he
obtained  his  information  throngh  Betanzos,  or  at  least  from
Indian  sonrces  the  latter  consulted,  althon^  he  mentions
what  may  appear  to  be  independent  authority.  In  the  First
Part  of  his  Ofaronicle  he  relates  a  myth  to  the  effect  tiiat,
after  many  years  of  darkness,  the  son  rose  from  the  Island
of  Titicaca  in  great  splendor ;  thenceforth  that  Island  was
regarded  as  sacred,  and  the  laca  reared  on  it  a  temple
dedicated  to  "their"  sun.  In  another  place  he  says  that  one
of  the  principal  chiefs  of  the  Collao  went  to  the  "lagnne  of
Titicaca,  and  met  on  its  principal  Island  white  men  with
beards  with  whom  he  fought  in  such  a  manner  as  to  succeed
in  killing  them  all.""  Should  t^s  event  prove  tme,  then
Cieza  furnishes  an  approximate  date  for  its  oocnrrenoe  I^
placing  it  dnring  the  term  of  office  of  the  chief  Viracocha,
hence  in  the  fourteenth  century."  lii  the  Second  Part  he  is
more  definite  and  allades  to  the  source  whraice  he  got  his
information:  "They  also  tell  what  I  have  written  in  the  First
Part:  that  on  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  in  the  past  centuries,
were  white  people,  with  beards,  and  that,  coming  forth  from
the  valley  of  Coquimbo  a  captain  by  the  name  of  Cari,  he
reached  where  now  is  Chueuito  from  where,  after  having
made  some  new  settlements,  he  passed  over  to  the  Island
with  his  people,  and  made  snch  war  upon  that  people  of
which  I  speak,  that  he  killed  them  all.  Chirihuana,  gov-
ernor of  those  pueblos  (which  pertain  to  the  Emperor)  told
me  what  I  have  writt^i.  .  .  .""  The  name  "Chirihuana"
recalls  one  of  the  older  societies  of  dancers  still  extant
among  the  Aymar^  and  if  the  traditions  should  be
proven  as  coming  from  snch  a  source,  seventeen  years  after


;cbyG00'^lc


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  301

the  arrival  of  Pizarro  and  sixteen  after  his  ocoapation  of
Cnzco,  they  might  be  primitive  lore  of  considerable  aafiien-
tidty  and  purity.

The  first  and  second  chapter,  also  the  greatest  portion
of  the  third,  of  Cieza's  Second  Part  of  the  "Chronicle  of
Pern, ' '  are  nnf ortnnately  missing.  Li  Chapter  IV  he  states :
"Many  times  have  I  asked  the  inhaHtants  of  these  prov-
inces what  they  knew  about  what  there  was  in  them  before
the  Incas  ruled  over  them  .  .  .'*"  Cieza  had  a  compara-
tively short  time  for  his  investigations,  and  was  dependent
upon  interpreters,  still  what  he  ascertained  in  this  manner
concemiiig  Titicaca  lore  corresponds  in  the  main  with  what
is  stated  by  Betanzos.  He  says : ' '  Before  the  Incas  ruled  in
these  kingdoms  and  were  known  in  them,  the  Ijidians  tell
another  mnch  more  important  thing  than  all  the  rest,  for
they  affirm  that  for  a  long  time  they  were  without  seeing  the
snn,  and  that  suffering  a  great  deal  on  that  account,  they
prayed  and  made  vows  to  those  on  whom  they  looked  as
their  gods,  begging  them  for  the  li^t  of  which  they  were
deprived.  And  while  this  was  going  on  the  sun  rose  in
great  splendor  from  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  which  is  within
this  great  lagnne  of  the  CoIIao,  so  that  all  were  delighted.
And  after  this  had  happened,  they  say  that  from  the  part
of  midday  there  appeared  and  came  a  white  man  of  large
size  who  showed  great  authority  and  inspired  vaieration
by  his  person  and  presence ;  and  that  this  man,  of  whom  they
say  he  had  so  much  power  that  of  heights  he  made  levels
and  of  plains  great  heights,  creating  springs  in  live  rock.
And  as  they  recognized  in  him  such  power,  they  called  him
Maker  of  all  Created  Things,  Beginning  Thereof,  Father
of  the  Sun,  for  they  say  that  besides  these  he  performed
other  and  greater  deeds,  because  he  gave  to  men  and  ani-
mals their  existence  and  that  finally  they  derived  from  Um
great  benefits.'"*

This  Being  the  Indians,  according  to  Cieza,  call  Ticivira-
cocha,  also  Tupaca  and  Ariiauan  or  Aranauan.'^  It  is  easy


;cbyG00'^lc


302 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI

to  recognize  in  him  the  "Con  Tici  Viracocha"  of  Betanzos.
Only  the  latter  makes  him  come  from  Titicaca  Island,
whereas  Cieza  states  he  came  from  the  Sonth.  There  mi^^t
be,  in  the  tales  gathered  by  Cieza,  a  confasion  with  the  first
appearance  of  the  "Viracocha"  mentioned  by  Betanzos,
and  of  which  Cieza  does  not  seem  to  have  been  informed.

Pedro  Qntierrez  de  Santa  Clara,  as  stated,  is  not  as
original  a  source  as  Cieza.  The  information  he  conveys  is
at  variance  with  that  of  the  preceding  authors,  bnt  it  recalls
the  r^nark  of  Pedro  Pizarro:  "These  Indians  say  that  an
Inga  was  their  first  lord.  Some  say  he  came  from  the
Island  of  Titicaca.""

Qntierrez  attributes  Creation  to  two  distinct  beings,  Ihe
first  of  which  was  called  "Cons,"  the  other  "Pachacauna,"
the  second  destroying  what  the  first  had  done  to  remake  it
after  his  own  pleasure.  After  these  two  deities : ' '  The  first
Indian  lord  who  began  to  enter  foreign  lands  was  called
Mango  Ynga  Zapalla  and  this  Indian  initiated  the  wars.
He  went  forth  with  armed  people  from  a  large  island  called
Titicaca,  which  is  inmidst  of  a  lagone  that  is  very  large  and
quite  deep,  in  the  great  province  of  Atitn  CoUao.  This
Mango  Ynga  Zapalla  succeeded  in  becoming  a  very  re-
nowned and  preferred  lord,  more  than  all  the  small  ciiiefs,
curacas,  that  were  around  of  that  lagune;  on  account  of
which  he,  by  advice  of  the  fiend  and  of  the  sorcerers,  sooji^t
to  occupy  their  lands  in  a  thousand  ways,  modes  and  man-
ners he  conld,  and  to  place  them  onder  his  lordship  and  com-
mand. And  with  this  intention  he  went  forth  with  many
people  from  the  Island,  in  many  rafts  made  of  canes  and
dry  wood.  Forthwith,  by  flatteries  and  threats  he  drew  nnto
him  some  curacas  and  small  chiefs,  and  those  who  wonld
not  obey  his  bidding  he  made  war  upon  until  he  put  th^n
under  his  dominion  and  conmiand.  When  he  found  himself
lord  of  this  great  province,  and  that  all  the  Caracas  and
principal  bdians  served  him  as  their  natnral  lord,  be
foonded  a  settlement  which  he  called  Atuncollao  which  is  to


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


se


1 1

■si
l°-

-  1 1
ill

Ij
JS

li

i  I

18


«kGoo'^Ic


.wGooi^lc


,.J


DamziowGoOi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  303

say :  the  great  CoUao.  In  this  settlement  he  established  his
seat  and  royal  conrt  in  order  that  the  Indians  he  bad  con-
quered might  not  rebel,  and  after  he  had  them  well  subjected^
and  pacified,  his  days  came  to  an  end.  .  .  ."*•  He  further
states  that  the  seventh  Inca  war-chief,  whom  he  calls  Topa
Ynga  Ynpangne,  conqnered  the  settlement  of  Cnzco  and
established  there  the  tribe  of  the  Inca.'"

The  list  of  Inca  chiefs  famished  by  Gutierrez  does  not
agree  with  that  of  Betanzos  in  some  respects,  neither  does
it  with  the  list  of  Cieza,  whereas  it  folly  agrees  with  that  of
GarcilasBo  de  la  Vega.»'  Bnt  it  does  not  seem  possible  that
the  book  of  the  latter  could  already  have  been  consulted  by
Gatierrez.  The  agreement  in  the  names  and  the  sequence
of  the  war-chiefa  points  to  a  common  sonrce  of  information.
On  the  other  hand  traditions  about  the  conquest  of  the
Collao  from  Titicaca  Island,  in  the  tenth  century,  about,
recall  the  statements  of  Oviedo  and  Pedro  Pizarro,  in  a
general  way.  In  other  respects  (for  instance,  in  regard  to
the  creation  by  Cons  and  re-creation  by  Pachacamac)  there
is  an  analogy  between  Betanzos  and  Gutierrez.  Close
agreement  in  Indian  tradition  gathered  by  distinct  sources
can  never  be  expected,  bnt  the  conquest  of  Cuzco  by  Indians
of  Aymar6  stock,  part  of  whom  originally  came  from  Titi-
caca Island,  is  not  mentioned  by  the  two  elder  Spanish
chroniclers,  Betanzos  and  Cieza.

( Agustin  de  Zdrate^  royal  treasarer  in  Pern,  whither  he
came  in  1543,'^  earlier  than  both  Cieza  and  Gntierrez,  states
in  his  History  of  the  Discovery  and  Conquest  of  Peru,
the  first  edition  of  which  appeared  at  Antwerp  in  1555:
"These  lords  kept  their  Indians  at  peace  and  were  their
captains  in  the  wars  they  had  with  their  neighbors,  and
there  was  no  general  lord  of  the  whole  land,  until  from  the
region  of  the  Collao,  from  a  great  lagoon  there  is  (in  it),
called  Titicaca,  which  has  eighty  leagues  in  circumference,
there  came  a  very  warlike  people  which  they  called  ingas.
These  wore  the  hair  short  and  Imd  the  ears  perforated,  with


;cbyG00'^lc


304 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

pieces  of  gold  in  the  holes  which  mlarge  the  apertnres.
These  called  themselves  [are  called]  ringrim,  signifying
ear.  And  the  principal  among  them  they  called  Zapalla
inga,  (the)  only  chief,  although  some  mean  to  say  that  he
was  called  inga  Viracocha,  which  is  'froth  or  grease  of  the
sea,'  since,  not  knowing  where  the  land  lay  whence  he  came,
(they)  believed  him  to  have  been  formed  ont  of  that  lagrtuie-
.  .  .  These  ingas  began  to  settle  the  city  of  Cuzco,  etc.""

Substantially,  this  is  what  O-ntierrez  has  atated,  and  it
may  have  been  recorded  abont  the  same  time.

Three  years  prior  to  the  appearance  of  the  book  of  Zarate,
the  first  issue  of  the  Chronicle  off  Francisco  Lopez  de  Go-
marajwas  published,  bat  as  the  anthor  never  was  in  America
and  obtained  his  information  at  second  hand,  I  place  him
after  the  former.  Treating  of  the  Inca  Clomara  states:
"Their  ori^  was  from  Tiquicaca,  which  is  a  lagnne  in  the
Collao,  forty  leagues  from  Cuzco,  the  name  of  which  signi-
fies Island  of  Lead.  ...  It  is  eiji^ty  leagues  in  oircum-
ference.  The  prindpal  Inca  who  took  away  from  Tiquicaca
the  first  ones  and  led  them,  was  called  Zapalla,  signifying
only  chief.  Some  aged  Indians  also  say  that  he  was  called
Viracocha,  which  is  to  say  'grease  of  the  sea,'  and  that  he
brought  his  people  by  sea.  They  finally  affirm  that  Zapalla
peopled  and  settled  Cuzco,  whence  the  Incas  began  to  make
war  upon  the  surroimdings.""

The  similarity  of  the  above  and  the  text  of  Zarate  is
striking,  yet  it  is  hardly  possible  that  one  copied  the  other,
unless  Qomara  obtained  access  to  the  manuscript  of  Zarate.
The  latter  bad  good  opportunities  of  securing  knowledge
about  Indian  folk-lore  at  what  we  may  consider  first-hand ;
hence,  if  there  has  been  any  plagiarism,  it  is  more  likely  to
have  been  committed  by  Qomara,  after  the  return  of  Zarate
to  Spain.  The  author  of  the  Chronicle,  and  chaplain  of
Hernando  Cortes,  however,  lived  in  official  disgrace  and
obscurity  at  the  time,  and  his  book  was  not  well  received  at
Court,  whereas  Zarate,  who  had  no  intention  of  pubUahing


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  305

his  work  himself,  but  intended  it  for  posthnmoas  iBsne,  was
compelled  to  have  it  printed  by  pressure  from  Court.

There  is  still  another  and  similar  version,  from  the  same
period,  apparently:

An  anonymous  document,  already  m^itioned  byV^reacott)
but  hardly  noticed  since,  entitled  Conquista  y  Poblacton  del
Peru,  states  the  following:  "After  this  was  done,  these
large-eared  people  (Orejones)  say  that  the  manner  in  which
theygotachiefamongthemseIveswa3,that  (from)  a  lagune
which  is  thirty  leagues  from  Cuzco,  in  the  land  of  Collao,
and  (which)  is  called  Titicaeaca,  the  principal  of  them,  who
called  himself  Viracocha,  came  forth,  who  was  very  shrewd
and  wise  and  said  he  was  a  child  of  the  sun.  And  of  this  one
they  say  that  he  gave  them  polity  in  dress  and  in  building
houses  of  stone,  and  he  it  was  that  built  the  Cnzco  and  made
stone-honses  and  the  fortress  and  house  of  the  sun.  ..."
This  document  is  not  complete,  hence  no  certainty  exists  as
yet  regarding  its  date,  although  there  are  indications  that  it
was  written  during  the  period  of  early  colonization  in
Peru."

Leaving  aside  the  short  notice  which  Oviedo  has  preserved
to  us,  and  in  which  Titicaca  is  not  mentioned,  we  have  thus
far,  in  the  first  half  of  the  sixteenth  century  what  appear  to
be  two  distinct  versions  of  traditions  concerning  the  remote
past  of  that  Island.  Betanzos  and  Cieza  are  silent  on  the
subject  of  a  "  conquest "  of  Cnzco  by  people  originally  issued
from  Titicaca.  Still  even  they  hint  at  something  akin  to  it
Betanzos  states :  "And  from  there  (speaking  of  the  journey
of  Viracocha  from  the  coimtry  around  the  Lake  northward)
the  Viracocha  departed  and  came  on,  making  people  as  yon
have  heard,  nntil  he  came  to  Cuzco  where,  upon  arriving,
they  say,  he  made  a  chief,  to  whom  he  gave  the  name  of
Alcaniza,  and  also  named  tiie  place  of  that  chief  (he)  made, «
Cuzco,  and,  leaving  directions  how,  after  he  would  be  gone,
the  'large  ears'  should  come  forth,  he  went  on  performing
his  task." He  goes  on  to  relate  how,  while  Alcauiza  was


;cbyG00'^lc


306 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

chief  of  the  little  hamlet  of  thirty  houses  t^at  then  con-
stitnted  the  settlement,  four  men  came  ont  of  a  cave  at
Pacaritambo,  among  them  Ayar  Mango  who  afterward  be-
came Manco  Capac  and  the  first  Cnzco  chieftain  of  the
Inca."

Cieza  also  mentions  the  preponderance  of  the  tribe  at
Hatnn  Colla  of  which  Qntierrez  treats,  hnt  without  con-
necting its  origin  with  the  people  of  the  Island,  and  he
describes  the  "creation"  of  the  Inca  as  independent  from
Viracocha  or  from  any  conquest  by  CoUa  Indians.  I  have
allnded  to  the  character  of  his  information  and  manner  in
which  he  obtained  it.

In  the  second  half  of  the  sixteenth  centory  the  number  of
writers  that  gathered  Indian  lore  is  considerably  greater
than  in  the  first,  bat  they  obtained  it  at  a  period  more
remote  from  first  contact,  and  when  Indian  society  was
already  disturbed  and  the  teachings  of  the  church  had
penetrated  the  mind  of  the  natives,  creating  lasting  im-
pressions.

OarcilasBO  de  la  Vega,  who  lays  particular  stress  on  his
Inca  descent  fromthe3fo(ftcr'sstde(!)  while  pretending  that
succession  was  in  the  Male  line,  was  bom  at  Cuzco  in  1540,
and  remained  in  his  mother's  care  tmtil  1560,  when  he  went
to  Spain  for  the  remainder  of  his  life."^  He  spoke  Qnichna
perfectly,  being  in  constant  contact  with  his  Indian  rela-
tives. He  also  kept  np  connections  with  Inca  descendants
at  Cnzco  by  correspondence,  in  bis  later  years.'"  At  least
part  of  the  object  he  had  in  writing  his  Comentarios  was,  to
assist  in  the  presentation  of  certain  claims  which  his  Indian
relatives  had  or  believed  they  had  on  the  Spanish  govern-
ment.'* In  order  to  press  these  claims  more  effectively,
Garcilasso  de  la  Vega  wrote  a  His.tory  of  tiie  Inca,  with  a
description  of  their  general  degree  of  culture,  society,  and
creed,  very  palatable  to  the  notions  of  the  times,  especially
in  that  it  sufiplies  primitive  Peru  with  a  monarchical  and
theocratic  organization  which  Europe  conld  understand,


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


1 1

I


DqiBDOwGoOl^lC


.wGooi^lc


^ .■.!.,■


.wGooi^lc


ABORiaiNAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  307

and  hy  means  of  which  ancient  birtliri^ts  and  claims  to
snccession  based  upon  supposed  heredity  could  be  not
merely  insinuated,  but  introduced.  His  statements  on  the
religion  of  the  Inca  are  colored  by  the  desire  to  eliminate
from  their  creed  and  customs  as  much  as  possible  facts
clashing  too  harshly  with  Christian  principles.  Garcilasso
is  (and  for  interested  motives)  constantly  endeavoring  to
push  primitive  Pemvian  culture  as  near  as  possible  to  the
European  of  his  time.  Much  of  his  detailed  information  is
of  the  highest  value,  but  he  has  woven  it  into  a  picture
(by  using  terminology  of  the  so-called  Old  World  and  its
social  condition)  that  is  misleading.  While  this  may  not
be  absolutely  germane  to  the  subject,  it  is  necessary  for  a
due  appreciation  of  Oarcitasso's  writings,  which  contain
considerable  material  for  ancient  folk-lore,  of  the  Quichua
as  well  as  of  the  Aymar&  Indians.

Oarcilasso  conveys  the  following  information  concerning
the  manner  in  which  he  secured  the  traditions,  which  he
g^ves  as  authentic :

"It  strode  me  that  the  best  plan  and  way  was  to  relate
what,  in  my  childhood,  I  beard  many  times  from  my  mother,
and  from  her  sisters  and  uncles,  and  from  other  and  elder
people,  about  their  origin  and  beginning.  .  .  .  My  mother
residing  at  Cnzco,  her  home,  there  came  to  visit  her  nearly
every  week  the  few  relatives,  male  and  female,  who  had  sur-
vived the  cruelty  of  Atanhuallpa.  During  these  visits  their
usual  conversation  was  about  the  origin  of  their  kings,  of
their  supremacy,  of  the  greatness  of  their  empire,  of  their
conquests  and  great  deeds  in  govcming,  in  war  as  well  as
in  the  laws  they  made,  so  beneficial  to  their  vassals.

"During  these  discourses  I,  who  was  a  boy,  often  ran  in
and  out,  amusing  myself  with  parts  of  the  story  as  children
do  with  the  tales  of  nurses.  In  this  manner  days  and  years
went  by,  until  I  had  come  to  the  age  of  sixteen  or  seventeen.
Being  one  day  present  with  my  kindred,  who  were  discours-
ing of  their  kings  and  ancestors,  it  came  to  my  mind  to  ask


;cbyG00'^lc


308 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

the  most  elderly  person  amoD^rst  them,  and  so  I  interrnpted
his  speech  in  this  manner:  *Inca,'  said  I,  'and  my  uncle,
hoT  is  it  possihle,  since  yon  have  no  writingB,  that  yon  have
been  able  to  preserve  the  memory  of  things  past,  and  of  the
origin  of  our  kingst'  "*°  The  aged  Indian  whom  he  thus
addressed  and  who  afterward  became  his  chief  informant,
made  the  following  statement  in  regard  to  the  origin  of  the
Inca:

(  "Yon  must  know,  therefore,  that  in  ages  pwt  all  this
region  and  comitry  you  see  around  ns  was  nothing  but
mountains  and  wild  forests,  and  the  people  in  those  times
were  like  so  many  beasts,  without  religion  or  government;
they  neither  sowed,  nor  ploughed,  nor  clothed  themselves,
etc.,  etc.  Our  Father  the  Sun,  beholding  men  such  as  before
related,  took  compassion  on  them,  and  sent  a  son  and  a
daughter  of  his  own  from  heaven  to  earth  to  instruct  onr
I)eopIe  in  the  knowledge  of  Onr  Father  the  Snn,  that  they
mi^t  worship  and  adore  him  and  esteem  him  for  their  God,
giving  them  laws  and  precepts  whereunto  they  might  con-
form their  lives,  lite  men  of  reason  and  civility.  .  .  .  Wth
these  commands  and  instructions.  Our  Father  the  Sun
placed  his  two  children  in  Lake  Titicaca,  which  is  about
eighty  leagnes  hence,  giving  them  liberty  to  go  and  travel
wherever  they  pleased;  and  in  whatsoever  place  they  stayed
to  eat  or  sleep,  they  should  strike  into  the  ground  a  little
wedge  of  gold  which  he  had  given  them,  being  about  half  a
yard  long  and  two  fingers  thick,  and  where  with  one  stroke
this  wedge  would  sink  into  the  earth,  there  should  be  the
place  of  their  habitation  and  the  court  unto  whidi  all  people
shonld  resort.  .  .  .  Thus  Onr  Father  the  Sun,  having  de-
clared his  pleasure  to  these  his  two  children,  he  dispatched
them  from  him,  and,  taking  their  journey  from  Titicaca
northward,  at  every  place  where  they  came  to  repose  they
tried  to  strike  their  wedge  into  the  ground,  but  it  took  no
place,  nor  would  it  enter.  At  length  they  came  to  a  poor  inn,
or  place  wherein  to  rest,  about  seven  or  eight  leagues  sonth-


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  309

ward  from  this  city,  which  to  this  day  is  called  Pacarec
Tampn,  which  is  as  mndi  as  to  say,  'The  Shining  or  lUmm-
nated  Dormitory.'  This  is  one  of  those  colonies  which  the
Prince  planted,  the  inhabitants  whereof  boast  of  this  name
and  title  which  our  Inca  bestowed  npon  it;  whence  he  and
his  queen  descended  to  the  valley  of  Cozco,  which  was  then
only  a  wild  and  barren  motmtain."  "This  was  the  relation
made  to  me  by  this  Inca,  brother  of  my  mother,  concerning
the  origin  of  the  kings  of  this  comitry.  I  afterward  tried  to
translate  it  faithfully  from  my  mother-tongne,  which  is  the
Inca,  into  Spanish."*'

Garcilasso  then  proceeds  to  tell  other  traditions,  from
other  parts  of  Peru:

"Having  to  report  the  most  current  opinions  touching
the  origin  of  the  Inca  kings,  I  will  say  that  most  of  the
people  of  Peru,  that  is,  the  Indians  from  sonth  of  Cozco,
what  they  call  Collasuyu,  and  those  in  the  west,  called
Cuntisnyu,  tell  about  it  a  very  pleasing  fable.  In  order  to
make  it  more  anthoritative  through  time  (antiquity),  they
say  it  happened  after  the  deluge,  of  which  they  know  noth-
ing beyond  that  it  really  took  place.  .  .  .  Thus  they  say
that  after  the  waters  of  the  deluge  had  subsided,  a  certain
man  appeared  in  the  country  of  Tiahuanacn,  which  is  to  the
sonth  of  Cozco.  This  man  was  so  powerful  that  he  divided
the  world  into  four  parts,  and  gave  them  to  four  men  whom
he  honored  each  with  the  title  of  king,  the  first  of  which  was
called  Maneo  Capac,  the  second  Colla,  the  third  Tocay,  and
the  fourth  Pinahua.  To  this  they  add  that  he  gave  the
northern  part  to  Manco  Capac,  that  of  the  south  to  Colla
(after  whom  that  great  province  has  ever  since  been
called),  to  Tocay  that  in  the  east,  and  to  Pinahua  that  of
the  west.  They  further  assert  that,  after  having  thus
favored  them,  he  sent  each  one  to  the  land  pertaining  to
him,  to  conquer  and  govern  all  the  people  there  found.

"The  Indians  who  live  east  and  north  of  the  town  of
Cozco  report  another  origin  of  the  Incas,  similar  to  tiie


;cbyG00'^lc


310 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

preceding.  For  they  say  that  in  the  bepnning  of  the  world
four  men  and  four  women,  who  -^ere  brothers  and  sisters,
came  ont  of  the  windows  in  certain  rocks  that  are  near  the
dty,  in  a  place  called  Pancartampn.  .  .  .  The  first  of  these
brothers  is  called  by  them  Manco  Capac,  and  his  wife  Mama
OcUo.  They  believe  that  this^one  was  the  founder  of  this
town."

All  the  tales  except  the  first  one  (told  him  by  his  rela-
tives) Garcilaaso  regards  as  silly  fables,  while  acknowledg-
ing liiat  they  are  authentically  Indian  and  primitive.

It  is  easy  to  recognize  in  the  tales  recorded  by  Gareilasso
the  substance  of  those  contained  in  the  sources  preceding
him.  But  it  is  manifest  that,  since  Gareilasso  was  told  of
them  while  he  was  yet  a  youth,  his  aged  Indian  relative
adapted  them  to  the  age  of  his  listener.  An  Indian  of  ex-
perioice,  and  really  versed  in  ancient  lore,  will  never  dis-
close such  matters  in  their  real  aspect  to  younger  men,
except  after  their  discretion  has  stood  an  exceptionally
severe  test.  To  such  a  test  Gareilasso  does  not  seem  to
have  been  subjected,  hence  the  stories  which  he  repeats  have
not  the  merit  of  the  results  of  serious  investigation  like
those  of  Betanzos  and  even  of  Cieza.

Gareilasso  acknowledges  also  other  sources  of  informa-
tion. The  writings  of  Father  Bias  Valera,  partly  destroyed
at  the  sacking  of  Cadiz  by  the  English  in  1596,  are  quoted  by
him  repeatedly.  Valera  was  a  native  of  Chaehapoyas  in
northeastern  Peru  and  received  in  the  Jesuit  order  at  Lima
in  1568,  whence  he  went  to  Cnzco  three  years  later,  so  that,
the  date  of  his  birth  being  1551,  he  must  have  begun,  like
Gareilasso,  his  investigations  about  the  Indians  at  quite  an
early  age.*'  This,  the  fewer  opportunities  he  may  have
had  for  cnltivating  intimacy  with  the  aborigines,  and  his
early  death  in  Spain,  lessens  the  value  of  Father  Valera's
data.  Nevertheless  it  should  not  be  overlooked  that  he  ar-
rived at  Ouzco  at  a  time  when  special  investigations  were
being  carried  on  there  on  the  subject  of  Indian  historical


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MTTHS  AND  TBADITIONS  311

lore,  both  by  order  of  the  Viceroy  Don  Prancisco  de  Toledo
and,  separately,  by  instmctious  of  the  Bishop  of  Cnzco,
then  Sebastian  de  Artaun  or  Lartaun.*'

Through  the  former,  no  information  relative  to  Titicaca
Island  was  revealed  as  far  as  known.  Neither  ia  there  any
mention  of  the  Island  in  the  investigation  reported  npon  by
the  Licentiate  Polo  de  Ondegardo  in  the  same  year  of  1571.
The  latter  merely  alludes,  in  terms  very  brief,  to  some
stories  according  to  which  Cozco  had  been  originally  settled
from  other  parts,  bnt  he  adds:  "This  is  of  small  impor-
tance, because  they  say  it  happened  before  the  Delnge,  and
they  connect  it  with  certain  fables  that,  being  very  old,  it
is  not  necessary  to  dwell  npon.""  I  would  add,  that  the
"Deluge"  appears  first  almost  simoltaneously  in  the  writ-
ings of  Cristoval  de  Molina,  of  which  I  am  now  to  treat.*'

The  resnlt  of  the  clerical  investigation  was  reported  upon
by  a  secnlar  priest,  Father  Criat6val  de  Molina,  who  resided.
at  Cozco  between  the  years  1570  and  1584  as  priest  of  the
hospital  founded  in  1557  for  the  exclusive  benefit  of  Indians
and  afterward  converted  into  a  municipal  infirmary.'**
Father  Molina,  in  his  treatise  entitled  Relacion  de  las  fabu-
Itis  y  ritos  de  los  Tngas,  of  which  only  the  translation  by
(Sir  Clement  B.  Markhan^is  at  my  command,  treats  at
lesigth  of  ancient  lore  of  the  Cnzco  tribe  and  adjacent  clus-
ters.  He  states :

"And  first  with  regard  to  their  idolatries,  it  is  so  that
those  people  had  no  knowledge  of  writing.  But  in  a  house
of  the  Sun  called  Foquen-Cancha,  which  is  near  Cuzoo,  they
had  the  life  of  each  one  of  the  Yncas,  with  tiie  land  they
conquered,  painted  with  fignres  on  certain  boards,  and  also
their  origin.  Among  these  paintings  the  following  fable
was  represented :  In  the  life  of  Manco  Ccapac,  who  was  the
first  Inca,  and  from  whom  they  began  to  be  called  Children
of  the  Sun  and  to  worship  the  Snn,  they  bad  a  fnl]  account
of  the  Deluge.  They  say  that  all  people  and  all  created  things
perished  in  it,  in  as  far  as  the  water  rose  above  all  the  high*


;cbyG00'^lc


312 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOAOA  AND  KOATI

est  moontains  in  the  world.  No  living  things  survived  except
a  man  and  a  woman,  who  remained  in  a  box,  and  when  the
waters  subsided,  the  wind  carried  them  to  Hoanaco,  which
will  be  over  sevent;^  leagues  from  Cnzco,  a  little  more  or
less.  The  Creator  of  all  things  commanded  them  to  remain
there  as  Mitimas,  and  there  in  Tiahnanaco  the  Creator
began  to  raise  ap  the  people  and  nations  that  are  in  that
region,  etc.  .  .  .  They  say  that  the  Creator  was  in  Tiahna-
naco and  that  there  was  his  chief  abode.  .  .  .  They  say  that
it  was  dark,  and  that  there  he  made  the  snn,  the  moon*  and
stars,  and  tiiat  he  ordered  the  snn,  moon,  and  stars  to  go  to
the  Island  of  Titicaca,  which  is  near  at  hand,  and  th^ioe  to
rise  to  heaven.  They  also  declare  that  when  the  snn  in  the
form  of  a  man  was  ascending  to  heaven,  very  brilliant,  it
called  to  the  Incas  and  to  Manco  Capac  as  their  chief,  and
said : '  Thoa  and  thy  descendants  are  to  be  Lords  and  are  to
subject  many  nations.  Look  npon  me  as  thy  father  and
then  shalt  be  my  children  and  then  shalt  worship  me  as  Uiy
father. '  And  with  these  words  it  gave  to  Manco  Ccapac  for
his  insignia  and  arms  the  Suntur  Paucar  and  the  Champi
and  the  other  insignia  that  are  nsed  by  the  Incas,  li^
sceptres.  And  at  that  point  the  snn  and  moon  and  stars
were  commanded  to  ascend  to  heaven  and  to  fix  themselves
in  their  place,  and  they  did  so.  At  the  same  instant  Miinco
Ccapac  Euad  his  brothers  and  sisters,  by  command  of  the
Creator,  descended  mider  the  earth  and  came  ont  again  at
the  cave  of  Faccari-Tambo,  though  they  say  that  other  na-
tions also  came  ont  of  the  same  cave,  at  the  point  where  the
sun  rose  on  the  first  day,  after  the  Creator  had  divided  the
nij^t  from  the  day.  Thns  it  was  that  they  were  called  Chil-
dren of  the  Snn,  and  that  the  Snn  was  worshiped  and
revered  as  a  father."*'

In  the  first  place,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  Molina
refers  to  "figures  on  certain  boards"  as  his  principal  source
for  the  above  tales.  These  boards  he  says  were  kept  at  a
shrine  called  "Poqnen-Cancha,"  near  Cnzco. The  proper


;cbyG00'^lc


ABOBIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  313

name  for  thig  ahrine,  which  was  one  of  the  eighty ' '  Qxiacaa  * '
or  "Huacas,"  that,  according  to  Father  Bemabe  Cobo,  S.J.
(1653),  existed  near  Cuzco,  is  pven  by  him  as  "Poquin
cancha."  This  is,  very  probably,  a  misprint  {or  misread-
ing) for  Pvquiu  Cancha,  signifying  "enclosure  of  the
spring."  Cobo  says  of  it  that  it  was  a  house  of  the  Sun  on
the  summit  of  "Cayocache,"  where  they  sacrificed  chil-
dren.*'
LPedro  de  Sarmiento  Gamboa^to  whom  the  Viceroy  Toledo
committed  the  task  of  condensing  the  mnltifarions  material
gathered  ahont  that  time  into  a  "History"  of  the  so-called
"Inca  Empire,"  spreads  ont  the  tale  of  the  painted  boards
in  the  following  manner:  "There  connects  with  this  the
great  investigation  which  Pachacnti  Inga  Ynpangni,  ninth
Inga,  who  issued  a  general  call  to  all  the  old  historians  of
all  the  provinces  be  subjected,  and  even  of  many  others
more  from  all  those  kingdoms,  and  be  kept  them  in  the  city
of  Cuzco  for  a  long  time,  examining  them  concerning  the
antiquities,  origin  and  notable  facts  of  their  ancestors  of
those  kingdoms.  And  after  he  had  well  ascertained  the
most  notable  of  their  ancient  histories  he  had  it  all  paloted
after  its  order  on  large  boards,  and  he  placed  them  in  a  big
hall  in  the  house  of  the  sun,  where  the  said  boards,  which '
were  garnished  with  gold,  would  be  like  our  libraries,  and
he  appointed  learned  men  who  cotild  understand  and  ex-
plain them.  And  nobody  could  enter  where  those  boards
were,  except  the  Inga,  or  the  historians,  without  express
license  from  the  Inga.'**'

At  the  same  time  and  in  consequence  of  the  investigation
instituted  by  the  viceroy  Toledo,  four  "cloths"  were  pro-
duced, on  which  were  painted  "the  figures  of  the  Ingas  as
well  as  the  medals  of  their  women  and  Ayllos,  and  the
history,  on  the  edges,  of  what  happened  at  the  time  of  each
one  of  the  Ingas,  and  the  fable  and  noteworthy  things  that
go  on  the  first  cloth  which  they  call  of  Tambotoeo,  and  the
fables  of  the  creations  of  Viracocha  that  go  on  the  edge  of


;cbyG00'^lc


314 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

the  first  cloth  as  foundation  and  beginning  of  the  history;
each  thing  by  itself  distinct,  as  it  is  written  and  rabricated
by  me  the  secretary  present,"  etc.  These  four  cloths  were
shown  to  a  large  number  of  Indian  witnesses  that  had  been
interrogated  at  the  time.  The  paintings  had  been  made  for
the  purpose  of  accompanying  and  Ulustrating  the  (lately
published)  work  of  Pedro  de  Sarmiento  Oamboa,  iriiich  was
then  read,  in  part,  to  the  Indians  by  an  interpreter,  and  the
four  pieces  of  cloth  served  to  illastrate  the  talk.  The  In-
dians, in  their  usual  way,  approved  everything  contained  on
the  oloth  and  in  the  talk,  which  means  very  little,  as  the
Indian  approves  (cum  reservatione  mentali)  more  or  less
everything  that  is  shown  and  read  to  him,  and  declares  it  to
be  true.  Whether  these  four  pieces  of  painted  cloth  stood
in  any  relation  to  the  four  panels  of  Molina  is  not  possible
to  assert  or  deny,  as  yet  The  former  were  sent  to  King
Philip  n  of  Spain.»»

The  principal  source,  however,  for  the  statements  of
Molina,  seems  to  have  been,  according  to  Cobo,  "anotiier
general  gathering  of  the  old  IJidians  who  had  yet  seen  the
times  of  the  chief  Gnayna  Capac,  which  gathering  was  made
in  the  very  city  of  Cnzco  by  Crist6bal  de  Molina,  curate  of
the  parish  of  Our  Lady  of  Bemedios  of  the  hospital  of  the
natives ;  by.  command  of  the  Bishop  D.  Sebastian  de  Lar-
tanm.""*  Cobo  claims  tiiat  the  results  of  that  investigatiou
agree  with  those  of  Polo  de  Ondegardo  and  the  Viceroy
Toledo,  which  he  states  to  have  had  and  consulted.  What  I
have  been  able  to  see  of  them  does  not,  as  stated  before,
contain  any  direct  allusions  to  Titicaca,  but  there  are  others
which  I  do  not  know."*  Gatherings  of  Indians  with  the
view  of  ascertaining  ancient  lore  are  not  always  snocessfni.
The  Indian  dislikes  to  communicate  on  such  subjects  in
the  presence  of  witnesses  from  his  own  race.

The  deep  and  rapid  impression  made  by  biblical  tales  on
the  mind  of  the  Indians,  through  teachings  of  the  Catholic
Church,  is  perceivable  in  some  of  the  traditions  reported


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


I

i

a

a  -a


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ABOBIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  315

by  Molina,  as,  for  instance,  in  tite  story  of  tbe  Delnge,  which
earlier  chroniclere  do  not  mention,  bnt  would  snrely  have
alladed  to,  had  they  heard  of  it  Otherwise  the  tales  re-
corded by  Molina  agree  in  substance  with  those  preserved
by  his  predecessors  in  that  the  heavenly  bodies  are  repre-
sented as  having  been  created  on  or  about  the  Island  of  Titi-
caca,  and  the  Inca  to  have  gone  from  that  Island  to  Cnzco.
As  stated  before,  no  close  agreement  between  the  texts  of
traditions  obtained  by  distinct  parties,  or  at  distinct
localities,  can  be  ezx>^ed,  hence  divergence  in  details  does
not  impair  the  value  of  substantial  resemblance.

Gamboa's  work  is,  from  its  nature  and  origin,  a  second-
hand compendium.  It  is,  furthermore,  not  an  impartial
document.  Its  tendency  ia  clearly  shown  in  the  beginning,
where  he  declares  his  object  to  be  "to  disabuse  all  those  in
the  world  who  Uiink  that  the  said  Ingas  were  legitimate
kings  and  the  cnracas  natural  lords  of  this  land."  This
tendency  pervades  the  whole  book  and  makes  of  it  a  sus-
picious source,  considerably  diminishing  its  valne.  In
everything  touching  upon  primitive  tradition  Sarmiento
only  follows  his  predecessors,  partially  divesting  the  origi-
nal tales  of  their  purely  Indian  character,  and  adding
nothing  that  had  not  already  been  stated  before.  About  the
Island  of  Titicaca  he  says:  "After  the  delnge  had  passed,
and  when  the  land  was  drying,  the  Viraoodia  determined  to
people  it  a  second  time,  and,  in  order  to  achieve  it  with
greater  perfection,  he  determined  upon  creating  luminaries
that  might  shed  more  light.  And  in  order  to  do  this,  he
went  with  his  servants  to  a  great  lagone  that  lies  in  the
CoUao,  and  in  which  lagnne  there  is  an  island  called  Titi-
caca, ...  To  which  island  Viracocha  repaired  forthwith
and  commanded  that  the  sun,  moon,  and. stars  should  at
once  come  forth  and  rise  into  the  sky  to  illuminate  the
world ;  and  thus  it  was  done.  And  it  is  said  that  he  made
the  moon  brighter  than  the  snn,  and  that  therefore  the  sun,
jealous  at  the  time  they  were  to  rise  into  heaven,  threw  a


;cbyG00'^lc


316 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

handfnl  of  ashes  into  the  face  (of  the  moon),  from  vhich
time  on  it  remained  of  the  paler  color  in  which  it  nam  ap-
pears.""

Migael  Cabello  Balboa  came  to  Pern  in  1566,  and  com-
pleted his  Misceldnea  austral  at  Lima  twenty  years  later.
He  places  the  origin  of  the  Inca  at  Facari  Tampa,  identify-
ing the  site  with  Tambo  Tooco,  and  then  adds:  "Many  ^•
dians  pretend  that  the  brothers  who  appeared  at  Pacari
Tambo  .  .  .  were  natives  of  Titicaca,  and  that  in  that  place
were  manofactnred  the  garments  in  which  they  showed
themselves  for  the  first  time."  According  to  him,  the  little
band  (headed  by  Manco  Capac)  traveled  at  night  and  hid
in  the  daytime,  presenting  themselves  saddenly,  arrayed  in
gorgeous  vestments,  a  short  distance  from  Cuzco."*

The/jesnit  Joseph  de  AcostaVesided  in  Pern  from  1569  to
1585."^  His  book,  less  prolix  tsian  nsoal  for  the  time,  is  of
great  valne.  He  mentions  the  investigations  institnted  by
Toledo  and  by  order  of  the  King  of  Spain,"  and  it  is  there-
fore possible  that  what  he  attributes  to  Indian  sources  may
have  been  derived  from  depositions  then  obtained.  Bat  he
discriminates  between  traditions  in  general,  current  among
Indians  of  Pern  (and  Bolivia)  and  specific  Inca  lore.  Of
the  former  he  states:

"However  it  may  be,  the  Lidians  say  that  with  this  their
deluge  people  were  all  drowned,  and  tiiey  relate  that  from
the  great  lagnne  of  Titicaca  there  came  ont  one  Viracocha,
who  made  his  abode  at  Tiagnanaco,  where  to-day  are  seen
rains  and  parts  of  ancient  and  very  strange  edifices,  and
that  from  there  they  came  to  Cozco,  and  so  the  haman  fam-
ily began  to  multiply.  They  point  ont  in  that  lagune  an
islet  where  they  fable  that  the  snn  concealed  and  maintained
itself,  and  for  this  reason  they  anciently  made  to  it,  Uiere,
many  sacrifices,  not  only  of  sheep,  bnt  of  men.  Others  say
that  ont  of  a  certain  cave,  through  the  window,  there  came
six  or  I  do  not  know  how  many  men,  and  that  these  made  the
beginning  of  the  propagation  of  mankind,  and  this  was  at


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  317

what  (the  place  which),  for  that  reason,  they  call  Pacari
Tambo.  So  they  are  of  opinion  that  tiie  Tambos  are  the
oldest  lineage  of  mankind.  From  there,  they  say,  proceeded
Mangocapa,  whom  they  recognize  as  the  foonder  and  head
of  the  Ingas.  .  .  .""^  Elsewhere  Acosta  states;  '*The  firat
man  the  Indians  mention  as  the  beginning  of  the  Incas  was
Mangocapa,  and  of  him  they  fable  that,  aft«r  the  Deluge,  he
came  oat  of  a  cave  or  window  of  Tamtm,  which  is  five  or  six
leagues  from  Cuzco.""

Acosta  expresses  himself  nearly  in  the  same  terms  as
Pedro  Pizarro  regarding  the  two  versions,  one  locating  the
origin  of  the  Inca  on  Titicaca  Island,  Hie  other  near  Cnzco.
In  reality  they  do  not  conflict;  only  it  seems  that  the  latter
was  a  tradition  confined  to  the  Bica  tribe,  which  became
separated  from  the  former  after  the  investigation,  in  1542,
byfVaca  de  Castro^  Acosta,  in  the  passage  first  quoted,  has
given  bat  an  abstract  of  what  his  predecessors  recorded
concerning  Titicaca  traditions.

The  chroniclei(^Antonio  de  Herrera)foUows  Cieza  in  his
mention  of  Peruvian  traditions ;"  the  Dominicai/Gregorio
Garcia  •■^copied  Betanzos,  andf  Pray  Hieronymo  Eoman^
both."

Passing  over  a  nomber  of  works  of  the  beginning  of
the  seventeenth  century  that,  while  of  ethnologic  value  for
ancient  Pern,  contain  nothing  germane  to  the  subject,  the
author  next  to  be  taken  up,  in  point  of  date  as  far  as
can  be  ascertained,"'  would  be  the  Indian(juaD  de  Santa
Cruz  Pachacuti  Yamqai  Salcamayhua.')  He  claims  to  be
"native  of  the  pueblos  of  Sanctiago  of  Hananguaygua  and
Huringnaiguacanchi  of  Orcasuyo,  between  Canas  and  Can-
chis  of  Collasuyo  [follows  part  of  his  genealogy],  all  princi-
pal Caciques  that  were  in  the  said  province  and  professed
Christians  in  the  matters  of  oar  holy  Catholic  faith.  .  .  .
I  say  that  we  have  heard,  being  a  child,  very  ancient  notices
and  the  histories,  barbarisms  and  fables  from  the  time  of
the  gentilisms,  which  is  as  follows,  as  among  the  natives  of


;cb/G00'^IC


318 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

the  things  of  times  past  they  always  are  aecnstomed  to
talk."**  Salcamayhua  writes  as  an  Indian  from  the  monn-
tainons  regions  of  Pern,  speaks  Spanish— i.e.,  literally
translating  from  his  native  tongue.  Hence  a  literal  render-
ing, however  nnconth,  is  almost  indispensable.

Salcamayhna  makes  snch  ostentations  professions  of
Christianity  that  some  of  his  statements  appear  suspicions.
That  perspicacioos  and  sober  scholar,  Don  Marcos  Jimenea
de  la  Espada,  called  attention  to  it.'*  He  tells  us  that  the
peopling  of  what  now  is  called  Bolivia  took  place  from  the
southeast,  from  "above  Potosi.""  After  the  country  had
been  settled,  there  came  to  the  Collao  (Aymara  region)  a
bearded  man  whom  he  calls  "Touapa,"  also  "Viracoha
Pachayacfaachican,"  performing  miracles,  and  whom  Salca-
mayhua therefore  identifies  with  Saint  Thomas  the  Apostle.
He  describes  the  wanderings  of  that  personage  and  his
tribulations  among  tiie  barbarous  natives  around  Lake  Titi-
caca,"  and  concludes  by  stating  that  "they  say  that  the
said  Tonapa,  after  having  liberated  himself  from  the  hands
of  those  barbarians,  remained  some  time  on  a  rock  called
Titicaca,""^  and  that  afterward  he  passed  throng  Tiquina
toward  Chacamarca,  and  on  his  way  came  to  a  village  called
Tiahuanaco,  where  the  people  ridiculed  his  teachings.  In
punishment  he  changed  them  into  stones.  From  Chaca-
marca he  followed  the  Desagnadero  to  the  soath,  finally
reaching  the  ocean,  where  he  disappeared.*"  While  in  the
Collao,  Tonapa  met  a  chief  called  Apotampo,  who  was  &e
only  one  who  lent  an  ear  to  his  teachings,  in  consideration
of  which  Tonapa  gave  him  "a  piece  of  wood  from  his  walk-
ing-stick.""" This  Apotampo  was  father  to  Manco  Capac,
to  whom  Salcamayhua  attributes  the  foundation  of  Cuzco,
which  place  was  then  already  occupied  by  Indians,  so  that
by  "fotmdation"  the  estahlishmoit  of  a  formal  village  must
be  understood."  In  regard  to  the  teachings  of  Tonapa,  the
author  states:  "The  modem  old  men  from  the  time  of  my
father,  don  Diego  Felipe,  are  wont  to  state  that  it  was


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


I

^  I

3 I


iwGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


DamziowGoOi^lc


ABOBIGINAL  MTTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  319

almost  the  commandments  of  God,  especially  the  seven
precepts,  only  the  name  of  God  our  Lord  was  lacking  and
that  of  onr  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  it  is  puhHo  and  notorious
among  the  old  men,  and  the  penalties  were  severe  for  those
who  broke  them."''*

The  analogy  of  these  tales  with  those  reported  by  Betan-
zos  and  Cieza  is  unmistakable,  as  far  as  their  substance  is
concerned.  Details  of  course  vary,  and,  furthermore,  the
effect  of  three  quarters  of  a  century  of  contact  with  the
Spaniards  and  the  clergy  is  plainly  visible.  The  story  of
the  walking-stick,  of  which  Tonapa  gave  a  piece  to  Apo-
tampo,  recalls  the  magic  wand  mentioned  by  Gardlasso  de
la  Vega.

Contemporary  with  Saloamaybna  (although  he  is  not
known  to  have  exerted  any  influence  on  their  sources  of  in-
formation) are  what  might  be  termed  a  "school  of  writers"
of  the  first  half  of  the  seventeenth  century.  There  are
even  two  "schools,"  one  of  Jesuits,  the  other  of  Augustines.
All  of  them  resided  for  some  time  in  northern  Bolivia  with
the  Indians,  as  missionaries  and  teachers ;  their  information
is,  therefore,  in  a  certain  way,  first-hand.

In  the  beginning  of  the  sevraiteenth  century  the  search
for  survivals  of  primitive  ceremonials  among  the  Pemvian
Indians  became  not  only  more  active,  but  more  systemat-
ized. The  Jesuit  Joseph  Pablo  Arriaga  was  one  of  the  prin-
cipal organizers  of  that  investigation.  His  own  work,  the
Extirpation  of  Idolatry  in  Peru,''*  appeared  in  print  in
1621,  and,  while  of  the  highest  value  for  ethnologic  know-
ledge in  general,  it  contains  no  allusion  to  folk-lore  con-
nected with  the  Island  of  Titicaca.  What  little  is  known
about  the  two  books  written  by  his  co-worker,  Father(Luis
Terhnel,)afford8  no  material  either  for  our  present  investi-
gation." The  silence  of  Arriaga  on  the  traditions  of  the
Titicaca  basin  need  cause  no  surprise.  Arriaga  was,  o£B-
cially,  the  spirit  that  moved  the  search  for  Indian  rites  and
beliefs,  in  a  methodical  way,  and  his  book  is  a  manual  of


;cbyG00'^lc


320 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

that  search  rather  than  a  treatise  on  ceremonials.  Henoe
it  contains  many  valuable  descriptions  of  customs  that
were  still  in  vigor,  but  as  examples  only.  For  the  great
mass  of  details  he  refers  to  special  reports  of  loc(U  "  viat-
ors," some  of  which,  if  not  all,  still  exist  in  manuscript
Thtis  it  is  likely  that  in  the  reports  of  the  visitorsfAlonao
Garcia  Gnadrado)on  the  Lake-shore  near  Copacavana,  and
of (Bartolom^  de  Ihienas  on  Tiahiianaco,)folk-lore  on  th«
Islands  will  be  fonnd;^*  also,  possibly,  in  the  letters  of
Pather|Hemando  de  Avendano.'')  Every  visitor  was,  ac-
cording to  instmctions  framed  by  Axriaga,  to  keep  a  writtra
account  of  the  proceedings  of  his  inquiry."

Leaving  aside  other  works  of  the  bepnning  of  the
seventeenth  century  that  are  but  imperfectly  known,"  I
turn  to  a  contemporary  of  Arriaga  and  Salcamayhna,  tke
Jesuit  Bemab^  Cobo.  Bom  at  Lopera  in  Spun,  1582,  be
came  to  Peru  at  the  age  of  seventeen  years,  and  was  re-
ceived a  novice  in  the  "Company  of  Jesus"  in  1601,  and
ordained  priest  in  1612.  From  1615  to  1618  he  was  on  the
Lake-shore  at  Juli  and  as  far  as  Copacavana,  then  as  a
missionary  farther  south  in  Bolivia.  He  had  good  oppor-
tunities to  become  acqoainted  with  the  country  and  its
people,  as  his  voluminous  book  on  the  "New  World"
abundantly  proves.^*  He  gathered  the  traditions  then  cur-
rent abont  the  Islands  and  Copacavana,  and  in  their  dis-
cussion displays  much  critical  spirit  But  he  investigated
and  studied  at  a  time  remote  from  the  period  of  first  eon-
tact  and  does  not  always  state  the  sources  of  his  informa-
tion. These,  even  in  case  they  were  Indians,  were  no  longer
nntampered  with,  after  eighty  years  of  growing  contact
with  whites  and  of  church  influence.  Hence  the  following
quotations  from  the  book  of  Cobo  are  to  be  taken  with  the
reserve  which  the  above  remarks  imply.

"In  many  ways  do  the  Peruvian  Indians  relate  the  ori^
and  beginning  of  the  Incas  their  kings,  interweaving  so
much  confusion  and  diversity  of  incongruities  that  from


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  321

their  statement  it  is  not  possible  to  gather  anything  cer-
tain.""

Thoa,  "leaving  aside  for  the  present  and  its  proper  place
what  they  held  about  the  Deluge  and  peopling  of  the
earth,"  he  proceeds  to  give  some  of  the  "fables  and  fictions,
most  received  by  nearly  all,  about  whence  proceeded  the
Inca  kings."

'  *  The  first  is  as  follows :  That  from  the  lagone  of  Titicaca
there  came  to  Facarictambo,  a  place  distant  from  Gnzco
seven  leagnes,  certain  Indians  called  Incas,  men  of  prudence
and  valor,  clad  in  a  very  different  dresa  from  that  worn
by  those  of  the  district  of  Cuzco,  with  their  ears  perforated
and  pieces  of  gold  in  the  orifices;  and  that  the  principal  of
them,  called  Manco-Capac,"  etc.,  etc.  He  goes  on  to  give  an
account  of  the  manner  in  which  Manco  Capao  made  himself
master  of  Ouzco.*"

Another  account  says  that  four  brothers  and  f onr  sisters
came  out  of  the  cave  of  Pacarictampu,  adding:  "About
their  origin  they  do  not  agree,  some  imagining  they  pro-
ceeded (originated)  out  of  themselves,  and  others,  that
from  the  lagune  of  Titicaca,  where  they  escaped  the  Deluge,
the  Maker  of  the  world  led  them  through  the  caverns  of
the  earth  until  they  came  out  through  that  cave  of  Pacaric-
tampu," etc."

Still  another:  "That  when  the  Creator  of  the  world  (i^om
IB  their  language  they  call  by  two  names,  to  wit :  Ticdvira-
coha  and  Pachayachachic)  shaped  all  things  at  Tiagnanaco,
where  they  imagine  he  resided,  he  commanded  the  sun,
moon  and  stars  to  go  to  the  Island  of  Titicaca  which  is  in
the  lagnne  of  that  name,  and  that  from  there  they  should
rise  into  heaven,  and  that  at  the  time  the  snn  was  leaving
in  the  figure  (form)  of  a  resplendent  man  he  called  the
Incas,  and  to  Manco  Capac,  as  the  eldest  brother,  he  spoke
as  follows:  'Thou  and  thy  descendants  have  to  subject
many  lands  and  be  great  lords ;  always  hold  me  to  be  your
father,  priding  yourself  on  being  my  children  and  never


;cbyG00'^lc


322 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

forgetting  to  venerate  me  as  such*;  and  that,  after  he  had
said  this,  he  gave  to  him  (Manco  Gapac)  the  insignia  of
king  .  .  .  and  that  forthwith  (after  the  orbs  had  taken
their  respective  places  in  the  heavens),  by  command  of  the
Maker,  the  Inca  brothers  sank  into  the  earth  and  went  to
come  ont  at  the  said  cave  of  Pacarictampa/*"'

Finally  another  tale:"'  "This  same  fiction  others  relate
in  this  manner :  They  say  that  the  Snn,  pitying  the  miser-
able condition  in  which  was  the  world,  sent  to  it  a  son  and
a  daughter  of  his,  to  instruct  and  teach  men  the  knowledge
of  Ihe  Snn,  persuading  them  to  worship  him  as  a  god  and
yield  him  the  adoration  that  was  dne  to  him  as  sndi,  .  .  .
and  that  they  were  placed  by  the  Snn  in  the  said  lagnne  of
Titicaca,  commanding  them  to  take  the  road  and  direction
they  pleased,  provided  that,  wherever  they  wonld  stay  to
eat  and  take  rest,  they  would  sink  into  the  soil  a  rod  of  gold
he  gave  them,  one  ell  in  length.  .  .  .**  Then  follows  an  al-
most textual  copy  of  the  story  told  by  Glarcilasso  de  la
Vega,  although  the  source  is  not  alluded  to.'*

He  mentions  a  version  which,  he  says,  is  similar  to  the
preceding,  with  the  difference  that  the  Inca  were  bom  on
the  Island  from  a  woman  called  Titicaca."

In  a  chapter  devoted  to  a  description  of  the  Islands  of
Titicaca  and  Koati  (it  is  not  clear  whether  he  visited  the
former,  and  certain  that  he  was  not  on  Koati)  he  relates
traditions  that  are  partial  repetitions  of  the  preceding,  but
deserve  to  be  quoted :

"The  adoratory  (shrine)  of  the  sun  that  was  on  the
Island  of  Titicaca  was  a  large  and  solid  rock,  the  venera*
tion  for  which  and  motive  why  they  dedicated  it  to  the  sun
has  for  beginning  and  foundation  a  very  ridiculous  novel,
which  is  that  tiie  ancients  affirm  that,  having  been  without
light  from  heaven  many  days  in  that  province,  and  all  its
inhabitants  being  surprised,  confused  and  frightened  by
such  long  and  obscure  darkness,  those  who  dwelt  on  the
aforesaid  island  of  Titicaca  saw  one  morning  the  sun  oome


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AKD  TRADITIONS  323

out  from  that  rock  with  extraordinary  splendor,  from  which
they  believed  thia  rock  to  be  the  house  and  true  dwelling
of  the  stm  or  the  thing  of  all  that  was  most  acceptable  to
it.  .  .  ."

"Others  refer  the  fable  differently,  and  say  that  the
reason  for  having  dedicated  to  the  sun  this  rock  was  be-
cause beneath  it  the  sun  was  kept  and  guarded  during  all
the  time  the  waters  of  the  Deluge  lasted,  after  which  it
came  forth  from  there  and  b^an  to  enlighten  the  world
from  that  place,  that  rock  being  the  first  object  that  enjoyed
its  light""

The  Jesuit  Anello  Oliva  was  a  Neapolitan  by  birth.  He
came  to  Lima  two  years  before  Cobo  and  entered  the  order
of  Jesuits  at  that  city.  Like  Cobo,  he  spent  some  time  at
Jnli  on  Lake  Titicaca.  He  concluded  his  History  of  Pern
and  of  the  Company  of  Jesus  in  that  country  in  the  year
1631,  twenty-two  years  earlier  than  Cobo  finished  bis  more
voluminons  "History  of  the  New  "World."*'  But  the
sources  which  Oliva  acknowledges,  as  having  based  upon
them  his  tales  of  ancient  lore,  are  not  as  satisfactory  as
those  of  Cobo.

Oliva  acknowledges  having  consulted  chiefly:

1.  Garcilasso  de  la  Vega,  laying  particular  stress  on  what
the  latter  claims  to  have  taken  from  the  writings  of  Father
Bias  Valera."

2.  Manuscripts  of  a  certain  doctor  in  theology  of  the
Cathedral  of  Charcas  (Sucre  in  Bolivia),  calledNBartoIome
Cervantes.*")

3.  The  sayings  of  an  Indian  by  the  name  of  Catari,  from
Cochabamba  (in  the  Qoichua-speaking  districts  of  Bolivia),
who  claimed  to  have  been  Qaipucamayoc  and  chronicler  of
the  Incas."

Of  the  writings  of  Father  Valera  we  have  already
spoken,  and  Oliva  rather  discards  the  version  given  by


;cbyG00'^lc


324 THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Garcilasso,  of  the  origin  of  the  Inca,  for  the  reason  that  it
implies  a  sapemataral  origin  for  Manco  Capae  and  hia
female  companion."'

I  have  not  yet  been  able  to  find  any  data  of  importance
concerning  Doctor  Cervantes.  His  piincipal  reliance
seems  to  have  been  on  what  was  given  him  as  traditions  pre-
served by  the  keepers  of  qnippns  or  knotted  strings.  Of
the  value  of  these  strings  for  historical  documentation,
Qarcilasso  himself  confesses  the  following:

^In  a  word,  In  these  knots  were  expressed  all  things  that
could  be  computed  by  numbers,  as  far  as  to  note  the  num-
ber of  battles  and  encounters,  of  the  embassies  on  the  part
of  the  Inca  and  the  declaration  the  king  had  given.  But  by
these  knots  it  was  not  possible  to  express  the  contents  of
the  message,  the  express  words  of  declarations,  and  such
other  historic  events,  for  these  things  consisted  of  terms
uttered  in  speech  or  in  writing,  and  the  knot  marked  indeed
the  number  but  not  the  word.  To  remedy  this  defect  they
had  also  certain  signs  by  which  they  recognized  memorable
actions,  embassies,  and  declarations  made  in  times  of  peace
or  war:  the  Qnipncamayos  learned  their  substance  by  heart
and  taught  tiiem  one  to  another  by  tradition.  .  .  .""

Oliva  cannot  have  obtained  his  information  from  Catari
earlier  than  the  first  decade  of  the  seventeenth  century,  or
three  quarters  of  a  century  after  the  conquest,  when  folk-
lore had  been  exposed  to  steady  and  slowly  modifying  con-
tact. Furthermore,  if  the  name  of  his  informant  is  any
indication  at  all,  it  is  an  Aymard,  not  a  Quichua,  name.
The  primitiveness  of  stories  told  in  southern  central  Boli-
via, long  after  the  Indians  had  been  under  Spanish  rule
and  nnder  the  teachings  of  the  church,  and  at  a  time  when
their  ancient  ceremonials  were  being  subjected  to  a  close
and  nnsympathetio  scmtiny,  may  appear  questionable.
Their  reliability  becomes  more  doubtful  yet  through  the
wide  geographical  range  they  embrace,  about  which  the
Indians  of  ancient  Peru  could  have  no  information,  and


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TEADITIONS  325

through  the  positive  maimer  in  which  details  are  ^ven.
Oliva  tells  ns:

"After  the  Deluge,  the  first  people  came  to  South  Amer-
ica from  parts  miknovn,  landing  somewhere  on  the  coast
of  Venezuela.  F^om  there  they  gradually  scattered  over
the  whole  continent,  one  band  reaching  the  coast  of  Ecnador
near  Santa  Elena.  Several  generations  passed,  many  made
voyages  along  the  coast  and  some  were  shipwrecked.  At
last  one  bnuudi  took  up  its  abode  on  an  island  called
Guayau,  near  the  shores  of  Ecuador.  On  that  island
Manco  Capac  was  bom,  and  after  the  death  of  his  father
Atau  he  resolved  to  leave  his  native  place  for  a  more
favored  clime.  So  he  set  oat,  in  anch  craft  as  he  had,  with
two  hundred  of  his  people,  dividing  them  into  three  bands.
Two  of  these  were  never  heard  from  again,  but  he  and  his
followers  landed  near  lea,  on  the  Peruvian  coast,  thence
stru^led  up  the  mountains,  reaching  at  last  the  shore  of
Lake  Titicaca.  There  Manco  separated  from  the  others,
leaving  them  wi&  orders  to  divide  after  a  certain  time  and
to  go  in  seardi  of  him,  while  he  took  the  direction  of  Cnzco.
He  told  his  people,  before  leaving,  that  when  any  of  the
natives  should  ask  them  their  parpose  and  destination,  to
reply  that  they  were  in  qaest  of  the  son  of  the  Son.  After
this  he  departed,  reaching  at  last  a  cave  near  the  Cnzco
valley,  where  he  rested,

"When  the  time  had  elapsed,  his  companions  started  in
several  groups  in  search  of  him.  One  of  these  crossed  over
to  the  Island  of  Titicaca,  where  they  were  surprised  to  find
a  rock,  and  in  this  rock  a  cave  lined  with  gold,  silver,  and
precious  stones.  Thereupon  they  sunk  the  craft  in  which
they  had  reached  the  island,  and  agreed  among  themselves,
if  anybody  from  the  surrounding  country  should  appear,
to  say  that  they  had  come  out  of  the  cave  to  look  for  the
son  of  the  Sun.

"A  few  days  after,  on  the  day  of  full  moon,  they  saw
some  canoes  approaching,  and  they  forthwith  retreated  to


;cbyG00'^lc


326 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITIGACA  AND  KOATI

the  cavern.  Those  who  came  in  the  canoes,  when  they  ap-
proached the  cliff  and  perceived  the  strangers  viewing  the
cave  apparently  with  the  greatest  unconcern,  were  snr-
prifled.  The  strangers  gave  them  to  understand  that  they
had  jnst  come  oat  of  the  rock  and  were  in  qnest  of  the  son
of  the  Snn.  This  filled  the  others  with  profound  respect
for  the  newcomers ;  they  worshiped  them  and  made  offer-
ings to  tiie  rock,  sacrificing  children,  llamas,  and  ducks.  All
together  went  back  to  the  munland,  and  shortly  afterward
learned  that  at  Pacari  Tampu  the  son  of  the  Snn  had  come
out  of  a  cavern,  called  Gapactocco,  in  great  splendor,  be-
dected  with  gold,  as  brilliant  in  appearance  as  his  father,
and  that  with  a  sling  he  had  hurled  a  stone  with  such  force
that  the  noise  was  heard  for  more  than  a  lea^e  off,  and  the
stone  made  in  the  rock  a  hole  as  large  as  a  doorway.^

"At  these  news  all  the  people  of  those  regions  went  to  see
the  miraculous  being.  Manco  Capao  received  them  as  sub-
jects. On  this  artifice  he  began  to  base  his  authority  and
the  subsequent  sway  of  the  Inca  tribe.""

Oliva  mentions  also  a  tradition  concerning  Tiahuanaoo,
according  to  which  that  place  would  be  the  oldest  settle-
mrait  in  the  land.  He  says  tiiat  the  original  name  of  Tiahua-
naco  is  Chucara,  and  that  nothing  is  known  of  its  earliest
history  beyond  that  "there  lived  the  great  chief  Huyusius,
who,  they  say,  was  lord  of  the  world.*'  This,  he  states,  was
long  previous  to  the  time  of  Manco  Capac.**

There  is,  in  the  tales  related  by  Oliva,  something  that
recalls  those  recorded  by  Cabello  Balboa,  and  it  would  not
be  surprising  if  the  writings  of  the  latter  could  have  been
known  to  the  former.*^  The  details  given  by  Oliva  on  the
earliest  periods,  and  about  the  manner  in  which  Titicaca
Island  became  connected  with  the  Inca  and  their  orijpn,  are
manifest  explanation  of  traditions,  related  in  mnch  greater
purity  by  Betanzos,  Cieza,  and  others.

At  the  time  when  Cobo  and  Oliva  were  gathering  folk-
lore on  the  past  of  the  tribes  of  Cnzco  and  of  the  Gollao,  the


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  327

Augostme  monks  in  charge  of  the  sanctuary  of  Copacavaiia
were  not  idle.  Leaving  aside  the  yet  insufficiently  known
work  attribnted  to  Fray  Baltazar  de  Salas,  printed  in
1628,'"  we  mnst  devote  serions  attention  to  the  History  of
Copacabana  by  Fray  Alonzo  Bamos  Oavilan,  published  at
Lima  in  1621.'*  That  book  is  exceedingly  rare,  but  the  late
Father  Sans  of  La  Paz  has  published  it  as  far  as  the  incom-
plete copy  at  his  command  permitted.  In  that  copy  the  first
three  chapters  were  lacking,  and  Sans  replaced  them  by  hia
own  views  of  the  early  history  of  Titicaca,  in  part  The
Bight  Beverend  Bishop  of  La  Paz,^on  Fray  Nicolas  Ar-
maitia,|  however,  aoqnainted  with  the  existence  of  two  com-
plete copies  of  the  work  of  Bamos,  took  pains  to  collate  the
book  of  Sans  with  one  of  these  copies,  and  was  also  kind
enongh  to  allow  me  to  copy  such  passages  as  were  not  con-
tained in  the  publications  of  the  former.  Hence  it  becomes
possible  to  investigate  the  text  of  Bamos  completely.  In
them,  a  popular  belief  is  mentioned  in  the  origin  of  Manco
Capac  from  Titicaca  Island."^  Bamos  also  speaks  of  a
mysterious  white  man  called  Tonnpa  and  Taapac,  murdered
by  the  Indians  on  the  Island."*^  Mention  is  also  made  of
the  belief  that,  after  several  days  of  obscurity,  the  sun  came
out  of  the  Sacred  Bock."*

There  are,  in  these  statements  of  Bamos,  many  points  of
resemblance  with  what  Cobo  preserved.  The  two  were  not
only  contemporaries,  but  resided  on  the  shores  of  Titicaca
at  the  same  time ;  the  Augustine  in  the  immediate  vicinity
of  Titicaca  at  Copacavana,  the  Jesuit  at  Juli  between  that
sanctuary  and  Puno.  There  may  have  been  communication
between  them,  or  each  may  have  obtained  his  information
independently  of  the  other.  Besides,  the  Tonapa  tale  as
related  by  Bamos  is  almost  identical  with  the  statements  on
the  same  topics  by  Salcamayhua,  another  contemporary  of
his."*'  It  will  be  recollected  that  Tunapa  was  already
alluded  to  by  Cieza,  but  very  few  are  the  details  he  gives,  in
comparison  with  what  is  contained  in  the  writings  of  Bamos


;cbyG00'^lc


328 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

and  Salcamayhna.  Between  1550  and  the  beginmng  of  the
aeventeenth  centary  only  a  few  fragments  of  stories  re-
sembling the  Tonapa  or  Tonapa  tradition  are  as  yet
known.>°*  Hence  it  is  possibly  a  CoUa  or  Aymara  tale^
heard  by  BamoB  and  Salcamayhna  from  AymarA  TnHiftns
or  (in  the  case  of  the  latter)  from  Qnichnas  confining  with
the  Aymara  stock.  (This  is  also  supported  by  the  first  ap-
pearance in  detail  of  the  legend  of  the  cross  of  Carabaco^
Anello  Oliva  makes  an  allusion  to  that  singular  tale,  but
he  is  posterior  to  Bamos.

Withal  elaborate  details  on  one  hand,  and  the  brevity  of
notices  on  the  other,  all  of  which  tends  to  shroud  the  sub-
stance of  original  tradition,  Bamos  agrees  with  Betanzos
and  Cieza  in  the  main,  which  is  the  more  important,  since  it
is  not  likely  he  consulted  the  works  of  either  of  these  early
writers.**"  He  appears  to  base  mainly  on  the  lore  he  col-
lected on  the  shores  of  the  Lake  and,  possibly,  on  the  Is-
lands. It  is  no  surprise,  therefore,  to  find  that  those  writers
of  his  order  that  followed  him  in  point  of  date,  are  hardly
more  than  copyists,  and  acknowledge  themselves  as  such.

Father  Antonio  de  la  Calancha,  a  contemporary  of  Bamos
and  a  punctual  follower  of  his  statements,'**"  alludes,  as  a
source  he  consulted,  also  to  the  Licentiate  Polo  de  Onde-
gardo,  of  whom  I  have  treated  before.  Calancha  refers  to
the  investigations  Oudegardo  carried  on  "in  all  the  conn-
try  above  Chuquiago  (La  Paz),  Chuquisaca  (Sucre),  Po-
toai,  and  their  surroundings,  where  the  Licentiate  Polo
made  bis  inquiries,  and  in  that  of  Chucuito."'"^  As  before
stated,  the  known  writings  of  Ondegardo  contain  no  Titi-
caca  lore,  so  that  Calancha  must  have  had  access  to  papers
that  are  as  yet  unpublished.  He  says  that,  according  to
what  Ondegardo  gathered,  the  first  men  lived  in  obscurity  •
and  were  nearly  all  destroyed  by  a  fiood,  but  multiplied
again,  and  the  builders  of  Tiahnanaco  were  tamed  into
stone;  after  which,  at  Tiahnanaco  and  on  Lake  Titicaca,  the
sun  and  moon  appeared. "The  sun  at  once  went  to  the


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS  329

Indian  Mango  Capac,  adopted  him,  made  him  king  .  .  .
and  then  rose  into  the  heavens.""**

(Father  Hippolyto  Maracci,"^  the  Augastine  Fray  Fer-
nando de  ValverdeXand  finally  the  Augustine  Fray  Andres
de  San  Nicolas"**— all  base  their  statements  on  the  writings
of  Fray  Alonzo  Ramos  Qavilan.  San  Nicolas,  after  repeat-
ing in  substance  what  Bamos  said,  admits:  "The  founda-
tion which  the  Indians  had  in  worshiping  the  island  and  the
rock  .  .  .  was  because  on  it  the  family  of  the  liicas  had
their  fabulous  origin."^"

White  the  traditions  which  we  have  compiled  differ  from
each  otiier  considerably  in  detail,  their  substance  agrees
fairly  well,  in  that  they  all  assign  to  a  remote  period  the
time  when  Titicaca  Island  first  came  into  prominence
among  the  Indians.  The  occasion  for  it  seems  to  have  been
some  natural  phenomenon.  A  period  of  darkness  (whether
long  or  short  is  not  safe  to  affirm)  seems  to  have  been  its
principal  feature.  After  it  the  heavenly  orbs  shone  out  in
splendor.  By  what  this  obscurity  was  produced  we  cannot
conjecture.'*"  Under  any  circumstances  it  appears  certain
that  the  tales  about  this  occurrence,  which  fastened  itself  so
firmly  on  the  minds  of  the  Indians,  are  local  tales,  not  gen-
eral myths.  They  belong  essentially  to  the  circle  of  Aymara
folk-lore,  whence  they  penetrated  to  a  certain  extent  beyond
their  original  home.

To  the  same  circle  must  be  assigned  the  statements  about
the  origin  of  the  Inca  from  Titicaca  Island,  in  connection
with  the  natural  phenomena  alluded  to.  These  also  appear,
in  their  primitive  form,  as  traditions  of  the  Aymara,  sub- 1
sequently,  as  shown  in  the  writings  of  Garcilasso  de  la'
Vega,  transferred  to  those  of  the  Quichua  of  Cnzco.


;cbyG00'^lc


.wGooi^lc


NOTES


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS
CONCERNING  THE  ISLAND  OF  TITICACA


*Tlw  "TlneoehM"  here  mantioQed
recall  the  "white  uid  bearded  men"
of  Cieia. See  farther  on.

'This  ptorj  is  u  truthful  (it  be-
ing well  catabliehed  that  Hoaaear  waa
tnardered  bj*  the  order  of  Atanhuallpa
near  Antamarea,  aonth  of  Cazamarea
and  north  of  ATaencho)  aa  that  re-
lated bj  Ciexa  (PHmera  Parte  St  la
Cr6niea,  Cap.  or,  p.  447),  that  Mnnco,
Inca,  the  one  who  led  the  Indiana  at
the  blockade  of  Cnico  in  1536,  waa
bom  at  Tiahnanaeo.

*  Something  analo^np  is  mentiiMted
in  that  long  and  tiraome  poem  bj
(Pedro  de  Peralta  Ba^lueTo|^Booha  7
Benavidea :  Lima  fvndada  o  Cmuimfta
del  Peru,  1732,  edition  of  186S,  Canto
aegundo,  p.  34.

"Deapnes  la  astata  Hnaco  &  infante
hermoBO,
Criado  en  el  seno  de  una  gmta  lun.

Para  darle  por  padrs  Inmiuoao

Del  dia  al  claro  aator,  lo  n^6  al  dia :

Lnego  en  nn  monte  al  parto  prodl-

gioao,
A  qoien  oro  ealaaba,  oro  veatia.
Lo  ezpueo  al  vnlgo  inflel  que  lo  jni-

No hijo ja, el miamo Sol que lo
alumbrsba.*'


'fCompare  mj  artide  on  "The
Honteauma  of  the  Pneblo  Indians,"
in  A-morican  Anthropologirt,  October,
18S2,  p.  325.)

*  Eapeciallj  at  the  pneblo  of  Co-
chitl.  New  Mexico,  where  mj  ainee
deceased  host,  (joan  Joei  Hontoja^
(M&^ya  Tihna),'\waa  Ter;  fond  of
displaTing  a  amatcering  of  elaaatcal
history,  gathered  at  random  in  conver-
sation with  tbe  prieata.

'Belatione  per  8va  Maetta,  Ba-
muaio,  lfi6e,  ToL  HI.

'HUtona  general  y  natural,  ToL
IV,  Lib.  ZLTi,  p.  235:  "A  eeta  tierra
Tino  antiguamente  an  grand  Bcfior  eon
una  gente  qne  llaman  luga  6  agora  ae
llaman  orejones,  6  solo  al  superior  le
llflnmTi  Inga  .  .  .  Bete  eefior  que  Ila*
man  Inga  pobid  el  CoMO,  6  hi^o  ana
eibdad  mnj  f  nerte  para  midir  fl  .  ,  . "

'Belanott  cM  Deieubritniento,  etc,
p.  234;  "Unoa  dieen  que  Bali6  de
la  iala  de  Titieaea  qnee  ana  isla  qaeatfi
en  nna  lagnna  en  el  Collao,  qne  tenia
seaenta  legnaa  en  torno  .  .  .  Otroe  in-
dios  dicen  queete  primer  tefior  lalid  de
Tambo,  eate  Tambo  eati  en  Conde-
snios  seis  leguas  del  Cnzco  poco  mas  6
menoB.  Este  primer  Inga  dieen  se
namaba  Inga  Tiracoeha. "

'Ditmno  tobre  la  Detontdetteia  y
Oobi&mo  Ae  lot  Ingot,  p. 6. This


;cbyG00'^lc


332


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI


document  wu  published  in  1892,  b;
Jimiiiei  de  la  Eapada,  nmder  the  title
ot  Una  Antigvalta  peruana.

"Diteurio,  p.  6;  "Difiron  este
cargo  4  perMiiaa  de  moeha  CDriooidad
por  Interpretaeion  de  Pedro  EacBlante
indio  ladino  en  lengna  eaatellana,  el
coal  Bervia  &  Taca  de  Curtro  de  inUr-
prete,  eon  aslatencia  de  Juan  de  Betau-
CM  7  Frtmeiieo  de  YiUscsatiu  vednoa
d«Bta  dodad  del  Cnceo,  petaonaa  qne
■abian  may  bien  la  lengna  general
deete  reino,  loe  enaka  iban  eaeribiendo
lo  qne  poy  loe  QoipM  iban  deola-
lando. ' '  mllacaatin  'Y*  mentioned,
now  and  iben,  aa  being  very  well
Tened  in  Indian  language.  Cieur
Segunda  ParU  tie  la  CrtMen,  p.  i,
and  other*.

°  On  Deeembei  1,  1S39,  one  Juan
de  Betanios  directed  a  letter  to  the
Conndl  of  the  Indiea  from  Santo  Do-
mingo, concerning  affaire  of  Cnbagna ;
Carta  ol  Contejo  real  dt  India*,  J>otm-
mmtof  iniditoa  de  Indiat,  Vol.  I,  p.
604.  It  ie  hardlr  poeeible  this  waa
the  Mme  aa  the  author  under  con-
aideratlon,  ainee  the  latter  would
•careely  hare  had  time  to  acquaint
hiniMlf  with  the  langnagea  of  Pent  in
the  cooTBe  of  abont  three  jears.

"The  manuKript  of  the  Doctrina
tAripttiana  Is  at  the  National  Archivea
of  Lima.  Betanxos  bstb  (Bitma  jr
Narraoion  de  lot  Inau,  Dedicatoria) :
"Hfime  eido  tambien  majr  penoM,  por
el  poeo  tiempo  qne  he  tenido  para
oenparme  en  ella,  pnes  para  el  otro
libro  de  U  Doetrina  era  meneater
todo."  Thia  ihows  that  he  worked  at
the  Utter  work  aimoltaneonelty  with
Ol*  Doetrina,

"BiURa  y  KarToettM,  p.  100:  "hasta
eate  alio  en  qne  eetamoa  de  mill
r  qninientoa  j  dnenenta  j  nn
aiioa."

"  We  may  gather  tMa  from  Orego-
rio  Qardai  Ortpen  de  lot  Indios,
edition  of  172S  (Proemio),  p.  4;
"Joan  de  Betoncoe,  eonqnistador  del
Perli,  fi  do  entrfi  con  D:  Francisco  Pi-
zarro,  hi^  vna  Hiatoria  por  mandado


da  D:  Antonio  de  Mendofa,  Yirrei  de
aqnel  Beino,  annqne  no  aali6  &  luz  . . .
Eata  Hiatoria  tengo  en  mi  poder,  la
qoal  me  ha  aiadado  barto  pan  eate
mi  Libro. ' '

**:8Knta  V  SarraouM,  IntrodnetiaB,
by  Eapada.

"  Swna  y  ^orraoMm,  Cap.  I,  |^  1
and  2.

"/bidm.

UAneDo  OliTa  {Riitoria  del  Fera
y  Farone*  Intignet  at  Amtidod  de  l»
Compote  de  /mn«,  IS31,  pnbliilied  at
Idma  abont  1802:,  Lib.  I,  Cap.  vm,
p.  168)  call!  him  "Pedro  de  (^esa
CoDgora."  I  have  not  yet  been  able
to  diecorer  on  what  anthority,

**  He  did  it  in  Uezieo,  aeeording  to
appearancea.

"Ciesa  hiniaelf  atatea  of  the  f^tat
Part  of  the  Chronicle,  Primera  Parte,
p.  45S:  "La  enal  se  comencd  &  c*-
crebir  en  la  dudad  de  Certago,  de  la
gobemadon  de  Popayan,  afto  de  1541,
y  H  aeabfi  de  eaerebir  otiginalmenta
en  la  dndad  de  loe  Beyea,  del  rdno  del
Ferfi,  &  8  diaa  del  mea  de  Setiembra
de  1550  aSoB,  lienda  el  aotor  da
edad  de  toeuito  y  dea  afioa,  ha-
biendo  gaatado  loa  diei  y  rieta  ddkN
an  aataa  Indias."  It  ia  well  eatab-
liahcd,  alao,  that  ha  died  at  Seville
in  1560.

'^Segunda  Parte,  Cap.  ti,  p.  13:
"T  poT  haeerlo  eon  mfca  veridad  visa
al  CuEco,  aiendo  en  elli
Jnan  de  Sayavedia,  donde  hic«  jui
&  Cayn  Tfipae,  que  ea  d  qne  hoy  vrra
de  loa  deeeendientea  de  Enaina  Capae,
porque  Sairi  Tfipac,  hijo  de  Ua^MO
Inca,  eati  retirado  en  Titieoa  ■  ■  •  y
6  otroB  de  loe  orejonea,  qne  aon  lea
que  entre  elloa  ae  tienen  por  mia  mo-
blea;  y  eon  loe  mejorea  intdipretaa  y
lengnaa  que  ae  hallaron  lea  pi^ont^
eatoe  aefiorea  Ineaa  quA  g«aite  era  y  da
qn£  nadon."

"Primera  Parte,  Cap.  cm,  p.  445:
"qne  carecicron  de  Inmbre  maeboa
diaa,  y  qne  eatando  todoe  poeatoa  ^
tinieblas  y  obaeuridad,  aali6  deata  iaia
de  Titicaea  el  eol  muy  reaplandecientv.


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS


poT  lo  CDal  1ft  tnvieron  por  torn,  ■&■
grada,  j  loi  ingaa  hieieron  en  ella  el
templo  que  digo,  que  tiii  entie  ellos
may  eet^nado  7  veoerado,  i  honra  de
Bu  Bol,  ,  .  ."  (Cap.  C,  p.  443),  "j
que  el  nno  delloa  eutTd  en  la  Ugnna
de  Titieaca,  j  qae  hall6  en  la  iala
mayor  que  tiene  aqnel  palnde  gentea
blancaa  y  que  teolan  barbaa,  eon  loa
cuales  peled  de  tal  mnnera,  que  loa
pudo  matai  t  todoa. "

"It  any  reliance  can  be  placed  on
the  Tariotu  liata  of  Inca  war-chiefs
given  by  the  anthon  of  the  aixteentli
century,  Inea  Tiraeoeha  mtwt  have
lived  about  the  end  of  the  fourteenth
century.

"  Seffwida  Forte,  Cap.  it,  p.  4,

"Ibidem,  p.  2.

"liidem.  Cap.  T,  p.  C

"  Ibidem,  p,  6.

"BelaMtm  del  DetoHbrimiento,  p.
233.

"  HiltoTia  de  las  ffuenat  oivUet  del
Peri,  III,  p.  421:  "Quanto  a  lo
primero  diaen  loa  yndioa  may  viejoa
7  antignoa  7  que  lo  07eron  drair  a  am
ma70Tea  y  lo  tienen  07  dia  en  ana
inemoriaa  7  cantarea,  qne  uto  aeiacien-
toa  afiofl  primeroa  que  no  tuTieron
reyee,  aino  vnoa  aefioretee  llamadoa
cnracaa  que  loa  gonemauan  eada  vno
en  m  prouineia  7  que  despnee  Tinieron
lofl  Yogas  que  reynaron  en  todas  eataa
pronineiaa,  qoe  lea  aum  mas  de  Seia-
eientoa  aBos.  Kl  primer  aedor  que
eomen^o  a  eotrar  por  tierras  agenaa
fne  llamado  Mango-Tnga  Capalla,"
et«.  There  is  a  certain  analogy  between
the  tale  abont  the  CoUao  and  Hatvn-
eoUa  (now  a  Tillage  a  short  distance
north  of  Puno  near  Lake  Titicaea)
told  by  QutietTSE,  and  the  following
statement  of  Cieia:  Seganda  Parte,
Cap.  IV,  p.  3:  "T  eatsndo  eatas  gentea
desta  manera  se  levantd  en  la  pro-
vineia  del  CoUao  nn  sefior  vaientlsiino
llamado  Zapana,  el  cual  pndo  tanto,
que  met  16  debajo  de  sa  aeSorlo  mnehas
gentea  de  aqnella  provincia."  This
Zapana  is  also  mentioned  by  Cieia  in
Frimera  Parte,  Cap.  0,  p.  443,  aa  one


of  the  earliest  and  principal  chiefs  of
the  Collao.  There  is  a  rMemblance
between  Zapalla  and  Zapana.  Ac-
cording to  Torres  Bnbio  (Arte  y  Vo-
eabidario,  foL  82),  Qapalla  means
"solo,  vno,"  in  Qnichna.  In  Aymari
there  is,  among  the  worda  nsed  to
designate  "the  only  one,"  according
to  Bertonio  (Fooabtdarto,  I,  p.  436),
"sapaktha,"  and  for  "alone  and  nB-
acoompanied, "  "  sapaqoi. ' '  The  term
Zapalla,  as  part  of  a  title  of  the  prin-
cipal Inea  war-chief,  is  found  in
Cieia,  Seiniiula  Parte,  Cap.  LXi,  p.  233 :
"Y  asl,  k  grandee  voeea  deeian:
Qnayna  Capae  Inca  Zapalla  tnenillaeta
nya,"  que  quiere  decir:  'Ouayna  Ca-
pae aolo  es  rey,  &  €1  oyau  todos  loa
pnebloa. '

The  Cona  and  Paehaeamae  myth  is
fOtmd  in  Hittoria  de  lae  gverrae
mvOm  del  Pera,  III,  Cap.  lvi,  p.  4S0
et  teq.:  "En  toda  esta  tiem,  *fT"i'*'fl
eemo  ea,  qne  los  logas  sefiorss  auian,
7  todoa  loe  yndioa  qne  en  ella  habi-
tanan,  adoranan  doe  diosea,  qne  el  mo
SB  deiia  Cons  7  el  otro  Paehaeama,
eomo  a  diosM  principalea;  7  por  aoee-
aorea  tenian  al  Sol  7  a  la  Lnna
(didendo)  qoe  eran  marido  7  mnger
7  qne  estoa  eran  mnltiplicadores  de
toda  la  tierra,"  etc.  (P.  493):
"Cnentan  loa  7ndioe  mn7  viejoa  qne
agora  a7,  qne  lo  oTeron  de  sns  passa-
doa,  qae  al  primer  Dloa  que  nvo  en  la
tierra  fne  llamado  Cona,  el  coal  f ormo
el  eielo,  aol,  la  lnna,  estrellas  y  la
tierra,  con  todos  loe  anlmalee  y  lo
demas  qne  ay  en  ella,  qae  fne  tan
Bolamente  con  el  pensamiento  7  eon
an  resaello,  7  qne  paaando  por  «etaa
tierms,  qne  eran  todavfa  deapobladas,
hiio  7  crio  todas  laa  eoaaa  qne  se  veen
7  pareseen  en  ellaa,  7  que  formo  eon
sn  reauello  todoe  los  yndios  7  loe  anl-
malee terreatrea  7  anea  eeleatea  y
maehoa  arholee  7  plantaa  de  dinenaa
maneras.  T  qae  despnee  deato  ae  foe
a  la  mar  7  que  andnno  a  pie  enjuto
Bobre  ella,  7  sobre  los  rioa,  7  qne  crio
todofl  los  peees  qne  a7,  eon  sola  sn
palabra,  7  que  hiso  otras  eosaa  mara-


;cbyG00'^lc


334


THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICAOA  AND  KOATI


Tllloau,  J  qoe  dwpDea  m  foe  detta
tiam  7  m  anbio  b1  ei«lo.  Desiftn  mu
Mtoa  yndiaa,  que  dMde  a  moeho  Uempo
J  a  mnchoa  afioa  f  siglo*  vino  a  la
tiern  td  otro  dioa  mai  podenwo  qae
Com,  llBmado  Pachaeama,  qne  qniere
decir  Hassdor  del  Himcio,  o  Be-
fonnador,  7  que  destrajo  eon  fnego
7  agua  todo  lo  hecho  7  criado  por
el  diot  Cona,  7  que  1m  TndiM  qne
ania  Im  Miniiiitio  en  aimlM  7  moDM
7  Im  onblo  a  bioir  a  1m  Andee  7  a
1m  TaDei  .  .  .  T  que  despvea  de  de-
■tTn7dM  eatM  tieiraa,  diwn  Im  TndiM
qne  el  diM  Pachaeama,  como  mas
podeiMo  en  todas  laa  ecus  7  por
otra  parte  miserieordiMO,  laa  toni6  &
nfonnai  7  a  mnndUeai  •  .  ■  7  qae
dapuM  de  lieebaa  Mtaa  cMaa,  eon
otraa  mndiaB,  disen  que  m  torao  a]
eielo."  The  analogy  between  the
above  and  the  myth  eonatgned  in  Be-
tancM,  of  the  two  aneceaaiTe  "erea-
tora,"  ia  manifeat,  bnt  in  the  venion
of  Qntierrea  the  atteriy  "nn-Indlan"
(notiona  of  a  ereation  perfonned  by
the  breath  of  a  ereattve  element  or
indiridnal,  and  especialhr  the  crea-
tion b7  meana  of  the  ' '  «t>ord, ' '
■how  that  the  lore  ia  no  longer  in
Its  primiUTO  state.  It  ia  likely  that
Qutierrea,  who  flniahed  hia  work
nearl7  fort7  7eara  after  he  had  been
in  Pern,  either  explained  while  pre-
tending to  eimply  narrate  the  talee,
or  that  he  adopted  adulterated  ver-

*  The  paangea  relating  to  the  a»-
aomed  ' '  eonqnest  0 1  Cnico ' '  are
found  in  his  Hittoria  de  lot  jWMToa
mvile*.  III,  p.  432  et  aeq.

'It  woi^d  be  too  long  to  refer  in
detail  to  this  anbjeet.  Intereated  atn-
denta  can  eaail7  compare  the  aeriea,
in  each  of  the  anthora  mentioned,
with  others,  and  draw  their  eonelii'
dons  aeeoidingl7.

"Bittoria  del  DetotibTimimto  y
CoRfKitta  d«  la  Proritwia  dol  Peri,
Vedia,  VoL  II,  p.  459.

**lfeid0m,  p.  470:  "T  al  principal
deQM  Uamaron  Zapalla  inga,  qoe  ea


solo  sefior,  annqne  slgnnM  qnierea  de-
cir  qne  le  Uamaron  inga  'Vlra-
eoeha  .  .  ."  This  reealla  Padre
Piiarro :  Jlelooion,  p.  234.

In  Qoiehua,  the  ear  ia  called  "liaa
rL"  Torrw  Rnbio:  Arte,  fola.  M,
135.

**  The  title  of  the  second  edition  of
Oomara  't  ehnniele  is :  Pria<«ra  jr
Segtmda  Parte  de  la  hiMtoria  geaenl
de  lot  India*  hatta  el  aHo  de  ISSl,
Medina  del  Campo,  1553;  I  iwe  the
reprint  b7  Tedia ;  J7u<onadores  prtKi-
tivot  de  ItidioM,  VoL  I,  p.  231.
Levinns  Apollonina  {De  pentanae  Be-
gion.it,  inter  Novi  Orhte  prvmiteiat
Celeherrimae,  in%ention«:  ^  ia  eaSfm
getie,  Libri  T,  Antwerp,  1567,  foL
36)  nterefy  eopiea,  in  a  eondenaed
form,  either  Qomarn  or  Z&rate.

"Congiiitta  y  Foblaeion  del  Peri,
Doemmeittoi  para  la  Sutoria  de  ChOe,
Vol  VII,  p.  447:  "Dieen  eatM  an-
jonea  qne  la  manera  qne  tnrlaron  paia
tener  safiores  entre  si,  fni  de  qne  ana
lagnna  qneati  treinta  legoaa  de  Cvko
en  la  tierra  del  Collao,  qne  se  llsMi
Titaeaea,  saliif  dellM  que  se  IhuBaba
Inga- Viracochs,  que  era  muy  eutaidido
7  aabio,  7  decla  que  era  hijo  dd  So^
7  £ste  dicen  elloa,  qne  Im  diA  polkia
de  vestidos,  y  ha^er  easaa  de  piedra,  7
ta6  fl  qoe  edified  el  Cnaeo,  7  hiao
eaaaa  de  piedra,"  etc  The  doeama^
cited  was  alread7  known  to  PnaeotL
There  ia  a  mannseript  cop7  of  H  at
the  Lenox  branch  of  the  New  ToA
Pnblie  Library,  and  it  has  beoi  pob-
llahed  twice,  both  timw  in  Sontt
America.  Jiminei  de  la  Espada  (Trn
BetooMHie*  de  AntigieAtdet  ffmninai.
Carta  al  Bxctno  Br.  D:FraHeiaea  de
Borja  Qneipo  de  Llano,  Conde  de
Toreno,  p.  xii!)  giTW  a  swngwfcat
different  title,  and  anggeata,  thait  tha
author  mi|^t  have  been  Father  Cifl'
tfival  de  Molina,  who  ia  known  ta
have  written  a  Deteripdon  de  todo  I0
desmbierto  y  andado  por  Don  Diofo
de  Almagro,  detde  Ttinles  al  rio  de
JfoHle,  in  1539.  This  docnment  is  BtHI
unpnldislied: Aelaoiottat gaogrSfcee


;cbyG00'^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS


335


de  Indiat,  I,  pp.  zlii  and  ezlii.  Ante-
cedent e».

"  Sitma  y  Narracion,  Cap.  H,  p.  8,

"  CcymentarioB  Seoiet,  editio  prin-
ceps,  Liabon,  1609,  Vol.  I,  Proemio.

"Iftidem,  I,  foL  263.

"Ibidem.  It  wonld  Teqnire  copy
of  the  whole  chapter  to  present  Uie
details.  The  petition  was  h&ndBomely
attended  to,  the  petitioners  receiving :
"Ea  assi  que  al  principio  deste  afio
de  BejB  cientoa  j  quatro  salio  la  con-
sulta  en  bu  negocio,  de  que  se  le  hazia
merced  de  siete  mil  j  quinientoa  diica-
doe  de  renta  perpetnos,  sitnadM  en  la
caxB  Beal  da  bd  Mageatad  en  la
cindad  da  Iob  Bejee,"  etc.

"  CoToentariot  BeaUt,  I,  Lib.  i,  Cap.
XV,  fol.  14.

*^  Ibidem,  toU  15.

"  Enrique  Torres  Saldamando ;  Lot
Anttguot  Jeauitat  del  Peri,  pp.  21  to
23,  indusive.  ,

"  The  name  was  probablyrLartBani,
or  Lartaun.'^  Mendibnru;  Diecionario
HistdTico  Biogrdfico  del  Peri,  VoL
IV,  p.  388.

Cobo  (Bittoria  del  Nuevo  Afundo,
Vol.  Ill,  p.  118),  after  mentioning
the  investigation  carried  on  under  the
anspicea  of  the  viceroy,  adds:  "Y
poco  deapuea,  en  otra  jonta  general
de  los  indios  viejoe  que  habian  alcan-
cado  el  reinado  del  Inca  Onalna
C&pac,  que  hizo  en  la  misma  cindad
del  Cuzco  Crist6bal  de  Molina,  cnra
de  la  parroquia  de  Nuestrs  Sefiora  da
lofl  Bemedios  del  Hospital  de  los
natnralea,  por  mandado  del  obispo
DiSebastian  de  Lartaum,  se  averignd
]o  mismo,  reaultando  della  una  copioaa
relacion  de  los  ritoa  j  fibulas  qtie  en
BU  gentilidad  tenian  los  indies  pema-
noB.  La  cual  conforms  en  todo  lo
Bustancial  con  la  del  lieeneiado  Polo
7  con  la  que  ae  hizo  por  orden  de
DrPrancisco  Toledo,  qne  ambaa  vinie-
Ton  &  mi  poder  .  .  ."

"  The  title  given  in  the  pnblicatioit
of  that  important  document  is  utterly
misleading,  aa  Jim6nei  de  la  Bapada
baa  justly  observed. It  reads:  Sela-


don  d«  los  fundamentog  aceroa  del
notable  daRo  que  retulta  de  no  fuardar
d  loB  Indioa  m*  Fverot,  Doe.  de  In-
diaa.  Vol.  XVII,  p.  9,

"  Ondegardo:  Belaoion  de  lot
fundamentot,  p.  10:  "porqne  dado
caao  como  es  ansi  quelloe  trtvieron
noticia  del  IMlnvio,  afirman  que  se
destruy6  todo  el  Mundo  por  agua;
desta  generalidad  dura  la  memoiia  en-
trellos  e  mny  generalmente  como  cosa
mny  notoiia. '  *  fit  must  be  noted  that
Ondegardo  made  hia  aearch  for  folk-
lore more  than  thirty  ysara  after  the
first  eontaet  of  Peruvian  Indians  with
whites,  and  when  the  chnrch  was  al-
ready well  established  in  that  part  of
South  America.  Also,  that  neither
Betanzos  nor  Qeza  allnde  to  a  tale  of
the  deluge  ^n  the  myths  they  have
preserved.  Arhere  are  some  stories  of
great  inundationa,  but  apparently
local  ones  only,  and  the  remark  is
very  pertinent,  by  Joseph  de  Acosta:
Hiatoria  natural  y  moral  de  lot  Ii\dia»,
1608,  Lib.  I,  Cap.  XXV,  p.  82:  "Ay
entre  ellos  comnnmente  gran  noticia,
y  mucha  platica  del  dilnvio,  pero  no
se  pnsds  bie  determinar,  ai  el  dilnuio
qne  estos  refieren,  ea  el  vnineiBal,  qne
enenta  la  dinina  Eseritnra,  o  si  fns  al-
gnno  otro  dilnuio,  o  innndaeion  par-
ticular, de  las  regionee  en  que  ellos
mor&:  mas  de  qne  en  aqueatas
tierraa,  hombrea  expertos  diien,  qne
se  veen  sefiales  claros,  de  aner  anido
algnna  grande  inondacion.  To  mas
me  llego  al  paree«r,  de  los  qne
aienten,  que  loa  rastroe  y  aeaales  que
ay  de  dilnuie,  no  son  del  de  Noe,  sino
de  algnno  otro  particular,  eomo  el  qne
euenta  Flaton,  o  el  qne  los  Poetas
cantan  de  Dencalion."

"The  hospital  for  Indians  was
founded  at  Cnseo  with  the  aid  of  vol-
untary donations  of  the  Spanish  rem-
dents  (amounting  to  17,314  pesos).
The  subscriptions  were  opened  March
25,  1556,  and  in  eleven  days  14,500
pesos  bad  been  subscribed.  See  Bela-
elon  de  la$  maiwla*  jf  limotjuu  que  los
VBfituM  V dbitantet Maienm m la


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


fwidaeion  M  dieho  hotpittO.  USS.
Origiiial  in  lAbro  viejo  de  la  funda-
oifrn  de  la  gran  oiwdad  dsl  Cvseo.
("Tha  Fablea  and  BUei  of  tA«
Tnau.  HaekluTt  Boeietr,  1873,  pp.  4
to  6.)

"EMoria  del  Nuevo  MundQ,  TV,
p.  44:  "La  Begimda  m  deeia  Piiqnin-
canchA.  Eta  una  easa  del  Sol  que
eataba  eucima  de  Cajoeaetie.  Socrill-
e&banle  nifioB."

"Segmtia  parte  de  la  BUtoria
general  Uamada  Indiea,  la  eital  par
mandado  del  exeelentUimo  eefior  Don
Franeiaeo  de  Toledo,  virrey,  gober-
itadoT,  y  oapit&n  goneral  de  lot  reino*
del  Pir&  y  majfordomo  de  la  oata  real
de  CattUla,  eompuia  el  oapitdn  Pedro
Barmiento  de  Qamhoa.  Finished
1ST2.  (Id  Abhandl.  der  Konigl.  6e-
aelUehaft  der  Wwenaehaften  m
OSttingtn,  Nene  Polfe,  Band  TI,
1902-1006.)

"  Informaekniet  aoeroa  del  SeRorio
y  Oobiemo  de  lot  Ingot  feeehtu  por
mandado  de  Don  Franciteo  de  Toledo,
Firev  del  Peri,  1570  to  1672,  pnb-
lished  by  Eqwda,  at  Uadrid,  in  1882,
together  with  the  Memoriat  of  )£ont»-
■inoa.  Carta  de  Don  Franeitco  de
livedo  ol  Contejo  de  Indiat,  March  1,
1ST2,  p.  249.  A  painted  doth  eontaiu-
ing  a  "genealogy"  of  Inea  Indiana
was  alao  tent  to  Spain  in  1603,  in
eare  of  Oarellawo  de  la  Tega,  bnt  it
■tood  in  no  relation  to  the  font  men-
tioned. Comentariat  Bealei,  1,  fol.
268:  "Y  para  major  verification,  j
demonatraeioa  embiaion  pintado  en
Tsnt  J  media  de  tafetan  bianco  de  la
Oiina  el  arbol  Beal,  deocendiendo
deade  Uaneo  Capac  haota  Enayna
Capac,  7  an  hijo  Panlln.  Teuian  loa
Yncaa  pintadoa  en  sn  tiage  antigno.
En  laa  eabe^as  trayan  la  borla  eolo-
Tada,  y  en  laa  orejaa  sna  OTegeraa:  y
en  Us  manos  sendaa  parteaanas  en
Ingar  de  cetro  Beal;  venian  pintadoa
de  loa  pechos  arriba  y  no  mas."  This
agrees  fairly  well  with  the  so-ealled
pictures  of  the  Inca  chiefs  giren  by
HerreTS,  and,  as  the  date  when  the


eloth  was  sent  to  Qardlaaw  was  a
few  years  prerious  to  the  pvUiea-
tion  of  the  Utter 's  book,  there  is
a  poaaibility  that  thU  clotfa,  and
not  the  four  painted  pieeea  sent  by
Toledo,  served  to  Heireia  aa  ori^-
nals.  It  is  true,  however,  that  PanDa
Inea  does  not  appear  on  Herman
mfidaillona.

"  See  note  43.

**  Jn/ormaoionM  aoeroa  del  SeHorio
y  Oobiemo  de  lot  tngat,  p.  267.  Only
one  witness,  originally  ^om  Chadis*
poyaa,  bnt  living  on  the  eoaat  at
Hnacho,  teati£ed  that  "Manco  C^>ae
habia  salido  de  una  Fefia  de  Ploooo."
This  alludes  to  the  Qnichns  interpre-
tation of  the  word  "Titieaea."  Am
already  stated,  the  word  ia  Aynar^
and  signifies  "rock  of  the  wild  eat."
The  Indians  who  dwelt  on  and  near
the  Island  long  before  the  Inea  ^»-
peared  were  Aymarfi,  who  gave  the
name  to  the  Island  in  their  nstivs
tongne.

From  the  writings  of  Calandia
(Cordntoa  MoraUmida,  VoL  I,  Lib.  i^
Cap.  z,  p.  366)  it  seema  the  ineati-
gationa  of  Ondegardo  are  also  en-
bodied  in  another  report  which  is  not
accaosible  to  me.

"Segunda  Parte  de  la  Hist.  ffraL
Oamada  Indiea,  p.  26.

**I  qnote  from  the  Frmch  transla-
tion of  the  UiteeUnea  aiutrtU,  by
(Temanx  Compans,^  pablished  im^r
the  title  of  Hittoire  da  FSrott,  pp.  11
and  144.

*Acosta  was  bom  at  Medina  dd
Campo,  in  Spain,  abont  the  year  1540.
Torres  Saldamando:  Lot  antiffmae
Jetvitat  del  Peni,  p.  2.  The  daU  *
given  in  my  text  are  found  on  pagaa
2  and  10.  He  died  at  Salamanca,
Febrnary  15,  1600.

"  Bietoria  natural  y  MoroJ  de  Us '
Indiat,  Lib.  YI,  Cap.  xix,  p.  4£9:
"Por  mandado  de  U  Mageetad  Cato-
lica  del  Sej  don  Felipe  BBeatra
sefioT,  so  hico  anerignaeion  eon  la  dili-
gencia  que  f  ne  possible  del  origen,  j
ritoi^  y  fueroe  de  loe  Inga^  j  por  no


;cbyG00'^lc


ABOBiaiNAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS


tener  aqnellM  Indioa  eBeiitnraa,  no  se
pndo  aporar  tanto  como  se  denma."

"  Sitt.  natural,  etc^  p.  82.

"  Ibidem,  p.  432.

"  The  fint  edition  of  Eemra  ii
from  IBOl-ieiS.  I  nee  the  one  edited
bjr  Bareia,  from  1726,  1728-lT3a
Sittona  general  de  lot  Eeohot  de  lot
CatteHanoa  en  lot  lata*  jt  Tierra  firme
del  Mar  Oc&mo,  VoL  II,  Dec  v,  p.  60
«t  teq.

"Origen  de  lot  Indioe,  edition
1729,  pp.  333  and  334.  He  bIbo  quotes
Cieia  and  Acoata.

*■  Lot  Bep&>licat  del  Uiindo,  Sala-
manca, 1595,  VoL  III,  Lib.  Q,  Gap.
XI,  fol.  163.

"  I  follow  the  indleationB  of  Bon
MareoB  Jimlnei  de  la  Espsda:  Tret
S^aeione*,  p.  zliv:  "La  drcunBtancift
de  eDeontrarae  jnnto  con  otroit  USS.
del  Dr.  Francisco  de  Aiila,  j  anotado
ademas  por  el  sablo  visitador,  aobre
atmuar  so  iateres,  noe  preats  algnna
Inz  aeerea  de  la  fecha  en  ^ne  debi4
eacribirse,  j  que  70  pongo  no  lejoe  de
loea&oflde  1613."

"SsCocion  de  AnUgHedadee  deite
Beyno  del  PirH,  Tret  BeJaeionei,  p.
234.  He  aaja:  "que  entre  loe  nstn-
ralea  &  laa  cosaa  de  loe  tiempos
paaaadoe  aiempre  Iob  snelen  pailar,"
etc  The  word  "parlar"  for  "to
speak"  is  nsed  to-daj  bj  tiie  Aj-
marA  genatallj.  In  Voeabtilario  de
lot  Vocee  ueaalee  de  Aytnara  al  Cat-
tellano  y  Quechaa,  1895,  p.  2,  "Par-
lai"  is  given  as  the  Quiehua  term  for
*  hofilor,  and  "amsilia"  for  the
ATroari,  Hence  it  would  seem  to
have  been,  a  Quichna  word,  alUioagh  it
la  not  found  in  Torres  Bnbio,  Arte  y
Pmubitlano.  1754,  nor  in  Tsehodi,
AlF£>rt«r6««h!il853,  or  in  Bertonio.
^  "Bslooion'de  Antig^edadee,  p.  234,
same  volnme,  p.  xliii:  "Forqne  eeo  si,
D:JDan  de  Banta  Cras  qniere  mos-
traiM  «ftt61ico  cristianD  4  toda  owta,
convirtiendo,  uempre  _  qne  pnede,  en
nnestros  djablos  los  antignos  espiritus
de  loe  hnacaa,  j  anstitayendo  la  inter-
vendon  bondadoaa  fi  serera  del  ineom-


prensible  Eniracocha  en  cintos
hechos  materialee  7  eztemoe,  A  en  la
conciencia  de  loa  Incaa,  por  la  de
Jesneristo  6  la  de  sn  etemo  Padre."

"Ibidem, p.  234.

"ibidem,  p.  236.

"  P.  289.

"P.  240.

-  Pp.  237  and  240.

"  Ibidem,  p.  240  ri  teq.

"  P.  237.

"  Ezttrpooion  de  la  Fdolatria  del
Pin,  Lima,  1621.  Father  Arriaga
was  bom  at  Tergara,  in  Biseaj,  in
1564,  went  to  Peru  in  1585,  returning
to  Spain  (after  Iiaving  been  admitted
into  the  Societf  of  Jems  and  received
ordination)  in  1601.  He  came  back
to  Peru  three  years  after  and  was  en-
gaged in  the  STstematic  inveatigation
of  ancient  Pernviaa  ceremonials.  He
became  entrnsted  with  tlie  eonstrue-
tioQ  of  the  College  of  Caciques  at
Lima,  which  was  opened  in  1619.
Father  Arriaga  perished,  1622,  near
Havana  in  a  tempest  that  wrecked  a
unmber  of  Tessele.

"He  came  to  Pern  in  1610,  and
died  at  Lima,  I>ecember  3,  1670.
Torres  Saldamasdo:  Loe  antiguo*
Jeevitat,  p.  122.  Arriaga  cites  bim
freqnent^  and  Tnj  Antonio  de  la
Calancha  (Cor^ioa  Mordliaada,  Vol.
I,  p.  410)  refers  to  his  mannseript
entitled  Contra  IdolatHoni  as  a  very
valuable  soorce  on  the  ceremonials  of
the  Indians  of  the  coast.  !E!spada,  in
his  introdnetlon  (letter  to  the  Conda
de  Toreno,  Tret  Selootones,  p.  zzziv),
mentiona  two  works  of  Father  Ter-
hnel:  Trotodo  de  lot  idotatriae  de  loe
indto*  del  Peru,  and  the  above  cited
Conlrd  Jdolatriam,  of  which  he  says:
"en  que  ae  oeupa  dd  ortgen  de  los
indioa  yuncas  6  de  los  llanos  eoste-
■fioe."

"Bxtirpaoion  de  la  Tdolatria,  Cap.
IX,  p.  53.

'^ Exttrpaoifn,  p.  6:  "Despnes  de
lod  dichos  dos  Tisitadorea,  el  primero
que  pnso  mas  cuidado  en  esto  fufi  el
Doctor  Fernando  de  Avendafio,  qne


;cbyG00'^lc


THE  ISLANDS  OP  TITIOACA  AND  KOATI


tenia  entoncM  la  doetrina  de  San  Pe-
dro de  Casta  en  la  minna  proriitcla  de
HoaioduTL"  Exti«cts  of  letters
writteD  t^  Avendafio  are  givea  bj
Arriaga.  Very  TBlnable,  principallr
for  lisgniaties,  are  the  ntnnoxm
preached  by  Aveodafio  in  Qnichua  and
published  (with  a  Spanish  transla-
tioo)  in  1649  at  Lima;  Sermonea  de
lOM  MUteriot  da  Nvegtra  Santa  Fa
catolioa,  en  Leagva  caiteUana,  y  la
general  del  Inaa.  Thej  contain  noth-
ing relative  to  Titicaea.

**  Extirpaoion,  Cap.  xv,  p.  88 :
"Todo  lo  que  diieren  &  de  yr  escri-
viendo  breremente,  pero  con  claridad,
J  di«tinoion  para  mejar  entendeise  en
vn  libro  bianco,  qne  tendra  para  cste
efeeto;  poniendo  sn  titnlo.  La  Ydol»-
tria  que  se  deeeubriA  en  tal  poeblo,
tal  dia  mee  j  afio.  Y  en  el  misnio
libio  a  parte,  o  en  otro  distinto,  yra
escriviendo,  lo  q  inddstemente  deecu-
briere  do  Hnacas,  o  Hechizeros,  o  cosaa
BomejanteB  de  otros  puebloe.  Y  lo
mismo  hara  eada  j  qnando,  que
eapiere  laa  eosas  de  otraa  partes,
snnque  no  soan  de  an  visita  .  .  .  De
qual  quiera  manera  que  eea  todo  lo
que  Be  anpiere,  lo  eierto  eomo  oierto,
7  Id  dudoeo,  eomo  dndoso,  so  i  de
eecribir  con  claridad,  pnntnalidad,  y
diligencia. "

"  I  refer,  for  such  works,  to  the
letter  to  the  Condo  Toreno,  by  Es-
pada,  in  TTe$  Belaoiones  de  Antig^-
dadet  Peruanat.

"Siatoria  del  Nnevo  Mundo,  com-
pleted 1653,  bnt  published  in  SeriUa
in  1900,  in  four  volnmee.  It  is  one
of  the  most  important  works  on  Span-
ish America  (the  author  also  lived  in
Mexico  for  twenty  yeara)  for  eth-
nology, archaeology  and  natural  his-
tory for  the  seventeeoth  century.

"Hwtoria  del  Nvevo  Mvndo,  VoL
HI,  p.  12L

"  mdem.

"  P.  122.

■P.  128.

"P.12t

"P.  128.


■P.  125:  "Otra  f&bola  del  orign
de  lofl  Ineaa  ea  mny  semejante  &  erta,
salvo  que  afirma  que  loa  primeKa
nncieron  en  la  sobredidia  iota  de  VM
mnjer  llamnda  TiUeBca,  de  qnien
toni6  el  nombre  qne  hoy  tiene  la  iaia
y  lagnna."

-Vol.  IV,  p.  85.

"Sittoria  del  Pent  y  Vamnea  i»-
tignet  en  Santidad  de  la  CowipaAia  de
Jemu,  p.  xvL

"  P.  5  rt  teq.

"Lib.  I,  Cap.  n,  p.  23:  "Notida
eerit  eota  que  no  Be  hallari  tan  fa«il-
mente  en  laa  historias,  par  lo  manoa
con  auer  viato,  y  leido  mnehaa  no  la
h6  alcanfado  dellaa,  y  en  d  tim^K)
que  eetoy  eecribiendo  eata  vinieron  &
mia  manos  unoa  papelee  originaleo,
que  me  di6  el  doctor  Bartcdame  Cer-
vantes, radonero  de  la  Bancta  y^ena
de  loe  Charcas  en  qne  haU£  eon  pnn-
tnalidad lo  que  mochoe  anoe  fi  6  de-
seado  saber."

"  Pp.  18,  19  and  20.

■Lib.  I,  Cap.  n,  p.  17.

"  Cofltentarioe  Beaiea,  I,  foL  137-
He  claims:  "Yo  trat6  loe  Qu^db  j
lludos  con  loe  Yndios  de  mi  padre,  y
con  otroe  Curacaa  qoando  per  ann
Jnan  y  Nauidad  venian  a  la  Ciadad,
a  pagar  sns  tribntoB.  Los  Cnnuaa
agenoe  rogauan  a  mi  madre,  que  me
mandasse  lee  coteja«ee  sua  cnentas  por
que,  eomo  gente  soepeefaoaa,  no  se
flauan  de  los  Eepafiolee,  que  lea  tr«-
taasen  verdad  en  aqnd  particalar,
hasta  que  yo  lea  certiflcMia  della,
leyendoles  los  trasladoe,  que  de  am
tribntos  me  trayan,  y  eotejandokM
con  sue  findos,  y  desta  manera  supe
dellos  tanto  eomo  los  Yndioa."

"  Siatoria  del  Perv,  Lib.  I,  Cap.  n,
pp.  23-27.  The  story  of  the  throw
with  the  sling  was  repeated  to  ns  by
an  Indian  from  At&ngaro  north  of
the  Lake,  with  slight  variations.

"P.  38:  "Lnego  dinidifi  d  Seaiw
en  qnatro  partes  que  aon  laa  miin—
en  qn£  el gran Hnynstus antea  qoe


.wGooi^lc


ABORIGINAL  MYTHS  AND  TRADITIONS


eomeiisarti  i  reiaar  m  padre  Usnco
Capac  lo  aula  repartido  .  .  ."  This
tbIbtb  to  the  Inea  war-chief  Sindii
Soca  and  allndeB  to  a  aapposed  ante-
rior rale,  the  seat  of  which  was  Tia-
hoanaeo.  (P.  39.)  "T  paesd  i  laa
partes  de  Tyyaj  Tanacn  por  ver  mi»
ediflcioe  qne  antiguameate  llamabau
Chncara,  eaya.  antigiiedad  aadie  aapo
detenninalla.  Mas  aolo  que  all!  vivia
el  grau  seEior  HaToatiia  qae  dedan  ser
SeBor  de  todo  el  mundo."  The  word
' '  HujuBtuB ' '  is  BDspidoDB.  It  is
neither  Qnichna  nor  ATmarti,  and  re-
calla  the  manner  in  which  the  Indians
of  those  parts  would  pronounce  "Ad-
gnstus"  1

"  Cabello  Balboa  was  aUve  in  1603.
Orden  y  Traea  para  deteubrir  y  poblar
la  tierra  de  tot  Chvnehoi  y  otrai  pro-
vincvu,  SeL  geogr&pxu,  11,  Apfodice
III,  p.  ciii.

"Tizcarra:  Copaea3>a»a  de  lof  /n-
oai.  About  this  rather  snapiciona
book,  and  that  of  Salaa  npon  which  it
claims  to  be  baaed,  aee  preceding
chaptera.

"  The  work  of  Father  Bamos  ia
exceedingly  rare.  I  know  of  onl7  f  onr
copiee,  one  of  which  (and  an  Incom-
plete eop7)  waa  taken  to  Spain  bj
Father  Bafael  Sana,  whUe  two  intact
ones  are  in  Bolivia  and  the  fourth
one  at  the  Hispanic  Society  of
America.  Uj  friend,  the  ffig^t
Beverend  Biahop  of  La  Pai,  Pray
Nicolas  Armentia,  had  the  kind-
uesa  to  compare  the  text  of  one
of  these  copies  with  the  pnrported
reprint  of  the  book  by  the  late
Father  Nicolaa  Sana,  and  to  fnmiah
ine  with  the  title  of  the  original,
wliich  is :  Hittoria  del  cSlebre  y  mila-
fffoto  Banttiario  de  la  Timgne  Tntdgen
de  Kfh  8fi  de  Copacabana,  Lima,
1621.  Of  the  partial  reprinte  nude
by  Father  Sans  there  are  two  editiona,
also  rare,  the  first  one  of  which,  dated
1860,  eontaina  a  map  of  Lake  Titicaca
and  sn  ontline  sketch  of  Copacavana.
The  aecond  edition  bears  date  1686.
I  qnote  from  tike  former.


'^Eittoria  de  Copaeahana,  1860,
Cap.  i-n,  p.  3:  "y  de  la  caal  la
tradicion  Tulgor  hace  salir  a  Haaco
Capac  a  la  conqnista  del  imperio."
This  is  from  Father  Sana.

"*  Cap.  zxTH,  p.  S3  At  »eq.

"Cap.  Tin,  p.  12:  " El  foadamento
de  la  estimacion  de  esta  isla  fad  ha-
benie  creido  por  los  antigaos  qne,
habiendo  estado  en  tinieblas  algnnos
diaa,  vieron  dwpnes  aalir  al  Sol  de
aqnella  pe&a."

"*  With  the  difference  that  Bamos
gives  more  detail  concerning  the  mya-
teriona  "Cross  of  Carafanco."  See
my  article  in  the  American  Anthro-
pologitt,  Vol.  TI,  No.  5.  "The  Cross
of  Carabnco. "

"And  even  that  resemblance  ia
very  faint.  Compare  Belacion  de  lo
Beligion  y  Bitoa  del  Pent,  tiecha  por
lot  prim«roa  Beligiotot  Agiutittoa
que  alii  posaron  para  la  Convernon
de  lot  naturaUt,  Doe.  de  Indiat,  III,
p.  2i;  alao  Cabello  Balboa:  Mit-
celanla  anstral  (M3S.).

™  The  manuscript  of  Betauos  was,
when  Bamos  wrote,  in  Spain,  and
possibly  in  the  hands  of  Fray  Gre-
gorio  Garcia.  Of  the  writings  of
Ciesa  only  the  flrat  part  had  been
published.

""According  to  Mendiblira  {Die-
oionaTio,  VoL  n,  p.  117),  Calancha
was  born  at  Snere  (now  in  Bolivia),
in  1584,  and  died  1654.  His  pon-
derom,  but  valuable  work,  Cor^toa
Iforalizoda,  was  pnbliahed,  the  first
Tolnme  in  1638,  the  second  (very
rare),  in  1653.

*"  CoT6nioa  Moralvada,  Vol  I,  Lib.
n,  Cap.  I,  p.  366.

"'Ibidem,  p.  367.

"'De  diva  virgine,  Copaeavana,  tn
peruana  novi  mvndt  Segno  oeteber-
tima.  Liber  vnvt,  Quo  eivt  Origo,  et
iliraonla  eompendio  detenpta,  Rome,
1656.

'"Imdgen  de  N:S:  de  Copaoavana,
mentioned  previously.

"/dSfB,  foL  IB.

■"Bamos:  Eittoria  de  Copaeabana,


;cbyG00'^lc


340 THE  ISLANDS  OF  TITICACA  AND  KOATI

Cap.  Tin,  p.  12,  sdition  of  1S60:  "EI  in  which  the  region  la  aaid  to  har*

fiutdamento  de  U  eatimAcioQ  da  eata  been  plnnged. Bome  aiathon  mention

isls  fa£  el  haberse  creido  por  loa  an-  a  long  period,  wtiile  othera  apeak  of

tignoe  qne,  habiendo  eetado  en  tinie-  merely a  few  dajs. Soeh a ahurt

blaa  algunoa  diaa,  vioron  deopaea  aalir  period  of  darknesa  waa  at  Copaearana

al  Sot  da  aqaella  pefia." I  call  at-  produced  bj  the  eruption  of  the  toI-

tentioQ  to  the  Tariona  veraioiia  eon-  cano of Ornate in 1600. Bamoa:

eerning  the  dnration  of  tlie  obacnrity  Bittoria,  p.  120.


;cbyG00'^lc


LIST  OF  INDIGENOUS  PLANTS

These  jdantB  vere  collected  by  Mrs.  Ad.  F.  fiandelier  on  the
Island  of  Titicaca,  and  ose  was  made  thereof  according  to  Btato-
ments  of  the  Indiana.


Nmma  In  Arnmi  IiaUa  NaoM  Um  In  Indian  M't^HM

BeUlajft Malvagtrum "Against  all  land  of  diseases"

Chapi Relbmunm  microphjUnm

(Gray)  Hemsley Same

Chancha Not  determined Against  dog-bite. The  plant

is  groimd  to  a  pnlp,  which
ia  mixed  with  the  ashea  of
the  hairs  of  the  dog  and
applied  as  a  plaster  on  the
woond

dhiki  Acicarpba  procombens

Lass Taken  as  an  infusion  to  re-

freeh  the  blood  after  a  dis-
pute or  quarrel

Hannea Not  determined Not  used  on  the  Island

Hannk'ara Lepidinm  bonarensis  DC  .  Against  pneomouia  and  plen-

roais. Taken  as  infusion

Hanuk'sra  inna  .  Not  determined Not  osed  on  the  Island

Kachii-Kaehn  . . .  Erodinm  cicntarinm  L'Her  Against  goitre.  Toasted  like
coSee,  ground  and  applied
OD  the  skin.  Some  nae  in
the  case  of  sores

Sea-Kea Not  determined Placed  on  wounds  or  cuts  to

stop  bleeding

Layn-Layn Oxalis,  probably  a  new

species Not  used  on  the  Island

Marancela Si^rincbinm  Sps.,  near  "i

8.  posilla  H.  B.  K.  . .  }  Both  need  as  purgatives

Marancela Lobelia  nana  H.  B.  K.  .  )

Miaiou  Not  determined Atrainst  pain  in  the  stomach

Idani-llimi Not  detennined Same  use  as  Ctiik'i


;cbyG00'^lc


LIST  OF  INDIGiaJOro  PLANTS


Nuns  In  ATnuui  Latdn  Huna

Knaomaya Bolannm  BOFeifolinm

Rnsby


Panti-Panti Cosmos  pnleberrimiu  .


Sasaya  blanca  . .  Cerastium  arrense  L.  .


ToDonarl Acicarpha  .


TTairank'aja  Rannncnlns  pnamorsos

H.B.K

Verbena Yerbeoa


Uh  In  IndluKadldD*

..The  leaves,  dried  and  moist-
ened with  native  giape-
biandy,  are  wrapped  aroimd
the  body  of  a  child  that  haa
been  frightened  b;  thesi^it
of  a  coipse.  If  the  child
falls  into  perspliation  and
its  eheeks  become  red,  it  is
looked  upon  as  saved,  other-
wise it  may  die.  See  "Iat-
pata"
.  The  root  and  flowers  are  used
for  preparing  a  hot  infu-
aon  which  ia  an  ezcelleot
remedy  against  severe  colds

. .  Taken  as  infusion  against
sodden  affections  of  the
Inngs  and  some  nervous  dis-
eases peculiar  to  the  ooon-
try

.  While  admitting  that  the  plant
is  Dsed  by  them  for  medie-
inal  purpoees,  the  Indians
obstinately  refused  to  give
any  information  on  the  sub-
ject

, .  Not  used  on  the  Island
. .  For  all  sorts  of  d


The  determination  of  botanical  names  in  the  above  list  is  doe  to
the  kindness  of  Professor  Nathaniel  L.  Britton,  Director  of  the  New
York  Botanical  Gardens.


;cbyG00'^lc


INDEX


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


INDEX  TO  PRINTED  SOUECES  IN  THIS  VOLUME

(Tbapafenomba*  toUowtaiCtiUH  T^a  to  thia  Tolams.)

jL«oM>,  p.  Io»r  d«:  ISO. ISS,  34^  24B,  3S4,  380,  307,  8S3,

HblorlB  nUnnl  j  moral  it  Indtu.  lOTS.  BBS

lee,  S8S,  887

AmhIi,  AlnundTfi,  and  Oknuu,  S.  V.;  O*b«llo  Bdboa,  Hlcnd  da;

Exploration  of  Lako  Tllleua. S3  Hittoln dn Ptoon <T«niBiix Oimpui*).

AaoDTinou :  S86

BoUcloD  dal  iIUd  dal  Cnioo. 344  Oklkocfai,  rnr  Antonio  da  te:

TocsbDlario do  1m toch naaatsa do  At-  Oot6bhmi Horaliudo dal Ordon da Bob

- - ~  iu>  J  Qnaehu,  180*,  a«.  AnRin  an  al  Pord,  ToL  I.  1688. 87,  80.


ISM,  343,  AfBRin  an  al  Pord.  ToL  I,  1688. 87,  80.
80,  ST,  3BT,  3BB,  888,  BBB

Ralaelon  do  Im  coilnoibrca  untlnu  da  1«  Vol. II. 18G8. 36, 187, 166, 343, 344.

natnralM dal PlnL iBlS <in  Trea  Kola-  340,  34B,  3S1

elonoo  do  Antlittedadaa  pamanai). 150.  Oaaaa,  Pray  Butokml  da  laa:

lEl,  ISS,  348  BroBlatima  raUdon  daU  doatmjclon  dilu

La  ConqnlaU  dal  Paru,  Damada  la  Nnena  Yndlaa  (Vonlce.  1048). 18B

CaatUla, SarlDa, 1S84. 139,  3G3  Cl«*  do  Uon.  Podro  do;

Apollanlna,  Iiarlnna:  ,  SeBonda Part* do la Ordnloa dol Pam,

Do pamanao Bailanta, intar Raul Otiili  Qne  traU  dol  Safiorto  do  loa  Ineaa  Tnpan-

proninalaa.  Oalabarrlmaa,  Innontlooo:  8  In  qolar  daini  Orandoo  HooboarOobamaeiDn

•adem  iBalla,  ISBT. 884  (writton prarloni to 1B80, pnblialiod

AnklTo  boUTiano:  Hadrid. 1880). 3»,  186. 150, 164, IBS,

Carta  da  loa  prinelpaliB  da  Stea-ilsa  1  la  IBB,  344,  846.  3B4,  3BB,  360.  3BB,  883,  BBB

Comnnldad  do  OaDapa  (1781). 14B  Prlnora Parto  do  la Ordoloa dol Form.

Borda,  Pray  Ifatlaa;  39,  B4,  88,  86,  IBl, 186,  IBB,  141.  143,

iDformo  (1781). 14G,  14B  .  146. 147, 149, 151,  341,  348,  35S,  356,

^--.,  P.  Pablo,  Jooot  do:  386,  383,  8B1,  SB3,  BBB

— ^lon  da  U  TdoUtrU  dol  Pir*,  1031.  Oobo,  P.  BornabJ:

'B, •««. 147. 148, 148, ISO, 151. 158,  Hlatoria  dal  Nnoro  Mnndo,  1066 (Bnflla,

1B4, ISS, 156, 167, tSS, 169,  34).  34B,  18B0). 3B, 84, 56. ISG. 186,  187.  189,

347.  348,  350,  3GB.  887,  888  140, 141, 143,  148, 148. 160, 168, 154,

Avandafio,  P.  Pomando  da:  IGS, 1S6, 1S7, IBB, 160,  343,  348, 344,

SanaoDOa da loa Mlatarloa do Mn«tra  346,  246,  347,  346,  34B,  3G0,  351,  3G5,

Santa  Po  eatoUoa, an Lonpia  laataQana,  350.  38S,  38T,  388,  388,  BSG,  886,  888

J  la  nnarBl  dal  Inaa,  104B. 888  Hialorla  da  1^  Pnndailon  do  Lima  {168B}.

134

Bandalior,  Ad.  P.:  Colooclon da Documentoo InMlloa aobr* la

nM  AborlBlnal  Bnlna  at  BUlnatanl. Pam.  Hiatorja  da  OUIa:

1906. 24i  Vol.  VIL

The Uontanuna at tbo Psoblo Indlaoi,  Eipoalnlon  da  Hamas  Jlmanaa  aearoa  do

18B3. 881  laa  daaaTonanelaa da  Piaarra  ;  Almacro.

An Archaaoloaleal Baeonnfllaaanco Into  1S6

Koitoo (oaoond  edition}. 189, 140, 141,  Anonjinotu :

343  Omqnlda  j  PobUdon  dol  Pari. 1B7,

Pinal  Beport  of  InTenisalloni  amona  tba  343.  884

Indiana at tba SoDthwoaum United  ToL  XII.


filataa. VoL I. 140. 141, 387  Oarela  do  THIbIob,  Dtafo:

Oroaa  of  Oarabnco (Amarioan  AiithK>poli>-  Bobra  roMhodon  da  lodloo. 184

|M.  ToL  VT). 144._  143,  14S. 1G4,  S89 CMaerion Oa Doonmantaa intdltga pan 1


-_j|  Beport,  ete..  ToL  11. 241,  346  Hialorla  dc  _.,

Baaadra.  Kodooto:  Vol.  I.

Loa  Lana  de  Tltlcsaea (In  Boletln  da  la  Oariro,  Prar  OrlatAbal  da:

Soelodad  Oeonaflsa  da  Lima,  Tomo  III}.  Bolaelon  y  docUraclon  dal  Dodo  qua  oato

38,  34,  3T  nlla  da OUncba  t  ana  comaroauoa  aa

Bortonio,  P.  LndoTleo:  (obemabaa.  alo..  1B5B. 368

Arta J QrammatLca nxTj aoploaa da la  VoL  V.

Lanna AymarB (1608, Plalimann fan-  Pliarro,  Pedro;

almila  ISTO}. 180  Balaoion  dol  Donnibrlnilento  j  Oonqnlata

Tocabnlarlo  an  U  Lanna  AjnarB  (1613).  do  loa  Belnoa  dal  Part,  1571. 84.  85.

143, 156, 159,  341, 343,  348, 344, 888,  140,  143,  140,  147,  149,  ISO,  15S,  IGB,

887  341,  3G3,  3BG,  3G0,  38T,  881.  888,  884

BMBUioa, Joan da  -.  Samano,  Juan  da :

Sana  7  Narraeion  do  loa Tneai  quo  loa  Balaslon  de  loa  prlmaroc  doaenlnimlantoa

Indioa Llamaron Capaemna (pnUlahad  da  Pranolaco  Puarro  7  Dloco  do  Alnka-

Hadrld, 1880, vrlttwi 1560). 80, 145,  sro.  1536. 139


;cbyG00'^lc


San  Martin,  ^nj  Matlu  dt:  Primtn  t Swunda  Part*  4a  b  HMoria

Pancer  lobra  tl  Etcrfipnlo  d«  il  »n  bien del  P«  "  ^^ "

nDidiu !aa Biaoea adquiiidDa pvr lo> Forbaa,  I
Oanqaiitadona. 34  Bmint


_. ._ ,  DecrMoa, E«»«ln-

la  la  BepDbUea  BoliTiaua:


Bepint  o:
1861. SI


GareU,  Frar  Orsnrlo:
Oriaen  da  toa  Indio

(ITZB). 187,  882,  38T


idioa  da  el  Na«<ro  Miuda


BaoU  Cnii,  AndHa  da:


^  Fraseiaeo  Iiopca  it:


n^l-ifS^jTni™— ..-  i_ui._  .1  1  1 ■■< mnaral  de  laa  Indiaa  haata  id  aflo  da  ISBI
de  inaiat. Qntlamt  da  Santa  Clara,  Padra:
*"'  '- Hiatorla  da  Ua  nerraa  cMIca del Pert,
"'■ ■- ■'■"' 2*, 187, "" — °


ISM  U  1S48. 24. 187, ISO, 380, SSI,


ianlo  dal  Pert. 3A Herrara,  Anhrnio  de:

HiitorU  general  de  loa

tdlanoa,  an  laa  Tolaa  ;  la  Tierra


iperador  de  lo  ansee- _  Har  Oofano
buiToflSSS).  186 Hm,  a  8.:
^r^e)ltede:  TraTela  in  P.


Har  O^ofano  (ITSS). 186,  157,  887

(ISeo). 241


ptberBaeian  ceDeni  Infonnacio:

«■  T  Bltoa  dal  Pern,  asO

oa  Rellclnaoa  Afsa- Infonnacioi _ _,

"JfS  ^.^"I^*""  ^ 1" IneM (pubilaied lEadn^ ISni.

1,  3*8,  SSfl,  889  167,  SSS


Julian,  Aotenio:

Id  Peiia  da  la  Amevif


1S8B. 386

"Sjwft'lJeeneiado:  "litSi'dru  America,  1787.
Reprsaentaeian heeha en OoneiDo Pro-

Tinclal  aobre  loa  da&oa  t  molaatlaa  qna  Llbro primaro de  OabOdoa da  Lima. 1888.

aa  baesn  i  lo*  Indloa. 144  ISO

Vol.  XTII.  Lapai  da  Telaaoo.  Jnan:

Ondanrdo,  Polo  de:  GeoxrafEa t  ]>(Beriiielon nnlietaal T

Bdacion  da  toi  tundamenlna  acerea  del  Indiaa  (1671-""" ••-'-■'  •-


notable  dllla  que  rcaulta  da  no  nardar :
■  '36,  ISTI.


Unknown  Ueilea.


^Ahna^ DlivK. (th. vnnnnrl  '  **^^ D"I i


vol.  X.X..  ItalBBdea,  Fraj  Jnan:

Almafio, Diego (tie  yonn(»r) :  Tatdro.  V.ia«derD,  de  1«  .au.H.  nn

AcuaKion  contra  Don  Franciam  Piaarro  j,  i,  proTincia  de  aan  iTan del  Per _.

■D  iV-i,,; "^'  ^"  OrdtB  de  Predicadorea,  1881. 36,  134

Tel XXIV. T.  ,  ^, . , ,  Mandibllm,  Manual  de:

laformaeJon  de  laa  Idolatrlaa  de  lo*  In«"  DlodonaHo Biatorioa-Blocriflea del Per*.

Vol.  XLlf.  Meniota,  Ftar  Dle«.

ABoojDiona: ,_ ,  ,  Chr^oa  di

SuFHoa ocnrrldoB en la oenqolata del lo, ciiarci-

Por^  anlea  da  la  llotada  dal  I^eenelado  p.  g.  FraBclww.  en'laa  Indiaa  Omii^ul^

U  Oaan. 343 .  , ^ ^, .  Bajno  del  Pari,  1684. SB,  188

Oonat  tno^nea ijboA^ dri Artobln^o  um^^  Oriatdbal  de:

?S„'S!  ^^  ^,"'  ^'"'  ^*" ("Pri>"  o'  Fable* and Bitea of tba Inem (HaUojt

n. .-. '"i 1  ' J i_ J  1 i „!,._  j> J  Soci^. 145, 151,  246,  248,  3«B,  SSB

S..iS^; .-'fp.™ i^a^«^^ '  Morale*  ilSinoraa.  Luia  da:

to*  Kej«,  to  el. Per*,  1888. 156  Balaaion  d"  •---■■ ■


Notea'  on  a  Map  of  Part  of  the  Oordfllera Sll "pSIi- F«li»"^r  ^^ml« A- ~~..-
J^LV M'1,^  il «»'''P'^»'  -f""^ Kr^uS^da'^atTlS^^SS (^  ^S^

Cuihing mni  W-  '^"'^  ^  •"  Ti«j«  dal  Peri). S6,  S7

Zudi  telichca. 160,  IS4

OliTa,  P.  Audio:

Eipada.  Uareoa  Jlmenei  de  la:  Hiatoria  del  Pard  y  Tarone*  rn«»p»«  ■■

Tree  Belaclonea  da  Aatifttedadea  peruanu Bantidad  da  U  CompaUa  da  Jerta  (ISSl).
(Dadicatoria). BS4,  BB?,  BBS  2B,  IBS,  246,  283,  882,  888

Sitete,  Ulcuel  de:  Ortao.  Jama*:

La  Relacion del  Vlaje  que biio  el  Seflor Tbe  Ande*  and  the  Amaaon. SB

Oapitan  Hernando  Flaano,  ate.  (ieaZiru).  Orledo  y  Taldia,  Oonialo  Fenandes  da:
352  Hiatorla taoeral y natural de India*.


.wGooi^lc


130. Edieion  IgSS. 141,

Plnl rnnhliihwl 1HT01 fln.,_ „

.81,  IBS,  168,

. __  itneiio,  r-''— ■

Paralls  BarnueTs,  RocIib  7  BiDsTidM,  P«dra Betstk^.  ,..

"■! A paoiflutlone


Lima  fnndidi  o  Conqnuto  d>I  Pirn,  1TS3  aiacie  della  nnona  Oaitidia

,.i-i__  _.  .0...^ jji  jg[I,  quallU  del  pa«M  dopo  cL

~ ~  FersBDdo  Fium  ai  parti  A  ;

anqalatM d«l  Ua«aU:  Jolf  IE.  _16B4_(l_n  T


(cdilioD  of  ISeS). 831 datta  qoallU  del  pa«M  dopo  eha  el  OapiUno
■'--'-■■- '^ -  temtBf-  •-  " "-  "' ■  -— .  -  -■


' '  Pt«drahlU,  LAeaa  Fernandei  de:  Fersaodo  Fium  ai  parti  A  rlloi

-  Hiitoria (eneral da Isi OonqalatM dal UaeaU:  Jolf  IE. 16B4 (In  Ban

-  Nveio  Rayno  de  Oranada.  16BB. 148  III,  1S85). ISO,  1S9,  241,  246,


--J. 350, 381, 356,  288, 2S6, 388, 280,
a  da Banto  ~ '


83 (in  Bibliolera  de  AutorH  espaSolet, Ban  Nicolis,  Frar  Andria
I.  X17" "'" ""  ._-— J-  -v. c -.  ^.


N.  a.  de  CepacaTaoB  Portanto


'^anta,  Tcnuio  ia:  del  Naero  Mondo  Ya  Coaocida  en  EnMpa,

. Eatadio Uanogriflco del Lap TilUaea: '"• "* '■ ■"* ■'= "" "*'■ ""'
bajo  aa  aapeclo  fitlco  i  hiat^rico  (in  Bole-


. (In da la Soeiedad GeoKTldca de Lima, Banlilfan,  ^emaado  da:

Tomo  1). 23,  28,  81,  83.  34.  Sfi,  GS  Belacign  dd  OH«:eii,  Deacendencia.  Pdlitic

y  Oobiemo  de  loa  lacaa (about  1585) (I
Ssimgndl,  A.:  Tr» Kalaciona de ADttgHedade* pemi

Elementoa  de  Botiolea  Aplicada  1  la  Uadl- naa). I4T,  149, ISO,  155
cina  T  la  Indnitria,  1S5T. 84.  28T  Sarmlento de Oamboa, Fedra;

Itsmoa  BaTiltn,  Fra;  AIooio:  Sagunda  parte  de  U  Hiatoria  tenand  Hi

HIaloria de Copacahana (edited  br  Praj mada Indica.  - -' -  - ''- '

Rafael  Sane,  1860). 28,  81,  83,  181,  185,  ' '

186, 187, 144, 243. 244. 24  S, 246,  2  47.

248, 249.  260. 261, 25S, 268, 387,  389,

2S0,  sas  CM*  real  da  Oaatilla, compuaa  e] capitin

Hiatorla  da  (lopBcabana  7  de  la  HQacroM Pedro  Barmiento  da  (lamboa,  1573. 886

Imigen de nu Virsen (edited b; Qana, SqDier,  B.  O.:

I8S6). 2T, 31. 33, 131, IBS, 187, 165, Fard,  laeidenU  of  TraTal  and  Eiplorallon

159,  2S5,  287,  288,  289,  889,  840  tn  (he  Land  of  the  Ineaa. 24,  ^6, 158,

Biatoria  del  c£tabra  y  milagroio  Santaario 248,  344,  246,  248,  261.  286,  288

da la Yniigna Ymlisen de Sfl Srk da

Copacabana (orlgina!  work. Lima, 1831).

31.  una  Toledo,  FramilBOo  de:

liUd  by Carta  a!  OaoBeio  de  Indlaa,  1572. 338

Ordeaaniaa  1573  (In  Ordenaniaa  del  Perft,

1753). las,  145,  146,  14T,  166,  341,  350,

2S1
Toma  Subio,  F,  DietO  it:


n  y  TraiL  ^ ,

la  lierra  de  loi  Chnnchoa  y  elraa  proTln- 338,  834,  887  ^

D  de  U  Cindad  de  La "^


S'l,,..  ,.

Proyineia de loa CoUa-  Laco  Titieaea; obaaiTaeiaDsa  aobre

188.142,242  mlDDcion prosiniTa de lua AgD^_ ...

laProTineia  dfljoa  Paeajea.  Solotin da 1* flociedad  Ooofrafiea, Tomo


Uiloa  HogoUon,  ioan  ^e:  Totbi,  Afaetl

Relacion de la Proyineia de loa CoUa-  Laco  Titiei

Eli,  etc..  1586. 188.  142,  242  mlDDcion prosiniTa di

laeion  "-  -  " '--'- '-  '"  " — *-  --— - '- ■- "--'-'-•


I,  147,  148.  241,  248  1). 31
~ ■■ Tachndi,  J


Pard,  Kelaealiiuen  (1842). 32.  G5
Reiaen  durch  Sed-Amerlka,  1869. 148
Dio  Koelina-Spraoho,  WOrterbueh. 165,  88T


Relacion  one  eubio  t  mar
tad  ae  hiilese  deata  Oiuda


liudad  de  OuencB  y Vaca  da  Caal

.  1581. 151  Carta  al

Maldonada,  Fray  Juan  dB  Fai:^ _^ ^  lodiaa).

e  loa  Incu  1543  (pobilahed  bj  Don  liar.
-- •■ de  la  Zapada). 297


^mVerador. 1542 (ia  Cartaa  da


Relacion  beeha  por  ml.  Pray  (Jeronlmo  da coa  Jim


a  Dotrlna  y  Pueblo  de  Cafnaa- Ven.


1683. 151  ComenUrioa  Realm  de  loa  Incu (Vol. I.

Riyero  and  Taehodi:  1609).  80,35,  136.148,144,148,160,  151.

ADtigUsdadea  pemanaa  (Atlaa). 3S  163, 154, 349,  250,  254,  365,  358,  286,

ADtlffledadaa  psruanaa.  18S1  (Text). 385  287.  3SG.  SSB,  S3B

Roman.  Fray  HlaronymD:  TlUannnaa,  Arebbiahop  Pedro  da:

Laa  Repdblicaa  del  Uundo,  1696. B87  EiortKloii contra la IdoUtria dal Part
(Lima.  1640). 166.  169.  180,  241

SatCBmaybuB,  Joan  da  Santa  Orn«  Pachaentl  TlDarnui,  Ommt  Pam  de:

Yamqui:  Hiatorla  de  la  Nuera  Ifaiico,  1410. 147


;cbyG00'^lc


INDEX


...-.„, a  da  la  Oonmtate  U

Anlo-IiDcaiBticM  t  JMcnfladM  d«t  Anntrv'  Fern  j  ProTinela  dd  Ouna.  LS34  IrqiU

Annln  PnlAioiKa  da  In  Pn-UDaiieuH  of  ISBl). 140,  MS,  ESa.  256
<L>  Pu,  IBOO. IB3,  184,  IBS,  asS.  aST,
BBS

Zaratc^  AcoMIn  d«:

Wienar,  Oharlai:  Hiitorla dil DaHnbrlmlsDta i  OaaqoWi

Piron  Bt  BoUtI^  1S80. 2i,  2S,  8S,  2BS  da  la  FraTiada  dd  Part. SS4


INDEX TO

BiANTTSCRIPT  SOURCES  IN  THIS  VOLUME

OabaDo  da  Batboa,  P.  Uignet:  tancclenlaa t  tt  7  1  n  blitorla (Lcaai

HiKwIante  antaretiaa  (anatral). B3»  Libmrj. lao

Oieia,  Padro  da:  Bdadon  da  laa  mandaa  j  linii>mf4  qgc  |m

Tarc«T LIbro da Ua gnarrM elTilga  del Teijnoa  ;  abltaiitai  bfdfoim  ea  la  tnadaete


a  OompaBla  da  Jaadi Inndaeii

_ , . .  Ltamii  d«l  Volcan  da BBS

Omila.  1600. 161  Tiatlm


dliha hamftal (In l^Sbra Ticje^b  h


Libra  da  Oaaaadoa  qve^  pcrtanaw  ^i  Mte  pnablQ ds  Nlea^aobre  ^U^Planta  de  laa flilmlidai
IhtienB.jDan  da':~  tlU  OtodadT  15~90.~


imnvxamimni  ocho  de  benera an  «l  TAa  da  la  Paro^la  da  B


da  ISM  X<- B«,  144.  I4S.  par eamlaioo dal Ti

Ihtlenia,  Joan  da:  *^' - "

Gobianin  dal  Part  con  (odai  laa


;cbyG00'^lc


GENERAL  INDEX

AbuM  1^  palltleal  uid  •cdMlutlal  anltaori-  Arm-panDn, bkr  tl, SIT

IJM.  To,  S4  AiwiilpL ein  and  deiiartmant  of, 34, SS;

Aeelacnui  (Qnlehua,  houa  of  wamm),  21S  date  oJ  foDDdatlon  of,  ISG

Aceuaatloni,  nnjiut.  ■(■inat  ths  Spaolarda,  S7  Arlcua  (im  Larteaja),  13S

Achacaeha,  town,  TO  Aimaatia,  Biahop  Fray  Kloolaa,  B2T.  9t»

Achacachc,  Kio  da,  0  Arnanan,  11

AihaeliiU,  8,  SB,  94,  SS,  99,  100,  12fl,  141,  Aniaca,  P.  Pafalo  Joatt  da. IGS,  31B,  830;

14S,  1G0,  1S4  blosraphleal  aketch,  B8T

AeQa-Doail,  deSnltlon  of  word,  2BS  Artann,  or  Lartaon,  Bsbaatlan  da,  Biaho[i  of

Aeoeapia,  oraela  at,  SGCI  Ouico,  Sll,  S14

AeoncagDa,  maanUin  in  Ohila,  34  Artiflcial  dralnaca  (hb  Incm  andtnai).  190

Acora,  TlUan  B,  34,  BS,  ISS  Aaaaj  at  goldan  plaM  (*e«  TUcarra),  3BS

Aeoata,  P.  Joupb  da,  aritieal  aplrlt  diaDlared  Atabnatpa,  Inea  nr  ehlaf,  338,  MS,  BOT

by,  819:  lonrcea  of  Infomutlon,  818;  eraa-  AMofaDallpa,  ISO

tlon  mTtli,  816,  817  AtnuaiihaTlo  enTTontt  on  Laka  Titleaea,  IS

Acaiali,  Alaxandre,  81,  83  Alnn  Collao,  reported  conqnaat  of,  by  Uanio

Aianli,  Lonia,  13  Ynfa ZapaDa, 803

Asrionltnral  Utt  on  Iiland,  8T  AocaTpata,  ugnara  on  Tllloua  Idaad.  3T9

Afnayo  {aBe  LUfOai,  143  Annaline  monka  (aea  Copa«oana  Midiion),

A&ijadoro,  1ST,  199,  300;  dlkaa  at,  199  187,  331

Alraruacoa,  Tillan  in  proTlnBa  af  Omaanroa,  AucuatlDoa,  adiool  of  writara,  819

sri  A^an,  rlilam,  11

Ajf,  red  peppar,  96  Anqnl-anqni  danca  al  Uojo,  113

AUamini,  range,  T  ATandaao,  F.  Hernando  da,  lattera  of,  830

Alabaater  at  Ohanunni,  105  Ayanqna  (aaa  SandaU),  IBB

Alealda,  Indian,  51,  82:  fnnetlDni,  BS,  146  Ararltanco  (lee  ilanco  Capu),  808

Alsaldaa,  election  ot,  145  Ayarlrl,  Peru.  S9

Aleamarl  (aao  ChliuUnds),  4T,  2E1  AyneU,  ba;  of,  23

Aleanlia, flnt  chief  of  Onico, aocordlns  to  Ayllo*.  aeTen,  at  OopaeaTana  and  lalasda  In

Betaniot,  806  "°° "" ""


Alftre^  cbnroh  offloar,  IIS  Aylla.  clana  or  nntea,  8S,  81,  83,  88, 144,

Allao  (llnnu  Keuminata),  334  145,  154

Aljirl  (aaa  Pmonal  ttriteii.  78  AyllD  Tiahoanaoo  al  Oonl,  83

" ->,  Diego  de  (the  older],  64  Aylltu,  ebanfca  In  D><n—  "f 1*K

>,  Diaio  da  (tha  yaiinnT),  84,  36B .^mart,  lanfnafa,  5


Almacro,  Diego  de  (the  older],  64  Aylltu,  ^aufca  li

Almafro,  Diaio  da  (tha  rannnr),  84,  36B .^mart,  lanfnafe. .  .
Alpine  ^v  on  tile  Andaa  at  Boliria,  T,  8  Afmard,  prlmillTo  relicion


Qdiehtu  dftBoea, freal

DU  of

Aymart  danoan,  II


Amantani,  liiand,  E

Amaion  lUTer,  4  ATnart

American  lloaann  ot  Matoral  HMott. 140. Ajmari  euatonu  of  marriaftL

143  Aymart  danoan,  Iheir  deTotloi

Ananta,  monnlain,  T
Anehaneho,  98,  101
Ancient  eoatoma  of  Armard,  TG
Anelant  pottair  from  Saaapata,  40
Ancon,  trapUned  akoll  at,  174,  ITS
ABMiaTOWS,  Tlllasak  18,  IS,  48,  TO,  8T
Andanai,  lemeed  nidaa-baaa,  6,  IS,  It,  4

■1.  47,  1

la,  chi-

iait&  1 — ,

ADimal  Intareeaaora,  101

Animal  life,  on  Lake  TItieaca,  13 :  on  THIOBM

laUnd,  47 :  on  Koatl  laU^  60
Annrei  de  Campo-redondch  Pedro^  08,  185
Apacblnanea, auo Apaclitnaca, umlat, 48,


Aplnf&Ha,  ialand,  18,  159,  338.  339,  360,  351
Aplnnila  and  Pamplll,  Inca  ramaina  lald  to .

Apotampo,'  talhar  ot  Manoo  Oapac,  818,  81S Bailor,  Prof-  B.  Q.,  34,  83


;cbyG00'^lc


Bmddiar,  Kr*.  Ad.  F.,  17.  4B,  SB,  13G,  170 0>t<k«s1ui,  o«r  PDqii«n.O»Belu,  813

Banquitoa  of  Soaoia  ud  OhihnahDa  In  Hu- Oentipsds*  (•«  UtSrUf,  1G5

Ico.  171  CsriimDiiul  vban  Gghtninc  itrikM  bv&diBC

Baptlua,  84  100

BsrlBT,  IS  CerMBonial  objaeU  cone«*l«d  by  lodiaiu.  TO

BMfcn,  plndlnriliU  71,  T2,  180  OwBrnonikla,  prlmitiTB,  in  hano-lwildiin  B(.

BcUlatsar,  SebHtlut  de,  88,  1S5  Oarro  de  Montonma,  ChBinabB*.  I


Doelrina  d

tMi  bT,  SB7,  8B2:  early  traditiona  of  Incaa  Chaeanani, Indiui  duetc, IIS. 116, 111,

aod  Armaria,  297  122

Bloodahed  duiiiK  Armari  dancM,  114  OluehiipOTai, on penfomla of CopaekTama,

BoU  (MS  IHul),  as,  242  1S7,  282

Bolhria,  BapobUe  of,  8.  t,  7,  19  Cbachaporaa  Indiana,  07.  187,  183

BoondaiT  line  between  Pent  and  Bolhrla.  23  Ohacn-aTUn,  or  ChoksU,  Indian  danea,  8S,  103

BmJo (ue Mtdieint-inm, Borctftn, Ska-  Obaen-uUo,  rain  danca.  118

moiu},  120  Ghana,  bar  of,  48,  44,  46,  47

Boddleya,  wild  otiTe  tTM,  IS.  40  ObaUi,  nrdeo  of,  witt  Ine*  rsfau,  IBS

BnildinB-ait«  of  Indiana,  Bl  diaDa.  baeienda,  Ifl,  IS,  45,  4B.  51.  53.  54,

Bnrlat  cnitomi  M  Tiabnaaaoo,  85  CO.  69,  78,  B8,  SB,  B3,  lOG,  106,  117,  140.

Burial  ailea  on  Iiland.  moaUr  ObvUpa,  1A8  188

Bnrlall,  85  Challa,  lathmna  of.  44,  17B,  1TB,  IBO

Cballa,  larie  Mooea  at  and  near  br.  238

Cabbace.  IS  Cballa  Fata,  beicht,  18,  4S.  48,  1T^  178

Csbello Balboa. Mlfoel, on Titieaea  Iiland,  Chama-kani, 12$;  181

318;  Uliesllnaa  anitral,  318  Cbampi,  B12

Cacha,  mini  at.  ISS,  288  Cbampn-Daya,  Inlet.  48.  ITS

Cachomarca,  11  Cbadi.  promoatory  of.  13

Cacique,  office  abollibed  by  BoliTar.  1825, 145  Ctaaraaaani,  mountain!  of  (tee  Oannbaya,  A.w

Cojaraarea.  houie  of  Aiahnalpa,  IBS  du  of),  48,  SB.  214

Oajamarca,  town,  183,  1B4,  ^86,  262;  oracle  Obaraaaani,  TiUam,  T.  142,  155,  242

■t.  268  Charrh.nl,  moonuin.  24

Calancha. Tray  Antonio da  la, 11. 12, se,  CbaTui  de  HuanUr, Hoinuoo,  ailnr-leBf  an

212, 213,  282, 261, 233, 2T1. ITS, 286,  andeal  altar  of,  287

828:  bioltnphlcal  iketfll  of.  888;  crsation  Cbayllpa,  CToap  of  Indian  daneara,  86, 103.

mytb  according  to  Ondegardo.  823  118.  llf.  122

Oallahaaya.  traTellni  t''f"f",  103,  104,  105,  Ohayllpa  (wilnme,  108,  113

IGG  ChsHS-makini  nn  Tilicaea.  B3
Callabuara  coctume.  104

CalTano,  aummit.  44,  48,  103.  178,  208,  214
Ca[i6n,  tronaera  of  Armaria,  143
Oalifia (gee Coitunu d/ Ainiwrd Indlaiu,

Oamara,' Franclaeo  de  la,  13«  Chrclwria'FVM  {Tn'soati),  278,  2T4


._, ,  __  CbL

mpoa,  aubordlnate  Indian  offlciala,  32  ChilUaya.  bay.


Jcberia  FaM  {on  Eoati),  2
ili-ehl  (Armari  for  half),  1
imtaya.  bay,  14,  34


•nrt  at Chililaya,  poii.  B.  10,  IS,  187;  niiu  at,  181


Chirheria,  Koatl,  278.  238

■ ■■  ■lymnri  1 ,  ,_,  __. , __..  __.

Ionian  baain,  21  Cbinalinda (laa  Aleanari),  47, S51


imonf  Ayuiiri  Indiana.  85,  12T ChlUu,  chertr  marl.  208
... . ,__  ..__,_ «,  Cbinalini"- '-- " '


Cantuta.  ihrab,  IB,  84,  4  .._ _..

CapacRayni.  2TB  rnlna.  217,  220.  221,  222,  224,  225,  230,

Capacbiea,  peninaala,  4,  24  231,  232, 284,  25B,  265, 273; aprinc  at.

Oapadocco.  appearance  of  eon  o(  the  Bnn  at 224 ; walla  of defene^ 223 ; wmtEb-towtr

eaTe  of.  328  at,  228

Oarabaya.  And**  of,  7,  B,  28,  48  Ohirtbuana,  OoTemor  of  the  Indiiuia  of  Clia-

Oarabaya,_riTar  confounded  with  Lake  Titl- cullo,  188,  300

110, U8,  IIT; hlffbeat  croup  of  danccra.
id  penin- 123

Choka.  water-hen  (Fulica),  12.  47
102,  155 Chonta,  hoe.  7T.  ISO
jl  Chua,  bowl  or  aanccr,  141

Chna-cboa-ni,  88

Cbucara.  a  name  for  Tiabnanaeo,  328
ChucarlpD, 189, 215, 21T. 228. E2S, 210;
Inca  andenei  at.  226 ;  myth  of  eoaa-plaola-
tion  by  Incaa,  227
SiS,  824 Chucarlpu-pato. mina, 221, 225, 328, 212,

liau  lore, Chueo' (aee'l^Iiichii],  73.  142
B»  ChD»«  (lee  Llueliui,  78.  ITS

"aTaOnni,  monutaln,  8  Chumlto.  Ufune.  4,  6.  B

" * ■*"  Chnenilo,  priMnontory,  4

Cbuniilo,  provinea  u,  138


.wGooi^lc


Chuenito,  prorinoa  of  DomlnlMui  Ordar.  9S


Chullpft,  daOnhloo  at  hum
Chnllpa  anilsiiM,  ICT,  188
Chullpa  hnriali,  ITS
ObnDpa  dweUinc*,  IBT


"o'nVtiei


OcntNiloii,  part  of  prlmitiT*  Indlui  Mmoo-

nUl.  2SB,  a«7
ConqnlM*  }  Foblulon  del  Pert,  SOB
Oou (iM  OutitTrtt  dt  Santt  Clara,  Ptirt

(U),  802,  80S,  883
Oonttmta  of  honn  t»Btroll«d  by  wamui,  SO
OoD  Tini  Tlneoeha  (laa  £i(auH),  398,  803
Cob  Titl  Tineo«ba  (*«a  Stlamoi),  288

.  ...  OoDvar,  Bir  Martin,  aaeent  of  lUttuani  br.  88

175,  176 ;  diitrlbD- Cooking  ti ' —


Olmlliui-lCajaDl,  IBB,  284;  CTMt  of,  42,  189;

rniai  oa,  288
Chanelioa,  104

Chtincba-elcarl,  Indian  dancan,  llOf  118
Chafin,  ai.  8B,  63

Ohnro,  or  Oharl.  anaib  naad  aa  rattlas,  157, 174
GhDipa,  or  Cbhoapa,  bac,  143
Oleaa,  Pedro  da,  11,  78,  288,  254,  808,  817,

835,  837
Cleia  de  Letn,  Fsdro  da,  S2,  SS, 1T5, 185;

eritielam of hit worki, 309; tradition!

about  TllIeusB  Iiland,  237,  SSS,  SCO
OlraCDDa.  ne«dla.  77
Oiria-Pata.  G2,  S7, 144,  17S,  1T7,  179,  183,

136;  aacieot  cnTa*  ocaTated  at,  178,  IBO,

^" "'" SBS;  antlnoitiaa  toiuid  -- ■■"■


177,  i
280
Olaoa  on  Tilicaea,  S3


_  MT»na,  peDinaula,  i  7  9,  --,  — ,  —
15.  84,  41,  46,  G6,  eS.  78,  S9.  01,  130,
1B7.  ISB;  Tnca  raina  on,  281:  reportad
CDDDKlion  with  Inca  MramonlaU  on  Titl-
eaea,  2SS;  rock  tsali  on,  283

OopaeaTana,  aanctnary  of,  18,  92.  109,  367

OopaoaiBDa,  TflUn,  16,  IS,  42,  EO,  81,  63,
68,  TB,  84,  104,  116,  Hi,  182.  188,  185,
185:  decoration  of  aqnara  at  featlnl.  Ill;
aScMa  of  Son-father  and  Uoon-mother  at,
278;  fain  at,  TO,  83 ;  In«a  TtMisaa  at,  383

Oonlillera  ReBl.  8,  7,  B

Connarant  (aaa  Ourv*),  48,  64

Oorrecidor  of  OopaeaTana,  84

Ooattj  ooatimea  of  Uonnoa.  116

Ooatmna  of  ATnuri  Indiana  (mala),  78

Ooatnme  of  Ajrmart  mmsn,  74

OoUHa,  hacienda,  88

OouBcil  of  old  men,  anpncaa  anthoritj  amonc
Indiua,  83

007a.  261,  2B5


Olaj


, 209


_ ..  oato  of  baala  of  Lake  litieaca,  16,  20
Clotha  paintad bj Ineaa, paintinn aaid to

haTSboen  Utiorical,  818,  814
Ooa  <a«a  Dltonla),  77
Ooal  on  Titieica  and  al  Tuopnpala,  45
Ooina.  Uland.  14
Coaat-peopla,  PerDTian,  5
Ooaat-nnge,  f

--■-a,  OB,  71.  ■

26i;  sea;  aeel  37a,  373;  379;  Hi',  aia,

814.  830,  82T ;  biocraphical  akoteb  of,  820 ;

flTB  diatinet  creaKon  nrth •-'  "-- ""

_ ... - ■ iKJH


Oroaa  of  Carabnoo,


plantlnj  ai


Cmeifliaa,  TO

Oni,  Fra7  Ftanitico  da  la,  184
Caerro  (aee  OorTnorant),  48
Onltnre-planta, on laianda of  Tl

Koali, 19; on Soati, 50; o

laUnd,  63

Oumbi.  Bpaelaa  of  cloth,  349
Oninbl.  or  Pampacona,  142
OniTs,  Tlllan  166
Onahinc,  P.  13..  04.  101,  108,  117.
OnaljaU, haeleDda, objoeta  for e


I.  97,  148;  imiraphloal On; (


364;  biookatle  oi,  by 'iDdiana,  ^8,  64'


13S IBB, 336.


Colla,  809

Collaenaa.  Indiana  of.  188

Coiiao,  buriala  in  diatrici  of.  ISB

Collaa,  praTlnea,  SB,  80,  85.  64,  147,  116

Collaa,  ITE

CoUaioio.  proTince  of,  398

OoUca-Pala.  178,  17T,  182;  bnriala  at,  176

CoUcu,  Mora ' """


L ladiai


ro principal fmnpa
liou, 311, 815


Cocuda  de  Oao


a  Trlniia),  20
(aee^o™),  >


Indiana  lo  apaclal  eaaaa,  79


OcndoT-o-Da-ua-cha-i


DeUKoodSTo,  biunsn  aacrlllce  near,  244
DaatnctioD  ot  mina  br  Indiana,  183
Diacretlon naed  bj  Indiana  In nlatlnc an'

ciani  lora,  810
Dlacnrao  aobra  la  Deaesndanola  j  Gobiemo  de

loa  Ingai,  1542 (Una  Aniisnalla  pemana,

Diaeaaea'of  the  Ajmart  Indiana,  68

DItaasea,  pilmoDary,  188

Diapoallian of pnfWTtr aftar doatb anong


;cbyG00'^lc


Diitrlbntlon  of  land*  mniuUr,  SO,  144  Q<ai>*ST4.  Bt,  ttoiy  ol

Dim  (tea  Oti),  B3  ^— -.. 1-....- -

DlTen  (Padletp*).  IS,  47
DiTinlnf  by  muni  of  nca-lHTei,  12S
Don  luTkliig,  aril  proun,  103
Domntie  aDTiD*!!  on  TiacHB,  K3
DomHtlc  {owl,  bird!  of  ill  oman,
Dominkiin  Frian,  fl

D'Ot„^_,, ...  -_

Draami  of  aorcenn.  98  Onpe-brandT.  libationi,

" >- 'ndiana  on  (aaUralL  112.  1S8 Qniupt  of  dkiieera  on  Til


irali,  112,  ISS Qniupt  of  it-neen  on  Tlticaca  laUnd,  13S
b7,  830 - -~ -'


D'OTblgnr,  Alcidi

DrnnltMSwaa  0?"

Dn«flaa.  BartolomA  da,  rapOTta  or,  bau  uaaiiaaj,  ^u,  oa

Doha,  or  Dno,  140  Ooarachl,  tama^  of.  51,  E3

Dnn,  Alexander,  6S  Onijan,  liland  on  the  coaat  of  Kcatdot.  (aid

DwdliDgl  of  tba  todUlu,  S8,  SB  br  OliTa  (o  haye  bean  biitliplaca  of  Mann

Rariea,  41  On[niia-pEn  (aea  Ouu),  M,  BS,  69,  72.  140

Earth  an  Aehachlla  alto,  flS  Oolb,  13

Eeelaiiaitical  aQtbarlliea  tor  Iiland,  SI  Ontiemi,  Jaa«  Roaando,  38

Edipie,  InoHI,  149  Gotiarcei  de  8anU  Clara,  Pedro  d^  85.  IM.

EenadoT,  flB  803

Eui  of  aquatic  birdi.  eaten  by  Indiana,  G8

Entiaroadera  (>•«  Tamirupata),  6B

EDcamlacdaa  at  OopacaTaoa,  88,  184

Bicobari,  Father  U.,  SB

Eaeobarl,  MAcario,  83

Eioteric  orden  amoof  Indiana,  SB

12S; in  ancient  Ueiico, 124;  on'^llieau  tt

Itland,  398
Eipad*.  Uueo*  Jinenoi  da  la, 146,  818
EaplnalX  Uannel  de,  S4
E«Uiicla  (•*•  OoiHun<dad),  144
EoealTptna  traaa  on  Eoatl,  fiO
E>auTallon  on  Lak*  Tilieaoa,  38

BTfomena.  bellat  in,  101  IS

Evil  lorcerr  paniihad  amoDi  Anuria,  13T

ZtU  (ptrita  ^arlU),  SS,  93  10

Exchansa  of  culllTated  plat*  amont  Indlaoi,  SI  ,  91

Buona,  Tlllaie,  IS

Fetiah, at jmik-kduh vmcv vhqudj, j-i«;

of  Indian  corn,  slo.,  for  afU  pnrpoati.  100  i

Tatiahea.  Indian,  9,  94, 158;  of  blaek  atona

for  anil  ■orceir.  105;  told  b;  Oallahnaraa,

105;  dTMiad  in  obth  (aeo  Oebo).  3T3

"  ' 'f  piff  in  wltchoraft,  05  Hnanean4,  town,  41

L(  ladiatu,  BO  Hnansant,  'rillafe,  4

-'--  Indian  InanrraetloB,  89  Hnaqnl,  port,  4

>ca.  13,  48  Saarina,  b«T.  14.  17,  84

riahini  In  Lake  Titieaea,  31  Hnarlna,  Tlllafa^  Ifl,  8S

Flahini  Bpeari.  248  Hnaaear, Inca var-chiet 313, 338, >tS;

Ilatteiilni  of  the  torahaad,  artlfleial,  47,  167 kiUad  V  order  o(  Atahnallpa  at  *-'——.

ne«ehar,ViBa  Alice,  108  Pars,  881

niat  flakea  found  at  Olrla-Pata.  ISl  Hnata,  pontnnU,  IS

Ilood  myth  at  Ttahnanaeo,  11  Bnat^a^,  handel  of,  IS

FoMil  plants  earbonUarona,  4E  Hnana  0~ — '~

FooBlaIn of  the  Ynea (ao  called}, 14, 43, 3fil,  38W.  ..o,  ...

190,  197,  199  Hurna  Potoal  (aea  £arfc»Ja«w,  alio  Km-Em-
Fox  in  Armarl  lore,  101  a-So),  T,  37

Famltnra  of  Indian  houlM,  09-76  Hninan aacrifleea, amanc  Ineaa, 185. 3*1,
344;  deeeribad  by  BanuM,  306;  cine*  Ite

Qallo. 89, 73, 78  ™nnn.« 911

Gamboa.  Fray  Franelaco  de,  188

Gam  no,  Don  Enriqna,  36

Garcia,  Don  Uiftiel,  coQectlon  of  antlqaltie*

by,  37,  B3,  5S,  68,  61,  180,  230,  331,  326.

337,  382  lea,  Pen,  835

GaieJa,  family  of,  51  leblin,  Pnua-graaa,  7S,  14S

Garcia,  Fray  Qrapirlo.  68,  B11  IdoUtraua  praetlcea  oontinnad  en  tha  Ii

Garcia  Cnadrado,  Alonao,  report  of.  830  88

Garcia  Cnadrado,  Llccnolado,  3fl  Ilaoata,  Bl,  79,  82;  fanctiona,  M;  i«l

Garden  near  Ohalla,  of  Spaniah  orlain, IS,  dntlea  at,  96

100,  30B  Hare, villacs, 8, 0, 15. 36, 38: nrai

Gema.  maaanra,  77  near,  35


iriqna,  36  ^^ ^ _^ ^^^ Hoyiutu),  nij^hieal  cU«f  at  nahoanaeo,  836^


;cbyG00'^lc


INDEX  353

nUmpa  (tM  Banka-Uma),  S,  B,  S3,'  43,  iS,  tanmui  hud  of  Miuia  foniid  at,  370;  Iocs

370; altltndc (iM Camda)i), 82; voi-  artsfaeta (oond at, 3701 Urgs doorway*

ahiped  ■■  Aehaehila, S7fl  and  niohea  at,  96fi;  Icianss-iliaFad  nicJu  al,

lUaCBi,  DisBo  de,  SB,  193  2e*: pauatewan at, BCS; poiafblr l*o

niimanl,  S,  8,  B, 14,  SB,  Sfi, 82,  IBS,  31E,  atorfea,  304;  atona  pip«  fanndat,  S70,  371

2T6: Bttcmpta  at  aaceniloo  of, B8: Tniai  UikUTU, nunmlt od  Titieaea, IB, M, 40,

DMr  anoir-lliic,  184;  ilopea,  bnml*  In,  187  170

lUpa,  iBKUDe,  S2  Uak-Uyn  and  Plloo-KaTD*,  probah^  ihrinN

Imitation of plnmM In nMal tonnd on  at  Aduehaai  of  Borala  paaka,  330

EoatI,  aS8  Irma  (aa*  PaiAaeiimae),  3T7

Inca  andenea,  IBS.  ISO;  on  Titieaoa,  IBS  Irpa,  dancinl  r -"'

iBca  arMfsct*,  IBO  Itan-pat*.  315


IBB.  ISO;  on  Titieaoa,  IBS  Irpa,  dancinf  nuater,  llB,  ISB

188  7 "^

ildinfi  on  Tltleaeai  Ihsir  ^anaral  flhar-

Tlliiiaea,  378  Jacnar-akiiu  worn  b;  iueor*,  108,  110,  118


oqal,  IbS


Inea  namea  at  CopacaTana,  383  JaTall,  indinnoni  wild  boar.  140

IncB  runaina  betwoan  OopacaTana  and  Oaeha  Jeanjta.  Ordai  of,  3B:  achool  at  wTitan,  SIS

tn  Pern,  3SS  JiUlnianl  (•••  /lUnuinJ),  S8

Inca  rain*,  IBE;  diitrlbntlon  of,  on  Tlllcaca,  Jull.  Oonyent  of  Ban  Podro  Ifartlr  d«.  3B

1B7  Jl^ TlUan 8, IB, 38, 827; block* from

Inca  ■ettlcmant  on  Tttlcaea,  appraxlmato  data  Koatl  nacd  tor  ibnreh  at,  3fl3

of,  348  Jnliaea,  Pom,  S9
Inea  traila  on  Titieaea,  ISS

Inca  tribe  of  Onico.  18T  Ka-Ka-a-Ka  (aae  HiuyM  PsdwO.  27,  3TS

Incan-taqnl, Inca  road, 318  KaksTO^KcB*,  rldn  of,  «3,  48,  44,  G3,  1B8,

lucaa, 14,  34.  27,  BS,  SI, 148.  IBl:  origlii  IBS,  1S9,  317.  326,  384,  3SG

of,  aeeordlnf  to  QHreilauo  de  la  Vcn,  808  Kalalfl,  itons  towen  at,  248

Inca-ileuri, Indian  dancera, IIS, 133; dr*-  Ealicti-Pata.  rain.  afl3.  284,  2SB,  3T2:  Obnllpa

outle  HTformanes  of,  115  burl*!*  at,  36S,  STO,  271

Ineanae  In  «renianlal^S4  Kara  (sea  Cmida  it  Ofs),  48,  IBS,  314

Indian  anthorltlea  on  Tllicaea  laland,  B1  Karka-Jaqna  (lea  Httayns  Polsri,  alao  Ka-Ka-

Indian  eraation  mTlh  lnfln«Bl^od  by  ObrlitlaD  o-Es).  f,  278

Ideaa,  884  Eaaapata.  animal  bonea  and  mctalUo  artataeta,

Indian  danou,  orifinall;  i^mboUc,  157;  aty-  207 2(1D.  310;  animal  bead*  on  jaia,  207:

molofT  of  namea.  163  arlillclal  tank  at,  311;  unrit*  b«ida  foDBit

Indian  foTornort  (•«*  Ilaeatn).  88  at,  30S:  batanaa  at,  309;  bnrlala  at,  209,

Indian  liaapital  at  Onico,  fonndod  !n 1557,  238;  cicaTationa  at,  20S;  Inoa  pottBir  at,

811,  814  307;  loca  letUement  at.  318,  314;  iatbmni

Indiui  bontinf,  30  and  rain*  of,  44,  SB,  140,  Ifln.  isn anit-

-  ' — "—  -■  '"'"' "" ~'  ' "— oofbt  from, i


Jarn  alonei  broncbt  from, 3S8, 384; *o-
caired  Temple  of  tbe  Bna  at.  208,  208,  218,
Liiuiiui  uicuii;iuii-uiiui  uBiui  auiDsrs  ui  uieii 245;  ■o-Falled  Tempi*  of  tbe  Bun  *  lanhn.
belief*,  138  218, 31B, 24B. 2SS. 274, 281; a


la  and  jonrnejnMn,  T

""'lBIL"i'Ta""i78'


Indian  tradition*,  80'' "' ~~'  '  Kea,  bar  o^,  48,  4B

Indian  npilalng  of  lTSO-81,  89,  88,  88,  31, Kea.  pramoDtorr  and  aettltment,  4


Totlng  in  Boli*la,  Pern,  and  Uexleo, Ken-RoUn. ...  ..... __. __.

ITI, 177, lis,  300:  burial  aj

laoian  women  on  Tlllcaca.  87  Inca  rnini  at,  170,  177,  374;  raina  at,  lOB

Indiana.  B,  19;  OalboUca,  Bl;  tndlnatlon  to  Eea-KoIIn Cbleo, 200; aoenoiDlallon  of  hn-

retaro  to  primitlne  creed. 91; tntareat  In man remain -' ' "•■ — — -  —

den,  90;  not  arfecte^br  beauty  of  acenery,  name. 241:

a. 20, B4. 196; ranUra, 7B; rtruek b;

llablnini  made  medicine-men.  130  n.^,  ^ud

Indfana  of  Titieaea,  81.  B7;  pbydcal  appear-  Kmialcbo  (aee  X(Ra-fc«na),  118,  116,  117, 128

ance,  67  Kena-kena,  ironp  of  daneera,  lOa

Indiana  on  Pnna,  aeemlntl;  Indigent,  89,  90  Kena-kena,  pan-dnte  of  Armari  Indiana,  113

Iun-B« {Iceaa}, tradition about Uie^ 3S4,  Kanata.  i^nd.  44.  BB.  fi4

2B5  Keflna  (i>oI|rI(|Wif J,  18,  46,  49,  190,  208

Insaa  (aaa  Zdmti).  808  EaBuanl,  IBB

InrHalioa  into  eaoterlc  aocletlea,  124  Kere.  bearth,  70,  141

iDBceta  on  Titieaea  Idand,  49  Kere.  cupa,  ISO,  185

Intl-Eala.  rock  aeata  In  OopacaTana,  283  Eeutl-pnnen, 218, 317, 384

loHpnnea,  384  Kitchen,  S9

Inneation*  at  Tinea,  97  Kitcben  implemonta,  70

IBak-Uyu,  rain  on  Koatl.  269.  260,  263,  268,  Kitcben  Tegetablei.  18

3S9.  272,  278,  377,  385.  389;  analogj  wllb  Xoa,  illsnd,  13,  38.  53.  54

PUco-Eayma,  376.  280;  andenat  at, 382;  Koali.  ialaod,  10,  18,  14.  IE,  16,  18.  20.  28.

animal  flcurea  ot  atone  found  at,  270;  com-  41,  43,  44,  49.  GO,  51,  57,  83,  <4,  68,  185,

Sariton  wllh  Inea  rain*  on  Tllleaoa,  3T4,  187,  IBS,  269,  278,  278,  822;  aacleni  wall

75; eorioai eonrt at, 864; erroneonaly  on  ereal.  360,  378:  andenea  on.  280;  aol-

oallod 'Tampla  ot  tb*  Hoon," 360, 261;  mal  flpina  tram,  48,  68,  3T0;  nppmfmate

fold and lUTer Ignra* fannd at, 370;  ancient  population  of,  381;  lieeanu  known


.wGooi^lc


354  INDEX


throBgh  th*  IdcW,  940;  oUM  "blud  of  Ibnco  Capu,  394,  395.  SOS,  BD9,  Bll,  HI,

Uu  HiMn,"  38T;  OhoDp*  biirla]i  on,  359,  SIS,  S17.  S18,  B31,  833.  834,  838.  339

"'" ; Ohiilliw  nmaiiu  an. Sit; diwnltary  Uaneo  Oipae  aod  Huna  OeDo.  iHand  of.  110

— ■' —  DQ.  2fl6:  Inoa  baildiun  poil«-  Hun-eaUiit  Monii  bellcred  in.  ISl

icHurr to Uu»a onTltleuA,  U>np>  Ynn  Z " ' ~ '

dI  lool  fetUlM (AjihKhilu)  Clam),  803
, ., __..- — K ofihyj—


exoaVationi  oa.  2fl6:  Inoa  traih^iin  poatt-  Hun-eaUaf  al

rEor aod •eceu()r7.ta Uu»a oT^WeuA,  Ifanp>  Yn^aZapalto  (aae  dtit<*rTa  d*  £■>!•

.. -, . , , _T>,  85

poaaiblf  MTmolocT  of  naoM,  2BS:  pro'  UaraecL  P.  HippolTto,  B39,  889

... .  ^^^  Igg.  taeiuieA  women  Uarennj,  53,  ifi;  ruiu  at,  1S3

ne  laid  to  bara  ttdtMd  at,  Haria  Ka  and  Mama  Cbovnarilo-


;  pUfrlmag*  to, nndtr  Uu locaa, Hap  of  Tltioaea  bufn,  1
uiD!«  «t7D3a^' — "• " """- — *■ ■ ■" "' — ■— ■- '


289,  ae'l,  aee'rVliilsd  in  1S18^  agg" " woman  on'miiaa  Idan4,  aSS"
EochJ,  iaUud (taa  £iifi-A«ata),  44,  6B,  G4, Hariwiat,  rrar  Jnan,  rraodHO,  10«


t.  IBB.  184.  984;  Inca  raina  Uarrian  eiiatoma,  84

I,  188,  200,  384;  laif*  alchei  at,  lla-8*ra,  83,  lie,  144

•Du  Uaaa  on  laland,  98

ona,  aortham  bar  ol.  48,  44,  45,  189,  317,  Hat*.  Board  or  aqnaab,  OMd  in  tnpUnlnc.  1'

3Si,  334,  384  Uattbawa,  Dr.  WaahlnHon,  108

- -' n  bay  of.  4B,  4S,  47,  4S,  3B4  Hant  of  Mona  (or  clod^teutdni;  77


Konpona.  monntala,  24,  83 :  oracia  at,  3B0 liaynnani.  baT,  44
■"-ill-boala  <aH  Keehi).  63.  317  Uarprdomo,  onraaor,  ..,  .-

- "■  "- '  ■ - - - -. IfeEi^  Cbarlai  PaoL  ISt

HedJunal  ^anta  on  laland  ol


Knll-boala  <aH  Keehi).  63.  317  Uarprdomo,  onraaor,  79,  98

KanD'Kona,  Ajmati  nama  for  inowr  monn- IfeEi^  Cbarlai  Paol  —


Konnrana  (aee  Santo  Muni,  3B,  314  Hadietno^nan (Ma  8k«wiu}, 94, 97; their
Enpanita,  roln,  65  oraaniutkiB  and  dwraaa  of  rank,  Ut.  13B

"  irupata,  rnina  at.  301,  303,  333,  335,  369,  UsalTnca.  (aBsTBl,  of  t  ' - ~- "

278  Hmdw,  AM  67.  89

■ - -"' - -  "  (laa  BsMa),  71


atata  (aaa  San
etMnloEleal  pi
AduahBaa,  f<


UetMi


La  Pm,  clt7  of.  B,  3B, 53,  GS, 7B,  79,  87,  Adiaabaaa,  iOC

110,  lie,  183  Himnla,  andral  danM,  115,  133,  13B,  158

La  Baya.  aonrca  of  tba  Amaion.  38,  38  Uinehin,  John,  38

LandL  enttiratad  for  Indiana,  81;  enltlmtad  Ulali.  Tolcano.  24,  181

forWdowneia,  81  Hll'ani ((M  P«r«otM)  Mrtte*}. 78, 79.  143

Lanwaja  (aaa  «arata),  IS5  Hitlmaea  al  Kaaapata,  313

Larpata,  diiaaaa  of  cUldran.  135  HiUa  (Itailoo).  IBB

Lanaaaanl  idand.  18,  44.  58,  54  Uode*  of  labaiatanaa  In  pT*4pan{d  ttaui^  30

IrimndarinI,  langa,  7  Hohou,  Titlaio.  and  maaaacra  at.  149

IdT.ka, Indian  madiolno-man. iorocrer,  etc.,  Molina,  Dloco  da  (aaa  Oviada),  S6t

130. 134, 159: wllehenft  sangnoniala  ot,  HoUna, F.  Oriat6*al  da,  nport  on  rflaa  and


Molina, F.  Oriat6*aL  _.
tabiM  of  tha Inoai


ivr


Leke-laka^  alu  Llldli.  48  unrca (or hla wriUhfL B

LIbaliona  of  aieohol  and  wlno,  99  atMDl  Tlllcaea  laland,  ~SlS;


LlrtlninB  atrok«a^  19 ^ ___  „^^^^_-  }?^-A**

Limbo.'g^


Lika,  Toehr  point  o(,  ISS  Montaiiuna  aloir  (nm  Mew  Mexico,  398

t,  oitr  of.  134  Montaja,  Jsan  icU,  Indian  ot  OocUti.  Ki


Limauile  at  XakaTo-Eana,  4S  Moon  aa  a  fetiah  (aaa  Stm).  94

Ualtl-aiTJPaU  (ua  Santa  Barbara),  43  Moqnecaa,  Tillan,  8

Llama,  21,  139  Horenoi,  eoulGdaneon,  Matiiaa,  118,  1S8

Llania  fain*  In  witottoratt,  M,  98  Hortan,  71;  alana,  188

Llama  tallow  In  witchcnift.  9S,  08,  97  Uoontaln  Tiew  (nm  Ynmani,  55

Uaq'arlli,  projwitian  of  land,  44,  138,  SOS,  Mnehn.  Mariano,  praat*  ot  Ch^U.  119,  131

304.  311,  313  MoUn,  fatiah  o(  irt^  alabaater.  97,  98,  100;
LUklla (cloth),  95,  143  108,  105;  (oond  at  Tlcanl,  105

Llial.  or  A;Uu  (bmi  Sola),  BS 179,  184  Unln-mnln  (aaa  TM).  47

LlooDO  Yupanqal,  Inca  war^euaf,  1B8  UoBeeai,  provinea  ot,  104,  155

Lluchn,  woolen  cap.  7B  Mun-Kalo, sraat 44, 178, 190, 31^ Sit.
Lin] 0.  hacienda  of, 8, B8.  41,  65,  39, IIB, 310, 317.  331.  325,  23S, 337. 339,  380,

leS  3B4,  248;  ailTar  nuak  lonnd  at.  336

Locea.  Inea  rnina  at,  37,  3B1  Hnaleal  Inatmmanta  at  eolipao,  148

Ijopei  da  Telauo.  Joan,  QS  Mjfale  (aplder),  155

XjDJwca,  braDcb  of  the  Armarl  Indiana,  85  Mytb  of  ooea-iiluitlng  on  laland.  91

Mfthleal  animal  in  Lalu  Titieaca,  83.  4S,  58.
Uachola  (laa  PaccartTw  and  AcfiachOa),  145, 57,  103

Maiaa,'  IS.  IB.  31  Nation.  W.,  B3,  G8

Maker  ot  all  created  lhln|t,  caUed  b;  Indiana  tfarlgatlon  on  Lake  Titieaca,  reatrietiona  tipM,

TiciTiraco'cha  or  Tnpaea.  Amanan  or  Ara- 10

naaan (aee  CK«m),  801  Needlea  of  ooppai  and  bronie  (laa  Tmurti,  77

UaDqui  Amaja,  rnina,  5,  34  Nicarana,  141

Mamaoonaa  (aeo  Btcluiti  wom«n),  354,  355  Nichea  and  omamenU  In  honaea,  89

Mamani Manual Onra-airi at Cbalta. and  Nichea  Id  Inca  fatdldlno  on  Tlticaea,  3SS

medicine-Dan,  97,  98,  105,  lOS,  131,  133,  NiKhl-herona,  47

125,  305  Nlua,  E^TMareoa  de,  138,  184
Hama-Oilla.  Tolna,  190,  31S,  321.  3S1,  274

Hnma-Ojllia,  mother  of  tba  ann,  294  ObUsallona  of  Indiana  towarda  landowncn,  Tt


.wGooi^lc


INDEX  3CS5

Obcidlan.  ISO  M2,  364,  3<S.  ST8,  271

Ou,  IB  dad«d  in  will*,  196;  a.

Ocarapo.  Don  Aotoolo  i%  tT4,  ITS  orata  nlcliat  al,  isa;  Urn  alcbm  at,  IBi;

Offlcara  of  Snr  Uaiiean  pnabfoa,  8«,  88  niehtm  at. 286; not  a  ^rfne  at  Iha  Son,

Offlclal  iDTHtlfatlona  Into  Indian  antiqnitita. 3TS;  pouibla  DnmbaT  at  Inbabltand,  IBT;

ISTl,  SlI  roof,  194;  ■lluatian  and  Tisw,  198

ODcial  aaanb  for  tnanire,  161T,  387  PiUeoponeii,  334

OjoM  (an  £andab>,  IBS  Pinahna,  809

OliTa,  P. Anallo,  iS2, 82B; analon  of  liii  PUano,  Franobco,  81,  88,  84,  182.  IBB,  261,
mltiun  Willi  Ihoaa  of  llifntl  OabaDo  Bsl- 368

boa,  S38;  nirtlll  coacornlnc  Uanco  Oapac  Piurro,  Gunialo.  88,  84,  IBS,  344;  rlait  to
•ad  Tilicaca Island, 83S: roTiew of  lila prctnanla  of  CopacaTana,  1SS9,  388

book,  838.  834,  83G.  838:  tradition  at  Flurro,  Harnando,  88,  84,  IBS,  344;  eharpid
oriiinal  paopUng  at  ebntli  America  befin-  vHli  eaualai  dulli  of  Spaniarda  In  Laka
nlQE  in  Yan«n^ S2S; tradilloni about Titicsca.  367

liabnanMo,  83S  Piurro,  Pedro,  on  tradition!  abant  Titleaca,
OmaioToa,  prorinn  o(.  19T  396,  BOS,  SIT

Ondecardo,  Polo  da,  Bll,  814,  838;  iaTeMI-  Plaatis  work  on  Titieaea,  IBS

cationa  bj,  828  Pl0D(h,  63,  TT

Opau  Indiana  of  Bonora,  108  Plnmaia  ai  danec  onlamant,  lET

Oilrin  ot  preifnt  ladiaua  on  TKlsau  pnba-  Polltloal  and  Jndiciarr  aathoiitlBa  for  Iiland.

Omata,  ervplion  of,  161  Pomata,  vUlaca.  6,  IS,  3T,  IBS

Oalricb.  American  {Rhta  anurfeaim),  phunea  Ponebo,  86,  186

of,  16S  PoDcboi,  ancient,  from  Titldwia  Iiland.  231,
Onr Ladr of OopacsTana, patron aalnt of 336,  283

bland,  93  Fonio  (lee  Ftrtonal  «nr<»>,  TS^  79,  14S

Oriado  y  Taldja,  Oonialo  Feraandei  de,  3B8,  Population (numben of) ot Obneaho and

3BT.  298  adjoining  dlitrida  to  BollriaB  frontlor,  37

Owl,  bird  of  trll  omen,  101  PopnUtloa  ot  Oopacaiana  and  Thloaea  Idanda,

Pacaree  Taoipn,  deOnllion  of  name  bT  Oar-  Fopnlallon  ot  Koatl,  60

cOaaao,  SOB  Popnlatioa  of  TiUeaea  Iduid,  61

PacBritambo.  near  Coica, auppaaed  placa  of  Foqnen-Oaaeba,  palnMd  baarila  at,  811,  812,

oricin  of  Incaa,  297,  313.  818,  SIT, B31. BIS

833,  836;  tradhion  about (aaa  BKrnust),  FoUlo,  18

308  Pottery,  madern,  70

Paecarioa (lee AeftMltAa), 141, 146, ISO,  Prann  in  Ajmtri,  pTMadln«  boDM-bnildlni,

154,  190  96

Pacba  ayre,  98  PrHto,  cksreh  tDnettoDary,  119,  131,  189

Pachaeama (see  QtMtrrtt  i*  Santa  Clara),  PrlmltlTe  eonunerce,  21

303,  BOS,  S88  PrloMe  (tee  Prm*),  169

Pachatamu (Qnlefana], 149; bona* at  ae-  PDcar4,^mlet,  SI.  62,  144,  1B9

etnded  women  at,  2G3,  2TT;  oracle  at,  368  Pneari,  marebf  bottom,  48,  173

Paehacnii  Ynpinani,  Inea  war-oblet  (aee  Pncari,  rlTor  ot.  38

Potnlid  beard*},  818  Pncari,  mini,  47, 187, 199,  300,  301,  306,  332,
Pacbajacbacblo  (ate  TieiviraeteKa),  831  232,  336;  artefact*  in  copper  and  bronie.

Painted  boarda  (lee  f  cnm-Oanclia),  S13  203;  not  mentioned  br  older  anthora,  203;

Painted  cloth  leat  trcm  Parn  to  Osrcllaaao  de port  co  laland  ot  Tlllcaoa  for  Koatl,  280,

la  Vaca,  16Q8,  S86  SSI

PaintincB,  aboriflnal.  al  Ouica,  157  Pucart  bay,  48

PalU-Kaaa,  anramll  of,  43.  4S,  1ST,  198  PnearanI,  Tillafe,  ISl;  atone  Idol  ot,  3T8

Pampa  de  IlaTe.  name  (iren  to  wideit  part  ot  Pncblo  women  of  New  Uuiea,  67

Lake  Titleaca,  IS  Puerto  BJoo,  anliqaltta*  trooi,  140

Pampili island,  IB,  238,  329,  350,  3G1  Ful4X  inllans,  49

Pando,  Joai  Uaonel,  88  Ponapunen,  234

Pardo,  Octario,  38 ■  Pnaa, UUdand, 4, 6, SO, 87, 10. 73, 37.
Parrsta  (BetAarkrnoKtu).  «8  lOS.  342


Paalnrai

— ■ -ML Isluid. la  Pnncn Us „,, „, , .

^  4,  S,  9,  16,  28,  S3,  79,  SI,  104,


PaUpatani,  Island,  J4  Pnnen  (landing),  42,  62,  187.  191


Patron  sslnta  and  imaiia,  93

Paucartampa (see  PxcarUambB), 810  Fnno,  department,  4,  9,  38 '

Payaya,  iarand,  IB,  63.  G4  PuqDtn>Oaneba  (at*  PtQutn-Caneha),  BIB

Pidieulw  vetimtnti  and  capiKf,  abnndanee PusipianI,  Indian  dances,  117,  122,  128

of,  4B,  62  Pn-tQ-tn.  cow-bom.  93,  14S
Peleebnco,  TiUsfa,  7,  243

Personal  namea  in  Aymari,  86  Qnarrela  and  flfbta  between  Indiana,  88

PertOBsl  ■eniee  to  landowner*,  7S  ualctana,  lanrnare,  163,  104

Pern,  republic  ot,  8,  7  Qnlcbna  Indians.  31,  23.  34,  04,  87.  99

Pbillp  if,  Kim  of  Spain,  314,  818  Qnlcka-uaya,  bsdenda,  84

Piekerinf.  Frof.  Bdwud  Ob.,  34  UuinUL  168
Plctnre-writlna,  88.  148


IBS,  30S,  316, 322,  280,  283, 384,  259,


;cbyG0O'^lc


356  IKDEX

QnlTtaL  Mictail  InM  tnO  to  Ekka^o-Kana,  Sirmlenlo  Qmmbo*.  Pedro  da,  81),  >I4,  111:
18B,  laa,  IBS,  3St  cTlUclm  at  Ut  wrfdnat,  SU;  tndttta  «■

TItioMS  tdud,  >1B

Rilmondl, ADtonlo, lUtamanti BboBt Psrn-  SaTii,  Qnlelims  tor  lobsoM,  371

Tian  lodifenoDi  tobneoo.  3Tt  Seotvioii  on  TUieaaB  hUno,  49

RilnbDw,  an  Aehaehila,  100  Baal  (aM  MptlHetl  mimal),  48

lUlnfalli  on  TilJcaoa  Idand,  18  SMiadad  womBB (talarir  oallad  "Vbfte  tt

Bain -making,  100,  156,  1G8;  at  Ttahnuuco,  _  Iha  Bon"),  3S3,  3_5G:  on  Titisaea,  »I

TUmli,  rlnr,  S,  28


and  OI«u, acroemont  be-  Bhamau (aee  MtHehtfrntn), S4.  ST, IM,

^ ..«  jgg.  ^,^j  inflnanea  ovar  Indlu*,  111

... _)S,  313,  BMuana  of  FDeblo  Indiana,  100

, --^ SS3. 384. ass, 3S1,  Bienri,  Indian  danoan,  llfl,  138

3SS, 388,  370,  271,  27S,  288. S3T, 828,  Slcivn,  pfontontorr  ol,  43,  44,  48,  IBS,  18t,
839; popnlar bstlef In origin of Hanoo 931,  337,  338;  ralna  and  v  '  "~


an  thair  Matemanta,  I
I  aarOan, Frar  Aloi

'.  a  IS,  331,  394,  as


■  at,  318


BatUaa,  of  l»ana,  1S7;  maUllio,  1S7

Ballrloni  Iwliafi  and  onmoniala  amonC  In-  Skin  dfaaaaee  oa  Iiland,  SS

dbna,  SI  Sknila.  aTtlOeial  flatteni

Ballglaaa  ccnmouial  at  Ookd,  ISO  mala,  not  deloimad,  1

BapaTUmleDla*  at  OopaeavaDa,  188  " '"*

Baporta  on  Indian  aoatsma  from  aer

BaptOaa  on  ialanda  of  Tllloaoa  and  Koatl,  4S
BisgrliB,  large  ean  (aee  liraU),  804,  80B


Ike  anubo

nooK  Ol  bae  <ja<  iiee  ^in-Jiawt,  ««  jfT8,  378

Boman, Vrmj Hieronrmo, 817  Sorala,  town,  B


—Jnga,  anolant,  —  .,  ,.

Roca  Inea.  var-chief,  29S  Sorala,  group  of  monntalna,  8,  7,  8,  i;

Book  of  the  Oat  (aee  TiUKtla),  44  3TS,  378


Boman, rray Hieronrmo, 817  Sorala,  town,  BT

Romnhia  and  BemnJ,  lata  of,  3S8  Soreerart  (aee  Sk<tm»Kt,  ale.)  130

Bopaa,  aaoiant,  148  Sorearr  and  witeheraft,  85

Botalion  at  landa  among  Indiana,  34,  80,  144, Spanlth  eotonlali.  dldlmltiaa  of  poaitiu  ail
1S1  lack  of  naonnaa.  78

Spidera,  need  in  dltlning,  103
Sacred  Rock (aee  flH-Zate), 44. 188, 200, Squier, E.  O.,  JS, 118, 189. ISl,  193,  IH,
214, ai8. 3IT, 93E, 330, 229, 331, asz. 903,  208,  204,  205,  208,  328,  380,  281,  IK
2G0,  373,  374,  388,  394,  827:  gataWBTa  to, Statnia  nporMd  to  kave  axiated  on  nlcaea
3fl4.  347:  original  Armari  ahrina,  adopMd (aea  tamct}.  280

by Ineaa, 388, 38S; piinotpal fetiah on Stieki  wHh  notehea,  tor  keeping  acmvau,  8t
liland,  988:  aeal  of  an  oracle, 999; aao- Stone  ohaata  oontalnlng  ponehaa,  331
rlfloial  itone-heapi  ol  Puebloa  and  NaTajoa, Stone  (tolnea  near  Hbtc,  8

"' —  toadi,  to  Intaroede  for  rain,  108:  n"
ihea,^7a


Sallma,  Tol


fettihea,  ±

»  BaHaaar,

IT  PHirenonaaa,  ov,  vu


,_  _.^ ,j,  _-., ,  BtravberriH,  18

830,  S27,  828;  lonrces  of  information,  8 18 ;  Sochei.  range,  7

foandation  of  Onico,  818;  Iraditiona  abant  Snehei,  riTar,  S

Tnn.To .lu,  Tlncocha,  ale.,  818;  analoR  Backing,  Indian  medicinal  praoliaa,  130

1  vlih  Ihoaa  ol  Betaniaa  and  Son, no  inprBne  deitr  of  the  Ajiud  94;


y  ona  of  the  fatlahB,  150

id  Uoon,  not  worahipved  aa  nA  bf


Olau,  B
Samfrnnw  rtrvvw

Sampara,  TiUaca, 18, 14,  41,  80, 121,  280,  the  Incaa,  3T7;  feliahaa,  n

289,  281;  Indian  maclc  deriTeJ  from,  3S<i  aa  hoaband  and  wife,  ats

San  Martin,  Fra^  Tomb  da,  Dominican,  3d,  Snnchnli,  range,  7

184  Sno-Fathei  and  Uoon-Kotber,  Inea  b<llif  ia.

Ban  Nicolaa,  Fra]r  Andite  de,  333,  268,  38S,  3T7.  378

839  enntar  Pancar,  813

Bandala  (hb  (7g«t«m«),  88,  188  Saa-voraliip  not  enforced  by  tha  Incaa,  ITT

Bani. Father  Bataal,  Pranaiaean, 313, 381,  Snpar  (aaa  SHI  tpMU),  63,  150


. ,_..-  TUpao,  11.  99.  81,  83T

Santa  Barbara  Caaa  LtaUi-Bfvi-PtUti),  48, 172,  Tacanaa  (aaa  Andentt),  G

178,  200  Tambo  (mined)  at  Ewvate,  818

BanU  Uaria.  andanaa  of,  188.  208;  voodan  Tambo  Oolorado,  near  Pfieo.  Pern.  333

goblflti  fonnd  at,  185  Taiubolooo  (eea  Barmitntit),  818.  818


I,  range  of,  4,  38  T'aca,  321

(St.  Jamaa), 100, US  Tanca-Unea. ..

---•--—- Impata,  haolanda,  8L

talldw  (aqnatle  Urda),  IS


. .. , 100, US  Tanca-Unea.  mini

Hnata.  penininla  of,  9.  10,  IS,  43, Tanimpata,  haclen

Tiania.  or

>,  monntain,  83  TaqnJll.  bland,  8


.wGooi^lc


Trucks  of  Um  Ban  and  Vimr  on  TllkMa,  117,


TinieiL  indifsnoo*  d«eT,  90  TndinK  trip*  to  lowar  nciou  (TnnfM),  8T

TorhucL  P.  Imli.  316.  SST  Tradition,  aboDt  ueiwt  «>U  protMtlDt  Ooiw-

ThtodDlito,  iofliMiiMd  hj  Itmabuoat  nwki,  eiTmna. 382; abont oricln at tha Ineu

41,  SG  from  ^Qoini,  306;  at  ersBtian  at  nui  and

Tharmonietrii  DbuTTktieu  on  Idaadi  of  Titi-  moon  on  Titi(»r- --'  —  ' -— -— "••

eaes  ud  Soatl,  IT,  18  S13: of  whita  i

Thander  ud  Uihtainr,  loM  fgtUbM,  ISl  br  Olau,  SOO

aeo.  muii  and  TiUue,  ID,  11.  IZ,  2S,  Tradilions  abont  Titlcua  laland,  2S4;  local

2,  BB,  100,  IK.  118.  tlS,  119,  120,  Arnart  Ion,  828


If,  i^v, Arm

Indian  Tnain

ka.  S9;  Trephii

.  _- ... ..J««  at tfon  _, ,  -  —

ear)/  traditinna  abooL  209;  aboda  of  TiwUnlu amDii( Indiana of BolMa and


c  lore  ail  10:  shurch  booka.  S9:  Trephinad  a

— - -,  .tUaf  "-

got,  299;  aboda  o^

, Jinr  to  Molina,  813

fcbl.  221.  2S0,  ST9  Trfba,  SS


.. . — Jta  at tloD  at  Onioo,

., abont,  299;  aboda  ol Trgihlnin* i

tha  Oniator,  accordinr  to  Molina,  813  Fara,  114


iTomontorr,  44.  48,  217,  224,  227 Troplaal  frnlt,  87
>,  alao  Thicbicaaa  (an  IWciKa),  08, Tnapaea,  11,  29

Tonapa  <aea  Tmapa,  alao  fadpoe),  827,  828
TonU  (t*«  Ohulm),  80
^ ..  Tnpae  Aman  <aa*  Indian  vprMnff),  88

t  CachilaTa,  near  ObnUaTa, S7: on Tupac TnpanqBi, Inea war-cbiat *iaH lo
oall,  97,  2SS  Tltiflaea  7fUnd,  1S8,  312,  840,  25S;  TUit

a  eeremenial,  W:  at  Kaiapata  betors  ai- to  Soati,  2S1
LTaiioni,  97798  Tnrl-TnrlS.  cliff,  44,  317

1,  bird  of  eril,  102  Tnrka  Iiland.  antiqnltU*  fran,  141

!— o._  T..I,.  J. _>n .. „<j  Tnmnoia«.  181

I,  298

rnina  at  baas  at.  201


Pablo  ds,  TfDaEo.  1«,  88


Tlqnlna,  Btreita  of,  B,  10.  14.  16,  84,  188  rr.-„™ h._i^  m (■.  -„i_.  .>  h...  ~r

TiS,  irUd  cat  (a«i  liiJu^n^).  47,  68,  102,  n;frZ^f^S^,?hJu '  12.^7^  ^

214  r  pl«a  of  aVln  of,  naad  In  wilohcraft.  97  nSl  M«  ^(f^^^  ^ ^

■"'^S^-f'iS^^'^'iri  "*  "*"*  '"'  "M^"^  Uil^ota,i;k«  of  blood.  381

t;«™ r.i.-J J T fl in la iji la it  nfla-K*.  haigbt  of,  on  BoatL  43.  288

iS^'n aif\i^  Is 'J  'to' St'  ii II'  DDa-Pil,  pnmontorr,  41,^89.  280,  273

JS;l6S'8%*7'8Sf'78,'''76,%"ii7t'ni;  gE.'^rs ssr'^V

IIB, lil. 187.  ISO.  2B9,  276.  821.  828  S{?™IS!  win.

abaDdonsd  after  1BB4  and  noconpied  Utar  n  nrhT^Kn^Ynit,


abandonsd  after  1ES4  and  iweon^Jed  latar

_'__ ' '" ' " _  d  In'whchoMJti  06.  B8,

"  287;  Bjot  Tiiil'to,  1^  Bpaiiiarda,  81;  nii'o'raniDa  (loo  Joaffl 4B 60 61

inferior  workmanahip  on  Inoa  atmatnraa.  jt.._^^.„ liu* h qj wi * '

288;  older  reporU  nawerated.  228;  orir  n?.n^/«;  7^=^.  ^JnaLl 97 105

map,  Inhabllid  by  ArS'.r*  Indiana 18^  vl^^M,  aSTs,^ '

aaat  of  an  ancient  anrine,  287  tt**..  tm^  n<u,i\ ini t4i

Tlllcaea.  lakj  8,  4. T,  0, 11. 12, 38. 188.  ^J^  t^dl™.  88 87-  elana  of 88

l"i8t'2ri4?'Cn3*TlSnl'S;/Ao?;  ^"SX^n^'tSIt  ^•^"' "'■ ^'^'^^

305: (Inklnj of  Tavel {aee Torar), 81;  n  "12^™  »-,  Tiiu„—n a ■■

Bwinuninc  in*  248;  water  of,  9,  10  Djn-Iri  (name  for  HUmanl),  8,  88

Titicaea  baaln,  81

Titicacao  (aea  Tttieoaa),  B4  Vaea  d«  Oaatro, OriatAral,  ofleial  InTMUaa-

Titi-Kala (Sacred  Bock, Rock  of  Ike  Oat),  tion  of  ancient  lore  of  Onioa  Indiana Un-
fa, 62, ISS. 214; (old and allTaT ob-  cu),  307,  817

Ject*  found  at.  320;  object  of  apeclal  Colt,  Talera.  Fatfaer  Blaa, 186,  838:  bio(Tapb]cal

287, 2TS,  277,  234; ruina  at,  310, 330,  data  C0DC«niinc  810;  ail  vHtiDfi  uaod  br

231.  2B2  aarcflaaao  de  la  Veca,  810

Titin  tTayanl,  173  "-' ■- ■■ —  " ■■-  ■•-  "

Tito  Ynpanqni,  Franciieo 88

Toada,  iiilsre«uarB  for  rain,  108

TocaT,  BOO  Veu.  Qarellaaao  da  la,  SOS,  S19,  832,  83B,

Toledo, Don  Francjaeo  de,  ViceroT,  33, SS,  S24:  biomphlcal  notice  of,  806;  intareslcd

167,  17B,  811,  8)8,  814,  S16  tradandea dUplared In i^ book. S07;

Tonapa,  II,  BI,  81B,  S2T;  ehanaed  people  of  aonreea  _of Information. 807: traditiona

probablr  an  AriDari  mrtli, B2B;  wander-  vefeiaiion

In^  of,  according  to  HalcamaThna,  818,  819  Venereal  d

Toolg,  modem,  atod  br  Indiana,  77,  14S  Verbena.  4

Topa  Ynga  Ynpanjne,  aaid  to  bara  eonqai — ■" " — '

Caico  (aee  O-alitrrit  dt  Banta  Clara),


poaaire,  tobacco,  271  Viaeba,  Tillaae.  7

1,  or  Tnmi.  pini.  142.  181,  207,  336,  237 Vlcnfla.  30,  86


a  Otara),  808  from  n
Viaeba,  t

,  u. luui..  i..uri.  143.  181,  207,  336,  237  Vlcnfla.  a<.,  u..

of  gold  from  HoroKato.  236  Vlcnfla  dance,  or  Okokela  {•«•  Chaeu-a^Ilu},

Torao  Kopana,  mln,  SB  108

Totora,  12,  IB.  S4,  47,  ITO  Vjleanota,  Oracle  at,  366

ToTar,  Asoatin,  6  Vilcanota.  rania  of,  4,  B,  38,  314


;cbyG00'^lc


r)  (IM  NttdUt  tl  etpptr  mui  brvsM),  TT,


Tanrinka,  vktor^nkko,  48,  10^

,  .  .  , Ta-i*-idii,  projection  of  Utid,  44

ilMUioea.  imporMnt  Indian  fMIthen,  ISl  Tarba  d»  unwnM,  OalUhniTa  m


VEieuTs.  F.  NiuDor,  2BG  Ta-ia-chi,  projection  of

Volcanoea.  important  Indian  fstlahen,  ISl  Torba  d»  amaota,  C~"~
TotiTa  Dff*rin(a  of  fold  and  allTsr  flcoiai,  2E0 malaneholj,  104

Watcb-loven,  ancient,  aS6


Terba  d«  OaMilla,  haDebon^  1<
Watcb-loven,  ancient,  aS6  TDtb-KaTmL  STS

Water-inaka  (aee  Taurtnlfo),  48  "  .i.tt!._.. .


n  Tlticaca,  8,  as  88, 1B7, 170,

implamenCa  of  Ohnllpaa, ""*  ""'' ■  — '


VeaTing  implamenCa  of  Ghnllpaa,  18S

White  men,  mytb  of,  on  Tlticaca  Iiland,  05

Wlann,  Chario.  300

Witohciafl  on  Iiland,  BB

Woman  on  Titleaca  Iiland  for  seremoiiial  pnr-

poaei,  BG  ZampoEa,  Ursa  pan-flute,  113

Wooden  toblat  fonnd  at  Santa  Karla,  48  Zap^la  bin  (aea  Xiraf},  904

Zapana,  olilef  of  tha  OoIUa,  3S8

TaeoIU,  141  Ztrale,  Afnitln  da,  hii  book,  SO

Tampnpata,  bamlat  of,  18,  49,  83,  181;  Inn of  ori^  of  Iceai  from  TUicaa

nuni  at,  383  Zepita,  TiBafa,  30


;cbyG00'^lc


DaitizecbyGoOt^lc


:'\N


iiGooi^le


THE  ISLANDS  OF
TinCACA  AND  KOATI


THE  HISPANIC  SOCIETY  OF  AMERICA  takes  plea-
sure in  annonncmg  the  publication  of  Mr.  Adolph  F.
Bandelier's  The  Jslandb  of  Ttticaca  ahd  Koati.

The  author  of  this  work  is  the  veil-known  archseologist
who,  though  a  native  of  Switzerland,  has  been  since  his
youth  a  resident  of  the  United  States.  Becoming  interested
in  the  subject  of  archsology,  he  traveled,  under  the  auspices
of  the  Ardueolo^cal  Institute  of  America,  among  the  native
races  of  New  Mexico,  Arizona,  Mexico,  and  Central  Amer-
ica, making  a  thorough  study  of  their  life  and  traditions.
Later,  under  the  auspices  first  of  Mr.  Henry  Villard  of  New
York  and  then  of  the  American  Museum  of  Natural  History
of  New  York,  he  began  similar  investigations  in  Bolivia  and
Peru,  and  the  collection  of  antiquities  for  the  Museum.

A  report  of  part  of  this  work  is  contained  in  the  pages
of  "The  Islands  of  Titicaca  and  Koati,"— islands  situated
in  Lake  Titicaca,  on  the  Peru-Bolivia  boundary.  The  volume
is  illustrated  with  eighty-five  plates,  many  of  which  are  in
full  color ;  several  maps,  one  of  which  is  a  reproduction  of  a
manuscript  map  of  1573,  enable  the  reader  to  follow  intelli-
gently Mr.  Bandelier's  narrative.  The  plates  give  views
not  <mly  of  the  author's  discoveries  but  also  of  the  natives,
who  still  retain  many  of  their  primitive  castoms  and  cos-
tumes. Excavations  were  made  on  the  islands  named  dur-
ing a  residence  there  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Bandelier  for  the
greater  part  of  seven  months;  thdr  stay  was  interrupted
for  a  short  time  because  of  a  Peruvian  revolution  which


;cbyG00'^lc


caused  an  interraptioii  of  all  commanication  between  the
islands  and  the  shores  of  the  lake.  Work  was  done  at  all
times  in  face  of  the  greatest  difficulties.  The  author  says:
"Only  those  who  have  resided  for  some  time  in  that  section
of  Bolivia  can  appreciate  the  obstacles  it  presents  to  scien-
tific investigation.  Climate,  natnre,  and  man  conspire  to
impede,  annoy,  and  obstruct."  Yet  Mr.  Bandelier,  as  the
book  itself  bears  witness,  was  satisfied  only  with  thorough
work.

As  a  consequence  we  have  here  a  full  and  exhaustive
description  of  the  archeology  and  folk-lore  of  the  region
described,  and  the  author  shows  in  oopions  notes  at  the  end
of  each  chapter  the  records  that  have  been  transmitted  by
the  old  Spanish  chroniclers  and  by  later  investigators.
There  is  a  thorough  portrayal  of  the  native  Indian,  tradi-
tions, customs,  and  superstitions;  some  of  ^diich  serionsty
interfered  with  the  work  of  excavation.

Mr.  Bandelier  in  successive  chapters  treats  of  the  Basin
of  Lake  Titicaca,  the  Islands  of  Titicaca  and  Koati,  the
^dians  on  Titicaca,  the  Buins  on  each  Island,  and  the  Abo-
riginal Mytiis  and  Traditions  concerning  the  Island  of  Titi-
caca. At  the  close  of  the  book  there  is  a  List  of  Plants
Indigenous  to  the  Islands  and  a  fall  Index.

Medium  octavo,  xvii  +  359  pages,  bound  in  dark-red  bnck-
ram,  with  ^It  top,  and  lettered  in  gold. Price,  $5.00.

This  prospectus  shows  size  of  leaf,  style  of  text-tyx>e,  and
-  qn^ty  of  paper.


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


.wGooi^lc


ui-'j u 1306


I


.,  Cooi^lc


.wGooi^lc
