The Talmud (Joseph Barclay, 1878)
==========================================================
Barclay's 1878 The Talmud — selections from the Mishnah and Talmud by the Anglican bishop of Jerusalem; an early Christian introduction to rabbinic literature. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

Google 


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 


- — - ■Ti 


1154 Mmt ImnM (R. ManassehX the Conciliatm- ; a Reconcild- '%' 
■£ ^tbe apparent Contradictions in H. Scripture ; trans, with notes 
Jigr & JHL' linden. 1842. 2 vds. in i, 8vo, doth, 5^. . ^ 


THE TALMUD 


o 


^ ^<^\,y. 


y 


.<y 


.<^Vu<v->j,j^. ' 


TH E TALMUr 


BY JOSEPH BARCLAY, LL.D. 


RECTOR OF BTAFLEFORD, HERTS 


(Ahoth. L 1.) 


WITH ILLUSTRATIONS AND PLAN OF THE TEMPLE 


y 


LONDON 


JOHN MUERAY, ALBEMARLE STREET 

1878 


\,All rights reserved, '\ 


* ^ •*■ 


&T^ 


JJL6/«,.^' 


HAHVA«0 C0LL{JBE UiRARY 


. ' w 


/ 


/ 


.,• - r^f- -.,,.<?/' 


HARVARD 

UNIVERSITY 

LIBRARY 


Printed ly R. & R. Clark, EdinbttrgK 


PEEFACE. 


The following selection of treatises, translated from the 
Mishna, with explanations from the Gemara and other 
sources, is designed to supply the reader with a 
general and impartial view of this important branch of 
Hebrew literature. These treatises are chosen because 
they illustrate Bible teaching ; and it is attempted to 
present them in a literal and readable form. Those 
lire omitted which are either too tedious or too gross 
for general circulation. It will be observed that these 
treatises contain the particular mode of thought 
against which the deepest woes of the New Testament 
are denounced ; while, at the same time, they afford 
much infonnation concerning the inner life of the Jews 
lit the period of our Saviour's sojourn upon earth. 
Hence the reason is apparent why the Talmud is 
anther undervalued or overvalued, according to the 
reader's standpoint. Speaking generally, however, it 
has proved injurious to those who have submitted to 
it- authority, and bowed to the dictum that "the 
Bible is like water — the Mishna is like wine — and the 
Gt-mara is like spiced wine." 


VI PREFACE. 

To the treatises from the Talmud there is added 
translation of the treatise on " The Tabernacle," fro 
the Bereitha. 

Where there are various readings in the origin 
text, that rendering is given which seems most pr 
bable. A residence of several years in the East, 
which ten were passed in the Holy Land, enabled n 
to gather the opinions of some of the most Icamc 
Rabbis with regard to disputed points in the interpre 
ation of the Talmud. The substance of these opinio: 
is embodied in this volume. 

J. B. 

Staplefobd Rectory, ELebts, 
November 1877. 


CONTENTS. 


List of Illustrations 
List of Authorities 
Introduction 


I. 

II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

VII. 

VIII. 

rx. 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIII. 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

XVIII. 


THE MISHNA TREATISES. 
On Blessings ^ . 
On the Sabbatical Year ^ 
On the Sabbath / 
On the Passover .•» . 

On the Day of Atonement 
On Tabernacles ^ 


J 


J 


On the New Year 

On Fasting ^ 

On the Feast-Offering 

On the Sanhedriit 

On Idolatry W 

On the Fathers ./ 

On the Daily Sacrifice .* 

On the Measurements of the Templr 

On Leprosy * . 

On the Red Heifer ' 

On Hands 

Trbatisr oh the Tabernacle, from the Bereitha 


PAGE 

ix 

xi 

1 


49 
62 
83 
95 
119 
136 
149 
158 
169 
176 
204 
218 
242 
255 
267 
300 
324 
334 


• • • 


VIU CONTENTS. 

APPENDIX. 

PAGE 

Note on Modebn Judaism .... 359 

Calendar op the Months and Chief Jewish Feasts and 

Fasts in each Year ..... 364 

Note on the Sanhedrin ..... 366 

Notes on the Plan of the Temple from the Talmud and 

other Jewish Authorities .... 367 

Notes on the Tabernacle .... 373 

List of Texts ...... 375 

INDEX 381 


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 


View of Jeru&vleh from the Mount op Olives, 

SHOWING THE SlTE OF THE TeMPLE. To illVF- 

trate tlu Treatise on Uie red Heifer . Frontispiece. 

Priest in Linen Vestments sprinkling Blood — 

Tlie Day of Atonement . . . . Tofacejpage 128 

High Priest in his Robes bestowing the Blessing „ 252 

Top of the Mount of Olives, as seen fro3i 

Mount Moriah . „ 305 

A Modern Polish Rabbi Wearing Talith and 

Phylacteries . . . . „ 359 

Mezuza or Sign upon the Door-Post \ 

Phylactery for the Forehead • > . „ 362 

Phyl.\ctery for the Arm. j 

Inscription on a "Stone of Warning" from the 

Temple . . • „ 368 

Plan of the Temple . . End. 


LIST OF THE CHIEF AUTHOEITIES USED IN 
PREPAEING THIS VOLUME. 


Alxxlah Sarah, von Dr. Ewald (Nuraberg, 1856). 

Alpbabetische Liste Aller Gelehrten Juden und Judinnen, von M. P. 

Yung (Leipzig, 1817). 
Apochiypha. 

Aruch, von Rabbi Nathan, 2 vols. (Prague, 1835). 
Autzer Leshon Hakkodesh, by Pagnini, 2 vols. (Leyden, 1575). 

Berachoth, von Pinner (Berlin, 1842). 

Bereitha (1801). 

Bujrtorf, works of (Basle, 1639, 1680). 

Curiosities of Literature, by Disraeli (1834). 

Der Talmud in Seiner Nichtigkeit (Warsaw, 1848). 
Discourses by Wotton (1718). 

Entdecktes Judenthum, von Eisenmenger, 2 vols. (Koenigsberg, 1711) 
Eschcol Haccopher (The Karaite View of the Oral Law). 
Edinburgh Review (July 1873). 

Hebrew Republick, by Lewis, 2 vols. (1724). 
History of the Jews, by Milman, 3 vols. (1829). 
Hixzuk Amunah, by Isaac ben Abraham (1632). 

Introduction to Hebrew Literature, by Etheridge (1856). 

Jonu^ by Sherringham (1696). 

Josephus, Works of, by Whiston (1848). 

Justin Martyr— Dialogue with Trypho— by Rev. G. Reith (1870). 

Kidder on the Messias (1726). 

La Geographic du Talmud, par Adolphe Neubauer (Paris, 1868). 
La Source de la Vie, par Samson Levy, 2 vols. (Paris, 1845). 
Law Magazine — Growth of Jewish Law (August 1872). 


Xll LIST OF AUTHORITIES. 

Lexicon Pentaglotton — Hebraicuui, Chaldaicum, Syriacum, Talmudico- 
Rabbinicum, & Arabicum, by Schindler (Frankfort-on-the-Maine, 
1653). 

Lightfoot, Works of (1684). 

Malirich Hamarchoth, by Aquinas (Paris, 1629). 

Makhzor, 3 vols. (Vienna, 1859). 

Midrash Rabboth (Leipzig, 1864). 

IMidrash Tancliuma (Warsaw, 1849). 

Mishna, by Rabbi Solomon Adani (Amsterdam, 1645). 

Mishna — Judaio-German, 6 vols. (Vienna, 1817). 

]\lishna, with commentaries, by Surenhusius, 6 vols. (Amsterdam 

1698). 
Mishna, Constitutions and Laws of, by Maimonides, 2 vols. (Venice, 

1549). 

Mishna Treatises, by de Sola and Raphall (1843). 
Modem Judaism, by J. Allen (1830). 
Modem Judaism, by Dr. Margoliouth (1843). 

Old and New Testaments. A 

Old Paths, by Dr. M^Caul (1854). r 

Philo Judffius, by C. D. Yonge, 4 vols. (1854). 

Quarteriy Review (October 1867). 

Rabbinische Blumenlese, von Leopold Dukes (Leipzig, 184 1). 

Relalld^s Works (1723). 

Rites and Ceremonies of the Jews, by Levi (1783). 

Selections from the Talmud, by H. Polano (1877). 
Shem Haggedolim (Vienna, 1864). 
Siphra, Sephcr Torath Cohanim (Bucharest, 1860). 
Sota von Wagenseil (Altdorf, 1674). 

Talmud of Babylon, 12 vols. (Vienna, 1843). 
Talmud of Jemsalem, 4 vols. (Russia, 1866). 
Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan ben Uzzicl, with the fragments of 

the Jemsalem Targum, by Ethcridge (1862-65). 
Temple Services, by Dr. Edersheim (1874). 

Vacca Rufa of Maimonides, by Zeller (Amsterdam, 1 709). 

Zohar, 3 vols. (Zolkiew, 1862). 


INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER I. 

Compilation of the Talmud — Rabbi Judah the Holy — Mishna — Gemara — 
General Survey of the Six Orders or Volumes of the Mishna. 

The Talmud (teaching) comprises the Mishna and the 
Gemara. The Mishna (" learning " or " second law ") was, 
according to Jewish tradition, delivered to Moses on Mount 
SinaL " Rabbi Levi, the son of Chama, says, Eabbi Simon, 
the son of Lakish, says, what is that which is written, ' I 
will give thee tables of stone, and a law and conmiand- 
ments which I have \mtten, that thou may est teach them'?^ 
The Tables are the ten commandments; the Law is the 
written law ; and the commandment is the Mishna ; ' which 
1 have written ' means the prophets and sacred writings ; 
• that thou mayest teach them ' means the Gemara. It 
teaches us that they were all given to Moses from Mount 
SinaL" From Moses the Mishna was transmitted by oral 
tradition tlirough forty " Eeceivers," until the time of Eabbi 
Judah the Holy. Tliese Receivers were qualified by ordina- 
tion to hand it on from generation to generation. Abar- 
banel and Maimonides disagree as to the names of these 
Receivers. While the temple still stood as a centre of unity 
to the nation, it was considered unlawful to reduce these 
traditions to writing. But when the Temple was burned, 
and the Jews were dispersed amongst other peoples, it was 
considered politic to form them into a written code, which 
should serve bf. a bond of union, and keep alive the spirit 
of patriotism. The Jewish leaders saw the effect of Consti- 

^ Exod. xziv. 12. 
B 


2 THE TALMUD. introduction. 

tutions and Pandects in consolidating nations — the ad- 
vantage of written laws over arbitrary decisions. Number- 
less precedents of case law, answering to our common law, 
were already recorded: and the teachings of the Hebrew 
jurisconsults, or " Responsa prudentium," which were held to 
be binding on the people, had been preserved from former 
ages. All these traditions Babbi Judah the Holy undertook 
to reduce into one digest. And this laborious work he 
completed about A.D. 190, or more than a century after the 
destruction of Jerusalem by Titus. Eabbi Judah was bom 
on the day that Babbi Akibah died. Solomon is said to 
have foretold the event : " One sun ariseth, and one sun 
goeth down." Akibah was the setting and Judah the rising 
sun. The Mishna of Babbi Judah, afterwards revised by 
Abba Areka in Sura, is the text of the Babylon Talmud. 
The commentaries written on this text by various Babbis 
in the neighbourhood of Babylon, until the close of the 
fifth century, are called the Gemara (completion) ; and are 
published in twelve folio volumes, called the Babylon 
Talmud — the Talmud most esteemed by the Jews. The 
Jerusalem Talmud contains commentaries written partly by 
Babbis in Jamnia and partly in Tiberias, where they were 
completed by Babbi Jochanan in the beginning of the fourth 
century. As now published it has only four out of the six 
orders or books of the Mishna, with the treatise Niddah from 
the sixth. In the time of Maimonides it contained five 
orders. On twenty-six treatises it has no Gemara, though in 
the treatise on shekels the Gemara of Jerusalem is used for 
the Babylon Talmud. The six books of the Mishna are sub- 
divided into sixty-three treatises, in the following manner : — 

BOOK I. 

This book, called Order of Seeds, contains the following 
treatises : — 

1. Blessings, together with prayers and thanksgivings, 
with the times and places in which they are to be used. 

2. A Comer of a Field (Lev. xxiii. 22 ; Deut. xxiv. 19) 


INTRODUCTION. ORDER OF SEEDS. 3 

treats of the corners of the field to be left for the poor to 
glean them — the forgotten sheaves, olives, and grapes — and 
of giving alms, etc. 

3. Douhtful treats of the doubt about the tithes being 
paid, as the Jews were not allowed to use anything without 
its being first tithed. 

4. Diversities (Lev. xix. 19 ; Deut. xxii. 9-11) treats of 
the unlawful mixing or joining together things of a different 
nature or kind — of sowing seeds of a different species in 
one bed — -grafting a scion on a stock of a different kind, 
suffering cattle of different kinds to come together. 

5. The Sabbatical Year (Exod. xxiii. 11; Lev. xxv. 4) 
treats of the laws which regulated the land as it lay fallow 
and rested. 

6. Heave Offerings (Num. xviii 8) treats of separating 
the heave offering — who may eat it, and who may not eat 
of it — of its pollutions, etc. 

7. Tlie First Tithes (Lev. xxvii. 30; Num. xviii. 28) 
treats of -the law of tithes for the priests. 

8. The Second Tithes (Deut. xiv. 22 ; xxvi. 14) treats 
of those which were to be carried to Jerusalem and there 
eaten, or to be redeemed and the money spent in Jerusalem 
in peace offerings. 

9. CaJce of Doiigh' (Num. xv. 20) treats of setting apart 
a cake of dough for the priests ; also, from what kind of 
dough the cake must be separated. 

10. Uhcircumcised Fruit (Lev. xix. 23) treats of the 
unlawfulness of eating the fruit of any tree tiU the fifth 
year. The first three years it is uncircumcised ; the fourth 
year it is holy to the Lord ; the fifth year it may be eaten. 

1 1. First Fruits (Exod. xxiii. 19 ; Deut. xxvi. 1) treats of 
what fruits were to be offered in the Temple, and in what 
manner; also of the baskets in which they were to be 
carried. 


4 THE TALMUD. intboduction. 

BOOK 11. 
THE ORDER OF THE FESTIVALS. 

1. Sabbath treats of the laws relating to the seventh day. 

2. Mixtures, or combinations, treats of the extension of 
boundaries^ whereby all the inhabitants of the court, or 
entry, where the mixture is made, are counted as one family 
inhabiting one domicile ; and are therefore allowed to carry 
victuals from one house to another. It also treats of the 
mixtures for a Sabbath day's journey, whereby the distance 
may be extended for an additional 2000 cubits. 

3. Passovers treats of all rites and ceremonies relating to 
the Paschal Lamb. 

4. Shekels (Exod. xxx. 13) treats of the half shekel, which 
every Jew, rich or poor, was obliged to pay every year to 
the daily sacrifice. 

5. Day of Atonement treats of the solenmities peculiar 
to it. 

6. Tabernacles teaches how they are to be built, and how 
to be used. 

7. The egg laid on a Festival treats of the works which 
may or may not be done on any of the Festivals, which are 
called days of holy convocation, on which no servile work 
may be done. 

8. JSfew Year treats of the laws and solemnities of the feast 
of the New Year, as also of the feasts of the New Moons. 

9. Fasts treats of the various fasts tliroughout the year. 

10. The Boll treats of the feast of Purim, and gives 
instructions how and in what manner the Book of Esther 
and other Lessons are to be read. The Gemara directs 
Jews to get so drunk on this feast, that they cannot discern 
the difference between " Blessed be Mordecai and cursed be 
Hainan," and " Cursed be Mordecai and blessed be Haman." 

11. Minor Feasts treats of the works, that may and that 
may not be lawfully done on the 2d, 3d, 4th, 5th, and 6th 
days, when the first and seventh are holy; these inter- 
mediate days being lesser festivals. 


INTRODUCTION. WOMEN. 5 

12. Saxyrifices on Festivals treats of the three great 
festivals, when all the males were obliged to appear before 
the Lord, and of the sacrifices which they were to bring. 
It also lays down rules for the dissolution of vows, which 
it says " are like mountains hanging on a hair, for the text 
is slender and the constitutions many." 


BOOK III. 

ON WOMEN. 

1. Brother's Widow (Deut. xxv. 6-11) treats of the law 
obliging a brother to marry the relict of his deceased brother ; 
also, when the obligation is to take place, and the cere- 
monies to be used at its performance. 

2. Marriage SetthmerUs treats of dowries and women 
who happen to obtain estates, either real or personaL From 
this tract the baptism of infant proselytes can be proved. 

3. Vows (Num. xxx. 4-16) shows when vows are binding 
and when null and void. When a married woman makes 
a vow the husband can confirm or annul it. This tract 
points out what vows fall under his cognizance and what do 
not 

4. The Nazarite (Num. vi. 21) treats of the laws relating 
to the different sorts of Nazarites. 

5. Tried of Jealousy (Num. v. 11-31) treats of the mode 
of trial and punishment of criminals. Men may go home 
to their wives from voluntary wars, but not from wars of 
command. This tract shows the miserable state of the Jews 
at the destruction of the second Temple, and at the future 
advent of the Messiah. 

6. Divorces treats of the laws relating to divorces, also 
the formalities to be observed both before and after they are 
given. A man may divorce his wife if she spoil his broth, 
or if he find another more handsome. 

7. Betrothing treats of the laws of espousals and some 
other previous rites of marriage. It commands sons to be 
taught suitable trades. It states that all ass-drivers are 


6 THE TALMUD. ixtboduction. 

wicked, camel-drivers are honest, sailors are pious, physicians 
are destined for hell, and butchers are company for Amalek. 


BOOK IV. 

ON DAMAGES. 

1. First OcUe, so called because in the East law is often 
administered in the gateway of a city. It treats of all such 
damages as may be received from man or beast. It assesses 
damages done by a beast according to the benefit which the 
beast receives. If it eat a peck of dates its owner would 
be fined for a peck of barley, as dates are not more nourish- 
ing for a beast than barley. 

2. The Middle Gate treats of laws of usury and trusts, of 
letting out on hire, of landlord and tenant, etc. 

3. Last Gaie treats of the laws of commerce and co- 
partnership, of buying and selling, of the laws of inheritance 
and the right of succession. 

4. Sanhedrin treats of the great national senate. 

5. Stripes treats of false witnesses, of the law of the 
forty stripes save one, of those who were bound to fly to 
the cities of refuge. 

6. Oaihs explains the laws for administering oaths ; when 
an oath is to be admitted between contending parties who 
are qualified to take them. In Hilchoth Eduth. ix. 1 it is 
taught that ten sorts of persons are disqualified — women, 
slaves, children, idiots, deaf persons, the blind, the wicked, 
the despised, relations, and those interested in their evidence. 

7. Evidences are a collection of many important decisions 
gathered from the testimonies of distinguished Eabbis. It 
is observable that the decisions of the School of Shammai 
are more rigorous than those of the School of Hillel, from 
whence it is inferred that the former adhered more closely 
to Scripture, the latter to tradition. The former were the 
Scribes, and are now represented by the Karaites, who reject 
the Talmud. 


INTRODUCTION. HOLY THINGS. 7 

8. Idolatry, or the worship of stars and meteors, treats 
of the way to avoid this grievous sin. 

9. The Fathers contains a history of those who handed 
down the Oral Law, also many maxims and proverbs. 

10. Panishiiicjit treats of the punishment of those dis- 
obedient to the Sanhedrin (Deut. xvii. 8-11). 


BOOK V. 

ON HOLY THINGS. 

1. Sacrifices treats of the nature and quality of the offer- 
ings ; the time, the place, and the persons, by whom they 
ought to be killed, prepared, and offered. 

2. Meat Offerings treats of the flour, oil, and wine, and the 
wave loaves. 

3. Unconsecrated Things treats of what is clean and un- 
clean, of not eating the sinew that shrank, and not killing 
the dam and her young in one day (Deut. xxiL 6). 

4. First Bom treats of their redemption by money, and 
their being offered in sacrifice; also of the tithes of all 
manner of cattle. 

5. Estimations (Lev. xicvii. 2) treats of the way in which 
things devoted to the Lord are to be valued in order to be 
redeemed for ordinary use ; also, how a priest is to value a 
field which a person has sanctified. 

6. Exchanges (Lev. xxviL 10, 33) treats of the way 
exchanges are to be effected between sacred things. 

7. Cutting off treats of offenders being cut off from the 
Lord. 

8. Trespass (NHim. v. 6, 8) treats of things partaking of 
the nature of sacrilege. It asserts that if a man take away 
a consecrated stone or beam he commits no trespass. If he 
give it to his companion he commits a trespass, but his 
companion commits none. If he buQd it into his house he 
commits no trespass till he lives in the house long enough 
to gain the value of an half-farthing. If he take away a 
consecrated half-farthing he commits no trespass. If he 


8 THE TALMUD. 


TNTRODUCnON. 


give it to his companion he commits a trespass, but his 
companion commits none. If he give it to a bath-keeper 
he commits a trespass though he does not bathe, because 
the bath-keeper says to him, " See, the bath is open ; go in 
and bathe." 

9. The Daily Sacrifice treats of the morning and evening 
offerings. 

10. The Measurements treat? of the measurements of the 
Temple. 

11. Birds* Nests treats of the mistakes about doves and 
beasts brought into the Temple for sacrifice. 


BOOK VI. 

ON PURIPICATIONS. 

1. Vessels treats of those which convey uncleanness 
(Lev. xL 33). 

2. Tents (Num. xix. 14) treats of tents and houses re- 
taining imcleanness, how persons who enter them become 
unclean, and how they are to be cleansed. 

3. Plagues of Leprosy treats of leprosy of men, garments, 
or dwellings, how their pollution is conveyed, and how they 
are to be purified. 

4. The Bed Heifer directs how she is to be burned, and 
how her ashes are to be used in purifying. 

5. Purifications teaches how purifications are to be 
effected. 

6. Pools of Waier (Num. xxxi. 23) treats of their con- 
struction, and the quantity of water necessary for cleansing. 

7. SefparaJtixm of women. 

8. Liquors that dispose seeds and fruits to receive pollu- 
tion (Lev. XL 38). 

9. Issues that cause pollution. 

10. Baptism on the day of uncleanness (Lev. xxii. 6). 

11. Hands treats of the washing of hands before eating 
BREAD, though dry fruits are allowed to be eaten without 
such washing. 


INTRODUCTION. POLLUTIONS. 9 

12. Stalks of Fruit which convey Uhcleanness treats of 
fruits growing out of the earth, which have a stalk and no 
husk. They can be polluted and can pollute, but may not 
be compounded with anything that was unclean before. If 
they have neither stalks nor husks they neither can be pol- 
luted nor can they pollute. It also treats of the hair and 
wool that grows on some fruits, and the beards of barley, etc. 


10 THE TALMUD. 


INTEODDCTION. 


CHAPTER II. 

History of the Talmud — Other Rabbinical Writings — The Bereitha — Schools 
of Tiberias and Babylon — Struggles for Supremacy — Form of Cherem. 

From the six books or " Orders " the Jews call the Babylon 
Talmud by the pet name of " SJms" (six). The language 
in which it is written is Hebrew intermingled with 
Aramaic, Chaldee, Syriac, Arabic, Greek, and Latin words. 
The Gemara was first begun by Eabban Judah's two sons. 
Rabbi Gamaliel and Rabbi Simeon. It was vigorously 
carried on by Rabbi Ashd in Sura, a town on the Euphrates, 
from 365 a.d. to 425. He divided the Mishna into its 
sixty-three treatises, and every half-year summoned his 
disciples and assigned to them two fresh portions of the 
Law and two of the Mishna. At each meeting their 
remarks on these portions were discussed, and if approved 
were incorporated into the Gemara, Rabbis Zabid, Gebhia 
Rychuma, and Semo of Pumbeditha ; ^ and Rabbis Marimer, 
Adda bar Abbin, Nachman bar Huno, and Touspho, pre- 
sidents of the schools of Sura, laboured for its advancement ; 
and it was finally completed by Rabbi Abino (Rabbina), 
and sealed by Rabbi Jos6 about 498 a.d. He was the last 
of the " Dictators." Those who lived after him were called 
" Opinionists," as they did not dictate any doctrines; but 
only deduced opinions from what had already been settled 
in the canon of the Talmud. The Opinionists were suc- 
ceeded by the Sublime Doctors, who were in turn replaced 
by the ordinary Rabbis. In addition to the Talmud there 
has been handed down a vast amount of Jewish learning, 
such as the Bereitha, the Tosephtoth or appendices, the 

^ So named from its situation at the mouth (Pum) of the Bedaitha, a canal 
between the Tigris ami the Euphratus. 

•4- 


INTRODUCTION. 


COMPILATION. 1 1 


Mechilta or traditions unknown to Eabbi Judah the Holy, 
and the commentaries Sifra and Sifre, Of these the Jews 
regard the Bereitha as second to the Mishna. " The mark 
of Bereitha is 'the sages learned,' or 'it is once learned,' 
or 'it is learned in another one.' Arid everything which 
is not disputed of all these things is an established decision. 
And whatever Ls disputed goes according to the concluded 
decision. Wliat is disputed in the Bereitha, which is not 
questioned in the Mishna, the decision is according to the 
Mishna. What is disputed in the Mishna, and not ques- 
tioned in the Bereitha, is not to be decided according to the 
Bereitha. And thus it is said, ' If Rabbi Judah the Holy did 
not teach it, whence could Eabbi Chayya know it ? ' The 
exception is, that when the decision of Rabbi Eliezer, the son 
of Jacob, is given, it is regarded as equal to the Mishna. In 
102 questions the decision is always with him." 

The period during which both the Jerusalem and 
Babylon Talmuds were compiled was a season of compara- 
tive peace for the Jews. From the death of Rabbi Judah 
the Holy until Constantine ascended the throne the schools 
in Tiberias were unmolested- Judah was succeeded in the 
Patriarchate by Gamaliel; and he in turn gave way to 
Judah the second. Being inferior in learning to some of 
his own Rabbis, the splendour of his Patriarchate was 
eclipsed by the superior talents of Simon Ben Laches and 
Rabbi Jochanan. From that time the Patriarchate gradually 
sank in estimation, till the struggles for unlimited power, 
and the rapacity of the Rabbis, brought the office into 
contempt, and caused the Emperor Honorius in one of his 
laws to brand them as " Devastators." Still, with a loyal 
affection to the race of Israel, the Jews, wherever scattered 
in the west, looked to Tiberias as their Zion, and willingly 
taxed themselves for the support of its Rabbinical schools. 
The Jews in the east regarded the Prince of the Captivity 
or Patriarch of Babylon as their centre and chief. He rose 
to power between the abandonment of the Mesopotamiaii 
provinces by Hadrian and the rise of the Persian kingdom. 
He presided over his subjects with viceregal power and a 


1 2 THE TALMUD. 


INTRODUCTION. 


splendid court Eabbia were his satraps, and the wise and 
learned his officers and councillors. Wealth flowed in upon 
his people, who were engaged in every kind of commerce. 
One of his merchants in Babylon was said to have had 1000 
vessels on sea and 1000 cities on shore. There was for a 
time a spirit of rivalry between the spiritual courts of 
Tiberias and Babylon. On one occasion there was an open 
schism about the calculation of the Paschal feast The 
struggle for supremacy took place when Simon, son of 
Gamaliel, who claimed descent from Aaron, was Patriarch of 
Tiberias, and Ahia, who claimed descent from King David, 
was Prince of the Captivity. His two most learned men 
were Hananiah, the rector of Nahar-pakod, and Judah, son 
of Bethuriah. To humble these men was the aim of Simon. 
Accordingly he sent two legates with three letters to 
Babylon. The first letter was given to Hananiah. It was 
addressed, "To your holiness." Flattered by the title, he 
politely asked tlie reason of their visit. "To learn your 
system of instruction." Still more gratified, he paid them 
every attention. Availing themselves of their advantage, 
the legates used every effort to undermine his teaching and 
lessen his authority. Hananiah, enraged by their conduct, 
simimoned an assembly, and denounced their treachery. 
The people cried out, "That which thou hast built, thou 
canst not so soon puU down; the hedge which thou hast 
planted, thou canst not pluck up without injury to thyself." 
Hananiah demanded their objections to liis teaching. Tliey 
answered, " Thou hast dared to fix intercalations and new 
moons, by which nonconformity has arisen between Babylon 
and Palestine." "So did Rabbi Akiba," said Hananiah, 
"when in Babylon." "Akiba," they replied, "left not his 
like in Palestine." "Neither," cried Hananiah, "have I 
left my equal in Palestine." The legates then produced 
their second letter, in which it was written, " Tliat wliicli 
thou hast left a kid is grown up a strong homed goat." 
Hananiah was struck dumb, llabbi Isaac, one of the legates, 
ran, and mounted the reading desk. "These," said he, 
calling them out aloud, " are the holy days of God, and 


INTRODUCTION. 


EXCOMMUNICATION. 


13 


tliese the holy days of Hananiah." The people began to 
murmur. Eabbi Nathan, the second legate, arose, and read 
the verse of Isaiah, " Out of Zion shall go forth the Law, 
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem." Then in a 
mocking voice, " Out of Babylon shall go forth the Law, and 
the Word of the Lord from Nahor-pakod." The congrega- 
tion was in an uproar. " Alter not the word of God " was 
the universal shout. The legates then produced the third 
letter, threateniAg excommunication to all who would not 
obey their decrees. They further said, " The learned have 
sent us, and commanded us to say, if he will submit, well ; 
if not, utter at once the Cherem.^ Also set the choice 
before our brethren in foreign parts. K they will stand by 
us, well ; if not, let them ascend their high places. Let 
Ahia build them an altar, and Hananiah (a Levite) sing at 
the sacrifice, and let them at once set themselves apart, and 
say, "We have no portion in the God of Israel." From 
every side the cry arose, " Heaven preserve us from heresy ; 
we have still a portion in the Israel of God." The autho- 
rity of Tiberias was then recognized as supreme. But when 
Babylon was afterwards politically severed from the Roman 
power in the west, and fell to the Persians, the Prince of 
the Captivity represented the Jews of the east as their 
independent Head. 


^ The Cherem was niopt fearful. The 
excotumunicate was cursed with the 
curse of Joshua against Jericho, and 
the curse of Elisha against those that 
mocked him, and the curse of fiends of 
deacUy power : " Let nothing good come 
out of him, let his end be sudden, let 
all creatures become his enemy, let the 
whirlwind crush him, the fever and 
every other malady, and the edge of 


the sword smite him ; let his death be 
unforeseen and drive him into outer 
darkness," etc. There were three 
d^rees of excommunication. The 
first was '*the casting out of the syna- 
gogue." The second **the delivering 
over to Satan." And the third was 
the anathema proclaimed by priests 
with the sounding of tioimpets. 


14 THE TALMUD. 


INTBODUCnOK. 


CHAPTER III. 

The Talmud adopted by the Jews — Gentile and Christian hostility to it — 
Keuchlln demands toleration for it — Distinctions made in its Teachings 
— Scliools of Shammai and Hillel — Bath Kol — Pharisees — Sadducees and 
other Sects — Kabbalists — Metatron — Summary. 

The canon of the Talmud was closed in a season of opulence 
and repose. This scene, however, speedily changed. 
Gloomy and dark days were followed by a stonn of perse- 
cution from the Persian kings, Yesdigird and Firuz " the 
tyrant." When their schools were closed, the Jews clung 
more closely to the Talmud than before. Although never 
formally adopted by any general council, all orthodox Jews 
embraced it as supplying a want wliich they felt. And 
they have adliered to it through long and dreary centuries, 
despite the rack and fire of the Inquisitor, and the con- 
tempt and scorn of a hostile world. The Talmud has been 
periodically banned, and often publicly burned, from the 
age of the Emperor Justinian till the time of Pope Clement 
VIII. In the year 1569 the famous Jewish library in 
Cremona was plundered, and 12,000 copies of the Talmud 
and other Jewish writings were committed to the flames. 
The first to demand for it toleration and free inquiry was 
Reuchlin. He declared that he must oppose the destruc- 
tion of "a book written by Christ's nearest relations." 
Before him, Haschim II., Caliph of Cordova in the close of 
the tenth century, had ordered it to be translated into 
Arabic. This was done by Eabbi Joseph, the son of Eabbi 
Moses, sumamed "clad in a sack," because he was thus 
meanly clad when his great talents were discovered. 

The study of the Talmud has the most fascinating influ- 
ence over the Jewish mind, and if the latter is to be com- 
prehended, the teaching which moulds it must be clearly 
understood. " Every one," say the Jews, " is bound to 


INTKODUCTION. 


HILLEL. 1 5 


divide the time of liis study into three parts — one-third is 
to be devoted to the written law, one-third to the Mishna, 
and one-third to Gemara." To understand it in accordance 
with the thirteen rules of interpretation, it takes a study 
of seven hours a day for seven years. They also say that it 
is lawful to rend a man ignorant of the Talmud "like a 
fish." Israelites are forbidden to marry the daughter of 
such an one, as " she is no better than a beast." 

To obviate arguments furnished by its own statements 
against itself, its adherents make a distinction between its 
decisions, its directions, and its legendary or romance part, — 
a distinction fatal to its claim of equality with Holy 
Scripture. For this legendary part some of the ancient 
Itabbis had but little respect. Rabbi Joshua, son of Levi, 
says, " He who writes it do%vn will have no part in the 
world to come; he who explains it will be scorched." 
Maimonides also says, " If one of the many foolish rabbis 
reads these histories and proverbs, he will find an explana- 
tion unnecessary, for to a fool everything is right, and he 
finds no difficulty anywhere. And if a really wise man 
reads them, there will be but two ways in which he will 
consider them. If he takes them in their literal sense and 
thinks them bad, he will say. This is foolishness, and in so 
doing he says nothing at all against the foundation of the 
faith." The School of Shammai, who lived before Christ, 
and the School of Hillel, who lived till eight ^ years after 
His birth, are brought forward aa contradictory in their 
decisions. Like Christian leaders in later times, they strove 
to exceed each other in learning and pride. Hillel, called 
also tlie second Ezra, was bom in Babylon. His thirst fdr 
learning drove him to Jerusalem. He was so poor he could 
not fee the porter of the college. So he used to listen at 
the window. One bitter winter's night he became insen- 
sible from cold, and the snow falling fast covered him up. 
Tlie darkened window called the attention of those inside 
to his form without. He was then brought in, and soon 
restored to life. It is said that afterwards " he had eighty 

^ Some thiDk ho died twelve yean B.O. 


16 THE TALMUD. introduction. 

scholars: thirty of them were fit that the divine glory 
should rest upon them, as it did upon Moses — tliirty others 
were worthy that the sun should stand still for them, as it 
did for Joshua — and twenty were of a form between," By 
a sort of legal fiction both schools are supposed to be of 
equal authority. A Bath Kol ^ or holy echo, supplying the 
place of departed Urim and Thummim, and of oracles long 
since silent, is related to have established it. " There came 
forth a divine voice at Jabneh and said, Tlie words of the 
one and of the other are the words of the living God, but 
the certain determination of the tiling is according to the 
School of Hillel, and whosoever transgresseth against the 
words of the School of Hillel desen-es death." Both schools 
were Pliarisees, but the School of Shammai was the straiter 
sect. Seven different shades of character have been attri- 
buted to the Pharisees of that age : there were tliose who 
served God from selfishness — those who did it gradually — 
those who avoided the sight of women — saints in office — 
those who asked you to name some duty which they ought 
to perform — those who were pious from fear of God — and 
tliose who were pious from love of Him. Popular opinion 
differed with regard to them. Some said, "If only two 
men be saved, one must be a Pharisee ;" while others de- 
fined a Pharisee to be " one who wished to play the part of 
Zimri, and to claim the reward of I^hinehas." The great 
opponents of the Pharisees were the Sadducees, who arose 
B.C. 300, and were followers of Baithos and Sadok. Their 
rivals on the other side were the Mehestanites, who returned 

^ The Jews say that the Holy Spirit ben Lachish wished to see the face 

spake to the Israelites during the Ta- of Rabbi Samuel, a Babylon RabbL 

bemacle by Urini and Thummim, and * Let us follow,' said they, * the hearing 

under the first Temple by the Prophets, of Bath Kol.' Tliey joumeye<l near a 

and under the second by Bath Kol. school, and as they were passing it 

The Bath Kol, which signifies "daughter they heard a boy reading from the book 

voice" or "daiighter qf a voice,'* Yf as a of Samuel the words, *And Samuel 

kind of divine intimation, which was as diecL' Observing this, they concluded 

inferior to the oracular voice proceeding that their friend was dead. And it so 

from the Mercy Seat as a daughter is happened that news was soon brought 

supposed to be inferior to her mother. to them that Rabbi Samuel of Babylon 

It was said to be preceded by a clap had died." The Bath Kol seems to 

of thunder. This, however, was not have been a sort of divination practised 

always the case. The Talmud relates with the words of Scripture, like the 

that " Rabbis Jochanan and Simeon Sories Virgilianoe among the heathen. 


INTRODUCTION. 


SECTS. 1 7 


from the Captivity versed in the doctrines of Zoroaster — in 
astrology, and in the influences of good and bad spirits. 
To these might be added the Misraimites, who studied the 
Kabbala, specially in reference to the forms of letters. The 
letter Koph, for example, has its curved part severed from 
its stem, and thus teaches that " the door of mercy is always 
open to the penitent" The numerical value of the letters 
of Messiah and Nachash (serpent) is the same, and this 
teaches that " the Messiah will overcome the Serpent" The 
Kabbalists believed nothing but what they "received." 
Their teachers received from the prophets — the prophets 
received from angels — David from the Angel Michael, 
Moses from Metatron, Isaac from Eaphael, Shem from 
Yophiel — and the angels themselves from God. The Meta- 
tron is the connecting link between the Divine Spirit and 
the world of matter. It resembles the Demiurges of the 
Gnostics. It is the mystical expression for the Being that 
fonns an union between God and nature, or, as the Zohar 
puts it, between the " King and the Queen." There were 
also the Essenes, who allegorized the Law ; the Hellenists, 
who mixed it up with Greek philosophy ; the Therapeutists, 
who thought supreme happiness to be meditation; the 
political Herodians ; the Zealots ; and other petty sects who 
formed the great mass of the people, and held either with or 
against the two great schools. The decisions of both schools 
are remarkable for their concise brevity. A phrase suggests 
many thoughts — a single word awakes a whole train of 
reasoning. A German writer has said of the Mishna, that 
" it is a firmament of telescopic stars, containing many a 
cluster of light, which no unaided eye has ever resolved." 
Some of its sayings are of touching beauty. Such are the 
words of Rabbi Tarplion, " The day is short — the labour vast ; 
— but the labourers are slothful, though the reward is great, 
and the Master of the house presseth for despatch." Some 
of its sayings are extravagant — some are loathsome — and 
some are blasphemous. But mixed up as they are together, 
they fonn an extraordinary monument of " human industry, 
human wisdom, and human folly " 

C 


1 8 THE TALMUD. istboductiox. 


CHAPTER IV. 

Casuistry — Predestination and Free Will — ITerc-ditarj- Sin — Philosophy — 
Geography — Astronomy — Astmlogj- — Amulets and Channs — Sorcery — 
I^egends. 

The Talmud contains a system of casuistry in reference to the 
doctrines of intention and legal uncleanness. It proportions 
responsibility to the amount of intention, and thereby hands 
over tender consciences to the control of the Rabbis, It 
proportions legal uncleanness to every degree of approach to 
the source, or, as it is called, " the father " of uncleanness ; 
and this again renders necessary continual appeals to the 
decision of the Eabbis. 

Predestination and free will are both taught. " Every- 
thing is in the hands of heaven, except the fear of heaven." 
" All things are ordained of God, but men's actions are their 
own." "When men wish to sin they are enjoined to go to a 
place where they are unknown, and to clothe themselves in 
black so as not to dishonour God openly. Hereditary sin 
was denied by the early Kabbaliste, but the later ones allow 
it. They believe that all souls were created in Adam, and 
therefore partake of his fall. Every kind of philosophy 
known at the time of its compilation is more or less intro- 
duced into the Talmud, and all more or less tinged with 
Magian superstition. From this superstition grew the 
mysticism of the Jewish schools. All the arts and sciences, 
under some form or other, are alluded to, and references to 
historical events abound in its pages. When it is dangerous 
to speak of them openly they are veiled under some figure 
known only to the initiated. Some observations seem to 
anticipate future discoveries. The Antipodes are hinted at. 
And the Jerusalem Gemara says that Alexander the Great 


I XTRODUCTioN. ASTROLOGY. 1 9 

was represented as carrying a ball in his hand because he 
believed the figure of the earth to be a sphere. Astronomy 
is fully discussed. The planets are " moving stars." Mer- 
cury is "the star;" Venus, "splendour;" Mars, "redness;" 
Jupiter, " rightness ;" Saturn, " the Sabbath star." The signs 
of tlie Zodiac have the same names as are now used. The 
CJalaxy is "the river of light." Comets are "burning arrows." 
And it is said that when a comet passes through Orion it 
will destroy the world. A certain Ishmaelite merchant is 
related to have invited Eabba to come and see where the 
heavens and the eartli touched. Eabba took his bread basket 
and placed it on the window while he prayed. He afterwards 
looked for it, but it was gone. He asked the Ishmaelite, 
"Are there thieves here?" "No," he replied, "but your 
Ijasket has gone up in the revolving of the firmament. It 
will return if you wait till morning when the revolving of 
the firmament returns where it was before." Astrology is 
treated as a science which governs the life of man. The 
stars make men wise. The stars make them rich. "A 
man bom on the first day of the week will excel in only 
one quality. He that is born on tlie second day will be an 
angry man, because on that day the waters were divided. 
He that is bom on the tliird day of the week will be rich 
and licentious, because on it the herbs were created. He that 
is bom on tlie fourth day will be wise and of good memory, 
because on that day the lights were hung up. He that is 
bom on the fifth day will be charitable, because on that day 
the fishes and fowls were created. He that is bom on the 
Sabbath, on the Sabbath he also shall die, because on his 
account they profaned the great Sabbath day." Eabba bar 
Shila says, " He shall be eminently holy." Eabbi Chauina 
says, " The influence of the stars makes wise, the influence of 
the stars makes rich, and Israel is under the influence of the 
stars." Eabbi Jochanan says, " Israel is not imder the in- 
fluence of the stars. Whence is it proved ? ' Thus saith 
the Lord, Leam not the way of the heathen, and be not dis- 
mayed at the signs of heaven, for the heathen are dismayed 
at them ' (Jer. x. 2). The heathen, but not Israel" " An 


• Tf 


20 THE TALMUD. 


INTRODUCTION. 


eclipse of the sun is an evil sign to the nations of the world ; 
an eclipse of the moon is an evil sign to Israel, for Israel 
reckons by the moon, the nations of the world by the sim." 
It is also said that Saturn and Mars are the baleful stars, 
and whosoever begins a work, or walks in the way, when 
either of these two is in the ascendant, will come to sorrow. 
Astrology naturally leads to amulets and charms. Amulets 
are divided into two classes, approved and disapproved. An 
approved amulet is " one that has cured three persons, or has 
been made by a man who has cured three persons with other 
amidets." Charms are abundantly provided against accidents. 
" For bleeding of the nose let a man be brought to a priest 
named Levi, and let the name Levi be written backwards. If 
there be not a priest, get a layman, who is to write backwards 
"Ana pipi Shila bar Sumki," or "Taam dli bemi ceseph, taam 
dli bemi pagam ; " or let him take a root of grass, and the cord 
of an old bed, and paper, and saffiron, and the red part of the 
inside of a palm tree, and let him bum them together, and 
let him take some wool, and twist two threads, and dip them in 
vinegar, and roll them in ashes, and put them into his nose ; 
or let him look out for a stream of water which flows from 
east to west, and let him go and stand with one leg on each 
side of it, and let him take with his right hand some mud 
from under his left foot, and with his left hand from under 
his right foot, and let him twist two threads of wool, and 
dip them in the mud, and put them into his nosa" If a 
man be bitten by a mad dog he must die, unless some 
remedy be found for him. " Abai says he must take the 
skin of a male adder, and write upon it, ' I, M, the son of 
the woman N, upon the skin of a male adder, write against 
thee, Kanti Kanti Klirus, but some say, Kandi Kandi 
Klurus, Lord of Hosts. Amen. Selah.' Let him also cast 
off his clothes, and bury them in a graveyard for twelve 
months of a year; then let him tnke them up, and bum 
them in a furnace, and let him strew the ashes at the parting 
of the roads. And during these twelve months let him only 
drink out of a brass tube, lest he see the phantom form of 
the demon, and he be endangered. This was done by Abba, 


INTRODUCTION. DEMONS. 2 1 

the son of Martha — lie is Abba, the son of Manjumi. His 
mother made him a tube of gold." Magic naturally follows 
from such teaching. Abba Benjamin says, " If leave had 
been given to see the hurtful demons, no creature could 
stand before them. Abbai says, " They are more than we 
are, and stand against us, like the trench round a garden 
bed." Eav Huni says, " Every one has a thousand on his 
left hand, and ten thousand on his right hand." Eabba 
says, " The want of room at the sermon is from them, the 
wearing out of the Eabbis' clothes is from their rubbing 
against them, bruised legs are from them." "Whosoever 
wishes to know their existeiice, let him take ashes passed 
through a sieve, and strew them in his bed, and in the 
morning he will see the marks of a cock's claws. Whoso- 
ever wishes to see them, let him take the inner covering of 
a black cat, the kitten of a fii*stbom black cat, which is also 
the kitten of a firstborn, and let him bum it in the fire, and 
powder it, and fill his eyes with it, and he will see them. 
And let him pour the powder into an iron tube, and seal it 
with an iron signet, lest they steal any of it, and let him 
seal the mouth of it, lest any harm ensue. Bav Bibi bar 
Abbai did thus, and he was harmed, but the Babbis prayed 
for mercy, and he was healed." Arts of sorcery are attri- 
buted to the Babbis. They are represented as having the 
power to create both men and melons. One of them is 
said to have changed a woman into an ass, and ridden the 
ass to market, when another sorcerer changed the ass again 
into a woman. This sorcery is traced to Abraham, who is 
said (Gen. xxv. 6) to have given his sons gifts. These gifts 
are stated to have been the arts of sorcery. Legends 
abound everywhere throughout the Talmud. Babbi Judah 
said, Bav said, " Everything that God created in the world, 
He created male and female. And thus he did with levia- 
than, the piercing serpent, and leviathan the crooked 
serpent. He created them male and female; but if they 
had been joined together they would have desolated the 
whole world. What then did the Holy One do? He 
enervated the male leviathan, and slew the female, and 


22 THE TALMUD. intkoductiox. 

salted her for the righteous in the time to come, for it is 
said, " And He shall slay the dragon that is in the sea " 
(Isa. xxvii. 1). Likewise, with regard to behemoth upon a 
thousand mountains. He created tlieni male and female ; but 
if they had been joined together they would have desolated 
the whole world. What then did the Holy One do ? He 
enervated the male behemoth, and made the female barren, 
and preserved her for the righteous in the time to come," 
That period is to be a season of gi-eat feasting. The liquor 
to be drunk will be apple-wine of more than seventy years 
old. The cup of David alone will hold one hundred and 
twenty-one logs. It is related that a Eabl)i once saw in a 
desert a flock of geese so fat that their feathers fell off, and 
the rivers flowed in fat. He said to them, " Shall we have 
part of you in the world to come?" One of them lifted up 
a wing and another a leg, to signify the parts we sliall have. 
We should otherwise have had all parts of these geese, but 
that their sufferings are owing to us. It is our iniquities 
that have delayed the coming of the Messiah, and these 
geese suffer greatly by reason of their excessive fat, which 
daily increases, and will increase till the Messiah comes." 
Babba bar Chama says tliat he once saw " a bird so tall, 
that its head reached to the sky and its legs to the bottom 
of the ocean." The water in whicli it stood was so deep 
that a carpenter's axe which had fallen in seven years 
before had not then reached the bottom. He also saw *' a 
frog as large as a village containing sixty houses." This 
frog was swallowed up by a serpent, and this serpent in 
turn by a crow ; this crow flew, and perched upon a cedar, 
and this cedar was as broad as sixteen waggons abreast. 
There is also an account of a fisli whicli was killed by a 
wonn. This fish, when driven ashore, destroyed sixty 
cities, and sLxty cities ate of it, and sixty cities salted it, 
and with its bones the ruined cities were rebuilt. Stories 
are also told of fishes with eyes like the moon, and 
of horned fishes three hundred miles in length. These 
stories are intended to confirm the text, " They that go down 
to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters ; these 


INTRODUCTION. L£0£NDS. . 23 

see the works of the Lord and his wonders in the deep " 
(Ps. cvii. 23, 24). To illustrate the statement of Amos 
(iii. 8), a story is told of a lion which one of the Caesars 
wislied to see. At 400 miles distance he roared, and the 
walls of Bonie felL At 300 miles he again roared, and all 
the people fell on their backs, and their teeth fell out, and 
Caesar fell off his throne. Caesar then prayed for his re- 
moval to a safer distance. The Talmud informs us that " a 
young unicorn, one day old, is as large as Mount Tabor." 
Consequently Noah had great difficulty in saving an old 
one alive. He could not get it into the ark, so he bound it 
by its horn to the side of the ai'k. At the same time Og, 
King of Bashan (being one of the antediluvians), was saved 
by riding on its back. We are further informed that he 
was one of the giants who came from the intermarriage of 
angels with the daughters of men. His footsteps were 
forty miles long, and one of his teeth served to make a 
couch for Abraham. When the Israelites came against him 
under the command of Moses, he inquired the size of their 
camp, and hearing that it was three miles in extent he tore 
up a mountain of that size, to hurl it upon them. Grass- 
hoppers were, however, sent to bore holes in it, so that it 
fell over his head on to his neck. His teeth also grew and 
were entangled in the rocks, as the Psalmist says, " Thou 
hast broken the teeth of the ungodly " (Ps. iii. 7). He is 
also said to be identical with Eliezer the servant of 
Abraham, and to have been, like Enoch, translated to Para- 
dise. This account, however, differs widely from the state- 
ments of the Jerusalem Targum on the Book of Nimibers 
(xxi. 34). The Talmud affirms that Adam was made from 
dust of all parts of the earth; and that he was created 
with two faces, as it is written, " Thou hast beset me behind 
and before " (Ps. cxxxix. 5). The Eabbis further state that 
he was formed in two parts, one male and one female. His 
height before his fall reached to the firmament, but after 
his fall God put his hand upon him, and compressed him 
small In the tenth hour after he was made, he sinned ; 
and in the twelfth he was driven out of Paradise. Abraham 


24 THE TALMUD. intboductios. 

is said to have put Sarah into a box when he brought her 
into Egypt, that none should see her beauty. At the 
custom-house toll was demanded. Abraham said he was 
ready to pay. The custom-house officers said, "Thou 
bringest clotlies." He said, " I will pay for clothes." They 
said, " Thou bringest gold." He said, " I will pay for gold." 
They said, " Thou bringest silk." He said, " I will pay for 
silk." They said, " Thou bringest pearls." He said, " I will 
pay for pearls." They said, " Thou must open tlie box," where- 
upon her splendour shone over the wliole land of Egypt 

Abraham, it is also said, had a precious stone hung 
round his throat, on whicli when the sick looked they 
were healed. Some of the laws of Sodom are also recorded : 
" Whosoever cut off tlie ears of anotlier's ass received the 
ass till his ears grew again." " Whosoever wounded another, 
the man wounded was obliged to pay him for letting his 
blood." When the judges of Sodom attempted to fine 
Eliezer, the servant of Abraham, because another man had 
wounded him, he took up a stone and flung it at the judge. 
He then bid the judge to pay the fine, which was now due 
to him for letting his blood, to the man who had first 
wounded him. There was a public bed in Sodom, and 
every stranger was obliged to lie in it. If his legs were too 
long for it, they were cut off; and if too short, they were 
racked out to the proper length. When a traveller came, 
each citizen, to show his hospitality, was obliged to give him 
a coin with his name 'WTitten upon it. The traveller was 
then deprived of bread ; and when he had died of starvation, 
the citizens came, and each one took back his own money. 
The Sodomites thus kept up their character for liberality. 

At the giving of the Law the Israelites stood at the lower 
part of the mount (Exod. xix. 1 7). Eabbi Avidmi says, "these 
words teach us that the Holy One, blessed be He, turned 
the mountain over them like a tub, and said to them, " If ye 
will receive the Law, well ; but if not, there shall be your 
grave." Eabbi Joshua says, "As each commandment pro- 
ceeded from the mouth of the Holy One, Israel retreated 
twelve miles, and the ministering angels lead them back, as 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE LAW. 25 


it is said, 'The angels of the host did flee apace '^ (Ps. Ixviii. 
13). Do not read ' they fled ' but they led.' " Eabbi Eliezer, 
the Modite says, that Jethro " heard the giving of the Law ; 
for when the Law was given to Israel His voice went from 
one end of the world to the other, and all the nations of the 
world were seized with trembling in their temples, and they 
repeated a hymn, as it is said, ' In His temple doth every one 
speak of His glory'" (Ps. xxix. 9). The question is asked, 
" Why are the Gentiles defiled ? " " Because they did not 
stand on Mount Sinai, for in the hour the serpent came to 
Eve he communicated defilement, which was removed from 
Israel when they stood on Mount Sinai." Rav Acha, the 
son of Rabba, said to Eav Ashai, " How then is it with pro- 
selytes?" He answered, " Although they went not there, 
their lucky star was there, as it is written, ' With him that 
standeth here with us this day before the Lord our God, and 
also with him that is not here with us this day' " (Deut. 
xxix. 15). In the hour that Moses ascended up on high 
tlie ministering angels said before God, "0 Lord of the 
world, what business has he that is bom of woman amongst 
us?" He answered, "He is come to receive the Law." They 
replied, " This desirable treasure, which has been treasured up 
from the six days of creation, six hundred and seventy-four 
generations before the world was created, dost Thou now 
wish to give it to flesh and blood ? what is man that Thou 
art mindful of him ? and the son of man that Thou visitest 
him ? Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Thy name in all 
the earth. Who hast set Thy glory above the heavens." The 
Holy One said to Moses, " Eetum them an answer." He 
said, " Lord of the world, I fear, lest they burn me with 
the breath of their mouth." God said, *' Lay hold on tlie 
throne of my glory, and return them an answer ; for it is said, 
' He that holdeth the face of His throne, He spreadeth His 
cloud over him'" (Job xxvi. 9). Rabbi Nahum says, "This 
means that the Almighty spread some of the glory of the 
Sliechinah and His cloud over him." He then said, " Lord 

* The Rabbis make two changes in this verse — they change *' kings" into 
"angels,'* and "fled** into "led." 


26 THE TALMUD. 


IKTKODUCTIOK. 


of the world, wliat is written in the Law that Thou art about 
to give me ? " "I am the Lord thy God, that brought thee 
out of Egypt." He then said, " Did ye (angels) ever go down 
into Egypt and serve Pharaoh ? why then should ye have 
the Law?" Again, "What is written therein?" "Thou 
shalt have none other God." He tlien asked them, " Do ye 
then dwell among the uncircumcised, that ye should commit 
idolatry?" Again, "What is written?" "Kemember the 
Sabbath day to sanctify it." " Do ye then do any work so 
as to need rest ?" Again, " What is written ?" " Thou shalt 
not take the name of the Lord in vain." " Have ye then 
any work that would lead to this sin?" Again, "What is 
written?" "Honour thy father and mother." "Have ye 
then got any father or mother ?" Again, "What is written?" 
" Thou shalt do no murder." " Thou shalt not commit adul- 
tery." " Thou shalt not steal." " Have ye then envy or the 
principle of evil amongst you?" Immediately they praised 
the Holy One, " Blessed be He." Wonderful stories are told 
of the manna. The manna is said to have fallen from heaven, 
accompanied by showers of pearls and precious stones. It 
tasted to every one according to his desire. If one wished 
for fat fowl, so it tasted. If another wished for honey, so it 
tasted, as it is written, " Thou hast lacked nothing" (Deut 
xi. 7). The Targimi of Jonathan goes on to inform us, " At 
the fourth hour, when the sun had waxed hot upon it, it 
melted and became streams of water, which flowed away into 
the great sea, and wild animals that were clean, and cattle, 
came to drink of it, and the children of Israel hunted and 
ate them" (Exod. xvL 21). It is further related that the 
Queen of Sheba (whom the Eabbis labour to prove to have 
been the King of Sheba) wished to test the knowledge of 
Solomon who had written on botany " from the cedar to the 
hyssop." She once stood at a distance from him with two 
exquisite wreaths of flowers — one artificial, one natural. 
They were so much alike that the king looked perplexed, and 
the courtiers looked melancholy. (Observing a swarm of 
bees on the window, he commanded it to be opened. All 
the bees lighted on the natural and not one on the artificial 


INTRODUCTION. SOLOMON — NEBUZARA DAN — TITUS. 2 7 

wreath. Solomon is also said to have sent Benaiah, the son 
of Jehoiada, to bind Aschmedai, the king of the devils. 
After deceiving the devil with wine he made him reveal the 
secret of the Schamir, or little worm, which can cleave the 
hardest stone. And by the aid of this worm Solomon built 
the Temple. The devil afterwards asked Solomon for his 
signet ring, and when he had given it to him the devil 
stretched one wing up to the firmament and the other to the 
earth, and jerked Solomon four hundred miles away. Then 
assuming the aspect of Solomon, he seated himself on his 
throne. After Solomon had again obtained it, he wrote, 
" What profit hath a man of all his labour which he taketh 
under the sun?" (Eccles. i. 3). 

A story is told of Nebuzaradan, that he saw the blood of 
Zecharias bubbling in the court of the priests. When he 
asked what it meant, he was informed that it was the blood 
of bullocks and lambs. When he had ordered bullocks and 
lambs to be slain, the blood of Zecharias still bubbled and 
reeked above theirs. The priests then confessed that it was 
the blood of a priest and prophet and judge, whom they had 
slain. He then commanded eighty thousand priests to be 
put to death. The blood, however, still continued to bubble. 
God then said, " Is this man, who is but flesh and blood, 
filled with pity towards my children, and shall not I be 
much more ? " So he gave a sign to the blood, and it was 
swallowed up in the place. Of the eighty thousand priests 
slain none was left but Joshua the son of Jozedek, of whom 
it is written, "Is not this a brand plucked out of the fire?" 
(ZecL iii. 2). Of Titus it is said, that he was unclean in 
the Temple, and with a blow of his sword rent the veil, 
which flowed with blood. To punish him a gnat was sent 
into his brain, which grew as large as a dove. When his 
skull was opened, the gnat was found to have a mouth of 
copper, and claws of iron. 


28 THE TALMUD. 


INTRODUCTION. 


CHAPTER V. 

Evil Spirits — Satan — Good Angels — Heaven — Hell — The Resarrection — Lost 
Judgment — Talmud contradicts Holy Scripture — Estimate of Gentiles — 
Precepts for the Sons of Noah — River Sainbatioii — Stories of Rabbis — 
Proverbs — Ideas of God — The Messiah : His Kingdom — Allusions to the 
Lord Jesus Christ and his Disciples. 

The Talmud teaches that evil spirits, devils, and goblins, 
are the offspring of Adain. They are said to fly about in 
all directions. They know from eavesdropping what is to 
come in the future. Like men, they eat, drink, and multi- 
ply. They are represented as playing men awkward tricks. 
One is stated to have broken a vessel of wine, and to have 
spilt it on the ground. The Eabbis, however, afterwards 
compelled him to pay for it. People are forbidden to ride 
oxen fresh from the stall, as Satan dances between their 
horns. Men are forbidden to salute their companions by 
night, lest they may turn out to be devils. It is also com- 
manded to shake out, before drinking, some water from the 
vessel, to get rid of what is sipped by the evil spirits. It 
is, however, permitted to consult Satan on week-days. He 
is considered identical with the Angel of Death. But he is 
described as having no power over those engaged in reading 
the law. Many of his devices are related in the Talmud^ 
whereby he made learned men leave off reading, and then 
he snatched away their souls. A story is told of the 
attempt of Babbi Joshua, the son of Levi, and Satan to 
deceive each other about the Eabbi's place in paradise. 
Finally, however, Satan managed to take away his life, 
whereupon the voice of Elijah is heard shouting in heaven, 
" Make room for the son of Levi," — " Make room for the 
son of Levi." The Angel of Death is represented as stand- 
ing at the head of the dying man. He has a drawn sword 


INTRODUCTION. ANGELS. 29 

in his hand, on which is a drop of gall. When the dying 
man sees it, he shudders and opens his mouth. The Angel 
of Death then lets it fall into his mouth. The sick man 
dies, corrupts, and becomes pale. Three days the soul flies 
about the body, thinking to return to it, but after it sees 
the appearance of the face changed, it leaves it and goes 
away. Eabbi Isaac moreover asserts, that a worm in a 
dead body is as painful as a needle in a living one. The 
Talmud still further states that there are three voices con- 
tinually heard — the voice of the sun as he rolls in his 
orbit — the voice of the multitudes of Eome — and the voice 
of the soul as it leaves the body. The Eabbis, however, 
prayed for mercy on the soid, and this voice has ceased. 
Instances are also given of men overhearing the conversa- 
tions of the dead, and receiving profit from them. A man 
is said to have heard one girl tell another in the grave, that 
those who sowed their crops at a particular time would 
find their harvests fail. So he took care to sow at another 
time, and he had an abundant }deld. It is also said that 
every Friday evening a second soul enters into the bodies 
of men, and that it remains to the end of the Sabbath, when 
it departs. The evidence of this second soid is shown by 
an increased appetite for eating and drinking. 

Good angels are stated to be daily created out of the 
stream of glory which flows from the throne of God, and 
they sing a new song, and vanish ; as it is said, " They are 
new every morning : great is thy faithfulness " (Lam. iii. 23). 
The Rabbis also say that angels are created out of every 
word which proceeds from the mouth of God ; as it is said, 
" By the word of the LORD were the heavens made ; and 
all the host of them by the breath of His mouth" (Ps. 
xxxiii. 6). The following story is also told : — In the hour 
when Nimrod, the impious, cast Abraham into the midst of 
the fiery furnace, Gabriel said before the blessed God, " Lord 
of the world, I will go down and cool the flame, and deliver 
th6 righteous One from the furnace of fire." The blessed 
God said to Him, " I am the ONE in this world, and he is 
the one in his world. It becomes the ONE to deliver the 


30 THE TALMUD. introduction. 

one." But as the blessed God deprives no one of His 
reward. He said, " Thou shalt be deemed worthy to deliver 
three of his posterity." Eabbi Simon, the Shilonite, taught, 
" In the hour that Nebuchadnezzar, the impious, cast 
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah into the midst of the fiery 
furnace, Jorkemo, the prince of hail, stood up before the 
blessed God, and said, ' I will go down and cool the flame, 
and deliver the righteous oues from tlie furnace of fire.' To 
him said Gabriel, ' The power of the blessed One is not so, 
since thou art the prince of hail, and everyone knows that 
waters quench fire ; but I, the prince of fire, will go down 
and cool inwardly, and heat outwardly, and I will make a 
wonder within a wonder.' " To him said the blessed God, 
" Go down." In the same hour Gabriel began and said, 
" And the truth of the Lord endunth for ever" (Ps. cxviL 2). 
Israelites are forbidden to pray in the Syriac language, as 
the angels do not understand it, and consequently cannot 
caiTy their petitions to God. Gabriel, however, is acquainted 
with it, as he taught Joseph the seventy languages. The 
chief of all the angels is said to be the Metatron, who once 
received fiery blows from another angel called AmpieL 
With regard to heaven, the Rabbis t^ach that Egypt is four 
hundred miles long and broad, the Morians* land is sixty 
times larger than Egypt, and the world is sixty times larger 
tlian the Morians' land ; Heaven is sixty times larger than the 
world, and hell is sixty times larger than heaven. It follows 
that the "whole world is but a pot-lid to heU." Yet some 
say that hell is immeasurable, and some say heaven is 
immeasurable. It was a pearl amongst the sayings of a 
Kabbi, " Heaven is not like this world, for in it there is 
neither eating, nor drinking, nor marriage, nor increasing, 
nor trafficking, nor hate, nor envy, nor heart-buniings ; but 
the just shall sit with their crowns on their heads, and 
enjoy the splendour of the Shekinali." Hell is said to have 
three doors, — one in the wilderness, one in the sea, and one 
in Jerusalem. In the wilderness, as it is written, "Tliey, 
and all that appertained to them, went down alive into the 
pit" (Num. x\i. 33). In the sea, as it is written, "Out of 


IJH'RODUCTION. THE RESURRECTION. 31 

the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice" (Jonah 
ii. 3). In Jerusalem, as it is written, "Saith the Lord whose 
fire is in Zion, and His furnace in Jerusalem " (Is. xxxi. 9). 
The school of Eabbi Ishmael teaches that the "fire in Zion" 
is heU, and " His furnace in Jerusalem " is the gate of hell. 
It is also taught that the fire of hell has no power over the 
sinners in Israel, and that the fire of hell has no power over 
the disciples of the wise. It is again, however, stated that 
the Israelites who sin with their bodies, and the Gentiles 
who sin with their bodies, go to hell, and are punished there 
twelve months. After their body is wasted, and their soul 
is burned, the wind scatters them beneath the soles of the 
righteous, as it is said, "And ye shall tread down the 
wicked : for they shall be ashes under the soles of your 
feet" (Mai. iv. 3). Heretics, — deniers of the resurrection, — 
Epicureans, and other sinners, shall be perpetually tormented 
" where their worm dieth not and their fire is not quenched." 
The doctrine of the resurrection is clearly taught in the 
Talmud. As for the last judgment, the following story is 
told : " Said Antoninus to Eabbi, The body and soul can free 
themselves from judgment How ? The body can say. The 
soul sinned from the time it separated from me, while I lay 
as a stone in the grave. And the soul can say. The body 
sinned from the time it separated from me, while I flew in 
the air as a bird." He replied, "I will give you an example 
to which it is like. It is like a king of flesh and blood, 
who has a beautiful garden, and in which are pleasant fruits, 
and he placed two watchmen therein, of whom one was 
lame and the other was blind. Said the lame to the blind, 
' I see pleasant fruits in the garden ; come, and let me sit 
upon thee, and let us go and eat.* " The lame sat upon the 
blind, and they went and ate. After some days the Lord 
of the garden came, and said, "Where are my pleasant 
fruits?" The lame said, "I have no legs to go to them." 
The blind said, " I have no eyes to see them." What did 
he do ? He set the lame upon the blind, and judged them 
as one. So the blessed God will return the soul into the 
body, and judge them as one, as it is said, " He shall call to 


32 THE TALMUD. 


INTRODUCnOlf. 


the heavens from above and to the earth, that he may judge 
his people " (Ps. iv. 4). He shall call to the heavens from 
above, that is the soul ; and to the earth that he may judge 
his people, that is, tlie body. After the resurrection men 
will live without work or weariness of body, their houses 
shall be of precious stones, and their beds of silk, and the 
rivers shall run with wine and perfumed oil. 

The Talmud often contradicts Holy Scripture. It says 
tliat they are in error who believe the Bible accoimt of the 
sins of Reuben, of the sons of Eli, and of the sons of SamueL 
It allows usury, and the piissing of children through the 
fire to Molech. It permits deceit, and supports it with the 
text, " With the pure thou wilt show thyself pure, and with 
the froward thou wilt show thyself unsavoury " (2 Sam. xxiL 
27). The Rabbis teach hatred of Christians and Gentiles. 
Instead of saying, " In the presence of tlie king," they are 
taught to say, " In the presence of the dog." A Jew, who 
bears witness against another Jew before a Gentile is publicly 
cursed. A Jew is also released from any oath he may swear 
to a Gentile. It is only penuitted a Jewish physician to 
heal Gentiles for the sake of the fee, or for the practice of 
medicine, but it is not allowed to save their lives in seasons 
of danger. Their marriage is no marriage; and their 
butchers' meat is only carrion. It is wrong to invite them 
into a Jewish house ; and it is not needful to restore what 
tliey have lost. When the ox of a Jew gores the ox of a 
Gentile, the Jew is free ; but if the ox of a Gentile gores 
the ox of a Jew, the Gentile must pay the fuU cost. A 
story is told of a Rabbi who sold a nimiber of palm-trees to 
a Gentile, and afterwards ordered his servant to cut off some 
pieces from them. " For," he said, " the Gentile knows their 
number, but he does not know whether they be thick or 
thin." 

The precepts binding on the sons of Noah are stated to 
be seven : to do justice ; to bless the name of God ; to avoid 
idolatry ; to flee from fornication and adultery ; to abstain 
from blood-shedding ; not to rob ; and not to eat a member 
of a living' animal An account is given of the liver 


INTRODUCTION. 


PROVERBS. 33 


Sambation, which flows with stones all the six days of the 
week, but rests on the Sabbath day. Examples are also 
furnished of gluttony and drunkenness. The paunches of 
some Eabbis grew so big, that, when put together, a pair of 
oxen might go between them. A story is also related of 
one Rabbi killing another in a drunken tit, and then working 
a miracle which restored him to life. In the following year 
he again invited the Rabbi to drink with him, but he 
declined, on the ground that "miracles are not wrought 
every day." Instances are also given of the anguish of 
Rabbis in the prospect of death. They express themselves 
as being without hope of salvation, and as having the fear 
of heU before them. Proverbs everywhere abound in the 
Talmud, and they are generally replete with shrewd observa- 
tion. "The world subsists through the breath of school 
children. Whosoever transgresses the words of the Scribes 
is guilty of death. Whosoever teaches a statute before his 
teachers ought to be bitten by a serpent. There is no like- 
ness between him who has bread in his basket and him who 
has none. Rather be the head of foxes than the tail of 
lions." This, however again appears as " Rather be the tail 
of lions than the head of foxes." "The righteous in the city 
is its splendour, its profit, its glory : when he is departed, 
there is also departed the splendour, the profit, and the glory. 
Licentiousness in a house is as a worm in a pimipkin." This 
reappears as "Violence in a house is as a worm in a pumpkin." 
"Thy friend has an acquaintance, and the acquaintance of thy 
friend has also an acquaintance; be discreet." The unworthy 
child of a good father is called " vinegar, the son of wine." 
" If the opportunity fails the thief, he deems himself honest 
The cock and owl await together the morning dawn. Says 
the cock to the owl, ' Light profits me, but how does it profit 
thee V Youth is a crown of roses, old age a crown of thorns. 
Many preach well, but do not practise weU. It is the 
punishment of liars, that men don't listen to them when they 
speak truth. Every man who is proud is an idolater. To 
slander is to murder. Whosoever humbles himself, Grod 
exalts him: whosoever exalts himself, God humbles hinL 

D 


34 THE TALMUD. istroductiok. 

Men see every leprosy except their own. He who daily 
looks after his property finds a coin. The post does not 
honour the man ; but the man the post Every man is not 
so lucky as to have two tables. Not what thou sayest 
about thyself, but what thy companions say. The whole 
and broken tables of the Law lie in the ark. The salt of 
money is almsgiving. He who walks four cubits in the 
land of Israel is sure of being a child of the world to come. 
The plague lasted seven years, and no man died before his 
time. Let the drunkard only go, he will fall of himself. 
Be rather the one cursed than the one cursing. This world 
is like an inn, but tlie world to come is the real home. 
The child loves its mother more than its father : it fears its 
father more than its mother. Repent one day before thy 
deatL If your God is a friend of the poor, why does He 
not support them ? A wise man answered, ' Their case is 
left in our hands, that we may thereby acquire merits and 
forgiveness of sin.' The house that does not open to the 
poor shall open to the pliysician. He who visits the sick 
takes away one sixtieth part of their pain. Descend a step 
in choosing a wife ; mount a step in choosing a friend. An 
old woman in a house is a treasure. Wliosoever does not 
persecute them that persecute him, whosoever takes an offence 
in silence, whosoever does good from love, whosoever is 
cheerful under his sufferings, they are friends of God, and of 
them says the Scripture ' they shall shine forth as the sun 
at noonday.* " R Phineas, son of Jair, said " Industry brings 
purity — purity, cleanness — cleanness, holiness — holiness, 
humbleness — humbleness, fear of sin — and fear of sin, par- 
taking of the Holy Ghost." 

Ideas of God are gathered from the occupations which 
the authors of the Talmud assign to him. " The day con- 
tains twelve hours. The first three hours the Holy One, 
blessed be He, sits and studies the Law. The second three 
hours He sits and judges the whole world. When He sees 
that the world deserves destruction. He stands up from the 
throne of judgment, and sits on the throne of mercy. The 
third three hours He sits and feeds all the world, from the 


INTRODUCTION. 


IDEAS OF GOD. 35 


horns of the unicorns to the eggs of the vermin. In the 
fourth three hours He sits and plays with leviathan, for it 
is said " The leviathan, whom thou hast formed to play 
therein" (Ps. civ. 26). Eabbi Eliezer says "The night has 
three watches, and at every watch the Holy One, blessed 
be He, sits and roars like a lion ; for it is said, ' The Lord 
shall roar from on high and utter His voice from His holy 
habitation; He shall mightily roar upon His habitation '" (Jer. 
XXV. 30). Eabbi Isaac, the son of Samuel, says in the name 
of Eav, " The night has three watches, and at every watch the 
Holy One, blessed be He, sits and roars like a lion, and says 
' Woe is me, that I have laid desolate my house, and burned 
my sanctuary, and sent my children into captivity amongst 
the nations of the world!'" He is described as praying, and 
wearing phylacteries, and as having a special place for weep- 
ing. " Before the destruction of the Temple the Holy One 
played with leviathan, but since the destruction of the Temple, 
He plays with it no more. In the hour that the Holy One 
remembers His children who are dwelling with sufiTering 
amongst the nations. He lets two tears fall into the Great 
Ocean, the noise of which is heard from one end of the world 
to the other, and this is an earthquake." It is further said 
that He " braided the hair of Eve," and " shaved the head 
of Sennacherib." He is represented as keeping school, and 
teaching the sages. To this school the devils come, especially 
Aschmedai, the king of the devils. In the discussions that 
take place, God is said to be sometimes overcome by the wiser 
Sabbis. 

The question of the Messiah is often brought forward. 
" The tradition of the school of Elijah is, that the world is 
to stand six thousand years, two thousand years confusion, 
two thousand years the Law, and two thousand years the 
days of the Messiah." It is further said that the time for 
the coming of the Messiah is expired. "Eav says the 
appointed times are long since past" The Jerusalem Talmud 
relates that " it happened once to a Jew, who was standing 
ploughing, that his ox lowed before him. An Arab was 
passing, and heard its voice. * O Jew I 


36 THE TALMUD. introductiox. 

unyoke thine ox, and loose thy ploughshare, for the Temple 
is desolate/ It lowed a second time, and he said, ' Jew ! 
Jew ! yoke thine ox and bind thy ploughshare, for King 
Messiah is born.' The Jew said, 'What is His name?* 
He answered ' Menachem/ He asked again, ' What is His 
fathei's name?' He said, 'Hezekiah/ He asked, 'From 
whence is He?' He replied, 'From the royal palace of 
Bethlehem Judah.' The Jew then went and saw him ; but 
when he went again, the mother told him ' that the winds 
had borne the child away.*" The Babylon Talmud further 
states that " Eabbi Joshua, the son of Levi, found Elijah 
standing at the door of the cave of Eabbi Simeon ben Yochai, 
and said to him, 'Shall I reach the world to come?* He 
answered, 'If this Lord will.' Eabbi Joshua, the son of 
Levi, said, ' I see two, but I hear the voice of three.' He 
also asked, 'When wiU Messiah come?' Elijah answered 
'Go and ask Himself Eabbi Joshua then said, 'Where does 
he sit ?* . ' At the gate of Eome.' ' And how is he known V 
'He is sitting amongst the poor and sick, and they open 
their wounds, and bind them up again all at once : but he 
opens only one, and then he opens another, for he thinks. 
Perhaps I may be wanted, and then I must not be delayed.* 
Eabbi Joshua went to him, and said, ' Peace be upon thee, 
my Master, and my Lord.' He answered, ' Peace be upon 
thee, son of Levi.' The Eabbi then asked him, ' When will 
my Lord come ?' He answered, ' To-day '" (Ps. xcv. 7). It 
is said that " the bones of those who reckon the appointed 
time of the Messiah must burst asunder." Again, however, 
it is said that " Elias told Eabbi Judah, the brother of the 
pious Eabbi Salah, that the world would not stand less than 
eighty-five years of Jubilee, and in the last year of Jubilee 
the son of David will come." It is further stated that there 
are first to be the wars of the Dragon, and of Gog and Magog ; 
and that God wUl not renew the earth until seven thouscuid 
years are completed. The Eabbis also say that when the 
Messiah comes to fulfil the prophecy of riding upon an ass 
(Zech. ix. 9), the ass shall be one of " an hundred colours." 
As for the return of the ten tribes to their own land, the 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE MESSIAH. 37 


Talmud in some places asserts it, and in some places denies 
it But it is said that in the days of the Messiah all the 
Gentiles shall become proselytes to the Jewish faith. The 
Eabbis are divided as to the continuance of the Messiah ; 
some say forty years, some seventy years, some three genera- 
tions, and some say that He will continue as long as from 
the creation of the world or the time of Noah " up to the 
present time." Others say that the kingdom of the Messiah 
will endure for thousands of years, as " when there is a good 
government it is not quickly dissolved." It is also said that 
He shall die, and His kingdom descend to His son and 
grandson. In proof of this opinion Isaiah xlii. 4 is quoted : 
" He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till He have set judg- 
ment in the eartL" The lives of men will be prolonged for 
centuries : " He will swallow up death in victory " (Is. xxv. 
8) ; and " the child shall die an hundred years old " (Is. 
Ixv. 20). The Talmud applies the former verse to Israel, 
the latter verse to the Gentiles. The men of that time will 
be two hundred eUs high. This is said to be proved by the 
word "upright" (Lev. xxvi. 13), "upright" being applied to 
the supposed height of man before the fall. " Moreover the 
light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun ; and the 
light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days " 
(Is. XXX. 26). The land of Israel will produce cakes and 
clothes of the finest wool. The wheat will grow on Lebanon 
as high as palm-trees ; and a wind will be sent from God 
to reduce it to fine flour for the support of those who gather 
it ; as it is said " with the fat of kidneys of wheat " (Dent, 
xxxii. 14). Each kidney will be as large as "the kidneys 
of the fattest oxen.*' To prove that this is nothing wonder- 
ful, an account is given of a rape seed, in which a fox once 
brought forth young. These young ones were weighed, and 
found to be as heavy as sixty pounds of Cyprus weight. 
Lest these statements should be thought a contradiction of 
the verse "Thenre is no new thing under the sun" (Eccles. L 9), 
the Eabbis say that it is just like the growth of mushrooms, 
toadstools, and the delicate mosses on the branches of trees. 
Grapes will also grow most luxuriantly ; and in every cluster 


38 THE TALMUD. 


IKTBODUCTION. 


there will be thirty jars of wine. Jerusalem will be built 
three miles high ; as it is written, " It sliall be lifted up " 
(Zech. xiv. 10). The gates of the city will be made of pearls 
and precious stones, thirty ells high and thirty ells broad. 
A disciple of the Eabbis once doubted whether precious 
stones could be found so large ; and shortly afterwards, he 
saw an angel with similar stones, as he was out at sea. On 
his return to land he related what he had seen to llabbi 
Jochanan. Whereupon the Rabbi said, *' Thou fool, if thou 
hadst not seen, thou hadst not believed ; thou mockest the 
words of the wise." He then " lifted up his eyes upon him, 
and he was made an heap of bones." 

Said R Samuel, the son of Nachman, R Jochanan said 
" Three shall be called by the name of the Holy One ; blessed 
be He." Ancl these are the Righteous, the Messiah, and 
Jerusalem. The Righteous, as is said (Is. xliii. 7). The 
Messiah, as it is written (Jer. xxiii. 6) : " And this is His 
name where])y he shall be called, THE LORD OUR 
RIGHTEOUSNESS." Jerusalem, as it is written (Ezek. 
xlviii. 35) : "It was round about eighteen thousand mea- 
sures : and the name of the city from that day shall be Tlie 
LORD is THERR" 

In the later editions of the Talmud the allusions to 
Christ and Christianity are few and cautious, compared with 
the earlier or unexpurgated copies. The last of these was 
published at Amsterdam in 1645. In them our Lord and 
Saviour is " that one," " such an one," *' a fool," " the leper," 
"the deceiver of Israel," etc. Efforts are made to prove 
that He is the son of Joseph Pandira before his marriage 
with Mary. His miracles are attributed to sorcery, the 
secret of which He brought in a slit in His flesh out of 
Egypt His teacher is said to have been Joshua, the son 
of Perachiah. This Joshua is said to have afterwards ex- 
communicated him to the blast of 400 rams' horns, though 
he must have lived seventy years before His time. Forty 
days before the death of Jesus a witness was summoned by 
public proclamation to attest His innocence, but none ap- 
peared. He is said to have been first stoned, and then 


INTRODUCnOS. 


CHRISTIANITY. 


39 


hanged on the eve of the Passover. His disciples are called 
heretics, and opprobrious names. They are accused of 
immoral practices ; and the New Testament is called a 
sinful book. The references to these subjects manifest the 
most bitter aversion and hatred. 


40 THE TALMUD. 


INTKODUCriON. 


CHAPTER VI. 

Eabbinic Logic. 

The Rabbis have laid down thirteen rules for the interpreta- 
tion of the Talmud. These rules form their system of 
logic. They are as follows : — 

(1.) Light and heavy ^ an argument from the less to the 
greater. An example is furnished in the case of Miriam 
(Num. xiL 14). "If her father had but spit in her face, 
should she not be ashamed seven days ? let her be shut out 
from the camp seven days, and after that let her be received 
in again." The argument is here drawn from the conduct 
of man, the less, to that of God, the greater. The owner of 
an ox is also fined more for his beast if it gores his neigh- 
bour's beast than if it eats his neighbour's corn ; since the 
tooth only means sustenance for the stomach, but the horn 
means mischief. 

(2.) Equality y an argument from the similarity or 
identity of words and impressions. An example is furnished 
in Deut. xv. 12 : "If thy brother, an Hebrew man, or an 
Hebrew woman^ be sold unto thee, and serve thee six years, 
then in the seventy year thou shalt let him free from thee." 
In the 18th verswwhen this law is again referred to, the 
man only is menHned ; but as the woman was mentioned 
in the former vero, it is concluded that the law applies 
equally to both. 

(3.) Tlie huUding of tlie failier, an argument from the 
statements in (a) oiie place in the Law to other passages, 
which are similar. An example is furnished in Exod. xiL 
16, where servile work is forbidden during the feast of un- 
leavened bread, and the conclusion is drawn that servile 


1 


40 


T 

I 


( 


otr 


i^^ 


in 

16 
lea 


44 


THE 


i 


to have been "eleven hu: 
of three hundred thousant 
1 Chron. xxvii. 1, where it 
served the king every m 
plied by the months, mak 
thousand. And the twelv 
twelve captains raise the n 
the amount requii-ed to re 


'^TRoDircnoN. 


J* g^w to its 

^ bought, 
oieakiog up 
to regenerate 
appearing of 
,^gious and 
^^tions felt, 
'trow of the 
™08e political 
* iiitennission 
« overthrow of 

^ religious 
from right 

as the great 
^ere labour- 
oration after 
men were 
^oh became a 
, o Christian 
i^oquence the 
jtic lore, which 
'discoursing in 
^stian orators 
»ple and Rome. 
®- But their 
converse with 
*h. We can 
rors — we can 
^t, being dead, 
j their labours 
ns of our race 
les to moulder 
^, to influence 
eir departures 
wished matter 
which form a 
01 their errors 
indred themes. 


t 


iNTRODUCTiox. WISDOM OF THE FATHERS. 47 

howe\'er, open up an interminable vista, leading us away from 
the Talmud itself. It is better now to conclude this intro- 
duction. And with what more suitable words can I close 
than with those drawn from the wisdom of the Fathers? 
"It is not incumbent upon thee to complete the work: neither 
art thou free to cease from it. If thou hast studied tlie law, 
great shall be thy reward; for the Master of thy work is faith- 
ful to pay the reward of thy la]x)ur: but know that the 
reward of tlie righteous is in the world to come." 


SELECTIONS FKOM THE TALMUD, 


THE MISHNA. 
Treatise I. 

Recitation of the Shemah — Blessings — Rabbi Gamaliel — Exemptions from the 
recitation — Prayers — Differences between the schools of Shammai and 
Hillel — Reverence for the Temple. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. "From what time do we recite the Shemah^ in the 
evening V • From the hour the priests^ enter (the temple) to 
eat their heave offerings, until the end of the first watch."* 
The words of R Eleazar ; but the Sages say " until midnight" 
Babban Gamaliel says, " until the pillar of the mom ascend." 
It happened that his sons came from a banquet They said 
to him, " we have not yet said the Shemah." He said to 
them, " if the pillar of the mom be not yet ascended, you 
are bound to say it; and not only this, but all that the 

1 " Hear, Israel, the Lord our God Ghost, proceeding of them both ; to 

iM one Lord," etc (Deut vi. 4-9, xi. all which is added the word One, to 

13-21 ; Num. zy. 37-41). Evening signify that these three are Indivisible. 

prayer might be said after 12.30 p.m. But this mystery shall not be revealed 

(Acts z. 9. ) It is abundantly evident until the coming of Messiah. " The 

from the Zohar that the ancient Jews Zohar gives also an imperfect illustra- 

understood that in the Shemah there tion of this great Truth, by saying 

a confession of the doctrine of the that the Trinity in unity is like ** the 


Trinity in xmity — three Persons in One human voice which is composed of 

God. '* Hear, Israel : Jehovah our three elements — ^warmth, air, and va- 

God is one Jehovah. By the first pour." 

name in this sentence, Jehovah, is sig- • t»_. i. u .^ i n- «««i... 

nitied God the Father, the Head of idl ./ Pne«.t« who were legally nndean. 

things. By the next words, our God, ^^^- ^*"- '^• 

is signified God the Son, the fountain ' The Mishna begins the night at 

of all knowledge ; and by the second 6 p.m., and divides it into three 

Jehovah, is signified God the Holy watches of four hours each. 

S 


50 BLESSINGS. TALMUD 

Sages say, ' till midnight/ they command till the pillar of 
the mom ascend." The burning of the fat and members 
they command " till the pillar of the morn ascend." And 
all offerings, wliich must be eaten the same day, they com- 
mand " till the pillar of the mom ascend." If so, why do 
the Sages say " until midnight ? " " To withhold man from 
transgression." 

2. "From what time do we recite the Shemah in the 
morning?" When one can discern betwixt "blue and white," 
R Eleazar says '^ betwixt blue and leek green." And it 
may be finished "until the sun shine forth." R Joshua 
says "until the third hour."^ For such is the way of royal 
princes to rise at the third hour. He who recites Shemah 
afterwards loses nothing. He is like a man reading tlie 
Law. 

3. The school of Shammai say that in the evening all 
men are to recline when they recite the Shemah; and in 
the morning they are to stand up ; for it is said, " when 
thou liest down and when thou risest up."^ But the school 
of Hillel say, "that every man is to recite it in his own 
way; for it is said " when thou walkest by the way."' If so, 
why is it said, " when thou liest down and when thou risest 
up"? "When mankind usually lie down, and when mankind 
usually rise up." E. Tarphon said, "I came on the road, and 
reclined to recite the Shemah according to the words of the 
school of Shammai, and I was in danger of robbers." The 
Sages said to him, " thou wast guilty against thyself, because 
thou didst transgress the words of the school of HilleL** 

4. In the morning two blessings are said before (the 
Shemah), and one after it ; and in the evening two blessings 
before and two after it, one long and one short^ Where 
the (Sages) have said to lengthen, none is allowed, to shorten; 
and to shorten none is allowed to lengthen: to dose, none is 
allowed not to close ; not to close, none is allowed to close. 

5. We commemorate the departure from Egjrpt at night ; 

^ The Mishna begins the dny at 6 ^ A long blessing begins and enda 

A.M. The third honr ia 9 a.m. with " Blessed art Thon, Lord ; " a 

* Dent vi. 7. short blessing only ends with these 

' Ibid, words. 


THE SHEMAH. 


51 


I worm ; 


said R. Eleazar, son of Azariah, " truly I am a son of seventy 
yeats. and was not clear that thou ehouldst 8ay the departure 
from Ejjypt at night until the son of Zoma expounded, 'that 
thou mayeat rememlHjr the day when thou earnest forth out 
of tlie land of Egypt all the days of thy life ;'' the days o£ 
thy life (are) day^ ; all the days of thy life (include) the 
nighta." But the Sages say, " the days of thy life (are) tJiis 
world ; all the day^ of thy life (include) the days of the 
Lh." 


CHAPTER II. 


1. •' If one who is reading in the Law when the time cornea 
for praying intends it in his heart? " " He ia free." " But if 
not ?" " He is not free." " At the end of the sections one 
salutes out of respect, and responds ; but in the middle of a 
section he salutes from fear, aud responds." Such are the 
words of E, Mair. R Judah says, " in tbe middle he salutes 
from fear, and responds out of respect; at the end he 
salutes out of respect, and repeats peace to every man." 

2. The intervals of the sections are between the first 
blessing nnd the second-^between the second and " Hear, O 
Israel;" between "Hear" and "it shall come to pass;"* 
between "and it shall come to pass" "and he said;"* between 
" and he said" aud it is " true and certain."' Said R. Judah, 
" between ' and he said and it is true and certain,' none ia 

b.pauee." R. Joshua, the son of Korcha, said "Why does the 
tioii) " Hear," etc., precede, " and it shall come to pass "? 
. one may take on himself the kingdom of heaven, 
Ibre he take on himself the yoke of the commandments." 
J does (the section) and " it shall come to pass " precede 
1 he said " ? " Because ' and it shall come to pass ' may 
I practised by day and by night ;' hut ' and he said," etc., 
J by day."' 

t itL 8. ' Dent. il. 19. 

* Dnit. xL lS-11. 
' Nam. IT. 87-11. 

* Bksiuc ia ia. 1. 10 It ia written, 
Bat Uw Lonl ti Uic trua Ood," etc. 


52 BLESSINGS. TALMTTD 

3. He who recites the Shemah so as not to be audible 
to his own ears, is legally free.^ E. Jos6 says "he is not 
legally free." "If he has said it without grammar and 
pronunciation ?" R Jos(5 says " he is legally free." R 
Judah says " he is not legally free." " If he said it irregu- 
larly ?" " He is not legally free." " In recitation he mistook? " 
" He must recommence from the place where he mistook." 

4. Labourers may recite the Shemah on the top of a tree, 
or of a wall, but they are not allowed to do so with the 
prayer.* 

5. A bridegroom is exempted from reciting the Shemah 
on the first night of marriage, and, even until the expiration 
of the Sabbath if the marriage be not complete. It happened 
that Habban Gamaliel recited on the first night. His dis- 
ciples said to him, "hast thou not taught us, our master, that 
a bridegroom is exempted from reciting Shemah on the first 
night ?" He said to them, " I will not hear you, to deprive 
myself of the yoke of the kingdom of heaven even one hour." 

6. He (R Gamaliel) bathed on the first night of his 
wife's death. His disciples said to him, "hast thou not 
taught us, our master, that a mourner is forbidden to bathe ?" 
He said to them, "I am not like all other men; I am 
infirm." 

7. When his slave Tabbi died, he received visits of con- 
dolence. His disciples said to him, " hast thou not taught 
us, our master, that visits of condolence are not to be received 
for slaves ?" He said to them, " my slave Tabbi was not 
like all other slaves, he was upright." 

8. The bridegroom who wishes to recite the Shemah on 
the first night may recite it. R Simeon, the son of Gamaliel, 
said, " not every one who wishes to affect the pious reputa- 
tion, can affect it." 


^ When the expressions ''free" or is it with the expressions "dean" or ^ 
''not free" are used, they refer to the " unclean." 

decisions of the Levitical Law. So also ' t.e. the eighteen blessings called 

••Amidah." 


mmLMcnom. 


EXEMFnONS. 


CHAPTEE III. 
. He ■whose dead lies before him is exempted from 
leciting the ShemaL, — from the prayer, — and from the 
phylact<?rie8.' Those who eany the bier, and those who 
relieve them, and those who relieve the relief,— —those who 
go hefore the bier, and those who follow it, who are required 
for the bier, are exenipted from reciting the Shemah. But 
iJioee not required for tlie bier are bound to recite it. Both 
(parties) are exempted from the prayer. 

2. When they have buried the dead, and return, if they 
have time to begin and end (the Shemah) before they reach 
the rows (of mourners), they must begin i if not, they must not 
begin. Of those standing in the rows, the inner (raoumera) 
are exempt, but the outer ones are bound to recite the Shemah. 

3. Women, slaves, and children, are exempt from reciting 
the Shemah, and also from the phylacteries ; but they are 
boand in the prayer, the sign on the door-post, and the 
blessing after food. 

4. A man in his legal imcleanneas is to meditate in his 
heart on the (Shemah), but he is not to bless before, or after 
it After his food he blesses, but not before it. R. Judah 
says " he blesses Ixith before and after it." 

If one stand in prayer, and recollect that he is in hia 
ondeanness, he is not to pause, but to shorten (the prayer). 
If be has gone down into the water (to bathe),* and can go 
op, dress, and recite the Shemah before the sun shines forth, 
he ia to go up, dress, and recite it But he is not to cover 
himself with foul water, or with water holding matter in 
solution unless he has poured clean water to it. " How far 
ig he to keep from foul water, or excrement ?" " Four cubite." 

6. A man in his uncleanoess with a running issue, a 
tromui in her uncleanness, during separation, and she who 
perceives the need of separation, require the bath. Bat H 
Judali " exempts them." 

' PhjUctenn coiuiit of telU of are bonnil bf tlioDga ronnil the Idt um 

Bcrfptun (Exnd. liiL £-10, 11-17; I>eut. and roreheud. 
>L 44, ia-£S) written on paichmsnt 

a Ifather box. Thej • Lev. xr. 18. 


54 BLESSINGS. 


TALMUD 


CHAPTER IV. 

1. The morning prayer may be said till noon. R. Judah 
says " until the fourth hour." The afternoon prayer until 
the evening. R. Judah says "imtil half the afternoon." 
The evening prayer has no limit, and the additional prayers 
may be said all day. E. Judah says "until the seventh 
hour." 

2. E. Nechooniah, son of Hakanah, used to pray when 
he entered the lecture-room, and when he went out he said 
a short prayer. The (Sages) said to him, "what occasion 
is there for this prayer?" He said to them, "when I 
enter I pray that no cause of offence may arise through me ; 
and when I go out I give thanks for my lot." 

3. Rabban Gamaliel said, " one must daily say the 
eighteen prayers." E. Joshua said "a sununary of the 
eighteen." R Akivah said, " if his prayer be fluent in his 
mouth, he says the eighteen; if not, a sunmiary of the 
eighteen." 

4. E. Eleazar said, "if one make his prayer fixed, his 
prayer is not supplications." E. Joshua said, "if a man 
travel in dangerous places, let him use this short prayer : 
* Save, Lord, thy people, the remnant of Israel ; at every 
stage of their journey^ let their wants be before thee. 
Blessed art thou, Lord, who hearest prayers.'" 

5. If one ride on an ass, he must dismoimt : if he cannot 
dismoimt, he must turn his face ; and if he cannot turn his 
face, he must direct his heart towards the Holy of Holies. 

6. If one be seated in a ship, or in a carriage, or on a 
raft, he must direct his mind towards the Holy of Holies. 

7. R Eleazar, the son of Azariah, said " the additional^ 
prayers are only to be said in a public congregation." But 
the Sages say, "if there be a public congr^ation, or no 
public congregation." E. Judah said in his name, " in every 
place, where there is a public congregation, individuals are 
exempted from additional pra-yers." 

^ Or transgrMsion. * Called Miuaph. 


SELECTIONS. PRAYERS. 55 


CHAPTER V. 

1. Men should not stand up to pray, except with rever- 
ential head. The pious of ancient days used to pause one 
hour before they began to pray, that they might direct 
their hearts to God. Though the king salute, one must not 
respond ; and though a serpent wind itself round his heel, 
one must not pause. 

2. Men should mention the heavy rain in praying for the 
resurrection of the dead ; and entreat for rain in the blessing 
for the year, and " the distinction between the Sabbath and 
week-day"^ is to be said in the prayer "who graciously 
bestows knowledge."* R Akivah said, "the distinction be- 
tween the Sabbath and week-day is to be said in a fourth 
prayer by itself." E. Eleazar said, " in the thanksgivings." 

3. He who says, " Thy mercies extend to a bird's nest," 
or, " for goodness be Thy name remembered," or he who says, 
"we give thanks, we give thanks,"^ is to be silenced. If a 
man pass up to the ark (where the rolls of the Law are kept) 
and make a mistake, another must pass up in his stead ; nor 
may he in such a moment refuse. " Where does he begin ?" 
** From the beginning of the prayer in which the other made 
the mistake." 

4. He who passes up to the ark is not to answer "Amen" 
after the priests, lest his attention be distracted. If no other 
priest be present but himself, he is not to lift up his hands 
(to bless the congregation). But if he be confident that he 
can lift up his hands, and then resume, he is at liberty. 

5. If a man pray, and make a mistake, it is a bad sign 
for him If he l)e a representative of a congregation, it is a 
bad sign for his constituents, for a man's representative is 
like himself. They say of R. Hanina, son of Dosa, that when he 
prayed for the sick, he used to say, "this one will live," or "this 
one will die." The (Sages) said to him, " how do you know?" 
He said to them, " if my prayer be fluent in my mouth, I 
know that he is accepted ; but if not, I know that he is lost." 

1 Prayer caUed *' Habdelah." > CaUed *' Chonen hada'atb." 

' As if there were two gods. 


56 


BLESSINGS. 


TALlirD 


CHAPTER VI. 


1. " How do we bless for fruit ?" " For fruit of a tree say, 
*Who Greatest the fruit of the wood/ excepting the wine. 
For wine say, *"VMio Greatest tlie fruit of the \dne.^ For 
fruits of the earth say, * Who Greatest the fruit of the ground,' 
excepting the morsel. For the morsel say, 'Who bringest 
forth bread from the earth.* For vegetables say, 'WTio 
Greatest the fruit of the ground.' E. Judah says, *Who 

%\ Greatest various kinds of herbs/" 

2. He who blessed the fruits of the tree (thus), "Who 
Greatest the fruits of tlie gi'ound ?" " He is free." And for 
the fruits of ground (said), " Who Greatest the fruits of the 
wood ?" " He is not free." But, in general, if one say, " (Wlio 
Greatest) everything ?" " He Ls free." 

. 3. For the thing which groweth not from the earth, say, 
" (Wlio Greatest) everything." For vinegar, unripe fruit, and 
locusts, say " everything." For milk, cheese, and eggs, say 
" everything." R. Judali says, " whatever it be, which had 
its origin in a curse, is not to be blessed." 

4. If a man have before him many kinds of fruits ? R 
Judah says, " if there be among them of the seven I kinds, 
he is to bless them." But the Sages say "he may bless 
whichever of them he pleases." 


^ Mentionwl Deut. viii. 8. The 
Jews make a distinction between Bic- 
curim, the fruits of the soil in their 
natural state, and Therumoth, the fruits 
in a prepared state, such as oil, ilour, 
aud wine. The first fruits were always 
brought to Jerusalem with great pomp 
and display. The Talmud says that 
all the cities which were of the same 
course of priests gathered together into 
one of the cities which was a priestly 
station, and they lo<Iged in the streets. 
In the morning he who was chief among 
them said, "Arise, let us go up to 
Zion to the House of the Lord our God.** 
An ox went before them with gilded 
honis, and an olive crown was on his 
head. This ox was intended for a peace 


offering to be eaten by the priesta in 
the court of the sanctuary. The pipe 
played before the procession until it 
approached Jerusalem. When they 
drew near to the holy city, the flnt 
fruits were ** crowned " and exposed to 
view with great ostentation. Then the 
chief men and the high officers and the 
treasurers of the temple came ont to 
meet them and receive them with 
honour. And all the workmen in 
Jerusalem rose up in their shops, and 
thus they saluted them: '*0 cor 
brethren, inhabitants of such a city, ye 
are welcome. " The pipe played before 
them till they came to the Temple 
Mount. Every one, even King Agrippa 
himself, took his basket upon his 


n 


SELECTIONS. 


RULES AT MEALS. 


57 


5. " If one blessed the wine before food ?" " The blessing 
frees the wine after food." " If he blessed the titbit before 
food r " It frees the titbit after food." " If he blessed tlie 
bread ?" " It frees the titbit." But the blessing on the titl)it 
does not free the bread. The school of Shamniai say, "neither 
does it free the cookery." 

6. "If several persons sit down to eat ?" " Each blesses 
for himself." " But if they recline together ?" " One blesses 
for all." " If wine come to them during food ?" " Each blesse^s 
for himself." " But if after food ?" " One blesses for all." 
He also blesses for the incense, even though they have not 
brought it till after the repast. 

7. " If they first set salt food before a man and bread 
with it ?" " He blesses the salt food, which frees the bread, 
as the bread is only an appendage." The nde is, whenever, 
there is principal and with it appendage, — the blessing on 
the principal frees the appendage. 

8. " If one have eaten figs, grape^s, and pomegranates ?" 
"He must say after them three blessings." 'The wonls of 
Babban Gamaliel. , But the Sages say, " one blessing — a 
summary of the three." E. Akivah says, " if one have eaten 
boiled (pulse) ; and it is his meal, he must say after it three 
blessings." Whoever drinks water for his thirst, says, " By 
whose word everytliing is," etc. R Taq)lion says, " Who 
createst many souls," etc. 


ihonldar, and went forward tiU be came 
to tlw court Then the Levites Muig, 
*'I wiU exalt thee, Lonl, because 
thou haat lifted me up, and hast not 
made my foea to rejoice over me " 
(Pa. XXX. 1). While the iMwket U Ntill 
OD hia ihoulder, he says, '* I profess 
thia day to the Lord my Qod. *' An<l 
when be repeata the passage, "A Syrian 
ready to perish was my father ** (Deut. 
xxri. 3-5), he casts the liasket down 
from his shoulder, and keeps silent 
while the priest waves it hither and 
thither at the south-west comer of the 
altar. The whole passage of Scri])tnre 
being then recited as far as tliu tenth 
▼ene, he places the basket before the 
altar~-he worships — and goes ont. Tlie 


boskets of the rich were of gold or 
silver. The Ijasket^ of the poor were 
of peeled willow. These latter, to- 
gether with their contents, were i>re- 
sented to the priestM in senice. Tlie 
more valuable buckets wure rctunied to 
their owners. They used to hang 
turtle doves nnd young pigeons round 
their baskets, which were lulorued with 
flowers. These were sacrificed fi»r 
buiiit offeiingH. The ]iarties who 
brought the first fniits, wore obliged to 
lodge in Jerusalem all the night after 
they brought them, and the next morn- 
ing they were allowe<l t».i return home. 
The first fruits were forbi<Men to lie 
ofl"ercd before the feast of Pentecost, 
and otter the feast of Dedication. 


58 BLESSINGS. TALMUD 


CHAPTEE VII. 

1. Three men who have eaten together are bound to 
bless after food. " If a person have eaten of that which is 
doubtful, whether it has paid tithe or not ; or of first tithe 
from which the heave offering has been taken ; or of second 
tithe or consecrated things, which have been redeemed; 
also, if the waiter have eaten the size of an olive; or a 
Samaritan be of the party ?" " The blessing must be said." 
" But if one have eaten the untithed — or first tithes from 
which the heave offering has not been taken — or conse- 
crated things which are imredeemed ; or if the waiter have 
eaten less than the size of an oHve, or a stranger be of the 
party ?" " The blessing is not to be said." ^ ^ 

2. There is no blessing at food for women, slaves, and 
children. Wbat quantity is required for the blessing at 
food ? The size of an olive. E. Judah says "the size of an egg." 

3. " How do we bless at food ?" " If there be three, one 
says, "Let us bless," etc.; if three and himself, he says, 
" Bless ye," etc. : if ten, he says, " Let us bless our God," 
etc. ; if ten and himself, he says, " Bless ye," etc. ; (so) if 
there be ten or ten mjoiads. If there be an hundred, he says, 
"Let us bless the Lord our God," etc.; if there be an 
himdred and himself, he says, "Bless ye," etc.: if there be a 
thousand, he says, " Let us bless the Lord our God, the God 
of Israel;" if there be a thousand and himself, he says, 
" Bless ye," etc. : if there be a myriad, he says, " Let us bless 
the Lord our God, the God of Israel, the God of Hosts, who 
sitteth between the Cherubim," etc.; if there be a myriad 
and himself, he says, " Bless ye," etc. etc. As he pronounces 
the blessing, so they respond after him, " Blessed be the Lord 
our God, the God of Israel, the God of Hosts, who sitteth 
between the Cherubim, for the food we have eaten." R 
Jos6 the Galilean says they should bless according to the 
number of the assembly ; for it is written, " Bless ye God in the 
congregations; (even) the Lord from the fountain of Israel"^ 

* P». Ixviii. 26. 


SELECTIONS. SCHOOLS OF SHAMMAI AND HILLEL. 59 

Sfidd R Akivah, " What do we find in the synagogue? whether 
many or few the minister says, "Bless ye the Lord," etc. E. 
Ishmael says, " Bless ye the Lord, who is ever blessed." 

4. When three have eaten together, they are not per- 
mitted to separate without blessing ; nor four or five. But 
six may divide into two parties, and so may any number up to 
ten. But ten may not separate without blessing, nor any 
number less than twenty (who can divide into two parties). 

5. If two companies have eaten in one house, and some 
of each company be able to see some of the other company, 
they may join in the blessing ; but if not, esjch company 
blesses for itself. " They should not bless the wine till it 
has been mixed with water." The words of E. Eleazar. 
But the Sages say " they may bless it immixed." 


CHAPTEE VIIL 

1. These are the controversies relating to meals between 
the schools of Shammai and Hillel. The school of Shammai 
say, " one must say the blessing of the day, and then bless 
the wine ;" but the school of Hillel say, " one must say 
the blessing on the wine, and then bless the day." 

2. The school of Shjunmai say, " men must pour water 
on the hands, and then mix the goblet ; " but the school of >^ \k. 
Hillel say, "the goblet must be mixed, and then water 'v ^ 
poured on the hands." ;* <j 

3. The school of Shammai say, "one is to wipe his -. - ^ 


^ hands on the napkin, and lay it on the table;" but the -^ 
flchool of Hillel say, " on the. cjishion." 
iCMb 4. The school of Shammai J)Iess " the light, the food, the 
' 8pices, and the distinction of the day ; " but the school of 
Hillel bless " the light, the spices, the food, and the distinc- 
tion of the day." The school of Shammai say, "who 
created the light of fire;" but the school of Hillel say, 
" Creator of the lights of fire." 

6. Men must not bless light and spices of idolatrous 
Grentiles, nor light and spices of corpses, nor light and spices 


60 BLESSINGS. TALMXTD 

before an idol. They must not bless the .light until they 
have enjoyed the light. 

7. " If one have eaten, and forgotten, and not blessed ? " 
Tlie school of Shammai say, " he must return to his place 
and bless." But the school of Hillel say, " he may bless in 
the place where he recollects." " How long is one obliged to 
bless ?" " Until the food in his stomach be digested." 

8. " If wine came to the company, and there is but one 
goblet ?" The school of Shammai say "that one must bless 
the wine and then bless the food." But the school of Hillel 
say " that one must bless the food and then bless the wine." 
Men must answer " Amen " when an Israelite blesses ; but 
they must not answer " Amen " when a Samaritan blesses, 
until the whole ^ blessing be heard. 

CHAPTEE IX. 

1. He who sees a plaxie where signs were wrought for 
Israel, says, "Blessed be He who wrought signs for our 
fathers in this place;" a place where idolatry has been 
rooted out, — says, " Blessed be He who hath rooted idolatry 
out of our land." 

2. On comets, earthquakes, lightnings, thimder, and 
tempests, say, " Blessed be He whose strength and might fill 
the world." On mountains, hills, seas, rivers, and deserts, 
say, " Blessed be He who made the creation." R Judah 
says, when a man sees the great sea he is to say, " Blessed 
be He who made the great sea," — ^when he sees it at intervals. 
On rains, and on good news say, " Blessed be He who is 
good and beneficent." On bad news say, " Blessed be the 
true Judge." 

3. He who has built a new house, or bought new furni- 
ture, says, " Blessed be He who has kept us alive," etc. One 
must bless for evil the source of good ; and for good the 
source of eviL "He who supplicates for what is past?" 
" Such prayer is vain." " How ? " His wife is pregnant, and 
he says, " God grant that my wife may bring forth a male 

^ Lest it be a bleesing used on Monnt Gerizzim. 


*i~ 


SBiJ«mos8. REVERENCE FOE THE TEMPLE. 61 

child. Such prayer is vain. Or if one on the road hear 
the voice of lamentation in the city, and say, " God grant that 
it may uot be my sou. my liouse," etc., aucli prayer is vain. 

4- Whoever enters a fortified town must say two 
prayers, one at his entrance, and one at bia departure. 
Beo Azai says, " four, two at his entrance, and two at bis 
departure ; he returns thanks for the past, and suppKcates for 
the future." 

5. Man is bound to bless God for evil, as he is bound to 
bless Him for good. For it is said, " And tliou shalt love 
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, 
Kod with all thy might." ^ "With all thy heart" means, 
vitfa both thy inclinations, the evil as well as the good. 
"With all thy soul" means, even should He deprive thee of "^ 
life ; and " with all thy might " means with all thy wealth, j^ 
AiMther opinion is, that " with all thy might " means what- 
ever measure He metes out imto thee, do thou thank Him . 
with thy entire might No man is to be irreverent opposite 
lh« eastern gate of the Temple, for it is opposite the Holy ^ 
of Holies. No man is to go on the mountain of the house ■> 
with his staff, shoes, or purse, nor with dust on hia feet, ^ 
Bor is he to make it a short cut, nor is he to spit at all. -^ All 
Qts seals of the blessings in the sanctuary used to say, " from 
eternity." But since the Epicureans perversely taught there 
ta but one world, it was directed that men should say, " from 
rbemity to eternity." It was also directed that every man 
should greet his friend iu THE NAME, aa it is said, " And 
behuld Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said imto the reapers, 
Tlie Lord (Vie) with you : and they answered him. The Lord 
bleaa ihee."* And it is also said, "The Lord is with thee, 
thou mighty man of valour.'" And it is said, " Despise not 
thy mother when she is old."* And it is also said, " (It is) 
timv for (thee), Lord, t* work, for they have made void thy 
law."* E. Nathan says, "They have made void thy law 
because (it is) time for (thee). Lord, to work." 

' Deot. It 6. ' Ruth iL i. * Judgta vL 13. 


62 . THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmud 


Treatise IL 
®n t!)e Sabbatical gear. 

CHAPTER I. 

Ploughing — Gardening — Dunging — Removing Stones — Sowing — Catting 
down Trees — Fruits — Buying and Selling — Territory included in the 
Sabbatical Year — Produce governed by its Laws — Debts and Payments. 

1. " How long do men plough in a field with trees on the 
eve of the Sabbatical year?"^ The school of Shammai say, 
" so long as it is useful for the fruit ;" but the school of 
HUlel say, " till Pentecost," and the words of the one are 
near to the words of the other. 

2. " What is a field with trees ?" " Three trees to every 
fifty cubits square, if they be fit to produce a heap of figs 
worth sixty Italian minas;^ on their account men can 
legally plough the earth for the whole fifty cubits square 
aroimd them. Less than for these they may not legally 
plough, save the extent of the gatherer of fruit with his 
basket outwards. 

3. " Whether they be fruitless or fruitful ?" " Men may 
regard them as though they were fig-trees.** " If they be 
fit to produce a heap of figs worth sixty Italian minas ?" " On 
their account they may legally plough the whole fifty cubits 
square around them. Less than for these they may not 
plough, save what is absolutely needful." 

4. " One tree produced a heap of figs, and two trees did 
not produce it ; or two trees produced it, and one did not 
produce it ?" " Men may not plough save what is absolutely 
needful for them, till they be from three to nine in number." 

^ It has been a subject of dispute civil New Tear's Day, which feU in 
when the Sabbatical year began — Tishri (September), 
whether in Nisan or Tishri. The weight ' An Italian mina perhaps = a d»> 
of evidence is, however, in favour of the narius. If so, the heap would be worth 

about £1 : 17 : C. 


HElBrTIONS. 


PLOUGHING. 


" If they be ten?" "On their account men may legally plough 
around thena the whole fifty cuhita square ; and also from 
ten trees and upwards, whether they produce or do not pro- 
duce it." As is said, " in earing-time and in haiTest thou 
tilialt rest.'" There is no need to say earing-time and 
liarveet in the Sabbatical year, but earing-time ou the eve 
erf the Sabbatical yuar, when it ia just entering on the Sab- 
l.iatical year; and harvest of the Sabbatical year, which is 
proceeding towards the cloae of the Sabbatical year. Kabbi 
Ishmoel said, "as tlie earing-time (mentioned Exod. xxxiv. 
21) is voluntary, so the harvest ia voluntary, except the 
harvest of the (omer) sheaf."* 

5. " K tJie three trees belong to three owners ?" " They 
are reckoned as one, and on their account they may legally 
plough the whole fifty cubits square around them." " And 
how much space must be between them ? " Eabban Simon, 
the son of Gamaliel, said, " that a bullock with his ploughing 
instrumente may pass." 

6. " If there be ten saplings dispersed in the fifty cubits 
S(|uare ?" " On their account men may plough the whole fifty 
cubitfi square around them till new year's day," " If they 
be placed in a row, or rounded like a crown ?" "Men may 
not plough save what is absolutely needful for them." 

7. The saplings and the gourds are reckoned alike in the 
fifty cubits squaro. Kabban Simon, the son of Gamaliel said, 
" for evejy ten cucumbers in the fifty cubits square, men 
moy plough the fifty cubits square around them till new year's 
day." 

8. " How long are they called saplings ?" Rabbi 
EJeazar, the son of Azariah, said,' "till they can be used." 
£. Joahua said, " till the age of seven years." R. Akiba 
said, "a sapling, as commonly named." "A tree decays 
aud sprouts afresh ; when less than a handbreadlh, it is a 
saplini; ; when more than a handbreadth, it is a tree." The 
wt>rdii of Itabbi Simon. 

' Ei^L iniT. 21. ma-Sr- from gnin growa in tbc field 

* La*. uilLlO. The omcr OT " wave durint; the Ssbbatickl jtai. It cu 

' It Ibt Piuovct, uid Ibe two lUo oJlowcd to till sufficiciit lind to pij 

t FcDiccMt, vat to be luo. * Lev. liz. 2^3S. 


64 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmud 


CHAPTER II. 

1. " How long may men plough in a white ^ field on the 
eve of the Sabbatical year?" "Till the productiveness 
ceases ; so long as men usually plough to plant cucumbers 
and gourds." Said R Simon, " thou hast put the law in 
every man's hand. But men may plough in a grain field 
till the Passover, and in a field of trees till Pentecost." 

2. Men may dung and dig amongst cucumbers and 
gourds till new year's day, and they may also do so in a 
parched-up field. They may prune them, remove their 
leaves, cover them with earth, and fumigate them, till new 
year's day. R. Simon said, " one may even remove the leaf 
from the bunch of grapes in the Sabbatical year." 

3. Men may remove stones till new year's day. They 
may gather the ears, they may break off branches, they may cut 
off the withered part till new year's day. R. Joshua said, 
" as they may break off branches and cut off the withered 
part of the fifth year, so also they may do it in the sixth 
year." Rabbi Simon said, " every time I am permitted to 
work amongst the trees, I am permitted to cut off the 
withered part." 

4. Men may smear the saplings, and bind them, and cut 
them down, and make sheds for them, and water them, till 
new year's day. R. Eleazar, the son of Zadok, said, " one 
may even water the top of the branch in the Sabbatical 
year, but not the root." 

5. Men may anoint imripe firuits, and puncture^ them, 
till new year's day. Unripe fruit of the eve of the Sab- 
batical year which is just entering on the Sabbatical year, 
and imripe fruit of the Sabbatical year which is proceeding 
to the close of the Sabbatical year, they may neither 
anoint nor pimcture. Rabbi Jehudah said, " the place where 
it is customary to anoint them, they may not anoint them, 
because that is work. The place where it is not customary 

1 Grain or com field. ' With a pointed inBtniment covered with oil. 


SELECTIONS. RICE, ONIONS, AND GOURDS. . 65 

to anoint them, they may anoint them." R Simon "per- 
mitted it in trees because it is allowable in the usual cul- 
ture of the trees." 

6. Men may not i)lant trees, make layers, or engraft 
them, on the eve of the Sabbatical year, less than thirty 
days before new year's day. And if one plant them, or 
make layers, or engraft them, they must be rooted out. 
Babbi Judah said, " every graft which does not cohere in 
three days has no more cohesion." Eabbi Jose and E. 
Simon said " in two weeks." 

7. Rice, and millet, and poppy, and simsim,^ which have 
taken root before new year's day, must be tithed for the 
past year, and are allowed for use in the Sabbatical year ; 
otherwise they are forbidden in the Sabbatical year, and 
must pay tithes for the following year. 

8. R. Simon of Shezur said, " Egyptian beans which are 
sown at first for seed are reckoned like them." B. Simon 
said, " the large lentils are reckoned like them." R. Eliezer 
said, "the large lentUs which put forth pods before New 
Year's day are also reckoned like them." 

9. " Onions, not for seed, and Egj^tian beans, from which 
water is withheld thirty days before new year's day, must 
pay tithes for the past year, and they are allowed for use in 
the Sabbatical year. Otherwise they are forbidden in the 
Sabbatical year, and must be tithed for the coming year, and 
80 also (the produce) of a rain-field^ from which the water of 
irrigation is withheld on two occasions." The words of R. 
Maier. But the Sages say " three." 

10. " The gourds which stand over for seed ?" " If they 
dry up before new year's day and are unfit for human food, 
it is lawful to let them remain on the Sabbatical year. 
Otherwise it is forbidden to let them stand over on the 
Sabbatical year. Their buds are forbidden in the Sab- 
batical year. But they may be sprinkled with white dust."* 
The words of R. Simon. Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, 

^ linseed (t). the permission to sprinkle with water a 

' Rain-field means a field irrigated "white" or com field in which the 

with rain water. gourds are growing. 
* Some snppoae the meaning to be, ; 

f 


66 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. T*I.jrm 

"forbade them." Men may irrigate rice in the Sabbatical 
year. Kabbi Simon said, " but they must not cut its leaves." 


CHAPTER III. 

1. How long may men bring out dung to the beap t" 
" Till the time comes for stopping work," The words of E. 
Maier. R. Judah said, " till ita fertility' dry out." R. 
Josi said. " till it hardens into a lump." 

2. " How much may men manure ? " " As much as three 
times three heaps for fifty cubits square of ten times ten ass 
panniers, each containing a letech.* They may increase the 
jinnniers, but they must not increase the heaps." Rabbi 
Simon said " also the heaps." 

3. A man may make for his field three times three heaps 
to the fifty cubits square. " Fur more than these he must 
excavate the earth." The words of R. Simon. But the 
Sages " forbid it, till he sink the heaps three handbreadtha, 
or till he raise them three above the earth." A man may 
keep his manure in store. Rabbi Maier " forbade it till he 
sink it three handbreadths, or till he raise it three." If ha 
have only a little, he may increase it and proceed in bis 
work. Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah, " forbade it till he 
sink the manure three handbreadths, or raise it three, or till 
he place it on a rock." 

4. " He who stables his cattle in his field ?" " He may 
make a pen twice fifty cubits square. He may remove 
three sides and leave the middle one. It follows that he 
has a stable four times fifty cubits square." Rabbi Simon, 
the son of Gamaliel, said " eight times fifty cubits square." 
■■ If his whole field were four times fifty square cubits t" " He 
should leave a little space because of the observant eye, and 


' The word tninaliiteci "fertility" 
meanB literally " sweetnes*. " Soino 
kpply these wards to Ihe dung out of 
vtiich the moisture baa "dried out," 
■nd it is tben only reckoned as earth. 
Othen apply them to the groimd which 


■ icut its fertility (swectuew) for want 
nia (Job. iii. 33). The mconlos 
that no idvanbige mant be gained tima 
in the approaching SablMtJcal year. 

' About 36^ gailona. 


SELECTIONS. QUARRIES AND TERRACES. 67 

he may remove the manure of his cattle from the pen and 
put it into the middle of his field, as men usually manure." 

5. A man may not open a quany in the beginning of 
the Sabbatical year in his field, uidess there be ah'cady in 
it three heaps of stones measuring three cubits l)y tliree 
cubits, and in height three cubits, counting twenty-seven 
stones in each heap. 

6. A fence composed of ten stones each, of weight suffi- 
cient for two men, may be removed. " If the fence measure 
ten handbreadths ?" " Less than this he may clear off, but 
he must leave it a handbreadth high over the groimd." 
These words only speak of his own field. But from his neigh- 
bour's field he may take away what he pleases. These words 
speak of the time when one did not begin the work on the 
eve of the Sabbatical year ? " But if one begin on the eve of 
the Sabbatical year?" " He may take away what he pleases." 

7. Stones shaken by the plough, or those covered and 
afterwards exposed, if there be amongst them two of a 
burden for two men, may be removed. He who removes* 
stones from his field may remove the upper (ones),^ but he 
must leave those touching the earth. And so also from a 
heap of rubbish, or a heap of stones, one may take away the 
upper part, but must leave that which touches- the earth. 
If there be beneath them a rock, or stubble, they may be 
removed. 

8. Men must not build terraces on the face of the hills 
on the eve of the Sabbatical year, when the rains have 
ceased, because that is preparation for the Sabbatical year. 
But one may build them in the Sabbatical year, when the 
rains have ceased, because that is prepamtion for the close 
of the Sabbatical year. And men must not strengthen them 
with mortar, but they may make a slight wall. Every stone 
which they can reach ^ with their hands and remove, they 
may remove. 

^ ue. Stones lying on the top of ' t.r. From the outride of tbe bound - 

other itones. ary wall, 08 in like manner his ears of 

* The femoral of stones " touching " com might be plucked. An answer to 

the earth might loosen it, and become envious remarks that he was preparing 

a kind of cultlTation. for cnltivation (Jer. Tal.) 


68 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmud 

9. " Shoulder stones may come from every place, and the 
contractor may bring them from every place. And these 
are shoulder stones, every one which cannot be carried in one 
hand." The words of E. Maier. Eabbi Jos^ said, " shoulder 
stones, commonly so named, all that can be carried, two, 
three, upon the shoulder." 

10. He who builds a fence between his own and public 
property may sink it down to the rock. " What shall he 
do with the dust ?" " He may heap it up on the public 
property, and benefit it." The words of R Joshua. R 
Akiba said, " as we have no right to injure public property, 
so we have no right to benefit it." " What shall he do with 
the dust ? " . " He may heap it up in his own field like 
manure, and so also when he digs a well, or a cistern, or a 
cave." 


CHAPTEE IV. 

1. In olden times they used to say a man may gather 
wood, stones, and grass in his own (field), just as he may 
gather that which is greater out of his neighbour's field. 
When transgressors increased, a rule was made that this one 
should gather from that one, and that one from this one, 
without benefit ; and it is unnecessary to say that one could 
not promise victuals to those who gathered. 

2. A field cleared of thorns may be sown in the close of 
the Sabbatical year. If it be tilled or manured by cattle, it 
must not be sown in the close of the Sabbatical year. " If 
a field be twice ploughed ?"^ The school of Shanmiai say, 
"its fruit must not be* eaten in the Sabbatical year." But 
the school of Hillel say, " it may be eaten." The school of 
Shammai say, " they must not eat its fruit on the Sabbatical 
year, if (the owner of it have) benefit therefrom." But 
the school of Hillel say, " men may eat it whether there be 

^ Twice ploughed implies the pay- Sabbatical year. So long as a foe could 

ment of tribute when the land was be resisted, it was not cultivated (1 Mac. 

under foreign rule. Its cultivation vi. 49). 
was allowed for this purpose dniing the 


SELKCTIONB. 


OLIVE TRE?S. 


69 


or be not benefit." R Jurlah aoid, "the words are con- 
trary ; that which is permitted by the school of Shaimuai ia 
restricted by the school of HiUeL" 

3. Men may contract for cultivat«d fields from Gentiles 
on the Sabbatical year, but not from laraelites. And they 
may strengthen the hands of the Gentiles on the Sabbatical 
year, but not the hands of Israelites. And in saluting 
(Jentiles they may ask after their peace for the sake of 
peace,' 

4. " If one thins olive trees ?" The school of Shammai 
say, " only cut them down," and the school of Hillel say, " one 
may root them out ;" but they both agree that for smoothing 
the earth the trees must be cut down. " What is meant by 
thinning ?" " Removing one or two." " What ia meant by 
smoothing the earth ?" " Removing three trees each by the 
Ride of the other." "How is this understood ?" "That one 
may root them out not only of his own field, but also when 
smoothing down the field of his neighbour." 

5. " He who cleaves olive trees must not fill in the vacuum 
with earth ; but he may cover it over i^-ith stones or stubble. 
He who cuts down trunks of sycamore must not fill in the 
vaciiiim M-ith earth, but he may cover it over with stones or 
stubble. Men must not cut down a young sycamore in the 
Sabbatical year, because that is labour. R. Judah said, " if 
as it is usually done it is forbidden : but one may allow it 
to be ten haudbreadths high, or cut it just above the ground." 
"He who lops off vine tendrils, and cuts reeds ?" R Jose 
the Galilean said, " he must leave them an handbreadth 
high." Rabbi Akiba said, " he may cut them as it is usual 
with an axe, or sickle, or saw, or with whatever he pleases." 
"A tree that is spht ?" "Men may bind it round in the 
Sabbatical year, not that it may cohere, but that it^ fissure 
may not extend." 

7- " From what time may the fruits of trees in the Sab- 
batical year be eaten ? " " Unripe fniits, when they are 
bvC(>miug transparent, may be eaten with a piece of bread in 
the field. When they are mellow, they may be gathered 


70 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmud 

into the house ; and so also with all like them." During 
the remainder of the seven years their tithes must be paid. 

8. The sour grapes in which there is juice may be eaten 
with a piece of bread in the field. Before they rot they 
may be gathered into the house, and so also with all like 
them. During the remainder of the seven years their tithes 
must be paid. 

9. " Olives from which men have collected the fourth of 
a log^ of oil to the seah ?"^ " They may be crushed and eaten 
in the field." When men can collect from them half a log, 
they may be pounded and used for anointing in the field. 
When those have been collected which have attained a third 
of their size they may be pounded in the field, and gathered 
into the house, and so also with all like them. During 
the remainder of the seven years their tithes must be paid. 
But for the rest of all fruits of trees, as are their seasons for 
the laws of tithes, so are their seasons for the laws of the 
Sabbatical year. 

10. "From what time may men not cut trees in the 
Sabbatical year ?" The school of Shammai say, " every tree 
when it shoots forth." The school of Hillel say, " the locust 
trees when they put forth their curling tendrils, and the 
vines when they form berries, and the olives when they 
flower. And the rest of the trees when they shoot fortL" 
But it is permitted to cut all trees, when they come to the 
season, for tithes. " How much fruit should be in the olive 
tree to prevent its being cut down?" "A quarter cab." 
Eabban Gamaliel said, " the whole depends on the size." 

CHAPTER V. 

1. The Sabbatical year of white figs^ is the second after 
the Sabbatical year, because they produce in three years. 
Eabbi Judah said, " the Sabbatical year of the Persian figs is 

^ A log held the contents of six posed to be the fruit which tempted 

eggshells. Eve. The decision in the text assumes 

* A seah held about the third of a that the trees began to bud in the Sab- 
bushel, batical year, and that the fruit would 

'Lit. ''daughters of the pit." not be ripe for three years. 
"Adam's apples," (Jer. Tal.) Sup- 


SELEcnox8. ESCHALOTS. 71 

the dose of the Sabbatical year, because they produce in 
two years.** The Sages replied to him, " they only said white 

figs." 

2. " If one store eschalots in tlie Sabbatical year ? " E. 

Alaier said, '' there must be not less than two seahs,^ in height 
three handbreadths, and over them an handbreadth of dust." 
But the Sages say, ''not less than four cabs, in height an 
handbreadth, and an handbreadth of dust over them, and 
they must be stored in a place where men tread." - 

3. "Eschalots over which the Sabbatical year has passed?" 
Babbi Eleazar said, " if the poor have gathered the leaves they 
are theirs ; but if not, the owner must reckon with the poor." 
R Joshua said, " if the poor have gathered the leaves, they 
are theirs; but if not, the poor cannot reckon with the 
owner." 

4. ** Eschalots of the eve of the Sabbatical year which 
have entered on the Sabbatical year, and summer onions, 
and also dye ^ plants of the best ground ? " The school of 
Shammai say, "they are to be rooted out with wooden 
spades." But the school of Hillel say, " with metal axes." 
But they both agree with regard to dye plants on rocky 
ground, that they are to be rooted out with metal axes. 

6. " From what time is it allowed to buy eschalots on 
the departure of the Sabbatical year?" R JudaJi said, "off 
hand;" but the Sages say, "when the new ones become 
plenty." 

6. These are the implements which the farmer is not 
permitted to sell in the Sabbatical year — the plough Avith 
all its implements, the yoke, the shovel, and the goad. But 
he may sell the hand-sickle, and the harvest-sickle, and the 
waggon, with aU its implements. This is the rule : " all 
implements, the use of which may be misapplied for trans- 
gression, are forbidden ; but if they be (i)artly for tilings) 
forbidden and (partly for things) allowed, they are per- 
mitted." 

7. The potter may sell five oil-jugs, and fifteen winc- 

» Twelve CM\m. ' **.Puah, for dyeing red " (?) 

* To pnmnt thdr growth. 


72 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmttd 

jugs, because it is usual to collect fruits from the free pro- 
perty. And if one bring more than these, it is allowed, 
and he may sell them to idolaters in the land, and to 
Israelites out of the land. 

8. The school of Shammai say, '' a man must not sell a 
ploughing heifer on the Sabbatical year ; " but the school of 
Hillel allow it, "because the buyer may slaughter her." 
He may sell fruits in the time of sowing, and may lend 
another man his measure, even if he know that the other 
man have a threshing-floor, and he may change money for 
him, even if he know that he have labourers. But if it be 
openly declared, all is forbidden. 

9. A woman may lend to her companion on the Sab- 
batical year, even when she is suspicious, a flour-sieve or a 
grain-sieve, and an hand-mill and an oven; but she is 
neither to pick the wheat nor grind it with her. A woman 
of a special religious society may lend to the wife^ of an 
ordinary man a flour-sieve, or a grain-sieve, and may pick 
wheat, or grind it, or sift it, with her. But when she (the 
wife of an ordinary man) pours in the water, she (a woman 
of a special religious society) must not touch the flour (to 
knead it) with her, lest she strengthen the hands of a trans- 
gressor. And all these things were not said save for the sake 
of peace. And we may strengthen the hands of idolaters in 
the Sabbatical year, but not the hands of Israel; and in 
salutation we may ask after their peace, for the sake of peace. 


CHAPTER VI. 

1. Three countries (are included) in the laws of the 
Sabbatical year. In all the possessions of those who 
returned from Babylon — ^from the (border) of the land of 
Israel and to Cezib,* we may not eat cultivated fruit, and we 
may not cultivate the ground. And in all the possessions 
of those who came up from i^ypt from Cezib,^ and to the 

^ This pennission has reference to certain laws with regard to l^al deanness. 

' Achxib ; ^kxiippa, near Acca. 


8ELKCTI0K8. CULTIVATION. 73 

river of Egypt, and to the Amana,^ we may eat cultivated 
fruits, but wo may not cultivate the ground. From the 
river of Eg3rj)t, and from the Amana to the interior, we may 
eat the fruits and cultivate the ground. 

2. Men may labour in that which is separated from the 
ground in Syria, but not in that which is attached to the 
ground. They may tliresh, and shovel, and tread out, and 
make sheaves, but they must not reap the grain nor glean the 
grapes, nor beat the olivnes. This is the rule ; said Rabbi 
Akiba, " all things similar to that which is allowed in the 
land of Israel, men may do in Syria." 

3. " Onions upon wiiich fell rain and they sprouted ?" 
" If the leaves on them be dark, they are forbidden ; if 
green, they are allowed." Eabbi Chanina, the son of Anti- 
gonus, said, " if they can be pulled up by their leaves they 
are forbidden ; and contrariwise if it happened so in the 
close of the Sabbatical year, they are allowed." 

4. " From what time may men buy greens at the close 
of the Sabbatical year ? " " From the time that similar 
yoimg ones are produced. If the earlier ones are prema- 
turely ripened, then the later ones are allowed." Eabbi ^ 
allowed greens to be bought off-hand at the close of the 
Sabbatical year. 

5. Men must not export oiP wliich is only to be burned, 
nor fruits of the Sabbatical year, from the Land to lands 
abroad. Said Rabbi Simon, " I expressly heard that they 
may be exported to Syria, but that they must not be ex- 
ported to lands abroad." 

6. Men must not import a heave-ofiering from abroad 
into the land. Said Rabbi Simon, " I expressly heartl that 
they may import it from Syria, but that they must not im- 
port it from lands abroaxl." 


' Some consider this to be tlio ' Rnhbi Jiulah tlie Holy, called ouly 
Abuia : othern read Amnum, and try Rabbi })y way of ciuiiieuce. 
to identify it with Mount Hor. ^ i.e. Deiilod oil of the heave offer- 

ing, etc. 


74 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmtd 


CHAPTER VIL 

1. The Sages stated an important rule: "In the Sab- 
batical year, everything eaten by man and eaten by beast, * 
and a kind of dye-stuff, and whatever cannot remain in the 
ground, to them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and 
to their value the laws of the Sabbatical year apply. They 
are to be cleared off from being private property, and their 
price is to be cleared off from being private property."^ 
"And which are these?" "The leaves of the deceitful 
scallion, and the leaves of mint, succory, and cresses, and 
the leek, and the milk-flower."* "And what is eaten by 
beasts?" "Thorns and thistles and a kind of dye-stuff, 
spitouts of indigo and madder. To them the laws of the 
Sabbatical year apply, and to their price the laws of the 
Sabbatical year apply. They are to be cleared off from 
being private property, and their price is to be cleared off 
from being private property." 

2. And again, the Sages stated another rule ; "All which 
is not eaten by man nor eaten by beasts, and a kind of dye- 
stuff, and whatever remains in the ground, to them the 
laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their price the 
laws of the Sabbatical year apply, but they are not to be 
cleared off from being private property, nor is their price to 
be cleared off from being private property." " And which 
are these?" "The root of the deceitful scallion, and the 
root of the mint, and scorpion grass,' and the bulbs of the 
milk-flower, and the spikenard, and a kind of dye-stuff, the 
dye-plant, and the wormwood, — to them the laws of the 
Sabbatical year apply, and to their price the laws of the 
Sabbatical year apply. They are not to be cleared off from 
being private property, nor is their price to be cleared off 
from being private property." Rabbi Maier said, "their 
prices are to be cleared off from being private property till 
new year's day." The Sages said to him, " if they are not 

1 i.e. They become common pro- " Perhaps "theater of Bethlehem. " 
perty, and are to be depastured by 'A spiral grass growing on the palm 
cattle (Lev. xxv. 7). tree (?). 


SKLEcnoN-s. BUYING AND SELLING. 75 

to be cleared off from being private property, it is immaterial 
about their prices." 

3. "The peelings and flower of the pomegranate, the 
shells and kernels of nuts ?" " To them the laws of the Sab- 
Imtical year apply, and to their prices the laws of the 
Sabbatical year apply." Tlie dyer may dye for himself, but 
he must not dye for pay, because men must not trade in 
fruits of the Sabbatical year, nor in the firet-bom, nor in 
heave-offerings, nor in carcases, nor in that which is torn, 
nor in abominations, nor in creeping things. And one must 
not buy greens of the field and sell them in the market. 
But one may gather them, and his son may sell them on 
his account. He may, however, buy for himself, and he is 
aUowed to sell what is superfluous. 

" He bought a first-bom animal for a feast for his son, or 
for a holiday, and has no need of it ?" "He is allowed to 
sell it" 

4. "Hunters of wild animals — birds and fishes — ^who 
chanced to find sorts that are unclean ?" "It is allowed to 
sell them." R Judah said, " if a man become possessed of 
them in his ordinary way, he may buy and sell them, 
excepting that such shall not be his practice." But the 
Sages " disallow them." 

5. "The shoots of vines and of the locust-trees ?" "To 
them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their 
prices the laws of the Sabbatical year aj)ply." They are to 
be cleared off from being private property, and their prices 
are to be cleared off from being private property. The 
shoots of the oak, and the nuts,^ and the blackberries ?" 
** To them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, and to their 
prices the laws of the Sabbatical year apply." They are not 
to be cleared off from being private property, and their 
prices are not to be cleared off from being private property. 
But their leaves must be cleared away to become public 
property, as they fall down from their stems.* 

6. " The rose and the carnation and the balsam and the 
chestnut ?" " To them the laws of the Sabbatical year apply, 

> Arabic, FAttftk. Pistachio nuts. ' See Chap. ix. 0. 


76 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. talmitd 

and to their prices the laws of the Sabbatical year apply." 
E. Simon said, " there is no Sabbatical year for the balsam, 
because it has no fruit." 

7. " A new Sabbatical rose which one steeped in old oil ?" 
" One may pick out the rose." " But an old rose in new 
oil ?" " One is bound to clear it off from being private prQr 
perty." " New locust fruit which one steeped in old wine, 
and old (fruit) in new (wine) ? " " Men are bound to clear 
them off from being private property." This is the rule : 
everything which produces taste one is bound to clear oflF 
from being private property, sorts that are different and sorts 
that are the same, however little they be. The laws of the 
Sabbatical year disallow however little of its own sort, and 
in different sorts that which produces taste.^ 


CHAPTER VIII. 

1. The Sages stated an important rule for the Sabbati- 
cal year : — " of all that is only fit for man's food a plaster 
may not be made for man, and it is needless to say for 
beast. And of all that is not fit for man's food a plaster 
may be made for man, but not for beast." And all that is 
not fit either for man's food or beast's food, if one consider 
it as food for man or food for beast, the Sages impose on it 
the inconveniences of the laws relating to man and the in- 
conveniences of the laws relating to beast. If one, however, 
consider it as wood, it is reckoned as wood ; for example, 
the savory and the hyssop and the laurel. 

2. Produce of the Sabbatical year is given for food, for 
drink, and for anointing, to eat the thing which it is usual 
to eat, and to anoint with what^ it is usual to anoint with. 
One may not anoint with wine or vinegar. But one may 
anoint with oiL And so is it likewise with the heave- 
offering and second tithe. The laws of the Sabbatical year 
are more convenient for them, because it is permitted to light 
a candle made from them. 

1 This refers to the examples already given of a rose in oil, or locnst fmit in wine. 


SELECTIONS. 


MONEY. 77 


3. Men most not sell the fruita of the Sabbatical year, 
neither by measure, nor by weight, nor by count. Neither 
may they sell figs by counting, nor greens by weight. The 
school of Shammai say, " nor in bunches." But the school 
of Hillel say, " that which it is usual to make in bunches in 
the house men may make in bimches in the market ; for 
example, cresses and the milk flower." 

4. If one said to a labourer, " here ! take this aisar^ and 
gather greens for me to-day ?" "His hire is allowed." "Gather 
me for it greens to-day ? " " His hire is forbidden." If one 
take from the baker a cake for a pundion* (saying), " when 
I will gather greens of the field I will bring them to you ?" 
"It is allowed." "If one take bread from the baker in 
silence ?" " He must not pay him from money of the Sab- 
batical year, because men must not pay a debt with money 
of the Sabbatical year." 

5. Men must not give money of the Sabbatical year to 
a well-digger, nor to a bath-keeper, nor to a barber, nor to 
a skipper, but one may give it to a well-digger for drink, 
and to aU persons one may give a gratuitous present. 

6. Men may not dry figs of the Sabbatical year in the 
usual place, but one may dry them in a waste place. They 
must not tread grapes in a wine-press, but they may tread 
them in a kneading-trough. And they must not put olives 
into the oil-press with the stone over them, but they may 
pound them aild put them into a small press. Sabbi Simon 
said^ " one may also grind them in the house of the oil-press 
and put them into the small press. 

7. Men must not boil greens of the Sabbatical year in 
oil of the heave-offering, lest they take it for uses that are 
forbidden. R Simon "allowed it." And the very last 
thing (in a series of exchanges) partakes of the laws of the 
Sabbatical year ; but the fruit itself (first exchanged) is for- 
bidden. 

8. Men must not buy servants, ground, or an unclean 
beast, with money of the Sabbatical year ; but if they buy 
them, they must eat ' as much as their value. They must 

^ AJmt, ft edn worth StVth faithiBgJi. * Pnndion, t coin worth 1^ 
* Of the frnitf of the Sebhetical year. 


78 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. Talmud 

not bring for an offering the two pigeons of one with an 
issue, or the two pigeons after childbirth bought with money 
of the Sabbatical year. And if they bring them, they must 
eat ^ as much as their value. They must not anoint vessels 
with oil of the Sabbatical year. But if they anoint them, 
they must eat ^ as much as their value. 

9. " A skin which one anointed with oil of the Sabbatical 
year ?" Eabbi Eleazar said, " it must be burned." But the 
Sages say, " one must eat ^ as much as its value." The Sages 
said before Rabbi Akiba it was a saying of Rabbi Eleazar, 
" a skin smeared with oil of the Sabbatical year must be 
burned." He said to them, " Hush ! I cannot tell you what 
Rabbi Eleazar said about it." 

10. And again, the Sages said in his presence, it was a 
saying of Rabbi Eleazar,^ "he who eats the bread of 
Samaritans is as one who eats swine-flesh." He said to 
them, " Hush ! I cannot teU you what Rabbi Eleazar said 
about it." 

11. "A bath which was heated with stubble or straw of 
the Sabbatical year ?" " It is allowed to wash in it." " But 
if one confer honour (on the bath) ?" " He should not wash 
in it." 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. The rue, and the sorrel with spreading leaves, and 
the wild savory, the coriander of the mountains, and the 
parsley of the marshes, and the rocket of the desert^ are free 
from tithes ; and they may be bought from all men in the 
Sabbatical year, because nothing like them is legally guarded. 
Rabbi Judah said, " the sprouts of the mustard are allowed, 
because transgressors are not suspected for taking them 
from a guarded place." Rabbi Simon said, " all vegetables 
that sprout again are allowed, excepting the sprouts of cab- 
bage, because there is not their like amongst the greens of 
the field." But the Sages say, " whatever sprouts again is 
forbidden." 

^ Of the fruits of the Sabbatical year. 
' There are varioiu Babbia of this name, spelt in different ways, mentioned in 
the Talmud. 


sfXEcnoNs. PUBLIC PROPERTY. 79 

2. There are three countries to be public property in the 
Sabbatical year: Judah and beyond Jordan and Galilee; 
and each is divided into three parts : Upper Galilee, Lower 
Galilee^ and the Vale. From the village of Hananiah and 
upwards, every part in which the sycamore tree does not 
grow is Upper Galilee. And from the village of Hananiah 
and lower down, where any sycamore tree grows, is Lower 
Galilee. And the neighbourhood of Tiberias is the Vale. 
And in Judah, the mountains, the plain, and the vale, and 
the plain of Lydda is as the plain of the south. And its 
mountains are as the king's mountain.^ From Bethhoron 
and to the sea is one province. 

3. " And wherefore did the Sages say three countries V* 
** That men might eat during the Sabbatical year in every 
one of them, till the last fruits be finished in it.'' R 
Simon said, "they did not say three countries, they said 
only in JudaL" And all the other coimtries are reckoned 
as the king's mountain ; and all countries are reckoned the 
same for olives and dates. 

4. Men may eat so long as there is any fruit legally 
free, but they must not eat of that which is legally guarded. 
Babbi Jos^ " allowed it, even when guarded." They may 
eat fruit so long as it is found in bird's nests, and such 
fruit as is twice produced in each year, but they must not 
eat of winter fruit. R Judah '' allowed it at all times, if it 
ripened before the summer ended." 

5. "If men pressed three sorts of fruit in one barrel ?" 
R Eliezer said, "they may eat of the first." R Joshua 
said, * even of the last" Eabban Gamaliel said, " everything, 
the species of which is finished growing in the field, its 
species is to be removed from the barrel."^ Sabbi Simon 
said, "aU greens are reckoned as one. They are to be 
cleared away from the house." They may eat of the leeks till 
the teasels have ceased growing in the valley of Beth-Netopha. 

' The king*! mountain is perhaps Ooosh?). It contained Cephar Bish, 

XoODt Ephnim, or the monntain range Cephar Sheclaim, Cephar Dikraia, etc 
over the plain of Sharon. It ia also 

niggeated that it might have been the ' Others read " and the deciaion ia 

mountahu ronad JUijathJearim (Abu as his word." 


80 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. 

6. " He who gathers fresh herbs ?" " He may use them 
till their aap dry out," " And he who binds the dry in 
biuidles ?" " He may use them till the second rain descends." 
" The leaves of reeds and the leaves of vines ?" " They may 
be used till they fall from their sterna." " And he who 
binds the dry in bundles?" "He may use them till the 
second rain descends, Rabbi Akiba said, "they may be 
used by all persons till the second rain descends." 

"7. "Like to this rule is his case who rented a house to 
his neighbour till the rains ?" "This means tQl the aecond 
rain descends." " He who by his vow cannot get assistance 
from his neighbour till the rains ?" "This means till the 
second rain descends," " When may the poor enter into 
the gardens ?"* " When the second rain descenda." " Whrai 
may they use and bum the stubble and straw of the Sab- 
, batical year ?" " When the aecond rain descends." 

^H 8. " A man had fruit of the Sabbatical year, and the 

^^1 time came for clearing it out from his house T' "He may 

^^M divide to every one victuals for three meals ; and the poor 

^^M may eat the fruit after the clearing of it out, but not the 

^H rich," The words of Rabbi Judah, Rabbi Jos^ said, "the poor 

^^M and the rich are alike, they may eat it after it is cleared ont" 

^^M 9. "A man had fruits of the Sabbatical year, whether 

^^M they fell to him by inheritance, or were given to him by 

^^M tP^ ^" ^ Eliezer said, "let them be given to those who 

^^M may eat them," But the Sages say, " the transgressor must 

^^M not profit, but let them be sold to those who may eat them, 

^H aud let their price be divided to every man." " He who 

^^^ eats dough of the Sabbatical year before the heave-offering 

^H be separated from it ?" " He is guilty of death." 

L 


CHAPTER X. 

, The Sabbatical year releases' a loan, whether it I 
with or without a bill The credit of a shop is not released. 

' Th« iKoiid or the "tatt*t'' rain ' Ley, iiiii. 22; Deut, uiv. 10 
(Joel u. 23). cnUed MiUcoah, tallH in 
"pring chieflf during the montlu at ' Deal. iv. 1. 
;h uid ApriL 


SELECTIONS. BORROWING AND LENDING. 81 

But if one made it as a loan, it is released. Babbi Judah 
said, " all the first credit is released, the wages of an hire- 
ling is not released." " But if one made it as a loan ?" " It 
is release*!." Eabbi Jose said, "every work which ceases 
on the Sabbatical year is released ; l)ut that which does not 
cease on the Sabbatical year is not released from payment." 

2. The butcher who slaughtered a heifer (at the end of 
the Sabbatical year), and divided her hetad (for sale on the 
first of the two feast days) of the new year, i-emains a 
debtor; but if he did so in an intercalary month,^ he is 
released (Deut. xv. 1). But if it be not an intercalary month, 
he is not released. He who forced, or enticed, or uttered a 
slander, and every act of the tribunal, have no release. 
" He who lent on security, or delivered his bills to the tri- 
bunal ?" " There is no relejise for him." 

3. The Defence" (for the poor) has no release. This is 
one of the tilings which the old Hillel ruled. When he saw 
that the people refrained irom. mutual loans, and transgressed 
what is written in the law, " Beware that there be not a 
thought in thy wicked heart," ^ etc., Hillel nded tlie Defence. 

4. Tliis is the substance of the Defence, " I hand over to 
you judges such and such men in such a i)lacc, that every 
debt which belongs to me I may collect, whenever I j)lease." 
And the judges or witnesses sealed it below. 

5. The Defence WTitten before the Sabbatical year is 
valid, but afterwards it is disallowed. Bills written before 
the Sabbatical year are disallowed, but afterwards they are 
valid. He who bon-ows from five pei-sons nmst \viite a 
Defence for each of them. If five pei*sons borrow from one, 
he writes but one defence for all of them. 

6. Men must not vmie a Defence save only on ground. "If 
he have none ? " " Tlie lender mtiy piusent liim with however 
little from his own field." " If he had a field in jdedge in 

' Thifl decision supposes the case of * ** The Defence," called Pruzbul 

the month Elal having thirty days, and {vpo<Tfio\i^\ w:is a legal document con- 

the last day to be in the Sabbatical stitutc<l to encourage loans to the 

year ; oonsequently it would not be one poor, and to protect the interests of the 

of the two feast days of the new year, lender. 
which it should have been if the month 

hid been the usual lunar month. ' Deut. xv. 9. 

O 


I 


82 THE SABBATICAL YEAR. TALinn) 

a city ?" " He may write on it the Defence." Eabbi Hnzpith 
said, " a man may write it on the property of his wife ; and 
for orphans on the property of their guardians." 

7. "Beehives?" E. Eliezer said, "they are as ground, 
and men may write on them a Defence, and they contract 
no legal uncleanness in their proper place, but he who takes 
honey out of them on the Sabbath is liable (for a sin-offer- 
ing). The Sages, however, say they are not as ground, and 
men must not writfe on them a Defence, and they do contract 
legal defilement in their place, and he who takes honey out 
of them on the Sabbath is free." 

8. " He who paid his debt on the Sabbatical year ?" " The 
lender must say to him, * I release thee.'" " When he said it 
to him ?" " Even so, he may receive it from him, as is said, 
and this is the manner of the release."^ It is like the slayer 
who was banished to the city of refuge, and the men of the 
city wished to honour him. He must say to them, " I am a 
murderer." They say to him, " Even so." He may receive the 
honour from them,as is said, "and this is the caseof the slayer."* 

9. "He who pays a debt in the Sabbatical year ?" "The 
spirit of the Sages reposes on him."* " He who borrowed 
from a proselyte, when his children* became proselytes with 
him ?" " He need not repay his children." " But if he repay 
them ?" " The spirit of the Sages reposes on him." All move- 
ables become property by acquisition ; but every one who 
keeps his word, THE SPIRIT 

OF THE SAGES 

REPOSES 

ON 

HIM. 

^ Deut zv. 2. ' Deut xix. 4. 19; xztii. ; zzrilL These portioiis were 
' i.e. They are well pleased with him. read by the king or high priest ^m a 
* Money owing to Jewish proselytes wooden platform erected in the Temple. 
was generally repaid, but it was not The king or the high priest nsnaUy 
obligatory to pay it to their heirs, as the read them sitting, ^ng Agrippa, how- 
persons from whom the proselytes came ever, read them standing, and when he 
were no longer in a religions sense their came to the words " l^ou mayst not 
next of kin. set a stranger over thee, which is not 
Note.— At the Feast of Tabernacles thy brother" (Dent xviL 16), "tears 
in the Sabbatical year, the following por- dropped from his eyes." The people 
tions of Scripture were appointed to be then cried ont to encourage him, ** Thou 
read :— Deut i- 1-6 ; vi. 4-8 ; xi. 18- art our brother — thou art our brother" 
22 ; xiv. 22 ; xv. 23 ; xriL 14; xxvi. 12- (Sotah, vii. 8). 


8ELBCTI0X8. REMOVALS. 83 


Treatise III. 

<Dn tte Sabbatf;. 

Remoyals — Work to be avoided — Discussion between the Schools of Shammai 
and Hillel as to what constitutes Work — Work alloweil — Lighting — Eve 
of the Sabbath — Cooking and Hot Water — Retention of Heat — Burdens — 
Ornaments — Principal and Secondary Work. 

CHAPTEli I. 

1. Removals^ on the Sabbath are two. Of these removals 
four are inside a place. And there are two other removals, 
of which four are outside a place. "How?" "A beggar 
stands without, and the master of the house within. The 
beggar reached his hand w^ithin, and gave something into 
the hand of the master of the house, or took something from 
it and brought it out ? " " The beggar is guilty,- and the 
master of the house is free." "The master of the house 
reached his hand outside and gave something into the hand 
of the beggar, or took something from it and brought it in ?" 
" The master of the house is guilty, but the beggar is free." 
" The beggar reached his hand within, and the master of the 
house took something from it, or gave something into it, and 
the beggar brought it out ?" " Both are free." " The master 
of the house reached his hand without, and tlie beggar took 
something from it, or gave something into it, and the master 
brought it in ?" " Both axe free." 

2. A man must not sit before the barber near to evening 
prayer,' until he has prayed. He must not enter a batli, nor 
a tannery, nor eat, nor judge. " But if they began ?" " Tliey 
need not cease." They may cease to read the "Hear,"* etc., 
but they must not cease to pray. 

3. A tailor must not go out with liis needle near dusk,^ 

' From private to paUic property. ' On Friday evening 

'OfdMth. « Deut yl 4. 


84 


THE 8ABEATH. 


lest he forget and go (afterwards). Nor a scribe go out 
with his pen. Nor may one search his garments. Nor 
shall one read at the light of the lamp. In truth they said, 
" the teacher may overlook when chiltlreu are reading, but he 
himself shall not read." Similar to him, one with au issue 
shall not eat with her who has an issue, because of the 
custom of transgression. 

4. And these following are from the decisions which they 
mentioned of the upper chamber of Hananiah, the son of 
Hezeldah, the son of Gorion, when the Sages went up to 
visit him. The school of Shammai was counted, and was 
more numerous than the school of Hillel. And eighteen 
matters were determined on that day. 

6. The school of Shammai said, " they must not soak 
ink, nor paint«, nor vetches, unless they be sufficiently soaked 
wliile it is yet day," But the school of Hillel allow it. 

6. The school of Shammai said, " they must not pnt 
bundles of flax inside the oven, except it be suflicieutlj 
steamed while it is yet day, nor wool into the boiler except 
it imbibe sufficient dye in the eye of day. But the school 
of Hillel allow it. The school of Shammai said, " they must 
not spread nets for bea-sts, nor birds, nor fishes, except they l* 
netted while it is yet day." But the school of Hillel allow it 

7. The school of Shammai said, " they must not sell to a 
stranger, and they must not lade his ass with him, and they 
must not load on him, except they have sufficient time to 
reach a near place hcjore the Sahbaik. But the school of 
Hillel allow it 

8. The school of Shammai said, "they must not give 
skins to a tanner, nor articles to a strange laundress ; except 
they can be sufficiently done while it is yet day." But all 
of tiiem the school of Hillel allow " with the sun." 

9. Said Rabbi Simon, the son of Gamaliel, " the house of 
my father used to give wlute articles to a strange laundress 
three days before the Sabbath." But both schools agree 
that " they may carry ' beams to the oil-press and logs to 
the wine-press." 

* Though by tbeir weight tbej continae to pteta ont oil or wmo on the SabbatJi. 


J 


BBUHTIOSB. LIGHTING LAMPS. 

10." They most not fry flesli, onions, and eggs ; except 
they be sufiiciently fried while it is yet day. They must 
not put breat^l in the oven at dui^k, nor a cake on coals, 
except its faee be sufficiently crusted while it is yet day," 
Babbi Eliezer said, " tliat ita under side be aufficiently 
crusted." 

11. "They may hang up the passover' offering in an 
oven at dusk. And they may take a light from the wood 
pile in the house of burning.^ And in the suburbs "when 
the fire has sufficiently lighted the greater part," Rabbi 
Jmlah says, "from the coals however little" (Idndled before 
the Sabbath). 

CHAPTER II. 

1. " With what may they light (lamps) on the Sabbath ?" 
"And with what may they not light?" "They may not 
light with cedar moss, nor with unhackled flax, nor with 
floss silk, nor with a wick ot willow, nor with a wick of 
netllea, nor with weeds from the surface of water, nor with 
pitch, nor with was, nor with castor oil, nor with the defiled 
oil of heave-offering, nor with the tail, nor with the fat." 
Nabam the Median said, " they may light with cooked fat." 
Bm the Sages say, " whether cooked or uncooked, they must 
not light with it." 

2. They must not light with the defiled oil of the heave- 
ftffering on a holiday. Rabbi Ishmael said, " they must not 
light with pitch dregs for the honour of the Sabbath." But 
the Sages allow all oils, " with sesame oil, with nut oil, with 
radish oil, with fish oil, with colocyiith oil, with pitch drega 
anil naphtha." Rabbi Tarphon said, "they must only light 
with olive oil." 

3. "They must not hght with anything that grows from 
wood, except flax And all that grows from wood does not 
contract the uncleanness of tents,* except fla.x. " A wick 
of cloth folded but not sijiged?" Rabbi Eliezer says, "it 


86 THE SABBATH. 


TALMUD 


contracts imcleanness, and they must not light it.*' Eabbi 
Akiba says, " it is clean, and they may light it." 

4. A man must not perforate an eggshell, and fill it with 
oil, and put it on the mouth of the lamp, because it drops, 
even though it be of pottery. But Eabbi Judah "allows it." 
" But if the potter joined it at first ?" " It is allowed, since it 
is one vessel." A man must not fill a bowl of oil, and put 
it by the side of the lamp, and put the end of the wick into 
it because it imbibes. But Eabbi Judah " allows it" 

5. "Whoever extinguishes the lamp because he fears 
the Gentiles, or robbers, or a bad spirit, or that the sick may 
sleep?" "He is free." "He spares the lamp?" "He 
spares the oil ?" "He spares the wick ?" "He is guilty." 
But Eabbi Jos(5 frees in all cases except the wick, because 
" it makes coal." 

6. For three transgressions women die in the hour of 
childbirth : when they neglect times, and the dough ofifering,^ 
and lighting the Sabbath lamp. 

7. Three things are necessary for a man to say in his 
house on the eve of the Sabbath at dusk. " Have you taken 
tithes ?" " Have you prepared erub ? "^ " Light the lamp." 
" It is doubtful if it be dark or not ?"^ " They must not tithe 
that which is certainly untithed, and they must not baptize 
vessels, and they must not light the lamps. But they may 
take tithes of the doubtful heave-ofifering, and prepare erub, 
and cover up hot water." 


CHAPTEE III 

1. ** A cooking oven which was heated with stubble or 
brushwood ?" " They may place on it cookery." " With oil- 
dregs and with wood ?" " They must not place it, till the 
coals are raked out, or ashes put in." The school of 
Shammai say, " hot water, but not cookery." But the school 

* Num. XV. 20. piece of dough which is common pro- 

* i.e. Have you so joined houses that perty. 
are apart that they may be counted as 

one on the Sabbath for carrying articles ' When three stars are seen, it is 
etc. It is done by persons blessing a dark. 


MLEcriOKs. HEATING. 87 

of Hillel say, "hot water and cookery." The school of 
Shammai say, " they may take it off, but not place it back." 
But the school of Hillel say, " they may place it back." 

2. " A cooking-stove, which was heated with stubble or 
brushwood ?*' "They must not place anything either inside 
or upon it*' " A bake oven, which was heated with stubble 
or brushwood ?" " It is as a cooking oven." " With oil-dregs 
or with wood ? " " It is as a cooking stove." 

3. They must not put an egg beside a boiler, lest it be 
boiled. And they must not wrap it in towels. But Eabbi 
JoQ& allows it. And they must not hide it in sand, or 
in the dust of the roads, lest it be roasted. 

4. It happened that the men of Tiberias arranged, and 
introduced a pipe of cold water into a canal of the hot 
springs. The Sages said to them, " If it be Sabbath, it is as 
if hot waters were heated on Sabbath, they are forbidden 
for washing and drinking. But if on a holiday, as if hot 
waters were heated on a holiday, they are forbidden for 
washing but allowed for drinking." " A skillet with attached 
brazier ?" " If one rake out the coals (on Friday evening), 
persons may drink its hot waters on Sabbath." "A pun 
with double bottom?" "Even though the coals are raked 
out^ they must not drink of it." 

5. " The boiler which is set aside (from the fii-e) ? " 
"They must not put into it cold water to be warmed; but 
they may put into it, — or into a cup, — cold water to make 
it lukewann." " A saucepan or an earthen jx)t, which they 
took off boiling ?" " They must not put into it si)ices, but 
they may put them into a bowl or into a plate." I^bbi 
Judah says, " they may put them into all vessels, excepting a 
thing in which there is vinegar or fish-brine." 

6. They must not put vessels under a lamp to catch the 
oil " But if they place them, while it is still day ?" — " It is 
allowed." But they must not use it, l)ecause it is not pur- 
posely prepared (for Sabbath use). Tliey may remove a new 
lamp, but not an old one. • Kabbi Simon says, " all lamjjs 
may be removed, except the lamp lighted for the Sal.)bath." 
They may put a vessel under the lamp to catch sparks, but 
they must not put water int«j il, as it (Quenches. 


88 THE SABBATH. talmud 

CHAPTEE IV. 

1. "With what may they cover up (pots to retain the 
heat) ?" And with what may they not cover them up ?" 
" They may not cover them up with oil-dregs, or dung, or 
salt, or lime, or sand either fresh or dry» or straw, or grape- 
skins, or woollen, or herbs when they are fresh, but they 
may cover up with them when they are dry. They may 
cover up with garments, and fruits, with doves' wings, with 
carpenters' sawdust, and with tow of fine flax." Babbi 
Judah forbids " fine," but allows " coarse." 

2. They may cover up with hides, and remove them, — 
with woollen fleeces, but they must not remove theuL "How 
does one do?" "He takes off the cover, and they fall 
down." Rabbi Eleazar, the son of Azariah, says " the vessel 
is inclined on its side, and he takes them away." " Per- 
haps he took them away and cannot return them ?"^ But 
the Sages say " he may take them away, and return them." 
" He does not cover it, while it is yet day ?" " He must 
not cover it, when it begins to be dark." "He covered 
it, and it opened ?" " It is allowed to cover it again." A 
man may fill the goblet, and put it under the pillow or 
under the bolster (to warm it). 

CHAPTER V. 

1. "With what is a beast led forth, and with what is it 
not led forth V*^ " One may lead forth the camel with a 
head-stall, and the she-camel with a nose-ring, and the 
Lydda^ asses with a bridle, and a horse with a halter, and all 
animals that wear a halter they may lead forth with a halter, 
and they are held with a halter, and, if imclean, they may 
sprinkle water upon them, and baptize them in their places. 

2. The ass one may lead forth with a pack-saddle when 
it is bound on it. Rams go forth tied up. Ewes go forth 

' As that would involve " labour. " difference between what in necessai-y 

and what is a burden. 
'The point to be decided ia the ' Others think " Lybian " asses. 


•BLECTioxa. CATTLE. 89 

with tails bound back, doubled down, or put in a bag. The 
goats go forth bound tightly. Eabbi Jos(5 " forbids all, ex- 
cepting ewes, to have their tails in a bag." Eabbi Judah 
says "the goats go forth bound tightly to dry up their 
udders, but not to guard the milk." 

3. " And with* what must they not go forth ?" "A camel 
most not go forth with a rag bound as a mark to its tail, 
nor fettered, nor with fore-foot tied doubled up, and so with 
the rest of all beasts ; a man must not bind camels one to 
another, and lead them, but he may take their ropes into 
his hand, and hold them, guarding that they be not twisted.^ 

4. One must not bring forth an ass w4th a pack-saddle, 
when it is not tied upon liim h:forc the Sabbath ; nor with 
a bell, even though it be muffled, nor with a ladder^ on its 
throat, nor with a strap on its leg ; nor may cocks and hens 
be led forth with twine or straps on their legs. Nor may 
rams be led forth with a gocart under their tails, nor ewes 
with John wood.® And the calf must not be led forth with 
a muzzle, nor a cow w^ith the skin of the hedgehog,* nor 
with a strap l)etwecn her bonis. The cow* of Eabbi Eleazar, 
the son of Azariah, used to go out with a strap between her 
horns, but not with the will of the Sages. 


CHAPTEE VI. 

1. "With what may a woman go out?" And "with 
what may she not go out ?" " A woman may not go out 
with laces of wool, nor with laces of flax, nor with straps on 
her head, and she cannot baptize herself in them till she 
unloose them ; nor with frontlets, nor temple fillets, unless 
sewn to her cap, nor with a headband, into the public street, 
nor with a golden crown in the form of Jerusalem, nor with 

^ Throngh fear of ]inen and woollen caused them to Hneeze and the ninggotH 

Iwing miz^. Dent. xxii. 11. to fall ofT. 

' Ladder - shaped piece of wood to ''To prevent her being sucked by 

prermt it rubbing its throat if it have reptiles. 
% wan, ' Tlie Oemara my 8, the cow wan liis 

' Wood diMOvered by one John, ncighlmurV, luit aH he did not (dijeit, 

whkh when put into sheep^s nontiilrt, the blame was laid on him. 


90 


THE SABBATH. 


a necklace, nor with nose-rin^, nor with a ring -without a 
seal, nor with a needle without an eye ; but, if she go out, 
she is not guilty of a sin-offering." 

2. A man must not go out with hobnailed sandals,' nor 
with one sandal when there is uo sore on his other foot, nor 
with phylacteries, nor with an amulet unless it be of on 
expert, nor with a coat of mail, nor with a helmet, iior with 
greaves ; hut, if he go out, he is not guilty of a sin-offering. 

3. " A woman must not go out with an eyed needle, nor 
with a signet ring, nor with a spiral head-dress, nor with a 
scent-box, nor with a bottle of musk ; and if she go out she 
is guilty of a ain-nffering." The words of Rabbi Meier. 
But the Sages " absolve the scent-box and tlie bottle of 
musk." 

4. The man must not go out with Bword, nor bow, iior 
aiiield, nor sling, nor lance ; and if he go out he is guilty of a 
Bin-offering. Eabbi Eleazar said, "they are his omamenta." 
But the Sages say, " they are only for shame, as is said, ' And 
they shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their 
spears into pruning hooks : nation shall not lift up sword 
against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.'"' 
Garters are clean, and they may go forth in them ou Sabbath. 
Anklets' contract uncleanness, and they must not go out in 
them on Sabbath. 

6. A woman may go out with plaits of hair whether they 
be her own, or her companion's, or a beast's hair, with 
frontlets and temple fillets, when they are sewn to her cap, 
with a headband or a stranger's curl into the courtyard, witli 
wool in her ear, and wool in her shoe, and wool prepared for 
her separation, with pepper, or with a grain of salt,' or with 
anything which she will put inside her mouth, except that 
she shall not put it in for the first time on the Sabbath, and 
if it fall out she must not put it back. " A false tooth or a 

I Once a Dumber of Jevii took rcrnge ' Isai&h li. 4 ; Uic&h iv, 3. 

In a cave, and hearing some petaons ' Thcae ankleta were a kind of chtin 

paM, whomthej'suppoHedtolieeneniiea, nan] to ineveut membeia o( oetUiu 

tbvy tell on Kuh other vritb their bub- fntiiiUes in J 

nailed aaudali, and beat each other to atridei in walking, 

death. * To cure toothxf 


sELEcnosR. DRESS AND MEDICINE. 91 

tooth of gold ?" Eabbi " aUows it." But the Sages " forbid 
it" 

6. A woman may go out with a coin on a sore foot. 
Little girb may go out with plaits and even splinters in 
their ears. Arab women go out veiled, and Median women 
with mantillas; and so may any one, but, as the Sages have 
said, " according to their custom." 

7. A mantilla may be folded over a stone, or a nut, or 
money, save only that it be not expressly folded for the 
Sabbath. 

8. " The cripple may go out on his wooden leg." The 
woids of Eabbi Meier. But Eabbi Jos(5 forbids it. " But if 
it have a place for receiving rags ?" " It is unclean." His 
crutches cause uncleanness by treading. But they may go 
out with them on the Sabbath, and they may enter with 
them into the Temple court. The chair and crutches (of a 
paralytic) cause uncleanness by treading, and they must not 
go out with them on the Sabbath, and they must not enter 
with them into the Temple court. Stilts^ are clean, but 
they must not go out with them. 

9. The sons may go out with their (father's) girdles. 
And sons of kings with little bells ; and so may any one, but, 
as the Sages have said, " according to their custom." 

10. "They may go out with an egg of a locust,^ and a 
tooth of a fox,* and a nail of one crucified, as medicine."* 
The words of Eabbi Meier. But the Sages say (others read 
the words of Eabbi Jos6 and Eabbi Meier) " it is forbidden 
even on a week day, because of the ways of the Amorites."? 


CHAIT^E VII. 

1. The Sages laid down a great rule for the Sabl)atli : 
Every one who forgets the princix^e of Sabbath, and diil 
many works on many Sabbaths, is only responsible for one 

' Othen timnilate " loasks." fux. For one who slept too much, they 

s To cure ear-ache. used a tooth of a living fox. 

' To cure one who did not sleep * To cure op^e. 

oioiigh they need a tooth of a dead ' Lev. xviii. 3. 


C( 


92 THE SABBATH. talmitd 

sin-ofTering. Every one who knows the principle of Sab- 
bath, and did many works on many Sabbaths, is responsible 
for every Sabbath. Every one who knows that there is 
Sabbath, and did many works on many Sabbaths, is respon- 
sible for every principal work.^ Every one who has done 
many works, springing from one principal work, is only 
responsible for one sin-oflfering." 

2. The principal works are forty, less one — sowing, 
ploughing, reaping, binding sheaves, threshing, winnowing, 
sifting, grinding, riddling, kneading, baking, shearing wool, 
whitening, carding, dyeing, spinning, warping, making two 
spools, weaving two threads, taking out two threads, twist- 
ing, loosing, sewing two stitches, tearing thread for two sew- 
ings, himting the gazelle, slaughtering, skinning, salting, 
curing its skin, tanning, cutting up, writing two letters, 
erasing to write two letters, building, demolishing, quench- 
ing, kindling, hammering, carrying from private to public 
property. Lo, these are principal works — forty, less one. 

3. And another rule the So^ea laid down: "All that is 
worthy of reser\'^ation, and they reserve its like — if they 
carry it out on the Sabbath, they are responsible for a sin- 
ofTering ; and everything which is not worthy of reservation, 
and they do not reserve its like — if they carry it out on the 
Sabbath, none is responsible but the reserver." 

4. Whoever brings out straw — a heifer's mouthful ; hay 
— a camel's mouthful; chafT — a lamb's mouthful; herbs 
— a kid's mouthful; garlic leaves and onion leaves — if 
fresh, the size of a dried fig — if dry, a kid's mouthful ; but 
they must not add one with the other, for they are not 
equal in their measures. Whoever carries out food the size 
of a dried fig, ig guilty of death. And victuals, they may add 
one to another as they are equal in their measures, excepting 
their peels and their kernels, and their stalks and the fine 
and coarse bran. Eabbi Judah says, " excepting the peels 
of lentils, as they may cook them with them." 

* Works are divided into principal secondary works, they regarded them 

and secondary^ or in Rabbinic langoage as one sin, and consequently deserving 

faUitrs and children. And if a man (me punishment, 
does one principal work and twenty 


*^^'^^»8, WORK. 93 


CHAPTEE VIII. 

^. One may bring out wine sufficient for the cup,^ nulk 
s^Jfficient for a gulp, honey sufficient for a bruise, oil suffi- 
cient to anoint a small member, water sufficient to moisten 
the eye-salve, and the rest of all beverages a quarter of a 
log, and whatever can be poured out* a quarter of a log. 
Babbi Simeon says, " all of them by the quarter log." And 
they did not mention these measures save for those who 
reserve them. 

2. " Whoever brings out cord sufficient to make an ear 
for a tub, bulrush sufficient to hang the sieve and the 
riddle ?" Sabbi Judah said, " sufficient to take from it the 
measure of a child's shoe ; paper sufficient to write on it 
the signature of the taxgatherers ; erased paper sufficient to 
wrap round a small bottle of balm — is guilty" (of death). 

3. Leather sufficient for an amulet ; parchment polished 
on both sides, sufficient to write a sign for a door-post; 
vellum sufficient to write on it a small portion, which is in 
phylacteries, that is, "Hear, Israel;" ink sufficient to 
write two letters ; kohl* sufficient to paint one eye. 

4. Bird-lime sufficient to put on the top of a perch ; 
pitch or sulphur to fill a hole ; wax sufficient to fill the 
mouth of a small hole ; brick-clay sufficient to make a mouth 
of a crucible bellows for goldsmiths, — Rabbi Judah says, 
'' sufficient to make a crucible stand ;" bran sufficient to put 
on the mouth of a crucible blow-pipe for goldsmiths ; oint- 
ment sufficient to anoint the little finger of girls, — Rabbi 
Judah says, "sufficient to make the hair grow;" Rabbi 
Nehemiah says, " to freshen the temple." 

5. Bed earth " as the seal of merchants," — the words of 
R Akiba; but the Sages say, ''as the seal of letters;" 
dung and fine sand, " sufficient to manure a cabbage stalk," 
— ^the words of Rabbi Akiba ; but the Sages say, " sufficient 
to manure a leek ;" coarse sand sufficient to put on a full 
lime-hod ; a reed sufficient to make a pen. " But if it be 

^ i.€. One put wine and three parts ' e.g. Foul water. 

' Henna dust for women's eyes. 


94 THE SABBATH. 


TALMUD 


thick or spKt ?" "sufficient to boil with it a hen's egg easy 
(to be cooked) amongst eggs, mixed with oil and put in a 
pan." 

6. A bone sufficient to make a spoon, — Babbi Judah 
said, " sufficient to make the ward of a key ;" glass suffi- 
cient to scrape the top of a shuttle ; a lump of earth or a 
stone sufficient to fling at a bird; Rabbi Eliezer said, 
" sufficient to fling at a beast.*' 

7. " A potsherd ?" " Sufficient to put between two beams," 
— the words of Eabbi Judah ; Rabbi Meier says, " sufficient 
to take away fire with it ;" Rabbi Jos^ says, " sufficient to 
receive in it the fourth of a log." Said Rabbi Meier, 
" Although there is no visible proof of the matter, there is an 
indication of the matter, as is said, " there shall not be found 
in the bursting of it a sherd to take fire from the hearth."^ 
Rabbi Jos6 said to him, " thence is the visible proof, ' or to 
take water out of the pit.'"^ 

^ Isaiah xxx. 14. 

The remaining two-thirds of this treatise are not translated^ 
as they are devoid of interest, and in parts unfit for pvb- 
lication. 


sELEcnoss. SEARCHING FOR LEAVEN. 95 


Treatise IV. 
®n tije $a0!Sober« 

SvarcbiDg for Learen — How Leaven ib to be put away — ReatrictionB with 
rffjard to it — What things make Leaven — Leavening — Work on the Eve 
of the Panover — Trades allowed — Men of Jericho— Hezekiah — The Daily 
Offering — Intention — Slaughter of Passover Offering — Mode of proceeding 
— ^The Passover on a Sabbath — Discnssion between K Akiba and R. 
Eleazar — Roasting the Passover — ^Various contingencies — Hindrances — 
Rules and Directions — How the Passover is to be eaten — Praise and 
Thanksgiving. 

CHAPTER I. 

1 . On the eve of the fourteenth day of Nisan ^ men search 
for leaven by candlelight Every place where men do not 
bring in leaven, there is no need of search. " And wherefore 
do they say, two lines of barrels in the wine cellar ?" " The 
place is meant into which persons bring leaven." The 
school of Shammai say, " two rows in front of the whole 
cellar." But the school of Hillel say, " the two outer lines 
on the top." 

2. People need not suspect, lest perchance the weasel 
have slipped (with leaven) from house to house or from 
place to place. If so, from court to court, from city to city, 
there is no end to the matter. 

3. Rabbi Judah said, "men search on the eve of the 
fourteenth and on the morning of the fourteenth day, and at 
the time of burning it." But the Sages say, " if one did 
not search on the eve of the fourteenth, he must search on 
the foiirteenth ; if he did not search on the fourteenth, he 
must search during the feast ; if he did not search during 
the feast, he must search after the feast ; and whatever re- 

^ NiMn nearly corresponds with the month of March. 


1)6 THE PASSOVER. taimw 

mains, he shall leave well concealed, that tliere be no further 
need of search after it." 

4. Rabbi Meier said, "men may eat it till five o'clock,' and 
bum it at the beginning of six." Kahbi Jndah said, " they 
may eat it till four, and they are in suspense about five, but 
they bum it at the beginning of six." 

5. And again said R Judah, "two loaves of the dis- 
allowed praise-offering were placed on the portico of the 
Temple inelosure ; whilst they were placed there, all the 
people might eat leaven. If one were taken down they were 
in suspense ; they neither ate nor burned it. When both 
were taken down they began to bum it." Eabban Gamaliel 
said, "men may eat ordinary food till four o'clock, and the 
heave-offering till five o'clock, but they burned the leaven at 
six o'clock." 

6. Rabbi Chanina, the deputy of the priesthood, said, 
"from the (first) days of the priesthood the priests did not 
object to bum the flesh rendered legally unclean * with the 
second degree of uncleanneas, with the flesh rendered legally 
unclean with the first degree of uneleanness. Even thoagh ■ 
they should add legal imcleanness to legal uneleanness." 
Rabbi Akiba went further and said, " from the (first) days 
of the priesthood the priests did not object to l^ht the oil 
which was disallowed on the day of a man's baptism (who 
liad been legally unclean), with a candle which was unclean 
with the uneleanness of the dead, even though they should 
add legal imcleanness to legal uneleanness." 

7. Said R. Meier, " from their words we leam that in«i . 
may burn the clean heave-offering of leaven, with that which 
is unclean, on account of the paasover." To him replied 
Rabbi Jos(5, " this is not the conclusion." But Rabbi Eliezer 
and Rabbi Joshua confess " that men should bum each by 
itself." . And the contention is with regard to what is doubt- 
ful, and what is unclean. Because Rabbi Eliezer said, " thou 
shalt bum each by itself." But R. Joshua said, " both nt once." 


II o'clock k.m. To obuin 
puUtion of time, six otaBt ba 
ths boun Dicntionsd io the 


' Whan luicieanneM 
to be onderatoad o 


97 


CHAPTER ir. 

1. The whole time that it is allowed to eat leaven, men 
ntaj feed beasts wth it, and wild animals and fowls, and 
tliey may sell it to a stranger. And they are allowed to 
enjoy it in every way. 'When that season has passed over 
its enjoyment is disallowed, and they must not heat with it 
au oven or a stove. Kabbi Judah said, " tliere is no riddance 
of leaven but by burning." But the Sages say, "also by 
powdering and scattering it to the wind, or casting it into 
the sea." 

2. " The leaven of a stranger, over which the passover 
baa passed ?" "Its enjoyment is allowed." "But of an 
Israelite ?" " Its enjojTiient is disallowed," as is said,' " And 
there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee." 

3. "The stranger who has lent money to an Israelite 
on his leaven 7" " After passover its enjoyment is allowed." 
" And an Israelite who lent money to the stranger on his 
leaven V " Its enjoyment after passover is disallowed." 
" Leaven over which a bnildiug fell ?" " It is as though it 
was cleared away." Babban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, 
" all after which the dog cannot snuff." 

4. " He who has eaten a leavened heave-offering during 
the passover in error V " He must pay its value and a fifth 
ittore." " In presumption ?" " He is free from the payment, 
and from it« value eveo for fueh" * 

5. These are the things by which one can discharge his 
obligation to eat unleavened bread during the passover; 
iHtb cakes made of wheat, and barley, and rye, aud oats, and 
spelt ; and they discharge their obhgation in that of which 
the tithing was doutitfid, and in the first tithe after the 
beave-oHering was separated from it, and in second tithes 
and holy things after their redemption. And the priests 
disGharge their obligation with cakes of dough-offering and 
heave-offering, but not with that which owes first tithes, or 
before the heave-offering was separated from it, nor with 

> Eiod. ziiL 7. ■ ic. Be Is to be put to death torthwitli. 


98 THE PASSOVER. talmud 

that which owes second tithes or holy things before their 
redemption. "The loaves of the praise-ofifering and the 
cakes of the Nazarite ?" " If made for themselves, they do 
not discharge the obligation : if made for sale in the market, 
they discharge the obligation." 

6. And these are the herbs with which one discharges 
his obligation to eat bitter herbs in the passover : — ^lettuce, 
endives, horse-radish, liquorice, and coriander. The obliga- 
tion can be discharged whether they be moist or dry, but not 
if they be pickled, or much boiled, or even a little boiled. 
And they may be imited to form the size of an olive. And 
the obligation may be discharged with their roots ; and also if 
their tithes be in doubt ; and with their first tithing, when 
the heave-oflfering has been taken from them ; and with their 
second tithe, and with holy things which are redeemed. 

7. Persons must not moisten bran during the passover 
for chickens, but they may scald it. A woman must not 
moisten bran in her hand when she goes to the batL But 
she may rub it dry on her flesh. A man should not chew 
wheat and leave it on a wound during Passover, because it 
becomes leavened. 

8. People must not put flour into the charoseth* or into 
the mustard. " But if one puts it ?" " He must eat it ofif- 
hand." But Eabbi Meier forbids it. They must not boil 
the passover oflfering in liquids nor in fruit juice. But one 
may smear it (after it is roasted), or dip it into them. Water 
used by the baker must be poured away because it becomes 
leavened. 


CHAPTER ni. 

1. These cause transgression during passover: the Baby- 
lonian cutback,^ and the Median beer, and the Edomite 
vinegar, and the Egyptian zithum,^ and the purifying dough 

^ Fruit-sauce ; a mixture of dates, * Fragments of chickens and dongh 

raisins, and other fruits, to recall the left to ferment. 

memory of the mortar from which the ' A compound of barley, wild safESron, 

bricks in Egypt were made. and salt, one-third of each. 


8ELEcno2;s. DOUOH. 99 

of the dyer,^ and the clarifying grain of the cooks, and the 
paste of the bookbinders. Sabbi Eleazar said, "even the 
cosmetics of women." This is the rule. All kinds of grain 
whatever may cause transgression during the passover. These 
are negative commands, and they are not visited by cutting 
off. 

2. "Dough in a split of a kneading trough ?" " If there 
be the size of an olive in a single place one is bound to clear 
it out" Less than this is worthless from its minuteness. 
And so is it with the question of uncleanness. Particularity 
causes division. " But if one wish it to remain ?" " It is 
reckoned as the trough." "Dough dried up?"^ "If it be 
like that which can become leavened it is forbidden." 

3. " How do persons separate the dough-offering when it 
becomes unclean on a holiday ?" Babbi Eleazar said, "you 
cannot call it a dough-offering till it be baked." Sabbi 
Judah, the son of Bethira, said, " you must put it in cold 
water." Said R Joshua, " it is not leaven so as to transgress 
the n^ative command ' It shall not be seen nor found/ ^ but 
it must be separated and left till the evening. But if it 
become leavened it is leavened." 

4. Babban Gamaliel said, " three women may knead at 
once, and bake in one oven, each after the other." But the 
Sages say, " three women may be busied with the dough, one 
kneads, and one prepares, and one bakes." Sabbi Akiba 
said, "all women, and all wood, and all ovens, are not alike." 
This is the rule. " If it ferment it must be smoothed down 
with cold water." 

5. Dough which begins to leaven must be burned, but he 
who eats it is frea When it begins to crack it must be 
burned, and he who eats it must be cut off. " What is 
leavening ? " " like the horns of locusts." " Cracking ? " 
" When the cracks intermingle." The words of S. Judah. 
But the Sages say, "if either of them be eaten, the eater 
must be cut off." "And what is leavening?" "All which 

' A dough or unripe grain lid put which does not rise, or that sounds 

ofsr the liquid to aheorb the dregs dull when it is struck. 
from the foam of fermentation. 

* Lit '"deaf." That is, dough > Exud. zi 19. 


100 

chEmged ita appearance, as when a man's hairs stand on end 

through fright." 

6. " If the fourteenth day of Nisan happened on the 
Sabbath ?" " They must clear off all the leaven before ths 
Sabbath begins," The words of K. Meier. But the S^es 
say, " in the proper season." Eabbi Eleazar, the son of 
Zaduk, said, " the heave-offering before the Sabbath, and 
ordinary things in the proper season." 

7. " If one went to kiU liia passover, or circumcise hia 
son, or to eat the marriage-feast in the house of his father- 
in-law, and he remembered that there was leaven in hia 
house ?" " If be can he must return and clear it out, and 
return to his duties. He must return and clear it away. 
But if not, he can eateem it as nothing in his heart." " (If 
one went) to save a person from the militia, or from a river, 
or from robbers, or from burning, or from the fall of build- 
ings ?" " He may esteem it as nothing in his heart." " But if 
he is reposing at his ease 1" " He must return off-hand." 

8. And so also when one went forth from Jerusalem and 
remembered that he had holy ilesh in his hand. If he passed 
Zophim' he must bum it on the spot. But if not he must 
return and bum it in front of the temple with the wood of 
the altar. " And for how much flesh or leaven must men 
retiirn ?" Rabbi Meier said, " both of them the size of an 
egg." Eabbi Judah said, " both the size of an olive. But 
the Sages say, " Holy flesh the size of an olive, and leaven 
the size of an egg." 


CHAPTEE rV. 

1, "A place in which men are accustomed to do woi 
on the eve of the paasover?" "For half a day they macjij 
work." " A place in which they are not accustomed "** 
work 1" "They must not work." " If one goes from a pl»^3 
where they work to a place where they do not work ; *= 
from a place where they do not work to a place where tl»^= 


' An emiaeace from wliirh th«r« «u 


« of the templa. 


BELECTioKS. SELLING AND WORKING. 101 

do work ?" " The Sages put on him the burden^ of the place 
from which he went, or the burden of the place to which he 
came ; but a man should not change the customs of a place, 
as it causes quarrels." 

2. like to him is he who carried fruits of the Sabbatical 
year from a place where they were fuiished growing to a place 
where they were not finished growing ; or from a place where 
they were not finished to a place where they were finished. 
He is bound to remove them. Eabbi Judah said, " they can 
say to him, go and bring them for yourself from the field." ^ 

3. " A place in which men are accustomed to sell small 
cattle to Gentiles ?" " They may sell them." " A place in 
which they are not accustomed to sell them ?" " They may 
not sell them." But in no place may they sell working 
cattle — calves, ass-foals, either unblemished or broken down.' 
Babbi Judah "allowed the broken down." The son of 
Bethiia " allowed a horse." 

4. "A place where men are accustomed to eat roast 
meat on the night of the passover?" "They may eat it." 
"A place in which they are not accustomed to eat it?" 
" They may not eat it." " A place in which they are ac- 
customed to light a candle on the night of the Day of 
Atonement ?" " They may light it." " A place in which 
they are not accustomed to light it ?" " Tliey may not light 
it" But men may light candles in the synagogues, and in 
the schools, and in the dark streets, and for the sick. 

5. " A place in which men are accustomed to do work 
on the ninth of ^Ab;"* "They may work." "A place in 
which they are not accustomed to work ?" " They may not 
work." But everywhere the disciples of the Sages are idle. 
Babban Simon, the son of Gamaliel, said, " a man may always 
make himself a disciple of the Sages." But the Sages say, 
"in Judah they did work on the eves of the passovers for 
half a day, and in Galilee they did nothing." And work in 

^ The bmden means that the man is ' Lest the Gentiles should set them 
forbidden to work. to work on the Sabbath. 

^ Part of July and August. The 

* See trettise on the Sabbatical year, ninth of Ab is the anniversary of the 
fz. 69 etc. threefold destruction of the Temple. 


102 THE PASSOVER. talmttd 

the night before the passover the school of Shammai dis- 
allowed ; but the school of Hillel " allowed it till sunrise." 

6. Eabbi Meier said, "every work which was begun 
before the fourteenth day of Nisan may be finished on the 
fourteenth ; but it must not be commenced on the fourteenth, 
even though it can be finished." And the Sages say, " three 
trades can carry on business on the eves of the passovers for 
half a day; and these are they — the tailors, and the 
barbers, and the washers." Eabbi Jos^, the son of Judah, 
said, " also shoemakers." 

7. Persons may set hens on their nests on the fourteenth. 
"But if the hen ran off?" "They may return her to her 
place." " And if she died ?" " They may set another instead 
of her." They may clear away from beneath the feet of 
beasts on the fourteenth. But on the holiday (or middle- 
days) they put it aside. They may carry to, and bring 
vessels from, the house of the trader, even though they be 
not necessary for the holiday. 

8. The men of Jericho did six things, in three they were 
prohibited, and in three they were allowed. And these are 
they in which they were allowed : they engrafted dates the 
whole fourteenth day of Nisan, and they shortened the 
"Hear,"^ and they reaped and stacked new com before "the 
sheaf "^ was offered ; and they were allowed. And in these 
they were prohibited : they used the produce of what was 
consecrated, and they ate on the Sabbath the fruit that had 
fallen down from the trees, and they gave ^ (to the poor) the 
comers of the fields of vegetables. And the Sages pro- 
hibited them from these things.* 

9. Bereitha — External Tradition. 

Hezekiah the king did six things; to three the Sages 
consented, and to three they did not consent. He carried 
the bones of his father (Ahaz) on a rope bed,*^ and they con- 

* Dent. vL 4. • Lev. xxiii. 16. • Lev. xix. 9, 10. 

^ Because the poor might eat them untithed, thinking they were Peah. 
' To show his abhorrence of his father's idolatry. 


SELEcnoMS. HEZEKIAH. 103 

sented. He powdered the brazen serpent,^ and they con- 
sented. He concealed the book of medicines,^ and they 
consented. And to three they did not consent : he cut off 
(the gold from) the doors of the temple^ and sent it to the 
Assyrian king, and they did not consent. He stopped the 
waters of the upper Gihon,* and they did not consent. He 
introduced an intercalary Nisan, and they did not consent. 


CHAPTER V. 

1. The daily ofTering was slaughtered at half -past eight,^ 
and offered at half-past nine. On the eve of the passover 
it was slaughtered at half -past seven and offered at half-past 
eight, whether the passover fell on a week-day or on the 
Sabbath. When the eve of the passover began on the eve 
of the Sabbath (Friday), it was slaughtered at half-past six, 
and offered at half-past seven, and the passover followed 
after it 

2. " The passover offering, which was slaughtered without 
intention — and the priest took its blood, and he went 
and sprinkled it without intention ?" or " with intention, 
and without intention?" or "without intention and witli 
intention ?" " It is disallowed." " How can it be with 
intention and without intention ?" "With intention partly 
for the passover, and with intention partly for peace-offer- 
ings." "Without intention and with intention?" "With 
intention partly for peace-offerings, and with intention partly 
for the passover-offering." 

3. " If he slaughtered the passover for those who may 
not l^ally eat it, — for those who are not reckoned in one 
company, — for the uncircumcised, and for the unclean ?" "It 
is disallowed." "For those who may eat, and for tliose 
who may not eat it ?" " For those who are reckoned in one 
company, and for those who are not so reckoned ?" " For cir- 
cumcised, and for uncircumcised ?" " For unclean, and Un- 

^ 2 King* xriii. 4. ' Lest the people should substitute medicine for God. 

* 2 King* ZTiii. 16. ^2 Chron. zxxii. 4. ' i.e. 2.80 p.m. 


104 THE PASSOVER. talictd 

clean ?" " It is allowed." "If he slaughtered it before noon ?" 
" It is disaUowed." Because it is said " between the even- 
ings."^ " If he slaughtered it before the daily offering?" "It 
is allowed." Except that one must keep stirring* its blood, 
till the blood of the daily offering be sprinkled. ** But if it 
be even sprinkled (before ?) " " It is lawful" 

4. " He who slaughtered the passover-offering possessing 
leaven ?" "He transgressed a negative command."* Babbi 
Judah said, " this applies even to the daily offering (of that 
evening)." Eabbi Simon said, "the slaughter of the passover 
on the fourteenth with intention for the passover makes (a 
man possessing leaven) guilty ; but if it be slaughtered with- 
out intention for the passover he is free." "And in all other 
sacrifices during the feast, whether one sacrifice with or 
without the proper intention ?" "He is free." "When one 
thus offers in the feast itself with proper intention ?" " He is 
free." "Without proper intention ?" " He is guilty." "And 
in all the other sacrifices, when one possessing leaven offers 
either with or without intention ?" "He is guilty, only ex- 
cepting the sin-offering, which was slaughtered without 
intention." 

5. The passover was slaughtered* for three bands in 
succession, as is said, " The whole assembly of the congrega- 
tion of Israel"* — assembly, congregation, Israel. The first 
band entered, the court was filled, the doors of the court 
were locked. The trumpeters blew with the trumpets, blew 
an alarm, and blew. The priests stood in rows, and in their 
hands were bowls of silver and bowls of gold. All the 
silver row was entirely silver, and all the golden row was 
entirely gold. They were not mingled. And the bowls 
were not flat-bottomed, lest they should lay them down, and 
the blood be coagulated. 

6. When an Israelite slaughtered, and a priest caught 

^ Exod. xii. 6. and they were found to have been 

* To prevent its coagulating. 256,600. Allowing not less than ten 

' Exod. xxiii. 18. persons to the eating of each lamb, he 

^ Josephus mentions the number of computes those present at the feast to 

lambs slain at a particular passover to have been 2,700,200 persons. — Josephus* 

have been numbered by the high priest, Wars, vi 9, 3. ' Exod. xii. 6. 


8ELBcnox8. SLAUGHTERING THE PASSOVER. 105 

the blood, he gave it to his companion, and his companion 
to his companion, and he took the full, and returned the 
empty bowL The priest nearest the altar poured it out at 
once in front of the foundation of the altar. 

7. The first band went out, the second band entered ; the 
second went out, the third entered. As was the proceeding 
of the first, so was the proceeding of the second and the 
third. They read the praise.^ When they finished they 
repeated it, and after repeating it they read it a third tiine, 
even though they did not complete it thrice in their time. 
R Judah said, "during the time of the third band they did 
not reach to * I love the Lord, for He hath heard,* because 
the people were few." 

8. As was the proceeding in ordinary days, so was the 
proceeding on the Sabbath, save that the priests washed out 
the court,* though not with the will of the Sages. R Judah 
said, ** a cup was filled with mixed-up blood,^ and poured 
out at once upon the altar ;" but the Sages " did not admit it." 

9. " How did they hang up and skin the passover sacri- 
fices ?" " Iron hooks were fixed in the walls and pillars, and 
on them they hung them, and skinned them." " And every 
one who had not a place to hang them up and skin them?" 
"Thin smooth rods were there, and he rested one on Ms 
shoulder and on the shoulder of his companion, and hung it 
up and skinned it." Eabbi Eliezer said, " when the four- 
teenth b^an on a Sabbath, he rested his hand on the 
shoulder of his companion, and the hand of his companion 
on his shoulder, and he hmig it up and skinned it." 

10. He cut it open, and took out its entrails. He put 
them on a dish and incensed them on the altar. Tlie first 
party went out, and sat down on the Mountain of the 
House. The second party were in the Chel,* and the thinl 
party remained in their place. When it grew dark they 
went out and roasted their passovers. 

^ Pudmf cziii.-czTiiL ' Taken from the intermingled blood 

' Thej washed the court indirectly of the many offorings. 

by liopping a canal of water which 

overflowid the court ; they afterwards * See measurements, u. 3. 

opanad it, when aU flowed off again. 


106 THE PASSOVER. talmud 


CHAPTER VI. 

1. These things in the passover abrogate the command 
against work on the Sabbath: its slaughtering, and the 
sprinkling of its blood, and purging its inwards, and incensing 
its fat. But its roasting and the rinsing of its inwards do 
not abrogate the Sabbath. But to carry it, and to bring it be- 
yond a Sabbath day's journey, and to cut off its wen, do not 
abrogate the Sabbath. Eabbi Eleazar said, " they abrogate it." 

2. Said Babbi Eleazar, " and is not this the teaching ? 
when slaughtering is work it abrogates the Sabbath. Things 
which are for * resting' do not abrogate the Sabbath."^ To 
him said Eabbi Joshua, "a holiday wiU give the proof ; the 
Sages permitted that which is work, and they forbade that 
which is resting." R^-bbi Eleazar said to him, "what do 
you mean, Joshua ? what comparison is there between a 
command and that which is voluntary?" Babbr Akiba 
answered and said, " sprinkling^ will give the proof, because 
it is a positive command, and it is for ' resting,' and does not 
abrogate the Sabbath ; but you should not wonder at this, 
even though it be a conmiand, as it is for * resting,* and does 
not abrogate the Sabbath." Eabbi Eleazar said to him, "and 
on that I form my judgment, when slaughtering is work it 
abrogates the Sabbath ; sprinkling, which is for 'resting,' does 
it not teach that it abrogates the Sabbath ?" Eabbi Akiba 
said to him, "on the contrary, if sprinkling, which is for 

* resting,' does not abrogate the Sabbath, slaughtering, which 
is for work, is it not the teaching ? should not abrogate the 
Sabbath." Eabbi Eleazar said to him, "Akiba, thou hast 
annulled what is written in the Law, * between the evenings/ 

* in its appointed time,' whether it be a week day or a Sab- 
bath." He said to him, "My teacher, give me proof of an 
appointed time for these things, like the appointed time for 

^ The following subtle discussion ' The sprinkling of a person unclean 
arises out of the distinction between from touching a dead body when the 
** work " forbidden by the law of God passover fell on a Sabbath, 
and "resting from work" eigoined by 
tradition. 


aELwmoNS. FEAST OFFERING. 107 

slaughtering the passover-offering ?" The rule is, said E. 
Akiba, " all work for the passover which it is possible to do 
on the eve of the Sabbath does not abrogate the Sabbath ; 
slaughtering, which it is impossible to do on the eve of the 
passover which falls on a Sabbath, abrogates the Sabbath." 

3. " When do men bring with the passover a feast-ofiTer- 
ing ?" " When the passover falls on a week-day, when those 
who offer it are legally clean, and when the lamb is too small 
for the eaters. But when the passover falls on a Sabbath, 
when the lamb is too much for the eaters, and there is legal 
uncleanness, they should not bring with it a feast-offering." 

4. The feast-offering^ came from flocks, from herds, from 
sheep and goats, from rams and ewes, and it may be eaten 
daring a period of two days and one night. 

6. "The passover which was slaughtered without the 
proper intention on a Sabbath?" "The offerer of it is indebted 
for a sin-offering." " And all the other sacrifices which he 
slaughtered for the passover ?" " If they be not suitable for it 
heisguilty." "And if they be suitable?" Eabbi Eleazardeclares 
him " indebted for a sin-offering." But R Joshua " frees him." 
Said Babbi Eleazar, "what ! if the passover which was allowed 
for proper intention when the offerer changed its intention, 
makes him guilty ; is it not the teaching that sacrifices, which 
are disallowed for want of proper intention when the offerer 
changed their intention, make him also guilty?" Babbi 
Joshua said to him, " no ; if thou saidst in the passover when 
he changed its intention it is changed to a thing disallowed, 
thou wilt say in the other sacrifices when he changed their 
intention they are changed to a thing allowed." Babbi 
Eleazar said to him, " the congregational offerings will give 
the proof, because they are rendered lawful on the Sabbath 
by intention, but whoever slaughtered (another) sacrifice with 
their intention is guilty." Babbi Joshua said to him, " no ; 
if thou sayest so in the congregational offerings, which are a 

^ Thii refers to the second chagigah has led some coninientators to suppose 

— the feast-olferiDg of individnids on that there is a discrepancy ])etween the 

the 15th of Nisan. It is called by the account of the last passover of our Lord 

gcnenl name paMo?er, John xviii 28. as related in the Synoptical Oospels, 

Want of acquaintance with this subject and as recorded by St John. 


108 THE PASSOVER. talucd 

determined number, thou wilt also say so in the passover 
eacriiice which has no determined number. Eabbi Meier said. 
"even lie who slaughtered other offerings on the Sabbath, 
with the intention of the congregational offerings, is free." 

6. " When one slaughtered the pasaover, but not for its 
eaters, or not for those numbered to eat it, for uncircixmcised 
and for unclean persons ?" " He is guilty." " For its eaters 
and not for its eaters ? For its reckoning and not for its 
reckoning ? For circumcised and uncircumcised ? For clean 
and unclean ?" " He ia free." " He slaughtered it, and it was 
found blemished ?" " He is guilty." " He slaughtered it and 
it was found torn in secret ?" " He is free." " He slaughtered 
it, and it became known that its owners retired from it, or 
died, or became legally unclean ?" "He is free, because he 
slaughtered it with lawful permission." 


CHAPTER VII. 

1. "How do men roast the passover !" "They bring a 
stick of pomegranate and thrust it through its mouth to its 
tail. And they put its legs and intestines inside it." The 
words of R Jo3i5, the Galilean. Eabbi Akiba said, " that is 
a kind of boiling, therefore they hang them outside of it." 

2. Men must not roast the passover on a spit or a gridiron. 
Said R Zaduk, " it happened to Rabban GamaUel that he said 
to Zabi, his servant, ' go and roast for us the passover on the 
gridiron.'" " If it touch the side of the oven ?" " That part 
must be peeled off." " If its gravy drop on the side of the 
oven, and again return on it ?" " That part must be taken 
out." "If the gravy drop on the fine flour?" "That part 
must be pulled out " (and burned). 

3. " If men anointed (basted) it with oil of the heave- 
offering ?" " If it be a company of priests, they may eat it." 
" If it be a company of Israelites V " If it be raw they can 
wash it away." " But if roast ? " " They must peel off the 
surface." " If it was anointed with oil of the second tithe?" 
" Its value in money must not be charged to the members of 


MtLMtmoss. 


THE GOLDEN PLATE. 


109 


Ihe company, because they cannot redeem ' the second tithes 
in Jerusalem." 

4. Five things may be brought during legal uncleanneas, 
but they must not be eaten in legal uncleanness : the sheaf,* 
tile two wave loaves,* and the shewbread,* sacrifices of 
peace-offerings ot the congregation,' and the kids* on the 
feast of the New Moon. The passover which was brought 
durmg legal uncleanness, may be eaten in uncleanness, 
liecause in the beginning the command came only for eating. 
6. " If the flesh be legally unclean and the fat unpol- 
ittted >" " The priest must not sprinkle its blood on the altar." 
"If the tat be unclean and the fleah unpolluted?" "The 
Priest may sprinkle its blood." But with other holy offerings 
" is not so, for though their flesh be unclean, and their fat 
f^iiains unpolluted, the priest may sprinkle their blood on 
^e altar. 

6, "If the congregation be legally unclean, or its majority, 
"'" the priests he legally unclean, and the congregation legally 
<^'<^an ?" " The passover may be kept in legal uncleanness." 
"tf theminorityofthecongregationbelegaUy unclean?" "The 
t^Ie^n majority can keep the first, and the unclean minority 
"*© Beoond passover" {on the 14th day of the following month), 
V. When the blood of the paasover-offering was poured 
*** the altar, and it was afterwards known that it was un- 
ciean, the (golden)' plate of the High Priest makes it ac- 
•^pted, "When the body of the paschal sacrifice was unclean, 
" the plate " cannot make it accepted, as they say the Nazarite 
■*"• the celebrant of the passover have the uncleanness of 
"•* tlood accepted with " the plate." But " the plate " does 
•"^ make the legal uncleanness of the body of the paschal 
"'''t* accepted. If it he legally unclean with an unknown 
'"''^leanness, the plate makes it accepted. 

8- "If it be legally unclean in whole or in most part?" 
" The passover must be burned in front of ' the palace '* with 
^"•s *ood of the altar." " A little which is unclean, and 


' Jo. TU. n 


* Numb, nviii. 15. 


110 


THE PASSOVER. 


that which is left over ?" " The owners may bum it in their 
own courts, or on their roofs with their own wood." The 
stingy ones burnt it in front of the palace, that they might 
use the wood of the altar. 

9. "The pasaover which was carried out of the city, or 
became uuclean ?" " The owner muat bum it off-hand," " Its 
masters became unclean or died?" "Let it« appearance 
change, and let it be burned on the sixteenth." ' RabU 
Jochanan, the son of Beruka, said, " even it muat be buzned 
off-hand, because it has no one to eat it." 

10. " Bones and tendons and what is left over ?" They 
must be bumed on the sixteenth. " If the sixteenth hap- 
pened on a Sabbath?" "They must be bumed on the 
seventeenth, because they cannot abrogate either the l*wa 
of the Sabbath or the holiday." 

11. All that is eaten in a great ox may be eat«n in s 
tender kid, and the tops of the shoulder-blades, and tha 
gristle. " Whoever broke any bone in a clean passover !" 
" He must receive forty stripes." " But for what is left over 
in the clean, and broken in an imclean passover V " He does 
not receive the forty." 

12. "A member partly displaced?" " One must cut in till 
he reach the bone, and he must peel off the flesh till he reach 
the joint, and he cuts it off. But in other holy offerings 
one may cleave the displaced members with an axe, since 
there does not exist any (prohibition of) breaking the bone 
for them." {For example), from the door-post and inwards 
is inside. From the door-post and outwards is outsid& 
The windows and thickness of the wall are reckoned as 
inside. 

13. "Two companies which eat the passover in one 
house ?" " These turn their faces to thb side and eat ; and 
those turn their faces to that side and eat. And the boiler* 
is between the companies. The servant stands to mix wine. 
The servant must shut his mouth till he serve the other 


' II remtlaed itneat«ii ovvniigtit, and 
llierefare must lie bomed, in ncconluice 
with Eiod. lil. 10. 

* From tb« Deed of ■ boiler It ip- 


si the nine Dsed at lh» Pi 


iudf wu ■Iwijs rod. 


Tbtn 


•ELECTIONS. VARIOUS CONTINGENCIES. Ill 

company. He afterwards turns his face till he reach his 
own company, and then he may eat. And she who is newly 
married can turn her face aside and eat it." 


CHAPTER VIII. 

1. ** The married woman, while she is in the house of 
her husband V* " Her husband slaughtered on her account, 
and her father slaughtered on her account ?" " She must eat 
the passover with her husband." " She went to spend the 
first feast after her marriage in the house of her father — her 
&ther slaughtered on her account, and her husband slaughtered 
on her account ?" " She may eat in the place which she wishes." 
" An orphan on whose account the guardians slaughtered ?" 
" He may eat in the place which he wishes." " A slave of 
two partners ?" " He must not eat with both." " A slave who 
is half free ?" " He must not eat with his master." 

2. One said to his slave, " go and slaughter for me the 
passover." "He slaughtered a kid?" "He may eat it." 
"He slaughtered a lamb?" "He may eat it" "He 
slaughtered a kid and a lamb ?" " He may eat of the first" 
" He foigot what his master said to him — what shall he 
do ?" " He must slaughter a lamb and a kid, and shall say, 
" If my master said to me — a kid, the kid is on his account, 
and the lamb is on my account ; and if my master said to 
me — a lamb, the lamb is for him, and the kid is for me." 
" If his master forgot what he said to him ?" " Both animalft 
must go forth to the house of burning ; and they are free 
from keeping the second passover." 

3. One said to his sons, "I am ready to slaughter the 
passover for you who shall first go up to Jerusalem." As 
soon as one of them entered with his head and the greater 
part of his body inside the city gate, he gained his own 
share of the passover, and gained it for his brothers with 
him. They may always be reckoned in one company, when 
each one obtains the size of an olive. They may first be 
xeckoned, and -afterwards withdraw from a company till 


112 THE PASSOVER. 


TALMUD 


the passover be slaughtered. Babbi Simon said, "until its 
blood be poured out on their account" 

4. " He who reckoned others with himself in his portion 
of the lamb ?" " The members of the company are allowed 
to give to him his share, and he may eat it with his own 
guests ; and they may eat their portion with their own 
guests." 

5. "If one observed an issue twice?" "They may 
slaughter the lamb on his account on the seventh day of the 
issue if it be the fourteenth day of Nisan." " If he observed 
it thrice ?"^ " They may only slaughter on his account on the 
eighth day of the issue" (if it be the fourteenth day of Nisan). 

6. " The mourner and the person who opened a heap,* 
and also the person who has the promise of release from 
prison, and the sick, and the aged, who are able to eat the 
size of an olive ?" "They may slaughter the passover for 
them." For all of them they must not slaughter the lamb on 
their own account alone, lest they bring the passover into 
contempt,^ because there might happen to them some 
abomination. They are freed from keeping a second 
passover — excepting him who in opening the heap was un- 
clean from the beginning. 

7. " They must not slaughter the passover for one person." 
The words of Eabbi Judah ; but Eabbi Jos4 " allowed it" 
Even for a company of an hundred, when they cannot eat 
the size of an olive, they must not slaughter the passover ; 
and they must not form a company of women, of slaves, and 
of little ones. 

8. A mourner may be baptized, and eat his passover in 
the evening, but not other holy things. " He who heard of 
a death, or had the bones of his relations collected ?" "He 
may be baptized and eat holy things." " A stranger who 
was proseljrtized on the eve of the passover ?" The school of 
Shammai say, " He may be baptized and eat his passover in 

1 If one observed the issue three ' The mourner might be too sorrow- 
times on the same day, he could not be ful to eat, the sick too ill to eat, and 
considered clean before he brought a the prisoner might be detained in 
sacrifice. prison, etc 

» In which there is a dead body. 


FIKST AND SECOND PA8S0VER. 


the e%-eiiuig ;"* but the acliool of Hillel say, " he who jost 
departed from the foreskin is as legally unclean as he who 
just departs froin the grave." 


CHAPTER IX. 

1. He who was legally uncleau, or in a journey afar off, 
Uul did not keep the first, muat keep the second (passover), 
** He mistook it, or was constrained by force, and did not 
^««p the firet ?" " He must keep the second." " If so, why 
■ it said unclean^ or in a journey afar off?" "Because 
"ich persons are free from being cut off, but those bound 
•« observe it are to be cut off if they neglect it." 

2. What ifl a "journey afar off?" "From Modiim' and 
"flffards; and so is the measure from Jerusalem on every 
siiJe." The wonls of Rabbi Akiba; Eabbi Eleazar said, 
WDm the threshold of the temple-court and outwards." 
t"*** R. Joai^, " for this reason there is a dot on the ' he ' 
'")• to explain not that it is really afar off, but that one is 
*^ off &om the threshold of the temple court and out- 

3, "What is the difference between the first and second 
••'sover?" "The first passover forbids leaven to be seen or 

^tXttX ; but the second allows unleavened and leavened bread 
^ ^^txe's house." The first passover requires hallel* during 
?*^*>g, but the second does not require hallel during eating. 
^^h require hallel in their preparations, and the paschal 
T*^*ific€« must be eaten roasted on unleavened bread with 
^**» herbs, and they both abrogate the Sabbath. 
,^ "4, " The pasaover-offering which was brought during 
^8*1 vDcleanness ?" " The man or woman with an issue may 
j!?* «Bt of it, nor she in separation or in childbirth. But if 
J^y eat they are free from being cut off." Kabbi Eleazar 

^**e them even in going into the sanctuary." 


I W«uiib«r» It 10. 'On the T 

y^^bont 15 mile* bom J«nu*leir. "distant" 
S"*a» <a UodiD wu tbe city of lh« 


a fipvn, which m 


114 THE PAasOVER. 

5. "Wliat ia the difference betweeu the passover of 
Egypt and the passover of succeeding generations ?" " The 
passover of Egypt waa taken on the tenth day^ and required 
the sprinkling with a bunch of hyssop on the Untel and the 
two side posts, and was eaten with haste in one night ; but the 
passover of succeeding generations exists the whole seven days." 

6. Said R. Joshua, " I once heard Uiat the substitute* of 
the passover-offering can be sacrificed, and that the substi- 
tute of the passover-offering can not be sacrified, I have no 
one to explain." Said R. Akiba, '" I will explain ; the pass- 
over-offering, which was found (after being lost) before the 
time for slaughtering its substitute, may be pastured till it be 
blemished, and it can be sold, and the owner can t^e for its 
price peace-offerings, and so also for its substitute. After 
the time for slaughtering the passover-offering its substitute 
may be offered for a peace-offering, and so can also its sub- 
stitute," 

7. "He who set apart an ewe for liis passover, or a male 
of two years ?" "He may pasture it till it be blemished. And 
he can sell it, and its price may be used tor a free-will 
offering." " He who selected his passover, and afterwards 
died?" "His son must not offer it after him with the intention 
of a passover, but he may offer it with the intention of a 


\ 


" The passover-offering which was mixed op with 
other sacrifices V "All must be pastured till they be 
blemished, and they must be sold, and the offerer must bring 
the price of the best of this kind and the price of the beat 
of that land, and the loss he must make up from his private 
means." " The passover-offering which was mixed up with 
firstborns?" Kabbi Simon said, "if there be companies of 
priests they may eat it." 

9, "A company* which lost its passover-offering, and 
said to some one, ' go and seek it and slaughter it for us ;' 

' Eiod. liL 3. ' The fullowing rules ore foanded on 

two princtplea ; firatlj-, that every lamb 

* The eulxtitutc refers to one aufioBl mital bare iti own Diimbered company 
cbangL'd for nnottier, which hod been af eaten ; and lecondJy, that no person 
iatended far the puaorei-offeriDg. could be numbered with two eompMiea. 


I 


SELECTIONS. VAEIOUS CONTINGENCIES. 115 

and he went and found it and slaughtered it, and they 
meanwhile also took one and slaughtered it, — if his be first 
slaughtered?" "He may eat of his and they may eat with 
him of his." "But if theirs be first slaughtered?" "They 
may eat of theirs, and he may eat of his." " But if it be 
not known which of them was first slaughtered, or both 
were slaughtered at once?" "He must eat of his passover, 
but they cannot eat with him, and their passover must go 
forth to the house of burning ; and they are freed from 
keeping a second passover ^ " He said to them, 'if I be too 
late, go and slaughter for me;' he went, and meanwhile found 
(the lost) one and slaughtered it, and they took and also 
slaughtered one. If theirs be first slaughtered ?" "They may 
eat of theirs, and he may eat with them." "But if his were 
first slaughtered?" "He shaU eat of his, and they shall eat 
of theirs." " But if it be not known which of them was 
first slaughtered or both of them were slaughtered at once?" 
" They shall eat, of theirs, but he must not eat with them, 
and his lamb must go forth to the house of burning, and he 
is freed from keeping a second (passover)." " If he said to 
them ' slaughter for me,' and they also said to him 'slaughter 
for us?" " All shall eat of that one first slaughtered." " But 
if it be not known which of them was first slaughtered?" 
"Both must go forth to the house of burning." "If he did 
not say it to them, nor they say it to him?" "They are not 
sureties one for the other" (and they must eat apart from 
each other). 

10. "Two companies had their passover-offerings mixed: 
this company drew out one for themselves, and that com- 
pany drew out one for themselves. One of these comes to 
those, and one of those comes to these, and thus they say, 
' if this passover be ours, let our hands be withdrawn from 
yours and be counted with ours; but if this passover be 
youis^ let our hands be withdrawn from ours and be counted 
with yours.' And so with five companies of five each, and 
ten of ten each, they may draw out and join one from every 
company, and say so." 

11. "Two persons who had their passover-ofiferings 


116 THE PASSOVER. talmttd 

mixed?" "One draws out one for himself, and the other 
draws out one for himself. This one can count with himself 
a person invited from the market And that one can count 
with himself a person invited from the market. This 
individual comes to that one, and that one comes to this 
one, and so they say, * if this passover be mine, let thy 
hands be withdrawn from thine, and be counted with mine ; 
and if this passover be thine, let my hands be withdrawn 
from mi^e, and be counted with thine/ 


> » 


CHAPTER X. 

1. On the eves of the passovers near to the time of 
evening prayer a man must not eat till it be dark. And 
even the poorest in Israel must not eat till he can recline at 
ease, and they must not withhold from him the four cups of 
wine, even though he receives the weekly ahns. 

2. When they mix for him the first cup of wine,^ the 
school of Shammai say, " he shall repeat the blessing for the 
day, and after that the blessing for the wine." But the 
school of Hillel say, " he shall repeat the blessing for the 
wine, and after that the blessing for the day." 

3. The attendants bring before him greens and lettuce. 
He dips the lettuce in its sauce till he come to the time for 
the seasoning of the bread. They bring before hiwi un- 
leavened bread, and lettuce, and the fruit sauce, on two 
dishes, even though the fruit sauce is not a command. 
Babbi Eleazar, the son of Zadok, said (it is) " a conmiand, and 
in the time of the sanctuary they used to bring before him 
the body of the passover offering." 

4. The attendants mixed for him the second cup, and 
here the son asks his father, and if the son have no know- 
ledge his father teaches him, " in what is this night differ- 
ent from all other nights?" "Because in all other nights 
we eat leavened and imleavened bread. In this night all is 

^ It wafl after the first cup of wine disciples' feet (John ziii. 5 ; Lnke 
was drunk that our Lord washed the zxii. 17.) 


r 


PRAISE AND THANKSGIVING. 117 

nnJeavened. Because in all other nights we eat every herb, 
in this night bitter herbs. Because in all other nights we 
eat fleeh roasted, well boiled, and boiled. In this night all 
»s roasted. Because in all other nights we dip what we eat 
once, in this night twice " {if. in the sauce and the seasoning). 
A-nd according to the knowledge of the son his father teaches 
^"T> - He begins in shame and he ends in praise. And he ex- 
po«xn<i3 from " a Syrian ready to perish was my father,"' till 
he end the whole passage. 

5. Kahban Gamaliel used to say, "every one who did not 

"PeaJc of these three thir^ in the passover did not discharge 

^>>» *^iity, and these are they: — the passover, the unleavened 

brettej,and bitter herbs. Passover, because OMNIPRESENCE 

P**w©d over the houses of our fathers in i^ypt. Unleavened, 

"^^^aose oar fathers were redeemed from Egypt Bitter, 

'*'cau»e the Egyptians made the lives of our fathers bitter in 

^"SyT*!" In every generation man is bound to look to him- 

*^" as though he in person went out from Egypt, as is said,* 

" Antl thou shalt show thy son in that day, saying. This is 

aoQe because of that which the Lord did unto me when I 

**^e forth out of Egypt." For this reason we are bound to 

•c knowledge, to thank, to praise, to glorify, to exalt, to 

°**Biiify, to bless, to elevate, without limi t,, HIM who has 

'***e for our fathers and us all these miracles. He brought 

"^ from slas-ery to freedom, from sorrow to joy, and from 

**>ouming to festi\-ity, and from tliick darkness to great Uglit, 

^*1 from servitude t« redemption, and let us say before Him 

**aUe]ujah. 

6. " How far does he repeat V The school of Shamroai 
t,^' till "a joyftil mother of children."' But the school of 
I^T^d say. till "the flint into a fountain of waters,"* and he 
^'•lii'cl with a " blessing for i-edemption." Eabbi Tarpon 
™^d, " < \^o redeemed us and redeemed oxa fathers from 
V^^t,' and he does not end with any other blessing." Rabbi 
7^*^l>» adds, " So the Lord our God and the Gml of our 
^^*en shall bring us to hohdays and other feast-days yet to 


118 THE PASSOVER. talmud 

come to us in peace, rejoicing in the building of THY city, 
and delighting in THY service ; and we shall eat there the 
sacrifices and the passovers, etc., until ' Blessed be Thou, Lord, 
the Eedeemer of Israel'" 

7. When the attendants mixed for him the third cup^ he 
says the blessing for his food, with the fourth cup he finished 
the hallel, and said over it the blessing of the Song.* Between 
the first and second cups if he wish to drink, he may drink 
as much as he likes. Between the third and fourth he must 
not drink. 

8. Persons are not free after the passover to ask for more 
food. " If some fall asleep during the passover ?"^ " They 
may afterwards eat of it." " AU ?" " They must not eat of 
it." Eabbi Jos^ says, " If they dozed ?" " They may eat of 
it." " If they slept ?" " They must not eat of it." 

9. The passover after midnight renders hands legally 
unclean. False intention and the remains of the feast ren- 
der hands legally unclean.* " When one repeated the pass- 
over-blessing?" "He is free from the sacrifice-blessing, but 
the sacrifice-blessing does not free him from that of the 
passover." The words of R IshmaeL Babbi Akiba said, 
" this does not free from that, nor that from this." 


^ The third cup was called the ** cap ' They may have heea. overcome with 
of blessing *' (1 CJor. x. 16). It was wine (1 Cor. xi 21). 
the one used by our Lord for the institu- 
tion of the holy sacrament. ^ This is explained in the 

' Psalm cxxxvi. " Hands." 


*^»*cnoNs, PREPARATIONS OP THE HIGH PRIEST. 119 


Treatise V. 

®n tfie ]9as ot Sltonement. 

Preptfations of the High Priest — Cleansing the Altar — Casting Lots — Day- 
break — Offerings — Dress — Prayer — The Goats — Monohazus — Helena — 
Azazel — the Golden Censer — the Vail — Holy of Holies — " Foundation " — 
Sprinkling the Blood — Sending forth the Goat into the WUdemess — 
High Priest burning the Bollock and Goat — Reading — Ceremonial — 
Bales and Exceptions — Rejientance and Atonement. 

CHAPTEE I. 

1. Seven days before the Day of Atonement the High 
Priest was removed from his house to the chamber^ Par- 
hedrin, and the council prepared for him another priest,* 
lest theie happen to him any defilement. R Judah said, 
** they prepared also another wife, lest his wife die ; as is 
said,' ** And he shall atone for himself and for his house ;" 
for his house, t.«. for his wife. The Sages said to hJTn^ " if 
BO, there is no end to the matter.'' 

2. All these seven days, he (the high priest) sprinkled 
the blood, burned the incense, and trimmed the lamps, and 
offered the head and the foot. On the remainder of all the 
days, if he wished to offer, he offered ; since the high priest 
first offered part, and first took part (in the sacrifices). 

3. The elders from the elders of the great Sanhedrin 
delivered to him, and read before him, the ceremonial of the 
day ; and they said to him, " My Lord High Priest, read 
with thy mouth, perchance thou hast forgotten, or perchance 
thou hast not learned."* On the eve of the day of atone- 
ment, towards dawn, they placed him in the eastern gate 
(of the Temple), and they caused to pass before him bul- 

^ Where the couiiellorB sat ' Lev. xri. 6. 

* Called Sagan (suffngan) (2 Kings ^ As might occur from the freqnent 
XZT. 18 ; Jer. liL 24). changes daring the second Temple. 


120 DAT OF ATONEMENT. talmud 

locks, rams, and lambs, that he might be skilled and expert 
in his ministry. 

4. All the seven days they did not withhold from him 
food and drink ; the eve of the day of atonement, with the 
beginning of darkness, they did not permit him to eat much, 
since food induces sleep. 

5. The elders of the great Sanhedrin delivered hini to 
the elders of the priesthood, who brought him to the upper 
chamber of the house Abtinas. And they administered to 
him the oath,^ and they left him and departed. And they 
said to him, " My Lord High Priest, we are ambassadors of 
the great Sanhedrin, and thou art our ambassador, and the 
ambassador of the great Sanhedrin. We adjure thee by 
Him, whose Name dwells in this house, that thou wilt not 
change aught of all which we have said to thee." He went 
apart and wept. They went apart and wept^ 

6. If he were a learned man, he expoimded ; but if not, 
the disciples of the learned expounded before him. If he 
were skilled in reading, he read ; but if not, they read before 
hiuL " And in what did they read before him ? " " In Job, 
and in Ezra, and in Chronicles." Zachariah, the son of 
Kebutal, said, " I often read before him in DanieL" 

7. If he desired to sleep, the young priests filliped with 
the first finger' before him, and said to him, " My Lord High 
Priest, stand up and refresh thyself* once on the pavement," 
and they kept him occupied*^ until the time approached for 
slaying (the victims). 

8. Every day they cleansed the altar at cockcrow, or at 
its approach, intermediate before or after it ; and on the day 
of atonement ^ at midnight ; and in the three great feasts, at 
the first watch. And before cockcrow the court was crowded 
with Israel 

^ That be would inceiiBe *' within " ' Singing to him " Unless the Lord 

the vail (Lev. xvi. 12, 13), in opposi- build the house, they labour bnt in vain 

tion to the Sadducees, who maintained that build it, etc. (Psalm czzvii.) 
that the incense should be burned ' The Jews think that the day of 

*' without." atonement was the day on which Adam 

* That such an oath was necessary. sinned, on which Abraham was ciicum- 

' Or the ** index" finger; other trans, cised, and on which Moses offered 

the ** middle " finger. atonement for the sin of the golden 

^ Or change thyself. calf. 


ONS. 


CASTING LOTS. 


121 


Tix. 


CHAPTEE II. 

^ • At first every one who wished to (cleanse) the altar, 
^^^^^^sed it When they were many, they ran and mounted 
"^^ Q^cent, and each one, who at the middle outstripped his 
^^^^^I>anion by four cubits, won it. If two were equal the 
P'^^siclent said to them, "lift your fingers."^ "And what is 
taa,t; 3 " « They lifted one or two fingers, but no one lifted 
^^ "thumb in tie Sanctuary." 

2. It happened that two were equal, and nmning and 
^oxxxiting the ascent, one of them thrust his companion, so 
he fell, and his leg was broken. And when the great 
■in saw that they were getting into danger, they de- 
that they should not cleanse the altar save by lot. 
were four lots, and this was the first lot. 
The second lot was : Who should slay ? Who 
le ? Who should take the ashes from the inner altar? 
who should take the ashes from the candlestick ? and 
should carry the members to the ascent ? the head and 
right foot, and the hind feet, the tail, and the left foot, 
breast, and the throat, and the two sides, and the in- 
^^^^1^ and the fine flour, and the pancakes, and the wine, 
^^^^iiteen priests discharged this lot. Said Ben Asai in the 
P^'^eence of R Akiba from the mouth of Rabbi Joshua, " like 
^ its way of motion " (when alive). 

4. The third lot ^ was for new men who came to offer 
^cense, and they cast the lots. The fourth lot was for new 
^en with the old, who should carry the members from the 
Ascent to the altar. 

5. The daily offering was with nine, ten, eleven, twelve, 
priests ; not less and not more. " How ?" " Itself with nine : 


th. 


' te. Cast lots, which wu done by 
plaehig the prievts in a row, and bidding 
them to hold up their fingers. After 
filing on a certain number, the cap of 
one oi th«m was taken off. With this 
priest the reckoning began, and pro- 
ceeAsd till the prearranged number fell 
on some one of them ; and his was the 
lot Particolar care was taken to count 
the fingen which were held up, and 


not to number their persons, as this 
was considered unlawful. (1 Chron. 
Mi. 1.) 

* The third lot for burning incense 
was the most important. It was al- 
ways done by a f^sh man, so that a 
priest might bum incense only once 
during his lifetime. (Luke L 9 ; Rev. 
viii. 3, 4.) 


122 DAT OF ATONEMENT. talmitd 

at the feast of Tabernacles in the hand of one, a glass of 
water there is ten. The evening offering with eleven, itself 
with nine, and in the hands of two, two faggots of wood. 
On Sabbath, eleven; itself with nine, and two, in their 
hands two fragments of incense of the shewbread. And on 
the Sabbath in the feast of Tabernacles in the hand of one 
a glass of water." 

6. The ram was oflFered with eleven ; the flesh with five, 
the inner part, and the fine flour and the wine, to each two 
and two. 

7. The bullock was offered with twenty-four priests. 
" The head and the right foot ?" " The head with one, and 
the foot with two." " The chine and the left foot ?" " The 
tail with two, and the left foot with two." "The breast 
and the throat ?" " The breast with one, and the throat with 
three, the two hind feet with two, and the two sides with 
two, the inner parts and the fine flour, and the wine, each 
with three and three." " Of which is that said ?" " Of the 
offering for the whole congregation." " But for the offerings 
of an individual ?" " If he wished to offer, he might offer." 
" For the skinning and cutting up ?" " For these all were 
equal." 

CHAPTER m. 

1. The overseer said to them, " go and look if the time 
for slaughter is come." If it came, the watchman said, " it 
is brightening."^ Matthew the son of Samuel said, "is the 
whole east light as far as Hebron ?" and he said "yes." 

2. "And why was that necessary?" "Because it once 
happened that the light of the moon came up, and they 
deemed it the light from the east." And they slaughtered 
the daily offering, and they brought it to the house of burn- 
ing. And they brought down the High Priest to the house 
of Baptism. This was the rule in the Sanctuary that every 
one who covered his feet (was required) to wash ; and every 
one retiring was required to sanctify his hands and feet. 

^ Or, M your wUh 


Sicxcnosa. DEESS OF THE HIGH PRIEST. 123 

3 . No one entered the court for service, however clean, 
on£il he washed. Tlie High Priest made five washings and 
leia f>'uri{icatioiis in this day, and all were in the Holy place 
alx:»-*-'«3 the house of Pan'a,^ with the exception of this first 
on«3 «»Joiie. 

-4r_ They made a screen of linen between him and the 
pe«:>^>l.«. He undressed, descended, and washed. He came 
up ^»ad wiped himself. Tliey brought to him roLes of gold, 
an«i lae dresse*!, and he sanctified his hands and feet. They 
l>Tt>-KX4»"ht to him the daily offering. He cut (its throat), and 
an<*'tla«r finished the slaughter at his hand. He received 
th^ l_>lood and sprinkled it. He entered to ofler the morning 
iBO^Hjse and to trim the lights, and to offer the head and the 
I'leni'Vjers, and the things tried in the pan, and tlie wine, 

S. The morning incense was offered between the blood 
f"^*-^ t-lie members. That of the evening^ between the mera- 
^■■^s and the liltations. If the High Priest were old, or 
'l^'li da.te, they heated for hnn (iron), and they put it into the 
toX^i ■^ater, that its temperature should be changed. 

G . They brought liim to the house of Parva, and it was 
™ "the Sanctuary. They divided with the screen of linen 
oet-wr^gn him and the people. He sanctified bis hands and 
leet ^ad undressed. R. Meier said, he undressed and sancti- 
^^ liis hands and feet, he descended and washed, he came 
^1* ^.ad he wijied himself. They brought to biin white 
"*''^. he dressed and sanctified his hands and feet 

• - "In the morning he was dressed with Pelusian linen 
*^*^la twelve miuas,' and in the evening with Indian linen 
/**^Vi eight hundred zuz."* The words of R Meier, But 
. ^ Siiges say, " tliat in the morning his dress was worth 
^**t«cn minas, and in the evening twelve minas ;" all these 
~^*^;y miuaa were from the congregation, and if he wished 
"^^id t« them he miglit add of himself. 

b,^^*^»e 0«tD»r» wji it wh bo cnllBd ' The mini of the lanctiary »«« 

n,^^**'** PuTi 1 Diagii^ian built tbU worth ahont £5 : 1 Is., canaeqODtitl; the 

^^^^*^jiil digged throogh troia it to we luommg ilreu cu«t nbout £68 : 8>. 
t ^^ Tit* ot the High Priert on the day 

^^^***mnt)i% : or rUe bectaae it was ' Theini WM worth obmrt 64d,. cOB- 

ir*--*^ rtoring " ballark-liideA." nequently the evening dreiM coat •bont 

K-Al betwMii Ue etenlug*. £21 : 13 : 1. 


124 DAY OP ATONEMENT. TALNin**— 

8. He came to the side of hia "bullock, and the bullock 
■was standing between the porch and the altar ; hia bead t 
the North, and his face to the West ; and the Priest Bto<^»-J 
in the East, and his face Westward, and he placed l»ofc:=^-h 
hands upon him and made confession, and thus he spake, "^ ^ 
beseech thee, Name, I have committed iniquity. I ha-^^-'e 
sinned before Tliee — I, and my house — I beseech thee. C* 
Name, pardon' now the iniquities and the transgresait*'*'® 
and the aiiia which I have perversely committed, and tra.xr»3- 
gressed, and sinned before thee, I, and my house, a» *^ 
written in the law of Mosea thy servant, that in this ci^*-^' 
" He will atone for you," etc. And they answered a.f*:^-^' 
him, "BLESSED BE THE NAME. THE llOlHOTSr' ^ 
OF HIS KINGDOM FOR EVER AND EVER." 

9. He came to the east of the court to the north of 
altar. The Sagan was at his right hand, and the chief 
the fathers at his left. And there were the two goats ; 
the um was there, and in it were two lots of boxwood, * 
Ben Gamla made them of gold, and they commemorat' 
him as praiseworthy, 

10. The son of Katin made twelve pipes to the lav" 
where before there were but two ; and also he made a wh*=^^ *"'' 
for the laver, lest its water should be polluted by nig^ — * 
Monobazus' the king made all the handles of the vessels, 

gold for the day of atonement. Helena, his mother, m.**-^'^^^ 
a chandeher of gold near the door of the Sanctuary, and ^^"^ 
also made a tablet of gold upon which the section of t-^^ 
Sota' was written. Wonders were wrought for the door^ *^ 
Nicanor,* and they were commemorated as praiseworthy. 

1 1. And these were iu ignominy : The family of Gar*^:*-* 
who were unwilling to instruct in the preparation of '*^ 
shew bread. The family of Abtinas, who were unwillin^^ . 
instniet in the preparation of incense. Hogrus, the soa 

Levi, knew a tune in the chant, and was unwilling 
instruct. The son of Kamzar was imwilling to instruct 

* Litenlly "carer over," Ic "itone * The acciued womaii. 
for." 

* RLng of Adi4bra?. t. proi«1yt« to * SwTreatiae on " Ucut 
jodains aboat a.d. 45. II. S, notr. 


tcnoNS. CONFESSION OF THE HIGH PRIEST. 125 

tti^ art of writing. Concerning the former it is said, *' The 
^^xxLory of the just is blessed ;" and concerning the latter it 
^® isaid, " but the name of the wicked shall rot " (Prov. x. 7). 


CHAPTER IV. 

1. He shook the um and brought up two lots ; one was 

'^'Titten "for the Name," and the other was written "for 

-Azazel."^ The Sagan stood at his right hand, and the Chief 

^f the Fathers at his left. If " for the Name" came up in 

Ills right hand the Sagan said to him, "My Lord High Priest, 

lift up thy right hand ;" and if " for the Name " came up in 

his left the Chief of the Fathers said to him, "My Lord High 

Priest, lift up thy left hand." He placed them upon the two 

goats, and said, " for the Lord is the sin offering." R Ismael 

said, « it was not necessary to mention the sin offering" but 

« for the Lord." And they answered after him, " BLESSED 

BE THE NAME. THE HONOUR OF HIS KINGDOM 

FOR EVER AND EVER" 

2. He twisted a tongue^ of brightness on the head of 
the goat to be sent away, and he placed him opposite the 
gate from whence he should be sent. And the one for 
slaughter he placed opposite the slaughter-house. He him- 
self came beside his bullock the second time, and laid his two 
hands upon him and made confession, and thus he spake : — 
"I beseech Thee, Name, I have committed iniquity, I 
have transgressed, I have sinned before Thee. I, and my 
house, and the sons of Aaron, Thy holy people. I beseech 
Thee, Name, pardon iniquities, transgressions, and sins 
which I have perversely committed, and transgressed, and 
sinned before Thee, I, and my house, and the sons of Aaron, 

^ A. v. ^Scapegoat," or for the goat that departs." Theodotion tran- 

"deril." Others tranalate " wholly put slates "the goat sent away." Aquila, 

away" in reference to the sins of the "the goat set f^^e." The LXX. and 

people, or for " the hard mountain," and Josephns understand by the term ** the 

okhasthe*'demonof dryplaces." Some, averter of ills," and the Vulgate "caper 

however, think Axazel to be the fallen emissarius." 
angel mentioined in the Book of Enoch, 

and identical with Sammael, the angel ' A tongue-shaped piece of scarlet 

ofdefttti. Symmachni translateB " Uie wool. 


126 DAY OF ATONEMENT. talmud 

Thy holy people, as is written in the law of Moses, Thy 
servant, sajdng, that in this day he will atone for you to 
purify you from all your sins * Before the LOED. Ye shall 
be pure/" And they answered after him, "BLESSED BE 
THE NAME. THE HONOUE OF HIS KINGDOM FOR 
EVER AND EVER." 

3. He slaughtered him and caught his blood in a bowl, 
and he gave it to him who mixed it upon the fourth platform 
of the Sanctuary, that it might not congeaL He took the 
censer, and went up to the top of the altar, and raked the 
live coals here and there, and gathered out from the inner 
embers. And went down and placed it upon the fourth 
platform in the court. 

4. Every day he gathered out the coals with one of 
silver and poured them out into one of gold, but to-day he 
gathered them with one of gold and he entered with it 
Every day he gathered them out with one of four cabs^ and 
poured them into one of three cabs. But to-day he gathered 
them out with one of three cabs, and with it he entered. 
Rabbi Joseph said, " every day he gathered out with one 
containing a seah,^ and poured it into one of three cabs. But 
to-day he gathered out with one of three cabs, and with it he 
entered. Every day it was heavy, but to-day it was light. 
Every day its handle was short, but to-day long. Every day 
it was green gold ; to-day red." The words of Rabbi Mena- 
chem. " Every day he offered half a pound in the morning, 
and half a pound in the evening, but to-day he added his 
handful. Every day it was fine ; but to-day the finest of 
the fine." 

5. Every day the priests went up the ascent (to the altar) 
in the east and descended in the west. But to-day the High 
Priest went up in the middle and descended in the middle. R. 
Judah said, " The High Priest ever went up in the middle 
and descended in the middle." Every day the High Priest 
sanctified his hands and his feet from the laver ; but to-day 
from the golden basin. R. Judah said, "The High Priest 
ever sanctified his hands and his feet from the golden basin." 

^ A cab contained 2'8S33 pints. * A seah contained 1 peck and 1 pint. 


SELECTIONS. THE VAIL. 127 

6. " Every day there were there four rows^ of hearths ; 
but to-day five." The words of E. Meier. Eabbi Joseph 
said, "every day three; but to-day four." Eabbi Judah 
said, " every day two ; but to-day three." 


CHAPTEE V. 

1. They brought out for him the cup and the censer, and 
filled his hand full (of incense), and put it into the cup, the 
laige according to his largeness,^ and the smaller according 
to his smallness, and so was its measure. He took the 
censer in his right hand, and the spoon in his left. He 
proceeded in the Sanctuary until he came between the two 
vails dividing between the holy and the holy of holies, and 
intermediate was a cubit. E. Joseph said, " there was one 
vail only," as He said, " the vail is the division for you be- 
tween the Holy and the Holy of Holies" (Exod. xxvi. 33). 
Outside it was looped up southward, inside northward. He 
proceeded between them tiU he reached the north. When 
he reached the north his face was turned southward. He 
proceeded leftwards near the vail till he came to the ark. 
When he came to the ark, he put the censer between its 
two staves, he heaped the incense on the live coals, and the 
whole house was entirely filled with smoke. He went out, 
and returned by the way of his entrance, and he offered a 
short prayer in the outer house, and he did not prolong his 
prayer, lest he should excite terror^ in Israel. 

2. When the ark was removed, a stone was there from 
the days of the first prophets, and it was called " FOUNDA- 
TION."* It was three digits high above the earth, and upon 
it he put the censer. 

^ On the altar. more probablj to have been the foun* 

* The liae of the priest's hands was dation of the altar of burnt ofTenngs. 
proportionate to his stature. This sacred rock is 60 feet across and 

' Tliat lie had been stmck dead. 6 feet high. It is pierced quite through, 

* Supposed by some to be the Sukh- to allow, as some think, the blood of the 
BAH in the present Mobqui of OMAR, sacrifices to flow off into the " Noble 
nom iU poiitioo, however, it seems Care " and the canals beneath it 


128 


DAT OP ATONEMENT. 


3. He took the blood from the mixer.^ With it he 
entered to the place where he etitereii, and stood in the 
place where he stood. He sprinkled of it once on high, and 
seven times below, and he did not purpose to sprinkle 
neither on high nor below, but unintentionally,* and so lie 
counted, " one, one and one, one and two, one and three, one 
and four, one and five, one and six, one and seven." He. 
went out and placed it on the golden pedestal, which was in, 
the Sanctuary. 

4. They brought to him the goat, he slaughtered it and 
caught his blood in a bowl. He entered to the place where 
he entered, and stood in the place where he stood, and 
sprinkled of it once on high and seven times below, and he 
did not purpose to sprinkle neither on high nor below, bat 
unintentionally ;° and so he counted, " one, one and one, one 
and two," etc. He went out, and placed it on the second 
pedestal, which was in the Sanctuary. R. Judah said 
" there was but one pedestal only." He took the blood of 
the bullock and laid down the blood of the goat, and 
sprinkled of it on the vftU opposite the ark, on the outside^ 
once on high, seveTi times below, and he did not purpose^ 
etc., and so he coimted. He took the blood of the goat and 
laid down the blood of the bullock, and sprinkled of it on 
the vail opposite the ark, nn the outside, once on high and 
seven times below, etc. He poured the blood of the bullock 
into the blood of the goat, and infused the full into the 
empty. 

5. And he went out to the altar which is before the LORD,. 
This was the golden altar. He began cleansing it, and wenti 
down. " From what place did be begin ?" " From the Worth- 
eastern comer, the North-western, South-western, and South- 
eastern, the place where he began with the sin-offering of the 
outer altar, at the same place he finished upon the inner altar." 
Ji, Eliezer said, " he stood in his place and cleansed, and io 
general he operated from below upward, excepting that which 
was before him, on that he operated from above downwards." 


BKLECTiowa. SPRINKLING THE BLOOD, 129 

6. He sprinkled on the middle' of the altar seven times, 
and the remainder of the blood he [wured out on the western 
founiUtioD of the outer altar, and the blood from the outer 
altar he poured out on the southern foundation. This and 
that commingled in tlie channel, and flowed out t^ the Kidroa 
Valley, and they were sold to the gardeners for manure, and 
they became guilty' in themselves. 

7. AH work of the day of atoaement is described in 
order. If the High Priest performed one before the other, he 
did nothing. If the blood of the goat be sprinkled before the 
blood of the bulioek, he must return, and sprinkle from the 
htood of the goat after the blood of the bullock. And if he 
had not tiuished the performances within, the blood was 
spilled. He must bring other blood, and return to sprinkle 
first from within. And so in the Sanctuary, and so in the 
golden altar, because all are an atonement in themselves. 
B. Gleazer and R. Simon say, "from the place where he 
stopped there he began." 


^^nded 
^Kdbot 


CHAPTEE VI. 

1. Both he-goata for the day of atonement are com- 
to be alike in colour, and in stature, and in price, 
bo be selected at the same time, and although they be 
et^ual, yet are they lawful. " If one be selectfid to-day 
and the other to-morrow ?" " They are lawful." " If one of 
them died ?" " If he die before the lot be cast, the priest 
shall take a pair for the second ; and if aft€r the lot be cast 
be die, the priest shall fetch another pair, and cast the lot 
over them anew. And be shall say, " if that for the Name 
6ie, this over which this lot comes will be a substitute for 
tlut Name ; and if that for Azazel die, this over which this 
lot comes will be a substitute for Azazel." And the second 
flhuU gu to pasture, until he become blemished, and he shall 
be sold, and his price must be put into the offertory. Since 


130 


DAY OF ATONEMENT. 


the Bin-offering of the congregation dies not. R Jadah 
said, "thou shalt die;"' and again said R. Judah, "is his 
blood shed ?" " The one to be sent forth shall die." " Has 
the one to be sent forth died ?" " His blood shall be ahed," 

3. The high priest came to the side of the goat to be 
sent forth, and be placed his two hands ' on liim and made 
confession, and thus he spake : " I beseech Thee, O Name, 
Thy people, the house of Israel, have done perversely, have 
transgressed and sinned before Thee, I beseech Thee, 
Name, pardon now their perverse doings, and their trans- 
gressions, and their sins, which they have pervereely com- 
mitted, and transgressed, and sinned before thee. Thy 
people the house of Israel, as is written in the law of Moses 
Thy servant, saying, ' For on that day shall he make an 
atonement for you to cleanse you from all your sins ; before 
the LORD ye shall he pure.'^ And the priests and the 
people who stood in the court, on hearing the Name clearly 
pronounced by the mouth of the High Priest, knelt and wor- 
shipped, and fell on their faces and said, ' BLESSED BE 
THE NAME. THE HONOUR OF HIS KINGDOM 
FOR EVER AND EVER"' 

3. They dehvered (the goat) to his conductor. All were 
eligible for conducting him. But the great priests made a 
rule, and they did not permit Israel to lead him forth. Said 
R. Joseph, " it occurred that Arsela of Zippori lead him forth, 
and he was an Israelite." 

4. And they made 8t«ps * for him by reason of the 
Babyloniaus," who plucked off hia hair and said to him, " take 
and go, take and go." The nobles of Jerusalem escorted him 
to the first booth. There were ten booths from Jerusalem to 
Zuk,* — ninety stadia — seven and a half to every mile. 

' R. Jndah addreuea in iniigiQation 

' It Bremn, scconliD(( to the Tslnnid. 
th»t there wna no "laying on of hands" 
aa either the luaming or evuning esuri- 
fice ; or on anj other pnhlic sscriflce, 
eiGC^itiiig the scapegoat and the hul- 
lock, when the congregation had i 


• Lev. 3 


' Or viaduct, or ciuieway. 


L 30. 


' Snppoaed to be Aleiandiine Jen, 
so called from liatrpd to the B«bs'loni»iui_ 

* Zak is HuppDsed by r.ii.i.i»-«n«^ 
Conder of the Paientiae Eiploiatiodr 

Fund to b« the mmteni el UbaXii 

about nix asd ■ half milu eaat c= 

Jerusalom in the directioa of the Dei^^ 

Sea, and on the way to the muu » 

Mird <Moni Mardea). A irell newtC^ 

place is still called B!r e< Sak. 


B!r (« sak. ^ 


8KLECTI0K8. 


THE GOAT IN THE WILDERNESS. 


131 


5. At every booth th^y sdd to him, " there is food, there 
is water," and they escorted him from booth to booth, except 
the last For they came not with him to Zuk, but stood 
afar off and saw his acts. 

6. "What did he do?" "His conductor divided the 
tongue of brightness (iv. 2.) Half he twisted on the rock, 
and half he tv^ted between his horns. And he thrust him 
backwards, and the goat rolled, and descended, and he had 
not reached to the half of the mountain, till his members were 
made members.^ He returned and sat under the last booth 
until darkness set in." " And when did he render garments 
unclean?"* "From his exit from the wall of Jerusalem." 
R Simon said, " from the time of his thrusting at Zuk" 

7. The High Priest came beside the bullock and he-goat 
which were to be burned. He cleft them, and brought out 
their entrails. He put them on a dish, and caused them to 
smoke upon the altar. He folded them in their skins, and 
caused them to be carried to the place of burning. " And 
when did he render garments unclean ?" " From his proceed- 
ing without the wall of the court." R Simon said, "when 
the fire kindled on the greatest part " (of the sacrifice). 

8. They said to the High Priest, " the he-goat has arrived 
in the wilderness," " And whence knew they that the he- 
goat had arrived in the wilderness ?" " They set watchmen, 
who waved handkerchiefs, and they knew that the he-goat 
had arrived in the wilderness." Said R Judah, " and was not 
ibis a great sign to them ? from Jerusalem to Bethhoron ^ 
there were three miles. They went a mile and returned, 
and rested the time of a mile, and they knew that the he-goat 
arrived in the desert." R Ishmael ^ said, " and was there 
not another sign to them ? a tongue of brightness was twisted 
on the door of the Sanctuary, and when the he-goat arrived 


^ Le, broken to pieces. 

* Mmimonidet says that those con- 
nected with the red heifer and scape- 
|p>at were rendered nnclean because 
these animals were " sin -bearing*' 
aniihals. All that Israelites now have 
to offer on the day of atonement is for 
males a whita ooek ^because gerer in 


Hebrew signifies a man and a cock), 
and for females a hen. And they pray, 
" Let this be my substitate, — this my 
atonement. This cock goeth to death, 
but may I be gathered and enter into a 
long and happy life, and into peace." 
» "Place of the hollow." 
* Bereitha, or External Traditions. 


DAY OF ATONEMENT. 


in the wilderness the tongue blanched, as is said, " Though 
your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as enow."^ 


CHAPTER VII. 

1, The High Priest came to read. If he wished to read 
in linen garments, he read. If not, he read in his own whit« 
stole. The public Minister of the congregation toolc out the 
roll of the Law, and delivered it to the Chief of the con- 
gregation, and the Chief of the congregation gave it to the 
Sagan, and the Sagan gave it to the High Priest. And the 
High Priest stood and received it and reatL He stood and 
read " after the death"" and " also on the tenth day."' And 
he rolled up the book of the Law, and put it into his bosom, 
and said, " More than what I have read before you is writteo 
here." And "on the tenth"* in the Pentateuch of overseers 
he recited, and pronounced upon it eight blessings ; upon the 
Law, and upon the Service, and upon the confession, and upon 
the forgiveness of sins, and upon the Sanctuary separately, 
and upon Israel separately, and upon Jerusalem separately, 
and upon the Priests separately, and upon the remainder of 
the prayer. 

2, He who saw the High Priest, when he read, could not 
see the bullock and the he-goat, when they were burning. 
And he who saw the bullock and the he-goat, when they 
were burning, could not see the High IMest, when he read. 
Not because it was forbidden, but because the way was far, 
and the work of both was proceeding at once. 

3, If he read in linen garments, he sanctified hia hands 
and his feet, he undressed, he descended and bathed. He 
came up, and wiped himself. They brought him goldec^^ 
garments, and he dressed, and he sanctified his hands an«3 
hi-s feet, and went forth and offered the ram for himself, atk^^, 
the ram for the people, and seven lambs without blemish of 
year old. The words of B. Eleazar. R. Akiba said, " wi" 


( 


BELEGTioys. CEREMONIAL. 133 

the morning sacrifice they were ofifered." And the bullock 
of burnt ofifering and the he-goat/ which was prepared with- 
out, were offered with the evening sacrifice. 

4. He purified his hands and his feet, and undressed, and 
washed, and he came up, and wiped himself. They brought 
to him white garments, and he dressed, and sanctified his 
hands and his feet. He entered to bring forth the spoon 
and the censer, he sanctified his hands and his feet, and 
undressed, and he descended, and washed. He came up, and 
wiped himself. They brought to him garments of gold, and 
he dressed, and sanctified his hands and his feet. And he 
entered to offer the evening incense, and to trim the lights ; 
and he sanctified his hands and his feet, and he dressed. 
They brought to him his own garments, and he dressed. 
And they escorted him to his house. And he made a feast- 
day for his friends, whto he went out in peace from the 
Sanctuary. 

5. The High Priest ministered in eight vestments. And 
the ordinary priest in four, in the tunic, and drawers, and 
bonnet, and girdle. To these, the High Priest added the breast- 
plate, and ephod, and robe, and (golden) plate. In these 
they inquired by Urim and Thummim.* And they did not 
inquire in them for a private person ; only for the King and 
the great Sanhedrin, and for whomsoever the congregation is 
necessary. 

CHAPTEE VIII. 

1. On the day of atonement, food, and drink, and wash- 
ing, and anointing, and the sandal latchet,^ and marriage 
duties, are restricted. *' But the king and bride are allowed 
to wash their face, and the woman after childbirth may wear 
sandals.'' The words of £. Eleazar, but the Sages forbid 
them. 

1 ^ , m tribes which were graven on the breut- 

Wum. xxix. 7. plat© of the High Priest 

' Urim and Thommin (lights and ' Sandals were, however, allowed 

peTfecti(ms),theJewa think, gave answer where there was fear of serpents and 

bj the divine iUnmination of the suit- scorpions. WooUen socks might be 

ibto ktttn oompoaing tlie names of the nsed. 


DAY OF AIOHEUEKT. 


2. Tlie person who eats the size of a big date and its 
grain, and drinks a jawful, is liable to punishment. All edible 
things are iuiit«d for the measure of the date, and all drink- 
able things are united for the measure of the jawful. Eating 
and drinking are not united. 

3. He who eata and drinks unwittingly, is only liable 
for one sin-offering. If he eat and work, he is liable for 
two siu-offerinffa. He who eats what is disagreeable for 
food, and drinks what is disagreeable for drinking, and he 
who d links fish brine, or salt gravy, is free. 

4. Tliey do not afflict young children in the day of 
atonement, but they coax them one or two years before, that 
they may he aceuatonied to the commandments. 

5. If the pregnant woman be affected by the odour, they 
give her food, till her strength return. To the sick person 
they give food by order from the physicians. If there be 
no physicians, they give him food at his own demand until 
he say " it is enough." 

6. Him who is affect«d with blindness, they fed even 
with unclean things, tUl his eyes got the power of vision. 
TTim who is bitten by a mad dog, they fed not with the 
caul of hia liver. But R. Mathia Ben Charash said, " it 13 
allowed ;" and again said K. Mathia Ben Charash, "to him 
who had tlutiat complaint they administered medicine in his 
mouth on the Sabbath day, since there ia uncertainty of life, 
and all uncertainty of life abrogates the Sabbath." 

7. " On whomsoever an old ruin falls, if there be a doubt. 
whether one be under it or not ; if there be doubt, whether 
he be alive or dead ; if there be a doubt, whether he be a 
foreigner or an Israelite ? " " They open over him the heap. 
If they find him alive, they open fully, but if dead, they 
leave him." 

8. The sin-offering, and the offering for known transgres- 
sion make atonement. Death and the day of atonement 
with repentance make atonement. Kepentance atones for 
light transgressions, for commands positive and negative. 
But grave offences are susjmnded, till the day of atODement 
come, and it will atone. 


SCLBCnOKH. 


KEPENTANCE AMD ATONEMENT. 


135 


9. He who said " I will sin and repent — I will sin and 
repent?" "They did not give him the opportunity of 
repentance," " I will sin, and the day of atonement shall 
atone?" "The day of atonement makes no atonement." 
TranagreaaioDs between man and Tlie Place ^ the day of 
atonement expiates. TlaiisgreBsiona between man and his 
neighbour, the day of atonement does not expiate, until hia 
companion l>e reconciled. This R. Eleazar Ben Azariah ex- 
plained " From all thy sins before the LORD thou shalt he 
cleansed." Transgressions between man and The Place, the 
liay of atonement expiated. Transgressions between man 
and his companion, the day of atonement did not expiate, 
until his companion be reconciled. Said E. Aldba, " Happy 
axe ye, Israel ' before whom are ye to be pure ? Who will 
purify you ? Your Father in heaven, aa is said, ' I will 
sprinlde clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean.'" Then 
said the Fountain of Israel, the LOBD, " Aa tlie fountain 
purifies tlie defiled, so the Holy One, blessed be He, purifies 
Israel" 


' i.t. Qod omaiprcMiit. The Jews 
in » tpiril of reverence me the wurdi 
"PUce" uid the "Nftme" to danole 
Ood. In rekdui^ the; do not nnw 
proncHKuv the word Jehofah, but sab- 
■titata Adonii for it ; and when Jehovsh 
I* followed bj' the word Adouu tbey 
tkn «M tb« word Elobim. The tnia 
pRmaitdatUiD of the Name hu been ■ 
— l(}e e t of much contention. It hu 


b«n rerionsly giTeo, u Yeheveh, Yeh- 
Tflh, Yahveh, Yahavah, Ythavch, and 
YeboiDh. When it wu uttered on the 
D»y of Atonement the wonhippers " tell 
on their faeeii" in rorerence tor it (vi. 
2). It WBS HpolieD (or the last time la 
the Temple by the luoDtb of Simon the 
Juat. Henceforward, the Oemara uys 
whoever attempU to pronounce it ahall 
haTB no part in the world to colno. 


136 TABERNACLES. TAuniD 


Treatise VI. 

©n Eabemaclea.^ 

Size and Covering of Tabernacles — ^What constitutes a Tabernacle — Exemp- 
tions — Palm Branches — Myrtle Boughs — Willows — Citrons — Reading 
and Blessing — Thrashing the Altar— Rejoicings — Pouring out of the 
"Water — The Lighting and Dancing — Singing and Music — Blowing 
the Trumpets — Offerings and Courses — The Course Bilgah. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. A BOOTH which is above twenty cubits high is disallowed. 
R Judah allows it. One which is not ten hands high, one 
which has not three walls, or which has more sun than 
shade, is disallowed. "An old booth?" "The school of 
Shammai disallow it; but the school of HiUel allow it." 
" What is an old booth ?" " One that was made thirty days 
before the feast : but if it were made with intention for the 
feast, even from the beginning of the year, it is allowed." 

2. " If a man make his booth beneath a tree ?" " It is as 
though he made it in the house." " If one booth be above 
another ?" " The upper one is allowed ; but the lower one is 
disallowed." R. Judah says, "if they cannot inhabit the 
upper one, the lower one is allowed." 

3. "If one spread a cloth over (its roof)^ on account of 
the sun ; or under (its roof) on account of the falling leaves; 
or if one spread a canopy over his bed ?" " It is disallowed. 
But he may spread a cloth over two bedposts." 

4. " If one have trained a vine, or a gourd, or ivy, and 
covered it over ?" " It is disallowed. But if the covering 

^ According to Mairaonides, we have * The cloth would change it into a 
in this treatise proof that it is coeval wit h tent, 
the laws of Moses on the same subject 


sBLEoriONs. HOOFING TABERNACLES. 1 37 

be larger than these, or if they have been trimmed, it is 
allowed." The rule is, everjrthing which contracts unclean- 
ness, and does not grow from the ground, must not be used 
for a covering ; but everything which does not contract un- 
cleanness, and grows from the ground, may be used for a 
covering. 

5. Bundles of straw, and bundles of wood, and bundles 
of twigs, must not be used for covering. But all of them, 
if untied, are allowed. And all of them are allowed for 
side walls. 

6. " They may cover it with laths." The words of R 
Judah ; but R Meier forbids it. " If one put a board four 
hands wide over it ?" " It is allowed, provided he do not sleep 
under it" 

7. " Rafters over which there is no ceiling ?" E. Judah 
says, "the school of Shanmiai say, 'let him loosen them, 
and remove the middle one out of three.' But the school 
of Hillel say, ' he may either loosen them, or remove the 
middle one out of every three.'" R Meier says, " he must 
remove the middle one out of every three, but he need not 
loosen them." 

8. "If one roof in his booth with spits, or bed-boards ?" "If 
the intermediate spaces be equal to them, it is allowed." " If 
one pile up loose sheaves to make a booth ?" " It is no booth." 

9. " If one interweave the side walls from above down- 
wards?" "If they be three handbreadths high from the 
ground, it is disallowed." "If from the ground upwards 
they be ten handbreadths high ?" " It is allowed." R Jos6 
says, " even as from the ground upwards ten handbreadths (are 
required), so likewise from the roof downwards, ten hand- 
breadths (are required)." " If the covering be three hand- 
breadths above the side walls ?" " It is disallowed." 

10. "If a house be unroofed and covered over?" "If 
there be a space of four cubits between the wall and the 
covering, it is disallowed : also a court, in which there is an 
enclosed passage." "If the large booth be inclosed with 
covering, which must not be used, and if there be below it 
a space of four cubits ?" " It is disallowed." 


138 TABERNACLES. 


TALMUD 


11. " If one make his booth like a pyramid ; or lean it 
against a wall ?" R Eleazar "disallows it, because it has 
no roof;" but the Sages "allow it" "A large reed mat, 
which has been made for sleeping purposes ?" " It contracts 
uncleanness, and they must not cover with it." " If made 
for covering purposes ?" " They may use it ; and it contracts 
no imcleanness." R Eleazar says, " whether large or small, 
if made for sleeping, it contracts imcleanness, and must not 
be used for covering ; but if made for covering, they may 
cover with it, and it contracts no uncleanness." 


CHAPTEE II. 

1. "If one sleep imder a bed in the booth ?" "He has 
not discharged his duty." E. Judah said, " we used to sleep 
imder a bed before the elders, and they said nothing to us." 
R Simon said, "it happened that Tabbi, the slave of R 
Gamaliel, used to sleep imder a bed, and R Gamaliel said to 
the elders, ' you have seen my slave Tabbi, he is a disciple 
of the Sages, and knows that slaves are exempted from the 
booth, therefore he sleeps imder a bedstead.' From this we 
in our way infer that he who sleeps under a bed has not 
discharged his duty." 

2. " If a man support his booth with the posts of his 
bed?" "It is allowed." R Judah says, "a booth which 
cannot stand by itself, is disallowed." A booth, which is 
unequally covered, and its shade greater than its sunlight, is 
allowed. If the covering be thick like a house roof, even 
though the stars are not seen through it, it is allowed. 

3. "If one make his booth on the top of a waggon, or on 
a boat ?" " It is allowed ; and he may go up to it on the 
festival." " If one make it on the top of a tree, or on the 
back of a camel ?" " It is allowed, but he must not go up to 
it on the festival."^ " If two sides (be formed) by a tree, 
and one by the hands of man, or two by the hands of man 
and one by a tree ?" " The booth is allowed, but he must not 

^ Bnt he may go np on the middle days of the feut. 


EATING AND DRINKING. 139 

go up to it on tlie fe8ti\'aL" " If three (sides be formed) by 
hands of man and the fourth by a. tree?" "The booth is 
allowed, and he may go up to it on the festival" This is 
the rule — when, on the removal of the tree, it can stand by 
itself, the booth is allowed, and one may go up to it on the 
festival 

4. " If one make his booth between trees, and the trees 
form side waUs ?" " The booth is allowed." Messengera on a 
pious errand are exempted from the booth. The sick and 
their attendants are exempted from the booth. Persona may 
occasionally eat or drink outside the booth. 

5. It happened that they brought to R Jochauan, son of 
Zachai, a dish to taste, and to Babban Gamaliel two dates 
and a jar of water, and they said, " bring them to the booth." 
But when they brought to R. Zadok food smaller than an 
egg, he took it in the napkin^ and ate it outside the booth, 
bat he did not say a blessing after it 

6. R. Eleazar says, "a man is bound to eat fourteen 
meals in the booth, oue by day and one by night ;" but the 
Sages say the matter is not' determined, except on the first 
night of the festival Moreover E. Eleazar said, "he who 
has not taken his meal on the first night of the festival, may 
complete it on the last night of the festival ; but the Sages 
say that he must not complete it, and for this it is said, 
■ {That which is) crooked cannot be made straight, and that 
which is wanting, cannot be numbered.'"* 

7. " If any one's head, and the greater part of his body, 
be in the booth, and his table in the house ?" The school of 
Shammai " disallow it ;" but the school of Hillel " allow it" 
The school of Hillel said to the school of Shammai, " did it 
not happen that the elders of the school of Shammai, and those 
of the school of Hillel, went to visit R. Jochanan, son of 
Hachorni, and they found him sitting with his head and the 
greater part of his body in the booth wliiJe his table was in 
the house, and they said nothing to him ?" The school of 
Shammai said to them, " Is tltat a proof ? Even the elders 


140 


TABERNACLES. 


did say to him, ' if such has been thy ciiBtom, thou bast 
never in thy life fulfilled the commandment of the booth.' " 

8. Women, slaves, and children, are exempted from the 
booth. A boy who no longer needs his mother b bound to 
the bootlL It happened that the daiighter-in-law of Shaoimai, 
the elder,^ gave birth to a son, and Shammai removed the 
ceiling and covered over her bed on account of the little one, 

9. During the whole seven days a man is to make the 
booth his regular dwelling, and (to use) his house only occa- 
sionally. " If rain fall, when is it permitted to remove from 
it ?" "When the porridge is spoiled." The elders iUuatrate 
this by an example : " To what is the matter like ?" " It is 
as if a servant pour out a cup for his master, who in return 
dashes a bowlful in liia face." 


CHAPTER m. 

1. A palm branch stolen or withered is disallowed. One 
from an idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to idol- 
atry,' is disallowed. If the point be broken off, or the leaves 
torn off, it is disallowed. If they be only parted, it is allowed. 
R. Judah says, " it must be tied together at the top." Shorts 
leaved palms from the Iron Mount' are allowed. A palm 
branch measiuing three hands, sufficient to shake it by, is 


2. A myrtle bough stolen, or withered, is disallowed. 
One from an idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to 
idolatry, is disallowed. If the point be broken off, or the 
leaves torn ofl', or if it have more berries than leaves, it is 
disallowed. But if the berries be lessened it is allowed ; but 
they must not diminish them on the festival. 

3. A willow of the brook stolen, or withered, is disallowed 
One from an idolatrous grove, or from a town withdrawn to 
idolatry, is disallowed. If the point be broken off, or the 
leaves torn off, or if it be a mountain willow, it is disallowed. 


SELECTIONS. CITRONS AND PALM-BRANCHES. 141 

One faded, or from which some leaves have dropped off, or 
which has grown on dry ground, is allowed. 

4. R Ishmael says, " three myrtle boughs, two willows, 
one palm branch, and one citron, even if two out of the three 
myrtle boughs have their points broken off." R Tarphon 
says, "even if three have their points broken off." R 
Akivah says, "even as there is one citron and one palm 
branch, so there is one myrtle bough and one willow." 

5. A citron stolen or withered is disallowed. One from 
an idolatrous grove, or from a city withdrawn to idolatry, is 
disallowed. One off an imcircumcised tree^ is disallowed. 
One from an unclean heave-offering^ is disallowed. From 
the clean heave-offering one is not to take a citron, but if it 
be taken, it is allowed. " One from what is doubtful as to 
payment of tithe ?" The school of Shammai " disallow it," but 
the school of Hillel " allow it." One is not to take a citron 
from the second tithe in Jerusalem, but if it be taken it is 
allowed. 

6. If a stain spread over the greater part (of the citron), 
if it have lost its crown, or its rind be peeled off, or if it be 
split, or bored, or if ever so little be wanting, it is disallowed. 
If a stain be spread over the smaller part of it, if it have 
lost its stalk, or if it be bored so that no part however small 
be wanting, it is allowed. A dusky citron is disallowed. A 
leek green one R Meier " allows," but E. Judah "disallows it." 

7. "What is the (legal) size of a small citron ?" R Meier 
says " like a nut" R Judah says " like an egg." And of 
a large citron?" "That one can hold two in his hand." 
The words of R Judah. But R Jos^ says, " One if (it must 
be held) in two hands." 

8. " They must only tie the palm-branch with its own 
kind." The words of R Judah. But R Meier says " even 
with twine." R Meier said, " it happened that the men of 
Jerusalem tied their palm-branches with gold thread." The 
Sages said to him, " underneath they tied them with their 
own kind." 

9. "When did they shake the palm-branch ?" "At the 

1 Ler. ziz. 28. * Nmn. zviii. 11, 12. 


142 TABERNACLES. taimw 

beginning and ending of " give thanks unto the Lord," ' 
and at " Save now, I beseech Thee, Lord." * The words of 
the school of HilleL But the school of Shanunai say, " also 
at ' Jjjrd, I beseech Thee, ' send now prosperity."* B. 
Akivah said, " I watched Eabban Gamaliel and R. Joshua ; 
and when all the people shook their palm-branches, they 
only shook theirs at 'Save now, I beseech Thee.'" If one be 
on the road, and have no palm-branch with him, he must, 
when he gets home, shake it at his table. If he have not 
done it in the morning, he loust do it towards evening, as 
the whole day is allowed for the palm-branch. 

10. If the hymns * be read to a man by a slave, or a 
woman, or a child,' he must repeat after them what they 
read, but it is a disgrace ' to him . If a grown-up man read 
it to him, he must repeat after him, Hallelujah. 

11. In a place where it is tbe custom to repeat,'' a man 
must repeat ; to simply read, a man must simply read ; to 
bless after the palm-branch, a man must bless. In every 
case according to the custom of the country. K a person 
buy a palm-branch from his neighbour during the Sabbatical 
year, he must give him a citron as a gift, for it is not per- 
mitted to buy a citron during the Sabbatical year. 

12. At first the palm-branch was used in the Sanctuary 
seven days, and in the country one day. But after the 
Sanctuary was destroyed, R. Jochanan the son of Zachai 
decreed, " that in the country the palm-branch should he 
used seven day.^, in memor)' of the Sanctuary," He at tlie 
same time also decreed, " that on the day of the wave-sheaf' 
it should be unlawful to eat new grain." 

13. If the first day of the feast fall on a Sabbath, all the 
people are to bring their palm-branches (beforehand) to the 
Synagogna In the morning they come early, and each 
man must distinguish his own palm-branch, and take it, for tJie 

this dotf cnnuot act u depntiM to 
' PealmcxviiL 1. - . .. - 

' PBdra ciTiiL 25. 

* Plalm uvilL SG. 

* I'aalnia tiiii. U> ciiili. ini^luitirB, 

* Theu not being legally bound ti 


SELEcrnoNB. PALM-BRANCHES AND WILLOWS. 143 

Sages say, " that a man cannot discharge his duty on the 
first day of the feast by means of his neighbour's pahn- 
branch, but on the other days of the feast he may discharge 
his duty by means of his neighbour's palm-branch." 

14. R Jos^ says, " if the first day of the feast fall on the 
Sabbath, and a man forget, and carry his palm-branch out on 
the public common, he is absolved, because he carried it out 
with permission." ^ 

15. A woman may receive the palm-branch from the 
hand of her son, or of her husband, and put it back into 
water on the Sabbath. R Judah says, " on the Sabbath they 
may put it back ; on the feast they may add water ; and on 
the middle days they may change the water." A child who 
knows how to shake, is bound to shake the palm-branch. 


CHAPTER IV. 

1. The palm-branch and the willow (were used) for six 
days and for seven. The hynm, and the rejoicings, for 
eight days. The booth and the pouring out of water 
for seven days ; and the musical pipes for five and for six 
days. 

2. The palm-branch (was used) for seven days. " How ? " 
*^ When the first day of the feast fell on a Sabbath, the palm- 
branch (was used) for seven days. Otherwise all the days 


were six." 


3. The willow (was used) for seven days. "How?" 
** When the seventh day of the wiUow happened to fall on a 
Sabbath, the willow (was used) for seven days. Otherwise 
all the days were six." 

4. ** How was the command for the palm-branch when the 
first day of the feast fell on a Sabbath ?" " They used to 
bring their palm-branches to the mountain of the House, and 
the inspectors received them, and arranged them on a bench. 
But the elders placed theirs in a chamber. And the people 
were taught to say, " Whoever takes my palm-branch in his 

^ Pwiniiiioii ariiiiig oat of his intentioii to folfll the Uw. 


144 TABERNACLES. talmud 

hand, be it his as a gift." On the morrow they came early, 
and the inspectors spread them before them. And they 
used to snatch them and hurt each other. When the 
Sanhedrin saw that persons were endangered, it was decreed 
that every man should take them home." 

5. " How was the conmiand for the willow ?" " There 
was a place below Jerusalem called Moza ;^ thither the people 
went down and gathered drooping willow-branches. And 
they came and erected them at the side of the altar, with 
their tops bending over the altar. They blew the trumpet, 
and sounded an alarm, and blew a blast. Every day they 
made one circuit round the altar, and said, " Save now, I 
beseech Thee, Lord ! Lord, I beseech Thee, send now 
prosperity." Rabbi Judah said, " I and HE save now, I 
beseech Thee."^ On the day itself^ they made seven circuits 
round the altar. "As they withdrew what did they say I" 
" Beauty is thine, Altar !" " Beauty is thine, Altar !" 
R Eleazar said "To the LORD, and to thee, Altar!" 
" To the LORD, and to thee, Altar !" 

6. As they did on the week-days, so. they did on the 
Sabbath, save that they gathered the willow-boughs on the 
Sabbath-eve, and put them into vases of gold, that they might 
not fade. R Joshua, son of Beroka, says, " they brought date- 
branches, and thrashed them on the ground at the sides of 
the altar " (others say " on the altar "). And the day itself 
was called, " the day for thrashing the branches." 

7. Immediately the children threw down their palm- 
branches, and ate their citrons. 

8. The hymn and rejoicings were for eight days. "How?" 
" It is taught, that a man is bound to the hymn, and the re- 
joicings in honour of the last day of the feast, even as on its 
other days." " How is the booth for seven days ? " " When 
a man has completed his eating, he is not to pull down his 
booth ; but after the evening sacrifice he may remove his 
furniture in honour of the last day of the feast." 

^ Means a place exempt from taxa- ' Deut. xzzii. 89. 
tion called Oolonin, perhaps the modem 

Colonia. Some, however, say it was a ' The seventh day on which they 

place in the Kedron Valley. used the willows. 


SELECTIONS. JOY OF THE WATER-DRAWING. 145 

9. " How was the pouring out of the water ?" "A golden 
pitcher holding three logs ^ was filled from Siloam. When 
they came (with it) to the Watergate they blew the trumpet, 
an alarm, and a blast The priest then went up the ascent to- 
the altar, and turned to his left Two silver basins were there. 
R Judah says, ** they were of lime, but their look was dark 
from the wine." And they were bored with two narrow 
nostrils, one wider, the other narrower, that both might get 
empty at once. " The one to the west was for the water ; the 
other to the east was for the wine; but if the water was 
poured into the wine basin, or the wine into the water basin, 
it was allowed." R. Judah said, " they poured out one log on 
each of the eight days." To him, who poured out, they said, 
" lift your hand :" for once it happened, that one poured over 
his feet,^ and all the people pelted him to death with their 
citrons. 

10. As they did on the week days, so they did on the 
Sabbath; save that on the Sabbath eve an unconsecrated 
golden cask was filled from Siloam, and placed in a chamber. 
K it were spilt or uncovered, it was refilled from the 
laver, as water and wine which had been uncovered were 
disallowed on the altar. 


CHAPTER V. 

1. The musical pipes were (played) [for [five and (some- 
times) six days. That is to say, the pipes of the water- 
drawing, which supersedes neither the Sabbath day nor the 
feast The (Sages) said, " he who has not seen the joy® of 
the water-drawing, has never seen joy in his life." 

2. With the departure of the first day of the feast, they 
went down into the women's court, and made great prepara- 

^ A log is about half a pint citrons till his body-guard interfered, 

' He if tald to have been a Saddncee and, as fighting took place, some six 

who rejected tradition. Alexander thousand Jews were killed in the 

Jaaiunu, to show his contempt for the Temple. Josephus. Antiq., Book xiii. 

Phiriseei, poured the water on the chap, xiii., 5. 

gromid. Tba people became excited, 

and pdted him with their ethrogs or ' Isaiah xii. 8 ; John viL 87» 88. 


146 TABERNACLES. talhvd 

tioDs.' Four golden candlesticks were there, and four golden 
basins on their tops, and four ladders to each candlestick, 
and four lads from the young prieats, and in their hands were 
jars of oil containing one hundred and twenty logs, with 
which they replenished each baain. 

3. The cast-off breeches and belts of the prieata were torn to 
wicks, which they lighted. And tliere was not a court in Jeru- 
salem that waa not lit up by the lights of the water-drawing. 

4. Pious and experienced men danced with lights 
torches in their hands, singing hymns and lauds before them. 
Ajid the Levites accompanied them with harps, psalteriee, 
cymbals, trumpets, and numberless musical inatrumeutK. 
On the fifteen steps which went down from the court of 
Israel into the women's court, corresponding with the fifteen 
songs of defjfreea,' stood the Levites with their musical instru- 
ments, and sang. And at the upper gate, which went down 
from the court of Israel to the court of the women, stood 
two priests with trumpets in their hands, ^\^len the cock 
crew, they blew a blast, an alarm, and a blast.' When 
they reached the tenth step, they blew a blast, an alarm, 
and a blast. And when they got into the court, they blew 
a blast, an alarm, and a blast. They went on blowing as 
they went, until they reached the gate, that leads out to the 
east. "When they reached the gate, that leads out to the 
east, they turned their faces westward,^ and said, 

" Our fathers, who were in this place, 
Turned their backs upon the temple ; 
And their faces towards the east, 
And woisbippcd the eun eaBtword.'' ^ 

E. Judah aaya, they repeated again and again, 

" But we unto the LOHD ; 
To the LORD are our ejee."' 

■ QaUeriH were erecteil for tbt the Cfaristiui dlspetuation belieren an 

women, and the nioD itood lielow them. directed (o tonk tu Jebun, who proniiHa 

< Psidnia cix. tu utiit. indiuive. to he lii their midiit (Mitt. xruL 20). 

' Tlie signal for drawing water. * Erekiel viii. 18. 

• The orthodox wor>hi])pe« in the • Thia Is one of the rery few tpeci- 

Temple looked towards the weat, or niena of Hebrew poetry, apart tram 

Hair of BolietL The Eial or Sun wor- Soripture (dating prior to the datrnc- 

1 tioD of the Temple) which have conic 


J 


BLOWIKO THE TRDMPET3 AND 0FFEEING8. 147 


5. In the sanctnarj- they did not blow the trumpet less 
than twenty-one times, nor oftener than forty-eight tunes. 
Every day they blew the trumpet twenty-one times, thrice 
at opening tlie gates, nine times at the daily offBring of the 
Tnnming, and nine times at the daily offering of the evening. 
When there were additional offerings they blew nine times 
mora On the eve of the Sabbath they ^ain blew aJx times; 
thrice to interdict the people from work, and thrice to 
separate the holy from the ordinary day. But on the eve 
of the Sabbath during the feast they blew forty-eight times : 
thrice at the opening of the gates, thrice at the upper gate, 
thrice at tlie lower gate, thrice at the water-drawing, tlirice 
over the altar, nine times at the daily offering of the morning. 
nine times at the daily offering of the evening, nine times at 
the additional oflerings, thrice to interdict the people irom 
work, and tKrice to separate the holy from the ordinary day. 

6. On the first day of the feast there were thirteen 
bullocks, two rams, and one goat. There then remained 
fourteen lambs for eight courses of priests.' On the first 
day six couises offered two Iambs each, and the other (two) 
courses one lamb each. On the second day five courses 
offered two lambs each, and the remaining (four) courses one 
lamb each. On the third day four courses offered two lambs 
each, and the remaining six one lamb each. On the fourth 
day three courses offered two Iambs each, and the remaining 
eight one lamb each. On the fifth day two courses offered 
two lambs each, and the remaining ten one lamb each. On 
tJie sixth day one course offered two lambs, and the remain- 
iDg twelve one lamb each. On the seventh day they were 
aU equal. On the eighth day they cast lots, as on other 
feasts. They said, " that the order wliich offered bullocks 
lo-day, was not permitted to offer bullocks to-morrow," But 
tbey changed in rotation. 

7. Three times in the year all the courses shared alike in 
the offerings of the great feasts, and in the distribution of the 


I Tht prinlhood wu iliTidel into 
twTOtj.fonr conmeg (1 Chron. iii<. 7- 
I*). Daring ths teut aU tbe coureca 
ulalftend, ud, m Mch dt j th* mambcr 


Mkj WM ilwrensed by one, Ibo 
werr rt(liatnbut«d so u to nipplf 
ring (or etary codim. 


shewbread. Id the Solemn Aescmbly' tliey say to each priest, 
" Here is unleavened bread for thee, and here is leavened for 
thee." The course in regular succession offered the daily 
sacrificeSj vows, and free-will offerings, and all the other 
sacrifices and serriees of the congregation. If a feast be 
next to the Sabbath, either before or after it, all the courses 
shared alike in the distribution of the sliewbread. 

8. "But if a day intervene between the two?" "The 
course in regular succession took ten loaves, and the loiterers' 
took two." At other times of the year, the course entering on 
duty took six loaves, and the course going off duty took six. 
E. Judah says, " the course entering took seven, and that going 
off took five." Those entering shared them on the north side 
(of the temple court), and those going out on the south Hidei 
The course Bilgah always shared theirs on the south side. 
But their alaughter-ring was fastened down, and the window 
of their closet was shut up.^ 

thp line or Klesznr, and Tour he anigned 
lo lh« tine of Itbamar. SuDuel it Mid 
lo have aiideil eight coimea more, and 
the ramHinJDg eight were added bj 
Dsvid. The Scriirtures, however, awwt 
that David nmuiged the vhole twentj- 
fQur courses. "Tha airangBinmt eon- 
tinued till the captivity. AfUc the 
eaptivity only four couraea retnnied — 
nunely Jnlush, Hirim, Puhor, and 
Immer. Thti Babylon Talmud meotinM 
Jojorib ioatead of Harinj, To retlon 
again tlie number at counsa,tweiity-(i>nr 
lota were csait intu a box, and each head 
of thi four couraea, which retnmed, draw 
six lots— oue for himself, and Bie fM 
the couises which the; wished to revive. 
The restored order of courses continoed 
as of old, except in the case of Jqjaiil^ 
who yielded the first nuik to Jedaiah, 
aa Jedaiah was of the famUj of Om 
High Priest Joshua, the son of Joiedek. 
They soon increased in nuoiben, and 
we lead that eafh cxiurse kept ■ station 
of two thoosand four hundrsil priMto at 
Jerusalem, and half a station at Jericho. 
The lesser niunber was statioMd at 
Jericho to give faonoi 


' In the tea«t o 


werks there were 


two leavened wave 


loBvoa (Lev. iliii. 


17). 


* Those prieatfl « 


ho were slow in nt- 


tendance, as they n 


ere obliged to share 


th the whole priest- 


* The course Bilgah was Bfteenth 
(] ChroD. xiiv. 11). Each coun<e had 
a ring to which the heads of the victims 
were tied, and also a duset for slnren. 
These were taken from the coutae Bilgah 
as a mark of disgrace. During the 
persecution of Antiochus, Miriam, a 
daughter of Bilgah, married a Syru- 
Orecian husband. When the Qreeka 
took the Temple, she struck the altar 
with her shoe, exclaiming, " wolf, 
wolf, how long art thou to consume the 
wealth of Israel, and canst not preserve 
them in their honr of need I " It was 
supposed that she must have learned 
something evit in her father'a house, 
and the whole course was therefore 
degnidal. The Rabbia say that the 
courses of the prieelfl were first ordained 
by Moses, and that he established eight 
of them. Four conrsea he assigned to 


8ELW3TION8. POUE NEW YEARS. 149 


Treatise VII. 
tlije i&eto gear* 

Four New Years — Judgments — New Moon — "Witnesses — Evidence — Samari- 
tans — Spreading the News — Beth Yangzek — Examining Witnesses — 
Rabban GamaliePs Plan of the Phases of the Moon — Rabbi Joshua — 
Sanhedrin — Comets and Trumpets — Intention — The Serpent of Brass — 
Jemaalem and Jamnia — Blessings — Texts of Scripture — How the Trum- 
pets are to be blown. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. There are four new years. The first of Nisan^ is a new 
year for kings and for festivals.* The first of Elnl^ is a new 
year for the tithing of cattle ; but R. Eleazar and R. Simeon 
say, " it is on the first of Tishri.* The first of Tishri is a 
new year for civil years, for years of release, and for jubilees, 
also for planting of trees* and herbs. The first of Sebat* is 
a new year for (the tithing of) trees according to the school of 
Shammai, but the school of Hillel say, " on its fifteenth." 

2. The world is judged at four periods : at the passover, 
for the growth of com ; at Pentecost, for the fruit of trees ; 
at new year's day, when all human beings pass before Him 
like lambs, as is said, " He fashioneth their hearts alike ; He 
considereth all their works ;"^ and at the feast of tabernacles, 
judgment is given for the rains. 

3. Messengers went forth (from Jerusalem) in six months: 
in Nisan for the passover ; in Ab^ for the fast ; in Elul for 
the new year ; in Tishri for the regulation of the feasts ; in 

^ Niian answered to part of March three feasts, beyond which one could 

and Aprfl. The reign of .kings was not neglect a vow. 
ooonted from this month, so that if a ' Part of August and September. 
king be^m to reign in Adar (February * Part of September and October. 
and March) in the foUowing Nisan he > Lev. ziz. 23-25. 
wonld bo reckoned to have reigned two ' Port of January and February. 
yeanu ^ Psalm xzziii. 15. 

* The paasoTflr was the first of the * Part of July and August. 


150 


THE NEW YEAR. 


Kialev' for the dedication; in Adar* for the feast of lots; 
and also in lyar^ during the existence of the Temple for the 
little passovcr. 

4. Far two months* they may profane the Sahbath, for 
Nisan and for Tiahri, lieeause in them the messengers went 
forth to Syria, and in them they regulated the feasts. And 
during the existence of the Temple they might profane it in 
all the months for the regulation of the offerings. 

5. If the moon^ appeared high and clear, or did not 
appear high and clear, the witnesses may profane the Sab- 
hath on account of it. R, Jobi? says, " if it appeared high 
and clear, they may not profane the Sahhath on account of it." 

6. It happened that more than forty pairs of witnesses 
were passing through, when E. Akivah detained them in 
Lydda. Eabban Gamaliel sent to him, " if thou thus detain- 
eat the people, it will be a stumbling-block in the future." 

7. When father and son have seen the new moon, they 
must go (before the Sanhedi'in), not that they may be com- 
bined together, but in order that, should the evidence of 
either of them be disallowed, the other may be combined 
with another witness. K. Simeon says, " father, and son, 
and relatives in every degree, may be allowed as competent 
witnesses for the new moon." E. Jos(5 says, " it happened 
that Tobias, the physician, his son, and his freed slave, saw 
the new moon in Jerusalem, and the priests accepted hia 
evidence, and that of his son, but disallowed his slave ; hut 
when they came before the Sanhedrin, they accepted him and 
his slave, but disallowed his son." 

8. These witnesses are disallowed — gamblers with dice, 
naurers,* pigeon-breeders,^ traders in produce of the Sabbatic&l 


' Part of NoTeniber vid December. 

* Fart of February uid Marcb. 
' Part of April and May. 

* Tbat m, for the Daw moon obaerv- 

' Tbs Talmud Btatet that vhen the 
mn and moon tcere Brat created they 
vers of e>]ual size. The niooa became 
Jealous of the bud, and "lie wa> ndnced 
in bulk. The moon then Hp))eal«il to 
Qod, uid aha waa cnnmh'H by the 
promiw that Jacob, Samuel, and David 


thi 


> be likewise small. Aa, how. 

kMne injuitloe ieemed to haT* 

mmltted, Ood ordainHl "a dn- 

inijring" an erery new moon, beoanae 

had become laas than the inn I 


' ThoK who bred plKeona, to bet on 
llieir qoickveaa of fliffbt, or to enlioa 
their neigbboure' pigeoua to their don- 


SELECTIONS. FIRE SIGNALS. 151 

year, and slaves. This is the rule — all e\ddeiice that cannot 
be received from a woman cannot be received from any of 
these. 

9. *'He who has seen the new moon but cannot walk ?" 
" They must bring him on an ass or even in a bed." Those 
afraid of being waylaid may take sticks in their hands, and 
if they have a long way to go, they may take provisions. If 
they must be a day and a night on the road, they may pro- 
fane the Sabbath in travelling to testify for the new moon ; 
as is said, " These are the feasts of the LORD, which ye 
shall proclaim in their seasons."^ 


CHAPTER II. 

1. If a witness were unknown, another was sent to testify 
to him. At first they received evidence of the new moon 
from any one ; but when the heretics^ bribed (the witnesses), 
they ordained that evidence should only be received from 
those who were known. 

2. At first high flames were lighted, but when the 
Samaritans mimicked them, it was ordained that messengers 
should be sent forth. 

3. "How were these high flames lighted?" "They brought 
long staves of cedarwood, canes, and branches of the olive 
tree, and the tow of flax, which was tied with twine. And 
one went to the top of the mountain and lighted them, and 
waved the flame to and fro, up and down, till he could per- 
ceive his companion doing so on the second mountain, and 
so on the third mountain," etc. 

4. " And where were these high flames lighted ?" " From 
the Mount of Olives to Sartaba ; from Sartaba to Grophinah ; 
from Grophinah to Hoveran ; from Hoveran to Bethbaltin ; 
there they did not cease to wave them to and fro, up and 
down, till the whole country of the captivity * looked like 
torches of fire." 

^ Ler. zxiii. 4. of the Saddacees, was a scholar of Anti- 

* Lit Bithoiin, the foUowers of . gonos of Socho. 
Biothos, who, with Zadok, the founder ' Babylon. 


152 


THE NEW TEAR. 


5. There was a large court iii Jerusalem called Betli 
Tangzek,' there all the T\'itn esses met, and there the 
Sanhedrin examined them. And they made great feasts f'lr 
them, that they might come often. At first they did not stir 
from thence all day.^ Rabban Gamaliel the elder ordained, 
that they might go two thousand cubits on every side. And 
not only they, but the midwife going to a birth ; and they 
who go to rescue from fire, or from enemies, or from inunda- 
tion, or from fallen buildings. These are as inliabitants of 
the place, and they have two thousand cubits on every side. 

6. "How did they examine the witnesses?" "The first 
pair which came were examined first, and they brought in 
the eldest of them, and they said to him, ' Tell us how you 
saw the moon — (lier horns) towards the sim, or away from 
the sun ? To the north, or to the south ? What was her 
attitude ? Towards where her declination ? And what v 
her breadth ?' If he said 'towards the sun,' he said no- 
thing. Afterwards they brought in the second and examined ;,, 
if the eWdence was found to agree, the evidence stood. The ■ 
remaining pairs of witnesses were then superficially examined, 
not because there was necessity for tSieir evidence, but n(*. 
to discourage them, that they might be T^-illing to corns 

7. The chief of the Sanhedrin said, {" the feast) is sancti- 
fied;" and all the people answered after him, "Sanctified, 
sanctified." Whether the new moon hiid been seen in itS' 
season, or not, they sanctified it. R. Eleozar, son of Zadok,. 
said, " il" it were not seen in its season, they did not sanctiQr- 
it, for heaven Ijad already sanctified it." 

8. Kabban (iamaliel hud on a tablet and on the wall a| 
his chamber figures and phases of the moon which ' " 
showed to ignorant witnesses, and said, " was it like tliis yoa 
saw her, or like that ?" It happened once that two witnessea 
came, and said, " we saw the moon in the morning in the 
east, and in the evening in the west ;" said R Johanan, a 

1 Bo called Id 
I . " tbe place lea 
■•Mkds, Botb Ywuk, " the place of chiinn," 


asLEcnoNs. FALSE WITNESSES. 153 

of Nourrie, " they are false witnesses," but when they came 
to Jamnia, Sabban Gamaliel received their evidence. Two 
other witnesses came, and said, " we saw the moon in her 
season, but on the next evening of the intercalary day she 
was invisible," and R Gamaliel received them. Said R 
Dosah, son of Arkenaz, " they are false witnesses, for how can 
they testify of a woman being delivered, and on the morrow 
she is still pregnant ?" To him said E. Joshua, " I approve 
thy words." 

9. Rabban Gamaliel sent to (R Joshua), " I order thee to 
come to me with thy staff and money on the day of atone- 
ment, according to thy reckoning." ^ R. Akivah went to (R 
Joshua), and found him sorrowing. He said to him, " I can 
prove that all Rabban Gamaliel has done is well done, for it 
is said, ' These are the feasts of the Lord, even holy convo- 
cations, which ye shall proclaim in their seasons,' ^ or out of 
their seasons ; I have no other feasts but these." R Joshua 
came to R Dose, son of Arkenaz. He said to him, " if we 
are to judge the tribunal of Rabban Gamaliel, we must also 
judge the tribunals which have existed from the days of 
Moses till now," for it is said, " Then went up Moses and 
Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of 
Israel" * " And why were not the names of the elders men- 
tioned, but to inform us that every three men in Israel who 
compose a tribunal, are as a tribunal of Moses ?" R. Joshua 
took his staff and money in his hand, and went to Jamnia 
to Rabban Gamaliel on the day when the atonement began, 
according to his reckoning. Rabban Gamaliel stood up and 
kissed him on his head, saying to him, " come in peace, my 
master and disciple, — my master in wisdom, my disciple in 
obeying my words." 

CHAPTER III. 

1. " The Sanhedrin and all Israel saw (the new moon) ; 
the witnesses were examined, but it became dark before they 

^ To canj money on the day of to R Joshna's reckoning it would have 
atonement wm nnlawftd, bat- according been a day too late 

* Ley. zziii. 4. * Exod. uiy. 9. 


THE NEW YEAR. 

could say, " Sanctified " ? " The mouth is intercalaiy." " The 
Sanhedrin alone saw it ?" " Two members must stand up and 
testify before them, and they shall say, 'Sanctified, sanctified,'" 
"Three composing a Sanhedrin sew it?" "Two of them 
must stand up, and their aaseasors must be seated with the 
single member, and before them they shall testify, and say, 
' Sanctified, sanctified,' because an individual cannot be 
trusted by himself alone." 

2. All comets are allowed, except (homa) of a heifet," 
because it is (written) hom.' Said Eabbi Jos^, " are not all 
cornets called horn ? for it ia said, ' When they shall make a 
long (blast) with the ram's horn.'"* 

3. The comet of the New Year was a straight horn of a 
wild goat ; and its mouthpiece was plated with gold. And 
the two trumpets * were stationed on each side. The cornet 
prolonged ita note when the tmmpets ceased, because the 
obligation of the day was for the comet. 

4. On fast days (there were) crooked ram's horns ; and 
their mouthpieces were plated with silver. And tiie two 
tnimpets were stationed in the midst. The comet ceased, 
and the trumpets prolonged their notes, because the obliga- 
tion of the day was for the trumpets. 

5. The jubilee is like the New Year for the sounding 
and the blessings. R. Judah says, "on the New Year they 
sounded rams' boms ; and on the jubilee wild goats' horns." 

6. A comet, which was rent and cemented, is disallowed. 
One cemented from fragments of comets is disallowed. "It 
had a hole, which was closed ?" " If it hinder the sound, it 
is disallowed ; but if not, it is allowed." 

7. " If one sound the comet within a pit, a cistern, or in 
an earthenware vessel, and one (outside) hears the sound of 
the comet?" "He is free."" "But if he hear the echo of 
the sound ?" " He ia not free." And so, if one be passing 
behind a synagogue, or his house adjoin the syna^gue. and 
he hear the sound of the comet, or the reading of the roll of 

' Nut tu rcniind God of th« lin of * Ilutnb. x. 
the goldeii valf, > From the obllgAtion of luutins w 

• Dent, iixiii. 17. ' Jo«h. vi. 6. wmicling. 


SELScnoNS. THE FIERY SERPENT. 155 

Esther, he is legally free, provided he heard it with due at- 
tention ; but if not, he is not legally free. Although one 
hears as well as another ; yet one hears with hearty intention, 
and another without hearty intention. 

8. " And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand 
that Israel prevailed,"^ etc. And how could the hands of 
Moses make the battle, or crush the battle ? But it is 
written to tell thee that whilst Israel looked to Heaven for 
aid, and subjected their hearts to their heavenly Father, they 
prevailed ; and when they did not do so, they were defeated. 
Like as He says, " Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon 
a pole, and it shall come to pass that every one that is 
bitten, when he looketh upon it, shall live."* And how 
could the serpent kill, or make alive ? But when the 
Israelites looked to Heaven for aid, and subjected their 
hearts to their heavenly Father, they were healed ; and when 
they did not do so, they perished. One deaf and dumb, or 
an idiot, or a child, cannot, as proxies, free others from their 
obligations. This is the rule — all who are not responsible 
for a thing, cannot free others from their obligations. 


CHAPTER IV. 

1. When the feast of New Year happened on the 
Sabbath, they used to sound the comet in the Sanctuary ; 
but not in the provinces. After the destruction of the 
Sanctuaiy, R Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed that they 
should sound it in every place in which there is a tribunal 
of justice. R Eleazar says, " E. Jochanan, son of Zacai, 
decreed it only for Jamnia." But the Sages said to him, 
" it was all one for Jamnia, and all one for every place in 
which there is a tribimal of justice. 

2. And again,' Jerusalem was privileged above Jamnia, 

^ Ezod. JCviL 11. whole city daring the session of the 

' Numb. xxL 8. Sanhedrin {i.e. till noon) ; but in 

' There is a supposed hiatus in the Jamnia they did not sound in the city, 

HishoA t«zt to the folio wing effect : ** In but only before the tribunal of justice. 

Jeniaalem they soondad through the And again," etc. 


156 


THE NEW YEAK. 


because every city which could be seen, and the sounding 
heard, and which was near, and to which it was allowed to 
go, might sound the comet ; but in Jamnia they could oviy 
sound it before the tribunal of justice, 

3. At first the palm-branch was taken seven days in the 
Sauctuftry, and one day in the provinces. After the destruc- 
tion of the Temple, R. Jocliauan, son of Zacai, decreed, 
" that the palm-branch should be taken in the provinces far 
aeven days, to commemorate the Sanctuary ;" also " that the 
whole day of the waving ' it should be forbidden (to eat new 
com)." 

4. At first they received evidence of the new moon 
during the whole (thirtieth) day ; but once the witnesses 
delayed (do min g, and the Levites erred in the chanL They 
decreed, that they should receive evidence only till the time 
of the evening sacrifice ; and if witnesses came after the 
evening sacrifice, that and the next day were kept holy. 
After the destruction of the sanctuary Rabban Jochanan, son 
of Zacai, decreed, "that they should receive evidence of the 
new moon during the whole day." R. Joshua, sou of Korcba, 
says, " and again Rabban Jochanan, son of Zacai, decreed that 
wherever the chief of the Sanliedrin might be, the witnesses 
need only go to the place of its meeting." 

5. The order of blessings to be said on the New Year is, 
"The Fathers,"^ and "The Mighty," and " Sonctiiication of 
the Name," and there are comprehended the " Kingdoms " 
without blowing the trumpet; "The Holiness of the Day," 
and he blows ; " The Remembrances," and he blows ; " The 
Trumpets," and he blows. And he says, " The Service," 
" The Confession," and " Blessing of the Priests." The 
words of R, Jochanan, son of Nonrri. Said R. Akivah to 
him, " if the trumpet be not blown afler ' The Kingdoms,' 
why are they mentioned f " But the order is, " The Fathers," 
and " The Mighty," and " Sanctification of the Name," 
and there are comprehended " The Kingdoms," with sanctifi- 

> i.e. Of the iheaf ot the Gnt-fhllta, bleuingia which wen uied in the m 
Ler. iziii. 10. of the Teraple and of thi »; 

* The titlea or the hesdingi ot the ont of JBruHlem. 


I 


SELECTIONS. READING THE SCRIPTURES. 157 

cation of the Day," and he blows ; " The Eemembrances," and 
he blows; " The Trumpets," and he blows. And he says, "The 
Service," " The Confession," and " Blessing of the Priests." 

6. They cannot read less than ten (texts of Scripture) 
relating to " The Kingdom," ten relating to " Eemembrances," 
and ten to "Trumpets."^ R Jochanan, son of Nourri, says, 
" if three be read from all of them, the duty is fulfilled, but 
they mention not the remembrance of the kingdom, and 
trumpet of vengeance.* They must begin with the Law and 
end with the Prophets." R Jos^ says, " if they end with 
the Law, the duty is fulfilled." 

7. (The minister of the congregation) must go over to 
the reading desk on the feast of the New Year. The second 
minister must blow the trumpet. But at the hour for the 
hymn the first must read the hymn. 

8. For sounding the trumpet of the New Year they may 
not transgress the Sabbatical limit, they may not remove for 
it a heap of stones, they may not climb a tree, and they may 
not ride a beast, or swim over water. Nor may they cut it' 
with anything that violates the Sabbatical rest, or violates a 
negative command. But if one wish he may pour into it 
water or wine.* They may not prevent children from blow- 
ing, but they may practise in teaching them. But he who 
practises blowing is not freed from his obligation, and he 
who listens to the practice is not freed from his obligation. 

9. The order of blowing the trumpet is, three blasts blown 
thrice. The measure of the blast is as six alarms. The 
measure of the alarm is as three shrieks. If one blew the 
first and prolonged the blast for the second to be as two, it 
reckons but as ona He who has said the blessings, and 
afterwards a trumpet is given to him, must blow a blast, an 
alarm, and a blast three times. As the minister of the con- 
gr^ation is bound, so is each individual bound. R Gamaliel 
Bays, " the minister of the congregation releases the public 
from their obligations." 

^ Three were read from the Uw, three ' t.e. They would not read inch pest- 

from the FHJm% and three from the ages as Ps. IzxviiL 89. 

Propheti, — nieh paMagea aa Ezod. zv. ' t.«. To improye ita tone. 

l8»Flk zziT.yXMk.xz. Si^ZeckziT. 9, etc * To clear ita tone. 


158 FASTING. 


TALMUD 


Treatise VIII . 

JFasting. 

When Rain is to be prayed for — Proclamations for Fasting — Ceremonial of 
Fasting — Prayers — Blowing of Trumpets — R Gamaliel and R Meier — 
Sign of Famine — Partial Rain — Pestilence — Story of Hone Hammeagal — 
— Lifting up of Hands— Deputies — Bringing Wood — Five things hap- 
pened in Tammuz and five in Ab — Mortifications — Rejoicings. 

CHAPTEE I. 

1. When do we remember in prayer the heavy raui?"* 
Eabbi Eleazar said, " from the first holiday of the feast (of 
tabernacles)," Rabbi Joshua said " from the last hoUday of 
the feast." To him said Eabbi Joshua, " when the rain is 
no mark of blessing in the feast, why should one remember 
it?" Said Eabbi Eleazar to him, "even I did not say to 
ask for it, but to remember the blowing of the wind, and the 
descent of the rain in its season." He replied to him, " if 
so, one can remember it always." 

2. We ask for rain only near to the season of rains. 
Eabbi Judah said,^ "he who passes last before the ark on the 
last holiday of the feast of tabernacles remembers it ; the first 
does not remember it. On the first holiday of the passover 
the first remembers it, the last does not remember it." How 
long do we ask for rain ? Eabbi Judah said, " till the pass- 
over be ended." Eabbi Meier said, " till Nisan depart,* as 
is said,* ' And He will cause to come down for you the rain, 
the former rain, and the latter rain in the first numth* " 

3. On the third day of Marchesvan * we ask for the rain. 
Eabban Gamaliel said, " on the seventh, fifteen days after the 

^ i.e. The Chazan that prays Musaph. * Joel ii 23. 

^ Nisan corresponded partly to March ^ Marchesvan corresponded partly to 
and April. October and November. 


SELECTIONS. NO ANSWER TO PRAYER. 159 

feast, that the last Israelite returning home from the feast 
may reach the river Euphrates." 

4. If the seventeenth day of Marchesvan arrive, and the 
rain does not come down ?" " Men of eminence begin to 
fast for three days. They may eat and drink by night. 
And they may work, and wash, and anoint themselves, and 
put on their sandals, and use their couches." 

5. " If the first day of the month Chislev ^ arrive, and 
the rain does not come down V* " The tribunal proclaims three 
fast-days * for the congregation. Persons may, however, eat 
and drink by night. And they may work, and wash, and 
anoint themselves, and put on their sandals, and use their 
couches." 

6. " If these days pass over, and there be no answer ?" 
The tribunal proclaims three other fast-days for the congrega- 
tion. Persons may, however, eat and drink while it is still 
day. But they are forbidden work, and washing, and 
anointing, and putting on sandals, and the use of the couch. 
And the baths are locked up." " If these days pass over, 
and there be no answer?" "The tribunal proclaims for 
them seven more*; these are altogether thirteen fast-days for 
the congregation." "And what are these fast-days more 
than the first six ?" " Because during them men blow with 
the trumpets and lock up their shops." On Monday they 
can half open them at dark. But on Thursday they may 
open them for honour to the approaching Sabbath* 

7. " If these days pass over, and there be no answer ?" 
** People diminish business, building, planting, betrothals and 
marriages, and salutations of peace between man and his 
friend, as children of men ashamed before OMNIPEESENCE" 
The men of eminence have again recourse to fasting, till 
Kisan be ended. If Nisan be ended, and the rain comes 
down, it is a mark of cursing, as is said/ " Is it not wheat 
harvest to-day ?" etc. 


' Part of Norember sad port of De- on a Thursday Moses went up to Mount 

cember. Sinai, and retnraed on a Monday with 

' The faai-daja of strict Pharisees the second Tables of the Law. 

ware Mandays and Thnndaya, because * 1 Sam. ziL 17. 


CHAPTEK II. 

1. " What is the order of the fast-days ?" " Men draw- 
out tlie ark coutaining the roUs of the Law to the public 
street of the city, and they put burnt ashes on the top of the 
ark, and on the head of the prince, and on the head of the 
president of tlie tribunal, and every one takes and puta ashes 
ou his own head." The most ^ed of them saya before them 
touching words, " Brethren, it is not said for the men of 
Nineveh, ' And God saw their sackcloth and their fasting,^ 
but ' God saw their works, that they returned from their 
evil way.' And iu the tradition (of the prophet) he says ' 
' Rend your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the 
Lord your God.' " 

2. "WTien they stood in prayer, they placed before the 
ark an aged man and full of experience, one who had 
children and an unblemished house, that liis heart be not 
distracted in prayer, and he says before them twenty-four 
blessings, the usual eighteen for every day, and he adds to 
them six more. 

3 These are they, " remembrances,"' and " blowing of the 
trumpets," " " In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and He 
heard me," * " I will lift up my eyes unto the hills," ' " out 
of the dppths have I cried unto Thee, Lortl,"* " A prayer of 
till! afflicted when be is overwhelmed."' Eabbi Judah says, 
" it was not necessary to say the ' remembrances.' and ' the 
trumpets,' but he said instead of them, 'If there be in the 
land famine, if there be pestilence,'" ® etc. " The word of the 
Lord that came to Jeremiah concerning the dearth." ^ And 
be said their closing benediction. 

4. For the first additional prayer he said, " He who 
answered Abraham our father on Moimt Moriah, He shall 
answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. 
Blessed be Thou, Lord, the Redeemer of Israel." For the 
second he said, " He who answered our fathere by the Red 


Jonah iiL 10. 


' Joel li. 13. 


' Prajere for tl 


eNtiw 


P«alm CO. i. 


■ Piukn cut i. 


' PBBlmCIII. 


Psalm cii. 


' 1 Kii>ss Tiii 37. 


' Jer. liT. L 


ItJl 


sea. He will answer yoti. and hear the voice of your CTy thia 
day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who rememberest Uiose forgot- 
ten by man." For the third he said, " He who answered 
Joshua in Gilgal, He will answer you, and hear the voice 
of your cry this day. Blessed be Thou, Lord, who hearest 
the blowing of the trumpet." For the fourth he said, " Ha 
who answered Samuel in Mizpah, He will answer you, and 
hear the voice of your cry this day. Blessed bo Thou, 
Lord, who heareat the cry of distress." For tlie fifth he 
said, " He who answered Elijah on Mount Carmel, He will 
answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. 
Blessed be Tliou, Lord, who hearest prayer." For the sixth 
he said, " He who answered Jonah from the fish's belly. He 
will answer you, and hear the voice of your cry this day. 
Dieted be Thou, Lonl, who art ever answering prayer in the 
time of ne«d." For the seventh he said, " He who answered 
r>«vid and Solomon his son in Jerusalem, He will answer 
yoa. and will hear the voice of your cry thia day. Blessed 
be Tliou, Lord, who hast pity on the earth." 

5. It happened in the days of Babbi Chelpatha and B, 
Chanania. son of Teradion, that a minister passed before 
(he ark. and finished the whole blessing, and the congregation 
did not answer after him, Amen. One cried out, " Let the 
priests blow the trumpets ;" they blew. (The minister 
prayed), " May He who answered Abraham our Father on 
Hoant Moriah answer you, and hear the voice of your cry 
this day." (One cried out), " Let the sons of Aaron blow an 
aliirm ;" they blew an alarm. (The minister prayed). " May 
He who answered our fathers by the Bed Sea, answer you, 
and hear the voice of your cry this day." And when the 
TOMter came before the Sages tliey said it was not customary 

_fai do ao, save in the Eastern gate and on the Mountain of 
'Sense. 
i. These are the first three fasts. The priests of the 

flily Watch of the Temple faat^d, hut not completely. 

^^d the priests of their " Father's House "^ did not fast at aU, 


162 


FASTINO. 


In the second three fosta the men of the Watch fasted com- 
pletely. And the men of their " Father's House " fasted, but 
not completely. " In the seven last fasts both of them 
fasted completely." The words of Eabbi Joshua. But the 
Sages say, " in the three first fasts neither one nor other fasted 
at all. In the second three faats the priests of the Watch 
fasted, but not completely. And the priests of their 
' Father's House ' did not fast at alL In the seven last 
fasts the priests of the Watch fasted completely, and the 
priests of their ' Father's House ' fasted, but not completely." 

7. The men of the Watch are allowed to drink wine by 
night, but not by day, and the men who inherit the patri- 
mony of their fathers ' may not drink it neither by day nor 
night. The men of the Watch and the Delegates * are not 
allowed to shave, nor wash, except on Thursdays for the 
honour of the approaching Sabbath. 

8. That which is written in "The Eoll of Fasting."' 
" not to mouni " on certain days — the day before them it is 
not allowed- — the day after them it is allowed to mourn, 
Eabbi Jos^ said, " both before and after the day it is not 
allowed." But when it is written, " not to fast," both the 
day before and the day after the fast, it is allowed to fast. 
Eabbi Josi5 said, " before the fast it is not allowed — after 
the fast it is allowed." 

9. The rulers must not proclaim fasts for the congregation 
to begin on Thursday, so as not to raise the market But the 
three first fasts are Monday, Thursday, and Monday. And the 
three second, Thursday, Monday, and Thurstiay. Eabbi Jos^ 
said, " as the first fasts are not to begin on Thursday, so like- 
wise the secoiiil and tlie last are not to begin on that day." 

10. " The rulers must not proclaim fasting for the congre- 
gation on the feast of New Moon, and on the feasts of Dedi- 

Watchea. Eooli Waliili mluiBtared Tor n ' This iitirADa the offidating priests. 

weekiDthBTemplH. Theae Watches w^re 

again BuUlivideil ioto sovea " Father's * The delegstss -were the rapresents- 

Hoosea, " and each " PBther"B House " tivea of the rongregBtion, who attendM 

officiatnl for n day in the Temple, aC the public socriHcea, and prajed ua 

A diapenaation from fasting wan grouted their belialf. 

to the prieaU on dutj, that they might 

Dot be weak in the lervioe of the ' Thiawaa a hook written in Choldec, 

Saoctaary. ui is proreU hy the quotations from it. 


SELECTIONS. PESTILENCE. 163 

cation, and Purim; but if they have already begun, they 
need not cease." The words of Eabbi GamaKeL Said R, 
Meier, " even though Eabbi Gamaliel said they need not 
cease, he admits that the congregation do not fast the whole 
day; and so also on the ninth of Ab, the fast for the 
burning of the temple, if it happen on the eve of the 
Sabbath," 


CHAPTER III. 

1. The order of these fasts is said only for the first rains. 
But if the sprouts wither, men blow an alarm oflf-hand. 
And if the rains cease between rain and rain forty days, men 
blow an alarm off-hand. Because it is a sign of famine. 

2. If the rains came down for the sprouts, but did not 
come down for the trees, for the trees, but not for the 
sprouts, for both these, but not for the wells, pits, and caves, 
men must blow an alarm for them off-hand. 

3. And so also for the city, on which the rain did not 
come down, as is written,^ " And I caused it to rain upon 
one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city ; one 
piece was rained upon, and the piece whereupon it rained 
not withered." This city fasts and blows an alarm, and all 
its neighbouring cities fast, but do not blow alarms. E. 
Akiba said, " they blow alarms, but do not fast" 

4. And so for a city, in which there is pestilence, or 
falling of buildings, that city fasts and blows an alarm, and 
all the neighbouring cities fast, but do not blow an alarm. 
Eabbi Akiba said, "they blow alarms, but do not fast" 
" What is pestilence ?" "A city containing five hundred men, 
and there go forth from it three dead in three days, one after 
the other ; this is pestilence, less than this is not pestilence." 

6. For these things men blow an alarm in every place — 
for the blastiQg and for the blighting, for the locust and for 
the caterpillar, and for the evil beast, and for the sword, they 
blow an alarm over them, because it is a spreading wound. 

6. It happened that the elders went down from Jerusalem 

* Amos iv. 7. 


164 FASTING. 


Tin^^^ 


to their cities, and proclaimed fasting, because the blasting 
appeared, as much as would fill an oven, in Askelon. And 
again they proclaimed a fast, because the wolves devoured 
two children beyond Jordan : Rabbi Josd said, " not because 
they devoured them, but because the wolves were seen." 

7. For these things men blow an alarm on the Sabbath — 
for a city, encompassed by Gentiles, or by a flood, and for a 
ship tossed in the sea. Kabbi Jo34 said, " for help, but not 
for a cry of distress," Simon the Temanite said, " also for 
pestilence," but the Sages did not admit it. 

8. For all distress — ^may it not come on the congregation 
— men sound an alarm, except for too much rain. It hap- 
pened that they said to Honii Hammeagal, " pray that the 
rain come down:" he said to them, "go and bring in the 
paaaover ovens, that they be not dissolved." lie prayed, 
but the rain did not come down — What did he do I He 
dug a hole and stood in it, and said before HIM, " Our 
Lord of the world, thy sons have turned towards me, be- 
cause I am a son of the House in Thy Presence, I am 
sworn in Thy great Name, that I move not from hence, till 
Thou have pity on Thy children." The rain began to drop ; 
he said, " I did not ask it thus, but rains for wells, pits, and 
caves." The rain began to descend with storm. He said, 
" I did not ask it thus, but rcaaouable rain, with hles.'iing 
ami free will" The showers came down as they ought, 
until all Israel went up from Jerusalem to the Mount of 
Olives oil account of the rains. They came and said to 
him, " as thou hast prayed that the rains should come down, 
at) pray that they may depart," He said to them, " go and 
see if the Stone of Proclamation ' be covefeA" Simon the .^^ 
son of Shatach sent to him word, " if thou wert not HomiB ^t^ 
I would excommunicate thee ; but what shall I do to tli«^^^^ 
since thou prayest before OMNIPRESENCE, and He does t^:^-^ 
will, as a son who plays upon his fattier, and he does b^:r :SiK 
will ? and for thee the Scripture says, " Thy father and ifc?^-^ 
mother shall Ije glad, and she that bai-e thee shall rejoice-' """' 

' A slonB OD wbich lost jirnperty vaa deposited, 
made, no that ils owner might reclaim it. 


SELECTIONS. 


RAIN. 165 


9. " If men were fasting, and the rains came down for them 
before the sun rose V " They need not complete the day." 
" If the rains came down after sunrise ? " " They must 
complete it" R Eliezer said, " before noon they need not 
complete it, if after noon they must complete it." It hap- 
pened, that the rulers proclaimed a fast in Lydda, and the 
rains came down in the forenoon. Said R Tarpon, " go and 
eat, and drink, and make holiday." They went and ate and 
drank, and made holiday, and they came in the evening and 
read the great Thanksgiving."^ 

CHAPTEE IV. 

1. Three times in the year the priests elevate their hands 
to bless the people, four times a day — in the morning prayer, 
in the following prayer, in the evening prayer, and at the 
locking of the gates. These times are the fast days, on the 
fasts of the deputies, and on the day of atonement. 

2. These are the Delegates, according as is said, " Command 
the children of Israel, and say imto them, My offering and 
my bread for my sacrifices made by fire."^ And how is it 
possible, that the offering of a man should be sacrificed, and 
he does not stand by it ? Therefore ^he former prophets 
decreed four-and-twenty Watches. For every Watch there 
were Delegates in Jerusalem of priests, Levites, and Israelites. 
When the time approached (for them) to go up, the priests 
and Levites went up to Jerusalem, and the Israelites, who 
belonged to the Watch, gathered in their cities and read in 
the history of Genesis. 

3. And the Delegates used to fast four days in the week, 
from the second day till the fifth. But they did not fast on 
the eve of the Sabbath, for honour to the Sabbath. Nor on 
the first day, that they should not go forth from repose and 
enjoyment, to toil, and fasting, and death. On the first day 
they read in Gtenesis,* " and let there be a firmament" On 
the second, " let there be a firmament and let the waters be 
gathered together." On the third day, " let the waters be 

^ PMlm czzxtL ' Numbers xxviiu 2. ' Oen. I 6, etc 


166 


FASTTSG. 


gathered together, and let there be lights." Ou the fourth, 
" let there be hghta, and let the waters bring forth abun- 
dantly." On the fifth, " let the waters bring forth abun- 
dantly," and " let the earth bring fortlL" On the sLttb, " let 
the eartli bring fortli," and " the heaveua were tinished." 
Two men read a large portion, but a amull portion was read by 
one. At morning prayer, at the following prayer, at the 
evening prayer, they went in and read orally (by heart), as 
they read the " Hear.'" etc. On the eve of the Sabbath they 
did not go in to evening prayer for honour to the Sabltatli. 

4. Every day when there ia praise, the Delegates are not 
at morning prayer. When there ia the ailditional offering at 
the following prayer, there ia not the cloaing prayer at the 
locking up of the gates, " When there ia the offering of 
the wood, there is not the evening prayer." The words of 
Eahbi AMba. The son of Azai said to him, R Joshua thus 
taught it : " when there was an additional offering, the 
Delegates did not come to evening prayer ; when there was 
the offering of the wood, they did not corae to prayer at the 
locking up of the gates." R. Akiba changed hia opinion, 
and taught as the son of AzaL 

5. The times of bringing wood for the altar by priests 
and people were nine. On the firet of Nisan,' the children 
of Arach son of Jndah brought it. On the twentieth of 
Tammuz,' the children of Da^id the son of Judah brought 
it. On the fifth of Ab,* the citildreu of Parhush the son of 
Judah brought it. On the seventh, the children of Jonadab 
the aon of Rcchab brought it. On the tenth, the children 
of Suiah the son of Benjamin brought it On the fifteenlli, 
the children of Zathva the son of Judah brought it, and with 
them the priests and Levites and all who were ignorant of 
their tribe. And the children of Gonebi Eli * and tlie 
children of Kozhi Kezihoth. On the twentieth, the children 
of Pachath Moab the son of Judah brought it. On the 

* Dflut. »i. 4. etc dried figs ;" bccaiwe whsn fnrbiddsD by 
' Part of Marcli nnd April. Jeroboam to go up to tlie Temple wilh 

* Put or June snd July. tho llrst-(hiita lud wood, they dtccivnl 
' Part of July and AuguaL tho watehan by Baying they wen only 

* i.e. "Thieves of thu [lOilJe and going to jireiia tigs. — Jer. Tal. 


SELECTIONS. MOURNING AND JOY. 167 

twentieth of Elul,^ the children of Adin the son of Judah 
brought it On the first of Tebeth, the children of Parhush 
returned the second time. On the first of Tebeth,^ there 
was no meeting of the Delegates, as there was on it " The 
Praise," and the additional offering at the following prayer, 
and the offering of the wood. 

6. Five things happened to our fathers on the seventeenth 
of Tammuz, and five on the ninth of Ab. On the seven- 
teenth of Tammuz the stone tables were broken, and the 
daily offering ceased, and the city was broken up, and 
Apostemus * burnt the law, and he set up an image in the 
Temple. On the ninth of Ab it was proclaimed to our 
fathers, that they should not enter the land, and the House 
was ruined for the first and second time, and Either was 
taken, and the city was ploughed up. On entering Ab we 
must diminish joy. 

7. The week in which the ninth of Ab comes, men are 
not allowed to clip their hair, or wash their clothes ; but on 
Thursday they are allowed, for honour to the Sabbath. On 
the eve of the ninth of Ab one must not eat from two dishes, 
must not eat flesh, and must not drink wine. Rabban Simon 
the son of Gamaliel said, " one must change the style of 
living." R. Judah " enjoined to turn over the beds," but 
the Sages did not approve him. 

8. Said Babban Simon the son of Gamaliel, "there were no 
holidays in Israel like the fifteenth of Ab, or like the day of 
atonement. Because in them the daughters of Jerusalem 
promenaded in white garments borrowed, that no one might 
be ashamed of her poverty. All these garments must be . 
baptized. And the daughters of Jerusalem promenaded 
and danced in the vineyards. And what did they say ? 
' Look here, young man, and see whom you choose ; look not 
for beauty, look for family ;' * Favour is deceitful, and beauty 
is vain, but a woman that feareth the Lord, she shall be 
praised ;' and it is said ' Give her of the fruit of her hands, 
and let her own works praise her in the gates,' « and also it is 

^ Part of August and September. ' Antiochus Epiphanes. 

' F^ of December and January. * Prov. xxxi. 80, 81. 


168 FASTING. 


TALMUD 


said, ' Go forth, ye daughters of Zion, and behold King 
Solomon with the crown, wherewith his mother crowned him 
in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness 
of his heart/ ^ The day of his espousals, this is the gift of the 
Law ; and in the day of the gladness of his heart, this is the 
building of the Sanctuary, and may it be speedily built in 
our days. Amen." 

1 Sol Song, iiL 11. 


8ELBCTI0NS. THE FEAST-OFFERING. 169 


Treatise IX. 

tKlje JFeast ©ffering^^ 

What is a Child ? — Offerings — Crooked and Straight — Remission of Vows- 
Persons unsuitable for the World — Laying on of Hands — Baptisms — De- 
filements — Purity — Vessels of the Sanctuary. 


CHAPTER I. 

1. AiiL are bound to appear in the Temple, except the deaf, 
an idiot, and a child, and an eunuch, and women, and slaves 
who are not free, and the lame, and the blind, and the sick, 
and the aged, and the man who cannot go afoot. " What 
is a child V " Every one who cannot ride on the shoulder 
of his father, and go up from Jerusalem to the Mountain of 
the House." The words of the school of Shammai. But 
the school of Hillel say, " every one who cannot grasp his 
fathei^s hand, and go up from Jerusalem to the Mountain of 
the House," as is said, " three times." ^ 

2. The school of Shammai say, " the appearance in the 
Temple is with two pieces of silver, and the peace-oflfering 
with a meah of silver."* But the school of Hillel say, " the 
appearance is with a meah of silver, and the feast offering 
with two pieces of silver." 

3. The burnt offerings of the appointed feasts come from 
ordinary money ; but the peace-offering from tithes. " Tlie 
offerings on the first holiday of the passover ?"* The school 
of Shammai say, " from ordinary money," but the school of 
Hillel say, " from tithes." 

^ The feast ofTering (chagiga) was the ' Exod. zziiL 14. 
offering of individual wonbippere, and 

was quite distinct from the sacrifices of ' Worth perhaits Sd. 
the whole congregation. See Treatise 
on the PassoTer, vi 4 {note). * Jer. TaL says "Tabernacles.** 


170 THE FEAST-OFFERING. talmud 

4. Israelites discharge their duty with vows, with free- 
will oflFerings, and with tithes of animals ; and priests with 
sin-offerings, with trespass-offerings, and with the breast 
and shoulder, and first-born, but not with fowls, nor with 
meat-offerings. 

5. "If one have a large family and small income?" 
" He must bring more peace-oflferings, and less bumt-oflfer- 
ings." " If a small family and large income ?" " He must 
bring more burnt-offerings, and less peace-offerings." " If 
both be small ?" " Of this they say, a silver meah, and two 
pieces of silver are suflScient." " If both be large ? " " Of 
this it is said, every man shall give as he is able according 
to the blessing of the Lord thy God which He hath given 
thee."i 

6. When one did not bring his peace-offering on the 
first holiday of the feast, he may bring it during the holidays, 
and even on the last day of the feast. ** If the feast passed 
over, and he did not bring the peace-offering ? " " He is 
not obliged to bring it." . For this it is said, " that which 
is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is want- 
ing cannot be numbered."* 

7. Eabbi Simon the son of Menasia said, " if thou shalt 
say, a thief or a robber, he may return and become straight." 
R Simon the son of Jochai said, " we do not call one crooked, 
save one straight at first, and he became afterwards crooked ; 
and this is the disciple of the wise, who departs from the 
Law." 

8. The remission of vows is like flying in the air, and it 
has no foundation. The decisions for the Sabbath, peace- 
offerings, and trespasses, are as mountains hanging on 
a hair; because the verse is small but the decisions are 
many. Jurisprudence, and the Temple service, cleanness and 
uncleanness, and illegal connections, have their own founda- 
tions ; they, they are the body of the law. 

1 Deut xvL 17. • EccL i 15. 


SBLBCTioNS. LAYING ON OF HANDS. 171 


CHAPTEE 11. 

1. Men may not discourse on illegal connections with 
three,^ nor on the work of creation with two,^ nor on the 
cherubs with one,^ save when one is wise, and comprehends 
it of his own knowledge. Every one who considers four 
things, it were suitable for him that he did not come into 
the world. What is in the height ? what is in the depth ? 
what is before ? and what is behind ? And every one who 
is not anxious for the honour of his Creator, it were suitable 
for him that he did not come into the world. 

2. Jos^ the son of Joezar said that " one is not to lay 
his hand on the offering." Josd the son of Jochanan said, 
'' he is to lay his hand on the offering." Joshua the son of 
Ferachia said, that he " is not to lay on his hand." Nittai 
the Arbelite said, "he is to lay on his hand." Judah the 
son of Tabai said, that " he is not to lay on his hand." 
Simon the son of Shatach said, '' he is to lay on his hand." 
Shemaiah said, '' he is to lay on his hand." Abtalion said, 
^ he is not to lay on his hand." Hillel and Menachem did 
not dispute. Menachem went out and Shammai entered. 
Shammai said, " he is not to lay on his hand." Hillel said, 
** he is to lay on his hand." * The first were Princes, and 
the second were Presidents of the Tribunal. 

3. The school of Shammai said, " men may bring peace- 
ofiferings during the feast, but they are not to lay their hands 
on them, and they are not to bring burnt-oflTerings." But 
the house of Hillel say, " they may bring peace-offerings, 
and burnt-offerings, and lay their hands on them." 

4. " When Pentecost happens to be on the eve of the 
Sabbath?" The school of Shanmiai say, "the day of 
slaughtering the offering is after the Sabbath." But the 

^ From motiyes of delicacy. but for public sacrifices there seems 

» This must be done only by one (according to the Talmud) to have been 

j)g^ 1^ 32) — * rf no "laymg on of hands, except in the 

, ' ^' , case of the scapegoat and the bullock, 

Ezek. X. ; Isaiah vi. when the congregation had sinned 


4 


This decision is for private sacrifices, through ignorance. 


172 


THE FEAST-OFFEKING. 


Bchool of Hillel say, " there is no day of slaughtering after 

the Sabbath." But they both acknowledge that if it happened 
to be on the Sabbath, the day of slaughter is after tlie 
Sabbath. And the bi{;h priest must not robe in his vest^ 
menta, though they are allowed in seasons of mourning and 
fasting, for fear of contirming the words of those who aayl 
that " Pentecost is after the Sabbath." ' 

5. Men must wash their hands for ordinary eating, hut 
for tithes and for the heave-offering they must be baptized. 
And for the sia-oH'ering, if the hands be unclean, the body 
is unclean. 

6. He who baptized himself for ordinary eating, and in- 
dicated it to be for ordinary eating, he is prohibited &om 
(eating) the tithe. " If he baptized for the tithe, and, 
indicated it to be for the tithe?" "He is prohibited fmta 
eating heave-offeringa." " If he baptized for heave-offeringi^ 
and indicated it to be for heave-offerings?" "He ia pro- 
hibited from eating the holy tieah." " If he baptized for iba' 
holy flesh, and indicated it to be for the h61y fleah ?" " Ha' 
is prohibited from the sin-offering." " If he baptized for the 
weighty V " He is permitted the light," " K he baptized, 
and did not indicate his intention ?" " It is as no baptism." 

7. Treading on the garments of an ordinary man deSled 
the Pharisees. Treading on the garments of the Pharisees 
defiled those who eat the heave-offering. Treading on the 
garments of those who eat the heave-offering dehled for the 
holy flesh. Treading on the garments of those who eat the 
holy fleah defiles for the sin-offering. Josepli the son of 
Joezer was the most pious of the priesthood, and treading on 
his cloak defiled for the holy flesh. Jochanau the son of 
Gudgada used to eat with the purification for the holy flesh 
all his life ; and treading on his cloak defiled for the sin- 
offering. 

> i.e. The Saddacom (Lev. ixlU. IC). 


I 

I 


SELECTION'S. BAPTIZING VESSELS. 1 73 


CHAPTEE III. 

1. There are more weighty rules for holy things, than 
for the heave-offering. Because vessels may be baptized in 
vessels for the heave-offering, but not for holy things. The 
outside and inside and handle (are reckoned separately) for 
the heave-offmng, but not for holy things. He who 
carries that which defiles by treading upon it, may carry 
the heave-offering but not the holy flesh. Treading on 
the garments of those who eat the heave-offering defiles 
for the holy flesh. The meas^lre of the holy flesh is not 
as the measure of the heave-offering. Because for the 
holy flesh one must loose his garments and dry himself, 
and baptize and afterwards bind them up. But in the 
heave-offering he can bind them up and afterwards baptize 
himselfl 

2. Vessels completed in purity must be baptized for 
holy things, but not for the heave-offering. A vessel unites 
whatever is inside to holy things, but not to the heave- 
offering. The fourth degree of legal uncleanness^ is dis- 
allowed in holy things, and the third degree in the heave- 
offering. In the heave-offering, if one of the hands be un- 
clean, its fellow may be clean, but in holy things one must 
baptize both hands ; because each renders its fellow unclean 
for holy things, but not for the heave-offering. 

3. Men may eat with unwashen hands the dry meat 
of the heave-offering, but not the holy flesh. The first 
day mourner, and he who failed in atonement, have 
need of baptism for the holy flesh, but not for the heave- 
offering. 

4. There are weighty rules for the heave-offering, be- 
cause in Judah men are credited with the purity of wine 
and oil during the whole year. And in the time of wine- 
pressing and oil-pressing (men are credited) even for the 

^ There are reckoned six degrees of are altogether twenty-nine fathers of 

nncleanness : The father of fathers, the uncleanneas, of which eleven arise from 

fathers, the first, second, third, and contact with a dead body, 
fourth children of defilement There 


174 


THE FEAST-OFFERING. 


heave-oCfering. When the time for wine and oil pressing 
liaa passed over, and a barrel of wine ia brought for the 
heave-offering, it must not be received. But one may let it 
atnnd over for the wine-pressing next year. But if one 
said, " I put into it a quarter log of holy wine," it ia 
credited. *' Jugs of wine and jugs of oil which are mixed T" 
" They are credited in the time of wine-pressing and oil- 
presaing, and seventy days before that time." 

5. From Modiyith ' and inwards,^ men are credited for 
the purity of earthen vessels. From Modiyith and outwaida 
they are not credited. "How?" "The potter, when he ia 
selling pots, comes inwards from Modiyith." One says, 
" this ia the potter," and " these the pots," and " these the 
purchasers," "it is credited." "When he went outwards?" 
" It is not credited." 

6. The tax-gatherers when they enter the house, and 
also the tax-gatherers when they restore the vessels, are 
credited in saying, " we did not touch them." And in 
Jerusalem they are credited in holy things (that they did 
not defile them), and at the time of the feast they are 
credited even in the heave-offering. 

7. " He who opened hia barrel of wine,^ and commenced 
with his dough for the use of the feast?" E. Judah said, 
" he may finish it " (after the feast). But the Sages say, " he 
must not finish it." When the feast was over, the priests 
looked round for the purity of the Temple court If the 
feast ended on Friday, they did not look round for honour 
to the approaching Sabbath. R Judah said, " even they did 
not look round on Thtirsday, because the priests are not 
then idle." 

8. " How did they look round for the purity of the 
court?" "The priests baptized the vessels, which were in 
the Sanctuary, and used to say to the people, ' Watch and 
do not touch the table and the candlestick, leat you render 
them unclean.'" All the vessels in tlie Sanctuary were double 
and treble, because if the first became unclean, they could 

' A city about 15 miles from Joni- a dealer whom wioe or flour miKht be- 
B&lem. ' TowBTdn Jeruulem. come legsJly defiled bj contact with ths 

' This deciaion refers to the caao of toiniuon iwopla. 


SELECTIONS. VESSELS OF THE SANCTUARY. 175 

bring duplicates instead of them. " All the vessels which 
were in the Sanctuary required baptism ^ except the golden 
altar, and the brazen altar, because they are as earth." The 
words of R Eliezer. But the Sages say, " because they were 
overlaid." 

^ The Toseplita relates, that when the the Sadducees used to mock them by 
Phariseeswere baptizing the candlestick, saying, they were baptizing the sun. 


176 


THE SANHEDRIN. 


TALJCUD 


Treatise X. 

Judges — Judgments — The Tribunal of Seventy-one — The Great Sanhedrin — 
The Small Sanhedrin — High Priest — Funerals — King — Royal Wives — 
— Book of the Law — Objections to Judges — Relations — Examination of 
"Witnesses — Evidence — Judgments in Money and Judgments in Souls — 
Form of the Sanhedrin — Appointment of Judges — Intimidation of Wit- 
nesses — Investigations — ^Acquittal or Condemnation — Stoning — Hanging 
— Burning — Beheading — Strangling — Blasphemy — Idolatry — Enticing — 
Sorcery — A Son Stubborn and Rebellious — Burglary — Murder — Theft — 
Those who have no portion in the World to come — The Rebellious Elder 
—The False Prophet— The False Witness. 


CHAPTER I. 

1. " Judgments foi* money (require) three (judges). Eobbery 
and beating (require) three. Damages or half damages, double 
payments and payments four or five fold (require) three. Con- 
straint, and enticement, and slander (require) three." The words 
of E. Meier. But the Sages say, " slander (requires) twenty- 
three judges, because there exist in it judgments of souls." 

2. Stripes (require) three judges. In the name of Sabbi 
Ishmael, the Sages say, " twenty-three." " The intercalary 
month^ requires three. The intercalary year requires three." 
The words of Eabbi Meier. Babban Simon the son of 


^ The Jewish year is composed of 
twelve lunar months. It is adapted to 
the solar year by the use of an inter- 
calary month called Veaddar — the ad- 
ditional Addar. Every nineteen years 
there are seven occasions on which this 
embolismic month must be introduced 
to prevent the various feasts revolving 
over the four seasons of the year, like 
the Moslem fast of Ramadhan. For- 
merly the Sanhedrin arranged this inter- 
calary mouth to suit the harvest, so 


that if it were late, the wave sheaf and 
other observances should still be kept 
according to their proper dates. When, 
however, the Sanhedrin was suppressed 
by the Emperor Ck>nstantine, Hillel 
the Second of Tiberias ruled that an 
intercalary month of twenty-nine days 
should be atlded in the 3d, 6th, 8th, 
11th, 13th, 17th, and 19th yeare of 
the Metonic Cycle. This decision has 
since remained the Jewish standard for 
reckoning time. 


8ELSCTI0NS. 


JUDGMENTS. 177 


Gamaliel said, " with three judges they begin, and with five 
they discuss, and they conclude with seven; and if they 
concluded with three it is intercalated." 

3. "The appointment of elders, and striking oflF the 
heifer's neck^ (require) three." The words of Eabbi Simon ; 
But Eabbi Judah said, " five." The loosing off the shoe,^ 
and dissatisfaction in marriage (require) three. The produce* 
of the fourth year,* the second tithes, of which the value is 
unknown (require) three. The valuation of holy things 
(requires) three. The estimation of movable things requires 
three. E. Judah said, "one of them must be a priest." 
Immovable things require nine judges and a priest; and 
the valuation of a man (slave) is similar. 

4. Judgments of souls (require) twenty -three judges. 
Bestiality (requires) twenty-three, as is said, " and thou shalt 
slay the woman and the beast," and it is also said, " the 
beast thou shalt slay." An ox to be stoned (requires) 
twenty-three judges ; as it is said, " The ox shall be stoned, 
and his owner also shall be put to death,"* as is the death of 
the owner, so is the death of the ox. The wolf, and the 
lion, and the bear, and the leopard, and the panther, and 
the serpent, are to be put to deatli with twenty-three judges. 
R Eliezer said, " every one who first killed them has gained 
honour." R Akiba said, " they are to be put to death after 
a judgment with twenty-three (judges)." 

5. A tribe must not be judged, nor a false prophet, nor a 
high priest, save before the tribunal of seventy-one. And 
soldiers must Hot go forth to lawful warfare, save by a decree 
of the tribunal of seventy-one. Men must not add to the city 
or to the temple courts, save by a decision of the tribunal of 
seventy-one. They must not appoint judges to the tribes, save 
by a decision of the tribunal of seventy-one. A city must 
not be excluded, save by the tribunal of seventy-one. And 
the tribunal must not exclude a city on the border, nor 
exclude three cities, but only one or two. 

6. The Great Sanhedrin consisted of seventy-one members, 

^ Dent xxi. 4. « Deut. xx. 5, 9. ' I/ev. xix. 24. 

* Deut xiv. 22-25. * Exod. xxl 29. 

N 


178 


THE SANHEDEIN. 


aad the small one of twenty-three. Aud whence know we 
that the great one contained seventy-one ? as is said, " Gather 
imto me seventy men of the eldera of Israel:"' and Mo&es 
over them. There are aeventy-one. R. Judah said " seventy." 
And whence know we that tlie small one consisted of twenty- 
three ? as is said, " Then the congregation shall judge ;"* " and 
the congregation shall deliver." A congregation to judgv, 
and a congregation to deHver, there is twenty. And whence 
know we that a congregation requii'ed ten ? as is said. " How 
long shall I hear with this evil congregation ?"* Joshim aud 
Caleh were excepted. " And whence know we to produce the 
other three ? " From the meaning, as is said, " Thou slmlt not 
follow a multitude to do evil."^ I am hearing that " I shall 
be with them for good." If so, why is it said, " to decline 
after many to wrest judgifietU "?* " Because thy inclinations 
to good do not equal thy inclinations to eviL Thy incUn- 
ationa to good are by the report of one. Thy inclinations 
to evil are by the report of two. And a tribimal must not be 
balanced. Another must be added. There are twenty-three," 
" And how populous must Ite the city suited for judges 
" One hundred and twenty." It. Nelieniiah said, " two 
hundred and thirty to represent twenty-three oveiseera of 
tens," 


CHAPTER II. 

1. The high priest may judge, and be judged.'' He may 
bear witness, and witness may be borne against him. He may 
have his shoe loosed, and the shoe may he loosed for hia wifw,* 
His brother may take his wife, but he must not take his 
brother's wife, because he is prevented from marrying i 

1 Numb. li. 17. * Nmnb. xW. 27. 

< Numb. iixv. 24, 26. Acongraga- 
tian or inmyan ini|ft not be \ai thui 
tva mea. If there be 10,000 vromeu 
they cuinot torm m mluyui. The Lonl 
Jeifiis more juorcifnlly prumlsvfl Hi4 
presence ti> " two or three gBlhared to- 
eelhor." Mntt, xviii. 20. 


* Sxod. uiii. 2. 

* The Qrait SiuiheilrlD Mu)d n 
high prieil for oottain offancoa. 


I la Du oouit. _ 


KINGS. 179 

widow. If there happened a death in his family, he must not 
go immediately hehind the bier, " But when the (mouraera) 
are concealed (in a street^, then he is discovered (to the public). 
They are discovered to the public, and he is concealed in a 
street And he may go with them to the entrance gate of 
the city." The words of R. Meier. B, Judah said, " lie 
must not depart from the sanctuary ;" as is said, " neither 
shall he go out of the sanctuary,"' And when he comforts 
others, the fashion of all the people is to pass one after 
the other, and the deputy priest puts bim in the middle 
between himself and the people. But when he is comforted 
by otheis, all the people say to him, " we are thy atonement" 
And he says to them, " you shall be blessed from heaven." 
And at the 6rst meal ' after a funeral, all the people recline 
cm the ground, and he site on a stool. 
I 2. The king neither judges, nor is Judged. He neither 
^Imub witness, nor is witness borne against biTn, He does 
not unloose the shoe, and the shoe is not unloosed for his 
wifa He does not marry his brother's wife, nor is his wife 
ntairied by hia brother. K. Judah said, " if he pleased he 
' B»y unloose the shoe, or marry his brother's wife. He is 
rlKRcmbered in prayer for good." Tlie Sages said to him, 
we do not hear him (the king) (for anloosing the shoe) and 
his widow must not many." R Judah said, " the king may 
marry the widow of a king, aa we find with David that he 
marrioi] Uie widow of Saul ;" as is said, " And 1 gave thee 
thy master's hou&e, and thy master's wives into thy bosom."* 
3. If there happened a death in his family, he goes not 
out from the entrance of his palace. R. Judah said, " if he 
pleases to go after the bier he may go, as we find in David 
that be went aft«r the bier of Abuer;" as is said, "And 
King David himself followed the bier,"* The Sages said to 
him, " this only happened to pacify the people." And at 
the lirHt meal after a funeral, all the people recline on the 
^mnd, and he sits on a sofa. « 

. And he may go forth to lawful warfare by order of 
e Bapreme wturt of seventy-one, and he may break down n 
•T. tiL 12. > i flwu iii. 35. ■ 2 Sun. liL S. * S Sum. iii. SI. 


THE SANHEDEIN. 


1 


road for himself, and noue can prevent liim. The road of a 
king is without measure, and all the people plunder and lay 
it before him. And he takes part first. He must not multi- 
ply wives beyond eighteen, R. Judah said. " he may multiply 
wives for himself so long as they do not turn away his 
heart" K. Simou said, " even if one turn away his 
heart, he should not marry her." If so, wherefore is it 
said, " he must not multiply for himself wives, even though 
they be as Abigail"? He must not multiply horses, except 
sufficient for his own riding. And silver and gold he must no^ 
multiply much, only sufficient to [my his own expenses. 
And he must writ* a book of the law for himselt When 
he goes out to war. he must bring it witli him. When he 
returns, he must bring it with him. If he sit in judgment 
it 13 with him. When he is seated it ia l>efore liim, as is 
said, " And it shall he with him, and he shall read therein 
all tho days of his life."' 

5. None may ride on his horse, and none may sit on hia 
chair, and none may use his soeptre, and none may see him 
shavmg, either when he is naked, or in the bath, as is said, 
" Thou shall in any wise set bim king over thee,"' that his 
dread be upon thee. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. " Judgments in money matters (require) tliree judges. 
This party chooses for himself one, and the other parly 
chooses for himself one. And both parties choose another." 
The words of R Meier. But the Sages say, " Uie two judges 
choose for themselves the other." " This one may declare 
the judge of that one illegal. And that one may declare the 
judge of this one illegal" Tlie words of R Meier. But 
the Sages say, " it is only when witness can be brought 
against tliem that they are related or unlawful" " But if 
they be righteoqe or experienced, they must not be declared 
illegal," " Tliia one may declare illegal the witness of that 
one. And that one may declare illegal the witness of this 


sELKcnoNs. RELATIONS. 181 

one." The words of E. Meier. But the Sages say, " it is 
only when witness can be brought against them that they 
are related or unlawful, but if they be righteous they must 
not be declared illegal" 

2. One said to the other, " I trust my father," " I trust 
thy father," " I trust three cowherds." R Meier said, " he 
may change his mind." But the Sages say, " he must not 
change." If he must give an oath to his companion, and 
he said to him, " vow to me by the life of thy head ?" R 
Meier said, " he may change his mind." But the Sages say, 
" he must not change his mind." 

3. And these are illegal (as judges or witnesses), one who 
played at cards, or lent on usury, or bet on the flight of 
doves, or trades in the Sabbatical year. R Simon said, " at 
first they were called gatherers on the Sabbatical year ; when 
they were forced by Gentiles to cultivate the ground, they 
changed to call them traders on the Sabbatical year." E^ 
Judah said, " it is only when they have no other occupation 
but this one alone : but if they have another occupation, they 
are allowed." 

4. And these are related, his father and his brother, and 
the brethren of his father, and the brethren of his mother, 
and the husband of his sister, and the husband of his 
father's sister, and the husband of his mother's sister. And 
the husband of his mother and his father-in-law, and his 
brother-in-law, they, their children, and their sons-in-law, 
and his step-son alone. R Jos6 said, " this was the teaching 
of R Akiba ; but the first teaching was, his imcle and the 
son of his uncle, and all suitable for inheritance, and every 
one related to him at the present time." " One was related 
and became estranged ?" ** He is lawful" R Judah said, 
** even if his daughter died, and he has children left by her, 
they are related." 

5. "Who is a friend? and who is an enemy?" "A 
friend is the bridegroom's best man, an enemy is every one 
who has not spoken with him three days in malice." The 
Sages replied to him, " Israelites are not so suspidoiui'' 

6. " How are witnesses examined ?" " They are hv 


182 THE SANHEDRIN. 

in and intimiilated ; and all other men are driven out. And 
the chief of the witnesses is left, and they say to him, " tell 
us how do you know that this man is indebted to that 
man?" If the witness said, "he told me that I am in- 
debted to him " — " such a man told me that he is indebted 
to him," — he has said nothing, till he shall say, " he acknow- 
ledged in our presence that he owed him two hundred zuz." 
And afterwards the second witness is brought in, and ex- 
amined. If their statements were found agreeing, the 
judges held a conversation. Two of them said " he is clear," 
and one said " he is indebted ?" " He is cleared." " Two 
said, he ia indebted, and one said, he is clear ?" " He is 
indebted." " One said he is clear, and one said he is ia- 
debtetl ? And even if two pronounced him clear or in- 
debted, and one said, ' I don't know V" " The judges must 
be increased," 

7. The matter is finished. They bring in the pIuntifT 
and defendant Tlie chief judge says, " thou, such a one, 
art clear ; thou sucli an one, art indebted." " And whence 
know we that one of the judges on going out should not 
say, ' I was for clearing him, hut my colleagues pronouinced 
him indebted, but what shall I do when my colleagues are 
too many for me ?'" " Of this man it b said, ' Thou shalt not 
go up and down as a tale-bearer among thy people;'' and it 
is said, 'A talebearer revealeth secrets.'"" 

8. At any time the one condemned may bring evidence 
and annul the judgment. The judges said to him, " bring 
all your evidence within thirty days from this date." If he 
brought them within thirty days, it is annulled, if after 
thirty days, it is not annulled. Eabhan Simon the son of 
Gamaliel said, " what shall he do if he did not find them 
within thirty days, but found them after thirty days 1" 
" The judges said to him, ' bring witnesses ;' and he said, ' I 
have no witnesses :' they said, " bring evidence ;' and he said, 
' I have no evidence :' but afterwards he fouml evidence, and 
foimd witnesses ? " " They are nothing," Babban Simon the 
son of Gamaliel said, " what shall he do if he did not know 

' Lev. lix. 18. ' Prov, a. IS. 


SELECTIONS. VERDICTS. 183 

that he had witnesses, and found witnesses ; he did not know 
that he had evidence, and found evidence ?" " They said to 
him, ' bring witnesses ;* he said, ' I have no witnesses.' 
' Bring evidence,' and he said, ' I have no evidence.'" " He 
saw that he will be pronounced indebted in judgment," and 
he said, " approach such an one, and such an one, and bear 
witness for me," or "he pulled out evidence from his 
pocket ?" " It is nothing." 


CHAPTEE IV. 

1. Judgments in money and judgments in souls must be 
eciually inquired into and investigated; as is said, "Ye 
shall have one manner of law."^ "What is the difference 
between judgments in money and judgments in souls?" 
"Judgments in money (require) three judges, judgments in 
souls twenty-three. Judgments in money open the case 
either for clearing or proving indebted, but judgments of 
souls open the case for clearing, and the case is not opened 
for condenming. Judgments in money are balanced by one 
judge either for clearing or proving indebted ; but judgments 
in souls are balanced by one for clearing and by two for con- 
demning. Judgments in money may be reversed either for 
clearing or proving indebted ; but judgments in souls may be 
reversed for clearing, but must not be reversed for condemna- 
tion. All may express an opinion on judgments in money 
for clearing or proving indebted. All may express an 
opinion on judgments in souls for clearing, but all must not 
express an opinion for condemnation. He who has expressed 
an opinion on judgments in money for proving indebted, may 
express an opinion for clearing, and he who has expressed 
an opinion for clearing, may express an opinion for proving 
indebted. He who has expressed an opinion on judgments 
in souls for condemnation may express an opinion for clearing, 
but he who has expressed an opinion for clearing must not 
reverse it to express an opinion for condenmation. Judgments 

^ Lev. xxiv. 22. 


184 


THE 8ANHEDRIN. 


in money are conducted by day and settled by nigliL 
Judgments in bouIs are conducted by day and settled by 
day. Judgments in money are settled on llie same day, 
either for clearing or proving indebted. Judgments in soiJa 
are finished on the same day for clearing, and on the day 
after it for condemnation — wherefore there can he no judg- 
ments on Friday or on the eve of a festival." ' 

2. Judgments in legal uncleanness and legal clcansings 
begin with the Supreme (judge). Judgments in souls begin 
with a judge at his side. All are eligible to pronounce 
judgments in money matters, but all are riot eligible to 
pronounce judgments in souls — only priests, Levitea, and 
Israelites who can intermarry into the priesthood. 

3. The Sanhedriu was like half a round threshing-floor, 
in order that the membera might observe each other. And 
two scribes of the judges stood before them, — one on tlie 
right and one on the left. And tliey wrote the sentence of 
acquittal, and the sentence of condemnation. B. Juilah said, 
" three ; one scribe wrote the sentence of acquittal, and one 
wrote the sentence of condemnation; and the third wrote both 
the sentence of acquittal and tlie sentence of condemDation." 

4. And three rows of the disciples of the wise sat before 
them. And each one knew his place. When it wa« necca- 
saiy to appoint a judge, they appointed one from the first 
row. One from the second row came instead of him into 
the first, and one from the third row came instead of him 
into the second, and they selected another from the congre- 
gation, and they seated him in the third row, and he did not 
sit in the plac« of his predecessor, but he sat in a place 
suitable for himself. 

5. " How did the judges intimidate witnesses in the 
testimony for souls ? " " l"hey introduced them, and intimi- 
dated them." " Perhaps you are speaking from guess t or 
from hearsay ? witness from witness ? or from a trustworthy 
man we heai-d it ?" Or perhaps " you don't know that at the 
last we shall proceed to inquire into your own cliaracter and . 


SELECTIONS. 


WITNESSES. 185 


investigate it" " Have a knowledge that the judgments of 
money are not as judgments of souls. In judgments for 
money, when the man pays the money he has atoned. In 
judgments for souls his blood and the blood of his posterity 
are suspended till the end of the world." So we find it 
with Cain when he slew lus brother. It is said of him,* 
" the voice of thy brother's bloods crieth." He does not say 
thy brother's blood, but bloods of thy brother, his blood 
and the blood of his posterity. Another thing is also meant, 
that thy brother's bloods are spattered on wood, and on 
stones. Therefore man is created single, to teach thee that 
every one who destroys one soul from Israel, to him is the 
verse applicable, as if he destroys a fuU world. And every 
one who supports one soul in Israel, to him is the verse 
applicable, as if he supports the fuU world. And it is also 
said, for the peace of creation, that no man may justly say 
to his companion, my father is greater than thine. And 
that the Epicureans should not say, that there are more 
Creators in the heavens, and it is also said, to show forth the 
greatness of the Holy One, blessed be He! When man 
stamps many coins with one stamp, all are alike. But the 
King of Kings, the Holy One, blessed be He ! stamped every 
man with the stamp of the first Adam, and no one of them 
is like his companion ; therefore every one is boimd to say, 
"for my sake was the world created." But, perhaps, the 
witnesses will say " what is this trouble to us ?" But is it 
not already said, " And is a witness, whether he hath seen or 
known of it ; if he do not utter it " ? ^ But perliaps the witnesses 
will say, "what is it to us, to be guilty of this man's 
blood ?" But is it not already said, " When the wicked 
perish, there is shouting " ?* 


CHAPTER V. 

1. The witnesses were examined with seven investiga- 
tions. " In what Sabbatical year ?" " In what year ?" " In 

> Gen. iv. 10. • Lev. v. 1. > Prov. xl 10. 


186 THE SANHEDRIN. talmtd 

what' month ? " " WTiat date in the month ?" " What day ?" 
"What hour?" "What place?" R Jos^ said, "Wtat 
day ? " " What hour ? " " What place ? " " Did you know 
him?" "Did you warn him?" In a case of idolatry, 
" whom did he serve ?" " And with what did he serve ?" 

2. Every judge who extends examinations is praiseworthy. 
It happened that the son of Zacchai examined (even) on the 
stems of figs. And what difference is there between inves- 
tigations and examinations ? In investigations if one say, 
" I don't know," their witness is worthless. In examina- 
tions, if one say " I don't know," and even two say, " we 
don't know," their witness stands. Whether in investiga- 
tions or examinations, when they contradict each other, their 
witness is worthless. 

3. One witness said, " on the second of the month," and 
another witness said, " the third of the month." Their wit- 
ness stands. Because one knows of the intercalary month, 
and another does not know of the intercalary month. One 
said, " on the third," and another said, " on the fifth ;" their 
witness is worthless. One said, " at the second hour," and 
another said " at the third hour ;" their witnesg stands. One 
said, " at the third," and another said, " at the fifth ;" their 
witness is worthless. R Judah said "it stands." One 
said, "on the fifth," and another said, "on the seventh;" 
their witness is worthless, because at the fifth (hour) the sun 
is in the east, and at the seventh hour the sun is in the 
west. 

4. And afterwards they introduce the second (witness) 
and examine him. If both their statements agree, they open 
the case with clearing. One of the witnesses says, " I pos- 
sess information to clear him." Or one of the disciples of 
the Sanhedrin saySy " I possess information for condemning." 
They order him to keep silence. One of the disciples of the 
Sanhedrin says, " I possess information to clear him." They 
bring him up, and seat him between the judges, and he did 
not go down during the whole day. If there be substantial 
information, they give him a hearing. And even when he 
(the accused) says, " I possess information for clearing my- 


SELECTIONS. 


STONING. 187 


self," the judges give him a hearing; only there must be 
substantial information in his words. 

5. If the judges found him clear, they released him, 
but if not they deferred his judgment till the morrow. 
They conversed in pairs, and reduced their eating, and they 
drank no wine all the day, and discussed the matter the 
whole night. And on the morrow they came very early to 
the judgment hall. He who was for clearing said, " I was 
for clearing, and I am for clearing in my place." And he who 
was for condemning said, " I was for condemning, and I am 
for condemning in my place." He who pronounced for con- 
denming, could pronounce for clearing, but he who pro- 
nounced for clearing, could not turn round and pronounce 
for condemning. If the judges erred in a matter, the two 
scribes of the judges recalled it to their memory. If they 
found him clear, they released him : but if not, they stood to 
be counted. " Twelve cleared him, and eleven condemned ?" 
" He is clear." " Twelve condemned him, and eleven cleared 
him, and even eleven cleared, and eleven condemned," and one 
said, " I don't know." And even twenty-two cleared or con- 
demned, and one said, " I don't know ?" " They must add 
judges." " How many do they add as judges two by two ?" 
" Up to seventy-one." " Thirty-six cleared him, and thirty- 
five condemned him?" "He is clear." "Thirty-six con- 
demned him, and thirty-five cleared him ?" " They disputed 
with each other until one of the condemning party acknow- 
ledged the statement of the clearing party." 


CHAPTEE VI. 

1. When the judgment was finished, they brought him 
forth to stone him.^ The place of stoning was outside the 
judgment hall ; as is said, " Bring him forth that hath 

^ Before executing a criminal, a own cost This custom was in obedi- 

quantity of frankincense in a cup of ence to Proverbs xxxi. 6, ** Give strong; 

wine was given to him to stnpify him drink unto him that is ready to perish, 

and render him insensible to pain, and wine nnto those that be of heavy 

The compassionate ladiea of Jonisalem hearts. " 
generally provided this draught at their 


188 THE 8ANHEDEIN. TAUreo 

ouraed."^ One stood at the door of the judgment-hall with 
towela in his hand, and another man rode a horse at a distance 
from him, but so that he might see him. If one said, " I 
have something to tell for his clearing," this one waved the 
towels, and the other galloped his horse, and stopped the 
accused. And even though he himself said, " I have some- 
thing to tell to clear myself," they brought him back as many 
as four or five times, only there must be substance in his words. 
If they found him clear, they freed him ; but if not, they took 
him forth to stone him. And a herald preceded him (cry- 
ing) " Such an one, the son of such an one, is brought out 
for stoning, because he committfid such a transgression, and 
so and so are witnesses ; let every one who knows aught for 
clearing him come forth and tell it" 

2. When he was ten cubits from the place of stoning, 
they said to him " confess," as it is the custom of all about 
to die to confess, since to every one who confesses there is a 
portion in the world to come. So we find with Achan when 
Joshua said to him, " My eon, give, I pray thee, glory to the 
Lord God of Israel, and make confession unto him."* "And 
Achan answered Joshua, and said, Indeed, I have sinned 
against the Lord God of Israel, and thiis and thus I have 
done," " And from whence know we that his confession 
made atonement for him?" "As it is said, 'And Joshua 
said. Why hast thou troubled us ? the Lord shall trouble thee 
this day.' This day thou art troubled, but thou shalt not be 
troubled in the world to coma'" And if he did not know how 
to confess, they told him to say, " let my death be an atone- 
ment for all my sins." Kabbi Judah said, " if he knew that 
he was falsely condenmed, he said, ' let my death be an atone- 
ment for all my sins, except tiiis one ; '" the (Sages) said, " if 
so, every man will speak thus to make themselves innocent" 

3. When he was foiur cubits from the place of stoning, 
they stripped off his garments. " If a man, they covered 
him in front ; if a woman, before and behind." The words 
of Eabbi Judah. But the Sages say " a man was stoned 
naked, but the woman was not stoned naked," 


SELECTIONS. 


HANGING. 189 


4. The place of stoning was two men high. One of the 
witnesses thrust him down on his loins. If he turned on 
his heart, the witness must turn him on his loins. If he 
died with that thrust it was finished ; but if not, the second 
(witness) took the stone, and cast it upon his heart. If ho 
died with that blow, the stoning was finished. But if not, he 
was stoned by all Israel, as is said, " The hands of the wit- 
nesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and 
afterward the hands of all the people."^ "AU who were 
stoned were hung up." The words of Eabbi Eliezer. But 
the Sages say, " none were hung up, save the blasphemer 
and the idolater." " The man is to be hung with his face 
toward the people, but the woman with her face toward the 
wood." The words of Eabbi Eliezer. But the Sages say, " the 
man was hung up, but they do not hang up a woman." 
Sabbi Eleazar said to them, " and did not Simon, the son of 
Shatach, hang women in Askalon ?" They said to him, "he 
hung up eighty women (witches), and two could not be 
judged, in one day." " How did they hang him ?" " They 
sunk a beam in the ground, and a transverse beam proceeded 
from it, and they bound his hands, one over the other, and 
hung him up " (by them). E. Jos6 said, " the beam was in- 
clined against the wall, and he was hung upon it, just as the 
butchers do," And they loosed him immediately afterwards. 
" But if he was out all night ?" " It was a transgression of a 
negative command, as is said, ' His body shall not remain 
all night upon the tree, but thou shalt in any wise bury him 
that day (for he that is hanged is accursed of God),'"^ etc. As 
one says, " wherefore is this one hung ?" " Because he blas- 
phemed the NAME, and it follows that the heavenly NAME 
is profaned." 

6. Eabbi Meier said, "when man is sorrowful,^ what 
language does the Shekinah^ make him to utter ?" If it be 
lawful 80 to speak, " my head makes me ashamed, my arm 
makes me ashamed." If, to speak after the manner of men, 

^ Dent ztU. 7. * Deat. zzi 28. * i,e. the Divine Presence. The 

' This supposes a inui sorrowful, luminous cloud of glory in the Holy of 

because lie is obliged to punish his own holies. 

aoo. 


190 THE SANHEDRIN. talmud 

OMNIPRESENCE is sorrowful, when the blood of the wicked 
is poured out, how much more sorrowful is He for the blood of 
the righteous. And not in the case of the condemned alone, 
but every one who leaves his dead overnight, is a transgressor 
of a negative command. If they left him for the sake of 
honour, to bring a coffin and a shroud for him, there is no 
transgression. But they did not bury him (the condenmed) 
in the sepulchres of his fathers. And there were two burial 
grounds prepared for the Judgment Hall — one for the stoned 
and the burned, and one for those beheaded and strangled 

6. When the fleah of the condenmed was consimied, they 
gathered his bones and buried them in their proper place ; 
and his relatives came and asked after the "peace of the 
judges, and the peace of the witnesses, as much as to say, 
" know there is nothing in our hearts against you, as your 
judgment was true." And they did not mourn, but were 
gloomy, since gloominess is only in the heart. 


CHAPTER VIL 

1. Four punishments were permitted to the supreme 
court, — stoning, burning, beheading, and strangling. R 
Simon said, "burning, stoning, strangling, and beheading." 
The preceding chapter is the order of stoning. 

2. The order for those burned was to be sunk in dung 
to their knees. And men put a hard towel in a soft one, 
and encircled his neck. One pulled on one side, and 
another pulled on the other side, till the condemned opened 
his mouth. And one lit a wick, and cast it into his mouth, 
and it went down to his bowels, and it consumed his in- 
testines. R. Judah said, " if he died in their hands, they 
did not complete in him the order of burning; only they 
opened his mouth with tongs against his will, and lit the 
wick, and cast it into his mouth, and it went down to his 
bowels and consumed his intestines." Said R. Eleazar the 
son of Zadok, " it happened with the daughter of a priest, 
who was immoral, that they surrounded her with dry 


SELECTIONS. BLASPHEMY. 191 

branches and burned her." The Sages replied, " because the 
court at that time was unskilled." 

3. The order of those beheaded was to have their heads 
struck off with a sword, as is the custom of governments. 
R Judah said, " that was an abuse ; they only rested his 
head on a block, and hewed it off with an axe." The 
Sages replied to him, ''no death is a greater abuse than 
that" The order for those strangled was, that they were 
sunk down in dung to their knees, and they put a hard 
towel inside a soft one, and encircled his neck. One pulled 
on one side, and another pulled on the other side^ till his 
soul departed. 

4. These were stoned ; .... a blasphemer, and an 
idolater, and he who gave his seed to Molech, and one with 
a familiar spirit,^ and a wizard, and he who profaned the 
Sabbath, and he who cursed father or mother, and he who 
came to a betrothed maid, and an enticer to idolatry, and a 
withdrawer to idolatry, and a sorcerer, and a son stubborn 
and rebellious. 

5. The blasphemer was not guilty till he expressed the 
NAME. Said E. Joshua, the son of Korcha, every day they 
examined the witnesses under a substituted (feigned) name, 
for example, " Jos6 shall beat Jos^." When the judgment 
was finished, they could not execute him under the nickname, 
but they withdrew all men outside, and interrogated the 
principal witness, and said to him, "tell us clearly what 
thou hast heard ?" and he said it. And the judges stood 
up on their feet, and rent their garments,* and they were 
never sewn again. And the second witness said, " even I 
(heard) as he," and the third said, " even I (heard) as he." 

6. One committed idolatry, whether he served the idol, 
or sacrificed to it, or burned incense to it, or made a libation 
to it, or bowed down to it, or accepted it for his god. And 
also, he who said to it, " thou ait my God." But he who 

'The words in the original, Baal ''stomach." Aob seems however much 

Aob, are fnppoaed by some to denote a more likely to be allied to the Coptic 

Tentriloqnist, as inch persons are called word for *'a serpent" or "Python," 

in the LXX. tyyaarpiiiAdoif and also Acts xvi. 16. 

from Acbf meaning a " bottle " or ' Matthew xxvl 65. 


192 


THE SANHEDRIN. 


embraced it, and kissed it, and honoured it, and dtisted it, 
and 'washed it, and anointed it, and dressed it, and put shoes 
on it, transgi'essed a negative command. He who vowed 
in its name, and performed the vow in its name, transgressed 
a negative command. " He exposed himself to Baal peor ? " 
" That is positive aervica" " He cast a stone to Mercury i" 
" Tliat is positive service," 

7. He who gave his seed to Molech ' ia not guilty till 
he hand it to Molech, and pass it through the fire. " If he 
hand it to Molech, and do not pass it through the fire, (or if) he 
passed it through the fire, and did not hand it to Molech !" 
" He is not guilty till he hand it to Molech, and pass it 
tlirough the fire." One has a familiar spirit, when the 
Python speaks from his arm. But the wizard speaks with 
his mouth. These are to be stoned, and inquiry from them 
is forbidden. 

8. He who profaned the Sabbath by aught which renders 
him guUty of presumption is to be cut off ;* but if he pro- 
faned the Sabbath in error, a sin-offering {is ret^nired) from 
liim. He who cursed father or mother is not guilty till he 
curse them by the NAMK " If he curse them with a 
substituted name of God?" R Meier pronounces him 
"guilty:" but the S^es "free Iiim." 

9. "If one came to a betrothed maid ?" "He is notguQty, 
except she he a vii^u and betrothed, and in the house of 


' The imago of Molech wna made of 


It 1 


kollon 


hcnlcd wltb fin ontaide. It stood in 
Iho valley of Hinnom without the walls 
ut Jerusalem. Kimcbi myg the Image 
of Molech coDtuiued seven chapels. 
These chupctg are supposed by soiob to 
represeut the seven planets. In the 
first chapel flowers \ien offereil ; in 
the second, turtle doves or fuung 
pigeons ; In the third, LsmlM ; in the 
fourth, ronu ; in the Hfth, calves ; in 
tho siith, oton ; " but whosoever of- 
fered his son, they opened to him the 
seventli clmpeL" The face of Moleeh 
iviB like the face of a calf, and thu 
image stretched forth its hands " as t 

something; 


< his 

i neighbour." "They 


kindled the image with fire, and tba 
priests took the babe and pnt It into 
tho hands of Molei^h, and the babs^vo 
□P the ghost" They oalleil it Tophel, 
because they made a noise with ibvnu 
(tophim), that the father might not 
bear the screams of bis child and lu(« 
pity upon him. And thej colled it 
Hinnom, because tho child roan] 
{menahem) in his anguish. Others aiy 
it was called tUnnom, because the prinl* 
used to say. "May it prolit (njl') 
thee— may it be sweet to thee." 

' Catting off is generally auppOMd to 
have extended to the family as well m 
the guilty person. It seems to ban 
iuclud»l the future aa well 


tte-^ 


8ELECTI0NS. SORCERY. 193 

her father." "If two came to her?" "The first is to be 
stoned and the second strangled." 

10. "The enticer to idolatry?" "This ordinary man 
enticed an ordinary man ; he said to him, ' there is an object 
of fear in such a place, so it eats, so it drinks, so it does good, 
so it does evil' " Of all who are guilty of death in the law, 
we are not to set witnesses in concealment to convict them, 
except in this case of an enticer to idolatry. When he has 
spoken of his idolatry to two persons, they as witnesses bring 
him to the judgment-hall, and stone him. If he spoke thus 
to one, this one replies, " I have companions who desire to 
hear so and so." " If he be cunning, and he does not speak 
before them ?" "Witnesses are concealed behind a wall, and 
he says to the idolater, ' tell me what thou saidst to me 
alone,' and the idolater told him. And he replied to him, ' how 
can we leave our God, who is in heaven, and go and serve 
wood and stone ?*" " If the idolater returned from his sin, it 
is well ; but if he said, ' so is our duty, and so it is excellent 
for us,' they who stood behind the wall bring him to the 
judgment-hall, and stone him ; if he said, ' I shall serve, I 
shall go and serve, let us go and serve ; I will sacrifice, I 
will go and sacrifice, let us go and sacrifice ; I will bum 
incense, I will go and bum incense, let us go and bum 
incense; I will pour a libation, I will go and pour a libation, 
let us go and pour a libation ; I will bow down, I will go 
and bow down, let us go and bow down ' — the withdrawer 
18 he who says, 'let us go and serve idols.''' 

1 1. The sorcerer, who has done the act, is guilty of death, 
but he is not guilty who merely deludes the eyes. R 
Akiba said in the name of E. Joshua, " two sorcerers can 
gather cucumbers — one gathers them and is free, but another 
gathers them and is guilty. He who has performed the act 
IB guilty. He who has merely deluded the eyes is free." 


194 THE SANHEDRIN. talmtjd 


CHAPTEE VIIL 

1. A son stubborn and rebellions.^ "From what time 
is he decidedly a son stubborn and rebellious ?" " From the 
time the two hairs have come, and up to the time the beard 
has sprouted ; but the Sages spoke in modest language. As 
is usually said, wOien a man has a son — a son, but not a 
daughter ; a son, but not a man ; a child as yet free from 
coming under the rule of the commandments." 

2. " From what time is lie guilty V " From the time he 
ate three quarters of a pound of flesh, and drank half a log 
of Italian wine.*' E. Jos^ said, " a pound of flesh and a log 
of wine." " He ate it in an appointed feast ; he ate it in the 
intercalary montli; he ate it during the second tithes in 
Jerusalem ; he ate of a carcase and of things torn, abomi- 
nable tilings and creeping things ; he ate of that which had 
not paid tithes, and the first tithes before the heave-offering 
was separated from them, and the second tithes and holy 
things which were not redeemed ; he ate of a thing which 
is commanded, and of a thing which is a transgression ; he 
ate every kind of meat, but he did not eat. flesh; he drank 
every kind of fluid, but he did not drink wine ?" " He is not 
a son stubborn and rebellious till he eat flesh and drink wine," 
as is said, "A glutton and a drunkard ;"^ and even though 
there is no conclusive evidence, there is a memorial to the 
matter, as is said, "Be not among winebibbers; among 
riotous eaters of flesh." ^ 

3. " If he steal it from his father, and eat it (with permis- 
sion) on the property of his father ; from others, and eat it 
on the property of others ; from others, and eat it on the 
property of his father?" "He is not a son stubborn and 
rebellious till he steal it from his father and eat it on the pro- 
perty of others.". E. Josd, the son of R Judah, said, " till 
he steal it from his father and from Ids mother." 

4. "If his father desires (his punishment), and his 
mother does not desire it ; his father does not desii^ it, and 

^ Deut. xxi. 18. * Deut. xxi. 20. » Prov. xxiii. 20. 


SELECTIONS. 


BURGLABY. 195 


his mother does desire it?" "He is not declared a son 
stubborn and rebellious until both of them desire it" R 
Judah said, " if his mother was not suitable for his father, 
he is not declared a son stubborn and rebellious." " One of 
them was broken-handed, or lame, or dumb, or blind, or 
deaf?" "He is not declared a son stubborn and rebellious," 
as is said, "' Then shall his father and his mother lay hold 
on him,' ^ which is impossible if they be broken-handed ; 
' and bring him out,' which is impossible if they be lame ; 
' and they shall say,' which is impossible if they be dumb ; 
'this our son,' which is impossible if they be blind; 'he 
will not obey our voice,' which is impossible if they be 
deaf. They must warn him before three judges, and then 
flog him." "He returned to his bad habits?" "He is to 
be judged before twenty-three judges, but he is not to be 
stoned till the three first (judges) are present, as is said, 
' this our son ' who was flogged before you." " He ran away 
before his judgment was finished, and afterwards came to 
puberty?" "He is free." "But if he ran away after the 
decision and then came to puberty?" "He is guilty." 

5. A son stubborn and rebellious is judged for the sake 
of his future prospects. The law says, " better die when he 
is innocent, and not die when he is guilty." The death of 
the wicked is pleasant for them, and pleasant for the world ; 
but the death of the righteous is evil for tliem, and evil for 
the world. Wine and sleep are pleasant to the wicked, and 
pleasant to the world ; but for the righteous, it is evil for 
them, and evil for the world. Separation for the wicked is 
pleasant for them, and pleasant for the world ; but for the 
righteous, it is evil for them, and evil for the world. Union 
for the wicked is evil for them, and evil for the world ; but 
for the righteous, it is pleasant for them, and pleasant for 
the world. Eest for the wicked is evil for them, and evil 
for the world ; but for the righteous, it is pleasant for them, 
and pleasant for the world. 

6. If one engaged in burglary, he is judged for the sake 
of Ids future prospects. " He engaged in burglary and broke 

> Deut. xxi. 19, 20. 


196 


THE SANHEDEIN. 


a barrel ?" " If tlie owner miglit not kill him, lie must pay 
for tlie barrel ; but if tlie owner might kill him, he is freed 
from paying for the barrel." 

7. These are tbey who are rescued' with their soula, — 
he who pursued after his companion to kill him, and one 
after a betrothed girl But one about to profane the Sab- 
bath, and one about to serve idols, such cannot be saved 
with their souls.' 


CHAPTER IX. 

1. And these are to be beheaded. The murderer and 
the men of a city witlidi-awn to idolatry. " The murderef 
who emote liis neighbour with a atone or iron, and he 
pressed him down in the midst of the water, or in the midst 
of fire, and he could not come out from thence, and he 
died ?" " He is guilty." " He pushed him into the midst of 
water, or into the midst of fire, and he could come out, but 
he died?" "He is free." "He encouraged a dog against 
him, he encouraged a serpent against him?" "He is free," 
" He caused a aeqjent to bite liira ?" Eabbi Judah declared 
him "guilty," but the Sages "freed him." " He smote bis com- 
pauiun either with a stone or his fist, and he was counted 
for dead, and he became lighter, and afterwards became heavier, 
and died ?" " He is guilty." B. Nehemiah said, " he is free, 
because there are extenuating circumstances in the matter." 
2. " His intention was to kill a beast, and he killed 
a man — a foreigner, and he killed an Israelite — a pre- 
mature birth, and he killed a timely child?" "He is 
free. " " His intention was to smite his loins, and there 
was not sufficient force in the blow to cause death in hii 
loins, and it passed to hia heart, and there was suflicieBl . 
force in the blow to cause death in his heart, and he died?'*' 
" He is free." " His intention was to smite him on his hi 

' i.«. tliefaresavcdfromcriniebyiln- 'An the lanaar clui of iiitciid,i 
medintely depriving them of life. Thw 
nummary mode of procertnre wm called 
"the reliet'i! beating." It nu a UdiI 
of Lynch lav laflirteil by the jieople it 
oitce. John viii. SQ. 


SELECTIONS. GUILTY OF DEATH. 197 

and there was sufficient force in the blow to cause death on 
his heart, and it passed on to his loins, and there was not 
sufficient force in the blow to cause death on his loins, but 
he died ?" " He is free." " His intention was to smite an 
adult, and there was not sufficient force in the blow to 
cause death to an adult, and it passed off to a child, and 
there was sufficient force to kill the child, and he died ? " 
" He is free." " His intention was to smite a child, and 
there was sufficient force in the blow to cause death to a 
child, and it passed to an adult, and there was not sufficient 
force to cause death to the adult, but he died?" "He is 
free." " But his intention was to smite him on his loins, 
and there was sufficient force in the blow to cause death on 
liis loins, and it passed to his heart, and he died?" "He 
is guilty." "His intention was to smite an adult, and 
there was sufficient force in the blow to cause the death of 
the adult, and it passed to a child, and he died ?" " He is 
guilty." R Simon said, " even if his intention be to kill 
this one, and he killed that one, he is free." 

3. "A murderer, who is mingled with others?" "All 
are to be freed." R Judah said " they are to be collected 
in a prison." " Several condemned to (different) deaths are 
promiscuously mingled ?" " They are all to be adjudged the 
lightest punishment." " Those condemned to stoning with 
those condenmed to burning?" R Simon said, "they are 
to be condemned to stoning, because burning is more 
grievous," but the Sages say, " they are to be condemned 
to burning, because stoning is more grievous." To them 
replied R Simon, " if burning were not more grievous, it 
would not have been assigned to the daughter of a priest 
who was immoral" They replied to him, " if stoning were 
not more grievous, it would not have been assigned to the 
blasphemer, and the idolater." " Those condemned to be- 
heading, mingled with those condemned to strangling?" 
R Simon said, "they are to be put to death with the 
sword/' but the Sages say, " with strangling." 

4. "He who is found guilty of two deaths by the 


198 THE SANHEDRIN. talmud 

judges ? " " He is condemned to the more grievous punish- 
ment." " He committed a transgression, which made him 
deserve two deaths?" "He is condemned to the more 
grievous." E. Joso said, "he is condemned for the first 
deed which he committed." 

6. "He who is flogged once and again?" "The judges 
commit him to prison, and they give him bariey to eat till 
his belly bursts." "He who killed a person without 
witnesses?" "They commit him to prison, and they give 
him to eat the bread of adversity, and the water of affiction."^ 

6. " A thief who stole a sacred vessel, and he who cursed 
in necromancy, and the paramour of an Aramaean?" "The 
avengers may at once fall upon him." " The priest who 
served in legal uncleanness ?" " His brother priests have no 
need to bring him to the tribunal, but the young priests 
drag him outside the court, and dash out his brains with 
faggots of wood." " A stranger who served in the sanctu- 
ary ?" E. Akiba said, he is to be killed " with strangling," 
but the Sages say, " by the visitation of heaven." 


CHAPTEE X. 

1. All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as 
is said, "Thy people also shall be all righteous,"^ etc. And 
these are they who have no portion in the world to come : 
he who says there is no resurrection of the dead in the law, 
and that tliere is no revealed law from heaven, and the 
Epicurean. E. Akiba said, " even lie who reads in forbidden ^ 
books, and he who mutters over a wound ;" and he said, " I 
will put none of these diseases upon thee, which I have 
brought upon the Egyptians : for I am the Lord that healeth 
thee."* Aba Shaul said, "even to meditate the NAME^ in 
its letters." 

2. Three kings and four ordinary persons have no portion 
in the world to come. Three kings, Jeroboam, Ahab, and 

^ Isaiah xxx, 20. ' Isaiah Ix. 21. ' i.e. to meditate with the intention 

^ Lit outside, * Exod. xv. 26. to mutter JEHOVAH over a wound. 


SELECTIONS. THE WORLD TO COME. 199 

Manasseh. E. Judah said, " Manasseh had a portion in the 
world to come," as is said, *' And prayed unto him, and he 
was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought 
liim again to Jerusalem into his kingdom."^ The Sages said 
to him, " He brought him back to his kingdom, but He did 
not bring him back to life in the world to come." Four 
ordinary persons, Balaam, and Doeg, and Ahitophel, and 
Gehazi, have no portion in the world to come. 

3. The generation of the deluge has no portion in the 
world to come, and they stand not in judgment, as is said, 
"My Spirit shall not always strive with man."* (They 
have) neither judgment nor spirit. The generation of the 
dispersion has no portion in the worid to come, as is said, 
" So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the 
face of all the earth."* And the Lord scattered them in this 
worid, and from thence the Lord scattered them in the worid 
to come. The men of Sodom have no portion in the worid 
to come, as is said, " But the men of Sodom were wicked and 
sinners before the Lord exceedingly,"* wicked in this worid, 
and sinners in the worid to come. But they will stand in 
judgment E. Nehemiah said, " neither one nor other will 
stand in judgment," as is said, " Therefore the ungodly shall 
not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation 
of the righteous."* " Therefore the wicked shall not stand in 
judgment ;" this is the generation of the deluge : " Nor sinners 
in the congregation of the righteous ;" these are the men of 
Sodom." The (Sages) said to him, " they do not stand in 
the congregation of the righteous, but they stand in the con- 
gregation of the wicked." The spies have no portion in the 
world to come, as is said, " Even those men that did bring 
up the evil report upon the land, died by the plague before 
the Lord."^ And they died in this world. They also died 
in the plague in the world to come. " The generation of 
the wilderness has no portion in the world to come, and they 
will not stand in judgment, as is said, ' In this wilderness 
they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.'"^ The 

* 2 Chron. xxxiii. 13. ' Gen. vi. 3. ' Gen. xi. 8. 

* Gen. xiii. 13. » P». i. 5. « Numb. xiv. 37. ^ Niunb. xiv. 85. 


200 


THE 8ANHEDEIN. 


words of B, Akiba. R. Eliezer said, " of them He said, 
' Gather my saints togetlier unto me, those that have made 
a covenant with me by sacrifice.'"' "The coDgregation of 
Korah will not come up, as is said, ' And the earth closed 
upon them ' ^ in this world. ' And they perished from among 
the congregation' in the world to come." The words of R. 
Akiba. E. Eliezer said, " of them he said, ' The I^ord killeth 
aud maketh alive ; he bringeth down to the grave and 
bringeth up.'"" "The ten tribes will not return, as is said, 
' And cast them into another land, as it is this day ;' * as the 
day departs and does not return, so they depart and do not 
return." The words of E. Akiba, E. Eliezer said, " aa the 
day darkens and brightens, so will it be with the ten tribes ; 
aa it was dark for them, so will it be bright for them." 

4. The men of a city withdrawn to idolatry have no 
portion in the world to come, as is said, " Certain men, the 
children of Belial, are gone out from among you and have 
withdrawn the inhabitants of their city,"' and they are not 
to be killed till tbe withdrawers be from the city itself and 
from the tribe itself, and till it withdraw the majority, and 
tdl tbe withdrawers be men. If tbe withdrawers be women, 
or children, or the minority be withdrawn, or the with- 
drawers bo ontaido it, they are to he treated singly, and they 
need two witnesses, and a warning to each one of them. It is 
more grievous for individuals than for tbe multitude, because 
individuals must be stoned, though for that reason their 
money is safe for their heirs ; but the multitude are cut of 
with the sword, and for that reason their money is lost. 

5. " Thou shalt sm'ely smite the inhabiUints of that city,"' 
etc. A caravan of asses or camels pasttiug from place U> 
place are delivered, as is said, " Destroying it utterly and alLi 
that is therein," etc From thence they said, " tbe propert; 
of the righteous in it is lost, out of the city it is safe. JivtS 
that of tbe wicked, whether inside or outside, is lost." 

6. " And thou shalt gather all tbe spoil of it into it^M 
midst of the street thereof"^ If it have no street, they mu 

' P8, I. 6. " Numh. ivi. 33. ' 1 Sum. ii. 6. * Dcut iirix. SS. 1 


SELECTIONS, THE REBELLIOUS ELDER. 201 

make a street for it If there be a street outside of it, they 
bring it insida " And shalt bum with fire the city and all 
the spoil thereof," its spoil but not the spoil of heaven. From 
thence they say, the holy things therein are to be redeemed, 
and the heave-offerings suffered to decay. The second tithes 
and holy writings are to be concealed ** Every whit for the 
Lord thy God." Said R Simon, " The Holy One, Blessed be 
He, said. If you execute judgment on the withdrawn city, I 
count it for you as though you brought a bumt-offering 
wholly before ma" '* And it shall be an heap for ever ; it 
shall not be built again." " Thou shalt not make of it even 
gardens or parks." The words of R Jos^, the Galilean. R 
Akiba said, " it shall not be builded again. It must not be 
built as it was before, but it may be made (into) gardens and 
parks." " And there shall cleave nought of the cursed thing 
to thine hand."^ Whilst the wicked are in the world, wrath 
is in the world. When the wicked are destroyed from the 
world, wrath retires from the world- 


CHAPTEE XI. 

1. These are to be strangled, — he who beats his father 
or his mother, and he who steals a soul from Israel, and an 
" elder " who is rebellious against the judges, and a false pro- 
phet, and he who prophesies in the name of idolatry, and 
false witnesses proved to be perjured against a priest's 
daughter and her paramour. He who beats father or mother 
is not guilty till he make a bruise in them. It is more 
grievous to curse them than to beat them. Because if he 
cursed them after their death, he is guilty ; but if he beat 
them after .their death, he is free. He who stole a soul from 
Israel is not guilty till he bring him on his property. R 
Judah said, " till he bring him on his property and obtain 
service by him," as is said, " And maketh merchandise of him, 
or selleth him."* " If he steal his own son ?" R Ishmael, 
the son of R Jochanan, the son of Beroka, pronounces him 

» Deut. xiii 17. " Deut. xxiv. 7. 


202 THE SANHEDRIN. 


TALMUD 


" guilty," but the Sages pronounce him " free." " If he stole 
one, half a servant and half free?" E. Judah pronounces 
him " guilty," but the Sages pronounce him " free." 

2. The elder rebellious against the decision of the 
judges ? as it is said, " If there arise a matter too hard for 
thee in judgment,"^ etc. There were three places of judg- 
ment. One place was by the door of the Mountain of the 
House ; and one was by the door of the court ; and one was 
in the chamber of hewn stone. The witnesses against the 
rebellious elder came to the one by the door of the Mountain 
of the House, and each one said, "so I expounded, and 
so my companions expounded ; so I taught, and so my com- 
panions taught" If the judges listened to them, they told 
them : but if not, they went to those at the door of the 
court, and each one said, "so I expounded, and so my 
companions expounded ; so I taught, and so my companions 
taught." If they listened to them, they told them ; but if not, 
both parties went to the supreme court in the chamber of 
hewn stone, because from it the Law proceeded forth to all 
Israel, as is said, "Of that place which the Lord shall choose." ^ 
" If the rebellious elder returned to his city, and taught as 
before ?" " He is free." " But if he decided to practise false 
teaching ?" '• He is guilty, as is said, " And the man that will 
do presumptuously."^ He is not guilty till he decide to 
practise his false teaching. A disciple who decided to prac- 
tise false teaching is free. It follows that what is a grave 
offence in the one is a light offence in the other. 

3. The burden in the words of the scribes is greater than 
the burden in the words of the law. He who said, " There 
are no phylacteries, so as to transgress the words of the law ?" 
" He is free." He who said, " Tlicre are five frontlets, so 
as to add to the words of the scribes ?" " He is guilty." 

4. " The judges do not put such an offender to death in 
the tribunal of his city, nor in the tribunal of Jabneh,* but 
they bring him up to the supreme court in Jerusalem, and 
they guard him till a holiday ; and they put him to death on 
a holiday, as is said, " And all the people shall hear and fear, 

» Dcut. xvii. 8. 2 Deut xvii. 10. » Deut xvii. 12. * Now caUed Yebna. 


■.1. 


SELECTIONS. 


IDOLATRY. 203 


and do no more presumptuously/'^ The words of R Akiba. 
R Judah said, " they do not cause him anguish in delaying 
his judgment, but they execute him oflf-hand." And they 
write and send messengers to all places, " Such a man, the 
son of such a man, is condemned to death by the tribunal/' 

6. A false prophet, who prophesied what he did not hear, 
and what was not told to him, is put to death by the hands 
of man. But he who suppressed his prophecy, and he who 
added to the words of a prophet, and .a prophet who trans- 
gressed his own words, is put to death by the visitation of 
heaven, as is said, " I will require it of him/'^ 

6. And he who prophesied in the name of idolatry and 
said, " so the idol said," even though its decision was exactly 
to pronounce unclean the unclean, and to pronounce cleansed 
the clean, is to be strangled. And so also the false wit- 
nesses against a priest's daughter. Because all false wit- 
nesses are condemned to the same death which they had 
intended (for the accused), except false witnesses against 
the daughter of a priest, and they are to be strangled. 

^ Dent zril 13. ' Dent zviii 19. 


204 IDOLATRY. 


TALMUD 


Treatise XI. 

Dealings with Idolaters — Idolatrous Feasts — ^Things not to be sold to Idolaters 
— Labour with Idolaters — ^The Letting out of Houses and Fields— Precau- 
tions — Things forbidden and Things allowed — Idols and Fragments of 
Idols — Hills and Groves — Houses joined to an Idol Temple — Idolatrous 
Trees — Image of Mercury — ^Annulling Idolatry — Pagan Alignment for 
Idolatry — Answer — Treading — Pressing — Baking — Wine of Libation — 
Culinary Utensils. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. Three days before the feasts of the idolaters it is for- 
bidden to deal with, them, to lend articles to them, or to 
take a loan of articles from them ; to make a loan of money 
to them, or to borrow money from them ; to repay them, or to 
take payment from them. Babbi Judah said, " it is allowed 
to take pajrment from them, since it is unsatisfactoiy to the 
idolater." The (Sages) answered him, "though it is un- 
pleasant to him now, he rejoices afterwards." 

2. R Ishmael said, '' three days before and three days 
after their feasts it is forbidden.'' But the Sages say, 
" before their feasts it is forbidden, after their feasts it is 
allowed." 

3. ''And these are the feasts of the idolaters, — the 
Kalends, and the Satumtdia, and the Quartesims^ and the 
coronation day of their kings, and the day of their birth, and 
the day of their death." The words of R Meier. But the 
Sages say, " every death anniversary in which there is bum- 

^ Literally strange worship. It chiefly means the worship of the stars, and 
other heavenly bodies. 


SELECTIONS. 


DECORATIONS. 205 


ing of incense/ there is in it the worship of idols. But if 
there be no burning of incense there is no worship of idols." 
" The day of shaving his beard and cutting his hair, the day 
of his disembarking from the sea, and the day of his release 
from prison, and the day when the heathen makes a feast 
for his son ?" " It is not forbidden to deal with them save 
on this day of his feast, and with this man who keeps the 
feast only." 

4. " The city in which there exists idolatry outside the 
city ?" " It is allowed to deal with the idolaters." " If the 
idolatry be outside?" "Inside it is allowed." "How is it 
with going there?" "When the road directly leads to the 
place itself, it is forbidden ; but if it be possible to go by it 
to another place, it is allowed." 

5. "If in the city in which there exists idolatry there be 
shops, some decorated with idolatrous crowns, and some 
without decoration?" This was the case in Bethshan; and 
the Sages say, " the decorated ones are forbidden for deal- 
ing, and those not decorated are allowed." 

6. These things are forbidden to be sold to idolaters, — 
fir-cones, and the best figs, with their clusters, and incense, 
and the white cock. R Judah said, " it is allowable to sell 
a white cock amongst many others. But when a man has 
only one, he must cut its claw before he sell it, since the 
heathen do not offer that which is blemished in idol wor- 
ship." And all other things for ordinary uses are allowed, 
— but if they be declared to be for idolatry, they are for- 
bidden. R Meier said, " even the fine dates, and the date 
sap,^ and the Jericho dates, are forbidden for sale to 
idolaters." 

7. Where they are accustomed to sell small cattle to 
idolaters, they may sell them. Where they are unaccus- 
tomed to sell them, they must not sell them. And every- 
where they must not sell to them the large cattle, calves, 
ass foals, unblemished or blemished. R Judah allowed the 
broken-boned ; and Benbethira allowed even horses. 

8. Men must not sell to them bears or lions, or any- 

1 Jer. xxxiv. 5. ' Or sngar cane. 


206 IDOLATEY. 

thing in which there ia peril to the multitude. They must 
not build with them royal halls/ judgment seats, and 
stadiums,* and bemas." But men may build with them 
altars and baths. When they reach to the arching in which 
they place their idol, it is forbidden to build farther. 

9. And Israelites must not make decorations for idola, 
necklaces, and nose-rings, and rings. K. Eleazar said, " for pay 
it is allowed." Men must not sell to tliera what is fastened 
to the ground. But one may sell it after it is cut down. It, 
Judah said, " one may sell it to a heathen on condition that 
he cuts it down." 

1 0, " Men must not let to them buildings * in the Laud 
of Israel, and it is needless to say fields. But in Syria they 
may let to them buildings, but not fields. But out of tha 
Laud they may sell to them buildings, and may rent to them, 
fields." The words of R. Meier. R Josi- said, " iu the Land 
of Israel men may let to them buildings, but not fielils. 
But in Syria they may sell buildings and rent fields to 
them, and out of the Land they may sell both." However, 
where they said to let, they did not say a dwelling-house ; 
since an heathen can bring inside of it an idol, as it is said, 
" Thou shall not bring iu abomination into thy 
And everywhere a man must not hire to an heathen his 
bath, because it is called by his name. 


CHAPTER II. 

1. Israelites must not put cattle in the stables of idolaters, , 
because of their evil habits. And a woman must not be^ 
alone with them, because of their evil habits. And no niawa 
should be alone with them, because they are apt to shaJ 
blood. 

2. A daughter of Israel must not attend an idolatroM 
woman, because she helps the birth of a child for idolat^ 
But an idolatress may attend a daughter of Israel. Adaugh. ' 


SELECTIONS. THINGS FORBIDDEN. 207 

of Israel must not suckle a child of an idolatress ; but an 
idolatress may suckle a child of a daughter of Israel, imder 
her observation. 

3. "Israelites may take from them medicine to cure 
property; but not to cure persons. And they are not to 
be shaved by them anywhere." The words of R Meier. 
But tlie Sages say, " under public observation it is allowed, 
but not entirely alone." 

4. These things of the idolaters are forbidden, and 
every use of them is strictly forbidden ; wine, and vinegar of 
the heathen which was at first wine, and Hadrian's mixture^ 
with its fragments, and hides of animals with their hearts* 
(torn out). Eabbi Simon the son of Gamaliel said *' when 
the rent is round, it is forbidden, when lengthwise it is 
allowed." " The flesh brought in for idolatry is allowed ; but 
that which is brought out is forbidden, because it is the 
sacrifice for the dead." The words of R Akiba. It is 
forbidden to do business with those who go to worship the 
Penates; but with those who return from them it is al- 
lowed. "The skin bottles of the idolaters and their jugs 
into which Jewish wine is poured, are forbidden, and every 
use of them is strictly forbidden." The words of R Meier. 
But the Sages say, " every use of them is not forbidden." 
" Grape stones and grape skins of the idolaters are forbidden, 
and every use of them is strictly forbidden." The words 
of R Mair. But the Sages say, "when moist, they are 
forbidden ; but when dry, they are allowed." " Fish brine 
and the cheese from Bethuniki,' a village of the idolaters, 
are forbidden and every use of them strictly forbidden." 
The words of R Meier. But the Sages say, " every use of 
them is not forbidden." R Judah related, that R Ishmael 
asked R Joshua, as they were journeying along the road — he 
said to him, "why do they forbid the cheese of idolaters?" 

^ Hadrian's mixture was balls of clay ' The heart torn out of the animal 

saturated with wine and taken on mill- when alive to be offered in idolatrous 

tary expeditions. When the soldiers worship. 

wished to drink, they soaked them in 'A village where calves were offered 

water so that it had a taste of wine, in idolatry. Consequently the rennet 

and the mud settled at the bottom of was forbidden, and the cheese made 

the vessel. from their rennet was also forbidden. 


208 


He replied to him, " because they cause it to ferment with 
the stomach of a carcase." E. lahmael said to him, " and 
is not the atomacli of a biirnt-offeriug of more importance 
than the stomach of a carcase, and it was said, " the priest 
who was so minded supped the milk that was in it," but 
the Sagea did uot agree with him, and they said, " the priests 
do not use it, and they are not guilty." He changed the 
conversation, and said to him, " because they ferment it 
with the stomach of a calf (devoted) to idolatry," He said 
to him, " if so, why do they not forbid it for every use I" 
He turned to another subject, and said to him, "brother 
Ishmael, how do you read, ' For thy love is better than 
wine,'' or' For tliy love is good'"? He replied to him, "For 
thy love is good." He said to him, " it is not so, since the 
next verse explains it, ' Because of the savour of thy good 
ointments.' " 

5. These things of the idolaters are forbidden, but every 
use of them is not strictly forbidden ; milk which an 
heathen milked, and an Israelite did not see it. " Their 
bread and oil?" "Eabbi and his colleagues allowed od." 
But the cookery, and the gravy into which they are wont 
to put wine and vinegar, and ahred thunny fish, and the 
sauce in which the fish chalbith is not swimming, and the 
herring, and the essence of asaaffetida, and spiced salt, are 
forbidden ; but every use of tliem is not strictly forbidden. 

6. These things are allowed for eating — milk which an 
idolater mdked, and an Israelite saw, and honey and honey- 
comb, even if they are dropping, as they do not contain the 
effect of liquor,* and gravy into which they are not wont to put 
wine and vinegar, and shred thunny fish, and sauce in which 
there is the fish chalbith, and the leaf of the assafcetida, 
and olives crashed into round cakes. E. Josd said, " the 
kernels detached from the olives are forbidden." The 
locusts which they bring from their baskets^ are forbidden ; 

' SoL Song, i. 2. The question li, ' i.e. for legal defilement, 
whether the fritiadshlp iprtuig ^ni the 

nine or not, and his Doacliuion is that * The locusts might be miied in the 

ax the Batour ii coanecle'! with the oil, basket with wine or liqnor, which 
ea i> the friendship with the wine, anil would caiue legiil defllenieiiL 
60 is tlie clieese coniiticted with idolatry. 


SELECTIONS. 


IMAGES. 209 


but those brought from their magazines are allowed. And 
even so is the decision for their heave-oflferings. 

CHAPTER III. 

1. "All images are forbidden, because they are wor- 
shipped once a year." The words of R Meier. But the 
Sages say, " only those are forbidden which have in their 
hand a staff, or bird, or ball." R Simon, the son of Gamaliel, 
said, " all images which have in their hand anything what- 
ever." 

2. "If one find the broken pieces of images ?" " They 
are allowed (for useful purposes)." " If one find the figure 
of an hand, or the figure of a foot ? " " They are forbidden, 
because such as they are worshipped." 

3. " (If one find) vessels on which is the form of the 
sun-disc, the form of the moon, the form of a dragon?" 
"They are to be carried into the Salt Sea."^ R Simon, the 
son of Gamaliel, said, "when such forms are on precious 
(vessels) they are forbidden, when they are on insignificant 
(ones) they are allowed." 

4. R Jos^ said, " one must grind the image to powder and 
scatter it to the wind, or cast it into the sea." The Sages 
said to him, " then it will make dung," and it is said, " And 
there shall not cleave to thy hand aught of the accursed 
thing." ^ 

5. Proclus, the son of a philosopher, asked B. Gamaliel, 
in Acho,^ as he was bathing in the bath of Venus, and said 
to him, " it is written in thy law, ' and there shall not cleave 
to thy hand aught of the accursed thing ;' why dost thou 
bathe in the bath of Venus?" He said to him, "men do 
not give replies in the bath ;" and when he came out he 
said to him, " I came not within its district ; it came into my 
district." They did not say, " let us make a bath to the 
honour of Venus, but they said, let ns make Venus an honour 

^ The Salt Sea generally means in > Deut xiiL 17. 
the Talmud the Dead Sea. It is now 

called by the Arabs Bahr-Ldt^ i,e, the * The modem Akka (Acre). 
Sea of Lot. 

P 


210 IDOLATRY. 


TALMUD 


to the bath." - Another thing : " if they gave thee money 
wouldst thou enter naked before thy idol, or wouldst thou do 
aught disgraceful in its presence ? yet if it stands on a canal 
every one dishonours it." It is not said, save for their 
heathen gods, " that which is customary from its being a god, 
is forbidden, that which is not customary from its being a 
god, is allowed." 

6. Though idolaters worship the mountains and the hills, 
the mountains and the liills are allowed, but what is upon 
them is forbidden ; as is said, " Thou shalt not covet the silver 
and the gold upon them to take tliem."^ R Jos^, the Gali- 
lean, said, " their gods of the mountains, but not tlie moun- 
tains their gods ; their gods of the hills, but not the liiUs 
their gods." "But why are the groves forbidden?" "Be- 
cause they are prepared by man's hands, and every object of 
idolatry which is prepared by man's hands is forbidden." 
Said E. Akiba, " I will consider and decide before thee ; every 
place in which you find a high mountain, and an elevated 
hill, and a flourishing tree, know that there is idolatry." 

7. " He who had a house joined to an idol, and it fell 
down?" "It is forbidden to rebuild it." "What shall he 
do ?" " He must first reduce the size of the house by four 
cubits, and then rebuild it." " If the house be in conmion 
between him and the idol?" "It is decided to leave the 
four cubits unoccupied, as its stones, wood, and dust cause 
defilement like a worm, ' Thou shalt utterly detest it'" * 

8. There are three sorts of buildings. The house origin- 
ally built for idolatry is forbidden. " If the idolater white- 
washed, and painted, and repaired it for the idol?" "He 
must take down his repairs." " If he brought in and after- 
wards took out the idol ?" " It is allowed." 

9. There are three sorts of stones. The stone originally 
hewn for a pedestal to the idol is forbidden. " If the idolater 
whitewashed, and painted, and repaired it to honour an idol ?" 
" He must take down his repairs." " If he placed his idol 
upon it, and afterwards took it away ?" " It is allowed," 

10. There are three sorts of groves. The tree originally 

1 Deut vii 26. • Deut vii. 26. 


SELECTIONS. GROVES. 211 

planted to honour an idol is forbidden. " If the idolater cut 
it, and hewed it, and made changes to honour an idol V " He 
must take down his changes." " If he placed an idol beneath 
it and abused it ?" " It is allowed." 

1 1. " What is a grove ?" " That in which there is an 
idoL" E. Simon said, " everything that is worshipped, as it 
happened in Zidon at the tree where they worshipped, and 
they found beneath it a heap. Said R Simon to them, 
' examine this heap.' And they examined it and found in 
it an image.' He said to them, ' as the object of service is 
the image, we shall allow the tree to you."* 

12. One must not sit in the shadow of an idolatrous 
grove, and though he sit, he is legally clean. And one must 
not pass underneath it ; even if one pass he is defiled. "If it 
odcupy the public thoroughfare and one pass beneath it?" 
" He is clean." 

13. One may sow underneath it vegetables in winter, but 
not in summer. But lettuce^ must not be sown either in 
summer or winter. R Jos6 said, " not even vegetables in 
winter, since the leaves would fall upon them and serve 
them for dung." 

14. " Has one taken wood from it ?" " Its wood is for- 
bidden for every use." " Has one heated an oven with it ?" 
" If the oven be new it must be broken down, and if old it 
must be cooled down." " Has one baked bread in it ?" 
" The use of the bread is forbidden." " Are the loaves mixed 
with other loaves, and these again with others ?" " The use 
of all the loaves is forbidden." R Eliezer said, " its value 
is to be cast into the Salt Sea." The Sages replied to him, 
" there is no redemption for idolatry." " Has one made out 
of such a tree a weaver's shuttle ?" " Its use is forbidden." 
" Has one woven a garment with it ?" " The use of the 
gannent is forbidden." " Is the garment mixed with other 
garments, and these again with others ?" "The use of all 
the garments is forbidden." Eabbi Eleazar said, " its value 
is to be cast into the Salt Sea." The Sages replied to him, 
" there is no redemption for idolatry." 

^ Lest the lettuce might deriTe profit from the ahade of the idolatrous grove. 


212 IDOLATEY. 

15. "How is the tree to be desecrated?" "Has the 
idolater broken off dry bark, or green boughs ; has he taken 
from it a. staff, or a twig, or even a leaf — it is desecrated." 
" Has he trimmed it for the sake of the tree ?" " It is for- 
bidden." " Has he trimmed it, but not for the sake of the 
tree ?" " It is allowed." 


CHAPTER rV. 

1. Rabbi lahmael said, "three stones' beside each other 
at the side of the image of Mercury are forbidden, biit two 
are allowed." But the Sagea say, "when they are within 
his view they are forbidden, but when they are not witliin 
his view they are allowed." 

2. " Has one found money on his head, a garment, or 
implements which are not offerings ?" " They ore allowed." 
Festoons of grapes, wreaths of ears of corn, and wines, and 
oils, and fine flour, and everything similar offered on his 
altar are forbidden. 

3. A garden or a bath for idolatry are permitted for use 
when they are gratuitous. But they ore not to be used if a 
present for the worship of the idol be expected. If it be in 
partnership with others that are not eo employed, it can be 
used, whether it be with the expectation of a present or 
gratuitous. The idol of idolaters is at once forbidden, but 
the idol of Ismel is not forbidden untU it be served. 

4. An idolater may desecrate his own idol, or the idol of 
his companion. But Israel must not desecrate the idol of an 
idolater. In desecrating the idol he desecrates what apper- ■ 
taina to it. " Has he desecrated what appertains to it )" ' 
" What appertains to it ie allowed, but the idol itself is for — 
bidden." 

5. " How is it to be desecrated ?" " He cuts off the lobs 
of its ear, the tip of its nose, the end of its finger — he defomt _»-^-: 


' TheBB stonea murt be arranged as 
two on tha ground, anrl one over them, 
and not mors than four ella ilislant 
from Iha iuuigs, to TulIU the conditious 


of being ui MoLttrous oiTering. If 
Blones did not fulfll tha»a conditic 
an Israelite might lue them for 
purpoaea. 


SELECTIONS. MERCURY. 213 

even though he does not diminish it — it is desecrated." " He 
spits before it, he drags it, and throws dirt upon it ?*' " It is 
not desecrated." " Has he sold it or pledged it ?" Eabbi says, 
" it is desecrated." But the Sages say, " it is not desecrated." 

6. The idol, the service of which is abandoned in the 
time of peace, is allowed. " But if its service be abandoned 
in time of war ?" " It is forbidden."^ The royal pedestals* 
are forbidden, because they are erected at the time when 
kings are travelling. 

7. The elders were asked in Eome, " If God has no 
pleasure in idolatry, why does He not destroy it?" They 
replied to the Romans, " If the idolaters were serving a thing 
which was not necessary to the world. He would destroy it, 
but they serve the sun disc, and the moon, and the stars, 
and the signs of the zodiac. Shall he destroy his world on 
account of the fools?" They replied to them, "If so He 
can destroy the object which is not wanted for the world, 
and leave that which the world wants." They replied to 
them, " even we should be strengthening the hands of the 
worshippers of such objects ; they would say, there is a proof 
that they are gods, because they are not destroyed." 

8. One may buy a wine-press pressed by an idolater, even 
though he take grapes with his hand and lay them on the 
heap of grapes, as it is not made the wine of idolatrous liba- 
tion, till it runs into the vat " Has it run into the vat ?" 
" That which is in the vat is forbidden, but the remainder is 
allowed." One may tread with an idolater in the wine-press, 
but one must not gather grapes with him. One must not tread 
or gather grapes with an Israelite who works in a state of 

. defilement But one may carry with him empty barrels to 
the press and bring them away with him from the press. 
One must not knead nor prepare with the baker who works in 
(a state of) legal defilement, but one may carry the bread with 
him to the dealer in bread. 

^ If the idol be disregarded in time flision of war, there was no proof that 

of peace, the heathen have ceased to they would not worship it at another 

esteem it as a god, and Israelites might time. 

nse it for some purpose. But if the ' ue, triumphal arches with statues 

heathen neglected it during the con- upon them. 


214 


roOLATRY. 


9. " If an ulolater be found standing by the side of a wine 
vat, and if he have any loan upon it ?" " It is forbidden." 
" If he have no loan on it ?" " It is allowed." " Has he 
fallen into the vat and come out again, or measured it with a 
cane ; has he driven away a hornet with a cane ; or has he 
given a slap to the fermentation on the top of the barrel ?" 
All these things once happened, and the (Sages) decided, 
'■ Let it be sold." But R Simon " allowed it" He took 
the ban'el, and flung it in a rage into the vat. This once 
happened and the Sages allowed it. 

1 0, " Has one made the wine of an idolater without legal 
defilement, and left it in his possession in a house open to 
public concourse — in a city in which there are idolatera and 
Israelites r' "It is allowed." "In a city in which all are 
idolaters ?" " It is forbidden till he leave a watchman, and 
it is not needful that the watchman sit and watch. Even 
though he goes in and out it is allowed" R. Simon, the son 
of Eleazar, said, " all possession of wine by idolaters is alik&" 
" Has one made the wine of an heathen without legal defile- 
ment, and left it in hia possession, and the idolater afterwards 
wrote to him, I have received from you the money for the 
wine?" "It is allowed." "But if the Israelite wish to 
withdraw it, and the idolater do not permit him, till he shall 
give him hia money for it?" This once happened in Beth- 
shan, and the Sages " forbade it," 


CHAPTER V. 

1 . " Has an idolater hired an Israelite to make witlu 
him wine of idolatrous libation?" "Hia wages are for- 
bidden." " But if he hired him to do with him anothe-j 
work, even though he say to him, ' carry for me a barrel a 
wine of libation from place to place?'" "His w^es s 
allowed." " Has one hired an ass to bring on him wine • 
idolatrous libation?" "The hire is not allowed." "H_ 
one hired out the ass for riding, even tliough the idolati 
put his wine flask upon him ?" "The liire is allowed." 


SELECTIONS. 


WAGES. 215 


2. Wine of idolatrous libation which fell on grapes must 
be cleansed away, and they are allowed. But if the grapes 
be crushed, they are forbidden. " Has the idolatrous wine 
fallen on figs or on dates ?" " If it convey to them a taste, 
they are forbidden." It happened once with Baithus, son of 
Zonan, that he brought dried figs in a boat, and a barrel of 
wine of idolatrous libation was broken, and it fell upon 
them, and he consulted the Sages and they allowed them. 
This is the rule, — In every use where the taste is conveyed, 
it is forbidden. But where in its use no taste is conveyed, 
it is allowed. It is like vinegar which has fallen on peas. 

3. "An idolater who was carrying with an Israelite 
pitchers of wine from place to place ?" " If it be certain 
that the idolater is watched, it is allowed." " If the Israelite 
let him know that he is departing — if there be time to bore, 
to close, and to seal the pitcher?" R Simon, son of Gamaliel, 
said, " it is not allowed if there be time to open, to cork, 
and to seal it again." " And an Israelite put his wine into 
a carriage, or into a boat, and he has gone a near cut — he 
entered the city and washed?" "It is allowed." "But if 
he let the idolater know that he is departing, if there be 
time to bore, and cork, and seal it again ? " E. Simon, son of 
Gamaliel, said, " it is not allowed if there be time to open 
the barrel and cork and seal it again." " If he leave the 
idolater in the wine-shop, even ttough he go in and out?" 
" It is allowed." " But if he let the idolater know that he 
departs, if there be time to bore, and cork, and seal it 
again ? " E. Simon ben Gamaliel said, " it is not allowed 
if there be time to open, and to cork, and to seal it again." 
" Did he dine with the idolater at table, and he left a flask 
on the table, and a flask on the sideboard, and he left them 
and went out ? " " That one which is on the table is for- 
bidden, but that one on the sideboard is allowed." " But if 
he said to him, ' you may mix and drink wine, even that one 
on the sideboard is forbidden.*"^ Open barrels are forbidden, 
also sealed ones, when there is time to open, and cork, and 
seal them up again." 

^ Because the idolater might have made an idolatroufl libation from both flaaka. 


216 


4. If foreign banditti have entered into a city in time of 
peace, open barrels are forbidden — cloaed ones are allowed. If 
the banditti have entered in time of war, both are equally 
allowed, because there is no time for idolatrous libation. 

5. When an idolater has sent to workmen of Israel a 
barrel of wine of idolatrous libation for wages, it is allowed 
to say, " give us its value." " But if it has come into their 
possession ? " " It is forbidden." 

6. " Has one sold wine to an idolater ?" " If he E^reed 
for the price before it is measured, its payment is allowed." 
" Has he measured it before he agreed for the price ? " " Its 
payment ia forbidden." 

7. " Has one taken a funnel and measured wine into the 
bottle of an idolater, and he then turned round and measured 
wine into the bottle of an Israelite?" "If the funnel 
retain a drop of the wine of the idolater, the wine ia for- 
bidden." " Has one poured the wine from vessel to vessel?" 
" That vessel from which he poured it is allowed, and that 
one into which he poured it is forbidden." 

8. Wine of idolatrous libation is forbidden, and even a. 
little of it renders forbidden — wine in wine, and water in 
water— how much soever they be, and wine in water, and 
water in wine, in giving a taste. This is the rule, — If both 

a of one sort, however little ; if they be of different sorts, 
in giving a taste. 

9. These things are forbidden, and even a little of them 
renders other things forbidden. Wine of idolatrous libation, 
and idols, and skins of beasts with the hearts torn out, and an 
ox that was stoned,^ and an heifer tliat ia beheaded,'' and the 
birds from the leprosy, and the hair of the Nazuxite,' and the 
first-born of the ass, and flesh in milk, and the scapegoat, and 
the profane animals * which were slaughtered in the Temple 
court. These are forbidden to be mixed with other things ; 
and if so mixed, even a little of them renders other things 
forbidden. 

' Enod. ixi. S9. tcriug of oattle ajid tovh Tor prorane 

* Deut. xxi. i. or dmnestii: iiarpoaes. Thej vara 
' Numb. ri. IS. coJIeil profane to iluUnguish Lhem &om 

* Tbta ntexa to the killing or Blungh- the hoi; sacrifices. 


SELECTIONS. 


WINE. 217 


10. " Wine of idolatrous libation which has fallen into a 
vat ?" "All its use is forbidden." R Simon ben Gamaliel 
said, " it may all be sold to heathens, excepting the value of 
the wine of idolatrous libation which is in it" 

11. "A stone press which an idolater has prepared with 
pitch ?" " It must be cleansed, and it is clean." " And if 
of wood?" Eabbi said, " it should be cleansed;" and the 
Sages said, " one must peel off the pitch ; but if it be made 
of earthenware, even though one peel off the pitch, it is 
forbidden." 

12. "If one buy culinary utensils from an idolater?" 
" That which it is usual to dip (in water), one must dip ; 
to scour, one must scour ; to whiten in the fire, one must 
whiten in fire. The spit and the fork, one must whiten in 
the fire ;^ and the knife must be rubbed down, and it is 
clean." 

* Numb. xxxi. 23. 


218 


THE FATHERS. 


TALMUD 


Treatise XIL 

The Oral Law — Its Transmission — Names of the "Receivers" — Maxims- 
Apothegms — ^Wisdom of the Wise. . 


CHAPTER I. 

1. Moses received the Oral Law from Sinai and delivered 
it to Joshua^ and Joshua delivered it to the elders, and the 
elders to the prophets, and the prophets to the men of the 
great synagogue.^ They said three things, " be deliberate in 
judgment, raise up many disciples, and make a fence for 
the law." 

2. Simon the Just was one of the last of the men of the 
great synagogue. He used to say that the world stood on 
three things — " on the law, the service, and the acts of the 
pious." 

3. Antigonus of Soco received (the law) from Simon the 
Just He used to say, " be not as servants, who serve their 
master for the sake of receiving a reward, but be like 
servants who serve their master without the view of receiving 
a reward ; and let the fear of heaven be upon you." 

4. Jos^, son of Joezer of Zeredah, and Jos^, son of Jochanan 
of Jerusalem, received (the oral law) from him. Jos6, son of 
Joezer of Zeredah, said, "let thy house be a house of 


^ The men of the great synagogrue 
were the " Scrihes " who flourished 
from the return out of Bahylon till the 
Gneco-Syrlan persecution, B.O. 220. 
Their ohject was to preserve the sacred 
text with scrupulous minuteness, and 
make a "fence" for the law. They 
added numherless directions for the 
better observance of the old precepts. 
The Scribes were succeeded by the 


"learners," the "repeaters," and the 
' ' master builders, " who continued from 
B.O. 220 till A.D. 220. In their time 
fall the Maccabean revolution, the 
birth of Christ, the overthrow of the 
temple by Titus, the rebellion oi Bar- 
chochba, the complete destruction of 
Jerusalem, and the dispersion of the 
Jews. 


SELECTIONS. 


MAXIMS. 219 


assembly for the wise, and dust thyself with the dust of 
their feet, and drink their words in thirstiness." 

5. Jose, son of Jochanan of Jerusalem, said, " let thy 
house be wide open, and let the poor be thy children. Dis- 
course not much with women, not even with thy wife, much 
less with thy neighbour's wife." Hence the wise men say, 
"whoever converses much with women brings evil on himself, 
neglects the study of the law, and at last will inherit helL" 

6. Joshua, son of Perechiah, and Natai the Arbelite re- 
ceived the oral law from them. Joshua, son of Perechiah, 
said, "get thyself a master, and obtain a companion, and judge 
all mankind with favour." 

7. Natai the Arbelite said, "withdraw from an evil 
neighbour, and associate not with the wicked, neither flatter 
thyself to escape punishment." 

8. Judah, son of Tabia, and Simon, son of Shetach, received 
it of them. Judah, son of Tabai, said, " consider not thyself 
as the arranger of the law, and when the parties are before 
thee in judgment, consider them as guilty ; but when they 
are departed from thee, consider them as innocent, when 
they have acquiesced in the sentence." 

9. Simon, son of Shetach, said, " be extremely careful in 
the examination of witnesses, and be cautious in thy words, 
lest they from thence should learn to utter a falsehood." 

10. Shemaiah and Abtalyon^ received it from them. 
Shemaiah said, " love thy business and hate dominion, and 
be unknown to government." 

11. Abtalyon said, "ye Sages, be cautious of . your 
words, lest ye be doomed to captivity, and carried captive 
to a place of bad waters, and the disciples who follow yoii 
should drink of them, by which means the name of God 
may be profaned." 

12. Hillel and Shamai received it of them. Hillel 
said, " be thou of the disciples of Aaron, who loved peace, 
and pursued peace, so that thou love mankind, and allure 
them to the study of the law." 

^ Supposed by some to be the Sameas try to identify Sameas with Simon, son 
andPollioof Josephus. Though others of Shetach. — Antiq. ziv. iz. 4, etc. 


220 


THE FATHERS. 


13. He used to say, "whoever aggrandises liia name, 
destroys his name, and he who does not increase his know- 
ledge in the law, shall be cut off, and he wlio does not 
atudy the law, is deserving of death, and he who serves 
himaelf with the crown of tlie law, will perish." 

14. He also said, "if I perform not good works myself, 
who can do them for me ?" and " when I consider myself, 
wliat am I ?" and " if not now, when shall I ?" 

15. Shamai said, "let thy stndy of the law be fixed, 
say little and do much, and receive all men with an open, 
pleasant face." 

16. Eabban Gamaliel said, "procure thyself an in- 
structor, that thou raayest not be in doubt, and accustom 
not thyself to give tithes by conjecture." 

17. Simon, his son, said, "I have all my life been 
brought up among wise men, and never found anything 80 
good for the body as silence, neither is the atudy of the 
law the principal thing, but its practice," and " whoever 
multiplies words causes sin," 

18. Eabban Simon, son of Gamaliel, said, "the duration of 
the world depends on three thiugs, justice, truth, and peace, 
as is said, "judge truth, and justice, and peace in your gates." 


CHAPTER II, 

1. Eabbi Judah said, " which are the most eligible paths 
for man to choose ? All such as are an ornament to those 
who tread therein ; and get them honour from man. Be 
also as careful of the observance of a light precept, as of a 
weighty one ; becau,?e thou knowest not the due reward of 
the precepts, and balance the loss sustained by the omission 
of a precept against its recompense, and the reward of sin 
against its loss of happiness. Consider also three things, 
and thou wilt not transgress. Understand what is above 
thee: an All-seeing Eye and an Hearing Ear ; and that all thy 
actions are written in a Book." 

2. Eabban Gamaliel, the son of Bahban Judah tlie 


SELECTIONS. WORDS OF THE WISE. 221 

Prince, said, "that the study of the law and intercourse 
with the world are commendable together, as the joining 
of these two annihilates sin ; and all the study of the law, 
that is not supported by business, will become of none 
effect, and will be the cause of sin; and whoever is en- 
gaged in the service of the congregation, ought to act for 
God's sake, then will the merit of their ancestors support 
them, and their charitable deeds exist to eternity ; and I 
(God) shall account you deserving of a great recompense, as 
if ye had actually done it." 

3. "Be ye warned of following princes, as they only 
bestow favours on men for their own interest They show 
themselves as friends while men are useful to them ; but 
they will not support a man in time of need." 

4. He used to say, " do His will as if it were thine own 
will, that He may accomplish thy will as if it were His will ; 
abolish thy will for the sake of His will, that He may abolish 
the will of others for the sake of thy wilL" Hillel said, 
" separate not thyself from the congregation, nor have con- 
fidence in thyself, until the day of thy death. Judge not 
thy neighbour till thou art in his situation, neither utter a 
sentence as if it were incomprehensible, that afterwards may 
be comprehended, nor say, when I shall have leisure I shall 
study ; mayhap thou wilt not have leisure." 

5. He also said, " a boor cannot be fearful of sin, nor can 
a rustic be a saint ; the bashfid will not become learned, nor 
the passionate man a teacher; neither will he, who is much 
engaged in traffic, become wise ; and where there are no 
men, strive thou to be a man." 

6. He having also seen a skull floating on the water, 
said, "because thou didst make othei*s float, have they 
floated thee ! and the end of those who made thee float will 
be that they will float." 

7. He also said, "he who increases flesh, increases 
worms; he who increases riches, increases care; he who 
increases wives, increases witchcraft; he who increases 
female servants, increases lewdness ; he who increases men 
servants, increases robbery ; but he who increases his know- 


222 


THE FATHERS. 


r 


ledge of the law, increases life ; he who increases hia study- 
in college, iucreasea wisdom; he who iucreasea counsel, in- 
creases prudence ; he who increases justice, increases peace ; 
if a man have gained a good name, he has gained it for 
himself; if he have gained the words of the law, lie has 
gained for himself everlasting life in the world to come." 

8. Rabbi Jochanan, son of Zaccai, received the oral law 
from Hillel and Shammai. He used to say, " if thou haat 
spent much time in the study of the law, yet pride not thy- 
self thfereon, because for that wast thou created." Kabbi 
Jochanan, son of Zaccai, had five disciples, and these are they, 
— Eabbi Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua, son of 
Chananya, Kabbi Josii the priest. Rabbi Simon, son of Na- 
thanael. Rabbi Eleazar, son of Arach. He used thus to 
estimate their merits : " R Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, is as a 
well -plastered cistern which loses not a drop ; Joshua, son of 
Chananya, happy are his parents ; Josi5 the priest is a saint ; 
Simon, son of Nathanael, fears sin ; Eleazar, son of Aracli, is a 
mighty spring." He used to say, " if all the Sages of Israel 
were in one scale of the balance, and R. Eleazar, son of 
Hyrcanus, in the other, he would outweigh them alL" Abba 
Saul said in hia name, " if all the Sages of Israel were in 
one scale, and even R. Eleazar, son of Hyrcanus, with them, 
and R. Eleazar, son of Arach in the otber, he would outweigh 
them all." 

9. He also said to them, " go forth and consider which 
is the good path for man to cleave to ?" To this R, 
Eleazar answered, " a good eye." R. Joshua said, " a good 
companion." R, Josii said, " a good neighbour." R Simon 
said, " he who foresees the future." R Eleazar said, " a 
good heart." He then said to them, " I prefer the words of 
R Eleazar, son of Arach, above yours, as his words include 
yours." He also said to them, " go forth and consider 
which is the bad way that man should shun;" to which R 
Eleazar said, " a bad eye." R Joshua said, "' a bad com- 
panion." R. Josfi said, " a bad neighbour." R Simon 
said, " he who boiTows and pays not ; for when one borrows 
from man, it is as if he borrows from God, as is said, ' The 
wicked borroweth and payeth nut agaiu ; but the righteous 


SELECTIONS. REWARD OF THE RIGHTEOUS. 223 

sheweth mercy and giveth.'"^ R Eleazar said, " a bad heart." 
He then said to them, " I prefer the words of R Eleazar, 
son of Arach, above yours, as his words include yours." 

10. They also said three things. R Eleazar said, "let 
the honour of thy companion Ibe as dear to thee as thine 
own ; and be not easily moved to anger ; and repent one 
day before thy death ; and warm thyself by the fire of the 
Sages, and be careful that their coal does not bum thee, for 
their bite is as the bite of a fox, and their sting is as 
the sting of a scorpion, and their bum is the burn of a fiery 
serpent, and all their words are as fiery coals." 

11. R Joshua said, "the bad eye, the bad thought, and 
envy of companions, cause the death of man." 

12. R Jos6 said, "let thy companion's property be as 
dear to thee as thine own ; and prepare thyself to study the 
law, as it cometh not to thee by inheritance ; and let all 
thine actions be in the name of God." 

13. R Simon said, "be careful of reading the 'Hear,'* 
etc., and the other prayers ; and when thou art praying con- 
sider not thy prayer as fixed, but as supplicating mercy in 
the presence of the Supreme, as is said, ' For He is gracious 
and mercifid, slow to anger and of great kindness, and 
repenteth Him of the evil;"* and be not impious in thine own 
sight." 

14. R Eleazar said, "be diligent to study the law, that 
thou mayest know how to confute the Epicurean ; consider 
also in whose presence thou art labouring, for the Master of 
thy work is faithful to pay thee the reward of thy labour." 

15. R Tarphon said, "the day is short, the labour vast, 
but the labourers are slothful, though the reward is great, 
and the Master of the house presseth for despatch." 

16. He used to say, "it is not incumbent upon thee to 
complete the work, neither art thou free to cease from it. 
If thou hast studied the law, great shall be thy reward ; for 
the Master of thy work is faithful to pay the reward of thy 
labour ; but know that the reward of the righteous is in the 
world to come." 

» Pi. xxxvil 21. « Dent. vi. 4, etc. » Joel ii. 13. 


THE FATHERS. 


CHAPTER III. 

1. Akabia, son of Maliallalcl, said, " ponder ou three tliinga, 
and thou wilt not be led to the commiasion of sin ; consider 
from whence thou comeat, and whither thou guest ; and in 
whose presence thou must in futurity stand to account in 
judgment. From whence comest thou ? from a foul drop. 
And whither gocst thou ? to a place of dust,— worms,- — and 
reptiles ; and in whose presence art thou in future to accoujit 
in judgment ? even before the King Who ia King of kings, 
and the HOLY ONE, blessed be He." 

2. liabbi Clianina, suffragan of the prieata, said, " pray for 
the peace of the kingdom, for, were it not for its fear, men 
would swallow each other aliva" Kabhi Chanina, son of 
Theradion, said, " two who are sitting together and speak not 
of the law ore an assembly of scoruers ; as ia said, " Nor 
sitteth in the seat of the scornful." ' But two who sit 
together, and speak of the law, the DIVINE PRESENCE 
(Shechinah) rests between them ; as is said, " Then they that 
feared tlie Lord spake often one to another ; and the LORD 
hearkened and heard ; and a book of remembrance was 
written before him for them that feared the LokI ; and for 
them that thought upon His name." ^ This refers to two ; 
but whence may we infer, that if but one sits engaged in the 
study of the law the Holy One, blesse<i be He, will appoint 
bim a reward ? Because it ia said, " He sitteth alone and 
keepeth silence, because he hath borne it upon him," * 

3. Eabbi Simon said, " three who have eaten at one table 
and have not spoken of the law, are to be considered as if 
they had eaten of the sacrifices of the dead, for it is said, 
' For all tables are full of vomit and filthiness, so that there 
ia no place clean.' * But three who have eaten at one table 
and have spoken of the law, are considered as if they had 
eaten at GOD'S table, as is said, ' And he said unto me This 
is the table that is before the LORD.' " ' 


SELECTIONS. STUDY IN THE LAW. 225 

4. R Clianiiia, son of Cliauiua, said, "he who wakes 
ill the niglit and travels in the road alone, and turns his 
heart to vanity, is guilty of the death of his own soul." 

5. R Nechunya, son of Ilakana, said," whoever lays on him- 
self the yoke of the law is relieved from the yoke of the king- 
dom and the yoke of the custom of the world, and whoever 
breaks ofif the yoke of the law, imposes on himself the yoke 
of the kingdom and the yoke of the custom of the world." 

6. R Chalaphta of the village of Chananya said, " ten 
men who assemble together and study the law, the Shechinah 
rests among them, as is said, * God standeth in the congre- 
gation of the mighty.' " ^ And hence it is inferred that it is 
also so with five, because it is said, " and hath founded his 
troop in the earth." ^ And hence it is inferred that it is 
likewise so with three, because it is said, " He judgeth among 
the gods." ' And hence it is inferred that it is also thus 
with two, because it is said, " Then they that feared the Lord 
spake often one to another^, and the Lord hearkened and 
heard, etc." * And hence it is inferred that it is likewise so 
with one, because it is said, " In all places where I record 
my name I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee." * 

7. R Eleazar of Barthota said, " give unto Him of His 
own, for thou and all that thou hast are His." And thus 
said David, "For all things come of Tliee, and of thine own 
have we given Thee." * R Simon said, " he who journeys 
on the road, meditating on the law, and ceases therefrom to 
admire this beautiful tree or that beautiful fallow ground, is 
considered in Scripture as endangering his life." 

8. E. Dosthai the son of Jonai, in the name of E. 
Meier, said, "whoever forgetteth anything of what he had 
obtained by study, is considered in Scrii)ture as having 
endangered his life ; as is said, " Only take heed to thyself 
and guard thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things 
which thine eyes have seen." ^ " Perhaps his study has 
])een too powerful for him ?" " But it is said, * And lest they 
depart from thy heart all the days of thy life.'"® Hence ho 

1 Pa. Ixxxii. 1. • Amos ix. 6. » Vh. Ixxxii. i. < MaL iii. 1«. 

» Exod. XX. 24. • 1 Chron. xxix. M. ' Deut. iv. 9. ' DeuU iv. 9. 


226 


THE FATHERS. 


endangera not Ms life, till he deliberately removes them 
from bis heart." 

9. Eabl)i Chanina, aon of Dose, said, " whosoever's fear of 
sin precedes his wistlom, his wisdom will remain ; but who- 
soever's wisdom precedes bis fear of sin, bis wisdom will not 
remain." He used to say, " whosoever's good deeds exceed 
Ilia wisdom, bis wisdom will remain ; but whosoever's wisdom 
exceeds his good deeds, his wisdom will not remain." 

10. He also nsed to say, "with whomsoever tlie spirit 
of his companions is gratified, the Spiidt of God is gratified ; 
but with whomsoever the spirit of his companions is not 
gratified, the Spirit of God is not gratified." R. Josu, son of 
Harchinas, said, "that morning sleep, noontide wine, childish 
conversation, and the assembly of the ignorant, take man out 
of the world." 

11. E. Eleazar Hamodai said, "he who profanes the 
holy offerings, despises tbe solemn feasts, puts bis neighbour 
to shame in pubbc. makes void the covenant of our father 
Abraham, and expounds the law contrary to its true sense, 
although he be well learned in the law and possessed of 
good deeds, yet has he no share in the world to come." 

12. K. Isbmael said, "be hiunble to thy superior, and 
affable to thy inferior, and receive all mankind with joy." 

13. R, Akiba said, "laughter and levity accustom man- 
kind to lewdness, tradition is a fence to the law, tithes are a 
fence to riches, vows are a fence to abstinence, the fence to 
wisdom is silence." 

14. He used to say, "man ia beloved as he was created 
in the image of God, but au additional love was shown to 
him that he was created in the image of God, as is said, ' In 
tbe image of God he made man.'^ Beloved are Israel in 
that they are called tbe children of God, but an additional 
love was shown to tbem in that they are called the children 
of God, as is said, ' Ye are the children of the Lord your 
God,'* Beloved are Israel, to whom was given the desirable 
vessel wherewith the world was created, but an additional 
love was shown unto them, that the desirable vessel wbere- 

' Gen. ix. 6. 


SELECTIONS. WISDOM. 227 

with the world was created was given unto them, as is said, 
'For I give you good doctrine, forsake ye not my law.'"^ 

15. "Everything is seen by God, though freedom of 
choice is given unto man ; the world is judged in goodness, 
though all is according to the greatness of the work" 

16. He used to say, "everything is given to man on 
pledge, and a net is spread over all living ; the shop is open, 
and the merchant credits ; the ledger is open, and the hand 
records, and whosoever chooses to borrow may come and 
borrow, as the collectors are daily coming round and getting 
payment of man, whether with his consent or without it, for 
they have good authority to support them, and the judgment 
is true justice, and all things are ready for the feast." 

1 7. R Eleazar, son of Azariah, said, " if there be no law, 
there is no morality, and if there be no morality, there is no 
law ; if there be no wisdom, there is no reverence, and if 
there be no reverence, there is no wisdom ; if there be no 
understanding, there is no knowledge, and if there be no 
knowledge, there is no understanding ; if there be no meal, 
there can be no study of the law, and if there be no law, 
there will be no meal." He used to say, " to what may he 
be likened whose wisdom exceeds his good deeds? To a 
tree whose branches are many and his roots few, so that the 
wind comes and plucks it up and overturns it, as is said, 
'* For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and he shall 
not see when good cometh, but shall inhabit the parched 
places in the wilderness in a salt land and not inhabited,"^ 
But to what is he like whose good deeds exceed his wisdom ? 
To a tree whose branches are few and its roots many, so that 
if all the winds in the world come and assail it, they cannot 
move it from its place, as is said, " For he shall be like a 
tree planted by the waters, and that spreadeth out her 
roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, 
but her leaf shall be green and shall not be careful in the 
year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit."' 

18. R Eleazar, son of GMsma, said, "sacrifices of doves 
and observance of times are important constitutions. Astro- 
nomy and geometry are the ornaments of wisdom." 

* Plrwr. It. 2. ■ Jcr. xvil. 6. " Jer. xvii 8. 


THE FATHEK.5. 


^L not tb 

^^^ ueithe 

L 


CHAPTER IV. 

Thesonof Zoma said, "Who is wise ? He who is ■willing 
instruction from all men, as is said, ' Than all my 
teachers.'* Who is mighty? He who subdues his evil 
imagiuation, as ia said, ' He that is slow to auger is hettet 
than the mighty, and he that ruleth his spirit than he that 
taketh a city.'' Who is rich? He who rejoices in Ms lot, 
as is said, 'For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hauda, 
happy shalt thou be aud it shall he -well with thee;'* happy 
shalt thou be in this world, aud it shall be well witli thee in 
the world to come. Who is hdnourable ? He who honours 
mankind, as is said, Tor them that honour me I will honour, 
and they that despise me shall he lightly esteemed.'"* 

2- Ben Asai said, "rim to the performance of a slight 
precept as though it were a grave one, and flee from trans- 
gression, for the performance of a precept causes another 
precept, and transgression causes transgression, as the reward 
of a commandment ia a commandment, and the reward of 
transgression is transgression." 

3. He used to say " despise not all men, nor oppose all 
things, for there is no man who has not his hour, neither 
is there anything that has not its place." 

4. Eabbi Levitas of Jabneh said, " be very humble of 
spirit, as all the hope of man is to be food for worms." 
Eabbi Johanan, son of Beroka, said, "whosoever profanes God's 
name in secret, will be punished publicly, whether it be 
done igiiorantly or presumptuously, it ia all one in the 
profanation of God's name." 

6. Eabbi lahmael, his son, said, "he who learns that 
he may be able to teach others, will he enabled to study 
and to teach others ; hut he who studies in order to per- 
form the precepts, wiU be enabled to study, teach, observe, 
do the commandments." Eabbi Zadok said, " make 
not the study of the law subservient to thy af^andizement, 
neither make a hatchet thereof to hew therewith," And 


■ Prov. 1 


' p>. ( 


i. 30. 


sELEcmoNs. HONOUR. 229 

thus said Hillel, "whosoever receiveth any emolument 
from the words of the law deprives himself of life." 

6. Eabbi Jos4 said, "he who honours the law, his 
person shall be honoured by mankind ; and he who pro- 
fanes the law, his person shall be dishonoured by mankind." 

7. Eabbi Ishmael, his son, said, " he who avoids being 
a judge, delivers himself from enmity, robbery, and false 
swearing; but he who is arrogant in judging, is a proud 
wicked fool." 

8. He used to say, "judge not alone, for none ought to 
judge alone save One ; neither say, receive ye my opinion, 
for they are at liberty to accept it, but thou canst not com- 
pel them." 

9. Eabbi Jonathan said, " whosoever performs the law 
in poverty, shall in the end perform it in riches ; but he 
who neglects tlie law for riches, will in the end neglect it 
for poverty." 

10. Eabbi Meier said, "diminish your worldly affairs 
and engage in the study of the law, and be humble in 
spirit before all men ; and if thou neglect the law, there are 
many hindrances to oppose thee, but if thou hast laboured 
in the study of the law, there is much reward to be given 
thee." 

11. Eabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, " he who per- 
forms but one precept gains for himself an advocate;^ and 
he who commits a single sin, gains for himself an accuser;^ 
repentance and good deeds are a shield before the divine 
punishment." Eabbi Johannan Hasandelar said, " every 
congregation formed for God will be permanent, but that 
which is not for God will not be permanent." 

12. Eabbi Eliezer, son of Shamua, said, " let the honour 
of thy disciple be as dear to thee as thine own, and the 
honour of thy companion as the fear of thy master, and 
the fear of thy master as the fear of God." 

13. Eab])i Judah said, "be careful in doctrine, for an 
error in doctrine is presimiptuous sin." Eabbi Simon said, 

^ The word in the original is the ' The word used is the Greek Kan/j- 
Cireck ira/NLcXi|Tos. 1 John ii. 1. yopos. Kev. ziL 10. 


230 


THE FATHERS. 


" there are three crowna — the crown of the law, the crown 
of the priesthood, and the crown of monarchy, but the 
crown of a good name ia better than all of them." 

14. Eabbi Nehorai said, "flee to a place where the 
law is studied, and do not say that it wiU follow thee, for 
thy companions will establish it for thee, and lean not to 
thine own understanding." 

15. Eabbi Janai said, "the prosperity of the wicked 
and the chastisements of the righteous are not in our hands." 
Rabbi Mathia. son of Charash, said, " be forward to greet all 
men, and be rather as the tail of the lion, than as the head 
of the foxes." 

16. Eabbi Jacob said, "this world may be likened to a 
courtyard before the world to come, therefore prepare thy- 
self in the hall, to enter into the dining-room." 

17. He used to say, " one hour employed in repentance 
and good deeds in this world is better than the whole life 
in the world to come ; and one hour's refreshment of spirit 
in the world to come, ia better than the whole life in tiiis 
world." 

18. Eabbi Simon, son of Eleazar, said, " try not to pacify 
your neighbour in the moment of his anger, and do not con- 
sole him while his dead lies before him ; inquire not of him 
in the momeot of his vomng, nor desire to see him in the 
time of his calamity." 

19. The younger Samuel used to say, "rejoice not 
when thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad 
when be stumbles, lest the Lord see it and it be evil in 
His sight, and He turn His wrath from him." 

20. Elisha, son of Abuya, said, " he who teaches a child, 
is like to one wlio writes on clean paper ; but he who teaches 
old people is like to one who writes on blotted paper." 
Eabbi Josi5, the son of Judah, of a village near Babylon 
said, " to what may he who learns the law from little 
children be likened ? To one who eata nnripe grapes and 
drinks new wine." " And to what may he wlio leanis the law 
from old men be likened? To one who eats ripe grajiea 
and drinks old wine." Babbi Meier said, " look not at the 


SELECTIONS. CREATION. 231 

flask, but that which is therein, for there are new flasks full 
of old wine, and old flasks which have not even new wine 
in them." 

21. Eabbi Eleazer Hakapher said, "envy, lust, and 
ambition take men out of the world." 

22. He used to say, "those who are bom are doomed 
to die, the dead to live, and the quick to be judged, to 
make us know, understand, and be informed that He is 
God. He is the Former, Creator, Omniscient, Judge, Witness, 
and Claimant, and He will judge thee hereafter, blessed be 
He ; for in His presence there is no unrighteousness, forget- 
fulness, respect of persons, or acceptance of a bribe, for 
everything is His. Know also that everything is done 
according to the account, and let not thine evil imagination 
persuade thee that the grave is a place of refuge for thee, 
for against thy will wast thou formed, and against thy will 
wast thou bom, and against thy will dost thou live, and 
against thy will shalt thou die, and against thy will must 
thou hereafter render an account, and receive judgment in 
the presence of the King of kings, the Holy God, blessed 
be He." 


CHAPTER V. 

1. With ten expressions^ the world was created. 
"But wherefore is this taught, since God could have 
created it with one expression?" "This is to punish 
the wicked, who destroy the world that was created with 
ten expressions, and to reward the righteous who establish 
the world created with ten expressions." 

2. There were ten generations from Adam to Noah, to 
let us know that God is long-sufifering, as all those genera- 
tions provoked him before he brought the deluge upon them. 
There were ten generations from Noah to Abraham, to let 
us know that God is long-suffering, as all those generations 

^ The Rabbis reckon that the ex- that the tenth expression is to be found 
pnesion " God said " is used nine times in the first verse, "In the beginning 
in the fint chapter of Genesis, and God created the heaven and the earth.' 


232 THE FATHERS. taluld 

provoked him, until Abraham our father came and took the 
reward of them all 

3. Our father Abraham was proved with ten trials, and 
in all of them he stooti firm ; to let us know how great was 
the love of our father Abraham to God. 

4. Ten miracles were vo'ouyht for our fathers in Egypt, 
and ten at the Ked Sea, Ten plagues did the blessed God 
send on the Egyptians in Egypt, and ten at the Ked Sea- 
Ten times did our fathers tempt the blessed God in the 
wilderness, as is said, " And have tempted me now these 
ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice." ^ 

5. Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in the 
holy temple, — no woman miscarried from tlie scent of the 
flesh of the sacrifices ; nor did the flesh of tlie sacrifices ever 
stink ; nor was a fly seen in the slaughter house ; nor did 
lei^l uncleanness happen to the high priest on ttie day of 
atonement ; nor did the rain extinguish the fire of the wood 
arranged on the altar ; nor did the wind prevent the straight 
ascension of the pillar of smoke ; nor was any defect found 
in the omer, the two loaves, and the show-bread ; and 
though the people stood close together, yet when they wor- 
shipped there was room enough for all ; nor did a serpent 
or scorpion injure a person in Jerusalem ; nor did a man 
say to liis neighbour, I have not room to lodge in Jenisalem. 

6. Teu tilings were created on the eve of the Sabbath in 
the twihght, and these are they, — the mouth of the earth 
the mouth of the well ; the mouth of the ass ; the rainbow 
the manna; the rod of Moses; the shameer;* the letters 
writing ; and the tables of stone. And some aay also the 
demons; and the grave of our lawgiver Moses; and the 
ram of our father Abraliam ; and some say the tonga, the 
model of tongs. 

7. Seven things are to be met with in a rude person, 
and seven in a wise man. The wise man will not apeak 
before one who excels him in wisdom and years ; nor wQl 
he interrupt his companion in his discourse ; nor is he in 

' Numb. liy. 22. 
The aluunecc is tlie 


SELECTIONS. 


PUNISHMENTS. 233 


haste to answer ; he inquires according to the subject, and 
answers according to the decision ; and he will answer the 
first proposition first, and the last proposition last; and 
what he has not heard he will acknowledge he has not 
heard it ; and he confesses the truth. But the opposites of 
these are to be met with in a rude person. 

8. Seven kinds of punishment are brought on the world 
for seven important sins ; for when a part of the people 
give tithes and the others do not, a scarcity and a dearth 
ensue, so that some are filled and others suffer hunger ; but 
when the whole agree not to give tithes, a famine of dearth 
and confusion ensues. If they offer not up the " cake,"^ con- 
fusion and fire ensue. Pestilence comes into the world for 
the commission of sins said to be punished with death in 
the law, but which are not recognised by our judges ; and 
for not observing the law concerning the fruits of the 
Sabbatical year. The sword enters the world on accoimt of 
the delay of justice and its perversion ; and on accoimt of 
those who explain the law contrary to its true sense. 

9. Evil beasts come into the world on accoimt of false 
swearing, and the profanation of God's name. Captivity 
enters the world on account of idolatry, immorality, blood- 
shed, and not suffering the land to rest on the Sabbatical 
year. At four seasons the pestilence is prevalent, — ^in the 
fourth year, the seventh, and the end of the seventh, and the 
end of the feast of tabernacles in every year. In the fourth 
year, for not giving the poor^s tithe of the third year ; in the 
seventh, for withholding the poor's tithe of the sixth year ; 
and at the end of the seventh, on account of the fruits of the 
Sabbatical year ; and at the end of the feast of tabernacles 
yearly, on account of robbing the poor of the gifts due to them. 

10. There are four sorts of men: — He who says, that 
which is mine is mine, and that which is thine is thine, is a 
passable custom, and some say this was the custom of Sodom. 
He who says, what is thine is mine, and what is mine is 
thine, is tlie custom of the ignorant. He who says, what 
is mine is thine, and what is thine is also thine, is the 

» Numb. XV. 20. 


234 


THE FATHERS. 


custom of the pioua. He who says, what is mine is mine, 
and what is thine is mine, is the custom of the wicked. 

1 1. There are four sorts of passionate men :■ — He who is 
easily provoked and easily pacified loses more than he gains ; 
he whom it is diificult to provoke and difficult to pacify gains 
more than he loses ; he whom it is difficult to provoke and 
easy to pacify is pious ; but he who is easily provoked and 
with difficulty pacified is wicked. 

12. There are four sorts of disciples ;— He who is quick 
to hear and quick to forget loses more than he gains ; he who 
is alow to hear and slow to forget gains more than he loses ; 
he who is quick to hear and slow to forget is wise ; he who 
is slow to hear and quick to forget has an evil portion. 

13. There are four sorts in those who bestow charity: — 
He who is willing to give but does not wish that others 
should give, has an envious eye towards others ; he who likes 
to see others give but will not give, has an evil eye towards 
himself; he who is willing to give and that others should also 
give, acta piously ; he who will not give and likes not that 
others should give, acts wickedly. 

14. There are four sorts in those who go to college: — 
He who goes but does not study, has only the reward of 
going ; he who studies and does not go, has the reward of 
action ; he who goes and studies, is pious ; he who neither 
goes nor studies, is wicked. 

15. There are four sorts in those who ait before the 
Sages : — Those who act as a sponge, a funnel, a strainer, and 
a sieve ; as a sponge wliich sucka up all, as a funnel which 
receives at one end and lets out at the other, as a strainer 
which lets the wine pass through, but retains the lees, and 
as a sieve which lets the bran pass through but retains tiie 
fine flour, 

16. Every affection that depends on some carnal cause, 
if that cause cetises the affection ceases, but that which does 
not depend on such a cause wiU never cease, AVTiere do we 
meet with an aflection dependent on a carnal cause ? Such 
was the love of Ammon to Tamar ; but that which does not 
depend on such a cause was the love of David and Jonathan. , 


SELECTIONS. 


VIRTUES. 235 


1 7. Every dispute that is carried on for God's sake, will 
in the end be established ; but that which is not for God's 
sake, will not be established. " What may be considered a 
dispute for God's sake?" "Such as the disputes of Hillel 
and Shammai ; but that which was not for God's sake was the 
contention of Korah and all his company." 

18. He who by his conduct justifies the public, no sin 
will be caused through his means, and whosoever causes the 
public to sin is not suffered to repent. Moses acted justly 
and caused the public to obtain merit: the merit of the 
public was attributed to him, as is said, ** He executed the 
justice of the Lord and his judgments with Israel"^ Jero- 
boam, the son of Nebat, sinned, and caused Israel to sin : the 
sin of the public was attributed to him, as is said, " Because 
of the sins of Jeroboam, who did sin, and who made Israel 
to sin."2 

19. He who possesses these three virtues is of the dis- 
ciples of our father Abraham, and he who is possessed of the 
three opposites is of the disciples of the wicked Balaam. 
The disciples of our father Abraham possess a benevolent 
eye, an humble spirit, and a contented mind. The disciples 
of Balaam have an evil eye, a haughty spirit, and a narrow 
mind. " What is the difference between the disciples of our 
father Abraham and the disciples of the wicked Balaam ?" 
" The disciples of our father Abraham eat of the fruit of 
their good works in this world, and inherit the future one, 
for it is said, ' That I may cause those that love me to 
inherit substance, and I will fill their treasures.'^ But the 
disciples of the wicked Balaam inherit hell and descend to 
the pit of destruction, as is said, ' But Thou, God, shalt 
bring them down into the pit of destruction ; bloody and 
deceitful men shall not live out half their days, but I will 
trust in Thee.'"* 

20. Judah, son of Tamai, said, " be bold as a leopard, light 
as an eagle, swift as a roe, and strong as a lion, to do the 
will of Thy Father, who is in heaven." He used to say, 
"the impudent are for hell and the modest for paradise. 

* Deut xxxiiu 21. " 1 Kinga xiv. 10. ' Prov. viiL 21. * Ps. Iv. 23. 


236 THE FATHERS. Titiiim 

May it be acceptable in Thy presence, Lord our God I 
that Thy city may speedily be rebuilt in our days, and let 
our portion be in Thy law." 

21. He also said, "at five years of age a child should 
study the Bible; at ten ho should study the Mislina; at 
thirteen he should observe the precepts ; at fifteen he should 
study the Gemara ; at eighteen he should get married ; at 
twenty be should study the law ; at thirty he is arrived at 
fuU strength ; at forty he is arrived at understanding ; at fifty 
he is able to give counsel ; at sixty he is accounted aged ; at 
seventy he is hoary ; at eighty he may still be accounted 
strong ; at ninety he is only fit for the pit ^ ; at a hundred he 
is as if already dead and foi^otten from the world." 

22. The son of Bagbf^ said, " ponder the law again and 
i^iu, for all things are in it ; contemplate it always, and de- 
part not from it, for there is notliing to be preferred to it." 

23. The son of Haha said, " tlie reward is proportioned to 
the labour." 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. The Sages studied in the language of the Mishna ; 
blessed be He who made choice of them and their learning. 
R. Meier aaid, " he who is engaged in the study of the law for 
its own sake merits many things, and not only so, but the 
whole world is under the greatest obligation to him ; he is 
called a dear friend, dear to God and dear to mankind ; he 
rejoices God and rejoices His creatures. It clothes Iiim with 
meekneas and the fear of God, and directs bim to become 
just, pious, righteous, and faithful ; it removes him from aiu, 
and brings him near to merit, and the world is benefited by 
his counsel, sound wisdom, understanding, and strength; as 
is said, " Counsel ^ mine, and sound wisdom ; I am imder- 
standing, I have strength."' It also bestows on him empire, 
dominion, and perception in judgment. It reveals the 
secrets of the law to him, and he shall be an increasing 
fountain, and a never-failing river ; and it will cause him to 

»r [lerliaiM " Tor medilftljou. '' ' I'ruv. vUi. 11. 


SELECTIONS. 


KING DAVID. 237 


be modest, slow to anger, and ready to pardon an injury 
done to him ; and it will magnify and exalt him above all 
things." 

2. E. Joshua, son of Levi, said, " every day a Divine voice 
(bath kol) proceeds from Mount Horeb, which proclaims and 
says, * Woe be to those who contemn the law ; for whoever is 
not engaged in the study of the lawmaybe considered as excom- 
municate ; ' for it is said, * as a jewel of gold in a swine's 
snout, so is a fair woman which is without discretion;'^ and it 
is said, * And the tables were the work of God, and the writing 
was the writing of God, graven upon the tables.'^ Eead not 
graven but freedom; for who are counted free but those 
engaged in the study of the law ; and whoever is engaged 
in the study of the law is exalted ; as it is said, ' And from 
Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth.' "* 

3. He who learns from his companion one chapter, 
sentence, verse, or expression, ought to behave towards him 
with respect ; for thus we find by David, King of Israel, 
who having learned only two things from Ahitophel, called 
him his teacher, guide, and acquaintance, as is said, "^ But it 
was thou, a man mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaint- 
ance."* Hence it may be deduced that if David, King of 
Israel, who having learned only two things from Ahitophel, 
called him his " teacher, guide, and acquaintance," how much 
more ought he who learns from his companion a single 
chapter, sentence, verse, or expression, to show him the 
utmost respect ? And there is no glory but the knowledge 
of the law ; as is said, " The wise shall inherit glory ;"* and 
the perfect shall inherit the good ; but nothing is really good 
but the law, as is said, " For I give you good doctrine, for- 
sake ye not my law."^ 

4. Thus is the law to be observed : Tliou shalt eat bread 
and salt, and water by measure shalt thou drink ; on the 
earth shalt thou sleep, and a life of trouble shalt thou live ; 
and thou shalt labour in the study of the law. If thou 
doest thus, thou shalt be happy, and it shall be well with 

* Prov. xi 22. « Ex. xxxiL 16. • Num. xxi. 19. * ft. It. 18. 

» Prov. iU. 86. • Prov. iv. 2. 


238 


THE FATHERS. 


thee ; thou shalt be happy in this ^orld, and it shall bsfl 
well with thee in the world to come. 

5. Seek not grandeur for thyself, neither covet more 
honoiu' than thy learning merits. Crave not after the tables 
of kings ; for thy table is greater than their table, and thy 
crown is greater than their crown ; and the Master who 
employs thee is faithful to pay thee the reward of thy labour. 

6. The law is more excellent than the priesthood and 
royalty ; for royalty is acquired by thirty properties, and 
the priesthood by twenty-four ; but the law is acquired by 
forty-eight things, and these are they, — with study, attention, 
eloquence ; an understanding heart, an intelligent heart ; 
with dread and meekness, fear and joy ; with attendance on 
the Sages, the acuteuess of companions, and disputations of 
the disciples ; with aedateness, the study of the Bible, and 
the Mislma ; in purity, in taking little sleep, in using little 
discourse, in being little engaged in traffic, in taking little 
sport, in enjoying little delight and little worldly manners ; 
in being slow to anger, in having a good heart, in having 
faith in the Sages, and in bearing chastisements ; in being 
sensible of his situation, and rejoicing in his portion; ; 
being circumspect in his language, in not pretending to pre 
eminence, in sincerely loving God, and loving His c 
in loving admonition, and that which is right ; in avoidi 
honour, and in not priding himself on his acquired '. 
ledge ; not rejoicing in pronouncing sentence, in bearing t 
burden equally with his companion, and inclining him 1 
merit, and confimmig liim in the truth and in peace ; 
sedate in his study, inquires according to the subject, i 
answers according to the constitution ; is attentive to s 
and extends it ; learns it with a view to the teaching \ 
others, and also with a view to perform tlie precepts ; 
creases his teacher's knowledge, and is attentive 1 
instruction, and reports everything in the name of the j: 
who said it ; hence it is inferred tliat whoever reports s 
thing in the name of the person who said it, procui 
redemption for the world, as is said, " And Esther certified 
the king thereof in Mordecai's name."' 

' E'tlher ii. 22. 


SELECTIONS. 


CROWNS. 239 


7. Great is the law, which bestows life on the doers of it, 
both in this world and in the world to come ; as is said, 
" For they are life unto those that find them, and health to 
all their flesh." ^ And it is said, "It shall be health to thy 
navel, and marrow to thy bones." ^ And it is said, "She is 
a tree of life to them that lay hold upon her ; and happy is 
every one that retaineth her."* And it is said, "For they 
shall be an ornament of grace unto thy head, and chains 
about thy neck."* And it is said, "She shall give to thine 
head an ornament of grace; a crown of glory shall she 
deliver to thee."^ And it is said, " Length of days is in her 
right hand, and in her left hand riches and honour."* And 
it is said, *" For length of days and long life, and peace shall 
they add to thee."^ 

8. Eabbi Simeon, son of Judah, in the name of Eabbi 
Simeon, son of Jochai, said, " beauty, strength, riches, honour, 
wisdom, age, hoariness, and many children, are suitable for 
the righteous, and suitable for the world ; as is said, ** The 
hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be foimd in the way of 
righteousness."® And it is said, "Children's children are 
the crown of old men, and the glory of children are their 
fathers."' And it is said, "Then the moon shall be con- 
founded, and the sun ashamed, when the Lord of Hosts shall 
reign on Moimt Zion, and in Jerusalem; and before his 
ancients gloriously."^® 

9. Eabbi Simeon, son of Manasya, said, "those seven 
qualities which the Sages counted as proper for the righteous, 
were all established in the Eabbi (Judah) and his children." 
Eabbi Josd, son of Kishma, said, " I was once travelling along 
the road and met a certain person, who saluted me with peace, 
and I returned his salutation. He then said to me, " Eabbi, 
whence art thou ?" I answered liim, " from a great city 
abounding in sages and scribes :" said lie to me, " if thou be 
willing to dwell with us in our city, then will I give thee a 
tliousand thousand golden dinars, and precious stones and 

1 Prov. iy. 22. * Ptot. iii. 8. • Prov. iii. 18. * Prov. L 9. 

» Prov. iv. 9. • Prov. iiL 16. ' Prov. UL 2. " Prov. xvl 81. 

• Prov. xvii 6. w Isaiah xxiv. 28. 


240 THE FATHERS. 


TALMUD 


I 


!.l 


pearls." To this I answered, " if thou wouldest give me all 
the silver and gold, and precious stones and pearls in the 
world, I would only dwell in a place where the law is 
studied ; because at the time of man's departure from this 
world he is not accompanied either with silver and gold, and 
i j precious stones and pearls, but with the law and good deeds 

alone, as is said, ' When thou goest it shall lead thee ; when 
thou sleepest it shall keep thee : and when thou awakest it 
shall talk with thee/"^ "When thou goest it shall lead 
thee," that is in this world. " When thou sleepest it shall 
keep thee," in the grave ; " and when thou awakest it shall 
talk with thee," in the world to come. And thus it is 
written in the book of Psalms by the hand of David, king of 
Israel, " The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands 
of gold and silver." * And it is said, " The silver is mine, 
and the gold is mine, saith the Lord of Hosts." ^ 

10. Five possessions hath the Holy One, blessed be He, 
obtained in this world, and these are they, — the law is one 
possession; heaven and earth another; Abraham another; 
Israel another ; and the holy Temple another. Now whence 
is it to be proved that the law is one possession ? Because 
it is written, " The LORD possessed me in the beginning of 
His way before His works of old." * And whence is it proved 
that heaven and earth is another possession ? Because it is 
said, " Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne and the 
earth is my footstool ; where is the house that ye build imto 
me ? and where is the place of my rest ? "* And it is said, 
" Lord, how manifold are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou 
made them all; the earth is full of thy riches."* Whence 
is it proved that Abraham is one possession ? Because 
it is written, ''And he blessed him, and said blessed be 
Abraham of the most high God, possessor of heaven and 
earth." ^ Whence is it proved that Israel is one possession ? 
Because it is written, " Till thy people pass over, Lord, till 
the people pass over, which thou hast purchased"® And it 
is said, " But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the 

1 Prov. vi 22. " Pa. w^x. 72. ' Hag. ii. 8. i Prov. vilL 22. 

» Isaiah Ixvi. 1. • Ps. civ. 24. ' Gen. xiv. 19. • ExoiL xv. 16. 


SELECTIONS. GLORY OF GOD. 241 

excellent, in whom is all my delight."^ Whence can it be 
proved that the holy temple is one possession ? Because it 
is said, " The sanctuary, Lord, which thy hands have estab- 
lished."^ And it is said, "And he brought them to the 
border of his sanctuary, even to this mountain which his 
right hand hath purchased."* Everything which God 
created, he created but for his glory ; as is said, '* Every one 
that is called by my name ; for I have created him for my 
glory, I have formed him ; yea, I have made him."* And 
the Lord will reign for ever and ever. R Chanina, son of 
Akasea, said, " the Holy One, Blessed be He, wished to purify 
Israel, wherefore He magnified for them the Law and the 
Conmiandments, as is said, *' The Lord is well pleased for his 
righteousness' sake ; he will magnify the law and make it 
honourable."* 

» Ps. xvi. 8. « Exod. xv. 17. » Pa. Ixxviii. 64. * Is. xliii 7. » Is. xlii. 21. 


B 


THE DAILY SACBIFICB, 


Treatise XIII. 
Efie Bails iSacriSce. 

Oturding the Temple at If ight— Taking the Aahca off the Altar— Castang Lot 
— OpeniDg the Temple in the Uoming — Arranging the Ptre oc the AlUi 
— Tha Wood-kindling — Allotting 8«rTic«a — Examination of the Ddl] 
Sacrifice — aiaughter-hoiue — Soondi heani at Jericho — SnuflJag th< 
Candleatick — PoutioD of &e Lamb when ehun— Pouring oat ita Blooi 
— Preparations for Burning — Order of carrying the Members ta the Altai 
— Blesdngs — Cleanung the Vessels of the Holy Place — The High Priei 
on tbs Altar — Music and Psalm-singing. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. The Frieste guarded the sanctuary in tliree places,* — ^ii 
the House Abtinas, in the House Nitzus, and in the Hou» 
Moked. The House Abtinas and the House Nitzus bar 
upper chambers, and the young prieBte guarded there. Th» 
house Moked was arched, and its large chamber was but 
rounded with stone divans, and the elders of the House o 
the Fathers slept there, with the keys of the court in thel 
hands ; and the younger priests also slept there, each wit] 
his cushion on the ground. They did not sleep in the hoi; 
garments, but they undressed, and folded them, and pa 
them under their heads, and they covered themselves wit] 
their own dresses. H legal defilement happened to one o 
them, he went out, and proceeded in the circuit that wen 
under the Temple, and candles flamed on either side, until h 
arrived in the house of baptism. And the iire pile wa 
there, and the place of the seat of honour; and this was it 
honour, when he found it closed, he knew that some one wa 

' See the Treatise on Utofurtmrnlt, chap. L 


SELECTIONS. THE ASHES. 243 

there; when he found it open he knew that no one was 
there. He descended and washed ; he came up and wiped 
himself, and wanned himself before the fire pile. He came 
and sat beside his brethren the priests, till the doors were 
opened ; then he went out on his own way. 

2. He who wished to take the ashes from the altar, rose 
up early and batbed before the Captain of the Temple came. 
And in what hour did the Captain come ? All times were 
not equal ; sometimes he came at cockcrow, or near to it, 
before or after it. The Captain came, and knocked for them, 
and they opened to him. He said to them, " let whoever is 
washed, come, and cast lots." They cast lots, and he gained 
who gained. 

3. He took the key and opened the wicket door, and 
entered from the House Moked to the court, and the priests 
went after him with two lighted torches in their hands. 
And they divided themselves into two parties. These went 
in the gallery eastward, and those went in the gallery west- 
ward. They observed everything as they walked till they 
approached the place of the pancake-makers. They arrived. 
Both parties said, peace ! all peace ! The pancake-makers 
began to make pancakes. 

4. He who gained the lot to take the ashes from the 
altar, took them ; and they said to him, " be careful that 
thou touch not the vessels, till thou dost sanctify thy 
hands and thy feet from the laver." And the ash dish 
was placed in the comer between the ascent to the altar and 
the west of the ascent. No man entered with the priest, 
and there was no candle in his hand, but he walked towards 
the light of the fire on the altar. They did not see him, and 
they did not hear his voice, till they heard the creaking of the 
wheel, which the son of Kattin made for the laver, and they 
said, '' the time has come to sanctify his hands and feet from 
the laver." He took the silver ash dish, and he went up to 
the top of the altar, and he turned the live coals on one side, 
and he piled up those that were well burned inwards, and 
he descended, and came on the pavement of the altar. He 
turned his face northwards, and went eastward of the ascent 


244 THE DAILY SACRIFICE. talmud 

about ten cubits. He packed the coals on the i)aveinent 
three handbreadths distant from the ascent, at the place where 
they put the crops of the fowls, and the ashes of the inner 
altar, and of the candlestick. 


CHAPTER II. 

1. His brethren saw him come down, and they came 
running to him. They hastened and sanctified their hands 
and their feet from the laver. They took the brushes and 
the forks, and went up to the top of the altar. The mem- 
bers and the cauls ^ (of the sacrifices) which were not con- 
sumed over night, they moved to the side of the altar. If 
the sides could not contain them, they laid them out in a 
closet at the ascent 

2. They commenced to bring up the ashes to the top of 
the heap,* and the heap was on the middle of the altar. 
Sometimes there was on it about three hundred cors ;* but 
in the holidays they did not clear away the ashes, since they 
were an honour for the altar. Never was the priest lazy in 
removing the ashes. 

3. The priests began bringing up the faggots to arrange 
the fire of preparation on the altar. " Was, then, all wood 
allowed for preparation ?" " Yes, all wood was allowed for 
the fire of preparation, except that of the olive and that of 
the vine. But these they preferred, — branches of the fig-tree, 
of the nut, and of the pine." 

4. The priests arranged the great fire of preparation east- 
ward, and then made an opening eastward, so that the heads 
of the inward faggots touched the heap on the altar. And 
there was a division between the faggots, that the priests 
might kindle the chips there. 

5. The priest chose from the faggots the best figw;ood to 
arrange the second fire of preparation for the incense opposite 
the western horn southwards. He prolonged it from the 

^ Membranes over the fat * A cor was equal, according to the 

Rabbis, to 44*286 gallons, but Josephns 
^ In the form of an apple. reckons it to have been 86*696 gallons. 


SELECTIONS. THE LOTS. 245 

horn towards the north four cubits, reckoning for five seahs^ 
of live coals, and on the Sabbath he reckoned for eight seahs 
of live coals. As they placed there the two cups of frank- 
incense of the showbread. The members and cauls (of the 
sacrifices) which were not consumed by the fire overnight, 
were returned again by the priests to the great fire of 
preparation. And they kindled both the preparations with 
fire ; and they came down, and entered into the chamber of 
hewn stone.* 

CHAPTER III. 

1. The Captain of the Temple said to the priests, " come 
and cast lots." "Who is to slaughter?" "Who is to sprinkle?" 
"Who is to take the ashes from the inner altar?" "Who 
is to take the ashes from the candlestick ?" " Who is to bring 
up the members to the ascent, the head and the right foot^ 
and the two hind feet, the chine, and the left foot, the breast, 
and the throat, and the two sides, the inwards, and the fine 
flour, and the pancakes and the wine ?" They cast lots, and 
he gained who gained. 

2. The Captain said to them, " go and see if the time for 
slaughter approaches ?" If it approached, the watchman said, 
" it brightens." Matthia, son of Samuel, said, " is it light in 
the whole east, even to Hebron ?" and he said, "yes." 

3. He said to them, "go and bring the lamb from the 
lamb-chamber." The lamb-chamber was in the north-west 
•comer of the court, and there were four chambers there, one 
the lamb-chamber, one the seal-chamber,* and one chamber 
for the burning materials, and one chamber where they made 
showbread. 

4. The priests entered the chamber for the vessels, and 
they brought out ninety-three vessels of silver and gold. 

^ A seah, according to the Rabbis, four sorts, and were respectively in- 

was 1*4762 gallon. scribed with **calf " or '*kid," aocoitl- 

' Or of " the treasurers." ing to the offerings to be presented ; 

' In this chamber were kept the and with the woid " male " when the 


''seals" or "tokens" given to those offering was to be a ram ; and "sinner" 
persons who bought their offerings from when it was to be a sin-offering, 
the LeWtes. These *' seals" were of 


246 


THE DAILY BA.CRIFICE. 


They made the daily sacrifice drink in a golden cnp. £veq| 
though he 'was examined the night before, they examined him 
again by torch-hght. 

5. He who gained the lot for the daily sacrifice, led tbs 
lamb to the slaughter-house, and those who gained the lotai 
for the memhera, went after him. The slaughter-house 
to the north of the altar, and in it were eight dwarf pillan^ 
and beams of cedar wood were fastened upon them, and iron 
hooks were fastened in them. And there were three rowi 
of hooks to each of them. Upon them the priests bung tha 
sacrifices, and skinned them, near the nmrble tables between 
the pillars. 

6. Those who gained the lot for the removal of the aahea 
from the inner altar, and the ashes from the caDdlestick; 
advanced with four vessels in their hands, a flagon ' and 
cup * and t^'o keys. The flagon resembled a great golden 
measure containing two caba and an half. And the cup' 
resembled a great golden jug. And the two keys to the 
Banctuary. One key entered the lock up to the shoulder of 
the priest, and one opened quickly. 

7. The priest came to the wicket on the north, and then. 
were two wickets in the great gate, one in the north and 
in the south. Through that in the south man never entered, 
and Ezekiel explains it. " Then said the Lord unto me : This 
gate shall be shut, it shall not be opened, and no man shall 
enter in by it ; because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath' 
entered in by it, therefore it shall be sliut."* He took tha 
key and opened the wicket ; he entered the chamber, and be 
went frem the chamber into the sanctuary, until be came to 
the great gate. When he came to the great gate, he took, 
down the bar and the bolts and opened it. The slaughterer 
did not slaughter till he heard the noise of the opening ol 
tile great gate. 

8. From Jericho' people heard the opening of the 

gate. From Jericho they heard the noise of the ehtrt-eL? 

' Orjiig. 


' Others read a buket. 
* Eieb. xliv. 2. 

I ia about eigliteen iiilli^ 
it from J«nuii]«iii. 


* Perhjipa "■ gn . 
Some think it to h<v« b««ii 
m^tniBiciit," ftDd othon 
have Wa "an organ.'' 


SELECTIONS. THE LAMB. 247 

From Jericho they heard the noise of the wooden wheel 
which the son of Kattin made for the laver. From Jericho 
they heard the voice of Gabini the herald. From Jericho 
they heard the soimd of the comet From Jericho they 
heard the sound of the cymbal. From Jericho they heard the 
voice of the song. From Jericho they heard the clang of the 
horn, and some say even the voice of the High Priest at the 
time when he mentioned the Name on the Day of Atone- 
ment. From Jericho they smelt the odour of the preparation 
of incense. Said R Eleazar, the son of Daglai, "the family of 
Aba had goats on the moimtains of Mikvor/ and they used 
to sneeze from the odour of the preparation of the incense." 
9. The priest who gained the lot for removing the ashes 
from the inner altar entered, and took the flagon and laid it 
before him, and he took handfuls of ashes and filled them 
into the flagon, and at last he brushed the remainder into it. 
And he left it and went out (of the holy place). He who 
gained the lot for removing the snuff from the candlestick, 
entered and found the two eastern lights burning. He 
snuffed the rest, and left these burning in their place. If he 
found them extinguished, he snuffed them, and lighted them 
again from those still burning, and afterwards he snuffed the 
rest. And there was a stone before the candlestick, and in 
it were three steps, on which the priest stood and trinmied 
the lights. And he placed the cup with the snuff on the 
second step, and went out. 


CHAPTER IV. 

1. The priests did not tie the four feet of the lamb to- 
gether, but they boimd its fore and hind feet. He who 
gained the lot for carrying the members, held it ; and thus 
was it bound, its head southward, and its face westward. 
The slaughterer stood in the east with liis face westward. 
The morning sacrifice was slaughtered at the north-western 

' Some think " Machenis ** on the east of the Dead Sea, about 50 miles distant 
from Jenvalem. 


N 


, 248 THE DAILY SACRIFICE. talmto 

comer on the second ting. The evening sacrifice was 
slaughtered at the Dorth-eastem comer on the second ring. 
The slaughterer slaughtered, and the receiver caught (the 
hlood). The priest came to the north-eastern comer of the 
altar, and he Bprinlded the hlood north-east. He came to 
the south-west, and sprinkled the blood south-west:' the 
remainder of the blood he poured out on the southem altar- 
base. 

2. The priest did not break its leg, but he made a hole 
in the midst of its side, and by that it woa hung up. He 
skinned it downward till he came to the breast. When he 
came to the breaat^ he cut off the head, and gave it to him 
who had gained (its lot). He cut off the two hiqd feet, and 
gave them to him who had gained them for his" lot. He 
finished the skinning ; he tore out the heart, that the 
blood should come out. He cut off the two fore feet, and 
gave them to him who had gained them for his lot. He 
came to the right leg ; he cut it off, and gave it to him 
who had gained it for his lot. He cleft the body, and it 
became all open before him. He took out the caul, and 
put it on the place of slaughter, with the head on the top of 
it He took out the intestines and gave them to him who 
had gained them for his lot to cleanse them. And the 
helly they cleansed in the house of the washers, as much as 
was neediul. And the intestines were cleansed three 
times at least, upon the marble tables between the pillare. 

3. The priest took the knife and separated the lunga 
from the liver, and the finger of the liver from the liver, but 
he did not remove it from its place. He made a hole in 
the breast, and gave it to him who gained it for his lot. 
He came to the right side, and he cut it downwards to the 
backbone, but he did not touch the backlione, till he came 
to the two tender ribs. He cut it off and gave it to him 
who gained it for his lot, with the liver hanging upon it. 

' In each art of sprinklinB the priest, Ihus, in two nets of Bprinkling, he pot 
Blanding before a raroer, aprinkled the the blood or " ' 
' ' ' ' «ro sides of the altikr. And 


SELECTIONS. THE MEMBERS. 249 

He came to the neck, and left the two side bones on both 
sides. He cut it off and gave it to him who had gained it 
for his lot, with the windpipe and the heart and the lungs 
hanging upon it. He came to the left side, and left on it 
the two tender ribs, above and below, and so he left it on 
the corresponding side. It follows that he left on the two 
sides, two and two ribs above, and two and two ribs below. 
He cut it off, and gave it to him who gained it for his lot, 
the backbone with it, and the spleen hanging upon it And 
it was large, but the right side is called large, as the liver 
hangs upon it. He came to the tail ; he cut it off and gave 
it to him who gained it for his lot, and the fat, and the 
finger of tjie liver, and the two kidneys with it He took 
the left hind leg, and gave it to him who gained it for his 
lot It follows that all the priests stood in one row with 
the members in their hands. The first priest with the head 
and hind foot, the head in his right hand with the nose 
towards his arm, and the horns between his fingers, and the 
place of slaughter upwards, and the caul placed on it ; and 
the right hind foot in his left hand with the skin outside. 
The second priest stood with the two fore legs, the right in 
liis right hand, and the left in his left hand, and the skin 
outside. The third priest stood with the tail and the hind 
foot ; the tail in his right hand, and the fat wrapped be- 
tween his fingers, and the finger of the liver and the two 
kidneys with it ; the left foot was in his left hand with the 
skin outwards. The fourth priest stood with the breast and 
the throat The breast was in his right hand, and the throat 
in his left, and its side bones between his fingers. The fifth 
priest stood with the two sides, the right side in his right 
hand, and the left side in his left hand, and the skinny side 
outwards. The sixth priest stood with the intestines placed 
in a pan, and the legs over them. The seventh priest stood 
with the fine flour. The eighth priest stood with the pan- 
cakes. The ninth priest stood with the wine. They then 
proceeded and deposited the members on the lower half of 
the ascent westward, and they salted them, and descended, 


250 THE DAILY SACRIFICE. talmto 

and came to the chamber of the hewn stone to read the 
" Hear,"i etc. 


CHAPTEE V. 

1. The Captain of the Watch said, "give one blessing," 
and the priests blessed and read the ten commandments, 
"Hear,"^ etc. "And it shall come to pass if ye shall 
hearken,"* etc. And "He spake,"* etc. They then gave the 
three blessings to the people, "Truth and Sureness," and 
" the Service," and " the Blessing of the Priests." And on 
the Sabbath they added one blessing for the outgoing 
Temple-guard. 

2. He said to them, " novices * to the incense, come and 
cast lots." They cast lots. He gained who gained. He said 
to them, " novices with old men come and cast lots, who 
shall bring up the members of the lamb from the ascent to 
the altar." R Eliezar, the son of Jacob, said, " those priests 
who brought the members to the ascent must also bring 
them to the top of the altar." 

3. He handed the priests over to the sextons. They 
divested them of their dresses, leaving them their breeches 
only, and there were windows there, and over them was 
written, " used for vestments."® 

4. He who gained the lot for the incense, took the spoon ; 
and the spoon resembled a great measure of gold containing 
three cabs. And the pan was heaped full of incense ; and 
it had a covering like a kind of weight upon it. 

5. He who gained the lot for the censer, took the silver 
censer, and went up to the top of the altar, and he turned 
the live coals here and there, and he put them into the 
censer. He descended, and poured them into a censer of 

^ Called the Shema. It consisted of bamed it before. It might come to a 

the following three passages of Scrip- priest once in his lifetime, and never 

ture : — again afterwards. Luke i. 9. 

^ Dent. vi. 4-9. * Deut. zi. 13-21. * The chambers for vestments had 

* Numb. zv. 87-41. separate rooms for each of the 24 

° The lot for the incense was always courses, and separate wardrobes for 

arranged for a new man who had never each of the four kinds of vestments. 


SELECTIONS. THE PRIESTS. 251 

gold. There was dispersed from them about a cab of live 
coak, and he brushed them into the channel for refuse. On 
the Sabbath he put over them a cover. And the cover was 
a great vessel containing a letecL^ And there were two 
chains to it, one by which the priest drew it down, and one 
by which he held it from above, that it should not be rolled 
about ; and it was useful for three purposes, as a covering 
over the live coals, and as a covering over the reptile on the 
Sabbath, and it was also used to cany down the ashes from 
the altar. 

6. The priests arrived between the porch and the altar. 
One of them took the shovel,^ and flung it between the 
porch and the altar. No one could hear the voice of his 
neighbour in Jerusalem from the rattling of the shoveL 
And it was useful for three purposes : when the priest heard 
its rattle, he knew that his brother priests were entering to 
worship, and he came running; and the Levite, when he 
heard its rattle, knew that his brother Levites were entering 
to chant, and he came nmning; and the chief of the 
Delegates^ compelled the defiled men to stand in the eastern 
gate of the Temple. 


CHAPTER VI. 

1. The priests began ascending the steps of the porch. 
They who gained the lot for the removal of ashes from the 
inner altar and from the candlestick, proceeded in front. 
He who gained the lot for the removal of ashes from the 
inner altar, entered the Holy Place, and took the flagon, and 
he bowed down and went out. He who gained the lot for 
the removal of snuff fix)m the candlestick, entered the Holy 
Place, and found the two eastern lamps burning ; he removed 
the snuff from the eastern one and left the western one 
burning, and from it he lighted the candlestick in the even- 
ing. If he found it extinguished, he removed the snuff, and 

^ About 37} gftlloiu. * The Delegates were appointed to 

represent the whole congregation of 
* See note 5, chapter iii. 8. Israel in the temple services. 


252 THE DAILY SACRIFICE. talmud 

lit it from the altar of burnt-offerings. He took the cup 
from the second step, and he bowed down, and went out. 

2. He who gained the lot for the censer, gathered the 
live coals on the top of the altar of incense ; and he smoothed 
them with the bottom of the censer, and he bowed down, 
and went out. 

3. He who gained the lot for the incense, took the pan. 
from the cup, and gave it to his friend or to his neighbour. 
When the incense was dispersed in it, he supplied it to him 
in handfuls. And he instructed him, " be careful and do not 
begin too near yourself, lest you be burned." He smoothed 
it and went out. The offerer could not offer the incense, till 
the Captain said to him, " offer incense." If the offerer were 
the high priest, the captain said, " My Lord, High Priest^ 
offer the incense." The people dispersed, and he offered the 
incense, and he bowed down and went out from the Holy 
Place. 

CHAPTEE VII. 

1. When the High Priest entered to worship, three priests 
had hold of him, one on his right hand, one on his left hand, 
and one by the jewels on his breast-plate. And so soon as 
the Captain of tlie Temple heard the sound of the footsteps 
of the High Priest as he proceeded on his way, he lifted the 
veil for him. He entered the holy place, bowed himself, 
and went out. And his brethren the priests entered, and 
bowed down, and went out. 

2. The priests came and stood on the steps of the porch. 
The first came and stood to the south of his brother priests. 
And they had five vessels in their hands, — the flagon in the 
hand of one, and the cup in the hand of one, and the censer 
in the hand of one, and the pan in the hand of one, and the 
spoon with its cover in the hand of one. They blessed the 
people once. In the city they said the service in three 
blessings, but in the sanctuary they said it in one blessings 
In the sanctuary they pronounced the Name^ as it is written, 

^ Jehovah. 


SELECTIONS. CEREMONIAL. 253 

but in the city they pronounced it by its substitute.^ In 
the city the priests raised their hands (in blessing) oppo- 
site their shoulders, but in the sanctuary they raised them 
above their heads, excepting the High Priest, who could 
not lift his hands above the golden plate. R Judah said, 
" even the High Priest could lift his hands above the golden 
plate, as is said, ' Aaron lifted up his hand toward the people 
and blessed them.*"* 

3. When the High Priest desired to offer incense, he 
went up on the ascent to the altar, and the Sagan (Suf&agan) 
was on his right. When he reached the half of the ascent, 
the Sagan took him by his right hand and helped him up. 
The first (priest) reached to him the head and hind foot of 
the lamb, and he laid his hand on them, and then pushed 
them away. The second priest reached out to the first one 
the two fore-legs, and he handed them to the High Priest, 
and he laid his hands upon them, and then pushed them 
away ; the second priest was dismissed, and he departed, 
and so they reached out to him all the members of the 
lamb, and he laid his hands upon them and pushed them 
away ; but when he desired, he merely laid his hands on 
them, and others pushed them away. He next came to 
make a circuit of the altar. ''From what place did he 
b^in?" "From the south-eastern comer, north-eastern, 
north-western, south-western." They gave to him the wine 
for libation. The Sagan stood by the comer of the altar 
with the banners in his hand, and two priests stood by the 
table of the fat with two silver trumpets in their hands : 
They sounded a blast, they blew an alarm, and again they 
soimded the trumpets. They came and took their position 
beside the son of Arza.' One stood on his right hand and 
one stood on his left. The High Priest bowed down to make 
the libation, and the Sagan waved the banners, and the son of 
Arza clanged the cymbals, and the Levites intoned the chant. 

^ That is by rabstitating for the ' Lev. ix. 22. 
Name (Jehorah) the word Adonai, ex- 
cept where Adcaai aiid Jehovah come * Who had charge of the chaonels 

togifhv. Ik maA caaeg Blohim ia from the altar. 


254 THE DAILY SACRIFICE. talmud 

When they came to a full stop, the trumpets sounded, and 
the people bowed themselves. At every full stop there was 
a blasts and at every blast there was bowing down. This is 
the order of the daily ofiFering for the service of the House 
of our God, May it be His will to build it speedily in our 
days. Amen. 

4. The chant which the Levites intoned in the sanctuary 
on the first day of the week was, ** The earth is the Lord's 
and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell 
therein."^ On the second day they said, " Great is the Lord, 
and greatly to be praised, in the city of our God, in the 
mountain of his holiness."^ On the third day they said, 
"God standeth in the congregation of the mighty : He judgeth 
among the gods."* On the fourth day they said, " Lord 
God, to whom vengeance belongeth ; God, to whom venge- 
ance belongeth, show thyself."* On the fifth day they said, 
"Sing aloud imto God our strength, make a joyful noise 
unto the God of Jacob."* On the sixth day they said, "The 
Lord reigneth, he is clothed with majesty,"® etc. On the 
Sabbath they said the chant composed for the Sabbath day, 
the chant composed for the future, for the day to come, 
when all will be rest and repose for life everlasting. 

* Psalm xxiv. 1, ' xlviii. 1. • Izzxii. 1. 

* xciv. * Ixzzi. • xciii. 


SELECTIONS. 


MEASUREMENTS. 255 


Treatise XIV. 

fKeasurements. 

Priests and Levites gaarding the Temple— OflBcer of the Watch — Gates — 
Chambers — Keys — Maimer of entering the House — Nicanor — Steps — 
Altar — Place of Slaughter — The Layer — The Porch — ^The Sanctuary — 
Repairing the Holy of Holies — Measurements — Judging the Priesthood. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. The priests guarded the sanctuary in three places, in the 
House Abtinas,^ in the House Nitzus,* and in the House 
Moked ;* and the Levites in twenty-one places, five at the 
five gates of the Mountain of the House, four at its four 
comers inside, five at the five gates of the Court, four at its 
four comers outside, and one in the chamber of the Offering, 
and one in the chamber of the Veil, and one behind the 
House of Atonement. 

2. The Captain of the Mountain of the House went 
round to every Watch in succession with torches flaming 
before him, and to every guard who did not stand forth, the 
Captain said, " Peace be to thee." If it appeared that he 
slept, he beat him with his staff; and he had permission to 
set fire to his cushion.* And they said, " what is the voice in 
the Court ?" " It is the voice of the Levite being beaten, 
and his garments burned, because he slept on his guard."* 

' A famous maker of incense. in the 21 stations. The three more 

* Sparkling. important places contained g^uards of 

' Burning. The watch at certain both Levites and Priests ; 80 of each. 

gates seems to hare been hereditary in There were therefore 240 Levites on 

certain families. Just as at the pre- guard each night. 

sent time the custody of Rachel's tomb a „ » j ui a ^ « * . 

is the priTUege of a certain famUy in * He roUed np his overcoat and laid 

Jenisdem. Each gnard consisted of it down for a cnshion. 

10 iDiBy SO Uuit thflra were 310 Levites ■ Rev. zvL 15. 


256 MEASUREMENTS. talmto 

Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Jacob, said, " once they found the 
brother of my mother asleep, and they burned his cushion." 

3. There were five gates to the Mountain of the House, 
two Huldah gates in the south which served for going in 
and out, Kipunus in the west served for going in and out ; 
Tadi ^ in the north served for no (ordinary) purpose. Upon 
the east gate was portrayed the city Shushan. Through it 
one could see the High Priest who burned the heifer, and all 
his assistants going out to the Mount of Olives. 

4. In the court were seven gates — ^three in the north, 
and three in the south, and one in the east. That in the 
south was called the gate of Flaming, the second after it, the 
gate of Offering ; the third after it the Water-gate. That in 
the east was called the gate Nicanor. And this gate had 
two chambers, one on the right, and one on the left ; one the 
chamber of Phineas, the vestment keeper, and the other the 
chamber of the pancake maker. 

5. And at the gate Nitzus on the north was a kind of 
cloister with a room built over it, where the priests kept 
ward above, and the Levites below ; and it had a door into 
the Chel.* Second to it was the gate of the offering. Third 
the House Moked. 

6. In the House Moked were four chambers opening as 
small apartments into a saloon — ^two in the Holy place, and 
two in the Unconsecrated place ; and pointed rails separated 
between the Holy and the Unconsecrated. And what was 
their use ? The south-west chamber was the chamber for 
offering. The south-east was the chamber for the show- 
bread. In the north-east chamber the children of the 
Asmoneans deposited the stones of the altar which the 
Greek Kings had defiled.' In the north-west chamber they 
descended to the house of baptism. 

7. To the House Moked were two doors ; one open to 
the Chel, and one open to the court. Said Eabbi Judah, 
" the one open to the court had a wicket, through which 
they went in to sweep the court" 

8. The House Moked was arched, and spacious, and sur- 

1 Obscurity. ' PUtfonn or rampart. ' 1 Mac it 25. 


SELECTIONS. LOCKING THE GATES. 257 

rounded with stone divans, and the elders of the Courses 
slept there witli the keys of the court in their hands ; and 
also the yomig priests each with his pillow on the ground. 

9. And there was a place a cubit square with a tablet of 
marble, and to it was fastened a ring, and a chain upon 
wliich the keys were suspended. When the time approached 
for locking the gates, the priest lifted up the tablet by the 
ring, and took the keys from the chain and locked inside, and 
the Levites slept outside. When he had finished locking, he 
returned the keys to the chain, and the tablet to its place, 
laid Ids pillow over it, and fell asleep. If sudden defilement 
happened, he rose and went out in the gallery that ran 
under the arch, and candles flamed on either side, until he 
came to the house of baptism. Rabbi Eleazer the son of 
Jacob, says, " in the gallery that went under the Chel, he 
passed out through Tadi." 

Our Beauty be upon Thee in Three Places. 

CHAPTER II. 

1. The Mountain of the House was five hundred cubits 
square. The largest space was on the south, the second on 
the east^ the third on the north, and the least westward. In 
tlie place largest in measurement was held most service. 

2. All who entered the Mountain of the House entered 
on the right-hand side, and went round, and passed out on 
the left: except to whomsoever an accident occurred, he 
turned to the left. "Why do you go to the left?" " I am 
in mourning." " He that dwelleth in this House comfort 
thee." " I am excommunicate." " He that dwelleth in this 
House put in thy heart (repentance), and they shall receive 
thee." The words of Rabbi Meier. To him said Rabbi 
Josd, "thou hast acted as though they had transgressed 
against him in judgment ; but, * may He that dwelleth in 
this House put it in thy heart that thou hearken to the 
words of thy neighbours, and they shall receive thee' " 

3. Inside of the (Mountain of the House) was a reticulated 

S 


258 


MEASintEMENTS. 


■wall, ten hand-breadtha high ; and in it were thirteen 
breaches, broken down by tiie Greek kings. The (Jews) 
restored, and fenced them, and decreed before them thirteen 
acts of obeisance. Inside of it was the Chel, ten cubits 
broftd, and twelve steps were there. The height of each 
step was hfdf a cubit, and the breadth half a cubit AU 
the steps there were in height half a cubit, and in breadth 
half a cubit, except tliose of tlie porcli. All the dooT3 there 
were in height twenty cubits, and in breadth ten cubits, 
except that of the porch. All the gateways there had doors, 
except that of the porch, AU the gates there had lintels, 
except Tadi ; there two stones inclined one upon the other, 
AU tile gates there were transformed into gold, except the 
gate Nicanor,^ because to it happened a wonder, though some 
said " because its brass ghttered like gold." 

4. And all the walls there were high, except the eastern 
wall, that the priest who burned the heifer, might stand on 
the top of the Mount of Olives, and look sti'aigbt into the 
door of the Saoctuary when he sprinkled the blood, 

5, The Court nf the women was one hundred and tliirty- 
five cubits in length, by one hundred and thirty-five in 
breadth. And in its four comers were four chambers, each 
forty cubits 8C[uare, and they had no roofs ; and so they will 
be in future, as is said. " Then he brought me forth into the 
utter court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the 
court ; and, behold, in every comer of the court there was a 
court."' In the four comers of the court there were courts 
smoking, yet not smoking, since they were roofless. And 
what was their lue ? Tlie south-east one was the chamber 
of the Nazarites, for there the Nazarites cooked their peace- 
oft'erings, and polled their hair, and cast -it under the pot 
The north-east was the chamber for the wood, and there the 
priests with blemishes gathered out the worm-eaten wood. 
And every stick in which a worm was found, was unlawful 


' So oalleii eithar becBiiso Nicsnor a 
Ph&riseB hod the gHtu made ia Alex- 
andris, and tbongh it wna thrown OTer- 
boanl from n, ' ' ' 


n Gntk prince, wan n 

time ot tie Aflmoneant 

' Ezekiel xlrL 21. 


D there la the 


Lv 


COURTS. 


259 


for the altar. The north-west was the chamber for the lepers. 
The south-west ? Eabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, " I 
forget for what it served" Abashaul said, " there they put 
*ii»e, and oiL" It was called the chamber of the houee of 
"il- And it was open at first and aurroimded with lattice 
*ork, that the women might see from above and the men 
from beneath, lest they should be mixed. And fifteen steps 
**>ri^sponding to the fifteen steps in the Paalms, ascended 
"oni it to the court of Israel ; upon them the Levites chanted. 
■*^ey were not angular, but deflected like the half of a round 
'i»r«9hiDg-fiuor. 

6. And under the court of Israel were chambers open to 

ne court of the women. There the Levites deposited their 

**arp8, and psalteries, and cymbals, and all instruments of 

***Uaic The court of Israel was one hundred and tliirty-five 

^^bila long, and eleven broad ; and likewise the court of the 

^*iests was one hundred and thirty-five cubits long, and eleven 

*^*ftd. And pointed rails separated the court of Israel from 

'^^ court of the priests. Eabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, 

^^*i, " there was a step a cubit high, and a dais placed over 


And in it were three steps each half a cubit in height." 

^ * find that the priests' court was two and a half cubits 

?*8lier than the court of Israel. The whole court was one 

'^'idreil and eighty-seven cubits in length, and one hundred 

^^** thirty-five cubits in breadth, and the thirteen places for 

^^ing were there. Abajose, the son of Chanan, said, "in front 

the thirteen gates." In the south near to the west were the 

I^Per gate, the gate of flaming, the gate of the firstborn, the 

. **** gate. And why is it called the water gate 1 Because 

'*igh it they bring bottles of water for pouring out during 

t«ast of Tabernacles. Eabbi Eleazar the son of Jacob 

" through it the water relumed out, and in future it will 

from under the threshold of the house," And there 

^•^ opposite to thorn in the north, near to the west, the gate 

,, "Jochania, tlie gate of the offering, the gate of the women, 

. ^ ^te of music. And " why was it called the gate of 

**^*«auia ?" " Because through it Jochania went out in his 

l^t-ivity," In the east was the gate Nicauor, and in it were 


MEASUREMENTS. 


two wickets, one on the right, and one on the left, and two in 
the west which were nameless. 


OiTK Beauty be upos Thee, Mountain of the House. 


I 


k 


CHAPTER III. 

1. The altar was thirty-two cuhits square. It aseended' 
a cubit and receded a cubit. This was the foundation. Ii[ 
remains thii-ty cuhits square. It ascended five cubits, and' 
receded one cubit. This is the cu'cumference. It remains 
twenty-eight cubits square. The place for the horns was a 
cubit on each side. It remains twenty-six cubits sciuaro; 
The place of the path for the feet of the priests was a cubit 
on each side. The hearth remains twenty-four cubits squam 
Eabbi Jos^ said, "at first it was only twenty-eight cubits 
square." It receded and ascended until the hearth remained 
twenty cubita square ; but when the children of the capti\-ity 
came up, they added to it four cubits on the north, and four 
cubits on the west, lihe a gamma tt is said ; and the altar 
was twelve cubits long by twelve broad, being a square. One 
might say it was only "a square of twelve"' as is said. 
Upon its four sides we learn that it measured from the middlfl 
twelve cubits to every aide. And a line of red paint girdled 
it in the midst to separate the blood sprinkled above from 
the blood sprinkled below. And the foundation was a per- 
fect walk along on the north side ; and all along on the west, 
but it wanted in the south one cubit, and in the east one 
cubit.* 

2. And in the south-western comer were two holes as two 
thin nostrils, that the blood poured upon the western and 
southern foundation should run into them ; and it commingled 
in a canal and flowed out into the Kidron. 

3. Below in the plaster in the same comer there was a 
place a cubit square, with a marble tablet, and a ring ^tenoi 

' Ei»ki.i diii. 18. 
• As this corner would hsve ' 
this tiib« uf Juiloh, it WBu not 


( 


SELECTIONS. ASCENT TO THE ALTAR. 261 

in it. Through it they descended to the sewer and cleansed 
it. And there was a sloping ascent^ to the south of the 
altar, thirty-two cubits long by sixteen broad. In its western 
side was a closet, where they put the birds unmeet for the 
sin-offering. 

4. Either the stones of the sloping ascent, or the stones 
of the altar were from the valley of Bethcerem.^ And they 
digged deeper than virgin soil, and brought from thence per- 
fect stones over which iron^ was not waved. For the iron 
defiles by touching. And a scratch defiles everything. In 
any of them a scratch defiled, but the others were lawful. 
And they whitewashed them twice in the year ; once at the 
passover, and once at the feast of Tabernacles. And the 
Sanctuary (was whitewashed) once at the passover. The 
Rabbi said, " every Friday evening they whitewashed them 
with a mop on account of the blood." They did not plaster 
it with an iron trowel, " mayhap it will touch and defile." 
Since iron is made to shorten the days of man, and the altar 
is made to lengthen the days of man, it is not lawful, that 
what shortens should be waved over what lengthens. 

5. And there were rings to the northern side of the altar, 
six rows of four each : though some say four rows of six each. 
Upon them the priests slaughtered the holy beasts. The 
slaughter-house was at the north side of the altar. And in 
it were eight dwarf pillars with a beam of cedar wood over 
them. And in them were fastened iron hooks — three rows 
to each piUar. Upon . them they hung up (the bodies), and 
skinned them upon marble tables between the pillars. 

6. The laver was between the porch and the altar, but 
inclined more to the south. Between the porch and the 
altar were twenty two cubits, and there were twelve steps. 
The height of each step was half a cubit, and its breadth a 
cubit — a cubit — a cubit — a landing three cubits — a cubit — a 

^ This sloping ascent to the altar was barefooted. The coldness of the pave- 

strewn with salt. This salt was brought ment in winter, and eating so much 

from the mountain of Sodom at the flesh of the sacrifices, brought various 

south of the Dead Sea. The salt was diseases on the priests, 

intended to keep the priests from slip- , jj f ^^^^ vineyard, 
ping and falling, which might easily 

happen, as they were obliged to minister ^ Deut. zzviL 6. 


262 MEASDREMENXa. 

cubit and a landing three cubits. And the upper one a 
cubit — a cubit, and the landing four cubits. Eabbi Jehudah 
said, " the upper one a cubit, — a cubit, and the landing five 
cubits." 

7. The doorway of the porch was forty cubits high, and 
twenty broad. Over it were live carved oak beams. The 
lower one extended beyond the doorway a cubit on either 
side. The one over it extended a cubit on either side. It 
follows that the uppermost was thirty cubits ; and between 
each one there was a row of stones. 

8. And stone buttresses were joined from the wall of the 
sanctuary to the wall of the porch, lest it should bulge. And 
in the roof of the porcb were fastened golden chains, upon 
which the young priests climbed np, and saw the crowns. As 
it ia said, " And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, 
and to Jedaiab, and to Hen, the son of Zephaniah, for a 
memorial in the temple of the Lord."^ And over the door- 
way of the sanctuary was a golden vine supported upon the 
buttresses. Every one who vowed a leaf, or a berry, or a 
cluster, he brought it and hung it upon it Said Rabbi 
Eleazar, the son of Zadok, " it is a fact, and there were num- 
bered three hundred priests to keep it bright." 

Our Beauty be upon Tuee, Altak. 


CHAPTER IV. 

1, The doorway of the Sanctuary^ was twenty cubits in 
height, and ten in breadth. And it had four doors, two with- 
in and two without, as is said, " Two doors to the temple and . 
the holy place."* The outside (doors) opened into the door- 
way to cover the thickness of the wall, and the inside doors 
opened into the Sanctuary to cover (the space) beliind the 
doors, because the whole house was overlaid with gold ex- 
cepting behind the doora. Rabbi .Tudah said, " they stood in 

• Zeehnrinh vi. It. of the eye. TIib pupil is Jenuriam. 

' The Rabbia Ray thut " the world And the imugB in tbe papil ia the 

ii like on eye. Tba ocean U the white Sanctiury." > Esekiel zli, " 


J 


SELECTIONS. THE SANCTUARY. 263 

tlie middle of the doorway, and like a pivot these folded be- 
hind them two cubits and a half; and those two cubits and 
a half, half a cubit and a jamb on this side, and half a 
cubit and a jamb on the other side." It is said, " two doors 
to two doors folding back, two leaves to one door and two 
leaves to the other." ^ 

2. And the great gate had two wickets, one in the north, 
and one in the south. Through the one in the south no 
man ever entered. And with regard to it Ezekiel declared, 
as is said, " The Lord said unto me ; this gate shall be shut, 
it shall not be opened, and no man shall enter in by it ; 
because the Lord, the God of Israel, hath entered in by it, 
therefore it shall be shut." ^ The priest took the key, and 
opened the wicket, and went into the little chamber, and from 
the chamber to the Sanctuary. Eabbi Judah said, " he went 
in the thickness of the wall, until he found himself standing 
between the two gates, and he opened the outside gates from 
inside, and the inside from outside." 

3. And there were thirty-eight little chambers, fifteen in 
the north, fifteen in the south, and eight in the west. The 
northern and southern ones were (placed) five over five, and 
five over them ; and in the west three over three, and two 
over them. To each were three doors : one to the little 
chamber on the right, one to the little chamber on the left, 
and one to the little chamber over it. And in the north- 
eastern comer were five gates : one to the little chamber on 
the right, and one to the little chamber over it, and one to 
the gallery, and one to the wicket, and one to the Sanctuary. 

4. The lowest row was five cubits, and the roofing six 
cubits, and the middle row six, and the roofing seven, and 
the upper was seven, as is said, ** the nethermost chamber 
was five cubits broad, and the middle six cubits broad, and 
the third seven cubits broad."' 

5. And a gallery ascended from the north-eastern comer 
to the south-western comer. Through it they went up to 
the roofs of the little chambers. One went up in the gallery 
with his face to the west. So he proceeded all along the 

> Ezekiel zli. 24. > Ezekiel zliv. 2. > 1 Kings vl 6. 


264 MEASUREMENTS. talmuh 

northera side, till he reached the west. On reaching the 
west, he turned his face southward, going along the west aide, 
till he reached the south. On reaching the south, with his 
face to the east, he went along the south side till he arrived 
at the door of the upper storey, because the door of the upper 
storey opened in the south side. And at the door of the 
upper storey were two cedar heams. By them they went 
up to the roof of the upper storey, and on its summit rails 
separated between the Holy and the Holy of Holies. And 
in the attic, trapdoors opened to the Holy of Holies. 
Through them they let down the workmen in hoses, lest 
they should feast their eyes in the Holy of Holies. 

6. The Sanctuary was a square of one hundred cubits, 
and its height one hundred. Tlie foundation six cubits, and 
the height (of the wall) forty cubits, and the string course ' 
one cubit, and the rain chaimel two cubits, and the beams 
one cnbit, and the covering plaster one cubit ; and the height 
of the upper storey was forty cubits, and the string course 
one cubit, and the rain channel twp cubits, and the beams 
one cubit, and the covering plaster one cubit, and the battle- 
ment three cubits, and the scarecrow one cubit. Babbi 
Judah said, " the scarecrow was not counted in the measure- 
ment ; but the battlement was four cubits." 

7. From east to west there were one himdred cubits, the 
wall of the porch hve, and the porch eleven, and the wall of the 
Sanctuary six, and the interior forty, and the partition space 
(between the Vails) one, and the Holy of Holies twenty 
cubits. The wall of the Sanctuary was six, and the little 
chamber six, mid the wall of the httle chamber five. From 
north to south there were seventy (cubits). The wall of the 
gaUeiy five, the gallery three, the wall of the little chamber 
five, the little chamber six, the wall of the Sanctuary six, 
its interior twenty, the wall of the Sanctuary six, the 
little chamber six, the wall of the httle chamber five, 
the place for the descent of the water three, and the wall 
five cubits. The porch was extended beyond it fifteen 
cubits in the north, and fifteen in the south ; and this space 

' CnriniiBly graven Bnd gilt. 


SELECTIONS. CHAMBERS. 265 

was called, "the house of the instruments of slaughter," 
because the knives were there deposited. And the Sanctuary 
was narrow behind and broad in front, and it was like a lion, 
as is said, " Ho ! Ariel, the city where David dwelt,^ as a lion 
is narrow behind and broad in front, so the Sanctuary is 
narrow behind and broad in front." 

Our Beauty be upon Thee, Door of the Sanctuary. 


CHAPTEE V. 

1. The length of the whole court ^ was one hundred and 
eighty-seven cubits. The breadth one hundred and thirty- 
five. From east to west one hundred and eighty-seven. 
The place for the tread of the feet of Israel was eleven 
cubits. The place for the tread of the priests eleven cubits. 
The altar thirty-two. Between the porch and the altar 
twenty-two cubits. The Temple one hundred cubits ; and 
eleven cubits behind the House of Atonement. 

2. From north to south there were one hundred and thirty- 
five cubits. From the sloping ascent to the altar sixty-two. 
From the altar to the rings eight cubits. The space for the 
rings twenty-four. From the rings to the tables four. From 
the tables to the pillars four. From the pillars to the wall 
of the court eight cubits. And the remainder lay between 
the sloping ascent and the wall and the place of the pillars. 

3. In the court were six chambers, three in the north, 
and three in the south. In the north, the chamber of salt, 
the chamber of parva, the chamber of washers. In the 
chamber of salt they added salt to the offerings. In the 
chamber of parva they salted the skins of the offerings ; and 
upon its roof was the house of baptism for the High Priest 
on the day of atonement. In the chamber of washers they 

^ Isaiah zxix. 1. king of the family of David." Cnnoeus 

* ** The king only, and no man else further observes, " that the king was 

(remarks Maimonides) might sit in the esteemed nearer to Gkxl than the pdetta 

court of the temple in any place ; and themselves, and a greater president of 

even this privilege was confined to a religion.'* 


266 MEASUREMENTS. talmud 

cleansed the inwards of the offerings; and from thence a 
gallery extended up to the top of the house of parva. 

4. In the south were the chamber of wood, the chamber 
of the captivity, and the chamber of hewn stone. The 
chamber of wood, said Eabbi Eleazar, the son of Jacob, " I 
forget for what it served." Abashaul said, " the chamber of 
the High Priest was behind them both, and the roof of the 
three chambers was even. In the chamber of the captivity was 
sunk the well with the wheel attached to it, and from thence 
water was supplied to the whole court In the chamber of 
Hewn Stone the great Sanhedrin of Israel sat, and judged the 
priesthood, and the priest in whom defilement was discovered, 
clothed in black, and veiled in black, went out and departed; 
and when no defilement was found in him, clothed in white, 
and veiled in white, he went in and served with his brethren 
the priests. And they made a feast-day, because no defile- 
ment was found in the seed of Aaron the Priest, and thus 
they said, " Blessed be the Place. Blessed be He, since no 
defilement is found in the seed of Aaron. And blessed be 
He who has chosen Aaron and his sons to stand and minister^ 
before the Lord in the House of the Holy of Holies. 

Our Beauty be upon Thee, whole Court ; 

And Completion to Thee, Tract 

MEASUREMENTS. 


^ The Temple services were arranged charge of the treasuries, three Gizbarim, 

by the council of fourteen. This council who were assistants of the E.atholi]dn« 

was composed of the High Priest, the and seven Ammarcalin, who had chai^ge 

Sagan (the deputy or Suffragan of the of the gates. 
High Priest), two Katholikin, who had 


SELECTIONS. LEPROSY. 267 


Treatise XV. 

I ndications of Leprosy— Inspection — Uncleanness — Boils — Burnings — Scalls — 
Time — ^White Hair — Qnickflesh — Black Hair — Spots — Pronouncing — 
Inclosing — Cleanness and Uncleanness — Yellow Hair — Shaving — The 
Beard — Gannents — Buildings — Warp — Woof — Bobbins — Webs — Articles 
liable to Leprosy — Houses — Stones, Wood, and Mud — Inspection — 
Plaster — Breaking down — Causing Uncleanness — Cleansing — The Birds 
— The Cedar — Sacrifices — Bathing — Applying the Blood — The Offering. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. The indications of leprosy are two, and these again 
(contain) four. " First, there is a spot white as snow ;' next 
to it one like the lime of the temple, and its swelling like 
the shell of an egg ; next to it one like white wool" The 
words of Rabbi Meier. But the Sages say, " the swelling is 
like white wool, and second to it a spot like the shell of an 

egg." 

2. " What of the mixture in the snow ?" " Its colour is 

like wine mingled in snow." "What of the mixture in 
lime ?" " Its colour is like blood mingled with milk." The 
words of Rabbi IshmaeL R. Akiba said, "that which is 
reddish in each is like wine mingled in water, save that in 
the snow is bright, but that in the lime is duller than it." 

3. These four indications are reckoned together in pro- 
nouncing "clean," in pronouncing "fretting," and ui"inclosing."* 
Tliey are reckoned together for inclosing that which is 

^ This treatise on leprosy (the divim sunshine near the shade. " I have seen 

stroke) is held in the highest estimation a case of leprosy in Jerusalem precisely 

by the Jews, and is considered one of answering to tliis description, 
the most important in the Talmud. 

' This is explained to mean ** deeper ' i,e. with a mark round the affected 

in appearance than the skin, like the spot. 


268 


stationary at the close of tlie first week; in pronouncing 
cluan that which is stationary at the close of the second 
week ; in pronouncinp unclean, that in which there is pro- 
duced quickflesh or white hair at once, or at the close of the 
first week, or at the close of the second week, even after the 
pronouncing clean. They are reckoned together for pronounc- 
ing unclean, when the spreading is produced, at the close 
of the first week, or at the close of the second week, even 
after the pronouncing clean ; in pronouncing unclean that 
which has turned all white, after heing pronounced clean ; 
in pronouncing clean that which has turned all white, after 
being pronounced unclean, or after heing inclosed. These are 
the indications of leprosy on which all leprosy depends. 

4. Rabbi Chanina, the suffragan of the priests, said, " the 
indications of leprosy are sixteen." E. Dosa the eon of 
Harcinus, said, " the indications of leprosy are thirty-six." 
Akabia, the son of Mahallalel, said, " seventy-two." Kabbi 
Chanina, the suffragan of the priests, said, "priests do not 
examine lepers on the day after the Sabbath, lest their week 
fall on the Sabbath, nor on the second day, leat their second 
week fall on the Sabbath. And buildings are not examined 
on the tliird day, lest their third week fall on the Sabbath." 
Rabbi Akiba said, " they must examine at all times." 
Should the day for examination fall on the Sabbath, they 
can postpone it till after the Sablmth, and so it may be 
more convenient, or more inconvenient. 

5. " How more convenient ?" " In the leprosy there was 
white hair, and the white hair went away. The hairs were 
white and became black ; one was white and one black ; 
both became black. They were long and became short, one 
was long and one short, and both became short. A boil has 
come close to both or to one of tliem, a boil has encompassed 
both or one of them, or the boil has divided them, or the 
quiekflesh of the bod, or a burning, or the quickflesh of a 
burning, or a freckled spot, or there was in it quickflesh, 
and the quickflesh went away. It wiw square and became 
round or elongated. It was inclosed and it became one- 
sided, it was contracted and it became dispersed, and the 


JBLKcnoM HAIR. 269 

i>oil came and entered into its midst, it encompassed it, it 
'Ji'i'ided it, gr the l>oil diminiahed it, or the quickfleah of the 
boil, or the burning, or the quickilesb of the burning, or the 
fi'eckled spot. It was spreading, and the spreading went 
a^'ay, or ita source went away, or it began to diminish, and 
li^ere is not left in both of tbem a measure of three lentils 
■l^iape.* The boil and the qiiickHesh of the boil, and the 
Duming and the quickflesh of the burning, and the freckled 
*pot dividing between the source and the place of spreading 
'''^appeared ; these sj-mptams are convenient" 

6, "How more inconvenient?" "The leprosy had no 
*'l»ite hair, and white hair sprang up ; the hairs were black 
•^•3 became white ; one was black and one was white, and 
''**'tli became white ; they were short and became long ; one 
*"as abort and one was long, and both became long ; a boil 
™» come close to both, or to one of them ; a boil lias en- 
•^^Knpassed both, or one of them ; or the boil has divided it, 
**■ the quickflesh of the boil ; or the burning, or the quick- 
^^sh of the burning ; and the freckled spot ; and they went 
*^ay ; there was no qtiicktlesh, and quickflesh was produced; 
"■ 'W'as round or elongated, and it became square ; it was 
""^^-aideil, and it filled up the iucloeure ; it was dispersed 
7***i l>ecame contracted ; and the boil came and entered into 
J^ xnidst ; it encompassed it, it divided it, or the boil 
'****i»iiahed it, or the quickflesh of tlie boil ; the burning or 
1^^ cjuickflesh of the burning ; and the freckled spot ; and 
^^y went away ; there was no spreading of the leprosy, and 
^'■^ading was produced in it ; the boil and the quickflesh 
*^»e boil, the burning and the quickflesh of the burning ; 
^ ** the freckled spot dividing between the source and the 
^^**^ of its spreading disappeared ; these symptoms are in- 


CHAPTER II. 

" If the white spot looked dim in a Gennan, and the dim 
i-te in an .Ethiopian?" Rabbi Isluaael said, "for the 


I 


270 LEPROSY. T4LM0D 

children of Israel T am atoning, they are as boxwood neither 
black nor white, but intermediate." R. AMba said, " paintera 
have coloiu^, by which they paint faces black and white and 
intermediate. One introdttces a medium colour, and encircles 
it outside, and the face appears intermediate." R. Judoh 
aaid, " the indications of leprosy are for convenience, but not 
for inconvenience ; the German is to be inspected in his flesh 
for convenience, and the ^Ethiopian as intermediate for con- 
venience." But the S^ea say, " both are intermediate." 

2. Lepers ore not to be inspected in the early morning 
nor in the ^ evening ; nor inside a bouse, nor on a cloudy 
day, lest the dim appear white, nor at noon, lest the white 
appear dim. " When are they to be inspected ?" " In the 
third, fourth, fifth, seventh, eighth, and ninth hours," The 
words of Eabbi Meier. R. Judah said, " in the fourth, fifth, 
eighth, and ninth hours." 

3. The priest blind of one eye, or with the sight of his 
eyea dim, must not inspect lepers ; as is said, " Wberesoever 
the priest looketh."' " Is the bouse dark ?" " Windows are 
not to be opened in it to inspect its leprosy." 

4. " How is the leper ' to be inspected ?" " The man is 
to be inspected in the attitude of digging and pressing olives. 
The woman is to be inspected as though kneading and 
suckling her child, as though weaving in a standing attitude, 
to the elbow of the right hand." Ilabbi Judah said, "even 
to the left hand as though spi nnin g flax." 

According to the proportion of leprosy observed is to be 
the shaving. 

5. A man may inspect all leprosy save his own. Rabbi 
Meier said, " also not the leprosy of his relations." A man 
may absolve all vows save his own. R. Judab said, " also 
not the vows of his wife between herself and others," A 
man may inspect all the firstborn save his own. 


' Literallj betvaen the eveniugB. 

> Let, idu. 12. 

' The Rabbis i^koned lepera us pt 


Bona dead, and they coiml«d with them 
the blind, and the poor, aud thoss who 
have uu children. 


SELECTIONS. 


UNCLEANNESS. 27 1 


CHAPTER III. 

1. Every one afflicted with leprosy is legally unclean, ex- 
cepting foreigners and the sojourning stranger. Every one is 
eligible for the inspection of leprosy, but the declaration of un- 
cleanness and of cleansing belongs to the priest. They say to 
him " pronounce unclean ;" and he says " unclean." " Pro- 
nounce clean ;" and he says " clean." Two leprosies are not 
inspected at once, whether in one man or in two men ; but 
the priest inspects the first, and he incloses it, or pronounces 
it fretting, or legally frees him ; and then he turns to the 
second. They do not inclose that which is already inclosed, 
and they do not pronounce fretting, that which is pronounced 
fretting, they do not inclose that which is pronounced 
fretting ; and they do not pronounce fretting, that which is 
inclosed. But in the beginning, or in the end of the seven 
days, him who is inclosed the priest can inclose ; him who 
is pronounced fretting, the priest can pronounce fretting. 
He can inclose and he can free. He can declare " fretting " 
and he can declare " free." 

2. To the bridegroom in whom leprosy has appeared 
the Sages permit the seven days of the feast, be the leprosy 
in himself, in his house, or in his clothing. And so also in 
a festival, they permit to him all the days of the feast. 

3. The skin of the flesh is unclean in two weeks, and 
with three marks; with white hair, and quickflesh, and 
spreading. With white hair and quickflesh in the beginning 
and in the end of the first week, and in the end of the 
second week, even after being pronounced free. And with 
spreading in the end of the first week, and in the end of the 
second week even after being pronounced free, and it renders 
the leper unclean for two weeks which make tliirteen days. 

4. The boil and the burning cause uncleanness for one 
week with two marks, with white hair and with spreading. 
With white hair in the beginning or in the end of the week, 
even after being pronounced free. And in spreading in 
the end of the week, even after being pronounced free. 


272 


And they render the leper uucleau for one week which has 
seven days. 

5. Scalls' cause uDcleanness in two weeks with two marks, 
with thin yellow hair, and with spreading. With thin yellow 
hair in the beginning, or in the end of the first week, or in 
the end of the second week, even after being pronounced free. 
And in spreading, in the emi of the firet week, or in the end 
of the second week, even after being pronounced free. And 
they cause nncleannesa in two weeks which have thirteen days, 

6. The 8ca]l on the back of the bald head, or on the 
bald forehead causes uncleanness in two weeks with two marks, 
with quickflesh and with spreading. With qoickflesh in 
the beginning or in the emi of the first week, or in the end 
of the second week, even after being pronounced free. And 
with spreading in the end of the first week, or in the end of 
the second week, even after being pronounced free. And 
they cause uncleanness in two weeks which have thirteen 
days. 

7. Garments cause uncleanness in two weeks, and with 
three marks — greenish, reddish, and spreading. Greenish 
and reddish (marks) in the beginning, or in the end of the 
first week, or in the end of the second week even after being 
pronounced free. And in sprea(.ling, in the end of the first 
week, or in the end of the second week, even after being 
pronounced free. And they cause uncleanness in two weeka 
which have tliirteen days. 

8. Houses cause uncleanness in three weeks and with 
three marks — greenish, reddish, and spreading. Greenish 
and reddish (marks) in the Ijeginning, or in the end of the 
first week, or in the end of the second week, or in the end 
of tlie tliird week, even after being pronounced free. And 
spreading in the end of the first week, or in the end of the 
second week, or in the end of the third week, even after 
being pronoimced free. And they cause uncleanness in three 
weeks which have nineteen days. For leprosy there is no 
separation for less than one week, or for more than three 
weeks. 

' In the head. 


SELECTIONS. QUICKFLESH. 273 


CHAPTEE IV. 

1. There exists in the wliite hair what is not in the 
spreading, and there exists in the spreading what is not in 
the white hair, because the white hair renders unclean from 
the first, and rendei's unclean in every whitish colour, and 
there is no mark of cleansing in it. There exists in the 
spreading, that spreading renders unclean, however little, 
and renders unclean in all leprosy external to (the source) 
of leprosy, which is not the case in white hair. 

2. There exists in the quickflesh, what is not in spread- 
ing, and there exists in spreading, what is not in quickflesh ; 
because the quickflesh renders unclean from the first and 
renders unclean in eveiy colour, and there is no mark of 
cleansing in it. There exists in the spreading, that spread- 
ing renders unclean, however little, and renders unclean in 
all leprosy external to (the source) of leprosy, which is not 
(the case) with quickflesh. 

3. There exists in white hair what is not in quickflesh, 
and there exists in quickflesh what is not in white hair, 
because white hair renders unclean in the boil and in the 
burning, in conjunction, and in diffusion, in inclosing and 
when there is no inclosing. There exists in quickflesh, that 
the quickflesh renders unclean in the bald head and in the 
bald forehead, whether it be unusual or usual, and it retards 
that which is not usually all white. And it renders unclean 
in every colour, which is not the case with white hair. 

4. " When two hairs have their roots blackish, and tops 
whitish ?" "They are clean." "When the roots are whitish 
and the tops blackish ?" " They are unclean." " How much 
should be the whiteness ?" K. Meier said, " however little." 
R. Simon said, " sufficient for the scissors to take hold of them." 
" If it be one below and divided above and it look like two?" 
" It is clean." " A white spot in which there is white hair, 
or black hair ?" " It is imclean." We are not to doubt that 
the place of the black hair diminishes the white spot, since 
there is no substance in it. - 

T 


274 LEPROSY. TAtMiT) 

5. "A white spot of three lentils square, with a line 
proceeding from it ?" "If there be in it two hairs' breadth 

it binds it to white hair and to spreading, but not to quick- 
flesli." " Two white spots with a hne proceeding from one 
to the other ?" " IE there be in it two hairs' breadth, they are 
united, but if not, they are not united." 

6. A white spot of three lentils square, in which there 
is quickSesh of the size of a, lentil, and white hair in the 
quickflesh, and the quickflesh has gone away, is undean by 
reason of the white hair. If the white hair has gone away 
it is unclean by reason of the qiUcbflesh. R. Simon pro- 
nounces it " clean, because the white spot is unclianged." 
" If the white spot with its quickflesh is the measure of 
three lentils square, and the white hair is in the white 
spot ?" " If the quickflesh disappear it ia unclean by reason of 
the white hair." "If the white hair ilisappear?" "It is 
unclean by reason of the quickflesh." R Simon prouoiincea 
it "clean, because it was not as usual, that the spot was of 
the measure of three lentils square." But he admits, if 
there be in the place white hair of the measure of three 
lentils square, that the leper is unclean. 

7. A white spot, iu which there is quickflesh and 
spreading, though the quickflesh has gone away, is unclean 
by reason of the spreading. " Has the spreading disap- 
peared?" "It is tmclean by reason of the quiukflesh, and so 
with white hair and apreoding." " If it has gone away and 
returned in the end of the seven days ?" " It is just as it 
was (at first)." After l)eing pronounced free, it must be 
inspected as in the beginning. " If it were bright white 
and became dim, or dim and became bright whit* ?" " It is 
just as it was at first, excepting that there be no diminution 
of the four indications." "Did it contract and spread?" 
"Did it spread and contract?" K. Akiba pronounces it 
" unclean." But the Sages pronounce it " clean." 

8. " A wliite spot of three lentils square which has spread 
about half three lentils square, and gone away from the 
source about half three lentils square ?" R. Akiba said, "it 


WHITE SPOTS. 


•275 


ttna^t be inspected as iii the beginning," but the Sages pro- 
i>«>«ince it " clean." 

S. " A white spot as large as three lentils squai*, which 

l»^»^ spread as much as half three lentils square, and some- 

^l»^t more, and has gone away from the source about half 

tlxrec lentils square?" R. AkJba pronounces it "unclean" 

•***-ti the Sages pronounce it " clean." " A white spot aa 

l^^'ge as three lentils square which has spread as much as 

"**"^e lentils square, and somewhat more ; and the source 

«a^ goneaway fromit ?" R. Akiba pronounces it " unclean," 

uTit the Sages say " it must be in8])ected as in the beginning." 

TO, "A white spot as large as three lentils square which 

^**s spread as much aa three lentils square, and in the spread- 

'^'S there is produced quickflesh, or white hair and the 

^'^'^Tice has gone away from it ? " E. Akiba pronounces it 

'^iiclean," hut the Sages say "it must be inspected as in 

tne "beginning." " A white spot as lat^e as half three lentils 

**l*»are in which there is nothing — there is afterwards pro- 

^**Ced a white spot as large as half three lentils square and 

'** it one hair ? " " It must be inclosed." " A wliite spot 

?* l^rge as half three lentils square and in it one hair, there 

J® ssJl^rwardB produced a white spot as large as half three 

^itila square, and in it one hair ? " "It must be inclosed." 

•^ white spot as large as half three lentils square, and in it 

'^ hairs — there is afterwards produced a white spot as 

"^"K** as half three lentils square, and in it one hair ? " " It 

'*"*»st be inclosed." 

11. "A white spot aa large as half three lentils square 

'^ "^liich there is nothing, — there is afterwards produced a 

'**t« spot as large aa half three lentils square, in wliich 

•'etv aj^ t^o hairs ?" " It is positive uucleanness, because 

*^ Said, if the white spot be before the white hair it is 

***^^L'an, and if the wlute hair be Itefore the white spot it is 

1 *^^-n. But if there he a doubt it is unclean." But R. 


.1, 


*^'»Uq disagreed with this decision. 


CHAPTER V. 

1. "Every doubt in leprosy is cleaimess except this one 
just mentioned, and still another, and what is it?" "One 
in whom there was a wliite spot as large as three lentila 
square, and the priest inclosed it. In the end of the 
seven days, it is as large as a Selah,' It is doubtful if that 
be it. It is doubtful if another one has come underneath 
it. It ia unclean," 

2. " The leper is decidedly unclean with white hair, — the 
white hair has gone away, and white hair has wtuxned, and 
so with qiuckflesh and with spreading, in the beginning, 
or in the end of the first week, or in the end of the second 
week, or after being pronounced free ? " " It ia as it was (at 
first)." " He is decidedly unclean with quickfli'sh, and the 
quickflesh has gone away and quickflesh has returned, and 
80 with white hair, and with spreading, in the beginning or 
in the end of the first week, or in the end of the second 
week, or after being pronounced free V " It is as it was (at 
first)." " He is decidedly unclean with spreading, the spread- 
ing has gone away and spreading has returned, and so with 
wliite hair in the end of the first week, or in the end of the 
second week, or after being pronoimced free ? " " It is as it 
was at first," 

3. " Is there concealed hair ? " Akabia, son of Mahallalel, 
pronounced it "unclean," but the Sages pronounced it "clean." 
" What is concealed hair ? " " Where there is a white spot 
and in it white hair, the spot has gone away and left in its 
place white hair, and it returned." Akabia, son of Mahallalel, 
pronounced it " unclean ; " but the Sages pronounce it 
" clean." Said R. Akiba, " I admit that he ia cleau," 
" Which ia the concealed hair ? " " Where there ia a white 
spot as large as three lentils square, and in it two hairs, ami . 
there went away a space as large as half three lentils squase.^ 
and left white hair in the place of the white spot, and i:^ 
returned." The Sages said to him, " as the words of Akat«4 

Lhave been nidJified, so thy words cannot be acknowledged -*~ij 
■ Dollar or Shokcl. I 


SELECTIONS. DOUBTS. 277 

4. Every doubt about leprosy in the beginning is clean- 
ness, so long as it is not identified with uncleanness. When 
it is identified with uncleanness, the doubt is uncleanness. 
" How ? " " Two came to a priest ; in one there was a white 
spot as large as three lentils square, and in the other a spot 
as large as a dollar. In the end of the seven days the 
wliite spot in one was as large as a dollar, and in the other 
the spot was as large as a dollar, and the priests knew not 
in which was the spreading — if it be in the one man or in 
the two men ? " " It is cleanness." E. Akiba, said " in one 
man it is uncleanness, in two men it is clean." 

5. When the leper is identified with uncleanness," doubt 
about him is uncleanness. " How ? " " Two lepers came to a 
priest ; on one was a spot as large as three lentils square, 
and on the other, also, a spot as large as a dollar. In the 
end of the seven days, in one the spot was as large as a 
dollar, and somewhat more, and in the other the spot was 
as large as a dollar and somewhat more ? " " Both are 
unclean, even though both returned to be the size of a dollar. 
Both are unclean until they returned to be as three lentils 
square." This is what the Sages said "from the leper's 
identification with uncleanness; the doubt about him is 
uncleanness." 

CHAPTEE VI. 

1. The extent of the white spot is as three Cicilian lentils 
square, the space of the three lentils square is nine lentils, 
the space of the lentils is four hairs, it follows that the 
extent of the spot is thirty-six hairs. 

2. " The white spot as large as three lentils square in 
wliich there is quickflesh as large as a lentil ?" " If the 
white spot increased, it is unclean, if it diminished it is clean. 
If the quickflesh increased, it is unclean, if it diminished it 
is clean." 

3. "A white spot as large as three lentils square in 
which there is quickflesh less than a lentil ?" " If the white 
spot increased it is unclean, if it diminished, it is clean. If 


the q^uickfiesh inci'easett, it is unclean, if it diiiiinisLed, R 
Meier pronounced it ' unclean,' but the Sagea pronounced it 
'clean,' because the leprosy does not spread towards the 
middle." 

4. "A white spot larger than three lentils square, in 
which there is quickflesh larger than a lentil ?" " If they 
increased or diminished, they are imclean, excepting that 
they did not diminish ought from the stated measure." 

5. " A white spot as large as three lentils square, and 
quickflesh as large as a lentil encompasses it, and outside of 
tlie quickflesh there is a white spot ?" " The inner one is to be 
inclosed, and the outer one is to be decided unclean." Said 
E. Jos^, " no quickflesh ia a mark of tmcleannesa on the 
outside, because the whit« spot is in the midst" " If it 
diminished and went away ?" Eaban Gamaliel said, " if it 
commenced to diminish from the inside, it is a si^ of 
spreading for the inside, and the outside white spot is clean, 
and if it diminished from the outside, the outside is clean, 
and the inside is to be inclosed," R Akiha said, " whether 
it diminished inside or outside it is clean." 

6. Said R. Simon, "when is it so?" "When it is pre- 
cisely as a lentil." " If it be more than a lentil 1" " The 
overplus is a mark of spreading to the inside, and the outside 
is unclean." " If there be in it a freckled spot less than a 
lentil ?" " It is a sign of spreading to the inside, but it is no 
mark of spreading to the outside." 

7. There are twenty-four ends of members in man in 
which there is no uncleanness from quickflesh — the tips of 
the fingers and toes, the tips of the ears, and the tip of the 
nose, and still one more, and the ptqis of a woman. Babbi 
■ludah said, " also of a man." R. Eliezer said, " even wens 
and excrescences are not unclean from any quickflesh." 

8. These are the places in man in which there is no un- 
cleanness from a white spot, the inside of the eye, the inside 
of the ear, the inside of the nose, the inside of the mouth, 
the wrinkles, and the wrinkles of the neck beneath tlie pap 
and the armpit, the sole of the foot, and the nails, the head 
and the beani, the boil and the bimiing, and the inflammation. 


SELECTIONS. BALDNESS. 279 

Issues cause no uncleanness in leprosy, and they are not 
identified with leprosy, and leprosy spreads not in them, and 
quickflesh produces no uncleanness in them, and they are 
no hindrance to one who is turned all white. If the head 
and beard turn to baldness, the boil and the burning and 
the inflammation produce a scab. These cause uncleanness in 
leprosy, but they are not identified with leprosy, and it is 
not leprosy (though it) spreads in them; and quickflesh 
produces no uncleanness, but they prove a hindrance to one 
who is turned all white. Tlie head and the beard before hair 
has grown up, and excrescences in the head and beard are 
judged by the priest to be natural skin of flesh. 


CHAPTER VII. 

1. These white spots are clean which existed before the 
giving of the law^ in the foreigner, in the proselyte, in the 
child before birth, in the wrinkle which has filled out, in the 
head and the beard, in the boil and quickflesh, and in the 
inflanmiation and issue. The head and the beard which have 
turned to baldness, the boil and the quickflesh and the in- 
flammation which have formed a scab, are clean. " A white 
spot in the head and the beard so long as hair has not sprung 
up, or the hair has sprung up and turned to baldness ; the 
boil and quickflesh and inflammation, so long as they have 
not formed a scab, or they have formed a scab, and are 
cured?" R Eliezer, the son of Jacob, pronounces them 
" unclean," since their beginning and their end are unclean, 
but the Sages pronounce them " clean." 

2. The indications of leprosy have changed either for 
convenience, or for inconvenience. " How for convenience ?" 
" It was like snow, and became in colour as the lime of the 
temple ; it was as white wool, and it became like an egg-shell. 
It became the swelling, or bright white." " How for incon- 
venience ?" " It was as an egg-shell, and became in colour 

' The law wis prospective, not retrospective ; '* When a man shall have" etc. 
(Lev. ziii. 2). 


280 LEPROSY. 

like white wool ; it was as the lime of the temple and became 
Hke snow." R. Eliezer, son of A^ariah, prononncea it "clean." 
R. Eleazar Hasma said, " if (it changed) for convenience it 
is clean, hut if for inconvenience, it must be inspected as in 
tlie heginnii^." R. Akiba said, " whether (it changed) for 
convenience or for inconvenience, it must he inspected as in 
the beginning." 

3. " A white spot in which there ia nothing in the begin- 
ning?" "In the end of the first week it must he inclosed. 
In the end of the aecotid week, after it is pronounced free, it 
shall remain free." Whilst the priest is about to inclose it 
or pTODOunce it free, if marks of uncloanneas are produced 
in the man he shall be decided unclean. A white spot in 
which are marks of nncleannesa the priest shall decide unclean. 
" Whilst the priest is about to decide the man unclean, and 
the marks of uncleanness are gone away, in the beginning 
or in the end of the first week?" " It must he inclosed." 
In the end of the second week, after the priest pronounces 
him free, he shall remain free. 

4. " If he rooted out the marks of uncleanness, and 
burned the quickflesh ?" " He transgressed a negative 
command." " What about cleansing ?" " Before he came to 
the priest he is clean. After being decided unclean, he is 
unclean." Said R. Akiba, " I questioned Eamban Cramaliel 
and Rabbi Joshua as they were going to Gadvod, during 
the time of inclosure what is it?" They said to me, "we 
have not heard, but we have heard, that before he came to 
the priest he is clean, after being decided unclean he ia 
imclean." " I began to bring to them arguments, that 
whether he stands before the priest, or during his inclosure, 
he is clean, until the priest pronounce him unclean." " When 
may he Ite cleansed ?" 11. Eliezer said, "if there be pro- 
duced in him another leprosy, and he ia pronounced clean 
from it." But the Sages say, "when the leprosy is grown' 
all over him, or when his wlute spot diminishes to be less 
than three lentils square." 

5. He who baa a white spot, and it is cut away, ia dean. 

' Or flowered all over. 


SELECTIONS. GROWTH. 281 

" If it be intentionally cut away ?" R EUezer said, " he 
will not be clean until another leprosy be produced in him, 
and he be cleansed from it." But the Sages say, " he will 
not be clean imtil the leprosy be grown all over him." 


CHAPTER VIII. 

1. He who has turned aU white after uncleanness, is 
clean. If the extremities of his members took another turn 
he is unclean, till his white spot diminish to be less than 
three lentils square. From the time of his cleansing lie is 
unclean. If his extremities have taken another turn, he is 
unclean until his white spot return as it was before. 

2. "A white spot as large as three lentils square, in 
which there is quickflesh as large as three lentils square, if 
it grew aU over him and afterwards the quickflesh in it 
went away, or the quickflesh went away and afterwards it 
grew all over liim?" "He is clean." "K quickflesh be 
produced in him?" "He is unclean." " If white hair be 
produced in him ?" R. Joshua pronounced him " unclean," 
but the Sages pronounced him " clean." 

3. A white spot in which there is white hair, if it grew 
all over him, even though white hair continued in its place ?" 
" He is clean." " A white spot in which there is spreading, 
if it grew all over him ?" " He is clean." And aU these 
things when the extremities of the members took a turn, 
cause uncleanness. " If it grew only in part ?" " He is 
unclean." " K it grew aU over him ?" " He is clean." 

4. Every growth in the extremities of the members which 
in its growth cleansed the man, renders, in its changing, 
the man again unclean. All changes in the extremities of 
the members which in their change rendered unclean the 
man who was clean ; while they are covered they are clean, 
but while they are discovered they are unclean, even though 
they changed an hundred times. 

6. Every fresh part which becomes unclean with the 
plague of the white spot^ pieventB its growth all over the 


282 


LEPROSY. 


leper, so that he coulil be pronoimced clean. Every part 
which does not become unclean with the plague of the white 
spot, does not prevent its growth all over him. " How ?" 
" It has grown all over bim, but not in the bead and beard, 
in the boil, in the quickfl&<!h, and in the intlanunatton. and 
in issues ; the head and heard changed and became bald, 
the boil and ijuickliesh and inflammation have formed a 
scab — he is clean. It has grown all over him, but not 
the measure of half a lentil, next to the head and beard, to 
the boil, to the quickSesh, and to the inflammation ; the 
head and beard changed to baldness, the boil and quickflesh, 
and inflammation formed a scab, even though the place of 
the quickflesh formed a white spot — he is unclean, untfl 
bo grown all over him." 

6. "Two white spots, one unclean and one clean, have 
grown from one to the other, and afterwards have grown aQ' 
over him?" "He is dean." "They have grown in Hm 
upper lip, in the lower lip, in two fingers, in the two eyelid^ 
even though they coalesce one with the other, and they 
appear as one?" "He is clean." "If it have grown all 
over him, but not in the freckled spot ?" " He is unclean." 
" The extremities of his members have turned to a kind ot 
freckled spot?" "He is clean." "The extremitiea of liia 
members have turned to a freckled spot, in size lese than a 
lentil?" R. Meier pronounces him "unclean." But the 
Sages say, " a freckled spot less than a lentil is a mark of 
uncleannesB in the beg inning , but no mark of uncleannees in 
the end." 

7. "He came (to the priest) all white?" "The priest 
must inclose the place." If white hair be produced in 
him?" "He ia to be decided unclean." "Have the two , 
hairs turned black, or one of them ? Have both of then^ 
become shorter, or one of them ? Has the boil incline! 
towards both of them, or to one of them ? Has the be* 
encompassed both, or one of them ? Or has the Iniil dirid^ 
them, or the quickflesh of tlie boil, the burning or t."; 

quickflesh nf the burning, and the freckled spot ?" Or t 

there been produced in him quickflesh or white hair ?" " H» 


SELECTIONS. BOILS. 283 

is unclean." '* There was not produced in him quickflesh nor 
white hair ?" " He is clean." And all these marks when 
the extremities of the members again changed in appearance, 
are reckoned as they were before. " If the white spot grew 
in part of him ?" " He is unclean.". " If it grew aU over 
him?" "He is clean." 

8. " If the white spot grew all over him at once, during 
his cleansing ?" "He is unclean." " But if it grew all 
over him during his uncleanness ?" " He is clean." " If 
he be declared clean during his inclosure ?" "He is 
declared free from uncovering his head and from rending 
his garments, and from shaving, and from "the birds." ^ 
" If he be declared clean during his being decided unclean ?" 
"He is indebted for all these." Both these men equally 
cause uncleanness in their entrance into (a house). 

9. " If he came (to the priest) aU white, and there was 
in him quickflesh as large as a lentil, if it have grown all 
over him, and afterwards the extremities of his members 
have changed ?" R Ishmael said, "so that the extremities 
of the members changed to a large white spot." R EUezer, 
son of Azariah, said, " so that the extremities of the members 
changed to a small white spot, he is unclean." 

10. There is in the showing of the leprosy to the priest 
gain ; and there is in the showing of it loss. " How ?" 
" He who was decided unclean, and the marks of uncleanness 
went away, there was not sufficient time to show them to 
the priest until they again grew all over him. He is clean." 
" When he showed them to the priest ?" " He is unclean." 
" A white spot in which there is nothing, he did not take 
time to show it to the priest, until it grew all over him ?" 
"He is imclean." "When he showed it to the priest?" 
" He is clean." 

CHAPTER IX. 

1. The boil and the burning cause uncleanness in one 
week with two marks, with white hair and with spreading. 

' Lev. xiv. 4. 


284 LEPROSY. TALMUD 

" What is a boil ?" " If one receive a knock with wood, or 
stone, or oil dregs, or the waters of Tiberias, everything which 
is not through fire. This is the boil." " What is a burning ? ** 
" If one receive a bum from live coals, or hot ashes, every- 
thing which is from fira This is the burning." 

2. The boil and the burning are not identified one with 
the other, and they do not spread from one to the other, 
and they do not spread in the skin of the flesh, and the 
skin of the flesh does not spread in them. " If they become 
a running sore ?" " They are clean." " K they form a skin 
like the peeling of garlic ?" "This is the scab of the boil 
mentioned in the law." "They are changed and healed 
even though in their place there be a scar ?" " They are 
judged to be skin of flesh." 

3. They questioned E. ' Eliezer, " if there sprung up in 
the palm of the hand a white spot like a dollar,^ and in its 
place the scab of a boU?" He said to them, "it must be 
inclosed." They said to him, " wherefore — it is not suitable 
for the growth of white hair — and as for spreading, it is not 
spreading, and as for quickflesh it does not render it un- 
clean?" He said to them, "perhaps it will contract and 
spread." They said to him, " but if its space be only as 
large as three lentils square ?" He said to them, " I have 
not heard it." R. Judah, the son of Bethirah, said to him, 
" I wiU study it." He said to him, " if thou dost study it 
for the confirmation of the opinions of the Sages, yes." He 
said to him, " perhaps there will be produced another boil 
outside of it, and this boil will spread to it." He replied to 
him, " thou art a great sage, becaiise thou hast confirmed 
the words of the Sages." 


CHAPTER X. 

1. The scalls cause uncleanness in two weeks and with 
two marks. With thin yellow hair, and with spreading^ 
"With thin yellow hair diminishing in shottnesBw'' Hie 

^ Orselalu 


SELECTIONS. 


SCALLS. 285 


words of Rabbi Akiba. E. Johanan, the son of Nuri, said, 
" hair even when long." Said E. Johanan, the son of Nnri, 
" what means the language, this staff is thin, this rod is thin, 
thin diminishing in shortness, or thin diminishing in length V 
R Akiba said to him, " before that you give a proof from 
the rod, let ils have a proof from the hair ; the hair of so 
and so is tliin, tliin diminishing in shortness, not thin 
diminishing when the hairs are long." 

2. " Thin yellow hair causes uncleanness in adhesion or 
in dispersion, in inclosure or when not inclosed, when it is 
unusual or when it is usual." ^ The words of E. Judah. 
E. Simon said, " it causes no uncleanness, save when it is 
unusual." E. Simon said, "and this is the decision." 
" What if the hair be white ?" " White hair does not apply, 
because no other hair delivers from its influence, and it causes 
no uncleanness, except it be unusual." "Why is it thin 
yellow hair?" "Because other hair delivers from its influ- 
ence." Is it not the teaching that no uncleanness is pro- 
duced except it be unusual ? E. Judah, said " every place 
which needs to be unusual," the law says, " unusual." But 
of the scall it is said, there is not in it " yellow hair."^ It 
causes uncleanness whether it be unusual or usuaL 

3. Sprouting dark hair delivers from the efiect of yellow 
hair, and from the effects of spreading both in adhesion and 
in dispersion, in inclosure or when it is not inclosed. " But 
if former hair can deliver from the effects of yellow hair, 
and from the effects of spreading, in adhesion or in disper- 
sion, or in inclosure, and it cannot deliver if it be grown 
from one side only, until it be distant from the usual standing 
hair, a space of two hairs ?" " If one of the hairs be yellow 
and one black, one yellow and one white, they do not deliver 
the sufferer from the scalL" 

4. YeUow hair which preceded the scall is clean. E. 
Judah pronounces it "unclean." E. Eliezer, the son of 
Jacob, said, " it causes no uncleanness and it does not deliver 
the sufferer from the scalL" R Simon said, "everything 

' ic whetlier th* miU praoeded the yellow hair, or vice versa. 

* Lev. ziii. 80. 


286 LEPROSY. 

which is not a mark of uucleainiess in the scall, is in the 
3call a mark of cleauness." 

5. " How is the acall shaven ? " " They shave outside of it 
and leave two hairs near to it, that it may be known if it 
spread." " Was the man declared unclean with yellow hair,, 
has the yellow hair gone away and again retin-ned, and bo 
likewise with the spreading in the beginning, or in the end ol 
the first week, or in the end of the second week, after being 
pronounced free?" "He is as he was before." "Was he 
declared unclean with the spreading, has the spreading gone, 
and spreading again returned, and so likewise with yellow 
hair in the end of the first week, or in the end of the second 
week, after being pronounced free ?" " He is as he 
before." 

6. "Suppose two scalla beside each other and a line of 
hair divides a space between them ?" " If tlie hair fall from 
one place he is unclean. If from both places he is clean." 
" How much must be the falling of the liair ?" " The space' 
of two hairs." "Has it fallen from one place?" "It musfe^ 
be the measure of three lentils square, he is unclean.' 

7. " Suppose two scalla one within the otiier, and a line 
of hair dividing a space between them ?" " If the hair have 
fallen from one place, he is unclean, if it have fallen &om 
both places, he is clean." " How much must be the falling V 
" The space of two hairs." " Has it fallen in one place the 
measure of three lentils equare ?" " He is clean." 

8. Whosoever has a scall and within it there is yellow 
hair, he is unclean. " Is black hair produced in it ?" " He-' 
is clean even though the black hair went away again.' 
Babbt Simon, the son of Judah, said on the authority of 
Eabbi Simon, " every scall which is once pronounced clean,, 
there is no uncleanness in it for ever after." Rabbi Simoa 
said, " every yellow hair which is once pronounced c] 
has no uncleanness for ever after." 

9. " Whosoever had a scall the measure of three lentils. 
square, and the scall covered his whole head?" "He 
clean." " ITie head and the beard do not legally hinder 
other." , The words of R. Judah. E. Simon said, " they 


HKLKCTIONa. 


GARMENTS. 287 


legally hinder each other." Ealjbi Simon said, "and the 
teacliing is, that if the skin of liis face and the skin of his 
flesh have another thing, which divides between them, they 
do hinder each other." Tlie head and beard, there is 
nothing that divides between them. "Is not this the 
teacliing that they do hinder each other ?" " The head and 
beard do not adhere each to the other, and they do not 
legally spread in leprosy each to the other." " What is the 
beard ?" "The hair from the division of the cheek-bone to 
the covering of the windpipe." 

10. The bald head and bald forehead cause uncleanness 
in two weeks and with two marks, with quickflesh and with 
spreading. " What is a bald head ?" " If one have eaten 
crocodile fat,^ or anointed with this fat a sore unsuitable for 
the growth of hair." " What is a bald head ?" " It extends 
from the pate, sloping downwards behind to the covering of 
the neck." "What is a bald forehead ?" "It extends from 
the pate, sloping downwards in front tUl it comes opposite 
the hair from al)ove." The bald head and bald forehead do 
not legally adhere^ each to the other, and they do not 
legally spread to each other. R Judah said, " if there be 
hair between them they do not adhere to each other, but if 
not, they adhere." 


CHAPTER XI. 

1. Every one's garments receive imcleanness in leprosy 
except the garments of foreigners. He who buys garments 
from foreigners should first inspect them. But sea-skins 
receive no uncleanness in leprosy. "If there be united 
with them that which grows on the earth, even though it 
be a thread, or a rope, anything which receives legal un- 
cleanness ?" " The garments are unclean." 

2. " Suppose camel's wool and sheep's wool couMningled ?" 
" If the greater part be from camels, the garments receive 

^ Some commentators explain this to ' The bald head and bald forehead 
mean salamander oil ; and others again are not legally counted as one in a 
interpret it as sloe juice. decision respecting a case of scall. 


f 


no uncleaunesa in leprosy." " If the greater part of the 
wool be from sheep?" "They receive uncleamiess in leprosy." 
"If they be half and half?" "They receive uncleanness in 
leprosy." And so also is the rule for flax and hemp, when. 
they are commingled together. 

3. " Skins and garments when dyed receive no unclean- 
ness in leprosy. Buildings painted or impainted, receive 
uncleanness in leprosy." The words of Eabbi Meier. B, 
Judah said, " skins are treated as buildings." R Simon said, 
" if tliey be coloured naturally, they receive uncleanness ; if 
artificially, they do not receive it." 

4. A garment dyed in its warp, and white in its woof, 
or dyed in its woof, and white in its warp, has all to be 
regarded according to its appearance. Garments receive 
uncleanness in intense greenness and in bright redness. " It 
was green and it spread all over red, or it was red and it 
spread all over green ?" " It is unclean." " It changed its 
colour and it again spread ; it changed again and it did not 
spread ?" " It is the same as though it did not change." 
R Judah said, " it must be examined as in the beginning." 

5. "It is at a stand-still in the first week?" "It must 
be washed and inclosed." "It is at a stand-still in the 
second week?" " It must be burned." "It spread in both 
weeks ?" " It must be burned," " It was dull in the begin- 
ning?" Eabbi Ishmael said, "it must be washed and 
inclosed," but the Sages say, " leave it alone." " It was dull 
in tbe first week V " It must be washed and inclosed." " It 
was dull in the second week ?" " It must be torn out, and 
that which is torn out must be burned, and it should be 
patched." R Nehemiali said, " it need not be patched." 

6. " If the leprosy returned to tbe garment ?" " The patch 
is saved." "If it returned to tbe patch ?" "The garment 
must be burned." " If tbe patch on a clean garment was 
from an inclosed garment, and tbe plague returned to the 
inclosed garment?" "The patch must be burned." "If it 
returned to the patch ?" " The first garment must be burned, 
and the pateh may serve the second garment with marks." 

7. " Suppose a summer dress in which there is patch- 


SELECTIONS. 


BOBBINS. 289 


work, dyed and white, the leprosy spreads from one patch to 
the other ?" They questioned Eabbi Eleazar, " how is it if 
there be one patch only ?" He said to them, " I have not 
heard." R Judali, son of Bethii-ah, said to liim, " I will study 
it." He said to liim, " if thou dost study it for the con- 
firmation of the opinions of the Sages, yes." He said to 
him, " perhaps it will be at a stand-still for two weeks, and 
a stand-still in garments for two weeks causes imcleanness." 
He said to him, " thou art a great Sage, because thou hast 
confirmed the words of the Sages." Spreading near to the 
source, however little — at a distance from the source, the 
measure of three lentils square, and reappearance the measure 
of three lentils square — (cause uncleanness). 

8. The warp and woof receive uncleanness instantly. 
R. Judah said, " the warp from the time it is boiled, and the 
woof instantly, and the stalks of flax from the time that 
they are bleached. "How much must there be in the 
bobbin, that it shall receive uncleanness in leprosy ?" 
" Sufficient to weave both of waip and woof three fingers 
square — ay, even if it be all warp— or even all woof." If 
there be knots in the thread it receives no uncleanness in 
leprosy. R. Judah said, '*even though there be one break 
and it was knotted, it receives no uncleanness." 

9. " If thread was roUed from one bobbin to the other, 
from one spool to the other, from the upper to the lower 
weaver's beam, and also from the two sides of a shirt, and if 
the leprosy appeared in one of them ?" " The second is clean." 
In the weaving of the woof, and in the warp at a stand-still, 
they receive uncleanness instantly. R Simon said, **the 
warp if it were quite prepared receives uncleanness." 

10. "Hfus the leprosy appeared in the warp at a stand- 
still ?" " That which is already woven is clean." " Has it 
apj)eare<l in that which is woven ?" "The warp at a stand- 
still is clean.*'' "Has it appeared in the fine linen ?" "Tlie 
selvage must be burned." " Has it appeared in the selvage ?" 
" The fine linen is clean." A shirt in which the leprosy 
appeared saves its seams, even if they be purple. 

11. " Everything which is adapted to receive uncleanness 

u 


290 


LEPROSY. 


from the dead, even though it is not suitable for un- 
cleansess from treading, receives uncleanness from leprosy, 
such as the sails of a ship, the mainsail, and the combs* for 
women's hair, and book covers, am! gii-dles, and latchets for 
shoes and sandals, which are as broad as three lentils square. 
These aJl become unclean with leprosy. " Fringes in which 
leprosy appeared ?" R. Eleazar, the son of Jacob, said, " they 
are not unclean until the leprosy appear in the part woven 
and in their down," Water bottles and bags which appear 
as usual, and yet there is spreading from inside outwards, 
and from outsiile inwards (are unclean). 

12. "A garment which has been inclosed and mixed 
with others t" " All are clean." " If it be cut up and 
reduced to down ?" " It is clean, and its use is allowed." ' 
" But it' it be decided unclean and mixed with others ?" 
" All are unclean." " If it be cut up and reduced to down V 
" It is unclean and its use is forbidden." 


L 


CHAPTER XII. 

1. All buildings receive uncleanness in leprosy except 
the buildings of foreigners. He who buys houses from 
foreigners must first inspect them. A round house, a three- 
cornered house, a house built on a ship or on a mast, or one 
built on four beams, do not receive uncleanness in leprosy. 
But if the house be square, even though it be buUt on four 
pillars, it receives uncleanness in leprosy. 

2. " Suppose a house one of whose sides is covered with 
marble, and one side with Hagging, and one with tiling, 
and one with mortar ?" " It is clean." " A house in which 
there are not stones, and wood, and mortar, and the plague 
appeared in it, and afterwards there was brought into it 
stones, and wood, and mortar ?" " It is clean." " And also a 
garment in which there was not weaving three fingers square, 
and the pl^ue appeared in it, and afterwards it was woven 
three fingers square ?" " It is clean." No houae causes 

1 luiah IIL 18. 


SELECTIONS. 


HOUSES. 291 


uncleanness in leprosy until there be in it stones, and wood, 
and mortar. 

3. " And how many stones must be in it ?" R 
Ishmael said, " four." R Akiba said " eight," then said 
Rabbi Ishmael " until the leprosy appear the measure of twice 
three lentils square on two stones, or even on one stone." R 
Akiba said, " until the leprosy appear the measure of twice 
three lentils square on two stones, not on one stone." R 
Eleazar, son of R. Simon, said, " until there appear as much 
leprosy as the measui'e of twice three lentils square upon two 
stones in the comer of two walls, its length the measure of 
twice three lentils square, and its breadth the measure of 
three lentils square. 

4. There must be wood sufficient to put under a lintel. 
R Judah said, " sufficient to make a buttress behind a linteL" 
There must be mortar sufficient to fill up a crack. The walls 
of a crib and the walls of a shed receive no uncleanness in 
leprosy. Jerusalem and the regions beyond the Land (of 
Israel) receive no uncleanness in leprosy. 

5. " How is the inspection of the house ?" " The owner of 
the house must come and inform the priest, saying, "the 
resemblance of the leprosy has appeared in my house :" even 
though he be a learned man, and knows the leprosy with 
certainty, he should not decide, and say, " a leprosy has ap- 
peared in my house," but " the resemblance of the leprosy 
has appeared in my house." And the priest orders him to 
clear the house before he shall come to inspect the leprosy, 
so that all in the house be not unclean, and afterwards the 
priest shall come to inspect the house, even if it be only 
bundles of wood, or even bundles of reeds." The words of R 
Judah. R Simon said, " is it the (priest's) business to order 
the clearing of the house ?" R Meier said, " and what does 
he pronounce unclean for him, if you shall say Yesseb of 
wood, and garments, and metals, they may be washed v* 
they are clean." " On what had the law pity t" * Or 
eartheni vessels, and on his jug, and on his oven." • 

law had thus pity on the property of the vnlgu, m 
on the property of the honourable ; if thns the IftW 


292 


on hia property, much more (had it pity) on the soul of his 
sons and his daughters; if it had so much pity for the 
wicked, much more (had it pity) for the righteous. 

6, The priest does not enter into the houae and shut it 
up, uor into the house in which there is the leprosy and 
shut it up. But he stands at the door of the house in 
whicli there b the lepnisy and shuts it up, as is said, " Then 
the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, 
and shut up the house seven days : and the priest shall 
come again the seventh day and shall look : and hehold, if 
the plague he spread in the walls of the bouse, then the 
priest shall conunand that they take away the stones in 
which the plague is, and they shall cast them into an 
uncleau place without the city."' And he shall take other 
stones and bring them to replace the (first) stones, and he 
shall take other mortar and piaster the house. He must 
not tjike the stones from this side and hring them to that 
side, nor mortar from this side and bring it to that side, nor 
take lime from every place. He must not bring one stone 
instead of two, nor two stones instead of one. But he must 
bring two instead of two, three instead of three, four instead 
of four. From whence do they say, " woe to the wicked, 
woe to his neighbour i" " When both have to take away the 
stones, both to scrape the house, both must bring back other 
stones, but the owner himself must bring the mortar, as is 
said, " And he shall take other mortar, and shall plaster the 
house."' His companion need not trouble himself about 
the plaster. 

7. The priest came in the end of the week and inspected 
the house. If the leprosy rettirned, he must break down the 
house, its stones, and its timber, and all the mortar of the 
house, and he must carry them forth without the city to an 
unclean place. Spreading ot leprosy near its source, how- 
ever httle, and at a tlistance from its source, the measure of 
three lentils square, and its return in houses the measure of 
twice three lentils square (render bouses unclean). 


SELECTIONS. PLASTER. 293 


CHAPTER XIII. 

1. The indications of leprosy in houses are ten. "It 
was dull in the first week, and it went away ?" " It must be 
scraped off, and it is clean." " It was dull in the second 
week, and it went away ?" " It must be scraped ofif, but its 
owner needs the birds." ^ "It was spreading in the first 
week ?" " He takes it out, and scrapes it down, and plasters 
it, and gives it another week." " If it return ?" " It must 
be broken do^vn." "It did not return?" "He needs the 
birds." ^ " It stood still in the first week, and spread in the 
second ?" " He takes it out and scrapes it down, and plasters 
it, and gives it another week." " It returns ?" " It must be 
broken down." " It did not return ? " " He needs the birds." * 
" It stood stiU in the one week and also in the other ?" " He 
must take it out, and scrape it down, and plaster it, and 
give it another week." " It returns ?" " It must be broken 
down." "It did not return?" "He needs the birds." * 
" Before he is cleansed by the birds the leprosy again ap- 
peared in it ?" " It must be broken down." " And if after 
he was cleansed by the birds, the leprosy again appeared 
in it ?" " It must be inspected as in the beginning." 

2. The comer stone, when it is to be taken out, must l>e 
taken out entirely. " When it is to be broken down ?" "A 
man must break down only his own part, and leave that of 
his neighbour." It follows that taking out is more difficult 
than breaking down. R EUezer said, "in the case of a 
house built on the projection of a binding stone, if the leprosy 
appeared in the projection, he takes it all away, if it appeared 
in the binding stone, he takes that which belongs to him, 
and leaves that part which belongs to his neighbour." 

3. "A house, in which the leprosy appeared, has an upper 
storey on it?" "The (priest) concedes the beams to the 
upper storey." "It appeared in the upper storey?" He 
concedes the beams to the house itself." " There was no 
upper storey on it ?" " The stones and timber and mortar 

' I/ev. xiv. 4. It is used like one in the Thynis of 

' This reply forms a kind of chorus Theocritus, 
luch as is found in the Greek poets. 


294 


LEPROSY. 


are broken down with it But the concession (of the beams) 
saves the balconies upon them, and the lattices of the 
windows." R. Judah said, " a battlement built over it is to 
be broken down with it, its stones and timbers and mortal 
cauae micleanness in the measure of an olive." R. Eleazar 
Eashma said, " however little they be." 

4. A house which is shut up, causes uncleanneas inside. 
" But that house which is decided unclean inside and outside?" 
" Both inside and outside it causes uncleanness by one 
entering into it" 

5. " Suppose stones built into a clean house from one 
legally shut up, and the leprosy again returned to the house ?" 
" He must take the atones away." " If the leprosy retxirned 
to the stones ?" "The first bouse must be broken down, and 
the stones may serve for the second house with marks," 

6. " A house which covers over a leprous house, and also 
a tree which covers over a leprous house ?" " He who entered 
the outer one is clean." The words of E. Eliener, son of 
Azariah. Said R. Ehezer, " what ! if one stone of it causes 
uncleanness by entrance into it, should not the house itself 
also cause uncleanness by entrance into it ?" 

7. " One unclean with leprosy stood beneath a tree, and 
one clean passed by V " The latter becomes unclean." 
" One clean stood beneath the tree, and one unclean passed 
by?" "The former remains clean." "If he stood?" "The 
one clean becomes unclean." " And if oue passed by with 
a leprous stone '!" " He remains clean," " But if he stops ?" 
" The one clean becomes unclean." 

8. " A clean person entered with his head and the greater 
part of his body into an unclean house ?" " He becomes 
\mclean." "And an unclean person entered with hia head 
and the greater part of his body into a clean house ?" "He 
renders it unclean." A clean garment, of wliich tliree fingers 
square, entered au unclean house, is rendered unclean, and 
the unclean garment which enters even the size of an olive 
into a clean house, causes legal uncleanness. 

9. " He who enters a leprous house, with his garments 
on his shoulder, and his sandals and rings in Itis band?" 


SELECTIONS. 


THE SYNAGOGUE. 295 


" He and they are instantly unclean. If he be dressed in 
his clothes and his sandals on his feet, and his rings on his 
fingers, he is instantly unclean : but they remain clean, 
whilst he can eat half a loaf ^ of wheaten, but not of barley 
bread. He may sit and eat it with soup." 

10. "If one stood within a leprous house, and stretched 
his hand outside and his rings were in his hand, or if he 
remained whilst he could eat half a loaf?" "They are 
unclean." " If he stood outside and stretched his hand 
inside the leprous house, and his rings were in his hand V 
R Judah pronounces them "instantly unclean," but the 
Sages say, " not until he could have time to eat half a loaf." 
They said to E. Judah " what ! if in the time all his body 
is imclean, no imcleanness is produced in that which is upon 
him, until he remain whilst he can eat half a loaf — is it 
not the legal decision that, in the time all his body is clean 
he does not render that which is upon him imclean till he 
remain the time for eating half a loaf." 

11. "A leper enters a house?" "All the vessels there 
are unclean, even up to the beams of the house." Eabbi 
Simon said, " up to four cubits high." Vessels are instantly 
unclean. R Judah said, " vessels are rendered unclean if 
he remain till he can light a candle." 

12. If he entered the synagogue, the congregation makes 
for him a division ten handbreadths high, and in breadth 
four cubits. He must enter first and go out last. All 
covering boimd ^ saves from legal imcleanness in the tent of 
the dead. The covering boimd also saves from uncleanness 
in the leprous house. " And everything which saves from 
imcleanness in the tent of the dead with a cover only, such 
also saves from uncleanness in a leprous house." The words 
of R Meier. E. Jos^ said, " every covering boimd which 
saves in the tent of the dead also saves in the leprous house 
when covered only. And everything which saves from un- 
cleanness when covered in the tent of the dead, even though 
it be imcovered in the leprous house, is clean." 

^ Half a loaf, some say of the size of three oggs, others of four eggs. 

' Numbers xix. 15. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

" How was the leper cleansed ?" " He brought a new 
md put into it a quarter of a log of rimning 
water, and he brought two tame birds. He killed one of 
them over the earthen vessel aud over the running water. 
He dug and buried it before him. He took eedar-wood and 
hyssop, and scarlet (wool), and rolled them in the rest * of 
the piece of wool. And he attached to them the tips of the 
wings, and the end of the tail of the second bird. The 
priest dipped them into the earthen vessel, and sprinkled 
the water and blood seveu times on the back of the hand of 
the leper, and some say on his forehead. And so also was 
the order of Bprinkling on the lintel of the leprous house 
outside. 

2. The priest proceeded to let loose the living bird. He 
turned his face neither towards the sea, nor the city, nor the 
wilderness, as is said, "And shall let the living bird out 
from the city into the open field." ^ He proceeds to shave 
the leper. He causes the razor to pass over all his flesh. 
And the leper washes his clothes and bathes. He is clean, 
so as not to render others unclean by his entrance into a 
house; but he still causes uncleanness like the creeping thing. 
He may enter within the city wall. He remains a wanderer 
from his home seven days, and the use of his bed is forbidden. 

3. On the seventh day he undergoes a second shaving 
like to the first. He washes his clothes and bathes. He 
is clean from causing imcleanneBs like the creeping thing ; 
and he is as one daily baptized. He may eat of the tithes. 
When the aim is setting, he may eat of the heave-ofifering. 
When he brought his atonement, he may eat of the holy 
things. There eicist three cleansings for leprosy, and three 
clean sings for chitdbirth. 

4. Three persons must shave, and they are shaved by 
legal commanil, the Nazarite, and the leper, and the Levite* ; 

r after the wnal was lAid paraJlel with the ccdu 


SELECTIOXS. 


THE BIRDS. 297 


and all these if they be shaved without a razor, or were left 
with two hairs, did nothing. 

5. The two birds are ordered to be equal in colour, and 
size, and price, and to be procured at the same time. Even 
if they be unequal, they are allowed. If one be procured 
to-day, and the other procured to-morrow they are allowed. 
" If one be killed, and it be found that it is not tame ?" " The 
leper must take a pair for the second bird." The first bird 
is lawful for food. " If it be killed, and it be found unlaw- 
ful ?" "He must take a pair for the second bird." The 
first is lawful for ortlinary use.^ " If its blood be poured 
away ?" " The one to be let loose must die in its stead." 
"If the one to be let loose die ?" "The blood of the one 
killed must be poured away."^ 

6. The cedar is ordered to be a cubit in length, and in 
breadth the quarter of a bedpost split into halves, and these 
halves again split into quarters. The hyssop is ordered not 
to be Greek hyssop, or coloured hyssop, or Eoman hyssop, 
or desert hyssop, or any sort of hyssop with a distinctive 

name. 

■ 

7. On the eighth day the leper must bring three sacrifices, 
the sin-offering, and the trespass-ofifering, and the burnt- 
offering ; and the poor man must bring a bird for the sin- 
offering, and for the burnt-offering a bird. 

8. He came beside his trespass-offering, and laid both 
his hands upon it, and slew it, and two priests received its 
blood ; one of them received it in a vessel, and one received 
it in his hand. He who received it in the vessel came and 
sprinkled it on the side of the altar ; and he who received 
it in his hand came beside the leper. And the leper bathed 
in the leper's chamber, and went and stood in the gate of 
Nicanor. R. Judah said, " the bathing was not necessary." 

0. The leper stretched in his head from the gate of 
Nicanor, and the })riest put (the blood) of his trespass-offering 

' Some commentators think that the ' By reference to the tract on the 
une of the bird was forbidden, but after Day of Atonement vi. 1, it will be foond 
examining several editions of the Mish- that the regulations for the goats are 
na, I have translated as in the text. similar in principle to the regulations 

for the birds of the leper. 


298 THE HBIFEE. 

on the tip 1 of his ear ; be stretched in his hanil, and he put 
it on tlie thumb of his hand ; he stretched in bis foot, and 
he put it on the great toe of his foot. R. Judah said, " he 
might stretch in the three at once." If he had no thninb, 
or great toe, or right ear, he could never be cleansed. H. 
Eleazar said, " tlie priest put (the blood) in their places." R 
Simon aaid, " if the priest put it on the left hand membera 
the leper went free. It was well done." 

10. The priest took the log of oil, and poured it into the 
palm of his brother prieat, and if he poured it into his own 
palm, it was well done. He dipped his finger into the oil 
and sprinkled it seven times before tlie Holy of Holies. At 
every sprinkling be dipped in his finger. He came beside 
the leper. On the place where he put the blood there he 
put the oil, as is said, " Upon the place of the blood of the 
trespass-offering,"^ And the remainder of the oil which 
was on the palm of the priest, he must put on the head of 
him that is to he cleansed to make an atonement. " If he 
put it on, he atoned. And if he did not put it on, he made 
no atonement." The words of R Akiba, K. Johanan, the 
son of Nuri, said, " the conmiand is free between putting on 
the oil or not putting it on." " He has atoned, but without 
the oil ?" " It is not reckoned to him m a complete atone- 
ment." " If the log of oil failed before he poured it out T" 
" He may refill it." " If it failed from the time of pouring it 
out?" "He must bring another log as in the beginning." 
The words of R Akiba. R. Simon aaid, " if the log failed 
before the prieat sprinkled it he may refill it. If it failed at 
the time of sprinkling it be must bring another, as in th^ 
beginning." 

11. "A leper who brought his offering as a poor iiiiii»i 
and became rich, or as a rich man, and became poor t " 
" All depends on the sin-offering." The words of R Simonv 
R. Judah said, "on the treajiass-offering." 

12. " If a poor leper brought the oflfering of the rich T * 
" It is well done." " But if a rich one brought the ofTeriiK^ 
of the poor?" "It is nothing." A man may bring for hJ* 

< Or oil Ihe middle of tbe inside of his ear. ' Lev. xiT. 18. 


SELECTIONS. OFFERINGS. 299 

son, for his daughter, for his man-servant or for his maid- 
servant the offering of the poor, and they may eat of their 
sacrifices. E. Judah said, " but for his wife he must bring 
the offering of the rich, and so likewise every offering for 
which she is responsible." 

13. "Two lepers whose offeriutigs were mixed, and the 
offering of one of them is already made, and one of them 
died ?" This question the men of Alexandria asked of R 
Joshua. He answered them, " the survivor must write his 
property in the name of another man, and bring the offering 
of the poor." 


300 THE HEIFER. talmcd 


n'y 


Treatise XVI. 

The Heifer's Age — Ages of other Offerings — Places from which the Red 
Heifer may come — Blemishes — Black hairs — Separation of the Priest for 
burning the Red Heifer — Sprinkling — Lads who drew water from Siloam ■ 
— Number of Red Heifers — Bridge to the Mount of Olives — Procession 
of Heifer and Attendants — Pile for burning — Position of the Heifer — 
Position of the Priest — Slaughter of the Heifer — Sprinkling the Blood — 
Kindling the Pile — Gathering the Ashes — Doctrine of Intention — ^VesaelB 
— Pumpkin Bottles — A Hollow Reed — Purifications — Cases of Casuistry — 
Seas— Wells— Reptiles — A Clean Place — Hyssop — Sprinkling. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. Rabbi Eliezer said, " the red heifer must be a calf of a 
year old, or an heifer of two years." But the Sages say, ** a 
calf of two years, and an heifer of three years, or of four 
years." Rabbi Meier said, "even of five years she is 
allowed, or older. But they are not to wait (longer) for 
her, lest she turn black, and be disallowed." Rabbi Joshua 
said, " I only heard, third." They said to him, what is the 
meaning of "third?" He said to them, "thus I heard it 
without explanation." The son of Azai said, " I will expl€dn 
it, if you say " third," that is to others in counting ; but if 
you say one of three, that is, of three years." As when 
they say, a fourth vineyard." They said to him, "what 
means fourth ?" He said to them, " thus I heard it without 
explanation." Said the son of Azai, " I will explain. K 
you say * fourth,' that is, to others in counting. But as 
you say one of four, that is, of four years. As when they 

^ The Jews say that Solomon, who could not comprehend the ftdl meaning 
Understood all the commands of God, of the Red Heifer. 


SELECTIONS. AGES OF OFFERINGS. 301 

say, he who eats in a leprous house an half loaf,^ of three loaves 
to the cab of flour." They say to him, " say eighteen loaves to 
the seah of flour." He said to them, " Thus I heard it with- 
out explanation." Said the son of Azai, " I will explain. If 
you say three to the cab, there is no dough-offering. But if 
you say, eighteen to the seah, the dough-ofifering diminishes it." 

2. R Jos6 the Galilean said, "the cleansing of the 
Levites required bullocks of two years old, as is said, " And 
another young bullock shalt thou take for a sin-offering.^" 
But the Sages say, " even of three years." R Meier said, 
" bullocks even of four and five years are allowed, but old 
ones are not brought, for honour's sake." 

3. Sacrifices required lambs of a year old, and rams of 
two years old, and all (are reckoned) from day to day.' If 
they be thirteen months old, neither ram nor lamb are 
allowed. E. Tarphon called it, " half and between." The 
son of Azai called it, " pointed out." R Ishmael called it, 
" recalled coin." If the ram be brought for offering, and the 
libation of the ram be brought with him, it does not pass 
for his offering, except he be thirteen months and one day 
old. That is the law for the ram. 

4. The sin-offering of the congregation, and their burnt- 
offerings, the sin-offering of an individual, and the trespass- 
offering of the Nazarite, and the trespass -offering of the 
leper, are allowed for thirty days and upwards, and even on 
the thirtieth day. And if they are brought on the eighth 
day, they are allowed, vows, free-will-offerings, the first-bom, 
and the tithe, and the passover, are allowed from the eighth 
day and upwards, and even on the eighth day. 


CHAITTER II. 

1. Rabbi Eliezer said, "an heifer for a sin-offering is 
allowed even in pregnancy." But the Sages disallow her. 

* The meaoing is that he iirho spends ' Numb. riiL 8. 
as much time in a leprous house, as is * The age^of the lamb was reckoned 

Hufficient for eating a loaf of such a size, from its birthday in Elul of last year, 

becomes defiled in his garments. See till the first day of Elul in the current 

Leprosy, xiu. 10. year. 


302 

E, ElJezer said, " she is not to be takeu from foreigners.' 
But the Sages allow her. And not only she, but all tha 
offerings of the congregation, and of the individual, may come 
from tlie Laud (of Israel), or fTOin outside the land, from 
the fresh harveat and from the old harvest, except the omer,*' 
and the two loaves,* which may only come from the fndt 
harvest, and from the Land, 

2. An heifer whose horns and hooia are black should 
have them cut away. The pupil of the eye, and the teeth, 
and the tongue, cause no blemish in the lieifer. If she be 
diminutive, she ia allowed. " Had she a wen which 
cut away ?" E. Judah "disallowed her." Eahbi Simon 
" every place which was cut down, and no red hair sprang 
up in its place, renders her blemished." 

3. An heifer produced from the side, or from the hire 
inamorality, or exchanged for a dog, is disallowed. & 
Eliezer allowed it, " as is said, ' Thou slialt not bring the bin 
of a whore, or the price of a dog into the house of the Loid 
thy God.'' But she liid not come into the houaa" A3 
blemishes which are disallowed in holy things are disallowed' 
in the heifer. K one rode on her, or leaned on her, or hung 
something on her tail, or crossed a river on her, or doubled 
the rope over her, or put his garment on her, she is dis- 
allowed. But if one bound her with a rope, or made a shoe 
to prevent her slipping, or spread his garment over her 
because of the fiies, she is allowed. This is the rule. Every- 
thing which was necessary for her is allowed. If there 1 
any use of her for another's benefit, she is disallowed. 

4. If a bird rested on her, she is allowed. If the mala, 
came to her, she is disallowed. R Judah said, "if he i 


tbe e 


I lEth 1 


though it were h Ijabboth. 
wajB have been gathered Trom a freah 
harveat cultivated evtm in the Subbtttical 
year. The reapers asked these qnertiong 
three times of thu«e who vqre wjbie«sea, 
" Han the »un gone down t " " With 
thii siclde?" "liito this basket!" 
"On thiJi Sabbath (Brst day of the 


Passover) i " " Shall I reap ) " 
the witnesws anaveied thew qoMtitnt 
the ahfaT was reaped. It WM linallf 
ground into Sour, and ui bandfal of " 
mixed with TnuikiuDeiuie win banad ( 
the altar. The remainder balongad Itt 

' Numb. ExvilL The twp inltK 
loaves of wheaten flour wen 4]wi}S< 
offered on llie Jewish Pentecoat, 

' Deut. iiiii. 18. 


BLEMISHES. 


303 


I 


bronght, she is disallowed, but if he came of himself, aha is 
allowed." 

5. If she had two black or white hairs in one cavity, 
ihe is disallowed, R. Judah said, " even in one pore." " If 
they be in two pores and they prove united ?" " She is dis- 
ftUowed." Rabbi AHba said, " even four or five, if they be 
scattered, may be plucked out." Itabbi Eleazar said, " even 
fifty." R. Joshua, son of Bathira, said, " if there be even 
one in lier head, and one in her tail, she is disallowed." 
" If there be two hairs, their roots black, and their tops red, 
their roots red and their tops black?" "All follows after 
the appearance." The words of Habbi Meier. But the Sages 
My, "after the root." 


CHAPTER III. 

1. Seven daj-s before the burning of the heifer, the priest 
who burned the heifer was removed from his house to the 
chamber in front of the Temple Palace towards the north- 
east ;' and it was called the Stone House. And he was 
sprinkled during all the seven days from all the ashes of 
red heifers which were there. R. Jos^ said " they did not 
sprinkle him save on the thini and seventh days only." R 
Hananiah, the deputy high priest, said, " on the priest who 
burned the heifer they sprinkled during all the seven days, 
but on him who took service on the Day of Atonement, they 
did not sprinkle save on the third and seventh days only." 

2. There were courts in Jerusalem built of stone, and 
beneath they were hollow,' through fear of an unseen grave. 
And pregnant women were brought, and they were delivered 
there. And there they reared their son."?, and oxen were 
brought with doors on their backs, and the lads were seated 

. 1 Chron, iiii. I. it wu ngirded u ■ Dou.coiidactor. 
There nn rKkonnl aix d^reo of un- 

_ 3 Jeniih tnuUtian ■ ctuutuns — the father at fatbsn — the 

iAmA body COTcred Id with CBrtb con- fnthcn— the fint, te«inil, third. Hid 

nyadli^niKleaiinBiitoaTery onevho roorth cbitdren of deHlement. Then 

v^kad DTsr It ; bQt if i vuilt maover ue ftltogBther t««nI;-nlDe fatheni of 

tha body, or if air iBtcrreiKd between nncleuinen, of which Eleven uiae froni 

tb« oorpM ind the auifioe of Uu gronuil, ooutict with ■ dead bodj. 


THE HEIFEE. 

ou them witli stone cups in their hands. They canie to 
Siloam, they diamoiinted, and filloil them. They remountetl, 
and returned on the backs of the oxen, R. Jos6 said, " from 
their seats on the backs of the oxen they let down (the cujisj 
and filled them (with water)." 

Z. The lads came back to the Mountaiiu of the House 
and dismounted. The Mountain of the House and its courts 
were hollow below through fear of an unseen grave. And 
at the door of the court there were prepared the ashes of 
the red heifers ; and they brought a ram from the sheep. 
and they twisted a rope between his horns, and tliey twisted 
a stick and stuck it into the end of the rope, and it was 
dipped into the ashes, and the ram got a blow, and he 
skipped Imckwarda, and took them, and caused them to 
appear on the surface of the water. R. Jos^ said, "you 
should not give an opportunity to the Sadducees for scoffing ; 
but (the lad) took and prepared the ashes." 

i. They did not make use of (what pertained) to one 
red heifer for a second one, nor did they use another lad for' 
his (prepared) companion, "And the lads themselves were 
in need of sprinkling." The words of Eabbi Jos^ the Gali- 
lean. R. Aldba said, " they had no need of sprinkling." 

5, If they did not find (ashes) of seven red heifere, aijt 
were sufficient, five, four, three, two, one. "And who mode 
them ?" " Moses made the first. And Ezra the second, and 
(there were) five from Ezra and afterwards." The words of 
Rabbi Meier. But the Si^jes say, "seven from Ezra and 
afterwards." " And who made them ?" " Simon the Just, and 
John the High Priest made each two. Elihueni son of 
Hakuf, and Hanamel the Egyptian, and Ishmael, son of 
Piani, made one each." 

6. And a causeway was made from the Mountain of the 
House to the Mount of Olives, with arches over arches. And 
there was an arch in frout of the last pillar for fear of an 
unseen grave. Over it the priest who burned the heifer, and 
the heifer with all her attendants, proceeded to the Mount 
of Olives. 

' Some commoatatcni expIoiD tijnt " cacli heifur icqnirea B frwb luL " 


SELECTIONS. BURNING THE HEIFER. 305 

7. If the heifer were unwilling to go, they did not bring 
with lier a black one, lest it be said, " they slaughtered a 
black one " nor a red one, lest it be said, " they slaughtered 
two." R Jose said, " this was not the reason, but because 
it is only said, "That he may bring her forth."* And the 
elders of Israel preceded her on foot to the Mount of Olives. 
And a house for washing was there. And the priest who 
burned the lieifer was rendered unclean ])ecause of the 
Sadducees,'^ lest they should say, " it is needful for sunset to 
pass over him."'* 

8. The elders put their hands on the priest and said, 
" my Lord High Priest, wash once." He descended and 
washed, and he came up and wiped himself. And wood 
w^as set in order there, cedar, and ash, and cyi)ress, and 
figwood smoothed. And it was made like a tower, and 
windows were opened in it, and their dii-ection was westward. 

9. The red heifer was bound with a rope of bulrushes, 
and she was put on the place of preparation, with her head 
southward, and with her face westward. The priest stood 
in the east ^nth his face westwanl. He slaughtered the 
heifer with his right hand, and received (the blood) in his 
left hand. 11. Judah said, " he received it in his right hand, 
and put it into his left, and sprinkled it with his right hand." 
He dipped his hand, and sprinkled the blood seven times in 
front of the House of the Holy of Holies. For every 
sprinkling of blood he dipped his hand. When he finished 
sprinkluig the blood he wiped his hand on the l)ody of the 
heifer. He went down and kindled the fire with chips. 
Rabbi Akiba said, " with palm branches." 

10. She burst and moved from her place. He took 
cedar wood and hyssop, and scarlet (wool). He said to 
them, "is this cedar wood, is this cedar wood?" "is this 
hyssop, is this hyssop ?" " is this scarlet, is this scarlet ?" 
three times for each thing. And they said to him, " yes," 
" yes," three times for each thing." 

1 Numb. xiz. 8. red heifer. But the Saddncees main- 

* The Phaziaees aaaerted that a priest tained that he was not legally clean 

ini^ be defiled, and that after washing before nunset. Numb. xix. 9, 10. 

ke WM Iqpdly deaa for baming the ' Lev. xxiL 7. 

X 


306 


THE HEIPEB. 


N 


1 1. He wiupped thorn iii t!iu remaiuilur ' of the tongue 
of scarlet wool, and cust tliem iiit^i the midst of the burning. 
When the lire was burned down, the aslies were lieat*:n with 
sticks, and sifted with sieves. R. Ishmael said, " with 
stone hammers, and the work was finished with stone sieves." 
A black piece in which there are ashes must he pulverized, 
and that wiuch haa no ashea is left. Bones with or without 
aahea were pulverized. And they were divided into three 
parts. One part was put in the Chel, and one was put on 
the Mount of Olives, and one vraa divided for all the guards.* 
(i.e., the representatives of all Israel). 


CHAPTER IV. 

1. " The heifer which -was slaughtered witliout the proj»er 
intention, (the priest) caught the blood and sprinkled it 
without the proper intention, or with the proper iutention, 
and afterwanls without the proper inteution, or without the 
proper intention, and (afte]-wards) with the projter intention f" 
" She is disallowed." R. Eliezer "allowed her." "And if the 
priest did not wash his hands and his feet?" "She is dis- 
allowed." R. Eliezer " allowed her." " If she was not 
slaiightered by the Higli Priest ?" " Slie is Llisallowed." R. 
Judah " allowed her." " If any of his garments were wanting ?" 
" She is disallowed." And the rites were performed in white 
vestments. 

2. If the priest burned her out of her prepared place, or 
in two places, or burned two in one place 1" " She is lUs- 
allowed." " If he sprinkled her blood but not straight in 
front of the DOOR?" " She is disaUowed." "If he sprinkled 
her blood the sixtli time for the seventh, — he then turned 
and sprinkled the seventh ?" " She is diaallowed," " If the 
priest sprinkled the seventh time for the eighth — he then 
turned and sprinkled the eightli!" She is allowed." 

> Tho cedir, hyuop, anil aouiet vrod nnialaod too long wu mtpfi 
woo! ware luid pBnilloI to eadi CFtbor, round tho bumjle. 
uid whstcrsr pgTtioD of the scarU't ' Niuab. lii. 9, 


GARMENT.S. 307 

3. If the priest bnmed the red heifer without wood, or 
with every sort of wood, even with stubble and dung?"^ 
" She is allowed." " If he skinned and cut her ?" " She is 
wUowed." " K he slaughtered her on condition of eating 
from her flesh, and driukiug from her blood?" "She is 
allowed." Rubbi Eliezer said, " intention does uot disallow 
the heifer." 

4. All who are busied about the heifer from the begin- 
ning to the end reader their garments legally unclean. And 
any work gained from bur renders her disallowed. If any 
illegality happened during her slaughter, she does not render 
their garments unclean. If it haiipened during the sprink- 
ling of her blood, every one busied before her disallowauce 
renders his garments itnclcan. After her disallowance he 
does not render his garments unclean.. It follows that 
her ditficulty is his convenience. They who are busied 
at)out her are always liable for a trespass-offering. They 
may add wood to her during her burning, And her business 
ia done in the day and by a priest. Every work for gain 
with her causes her disallowance, until she be reduced to 
ashes. And work for gain causes disallowance in the water 
also, until the ashes be strewn upon it. 


^m CHAPTElt V. 

1. He who brings eartlien vessels for tlie ashes of the 
lieifer must wash them, and phice them in the fiiruacc over 
night Itabbi Judah said, " even if he bring them from his 
house they aie allowed. Since every one ia trusted about 
the htitfer. Bnt in the heave-offering he opens the furnace, 
and takes out the vessels." It. Simon said, " from the second' 
tow." R Jo3(!> said, " from the third raw." 

2. He who washes vessels for the ashes of the red heifer 
in water unsuitable for purlflcatiou, must dry them. If he 

■ Or thick puii of straw. or aome veuel mlglit have come In con- 

■ U the rcKsl* b»d been in Iha lint tftrt with Uiam, m u to rendar Ui«u 
•«v. Mine oM nUght hen touched Uum, uitoleui. 


308 


TOE HEIFER. 


wash them in water suitable for purification, it is not necea- 
sary to dry them. If be add tliereiu water for puriiicatioii, 
whether of one sort or the other sort of water, he rauat dry 
them. 

3. A pumpkin bottle which is washed in water imsuitable 
for purification, may be used for purification, till it becomes 
legally unclean. When it is micleau, they may no longer 
purify in it. K, Joshua said, " if one purify in it at first, 
one may purify in it to the last, if it cannot purify at last, 
it cannot purify at first." Whether it he clean or unclean, 
one must not add therein water for purification. 

4. " A hollow reed cut for the aslies of the red heifer ?" 
K. EUezer said, " it must he washed at once." K. Joshua 
said, "it must be rendered legally unclean, and afterwards 
washed." Every one is sidtable for puvii'ying excepting a 
deaf person, an idiot, and a child. K. Judah " allows a child, 
hut disallows a woman and a neut«r." 

5. Water may be prepared for piu-ification in every veasel, 
even in vessels of dung, in vessels of stone, and vessels of 
clay, and in a boat. Water must not be prepared for jiurifica- 
tioH in the aides of vessels, nor in the bottom of a vaae, nor 
in the coi'k of a barrel, nor in one's fists, since they are not 
used for filhng water, and they must not purify with them. 
And the water of the ashes of the heifer b not sprinkled 
without a vessel. Tliere is no safety from defilement in the 
covering ' hound excopt in proper vessels — there is no safety 
from the defilement of earthen vessels, except in proper vessels. 

6. An egg-shaped vessel of the potters is allowed for the 
purifying water. E. Josi5 " disallows it" " The egg (shell) of 
a hen?" R. Meier and R. Judah "allow it," but the Sages 
" disallow it" 

7. "A trough in a rock?" "They do not fill water with 
it, they do not purify in it, and they do not sprinkle from 
it, and it does not need the covering bound, and it does not 
disallow* the purifying pool." "If there were a vessel 
united (to it) with lime?" "They may fill water with it. 


HELECTIONS. TROUGHS. 309 

they may purify in it, and sprinkle from it, and it needs a 
covering boimd, and (if it becomes legally unclean) it dis- 
allows the purifying pool." " It had a hole in the bottom, 
and it was stuffed with a rag?" "The water in it is dis- 
allowed, because it is not (entirely) surrounded with the 
vessel." " If the hole were in the side, and it was stuffed 
with a rag ?" " Tlie water within it is allowed, because it is 
surrounded with the vessel." " If a rim of mud was made 
for it, and the water rose up to it ? " " It is disallowed." 
" If it was so strong that the vessel could be lifted by it ?" 
" It is allowed." 

8. " There are two troughs in one stone. One of them 
is legally purified. The water in the second is not purified. 
There are holes from one trough to the other like the i)ipe of 
a bottle, or water overflowed from above only as much as 
the peeling of a garlic, and the owner had purified one of 
them ? " " Tlie water in the second can also purify." 

9. " Two stones which are placed near to each other, 
and one made of them a (drinking) trough, and also two 
kneading-throughs, and also a drinking-trough, which was 
divided?" "The water, which is between them, does not 
purify." " If one connected them with lime or gypsum, 
and they can be lifted at once?" "The water, which is 
between them, can purify." 


CHAPTER VI. 

1. "Wlien one wishes to purify, and the ashes of puri- 
fication have fallen on his hand, or upon the side (of the 
vessel), and they afterwards fell on a drinking-trough?" 
" They are disallowed." " If water of purification fell from a 
pipe on the trough ? " " It is disallowed." " He took the water 
of purification out of the pipe, and covered the pipe or shut 
the door with it ?" "The ashes of purification are allowed, 
but the water is disallowed." " He laid it on the ground ? " 
"It is disallowed." "He laid it in Ids hand?" "It is 
allowed, because it is not otherwise possible," 


f 


310 THE HEIFBR. talwii. 

2. "If the ashes swam on the surface of the water?" 
R. Meier and Kabhi Simon said, " one may take them and 
purify ; " Imt the Sages say, " all ashes which have once 
touched water, cannot purify." " If one have sprinkled the 
water, and the ashes be found at the bottom ?" R. Meier 
and It. Simon said, " He may dry them and purify ; " but 
the aagea say, " all ashea which have (once) touched water, 
cannot purify." 

3. " If one prepare water for purification in a trough, 
and there be a jug in it ? " " Though its mouth be ever ao 
narrow, the water therein can purify." "If there be a 
sponge?" "The water in it is disallowed." "How is one 
to act ? " " He is to sprinkle till he come to the sponge. 
When he has touched the sponge, even if the water swim 
over it ever so little, it is disallowed." 

4. " One has put in his hand, or his foot, or leaves of 
vegetables, so that the water of puriiication has run over to 
another vessel?" " It is disallowed." If they were leaves 
of reeds, or leaves of nuts, they are allowed. This is the 
rule. The thing which contracts uncleanness is disallowed. 
And the thing which does not contract uncleanness is 
allowed. 

6. " If one divert a well into a vat-shaped pool, or into 
a marsh ?" " The water in them is disallowed for issues and 
leprosies, or to purify with it as with the water of tlic ashes 
of the heifer, since it is not filled in a vessel." 

CHAPTEK VII. 

1. "When five persons filled five bari'els with water of 
purification, t^ purify five persons requiring purification, 
aud they changed their mind for one purification, or they 
prepared for one purification, and they changed their mind 
for five ?" " They are all allowed." " One person who filled 
five barrels to purify five pereons requiring ptirification, and 
changed bis mind for one purification ? " " None is allowed 
but the last." " Or be made ready for one purification, and 
changed his mind for five purifications ? " " None is allowed 


SELECTIONS. ASHES. 311 

but the first purification." " If he said to one, * purify all 
those for thee ?'" " None is allowed but the first." " Purify 
aU those for me ? " " They are all allowed." 

2. " He who fills (water of purification) with one hand, 
and does work with the other hand, if he fiU for himself or 
for another person, or if he fill for both at once ?" " Both 
are disallowed, since work disallows in filling (water of 
purification) whether for himself or for another." 

3. " He who puts in ashes with one hand, and does work 
with the other hand?" "If it be for himself, it is dis- 
allowed ; but if it be for another person, it is allowed." " He 
who while doing work puts in ashes for himself and for 
another?" "His own is disallowed, and the other's is 
allowed." "He who puts in ashes for two persons at 
once ?" " Both are allowed." 

4. " Put in ashea for me ; and I will put in • ashes for 
thee ?" " The first case is allowed." " Fill water for me ; 
and I will fill water for thee ?" " The latter case is 
allowed." " Put in ashes for me, and I will fill water for 
thee?" "Both cases are allowed." "Fill water for me; 
and I will put in ashes for thee ?" " Both cases are dis- 
allowed." 

5. " A person filled water for his own use, and (also) for 
purification ?" " He fills first for hunself and binds it on 
the shoulder-pole ; and afterwards he fills that for purifica- 
tion." " And if he fill that for purification first, and after- 
wards fill for himself?" " It is disallowed." He must put 
his own water behind him, and the water for purification 
before him. " And if he put that for purification behind 
him ?" " It is disallowed." " Both are water for purifica- 
tion, he put one in front and one behind him ?" " It is 
allowed, because it is not otherwise possible" 

6. " If one carry a rope in his hand ?"^ " If he go in 
the (straight) way, it is allowed." " If he go out of his 
way ? " " It is disallowed." One went to Jabneh * during 

^ The principle laid down in this the rope for any work advantageona to 

mishna is that if one merely earned the himself it was disallowed, 
rope for drawing the water, it was al- ' The modem Yebna (Jamnia^. 
lowed to him to do bo. But if he used . 


312 


THE HEIFBR. 


three feasts, about this matter, aud in the third feast it was 
allowed to hini as a deciaiou for tlie time. 

I. "If one rolled the rope round his hand!" "It is 
allowed ; but if he rolled it after (drawing the water), it is 
disallowed." Said R. Joa^, " this act they allowed as a 
decision for the time." 

8. "If one put aside the barrel lest it be broken, or turned 
it on ita mouth for the purpose of drying it, intending to 
fill it with water ?" " It is allowed." " But if he did so lo 
carry iii it ashes ?" " It is disallowed." If one turned out 
potsherds from the troiigh, that it ndght contain more water, 
it is allowed ; but if they would be no hindrance to him in 
the time of sprinkling, it is disallowed. 

9. " One who had water on his shoulder, aud he taught 
a decision in the law, or he showed the way to others, or he 
killed a serpent or a scorpion, or he took food to put it 
aside?" "It is disallowed." "Tlie fooil was for eating ?" 
" It is allowed." " The serpent or scorpion hindered him i"" 
" It is allowed." Said Rabbi Judah, " this is the rule — au act 
for work, wliether a man stood or did not stand, is dis- 
allowed. And an act which is not for work, if he fitood, is 
disallowed ; but if he did not stand, it is alloweil." 

10. "'He who handed over his water of purification to 
an unclean (person)?" "It is disallowed." "But if he 
handed it to a legally clean person ?" " It is allowed." B. 
Eleanar said " even to a Qterson legally) unclean it is allowed, 
if its owner did no work." 

II. '■ IVo peiBons drew water for puriJication, and each 
helped the other, or each took a thorn from the other t" 
" For one purification it is allowed, ibr two puriJications, it 
is disallowed." B, Jos(5 said. " even for two purifications it 
is allowed, if it were made a condition between them," 

12. " He who has broken (something) during drawing 
water for purification with the view of preparing it after- 
wards ?" " The water is allowed." " But if he prepared it i" 
" The water is disallowed."' " He ate with the view of diying 


SELFXrriONS. 


SANDALS. 313 


the remainder of his food ?" " The water is allowed." " But 
if he dried it ?" " The water is disallowed." " He ate and 
left some, and he threw away what was left in his hand 
under a fig-tree, or into the place of drying, that it might 
not be lost ?" " The water is disallowed." 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. " Two persons watched a trough, containing water for 
purification, one of them becomes legally imclean ?" " It is 
allowed, because it was in the safe keeping of the second." 
" He became clean and the second unclean ?" " It is allowed, 
because it was in the safe keeping of the fii-st." " Both 
became unclean at once?" "It is disallowed." "One of 
them did work ?" " It is allowed, because it was in the 
safe keeping of the second." " He stood still, and the second 
did work ?" " It is allowed, because it was in the safe 
keeping of the first." " Both worked at once ?" " It is dis- 
allowed." 

2. If one put ashes in the water for purification, he must 
not put on his sandal, for if the water fall on the sandal, 
it becomes legally unclean, and renders him legally unclean. 
This is the proverb, " What makes thee unclean, cannot make 
me unclean, but thou canst make me unclean." " If water 
fall on his flesh?" "He is clean." "If it faU on his 
garment ?" " It becomes unclean, and renders him imclean." 
This is the proverb, " Wliat makes thee miclean, cannot make 
me unclean, but thou canst make me unclean." 

3. He who burned tlie red heifer, and the bullocks ;^ and 
he who sent forth the scapegoat, render garments unclean. 
The heifer, and the bidlocks, and the scapegoat which was 
sent forth, cannot of themselves render garments unclean. 
This is the proverb — " What makes thee unclean, cannot make 
me unclean, but thou canst make me unclean." 

4. If one eat from the carcase of a clean bird, as it is in 
his throat, it renders garments unclean. The ' carcase itself 
does not render garments unclean. This is the proverb, 

1 Lev. iv. 12, 21. 


( 


THE HEIFER. talmtd 

" What niakas thee unclean, cannot make me tmcloiiu, Init 
tliou CRHst make me unclean." 

5. Every ^ secondary uncleanneaa does not render vessel-; 
unclean, but fluid does bo. If fluid become unclean, it 
rendera veaaela unclean. This ia the proverb. " What niakea 
thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst 
make me unclean." 

6. Earthen vessels cannot render each other nnclean, 
but fluid does so. If fluid becomes unclean, it renders 
ve-ssels unclean. Thia ia the proverb, " What makes thee 
unclean, canuot make me unclean, but thou canst make me 
unclean." 

7. Everything' which disallows the heave-offering rendera 
the fluid unclean so as to bo a primary uncleauneas, for render- 
ing a person unclean, and disallowing him, except he was one 
wlio washed by day.* Tliis ia the proverb, " What makes 
thee unclean, cannot make me unclean, but thou canst 
make me uJiclean." 

8. AU seas are reckoned for a pool of purification hs is 
said, "And the gathering t<^ther of the waters called He 
seas "* The words of R Meier. R Judah said, " the gnaat 
sea is 03 a purifying pool, it is not said seas, but there ia in 
it many kinds of sens." R. Jos6 sotJ, " all seas may purify 
in flowing, but they are disallowed for issues, and leprusiea, 
and for purifying with them the water of the ashes of tlie 
red heifer." 

9. Waters with a nickname are disallowed. These are 
the nicknames — salt and lukewarm. Deceitful ° watera are 
disallowed. These are deceitful waters, — they failed once 
in seven years — they failed during war and during famine, 
yet they are allowed. E. Judah " disallows them." 

10. The waters of Kinuiou (Kiahon ?), and tlie waters of 
Pygah {Belua ?) are disallowed, because they are the waters 
of marshes. The waters of the Jordan and the waters of 

^ Primiry naclesoaeM wiMS from from contact with lecondary anclMD- 

toDching a [lend bod;, leproiij', etc neBB. 

Secondary unolsanneu uria« from * That it one orei whom cTeninglijul 

towhing Odo who hml prinisry andean- not yet uime. nor wai hb olTcriiig Jrt 

nesa. modi^. Lev. xiii. U, 7. 

' A lertiary uncleaunoia follows ♦ Uen, i. 10. ' laiiah Irlil. 11. 


WATER. 315 

Jarrouk' are disallowed, because they are mixed. And these 
are mixed waters, one allowed and one disallowed are mixed. 
Two which are allowed and mixed, are allowed. R. Judah 
•■ disallows them." 

11. "The well of Ahah* and the cave of Panias' are 
allowed. Water which changed, but changed of itself, is 
allowed. A well of water which came Irom a distance is 
allowed, only it must be watched, that no man check it 
R. Judah said, " it is taken for granted and alloweil." " A 
well into which earth or clay fell ? " " One must wait till 
it clear." Tlie words of R. Ishmael. It, Akiba said, " there 
13 no need of waiting," 


CHAPTER IX. 

1, " A pan full of the water of purification into wliich 
ordinary water, however little, has fallen ? " R. Eliesier said, 
" one mast sprinkle twice with it" But the Sages "disallow 
it," " li" dew fell into it ? " R Eliezer said, " let him leave 
it in the sun, and the dew evaporates," But the Sages 
" disallow it." " If fluid has fallen into it, or fruit juice ? " 
'■ Let him pour it out, and it is necessary to dry it" Ink, 
gum, and \Htriol, and everything which can be remarked, 
must be jioured out, and there is no necessity to dry it 

2, " If insects and worms have fallen in, and burst or 
changed their appearance ? " " The water is disallowed " A 
black beetle, though not burst nor changed, dwallows it, 
since it is like a pipe. Rabbi Simon and R. Eliezer the son 
of Jacob said, " the wheat worm and the grain worm are 
allowed, l>ecau8e there is no matter in them." 

3, " If a beast or animal drink of it ? " " They disallow 
it." All fowls disallow it, excepting the dove, because it 
sucks. All creeping animals do not disallow it, excepting 

' Th* Htct J«nnnk U the Hieromm Bsirfit This Bnpposilion ii, however, 

oTth* Oreeka. It bll< into the Jordan very donbtrul. 

■bout (our mil« beloir the Lake cf ■ The iDodflrn Btnlu, one at tlie 

"nbciriai, The Antbd now ciU it the nourccs of the JorclAo. It i* aitnated 

SimJat el Mandhftr. nnder Mount IlGnnon, clou to the re- 

' Till will of Allah U supposed by niuoa o[ the ancient CiLaarea Ptiilifipi. 
~~W to tw tha KKUce of a liier near 


316 


THE HEIPEK, 


the weasel, becaiise it laps. Rnbban Gamaliel said, " also the 
serpent because it apues." R. Eliezer said, " also the mousa" 

4. " If one tliiiik to drink the water of purification ? " 
R. Eliezer said, " it is disallowed." R Joshua said, " when he 
drew it (towards him)." R, Joaci said, " of what are they 
talking, of water in which there are no ashes." " But of 
water in which there are ashes ?" R, Eliezer said, " when he 
drew it (towards him)," R. Joshua said, " when he drinks." 
But if it be poured into his throat, it is allowed. 

5. Water of puritication which is disallowed, must not be 
kneaded in mortar, lest it bring misfortune to others. R. 
Judah said, " it ia worthless." " A cow which drank water of 
purification ?" " Her flesh is unclean for twenty-four hours."' 
R Judah said, " it becomes worthless in her intestines." 

6. The water of piuificatiou and the ashes of purification 
must not be passed over a river even in a boat, nor may they 
be floated on the surface of water. Nor may one stand on 
one side and throw them to the other side. But one may 
pass with them through water, which ia up to his neck. 
He who is cleansed for purification, may pass over water with 
empty vessels in his hand cleansed for purification, and with 
water in which there are no ashes. 

7. " Ashes which are allowed for purification, when they 
are mixed in ordinary ashes ?" "We must follow the majority' 
(in reference to uncleanness) and they do not purify with 
them." Rabbi Eleazar said, " they may puriiy with thejn alL" 

8. Water intended for purification which was disallowed, 
renders unclean (him who was) cleansed for the heave- 
offering ui his hands and body, but it does not render unclean 
him who was cleansed for purification, either in hia hands or 
in his body. " If it were rendered unclean ? " " It renders 
unclean (him who was) cleansed for the heave -offering in 
his hands and in his body, but (him who was) cleansed for 
purification it renders unclean, in his hands, but not in his 
body." 

' Lit trom time to time. •woali follow. But if the greater part 

* The meimllig is, that iT llie gieater be cjnlinary aabte, there would be no 
psrl of the luhes be l^iU, puriUcntiun purili cation. 


CELECTIOKS. 


PCIRIFICATION. 


317 


9. Aslies wliich are allowed when put on the aurfitce of 
water, which ia unsuitable for puriiication, render unclean 
Tiiin who was cleansed for the heave-offering in his hands 
and body, but it does not render unclean him who was 
cleansed for purification, either in his hantls or in his body. 

CHAPTER X. 

1. Everj-thing suited for causing legal uncleanness in 
that which is trodden must be expelled from the ceremony 
of purification, whether it l>e unclean or clean, and man 
likewise. " Everything suited for producing defilement of 
the dead, whether it be unclean or clean ?" R Eliezer said, 
* it is not expelled." R Joahua said, " it is expelled." But 
the Sat^ say, " if unclean it is expelled, but the clean thing 
k not expelled." 

2. He who is cleansed for purification, when he touches 
that which is expelled, is unclean. A jug for purification, 
when it touches that which is expelled, is unclean. He who 
is cleansed for purification, when he touches eatable or 
drinkable things with hi-s hand, is unclean. " But with his 
foot?" "He is clean." "The thing was moved with his 
band?" R Joshua pronoimces him "unclean;" but the 
&agea pronounce him " cle-an." 

3. "An earthen vessel for purification, which touched a 
creeping thing ?" " It is clean." " It was placed upon it ?" 
R Eleazar pronoimces it "clean;" but the Sages pronounce it 
"unclean." '• It touched eatable or drinkable things, or holy 
writings?" "It is clean." "It was placed upon them?" 
R Josi; pronounced it " clean ;" but the Sages pronounced it 
" unclean." 

4. " When he who was cleansed for purification touched 
B fireplace' with his hand?" "He b unclean." "But 
»ith his foot?" "He is clean." "He stood on the fuT3- 
place, and stretched his hand with the jug, and the water 
Und ashes in it beyond the fireplace, and also the shoulder 
pole, which he placed over the fireplace, and on it were two 


i 


318 THK HEIFKH. taimvd 

■earthen vessels, one on either side?" II. Akiba pronounces 
him " clean ; '" hut the Sages pronounce him " unclean." 

5. " He stood outside the fireplace, and stretched his hand 
to tlie window, and took the jiiy (with water and aahes) and 
paaaed it over the fireplace?" R. Akiba pronounces him 
" unclean," but the Sages pronounce him " clean." But he who 
was cleansed for purification, may stand over the fireplace, 
and in his hand an empty vessel cleansed for purification or 
(one) with water without ashes. 

6. " When a jug for purification touched (one) in which 
there were holy things, or one in which there was an heave- 
offering ?" " The one for purification is unclean ; but those 
of the holy things and the heave-ottering are clean." " If 
both be in his two bauds ?" " Both are unclean." " If both 
be in two papers?" "Both are clean." "If the one for 
purification be in paper, and the one for the heave-offering 
be in his hand?" " Kotli are »mclean." "If the one for 
the bcave-ofl'ering be in paper, and the one fur purification 
be in his hand?" "Both are clean." R Joshua said, 
" the one for the purification is unclean." " They were 
placed on the ground and one touched them V " ITie one 
for purification is unclean, the one containing the holy 
things, and the one with the heave- offering are clean." 
" He moved them ?" R. Joshua pronounces them " unclean," 
but the Sages pronounce them " clean." 

CHAPTER XL 

1. " A pan for purification which one left ojhjii, and he 
found it covered ?" " It is disallowed," " He left it opeji 
and found a covering on it ?" " If a weasel could drink of 
it, or a serpent, according to the words of Rabban Gamaliel, 
or there fell in it dew by night, it is disallowed," Water 
with ashes cannot be saved (from legal impurity) by the 
covering^ bound upon it. And water in which there are 
no ashes, is saved by the covering bound upon it, 

2. Every doubt implies cleanness in tlje heave-offerii^ 

1 Heb. U. 13, IJ. ' Nuinl^rs xix. 16. 


8ELK0TI0N8. HOLY THINGS. 319 

and cleanness in purification. Every reason for suspense in 
the heave-offering, causes pouring away of the water in 
purification. If acts requiring legal cleanness be afterwards 
performed, they are in suspense. Shallow water ^ is clean 
for holy things, and the heave-offering and purification. R. 
Eleazar said, " trickling water^ is unclean for purification." 

3. " A dried fig of the heave-offering which has fallen 
into water for purification, and one has taken it out and 
eaten it?" "If it be the size of an egg, whether it be 
unclean or clean, the water is unclean, and he who ate it is 
guilty of death." E. Josd said, " if it be clean the water is 
clean." He who was cleansed for the sin-offering, and 
afterwards put his head and the greater part of his body 
into water of purification, is unclean. 

4. Everyone charged by the words of the Law to enter 
water, renders unclean holy things, and the heave-offering and 
ordinary things and the tithe, and is prevented from entering 
the temple. " After entering (the water) he renders unclean 
holy things, and disallows the heave-offering." The words of 
R Meier, but the Sages say, "he disallows holy things 
and the heave-offering, but he is permitted in ordinary 
things and tithes, and if he came to the temple, whether 
before or after entering (water), he is a debtor (to the Law)." 

5. "Everyone charged by the words of the Scribes to 
enter water, renders unclean holy things, and disallows the 
heave-offering, but allows ordinary things and the tithes." 
The words of E. Meier, but the Sages "disallow him in 
tithes." After his entering (water) he is permitted in aU 
these. And if he came to the temple whether before or after 
entering water, he is free. 

6. Everyone charged to enter water, whether by the 
words of the Law or the words of the Scribes, renders unclean 
the water for purification and the ashes for purification, and 
the sprinkler of the water of purification, by touching or 
Ufting. "The hyssop, and the water without ashes, and 
empty vessels cleansed for purification (render unclean), by 

^ Maimonides translates ** Lattice-work." 
* Or trelliswork. 


320 THE HEIFER. 


TALMUD 


touching or lifting." The words of R. Meier, but the 
Sages say, " by touching but not by lifting." 

7. All hyssop which has a distinctive name is forbidden, 
simple hyssop is allowed ; Grecian hyssop, coloured hyssop, 
Roman hyssop, desert hyssop, are forbidden, and that of the 
unclean heave-offering is forbidden, but if it were of the 
clean (heave-offering) one should not sprinkle with it, but if 
one sprinkled with it, it is allowed. Men must not sprinkle 
with the sprouts or the hemes of hyssop. When sprinkled 
^vith the sprouts, they are not prevented from entering the 
temple. R Eliezer said, " not even with the berries." These 
are sprouts — stalks which have not ripened. 

8. Hyssop used for sprinkling is allowed to cleanse the 
leper. " If one gathered it for wood, and fluid fell on it ?" 
" He may dry it, and it is allowed." " If one gathered it for 
food, and fluid fell on it ?" " Even though he dried it, it is 
disallowed." "If one gathered it for purification ?" "It is 
reckoned as food." The words of R. Meier. R Judah, and 
R. Jos(5, and R. Simon say, " it is reckoned as wood." 

9. The order of the hyssop (requires) three roots, and in 
them three stalks. R Judah said, "to every root three 
stalks." Hyssop which has tliree roots is to be separated and 
bound, if separated and not bound, if bound and not 
separated, if neither separated nor bound, it is allowed. R 
Jos^ said, " the order of the hyssop is three roots and in 
them three stalks, and if there remain over from sprinkling 
two, and their fibres how^ever small, they are allowed." 

CHAPTER XII. 

1. Short hyssop is made sufficient for sprinkling with a 
thread and spindle, and it is dipped and lifted, and one holds 
the hyssop and sprinkles. R Judah and R Simon say, " as 
is the rule for sprinkling with the hyssop, so is the dipping 
with the hyssop " (^.c. in holding it). 

2. " If one sprinkled and there is a doubt if the water 
with ashes came from the thread, or a doubt if it came from 
the spindle, or a doubt if it came from the stalk?" "His 


SELECTIONS. INTENTION. 321 

sprinkling is disallowed." " If he sprinkled on two vessels, 
there is a doubt ; if he sprinkled on both, there is a doubt 
that the sprinkling splashed from one to the other ?" " His 
sprinkling is disallowed." " A needle is placed on a potsherd, 
and he sprinkled it, there is a doubt if he sprinkled on the 
needle, there is a doubt if the sprinkling splashed from the 
potsherd upon it ?" " His sprinkling is disallowed." " A pan 
for purification with a narrow mouth ?" " He is to dip the 
hyssop in and lift it out as usual" R Judah says, " the 
first sprinkling (is allowed)." "The water of purification 
which became diminished ?" " One may dip in even the tops 
of the staiks and sprinkle, except that he should not dry up 
the vessel" " His intention ^ was to sprinkle before him, 
and he sprinkled behind him, to sprinkle behind him, and 
he sprinkled before him ?" " His sprinkling is disallowed." 
"Before him and he sprinkled sidewise in front?" "His 
sprinkling is allowed." He may sprinkle a man whether 
he be aware of it or not. He may sprinkle a man, or vessels, 
even should they be an hundred. 

3. "His intention was to sprinkle on anything which 
can receive defilement, and he sprinkled on a thing which 
cannot receive defilement ?" " If there remain (water) in the 
hyssop he must not repeat it." " His intention was to sprinkle 
on something which does not receive defilement, and he 
sprinkled on something which does receive defilement?" " If 
there remain (water) in the hyssop, he may repeat it." " If 
upon man, and he sprinkled on a beast ?" " If there remain 
(water) in the hyssop, he must not repeat it." " Upon beast 
and he sprinkled on man?" "If there be (wat^r) in the 
hyssop he may repeat it." Water which has di'opped from 
the hyssop is allowed, because it renders everything unclean 
hke the water of purification.^ 

* This doctrine of Intention has also Sacrament of Orders, any bishop in any 
been adopted into the system of Roman- age failed in due intention, all the 
ism. The Council of Trent (Session Orders which flowed from him are in- 
▼ii., Canon xi.) teaches, that "Who- valid. So that, at the present day, all 
eyer shall afiBrm that when ministers Romish ecclesiastics, from the Pope in 
perform and confer a sacrament, it is the Vatican down to the lowest priest, 
not necessary that they should have at are probably laymen. And the history 
least the intention to do what the of the Papacy rather confirms this con- 
Church does ; let him be accursed." It elusion, 
follows, that if, for example, in the ' Chap. ix. 9 ; viiL 5. 


322 THE HEIFER. tmmvt> 

4. He who sprinkled from a public window and entered 
the Banctiiary, and the water was afterwards found (to be) 
disallowed, is free. He who sprinkled from a private 
window and entered the sanctnary, and the water was 
afterwards found (to lie) disallowed, is a debtor. But the 
high priest, whether he sprinkled fi'om a private, or from a 
public window, is free, since no high priest is indebted (for 
an offering) on his entering the sanctuary. Persona were 
slipping in water of purification before a public window, 
and treading in it and were not hindered, because the (Sages) 
say, "the water of purification, which has done its duty. 


5. A clean man who took the axe of one legally unclean 
by the handle,^ and sprinkled it, even though there he so 
much water upon it as is sufficient for sprinkling, is clean. 
" How nuicli water is sufficient for sprinkling ?" " Sufficient 
that the tops of the stalks of hyssop he dipped and sprinkle." 
R Judali said, " we regard them as though the hyssop were 
copper." 

6. " He who sprinkled with unclean Iiysaop ?" " If it be 
the size of an egg, the water is disallowed, and the sprinkling 
is disallowed." "If it be not the size of an egg?" "The 
water is allowed, but the sprinkling is disallowed, aad he 
who is sprinkled renders his companion unclean, and he 
again his companion, even though there be an hundred," 

7. He who was cleansed for purification, if his hands 
became unclean, his body is unclean, and he renders his 
companion unclean, and he again his companion, even thougli 
there be an hundi'ed. 

8. A jug for purification, which became unclean on the 
outside, becomes unclean inside, and renders unclean the 
one next to it, and it again the next one, even though 
they be an hundred. Tlie beU and its clapper are reckoned 
as one. The spindle for bulrushes is not to tje sprinkled 
either on the spindle or on the ring. But if it be sprinkled, 
it is sprinkled. If it be a spindle for flax, its parts are all 
reckoned as one. The skin which covers a couch which is 
joined to rings, is reckoned as one with it. The canopy is 

' Another rendering i« " in hia gBrment " 


8ELKCTI0N8. SPRINKLING. 323 

neither reckoned for nncleanness or cleanness. All handles 
of vessels which enter them are reckoned as one with them. 
Rabbi Jochanan, the son of Nuri, said, " even if they be only 
attached." 

9. The panniers of an ass, and the staff of the threshing 
waggon, and the pole of a bier, and the horn vessels of 
travellers, and a chain for keys, and the stitch-hooks of 
washers, and a garment sewed with a mixture of wool and 
linen, are reckoned as one for imcleanncss, but not reckoned 
as one for sprinkling. 

10. " The cover of a kettle which is bound by a chain ?" 
The school of Shamai say, "it is reckoned as one for 
nncleanness, but not reckoned as one for sprinkling." The 
school of Hillel say, " he sprinkled the kettle, he sprinkled 
the cover ; he sprinkled the cover, he did not sprinkle the 
kettle." AU are permitted to sprinkle, except a neuter and 
a woman, and a child without understanding. A woman 
may help a man when he sprinkles, and she may hold for him 
the water. And he dips the hyssop and sprinkles. If she 
take hold of his hand even in the moment of sprinkling, 
it is disallowed. 

11. "One dipped the hyssop by day, and sprinkled by 
day ?" " It is allowed." " He dipped the hyssop by day, 
and sprinkled by night, by night, and sprinkled by day?" 
" It is disallowed." " By day, and sprinkled on the day 
following ?" " It is disallowed." But he liimself washed by 
night, and sprinkled by day, since we do not sprinkle till 
the sun rise ; and everj'thing done in sprinkling when the 
pillar of the mom ascends, is allowed. 


TllEATISE XVII. 

Pouring Water— VeBstla — Walpr— Wlm may jioiir— How it is to be poumJ- 
Uindraaces to Cleaimesg— Donliting — Primarf UdcIouiiifss — SecoadM 
UncleannesB — Derived Unclean neas — Rabbaii Simeoo, Son of GstnBliel- 
Strn.]"a of Pliylaoteries — Rolls of the Law— Holy Scriptursa— <'«iiticl*B u 
Ecclesiaatea — Foot-baths — Ammoaand Moah — Dtsctuaion between 
Eleazar, lahmael, and Turjihon — Weeping of R. Elearar — An Am 
Proselyte— Chaldee Writing— Asayriaa Writing— The Sadducen 
Books of Homer— The Pbaiisees— Writing the Name. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. A QuAETER log' of water is poured on the hands trf 
one peraon ; also on the hands of two persons. Half a log 
on three or four. From a log for five, ten, or even ona 
hundred (persona.) E. Jos^ says, " pro\-ideti there l>e not 
less for the last than a quarter log." Men may add (water) 
for the second washing,^ tut they must not add it for the 
first. 

2. They may put water for hands in all vessels, even in 
vessels of dung, or vessels of stone, or vessels of e&rtli. Bat 
they must not pour it on hands out of the (broken) sides ti 
vessels, or the bottom of a tub, or the bung of a caalk 
Nor may one give it to his neighbour out of the hoUfiV 
of his hand: because they must not draw or consecrate, * 
sprinkle the water of purification, or put it on hands, eic^ 
it be iu a vessel. They can only presen'e vessels by til 
covering bound ^ upon tlieni. Nor can they preserve from 

> A tog la about half a pint eating cotuea*t«d food Oulj iBiill ^ 

' Before eating ordinary food the waaLed Iwiee. 
b4Dd* must be woahed once. Before " Num. lix. 15. 


attXCTtom. WASHING. 325 

uncleannesa water in open earthen vessels,' only in (covered) 
vessels. 

3. Water which is unfit for animals to drink, is unfit 
(tor washing) in vessels ; but on the ground it is fit. If 
ink, gum, or vitriol black drop into it, and its colour be 
changed, it is unfit. If one made use of it, or soaked his 
bread in it, it is unfit. Simeon the Temanite said, " even 
if he intended to soak it in one vessel and it dropped into 
another, it is fit" 

4. If one rinsed vessels in it, or rinsed out measures, it 
is unfit. If one rinsed in it vessels already washed, or new 
ones, it is fit. E. Jose " disallows it for new vessels." 

5. Water in which the baker has dipped rolls, is unfit ; 
but if he only dipped in his hands, it is fit. All are allowed 
tn pour water on hands, even one deaf, an idiot, or a minor, 
A man may rest a cask between his kne^s and pour it He 
may incline the barrel on its side and pour it An ape may 
pour water on hands. R Josi^ " disallows these two cases." 

CHAPTEE II. 

1. " If one poured on his hand one gush ?" " His hand 
is clean." "If on both bands one gnah?" R Meir pro- 
nounces them "unclean, until one poured out of a quarter 
1(^ (vessel) upon them." "If an heave-loaf fall (on the 
water) ?" "It is clean." R Jose "pronounces it unclean." 

2. " If one poured out his first (ablution) in one plac€, 
and his second in another place, and a heave-loaf fall on 
the first ?" " It is unclean." " If on the second ?" " It is 
clean," "If one poured out both the first and second 
(ablutions) into one place, and a heave-loaf full on them V 
"It ia unclean." " If one poured out bis firet ablution, and 
find on his hand a splinter or small stone ?" " His hands are 
unclean, as the second water only purifies the first washing 
on tliB hand."* R Simon, the son of Gamaliel, says, " whal> 
aoever is a creation of the water is clean." 


if a dead the place carared b; thi iplinUr or 
stoue, which remained uowMhtd b; the 
t purify Bnt water. 


HAUDB. 

3. The hands become legally unclean, or legally clean up W 
the wrist. " How ? " " If one poured the first (ablution) np to 
the wrist, and the second above the wrist, and the water ran 
back into the Land ? " " It is clean." '" If one poured the 
first and second (ablutions) above the wrist, and the water 
ran back into the hand ? " " It is unclean." " If one poured 
the first (ablution) over one hand, and afterwards the second 
over both hands 1 " " They are unclean," " If one poured 
the first (ablution) over both hands, and afterwards the 
second over one hand ? " " His hand is clean." " If one 
poured water on one hand and then rubbed it against ita 
fellow ? " " It is unclean," " If he rubbed it against him 
head, or against the wall ? " " It is clean," Men may pour 
water over four or five persons alongside of each other, at 
above each other, provided they be separated, so that tiul 
water can come on them. 

4. " There is a doubt if the water hna been used ; thei 
is a doubt if it has not been used ; there is a doubt if it be 
the prescribed quantity, there is a doubt if it be not the pra- 
scribed quantity : there is a doubt if it be (legally) unclean, 
there is a doubt if it be (li^ally) clean ? " " In doubting he 
is clean," because the Sages said, " if there be a doubt of 
his hands being unclean, or imparting uncleanness, or being' 
clean, he is clean." B. Jose aaid, " if there be a doubt <rf 
cleanness it is uncleanness." " How ? " " His hands an 
clean, and before him are two unclean loaves, it is doubtful 
if he touched them, it is doubtful it he did not touch them: 
his hands are unclean, and before him are two clean loavra, 
it is doubtfid if he touched them, it is doubtful if he did 
not touch them ? " "His hands are one unclean and one clean." 
"And before him are two clean loaves : he touched one 4 
them, it is doubtful if he touched the unclean, it is doubt-fi 
if he touched the clean ? " " His hands are clean." " A* 
before hiui are two loaves, one unclian and one clenn, '*' 
touched one of them, it is doubtful if he touched the uncle** 
it is doubtful if he touched the clean ? " " His hands are oot 
unclean and one clean." "And before bim are two loavt^ 
one unclean and one clean, he touched both of them, it w 


CLEAN OK UMUl.KAJJ. 327 

doubtful if it were the unclean (loaf) with the unclean (hand), 
nr the clean (loaf) with the cleBii (hand), or the clean loaf 
with the iineleau (hand), or the unclean loaf with the clean 
hand ? " " The hands remain as they were, and the loaves as 
they were.*" 

PCHAITER III. 
1. "Wliosoever puts bis hands into a house smitten with 
leprosy ?" " His hands are unclean in a primary degree."* 
The words of E. Akibah. But the Sages say, " his hands 
are unclean in a secondary degree,"' "Whatever renders 
garments unclean at the time of contact, renders hands 
unclean in a primary degree." The words of R. Akihah. 
But the Sf^ies say, " in a secondary degree." They said to 
R Akihah, " where do we find the hands (unclean) in a 
primary degree ?" "Everywhere," he said to them; "and 
how is it possible for them to be unclean in a primary degree, 
unless his body is unclean, excepting this."* " Victuals, and 
vessels which are unclean through liquids render hands un- 
clean in a secondary degree." The words of R. -Joshua. But 
the Sages say, " that which is unclean through a source of 
ancleanne3s,° rejiders the hands unclean ; but derived un- 
cleanness* does not render the bands unclean." Kabban 
Simeon, the sou of Gamaliel, said, " it happened that a woman 
came before my father. She said to him, ' my Jiands entered 
into the hollow of an earthen vessel.' He said to her ' my 
daughter, from what was its uncleanness ?' But I did not 
hear what she said to him." Tlie Sages said, " the thing is 
clear, that which is unclean through a source of tmcleanness 
renders the hands unclean ; but derived uncleanness does not 
temier the hands uncleim." 

2. "Whatever disallows the heave-offering, renders the 

' ThoM that were legally clean con- ' i.«. The putting hit hands into a 

tinoe dean, ami those ie^ij andean house infectnl with lepniey. 

continue "id™. » Lit. " father of undeannesa," anch 

* Hi« hanii» render nnelean what _ .. _„,,. r^ 

lh«r lonch. " ■ """^ °' ^"^ "f'"*^ '^ 

' Hi* handi rendBT aacred things * i.f. Unoleannoas not cantaining the 
prinnplo of ancleanncaa. 


328 HANDS. TALMun 

bands unclean in a secondary degree. One hand can render 
the other hand unclean." Tlie words of R Joshua. But 
the Sages say, "a secondary cannot make a secondary,"' 
He said to them, " and are not Holy Scriptures secondaries, 
and they render the hands unclean." They said to him. 
" we cannot judge the words of the Law from the words of 
the scribes, nor the words ol" the scribes from the words of 
the Law, nor the words of the scribes from other words of the 


3. Straps of phylaeteries with the phylacteries, render 
the hands unclean. E. Simeon says, " the straps of phylac- 
teries do not render the bands unclean," 

4. The margin in a book of the Law, at tlie top and 
bottom, at the beginning and end, renders the hands unclean, 
R Josi5 says, " in the end it does not render the hands un- 
clean, until the roller be attached." 

5. A book of the Law which is erased, but in which there 
i«main eighty-five letters lite the portion, " And it came to 
pa.'is when the Ark set forward,"^ renders the hands imclean. 
Any roll in which there are written eighty-five letters like 
the portion, " And it cam*- to pass when the Ark set for- 
ward," renders the hands unclean. All sacred Scriptures 
render the hands unclean. The Canticles and Ecclesiastee 
render the hands unclean. K. Judah says, " Canticles render 
the hands unclean, but Ecclesiastes is in dispute." R Joa^ 
says, " Ecclesiastes does not render the hands unclean, but 
the Canticles are in dispute." 11. Simeon says, " Ecclesiastes 
is one in which the school of Shanunai is less strict, and the 
school of Hillel more rigid." R. Simeon, the son of Azai, said, 
" I received by tradition from the mouths of the seventy-two 
elders, on the day they inducted R Eleazar, the son of 
Azariah, into the presidents' seat, that Canticles and Ecclesi- 
astes render the bands unclean." R Akivah said, " God 
forbid ! no man in Israel ever questioned that the Canticles 
render the hands unclean, as the whole world is not equal to 

' An olyectnndean in thB secondary * Nnmli. i. 36, 86. The nbbis 
degrco cannot mske anotliei ondeui in count these versea a diitisct book of 
the aame degree. the liw. 


SELECTIONS. 


AMMON AND MOAB. 329 


the day on which the Canticles were given to Israel ; for all 
the Scriptures are holy, but the Canticles are Holy of Holies. 
They only disputed in reference to Ecclcsiast^." E. Jochanan, 
the son of Joshua, the son of R. Akibah's father-in-law, said, 
" according to the words of the son of Azai, thus they dis- 
puted, and thus they decided." 

CHAPTEE IV. 

1. On that day^ they voted and decided, "that a foot- 
bath containing from two logs to nine cabs,^ which was 
split,^ may become imclean from pressure."* although R 
Akibah says, " that a foot-bath is as its name."* 

2. On that day they said, *' that all sacrifices offered with- 
out due intention are allowed, but they do not absolve the 
owners from their obligation, except the passover-ofifering, 
and the sin-offering — ^the passover-offering in its time, and 
the sin-offering at all times." E. Eleazar says, "also the 
trespass-offering, the passover-ofifering in its time, and the 
sin or trespass-ofifering at all times." R Simeon, the son of 
Azai, said, " I received it by tradition from the mouth of the 
seventy-two elders, on the day they inducted R Eleazar the 
son of Azai into the president's seat, that aU sacrifices 
offered without due intention, are allowed, but they do not 
absolve the owTiers from their obligation, except the passover- 
offering, and the sin-offering." The son of Azai only added 
the bumt-ofifering, but the Sages did not agree with him. 

3. On that day they said, " how is it with Ammon and 
Moab ® in the Sabbatical year ?" R Tarj^hon decided " they 
must pay tithes for the poor:"^ but E. Eleazar, son of 
Azariah, decided "second tithes."® R Ishmael then said, 
" Eleazar, son of Azariah, it behoves thee to prove it, for thou 

^ When R. Eleazar, the son of and as such cannot become unclean 
Azariah, was made x>resident of the from pressure. 

school in Jamnia. 6 i^^ with Israelites dwelling there. 

• A cab is about three pints. - _.., , .. u v * 

' And could not contain water enough ' ^ithe for the poor could be eaten 

to wash one foot anywhere. 
^ Of an unclean person. ^ Second tithes could only be eaten 

' U continues as long as its name, in Jerusalem, Dcut ziv. 22, 23. 


330 


addest to the burden {of the Law) ; and whoever adda to the 
burden (of the Law) it behoves him to prove it." R Eleazar, 
aon of Azariah, said to him, " Ishmiiel, my brother. I have 
not fbangerl from the order of the years,' hut ray brother 
TiirphoD has chauged, therefore it behoves him to prove it," 
IJ. Taiphon replied, " Egypt is out of the land, and Ammon 
and Moah are out of the land : as Egypt pays tithes for the 
poor hi the Sabbatical year, so Amnion and Moab pay tithes 
for tlie poor in the Sabbatical year." R Eleazar, son of 
Azariah, replied, " Babylon is out of the land, and Ainmoii 
and Moab are out of the land ; even as Babylon pays second 
tithes in the Sabbatical year, so Ammon and Moab pay 
second tithes in the Sabbatical year." E. Tarphon replied. 
" I^'pt being near, is subject to tithes for the poor, in order 
that the poor in Israel may be supported in the Sabbatical 
year ; so Ammon and Moab, which are near, must also be 
subject to tithes for the poor, in order that the poor in Israel 
may be supported in the Sabbatical year," E. Eleazar, the 
son of Azariah, repUed, " thou seekest to increase money, but 
thou oidy loseat souls ; wouldest thou be the cause tliat 
heaven should neither send down dew nor rain, as is said, 
' Will a man rob God ?' Yet ye have robbed me. But ye 
say, Wherein have we robbed thee ? In tithes and offerings."* 
E. Joshua said, " behold I will answer for my brother 
Tarphon, but not according to the sense ol' his words — 
" ^SyP^ ''^ ^ ^^^ arrangement, Babylon is an old arrange- 
ment ; the judgment before us is a new arrangement. Let 
the new arrangement be judged from the new arrangement, 
but let not a new arrangement be judged from an old 
arrangement. E^OT'- ^ ^" arrangement by tlie elders (of 
the Saiihedriu), but Babylon is an arrangement by the 
prophets — the judgment before us is an arrangement by the 
elders. Let therefore the arrangement by the elders be 
judged from an arrangement by the elders ; but let not an 

' Tho Butth year was Siod for the ' MalBchJ iii, 8. It a ussumed that 

tithe to the poor, «>iiiiequenU)' in the prophet means tlie conawraled 

countrira onlaide the land of lerael. necond tithe, nnd not the unoousBcrated 

and not auhject to the Sabbatical rent, tithe for the poor. 
InvelitM ahonid pay the BeooDd tl" 


WRITINCS. 331 

arraDgement by the elders be judged fmm an arrangement 
by prophets." They voted and decided "that Ammon and Moab 
must pay tithes for the poor in the Sabbatical year." When 
R, Jose, son of Dormiskith, came to R Eleazar at Lydda, he 
said to him, "what had you new in the college to-day?" 
He answered, "they voted and decided that Ammon and Moab 
must pay tithes in the Sabbatical year." R. Eleazar wept 
and said, ""The secret of the LORD is with them that fear 
him ; and He will show theni Hjr covenant,'^ Go and tell 
them, be not anxious about your vote, for I received it by 
tradition from Rabbaii Johanon, the son of Zachai, who heard 
it from his teacher, up to the decision of Moses from Sinai, 
that Ammon and Moab must pay tithes to the poor, in the 
Sabbatical year." 

3. On that day came Judah, an Ammonitish proselyte, 
and stood before them in the college. He said to them, 
" how am I to come into the congregation V Babhan 
Gamaliel said to him, " thou art forbidden." R. Joshua 
said to him, " thou art aUowed." Rabbaii Gamaliel said, 
" the Scripture says, ' An Ammonite, or Moabite shall not 
enter into the congregation of the LORD ; even to their 
tenth generation etc,'"' To him said R Joshua, " are then 
the Ammonites or Moabites still in their own land ? 
Sennacherib, King of Assyria, aforetime came up, and 
commingled the nations, as is said, " And I have removed 
the Ixmndfl of the people, and have robbed their treasuree, 
and I have put down the inbabitants like a valiant (man)."* 
Rabban Gamaliel said to him, " the Scripture says, ' And 
afterwards I will bring again the captivity of the children 
of Ammon ;'* and they are already returned." To him said 
R Joshua, ■• the Scripture says, ' And I will bring again the 
captivity of my people of Israel,* and Judah.' But they 
are not yet returned." And they allowed liini to come into 
the congregation. 

4. "Tlie Cbaldee passages in Ezra and Daniel render the 
hands miclean. Chaldeo witten in Hebrew, and Hebrew 


HANDS. 


\vritten in Chaldee, or in Hebrew ' do not render the hands 
unclean. In no case do they cause uncleanness, unless the 
writmg be Assyrian, on parchment with ink. 

5. The Sadduceea said, " we blame you Pharisees, because 
you say sacred Scriptures render the hands uncle-an, but the 
books Hameram ^ do not render the hands unclean." 
Eabban Jochanau, the son of Zachai, said, " and have we 
nothing else against the Pharisees but this ? Behold they 
say, ' that the bones of an aas are clean, but the bones of 
Jochanan the high priest are unclean.'" They said to him, 
" according to their value is theii" uncleanness, so that no 
one may make the hones of his father and mother into 
spoons." He said to them. " so (are) the sacred Scriptures : 
according to their value is their uncleanness. The books 
Hameram, which are not valued, do not render the banda 
unclean." 

6. The Sadduceea said, "we blame you Pharisees, that 
you declare the stream flowing (from a clean into an unclean 
vessel) to be clean." The Pharisees said, "we blame you 
Sadduceea, that you declare a stream of water flowing from 
a gra^-eyard to be clean." The Sadducees said, "' we blame 
you Pharisees, because you say, if my ox or my ass cause 
damage, we are responsible ; but if my slave or my bond- 
woman cause damage, we are free. What ! if I be respon- 
sible for my ox and my ass, for which I have no obligation, 
I am bound for my slave or bondwoman for whom I have 
obligation. It is just that I should be bomid for their 
dami^es." They said to them " no ! il' you speak of my ox 
and my aas which have no knowledge, as you speak of my 
slave and bondwoman who have knowledge : then, if I ofTend 
them, they may go and set fire to the stacks of com of 
another, and I should be hound to pay." 

7. A Galilean Sadducee said, " I blame you I'harisees, 


' The sncient Hebrew lettara sre-now Iheratore err^ in odling tbe old nutioiud 


ciLltDd Samaritan. Thoy t 
for writing by the small commnnity of 
SamsritanB who dwell in Nabliis, in tha 
Holy Land. The Jews now u>e the 
Chaldee charactere ; and tbe Talmud 


letters A^yrian. 

' Soma eapposo tlie writings of 
Homer are meant ; others think that 
these were books agaiiut revaalcd rail- 


SELECTIONS. THE NAME. 333 

because you write the name of the reigning sovereign in the 
letter of divorce with Moses." The Pharisees said, " we 
blame you Galilean Sadducee, that you write the sovereign 
on the same page with the NAME, and not only so, but you 
write the sovereign above, and the name below, as is said, 
" And Pharaoh said, who is the Lord, that I should obey his 
voice to let Israel go."^ But when he was punished, what 
did he say ? " The LOED is righteous." ^ 

' Ex. T. 2. The name of Pharoah • Ex. ix. 27. This is merely addeil 

cannot be considered an insult to Moses, to avoid ending with Pharoah 's blas- 
since it precedes the name of God. phemy. 


TREATISE ON THE TABERTfArLE. 


FROM THE BERETTHA. 


Treatise XVIII. 


E\it STafetmaclf. 

HeBve-OflEringa— Dioiensiona of the TahamacJ? — BonrtU^Biirs — Bingi of 
Gold— O^rlaying with Oo!J — Pipta of Gold — CortainB— Thraid*— 
Coupling — Taohes — Sockets — Vail— Holy of Holies — Holy Place — Safml 
VeaaeU — Cunning Work — Conrt — Bars — Pins — ^HangingB— The Ark — 
The Tables of tlia Uw hoth Whole and Broken— The StaTe*— Th* T»hle 
ot ahew-liread- The CandleBtick- Indefinite Expteaiona— The AlUr of 
IneenBB- The AJtnr of BunH-OfTerings— The line for the Sprinkljni- of 
Blood— The Laver — Gunrda- En cam pment— StoDdarda—Pre pactions— 
Blowing the Tnimpet--The Maroh — Signs for Encumping— Tht Pillar of 
Cload— The Shechinah. 

CHAPTER I. 

Rabbi Judah the Holy, aaid, there were ten heave-offer- 
ings, the heave-offering of the Lord, and the heave-offering 
of the tithes, of the dough, and of the first-fniits ; and the 
heave-offering of the Nazarite, and the heave-offering of 
thanksgiving, and the heave-offeriiig of the land, and the 
heave-offeriug of Israelites dwelling in Midian, and the 
heave-offering of the shekels, and the heave-offering of the 
tabernacle. The heave-offering of the Lord, and Uie bea\-e- 
offering of the tithes, and of the dough, and of the firet-fnuts, 
and the heave-offering of the Nazarite, and the heave-offering 
of thanksgiving, were for the priests. The heave-offering of 
the land was for the priesta, the levites, and the Nethinim.' 
and the Sanctuary and Jerusalem. Tlie heave-offering of 
Midian was for Eleazar the priest, the heave-offering of 
shekels was for the sockets of the tabernacle, the heave- 

' The Nethinim or the " given onea" from the copliirity in Babylon. Tbcy 

were added, it ia Buppoaed, from amongst were lielt! in low eatimitioo, and wart 

the Gilieanltea to HII up the deRciendei fnrbidilen to intermany with ImelitM. 
in the namher of Lerilea who returned 


rntlOTIDNB. 


DIMENSIONS. 


335 


offering of the tabernacle furnished the material of the 

tabernacle, and the oil for lighting, and the sweet incense, 

and the fpirmenta of the priests, and the garments of the 

Iiigh priest. The length of the tabernacle was thirty cubits, 

and its breadth was ten cubits, and its height was ten cubite. 

Rabbi Joai said, " ita length was thirty-one cubits." " How 

waa the tabernacle set up ?" " Forty sockets of silver were 

placed on the north, and forty sockets of silver on the south, 

and sixteen on the west, and four on the east. These are 

one hundred sockets. As is said,' ' An hundred sockets of 

the hundred talents, a tjilent for a socket.' " " How were the 

jh iMards set ui> ?" " Twenty boanls were placed on the north, 

ind twenty lioards on the south, and eight on the west. On 

ftthe east there was no board, but there were four pillars of 

fcahittiin-wood. Upon them the vail was hung. As is said,* 

mt thou shalt make a vail,' etc., ' and thou shalt hang it upon 

rfour pillars of shittim-wood, overlaid with gold,' etc., and 

' thou shalt bang up the vail under the taches.'" And the 

sockets were made with holes, and these were cut out in the 

boards below, a quarter from one side and a quarter from 

I tiie other side, and there was cut out half of it in the middle, 

■and it made two pins like two supports, and tliey entered 

*into two sockets, as is said, " two sockets under one hoard 

for its two tenons.* The pins extended from the boards two 

and two, to every one which was inserted, the positive into 

the negative, as it is said,' " Set in order one against the other." 

The words of KabhJ Nehemiah. when Itabbi Nehemiah said. 

"there is no meaning in saying, 'set in order.'" "And 

what is meant by set in order?" "It is meant that there 

should be made for them rungs like an Egyptian ladder." 

There was cut out from the board above a finger breadth 

from one side, and a finger breadth from the other side, and 

they were put into the golden ring, that they should not 

e one from the other, as is said, " And they shall be 

wapled together beneath, and they shall Ije coupled together 

wve the head of it unto one ring.""^ There is no meaning 


336 


THE TABERNACLE. 


in saying, " unto one ring," and what is meant by saying, 
"unto one ring?" "The place where the bar was put 
in, and every board had in it two rings of gold, one 
above, ajid one below ; in tbem were put in the bars." And 
there were two upper bars, and two lower (bars) on the 
south side ; the length of each of them was fifteen cubits. It 
follows that two were in length thirty cubits against twenty 
boards, and the middle (bar) was in length thirty cubits 
i^inst twenty boards, which was inserted in the middle of 
the boards from east to west, as is said, " And the middle 
Ijar in the midst of the boarils shall reach from end to end.'" 
As the boards were made in the south, so the boards were 
made in the north, but in tlie west they were not so ; but the 
length of the upper bar and the lower one was six cubits 
against four boards, and the middle (bar), twelve cubits 
against eight boards. And the boards, and the bars, and 
the pillars, and the sockets, the place of the thickness of the 
boards were overlaid with gold, as is said, " And the boards 
thou shalt overlay with gold."^ " The places for the bars." 
there is no meaning in saying, "places for the bars;" and 
what is the meaning of saying, "places for the bars?" 
" The place where the bar entered the boards," " And the 
bars themselves shall be overlaid with gold.'" " How was it 
done?" "Two pipes of gold were introduced — the length 
of each of them was a cubit and a half ; and they were put 
into the hole of the board, the place where the bars were 
put in." 

CHAPTER II. 

" How was the tabernacle covered ?" " There were pro- 
vided ten curtains of blue, of purple, and scarlet, and fine- 
twined linen." As is said, " Moreover thou shalt make the 
tabernacle (with) ten curtains of fine-twined linen, and blue. 
and purple, and scarlet"* " Their threads were doubled 
thirty-two times." The words of Rabbi Nehemiah, vhen R. 
Neheniiah said, " thread," *.c., one doubled in two, " twined." 
' Eiod. uvi, 23. * izvi. 29. ' uvi. 29, • un. 1. 


SELECTIONS. CURTAINS. 337 

i,e.., to four, "fine-twined," i,e., to eight. It follows that 
their threads were doubled thirty-two times." But the 
Sages say, " thread," i.c., one doubled in two, " twined," ix., 
to three, " fine-twined," i,e,, to six. It follows that their 
threads were doubled twenty - four times." They were 
coupled in two vails, one of five, and one of five.^ As is 
said, "the five curtains shall be coupled together one to 
another : and (other) five curtains (shall be) coupled one to 
another," and they were coupled with loops of blue, as is 
said,^ " And thou shalt make loops of blue upon the edge of 
the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling ; and like- 
wise shalt thou make in the uttermost edge of (another) 
curtain, in the coupling of the second." And they were 
coupled to fifty taches of gold, as is said,^ " And thou shalt 
make fifty taches of gold, and couple the curtains together 
with the taches ; and it shall be one tabernacle." And the 
taches appeared in the tabernacle as stars in the firmament. 
The length of the curtains was twenty-eight cubits, as is 
said,* " the length of one curtain (shall be) eight and twenty 
cubits." Take from them ten cubits for the breadth of the 
tabernacle, there will remain nine cubits from the one side, 
and nine cubits from the other side They hung down and 
covered the boards till they reached the sockets. This 
teaches that the sockets were one cubit high. And the 
breadth of the curtains was forty cubits. As is said,^ " and 
the breadth of one curtain four cubits." Take from them 
thirty cubits from the east to the west, which were on the 
roof of the tabernacle, and ten cubits to the west ])ehind the 
tabernacle, there are forty. 

CHAPTEE III. 

There were provided eleven curtains of goats' hair, and 
the length of every one of them was thirty cubits, as is said, 
"And thou shalt make curtains of goats' (liair) to be a 
covering upon the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou 

* Ezod. xxvi. 3. • xxvi. 4. ' xxvi. 6, 

* xxvi. 2. ' xxvi. 2. 


338 THE TABERNACLE. 

make. The length of oue curtain (shall be) thirty cubits."^ 
And they were coupled in two vails, one of five, and one of 
six, as is said, " And thou shalt couple five curtains by them- 
selves, and six curtains by themselves,"' aud they were 
coupled with fifty loops, as is said, "And he made fifty 
loops upon the outmost edge of the cuitain in the coupling,. 
and fifty loops made he upon the edge of the curtain vhich 
cOHpleth the second."* And the loops were coupled to 
fifty taches of brass, as is said, " And thou shnlt make fifty 
tachea «f brass, and put the taches into the loops, and couple 
the tent together that it may be one,"' Tlie length of tbe 
curtains was thirty cubita. Take from tliem ten cubit« for 
their breadth, there will remain ten cubits from one aide^. 
and ten cubits from the other side, as they hung down and 
covered the hoarda and the sockets. The breadth of the 
curtains was forty-four cubits, as ia sai{l. "And the breadth a 
oue curtain four cubits ; aud the eleven curtains shall l>e al 
of one measure."^ Take from them thirty cubits for thdl 
length of the tabernacle, and ten cubits behind tho taber- 
nacle — these are forty. There was left there one ciirtaini 
which was doubled in front of the tent, as is said, '* auct' 
thou shalt double the sixth curtain in the forefront of the 
tabernacle."* Rabbi Jndah said, " half of it was doubled in 
the forefi-ont of the tal)enmcle, and half of it was hanging 
behind the tabernacle," as is said, " And the remnaut that 
remaineth of the curtains of the tent, tlie half curtain that 
remaineth shall hang over the backside of the tal^rnacle,"^ 
There was also provided one great cover of rama' skins dyed 
red, its length thirty cubits, and its breadth ten cubits; 
with it they clothed the tent upon the taliemacle from t 
to west, as is said, " And thou shalt make a covering for the 
tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covermg above of badgers' 
skins,"" and it was nia*le " like patchwork." The words erf 
Ilabbi Nehemiah. Eabbi Judah said, '" there were two 
covers — the lower one of rama' skins dyed red. and the 

' Exod. XTvl. 7, a. ■ iiTi. 9. " ixxvi. 17. * ixri. 11. 

' uri. 8. « n»i. 9. ' rxvl 18. 

' Some camniBatoUira expUin t 
■ml otliin imdentand tbu nieantug 


SELECTIONS. 


THE VAIL. 339 


upper one of badgers' skins," as is said, " his covering and 
the covering of the badgers* skins that is above upon it."^ 

CHAPTEE IV. 

The vail was woven ten cubits square, and there were 
made in it four loops, and it was hung on hooks on the 
tops of the pillars, and it was spread in the third portion of 
the tabernacle, tliat tliere should be from it inwards ten 
cubits, and from it outwards twenty cubits, as is said, 
"And thou shalt hang up the vail imder the taches."^ It 
follows that the place of the Holy of Holies was ten cubits 
8(j[uare, and tliere were put the ark, and tlie pot of maima, 
and the pan of anointing oil, and Aaron's rod with its 
almonds and flowers; and there Aaron entered four times 
on the day of atonement. Outside the vail were placed the 
table and candlestick. But the table was on the north, and 
opposite to it was the candlestick on the south ; as is said, 
" And thou shalt set the table without the vail, and the 
candlestick over against the table." ^ And as they were 
placed in the tent of the congregation, so were they placed 
in the everlasting House.* Now the tent of the congregation 
was in length thirty culnts, and in breadth ten cubits. 
But the everlasting House was in length sixty cubits, and 
in breadth twenty cubits. Tliis teaches that the tent of the 
congregation was one-fourth part of the everlasting House. 
And as the vail was woven, so was woven the ephod and 
the breastplate, only in these there was an additional 
thread of gold ; as is said, " And they did beat the gold into 
thin plates and cut it into wires." ^ As was the weaAnng of 
the covering vail, so was the weaving of the covering for the 
entrance. But the vail was cunning work, as is said, " Thou 
shalt make the vail of blue and purple," etc. ; " cunning 
work"® But the covering of the entrance was needle- work, 
as is said, " And thou shalt make an hanging for the door 
of the tent," etc., "of needle- work." ^ The words of R 

» Numb. iv. 25. = Exoil. xxvi. 33. ' xxvi. 35. 

^ Or in the '* UouRe of dispensations.* ' ^ Ex(mI. xxxix. 3. 

• xxvi. 81. 7 xxvi. 36. 


340 


THE TABERNACXE. 


Xeheniiali. R. Nehemiah usually said, " every place where 
it is said cunning work (there were) two figures — in the 
needlework (there was) but one figure only." And the 
branches of tlie candlestick were right opposite to the breadth 
of the table. And the golden altar was placed in the 
middle of the house, and divided the house, and its half 
inwards was right opposite to the ark ; as is said, " And 
thon shalt put it before the vail that is by the ark of the 
testimony before the mercy-seat.'" From the boards on 
the south to the branches of the candlestick (there were) 
two cubits and a half. And from the branches of the candle- 
stick to the table (there were) five cubits. And from tlie 
table to the hoards on the north (were) two cubits and a 
halt This teaches that the breadth of the Holy plae^ (was) 
ten cubits. From the boards on the west to the vail (were) 
ten cubits. From the vail to the table were five cubits. 
From the table to the golden altar (were) five cuhita From 
the golden altar to the boards on the east (were) ten cul)it«. 
Tliia teaches that the length of the tabernacle was thirty 
cubits. 

CHAPTER V. 

The court of the tabernacle was in length one hundred 
cubits, and in breatlth fifty cubits, as is said, " And thou slialt 
make the court of the tabernacle for the south side, etc., an 
hundred cubits,^ and likewise for the north side an hundred 
cubits," as is said, " And likewise for the north side in lenj^rth 
there sliaU be hangings of an hundred cubits long."* And 
on the west fifty cubits, as is said, " On the west side shall 
bo hangings of fifty cubits,"* And on the east fifty cubits. 
as is said, " On the east side eastward slialt bf fifty cubita."* 
Take from them fifty cubits for hangings, as is said, " The 
hangings of one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits,"' etc. 
" And for the other side," etc. From both sides tlie liaugings 
on tlie south to the tent were twenty cubits, and the tent 


8ELECTI0N8. 


THE COURT. 341 


was ten cubits broad, and from the tent to the hangings on 
the north were twenty cubits. This teaches that the breadth 
(of the court) was fifty cubits. From the hangings on the 
west to the tent were twenty cubits, and the tent was thirty 
cubits long ; and from the tent to the hangings on the east, 
tliere were fifty cubit^. This teaches that its length was an 
humhxjd cubits, as is said, " The length of the court shall be 
an hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty everywhere."^ 
Eabbi Jose said there is no meaning in saying " fifty every- 
wliere," and wliat is meant by saying " fifty everywhere V* 
" Tliat is in front of the tent." This teachas that its length 
was one himdred cubits, and its breadth fifty cubits. But 
you could not know the breadth of the hangings till you know 
the height of the court, as he (Moses) said, " And the height 
five cubits ;"^ as the height was five cubits, so was the breadth 
five cubits. " How was the couit set up ?" Twenty 
sockets of brass were put on the north side, and twenty on 
the south side, and there was a pillai* in every one of them. 
And there were beams, and a ring was fastened in their 
middle, and the beams were fastened with ropes and pillars ; 
and the length of every beam was six handbreadths, and its 
breadth was three (handbreadths). And the ring was hung 
on the hook in the pillar ; and the hanging was rolled on it 
like the sail of a ship. It follows that the hanging extended 
from the pillar two cubits and a half on one side, and two 
cubits and a half on the other side ; and so with the second 
pillar. This teaches that between each pillar there were five 
cubits. Tlie beams were coupled with ropes and pillars, 
and they were coupled in the pins of brass ; and as there 
were pins to the tabernacle, so were there pins to the court, 
as is said, " All the vessels of the tabernacle in all the service 
thereof, and all the pins thereof, and all the pins of the 
court, shall be of brass." ^ But you could not know how 
much space there was from the hangings to the entrance of 
the court, till he said, " And the hangings of the court, and 
the hanging for the door of the gate of the court, which is 
by the tabernacle, and by the altar."* As between the taber- 

* Exod. xxvii. 18. ' xxvii 19. » Numb. ir. 26. 


342 THE TABBHITAOLE. r.MMtfT 

nacle and the altai' there were ten cubits, so froui the liany- 
ings to the eiitmnce of the court there were t«ii cubits. But 
you could not know how high was the entrance of the court, 
till he said, " Aiid for the gate of the court shall be an hang- 
ing of twenty cubits," in length and height. In breadtfa it 
wfts five cubits. " There was no meaning in saying five 
cubits, and what is the meaning of saying five cubite ?" 
" To instruct thee that its length was ten cubits, and its 
breadth five cubits." As was the entrance of the tent, so 
was tlie entrance of the court. As was the entrance of the 
court, 80 was the entrance of the sanctuary. Aa was tlie 
height of the entrance of the sauctiiary, so was the breadth 
of the entrance of the porch. "The length of the court 
shall be an hundred cubits, and the breiidth of it fifty every- 
where."' The oral law says, " Take fifty and surround them 
with fifty."* Hence said Rabbi Jos^, the son of Itohbi Judah,' 
" an enclosed space which can contain two seahs (of BOwn 
grain) aa the court of the tabernacle, is lawful for carrying 
burdens on the Sabbath day," 

CHAITER VI. 

THE ARK which Moses made in the desert was in length 
two cuiiits an<i a half, and in breadth one cubit and a tmU, 
and in htiight one cubit and a half, as is said, " And they 
shall make an ark of shittim wood, two cubits and a lialf 
shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a half (he breadth 
thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof,"* K. 
Meier said, " with a cubit containing six handbreadtlis — thus 
they make fifteen handbreadtlis. Take from ihem twelve 
handbreadths for the breadth of the tables, and two hand- 
breadths for the place where the roll of the Law lay, and 
half a handbraidth from either side for the thickness of the 
ark. And the breadth of the ark was nine handbreAdths. 
Take from ihcm six handbreatlths for the length of the tables, 

' Eiod. xivii. IS. tn b« iuiiiIk with a rope of littf tmhtttu 

* ^me uipluin this to mean "mul- (Krovin.) 


THE AHK. 343 

and for the plsce where the roll of tlie Law lay, two haad- 
breadths, that it should not be prcssdl going in and out, and 
half ft Iianiihreadth on either side for the thickness of the 
ark." R, -fudah said, " with a cubit containing tive hand- 
breadths, thus tliere were twelve handlireadths and a half, 
and four tables lay in it — two perfect, and two broken. And 
the length of each table was six handbreadths, and their 
breadth six, and their thickness three. Take from them 
twelve handbreadths for the breadth of the tables, and a 
lingerbreadth on either side for the thickness of the ark. 
And the breadth of the ark was seven handbreadths and a 
half. Take from them six handbreadths for the length of 
the tAbles. and one haudbreadth for the place where the 
handles (pillars) lay ; and on it the explanation of the 
pTophet« is, " King Solomon made himself a chariot of the 
wood of Lel^uon. He made the pilliii's thereof of silver.'" 
And (there was) a fingerbreadth on either side for the thick- 
ness of the ark, but the roll of the Law was put on the aide, as 
is said. " And put it in the side of the ark of the covenant of 
the LOllI),"^ And so with the Philistines, he said, "And 
put the jewels of gold, which ye return for a trespass-offering, 
in a coffer by the side thereof,"^ E. -Tudah the son of Lakish, 
said, ■' there were two arks, one which abode in the encamp- 
ment, and one which weut forth with them to war, and in 
it were the broken tableg," as is said, " And the ark of the 
covenant of the Lord went,"* But the one with them in the 
encampment contained the roll of the Law. Tliat is what is 
written, " Nevertheless the ark of the covenant of the Lord ; 
and Moses departed not out of the camp."* And so he said 
with regard to Saul, " And Saul said mit<) Ahiah, bring 
hither the ark of God."* And bo of Uriah it is said, "Tlie 
ark, and Israel, and Judah abide in tents."' But the ark 
of the covenaiit went not forth to war, save once only, as is 
said, " So the people sent to Shiloh, that they might bring 
from thence the ark of the covenant of the Lord of hosta."' 

< Song or SoloQioti, iU. 9, 1 0. ' I>cdL xx li. 26. 


344 THE TABEBNACLG. 

E, Jutlah aaid, " there was nothing in the iirk save the tables 
of the covenant only," as is said, " There was nothing in the 
ark save the two tables of stone."' 


CHAPTER VII. 

" How did Bcziileel make the ark?" "He made three 
lx)xes, two of gold and one of wood. He put the wooden 
one inside the golden one, and the golden one inside the 
wooden one, and covered the upper edge with gold ; as ia 
said, " And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold : within and 
without ahalt thou overlay it."^ " And what is the meaning 
of saying, 'thou shalt overlay it?'" "It means that he 
covered the upper edges (with) gold." The golden mercy- 
seat was placed above upon it ; as 13 said, " And tliou shalt 
put the mercy-seat above upon the ark."' And four ringis of 
gold were fastened in it, two on the north and two on the 
south, and in them the staves were put, and they v 
never moved from thence ; us ia said, " The staves shall be 
in the rings of the ark ; they shall not lie taken from it." * 
Even though Solonmii made the pattern of all the vessels, 
the pattern of the ark he did not make ; as is said, •" And 
all tlie elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the 
ark,"' The ark was placed in the midst of the House, and 
divided the House ten cubits by ten cubits. And two 
cherubs of gold stood on their feet on the gi-oimd. From 
the wall to the cherub there were Hve cubits, and irom the 
cherub to the wall five cubits. " Where is it mentioned, that as 
soon aa the priests brought in the ark the staves were drawn out, 
and they reached to the vail, and they touched the entrance?" 
As is aaid, " And they drew out the staves, that the ends trf 
the staves were seen out in the holy place before the oracle."* 
For that reason the doors of the Holy of Holies were never 
closed. "And they were not seen without."' "It is not 
possible to say that they were not seen, since it was already 
aaid " they were seen." Neither is it possible to say thai 


» 1 Kmg> . 


r. 15. 


HBL£L-1IUM>. THE STAVES. 345 

they were seen, since it is already said " they were not seen." 
" How is it ?" " ITiey were pushing out in the vail, and were 
3een in the aanctury like the two paps of a woman." " And 
from whence (do we know) that they were drawn out from 
the inside ?" As is said, "And they were not seen without." 
There we learue<l that they were drawn out from the inside. 
And from thence (we learned) that they were drawn out to 
the outside, as is said, " And the ends of the staves were 
seen." And where thou sayest that as the staves were drawn 
out, 30 were drawn out the wings of the cherubim, and they 
covered the ark, and overahadowed the house from above, aa 
is said, " And the chenibims covered the ark and the staves 
thereijf. atwve."' "And where was the ark concealed?" 
Rabbi Judah. the son of Lacliisli, aaJd, " in its place in the 
bouse of the Holy of Holies, as is said, ' And there they are 
nuto this day.'"* But the Sages say, " in the chamber of the 
wood." "And who concealed it?" llabbi Judah the Holy 
said, " Josiah concealeil it, as it is said ; ' And said unto the 
Levites that taught all Israel, which were holy unto the 
Lord, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the sou 
of David, Kiny of Israel, did build ; it shall nut be a bunlen 
npon your shoulders."^ He said to them, "it shall not be 
carried captive with you to Babylon, that you shoidd bear 
it ujioa your shoulders." Babbi Eleazar said, " it went to 
Babylon, aa is said, ' Nothing shall be left, saith the Lord,'* 
nothing, not even the words in it." The hou.se of the Holy 
of Holies, wbieli Solomon made for it, had a wall, entrance, 
and doors, as is said, " And the temple and the sanctuary 
had two doors."* But in the latter house there was no 
wall, only two boards were there, aud the length of each one 
vaa a cubit and a half. And two vails of gold were there, 
SfH^ad over them from above, and it was culled the place of 
Partitiort* 

' I KiDg* vili. 7, S. ' Somp Miamsntittani interprnt Trab- 

' liii. 8. tin to mun "plua of rloobting," u 

* a ChroD. ixxv. 3, lealuti contjniiiilly dupnl«il tba CI*ct 
< 2 Kin^ II. 17. illvinon iMtwceti the Holy PIkra uia 

* EKk. xU. IS. the Uolj at BuUes. 


THE TABERNACLE. 


CHAITEE VIII. 


THE TABLE which Moaea made in the wilderness was 
in length two cubits, and its bityidth one cubit, and its 
height was one cubit and a half, as is said, " Thuu sbalt also 
make a table of shittim ■wood, two cubits shall be the length 
Lhereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a 
half the height thereof."' Babbi Judah said, " the cubit 
(contained) five hand breadths, thus there are ten hand- 
breadths." From thence the Sages said, " the table was in 
length ten handbreadths, and in breadth five handhreadtha. 
And the shew-bread was in length ten handbreadths, and ia 
breadth five. The length of the shew-bread was placed 
against the breadth of the table. It extended over two 
Iiandbi-eadtha and a half on either side. It folltiwa that its 
length quite filled the breadth of the table." Rabbi Meier 
said, " the table was in length twelve handbreadths, and in 
breadth six handbreadths. And the shew-bread was in length 
ten (handbreadths), and in breadth five. And its length was 
placed agaii^t the breailth of the table. It extended over two 
handbreadths on either side ; and there was an opening o{ 
two handbreadths in the middle, that the air might blow- 
through them (the loaves)." Aba Shaul said, " they put there 
two cups of incense of the shew-bread." The Sages said to 
him, " and is it not already said, ' And thou shalt put pure 
frankincense ujion each row.'"* He replied to thein, "and 
ia it not already said, ' And by him shall be the tribe of 
Mannsseh /'"* Although Solomon made ten tables, and sQ 
of them were lawfid for service, as is said, "' He made also 
ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right 
side, and five on the left."' "If thou sayest five on the 
south, an<l five on the north, is not a table on the aoat& 
wortliless ?" But what is the meaning of saying, " fivo on the 
riyht and five on the loft ?" " Five to the right of the taUo 

' Kiii± uv. 23, ' Numb. ii. 20. ^ thwaron nMM 


tELECrtONB. 


THE CANDLE8TICK. 


347 


and five to the left of the table of Moses, even ' 
ihoiigb he (lid not arrange the shew-bread, save for the table 
ot Moses only, as b said, " And the table whereupon the 
sbew-lireati was."" Rabbi Josi', the son of Kabbi Judah, suiil, 
" nil the tables were arranged for shew-bread as is said, ' And 
ihe tables whereon the shew-bread was set.'"* 


CHAl'TEK IX. 

THE CANDLKSTICK which Moses made in the wilder- 
ness wfia wrought from gold, and required hammering, and 
required knops and flowers, as is said, " And thou ahalt 
make a candlestick of pure gold ; of beaten work shall the 
candlestick be made: his shall and his branches, his bowls, 
hiB knops, and hia flowers, shall be of the same."* "Do 1 
hear that he shall make separate members Eind join them to 
it ?" " The teaching says, that ' they shall be of the same.'" 
"Whence know we that it extends to the light?" "The 
[caching says, 'Thou shalt make.'" " I am of opinion that 
it should be extended to the bowls, knops, and Howers. 
The teaching says ' it,' and what dost thou see to extend it 
to the light, and withhold it from the ImwIs, the knops, and 
the flowers ?" " liecause the verse extends and withholds, 
(therefore) I extend (it to) the lights that they should be 
made with it, and I withhold the bowls, the knops, and the 
flowers, that they should not be. made with it," " Whence 
know we to extend (it to) the tongs and snxifF-dishea ? " 
" The teaching says, ' thou shalt make.' " " I am of opinion to 
extend (it to) the snuffers, and the tweezers." " The 
t«achiug says, 'it,' and what dost thou see to extend 
(it to) the tongs and snuff-dishes, and to withhold (it from) 
the snuS'ers ?" " Because the veree extends and withholds. 
I extend (it to) the tongs and snuff-dishes, since they are 
used with it. And I withhold (it from) the snuffers and 
tweezera, since they are not used with it." As it was made 
of gold, it required hammering ; when it was not of gold it 
did not require hammeriug. Wlien it was made of gold it 
' 1 Klaa nL iS. * 2 Chron. I». IB, » Bxod. tir. 81. 


348 


THE TABERNACLE. 


required IxiwU, bioiJS, jmd flowers ; when it was not of gol 
it did not rec[uire bowla, knops, and flowers. When it ■ 
made of gold it required a talent ; when it was not of goM 
it did not require a talent. Rabbi Joshua the son of Korctu 
said, " it (the candlestick) was made of a talent, but t 
lights, and the toi^, and the Bnuff-dishes, wore not from i 
talent," as is said, " Of a talent of pure gold shall he niakf 
it.'" " And what do I estabhsh ?" " That all these vei 
were vessels of pure gold. But the ti'unipets wliicli Moset 
made in the wilderness were made of silver only, aa is sai 
' Make thee two trumpets of silver.'"^ 

CHAI'TER X 

" How did Bezaleel make the cauillostick ?" " He mm 
it fittm an ingot of gold, and it was like a boom. AtM 
above and below he made bowls, knops, and flowers. 
dixiw out from it two branches, one on either side, and f 
it he drew out two other branches, one on either aide, a»( 
again drew out two branches, one on either side, as is s 
' And six branches shall come out of the sides of it.'"* Bu6 
we could not imderstand the hammering of the Iwwls, untS 
it be said, " And in the candlesticks shall lie four bowls mads 
like unto almonds with then knops and theii' fiowore."* 
Aisi, the son of Judah, said, " tliei'e are Jive expressions i 
the Law, and they have no fixed meaning. These are they; 
"accepted,"' "cursed,"'^ "to-morrow,"' "made like nntt 
almonds,"* " and will rise up."" " If thou doest well, abalt 
thou not be accepted ?" or ; " thou shalt be accepted even it 
thou doest not well" " Cui-aed be their anger for it i 
fierce," or ; " for in their anger they slew a man. and in t 
selfwill they houghed ciu^ed oxen." " To-morrow I wiM 
stand " or " go out, fight with Amalek to-morrow." 
like unto almonds with their knops, and then- flowers," a 
" four bowls made like unto almonds." " And this peopl 


' Dcau xxxi. IS- 


INDEFINITE EXPRESSIONS. 349 

will rise Tip," or, " thou slialt sleep with thy fathers, and 
thou shall rise up." These are the five expreaaioiia in the 
Law which have no fixed meaning. Aisa, the son of Akbia, 
Bftid, " it happened once to be more (than a talent by) rt 
dinar of gold, and it was brought into the cnicible eighty 
limea." The body of the candlestick was eighteen hand- 
breadths, the feet and the flowers were three handbreodths, 
and two handbreadths were smooth, and one handbreadth 
was for the Iwwl, a knop and a flowei', and two handbreadths 
were smooth, and one handbreadth a knop, and two branches 
proceeded from it, one on either side. And two hand- 
breadths were smooth, and one handbreadth a knop, and two 
branches proceeded from it, one on either side, and two 
hand breadths were smooth, and one handbreadth a knop, 
and two branches proceeded from it on either side. Tliere 
remained three haiidbreadths, in which were the liowls, the 
knops, and the flowers, as is said " Three bowls made like 
unto almonds with a knop and a flower in one branch."' 
It follows tlmt the bowls were twenty-two, and the knops 
eleven, and the flowers nine. " The bowls, to what were they 
like ?" ■' To cups of Alexandria." " The knops, to what were 
they like?" " To the apples of pine-trees."' "The flowers, 
to what were they like ?" " To the flowers on the pillars of 
the temple." It is found that yon learn that there exists 
Id the candlestick difficulty and forgetfulueas more than 
in all tlie other vessels. " And whence know we that 
OMNI PRESENCE showed to Moses, the vessels ready, and 
the candlestick ready?" As it ia said, "see and make them 
according to their patterns."* Although Solomon made ten 
I'andlesticks and all of them were lawful for service, as is 
said, *' And he made tea candl&sticks of gold according to 
Iheir form, and set them in the temple, five on the right 
hand and five on the left."* If you say, five on the south 
and five on the north, is not the candlestick on the north 
worthless ? " And what is meant by saying, five on the right 
hand and five on the left ?" " Five on the right side of the 
candlestick of Mosea, and five on tlie left side of the 
L HT. 33. ' Or " cgE^luped, o¥«l." ' Exod, en. 40, • 2 Chron. i». 7. 


350 THE TABERNAOLB. t* 

candlestick of Mosea, even though they lighted the candle- 
stick of Kloses only, aa is said, ' And the candlestick of 
gold, with the lamps thereof, to biirn every evening,' 
Rabbi Jose, the son of Rabbi Judah, said, " tliey were all 
lighted," aa is said, " Moreover the candlesticks with their 
lamps, that they should hum after the manner, l>efore the 
oracle of pure gold ; and the llowers, and the lamps, and 
the tongs made he of gold, and that perfect gold,"* All 
these completed the golden one of Moaes. Those on the 
west and east flamed in front of the middle lights as is said, 
" The seven lamps shall give light over t^ainst the candle^- 
stick."" From thence Rabbi Nathan said, "the middle on*' 
is the most honourable." The seven lamps tiamed alike^ 
and their lamps were espial, and they resembled each othi 
" How did they snuff it ?" " They remova.! the snuff from 
the candlestick and deposited it in the tent, and nibbed it 
with ft sponge." " It follows tlnit many priests were busied 
on one lamp." The words of Habbi .Tosi^-, But the Sages 
say, " they did not remove the lani^is from their places ; they 
only removed the snuff from the candlestick, ns is said, 
' He shall order the lamps upon the pure candlestick.*"* 

CHAPTER XI. 

THE ALTAR OF IXOENSE was in length a cubit, and 
in breadth a cubit, and in height two cubits, as ia said, 
" And thou shalt make an altar to bum incenao npon ; of 
shittim-wood abalt thou make it. A cubit shall be the 
length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof: four square 
shall it be : and two cubits shall be the height thereof : the 
horns thereof shall be of the same."* And it was all 
overlaid ivnth gold, as ia said, " And thou sfialt overlay it 
with gold."^ This altar had three names, the altar of 
incense, the altar of gold, the inner altar. The altab OF 
BURNT-OFFERDJdS was in length five cubita, and Id bre«dUi 
five cubits, and in height three cubits, as is said, "And ha 

' 2 ChroD. liiL 11. ' iv. 20. 21. • Numb. viii. 2. 

* Lnv, iiiv, 4. ' Enod. xxx. 1. ' ixi. 3, 


KELt(TIOSH. 


ALTAR OF BURNT-OFFICRINGS. 


351 


made the altar of Imrnt-offermg of shittim-wooil ; five cubits 
waa the length thereof, and five cnhits the breadth thereof; 
it was four square; and three cubits the height thereof."' 
The words of Riibbi Meier. To him said Rabbi Josi!, " fixim 
hearing what is aaid five by five do we not know that it is 
four square f What is the meaning of saying four square 1" 
" It is superfluous, save for identification in pronoimcing 
with regard to it an equal decision. It is said here four 
square., and there four s(iuare," "What four square ia 
meant there ?" " That its Iieight ia double its breadth, even 
the four square menticmed here means that its height is 
double its breadth." Rabbi Maier said to hiui, " if it be 
acconling to thy wonls, it follows that the altar is liigher 
than the curtains." Rabbi -Tosi5 answered him, " and is it 
not already said, ' And the hangings of the court, and the 
baugiug for the door of the gate of the court, which is by 
the tabernacle, and by the altar round about.'"* As the 
tabernacle was ten cubits broad, so the altar of bumt- 
ofTerings was ten cubits broad. A painted line girdled it in 
the middle to divide between the blood (sprinkled) above, 
and the blood (sprinkled) below. The painted line and 
dowuwartls was fi\'e cubits. The foundation was a cubit. 
And three cubits was the compass, and the circuit was a 
cubit, and tliere they put the blood sprinkled below. Tlie 
]uii]ted line and upwards was five cubits, — a cubit the horns, 
and three cubits the compass, and one cubit the circuit. 
And there they put the blood which was sprinklwi aliove. 
And the blood intended to be sprinkled on the painted line 
and downwards, if it were put on the painted line and 
upwards, was worthless. And the bloi4 that was intended 
to be spriuked above the painted line, if it were put on the 
painted line and downwanls, was worthless. The altar 
which Moses made in the wilderness waa in height ten 
cubits, and the one which Solomon made was in height ten 
cubits, and the one wliicli the cliildren of the captivity 
made was in height ten cubit«, and the one prepared for the 
Future, its height is ten cubits. The altar of burnt-offerings 
> Eiod. xxxviiL 1, ' Nonib. iv. 26. 


352 THE TABERNACLE. talmud 

was placed in the midst of the court (with) its ascent on 
the south, with the laver on the west, with the slaughter- 
house on the north, and all the Israelites to the east, as is 
said, " And all the congrej]jation drew near and stood before 
the Lord."^ lliis altar had three names, the altar of burnt- 
offering, the altar of bm.ss, the outer altar. 


CHAPTER XII. 

Moses made one LAVER, as is said, "Thou shalt also make 
a laver of brass." ^ Solomon made ten lavers, as is said, 
" He made also ten lavers, and put five on the right hand, 
and five on the left, to wash."^ "There is no meaning in 
saying ' five on the right hand, and five on the left/ and 
what is the meaning of saying ' five on the right hand, and 
five on the left?'" "Five on the right of the laver of 
Moses, and five on the left of the laver of Moses." Solomon 
added to it when he made the sea, as is said, " And he made 
a molten sea, ten cubits from the one brim to the other ; it 
was round all about, and his height was five cubits ; and a 
line of thirty cubits did compass it round about. And it 
was an handbreadth thick, and the brim thereof was wrought 
like the brim of a cup, with flowers of lilies, it contained 
two thousand baths."* It is not possible to say "two thou- 
sand," since before it is said "three thousand,"* and it is 
not possible to say " three thousand," since before it is said 
"two thousand." "How can it be?" "Two thousand 
liquid make three thousand dry measure." But you don't 
know how much is the bath until it be said, " The ephah 
and the bath contain one measure,"® "for ten baths are an 
homer." Allow ten baths for every cur — there are two 
hundred curs. Subtract from them fifty curs, and allow 
fifty square, there are one hundred and fifty cleansing pools ; 
since every pool contains forty seahs." " And from whence do 
we know that every pool contains forty seahs ?" " As is 

1 Lev. ix. 6. * Exod. xxx. 18. ' 2 Chron. iv. 6. 

* 1 Kings vii. 23, 26. » 2 Chron. iv. 6. « Ezek. xlv. 11, 14, 


KELECTIONS. 


THE LAVER. 353 


88ud, * And bathe his flesh in water,* ^ water to cover all his 
flesh." " And how much is it ?" " A sc^uare cubit, in 
height three cubits." From thence the Sages judged the 
measure of a pool to be forty sealis. " And how can it con- 
tain one hundred and fifty cleansing-pools, if thou shalt say 
it was all round ?" " It could not contain them." " If thou 
shalt say it was all square ?" " It therefore contained more." 
But the three lowest cubits were square ; allow for ten cubits 
square, there are an hundred cubits. Allow for an hundred 
square; there are an hundred cleansing-pools. Tlie two 
liighest cubits were round. Allow for ten cubits sc^uare ; 
there are seventy-five cubits. Allow for seventy-five sc^uare ; 
there are an hundred and fifty. Allow for fifty square ; 
there are fifty cleansing-ix)ols ; since the scjuare exceeds the 
round by a fourth. " And whence do we know that the 
square exceeds the round by a fourth ?" "As is said, ' Ten 
cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and a line of 
thirty cubits did compass it round about.' "^ This teaches 
that the square exceeds the roimd by a fourtlL "And 
whence do we know that it was round above ?" " As is said, 
' And it was an handbreadth thick, and the brim thereof was 
wrought like the brim of a cup.'" "And whence know we 
that it was scjuare below ?" " As is said, * It stood upon 
twelve oxen, three l(K)king towards the north, and three 
looking towards the west, and three looking towanls the 
south, and three looking towanls the east/"^ And what is 
meant by saying " looking towards " four times ; but that 
when (»nc entertnl the temple, he looked towards the right ; 
when he entered into the court, he looked towards the right ; 
when he entered the Mountain of the House, he looked 
towards the right ; when the priest went u]> to tlie top of 
the altar, he looked towards the riglit. " And under it was 
the similitude of oxen, which did compass it round al>out, 
ten in a cubit, compassing the sea round about. Two rows 
of oxen."* It follows that (there were) four rows of tlie 
heads of oxen, which ser\'ed for the four sides, as is said, 
" And the similitude of oxen, two rows of oxen were cast 

» U-v. XV. 13. " 2 C'lmm. iv. 2. ^ iv. 4. •• iv. 3. 

2 A 


354 THE TABERNACLE. talmud 

when it was cast."^ And it was all cast even from the feet 
of the ox. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

" How did the Levites guard the tabernacle ?" " The 
family of Kohath watched on the south, as is said, 'The 
families of the sons of Kohath shall pitch on the side of the 
tabernacle southward/^ And they were overseers of the 
vessels of the ark, as is said, ' And their charge shall be the 
ark, and the table, and the candlestick, and the altars, and 
the vessels of the sanctuary wherewith they minister, and 
the hanging and all the sevice thereof/* Outside of them 
were the three tribes of Reuben, Simeon, Levi The family 
of Gershon watched in the west, as is said, ' The families of 
the Gershonites shall pitch behind the tabernacle westward.'* 
And they were intrusted with all the vessels of the taber- 
nacle, as is said, ' And they shall bear the curtains of the 
tabernacle, and the tabernacle of the congregation/* Out- 
side of them were the three tribes of Ephraim, and Manasseh, 
and Benjamin. The family of Merari watched on the north, 
as is said, * And the chief of the house of the father of the 
families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail : these shall 
pitch on the side of the tabernacle northward/® And they 
were intrusted with the taches, and boards, and bars, and 
pillars, and the sockets of the tabernacle, as is sedd, ' And 
imder the custody and charge of the sons of Merari shaU be 
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the 
pillars thereof, and the sockets thereof/^ And outside of 
them were the three tribes of Dan, Asher, and Naphtali 
On the east were Moses, Aaron, and their families, as is 
said, * But those that encamp before the tabernacle toward 
the east, even before the tabernacle of the congr^ation 
eastward, sliall be Moses and Aaron and his sons/® And 

1 The Jerusalem Talmnd states that ' Numb. iiL 29. ' iii. 81. 

the water poured through the feet of * iiL 23. ■ iv. 25. 

the oxen, and that this was the weU of ' iii. 35. ' iiL 36. 

Etham. ^ iiL 38. 


BKLEOTioss. THE ENCAMPMENT. 355 

outside of them were the three tribes of Judah, Issacbar, 
and Zebulon. The whole encampment of Israel was twelve 
miles. The standard of Judah was four miles, and the 
encampment of the Levites, and the encampment of the 
SHECHLNAH, fuur mOea. The standard of Reuben was four 
miles. The standard of Epbraiin was four miles. The encarap- 
meul of the Levites and the encampment of the SHECHLNAH 
was four miles. And the encampment of Dan was four 
miles. It follows t/utt the four coniers of the tabernacle 
were four encampments for service on every side, as is said, 
'Then the tabernacle of the congregation shall aet forward 
with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camp ; as 
they encamp ao shall they set forward, every man in hit 
place by their standards,'^ So soon as Israel set forwanl, 
the pillar of cloud which was standing still rolled up and 
spread out over the children of Judali like a kind of beam. 
The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an alarm, and soimded, 
and the standard of Jndah moved forward first, as is said, 
' In the first place went the standard of the camp of the 
children of Judah according to their armies.'* At once Aaron 
and his sons entered (the Tabernacle) and took down the vail, 
and with it they covered the ark, as is said, ' And when the 
camp sett«th fom'ard, Aaron shall come and his sons, and 
they shall take down the covering vail, and cover the ark of 
testimony with it,'* The (trumpet) sounded, and blew an 
alarm, and sounded- And the standard of the encampment 
of Reuben set forward. At once the sons of Gerehon, and 
the sons of Meraii entered, and took down the tabernacle, 
and loaded it on the waggon. And they set up the taber- 
nacle before the sons of Eohath came, as is said, ' And 
the Kohathites set forward, liearing the sanctuary ; and the 
other did set up the tabernacle against they came.'* And 
the trumpet sounded, and I>lew an alarm, and sounded, and 
the standard of Ephraim moved forward ; the children of 
Kohath entered and took down the holy vessels, and loaded 
them on their shoulders, as is said, 'And when Aaron and 
his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary and 

' Nnmb. iL 17. » i. 14. ' iv. 5. * x. 21. 


356 THE TABERNACLE. TAMtiT 

all tlitj vessels of the sanctuary, as the camp is to set Ibr- 
wnrJ; after that the sons of Kohath shall ciinie to l«jar it.'^ 
The (tnimi>et) sounded, and blew an alarm, and aomided. 
And the standard of Dan moved forward, as is said, ' And 
tlie ataudard of the camp of the children of Dan set forwanL** 
It follows that two standai-da were in front, and two standards 
were in the rear, and the encampment of the Levitea, and 
the encampment of the SHEOHINAH was iu the middle, as 
is said, ' TJieu the tabernacle of the cougregatioo shall set 
forward with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the 
camp.'' And as they encamped, so they set forward, aa is 
said, ' Aa they encamp, so shall they set forward.' Isntel 
set forward by three commands, by command of the HOLY 
BLESSED ONE, by command of Moses, and by command 
of the tnirapets." " Whence know we the command of the 
HOLY BLESSED ONE ?" " As is said. ' At the command- 
ment of the Lord, the cliildren of Israel journeyed, and at 
the commandment of the Lord they pitched,'"^ etc. " By the 
commandment of the Lord by the hand of Moses."* " By 
commandment of Moses — how ?" " Moses said in the 
evening, 'early in the morning you must go forward.'" At 
once the Israelites began to gather their cattle, aijd prepared 
their furniture for the march. " By commandment of the 
trumpets whence know we iti" "Aa ia said, 'Make thee 
two trum|)eta of silver, etc., that thou mayest use them for 
the calling of the assembly, and for the journeying of the 
camps.'"^ " How ?" " The tmmiiets sounded, blew an alarm, 
and sounded ttu'ee blasts for eveiy slandanl." Itjililii Judah 
said, "there were threi.' l.ilasts for every trilH?." 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Wlien Israel was to encamp, the pillar of cloud i-nse up 
and spread out over the children of Judah like a kind of 
booth, and it covered the tent outwards, and filial the 
tabernacle inwards ; aa is said, " Then a cloud covered llie 


SKLECTioNs. TUE SHECHINAH. 357 

tent of tlie congregation, and the glory of tlie Lord filled the 
tabernacle."^ And that was one of the clouds of glory, wliicli 
served the Israelites in tlie wilderness forty years. One on 
the right hand, and one on the left, and one before them, 
and one behind them. And one over them, and a cloud 
dwelling in their midst (and the cloud, the SHECHINAH 
which w^as in the Tent), and the pillar of cloud wldch moved 
before them, making low before them the high (places), and 
making high before them the low (places), and killing serpents 
and scorpions, and burning thorns and briers, and guiding 
them in the straight way. Eabbi Simon, the son of. Jose, 
said, " during the forty yeara, when the Israelites were in the 
wilderness, none of them had need of the light of the sun 
by day, nor the light of the moon by night. Wlien it 
became reddish they knew that the sun had set, and when 
it became whitish they knew that the sun rose. And when 
one looked into a baiTel, he knew what was in it ; and into 
a pitcher, and he knew what was in it, by reason of the 
cloud, the SHECHINAH in their midst," as is said, "For the 
cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day, and fire 
was on it by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel 
throughout all their journey."^ And so it is prepared to 
come in the future : Jis is said, " Arise, shine ; for thy light 
is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." 
" The sun sliall .l)e no more thy light ])y day ; neither for 
brightness sluill the moon give liglit unto thee : but the 
Jj)Yil shall ]»e linto thee an everlasting light." " Thy sun 
shall i\{) more go down ; neither shall thy moon witlulraw 
itself; for the L(jnl sliall be thine everhusting light, and tlie 
days of thy mourning shall be ended." ^ " From whence did 
the SHEcil IN AH speak with Moses ?" " llubbi Nathan said, 
"from the altar of incense," as is said, " And thou shalt put* 
it before the vail that is by the ark of the testimony, etc. 

WHEKE I WILL MEET WITH THEM"* 

Ital)bi Simon, the son of Yochai, said, " beside the altar of 
incense," as is said, " And thou shalt l>eat some of it very 

» Exod. xl. 34. = xl. 38. ^ i^.^ j,. i, 19^ oq. 4 j^xcxl. xxx. G. 


SmSti 


I ih W I I M ■ - ■ -J ■ » " ^ 


358 THE TABERNACLE. talmfd. 

small, and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle 
of the congregation, 

WHEEE I WILL MEET WITH THEE."^ 

The disciples of Rabbi Ishmael said, " beside the altar of 
burnt-offering," as is said, " This shall be a continual bumt- 
oflfering throughout your generations at the door of the 
tabernacle of the congregation, before the Lord, 

WHERE I WILL MEET YOU."« 

1 Exod. XXX. 86. « xxix. 42. 


APPENDIX. 


NOTE ON MODERN JUDAISM. 

Every Jew when he attains the age of thirteen years and 
one day becomes a bar Mitzvah (son of commandment), and 
is henceforth responsible for his own sins. The ceremonies 
connected with this event correspond to the Christian rite 
of confirmation. He is also bound to observe the three 
fundamental principles of Judaism — the wearing of the 
Talith, the wearing of the Phylacteries, and the observance 
of the Mezuza, or the Sign upon the door-posts. 

Talith. 

The Talith, which resembles an oblong shawl, is worn 
over the head or shoulders. From its having four comers 
it is called arba canphoth. Its chief name, Tsitsith, is 
derived from the fringes on which its holiness depends. Tlie 
Talith is made of sheep or lamb's W(k)1, and sometimes of 
camel's hair. The fringes, which are of wool, ciirefully slioni, 
must be specially spun for this purpose. Four threads, of 
which one must (if possible) be blue, are passed through 
eyelet holes made in the four comers. These threads are 
doubled to make eight. Seven of tliem are of equal length, 
but the eighth thread must be long enough to twist five 
times round the rest, and after being tied into five tight 
knots, to have an end of the same length as the others. 
These five knots added to the eight threads make the number 
thirteen. The numerical value of the Hebrew word Tsitsith 


!^ 


360 APPENDIX. 

is 600, so that the sum total is 613, which represents the 
613 precepts of the oral law. These rabbinic precepts cor- 
respond to the 613 Hebrew letters of which the decalogue 
is composed. They are divided into 248 positive precepts, 
whicli, tlie Iial)bis say, equal tlie members of the human 
body; and into 365 negative precepts which, they also say, 
equal the number of the human veins. Wlien the Talith is 
put on, the Jews i^jy, " That it may l)e made through my 
fulfilling this precept a spiritual gannent for my soul, spirit, 
and l>reath, for my 248 8]>iritual members, and for my 365 
spiritual veins." Orthodox Jews also daily wear a smaller 
Talith underneath their garments, and those who are more 
religious allow the fringes to be seen to remind them of the 
613 precepts. The Scripture on which this observance is 
foimded is Nimib. xv. 37-39, "And the Lord spake unto Moses, 
saying, speak unto the children of Israel, and bid them that 
they make them fringes in the borders of their garments, 
throughout their generations, and that they put upon the 
fringe of the border .a riband (or, as the Kabbis say, a thread) 
of bliie : And it shall be unto you for a fringe, that ye may 
look upon it, and remember all the commandments of the 
Lord and do them." Our Lord, when on earth, wore the 
Tsitsith, for the diseased woman touched " the hem ** (fringe 
KpaoTTf^ov) of His garment (Matt. ix. 20), "And he rebuked 
the Pharisees for their ostentation in enlarging the " borders " 
(fringes Kpixanr^^ of their gannents (Matt, xxiii. 5). 

Phylacteuies. 

Tlie second fundameutal principle of Judaism is the 
wearing of l*hylacteries. These are supposed by some writers 
to be the same as the frontlets (Tataj)h()th), mentioned (Ex. 
xiii. 16; Dent. vi. 8; xi. 18). The Totaphoth mean pro- 
perly " Ornaments," and refer to the law and commandments, 
as undei*stood in such passages as " Bind them about thy 
neck ; write them upon the table of thine head " (Prov. iiL 
3 ; vi. 21 ; viii. 3). And so the Karaite Jews interpret all 
these passages figuratively. But since their return from the 


PHYLACTERIES. 361 

Babylonian captivity, the Eabbinical Jews insist upon their 
literal meaning, and they enjoin the wearing of Phylacteries 
{<f>v\aKrqpia, preservatives. Matt, xxiii. 5), upon the forehead 
and arm of the worshipper. Phylacteries, called in He])rew 
Tephillin (from Palal to pray) are, Jtrstl?/, one for the foi-e- 
head (Tiev. xiv. 1). It is a leathern box which contains four 
compartments, in which are enclosed four portions of the Law 
written on parchment, and carefully folded. This box is 
made of leather, pressed upon blocks of wood sj>ecially pre- 
pared for the pur})ose, while the leather is well soaked in 
water. When it is dry and rea<ly for use, the following j>ass- 
ages of the law are sewn into it — (Ex. xiii. 1-10, 11-lG; Deut. 
vi 4-9 ; xi. 13-21). On this box there is also impressed the 
letter ^ (Shin), with three strokes for the right hand side of the 
wearer, and also the same letter with four strokes for the left 
hand side of the wearer. Secondly, there is another leathern 
box, without any ^ (Shin), for the arm of the worshipper, 
and with only one compartment, into which the same pas- 
sages of Scripture are sewn with the sinews of animals, 
specially prepared for this oly'ect. The phylacteries are 
lK)und on the forehead and arm by long leathern straps 
(R'tsuoth) which pass through the Maaharta, or passages in 
their sides. The straps round the head must be tied in a 
knot shaped like the letter T (Daleth). And the straps on 
the arm must be long enough to go round it seven times, 
and tlu'ee times roiuid the middle finger, with a small 
surplas over in the form of the letter ^ (Yod). There is thus 
formed by the letter Shin on the phylactery, and by the knot 
Daleth on the back of tlie head, and by the Yod on the 
hand the word Siiaddai, or Almighty. This is said to fulfil 
the text, " And all people of the earth shall see that thou 
art called by the name of tlio Lord (or as tlie Itab])is say, 
' the name of tlie I^rd is read ujk)!! tliee '), and they shall ])e 
afraid of thee" (Deut. xxviii. 10). The time for putting on 
the phylacteries is during the day, at the time of prayer and 
reading of the Shema, or " Hear Lsrael," etc. (Deut. vi. 4, etc.) 
They are not to be worn at night, on the Sab])ath. or on the 
festival days, because it is said, " And it shall be for a sign " 


362 APPENDIX. 

(Ex. xiiL 9). As the Sabbaths and festivals are signs in 
themselves, no other signs are needed. The phylacteries are 
to be kept in special bags with the greatest reverence. The 
Eabbis assert that they are worn by Grod, and " that the 
single precept of the pliylacteries is equal to all the com- 
mandments." 

Mezuza. 

The third fundamental principle of Judaism is Mezuza, 
or Sign upon the door post. This precept is founded upon 
the command, " And thou shalt write them upon the posts 
of thy house, and on thy gates " (Deut. vi 9 ; xL 20). The 
door-posts must be those of a dwelling-house ; and accord- 
ingly, Maimonides mentions ten different things which are 
requisite to constitute a dwelling-house. Public buildings, 
such as synagogues, are excluded from this conmiand. The 
Karaite Jews reverse this order, and afl&x Mezuzas to syna- 
gogues but not to private houses. The way in which 
Mezuzas are made is as follows : — Two portions of Scripture 
(Deut. vi. 4-9; xi. 13-21) are written on ruled vellum 
which must be prepared according to Rabbinic rules. This 
vellum is rolled up so as to fit into a cylindrical tube of 
lead or tin. The word Shaddm (Almighty) is written on the 
outside of the roll, and a section is cut from the tube, so 
that Shaddai may he clearly seen. It is then nailed through 
both its ends to the door posts of all the apartments on the 
right hand side. Those who enter are thus reminded that 
the eye of God is upon ail their doings. Under the word 
Shaddai, some Jews write the three angelic names, Coozu, 
Bemuchsaz, Coozu ; and to these three angels they even 
pray for success in business. When the Mezuzas are being 
fastened to tlie door-posts the following prayer must be 
used, " Blessed art thou, Lord our God ! King of the 
universe, who hath sanctified us with His laws, and com- 
manded us to fix the Mezuza." 

The Talmud estimates the virtue of the Talith, the 
phylacteries, and the Mezuza in the following terms : — 


MEZUZA. 363 

" Whoever has the phylacteries bound to his head and arm, 
and the fringes thrown over his garments, and the Mezuza 
fixed on his door-post, is safe from sin: for these are 
excellent memorials, and the angels secure him from sin ; as 
it is written, " The angel of tlie Lord encampeth round about 
them that fear Him and delivereth them" (Ps. xxxiv. 7). 

If, instead of resting in the mere routine of these 
observances, which they too often do, the eyes of Israel 
were enlightened by the Holy Ghost, they woiQd see them 
to be shadows of glorious truths. The Talith would be seen 
as a symbol of the imputed righteousness of Christ, who 
has fulfilled the law. The phylacteries would appear as 
symbols of the necessity of having God's Word engraven 
both on head and heart. And the Mezuza would be regarded 
as a symlx)l of the omniscient eye of an holy God from 
whom nothing can be hidden or unknown. 


364 APPENDIX. 


CALENDAR OF THE MONTHS AND CHIEF JEWISH 
FEASTS AND FASTS IN EACH YEAR. 

I. — NisAN, called in Scripture Abib (part of March and April). 
(Beginning of the Sacred or Ecclesiastical Reckoning). 

1. New Moon. 

14. Passover. 

15. First Day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread. 

16. Waving of the first ripe Omer (wave sheaf), Lev. xxiii. 10-12. 
21. Last Day of Unleavened Bread. 

II. — Iyae (part of April and May). 

1. New Moon. 

15. The Second or "little" Passover. 

18. Feast of the 33d day after the Omcr. 

III. — Si VAN (part of May and June). 

1. New Moon. 

6. Feast of Pentecost or Weeks. Seven Weeks or 50 days after the 
Sheaf offering. The two loaves of fine flour, called first-fruits, were 
waved before the Lord. This Feast commemorates also the giving of 
the Law on Mount Sinai. 

27. Fast for the burning of Rabbi Chanina, by the Greeks. 

IV. — Thamuz (part of June and July). 

1. New Moon. 

17. Fast for the t-akiug of Jerusalem, by Nebucliadnezzar, on the 
9th, and by Titus, on the 1 7th. If this day fall on a Sabbath, the 
Fast is kept on the following day. 

V. — Ab (part of July and August). 

1. New Moon. 

1). Fast for the threefold destruction of the Temple. 
15. Fejist for tlie rcadniission of the Tribe of Benjamin (Judges 
xxi. 15). It is also called the Day of the Wood Oftering. 

VI. — Elul (part of August and September). 
1. New Moon. 


CALENDAR. 8()5 

Vll. — TisnRi (part of September and October). 
(Beginning of the Civil Reckoning). 

1 and 2. Feast of the Civil New Year, and of Trumpets. 

3. Fast for the Murder of Gedaliah. 

4-9. Days of Penitence. 

10. Fast on the Great Day of Atonement 

15-21. Feast of Tabernacles. The last day is called " Hosanna 
Rabba ** (i,e. save with a great salvation). 

22. Feast on the completion of the Yearly Reading of the Law. 
It is called " Rejoicings of the Law." 

VIIL — Mabcuesvan (part of October and November). 
1. New Moon. 

IX. — EiSLEV (part of November and December). 

1. New Moon. 

25. Feast of Dedication or Lighted Lamps to commemorate the 
cleansing and dedication of the Temple after the victory of Judas 
Maccaba)us over the Syrians, Ra 148. This feast lasts eight days. 

X. — Tebeth (part of December and January). 

1. New Moon. 

10. Fast for the commencement of the siege of Jerusalem by 
Nebuchadnezzar. 

XL — SiiEBAT (part of January and Febniar}-). 

1. New Moon. 

The last Sjibbath in this month is called the " Portion of 
Shekels." Such Portions of the Law, as Exndus xxx. 15, etc., are 
read, and collections of money are nuule for the |K>or Jews in 
Jerusalem. 

XIL — Adau (part of February and March). 

1. New Moon. 

13. Fast of Estlier (Esther iv. IG). If it full on a Sabbath its 
observance takes ])lace two days before. 

14 and 15. Fciist of Purim for the destniction of Haman. 
( ) Veaddar or the additioniil Adar — the month intercalated to 

make the lunar and solar years corres]X)nd. (See note, page 17G). 
In the present year, a.d. 1877, according to Jewish Chronology, 
the year a.m. 5638 began on the fii-st day of Tishri. 


NOTE ON THE SANHEDKIN. 

The Synedrion (mviSpiav) called in Aramaic Sanhedrin, was th» | 
Supreme Court of the Jewish uation. It is invested with an i 
interest, as having been the tribunal, wiiii^h deliberately rq'ected th* I 
Meseiahahip and Deity of the Lord Jesiia Christ,^ — a dccigion to which I 
the Jewish people have adhereil up to the present time. As its name 
implies, it was a kind of senate, established during the Gree£ occupa- 
tion of Palestine, which preceded the Maccabican period, and is not, 1 
as the JewB think, a continuation of the neventy elders appointed bf ] 
Moses. It seems to be mentioned in 2 Mac. i. 10 ; iv. 44 ; xL 27 j 
under the name of the Council (i) ■ytpoua-ia). To speak accuiately, 
there were three Sanhedrins — two smaller, and one great one. The ] 
two smaller ones seem to have served as standing committees of th« I 
general body. The chief president was called " Prince," and the ' 
vice president " Father of the House of Judgment." When priests, 
eldera, and scribes are mentioned together, the Great Sanhedrin ia 
meant. The Riibbis say that to be an ordinary member of the San- 
hedrin, a man must have been wise, handsome, aristocratic, old, a 
magician, and able to speak seventy languages, that the Saohediin 
mi^ht not need an interprBt«r. It is said to have had ten " flittiugs " — 
from the chamber in the temple to the shops in the outer court ; fram 
the shops in the outer court to Jerusalem ; from Jerusalem to Jabnoh ; 
from Jabneh to Osha ; from Osha to Shepharaam ; from Shephara&m 
to Bethshaaraim ; horn Bethshoaraim to Sepphoris ; from Sepphorid 
to Tiberias. To make up the number ten, it is said to have flitted 
backward and forward twice between Osha and Jabneh. Tbeae 
Sittings Iwgon forty years before the destruction of the Temple. 

The Presidents are stated to have been, 

Ezra, 

Simon the Just, 

Antigoniis of Soclio (the Master of Saiioc}, 

Joseph, son of Joezer ; P. Joseph, son of Jochanau. V. P. 

Joshua, son of Perachiah, lied to Alexandria, frvm Alpyf^nij^T 
Janneus. 

Judah, son of Tabbw, P. Simon, son of Shetach. V. P. ; ihey wa» 
remarkable for bauging eighty witches in one day. 

Shcmaiah, P. Abtalion, y. P., descendants of Sennacharib; Buppoaed 
to be the Sameas and PolUo of Josephus. 

Hillel P. Shammai, V. P. Hillel was likened to Moaes. At 
forty years of age he came to Jenisalera ; forty yeua ho 
studied the law ; forty years he was president. 

Simeon, son of Uillel, supposed to be tiie one who took our Saviour 
in his arms. 

Gamaliel, son of Simeon (teacher of St. Paul). When he died the 
honour of the law and purity died also. 


PRESIDENTS. 367 

Simeon, his son (slain in Jerusalem). 

Jochanan, son of Zaccai. 

Gamaliel of Jabneh, son of Simeon. 

Simeon, son of Gamaliel (first patriarch of Tiberias). 

Judah, son of Simeon. 

Gamaliel, son of Judah. 

Gamaliel of Jabneh is said to have been deposed for a time from 
the presidency, and afterwards restored with Rabbi Eliezer, the son of 
Azariah, as joint president. The reason of his deposition is said to 
have been his want of judgment in dealing with Kabbi Joshua, who 
said that " prayer is a thing arbitrary," while he taught it to be " a 
bounden duty." Whereupon he made the Rabbi stand while he 
expounded the law. The congregation resented this as a sign of pride 
and passion, and elected Eliezer who was but sixteen years old but very 
grave. Rabbi Akiba was offended that he himself was not chosen, and 
said, " it is not because he is more learned, but because he is of nobler 
birth — happy is he who has ancestors to privilege him — happy is the 
man who has a nail to hang on." ** And what was the nail of Rabbi 
Eliezer, the son of Azariah ]" " He was tenth from Ezra." 

NOTES ON THE PLAN OF THE TEMPLE 
From the Talmud and other Jewish Authorities, 

See Plan at end of Voluirw, 

1. The Mountain of the House was a square of 500 cubits. The 
south side was " more empty" than the other sides. The east " more 
empty" than the north and west, and the north " more empty" than the 
west, aaay Royal Cloisters (Joseph us, Antiquities , xv. xi. 5). bbb, 
Solomon's Porch, Jno. x. 23; Acts iii. 11. 

2. The gate of the wall of the Mountain of the House in the east 
was called the Shushan Gate, because there was engraved on it the 
city Shushan. 

3. The gate of the wall of the Mountain of the House called Tadi. 
It served only for priests by night. 

4. The West Gate, called Kipunus (Coponius), was for thorough- 
faro. To it was probably joined, c c, the bridge which spanned the 
Tyropaeon Valley, d e f. Gates mentioned by Josephus. Of these 
four gates, three have been discovered by the officers of the Palestine 
Explorations. The gate Kipunus is alone mentioned in the tract 
Measurements, as being probably that one through which worshippers 
usually entered. 

5. The two southern gates were called the Gates of Huldali. 
g ggg, Where the Levites watched. 

6. The assembly of the small Sanhedrin at the door of the 


3G8 APPENDIX. 

Eastern Gate, and tliere ant three rowK, each conttuuiiiK twenty'tlircc 
nieu. hkhh, Shops in the Court of the Gentiles. Matt, ixi. 12. 

7. A wall about teu hnnde high arounil the whole (»urt, and in it 
were tliirteen openinga as if opposite thirteen gates, iiiii, SUihs 
(Josephus, Antiquities, xv. xl 5) on which was engraTCn the prohibi- 
tion against foreigners entering the temple (Acte xxi. 29). Oiie of 
these "stones of warning" was discovered in Jerusalem in 1671. A 
facsimile of it (on a reduced scale) is now ioclude^l in this volume, hj 
the kind permission of the Committee of tlie Palestine Exploration 
Fund. Its translation runs thus, " No stronger is allowed to piuw 
within the b»lu strode round the temple and enclosure. If found, the 
offender must take the eonseijnence, and liia death will follow." 

8. The Chel was a space round tlic court between the smaller wall 
and the wall of the court Its breadth was ten cubits. In it were 
twelve steps rising to the Eastern Gate nf the Court The heij^t of 
each step was half a cnbit, and its breadth was half a cubit, 

9. Tlie Eastern or Beautiful Gate (Acts ill 2) opened into the 
Court of the Women and into the other courts. The length of all the 
courts from east to west waa 187 cubits, and tlieir breadth was 135 
cubits. Besides the chief gate iu the east, there were two more gates, 
one on the north, and one on the south, lending into the Court of the 
Women. 

10. TheCourtof the Women was a square of 135 cubits, and in its 
four comers were four cliambers, each forty cubiU long nud twenty 
brood. 1 1 i i. Treasure cliests (Mark xiL 1 ; Luke xxi. 2 ; John. Tiii. 
20). The chests or trumpets (Matt vL 2), (so called from tJuar 
shape), were thirteen in number. Of these nine were for the It^ 
payments of the worHhippers, and four were for freewill ^fle. 
Trumpets numbered 1 and 2 wore for the half shekel tribute. Tnimpeta 
3 and 4 were respectively for the money paid by women for the offer- 
ings nf turtle-doves and young pigeons. Trumpet & received offeringa 
for the wood of the altar. Trumpet 6 received offering for JDeenaa. 
Trumpet 7 received offerings for gnhlen vessels of service. Trumpet 
8 received what remaine<l over out nf a pmletermined Biim from tha 
purcliasc nf a siu-nfferiug. Trumpet !l received whatever remtuncd 
over after the purchase of a trespaaa-offeriog. Trumpet 10 reodved 
whatever remained over after the offerings of birda. Trumpet 1 1 
receive*! whatever remained over from the offeriug of the Nuarita 
Trumpet 12 received whatever remained over from the offering of th»' 
cleansed leper. And tnimpet 13 received freewill gitla. ThCM' 
trumpets are to be distinguished from the three chests, each hokUng 
three seaha of c(>iu, which received the contributions and toxea 6010 
Israelites in foreign lands. These chests were emptied nt the tliive 
groat festivals, and yielded enormous treasures for tlie Timiiilo and 
public revenue. 

11. Tliech.inibcrof Ihewoiid, which was nrraugeil fureneli daj'snue. 


NOTES ON THE TEMPLE. 


3G0 


13. The chamber of the Naairitea. There they boQed their peace- 
offeriDgs, and burned ttieir hair luider the kettle. 

13. The chamber of the lepers, where they shaved their lair. 

14. The chamber of the "houae of oil," for the "candlestick" 
and " flour-oHering." 

15. The second small Sanhedrin sitting at the door of the court 
of Israel, "as half a round thresLtug floor," and there sat three rows, 
ouch contwning twenty-three men. 

16. Two chambers under the Court of Israel in the earth. There 
the Lerites put their musical iiistnunents and learned the art of sing- 
ing. Their doors were open towards the Court of the Women. 

I". The gate of Nicanor which opened into the Court of Israel 
firom the Court of the Women. It is called " the higher gate " (2 Kings 
XV, 35) and the " new gate " { Jer. xsxvi 10). The ascent to it was 
fifteen steps. Each step was half a cubit high and half a cubit broad. 

18. The Court of Israel. - Its length from north to south was 187 
cubits and its breadth from east to west eleven cubits. 

19. Two chambere to the two sides of the gate, the right called 
the " Chamber of Phincas " the vestment keeper ; and the left the 
" Chamber of Spioery," 

20. The place where the priests gave the blessing. It was a 
landing of three steps, each being half a cubit high. 

21. The chamber of salt, a cave under the Court of the Priests. 
Ita door opened towards the Court of Israel. 

22. The chamber of the " House of pouring" water on offerings. 
It opened to the " Chamber of Salt," and to the chamber of the 
" House of Parva." In it was a staircase for persona to ascend to 
the roof of the " House of Parva." 

23. The chamber of the " House of Parva," where the skins of 
the offerings were sold. On the roof was the " House of Baptism," 
for the high priest on the Day of Atonement. 

24. The slaughter house. In it were eight pillars called " dwarfs," 
and in pach of them were throe iron hooks. 

them the 


2fi. Twenty-four rings, in which the necka of the victims were 
placed for slaughter. 

27. The altar of bum t-ofleri tigs, deserihed in the Tract Measure- 
ments. " An apple," t.i, an heap of ashes always remained oil the 
midst of the altar. 

28. The ascent to the altar was in length thirty-two cubits from 
south to uortli, and in breadth sixteen cubits. There was a saiall 

2 B 


370 APPENDIX. 

space between it and the nltar, so that it might not toiu^h it. From 
the aacent proceeded two small staircaaea, one from the east that 
reached tlie circumferraca, and' one from the west that reached iho 
foundation. In the west was a window, and it waa called Rsbubsl 
(deep). There thej' put the fowls that were ceremouiollj defiled 
until their forma changed. The space from the southern wall of the 
court to the aacent moaaiired eight cubits. 

29. The court of the priests. Its length from north to south 
was 135 cubits, and ita breadth from east to west eleven cubits.. 
And there was a railed gallery there round the walls. 

30. Tiie place where the priests put the ashes of the out«ide and 
inaiile altars, and the crops of the fowls. - It was distant three ]iaiiil-< 
breadths from the east of the ascent. 

31. The lavcr and its pedestal. In it wore twelve pipes that 
twelve priests miglit wash at the same time. There waa a cavity near' 
them to let the water flow off during the night. Their place wa* be- 
tween the porch and the altar — both of them inclined to the MUtli. 
Next to them was the draw-well (31') for supplying tbo lavei tani 
the court with water. 

32. The ]mn for taking away the aahes of the altar. It wai 
placed westward of the ascent 

33. A tablet of marble. In it was fastened a ring, aiid there ttw- 
young priests descended to "the shafts." 

31. Two tables to the west of the ascent, one of marble and one 
of silver. Upon the marble one the priests placed the members and 
fat. And upon the silver one they placed the silver vesseta for service. 

35. Twelve steps ascended from the altar to the iiorch in the space of 
twenty-two cubits. From the altar westward, and lo the east side of 
tlie steps, was plain ground for two cubits. Up from thence were 
three steps— the height of each half a cubit, and its breadtli a cubit. 
And above them waa one step — its height half a cubit and its breadth 
three cubits, and this was called Pia»ta (platform). Above it were 
two steps — the height of each was half a cubit, and their breadth 
three cubits. This also was called Piazza. And higher were fout 
steps — the height of each half a cubit, and their breadth a cubit. 
And higher there was one step, its height half a cubit and its breadth 
four cubits. It also was nUled Pia7.za. We now find that the 
ground of the door of the porch waa higher than the giuund of th* 
place of the altar by six cubits. 1 1, Jaclitn and BoaE — two pillan al 
the entrance of tlie porch. 

36. The porch of the house- — in length from north to south 
seventy cubitt), and in breuiltli from east to west eleven cubits. At 
its door were (m m) two tables, one of marble and one of silver. On 
them the priests laid the shewbreod in their going out and coming 


I 


NOTES ON THE TEMPLE. 371 

37. The doorway of the porch had no doors — there was only a 
vaiL Its breadth was twenty cubits, and its height forty cubits. 
The thickness of the wall was five cubits. Over it were five in- 
wrought beams, one above the other, for ornament They were called 
" cross-beams." 

38. Two chambers open towards the porch in the north and 
south. There the broken knives were put away. Each chamber had 
a little rail door in the corner of the court, and the measure of each of 
these chambers, from north to soutli, was fifteen cubits, and their 
breadth was the breadth of the porch. We fiud the length of the 
Porch to be altogether one hundred cubits. 

39. This " empty " space was called " circumference." It was a 
way which went all round the north and west of the Sanctuary and 
the chambera On the south side it wa.s called the "place of the 
descent of the waters," because there all the rain water ran down 
from the roof of the Sanctuary. 

40. Fifteen chambers were on the north of the Sanctuary, viz. 
five placed upon five, etc The same number were on the south of 
the Sanctuary. The chamber in the north-east comer, and the 
chamber in the south-east corner, had each five doors. The chamber 
in the north-east had one door to the " circumference" — a door to the 
second chamber — a door to the chamber above it — a door towards 
the porch — and a door to the Sanctuary. So also was it in the 
southern side, only there the door to the Sanctuary was always shut 
1 Kings vi. 5 ; Jer. xxxv. 4. 

41. The door of the Sanctuary. Its breadth was ten cubits, and 
its height twenty cubits. The length of the Sanctuary from east to 
west was forty cubits, and its breadth twenty cubits from north to 
south. 

42. A square marble slab to the right of the entrance lying upon 
the earth. From under it was taken the dust for the trial of jealousy. 

43. The golden altar standing in the middle, between the table 
of shew-bread and the candlestick, inclined outwards. 

44. The Candlestick standing in the south of the Sanctuary, and 
before it was a stone with three steps. Ui>on it the priest stood and 
trimmed the lights. And upon it the person who trimmed the 
lights placed the golden cup and the wicks. 

45. The golden table of shewbroad in the north. On it the 
priests laid the shewbrcad and the covers and bowls. 

46. Two golden pedestals. Upon them the High Priest, when 
he went out from the Holy of Holies, placed the blood of the bullock, 
and the blood of the goat, on the Day of Atonement 

47. The Traksin (partition wall) was in width a cubit. In it 
were two vails — the thickness of each vail was an handbreath, and 


372 APPENDIX. 

there was a void space between them of three handbreaths. The two 
vails and the void space were supposed to meet the dispute as to the 
minutely accurate line of separation between the Holy Place and the 
Holy of Holies. 

48. The Holy of Holies in length and breadth twenty cubits by 
twenty. In the midst was the " Stone of Foundation," and upon it 
rested the ark in the Temple of Solomon. 

49. Three chambers to the west of the Sanctuary and the Holy 
of Holies ; and over them three ; and over them two — in all eight 
In the middle chamber was a square passage, and from it there were 
doors to the other chambers alongside, and also a door to the 
chamber above it. • 

50. Eleven cubits was the distance from the back of the House 
of Atonement to the wall of the court 

51. The chamber of the House of Moked (burning). In it were 
two gates — one open to the chel, and one to the court of the 
Sanctuary. In it also were four smaller chambers in its four comers ; 
and there was a square of marble, and in it was fastened a ring, and 
under it were the golden keys of the court suspended on chains. 

52. A chamber where the House of the Asmoneans deposited the 
stones of the altar which the Greeks defiled, and it was unconsecrated. 

53. The chamber where they baked the shew-bread ; and it was 
holy. Adjoining it was also the " seal " or " token " chamber. 

54. The chamber of the House of Burning. From it the priests 
went down to the House of Baptism in a pathway under the arcL It 
was unconsecrated. 

55. A chamber for sheep. It was holy. 

56. Gate of the Offering. 

57. The House of Nitzus (sparks, or sparkling, or of the ovens). 
There was a kind of divan in it, and over it was an upper chamber, 
where the guards stood. They went up to it by a staircase from the 
cheL 

58. The Gate of Flaming. Through this gate the wood was 
brought in for the altar. 

59. The Gate of the Offering. 

60. The Chamber of the Captivity. There the Children of the 
Captivity made a cistern to supply water to the whole court 

61. Chamber of Wood. It was also called the Chamber of the 
" Promenade of the High Priest" 

62. The Chamber of Hewn Stone. There the Great Sanhedrin 
sat (** like half a round threshing-floor") in the half of the unconsecrated 
part which was in it, and before them were three rows each of twenty- 


NOTES ON THE TABERNACLE. 373 

X It was open to the imconsecrateil pliu:e, ajid to the Holjr 

63, The upper Chamber of the House AhtiDS& 

. The Water Gate. Through it they brought the wat«r at the 
t of Tabernacles to pour it upon the altar. 


NOTES ON THE TABERNACLE. 

The Gemara in the Treatise Shabat makes the fullowing observations 
on the Tabernacle : — -" And to the Tabernacle thou shalt make ten 
curtains; — the length of one curtain shall bo twenty-eight cubits."' 
Draw their length to the breadth of the Tabernacle. How much was 
their length ? Twenty-eight Take away for the roof ten ; there re- 
mfun nine cubits to this side, and nine to that side. According to Rabbi 
Judah (who thinks that at the top the boards were thin as a finger), 
one cubit of the sockets only was uncovered. And according bo 
Rabbi Nehemiah (who thinks the boards were of nnifonn thickness), 
there reinaiaB also one cubit of the boards uncovered. Now draw 
their breadth to the length of the Tabernacle. How broad were they ) 
Forty. Take away thirty cubits from the roof; there remain tim. 
According to Rabbi Judah, the cubit of the sockets was also covered. 
Aeeonluig to Eabbi Nehemiah, the cubit of the sockets remwned un- 
covered. " You shall make curtains of goats' hair, the length shall 
be thirty cubits.'" Draw the length to the breadth of the Tabernacle. 
How much was iti Thirty. Reduce ten cubits for the roof ; ten remain 
to this side, and ten to that side. According to Rahbi Judah, it also 
covered the cubit of the sockets. And according to Rabbi Nehemiah, 
they were uncovered. Now draw their breadth to the length of the 
Tabernacle. How broad were they I Forty-four. Take away thirty 
ouluts for the roof; there remain fourteen. Take away two for the 
doahling, as it is written, " Thou shalt double the sixth curtain in the 
forefront of the Tabernacle."' There remain twelve cubits. Accord- 
ing to Rabbi Judah, we understand what is written, that the half of 
the curtain shall trail upon the ground. But what can we do 
according to Rahbi Nehemiah 1 What is the meaning of trailing 1 
Longer than the othera. The scholars of Rabbi Ishmael have learned 
to what was the Tabernacle like } " To a lady who went in the 
market, and the ends of her dress followed her" 

Aben Eira and Ramban, repeating the old tradition, say, there 
were figures on every standard. On the standard of Reuben was the 
picture of a man. On the itaudard of Judah the picture of a lion. 
On the standard of Ephraim the picture of an ox. And on the 
^tondaid of Dan the picture of an raigle. So that they were like the 
nibim which the prophet Ezekiet saw. 
' Exod. xxil 1, 2. ' Eiod. ixri. 8. ' Eiod. iitL 9. 


374 APPENDIX. 

The Rabbis assert that the vessels of the Tabernacle were an 
exact facsimile of real existences in heaven. " Rabbi Jos^, son of 
Rabbi Judah, said, a fiery ark, and a fiery table, and a fiery candle- 
stick descended from heaven. And Moses saw them, and made 
according to their similitude." They also think that the Ark of the 
Covenant is concealed in a chamber under the Temple Enclosure, and 
that it and all the holy vessels will be found at the coming of the 
Messiah. The Apocrypha, however, informs us, that Jeremiah laid 
the Tjibcmacle, and the Ark, and the Altar of Incense, in an " hollow 
cave, in the mountain where Moses climbed up and saw the heritage 
of God." And " the place shall be unknown until the time that God 
gather his people again together, and niccive them into mercy." * The 
sacred vessels, which were taken to Rome after the destruction of 
Jerusalem in a.d. 70, and are now seen sculptured on the Arch of 
Titus, were carried oif to Africa by the Vandals under Genseric. 
Belisarius brought them to Constantinople in a.d. 520. They were 
afterwards sent back to Jerusalem, and from thence they are sup- 
posed to have been carried away to Persia, when Chosroes plundered 
the Holy City in June 614. 

1 2 Mac it. 4-7. 


LIST OF TEXTS. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verse. 


Page. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verse. 


Page. 


Genesis . 


• 

1. 


1 


43 


Exodus . 


xxiii. 


2 


178 


• 

1. 


G 


165 


xxiii. 


11 


3 


i. 


10 


314 


xxiii. 


14 


169 


• • 

11. 


4 


43 


xxiii. 


18 


104 


iv. 


7 


848 


xxiii. 


19 


3 


iv. 


10 


185 


xxiv. 


9 


153 


vi. 


8 


199 


xxiv. 


12 


1 


ix. 


6 


226 


XXV. 


10 


342 


xi. 


8 


199 


XXV. 


11, 15, 


344 


• • • 

XUI. 


13 


199 


21 


xi7. 


19 


240 


XXV. 


23 


346 


x\iiL 


17 


42 


XXV. 


80 


109 


XXV. 


6 


21 


XXV. 


31 


847 


xlix. 


7 


348 


XXV. 


32, 84, 


348 


xlix. 


27 


260 


XXV. 


39 
33,40 


349 


EzodiiR . 


V. 


2 


333 


XX vi. 


1, 2, 8, 9 


873 


• • ■ 

VllL 


8 


344 


xxvi. 


1, 28, 29 


336 


ix. 


27 


333 


XX vi. 


2, 3, 4. 6 


337 


xi. 


19 


99 


xxvi. 


7, 8, 9, 


338 


xii. 


3 


114 


n, 12, 


xii. 


6 


104 


1 


14, 17 


• ■ 

XIL 


10 


110 


1 


xxvi. 


17, 19, 


335 


xii. 


16 


40 


24, 


xiii. 


1-10, 


361 


• 


3133 


11-16 


xxvi. 


31, 33, 


339 


■ ■ • 

Xlll. 


2 . 


42 


35, 36 


• • • 

XUl. 


7 


97 


xxvii. 


9,n,i2, 


340 


• * • 

Xlll. 


8 


117 


13 


xiii. 


9 


362 


■ 


xxvii. 


18, 10 


341,342 


xiii. 


16 


360 


xxviii. 


36-38 


109 


XV. 


16 


240 


1 


xxix. 


42 


358 


XV. 


17 


241 


XXX. 


1, 3 


350 


XV. 


18 


157 


XXX. 


6 


340, 357 


XV. 


26 


198 


XXX. 


13 


4 


xvi. 


21 


26 


XXX. 


15 


864 


xvii. 


9 


348 


: 


XXX. 


IS 


352 


xvii. 


11 


155 


XXX. 


36 


358 


1 


xix. 


17 


24 


XX xii. 


16 


237 


1 


XX. 


24 


225 


xxxiv. 


19 


42 


1 


xxi. 


12 


42 


xxxiv. 


21 


63 


1 


xxi. 


20 


177, 216 


1 


xxxviii. 


1 


351 


376 


LIST OP TEXTS. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Vcr86. 


Page. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verae. 


1 
P««e. 


Exodus . 


xxxviii. 


14, 15 


340 


Leviticus . 


xxiiL 


27 


132 


xxxviii. 


27 


335 


xxiv. 


4 


350 


xxxix. 


3 


339 


xxiv. 


7 


346 


xl. 


34, 38 


357 


xxiv. 
xxiv. 


14 
22 


188 
183 


Leviticus. 


• 

1. 


2 


41 


XXV. 


4 


3 


iv. 


12, 21 


313 


XXV. 


7 


74 


V. 


1 


185 


xxvi. 


13 


37 


ix. 


5 


352 


xxviL 


2, 10, 33 


7 


ix. 


22 


253 


xxviL 


30 


3 


xi. 


33, 38 


8 


■ • • 

XUL 


2 


279 


Numbers . 


ii. 


17 


354, 356 


• • • 

XllL 


3,29 


42 


■ • 

11. 


20 


346 


• • • 

XUL 


10, 17, 


302 


• ■ • 

111. 


23, 29, 


354 


• ■ • 

Xlll. 


12 


270 


31, 35, 


• • ■ 

XIU. 


30 


285 


36, 38 


xiv. 


4 


283, 293 


iv. 


5 


355 


xiv. 


7 


296 


iv. 


15 


356 


xiv. 


28 


298 


iv. 


25 


339, 354 


xiv. 


38-40, 


292 


iv. 


26 


341 


42 


iv. 


26 


351 


xiv. 


45 


43 


V. 


6, 8 


7 


XV. 


1 


41 


V. 


11-31 


5 


XV. 


13 


353 


vi. 


18 


216 


XV. 


16 


53 


vi. 


21 


5 


xvi. 


6 


119 


• • • 

Vlll. 


2 


850 


xvi. 


12, 13 


120 


• ■ • 

\nii. 


8 


301 


xvi 


30 


130 


ix. 


10 


118 


xvi. 


• • • 


132 


ix. 


18, 23 


356 


xvii. 


13 


41 


X. 


• • • 


154 


xviii. 


3 


91 


X. 


2 


348 


xix. 


9, 10 


102 


X. 


2, 22 


356 


xix. 


16 


182 


X. 


14, 21 


355 


xix. 


19, 23 


3 


X. 


33 


343 , 


xLx. 


23 


141 


X. 


35,36 


328 


xix. 


23-25 


63,149 


xi. 


17 


178 


xix. 


24 


177 


xii. 


14 


40 


XX. 


2 


42 


xiv. 


232 


xxi. 


12 


179 


xiv. 


27 


178 


xxii. 


6 


8 


xiv. 


35, 37 


199 


xxii. 


C, 7 


314 


xiv. 


44 


343 


xxii. 


i 


49, 'M)b 


XV. 


20 


3. S6, 


xxii. 


10-13 


43 


23-3 


xxiii. 


4 


151 


XV. 


37-41 


49, 51, 


xxiii. 


10 


156 


250, 360 


xxiii. 


10, 11 


142 


xn. 


33 


30, 200 


xxiii. 


10-12 


304 


xviii. 


8 


3 


xxiii. 


11, 17, 


109 


xviii. 


11, 12 


141 


19 


xviii. 


28 


3 


xxiii. 


15 


102,172 


xix. 


3, 9, 10 


305 


xxiii. 


17 


148, 302 


xix. 


9 


So6 


xxiii. 


22 


2 


xix. 


14 


8 


xxiii. 


22 


80 


xix. 


15 


295. 30S, 
318.324 


LIST OF TKXTS. 


377 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verao. 


Page. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verse. 


Page. 


Nambers . 


xlx. 


18 


85 


Deuterou. 


• • • 

XVIU. 


19 


203 


xxi. 


8 


155 


xix. 


4,5 


42, 82 


xxi. 


19 


237 


XX. 


5, 9 


177 


xxi. 


84 


23 


xxi. 


4 


177, 216 


xxviii. 


■ • • 


302 


xxi. 


18, 20 


194 


xx\iii. 


2 


165 


xxi. 


19, 20 


105 


xxviii. 


15 


109 


xxi. 


23 


189 


xxix. 


7 


132, 133 


xxii. 


1 


41 


xxx. 


4-16 


5 


xxii. 


6 


7 


xxxi. 


23 


8,217 


xxii. 


9-11 


3 


XXXV. 


24, 25 


178 


xxii. 
xxiii. 


11 
3 


89 
331 


Deuteron. 


• 

1. 


1-6 


82 


xxiii. 


18 


302 


iv. 


9 


225 


xxiv. 


7 


201 


iv. 


32 


171 


XX iv. 


19 


2, 80 


V. 


22 


45 


XXV. 


5-11 


5 


vi. 


4 


83, 102 


XXV. 


9 


178 


166,223, 


xxvi. 


1 


3 


361 


xxvi. 


5-11 


117 


vi. 


4-9 


250,361, 


xxvi. 


14 


3 


362 


xxvii. 


• • • 


82 


vi. 


8 


360 


xxvii. 


5 


261 


25, 26 


210 


xxviii. 


... 


82 


a • 

Vll. 


26 


206 


xxviii. 


10 


361 


xi. 


7 


26 


xxix. 


15 


25 


xi. 


13-21 


250,861, 


xxix. 


28 


200 


362 


xxxi. 


16 


348 


xi. 


18 


360 


xxxi. 


26 


343 


• ■ ■ 

Xlll. 


13 


140 


•xxxii. 


14 


37 


• • • 

XIU. 


13, 15, 


200 


xxxii. 


39 


144 


16 


xxxiii. 


17 


154 


• • • 

Xlll. 


17 


201,209, 


xxxiii. 


21 


235 


xiv. 


1 


226 


xiv. 


4.5 


42 


Joshua 


• • 

Vll. 


19, 20, 25 


188 


xiv. 


22 


3,82 


xiv. 


22, 23 


329 


Judges . 


vi. 


12 


61 


xiv. 


22-25 


177 


xxi. 


15 


364 


xiv. 


26 


41 


XV. 


1 


80, 81 


Ruth . . 


• ■ 

11. 


4 


61 


XV. 


2 


82 


XV. 


9 


81 


1 Samui'l. 


• • 

11. 


6 


200 


XV. 


12 


40 


■ • 

11. 


30 


228 


XV. 


19 


42 


iv. 


4 


343 


XV. 


23 


82 


vi. 


8 


343 


xvi. 


3 


51 


xii. 


17 


159 


xvi. 


17 


170 


xiv. 


18 


348 


xvii. 


7 


189 


xvii. 


8, 10. 12 


202 


2 Samuel . 


• • • 

111. 


31, 35 


179 


xvii. 


8-11 


7 


xi. 


11 


343 


xvii. 


13 


203 


Xll. 


8 


179 


xvii. 


15 


82 


xxii. 


27 


32 


xvii. 


15, 19 


180 


xxiv. 


9 


43 


• • ■ 

XVlll. 


8 


161 


378 


LIST OP TEXTS. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verse. 


Page 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Veree. 


Page. 


1 Kings . 


vi. 


5 


871 


Psalms 


xxxiii. 


15 


149 


vi. 


6 


263 


xxxiv. 


7 


363 


• • 

vu. 


23, 26 


352 


XXX viL 


21 


223 


• • 

vu. 


48 


847 


xlviii. 


I 


254 


• • ■ 

Vlll. 


8, 9 


844 


1. 


5 


200 


• • • 

Vlll. 


7.8 


345 


Iv. 


13 


237 


• • ■ 

Vlll. 


37 


160 


Iv. 


23 


235 


xiv. 


16 


235 


Ixviii. 
Ixviii. 


13 
26 


25 
58 


2 Kings . 


XV. 


35 


369 


Ixxviii. 


39 


157 


xviii. 


4, 16 


103 


Ixxviii. 


54 


241 


XX. 


17 


845 


Lxxxi. 


• • > 


254 


XXV. 


18 


119 


Ixxxii. 
xciii. 


1 

• ■ • 


225, 254 
254 


1 Chron. . 


xxi. 


1 


121 


xciv. 


• • ■ 


254 


xxi. 


5 


43 


xcv. 


7 


36 


xxiv. 


7-19 


147 


eii. 


■ • • 


160 


xxiv. 


14 


148 


civ. 


24 


240 


xxvii. 


1 


44 


civ. 


26 


35 


xxix. 


1 


303 


cvii. 


23, 24 


23 


xxix. 


14 


225 


cxiii. 


... 


105, 113 


xxix. 


19 


109 


cxiii. 
cxiv. 


9 

8 


117 
117 


2 Chron. . 


iv. 


2,3,4 


854 


cxvii. 


2 


30 


iv. 


5,6 


352 


cxviiL 


• • » 


142 


iv. 


7 


849 


ex viii. 


1,21.25 


142 


iv. 


8 


846 


cxix. 


72 


240 


iv. 


19 


847 


cxix. 


99 


228 


iv. 


20, 21 


850 


cxix. 


126 


61 


• • • 

Xlll. 


11 


350 


cxx. 


• • « 


146 


xxxii. 


4 


103 


cxx. 


1 


160 


xxxiii. 


13 


199 


oxxvii. 


• . • 


120 


XXXV. 


3 


345 


, 


«-xxviii. 
cxxx. 


2 

• • • 


228 
160 


Nehemiah 


11. 


8 


303 


cxxxii. 


• ■ • 


120 


cxxxiv. 


... 


146 


Esther . 


• • 

11. 


22 


238 


cxxxvi. 


... 


118 


iv. 


16 


365 


f'xxxvi. 


165 


. 


iwxxix. 


5 


23 


Job 


xxi. 


33 


66 


• 


1 


xxvi. 


25 


Proverbs . 


• 

1. 
iii. 


9 
3 


239 
360 


Psalms 


• 

1. 


1 


224 


iii. 


2,8.16,18 


239 


• 

1. 


5 


199, 200 


iii. 


35 


237 


iii. 


7 


23 


IV. 


2 


227, '2^1 


iv. 


4 


32 


iv. 


9, 22 


239 


xvi. 


3 


241 ; 


vi. 


21 


36rt 


xxiv. 


... 


157 ' 


vi. 


22 


241) 


xxiv. 


1 


254 


viii. 


^^3 


360 


XXV. 


10 


331 i 


viii. 


14 


■ 236 


xxix. 


9 


25 


viii. 


21 


235 


1 


XXX. 


1 


57 viii. 


22 


240 


xxxiii. 


6 


29 

1 


1 


xi. 


10 


1S5 


LIST OF TEXTS. 


379 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verse. 


Page. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


Verse. 


Page. 


Proverbs . 


xi. 


13 


182 


Jeremiah . 


xxxvi. 


10 


369 


xi. 


22 


237 


xlix. 


6 


331 


xvi. 


31 


239 


lii. 


24 


119 


xvi. 

xvii. 

xxiii. 


32 

6 

20 


228 
239 
194 


Lamen. . 


• • • 

111. 

• • • 

111. 


23 

28 


29 
224 


xxiii. 


22 


61 


Kzckiel . 


• • • 

Vlll. 


16 


146 


• 


xxiii. 


25 


164 


x. 


• ■ • 


171 


xxxi. 


6 


187 


XX. 


33 


167 


xxxi. 


30, 31 


167 


xli. 


22 


224 


Eccles. . 


• 

1. 


3 


27 


xli. 


23 


262,345 


• 


9 
15 


37 
139,170 


xli. 


24 


263 


1. 

• 

1. 


xliii. 
xliv. 


16 
2 


260 
246,263 


Song of Sol. 


1. 


2 


208 


xlv. 


11, 14 


352 


• • • 

111. 


9, 10 


343 


xlvi. 


21 


258 


• • • 

111. 


11 


168 


xlviii. 


35 


38 


Isaiah 


• 

1. 


18 


132 


Joel . . 


• • 

11. 


13 


160, 223 


• • 

11. 


3 


13 


• • 

11. 


23 


80, 158 


• • • 

111. 


18 


290 


• • • 


f\ 


vi. 
ix. 

X. 

xi. 


• • • 

6 
13 

4 


171 
45 

381 
90 


Amos . . 


111. 
iv. 
ix. 
ix. 


8 

7 

6 

14 


23 
163 
225 
331- 


xii. 


3 


145 


Jonah . . 


• • 

11. 


3 


31 


xxiv. 


23 


239 


• • • 

111. 


10 


160 


XXV. 

xx\'ii. 


8 
1 


37 
22 


Micah 


iv. 


3 


90 


xxviii. 


8 


224 


HaggJii 


• • 

11. 


8 


240 


xxix. 

XXX. 


1 
14 


265 
94 


Zechariah 


■ • « 

111. 

• 


2 


27 


XXX. 


20 


198 


\'i. 

• 


14 


262 


XXX. 


26 


37 


IX. 

• 


9 


36 


xxxi. 


9 


31 


XIV. 

• 


9 


157 


xlii. 


4 


37 


XIV. 


10 


38 


xlii. 


21 


241 


Malachi . 


• ■ • 

111. 


8 


330 


xliii. 


7 


38,241 


• • • 

111. 


16 


224,225 


xlviii. 


13 


43 


iv. 


3 


31 


Iviii. 
Ix. 


11 
1, 19, 20 


314 
357 


St. Matt. . 


vi. 

■ 


2 


368 


Ix. 

Ixv. 

Ixvi. 


J 7 ^ 

21 
20 

1 


198 

37 

240 


IX. 

xviii. 

• xxi. 

xxiii. 


20 

20 

12 

5 


360 

146 

368 

360,361 


Jeremiah . 


X. 


2 


19 


XX vi. 


• « « 


184 


X. 


10 


61 


xxvi. 


05 


191 


xiv. 


1 


160 • 


xxvii. 


■ • • 


184 


xvii. 

■ • • 


6, 8 


227 


St. Mark . 


• ■ 

Vll. 


139 


XXlll. 


6 


38 


• > 


^1 "^ 


A\ 1* k\ 


XXV. 


30 


35 


XII. 

• 


1. 


3b8 


» 


M 


^f^ 


XIV. 


185 


XXIX. 


7 


69 


xxxiv. 


5 


205 


St. Luke 


• 

I. 


9 


121,250 


XXXV. 


4 


371 


xxi. 


2 


368 


380 


LIST OF TEXTS. 


Book. 


Chapter. 


St. Luke . 


xxii. 


XXll. 


XXlll. 


St. John . 


Vll. 

• • ■ 

nil. 


Vlll. 


X. 

• • • 

XIII. 


XVIU. 


XIX. 


Acts . . 


• • • 

111. 

• • • 

111. 


XVI. 


XXI. 


Verse. 


17 


37,38 
20 
59 
23 
5 
28 

« • • 

2 

11 
16 
29 


Page. 


116 
184 
184 

145 
368 
196 
367 
116 
107 
184 

368 
367 
191 
368 


Book. 


diapter. 


Verae. 


1 Cor. . 


X. 


16 


xL 


21 


Hebrews . 


• 


13,14 


Rev. . . 


• • • 

Vlll. 


3,4 


• • 

XIL 


10 


XIV. 


1 


xvi. 


15 


Apocrypha 


1 Maccabees 


u. 


25 


VI. 


49 


2 Maccabees 


• 

1. 


10 


• • 

u. 


4-7 


IV. 


44 


xi. 


27 


PBg^^ 


118 
118 

818 

121 
229 
861 
255 

256 
68 

866 
874 
866 
866 


3 


O 


D 


O 


3 


O 


J 


3 


D 


O 


3 


O 


INDEX. 


ABRAHAM. 

Abraham, sorcery attributed to him, 
21 ; legend of, 23, 24 ; his ten trials, 
232 ; his disciples, 235. 

Abtalyon, his maxims, 219. 

Abtinas, the family of, 242, 255 ; in 
ignominy, 124. 

Agrippa, King, in the procession with 
the first-fruits, 56 ; reading the Scrip- 
tures at the Feast of Tabernacles, 82. 

Akabia, son of Mahalallel, 224. 

Akiba, R., on abrogating the Sabbath, 
106, 107 ; his wise sayings, 226. 

Alexander Jannseus, his contempt for 
the Pharisees, 145. 

Altar, cleansing the, 121 ; measure- 
ments, 250 ; ascent to, 261. 

of Incense, the, 350 ; its three 

names, 850. 

of burnt-offerings, 350 ; dimen- 


sions, 351 ; the painted line for 
sprinkling blood, 351 ; its three 
names, 352. 

Amulets and charms, 20. 

Angels, 29, 30. 

Antigonus of Soco, 218. 

Areka, Abba, Talmud revised by, 2. 

Ark, the, 342 ; dimensions, 842 ; the 
whole and broken tables, 343 ; how 
made by Bezaleel, 344; the staves, 344. 

Ashes, the, taken from the altar, 243, 
244 ; of the red heifer, 304 ; of puri- 
fication, 309-317. 

Astrology and Astronomy in tlie Tal- 
mud, 19. 

Atonement, the Day of, 119 ; prepara- 
tions of the High Priest, 119 ; cleans- 
ing the altar, 121 ; casting lots, 121 ; 


BLASPHEMY. 

the daily offering, 121 ; dress of the 
High Priest, 124, 125 ; the vail, 127 ; 
the Holy of Holies, 127 ; the Founda- 
tion stone, 127 ; sprinkling the blood, 
128 ; cleansing the golden altar, 128 ; 
the goats, 129 ; sending the goat into 
the wilderness, 131 ; burning the 
bullock and the goat, 132 ; reading, 
132 ; ceremonial, 133 ; rule^ and 
exceptions, 133 ; repentance and 
atonement, 135. 
Azazcl, scape-goat, or devil, 125, 129. 

Babylon, the Patriarchate of, upheld 

by the Jews in the East, 11. 
Baking, 213. 
Balaam, disciples of, 235. 
Baldness, 287. 
Baptizing vessels, 173, 174. 
Bar MUzvah, or Son of Commandment, 

359. 
Barley, wave sheaf of, 302. 
Bath Koly legend of the, 16. 
Beheading, 191. 
Ben Asai, his wisdom, 228. 
Bereitha, the, 11, 102. 
Beth Yangzek, a court in Jenisalem 

where the witnesses were examined, 

152. 
Bethcerem, valley of, stones from the, 

261. 
Bethuniki, a village of idolaters, 207. 
Bilgah course, the, degraded by Miriam's 

conduct in the Tem])le, 148. 
Birds, tame, offerings for leprosy, 296, 

297. 
Blasphemy, 191. 


382 


INDEX. 


BLEMISHES. 

Blemishes in the red heifer, 802, 303. 

Blessings, on, in the Mishna Treatise, 
49 ; recitations of the Shemah, 49-52 ; 
exemptions, 53 ; prayers, 54, 55 ; 
fruit, ^6 ; rules at meals, 56-59 ; con- 
troversies in the schools of Shammui 
and Hillel, 59, 60 ; reverence for the 
Temple, 61. 

order of, 156. 

Bobbins, leprosy in, 289. 

Boils in leprosy, .271, 283, 284. 

Bones, breaking the, in a clean Pass- 
over, 110. 

Books, the six, of the Mishna, 2-9. 

Booths, 136, see Tabernacles. 

Borrowing, 80-82. 

Buildings, uncleanness in leprosy, 290 ; 
stones, wood, mortar, 291 ; inspection 
of the house, 291, 292 ; ten indica- 
tions of leprosy in, 293 ; plaster, 298 ; 
defilement, 294, 295. 

Burglary, 195. 

Burning in leprosy, 271, 283, 284. 

Buying, 74-76. 

Calendar of the months, and chief 

Jewish Feasts, and Fasts in each 

year, 364, 305. 
Candlestick, the, in tho Tabornacle, 

347 ; tongs, snufr-dislu-s, 347, 348 ; 

its making by Ik'zaljM-l, 348-360. 
Cantirles, the, rendering the hands 

unclean, 328. 
Captain, the, of the Temph', 243, 245. 
of the Mountain, of the 

House, 255 ; his duty at night, 255. 
Ctusuistry in the Talmud, 18. 
Cattle, leading fortli, on the Sabbath, 

88, 89. 

small, sold to idolaters, 205. 

Chalaphti, K., on study in the Law, 

225. 
Clianina, 1?., on the Passover, 90 ; on 

study in the Law, 224. 

son of Dose, on wisdom, 220. 

Cherem, the, 13. 

Clieese from Bethuniki, 207. 

Citrons, 141. 

Cocks, white, sold to idolaters, 205. 


ELEAZAR. 

Controversies between the schools of 
Shammai and Hillel, 59, 60. 

Com, new, or the sheaf of the first* 
fruits, 156. 

Comets for the New Year, 154 ; when 
sounded, 155. 

Courses, the, of Priests, 147 ; said to 
be arranged by David, 148. 

Court, the, of the Tabernacle, its 
dimensions, 340-342. 

Courts, hollow, in Jcmsalem, 303, 
304. 

Covering of rams' skins for the Taber- 
nacle, 388. 

Cow drinking of the water of purifica- 
tion, 316. 

Creation of the world with ten expres- 
sions, 231. 

Cremona, Jewish library at, plundered, 
and 12,000 copies of the Talmud 
burnt, 14. 

Cripples, mles for, 91. 

CHiltivation, 72, 73. 

Curtains in the Tabernacle, 836-333. 

Damaoes, 6, 7. 

Decorations for idols, 205, 206. 
Defence, the (for the poor), 81. 
Defilements, 172. 

Delegates, thr, for fasting, 162, 105. 
l)evast;itors, tlie, 11. 
Dictators, tlie, lU. 
Disputes, 2.'i.5. 

Dosthai, K., on study in the Law, 2*25. 
Dou^h-olTerin^, the, 90. 
Dress of tlie High Priest on the Day of 
Atonement, 123. 

women's, 89 ; nien\s, 90. 

Dunging, 60. 

KrcLEsiASTKs, rendering the hands 

unclean, 328. 
KMer, the rebillious, 201, 202. 
Kleazar, Habhi, on abrogating the Sal" 

batli, 100, 107. 
llaka])her, U., on resurrection 

and ju<lgment, 231. 

Hamodai, P., on profaning holy 


offerings, 220. 


INDEX. 


383 


ELEAZAR. 

£leazar,8on of Azariah, his wisdom, 227 ; 
on payment of tithes by Ammon and 
Moab, 330 ; his weeping, 331. 

Eschalots, 71. 

Exemptions from reciting the Shemah, 
62,53. 

Fast-days of the Pharisees, 169. 

Fasting, 168 ; proclamations for 169 ; 
ceremonial of, 160 ; prayers, 160, 
161 ; blowing of trumpets, 161 ; the 
weekly watch, 161 ; first three Fasts, 
161 ; the ** Roll of Fasting," 162 ; 
sign of famine, 163 ; partial rain, 
163 ; pestUence, 163 ; rains, 164, 
166 ; lifting up the hands, 166 ; the 
delegates, 165 ; bringing wood for 
the altar, 166 ; mortifications and 
rejoicings, 167. 

Fathers, the, 218 ; the Oral Law, 218 ; 
its transmission, 218 ; names of the 
** Receivers," 218-220 ; maxims, 218- 
220 ; study in the Law, 222, 223, 

226 ; reward of the righteous, 223 ; 
the divine Presence, 224 ; wisdom, 

227 ; honour, 229 ; doctrine, 229 ; 
creation, 231 ; the number "ten," 
231, 232 ; punishments brought on 
the world by sin, .233 ; four sorts of 
men, 233, 234 ; virtues, 236 ; study 
of the Mishna, 236 ; observance of 
the Law, 237 ; the crown of glory, 
239 ; the five possessions, 240 ; the 
glory of God, 241. 

Feast-offering, the, 169 ; incompetent 
persons, 169 ; amount of offering, 
169 ; remission of vows, 170 ; diverse 
opinions about laying on hands, 171 ; 
baptism, 172 ; defilements, treading 
on garments, 172 ; baptizing vessels, 
173, 174 ; degrees of uncleanness, 
173 ; rules for the heave-offering, 
173 ; vessels of the Sanctuary, 174, 
175. 

Feasts, idolatrous, 204. 

Festivals, order of the, 4, 6. 

Figs, dried, of the heave-offerings, 319. 

Fire-place, touching a, 317, 318. 

Fire signals for the new moon, 161. 


HEAVE-OFFERINGS. 

First-fruits brought to Jerusalem, 66, 

67. 
Foot-bath, the, 329. 
Foundation Stone, the, 127. 

Gamaliel, Rabban, on reciting the 
Shemah, 49, 62 ; on three things in 
the Passover, 117 ; his tablet of the 
figure and phases of the moon, 162 ; 
interview with R. Joshua, 163 ; 
questioned by Proclus about bathing 
in the bath of Venus, 209 ; the 
Ammonite proselyte, 331. 

Gamblers, 160. 

Gardening, 64. 

Garments, leprosy in, 287-290. 

Garmu, the family of, in ignominy, 
124. 

Gates to the Mountain of the House, 
256. 

Gemara, the, 10. 

Goats for the Day of Atonement, 131 ; 
the he-goat in the wilderness, 131. 

Gourds, 65. 

Grapes, 207, 213. 

Groves, idolatrous, 210, 211. 

Hadrian's mixture, 207. 

Hair, the white, in leprosy, 273, 284, 
285 ; black, 273. 

the yellow, 284-286. 

Hananiah, accused of heresy, 12, 13. 

Hands, 324 ; pouring water on, 324- 
326 ; vessels, 324, 325 ; clean or un- 
clean, 326-328 ; degrees of unclean- 
ness, 327 ; the straps of phylacteries, 
328 ; book of the I^w, 828 ; the 
Canticles and Ecclesiastes, 328 ; 
foot-baths, 329 ; tithes, 329-331 ; 
passages in Ezra and Daniel, 331 ; 
the Sadducees and Pharisees, 332, 
333. 

Hanging, 1.S9. 

Hanina, R., on prayers for the sick, 55. 

Hashim II., Caliph of Cordova, orders 
the Talmud to be translated into 
Arabic, 14. 

Heating and cooking, 86, 87. 

Heave-offerings, rules for, 173. 


Hea 


1 Euid neU, thei] 


Hi^it'i^r, the, 300 ; tier age, 300 ; ages of 
other offeriugs, 3fll ; whence taken, 
802 ; blemiihes, S03 ; apparation of 
the priest before burning, SOS ; 
Bpriokling, 303 i lads dmwing water, 
304; ashes of red. 304,-' bridge bi 
thfl Mount of Olives, 304 ; procession 
□f heifer and her attendants, 304 ; 
place of preparstian, 305 ; podtion 
of the priest and heifer, 305 ; 
hnming, SOS ; sprinkling the blood, 
306 ; gathering the sahea, 307 ; 
tbssgIb, 308 ; sshes and waters of 
purification, 80B-319 ; proverbs, 313 ; 
rtplilcs, 310; holy things, 81B; 
]i;sBop, 320-323 ; doctrine of inteO' 
tion, 321. 

Herbs, bitter, for tho Passover, B8. 

Uexekiali, hi« six things, 1D2, 103. 

High Priest, the, prepamUons for the 
Day of Atonement, 119 ; hispiiri6ca- 
tians, 123 ; dress, 123 ; coafession, 
124, 125; slaughter? the buIlo<:k, 
126; enters the Holy of Holies, 127; 
sprinkles the blood, 12S ; cleanses 
the golden altar, 128 ; sends the 
goat into the wilderness, 130 ; bnrns 
the bnllock and he -goat, 131 ; 
readiug, 132 ; his Testnients. 133 ; 
duties and privileges, 178, 170; 
oSering incense, SR3. 

Hillel, his school, 15, Ifl ; poverty 
and learning, 16 ; his maxims, 219, 
gte Shammoi. 

Hogma, the son of Levi, in ignominy, 
124. 

Holy of Holies, the, entrance of the 
High Priest, 127. 

Holy One, the, ideas of, in th« Talmud, 
S4, 35. 

Holy things, on, 7, 8. 

Honi Hamnieagal's prayer for 

Houses, idolatroua, 210. 

Hyssop, 320 ; for sprinkling, 


104. 


, 191, i 


icith 


decorationa 205 ; thinp forbidded, 
20S-2DS ; things allowed, SOS. S09 ; 
images, 209 ; idols and fiagmenta of 
idols, 209 ; hills and gravi!a, 210- 
212; ahouso joined loon idol, 210] 
trees, 212; the image of 
S12, 213 ; Pagan aigumeut for, 311 
treading the wine-pn.'sa, 213 ; bokii 
213 : wages, 214 ;.wine of libatii 
214-217 ; culinaiy ntcnaila. 217. 

Idols, desecradon oF, 212 ; distgard 
in time of peace, 213. 

Images, idolatrous, 209, 

Intention, when Elanghtering &e fa 
over, 107 ; the doctrine of. 821. 

Ishmnel, R., on the payment of tit) 
by Amnion and Monb, 329. 

Jehotaf, true pronuneiation of, 185. 

Jericho, the men of, their six things 
102. 

Jerusalem, its privileges above Jan 
155. 

Jochanie, gate of, 2S9. 

Joshua, R., on the Talrand, Ifi ; 
pute with Satan, 28 ; iutorvicv with 
Elijah, 30 ; on abrogating Qa 
baUi, lOS, 107 ; on the Divine Vtaa^ 
287. 

Jns^ R., anecdote of, 239. 

Jiidah tho Holy. R., ou 
95, 9S ; on heavv-olferingB, 331^ 
on the curtAin for the Tnbcmaclt^ 
338. 

Jndges for various onVncvB, 170. 

Judgment, the Last, story of, 31. 

Judgments in money and aaul^ Uiek 


Karbalists, the, 17, 

Kalends, the, 204. 

Kamur, the son of, in ignominy, 131 

King, the, )iis privileges, 170, 160. 

Laub. the. for the daily saerifle«^ Sit; 
its position, 217 ; distributioD of ib 
nicmbt!rs prrparstorjr to being baniU 
24S. 240. 


INDEX. 


385 


LAYER. 

Laver, the, 352 ; dimensions, 352, 353 ; 
the oxen, 353. 

Law, the hook of the, roll of, rendering 
the hands unclean, 328. 

Laying on of hands, 171 ; yarions 
opinions, 171. 

Leayen, searching for, 95 ; when humt, 
96 ; when eaten, 97 ; clearing it off, 
100. 

Legends in the Talmnd, 21-24. 

Lending, 80-82 

Leper, the, in the synagogue, 295 ; 
how cleansed, 296 ; two tame birds, 
296, 297 ; the cedar, 297 ; his three 
sacrifices, 297 ; applying the blood, 
298 ; his offering, 298. 

Leprosy, 267 ; indications of, 267-269 ; 
inspection, 270 ; uncleanncss, 271 ; 
boil and burning, 271, 283, 284; 
scalls, 272, 284-286 ; garments, 272, 
287-290 ; houses, 272 ; white hairs, 
273, 274 ; quickflesh, 273, 274 ; black 
hair, 273 ; white spots, 273-283 ; 
pronouncing, 274, 275 ; inclosing, 
275 ; cleanness and uncleanness, 276 ; 
yellow hair, 284-286 ; shaving, 286 ; 
the beard, 286; baldness, 287 ; warp, 
woof, bobbins, 289 ; buildings, 290- 
293 ; cleansing, 296 ; the birds, 296, 
297 ; the cedar, 297 ; sacrifices, 297 ; 
bathing, 297 ; applying the blood, 
297 ; offering, 298. 

Letters, numerical value of, 17. 

Letting buildings to idolaters, 206. 

lievites, guarding the Sanctuary, 255 ; 
guarding the tabernacle, 354 ; en- 
campment, 355 ; of the Shechiuah, 
855 ; standards, 355 ; the pillar of 
cloud, 355-357 ; blowing the trumpet, 
855 ; the march, 855, 356 ; signs for 
encamping, 356 ; the Shechiuah, 357, 

Libations, idolatrous, 214-217. 
Lighting lamps, 85. 

Logic, Rabbinic, thirteen rules, 40- 

44. 
Lots, casting, for cleansing the altar in 
the Sanctuary, 121 ; for removing 
the ashes, 243 ; for slaughtering and 
sprinkling, 245. 


MOLECH. 

Magic, 21. 

Maimonides, on the Talmud, 15 ; the 
red heifer and scape-goat, 131 ; the 
Treatise on Tabernacles, 136 ; the 
requisites for a dwelling-house, 862. 

Malkoshy the, or latter rain, 80. 

Manna, stories of the, 26. 

Marshes, * waters of, disallowed for 
purification, 314. 

Meals, rules at, 56-60. 

Measurements, 255 ; gates, 256, 258 
the House Moked, 256 ; keys, 257 
manner of entering, 257 ; walls, 259 
gate of Jochania, 259 ; gate Nicanor, 
259; the altar, 260; place for 
slaughter, 261 ; the porch, 262 ; the 
Sanctuary, 262{; size, 264 ; length 
of court, 265 ; chambers, 265, 266. 

MechUta, the, or traditions, 11. 

Mehestanites, the, 16. 

Meier, R., on study in the Law, 236. 

Mercury, the image of, 212. 

Messiah, the, traditions of, 35-38. 

Afezuza^ or sign on the door-post, 362. 

Mishna, the, compiled by R. Judah, 2 ; 
revised by Abba Areka, 2 ; its six 
books, 2-9 ; order of Seeds, 2, 3 ; of 
the Festivals, 4, 5 ; on Women, 5, 6 ; 
on Damages, 6, 7 ; on Holy things, 
7, 8 ; on Purifications, 8, 9. 

Mishna, the, its Treatises : — on Bless- 
ings, 49-61 ; the Sabbatical year, 
62-82 ; the Sabbath, 83-94 ; the 
Passover, 95-118 ; the Day of Atone- 
ment, 119-135; Tabernacles, 186- 
148 ; the New Year, 149-157 ; Fast- 
ing, 158-168 ; the Feast-offering, 
169-175; the Sanhedrin, 176-203; 
Idolatry, 204-217 ; the Fathers, 218- 
241 ; tlie Daily Sacrifice, 242-264 ; 
measurements, 255-266 ; I/eprosy, 
267-299; the Heifer, 300-823 ; Hands, 
324-333 ; the Tabernacle, 834-358. 
Misruiinitcs, the, 17. 
Modiim, or Modin, 113. 
Modiyith, 174. 
Moked, the House, 242 ; chambers and 

doors, 255, 256. 
Molech, 192. 
C 


i 


a 


Money, 77. 

Money matters, judgments in, 180. 

Honobaxita, king of AJiab^ne, 124. 

Moon, the, l^end of, in the Talmud, 
160. 

Moon, the New, 150 ; witaeasea, 150- 
151 ; Gre Hignils, 151 ; Kabban 
GnmniWa Inblct of the phaaea, 1S2 
seenhy theSanhedrin, 163; receiring 
evidence of, 156. 

Moses, legend oF, 25 ; and the fiery 
Berpent, I6S ; received the Oral 
Law and delivered it to Joshua, 21S. 

Monnlain of tho Houbh, the, 265 ; 
captaitl of, 265 ; gates, 2B8-268 ; 
lookiiig the galea, 267, 2S9 ; mea- 
sureni^nts, 257 ; walls, steps, 258 ; 
conrt of the women, 268 ; chambers, 
258, 259 ; the altar, 2110 ; place for 
slaughter. 281 ; the laver, 261 ; door- 
way of the poich, SS2 ; the Sanctuary, 
262-286 ; the court, 285. 

Munler, 198, 197. 

Myrtle bonghs allowed at the Feast of 
Tahernacles, 110. 

Natai, R.,hi3niiixiTn, 219. 
Nebnzaradan, li-gcud of, 27. 
Nechimya, R. , on tlio joko of the Law, 

22S. 
New Tear, the, 149 ; four new years, 

119 : judgmentant four periods, 149 ; 

the new moon, 160 ; witnesses ex- 

aminad in the court, Beth Yaugiiek, 


privileges of Jerusalem over Jsmnia, 

156 I order of blessings, 156 ; reading, 

157 ; order for sounding tho trumpet, 
167. 

Nieanor gate, the, 268, 259. 
Nicknames, waters with, iliaallowed 

for puriliration, 311. 
Nitzua, the House, 242, 256. 

Otfebisc, the daily, 103 ; the Fcoat, 

107 ; ages of, 301. 
Og, the king of Bashan, legend of, S3. 

Olive), Mount of, causeway to, from 


the Mouolaill of the Hi 

procession of the priest, the bcitcr, 

and attendants, 804, 
Omer, or wave shcof, 68, 14a 
Onions, 86, 73. 
Opiniouists, the, 10. 
Oral Lav, the, 218. 

Paoan srgnmeut for idoktf7, 218. 

Palm -branches, 140; shaking, 142; 
thrashing with, 144 : t 
rats the Sanctuary, 158. 

Panioa, cave of, 315. 

Paschal Feast, the, schunn about tb« 
calculation, 12. 

I'naiiover, the. Treatise on, 65 ; soajchii^ 
lor leaven, 96 ; when eaten, 97 ; 
hitter herbe, BS ; doogh, 99 ; tdtiog 
and working, 101 ; trades allowed, 
102 ; slattghtering the daily offering, 
103, 104 ; feast-ofTerio^ 107 ; intcn- 
tiou, 107 ; routing, 108 ; legal nn- 
cleannesB, 106 ; the golden plat*, 
11)9; variousoontingencies, 111-116; 
first and second. IIS ; evca of Uw 
Psssovers, 116; prnisv and thanks- 
giving, 117 : after midnight, 118. 

Patriarclis, the, of Babylon, their 
viceregal power and court, 11, 12. 

of Tiberiaa, 11 ; rivalry with 

Babylon, 12. 

Pestilence, order of fasting, 183, 
Pharisees, the, dilfciTUt Bhudes of 

charaeteT attribnlcd to thetn, IS; 

their sects, 17 ; blamed by the Sad- 

dueees, 332. 
Fhylaeterica, 328, S60. 
Pigeon-hreeden, 150. 
Pipes, mnsical, at the Feast of Tabrr- 

noRlca, 14S. 
Pillar of acnd. the, 356-557. 
Plate, the golden, of the Uigh Priut, 

109. 
Ploughing, 62, 63. 
Prayers, rules for, 64, 66. 
PreceptH, hiading, on tho miu of Vaah, ^ 

32. 33. 
Priest High, the, IIB, let High PrioW 


INDEX. 


387 


PWESTS. 

Priests, their duties in the Temple, 

242-252. 
Pronouncing on leprosy, 274, 276. 
Property, public, three countries in the 

Sabbatioftl year, 79. 
Proverbs, 33-36. 

Pumpkin bottle for purification, 808. 
Punishments, seven kinds for seven 

important sins, 283. 
Purifications, on, 8, 9 ; ashes and 

waters of, 809, things allowed and 

disallowed, 309-320. 

Quarries in the Sabbatical year, 67. 
Quartesima, the, 204. 
Quickflesh in leprosy, 273, 274. 

Rabbi Vndah the Holy, compiles the 

Mishna, 2. 
Rain, fasting for, 158, 159; partial, 

163 ; Hone Hamnieagal's prayer for, 

164. 
Receivers, the forty, 1. 
Reed, hollow, for the ashes of the red 

heifer, 308. 
Removals on the Sabbath, 83. 
Reptiles, 815. 

Resurrection, doctrine of the, 31. 
Reuchlin demands toleration for the 

Talmud, 14. 
Rice, 65. 

Rings, golden, in the Tabernacle, 335. 
Roasting the Passover, 108. 
Ro8e, the Sabbatical, 76. 

Sabbath, the, treatise on, 83 ; re- 
movals, 83 ; work to be avoided, 83- 
85 ; lighting lamps, 85, 86 ; heating, 
86-88 ; leading forth cattle, 88, 89 ; 
dress, 89-91 ; principal and secondary 
work, 91, 92; rules for, 91, 92; 
smaller matters, 93, 94. 

Sabbatical year, the, treatise on, 62 
ploughing, 02, 63 ; gardening, 64 
herbs, gounls, 65; dunging, 66 
stones, quarries, terraces, 67, 68 
sowing, 68 ; cutting down trees, 69 
olives, 70 ; figs, 70 ; eschalots, 71 
Belling and lendiug, 71, 72 ; cultiva- 


8ANHEDRIN. 

tion, 72, 73 ; buying and selling, 
74-76 ; money, 77 ; public property, 
79 ; borrowing and lending, 80-82. 

Sacrifice, the daily, 242 ; guarding 
the Temple at night, 242 ; casting 
lots for removing the ashes from the 
altar, 243 ; opening the Temple, 
243 ; kindling the wood, 244 ; lots 
for slaughtering and sprinkling, 
245, 246 ; examining the daily sacri- 
fice, 246 ; slaughter-house, 246 ; 
sounds heard at Jericho, 246, 247 ; 
removing the snuff from the candle- 
stick, 247 ; position of the lamb, 
247 ; pouring out its blood, 248 ; 
cutting up its members, 248, 249 ; 
order of carrying them to the altar, 
249 ; blessings, 250 ; incense, 250, 
252 ; sound of the shovel, 251 ; 
cleansing the altar, 251 ; the High 
Priest on the altar, 253 ; chanting 
and psalm singing, 254. 

Sacrifices, private and public, 171. 

Sadducees, the, 16 ; blaming the Phari- 
sees, 832. 

Sagan, the, or SufTragan, 253. 

Salt, strewn on the ascent to the altar, 
261. 

Sanctuary, the, measurements, 262, 
264 ; doors, 262 ; chambers, 263 ; 
gallery, 263. 

Sandals, 313. 

Sanhedrin, the, 176 ; judges required 
for various offences, 176, 177 ; tri- 
bunal of 71 members, 177 ; the Great, 
177 ; the Small, 178 ; the High 
Priest's duties and privileges, 178, 
179 ; the king's privileges, 179, 180 ; 
judgments, 180 ; witnesses examined, 
181-183, 185-187; verdicts, 183; 
judgments in money and souls, 183- 
185 ; intimidating witnesses, 184 ; 
stoning, 187-189; hanging, 189; 
buniing, 190 ; beheading, 191 ; 
strangling, 191,201-203; blasphemy, 
idolatry, 191 ; giving his seeil to 
Molcch, 192 ; profaning the Sabbath, 
192 ; enticing, 193 ; sorcery, 198 ; 
stubborn and rebellious sous, 194, 


195; burglsry, 196; murder, 1B6- 
163 ; tlie^ 1S8 ; those who have no 
portion in the world to come, 168- 
301 ; Y&rioiu offeoi^ca, 201-203 ; the 
rvhelliouH Elder, 201. 

Saplioga, 03, 61. 

Sotan nnd eril spirits, 28. 

Saturnalia, the, 204. 

ScalU in leprosy, 272, 285 ; ahavisg Tor, 
28S. 

Suape-goat, the, 131, 

Schools of Shammai and Hillel, their 
controversies relating to meals, G9, 
60 ; olive treex, 69 ; selling a heifer, 
72 ; deeisions about work, 84 ; on 
the Pitsaover, 112 ; on booths, 139. 

Scribes, the, 218. 

Scriptiu'ea, reading the, 1S7. 

Seas, the, allowed for puriBt-ation, 3U. 

Seeds, order of, 2, 3. 

Soiling, 75, 77. 

Serrices, the Temple, 266. 

SeTenty-ons, the tribunal of, 177. 

Shammai, school of, 16, Mi Schools, 

Shas, the Babylon Talmud called so by 
the JeWB, 10, 

ShaviDg the Scall, 286. 

Sheba, Queen of, teats the knowledge 
of Solomon. 26. 

Sbeehinah, the, 35G, 357. 

Shemah, the, racitittiona of, 49-52 ; 
exemptions, 53, 63. 

Shemoioh, his maxims, 219. 

Shewbread, the table of, 348; dimen- 
aiuns, 34$. 

Shovel, the, ita sound, 247, 251. 

Simon, B., Ktudy in the Law, 224 ; the 
throe crowns, 229. 

Simon, K., son of Nathaniel, ha metitfi, 
222, 223. 

Simon the iTiut, 218. 

Simon, Kabban, son of Gamaliol, sends 
his legates to Ahia, 12 ; on holidsfg 
in Israel, 167 ; bringing witnesses, 
IS2, 183 ; his maxims, 220. 

Slaughtering the Passover, 103, 104. 

Sockets of silver in the Tabernacle, 
S35. 

Solomon, legend of, 28, 27. 


Sans, punishmenta for stubborn i 

lehellious, 194. 
Sorcery, 21. 193. 

Spots, white, in leprosy, 373-2S3. 
Sprinkling the blood on the Day a 

Atonement, 128, 199 ; of tlie i 

heifer, 305 ; with hyssop, 320-323. 
Standards of the Levites, 965. 
Staves, the, of the ark, 344, 34S. 
Strangling, 161. 201. 
Stone of ProckmsXinn, 164. 
Stone lionse, removal of tbn priest h 

the, 303. 

Stones, removing 64, 67 ; fur idols, 21<kfl 
Stoniug, 187-180, 

Tabrrnacik, the, 334 ; i 

83S ; sockets, boards, rings, 38S, 339 d| 
pipes of gold, 336 ; curtains. 330-33SgO 
threads, taches, loops, 337, S38ia 
coverings, 338 ; the vail, 338 ; Uia 
Holy of Holies, 339 ; conning work, 
339 ; the court, 340 ; dimenmoni, 
340-342 ; the ark, 342-345 ; davM, 
344, 345 ; the table, 316 ; ihew- 
bresd, 346 ; candlestick, S47-S50 ; 
altar of incense, 350 ; altaf of barnt- 
olTcritigi, SGO ; line for the Rprinkting 
of blood, 351 ; the taver, 3G3-3GI£{ 
guards, 364-357 ; notes on. 373, 37t/ 

Tabeniaclea, on, 138 ; uxb and cove 
of, 136, 137 ; eating and drinking 
136 ; palm-branches. 140-144 ; dth 
141 ; reading nod blei 
willows, 143, 144 ; thnshing 1 
branchej^l44 ; hymns and nyotcii 
144 ; joy of the water-ilrawiug, 14^fl 
lighting and dandng, 146 ; sinp 
and music, 146 ; blowing tminpc 
147 ; oHeriugs and coarse^ 147, 14^ 

Tslilb, the. 359. 

Talmud, the Babylon, 3 ; csllod U 
Shiu by the Jews, 10 ; its o( 
ment tnd completion. 10 1 
its compilation, 11 ; adopted hf il 
orthodox Jews, 14 ; pniodicaT 
banned and burnt, 14 ; ila Cudn* 
ing inllueuce, 14 ; rules of inttcpffn 
tation, 15 ; legrudar; pirta, Hi 


TALMUD. 

casuistry, 18 ; astronomy, astrology, 
19 1 ■mal«ts and cbanns, 20 ; magic 
and sorcery, 21 ; legends, 21-24 ; the 
Law, 24-27 ; evil spirits snd Satan, 
2B ; heaven and hell, 30, 31 ; reaur- 
rectionand last judgment, 31 ; con- 
tradicU Holy Scripture, 32 ; eatimate 
of Gentiles, 32 ; precepts binding 
on the SODS of Noah, 32 ; stories of 
Rabbis, 33 ; provertis, 33, 34 ; ideas 
of God, 34, 35 ; the Messiah, S5-3S ; 
Christianity, 39 ; Eabbiuic logic, 
40-44. 

Talmad, the, of Jerusalem, 2, 35. 

Taignm, tlie, of Jonathan, on the 
manna, 26. 

Tarphon, R., on the Talmud, 17; 
rewalxl of the righteous, 223 ; on the 
payment of tithes by Ammou and 
Hoab, 330. 

Tax-gatherers, the, 174. 

Temple, the, reverence for. 61 ; guarded 
at night, 242 ; services, 206 ; notes 
on the pUn of, 367-373. 

TeD, the, expressions for the creation 
of the world, 231 ; generations from 
Adam to Koah, 231 ; from Noah to 
Abnham, 231 ; trials of Abraham. 
232 ; miracles in Kgypt, 232 ; at the 
Bed Sea, 232 ; plagues, 232 ; tempta- 
tions in the wilderness, 232 ; miracles 
in the holy temple, 232 j thin(,'S 
created on the eve of the Ssbbath, 232. 

Temcet, 67. 

Tiberias, the Patriarchate of, npheld by 
the Jevs in the west, 11. 

Tithes, 329 ; discussion aboat Ammon 
snd Hoab in the Sabbatical year, 329- 
331. 

Titns, legend pf, 27. 

To«ephtoth, the, or appendices, 10. 

Trees, desecrated by idolaters, 212. 

Troughs, 308, 300. 


Tnunpets, order of blowing, 167, 181. 

Uncleanness, degrees of, 173, 303, 

313, 314, 320, 323, 327. 
UaurefB, 150. 
Utensils, culinar;, 217. 
Urim and Thummim, 133. 

Vail, the, of the Tabernacle, 3S9, 340. 
Vessels of the Sanctuary, bnptism of, 

175 ; earthen, for the ashes of the red 

heifer, 307 ; washing, 307. 
Virtues, 235. 
Vows, remission of, 170. 

Warf and woof, the, leprosy in, 279. 

Washing hands, 324, 325. 

Watch, priests of the weekly, 181, 162, 

, Water for washing hands, 324-326. 
. Water-drawing, joy of the, 145. 
' Waters of purification, 309-310 ; some 
disallowed, 314. 

Well of Ahab, 315. 

Willows, at the feast of Tabemicles, 
I 143. 
' Wine of idolatrons libation, 214-217. 

Wine-press, treading the, 213. 

Witnesses for the new moon, ISO ; which 
I disallowed, 150 ; fire signals, 151 ; at 
I Beth Yangzck, 152 ; how examined, 
152,153, 181-18S; illegal, 131 ; inti- 
midated, 181 ; when examined, 186, 
I 188. 

Wolves, 164. 

Women, 6, 8. 

Working on the Tsssover, 100-102. 

Works, principal aud secondary, 92,93. 

World to come, the, those who have 


Zapor, R., on study in the l«w, 22f. 
Zomtt, the son of, his wonli of wisdom. 


JTije Speaker^g Commentarg on tije l^olg l&Mt—Contd. 

JSTEABLY BEADY, VOIi. I. OF 

THE NEW TESTAMENT3 with an Explanatory and Critical 
Commentary, and a Revision of the Translation. By BISHOPS and 
CLERGY of the ANGLICAN CHURCH. Edited by F. C. COOK, M. A. , 
Canon of Exeter, Preacher at Lincoln's Inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to 
the Queen. To be completed in 4 Vols. Medium Svo. 

Vols. I. ft II. — Ooopels aad AoU. 

Oeneral Intro* ) 
duotion i ^^' THOMSoh, D.D., Lord Archbishop of York. 

St. Matthew and) h. Lonoukvillb Makskl, D.D., late Dean of St Paul's, and the 
St. Hark . . / Editor. 

St. IiUke . . . W. Basil Joneb, D.D., Lord Bishop of St David's. 

Aft T/«iin (R P. Westcott, D.D., Canon of Peterboroogh, and Regius Pro- 

0K.Jonn . . .| fessor of Divinity at Cambridge. 

The Acts . . . W. Jacobson, D.D., Lord Bishop of Chester. 

VoL m.— Xplstlea of St. PatiL 

BAmima J K. H. Giitord, D.D., Hon. Canon of Worcester, Rector of Much 

AronuuiB , , . -^ Hadham, and Examining Chaphiin to the Bishop of London. 

/T. S. Evans, Canon of Durham, and Professor of Greek in Durham 
Ck>rinthianB . A University. 

\J. Waitb, M.A, Vicar of Norham, Northumberland. 

Ckklatians • » J. 8. Howsok, D.D., Dean of Chester. 

Philippians, v 

Sphesians, Col- 1 J- A. jBRmtE, D.D., late Dean of Lincoln. 

OBsiaziB, Thes- vCanon Wbstcott, D.D. 

salonianSa and j Wm. AuEXA2n)KR, D.D., Lord Bishop of Deny and Raphoe. 

Philemon / 

Pastoral Spistles John Jacksok, D.D., Lord Bishop of London. 
Hebrews . . . W. Kat, D.D. 

VoL rv.— Cathollo SplstlM aad B«velation. 
Barnes ^' ^* } Robkrt Scott, D.D., Dean of Rochester. 
Joto * } ^^ AiJEXANDKB, D. D., Lord Bishop of Derry and Raphoe. 

St. Peter and St. C^- ^- Liohttoot, D.D., Canon of St. Paul's, and Margaret Profet- 
-r-nA^ '■{ sor of Divinity at Cambridge. 

juae . . . \^j. R LuMBY, RD., Incumbent of St Edward's Cambridge. 

BerelAtlon of St. ) _ _ ... . ^ ... 

J %^ \ Wm. Lxe, Archdeacon of Dublm. 


Also in preparation, 
THE STUDENT'S EDITION 

OF THE 

SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY ON THE BIBLE, 

CAREFULLY ABRIDGED FROM THE LARGER WORK, 

Edited by the Bev. J. M. FXTIiliEB, M.A., Vicar of Bezley. 

To be published in Monthly Vols. Crown 8vo. 

JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 


Dr. WILLIAM SMITH'S CHURCH DICTIONARIES. 


A DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE: cokprkiso m Asngrm^. 

BuwRAPHT. GEootuPHT, ASD Natueal HisToRT. By Vwioiis WciUra. 
EJiteJ by WILLIAM SMITH, D.C.L. •nd LL.D. With lUnBtrationa. 
3 voU, Medium Svo. £5 Sf. 


A Dr. SiBlth'» 'BIWu Dlctlonaiy,' ertr 
ntator.'-— rii«M. 

t kllka for nr.boUr ud ■iRclcnl. The r 
a Icijid bltbflrtu pralucetL*'-'- J f^runiR- 


a of iQlclllgoDCfl mi 


A DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITlESl 

IKQ THE HlSTOBT, INSTITUTIONS, AM) ANTIqUITCKS Of THE CHBISTUN 

Chukch. By Varicms WriWra. Edited by WM. SMITH, D.C.L.. and 
Rev. professor CHEETIUM, M,A. With llliwtmtioM. Vol I. 
(To bo oomiiluted iil 2 toU.) Medium 8ro. 31>. M, 
This Work commenceB at the point atwhjeh the "Dictionary of the Bibl»" 

lenvea off, nud girea an accouat of the Inalitutions of the CIiriBtum Church, 

from Iho time of ths AjKuitles to the nge of Cbarlenm^e. 


dgi nrllhln » 


if inf< 
cnpy« 


en o[ the Tuloua douuuimUoDf. ton ut tU 
LniLinlor; Tolmns of thi* lDiic.«ipc«t«d rad] 

I riDCuttnB hiie uecednl oar lilgbcM a 

II line, wbeLliM Geniun, FTOith, or " 


■■ Thii vilumble dl 
to vlilch bu blthgrt< 

Ubniica. Dot utily of tba cWrgj *nd of mln: 
educated Ujmen."— >^i»d<mL 

"We welcoDid with genuine pleoinn 11 
Itrng-deilRd work. Onr flnt fev ^Uni^efl i 
that the thomuEfaneu nu'l cmnpleleneu oT iu riec 
Utloaj. It dlslineet nil iU oompeeM In lU own lini 

m. 
A DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN BIOGRAPHY, LITERA-i 

TURE. SECTS, and DOCTRINES. By Vanarm Writura. Edited bf 1 

WM. SMITH, D.CL., and Brv. PROFESSOR WACE, M.A. VdJ. t^ 

(To be completed in 3 toU.) Medium Bvu. 3U Set 

Tbia Work is designed to giva a, comprehetisivo account of tl 

the Literary, the Dogmatic, and the Ecclesiastical Uh of the Churclh] 

daring the first eight centuries of Christianity, and, in Mmbinatioii with 9 

the Dictionaiy of Christian Antii]uities, it will atford, it is believed, thtl 

most complete collection of mutcriaU for the Church History o 

period which has yet been published, either id England or abroad. 

"It Issgitut ravdil to EoKlUb KheUnhip «nd Eogllib theobiny to bare (irednonlaJ 

worklike thle, fiill orcbe mulla of oilgiiuluid UburioueiludT. wlilcb i«<t>l ~ ~ 

ddee of diapnted queitloiLa. und diRkring in t1b> poaifMy fram the wnten uf 

tuj c^iult with » much nrafldeiiee, that thej will And tound end vilneble 

Hm edlton ruiy with Juttlce pnt torwud tb« elolm Ihel they ham nada acnueMe t 

•duelled panoDi ■ great leiu of hifonnatlDD liltlierto eDljr (he pn>Ui^ at atadeali «< 

the coumuid of a Urge Ubmcj."— Tliui. 


JOHN MURRAY, ALI3E5UKI.E STREET. 


i 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST 
©^Bjlagital Jtnb ]|LE%iai!S ^uHitaliutts. 

THE BIBLE AND PRAYER-BOOK. 

THE SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY. 

THE HOLY BIBLE, according to the Authorised 
Veraon, A.n. r6M, with an EXPLANATORY anJ Critical Com- 
MENTAHv, am! Revisjon of [he Trajsji.ation. By BISHOPS 
and CLERGY of ihe ANGLICAN CHURCH. Edite.1 by 
F. C. COOK, M.A., Canon of Exeter, Preacher at Lincoln's Inn, 
and Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen. Medium 8vo. 
THE OLD TESTAMENT. 

TsL L Ita. Tha Pntataiuh:— 
T(ib,ILftIIL Ma. Tht Hiitaciul Biuki:— 

TaL IT. Ito. Th* F••ElrlUSsak■:— 

ia^E°'1!wTT. H.A.. Hoo.CumofCIirtitChiinlL 
■Dd FntcBia of Pulinl Thcnliiiy. KkK"! Coijwi. LwdnL^' 

W. T. BULLOCK. M.*.. PubautaJJufSt ftoTl. 

■OHe « HLOIUII.... T. KlNCSIlV■ly,H,A..rtelKDd>rTlItS4ll>blIIr' 
T<lL T. Ml iHiah ni lanaUh. 

ToL TI U*. btkial, Duiat, b>< tt< Twain Sur Pn^boli. 

"*""'■ tj. (I. FULLHa. M.A..Vkilo(ll«l^. KmL 

■ ... E~HvxTi.ax.HJi..rnimitijiiiVim. 

''] R. GAHOILL. M.A.. Pniraio of Anblc. Oi 

TK Sail CLAKK. U.A-.B&dlhr EurrOlt 

»; j W. D>AK> UJ^. Hoc C^ .1 w<««, 

6 Vols. Medinm 8*0, £6 i S'. 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 


Koiv Piiblishin^^ 

THE SPEAKER'S COMMENTARY. 

THE NEW TESTAMENT, with an Explanatory 
and Crjtical Commentary, and a Revision of the Trans- 
lation. By BISHOPS and CLERGY of the ANGLICAN 
CHURCH. Edited by F. C. COOK, M.A.. Canon of Exeter, 
Preacher at Lincoln's Inn, and Chaplain in Ordinary to the Queen. 
4 vols. Medium 8vo. 

Vols. I. ft n. Oofpelt and Acta:— 

*wSf^^ ""y.*??!!?! } ^^*^- THOMSON. D.I>., Lord ArchhUhop of York. 

8T. MATTHEW Mi4) 11. I.onci'F.VII.le MakSEL. D.D., Ute Dean of St. P^ul'b, and tlic 
ST. MAKE / HDITDR. 

IT LTJXS W. Basil Jones, D.IX. Lmd Bishop of St P.-ivuI's. 

•V TAW / H- H. WESTCt)TT. H.D.. Canon of Peterborough, and Rcirtus Prof, cf 

■T. JQBfl I DivinUy at Cambridnc. 

THE AOn W. J ACOliSON. D. D. , Lord BUhnp of Chester. 

YoL m. Spiatlet of Bt Paul \— 

»ftigAW /*-• '^- GllFORD. D.n., Hon. Canon of Worcester, Rector of Much 

"^^ ■ ( lladliaui, and Exaininin^; Chiii>lain to the Bishop of London. 

( T. S. KVANS, Cunon of Durham, and Professor of Greek in Durhaju 

OOBDITHZANB \ University. 

(J. Waite. M.A., Vicar of Norham. Northumbcrkmd. 

OALATIAini J. S. HOWSON. D.D., I>can of Chester. 


mawAiiW HAAWB, gj^M, ALEXANDER. U.D., I-ord BUhopof Derry and Raphoc. 

PA8T0EAL EFI8TLB8.. JOHN jACKSON, D.D., Lord Bishop of London. 
HKMllWB W. KAY. D.D. 

Vol. IV. Catholic Epiatlea and Rorelatioii:^ 

SFI8TLB OP 8T. JAKES RoiiEKT SCOTT. D.D.. Dean of Rochester. 

EPISTLES OP ST. JOHM* Wm. ALE.V andbr. D.D., I^rd Bishop of Deny and Raphoe. 

(J. B. Lic.H IFOOT. D.D., Canon of St. I'auls, and Margaret Professor 

ST. PETEE * ST. JUDE { of Divinity .it Canihridtrc. 

(J- R> Lt'MiiY, B.D., Incumbent of St. Edward's, Cambridge. 

*5^L".?!!..I!f...*T!}^^'*'- ^^^ ^•^- Archdeacon of Dublin. 


THE EPISTLES OF ST. PAUL TO THE CORIN- 

Till ANS. The Greek Text, with Critical Notes and Dissertations. 
By A. P. STANLEY, D.D., Dean of Westminster. Fourth 
Edition. 8vo. \%s, 

THE PSALTER OF 1539. A Landmark of the English 

Language. With Preface and Notes. By Rev. JOHN EARLE, 
M.A., Prebendary of Wells, and Professor of Anglo-Saxon at 
Oxford. Square 8vo. 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 3 


THE NEW TESTAMENT. Edited with a plain 

PRACTICAL COMMENTARY for FAMILIES and GENE- 
RAL READERS. T/uni Editiott, With lOO Illustrations. 
2 vols. 8vo. 2\S, 

VOL. I.— THE GOSPELS. By EDWARD CHURTON, 
M.A., late Archdeacon of Cleveland and Rector of Crayke. 

VOL IL— THE ACTS AND EPISTLES. By W. BASIL 
JONES, D.D., Lord Bishop of St. David's. 

The Illustrations in this work consist of Panoramic and other Views 
of Places mentioned in the Sacred Text, from Sketches and Photographs 
made on the spot by Rev. S. C. Malan, M.A., and the late James 
Graham. 

" lliis ' Commentary ' is not less marked by accuracy and sound learning, than by 
judgment, candour, and piety.'* — Guardian. 

"A Book for all time.' — -Vi»/« atuL Queries. 

"This beautiful book."— 7Mm Bull. 

** In this edition of the New Testament, the results of modem travel, of modem 
discovery, of modem criticism, are brought together and made available for instruc- 
tion." — A thenetunt. 

" These volumes will be sought after." — English Churchman. 

" A work of great elegance and sound scholarship. A most valuable book, complete 
and satisfactory in its dctauls. As a gift-book it will be most appropriate and in- 
>'aluab!e.'' — Union Revinv. 

A DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE : comprising its 

Antiquities, Biography, Geography, and Natural His- 
tory. By Various Writers. Edited by WILLIAM SMITH, 
D.C.L., and LL.D. Editor of the "Classical and Latin Dic- 
tionaries. " With Illustrations. 3 vols. Medium 8vo. 5/. 5/. 

" Dr. Smith's ' Bible Dictionary' could not fail to take a very high place in English 
literature ; for no similar work in our own or in any other language is for a moment 
to be compared with it." — Quarterly /^tT'/Wc. 

" By such a work as Dr. Smith's ' Bible Dictionary,' every man of intelligenc: may 
become his o«'n commentator."— y////^. 

" Oiu* Churches could scarcely make a better investment than by adding this work 
of unsurpassed excellence to their pastors' library." — Baptist Magazine. 

"A repertory of invaluable Biblical \orc.*'~ Literary Churchtnan. 

" A magnificent tmdertaking worthy the great name of its Editor, and the great 
body of eminent men he has gathered around him." — Christian Witness. 

"A book of reference alike for scholar and student The most complete, learned, 
and trust>»'orthy work of the kind hitherto produced." — Athenetutn. 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 


FOR FAMILIES AND STUDENTS. 

A CONCISE DICTIONARY OF THE BIBLE. Con- 

densed from the larger Dictionary. Edited by WM. SMITH, 
D.C.L. With Maps and 300 Illustrations. Medium 8vo. 21s. 

FOR SCHOOLS AND YOUNG PERSONS. 

A SMALLER BIBLE DICTIONARY. Abridged from 

the larger Work. By WM. SMITH, D.C.L. With Maps, 
Illustrations, and Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. ys. 6if, 

** An invaluable service has been rendered to students in the condensation of Dr. 
Wm. Smith's ' Bible Dictionar>'.' The work has been done as only a carefuland intelli- 
gent scholar could do it, which preserves to us the essential scholarship and value of 
each article."— /^nVwA Quarterly Review. 

THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER, illustrated 

with Borders, Initial Letters, Woodcuts, and Notes explaining 
THE Order and History of the Offices. By Rev. 
THOMAS JAMES, M. A., late Honorary Canon of Peterlwrough. 
8vo. i&r. cloth; 31J. 6Y. calf; 36^. morocco. 

The Embellishments of the present edition consist of Ornamental 
Scrolls, Foliage, Head-pieces, Vignettes, together with Borders, and Initial 
Letters printed in r^/and blacky and the following Historical Engravings, 
to illustrate the Gospels, from the works of the early Masters : — 

"The number, variety, and beauty of the devices that enrich the pages, far surpass 
anything that has been done in decorative printing.*' — The Spectator, 

"A noble devotional volume and fitting Christian manual." — The Times. 

** Not surpassed by the life-engrossing laborious productions of those good old 
transcribers m cloistered cells of the past" — The Morning Post. 

'* There is not a page which has not something worthy of commendation."— 
A theneentn. 

** It is impossible to speak too highly of the exceeding beauty of this work."— 
Cambridge Chronicle. 

FRAGMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE HIS- 

TORY OF THE BOOK OF COMMON PRAYER. From 
Manuscript Sources (Bishop Sanderson and Bishop Wren). By 
WM. JACOBSON, D.D., Bishop of Chester. 8vo. $s. 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 


CHURCH HISTORY. 


A DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN ANTIQUITIES. 

Comprising the History, Institutions, and Antiquities 
OF THE Christian Church. By VARIOUS WRITERS. 
Edited by WM. SMITH, D.C.L., and Rev. PROFESSOR 
CHEETHAM, M.A. With Illustrations. Vol I. (To be com- 
pleted in 2 vols.) Medium 8vo. 3IX. 6d, 

This Work commences at the point at which the ** Dictionary of the 
Bible " leaves off, and gives an account of the Institutions of the Chris- 
tian Church from the time of the Apostles to the age of Charlemagne. 


4<i 


' This valuable dictionary brings within easy reach a vast mass of information, 
access to which has hitherto been restricted to a few, and it deserves to occupy a place 
in the libraries, not only of the clergy and of ministers of the various denommations, 
but of all educated laymen."— >S*/a«/wn/. 

** We welcome with genuine pleasure the initiatory volume of this long-expected 

and long-desired work. Our first few glances at the articles surprised us into the 

confession that the thoroughn^s and completeness of its execution have exceeded our 

highest expectations. It distances all its compeers in its own line, whether German 

French, or English." — EtiglUh Churchmai^ 

A DICTIONARY OF CHRISTIAN BIOGRAPHY, 

LITERATURE, SECTS, and DOCTRINES. By VARIOUS 
WRITERS. Edited by WM. SMITH, D.C.L., and Rev. 
PROFESSOR WACE, M.A. Vol. I. (To be completed in 
3 vols.) Medium 8vo. 31J, 6</. 

This Work is designed to give a comprehensive account of the Per- 
sonal, the Literary, the Dogmatic, and the Ecclesiastical Life of the 
Church during the first eight centuries of Christianity, and, in com- 
bination with the Dictionary of Christian Antiquities, it will afford, it 
is believed, the most complete collection of materials fer the Church 
History of that period which has yet been published, either in England 
or abroad. 


« 


It is a great credit to English scholarship and English theology to have produced 
a work like this, full of the results of original^ and laborious study, which people on 
different sides of disputed questions, and difiering in view possibly from the writers of 
the articles, may consult with so much confidence, that they will find sound and 
valuable wformation. The editors may with justice put forward the claim that they 
have made accessible to all educated persons a great mass of information hitherto 
only the privilege of students with the command of a large library."— y/iw/*. 

•* We not only admit the oi>portuneness of this enterprise, of which the tarst volume 
is before us, but we welcome it with acclamation. The conductors will confer a great 
benefit upon the English Church and clergy indeed, but specifically upon students 
whose knowledge is confined to their mother tongue, by projecting and carrying 
through a Dictionary of Christian Biography in which the same patient industry, the 
same scrupulous fairness, the same paramount regsud for the interests of historical 
truth is maintained, as in previous members of this important series. For ' practical 
purposes,' as they say, the editors have produced one of the most useful works of 
this generation. "—CAwrM Quarterly Review, 


] 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 


A HISTORY OF THE ANCIENT WORLD, from 

ihe EARLIEST RECORDS lo Ihe FALL of the WESTERN 
EMPIRE, A.D. 476. liy I'HILIP SMITH. B.A., Author of 
"The Student's Old and Kew Tcstameul History," &c. Fottrth 
Edition, with Majis ood Plans, 3 \'oIs. 8vo. 3I1. &/. 


" His poLnb of tronBllc 
iiriii^Blitt& powfin, u 
liberally of ihc new lights 
•a the EtH ; and in aU Ih 
npuULca, hii worit is fat 
Satimiir Xtrtim. 

[hit 


ungciL He hai 
^ and philoloe; 

Aodcat History in 


rials, bul be Ii bouod id use t1 
: of a sngle, al,le, uninpa; 


THE STUDENTS MANUAL OF OLD TESTA- 
MENT IlISTORV. From the Creation of the World lo ihc 
Return of the Jews from Caplirily. With .in Intrcaluction to the 
Iwoksofthe Old Testament. By PHILIP SMITH, aA. Will, 
Maps and nutnerous Woodcuts. Post 8vo. 71. &/. 


■'Ofou 


lily or to fully IT 


iplurc biMnry baA am been to carefully dt so 
surprlsioe thai ■ tubjcci of sucb uniivu] imi 
ing tjccd diifrcgaTdcil. Tbit work is very aUc an 


THE STUDENT'S MANUAL OF NEW TESTA- 
MENT HISTORY. With ati Introduction, containing the con- 
nection or the Old and New Tcslaments. By PHILIP SMITH, 
B.A. With Maps and Woodculs, I'ostSvo. J], (kf. 


" These Manuals • 


31 Ihe I 


KHtly rt 


Hibject matter in of wider ii 


THE STUDENT'S ANCIENT HISTORY OF THE 

EAST. I'roni Ihc Earliest Times lo the Conquest of Alexander 
llie Great ; including Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Media, Persia, 
.\3ia Minor, and Ph<emeia. Hy PIIILIT SMITH, ll.A. Wooil- 


I'o- 


Svo. 71. 6,f. 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 


FOR SCHOOLS AND YOUNG PERSONS. 

A SMALLER ANCIENT HISTORY 07 THE 

EAST ; from the Earliest Times to the Conquest of Alexander 
the Great. By PHILIP SMITH, B.A. With 70 Woodcuts. 
i6mo. 3 J. 6<f. 

'*This book is intended to supply the learner with some information respectin|i: the 
Eastern nations, with which he comes in contact while reading the histories of Greece 
and Rome : and to set before the general reader a brief account of the course of 
ancient civilisation in its earliest seats. Besides this general purpose, the book is 
specially designed to aid the study of the Scriptures, by placing in their true historical 
relations those allusions to Egypt, Assyria, Babylonia, Phoenicia, and the M«do< 
Persian Empire, which form the back-ground of the history of Israel from Abraham 
to Nehemiah. The present work is an indispensable adjunct of the ' Smaller 
Scripture History ; ' and the two have been written expressly to be used together.** — 
Prv/ace. 

A SMALLER SCRIPTURE HISTORY OF THE 

OLD AND NEW TESTAMENTS, in Three Parts. I.— Old 
Testament Historj'. II. — Connection of Old and New Testa- 
ments. III. — New Testament History to A.D. 7a Edited by 
WILLIAM SMITH, D.C.L. With 40 Illustrations. i6mo. 
35. 6i/. 

"This abridgment omits nothing of vital importance, and is presented in such a 
bandy form that it cannot fail to become a valuable aid to the less learned Bible 
Student. Dr. Wm. Smith's labours are so well known that it is unnecessary to add 
more than that he has produced the best modem book of its kind on the best book of 
all days and all time." — People s Magazine, 

" This work is intended for younger children, and contains a good summary of the 
histories of the Old and New Testaments, with a brief summary of the connecting 
period. Inhere are a few notes, inte nded chiefly for the teacher. It is a perfectly 
marvelloW) work of condensation, containing as it does, in so small a space, such an 
inunense amount of accurate information as to Scripture facts." — John BulL 


THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH DURING THE FIRST 

THREE CENTURIES. By the Rev. J. J. BLUNT, B.D., 
late Margaret Professor of Divinity at Cambridge. 5th Edition, 6^. 

"The warmth with which he insists on the early and rapid spread of Christianity 
as a proof of its divine origin, the minute and ingenious learning with which he main> 
tains it, the deep importance he attaches to it, recall forcibly to our minds a phase of 
discussion which had almost passed away in the ever shifting polemics of religion and 
infidelity.** — Qvarter^.y Review. 


8 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 

THE HISTORY OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. 

From the Apostolic Times to the Reformation, 1517. By 
J. CRAIGIE ROBERTSON, M.A,, Canon of Canterbury. 
Fifth Edition, revised. 8 Vols. Post 8vo. dr. each. 

" I cannot conceive, on a smaller scale, any work which would more guide students 
into a calm, impartial, candid view of the course of disturbed history and ecdesaastical 
politics, in former or in present times, than Canon Robertson's." — Dean ^ WaU 
mintUr. 

" Canon Robertson's work will always l)e esteemed as a text-book for the student, 
while the host of references with which he has studded his pages, will be invaluable as 
a guide to the more advanced inquirer." — Satitrday Review, 

" Canon Robertson's work has taken high rank as a standard authority, and has 

endured satisfactorily the ordeal of a searching criticism. From the nature of its 

subject, and the space of time it covers, it seems naturally to challenge competition 

with Dean Milman's ' History of Latin Christianity ' ; but, in truth, the two books 

are written from a different point of view, and may be regarded as meeting the wants 

of different classes of readers." — Scottish Guardian. 

HISTORY OF THE JEWS, from the Earliest Period 

to Modem Times. By H. H. MILMAN, D.D., late Dean of 
St. Paul's. 3 Vols. Post 8vo. i8j. 

CONTENTS. 

I. 
The Patriarchal Age— Israel in Egypt— The Desert— The Invaaon— The Conquest 
—The Judges— The Monarchy— Judah and Israel— ThelHigh Priests. 

II. 
The Asmonaeans— Herod— The Herodian Family — The Roman Govemon — Prepara- 
tions for the War — The War — Siege of Jerusalem — Terminatioo of the War — 
Barochab — The Patriarch of the West, and the Prince of the Captivity. 

lit. 
Judaism and Christianity — ^Judaism and Mahommedanism— Golden Age and Iron Age 
of Judaism — Jews in England— Jews expelled from Spain— Jews of Italy^— 
Modem Judaism. 

HISTORY OF CHRISTIANITY, from the Birth of 

Christ to the Extinction of Paganism in the Roman Empire. By 
DEAN MILMAN. 3 Vols. Post 8vo. i8j. 

CONTENTS. 

The Life of Christ— Christianity and Judaism — Christianity and Paganism— Consti- 
tution of Christian Churches — Marcus Aurelius the Philosopher— Persecutum 
imder Diocletian — Constantine and his Son»->Trinitarian Controversy— Julian- 
Abolition of Paganism — The Great Prelates of the East and West — Jerome and 
the Monastic System— Public Spectacles — Christian Literature— Christianity 
and the Fine Arts. 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 9 

HISTORY OF LATIN CHRISTIANITY, including that 

of the Popes to the Pontificate of Nicholas V. By DEAN MIL- 
MAN. gVok. PostSvo. S4t. 


*l 


This work in fact, from beginning to end, will be co-extensive with the Great 
History of Gibbon. It was natural that a Christian and a clergyman should wish to 
accompany that wonderful performance through its whole course, and place the 
religion, which it so constantly misconceives, in a more favourable light ; and it is 
creditable to the author that, with the sincerest attachment to Christianity, he should 
have accomplished his purpose in so fair and candid a spirit, and with such an exemp- 
tion from professional bias." — Westminster Review, 


LECTURES ON THE HISTORY OF THE JEWISH 

CHURCH. By A. P. STANLEY, D.D., Dean of Westminster. 
First and Second Series^ Abraham to the Captivity. With 
Maps. 2 Vols. 8vo. 24J. 
. T/iird Serifs, from the Captivity to the Christian Era. With 
Maps. 8vo. 14J. 

LETTERS ON THE HISTORY OF THE EASTERN 

CHURCH, with an Introduction on the Study of Ecclesiastical 
History. By A. P. STANLEY, D.D., Dean of Westminster. 
Fifth Edition. With Maps. 8vo. 12s, 

CONTENTS. 

The Province, Study, and advantages of Ecclesiastical History — The Eastern 
Chturh — Council of Nicaea, a.d. 325 — The Emperor Constantine — ^Athanasius — 
Mahometanism and the Eastern Church— The Russian Church — ^The Patriardi 

f^^ Nicon^Peter the Great and the Modem Church of Russia. 


THE STUDENT'S MANUAL OF ECCLESIASTICAL 

HISTORY. A History of the Christian Church from 
THE Earliest Times to the Eve of the Reformation. 
By PHILIP SMITH, B.A., Author of the " Student's Manuals 
of Old and New Testament History." With Woodcuts. Post 
8vo. Ts, 6d, 

THE STUDENTS MANUAL OF ENGLISH 

CHURCH HISTORY, FROM THE REFORMATION TO 
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY. By Rev. G. G. PERRY. 
Post 8vo. ^s. 6d. 


12 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 


THE JESUITS.: Their CONSTITUTION and TEACH- 
ING: an Historical Sketch. By \V. C. CARTWRIGHT, M.P. 
8vo. gs. 

*' Although Mr. Cartwright's treatise is modestly entitled a ' Sketch/ and is chiefly 
devoted to exhibiting the great Society in its least favourable aspects, there are few 
books in the English language which contain so much useful and trustworthy informa- 
tion on the suhitct."—Satttraay Review,' 

** A more remarkable book than this on the subject of the Jesuits has never hitherto 
appeared. It is written with unimpassioned impartiality, and may be confidently 
submitted to the study of every sincere member of the Church of Rome, who at least 
does not approve of seeing their venerable pontiff the mere tool of a body of men who 
seek ends, nere described, by means which Mr. Cartwright renders clear and in- 
telligible." — Notes and Queries. 

THE LIFE AND TIMES OF ST. CHRYSOSTOM. 

A Sketch of the Church and the Empire in the IVth Century: 
By Rev. W. R. W. STEPHENS, M.A., BaUioI ColL Oxon., 
Vicar of Mid-Lavant, Sussex. With a Portrait 8vo. i$s, 

" Good books on the Christian Fathers are rare in English theology. With surprise 
therefore, as well as with pleasure, we have read this learned and able work on St. 
Quysostom by an English scholar. Mr. Stephens writes clcarlv as well as learnedly, 
and his candour and good sense in the treatment of historical, no less than of theo- 
logical, questions cannot be too highly praised. A far better idea of Chr^sostom and 
his times may be gathered from his pages than from the more philosophical work of 
Neander." — Examiner. 


EIGHT MONTHS AT ROME, DURING THE 

VATICAN COUNCIL. By POMPONIO LETO. Translated 
from the Italian. With Appendix containing Original Documents. 
8vo. lis, 

" A most fascinating book. It jpves us the impressions of a readent at Rome 
during the eight months of the Vatican Council. His sympathies are altogether widi 
the LiDoral Roman Catholics. The book is full of true human interest, Uie descrip- 
tions are delightful reading, and the theological discussions are full of instruction.*'— 
Daily Review. 

" It b well known that the author is Marchese Francesco Nobili-Vitelleschi, brother 
to the late Cardinal Vitelleschi. The position of the writer accoimted, in part, both 
for his accuracy and his moderation. The latter feature of his work strongly contrasts 
with the prevalent tone of the Italian press at the time of the Vatican CoundL Vitd- 
leschi is free both from indifference to all religion, and from hostility to Christianity." 
— Record. 


ROME AND THE NEWEST FASHIONS IN 

RELIGION. Three Tracts. By the Right Hon. W. E. 
GLADSTONE, M.P. Containing The Vatican Decrees— 
Vaticanism— The Pope's Speeches. With Preface. 8vo. 
^s, 6d. 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 13 

SERMONS AND 
DEVOTIONAL WORKS. 


COMPANIONS FOR THE DEVOUT LIFE; A 

Series of Lectures on well-known Devotional Works 

DELIVERED IN St. JAMES's ChURCH, PICCADILLY, IN 1875-6. 

With a Preface by the Rev. J. E. KEMPE, M. A., Rector. New 
Edition. In One Volume. Post 8vo. 6s. 

CONTENTS. 

Db Imitationb Christi. Canon Farrar. Thbologia Germanica. Canon Ash- 

Pknsees OF Pascal. Deanof St. Paul's. _^*"* 

St. Francis of Sales' Devout Life. 
Dean of Norwich. 

Baxter's Saints' Rest. Archbishop 
of Dublin. 


FiNBix>N's (EuYREs Spiritueixbs. Rev. 
T. T. Carter. 

Andrewes' DbvoTioNS. Bishop of Ely. 
Christian Year. Canon Barry. 
St. Augustine's Confession. Bishop i Paradise Ix)st. Rev. E. H. Bicker- 
of Deny. s^*'"- 

Pilgrim's Progress. Dean of Chester. 

Tub Prayer Book. Dean of Chichester. 


Taylor's Holy Living and Dying. 
Rev. W. G. Humphry. 


" The idea of these lectures is admirable and praiseworthy, and the lecturers them- 
selves have carried it out in a large and generous spirit, "rhe volume as a whole is 
eminently good, and suggests to Christian preachers of all denominations a line of 
pulpit instruction which is worthy of their imitation. ** — English IndeptneUnt. 

*' This is a volume of more than ordinary interest. The books selected are well 
known, and favourites with lai^e numbers of readers. The lecturers have* all treated 
their respective subjects simply and practically, their aim having been to make these 
' Companions for the Devout Life ' more companionable and useful than they have 
hitherto been."— CAwn-/* Reviciv. 


THE Classic PREACHERS OF THE ENGLISH 

CHURCH. A Series of Lectures delivered in St James's 
Church, Piccadilly, during 1877. With an Introduction, by 
the Rev. J. E. KEMPE, M.A., Rector. Post Svo. 7j. &/. 

DONNE {The Poet Preacher) J. B. Lightfoot, D.D., Canon of St 

Paul's. 

BARROW {The Exhamtive Preacher) H. Wage M.A., Prof of Ecdes. Hist, 

Kingrs Coll. , London. 

SOUTH {The Rhetorician) W. C Lake, M.A., Dean of Durham. 

BEVERIDGE {The Scri/turaHW. R. Clarke, M.A., Prebendary of 
Preacher) } Weils, and Vicar of Taunton. 

WILSON {Th£ Saintly Preacher) .... F. W. Farrar, D.D., Canon of West- 
minster. 

BUTLER { The Ethical Preached • • • • £• M. Goulburn, D.D., Deanof Norwich. 


m. HUHIIAY'S LIST OF 


THE CONTINUITY OF SCRIPTURE, ;is declared by 

the Testimony of our Lord »nJ of Ihe Evangelists tad 
Apostles. By LORD IIATHERLEV. New Edition. i6mo. 
3j. 6./. Or crown 8vo. 61. 

"TJndrr a very mcxleTntc tp»se, this volume roQtalnf ■ cDmleiu«d xud faralik 
u^ument in BUpport laf the Divine authority o( the Holy Scnpluret uid of the tTuth 
of the Christian interpretation of theiti. Stich ji workdcjtrvn. for wivral rcuou. an 
apecUl weLcome, Ijird Hiiherley, a 


intdlectoa] and n 


lie in lelieioui tlwughi, 
he tid« of the received 
e, and has earaed from 


FOUNDATIONS OF RELIGION IN THE MIND 

AND HEART OK MAN. By Sir JOHN BYLES, l.iie one 
of the Judges of H.M. Court of Common Pleas at West m inkier. 
Post Svo. 61. 


and in a ri^ and 


'■Sujohn ByltaenaMesihenndenojgdgeof t> 


WORSHIP IN THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. 

My A. J. B. BERESrORD-HOPE, M.P. 8vo. gr. Or, Populai 
Sclectiuna from. Svo. 2j. (xl. 

'*Mr Berenford Hope's book is calm. Iiemperate. and, toanrfaii nkind. coaviadAg : 
and it ia CKCcUentiy wel^ arraoEe^J'" — Lilfary CkurcAman. 

ell u valiiahle camribution to the Jitoatun of the day.' — 


Sahinlay ftrvinv. 

"Mr. HopeiiB man irho hai a right toheheantin the great Ritual aaanirtnr 
of the Ony.'—Aigii'* Indi^ndtixl. 

r. Hope hoK rightly judged that a la>inan's ricvof iheprcHBl tilualdiRiculliei 


'^L 


nghtlyjudgeil 


THE SHADOWS OF A SICK ROOM. Wiih Preface 

by CANON LIDDON. i6ino. 2j. &/. 

if deep and ihmnch pietr. f« 
death liave Ihrowti thenuetvcs 


" A little book, evidently the productiaa 1 
» Eultivated that his ihooghit when lying iieu unio • 
Into deliniie fottn. and shaped tbeoudves into that old 

iioiv.a.4iays lay. of tliifer eloquence 10 which we are _. 

few of those half-forgolteB iiiastEr.ineca of the Engliih Chi 
howereT, iaaot artificial ^ '.._■-■-..- i... 


the Divine. Thi 


hutpoun Lb 
in nr the mil 
1 it in thit volui 


eiE, like poeltv to a poet. Ih( 


\ 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 17 


LIFE IN FAITH: Sermons Preached at Cheltenham 

and Rugby. By T. W. JFIX-BLAKE, D.D., Head Master of 
Rugby. Small 8vo. 3^. 6r/. 

AIDS TO FAITH; a Series of Theological Essays. By 
Various Writers. Edited by ARCHBISHOP THOMSOX. 
8vo. gs. 

PRINCIPLES AT STAKE: Essays on the Church 
Questions of the Day. By Various Writers. Edited by Rkv. 
G. II. SUMNER. 8vo. 12s, 

CHURCH AND THE AGE: a Series of Essays on the 

Principles and Present Position of the Anglican Church. By 
Various Writers. Edited by Rev. W. D. MACLAGAN and 
Rev. Dr. WEIR. 2 vols. 8vo. 26s, 

PRIMITIVE DOCTRINE OF BAPTISMAL Rege- 
neration. By CANON MOZLEY. 8vo. 7x. M. 

TREATISE ON THE AUGUSTINIAN DOCTRINE 

OF PREDESTINATION. By CANON MOZLEY. A New 
and Revised Edition. Post 8vo. 

SERMONS PREACHED IN LINCOLN'S INN. By 

CANON COOK. 8vo. 9s. 

CHARACTER AND CONDUCT OF THE APOS- 

TLES, considered as an Evidence of Christianity. By DEAN 
MILMAN. 8vo. loj. 6^/. 

SERMONS PREACHED DURING THE TOUR OF 

THE PRINCE OF WALES IN THE EAST. By DEAN 
STANLEY. With Notices of some of the Localities vi-.itcd. 
8vo. 9x. 

SERMONS PREACHED AT LINCOLN'S INN. By 

ARCHBISHOP THOMSON. 8vo. los. M. 


i8 MR. MURRAY'S LIST OF 


LIFE IN THE LIGHT OF GOD'S WORD. By 

ARCHBISHOP THOMSON. PostSvo. 5^. 
UNIVERSITY SERMONS. By dean SCOTT. Post 

8vo. &r. 6(r, 

THE LIMITS OF RELIGIOUS THOUGHT Exa- 
mined. By the Lite H. I,. MANSEL, D.D., Dean of St. 
Paul's. Fifth Edition. Post Svo. Ss. M. 

POETICAL WORKS OF BISHOP HEBER. For- 

trait. Fcap. Svo. 3.^. 6</. 

HYMNS ADAPTED TO THE CHURCH SERVICE. 

By BISHOP IIEBER. i6mo. is. 6r/. 

MOTTOES FOR MONUMENTS ; or, Epitaphs selected 

for General Study and Application. By MRS. PALLISER. 
Illustrations. Crown Svo. ys. 6ti, 

"With such a help as thi.s, Judiciou.Kly circulated in a country parish, much that so 
often shocks by its incongruity in ' God's Acre,' might be gently got rid of. Over 
and above, however, its more immcdi.ite object, the book has a value of its own. It 
is a choice collection of holy thoughts which the living may by to heart with profit in 
anticipation of the gcscwc"— Christian Obsen'er. 

THREE ESSAYS ON THE MAINTENANCE OF 

THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND AS AN PISTABLISHED 
. CHURCH. By REV. CHARLES HOLE, REV. R. WAT- 
SON DIXON, and REV. JULIUS LLOYD. To which Mr. 
Peek's Prizes were awarded by the Marquis of Salisbury, Rew 
Dr. Hessey, and Rev. Dr. Vaughan. Svo. lOs. 6d. 

** These admirable and vigorous essays require few words to introduce and recom- 
mend them to the great body of its members. They arc all .admirable in point of 
style, cleames.s of argument, and moderation of tone. The three Essays taken toge- 
ther may be fairly considered as exhaustive of the whole subject, and as furnishing a 
complete armoury of defence for future oratoi^s and writers." — Standard, 

PROVERBS ; or, words of human wisdom. ! 

Collected and Arranged. With Preface by CANON LIDDON. 1 

i6mo. y. (xL 


** The collccUon shows great judgment and wide reading. The lK>ok will lake it< 
stand amon^i the most attractive of the season. It is a book for both the grave and 
the gay." — Church Iler-ald, 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 19 


THE ENGLISH CATHEDRALS. 


HANDBOOKS TO THE CATHEDRALS OF ENG- 

LAND AND WALES ; giving a History of each See, 
WITH Biographical Notices ok the Bishops. By 
RICHARD J. KING, B.A., Exeter College, Oxford. 

Vols. L and II.— SOUTHERN DIVISION.— Winchester, 
Salisbury, Exeter, Wells, Rochester, Canter- 
bury, Chichester, and St. Albans. With i6o Illus- 
trations. 2 vols. Post 8vo. 36J. 

Vol. in. — EASTERN DIVISION. — Oxford, Peter- 
borou(;h, Lincoln, Norwich, and Ely. With 90 
Illustrations. I&r. 

Vol. IV.— WESTERN DIVISION.— Bristoi^ Gloucester, 
Worcester, Hereford, and Lichfield. With 50 
Illustrations. . Post 8va I dr. 

Vols. V. and VL— NORTHERN CATHEDRALS.— York, 
RiPON, Durham, Carlisle, Chester, and Manches- 
ter. With 60 Illustrations. 2 vols. Post 8vo. 21s, 

Vol. VIL— WELSH CATHEDRALS. — Llandaff, St. 
David's, St. Asaph's, and Bangor. With 40 Illustra- 
tions. Post 8vo. 151. 

" Each cadiedral has been described after careful personal examination. They are 
illustrated by engravings of the highest beauty and interest ; most of them represent- 
ing subjects or points of view which do not occur in Britton, executed for the most 
part by Mr. Jc7nti.'*—(>uarigrfy JRrvtew, 

" This very attractive and valuable work may, indeed, be said to be by far the best 
Kuide-book to our Cathednds. It is, in fact, a national work, as well as a Church 
work, and it is worthy of our Church and nation." — EMgUsh Churcfiman, 


** It would be difficult to find any work in which the author has so carefully and 


edifice, and a chronological narrative of the Bishops of each See." — Rel^nary. 


** lliis work is full of very valuable information, architectural, archaeological, his- 
torical, and ixtinic"—Saiurtiay Revinv. 

** Handbooks that should provide a concise but correct history of the several Cathe> 
drals in this country have long been looked for, not only by antiquaries and archi- 
tects, but by all men of art or of letters, llie illustrations are the best of their kind.** 
— Literary Churchman, 


*' These volumes will prove a great boon to the architectural student ; but they are 

ly written, that the gene- 
Uie history and arcoitec- 


so free from mere technical phraseology, and are so pleasantly written, that the gene 
ral reader will be tempted to increase nis knowledge of both 


turc of our great cathedrals." — John BuU, 


Hit. UURRtr'S LIST OF 


WORKS ON THE HOLY LAND 


SURROUNDING COUNTRIES. 


HISTORY OF ANCIENT EGYPT. Derived from 

Monuments and Inscriplions. By Professor liRUGSCH. 
ofGotlingen. Translsled by ihc Inle II. DANBV SEVMOUK. 
With Majis. 1 vols. 8vo. 

NINEVEH AND ITS REMAINS; a Popular Accoum 

OF RtiEARCllES -AMI DiSCOVEKlES AT NiSEVEK, Dt'RlNa AN 

K-VPEDiTiOS TO Assyria in 1845-7- By A. H. LAVARD. 
Wuh numerous Illuslrolians. I'Oit Svo. p. bJ, 


ll«n. 


.orNm. 


eipTcavd in his original vcrk. 


WoTshippen, orifiiully publish 


h or Deril- 

Nineveh and its Rbduiiu,' ihc iianalive pf 
ontBind in hit nOik ulllled 'Nincveti and 


NINEVEH AND BABYLON: a Popui^r Nar«aiivk 

OF A SKCONI) ESrKDlTION TO ASSVKH, IS49-5I. B>- A. U. 

LAVARD. With numerous lUusttalions. Tost Svo. 7J. 6d. 

"Tliii volume conuins an abridgment of the nanail.c of my second expedilioolo 
Assyria and Babylonia, published in i8s], undiithe title of 'NiacrehaDd Bibyloa ' 

iDKriptioot u decipberEd by Englidi and Frenc] 

IcnawkdEC of the hUlorjr, Che languagft* and the ai 

Bibylnsiaiu. but lhey*bave not ted mc 10 mwlify, lo any maicrial eiKnt,' ll 

pul Icmvard in my original worii. I have noticed in ibe following paget I 

•loponanl reiulu of the iaterpieution of the Auyrian iuciipliaoi."— , 

" The vailoui atlempu thai bare li«n made to give popular dscciplian 
Layaid't diioiveries, have tauihl him ibe neceiuiy of nladng them in a 
f,rm behre the public "-£[«wi/>((. 


uchpleai 


Sucb 


■-•■-Er«.,pli<^l Mas.>-J-, 


i Mr. Uja.. 


i 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 21 


THE FIVE GREAT MONARCHIES OF THE 

ANXIENT WORLD ; or the History, Geography, and 
Antiquities of Assyria, Babylonia, Chald.-ea, Media, and 
Persia. By GEORGE RAWLINSOX, M.A., Canon of 
Canterbury, and Camden Professor of Ancient History at Oxford. 
Third Edition, with Maps and 600 illustrations. 3 vols. 8vo. 42 •. 

" Canon Rawlinson has placed within the reach of English readers all that u-e as 
yet know of those great fabrics of eastern power of which the names are so familiar to 
us, and which affected more or less directly the history in which we arc most 
interested. He has taken the subject in hand fully and comprehensively, and with 
the advantage of discoveries which are new since Niebuhr." — Satuniay Rct'tcw. 

"Professor RawUnson's work well maintains the credit of the English scholarship, 
and while it lays open many curious records of the past, has a special value in its 
frequent elucidation and illustration of historical passages in Holy WriL'* — Kcconi. 

THE LAND OF MOAB. Travels and Discoveries 

ON THE East Side of the Dead Sea and the Jordan. 
By the Rev. H. B. TRISTRAM, LL.D., F.R.S., Canon of 
Durham, Author of "The Land of Israel," "Natural History of 
the Bible,'* &c. With Map and Illustrations. Crown 8vo. 15J. 

" Canon Tristram's party was ready for every emergency : however wild are the 
savages he meets, he has a missionary to spring on them who is familiar witli their 
tongue and manners ; he has a botanist for every shrub : and a photographer for 
every rub. And besides all this, he is a host in himself— naturalist, philologer, 
antiquary, geologist, Nimrod ; he is equally ready with his gun and his fossil- 
hammer, his Bible or his Arabic ; equally adept in solving the difficulties of Bedouin 
etiquette or stuffing a vulture, or determining a site. And besides all this, he carries 
a pen, and a very deft and ready pen, and when there b anything to tell he knows 
how to tell it ; and so Moab has been reft from the domain of the unknown and 
unknowable, and lies all mapped out and photographed and described. Altogether 
Che book is a very interesting one, and we can only hope future explorers will imitate 
Mr. Tristram's part in the zeal and thoroughness of its research. '—.S'/i/wn/drx 
Revinv. 


JOURNAL OF RESEARCHES IN THE HOLY 

LAND IN 1838 AND 1852. With Historical Illustrations. 
By EDWARD ROBINSON, D.D. Maps. 3 vols. 8vo. 42^. 

" Robinson's ' Biblical Researches * has been our leading text-book on the geography 
of Palestine for twenty years. Until Eli Smith and Edward Robinson began their 
travels in 1838, little had been done towards a survey of the Holy Land which could 
pretend to be at once scientific and historical. Together they rode through the 
country, noting its aspects, fixing its sites, laying down its wadies and watercourses, 
its deserts and mountains.'* — Atheu^um. 


p 


MR. uuamys list of 


w 


SINAI AND- PALESTINE; IN CONNECTION 

WITH THKIR Hl.STOkV. By UIviN STANLEY. Plans. 

CONTENTS. 
Cannection 6r Sacred KktDry mid S^ted Geography —Egypt in ivIatiaD la ItncJ — 
Pcuinnila o( SEnai— Palatine— Tlie bclehti and pam oT Bcujaulu— EiAnim 
lilt MariumcPlaiu-JonLui and the Dead .'wi-Petiea-'FlalnDr Eidraclaci— 
Galilee- tiourcu gf J«dan — L«baaoa and Anli-Lcbaopo— llie Gospel Hktery 
-The Holy Plato. 

THE BIBLE IN THE HOLY UND. Extract from 

tlie above Work for Village Schools. By a I^DV. Woodcuts. 


SIGNS AND WONDERS IN THE LAND OF 

1L\M. A DrSCKIITTON OK the TKS PLAliUfS OK EOVI-T. 

Post Svo. 7j, 6./. 

Phiuueh, uhI euk 

inivdlm; but hucfaieruurce of illuslralion is glder Ihaa 

lindj it in the paiatinei» sculptures, papyri, awl ioicripiiQcu upoa ubicli modern 

EEyptrjloEi»L« have been » loitg ul wort. Hit book, which is atReable and ei»y 

roidingj ii lichly ttiodded wirh ^'lod ivoodcub. It is a capital Sunday book."- 

*'Agood work, well done, and Just (he boolL fat the pariah lending library ; btii 

wiJl do much to papulaiisc the rcsulin of the l^^ypiotoEy of the present ^(e. llwtc 
raulu are w many confimutiDDt oT the Moeaic rcenrd : and Ibe fact k enyhatieally 
one to be brought rorwiird. We trust llie book wUl be widely dreulaied. &1r. 
MOliniiDn has evidently given auch thought lo his u>k, and broughl t« fta cim- 
lidcinble range oT ncidiog and an undoubted power of jraphit ileicriptioii."- 


DAMASCUS, PALMYRA, LEBANON; WITH 

TK-WKLS AMONG THK GIANT CITIE.S OF BASHAN 
AND THE HAURAN. ByKKV. J. L, PORTER. Woodculi. 
Post Svo. ■}!. 6J. 

THE CRUISE OF THE "ROB ROY" ON THE 

JORDAN, NILE, RED SE.\, GENNESARETII, &t. A 

l.'anoe t'niise in I'aleiiline and I'^pt ami the Waters of 
Daiiia^eiii By JOHN MACGREGOR, SI.A. New Edition. 
Wiih Maps ami llluslraliotu. Post S»o. yi. 6J. 


I 


THEOLOGICAL AND RELIGIOUS PUBLICATIONS. 23 


THE MODERN CUSTOMS AND MANNERS OF 

BIBLE LANDS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF SCRIPTURE. By 
HENRY VAN-LENNEP, D.D. With Coloured Maps and 
300 Illustrations. 2 vols. 8vo. 21s, 

"The illustrations are excellent, and the whole book is an attractive collection of 
thosie facts which so much add to the intellectual appreciation of the Holy Scriptures." 


"Dr. Van-I.,ennep's work contains a mass of information on the manners and 
customs of Hible lands not readily accessible elsewhere." — A/A^ntritm. 

*' It is impossible to over-estimate the value of Dr. Lennep's work. So intensely 
reliable are the statements, that the more its pages are studied, so much the more 
conclusive will it appear that a better help to the Holy Scriptures can scarcely be 
expected ever to appear.** — BelPs Weekly Messenger. 


TRAVELS IN ASIA MINOR, with Obsenations on 

the State of .Society, and a Description of Antiquarian Researches 
and Discoveries, together with an Account of Missionary labours, 
Illustrations of Biblical Literature and Archieology. By HENRY 
VAN-LENXEP, D.D., Thirty Years Resident in Turkey. With 
Map and Illustrations. 2 vols. Post 8vo. 24/. 

" Dr. Van-Lcnnep has written an interesting book respecting regions which, in the 

K resent d.iy of geographical inquiry, do not receive the attention they deserve at the 
ands of either travellers or .antiquaries. He confines hi& descriptions of soenery and 
remarks upon the people entirely to what he himself saw : and having a great deal of 
matter to narrate, he has not been under the necessity, like several modem travellers, 
of eking out the substance of his information by referring to observations of other 
explorers, or by manufactured digressions of a scientific character." — Keconi, 


THE MANNERS AND CUSTOMS OF THE 

ANCIENT EGYPTIANS. Their Private Life, Government, 
Laws, Arts, Manufactures, Religion, Agriculture, Early History, 
&c. Derive<l from a comparison of the Paintings, Sculptures, and 
Monuments still existing, with the accounts of Ancient Authors. 
By the late Sir J. G. WILKINSON, F.R.S. A new and revised 
Edition, containing the author's latest corrections. Edited by 
SAMUEL BIRCH, LL.D. \Vith more than 500 Illustration.*?. 
• 3 vols. 8vo. 

THE TEMPLE OF JERUSALEM. And the other 

Buildings in the Haram Arka, from Solomon to Sala- 
niN. By JAMES FERGUSSOX, D.C.L., F.R.S. With 
numerous Illustrations. 4to. 


a4 


MR. MURRAY'S LIST. 


AN ATLAS OF ANCIENT GEOGRAPHY. 

Stblual aiib ClufifiicuL 

Intended to Illustrate the ** Dictionary of the Bible,*' and the 
"Dictionaries of Classical Antiquity." 

COMPII.KI) rNDfc-.R THE SIPKRINTENOEXCK OF 

Dr. WM. smith and Mr. 0E0R(;E GROVE. 

Folio. Half-bound. jC6 6s. 

1. CiEiK.RAPHic.M- Systems ok the 22. Gkekce diking the Peloihj.n.se- 

Ancients. i si an War. 

2. The Wori.o as known to the i 23. Greece during the Ach kan 


Ancients. 

3. Emi'IREn ok the Hahvi-omans, 

LVDIANS, MeDES, ANO PER- 
SIANS. 

4. Empire ok Ai.exanoer the 

Great. 

5, 6. KlN(;iKlMS OK THE Sl\ CESSORS 

OK Alexander the (Ireai*. 

7. The Roman Kmi-ii.e in its okkat- 

est extent. 

8. The Roman Emiikk aktek its 

division into the eastern and 
Western Empires. 

9. (}reek and Ph(Enici \n Colonies. 

19. Environs ok Rome. 

20. Oreece akter the Doric Mm;ka- 

TION. 

21. Greece dcrini; the Persian- 

Wars. 


League. 

24. Northern Greece. 

25. Central Greece — Athens. 

26. Peix^ponkkscs.— With Plan ok 

Sparta. 

27. Shores and Islands ok the 

iEGBAN Sea. • 

28. Historical Maps ok Asia Minor. 
ag. Asia Minor. 

30. Arahia. 

31. India. 

32. Northern Part of Africa. 

33. ^licJYPT AND iETHIOPIA. 

34. Historical Maps of the Holy 
Land. 

42, 43. Plans ok Babylon, Nineveh, 
Troy, Alexandria, and Byzan- 

THM. 


•'ITic Students of Dr. Smith's admirable Dictionaries must have felt themselves in 
vrant of an Atlas constructed on the same scale of precise and minute information 
with the article they were reading. This want has at length been supplied by the 
superb work before us. The indices are full, the engraving is exqui&itc, and the 
delineation of the natural features very minute and beautiful. It may safely be pro- 
nounced—and higher praise can scarcely be bestowed — to be a worthy companion 
the volumes which it is intended to illustrate." — Guardian. 

" This Atlas is intended to be a companion to the Dictionary of the Bible and the 
Classical I>ictionari<s. The maps are all new ; they have been constructed according 
to the highest and most recent authorities, and executed by the most eminent 
engravers. The artistic execution of this important and superb work is peerless. Each 
map is a picture. Their accuracy is of course beyond suspicion, although only 
continuous use can really test it." — British Quarterly Rrt'ictu. 

• 

Whether large or small, we have certainly no such a thoroughly 
satisfactory set of Maps elsewhere : and this Atlas may almost claim an 
international value, for it has profited by both English and foreign 
help, and tlie Maps have been executed by the most eminent engravers 
both in London and Paris. 


JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE STREET. 


This book should be returned to 
the Library on or before the last date 
stamped below. 

A fine is incurred by retaining it 
beyond the specified lime. 

Please return promptly. 


I 


i
