Barddas (Iolo Morganwg (ed. J. Williams ab Ithel), 1848)
=======
Iolo Morganwg's 'Bardic-Druidic' theology, presented as ancient but largely his own invention — the forgery that shaped the entire modern druid revival. (Text of the 1862/1874 edition.) Public domain. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/barddas-two-volumes-in-one).

ISTA FLASH DRIVE 9.0
The World's Wisdom
in the Palm |


of Your Hand


The
Barddas of
Iolo
Morganwg


edited by J.
Williams Ab Ithel


[1862-74]


A visionary reconstruction of the Druidic and Bardic tradition,
which had a huge influence on the modern Celtic and neo-Pagan
revival. Or a notorious forgery, you decide...


$3 The Barddas, Vol. I
by Iolo Morganwg, edited by J. Williams Ab Ithel [1862]


5) The Barddas, Vol. II
by Iolo Morganwg, edited by J. Williams Ab Ithel [1874]


ISTA FLASH DRIVE 9.0
The World's Wisdom
in the Palm

of Your Hand


The
| Barddas of
| Iolo
Morganwg


, J. Williams Ab
Ithel (editor)


Druids Cutting the Mistletoe on the Sixth


Day of the Moon, by Henri Paul Motte [ca. Vol .I


1890-1900] (Public Domain Image)


[1862]


VolumeI | Volumell


Contents StartReading Page Index


The Barddas of Iolo Morganwg is a collection of writings, largely
forged, about ancient Welsh Bardic and Druidic beliefs. Although
the author of this work is cited as J. Williams Ab Ithel, he was
actually the editor, who pieced it together from manuscripts
written by Iolo Morganwg. Iolo Morganwg (1747-1826), itinerant
poet and scholar, was a key figure in the Druid revival of the 19th
century. He was personally responsible for reviving the Welsh
national poetry contest, the Gorsedd. On June 21st, 1792,
Midsummer evening, Iolo and a dozen other Welsh poets
gathered on Primrose Hill in London and held the first Gorsedd
in hundreds of years. Iolo was a Welsh patriot and held
revolutionary views; he was a personal friend of Tom Paine, and
George Washington subscribed to his first volume of poetry. He
is said to have influenced both William Blake's poetry and Robert
Grave's White Goddess. He revived the concept that the Welsh
explorer Madoc discovered America. This led to an expedition to
Mandan territory in the Great Plains, which found no trace of the
Welsh, but was one of the inspirations for Thomas Jefferson's
Lewis and Clarke expedition.


Iolo Morganwg's contributions to world culture are still with us
today; there is an extensive neo-Druid movement; and the
Gorsedd (and Welsh nationalism) are still going strong. The
Gorsedd is held annually during the Eisteddfod in Wales, a

festival of Welsh culture. Two other Celtic regions, Cornwall and

Brittany, have also adopted the Gorsedd.


Iolo Morganwg, born Edward Williams, a native speaker of both
English and Welsh, spent his entire life collecting and
transcribing mediaeval Welsh documents, as well as writing
poetry under his own byline. He was also a first-rate literary


forger of ancient Welsh; some have commented that his
forgeries were as good or better than the real thing.
Furthermore, he wrote much of the Barddas under the influence
of laudanum (an opium-based medication which he took for
asthma). Scholars have spent two centuries trying to establish
which parts of his extensive writings purporting to be based on
ancient manuscripts are genuine, and which he wrote
personally. Our understanding is still very murky. For these
reasons, Iolo's writings are considered highly controversial.


Because Druidic beliefs were exclusively transmitted orally, we
have no primary accounts of it, so there is practically nothing to
compare this text with. What we do know is summarized neatly
in the Preface to this work, and consists of a few excerpts from
classical authors. The longest account is from Julius Caesar, who
was more interested in exterminating Druids, so he was hardly a
disinterested observer.


However, this is one of those visionary texts which is worth
reading for its own merits, irrespective of whether it is 'genuine'
or not. Taken at face value, the Barddas remains a fascinating
text. It has resonances with the Upanishads, Kabbalah, and
Freemasonry. The Bardic alphabet presented in the 'Symbol'
section is completely invented, based on Runic and Ogham, and
has utility as a magical alphabet. However it is about as genuine
as the alphabets of J.R.R. Tolkien. The 'Theology' section appears
to be based on Iolo's peculiar Christian views (he described
himself as a Unitarian Ouaker). 'Theology' also contains a great
number of Triads, some of which may be from authentic ancient
Bardic lore. The 'Wisdom' section has a great deal of
mythopoetic information, some of which is authentic, some not.
The Barddas is great reading if you are at all interested in the


ancient Druids, as long as you keep in mind the background of
its creation.


Production notes: I have omitted the Welsh text of this book, which was printed on the
even numbered pages, but retained all page numbers. The English footnotes often
started on the facing (preceding) page and occasionally continue on for several pages,
so I have taken care to document page numbers in footnotes. I have omitted sporadic
footnotes which were only relevant to the Welsh text, except in a few cases where they
also impact the understanding of the English translation. These footnotes use


asterisks instead of numbers.


John B. Hare, November 6, 2005.


Title Page
Welsh Manuscript Society
Advertisement


Preface


Preface
Julius Caesar
Strabo
Diodorus Siculus
Cicero
Pliny
Pomponius Mela
Diogenes Laertius
Suetonius
Ammianus Marcellinus
Tacitus
Druids and Bards


Llywelyn Sion


Contents
A List of Documents
Symbol


The Origin of Letters, Roll, and Paper.--The Virtue of Letters
The Origin and Progress of Letters.--The Name of God.--The
Bardic Secret
The First Inventors of Letters.--Improvers of the Alphabet.--
Invention of the Roll and Plagawd.--Obligation of a Bard to Hold
a Chair and Gorsedd
Origin of Letters
The Inventor of Vocal Song.--The First Recorders of Bardism.--Its
First Systematizers.--Their Regulations.--Mode of Inscribing the
Primary Letters.--Origin of Their Form and Sound.--The Three
Menws
The Principal Elements of Various Things.--The Gogyrvens
The Invention of Letters by Einigan and Menw.--The Secret of
Bardism
Cuttings.--Foundations of Awen
Origin and Progress of Letters.--Einigan the Giant.--The
Gwyddoniaid.--Systems of Letters
The Origin of Letters and Books.--Their Introduction into Britain--
Ihe Coelbren


The Primary Letters.--Improvement of the Alphabet
Primary Cuttings.--Improvement of the Coelbren.--Its Restoration
Recovery of the Old Cymraeg
The Primary Letters.--Their Augmentation.--Restoration of the
Coelbren


Llai Bardic Secret

ne Sacred Symbol

Primary Y ru of the Alphabet
— rvens.--Writing V IF I a


sa ter - ie oa
The Bardic Secret.--Formation of Letters
The Vowels:


inal Ce intry of tl y_of the Cymry.--Their
"aval in Britain hi, FE Y of the Albhabet abet
Coelbren of the Bards, According to the Arrangement of
Llawdden
Ihe Symbols of Literary Sciences.--Improvement of the
Coelbren. —Metrical canons, Dissolution of the Monastery of Pen


The Five ay ey of ae


S GY


Mu fbe rs
The Nine Degrees of Numerals
The System of Numerals
Arithmetic
The System of Numerals
Numerals
the 2 Numerals


Numerals
The Three Symbols
The Materials of Language and Speech
The Three Wreathed Bards
Coelbren of the Bards
Coelbren of the Bards
Coelbren of the Bards
Peithynen
Coelbren of the Bards
Secret Coelbren.--Secret Coelvain.--Coelvain of History
Burning the Letters
Coelbren of Simple Letters
Palm Coelbren
Peithyn Coelbren.--Palm Coelbren
Peithynvain
Memorials
Plagawd
Ihe Three Principal Materials of Knowledge
The Herald-Bard
Dasgubell Rodd


Theology


Triads of Bardism
Theological Triads
Theological Triads
Theological Triads
Theological Triads
Theological Triads
Theological Triads
Druidism
God


Ceugant. Suitareti .—God
Ihe Three Imperceptibilities of God
The Bards' Enigma
The Twelve Primary Negatives
Bardic Aphorisms
The Divine Names
Hu the Mighty
Ihe cln es.


Annwn, —Life. _-Death
Abred
The Origin of Man.--Jesus Christ.--Creation


The Creation.--The First Man.--The Primary Letters
The Discipline Of Bardism. The Creation
The Creation.--Worship.--Vocal Song,--Gwyddoniaid
The Material of the. World


Goll in the ada
God in the Light
Triads of Bardism
God; and the Faculties of the Soul
Sentences of Bardism
The Ten Commandments of the Bards
The Ten Commandments of the Bards
The Rudiments of Theology
The Triads of St. Paul
The inegs. of St. Paul


Triads of Bardism and Usages
Triads of Bardism
The Mode of Taking Food and Drink
The Gorsedd Prayer
The Prediction of Peredur, The Bard of Prydain
The Stanza of the Gorsedd Chair of the Winter Solstice


Wisdom


Triads of Wisdom
The Elements
Triads of Bardism. The Elements
Ihe Triads of Bardism, Called the Triads of Ionabwy. The
Elements
Bardism, &c. The Elements
The Elements
The Elements
The Elements
Bardism. The Elements
The Materials
The Elements
The Elements
Ihe Materials of Man
The Eight Materials of Man
The Seven Materials of Man
The Seven Primary Materials of the World
The Eight Materials of Man
The Parts of the Human Body in Which are the Faculties
The Philosophy of the Blue Bard of the Chair
Particular Triads
Triads of Ten Numbers
Mutual Reasoning Between a Disciple and his Teacher


The Stars
Astronomy
Chronology
SnRSneIDSy.
The Memorial of Computatio e Memot
Memorial and Tr
The Cycle of Time
Ihe Months
The Beginning of the Year


The. Three Circles oH the sun


The ‘Abas
The D Divisions of the Year
isions of the Year
Divisions of the Year
The Divisions Of The Year
The Divisions of ithe Year


ea of ae a RE DA
Years of the Sun and Moon
Years of the aun, And Moon


p. title


/\\


Y GWIR YN ERBYN Y BYD.


BARDDAS;


OR, A COLLECTION OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE THEOLOGY, WISDOM, AND USAGES


The Bardo-Druidic System
OF THE ISLE OF BRITAIN.


WITH


TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES.


BY


THE REV. J. WILLIAMS AB ITHEL, M. A.,


RECTOR OF LLANYMOWDDWY, MERIONETHSHIRE;
AUTHOR OF "THE ECCLESIASTICAL ANTIOUITIES OF THE CYMRY." &c., &c.


PUBLISHED FOR
The Welsh Mss. Society
VOL. I.


LLANDOVERY:


PUBLISHED BY D. J. RODERIC; LONDON: LONG IAN & CO.
MDCCCLXII.


[1862]


NOTICE OF ATTRIBUTION
Scanned at sacred-texts.com, November 2005. Proofed and edited by John Bruno Hare.
This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to
January 1st, 1923; since the author died in 1826, it is also in the public domain
worldwide. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this


notice of attribution is left intact in all copies


mr
* a


HARDDAS;


£u MeboDrete rt


Maseru


Click to enlarge


Title Page


p. verso
/\\
Y GWIR YN ERBYN Y BYD.
I'R


BEIRDD, DERWYDDON, AC OFYDDION,


Y CYFLWYNIR
Y CASGLIAD HWN O WYBODAU A DEFODAU
Barddas yr Hen Cymry
GAN EU FFYDDLAWN WASANAETHWR,
AB ITHEL, B. B. D.


YN ENW DUW A PHOB DAIONI.


Click to enlarge


Verso


p. vii


"OES Y BYD I'R IAITH GYMRAEG."


Patroness,


HER MOST GRACIOUS MAJESTY OUEEN VICTORIA.
Patronized also by
HIS IMPERIAL MAJESTY THE EMPEROR OF RUSSIA,
AND


HIS IMPERIAL HIGHNESS THE PRINCE LOUIS LUCIEN
BONAPARTE.


President,
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE EARL OF POWIS.
Vice-presidents,
His Grace The DUKE OF BEAUFORT, K.G.
His Grace The DUKE OF NEWCASTLE, K.G.
His Grace the DUKE OF SUTHERLAND, K.G.


The Most Noble The MAROUESS OF LANSDOWNE, K.G.


The Most Noble The MAROUESS OF CAMDEN, K.G.
The Right Honourable The EARL OF SHAFTESBURY
The Right Honourable The EARL OF DUNRAVEN

The Right Honourable The EARL OF CAERNARVON
The Right Honourable The EARL OF CAWDOR, F.R.S.
The Right Honourable VISCOUNT EVERSLEY

The Right Honourable VISCOUNT FEILDING

The Right Reverend The LORD BISHOP OF ST. DAVID'S
The Right Reverend The LORD BISHOP OF ST. ASAPH
The Right Reverend The LORD BISHOP OF LLANDAFF
The Right Reverend The LORD BISHOP OF BANGOR
The Right Honourable LORD DYNEVOR

The Right Honourable LORD CARBERY

The Right Honourable LORD MOSTYN

The Right Honourable LORD LLANOVER

The Honourable T. LL. MOSTYN, M.P.

The Right Honourable CONSEILLER JOUKOVSKY


SIR WATKIN WILLIAMS WYNN, Bart. M.P. Wynnstay


SIR STEPHEN GLYNNE, Bart. Hawarden Castle, Flintshire


SIR EDWARD BULWER LYTTON, Bart. M.P. Knebworth,
Hertfordshire


SIR THOMAS PHILLIPPS, Bart., F.R.S., F.S.A. &c., Middle Hill
SIR HUGH WILLIAMS, Bart., Bodelwyddan

BERIAH BOTFIELD, Esg. M.P., F.R.S., F.S.A., &c., Norton Hall
WILLIAM ORMSBY GORE, Esg. M.P. Porkington

OCTAVIUS MORGAN, Esg. M.P.. F.R.S., F.G.S. Friars, Newport
W. W. E. WYNNE, Esg. M.P. Peniarth, Merionethshire

SIR GARDINER WILKINSON, F.R.S., D.C.L.


W. A. WILLIAMS, Esg. of Llangibby Castle, Monmouthshire


His Excellency MONS. VAN DER WEYER, Belgian Minister

His Excellency BARON BENTINCK, Netherlands Minister
Committee,

The Right Honourable Lord Llanover, Chairman

Octavius Morgan, Esg. M.P., F.R.S., F.G.S., Friars, Newport


J. Bruce Pryce, of Dyffryn, Esg. Cardiff, Glamorgan


J. Arthur Herbert, of Llanarth, Esg.

The Rev. Illtyd Nicholl, M.A. of Ham, Cowbridge, Glamorgan
Editors, Translators, and Collators of Manuscripts,

The Rev. J. Williams Ab Ithel, M.A. Rector of Llanymowddwy*

The Rev. E. Owen Phillips, M.A., Vicar of Aberystwyth*

The Rev. Hugh Williams, M.A. Chancellor of Llandaff*

John Pughe, Esg. F.R.C.S. Penhelyg, Aberdovey

William Rees, Esg. of Tonn, Llandovery*


Those marked thus* are also Members of the Committee.


Corresponding Members,
WALES.


The Right Hon. Lady Llanover, (Gwenynen Gwent) Llanover,
Abergavenny


Lady Charlotte Schreiber, Dowlais, Glamorganshire
George Grant Francis, Esg. F.S.A. Cae'r Baily, Swansea
Major Herbert, Llansanffraed, near Abergavenny


Rev. Dr. James, (Dewi o Ddyfed,) of Pantêg, Monmouthshire


Arthur James Johnes, of Garthmyl, Esg. Judge of Local Courts,
North Wales


John Johnes, Esg., Dolaucothy, Caermarthenshire
Rev. T. Jones, M.A. Llanengan, Caernarvonshire


The Very Rev. Dr. Lewellin, Dean of St. David's, & Principal of St.
Pe


Thomas Wakeman, Esg., The Graig, near Monmouth
W. W. E. Wynne, Esg. M.P. Peniarth, Merionethshire
Rev. Sir Charles Salusbury, of Llanwern, Bart.

Miss Williams, of Ynyslâs, Glamorgan, South Wales


Miss Jane Williams, of Ynyslâs, Glamorgan, South Wales.


ENGLAND, &c.
Rev. A. B. Clough, B.D., F S.A., &c. Braunston, Northampton
Rev. Robert Jones, M.A. All Saints Rectory, Rotherhithe, London
Rev. R. H. Lloyd, M.A. of Owersby, Lincolnshire
J. Whitefoord Mackenzie, Esg. F.R.S., F.S.A. &c.


Edinburgh Sir Thomas Phillipps, Bart. F.R.S. Middle Hill,
Worcestershire


The Lady Charlotte Schreiber, Roehampton, Middlesex


Secretary,
Mr. William Griffith, 4, Sidmouth Place, Gray's Inn Road, London.


HONORARY FOREIGN SECRETARY FOR GERMANY.--Mr. J. G.
Sanerwein, Asiatic Society's Office, London.


HONORARY FOREIGN SECRETARY FOR FRANCE.--Mons”. Rio,
Paris.


Treasurers,
Messrs. Bailey, Gratrex & Co., Bankers, Abergavenny.
Publisher,


Mr. D. J. Roderic, Llandovery, South Wales.


The Welsh Mss. Society,


HAS been formed for the purpose of transcribing and printing
the more important of the numerous Bardic and Historical
Remains of Wales, still extant in the Principality, and other parts
of the world, that have hitherto been allowed to continue in a
state of obscurity, without any effective measures being adopted
to lay their contents before the public, and secure them from the
various accidents to which they are liable. In addition to the
general decay which, from their perishable nature, these
venerable relics have been for ages undergoing, whole
collections have, within a short space of time, been destroyed by
fire; and of those MSS. dispersed throughout the country,


numbers known to have existed a few years ago, are now no
where to be found.


Besides the interest which these ancient documents possess, as
objects of antiguarian curiosity, and as contributing to the
elucidation of British History, they have a claim to attention of a
far more general character, as being intimately connected with
the origin and progress of modern European Literature; for it is
among the legends and traditions of the Welsh that many of the
materials are to be found, which supplied the nations of the
Continent with their earliest subjects of composition, and
produced those highly imaginative works that continue to
exercise so powerful an influence to the present day.


A great mass of Historical information, relating to the thirteenth,
fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries, is contained in the
unpublished Poetry of Wales; from which an intimate
acguaintance with the state of society during those periods may
be obtained; the Welsh Bards being the Chroniclers of the times
in which they lived, and their Poems chiefly addressed to the
leading men of the day. Besides Poetry, there is still existing
unpublished a large collection of Prose, both Historical and
Legendary; persons of affluence are therefore solicited to
contribute larger Donations and Subscriptions, than are reguired
by the Rules of the Society, in order to enable the Committee to
proceed with greater rapidity in carrying on the publication of
Manuscripts.


The first Work that was published by this Society, was the LIBER
LANDAVENSIS, or LLYFR TEILO, comprising nearly 700 Royal 8vo.
pages; gratuitously edited and translated by the late Rev. W. J.
Rees, M.A., F.S.A. &c. Of this Work only a few Copies remain to be


sold to persons becoming Members of the Society at £1 2s. Od.--
Non-members, £2 2s. 0d.


The second Work of the Society consisted of a MISCELLANEOUS
SELECTION OF ANCIENT WELSH MSS. in prose and poetry, from
the originals collected by the late Edward Williams, (Iolo
Morganwg) for the purpose of forming a continuation of the
Myvyrian Archaiology, and afterwards proposed to be used as
materials for a New History of Wales. Edited with Notes and
Translations, by his son, the late TALIESIN AB IOLO, of Merthyr
Tydvil. This work is of the same size and price as the Liber
Landavensis, and a few copies remain still in the hands of the
Publisher.


The third Work, The HERALDIC VISITATIONS OF WALES AND ITS
MARCHES, Temp. Elizabeth, and James I. in two Imperial 4to.
Volumes was printed under the gratuitous and able
superintendence of its Editor, the late SIR SAMUEL RUSH
MEYRICK, K.H., LL.])., F.S A, &c., of this Work only 240 copies were
published which were all engaged by Subscribers; it is therefore
out of print and has become extremely scarce.


The LIVES OF CAMBRO BRITISH SAINTS, was next published,
from Ancient Welsh and Latin MSS. in the British Museum and
elsewhere, comprising 680 pages Royal 8vo., and was
gratuitously edited and translated by the late Rev. W. J. REES,
M.A., F.S.A., &c. Some copies of this Work are still to be had of the
Publisher, price £1 1s. Od. to persons becoming Members of the
Society,--Non-members, £2 2s. Od.


The ANCIENT WELSH GRAMMAR made by EDEYRN DAFOD AUR,
by the command of Llywelyn ap Gruffydd, (prince of Wales from
1254 to 1282,) Rhys Vychan lord of Dynevor and Ystrad Towy; and


Morgan Vychan, lord paramount of Morganwg,--together with Y
PUM LLYFR KERDDWRIAETH, Or Rules of Welsh Prosody, by
Simwnt Vychan, in the 15th Century. Edited with Translations and
Notes, by the Rev. John Williams Ab Ithel, M.A. A few


p.x


copies only remain on hand, to be sold at £1 1s. Od. each,--Non-
members, £2 2s. Od.


The MEDDYGON MYDDFAI, or a Compendium of the Medical
Practice of the celebrated Rhiwallon and his Sons, Cadwgan,
Gruffydd, and Einion, of Myddvai, in Caermarthenshire,
Physicians to Rhys Gryg, lord of Dynevor and Ystrad Towy, son of
Gruffydd ap Rhys, the last Prince of South Wales, about the year
1230; from Ancient MSS. in the Library of Jesus College, Oxford,
Llanover, and Tonn; accompanied by an English Translation, To
the whole is annexed the curious Legend of THE LADY OF THE
LAKE, called LLYN-Y-FAN, from whom the above Physicians were
said to be descended, and a copious Herbal; Edited by the Rev. J.
Williams ab Ithel, M.A., Rector of Llanymowddwy; Translated by
John Pughe, Esg., F.R.C.S., Penhelyg, Aberdovey. Price £1 1s. Od.


To be ready early in 1863, the Second Volume of


BARDDAS; OR BARDISM, a Collection of Original Documents,
illustrative of the Theology, Discipline and Usages, of the Bardo-
Druidic System of the Isle of Britain, with Translations and Notes,
by the Rev. J. Williams Ab Ithel, M.A., Rector of Llanymowddwy.


*.* The curious matter brought to light for the first time in this
Work, cannot fail to attract the particular attention of scholars,


and to open a new and interesting era in the History of Welsh
Literature.


«> It is intended henceforward to bring out a Volume of about 400
pages every Twelve Months, to be supplied to Members of the Society
only, free of all expense. Those Works already published, and not out
of print, can be had by payment of the additional price affixed to
each.


RECOMMENDED FOR PUBLICATION.


The inedited matter of the LLYFR COCH O HERGEST, in the
Library of Jesus College, Oxford.


ANCIENT RECORDS, Temp. Edward III. belonging to the Manor
Court of Ruthin.


WELSH CHARTERS.
Y DAROGANAU, or VATICINATIONS of the middle ages.


A complete and correct edition of the BARDS of the 6th and 7th
centuries.


Y DIARHEBION CYMREIG, or WELSH PROVERBS.
The HISTORICAL TRIADS.
The Life of GRUFFUDD AB CYNAN.


The GREAL; in the Hengwrt Collection.


Rules of the Society


I. That the objects of the Society shall be to procure copies of any
interesting Manuscripts relating to Wales and the Marches
thereof, and to publish them with English Translations and
Notes.


II. That Subscribers of at least One Guinea annually, become
members of the Society.


III. That all Subscriptions being considered due for the ensuing
year, notice must be sent to the Secretary, before the 1st of
January, of any Member's intention to withdraw his name.


IV. That the Society's Publications are to appear yearly in parts or
volumes, to be delivered free to Subscribers not in arrear with
the subscriptions.


V. That there shall be only a limited number of copies printed of
each Work beyond the number of Subscribers, which copies the
Committee are empowered to dispose of to persons becoming
annual subscribers.


VI. That the management of the affairs of the Society be vested
in the Chairman and Committee, and that the funds of the
Society be disbursed in payment of the necessary expenses
incident to the production of the Works of the Society, and that
the accompts of the receipts and expenditure be audited
annually by two Members.


*.* Subscribers' Names, Donations and Annual Subscriptions are
reguested to be forwarded to the Secretary, Mr. Griffith, 4,
Sidmouth Place, Gray's Inn Road, London.


ADVERTISEMENT,


IN preparing the present work for the press, it has been deemed
advisable to place the Welsh and English on opposite pages, as
an arrangement more convenient for the scholar, who may wish
to test the accuracy of the translation by a reference to the
original.


Except to supply some of the headings, no liberty whatever has
been taken with the text. Even obvious and glaring errors,
whether in the orthography or punctuation, have been
transferred to our pages exactly as they were found in the
manuscript.


The translation has been rendered as literal as possible, short of
becoming obscure. This was considered expedient, not only with
the view of exhibiting the style and idiom of the original, but in
order to guard against any misapprehension of the sense, which
a free construction is too apt to produce.


Notes, historical and explanatory, have been added, which,
without being cumbersome, it is to be hoped, will prove of
considerable service to the reader.


Our thanks are especially due to the Right Honourable Lord and
Lady Llanover for their kindness in allowing us free access to the
MSS. of Iolo Morganwg, from which the present Collection has
been for the most part made.


p. xiii


PREFACE.


THE promoters of the National Eisteddvod, which was held at
Llangollen, in the autumn of 1858, conscious of the increased
attention that was being paid by foreign scholars to the
literature and usages of our Cymric ancestors, and desirous, at
the same time, of facilitating their inguiries in that direction, as
well as of effectually rescuing from a precarious existence the
traditions of the Bards, offered a prize of £30, and a Bardic tiara
in gold, for "the fullest illustration, from original sources, of the
theology, discipline, and usages of the Bardo-druidic system of
the Isle of Britain." Only one compilation was received, which,
nevertheless, received a very high encomium, accompanied with
a recommendation that it should be published, in the following
adjudication, which was read at the meeting by Myvyr
Morganwg, : one of the three judges appointed for the occasion.


"On this very important and interesting subject only one composition has been
received, which bears the feigned signature of PLENNYDD. It is a very extensive


collection, for the most part of unpublished
p. xiv


[paragraph continues) MSS., consisting of 287 folio pages, clearly and beautifully written, and
exhibiting indications of being carefully and accurately copied, for the writer, following
herein the example of the late Iola Morganwg, has suffered even errors, which were


obvious in the manuscripts before him, to remain unaltered.


"The compiler has been very diligent, and remarkably successful in obtaining access to
such a vast number of ancient MSS. bearing on Bardism, many of which had seen but


little light for several years before. With respect to their genuineness, PLENNYDD justly
observes,--'though their authors cannot in many instances be named, any more than
we can name the authors of the Common Law of England, yet the existence of the
peculiar dogmas and usages, which they represent, may be proved from the
compositions of the Bards from the era of Taliesin down to the present time.'


"This collection contains a great many of the Rules and Usages appertaining to the
Gorsedd of the Bards, several valuable fragments on the Natural and Moral Philosophy
of our ancestors, together with the ingenious Theology of the ancient Bardism of the
Cymry; also curious extracts on Astronomy, Arithmetic, the Bardic Coelbren, and a vast
guantity of Triads. Every fragment that can thus be made public, of what once related
to the primitive Gorsedd or Throne of the Bards, is truly valuable, inasmuch as it was
this simple, moral, and sublime system, that constituted the very foundation of the
primitive worship, legislature, and scholastic institutes of the nation, and was the
living means of promoting learning and morality among all classes of the people, in
early times. And when we consider that the Gorsedd of the Bards was but a
continuation, in the White Island, of the circular temples of patriarchal times, we may
feel assured that it is among the remains of Bardism, or the religious system
connected with those primitive temples, we may hope to discover, if at all, that Golden
Key, concealed and secured, which can open the mysteries, or esoteric doctrine, of
ancient nations.......


"We had no right to expect that we should find the 'Secrets of Bardism,' or the
'Mysteries of Maen Arch,' introduced into a compilation, which was intended to be
made public; for such have been, and ought to be a sort of mute tradition, and
tradition only, to be communicated solely to such as have proved themselves worthy
to receive the.......


"Nevertheless, there may be found in this collection, some fragments which contain,
as is very clear to every initiated Bard, the remains of that sublime learning, as it
existed in the Isle of Britain anterior to Christianity; such as those extracts about the
elements--the migration of the soul from the point of extreme evil in Annwn to the
point of extreme good in heaven--the mystic Name of God--the nature of Cythraul, &c.


In order to prove the genuineness and


great antiguity of these particulars to one who is not initiated in the mysteries of
Bardism, it may suffice that they are also discoverable, though in a more corrupt form,


in the ancient bardism of Hindoostan. They are old dogmas, at present neither


preserved nor existing amidst the antiguities of any nation under the sun, except the


Indians and the Cymry.


"But we have in the present collection some pieces of mixed Bardism, which may be
called Monkish Bardism, or Bardism and Christianity mixed together, which could
easily take place after the introduction of Christianity, owing to the remarkable--very
remark-able coincidence which exists between the two systems.


"The Compiler assures us that he is in possession of more documents, which would
have been added, if time had permitted. We trust that he will hereafter kindly make
the addition, and that the whole will be published in one or more volumes. It will make
a valuable Book, not only as aid in the management of the Gorsedd of the Bards, but
also, and especially, because the time is undoubtedly coming, as is proved by certain
signs, when every fragment of the primitive Bardism of the Cymry will be treasured as
gold, and subjected to the severest criticism by men of learning and research.


"I know not what the literati of the Continent will say, when the Book is published, but
I presume that their curiosity will be much excited by its contents, and that they
themselves will be highly pleased with the labour and industry of the Compiler.......


"The three judges are of opinion that the writer deserves to have the prize presented
to him by acclamation, and with the full and joyful approbation of the nation, as


represented in this Great Eisteddvod." 1


The compilation thus referred to is that, which, with omissions
and additions, somewhat re-arranged, and accompanied with an
English translation, is now offered to the public. With very few
exceptions, the several documents used on the present occasion,
have been collected from the manuscripts of the late Iolo
Morganwg, Bard according to the privilege and usage of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, and one of


p. xvi


the two that constituted the only members of the Bardic
institution, when it was revived at the close of the last century. :
But though they are thus in his handwriting, if we set aside some


brief and unimportant notices, which, whether original or
otherwise, may have been couched in his own language, there is
every reason to believe that they are transcripts of older
manuscripts. In the first place we may remark, that they are
interspersed, without method or order of any kind, among the
private and casual entries of the Bard, which he made on loose
scraps of old letters, bills, and placards--bound together only
after his death, and that they were thus evidently not intended
to be published. This fact of itself would remove the notion of
any design on his part to impose upon the credulity of his
countrymen. Moreover, we have had an opportunity of
examining fully and carefully those papers, and thus seen the
Bard, as it were, in his most private and unguarded moments,
and can, as the result of our observation, unhesitatingly
pronounce him to be incapable of perpetrating literary deceit or
forgery, particularly with the view of upholding a theory.
Integrity of purpose is apparent throughout all his works. Strong
feelings, indeed, he had, amounting almost to prejudice, but
they were founded in jealous concern for the due preservation of
the traditions of the country, and never displayed, except when
he beheld a disposition to oppugn or disparage what he
considered ancient and national. It was on this ground, for
instance, that he so strenuously advocated the claims of
Dosparth


p. xvii


[paragraph continues MOrganwg, or the Glamorgan system of versification,
in preference to the twenty-four new canons of poetry, which
were sanctioned at the famous Eisteddvod, held at Caermarthen,
under the patronage of Gruffydd ab Nicholas, in the 15th
century. Secondly, the style is in general too archaic for the 18th


century, exhibiting occasionally terms of such an obsolete
character as to baffle the skill of the etymologist. Nor must it be
asserted that they were fabricated for a purpose, with a view of
imparting to the documents the appearance of antiguity, for
even Iolo Morganwg himself professes not to fully understand
some of them. Thus, in reference to a Triad entitled, "Tri phrif
anaw Beirdd Ynys Prydain," he remarks, "the meaning of this
word (anaw) has not hitherto been satisfactorily given," and
proposes the guery, "whether it may not signify an original
genius?" and soon after, "whether anaw may not signify a
philosopher?" Again, after an extract, to which the name of
Llywelyn Sion is attached, relative to "Cadair Tarannon," he asks,
"Tarannon and Teyrnon--were they one and the same thing? Ou.
whether Cadair Teyrnon in Taliesin be not one and the same
thing, and also the same thing as gorsedd gwlad ac arlwydd?" The
word obryn is not to be met with in the Dictionaries; it may, and
probably does, signify a state in Abred corresponding with man's
turpitude at the time of his death, which is the meaning given to
it by Iolo Morganwg; but assuredly if he had been driven to coin
for himself a compound which should express the above idea,
instead of the very unusual prefix ob, he would naturally have
adopted cyf, cyd, or cyn, as


p. xviii


in the case of cydfil, which occurs in the same Triad. Sometimes,
when the language is not obscure, he seems to misunderstand
the import of a word, and to suggest an interpretation, which, on
due examination of the Bardic doctrine, appears to be
erroneous. Thus when, referring to /ight in the Triad--"There are
three cognates: man; liberty; and light," he observes,
"intellectual light is here probably meant," he forgets that it is


distinctly stated in other documents that man sprang into
existence simultaneously with the resplendent appearance of
the triple form of God's Name, which was the first manifestation
of material light. These facts clearly prove that Iolo Morganwg
had no hand in forging the documents in guestion. Thirdly, the
different readings, which abound in them, demonstrate that the
Bard had freguently even more than one manuscript before him,
when he made his transcripts--a fact, which shows, moreover,
that their contents were then better known than they are in our
own day. Fourthly, whilst the general subject is the same, there is
a want of uniformity in some of the details, as in the directions
given for constructing a Peithynen, and the formation of a
Gorsedd--the explanation of the Divine epithet IAU--and the
enumeration and names of the elements. This circumstance,
whilst it indicates a variety of sources, whence the different
expressions of opinion must have been derived, at the same
time excludes the idea of a collusion. Had Iolo and some of his
friends entered into a conspiracy to palm upon the public, as an
ancient system, a theory of their own invention, they would
doubtless have taken care that there should exist an exact
agreement


p. xix


between the several parts of their joint production. It is of the
essence of forgery to endeavour to avoid varieties in matters of
detail--whilst truth, and integrity of purpose, having a greater
regard for the main subject, are generally indifferent to these
particulars. Lastly, Iolo Morganwg refers to the actual existence
of some of the documents, which he alleges to have copied, and
gives, with very great minuteness, the address of the owner.
Thus, in relation to certain extracts which he made from "Trioedd


Barddas," "Trioedd Braint a Defod," "Trioedd Doethineb," and
"Trioedd Pawl," which contain the very essence of Bardism, as
exhibited in our pages, he remarks;--"The Triades that are here
selected are from a manuscript collection, by Llywelyn Sion, a
Bard of Glamorgan, about the year 1560. Of this manuscript I
have a transcript; the original is in the possession of Mr. Richard
Bradford, of Bettws, near Bridgend, in Glamorgan;" and as if this
were not sufficiently particular, he adds in a note, "son of the late
Mr. John Bradford, who, for skill in ancient British Bardism, left
not his egual behind." Nor does this statement occur among the
private papers of the Bard, but appears in his published work--
his "Poems Lyric and Pastoral," where also the selections alluded
to are printed. : If the reference had been untrue, it could easily
have been refuted, nor would his enemies, of whom he had
several, have been slow to take advantage of the circumstance to
expose the whole as a tissue of falsehood and deceit. But
nothing of the kind took place. It is fair, however,


p. xx


to observe that the existence of the manuscript in guestion at
the present moment is open to doubt--the prize offered at the
Eisteddvod failed to bring it forth. Still we are in hopes that it is
not irretrievably lost, and it may be in the possession of some
person who "careth for none of these things."


We trust that these reasons are sufficient to justify us in our
conclusion, that Iolo Morganwg had nothing whatever to do with
the original compilation of the main documents, which form the
present collection, and that he merely transcribed older
materials, which from some sources or other had fallen into his
hands.


Failing the attempt to convict Iolo Morganwg as a literary
impostor, the sceptics of the present day profess to discover the
sources in guestion in the Eisteddvodau, which were held
subseguently to the beginning of the 15th century, more
especially those of 1570, 1580, and 1681. A body of curious
matter is found to exist, purporting to have come down to us,
through the medium of the Chair of Glamorgan, as genuine
remains of the theology and usages of the Bards. This is an
incontrovertible fact. Again, history notes with egual sternness
the authorization, at the above mentioned Congresses
successively, of what was likewise called Bardism: and the not
unnatural inference is, that they are one and the same. But,
apparently for no other reason than that the code thus
promulgated was not formally committed to writing before, a
higher origin is denied to it, and of course the Bards of those
periods, Ieuan ab Hywel Swrdwal, Gwilym Tew, Lewys
Morganwg, Meurig Davydd, Davydd Benwyn, Llywelyn Sion,
Davydd Llwyd Mathew, Edward Davydd, and others, are


p. xxi


boldly charged with being its sole inventors. As they were not all
contemporaries, and as they held various positions in life, and
were also members of different religious communions, it would
be difficult to account for the unanimity with which they adopted
the strange and curious system, which these volumes present to
our view. To accuse them of being under the influence of that
spirit, which led to the overthrow of the monarchy, and to the
establishment of the commonwealth on its ruins, merely
because their system represents the three orders of Bard, Druid,
and Ovate, as co-egual in rank and privilege, is, to say the least,
not warranted by facts. History does not point out a single Bard


of those times as mixing in any political intrigue. On the contrary
they, one and all of whom we have any knowledge, appear to
have led guiet lives, paying due and just homage of loyalty to the
existing government of the day, without opposition, and without
complaint. Besides, it may be interesting to know, why the Bards
in guestion should have selected this particular form, whether as
the embodiment of their own creed, or as the representation of
ancient Druidism? There was nothing in the prevailing
philosophy of the day to suggest it; and to say that they derived
it from the traditions of the Brahmins, would be to give them
credit for a greater extent of knowledge than their positions in
life would warrant. Could they, then, have compiled the whole
system--ingenious, complex, and yet harmonious and
symmetrical as it was, out of the mere allusions to it, which are
contained in the works of the earlier Poets? The Rev. Edward
Davies observes,--"It does not appear, from their


p. xxii


own profession, nor from the research of Llwyd, and other
antiguaries, that this society possessed a single copy of the
works of the ancient Bards, previous to the eighteenth century." ;
If the inference, evidently intended to be drawn from this
guarded form of expression, be well founded, of course a direct
negative must be returned to our inguiry. But we are not
prepared to endorse the opinion, favourable as it may be to our
present argument. We believe that the Bards of the 15th and
16th centuries were, to some extent, acguainted with the
poetical productions of their predecessors, but at the same time
we boldly maintain that it was next to impossible they should
agree upon any system drawn from those sources. And in proof
of our assertion, we need only refer to those who are known to


have made the trial. What two persons have been found to agree
in their views of the mystic allusions of the Bards? What an
interminable distance there is between the respective theories of
Davies and Nash!


Whilst, however, we deny that the contents of these volumes
could have been derived immediately from the metrical
compositions of the medieval and early Poets, we believe that
they can be abundantly proved by them. There are numerous
allusions, which, otherwise obscure and unintelligible, become
by means of the light thrown upon them from Bardism, as clear
as day. As an example; Rhys Brydydd, between 1450 and 1490,
has the following lines on Hu the Mighty:--


p. xxiii


The smallest of the small

Is Hu the Mighty, as the world judges;

And the greatest, and a Lord to us,

Let us well believe, and our mysterious God;
Light His course, and active,

An atom of glowing heat is His car;

Great on land and on the seas,

The greatest that I manifestly can have,
Greater than the worlds--Let us beware


Of mean indignity to him who deals in bounty. 1


Even supposing Hu the Mighty to signify the Supreme Being, it
would be difficult to explain how He can be "the smallest of the
small," and at the same time "the greatest," or to show how His
chariot is composed of "an atom of glowing heat." Accordingly,
the interpretations given by Davies, Archdeacon Williams, and
Nash, varied though they be, are extremely vague and


unsatisfactory, leaving us in a greater state of bewilderment
than if we had never received them. And yet how simple is the
illustration which Bardism affords--"Hu the Mighty--Jesus the Son
of God,--the least in respect of His worldly greatness whilst in the
flesh, and the greatest in heaven of all visible majesties." Or,
which also explains the nature of His car;--"the particles of light
are the smallest of all small things; and yet one particle of light is
the greatest of all great things, being no less than material for all
materiality that can be understood and perceived as within the
grasp of the power of God. And in every particle there is a place
wholly commensurate with God, for there is not, and cannot be
less than God in every particle of


p. xxiv


light, and God in every particle; nevertheless God is only one in
number."


In like manner, there are various allusions to annwn, abred,
manred, byd mawr, byd bach, pair Ceridwen, the Coelbren, and
many other particulars of a similar kind, which, while they are in
themselves insufficient to constitute an intelligible groundwork
on which to raise a superstructure such as our pages contain,
bear strong testimony to the fact of its existence from the 16th
up to the 6th century. The transmigration related by Taliesin is
not identical in detail with that of Bardism, for in the latter the
soul is not supposed to enter inanimate objects, such as a sword,
a star, a word, a book, a boat, a shield, a tree, an axe, and a grain
of wheat, which form some of the gradations in "Cad Goddeu"
and "Angar Cyvyndawd;" and we infer from this discrepancy that
the Bardic doctrine was not directly founded on the poet's
language. Still we may regard it as a valuable testimony to the


actual existence among the Cymry, at the time when the poems
were written, of a doctrine of metempsychosis, whether believed
in, or preserved merely as a matter of curiosity. To notice in
detail all the passages, which might be culled out of the works of
the Poets, as referring to the principal tenets and usages of
Bardism, would swell our Preface to an unnecessary length,
especially since many of them are inserted in the body of the
work as footnotes; to then, then, we would beg to direct the
attention of our readers.


Further, the philosophical features of Bardism may be traced
even in the language of the Cymry, and the testimony, which it
thus affords, is the more valuable,


p. XXV


because it is indirect and unexpected. If we allow it possible that
the Bards of the 15th and 16th centuries should have actually
drawn their system directly from the works of their
predecessors, no one can for a moment entertain the thought
that they were capable of drawing it from the language, whether
solely, or in conjunction with the poetry of different times.
Independently of Bardism, it would be difficult to explain why
advyd, a term signifying re-world, or a beginning of the world
over again, should in common use stand for adversity, but "Rhol
Cof a Chyfrif" informs us that it was originally applied to the
state of retraversing abred, which, being a punishment for sin,
was of course a state of hardship and adversity. Again, we find
that the word gwydd means both wood and knowledge, which
cannot be accounted for except on the supposition of a common
origin, or that there was a mutual connection between the one
and the other from the earliest times. This affinity is explained by


the Coelbren. In like manner, the doctrine of eneidvaddeu alone
can satisfactorily account for the double meaning of maddeu,
and show us how a word, which properly means to liberate, or to
dismiss, came also to signify to forgive, which is its common
import at the present day. Angau, aberth, huan, nefoedd, and a
host of other words might be enumerated, which clearly refer to
the mythology of the ancient Cymry; hence it is manifest that no
Welsh philologist can effectually succeed in his investigations,
unless in the first instance he makes himself acguainted with
Bardism.


What, then, shall we say? Did the Bards in guestion model their
system according to the description, which Julius Caesar, and
other foreign


p. xxvi


writers, have given of Druidism? There is prima facie a wide
difference between the two systems. Caesar speaks of a plurality
of gods, of an archdruid, who had superior authority over the
others, and also of the immolation of human sacrifices; whereas
the unity of the Godhead is the very soul and centre of Bardism,
which also strongly insists upon the co-eguality of its orders, and
seems to discountenance altogether the notion of the sacrifice
of living beings, in the strict acceptation of the term, whether
they were men or beasts. This circumstance, therefore, is fatal to
the hypothesis which would regard classical Druidism as the
groundwork on which the fabric of Bardism has been raised.
Still, if the latter is, as it professes to be, the genuine remains of
the primitive worship and philosophy of Britain, there must be a
possibility of harmonizing the two systems--they must in


principle be identical. To this subject we will now address
ourselves.


Footnotes


xiii:1 The other adjudicators were the Rev. T. James, Netherlong,
Huddersfield, and the Rev. Silvan Evans, Llangian, Pwllheli.


xv:1 The adjudication was originally written in Welsh, in which
language it was also read at the meeting.


xvi:1 The other was the Rev. Edward Evan, of Aberdare.
xix:1 see Vol. ii.


xxii:1 The Mythology and Rites of the British Druids, p. 34.


xxiii: 1 Dr. O. Pughe's Dict., sub voce mymryn.


JULIUS C/ESAR, B.C. 99-44.


It is necessary that we should, at the outset, bear in mind the
following observation made by Caesar, as to the comparative
merits of the Continental and British systems:


"The institution is thought to have originated in Britain, and to have been thence
introduced into Gaul; and even now those who wish to become more accurately


acguainted with it, generally repair thither, for the sake of learning it."


It is clear from this statement that Druidism, in Ceesar's time,
was not considered as pure and as well understood on the
Continent as it was in the British isle, its genuine home; an
hypothesis, moreover,


p. xxvii


exactly in accordance with the traditions of the Bards:--"Bardism
originated in the Isle of Britain--no other country ever obtained a
proper comprehension of Bardism. Three nations corrupted
what they had learned of the Bardism of the Isle of Britain,
blending with it heterogeneous principles, by which means they
lost it: the Irish; the Cymry of Armorica; and the Germans." ;


According to this view, we must not expect that the two systems
should agree in all matters of detail, but only in principle and
substance.


Caesar's description refers solely to the Druidism of Gaul. How he
acguired his information, he does not tell us; it might have been
in part from personal observation, and in part, if not wholly,
from his friend Divitiacus, who was a Druid among the Adui. It is


possible that his narrative in this respect is correct; still his
general character for veracity does not bind us to believe
implicitly every word that he says. Suetonius tells us, that Asinius
Pollio, who was a contemporary of Caesar, was of opinion that his
assertions are not altogether worthy of credit;--"Asinius Pollio,"
he remarks, "thinks that they [the works of Caesar] were
composed with but little accuracy, and little truth, since Caesar
used to believe rashly respecting the deeds of other men, and
also to relate erroneously the things done by himself, either of
set purpose, or through failure of memory, and he is of opinion
that he intended to re-write and correct them." ; We shall not,
however, take the benefit of


p. xxviii


this opinion, but proceed at once to notice the principal points of
Druidism, as actually related by Caesar himself, and to compare
them with the views of the Bards, in order to see how far they
may be reconciled one with the other. The whole account, as
given by Ceesar of the Continental Druids, is as follows:


"They preside over sacred things, have the charge of public and private sacrifices, and
explain their religion. To them a great number of youths have recourse for the sake of
acguiring instruction, and they are in great honour among them. For they generally
settle all their disputes, both public and private; and if there is any transgression
perpetrated, any murder committed, or any dispute about inheritance or boundaries,
they decide in respect of them; they appoint rewards and penalties; and if any private
or public person abides not by their decree, they restrain him from the sacrifices. This
with them is the most severe punishment. Whoever are so interdicted, are ranked in
the number of the impious and wicked; all forsake them, and shun their company and
conversation, lest they should suffer disadvantage from contagion with them: nor is


legal right rendered to them when they sue it, nor any honour conferred upon them.


But one presides over all these Druids, who possesses the supreme authority among
them. At his death, if any one of the others excels in dignity, the same succeeds him:
but if several have egual pretensions, the president is elected by the votes of the
Druids, sometimes even they contend about the supreme dignity by force of arms. At a
certain time of the year, they assemble in session on a consecrated spot in the
confines of the Carnutes, which is considered the central region of the whole of Gaul.
Thither all, who have any disputes, come together from every side, and acguiesce in
their judgments and decisions. The institution is thought to have originated in Britain,
and to have been thence introduced into Gaul, and even now, those who wish to
become more accurately acguainted with it, generally repair thither for the sake of


learning it.


"The Druids usually abstain from war, nor do they pay taxes together with the others;
they have exemption from warfare, and the free use of all things. Instigated by such
advantages, many resort to their school even of their own accord, whilst others are
sent by their parents and relations. There they are said to learn thoroughly a great
number of verses. On that account, some continue at their education for twenty years.
Nor do they deem it lawful to commit those things to writing; though, generally, in
other cases, and in their public and private accounts, they use Greek letters. They


appear


p. xxix


to me to have established this custom for two reasons; because they would not have
their tenets published, and because they would not have those, who learn them, by
trusting to letters, neglect the exercise of memory; since it generally happens, that,
owing to the safeguard of letters, they relax their diligence in learning, as well as their
memory. In particular they wish to inculcate this idea, that souls do not die, but pass
after death from one body to another; and they think that by this means men are very
much instigated to the exercise of bravery, the fear of death being despised. They also


dispute largely concerning the stars and their motion, the magnitude of the world and


the earth, the nature of things, the force and power of the immortal gods, and instruct


the youth in their principles.


"The whole nation of the Gauls is very much given to religious observances, and on
that account, those who are afflicted with grievous diseases, and those who are
engaged in battles and perils, either i mmolate men as sacrifices, or vow that they will
immolate themselves, and they employ the Druids as ministers of those sacrifices;
because they think that, if the life of man is not given for the life of man, the immortal
gods cannot be appeased; they have also instituted public sacrifices of the same kind.
Some have images of immense size, the limbs of which, interwoven with twigs, they fill
with living men, and the same being set on fire, the men, surrounded by the flames,
are put to death. They think that the punishment of those who are caught in theft or
pillage, or in any other wicked act, is more acceptable to the immortal gods; but when
there is a deficiency of such evil doers, they have recourse even to the punishment of
the innocent.


"They chiefly worship the god Mercury; of him they have many images, him they
consider as the inventor of all arts, as the guide of ways and journeys, and as
possessing the greatest power for obtaining money and merchandise. After him, they
worship Apollo, Mars, Jupiter, and Minerva. Concerning them they have almost the
same opinion as other nations, namely: that Apollo wards off diseases; that Minerva
instructs them in the principles of works and arts; that Jupiter holds the empire of
heaven; and that Mars rules wars. To him, when they have determined to engage in
battle, they generally vow those things which they shall have captured in war. When
they are victorious, they sacrifice the captured animals; and pile up the other things in
one place.


"The Gauls declare that they have all sprung from their father Pluto, and this they say
was delivered to them by the Druids." ;


p. XXX


The principal topics, which demand our attention in this extract,
are:


1. The religious function of the Druids. The two systems are
perfectly agreed in this respect, that the priestly office belonged
to the Druidic order. Caesar, indeed, does not mention either of
the other two orders, but his silence is no proof that they did not


exist in Gaul as well as in Britain. It is very probable that the
Druids were, in respect of their office, the most conspicuous
among the Gauls, and that Caesar's attention was especially
drawn to their deeds, so as to overlook the Bards and Ovates, or
that he considered the functions of these as absorbed in that of
the Druids. We have the evidence of Diodorus Siculus and Strabo
that there were Bards in Gaul, and the latter says there were
Ovates (OUATELC) also.


2. The respect in which they were held. The Druids of Britain were,
likewise, highly esteemed by the people. According to the laws of
Dyvnwal Moelmud, "the Gorsedd of Bards" was "the oldest in its
origin" of "the three privileged Gorsedds of the Isle of Britain."
Its different functionaries had a right each to five free acres of
land in virtue of their office--were entitled to maintenance
wherever they went--had freedom from taxes--no person was to
bear a naked weapon in their presence--and their word was
always paramount. These privileges, as well as others, to which
they had a right, are distinctly specified in the present volumes,
and they show the great respect and honour in which they at all
times stood in the community. The conseguence was that many
persons were usually candidates for the office, not only among
the nobility and gentry, but also


p. xxxi


among those of low rank, for the bondsman became free on his
assuming the profession of Bardism, though he could not learn
it "without the permission of his proprietary lord, and the lord of
the territory." Caesar regards the Druids and Knights as of a
higher rank than the common people, and as being distinct from
them, and though he does not say that the former could have


arisen, and gained their nobility by means of their office, yet it is
not improbable that the teachers of Gaul were, in this respect,
similar to the Bards of the Isle of Britain. At any rate, every Bard
among the Cymry was according to his office a free and
honourable man, whatever his position might have been
previously. In this matter, therefore, we perceive no substantial
difference between the Druidism of Britain and the Druidism of
Gaul.


3. The arbitration and settlement of disputes. It appears from the
Laws of Dyvnwal Moelmud that there were "three Gorsedds
according to the privilege of the country and nation of the
Cymry," having their respective duties and functions with a view
to the improvement of society.


"The first is the Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and their foundation and
privilege rest upon reason, nature, and cogency; or, according to other teachers and
wise men, upon reason, nature, and circumstance. And the privilege and office of
those protected by the Gorsedd of Bards are to maintain and preserve and diffuse
authorized instruction in the sciences of piety, wisdom, and courtesy; and to preserve
memorial and record of every thing commendable respecting individuals and kindred;
and every event of times; and every natural phenomenon; and wars; and regulations
of country and nation; and punishments; and commendable victories; and to preserve
a warranted record of genealogies, marriages, nobility, privileges, and customs of the
nation of the Cymry; and to attend to the exigencies of other Gorsedds in announcing
what shall be achieved, and what shall be reguisite, under lawful proclamation and


warning: and further
p. xxxii


than this there is nothing either of office or of privilege attached to a Gorsedd of
Bards.......Second, the Gorsedd of the country and common weal; or the Gorsedd of


judicature and decision of law, for the right and protection of the country and nation,


their refugees, and their aliens. These Gorsedds act severally; that is to say, the
Gorsedd of federate support makes a law, where an occasion reguires, and confirms it
in a country and federate country; and that is not allowed to a country distinct from a
federate country. The Gorsedd of judgment and judicature decides upon such as shall
transgress the law, and punishes him. And the Gorsedd of the Bards teaches
commend-able sciences, and decides respecting them, and methodically preserves all
the memorials of the nation to insure their authenticity. And it is not right for any one
of these Gorsedds to intermeddle with the deliberation of either of the other two, but
to confirm them, and to support them regularly. The third Gorsedd, or that of federate
support, in its original and determinate purpose, is to effect what may be necessary as
to any thing new, and as to the improvement of the laws of a country and federate
country, by a federate jury of chiefs of kindreds, wise men, and sovereign ruler. A
sovereign prince, or ruler of paramount right, is the oldest in possessive title of the
kings and the princes of a federate community: and he is to raise the mighty agitation;


and his word is superior to every other word in the agitation of the country."


According to the tenor of this extract, it was "the Gorsedd of
judgment and judicature" that possessed the special right of
determining national and social disputes, in conformity with the
law that was enacted in a "Gorsedd of federate support." They
were matters of a literary character mainly that came under the
supervision of the Bards. Nevertheless, there was some
connection between the three institutions--they were "to
confirm, and support" each other "regularly." The Bards were
required more particularly to register the events that occurred in
country and nation, to preserve the records of genealogies,
marriages, nobility, privileges and customs, of the nation of the
Cymry, and to attend to the exigencies of other Gorsedds in
announcing what shall be


p. xxxiii


achieved, and what shall be reguisite, under lawful proclamation
and warning. So far, then, it might be said that they settled
matters appertaining to inheritances and boundaries, as the
Druids of Gaul did in the time of Ceesar. The Roman captain
might easily be mistaken with respect to the extent of the
authority and power of the Druids, attributing to them more
than in reality they possessed. After all, he does not admit that
the entire authority was in their hands--his observation is, "they
generally settle all their disputes, both public and private." And
even if things were exactly as he relates them, it is not difficult to
suppose that this was a natural corruption of the primitive
custom. Inasmuch as the Druids generally were possessed of
more learning and knowledge than any other class of people in
the country, it was guite natural that they should increase in
political and social authority, especially where the other
establishments were not as orderly and well defined as they
were in Britain. We see this principle at work in relation to the
Church, during what is called "the dark ages," when more than
necessary of temporal and political authority fell into the hands
of ecclesiastics.


Caesar says of the Druids of Gaul that the greatest punishment
which was inflicted upon evil doers was, to keep them from the
sacrifices. It must be admitted that there was nothing, as far as
we know, in the institute of Britain, which altogether answered
to this interdict. Perhaps the nearest approach to it was the
refusal of the protection of the Gorsedd to any member of the
community, who, for some fault or other, was announced to be
exposed to a "naked


Pp. Xxxiv


weapon." The Bards, however, had a peculiar mode of degrading
their convicted brethren. It took place at a Gorsedd, and the act
was called "to bring the assault of warfare against" him who was
to be thus disfranchised. After the Bards had agreed in their
decision, they covered their heads, and one of them unsheathed
the sword, named the person aloud three times, with the sword
lifted in his hand, adding when he was last named, "the sword is
naked against him." He could never after be re-admitted; and
was called "a man deprived of privilege and exposed to warfare."
There is some resemblance in this custom to what Caesar says of
the excommunicated, "that no legal right was rendered to them,
nor any honour conferred upon them;" and the resemblance is
sufficient to show that the usages of the two countries had
sprung from the same root.


4. The Archdruid. Among the Cymry the three orders, Bard, Druid,
and Ovate, were co-equal, one with the other, in point of
privilege and dignity, whilst they were different in regard to
duties. For thus it is stated in "Trioedd Braint a Defod:"--


"The three branches of Bardism: Poetry; Ovatism; and Druidism;
that is to say, these three branches are adjudged to be of egual
privilege, and egual importance, for there can be no superiority
to one of them over another--though they are distinct in
purpose, they are not distinct in privilege."


"There are three Bards of egual importance, that is, the three worthy primitive Bards,
namely: a licensed native Bard, or a Poet according to privilege and usage; an Ovate-
bard, devoted to genial learning; and a Druid-bard, devoted to theology and morality;--
and they are said to be of egual importance, because one cannot be better than


another, or supreme over the rest;--though one is distinct from another in respect of


office and movement, still they are egual and of like dignity in respect of obligation,


effort, and object, which are, learning, truth, and peace."
p. XXXV


In this sense, then, it may be said that the system of the Cymry
varied from that of the Gauls. Nevertheless, occasionally, that is,
when they met in Gorsedd, "one presided," even among the
British Bards. He was called chief-Bard, or Gorsedd Bard; and if
he were of the Druidic order, he might be easily regarded as an
Arch-druid, not only because he presided, but because in doing
so he stood on the "maen arch," in the centre of the sacred circle.
Every chief-Bard had a right to preside at a Gorsedd, but still
nothing could be decided without the consent of the majority of
Gorsedd Bards--the former was merely a kind of chairman
primus inter pares, for the time.


Caesar seems to imply that one only presided during life, and
when he died, that another was elected in his stead. This is not
altogether in unison with the custom of the Cymry. Nevertheless,
if such in truth was the usage of Gaul, it might easily have been
derived from our own country. Whilst the people of the
Continent did not properly understand Bardism, there was
nothing to prevent them from falling into a mistake as to the
nature of the authority, which the Bard president possessed,
deeming it to be personal, and intended to continue for life,
whereas it was official only--belonging to several, and to be
exercised as occasions reguired. The Cymry never had recourse
to the sword in order to settle the guestion of supremacy, as we
learn from Caesar was the case sometimes on the Continent. This
was guite an abuse--and thoroughly inconsistent with the spirit
of Bardism.


5. The place of meeting. According to Czesar, the Druids of Gaul
had a fixed place and time for meeting;


p. xxxvi


he mentions not the time, but the place he says was on the
confines of the Carnutes, in the middle of the country, as was
supposed. "Thither," he says, "all, who have any disputes, come
together from every side, and acguiesce in their judgments and
decisions." In like manner, the Bards or Druids of Britain had
their appointed times and places for meeting in Gorsedd. Their
times were the Albans, namely, Alban Eilir, Alban Hevin, Alban
Elved, and Alban Arthan, that is, the eguinoxes and solstices, or
the commencement of the four seasons of the year. The principal
places are recorded in the following Triads:--


"The three principal Gorsedds of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the Gorsedd of Bryn
Gwyddon at Caerleon-upon-Usk; the Gorsedd of Moel Evwr; and the Gorsedd of


Beiscawen.


"The three Gorsedds of entire song of the Isle of Britain: the Gorsedd of Beiscawen in
Dyvnwal; the Gorsedd of Caer Caradog in Lloegria; and the Gorsedd of Bryn Gwyddon


in Cymru."


There was thus one special Gorsedd in each of the three
principal provinces, where the native mind chiefly predominated.
The Gorsedd was a sort of national temple, to which the majority
of persons within the province resorted at the appointed times,
in order to worship God, and to receive instruction. All were
invited, except such as were "deprived of privilege, and exposed
to warfare," and no impediments were allowed to be put on their
way, as they travelled "under the protection and peace of God."


"Three common rights of federate country and border country: a principal river; a high
road; and a resort of worship; and those are under the protection of God and His peace;
since a weapon is not to he unsheathed by such as freguent them against those they


may meet;
p. xxxvii


and whoever shall do so, whether a native or a stranger, a claim of galanas against him


arises on the plaint of the lord of the territory." 1


6. The derivation of the Druidic system. We have already noticed
the coincidence between the notion which prevailed in Gaul on
this head and the drift of the Cymric traditions.


7. Memorials. "They are said," observes Caesar, "to learn
thoroughly a great number of verses; and on that account, some
continue at their education for twenty years." One of "the three
memorials of the Bards of the Isle of Britain," was "the memorial
of song." This was one of the oldest vehicles in which events and
sciences were handed down among the Bards, and it is
supposed that the particular form which they used was the
metre called "Triban Milwr," or the Warrior's Triplet. The name of
Tydain, the father of Awen, is especially associated with the
memorial of song; and "the poem of Tydain" is prominently
alluded to in the account of the establishment of Bardism. He
was a contemporary of Prydain.


As time rolled on, accumulating events and sciences, we may
easily suppose that "twenty years" would not be more than
sufficient to enable a man to treasure in his memory the "great
number of verses" necessary to contain and embody them.
Generally, however, nine years was the time during which a pupil


was required to be under discipline previous to his being
graduated as a Chief Bard.


p. xxxviii


"They do not deem it lawful (fas) to commit those things to
writing," i.e. the things appertaining to the system. Neither did
the British Bards countenance the habit of writing their
traditions. On the contrary, it was their custom to recite them
publicly in every Gorsedd, until they became deeply rooted in the
memory of the people. This is what they called the "voice of
Gorsedd," and it was in this manner that their traditions have
come down to us. Caesar's opinion respecting such a practice
coincides exactly with the reason which influenced the Bards of
Cymru. "They appear to me to have established this custom for
two reasons; because they would not have their tenets
published, and because they would not have those, who learn
then, by trusting to letters, neglect the exercise of memory." The
Bards had a "Cyvrinach," or Secret, which they did not consider it
lawful for any one to know out of their own order; such were the
Name of God, and the Ten Letters. All this secrecy related
especially to the institute, and the candidate for admission into it
took an awful vow that he would not divulge the cyvrinach to any
one, who was not a regular Bard. They likewise considered that
the use of writing tended to weaken the memory, not only in
respect of the disciples, but also of the people generally; or
rather, with regard to the latter, they considered that the voice of
Gorsedd was the easiest mode of teaching them, and the most
effectual for preventing every kind of falsehood and corruption.


With respect to the voice of Gorsedd, and its connection with the
discipline of the Bards themselves, we have it thus stated in " the


Book of Lewys Morganwg,


which he compiled from many of the old Books:"


"There is no other than the memorial, voice, and usage of Gorsedd belonging to the
privileges and usages of the primitive Bards, for they spring from primary and original
right, before there was any Book knowledge; therefore, they were submitted only to
the memorial of the voice, and usage of Gorsedd; or, as others say, to the memorial of
song, voice, and usage. And they have no permanent privilege and authority, but what


we know by these means."


Nevertheless, the Bards had a knowledge of letters from the
beginning. It is said that Einigan, the first man, "beheld three
pillars of light, having on them all demonstrable sciences, that
ever were, or ever will be," and that "he took three rods of the
guicken tree, and placed on them the forms and signs of all
sciences, so as to be remembered." People misunderstood
these, and "regarded the rods as a God, whereas they only bore
His Name. When Einigan saw this, he was greatly annoyed, and
in the intensity of his grief he broke the three rods, nor were
others found that contained accurate sciences. He was so
distressed on that account that from the intensity he burst
asunder, and with his [parting] breath he prayed God that there
should be accurate sciences among men in the flesh, and there
should be a correct understanding for the proper discernment
thereof. And at the end of a year and a day, after the decease of
Einigan, Menw, son of the Three Shouts, beheld three rods
growing out of the mouth of Einigan, which exhibited the
sciences of the Ten Letters, and the mode in which all the
sciences of language and speech were arranged by them, and in
language and speech all distinguishable sciences. He then took


p.xl


the rods, and taught from them the sciences--all, except the
Name of God, which he made a secret, lest the Name should be
falsely discerned; and hence arose the Secret of the Bardism of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain." ;


The first ten letters were derived from the creative Name of God,


/\\, and represented a, p, c, e, t, i, 1, 5 o, s; and "they had been
a secret from the age of ages among the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, for the preservation of memorials of country and nation.
Beli the Great made them into sixteen, and divulged that
arrangement, and appointed that there should never after be a
concealment of the sciences of letters, in respect of the
arrangement which he made; but he left the ten cuttings a
secret." »


According to some authorities, the alphabet of the sixteen letters
was formed, and divulged in the time of Dyvnwal Moelmud. The
original Abcedilros, or alphabet of the ten letters, was quite
different to that of the sixteen and its augmentations; and whilst
these were known to the public, the former was known only to
the Bards.


The Druids of Gaul had a knowledge of letters, though they did
not commit to writing the things that pertained to their institute.
"Generally," says our author, "in other cases, and in their public
and private accounts, they use Greek letters." The alphabet of
the sixteen was at this time open to the public in Britain; could it
have been the one which the Continental Druids used, mistaken
by Caesar for Greek letters?


p. xli


The Druids of Gaul had letters of their own, which were similar to
the letters of Greece; it is, therefore, not impossible that Caesar
confounded one series with the other. Mr. Astle, who is well
skilled in ancient letters, gives a series of Gaulish characters,
which are somewhat similar to those of Greece. They were taken
from the monumental inscription of Gordian, the messenger of
the Gauls, who suffered martyrdom, in the third century, with all
his family. "These characters," he says, "were generally used by
the people, before the conquest of Gaul by Caesar." ;


Another author remarks:--"There are those who think the Druids
had ancient characters, which were both elegant, and similar to
those of the Greeks. For according to the testimony of
Xenophon, and Archilochus, the figures of those letters, which
Cadmus brought out of Phoenicia into Greece, resembled
Gaulish, rather than Punic, or Phoenician characters." ;


He who compares the ancient Greek Alphabet with the Bardic
Coelbren, will find a remarkable similarity between them, so that
a stranger might easily mistake the one for the other.


The Druids of Britain as well as those of Gaul, made use of
letters under many circumstances. The "memorial of letters," or
the "memorial of Coelbren," was one of their "three memorials."
This is clearly seen in the Laws of Dyvnwal Moelmud. It would,
therefore, not be difficult to harmonize Cesar's narrative
respecting the "memorial of voice" and the "memorial of letters"
of the Gauls, with what we


p. xlii


know to have been the usage of the Bards of Britain in these
matters.


8. The transmigration of souls. The Bardic dogma on this head
was, that the soul commenced its course in the lowest water
animalcule, and passed at death to other bodies of a superior
order, successively, and in regular gradation, until it entered that
of man. Humanity is a state of liberty, where man can attach
himself to either good or evil, as he pleases. If his good gualities
preponderate over his evil gualities at the time of his death, his
soul passes into Gwynvyd, or a state of bliss, where good
necessarily prevails, and from whence it is impossible to fall. But
if his evil gualities predominate, his soul descends in Abred into
an animal corresponding in character to the disposition he
exhibited just before he died. It will then rise as before, until it
again arrives at the point of liberty, where it will have another
chance of clinging to the good. But if it fails, it must fall again;
and this may happen for ages and ages, until at last its
attachment to good preponderates. It was believed, however,
that man could not be guilty twice of the same sin; his
experience in Abred, whilst undergoing punishment for any
particular sin, would prevent him from loving that sin a second
time; hence the adage, "Nid eir i Annwn and unwaith."


The views of the Gaulish Druids, as far as they are expressed by
Caesar, do not appear to differ from the above. "They wish to
inculcate this idea, that souls do not die, but pass after death
from one body to another." The only thing that may be supposed
to be different is the passing from one body to another, which, in
the original Latin, seems as if it meant from


p. xliii


one human body to another human body, "ab aliis--ad alios." But
in reality there is no inconsistency between the two systems,


even in this respect; for, though the soul of a good man was
considered in general as entering an angelic body in the circle of
Gwynvyd, and the soul of a wicked man as entering the body of a
beast, a reptile, or a bird, in Abred, yet, it was thought that
occasionally the good soul returned from Gwynvyd to inhabit a
human body, and that the soul of one punished by death,
against his will, for an injurious evil, passed to another human
body. There is no doubt that this, with the Cymry as well as with
the Gauls, acted as a strong incentive to bravery, especially as
they considered that to suffer in behalf of truth and justice was
one of the greatest virtues, and was sure to bring the soul to
everlasting bliss.


9. Astronomy. "They dispute largely concerning the stars and
their motion," says Caesar, and herein the Druids of Gaul were
similar to those of Britain. We have evidence enough to prove
that the latter paid particular attention to the doctrine of the
stars. Testimony is borne to their Knowledge of the revolution of
the stars even by the very word, which they used to denote time,
amser, compounded of am, round, and ser, the stars. They
themselves, also, not unfreguently went by the name of
sywedyddion, that is, astronomers, or men versed in the science
of the stars.


Talhaiarn y sydd
Mwyaf sywedydd.


It will be seen that the names given by our ancestors to the
different constellations, as enumerated in


p. xliv


these volumes, are thoroughly Cymric, and radical, thus
indicating early and profound knowledge on their part "
concerning the stars and their motion."


10. Cosmology. The Bards believed that all the visible creation
sprang into existence simultaneously with the pronunciation of
God's Name; and this article occupies a very prominent place in
their religious creed. From other fragments in this Collection we
find that they professed to know something of the laws of
nature; why water rises to the surface of the earth, and descends
from the clouds, and why the sea is briny. And, if we take Taliesin
as a proper representative of Bardism, we may have abundant
proof from his poems that they reasoned much in his days
"concerning the world, the earth, and the nature of things."


11. Theology. "And about the force and power of the immortal
gods." Let GOD be substituted for "gods," and this statement
would apply egually to the Cymry, and no difference whatever
would exist between the two systems on the subject. Nothing is
oftener, and more positively insisted upon in the Bardic creed
than the doctrine of ONE GOD; and it is remarkable that all the
testimonies of archaiological research, though they are for the
most part of a negative character, tend to confirm the antiguity
and genuineness of that creed. The Bards were careful to
inculcate this truth above all, and brought it to bear upon the
several rites and ceremonies, which distinguished their national
worship. The ideas they had, also, of the nature and attributes of
the Deity were truly sublime and eminently magnificent, not to
be egualled perhaps by any other race of the Gentile


p. xlv


world, prior to its adoption of the more divine religion of Christ.


12. Sacrifices. The views of the Bards on the subject of
"aberthau," or oblations, are clearly and distinctly guoted in
these volumes, so that we need not give a summary of them
here. What we have to do is to harmonize the account, which
Caesar gives of the sacrifices of the Continental Druids with the
Bardism of the Cymry. The Roman captain might easily fall into a
mistake about those matters. When he saw malefactors being
put to death, under the supervision of the priests, he would
naturally infer that they were thus dealt with as sacrifices, to
propitiate the gods. He saw men, perhaps, giving themselves up
voluntarily to suffer the punishment due for their
transgressions, and he would reasonably suppose that they were
"vowing to sacrifice themselves." It is guite possible that he
should, also, have seen good men suffer in the cause of truth
and justice, and his inference would be, that they were being
sacrificed for want of a sufficient number of evil doers to take
their place. But, if we grant that Caesar gives a correct account of
the sacrifices of the Gaulish Druids, it is very easy to perceive
that the rite in guestion originated in the doctrine of
eneidvaddeu, which prevailed among the Cymry. "They think that
if the life of man is not given for the life of man, the immortal
gods cannot be appeased." Life for life was reguired by the laws
of the Cymry; but we do not find that our ancestors viewed the
retaliation as what would propitiate God, further than that to
benefit the man himself, who was put to death, might be taken
as a sign of his reconciliation


p. xlvi


with God. If a murderer died a natural death, his soul would
descend low in Abred, but the fatal punishment inflicted upon
him by the public officers was considered, according to the order


of providence, as eguivalent to that degradation, and his soul
passed simultaneously to another human body. In this sense,
then, the punishment of eneidvaddeu propitiated God; that is,
God did not, on that account, place man in such a miserable
position as He would otherwise have done. Since the Divine
Being wishes every man to be saved, it may be said, that
whatever is done to facilitate that object, and to bring about its
speedy consummation, must be pleasing to Him.


It is very probable that the prisoners of the wicker image were
no other than the malefactors who would not surrender
themselves voluntarily; we can hardly see the necessity for the
scheme in the case of the others. We do not read of anything of
the kind in connection with our own island; most likely it was
peculiar to the Continent.


Caesar observes that it was the opinion of the Gaulish Druids
"that the punishment of those who were caught in theft or
pillage, or in any other wicked act, was more acceptable to the
immortal gods" than that of the innocent. It is difficult to
withstand the supposition that these were the words of the
commentator himself, used by him as a reason for the want of
proportion, which he observed in the number of the bad and
good, that were immolated. If, on the contrary, it was really the
opinion of the Druids, then they must in this respect have
differed much from their Cymric brethren, who considered that
the offenders, who gave themselves up willingly


p. xlvii


to be punished, were more acceptable than those who were
punished against their will, and that the good, who suffered in
behalf of truth and justice, were still more so. Besides, there was


something in the above opinion inconsistent with the idea which
mankind in general entertained respecting the qualities of a
sacrifice, and which sets forth the immaculate, the obedient, and
the innocent, as the one which is most pleasing to God.


It appears from Cesar that the agent, which the Gauls used for
consuming their sacrifices, was fire. Fire might in like manner be
employed among the Cymry for the punishment of those who
were adjudged to be eneidvaddeu. "There are three eneidvaddeu
punishments: beheading; hanging; and burning; and it is for the
king, or lord of the territory, to order which he willeth to be
inflicted." ;


13. The Names of God. We must again express our conviction that
Caesar might have mistaken the several attributes, which
belonged to the one true God, for as many distinct and
independent divinities, just as it is said that some of the Cymry,
in the in-fancy of the world, deified and worshipped the rods
which only bore the Name of God. Not at once did men forget
the great and primitive doctrine of the unity of the Godhead,
setting up in the imagination of their hearts "gods many, and
lords many." Even the names, by which the gods of the Gentiles
were designated, had been invented, and were used to denote
the several properties of the Deity, before that


great corruption took place. As an old poet observes,--


"Pluto, Proserpine, Ceres, Venus, Cupid,
Triton, Nereus, Tethys, and Neptune,
Hermes, Vulcan, Pan, Jupiter, Juno,
Diana, and Apollo, are ONE GOD." 1


paragraph continues) TNE same doctrine is also taught in the hymns, which
historians ascribe to Orpheus. It is guite probable, therefore,
that Caesar, when he observed the several parts of the Gaulish
worship, concluded that they were adorations offered to distinct
gods, and that those gods were similar to the gods of Rome and
Greece, with whom he was best acquainted.


"They chiefly worship the god Mercury." This character is almost
the chief in every religious system; it is the same as to its original
nature with the Gwyddon of the Cymry, the Budha of the
Indians, and the Woden of the Saxons--that is, the Bard
presiding at Gorsedd. It was the office of this Bard to instruct
men in various kinds of knowledge, and to lead them along the
ways of morality; therefore, his auditors might easily consider
him as "the inventor of all arts, the guide of ways and journeys,
and as possessing the greatest power for obtaining money and
merchandise."


"Of him they have many images." Perhaps the maen crair, on
which the presiding Bard stood, and the meini gwynion, at which
his assistants took their station, were these supposed images.
But, granting that the inhabitants of Gaul, in Caesar's time, did
worship the god Mercury, it is easy to see that such


p. xlix


was merely a misapprehension of the primitive views, which
were entertained respecting the Bard in Gorsedd. The same
properties, but more suitably adapted to the character of a
divine being, were ascribed to Mercury, as were supposed to
belong to the Bard. The first, and most natural step in this
corruption, was to view the president of Gorsedd as the
representative of a Divine Gwyddon, and doubtless the people


fell into this mistake sooner than did the Druids themselves.
Inasmuch as the principles of Bardism were never so thoroughly
understood in Gaul as they were in Britain, it was not difficult to
fall into error on the point in guestion.


We know not whether Mercury was a name which the Druids
themselves gave to their president, or their god, or whether it
was one that Cesar invented, from noticing the similarity that
existed between their views and worship and those of his own
countrymen. If it be a Celtic name, what does it mean? Is it
MERCH-WR, (woman-man,) because the Gwyddon looked
straight before him along the line of the East--"Dwyrain," i. e. dwy
rain, the two rays--the ray of Eilir and the ray of Elved, which in
nature represented the two sexes, male and female? Or is it
MARCH-WR, (horse-man,) because he mounted, or, as it were,
rode the maen crair, whilst he presided in Gorsedd--the word
march again being originally derived from my--ARCH, i.e. the
ARCH, or maen ARCH, being another name of the stone on
which the Bard stood?


"After him they worship Apollo," who is supposed "to ward off all
diseases." He is the same undoubtedly with the SUN in the
Bardism of the Cymry,


p.l


which was regarded as the natural or physical representative of
the Sun of righteousness, or the Supreme God. Wherefore, many
of the rites and ceremonies of the Gorsedd were regulated with
reference to this luminary. The days for holding the Gorsedd
were the four Albans, when the rays of the orient sun converging
to the maen llog delineated the creative Name of God. The Bard
thus standing in "the face of the sun, and the eye of light," when


he taught the people, literally "spoke in the Name of the Lord."
No Gorsedd could be held except when the sun was above the
horizon.


Since it is the property of the sun to warm, cheer, and revive, it
may well be said to "ward off diseases;" and when deified, the
same attribute would of course still belong to it, but in a more
eminent degree.


Having lost sight of the true position of the sun in the system of
Bardism, it was not difficult to fall into error, and to worship the
creature more than the Creator. It would appear that the
Gentiles had made gods of "the heavenly host" sooner than of
any other parts of the creation; and if the Gauls were to some
extent idolaters in the time of Caesar, we may be sure that they
worshipped the Sun.


The next god, whom Cesar says they worshipped, was MARS,
"the ruler of wars." The British Bards were pre-eminently men of
peace; no one was allowed to carry a naked weapon in their
presence, nor did they ordinarily unsheath the sword against any
one. We say ordinarily, for there were occasions, on which they
were required to act in a different manner, as may be seen from
the following Triad:--


p. li


"The three necessary, but reluctant duties, of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: secrecy
for the sake of peace and public good; invective lamentation reguired by justice; and to


unsheath the sword against the lawless and depradatory." 1


It was not for the purpose of acguiring unlawful possessions,
and of oppressing other people and countries, that they


"unsheathed the sword;" "they would not have country and lands
by fighting and pursuing, but of eguity, and in peace." It was
evil that they resisted even unto blood. Accordingly, on his way
to the Gorsedd, the Bard carried the sword by its point, to signify
his own readiness to suffer in the cause of truth; it was sheathed
on the maen crair, for the people had been invited to attend,
where there would be no naked weapon against them; but
against "a man deprived of privilege, and exposed to warfare," it
was unsheathed. It may be that the rite of the sword in Gorsedd
had created an opinion in the mind of Caesar, that the Druids
were at the time worshipping Mars, the god of war; or it may be
that the Druids themselves, having forgotten its original import,
had come to regard it as referring to the same god, whom, they
no doubt had heard of as existing in the religious system of their
neighbours. The accompanying offerings and sacrifices seem to
have been derived from this view of Mars, since nothing of the
kind can be traced to the usages of the Cymry; unless the
burying his horse and arms with a warrior had been a sort of
foundation for the custom.


p. lii


After Mars, Jupiter is mentioned, as the god, who " held the
empire of heaven." IAU : was one of the names, which the Cymry
gave to the supreme God, and it signified the last or most recent
manifestation of the Godhead, such as that which occurred in
creation as contrasted with the preceding vacuum--after that in
the incarnation of His Son. Perhaps the word is the same with


A'N the unutterable Name of God, by which He created all
things--the Word of His might. There is, however, another
meaning given to the name in guestion in the traditions of the
Bards:--


"Disciple. Why is Iau (yoke) given as a name for God?


"Master. Because the yoke is the measuring rod of country and nation in virtue of the
authority of law, and is in the possession of every head of family under the mark of the
lord of the territory, and whoever violates it is liable to a penalty. Now, God is the
measuring rod of all truth, all justice, and all goodness; therefore He is a yoke on all,


and all are under it, and woe to him who shall violate it." 2


This meaning bears a close relation to the opinion that the
owner of the name "held the empire of heaven." Nevertheless,
the name, even in this sense, might have been founded upon


/IN, or, according to a further development, /I\\I/, which
signifies preservation, creation, and destruction.


The Gauls could not fall into the error of inventing an additional
divinity in the person of Jupiter, for he was the principal god, or
god in his primary character--though their formation of different
gods out of his attributes necessarily encroaches upon, and
abbreviates his greatness and authority.


p. liii


MINERVA. The Druids of Gaul, according to Caesar, were of
opinion that it was this goddess who "instructed them in the
principles of works and arts." It is very likely that she was the


same originally with the Awen, (A wen, FIX) the Word of God,
that proceeded out of His mouth, even as Minerva is said to have
sprung out of the brain of Jupiter. It was from the AWEN that all
knowledge was derived--in like manner Minerva was considered
as the goddess of wisdom. One of the objects of AWEN is to
produce peace--Minerva produced the olive, the symbol of
peace. In several other respects, also, a remarkable similarity


between the characteristics of the Bardic Awen and the goddess
Minerva, may be pointed out, though in matters of detail this is
not necessary, because Caesar observes that the opinion of the
Gauls was but almost the same as that of the other nations
concerning the above divinities.


14. Origin of the people. "The Gauls declare that they have all
sprung from their father Pluto, and this they say was delivered to
them by the Druids." There can be no doubt that this sentiment
is perfectly identical with that of the Bards relative to the
procession of man from Annwn.


"Whence didst thou proceed? and what is thy beginning?


"I came from the Great World, having my beginning in Annwn." +


We have thus gone through the testimony of Caesar, the principal
classical authority on the subject of Druidism; we will now
proceed to examine the statements of the other ancient authors,
who have


p. liv


touched upon the same point, though not so largely and
minutely; namely, Strabo, Diodorus Siculus, Cicero, Pliny,
Pomponius Mela, Tacitus, Diogenes Laertius, and Ammianus
Marcellinus.


Footnotes


xxvii:1 Trioedd Braint a Defod.


xxvii:2 Suet. i.


xxix:1 De Bel. Gal. liber vi. cc. 13-18.
xxxvii:1 The Laws of Dyvnwal Moelmud.
xl:1 Caffaeliad Llytlyr.

xl:2 Ystorrynnau Cyssefin.

xli:1 Origin and Progress of Writing, p. 56.
xli:2 Bucher. Fro. p. 183.


xlvii:1 Laws of Dyvnwad Moelmud.


xlviii:1 See Davies's Celtic Researches, p. 237.


li:1 Trioedd Braint a Defod.


li:2 Trioedd Ynys Prydain.


lii:1 The Cymric form of Jupiter, or Jove.


liii:1 Llyfr Barddas.


STRABO, B.C. 54.


The description, which this author gives of Druidism, refers
entirely, like that of Caesar, to Gaul, and is as follows:--


"And among the whole of them [the Gauls] three classes more especially are held in
distinguished veneration, the Bards, the Ovates, and the Druids. The Bards are
chaunters and poets. The Ovates are sacrificers and physiologists. The Druids, in
addition to physiology, practise ethic philosophy. They are deemed to be most upright,
and, in conseguence, to them are committed both public and private controversies,
insomuch that on some occasions they decide on battles, and stop the combatants on
the eve of engaging. Matters pertaining to murder are more especially entrusted to
their decision, and when profit accrues from these, they think fertility will attend their
country. These and others say that souls are immortal, and that the world is so too; yet
that ultimately fire and water will prevail. To their simplicity and ferocity are
superadded much stupidity, vain boasting, and love of ornament. They wear gold,
having collars thereof on their necks, and bracelets on their arms and wrists; and


dignified persons are clad in dyed garments embroidered with gold........


"Having stricken the man destined for sacrifice on the back with a sword, they augur
from the palpitation. They never sacrifice without the Druids. Other kinds of human
immolation are spoken of: some victims they slay with arrows, or crucify for their
offerings; and having prepared a colossus of hay, and thrown wood upon it, they bum


together oxen, all sorts of wild beasts, and men." i


Strabo and Caesar both agree with respect to some things, such
as, 1stly, that the Druids were in great esteem among the
people; 2dly, that they decided disputes; adly, that their presence
at the sacrifices


was necessary; 4thly, the immortality of the soul; 5thly, human
sacrifices. There is no occasion, therefore, that we should make
any further observation on these subjects in the main. We will
only notice the variations and additions made by Strabo, and
compare them with the Bardism of the Cymry.


1. The three degrees. These, according to the privilege and usage
of the Isle of Britain, were the Chief Bard, the Ovate, and the
Druid, the three being co-egual in dignity, though their offices
were distinct. Strabo calls his three classes exactly by the same
names, but he does not ascribe to them their respective
functions guite in accordance with Bardism, at least, as regards
the Ovate, who, he says, was the sacrificer, though he says again
that they never sacrificed without the Druids. It was not difficult
to incur misapprehension with reference to the duties of the
several orders, for on special occasions one might enter upon
the office of another.


2. The justice of the Druids. Justice was a virtue greatly inculcated
by the members of the Bardic College.


"The three foundations of Bardism: peace; love; and justice.


"For three reasons ought a man to hazard his life, and to lose it, if necessary: in


seeking for truth; in clinging to justice; and in performing mercy." 1


3. Their influence in war. The Bard, in his blue robe, was the
herald of peace. He was privileged to pass from one country to
another in safety and unharmed, for not only it was the law of
Bardism, but also the law of nations, that no person was to
unsheath


p. lvi


a sword against him. He was a man of peace, according to his
office, and if he thus went between two armies on the field of
battle, they immediately ceased from fighting. The privilege of
protection belonged in the same manner to the Druid and
Ovate.


4. Sacrifices. It is very probable that Strabo refers to the rites of
eneidvaddeu, when he speaks of murder as being entrusted to
the decision of the Druids. The Bardic traditions contain no
record of what is here said concerning "the fertility of the
country," or of the particular mode of stabbing or slaughtering
the men who. were sentenced to death, unless it was done ina
manner similar to that to which the lord of the territory had
recourse, when he drew blood from a degraded Bard, namely,
"from his forehead, his bosom, and his groin, that is, from the
seats of life and soul."


5. Vaticinations. Our ancestors very generally professed to foretel
events, though it is not said that they founded their predictions
upon any particular appearance, which the men, whom they put
to death, exhibited. Meugant, in the 6th century, observes:--


"Trust to God that the Druids will not prophesy,
When the privilege of the hill of legislature shall be broken."


6. The eternal duration of the world. The British Bards, likewise,
believed that every existence and form of life would continue for
ever--purged from evil. The opinion, which prevailed about the
increase or prevalence of fire and water, seems to be founded on
the Bardism of the Cymry:--


"There are three things on their increase: fire, or light; understanding,


p. lvii


or truth; and the soul, or life; these will prevail over every thing, and then Abred will


cease." i


Elsewhere it is said, that life proceeds from "a conjunction of
water, fire, and nwyvre;" hence, if life is on the increase, it follows
that its component elements also acguire continual strength.


7. Ornaments. The several members of the Bardic College wore
proper vestments, which were emblematic of their respective
offices. The Bard wore a sky blue robe, to signify peace; the
Druid wore white, denoting holiness; and the Ovate green, which
was an emblem of progress. Each colour was also uniform, to
signify truth, which is one. Nevertheless, it was lawful for them
to introduce silver and gold, which, not being subject to rust and
stain, were signs of honour. "Therefore, a gold fringe may be
properly added to a Bard's robe, of whichever of the three
colours it is, or a gold girdle be put round him, for it is right to
honour truth, peace, godliness, and knowledge."


Footnotes


liv:1 Geograph. lib. iv.


lv:1 Trioedd Braint a Defod.


lvii:1 Trioedd Barddas.


DIODORUS SICULUS, B.C. 44.


His description also is confined to the Druidism of Gaul, and is to
the following effect:--


"And there are among them [the Gauls] composers of verses, whom they call Bards;
these, singing to instruments similar to a lyre, applaud some, while they vituperate
others. There are also certain philosophers and priests surpassingly esteemed, whom
they call Druids. They have also soothsayers, who are held in high estimation; and
these, by auguries and the sacrifice of victims, foretel future events, and hold the


commonalty in complete subjection: and more
p. lviii


especially, when they deliberate on matters of moment, they practise a strange and
incredible rite; for, having devoted a man for sacrifice, they strike him with a sword on
a part above the diaphragm: the victim having fallen, they augur from his mode of
falling, the contortion of his limbs, and the flowing of the blood, what may come to
pass, giving credence concerning such things to an ancient and long-standing
observance. They have a custom of performing no sacrifice unattended by a
philosopher, For they say that thanksgiving should be offered to the gods by men
acguainted with the divine nature and using the same language, and by these they
deem it necessary to ask for good .things; and not only in the concerns of peace, but
even of war, not friends alone, but even enemies also, chiefly defer to them and to the
composers of verses. Freguently, during hostilities, when armies are approaching each
other with swords drawn and lances extended, these men rushing between them put


an end to their contention, taming them as they would tame wild beasts. "1


This description is somewhat similar to that which Strabo gives,
as the reader will easily perceive. Both authors agree as to the
number of the different orders--the esteem in which they were
held--their custom of predicting events by means of the sacrifice-


-and the influence of the Bards in restraining armies from
fighting.


1. The names of the orders. Whilst Strabo gives the same names
as those used by the Cymry, that is, Bards, Ovates, and Druids,
Diodorus calls them Bards, Soothsayers, and Druids, making a
soothsayer and an ovate to be of the same import, and both are
of opinion that this functionary had to do with the act of
sacrificing. They, likewise, agree as to the office of the Bard, that
he was a singer and a poet, and in respect of the devotion which
was paid by the Druid to philosophy, and the necessity of his
presence at the sacrifices.


p. lix


2. Vaticinations. Strabo mentions only one thing from which they
augured future events, namely, "the palpitation" of the victim;
Diodorus adds two other particulars, namely, "his mode of
falling" and "the flowing of the blood." There is no allusion to
these matters in the Bardic traditions.


3. The mediation of the Druids. According to the declaration of
Diodorus, the common people regarded the Druids as mediators
between themselves and the gods, and grounded their
competency and fitness for that purpose upon the fact that they
were acguainted with the divine nature, and used the same
language. We have already seen that the Druids of Britain, as
well as those of Gaul, studied and taught much respecting the
nature and attributes of God. Using "the same language" seems
to imply that the language of divine worship was unchangeable,
whatever might be that of the people. And since the acts of the
Gorsedd in Britain were to be performed at all times in Cymraeg,
we may reasonably infer that it was in the old Celtic tongue


Druidism was administered on the Continent--there was not
much difference between the Cymraeg and the native language
of Gaul.


Footnotes


Iviii:1 Hist. lib. v. c. 31.


CICERO, (slain) B.C. 43.


"This method of divination has not been neglected even amongst barbarous nations.
For there are Druids in Gaul, with one of whom I was acguainted, namely, Divitiacus
/Eduus, who enjoyed the hospitality of your house, and spoke of you with admiration.
This man not only professed an intimate knowledge of the system of nature, which the
Greeks call physiology, but also foretold future events, partly by augury, and partly by


conjecture." 1


p. Ix


Cicero does not speak here from vague report; but declares the
profession of a man who was personally known to him, who had
been his guest, and with whom he had familiarly conversed. And
all that he says of him coincides almost exactly with the
statements of Caesar, Strabo, and Diodorus Siculus. The only new
fact that we are made acquainted with is, that the Druids
sometimes foretold future events "by conjecture;" but perhaps
we should not take the word to mean simply a guess, but as
synonymous with inference--to signify that they had some
foundation for all their vaticinations.


Footnotes


lix:1 De Divinatione, 1, i.


PLINY, (born) A.D. 23.


This philosophic but credulous author speaks of the Druidism of
Gaul, in his "Natural Philosophy," as follows:


"The Druids (so they call their wise men) hold nothing in greater reverence than the
misletoe, and the tree on which it grows, so that it be an oak. They choose forests of
oaks, for the sake of the tree itself, and perform no sacred rites without oak leaves; so
that one might fancy they had even been called for this reason, turning the word into
Greek, Druids. But whatever grows upon these trees, they hold to have been sent from
heaven, and to be a sign that the Deity Himself has chosen the tree for his own. The
thing, however, is very rarely found, and when found is gathered with much ceremony;
and above all, on the sixth day of the moon, by which these men reckon the
beginnings of their months and years, and of their cycle of thirty years, because the
moon has then sufficient power, yet has not reached half its size. Addressing it in their
own language by the epithet of all healing, after duly preparing sacrifices and
banguets under the tree, they bring to the spot two white bulls, the horns of which are
then for the first time garlanded. The priest clothed in a white dress ascends the tree,
and cuts the misletoe with a golden knife; it is caught in a white cloak. Thereupon they
slay the victims, with a prayer that the Deity may prosper His own gift to them, to


whom
p. Ixi


[paragraph continues) He has given it. They fancy that, by drinking it, fertility is given to any


barren animal, and that it is a remedy against all poisons." 1


"Like to this Sabine herb is that called selago. It is gathered, without using a knife, with
the right hand wrapped in a tunic, the left being uncovered, as though the man were
stealing it; the gatherer being clothed in a white dress, and with bare feet washed
clean, after performing sacrifice before gathering it, with bread and wine. It is to be
carried in a new napkin. According to the tradition of the Gaulish Druids, it is to be
kept as a remedy against all evil, and the smoke of it is good for all diseases of the
eyes. The same Druids have given the name of samolus to a plant that grows in wet


places; and this they say must be gathered with the left hand by one who is fasting, as
a remedy for diseases of swine and cattle, and that he, who gathers it, must keep his
head turned away, and must not lay it down anywhere except in a channel through
which water runs, and there must bruize it for them who are to drink it." >


"There is another kind of egg in high repute in Gaul, although the Greeks make no
account of it. A great number of snakes in summer time are artificially twisted and
rolled together into a mass by the saliva of their jaws and the foam of their bodies. It is
called snake's egg. The Druids tell you that it is thrown into the air with hisses, and
must be caught in a cloak that it may not touch the ground; that he that catches it
must fly on horse-back, for that the snakes pursue him until hindered by the
intervention of some river; that the test of it is, if it flows against the stream, even
when tied with gold. And, according to the common craft of wizards, shrewd to
conceal their cheating, they pronounce that it must be taken up at a particular time of
the moon; as though it rested with man's choice, whether that proceeding on the part


of the snake should take place or not." 3


Pliny says that he has seen one of these eggs, and that the
Druids used them as a distinguishing badge.


In the above description there are several new things, that
present themselves to our notice, in connection with the
Druidism of Gaul.


1. One God. It is remarkable that Pliny speaks of the Gauls as
professing one God; for though he


p. Ixii


had occasion to refer twice to the Deity, he uses the singular
number each time. In this matter he differs from Caesar, and we
may be allowed to believe that though much ignorance and
error had crept upon the Continent, in later times, relative to the
Divine Being, the unity of His nature was to some extent


acknowledged. But Pliny, after all, may be only referring to one
god in particular, out of many, that is, the one that was
interested in the circumstance to which he refers, and therefore
names him in the singular number.


2. The oak groves. Though Pliny is undoubtedly mistaken as to
the etymology of the name Druid, yet we have the testimony of
the Cymric traditions that our remote progenitors did sometimes
choose to worship under the oak. This usage they seem to have
derived from Seth, who "first made a retreat for worship in the
woods of the vale of Hebron, having first searched and
investigated the trees, until he found a large oak, being the king
of trees, branching, wide-spreading, thick-topped, and shady,
under which he formed a choir and a place of worship." :


3. The misletoe. All admit that this plant was in great repute
among the Ancient Cymry. From remote times it has been used
by the Bards to decorate their tribunals on Alban Arthan, and
even to this day traces of that custom may be found in the
country during the Christmas festivities.


Three persons, Tydai, the Bard of Huon, Rhuvawn the Bard, and
Melgin, the son of Einigan the Giant,


p. Ixiii


are recorded in a Triad as having worn around their heads a
garland of misletoe, "darllys awelvar."


One of the names by which the Cymry called this plant was
Holliach, which answers completely to the "omnia sanantem" of
Pliny.


We know nothing of the rites which attended its gathering in
Britain; and therefore we are not in a position to say in what
consisted the resemblance or difference, as the case may be,
between them and the ceremonies mentioned above.


4. The white garment of the Druids. Of the same description, as we
have seen, was the official dress of the British Druids.


5. The offering of bread and wine. This seems to have come down
from Patriarchal times--from Melchizedec, who "brought forth
bread and wine," type of the Blessed Eucharist, that "pure
offering" which was to take place under the Gospel; and though
nothing is positively said of such a rite as existing in the Bardism
of the Cymry, it is likely enough that it was practised. The reader
is referred to the description given in these pages of the
sacrifices of the Bards.


6. Adder's stones or beads--glain nadroedd. The three orders used
to wear these beads, of a colour uniform with that of their
respective robes; and they generally regarded them as
possessed of rare virtues. It is guestioned whether they are the
production of nature or art. Be that as it may, they are always
found in great numbers; and there are people who search for
them, and from whom they may be had, but they maintain that
they are only to be met with at one season of the year, and that
they are blown by


p. xiv


a knot of snakes. "Ai chwythu y glain y maent?" "Are they blowing
beads?" is a proverbial inquiry applied to persons who lay their
heads together in conversation--an expression involving an
opinion similar to that of Pliny.


But our author is not altogether silent respecting the Druidism
of Britain, for he says:--


"Britain even now celebrates it [Magism] wonderfully, with so many ceremonies, that it


may seem to have imparted it to the Persians."


There is here, however, no mention of any doctrine or usage in
particular--Pliny merely intimates that there were many
ceremonies in connection with the Druidic worship, which view is
not inconsistent with the traditions of the Bards. The Persian, as
well as the Gaulish system, might have been received from
Britain, both of them, however, being greatly degenerated. Or it
may be, that the resemblance, which Pliny perceived between
the Druidism of Britain and the Magism of Persia had grown
from the same root--the patriarchal religion.


Footnotes


Ixi:1 Hist. Nat. lib. xvi. sect. 95.


X


2 Lib. xxiv. ss. 62-3.
3


Lib. xxix. s. 12.


Xi:


Ixii:1 Y Cread. Golychwyd, &c.


POMPONIUS MELA, A.D. 45.
His description is as follows:--


"They [the Gauls] have an eloguence of their own, and their Druids as masters of
wisdom. These profess to know the magnitude and form of the earth and the world,
the motions of the heaven and the stars, and the will of the gods. They teach the most
noble of the nation many things privately, and for a long time, even for twenty years,
in a cave, or in inaccessible woods. One of their precepts has become public, namely,
that they should act bravely in war, that souls are immortal, and that there is another
life after death. Therefore along with the dead, they burn and bury things which


belonged to them while living. Their debtor and creditor accounts were transferred
p. Ixv


below. Some even went so far as to ascend the funeral pyres of their friends of their


own accord, as though about to live with them." 1


Mela agrees with Caesar as to the knowledge which the Druids
were said to possess concerning the universe, and as to their
being in the habit of training their disciples for the long space of
twenty years. live may conclude from the only specimen of their
precepts, which he succeeded in obtaining, that they were
inculcated in the Triadic form:--


"To act bravely in war;
That souls are immortal;
And that there is another life after death."


1. Jnterment. The remains discovered in ancient sepulchres
sufficiently prove that the Cymry in former times buried with
their princes and great men those things to which in their life-


time they had been particularly attached, such as their steeds
and arms.


2. The debt of the deceased. Undoubtedly this is a remnant of the
ancient doctrine of the metempsychosis, according to which the
man, after his fall in Abred through death, was regarded as
suffering punishment, or paying the debt which he had
contracted in his life-time.


3. Voluntary death. It is, likewise, very probable that there is some
connection between the custom, which some of the people in
Gaul adopted, of throwing themselves on the funeral pyres of
their relatives, and the doctrine of eneidvaddeu, already spoken
of.


Footnotes


Ixv:1 De Situ Orbis, lib. iii. c, 2.


p. lxvi


DIOGENES LAERTIUS, (died) A.D. 222.


This author has preserved one of the Triads of the Druids, which
is as follows:--


"To worship the gods;
To do no evil;


And to exercise fortitude."


Now, it is remarkable that we have one Triad in the series called
"Trioedd Doethineb," which very much resembles the above, so
much so as to impress us with the belief that it was the original
model after which the Greek Triad was compiled. It runs thus,


"The three first principles of wisdom--
Obedience to the laws of God;
Concern for the good of mankind;


And bravery in sustaining all the accidents of life."


Diogenes says, moreover, that the Druids among the Britons
were the same as the Philosophers among the Greeks, the Magi
among the Persians, the Gymnosophistae among the Indians,
and the Chaldeeans among the Assyrians; and so undoubtedly
they were in respect of the origin and substance of their religion.


C. SUETONIUS TRANOUILLUS.


Suetonius flourished in the beginning of the second century. He
describes "the Druidic religion among the Gauls as one of
terrible cruelty." : We presume that he here refers to their
practice of sacrificing men, which, as we have already noticed,
seems to have sprung from the Bardic doctrine of eneidvaddeu.


Footnotes


Ixvi:1 "Lib. v. de Claudio Cesare, c. 25.


AMMIANUS MARCELLINUS, A.D. 380.


Ammianus Marcellinus says that "the Bards record the exploits
of heroes, in poems, which they sing to the soft sound of the
lyre," ; which is quite in accordance with the practice of the
Cymric Bards. He also observes that the Druids were similar to
the Pythagoreans, as indeed they were with reference to the
doctrine of the metempsychosis.


Footnotes


Ixvii:1 Lib. xv. c. 9.


C. CORNELIUS TACITUS.


We have left this author to the last, because he speaks of the
Druids of our own country. Tacitus lived in the time of Nero and
his successors until Hadrian. Though deemed in general a skilful
and correct historian, yet we have evidence enough to prove that
he could occasionally run counter of the truth; conseguently we
ought to be cautious how we receive his statements. He utters a
glaring falsehood when he treats of the history of the Jews;
declaring that they fled from the island of Creta into Egypt, and
received the name Iuda@i from mount Ida in that island--that
Moses obtained water in the wilderness by following a herd of
wild asses, and that the Jews religiously preserved in their
houses the image or picture of a wild ass, in grateful memory of
the event. Tacitus had no excuse whatever for falling into these
errors. There were a great many Jews in Rome, and the
Scriptures had been translated into the Greek language long
before his era; besides, St. Paul himself actually visited the city,
and preached the Gospel


p. lxviii


there in his time. If then, Tacitus, erred so egregiously, in the
face of so many opportunities of learning the real truth
concerning a renowned nation like the Jews, why might he not
have fallen into similar mistakes with regard to the Cymry,
though he received his account from his father-in-law, Agricola,
who was governor of Britain?


But what says Tacitus of the Druidism of Britain? In speaking of
the invasion of the isle of Mona, or Anglesey, by Suetonius
Paulinus, he says:--


"There stood apart on the strand an army, thick with men and arms, and women ran
to and fro after the manner of Furies, clad in funereal dresses, with dishevelled hair,
and carrying torches before them. The Druids, also, pouring out terrible prayers
around them, with hands raised towards heaven, struck the soldiers with awe by the
novelty of the sight; so that, as if their members clung to the spot, they offered their
unmoved bodies to the wounds. Afterwards, by the exhortations of their leaders, and
by their own mutual encouragements, not to be afraid of a womanish and fanatical
troop, they lead on the standards, overthrow their opponents, and involve them in


their own fires.


"A guard was afterwards placed over the conguered, and their groves were cut down,
which had been consecrated to their cruel superstitions; for they considered it lawful
to offer the blood of captives on their altars, and to consult the gods by means of the


nerves of men," 1


The historian has unguestionably coloured the above sketch as
black as possible; but, even if we grant that it is tolerably correct,
there is nothing in it, after all, which is inconsistent with the
ancient Bardism of the Cymry. Patriotism was a great virtue with
them--and aggressive war was looked upon as a dire crime--a
crime that exposed its perpetrators to the punishment


p. Ixix


of death. What wonder, then, is it, if the Cymry sentenced to
death the Roman soldiers, who chanced to fall into their hands?
But, it may be objected, they were slain by the Druids, as
sacrifices to their gods. There is no doubt that the Druids did
superintend their execution, and that this in a certain sense
partook of the nature of a sacrifice. Their death was a
punishment for the offence, which they had committed, but at
the same time it was regarded as a sort of atonement, which
made up for the degradation they would have been subject to in


Abred, if they had died a natural death. If Tacitus had known
something of the doctrine of eneidvaddeu, he would have
considered the act of the Druids on this occasion as a just and
merciful one; just, in that it punished the transgressor, merciful,
in that it placed him in a better state; for, according to their
creed, his soul would pass immediately into another human
body, totally cleansed from the guilt of the crime for which he
had died. So easy is it to misunderstand the nature and object of
men's actions, when viewed from a point which is external to
their own religious sentiments!


Footnotes


Ixviii:1 Lib. xiv. c. 30.


Druids and Bards


We have entered upon this subject at some length, because the
supposed antagonism between Classical Druidism and British
Bardism, is one of the principal grounds on which our literary
sceptics found their denial of the genuineness of our traditions,
and hence it becomes our strict duty to examine how far their
position in this respect is really tenable. It is to be hoped that our
comparative analysis will convince every unprejudiced person
that, whilst the apparent discrepancy, which existed between the
two systems,


p. Ixx


precludes the idea of one being considered as a mere copy of
the other, taken in recent times, there is sufficient identity of
principle observable in them both, subject to the qualifying
character of the Gaulish tradition, to suggest a common origin.
On this account, then, the tenets and usages of Bardism, as
given in our pages, may well be considered as the genuine
remains of Druidic lore; that is, if we have further reason for
believing that they were effectually preserved and handed down
through the different ages, which followed the introduction and
establishment of Christianity.


The machinery principally adopted by the Bards for this purpose
was, "the voice of Gorsedd," which is amply explained and
described in these volumes. Under favourable circumstances,
indeed, it might be considered as highly efficient; but such
circumstances, we all know, did not at all times exist. Under the
Roman domination, we may be assured, that the ancient
institute of the country, opposed as it was, both in spirit and


practice, to all foreign usurpation, would not be allowed to give
public expression to its views. The Bards could not meet in
Gorsedd without incurring great personal danger. Conseguently,
they would have recourse to "cyvail," which was the second
"assembly of the Bards," and created especially to meet the
reguirements of the case; that is, a cyvail was a group of three
persons, who met "where and when they could, for fear of the
assault of depredation and lawlessness." By this means the old
traditions might be preserved, though they would not be known
out of the circle of the fraternity. That there were Bards and
Bardism during this period,


p. [xxi


is undoubted. All the Bardic privileges and immunities were
recognized by law until the reign of Lucius, A.D. 173-189. Gorwg,
son of Eirchion, two generations later, is described not only as "a
very wise and religious king," but also as " a good Bard." ; And it
is supposed that Bardism formed the principal ingredient in the
Pelagian heresy, which spread so rapidly and extensively among
the people, towards the end of the fourth century.


About A.D. 383, when the Roman power was fast declining in the
island, Macsen Wledig, (Maximus,) with the view of resuscitating
the ancient system, submitted it to the verdict of country and
nation, as in the time of Prydain, "lest the primitive Bardism
should be lost and forgotten; when it was found in its integrity,
and in accordance with the primary privileges and usages. And
thus it was submitted to the judgment and verdict of country
and nation, and the ancient privileges and usages, the ancient
meaning and learning, and the ancient sciences and memorials


were confirmed, lest they should fail, become lost and forgotten;
and this was done without contradiction or opposition." >


In the reign of Gwrtheyrn Gwrthenau, however, about a century
later, Bardism was greatly corrupted, owing to "the divulging of
the Name of God, introducing falsehood into vocal song, and
distorting the sciences of Bardism." To remedy this state of
things, king Arthur, in the sixth century, established the system
of the Round Table, which was "an arrangement of the arts,
sciences, usages, and privileges of the


p. Ixxii


(paragraph coninues Bards and men of vocal song; and improved, and
committed to memory, where there was occasion, every thing
commendable in what was old, and authorized every thing new
that was adjudged to be an augmentation and an amplification
of desirable sciences, with a view to the wisdom and
reguirement of country and nation." The two Merddins, Taliesin,
St. Mabon, and others, presided at this Chair.


Upon the death of Arthur, the Chair of the Round Table was
removed to the court of Urien Rheged, at Aberllychwr, where it
went sometimes by the name of Taliesin's Chair, and sometimes
by that of the Chair of Baptism. "Under the privilege of the
institute of the Round Table, Gildas the prophet, and Cattwg the
Wise from Llancarvan, were Bards, and also Llywarch the Aged,
son of Elidyr Lydanwyn, Ystudvach the Bard, and Ystyffan the
Bard of Teilo." ;


It remained at Aberllychwr about two hundred years; after that,
it was transferred to Caerwynt, 2 where it continued for more
than a hundred years. It was then removed to Maes Mawr, by


Einion, the son of Collwyn; and afterwards by Iestyn, the son of
Gwrgant, to the court of Caerleon-upon-Usk, which was held at
Cardiff Castle. Here it was shortly disturbed, owing to the war
that broke out between Iestyn and Rhys, the son of Tewdwr; nor
was it again restored until the time of Robert, earl of Gloucester,
grandson of the latter, "who endowed this Chair with privilege
and maintenance in Maes Mawr in Morganwg, and gave the
name of Tir Iarll, or the


p. [xxiii


earl's land, to the portion which he conferred upon the Bards for
their maintenance, whilst he gave the other portion for the
maintenance of the Monks.......The Chair of Tir Iarll was enjoined
to investigate the ancient sciences of Bardism; and after the
search, recovery, and confirmation, the primitive Chair, Gorsedd,
sciences, privileges, and usages of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, were restored thoroughly and altogether." ;


Geraint, the Blue Bard, had, in the beginning of the tenth
century, established a Chair at Llandaff, different to the one of
the Round Table. It afterwards went by the name of the Chair of
Morganwg, and enbosomed that of Tir Iarll, itself being
enbosomed by (ynghesail) the Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain.


This Chair, whether we call it the Chair of Tir Iarll, or the Chair of
Morganwg, was well protected as long as the lords of Glamorgan
retained sovereign authority over that territory; and the rights
and immunities of the Bards were renewed from time to time,
but always on condition that they should investigate and
preserve the sciences of Bardism.


Llywelyn, the son of Gruffydd, was slain Dec. 11, 1282, and with
him fell the ancient independence of Cymru, which henceforth
became subject to the kings of England. In conseguence of the
opposition, which the Bards offered to the claims of Edward,
they were rigorously persecuted by that monarch, and of course
were prevented from meeting publicly in Gorsedd. Neither did
they any longer enjoy the trwydded or


p. Ixxiv


maintenance, which had been conferred upon them by their own
native princes. Nevertheless, they kept up the old system, and
from A.D. 1300, at least, down to Iolo Morganwg's time, they
managed to hold a Gorsedd occasionally for Morganwg, as the
following "Bardic Succession," or list of the Bards of the Chair of
Glamorgan, and the order in which they were the Awenyddion,
or disciples, taken from a manuscript of the late Mr. John
Bradford, : will shew. The dates denote the times when they
presided.


TRAHAEARN BRYDYDD MAWR 1300
HYWEL BWR BACH 1330
DAVYDD AB GWILYM 1360
IEUAN HEN 1370


His Awenyddion.


Gwilym ab Ieuan Hen,
Ieuan Tew Hen,
Hywel Swrdwal.


IEUAN TEW HEN 1420


Awenyddion.


Hywel Swrdwal,
Ieuan ab Hywel Swrdwal,
Ieuan Gethin ab I. ab Lleision,
Hywel ab Davydd ab I. ab Rhys.
IEUAN GETHIN AB I. AB LLEISION 1430


Awenydd.


Gwilym Tew, or G. Hendon.


GWILYM TEW 1460
Awenyddion.
Huw Cae Llwyd,
Hywel ab Day. ab I. ab Rhys,


Harri o'r Gareg Lwyd,
Iorwerth Vynglwyd.


MEREDYDD AB RHOSSER 1470


p. Ixxv


Awenyddion.


Iorwerth Vynglwyd,
Ieuan Deulwyn,
Sir Einion ab Owain.


IEUAN DEULWYN 1480


Awenyddion.


Iorwwerth Vynglwyd,
Lewys Morganwg,
Harri Hir.


IORWERTH VYNGLWYD 1600


Awenyddion.


Lewys Morganwg,
Ieuan Du'r Bilwg.


LEWYS MORGANWG 1520


Awenyddion.


Meiryg Davydd,
Davydd Benwyn,


Llywelyn Sion o Langewydd,
Thomas Llywelyn o Regoes.
MEIRYG DAVYDD (died in 1600) 1560


Awenydd.


Watcin Pywel.


DAVYDD BENWYN 1660


Awenyddion.


Llywelyn Sion,
Sion Mawddwy,
Davydd Llwyd Mathew.


LLYWELYN SION (died in 1616) 1580


Awenyddion.


Watcin Pywel,
Ieuan Thomas,

Meilir Mathew,
Davydd ab Davydd Mathew,
Davydd Edward o Vargam,
Edward Davydd o Vargam.


WATCIN PYWEL 1620


Awenyddion.


Davydd Edward,
Edward Davydd,
Davydd ab Davydd Mathew.


EDWARD DAVYDD (died in 1690) 1660


Awenyddion.


Hywel Lewys,
Charles Bwttwn, Esg.
Thomas Roberts, Offeiriad,
S. Jones o Vryn Llywarch, Offeiriad,
Evan Sion Meredydd,
Davydd o'r Nant.


DAVYDD O'R NANT 1680
Awenyddion.
Hopcin y Gweydd,


Thomas Roberts, Offeiriad,
Davydd Hopcin o'r Coetty.


SAMUEL JONES, OFFEIRIAD 1700


Awenyddion.


Rhys Prys, Ty'n y Ton,
William Hain,
Sion Bradford, yn blentyn.


DAVYDD HOPCIN, o'r Coetty 1730


Awenyddion.


Davydd Thomas,
Rhys Morgan, Pencraig Nedd,
Davydd Nicolas,
Sion Bradford.


SION BRADFORD (died in 1780) 1760


Awenyddion.


Lewys Hopcin,
William Hopcin,
Edward Evan,
Edward Williams.


However, as their meetings were not always regular, and as the
number of members was continually dwindling, there was
danger that the traditions of the institution would suffer loss in


conseguence. Hence such of the Bards as were anxious for their
preservation, began, more than before, to make collections of
them in Books. We say more than before, because some few, like
Geraint the Blue Bard, had previously


p. lxxvii


committed to writing many things concerning the Bards and
their system. With a view to consolidate those collections, several
Gorsedds were held from the beginning of the fifteenth century,
under the sanction of Sir Richard Neville and others. One was
held for that purpose in 1570, under the auspices of William
Herbert, earl of Pembroke, the great patron of Welsh literature,
and the founder of the celebrated Library of Welsh MSS. at
Rhaglan Castle, which was afterwards destroyed by Oliver
Cromwell. What was done at those meetings received
considerable improvement at one held by Sir Edward Lewis of
the Van, about 1580, from the arrangement of the venerable
Llywelyn Sion of Llangewydd; and lastly, a complete revisal of the
former collections was made by Edward Davydd of Margam,
which received the sanction of a Gorsedd, held at Bewpyr, in the
year 1681, under the authority of Sir Richard Basset; when that
collection was pronounced to be in every respect the fullest
illustration of Bardism. +


Part of the said collection, namely, "Cyfrinach Beirdd Ynys
Prydain," which is a most excellent treatise on the Ancient
Versification of the Cymry, was published in the original by Iolo
Morganwg, A.D. 1829. What is now offered to the public, it is but
reasonable to infer, constitutes the remainder, or, at any rate, a
great portion of the remainder, for many of the documents
profess to have been taken out of the Books of Trahaiarn


Brydydd Mawr, Hywel Swrdwal, Ieuan ab Hywel Swrdwal,
Llawdden, Gwilym Tew, Rhys Brydydd, Rhys Brychan, Lewys
Morganwg,


p. lxxviii


[paragraph continues) Davydd Benwyn, Davydd Liwyd Mathew, Sion Philip,
Antoni Pywel, and principally Llywelyn Sion, Bards who
flourished from the 14th to the 17th century. Llywelyn Sion tells
us that he made his collection out of the Books of Taliesin, Ionas
Mynyw, Edeyrn Davod Aur, Cwtta Cyvarwydd, Einion Offeiriad,
Davydd Ddu Hiraddug, Sion Cent, Rhys Goch, and others in the
Library of Rhaglan, by permission of the lord William Herbert.


There is no doubt that these Bards viewed the traditions of the
Gorsedd as the genuine remains of Ancient Druidism; and there
is every reason to believe that in their main features they were
so. The variations observable in minor points would indicate in
what direction, and to what extent, they suffered in their
passage from the Christian era downwards.


But a guestion offers itself,--Did the Christian Bards receive and
believe these traditions as articles of faith; or did they preserve
them merely as curious relics, or specimens of the primitive
theology and wisdom of the Cymry? We think that to act on the
former theory was impossible, in the face of two facts. First, they
were members of the Chair of Baptism, in which "no one had the
privilege of a teacher, who was not baptized and devoted to the
faith in Christ." For, be it observed, it was this Chair alone that
enjoined its members to preserve the ancient traditions; and it
was for that reason that we omitted all mention of other Chairs,
such as those of Powys and Gwynedd. Secondly, several
individuals of distinguished orthodoxy, piety, and position in the


Church, were admitted members of Bardism from time to time.
It is said that Arthur, when he was


p. Ixxix


about to institute the Chair of the Round Table, summoned to his
aid three prelates, two of whom are mentioned by name, that is,
Dyvrig, archbishop of Llandaff, afterwards of Caerleon-upon-Usk,
and Cyndeyrn, bishop of Llanelwy, "lest he and his knights
should do any thing contrary to the Holy Scripture and the faith
in Christ........ And Arthur enjoined St. Teilo to baptize the three
Bards," Taliesin, Merddin Emrys, and Merddin Wyllt, who
arranged its discipline and usages on the occasion. St. Teilo,
Cattwg the Wise, and St. Pryderi, were members of the Bardic
College, being "the three blessed Bards of Arthur's court." St.
David, the patron saint of Wales, Padarn, the bishop of
Llanbadarn, Deiniol Wyn, the first bishop of Bangor, and Gildas,
were also Bards. So also were Geraint, the Blue Bard, supposed
by some to be the same person as Asser Menevensis, about 900,
Einion the Aged, domestic chaplain to Sir Rhys the Aged, of
Abermarlais, 1300-1350, Sion Cent, priest, 1380-1420, Meurig
Davydd, 1560, Thomas Roberts, priest, 1680, S. Jones, Bryn
Llywarch, priest, 1680, and Bishop Burgess, who was graduated
Druid by Iolo Morganwg.


We cannot conceive that these men, some of whom were
ornaments to the Christian religion, should yet believe in tenets
that were inconsistent with that religion. We may mention St.
David in particular, as one who took a very active part in
suppressing the Pelagian heresy, which in many respects
exhibited the lineaments of Druidism. Padarn subscribed the


decrees of the Council of Paris, which was held in the year 557,
and is commended both as


p. Ixx


an abbot and a bishop in the writings of Venantius Fortunatus, a
Latin poet of Gaul, who was his contemporary; sure proofs that
he also was sound in the faith. These considerations force us to
conclude that the Bards in Christian times preserved and handed
down the traditions of their institutes, merely as curious
speculations, illustrative of the religion and philosophy of the
primitive inhabitants of the island.


It may be remarked in addition that some of the Bardic Chairs
were occasionally held in churches and religious houses. The
Chair of Tir Iarll was at one time held alternately in the Church of
Bettws and the Church of Llangynwyd. The Chair of Morganwg
was held at Easter in one of the chapter houses of Llandaff,
Margam, Glyn Nedd, or in the Church of Llanilltyd; at
Whitsuntide, among other places, in the Church of Pentyrch; on
St. John the Baptist's day in the Church of Llancarvan, and in the
Monastery of Penrhys. Surely, the ecclesiastical authorities
would never have allowed the inculcation of heresy to desecrate
places that were pre-eminently dedicated to the service of the
Christian religion. Bardism, then, was not regarded as
constituting the faith of all who professed to know it.


We doubt riot, however, that individuals would be found now and
then to cherish the traditions of the Bards as saving truths, just
as in our own days there are persons, who entertain strange and
erroneous doctrines, and yet have no mind to abandon their
Christian profession. Llyr Myrini endeavoured to reconcile
Bardism with Christianity, and to mould them into one system,


but his efforts resulted in Pelagianism; and there are traces in
our volumes of other developments


p. IXxxi


of a similar nature in respect of the Incarnation, which, however,
took a Sabellian direction. It is not meant that the principles of
Bardism were incompatible with the Christian religion; but that
heresies, having arisen from the attempt to harmonize them,
prove the attempt to have been made by individuals without the
aid or sanction of the great body of Bards, who were, we may
presume, good and honest Christians. In our opinion, the
following Triad seems to express the judgment of Gorsedd on
the comparative merits of the Bardic and Gospel dispensations:--


"There are three special doctrines that have been obtained by the nation of the Cymry:
the first, from the age of ages, was that of the Gwyddoniaid, prior to the time of
Prydain, son of Aedd the Great; the second was Bardism, as taught by the Bards, after
they had been instituted; the third was the Faith in Christ, being THE BEST OF THE
THREE."


The Bards believed that all things were tending to perfection;
when, therefore, they embraced Christianity, they must on their
own principles have viewed it as a stage in advance of their
former creed. The more advanced in religious knowledge would,
doubt-less, recognize it in its true character, as the fulfilment of
Druidism, that is, as far as the latter was identical with the
patriarchal religion of Noah--as "the mystery which hath been
hid from ages, and from generations, but now is made manifest
to his saints; to whom God would make known what is the riches
of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles." The Gospel of
Christ is "the truth"--the realization of types and shadows; it is
the "Truth against the world," which Bardism was continually


p. Ixxxii


searching for. We, therefore, not only in virtue of our clerical
office, but also as a Bard according to the privilege and usage of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain, under the privilege of the Chair of
Morganwg, embosoming the Chair of Baptism, beg to enter our
most energetic protest (gwrthneu) against all attempts to impose
upon any one as articles of belief the tenets of Bardism, where
they are inconsistent with Christianity, as found in the Sacred
Scriptures, and defined in the creeds of "the Holy Church
throughout the world."


YN ENW DUW A PHOB DAIONI.


Alban Eilir, 1862.


Footnotes
Ixxi:1 Gwehelyth Iestin ab Gwrgant.
lxxi:2 Trioedd Braint a Defod.
lxxii:1 Dosparth y Ford Gron.
lxxii:2 The Venta Silurum of the Romans.
xxiii: 1 See Preface to "Cyvrinach y Beirdd."


Ixxiv:1 Cited in W. Owen's "Bardism," prefixed to his "Heroic
Elegies of Llywarch Hen."


Ixxvii:1 See William Owen's Bardism, prefixed to his Elegies of
Llywarch Hen.


p. Ixxxiii


LLYWELYN SION,


INASMUCH as Llywelyn Sion of Llangewydd was the person, by
whom principally the present Collection of Bardism was made,
the following brief Memoir of him may not be out of place here,
or unacceptable to our readers.


He was born in the early part of the 16th century, and became at
the usual age one of the disciples of Thomas Llywelyn of
Rhegoes, and of Meurig Davydd of Llanisan, both eminent Bards
of the Glamorgan Chair--the latter having presided in it A.D.
1560. His numerous compositions show him to be a poet of
vigorous and lofty thoughts, which he, moreover, clothed in
pure, correct, and elegant language. According to Taliesin
Williams, who professes to derive his information from ancient
manuscripts, he was also an antiquary of great research and
ability.


Sion Bradford describes him as a man well to do in the world,
accumulating wealth by the sale of transcripts of manuscripts,
both poetic and prosaic, by which means also he obtained great
respect among all classes of people. From the Cywyddau, that
passed between him and Sion Mowddwy, it would appear that
he held a subordinate office--that of crier--in the law court of
Glamorgan. This


p. Ixxxiv


position brought him into contact with many of the gentry and
men of influence in the country, who invited him to their houses,


and, by allowing him access to their libraries, afforded him
facilities of gratifying the literary bent of his mind. He was in
particular acguainted with Sir Edward Mansell, who, about 1591,
wrote an excellent "account of the conguest of Glamorgan." Sir
Edward speaks of him under the name of "Lewelyn John," as a
painstaking and respectable writer. It would appear that Sir
Edward himself was a diligent collector of old Welsh MSS.
According to Sion Bradford, he was also in much esteem at
Rhaglan Castle; he says that it was from thence that he copied
most of his writings, Sir William Herbert having made there a
collection of the most valuable Welsh MSS., which were
afterwards ruthlessly destroyed by fire in the time of Oliver
Cromwell. Indeed, Llywelyn Sion himself, at p. 224 of the 1st
volume of this work, confesses as much, and expresses his
unbounded obligation to "the lord William Herbert, earl of
Pembroke," for giving him permission to make extracts from
ancient and rare Books in the Castle of Rhaglan.


He presided in the Chair of Glamorgan A.D. 1580, and it was then
that his arrangement received the sanction of Gorsedd. His
"Cyfrinach Beirdd Ynys Prydain," which formed a part of his
Collection, is beyond guestion an excellent and invaluable
treatise on Welsh versification, and one which ought to be widely
known beyond the limits of the Principality. Indeed, a New
Edition, with a translation, of this work, would form a very
appropriate seguel to BARDISM.


Sion Bradford says that he was an excellent teacher to many of
the poets of his time, as well as to other Welsh literati. It would
seem from some Englynion, which he composed, that, when far
advanced in years, he gave his Books to his young disciple

Edward Davydd of Margam. At the end of one of his collections,


entitled "Llyfr Hir Llanharan," is written, "Fy llaw i, Llywelyn Sion,
o Langewydd,


p. Ixxxv


hyd ymma, Tach. y 27. 1613;" after which follows the handwriting
of Edward Davydd.


According to Watkin Powell, he composed a Book, which he
designated, "Atgofion Gwybodau yr Hen Gymry," being a treatise
on the poetry, genealogy, memorials, medicine, agriculture, law,
handicraft, and chemistry of the Ancient Cymry. This he sent to
London to be printed, but meanwhile the author died, and the
Book was lost. According to one authority, his death took place
in 1615, but two other documents place it respectively in 1616
and 1617, when he had attained the venerable age of about 100.


Cair ragoriaeth Barhhas: ynffenndiaur myfyrhawd ; belgeffu addysg ;
g nunrhuaur mors a defo,


CONTENTS.


PAGE.

Advertisement xi

Preface xiii

Llywelyn Sion Ixxxiii
Symbol.

The Origin of Letters, Roll, and Paper.--The Virtue of

Letters 11


The Origin and Progress of Letters.--The Name of God.--
The Bardic Secret 17


The first Inventors of Letters.--Improvers of the Alphabet.-
-Invention of the Roll and Plagawd.--Obligation of a Bard
to hold a Chair and Gorsedd


Origin of Letters


The Inventor of Vocal Song.--The first Recorders of
Bardism.--Its first Systematizers.--Their Regulations.--
Mode of inscribing the primary Letters.--Origin of their
Form and Sound.--The three Menws


The principal Elements of various things.--The Gogyrvens


The Invention of Letters by Einigan and Menw.--The Secret
of Bardism


Cuttings: Foundations of Awen


Origin and Progress of Letters.--Einigan the Giant.--The
Gwyddoniaid.--Systems of Letters


The Origin of Letters and Books.--Their Introduction into
Britain.--The Coelbren


The primary Letters.--Improvement of the Alphabet


33


39


A1


AT


49


51


53


55


57


Primary Cuttings.--Improvement of the Coelbren.--Its 69
Restoration


Recovery of the Old Cymraeg 61


PAGE.


The primary Letters.--Their Augmentation.--Restoration of


the Coelbren 63
The Bardic Secret 65
The Sacred Symbol 67
The primary Letters.--Improvement of the Alphabet 67
Gogyrvens.--Writing with Ink 69
Gogyrvens 69
Gogyrvens 69


Gogyrvens 69


The Three First Words of the Cymraeg 69


The primary Letters.--Names of the Coelbren 71
Classification of the Letters 73
The Bardic Secret.--Formation of Letters 77
The Vowels 77
The primary Letters 79
Variations of Letters 81
The Sixteen Primary Symbols 81


Introduction of Letters.--Original Country of the Cymry.--
Their Arrival in Britain.--Augmentation of the Alphabet 83


Coelbren of the Bards, according to the arrangement of
Llawdden 85


The Symbols of Literary Sciences: Improvement of the 89
Coelbren.--Metrical Canons.--Dissolution of the Monastery


of Pen Rhys


The Pillars of Memory.--The Symbols


The Birds of Rhianon


The Five Ages of Letters


The Three Symbols of Sciences


The three Primitive Symbols.--The three Coelbren Symbols


Numbers


The Nine Degrees of Numerals


The System of Numerals


Arithmetic


The System of Numerals


Numerals


93


95


95


97


99


103


107


109


109


109


111


The Numerals 113


The Arithmetical Characters of the Ancient Cymry; that is,


the Numerals 113
The Three Symbols 115
The Materials of Language and Speech 115
The three Wreathed Bards 115
Coelbren of the Bards 117
Coelbren of the Bards 133
Coelbren of the Bards 143
Peithynen 151

PAGE.


Coelbren of the Bards 153


Secret Coelbren.--Secret Coelvain.--Coelvain of History 155


Burning the Letters 155
Coelbren of Simple Letters 157
Palm Coelbren 157
Peithyn Coelbren.--Palm Coelbren 157
Peithynvain 159
Memorials 161
Plagawd 163
The three principal Materials of Knowledge 163
The Herald-bard 163
Dasgubell Rodd 165


Theology


Triads of Bardism 169


Theological Triads 181
Theological Triads 197
Theological Triads 199
Theological Triads 201
Theological Triads 201
Theological Triads 205
Druidism 205
God 213
Cythraul 213
Ceugant.--Duration.--God 213


The three Imperceptibilities of God 215


The Bards' Enigma 215


The twelve primary Negatives 217
Bardic Aphorisms 219
The Divine Names 219
Iau 221
Hu the Mighty 221
The Circles 223
The Book of Bardism 225
Abred.--Gwynvyd.--Awen 235
The Three States 241
Annwn.--Life.--Death 243


Abred 243


The Origin of Man.--Jesus Christ.--Creation


The Creation.--The First Man.--The primary Letters


The Discipline of Bardism. (The Creation.)


The Creation.--Worship.--Vocal Song.--Gwyddoniaid


The Material of the World


The Fall in Abred


God in the Sun


God in the Light


Triads of Bardism


God; and the Faculties of the Soul


245


249


255


PAGE.


257


201


263


263


265


267


267


Sentences of Bardism


The Ten Commandments of the Bards


The Ten Commandments of the Bards


The Rudiments of Theology


The Triads of St. Paul


The Triads of St. Paul


The Triads of St. Paul and Bardism


Triads of Bardism and Usages


Triads of Bardism


The Mode of taking Food and Drink


The Gorsedd Prayer


The Prediction of Peredur, the Bard of Prydain


271


275


285


289


291


323


339


345


357


359


361


365


The Stanza of the Gorsedd Chair of the Winter Solstice 367


Wisdom.
Triads of Wisdom 369
The Elements 371
Triads of Bardism. (The Elements.) 371


The Triads of Bardism, called the Triads of Ionabwy. (The


Elements.) 377
Bardism, &c. (The Elements.) 379
The Elements 381
The Elements 381
The Elements 381
Bardism. (The Elements.) 383


The Materials 383


The Elements


The Elements


The Materials of Man


The Eight Materials of Man


The Seven Materials of Man


The Seven primary Materials of the World


The Eight Materials of Man


The Parts of the Human Body in which are the Faculties


The Philosophy of the Blue Bard of the Chair


Particular Triads


385


387


387


389


389


391


391


391


PAGE.


393


395


Triads of Ten Numbers 397


Mutual reasoning between a Disciple and his Teacher 399
The Stars 403
Astronomy 403
Chronology 405
Chronology 407


The Memorial of Computation..--The Memorial of Country 409


Memorial and Computation 409
The Cycle of Time 411
The Months 411
The beginning of the Year 417


The three Circles of the Sun 417


The Four Ouarters of the Year 417


The Albans 419
The Divisions of the Year 419
The Divisions of the Year 419
The Divisions of the Year 419
The Divisions of the Year 419
The Divisions of the Year 421
The Divisions of the Day 421
The Divisions of the Day 421
The Divisions of the Day 421
The Divisions of the Day 423


The Divisions of the Day 423


Years of the Sun and Moon


Years of the Sun and Moon


Years of the Sun and Moon


Days of Days


423


423


425


425


A LIST OF DOCUMENTS


OCCURRING IN VOLUME I. WHICH HAVE BEEN PRINTED BEFORE.


Pwy a wnaeth rôl--cenedl y Cymry, pp. 12, 14. Coelbren y Beirdd,
p. 25.


Adolwyn pa fodd--gyfergyd ar llafar, p. 46. Coelbren y Beirdd, p.7.


Einigan Gawr--poed felly bydded, pp. 48, 50. Coelbren y Beirdd,
p. 6.


Cyn amser Beli--pedair awgrym ar hugain, pp. 56, 58. Iolo MSS.
pp, 203, 204.


Ystorrynnau--arnynt yn awr, pp. 58, 60. Iolo MSS. pp. 204, 205.
Yn amser Owain--adver ag adgael, pp. 60, 62. Iolo MSS. p. 205.


Coelbren y Beirdd-- W Y, pp. 84-88. Coelbren y Beirdd, pp. 26,
27.


Coelbren y Beirdd--yn dorredig a chyllell, pp. 116-132. Coelbren y
Beirdd, pp. 15-22.


Llyma fal y dywed Lywelyn Sion--ddeunaw ar hugain, pp. 133-
142. Iolo MSS. pp. 206-209.


Cymmer goed bychain--breiniau gwlad, pp. 142-150. Coelbren y
Beirdd, pp. 22-25.


Y pillwydd--bren a fythawr, pp. 150-152. Iolo MSS. pp. 205, 206.


Trioedd Barddas--ynghylch y Gwynvyd, pp. 168--180. Poems Lyric
and Pastoral, vol. ii. pp. 235-239.


Llyma Weddi'r Orsedd--O Lyfr Mawr Margam, p. 360. Iolo MSS. p.
80.


Llyma weddi'r Orsedd--Duw a phob daioni, pp. 360, 362. Iolo
MSS. p. 80.


Llyma weddi'r orsedd o Lyfr arall--Daioni, p. 362. Iolo MSS. p. 80.
Gweddi Talhaiarn--Tanwyn ai cant, p. 362. Iolo MSS. p. 79.


Llyma ddarogan Peredur--Peredur Fardd ai cant, p. 364, 366. Iolo
MSS. pp. 80, 81.


Llyma Bennill Cadair--Merddin Emrys ai cant, p. 366. Iolo MSS. p.
81.


Saith deunydd dyn--Y Bardd Glas o'r Gadair a'i dywed, p. 388.
Myv. Arch. v. iii. p. 109.


Llyma saith--Y Bardd Glas o'r Gadair ai dywed, p. 390. Myv. Arch.
v. iii. p. 109.


Wyth devnydd dyn--sev y bywyd, p.390. Myv. Arch. v. iii. p. 132.


Athronddysg y Bardd Glas--or Gadair ai dywed, pp. 392, 394.
Myv. Arch. v. iii. pp. 108, 109.


“nnau.


Burdwan,


p.10 p.11


BARDISM


Symbal,


THE ORIGIN OF LETTERS, ROLL, AND PAPER.--THE
VIRTUE OF LETTERS.


MAY it please your information, my beloved teacher; pray, tell me
who was the first that made a Letter?


Einiged the Giant, son of Huon, son of Alser, : son of Javan, 2 son
of Japheth, son of Noah the Aged, after the death of his father,
for the purpose of preserving a memorial of what he did, and of
his praiseworthy actions, warranted in respect of credibility and
information. And because it was on wood (pren) that such belief
was first placed, both the letters, and what they were inscribed
on, were called Coelbren. ;


Who was the first that made a Roll. in connection with letters?


Bran the Blessed, : son of Llyr of Defective Speech, learned that
mode at Rome, and brought it with him to Britain, where he
taught it to the Cymry, as well as the manner of dressing the
skins of kids and goats, so as to be suitable for written letters.
And that mode became customary, so that the Bards alone
practised, as it were by bare rescue, the old style of inscribing
letters on wood, for the purpose of preserving the memorials of
the old and primitive sciences of the nation of the Cymry; thence
it came to be called Coelbren of the Bards. At present there are
only the Bards that keep it in memory, by engraving their songs
and records on wood, according to the ancient art, with the view
of preserving in reliable memory the primitive sciences of the
nation of the Cymry.


Who was the first that made paper?


A man from Constantinople, named Moran; he ground flax,
which on its being thinly spread out, became paper.


What is the virtue of letters?


They are mute organs that speak--a body without a soul, and
without life, guiding thought--dead ones, knowing more than the
living--a hand speaking better than the tongue--an eye hearing
better than the ear, without either noise or sound--speech
without a tongue--hearing without an ear--


p.16 p.17


language without words--form of voice--a messenger uttering
the truth, without knowing it--the dead teaching the living--
memory with no one guiding it--the understanding of the dead--
the principal skill of the art of the living--the preservation of all
arts and sciences--and the demonstration of all that is
demonstrable.


Footnotes
1:1 ».10 Probably the same as Elishah, in Gen. x. 4.


11:2 It is remarkable that, contrary to the popular notion which
represents Gomer as the progenitor of the Cymry, Nennius, the
Genealogy of Gruffydd ab Cynan, in the 2nd volume of the
Myvyrian Archaiology--and other Pedigrees registered by Lewis
Dwnn, all support the view of the text as to the descent of that
people from Javan. Nennius, indeed, asserts positively that his
information was derived "ex traditione veterum, qui incole in
primo fuerunt Britannice."


11:3 That is, wood of credibility. The ancient mode of cutting
letters on wood is frequently alluded to in the poems of the
Bards, both early and medieval. Thus;


TALIESIN, 520--570.


Wyf llogell cerdd wyf lle ynydd (llêenydd),
Caraf y gorwydd a gorail clyd.


I am the depository of song, I am a reader,
I love the sprigs and the compact wattling.
Buarth y Beirdd.


Gwydion ap Don--
A rithwys gorwyddawd y ar plagawd.


Gwydion, son of Don--
Formed wood knowledge upon plagawd.
Kadeir Keridwen.


RHYS GOCH AB RICCERT, 1140-1170.


Bu bwyall brenn bardd anghymmen
Yn naddu can i Wenllian.


The wooden axe of an unpolished bard
Has been hewing a song to Gwenllian.


CYNDDELW, 1150-1200.


O ffyrfioli tri o draethaut berffaith
Oe gwyded ieith oe gwydaur. ».


From composing three complete treatises
Of wood language--of wood letters.--Canu i Dduw.


DAVYDD AB GWILYM, 1300-1368.
Hwn fydd ar wydd i'w hannerch.
This will address them on wood.


O myn wawd orddawd arddof
Aed i'r coed i dorri cof.


If he would have an encomium of gentle character,
Let him go into the wood to cut a memorial.
I Ruff. Grug.


Haws yw cael lle ho gwael gwydd
Saerni dwfn saer na defnydd.


It is easier to obtain, where the wood is poor,
The carpentry of a skilful wright, than materials.--Ib.


IOLO GOCH, 1315-1402.


Arwain i Owain a wnaf

Ar eiriau mydr ir araf

Peunydd nid naddiad gwydd gwern,
Pen saerwawd.


I will bear for Owain,

In metrical words, fresh and slow,
Continually, not the hewing of alder wood

By the chief carpenter of song.--I. O. Glyndwr.


RHYS GOCH ERYRI, 1330-1420.


Ni welir mwy ol bwyall
Flodau saer ar gerddgaer gall.


No longer will be seen the mark of the axe
Of the flower of carpenters on a song-loving and wise one.
Mar. Gruff. Llwyd.


LLYWELYN MOEL Y PANTRI, 1400-1430.


Pan glywyf hiraethwyf hoed
Pensaergerdd pain is irgoed.


When I hear, I regret the delay,
The chief carpenter of song--a peacock beneath the green
wood.


GWILYM TEW, 1430-1470.
Llun ei gorph yn darllain gwydd.
The form of his person reading wood.
IEUAN DU'R BILWG, 1460-1500.


Aed dy fawl, ydwyd filwr,
Ar wydd hyd mae dydd a dwr.


May thy praise go--thou art a soldier
Upon wood, as long as day and water continue.


LEWYS MON, 1480-1520.


Bwyall gerdd pan ballai gant
Byth naddai beth ni wyddant.


The axe of song, when a hundred failed,
Always hewed what they knew not.
Mar. Rhys Nanmor.


SION TUDUR, 1560-1602.


Ni wnai brydydd na brawdwr
Roi gwydd gwael ar gywydd gwr.


No poet or judge
Used better wood for a poem to man.
Mar. Sion Brwynog.


RHYS CAIN, 1580.


Yscerbwd mewn cwd, nid min call--a'i mawl,
Llyfr moliant bardd cibddall,

Anhawdd yw ei iawn ddeall,

Fe wna i ddyn a fo'n ddall.


A skeleton in a bag--the lips of the wise will not praise it,
The eulogistic book of a purblind bard,

It is difficult to rightly understand it,

It will do for a man who is blind.--I lyfr pren.


A long string of similar guotations might be adduced, but the
foregoing are sufficient to show that the practice in guestion was
known to the Bards from the 6th down to the 17th century.


It may be observed that several words in the Cymric language,
which relate to knowledge or literature, have a primary reference
to wood. Thus; arwydd, a sign; cyfarwydd, skilful; cyfarwyddyd,
information; cywydd, a species of versification, also revelation;
dedwydd, having recovered knowledge, happy; derwydd, a Druid;
egwyddawr, a rudiment, an alphabet; gwgddawr, a rudiment;
gwyddon, a man of science; gwynwyddigion, men of sacred
knowledge.


13:1 Though Roll, as in the text, primarily refers to the schedule
that was turned up with the hand in the form of a pipe, it came
also to denote a system, or arrangement, as in the
phraseologies, Rhol y Crythor, Rhol y Telynor, Rhol y Mesurau, Rhol
Iolo Goch, Rhol Achau, Rhol Cof a Chyfrif, and Rhol y Beirdd. It is
alluded to by many of the Bards; thus--


DAVYDD AB GWILYM, 1300-1368.


Bydd yr un Rhol ag Iolo
Ddefod hardd, hen fardd y fro.


He will be of the same Roll as Iolo,
Fair usage--the old Bard of the district.


GRUFFYDD AB IEUAN AB LLYWELYN VYCHAN, 1470.


Y rhai na wyppont eu Rhol
Yu csgud aent i ysgol. ».4


They who know not their Roll,
Let them guickly go to school.


HUW AP DAVYDD AP LLYWELYN AP MADAWC, 1480-1520.


Goreuro Rhol geiriau rhawg,
Grafio dadl gref odidawg.


He gilt a Roll of long words,
He engraved a controversy, strong and excellent.
Mar. Tudur Aled.


HARRI AP RHYS AP GWILYM, 1530.


Graddau a Rhol gorwyddawd,
Gwraidd gwybodau er gwau gwawd.


The degrees and Roll of wood-knowledge,
The root of sciences, for the weaving of a song of praise.
Mar. Gwilym ap Ieuan Hen.


DAVYDD BENWYN, 1550-1600.


Eurai bwnc oran bencerdd,
Arail gwawd a Rhol y gerdd. ;.


He embellished a subject--the best chief of song--
He attended to encomium, and the Roll of song.
Mar. Lewys Morgan.


LEWYS AP HYWEL, 1560-1600.


Rhin gwawdiaith a'i rhoi'n gadarn,
Rhol beirdd yn rheoli barn.


The charm of panegyric, firmly placed,
The Roll of the Bards ruling judgment.
Mar. Iorwerth Vynglwyd.


SION TUDUR, 1560-1602.
Ai Rhol achau rhy lychwin.
And their Roll of pedigrees, too much covered with mould.


15:1 Father of the celebrated Caractacus. Bran is said to have
remained at Rome for seven years as hostage for his son. (Tr. 35.


Third Series). It was then that be acguired the information
imputed to him in the text.


THE ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF LETTERS.--THE NAME
OF GOD.--THE BARDIC SECRET.


Pray, my skilful and discreet teacher, if it be fair to ask, how was
the knowledge of letters first obtained?


I will exhibit the information of men of wisdom and pro-found
knowledge, thus;--When God pronounced His name, with the
word sprang the light and the life; for previously there was no
life except God Himself. And the mode in which it was spoken
was of God's direction. His name was pronounced, and with the
utterance was the springing of light and vitality, and man, and
every other living thing; that is to say, each and all sprang
together. And Menw : the Aged, son of Menwyd, : beheld the
springing of the light, and its form and appearance, not
otherwise than thus, / ÎX, in three columns; and in the rays of
light the vocalization--for one were the hearing and seeing, one
unitedly the form and sound; and one unitedly with the form
and sound was life, and one unitedly with these three was power,
which power was God the Father. And since each of these was
one unitedly, he understood that every voice, and hearing, and
living, and being, and sight, and seeing, were one unitedly with
God; nor is the least thing other than God. And by seeing the
form, and in it hearing the voice--not otherwise--he knew what
form and appearance voice should have. And having obtained
earth under him coinstantaneously with the light, he drew the
form of the voice and light


p.18 p.19


on the earth. And it was on hearing the sound of the voice, which
had in it the kind and utterance of three notes, that he obtained


the three letters, and knew the sign that was suitable to one and
other of them. Thus he made in form and sign the Name of God,
after the semblance of rays of light, and perceived that they were
the figure and form and sign of life; one also with them was life,
and in life was God, that is to say, God is one with life, and there
is no life but God, and there is no God but life.


It was from the understanding thus obtained in respect of this
voice, that he was able to assimilate mutually every other voice
as to kind, guality, and reason, and could make a letter suitable
to the utterance of every sound and voice. Thus were obtained
the Cymraeg, and every other language. And it was from the
three primary letters that were constructed every other letter--
which is the principal secret of the Bards of the Isle of Britain;
and from this secret comes every knowledge of letters that is
possible.


Thus was the voice, that was heard, placed on record in the
symbol, and meaning attached to each of the three notes:--the
sense of O was given to the first column, the sense of I to the
second or middle column, and the sense of V to the third;
whence the word OIV. That is to say, it was by means of this word
that God declared His existence, life, Knowledge, power, eternity,
and universality. And in the declaration was His love, that is,
coinstantaneously with it sprang like lightening all the universe
into life and existence, co-vocally and co jubilantly with the
uttered Name of God, in one united song of exultation and joy--
then all the worlds to the extremities of Annwn. It was thus,
then, that God made the worlds, namely, He declared His Name


JW 2
and existence OI V 5,


Why is it not right that a man should commit the Name of God to
vocalization, and the sound of language and tongue


Because it cannot be done without misnaming God, for


p. 21


no man ever heard the vocalization of His Name, and no one
knows how to pronounce it; but it is represented by letters, that
it may be known what is meant, and for Whom it stands.
Formerly signs were employed, namely, the three elements of
vocal letters. However, to prevent disrespect and dishonour to
God, a Bard is forbidden to name Him, except inwardly and in
thought.


Pray, my beloved and discreet teacher, show me the signs that
stand for the Name of God, and the manner in which they are
made.


Thus are they made;--the first of the signs is a small cutting or
line inclining with the sun at eventide, thus, /. the second is
another cutting, in the form of a perpendicular, upright post,
thus, | ; and the third is a cutting of the same amount of
inclination as the first, but in an opposite direction, that is,
against the sun, thus M and the three placed together, thus,


/\\. But instead of, and as substitutes for these, are placed the
three letters O I W. And it was in this manner that the Bard
inserted this name in his stanza, thus,


The Eternal, Origin, Self-existent, Distributor,--holy be the lips
That canonically pronounce them;

Another name, in full word,

Is O. I. and W--OIW ; the word.--Ieuan Rudd sang it. >


This name God gave to Himself, to show that He is in existence,
and that there is no one but Himself, except by gift and
permission; for truly all of us men, and other living beings, are
and exist only by the gift and permission


p.22 p.23


of God. It is considered presumptuous to utter this name in the
hearing of any man in the world. Nevertheless, every thing calls
Him inwardly by this name--the sea and land, earth and air, and
all the visibles and invisibles of the world, whether on the earth
or in the sky--all the worlds of all the celestials and terrestrials--
every intellectual being and existence--every thing animate and
inanimate; wherefore none that honours God, will call Him by
this name, except inwardly.


The three mystic letters signify the three attributes of God,
namely, love, knowledge, and truth; and it is out of these three
that justice springs, and without one of the three there can be no
justice. Which one so ever of the three stands up, the other two
will incline towards it; and every two of them whatsoever will
yield precedency and pre-eminence to the third, whichever of
the three it may be. It was according to this order and principle
that three degrees were conferred upon the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, and each of the three was invested with privilege,
precedency, and pre-eminence, in respect of the particularity of
necessity, over the other two, whichsoever they might be. Out of
the three attributes of God spring every power and will and law.


It was out of the knowledge and understanding of the
vocalization of language and speech, by reason of the three
principal letters, that sixteen letters were formed, constructed
from the primary columns, namely, the three principal letters in
the form of rays of light. And it was thus that form and
appearance could be imparted to every vocalization of language
and speech, and to every primary sound, and symbolic forms of
memory be made visible on wood and stone. Accordingly the
memory of seeing could thus take place simultaneously with the
memory of hearing; and, by means of signs, every sound of voice
could be rendered visible to the eye, as far as the ear could hear
what the tongue spoke, and what awen from God was capable
of. Then when sixteen letters were constructed out of the
principal


p.25


columns, namely these /\\--since no letter can be found on the
Coelbren, or in the Secret of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, that
has not its elements and modifications derived from one or
other of the three principal columns--and because these signs
were cut on wood, they were called llythyrau. : And when every
one of the letters was cut on wood, each of them received a
name and meaning in respect of sound and voice, warranted
and systematized; that is to say, each had its own peculiar
vocalization, confirmed by art. Thus were obtained the signs and
rudiments of war-ranted speech, which is called Abic, 2 but
others call it Abcedilros. ; Thus was ocular and manual art
applied to speech and thought, whence arose ocular memorials
and the materials of Knowledge. Then wise men and aspirants


engaged themselves in improving sciences and language and
speech, and in discriminating vocalization and the variety of
sound with greater skill and minuteness; and they elaborated
them, until they were able to make two more letters, so that the
Alphabet consisted of eighteen letters. After that the need of two
more was observed, until they became twenty; . then twenty-
two; and to complete the work, twenty-four principal letters; nor
are there more in the Alphabet of the Coelbren that are simple,
that is to say, of primary sound. Nevertheless, there are others
that are compound letters, significative of the mutation of voice,
and of the accentuation of letters, of which, according to highly
skilful teachers, there are sixteen in number, whilst others will
have them to be eighteen. Some of them cannot have authority
or warrant, at least they cannot have necessity, in virtue of
indispensable reason; nevertheless it is not allowable to forbid
the improvement of sciences, whilst every awen and art are free,
provided they do not injure, obscure, or confound laudable
sciences.


p.26 p.27


It is by means of letters that sciences and history are committed
to rational memory. The three foundations of sciences are
memory, understanding, and reason, and without the memory
little is the utility of memory, understanding, and reason. After
the discovery of the knowledge of letters it was that every
understanding, and consideration, and every meditation of awen
were committed to the memorial of letters; and from long
acguaintance therewith room was seen for improving,
amplifying, and varying the order and system of language and
speech, and the art of letters, that letters might be warranted,
which should be suitable to every circumstance of language and


speech, and for the purpose of showing visibly every sound and
utterance of word, voice, and speech, that they might harmonize
with the ratiocination of the art of language and letters, and that
speech might agree with speech between man and man, in
respect of the sound and meaning of a sentence, the effort of
language, and the encounter of the art and sciences of language
and letters. Hence easy and warranted became the
understanding, and understanding arose from understanding,
and all men became of one judgment in respect of the meaning
of word and sentence, and in respect of the sense, accent, and
signification of letters. And hence fixed confirmation was
bestowed upon the sciences of letters, and upon all sciences that
were committed to the memory and under the auspices of
letters; and it became easy, also, to learn and understand what
was thus arranged systematically and with a fixed meaning; and
it was easy for all men to be of one judgment, and of one sense
in respect of such. That is to say, from the long co-reasoning of
wise men and aspirants, : and men of art, improvement and
fixedness of meaning and system, are obtained, in respect of all
sciences, and in respect of every one of them. After letters had
been improved and amplified, as occasion reguired, in respect of
meaning and number, there were exhibited twenty-four
primaries--in the opinion of others, the three nines, that is to say,
twenty-seven; nor is there any need or occasion


p.28 p.29


for more primaries, for, say they, there cannot be symbols of
every sound of word and speech in the Cymraeg under twenty-
seven letters--but they formed secondaries and two primary
letters.


Pray, my far knowing teacher, why is it said that only a Bard of
thorough secrecy knows how the Name of God is to be spoken
audibly, that is to say, by means of the three principal columns of
letters?


Because only a Bard of secrecy knows properly the old system of
letters, and their meaning, accent, and powers, in respect of
their stability in the system of the eighteen letters; for when the
system of the eighteen was established, new letters were
employed for the Name of God, namely O I U, but previously,
during the era of the sixteen, no letters stood for the Name of


God, other than the three columns of primary letters, that is /\\
, which was called the system of God and light, and only a Bard
of thorough secrecy now knows properly either the one or the
other of the two old systems, which I have mentioned.


Why is not that secret : committed to letter and audible speech,
that it may be known of all?


Because it is misjudged by him who would have credence from
another for more than he knows, and it is the wicked man, with
the view of pillaging belief from the ignorant, that does so, and
that bestows unjust imaginations upon a letter, and its meaning,
accent, pronunciation, and sound, rather than the true and just.
It is by such men that divine sciences are and have been
corrupted, therefore the secret ought not to be divulged to other
than to him who, in the judgment and sight of man, is warranted
as having awen from God. Nor is there any other who knows the
vocalization of the Name of God, without telling a falsehood, and
the greatest falsehood is to falsify God and His Name.


Why is it not free from falsehood to commit the Name of God to
speech and the hearing of the ear?


p.30 p.31


Because that cannot be done without its being falsely spoken, by
any man or living being and existence possessed of soul and
intellect, but by God Himself;--to exhibit and pronounce it in
speech otherwise is falsehood, and the devastation and
spoliation of God, for there is no being but God and in God, and
whoso says otherwise speaks falsehood, which is falsehood
against God, and depredatory usurpation over Him. But he who
possesses awen from God will perceive the secret, and will know
it, and wherever a man may have awen from God, warranted in
respect of reason and conduct, it is not unjust to divulge to him
the secret, but it is not just to do so to any other, lest the Name
of God be spoken erroneously, falsely, and through unjust and
vain imagination, and thereby be mocked, disparaged, and
dishonoured. There is also another cause, namely, to induce a
man to excercise his understanding and reason upon just and
firm meditation; for he who does so, will understand the
character and meaning of the primitive system of sixteen letters,
and the subseguent system of eighteen, and hence will perceive
and understand the Name of God, and the just reverence due to
Him; for he who does truth will do justice.


When the system of letters was improved in respect of number
and pronunciation, V was employed where there could be no
proper vocalization of ©, and LI as producing L, or N as
producing kK; and by observing kind and quality, one could well


perceive the priority of Ll, that is, N inasmuch as that letter is


the root, and a primary word, which cannot be the case with N,
according to the fixedness given to the Cymraeg by wise and
clear sighted teachers. And where the Cymraeg stands on the
eighteen, the three vocal letters OIV, written variously by some


thus 9l MA, were fixedly and authoritatively arranged; and,
without the violation of secrecy, there cannot be another system
arising from the improvement of the three letters, and their
accent and meaning.


It was from these three things that they began to exhibit
sciences in Triads, that is to say;--


p.32 p.33


The three principal signs of sciences, namely,--the three rays of
light, for from them were obtained appearance and colour and
form--the three voices of light, and from them were obtained
hearing and speech and vocal song--and the three symbolic
letters, and from them were obtained the memory of sight, and
the form of voice, visibly, and.. mental understanding in regard
to what can have no colour, or form, or voice. And it was from
these three that fixedness and authority were obtained for
sciences and art.


Footnotes


17:1 ,»s The words Menw and Menwyd, which are here used as
proper names, signify the source of intellect and happiness, the
mind, or the soul, being derived from men, an active principle,
There are several words growing out of the same root, such as,
menwad, menwawl, menwedig, menwi, menwin, menwydaidd,


menwydaw, menwydawg, menwydawl, menwydedd, menwydiad,
menwydig, menwydus, menwydusaw, menwyn, through all of
which the original idea of intellect and bliss runs. "Tri
menwedigion teyrnedd," the three beneficent sovereigns; " tri
menwydagion Duw," the three blessed ones of God. (Tr.)


Diwahardd i fardd ei fenwyd,
Unrestricted to the bard his ta/ent.--Cynddelw.


[paragraph continues] p. 17 The English words man and mind, and the Latin
mens, seem to be of cognate origin.


21:1 Al. is.
21:2 The Name is alluded to by Iolo Goch;--


Oho Dduw! o waedd hyorn
Pa beth yw y gyfryw gorn?


Oho God! from the sound of the bold horn,
What is such a horn?


And by Sion Cent, 1380-1420,


Pannon ar ganon gannaid ai gelwir
Da gwelwn ef o'n plaid,

O. I. aCW. yw a gaid

Om beunydd i pob enaid.


He is called Pannon in the holy canon;

We behold Him favourable on our side-- ;.
O. I. and W. is He found to be,

OIW always to every soul.


Llywelyn ap Hywel ap Ieuan ap Gronw, 1500-1540, makes use of
the term, thus,


OIO Ddyn byw i ddwyn byd.
OIO man alive, to bear the world.
[paragraph continues ANG Davydd Nanmor, who died A.D. 1460, observes,--
O. I. ag W. yw ag Oen.
He is O. I. and W. and a Lamb.


25:1 , Al. llythyr; a cutting, from the prefix /ly, signifying what is
manifold, various, or manifest, and tyr, (torri,) to cut. Or it may be
from /leu, to explain, or to read; or else from /lw, an exclamation,
an oath, and tyr.


25:2 That is, A. B. C., the I being inserted with the view of giving B
its proper pronunciation, or of filling up the vowel sound
between B and C.


25:3 A word composed entirely of the ten primary letters. See
further on.


25:4 , Taliesin observes,
Iaith ugain ogyrfen y sydd yn awen.
The language of twenty letters is in Awen.


27:1 ».2 The word "Awenyddion" here translated aspirants,
generally stands for Bardic disciples, but it literally means
persons endowed with poetic genius, being derived from Awen.


29:1 , Cyfrinach, from cyd and rhin; what is Known to some, but
not to all. The word occurs in the poetical compositions of the
Bards. Rhys Goch yr Eryri has a whole poem entitled "Cywydd
Cyfrinach," in which there are allusions to the "Awen," "Einigan,"
"Pont Hu" (the bridge of Hu,) "tair llythyren " (three letters,)
"Menw," "Gair heb wybod" (the unknown word,) and other
esoteric doctrines of the Bards.


Lewis Mon, in his elegy on Tudur Aled, refers to the Bardic
secret,--


Yn iach brigyn awch breugerdd
Yn iach cael cyfrinach cerdd. ».2


Farewell sprig--ardency of the short-lived song,
Farewell to having the secret of song.


THE FIRST INVENTORS OF LETTERS.--IMPROVERS OF
THE ALPHABET.--INVENTION OF THE ROLL AND
PLAGAWD.--OBLIGATION OF A BARD TO HOLD A CHAIR
AND GORSEDD.


Who was the first that made letters?


Einigan the Giant, : or, as he is also called, Einiget the Giant; that
is, he took the three rays of light, which were used as a symbol
by Menw, son of the Three Shouts, and employed them as the
agents and instruments of speech, namely the three instruments
B. G. D. and what are embosomed in them, the three being
respectively invested with three agencies. Of the divisions and
subdivisions he made four signs of place and voice, that the
instruments might have room to utter their powers, and to
exhibit their agencies. Hence were obtained thirteen letters,
which were cut in form on wood and stone. ; After that, Einigan
the Giant saw reason for other and different organs of voice and
speech, and subjected the rays to other combinations, from
which were made the signs L. and R. and S., whence there were
sixteen signs. After that, wise men were appointed to commit
them to memory and knowledge, according to the art which he
made; and those men were called Gwyddoniaid, and were men
endued with awen from God. They


p.34 p.35


had no privilege and license warranted by the law and protection
of country and nation, but only by the courtesy and pleasure of
the giver. The Gwyddoniaid are called the principal sages of the
nation of the Cymry. When the Cymry came to the Isle of Britain,
and seisin of land and soil was appointed for every innate


Cymro, and each had his dwelling and position, and when
sovereignty was arranged, and was to be conferred upon him
who should be found to be the bravest and wisest and most
powerful, being an innate Cymro, they resorted to Gorsedd by
their heads of kindred, and conferred the sovereignty upon
Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, for he was found to be the
bravest, most powerful, wisest, and the brightest of wit. And
Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, assembled the heads of kindred,
sages, and men of knowledge of the nation of the Cymry in a
conventional Gorsedd. Then were Bards appointed, namely, of
three degrees, that is to say, primitive Bards, to uphold the
memorial of national voice and vocal song, and Ovates, to
uphold the memorial of symbols, whence they were called
herald-bards, and Druids, whose duty it was to impart
instruction and sciences to the nation of the Cymry, namely
divine sciences, and sciences of wisdom, according to what was
known by means of the memorial of the voice of Gorsedd and
vocal song, in right of the primitive Bard, and the memorial of
symbol and letter by herald-Bards. And when the offices
incumbent upon the three degrees were appointed, license and
privileges in respect of protection and reward were assigned to
them. And raiment was given to each of the three degrees,
namely blue to the primitive Bards, green to the Ovate-Bards,
and white to the Druid-Bards. Thus every one was to bear his
badge and honour by authority, that every Cymro might know
his privilege, protection, and reward; and security was given
them that none besides should bear those vestment badges.


When was the augmentation of symbols as far as twenty-four
brought into knowledge and use?


Rhuvawn the Golden-tongued, : introduced two symbols.


p.36 p.37


namely W and Ff, whereupon eighteen letters were used, and
thus they continued until the time of Talhaiarn of Caerleon-upon-
Usk, who introduced six letters different to what had been
before him, which were Ch. F. C. T. P. Ll., whence they became
twenty-four letters. After that, others were invented as
ancillaries to the signs which reguired them, for the sake of
confirming the vocalization of word and sign, until those which
now exist were arranged, namely, thirty-eight signs, as the signs
of wood and stone; and they are in use by the herald-bards of
the Isle of Britain under the privilege of the sciences of the
nation of the Cymry.


When were the sciences of the writing of Roll and Plagawd ;
obtained?


By Bran, son of Llyr the Blessed, it is said; but others relate that it
was by Gwydion, son of Don: the Irishman, of Arvon, who
brought them from Ireland. That, however, is not true in
reference to the nation of the Cymry, for certain is it that Bran
the Blessed first brought them into the Isle of Britain from Rome,
where he learned the art, and the mode of manufacturing
plagawd with the skins of lambs and calves and kids. It was
Gwydion that first introduced them into Ireland, after the Irish of
Mona and Arvon had obtained the faith in Christ; hence the
knowledge of letters and the writing of Roll and Plagawd.


Why should a Bard, in virtue of his oath, hold a Chair and
Gorsedd?


Because there can be no country and nation without good
sciences under the protection of God and His peace, and there


can be no prepared ; sciences without teachers, and there can be
no teachers without the ordering of privilege and usage, and
there ought to be no privilege without actual usage; wherefore
nothing can become actual without


p.38 p.39


prudent order, and established practice, and obligatory office on
the part of those who are entitled ; to privileges and immunities.
The three functions of Chair and Gorsedd are to teach sciences
from God and goodness, in respect of what is found to be
wisdom,--to preserve the memory of the privileges, usages, and
praiseworthy actions of the country and nation of the Cymry,--
and to uphold order and known dates in respect of the learning
of masters.


Footnotes


33:1 In one version of Rhys Goch's "Cywydd Cyfrinach" mention
is made of this personage as one whose learning was the source
of the Awen--


O ddysg Einigan a ddoeth.
It came from the learning of Einigan.


33:2 Reference is made to the usage of engraving on stone by
Huw Cae Llwyd, A.D. 145--1480;--


Darllen main bychain yn bet,
Dull Hywel dealt llawer. ;.


He sweetly read little stones,
After the manner of Howel, he understood many things.


35:1 ,» This doubtless is none other than the "Rhufin," whose
name occurs in a poem by Edmund Prys (1541-1624) in
conjunction with the names of "Plennydd," "Goron," "Meugant,"
"Melchin," "Mefin," "Madog," and "Cadog."


Mae un Rhufin min rhyfedd.
There is one Rhuvin of wonderful lips.


37:1 ,» We retain the original term plagawd, (Lat. plagula, plaga;
Gr. TAnyn, Dorice rAayn,) because in the documents before us it
is described as meaning not only parchment, but also a kind of
plant or sedge grown in the East.


37:2 Thus Taliesin,--


Gwydion ap Don
A rithwys gorwyddawd y ar plagawd. ;.:


Gwydion son of Don--
Fashioned wood-knowledge upon plagawd.
Kadeir Keridwen.


7:3 Pardion--parodion. Another reading has parorion,
continued, permanent.


39:1 ,. Al. "invested with."


ORIGIN OF LETTERS.


Einigain, Einigair, or Einiger, the Giant, was the first that made a
letter to be a sign of the first vocalization that was ever heard,
namely, the Name of God. That is to say, God pronounced His
Name, and with the word all the world and its appurtenances,
and all the universe leaped together into existence and life, with
the triumph of a song of joy. > The same song was the first

poem ; that was ever heard, and the sound of the song travelled
as far as God and His existence are, and the way in which every
other existence, springing in unity with Him, has travelled for
ever and ever. And it sprang from inopportune nothing; that is to
say, so sweetly and melodiously did God declare His Name, that
life vibrated through all existence, and through every existing
materiality. And the blessed in heaven shall hear it for ever and
ever, and where it is heard, there cannot be other than the might
of being and life for ever and ever. It was from the hearing, and
from him who heard it, that sciences and knowledge and under-


p.40 p.41


standing and awen from God, were obtained. The symbol of


God's Name from the beginning was /\ \, afterwards © | V,
and now OIW; and from the quality of this symbol proceed every
form and sign of voice, and sound, and name, and condition.


Footnotes


39:2 There was some such tradition about the Creation in Job's
time, as we infer from Chap. xxxviii. 7 of his Book. "When the


morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for
joy?"


There is an allusion to the creative melody in the poetic
compositions of the Bards. Thus in a version of the "Englynion y
Coronog Faban" attributed to Aneurin, about A.D. 550.--


Coronog Faban y dydd cynta

A gant ganon yn y gwenydfa

Ag awen gogoniant o'r uchelfa
Gan floedd bydoedd a byw Adda.


The crowned Babe, on the first day,

Sang a chant in the region of bliss,

And the awen of glory came from the high place,
With the shout of the worlds, and Adam lived.


p. 39


[paragraph continues] And William Cynwal (1 560-1 600)--


Yr awen o'r dechreuad
Gwedi'r Ton oedd gyda'r Tad.


The awen from the beginning,
After the tone, was with the Father.


39:3 Cymrice cerdd, which, though now universally meaning a
poem, or a song, seems to have originally denoted a going or a
walk. We have thus the reason why it received its secondary
meaning, i.e. because the melody of the divine vocalization a
gerddodd, walked through, or pervaded all creation.


THE INVENTOR OF VOCAL SONG.--THE FIRST
RECORDERS OF BARDISM.--ITS FIRST SYSTEMATIZERS.--
THEIR REGULATIONS.--MODE OF INSCRIBING THE
PRIMARY LETTERS.--ORIGIN OF THEIR FORM AND
SOUND.--THE THREE MENWS.


Pray, who was the first that made a vocal song in Cymraeg?


Hu the Mighty, : the man who first brought the Cymry into the
Isle of Britain; and he made the song to be a memorial of what
happened to the nation of the Cymry from the age of ages. And
he inserted in it the praise of God for what the Cymry had
received at His hand, by way of protection and deliverance, also
the sciences and regulations of the nation of the Cymry. It was
from that song that instruction in vocal song, and the
understanding of just memorials, were first obtained. After that
came Tydain, father of Awen, : who improved the sciences and
art of vocal song, and reduced it to an artistic system, that it
might be the more easily learned, understood, and
remembered, and be the more pleasantly recited and listened to.


Pray, who were they that first preserved the memory and
sciences of Bardism, and gave instruction in wisdom?


The Gwyddoniaid, namely, the sages of the nation of the Cymry;
they preserved the memory in vocal song of the sciences and
wisdom of Bardism, and gave instruction in them; nevertheless
the sciences of the Gwyddoniaid possessed neither privilege nor
license, except by courtesy--neither system nor chair. ;


p.42 p.43


Who were the first that conferred system and chair on Bards and
Bardism, and on Poets and vocal song?


The three primary Bards, namely, Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, :
who lived in the time of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, and in
the time of Dyvnvarth ap Prydain, his son. That is, they devised a
Chair and Gorsedd, and regulated teachers and aspirants, and
pupilage; and introduced instruction in sciences, and fixed and
just memorials in respect of the knowledge of Bardism, and
vocal song, with its appurtenances, and in respect of usages,
that, of justice, and according to the reguirements of wisdom,
were suitable to Bards and Poets, as would be most reguisite for
the benefit and praise of the nation of the Cymry.


Pray, my accomplished teacher, instruct me as to the regulation
and system of Chair and Gorsedd, which the three primary Bards
introduced in respect of Bards and Poets?


Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, did, of his acute and sagacious
sense and meditation, what he saw the best in every act and
event for the benefit and praise of the might of the nation of the
Cymry. He then called to him the Gwyddoniaid, and reguested
judgment by ballot as to the three who should be found to be
the wisest and best of them in respect of sciences, when
Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, were found to be the best in
respect of sciences, and wisdom, and secrecy, and the art of
vocal song. Then they conferred the privilege of country and
nation upon those whom they perceived to be the best in
respect of the sciences, and art of Bardism and vocal song, and
upon the instruction which they gave, and which was regulated
by system and art. And these are the order and system which
they devised.


Pray, on what were letters first made, and in what manner?
p.44 p.45


They were first made on trees, that is, wood was hewn into four
sided staves, on each of which were cut small notches, and it was
by means of as many notches as were necessary, that letters
were formed. After that, on a slate stone, that is, letters were
engraved on it with a steel pencil, or a flint. When it was done on
wood, it was called coelbren, and hence the grooves of the letters
were called coelbren; and the lettered stone was called coelvain. ;
There was a different way in which letters were made on wood,
other than by means of notches, namely, with black or any other
colour that might be most ready at hand. And this was practised
by the Cymry for ages before memory. When this island was won
by the men of Rome, they brought over here a plant, called
plagawd, that is, a sedge, which was obtained from the land of
Asia, and the land of Canaan, and wrote upon it. After that, art
was applied to the skins of calves, the skins of goats, and the
skins of sheep, and plagawd was made from them, and it is the
best of all manufactures for books. Nevertheless, the Bards of
the Isle of Britain retain in memory and history the mode of
making the ancient books, in order to rescue the Cymraeg from
the misunderstanding, to which it would otherwise be liable.
Another reason is, that wood and stone can be procured where
and when plagawd cannot; wherefore there is no proper
Gorsedd or Chair, where the ancient usages and the ancient
sciences, according to understanding and art, are not exhibited.
On that account there ought to be wood in every Gorsedd and
Chair, and besides a Roll of plagawd; that is, there ought to be an
exhibition of all the sciences of letters in the Gorsedd and Chair
of the Bards of the Isle


of Britain; and where there is no wood, then lettered stones.


Pray, how were letters first understood in respect of form and
sound?


Thus, God, when there was in life and existence only Himself,
proclaimed His Name, and co-instantaneously with the word all
living and existing things burst wholly into a shout of joy; and
that voice was the most melodious that ever was heard in music.
Co-instantaneously with the voice was light, and in the light,
form; and the voice : was in three tones, three vocalizations,
pronounced together at the same moment. And in the vision
were three forms and colours, which were the form of light; and
one with the voice, and the colour and form of that voice, were
the three first letters. It was from a combination of their
vocalizations that every other vocalization was formed in letters.
He who heard the voice was Menw the Aged, son of the Three
Shouts; but others say that it was Einigan the Giant that first
made a letter, the same being the form of the Name of God,
when he found himself alive and existing co-momentaneously
and co-instantaneously with the voice.


Pray, my eloguent and learned teacher, how many men, that
were Menws, have there been in the nation of the Cymry, for I
find mention and account of others of the name of Menw?


Three persons, within memory and knowledge, have been of
that name, that is to say, Menw, son of the Three Shouts, the
second was Menw the Tall from the North, and the other, Menw,
son of Menwad, of Arvon, the man who was the first of the
nation of the Cymry that made dramatic representations.


Footnotes


41:1 ».« Conformably with this statement is that of the Triads,
where Hu the Mighty is called one of "the three cultivators of
song and thought," because it was he that " first applied to vocal
song the preservation of memory and thought." Tr. 91. Third
Series.


41:2 He was the third of "the cultivators of song and thought," so
considered, because it was he that "first conferred art upon vocal
song, and system upon thought." Id. Geraint the Blue Bard, who
flourished about A.D. 900, has recorded his achievement in this
respect;--


Goruc Tydain Tad Awen
Oi fyfyrdawd fawr aren,
Glof ar gof gan gerdd gymhen. ».«:


The achievement of Tydain, the father of Awen,

Of his vast and wise meditation,

Was the securing of memory by eloguent verse.
Iolo MSS. pp. 262, 669.


41:3 "There were previously Bards and Bardism, but they had no
licensed system, ».« nor privileges or usages, but what were
obtained by kindness and courtesy, under the protection of
country and nation, before the time of these three," i.e.
Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron. Tr. 58, Third Series.


43:1 ,.» "The three primary Bards of the Isle of Britain: Plennydd,
Alawn, and Gwron; that is to say, they were the persons who
devised the privileges and ;. usages of Bards and Bardism.


Therefore are they called the three primaries. * * * Some say
that they lived in the time of Prydain son of Aedd the Great; but
others say that they lived in the time of Dyvnwal Moelmud, his
son, who in some old Books is called Dyvnvarth ab Prydain." Id.


45:1 ».« Stone of credibility. The poets frequently allude to the
coelvain, thus,--


CYNDDELW.
Mwyn Ofydd i Feirdd ei faith goelfain.


A kind Ovate to Bards was his large stone of credibility.
To Owain Cyveiliog.


GRUFFYDD AB DAVYDD AB TUDUR, 1290-1340.
Colofn Prestatun coelfeiniau Awrtun.


The pillar of Prestatyn, the belief stones of Overton.


GRUFFYDD AB MEREDYDD AB DAWYDD, 1310-1360.
Mair ai choelvain:


Cor Ior aur drefnad
Cyw aint wneuthuriad
Mawr uchelfab rhad


Of Mary, and her stone of credibility:


The Choir of the Lord, of golden order,
And of skilful workmanship,


The great, high and gracious Son
SION TUDOR.


Wrth ddarllain coelfain celfydd
Gair naw gloes ar gronigl wydd.


In reading an ingenious stone of credibility,
Or the nine tropes on a wooden chronicle.


47:1 ; Al. "Name."


THE PRINCIPAL ELEMENTS OF VARIOUS THINGS.--THE
GOGYRVENS.


The three principal elements > of every thing: power; matter; and
mode. ;


p.48 p.49


The three principal elements of sciences: life; intellect; and
affection. ;


The three elements of wisdom: object; mode; and benefit.


The three elements of memorials: understanding from affection;
distinctive sign; and reverence for the better.


The three elements of letters, /\\; that is to say, froma
combination of one or other of the three are letters made. They
are three rays of light. And of these are made the sixteen
gogyrvens, that is, the sixteen letters. According to a different
arrangement there are seven gogyrvens and seven, 2 the seven
words and seven score ; in the Alphabet of the Cymraeg being no
other than a sign of worthiness; and it is from them that every
other word proceeds. Others say seven score and seven hundred
words.


Footnotes
47:2 Al. "conditions."


47:3 Al. "condition." Al. "energy."


49:1 ,..s Al. "intellect; affection; and deliberation."
49:2 Probably "score" is to be supplied.
49:3


Saith ugein ogrfen
Y sydd yn Awen.


Seven score gogyrvens
Are there in Awen.--Taliesin.


THE INVENTION OF LETTERS BY EINIGAN AND MENW.--
THE SECRET OF BARDISM.


Einigan the Giant beheld three pillars of light, having in them all
demonstrable sciences that ever were, or ever will be. And he
took three rods of the guicken tree, and placed on them the
forms and signs of all sciences, so as to be remembered; and
exhibited them. But those who saw them misunderstood, and
falsely apprehended them, and taught illusive sciences,
regarding the rods as a God, whereas they only bore His Name.
When Einigan saw this, he was greatly annoyed, and in the
intensity of his grief he broke the three rods, nor were others
found that contained accurate sciences. He was so distressed on
that account that from the intensity he burst asunder, and with
his [parting] breath he prayed God that there should be accurate
sciences among men in the flesh, and there should be a correct
understanding for the proper discernment thereof. And at the
end of a year and a day, after the decease of Einigan, Menw, son


p.50 p.51


of the Three Shouts, beheld three rods growing out of the mouth
of Einigan, which exhibited the sciences of the Ten Letters, and
the mode in which all the sciences of language and speech were
arranged by them, and in language and speech all
distinguishable sciences. He then took the rods, and taught from
them the sciences--all, except the Name of God, which he made
a secret, lest the Name should be falsely discerned; and hence
arose the Secret of the Bardism of the Bards of the Isle of Britain.
And God imparted His protection to this secret, and gave Menw
a very discreet understanding of sciences under this His


protection, which understanding is called Awen from God; and
blessed for ever is he who shall obtain it. Amen, so be it.


From the mouth of Adam, like blessed trees, three crosses,
&c.

Rods of fine growth were obtained, being trees from the
mouth of Adam. ;


CUTTINGS.--FOUNDATIONS OF AWEN.


/| \. It was from the three signs that Einigan the Giant obtained
SO good an understanding of letters, which he cut on staves. He
devised the mode, and made twelve: principal letters, if the
books of the wise are true, which are called the ten radicals. As
to what they are, and what their forms, it is a secret in the
mystery of the Bards of the nation of the Cymry, namely, the
Gwyddoniaid, who are called the primary Bards. They are three
of the primary radicals, that is, the three cuttings; and they are
called cuttings, because they are cut out of the dark into three
rays; and for the same reason we say, the break of dawn, ; to cut
a field, to cut or break out. The third break out was the voice of a
song of triumph, that is, the first voice was a voice of triumph.


The three foundations of Awen from God: to understand the
truth; to love the truth; and to [maintain] the truth, so that
nothing may prevail against it. From these three things may the
guestion be correctly answered--Why wouldest thou be a Bard?
And from correctly answering


p.52 p.sa


the guestion is the degree of Chair obtained or refused. The
answer is between the aspirant and his conscience, and between
his conscience and God, not between him and his teacher.


Footnotes


51:1 ,.e This line is from the works of William Lleyn, 1540-1587.


51:2 Al. "ten."


51:3 The sameness of the word is better kept in the original,
"torri" meaning both to cut and to break.


ORIGIN AND PROGRESS OF LETTERS.--EINIGAN THE
GIANT.--THE GWYDDONIAID.--SYSTEMS OF LETTERS.


a.e.i.o.—b.c.t.l.s.r.p.


It was Einigan the Giant that first understood letters; and he
made the principal cuttings, which were eleven, that is, the four
vowels, and the seven consonants. And he inscribed on wood the
memorial of every object he beheld, every story he heard, and
every honour he understood. Others considering the things that
Einigan did, concluded that he was a devil, and banished him.
Upon this he came to his father's kindred in the Isle of Britain,
and exhibited his art, and they adjudged him to be the wisest of
the wise, and called him Einigan the Gwyddon, and all, who
learned the art of letters, they called Gwyddoniaid, which
Gwyddoniaid were the principal sages of the Isle of Britain,
before Bards were systematically distinguished in respect of
privilege and usage. When Bards and Bardism were arranged,
they were reguired to keep the memorial of the eleven cuttings.
After this the art was improved, and sixteen cuttings were
obtained, which were called the sixteen letters; subseguently,
eighteen, and thence until twenty-four, to which were added the
fourteen secondary letters, as they are now seen. This is
preserved in the memorial of voice and letters, and the usage of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain. The system of eleven is called the
system of Einigan; the one of sixteen, the system of Edric; the
one of eighteen, the system of Alawn ; "and the system of the
Bards;" ; the one of twenty-four is called the system of Arthavael;
and


p.54 p.55


the one now in use is called the new system, and the system of
Idnerth the Artist. It was in the time when Gruffudd, son of
Llywelyn, son of Seisyllt, exercised prerogative over Cymru
universal, that this Idner lived. ; Thus are shown the origin of
letters and the sciences of books in the memorials of the Bards
of the Isle of Britain.


Footnotes


53:1 ..» The literary achievement of Alawn is thus recorded in the
"Englynion y Gorugiau" by Geraint the Blue Bard;--


Goruc Alawn fardd Prydain,
Gofredeu cleu clodysgein,
Coel cyd celfyddyd cyfrein.


The achievement of Alawn, the Bard of Britain,
Was to establish true memorial of spreading fame--
The mutual recording in the art of disputation.

Iolo MSS. pp. 263, 670.


53:2 ».s; Added from another MS.


55:1 »s Ie. between A. D. 1021 and 1064.


THE ORIGIN OF LETTERS AND BOOKS.--THEIR
INTRODUCTION INTO BRITAIN--THE COELBREN.


Who was the first that obtained understanding respecting
letters?


Adam first obtained it from God in Paradise, and his son, Abel
the Innocent, learned it of his father. Cain the Murderer, Abel's
brother, would have fame from the good things of the world, but
Abel would not, except from sciences that were pleasing to God,
and from understanding and learning relative to what God did
or desired. Wherefore Cain envied his brother Abel, and slew him
feloniously and treacherously. 2 Then the sciences, which Abel
caused to be understood, were lost. After that, Adam had
another son, whose name was Seth; and he taught him the
knowledge of letters, and all other divine sciences. And to Seth
was a son, whose name was Enos, who was educated by his
father as a man of letters and praiseworthy sciences in respect of
book and learning. It was Enos who was the first that made a
book of record, for the purpose of preserving the memory of
every thing beautiful, commendable, and good, that is, of what
God the Creator did, and of his works in heaven and earth; and
he enjoined this to man as a law and ordinance. : This knowledge
was preserved by the posterity of Enos until the time of Noah the
Aged; and when the water of the deluge had ceased, and the
Ship had come on dry land, Noah taught the knowledge of
books, and all other sciences, to his son Japheth, and our nation,
the Cymry, who were descended from Japheth, son of Noah the
Aged, obtained this knowledge, and brought it with them to the
Isle of Britain,


p.56 p:57


and they maintained, amplified, and enlarged the sciences of
book and learning, and placed them on record until Christ came
in the flesh.


What were the first books that were first known to the nation of
the Cymry, and what were their materials?


Wood, that is, trees, and that mode was called Coelbren, from
which comes the Coelbren of the Bards, as it is still on record by
the nation of the Cymry. There was no other mode of dealing
with letters known to our nation before Christ came in the flesh.


Pray, my teacher, is it meet that thou shouldest show me orally
the instruction how to make the Coelbren of the Bards, and the
art that ought to belong to it?


I will show it, by the grace of God,--The Coelbren of the Bards is
made with the genial wood of oak plants, split into four parts,
that is, of greenwood as thick as a boy's wrist. These are hewn
sguare, that is, into four sides, a cubit in length, their breadth
and thickness being equal one to the other, namely the length of
a barley corn, which is the third of an inch. After ;


Footnotes
55:2 ps. See Gen. iv.


55:3 The Eastern people have likewise certain traditions
respecting Enos which are not recorded in the Holy Bible, such
as, that Seth his father declared him sovereign prince and high-
priest of mankind, next after himself; that Enos was the first who


ordained public alms for the poor, established public tribunals
for the administration of justice, and planted, or rather
cultivated, the palm tree.


57:1 ss The MS. breaks off abruptly here.


THE PRIMARY LETTERS.--IMPROVEMENT OF THE
ALPHABET.


Before the time of Beli the Great, > son of Manogan, there were
only ten letters, which were called the ten signs, namely, a, p, c,
e, t, i, |, 5 o, s. After that m, and n, were invented; and after that
four others, and they were made into sixteen by the divulgation,
and under the proclamation of country and nation. After the
coming of the faith in Christ, two other letters, namely u and d.
In the time of king Arthur ; there were introduced twenty
primary letters, as at present, by the counsel of Taliesin, the chief
of Bards, and domestic Bard of Urien Rheged. : Under the system
of the eighteen were arranged O. I. U. which is the


p.58 p.59


unutterable Name of God; whereas previous to that
arrangement it was O. I. O. according to the sixteen. Of the
principal signs there are not, to this day, more than twenty
letters, or twenty signs. Geraint the Blue Bard appointed twenty-
four letters, as it is at present; but the four are auxiliaries. After
that, through the argumentative consideration of Bards, and
Teachers who were chair Bards, there were brought into use and
privilege, by the improvement of the Coelbren, thirty-eight
letters on wood; but there are in black and white : only the
twenty-four signs.


Footnotes


57:2 ,.ss He was the father of the celebrated Casswallawn or
Cassivelaunus, who opposed the Roman invasion.


57:3 Arthur was elected pendragon of the Britons about A. D,
517, and died A, D. 552.


57:4 , Several of Taliesin's poems to Urien Rheged are printed in
the 1st vol. of the Myvyrian Archaiology.


59:1 ,ss I e. in writing.


PRIMARY CUTTINGS.--IMPROVEMENT OF THE
COELBREN.--ITS RESTORATION.


In the early times of the nation of the Cymry letters were called
cuttings; and it was after the time of Beli, son of Manogan, that
they were called letters. Previously, there were no letters but the
primary cuttings, which had been a secret from the age of ages
among the Bards of the Isle of Britain, for the preservation of the
memorials of country and nation. Beli the Great made them into
sixteen, and divulged that arrangement, and appointed that
there should never after be a concealment of the sciences of
letters, in respect of the arrangement which he made; but he left
the ten cuttings a secret.


After the coming of the faith in Christ, they were made eighteen;
and after that twenty, 2 and such they were kept until the time of
Geraint the Blue Bard, who made them twenty-four.


They continued such for long ages, even until the time of king
Henry the Fifth, ; who forbade schools, books, and the materials
of books for the Cymry. On that account the Cymry were obliged
to betake themselves in a body to the Coelbren of the Bards, and
to cut and blacken letters on wood


p.60 p.61


and rods; and every owner of a house and family, that wished to
know the sciences of letters and reading, took Bards into his
house. And from this was appointed the endowment of land, and
tilth, and fold for the Bards. And the Bards became numerous in
Cymru, and the knowledge of letters was greater than before the
prohibition; where-fore Llawdden the Bard : sang:--


Beware of being wrong; see and observe--the throw
And course of every privation;
And the adage of this world,


"That is not evil which produces good."


That is to say, where there was no school to be had, but an
English one, and no teacher but a Saxon, the Cymry would study
their own language and sciences more than ever, and they
improved and augmented the number of letters and cuttings,
until they completed the number, of which they now consist.


Footnotes


59:2 ;.s It may be remarked here that according to one version of
the Poem by Taliesin, in which the expression "Saith ugain
Ogrfen y sydd yn Awen," occurs, (See Antea p. 48) the word
"iaith" is used instead of "Saith," which makes the meaning to
be--"the language of twenty letters is in Awen,"--a statement that
in some measure bears out that of the text.


59:3.» A.D. 1412-1122.


61:1 ,.e Llawdden flourished from about 1440 to 1480.


RECOVERY OF THE OLD CYMRAEG.


It was in the time of Owain, son of Maxen Wledig, that the nation
of the Cymry recovered their privilege and crown. They took to
their primitive mother tongue instead of the Latin, which had
well nigh overran the Isle of Britain; and in the Cymraeg they
kept the memorials and history and systems of country and
nation, restoring to memory the ancient Cymraeg, with its
original words and expressions. Because the ancient
orthography of the ten primary letters was forgotten and
misunderstood, they became lost, and thus arose a
disagreement respecting several old words, that is, the putting
of two letters, where only one was reguired, as caan, braan,
glaan, instead of cân, brân, and glân, and digerth instead of
dierth, and phlegid instead of phlaid, with many others; also
putting t for dd, and í instead of e, and instead of y, and u instead
of e. It is not necessary to show the whole, but this much is given
in memory of him who made the amendment, namely, Talhaiarn


p.62 p.63


the Bard, : of Caerleon-upon-Usk, under the protection of the
Round Table. After him Taliesin, Chief of Bards, arranged the
Cymraeg, from a right understanding of the meaning and merit
of the ten primary letters, and their modes, and changes, and
proper inflections; and from this the ancient Cymraeg was
restored and recovered.


Footnotes


63:1 ,.» Talhaiarn presided in the chair of Urien Rheged, which
was established at Caer Gwyroswydd, or Ystum Llwynarth. He
composed a prayer, which has always been the formula used in
the Gorsedd Morganwg, or Bardic Sessions of Glamorgan. He
was also domestic chaplain to Emrys Wledig, or Ambrosius
Aurelianus. Taliesin in his Poems alludes to Talhaiarn,--


Trwy ieith Talhayarn
Bedydd bu ddydd farn.


According to the language of Talhaiarn,
There will be baptism at the day of judgment.
Angar Cyvyndawd.


THE PRIMARY LETTERS.--THEIR AUGMENTATION.--
RESTORATION OF THE COELBREN.


This is what I, Llywelyn Sion, 2 took from the Book of Davydd
Benwyn, 3 which is called the Coelbren of the Bards.


Here is the system of the symbols of letters, or the symbols of
language and speech, as it was arranged by Gwilym Tew, 4 Bard
and Chair Teacher, and exhibited at the Eisteddvod of the Chair
and Gorsedd of Pen Rhys Monastery, s when Owain Glyndwr and
the Cymry were prevailing against the Saxons. «


There were ten symbols of letters in the possession of the Cymry
from the beginning, before they came into the Isle of Britain,
which ten are now kept an undivulged secret by the Bards of the
Isle of Britain, and therefore no man can radically understand
the Coelbren of letters, who is not under the obligation of the
vow of the secret of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. In the time of
Dyvnwal Moelmud, son of Dyvnvarth, son of Prydain, son of
Aedd the Great, the symbolic cuttings of language and speech
were augmented


p.64 p.65


to sixteen in number, and they were mutually divulged, and to
each was given a new form, other than what the ten symbolic
points that are secret and undivulged have. In the time when
Bell the Great, son of Manog, : was king paramount of the Isle of
Britain, the sixteen symbols were laid open to the nation of the
Cymry, and security was given that there should be no king,
judge, or teacher of country, without knowing the sixteen signs,
and being able to reduce them into proper art. It was ages after


that, before understanding respecting the symbols of Plagawd,
that is, dressed skins, was obtained, and when that took place,
the Roll was invented, and after that, the Books that are now
seen in use. The number of the symbols was augmented until
they were found to be eighteen in the time of Taliesin, chief of
Bards, who employed them in his canons, hence the
improvement of vocal song. After that the number of the
symbols was raised to twenty, that is, the primaries, as at
present. After that Geraint, the Blue Bard, began to use auxiliary
symbols, which he invented, and which others, after him,
improved, and the Bards kept memorials of them. When Owain
Glyndwr was lost, plagawd and paper were prohibited in Cymru;
and the Bards and Teachers, and all others who were reguired to
keep memorials, were obliged to restore into sight and use the
symbols of the Coelbren of the Bards, until the making them
ready for the cutting became an art. Then they became infinitely
numerous by the hands of sieve and basket makers, who sold
them to any one that sought for them, and so they continued
down to the days of those who are now living. It is Davydd
Benwyn that says it.


Footnotes


63:2 ..» Llywelyn Sion was an eminent bard of Glamorgan,
distinguished for having been appointed to collect the System of
Bardism as traditionally preserved in the Gorsedd Morganwg, in
which he presided in 1580. A great portion of the present
Volume is due to his care and assiduity.


63:3 ;. Davydd Benwyn was a Bard who flourished from 1550 to
1600, being a native of Glamorganshire. He presided at the


Glamorgan Gorsedd in 1580.
3:4 A Gwilym Tew presided at the Glamorgan Gorsedd in 1460.


63:5 The Monastery of Pen Rhys was suppressed in the second
year of King Henry V.'s reign, AD. 1415, because its inmates had
sided with Owain Glyndwr.


63:6 The insurrection of Owain Glyndwr began about 1400, and
continued with varied success for fifteen years, when he died, i.
e. September 20th, 1415.


65:1 ».64 I.e. Manogan.


THE BARDIC SECRET.


O IW are the three letters, and in very old books O I U, because
U was used instead of W, in the olden times. It is the secret word
of the primitive Bards, which it is not lawful to speak or utter
audibly to any man in the


p.66 p. 67


world, except to a Bard who is under the vow of an oath. The
letters may be shown to any one in the world we like, without
uttering the vocalization, which, under the protection of secrecy,
is due to them, though he be not under an oath; but should he
utter them in speech audibly, he violates his protection, and he
cannot be a Bard, nor will it be lawful to shew him any more of
the secret, either in this world that perishes, or in the other
world that will not perish for ever and ever. : Sion Bradford. »


Footnotes


67:1 »« The non reception of a perjured Bard in the world of bliss
is likewise dwelt upon by Sion Cent;--


Nid addwyn i ddyn didduw

A dwng gan afrinaw Duw

Ei fyned i deg faenol

Draw 'n y nef heb ei droi'n ol.


It is not meet for a godless man,
Who will swear, divulging God,


To go into the fair manor,
Yonder in heaven, without being turned back.


67:2 ,. Sion Bradford was admitted a disciple of the bardic chair
of Glamorgan in 1730, being then a boy. He presided in the same
chair in 1760, and died in 1780.


THE SACRED SYMBOL.


Fin. That is to say, they are called the three columns, and the
three columns of truth, because there can be no knowledge of
the truth, but from the light thrown upon it; and the three
columns of sciences, because there can be no sciences, but from
the light and truth.


THE PRIMARY LETTERS.--IMPROVEMENT OF THE
ALPHABET.


Before the faith in Christ was obtained, no other than twelve
letters were used, namely, a, e,i, o, b, d, g, |, m, n, r, s. After the
coming of the faith, sixteen were put in use, then the art of the
twelve letters was lost, nor is there at present any one that
knows it, except from conjecture. After the coining of Taliesin
eighteen letters were used; and it was according to the art of the
system of eighteen that O I U was appointed for the Name of
God. Before that arrangement it was O I O according to the
sixteen. After the time of Taliesin the use of twenty letters was
obtained, ; which continued until the time of Geraint the


p.68 p. 69


(paragraph coninues, BÏUe Bard, who made an arrangement of twenty-four
letters. After that, from reasoning to reasoning, the Bards
improving the Alphabet, increased the number to thirty-eight on
wood; but in black and white : no other than twenty-four were
used.


Footnotes


Iaith ugain ogyrfen y sydd yn Awen.
The language of twenty letters is in Awen--Taliesin.


69:1 ,.. Le. in writing.


GOGYRVENS.--WRITING WITH INK.


Before the time of Belief and Baptism a letter was called
gogyrven (from corf ;); and its right name is still gogyrven on the
Coelbren--others call it cyrven. The old men--the primitive
teachers--inserted in vocal song the number of the rays of every
cyrven, and thus kept the memory and knowledge of them.


After plagawd had been obtained, that is, the dressed skins of
animals, writing with black, or ink, came into use; and thence
was introduced the practice of writing with ink on the Coelbren
and its staves, instead of cutting cyrvens, which is still seen in
places that are not visited, and are not much known. And thus
were memorials and computation kept on wood and boards, and
on stones, where it was possible to get them.


GOGYRVENS.


The three primary gogyrvens are /| A.
GOGYRVENS.


There were sixteen gogyrvens before the faith in Christ; after
that eighteen, then twenty.


GOGYRVENS.


Talhaiarn appointed twenty gogyrvens.


Footnotes


Oy


9:2 A bod


y.


THE THREE FIRST WORDS OF THE CYMRAEG.


Sulw


Sul ; The Sun,


Bardism.
p70 p: 71


The three first words of the Cymraeg: the Name of God, that is O
I U; the name of the Sun, perception, and sensation, that, is
SULW; and Bo, others say, BYW.


The Name of God is a substantive verb; the sun is a substantive
noun; and sulw is a substantive adjective--which was clear before
the perfect Cymraeg was lost.


THE PRIMARY LETTERS.--NAMES OF THE COELBRENS.


Here are the primaries,--


ANV<SrANeIKWUORNMY S


which were fifteen. After that A was made, and therewith
\
<m 2^ NA TA KA [” i^ . After that V and y


and then the letters were eighteen, thus,


Nvb<reXNGHIKWUORE
ae ye


being eighteen. After that, twenty; thus,--


A bVELONRGCRH


IRWMA9OR
MVTXVY


being twenty.


And thus the Coelbren continued until the time when the Latin
was lost in the country, so that only book students and scholars
knew it. Then, with the view of shortening the work on wood,
and of softening the Cymraeg, secondary letters were invented,
such as are now in the Coelbren of the Bards.


The ancient extraordinary character of the Coelbren of the Bards,
or mystic letters, which, it is said, were the first Known, was
thus,--


WAA AŴ M 4A I^ AU AK WW
WW KW XX. XX


Another,


od > » hGH 9 RRM
KTR DS &
and so with as many as one likes. Wherefore it is said, that with


one letter, by modifying it as occasion required, the Bards of the
Isle of Britain wrote whatever they liked in secret and mystery.


From what has been exhibited are seen the modes of the
Coelbrens, as they have been in various ages and times; they
have also borne the names of those who taught them; thus,


1. The old Coelbren, called also the primitive Coelbren, which
was known to the Cymry before strange nations arrived in the
island of Britain.


2. The Coelbren of eighteen, which is called the Coelbren of
Taliesin, or the one of Talhaiarn.


3. The Coelbren of twenty, which is called that of Ithel the
Tawny. :


4. The Coelbren of twenty-four, which is called that of Howel the
Good.


5. The Long Coelbren, which is of three or four ways and modes.


6. The Coelbren of Ystudvach; 2 and the Coelbren of Iorwerth the
Gray-haired, : &c.


7. The Coelbren of the Monks, after divers modes.


Footnotes


73:1 ,» This could hardly have been the same as Ithel the Tawny,
son of Llywelyn of the Golden Torque, in the middle of the 12th
century. The number of his alphabet, being less than that of
Howel the Good, who died A.D. 948, would reguire that he
should have flourished before the latter date.


73:2 Ystudvach was a Bard who flourished in the early part of the
fifth century.


73:3 ,» Iorwerth Vynglwyd, or the Gray-haired, was an eminent
Poet, who was a disciple of the Glamorgan Gorsedd in 1460, and
presided there in 1500.


CLASSIFICATION OF THE LETTERS.


A^RLTbBAFZh VJI&A4 ?


& Db cu. et mn het kL We m nm e
tae ee AMAT 2
> fm & Rh w w. x;

n BL A lp EXX $


b 7 sg
$ RR YTV W XY 2
The above Alphabets are from Llywelyn Sion. :


NBCDEFUGZIVEP X SFR Y
fVWXxXYYZ. HNVUWY


mn. w. u. W.


p.74 p.75


Abcedilros; so were called the ten primary letters, because they
are put in one word of four syllables, being arranged according
to the word, thus,


A.B.C.E.D.I.L.R.O.S.


After that M and N were invented, and thence there were twelve
letters, which were called Mabcednilros, the letters being thus
arranged--


M.A.B.C.E.D.N.I.L.R.O.S.


making twelve letters. After that four other letters were devised,
namely, G. T. P. F. And then there was a new arrangement of the
letters; all that were partially co-vocal being placed next to each


other, as if of one family in respect of sound. That is to say, firstly,
the simple ones, namely,


AE-L.O:
Then the labials, namely, M. B. P. F.
Then the dentals, namely, D. T. N.
Then the palatals, G. C.


Then the non congeners, namely, L. R. S.


And thus were they arranged,--
A.E.L.O.B.M.P.F.D.T.N.G.C.L.R.S.


and were called after their primitive name Abcedilros, though
the authentic letters might, in respect of kind and number, be
more than what are found in the special word.


After that, two other letters were devised, namely V or LH. and
A or H , then there were eighteen letters. After that, two
others, which made twenty, namely, K and N After that, four


other letters, namely, > V. Y. : which were arranged on the
Coelbren according to their families in respect of sound and
vocalness, and mutual relation. After that secondary letters were


devised, which are y2 “mL. IT. AP, &c., as far as thirty-eight.
Still their old


p.77


designation is retained, which is, Abcedilros. An old Book calls
them, Abcednilroswm.


Footnotes


73:* ,» This statement is made by the copyist, Iolo Morganwg.


75:1 .» A letter, probably either Z or V, ought to be supplied
here, in order to make up the number four, if that, and not three,
was really intended.


THE BARDIC SECRET.--FORMATION OF LETTERS.


It is very remarkable that the Druidical secrets consisted in the
use of the letters Iw or Ôl l;. anciently /\\, of the twelve
letters ., [ \I/-L < > A hd r iN Wor thus ANIA A.
E. I. O, and where W was made, it was cut fully across the


Coelbren; or thus, / \ ly /. which were five vowels. With them in
the second age there were seven strongly vocal letters, namely


L < > r Y KH or A. Instead of M there were two l>


together, as Wy, and instead of P, L upside down, thus f. and
instead of Mh, two Is, thus, N; and instead of F, N, and an
aspirate thus M, and subsequently, thus F; and instead of W,
/ fully across, thus, / And / \ LY, A. E. I. O; and then
rhs A. E. I. O. W. Some persons maintain that there were
only three vowels from the beginning, namely, /INX. O. I. W; after
that, AI / V. in other books, /\ and | making N E:


Footnotes


77:* This English sentence is evidently Iolo Morganwg's own
observation.


THE VOWELS.
There are eight vowels or sounds,


A. E. I. O. U. W. Y. Y, (wy,) so called because it is the mutate of W.


p.78 p.79


ANI 9UW? Y U,
ÂN N | OU V â Y. and after that, thus,
A NI V WwW Y ¥, which continued mostly


in use by the Bards and Teachers, until the time of Addav, son of
Davydd, of Gilvai, called in some books Adam Davi, : who
introduced five long vowels into the Abcedilros, namely,


AAIOW Z. and, asserting that there was no occasion for


U, he abolished it, and appointed twelve vowels. Nevertheless,
it was not that Addav who devised these five, for they had been
long retained in memory, even for upwards of three hundred
years; but they had no authority of Chair and Gorsedd. It was
this authoritative privilege that was bestowed upon them in the
time of the said Addav, who also restored to memory much of
the primitive learning. His books were warranted by the
authority of ancient memorial and art.


Thus, according to others,


AEIS U W Y which is called the New Coelbren.


THE PRIMARY LETTERS.


Sixteen principal letters have been from the beginning; namely,


ANI O-b (others say, bM W (or W, ^R (or N)
< © TT» V iN Y AF Ss,


And in respect of others, letters were doubled, trebled, or
quadrupled; as man, ei mman, maan, maab, gwen, gween, rhen,
byr, myyr, llyyr, tor, moor, crwn, crwwn,


p. 80 p. 81


baad, ei bbaad, dyydd, ei ddydd, fy 2222 22 dddydd, &c.
(Llywelyn Sion.)


Whence the doubling of d and dd, and I and ll, still retained. NN
n for d; M1 m for b.


Variations.


A for AN U for y or X. << for K.. HH for Ww... N* for R.


aey ZZ. NN tor P..R for M$ tor VW for V.. A
for F^.


Av secretary, whence I-- WA secretary from W..


These are the ten principal letters, which Einigan the Giant
made,


A.P,CG.E. I. L.L R, O, 5,4


That is to say, they are the ten powers of sound produced by the
ten organs of speech. Others call them the ten organs of speech;
and so also are the ten principal letters named.


Footnotes


79:1 ,» Adam Davie, an old English Minstrel or Poet floruit Anno
1312.--Percy's Essay, p. 101. He was probably the same as Addav
Eurych, who was also called Addav ap Davydd, and wrote in
English as well as in Welsh. His son, ,.» Gruffydd ap Addaf ap
Davydd, was the friend of Davydd ap Gwilym; and was murdered
at Dolgelley.


81:* These English observations are, no doubt, those of the
copyist, Iolo Morganwg.


81:1 We have placed the vowels E and O in the positions which
they ought to occupy so as to form the word Apcetilros.


VARIATIONS OF LETTERS.


A turned on its side, with its base to the right, A. stood for E;
when turned thus, VY, it stood for V, which being doubled thus,


>. stood for O; and from 1 were produced vd and X. And
in this way the letters were varied from nine to twelve, and
sixteen, and eighteen, and twenty, and twenty-four; and from
thence to thirty-eight letters, that is to say, forty save two.


THE SIXTEEN PRIMARY SYMBOLS.


-*b, ^A MAP < > —~«


p.82 p.83


INTRODUCTION OF LETTERS.--ORIGINAL COUNTRY OF
THE CYMRY.--THEIR ARRIVAL IN BRITAIN.--
AUGMENTATION OF THE ALPHABET.


At length here is an account of symbols and speech, namely,
letters and signs, according to their preservation by means of
the memory, voice, and usages of the Chair and Gorsedd of the
Bards of Glamorgan and Gwent in Tir Iarll, : and previously at
Caerleon-upon-Usk, since the first arrival of the Cymry in this
island. They say that three privileged arts were introduced by the
Cymry tinder the protection and guidance of Hu the Mighty > into
this island; namely, Bardism, Literature, and Agriculture; that is,
they were brought from Asia, as it is now called. Deffrobani, ;
however, or the Summer Country, was the first name of the
primitive country of the nation of the Cymry, in which country
were large and rich kingdoms without number. An usurping
nation drove the Cymry out of their country into countries where
for upwards of two hundred years they were roving from land to
land under the oppression of devastative and predatory nations,
until at last they landed in Scandinavia and the highlands of Italy,
and the region of Gaul. It was from Scandinavia that they first
came into the island [of Britain,] having landed at the river
Humber. . After that other clans of Cymry came from the land of
Gaul into this island, landing at the fords of Pwyth Meinlas, s but
the usurping nation of the Coranians « drove


p. 84


them to the South, whilst the Irish Picts drove the Cymry of the
land of Deivr and Bernicia, who were derived from the Cymry of
Scandinavia, to Venedotia; after that, the Irish of Ireland
oppressed them in Mona and Arvon. Ten from the beginning was
the number of the symbols of the Coelbren, and they were called
Abcedilroes and Abcedilros, as they are called at present, that is,


AV<N>INR MOK ang MA BOK «INN 1.


Subsequently, in the time of Prydain [son of ] Aedd the Great,
others were added until they were sixteen symbols, and they
continued of that number until the coming of Christ in the flesh;
then eighteen, and after that twenty, or, as others say, twenty-
one symbols primarily as at present, whilst others were invented
as auxiliaries, in number as far as thirty-eight.


Footnotes


83:1 ,.» "Cai Hir, nephew of the emperor Arthur, lord of the Comot
of Maes Mawr in Glamorgan, was the first who appointed a Chair
of Vocal Song in Tir Iarll, which was anciently called the Comot of
Maes Mawr, whither it had been re-moved from Caerleon upon
Usk, on account of the surrounding incursions of the Saxons. It
was still called there the Chair of Caerleon. In the time of the
contests between Rhys, son of Tewdwr, and Iestyn, son of
Gwrgant, the Chair was disturbed, until the time of William, earl
of Gloucester, who renewed it in Tir Iarll, (the earl's land,) for
such, after his appellation, was the new name bestowed upon
the Comot of Maes Mawr, and gave privilege and license to
Bards."--Anthony Powell.


83:2 Geraint, the Blue Bard, has recorded a tradition respecting
some of the services which Hu the Mighty showed to the Cymry,


preparatory to their journey from Deffrobani:--


Goruc Hugadarn gymmhrain
Ar Gymry Ynys Prydain
I ddyffryd o ddeffro Bain.


The achievement of Hu the Mighty, was forming social order
For the Cymry of the Isle of Britain,
To stream out of Deffrobani.--Iolo MSS. pp. 262, 669.


83:3 ,. Probably Taprobane, the island of Ceylon, is meant;
celebrated as having been the residence of Adam. The Historical
Triads, however, identify "the summer country" with that "in
which Constantinople now is." (Tr. 4. 56; Third Series.)


83:4 "They came across the Hazy Sea to the island of Britain and
Armorica where they remained." (Tr. 4; Third Series.)


3:5 Anglice "the narrow green point," where also the Romans
are said to have landed under Julius Caesar. (Tr. 22; Second
Series.)


83:6 The Coranians are described as the first of "the three
usurping hordes that came into the Isle of Britain, and went not
out of it," (Tr. 7; Third Series;) and as having in course of time
"coalesced with the Romans until they became one people," and
ultimately with the Saxons, "against the Cymry." (Tr. 15; ib.) They
were evidently the same as the Coritani.


COELBREN OF THE BARDS, ACCORDING TO THE
ARRANGEMENT OF LLAWDDEN. ;


A A > Dd N Ll
^A A € E M M
L B € E N N
A Vv K F © o
Hin M “. > O
< C R^ $ Ng FO FPF
&K cn H H N Ph
M Xx Ngh | I NI Mh
> |D KL ^ R
K Rh KS Nh y Y
; S FV 8 Y Y
A» T lw w
AM Th Y YF


Some have substituted


E and b for |, te for TM, also “ty, as
K for < ei BAD in case of
K] for K a daughter

< for ¥ V for y

H for Ah, also Hand H.y for >

r11 for W D for , where vf is
r1 for N or M radical, asif one should
2 and A for |M say ei “T> A\ D in case
R for / of a son

WW for V A. for N

UJ for A VW T for «t>

f< and € for R MN for R

% for l>


But the best of all is the old Coelbren, as Gwilym Tew: has


arranged it in his Book of Vocal Song, and the easiest to cut, and
of least labour.


Some have placed “ without V, but that is an error, for “A
has the weight of < H, and no more; therefore it ought to be


QVANT, and not AANT


p. 88 p. 89


Here are other modifications of the Coelbren, which I have seen
with Meurig Davydd. : ;


XEe< ?2XCHI NmMzX€PP^5^GUWYyY
ab<bPb<F€&ErIRNHHOPR:T V VY


Footnotes


85:1 ,.» Llawdden, or Ieuan Llawdden, was a very eminent Poet,
who flourished from about 1440 to 1480. He was at one time
Rector of Machynlleth, but in his old age he retired to the place
of his nativity, the Vale of Llychwr, where he died, and was buried
in the Churchyard of Llandeilo Talybont. His elegy ;.s was written
by his contemporary, Iorwerth Vynglwyd, from which we learn
that he obtained the highest bardic honours.


87:1 ,.ss Gwilym Tew was a Poet who flourished from 1430 to
1470, and who presided at the Glamorgan Gorsedd in 1460.


89:* , ss Taliesin Williams says that this observation is Llywelyn
Sion's.


89:1 An eminent Poet of Glamorgan, who presided in the
Gorsedd Morganwg in the year 1560, and died in 1600. Llywelyn
Sion in the early part of his life was well acguainted with him.


THE SYMBOLS OF LITERARY SCIENCES.--IMPROVEMENT
OF THE COELBREN.--METRICAL CANONS.--
DISSOLUTION OF THE MONASTERY OF PEN RHYS.


There are three series of symbols of literary sciences: the
symbols of Coelbren; 2 the symbols of music; ; and the symbols of
number.


The symbols of Coelbren are the most ancient of all, and were
known to the Gwyddoniaid from their first arrival in the island of
Britain. The primaries were ten, and were under the secret of the
Bards. After that, ten others were added, and the form and
appearance of each of the sixteen were totally altered from
those of the ten primaries, so that the secret could not be
known. The sixteen were divulged in the time of Dyvnwal
Moelmud; and in the time of Beli the Great, son of Manogan,
they were included in the domestic instruction and sciences, and
came under the office and art of the domestic teacher, who was
a Chaired Bard, that is to say, a Druid; for the domestic Bards
were called Druids in the early times of the occupation of the
island of Britain; it being incumbent upon the nation of the
Cymry to keep up the sciences of symbol and literature. In the
time of Arthur the symbols of Coelbren were eighteen notches in
number; and in the time of Geraint, the Blue Bard, twenty; nor
are there more than twenty of the primaries. After that, mixed
symbols were devised; that is to say, by means of a notch was
made the sign of sighing or breathing; and these were improved
from time to time until the time of Ieuan, son of the Dewless, «
the time when Robert, earl of Gloucester, was prince of
Glamorgan; and


p.90 p.91


from thence to the time of the last Clare but one, prince of
Glamorgan. It was the monks of Pen Rhys in the vale of Rhondde
that arranged them as they are at present, when Gwilym, son of
Howel the Savage, called Gwilym Tew, bore the Chair of vocal
song there in right of the primary Bards of the nation of the
ancient Cymry. No other improvement of the symbols of
Coelbren ever took place, nor did what was done there obtain
the efficient judgment of active Chairs, as far as the third, or, if it
might be obtained, as far as the ninth, but where nine cannot be
had, as far as the seventh, and if seven cannot be had, as far as
the fifth, and where five cannot be had, as far as the third, and
when there are not three, as far as the one that there is; for
individuals ought to be unegual in number in order to have the
judgment of a majority, that is, the number that is above half,
which cannot be the case, of irrevocable fixedness, but where
individuals are of unegual number, when they are divided into
two parts. Others of the ancient teachers say that a majority may
be obtained where the individuals are of egual numbers, by
conferring it as a privilege upon the first of the two halves that is
counted, under the condition of giving and taking the same as a
claim, before it is put to the verdict, and not otherwise. And it is
in this manner that the judgment of Chairs has been had upon
the number of the cut symbols of Coelbren,--that is, no
judgment as far as the efficiency of nine active Chairs, has been
obtained upon the last improvement of the cut symbols, and
their number; nevertheless, the improvement has the privilege
of time beyond the memory of the ninth generation, and it
cannot be opposed. About the same time, namely, the time
when Owain Glyndwr was opposing the king of London, that is,
in the time of King Henry the Fifth, there was an Eisteddvod


Chair in the monastery of Pen Rhys, where the canons of the
metres of vocal song were settled, among which that of Gwilym
Tew was adjudged the best, namely, the Ode which he
composed to Mary of Pen Rhys. : After that he improved the
number and arrangement


p.92 p.93


of the metres and consonancies. It was in it (the Ode) that, by
privilege of Chair, parallel rhymes were first used. That Ode was
exhibited in the first Eisteddvod Chair of Caermarthen, under the
patronage of Gruffydd, son of Nicholas, : and under the privilege
of leave and license from Saint Henry the King, of Windsor, that
is the fourth of the name; and it continued under the privilege of
Chair and Country until the time of the second Eisteddvod there,
where the canon of Davydd, son of Edmund, : was pronounced
the best, in the time of Henry, the fifth of the name. When the
year of Christ was one thousand, four hundred, and fourteen,
the monastery of Pen Rhys was dispossessed, and its property
sold, because it sided with Owain Glyndwr.


Footnotes


89:2 ,.ss Al. "voice."


Oo


9:3 Al. "harmony."


89:4 He was living somewhere from 1160 to 1180. See a brief
notice of him in Iolo MSS. p. 88.


91:1 ,.e This Ode is printed in "Cyfrinach Beirdd Ynys Prydain," p.
213.


93:1 ,» Gruffydd, son of Nicholas, was illustrious for his power,
riches, and family, was a great patron of the Bards, and
extremely popular throughout the principality. He latterly joined
the Yorkists, in whose cause he fought, and was fatally wounded
at the battle of Mortimer's Cross, in 1461.


93:2 Davydd, son of Edmund, was a native of Hanmer, in
Flintshire, and is celebrated as the reformer of Welsh Prosody,
having compiled the twenty-four ;. new canons of poetry, which
are still adopted by the Bards of North Wales, though they have
been protested against by those of Gwent and Morganwg as
innovations.


THE PILLARS OF MEMORY.--THE SYMBOLS.


The three pillars of memory and history: vocal song; letter; and
symbol. A symbol is a form that is understood, and, being
understood, shews at sight that that really exists which would
reguire many letters, or much of vocal song, or speech and
oration, before it could be properly understood.


There are three symbols: the symbol of number; the symbol of
sound or tone, from which is justly shown the voice and tone of
harmony; and the symbol of hieroglyphics, which is the form and
sign that is understood by its formation; and the blazonry of the
arms of nobility, and the arms of nation. The man who knows
this art, and will show it authoritatively, is called a herald-bard,
and his office and art is to represent history in hieroglyphics,
even as the times of the moon are shewn by its visible
delineations, and the number of year, month, and day.


p.94 p.95


THE BIRDS OF RHIANON .


The Birds of Rhianon sang until the Angels of heaven came to
listen to them; and it was from their songs that were first
obtained vocal song and instrumental music; vocal song being
that which is sung by the lips to melody and harp.


Evan Evans.


THE FIVE AGES OF LETTERS.


The five Ages of Letters. The first was the age of the three letters,
which above all represented the Name of God and goodness,
and which were a sign of goodness and truth, and
understanding and equity, of whatsoever kind they might be.
Other things were exhibited under the sign of blazonry in
respect of the art of a herald-bard. This is the mode in which they
numbered ten according to the three letters, namely,


/WN/ZNA, > being put for ten, and after that < for the
second tenth, that is, a hundred, and ¢ for the third tenth, that
is, a thousand, and b for the fourth tenth, that is, a myriad, and
for a million DD and for buna XD, and so on to three «, or
four or more. According to this arrangement / stood for A, that
is, the first letter, A for B, that is, the second, V the third, MA,
the fourth, V, A, VY, VM, IW and db. the tenth letter, Db,
y the twelfth. This is the first age.


In the second age sixteen letters were arranged, whence
literature became more clear. After that, In the third age there
were eighteen letters, for the improvement of literature; that is,


A was put for the second


sound of B; and then the three letters of God's Name were made


into > | M. and the eighteenth letter was ‘ay or, according to


another form, Hl.


In the fourth age there were twenty-four letters; and the Name
of God, according to the arrangement of the third age, was a
secret.


The fifth age was, as it is now, that is, there were thirty-eight
letters; and the Name of God, according to the arrangement of
the third age, was kept a secret.


Footnotes


95:1 ,. "Rhiaint was a name given to the sixteen letters, and in
the Ancient Secret the Birds of Rhianon:--one letter was called
Rhïan, plur. Rhieinau."--Iolo Morganwg, who refers to Llywelyn
Sion.


Hwn a bryn win o'r gwinwydd
Hon fal Rhianon ai rhydd. ;.s


He will buy wine from the vines,
She like Rhianon will give it.
Sion Brwynog, to Rhydderch ap Rhys
of Tregaian and his wife.


THE THREE SYMBOLS OF SCIENCES.


There have been three symbols of sciences in use by the nation
of the Cymry from the beginning.


The symbol of word and speech, that is to say, a letter, ten fold,
sixteen fold, twenty fold, and twenty-four fold.


The first of the three, in respect of privilege and origin, is the
symbol of word and speech, that is to say, a letter.


The second, the symbol of harmony, that is to say, tone and
music.


The third, the symbol of number, which is thus,--


ANIO9V>XV<>x
12345678910


That is to say, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine,
ten, one-ten and one, one-ten and two, one-ten and three, one-
ten and four, one-ten and five, one-ten and six, one-ten and
seven, one-ten and eight, one-ten and nine, two-tens; and as
before to three-tens, four-tens, five-tens, six-tens, seven-tens,
eight-tens, nine-tens, a hundred; and to a thousand; and from
thence to ceugant. It is a secret kept from the beginning by the
voice of the Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of Britain; and it was
first appointed as a special art in the sciences of wisdom by
Tydain, father of Awen, who also arranged the symbols of the art
of musical


p.98 p.99


harmony, in respect of voice, string, and bellows, as is exhibited
in the memorials of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. (From the
Second Book of the Secret of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and
from the Yniales. ;)


Let the following be added to the above system of symbols; X, 2
X,3X,4X,5 X,6 X,7 X, 8 X, o X, <, or XX; but some put
o> for a hundred, and XO for a thousand.


Footnotes


99:1 ,..s "The Yniales. That book, the work of Hopkin ap Thomas
of Glyn Tawy, contained various matters, memorials, and
sciences appertaining to things advantageous to be known. He
lived in Ynys Tawy, and made the Gwernllwyn Chwith. Llywelyn
the Red, son of Meurig the Aged, sang his praise."--MS.


In a poem addressed to Hopkin ap Thomas by Davydd y Coed,
who flourished 1300--1350, mention is made of the Yniales as
being in the former's possession.


"eece- mae yn ei lys
Eur ddar y Lucidarius
A'r Great ar Yniales."


Mannan There are in his court,
The golden oak, Elucidarius,
And the Great and Yniales."--Myv. Arch. vol. i. p. 494.


THE THREE PRIMITIVE SYMBOLS.--THE THREE
COELBREN SYMBOLS.


Here is the system of Symbols.


There have been three symbols remembered and preserved
from the beginning by the Bards and Sages of the nation of the
Cymry; namely,


1. The symbol of word > and speech, that is, letter. It is from the
symbols that a visible word is formed, and from the words a
visible language, and visible vocality.


2. The symbol of harmony and tone, that is, the signs of the
sound and utterance of vocal song, and instrumental ; song.


3. The symbol of number and weight.


The symbols of number are exhibited under the signs of the ten
vocal characters of word and speech, that is, the ten characters
of the primitive letters, which are kept secret by the Bards of the
nation of the Cymry under the obligation of a vow, and may not
be divulged to other than a Bard under the sworn vow of life and
death. Nevertheless, for the purpose of instructing the common
people, the sworn ten characters are not the means, but the trite
signs of number, such as are in the memory and knowledge of a


p.100 p.101


civilized country and nation, and in unison with the sense of
civilization, and the three foundations of the sciences of
learning, and the three signs of a civilized and scholastic nation.


Here is a description of the symbols, as they are exhibited under
the trite signs of number in use by the civilized nations of Belief
and Baptism.


1 one, 2 two, 3 three, 4 four, 5 five, 6 six, 7 seven, 8 eight, 9 nine,
O ten, and placing before the 0 the number which it has, thus, 10
one-ten, 20 two-tens, 30 three-tens, 40 four-tens, 50 five-tens, 60
six-tens, 70 seven-tens, 80 eight-tens, 90 nine-tens, 100 hundred.
11 one-ten and one, or ten and one, 12 one-ten and two, or ten
and two, 13 one-ten and three, or ten and three, 14 one-ten and
four, or ten and four, 15 one-ten and five, or ten and five, 16 one-
ten and six, or ten and six, 17 one-ten and seven, or ten and
seven, 18 one-ten and eight, or ten and eight, 19 one-ten and
nine, or ten and nine, 20 two-tens, 30 three-tens, 40 four-tens--
and one, or two, and two-tens, &c., one being added for every
other plurality of tens as far as a hundred; 101 a hundred and
one,--a hundred and two, &c., or one and a hundred, two and a
hundred, &c., and so for every additional hundred; 101 a
hundred and one, 120 a hundred and two-tens, 125 a hundred
and two-tens and five, &c., and so for every additional hundred
as far as a thousand; and so for every additional thousand as far
as a myriad, and for every additional myriad as far as a million,
and for every additional million; and so on, in the same manner,
as far as buna or mwnda; and on as far as cattyrva; : and on as
far as rhiallu; 2 and from rhiallu to manred; ; and from manred


p.102 p.103


to cyvanred; : and from cyvanred to ceugant, 2 which God only
knows.


From the "Brith Cyvarwydd," compiled by Anthony Powell of
Llwydarth in Tir Iarll, about 1580.


In the Book of Llywelyn Sion thus;--


There are three series of Coelbren symbols, namely, the symbols
of language and speech, being twenty-four symbols; the
symbols of music and harmony, of which there are seven,
namely, a, b, c, d, e, f, g; and they are called the symbols of tone,
and the tones of music; and the five symbols of time, namely,


Mu # Hf, which signify the times of the tones. Where
bare tones are exhibited, the times are put over them, but where
Staves are used, that is, the four staves of music, the times are
represented on the staves and intervening spaces.


Footnotes


99:2 Al. "of language."


99:3 Lit. "stringed."


101:1 5.10: Cattyrva (cad-tyrva) means literally, the crowd of battle.


101:2 Rhiallu, (rhi-allu,) the power of a sovereign; army of a
country.


101:3 Manred, (man-rhed,) the elementary particles of creation.


103:1 , » Cyvanred, (cyd-man-rhed,) an aggregate of the
elementary particles of creation.


103:2 Ceugant (cau-cant,) an enclosing circle, being the term
used by the Bards to denote the infinite space which God alone
traverses.


As these several terms were borrowed to represent particular
figures in the Numeration Table of the Bards, it would seem that
at first they respectively presented to the Bardic eye definite
ideas of numbers, such indeed as those which ;.: were
afterwards attached to them. This view is supported by the fact
that the Romans considered their caterva as composed of a
definite number of men, namely, six thousand.


NUMBERS.
Why do arrangements reguire numbers?


To facilitate the memory, for where there is number, there is
knowledge, but without number and weight and measure, there
can be no knowledge of anything, therefore number is one of
the three foundations of knowledge. That which is laid down in
the system of numbers will be remembered, whatever number it
may be; and every one of such numbers will be divided and re-
arranged, for the regulation of the memory, because it is from
order that the memorials of things and sciences are formed;
wherefore it is said "there is no memory but order"--also "there
is no order but system"--"there is no system but number, weight,
and measure"--the same being known, fixed by nature, and
confirmed by the judgment of wise men.


What number is the best for any system?


A natural number, where such is known, namely, that which will
convey in itself the whole, in respect of kind and condition, of
what is arranged by that number; and the best will be the least
number, where it will admit of a division. There is no
arrangement without number and its division, and this is called
the primary number, having within it a division, from which
comes an arrangement. But there are united numbers, such as is
three, which has a beginning, a middle, and an end, and the
least, greatest, and intermediate, also one thing, another thing
opposite to it, and a third thing joining them together, as means,
skill, and will, for if there be means, it may be there will be skill,


and if there be means and skill together, they will be of no avail
without what will join them, namely, desire or effectual will, that
will bear upon the other two: the number mostly used for
arrangements is three.


A number, natural in kind, is also four, which may be divided into
two, that is, two halves, and four guarters; six also into three
twos, and nine into three threes, are natural numbers used in
arrangements. Ten is likewise altogether a systematic number,
for it is in ten that the cycle of numbers terminates. Ten tens are
a hundred, : ten hundreds a thousand, ten thousands in the
myriad, ten myriads in the rhiallu, ten rhiallus in the buna, ten
bunas in the cattorva, ten cattorvas in the annant, 2 ten annants
in the trwn; ; and these are called the ten cycles of number.
Those also which may be divided equally are called distributive
numbers, such as four, and eight, and sixteen, and twenty-four;
and twenty-four admits of more divisions than any other
guantity, for it has two twelves, three eights, four sixes, six fours,
eight threes, and twelve twos.


p.106 p.107


Why is the number three used by the Bards of the Isle of Britain
in their lessons of instruction?


Because it is easier to remember three, and because the three
principal conditions form the division of three, that is, one, and
another, and conjunctive; and the easiest to remember is the
best of every learning; and the shortest distribution is three, and
the easiest to remember is the shortest that can be arranged. On
this account the Bards of the Isle of Britain arranged their
learning and wisdom in triads, that those who were
unacguainted with books might easily learn and remember


them, for the number of the illiterate is greater than that of the
literate, and it is to the majority that learning, and wisdom, and
institutional and domestic sciences, in respect of precise
meaning, ought to be imparted.


Footnotes


105:1 , » Wallice, "cant," which literally means a circle. Ceugant
again is the enclosing circle, which comprehends all.


105:2 The elementary principles of sound.
105:3 A throne, a circle.


Ag yn y trwn gwn i trig,
A diobaith ei debig. ,.10:


And in the throne I know he dwells,
And there is no hope of his egual.
Huw ap Dafydd, 1480-1520.


THE NINE DEGREES OF NUMERALS.
(From the Book of Ben Simon.)


One ten times will make ten, ten ten times will make a hundred,
a hundred ten times will make a thousand, a thousand ten times
will make a myriad, a myriad ten times will make a buna, a buna
ten times will make a cattriv. ;


After this the number is according to tens, thus; ten cattrivs, a
hundred cattrivs, a thousand cattrivs, a myriad cattrivs, a buna
cattrivs, cattriv of cattrivs, or cad-gattrivs, a hundred cad-
gattrivs, a thousand cad-gattrivs, a myriad cad-gattrivs, a cattriv
cad-gattrivs; then ten cattriv cad-gattrivs. After that, the nine
circles of the nine degrees, for ever and ever; and at the end of
such a circle, the renovation of all things to the end of the nine
circles of the state of novation, which are called the nine degrees
of heaven. 2 And at the end of every circle a beginning anew.


Footnotes


107:1 , es The number of battle. In al. cattyrva.


Tad nawnef i ti dyn anwyl
Tudur aeth at Tad yr wyl.


The Father of the nine heaven to thee, beloved man,
Tudur has gone to the Father of the feast.
Sion ap Hywel ap Ll. Vychan-1460, 1490.


p. 107


Mae gorph mewn bedd,
Gwyn yn gorwedd;


p. 108


Mae enaid e
'N rhodio 'r gradde.


His fair corpse is lying in the grave,
His soul is perambulating the gradations.
Thos. ap Ieuan ap Rhys, 1600.


p.108 p.109


THE SYSTEM OF NUMERALS.


Here is the system of numerals, that is, the particulars of the art
of Arithmetic, (from the Book of D. Richard, Llandochen.) They
are removed from point to point according to this method, that
is, every one of the points being itself a number, on whatever
point it may be, will make the next to be above it. These are the
names of the points:--One, ten, hundred, thousand, myriad,
million, mwnt, rhiallu, buna, tyrva, catyrva, cadrawd.


That is, ten ones are ten, ten tens are a hundred, ten hundreds
are a thousand, ten hundred thousands are a myriad, a myriad
myriads are a million, a million millions are a mwnt, : a mwnt
mwnts are a rhiallu, a rhiallu rhiallus are a buna, a buna bunas
are a tyrva, > a tyrva tyrvas are a cattyrva, a cattyrva cattyrvas are
a cadrawd, : a cadrawd cadrawds are the number of lives from
Annwn to Gwynwyd, &c. (Llywelyn Sion.)


Footnotes


109:1 , » "Mwnt" is probably of cognate origin with a mons,
mount, mynydd.


109:2 Tyrva, Lat. turba, a multitude, a crowd.


109:3 Cadrawd, (cad-rhawd,) the rage or course of battle; an
army.


ARITHMETIC.


One, five, ten, fifteen, twenty, hundred, thousand, myriad,
million, bunav, myndav, breon, catyrva, gwrmwnt, rhiallu, and
ceugant, which cannot be numbered.


THE SYSTEM OF NUMERALS.

One,
Ten,
A hundred, ten tens,
A thousand, ten hundreds,
A myriad, ten thousands,
Mwnt, ten myriads,
Rhiallu, ten mwnts,
Mwnda, Buna, ten rhiallus,
Cattyrva, ten tyrvas,
Tyrva, ten bunas, or mwnda, to a
Cadrawd, ten cattyrvas.

From the Book of Mr. Cobb of Cardiff.


These are called the ten degrees of Numerals; and it is from
being acguainted with every movement and treatment of the
numerals that every truth in respect of number, measure, and
weight is known.


NUMERALS.


Numeration. Numbers.


BLYS ED 2A >XN 2I >
234 5 678910 11 12 13 14


>V 2Y 2V >R >< >> >>V >>». ms
16 17 18 19 20 91 922


y» 22V >2X >>V >> í^ >>>
24 25 26 27 28


2222 DP D> P>»> B>>> b>>»> 4
40 50 60 70 80 90 100


Another mode according to the numeral letters


Another mode according to the numeral letters


d dd ddd 4444 V<l YI LA OM
100 200 300... 400. 500 600 700 800
Md >d r M or AD

900 1000 1000


Also thus;--


DK DEK DX D««<< DD od
<M


VM «JM >M xX Oo Oo &
5000 100000 10000 a myriad 1000000


Another--


MA x >
5000 + =10000 1000000


THE NUMERALS.


Others--


lama £9799 9 o


THE ARITHMETICAL CHARACTERS OF THE ANCIENT
CYMRY; THAT IS, THE NUMERALS.


Jj One, 6 six,

| two, A seven,

3, three, 8 eight,

4S four, O nine,

¢ five, O ten.
J 1344 6 bf A89 O
J 15 8 Sb A8 9 @

Another mode,--

| 1 2, 4 q 6 4 8 9 © or 10
IL1TSRGBEASYD ES
llês S6N8S9
lc2U5$65^A8P Ô @ ahudred


"G> a hundred; or €ÔX ; also O; also 100.
Of athousand; also OY ; also -& ; also 1000.


p.114 p.115


THE THREE SYMBOLS.


There are three kinds of symbol: the symbol of letter, which the
ancient authors called the symbol of cyrven; the symbol of
number; and the symbol of blazonry, as a coat of arms, which
belongs to the art of a herald-bard.


THE MATERIALS OF LANGUAGE AND SPEECH.


The three materials of language and speech: letter; syllable; and
word.


The three materials of speech: word; sense; and sentence.


There are twenty primitive letters, thirteen of which are called
consonants; and from them seven secondaries are derived; and
seven of the primitives are called vowels, but others call them
scunds.


THE THREE WREATHED BARDS.


The three wreathed Bards of the Isle of Britain: Tydai, ; the Bard
of Huon, 2 who was the first that arranged the mode of dwelling
according to clans for the nation of the Cymry; and Rhuvawn ;
the Bard, who conferred system and privilege upon the co-
aration of a township; and Melgin; . son of Einigan the Giant,
who was the first that made a symbol for language and speech.
And a wreath was given to each around his head, that is, of the
air-growing misletoe. (From various Triads, collected out of
different manuscripts in Glamorgan.)


Footnotes
115:1 , Probably Tydain, the father of Awen. See Note 2, p. 40.


115:2 The same, most likely, as Hu the Mighty, who in the Triads
(57, Third Series) is said to have himself "first collected and
disposed the nation of the Cymry into tribes."


115:3 Mentioned by Edmund Prys in one of his poems See Note
1, p. 34.


115:4 ,:s His name also occurs in the same poem:--
Melchin a Mefin myfyr.


Melgin and contemplative Mevin.


p.116 p.117


COELBREN OF THE BARDS.
The Bardic Coelbren, according to the book of Llywelyn Sion.


The primitive Cymry, and their poets, and book-wise men, were
accustomed to cut letters on wood, because in their time from
the beginning there was no knowledge either of paper or
plagawd, and here is exhibited the manner in which they
constructed their books and the figure of the mode and manner.


The first thing made was the pillwydd, : or the side posts, each
post being in two halves, thus,


That is, there is a number of holes in the post, the halves of the
holes being in either half, and the other halves in the other, so
that when the two halves are put together, there will be a row of
perfect holes in a line from one end to the other, in the middle of
the post, or pill. > There will be also another post of the same


kind and size. After that, other staves, called ebillwydd, ; each of
them thus,--


p.118 p.119


paragraph continuesy At 0ne end and the other let a neck be formed, as is
delineated here, and let a closed and tied pill be placed round
the necks of as many ebillwydd as may be reguired, at both
ends. And thus let them be joined together, pillwydd and
ebillion, : in the form of a hurdle; the ebillion, each one of them,
turning all round by their necks in the pillwydd, or posts. On the
ebillion the letters are cut with an efficient knife, that is, on each
of the four sides of every ebill; and when one side has been read,
the second side is turned upwards, after that the third side, and
after that the fourth side, each side being read as it is turned
upwards.


The corners, along each of the ebillion as far as the necks, must
be trimmed down, that the cutting of a letter on one face may
not become one with, or break into the letters of the other face,
and so with every one of the four faces.


There is another mode of constructing the Coelbren of the
Bards, namely, by making the pillwydd, or the posts, entire,
instead of their being in halves, having a row of holes along the
middle, bored with a fire auger; the ebillion being pivotted at
either end, and placed as to their pivots in the pillwydd. The two
ends of each of the pillwydd likewise should be pivotted, the


pivots passing into the holes of cross pillwydd, or transverse
staves, made after this manner,--


each hole tightly encircling the pivot of the post; and thus are
the whole firmly tied together, and conjoined, in the form of a
hurdle. Bearing in mind the facility of turning and re-turning in
respect of each one of the ebillion, the ends of the ebillion will be
the length of a thumb's joint through the posts, one end being a
turning hilt, the other a place on which to cut the numerical
mark of the ebill. The pivots of the posts will also be of the same
length through the holes of the cross pillwydd, which connect
them together;


p.120 p.121


they will be somewhat necked too, and each neck will be tied
with waxed thread or string, that the pivots of the pillwydd might
not drop out of the hole. The neck should be tied until it be
thicker than the pivot in the hole; and the pivots of each post
should be guite tight in their holes, lest it might drop or shake.
The connecting pillwydd are called tros/athau, : and the pillwydd
also are called cyffon hydlath or hydladd, > their pivots passing
into the transverse posts. Let the place of the string on each of
the pivots of the longitudinal pillwydd be rounded, and let them
be tied against the transverse staves, so that they do not
become loose, or shaky. This mode is firm and steady, and in
that respect better than the one which employs posts in two
halves, though it is not as easy to undo and put together the
frame which is made with an entire pill, as the one with a divided


pill.


There is another method of connecting the longitudinal and
transverse posts, that is, by cutting a semi-notch on each end of
the longitudinal, and the like on each end of the transverse
stave, thus,


the notch in each reaching to the middle of the stick, and putting
the notches of the transverse posts tightly in those of the
longitudinal ones, and tying the conjoined notches across firmly
with a waxed line, or the string of harp or violin. This method is
fair and firm.


Others make ebillion, and make a narrow hole with a fire auger
at each end of the ebillion, and place them by those holes ona
strong line or string; which some people consider the best way
of all, because the ebillion may be rolled up in a bundle, and tied
by the serial line. It is also, done in this way, easiest to carry with
one, because it need not be unfastened in order to be bundled
up. There must be a strong knot at each end of the string, that it
might not slip through the holes of the ebillion, and there ought
to be


p.122 p. 123


sufficient length in the string, that the ebillion might be shifted
and turned so as to be easy to read, and that the string might be
long enough to tie the Peithynen : in one round bundle, where
there is need and occasion. Nevertheless, this is the most
difficult way for reading it, though it is the easiest of all ways for
undoing it and putting it together.


It is easier to undo and re-set that which is framed together by
means of halved pillwydd, than the one which is framed by
means of whole pillwydd; nevertheless it is in-firm and unsteady.


It is more difficult to undo and re-set that which is framed in
entire posts, but that is the strongest, though it is the heaviest to
carry with one; it is also the best when persons write with ink on
wide ebillion.


Some people make use of broad, thin, smooth ebillwydd, and
form letters with ink by means of sguare pencils on the
ebillwydd, having made string holes through them, that the
ebillwydd might run together or apart on the string, as occasion
reguired.


Another usage and mode in respect of wide ebillwydd is to make
them oval at the transverse section,


and to render the margins thin, not leaving the thickness of the
edge more than about the thickness of a noble, or very little
more. This lightens it, but the drawing together is less compact,
because the ebillwydd will not lie firmly one on the other.


p.124 p.125


A few persons make use of ebillwydd of double thickness, that is,
they modify them, so that there may be two thicknesses or two
lines of inscribed letters on every face of the transverse section,
thus,--


and along the middle of every face a groove twice the width of
the letter engraving; or thus,--


which is an excellent, ingenious way, troublesome to make, but
better to read, than the one with the four-sided ebillwydd. And
when the writing is done with ink, and not with a knife, it is not
necessary to groove the middle of the surface of the ebill. Some
have made the ebillwydd, in regard to the transverse section,
thus,--


and more, they say, is the breadth of the sides in this way, and
on that account the letters are longer and larger, without
increasing the weight of the Peithynen. Its superiority is equal to
the trouble bestowed on it.


Some make necks on the ebillwydd that they may be inserted in
side pillwydd, and, besides, they make holes in the ends of the
ebillwydd, that a string may pass through them, for the sake of
facility in carrying. That is, they are carried in a bundle ona
String, instead of in side pillwydd. Let every one know his reason,
and purpose, and awen.


Care must be taken that the pillwydd enclose firmly and wholly
the necks of the ebillwydd, keeping all in a row together.


p.126 p.127


Rhill : is the name given to the quantity of ebillwydd framed
together, most freguently twenty-four, but some put together
twenty-six, others twenty-seven, that is, the three nines. A
Peithynen has as many rhills as are reguired.


The longitudinal section of a pillwydd,--


Ee Ee orthus ^^
The two halved pillwydd are tied firmly with the strings of a violin
or harp, as being the strongest. Some tie them with silk strings,
or silk ribbons. And all books are carried in a bag of green silk.


Another form of book is the Roll, which is made of a round piece
of wood, turned thin in the middle as long as may be required,
having its two ends of the original thickness of the wood, the
length of a thumb's joint, or a thumb's breadth, thus,--


— Y: O
. . .


eS SS SS


with three holes through the thin part, and a string passed
through them, in order to secure the plagawd or paper, which
may be placed to turn round the roll, as many leaves as may be


reguired, or may be necessary; and together with the leaves,
above them, a silk leaf longer than the paper leaves, to fold
round the whole, as a covering for the writing, to keep it clean
and free from damage. This method was discovered and brought
to use after the knowledge of plagawd was obtained; and after
that the knowledge of paper.


Subseguently to the Roll, the books now in use were devised,


in the time of Lles, son of Coel, : the first Baptismal King in the
island of Britain. Nevertheless, the Bards and Poets keep in
memory and use the old observance of books for the
remembrance and preservation of every old art belonging to the
nation of the Cymry, and the knowledge, as far as possible, of
one thing or mode, which cannot be had of another thing or
mode, through inevitable destiny; for no form of good sciences
ought to be lost.


This is the mode, as regards form and aspect, in which the
letters of the Coelbren of the Bards should be cut, that is to say,
they ought to be cut with a sharp-edged knife, and the cutting
should be distinct and ungulate.


Sixteen primitive letters have there been from the beginning--
before the memorial of sciences, and these have been taught
and practised by the old Cymry, who were Poets and Bards, and
other learned men of letters. They are the following,--


UNYS
ANTOLWRRCOPONAISL


After that, others were devised, namely,


VYb,UKDPNAYH


After that, others were devised, and the Coelbren was completed
as far as thirty-eight letters, warranted by the reason and
authority of Gorsedds, and Bards, and learned men, and these
are all of them.


There are twelve vowel letters, namely,


AANAVIOOVVY YY


p. 130 p.131


There are twenty-six consonants, namely, twelve primitives, as
shewn before, and fourteen secondaries.


The primitives are,


P or, according to another mode, b, VY or W,. J or
Pp Rok Go. Poe. >s Wo N.Y,
Y orR, fc S.


The following are the secondaries, namely,


E or 4, b PK «4 SoM. NN, FF
r Hb AN. Y KorH, Q or K.


And thus in a series, according to the ancient art of the system of
letters:


ANANVIO OV V
BWR ReorN P-CK
rN T Mop PU
YorS—hA GQ


Y Fb a
4Y GSok
KUN b—


After the coming of the faith in Christ, the saints and monks
intermixed another Alphabet, different from the Coelbren of the
Bards, which was derived from the Latin; and this is the form and
aspect which it presents,


p. 132 p. 133


and they are twenty-one, or twenty, according to others, by


leaving out 1


And when this was obtained, the old authors used to mix in their
Coelbrens some of one and some of the other of the two
Coelbrens above, which have been exhibited, that is to say, the
Coelbren of the Bards, and the Coelbren of the Monks, as it
seemed best to them, and according to reason and awen.


When the art of plagawd was obtained, writing on trees failed;
nevertheless the Bards and Poets preserved the old art of using
wood; and until lately there was not one in a hundred of the
regular Bards who was not skilled in the Coelbren, and could not
make it with his own hands, as the primitive usage of the Bards
reguired; that is to say,--Three things which a Bard ought to
make with his own hands: his Coelbren; his Roll; and his
Plagawd. Many, besides the Poets, knew the Coelbren until
within the memory of those now living; and many a one, in no
remote times, used to keep their domestic accounts on wood,
cut with a knife.


Footnotes
117:1 ,.e Pillwydd, (pill-gwydd,) wooden sterns.
117:2 Pill = bill = billet.


117:3 Ebillwydd, (ebill-gwydd,) a wooden piercer. Ebill also comes
from pill.


119:1 51.» The plural of ebill.
Ebillion gweddillion gwawd.


Staves of the relics of praise.
D. ab Gwilym.


121:1 5.120 Troslath, (tros-llath,) an over or transverse rod.


121:2 Cyffon, stocks, the plural of cyff, a stock, stem, trunk.
Hydlath, (hydllath,) a longitudinal rod.


123:1 ,»» This was the name applied to the Wooden Book of the
Bards, meaning originally what is plain or clear, an elucidator.
"The term has also been applied to several other things, a
weaver's slay, the cogs of a mill wheel, the rows of human teeth, a
board of wood, a slate, peithynen y ddwyfron, clwyd y ddwyfron,
the breast bone or brisket, &c. Of the several things, and of very
different natures and appearances, the original, whence all
others figuratively or similitudinarily derive their names, must be
the Book, because it is from some part, some appearance, or
property to be found in it that every other derives its name that
has been so called. All the different ideas to be found in the
others separately are united in this. The weaver's slay is similar
in its formation to the billets in the Bard's Book when framed
together. The cogs of a mill wheel resemble strikingly the ends of
those billets that project at each end. The teeth are in similar
rows. The board and slate, before parchment or paper became
known, were used whereon to inscribe, engrave, paint, or cut
letters or literary memorials. The arrangement of the breast
bone or ribs are very similar to the billets in the ;. Book and the
reeds in the slay. But it is in the Book only, and in no other thing,
called peithynen, that all those different ideas can be found or
traced up to their origin. This is of itself a striking proof of the
antiguity of this kind of Book. The probability is at least great
that it was known before the weaver's slay, the cogs of a mill
wheel, the use of a slate or board for inscription, &e., were
known to the Welsh, and these last must have been used before
parchment and paper were introduced by the Romans."--Iolo
Morganwg.


127:1 p.iz "Rhill, (rhi-ill,) a row; a small trench or furrow; a drill."--
Dr. Pughe's Dict. Drill, d-rill, is probably derived or borrowed from
it.


129:1 ,» Lles, son of Coel, was a contemporary of Eleutherius,
bishop of Rome, A.D. 173-189. Lles seems to have been the
Welsh form of Lucius, which was the Latin translation of Lleuver,
one of the original names of the British prince. His other name
was Lleirwg. Geraint, the Blue Bard, has recorded in a triplet the
literary achievement of Lleirwg, thus,


Goruc Lleirwg gwâr unben
Fab Coel fab Cyllin Aren,
Gyfryngeu a Llyfreu Lleu,


The achievement of Lleirwg, the meek chieftain,

The son of Coel, son of Cyllin the Eloguent,

Was the forming of books, and the medium of learning.
Iolo MSS., pp. 263, 671.


COELBREN OF THE BARDS.
Thus says Llywelyn Sion.


After the intestine war of Owain Glyndwr, : the king 2 forbade
paper and plagawd to be brought into Cymru, or to be
manufactured there, in order that it might prevent epistolary
correspondence between a Cymro and a Cymro, and between
the Cymry and the people of a bordering country and of foreign
lands; and this to revenge the siding with Owain, which was
observed every where on the part of every man in Cymru. He
also forbade the Bards and Poets to go their circuits,


p.134 p.135


and to visit the different families officially. Then was
remembered, and brought into use, the ancient custom of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain; namely, the cutting of letters, which
they called the symbols of language and utterance, upon wood
or rods prepared for the purpose, called Coelbren of the Bards--
and thus was it done. They gathered rods of hazel or mountain
ash in the winter, about a cubit in length, and split each into four
parts, that is, the wood was made into four splinters, and kept
them, until by the working of time they became quite dry. Then
they planed them sguare, in respect of breadth and thickness,
and afterwards trimmed down the angles to the tenth part of an
inch, which was done that the cuttings of the letters, that is, the
symbols, which were cut with the knife on one of the four sguare
surfaces, should not visibly encroach upon the next face; and
thus on every one of the four faces. Then they cut the symbols,
according to their character, whether they were those of
language and speech, or of numbers, or other signs of art, such


as the symbols of music, of voice, and string. And after cutting
ten of such bars as were reguired, they prepared four splinters,
two and two, which were called pill, planed them smooth, placed
two of them together side by side across the frame, and marked
the places for ten holes. After that, they cut the holes, that is,
half of each of the ten holes, in one splinter, and the same in the
other; and they did the same with the other two splinters; and
these are called pillwydd. Then they took the symbolized or
lettered bars, and made a neck at each of the two ends of every
bar, all round, the breadth of a finger, along the bar. Then they
placed the lettered sticks by their necks on one of the pillwydd at
one end, and in like manner at the other end; and on that the
other pillwydd at each end, hole for hole. And at both ends of
two pillwydden they made necks, as places for strings to tie
them firmly together at each end of the symbolized sticks. And
when the whole are thus bound tight together, the book that is
constructed in this manner is called Peithynen, because it is
framed; the


p.136 p.137


pillwydd at each end keeping all together, and the ebillion, or
lettered staves, turning freely in the pillwydd, and thus being
easy to read. That is, one face of the chill is read first, according
to the number of its face, then it is turned with the sun, and the
second face is read, and it is turned so for every other face, and
thus from ebill to ebill until the reading is finished. A number
from one to ten being on the turning face of each of the ebillion,
the numbered face is the first that is to be read, and then the
others in the order of their course with the sun.


There are forty sides to the ebillion in every Peithynen; after that,
another Peithynen is formed, until the conclusion of the poem or
narrative. And where more than ten ebillion are reguired, and
less than twenty, as many ebillion as are required are placed
altogether in one entire Peithynen. The reason of assigning ten
as the particular number of succession, is, that ten is the division
point of number, and under the number of decades are all
numbers arranged, until language cannot give them names. Ten
is a perfect circle, and ten within ten, or ten about ten, will be
within and without the circumference, circle within circle, for
ever and ever; therefore the best arrangement of number and
numbers is ten and tens. And it is not possible by any other
method to keep accounts in an orderly manner, in strong places,
so that they may be read and understood, and recited, uniformly
and consistently.


After having, for the reasons shewn, restored to memory and
use the old primitive art of the Cymry in letters and symbols, it
was submitted to the judgment and observation of the Chairs
and Gorsedds of vocal song of Deheubarth and Morganwg, and
the Eisteddvods of Gwynedd and Powys, that they might search
out what had been lost of the sciences of the symbols of the
Bardic Coelbren, and what improvement and extension had been
made in the kind and number of the symbols. Then they
confirmed sixteen characters as general ones from the
beginning, and the additions, which had been made to that
number from time to time until the era


p.138 p.139


of the Blue Bard, : when they were confirmed as twenty-one
primary symbols, in respect of the vocalization of the Cymraeg.


After that, they fixed the number of the common ones at twenty-
four; nor were any more appointed for domestic learning and
sciences; but the Bards had on their secret Coelbren thirty-eight,
of ancient preservation and secret record, which they restored to
use and practice. And it was not understood that more than ten
of them, which were called the ten primitives, ought to be put
under an oath of secrecy; these were put under the forms of
sworn secrecy, whilst the whole thirty eight were left a secret,
but without vow or oath; and from that they became common,
as they are now.


After recovering the knowledge of the Coelbrens, that is, the one
of the Bards and the one of the Monks, nearly every person,
male and female, wished to learn and construct them. From
thence they became the trade of sieve-makers and basket-
makers, and upon them was cut the record of every thing that
reguired the preserved memorial of letter and book. And thus it
was until the time of Henry the Seventh, who, being a Cymro, >
took his countrymen under the protection of his courtesy, and
placed


p.140 p.141


them, at his own expense, under the instruction of the monks,
and furnished them gratuitously with as much paper and
parchment as was reguired; and they were taught whichever
they would of the two languages, Welsh or English, and many
learned both. On that account the knowledge of letters was
more freguent among the common people in Wales than it was
in England; and from hence also there were more than enough
of Poets, whom the abbots placed here and there as scholars,
from which it happens that the Poets are domestic


schoolmasters unto the present day, proceeding on their
appointed circuits from house to house, and from family to
family. The old Coelbrens are freguently to be seen and beheld,
but now a Peithynen is not often made, except for a degree in
Chair, or for the payment of money, or the value of money, from
the person who might order it, according to the need of him
ordering it. There are many now living who remember the use of
the Coelbren of the Bards, and many a Coelbren may still be
seen in the houses of the old noble families.


The account, according to old memorials and letters, and the
memorials of the voice of Gorsedd, which have been preserved
by Chairs from the beginning, is as follows, namely;--


Ten symbolic characters of utterance, in respect of language and
speech, have been in possession of the nation of the Cymry from
the age of ages before they came into the island of Britain, which
were a secret under vow and oath among, the Gwyddoniaid,
these persons being Poets and men of vocal song and sciences
of wisdom before there were regular Bards. It was in the time of
Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, about one thousand five
hundred years before Christ was born in the flesh of the pure
and blessed Mary, and in the time of Aedd the Great, that
regular Bards were instituted, and authorized office and license
assigned to them. After that, the Coelbren of the Gwyddoniaid
was improved, as occasion required for its being understood and
read, until there were sixteen symbols in the Alphabet.


p.142 p.143


[paragraph continues] And it Was in the time of Dyvnwal Moelmud, about SIX
hundred years, by record and computation, before Christ was
born in the flesh, that the sixteen symbols, and their order for


the preservation of language and speech and every memorial of
country and nation, were divulged, because no other method
could be found so good for maintaining the memorials and
sciences of wisdom, and the privileges and usages of the nation
of the Cymry, and its appurtenances. And the ten symbolic
characters are kept to this day as a secret by vow and oath; and
no man, except those who have taken the oath, knows them.
When the sixteen became generally open to all the nation, the
Coelbren was further improved and extended, till it consisted of
eighteen in the time of Beli the Great, son of Manogan; and after
that of twenty; and, in the time of the Blue Bard, of twenty-one,
or, as another record says, of twenty-two; and so many are there
of primitive letters in the Cymraeg, such as are beyond this
number, as far as thirty-eight, being called secondaries.


Footnotes


133:1 ,:» Owain Glyndwr was born A.D. 1349. He began to wage
war against the English king, about A.D. 1400, which was
continued for about fifteen years, when Owain died, i.e. A.D.
1415.


133:2 The Cymric chieftain fought against two king, successively,
namely, against ,. Henry IV. and against Henry V., the latter of
whom succeeded to the throne AD. 1413, two years before the
death of Owain.


139:1 , s About A.D. 900. Geraint was the author of a Cymric
Grammar, which was preserved among the MSS. in Rhaglan
Castle, before it was destroyed in the wars of the
Commonwealth.


139:2 Being the grandson of Owain Tudur, of Penmynydd, in
Anglesey, who had married Catherine of France, the gueen
dowager of Henry V., A.D. 1428. It was in Henry VII. that the
British dynasty was restored, according to the vaticinations of
the Bards; and it is somewhat remarkable that he was also the
rightful heir of Llywelyn, the last independent prince of Wales,
and that conseguently Oueen Victoria reigns over the Principality
by inheritance, and not in right of conguest. This may be seen
from the following table;


LLYWELYN, "Eleanor, daughter of Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester
slain A.p. 1282 |


| | '
Catherine==Philip ap Ivor, Gwenllian, a nun, died at Sempringham
"a Lord of Iscoed Nunnery
= ;
Eleanor,==Thomas ap Llewelyn, heir and representative of the South Wales
sole heiress Princes. This marriage united the royal dynasties of North and
South Wales,


a=!


p. 139


a 4 c


| | |
Margaret==Sir Tudor ap Eleanor==Griffith Vychan, Helen== William de la
Grono, Lord Lord of Glyndwr- Pole, Lord of
of Anglesey dwy Mowddwy


| | |
Meredith ap Tudor-p Margaret, daughter of Sir OwEN GLYNDWR, Prince of
David Vychan, Anglesey Wales, A,p, 1400—1416


|
Owen Tupor==Catherine de Valois, daughter of Charles VI., King of France,
| widow of Henry V., mother of Henry VI.


|
Edmund Tudor,==Lady Margaret Beaufort
of Hadham


|
Henry VII, King of England.


COELBREN OF THE BARDS.
Here is shewn the mode of making the Coelbren of the Bards.


Take small pieces of wood, split into four parts, a cubit in length;
render the four sides fair, and exact, and smooth, their thickness
being about the fourth of an inch, or very little more than that,
and the width and depth being of egual size, that is, about the
length of a barleycorn each way in the thickness of the wood.
When you have prepared them thus far, trim down a little of the
edges or corners of the wood, to the width of the tenth or
twelfth of an inch; so that, when the letters are cut on one of the
sides, they may not appear on any other side, but in the rasped
margin alone. After that, make necks on the staves within the


p.144 p.145


length of two barleycorns of the end, round, and the thickness of
a nail or cabbage leaf, deeper than the surface of the tree; and
trim both ends neatly and smartly, that they may be beautiful to
look at, and easy under the finger to turn. Then the stave will be
ready, which is also called ebill, and in the plural ebillion, and its
appearance will be as here seen;--


Cr HANIO FL]


paragraph coninues ANG ON this stave or ebill the letters are cut with a knife
in small grooves the thickness of a leaf or small straw in depth,
and as wide as a slender stalk of hay. Let every groove be cut fair
and clear in its cutting. And when you have cut on one side, cut
on the next, and so on the four sides; but take care not to cut


deeper than the rasping of the edges. When you have cut on the
four sides, proceed to another stave, and from ebill to ebill, until
you shall have cut the whole of the poem or oration that was
intended. Then take four pieces of wood for the pillwydd, for
these sticks are called pillwydd, and with them make a frame, in
which the lettered ebillion shall be arrayed methodically and
securely. These are the delineations of the pillwydd;--


that is, in each is made a series of small semicircular notches, as
large as half the necks of the ebillion, care being taken that the
notch of one piece of wood is exactly opposite to its fellow in the
other. And when two are finished, they are joined together, and
afterwards the ebillion are inserted by their necks in the
pillwydd, and the two pillwydd are tied round their necks at each
end with a strong thread of silk,


p.146 p.147


or with the small strings of a harp or violin, or with thin brass
wires, or the small sinews of a hind. After this, construct the
other two pillwydd in the same way, and place the ebillion, by
their other necks, in them, tying them as at the other end. Thus
will all the ebillion be strong and orderly, each one exactly in its
place. And if there be occasion, because of the length of the
poem or oration, make another framework, for it does not
accord with convenience that there should be above from
twenty-four to thirty ebillion in the same framework; therefore
make two or three, or as many as may be reguired. When the
framework is completed exactly, it is called Peithynen, and each


of the ebillwydd will turn in it easily, for when one side of the
ebill has been read, it is turned so that the other side may be
read, and so with the four sides. The turning is made with the
sun, or to the right hand. And when one ebill has been read, you
proceed to the next below it, and so from one to the other until
the whole be gone over. It should be remembered that the
trimmed and ornamented end is to be towards the right hand,
so that with it you may turn every one of them easily and
dexterously. Others place the ebillion for the finger's end
alternately, one to the right hand, and the other to the left hand,
every other turn. Let this be as is deemed best by the maker.


A sharp knife is reguired to cut the grooves fairly and clearly,
with a skilful, dexterous hand.


The breadth of either half of the pillwydd will be the length of
two barleycorns, or somewhat less, and the thickness of each the
fourth of an inch; and it is not convenient that there should be
more bulk than what I said in the wood materials, lest they
should be too heavy, and inconvenient to carry and handle.


Care should be taken that every groove be exact in its form, the
perpendiculars of every letter be in a right position, inclining
neither to the one hand nor to the other, and that the obligues
slant correctly, as they ought, according to the form of the letter.


p.148 p.149


On that end of the ebill, which projects through the pillwydd
frame on the left side, is made its numerical groove, and so its
number on every one, that it may be easy to put every ebill in its
proper place, without being obliged to read it, whilst others are
before and after it. These numbers are made in two ways, the


one contains as many grooves as the number of the ebill in the
peithynen, the other is the numeral letter that may be required.


Take care that every letter, in respect of its groove, be of uniform
thickness, otherwise it will be unseemly to the sight.


The best wood wherewith to construct a Peithynen are young
oak saplings, as thick as would leave the ebillion large enough,
after the tree has been split into four parts, and the rind and
epidermis have been completely chipped off from each guarter.
They should be well dried before they are finished and lettered:
the best time to cut the wood is the Feast of St. Mary.


The best wood in respect of the facility of chipping and grooving
is hazel wood, split into four parts, or willow wood, split into four
parts; and they ought to be well dried before they are lettered.
The best of all willows is the yellow willow. The ancient Poets,
however, sought the wood of mountain ash, regarding it as
charmed wood, because worms do not devour or corrupt it, and
because no vain spirit, or wicked fiend, will abide where there is
mountain ash, and because neither charm nor enchantment can
avail against mountain ash, nor injure it, nor him who carries it,
and because no deadly poison can touch them.


This mode in regard to letters is the old mode of the Cymry
before the coming of strangers into the island of Britain. But
when they obtained the knowledge of the faith in Christ, writing
on skin came to be understood in Cymru, as at present; and
when that was known, a Roll was made, on which was placed the
written skin, being folded and tied around the same. This is the
form of the Roll, which is made of any wood you like, though
mountain


p.150 p.151


ash is considered the best, because of the charms attached to
that tree.


It was around the thin part of the Roll, within the ends, that the
lettered skins were put, as many skins as would go round the
Roll, which were folded and tied about it. When paper was
obtained, it was used instead of skins, as at present. The most
convenient of all forms of book and writing is the Roll in respect
of the facility and safety of keeping it; but it is not much used
now, except at the exhibition of Gorsedd and Chair by such as
are reguired to keep a Roll of the system of song, and the
pedigrees and privileges of country.


PEITHYNEN.


The pillwydd will be in two halves each post, so that they may be
opened and closed in order to receive and bind together the
peithwydd, or ebillion. There are two posts, one at each end of
the frame, and in each frame it is usual for the most part to have
twenty-four of the peithwydd, : though there may be any
number reguired. Therefore eighteen or twenty are often seen,
and not seldom thirty. And in the Peithynen as many fastenings
as may be desired, but more than three fastenings are unwieldy.
Some make a Peithynen with one long fastening, having perhaps
forty, fifty, or sixty, or more peithwydd, but where thatis the
case, more than one fastening is not manageable. The
peithwydd ought each to be four sided, with the edges or angles
slightly taken off to the full depth of the letters, so that the
letters of one side may not appear on the edge of the other side,
and so with every side. The width of the sides of the peithwydd
will be as large as the length of a


p.152 p.153


barley corn or wheat corn; if larger, the Peithynen would be
unwieldy and heavy, and would reguire much room in carrying.


Some put the peithwydd in the blue colour in which wool is dyed,
letting them stand there until every one of them is of a blue
colour; and having allowed them to dry, they cut the letters,
which will be white, and clearer on the blue wood, than if it had
not been coloured, the letters being of the same colour as the
wood. Others use black, or green, or red colour, it matters not
much what colour it may be, so that the letters sufficiently differ
from the colour of the wood. The best of all wood for lasting is


oak; the easiest to be worked is hazel, or willow, or alder. Birch is
a good tree, so are the plumb-tree and the hawthorn; the old
Poets formerly were fond of mountain ash; there need be no
better for lasting and working than apple trees, where they may
be had smooth. Boiling the pillwydd and peithwydd in sour lees,
will Keep them from worms, and heating them hot, and
smearing them with beeswax, half roasting them until the wax
penetrates into them from the heat, will Keep them from decay
and rot, whatever tree it may be.


Footnotes


151:1 5.150 Peithwydd, (paith-gwydd,) open or elucidative wood.


COELBREN OF THE BARDS.


Here is shewn the mode of making the Coelbren of the Bards.
Small pieces of wood are taken, split, about a cubit in length, and
sguared, until they are four sided, the width of each side being
less than half an inch, that is, its width will be about the length of
a barley corn. On these sides the letters are cut; but before they
are cut, it is reguisite that the edges should be rasped, in order
that, when the letters are cut on one side, their heads may not
appear as characters on the other sides, except in the rasping.


p.154 p.155


SECRET COELBREN.--SECRET COELVAIN.--COELVAIN OF
HISTORY.


The mysteries of the Bards, that is to say, the secret Coelbrens,
are small ebillion, a finger long, having notches :, so that they
may be used by two persons or more, who are confidants. It is by
placing and joining them together, with reference to what is
secret, that words and phrases are formed; and by bundling
them into words, according to secrecy, missive epistles and
secret books are constructed, the meaning of which no one
knows but confidants; nor is it right, according to usage and
troth, to divulge the same. They are called the Charms of the
Bards, or Bardic Mystery.


Secret Coelvains are similar, made of small stones bearing the
marks of mystery; and it is by disposing them, according to the
arrangement and art of the Secret, that necessary sciences are
demonstrated. And where such Coelbrens exhibit the number of
the letters of the Historical Coelbren, let them be made secret by
changing one letter for another, so that it be not ascertained
except from the necessity and declination of the same letter
twice in the same meaning and power.


The Coelvain of History will be, in respect of the historical letters,
according to their authorized and fixed order; that is, instead of
pillwydd there will be a Peithynen of slate, having on it the
reading, inscribed with a steel spike, or a sharp flint.


Footnotes


155:* ,» The virtue or charm attributed to letters, as here
explained, accounts very clearly for the etymology of rhint, (a
rhin,) a notch.


BURNING THE LETTERS.


It was in the time of Llyr of Defective Speech that the way of
burning the cyrvens with an iron stamp was understood, that is,
there was an iron for every letter, heated red hot, with which
they burnt on an ebill or a board what was reguired; and
sometimes they formed letters on wood with the small prickings
of a hot fork.


p.156 p.157


COELBREN OF SIMPLE LETTERS.


Occasionally the Bards kept Coelbrens of simple letters, that is to
say, one letter on each piece of wood; and by putting them
together, according to the reguirement of word and name, they
mutually communicated one with the other, and understood and
acguainted themselves with each other, without speech, and in
secrecy. Every one of the pieces of wood was four sided, having
six surfaces to each, and a letter on each surface, differently
coloured, so that what was wanted might be obtained at sight
without much searching. The arrangement of twenty-four was
found to be the best for those Coelbrens; and from obtaining
mutual knowledge by means of the said Coelbrens secrets were
ascertained, which caused much astonishment as to how it was
possible.


PALM COELBREN.


The palm Coelbren is that where twenty-four are cut on small
dice, that is, inasmuch as each die has six sides, and a letter on
each side, there will be on the four dice twenty-four letters,
besides what may be obtained otherwise, when the die is
reversed, in order to show a different letter.


Thus, AM N N $kPDYzM and others, being
reversed, will make VVPR PILAR W, &c. that is,


a, â, 6, ê, ng, c, d, y, y, m, turned upside down will make w, ŵ, p,
ff, ngh, d, dd, I, ll, w. By holding some of these in the palm of the
hand, and putting them together in the presence of a man of
secrecy, dumb conversation can be carried on.


PEITHYN . COELBREN.--PALM COELBREN.


The Peithyn Coelbren consists of staves placed regularly
together in a frame.


p.158 p.159


The palm Coelbren consists of small sguares of wood of the
shape and size of dice, each containing a letter, and a small hole,
through which a string is passed. There are as many strings as


there are letters; that is, A^ is lettered on one string, on
another string, and in the same way with every string, each
string having its own letter. And where knowledge is mutually
communicated in secret, one man takes from his string what is
necessary, and the other answers him back in the same manner;
and thus from palm to palm as long as is reguired. This is called
the palm Coelbren, and the palm speech, and the palm alphabet;
and freguently has vocal song been lettered in this way, that is,
the first verse on its own string, the second accordingly, and all
the following verses to the end of the song. And between word
and word, in order that each word might be distinctly evident, a
round piece of wood is inserted. This is called the dumb
Coelbren, and the dumb alphabet; and it is called the imparting
of secrets, for it can be done in sight of all the world, without any
body knowing it, except the privy friends alone.


Footnotes


157:1 ,ss Peithyn, any thing ribbed or cogged, a term applied to
the Wooden Book of the Bards.


PEITHYNVAIN.


Another mode for booking sciences were the Peithynvain, : that
is, they wrote with a steel pencil on both surfaces of the stones,
and then put them on a strong cord, or on an iron or brass rod,
which passed through the top of every Peithynvaen. These
stones were called Coelvain. Another method was that of Howel
the Good, devised by Blegywryd, his Clerk, 2 which was this;--they
faced the hall of the Prince's court with stones, one side and
another of the hall, and on the stones wrote in order, with a
strong pencil, the laws which Howel imposed upon the country
and nation of the Cymry, an open entrance being left for every
man that needed, whatever man he might be, whether a native
or a stranger, to proceed into the hall, and to read the law, or to
have it read to him. Hence it became customary to inscribe


p.160 p.161


a vocal song, a Roll, a poem, the memorial of praiseworthy
deeds, and the narration of wisdom, on Peithynvain, and to place
them on the face of walls and partitions, or on strings, or iron
rods. It was from this also that the practice arose of giving the
name of Coelvain to all sciences, of whatsoever kind they were,
and to whatsoever things that were inscribed thereon.


King Arthur placed the system of the Round Table, and the
praiseworthy deeds of its knights, on plates of brass and tin, in
his three principal courts, namely, Caerleon-upon-Usk, Celliwig, :
and Penrhyn Rhionydd, : written with a steel pencil.


Footnotes


159:1 , Peithynvain is the plural of peithynvaen, (peithyn
maen,) the stone of elucidation.


159:2 He was also Archdeacon of Llandaff. Sec Ancient Laws and
Institutes of Wales, vol. i. p. 343.


161:1 ,:e This is supposed to be the same as Pendennis Castle.
See Hughes's Hore Britanice, vol. ii. append. iii.


161:2 Glasgow.


MEMORIALS.


Before the knowledge of letters was obtained, there was no
other memorial than vocal song, authorized by three Chairs, and
the voice of an efficient Gorsedd. There were three efficient
Gorsedds that preserved memorials, namely, the Gorsedd of
Bards, the Gorsedd of the court of lord and law, and a
conventional Gorsedd of country and nation. And every
memorial was efficient that received the countenance of three
Gorsedds, of one or other of the three Gorsedds of country and
nation; that is, the countenance of the same Gorsedd three
times under the proclamation and notice of a year and a day.


When the knowledge of letters was obtained, the preservation of
Coelbrens, authorized by an efficient Gorsedd, was imposed
upon every Gorsedd whatsoever; and that memorial was called
Cyvarwydd, also Cyvarwyddyd.


After that, a knowledge of Plagawd, namely, letter skin, called
membrane from the Latin, was obtained. Then all the Gorsedds
were required to preserve authorized Rolls, as at present; and,
after that, Rolls and Books of paper. Nevertheless, the best is the
memorial of the Voice of Gorsedd, because no one can know the
usage except in the hearing of country and nation, and there can
be no confirmed


p.162 p.163


knowledge of what is stated by letter and book, because the
memory and recollection of letters cannot have the warranty of
the hearing of country and nation--one, any more than another,
of the Rolls and Books, which do not agree in their records.


PLAGAWD.


Plagawd was a plant of the lilly Kind, which was brought over
from India; and on it they wrote with black, or some other colour.
After that Plagawd of skin was made, being manufactured by art.


THE THREE PRINCIPAL MATERIALS OF KNOWLEDGE.


The three principal materials of Knowledge of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain: wood, that is Coelbren; and Coelvain; which two
existed before the faith in Christ was obtained; and when that
was obtained, Knowledge and understanding was had of the
third, namely Plagawd, that is, the dressed skin of a beast, which
is called parchment. (Grawen. : There are two grawens: one of
wood, the other of a beast.)


Footnotes


163:1 It is not very clear whether this word is the same or not
with crawen, a crust, having here the meaning of rind or skin.


THE HERALD-BARD.


The sciences of a Herald-bard have been lost, except what is
preserved in the art of armory. In primitive times the sciences of
heraldry were honourable, and every innate Cymro bore the
signs of his lineage, his privileges, and his praiseworthy deeds,
and of the praiseworthy deeds of his ancestors; and on that
account the bearing of lineage and gentility was called a coat of
arms. And when Ovatism was appointed, the sciences of Letter,
and the memorial of Coelbren, were improved, and the sciences
of heraldry wore abolished, being sufficiently included in the art
of a Primitive Bard, namely, Vocal Song, the voice of Gorsedd,
and the


p.164 p.165


sciences of Letter, Coelbren, and Coelvaen, and after that, the
Roll of writing. That, namely, the Roll of writing, : was obtained
by those who first introduced the faith in Christ into this island;
that is, it was at that time that the art of elucidating sciences on
plagawd skins, in preserved Rolls, became general in the country
and among the nation of the Cymry.


Footnotes


165:1 ,:e The introduction of the Roll is elsewhere specially
attributed to Bran the Blessed, father of the renowned
Caractacus.


DASGUBELL RODD. ;
Ouestion. What is the Dasgubell Rodd?
Answer. The keys of the primitive Coelbren.
O. What is it that explains the primitive Coelbren? ;
A. The Dasgubell Rodd.
O. What else?
A. The secret of the Dasgubell Rodd.
O. What secret?
A. The secret of the Bards of the Isle of Britain.
O. What will divulge the secret of the Bards of the Isle of Britain?
A. Instruction by a master in virtue of a vow.
O. What kind of vow?


A. A vow made with God.


Footnotes


165:2 ,. "A gift besom;" probably in reference to its employment
of clearing off what hides the bare truth, or of divulging the
secret in which it is couched.


165:3 Before we dismiss the subject of the Coelbren, it may not
be uninteresting to notice a fact which, as far as it goes, clearly
disproves the charge, which would palm upon the late Iolo
Morganwg the invention of the Bardic characters. About six or
seven years ago, during the process of repairing an old house,
called "The Court," at Merthyr Tydvil, a room, which had been
closed for a period of time exceeding the memory of man, was
laid open, and in it were found several pieces of oak furniture, of
decidedly a Tudor character, on one of which, a bedstead, were
engraved, in relief, the letters


Wwe<ek


that is, in modern orthography, M C L. Mr. Thomas Stephens,
author of The Literature of the Cymru, who has examined the
carving, and inquired into the history of the family that owned
the bedstead, has kindly favoured us with the following
remarks,--"As to the age of the letters, they are probably, and to
all appearance, of the same age as the bedstead. Wood carving
in England does not lay claim to any great antiguity. A taste for
carving prevailed during the reigns of the Tudors as well as of
the Stewards; and it seems to me that the bedstead in guestion
may be about 250 years old, or perhaps 300; but certainly not
more. If the true date is ever ascertained, I think it not unlikely
that I shall be found to have overstated its age than otherwise.
This, however, will be of service in determining the age of the
Coelbren to be at least as old as the age of Llywelyn Sion, and in
setting aside all imputations upon the character of Iolo
Morganwg, as a setter forth of an alphabet of his own
invention."


This is a most important admission on the part of one who is in
general extremely sceptical about the traditions of the Bards. Mr.
Stephens proceeds to give some account of the family, thus:--


p. 165


“* Ivor Bach
|
Griffith-r-da. of Sir Gilbert de Clare
|
Rhys
|
u |
Griffith Howel Velyn
taken prisoner in defending Castell
Coch, and starved at Cardiff Cas- Madoc


; Sir Richard de C |
tle, by Sir Richard de Clare Llewelyn


|
Llewelyn Vychan


|
Rhys
|


Tm Phillip
Richert Gwyn

Lewis ab Richard Gwyn, of Merthyr

Riad Lewis, Sheriff of Glamorgan in 1548, 1555, 1559


He lived at Van, near Caerphilly, and was the patron of Meyrig
Dafydd, (See Cyfrinach y Beirdd, pp. 124, 127,) Dafydd Llwyd
Matthew, and other Bards, The family, therefore, was one which
must have been cognizant of Coelbren y Beirdd. Next in descent
was


1. Thomas Lewis, of Van, also Sheriff of Glamorgan in 1569--died
Nov. 2, 1594, 87th of Queen Elizabeth.


p. 166


He had the following brothers and sisters, viz.,--


2. William Lewis
3. Edward Lewis
4. Mary Lewis

5. Elizabeth Lewis
6. Margaret Lewis
7.Jane Lewis

8. Blanch Lewis

9. Cicely Lewis


(paragraph continues) Thomas Lewis married Margaret, daughter of Robert
Gamage of Coyty, and uncle of the Countess of Leicester, the
great Gamage heiress; and as his eldest ;.. son was born in
1560, the marriage probably took place during the Shrievalty of
Sir Edward Lewis in 1559.


We have here the material for the interpretation of M CL. If
these letters are not the initials of any one of the three sisters--
Mary, Margaret, or Cicely Lewis, then they are most probably
those of the bride of Thomas Lewis--Margaret Damage Lewis--C
being used as a radical instead of G. There are two carved
bedsteads at the Court; one far more elaborately carved than the
subject of these remarks. The former was probably the wedding
gift of Sir Edward Lewis to his son; the latter, part of the dowry of


Margaret Gamage. That at all events is my exposition of Ŵ <N


p.168 p.169


Chealagy.


TRIADS OF BARDISM. .


1. There are three primeval Unities, and more than one of each
cannot exist: one God; one truth; and one point of liberty, and
this is where all opposites eguiponderate.


2. Three things proceed from the three primeval Unities: all life;
all goodness; all power.


3. God consists necessarily of three things: the greatest in
respect of life; the greatest in respect of Knowledge; and the
greatest in respect of power; and there can only be one of what
is greatest in any thing.


4. Three things it is impossible God should not be: whatever
perfect goodness ought to be; whatever perfect goodness would
desire to be; and whatever perfect goodness can be.


5. The three witnesses of God in respect of what He has done,
and will do: infinite power; infinite Knowledge; and infinite love;
for there is nothing that these cannot perform, do not know, and
will not bring to pass.


p.170 p.171


6. The three ultimate ends of God's regulation in giving existence
to every thing: to weaken the evil; to strengthen the good; and to


manifest all discrimination, that what ought to be might be
known from what ought not to be.


7. Three things which God cannot but perform: what is most
useful; what is most necessary; and what is most beautiful of all
things.


8. The three stabilities of existence: what cannot be otherwise;
what need not be otherwise; and what cannot be conceived
better; and in these will all things end.


9. Three things will necessarily exist: the supreme power; the
supreme intelligence; and the supreme love of God.


M. The three characteristics of God: complete life; complete
knowledge; and complete power.


11. The three causes of living beings: the love of God in accord
with the most perfect intelligence; the understanding of God
knowing all possible means; and the power of God in accord with
supreme will, love, and intelligence.


12. There are three Circles of existence: the Circle of Ceugant, :
where there is nothing but God, of living or dead, and none but
God can traverse it; the Circle of Abred, 2 where all things are by
nature derived from death, and man has traversed it; and the
Circle of Gwynvyd, : where all things spring from life, and man
shall traverse it in heaven.


p.172 p.173


13. The three states of existence of living beings: the state of
Abred in Annwn; : the state of liberty in humanity; and the state
of love, that is, Gwynvyd in heaven.


14. The three necessities of all animated existences: a beginning
in Annwn; progression in Abred; and plenitude in heaven, that is,
the circle of Gwynvyd; without these three things nothing can
exist but God.


15. Three things are necessary in Abred: the least of all
animation, and thence a beginning; the material of all things,
and thence increase, which cannot take place in any other state;
and the formation of all things out of the dead, hence diversity
of existence.


16. Three things cannot but happen to all living beings by the
justice of God: co-sufferance in Abred, because without that
none could obtain the perfect knowledge of any thing; co-
participation of egual privilege in the love of God; and co-
ultimity, through the power of God, in respect of such as are just
and merciful.


17. The three necessary occasions of Abred: to collect the
materials of every nature; to collect the knowledge of every
thing; and to collect strength to overcome every ad-verse and
Cythraul, 2 and to be divested of evil; without this traversing of
every state of life, no animation or species can attain to
plenitude.


18. The three principal calamities of Abred: necessity;
forgetfulness; and death.


19. The three principal necessities before fulness of knowledge
can be obtained: to traverse Abred; to traverse Gwynvyd; and the
remembrance of all as far as Annwn.


20. Three things indispensably connected with Abred:
lawlessness, for it cannot be otherwise; the escape of death from
evil and Cythraul; and the increase of life and goodness,


p.174 p.175


by being divested of evil in the escapes of death; and this from
the love of God embracing all things.


21. The three instrumentalities of God in Abred for the subduing
of evil and Cythraul, and escaping from them towards Gwynvyd:
necessity; forgetfulness; and death.


22. There are three primary contemporaries: man; liberty; and
light.


23. The three necessary obligations of man: to suffer; : to
change; and to choose; and whilst he has the power of choosing,
the other two things are not known before they happen.


24. The three eguiportions of man: Abred and Gwynvyd;
necessity and liberty; evil and good; all eguiponderate, man
having the power of attaching himself to the one he pleases.


25. From three things will the necessity of Abred fall on man:
from not endeavouring to obtain knowledge; from non-
attachment to good; and from attachment to evil; occasioned by
these things he will fall to his congener in Abred, whence he will
return, as at first.


26. From three things will man fall of necessity in Abred, though
he has in every thing else attached himself to good: from pride
even to Annwn; from falsehood to a corresponding state of


perception; 2 and from unmercifulness to a similarly disposed
animal, ; whence, as at first, he returns to humanity.


27. The three primaries of the state of man: the first
accumulations of knowledge, love, and power, without death.
This cannot take place, in virtue of liberty and choice, previous to
humanity: these are called the three victories.


28. The three victories over evil and Cythraul: Knowledge; love;
and power; for these know, will, and can do, in their conjunctive
capacity, what they desire; they begin in the state of man, and
continue for ever.


p.176 p.177


29. The three privileges of the state of man: eguiponderance of
evil and good, whence comparativity; liberty of choice, whence
judgment and preference; and the origin of power, proceeding
from judgment and preference, since these must necessarily
exist before any other action.


30. The three inevitable differences between man, or any other
living being, and God: man is finite, which God cannot be; man
had a beginning, which God could not have; man must needs
change his condition successively in the circle of Gwynvyd, from
not being able to endure the Ceugant, but God needs not, being
able to endure all things, and that consistently with felicity.


31. The three primaries of Gwynvyd: cessation of evil; cessation
of want; and the cessation of perishing.


32. The three restorations of the circle of Gwynvyd: original
Awen; : primitive love; and primitive memory; because without


these there can be no Gwynvyd.


33. Three things discriminate every animate being from others:
Awen; memory; and perception: these will be complete in every
one, and cannot be common to any other living being; each will
be plenary, and two plenaries of any thing cannot exist.


34. Three things has God given to every living being: namely, the
plenitude of his species; the distinction of his individuality; and
the characteristic of a primitive Awen as different from another;
this is what constitutes the complete self of every one as apart
from another.


35. From understanding three things will ensue the diminution
and subjugation of all evil and death: their nature; their cause;
and their operation; and this will be obtained in Gwynvyd.


36. The three stabilities of knowledge: to have traversed every
state of life; to remember every state and its incidents; and to be
able to traverse every state, as one would wish, for the sake of
experience and judgment; and this will be obtained in the circle
of Gwynvyd.


37. The three characteristics of every living being in


the circle of Gwynvyd: vocation; privilege; and Awen; nor is it
possible for two beings to be identical in every thing, for every
one will be complete in what is characteristic of him; and there is
nothing complete without comprehending the whole guantity
that can possibly belong to it.


38. Three things none but God can do: to endure the eternities
of Ceugant; to participate of every state without changing; and
to ameliorate and renovate every thing without causing the loss
of it.


39. Three things that can never be annihilated, from their
unavoidable possibilities: form of existence; quality of existence;
and the utility of existence; for these will, divested of their evils,
exist for ever, whether animate or inanimate, as beautiful and
good varieties of the circle of Gwynvyd.


40. The three excellencies of changing condition in Gwynvyd:
instruction; beauty; and repose, from not being able to endure
the Ceugant and eternity.


41. There are three things on their increase: fire, or light;
understanding, or truth; and the soul, or life; these will prevail
over every thing, and then Abred will end.


42. There are three things on the wane: the dark; the false; and
the dead.


43. Three things acguire strength daily, there being a majority of
desires towards them: love; knowledge; and justice.


44. Three things grow more enfeebled daily, there being a
majority of desires in opposition to them: hatred; injustice; and
ignorance.


45. The three plenitudes of Gwynvyd: participation of every
nature, with a plenitude of one predominant; conformity to
every Awen, and in one excelling; love towards every living being


and existence, and towards one, that is, God, above all; in these
three ones will the plenitude of heaven and Gwynvyd consist.


46. The three necessities of God: to be infinite in Himself;


to be finite to the finite; and to be co-united with every state of
animated beings in the circle of Gwynvyd.


Footnotes


169:* , 16. These Triads are printed in Edward Williams's Lyric
Poems, vol. second. Of the copy from which they were taken, he
gives the following account;--"The Triades that are here selected
are from a Manuscript Collection, by Llywelyn Sion, a Bard of
Glamorgan, about the year 1560. Of this manuscript I have a
transcript; the original is in the possession of Mr. Richard
Bradford, of Bettws, near Bridgend, in Glamorgan. This
collection was made from various manuscripts of considerable,
and some of very great antiguity--these, and their authors, are
mentioned, and most or all of them still extant."


pie They were published at Geneva, in 1856, by M. Pictet, under
the title of "Cyfrinach Beirdd Ynys Prydain," or " Le Mystere des
Bardes de I'Ile de Bretagne," accompanied by a translation and a
commentary in the French language.


171:1 ,.» Cylch y Ceugant, translated by Ed. Williams, "the circle
of infinity," and by M. Pictet, "le cercle de la region vide," means
literally, the circle of the enclosing circumference, that is, the

perfect rim that bounds the entire space of existence. From the


idea of unchangeableness or absoluteness, involved in the
doctrine of the ceugant, the word has acguired a secondary
meaning, that of "certain." It is in that sense that we are to
understand it in the adage--


Ceugant yw angan.
Death is certain.


paragraph continues) AISO in the following passage from Llywarch Prydydd y
Moch, A.D. 1160-1220--


Ked archwyf ym llyw y lloergant yn rot
Ef am ryt yn geugant.


Even should I demand of my chief the moon as a gift,
He will certainly give it me.
I Llywelyn ap Iorwerth, Myv. Arch. i. p. 300.


171:2 Cylch yr Abred is rendered by Ed. Williams, "the circle of
inchoation," and by M. Pictet, "le cercle de transmigration."
Abred seems to be compounded ;,..» of ab, from, and rhed, a
course, in reference to the migration of the soul from one animal
to another, until it reaches the state of humanity.


Abred is mentioned in a poem attributed to Taliesin, where it is
used to denote hell.


Hyd pan ddillyngwys Crist gaethiwed
O ddwfn fais affwys abred.


Until Christ released the bondage
From the immensely deep abyss of hell.
Y Milveib, Myv. Arch. v. i. p. 170.


171:3 Cylch y Gwynvyd, the circle of the white, or, (taking that
colour as the emblem of purity,) the holy world;--the circle of
felicity, for, be it observed, gwynvyd is the term generally used by
the Cymry to this day to denote bliss or happiness.


173:1 ,»» Annwn = annwfn, (an-dwfn,) a bottomless gulf; an
abyss; the great deep, or lowest point of existence, as it is
translated by Ed. Williams. There is an old adage which says,


Nid eir i annwn ond unwaith.--Annwn is visited but once.


[paragraph continues) Taliesin opposes it to heaven, when he speaks of a
deluge;--


O nef pan ddoethant
Yn annwfn llifeiriant.


When it came from heaven,
The torrent reached to annwn.--Kad Goddeu.


[paragraph continues] In the Christian code, annwn is made to stand for hell.


173:2 ,»5 Cythraul, (cy-traul,) the principle of destruction. The
term is that which is still employed for the most part to denote
the devil, or Satan.


175:1 5.17 M. Pictet has rendered this "l'impassibilitiê," as if the
word was compounded of di, non, and goddef, to endure. He was
driven to prefer this acceptation, from having mistaken the word
"angenorfod," which be supposed to mean what was necessary
for the triumph of man, over evil, and not, as we have rendered
it, "the necessary obligations" of a man, as such.


175:2 Obryn is an obsolete word, but seems to be compounded
of ob, a going out of, and rhyn, an emotion, or perception, and to
signify an eguivalent state of perception. Ed. Williams has it, "a
state corresponding with his turpitude," and is followed therein
by M. Pictet, who writes "point de démérite eguivalent."


175:3 ;.» Cydvil, (cyd-mil,) co-animal, meaning an animal
corresponding in disposition with himself. "A corresponding
state of brutal malignity."--Ed, Williams.


17721 we. Genius.


THEOLOGICAL TRIADS.
1. Three things cannot but exist: life; : power; and truth.


2. God consists of three things: life; power; and knowledge. >
Otherwise--Three things that cannot be dispensed with in God,
&c.


3. The three principal ; essentials of goodness: love; power; and
wisdom; each one being perfect of necessity, and indispensable
nature. Love; justice; and truth.


4. There are three Unities, and they cannot have : seconds: one
God; one ; truth; and one point of liberty; and in these three all
goodness is rooted in respect of power, goodness, and
knowledge.


5. There are three necessary distinctions between man and God:
man has size and measure, which God cannot have; man has a
beginning, which God cannot have; man is subject to the change
of condition, which God cannot be.


6. The three kinds of existences: God; the living; and the dead.


7. Three things which God cannot be; feeble; unwise; and
unmerciful. Others say,


8. Three things which God cannot be: folly; feeble; and
unmerciful.


9. Three things which God cannot but be: whatever perfect
goodness ought to be; whatever perfect goodness would desire
to be; and whatever perfect goodness can be.


10. Three things, without which there can be neither God nor
perfect goodness: perfect knowledge; perfect will; and perfect
power.


11. The three tendencies of the order of God's work in the
formation of all things: to subdue the evil; to elevate


p.182 p.183


the good; and to manifest every nature in respect of necessity
and privilege--To weaken the evil; to strengthen the good; and to
manifest every distinction.


12. Three things that God appointed supreme of every existence:
love; truth; and knowledge.


13. The three supports of a moral man: God; his own conscience;
and the praise of all the wise.


14. Three things that exhibit God: His powerful existence; His
significant existence; and His necessary existence.


15. There are three necessary existences, which cannot but be:
the greatest of every thing, that is, God; the least of every thing,
that is, nothing; and the middle, that is, finiteness. ;


16. Three things that cannot but be in some place or time: the
most necessary; the most useful; and the most desirable; 2 and
this cannot but be God.


17. Three things God cannot but perform: what is most useful;
what is most necessary; and what is most sought.


18. The three witnesses of God in respect of His works: His
infinite power; infinite Knowledge; and infinite love; for there is
nothing that these attributes cannot accomplish; cannot seek;
and cannot wish.


19. The three principal attributes of God: essence; knowledge;
and power.


20. The three principal properties of Knowledge: feeling; ;
understanding; and seeking. 4


21. The three principal properties of essence: substance; guality;
and motion.


22. The three principal properties of power: love; purpose; s and
order.


23. The three principal manifestations of God: what can be done
by perfect power; what is done s by perfect love; and what
perfect knowledge knows. Others say,--The three manifestations
of God: fatherhood; sonship; and spirituality.


p.184 p.185


24. Three things that are one in will and tendency with all
goodness: God in His might; an awakened conscience; and the
judgment of wise men.


25. The three causes of animate beings in the hands of God: love
desiring felicity to the utmost extent of perfect understanding;
wisdom knowing the utmost means; and power to accomplish
the utmost conception of understanding and love.


26. The three causations of all acts: : necessity and contingence
in the circle of Abred; choice by reason of liberty in the life of
man; and choice from love in the circle of Gwynvyd.


27. The three co-operations of man with God: to endure; to
consider; and to love; nor can man co-operate with God in any
other thing. To endure is the chief of all, for the others cannot
take place without it.


28. Three things that are discordant with God: misfortune;
falsehood; and despair.


29. Three places in which there will be most of God: where there
is most of what will love Him; most of what will seek Him; and
least of self.


30. There are three things, and God is found where they are
looked for: mercy; truth; and peace.


31. Three things that man knows not > what they are: God;
nothing; and infinity.


32. There are three circles of existence: the circle of Ceugant,
which God only can traverse; the circle of Abred, which man has
traversed; and the circle of Gwynvyd, which man shall traverse.


33. The three materials employed by God in making all things:
love; wisdom; and power. (See Triad 25.)


34. The three excellences of the state of man: the end of Abred;
liberty; and communion with the blessed. ;


35. The three felicities of heaven: the utter subjugation of all evil;
everlasting life; and the endless . renovation of bliss.


36. The three primary contemporaries of the world: s man; light;
and liberty.


p.186 p.187


37. The three prominent features of the state of living beings:
mortals; terrestrials; and celestials.


38. God consists of three gualities: what cannot be otherwise;
what cannot be dispensed with; and what cannot be better.


39. The three plenitudes : of Ceugant: God; justice; and love. :


40. Three things which cannot but be in God: supreme power;
supreme wisdom; > and supreme love.


41. There are three causes of death: ignorance; unrestrained ;
love for the good; and inability to endure the Ceugant; that is to
say, from love proceeds knowledge, and by knowledge may the
obligation of Ceugant be avoided, that is, from knowledge
proceeds the change of condition.


42. The three essential attributes . of God: eternity; power; and
love; and they are called impulsive attributes, s because God
cannot exist without them.


43. The three impulsive necessities of man: to suffer; to change;
and to choose; and because of the third, it cannot be known
when the two first will happen.


44. The three conditions of the necessity of humanity: the
eguiponderant commixture of Abred and Gwynvyd, and hence,
consideration; the experience of good and evil, and hence,


judgment; choice from judgment conseguent upon
consideration, and hence, liberty.


45. The three instrumentalities of God in Abred for subduing evil
and Cythraul, and escaping from it towards Gwynvyd: death;
necessity; and forgetfulness.


46. The three stabilities of Gwynvyd: the pleasure of God
granting; the power of God strengthening; and the knowledge of
God directing.


47. The three properties of Knowledge: love towards the best,
seeking it; judgment from experience, on obtaining it; and
choice according to judgment, on seeing what is right.


48. Three things will prevail at last: fire; truth; and life.


49. The three places of the being and existence of all animation:
with Cythraul in Annwn; with light in the state of man; and with
God in Gwynvyd.


50. There are three oppressions ; and onsets on the circle of
Ceugant: pride; perjury; and cruelty; because, of free will, and
endeavour, and pre-arrangement, they force existence upon
things that ought not to be, and that cannot accord with the
indispensables of the circle of Gwynvyd. And by making this
assault, man falls in Abred even to Annwn. The chief and most
grievous is pride, because it is from this that the other two
oppressions are derived; and it was from pride that the first fall
in Abred occurred, after the original progression to the species
and state of humanity in Gwynvyd.


51. Three victories will occasion an escape, namely: victories over
pride; uncharitable hatred; and cupidity; for no one with these
can attain to the circle of Gwynvyd, because they will not accord
with Gwynvyd, and Gwynvyd cannot be obtained from their
natures.


52. The three usurpations of pride: to distort every thing, so that
the truth cannot be seen; to enslave every liberty, so that one
cannot free himself from Abred; and to make a predatory onset
on God and His prerogative, so that there can be no justice.


53. The three stabilities of pride: usurpation and theft; murder
and ambuscade; and imposing belief upon what is false.


54. The three primary sins are: pride; cruelty; and falsehood.


55. There are three circles of existence: the circle of Ceugant,
where there is neither animate or inanimate save God, 2 and God
only can traverse it; the circle of Abred, where the dead is
stronger than the living, and where every principal existence is
derived from the dead, and man has traversed it; and the circle
of Gwynvyd, where the living is stronger than the dead, and
where every principal existence is derived from the living and
life, that


p. 190


p. 191


is, from God, and man shall traverse it; nor will man attain to
perfect knowledge, until he shall have fully traversed the circle of
Gwynvyd, for no absolute knowledge can be obtained but by the


experience of the senses, from having borne and suffered every
condition and incident.


56. There are three occasions for death on the part of God: to
better the condition in Abred; to renovate life for the sake of
reposing from then on endurance of Ceugant; and to experience
every state of the living and life, and what by nature and incident
belongs to it, that is, in order to collect the particular kind of
knowledge, and thereby obtain utter and complete knowledge
respecting every animation and being, and every guality and
essence, for otherwise than by means of this progression in
Abred it is impossible to learn and be skilled in all the sciences,
which can by nature and of necessity exist; and without them it is
impossible to bear with the circle of Gwynvyd.


57. There are three things which distinguish all living beings, one
from the other: what is nearest of all to God in respect of its
particularity; distinctive Awen, which cannot have another of the
same kind; and supreme bliss, being greatest of all of its kind.


58. Every living being has three things in respect of individuality
and particular character, namely: plenitude of what he is, and it is
impossible that there should be a second of the same, since
there can be no two plenitudes of any thing; one entire
uniformity in respect of order and mutual advantage; and one
point of contentment, and no one seeks what is otherwise, since
it was from ignorance of it that the pains of Annwn, and the
cause of Abred, ensued.


59. There are three reasons for changing the state of existence
and life in Gwynvyd: the instruction that is obtained therefrom;
the beauty of novation; and repose from the non endurance of
the eternity of Ceugant.


60. There are three things, each of which can have but one: one
plenitude in respect of kind and Awen; one uniformity


p.192 p.193


in respect of order and mutual advantage; and one supremacy,
that is, God over all. (See the last but one.)


61. The three principal co-existences of the circle of Gwynvyd:
love as far as the necessity of it reguires; order until it can not be
improved; and knowledge as far as thought and perception can
reach.


62. Three things cannot exist in the circle of Gwynvyd: death;
uncharitableness; and disorder. Others say;--need;
uncharitableness; and disorder.


53. There are three judgments relative to duty, whereby it may
be understood: what does another man forbid, and what would
he himself forbid in another man; what does another man seek,
and what would he himself seek of another man under the same
circumstances; and what can be borne and desired for ever by all
animations and existences in the circle of Gwynvyd, where
neither uncharitableness nor injustice can exist, for whatever
does not agree with that can be nought but undutifulness,
disorder, injustice, and uncharitableness.


64. The three stabilities of Gwynvyd: to know the nature of evil,
and to have endured it in Abred; to know the nature of good,
and to experience it in Gwynvyd; and to know of every living
form, its speciality, and individuality, as tending, by the pleasure,
purpose, and will of God, to the general good. And in these
things there is security and firmness, for God cannot otherwise


support it out of love to truth and justice, and God can do
nothing but truth and justice, and from truth and justice there
can be nought but perfect love, and there can be no
uncharitableness but from injustice.


65. From three things arises uncharitableness, that is: from
doing injustice, and thereby causing uncharitableness in the one
that suffers it; from suffering and receiving injustice at the hands
of another, whence uncharitableness springs towards the one
that does injustice; and from ignorance of the nature of
uncharitableness, and the way in which it instigates anger, self-
defence, and opposition in


p.194 p.195


respect to it, whence enmity ensues alternately world without
end.


66. The three stabilities ; of unity: one without another, and
hence firm liberty; entirety without many, and hence firm power;
and many in entirety, and hence firm knowledge; and from these
three is formed firm unity; and there can be no firm unity but
from God.


67. The three instabilities of many: non gregariousness, for there
can be no individuality and speciality in respect of any one head
or kind as distinguished from another thing or guality, or no
place for the one and the other at the same period and time;
finiteness, for there can be no infiniteness where there is
another of the same kind and quality, however little he may be in
respect of the kind and quality of his existence; changeableness,
for, where there are two or many in number, one must bear the
preference over another, and this can be changed, so that the


one that was last may be first, and the place and time be altered,
so that one can go from one place to another, and from one time
to another, and from one state to another, such particulars being
driven by one to the other. On this account God or gods cannot
consist of many, nor can God be manifold or of many.


68. From three causes was there a fall in Abred: from pride that
ventured into the circle of Ceugant, out of contempt and hatred
of the circle of Gwynvyd, and out of desire for what was
otherwise; hence violence was brought against God and
goodness, and what indispensably appertains to Gwynvyd, that
is, love, and all truth and justice; and from the fear of reason;
and of duty.


69. The three principal states of created animations: Annwn, in
which was their beginning; Abred, which they traverse for the
sake of collecting sciences; and Gwynvyd, where they will end in
plenteousness to the utmost extent of power, knowledge, and
goodness, so much that more cannot possibly be had.


70. The three causes for disanimation: to deliver and be
delivered from obligatory evil and worse; to approach


p.196 p.197


and be raised towards Gwynvyd; and the non endurance of
Ceugant and its want of repose, for there is none but God, Who,
being infinite, can traverse it, and the finite cannot prevail
against the infinite.


71. There are three kinds of death: punishment and pain for sin;
the love of God in bringing all animation and existence from


worse to better in Gwynvyd; and repose in Gwynvyd from not
being able to endure the eternities of Ceugant.


72. The three blessed epochs of man: to receive life, such as
having a soul at birth, ; or in the revival from a swoon; to give
life, or to generate; and to change life, or to die, which is a going
from worse to better.


Footnotes
181:1 ,e Al. "God."
181:2 Al. "love."
181:3 Not in one version.
181:4 Al. "they have no."
181:5 Al. "unicoloured."
183:1 ,» Al. "finitenesses."
183:2 Al. "loveable."
183:3 Al. "sense."
183:4 Al. "will." Al. "love."
183:5 Al. "seeking."
183:6 Al. "what He would do."


185:1 , 4 Al. "things."


185:2 AI. "it is not in the least known."
185:3 Al. "celestials."

185:4 Al, "for ever."

185:5 Al. "goodness."


187:* ,» Between this and what follows there is a larger space
than usual in the Manuscript, so that it is not guite clear whether
they were not originally two different fragments.


187:1 Al. "dwellers."
187:2 Al. "knowledge."


187:3 We presume that "anhyrym," feeble, or non-effective, is a
mistake for "anhyrwym," that cannot be bound, or restrained,
which is the sense we have given it in the translation.


187:4 Al. "impulsive attributes." Al. "original attributes."

187:5 Al. "original attributes."

189:1 ,..s Al. "encounters."

189:2 "Save God" omitted in one version.

195:1 5.10 Al. "virtues."

197:1 ».1% "Geni," to be born, comes from "gen," a soul, a spirit.


A gen y gwr gan ei gi,
Ai gorph el i Gaerffili.


May the soul of the man enter his dog,
And his body be taken to Caerphilly--D. ab Gwilym.


"Geni," to attain to a soul or life, to become animated. "Ganed
plentyn," a child has been animated, become animated. Enaid in
Silurian is written genaid.


THEOLOGICAL TRIADS.


The Triads of Bardism, that is, the Triads of godly sciences, and
of wisdom through Awen from God, which was given through
the Holy Spirit to the primitive Bards of the Isle of Britain from
the age of ages, according to the system and instruction of the
three primary Bards and teachers of the Isle of Britain and the
nation of the Cymry. 2 And this instruction is adjudged as
authorized by the memorials and voice of the Gorsedd of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, in right of the nation of the Cymry,
and according to the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle
of Britain.


1. There are three immeasurable unities: place; time; and life; ;
that is, neither one nor other of them has either a beginning or
an end.


2. There are three primary unities, and more than one of each
cannot exist: one God; one truth; and one point of liberty, and
that is, where all things, and all opposites, eguiponderate.


3. Three things spring from the three primary unities: all life; all
goodness; and all power.


p.198 p.199


4. The three attributes of God, being of primary co-existence: the
greatest of all things in respect of life; and the greatest of all
things in respect of might and power. Others say thus:


5. God is of three necessities, that is: the greatest in respect of
life; the greatest in respect of knowledge; and the greatest in


respect of might and power; and there can only be one greatest
of any thing.


6. Three things which God cannot but be: what perfect goodness
ought to be; what perfect goodness would desire-to be; and
what perfect goodness can be.


7. The three primaries of all things: materiality; motion; and
vitality.


8. The three characteristics of existence: time; place; and action.


9. The three stabilities of existence: nature; individuality; and
continuance.


10. The three discriminations of existence: size; form; and
operation.


Footnotes


197:2 ,» Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, who are said to have
been contemporaries of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great.


197:3 ,. Al. "God."


THEOLOGICAL TRIADS.


1. The three stabilities of unity, namely: completeness, for there
can be no two kinds of one universality; infinity, for there can be
no limit to one entirety; and immutability, for it cannot be that
one completeness, universality, and entirety, should be other
than they are. Therefore, there can be no God but from
fundamental oneness. :


2. Three things united will produce power: I, Thou, and It; that is
to say, the I willing, the Thou performing what the I wills, and the
It becoming what is decided by the I, willing in union with the
Thou. And they are called the three fundamentals, because from
them in one are produced might and existence.


3. There are three judgments of duty, in which it will be
understood; what a man forbids in another; what he seeks from
another; and what is compatible with the circle of Gwynvyd.


p. 200 p. 201


4. Three victories will cause an escape: over uncharitableness;
over coveteousness; and over disorder; for these will not accord
with the circle of Gwynvyd.


5. The three principal co-existences of the circle of Gwynvyd: love
as far as its necessity requires; order until it cannot be improved;
and knowledge as far as it can be conceived and comprehended.


6. There are three things that cannot take place in the circle of
Gwynvyd: death; uncharitableness; and disorder.


Footnotes


199:* , .. "Saith brif-gydoldeb un cadarn sef, Cydfan--Cydfod--
Cyflawn--Cyfnerth--Cydfyn--Cydwaith--a Chydfy."--MS.


The seven principal universalities of one fundamentality: co-
presence; co-existence; co-plenitude; -co-power; co-will; co-
operation; and co-eternity.


THEOLOGICAL TRIADS.


1. The three stabilities of Gwynvyd: to know the nature of evil,
from having suffered it in Abred; to Know the nature of good,
from having experienced it in Gwynvyd; and that every living
being should know his appointment, according to the pleasure
and purpose of God; and then there will be security and stability.
For God cannot otherwise maintain it from love to truth and
justice, and God cannot do other than what is true and just,
hence comes perfect love.


2. The three virtues of unity: one without another; entirety
without plurality; and plurality in entirety; and there can be no
firm unity but from God.


3. The three instabilities of plurality: non-universality; finiteness;
and changeableness; that is to say, non-universality, because the
speciality of one thing or kind cannot belong to another, nor can
the same place be for one and for another; finiteness, because
there can be no infinitude, where there is another thing,
however little it may be, of the same kind; changeableness, for
where there are two or more, one will have the precedency over
another, and hence there will be a capability of change, until the
first becomes last.


THEOLOGICAL TRIADS.


1. The three principal bodily perceptions of man: seeing; hearing;
and feeling.


p.202 p.203


2. The three principal perceptions of the soul of man: love;
hatred; and understanding.


3. There are three things from God, namely: what cannot be had
as good without; what all see that they want; and what nobody
else can satisfy.


4. The three residents of Ceugant: God; justice; and
desirableness; and where God is, there are the other two.


5. The three impossibilities of God: to hate; to become feeble;
and to become too great.


6. Three places where God cannot be found: where He is not
asked to be; where He is not desired to be; and where He is not
obeyed.


7. The three purposes of God in His works: to consume the evil;
to enliven the dead; and to cause joy from doing good.


8. The three ways in which God works: experience; wisdom; and
mercy.


9. There should be three agreements in every act of man:
agreement with the nature of morality; agreement with the
excellences of humanity; and agreement with what can exist in


every thing for ever in the circle of Gwynvyd. Others say,
agreement with the commandment of God; agreement with the
excellences of man; and agreement with what can exist for ever,
in respect of the godliness of its existence, in the circle of
Gwynwyd. Others say; with the benefit of all living beings; with
the justice of God; and with the love of the circle of Gwynvyd.


10. The three principal uses of all things in the hands of God:
that they should be with a view to the greatest need; to the
greatest utility; and to the greatest love.


11. The three principal properties of the Hidden God: power;
knowledge; and love.


12. The three daily cares that should occupy the mind of every
man: to worship God; to avoid injuring any one; and to act justly
towards every living thing.


13. The three fears of a wise man: the fear of offending God; the
fear of acting uncharitably to man; and the fear


p.204 p.205


of excessive wealth and prosperity. Another version: the fear of
God; the fear of sin; and the fear of excessive prosperity.


14. The three fears of the foolish man: the fear of man; the fear
of the devil; and the fear of poverty. Al. worldly adversity.


15. In three things will a man resemble the devil: laying snares in
the way; fearing a little child; and laughing at evil.


THEOLOGICAL TRIADS.


Here are Triads which were found at Bewpyr, having been lost
there by some one; or perhaps some person placed them of his
own accord on the floor, where they were found.


1. The three occasions on which God rushed out of His infinitude:
the first was, to make what never existed before, and that with a
view to good, and for the prevention of all evil. Hence issued
existence, or the work of His creation; and when it might have
been otherwise, herein were shown infinite power and wisdom.
The second was to deliver all emanations and existences from
evil chance, and the assault of Cythraul ;, and to restore what
had been lost, or become deteriorated, or to cast it off, and
substitute a better in its stead. This will occur and happen to
every existence, until all existence and creation shall have been
improved to the utmost limits of goodness.


2. Three things indicate God: the placing good and evil face to
face, in order that the one or the other may be known, with the
view of attaching one's self to the good and renouncing the evil.


Footnotes


205:1 , 4 This phrase, undoubtedly Bardic, seems to have been
present to the mind of the Welsh translator of the Litany, who
has employed it as eguivalent to "the assaults of the devil."


205:2 These Triads, it will be seen, arc incomplete.


DRUIDISM.
Disciple and Teacher.


This is the Druidism of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, with their
opinion respecting God and all living beings, of whatsoever
grade or kind they may be. It is rudimentally taught as follows:--


p.206 p.207


1. Question. What is God?
Answer. What cannot be otherwise.
O. Why cannot it be otherwise?


A. Could it be otherwise, we should have no knowledge of any
animation, being, existence, or futurity, in respect of any thing
now known to us.


O. What is God?


A. Complete and perfect life, and the total annihilation of every
thing inanimate and death, nor can any species of mortality
concur with Him. And God is life, full, entire, imperishable, and
without end.


2. God is perfect life, which cannot be limited : or confined, and,
in virtue of His proper essence, is possessed of perfect
knowledge, in respect of sight, sufferance, and intention, having
His origin in Himself, without communion with any thing else
whatsoever, and wholly free from all participation in evil.


3. God is absolute good, in that He totally annihilates all evil, and
there cannot be in Him the least particle of the nature of evil.


4. God is absolute power, in that He totally annihilates inability,
nor can power and will in Him be restrained, since He is
almighty, and allgood.


5. God is absolute wisdom and knowledge, in that He totally
annihilates ignorance, and folly; and therefore no event can by
any chance happen, which He knows not of. And in view of these
qualities and properties 2 no being or animation can be
conceived or contemplated other than coming from God, except
natural evil, which annihilates all life and goodness.


6. What would utterly annihilate and reject God and life, and
therein all goodness, is absolute and natural evil; which is thus in
complete opposition, and of a contrary nature, and essence, to
God, life, and goodness.


7. And by means of this direction, may be seen two things
existing of necessity, namely: the living and dead;


p.208 p.209


good and evil; God and Cythraul, and darkness in darkness, and
powerless inability.


8. Cythraul is destitute of life and intention--a thing of necessity,
not of will, without being or life, in respect of existence and
personality; but vacant in reference to what is vacant, dead in
reference to what is dead, and nothing in reference to what is
nothing. Whereas God is good with reference to what is good, is


fulness in reference to fulness, life in life, all in all, and light in
light.


9. And from what has been said, it may be seen that there can be
no existence of original nature but God and Cythraul, the dead
and living, nothing and occurrence, issue from what is issueless,
and existence from mutual union.


10. God mercifully, out of love and pity, uniting Himself with the
lifeless, that is, the evil, with the intention of subduing it unto
life, imparted the existence of vitality to animated and living
beings, and thus did life lay hold of the dead, whence intellectual
animations and vitality first sprang. And intellectual existences
and animations began in the depth of Annwn, for there is the
lowest and least grade, and it cannot but be that there and in
that state intellectual life first began, for it cannot be otherwise
than that the least and lowest grade of every thing should be the
original and primordial one. The greatest cannot exist in an
intellectual existence before the least; there can be no
intellectual existence without gradation, and in respect of
gradation there cannot but be a beginning, a middle, and an end
or extremity,--first, augmentation, and ultimate or conclusion.
Thus may be seen that there is to every intellectual existence a
necessary gradation, which necessarily begins at the lowest
grade, progressing from thence incessantly along every addition,
intervention, increase, growth in age, and completion, unto
conclusion and extremity, where it rests for ever from pure
necessity, for there can not be any thing further or higher or
better in respect of gradation and Abred.


11. All intellectual existences partake of good and


p.210 p.211


evil, and that, more or less, according to their degree in Abred,
from the dead in the depth of Annwn, to the living in the
extremity of goodness and power, even so far as would not be at
all possible for God to conduct them further.


12. Animations in Annwn are partakers of life and goodness in
the lowest possible degree, and of death and evil in the highest
degree that is possibly compatible with life and personal identity.
Therefore, they are necessarily evil, because of the
preponderance of evil over the good; and scarcely do they live
and exist; and their duration and life are necessarily short, whilst
by means of dissolution and death they are removed gradually
to a higher degree, where they receive an accumulation of life
and goodness, and thus they progress from grade to grade,
nearer and nearer to the extremity of life and goodness, God, of
His merciful affection for animated beings, preparing the ways
along Abred, out of pure love to them, until they arrive at the
state and point of human existence, where goodness and evil
eguiponderate, neither weighing down the other. From this
spring liberty and choice and elective power in man, so that he
can perform which ever he likes of any two things, as of good
and evil; and thus is it seen that the state of humanity is a state
of probation and instruction, where the good and evil
eguiponderate, and animated beings are left to their own will
and pleasure.


13. In every state and point of Abred that is below humanity, all
living beings are necessarily evil, and necessarily bound to evil,
from utter want of will and power, notwithstanding all the
exertion and power put forth, which vary according as they are
situate in Abred, whether the point be high or low. On this
account God does not hate or punish them, but loves and


cherishes them, because they cannot be otherwise, and because
they are under obligation, and have no will and choice, and
whatever the amount of evil may be, they cannot help it, because
it is from obligation, and not willingly, that they are in this
condition.


14. After having arrived at the point of humanity in


p.213


paragraph coninues ADred, where evil and good eguiponderate, man is free
from all obligation, because goodness and wickedness do not
press one upon the other, nor does either of them preponderate
over the other. Therefore, the state of man is a state of will and
freedom and ability, where every act is one of project and
selection, consent and choice, and not of obligation and dislike,
necessity and inability. On this account man is a living being
capable of judgment, and judgment will be given upon him and
his acts, for he will be good or bad according to his works, since
whatever he does he could do differently; therefore it is right
that he should receive punishment or reward, as his works
reguire.


Footnotes


207:1 ,e Al, "restrained."


207:2 Instead of "gualities and properties," another version has
"attributes." Al. simply, "properties."


GOD.


God is three things, : and cannot be otherwise: coeval with all
time; co-entire with all essence; and co-local with all mental
purpose. Could what is called God be otherwise, it would not be
God, since it could be surpassed, and no one is God that can be
surpassed. He is also co-sentient with all animation.


Footnotes


213:1 ,>> Al. "four things."


CYTHRAUL. ;


There are three benefits to be had from Cythraul: the defection
of evil; a view to goodness; and the triumph of victory over what
is contrary to the beneficial.


Footnotes


213:2 ,»» Bardism recognises another principle of evil, which is
called "DERA," respecting which Iolo Morganwg has the
following note:--"The old Bardic idea was that the DERA usurped
the occupation of Cylch y Ceugant, and that he would suffer
none but himself to occupy it, destroying all other beings;--that
God, being more powerful, is able to dispossess him, and, with
Himself to occupy it, creates beings highly susceptible of
happiness, to enjoy it with Him to all ;: eternity, on condition of
joining with Him to resist evil. The common proverb is hence
derived--'Myn y diawl y cwbl iddo ei hunan, fal y cybydd: mae
Duw, fal yr haul, yn rhoi than i bob un arall."


CEUGANT.--DURATION.--GOD.


Three things that are not capable of size or measure: Ceugant;
duration; and God; because there can be no extremes to one or
other of them--no beginning or end or middle to them.


p.214 p.215


THE THREE IMPERCEPTIBILITIES OF GOD.


There are three things that are imperceptible in God: His origin,
because there can have been no time in which He did not exist;
the greatness of His love, for how much so ever He does, He will
see no end to what He can in justice accomplish; and His power,
because there is no end, size, or measure to what He can do
after the utmost intention.


THE BARDS' ENIGMA. .


There is nothing truly hidden 2 but what is not conceivable; ;
There is nothing not conceivable but what is immeasurable;
There is nothing immeasurable but God;

There is no God but that which is not conceivable;

There is nothing not conceivable but that which is truly hidden;
There is nothing truly hidden but God.


In some Books the Bards' enigma is as follows:--


There is no God but what cannot be comprehended;

There is nothing that cannot be comprehended but what is not
conceivable;

There is nothing not conceivable but what is immeasurable;
There is nothing immeasurable but God;

There is no God but what is not conceivable.


Here is the ancient Bards' enigma:--


There is no God but what is not conceivable;
There is nothing not conceivable but God;
There is no God but what is immeasurable;
There is nothing immeasurable but God.


p.216 p.217
Here is another form of it.


There is nothing immeasurable but what is not conceivable;
There is nothing immeasurable but God;

There is nothing immeasurable but the greatest of all;
There can be no two of the greatest of all in any thing.


Here is a solution of the enigma.


What is not conceivable is the greatest of all, and the
immeasurable of what is not in place;

God is the greatest of all, and the immeasurable of intelligence;
And there can be no existence to any thing but from intelligence;
And the non-existence of all things comes from what is not in
place.


As the Bard says:


What is not conceivable is the greatest, and the immeasurable of
all that is not in place; :

God is the greatest, and the immeasurable of all that are
together in place. »


Footnotes


215:1 ,» These aphorisms are sometimes ascribed to Cattwg the
Wise, in the sixth century.


215:2 "Dirgel" is compounded of "dir," true, and "cel,"
concealment.


215:3 It is very difficult to render the exact meaning of "dim" in
this place, which is evidently not nothing in the popular use of
the term. The translation, which we have adopted, was
suggested by the late Archdeacon Williams in his Gomer, p. 136,
and is in fact the "nihil cogitabile," as distinguished from the
"nihil purum," in Sir William Hamilton's analysis of negative
thought.


217:1 ,>e "Difant," from "di," non, and "man," a place.


217:2 "Cymmant," from "cyd," with, or together, and "man," a
place. Al. "that is restored in place"--"that is in place all around "--
"intellectual place"--"elementation."


THE TWELVE PRIMARY NEGATIVES. ;


The twelve primary Negatives, called in some books the Lesson
of the Gwyddoniaid, but in other books the Lesson of Tydain.


There is nothing sought after but what is precious;
There is nothing precious but what is beneficial;
There is nothing beneficial but possession;

There is no possession but Gwynvyd;

There is no Gwynvyd but knowledge;

There is no knowledge but what is new;

There is nothing new but what changes;


p.218 p.219


There is no change but what is advantageous;
There is no advantage but what is beautiful;
There is nothing beautiful but what is just;
There is nothing just but love;

There is no love but God.


And thus it ends.


Tydain the Father of Awen sang it, says the Book of Sion Cent.


Footnotes


217:3 ,>e "Cynnegolion," the plural of "cynnegawl," a word
compounded of cyn, primary, and neg, adj. negawl, negation.


BARDIC APHORISMS.
Thus says the Bard:--


There is no advantage but what can in no ways be dispensed
with, that is, God;

There is no want but the want of God;

There is no enjoyment but the enjoyment of God;
There is no loss but the loss of God;

There is no sufficiency but God;

There is nothing immeasurable but God;

There is nothing knowing but God;

There is nothing in every place but God;

There is nothing powerful but God;

There is nothing in every thing but God;

There is no whole but God;

There is no God but what is whole.


THE DIVINE NAMES.


Some have called God the Father HEN DDIHENYDD, : because it
is from His nature that all things are derived, and from Him is the
beginning of every thing, and in Him is no beginning, for He can
not but exist, and nothing can have a beginning without a
beginner. And God the Son is called IAU, 2 that is, God under a
finite form and corporeity,


p.220 p.221


for a finite being cannot otherwise know and perceive God. And
when He became man in this world, He was called JESUS CHRIST,
for He was not from everlasting under a finite form and body.
And the man who believes in Him, and performs the seven works
of mercy, shall be delivered from the pain of Abred, and blessed
for ever be he who does so. Jesus Christ is also called GOD THE
DOVYDD; : and He has also other names, such as PERYDD, 2 and
GOD THE NER, ; and GOD THE NAV. «


Footnotes


219:1 ,>e That is, " the Ancient and Unoriginated One." The word
occurs as one of the designations of the Supreme Being in the
Welsh Bible, Dan. vii. 7; in the English Bible it is "the Ancient of
days." The following definition of the word is given in one of Iolo
Morganwg's Notes;--"Dihenydd--Gwehynwg. Yr Hen Wehynwg,
the same as Hen Ddihenydd. (Barddas.) Gwehynwg, sef y tardd i
fywydoldeb yn Annwn--the original lifespring, or springing into
life at the lowest point of animated existence, or out of the
chaotic mass of matter in its utmost state of decomposition."


219:2 ,>s The word is here taken in the sense of Younger, or as
denoting the last manifestation of the Deity.


221:1 "Dovydd;" Domitor; the Tamer.
221:2 "Perydd;" the Causer; the First Cause; the Creator.
221:3 "Ner;" Energy; the Powerful.


221:4 "Nav;" the Former; the Creator. Sion Cent has a Poem on
"the Names of God," into which he has introduced all these, with
the exception of "Hen Ddihenydd," and "Perydd," thus,--


Duw, Dofydd mawr, Ionawr, Iau.
Ener, Muner, Ner, Naf ydyw.
See Iolo MSS. p. 235.


paragraph coninues They are also, with many others of undoubtedly
Druidic origin, still used by the Cymry as epithets for the Deity.


IAU. .
Disciple and his Master.
Disciple. Why is Iau (yoke) given as a name for God?


Master. Because the yoke is the measuring rod s of country and
nation in virtue of the authority of law, and is in the possession
of every head of family under the mark of the lord of the
territory, and whoever violates it is liable to a penalty. Now, God
is the measuring rod of all truth, all justice, and all goodness,
therefore He is a yoke on all, and all are under it, and woe to him
who shall violate it.


Footnotes


221:5 ».220 "A yoke." It would appear, rather, that the /au, or yoke,
being the badge of power on the part of him who imposed it,
was so designated from I /IXXMZ, , ; a combination of Bardic
symbols, which indicates preservation, creation, and destruction,
and which was one of the earliest forms of the Divine Name. Iolo
Morganwg interprets "Iau" as meaning "the recent, or last
manifestation of the Deity--Mithras, Mithra;" from the adjective,
which literally signifies younger.


221:6 The yoke, as a measuring rod, is mentioned in the Welsh
Laws; it follows, therefore, that this catechetical fragment must
have been composed when those laws were in force.


HU THE MIGHTY.


Hu; the Mighty,--Jesus the Son of God,--the least in respect of His
worldly greatness whilst in the flesh, and the greatest in heaven
of all visible majesties. :


Footnotes


221:7 ,» The meaning of "Hu," is that which is apt to pervade, or to
spread over. It is used as an epithet of the Deity, in reference to
His omniscience, and is not ,» unfreguently to be met with as
such in the works of the Bards; thus Taliesin, describing the
resurrection of our Lord, observes,--


Trydedydd bu
Dadebriad Hu.


On the third day was
The resuscitation of Hu.
Llath Foesen. MS.


[paragraph continues] And Cynddelw,--


Oedran Iesu Hu hoywdeg
Yn wir Dduw un cant ar ddeg.


The age of Jesus, the fair and energetic Hu,
In God's truth was eleven hundred.


[paragraph continues] Rhys Goch Eryri, also, in his "Cywydd Cyfrinach,"
speaks of "Pont Hu," the bridge of Hu, in reference to the subject
of the Incarnation; pont being a term used bardically to denote a


teacher that conveys his disciples over the bog of ignorance.
Hence the adage--"A fo ben bid bont." He who is head let him be
a bridge.


Derived from HU is the word HUON, used also as a Divine
appellation; e.g.,


Gwae wynt ddydd brawd ger bron HUON. ».22


Woe to them on the judgment day in the presence of HUON.
Geraint Vardd Glas, A.D. 900.


[paragraph continues] It also occurs in the list of "the Names of God" by Sion
Cent;--


HUON, Ion, goreu i ddoniau.


HUON, and Ion, of best gifts.
Iolo MSS. p. 285.


Both Hu and HUON were no doubt originally identical with the
HEUS of Lactantius, and the HESUS of Lucan, described as gods
of the Gauls. The similarity of the last name to IESU is obvious
and striking.


Hu the Mighty is, moreover, described in the Triads as a
Historical personage; that is, as the one who first established the
Cymry in a civil community, taught them agriculture, with other
useful arts, and conducted them over into the island of Britain.
See Triad, 3rd Series, Ap. Myv. Arch. vol. ii.


221:* ,» This extract is from a list of "Damhegion Beirdd Ynys
Prydain."


p.222 p.223


THE CIRCLES...


The Circle of Abred, in which are all corporal and dead
existences.


The Circle of Gwynvyd, in which are all animated and immortal
beings.


The Circle of Ceugant, where there is only God. The wise men
describe them thus, in three Circles.


SN WW YE


va
SS ) ers VF


ee sae ~~, y AQ ic 2 bal — wm —
Ss! ôl 8 ES
Ee a Abred Sa


—--


el eel
ee Gyn Cec
AN


\


Footnotes


222:1 ,» Some persons, and among them M. Henri Martin, the
celebrated French Historian, are of opinion that the three Circles
of existence are represented in the old stone enclosures of the
Bards, such as Avebury, and in the wheels observable on ancient
British coins.


p.224 p.225


THE BOOK OF BARDISM.


Here is the Book of Bardism, that is to say, the Druidism of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, which I, Llywelyn Sion: of
Llangewydd, extracted from old Books, namely, the books of
Einion the Priest, > Taliesin, the Chief of Bards, ; Davydd Ddu of
Hiraddug, « Cwtta Cyvarwydd, ; Jonas of Menevia, « Edeyrn the
Golden-tongued, ; Sion Cent, s Rhys Goch, ; and others, in the
Library of Rhaglan, by permission of the lord William Herbert,
earl of Pembroke, » to whom God grant that I may prove
thankful as long as I live. The first is a Treatise in the form of
Question and Answer, by a Bard and his Disciple--the work of
Sion Cent, which contains many of the principal subjects of the
primitive wisdom, as it existed among the Bards of the Isle of
Britain from the age of ages. In this Dialogue, the Disciple first
puts the guestion, and the Bard, his Teacher, answers, and
imparts to him information and knowledge. In the second place
the Bard examines, and the Disciple answers.


The second examination.
O. Prithee, who art thou? and tell me thy history.


A. I am a man in virtue of God's will, and the necessary
conseguence that follows, for "what God wills must be."


O. Whence didst thou proceed? and what is thy beginning?


A. I came from the Great World, : having my beginning in
Annwn. >


O. Where art thou now? and how tamest thou to where thou art?


A. I am in the Little World, : whither I came, having traversed the
circle of Abred, and now I am a man at its termination and
extreme limits.


O. What wert thou before thou didst become a man in the circle
of Abred?


A. Iwas in Annwn the least possible that was capable of life, and
the nearest possible to absolute death, and I came in every form,
and through every form capable of a body and life, to the state
of man along the circle of Abred, where my condition was severe
and grievous during the age of ages, ever since I was parted in
Annwn from the dead, by the gift of God, and His great
generosity, and His unlimited and endless love.


O. Through how many forms didst thou come? and what
happened unto thee?


A. Through every form capable of life, in water, in earth, and in
air. And there happened unto me every se-verity, every hardship,
every evil, and every suffering, and but little was the goodness
and gwynfyd before I became a man.


O. Thou hast said, that it was in virtue of God's love thou earnest
through all these, and didst see and experience all these; tell me
how can this take place through the love


p.228 p.229


of God? And how many were the signs of the want of love during
thy migration in Abred?


A. Gwynvyd cannot be obtained without seeing and knowing
every thing, but it is not possible to see and to know every thing
without suffering every thing. And there can be no full and
perfect love that does not produce those things which are
necessary to lead to the knowledge that causes Gwynvyd, for
there can be no Gwynwyd without the complete knowledge of
every form of existence, and of every evil and good, and of every
operation and power and condition of evil and good. And this
knowledge cannot be obtained without experience in every form
of life, in every incident, in every suffering, in every evil and in
every good, so that they may be respectively known one from
the other. All this is necessary before there can be Gwynvyd, and
there is need of them all before there can be perfect love of God,
and there must be perfect love of God before there can be
Gwynvyd.


O. Why are the things, which thou hast mentioned, necessary
before there can be Gwynvyd?


A. Because there can be no Gwynvyd without prevailing over evil
and death, and every opposition and Cythraul, and they cannot
be prevailed over without knowing their species, nature, power,
operations, place, and time, and every form and kind of
existence which they have, so that all about them may be known,
and that they may be avoided, and that wherever they are they
may be opposed, : counteracted, 2 and overcome, and that we
may be cured of them, and be restored from under their effect.
And where there is this perfect Knowledge, there is perfect
liberty, and evil and death cannot be renounced and overcome


but where there is perfect liberty; and there can be no Gwynvyd
but with God in perfect liberty, and it is in perfect liberty that the
circle of Gwynvyd exists.


O. Why may not perfect knowledge be obtained, without passing
through every form of life in Abred?


A. On this account, because there are no two forms
p.230 p.231


alike, and every form has a use, a suffering, a knowledge, an
intelligence, a gwynvyd, a guality, an operation, and an impulse,
the like and complete uniformity of which can not be had in any
other form of existence. And as there is a special knowledge in
each form of existence, which cannot be had in another, it is
necessary that we should go through every form of existence,
before we can acguire every form and species of knowledge and
understanding, and conseguently renounce all evil, and attach
ourselves to every gwynvyd.


O. How many forms of existence are there? and what is the use
of them?


A. As many as God saw necessary towards the investigation and
knowledge of every species and quality in good and evil, that
there might be nothing, capable of being known and conceived
by God, without being experienced, and conseguently known.
And in whatsoever thing there may be a knowledge of good and
evil, and of the nature of life and death, there is a form of
existence which corresponds with the attainment of the
knowledge reguired. Therefore, the number of the kinds and
modes of forms of existence is the sum that could conceive and


understand with a view to perfect goodness, knowledge, and
gwynvyd. And God caused that every living and animate being
should pass through every form and species of existence endued
with life, so that in the end every living and animate being might
have perfect knowledge, life, and gwynvyd; and all this from the
perfect love of God, which in virtue of His Divine nature He could
not but exhibit towards man and every living being.


O. Art thou of opinion that every living being shall attain to the
circle of Gwynvyd at last?


A. That is my opinion, for less could not have happened from the
infinite love of God, God being able to cause, knowing the
manner how to cause, and continually willing every thing to exist
that can be conceived and sought in


p.232 p.233


(paragraph continues) HiS OWN love, and in the desire of every animation
whilst opposed to evil and death.


O. When will this condition happen to every living being, and in
what manner will occur the end of the life of Abred.?


A. Every living and animate being shall traverse the circle of
Abred from the depth of Annwn, that is, the extreme limits of
what is low in every existence endued with life; and they shall
ascend higher and higher in the order and gradation of life, until
they become man, and their there can be an end to the life of
Abred by union with goodness. And in death they shall pass to
the circle of Gwynvyd, and the Abred of necessity will end for
ever. And there will be no migrating through every form of
existence after that, except in right of liberty and choice united


with Gwynvyd, with a view to re-experience, and re-seek
knowledge. And this will remain for ever, as a variation and
novation of Gwynwyd, so that no one can fall into Ceugant, and
thence into Abred; for God alone can endure and traverse the
circle of Ceugant. By this it is seen that there is no Gwynvyd
without mutual communication, and the renewal of proof,
experience, and knowledge, for it is in knowledge that life and
Gwynvyd consist.


Q. Shall every man, when he dies, go to the circle of Gwynvyd?


A. No one shall at death go to Gwynvyd, except he who shall
attach himself in life, whilst a man, to goodness and godliness,
and to every act of wisdom, justice, and love. And when these
qualities preponderate over their opposites, namely, folly,
injustice, and uncharitableness, and all evil and ungodliness, the
man, when he dies, shall go to Gwynvyd, that is heaven, from
whence he will no more fall, because good is stronger than evil
of every kind, and life subdues death, prevailing over it for ever.
And he shall ascend nearer and nearer to perfect Gwynvyd, until
he is at its extreme limits, where he will abide for ever and
eternally. But the man who does not thus attach himself to


p. 234 p. 235


godliness, shall fall in Abred to a corresponding form and
species of existence of the same nature as himself, whence he
Shall return to the state of man as before. And then, according as
his attachment may be to either godliness or ungodliness, shall
he ascend to Gwynfyd, or fall in Abred, when he dies. And thus
Shall he fall for ever, until he seeks godliness, and attaches
himself to it, when there will be an end to the Abred of necessity,
and to every necessary suffering of evil and death.


Footnotes
225:1 ,» See Note, p. 62.


225:2 Einion Offeiriad, or the Priest, was the father of Thomas ap
Einion, author or compiler of the "Greal," the tale of "Pwyll
Pendaran Dyved," and the "History of Taliesin." He lived in the
14th century.


225:3 Taliesin flourished from A.D. 520 to 570. He is ranked in the
Triads, with Merddin Emrys and Merddin ab Madog Morvryn, as
the three "privardd bedydd," or baptismal Bards of the Isle of
Britain. Many of his compositions are still extant, which, with
some of later date, wrongly attributed to him, are printed in the
first volume of the Myvyrian Archaiology. Several Bardic allusions
may be discovered in his Poems.


225:4 Al. "of Euas." His proper name was Davydd ab Roderic ab
Madog, which is still to be seen on his effigies in Dymeirchion
Church, of which he was Vicar, and where he lies buried. He
flourished about 1340. He was an eminent and learned Poet, and
had a great share in regulating Welsh prosody. There is a sacred
poem by him "Am ddiwedd dyn a'i gorph," and a very poetical
translation of the "Officium B. Marie," from Latin into Welsh,
which fills thirty columns of the first volume of the Myvyrian
Archaiology.


225:5 He was Meurig or Maurice, treasurer of Llandaf, who died
in 1290. He obtained the name of "Cwtta Cyvarwydd" from a
Book of his, so called, which contains a compendium of the
History of Glamorgan, with other articles, a list of which is given
by Edward Llwyd in the Archaiologia Britannica, p. 257. He also


wrote the History of the whole Isle of Britain; a Book of Proverbs;
the Rules of Poetry; and Welsh Theology. He also translated the
Gospel of St. John from the Latin into Welsh, with commentaries.
"These Books," says Ingo ab Dewi, (about 1700,) "were at
Abermarlas about fifty years ago."


225:6 ,» Iohannes Menevensis, a divine and poet, who
flourished towards the close of the tenth century. Some
compositions, attributed to him, are printed in the first volume
of the Mwyrian Archaiology.


225:7 A poet and grammarian, who flourished in the thirteenth
century. The Grammar, which he undertook at the command of
the Princes of Wales, about 1270, has recently been published
under the auspices of the Welsh MSS, Society.


225:8 Sion Cent, or Dr. John Kent, a very eminent poet, and
learned divine, who flourished from about 1380 to 1420. He
wrote various Treatises in Latin on theological subjects, thirty-
nine of which may be enumerated, and many poems in his
native language, which were highly esteemed. Every manuscript
volume of Welsh poetry of early date generally contains some of
his productions. Three of them, one of which enumerates the
Bardic Names of God, are printed in the Iolo MSS.


225:9 Rhys Goch Eryri, or Rhys ab Davydd, was a very eminent
poet, who flourished from A.D. 1330 to 1420. About 30 of his
poems on various subjects are preserved, among them one
entitled "Cywydd Cyfrinach," which is printed in the Iolo MSS, p.
307, and is full of allusions to the mysteries of Bardism.


225:10 A distinguished patron of Welsh literature. He was the
author of a set of Theological Triads, which appear from the style


and language as if they were of Bardic origin.


227:1 ,»e There are two poems printed in the Myv. Arch., vol. i.,
and attributed to Taliesin, entitled respectively, "Canu y Byd
mawr," and "Canu y Byd bychan," or the Great World, and the
Little World. The former, referring to the creation, and the latter,
to the maintenance of the world, seem, both of them, to be
founded on the doctrine of the text. Iorwerth Vynglwyd (1460-
-1500) bears his testimony to the fact that man was described in
the creed of the Bards as a little world, thus;--


Medd y barddas urddasawl,
Byd bach, yw dyn, iach dan wawl.


Saith the revered Bardism,
A little world is man in his vigour, under the light.


227:2 It was this doctrine relative to the commencement of life
from Annwn, that was, no doubt, at the bottom of the opinion,
which Julius Caesar attributes to ,» the Gauls. "Galli se omnes ab
Dite patre prognatos preedicaut, idgue a Druidibus proditum
dicunt." (De Bel. Gal. I. vi, c. 18.)


229:1 ».2 "Ei gwrthryw," i.e. their species may be opposed by a
contrary species.


229:2 "Au gwrthrym," i.e. their force be opposed by a contrary
force.


ABRED.--GWYNVYD.--AWEN.
O. How often may one fall in Abred?


A. No one will fall once of necessity, after it has been once
traversed, but through negligence, from cleaving to ungodliness,
until it preponderates over godliness, a man will fall in Abred. He
will then return to the state of man, through every form of
existence that will be necessary for the removal of the evil, which
was the cause of his fall in Abred. And he will fall only once in
Abred on account of the same ungodliness, since it will be
overcome by that fall; nevertheless, because of many other
impieties he may fall in Abred, even numberless times, until
every opposition and Cythraul, that is, all ungodliness, shall have
been vanguished, when there will be an end to the Abred of
necessity.


O. How many have fallen in Abred? and for what cause have they
fallen?


A. All living beings below the circle of Gwynvyd have fallen in
Abred, and are now on their return to Gwynvyd. The migration of
most of them will be long, owing to the freguent times they have
fallen, from having attached themselves to evil and ungodliness;
and the reason why they fell was, that they desired to traverse
the circle of Ceugant, which God alone could endure and
traverse. Hence, they fell even unto Annwn, and it was from
pride, which would


p.236 p.237


ally itself with. God, that they fell, and there is no necessary fall
as far as Annwn, except from pride.


O. Did all, who reached the circle of Gwynvyd after the primary
progression of necessity from Annwn, fall in Abred from pride?


A. No; some sought after wisdom, and hence saw what pride
would do, and they resolved to conduct themselves according to
what was taught them by God, and thereby became divinities, or
holy angels, and they acguired learning from what they beheld
in others, and it was thus that they saw the nature of Ceugant
and eternity, and that God alone could endure and traverse it.


O. Does not the danger of falling in Abred, from the circle of
Gwynvyd, exist still as it did formerly?


A. No; because all pride and every other sin, will be overcome
before one can a second time reach the circle of Gwynvyd, and
then by recollecting and knowing the former evil, every one will
necessarily abhor what caused him to fall before, and the
necessity of hatred and love will last and continue for ever in the
circle of Gwynvyd, where the three stabilities, namely, hatred,
love, and knowledge, will never end. ;


O. Will those, who shall return to the circle of Gwynvyd after the
fall in Abred, be of the same kind as those who fell not?


A. Yes; and of the same privilege, because the love of God cannot
be less towards one than towards another, nor towards one form
of existence than another, since He is God and Father to them all,
and exercises the same amount of love and patronage towards
them all, and they will all be egual and co-privileged in the circle


of Gwynvyd, that is, they will be divinities and holy angels for
ever.


O. Will every form and species of living existence continue for
ever as they are now? If so, tell me why?


A. Yes, in virtue of liberty and choice, and the blessed will go
from one to another as they please, in order to repose from the
fatigue and tediousness of Ceugant, which God


p.238 p.239


only can endure, and in order to experience every knowledge
and every gwynfyd that are capable of species and form; and
each one of them will hate evil of necessary obligation, and know
it thoroughly, and conseguently of necessity renounce it, since
he will perfectly know its nature and mischievousness--God
being a help, and God being chief, supporting and preserving
them for ever.


O. How are these things to be known?


A. The Gwyddoniaid, from the age of ages, from the time of
Seth, : son of Adam, son of God, obtained Awen from God, and
thence knew the mystery of godliness.; and the Gwyddoniaid
were of the nation of the Cymry from the age of ages. After that,
the Gwyddoniaid were regulated according to privilege and
usage, in order that unfailing memory might be kept of this
knowledge. After that, the Gwyddoniaid were called Bards
according to the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, because it was after the arrival of the Cymry in the island
of Britain, that this regulation was made; and it is through the
memorials of Bardism and Awen from God that this knowledge


has been acquired, and no falsehood can accrue from Awen
from God. In the nation of Israel were found the holy prophets,
who through Awen from God knew all these things as described
in the Holy Scriptures, And after Christ, the Son of God, had
come in the flesh from Gwynvyd, further knowledge of God, and
His will, was obtained, as is seen in St. Paul's Sermon. ; And when
we, the Cymry, were converted to the faith in Christ, our Bards
obtained a more clear Awen from God, and knowledge about all
things divine beyond what had been seen before, and they
prophesied, improving Awen and knowledge. Hence is all
knowledge concerning things divine and what appertains to
God.


p.240 p.241


O. How is Awen to be obtained, where it is not, so that a Bard
may be made of him, who would be a Bard?


A. By habituating one's self to a holy life, and all love towards
God and man, and all justice, and all mercy, and all generosity,
and all endurance, and all peace, and practising good sciences,
and avoiding pride and cruelty and adultery, and murder and
ambuscade, and theft, and covetousness, and all injustice, that
is, the things that will corrupt and destroy Awen, where it exists,
and will prevent the obtaining it, where it does not exist.


O. Is it in the way it was first obtained, that Awen from God is still
obtainable?


A. It is in this way that Awen is obtained, that the truth may be
known and believed. Some, however, are of opinion that the way
in which the truth was first Known, was, that the divinities, or
holy angels, and the saints or godly men, who went to heaven,


and especially Jesus Christ, the Son of God, came down from
Gwynvyd to the Little World in the condition of man, in order to
teach, warn, direct, and inform those who seek to be divine. That
is, they came in the capacity of messengers sent by God in His
infinite love, and in virtue of their own great love co-operating
with the love of God, and as His obedient messengers. And we
shall have what of Awen from God is necessary for us, by
attaching ourselves to the good and godly with sincerity, and out
of pure love for all goodness.


Footnotes
23711 ,» What is stated here may explain the adage;--
Nid air i Annwn ond unwaith.
Annwn will be visited but once.
239:1 , Ieuan du'r Bilwg refers to Seth as a Bard;--


SEDD mab ieuaf Addaf oedd,
Breuddwydiwr, a Bardd ydoedd.


Seth was the youngest son of Adam,--
He was a dreamer and a Bard.


250.2


Pan elo'r goron ar garn ddifant

Ofer pob peth ond pregeth PAWL SANT

Pan elo 'r goron ar gyfeiliorni,

Nid ellir ai gweryd ond gair Celi.--Penegoes MS. ».23


When the crown is on the point of being lost,
All will be in vain except the sermon of St. Paul:
When the crown goes astray,

Nothing can save it but the Word of Celi.


THE THREE STATES.


1. According to the three principal gualities of man shall be his
migration in Abred: from indolence and mental blindness he
shall fall to Annwn; from dissolute wantonness he shall traverse
the circle of Abred, according to his necessity; and from his love
for goodness he shall ascend to the circle of Gwynvyd. As one or
the other of the principal gualities of man predominates, shall
the state


p.242 p.243


of the man be; hence his three states, Annwn, Abred, : and
Gwynvyd.


2. The three states of living beings: Annwn, whence the
beginning; Abred, in which is the increase of knowledge, and
hence goodness; and Gwynvyd, in which is the plenitude of all
goodness, knowledge, truth, love, and endless life.


Footnotes


243:1 ».22 As it is now generally admitted that the Hyperboreans,
spoken of by ancient authors, were the same as the primitive
inhabitants of Britain, or the Cymry, it is very probable that their
priest Abaris, who, according to Herodotus, (I. iv. 36.) carried an
arrow round the whole earth fasting, referred mystically to the
circle of Abred. He is said to have presented his arrow to
Pythagoras, by which we are probably to understand that the
philosopher received the doctrine of the metempsychosis from
the Druids.


According to Stephanus of Bysantium, (De Urb.,) the Cimbri or
Cimmerii were called also Abroi, perhaps Abredolion.


ABpot--KtuBpot, Ws TLWEG (POOL, KLUEDLOL.


ANNWN.--LIFE.--DEATH.
Guestion. In what place is Annwn?


Answer. Where there is the least possible of animation and life,
and the greatest of death, without other condition.


O. What are the characteristics of life?


A. Lightness, light, heat, and incorruption, that is,
unchangeableness. >


O. What are the characteristic marks of death?


A. Heaviness, cold, darkness, and corruption, that is,
changeableness.


O. In what does the nature of death and mortality consist?


A. In its characteristics, where one is the cause of another, as
heaviness is the cause of darkness, and both the cause of
corruption, and corruption the cause of both.


O. In what does the necessity of animation and life consist?


A. In its characteristics, that is, brightness, and light, and
lightness, and incorruption, one being the cause of another--
hence God and life.


Footnotes


243:2 p. 243 Al. "stability."


ABRED.


To consociate with evil will make one the lowest and meanest of
all animated beings; therefore a wicked man,


p.244 p.245


when he dies, and his soul enters the meanest worm: in
existence, becomes better, and ascends in the migration of
Abred. From this has arisen the saying,--"Trample not on thy
better," addressed to one who tramples on a worm voluntarily,
and without a cause.


Footnotes


245:1 ,»a "Pryf," a worm, originally written prif, probably obtained
its name from its being the first prif = primus--link in the chain of
Abred.


There seems to be some allusion to the doctrine enunciated here
in those lines by Casnodyn, A.D. 1290-1340;


Trefnaist wern uffern affaith sathan;
Trefred i bryfed, lle yd ymbrofan'.


Thou didst prepare the slough of hell suitable for Satan;
The habitation for worms, where they will be in mutual strife.


THE ORIGIN OF MAN.--JESUS CHRIST.--CREATION.
Here are Ouestions and Answers from another Book.
Teacher. Dost thou know what thou art?

Disciple. I am a man by the grace of God the Father.
T. Whence earnest thou?


D. From the extremities of the depth of Annwn, where is every
beginning in the division of the fundamental light and darkness.


T. How earnest thou here from Annwn?


D. I came, having traversed about from state to state, as God
brought me through dissolutions and deaths, until I was born a
man by the gift of God and His goodness.


T. Who conducted that migration?
D. The Son of God, that is, the Son of man.
T. Who is He, and what is His name?


D. His name is Jesus Christ, and He is none other than God the
Father incarnate in the form and species of man, and
manifesting visible and apparent finiteness for the good and
comprehension of man, since infinitude cannot be exhibited to
the sight and hearing, nor can there, on that account, be any
correct and just apprehension thereof. God the Father, of His
great goodness, appeared in the form and substance of man,
that He might be seen and comprehended by men. >


T. Why is He called the Son of God?


D. Because He is from God in His essential works, and not from
His uncreated pre-existence, that is, He is second to God, and
every Second is a son to the primary First, in respect of existence
and nature. That is to say,


p.246 p.247


(paragraph continues) JeSUs Christ is a manifestation of God in a peculiar
manner, and every one is a son to another, who is primary, and
the manifested is a son to him who manifests. And where God is
seen or comprehended otherwise than as a species and
existence beyond all knowledge and comprehension, such
cannot take place except in what is seen differently to the
attribute of God, in respect of the non-commencement and
unchangeableness of His being, His nature, and His quality. :


T. Did man, and other intelligent beings, Know anything of God
before He was manifested and made comprehensible in Jesus
Christ?


D. They knew that He existed by the creation of the world, and
the whole being for good, because there can be no creation
without a maker; and that would not be an act but a chance,
which should not be thoroughly for good, as a heap of stones
occurs by chance, whereas a house or a church is not built by
chance.


T. How may what is made be known?


D. By unmaking what is possible of it, for where anything can be
unmade, there must of necessity be a maker to what is thus


unmade. For things which were never made, as place and space,
without length and without breadth, cannot be unmade. In the
same way, time cannot be undone, because it was never made,
and it is said in St. Paul's Sermon, that it is impossible to make
without a maker. >


T. What is creation?


D. Every thing which can be otherwise, in respect of form and
substance and essence, than what it seems. That is to say, it may
be annihilated, in respect of what is seen or comprehended of it
now; and its non-existence may be conceived. And nothing is
made, of which its decomposition and non-existence cannot be
conceived, as in the case of incorporeal length and breadth and
depth, and immeasurable time, for it is impossible that they
should not have existed always without a beginning, and it
cannot be but that they


p.248 p.249


shall always exist without end and without change. It cannot be
judged differently of God, and His existence, because He is
spiritual and not corporeal life, wherefore His spirituality can
neither change nor end. Every thing changeable is made, in
respect of what is capable of change and non-existence, as there
is a change through burning and rottenness, and melting and
hardness, and cold and warmth. That is, there can be non-
existence in the change, but there can be no non-existence in the
matter and mode, neither loss, except only in its changes.


T. What is imperishable matter?


D. There are two kinds: the one dead and lifeless, that is, the
elements of the fundamental darkness, whence proceed all
inanimation and dead corporeity; and the atoms or elements of
light, whence proceed all living corporeity, and all intellect, and
all spirituality and life, and all sensibility: for every thing dead is
cold--every thing living is warm.


T. Why is it reguisite to traverse Abred?


D. Because where there is a beginning there must needs be an
increase and an improvement. And in order to magnify man in
respect of vital goodness, and to improve and prepare him for
Gwynvyd, God arranged it so. And this cannot occur to any thing
in existence, without traversing the middle and intermediate
space between the smallest small, and the greatest great. Nor
can there be either good or evil, except by chance, in any
immutable creation, nor can there be better or worse in what
does not circulate, nor better in what cannot be worse, nor
worse in what cannot be better. And where one enters upon evil,
he cannot become worse by remaining in it for ever and ever;
and it is the same with the better, where it cannot be better.


Footnotes


245:2 ».2«This view of our blessed Saviour is identical with the
heresy of the Sabellians, or Patripassians. See Hammond's
Canons of the Church, p. 54.


247:1 ;>e The Sabellianism, which marks this fragment, does not
appear to have been adopted by all the Christian Bards. Thus, in
"the Venedotian Triads of the Isle of Britain," it is stated,--


"Taliesin Ben Beirdd a weles yn y Dwydid (in al. Dwydawd and
Duwdid) dri pherson o Dad, o Fab, o Yspryd Glan."


Taliesin, the Chief of Bards, beheld in the Godhead three
Persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


247:2 Rom. i. 20.


THE CREATION.--THE FIRST MAN.--THE PRIMARY
LETTERS.


Disciple and his Teacher.


Disciple. Tell me, my kind and discreet Master, whence originated
the world, and all visible, all audible, all sensible,


p.250 p.251


and all intelligible things, and whence did they come, and were
made?


Teacher. God the Father made them by pronouncing His Name,
and manifesting existence. In the same instant, co-
simultaneously, lo! the world, and all that appertains to it, sprang
together into being, and together celebrated their existence with
a very loud and melodious shout of joy; even as we see them to
be now, and as they shall exist whilst God the Father lives, Who is
not subject to dissolution and death.


D. Of "what, in respect of materials, were formed living and dead
beings, which are cognizable to the human sight, hearing,
feeling, understanding, perception, and the creation of the
imagination?


T. They were made of the manred, : that is, of the elements in the
extremities of their particles and smallest atoms, every particle
being alive, because God was in every particle, > a complete
Unity, so as not to be exceeded, even in all the multiform space
of Ceugant, or the infinite expanse. God was in each of the
particles of the manred, and in the same manner in them


collectively in their conjoined aggregation; ; wherefore, the voice
of God is the voice of every particle of the manred, as far as their
numbers or gualities may be counted or comprehended, and the
voice of every particle is the voice of God--God being in the
particle as its life, and every particle or atom being in God and
His life. On account of this view of the subject, God is figuratively
represented as being born of the manred, without beginning,
without end.


D. Was existence good or bad before God pronounced His
Name?


p.252 p.253


T. All things were thoroughly good, without beginning, without
end, as they are now, and ever shall be; though in Abred neither
the mode, nor the thing that exists, is seen, except from learning
by means of demonstrative hearing and seeing, or by means of
reason making it comprehensible, namely, God and His peace in
every thing, and nothing existing without God and His peace.
Therefore, there was good in every thing,--a blissful world, and a
blissful deliverance from every evil, as an unconguerable
predominance. And where God exists in every atom of manred,
evil is impossible; because there neither is, nor can be room for
it, since God and all goodness fill the infinitude, which is without
beginning and without end, in respect of place and duration of
time. Therefore, evil or its like cannot exist, nor the least
approximation to it.


D. What judgment is formed concerning the act of God in giving
existence to the world, that is, heaven and earth, and all that are
in and from them?


T. God, with a view to every goodness of which He is capable,
branched Himself out of His majesty, incomprehensible to man
further it was so. And from this there was an increase of all finite
goodness, and all goodness cannot be had, without finite
goodness in infinite space.


D. Who was the first man?


T. Menyw the Aged, son of the Three Shouts, who was so called
because God gave and placed the word in his mouth, namely,
the vocalization of the three letters, which make the unutterable
Name of God, that is, by means of the good sense of the Name
and Word. And, co-instantaneously with the pronunciation of
God's Name, Menyw saw three rays of light, and inscribed on
them figure and form, and it was from those forms and their
different collocations that Menyw made ten letters, and it was
from them, variously placed, that he invested the Cymraeg with
figure and form, and it is from understanding the combination
of the ten letters that one is able to read.


D. My beloved Teacher, show me the power and mysteries


of the three primitive letters, and the forms of the ten letters,
which Menyw made from the varied combination of the three.


T. This is not allowed and permitted to me, for the ten letters are
a secret, being one of the three pillars of the mystery of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain. And before the disciple is brought
under the obligation and power of a vow, the mystery may not
be revealed to him. And even then it can only be displayed to the
eye, without utterance, without voice. It can only take place,


when the disciple shall have gone through all the cycle and
course of his pupillage. Nevertheless, the sixteen letters are
formed very differently, and I am at liberty to show and declare
their names and their powers, before the cycle of the vow of
pupillage shall have been traversed; and thus are the sixteen
symbols, and the way in which they are enforced by usage.


Footnotes


251:1 ,»» "Manred "is compounded of mân, small, fine, and rhêd,
a course.


251:2 Ti ymhob pwnk.--Thou art in every point.
Gruff. Gryg i Dduw, (1330-1370.)


251:3 "Cymminedd cyfungwlm;" light is thrown here upon the
expression "manred gymmined," with which Meugant
commences the several stanzas of his "Marwnad Cynddylan,"
(Ap. Myv. Arch. v. i. p. 159.) It is but a phrase borrowed from the
Druidic Creed, and employed by the Bard for some fanciful
reason or other, but without any immediate reference to the
strain or drift of the ,: song. Dr. Pughe knew nothing of the
Bardic import of the word "manred," which he renders, "of small
step or pace," and "manred gymmined," "short-paced traveller."
So necessary, for the proper understanding of the works of the
Bards, is a knowledge of Bardism!


THE DISCIPLINE OF BARDISM.
THE CREATION.


Disciple. With what material did God make all corporal things,
endued with life?


Master. With the particles of light, which are the smallest of all
small things; and yet one particle of light is the greatest of all
great things, being no less than material for all materiality that
can be understood and perceived as within the grasp of the
power of God. And in every particle there is a place wholly
commensurate with God, for there is not, and cannot be less
than God in every particle of light, and God in every particle;
nevertheless, God is only one in number. On that account, every
light is one, and nothing is one in perfect co-existence but what
cannot be two, either in or out of itself.


D. How long was God in making all corporal things?


M. The twinkling of an eye; when existence and life, light and
vision occurred, that is to say, God and all goodness in the act of
contemning evil. ;


THE CREATION.
Question. Of what materials did God make the worlds?


Answer. Of Himself, for existence having a beginning does not
otherwise take place.


THE CREATION.
Question. How were animation and life obtained?


Answer. From God, and in God were they found, that is, from the
fundamental and absolute life, that is, from God uniting Himself
to the dead, or earthliness--hence motion and mind, that is, soul.
And every animation and soul are from God, and their existence
is in God, both their pre-existence, and derived existence; for
there is no pre-existence except in God, no co-existence except in
God, and no derived existence except in God, and from God.


Footnotes


257:1 ,»e This fragment, in connection with the fact that His is
one of the Names of God, throws wonderful light upon the
language of Rhys Brydydd, whilst that also bears testimony to
the existence in his days, namely, between 1450 and 1490, of the
curious doctrine of the text:


Bychanaf or bychenyd,

Yw Hu Gadarn, fe'i barn byd;

A mwyaf, a Naf i ni,

Da coeliwn, a'n Duw Celi,

Ysgafn ei daith, ac esgud,
Mymryn tes, gloewyn ei glud,

A mawr ar dir a moroedd,

A mwyaf a gaf ar goedd;

Mwy no'r bydoedd, 'marbedwn
Amarch gwael i'r mawr hael hwn.


The smallest of the small

Is Hu the Mighty, as the world judges;

And the greatest, and a Lord to us,

Let us well believe, and our mysterious God;

Light His course and active,

An atom of glowing heat is His car;

Great on land and on the seas,

The greatest that I manifestly can have,

Greater than the worlds--Let us beware

Of mean indignity to him who deals in bounty.
See Dr. Pughe's Diet. v. mymryn.


It would have been utterly impossible to explain the allusions,
contained in this poetical passage, without the key which the
Bardic Catechism offers to us.


THE CREATION.--WORSHIP.--VOCAL SONG.--
GWYDDONIAID.


Disciple. From what did God make the world and living beings?


Master. From the particles, which He collected out of the infinite
expanse in the circle of Ceugant, and collocated


p.258 p.259


in order and just arrangement in the circle of Gwynvyd, as
worlds, and lives, and natures, without number, weight, or
measure, which any mind or intellect, but Himself, could possibly
foresee or devise, even if it possessed the endless ages of the
circle of Ceugant.


D. By what instrumentality or agency did God make these
things?


M. By the voice of His mighty energy, that is, by its melodious
sweetness, which was scarcely heard, when, lo! the dead
gleamed into life, and the nonentity, which had neither place or
existence, flashed like lightning into elementation, and rejoiced
into life, and the congealed, motionless shiver warmed into
living existence;--the destitute nothing rejoiced into being a
thousand times more guickly than the lightning reaches its
home.


D. Did any living being hear that melodious voice?


M. Yes; and co-instantaneously with the voice were seen all
sciences and all things cognitive, in the imperishable and
endless stability of their existence and life. For the first that


existed, and the first that lived, the first that obtained
knowledge, and the first that knew it, was the first that practised
it. And the first sage was Huon, the son of Nudd, : who is called
Gwynn, the son of Nudd, and Enniged the Giant; it was he who
first made demonstration visible and inceptive to the inferences
of men.


D. Who was the first that instituted the worship and adoration of
God?


M. Seth, the son of Adam; that is, he first made a retreat for
worship in the woods of the Vale of Hebron, having first
searched and investigated the trees, until he found a large oak,
being the king of trees, branching, wide-spreading, thick-topped,
and shady, under which he formed a choir and a place of
worship. This was called Gorsedd, and hence originated the
name Gorsedd, which was given to


p. 260


p. 261


every place of worship; and it was in that choir that Enos, the son
of Seth, composed vocal song to God.


D. Who was the first that made a vocal song?


M. Enos, : the son of Seth, the son of Adam, was the first that
made a vocal song, and praised God first in just poetry, and it
was in his father's Gorsedd that he first obtained Awen, which
was Awen from God; hence has arisen the usage of holding the
Gorsedd > of Vocal Song in the re-sort and Gorsedd of worship.


D. For what honourable purposes did Enos, the son of Seth,
invent vocal song?


M. In the first place, for the purpose of praising God and all
goodness; secondly, to commemorate good gualities, incidents,
and knowledge; thirdly, to convey instruction relative to
praiseworthy sciences in respect of God and man, that is, in such
a way as would be easiest to learn, and re-member, and most
pleasant to listen to.


D. What was the name that the wise men first had, whose
employment was vocal song and laudable sciences?


M. One was called Gwyddon, and many Gwyddoniaid; and they
were so called, because they followed their art in woods, and
under trees, in retired and inaccessible places, for the sake of
guietness, and the meditation of Awenic learning and sciences
from God, and for the sake of guietness to teach the sciences to
such as sought them, and desired wisdom by means of reason
and Awen from God.


Footnotes


259:1 ,»s In the document printed at p. 11, Huon is said to be the
son of Alser. Gwyn ab Nudd is celebrated in Welsh Romance as
the King of the Fairies, ,»» Brenin y Tylwyth Teg, in which capacity
many interesting particulars respect ing him have been collected
in the Notes to Guest's Mabinogion, ii, p. 323.


201:1 ,»e See Note, p. 54.


261:2 Al. "chair."


THE MATERIAL OF THE WORLD.


Guestion. What material did God use in the formation of the
world, namely, the heaven and the earth, and other things
known and conceived?


Answer. The manred, that is, the smallest of all the small, so that
a smaller could not be, which flowed ; in one sea through all the
Ceugant--God being its life, and pervading each atom, and God
moving in it, and changing the condition of the manred, without
undergoing a change in


p.262 p.263


paragraph coninues Himself. For life is unchangeable in all its motions, but
the condition of that which is moved is not one and the same.
Therefore, because God is in every motion, (ymmod,) one of
God's Names is MODUR, : and the condition that is moved is
called Moduransawdd. ;


Footnotes


261:3 ;>eThis explains the component rhed, which occurs in the
word "manred;"--q. d. the flowing particles.


263:1 ,»» 'The Mover."


263:2 "The condition of the Mover."


THE FALL IN ABRED.


God made all living beings in the circle of Gwynvyd at one
breath; but they would be gods, ; and attempted to traverse the
Ceugant. This, however, they could not do, wherefore they fell
down to Annwn, which unites with death and the earth, where is
the beginning of all living owners of terrestrial bodies.


Question. Where is Annwn?


Answer. In the extreme limits of the circle of Gwynvyd. That is,
living beings knew not how to distinguish evil from good, and
therefore they fell into evil, and went into Abred, which they
traversed until they came back into the circle of Gwynvyd.


O. What ignorance did they commit?


A. They would venture on the circle of Ceugant, and hence
became proud; but they could not traverse it, conseguently they
fell into the circle of Abred.


Footnotes


263:3,»» See Gen. iii. 5.


GOD IN THE SUN.


Ouestion. Why is the face turned towards the sun in every
asseveration and Prayer?


Answer. Because God is in every light, and the chief of every light
is the sun. It is through fire that God brings


p.264 p.265


back to Himself all things that have emanated from Him;
therefore it is not right to ally one's self to God, but in the light.
There are three kinds of light, namely: that of the sun, and hence
fire; that which is obtained in the sciences of teachers; and that
which is possessed in the understanding of the head and heart,
that is, in the soul. On that account, every vow is made in the
face of the three lights, that is, in the light of the sun is seen the
light of a teacher, or demonstration; and from both of these is
the light of the intellect, or that of the soul.


Footnotes


263:4 ».22 Howel ap Davydd ap Ieuan ap Rhys, (A.D. 1450--1480,)
clearly alludes to the doctrine of the text in the following
couplet;--


Y (Drindod, Duwdod) yn rhod y r haul
Ai annedd yn y wennaul.


The (Trinity, Deity) in the course of the sun,
Having His habitation in the bright sun.
I Fair a Sioseb.


p. 263


[paragraph continues) ON Which Ieuan Tir Iarll, who presided in the Chair of
Glamorgan A.D. 1760, and was remarkably well versed in Bardic
lore, has the following observations;--


"There was a general opinion in the age when this was
composed, that the sun was the abode, or habitation of God--in
other words, that the sun was heaven. There are many words
and sentences in other poems and odes which show ;.»» that
such was the view held by our ancestors respecting the sun. One
of the Names of God in primitive times was Hu, and therefore
the sun was designated Huan, which means annedd Hu, or the
abode of God. Sion Mowddwy, in a poem in which he sends the
sun as a messenger, says,


Yr haul glan hir olau glwys,

Ai rhediad o Baradwys,

Gan ENW DUW y gwnai'n dawel
Golianu o beutu 'r bel;

Golan nef wyd gwiwlawn faeth,
Golau 'r byd glaer wybodaeth.


Fair sun, with enduring and beautiful light,
Having thy course from Paradise,
By the NAME OF GOD dost thou guietly
Illumine all around the globe;
Thou art the light of heaven, worthy fosterer,
Light of the world, clear knowledge.

Sion Mowddwy.


"It may be supposed that they formerly sacrificed to the sun, or
at least in the face of the sun, which, in the opinion of those who


are skilled in the Mysteries of the Bards, is the most probable, for
I have not yet noticed in any place which ;.»s I have read, that
they themselves worshipped the sun, but only Him who dwelt in
it. Therefore, in the act of worshipping, as well as in the
performance of every other solemn rite, they did all in the face of
the sun and the eye of light, that is, in the face, or before the
face of Him, whom they regarded as living and existing in the
sun and the light.


"Gwilym Tew, in a poem eulogistic of the large wine flagon of
Rhys ap Sion of Glyn Nedd, says thus;--


Grenn our llaw gywrain Eurych,

A mîn gronn yn trammwy 'n grych,
Aberth yr haul, a byrth Rys

Yn ei hwyneb yw 'n hynys.


Golden vessel, the ingenious workmanship of a goldsmith,
With a rounded rim, running along in curls;

The sacrifice of the sun, supported by Rhys,

In its face, is our island."


GOD IN THE LIGHT.


Ouestion. Why do we say, heaven above, and hell beneath,
where there can be no highest in respect of any being, or lowest
in respect of any existence? And why God in the highest, and
Cythraul in the lowest?


Answer. Because the light is always highest, and above our
heads, and it is in the light that God is found, and there can be
no heaven, except in the light; and God and heaven always go
together with light. And the darkness is always the lowest, and
Cythraul and hell go together with it.


p.266 p.267


TRIADS OF BARDISM.


1. God made the world of three substances: fire; nature; and
finiteness.


2. The three instrumentalities of God in making the world: will;
wisdom; and love.


3. The three principal occupations of God: to enlighten the
darkness; to give a body to nonentity; and to animate the dead.


4. Three things which God cannot be: unskilful; unjust; and
unmerciful.


5. Three things required by God of man: firm belief, that is, faith;
religious obedience; and to do justice.


6. The three principal temperaments of life: strength; vigour; and
perception.


7. The three principal properties of life: temper; motion; and
light.


GOD; AND THE FACULTIES OF THE SOUL.
Question. What is conscience?


Answer. The eye of God in the heart of man, which sees every
thing that is perceptible, in its right form, place, time, cause, and
purpose.


O. What is reason?


A. The revolving of the conscience, whilst it contemplates by
means of sight, hearing, and experience, whatever comes before
it.


O, What is understanding?


A. The working of the conscience, whilst it exercises its energies
and might for the purpose of acguiring and improving good
sciences.


O. What is wisdom?


A. Sciences acguired by the revolving of the reason, and the
powerful working of the intellect, which obtain sciences from
God and goodness,--and by success in the improvement of them.


p.268 p.269
O. What is sense?


A. The exercise and rectification of wisdom, by studying the
manner in which it has been obtained, and tasting the counsels
of other wise men.


Thus thou knowest the correct saying of wisdom;--"Take as an
answer, I know, and I do not know, and try to understand it. Ile
who possesses wisdom, will correct himself, and will not stand in
need of another."


O. Didst thou not say that wisdom may be rectified by the
counsel of wise men


A. Yes; for trying the advice of wise men, and tasting that which
is wise, causes one to improve in wisdom, that is, not by the
acguisition of counsel and instruction, but by applying them to
the taste, as if bodily food were given to the wretch that asked it.
It is not the giver that feeds the body, but he that takes what is
proper for him, omitting what is otherwise.


G: What is God?

A. The life of all lives.

O. What is the spirit of God?

A. The power of all powers.

O. What is the providence of God?

A. The order of orders, and the system of systems.
O. What is the power of God?


A. The knowledge of all Knowledge, the art of all arts, and the
agent of all agents.


O. What is truth?


A. The sciences of wisdom preserved in memory by conscience.


O. What is justice?


A. The art and office of conscience, regulated by reason,
understanding, and wisdom, considering and acting accordingly.


O. What is judgment?


A. God co-reasoning with man in his conscience, in respect of the
knowledge which he possesses, after he has revolved in his mind
what has been demonstrated.


O. What is the soul?
A. The breath of God in a carnal body.
O. What is life?


A. The might of God.


SENTENCES OF BARDISM.


Here are the Sentences of Bardism, from the Book of Ieuan, the
son of Hywel Swrdwal. ;


1. That does not but exist, from which a greater amount of good
than of evil can be produced; since it cannot be otherwise in
virtue of God's power, wisdom, and love.


2. The existence of that, which does good to some, and does no
harm to others, is safe; since there is more utility from it, than if
it had not existed; and God will not permit possible good to be
lost.


3. Of that which is neither good nor bad, neither the existence
nor non-existence is safe for man, for nothing in reason is known
of it. Others say, that it is the material of every thing. However,
there is only God that knows its good and evil, its utility and
inutility, and whether the good or evil be the greater.


4. Where a great good to all, without harm to any one, can be
comprehended, it cannot be but that it is in existence, since
otherwise the three principal attributes of God, namely,
knowledge, wisdom, and mercy, would not stand without being
opposed by distress and necessity: therefore Bardism is true.


5. Truth cannot be had from that in which every truth cannot
consist, and which will not consist in every truth, for truth cannot
be had from what will contradict or withstand that which is true.


6. It is true that, according to justice, there should be the best of
all things.


7. It is true that, according to love, there should be the best of all
things.


p.272 p.273


8. It is true that, according to power, there should be the best of
all things.


9. It is true that, according to wisdom and knowledge, there
should be the best of all things.


10. It is true that there cannot be in God other than all
knowledge, all wisdom, all power, all love, and all justice, without
restraint, without measure, without cessation, without end.
Therefore, in respect of the power of God, it cannot but be that
the best of all things are in existence; and it cannot be otherwise
in respect of His knowledge; and it cannot but be, in respect of
His love, justice, and wisdom, that the best of all things are in
existence.


11. It is true that God can accomplish the best of all things; on
that account, it cannot but be that the best of all things are in
existence.


12. According to justice, there should be ability in justice;
therefore, in respect of justice, there cannot but be that ability
belongs to justice.


13. In respect of knowledge, there ought to be power in
knowledge, and in knowing what is best; therefore there is
power in knowing what is best.


14. According to love, there should be what is most merciful;
therefore, by the love of God, what is most merciful is in


existence in every essence.


15. God, in respect of His power, wisdom, knowledge, and love,
can produce the best of all things, the most just of all things, and
the most kind of all things; therefore, it cannot but be that the
best of all things are in existence.


16. It cannot but be that the extreme limits of goodness, and of
what is good, are in God; on that account, there cannot but be
that the extreme of all goodness, and all that is good, is, and
may be found, from God, and by God, through His infinite grace
and love.


17. There cannot be a God, that does not possess all power, all
love, all wisdom, all knowledge, all justice, and all goodness. And
it cannot but be that whatever those,


p.274 p.275


who possess these things, do, is found to be without distress,
without necessity.


And thus it ends.


Footnotes


271:1 ,»e Ieuan ab Hywel Swrdwal was an eminent poet, who
flourished from about 1450 to 1480.


THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. OF THE BARDS.
(From the Blue Book.)


1. God is one, and there is only Himself who is God. Love thy God
with all thy soul, with all thy heart, with all thy strength, with all
thy endeavour, with all thy understanding, and with all thy
affections. For it is He, and no other being, living or existing, that
made thee, and doth maintain thee, with all His might, and with
all His mercy.


2. Do not love or seek an image instead of God, whether of wood
or stone, of gold or silver, or of any other material, and whether
it be represented in colour or in effigy; for thou hast never seen
God; and who has seen Him? Do not take this world, or any other
world, however glorious it may appear to thee, in the place of
God; because they are not God, but the work of God, for thy
great good, and for that of others, millions of times beyond the
extreme limits of thy understanding and comprehension. Do not
take riches or possession of any kind, or the regard and
greatness of the proud and sinful world, in the place of God.
Take not either relation or friend, male or female, for a God. Do
not place thy aim, thy heart, thy intention, thy affections, or thy
confidence, upon one or other of these things, or upon anything
that will cause thee to trust less to God, because of the claim and
possession thou hast in them, Always remembering and
bewaring, do not seek or retain or love any one of these things,
in such a way as will make thee cleave less to thy


p.276 p.277


(paragraph continues) GOO than if thou wert without them. If thou doest so,
God will turn His face from thee, and will leave thee to stand on
thy own footing, and on the rotten foundation of the things
which thou worshippest.


3. Swear not to the Name of God, and do not mention His name
disrespectfully and lightly, nor deem it of no conseguence to
listen to such language from the lips of another without
reproving and counselling him charitably, kindly, and in a
friendly manner, at the same time fearlessly and boldly. If this
does not avail, then dwell no longer where thou art compelled to
hear the Name of thy God disparaged, and do not, without
necessity and cause of importance, mention the Name of thy
God at any time.


4. Remember to rest on Sunday, that thy family, thy man servant,
and thy maid servant, thy labouring man and labouring woman,
may rest, and cast off their fatigue,--that thy ox, thy horse, and
every other beast of toil, may enjoy rest, as they reguire.
Remember that both man and beast have a claim to the time of
rest;--there is no health without it. Remember that there is need
of a time for thee to reflect, to consider, and to learn thy duty
towards God and man. Without this there cannot be that
rotation, which ought to be, and which pleases God, in respect of
man or property, of world or existence, of animation or life. God,
in His six working days, made the worlds and all that are in
them, consisting of heaven and celestials, of earth and
terrestrials, of worlds, beings, and existences, of all essence and
essentials. God rested on His seventh day, that He might
consider His work; and on beholding it, He knew that all was
good. Do thou, also, on thy seventh day, consider the work of thy
six days, and review sharply, sincerely, and vigorously every


particle of it, whether it be the work of thy hands, or the work of
thy mind, or the work of thy affection, or the work of thy
intellect; and then let thy conscience speak, according to its
judgment, the language of God in its own undeceitful language,
and it will be well for thee, and very well, if it can say that such
work was good.


p.278 bo. 279


[paragraph continues) COnSider the work of thy next six days, with full
purpose, and full resolution to do it better than thou didst that
of the preceding. Try to bring every thing, whether it be the work
of the body, or the work of the mind, or the work of the
affection, or the work of the intellect, onward and on-ward, from
better to better, as long as thy life continues, and at the end of it,
thou shalt rest from all thy labour in a world and existence,
where thou shalt see, and canst truly say of every thing, that "it
is very good."


5. Remember to love and honour thy father and mother, as thou
wouldest that thy son and daughter should honour thee. They
have seen and heard more than thou; give credence to them
with respect and obedience. They have nourished and cherished
thee with love and care; do thou, also, cherish them in their
need, feebleness, and old age. They love thee sincerely, they love
thee indeed more than any other persons do; therefore it is from
their own mouths only that thou wilt obtain truth; though they
should deceive all others, they will not deceive thee, because of
the love they have for thee. Believe what they say, and act
accordingly. Bear in mind the loss of losing the only ones that tell
thee the truth. Bear in mind the love of the only ones that have
suffered in truth for thee. Repay them; render love for love;


render care for care; do unto them, as they have done unto thee.
Run obediently at their bidding, as they have ran carefully,
lovingly, and quickly at thy cries, when thou wert a feeble child.
Thou wert not suffered to complain long; do not suffer them to
complain long in their feebleness. By loving and reverencing thy
father and mother, thou wilt love and reverence thy God, Who on
that account will bestow upon thee His blessing. Thou shalt
prosper in thy life and means; thou shalt increase in wealth and
understanding; thou shalt have ease in thy conscience, and
consequently ease in every thing else; and from this ease of
mind, thou shalt have long health, and consequently long life.
And these things God promises to add to thee immeasurably
beyond what may be given to thee by any


p. 280 p. 281


thing else, or through any other means hitherto endued with
existence, other than what is in God Himself, and His infinite
power, knowledge, and love. He says the word; He will do it.


6. Kill not, and do no murder upon any account whatsoever. Do
not take away the life of either man or beast, except to prevent
thyself from being killed, as when thou killest the enemy that
would kill thee, when thou canst not escape, and leave him his
life; or when thou killest an animal to obviate hunger, when thou
canst not have food otherwise that will keep thee from dying. He
that slays shall be slain; : and though the body may not be slain,
the soul shall be slain. If he escape in this world, he shall suffer
grievously in the next world. Blood must be rendered for blood;
God hath sworn it.


7. Commit no theft; take not from any man, or from any living or
existing being, his own property, by forcible violence, whether it


be done publicly or privately. Take not from any living being his
property, by treachery, or cunning, or extortion, or oppression.
Take not, in any of these ways, his goods, or understanding, or
time, or opportunity, or memory, or art, or anything that belongs
to one or other of these particulars.


8. Abstain from fornication, and do not commit adultery and
concubinage. It is not lawful for any one to nourish the children
of others. It is not lawful for any one to divert affianced affection
from her whose due it is. Do unto the wife of another, as thou
wouldest that another should do unto thy wife, Do unto the
daughter of another, as thou wouldest that another should do
unto thy own daughter and sister: and remember!


9. Tell no falsehood of any kind, nor on any account whatsoever.
Be not a perjurer, or a traitor, or an unjust witness against thy
neighbour, or any other man whatsoever. Bear no calumny
against any man, or reproach, or satire. Do not love falsehood in
another. Conceal not the truth, when it is reguired of thee, on
any occasion whatsoever.


p.282 p.283


(paragraph coninues CONCeal not the truth by word, or deed, or behaviour,
or appearance; because the lie that comes from these things is
not less than that which comes from the tongue and speech.
Though it may be against thy father or mother, against thy
brother or sister, against thy son or daughter, against the wife of
thy bosom, against thy own life, yet tell the truth. For the
falsehood, of whatever kind it may be, will be against thy own
soul--it will be told, exhibited, and performed against God and
His truth.


10. Be not covetous of any thing, lest any one should give to thee
what ought to be given to one who is poorer than thou--lest thou
shouldest impoverish another by having what thou covetest--
lest, from coveting any thing whatsoever, thou shouldest
.commit injustice with the view of obtaining it--lest, by setting thy
mind upon what thou covetest, thou shouldest forget thy God
and His laws--lest thou shouldest omit from memory what is of
greater worth, for the sake of what thou covetest. Covet not thy
goods, or possessions, or any of thy own property, which can be
dispensed with agreeably to the laws of God, lest thou shouldest
refuse to the poor and needy what, out of charity and justice,
ought to be given or done to them. But love thy neighbour as
thou lovest thyself; this, however, thou canst not do, whilst there
is covetousness in thy heart. Thou canst not love God above all,
or love His laws more than the goods of the world, or love thy
neighbour more than mortal and terrestrial things. Covet not the
house or farm of thy neighbour, or his wife or daughter, or his
man servant or maid servant, or his ox or horse, or any thing
else that belongs to him, lest thou shouldest think of obtaining,
or taking, or willing them, in a way that is not consistent with the
will and laws of God. But seek of God what thou wantest, and
thou shalt obtain it, if thou askest it by faith and sincere belief,
and if the occasion be just, and thy necessity unavoidable, and if
its acguisition be not injurious to thee. Believe in thy God, and
trust in Him with hope and faith, and thou shalt have from Him
what, in His sight, is sufficient


p.284 p.285


and useful for thee. He knows thy wants, and what may be for
thy advantage, better than thou knowest thyself, and assuredly


He will not fail to give thee anything but what may be
disadvantageous and injurious to thee.


By keeping these laws incessantly, thou shalt obtain from God
love and peace, in the world which now is, and in the world
which is to come; and from man thou shalt obtain respect,
advantage, good will, and abundance, without there being need
in thy house, or an enemy to thy conscience--long life in the
world which now is, and eternal life, and endless felicity, in the
world to come.


The end.


Footnotes


275:1 ».2 Literally, "the ten words of the law," which phraseology
has been, also, retained in the Welsh Prayer Book, though it is
not now popularly used. When the Cymry embraced Christianity,
they manifested a special veneration for the Ten
Commandments, as is evidenced by the fact that "the ten words
of the law, the Gospel of John, and the blessed cross," constitute
a Triad of the instruments of swearing, which succeeded the
more ancient forms which had been used by the Bards, and
which shall be hereafter described.


When Taliesin took the Bardic vow " on the Altar of St. Teilo at
Llandaf," among other things he is made to say,--


O dengair deddf Duw a'm barno
Os datrin fy min man y bo.


From the ten words of the law may God judge me,
If my lips divulge where it is.--MS.


281:1 ,»e This is the motto of the Chair of Powys, and is supposed
to be co-eval with its foundation in the 6th century. It is guoted
by Davydd ab Gwilym,--


A laddo un a'i loyw ddur
I luddias hoed a leddir.


He who slays another with bright steel
To prevent delay, shall be slain.


THE TEN COMMANDMENTS OF THE BARDS.


Here are the Ten Commandments of the Bards of the Cymry,
from the Book of Joseph Jones.


1. Love thy God with the might of all thy body, with the might of
all thy soul, with the might of all thy heart, with the might of all
thy understanding, and with the might of all thy affection; and
love no one but Him. He is one, and there is no God but He. Seek
no other God but Him.


2. Beware of worshipping idols in the place of God--or any thing
else whether in colour or effigy. Do not make an image of God
out of anything in heaven or earth; and do not contemplate or
invent any adoration to them, whatever they may be, whether
they be in heaven, or in earth, or in the waters and seas of earth.
Do no homage to any thing, which may be set forth in the form
of God, for thou knowest not His form. If thou do, God will bring
vengeance, on account of His dishonour, upon thee, thy children,
thy grandchildren, and thy great-grandchildren. But if thou love
thy God, with true veneration and obedience, He will love thee
and thy posterity to the age of ages.


3. Take not the Name of thy God in vain, for he who does so is an
immoral man. He who honours not God, will not honour His laws
and commandments.


p.286 p.287


4. Remember to keep Sunday religiously. It is lawful for thee to
work for six days; but on the seventh day thou shalt rest, and
leave off all work and occupation, that all thy family and all thy


beasts of labour may rest. The seventh day is the rest of thy God.
In six days He made heaven and celestials, the earth and
terrestrials, all the worlds and their inhabitants; and on the
seventh day He rested, blessing and sanctifying it. From this
springs a claim to a season and time of rest on the part of every
man and beast,--of every living and animate being.


5. Pay just respect, honour, and love to thy father and mother,
and to every one who may be head and lord, by just rights, over
thee. Because from this thou shalt obtain the favour of thy
heavenly Father, guietness for thy district and home, peace and
long life in the world, and the rewards of the world to come.


6. He who slays shall be slain; therefore, do not kill or commit
murder, on any pretence whatsoever, upon any man or other
living being, except to prevent thyself from being killed by foe or
famine.


7. Tell no falsehood or perjury, be not an unjust witness against
another, and conceal not the truth by word, deed, or behaviour.


8. Steal not the property of another, by oppression, treachery,
daring, intention, cunning, or any other possibility; but do
justice, for God is just, and He will repay according to what is
just.


9. Avoid adultery and fornication, and dishonour not the wife Or
daughter of any man whatsoever; but let there be unto thee a
wedded wife of thy own, and be faithful to her, and let her be
faithful to thee. God will revenge Himself upon adultery and
fornication.


10. Be not covetous of any thing you see, whether they be
houses, or lands, or oxen, or horses, or any beast, or wife, or
daughter, or man servant, or maid servant, or anything
whatsoever that belongs to another. For from covetousness arise
every oppression and pillage, every avarice


p.288 p.289


and extortion, every niggardliness and sharpness, every
uncharitableness and want of alms-giving, and every illiberal and
disagreeable conduct.


And thus end the Ten Commandments, from the keeping of
which every goodness and blessing, and the love of God and
men, and every felicity in the present world, and in the world to
come, will accrue to man.


THE RUDIMENTS OF THEOLOGY.


1. Keep thy eyes upon God, worship Him, and do no dishonour
to Him in His presence.


2. Justice and love, with peace and truth, are the materials of
immortal life.


3. Avoid adultery and the violation of marriage.
4. Commit no depredation and pillage.


5. There is nothing just for any one, except what will suffice him
in the face of death.


6. Impart the knowledge of God to all, and the instruction of
man to such as will receive it.


7. Insert ........ «and the order of time in the memorials of
theological sciences.


8. Do thy best, to the extent of reason and power, and leave the
impossible excess to God, and His will.


9. Give of thy wealth and property an oblation to God and his
poor, that thou mayest not be accursed, and that thou mayest
not pine away; for God will have his own.


10. There is nothing which has not been made by God; there is
nothing which does not belong to God, and not to another. Leave
to God what He wills.


And thus end the Ten Commandments of St Paul, which he
received from the mouth of Jesus Christ, the Son of grace.


Footnotes


289:* , »s Illegible in the MS.


p.290 p.291


THE TRIADS OF ST. PAUL. .


1. The three principal duties of a Christian: belief in Christ; hope
in God; and love to man.


2. The three dispositions of an unchristian man: pride; cruelty;
and falsehood.


3. The three signs of a Christian: to love truth, however great
may be the loss; to love one's country, however great may be the
suffering; and to love an enemy, however great may be his
treachery.


4. Three things without which a man cannot be a Christian:
holiness of life; divine counsels; and suffering without complaint.


5. The three friends of every true Christian: reason; patience; and
conscience.


6. The three joys of a Christian: the love of God; the happiness of
man; and the success of truth.


7. Three things which every good man will be: industrious;
pacific; and benevolent.


8. Three things which God has given for the instruction of man:
natural reason; the judgment of conscience; and the Gospel of
Christ.


9. From three words will be one word of God:. love; truth; and
justice; and these three words are one word with God, and there


can be no other word from God than love.


p. 293


10. Three guestions that were put to Christ: the first, "What is
truth?" and He said, "Love;" the second, "What is justice?" and He
said, Love;" and the third, "What is love?" and He said, "God."


11. God consists of three things: the most powerful of all that
can be comprehended; the most just of all that can be
comprehended; and the most merciful of all that can be
comprehended.


12. There are three things belonging to God, the magnitude of
which cannot be comprehended: His power; His justice; and His
mercy.


13. There are three things, which, in virtue of the attributes and
nature of God, cannot but exist: all justice; all love; and all
beauty.


14. Three things without which nothing can be well known: the
nature that ought to be; the reason of what is possible; and the
commandments of God beyond every one of the two, and yet
not opposed to them.


15. There are three views of God: what is greatest of all things;
what is best of all things; and what is most beautiful of all things.


16. The three co-destinies of all men: the same beginning; the
same course; and the same end.


17. The three excellences of God: being the first of all things; the
chief of all things; and the most complete of all things.


18. There are three ways in which God can be seen: in Himself, in
power; in Christ, by sight; and in the soul of man, as to His Holy
Spirit.


19. There are three sufficiencies, from which will ensue life
everlasting: sufficiency of truth; sufficiency of knowledge; and
sufficiency of love.


20. From three sufficiencies there is every insufficiency:
sufficiency of worldly riches; sufficiency of bodily strength; : and
sufficiency of idleness. »


21. The three words of advice, which Jesus Christ gave above all
other advices: first, love thy God with all thy


p. 294 p.295


soul; secondly, love thy neighbour with all thy heart; and, thirdly,
love thy own reputation with all thy wisdom; and no one can ask
more of thee.


22. Three men that will please God: he who loves every living
being with all his heart; he who accomplishes every thing that is
handsome with all his strength; and he who seeks every
knowledge with all his understanding.


23. A conscientious man will be three things: wise; amiable; and
merry.


24. The three marks of non-conscientiousness: to be unwise;
timid; and petulant.


25. Three things, it is not known which of them is the worst: the
devil; a perjured man; and an unmerciful man.


26. There are three things of God: to desire existence to what
can be the best of all things; to believe that there is existence to
what is the best possible of all things; and to conduct one's self
in the best way possible in every thing.


27. Three things spoken to Paul from heaven: love thy God above
all things; love thy truth as thy own soul; and love thy neighbour
as thyself.


28. The three marks of a neighbour, by which he may be known
wherever he is: to be poor; to be a stranger; and to be in the
image of a man.


29. There are three duties towards God, without which there can
be no godliness, or the attainment of heavenliness: belief; fear;
and love.


30. Three things which the godly shall enjoy: union with God;
perfect gwynvyd; and complete knowledge;--the whole for ever,
without cessation, without end.


31. The three organs of the intellect: thought; word; and deed;
and they are called the three faculties. ;


32. The three exercises of the faculties, or the three organs,
commanded by Christ, namely: do good with all thy energies
wherever, and in whatever there may be cause and
requirement; 2 and be patient unto death, without repining, in
behalf of goodness, whenever, and on what occasion so ever
there may be need and reguirement;--and all this


p.296 p.297


with all thy power, with all thy affection, and with all thy
understanding.


33. The three paths towards truth: to understand it; to love it;
and to desire it. :


34. Three things, by the performance of which, all relating to
godliness will be accomplished: to avoid the world; 2 to deny the
flesh; and to resist the Cythraul.


35. The three foundations of wisdom: understanding; love; and
Justice.


36. The three measuring rods of justice: what is adjudged right
in another; what fears the opposition of what is not right ; from
another; and what is sought, according to desire, in respect of
what is adjudged right in another.


37. The three corroborations of justice: what is found right by
experience, exercise, and understanding; what is taught as right,
in respect of acguirement, judgment, and conscience, to
another; and what is desired, in virtue of what has been
acguired, judged, and learned, from another. What will oppose
these primary characteristics can have no claim or privilege.


38. The three measuring rods of the understanding: the
judgment of another; poise and counterpoise; and the guidance
of meditation with . affection; and, according as these things are,
will be the extent and nature of the understanding.


39. The three marks of a godly man: to seek after truth; to
perform justice; and to exercise mercy.


40. There are three things that are one whole, as to primary and
original derivation: justice; truth; and love; for from one, namely,
love, the whole proceeds as one right from God, inasmuch as
there is only one right of the whole in being and existence.


41. For three reasons ought a man to renounce life, where ;
there is occasion: seeking after truth; cleaving to justice; and
performing mercy.


42. Three things that corrupt the world: pride; extravagance; and
indolence.


p.298 p.299


43. The three principal gualities of godliness: to speak the truth
in spite of him who may withstand ; it; to love all that is comely

and good; and to suffer heartily in behalf of the truth and every
thing that is good.


44. Three things which cannot be finite: God; expanse; and time.


45. Three things that make a sinner: fear; covetousness; and
ignorance.


46. Three things that corrupt the world: pride; extravagance; and
indolence. >


47. The three principal gualities of godliness: consideration;
justice; and love.


48. In three things will a godly man be one with God: in knowing
every thing; in loving every thing; and in freeing himself from
every thing.


49. Three littles that will cause much evil: a little deceit; a little
anger; and a little ignorance.


50. The three principal things ; which God requires reflection;
justice; and love. «


51. Three things which, being disregarded, will draw down
vengeance: the advice of a seer; rational judgment and the
complaint of the poor.


52. The three unions that support every thing: the union of love
with justice; the union of truth with imagination; and the union
of God with contingency.


53. The three marks of godliness: to do justice; to be fond of
mercy; and to behave obediently under every circumstance.


54. There are ; three things, God does not love those who love to
see them: to see fighting; to see a monster and to see the pomp
of pride.


55. The three principal manifestations of God: His works; His
word; and His Spirit.


56. In respect of three things will a man have his object in unison
with the will of God, namely: when he believes only his own
senses; when he imagines only with his own


p. 300 p. 301


consideration; and when he has to do only with his own
conscience.


57. Three men who will speak differently, according to their
nature and disposition: a man of God, who will speak the best
part of the truth, for the sake of peace, advantage, and concord;
a man of man, who will speak the whole of the truth, be it good,
be it evil, come what will, whatever may ensue in conseguence; a
man of the devil, who will speak the worst part of the truth, in
order to harm and cause misfortune--a ready devil will speak an
assiduous falsehood for the sake of mischief and ruin.


58. Three things, wherever they are, there can be no godliness:
revelling; pride; and covetousness.


59. The three marks of godliness: disinterested love; courageous
obedience; and affectionate silence.


60. Three men who stand in the relation of brothers and sisters:
an orphan; a widow; and a stranger.


61. The three blessed ones of God: the gentle; the peaceable;
and the merciful.


62. The three characteristics of the children of God: a pure
conscience; unostentatious demeanour; and voluntary suffering
in the cause of truth and love.


63. The three principal commandments of God: love; justice; and
obedience.


64. The three signs of a just man: to love truth; to love peace;
and to love an enemy.


65. The three principal delights of a godly man: justice; mercy;
and gentleness.


66. The three encouragements of mischief: voluptuousness;
fighting; and inconstancy.


67. The three counsels, : which Jesus Christ gave to His followers,
namely, He counselled: first, perpetual poverty; because thereby
all violence, usurpation, extortion, and covetousness, will cease,
and conseguently perfect justice will be obtained; secondly,
voluntary obedience, for the sake of such as may demand it in
every thing that is sin-less, and conseguently there will be an end
to all guarrelling,


p.302 p.303


contention, and pride, and perfect peace and tranquillity will be
obtained; thirdly, pure and perfect love, in the exercise of all
affection, kindness, mercy, charity, mutual defence, and civility,
towards such as may deserve them, and of all kindness, peace,
guietness, and almsgiving, towards such as do not deserve, and
in the endeavour to rectify whatever is not right, in respect of
man, system, or usage, leaving to God what in his judgment he
concludes to be just. From following these three counsels will the
three special felicities be attained, which three felicities are: first,
no goodness can be commanded, which will not be performed,
kept, and completed; secondly, there can be no just and merciful
deed, which will not be performed; thirdly, there can be no debt
which will not be paid, and discharged, no reguest which will not
be obtained, and no deficiency which will not be supplied. Thus
also will be obtained the three deliverances, namely: there will
be no transgression : which will not be set right; no displeasure
which will not be forgiven; and no anger which will not be
pacified. And thence will be obtained the three excellences: first,
there will be nothing ill-favoured, which shall not be adorned;


secondly, there will be no evil, which shall not be removed; >
thirdly, there will be no desire, which shall not be attained. And
from reaching this mark: in the first place, there can be nothing,
which shall not be known; there can be no loss of anything
beloved, which shall not be regained; thirdly, there can be no
end to the gwynvyd which shall be attained. And it is not
necessary that there should be in understanding might and love
other than these things, with the careful performance of what is
possible.


68. There are three men of different dispositions and qualities: ;
a man of God, who does good for evil; aman of man, who does
good for good, and evil for evil; and a man of the devil, who does
evil for good.


p.304 p. 305


69. There are three men, who will get what they seek from God:
he who seeks to become better in his heart; he who seeks to
know the truth; and he who seeks the benefit and good of his
neighbour. ;


70. The three counsels of Lazarus: 2 believe thy God, for He made
thee: love thy God, for He redeemed thee; and fear thy God, for
He will judge thee.


71. Three things, if borne in mind, will keep one from sinning:
the commandments of God; the joy of heaven; and the
punishment of sin.


72. The three stabilities of godliness: faith; ; hope; and charity.


In another Book--The three foundations of godliness: faith; .
charity; and hope.


73. Three will testify of the commandments of God: necessity;
utility; and beauty.


74. The three losses on earth that will bring gain in heaven: to
lose riches out of love for man; to lose fame out of love for
civilization; and to lose life out of love for the truth.


75. The three losses of the body that will bring gain to the soul:
the loss of health; the loss of wealth; and the loss of hatred.


76. There are three kinds of falsehood: the falsehood of word
and saying; the falsehood of deed; and the falsehood of
demeanour. ;


77. From three blessings will the blessing of God be obtained:
the blessing of father and mother; the blessing of the poor and
sick; « and the blessing of the distressed stranger. ;


78. The three manifestations of God: Fatherhood creating the
world; Sonship teaching the world; and Spirituality supporting
and governing the world.


79. Three things which a man ought to do with his heart: to feel
it; to teach it; and to fear it.


80. For three reasons ought a man to part with s life, if


it be required: seeking after truth; cleaving to justice; and
performing mercy.


81. The three supports of a godly man: God and His gift of grace;
conscience itself; and the praise of every wise and good man.


82. The three counsels of Lazarus: obey God Who made thee;
love God Who redeemed thee; and fear God Who will call thee to
judgment for thy works.


83. Three things that concur in will and tendency with all
goodness: God in His power and favour; a wakeful conscience;
and the judgment of wise and godly men.


84. Three things that are united with the religious love;
avoidance; and seeking.


85. Three things that are incompatible with God: misfortune;
falsehood; and despair.


86. Three places where will be the most of God: where He is
mostly loved; where He is mostly sought; and where there is the
least of self.


87. The three godly gualities of man: patient endurance; sincere
and disinterested love; and renunciation of what is temporal.


88. Three things it is desirable to see: the mischievous becoming
happy; the miser becoming generous; and a sinner becoming
pious.


89. Three things that will be obtained from poverty: health;
prudence; and the help of God.


90. There are three falsehoods: the falsehood of speech; the
falsehood of silence; and the falsehood of conduct. Each of the
three will induce another to believe what he ought not.


91. Three things that a patient man will obtain: the love of good
men; the approval of his own conscience; and the favour ; of
God.


92. Three things that a merciful man will obtain: love; peace; and
the good will of God.


93. There are three punishments for sin: the punishment of man,
which is severe; the punishment of God,


p.308 p.309


which is more severe; and the punishment of conscience, when it
is awakened, which is the severest of all.


94. Three things that a man will have from believing in God: what
is needful of worldly matters; peace of conscience; and
communion with the celestials.


95. Three things necessary to a sinner: to acknowledge his sins;
to repent of them; and to entreat forgiveness.


96. Three things that a humble man will obtain: ease of mind;
the love of neighbours; and godly discretion.


97. The three punishments which a Christian inflicts upon his
enemy: not to accuse him; to forgive him; and to do what is kind
and good for him.


98. The three cares of a Christian: not to offend God; not to be a
stumbling block to man; and not to become enfeebled in love.


99. The three luxuries of a Christian: what is possible from the
predestination of God; : what is possible from justice to all; and


what can be practised in love towards all.


100. The three witnesses of godliness: to forbid selfishness; to
behave generously; and to support every goodness.


101. The three chief reguirements of God: justice; mercy; and
obedience before Him.


102. The three co-endeavours of love: to worship God out of love
towards Him; to benefit man out of love towards Him; and to
please self out of love for God and man.


103. The three chiefs of the world that tend together towards
love: the good will of God; the benefit of man; and the quality of
nature. »


104. Three things that will invest every thing with godliness: to
put man in order; to teach truth and justice; and to lessen pain
and want.


105. The three utilities of every thing in the hands of God: that
which refers to the greatest necessity; the greatest advantage;
and the greatest love. ;


106. Three things that are principally from God: truth; peace; and
knowledge.


p. 310 p. 311


107. Three things that are principally from Cythraul: ignorance;
falsehood; and contention.


108. The three characteristics of godliness: to be holy as God; to
be merciful as God; and to perform justice as God does.


109. The three principal gualities of godliness: justice; love; and
reflection.


110. With three things ought every goodness to be per-formed:
with all the understanding; with all the power and with all the
affection.


111. The three impious contentions: war for war; law for law; and
disgrace for disgrace.


112. The three pious contentions: prudence for imprudence;
favour for no favour; and love for hatred.


113. From three things comes godliness: love; justice; and truth. ;


114. There are three different kinds of men: a man of man, who
does good for good, and evil for evil; aman of God, who does
good for evil; and a man of the devil, who does evil for good.


115. The three teachers appointed by God for man: one is
contingency, which instructs one by seeing and hearing the
second is consideration, which instructs by reason and
understanding; the third is the grace of God, which instructs by
instinct and genius.


116. Three things which mark a man of the devil: pride; envy;
and violence.


117. The three materials of judgment: law from justice; mercy
from love; and conscience from reason and understanding of the
former two.


118. The three principal gualities of goodness: love; justice; and
suffering bravely in their behalf.


119. There are three words of advice to every man: know thy
power; know thy knowledge; and know thy duty; and knowing
them, act accordingly.


120. From three blessings will the blessing of God be obtained:
the blessing of father and mother; the blessing


of the poor and sick; and the blessing of the needy stranger.


121. Three godly gualities in man: to consider; to love; and to
suffer.


122. Three devilish gualities in man: avarice; anger; and pride.


123. The three characteristics of instrumental good: to rear
children in godliness; to support one's self in the office and state
in which one is placed, as duty requires; : and to cultivate the
earth.


124. The three characteristics of active good: to maintain truth
and justice; to maintain love and peace; and to augment that
gwynvyd, which may be pleasing to God.


125. The three characteristics of desirable good: to affect truth
and justice; to affect peace and love; and to affect and desire
gwynvyd wholly, and with a view to the whole.


126. The three saving goodnesses that will bring heaven to the
soul of man, that is to say: the goodness which he performs
voluntarily and in love, and which he would not of his own
accord undo, in that he understands its intent--and of doing
which goodness he would not repent during life, such as


practising justice, mercy, generosity, and forbearance,
unrepented of, and with full disposition and love towards those
good things, and towards what he does in their behalf; the
second is the goodness which he produces of his free will and
endeavour for a particular purpose, being thereby the cause,
which produces the said goodness, such as rearing children, and
teaching them to be godly, and workers of good, with a just
information and understanding of the good that ought to be
performed, to the utmost ability of the man who seeks to do it;
the third is the goodness which he would do of the free will and
desire of his heart, were it possible for him, if he had the means,
time, ability, and Knowledge, and which good things he would
not undo by word, deed, demeanour, or wish, ever after of his
own accord, in that he understood and knew what would be the
effect of his intention, and what would be the effect of


p.314 p.315


his act towards those things. And these goodnesses are
adjudged and privileged by God, according to the amount of
power, affection, facility, desire, and free will, connected with
them, as egual to the active goodnesses, which would do so, in
that they had the power, affection, means, place, and time.


127. There are three reasons why God should be loved, and
honoured: because He made us; because we are under an
obligation to Him for maintaining us; and as a return for the
felicity of His spiritual friendship.


128. There are three reasons and obligations for loving man:
because he is in the image of God; because He is of the same
essence and nature with ourselves; and because of the pleasure
and advantage that accrue to love from the act of loving.


129. Three things that will be had in the ways of God: peace;
truth; and knowledge.


130. Three things that God will give to His children, who love
Him: justice; mercy; and gwynvyd.


131. Three things which every one, who loves the truth, ought to
do: to seek it indefatigably; to obey its counsels; and to die,
where there is occasion, for its sake.


132. Three things abominable in man: adultery; falsehood; and
drunkenness.


133. The three things most decorous in man: justice; mercy; and
obedience.


134. The three principal vigours of man: awen; affection; and
intellect; and with these three he ought to love God.


135. Three things that ought to be obeyed: the commandments
of God; the law of the country; and the reguirements of
conscience.


136. Three things which God only knows, and therefore it is not
right to prejudge them: the tendency of awen; the attempt of the
intellect; and the judgment of conscience.


137. Three things which a man ought to do honestly: to gain
possessions through innocent industry and uprightness,


p.316 p.317


that he may do justice and almsgiving; to benefit man in every
employment which he performs; and to impart instruction in


godliness and morality to all, wherever he goes.


138. Three things, without which there can be no godliness or
morality: to forgive enmity and wrong; generosity; and just
demeanour on all occasions.


139. The three excellencies of goodness: meekness; prudence;
and liberality of mind and conduct.


140. There are three men, than whom there can be no worse: the
miser; the slanderer; and the hypocrite.


141. The three qualities that will effect godliness: knowledge;
truth; and liberality.


142. Three things that a man of God will be: moral; amiable; and
well disposed.


143. The three things which God requires of man: justice; mercy;
and obedience.


144. The three foundations of felicity: understanding; generosity;
and contentment.


145. Three things together will make all that is just: the help of
God; the instruction of the understanding; and the nature of
good. Others say, and good endeavour.


146. The three signs of godly wisdom: to seek knowledge, come
what may; to give alms, without thinking what may come; and to
suffer manfully for truth and justice, without fearing what may
come.


147. Three things most precious to man: health; liberty; and
morality. ;


148. The three foundations of law and habit: beautiful order;
justice; and mercy.


149. Three things, without which there can be no divine morality:
to forgive an enemy and a wrong; liberality of mind and deed;
and to cling to justice in every thing.


150. There are three special duties incumbent on man: to
support himself and family through industry and uprightness; to
benefit his fellow-men in every undertaking and employment, in
which be may be engaged; and to impart


p.318 p.319
instruction in divine morality to every man, wherever he goes.


151. Three things which a man shall have from early rising:
worldly riches; bodily health; and spiritual joy.


152. Three things which do not become a godly man: to look
with one eye; to listen with one ear; and to help with one hand.


153. The three measuring rods of every man: his God; his devil;
and his indifference.


154. The three foundations of piety: active justice; perceptive
truth; and energetic love.


155. The three necessaries of goodness: knowledge;
consideration; and lovingness.


156. There are three principal gualities, out of which spring all
the other good qualities: mercy, and its characteristic is to give
alms, protection, sustenance, and instruction, as occasion is
seen; obedience proceeding from humility, and its characteristic
is to receive alms, protection, and ad-vice, with manly decency,
and peacefulness; justice, and its characteristic sign is to do what
is right, according to conscience and understanding, in defiance
of the man who may oppose him, and to suffer bravely in behalf
of what he may judge as right, whatever it may be, and every
hardship and oppression soever, which may ensue, even if he
had to die for what he did and judged.


157. There are three gifts of charity: food; protection; and
instruction in the way of advice and demonstration.


158. Three things that will remind man of his duty towards God
and man: alms; fasting; and prayer.


159. Three things that will effect just godliness: to love God; love
towards all living beings; and to love all that is gentle and just.


160. The three counsels that Jesus Christ gave to His servants:
love thy God above all, and obey Him in all things; love thy
neighbour as thou lovest thyself, and do for him what thou
wouldest he should do for thee; seek praiseworthy sciences,
because from them thou wilt rightly


p.320 p.321


understand what thou shouldest love, obey, and do homage to,
and what thou shouldest do for me and for him. :


161. The three counter-forces of all Knowledge, art, and wisdom:
lack of seeking; excessive seeking; and blind seeking.


162. The three fences of wisdom: truth; love; and prudence. »


163. Three things that will close against wisdom: avarice;
inordinate desire; and over-hastiness.


164. The three principal concerns of the world: godliness;
praiseworthy sciences; and industry, to prevent waste.


165. The three gains that will turn out a loss in the end: to gain
fame for an injurious feat or act; to gain wealth by injustice; and
to gain the mastery in evil contention.


166. Three things that will turn out a great gain in the end: to
lose the world's goods by giving alms; to lose the praise and
regard of the world for a blessed act and disposition; and to lose
one's life in the cause of truth and justice.


167. The three qualities of just knowledge: love for what is best,
desiring to know it; seeking judiciously for what is best, that it
might be known and recognised; ; and choosing with judgment
and prudence what is found to be the best, and cleaving to it.
That is, the three qualities are, love, judgment, and choice.


168. In three ways may the will of God be known: in resigning
one's self to His will and commandments; in judging rightly and
thoroughly what is possible to God, in respect to His godliness,
and what is derived from God; and in judging what is due to
God, in respect of His justice, power, and love. By reviewing these
things may the will of God be understood and seen.


169. From three things will God and His will be comprehended
and known: from doing what God would do, as became Him, in
respect of His divinity and necessary attributes;


p.322 p.323


from loving what God would love, in virtue of His divine and
perfect love, for what is perfect cannot love what is imperfect;
and from judging what God would judge, in virtue of His great
power, justice, and love. As far as possible, by means of this wise
provision may be known the will and purpose of God; and hereby
will Awen from God be obtained.


170. The three dispositions of the mind, which can prognosticate
the future, and the means of knowing what will hereafter
happen to man, country, and nation: the first, obedience to God,
performing what ought to be; the second, Awen from God,
judging what is due from God, for God will not do anything but
what ought to be, as reguired by His love, justice, and power;
hence may be known what will take place, for what is due from
God will inevitably occur, in virtue of His nature and attributes.
And nothing but what God reguires should be, can take place;
and what ought to be cannot but be, in respect of the power and
justice of God.


Footnotes


291:1 ,» Iolo Morganwg, whose transcript we have adopted on
the present occasion, observes of St. Paul's Triads, that they are
found in MSS. of a date anterior to the Reformation. We embody
them in our Collection, because some of them, as Series the
Third, not only associate Bardism with their Pauline Title, but


also contain unmistakable traces of pre-Christian doctrines. It
would seem, as in the case of the Ten Commandments, that the
early Christians of Britain held the memory of the Great Apostle
of the Gentiles likewise in peculiar veneration. Besides "Trioedd
Pawl," or the Triads of St. Paul, allusion is freguently made to
"Pregeth Pawl," or St. Paul's Sermon, and "Deifregwawd Pawl,"
St. Paul's distichs or verses. These, with "Efengyl Ieuan," or the
Gospel of St. John, seem to have constituted the only Cymric
writings, which, in the infancy of the Church, contained the
doctrines of Christianity. It is probable that the attachment of the
Cymry to the name of St. Paul had some reference to the
supposed share he had in the foundation of their Church. It is
not necessary, in order to establish their claim to authenticity,
that the Triads in guestion should have been actually composed
by the Apostle himself; though it is guite possible that he might
have dictated their substance to Bran the Blessed, who
happened to be at Rome at the same time with St. Paul. Bran,
being a Bard, would naturally ;s throw them into the Triadic
form, as that which was best calculated at the time to impress
them on the public memory. Or perhaps they were composed by
the Bards, and received the sanction of the Gorsedd, after these
had in general become converts to Christianity--the name of St.
Paul being associated with then, because they were either
derived from his writings, or supposed to be in unison with his
doctrine. There is reason, indeed, to suppose that some of them
were derived immediately from some Apocryphal Scriptures,
such as those which refer to the Counsels of Lazarus. Though a
Bardic tone runs through the whole, yet, as already hinted, it is
more observable in the Third Series than in either of the other
two. But whether that formed a part of the original compilation--
afterwards separated from it as being of a too Druidic character,


or whether it is altogether a distinct document, the work of a
different school of Bards, we have no means of ascertaining.


293:1 ,»» Al. "health."

293:2 Al. "ease."

295:1 ,>4 Al. "and they are three faculties of man."
295:2 Al. "call."

297:1 ,»s Al. "to seek it."

297:2 Al. "worldliness."

297:3 Al. "what is right."

297:4 Al. "and."

297:5 Al. "if."

299:1 ,.»s Al. "contradict."

299:2 This Triad is the same as the 42nd.

299:3 Al. "Three things positively."

299:4 Al. "mercy."

299:5 One version omits the words "there are."


301:1 ,» These are similar to the Evangelical Counsels of the
Church, which are, voluntary poverty, perpetual chastity, and
perfect obedience.


303:1 ,» Al. "wrong."


303:2 Al. "annihilated."
303:3 ,:: Al. "There are three kinds of men."
305:1 , 4 Al. "his fellow-man." Al. "human beings."


305:2 Lazarus is asserted to have accompanied Joseph of
Arimathea into Britain. See Morgans's St. Paul in Britain, p. 147.


305:3 Al. "belief."

305:4 Al. "belief."

305:5 Al. "the falsehood that is not shewn."
Al. "the sick and diseased."

305:7 Al. "the sick and diseased."
Al. "renounce."

307:1 ,. Al. "support."


309:1 ,.s Al. "the predestination of God."


1c


Al. "The three dignities of meditation,” &c.
309:3 Al.


"The three dignities of God."
311:1 se Al. "obedience."

313:1 ,> Al. "to learn profession and duty."
317:1 ps6 Al. "virtue."


321:1 ,»» Al. "for him and for me."


321:2 Al. "Awen"


321:3 Al. "recognised and known."


THE TRIADS OF ST. PAUL.


1. The three principal sciences of man: sciences respecting God;
to know what he is himself; and to know the tendency of species
and nature. From these three all other laudable sciences
inevitably spring.


2. The three reguirements of God from man: faith, that is, firm
belief; religious obedience; and the performance of justice, in
thought, word, and deed.


3. Three things God cannot be: unskilful; unjust; and unmerciful.


4. The three principal employments of God: to enlighten the
darkness; to invest nonentity with a body; and to animate the
dead.


5. The three agents of God in making the worlds: will; wisdom;
and love; and from these three comes omnipotence.


p.324 p.325


6. Three things beyond all the research of man's sciences: the
extreme limits of space; the beginning and end of time; and the
works of God.


7. The three reguirements of God at the hands of man: to do
justice; to impart learning and good sciences to those who are
deficient in them; and to urge upon every thing the duty of
mercy towards all living beings of every kind and form.


8. Three things, which it is not easy to see clearly in another
man, and therefore it is not easy to prejudge them: the tendency


of awen; the endeavour of the intellect; and the judgment of
conscience; these God alone knows, and to Him belongs the
right of judging them.


9. There are three things, of whose length, breadth, and depth,
no one knows the thousandth part: the tendency of Awen from
God; the capabilities of Knowledge; and the properties of truth;
and God only knows them.


10. Three things which ought to be considered seriously three
times every day: the laws of truth; the laws of love; and the laws
of God.


11. Three things which there can be no reason to fear in the
world to come on the part of him who gives no reason to fear
them in this world: to meet another man before the face of God;
the exhibition of works performed in the presence of God; and a
call from the great judgment, where God Himself is judge.


12. Three things which can never be: cause of fear in the world
to come for one who gives no cause to fear in this world; lack of
mercy after this world for one who shows nothing but mercy in
this earthly life; and lack of Knowledge for him who, to the
utmost of what he knew, has exhibited knowledge to every man,
fond of knowledge, and to all who reguired it, or might be seen
in want of it. Others say: and lack of sciences, of whatever kind
they may be, for him who has exhibited knowledge, as far as he
could, to those who were in want of it.


13. The three best of all things that are found in this


p.326 p.327


world: bodily health; just and discreet understanding; and purity
of conscience.


14. Three things that ought to be considered seriously before we
partake of our meals: first, would it be comely and right to
present them before God, as if He would partake of them,
because of the just way in which they have been obtained;
secondly, could His grace be fitly bestowed upon them,
according to the desert of those who partake of them; thirdly,
are such meet to answer the purposes of God for the benefit of
man, that is, to support life and health. Where these particulars
do not apply to meals, and what relates to them, it is not right
and lawful before God to partake of them.


15. There are three things connected with mercy, that will occur
to him who shows it towards every owner of life and soul: he will
not fail to have justice in every thing, which he does, whatever it
may be; he will not lack the approval of his own conscience; and
he will not fail to have the utmost of God's good will and mercy
for ever, both in this world, and in the world to come. Because,
there is no justice but mercy, and there is no mercy but what
does not give pain to either the body or mind of any species or
form whatsoever, which may be found to possess life.


16. There are three things in mercy, in virtue of its kind and
guality: the first is the utmost of justice, for justice will not fail
the act of mercy, nor him who obtains it, whatever species of
living beings he may be; the second is co-operation with God, for
it was of His infinite mercy that God made all vitalities, and all
the orders, : and all their animations, of whatever kind or form
they actually exist, or may be conceived, since there was no
other species which justice could reguire at His hands; the third


is the impossibility, according to justice, of not obtaining all that
can be had from God as mercy, by him who performs it, co-
egually and commensurately with the performance itself. And
thus is it said:--


17. The three principal compounds of justice: utmost


love and mercy, because there can be no want of love on the
part of God, and His works of justice, towards any species or
form, which have received their existence from God and His
operation only, there not being in them anything that could
possibly be displeasing to God, and there is no justice but love
towards those who have done no displeasure; the second is, the
utmost truth and sincerity of species, form, and condition,
because there ought to be but truth, sincerity, and rectitude of
condition and skill in what is done by one who can perform the
best of all acts, and God can do no less than perform what is
best in every species, form, and condition; the third is the utmost
beauty or fairness in what is done, because that is not right and
becoming which is not the most beautiful act of all the beautiful,
and the fairest of the fair, where it is accomplished, and where it
is possible; but perfectly possible to God are every excellency,
every fulness, every skill, every beauty, every surpassing feat,
and every surpassing prudence, and whatever of existences and
acts He pleases will be effectuated, because God does what He
does for better, and not for worse; hence the proverb, "For
better, and not for worse, God does what He does;" also, "For the
best, and not for the worst, God does what He does." And these
proverbs are true; because it is demonstrated that it is not right


to judge, or think, or believe, or suppose, that all the works of
God are other than the best.


18. Three things will be obtained from behaving properly,
according to courtesy, and leading a holy life: the regard of the
world; joy of conscience; and the good will of God.


19. Three things will be obtained from a proper recognition of
God, that is, from a discernment of Him by means of a true
knowledge of kinds and gualities: every truth of being and
existence; every beauty and justice; and every eternal gwynvyd;
that is to say, from having the knowledge of God and His
goodness, will be obtained the knowledge of every thing
possible to man, his understanding and reason,


p.330 p.331


and to every awen, affection, beauty, and justice, of which he is
capable.


20. Three things in man that will include every other goodness:
bravery; peace; and godliness.


21. Three things in man that will exclude every goodness, of
whatever kind it may be: cowardice, or timidity; contentiousness;
and ungodliness arising from natural mischievousness.


22. Three things that will never end: life; intellect; and light; but
they will improve and increase for ever and ever.


23. There are three demeanours contrary to God: an oath
contrary to truth; a sentiment contrary to natural prudence; and
course of life contrary to innate awen. Others say; and concern
of life contrary to innate awen.


24. The three fulnesses of God: fulness of life; fulness of
knowledge; and fulness of might and power; and from these
three fulnesses comes the fulness of every goodness, in every
kind, part, form, and comprehension possible to it.


25. There are three things in God of pure necessity: an eye which
sees in every place, and at every time; an ear which hears in
every place and time; and memory, which preserves every thing,
and every event, in deed, word, and thought, in every place and
time, in order to exhibit them in the presence of the angels of
heaven, and all the saints, before the judgment of the day of
doom, that every man may be paid for his deed and conduct,
whether that shall be in heaven or in hell.


26. There are three things in man, that are the most odious of all
to God: craftiness; avarice; and becoming hardened against
praiseworthy' sciences.


27. Three things that God regards as the best in every man: to be
liberally conscientious; to demean one's self with a clear regard
to truth; and to genialize prsiseworthy sciences.


28. Three things invisible to him who is keenest of eye:


the path of an arrow through the air; the path of fish in the sea;
and the path of wile through the world.


29. Three things divine in a man: an amiable and cheerful
countenance; a meek and courteous demeanour; and
contentment of mind. Others say: an amiable countenance;
gentle demeanour; and contentment with every will of God.


30. Three things devilish in a man: a harsh countenance; a proud
spirit; and insatiable covetousness.


31. Three men it is difficult to make godly: the pugnacious; the
reveller; and the adulterer.


32. The three superiors of the world and life: a pure conscience;
knowledge of the truth; and health of body and mind.


33. Three things which the countenance cannot conceal: pride;
anger; and amorousness.


34. Three things easy to be seen in the countenance of those
who bear them: sorrow; joy; and peace of mind.


35. The three monstrosities of the world: the joy of fools; the
generosity of misers; and the courtesy of ungodly men.


36. The three forerunners of mischief: not to seek the sciences of
truth; not to anticipate the usages of courtesy; and not to make
an oblation to God.


37. Because of three things no man should ; become proud: his
sciences; his godliness; and the good he does; for he will not
know or do, as long as he lives, half of the one or the other of
them, though he should do as much as he can.


38. Three things which every man should avoid doing: to cause
worldly loss to any man whatsoever; to cause bodily or mental
pain to any man, or to any other living or animated thing; and to
cause deterioration to any thing whatsoever, whether it be
conduct, usage, learning, art, the sciences of wisdom, and
morality, or any other thing, of whatsoever kind it may be;
because the evil that he does


p.334 p.335


will fall upon him either in this world and life, or in that which is
to come in the next world.


39. Three men that will be odious to God: he who causes hatred
and contentiousness among his neighbours; he who conceals
the truth to the injury of another; and he who servilely disputes
against justice. Others say; he who does against justice.


40. The three indispensables of goodness: justice; beauty; and
truth.


41. The three indispensables of godliness: love truth; and
prudence. Others say; consideration.


42. Three things that will augment godliness: sciences; alms; and
worship.


43. The three souls of worship: truth; goodness; and beauty.


44. The three mutual charms of worship: prayer; thanksgiving;
and praise.


45. The three reguirements of God at the hands of man: belief;
obedience; and worship.


46. The three reasons for worship: to teach wisdom; to cultivate
the energies of the mind; and to gladden hope.


47. Three things which God only can perform: what has never
been in existence before; to know all that will happen; and to
judge the conscience. Others say Three things which are possible


only to God: to perform what did not exist before; to know what
will happen; and to judge the conscience.


48. There are three spirits from God, which ought to be in man
before he can be happy: reason to understand and to know all
rectitude; awen to love and to study all rectitude; and
courageous patience to side firmly with all rectitude, and against
all wrong, and to suffer, where occasion reguires, for what ought
to be, of whatever kind it may be.


49. The three losses that will bring gain in the end to man: to
lose more than what life needs and requires; to


p.336 p.337


lose bodily health on the part of a vain-glorious man; and to lose
what one considers as his chief in and over every thing, for it is in
this that most of his sinfulness consists.


50. The three different sciences concerning God: to remove far
off from all evil; to approach all goodness; and to acguiesce
patiently in every thing whatsoever, and in every incident and
event of life.


51. The three distinctions of truth: utility in every thing; beauty in
every thing; and strength to obviate and to oppose every thing.


52. The three columns of godliness: truth; beauty; and goodness.


53. For three godly reasons ought the Christmas Holidays to be
kept: in remembrance of the birth of Jesus Christ as the Saviour
of the human world; secondly, in order to give alms to God and
the necessitous poor out of all our possessions, for a gift to the
poor is a gift to God; thirdly, in godly joyfulness that the grace


and blessings of God have been obtained for men. He who does
not call Jesus Christ and His Gospel to memory, and gives no
alms, and does not enjoy his property in godly and religious
gladness, will receive no benefit from keeping it on the Feast of
Christmas.


54. Three things which a man ought to avoid, as he would the
fall of fire on his heart: pride; cruelty; and covetousness; for
where they are, all his doings will degenerate into ungodliness,
irreligion, and all mischievousness.


55. Three things familiar to every mischievous person: falsehood;
deceit; and depredation.


56. The three familiar things of the ungodly: pride; extortion; and
cruelty.


57. The three customs of mischief: treachery; murder; and theft.


58. The three familiarities of happiness: to love peace and
tranguillity; to love truth and justice; and to love God and all
goodness.


Footnotes
327:1 ,» Al. "and the orders."


333:1 5.32 Al. "a man should not."


p.338 p.339


THE TRIADS OF ST. PAUL AND BARDISM.


1. Three things that man will never be sufficiently: sufficiently
wise; sufficiently kind; and sufficiently uncovetous.


2. The three laws of man's actions: necessity and obligation,
since better cannot be; choice of the one you please of what is
possible, after considering which is best; and judgment,
according to what is possible, for ever in the circle of Gwynvyd,
united with all love and goodness.


3. There are three things, and no spot or place can be found
where they are not: God; truth; and the circle of Gwynvyd; and to
know this is to be united with them, and the same will deliver
from Abred.


4. Three things, the magnitude of which cannot be known: the
circle of Ceugant; the length of eternity; and the love of God.


5. There are three things from God: peace; truth; and knowledge;
and, knowing them, it is the duty of all to communicate them to
others.


6. There are three things from Cythraul: disagreement;
falsehood; and ignorance.


7. The three best friends of the soul of man, and the only ones
that will not forsake him: justice; mercy; and obedience.


8. Three things which cannot become finite: God; time; and
space.


9. Three things, between which there is a great difference:
between the thing praised and the thing forgiven; between what
is forgiven and what is suffered; and between what is suffered
and what is not punished.


10. The three principal vigours of man: awen; affection; and
intellect; and from these three ought every goodness to proceed.


11. There are three kinds of animal: agueous; terrestrial; and
aerial.


12. Every thing that a man does or seeks ought to be


in unison with three things: with the commandment of God and
conscience; with the best that can be conceived and
comprehended by man; and with what can co-exist with it for
ever in the circle of Gwynvyd.


13. The three principal objects of every thing in the hands of
God: that it should be the greatest in point of necessity; the
greatest in point of utility; and the greatest that the love of God
can accomplish.


14. The three necessary characteristics of truth, by which it may
be known: that it is better than any thing else which may be
discerned and comprehended for the same purpose; that it is
easier than any thing which may be comprehended and
discerned for the same object; and that it is more beautiful than
any thing which may be comprehended and realized for the
same place, purpose, and time.


15. There are three principal elements: earth; water; and light;
that is to say, every fundamental corporeity is from the earth;
every motion is from the water; and every vitality is from the
light or fire.


16. The three contemporaries of the Bardism of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain: peace; love; and truth; and from these three
comes justice.


17. Three things that will produce understanding and
knowledge: peace towards every thing; love towards all that is
good; and to consider every nature, whether it be corporal or
spiritual.


18. The three primary materials of every thing: fire, that is, light;
water; and earth. That is to say, the first of every material was
fire, and the particles of light; the second was water, whereby
things were discriminated; the third was earth, by which all
things were corporalized--all things else were mixed--and these
were called the three primary elements. Others say: There are
three primary elements: water, which was the beginning; after
that, earth; and it ended with fire; and hence ensued
imperishableness.


19. Three things, of which God is not capable: thinking


p.342 p.343


evil; not thinking the best; and thinking counter to what He has
thought; because He does not think but what is best, and it is
impossible that God should oppose the best.


20. There are three grades of animations: God in Ceugant, where
there is nothing but Himself; spiritualities in Gwynvyd, that is,
heaven; and corporalities in Abred, : that is, in water and earth.


21. There are three proofs in respect of all things, without which
they cannot be chosen: the proof of suffering before knowing;
the proof of consideration before understanding; and the proof
of understanding before choosing.


22. There are three conditions to which the nature of existence
and animation is subject: efficient, as is the case with God and
His powers; effected, as is the case with finite vitalities and mixed
beings; and non-effective, that is, what was not made, and will
not make, as, space, absolute time, mortality, and darkness.
Others say: What has not been made, that is, God; what has
been made, and will make, that is, the living and motion; what
has not been made, and will not make, that is, the motionless
dead.


23. There are three coincidences that support all things:
coincidence of love and justice; coincidence of truth and
conception; 2 and coincidence of God and accident,


24. There are three things, and as the two former are, so will be
the third: water flowing into the sea whence it came; the line of a
circle ending where it began; and the soul of a living being
returning to God whence it emanated;--after that, the same
migration as before.


25. There are three things, of which one will be like another: the
nature of agency in what is acted upon, as the nature of fire in
what is heated; the nature of motion in what is moved; and so
will be the nature of God, Who


p.344 p.345


made them, in the soul and life of man. And as is coldness where
fire is guenched, and stationariness, where motion is resisted, so
will be death, where there is no God. (Paul.)


26. The three stabilities of oneness, that is to say: the first is
universality, for there can be no two kinds of one universality;
infinity, for there can be no limits to one whole, nor can any
thing be whole, which is not universal or omnipresent, for that is
not one whole which is not all-comprehensive; : immutability, for
it is impossible that there should be one conjunctive, universal,
entire, and all-existent, otherwise than they are; therefore, there
can be no God but from fundamental and universal oneness.


27. Three things peculiar to God cannot belong to any other:
omniscience; omnipotence; and omnipresence.


28. There are three almsgivings, which are the principal of all
alms: the giving of provisions; the giving of protection; and the
giving of instruction and advice to a man who knows not what is
useful for him. Al. food; protection; and advice.


29. From three blessings will the blessing of God be obtained:
the blessing of father and mother; the blessing of a distressed
stranger; and the blessing of the sick and wounded.


30. There are three elements of primary necessity: earth; fluid;
and fire.


31. The three infinitudes: space; eternity; and God.


32. Three things that concur with the three infinitudes:
goodness; power; and love.


33. Three things that run contrary to the three infinitudes:
wickedness; inability; and uncharitableness. »


Footnotes


343:1 ,»» Some persons profess to discover indications of the
doctrine of Abred, or the metempsychosis, in the Holy
Scriptures. Thus, they say that the passage in Job, (ch. xxxiii. 29,
30,) "Lo, all these things worketh God often times with man, to
bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light
of the living," ought, according to the Hebrew, to be rendered,--
"Lo, all these things worketh God with man, AND THRICE to
bring back his soul from the pit, to be enlightened with the light
of the living." Again, they say that the Jews, when in reference to
the man that was blind from his birth, asked our Saviour, "Who ;.
s did sin, this man, or his parents, that he was born blind?" (St.
John ix. 2) must clearly have held a belief in a pre-existent state.


343:2 Al. "imagination."
345:1 , "Al. "all-existent."


345:2 There is a set of thirteen Triads, entitled "Paul's Triads,"
printed in E. Williams's Lyric Poems, vol. ii; but as they seem to
be other versions only of some of those Triads which we have
already inserted, it has not been deemed advisable to transfer
them into our pages.


TRIADS OF BARDISM AND USAGES. ;


1. The three foundations of Bardism: peace; utility; and justice.
Others say: peace; love; and justice.


p.346 p.347


2. The three supports of poetry and Bardism, that is to say:
privilege in right of usage, for there ought to be nothing that is
not according to usage; usage in right of privilege, for there
ought to be no usage that is not privileged, nor any usage
without privilege; and privilege and usage according to reason,
nature, and obligation, for there ought to be nothing that is not
so--the same resting on the three foundations, namely: truth;
love; and justice. Others say: truth; peace; and just utility.


3. Three incidental conditions happen to song and poetry:
corruption; improvement; and restoration: from corruption and
loss. And under each of the three contingencies, in order to
obviate non usage, they ought to be submitted to the verdict of
country, and the judgment of Gorsedd. That is to say, when they
are corrupted, they ought to be submitted so, that they may be
improved; and when they are lost, or when they become
dormant, they ought to be submitted so, that they may be
resuscitated, restored, and brought to memory, as they were
formerly. Then they ought to conform to the three supports,
namely: usage in right of privilege; and privilege in right of
usage; that is to say, nothing should be done, in right of any
thing, except what is customary, nor as usage, except what is
according to reason, nature, and obligation, with a view to truth,
peace, love, and just utility.


4. The three principal qualities of vitality: thought; power; and
will; and they cannot be complete and entire except in God.


5. The three excellences of Bardism: to be fond of meditation; to
extend learning; and to popularize manners and customs.


6. From three things does truth obtain credence: from believing
every thing; from disbelieving every thing; and from believing it
matters not what.


Three godly gualities in man: to consider; to love; and to suffer.
(St. Paul.)


7. For three reasons ought a man to hazard his life, and


to lose it, if there be occasion: in seeking after truth; in clinging
to justice; and in performing mercy. (St. Paul.)


8. There are three principal kinds of animations: agueous; aerial;
and celestial; that is to say, the agueous were the primordials of
life, being the first that existed, namely, in the seas, before there
was dry land; the aerials then calve into being, and they live on
dry land, deriving breath from the air; and the celestials are
those which attained the circle of Gwynvyd, being the highest of
all that are not subject to death.


9. The three conditions of animations: the being in Abred; in
liberty; and in Gwynvyd.


10. Three things which are impossible: that God should be evil
and unmerciful; that there should be evil, which will do no good;
and that there should be good, which will not prevail in the end.


11. The three burstings of the Lake of Llion: ; the first, when the
world and all living beings were drowned, except Dwyvan and
Dwyvach, their children, and grand-children, from whom the
world was again peopled--and it was from that bursting that
seas were formed; the second was, when the sea went amidst
the lands, without either wind or tide; the third was, when the
earth burst asunder by means of the powerful agitation, so that
the water spouted forth even to the vault of the sky, and all of
the nation of the Cymry were drowned, except seventy persons,
and the Isle of Britain was parted from Ireland, and from the
land of Gaul and Armorica.


12. The three administrations of Knowledge, which the nation of
the Cymry obtained: the first was the instruction of Hu the
Mighty, before they came into the island of Britain,


p.350 p.351


who first taught the cultivation of the earth, : and the art of
metallurgy; the second was the system of Bards and Bardism,
being instruction by means of the memorials and voice of
Gorsedd; and the third was the faith in Christ, which was the
best of all, and blessed be it for ever.


13. For three reasons may living beings be deprived of life,
namely: when one kills a man intentionally and purposely; when
one kills a man accidentally, or indirectly, as when it destroys
fruit and vegetables, which are for the food and sustenance of
the life of man; and when it will be better for the one that is slain
that it should be slain than otherwise, with the view of releasing
it from extreme pain, or of bettering its condition in Abred, as in
the case of a man, who gives himself 2 an eneidvaddeu for some
punishable evil, where he cannot render any other satisfaction


and payment for what he has done, than by submitting
voluntarily, at the demand of justice, to the punishment due. ;


14. In three ways a man happens to become eneidvaddeu: one is
punishment due, by the verdict of country and law, for an
injurious evil--an injurious evil being killing and burning, murder
and waylaying, and the betraying of country and nation. That is
to say, he who commits those evils ought to be executed; and
every execution takes place either by the judgment of a court of
law, or in war by the verdict of country and nation. The second is
the man, who surrenders himself, at the demand of justice which
he feels in his conscience, to execution, for an injurious and
punishable


p.352 p.353


evil, which he confesses to have committed, and where he
cannot render compensation and satisfaction for the injury he
has done, otherwise than by submitting voluntarily to the
punishment due for what he has done. The third is the man, who
undergoes the danger and chance of execution in behalf of truth
and justice, at the call of peace and mercy, and is slain. Such a
man is adjudged to be slain for the good, which he has done;
and on that account he ascends to the circle of Gwynvyd. In any
other than these three ways, a man cannot be adjudged as
eneidvaddeu by man, for it is God alone who knows how to
judge what is otherwise. The first of them will remain in Abred, in
the state and nature of man, without falling lower; and the other
two will ascend to the circle of Gwynvyd.


15. The three accelerations of the end of Abred: diseases;
fighting; and becoming eneidvaddeu, justly, reasonably, and
necessarily, from doing good; for without them there would be


no release from Abred, but at a much later period. Herein is seen
that it was for the benefit of, and mercy to, living beings, God
ordained the mutual fighting and mutual slaughter, which take
place among them.


16. The three states of animations: the state of Annwn and
Abred, where evil predominates over the good, and hence there
is essential evil--and in Annwn are every beginning and
progression towards what is better in Abred; the state of
humanity, where evil and good eguiponderate, hence ensues
liberty, and in liberty is power to choose, and consequently
improvement; the state of Gwynvyd, where good predominates
over evil, and there is success in love, since nothing is loved
there of necessity but the good, though it be also loved of
choice, and hence there is every completion of goodness, and an
end to every evil.


17. The three necessities of the occupants of Abred: the
predominance of opposition and Cythraul over prosperity and
amendment; necessary lawlessness; and death, ensuing from
the mastery of Cythraul, and from the system


of deliverance, which is according to the love and mercy of God.


18. The three necessities of mankind: liberty, for there is no
necessary good or evil, inasmuch as both equiponderate, and
hence either may be chosen according to judgment and
consideration; power, for free choice may be made; and
judgment, because there is understanding derived from power,
and because what is capable of being otherwise ought to be
judged.


19. The three necessities of the state of Gwynvyd: the
predominance of good over evil, and hence love; memory
reaching from Annwn, and hence perfect judgment and
understanding, without the possibility of doubting or differing,
and hence, the necessary choice of goodness; and superiority
over death, consisting in power derived from knowing the whole
of its cause, and the means of escaping it--the same being
unopposed and unrestrained--and hence everlasting life.


20. There are three common feasts, according to the order and
regulation of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the first, the feasts
of the four albans; ; the second, the feasts of worship, at the
guarters of the moon; the third, the feasts of country and nation,
conseguent upon a triumph and deliverance, and held under the
proclamation and notice of forty days. Others say: There are
three feasts of endowment, under the sanction of the Bards of
the Isle of Britain, at which every one presents his gift, made up
of the three tributes, namely, honey, flour, and milk. That is to
say: the feasts of contribution, under the proclamation of forty
days; the feasts of alban; and the feasts of worship; and it is the
privilege of Bards to preside at them, and to receive gifts of the
three tributes of endowment, which are, corn, milk, and honey.


21. There are three other feasts, in which Bards preside by
courtesy, namely: the feast of the head of kindred; a marriage
feast; and the feast of a fire back, which takes place when five
fire back stones have been raised, so as to


p.356 p.357


constitute a dwelling station. At them are contributed the gifts of
the comot and nation to the ninth generation; and the
endowments of those feasts are of tilth, fold, and wood covert,


as will be easiest to obtain and give them; the Bard having things
by courtesy.


22. Three things unprivileged to a Bard, for they are not proper
for him, that is to say: metallurgy, with which he has nothing to
do, except to improve it by means of his learning, knowledge,
and doctrine; the second is warfare, for there ought to be no
naked weapon of offence in his hand, since he is a man of peace
and tranguillity; the third is commerce, for he is a man of
primary law and justice, and his office is to teach country and
nation. And because of these things, it is adjudged that a Bard
ought to follow no trade other than his office and art of song
and Bardism, lest what ought to belong to a Bard and Bardism
should become corrupted, deteriorated, and lost.


23. Three pursuits are free to a Bard, and to every other native of
country and nation, namely: hunting; agriculture; and pastoral
cares; for it is by means of these that all men obtain sustenance,
and they ought not to be forbidden to any one who may wish
them. Others say: ploughing; pastoral cares; and medicine; for
these are pursuits of amendment, under the sanction of peace
and natural law.


24. The three principal endeavours of a Bard: one is to learn and
collect sciences; the second is to teach; and the third is to make
peace, and to put an end to all injury; for to do contrary to these
things is not usual or becoming to a Bard. ;


Footnotes


345:3 ,4 Copied by Iolo Morganwg, Oct. 1797.


347:1 ,e Al. "resuscitation."


349:1 , »s "Llion " means an aggregate of floods. The bursting of
the Lake of Llion is thus chronicled in the Triads:--'The three
awful events of the Isle of Britain: first, the bursting of the Lake
of Llion, and the overwhelming of the face of all lands; so that all
mankind were drowned, excepting Dwyvan and Dwyvach, who
escaped in a naked vessel, and of them the island of Britain was
re-peopled." (13, Third Series.) In another Triad (97) it is stated
that "the ship of Nevydd Nav Neivion carried a male and female
of all living beings, when the Lake of Llion burst."


It is alluded to by Iorwerth Vynglwyd;--


Lle 'r gwin mal lloer ar gynnydd,
Llawn byth fal llyn llion bydd.


The store for wine, like the moon on the increase,
Ever full, like the Lake of Llion, will it be.


p. 349


In the British Chronicles Arthur is introduced, as saying thus;--
"There is a lake near the Severn, called the Lake of Llion, which
swallows all the water that flows into it at the tide of flood,
without any visible increase; but at the tide of ebb, it swells up
like a mountain, and pours its waters over its banks, so that
whoever stands near it at this time, must run the risk of being
overwhelmed."--Myv. Arch. v. ii. p. 311.


351:1 ».350 "The three benefactors of the Isle of Britain: the first,
Hu the Mighty, who first shewed the nation of the Cymry the
method of cultivating the ground, when they were in the


Summer Country, namely, where Constantinople now stands,
before they came into the Isle of Britain." Tr. 56,


The benefit which he thus conferred on his countrymen is
freguently alluded to by the Bards; for instance, Iolo the Red, or
Iolo Goch, the bard of Owain Glyndwr, observes of him;--


Ai daliodd gwedy diliw,
Aradr braisg, arnodd-gadr, gwiw.


After the deluge, he held
The strong-beamed plough, active and excellent.


See Dr. Pugh's Dict. v.
351:2 Hu. Al. "his life."


351:3 ».3: The doctrine of eneidvaddeu is recognised in the Laws
of Dyvnwal Moelmud. Thus, in Triads 19, 20, we read:--"There are
three strong punishments: eneidvaddeu; cutting off a limb; and
banishment from the country, by the cry and pursuit of men and
dogs; and it is for the king to direct which he willeth to be
inflicted." "There are three eneidvaddeu punishments:
beheading; hanging; and burning; and it is for the king or lord of
the territory to order which he willeth to be inflicted." On the
supposition that these laws were really enacted by, or under the
authority of Dyvnwal Moelmud, it follows, that the doctrine
which the above Triads involve, is as old at least as 430 before
Christ. It seems as if a misapprehension of its real nature gave
rise to the opinion which Julius Caesar entertained, that the
Britons offered human sacrifices.


355:1 ,» These are the equinoxes and solstices of the year.


357:1 ».3 In Iolo's manuscript the five last Triads follow
immediately after Tr. 19; but they are crossed, as if they were not
of the same series.


TRIADS OF BARDISM. ;


39. The three privileges of Gwynvyd: the complete predominance
of love over hatred; complete power, under


p.358 p.359


the privilege of right and bliss, derived from universal
knowledge; and complete satisfaction with every thing, since
every opposition and Cythraul have ceased.


40. Three things that are endless: fire, that is, light; life, that is,
God; and understanding, that is, truth.


41. The three necessities of all animations: vocation; awen; and
privilege; and there is nothing else in the primary nature of
these that is thoroughly one with it.


42. The three necessities prior to perfect knowledge: to see; to
suffer; and to remember every thing, in every state of life.


43. Three things which man knows not what they are: God;
nonentity; and infinitude.


44. The three sources of knowledge: reason; nature; and
impulse.
Footnotes


357:2 , These follow the preceding, in Iolo's manuscript,
without any heading, except, "*These marks refer to the printed


copy. After 38," which seems to indicate that they belong to the
"Triads of Bardism," which are published in the "Lyric Poems."


THE MODE OF TAKING FOOD AND DRINK. .


When thou takest thy food, think of Him who gives it, namely,
God, and whilst thinking of His Name, with the word put the first
morsel in thy mouth, thank God for it, and entreat His grace and
blessing upon it, that it may be for the health of thy body and
mind; then thy drink in the same manner. And upon any other
thing or guantity, which thou canst not take with the Name of
God in thy mind, entreat His grace and blessing, lest it should
prove an injury and a curse to thee. Whilst thou art masticating
thy food in the name of God, chew it small and delicately, then
swallow, drinking whilst thou swallowest. And whilst thou art
drinking in slow and spare draughts, conduct thyself towards
God, as at thy food; and let the voice of heart and conscience be
manifested in thee, and not heard by any other being than God.


My beloved teacher, prithee, tell me the meaning of the small
and delicate mastication of food, and the spare swallowing of
drink?


Teacher. The small and delicate mastication involves a
p. 360 p. 361


deep meaning, namely, that there should be no belief in, and
reception of judgment, or chronicle, or report, or marvel, or
opinion, or concern, or faith, or unbelief, without, as it were,
chewing, turning, and agitating it small and delicately, scattered
and scrutinized, before it be swallowed by the understanding
and reason; that inguiry as to what is necessary be made of him
who knows about it, in respect of species, and guality, and in
respect of what is true or false in it; and that whilst all this takes


place, the unutterable Name of God, how it is to be spoken by
the mind of man, should be brought to memory and mind. Then
what thou hast taken into thy memory and mind, thy reason and
understanding, will be to thee a grace and a blessing, good for
thyself, and good for all men, and the grace of God's chief
blessing will dwell upon thee.


Footnotes


359:* , ss The heading in MS. is, "Ex Egwyddor Dewiniaeth," id est,
"From the Rudiments of Divinity." Probably the above fragment
and "Egwyddor Dywiniaeth," printed at p. 288, are portions of
the same work.


THE GORSEDD PRAYER.
The Gorsedd Prayer, called the Prayer of the Gwyddoniaid.


God, impart Thy strength;
And in strength, power to suffer;
And to suffer for the truth;
And in the truth, all light;
And in light, all gwynvyd;
And in gwynwyd, love;
And in love, God;
And in God, all goodness.

And thus it ends.

From the Great Book of Margam.


The Gorsedd Prayer, from the Book of Trahaiarn the Great Poet. ;


Grant, God, Thy protection;
And in protection, reason;
And in reason, light;


p.362 p.363


And in light, truth;

And in truth, justice;

And in justice, love;

And in love, the love of God;

And in the love of God, all gwynvyd.
God and all goodness. ;


The Gorsedd Prayer, from another Book.


Grant, O God, Thy protection;

And in protection, strength;

And in strength, understanding;

And in understanding, knowledge;

And in knowledge, the knowledge of justice;

And in the knowledge of justice, the love of it;

And in that love, the love of all existences;

And in the love of all existences, the love of God.
God and all goodness.


Talhaiarn's 2 Prayer, called by some, the Gorsedd Prayer.


God, impart strength;

And in that strength, reason;

And in reason, knowledge;

And in knowledge, justice;

And in justice the love of it;

And in that love, the love of every thing;

And in the love of every thing, the love of God.
Composed by Talhaiarn, the father of Tanwyn.


Talhaiarn's Prayer, or the Gorsedd Prayer.


God, Thy protection;

And in protection, strength;
And in strength, reason;
And in reason, knowledge;
And in knowledge, truth;
And in truth, justice;

And in justice, love;

And in love, the love of God;


And in the love of God, the love of
every animation and existence.


Talhaiarn's Prayer.


God, Thy protection;

And in protection, strength;

And in strength, reason;

And in reason, justice;

And in justice, love;

And in love, the love of God;

And in the love of God, the love
of every living thing.


Footnotes


361:1 ».30 Trahaiarn Brydydd Mawr, or the Great Poet, flourished
from about 1290 to 1350. He presided at the Glamorgan
Gorsedd in 1300. Two of his poems are printed in the Myvyrian
Archaiology. He is also supposed to have been the same person
as the one who distinguished himself under the assumed name
of Casnodyn, which is subscribed to five other poems in the
same collection.--Williams' Eminent Welshmen.


363:1 ,:» This was the motto of the Glamorgan or Silurian Chair.


363:2 ,: See ante, p. 62, note.


THE PREDICTION OF PEREDUR, THE BARD OF
PRYDAIN. ;


When the sovereign > country shall bewail a stratagem,
And sorrow and dispersion happen to the secluded populace,


p.366 p.367


Blessed the lips that shall easily, and in confidential secrecy,
Pronounce three words ; of the ancient and primitive
language.

Composed by Peredur the Bard.


Footnotes


365:1 ».3 It is not quite clear whether "Bardd Prydain," means
here the Bard of Britain, that is, the Isle of Britain, or the Bard of
Prydain, the son of Aedd the Great. Among the Gwyddoniaid,
which was the name by which the priests and public teachers
were known previous to the reformation of Bardism under
Prydain, we meet with a son of Peredur Wrawn; and if this
Gwrawn was the same as Gwron, one of "the three primary
Bards of the Isle of Britain," Peredur, in point of time at least,
might well be called the Bard of Prydain. There were two others
of the same name, who lived some time after the Christian era;
Peredur, the son of Eliver Gosgorddvawr, who lived about the
close of the fifth century, and Peredur, the son of Evrawg, a
chieftain who flourished in the early part of the sixth century,
and is mentioned by Aneurin as having fallen in the battle of
Cattraeth. Neither of these, however, is represented as of the
Bardic order. We may remark here, that, whenever the island of


Britain is mentioned in old documents, ».: it is almost invariably
described as Ynys Prydain, a circumstance which gives force to
the supposition that Peredur, in the heading of the above
Prediction, was meant for the Bard of the son of Aedd the Great.


365:2 "Gwarthefin " is also one of the Names of the Deity, and is
derived from gwarthaf, a summit, or a surface.


367:1 ,» These are the three primitive letters, 7!\, the secret of
which was known only to the Bards.


THE STANZA OF THE GORSEDD CHAIR OF THE WINTER
SOLSTICE.


When the country of Gwrthenin, 2 shall bewail a stratagem,
To the notches ; of rods shall the secluded populace repair;
Blessed the lips that shall easily, and in confidential secrecy,
Pronounce three words of the ancient and primitive
language.

Composed by Merddin Emrys. «


Footnotes


367:2 ,e This is probably a corrupt reading of "Gwarthefin;"
unless we take it as meaning "Gwrthenau," the cognomen of
Gwrtheyrn, one of "the three arrant traitors of the Isle of Britain."
In that case, the "stratagem" referred to would undoubtedly be
the treacherous plot of the long knives on Caer Caradog, of
which he was the promoter.


367:3 "Ysgyr," the plural of ysgor, which, according to Llywelyn
Sion, is used for a letter, i.e. a notch, or opening, from ys, and
gor, an opening, or aperture. There is here clearly a reference to
the Coelbren or Peithynen of the Bards, to ,. the use of which,
under certain national troubles, the people would have to recur,
as was the case in the time of Dwain Glyndwr.


367:4 Merddin Emrys was the Bard of Emrys Wledig, or
Ambrosius, in the 5th century.


p.368 p.369


Wigton.


TRIADS OF WISDOM. ;


1. There are three Gorsedd cries: the cry of greeting; the cry of
claim; and the cry of efficiency.


2. There are three authoritative cries: the cry of country and
nation to begin; cry relative to a pledge, in right of claim; and cry
for a recurrency, in virtue of obligation.


3. There are three unities: one God, that is, the one primary
element, from Whom proceeds every living and existing thing;
one truth, from which proceed every knowledge and mental
intelligence; and one point of liberty, from which proceed every
strength and operation.


4. Three things incapable of change: the laws of nature; the
quality of truth; and the laws of Bardism; for whatever is found
to be beautiful, good, and just, belongs to each one of those
things.


5. According to the three principal dispositions of man will be his
migration in Abred: from slothfulness and mental blindness he
will fall to Annwn; from his dissolute wantonness he will traverse
the circle of Abred, according to the necessity laid upon him; and
from his love of goodness he will ascend to the circle of
Gwynvyd. According as


p.370 p.371


one or other of the three principal dispositions prevails, will be
the state of man; hence his three states, Annwn, Abred, and
Gwynvyd.


6. The three states of living beings: Annwn, where there is a
beginning; Abred, where knowledge is accumulated, and hence
goodness; and Gwynvyd, where is the fulness of every goodness,
of knowledge, truth, love, and endless life.


7. The three necessities of man in Abred: natural goodness, and
hence intelligence, reason, and sciences; vigour, and hence love,
hatred, fear, hope, awen, sorrow, and joy--and from the union of
vigour and goodness proceed mercy, generosity, love, and
courage; inherent blindness, and hence all hatred, ignorance,
anger, pride, and covetousness; and where the two first do not
predominate over the third, man will fall in Abred when he dies,
and parts with life in this world.


8. The three necessities of man in Gwynvyd: godliness; love; and
light; and from the three proceed all power, all knowledge, and
all everlasting joy, and hence all goodness without cessation,
without end.


9. There are three primary elements: corporeity; fluidity and air.


Footnotes


369:1 ,: These Triads have been selected from a series entitled
"Triads of Wisdom," which, together with the "Triads of Bardism,"


and the "Triads of St. Paul," were reguired to be recited at every
meeting for public worship.


"There are three Triads of worship: the Triads of Bardism; the
Triads of ».% Paul; and the Triads of Wisdom; and they ought to
be recited in every resort of worship."


THE ELEMENTS.


Manred, the original form of all the materials, or all the
constituents, that is, the elements, of which the first four of the
five were dead, namely, calas, : fluidity, breath, and fire, until God
agitated them by uttering His Name, when instantly they
became alive in one triumphant song, and manifested their
condition.


Footnotes


371:1 ,»» The root of this word is cal, the root-also of caled, hard;
it is translated corporeity.


TRIADS OF BARDISM.
THE ELEMENTS.


1. The three materials of every being and existence: calas, and
hence every motionless body and solidity, and


p.372 p.373


every hardness and concretion; fluidity, and hence every
cessation, migration, and return; and nwyvre, : hence every
animation and life, and every strength, understanding, and
knowledge, and the same is God, without Whom there can be no
life and vitality.


Others say:--


There are three materials of every thing, namely: calas, and
hence every corporeity; fluidity, and hence every colour and
form, and every course and return; and nwyvre, and hence every
life, being God, from Whom proceed every soul, animation,
strength, and understanding, for where He is not, neither one
nor another of these things can exist.


Others say:--


There are three primary elements: calas, hence every hardness
and solidity, and it is dead; fluidity, and hence every progress
and mutation, and every alteration, colour, and form, and every
discrimination, and every concurrence, and it is dead; and
nwyvre, which is God, from Whom proceed every life, strength,
and intellect, and every perception and sense.


Thus, according to other wise men and teachers, as may be seen
in the old account:--


There are five elements: earth; water; air; fire; and nyv; > and the
nyv is God, from Whom are all life and orderly motion.


Others say:--


Calas, or earth, water, breath, uvel, ; and nwyvre, and every one
of them is dead, except the nwyvre, which is God, from Whom
comes all life.


According to another mode, as other teachers say from an old
account:


p.374 p.375


Earth, water, firmament, fire, and nyv; and the nyv is God, and
life, and intellect. From the first four are all death and mortality;
and from the fifth are all life and animation, all power,
knowledge, and motion.


2. The three constituents of life: motion; knowledge; and awen.


3. The three constituents of Knowledge: original awen; facile
reason; and inevitable necessity.


4. The three constituents of art: instruction from a master, who
knows it; innate understanding that will comprehend it; and the
exercise of congenial awen.


5. Three principles: innate understanding; vigorous ; affection;
and the rises of natural temperament.


6. The three concurrences of life: body; soul; and privilege.


7. The three constituents of awen: knowledge, or understanding;
vigorous affection; and devotion.


8. The three concurrences of art: correct system; firm justice; and
discreet skill in practising it.


9. The three elevations of art: information from him who knows
it; genial understanding to comprehend it; and needful occasion
to practise it.


10. Three privileges which ought to be conferred upon him who
teaches and demonstrates any good art that was not previously
known: the privilege of innate nobility as a Cymro; the privilege
of honorary art; and the protection of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, namely, that he should not, except of his free will, bear
weapons of offence, or en-gage in war and battle.


11. The three principal adornments of every thing: time; place;
and quality. Others say: The three principal elements.


.12. The three principal elements of Knowledge: Awen from God;
the exercise of the understanding; and the demonstration of a
master.


13. The three principal elements of Awen from God: innate
justice; habitual kindness; and natural understanding.


p.376 p.377


14. Three things that will confirm and honour Awen from God:
energetic industry; correct meditation; and courteous affection.


15. Three things :.


Footnotes


373:1 ,»» Dr. Pughe gives the following meanings to this word, --
"the ethereal sphere; the firmament, the atmosphere," and in
support thereof guotes from Taliesin and Llywarch Hen:


Addwyn haul yn ewybr yn nwyfre.
Glorious is the sun moving in the firmament.--Tal.


Gorddyar adar, gwlyb traeth,
Eglur nwyfre, ehelaeth ton;
Gwyw calon rhag hiraeth.


Clamorous are the birds, the strand is wet,
Clear is the welkin, ample the wave;
The heart is palsied with longing,--Ll. Hen.


p.373


It is compounded of nwyf and rhe, nwyf signifying "a subtil
pervading element; a fine ethereal fluid;" and rhe, "a swift
motion."


373:2 "Nyf " seems to be but another form of nwyf, and nwf, and
has the same signification.


373:3 "Ufel," according to Dr. Pughe, is "elementary fire; a spark
of fire."


375:1 ,:4 Al. "natural."


377:1 ,»e The rest are wanting.


THE TRIADS OF BARDISM, CALLED THE TRIADS OF
IONABWY.


THE ELEMENTS.


1. There are three original principles, which are the three
primary elements: the first, calas, hence all hardness, and it
hardens every other thing, that comes in conjunction with it, and
from this comes all corporeity; the second, fluidity, > and hence
all freshness and softness, and it freshens and softens every
thing that is commingled with it, and all moisture and all
corporal change; the third, nwyvre, and hence all life, for
whatever it mixes with becomes alive, as far as its species and
capability permit.


Other teachers and wise men say thus:
2. There are five elements: calas; water; air; fire; and nev. ;
And others say thus:


3. There are five elements: earth, which is calas; fluidity, which is
water and freshness; air, and hence all breathing, every voice
and speech; fire, and hence all heat and light; and nwyvre,
whence proceed all life, intelligence, Knowledge, and power from
will and desire.


Another of a similar kind:--


4. The three materials of every thing: earth; water; and nwyvre.
Others say: earth; water; and nev. Others say: calas; fluidity; and
nwyvre.


Another of the same kind:


5. There are five particular elements: calas; fluidity; firmament;
uvel; and nwyvre.


p.378 p.379
Another:--


6. There are three elements of matter, of original kind and
condition: calas, from which comes all corporeity that has form
and measure; fluidity, from which comes all progress capable of
rest and motion; and nwyvre, whence all life and understanding.


It is as follows in another Book, according to other teachers:--


7. There are five elements, namely:, earth; water; air; fire; and
nev; and it is in nev that God exists, as well as every soul, which is
also from Him.


Others say thus:--


8. The five concurrences of every thing: earth; water; air; fire; and
soul, the soul being God, from Whom proceeds all life; in the
earth are the body and form; in the water is the conjunction; in
the air are the breath and motion; in the fire is the feeling, that
is, the corporal senses; in the soul are the life, and the senses of
perception, namely, understanding, sciences, awen, reason, and
affection. And in these five all things concur and have their
origin.


Footnotes


377:2 ,». Al. "water."


377:3 This word is used now simply to denote heaven. It seems to
be the same as ».:7 the neph or cneph of the Egyptians, the WuKn
KOOUOU, that pervaded and animated the whole world.


BARDISM, &c. THE ELEMENTS.


There are three primary elements, out of which proceed every
other corporal substance, and living existence: the first is the
calas, from which are all corporeity and hardness, that is to say,
calas is the air, out of which, by compression, are derived every
corporeity, colour, and form; the second is the fire, out of which
proceed every motion and change; the third is the nwyvre, from
which are God, and all life, understanding, and knowledge.
Others say: Galas; uvel, and nwyvre, which is God. Others say:
there are five special elements: earth, water, firmament, fire, and
nwyvre. From the calas proceed every hardness, every
corporeity, and every form and colour, and it is dark, whether it
be liguefied or hard; from the uvel are fire, and all


p.380 p.381


heat and light, and all hue, and all motion and sensation; from
the nwyvre are all life, and God, and soul, understanding,
knowledge, and all affection and awen. And neither number,
weight, or measure, can be applied to one or other of these
three, where they are not mutually mixed together--nor
knowledge, motion, hue, or form.


The Book of John Bradford.


THE ELEMENTS.


There are five elements: earth; water; air; fire; and nev; : and
from nev are God and every living soul.


Footnotes


381:1 ,» Al. "nwyvre."


THE ELEMENTS.


There are three primordial elements, from which proceed every
material, and speciality of existence: calas; fluidity; and nwyvre.


Thus, after another mode, according to some ancient teachers:--
There are five primordial elements: calas; fluidity; breath, that is,
air and wind; uvel, that is, fire and light; and nwyvre, that is, life
and motion. Every motion takes place by the agitation of nwyvre;
it is in and within animate beings, and around and without
inanimate beings.


THE ELEMENTS.


There are five primordial elements, namely: earth; water; air; fire;
and nev. From the first four comes every inanimate matter, and
from nev God, and all life, and all living things, and from the
union of these five, comes every thing, whether it be animate or
inanimate.


In another Book, thus:--


There are five elements, from which proceeds every thing,
existing and living, whether it be animate or inanimate,


p.382 p.383


namely: calas; fluidity; air; uvel; and nwyvre. The first four are
dead, and the fifth is alive; and from the fifth are God and all life.


BARDISM.
THE ELEMENTS.


There are five elements, and from them, and their conjunction,
are all things, living and dead, that is to say: calas; fluidity;
breath; uvel; and nwyvre. From calas is every corporeity, namely,
the earth, and every thing hard; from fluidity are moisture and
flux; from breath are every wind, breeze, respiration, and air;
from uvel are all heat, fire, and light; and from nwyvre every life
and motion, every spirit, every soul of man, and, from its union
with the other elements, other living beings. From nwyvre, in its
simplicity, apart from every thing else, is God, for God is nwyvre,
and is incapable of variety, or change, or death, or corruption, or
diminution, for there can be no place where He is not, or time in
which He does not exist.


Different names are given to the elements in other Books, that
is, earth, water, air, fire, and nyv; and in other Books, thus,
namely, &c. From the union of calas with water is a body; from
the union of water with firmament, : darkness; from the union of
firmament, or air, with fire, heat; from the union of fire with nyv,
moving energy, and every motion from place to place; and from
nyv are all life and its characteristics, namely, understanding,
memory, awen, affection, hatred, sorrow, joy, &c.


Footnotes


383: 1 p. 382 Al. "air."


THE MATERIALS.


The five materials of every existence and life: calas; fluidity; air; >
Sun; ; and nwyvre. :


p.384 p.385
They are thus variously arranged:--


Calas, fluidity, and nwyvre; : and the uvel unites with the nwyvre,
the air unites with the uvel, the water, or fluidity, unites with the
air, and the calas unites with fluidity.


Footnotes
383:2 ,:» Al. "breath." Al. "firmament."
383:3 Al. "fire." Al. "uvel." Al. "uddel."
383:4 Al. "the soul." Al. "nyvel," i.e. a subtil element.


385:1 , 4 AI. "enyvel" = nyvel. Al. "animation." Al. "soul." Al.
"uddel" = uvel.


THE ELEMENTS.


There are three principal elements: water; fire; and nwyvre. From
the water comes the earth, that is, the water was dried of its
humidity by fire; and from the water, scattered or liguefied by
fire, is the air, or firmament; and from the union of water, fire,
and nwyvre, is life.


Others say:--


There are five elements: earth; water; firmament; fire; and
nwyvre. From the nwyvre are all life and power; from the fire is
all affection; from the firmament is all motion; from the earth is
all corporeity; and from the water are all growth, form, and
habit.


It is thus, according to another mode, in the Triads of Ionabwy:--


There are five elements: earth; water; air; > fire; and nev. From
nev are all animation and life, and from it are God and every soul
and spirit; and when it is separated from the other elements,
they die, whereas God cannot die, for He has no body formed
from the dead elements. On that account, He is not subject to
form, size, or measure, nor to place or time; wherefore He is
beyond every measure, place, and time, for ever and ever,
without cessation, without end. Nev is an element of life, and,
from its union with the dead ones, life takes place in a body;
from the union of the dead ones is every corporeity; from the
earth is every thing hard; and from the water are all growth,
form, and habit, because with water principally, and from its
species, augmentation and diminution take place; from the air is
every motion; from the fire are all affection and lust; and from


nevoedd ; is all life. It was thus that the ancient teachers
arranged them, before the nation of the


p.386 p.387


[paragraph continues) Cymry lost their sciences and arts. And when corporal
things die, the elements separate, and each one goes to what
pertains to it, namely, earth to earth, water to water, air to air,
fire to fire, and life to life, that is, to God; that is to say, all things
go to their beginnings and originals, where they rest.


There are five elements: calas; fluidity; breath; uvel; and nwyvre;
of which the first four are dead, and the fifth is life.


Footnotes
385:2 , :»Al. "firmament."


385:3 The plural of nev,--'heavens."


THE ELEMENTS.


There are three elements: : earth; fluidity; and nwyvre. Another
mode: calas; fluidity; and nwyvre.


Footnotes


387:1 ,s The same number of elements is recognised in "Hanes
Taliesin," Ap. Myv. Arch. v. i. p. 20:


A honno yn troi sydd Rhwng
tri alfyd.


And that turns
Between the three elements.


THE MATERIALS OF MAN.
Composed by Taliesin. From the Book of Llanrwst.


There are eight parts in man: the first is the earth, which is inert
and heavy, and from it proceeds the flesh; the second are the
stones, which are hard, and are the substance of the bones; the
third is the water, which is moist and cold, and is the substance
of the blood; the fourth is the salt, which is briny and sharp, and
from it are the nerves, and the temperament of feeling, as
regards bodily sense and faculty; the fifth is the firmament, or
wind, out of which proceeds the breathing; the sixth is the sun,
which is clear and fair, and from it proceed the fire, or bodily
heat, the light and colour; the seventh is the Holy Ghost, from
Whom issue the soul and life; and the eighth is Christ, that is, the
intellect, wisdom, and the light of soul and life. »


p. 388 p. 389


If the preponderating part of man is from the earth, he will be
foolish, sluggish, and very heavy; also a short, little, and slender
dwarf, in a great or small degree, according to the
preponderance. If it should be from the firmament, he will be
light, unsteady, garrulous, and fond of gossip. If from the stones,
his heart, understanding, and judgment, will be hard, and he will
be a miser, and a thief. If from the sun, he will be genial,
affectionate, active, docile, and poetic. If from the Holy Ghost,
then he will be godly, amiable, and merciful, with a just and
gentle judgment, and abounding in arts. And being thus, he
cannot but equiponderate with Christ, and divine sonship. And
so it ends.


Footnotes


387:2 ,» It is, probably, on this account that the Bards described
man as a "little world." They were not, however, singular in their
views on this point, for some ancient and medieval Christian
writers have spoken of man in the same strain. Thus St.
Augustine: " God therefore placed on the earth the man whom
He made, as it were another world, the great and large world in
the ,.ss small and little world." (Aug. 1. gu. 83, 84, 87; Retr. I. i. c.
2.) Gregory Nazianzene remarks;--"Every creature, both heaven
and earth, are in man." (Greg. Naz. Epist.) And Zanchius:--"The
body of man is the image of the world, and called therefore
microcosmos." (Zanch. de oper. Del, I. iii. c. 1.)


THE EIGHT MATERIALS OF MAN.


1. From the earth is the flesh; 2. from the water, the blood; 3.

from the air, the breath; 4. from the Galas, the bones; 5. from the
salt, his feeling; 6. from the sun, or fire, his agitation; 7. from the
truth, his understanding; 8. from the Holy Ghost, that is, God, his


soul, or life.


The "Brith y Coed": of John Bradford.


Footnotes


389:1 , :» The title of a Book.


THE SEVEN MATERIALS OF MAN.
1. Earth, from which is the body;
2. Water, from which are the blood and humour;
3. Sun, from which are the heat and light;
4. Air, from which are the breath and motion;
5. Nwyvre, from which are the feeling and affection;


6. The Holy Ghost, from Whom are the reason and
understanding;


7. God, from Whom is life everlasting.


The Blue Bard of the Chair has said it.


p. 390 p.391


THE SEVEN PRIMARY MATERIALS OF THE WORLD.


1. The first, earth, from which are every corporeity and hardness,
and every firm foundation;


2. The second, water, from which are all humour and freshness;
3. The third, air, from which are all respiration and motion;
4. The fourth, sun, from which are all heat and light;


5. The fifth, nwyvre, from which are all feeling, affection, and
wantonness;


6. The sixth, the Holy Ghost, from Whom are all understanding,
reason, awen, and sciences;


7. The seventh, God, from Whom are all life, strength, and
support, for ever and ever.


And from these seven primary materials are every existence and
animation; and may the whole be under God's regulation. Amen.


The Blue Bard of the Chair has said it.


THE EIGHT MATERIALS OF MAN.
From the Book of Mr. Cobb of Cardiff.


From the earth, the flesh;

From the water, the blood;

From the air, the breath;

From the calas, the bones;

From the salt, the feeling;

From the sun, that is, the fire, his agitation;

From the truth, his understanding;

From the Holy Ghost, that is, God, his soul,
or life.


THE PARTS OF THE HUMAN BODY IN WHICH ARE THE
FACULTIES.


1. In the forehead are the sense and intellect;
2. In the nape is the memory;


p.392 p.393


3. In the pate are discretion and reason;
4. In the breast is lust;

5. In the heart is love;

6. In the bile are anger and wrath;

7. In the lungs is the breath;

8. In the spleen is joyousness;

9. In the body is the blood;

10. In the liver is the heat;

11. In the spirit is the mind;

12. In the soul is faith.


Another.


In the forehead is the intellect;
In the nape is the memory;

In the pate are reason and discretion;
In the lungs is the breath;

In the breast is the lust;

In the heart is love;

In the spleen is joyousness;

In the liver is the heat;

In the bile is anger;

In the body is the blood;

In the spirit is the mind;


In the mind is the soul;
In the soul is faith;
In faith is God. ;


Footnotes


393:1 ,:» Al. "the Son of God."


THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE BLUE BARD OF THE CHAIR.


In the forehead is the intellect;

In the nape is the memory;

In the pate is discretion;

In the understanding, memory, and
discretion together, is reason;

In the lungs is the breath;

In the breast is lust;

In the liver is the heat;


p.394 p.395


In the veins is the blood;

In the bile is anger;

In the spleen is joyousness;

In the heart is love;

In all these is affection;

In the affection is the soul;

In the soul is the mind;

In the mind is faith;

In faith is the Son of God;

In the Son of God is imperishable life;
In imperishable life is gwynvyd;


Without end; and blessed is he, who rightly exercises the
faculties with which God has endued him, in order to attain to
endless gwynvyd, for ever and ever. Amen.


The Blue Bard of the Chair has said it.


PARTICULAR TRIADS.


1. There are three Persons in heaven: the Father; the Son; and
the Holy Ghost.


2. There are three particular ones: the one true element, the
necessary deluge; the one element, from which all men proceed,
namely, the earth; and the one element of life, namely God.


3. There are three particular twos: the two particular stars,
namely, the sun and moon; and the two elements, into which all
men will go, namely, the heaven and the earth. ;


4. There are three particular threes, namely: the three days that
Adam and Eve were taken from. >


p.396 p.397


5. There are three particular fours: the four materials of man,
namely, fire, air, water, and earth.


6. There are three particular fives: the five senses of man; the
five books of Moses; and the five zones of the earth. ;


7. There are three particular sixes, namely: the six ages of the
world; the six stone vessels, the water in which Jesus turned into
wine, at the marriage feast of John the Evangelist; 2 and the six
perceptions of man.


8. The three particular sevens: the seven sacraments of the
Church; the seven petitions of Pater Noster; and the seven days
of the week.


9. The three particular eights: the eight deadly sins; the eight
that went with Noah into the ark; and the eight winds.


10. The three particular nines: the nine waves of the ocean; the
nine graces of heaven; and the nine months of gestation.


11. Three particular tens: the ten commandments; the ten
lengths of numeration; ; and the ten degrees of God.


Footnotes


395:1 ».3 It will be observed that this and the two following Triads
are imperfect.


395:2 The meaning of this statement is not very clear. We are not
sure whether it is intended that our first parents were expelled
from Paradise within three days of their creation, or whether
they were deprived of the holy enjoyment of three days, or
portions of days, Friday, Saturday, and Sunday, that closed the
first week of time. Or are we to understand that Adam and Eve
were formed out of the constituents or elements of three days?
The first notion would not be consistent with the opinion that
generally prevailed in the middle ages, which represents them as
having continued but seven hours in their state of ,.» innocency.
" Et ut tradunt historiagraphi eos fuisse in Paradiso per vii. horas
et non ultra et statim ejecti sunt." Eulog. Hist. c. viii.


"Seithawr i buan

Yn cadw 'r berllan

Cyn cyvrdan satan

Sitiwr tartara.--lohan. Menev."


397:1 ,»s Pump gwregys terra.--The five zones of the earth.
Taliesin. Ap. My v. Arch. i. p. 25.


397:2 Though, according to the ancients, St. John always led a
single life, many of the middle writers of the Church, assert that
he was married, and that it was his marriage which our Lord was
at in Cana of Galilee. Bed. Proef. in Ioan. Rupert. Tuit. Comm. in
Ioan. lib. ii. in fin. Cyr. in Ioan, cap. 2, et alii.


397:3 "There is no number beyond ten."--Laws of Howel the
Good.


TRIADS OF TEN NUMBERS.


1. Three particular ones: one God; one truth; and one point of
liberty; and to Know those threes will bring to Gwynvyd.


2. Three particular twos: the two sexes of living beings, namely,
male and female; two principles, namely, good and evil; and the
two heads of necessity, namely, beginning and end.


3. Three particular threes: the three characteristics of order,
number, weight, and measure; the three bodily perceptions,
seeing, hearing, and feeling; and the three principal faculties . of
the intellect, ; to love, to hate, and to judge. «


p.398 p.399


4. Three particular fours: the four parts of the world and
measure, east, south, north, and west; the four points of the sun,
namely, the winter solstice, the vernal eguinox, the summer
solstice, and the autumnal eguinox; and the four properties of
form, namely, round, triangular, sguare, and flat.


5. Three particular fives: the five felicities of life, namely, health,
liberty, love, welcome, and respect; the five columns of justice,
fear, courage, hatred, love, and truth; and the five constituents of
matter, earth, water, air, fire, and heaven.


6. Three particular sixes. :


Footnotes


397:4 ,.» Al. "perceptions."


397:5 Al. "the soul."
397:6 Al. "to understand."


399:1 ,»s The rest are wanting.


MUTUAL REASONING BETWEEN A DISCIPLE AND HIS
TEACHER.


Disciple. Pray, my noble and very knowing Teacher, since you are
a Teacher, and a primitive Bard, according to the privilege and
usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, out of your usual
kindness to me, exhibit your art, and tell me the nature and
tendency of the voice of the Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle [of
Britain], that I may know its purpose and meaning, and become
myself a regular Bard of primary merit, even as you are.


Teacher. My brother in the faith and companion, Cadwgan, since
thou art an institutional awenydd, under the auspices of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, I will tell thee, and will exhibit to thee
the secret, with the reguest, and on condition, that thou listen
diligently, ardently, and vigourously, to what I shall lay before
thee, and not divulge what


I say. It is thus, namely The voice of the Gorsedd of the Bards of
the Isle of Britain, is the old memorial, which has been preserved
from the age of ages, and from the beginning, in respect to the
art and sciences of the primitive Bards of the Isle of Britain,
namely, the sciences concerning God and His goodness and
dispensations, and the usages of the Bards of the Isle


p.400 p.401


of Britain, and their privileges, and art of vocal song, and the
arrangement of letters, and the arrangement and preservation
of the Cymraeg, and the memorial of the wisdom of the nation
of the Cymry, and the memorial of the privileges and usages of
the nation of the Cymry, their genealogies, nobility, inheritances,


and the privileges of worthy marriages, and all other privileges
and usages, which ought to be worthily remembered.


D. God bless you for your kindness and amiability, for they are
very familiar to me; therefore, I shall ask points of you--point
upon point, until I receive your judgment and instruction.


T. Ask, and a hundred welcomes to you, and I will answer in the
best way I can.


D. Why does the water rise from the bottom of the earth to the
surface, where it issues out, and also falls from the sky to the
earth?


T. I will shew thee the reason;--every thing tends towards life and
light; in the light is life, and in the sky above the face of the earth
are the light and heat; the water in the centre of the earth, and
beneath the surface of the earth, being in the dark, tends
towards the light, with a view to life, for in every thing it is a
primary law of God that there should be a tendency and an aim
towards life and light. Again, water in the firmament runs
against its will along the apertures of the aerial parts, and seeks
resting places, but there are none such for it in any part of the
world, except on the face of the earth, and thither it tends, and
that place it eagerly seeks. And, because of these two primary
laws from God which exist in every thing, every thing eagerly
seeks its rest, where it can get it. This lesson is a lesson taught by
wise men.


D. Why is the water in the sea briny?


T. I will shew thee the reason;--the centre of the earth is a rock of
stone, and a branch of that rock runs along the bottom of the


sea, and melts in the water, and hence it be-comes briny. And
where the top of that rock approaches


p.402 p. 403


the surface of the earth, springs of water are found to be saline
in those localities, and salt is obtained from the water in those
places. ;


Footnotes


403:1 ».«2 It is to be regretted that L. Morris should have omitted
from a poem, which is inserted in the Myv. Arch. v. i. p. 47, a
portion "containing an odd sort of philosophy about the origin of
salt water, rain, and springs," as it might, notwithstanding its
oddity, have been of service in ascertaining the amount and
species of knowledge possessed by our Bardic ancestors on
these matters.


THE STARS.


There are three kinds of stars: fixed stars, which keep their
places, and are also called stationary stars; erratic stars, which
are called planets, and are fifteen in number, seven 2 being
always visible, and eight invisible, except very seldom, because
they revolve within and beyond the Galaxy; and the third are
irregular stars, which are called comets, and nothing is known of
their place, number, and time, nor are they themselves known,
except on occasions of chance, and in the course of ages.


From Bardism--Fragments about the months and other things.


Footnotes


403:2 ;.»» Seven of the Planets are mentioned in a poem of
Taliesin, called "Canu y Byd Mawr," or the Song of the Great
World. Myv. Arch. v. i. p. 25.


ASTRONOMY.


There are seven visible planets, and eight are invisible, except in


a long cycle of times, and vast ages. The constellations of the
stars are the following--


p. 402 p. 403


1. Caer Arianrod, 1. The Circle of Arianrod; ;
2. Yr Orsedd Wenn, _ 2. The White Throne;
3. Telyn Arthur, 3. Arthur's Harp; «
4. Caer Gwydion, 4. The Circle of Gwydion; ;
5. Yr Haeddel fawr, 5. The Great Plough-tail; «
6. Yr Haeddel fach, 6. The Small Plough-tail;


7. Y Llong fawr, 7. The Great Ship;
8. Y Llong foel, 8. The Bald Ship;
9. Y Llatheidan, 9. The Yard; ;
10. Y Twr Tewdws, 10. Theodosius's Group; s
11. Y Tryfelan, 11. The Triangle;


12. Llys Don, 12. The Palace of Don; »


p.404 p. 405


p. 404 p. 405


13. Llwyn 13. The Grove of Blodeuwedd;


Blodeuwedd,
14. Cadair Teyrnon,


14. The Chair of Teyrnon; :
15. The Circle of Eiddionydd;
15. Caer Eiddionydd, 16. The Circle of Sidi;

16. Caer Sidi, 17. The Conjunction of a Hundred
17. Cwlwm Cancaer, Circles;
18. Lluest Elmur, 18. The Camp of Elmur; ;
19. Bwa 'r Milwr, 19. The Soldier's Bow;
20. Brynn Dinan, 20. The Hill of Dinan;

21. Nyth yr Eryres, 21. The Hen Eagle's Nest;
22. Trosol Bleiddyd, 22. Bleiddyd's . Lever;

23. Asgell y Gwynt, 23. The Wind's Wing;


24. Y Feillionen, 24. The Trefoil;
25. Pair Caridwen, 25. The Cauldron of Ceridwen; ;
26. Dolen Teifi, 26. Teivi's Bend;


27. Yr Esgair fawr,
28. Yr Esgair fechan,
29. Yr Ychen Bannog,

30. Y Macs mawr,

31. Y fforch wenn,

32. Y Baedd Coed,

33. Llywethan,
34. Yr Hebog,
35. March Llyr,
36. Cadair Elffin,
37. Neuadd Olwen,
38.
39.
AO.


27. The Great Limb;
28. The Small Limb;


29. The Large-horned Oxen; «


30. The Great Plain;
31. The White Fork;


32. The Woodland Boar;


33. The Muscle;
34. The Hawk;


35. The Horse of Llyr; ;


36. Elffin's s Chair;
37. Olwen's s Hall.


Footnotes


403:3 ».42 The daughter of Don, and styled in the Triads (Myv.
Arch. ii. 73) one of the three beautiful ladies of the Isle of
Britain." This constellation is the ;. same with the Corona
Borealis. Mentioned in " Hanes Taliesin," Ap. Myv. Arch. i. 19.


403:4 The Lyre.


403:5 The son of Don; one of "the three sublime astronomers of
the Isle of Britain." Tr. 89, third Series. The Galaxy.


403:6 The Great Bear.
403:7 The Orion.


403:8 The Pleiades. Mentioned in "Hanes Taliesin," Ap. Myv. Arch.
i. 19.


403:9 Cassiopeia.
405:1 ,.»4 The title of one of Taliesin's poems, Myv. Arch. i. 65.
405:2 The zodiac, or ecliptic. Mentioned in "Hanes Taliesin."


405:3 Styled in the Triads as one of "the three monarch bulls." Tr.
73; third Series.


405:4 There was a king of Britain of this name, who flourished
from B.C. 859 to 839. He founded Bath.


405:5 Mentioned in "Hanes Taliesin."


405:6 The Twins.


405:7 The son of Bleiddyd--the celebrated king Lear of
Shakespeare.


405:8 Elfin is said to have first discovered Taliesin, in a leathern
bag, fastened to one of the poles of a weir. He is freguently
mentioned by the Bard.


405:9 ,., A distinguished character in Welsh Romance.


CHRONOLOGY.


Prydain, the son of Aedd Mawr, was born on the morning of
Alban Eilir, that is, the ninth day of March, according to the
computation of the Romans; therefore the beginning of the year
was fixed on his day, as a day of feast and institution, as it is still
to this day. In old times it was called the first day of Cyntevin, :
the end of Cyntevin being the feast of Alban Hevin From thence
to Alban Elved : it was called Summer, and also Harvest; from
Alban Elved to Alban Arthan : it was called Autumn; and from
thence to Alban Eilir, . Winter.


p.406 p.407


According to the computation of the Church and the Courts of
Law, Alban Eilir was said to be the tenth of March, but in the
chronology of the Cymry and the Romans it was said to be the
ninth of March.


Before the time of Prydain, the son of Aedd the Great, the
beginning of the year was fixed upon the day of Alban Arthan,
which was the ninth of the month of December, according to the
chronology of the Cymry. (See John Jones's Almanack, 1752.)


Footnotes
405:10 ;.. Cyntefin, (cynt-hefin,) the commencement of summer.


Calangauaf garw hin,
Annhebyg i gyntefin.


The calends of winter, rough is the weather,
Unlike the beginning of summer.--Ll. Hen.


405:11 The summer solstice.
405:12 The autumnal eguinox.
405:13 The winter solstice.


405:14 The vernal eguinox.


CHRONOLOGY.


Before the coming of Christ in the flesh, the Bards solemnized
times according to the years of memorial and computation,
namely, from the time of Prydain, the son of Aedd the Great,
who was famous five hundred and sixty-six years before the
birth of Christ in the flesh; and from that time it is usual with the
Bards to celebrate the memorial and computation of time in
accordance with the years of Christ. Prydain, the son of Aedd the
Great, as far as memorial and knowledge go, lived the time
mentioned before the birth of Christ, and, according to the
conjecture of wise men, and well informed herald-bards, six
hundred and fifty years subseguently to the first arrival of the
Cymry in the island of Britain. It was thus, one thousand two
hundred and six-teen years before the birth of Christ that the
nation of the Cymry first came into the island of Britain, and this
was called Brut time, because the years of memory and
computation were in old times conjecturally reckoned from the
time of Brut, : which was about a thousand years after the
demolition of the tower of Nimrod the Giant, and about two
thousand and eight hundred years after the expulsion of Adam
and Eve from the garden of Paradise, which occurred five »
hundred years after God had made this world.


Footnotes
407:1 ;.»s Brut--Brutus, supposed to be the same with Prydain.


407:2 ,»s Al. "nine."


p.408 p.409


THE MEMORIAL OF COMPUTATION.--THE MEMORIAL
OF COUNTRY.


This is the mode in which the ancient Teachers used to denote
the memorial of times; that is, from the arrival of the Cymry in
this island, it was the conjecture and memory of country and
nation, because there was no privilege attached to the science of
memorial and computation before the time of Prydain, the son
of Aedd, who was called Dyvnvarth Prydain, Dyvnvarth being his
original name. His epoch was about seven hundred years after
the arrival of the Cymry in this island; and from his time to the
advent of Christ in the flesh there were five hundred and fifty-
three years, as told in the memorials of computation and
tradition, warranted by the sanction of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, under the penalty of losing privilege and office, and the
freedom of plough, and gifts, and of all chattels due in respect of
song and poetry. Before the coining of the Cymry into this island,
there was hardly anything else remembered and preserved by
country and nation. This Knowledge is called the memorial of
computation, and others call it memorial and computation; thus
it is said, that it was in the year of memorial and computation,
five hundred and fifty-three, Christ came in the flesh; and this
has been kept in practice down to the time. ;


Footnotes


409:1 ,.. The fragment would appear to be imperfect, unless we
read "to this time."


MEMORIAL AND COMPUTATION.


Chronological memorial and computation were reckoned from
the time of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, who lived four
hundred and eighty years before the time when Christ came in
the flesh. When Bran the Blessed, the son of Llyr, had exhibited
the faith in Christ to the nation of the Cymry, and made them
believers in the island of Britain, they began to compute time
according to the years of Christ. Some maintain that every cry of
country and Gorsedd ought to be dated from the time of
Prydain, that is, according to the custom of the ancient Cymry;
others maintain that such


p.410 p.411


should be done in conjunction with the years of Christ; whilst
others will have only the years of Christ.


(Sion Bradford.)


THE CYCLE OF TIME.


The cycle of complete time is a year and a day, four weeks being
in each month, and thirteen months in the year.


THE MONTHS.
January.


1. The dead month;

The dead month;

The white water; ;

The white stream; >

The white surface of water; :
The black month;

The white flood; .

The white rime. ;


February.


2. The month of purity; «
The month of lambs;

The severe time;

The season of purification. «


March.


3. The agriculturist's month;
The month of violets;

The rising of the sap; :

The Lily of the valley;

The thunderer. s


p.412 p.413


April.


4. The month of the swallow;
The month of the cuckoo;
The beginning of summer;
The beginning of ripenness; :
The season of the young; >
The spring of the young; :
The time of vegetation;

The pear orchard; :

The green grass.


May.


5. The month of the cuckoo;
Freshness;

Opening; :

The beginning of summer;
The season of flies;
Superior verdancy;

Prime vegetation;

Various vegetation;

The cuckoo's song «


June.


6. The month of flowers;
The presence of summer.


July.


7. The month of hay;
The close of summer;
The extremity of summer;


The extremity of ripenness;
The height of summer. ;


August.


8. The wheat month;

The season of whiteness;
Blanched stalks;

White stalks;

White beards of corn;
The month of corn;
Extreme sunniness; «

8 The bright season;

The white appearance;
The white summer.


p.414 p.415


September.
9. The fruit month;
Reaping;
The white stalks;
The white stalk.
October.


10. The honey month;

The wine month; ;

The month of the honey gatherer;
The month of deer rutting.


November.


11. The month of mist;

The dusky month;

The month of honey-comb;
The fall of the leaves;
Receding appearance.


December.


12. The black month;
The dark month;
Fore-shortening;
The ventilator.


Another mode of designating the Months.


1. The white fluid. The beginning of Alban Arthan.

2. The severe month.

3. Regeneration.

4. The beginning of summer. The commencement of Alban
Eilir.

5. The summer month. The month of June.

6. The month of the excess of summer, beginning on Alban
Hevin.

7. The reaping month.

8. The month of white stalks.

9. Deer rutting, beginning on Alban Elved.

10. The month of receding appearance.

11. The month of fore-shortening.

12. The dead month. The black month.


p.416 p.417


In other Books it is as follows--beginning on the morrow of Alban
Arthan.


. The white fluid.

. The severe month.

. Reanimation.

. The springing rows.

. The beginning of summer.

. The open summer.

. The height of summer. The excess of summer.
. Reaping.

9. White stalks. Bright Stalks.

10. Deer rutting.

11. Receding appearance.

12. Fore-shortening. Black month.


CON A ui KRWDN >


Footnotes
411:1 ».«0 Gwyn-mer; in reference to either frost or snow.
411:2 Gwyn-hy-mer.


411:3 Gwyn-wy-bar; ice. Gwenhwyvar is also used as a proper
name, three of Arthur's wives being so called.


411:4 Gwyn-myr; myr being the aggregate plural of mor, a sea.


411:5 Gwyn-hy-bar, or gwyn-y-bar. From bar comes barug, the
term in popular use for hoar-frost,


411:6 Probably in reference to the penitential season of Lent.


411:7 Cyn-nodd-awr.


411:8 Daronwy is one of the epithets of the Deity. It was also the
name of a person who is considered as one of the three
molestations of the isle of Anglesey. (Tr. 81; first Series.) There is
a historical poem by Taliesin, preserved in the ;.»u 1st vol. of the
Myv. Arch, entitled "Cerdd Daronwy," or Daronwy's Song.
Probably this name is given to the month of March, not from any
idea that thunder happens in it oftener than in other months,
but because it is a powerful month--the lord of months, as
regards the severity of the weather, even as it is called Mawrth,
March = Mars, the god of war.


A13:1 ,.» "Cynhewin," from cyn, and haw, ripe. It may, however,
be but another form of Cyntefin.


413:2 "Canowin," from cenaw, an offspring; a graft. It may refer
to the sprouts of trees, as well as to the young of animals. We
say cenawon cyll, the catkins of hazel, and cenawon llewod, lion
whelps.


413:3 Cenaw-tardd.
413:4 Probably because the pear trees now begin to blossom.
413:5 Also " May;" and is the name still in use.


413:6 "Cogerddan," (cog-cerdd.) It may signify also the departure
of the cuckoo.


413:7 "Gwerthefin " is likewise an epithet for the Deity, and
signifies what is supreme, from gwarthaf, the upper part, or
summit. We have above derived it from gwarth and hefin.


413:8 Gorhïan, i.e. gor-huan.


415:1 «4 This clearly indicates that vineyards were formerly
cultivated in Britain.


415:2 "Gwynollydd," or "gwynyllydd," probably from gwyntyll.
Many of the above names are, however, now so obsolete, and
their roots so obscure, that we do not vouch for accuracy of
translation in every case.


THE BEGINNING OF THE YEAR.


The Ancient Cymry began the year on the morrow of the
shortest day of the winter, that is, on the turn of the sun.


THE THREE CIRCLES OF THE SUN.


The circle of the summer aban; : of the summer ablan; : and of
the winter alban.


Footnotes


417:1 ,.»e Sic in MS.; but we are inclined to regard them as clerical
mistakes for alban, a primary point. It seems also as if
"gwanwyn," spring, should have been written for the former
summer.


THE FOUR OUARTERS OF THE YEAR.
1. Winter. 2. Spring. 3. Summer. 4. Autumn.
Or thus:--
1. Winter. 2. Spring. 3. Summer.--White grasses.
And the four points of the sun are thus:--


1. The point of roughness. 2. The point of regeneration. 3. The
point of summer. 4. The point of reaping time. >


Also vulgarly, thus:--


1. Summer. 2. Winter. 3. Spring.


Footnotes


A17:2 ,.»e Or--The winter solstice; the vernal equinox; the summer
solstice; and the autumnal eguinox.


p.418 p.419


THE ALBANS.


They are as follows in the Book of Sion Howel Gwyn--the Book of
Tre'rbryn:--


Alban Elved is the calend of October;
Alban Arthan is the calend of January;
Alban Eilir is the calend of spring;
Alban Hevin is the calend of summer.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE YEAR.
From the same Book.
The three divisions of the year:--


The time of summer from Cyntevin to the calend of October;
Winter from the calend of October to the calend of February;
Spring from the calend of February to Cyntevin.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE YEAR.


Spring from Alban Arthan to Alban Eilir, and thence to Alban
Hevin; and from thence Summer to Alban Elved; and from thence
Winter to Alban Arthan. After that: Spring; Summer; Autumn;

and Winter.


Llywelyn Sion.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE YEAR.


Some of the ancient Bards divide the year as follows:--Harvest;
Winter; Spring; and the beginning of Summer. :


Footnotes


419:1 p. 418


Calangauaf garw hin,
Annhebyg i gyntefin.


The calends of winter, rough is the weather,
Unlike to the beginning of summer.--Ll. Hen.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE YEAR.


The four divisions of the year: Spring; Summer; Autumn; and
Winter. According to others: Summer; Winter; and Spring.


p.420 p.421


THE DIVISIONS OF THE YEAR.


The four divisions of the year: Spring; Summer; Autumn; and
Winter.


Harry the Tall.


The Spring begins in March, when the sun and its opposite are
alike, that is, when the day and night are of egual length. Ib.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE DAY.


There are eight parts of the day: 1. morning; 2. dawn; 3.
vapourlessness; 4. noon; 5. evening; 6. twilight, &c.


Or thus:--


1. Dawn; 2. morning; 3. vapourlessness; 4. noon; 5. rest; 6.
twilight; 7. disappearance; 8. midnight :.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE DAY.
1. Midnight; 2. dawn; 3. morning; 4. vapourlessness; 5. noon; 6.
rest; 7. evening; > 8. overcast.
Footnotes
421:1 ;. Literally, "separation."


421:2 5.4 Al. "after rest."


THE DIVISIONS OF THE DAY.


p. 420 p. 421


1, 1, Dewaint, Hwyr, : 1. Midnight.
Dewaint 2,Pylgeint, Diwedydd, 2. Dawn.
2, 3, Bore, Cyfnos 3. Morning.


Pylgeint _ 4, Anterth, _ Cyflychwyr, 4. Vapourlessness.
3, Bore, 5, Nawn Cyflwg, 5. Noon; the end of day;


A, 6, Echwydd Hwyr, mid-day.
Anterth, 7, &c. 6. Rest; evening;
5, Nawn, Gwedechwydd, commencement of night.
6, 8, Ucher, 7. Evening; after rest; «
Echwydd evening; commencement
7, Hwyr, of night.
8, Ucher, 8. Overcast.


p.422 p.423


It was in this way that they formerly computed time and the
divisions of day; that is, they enumerated eight parts of the day,
giving three hours to each, thus, the first hour of
vapourlessness, the second, &c., and so for others, mid-night,
dawn, &c.


Footnotes


A21:3 ,.»» The terms in the third column are jumbled together,
with no particular assignment, and may be thus translated:
evening, the end of day, commencement of night, twilight, ditto,
evening.


421:4 Al. "twilight."


THE DIVISIONS OF THE DAY.


It was in this way that they formerly computed time, and the
divisions of day: they enumerated eight parts of the day, and
three hours in each part, and reckoned thus, namely, the first
hour, or the second, or the third hour of midnight, dawn,
vapourlessness, &c., and so in respect of every one of the eight
divisions.


THE DIVISIONS OF THE DAY.


The four parts of the day: morning, that is, the first six hours;
vapourlessness, the second six hours; noon, the third six hours;
and the fourth, evanescence, : reaching till the morning.


Footnotes


Azn Al, "rest."


YEARS OF THE SUN AND MOON.
Twenty-nine years of the sun are thirty years of the moon.
The days of the lunar year are 354.
The days of the solar year are 366.


The days of the year of memorial and computation, 365. Others
say, 364.


It is called memorial and computation, information and
computation, since the Cymry have come into the Isle of Britain.


YEARS OF THE SUN AND MOON.


The years of the sun and moon are as follows:--The year of the
sun, 366 days. The year of the moon, 354 days.


The year of memorial and computation, 364 days.
Twenty-nine years of the sun are thirty years of the moon.
In another place, thus:--

Thirty-one years of the moon make thirty years of the sun.


From the Book of Brith y Coed.


YEARS OF THE SUN AND MOON.


There are two calculations of years: one is the year of the sun,
consisting of 365 days; the other is the year of the moon, having
354 days. The days which are over and above the number of the
lunar year are called days of days, and they are thus distributed
among the Albans, that is to say;--two days of days to Alban
Arthan, three to Alban Eilir, three to Alban Hevin, and three to
Alban Elved. They are free days, and let any one come from any
place he may, he will be free, and exposed to no weapon or
stroke, since there can be no court and law of country on those
days.


(Bardism; fragments of the Months and other things.)


Footnotes


425:1 ,.» "Days of days are those on which it is not proper to
prosecute a suit." Welsh Laws.


Dr. Pughe renders "dyddiau dyddon," by blank days;--
Hoedl Dafydd megis dydd dyddon. >.s


The life of Davydd is like a blank day.--D. Benvras.


DAYS OF DAYS.


Days of days are the days that are over and above the lunar year,
and are thus distributed according to their number; two days of
days are given to Alban Arthan, three to Eilir, three to Hevin, and
three to Elved. They are free days, and let any one come from
where he may, he will be free, without a weapon against him,
since there can be no court and law of country on those days.


Barddas, Vol. I: Page Index


Title Page


page title
page verso


Welsh Manuscript Society


pop
lap


BEE


Advertisement


Preface


page xv
page xvi
page xvii
page xviii
page xix
page xx
page xxi
page xxii
page xxiii


page xxiv
Page XXV
page xxvi


page xxvii
page xxviii
page xxix


page xxxii
page xxxiii
page xxxiv
page xxxv
page xxxvi
page xxxvii


page xxxviii


page xxxix
pagexl
page xli
page xlii
page xliii
page xliv
page xlv
page xlvi
page xlvii
page xlviii
page xlix
page li
page lii


Julius Caesar


page lili
page liv


page lv
page lvi
page lvii


page lviii
page lix


page Ix


page Ixi

page Ixii
page Ixiii
page lxiv


page lxv


page Ixvi


Diodorus Siculus


Cicero


Pliny


Pomponius Mela


Diogenes Laertius


Ammianus Marcellinus


Tacitus


page lxviii
page lxix


Druids and Bards


page bu


eel
page Ixxiii
page lxxiv
page lxxv
page lxxvi
page lxxvii
page lxxviii
page lxxix


page lxx
page boed


Llywelyn Sion


page lxxxiii
page lxxxiv
page Ixxxv


Contents


page 4
ues 6


sr =


A List of Documents


Ur rs.


page 9

page 10
page 11
page 12
page 13
cone 14
err:
page 17


The Origin and Progress of Letters.--The Name of
God.--The Bardic Secret


page 20
Rage zt 21


mined 24
page 25


page 30
page 31
page 3° 32


The First Inventors of Letters.--Improvers of the
Ba eae unvention of ine Rel and Plag Javed --


eens
page 36
page 37
page se 38


Origin of Letters


The Inventor oly Voce eo MM Recorders of
I tize 8 --


Bardism. s Firs
— bi


page 42
page “3 43


page ao a


The Principal Elements of Vari
da


by Einigan and Menw.--The
a tof Bardism


Cuttings.--Foundations of Awen


page 52
page 53


Origin and Progress of Letters.--Einigan the Giant.--


The Gwyddoniaid.--Systems of Letters


ee 24


——. =


The Origin of Letters and Books.--Their Introduction
into Britain--The Coelbren


page 57


The Primary Letters.--Improvement of the Alphabet


page 58
page 59


Primary Cuttings.--Improvement of the Coelbren.--Its
Restoration


aH se


Recovery of the Old Cymraeg


The Primary Letters.--Their Augmentation.--


Restoration of the Coelbren


page 65


The Bardic Secret


The Primary Letters.--Improvement of the Alphabet


The Three First Words of the Cymraeg


The Primary Letters.--Names of the Coelbrens


page 74


page 75
page 76
page 77


page 78


page 80


page 81


The Vowels


Introduction of Letters.--Original Country of the
Cymry.--Their Arrival in Britain.-Augmentation of the


page 82
page 83
page 84


Page 85


Alphabet


Coelbren of the Bards, According to the Arrangement


page 86
page of 9/7
page 88
page 89


of Llawdden


The Symbols of Literary Sciences.--Improvement of
the Coelbren.--Metrical Canons.--Dissolution of the


page 90
page 92
page 93


pase


page 96


page 97


page 98
page 99


Monastery of Pen Rhys


The Birds of Rhianon


The Three Symbols of Sciences


The Three Primitive Symbols.--The Three Coelbren


page 100


page 101


page 102
page 103


page 108


page 110


page 111


— J


page 113


Numbers


The System of Numerals


The System of Numerals


Numerals


The Three Symbols


page 114
page 115


page 116
page 117
page 121
page 122
page 123
page 124
page 126
page 127
page 128
page 129
page 131


— Y) — ve


page 133


page 134
page 135
page 136
page 137


Coelbren of the Bards


Coelbren of the Bards


page 140
ae Ur


— es


sr =


page 144


page 145
Y


pane M8
page 151


page 152


page 153


Coelbren of the Bards


Peithynen


Secret Coelbren.--Secret Coelvain.--Coelvain of History


page 154
page 155


eee


Coelbren of Simple Letters


eithyn Coelbren.--Palm Coelbren


JAG Ge IYO


page 15 e1 59


page 160
page 161


page 164
page 165


page 166
page 167


page 168
pace los 169


page 171 TT
ede te ue


page 175 ¥ e175


Peithynvain


Memorials


The Herald-Bard


Dasgubell Rodd


Triads of Bardism


page 177
page 178
page 179
page 180
page 181


page 183
page 184
page 186
page 187
page 188
page 189
page 190
page 191
page 192
page 194
page 195
page 196
page 197


page 198
page 199


Theological Triads


Theological Triads


Theological Triads


page 200
page 201


page 202
page 203
page 204
page 205


page 206 a


cyn
page 211
page 212
page 213


page 12 a 4
page


Theological Triads


Druidism


The Three Imperceptibilities of God


The Bards' Enigma


The Twelve Primary Negatives


page 218
page 219


page 220
page 221


page 222


page 224
page 225
page 226
page 227
ar 228


page 230 230
page 231
page 232 232
page 255
page 234 234
page 235


page 236
page 237


page 238
page 239


The Divine Names


The Circles


Abred.--Gwynvyd. |


page 240
page 241


page 242


Abred


page 244
page 245


The Origin of Man.--Jesus Christ.--Creation


page 247
page 249


The Creation.--The First Man.--The Primary L


page 250
page 251
page 252
page 253
page 254
page 255


The Discipline Of Bardism. The Creation


page 256
page 257


The Creation.--W


page 258
page 259
page 260


— o


TT


page 20b =


page 269
page 270


—


forship.--Vocal Song.--G\


The Material of the World


God in the Sun


Sentences of Bardism


God; and the Faculties of the Soul


page 24 214


The Ten Commandments of the Bards


page 276
a UCH ce


ar 281
page 25c 282


page 284 a.
page 285


The Ten Commandments of the Bards


page 287
page 288 288
page 289


The Triads of St. Paul


page 290
page 291
page eos 292


page 299
page 300
page 301
page 302
page 303
page 304
page 305


page 308
page 309
page 310
page 311
page 312
page 313
page 314
page 315
page 316
page 317
page 318
page 319
page 321
page 322
page 323


page 324
Rage 326


The Triads of St. Paul


page 327
page 326
page 328
page 329
page 330
page 331
page 332
page 333
page 334
page 335
page 336
page 337


page 338


page 339
page 340
page 341
page 342
page 343
page 344


page 345


page 346
page 347
page 348


The Triads of St. Paul and Bardism


Triads of Bardism and Usages


page 352
page 353
page 354
page 356
page 357


The Mode of Taking Food and Drink


page 361


page 302
page 364
page 365


Triads of Wisdom


page 3/0 En


page 372
page 373


page 374
mwr


Triads of Bardism. The Elements


The Triads of Bardism, Called the Triads of Ionabwy.


page 385


The Elements


Bardism, &c. The Elements


The Elements


The Materials


page 386


page 388
page 389


The Seven Primary Materials of the World


The Philosophy of the Blue Bard of the Chair


)agJe 394


—


page 395
Particular Triads


page 396
page 397


Triads of Ten Numbers


page 398
page 399


Mutual Reasoning Between a Disciple and his Teacher
page 400
page 403


Chronology


page 406
page 407


Country


page 408
page 409


Memorial and Computation


page 410
page 411


The Months


page 412
page 413
page 414
page 415 M1 5


page 41 17


page 418
Rage 419


page 420
page 421


page 423 e423


page 424
page 425


The Albans


The Divisions Of The Year


The Divisions of the Day


Years of the Sun and Moon


Errata


page 27: 'literary'->'literally'

page 173: 'lawlesness'->'lawlessness'
page 289: 'depradation'->'depredation'
page 319: 'preceptive'->'perceptive'


page 339: 'are are'->'are'


ISTA FLASH DRIVE 9.0
The World's Wisdom
in the Palm

of Your Hand


e The
: Barddas of
Iolo
Sy Morga nwg
> J. Williams Ab
Ithel (editor)


Vol. II


ca — &


= bn


[1874]


Archdruid in his Full Judicial Costume [19th cent.]


(Public Domain Image)


VolumeI | VolumelII


Contents StartReading Page Index


This is volume II of the Barddas of Iolo Morganwg. This volume,
which ends abruptly mid-sentence on page 167, is essentially a
set of bylaws for the organization of Welsh Bards. While it does
not have the depth and curious lore of the first volume, it is of
some historical interest. This is because Iolo Morganwg was a
central founder of the modern Welsh Gorsedd, the bardic
contest which is still held to this day. This is his vision for how
Bardism should be organized and the high standards to which
bards should adhere.


Title Page
Privilege and Usage


The Voice of Gorsedd

The Triads of Privilege and Usage

The Triads of the Bards.--The Triads of Privilege and Usage
The Triads of Privilege and Usage


The Triads of the Bards of Cymru
The Triads of the Bards of the Isle of Britain


p. title
/\\
Y GWIR YN ERBYN Y BYD.


BARDDAS;


OR, A COLLECTION OF ORIGINAL DOCUMENTS, ILLUSTRATIVE OF THE THEOLOGY, WISDOM, AND USAGES
OF


The Bardo-Druidic System
OF THE ISLE OF BRITAIN.
WITH
TRANSLATIONS AND NOTES.


BY


THE REV. J. WILLIAMS AB ITHEL, M. A.,


RECTOR OF LLANYMOWDDWY, MERIONETHSHIRE;


AUTHOR OF "THE ECCLESIASTICAL ANTIOUITIES OF THE CYMRY." &c., &c.


VOL. II.


This fragment of the unfinished second volume was found in the Stock of the late Mr.
Rees of Llandovery, after it was purchased by


BERNARD OUARITCH, 15 PICCADILLY, LONDON.


[1874]


NOTICE OF ATTRIBUTION
Scanned at sacred-texts.com, November 2005. Proofed and edited by John Bruno Hare.
This text is in the public domain in the United States because it was published prior to
January 1st, 1923; since the author died in 1826, it is also in the public domain
worldwide. These files may be used for any non-commercial purpose, provided this


notice of attribution is left intact in all copies


E'n


BARU AS:


cht Bike Giebe Sete


Click to enlarge


Title Page


Barmy.


Bards,


Privilege amb Cange.


THE VOICE OF GORSEDD.


THIS is the Voice of Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, in
which may be seen the Privileges and Usages of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain, as originally exercised and confirmed. With them
also are the Triads of the Bards of the Chair of Glamorgan,, and
other matters intended for Bardic instruction.


The Cymry first came into the Isle of Britain with Prydain, son of
Aeddan the Great. And when they were safely settled in the
country, there arose among them three men, whose names were
Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, each of them having Awen from
God, and who consequently were Bards. These were the first
who devised the Privileges and Usages of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, which they appointed for instruction, custom, and law in


the Isle of Britain; nor were there any Bards previous to these
men. The Bards maintained these usages, and improved them by
means of Awen from God, so that the Bardism of the Bards of
the Isle of Britain became the supreme learning and wisdom;
and many of the wise men of distant countries desired to learn

it, : but they impaired and corrupted it by means of


p.12 p.13


(paragraph continues AWeN which was not from God, until at last there was
no pure Bardism in any country or place in the world, but among
the Bards of the Isle of Britain, who were of the nation of the
Cymry. The following treats of the Privileges and Usages, which
the Bards of the Isle of Britain ought to preserve by means of the
memorial of vocal song, and to recite with the Voice of Gorsedd:
that is to say;--


1. The principal usages of the Bards of the Isle of Britain are to
'maintain the memory and teaching of peace, truth, and justice
in a country, and to bestow praise upon the good, and dispraise
upon the bad; and all this by means of Awen from God.


2. They are not to bear a naked weapon in the presence of, or
against any one; and it is not lawful for any one to bear a naked
weapon where there is a Bard.


3. There are three kinds of Primitive Bards. The Bard positive, of
original appointment, or a Poet, in virtue of discipleship, whose
duty it is to preserve order and rule, in respect of the Privilege,
Usage, and Voice of Gorsedd, so that Bardism be not lost, but be
maintained and preserved, in right of original usage, uncorrupt
and unchanged. And it is incumbent upon a Poet to sing praise
and dispraise, according to what is just and reguisite, and, by


means of song and oration, to preserve the memory of the
Privileges and Usages of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and their
appurtenances. A Poet is adjudged to be one of presidency after
three Chairs, that is, when he shall have gained the privilege of
three Chairs; and every office and employment, in respect of
song and Bardism, are free to him in virtue of his Chair; and he
may exercise the function of Poet, Ovate, and Druid, as he
pleases, in virtue of occasion, without a degree, without a grant.
In this particular he is the chief of the Bards, and no one can be
made master of song who is not a presiding Bard. His dress is to
be of serene sky blue, and unicoloured, for unicolour is of the
same hue as truth, and the serene sky blue is of the same hue as
peace, a Poet, or a privileged Bard, being a man of


p.14 p.15


peace and truth;--he is also called a Licensed Bard, a privileged
Licentiate, and Primitive Bard positive. Nor is it lawful for him to
bear arms, nor for any one to bear a weapon, where he may be
in his unicoloured vestment, by which he is to be distinguished.
The second of the primitive Bards is the Ovate, and it is
incumbent upon him to be acquainted with literature, that is, to
read and write, and to know the kinds of arts which may be
beneficial to Bards and to the world, and to exhibit them in their
authenticity before a Gorsedd or Chair, or a Bard of presidency. It
is incumbent upon him, also, to collect and to search for
knowledge, and to impart instruction in it, after it shall have
obtained the judgment and privilege of Gorsedd; he is not
bound to do more, except in virtue of a degree and grant. The
dress of an Ovate is to be green, being of the same colour as
knowledge and learning, which grow like the green vegetation of
spring; and in the attainment of knowledge the Ovate is the chief


of the Bards. The third of the primitive Bards is the Druid, and it
is incumbent upon him to teach, according to reason, nature,
obligation, and choice, what he sees to be true, of the original
learning, usages, and judgment of the Poets, as preserved in the
memory and by the voice of Gorsedd, and of the learning, art,
and attainment of the Ovate-bard. And his principal function is
to teach divine knowledge, and justice, truth, and peace; and in
respect of learning and knowledge, according to reason, nature,
and obligation, the chief of the Bards is the Druid. From knowing
how to sing and exhibit a song of his own composition before a
Gorsedd, which shall confer upon it the privilege of a Chair, he
will be entitled to the privilege of a Poet, that is, a Bard of
privilege, without either a degree or a grant. The dress of a Druid
is to be of unicoloured white, being thus of the same colour
positively as the sun and light, and conseguently of the same
colour as holiness of life, purity of godliness, and sanctity. If he
cannot com- pose a song, a Druid has nothing to do with the
function of a Bard of Privilege, except by grant and courtesy; but
he


p 16: p. 17


is privileged, without either a degree or a grant, to perform what
may be necessary, and what may seem good to him, in the
employment and office of an Ovate. Should a Druid be an
original Bard of Privilege, he has no need of either a degree or a
grant, but will act according to privilege. ;


p.18 p.19


4. Discipleship is the instruction of a master, who is a presiding
Bard; that is, he who desires to receive instruction and privilege
in respect of song and Bardism, must apply to a presiding


master, and put himself under his charge, and must attend every
Gorsedd of song with his master. Those who seek instruction and
privilege in respect of song are called Aspirants, Disciples,
privileged Licentiates, and Protected, because protection will be
afforded to them, that they should bear no arms, and that none
should bear arms where they are. Aspirants have no more
privileges, until they obtain a degree in right of a Gorsedd; and
no degree can be conferred upon an Aspirant until the end of
three years of discipleship, though in right of an Ovate he may
have a degree sooner, where there is a presiding Bard, who will
aver on his word and conscience that the candidate is competent
to be a Bard. No man can be admitted into discipleship, who
knows not his right hand, how to count a hundred, the names of
the months of the year, and the four parts of the world, namely,
south, east, north, and west, and who knows not his mother's
tongue in such a way as it may be easy to understand him. When
he shall have been a disciple for three years, he is privileged to
become a candidate for the degree of a Primitive Bard Positive, if
he has a beard; if he has no beard, let him wait until he has, or
let him seek the degree of an Ovate. And when he obtains a
beard, he is privileged to become a candidate for the degree of a
Primitive Bard, if he has been a disciple for three years, or is an
Ovate; and if he cannot at that time answer poetically and
judiciously, according to the instruction of Privilege and Usage, a
degree must be forbidden to him,


p.20 p.21


unless he is better acguainted with his necessity, his feat, and his
employment, in which case he is privileged to obtain a degree.


An Ovate is to be graduated, as before mentioned, in virtue of a
presiding Bard, who shall aver on his word and conscience, that
the candidate is competent to become a Bard, or according to
the judgment of a Gorsedd, to which application has been made,
or from having been a disciple for less than three years, if he can
answer the guestions put to him by an Ovate. An Ovate of
privilege is a Bard of privilege, or a Druid, who exercises the
vocation of an Ovate, or verifies the claim of an Ovate candidate,
or an original Ovate; and there is no need to a Bard of privilege,
or a Druid, of a degree or grant, since they are entitled by
privilege to assume the office of an Ovate.


The privilege of grant, or privilege by the courtesy of Gorsedd, is
that, when a Bard must needs exercise a function, which is not
his by privilege and degree, as when an Ovate, or original Druid,
in case of necessity, exercises the vocation of a Primitive Bard
Positive, where that person is wanting; or when an Ovate, in case
of need, exercises the vocation of a Druid. Some say, that an
Aspirant of three years, can, in right of courtesy, and of the grant
of usage, engage in the office of a Primitive Bard Positive, where
there is none, or a sufficient number of such already; and in the
same manner, engage also in the offices of an Ovate and a
Druid. It is not lawful for any one to assume the office of degree
and gorsedd, in right of the gift of courtesy, except where there
is a deficiency of presiding Bards, or of Bards of institutional
degree and privilege.


A person may share in the privilege of grant and courtesy, by
giving notice of a year and a day; and unless an institutional
Bard enters his protest against it before the expiration of that
time, then all, who have enjoyed grant and courtesy, are entitled


to the privilege of usage; this is the privilege of necessity, lest
Bardism should be lost.


Where there are three presiding Bards, there is the privilege


of an institutional Gorsedd. Where there are not three, there can
be no institutional privilege, but the privilege of grant, or the
privilege of courtesy, in virtue of a year and a day, when it
becomes institutional, in case the claim has not been negatived.


Positive privilege takes place where there is only one presiding
Bard, such being ordained lest Bardism should become lost. That
is to say, the presiding Bard is empowered to confer the privilege
of degree and gorsedd upon three persons, if he pleases, for the
sake of holding a Gorsedd, which takes place at the end of an
institutional year and a day; after that, they become presiding in
right of three Chairs, or three Gorsedds.


Where there is not one presiding Bard, or chief of song, and
hence there is a prospect of Bardism being lost, let those, who
know the usages and privileges of the Bards of the Isle of Britain
from the lips and voice of country, or from Book and Coelbren,
or from a very old song, give public notice of a year and a day
throughout the country, in the name of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, who are adjudged to be always living. And when the year
and a day are expired, it is lawful for them to hold a Gorsedd,
according to what is institutional, as indicated by the memory
and voice of country, and the memorial of Book and Coelbren.
And at the end of a year and a day after that they will be Bards of
privilege and usage, according to claim and acknowledgment,
and unless they are protested against before the end of a year


and a day after that by an institutional Bard of Gorsedd, under
the privilege of the primitive Bards of the Isle of Britain, then
they will be privileged and institutional, as well as their Gorsedd,
since they will now be Bards according to privilege and usage in
virtue of the same notice, grant, and courtesy, which first of all
conferred privilege and usage upon the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, that is, the privilege of necessity.


Footnotes


11:1 ,»» "Even now those who wish to become more perfectly
acguainted with it, for the most part repair thither [to Britain] for
the sake of learning it." De Bell. Gall. lib. vi, c. 13.


17:1 ,»s The three Degrees here mentioned, Bard, Ovate, and
Druid, are freguently alluded to in the compositions of the Poets,
from Taliesin to the present day. To notice a few examples:


TALIESIN, 520-570.
Ef gwneif beirdd byd yn llawen.
He will make the Bards of the world merry.


Dysgogan Derwyddon
Tra mor tra Brython.


The Druids predict,
That the Britons will continue as long as the sea.


MEUGANT, 600--650.


Cred i Dduw nad Derwyddon darogant
Ban torrer Din Breon braint.


Trust to God that the Druids will not predict,
When the privilege of Din Breon will be violated.


BEDDAU Y MILWYR, about the 9th century.


Bet gwrgi guychit--
A bet llaur llu ovit
Yg gwarthav guanas gnir yssit.


The grave of Gwrgi the hero--
And the grave of Llawr, the Ovate of the host,
Are indeed in the height of Gwanas.


HYWEL AB OWAIN GWYNEDD, 1140-1172.


Ked bwyfy karyadawc kerted ouyt
Gobwylled uy nuwy uy nihenyt.


Whilst I wander as an Ovate, impressed with love,
May God prepare my latter end.


GWALCHMAI, 1150-1190.


Un mab Maredud a thri meib grufud
Biau bid beird weini.


The one son of Maredudd, and the three sons of Gruffudd,
Own the benefit of the administration of Bards.


Och Duw na dodyw
Dydbrawd can deryw


Derwydon--


Would to God the day of doom were arrived,
Since Druids are come.


CYNDDELW, 1150-1200.


Beirniaid am regyd beird am ragor,
A'th folant feirddion derwydon dor.


Bards are constituted the judges of excellence,
And Bards will praise thee, even robed Druids.


Mwyn ouyt y veirt y ueith goelvein rann
Meirch mygyruann kynkan kein.


As a gentle Ovate, to the Bards of the ample Coelvaen, he
imparts
The fair, lofty coursers, and the harmonious song.


LLYWARCH AB LLYWELYN, 1160-1220.


Mi ym detyf wyf diamrysson,
O'r prif ueirt ym prif gyfeillyon.


By my institute, I am opposed to contention,
Of the order of primitive Bards, who have been my early
companions.


Dywawd derwyton dadeni haelon
O hil eryron o eryri.


Druids have declared that liberal ones should be born anew,
From the progeny of the eagles of Snowdon.


PHILIP BRYDYDD, 1200-1250.


Kadeir vaelgwn hir a huberit y veird

Ac nyt yr goueird yt gyuerchit
Ac am y gadeir honno heddiw bei heiddit
Bod se ynt herwyd gwir a breynt yd ymbrouit
Bydynt derwyddyon prydyon prydein.


The Chair of Maelgwn the Tall was prepared for Bards,

And not to poetasters was it given to compliment:

And if, at this day, they were to aspire to that Chair,

They would be proved, by truth and privilege, to be what they
really are:

The Druids, the chroniclers of Britain would be there.


MADOG DWYGRAIG, 1290-1340.


Yn nheir llys y gwys gwaisg ddygnedd nad byw
Llun teyrnaidd lyw llin teyrnedd
Balch y beirdd bobl heirdd hardded Hu.


In three halls is felt the oppression of anguish, that he lives
not,

The chief of princely form, of the royal and proud line

Of the Bards, a dignified race, the ornament of His.


DAVYDD AB GWILYM, 1300-1360.
Ciliawdr côf neud wyf Ofydd.


The chaser of memory, truly I am an Ovate.


LLYWELYN COCH Y DANT, 1440-1480.


Yma 'ddoeddem ni ddeuddeg
O Feirdd, un, sy fyw, ar ddeg.


Here were we twelve Bards,
Eleven are now living.


GRUFFUDD AB DAVYDD YCHAN, 1450-1480.


Yma o Brif-Feirdd ymbrofwn
O dair gradd i dorri grwn.


Here let us, the three degrees of Primitive Bards,
Try to break up a ridge.


LEWYS MORGANWG, 1500-1540.


Ba ddyrnod his ddoe arnom!
Beirdd Tir Iarll bu orddod drom! ,.15
Duodd gwawd ac oedd gadarn,
Diweddu Beirdd fel dydd barn.


What a blow befel us yesterday!

A heavy stroke fell on the Bards of Tir Iarll!

The song that was strong was overcast;

There was an end to Bards as in the day of doom.


p.24 p.25


THE TRIADS OF PRIVILEGE AND USAGE.


1. The three primary presiding Bards of the Isle of Britain:
Plennydd; Alawn; and Gwron.


2. For three reasons are Bards called Bards according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: one reason
is, because it was in the Isle of Britain that Bardism was first
understood; the second, because no other country in the world
had ever a just comprehension of systematic Bardism; the third,
because genuine Bardism cannot be upheld except in virtue of
the usages, systems, and voice of Gorsedd of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain. On that account, of whatever country they may be,
they are called Bards according to the privilege and usage of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain. ;


3. There are three kinds of Bards of the Isle of Britain: Primitive
Bards before Christianity; after that, the Bards of Beli; and the
pseudo-Bards, that is, the Poets, who are not regulated by the
ancient privileges and usages of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. ;


4. There are three Bards of eguality, namely: the Primitive Bard;
the Druid; and the Ovate; for there should not, and cannot be
supremacy to one over another of those three, though each has
a privilege over the other, according to the privilege and
speciality of office and obligation.


5. There are three colours, which differ one from the other in the
robes of the three principal kinds of Bards of the Isle of Britain,
namely: blue, ; the colour of the sky,


p.26: p.27


distinguishes the dress of the Primitive Bard Positive, who is
called Licentiate of Privilege, inasmuch as he has a gratuitous
privilege, and a free license from the day he is dismissed from
under the hands of his teacher before a Gorsedd or Chair of
systematic vocal song; the robe of the Druid-bard is white; ; and
the robe of an Ovate-bard is green. 2 And there ought not to be
two or more colours in the robe of one or other of these three,
for a variety of colours in one or other of them is contrary to
usage and order, and inconsistent with reason.


6. There are three things symbolized by the three colours of the
Bards' robes. The colour of the Primitive Bard is blue, and the
signification of that colour is peace, tranguillity, and love, it being
the colour of heaven in: sunshine and serenity--accordingly,
peace and tranguillity, in respect of kind and excellence, ought to
have the upper hand and supremacy over every other thing--
therefore the Primitive Bard is chief, by privilege and usage, in
respect of every memorial and record of primitive sciences.
Green is the colour of the Ovate, and under the sign of this
colour are placed all the sciences of awen and reason and
cogency, as distinct from what belongs to the principal sciences
of Bardism, and all the improvement of sciences of whatever
kind they may be, so that they are good. That is to say, they are
assimilated to the green vegetation of the growth of earth,
woods, and fields, which delights the heart and eye of those who
behold them. In right of an Ovate and his art, or Ovatism, and
his degree of Gorsedd, memorial and record are enjoined until
the period of efficiency, and from that time for ever afterwards
they will be distinct from the memorial and record of a primitive
Bard. White is the symbol


p.28 p.29


of truth, and a Druid bears it as the colour of his robe, for truth is
of the same hue as light and the bright colour of day, and it
cannot admit of a variety of colours. Truth is also represented
under the sign of unity of colour in the robes of each of the three
kinds of Bards. Nor will the justice of privilege, or sciences, or
improvements consist in any thing whatsoever other than in the
stability of truth. Each of the Bards, when he shall have been
privileged until the period of efficiency, has the privilege of
wearing which ever robe he likes, but he has not the privilege of
following any office and art other than that which belongs to the
robe he may have chosen to wear.


7. Three scientific offices have been, by special privilege,
attached to the colours of the robe. The function of a Primitive
Bard is to hold a Gorsedd, judgment, and supremacy of
testimony, and to maintain the memorial and record of the
primary and original sciences of the Bardism of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain, in two ways, namely: by means of the voice of
Gorsedd, that is, the recitation of every memorial and record
publicly at a Gorsedd and Chair, so that they may be heard by
country and nation, or by all who resort to the Gorsedd or Chair,
at which the Primitive Bard may attend, according to his office
and duty, and what is reguired of him--and he is entitled, under
the sanction of his hearing, to the authorized recitation of a
Primitive Bard, and his word is a word above all in Chair and
Gorsedd; his second memorial is the memorial of song, that is,
vocal poem, warranted by the judgment of Gorsedd. The
function of an Ovate is to amplify and to improve good sciences
in virtue of awen, reason, and circumstance, that is, inevitable
obligation; on this account, the Gorsedd does not enguire


concerning his teacher, when he is privileged a Bard, but merely
concerning his sciences, his art, and his life. Those particulars
are enguired after; and, it is in virtue of what he has of them,
that he is privileged by the judgment and verdict of Chair or
Gorsedd of vocal song. Two memorials and records appertain to
him,


p.30 p.31


namely, the memorial of vocal song, and the memorial of letters.
And when his memorial and record are imposed upon a
Primitive Bard by the verdict of Gorsedd, then those sciences will
depend systematically upon the voice of Gorsedd, which cannot
take place before an efficient judgment is pronounced upon
what is so imposed. The function assigned to a Druid comes
from the grant and privilege of the lord of the territory, in the
comot and town where it may be necessary; and the extent of
country, which is placed under him, is called his office, and in his
office he is to maintain instruction and worship; that is to say, he
is to teach, as it behoves a licensed teacher, all good and
methodical sciences, which are authorized by the voice of an
efficient Gorsedd, and he ought to hold a meeting of worship in
the place where it is reguired, and in the place which is regular
and warranted by the memory and custom of country and
nation. And his privilege is, that no naked weapon be borne in
the approach to the place, where he holds it, because a Druid is
a man under the protection of country and nation, and under
the protection of God and His peace.


8. Three persons who are to carry neither a sword nor a horn: a
Bard; a metallurgist; and a female.


9. Three arts that are under the protection of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain: instrumental and vocal song; mensuration; and
metallurgy; even if such men of arts and sciences be strangers,
they are so privileged. ;


10. The three monarchs of country, namely: a Bard, who is the
teacher of good sciences for the education of country and
nation; a judge, who enacts justice and law, for the sake of order
and peace in country and nation; and a lord, that is, a king or
prince of a territory, who is guardian and protector, for the sake
of defending country and nation:--and from the co-operating
union of the three conies every verdict of country and nation,
under the protection of God and His peace. Others say: a lord; a
judge; and a Bard.


p:32 p:33


11. There are three particular and distinct persons, who may be
lawfully privileged, though they be aliens and strangers, in virtue
of the verdict of country and border country, that is, the
conventional verdict of Cymru universally: a lord; a Bard; and a
judge. From the time they are so privileged, they are adjudged to
be innate; and neither they nor their posterity can become
disfranchised, because privilege is privilege, and there can be no
lack of privilege from privilege, nor privilege from lack of
privilege.


12. The three fortunes of a Bard: to make a country inhabitable;
to civilize a nation; and to improve sciences. Others say: to
civilize a nation; and to maintain sciences.


13. Three things which cannot be dispensed with in a Primitive
Bard: poetical awen; the sciences of Bardism; and the gualities of


such as lead harmless lives.


14. The three misfortunes of country and nation: a lord without
power; a judge without justice; and a Bard without sciences.


15. The three special privileges of a Bard: free passport in
whatever country he may travel; that no weapon be borne
against him in whatever place he may be; and that his word be
paramount in respect of sciences in whatever place he may be.
Others say: the three privileges of a Bard wherever he may be,
whether in a country or in a border country: free passport; that
his word should be paramount in respect of sciences; and that
no naked weapon be borne in his presence, wherever he may be.


16. There are three primary laws enjoined upon a Bard: that he
should keep his word; that he should keep his secret; and that he
should maintain peace and tranguillity.


17. The three institutional laws of a Bard: to maintain peace and
tranguillity wherever he may be; to exhibit instruction in regular
and commendable sciences and usages, improving and
amplifying them; and to keep a regular memorial of what is
meritorious in respect of the sciences and systems of country
and nation.


p.34 p.35


18. There are three things forbidden to a Bard: to bear the arms
of war; to bear a wrong pedigree; and to introduce falsehood
into his vocal song.


19. Three things monstrous in a Bard: immoral usages;
inaffability arising from a morose temper; and ignorance with


regard to his art and office of vocal song.


20. The three odiums of country and nation: a proud lord; a
deceitful messenger; and a petulant Bard.


21. The three souls of the art of a Bard: to preserve the memorial
and record of systematic sciences; to improve the usages of
courtesy; and to increase amusement.


22. Three things unbecoming in a Bard: to preserve the
memorial of what is dishonourable and monstrous; to corrupt
the usages of courtesy; and to impugn amusement.


23. There are three disusages, for which a Bard will inevitably
lose the privileges and chattels, which he possesses in respect of
song: fighting; falsehood; and adultery--these things being
adjudged contrary to law and right.


24. There are three disusages, for which a Bard will lose the
chattels, which he possesses in respect of song, to the end of
three years: defect in his memorial and record; habitual
drunkenness; and the practising of irregular employments and
trades, such as a Bard or a Poet ought not to practise--for
instance, to maintain himself by instrumental song, and other
things, which are forbidden to a Bard, or to a man of vocal song.


25. There are three things which cannot be contravened: the
memorial of the voice of Gorsedd; an old song, warranted by a
memorial proceeding from the judgment of Gorsedd; and the
warranted usage of Chair and Gorsedd.


26. The three memorials of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the
memorial of the voice of Gorsedd; the memorial of song,


warranted by the judgment of Gorsedd; and the memorial of
Coelbren, that is, the memorial of letters.


27. The three columns of the voice of Gorsedd: vocal song;
institutions; and Triads. Others say: song; voice; and institution.


p.36 p.37


28. The three licenses of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. Five free
acres for every Bard in right of his office and art; or where that is
not the case, a plough penny, that is to say, a contribution from
every plough in his official district; and where that cannot be, a
spear penny, namely, a contribution from every land owner--this
license, in whichever of the three ways it may be, is irrespective
of the five free acres, which he is entitled to in right of an innate
Cymro. The second are the remunerations made, to him for his
vocal song, and his roll of pedigrees, that is to say, the memorial
of marriages and births, and the memorial of commendable
deeds. The third is his circuit of minstrelsy every three years to
the houses of the natives and other gentry. And where he does
not obtain his provision of five acres, or, in lieu of those, his
plough penny, or spear penny, he is to bring an action at law in
the court of country and lord, in respect of usage, which cannot
be contravened.


29. Three men who ought not to be made Bards: a natural liar;
an habitual wrangler; and one who is inevitably ignorant: for
such persons can not have Awen from God, or any apprehension
of the sciences of Bardism.


30. Three things in man, which demonstrate Awen from God,
and that he is competent to become a Bard: natural affection;


integrity of life; and manly reason occupied with honourable
sciences.


31. The three necessities of a Bard and Bardism: to keep the
memorial and record of all that is honourable and good, in
respect of truth and sciences; to teach and explain political
sciences; and to impose peace and tranguillity upon those who
are out of the pale of justice and law. Others say: to instruct in
good sciences; to confer memorial and praise upon all that is
excellent and good; and to impose peace and rights of judicature
upon those who are out of the pale of justice and law.


32. The three repulsive necessities of a Bard: the compulsory
concealment of a secret, for the sake of advantage


p.38 p.39


and peace; vituperative complaint, reguired by justice; and to
unsheath a sword against the unjust and lawless.


33. The three doctrines reguired of a Bard: a song according to
reason and wisdom; voice according to the memorial and usage
of Gorsedd, and the resort of worship; and conduct according to
good usages and habits.


34. There are three laws of avoidance incumbent on a Bard: to
avoid idleness and sloth, since he is a man of ambition; to avoid
contention and strife, since he is a man of love and peace; and to
avoid folly, since he is a man of reason, understanding, and
Awen from God.


35. The three columns of privilege and usage: custom before the
memory of country and nation; the memorial and record of


letters; and the judgment of an efficient Gorsedd. Others say:
and the authority of an efficient Gorsedd.


36. There are three incidental Gorsedds, the day and time of
which cannot be specified, but which are regular and customary
as to place, and also of egual privilege with those which are
regular and customary as to day and time: the marriage day of
the king, or the son, brother, or lineal kinsman of the king, that
is, a royal marriage; the day on which the king wears his crown,
or golden torgues; and the day of the horn of peace between
country and border country. There will be a feast for three days
on each of those times, and a concert of music and joy by means
of voice and instrument.


Footnotes


25:1 ,» "The institution is thought to-have originated in Britain,
and to have been thence introduced into Gaul; and even now
those who wish to become more accurately acguainted with it,
generally repair thither, for the sake of learning it." Caes. De Bel.
Gal. lib. vi. c. 13.


25:2 William Cynwal (1560--1600) makes a distinction between a
Bard and a poet in the following lines:--


Taeraist yna trwst anhardd

Y mynwn fod a'm enw'n fardd,

Ni chleimiais, dodais bob dydd,
Gwrdd pridwerth and gradd Prydydd.


Thou didst assert with unseemly clamour,
That I would have my name as a Bard;


I did not claim--I appointed every day
An ardent ransom--save the degree of poet.


25:3 ,» Llawdden, at the Eisteddvod, which was held at
Caermarthen in the 15th century, thus describes the costume of
a Bard:--


Gwn glas oll yn las a'r lliw 'n lân--ysgawn,
Glas esgid a braccan,

Gloyw ei sas, a glas hosan

Glas i gyd glwys yw i gân.


A blue gown, all blue, of pure colour--and light,
A blue shoe and brogue,

A bright sash, and a blue stocking,

Altogether blue--this becomes a song.


27:1 ,» William Cynwal alludes to a distinctive dress of the
Druids:--


E'th folant feirddion, Derwyddon dor.
Bards and robed Druids will praise thee.


272


Fy swydd gyda f' arglwyddi,

Hynn fydd, a'u car hen wyf i,

Darllain mydrwaith rhuglwaith rhaid,
Syful im cyfneseifiaid,

Gwisgaw o befrlaw bob un

Gwyrdd roddion gwrdd o'r eiddun.


My function with my lords,

Is this, who am their aged kinsman,--

To read poetry, which is an easy task,

Courteously to my relatives, ».»

And to wear, from the fair hands of each,

Green and strong gifts, made by them.
Ll. Goch ab Meurig Hen, (1330-1370.)


27:3 Al. "and."


31:1 ,.» Or, "even if such men of privileged arts and sciences be
strangers."


THE TRIADS OF THE BARDS.--THE TRIADS OF PRIVILEGE
AND USAGE.


(From the Book of Llywelyn Sion.)


The following are the Triads of the Bards of the Isle of Britain,
and the memorials and records thereof, as preserved by the
voice of Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of Britain--together with
their essence and nature.


When the Cymry first came into the island of Britain from the
Country of Summer, where they had been previously


p.40 p.41


from the age of ages, the primitive knowledge, and original
wisdom, were preserved in memory and record, and taught by
the Gwyddoniaid.


THE TRIADS OF PRIVILEGE AND USAGE.


1. The three primary Bards of the Isle of Britain: Plennydd;
Alawn; and Gwron. Before them there were no Bards according
to the privilege and usage of Gorsedd, but the Gwyddoniaid
were at the head of instruction.


Others say:


The three primary presiding Bards of the Isle of Britain:
Plennydd; Alawn; : and Gwron; and before them there were no
Bards, but the Gwyddoniaid were the poets and teachers of
country and nation. The first of the Gwyddoniaid was Tydain, the
father of Awen, and it was he who first invented Cymric vocal
song.


Others say:


The three primary Bards of privilege and usage of the Isle of
Britain: Plennydd; Alawn; and Gwron; who lived in the time of
Prydain, son of Aedd the Great.


2. For three reasons are the Bards called Bards according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, namely:
first, because Bards and Bardism originated in the Isle of Britain;
secondly, because genuine Bardism has not been found in any
country besides the Isle of Britain; thirdly, because genuine
Bardism cannot be maintained except in virtue of the usages,
instruction, and voice of Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain. Therefore, of whatever country a Bard may be, he is
called a Bard according to the privilege and usage of the Bards
of the Isle of Britain.


3. Bardism was obtained originally from three things: Awen from
God; instruction by man; 2 and the tendency of nature.


4. Three ways in which the genuine Bardism of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain is maintained: the memorial of Gorsedd; the usage
of Gorsedd; and the song of Gorsedd.


Others say: the usage; voice; and song of Gorsedd.


5. The three memorials of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the
memorial of the voice of Gorsedd; the memorial of song; and the
memorial of usage. :


Others say: the memorial of the voice of Gorsedd; the memorial
of efficient song; and the memorial of Coelbren.


6. Three things that cannot be contravened: the usage and voice
of Gorsedd; an ancient song of Gorsedd; and the verdict of
country and lord. That is to say, by means of these three are the
memorial, authority, privileges, and usages of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain, maintained.


Others say:


Three things that cannot be contravened: ; the usage of
Gorsedd; the voice of Gorsedd; and an ancient song bearing the
privilege of Gorsedd.


7. There are three primitive Bards of original disposition. ; A Bard
of privilege, or poet, being a Primitive Bard Positive, according to
the privilege, usage, and voice of Gorsedd; and his function is to

rule, and to preserve the memorial and record of Bardism,


according to the three memorials, and to compose eulogy,
instruction, and memorial--his origination being from the
Gwyddoniaid. The second is an Ovate, according to awen,
exertion, and circumstance; and his function is to poetize
according to imagination, circumstance, and art, and to defer to
the judgment of Gorsedd, until it becomes efficient. The third is
the Druid, according to reason, nature, and Gorsedd; and his
function is to teach, according to the necessity of country and
nation; and every priest or worshipper is adjudged to come
under the privilege of a Druid, when he attends the Gorsedd of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain.


8. The three branches of learning of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain. Bardism, or poetry; in respect of which it is incumbent to
poetize, and to maintain the memorial of song, voice, and usage
of Gorsedd, and to maintain and improve the art of poetry. The
second is Druidism; and it is incumbent upon a Druid to teach
according to reason,


p.44 p.45


nature, and Gorsedd, as order, morality, and the mysteries of
godliness require. The third is Ovatism; and it is incumbent upon
an Ovate to endeavour after learning and knowledge, as he can,
by means of hearing, seeing, and devising. That is, a poet ought
to maintain all learning and knowledge which may be privileged
by an efficient Gorsedd; an Ovate ought to improve and amplify
learning and knowledge, and to submit them to the judgment of
Gorsedd, until it becomes efficient; and a Druid ought to teach,
according to the original usage and privilege of an efficient
Gorsedd, and according to any new discovery, in respect of
reason, nature, and cogency.


Others say:


The three branches of learning of the Bards of the Isle of Britain.
Poetry by a primitive Bard; and it is incumbent upon a Poet to
poetize, and to maintain the memorial of song, voice, and usage,
and to make arrangements according to privilege, for he is
gorseddog and chaired, Ovatism; and it is incumbent upon an
Ovate to endeavour and seek after learning, as far as he can, by
means of the hearing and voice of the world, of sight and
contingency, and of attempt, awen, and imagination. Druidism;
and it is incumbent upon a Druid to teach and instruct, in respect
of what is original and made efficient by Gorsedd, and in respect
of new discovery, according to reason, nature, and cogency.


9. The three distinguishing privileges of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain: maintenance wherever they go; that no naked weapon
be borne against them; : and that their word should be a word
above all men.


10. There are three duties, according to the reguirement and
occasion of country and nation, incumbent upon a Bard. The first
is to celebrate worship on all the quarter days 2 of the moon, so
as to impart instruction in godliness and wisdom, and proper
demeanour, and all due and good qualities. The second is to
carry on ambassadorial negotiation between country and
country, and between country and nation and


p.46 p.47


border country and border alien nation, in respect of commerce
and conference, between a nation and border aliens. The third is
to maintain peace and concord between native and native, and


between native and border alien, in right of his office of Bard,
though he may not be sought or called by country and nation.


Others say:


The three offices incumbent upon a Bard, according to the need
and occasion of country and nation, namely: to celebrate
worship; to be an ambassador between country and border
country, and between nation and border aliens; and to promote
peace and concord where there is contention, whether between
native and native, or between nation and border aliens.


Others say:


There are three common offices incumbent upon a Bard, which
are reguired by the necessity of country and nation, namely:
worship; embassy; and pacification.


11. There are three primary laws of duty incumbent upon a Bard,
in respect of his duty according to the necessity and occasion of
country and nation: to examine truth; to keep a secret; and to
conduct himself morally in reference to peace and justice.


12. There are three cogent necessities laid upon a Bard,
according to the necessity and occasion of truth and justice: to
tell what he knows, where nothing else can be found which is
right and just; to raise the cry of re-assertion, : where oppression
and lawlessness take place; and to exercise judgment over
devastation and spoliation.


13. Three offices, in virtue of original usage, belong to a Bard: to
compile the memorial and record of every thing that is
commendable; to maintain the song of voice and Gorsedd so


that they should become the memorial and instruction of
Bardism and poetical art, their usages and privileges; and to
agitate the progression and extension of knowledge, by
exhibiting the Chairs of song ritually and habitually with the cry
of restoration. >


p.48 p.49


14. The three demonstrations of the Bards of the Isle of Britain:
the demonstration of Bards, where a thing was not known; the
demonstration of the convention of Gorsedd and Chair, where it
was not seen; and the demonstration of the knowledge of truth
and justice, where it was not understood. The three
demonstrations ensue under the proclamation and notice of a
year and a day, and from thence unto the period of efficiency
they take place by means of the cry of restoration.


15. There are three loud cries of the Bards of the Isle of Britain:
the cry of restoration, which resuscitates and agitates every
thing that is not known; the cry of re-arrangement, : in respect of
what is done contrary to usage, from the necessity of time and
occasion, such as holding a Chair and Gorsedd irregularly as to
place and time, for instance, at the unseasonable points of the
sun and moon, or where it is not in the face of the sun and the
eye of light--that being done from obligation and necessity--but
what is done in virtue of the cry of re-arrangement cannot be
efficient, until it becomes customary by means of a Gorsedd
according to privilege and usage; and the cry of re-assertion,
against what may be done by devastation and wrong, and by
lawless oppression, and against what may be done, in respect of
song, without privilege, usage, art, Knowledge, and truth. The
cry of restoration, and the cry of re-arrangement, are to be made


under the proclamation and notice of a year and a day, and
thence until they become efficient; and the cry of re-
arrangement is to be made under the proclamation and notice
of necessity and cogency, until the occasion for it, according to
the need of country and nation, disappears, and what is done
under it cannot be efficient, unless it formally receives the
judgment of Gorsedd, conseguent upon the cry of restoration,
and the cry of re-assertion, covocally and simultaneously issued.
For without that, the privilege of Gorsedd ought not to be given
to what is obliged to be done contrary to usage and law; nor is it
fitting that it should have any privilege whatever,


p.50 p.51


except its day of necessity, until, in the way mentioned, it obtains
claim and avouchment, lest poetry, and Bardism, and the
privileges and usages of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, should
suffer corruption.


16. Three things that are submitted to judgment, under the
proclamation and notice of the cry of re-assertion: devastation
and pillage; non privilege and non usage on the part of country
and lord, owing to the want of understanding or exertion; and
non poetry, or that which may be other than what is reguired
according to the privileges and usages of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, after it has become habitual and customary to Bard and
Gorsedd.


17. For three reasons ought the Bards to hold a Chair and
Gorsedd, and a voice and recitation, conspicuously and
manifestly, in the sight and hearing of country and lord, and in
the face of the sun and the eye of light. First, that there may be a
privilege, not to be gainsaid, for all to resort to the place and


spot. Secondly, that all things cognizable by the eye, ear, and
intellect, may be seen and heard, and that there may be no lack
of law, usage, and truth, among kindred, and on the face of
country, which cannot be again known. Thirdly, that proper
instruction may be obtained for all the nation, and for all who
resort to Chair and Gorsedd, since proper, natural, and pointed
instruction ought to be uniformly imparted to true and loyal men
of country and nation, for there can be no country and law
without instruction in respect of truth and justice--hence
proceeds fraternity.


18. There are three things indispensably attached to the rite of
Chair and Gorsedd, namely: that they should be conspicuous
and manifest, in the sight and hearing of country and lord, as to
place and spot; in the face of the sun and eye of light, that is,
while the sun remains in the firmament, in respect of the time of
day; and on the points of the sun and moon, in respect of the
time of year; in order that whatever is done, recited, and taught,
may be familiar to all the men of country and nation, and border


p.52 p.53


country and aliens, and that the places, times, and men, and the
importance and privilege of all, be fully Known; and without
these things there can be no Chair and Gorsedd according to
usage, law, and just privilege.


19. Three things in respect of the usages of Bards and Bardism,
which ought to be open to all. First, the place and spot where is
the convention of Chair and Gorsedd, which is to be opened in
virtue of the proclamation and notice of a year and a day, if the
place be not already open. The second are the times, namely, the
customary ones as to the part of day and time of year, which are


none other than the points of the sun and moon. The third is the
instruction, which ought to be open to all, in respect of the mode
of reciting and demonstrating it, so that there should be no
concealment or secrecy of learning and true and just knowledge.
Therefore, these things are called the three open ones: being
open place and spot; open day and time; and open instruction
and recitation; and no judgment can be pronounced by wise
men, and country, and nation, upon what is otherwise.


20. There are three places and times, adjudged to have the
privilege of open and customary places and seasons, at which it
is lawful to hold a Chair and Gorsedd of song, namely: the places
and seasons at which there is the resort of worship; the resort of
judicature; and the resort of verdict of country in a conventional
Gorsedd; for they are known to all. Therefore they are adjudged
to be open, as if in the sight and hearing of country and lord,
and in the face of the sun and eye of light, though they may be
under cover and roof; for these things are to be according to
reason, nature, and necessity, and conseguently according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain.


21. The three maintenances of a Bard: his five free acres; his
oblation; and his tribute.


22. The three tributes of a Bard: messes of food and liguor;
vestments; and money. Others say: the three domestic tributes,
&c.


p.54 p.55


23. The three common oblations of a Bard: one is milk
contribution, which is offered on Alban Hevin; the second is meal
contribution, on Alban Elved; the third is honey contribution,


which is offered on Alban Arthan; and portions of each of the
three on Alban Eilir, that is, when new songs are privileged. And
the poor, aliens, and strangers are to have their portions from
the three oblations at those times, since they have no due
maintenance from land and chattels.


24. There are three places of open Gorsedd: an exposed
elevation : before memory, or in virtue of the proclamation and
notice of a year and a day; a church; and a court of judge and
law.


25. There are three seasons of an open Gorsedd: the points of
the sun and moon; Sunday and festival; and the day of court and
law.


26. There are three meetings of federal country: the meeting of
Bards in Gorsedd; the meeting of worship; and the meeting of
court and law.


27. There are three common proclamations: the resort of
worship; the field of a lord; and the Gorsedd of Bards; and in
them are to be issued every notice, every loud cry, every denial,
every word and contradiction unto the end of a year and a day.


28. The three columns of claim of the Bards of the Isle of Britain:
an ancient son;; the old memorial and voice of Gorsedd; and
verdict of country. »


29. There are three horns of proclamation belonging to the Bard:
the verdict of country, composed of three hundred men; the cry
of murder; and the signal of peace and concord; and they take
place under the notice of a year and a day, when they receive the
privilege of Bards, country, and king.


30. There are three horns of proclamation belonging to the king,
and he has the right of issuing them in the Gorsedd of the Bards:
war; the court of country and law; and the feast of country and
nation; but this is not lawful


p.56 p..57


for other than king and lord; and they are to take place in the
hurry of forty days.


31. There are three common horns, which ought to be used in
every convention of federate country: the horn of murder and
waylaying; the horn of oppression of border country and
stranger; and the horn of devastation and pillage. And in virtue
of these is the horn of deliverance; for they will have the
privilege of the verdict of country and nation.


32. The three protections of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: to
protect learning, that is, the art of Knowledge; to protect peace
and tranguillity; and to protect truth and justice. That is to say,
they ought to be protected even unto death, when there is
occasion, for it is on their account that a Bard exists, and he is no
Bard who does nothing in their behalf, and there is nothing
which is not a duty, arising from these things.


33. The three cares of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, namely: to
support science; to elucidate truth; and to cherish peace and
tranguillity.


34. The three non usages and non qualifications of the Bards of
the Isle of Britain: encroachment upon sciences; contradiction of
truth; and the impugning of peace and tranguillity; for by


perpetrating these things one becomes deprived of privilege and
exposed to warfare.


35. The three necessary functions of a Bard: to teach and explain
all things in the face of the sun and the eye of light; to praise all
that is excellent and good; and to substitute peace for
devastation and pillage.


36. There are three branches of Bardism: Poetry; Ovatism; and
Druidism; and these three branches are adjudged to be of egual
privilege and of egual weight, for one cannot have supremacy
over the other; though they are distinct in object, they are not
distinct in privilege.


37. There are three Bards of egual importance, who are the three
proprietary primitive Bards, namely: an innate licensed Bard, or
a Poet, according to privilege and usage;


p.58 p.59


an Ovate-bard, according to poetical learning; and a Druid-bard,
according to the sense of godliness and morality. They are said
to be of egual importance, because one cannot be better than
another, or one superior to another, in respect of office and
movement; but they are co-egual, and of like dignity, in respect
of duty, aim, and object, which are instruction, truth, and peace.


38. The three branches of the office of a Bard: duty; aim; and
object; and they are for the sake of instruction, truth, and peace.


39. Three times have Bardism and the Bards of the Isle of Britain
been submitted to the verdict of country and nation, (the verdict
of country being the asseveration of three hundred men, who


enguire into the hearing, knowledge, and judgment of country
and nation until the expiration of a year and a day.) First, in the
time of Prydain, the son of Aedd the Great, when the Bards
conformed to privilege and usage, judiciously and in order,
according to the verdict of country and nation, which privilege
and usage are the same as what are now called the privilege and
usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. No objection or protest
has ever after been made against those privileges and usages,
but previously there was neither privilege nor usage, except
from a sense of courtesy, and according as any one was pleased
to judge in regard to Bards and Gwyddoniaid. (Al. and it was
judged at will in regard to Bards and Gwyddoniaid.) The second
occasion was in the time of Maxen the Sovereign, : lest the
primitive Bardism should become lost and forgotten, when it
was recovered in its integrity, and according to the original
privileges and usages; it was submitted to the judgment and
verdict of country and nation, when the ancient privileges and
usages, the ancient import and instruction, and the ancient
sciences and memorials


p.60 p.61


were confirmed, lest they should fail, become lost, or forgot-ten;-
-nor was there an objection or protest made against them. The
third occasion on which they were submitted so, was in the time
of Ithel, king of Gwent; : when Bardism was found perfect,
without decay, without blemish, without injury, without
deterioration, in respect of the meaning, sciences, instruction,
memorial, and voice of Gorsedd, and in respect of privileges and
usages; wherefore, it was adjudged, decreed, and privileged
accordingly without contradiction or objection.


40. : Three times were Bardism and the Bards submitted to the
verdict of country, but could not receive the verdict of nation.
The first was in the time of Cadwalader the Blessed, 2 when
protest and objection were offered on the part of the nation,
because the sciences, memorials, privileges, and usages were
altered and falsified. The second occasion was in the time of
Bleddyn, son of Cynvyn, ; when the verdict of nation was not
sought, neither was it given. The third occasion on which they
were so submitted was at the Gorsedd of Caermarthen, when
the Bards of Glamorgan, Gwent, Ergyng, Euas, and Ystrad Yw,
entered an objection and a protest against the said Gorsedd,
under the claim of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and under the
privilege of the ancient sciences, memorials, and instruction, and
the ancient art of song, and the ancient privileges and usages,
because of the falsification and infraction to which they were
there subjected; and opposed them.


41. Three times were Bards and Bardism arranged, without
being submitted to the verdict of country and nation. The first, in
the time of the emperor Arthur. ; The


p. 63


second, in the time of Gruffudd, : son of Cynan, king of
Gwynedd. And the third occasion on which they were so
arranged, was in the time of king Edward the Second, >in the
Castle of Caernarvon. There is no privilege of Gorsedd, however,
to what was arranged on those occasions, but merely the
courtesy of country, according to reason and necessity, to which
Bards and Bardism are entitled, as long as they do not infringe,
falsify, and contravene the ancient sciences of song and Bardism.


And now the Bards and Bardism of the Isle of Britain, the ancient
privileges and usages, the ancient memorials and sciences, the
ancient import and instruction, the ancient art of song, and the
ancient sense of Bardism, are preserved in the memory and by
the voice of the Gorsedd of the Chair of Glamorgan, Gwent,
Euas, Ystrad Yw, and Ergyng, and are subject to the judgment
and authority of that Chair, under the formal and ritual
proclamation and notice of a year and a day unto the period of
efficiency, without contradiction or objection; and therefore are
under the privilege and protection of the verdict of country and
nation--which proclamation and notice were issued by the lord
William Herbert, earl of Rhaglan and Pembroke, and prince of
Glamorgan, in every court and church, and by the horn of
country, and the cry of restoration formally throughout all his
territory, unto the period of efficiency, as it has been said.


42. There are three arts which the son of a villain ought not to
learn without the permission of his lord, namely: scholarship;
Bardism; and metallurgy; for if the lord should bear until the
tonsure is given to the scholar, or until the Bard takes up his
song, or until the smith enters his smithy, they will he free, and
cannot afterwards be enslaved.


43. There are three persons free from the bond: a Bard; a
scholar; and a smith. Others say: the three free persons from the
bond, namely: a Bard; a scholar; and a metallurgist. For no
person can be bond, who knows one of the three privileged arts,
namely: scholarship;


p. 64 p.65


[paragraph continues] Bardism; and metallurgy. Those three arts are
privileged, and cannot be followed by any one but a gentleman;


and whoever knows them is entitled to the privilege of nobility,
social rights, and the maintenance of an innate Cymro; for those
arts are adjudged to be noble, and privileged arts of country and
nation.


44, There are three common places of protection, in which no
weapon can be raised against any person whatsoever, namely:
the Gorsedd of Bards; the court of country and lord; and the
precincts of worship.


45. There are three principal claims and avouchments of the
nation of the Cymry, which ought to be supported in the
Gorsedd of the Bards of the Isle of Britain. The first, a king who is
a free-born Cymro. The second, the fruition of five free acres for
every innate and free-born Cymro. The third, the right of
progress for every innate Cymro as far as he likes in respect of
country and border country in the island of Britain, without let
and without hindrance, as long as his hand is not about to strike,
and as long as he has no claim or is not sued, in respect of oath
and law. These privileges are due to the nation of the Cymry,
because theirs in right of original condition, possession, and
community, is the island of Britain.


46. The three principal objects of the Bards of the Isle of Britain,
in virtue of original usage: system of knowledge and learning; to
manifest justice; and to maintain peace.


47. By three methods is the genuine Bardism of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain maintained: by the usage of Gorsedd; the voice of
Gorsedd; and the song of Gorsedd.


48. The three memorials of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the
memorial of usage; the memorial of song; and the memorial of


the voice of Gorsedd. Others say: the memorial of usage; the
memorial of song; and the memorial of Coelbren.


49. There are three presiding primitive Bards: Primitive Bard
Positive, who is also called Bard of Privilege, Licentiate of
Privilege, and Licensed Bard; Druid; and Ovate.


Others say:


There are three kinds of primitive Bards: Bard of privilege in
virtue of original appointment; Druid, according to reason,
nature, and cogency; and Ovate, according to exertion,
imagination, and contingency.


50. From three things has Bardism been obtained: Awen from
God; the intellect of man : and the disposition of nature.


51. The three privileges of the Bards of the Isle of Britain:
maintenance wherever they go; that their word should be
paramount; and that no naked weapon be borne where they
may be.


52. The three branches of learning of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain: Bardism, on which depends the maintenance of the
usage, voice, and song of Gorsedd, as well as the regulation of
matters; Druidism, it being incumbent upon a Druid to teach and
instruct according to reason, nature, and cogency; and Ovatism,
which has to do with the sciences 2 of country, imagination, and
contingency.


53. Three things which a Bard ought to do: to listen; to look; and
keep secret. Al. to listen; to expect; and to be silent.


54. Three persons who cannot be made Bards: the idle; the
proud; and the liar.


55. Three things which a Bard ought to establish: knowledge;
truth; and peace.


56. Three things which a Bard ought to do, namely: to improve
and extend sciences; to soften morals and habits; and to solace
the mind.


57. In three ways is a Bard graduated, namely: first, a Bard of
privilege is graduated after discipleship, or after the notice of a
year and a day; a Druid is graduated by the decree of Gorsedd,
according to a majority of votes; and an Ovate is graduated after
a presiding Bard shall have affirmed upon his word and
conscience that the candidate may be made a Bard.


58. The three ministers of knowledge of the Bards of


the Isle of Britain, namely: song; symbol; and letter; of which
song is considered the best, because there will be need only of
the person who commits it to memory, without manual labour or
art, and because a song can be conveyed by means of the
tongue and memory from man to man, and from country to
country, and from age to age, without any thing to support it
other than memory and understanding. This cannot be the case
with symbol and letter; therefore, the best means of maintaining
and preserving sciences is song, according to the privilege and
usage of Gorsedd.


59. The three ministers of knowledge: song; chronicle; and letter.
The best is song, inasmuch as it is the easiest to learn and
remember, and the most difficult to alter and corrupt, being
arranged and ordered according to the art of song and the
metres of poetry. Wherefore, awen and the art of song and
poetry are indispensable to a Bard.


60. The three ministers of instruction: song; symbol; and letter.
Al. song by a poet; symbol by a herald-bard; and letter by a post-
bard.


61. There are three kinds of Triads under privilege and usage by
the Bards of the Isle of Britain, namely: Triads of privilege and
usage; Triads of Bardism; and Triads of song.


62. The three authorities of statute and law: their being
published under the proclamation and notice of a year and a day
in every court and church in the territory; their being submitted
to the verdict of country and nation, that is, the oath of three
hundred true men of country and territory, each of them being
an efficient man and head of kindred; and their being submitted
to the judgment of court


p.70 p.71


and judge, as the court may be from immemorial usage, in three
Gorsedds, in each of the three provinces of Cymru, judgment
being formed according to the memory, usage, and confirmation
of Gorsedd and court.


63. The three authorities of vocal song, when it shall have been
sanctioned by an efficient Gorsedd: correctness of language and
versification, for what is otherwise cannot be admitted according


to the privilege of a poet; correctness of meaning and object, for
what is otherwise ought not to receive judgment from the word
of a poet's conscience; and privilege received from the judgment
of an efficient Gorsedd; and they ought not to be contradicted,
because of the word and privileges of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain.


64. There are three warrants in virtue of which any one may be
admitted a Bard: the word of a presiding Bard of poetic lineage,
who shall say upon his word and conscience that the one who
desires to be a Bard: can be made a Bard; the word of twelve
true and loyal men of country and nation > judicially and legally
pronounced under the privilege of innate Cymry; and the word
of the sovereign of country or judge of court, who shall say that
the one who seeks to be a Bard may receive a faculty, because
he is a loyal man of country in respect of descent and privilege,
and that his lord gives him that freedom.


65. The three stocks of competition: ; a Bard; a judge; and a king.


66. The three mutual bonds of a country: Bardism; judicature;
and kingship. Al. The three characteristics of government, &c.


67. The three national duties of a Bard: to praise the good; to
impart instruction and advice; and to preserve the memorial and
record of what is worthy.


68. The three credibilities of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: the
memorial and voice of Gorsedd; symbol and picture; and letter
and writing.


69. Three things which a Bard ought to recite in Gorsedd under
the privilege of the nation of the Cymry who


p.72 p:73


may reguire it of him, that is to say: to recite the points of the
Cymric language; the privileges and usages of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain; and the privileges and usages of the nation of the
Cymry, and their sovereignty.


70. The three rudiments of the Bards of the Isle of Britain: word;
letter; and symbol. Al. word; symbol; and letter.


71. Three men who are entitled to the endowment of country: a
Bard; a judge; and a warrior.


72. The three primary descriptive mediums of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain: song; allegory; and usage.


73. The three stocks of law: conscience; truth; and cogency. Al.
and occasion.


The three materials of every rite and law: truth; knowledge; : and
conscience.


74. The three relics of oath ; and asseveration of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain: the ten commandments; the gospel of John; and
averment in the face of the sun and light. Others say: the ten
commandments; the gospel of John; and a Bard declaring upon
his word and conscience. According to others: a Bard; a judge;
and a juror declaring upon his word and conscience.


75. The three especial instructions which the nation of the Cymry
obtained: the first was that of the Gwyddoniaid before the time
of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, from the age of ages; the
second was Bardism, as taught by the Bards, after they were
instituted; the third, the faith in Christ, which was the best of the


three. That is to say, first, the Gwyddoniaid were the principal
philosophers and teachers of the nation of the Cymry, and when
privilege and usage were conferred upon them in the time of
Prydain, son of Aedd the Great, they were called Bards, ; and
what they knew was designated Bardism. There is no memorial
or knowledge of the Gwyddoniaid, except the name of Tydain,
the father of Awen, who first of all men composed a Cymric
song; and it was from his song that the best comprehension of
Bardism and poetry was obtained,


p.74 p.75


and hence were instituted Bards of privilege and usage, by
means of the counsel and instruction of the three primary ones,
Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron.


76. From three things was Bardism obtained: from memory and
knowledge from the age of ages; from the song of Tydain, son of
Tudno, : that is, Tydain, the father of Awen; and from Awen from
God by means of reason, sense, and understanding.


77. A Bard will be three things, namely: a chief and a bridge,
being resembled to a bridge, because he conveys over the
morass of ignorance; security where there is insecurity, because
there will be no weapon against him or against his fellow
traveller; and a privilege for the unprivileged, that is, his
protection. Accordingly it is said: he who would be chief, let him
be a bridge; he who would be a bridge, let him be a Bard; from
being a Bard, let him be a chief; from being a chief, let him be a
bridge. »


78. There are three common announcements, and whether it be
notice, assertion, cry, or denial that is issued, it ought to be


according to one of the three, under the notice of a year and a
day, namely: the field of a lord; the resort of worship; and the
Gorsedd of Bards. ;


Or thus:


There are three common announcements: the resort of worship;
the field of a lord; and the Gorsedd of Bards. Otherwise: three
places in which proclamation and notice are to be issued until
the expiration of a year and a day, &c., and in them are to be
uttered every cry of restoration, of re-assertion, and of re-
arrangement.


p.76 p.77


79. The three firm Gorsedds of the Isle of Britain: the Gorsedd of
country and lord; the Gorsedd of Bards; and the Gorsedd of
federate support. Others say: the three principal Gorsedds of the
Isle of Britain, &c.


80. The three principal Gorsedds of the Isle of Britain: the
Gorsedd of Meriw hill; the Gorsedd of Beiscawen; and the
Gorsedd of Bryn Gwyddon. AI. the hill of Evwr; Beiscawen; and
Bryn Gwyddon.


81. Three times was Bardism submitted to the verdict of country
and nation, namely: first, when it was originally arranged and
privileged in the time of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great;
secondly, in the time of Bran, son of Llyr; thirdly, in the time of
Gruffudd, son of Cynan, and it was so secured that no one
should be initiated in any song or learning whatsoever, but
under the privilege and protection of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain.


82, The three characteristics of a community: a Bard teaching; an
artist defending; and a labourer providing food; and they are
entitled to the privilege of innate loyalists of the country and
nation of the Cymry, of whatever country and nation they may
be.


83. Three things which cannot be contravened: an ancient song;
an ancient memorial; and an ancient art of poetry. ;


84. Three men who socially constitute a court: 2 a Bard; a smith;
and a harpist. Al. a Bard; a metallurgist; and a harpist. Or: a Bard;
a man of instrumental song; and a metallurgist.


Three men who establish a social habitation wherever they may
be: a Bard; a smith; and a harpist. ;


85. Three principal things required of a Bard: to preserve
memorial and knowledge; to preserve peace and courtesy; and
to preserve instruction and morality.


86. The three maintenances of a Bard: his five free acres; his
circuit of minstrelsy; and his fee for what he does, in virtue of his
art, to another.


p. 79


87. The three licentiates of court: a Bard; a judge; anda
worshipper.


88. The three supports of government: Bardism; judicature; and
labour.


89. There are three common departures: the resort of Bards to
Gorsedd and worship; the resort to a convention of country and
lord, which is regulated by jury and law; and the resort to
aration; both male and female being privileged to resort to
them.


90. There are three peculiar departures, a female being
privileged to join in them: hunting; warfare; and a convention of
federation.


91. In respect of three things ought a Bard to regulate matters,
and to be a man of Chair: nuptial festivities, which he ought to
chronicle and register; the royal games, that is, the twenty-four
games of the nation of the Cymry, which he ought to see are
conducted in peace and morality, and which he must arbitrate
justly; and the genealogy of the nation and territory where his
Chair and endowment may be, in respect of which he ought to
keep a memorial and system, lest innate privilege should suffer
oblivion, and blemish, and conseguently loss; if he attends not to
these things, he shall lose the remuneration of his song for three
years.


92. Three men who ought not, and cannot be made Bards: the
idle; the proud; and the liar.


93. There are three guarantees which will enable any one who
wishes to be made a Bard: the word of a Bard of poetic lineage,
who shall affirm upon his conscience; the word of a chief, that is,
a lord, or a judge; and the word of twelve true and loyal men of
country. A priest is adjudged to have the same privilege as a
Bard of poetic lineage, since he is a Druid in virtue of office and
duty.


94. The three first points, which a Bard ought to teach and
consider: to believe every thing; to disbelieve every thing; and to
believe it matters not what. Others say: the three first points of
Bardism; or, a Bard's three first points of instruction, &c.


p.80 p. 81


95. The three relics of belief and asseveration of the Bards of the
Isle of Britain: the ten commandments; the gospel of John; and
the face of the sun and eye of light. : And when one makes an
asseveration, he is to fold his two hands, placing the fingers of
the one between those of the other, and pressing them on the
breast, towards the relics mentioned.


96. There are three authorities of vocal song: just language and
versification, since none other can be believed according to the
privilege of a poet; just import and recitation, since none other
can be believed according to reason and nature in respect of the
duty and privilege of a poet; and the privilege of Gorsedd, that is,
the judgment and favour of three Chairs of song, which are held
according to the privileges of the Bards of the Isle of Britain,
being called by the Bards the privilege of an efficient Gorsedd.


97. In three ways is the Bardism of the Bards of the Isle of Britain
properly maintained, namely: by means of the voice of Gorsedd;
an efficient Gorsedd; and usage according to the memory of
country and Gorsedd. Others say: the voice of Gorsedd; the song
of Gorsedd; and the usage of Gorsedd. Others say: the memorial
of song; the memorial of voice; and the memorial of Coelbren,
that is, letter.


98. The three sorts of the primitive Bards of the Isle of Britain: a
Bard of privilege, or poet, to rule, and to record; a Druid, to


teach; and an Ovate, to improve learning and knowledge.


99. There are three endeavours, which are obligatory upon a
Bard: one is, to accumulate and teach sciences; the second is, to
instruct; and the third is, to pacify, by introducing concord and
tranguillity where there is contention and guarrelling, and
putting an end to strife; for it is not according to usage, or
becoming, that a Bard should do contrary to these things.


100. There are three pursuits which are lawful to a Bard, and to
every other native of country and nation, that


p.82 p.83


is to say: hunting; tillage; and pastoral cares; for it is by means of
those things that all persons obtain food, and they ought not to
be denied or prohibited, nor should such as may desire them be
restrained. : Others say: tillage; pastoral cares; and medicine; for
these are pursuits of improvement, conseguent upon peace and
morality, and are called the three common pursuits.


101. Three things which a Bard is not privileged to engage in,
since they are not proper for him. Metallurgy, with which art he
has nothing to do, except to improve it, according to his reason,
learning, Knowledge, and doctrine, for he is a man of literature.
War, since there ought to be no naked weapon in his hand
against others, for he is a man of peace and tranguillity. The
third is commerce, for he is a man of primary law and justice,
and he ought to attend to his office of instructing country and
nation. And because of these things it is deemed that a Bard
ought not to have any trade other than his office and art, in
respect of song and Bardism, lest what ought to belong to Bard
and Bardism should suffer loss and deterioration, and lest a


Bard, by following a trade, may not be able to practise
meditation in respect of the things which are suitable to Bard
and Bardism, and to literature and genial sciences; nevertheless,
the three common pursuits are proper for him.


102. The three common feasts, which are conducted and
arranged by the Bards of the Isle of Britain, namely: the first are
the feasts of the four albans; the second are the feasts of
worship at the guarters of the moon; the third are the feasts of
country and nation, because of a triumph and deliverance; which
are to be held under the proclamation and notice of forty days.


Others say:


There are three contributory feasts under the protection of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, at which all have their portion of the
three tributes, namely, honey, meal, and milk, that is to say: the
feasts of co-aration under the proclamation of forty days; the
feasts of alban; and the feasts


p. 85


of worship. It is privileged for Bards to preside over them, and to
receive presents at them out of the three contributory gifts,
which are corn, milk, and honey; : and they are called the Bards'
gifts of co-aration, because they refer to the plough.


103. There are three other feasts, which by courtesy a Bard
regulates, namely: the feast of the head of kindred; the feast of
marriage; and the feast of the fire back, which takes place where
five fire back stones are raised as a station of social abode. In


them the gifts of the comot and nation are presented, as far as
the ninth generation; and the Bards receive a portion of the
contributory gifts of those feasts, being taken from tilth, fold,
and wood covert, according as it may be easiest to obtain and to
give them. They are given by courtesy to a Bard, for it is only the
right of courtesy that a Bard is entitled to at these three feasts.


104. There are three proclamations. One is a proclamation under
the notice of a year and a day, and it is under that proclamation
that every substantial cry should be issued, such as the cry of
restoration, the cry of re-assertion, and the cry of re-
arrangement, which are to be published in every Gorsedd of
country and lord, in every Gorsedd of Bards, and in every resort
of worship. The second is the proclamation of forty days,
according to which every common feast of country and nation,
and every Gorsedd of oppression are held--a Gorsedd of
oppression being the name given to that which requires to be
held in conseguence of oppression by a border country or
stranger, or of depredation and pillage in a country, whereby
there is a peremptory occasion for country and lord, or Bards, or
others, in the cause of country and nation, to assemble in
Gorsedd, and to blow the horn of country preparatory to war,
defence, and deliverance. This proclamation is to be made in
every resort of worship, and in every court of comot, and by
sound of horn in every town, which contains five inhabited
houses. The third is the ready proclamation, such as the
recitation of juridical peace in the Gorsedd of country and


p.86 p. 87


lord, in the Gorsedd of Bards, in the Gorsedd of convention, in
every court of judge and law, and in every resort of worship. And


when juridical peace is proclaimed, it is not lawful for any one to
bear a naked weapon of offence, whilst it is lawful for all, in
respect of country and nation, alien and stranger, to be present,
as long as they shall remain under the protection of the juridical
peace, without a weapon, without assault; whereas he who
conducts himself otherwise is not allowed : to enjoy juridical
peace, but is adjudged to be a man deprived of privilege and
exposed to warfare. Twelve true and loyal men of country and
nation have the privilege of meeting together, without a weapon,
without assault, in right of juridical peace, which must be
proclaimed, before they perform what is necessary; and when
the juridical peace is proclaimed, they must go to court, in
respect of what is necessary, and there awake the horn of
country under the proclamation of forty days, and submit to the
verdict of country and nation, which verdict is privileged to
awake the horn of country. And they must proceed to deal with
their wants and reguirements under the proclamation and
notice of a year and a day, either in the Gorsedd of country and
lord, or in the Gorsedd of convention, or in the Gorsedd of
Bards. The court of twelve true and loyal men, constituted as
already mentioned, is called the court of agitation, and the
agitation of country, since they can have nothing to do with the
necessity and occasion otherwise than by means of the agitation
of the court and Gorsedd of which there is need.


105. Three things which it is lawful for a Bard to exact in his
circuit of minstrelsy, being the three principal provisions, namely:
corn; milk; and honey; nor is it lawful for a Bard to exact
provisions, except the three contributory provisions, for nothing
else may be given which is a provision under the protection of
God and His peace. And from the three contributory provisions


are all contributory gifts in the feasts of the four albans, and in
the feasts of


p.88 p. 89


worship, and in every other feast, which may be under the
protection of God and His peace.


106. There are three feasts which are deemed under the
protection of God and His peace, namely: the feasts of the four
albans; the feasts of deliverance of country and nation, which
take place under the proclamation of forty days, when gifts are
presented from the three contributory aids by all men of the
nation; and a portion of those gifts is for Bards, the poor, and
stranger, who are under the protection of God and the Bards of
the Isle of Britain.


107. There are three other feasts which are by courtesy under
the protection of God and the Bards of the Isle of Britain,
namely: the feast of the head of kindred; the feast of co-aration;
and the feast of the fire back; at which gifts are contributed from
the three principal provisions. Others say: from tilth; fold; and
wood covert; with a portion to the Bard, the poor, and the
stranger, who may be under the protection of God and His
peace, that is, under the protection of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain pursuant to the proclamation of forty days. Others say:
the three oblations: one from tilth; another from fold; and
another from wood covert:--or, of honey, or the juice of the fruit
of trees.


108. The three privileged specialities of country: Bardism;
judicature; and metallurgy; since they cannot be maintained
except by privilege, and all are not reguired to know them.


Others say: scholarship; judicature; and trade. Others say:
scholarship; trade; and commerce.


109. The three branches of Bardism: Ovatism; poetry; and
worship.


110. The three branches of artizanship: metallurgy; carpentry;
and medicine.


111. The three branches of scholarship: Bardism; judicature; and
chancellorship.


112. The three landless ones who are privileged: a Bard; a smith;
and a carpenter; for they have the privilege of free maintenance,
though they may not be possessed


p.90 p.91


of the privilege of innate nobility, and conseguently endowed
with land.


113. There are three privileged proprietors of land: a Cymro of
innate nobility, that is, he who is a Cymro in the ninth descent,
and every one who is such is entitled to his five free acres; a
Bard, or judge, who makes firm peace between country and
border country, that is, where they are not subjected to juridical
verdict, and are at variance; and a foreign army that may win a
battle and victory in behalf of the nation of the Cymry, : over
their enemies, for they are entitled to land and the privilege of
innate Cymry.


114. Three free allotments which are due in common to every
innate Cymro: five free acres of landed property; the benefit and
privilege attached to the function of science; and corporal


freedom. These should not be denied to any native who is a
genuine Cymro. Others say: free land; knowledge; and liberty.
Others say: the work of God the Father; knowledge; and liberty;
for no one should be denied his share of these three things.


115. There are three shares which are not free for all, that is,
none but the possessor is allowed to participate in them. One,
the things, which are of God's creation, such as strength of body
and intellect, a wife, and children. The second is, what man
makes of his own reason, understanding, art, and bodily
faculties, such as a house, furniture, dresses, and implements,
and every thing that is produced by his own ability, devise, and
material--he being privileged to have the whole of what he
makes and obtains by means of his own skill, art, and science.
Thirdly, no one is entitled to the incommunicable privilege which
another receives from a person, or from country and nation, or
from men of office and system, as duly deserving it, such as the
privilege of a king, or a judge, or a Bard, or any other office
whatsoever according to the reguirement of man, or of country
and nation.


116. The three proper subjects of praise, and of the memorial of
song and Bardism: every guality and usage


p.93


that are pure and good; every form and appearance that are
beautiful and lovely; and every contrivance and art for the
benefit of the public and life, which are not productive of
disadvantage and uselessness of egual weight with its utility.


11 7. The three depredations of the world: a lord without justice;
a judge without mercy; and a Bard without learning.


118. The three stabilities of the social state: a just lord; a merciful
judge; and a learned and moral Bard.


119. The three sanctuaries of country and nation: the Chair of
Bards; the courts of country and judge; and a plough at work. ;


120. The three essences of vocal song, and where they are not
found, it cannot be in accordance with the instruction of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain: the doctrine of goodness; the
memorial of what is commendable in man and circumstance;
and harmless amusement; and it was with the view of
confirming these that the system of Bards and Bardism was
ordained.


121. The three firm laws of the Bards of the Isle of Britain and
the nation of the Cymry: judgment according to the privilege and
usage of Gorsedd, by means of the verdict of presidents, and
which is formed by a majority of votes; judgment according to
the verdict and usage of country and nation under proclamation
and notice, submitted to the silence and voice of country and
nation by a majority of votes; and impulsive judgment according
to reason and nature brought about by necessity and obligation,
where neither of the other two can be obtained.


122. There are three graduated Bards: the Primitive Bard; the
Druid-bard; and the Ovate-bard. Others say: There are three
kinds of Primitive Bards: a Poet, or licensed Bard, on whom it is
incumbent to poetize, and to maintain the memorial and
supremacy of Gorsedd, and to maintain, that is, to rule in


Gorsedd, and his word is to be paramount in Chair and Gorsedd;
an Ovate, on whom


p.94 p.95


it is incumbent to genialize and to improve learning and
sciences; and a Druid, on whom it is incumbent to maintain
instruction and a meeting of worship--and where there is no
regular Druid having a Chair degree, the Poet is privileged to
maintain instruction and worship, for it belongs to him in virtue
of original reguirement and offices, and obligation of art to
maintain the instruction of worship.


123. There are three firm Gorsedds of song: a Gorsedd according
to the primitive practice and usage of the nation of the Cymry
from the age of ages, before memory and knowledge, its times
being the points of the sun and moon; an institutional Gorsedd
within memory, its times being the three principal and special
festivals, namely, Easter, Whitsunday, and Christmas; and an
incidental Gorsedd, its times being unknown, such as the
marriage day of a king, the day of coronation, and the day of the
horn of peace. :


Footnotes
41:1 ,.o Al. "Alan."


41:2 Al. "the sense and understanding of man."


iN


3:1


Al. "Coelbren."
A


T>


2


|. "are not."


43:3 Al, "of original discovery and order."


45:1 ,. Al. "in their presence."


45:2 "Ban ac adfan;" division and subdivision, i.e. the new and
full moon, and the first and third guarters.


47:1 "Adneu," compounded of ad and neu. It is usually translated
a pledge, or a deposit.


47:2 "Adwedd," compounded of ad and gwedd, a return to a
former state or appearance.


49:1 ,. "Adfann," from ad, and man, a place, or ban, a point or
division, whether of time or place; the reversal, or re-
arrangement, of the usual seasons and localities, for holding a
Gorsedd.


Sai p.54


Yn nghyfarfod clod cludfeirdd dyle.


In the convention of fame, on the area of the assembling
Bards.
Ll. P. Moch.


55:2 Al. "the verdict of three hundred men."


59:1 ,... Maxen Wledig, the Welsh title of Clemens Maximus, who
commanded the Roman forces in Britain, and revolted against
the emperor Gratian in A.D. 383. According to an ancient
document printed in the Greal, he was the son of Llwydrod, the
son of Trahaiarn, who was the brother of Elen Luyddawg, the
mother of Constantine the Great. According to the Welsh


accounts, he married Elen, the daughter of Eudav, or Octavius, a
powerful nobleman, who is called in the Bruts, earl of Ergyng
and Euas, districts now comprised in Monmouthshire and
Herefordshire. Maxen having defeated Gratian, and thus ss
obtained possession of Britain, Gaul, and Spain, exercised
imperial power until 385, when he was defeated and put to
death by Theodosius.


61:* , The number entered in MS. is 41, and the succeeding
ones are arranged accordingly. The reason is, that 40 was
inserted by mistake before the third part of No. 39.


61:1 Ithel succeeded his brother Meurig, as king of Glamorgan
and Gwent, in the year 843. He was slain A.D. 848. "Iudhail rex
Guent a viris Broceniauc occiaus est."--Annales Cambria, p. 13.


61:2 Cadwalader the Blessed succeeded his father Cadwallawn
ab Cadvan, about A.D. 634, and was the last of the Welsh princes,
who assumed the title of chief sovereign of the Britons.


61:3 ,. Bleddyn, son of Cynvyn, was sole prince of Gwynedd and
Powys from about 1068 until 1072, when he was slain in battle
by Rhys, son of Owain, son of Edwyn.


61:4 This Gorsedd was held under the patronage of Gruffudd,
son of Nicholas, who had obtained a commission from Edward
IV. for that purpose.


61:5 The celebrated king Arthur, in the 6th century.


3:1 .» Gruffudd, son of Cynan, reigned over North Wales from


1075 until his death in 1137. His biography, a very interesting


document, written in Welsh soon after his decease, is printed in
the second volume of the Myvyrian Archaiology.


63:2 Edward the Second reigned from 1307 to 1327.

67:1 , .s Al. "the sense."

67:2 Al, "the voice."

69:1 »« "A preceptive Bard, a teaching Bard."--Dr. O. Pughe's Dict.
Tewch chwi bosfeirddion.
Be silent, ye teaching Bards.--Bustl Beirdd.


Yn bosfardd, ba fardd a fo.

'R hyd bysedd rhaid ei bosio;

A thrwy bwys uthr o bosiad
Graddau gynt o'u gwraidd a gad. ;.«


A didactic Bard, whatever Bard would be,
On the fingers it is necessary to guestion him;
And through the weight of a solemn interrogation
Degrees from their source were given of yore.
Edm. Prys.
/1:1 ,» Al. "to attach himself to song."


71:2 Al. "territory."


Cynnadl cerdd cerennydd gymhen
Cein Venwas heb gas heb gynnen.


The competition of song, among witty friends,
Splendid talent, without hatred, without strife.


SN


3:1 ,» Al. "learning."


SN


3:2 Al. "belief."


~S


:3 Al. "the name Bards was bestowed upon them."


~S


5:1 .» Al. "Tydain, son of Tydnaw." Tud-nawf, gu. Noah?


75:2 There is evidently an allusion to this Bardic dogma in one of
the Mabinogion:--'Bendigeid Vran came to land, and the fleet
with him by the bank of the river. 'Lord,' said his chieftains,
'knowest thou the nature of this river, that nothing can go across
it, and there is no bridge over it?' 'What,' said they, 'is thy counsel
concerning a bridge?' 'There is none,' said he, 'except that he
who will be chief let him be a bridge. I will be so,' said he. And
then was that saying first uttered, and it is still used as a proverb.
And when he had lain down across the river, hurdles were placed
upon him, and the host passed over thereby."--Mabinogi,
Branwen the Daughter of Llyr.


Gwilym Tew (1433--1470) describes our Saviour as
Ein pont ein pen.--Our bridge and our chief.


[paragraph continues] And Lewys Daron, (1 580-1 600,) in his Elegy on Tudur
Aled, applies the same expressions to him:--


Pwy a fu benn, pa fab oedd,
Pwy and Tudur, pont ydoedd.


Who was chief? What son was he?
Who but Tudur? He was a bridge.


75:3 Ou. Whether the Glamorgan expressions, "Gwadu coed,
maes, a mynydd," "Cyhoeddi coed, maes, a mynydd," &c., are
derived from these announcements?


/7:1 5.2% Al. "and an ancient usage."


81:1 ,. Al. "and looking in the eye of the sun and the face of
light."


83:1 ,.» "Al. "nor should they be restrained from such as may
desire them."


85:1 ,. Al. "corn contribution; milk contribution; and honey
contribution."
87:1 , ss Al. "privileged."


91:1 ,» Al. "a foreign army that wins in behalf of the nation of the
Cymry"


oe
Ni nawdd fydd arad heb heieirn, heb had.


The plough is no sanctuary without the irons, or without
seed.
Taliesin.


95:1 ,. I.e. the proclamation of peace by means of a horn.


THE TRIADS OF THE BARDS OF CYMRU,


Extracted from the Old Books by Richard Iorwerth, and exhibited
by him in the Chair of Tir Iarll, and adjudged before it as
authoritative; after that, they obtained a Chair in each of the
three provinces.


THE TRIADS OF THE BARDS OF CYMRU.


The following are the Triads which were exhibited before the
Chair of Tir Iarll by Richard Iorwerth, son of Iorwerth the Grey-
haired. 2 From the Book of Thomas Hopkin ; of Llangrallo--one of
the Books of Thomas, son of Evan, « of Tre Bryn.


1. There are three Banded ; Bards. The first is the Primitive Bard,
or Poet, whose function and art are to


p.96 p.97


poetize, and to preserve the memorial of every thing that is
commendable in man or deed--to celebrate in song every thing
that is commendable and good, as would be fitting in respect of
what is meritorious and deserving--to teach in song every thing
that is good in respect of doctrine and usages, and to maintain
the memorial and teaching of the art of song, and all the
privileges and usages which have been conferred upon the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, and to teach them in methodical
song, according to the proper art of vocal song of the Bards of
the Ancient Cymry; And it is his duty to arrange and systematize
matters, according to the privileges and usages of the Ancient
Cymry, in every Chair and Eisteddvod, and Gorsedd of vocal
song; it is ncumbent upon him also to preserve and maintain


the Cymric language free from degeneracy and corruption, and
to teach it correctly, according to its guality and original and
proper arrangement. The second is the Herald-bard, whose
office and art are memorial, instruction, and history--to
symbolize good and laudable deeds, and to record in book and
writing the genealogies and descent of the nation of the Cymry,
their privileges and usages, so that they may be known, lest
there should happen to the nation of the Cymry that degeneracy
and ignobleness which impoverish the descent and privileges of
a nation, and hence ensue non privilege and false privilege, and
every lack of system, as has been the case with those unlearned
nations, among which neither Awen from God, nor Bards, nor
Bardism proceeding from that Awen, have been found. It is his
duty to learn to read and to write the Cymric language, and to
commit it to book and song properly and correctly, and to know
the privileges and usages of the Bards of the nation of the
Cymry, with their nature and essence. He ought also to impugn
all ignobleness, all lack of privilege, all false privilege, and all
illegality and disusage, lest the nation of the Cymry, their
privileges and laudable usages, their language, innateness, and
celebrated antiguity should suffer corruption. The third is the
Post-bard, whose art is vocal song according to the inventive


p.98 p.99


instruction and skilful art of the later Bards, and to impart
instruction in every science, wisdom, arts, and good and
laudable usages, and to systematize new sciences according to
kind, number, time, place, occasion, and dignity. : And this is the
distinction between the Primitive Bard and the Post-bard: the
Primitive Bard ought to bring with him what has been behind
him from old ages, and the Post-bard ought to call to him what


he sees before him; whilst the Herald-bard arranges these things
according as the advantage, reguirement, nature, essence, time,
and dignity of them may demand; and to bestow instruction,
sciences, wisdom, art, dignity, and honour out of them upon the
nation and country of the Cymry, as befits what is good and
praiseworthy.


2. There are three supremacies of song: to poetize; to play the
harp and stringed instrument; and to teach history.


3. There are three kinds of men of vocal song. The first is the
Poet, whose function is to poetize, and to sing methodically,
according to the art of song--being of warranted authority, of
learned pursuit, of genial imagination, of discreet intention, and
of regular purpose, to keep the memorial of privilege, usage,
and instruction derived from ancient song, to pronounce
judgment upon vocal song, to keep laudable memorial of every
man and deed that are adjudged to be commendable, to
preserve a record of the genealogies and descent of the nation
of the Cymry--their derivation and condition, and to sing
poetically upon a subject in such a manner as would be easiest
to understand, learn, and remember the song, for the
instruction and amusement of those who may learn, recite, and
hear it. The second is the Family Bard, or a minstrel who is a poet
of warranted authority, as becomes a poet according to the
privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry; and his function is to
sing domestically upon a subject and proposition, to sing with a
clear imagination, and with affectionate meditation, to regulate
and teach good, noble, and moral usages,


p.100 p.101


and to sing love without frivolity, praise without flattery, satire
without reproach, instruction in an amusing way, and
amusement in an instructive way, as may be easiest to learn,
understand, and remember the song. Upon him and his song
are conferred the system and judgment of the Chair and
Eisteddvod of the territory, in which may be his abode; but, in
conformity with good usages, and such as are meet to be
practised, he must neither sing nor teach in song what is not
fitting to be heard or taught. He is a brother in the faith and
companion to a Poet, who is a Chaired Bard, authorized by, and
under the protection and privilege of his Chair. It is lawful to
refer a domestic song to a Chair, and it ought to be judged
according to the kind of system which is peculiar to it, for its
system is not the same as that which belongs to the
extraordinary song of a Chaired Poet, who has to maintain his
Chair against his fellow competitors, but is arranged according
to its Cymraeg, the goodness of its instruction, the lucidity of its
meditation and Cymraeg, and the facility of learning,
understanding, and remembering it, and of clothing it in
harmony and music. The third is the Minstrel, who is authorized
to stroll, to censure, to satirize, to reproach, to mock, to abuse,
to supplicate, and to recite lyrics in a dialogue, for the sake of
amusing and rejoicing the mind. Neither he nor his song is
endowed with a system, judgment, or privilege of Chair, nor is
there any usage attached to his office or art, further than that
they are subject to the judgment of country and law, and that he
should do nothing against them. These three persons of vocal
song are called Chair Bard, Family Bard, and Irregular Bard; and
to them belong the three branches of vocal song, namely,
Bardism, that is, Poetry, Domesticity, and Minstrelsy.


4. There are three occasions for Bards and Bardism: to maintain
and preserve just memorial of what were formerly, whether
man, or deed, or sciences; to teach good usages, and sciences
which promote social inhabitation, whether they be art, or
wisdom, or morality; and to amuse, rejoice,


p.102 p.103


and occupy the mind, intellect, and affection, and to while away
the time not unwisely. For they are what make country and
district socially inhabitable, and whereby the arrangement and
system of country are conferred upon nation and tribe, in the
way found to be most practicable, most diverting, and most
permanent.


5. There are three things, which, according to their
arrangements, a Bard, who is a Chaired Poet, ought to know. The
first is the system of vocal song, its art, and appurtenances. The
second is the system of the privileges and usages of men of
vocal and instrumental song, and how to arrange and regulate
them, for that is the duty of a poet who is a primitive Bard. The
third is how to arrange Bardic history and sciences, or the
principal features of the wisdom of the Ancient Cymry, and the
genealogies and descent of the nation of the Cymry, their kings,
princes, and innate nobility, with their laudable deeds, and the
excellences of the nation of the Cymry; and to place the whole
on the record of song, and in proper arrangement, according to
the usages of the Bards of the Ancient Cymry.


6. The three special duties of a Bard according to the privilege
and usage of the Ancient Cymry: to preserve and maintain the
privileges of the nation of the Cymry; to preserve and maintain
the Cymric language free from corruption; and to preserve and


maintain good and laudable usages and sciences--and all this by
means of a systematic vocal song, under the protection and
privilege of Chair and Eisteddvod. That is, it was for the purpose
of preserving and maintaining these things that vocal song,
Bards, and Bardism were devised and appointed; and on the
same were conferred privilege and obligation in Chair and
Eisteddvod.


7. There are three things which are forbidden to a Bard, being a
Chaired Teacher: an immoral and wicked art or learning;
immoral acts and usages; and intercourse with immoral men
and society; for these things will spoil the social inhabitation of
country and nation. On that account, immorality, its kind or
form, are not becoming to


p.104 p.105


a Poet, since a Bard is the ballustrade of morality and social
inhabitation, according to his office and duty; and it was to
confirm the same that he was invested with the protection of
country and border country, and distinctive privilege, that he
might preserve and maintain social inhabitation and morality,
and teach them accurately.


8. There are three things indispensable in a Bard, namely: that
he should sing properly; that he should teach properly; and that
he should judge properly.


9. There are three things in right of primary obligation, by special
protection and privilege, to which a Bard according to the

privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry is entitled: that his land
should be free, namely, his five free acres; that his wassail should
be gratuitous, wherever he may go, in virtue of his office and art


of song--the same being supplied to him by the lord of the
territory, which he may visit; and that his word should be
paramount, no person's word being superior, as long as his
degree and Chair remain to him.


10. There are three disciplinary degrees attached to vocal song
and Bardism, namely: the first is a probationary Disciple; the
second is a pupil Disciple; the third is a master Disciple. A
probationary Disciple ought to know the system of syllables and
sentences, according to the Books of the system of metricities,
and how to arrange the metres of domestic song, for that
belongs to the discipline of vocal song, and to sing in five of
those metres poetically according to the opinion of a master of
song, who shall say upon his word and conscience that he is
competent to be a poet; he ought also to know the laws and
usages which relate to his discipleship. A pupil Disciple ought to
know, in addition to what a probationary Disciple knows, the
system of metres and resumptions, and to be able to sing in the
nine primary metres, and to exhibit the same as his own
composition, warranted by the word, or under the hand of his
Teacher; he ought to know, and to avoid the fifteen common
faults; he ought also to know the


p.106 p.107


usages necessary in holding a Chair and Eisteddvod, and to be
skilled in the genealogies of the nobility, and in history. A master
Disciple ought to know the whole that the pupil Disciple ought to
know, and therewith to sing like a disciple in all the chaired
metres, to know the system of their guality and kinds, to avoid
all the faults, to be skilled in history, as taught by the primitive
Bards according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry,


to trace the pedigrees of the innate princes and noblemen of the
nation of the Cymry, to be acguainted with the history of all their
laudable deeds and usages, to know the privileges of the nation
of the Cymry, their substance and quality, to be able to record all
these things before a Chair, to commit the whole methodically to
book, to regulate and arrange a Chair and Eisteddvod, according
to the judgment of a Bard, who is a chaired master of song, and
to know the articles of the wisdom of the Ancient Cymry, and
proper arrangement of the Cymric language, and all its syllables,
words, and sentences, and to write them properly and
systematically; he ought to Know in memory and viva voce all the
privileges and usages of the Bards of the Ancient Cymry, and
their proper arrangement, and the memorial and knowledge
respecting the ancient primitive Bards, their songs, and Books,
and all the history which is derived from then. And when, by
means of his own singing, he shall exhibit all the chaired metres,
according to their kinds founded upon primary guality, to be a
masterly science of music, he is entitled to a Chair; and when he
shall have obtained three, he will become a Chaired Teacher, and
be entitled to the protection and privileges conferred upon
Bards according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry.
And before he obtains a Chair, he is deemed as the companion of
a chief of song.


11. There are three apportionments of the fees of Bards, in
respect of the degrees of their discipleship and guality. The fee
of a probationary Disciple for his song, on each of the three
special festivals, is twenty-four pence, if he be


p.108 p.109


warranted by the word, or under the hand of his Teacher; and
courtesy is free to him, though it is not lawful for him to seek
more than the customary fee. The fee of a pupil Disciple for his
song, if warranted, is forty pence, that is, three shillings and a
groat; and he is not, of claim and reguirement, entitled to more,
though he is entitled to courtesy. The fee of a master Disciple is
eighty pence, that is, six shillings and eight pence, warranted, as
he must be, by the word or hand of his Teacher, and he has no
claim to any thing beyond that, except the reception of courtesy.
These fees are received from the lord of the territory, for the
song of memorial and instruction which is sung, and for the
history which is analyzed, or for the pedigrees of descent which
are traced, in pursuance of some lawful cause, such as a claim
for land, the privilege of the nation of the Cymry, and nuptial
festivity--each Disciple being authorized under the hand, or by
the word, of his Teacher, and his Teacher being authorized by the
judgment, privilege, and degree of Chair. And if a fee be received
for a song or narrative on one of the festivals, a fee shall not be
received on any of the others for the same exhibition. A fee is
due also to a Bard, according to his degree, from those to whom
he may sing, or exhibit a narrative; and these gifts shall
constitute the travelling provisions of Bards during their
discipleship.


12. There are three provisions for a Bard, according to the
privilege of his office and art: five free acres; a penny from every
plough in the comot assigned to him by the lord of the territory;
and his customary fees in respect of his office and art.


13. For three things ought fees to be paid to a Bard, according to
his degree: for the vocal song which he shall sing at the bidding
and desire of him who hears it; for the pedigree and information


which he shall supply in every claim for land, and in every claim
for the nobility and privilege of nation and country; and for any
reguired information which he shall give under his hand,
respecting what occurred formerly, and respecting what is
desired to be


p.110 p.111


learned of the Cymric language, as to the reading, writing, and
arranging of it. These things belong to a Bard in virtue of the
claim, justice, and privilege of his office and art of song.


14. There are three laws incumbent upon a Bard, who is a
Chaired Teacher, relative to his Disciples. The first is, that he take
to himself only one of each degree at once. The second, that he
suffer them not to take disciples, or to make disciples, for it is
not fitting that a disciple should make another disciple. And the
third, that the men of vocal song associate not with men of
instrumental song, by playing the violin or harp, or that they
follow and practise no trade or art whatsoever, except the art of
vocal song and its appurtenances.


15. Three things which a Teacher ought to guard against in his
Disciples, lest they should become irregular, oppressive to
country and family whither they may go, and where they may be,
illiterate as to their art, and consequently unsociable. The first is,
that they should not commit any immoral deeds, or practise any
immoral usages, or frequent any immoral places; that is, that
they should not habituate themselves to theft, treachery,
waylaying, fighting, adultery, fornication, contentions, quarrels,
deceit, oppression, blaspheming, reproaching, scoffing,
lampooning, mocking, mimicking, and drunkenness, that they
should tell no falsehood of any man or thing, or repeat it after


another, that they should compose no immoral or indecent
rhymes to displease man and country, to bring corruption into
good qualities, and to corrupt commendable usages, that they
should not go to taverns, and places where there are illegal
plays, and which are the resort of drunkards, perjurers, thieves,
traitors, harlots, all kinds of vagrants, tramps, all evildoers, and
those who are disaffected to the government, such as those who
alloy the king's money, and abuse his writs, that they should not
commit or practise any immoral plays, such as cards and dice,
that they should not play such plays for money, or any goods,
profit, or gain


p.112 p.113


whatsoever, that they should not freguent any secret, illegal
places, that they should not make use of immoral and
treasonable charms, that they should form no intimacy with any
evil persons, whether male or female, and that they should show
no discourtesy whatsoever to either wife or maid, wherever they
may be. But if they, the Disciples, should do these things against
the will of their Teachers, and contrary to their advice and
system, they shall forfeit their minstrelsy and fees, and all the
goods attached to their song, until the expiration of three years,
and bear the penalty of a fine and imprisonment, being tried by
the judgment of law, and all being officers over them, and
divesting them of the amount of goods, which may be attached
to their song in their respective circuits. For men of song ought
to practise good, sociable, peaceable, and just usages, to use fair,
amiable, and pacific speeches, to be kind, obedient, and
neighbourly, and to be at the necessity and reguirement of king,
country, lord, and judge, to direct, support, and guide them in all
things that they, and their officers, may do. The second duty of


the Teacher towards his Disciples is to teach them the art of
vocal song, and all that belongs to it, all the privileges and
usages of the Bards according to the privilege and usage of the
Ancient Cymry, as to their arrangement, quality, and substance,
all the privileges of the nation of the Cymry, and the
commendable usages and sciences, which ought to be
remembered and known by the Bards of the Cymry, and which it
appertains to Bards to know and to teach dogmatically; he ought
also to teach them the Cymric tongue, as to the correctness of its
arrangement, to write it correctly, to teach the system and order
of history, and to trace the descent of nobility, and what belongs
to such privileges; he ought also to teach them the order of
recording what is known and learned in respect of the system
which appertains to that branch of Bardic art, that is, the mode
of recording in song, speech, usage, and book; and the Teacher
ought to judge what the Disciples do, whether it be vocal song or
history, to see that


p.114 p.115


such be regular, and to guarantee it upon his word, and under
his hand. His third duty is to arrange systematically the strolling
minstrelsy of his Disciples, and he ought to confer with them a
month at least before every holiday and festival, on which it is
customary for Bards to hold their visitation and go on circuit,
such as the three principal festivals, the nuptial feast of a
gentleman, who is an innate freeholder, the feast of the patron
saint, and the feast of Chair and Eisteddvod, which is held at the
end of every three years, and in which gifts from the lord of the
territory are presented. Before these holidays and festivals the
Teacher ought to judge the song of his Disciples, to guarantee,
upon his word and under his hand, whatever is right, whether it


be vocal song or history, and to show every one where he is to
go, lest too many of them should go to the same place, and that
no more than one should go to the house of a person whose
rental is ten pounds a year, and two to the house of a freeholder,
whose property is twenty pounds a year, and in proportion to the
house of a person whose rental is higher, unless a different
number be invited by the householder, being a proprietary
gentleman. It is not becoming that a Bard should visit an ignoble
person, lest he be corrupted, and hence trace descent unjustly
and differently to what it ought to be. None of these men of
vocal song should depart from the house he came to at first,
whilst the said holiday, or feast, or wake, lasted, at the invitation
of another, without the permission of the master of the house;
and if he should do so, he shall forfeit his right of minstrelsy.
Should he go from house to house, he must be apprehended as
a vagrant, and a lawless tramp, without warranty, without
authority, be divested of his right of minstrelsy, and placed in the
situation of the poor. If he get drunk at the feast, or commit any
other act of discourtesy, he shall forfeit his fee and right of
minstrelsy. And if the Teacher guard not in respect of the
particulars here shown, he shall lose his privilege and Chair until
the end of three years, nor will it be lawful for him to have
Disciples after such irregularity.


p.116 p.117


16. For three things ought a Bard to be deprived of his degree
and privilege of song, and be rendered incapable of recovering
them as long as he lives. The first, for divulging a secret which he
holds, in respect of his office and privilege of song. The second,
for murder and waylaying, and for enlisting as a soldier, thus
exposing himself to weapons, so that he cannot visit country and


border country at the call and necessity of country and lord, and
in pursuance of a treaty between country and border country,
according to his office and privilege of song and Bardism, and
his protection of federate country in right of a federal treaty
between the kings of the Cymry, and the system which
appertains to it. The third, for pertinaciously telling a falsehood
in his song, so that his word cannot become paramount, and
cannot avail between country and border country, or in any
investigation between country and territory. Should he do these
three things, he cannot, whilst he lives, have privilege,
protection, and property in right of song and Bardism.


17. From three places in a Bard is blood to be drawn, when he is
degraded, namely: from his forehead; from his breast; and from
his groin; that is, from the receptacles of life and the soul, and
their vicinities. It is drawn by the king of the territory with the
point of the sword before an Eisteddvod of Bards, before the
court of country and lord, before the court of judge and law, and
before the country and people, in three churches on the Sundays
which occur at the periods of the three principal festivals, within
the territory where he may be, and, during life, the man so
degraded cannot have privilege, or protection, or any property
whatsoever in right of song and Bardism.


18. For three things will a Bard lose his privilege, protection,
degree, and all the goods which he possesses in right of song,
until the end of seven years, namely: for theft; adultery; and
pugnacity; for a Bard ought not to be guilty of these things.


19. For three things will a man of song lose his degree


p.118 p.119


until the end of three years: for adultery; for drunkenness; and
for associating with people of an immoral and bad character.


20. For three things will a Bard, who is a Chaired Teacher, fall to
the rank of primary discipleship, and what befits his illiterateness
and immorality: first, for a fault in his song, which he cannot, and
knows not how to correct; secondly, for immorality in respect of
conduct and life unbecoming a Bard, who is a teacher; thirdly,
where he cannot keep and maintain his Chair against his fellow
competitors.


21. There are three minstrels, who are permitted to stroll in their
lawful circuits within the territory, in which they may be, once a
year, and three times a year through the whole of Cymru
universally. The first is a Bard, who is a chaired chief of song, the
fee due for his song, or any other performance of his office and
art, being eighty pence, where there has been no previous
contract, and where it is not lawful for him to demand more than
six score pence in the way of fees or chattels, or their value in
any form, under the pain of forfeiting his right of minstrelsy, the
goods attached to his song, and whatever he possesses; and the
same shall be given up in behalf of the king of the territory,
where the immoral party shall have committed the wrong. The
second is a pupil Disciple, whose fee is four score pence, if he be
probationary; if disciplinary, then forty pence, and if chief of
song, four score pence. It is not lawful to contract before hand
for a greater remuneration without the warranty of his Teacher;
and if he does so, he shall forfeit his right of minstrelsy. The fee
of a chief of song Disciple is four score pence; and in respect of
pre-contract the same law stands for him as for the other
Disciples, for the Disciples ought not to judge their own works,
but their Teacher will judge for them, and there can be no


contract without judging what is bound by the contract made.
For a Chaired Teacher is bound by the judgment of his Chair,
protection, and privilege, according to his degree;


p.120 p.121


and a Disciple of every degree by the judgment of his Teacher.
The third is the Minstrel, who may be a maimed person, such as
blind or lame; it will be lawful for him to perform his minstrelsy
and to sing standing, until he be reguested to do otherwise. The
permission of the lord of the territory ought not to be given to
other than these to go on circuit, where they have no chaired
degrees.


22. A Bard has three claims, and he is not entitled to his fee or
degree, where he acts not according to them. The first is, to
maintain in a methodical song the memorial of the
commendable deeds of princes, lords, wise men, innate
proprietors, and every worthy servant of the nation of the
Cymry, for their own praise, and in order to shew the present
and future generations what is incumbent upon them in respect
of usage, act, conduct, and aim in all that is praiseworthy, for the
instruction, promotion, and maintenance of these things to the
nation of the Cymry, and for the amusement which arises from
the knowledge of them. The second is, to uphold the Cymric
language, and to teach it, as to its substance, guality, and
arrangement, to such as may desire, to teach the proper writing
of it, and to teach what in it refers to Bardism, vocal song, and
their appurtenances. The third is, to maintain the memorial of
genealogies, and nuptial feasts, lest any proprietary and innate
family of the nation of the Cymry should happen to suffer
degeneracy. The man's descent should be traced from the ninth


generation, when it cannot be traced from a proprietary lineage,
the derivation of which is known before memory, the same being
a princely tribe or a baronial tribe. This is, lest the privilege and
protection, which are due to no man whatsoever, except to a
proprietary Cymro, or an innate Cymraes, should befal the
degenerate, the alien, the foreigner, and the unprivileged villain.
The woman's descent should be traced on the father's and
mother's side, as to posterity and origin, from innate Cymry,
such being a privilege to her, being an innate Cymraes, which
cannot be to a foreign woman, or to the daughter of an alien; for
the latter does


p.122 p.123


not possess the privilege of a proprietary Cymraes, though an
alien or a foreign woman does not corrupt the lineage and
descent of her husband and children. For these reasons the
genealogical descent of the nation of the Cymry ought to be
traced, kept in memory, and preserved accurately, in order to
distinguish between noble and mean descent, and in respect of
native and foreigner, and of alien and baron. On this account, in
right of his office, and the art of his song, a Bard is entitled to his
fee by privilege and usage, and a penny from every plough; and
where money cannot be obtained, he should make a seizure,
and submit it to the judgment of twelve men of country. And
because of this system, in every nuptial feast it is right and
proper that the Bard should be under the privilege of a Chair
and Gorsedd; and it appertains to the lord of the territory to
make that arrangement, lest the five free acres should lack
privilege. It was, in order that these particulars should be
conducted rightly and duly, that the system of compiling the
lineages of descent was first arranged.


23. There are three things reguired in him who says he is a
Herald-bard. One is, that he should know the genealogies of the
princes, kings, and nobles of the Cymry. The second is, the
information of the primitive Bards. The third is, a properly
authorized and exhibited warranty of his degree and Chair. He
who says that he is a Herald-bard without possessing these
reguisites must be apprehended as a vagrant, and put in prison
until the lord of the territory gives him deliverance.


24. There are three things reguired in him who says that he is a
Primitive Bard. One is, the art of song and its relatives, and what
belongs to it according to the system of the Bards of the Ancient
Cymry. The second is, the information of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, according to the system into which it is reduced. The
third are, commendable usages and irreproachable conduct.
Whoever possesses these gualifications is entitled to his Chair.


25. There are three things reguired in him who says


that he is a Post-bard. One is, the art of song, according to the
inventive skill of the later Bards. The second is, to be able to read
Cymraeg, and to write it accurately. The third is, to be able to
answer guestions put to him according to the sayings of wise
men.


26. There are three things reguired in him who says that he is a
Bard, in virtue of being a Chaired Teacher. One is, that which is
reguired in a Primitive Bard. The second is, that which is reguired
in a Herald-bard. The third is, that which is reguired in a Post-
bard. If he is possessed of these gualifications, he is entitled to
his degree and privilege as a Chaired Teacher.


27. In three places ought a Chair and Eisteddvod of Bards and
men of vocal and instrumental song (a Chair in the case of men
of instrumental song, and an Eisteddvod in the case of Bards) to
be held. One is, an open yard, in the light of the sun, that is,
whilst the sun is in the firmament, and in the sight and
knowledge of country and nation, according to usage and law;
and unless the place has had the usage of three years, it must be
submitted to the knowledge and hearing of country and lord by
means of a legal notice under the proclamation of a year and a
day, the notice being given under such a proclamation for three
years. The place will then be institutional, having the privilege of
Bards and Chair. The second are, the courts of the lord of the
territory and his judges, for they are deemed open places, in
respect of the privilege which belongs to them. The third are, the
sacred enclosures, or churches, for they are deemed open, and
as being in the light of day, and in the Knowledge and hearing of
country and nation, and lord and law. There can be no warranty
or authority, or privilege, or word, in respect of Chair and
Eisteddvod, or anything that is done relative to vocal song as to
privilege and security, but for what is done in the open places,
according to the privilege and usage of country and law.


28. In three places is notice to be given under the proclamation
of a year and a day. One is, in every court of


p.126 p.127


lord, and judge, and law. The second is, in every llan : and church
in the territory. The third is, in every fair and marketin the
territory. Then what is rendered under the protection of the said
notice after the proclamation of a year and a day is privileged,
and ought to receive no opposition except what may be offered


before the end of the three years, according to the privileges and
usages of the Ancient Cymry, and the privileges and usages of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain. For it was under the protection of
such a notice that the Ancient Cymry began all privileges and
usages, every law and contract, and every order and system
according to the privilege, and under the protection of country
and nation, relative to those who practise and have practised the
arrangements of the nation of the Cymry. And nothing should
ever be done either by country or by lord, by claim or by counter
claim, other than according to, and in virtue of, this order of the
systems of country and nation.


29. There are three guarantees and authorities of Chair of song
and Eisteddvod of Bards, if it be held in one or other, as may be
convenient, of the open and privileged places, and at its open
time in the light of the sun. One is, the counsel and communion
of three men of song who are Chaired Bards according to the
privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, for the
testimony of their word, wherever they may be, will be a warrant
for vocal song, and Bardism, and whatever appertains to the
same in respect of privileges and usages. The second is, the
protection and privilege of twelve proprietors, being true men of
country and territory, under lawful proclamation and notice,
which protection is given where there are no three Chaired Bards
in Chair, as if where there are only two or one, or only men of
song by claim, who have not been chaired previously. The third
is, the protection of the lord of the territory, or of three of his
judges--nevertheless it is said that the protection of one
territorial judge will avail, if given under lawful notice and
proclamation; and the protection of the lord of the territory will
suffice, if warranted under his hand,


p.128 p.129


though he himself may not be present. And unless there be one
or other of these three, an institutional and lawful Chair or
Eisteddvod, according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient
Cymry, cannot be held.


30. There are three open times, on which it is lawful to hold a
Chair and Eisteddvod. One is, the three principal periods of the
sun, that is, the days, their festivals, and their third days, on
which the sun enters the point of the eguinox of spring, the
point of the long day of summer, the point of the eguinox of
autumn, and the point of the short day of winter. The second, the
three principal festivals, namely, Easter, Whitsunday, and
Christmas. The third, the days of court and law, in the places,
and at the time of day, where and when those courts are held,
and in no other place. But where there may be need and
occasion for other times, notice of them must be given under
the proclamation of a year and a day, according to usage and
law.


31. In three ways is a Bard graduated. The first is, after
discipleship, under a Teacher who is a Chaired Bard, until he
shall have known the art of song, and what belongs to it in
respect of office and duty, and until he shall have known the
privileges and usages of the Bards, and the other sciences which
appertain to Bard and Bardism, and become capable of
answering for himself where he is examined under the privilege
and protection of his Teacher. Being possessed of these
gualifications, he is entitled to a degree and Chair. The second is,
in virtue of sciences, and from being skilled in the art of vocal
song, and its appurtenances, and the privileges and usages of


Bards and Bardism, and what belongs to them, and from having
exhibited methodical and faultless singing of his own
composition, and being able to read Cymraeg accurately, and to
write and arrange it properly, because it is from those things,
and not otherwise, that his sciences can accrue without the
teaching of discipleship. It is reguired of him to exhibit all these
things before a Chair and Eisteddvod, and where there can be no
objection, he is entitled to a degree and Chair in virtue of his
sciences, and


p.130 p.131


they are called the degree and Chair of faculty, or, as it is
otherwise said, a faculty degree, since it is by the judgment and
faculty of Chair and Eisteddvod, and not by means of discipleship
and teacher, that he is graduated. The third is, where no
customary Chair and Eisteddvod can be obtained, and hence
there is an impossibility of receiving the judgment of song and
Bardism, through the want of Bards and Chaired men, by
submitting to the judgment of country and nation under the
notice and proclamation of a year and a day; and where there
can be no objection, or just opposition, then a degree ought to
be conferred upon the Bard. The said notice ought to be issued
under the proclamation of a year and a day until the end of three
years, when a degree and Chair should be confirmed to him. And
in this crisis, his sciences and art cannot receive other than the
judgment of country and nation and its wise men, and they can
have no system other than judgment according to reason,
nature, and cogency, because other than this cannot be had
from the want of Bards, nor can system arise from the lack of
system other than in virtue of reason, nature, and cogency, the
same being submitted to the firm judgment and verdict of


country and nation, under legal notice and proclamation until
the end of the three years. It was after this manner that the
primary Bards were graduated by the nation of the Cymry, and
the system of Bards and Bardism, and of the privileges and
usages which befit them, before there was either a Bard, or
Teacher, or Chair, or arrangement of any thing whatsoever
relative to vocal song and Bards and Bardism. This degree is
called the long-established and firm degree and chair of country
and nation, under the primary privilege and protection of the
country and nation of the Cymry. And this arrangement or
system, after notice under the proclamation of a year and a day,
is called the firm verdict of country and nation, for it is the
firmest of all verdicts and systems. There cannot, in any other
way, be a beginning properly of any arrangement and system in
respect of country and nation, as to law and contract, and


p.132 p.133


privilege and usage; nor can any thing whatsoever be renewed,
when it has once perished. Therefore, firm above all that is firm
is this verdict and system adjudged to be; and it is lawful for
every proprietor, native, and innate man of the nation of the
Cymry, to appeal to it; whether his claim be just or unjust, the
country and nation will judge it.


32. There are three customary vocations among the Bards of the
Isle of Britain. One consists of the Bards according to the
privilege of Chair and Gorsedd, which includes all Bards that are
graduated in Chair and Eisteddvod, in respect of the systems
which are attached to them. The second are the Bards according
to the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, and
includes such as are graduated in any way whatsoever, in respect


of the system which is attached to those particulars. The third
are the Bards according to the privilege and usage of the Ancient
Cymry, which include none other than a Primitive Bard, being a
Poet, for he existed before the two other degrees of Bards,
namely, the Herald-bards, and Post-bards, and before they had a
system, or order, or degree, or name; and before the arrival of
the Cymry in the Isle of Britain, they had Primitive Bards, being
Poets, who possessed privileges, usages, and a system. It was in
the Isle of Britain that the two other degrees of Bards were
appointed, as well as their system and reguirements, and the
privileges which appertain to them. Therefore, a Poet only, or a
special primitive Bard, ought to be designated a Bard according
to the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry, though he may
be already a Bard according to the privilege of Chair and
Gorsedd; and also according to the privilege and usage of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain. And although Tydain, the father of
Awen, and Rhuawn the Aged, and Madog, son of Alchnoe, and
Cadog the Peasant, and Erddyled the Luminous, and Arianrod,
daughter of Mynwar, were Bards and Bardesses, according to
the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry, it is not right to
call them according to the privilege and usage of the Bards of
the Isle [of Britain],


p.134 p.135


because they did not originate in those times. Nevertheless,
others say, that Bards according to the privilege and usage of
the Bards of the Isle of Britain should be called Bards according
to the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry, because it was
by the Ancient Cymry that they were first instituted in the Isle of
Britain, though there may be Bards now who are not so
appointed, and yet are Bards according to the privilege and


usage of the Ancient Cymry. Of this kind ought to be deemed the
wise, ingenious, and skilful Poets, who are found whilst a Chair
and Eisteddvod are dormant; for at that time they can exhibit no
mark or obligation, except Awen from God, understanding, and
the judgment of country and nation, similarly to what was the
case with the primary Bards of the nation of the Cymry, before
they had any other privilege, usage, or system.


33. The three primary Bards of the Isle of Britain: Plennydd;
Alawn; and Gwron; who lived in the time of Prydain, son of Aedd
the Great. It was these three persons that first legally arranged
and systematized Bards and Bardism, and conferred on them
the privileges and usages of Chair and Gorsedd, the protection
of country and nation, the connecting protection of federate
country, and the protection of lord and territory. And the reason
why this was done was, in order to preserve the memorial and
record of what was formerly most worthy and commendable in
respect of man and deed, law and usage, and of what was good
and praiseworthy, and in order to teach wisdom and all good
sciences, and to encourage the good and subdue the evil. This
was effected by the verdict of country and nation, and under
legal proclamation and notice, Prydain, son of Aedd the Great,
being supreme of jury and supreme of princes, at the time. Thus
did originate the class, called Bards according to the privilege
and usage of the Bards of the Isle of Britain.


34. There are three privileged protections to the Bards of the Isle
of Britain. One is, the protection of country and nation, that is,
his five free acres in right of his art and


p.136 p.137


office of song, and every privilege of viaticum. The second is,
that there shall be no weapon against him, and that he shall not
bear a weapon in the march and onset of war. The third is, that
his word shall be a word superior to all, and that the word of
nobody shall be superior to him. The second protection is the
connecting privilege of a federate country, that is, that he shall
be permitted to go into country and border country, opposed by
neither weapon nor force, neither word nor contradiction,
whether the countries which he visits shall be at peace or war.
This is done, that he may be enabled to go, as necessity reguires,
to introduce peace and justice between the countries which
bring war and ambuscade one against the other. The third
protection is the protection of his Chair; that is, whoever defers
to its protection cannot, except by judgment before it, become
unprotected; and should a bond appeal to its protection, he shall
go free; and all are allowed to be under its protection, in order to
obtain instruction and understanding in sciences. Of him, who is
thus circumstanced, nothing can be asked in the service of
country and lord, other than what he knows, and what befits him
in respect of song and Bardism, for it is in right of a Bardic
disciple and vocal song that he stands. And a Bard may adopt
what course he pleases to impart instruction, sciences, justice,
and peace to country and nation, and to country and border
country; and it was for facilitating these things, that what exists,
in respect of the systems of Bard and Bardism, was appointed.


35. The three literary Bards, being primitive Bards according to
the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Ancient Cymry, who
first derived their essence and guality from them, namely:
Taliesin, the Chief of Bards; Merddin, son of Morvryn; and
Merddin Emrys. That is, they are called the three literary
primitive Bards, because they made written books and


arrangements of the art of song, and what appertains to it. And
it is in virtue of their books, and in virtue of the usage, and
memorial of Chair and Eisteddvod, that the Bardism of the Bards
of the Isle of Britain is to be


p.138 p.139


maintained. Nor is a Chair or degree granted to any one who has
no information derived from the said three literary primitive
Bards, and skill in the books which they made, being the first of
their kind.


36. There are three special duties incumbent upon a Family Bard,
wherever he may be: to teach the reading and writing of the
Cymric language; to teach domestic politeness, and good
manners, in respect of justice and love; and to keep a record of
what belongs to the families in which he is tutor.


37. There are three things reguired in a Bard or Poet, who is a
supplicant. First, that he should ask neither goods nor any thing
else whatsoever by means of vocal song, without the permission
of the owner. Secondly, that he should not ask for any thing
above the value of six score pence. Thirdly, that he should not
send a supplicatory song, nor any other song whatsoever, with a
man of instrumental song, under the pain of losing the goods
attached to his song until the end of three years; and every fee
and provision, to which he is privileged, shall go to the lord of
the territory.


38. The three relics of adjuration of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain: the ten commandments; the gospel of John; and the
affirmation of a Bard upon his word and conscience.


39. There are three things for which a Bard will lose his Chair
until the end of three years. One is, defect of memorial and
record in respect of what ought to be remembered. The second
is, bearing a weapon in war. The third is, divulging his secret.
Others say: his Chair cannot be restored to him during life, if he
does these things.


40. The three monarchs of government: Bardism, to which
belong learning, and every doctrine of literature, morality, and
godliness; judicature, which has to distribute and do judgment
and justice where there is occasion, according to the privileges
and usages of country and nation, and according to right and
law, to those who may oppose them; and the office of a king or
lord, on which depends the defence


p.140 p. 141


of country and nation, and the arrangement of the same,
according to the privilege and usage of country and nation, and
if there be occasion, according to the verdict of country under
the notice and proclamation of forty days. Without these three
there can be no firm social abode for country and nation.


41. The robe of a Bard, being a Chaired Teacher, is of three
colours, and he may adopt whichever he pleases, provided the
robe, of whichever of the colours it is, be entirely unicoloured,
for unicolour is the symbol of truth, that being unicoloured at all
times, and under all circumstances. One is azure, or sky-blue,
signifying peace and tranguillity, which are similar to the sky of
summer weather, during clear and resplendent heat, without
mist, without a cloud. The second is green, the symbol of
learning and the wisdom of sciences, which spring and grow
beautifully like the green herbs of the fields, rejoicing the owner


of the eyes that be-hold them. The third is white, the symbol of
godliness and all purity and innocence, and all right and justice;
for these are of the same colour as the sun and light, glitteringly
and splendidly white. White ought to be worn in the resort of
worship; azure in Chair and Gorsedd; and green, when one
becomes a domestic tutor. And each of these colours should be
unicoloured, as significative of truth. Nor is it lawful for other
than a Chaired Bard to wear them, and it is not right for him to
mix them, but should he do so, it must be under the privilege
and dignity of a Disciple: because the robe of a Disciple consists
of the three colours mixed, and should not admit of any other
unicolour whatsoever:--and these are called the Bardic colours.


42. The three primary offices of a Bard: to maintain peace and
tranguillity; to maintain and improve good usages; and to
maintain the memorial of goodness, sciences, and laudable
deeds.


43. There are three primary laws incumbent upon a Bard in
respect of what he does himself: to keep his word; to keep his
secret; and to keep the peace.


p. 142


p. 143


44. There are three laws of avoidance incumbent upon a Bard: to
avoid idleness and extreme slothfulness, since he is a man of
exertion and experience; to avoid strife and contention, since he
is aman of love and peace; and to avoid folly, immorality, and
uncourteousness, since he is a man of reason, understanding,
and Awen from God.


45. There are three foundations of knowledge, which a Bard
ought to consider and discuss: reason; nature; and impulse.


46. There are three instructions reguired of a Bard: a song
according to reason and moral wisdom; oral tradition according
to the memorial and usage of Gorsedd and worship; and
demeanour, according to polite and good usages and habits.


47. Three things which a Poet, being a Chaired Bard, ought not
to bear: arms; rudeness; and dispraise; for it is his function to
promote peace and tranquillity, to encourage courtesy, and to
praise every thing that is good.


48. Three things commendable in a Bard: warm affection; gentle
boldness; and energetic reason.


49. Three things which cannot be dispensed with in a Bard: awen
of song; the sciences of the art of song; and courteous and good
gualities.


50. The three successful objects of a Bard and Bardism: to polish
and civilize a nation; to render a country socially inhabitable; and
to improve sciences.


51. Three persons who are exempt from sword and horn: a Bard;
a metallurgist; and a female.


52. The three arts which are under the protection and law of the
nation of the Cymry: instrumental song; literature, that is,
reading and writing Cymraeg; and medicine.


53. The three penalties of a country: a wicked lord; a rich upstart;
and an ignorant Bard.


54. Three things monstrous in a Bard: ignorance; incivility; and
immorality.


55. Three things which ill become a Bardic vocal song:


the memorial of what is impious and monstrous; the abuse of
law and courtesy; and resistance to amusement.


56. Three things which cannot be contravened: the usage of
Chair; the voice and memorial of Chair; and an ancient song
according to the privilege of Chair.


57. Three men who cannot, and ought not to be made Bards: the
proud; the indolent; and the false.


58. Three things indispensable in a Bard: Awen from God; the
instruction of a teacher; and individual exertion.


59. Three things which a songster, being a Chaired Bard, ought
not to reveal: the secret of the Bards; injurious truth; and the
disgrace of his friend.


60. The three credibilities of a vocal minstrel: the credibility of
song; the credibility of alphabet; and the credibility of
consideration.


61. The three co-equal secrets of song: awen; learning; and good
principles; and without them there can be no perfect song.


62. The three mutual feelings of a Bard: to feel mutually with
truth and justice; to feel mutually with his heart and affections;
and to feel mutually with his awen and its capabilities.


63. Three things which ought to be understood and known in a
vocal song and its appurtenances, and in every other thing
whatsoever, namely: points; divisions; and individualities. And
when these are not known, there can be no arrangement or just
art in respect of any thing; whilst by knowing and understanding
them, the nature of the art sought after is understood, and is
reduced to order and method, in such a way as it would be an
easy and loving matter to learn, remember, and practise the
same.


64. Three things indispensable in every art and science: to learn;
to remember; and to practise them.


65. Three things, without which there can be no vocal song:
knowledge; awen; and impulse.


66. The three impulses of song: affection towards the beautiful
and good; the consciousness of duty; and remuneration


p.146 p.147


from the contributions and commendation of good and
philosophical men.


67. The three excellences of art, namely: the facility of learning it;
the amusement of learning it; and the benefit and advantage of
learning it.


68. Three things that will make the art of song what it should be:
perspicuity of learning and arrangement; the excellency of the
art and its arrangement; and the naturalness of the art and its
appurtenances.


69. The three privileges of a Bard: that his word and saying
should be believed; provisions wherever he goes; and that he
should not against his will be made to administer to the
necessity, or to fill the office of country.


70. Three things which a Bard ought to examine, and watch over:
his passions; his innate judgment; and every novelty.


71. Three things which a Teacher, being a poetic Bard, ought to
do: to observe accurately the reason of art; to analyze accurately
what is understood; and to show accurately what is learned.


72. The three primary laws which ought to be incumbent upon a
Bard: to be fond of teaching; to be liberal of judgment and
reason; and to be moral as to conduct.


73. Three things which a Bard ought to endeavour to improve:
his poetic genius; his art of song; and the principles of his
conduct.


74. Three things will make a learned Poet: to improve learning
and sciences; to promote the sociable inhabitation of country

and nation; and to make his own name immortal. Others say:

and to cause his own name to be ever-lastingly remembered.

Others say: and to immortalize his own name.


75. In three things is seen the nature of all arts and sciences,
namely: in their principles; in their counterparts; and in their
effects.


76. : The three advantages of art and sciences: the gain of what
is good in respect of abstinence and living; deliverance


p.148 p.149


from what is bad in regard to contingency, mind, and deed; and
regular beauty to cheer the mind and sight.


77. The three columns of a Bard's duty: to teach properly; to sing
properly; and to judge properly.


78. The three effects of just awen: generosity; gentleness; and
joy.


79. The three friends of just awen: understanding; reflection; and
patience.


80. Three things that will augment awen: to exercise it properly;
to exercise it freguently; and to exercise it successfully.


81. Three things which a songster ought not to believe: the satire
of an itinerant minstrel, where a poet poetizes; an unpoetic song
by a commended and authorized poet; and the things which, in
the estimation of wise men, cannot be, as when the ignorant say
that the hair which is cut ought not to be placed where the birds
can get it, and such vain superstitions that never came from the
head of a wise and intelligent person. Of the same character is it,
to believe that neither Arthur nor Owain Glyndwr are dead, for
such cannot be true.


82. For three things shall a poet lose his authority: for teaching
wrongly where he ought to teach correctly; for pertinaciously
uttering a falsehood in his song; and for satyrizing where he
ought not.


83. Three things which a minstrel ought not to conceal:
innocuous truth; judgment upon poetry; and the praise due to
good men.


84. : Three things that will make a minstrel to be be-loved: to
teach willingly; to sing lovingly; and to bear a good name.


85. The three beautiful gualities in a minstrel: economy; concord;
and integrity.


86. Three things that are amiable in a minstrel: to be poetically
amusing; to be void of pride; and to be given to praise.


p.150 p.151


87. Three things that will corrupt a minstrel's awen excessive
drunkenness; excessive incontinence; and surliness.


88. Three things that will improve : a minstrel's awen an ancient
song; Bardism; and good and amusing traditions.


89. The three principal necessaries of a Bard: systematic
sciences; amiable morality; and the privilege of Gorsedd.


90. Three beautiful gualities in a Bard: obedience learning; and
affectionate disposition.


91. The three columns of art: reason; nature; and cogency; and it
is from understanding these things properly that ensues the
permanence of sciences.


92. The three amiable traits which a Bard ought to possess: to
direct the unskilful; to put an end to contention; and to regulate
festal plays. >


93. All plays ought to tend to three things: to heal the body; to
amuse the mind; and to be innocent.


94. The three silent reserves of a Bard: in respect of injurious
truth; in respect of unnecessary judgment; and in respect of
every thing uncertain.


95. Three things respectable for a minstrel: good family; good
friends; and good conduct.


96. There are three conditions incumbent upon a poet: to
maintain the language of the Cymry; to keep a record of
genealogies and nuptial festivities; and to preserve an instructive
memorial of the privileges and sciences of the nation of the
Cymry.


97. The three ameliorations of song and Bardism: instruction;
exertion; and rewards.


98. The three rewards of vocal song and all good sciences:
tribute and gain; praise and honour; and contentment of mind
and conscience arising from the benefit and good which they
eventually cause.


99. The three benefactors of the world: a Bard; a metallurgist;
and an agriculturist; they are so called because


p.152 p.153


every living being will benefit by them and their sciences, whilst
no living thing will be the worse. And they are deemed the chief
settlers of the country.


100. The three faculty Bards of the Isle of Britain. A family Bard,
on whom depends domestic instruction, according to vocal
song, and the system of domestic sciences and usages; and he is
to commit to song the memorial and record of the same. The


second is a reciter, whose function is to recite in Chair and
Gorsedd, by means of song and speech: and to issue cry and
proclamation, as notice to country and nation, in the territory
where he resides. The third is a man of instrumental song, on
whom depends the art of playing the harp and violin; and
instrumental song is under the protection of the Bards of the Isle
of Britain, without any other privileges and usages. Therefore
they are called the three faculty ones of Bards and Bardism.


101. The three primary recitations of the Bards of the Cymry:
vocal song; parable; and custom.


1 02. There are three functions incumbent upon a Bard,
according to the necessity and reguirement of country and
nation. One is, to maintain religious worship. The second is, to
conduct an embassy between country and border country. The
third is, to introduce peace and concord where there is
contention.


103. There are three primary laws incumbent upon a Bard in
respect of his obligation as to the necessity and reguirement of
country and nation. One is, to search for what is true. The
second is, the secret imposed upon him in respect of his office
and privilege of song. The third is, to conduct himself morally
according to peace and justice.


104. The three distinguished privileges of a Bard. One,
gratuitous provision, wherever he goes, in right of his office of
song. The second is, that he bear not, and there should not be
borne in his presence, a naked weapon of offence. The third is,
that his word should be paramount over all.


105. The three provisions of a Bard; his five free acres; his
offerings; and his contribution bag.


p.154 p.155


106. The three protections reguired of the Bards of the nation of
the Cymry: to protect learning, or the art of knowledge; to
protect peace and tranguillity; and to protect truth and justice.
For a Bard exists on account of these things, and he is no Bard
who does not act in their behalf.


107. The three cares of the Bards of the Cymry: to cultivate good
sciences; to cultivate peace and tranguillity; and to illustrate
truth and justice.


108. From three things was Bardism obtained: Awen from God;
the intellect of man; and the tendency of nature.


109. Three things which a Bard ought to do: to listen carefully to
every thing; to look fully at every thing; and to hold his peace
soundly unless there be sound reason for his speech.


110. Three things which a Bard ought to practise in his song and
in his conduct: to increase sciences; to soften manners and
customs; and to console the mind.


111. There are three energetic duties incumbent upon a Bard: to
accumulate learning and sciences; to instruct the ignorant; and
to make peace where there are contention and variance.


112. The three free pursuits which are lawful for a Bard and all
who may desire them: hunting; tillage; and dairy-work; for it is by
means of these things that all persons obtain their maintenance,
and they ought not to be prohibited.


113. The three licentiates of court: a Bard; a judge; and a
worshipper.


114. The three supports of government: Bardism; judicature; and
labour.


115. Three men who will constitute a social abode wherever they
are: a Bard; a smith; and a harpist.


116. From three things ensues the firmness of the sciences of
Bardism: the first is, Awen from God moving consideration and
intelligence; the second, memory and


p.156 p.157


knowledge from the age of ages; the third the song of Tydain,
son of Tudnaw, that is, Tydain, the father of Awen.


117. The three special learnings which the nation [of the Cymry]
obtained. The first was, that of the Gwyddoniaid from the age of
ages. The second was, that of the Bards, after the time of
Prydain, the son of Aedd the Great. The third is, the faith in
Christ. Out of these three arise the sciences of the nation of the
Cymry.


118. The three ministers of the sciences of the Bards of the
Cymry: song; symbol; and letter; of which song is adjudged to be
the best, because there is no occasion for any other art for its
preservation than memory and natural sense, that is, art from
God.


119. The three memorials of the Bards of the Cymry: an ancient
song; institute; and letter.


120. Of three things ought the Bards of the Cymry to maintain
the memorial and record: the first of the Cymric language; the
second, of the genealogies and descent of the Cymry; the third,
of the privileges and usages of the Bards and nation of the
Cymry.


121. Three things which cannot be contravened: an ancient song
of the primitive Bards; the memorial of the Chair of song; and
the verdict of country and nation. That is, from these three are
maintained the memorial and authority of the privileges, usages,
and sciences of the Bards and nation of the Cymry.


122. The three columns of claim of the Bards of the Cymry: the
song of the primitive Bards; the memorial and usages of Chair;
and the verdict of three hundred men.


123. There are three places in which it is proper to hold a Chair
of song: an uncovered elevation; a church; and the court of law.


124. The three times of Chair and Eisteddvod: the four points of
the sun, that is, the two periods of the eguinox, one in the
spring, and the other in the autumn; : the holidays of worship;
and the days of court and law.


p.158 p.159


125. There are three places of common sanctuary, in which no
weapon may be used against any person whatsoever: the Chair
of Bards; the courts of country and judge; and the assembly of
worship.


126. Three persons who are free from bond: a Bard; a scholar;
and an artizan.


127. The three dignified privileges of a Bard: maintenance
wherever he goes; that there should be no naked weapon where
he is; and that his word should be paramount over all.


128. The three innate privileges of a Bard: that his meaning be
vocal wherever he may be; that he should keep silence where
and when he pleases, for he is a man of secrecy and mystery;
and that he should not, unless willingly, enter upon the service
and office of his country, except in what relates to his office and
art of song and Bardic sciences.


129. The three avoidances of a Bard: to avoid bearing arms, for
there ought to be no weapon against him either in country or
border country; to avoid rudeness and immorality, for he is a
man subject to the law of morality and correct conduct; and to
avoid indolence, for he is a man of exertion.


130. The three privileged ones of country and nation: a Bard; a
scholar; and a metallurgist; that is, their land shall be free to
them, and they are entitled to the privilege which ought to arise
therefrom, that is, social rights.


131. There are three kinds of Bards. The first is the Primitive
Bard, whose instruction consists of song and oral tradition. The
second is the Herald-bard, whose instruction consists of symbol,
and the import of pictures. The third is the Post-bard, whose
instruction consists in reading and writing Cymraeg, memorial
and knowledge being thereby maintained.


132. Three things which a Bard ought to do: to learn minutely
what he sees and hears; to keep closely what he learns; and to
exhibit accurately what he knows.


133. The three teachers of man. The first is, instruction
160
161


derived from circumstance, that is, from seeing and hearing. The
second is, natural understanding giving heed. The third is, the
grace of God, that is, Awen. And from these three comes the
import of Bardism.


134. The three prominent features of Bardism: memorial;
instruction; and peace.


135. Three things which a Bard ought to confirm, and to make
supreme over every thing that is supreme: truth; peace; and the
import of sciences.


136. Three kinds of things ought to be praised and remembered:
every thing that is pure and good as to quality and custom; every
thing that is beautiful and amiable in form and nature; and every
clever device from which arises a greater amount of advantage
than of disadvantage.


137. There have been three kinds of Triads from the beginning
by the Bards of the Cymry, namely: the Triads of privilege and
usage; the Triads of worship; and the Triads of song.


138. The three fundamentalities of government: a just judge; a
merciful lord; and a wise and learned Bard.


And thus end the seven score : Triads of the Bards of the Cymry,
which were extracted from the ancient Books of authority by
Richard, son of Iorwerth the Grey-haired.


Footnotes
5:2 See Vol. i. p. 73, note.


95:3 Thomas Hopkin was the son of Hopkin Thomas, who wrote
the Greal and other works, about the year 1350. John Hopkins,
the versifier of the Psalms, was descended from this family.


95:4 ,» Thomas ab Evan, or Bevan, was a good poet and critic,
who flourished between 1660 and 1700.


Oo
U1
U1


Cathlau clan cerddau caw.
Hymns and incessant songs of the band.--Cynddelw.
99:1 ,.s These three Bards are mentioned by Edmund Prys:--


Prifardd, arwyddfardd raddfawl,
A phosfardd nid anardd dawl.


Primitive Bard, Herald-bard of honourable degree,
And Post-bard; the selection is not unhandsome.


127:1 ,»» "Llan" seems to be synonymous with the Latin fanum,
and the Greek tepevoc. Its original meaning was simply an
inclosure, but in later times the term was applied exclusively, in
its simple form, to an area enclosed for public worship, or a
church.


147:* In MS. it is 77, and the following Triads are numbered
accordingly down to 84 inclusive.


149:* ,.s In MS. it is 86, and the following Triads are numbered
accordingly to the end.


151:1 ,. Al. "augment."
151:2 Others say: "and to regulate games and festivities."


157:* The other points, which are the summer and winter
solstices, have not been explained.


159:1 ,e It is evident from this statement that there are two
Triads missing, which accounts, moreover, for the numerical
irregularity which we have noticed.


THE TRIADS OF THE BARDS OF THE ISLE OF BRITAIN.


Here are the Triads of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, with the
memorial 2 and account which exist in ; the voice of Gorsedd
respecting them, their origin and nature.


When the Cymry first came into the island of Britain from the
Summer Country, where they were previously, the primitive
knowledge and original wisdom were kept and taught by the
Gwyddoniaid, who were Poets possessed of Awen from God
before the invention and existence of instruction from man, and
before the Chair of song, and privileges and usages for Bards
and relative to Bardism were


p.162 p.163


arranged and regulated. And those Poets, or Gwyddoniaid,
preserved, by means of the memorial of poetry and vocal song,
the good primitive sciences, which were first understood by
means of Awen from God. And after a long space of time, there
was found from among the nation of the Cymry a Bard, being a
Poet, called Tydain the father of Awen, who was the wisest of all
the Poets, and he reduced vocal song and Bardism into order,
and arranged the privileges and usages that were proper for
Bard and Bardism. Those Bards were called Bards according to
the privilege and usage of the Ancient Cymry. It was according to
the arrangement made by Tydain, that vocal song and Bardism
were maintained for a long time, until Prydain, the son of Aedd
the Great, formed a confederacy in the island of Britain, and
among its nations. And, because it was Tydain that first made
this arrangement of vocal song and Bardism, and because the
sciences which he possessed were superior to those possessed


by any other person, in respect of vocal song and its relatives,
and because it was through him, and the order and system
which he made, that regular instruction and art in regard to
vocal song and the sciences of Bardism, were first obtained, he
was called Tydain, father of Awen. Some say, that it was before
the arrival of the Cymry in the island of Britain, Tydain lived; but
there is no sufficient information on that point.


Tydain took to him certain young and wise men, endued with
Awen from God, to be taught and instructed in the sciences of
vocal song and wisdom; and it was according to this
arrangement and system that such sciences were held by the
Poets and Gwyddoniaid until the time of Prydain, son of Aedd
the Great. And when he had appointed a sovereignty over all the
island of Britain and its nations, kings, princes, and lords, he
ordered the Poets to exhibit their sciences, and the memorial
and record in which they were preserved; and when that was
done, search was made as to who were the wisest and most
knowing of the Poets, when Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, were
found to be the


p.164 p.165


best as to those particulars which appertained to vocal song and
the sciences of wisdom. And they met in Chair, where they issued
the cry of restoration under the proclamation and notice of a
year and a day, and deferred to the substantial verdict of country
and nation. In that cry they cited and invited all the Poets and
Gwyddoniaid who were skilled in vocal song, the sciences of
wisdom, and the privileges and usages of the Ancient Cymry, to
repair to Chair and Gorsedd about to be held openly, in the sight
of the sun and eye of light. And thither came all who were versed


in awen and the sciences of vocal song, and their
appurtenances; and there were arranged and systematized such
privileges and usages as were suitable to Bards and Bardism,
and the wisdom and secret of Bardism; and there were also
arranged and instituted the three classes of Bards and Bardism
and the sciences of Bardism, namely, the Primitive Bard or
licensed Poet, according to the privilege and usage of the
Ancient Cymry, the Druid, being a Bard according to the primary
sciences of the Gwyddoniaid, and the Ovate, being a Bard
according to sciences derived from imagination and
circumstance. And they committed the whole to the record and
memorial of the Bards of the Isle of Britain, which are the song
of Gorsedd, the voice of Gorsedd, and the usage of Gorsedd, lest
they should become lost or forgotten. And when, in respect of
these things, they had appealed to the firm verdict of country
and nation, that is, the cry of country, under the notice and
proclamation of a year and a day, until the period of efficiency,
these three men, Plennydd, Alawn, and Gwron, were the three
primary presiding Bards of the Isle of Britain, that is to say, they
were primary according to the privileges and usages of the
Bards of the Isle of Britain, which were arranged, instituted,
legalized, and systematized in that Gorsedd, under the
protection and privilege of country and nation, by a firm verdict.
Then the primary Bards took to them others of the most
knowing poets, the most celebrated of whom were found to be
Madog, Cenwyn, and Anllawdd, being the three first that were,
after


p.166 p.167


instruction and discipleship, graduated presiding Bards,
according to the arrangement and system which were made, as


already shewn. And they were enjoined to maintain and preserve
the three memorials, to judge and rule in Chair and Gorsedd, to
take disciples and aspirants to be instructed in the sciences of
vocal song and its appurtenances, to keep from corruption the
primary knowledge and Cymric language, and to record every
thing good and laudable in man, deed, and event.


It was in those days that the three primary Ovates, Cadog, son of
Myl, the Wall of Greatness, Trysin, son of Erbal, and Rhuawn of
the Silver Song, were instituted and privileged. The Ovates were
appointed and enjoined to collect Bardic and good sciences,
from whatever incident, and from whatever awen and
imagination, to submit them to the judgment of Chair and
Gorsedd, and to regulate them according to the sense,
judgment, and system of art. In those days, also, were instituted
and privileged, as Druids, Meiwyn, the Bard; Rhiwallon the
Winged, son of Prydain, son of Aedd the Great; and Berwyn, son
of Arthrawd. And they were enjoined to maintain religious
worship, and the sciences appertaining thereto, according to the
three memorials, and according to the result of the judgment of
Chair and Gorsedd. These three triads of men, together with the
three primaries, were the twelve primary Bards of Gorsedd
according to the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain. That is, they are primary because none of their kind and
sort existed before them; and they are deemed the twelve
primaries, because they belonged to the same primary Gorsedd.
And it was from them that were obtained first the three degrees
of the Bards of the Isle of Britain; and it is according to what is
here said, that the teachers and learned Bards point out three
degrees of the substance and nature of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain. In the primary Gorsedd, which has been mentioned,


according to the privilege and usage of the Bards of the Isle of
Britain, figures and numbers were reduced to a fundamental


text breaks off here.....--JBH


Footnotes
159:2 "The memorial" does not occur in all the MSS.


159:3 Al. "by."


Barddas, Vol. II: Page Index


Title Page


The Voice of Gorsedd


The Triads of Privilege and Usage


page 29
page 30
page 31
page 32
page 33
page 34
page 35
page 36
page 37
page 38


The Triads of the Bards.--The Triads of Privilege and
Usage


page 40
page 41


The Triads of Privilege and Usage


page 42
page 43
page 44
page 45
page 46
page 47
page 48
page 49
page 50
page 51
page 52
page 53


page 54
page 55
page 56
page 57
page 58
page 59
page 60
page 61
page 62
page 63
page 64
page 65
page 66
page 67
page 68
page 69
page 70
page 71
page 72
page 73
page 74
page 75
page 76
page /7
page 78
page 79
page 80
page 81
page 82
page 83
page 84
page 85


page 86
page 87
page 88
page 89
page 90
page 91
page 92
page 93
page 94
page 95


page 96

page 97

page 98

page 99

page 100
page 101
page 102
page 103
page 104
page 105
page 106
page 107
page 108
page 109
page 110
page 111
page 112
page 113
page 114


The Triads of the Bards of Cymru


page 115
page 116
Rage 117
page 118
page 119
page 120
page 121
page 122
page 123
page 124
page 125
page 127
page 128
page 129
page 130
page 131
page 132
page 133
page 134
page 135
page 136
page 138
page 139
page 140
page 141
page 142
page 143
page 144
page 145
page 146


page 147
page 148
page 149
page 150
page 151
page 152
page 153
page 154
page 155
page 156
page 157


— / —


page 159
The Triads of the Bards of the Isle of Britain


page 162
page 163
page 164
page 165
page 166


—_ y _


Errata


page 15: 'upom'->'upon'


page 67: 'Bvate'->'Ovate'
