Curious Myths of the Middle Ages, Second Series (Sabine Baring-Gould, 1867; public domain)
===============================================================================
The Victorian comparative survey of the Melusina legend (ch. VII), with chapters on swan-maidens and the Fortunate Isles — the standard 19th-century treatment; 1868 edition. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/cu31924029898420).

'Mk



-.1 v-c


(•JorneU HmoerHttg IGibtarg



LIBRARY OF



LEWIS BINGLEY WYNNE

A B.. A.M. .COLUMBIAN COLLEGE. -71, '73
WASHINGTON. D. C.



THE GIFT OF

MRS. MARY A. WYNNE

AND

JOHN H. WYNNE

CORNELL '9B
1922



GR90.B25 °C91 "isis '" ""^^^
'^"liniilflli,l?fe.,St.,,«h?,...n?!ddIeages.



olin


Cornell University
Library



The original of tliis book is in
tlie Cornell University Library.

There are no known copyright restrictions in
the United States on the use of the text.


CURIOUS MYTHS OF THE
MIDDLE AGES

Sttanii ^txm



RIVINGTONS

3Lant(01X ... Waterloo Place

©xforl) . . . . High Street

CamftrttlBe - . . . Trinity Street



CURIOUS MYTHS OF
THE MIDDLE AGES



S. BARING-GOULD, M.A

AUTIKiR OF " POST-MEDI.liVAI, PREACHERS,'" &c



^tconb Striis



PHI LA DEL PHI A :
J B, L I P P I N C O T T & C O

LONDON: RIVINGTONS

1868

\Secoiid Edition^

:l|'iVI I;

! 1: I; .



Contents



PAGE

I. S. GEORGE ... I

II. S. URSULA AND THE ELEVEN THOUSAND VIRGINS 52

III. THE LEGEND OF THE CROSS 76

IV. SCHAMIR . . 121
V. THE PIPER OF HAMELN . 152

VI. BISHOP HATTO .... 182

VIL MELUSINA ... . . 2o6

VIII. THE FORTUNATE ISLES 259

IX. SWAN-MAIDENS ... . 296

X. THE KNIGHT OF THE SWAN . 3I4

XI. THE SANGREAL . . . 339

XII. THEOPHILUS . . 363

APPENDIX A. PRE-CHRISTIAN CROSSES . ■ ?.1^

B. SHIPPING THE DEAD . . 373



meditEval myths

S- ©eotge

A MORE interesting task for the comparative
-^^- mythologist can hardly be found, than the
analysis of the legends attaching to this celebrated
soldier-martyr ; — interesting, because these legends
contain almost unaltered representative myths of
the Semitic and Aryan peoples, and myths which
may be traced with certainty to their respective
roots.

The popular traditions current relating to the
Cappadocian martyr are distinct in the East and
the West, and are alike sacred myths of faded
creeds, absorbed into the newer faith, and re-
coloured. On dealing with these myths, we are
necessarily drawn into the discussion as to whether
such a person as S. George existed, and if he did

[II.] B



2 5. George

exist, whether he were a CathoHc or a heretic.
Eusebius says (Eccl. Hist. B. viii. c. 5), " Imme-*
diately on the first promulgation of the edict (of
Diocletian), a certain man of no mean origin, but
highly esteemed for his temporal dignities, as soon
as the decree was published against the Churches
in Nicomedia, stimulated by a divine zeal, and
excited by an ardent faith, took it as it was openly
placed and posted up for public inspection, and
tore it to pieces as a most profane and wicked
act. This, too, was done when two of the Caesars
were in the city, the first of whom was the eldest
and chief of all, and the other held the fourth grade
of the imperial dignity after him. But this man, as
the first that was distinguished there in this manner,
after enduring what was likely to follow an act so
daring, preserved his mind calm and serene until
the moment when his spirit fled."

This martyr, whose name Eusebius does not gi\'e,
has been generally supposed to be S. George, and
if so, this is nearly all we know authentic concern-
ing him. But popular as a saint he unquestionably
was, from a very early age. He is believed to have
suff"ered at Nicomedia in 303, and his worship was
soon extended through Phoenicia, Palestine, and
the whole East. In the seventh century he had two



^. George 3

Churches in Rome ; in Gaul he was honoured in the
fifth century. > In an article contributed to the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Literature ',
Mr. Hogg speaks of a Greek inscription copied
from a very ancient church, originally a heathen
temple at Ezra, in Syria, dated A.D. 346, in which
S. George is spoken of as a holy martyr. This is
important testimony, as at this very time was
living the other George, the Alexandrian bishop,
(d. 363) with whom the Saint is sometimes con-
founded.

The earliest acts quoted by the BoUandists, are
in Greek, and belong to the sixth century ; they are
fabulous. Beside these, are some Latin acts, said
to have been composed by Pasikras, the servant of
the martyr, which belong to the eighth century, and
which are certainly translations of an earlier work
than the Greek acts printed by the BoUandists.
These are also apocryphal. Consequently we
know of S. George little, except that there was such
a martyr, that he was a native of Lydda, but
brought up in Cappadocia, that he entered the
Roman army and suffered a cruel death for Christ.
That his death was one of great cruelty, is rendered
probable by the manner in which his biographers

' Second Series, vol. vii. pt. i.
B 2



4 5. George

dilate on his tortures, all agreeing to represent them
as excessive.

The first to question the reverence shown for S.
George was Calvin, who says ' Nil eos Christo reli-
quum facere qui pro nihilo ducunt ejus intercessio-
nem, nisi accedant Georgius aut Hippolitus, aut
similes larvae.' Dr. Reynolds follows in the wake,
and identifies the martyr with the Arian Bishop of
Alexandria. This man had been born in a fuller's
mill at Epiphania, in Cilicia. He is first heard of as
purveyor of provisions for the army at Constanti-
nople, where he assumed the profession of Arianism ;
from thence, having been detected in certain frauds,
he was obliged to fly, and take refuge in Cappa-
docia. His Arian friends obtained his pardon, by
payment of a fine, and he was sent to Alexandria,
where his party elected him Bishop, in opposition
to S. Athanasius, immediately after the death of the
Arian prelate, Gregory. There, associating with
himself Dracontius, master of the mint, and the
Count Diodorus, he tyrannized alike over Catholics
and heathens, till the latter rose against him and
put him to death. Dr. Heylin levelled a lance in
honour of the Patron of England ^ ; but his histori-

' Historie of that Most famous Saint and Soldier of Christ
Jesus, S. George of Cappadocia, 1633.



5. George 5

cal character was again questioned in 1753, by Dr.
John Pettingal in a work on the original of the
equestrian statue of S. George ; and he was an-
swered by Dr. Samuel Pegge, in 1777, in a paper
read before the Society of Antiquaries. Gibbon,
without much investigation into the ground of the
charge, assumes the identity of the Saint and the
Arian prelate. " The odious stranger, disguising
every circumstance of time and place, assumed the
mask of a martyr, a saint, and a Christian hero ;
and the infamous George of Cappadocia has been
transformed into the renowned S. George of Eng-
land, the patron of arms,, of chivalry, and of the
Garter'."

The great improbability of such a transformation
would lead one to question the assertion, even if on
no other ground. Arians and Catholics were too
bitterly hostile, for it to be possible that a partisan
of the former, and a persecutor, should be accepted
as a saint by the latter. The writings of S. Atha-
nasius were sufficiently known to the Medisevals to
save them from falling into such an error, and
S. Athanasius paints his antagonist in no charm-
ing colours. I am disposed to believe that there

' Gibbon's Decline and Fall, chap, xxiii.



6 S. George

really was such a person as S. George, that he was
a martyr to the Catholic faith, and that the very
uncertainty which existed regarding him, tended to
give the composers of his biography the opportu-
nity of attaching to him popular heathen myths,
which had been floating unadopted by any Christian
hero. The number of warrior saints was not so
very great; Sebastian's history was fixed, so were
those of Maurice and Gereon, but George was un-
provided with a history. The deficiency was soon
supplied. We have a similar instance in the story
of S. Hippolitus. The ancient tale of the son of
Theseus torn by horses was deliberately transferred
to a Christian of the same name.

The substance of the Greek acts is to this effect :
George was born of Christian parents in Cappa-
docia. His father suffered a martyr's death, and
the mother with her child took refuge in Palestine.
He early entered the army, and behaved with
great courage and endurance. At the age of
twenty he was bereaved of his mother, and by
her death came in for a large fortune. He then
went to the court of Diocletian, where he hoped
to find advancement. On the breaking out of the
persecution, he distributed his money among the
poor, and declared himself, before the Emperor,



S. George 7

to be a Christian. Having been ordered to sacri-
fice, he refused, and was condemned to death.
The first day, he was thrust with spears to prison,
one of the spears snapped Hke straw when it
touched him. He was then fastened by the feet
and hands to posts, and a heavy stone was laid
upon his breast.

The second day, he was bound to a wheel set
with blades of knives and swords. Diocletian
believed him to be dead ; but an angel appearing,
George courteously saluted him in military fashion,
whereby the persecutor ascertained that the Saint
was still living. On removing him from the wheel,
it was discovered that all his wounds were healed.
George was then cast into a pit, of quicklime,
which, however, did not cause his death. On the
next day but one, the Emperor sent to have his
limbs broken, and he was discovered on his knees
perfectly whole.

He was next made to run in red-hot iron shoes.
The following night and day he spent in prayer,
and on the sixth day he appeared before Diocletian
walking and unhurt. He was then scourged with
thongs of hide till his flesh came off his back,
but was well next day.

On the seventh day he drank two cups, whereof



8 S. George

the one was prepared to make him mad, the other
to poison him, without experiencing any ill effects.
He then performed some miracles, raised a dead
man to life, and restored to life an ox which had
been killed ; — miracles which resulted in numerous
conversions.

That night George dreamed that the Saviour
laid a golden crown on his head, and bade him
prepare for Paradise. S. George at once called to
him the servant who wrote these memoirs {octtk
Kal Tct, VTTO Tov ajiov inrofivrjfiaTa trvv axpi^eia iraar]
avvera^ev), and commanded him, after his death,
to take his body and will to Palestine. On the
eighth day, the saint, by the sign of the cross,
forced the devil inhabiting the statue of Apollo
to declare that he was a fallen angel ; then all the
statues of the gods fell before him.

This miracle converted the Empress Alexandra ;
and Diocletian was so exasperated against the
truth, that he condemned her to instant death.
George was then executed. The day of his
martyrdom was the 33rd of April.

The Latin acts may be summed up as follows ;
they, as already stated, are a translation from a
Greek original :

The devil urges Dacian, Emperor of the Persians,



S. George 9

king of the four quarters of heaven, having domi-
nion over seventy-two kings, to persecute the
Church. At this time lived George of Cappadocia,
a native of Mehtena. Mehtena is also the scene
of his martyrdom. Here he lived with a holy
widow. He is subjected to numerous tortures,
such as the rack, iron pincers, fire, a sword-spiked
wheel, shoes nailed to his feet ; he is put into an
iron box set within with sharp nails, and flung
down a precipice ; he is beaten with sledge-hammers,
a pillar is laid on him, a heavy stone dashed on
to his head ; he is stretched on a red-hot iron bed,
melted lead is poured over him ; he is cast into a
well, transfixed with forty long nails, shut into a
brazen bull over a fire, and cast into a well with
a stone round his neck. Each time he returns
from a torment, he is restored to former vigour.
His tortures continue through seven years. His
constancy and miracles are the means of converting
40,900 men, and the Empress Alexandra. Dacian
then orders the execution of George and hfs queen ;
and as they die, a whirlwind of fire carries off the
persecutor.

These two acts are the source of all later Greek

legends.

Papenbroech prints legends by Simeon Meta-



10 .S". George

phrastes (d. 904), Andreas Hierosolymites, and
Gregorios Kyprios (d. 1389).

Reinbot von Dorn (cent, xiii.), or the French
author from whom he translated the life of S.
George, thought fit to reduce the extravagance
of the original to moderate proportions, the
seventy-two kings were reduced to seven, the
countless tortures to eight ; George is bound, and
has a weight laid on him, is beaten with sticks,
starved, put on a wheel covered with blades,
quartered and thrown into a pond, rolled down
a hill in a brazen bull, his nails transfixed with
poisoned thorns, and he is then executed with the
sword.

Jacques de Voragine says that he was first
attached to a cross, and torn with iron hooks
till his bowels protruded, and that then he was
washed with salt water. Next day he was given
poison to drink without its affecting him. Then
George was fastened to a wheel covered with razors
and knives, but the wheel snapped. He was next
cast into a caldron of molten lead. George was
uninjured by the bath. Then, at his prayer, light-
ning fell and destroyed all the idols, whilst the
earth, opening, swallowed up the priests. At the
sight of this, the wife of Dacian, whom Jacques



5. George 11

de Voragine makes proconsul under Diocletian,
is converted, and she and George are decapitated.
Thereupon lightning strikes Dacian and his mi-
nisters.

S. George, then, according to the Oriental Chris-
tian story, suffers at least seven martyrdoms, and
revives after each, the last excepted.

The Mussulmans revere him equally with the
Christians, and tell a tale concerning him having a
strong affinity to that recorded in the acts. Gher-
ghis, or El Khoudi, as he is called by them, lived at
the same time as the Prophet. He was sent by God
to the king of El Mau9il with the command that he
should accept the faith. This the king refused to do,
and ordered the execution of Gherghis. The saint
was slain, but God revived him, and sent him to the
king again. A second time was he slain, and again
did God restore him to life. A third time did he
preach his mission. Then the persecutor had him
burned, and his ashes scattered in the Tigris.
But God restored him to life once more, and de-
stroyed the king and all his subjects '. The Greek
historian, John Kantakuzenos (d. 1380) remarks,
that in his time there were several shrines erected

■• Mas'udi, iibers. von Sprenger, vol. i. p. 120.



12 ^. George

to the memory of George, at which the Mohamme-
dans paid their devotions ; and the traveller Burck-
hardt relates, that " the Turks pay great veneration
to S. George ;'' Dean Stanley moreover noticed a
Mussulman chapel on the Sea-shore near Sarafend,
the ancient Sarepta, dedicated to El Khouder, in
which " there is no tomb inside, only hangings before
a recess. This variation from the usual type of
Mussulman sepulchres was, as we were told by
peasants on the spot, because El Khouder is not
yet dead, but flies round and round the world, and
these chapels are built wherever he has appeared ^"
Ibn Wahshiya al Kasdani was the translator of the
Book of Nabathaean Agriculture. "Towards the
year 900 of our era, a descendant of those ancient
Babylonian families who had fled to the marshes of
Wasith and of Bassora, where their posterity still
dwell, was struck with profound admiration for the
works of his ancestors, whose language he under-
stood, and probably spoke. Ibn Wahshiya al
Kasdani, or the Chaldsean, was a Mussulman, but
Islamism only dated in his family from the time
of his great-grandfather ; he hated the Arabs, and
cherished the same feeling of national jealousy to-

' Sinai and Palestine, p. 274.



5. George 13

wards them as the Persians also entertained against
their conquerors. A piece of good fortune threw
into his hands a large collection of Nabathaean
writings, which had been rescued from Moslem
fanaticism. The zealous Chaldaean devoted his life
to their translation, and thus created a Nabathaeo-
Arabic library, of which three complete works, to
say nothing of the fragments of a fourth, have
descended to our days °." One of these is the
Book of Nabathaean Agriculture, written by
Kuthami the Babylonian. In it we find the
following remarkable passage : " The contem-
poraries of Yanbiishadh assert that all the seka'in
of the gods and all the images lamented over Yan-
biishadh after his death, just as all the angels and
seka'in lamented over Tammuzi. The images (of
the gods), they say, congregated from all parts of
the world to the temple in Babylon, and betook
themselves to the temple of the Sun, to the great
golden image that is suspended between heaven
and earth. The Sun image stood, they say, in
the midst of the temple, surrounded by all the
images of the world. Next to- it stood the images
of the Sun in all countries ; then those of the

" Ernest Renan, Essay on the Age and Antiquity of the
Book of Nabathaan Agriculture, London, 1862, p. 5.



14 6". George

Moon ; next those of Mars ; after them, the
images of Mercury ; then those of Jupiter ; after
them, those of Venus ; and last of all, of Saturn.
Thereupon the image of the Sun began to bewail
Tammuzi, and the idols to weep ; and the image of
the Sun uttered a lament over Tammuz and nar-
rated his history, whilst the idols all wept from the
setting of the sun till its rising at the end of that
night. Then the idols flew away, returning to their
own countries. They say that the eyes of the idol
of Tehama (in South Arabia), called the eagle, are
perpetually flowing with tears, and will so continue,
from the night wherein it lamented over Tammuz
along with the image of the Sun, because of the
peculiar share that it had in the story of Tammiiz.
This idol, called Nesr, they say, is the one that
inspired the Arabs with the gift of divination, so
that they can tell what has not yet come to pass,
and can explain dreams before the dreamers state
what they are. They (the contemporaries of Yan-
bushiidh) tell that the idols in the land of Babel
bewailed Yanbushadh singly in all their temples a
whole night long till morning. During this night
there was a great flood of rain, with violent thunder
and lightning, as also a furious earthquake (in the
district) from the borders of the mountain ridge of



S. George 15

Holwan to the banks of the Tigris near the city
Nebarwiija, on the eastern bank of that river. The
idols, they say, returned during this flood to their
places, because they had been a little shaken.
This flood was brought by the idols as a judgment
upon the people of the land of Babel for having
abandoned the dead body of Yanbiishadh, as it lay
on the bare ground in the desert of Shamas, so that
the flood carried his dead body to the Wadi el-
A'hfar, and then swept it from this wadi into the
sea. Then there was drought and pestilence in
the land of Babel for three months, so that the
living were not sufficient to bury the dead. These
tales (of Tammiiz and YanbCishadh) have been col-
lected and are read in the temples after prayers,
and the people weep and lament much thereupon.
When I myself am present with the people in the
temple, at the feast of Tammiiz, which is in the
month called after him, and they read his story
and weep, I weep along with them always, out of
friendly feeling towards them, and because I com-
passionate their weeping, not that I believe what
they relate of him. But I believe in the story of
Yanbiishadh, and when they read it and weep, I
weep along with them, very differently from my
weeping over Tammijzi. The reason is this, that



l(i S. George

the time of Yanbushiidh is nearer to our own than
the time of Tammuz, and his story is, therefore,
more certain and worthy of belief. It is possible
that some portions of the story of Tammuz may be
true, but I have my doubts concerning other parts
of it, owing to the distance of his time from ours."

Thus writes Kuthami the Babylonian, and his
translator adds : —

" Says Abu Bekr A'hmed ibn Wa'hshiya. This
month is called Tammuz, according to what the
Nabathseans say, as I have found it in their books,
and is named after a man of whom a strange
long story is told, and who was put to death, they
relate, several times in succession in a most cruel
manner. Each of their months is named after
some excellent and learned man, who was one,
in ancient times, of those Nabathaeans that in-
habited the land of Babel before the Chaldaeans.
This Tammuz was not one of the Chaldaeans,
nor of the Canaanites, nor of the Hebrews, nor
of the Assyrians, but of the primeval lanbiinis. . .
All the Ssabians of our time, down to our own
day, wail and weep over Tammuz in the month
of that name, on the occasion of a festival in his
honour, and make great lamentation over him ;
especially the women, who all arise, both here



5. Gear or ]7

(at Bagdad) and at 'Harran, and wail and weep
over Tammuz. They tell a long and silly story
about him ; but, as I have clearly ascertained,
not one of either sect has any certain information
regarding Tammuz, or the reason of their lament-
ing over him. However, after I had translated
this book, I found in the course of my reading
the statement that TammCiz was a man concerning
whom there was a legend, and that he had been
put to death in a shameful manner. That was all ;
not another word about him. They knew nothing
jnore about him than to say, ' We found our ances-
tors weeping and wailing over him in this way at
this feast that is called after him Tammuzi.' My
own opinion is, that this festival which they hold
in commemoration of Tammiiz is an ancient one,
and has maintained itself till now, whilst the story
connected with him has been forgotten, owing to
the remoteness of his age, so that no one of these
Ssabians at the present day knows what his story
was, nor why they lament over him." Ibn
Wa'hshiya then goes on to speak of a festival
celebrated by the Christians towards the end of
the. month Nisan (April) in honour of S. George,
who is said to have been several times put to death
by a king to whom he had gone to preach Chris-



18 5. George

tianity, and each time he was restored to life
again, ,but at the last died. Then Ibn Wa'hshlya
remarks that what is related of the blessed George
is the same as that told of Tammuz, whose
festival is celebrated in the month Tammuz ; and
he adds that besides what he found regarding
Tammuz in the " Agriculture," he lit on another
Nabathsan book, in which was related in full the
legend of Tammuz ;—" how he summoned a king
to worship the seven (planets) and the twelve
(signs), and how the king put him to death several
times in a cruel manner, Tammuz coming to life,
again after each time, until at last he died ; and
behold ! it was identical with the legend of S.
George that is current among the Christians ^"

Mohammed en Medun in his Fihrist-el-U'lum,
says, " Tammuz (July). In the middle of this
month is the Feast El Bugat, that is, of the
weeping women, which Feast is identical with
that Feast of Ta-uz, which is celebrated in honour
of the god Ta-uz. The women bewail him, be-
cause his Lord had him so cruelly martyred,

' Chwolson: iiber Tammuz. St. Petersburg, i860, pp.
41 — 56. The translation is for the most part from the
Christian Remembrancer, No. cxii., an article on Tammiiz,
with the conclusions of which I cannot altogether agree. My
own conviction as to Tammiiz will be seen in the sequel.



S. George ]9

his bones being ground in a mill, and scattered
to the winds ^"

We have then the Eastern myth of S. George
identified with that of Tammuz, by one who is
impartial. What that myth of Tammiiz was in
its entirety we cannot say, but we have sufficient
evidence in the statement of Ibn Wa'hshiya to
conclude that the worship of S. George and its
popularity in the East, is mainly due to the fact
of his being a Christianized Tammiiz.

Professor Chwolson insists on Tammuz having
been a man, deified and worshipped ; and the
review below referred to confirms this theory. I
believe this to be entirely erroneous. Tammiiz
stands to Chaldee mythology in precisely the
same relation that the Ribhavas do to that of the
Vedas. A French orientalist, M. Neve, wrote a
learned work in 1847, on these ancient Indian deities,
to prove that they were deified sages. But the
careful study of the Vedic hymns to the Ribhus
lead to an entirely opposite conclusion. They
are the Summer breezes deified, which, in that
they waft the smoke of the sacrifices to heaven,
are addressed as assisting at the sacred offerings ;

* Chwolson : Die Ssabier, ii. 27.

C 2



20 5'. George

and in a later age, when their real signification
was lost, they were anthropomorphized into a
sacred caste of priests. A similar process has,
I believe, taken place with Tammuz, who was
the sun, regarded as a God and hero, dying at
the close of each year, and reviving with the- new
one. In Kuthami's age the old deity was appa-
rently misappreciated, and had suffered, in con-
sequence, a reincarnation in Yanbushadh, of whom
a similar story was told, and who received similar
worship, because he was in fact one with TammiJz.
Almost exactly the same legend is related by the
Jews of Abraham, who, they say, was cruelly tor-
tured by Nimrod, and miraculously preserved by
God',

The Phoenician Adonis was identical with
TammiJz. S. Jerome in the Vulgate rendered
the passage in Ezekiel (viii. 14), " He brought
me to the door of the gate of the Lord's house,
which was towards the north ; and behold, there
sat women weeping for Tammiiz," by eccc mulieres
sedentes plangentes Adonidem ; and in his com-
mentary on the passage says, " Whom we have
interpreted Adonis, both the Hebrew and Syriac

1 Leben Abrahams nach Ausfassung der Judischen Sage,
V. Dr. B. Beer, Leipzig, 1859.



S. George 21



'.S



languages call Thamuz . . . and they call the
month June by that name." He informs us also of
a very important fact, that the solstice was the time
when Tammuz was believed to have died, though
the wailing for him took place in June. Con-
sequently Tammuz's martyrdom took place at the
end of December. Cyril of Alexandria also tells
us of the identity existing between Adonis and
Tammiiz (in Isaiah, chap, xviii.).

The name Adonis is purely Semitic, and signifies
the Lord. His worship was introduced to the
Greeks by the Phoenicians through Crete.

Adonis is identified with the Sun in one of the
Orphic hymns : " Thou shining and vanishing in
the beauteous circle of the Horse, dwelling at
one time in gloomy Tartarus, at another eleva-
ting thyself to Olympus, giving ripeness to the
fruits'!" According to Theocritus, this rising and
setting, this continual coursing, is accomplished in
twelve months : " In twelve months the silent
pacing Horse follow him from the nether-world to
that above, the dwelling of the Cyprian goddess,
and then he declines again to Acheron ^" The
cause of these wanderings, according to the fable,

' Orph. Hymn Iv. 5, and 10, 11.
= Theocrit. Id. xv. 103, 104, 136.



22 S. George

was that two goddesses loved Adonis, Aphro-
dite, or more properly Astarte, and Persephone.
Aphrodite, the Syrian Baalti, loved him so tenderly
that the jealousy of Ares was aroused, and he
sent a wild boar to gore him in the chase. When
Adonis descended to the realm of darkness, Per-
sephone was inflamed with passion for the comely
youth. Consequently a strife arose between her
and Aphrodite, which should possess him. The
quarrel was settled by Zeus dividing the year
into three portions, whereof one, from the summer
solstice to the autumn equinox, was to belong
to Adonis, the second was to be spent by
him with Aphrodite, and the third with Perse-
phone. But Adonis voluntarily surrendered his
portion to the goddess of beauty '. Others say,
that Zeus decreed that he should spend six months
in the heavens with Aphrodite, and the other six
in the land of gloom with Persephone ''.

The worship of Adonis, who ■was the same as
Baal, was general in Syria and Phcenicia. The
devotion to Tammuz, we are told, was popular
from Antioch to Elymais '. It penetrated into

' Cyrill. Alex, in Isa.; ApoUodor. lib. iii. c. 14.

■• Schol. in Theocrit. Id. iii. v. 48, and xv. v. 103.

* Ammian. Marcell. xxii. 9. rF.lian, Hist, animal, xii. 33.



5. George %'6

Greece from Crete. Biblos in Phoenicia was the
main seat of this worship.

Tammuz, or Adonis, was again identical with
Osiris. This is stated by several ancient writers °.

The myth relating to Osiris was very similar.
The Egyptian sun-god was born at the summer
solstice and died at the winter solstice, when pro-
cessions went round the temple seeking him, seven
times. Osiris in heaven was the beloved of Isis, in
the land of darkness was embraced by Nepthys.

Typhon, as the Greeks call Seth or Bes, a mon-
ster represented in swine or boar shape, attacked
Osiris, and slaying him, cut him up, and cast him
into the sea. This took place on the 17th of the
month Athor.

Then began the wailing for Osiris, which lasted
four days ; this was followed by the seeking, and
this again by the finding of the God.

Under another form, the same myth, and its ac-
companying ceremonies, prevailed in Egypt, just as
at Babylon that of Tammuz had its reflection in the
more modern cidtus of Yanbiishadh. The soul of
the deceased Osiris was supposed to be incarnate in
Apis ; and, in process of mythologic degradation,
the legend of Osiris passed over to Apis, and with
* Lucian. de dea Syria, n. 7. . Steph. de Urb. v.



24 5. George

it the significant ceremonial. Thus Herodotus tells
us how that at Memphis the death of the sacred
bull was a cause of general wailing, and its dis-
covery one of exultation. When Cambyses was in
Egypt, and the land groaned under foreign sway,
no Apis appeared ; but when his two armies were
destroyed, and he came to Memphis, Apis had
appeared ; and he found the conquered people mani-
festing their joy in dances, and with feasting and
gay raiment '-

We have, it will be seen, among Phoenicians,
Syrians, Egyptians, and Nabathaeans, all Semitic
nations, peculiar myths, with symbolic ceremonies
bearing such a close resemblance to one another,
that we are constrained to acknowledge them as
forms, slightly varied, of some primaeval myth.

We find also among the Arab.s, another Semitic
nation, a myth identical with that of the Babylonian
Tammiiz, prevalent among them not long after their
adoption of Islamism. How shall we account for
this .'' My answer is, that the pre-Mohammedan
Arabs had a worship very similar to that of Tam-
muz, Baal, Adonis, or Osiris, and that, on their con-
version to the faith of the prophet, they retained
the ancient legend, adapting it to El Koudir, Avhoni

'• Thalia, c. 27.



5. George 25

they identified with S. George, because they found
that the Christians had already adopted this course,
and had fixed the ancient myth on the martyr of
Nicomedia. In Babylonia it had already passed to
Yanbiishadh ; and it was made to pass further to
Gherghis, much as in Greece the story of Apollo
and Python was transferred to Perseus and the sea-
monster, and, as we shall see presently, was adopted
into Christian mythology, and attributed to the
subject of this paper. And indeed the process
was perhaps facilitated by the fact that one
of the names of this solar god was Giggras ; he
was so called after the pipes used in wailing for
him.

The circumstances of the death of Tammuz vary
in the different Semitic creeds.

Let me place them briefly in apposition.
Nabathaean myth. Tammiiz.

A great hero, and prophet ; is cruelly put to
death several times, but revives after each mar-
tyrdom. His death a subject of wailing.
Phoenician myth. Adon or Baal.

A beautiful deity, killed by the furious Boar god.
Revived and sent to heaven. Divides his time
between heaven and hell, subject of wailing,
seeking, and finding.



26 5. George

Syrian myth. Baal.

Identical with the Phoenician.
Egyptian myth. Osiris.

A glorious god and great hero, killed by the evil
god. Passes half his time in heaven, and half
in the nether world. Subject of wailing, seeking,
and finding.
Arabian myth. El Khouder, original name Ta'uz.
A prophet, killed by a wicked king several times
and revived each time.
Oriental Christian myth. S. George.

A soldier, killed by a wicked king, undergoes
numerous torments, but revives after each. On
earth lives with a widow. Takes to the other
world with him the queen. Wailing and seek-
ing fall away, and the festival alone remains.
From this tabular view of the legends it is, I
think, impossible not to see that S. George, in his
mythical character, is a Semitic god Christianized.
In order to undergo the process of conversion, a
few little arrangements were rendered necessary,
to divest the story of its sensuous character, and
purify it. Astarte or Aphrodite had to be got out
of the way somehow. She was made into a pious
widow, in whose house the youthful saint lodged.
Then Persephone, the queen of Hades, had to be



5. George 37

accounted for. She was turned into a martyr, Alex-
andra ; and just as Persephone was the wife of the
ruthless monarch of the nether world, so was Alex-
andra represented as the queen of Diocletian or
Datian, and accompanied George to the unseen world.
Consequently in the land of light, George was with
the widow ; in that of gloom, with Alexandra : just
as Osiris spent his year between Isis and Nepthys,
and Adonis between Aphrodite and Persephone.
According to the ancient Christian legend, the
body of George travelled from the place of his mar-
tyrdom to that of his nativity ; this resembles the
journey of the body of Osiris, down the Nile, over
the waves to Biblos, where Isis found him again.

The influence of Persian mythology is also per-
ceptible in the legend. El Nedim says that Tam-
mijz was brayed in a mill ; this feature in his mar-
tyrdom is adopted from the Iranian tradition of
Horn, the Indian Soma, or the divine drink of
sacrifice, which was anthropomorphized, and the
history of the composition of the liquor was trans-
formed into the fable of the hero. The Hom was
pounded in a mortar, and the juice was poured on
the sacrificial flames, and thus carried up into
heaven in fire ; in the legend of the demigod, Hom
\\3.s a martyr who was cruelly bruised and broken



2.8 5. George

in a mortar, but who revived, and ascended to the
skies. In the tale of George there is another
indication of the absorption into it of a foreign
myth. George revives the dead cow of the peasant
Glycerius ; the same story is told of Abbot William
of Villiers, of S. Germanus, of S. Garmon, and of
S. Mochua. Thor also brought to life goats which
had been killed and eaten. The same is told in
the Rigveda of the Ribhus : "O sons of Sudharvan,
out of the hide have you made the cow to
arise ; by your songs the old have you made
young, and from one horse have you made another
horse'."

The numbers in the legend of the soldier-saint
have a solar look about them. The torments of S.
George last seven years, or, according to the Greek
acts, seven days ; the tyrant reigns over the four
quarters of heaven, and seven kings ; in the Naba-
thaean story, Tammuz preaches the worship of the
seven planets, and the twelve signs of the Zodiac.
Osiris is sought seven days. The seven winter
months are features in all mythologies.

The manner in which S. George dies repeatedly
represents the different ways in which the sun dies

" See my note in Appendix to " The Folklore of the N.
Counties of England," London, 1866. pp. 32 £-4.



5. George 29

each day. The Greeks, and, indeed, most nations,
regarded the close of day as the expiration of the
solar deity, and framed myths to account for his
decease. In Greek mythology the solar gods are
many, and the stories of their deaths are distributed
so as to provide each with his exit from the world ;
but in Semitic mythology it is not so, the sun-god
is one, and all kinds of deaths are attributed to him
alone, or, if he suffers anthropomorphism, to his
representative.

Phaethon is a solar deity ; he falls into the
western seas. Herakles is another ; he expires in
flames, rending the poisoned garment given him
by Dejanira. Phaethon's death represents the
rapid descent of the sun in the west ; that of
Herakles, the setting orb in a flaming western sky
rending the fire-lined clouds, which wrap his body.
The same blaze, wherein sank the sun, was also
supposed to be a funeral pyre, on which lay
Memnon ; and the clouds fleeting about it, some
falling into the fire, and some scudding over the
darkling sky, were the birds which escaped from
the funeral pyre. Achilles, a humanized sun-god,
was vulnerable in his heel, just as the Teutonic
Sigfried could only be wounded in his back : this
represents the sun as retiring from the heavens with



30 5. George

his back turned, struck by the weapon of dark-
ness, just as Ares, the bhnd God, with his tusk
slew Adonis, or sightless Hodr with his mistletoe
shaft smote Baldur.

In the S. George fable, we have the martyr, like
Memnon or Herakles, on the fire, and transfixed,
like Achilles and Ajax ; exposed in a brazen bull
on a fire, that is, hung in the full rain-cloud over
the western blaze ; cast down a hill, like Phaethon ;
plunged into boiling metal, a representation of the
lurid vapours of the west.

Having identified S. George or Tammuz with
the sun, we shall have little difficulty in seeing
that Aphrodite or Isis is the moon when visible,
and Persephone or Nepthys the waned moon ;
Persephone is in fact no other than Aphrodite
in the region of gloom, where, according to the
decree of Zeus, she was to spend six months with
Aidoneus, and six months in heaven.

But it is time for us to turn to the Western myth,
that of the fight of S. George with the dragon ; in
this, again, we shall find sacred beliefs of antiquity
reappearing in Christian form.

The story of S. George and the dragon first pre-
sents itself in the Legenda Aurea of Jacques de
Voragine. It was accepted by the unquestioning



^. George 31

clerks and laity of the middle ages, so that it found
its way into the office-books of the Church.

O Georgi Martyr inclyte,
Te decet laus et gloria,
Predotatum militia ;
Per quern puella regia,
Existens in tristitia,
Coram Dracone pessimo,
Salvata est. Ex animo
Te rogamus corde intimo,
Ut cunctis cum fidelibus
Cceli jungamur civibus
Nostris ablatis sordibus:
Et simul cum lastitia
Tecum simus in gloria ;
Nostraque reddant labia
Laudes Christo cum gratia,
Cui sit honos in secula.

Thus sang the clerks from the Sarum " Horse B.
Mariae," on S. George's day, till the reformation
of the Missals and Breviaries by Pope Clement
VII., when the story of the dragon was cut out,
and S. George was simply acknowledged as a
martyr, reigning with Christ. His introit was
from Ps. Ixiii. The Collect, "God, who makest
us glad through the merits and intercession of
blessed George the martyr, mercifully grant that
we who ask through him Thy good things may
obtain the gift of Thy grace." The Epistle,



32 ^. George

2 Tim. ii. 8 — ii, and iii. to — 13; and the Gospel,
S. John XV. I — 8.

The legend, as told by Voragine, is this : —
George, a tribune, was born in Cappadocia, and
came to Lybia, to the town called Silene, near
which was a pond infested by a monster, which
had many times driven back an armed host that
had come to destroy him. He even approached the
walls of the city, and with his exhalations poisoned
all who were near. To avoid such visits, he was
furnished each day with two sheep, to satisfy his
voracity. If these were not given, he so attacked
the walls of the town, that his envenomed breath
infected the air, and many of the inhabitants died.
He was supplied with sheep, till they were ex-
hausted, and it was impossible to procure the
necessary number. Then the citizens held coun-
sel, and it was decided that each day a man and
a beast should be offered, so that at last they gave
up their children, sons and daughters, and none
were spared. The lot fell one day on the princess.
The monarch, horror-struck, offered in exchange
for her his gold, his silver, and half his realm, only
desiring to save his daughter from this frightful
death. But the people insisted on the sacrifice of
the maiden, and all the poor father could obtain,



^. George 33

was a delay of eight days, in which to bewail the
fate of the damsel. At the expiration of this time,
the people returned to the palace, and said, " Why
do you sacrifice your subjects for your daughter ?
We are all dying before the breath of this mon-
ster !" The king felt that he must resolve on part-
ing with his child. He covered her with royal
clothes, embraced her, and said, " Alas ! dear
daughter, I thought to have seen myself re-born
in your offspring. I hoped to have invited princes
to your wedding, to have adorned you with royal
garments, and accompanied you with flutes, tam-
bourins, and all kinds of music ; but you are to be
devoured by this monster ! Why did not I die
before you V

Then she fell at her father's feet and besought
his blessing. He accorded it her, weeping, and
he clasped her tenderly in his arms ; then she
went to the lake. George, who passed that way,
saw her weeping, and asked the cause of her tears.
She replied : — " Good youth ! quickly mount your
horse and fly, lest you perish with me." But
George said to her : — " Do not fear ; tell me what
you await, and why all this multitude look on."
She answered : — " I see that you have a great and
noble heart ; yet, fly !" "I shall not go without
[II.J D



34- i'. George

knowing the cause," he replied. Then she ex-
plained all to him ; whereupon he exclaimed : —
" Fear nothing ! in the name of Jesus Christ, I will
assist you." "Brave knight!" said she; "do not
seek to die with me ; enough that I should perish ;
for you can neither assist nor deliver me, and you
will only die with me.''

At this moment the monster rose above the sur-
face of the water. And the virgin said, all trem-
bling, "Fly, fly, sir knight !"

His only answer was the sign of the cross. Then
he advanced to meet the monster, recommending
himself to God.

He brandished his lance with such force, that he
transfixed it, and cast it to the ground. Then,
addressing the princess, he bade her pass her
girdle round it, and fear nothing. When this was
done, the monster followed like a docile hound.
When they had brought it into the town, the peo-
ple fled before it ; but George recalled them,
bidding them put aside all fear, for the Lord
had sent him to deliver them from the dragon.
Then the king and all his people, twenty thousand
men, without counting women and children, were
baptized, and George smote off" the head of the
monster.



^. George 35

Other versions of the story are to the effect that
the princess was shut up in a castle, and that
all within were perishing for want of water,
which could only be obtained from a fountain
at the base of a hill, and this was guarded by
the "laidly worm," from which George delivered
them.

" The hero won his well-earn'd place

Amid the saints, in death's dread hour ;

And still the peasant seeks his grace,
And next to God, reveres his power.

In many a church his form is seen

With sword, and shield, and helmet sheen :

Ye know him by his steed of pride.

And by the dragon at his side."

Chr. Schmid.

The same story has attached itself to other saints
and heroes of the middle ages, as S. Secundus of
Asti, S. Victor, Gozo of Rhodes, Raimond of S.
Sulpice, Struth von Winkelried, the Count Aymon,
Moor of Moorhall, " who slew the dragon of Want-
ley," Conyers of Sockburn, and the Knight of
Lambton, " John that slew ye Worme." Ariosto
adopted it into his Orlando Furioso, and made
his hero deliver Angelica from Orca, in the true
mythic style of George ' ; and it appears again in

8 Orland. Fur. c. xi.
D 2



36 6\ George

the tale of Chederles '. The cause of the legend
attaching itself to our hero, was possibly a mis-
understanding of an encomium, made in memory of
S. George, by Metaphrastes, which concludes thus :
"Licebat igitur videre astutissimum Draconem,
adversus carnem et sanguinem gloriari solitum,
elatumque, et sese efiferentem, a juvene uno illu-
sum, et ita dispectum atque confusum, ut quid
ageret non haberet.'' Another writer, summing up
the acts of S. George, says : " Secundo quod Dra-
conem vicit qui significat Diabolum ;" and Hos-
pinian, relating the sufferings of the martyr, affirms
distinctly that his constancy was the occasion of
the creation of the legend by Voragine '.

If we look at the story of Perseus and Andro-
meda, we shall find that in all essential particulars
it is the same as that of the Cappadocian Saint.

Cassiope having boasted herself to be fairer than
Hera, Poseidon sent a flood and a sea-monster
to ravage the country belonging to her husband
Cepheus. The oracle of Amm.on having been
consulted, it was ascertained that nothing would
stop the resentment of the gods except the ex-
posure of the king's daughter, Andromeda, on a

' Noel: Diet, de la Fable; art. Chederles.
' Christian Remembrancer, vol. xlv. p. 320.



5". George 37

rock, to be devoured by the monster. At the
moment that the dragon approached the maiden,
Perseus appeared, and learning her peril, engaged
the monster and slew him.

The scene of this conflict was near Joppa, where
in the days of S. Jerome the bones of the huge
reptile were exhibited, and Josephus pretends to
have seen there the chains which attached the
princess to the rock '. It was at Berytus (Beyrut)
that the fight of S. George with the dragon took
place.

Similar stories were prevalent in Greece. In the
isle of Salamis, Cenchrius, a son of Poseidon, re-
lieved the inhabitants from the scourge of a similar
monster, who devastated the island. At Thespia,
a dragon ravaged the country round the city; Zeus
ordered the inhabitants to give the monster their
children by lot. One year it fell on Cleostratus.
Menestratus determined to save him. He armed
himself with a suit covered with hooks, and was
devoured by the dragon, which perished in killing
him. Pherecydes killed a great serpent in Caulonia,
an adventure afterwards related of Pythagoras, with
the scene shifted to Sybaris ; and Herakles, as is
well known, slew Hydra. But these are all ver-
^ Hieron. Epist. io8. Joseph. Bell. Tud. iii. c. 7.



38 5. George

sions — echoes — of the principal myth of Apollo and
Python.

The monster Python was sent by Hera to perse-
cute Leto, when pregnant. Apollo, the moment
that he was born, attacked the hideous beast
and pierced him with his arrows. And from the
place where the serpent died, there burst forth a
torrent.

A similar myth is found among the Scandinavian
and Teutonic nations. In these Northern myth-
ologies Apollo is replaced by Sigurd, Sigfried, and
Beowulf

The dragon with which Sigurd fights is Fafnir,
who keeps guard over a treasure of gold. Sigfried,
in like manner, in the Nibelungen Lied, fights and
overcomes a mighty dragon, and despoils him of
a vast treasure. The Anglo-Saxon poem of Beo-
wulf contains a similar engagement. A monster
Grendel haunts a marsh near a town on the North
Sea. At night the evil spirit rises from the swamp,
and flies to the mountains, attacking the armed
men, and slaying them. Beowulf awakes, fights
him, and puts him to flight. But next night
Grendel again attacks him, but is killed by the
hero with an enchanted sword. He fights a dragon
some years later, and robs it of an incalculable store



5. George 39

of gold. The Icelandic Sagas teem with similar
stories ; and they abound in all European house-
hold tales.

In the Rigveda we have the same story. Indra
fights with the hideous serpent Ahi, or Vrita, who
keeps guard over the fountain of rains. In Iranian
mythology, the same battle is waged between
Mithra and the daemon Ahriman.

It seems, then, that the fight with the dragon is
a myth common to all Aryan peoples.

Its signification is this : —

The maiden which the dragon attemps to devour
is the earth. The monster is the storm-cloud.
The hero who fights it is the sun, with his glorious
sword, the lightning-flash. By his victory the earth
is relieved from her peril. The fable has been
varied to suit the atmospheric peculiarities of dif-
ferent climes in which the Aryans found themselves.
In India, Vrita is coiled about the source of water,
and the earth is perishing for want of rain, till
pierced by the sword of Indra, when the stiieams
descend. " I will sing," says the Rigveda, " the
ancient exploits by which flashing Indra is distin-
guished. He has struck Ahi, he has scattered the
waters on the earth, he has unlocked the torrents
of the heavenly mountains (i. e., the clouds). He



40 S. George

has struck Ahi, who lurked in the bosom of the
celestial mountain, he has struck him with that
sounding weapon wrought for him by Twachtri ;
and the waters, like cattle rushing to their stable,
have poured down on the earth "." And again : —

" O Indra, thou hast killed the violent Ahi, who
withheld the waters !"

" O Indra, thou hast struck Ahi, sleeping guar-
dian of the waters, and thou hast precipitated them
into the sea ; thou hast pierced the compact scale
of the cloud ; thou hast given vent to the streams,
which burst forth on all sides ^"

Among the ancient Iranians the same myth
prevailed, but was sublimated into a conflict be-
tween good and evil. Ahriman represents Ahi, and
is the principle of evil ; corrupted into Kharaman,
it became the Armenian name for a serpent and
the devil. Ahriman entered heaven in the shape
of a dragon, was met by Mithra, conquered, and
like the old serpent of Apocalyptic vision, " he

■* Rigveda, sect. i. lee, 2. p. xiii. Ed. Langlois, iii. p. 329.

* Ibid. vol. i. p. 44 ; ii. p. 447. In the Katha Sarit
Sagara, a hero fights a dsemon monster, and releases a
beautiful woman from his thraldom. The story as told by
Soma Deva has already progressed and assumed a form very
similar to that of Perseus and Andromeda. Katha Sarit
Sagara, book vii. c. 42.



5. George 41

shall be bound for three thousand years, and
burned at the end of the world in melted metals V
Aschmogh (Asmodeus) is also the infernal serpent
of the books of the Avesta ; he is but another
form of Ahriman. This fable rapidly followed
in Persia the same process of application to known
historical individuals that it pursued in Europe.
In the ninth hymn of the Ya9na, Zoroaster asks
Homa who were the first of mortals to honour him,
and Homa replies : " The first of mortals to whom
I manifested myself was Vivanghvat, father of Yima,
under whom flourished the blessed age which knew
not cold of winter, or scorching heat of sum-
mer, old age or death, or the hatred produced by
the Devas. The second was Athwya, father of
Thraetana, the conqueror of the dragon Dahak,
with three heads, and three throats, and six eyes,
and a thousand strengths." This Thraetana, in
the Shahnameh, has become Feridun, who over-
comes the great dragon Zohak.

In northern mythology, the serpent is probably
the winter cloud, which broods over and keeps from
mortals the gold of the sun's light and heat, till in
the spring the bright orb overcomes the powers
of darkness and tempest, and scatters his gold
5 Boundehesch, ii. 351. 416.



42 6". George

over the face of the earth. In the ancient Sagas
of Iceland, the myth has assumed a very pecuhar
form, which, if it would not have protracted this
article to an undue length, I should have been glad
to have followed out. The hero descends into
a tomb, where he fights a vampire, who has
possession of a glorious sword, and much gold and
silver. After a desperate struggle, the hero over-
comes, and rises with the treasures to the surface
of the earth. This too, represents the sun in the
northern realms, descending into the tomb of winter,
and there overcoming the power of darkness, from
whom he takes the sword of the lightning, and the
treasures of fertility, wherewith the earth is blessed
on the return of the sun to the skies in summer.

This is probably the ancient form of the Scandi-
navian myth, and the King of gloom reigning over
his gold in the cairn, was only dragonized when the
Norse became acquainted with the dragon myths of
other nations. In the Saga of Hromund Greipson,
the hero is let down by a rope into a barrow, into
which he had been digging for six days. He found
below the old king Thrain the Viking, with a kettle
of quivering red flames suspended from the roof of
the vault above him. This king, years before, had
gathered all the treasures that he had obtained in



5. George 43

a long life of piracy, and had suffered himself to
be buried alive with his ill-gotten wealth. Hromund
found him seated on a throne in full armour, girded
with his sword, crowned, and with his feet resting on
three boxes containing silver. We have the same
story in the Gretla ; only there the dead king is
Karr the old; Grettir is led to open his cairn, by
seeing flames dancing on the mound at night. In
the struggle underground, Grettir and the vampire
stumble over the bones of the old king's horse, and
thereby Grettir is able to get the upper hand.

Similar stories occur in the Floamanna Saga,
the younger Saga of Olaf the saint (cap. i6), the
elder Olaf Saga (3 — 4), the history of Olaf Geir-
stafaalp, the Holmverja Saga, and the Barda Saga.
The last of these is strongly impressed with Chris-
tian influence, and gives indications of the transfor-
mation of the evil being into a dragon. Gest visited
an island off the coast of Helluland (Labrador),
where lay buried a grimly daemon king Raknar.
He took with him a priest with holy water and a
crucifix. They had to dig fifty fathoms before they
reached the chamber of the dead. Into this Gest
descended by a rope, holding a sword in one hand,
and a taper in the other. He saw below a great
dragon-ship, in which sat five hundred men.



44 6". George

champions of the old king, who were buried with
him. They did not stir, but gazed with blank
eyes at the taper flame, and snorted vapour from
their nostrils. Gest despoiled the old king of all
his gold and armour, and was about to rob him of
his sword, when the taper expired. Then, at once,
the five hundred rose from the dragon-ship, and
the dasmon king rushed at him ; they grappled
and fought. In his need, Gest invoked S. Olaf,
who appeared with light streaming from his body,
and illumining the interior of the cairn. Before this
light, the power of the dead men failed, and Gest
completed his work in the vaults In the story of Si-
gurd and Fafnir, the dragon is more than half man;
but in the battle of Gull-Thorir the creature is scaled
and winged in the most approved Oriental style ^
Let me place in apposition a few of the Aryan
myths relating to the strife between the sun and
the daemon of darkness, or storm.
Indian myth. Indra fights Ahi.

Indra kills Ahi, who is identified with the storm-
cloud, and releases from him the pent-up waters,
for want of which the earth is perishing. Ahi a
serpent.

' Bardar S. Snaefellsass. Kjobnhavn. i860, pp. 41 — 43.
^ Gull-Thoris Saga. Leipzig, 1858. c. iv.



5". George 45

Persian myth. Mithra and Ahriman.

Mithra is clearly identical with the sun, and Ahri-
man with darkness. Ahriman a dragon.

Greek myth. Apollo and Python ; Perseus and the
sea-monster.
Apollo identical with the sun, Python the storm-
cloud. Apollo delivers his mother from the
assault of the dragon.

Perseus delivers Andromeda from the water-born
serpent. In other Greek fables it is the earth
which is saved from destruction by the victory of
the hero.

Teutonic myth. Sigfried and the dragon.

Sigfried conquers the dragon who keeps guard
over a hidden treasure, the hero kills the dragon
and brings to light the treasure.

Scandinavian myth. Sigurd and Fafnir.

Like the myth of Sigfried. Other, and perhaps
earlier form, the dragon is a king of Hades, who
cannot endure light, and who has robbed the
earth of its gold. The hero descends to his
realm, fights, overcomes him, and despoils him of
his treasures.

Christian myth. S. George and dragon.

S. George delivers a princess from a monster,
who is about to devour her. According to an-



46 5. George

other version, the dragon guards the spring of

water, and the country is languishing for want of

water ; S. George restores to the land the use of

the spring by slaying the dragon.

This table might have been considerably ex-
tended by including Keltic and Sclavonic fables, but
it is sufficiently complete to show that the legend
of S. George and the dragon forms part of one of
the sacred myths of the Aryan family, and it is im-
possible not to grasp its signification in the light
cast upon it by the Vedic poems.

And when we perceive how popular this vene-
rable myth was in heathen nations of Europe, it is
not surprising that it should perpetuate itself under
Christianity, and that, when once transferred to a
hero of the new creed, it should make that hero one
of the most venerated and popular of all the saints
in the calendar.

In the reign of Constantine the Great, there
existed a great and beautiful church between
Ramula, the ancient Arimathsea, and Lydda or
'Decapolis, dedicated by the Emperor to S. George,
over his tomb. Ramula also bore the name of
Georgia, and the inhabitants pretended that the
warrior saint was a native of their town. A temple
of Juno at Constantinople was converted into a



5". George 47

church, with the same dedication, by the first

Christian Emperor, and according to one tradition,

the bones of the martyr were translated from his

tomb near Lydda, to the church in the great city

of Constantine. At an early date his head was

in Rome, or at all events one of his heads, for

another found its way to the church of Mares-

Moutier, in Picardy, after the capture of Byzantium

by the Turks, when it was taken from a church

erected by Constantine Monornachus, dedicated

to the saint. The Roman head, long forgotten,

was rediscovered in 751, with an inscription on it

which identified it with S. George. In 1600 it was

given to the church of Ferrara. In Rome, at

Palermo, and at Naples there were churches at a

very early date, consecrated to the martyr. In

509 Clotilda founded a nunnery at Chelles in his

honour ; and Clovis II. placed a convent at Barala

under his invocation. In this religious house was

preserved an arm of S. George, which in the ninth

century was transported to Cambray ; and fifty

years later S. Germain dedicated an altar in Paris

to the champion. In the sixth century a church

was erected to his honour at Mayence ; Clothaire

in the following century dedicated one at Nim.egue,

and his brother another in Alsace. George had a



48 S. George

monastery dedicated to him at Thetford, founded
in the reign of Canute ; a collegiate church in
Oxford placed under his invocation in the reign
of the Conqueror. S. George's, Southwark, dates
from before the Norman invasion. The priory-
church of Griesly in Derbyshire was dedicated
to SS. Mary and George, in the reign of Henry I.
The Crusades gave an impetus to the worship
of our patron. He appeared in light on the walls
of Jerusalem, waving his sword, and led the
victorious assault on the Holy City. Unob-
trusively he and S. Michael slipped into the
offices, and exercised the functions, of the Dioscuri.
Robert of Flanders, on his return from the Holy
Land, presented part of an arm of the saint to
the city of Toulouse, and other portions to the
Countess Matilda and to the abbey of Auchin.
Another arm of S. George fell miraculously from
heaven upon the altar of S. Pantaleon at Cologne,
and in honour of it Bishop Anno founded a church.

The church of Villers-Saint-Leu contains relics
of the saint, which were given to it in iioi by
Alexander, chaplain of Count Ernest, who had
received them from Baldwin at Jerusalem.

The enthusiasm of the Crusaders for the Eastern
soldier-saint who led them to battle, soon raised S.



5. George 4!)

George to the highest pitch of popularity among
the nobles and fighting-men of Europe. England,
Aragon, and Portugal assumed him as their patron,
as well as most chivalrous orders founded at the
date of these wars. In 1245, o^^ S. George's day,
Frederic of Austria instituted an order of knight-
hood under his patronage ; and its banner, white
charged with a blood-red cross, in battle floated
alongside of that of the empire. When the
emperor entered the castle of S. Angelo at
Rome, these two banners were carried before
him. The custody of the sacred standard of
S. George was confided to the Swabian knights.
In the early part of the thirteenth century there
existed a military order under the protection of
S. George at Genoa, and in 1201 an order was
founded in Aragon, with the title of knights of
S. George of Alfama.

In 1348 King Edward III. founded S. George's
Chapel, Windsor. In the following year he was
besieging Calais. Moved by a sudden impulse,
says Thomas of Walsingham, he drew his sword
with the exclamation " Ha ! Saint Edward ! Ha !
Saint George!" The words and action communi-
cated spirit to his soldiers : they fell with vigour on
the French, and routed them with a slaughter of

[11.] E



50 5. George

two hundred soldiers. From that, time S. George,
replaced Edward the Confessor as patron of
England. In 1350 the celebrated order was
instituted. In 1415, by the Constitutions of Arch-
bishop Chichely, S. George's Day was made a
major double feast, and ordered to be observed
the same as Christmas Day, all labour ceasing ;
and he received the title of spiritual patron of the
English soldiery.

In 1545 S. George's Day was observed as a red
letter day, with proper Collect, Epistle, and Gospel ;
but in the reign of Edward VI. it was swept away,
and the holding of the chapter of the Garter on
S. George's Day was transferred to Whitsun Eve,
Whitsun Day, and Whitsun Monday. Next year,
the first of Queen Mary, the enactment was re-
versed, and since then the ancient custom has
obtained, and the chapter is held annually on the
feast of the patron.

In concluding this paper, it remains only to point
out the graceful allegory which lies beneath the
\\'estern fable. S. George is any Christian who
is sealed at his baptism to be " Christ's faithful
soldier and servant unto his life's end," and armed
with the breastplate of righteousness, the shield of
the faith, marked with its blood-red cross, the



5. George 51

helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit,
which is the word or power of God.

The hideous monster against whom the Chris-
tian soldier is called to fight is that " old serpent,
the devil," who withholds or poisons the streams
of grace, and who seeks to rend and devour
the virgin soul, in whose defence the champion
fights.

If the warfare symbolized by this legend be
carried out in life, then, in Spenser's words —

" Thou, amongst those saints whom thou doest see,
Shall be a saint, and thine owne nations frend
And patrone : thou Saint George shalt called bee.
Saint George of mery England, the sign of victoree."



E a



^. Ursula antf t\^e ifileben Cljousantf Uirgins

T N reading the Germania of Tacitus, with a view
-*- to the study of Teutonic mythology, I Ht upon
a passage so perplexing, that I resolved to minutely
investigate it, and trace its connexion with other
statements, and examine its bearings, little knowing
whither it would lead. That passage shall be quoted
in the sequel. Suffice it to say here, that it guided
me to the legend of S. Ursula and her virgin com-
pany of martyrs.

At this point I became acquainted with the
masterly treatise of Dr. Oskar Schade, of Bonn,
on the story of S. Ursula ', and was agreeably sur-
prised to find that, proceeding from the point at
which I had arrived, he had been guided by sure
stages to that from which I had started.

1 Die Sage von der Heiligen Ursula, von Oskar Schade.
Hanover, 1854.



6". Ursula and the Eleven Thousand Virgins oJi

As my object in these pages is the analysis of a
Christian myth, I shall follow the Doctor's course
rather than my own. The fable of S. Ursula is too
important to be omitted from this collection of
Myths, because of the extravagance of its details,
the devotion which it excited, the persistency with
which the Church clings to it, setting all her
scenery in motion to present the tragedy in its
most imposing and probable aspect. It may not
be omitted also because it is a specimen of the
manner in which saintly legends were developed
in the Middle Ages, the process of the develop-
ment being unusually evident ; a specimen, lastly,
of the manner in which they were generated out
of worse than nothing ; a process which is also,
in this case, singularly apparent.

The legends of the Middle Ages were some
beautiful, some grotesque, some revolting. The
two latter classes we put aside at once, but for the
first we profess a lingering affection. Alas ! too
often they are but apples of Sodom, fair cheeked,
but containing the dust and ashes of heathenism.

Ursula and the eleven thousand British virgins
are said to have suffered martyrdom at Cologne,
on October 31st, 237 ; for in 1837 was celebrated
with splendor the i6th centenary jubilee of their



■34 6*. Ursula

passion. They suffered under the Huns, on their
return from their defeat at Chalons by Aetius
in 451 ; so that the anachronism is considerable.
The early martyrology of Jerome, published by
d'Achery, makes no mention of S. Ursula ; neither
does that of the Venerable Bede, who was born in
672. Bede states that he has included all the
names of which he read : as Ursula was a British
lady of rank, and was accompanied to martyrdom
by the enormous number of .eleven thousand dam-
sels, who shared with her the martyr's crown and
palm, it is singular and significant that Bede should
not allude to this goodly company. The Martyro-
logium Gallinense, a compilation made in 804,
does not include her ; nor does the Vetus Calen-
darium Corbeiense, composed in or about 831.
Neither is she mentioned in the Martyrology of
Rabanus Maurus, who died in 856. Usardus, who
wrote about 875, does not speak of her, though
under the 30th October he inserts the passion of
the holy virgins, Martha and Saula, with many
others in the city of Cologne. S. Ado wrote a
martyrology in 880, but makes no mention of
Ursula and the other virgins ; nor does Notker of
S. Gall, who died in 912 ; nor, again, does the Cor-
bey martyrology of 900 ; neither do the two of



and ilie Eleven Thousand Virgins 55

uncertain date called after Labbe and Richenove.
We see that up to the tenth century, for either
650 or 450 years after the martyrdom, there is no
mention of S. Ursula by name, and only one refer-
ence to virgin martyrs at Cologne. Usardus, who
mentions these, gives the names of Martha and
Saula. An old calendar in the Dusseldorf town
library, belonging to the tenth century, copies
Usardus, merely transferring the saints to the 21st
October. A litany of the following century, in the
Darmstadt library, invokes five, in this order :
Martha, Saula, Paula, Brittola, Ursula. Another
litany in the same collection raises their number
to eight, and gives a different succession : Brittola,
Martha, Saula, Sambatia, Saturnina, Gregoria,
Pinnosa, Palladia. Another litany, in the Dussel-
dorf library, extends the number to eleven : Ursula,
Sencia, Gregoria, Pinnosa, Martha, Saula, Brittola,
Saturnina, Rabacia, Saturia, Palladia. And, again,
another gives eleven, but in different order :
Martha, Saula, Brittola, Gregoria, Saturnina,
Sabatia, Pinnosa, Ursula, Sentia, Palladia, Sa-
turia.

A calendar in a Freisingen Codex, published in
Eckhart's Francia Orientalis, notices them as 5^.
M. XL Virgimim. And, lastly, in the twelfth



56 6". Ursula

century the chronicle of Rodulf (written 1117)
reckons the virgin martyrs as twelve.

But S. Cunibert (d. 66'^) is related, in a legend
of the ninth century, to have been celebrating in
the church of the Blessed Virgins, when a white
dove appeared, and indicated the spot where lay
the relics of one of the martyrs : these were, of
course at once exhumed.

In the ninth century there was a cloister of the
blessed virgins at Cologne : this is also alluded to
in the tenth and following centuries. The first,
however, to develope the number of martyrs to any
very considerable extent, was Wandalbert, in his
metrical list of saints. This was written about
851. He does not mention Ursula by name, but
reckons the virgins who suffered as " thousands.''

" Tunc numerosa simul Rheni per littora fulgent
Christo virgineis erecta trophsea maniplis
Agrippinas urbi, quarum furor impius olim
Millia mactavit ductricibus inclyta Sanctis."

The authenticity of these lines has, ho^\■ever,
been questioned by critics.

The next mention of the virgins as very nume-
rous is in a calendar of the latter end of the ninth
century, in which, under October 31st, are com-
memorated S. Hilario and the eleven thousand



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 57

virgins. Archbishop Hermann of Cologne, in 933,
also speaks of this number-. In 937 and 941
Archbishop Wichfried reckons them at eleven
thousand, and from that time the belief in the
virgin saints having numbered eleven thousand
spread gradually through Europe.

Various suggestions have been made to account
for this extraordinary number. By some it has
been supposed that Undecimilla was the name of
one of the martyrs, and that the entry in the
ancient calendars of Urstda et Undecimilla Virg.
Mart., originated the misconception ; and, in fact,
one missal, supposed to be old, has a similar com-
memoration ; whilst an inscription at Spiers, accord-
ing to Rettberg, mentions Ursula et Decumilia.
Johann Sprenz believed that the mistake arose
from the use, in the old MSS. martyrologies and
calendars, of the Teutonic Gimartarot, or Kimar-
trot (passu.s), which, standing S. Ursula Ximartor,
might have led later writers to have taken the
entry to signify S. Ursula, et XI. Martor. Or,
again, if the number of the virgins were eleven,
they may have been entered as SS. XI. M. Vir-
gines, or the eleven martyr-virgins, and the M.
have been mistaken in a later age for a numeral.
Against this it is urged that in no ancient calendar



58 5'. Ursula

does the M. precede the Virg. ; the usual manner
of describing these saints being SS. M. XL Virg.,
till the number rose at a leap to eleven thousand.

As yet we have had no circumstances relating to
these ladies, but ivith the tenth century they begin
to appear. Sigebert of Gemblours (d. 1112) is the
first author to narrate them. Under the date 453,
he reports the glorious victory of the Virgin Ursula.
She was the only daughter of Nothus, an illustrious
and wealthy British prince, and was sought in mar-
riage by the son of a "certain most ferocious tyrant."
Ursula had, however, dedicated herself to celibacy,
and her father was in great fear of offending God
by consenting to the union, and of exasperating
the king by refusing it. However, the damsel
solved the difficulty : by Divine inspiration, she per-
suaded her father to agree to the proposal of the
tyrant, but only subject to the condition that her
father and the king should choose ten virgins of
beauty and proper age, and should give them to her,
and that she and they should each have a thousand
damsels under them, and that on eleven triremes
they should be suffered to cruize about for three
years in the sanctity of unsullied virginity. Ursula
made this condition in the hopes that the difficulty of
fulfilling it would prove insurmountable, or that she



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 59

might be able, should it be overcome, to persuade
a vast host of maidens to devote themselves to the
Almighty.

The tyrant succeeded in mustering the desired
number, and then presented them to Ursula, to-
gether with eleven elegantly furnished galleys. For
three years these damsels sailed the blue seas. One
day the wind drove them into the port of Tiela, in
Gaul, and thence up the Rhine to Cologne. Thence
they pursued their course to Basle, where they
left their ships, and crossed the Alps on foot, de-
scended into Italy, and visited the tombs of the
Apostles at Rome. In like manner they returned,
but, falling in with the Huns at Cologne, they were
every one martyred by the barbarians.

This story bears evidence of being an addition to
the original text of Sigebert's Chronicle, for it is
not to be found in the original MS. in the hand-
writing of the author, though marks of stitches at
the side of the page indicate that an additional
item had been appended, but by whom, or when,
is not clear, as the strip of parchment which had
been tacked on is lost.

Otto of Freisingen (d. 1158) mentions the legend
in his Chronicle ; for he says, " This army (of the
Huns) when overrunning the earth, crowned with



60 ,S. Ursula

martyrdom the eleven thousand virgins at Co-
logne."

A legend of the twelfth century, given by Surius,
invests the story with all the colours of a romance.
In the same century it appears in the marvellous
history of Geoffrey of Monmouth (d. 1154)-
Whether this legend was in the Welsh book of
Walter the Archdeacon, from which the good
Bishop of S. Asaph derived so much of his history,
does not appear. The story, as told by him, differs
materially from that received in Germany. He re-
lates that the Emperor Maximian, having depopu-
lated Northern Gaul, sent to Britain for colonies
wherewith to re-people the waste country. Thus
out of Armorica he made a second Britain, which he
put under the control of Conan Meriadoc. He then
turned his arms eastward, and, having established
himself at Treves, commenced hostilities against the
emperors Gratian and Valentinian, who disputed
with him the imperial purple. In the meanwhile
Conan was defending Brittany against the incursions
of the neighbouring Gauls, but, finding that his troops
would not settle without wives, he sent to Britain for
a cargo of damsels, who might become the spouses of
his soldiers, and raise up another generation of fight-
ing men to continue the war with the Gauls. At this



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 61

time there reigned in Cornwall a king, Dionotus by
name, who had succeeded his brother Caradoc on
the throne. He was blessed with a daughter of
singular beauty, named Ursula, whose hand Conan
desired to obtain. Dionotus, having received a
message from the prince of Armorica stating his
difficulties, at once collected a body of eleven thou-
sand girls of noble rank, and sixty thousand of low
birth, and shipped them on the Thames for the
Armorican colony of expectant husbands.

No sooner, however, had the fleet left the mouth
of the Thames, than it was scattered by the winds,
and, some of the vessels having been driven ashore
on barbarous island coasts, the damsels were either
killed or enslaved ; some became the prey of the
execrable army of Guanius and Melga, kings of the
Huns and Picts, who, falling upon the band of luck-
less virgins, massacred them without compunction.

It is evident that Geoffrey did not regard this
legend as invested with sanctity, and he tells it as
an historical, and not a hagiological fact.

In 1106 Cologne was besieged, and the walls in
several places were battered down. Directly the
enemy were gone, the inhabitants began to rebuild
them ; and, as the foundations had suffered, they
were compelled to relay them.



6£ S. Ursula

Now it happened that the old walls ran across
the ancient cemetery of the Roman settlement of
Colonia Agrippina. Consequently in redigging the
foundations a number of bones were discovered,
especially at one spot. Thereupon some ecstatic
or excitable visionary beheld two females in a halo
of light, who indicated the bones as those of the
virgin martyrs. Immediately enthusiasm was
aroused, and the cemetery was examined. Innu-
merable bones were found, together with urns, arms,
stone cists, and monumental inscriptions. The old
Roman cemetery became a quarry of relics, appa-
rently inexhaustible. But in the midst of the
religious enthusiasm of the clergy and devotees of
Cologne, a sudden difficulty occurred, which pro-
duced bewilderment in the faithful, and mockery
in the unbelieving. A large number of bones and
inscriptions belonging to men were discovered ; thus
a Simplicius, a Pantulus, an Aetherius, were com-
memorated on the slabs exhumed, and the great
size of some of the tibia rendered it certain that
they had never belonged to slender virgins.

In the midst of the dismay reigning in the breasts
of the good Catholics at this untoward discovery,
appeared, most opportunely, an ecstatic nun, Eli-
zabeth by name, who resided in the convent of



and the Elciicn Thousand Virgins 63

Schonau. This visionary solved the difficulty, to
the great edification of the faithful. She fell into
trances, during which she was vouchsafed wondrous
revelations, which she detailed in Latin to her
brother Egbert, who alone was suffered to be
present during her ecstasies. According, to her
account, the Pope Cyriacus, the cardinals of Rome,
several bishops, priests, and monks, had been so
edified at the sight of the holy virgins in Rome,
that they had followed them on their return as far
as Cologne, where they, as well as the damsels, had
won the martyr's palm.

Thus, in a most satisfactory way, the presence of
these male bones was accounted for, and no scandal
attached to the chaste troop of male and female
celibates which had crossed the Alps, and descended
the Rhine, to fall before the sword of the barbarian.
Simplicius was ascertained to have been Archbishop
of Ravenna, Pantulus to have been Bishop of Basle,
and Aetherius proved to have been the bridegroom
elect of Ursula, who had been converted to Chris-
tianity, and had come up the Rhine to meet his
saintly betrothed.

A little difficulty occurred on another point. How
was it that the martyrs were provided with stone
coffins and sepulchral slabs }



6-1 5. Ursula

In order to explain this, another incident was
added to the legend by the vision-seeing nun.

Jacobus, Archbishop of Antioch, a Briton by
birth, had gone to Rome to visit Cyriacus the Pope,
but had learned, on his arrival, that his holiness had
been last seen clambering the Alps in the train of
eleven thousand virgins of entrancing beauty. The
Eastern patriarch at once followed the successor of
S. Peter, and reached Cologne on the morrow of
the great massacre. He thereupon cut the names
and titles of many of the deceased on stone — how
he ascertained their names is not stated; but, before
he had accomplished his task, the Huns discovered
him engaged in his pious work, and dispatched him.

Doubt and disbelief were now silenced, and the
ecstatic nun, having finished her revelations con-
cerning the eleven thousand, died in the odour of
sanctity.

Scarcely was she dead before fresh discoveries
in the old cemetery reopened the scandal.

A considerable number of children's bones were
exhumed, and some of these belonged to infants
but a few months old. This was a startling and
awkward discovery, seriously compromising to the
memories of the Pope, cardinals, and prelates who
had accompanied the young ladies from Rome, and



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 65

arousing a suspicion that the damsels had not been
the sole managers of their vessels on the high seas,
as the early legends had stated.

The nun, Elizabeth of Schonau, was dead. Who
was there then to clear the characters of these
glorious martyrs .'

Fortunately, an old Prsemonstratine monk, named
Richard, an Englishman, lived in the diocese of
Cologne, in the abbey of Arnsberg. He was
keenly alive to the slur cast upon the fair fame of
his national saints, and, by means of visions, laboured
effectively to vindicate it. He declared that the
eleven thousand had excited such enthusiasm in
England, that their married relations had accom-
panied them in the vessels, with their children of
all ages, and that all together had received the
martyr's crown. Richard added that a Sicilian
princess, Gerasina, had accompanied the pilgrims,
together with her four daughters and baby son ;
also that an empress of the Eastern empire, Con-
stantia by name, had suffered with them. Kings,
princes, and princesses, of Norway, Sweden, Ireland,
Flanders, Normandy, Brabant, Friesland, Denmark
— in a word, of all lands with which a geographer of
the twelfth century was acquainted — had joined the
expedition, in their desire to testify their admira-

[II,] F



66 .S. Ursula

tion of the chastity and piety of Ursula and
her companions. Holofernes, bridegroom elect of
Ursula, notwithstanding his father's opposition'
insisted on taking command of the fleet. Under
him were three hundred sailors who manned the
vessels.

Such is the history of the expansion and final
development of this curious fable. It exhibits a
series of misconceptions and impostures, we should
hope, unparalleled. To this day the church of S.
Ursula at Cologne is visited by thousands who
rely on the intercession of a saint who never
existed, and believe in the miraculous virtues of
relics which are those of pagans.

But something worse remains to be told.

Ursula is no other than the Swabian goddess
Ursel or Horsel transformed into a saint of the
Christian calendar.

"A part of the Suevi sacrifice to Isis," says
Tacitus, in his Germania. This Isis has been iden-
tified by Grimm with a goddess Ziza, who was
worshipped by the inhabitants of the parts about
Augsburg. Kiichlen, an Augsburg poet of the
fourteenth century, sings —

" They built a great temple therein,
To the honour of Zise the heathen goddess,



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 67

Whom they after heathen customs

Worshipped at that time :

The city was named eke Zisaris,

After the heathen goddess ; that was its glory.

The temple long stood entire,

Until its fall was caused by age.''

But it may be questioned whether Tacitus called
the goddess worshipped by the Suevi, Isis, because
the name resembled that of the German deity, or
whether he so termed her because he traced a
similarity in the myths and worship of the two
goddesses. I believe the latter to have been the
case. The entire passage reads, " They chiefly
worship Mercury, to whom on certain days they
sacrifice human beings. They appease Hercules
and Mars with beasts, and part of the Suevi sacri-
fice to Isis. Whence the cause and origin of the
foreign rite I have not ascertained, except that the
symbol itself, in shape of a Liburnian ship, indicates
that the religion was brought from abroad "."

Here, in the same sentence, three of the German
gods are called by Roman names. Mercury is
Woden : Hercules, or Mars, is Thorr. It is, there-
fore, probable that the fourth, Isis, is named from
a resemblance of attributes, rather than identity of
name. Again, in connexion with the mention of

2 Tacitus, Germania, ix.
F 2



68 S. Ursula

Isis, he alludes to a rite observed by the Siievi of
carrying about a ship in her honour. Now, in
Rome, the 5th March (III. Non. Mart.) was called,
in the Kalendarium Rusticum, the day of the Isidis
navigium. This is referred to by Apuleius in his
Metamorphoses. The goddess appeared to the poor
ass, and said, " The morrow that from the present
night will have its birth is a day that eternal religion
hath appointed as a holy festival, at a period when,
the tempests of winter having subsided, the waves
of the stormy sea abated, and the surface of the
ocean become navigable, my priests dedicate to me
a new ship, laden with the first-fruits of spring, at
the opening of the navigation " (Lib. xi.). To this
alludes also Lactantius ^

The myth of Isis and her wanderings is too well
known to be related. Now it is certain that in
parts of Germany the custom of carrying about
a ship existed through the Middle Ages to the
present day, and was denounced by the Church
as idolatrous. Grimm ■* mentions a very curious
passage in the Chronicle of Rodulph, wherein it
is related that, in 1133, a ship was secretly con-
structed in a forest at Inda, and was placed on

^ Lactant. Instit. i. 27.
■* Deutsche Myth. i. 237.



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 69

wheels, and rolled by the weavers to Aix, then
to Maestricht, and elsewhere, amidst dances, and
music, and scenes which the pious chronicler re-
frains from describing. That it was regarded
with abhorrence by the clergy, is evident from the
epithets employed in describing it : navim infausto
omine compactum — gentilitatis studium — profanas
simulacri excubias — maligni spiritus qui in ilia
ferebantur — infausti ominis monstrum ; and the like.

At Ulm, in Swabia, in 1530, the people were for-
bidden the carrying about of ploughs and ships on
Shrove Tuesday. A like prohibition was decreed
at Tiibingen on the 5th March, 1584, against a
similar practice. I have myself, on two occasions,
seen ships dragged through the streets on wheels,
upon Shrove Tuesday, at Mannheim on the Rhine.
In Brussels is celebrated, I believe to this day, a
festival called the Ommegank, in which a ship is
drawn through the town by horses, with an image
of the Blessed Virgin upon it, in commemoration of
a miraculous figure of our Lady which came in a
boat from Antwerp to Brussels.

Sometimes the ship was replaced by a plough,
and the rustic ceremony of Plough Monday in
England is a relic of the same religious rite per-
formed in honour of the Teutonic Isis.



70 S. Ursula

This great goddess was known by different
names among the various peoples of Germany.
She may have been the same as Zisca, but, as
we know absolutely nothing of the myth and
attributes of that deity, we cannot decide with
certainty. More probably she was the Holda, or
HoUe, who still holds sway over the imagination
of the German peasantry.

Now Holda is the great pale lady who glides
through the sky at night, in whose dark courts are
many thousand bright-eyed damsels, all, like her,
pure ; all, with her, suffering eclipse.

" Siderum regina bicornis audi
Luna puellas.
O Ursula ! Princess among thy thousands of virgins,

Pray for us ! "
Holda, or the Moon, is the wandering Isis, or
Ursula, whom German ■ poets love still to regard
as sailing over heaven's deep in her silver boat.
As—

" Seh' Ziehen die Wolke mit der Brust vol! Segen,
Des Mondes Kahn im Meer der Nachte prangen.''

Anast. GRiiN.
Or—

" Es schimmert, wie der Silberkahn,
Der dort am Himmel strahlt.''

VoN Stolberg.

Holda, in Teutonic mytliology, is a gentle lady



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 1 1

with a sad smile on lier countenance, ever accom-
panied by the souls of maidens and children, which
are under her care. She sits in a mountain of
crystal, surrounded by her bright-eyed maidens,
and comes forth to scatter on earth the winter
snow, or to revive the spring earth, or bless the
fruits of autumn. This company of virgins sur-
rounding her in the crystal vault of heaven is
that described by ^schylus : "Acnpcov KarotSa vvn-
repcov o/jii^yvpiv (Agam. v. 4).

The kindly Holda was in other parts called
Gode, under which name she resembled Artemis,
as the heavenly huntress accompanied by her
maidens. In Austria and Bavaria she was called
Perchta, or Bertha (the shining), and was supposed
to have horns like Isis or lo, other lunar goddesses.
But in Swabia and Thuringia she was represented
by Horsel or Ursul.

This Horsel, in other places called the night
bird Tutosel, haunted the Venusberg into which
Tanhauser plunged. She lived there in the midst
of her numerous troop of damsels, to assist the
laborious farmer and bless faithful lovers, or to
allure to herself those souls which still clung to
the ancient faith. A beautiful and benignant
goddess the peasantry ever regarded her, little



72 5. Ursula

heeding the brand put upon her pure brow by
an indignant clergy, who saw in her only the
Roman Venus in her grossest character, and not
Aphrodite, the foam-begotten moon, rising silvery
above the frothing sea.

Further this legend shall not lead us. Its
history is painful.

That ancient myths should have penetrated and
coloured Mediaeval Christianity is not to be won-
dered at, for old convictions are not eradicated in
the course of centuries. I shall, in this book,
instance several cases in which they have left their
impress on modern Protestant mythology. But
it is sad that the Church should have lent herself
to establish this fable by the aid of fictitious
miracles and feigned revelations. And now, when
minds weary with groping after truth, and not
finding it in science, philosophy, and metaphysics,
turn to the Church with yearning look, why should
she repel them from clasping the Cross, which, in
spite of all fables, " will stand whilst the world
rolls," by her tenacity in clinging to these idle
and foolish tales, founded on paganism, and but-
tressed with fraud t

Is this cultus of Ursula and her eleven thousand
nothing but a "pious belief".' A pious belief,



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 73

which can trust in the moon and the myriad stars,
and invoke them as saints in Paradise ! " If I
beheld . . . the moon walking in brightness ; and
my heart hath been secretly enticed, or my mouth
hath kissed my hand : this also were an iniquity
to be punished by the judge : for I should have
denied the God that is above " (Job xxxi. ^6 — 38).

It is Truth which men yearn for now; and sacred
Truth, when taught by a mouth which lends itself
to utter cunningly devised fables, is not listened to.

If the Catholic Church abroad would only purge
herself of these, her grand eternal doctrines would
be embraced by thousands. But the fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth are set
on edge.

The bibliography of the legend must be briefly
discussed. It is not of remarkable interest.

The revelations of Elizabeth of Schonau, and
those of Hermann, Joseph of Steinfeld, will be
found in Surius, "Vita Sanctorum," under Octo-
ber 3 [St.

" Epistola ad virgines Christi univ. super hystoria
nova undecim milimum (sic!) virginum," without
place and date, but belonging to the latter end of
the fifteenth century, is very rare : I have not
seen it.



74 ^. Ursula

" Hjstoria vndecim milium virginum breviori
atque faciliori modo pulcerrime collecta." Colon.
1509, 4to. Very scarce also.

"De Legende, vn hystorie der XI dusent jon-
feren, s. 1. et a." (circ. 1490), a curious Low German
legend, illustrated with quaint engravings, forty in
number.

De S. Lory, " Sainte Ursule triomphante des
coeurs, de I'enfer, de I'empire, Patrone du celebre
college de Sorbonne," Paris, i665, 4to. The
legend has been carefully analyzed by Rettberg,
in his " Deutschlands Kirchengeschichte," i. pp.
iTi — 123.

Crombach broke a lance in honour of the eleven
thousand in 1647: his work, "Ursula Vindicata,"
Colon. 1647, foL, with three maps, is interesting as
containing documentary evidence ; but it is dis-
figured by the superstition of the writer.

Leo, J. G., " aiTO(TKiaafia hist.-antiquarium de
ji,ooo virginibus." Leucopetrje, 1721, 4to. Rei-
schert, L., " Lebens-Geschichte u. Martyrtod der
N. Ursula." Cologne, i^!;^/, 8vo.

Heinen, E. M. J., " Lcben, Fahrt, u. Martyrtod
der h. Ursula." Cologne, 1838, 8vo. Scheben,
A., " Leben der h. Ursula." Cologne, 1850, 8vo.

Schadc, Oskar, " Die Sasjc v. der h. Ursula,"



and the Eleven Thousand Virgins 75

Hanover, 1854, 8vo. Also a beautiful series of
illustrations of the legend copied from the interest-
ing paintings in the church at Cologne, published
by Kellerhoven, " La legende de S. Ursula." Leipzig,
1861.

Some curious stories of the appearances of the
sacred virgin companions of Ursula, and of the
marvels wrought by their bones, occur in Csesarius
of Heisterbach's gossiping Dialogue of Miracles.



JTfie ILfgenli of tlje dross

Sibyll. vi. 26.

T N the year 1850 chance led me to the discovery
^ of a Gallo-Roman palace at Pont d'Oli (Pons
Aulae), near Pau, in the south of France. I was
able to exhume the whole of the ruins, and to
bring to light one of the most extensive series
of mosaic pavements extant.

The remains consisted of a mansion two hundred
feet long, paved throughout with mosaic : it was
divided into summer and winter apartments ; the
latter heated by means of hypocausts, and of small
size ; the former very large, and opening on to a
corridor above the river, once adorned with white
marble pillars, having capitals of the Corinthian
order. One of the first portions of the palace to
be examined was the atrium, out of -which,,, on the



The Legend of the Cross 77

west, opened the tablinum, a semi-circular chamber
panelled with alabaster and painted.

The atrium contained a large quadrangular tank
or impluvium, the dwarf walls of which were encased
in variegated Pyrenean marbles. On the west side
of the impluvium, below the step of the tablinum,
the pavement represented five rows of squares.
The squares in the first, third, and fifth rows were
filled with a graceful pattern composed of curves.
In the second and fourth rows, however, every
fourth square contained a distinctly characterized
red cross on white ground, with a delicate white
spine down the middle (Fig. a). Some few of
these crosses had a black floriation in the angles,
much resembling that met with in Gothic crosses
(Fig. 4). Immediately in front of the tablinum, on
the dwarf wall of the impluvium, stood the altar to
the Penates, which was found. The corresponding
pavement on the east of the impluvium was similar
in design to the other, but the S. George's crosses
were replaced by those of S. Andrew, each limb
terminating either in a heart-shaped leaf or a
trefoil (Figs, i, 5). The design on the north and
south was different, and contained no crosses. The
excavations to the north led to the summer apart-
ment. The most northerly chamber measured 26



78



The Legend of the Cross



feet by %% feet ; it was not only the largest, but
evidently the principal room of the mansion, for
the pavement was the most elaborate and beautiful.
It was bordered by an exquisite running pattern of
vines and grape bunches, springing from four drink-
ing vessels in the centres of the north, south, east,
and west sides. The pattern within this border
was of circles, containing conventional roses alter-
nately folded and expanded. This design was,
however, rudely interrupted by a monstrous cross


measuring 19 feet 8 inches by 13 feet, with its head
towards the south, and its foot at the head of a
flight of marble steps descending into what we were



The Legend of the Cross 79

unable to decide whether it was a bath or a vesti-
bule. The ground of the cross was white ; the limbs
were filled with cuttle, lobsters, eels, oysters, and fish,
swimming as though in their natural element ; but
the centre, where the arms intersected, was occu-
pied by a gigantic bust of Neptune with his trident.
The flesh was represented red ; the hair, and beard,
and trident were a blue-black. The arms of the
figure did not show : a line joining the lower edge
of the transverse limbs of the cross cut the figure
at the breast, leaving the head and shoulders
above. The resemblance to a crucifix was suffi-
ciently remarkable to make the labourers exclaim,
as they uncovered it, " C'est le bon Dieu, c'est
Jesus!" and they regarded the trident as the
centurion's spear. A neighbouring cure satisfied
himself that the pavement was laid down in con-
scious prophecy of Christianity, and he pointed to
the chalices and grapes as symbolizing the holy
Eucharist, and the great cross, at the head of what
we believed to be a circular bath, as typical of
Christian baptism. With regard to the cross, the
following laws seem to have governed its represen-
tation in the Gallo-Roman villa : —

The S. George's cross occupied the place of
honour in the chief room, and at the head of this



80 The Legend of the Cross

room, not in the middle, but near the bath or
porch. Again, in the atrium this cross was re-
peated twenty times in the principal place before
the tablinum and altar of the household divinities,
and again in connexion with water. Its colour was
always red or white.

Six varieties of crosses occurred in the villa
(Figs. I — 5) : the S. George's cross plain ; the
same with foliations in the angles ; the same
inhabited by fish, and bust of Neptune : the
Maltese cross : the S. Andrew's cross with
trefoiled ends ; the same with heart-shaped
ends.

On the discovery of the villa, several theories
were propounded to explain the prominence given
to the cross in the mosaics.

It was conjectured by some that the Neptune
crucifix was a satire upon the Christians. To
this it was objected that the figure was too
large and solemn, and was made too prominent,
to be so taken ; that to the cross was assigned the
place of honour; and that, independently of the
bust of the sea-god, it was connected by the
artists with the presence of water.

It was supposed by others that the villa had
belonged to a Christian, and that the execution of


[II.]



G



The Legc7td of the Cross 83

his design in the pavement had been entrusted
to pagans, who, through ignorance, had sub-
stituted the head of Neptune for that of the
Saviour.

Such a solution, though possible, is barely
probable.

My own belief is, that the cross was a
sacred sign among the Gaulish Kelts, and
that the villa at Pau had belonged to a Gallo-
Roman, who introduced into it the symbol of
the water-god of his national religion, and com-
bined it with the representation of the marine
deity of the conquerors' creed.

My reasons for believing the cross to have
been a Gaulish sign are these : —

The most ancient coins of the Gauls were
circular, with a cross in the middle; little wheels,
as it were, with four large perforations (Figs. 6, 7,
8). That these roiielles were not designed to
represent wheels is apparent from there being
only four spokes, placed at right angles. More-
over, when the coins of the Greek type took
their place, the cross was continued as the orna-
mentation of the coin. The gold and silver
Greek pieces circulating at Marseilles were the
cause of the abandonment of the primitive type;

G 2



84 The Legend of the Cross

and rude copies of the Greek coins were made
by the Keltic inhabitants of Gaul. In copying the
foreign pieces, they retained their own symbolic
cross.

The reverse of the coins of the Volcae Tec-
tosages, who inhabited the greater portion of
Languedoc, was impressed with crosses, their
angles filled with pellets, so like those on the
silver coins of the Edwards, that, were it not
for the quality of the metal, one would take
these Gaulish coins to be the production of
the Middle Ages. The Leuci, who inhabited the
country round the modern Toul, had similar
coins. One of their pieces has been figured
by M. de Saulcy'. It represents a circle con-
taining a cross, the angles between the arms
occupied by a chevron. Some of the crosses
have bezants, or pearls, forming a ring about
them, or occupying the spaces between their
limbs. Near Paris, at Choisy-le-Roy, was dis-
covered a Gaulish coin representing a head, in
barbarous imitation of that on a Greek medal,
and the reverse occupied by a serpent coiled round
the circumference, and enclosing two birds.

' Revue de Numismatique, 1836.



The Legend of the Cross 85

Between these birds is a cross, with pellets at
the end of each limb, and a pellet in each
angle.

A similar coin has been found in numbers
near Arthenay, in Loiret, as well as others of
analogous type. Other Gaulish coins bear the
cross on both obverse and reverse. About two
hundred pieces of this description were found
in 1835, in the village of Cremiat-sur-Yen, near
Quimper, in a brown earthen urn, with ashes
and charcoal, in a rude kistvaen of stone
blocks ; proving that the cross was used on the
coins in Armorica, at the time when increma-
tion was practised. This cross with pellets, a
characteristic of Gaulish coins, became in time
the recognized reverse of early French pieces,
and introduced itself into England with the Anglo-
Norman kings.

We unfortunately know too little of the icono-
graphy of the Gauls, to be able to decide whether
the cross was with them the symbol of a water
deity; but I think it probable, and for this
reason, that it is the sign of gods connected, more
or less remotely, with water in other religions.
That it was symbolic among the Irish and British
Kelts is more than probable. The temple in the



86 The Legend of the Cross

tumulus of Newgrange is in the shape of a cross
with rounded arms (Fig. 9). Curiously enough,
the so-called Phoenician ruin of Giganteia, in
Gozzo, resembles it in shape. The shamrock of
Ireland derives its sacredness from its affecting the
same form. In the mysticism of the Druids the
stalk or long arm of the cross represented the way
of life, and the three lobes of the clover-leaf, or the
short arms of the cross, symbolized the three con-
ditions of the spirit-world, Heaven, Purgatory,
and Hell.

Let us turn to the Scandinavians. Their god
Thorr was the thunder, and the hammer was his
symbol. It was with this hammer that Thorr
crushed the head of the great Mitgard serpent, that
he destroyed the giants, that he restored the dead
goats to life which drew his car, that he conse-
crated the pyre of Baldur. This hammer was a'
cross.

Just as the S. George's cross appears on the
Gaulish coins, so does the cross cramponnee, or
Thorr's' hammer (Fig. 11), appear on the Scan-
dinavian moneys.

In ploughing a field near Bornholm, in Fyen,
in 1835, a discovery was made of several gold
coins and ornaments belonging to ancient Danish



Tlie Legend of the Cross 87

civilization. The collection consisted of personal
ornaments, such as brooches, fibula, and torques,
and also of pieces of money, to which were fastened
rings in order that they might be strung on a neck-
lace. Among these were two rude copies of coins
of the successors of Constantine ; but the others
were of a class very common in the North. They
were impressed with a four-footed horned beast,
girthed, and mounted by a monstrous human head,
intended, in barbarous fashion, to represent the
rider. In front of the head was the sign of Thorr's
hammer, a cross cramponnee. Four of the specimens
bearing this symbol exhibited likewise the name of
Thorr in runes. A still ruder coin, discovered with
the others, was deficient in the cross, whose place
was occupied by a four-point star I

Among the flint weapons discovered in Denmark
are stone cruciform hammers, with a hole at the
intersection of the arms for the insertion of the
haft (Fig. lo). As the lateral limbs could have
been of little or no use, it is probable that these
cruciform hammers were those used in conse-
crating victims in Thorr's worship.

The cross of Thorr is still used in Icelan^l as a

^ Transactions of the Society of Northern Antiquaries for
1836.



88 The Legend of the Cross

magical sign in connexion with storms of wind and
rain.

King Olaf, Longfellow tells us, when keeping
Christmas at Drontheim —

" O'er his drinking-horn, the sign
He made of the Cross Divine,

As he drank, and mutter'd his prayers ;
But the Berserks evermore
Made the sign of the Hammer of Thorr
Over theirs."

Actually they both made the same symbol.

This we are told by Sriorro Sturleson, in the
Heimskringla ^ when he describes the sacrifice at
Lade, at which King Hakon, Athelstan's foster-son,
was present : " Now, when the first full goblet was
filled, Earl Sigurd spoke some words over it, and
blessed it in Odin's name, and drank to the king
out of the horn ; and the king then took it, and
made the sign of the cross over it. Then said
Kaare of Greyting, ' What does the king mean by
doing so .'' will he not sacrifice .-'' But Earl Sigurd
replied, ' The king is doing what all of you do who
trust in your power and strength ; for he is blessing
the full goblet in the name of Thorr, by making
the sign of his hammer over it before he drinks
it.'"

^ Heimskringla, Saga iv., c. 18.



The Legend of the Cross 89

Bells were rung in the Middle Ages to drive
away thunder. Among the German peasantry the
sign of the cross is used to dispel a thunder-storm.
The cross is used because it resembles Thorr's
hammer, and Thorr is the Thunderer : for the
same reason bells were often marked with the
"fylfot," or cross of Thorr (Fig. ii), especially
where the Norse settled, as in Lincolnshire and
Yorkshire. Thorr's cross is on the bells of
Appleby, and Scotherne, Waddingham, Bishop's
Norton, and West Barkwith, in Lincolnshire, on
those of Hathersage in Derbyshire, Mexborough
in Yorkshire, and many more.

The fylfot is curiously enough the sacred Swas-
lika of the Buddhist ; and the symbol of Buddha on
the reverse of a coin found at Ugain is a cross of
equal arms, with a circle at the extremity of each,
and the fylfot in each circle.

The same peculiar figure occurs on coins of
Syracuse, Corinth, and Chalcedon, and is frequently
employed on Etruscan cinerary urns. It curiously
enough appears on the dress of a fossor, as a sort
of badge of his office, on one of the paintings in
the Roman catacombs.

But, leaving the cross cramponnee, let us examine
some other crosses.



90 The Legetid of the Cross

Sozomen, the ecclesiastical historian, says that,
on the destruction of the Serapium in Egypt,
" there were found sculptured on the stones certain
characters regarded as sacred, resembling the sign
of the cross. This representation, interpreted by
those who knew the meaning, signified 'The Life
to come.' This was the occasion of a great num-
ber of pagans embracing Christianity, the more so
because other characters announced that the temple
would be destroyed when this character came to
light ''." Socrates gives further particulars : " Whilst
they were demolishing and despoiling the temple
of Serapis, they found characters, engraved on
the stone, of the kind called hieroglyphics, the
which characters had the figure of the cross.
When the Christians and the Greeks [i. e. heathen]
saw this, they referred the signs to their own
religions. The Christians, who regarded the cross
as the symbol of the salutary passion of Christ,
thought that this character was their own. But
the Greeks said it was common to Christ and
Serapis ; though this cruciform character is, in
fact, one thing to the Christians, and another
to the Greeks. A controversy having arisen,

■* Sozomen, Hist. Eccles. vii., c. 14.



The Legend of the Cross 91

some of the Greeks [heathen] converted to Chris-
tianity, who understood the hieroglyphics, inter-
preted this crpss-like figure to signify ' The Life
to come.' The Christians, seizing on this as in
favour of their rehgion, gathered boldness and
assurance ; and as it was shown by other sacred
characters that the temple of Serapis was to
have an end when was brought to light this cruci-
form character, signifying 'The Life to come,' a
great number were converted and were baptized,
confessing their sins *."

Rufinus, who tells the story also, says that this
took place at the destruction of the Serapium at
Canopus " ; but Socrates and Sozomen probably
followed Sophronius, who wrote a book on the
destruction of the Serapium, and locate the event
in Alexandria'.

Rufinus says, "The Egyptians are said to have
the sign of the Lord's cross among those letters
which are called sacerdotal — of which letter or
figure this, they say, is the interpretation : ' The
Life to come.' "

" Socrat. Hist. Eccles. v., c. 17.

* Rufin. Hist. Eccles. ii., c. 29.

" " Sophronius, vir apprime eruditus, laudes Bethleem ad-
huc puer, et nuper de subversione Serapis insignem librum
composuit." — Hieronym. Vit. lUust.



93 The Legend of the Cross

There is some slight difficulty as to fixing the
date of the destruction of the Serapium. Marcel-
linus refers it to the year 389, but some chrono-
logists have moved it to 391. It was certainly
overthrown in the reign of Theodosius I.

There can be little doubt that the cross in the
Serapium was the Crux ansata (Fig. la), the
S. Anthony's cross, or Tau with a handle. The
antiquaries of last century supposed it to be a
Nile key or a phallus, significations purely hypo-
thetical and false, as were all those they attri-
buted to Egyptian hieroglyphs. As Sir Gardner
Wilkinson remarks, it is precisely the god Nilus
who is least often represented with this symbol
in his hand ^ and the Nile key is an ascertained
figure of different shape. Now it is known for
certain that the symbol is that of life. Among
other indications, we have only to cite the Rosetta
stone, on which it is employed to translate the
title cti'mro/Sto? given to Ptolemy Epiphanius.

The Christians of Egypt gladly accepted this
witness to the cross, and reproduced it in their
churches and elsewhere, making it precede, follow,
or accompany their inscriptions. Thus, beside

" Manners and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians, iv.,
P- 341-



The Legend of the Cross 93

one of the Christian inscriptions at Phile is seen
both a Maltese cross and a crux ansata. In a
painting covering the end of a church in the
cemetery of El-Khargeh, in the Great Oasis, are
three handled crosses around the principal sub-
ject, which seems to have been a figure of a
saint '.

Not less manifest is the intention in an in-
scription in a Christian church to the east of the
Nile in the desert. It is this : —

KAeO^AIKH+EKKAH^f^CIA.

Beside, or in the hand of, the Egyptian gods, this
symbol is generally to be seen : it is held in the
right hand, by the loop, and indicates the Eter-
nity of Life which is the attribute of divinity.
When Osiris is represented' holding out the crux
ansata to a mortal, it means that the person to
whom he presents it has put off mortality, and
entered on the life to come.

Several theories have been started to account
for the shape. The Phallic theory is monstrous,
and devoid of evidence. It has also been sug-
gested that the Tau (T) represents a table or altar,

' Hoskins, Visit to the Great Oasis, Lond. 1837, plate
xii.



94 The Legend of the Cross

and that the loop symboHzes a vase ' or an egg ''
upon that altar.

These explanations are untenable when brought
into contact with the monuments of Egypt. The
ovoid form of the upper member is certainly a
handle, and is so used (Fig. 13). No one knows,
and probably no one ever will know, what origin-
ated the use of this sign, and gave it such signi-
ficance.

The Greek cross is also found on Egyptian
monuments, but less frequently than the cross of
S. Anthony. A figure of a Shari (Fig. 14), from Sir
Gardner Wilkinson's book, has a necklace round his
throat, from which depends a pectoral cross. A
similar ornament hangs on the breast of Tiglath
Pileser, in the colossal tablet from Nimroud, now
in the British Museum (Fig. 15). Another king
from the ruins of Nineveh wears a Maltese cross on
his bosom. And another, from the hall of Nisroch,
carries an emblematic necklace, consisting of the
sun surrounded by a ring, the moon, a Maltese

' " Hieroglyphica ejusdem (vocis) figura formam exhibet
mensas sacra; fulcro innixae cui vas quoddam religionis indi-
cium superpositum est." — P. Ungarelli, Interpretat. Obelisco-
rum Urbis, p. 5.

^ Dognde, Les Symboles Antiques, L'OEuf. Bruxelles,



The Legend of the Cross 95

cross likewise in a ring, a three-horned cap, and a
symbol like two horns '.

A third Egyptian cross is that represented Fig.

1 6, which apparently is intended for a Latin cross

rising out of a heart, like the mediaeval emblem of

, " Cor in Cruce, Crux in Corde : " it is the hieroglyph

of goodness ■*.

The handled cross was certainly a sacred symbol
among the Babylonians. It occurs repeatedly on
their cylinders, bricks, and gems.

On a cylinder in the Paris Cabinet of Antiquities,
published by Miinter", are four figures, the first
winged, the second armed with what seems to be
thunderbolts. Beside him is the crux ansata, with
a hawk sitting on the oval handle. The other
figures are a woman and a child. This cross is
half the height of the deity.

Another cylinder in the same Cabinet represents
three personages. Between two with tiaras is the
same symbol. A third in the same collection
bears the same three principal figures as the first.
The winged deity holds a spear ; the central god

' Bonomi, Nineveh and its Palaces, pp. 303, 333, 414.
■* H. W. Westrop, in Gentleman's Magazine, N. S., vol.
XV., p. 80.

^ Miinter, Religion d. Babylonier, Taf. i.



96 The Legend of the Cross

is armed with a bundle of thunderbolts and a dart,
and is accompanied by the cross ; the third, a
female, bears a flower. On another and still more
curious cylinder is a monarch or god, behind whom
stands a servant holding up the symbol (Fig. i 7).
The god is between two handled crosses, and
behind the servant is a Maltese cross. Some way
above is a bird with expanded wings. Again, on
another the winged figure is accompanied by the
cross. A remarkable specimen, from which I have
copied the principal figure (Fig. 18), represents a
god holding the sacred sign by the long arm,
whilst a priest offers him a gazelle.

An oval seal, of white chalcedony, engraved in
the Memoires de I'Academie royale des Inscrip-
tions et Belles Lettres (vol. xvi.), has as subject
a standing figure between two stars, beneath which
are handled crosses. Above the head of the deity
is the triangle, or symbol of the Trinity.

This seal is of uncertain origin : it is supposed
not to be Babylonish, but Phoenician. The Phoe-
nicians also regarded the cross as a sacred sign.
The goddess Astarte, the moon, the presiding di-
vinity over the watery element, is represented on
the coins of Byblos holding a long staff surmounted
by a cross, and resting her foot on the prow of a



The Legend of the Cross 97

galley, and not unlike the familiar figures of Faith
on the Christian Knowledge Society books.

The Cyclopean temple at Gozzo, the island
adjacent to Malta, has been supposed to be a
shrine of the Phoenicians to Mylitta or Astarte.
It is of a cruciform shape (Fig. 9). A superb
medal of Cilicia, bearing a Phoenician legend,
and struck under the Persian domination, has on
one side a figure of this goddess with a crux
ansata by her side, the lower member split.

Another form of the cross (Figs. 19, 20) is
repeated frequently and prominently on coins of
Asia Minor. It occurs as the reverse of a silver
coin supposed to be of Cyprus, on several Cilician
coins : it is placed beneath the throne of Baal of
Tarsus, on a Phcenician coin of that town, bearing
the legend P/l 7^3 (Baal Tharz). A medal, pos-
sibly of the same place, with partially obliterated
Phoenician characters, has the cross occupying the
entire field of the reverse side. Several, with in-
scriptions in unknown characters, have a ram on
one side, and the cross and ring on the other.
Another has the sacred bull accompanied by this
symbol ; others have a lion's head on obverse,
and the cross and circle on the reverse.

A beautiful Sicihan medal of Camarina bears a

[II.] . H



98 The Legend of the Cross

swan and altar, and beneath the altar is one of
these crosses with a ring attached to it °

As in Phoenician iconography this cross generally
accompanies a deity, in the same manner as the
handled cross is associated with the Persepolitan,
Babylonish, and Egyptian gods, we may conclude
that it had with the Phoenicians the same signifi-
cation of life eternal. That it also symbolized
regeneration through water, I also believe. On
Babylonish cylinders it is generally employed in
conjunction with the hawk or eagle, either seated
on it, or flying above it. This eagle is Nisroch,
whose eyes are always flowing with tears for the
death of Tammiiz. Nesr, or Nisroch, is certainly
the rain-cloud. In Greek iconography Zeus, the
heaven, is accompanied by the eagle to symbolize
the cloud. On several Phoenician or uncertain
coins of Asia Minor the eagle and the cross go
together. Therefore I think that the cross may
symbolize life restored by rain.

An inscription in Thessaly, EPMAH X0ONIOY,
is accompanied by a Calvary cross (Fig. 21) ; and
Greek crosses of equal arms adorn the tomb of

' These medals are engraved to accompany the article of
M. Raoul-Rochette on the Croix anse'e, in the Mem. de
I'Academie des Inscr. et Belles Lettres, torn. xvi.



The Legend of the Cross 99

Midas, in Phrygia. Crosses of different shapes,
chiefly like Figs, a and j i, are common on ancient
cinerary urns in Italy. These two forms occur on
sepulchral vessels found under a bed of volcanic
tufa on the Alban mount, and of remote antiquity.

It is curious that the T should have been used
on the roll of the Roman soldiery as the sign of
life, whilst the designated death '.

But, long before the Romans, long before the
Etruscans, there lived in the plains of Northern
Italy a people to whom the cross was a religious
symbol, the sign beneath which they laid their •
dead to rest ; a people of whom history tells
nothing, knowing not their name ; but of whom
antiquarian research has learned this, that they
lived in ignorance of the arts of civilization, that
they dwelt in villages built on platforms over
lakes, and that they trusted in the cross to guard,
and may be to revive, their loved ones whom they
committed to the dust. Throughout Emilia are
found remains of these people ; these remains
form quarries whence manure is dug by the
peasants of the present day. These quarries

*■ Isidor. Origin, i., c. 23. " T nota in capite versiculi sup-
posita superstitem designat." Persius, Sat. iv. 13. Rufin.
in Hieronym. ap. Casaubon ad Pers,

H 3



100 The Legend of the Cross

go by the name of terraniarcs. They are vast
accumulations of cinders, charcoal, bones, frag-
ments of pottery, and other remains of human
industry. As this earth is very rich in phosphates,
it is much appreciated by the agriculturists as a
dressing for their land. In these terramares there
are no human bones. The fragments of earthen-
ware belong to articles of domestic use ; with them
are found querns, moulds for metal, portions of
cabin floors and walls, and great quantities of
kitchen refuse. They are deposits analogous to
those which have been discovered in Denmark
and in Switzerland. The metal discovered in the
majority of these terramares is bronze. The re-
mains belong to three distinct ages. In the first
none of the fictile ware was turned on the wheel or
fire-baked. Sometimes these deposits exhibit an
advance of civilization. Iron came into use, and
with it the potter's wheel was discovered, and the
earthenware was put in the furnace.

When in the same quarry these two epochs are
found, the remains of the second age are always
superposed over those of the bronze age.

A third period is occasionally met with, but only
occasionally. A period when a rude art introduced
it-self, and representations of animals or human



The Legend of the Cross 101

beings adorned the pottery. Among the remains

of this period is found the first trace of money, the

«s rude, little bronze fragments without shape.

According to the calculations of M. Des Vergers,

the great development of Etruscan civilization took

place about 390 years before the foundation of

Rome, more than 1040 years before our era. The

age of the terramares must be long antecedent to

the time of Etruscan civilization. The remote

antiquity of these remains may be gathered from

the amount of accumulation over them. A section

of the deposit in Parma, where was one of these

lacustrine villages is as follows : —

ft. in.

Roman and later remains a depth of 4 i

Midden of ancient inhabitants, three deposits sepa-
rated by thin layers of red earth or ashes .... 68

Latest bed of lake containing piles 7 o

Secondary bed containing piles 3 3

Original bed of lake containing piles . . 21 o

Twice had the accumulation risen so as to necessi-
tate the re-driving of piles, and over the last, the
deposits had reached the height of 6 feet 8 inches-
Since the age when these people vanished, earth
has accumulated to the depth of 4 feet.

At Castione, not far from the station of Borgo
S. Donino, on the line between Parma and Placenza



102 The Legend of the Cross

is a convent built on a mound. Where that mound
rises there was originally a lake, and the foundations
of the building are laid in the ruins of an ancient
population which filled the lake, and converted it
into a hill of refuse.

From the broken bones in the middens, we learn
that the roebuck, the stag, the wild boar, then ranged
the forests, that cattle, pigs, sheep, goats, arid dogs
were domesticated ; that these people had two kinds
of horses, one a powerful animal, the other small-
boned, and that horseflesh was eaten by the in-
habitants of the terramares.

Wheat, barley, millet, and beans have been found
about the piles, together with the stones of wild
plums, sloes, and cherries, also crab-apple pips.

A bronze dagger was found at Castione, a spear-
head of the same metal in the deposit of Bargone
di Salso. A hatchet came from the terramare of
Noceto - quantities of little wheels, of unknown
use, have been discovered, also hair-pins and
combs. One, for a lady's back-hair, ornamented,
and of stag's horn, came from the terramare of
Fodico di Poviglio. The pottery found is mostly
in fragments. Sometimes the bottoms of the vessels
were rudely engraved with crosses (Figs. 22, 23, 24).

At Villanova, in the Commune of S. Maria delle



The Legend of the Cross ] 0^

Caselle, near Bologna, has been discovered a ceme-
tery of this ancient people. The graves cover a
space measuring about 73 yards by ofi yards. One
hundred and thirty-three tombs have been examined.
They were constructed of great boulders, rect-
angular, somewhat cylindrical, and slightly conical.
Earth had accumulated over them, and they were
buried. They were about four feet deep. The cist
was floored with slabs of freestone, the sides were
built up of boulders ; other cists were constructed of
slabs, and cubical in shape. A hundred and seventy-
nine of the bodies had been burnt. Each tomb
contained a cinerary urn containing the calcined
human remains. The urns were of a peculiar shape,
and appeared to have been made for the purpose.
They resembled a dice-box, and consisted of a
couple of inverted cones with a partition at their
bases, where they were united. Half-melted remains
of ornaments were found with some of the human
ashes. In one vessel was a charred fragment of a
horse's rib. Therefore it is likely that the favourite
horse was sacrificed and consumed with his master.
The mouth of the urn which contained the ashes
of the deceased was closed with a little vessel or
saucer. Near the remains of the dead were found
curious solid double cones with rounded ends ; these



10-1 The Legend of the Cross

ends were elaborately engraved with crosses (Figs.
23. 25. 27). In the ossuaries made of double cones,
around the diaphragm ran a line of circles contain-
ing crosses (Fig. 26).

Another cemetery of the same people exists at
Golasecca, on the plateau of Somma, at the ex-
tremity of the Lago Maggiore. A vast number of
sepulchres have there been opened. They belong
to the same period as those of Villanova, the age
of lacustrine habitations.

" That which characterizes the sepulchres of Go-
lasecca, and gives them their highest interest," says
M. de Mortillet, who investigated them, " is this,
— first, the entire absence of all organic representa-
tions ; we only found three, and they were excep-
tional, in tombs not belonging to the plateau ; —
secondly, the almost invariable presence of the
cross under the vases in the tombs. When one re-
verses the ossuaries, the saucer-lids, or the acces-
sory vases, one saw almost always, if in good pre-
servation, a cross traced thereon. . . The exami-
nation of the tombs of Golasecca proves in a most
convincing, positive, and precise manner, that which
the tcrramares of Emilia had only indicated, but
which had been confirmed by the cemetery of
Villanova ; that above a thousand years before



TIic Legend of the Cross 105

Christ, the cress was already a rehgious emblem
of frequent employment '."

It may be objected to this, that the cross is a
sign so easily made, that it was naturally the
first attempted by a rude people. There are,
however, so many varieties of crosses among the
urns of Golasecca, and ingenuity seems to have
been so largely exercised in diversifying this one
sign, without recurring to others, that I cannot but
believe the sign itself had a religious signification.

On the other side of the Alps, at the same
period, lived apeople in a similar state of civilization,
whose palustrine habitations and remains have
been carefully explored. Among the Swiss potteries,
however, the cross is very rarely found.

In the depths of the forests of Central America,
is a ruined city. It was not inhabited at the time
of the conquest of Mexico by the Spaniards.
They discovered the temples and palaces xDf
Chiapa, but of Palenque they knew nothing.
According to tradition it was founded by Votan



8 De Mortillet, Le signe de la Croix avant le Chris-
tianisme. Paris, 1866. The title of this book is deceptive.
The subject is the excavations of pre-historic remains in
Northern Italy, and pre-Christian crosses are only casually
and cursorily dealt with.



106 The Legend of the Cross

in the ninth century before the Christian era.
The principal building in Palenque is the palace,
228 feet long, by 180 feet, and 40 feet high. The
Eastern facade has fourteen doors opening on a
terrace, with bas-reliefs between them. A noble
tower rises above the courtyard in the centre. In
this building are several small temples or
chapels, with altars standing. At the back of one
of these altars is a slab of gypsum, on which are
sculptured two figures standing, one on each side of
a cross (Fig. 28), to which one is extending his
hands with an offering of a baby or a monkey. The
cross is surrounded with rich feather-work, and
ornamental chains °.

The style of sculpture, and the accompanying
hieroglyphic inscriptions leave no room for doubt-
ing it to be a heathen representation. Above the
cross is a bird of peculiar character, perched, as we
saw the eagle Nisroch on a cross upon a Babylonish
cylinder. The. same cross is represented on old
pre-Mexican MSS., as in the Dresden Codex, and
that in the possession of Herr Fejervary, at the
end of which is a colossal cross, in the midst of
which is represented a bleeding deity, and figures

' Stephens, Central America. London, 1842. Vol. ii.
P-346



Tlic Legend of the Cross ] 07

stand round a Tau cross, upon which is perched
the sacred bird '.

The cross was also used in the north of Mexico.
It occurs amongst the Mixtecas and in Queredaro.
Siguenza speaks of an Indian cross which was found-
in the cave of Mixteca Baja. Among the ruins on
the island of Zaputero in Lake Nicaragua were also
found old crosses reverenced by the Indians. White
marble crosses were found on the island of S. Ulloa,
on its discovery. In the state of Oaxaca, the
Spaniards found that wooden crosses were erected
as sacred symbols, so also in Aguatolco, and among
the Zapatecas. The cross was venerated as far as
Florida on one side, and Cibola on the other. In South
America, the same sign was considered symbolical
and sacred. It was revered in Paraguay. In
Peru the Incas honoured a cross made out of a
single piece of jasper, it was an emblem belong-
ing to a former civilization.

Among the Muyscas at Cumana the cross was re-
garded with devotion, and was believed to be endued
with power to drive away evil spirits ; consequently
new-born children were placed under the sign I

^ Klemm, Kulturgeschichte, v. 142, 143.
- See list of authorities in Miiller, Geschichte der Ameri-
kanischen Urreligionen. Basel, i8r;5, pp. 371. 421. 498, 499.



108 The Legend of the Cross

Probably all these crosses, certainly those of
Central America, were symbols of the Rain-god.
This we are told by the conquerors, of the crosses
on the island of Cozumel. The cross was not an
original symbol of the Azteks and Tolteks, but
of the Maya race, who inhabited Mexico, Guate-
mala, and Yucatan. The Mayas were subdivided
into the tribes of Totonacs, Othomi, Huasteks,
Tzendales, &c., and were conquered by a Nahual
race from the North, called Azteks and Tolteks,
who founded the great Mexican empire with which
Cortez and his Spaniards were brought in colli-
sion^. This Maya stock was said to have been
highly civilized, and the conquered to have in-
fluenced their conquerors.

The Maya race invaded Central America,
coming from the Antilles, when the country
was peopled by the Quinamies, to whom the
Cyclopean erections still extant are attributed.
They were overthrown by Votan, B.C. 800. The
cross was adopted by the Azteks, from the
conquered Mayas. It was the emblem of Quia-
teot, the god of Rain. In order to obtain rain

' It is exceedingly difficult to classify these races, and
arrive at any exact conclusions with regard to their history.
The Tzendales were probably never conquered.



TIic Legend of the Cross 109

little, boys and girls were sacrificed to him, and
their flesh was devoured at a sacred banquet by the
chiefs. Among the Mexicans, the showery month
Quiahuitl received its name from him. In Cibola,
water as the generator was honoured under this
symbol ; in Cozumel, the sacred cross in the tem-
ples was of wood or stone, ten palms high, and to it
were offered incense and quails. To obtain showers,
the people bore it in procession.

The Tolteks said that their national deity Quet-
zalcoatl had introduced the sign and ritual of the
cross, and it was their God of Rain and Health, and
was called the Tree of Nutriment, or Tree of Life.
On this account also was the mantle of the Toltek
atmospheric god covered with red crosses.

The cross was again a symbol of mysterious
significance in Brahminical iconography. In the
Cave of Elephanta, in India, over the head of a
figure engaged in massacring infants, is to be seen
the cross. It is placed by Miiller, in his " Glauben,
Wissen, und Kunst der alten Hindus," in the hands
of Seva, Brahma, Vishnu, Tvashtri (Fig. 39). This
cross has a wheel in the centre, and is called Kiakra
or Tschakra. When held by Vishnu, the world-
sustaining principle, it signifies his power to pene-
trate heaven and earth, and bring to naught the
powers of evil. It symbolizes the eternal govern-



110 The Legend of the Cross

ance of the world, and to it the worshipper of
Vishnu attributes as many virtues as does the
devout Catholic to the Christian cross. Fra
PaoHno tells us it was used by the ancient kings
of India as a sceptre.

In a curious Indian painting reproduced by
Miiller (Tab. i., fig. 2), Brahma is represented
crowned with clouds, with lilies for eyes, with four
hands — one holding the necklace of creation ;
another the Veda ; a third, the chalice of the source
of life ; the fourth, the fiery cross. Another paint-
ing (Tab. I., fig. 78) represents Krishna in the
centre of the world as its sustaining principle, with
six arms, three of which hold the cross, one a
sceptre of dominion, another a flute, a third a
sword. Another (Tab. 11., fig. 61) gives Jama,
the judge of the nether world, with spear, sword,
scales, torch, and cross. Tab. 11., fig. 140, gives
Brawani, the female earth principle, holding a lily,
a flame, a sword, and a cross. The list of repre-
sentations might be greatly extended.

It was only natural that the early and mediaeval
Christians, finding the cross a symbol of life among
the nations of antiquity, should look curiously into
the Old Testament, to see whether there were not
foreshadowings in it of " the wood whereby right-
eousness Cometh,"



The Legend of the Cross 111

They found it in the blood struck on the lintel
and the door-posts of the houses of the Israelites in
Egypt. They supposed the rod of Moses to have
been headed with the Egyptian Crux ansata, in
which case its employment in producing the storm
of rain and hail, in dividing the Red Sea, in bring-
ing streams of water from the rock, testify to its
symbolic character with reference to water. They
saw it in Moses with arms expanded on the Mount,
in the pole with transverse bar upon which was
wreathed the brazen serpent, and in the two sticks
gathered by the Widow of Sarepta. But especially
was it seen in the passage of Ezekiel (ix. 4. 6), "The
Lord said unto him. Go through the midst of the
city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a
mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh
and that cry for all the abominations that be done
in the midst thereof Slay utterly old and young,
both maids, and little children, and women : but
come not near any man upon whom is the mark ;
and begin at My sanctuary." In the Vulgate, it
stands : " Et signa Thau super frontes vivorum
gementium." There is some doubt as to whether
the sign Thau should be inserted or not. The
Septuagint does not give it. It simply says So?
ur^ixeLov. S. Jerome testifies that the versions of



112 The Legend of the Cross

Aquila and Symmachus, written, the one under
Adrian, the other under Marcus AureHus, were
without it, and that it was only in the version
of Theodotion, made under Septimius Severus,
that the T was inserted. Nevertheless S. Jerome
adopted it in his translation.

On the other hand TertuUian saw the cross in
this passage*. The Thau was the old Hebrew
character, which the Samaritan resembled, and
which was .shaped like a cross. S. Jerome pro-
bably did not adopt his rendering without founda-
tion, for he was well skilled in Hebrew, and he
refers again and again to this passage of Ezekiel'.
The Epistle of S. Barnabas seems to allude to it " ;
so do S. Cyprian, S. Augustine, Origen, and
S. Isidore '- Bishop Lowth was disposed to
accept the Thau, so was Dr. Miinter, the Pro-
testant bishop of Zeeland. But, indeed, there
need be little doubt as to the passage. The

'' Adv. Marcion. iii. 22 : " Est enim littera, Grsecorum
Thau, nostra autem T, species rrucis quam portendebant
futuiam in frontibus nostris apud veram et catholicam Hie-
rusalem."

•'' In Ezech. ix. 4. Epistol. ad Fabiol In Isaia c. Ixvi.

** Epist. ch. ix. . Sraupoff cV tw T e/AfAXfi/ e'x^'^ ''"^^ X^P^^-

' Cypr. Tcstimon. adv. Jud. ii. c. 27. August, de Alterc.
Synag. ct Eccles.



The Legend of the Cross 113

word for sign used by the prophet is W Tau,
meaning, as Gesenius says in his Lexicon, signuni
crucifornie ; and he adds, "The Hebrews on their
coins adopted the most ancient cruciform sign + ."

The Medisevals went further still, they desired to
see the cross still stronger characterized in the his-
tory of the Jewish Church, and as the records of
the Old Covenant were deficient on that point, they
supplemented them with fable.

That fable is the romance or Legend of the Cross,
a legend of immense popularity in the Middle Ages,
if we may judge by the numerous representations of
its leading incidents, which meet us in stained glass
and fresco.

In the churches of Troyes alone, it appears on
the windows of S. Martin-es-Vignes, of S. Panta-
leon, S. Madeleine, and S. Nizier^

It is frescoed along the walls of the choir of the
church of S. Croce at Florence, by the hand of
Agnolo Gaddi. Pietro della Francesca also dedi-
cated his pencil to the history of the Cross in a
series of frescoes in the Chapel of the Bacci, in the
church of S. Francesco at Arezzo. It occurs as a
predella painting among the specimens of earl)' art

8 Curiosites de la Champagne. Paris, i860.

[IL] I



114 The Legend of the Cross

in the Academia delle Belle Arti at Venice, and is
the subject of a picture by Beham in the Munich
Gallery ^ The legend is told in full in the Vita
Christi, printed at Troyes in 1517, in the Legenda
Aurea of Jacques de Voragine, in an old Dutch
work, " Gerschiedenis van det heylighe Cruys," in
a French MS. of the thirteenth century in the
British Museum. Gervase of Tilbury relates a
portion of it in his Otia Imperalia ', quoting from
Comestor ; it appears also in the Speculum His-
toriale, in Gottfried von Viterbo, in the Chronicon
Engelhusii, and elsewhere.

Gottfried introduces a Hiontus in the place of
Seth in the following story ; Hiontus is corrupted
from lonicus or lonithus.

The story is as follows : —

When our first father was banished Paradise, he
lived in penitence, striving to recompense for the
past by prayer and toil. When he reached a
great age and felt death approach, he summoned
Seth to his side, and said, " Go, my son, to the
terrestrial Paradise, and ask the Archangel who
keeps the gate to give me a balsam which will

" Lady Eastlake's History of our Lord. Lond. 1865, ii.
P- 390-

' Tertia Decisio, c. liv.; ed. Liebrecht, p. 25.



The Legend of the Cross 115

save me from death. You will easily find the way,
because my footprints scorched the soil as I left
Paradise. Follow my blackened traces, and they
will conduct you to the gate whence I was expelled."
Seth hastened to Paradise. The way was barren,
vegetation was scanty and of sombre colours ;
over all lay the black prints of his father's and
mother's feet. Presently the walls surrounding
Paradise appeared. Around them nature revived,
the earth was covered with verdure and dappled
with flowers. The air vibrated with exquisite
music. Seth was dazzled with the beauty which
surrounded him, and he walked on forgetful of his
mission. Suddenly there flashed before him a
wavering line of fire, upright, like a serpent of
ligTit continuously quivering. It was the flaming
sword in the hand of the Cherub who guarded the
gate. As Seth drew nigh, he saw that the angel's
wings were expanded so as to block the door.
He prostrated himself before the Cherub, unable
to utter a word. But the celestial being read in
his soul, better than a mortal can read a book, the
words which were there impressed, and he said,
"The time of pardon is not yet come. Four thou-
sand years must roll away ere the Redeemer shall
open the gate to Adam, closed by his disobedience.

I 2



116 Tlie Legend of the Cross

But as a token of future pardon, the wood whereon
redemption shall be won shall grow from the tomb
of thy father. Behold what he lost by his trans-
gression !"

At these words the angel swung open the great
portal of gold and fire, and Seth looked in.

He beheld a fountain, clear as crystal, sparkling
like silver dust, playing in the midst of the garden,
and gushing forth in four living streams. Before
this mystic fountain grew a mighty tree, with a
trunk of vast bulk, and thickly branched, but desti-
tute of bark and foliage. Around the bole was
wreathed a frightful serpent or caterpillar, which
had scorched the bark and devoured the leaves.
Beneath the tree was a precipice. Seth beheld the
roots of the tree in Hell. There Cain was en-
deavouring to grasp the roots, and clamber up them
into Paradise ; but they laced themselves around the
body and limbs of the fratricide, as the threads of a
spider's web entangle a fly, and the fibres of the
tree penetrated the body of Cain as though they
were endued with life.

Horror-struck at this appalling spectacle, Seth
raised his eyes to the summit of the tree. Now
all was changed. The tree had grown till its
branches reached heaven. The boughs -were co-



The Legend of the Cross 117

vered with leaves, flowers, and fruit. But the fairest
fruit was a Httle babe, a Hving sun, who seemed to
be listening to the songs of seven white doves
who circled round his head. A woman, more
lovely than the moon, bore the child in her
arms.

Then the Cherub shut the door, and said, " I give
thee now three seeds taken from that tree. When
Adam is dead, place these three seeds in thy father's
mouth, and bury him."

So Seth took the seeds and returned to his
father. Adam was ,glad to hear what his son told
him, and he praised God. On the third day after
the return of Seth he died. Then his son buried
him in the skins of beasts which God had given him
for a covering, and his sepulchre was on Golgotha.
In course of time three trees grew from the seeds
brought from Paradise : one was a cedar, another a
cypress, and the third a pine. They grew with pro-
digious force, thrusting their boughs to right and
left. It was with one of these boughs that Moses
performed his miracles in Egypt, brought water out
of the rock, and healed those whom the serpents
slew in the desert.

After a while the three trees touched one another,
then began to incorporate and confound their



1 J 8 The Legend of the Cross

several natures in a single trunk. It was beneath
this tree that David sat when he bewailed his
sins.

In the time of Solomon, this was the noblest
of the trees of Lebanon ; it surpassed all in the
forests of King Hiram, as a monarch surpasses
those who crouch at his feet. Now, when the son
of David erected his palace, he cut down this tree
to convert it into the main pillar supporting his
roof. But all in vain. The column refused to an-
swer the purpose : it was at one time too long, at
another too short. Surprised at this resistance,
Solomon lowered the walls of his palace, to suit the
beam, but at once it shot up and pierced the roof,
like an arrow driven through a piece of canvas,
or a bird recovering its liberty. Solomon, enraged,
cast the tree over Cedron, that all might trample
on it as they crossed the brook.

There the Queen of Sheba found it, and she,
recognizing its virtue, had it raised. Solomon
then buried it. Some while after, the king dug the
pool of Bethesda on the spot. This pond at once
acquired miraculous properties, and healed the sick
who flocked to it. The water owed its virtues to
the beam which lay beneath it.

When the time of the Crucifixion of Christ drew



The Legend of the Cross 119

nigh, this wood rose to the surface, and was brought
out of the water. The executioners, when seeking
a suitable beam to serve for the cross, found it, and
of it made the instrument of the death of the
Saviour. After the Crucifixion it was buried on
Calvary, but it was found by the Empress Helena,
mother of Constantine the Great, deep in the
ground with two others. May 3, 338 ; Christ's
was distinguished from those of the thieves by a
sick woman being cured by touching it. This same
event is, however, ascribed by a Syriac MS. in the
British Museum, unquestionably of the 5th century,
to Protonice, wife of the Emperor Claudius. It was
carried away by Chosroes, king of Persia, on the
plundering of Jerusalem ; but was recovered by
Herachus, who defeated him in battle, Sept. 14, 615 ;
a day that has ever since been commemorated as
the Feast of the Exaltation of the Cross.

Such is the Legend of the Cross, one of the
wildest of mediaeval fancies. It is founded, though
unconsciously, on this truth, that the Cross was a
sacred sign long before Christ died upon it.
And how account for this .'

For my own part, I see no difficulty in believing
that it formed a portion of the primaeval religion,
traces of which exist over the whole world, among



120 The Legend of the Cross

every people ; that trust in the Cross was a part of
the ancient faith which taught men to believe in a
Trinity, in a War in Heaven, a Paradise from which
man fell, a Flood, and a Babel ; a faith which was
deeply impressed with a conviction that a Virgin
should conceive and bear a son, that the Dragon's
head should be bruised, and that through Shedding
of blood should come Remission. The use of the
cross, as a symbol of life and regeneration through
water, is as widely spread over the world as the
belief in the ark of Noah. May be, the shadow of
the Cross was cast further back into the night of
ages, and fell on a wider range of country, than
we are aware of.

It is more than a coincidence that Osiris by the
cross should give life eternal to the Spirits of the
Just ; that with the cross Thorr should smite the
head of the Great Serpent, and bring to life those
who were slain ; that beneath the cross the Muysca
mothers should lay their babes, trusting by that
sign to secure them from the power of evil spirits ;
that with that symbol to protect them, the ancient
people of Northern Italy should lay them down in
the dust ^

" Appendix A.



Set am it

T T will be remembered that, on the giving of the
-*- law from Sinai, Moses was bidden erect to
God an altar : " Thou shalt not build it of hewn
stone, for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou hast
polluted it " (Exod. xx. 35). And later : " There
shalt thou build an altar unto the Lord thy God,
an altar of stones : thou shalt not lift up any iron
tool upon them " (Deut. xxvii. 6). Such an altar
was raised by Joshua after the passage of Jordan :
" An altar of whole stones, over which no man hath
lift up any iron " (Joshua viii. ^1).

When King Solomon erected his glorious temple,
"the house, when it was in building, was built of
stone made ready before it was brought thither: so
that there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool
of iron, heard in the house while it was in building"
(i Kings vi. 7). And the reason of the prohibition



122 Schamir

of iron in the construction of the altar is given in
the Mischna — iron is used to shorten life, the altar
to prolong it (Middoth 3, 4). Iron is the metal
used in war ; with it, says Pliny, 'we do the best
and worst acts : we plough fields, we build houses,
we cleave rocks ; but with it, also, come strife, and
bloodshed, and rapine. The altar was the symbol
of peace made between God and man, and therefore
the metal employed in war was forbidden to be used
in its erection. The idea was extended by Solomon
to the whole temple. It is not said that iron was
not used in the preparation of the building stones,
but that no tool was heard in the fitting together
of the parts.

That temple symbolized the Church triumphant
in heaven when the stones, hewn afar off in the
quarries of this world, are laid noiselessly in their
proper place, so that the whole, "fitly framed
together, groweth unto a holy temple in the
Lord ;" an idea well expressed in the ancient
hymn " Angulare fundamentum :" —

" Many a blow and biting sculpture
Polish'd well those stones elect,
In their places well compacted
By the heavenly Architect."

Nothing in the sacred narrative implies any



Schamir 123

miraculous act having been accomplished in this
erecting a temple of stones hewn at a distance ;
and in the account of the building of the temple
in the Book of Chronicles no reference is made to
the circumstance, which would have been the case
had any marvel attended it.

The Septuagint renders the passage, 6 ot«o? Xt^ot?
anpoTOfioi'; apyoK wKoho^rjOr). The word aKporofioi}
is used by the LXX in three places, for It^'D^n,
which is rough, hard, unhewn stone. Where it
says in Deuteronomy (viii. 15), "Who brought thee
forth water out of the rock of flint," the LXX use
aKp6TOfj,o<s. Where the Psalmist says, " Who turned
the flint-stone into a springing well" (Ps. cxiv. 8),
and Job, " He putteth His hand upon the rock "
(xxviii. 9), they employ a.KpoTOfj.o'i. So, too, in the
Book of Wisdom (xi. 4), " Water was given them out
of the flinty rock," e/c Trerpa? a/cpoTOfiov, which is
paralleled by "the hard stone," X/^09 aKk'qpo'^.
And in Ecclesiasticus, Ezekias is said to have
" digged the hard rock with iron," wpv^e cnSjjpa>
aicpoTO^ov (xlviii. 17).

AiOo'i aicp6TO/j,o<i is, therefore, not a hewn stone,
but one with natural angles, unhewn. Thus Suidas
uses the expression, aicX'qpa koX ar/J.TjTO';, and Theo-
dotion calls the sharp stone used by Zipporah in



124 Schamir

circumcising her son, aKp6To^o<;. The dpyoi^ of the
LXX signifies also the rough natural condition of
the stones. Thus Pausanias speaks of gold and
silver in unfused, rough lumps as dpyvpoi; koX ')(^pvao<;
dpyo'i. Apparently, then, the LXX, in saying that
the temple was erected of dKpoT6/j,oi<; dpyol<;, express
their meaning that the stones were unhewn and in
their natural condition, so that the skill of Solomon
was exhibited in putting together stones which had
never been subjected to the tool. This is also the
opinion of Josephus, who says, " The whole edifice
of the temple is, with great art, compacted of rough
stones, €K Xtdcov aKporofioov, which have been fitted
into one another quite harmoniously, without the
work of hammer or any other builder's tool being
observable, but the whole fits together without the
use of these, and the fitting seems to be rather one
of free will than offeree through mechanical means."
And therein lay the skill of the king, for the un-
shapen blocks were pieced together as though they
had been carefully wrought to their positions. And
Procopius says that the temple was erected of
unhewn stones, as it was forbidden of God to lift
iron upon them, but that, nevertheless, they all
fitted into one another. We see in these passages
tokens of the marvellous having been supposed to



Schamir 125

attach to a work w"hich was free from any miraculous
interposition. But at this point fable did not stop.
Upon the carrying away of the Jews to Babylon,
they were brought into contact with a flood of
Iranian as well as Chaldaean myths, and adopted
them without hesitation.

Around Solomon accumulated the fables which
were related of Dschemschid and other Persian
heroes, and were adopted by the Jews as legends
of native production. It was not sufficient that
Solomon should have skilfully pieced together the
rough stones : he was supposed to have hewn
them by supernatural means, without the tool of
iron.

As Solomon, thus ran the tale, was about to
build the temple without the use of iron, his wise
men drew his attention to the stones of the high
priest's breastplate, which had been cut and polished
by something harder than themselves. This was
schamir, which was able to cut where iron would
not bite. Thereupon Solomon summoned the
spirits to inform him of the whereabouts of this
subsjtance. They told him schamir was a worm
of the size of a barley corn, but so powerful that
the hardest flint could not resist him. The spirits
advised Solomon to seek Asmodeus, king of the



126 Schamir

devils, who could give him further information.
When Solomon inquired where Asmodeus was to
be met with, they replied that, on a distant
mountain, he had dug a huge cistern, out of
which he daily drank. Solomon then sent Ben-
aiah with a chain, on which was written the magic
word " schem hammphorasch," a fleece of wool and
a skin of wine. Benaiah, having arrived at the
cistern of Asmodeus, undermined it, and let the
water off by a little hole, which he then plugged
up with the wool ; after which he filled the pit
with wine. The evil spirit came, as was his
wont, to the cistern, and scented the wine. Sus-
pecting treachery, he refused to drink, and re-
tired ; but at length, impelled by thirst, he
drank, and, becoming intoxicated, was chained
by Benaiah and carried away. Benaiah had no
willing prisoner to conduct : Asmodeus plunged
and kicked, upsetting trees and houses. In this
manner he came near a hut in which lived a
widow, and when she besought him not to injure
her poor little cot, he turned aside, and, in so doing,
broke his leg. " Rightly," said the devil, " is it
written : 'a soft tongue breaketh the bone !'" (Prov.
XXV. 15). And a diable boitnix he has ever re-
mained. When in the presence of Solomon,



Schamir 127

Asmodeus was constrained to behave with greater
decorum. Schamir, he told Solomon, was the pro-
perty of the Prince of the Sea, and that prince
entrusted none with the mysterious worm except
the moor-hen, which had taken an oath of fidelity
to him. The moor-hen takes the schamir with her
to the tops of the mountains, splits them, and in-
jects seeds, which grow and cover the naked rocks.
Wherefore the bird is called Naggar Tura, the
mountain-carver. If Solomon desired to possess
himself of the worm, he must find the nest of the
moor-hen, and cover it with a plate of glass, so that
the mother bird could not get at her young without
breaking the glass. She would seek schamir for
the purpose, and the worm must be obtained from
her.

Accordingly, Benaiah, son of Jehoiada, sought the
nest of the bird, and laid over it a piece of glass.
When the moor-hen came, and could not reach her
young, she flew away and fetched schamir, and
placed it on the glass. Then Benaiah shouted,
and so terrified the bird, that she dropped the
worm and flew away. Benaiah by this means
obtained possession of the coveted schamir, and
bore it to Solomon. But the moor-hen was so
distressed at having broken her oath to the Prince



128 Schamir

of the Sea that she slew herself. According to
another version, Solomon went to his fountain,
where he found the dsemon Sackar, whom he
captured by a ruse, and chained down. Solo-
mon pressed his ring to the chains, and Sackar
uttered a cry so shrill that the earth quaked.

Quoth Solomon, "Fear not ; I shall restore you
to liberty if you will tell me how to burrow noise-
lessly after minerals and metals."

" I know not how to do so," answered the Jin ;
" but the raven can tell you : place over her eggs
a sheet of crystal, and you shall see how the
mother will break it."

Solomon did so, and the mother brought a stone
and shattered the crystal. " Whence got you that
stone .''" asked Solomon.

" It is the stone Samur," answered the raven ;
"it comes from a desert in the uttermost east."
So the monarch sent some giants to follow the
raven, and bring him a suitable number of stonesl"

According to a third version, the bird is an eagle,
and schamir is the Stone of Wisdom.



' Gittm, Ixviii. Eisenmenger : Neu-entdecktes Judenthum.
Konigsberg, 1711, i. p. 351.

' Collin dc Plancy : Li'gendes de I'Ancien Test. Paris,
1861, p. 280.



Scliainir 139

Possessed of this schamir, Solomon wrought the
stones for his temple.

Rabbinical fantasy has developed other myths
concerning this mysterious force, resident in worm
or stone. On the second day of Creation were
created the well by which Jacob met Rebecca, the
manna which fed the Israelites, the wonder-working
rod of Moses, the ass which spake to Balaam, and
schamir, the means whereby without iron tool
Solomon was to build the House of God. Scha-
mir is not in early rabbinical fable a worm ; the
treatise Sota gives the first indication of its being
regarded as something more than a stone, by
terming it a " creature," ND-iD. " Our Rabbis
have taught us that schamir is a creature as big
as a barley-corn, created in the hexam.eron, and
that nothing can resist it. How is it preserved .■'
It is wrapped in a wisp of wool, and kept in a
leaden box full of small grains like barley-meal \"
After the building of the temple schamir vanished.

The story passed to the Greeks. yElian relates of
the hro-^ or hoopoe, that a bird had once a nest in
an old wall, in which there was a rent. The pro-
prietor plastered over this crack. The hoopoe find-

^ Sota, xlviii. 8.
[II.] K



130 Schamir

ing that she could not get to her young, flew away
in quest of a plant iroa, which she brought, and
applied to the plaster, which at once gave way,
and admitted her to her young. Then she went
forth to seek food, and the man again stopped up
the hole, but once more the hoopoe removed the
obstacle by the same means. And this took place
a third time again'. What ^lian relates of the
hoopoe, Pliny tells of the woodpecker. This bird,
he says, brings up its young in holes ; and if the
entrance to them be plugged up never so tight, the
bird is able to make the plug burst out.

In the English Gesta Romanorum is the follow-
ing story. There lived in Rome a noble emperor,
Diocletian by name, who loved the virtue of com-
passion above every thing. Therefore he desired
to know which of all the birds was most kindly
affectioned towards its young. One da)-, the
Emperor was wandering in the forest, when he lit
upon the nest of a great bird called ostrich, in
which was the mother with her young. The king
took the nest along with the poults to his palace,
and put it into a glass vessel. This the mother-
bird saw, and, unable to reach her little ones, she

■■ yElian, Hist Animal, iii. 26.



Schaviir 131

returned into the wood, and after an absence of
three days came back with a worm in her beak,
called thumare. This she dropped on the glass,
and by the power of the worm, the glass was shi-
vered, and the young flew away after their mother.
When the Emperor saw this, he highly commended
both the affection and the sagacity of the ostrich.
On which we may remark, that a portion of that
sagacity was wanting to those who applied the
myth to that bird which of all others is singularly
deficient in the qualities with which Diocletian cre-
dited it. Similar stories are told by Vincent of
Beauvais in his " Historical Mirror"," and by gossip-
ing, fable-loving, and delightful Gervase of Tilbury'.
The latter says that Solomon cut the stones of
the temple with the blood of a little worm called
thamir, which when sprinkled on the marble, made
it easy to split. And the way in which Solomon
obtained the worm was this. He had an ostrich,
whose chick he put in a glass bottle. Seeing this,
the ostrich ran to the desert, and brought the worm,
and with its blood fractured the vessel. " And in
our time, in the reign of Pope Alexander III.,

^ Vincent Bellov., Spec. Nat. 20, 170.

^ Gervasii Tilberiensis Otia Imp., ed. Liebrecht. Hanov.
1856, p. 48.

K 2



132 Schamir

when I was a boy, there was found at Rome, a
vial full of milky liquid, which, when sprinkled on
any kinds of stone, made them receive such sculp-
ture as the hand of the graver was wont to execute.
It was a vial discovered in a most ancient palace,
the matter and art of which was a subject of
wonder to the Roman people."

Gervase drew from Comestor (Regum lib. iii.

C.5)-

" If you wish to burst chains," says Albertus

Magnus \ " go into the wood, and look for a wood-
pecker's nestj -where there are young; climb the
tree, and choke the mouth of the nest with any thing
you like. As soon as she sees you do this, she flies
off for a plant, which she lays on the stoppage ; this
bursts, and the plant falls to the ground under the
tree, where you must have a cloth spread for re-
ceiving it." But then, says Albertus, this is a fancy
of the Jews ^.

Conrad von Megenburg relates : " There is a bird
which in Latin is called merops, but which we in
German term Bomheckel (i.e. Baumhacker), which
nests in high trees, and when one covers its children
with something to impede the approach of the bird,

" De Mirab. Mundi. Argent. 1601, p. 225
" Dc Animalibus. Alantua, 1479, ult. pag.



Schamir 133

it brings a herb, and holds it over the obstacle, and
it gives way. The plant is called herba meropis, or
woodpecker-plant, and is called in magical books
cJiora ^"

In Normandy, the swallow knows how to find
upon the sea-beach a pebble which has the mar-
vellous power of restoring sight to the blind. The
peasants tell of a certain way of obtaining posses-
sion of this stone. You must put out the eyes of a
swallow's young, whereupon the mother-bird will
immediately go in quest of the stone. When she
has found it and applied it, she will endeavour to
make away with the talisman, that none may dis-
cover it. But if one has taken the precaution to
spread a piece of scarlet cloth below the nest, the
swallow, mistaking it for fire, will drop the stone
upon it.

I met with the story in Iceland. There the
natives tell that there is a stone of such wondrous
power, that the possessor can walk invisible, can, at
a wish, provide himself with as much stock-fish and
corn-brandy as he may desire, can raise the dead,
cure disease, and break bolts and bars. In order to
obtain this prize, one must hard-boil an egg from

' Apud Mone, Anzeiger, viii. p. 614.



134 Schamir

the raven's nest, then replace it, and secrete oneself
till the mother-bird, finding one of her eggs resist
all her endeavours to infuse warmth into it, flies off
and brings a black pebble in her beak, with which
she touches the boiled egg, and restores it to its
former condition. At this moment she must be
shot, and the stone be secured.

In this form of the superstition schamir has the
power of giving life. This probably connects it
with those stories, so rife in the middle ages, of birds
or weasels, which were able to restore the dead to
life by means of a mysterious plant. Avicenna
relates in his eighth book, " Of Animals," that it
was related to him by a faithful old man, that he
had seen two little birds squabbling, and that one
was overcome ; it therefore retired and ate of a
certain herb, then it returned to the onslaught ;
which when the old man observed frequently, he
took away the herb, and when the bird came and
found the plant gone, it set up a great cry and
died. And this plant was lactua agrestis.

In Fouque's " Sir Elidoc," a little boy Amyot is
watching by a dead lady laid out in the church,
when " suddenly I heard a loud cry from the child.
I looked up, a little creature glided by me ; the
shepherd's staff of the boy flew after it ; the creature



Schamir 135

lay dead, stretched on the ground by the blow. It
was a weasel. . . . Presently there came a
second weasel, as if to seek his comrade, and when
he found him dead, a mournful scene began ; he
touched him as if to say, ' Wake up, wake up,
let us play together!' And when the other little
animal lay dead and motionless, the living one
sprang back from him in terror, and then repeated
the attempt again and again, many times. Its
bright little eyes shone sadly, as if they were full of
tears. The sorrowful creature seemed as though it
suddenly bethought itself of something. It erected
its ears, it looked round with its bright eyes, and
then swiftly darted away. And before Amyot and
I could ask each other of the strange sight, the little
animal returned again, bearing in its mouth a root,
a root to which grew a red flower ; I had never
before seen such a flower blowing ; I made a sign
to Amyot, and we both remained motionless. The
weasel came up quickly, and laid the root and the
flower gently on its companion's mouth ; the crea-
ture, but now stiff" in death, stretched itself, and
suddenly sprang up, with the root still in its mouth.
I called to Amyot, ' The root ! take it, take it, but
do not kill ! ' Again he flung his staff, but so dexter-
ously that he killed neither of the weasels, nor even



1 36 Schamir

hurt them. The root of Hfe and the red blossoms
lay on the ground before me, and in my power."
With this, naturally enough, the lady who is speak-
ing restores the corpse to life. Sir Elidoc is founded
on a Breton legend, the Lai d'Eliduc of Marie de
France ; but another tale from the same country
makes the flower yellow ; it is a marigold, which,
^^'hen touched on a certain morning by the bare foot
of one who has a pure heart, gives the power to un-
derstand the language of birds '. This is the same
story as that of Polyidus and Glaucus. Polyidus
observed a serpent stealing towards the corpse of
the young prince. He slew it ; then came another
serpent, and finding its companion dead, it fetched
a root by which it restored life to the dead serpent.
Polyidus obtained possession of the plant, and
therewith revived Glaucus ^ In the Greek romance
of Rhodante and Dosicles is an incident of similar
character. Rhodante swallows a poisoned goblet
of wine, and lies as one dead, deprived of sense
and motion. In the meanwhile, Dosicles and
Cratander are chasing wild beasts in the forest.
There they find a wounded bear, which seeks a
certain plant, and, rolling upon it, recovers health

' Bode, Volksmahrchen a. d. Bretagne. Leipz. 1847, p. 6.
2 ApoUodorus, ii. 3.



Schaviir 137

and vigour instantaneously. Tlie root of this herb
was white, its flowers of a rosy hue, attached to a
stalk of purplish tinge. Dosicles picked the herb,
and with it returned to the house where he found
Rhodante apparently dead ; with the wondrous
plant he, however, was able to restore her. The
same story is told in Germany, in Lithuania, among
the modern Greeks and ancient Scandinavians.

Germany teems with stories of the marvellous
properties of the Luckflower.

A man chances to pluck a beautiful flower, which
in most instances is blue, and this he puts in his
breast, or in his hat. Passing along a mountain
side, he sees the rocks gape before him, and enter-
ing, he sees a beautiful lady, who bids him help him-
self freely to the gold which is scattered on all sides
in profusion. He crams the glittering nuggets into
his pockets, and is about to leave, when she calls
after him, " Forget not the best ! " Thinking that
she means him to take more, he feels his crammed
pockets, and finding that he has nothing to reproach
himself with in that respect, he seeks the light of
day, entirely forgetting the precious blue flower
which had opened to him the rocks, and which has
dropped on the ground.

As he hurries through the doorway, the rocks



138 ■ Schamir

close upon him with a thunder-crash and cut off
his heel. The mountain-side is thenceforth closed
to him for ever.

Once upon a time a shepherd was driving his
flock over the Ilsenstein, when, wearied with his
tramp, he leaned upon his staff. Instantly the
mountain opened, for in that staff was the "Spring-
wort."' Within he saw the Princess Use, who bade
him fill his pockets with gold. The shepherd
obeyed, and was going away, when the princess
exclaimed, "Forget not the best!" alluding to
his staff, which lay against the wall. But he,
misunderstanding her, took more gold, and the
mountain clashing together, severed him in twain.
In some versions of the story, it is the pale blue
flower —

" The blue flower, which — Bramins say —
Blooms nowhere but in Paradise" —

[Lalla Rookh)

which exclaims in feeble, piteous tone, " Forget-
me-not !" but its little cry is unheeded.

Thus originated the name of the beautiful little
flower. When this story was forgotten, a romantic
fable was invented to account for the peculiar
appellation.

In the story of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves,



Sclianiir 139

it is a word, " sesame," which makes the rocks
part, and gives admission to the treasures within ;
and it is oblivion of the magic word which brings
destruction upon the luckless wretch within. But
sesame is the name of a well-known eastern
plant, sesamum orientale ; so that probably in the
original form of the Persian tale absorbed into the
Arabian Nights, a flower was employed to give
admission to the mountain. But classic antiquity
has also its rock-breaking plant, the saxifraga,
whose tender rootlets penetrate and dissolve the
hardest stones with a force for which the Ancients
were unable to account.

Isaiah, describing the desolation of the vineyard
of Zion, says that " There shall come up briars
and thorns " (v. 6), rriT n'iy^l ~\ ovb (vii. 23 : cf
also ix. 17 ; x. 17). And, "Upon the land of my
people shall come up thorns and briars " (xxxii.
13), where I'Dii' is combined with fip. The
word D'li' never stands alone, but is always
joined with TDiy, which the LXX render dxavda
KoX %6/3T09 ; the word in the fifth chapter they
render ■yepao'; aicavOai ; that in the seventh, ■)(ipaoii
and aKavda ; so that %ipa-o'i is put for 1 Oii', and
dicavOa for nil>. The word in the ninth chapter
is dypo)crTi<; ^'qpa, that in the tenth, wael -^oprov Trjv



140 ScJiaiiiir

vKrjv. Upon both names the translators are not
agreed. Now, this word " smiris " is used by Isaiah
alone as the name of a plant. The smiris, as we
have seen, is a stone-breaking substance, and the
same idea which is rendered in Latin by saxifraga is
given in the Hebrew word used by Isaiah, so that
we may take n ii*! "i D"ii' to mean saxifraga and
thorn ^. In the North, we have another object, to
which are attributed the same properties as to the
" Springwort " and schamir, and that is the Hand of
Glory. This is the hand of a man who has been
hung, and it is prepared in the following manner :
wrap the hand in a piece of winding-sheet, drawing
it tight, so as to squeeze out the little blood which
may remain ; then place it in an earthenware
vessel with saltpetre, salt, and long pepper, all
carefully and thoroughly powdered. Let it remain
a fortnight in this pickle till it is well dried, then
expose it to the sun in the dog-days, till it is com-
pletely parched, or, if the sun be not powerful
enough, dry it in an oven heated with vervain and

' Cassel, Ueber Schamir, in Denkschrift d. Konigl. Akad.
der Wissenschaften. Erfurt, 1856, p. 76. The Oriental word
" smiris " passed into use among the Greeks as the name of
the hardest substance known, used in polishing stones, and
is retained in the German " Smirgel," and the English
" emery."



Scliaviir 141

fern. Next make a candle with the fat of a hung
man, virgin-wax, and Lapland sesame. Observe
the use of this herb : the hand of glory is used
to hold this candle when it is lighted '. Douster
Swivel, in the "Antiquary," adds, " You do make a
candle, and put into de hand of glory at de proper
hour and minute, with de proper ceremonisth ; and
he who seeksh for treasuresh shall find none at
all!" Southey places it in the hands of the en-
chanter Mohareb, when he would lull to sleep
Yohak, the giant guardian of the caves of Babylon.
He—

" From his wallet drew a human hand,
Shrivell'd, and dry, and black ;
And fitting, as he spake,
A taper in his hold,
Pursued : ' A murderer on the stake had died ;
I drove the vulture from his limbs, and lopt
The hand that did the murder, and drew up
The tendon strings to close its grasp ;

And in the sun and wind
Parch'd it, nine weeks exposed.
The taper . But not here the place to impart,
Nor hast thou undergone the rites
That fit thee to partake the mystery.
Look ! it burns clear, but with the air around,
Its dead ingredients mingle deathliness =.'"

Several stories of this terrible hand are related in

* Collin de Plancy, Dictionnaire Infernal. Paris, 1818.
5 Thalaba the Destroyer, book v.



142 Sckamir

Henderson's " Folklore of the Northern Counties of
England." I will only quote one, which was told me
by a labouring man in the West Riding of York-
shire, and which is the same story as that given by
Martin Anthony Delrio in his "Disquisitiones Ma-
gicjE," in 1593, and which is printed in the Appendix
to that book of M. Henderson.

One dark night, after the house had been closed,
there came a tap at the door of a lone inn, in the
midst of a barren moor.

The door was opened, and there stood without,
shivering and shaking, a poor beggar, his rags
soaked with rain, and his hands white with cold.
He asked piteously for a lodging, and it was cheer-
fully granted him ; though there was not a spare bed
in the house, he might lie along on the mat before
the kitchen fire, and welcome.

All in the house went to bed except the servant
lassie, who from the kitchen could see into the
large room through a small pane of glass let
into the door. When every one save the beggar
was out of the room, she observed the man
draw himself up from the floor, seat himself at
the table, extract a brown withered human hand
from his pocket, and set it upright in the candle-
stick ; he then anointed the fingers, and, apply-



Schamir 148

ing a match to them, they began to flame.
Filled with horror, the girl rushed up the back
stairs, and endeavoured to arouse her master and
the men of the house ; but all in vain, they slept
a charmed sleep ; and finding all her efforts in-
effectual, she hastened downstairs again. Look-
ing again through the small window, she ob-
served the fingers of the hand flaming, but the
thumb gave no light : this was because one of
the inmates of the house was not asleep. The
beggar began collecting all the valuables of the
house into a large sack — no lock withstood the
application of the flaming hand. Then, putting
it down, the man entered an adjoining apartment.
The moment he was gone, the girl rushed in,
and seizing the hand, attempted to extinguish
the quivering yellow flames, which wavered at
the fingers' ends. She blew at them in vain ; she
poured some drops from a beer-jug over them,
but that only made the fingers burn the brighter ;
she cast some water upon them, but still without
extinguishing the light. As a last resource, she
caught up a jug of milk, and dashing it over
the four lambent flames, they went out imme-
diately.

Uttering a piercing cry, she rushed to the door



144 Schamir

of the room the beggar had entered, and locked
it. The whole house was aroused, and the thief
was secured and hung.

We must not forget Tom Ingoldsby's render-
ing of a similar legend : —

" Open, lock,

To the Dead Man's knock I

Fly, bolt, and bar, and band !

Nor move, nor swerve,

Joint, muscle, or nerve.
At the spell of the Dead Man's hand !
Sleep, all who sleep ! — Wake, all who wake !
But be as the dead for the Dead Man's sake !

" Now lock, nor bolt, nor bar avails,
Nor stout oak panel thick-studded with nails.
Heavy and harsh the hinges creak,
Though they had been oil'd in the course of the week.
The door opens wide as wide may be,
And there they stand,
That murderous band,
Lit by the light of the GLORIOUS Hand,
By one ! — by two ! — by three ! "

But, instead of pursuing the fable through
its further ramifications, let us apply the scha-
mir of comparative mythology to the myth itself,
and see whether before it the bolts do not
give way, and the great doors of the cavern of
mysteries expand, and discover to us the ori-
gin of the superstitious belief in this sea-prince's



Schamir 145

worm, the stone of wisdom, sesame, forget-me-
not, or the hand of glory.

What are its effects ?

It bursts locks, and shatters stones, it opens
in the mountains the hidden treasures hitherto
concealed from men, or it paralyzes, lulling into
a magic sleep, or, again, it restores to life.

I believe the varied fables relate to one and
the same object — and that, the lightning.

But what is the bird which bears schamir, the
worm or stone which shatters rocks 1 It is the
storm-cloud, which in many a mythology of an-
cient days was supposed to be a mighty bird.
In Greek iconography, Zeus, " the aether in his
moist arms embracing the earth," as Euripides
describes him, is armed with the thunderbolt,
and accompanied by the eagle, a symbol of the

cloud.

" The refulgent heaven above,
Which all men call, unanimously, Jove ","

has for its essential attributes the cloud and its
bolt, and when the aether was represented under
human form, the cloud was given shape as a
bird. It is the .same storm-cloud which as " blood-

8 Cicero, De N. Deorum xvi.
[II.] L



146 Schamir

thirsting eagle " banquets its " full on the black
viands of the liver" of Prometheus. The same
cloud in its fury is symbolized by the Phorcidse
with their flashing eye and lightning tooth —

TTpo? Vo^oviia Trebia KktBtjvtjs, iva
ai ^opKiSes valov(TL hr)vai,a\ Kopai

rpcls KVKv6lJ.0p(j>0l, KOIVOV Oflp,' iKTrjfl€Vai,

[iOVoBovreSf A? ovff ^\tos Trpoa-depKeTot
aKTlo'iv, oilB' J) vvKTepos p-rjvr) TroTf.

(vEsCH. From.),

and also by the ravening harpies. In ancient
Indian mythology, the delicate white cirrus cloud
drifting overhead was a fleeting swan, and so it
was as well in the creed of the Scandinavian,
whilst the black clouds were ravens coursing
over the earth, and returning to whisper the news
in the ear of listening Odin. The rushing vapour
is the roc of the Arabian Nights, which broods
over its great luminous egg, the sun, and which
haunts the sparkling valley of diamonds, the
starry sky. The resemblance traced between
bird and cloud is not far fetched : it recurs to the
modern poet as it did to the Psalmist, when he
spoke of the "wings of the wind." If the cloud
was supposed to be a great bird, the lightnings
were regarded as writhing worms or serpents
in its beak. These fiery serpents, eKiKiai ypa/u./j.o-



Schamir 147

etSw? ^epo/xevoi, are believed in to this day by
the Canadian Indians, who call the thunder their
hissing. It was these heavenly reptiles which
were supposed by the Druids to generate the sun,
the famous anguineum so coveted and so ill compre-
hended. The thunderbolt shattering all it struck,
was regarded as the stone dropped by the cloud-
bird. A more forced resemblance is that supposed
to exist between the lightning and a heavenly
flower, blue, or yellow, or red, and yet there is evi-
dence, upon which I cannot enter here, that so it
\\'as regarded.

The lightning-flashing cloud was also supposed
to be a flaming hand. The Greek placed the
forked dart in the hand of Zeus —

" rubente
Dextera sacras jaculatus arces ; "

and the ancient Mexican symbolized the sacrificial
fire by a blood-red hand impressed on his sanctu-
ary walls. The idea may have been present in the
mind of the servant of Elijah when he told his
master that he saw from the top of Carmel rising
" A little cloud out of the sea, like a man's hand.
And it came to pass, that the heaven was black
with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain"
(i Kings xviii. 44). In Finnish and Esthonian



]4S Schamir

mythology, the cloud is a little man with a copper
hand, who, rising from the water, becomes a giant.

The black cloud with the lambent flames issuing
from it was the original of the magical hand of
gloiy.

The effects produced by the lightning are differ-
ently expressed. As shattering the rocks, scha-
mir is easily intelligible. It is less so as giving
access to the hidden treasures of the mountains.
The ancient Aryan had the same name for cloud
and mountain. To him the piles of vapour on the
horizon were so like Alpine ranges, that he had but
one word whereby to designate both. These great
mountains of heaven were opened by the lightning.
In the sudden flash he beheld the dazzling splen-
dour within, but only for a moment, and then, with
a crash, the celestial rocks closed again. Believing
these vaporous piles to contain resplendent trea-
sures of which partial glimpse was obtained by
mortals in a momentary gleam, tales were speedily
formed, relating the adventures of some who had
succeeded in entering these treasure-mountains.
The plant of life, brought by weasel or serpent,
restores life to one who was dead. This myth was
forged in Eastern lands, where the earth apparently
dies from a protracted drought. Then comes the



Schamir 14P

cloud. The lightning flash reaches the barren,
dead, and thirsty land ; forth gush the waters of
heaven, and the parched vegetation bursts once
more into the vigour of life, restored after sus-
pended animation. It is the dead and parched
vegetation which is symbolized by Glaucus, and
the earth still and without the energy of life
which is represented by the lady in the Lai
d'Eliduc. This reviving power is attributed in
mythology to the rain as well. In Sclavonic
myths, it is the water of life which restores the
dead earth, a water brought by a bird from the
depths of a gloomy cave. A prince has been
murdered, — that is, the earth is dead ; then comes
the eagle bearing a vial of the reviving water —
the cloud with the rain ; it sprinkles the corpse
with the precious drops, and life returns '.

But the hand of glory has a very different
property — it paralyzes. In this it resembles the
Gorgon's head or the basilisk. The head of
Medusa, with its flying serpent locks, is unques-
tionably the storm-cloud ; and the basilisk
which strikes dead with its eye is certainly the

' Compare with this the Psyche in "The Golden Ass,"
and the Fair One with the Golden Locks of the Countess
d'Aulnay.



150 Schamir

same. The terror inspired by the outburst of
the thunder-storm is expressed in fable by the
paralyzing effect of the eye of the cockatrice, the
exhibition of the Gorgon's countenance, and the
waving of the glorious hand.

Strained as some of these explanations may
seem, they are nevertheless true. We, with our
knowledge of the causes producing meteorological
phenomena, are hardly able to realize the extrava-
gance of the theories propounded by the ignorant
to account for them.

How Finn cosmogonists could have believed
the earth and heaven to be made out of a
severed egg, the upper concave shell representing
heaven, the yolk being earth, and the crystal
surrounding fluid the circumambient ocean, is
to us incomprehensible : and yet it remains a
fact that so they did regard them. How the
Scandinavians could have supposed the moun-
tains to be the mouldering bones of a mighty
Jotun, and the earth to be his festering flesh, we
cannot conceive : yet such a theory was solemnly
taught and accepted. How the ancient Indians
could regard the rain-clouds as cows with full
udders, milked by the winds of heaven, is beyond
our comprehension, and yet their Veda contains



Schamir ]51

indisputable testimony to the fact that so they
were regarded.

Nonnus Dionysius (v. 163 et seq.) spoke of
the moon as a luminous white stone, and De-
mocritus regarded the stars as ireTpovi. Lucre-
tius considered the sun as a wheel (v. 433), and
Ovid as a shield —

" Ipse Dei clypeus, terra cum tollitur ima,
Mane rubet : terraque rubet, cum conditur ima.
Candidus in summo . . . ." — (Metam. xv. 192 sq.)

As late as 1600, a German writer would illus-
trate a thunder-storm destroying a crop of corn
by a picture of a dragon devouring the produce of
the field with his flaming tongue and iron teeth
(Wolfii Memorabil. ii. p. 505) ; and at the present
day children are taught that the thunder-crash is
the voice of the Almighty.

The restless mind of man, ever seeking a reason
to account for the marvels presented to his senses,
adopts one theory after another, and the rejected
explanations encumber the memory of nations
as myths, the significance of which has been
forgotten.



2ri)e Vmi of J^amfln

HAMELN town was infested with rats, in the
year 1284. In their houses the people had
no peace from them ; rats disturbed them by night
and worried them by day —

" They fought the dogs, and kill'd the cats,

And bit the babies in the cradles,
And ate the cheeses out of the vats.

And Uck'd the soup from the cook's own ladles.
Split open the kegs of salted sprats,
Made nests inside men's Sunday hats.
And even spoil'd the women's chats.

By drowning their speaking

With shrieking and squeaking
In fifty different sharps and flats.''

One day, there came a man into the town, most
quaintly attired in parti-coloured suit. Bunting
the man was called, after his dress. None knew
whence he came, or who he was. He announced
himself to be a rat-catcher, and offered for a certain



The Piper of Hanieln 153

sum of money to rid the place of the vermin. The
townsmen agreed to his proposal, and promised
him the sum demanded. Thereupon the man
drew forth a pipe and piped.

" And ere three shrill notes the pipe utter'd,
You heard as if an army mutter'd ;
And the muttering grew to a grumbling,
And the grumbling grew to a mighty rumbling :
And out of the town the rats came tumbling.
Great rats, small rats, lean rats, brawny rats,
Brown rats, black rats, grey rats, tawny rats,
Grave old plodders, gay young friskers,

Fathers, mothers, uncles, cousins.
Cocking tails and pricking whiskers ;

Families by tens and dozens.
Brothers, sisters, husbands, wives,
Follow'd the Piper for their lives.
From street to street he piped advancing,
Until they came to the river Weser,
Wherein all plunged and perish'd."

No sooner were the townsfolk released from their .
torment, than they repented of their bargain, and,
on the plea that the rat-destroyer was a sorcerer,
they refused to pay the stipulated remuneration.
At this the piper waxed wrath, and vowed ven-
geance. On the 26th June, the feast of SS. John
and Paul, the mysterious Piper reappeared in
Hameln town —

" Once more he stept into the street,
And to his hps again



154 The Piper of Hameln

Laid his long pipe of smooth, straight cane ;
And, ere he blew three notes (such sweet,
Soft notes as yet musician's cunning
Never gave to the enraptured air),
There was a rustling, that seem'd like a bustling
Of merry crowds justling, at pitching and hustling.
Small feet were pattering, wooden shoes clattering.
Little hands clapping, and little tongues chattering :
And, like fowls in a farmyard where barley is scattering.
Out came the children running.
All the little boys and girls,
With rosy cheeks and flaxen curls.
And sparkling eyes, and teeth like pearls,
Trippmg, skipping, ran merrily after
The wonderful music with shouting and laughter."

The Piper led the way down the street, the chil-
dren all following, whilst the Hameln people stood
aghast, not knowing what step to take, or what
would be the result of this weird piping. He led
them from the town towards a hill rising above the
Weser —

" When, lo ! as they reach'd the mountain's side,
A wondrous portal open'd wide.
As if a cavern were suddenly hollow'd ;
And the piper advanced, and the children follow'd ;
And when all were in, to the very last.
The door in the mountain side shut fast."

No ! not all. Two remained : the one blind, and
the other dumb. The dumb child pointed out the
spot where the children had vanished, and the blind



The Piper of Hamcln 155

boy related his sensations when he heard the piper
play. In other accounts, the lad was lame, and he
alone was left ; and in after years he was sad. And
thus he accounted for his settled melancholy —

" It's dull in our town since my playmates left ;
I can't forget that I'm bereft
Of all the pleasant sights they see,
Which the piper also promised me ;
For he led us, he said, to a joyous land,
Joining the town, and just at hand,
Where waters gush'd, and fruit-trees grew,
And flowers put forth a fairer hue.
And every thing was strange and new ;
And sparrows were brighter than peacocks here.
And their dogs outran our fallow deer,
And honey bees had lost their stings.
And horses were born with eagle's wings ;
And just as I became assured
My lame foot would be speedily cured,
The music stopp'd, and 1 stood still,
And found myself outside the hill.
Left alone against my will,
To go now limping as before.
And never hear of that country more."

The number of children that perished was one
hundred and thirty. Fathers and mothers rushed
to the east gate, but when they came to the moun-
tain, called Koppenberg, into which the train had
disappeared, nothing was observable except a small
hollow, where the sorcerer and their httle ones had
entered.



156 The Piper of Hameln

The street through which the piper went is called
the Bungen-Strasse, because no music, no drum
(Bunge), may be played in it. If a bridal pro-
cession passes through it, the music must cease
until it is out of it. It is not long since two moss-
grown crosses on the Koppenberg marked the spot
where the little ones vanished. On the wall of a
house in the town is written, in gold characters —

"Anno 1284 am dage Johannis et Pauli war der 26. Junii
dorcli einen piper mit allerlei farve bekledet gewesen 130
kinder verledet binnen Hameln gebon to Calvarie, bi den
Koppen verloren."

On the Rathhaus was sculptured, in memory of

the event —

" Im Jahr 1284 na Christi gebert
The Hamel worden uthgevert
hundert und dreiszig kinder dasiilvest geborn
durch einen Piper under den Koppen verlorn."

And on the new gate —

" Centum ter denos cum magus ab urbe puellos
Duxerat ante annos CCLXXII condita porta fuit."

For long, so profound was the impression pro-
duced by the event, the town dated its public
documents from this calamity '.

' Thorpe, Northern Mythology, iii. 119; and Grimm,
Deutsche Sagen, licrlin, 1866, i. p. 245. Griipm has col-
lected a list of authorities who speak of the event as an his-
torical fact.



Tltc Piper of Haincln 157

Similar stories are told of other places. A man
with a violin came once to Brandenburg, and walked
through the town fiddling. All the children fol-
lowed him : he led them to the Marienberg, which
opened and admitted him and the little ones, and,
closing upon them, left none behind. At one time,
the fields about Lorch were devastated with ants.
The Bishop of Worms instituted a procession and
litanies to obtain the deliverance of his people from
the plague. As the procession approached the
Lake of Lorch, a hermit came to meet it, and
offered to rid the neighbourhood of the ants, if the
farmers would erect a chapel on the site, at the cost
of a hundred gulden. When they consented, he
drew forth a pipe and piped so sweetly that all the
insects came about him ; and he led them to the
water, into which he plunged with them. Then he
asked for the money, but it was refused. Where-
upon he piped again, and all the pigs followed him :
he led them into the lake, and vanished with them.

Next year a swarm of crickets ate up the herbage ;
the people were in despair. Again they went in
procession, and were met by a charcoal-burner,
who promised to destroy the insects, if the people
would expend five hundred gulden on a chapel.
Then he piped, and the crickets followed him into



158 The Piper of Hameln

the water. Again the people refused to pay the
stipulated sum, thereupon the charcoal-burner piped
all their sheep into the lake. The third year comes
a plague of rats. A little old man of the mountain
this time offers to free the land of the vermin for a
thousand gulden. He pipes them into the Tannen-
berg ; then the farmers again button up their
pockets, whereupon the little man pipes all their
children away ^

In the Hartz mountains once passed a strange
musician with a bagpipe. Each time that he
played a tune a maiden died. In this manner he
caused the death of fifty girls, and then he vanished
with their souls ^

It is singular that a similar story should exist in
Abyssinia. It is related by Harrison, in his " High-
lands of .Ethiopia," that the Hadjiuji Madjuji are
djemon pipers, who, riding on a goat, traverse a
hamlet, and, by their music, irresistibly draw the
children after them to destruction.

The soul, in German mythology, is supposed to
bear some analogy to a mouse. In Thuringia, at
Saalfeld, a servant-girl fell asleep whilst her com-

^ Wolf, Beitrage zur Deutschen Mythologie. Gottingen,
1852, i. 17T.

2 Prohle, Miihrchen, No. 14.



The Piper of Hanicln 159

panions were shelling nuts. They observed a httle
red mouse creep from her mouth and run out of the
window. One of the fellows present shook the
sleeper, but could not wake her, so he moved her
to another place. Presently the mouse ran back
to the former place, and dashed about seeking the
girl : not finding her, it vanished ; at the same
moment, the girl died ''.

Akin to the story of the piper is that made
familiar to us by Goethe's poem, the Erlking.

A father is riding late at night with his child
wrapped in a mantle. The little fellow hears the
erlking chanting in his ear, and promising him the
glories of Elf-land, where his daughters dance and
sing, awaiting him, if he will follow. The father
hushes the child, and bids him not to listen, for it
is only the whistling of the wind among the trees.
But the song has lured the little soul away, and
when the father unfolds his mantle, the child is
dead.

It is curious that a trace of this myth should re-
main among the Wesleyans. From my experience
of English dissenters, I am satisfied that their reli-
gion is, to a greater extent than any one has sup-

'' Praetorius, i. 40.



160 Tlie Piper of Hameln

posed, a revival of ancient paganism, which has
long lain dormant among the English peasantry.
A Wesleyan told me one day that he was sure his
little servant-girl was going to die; for the night
before, as he had lain awake, he had heard an
angel piping to her in the adjoining room ; the music
was inexpressibly sweet, like the warbling of a flute.
" And when t'aingels gang that road," said the
\'orkshire man, "they're boun to tak bairns' souls
wi' em." I know several cases of Wesleyans de-
claring that they were going to die, because the}-
had heard voices singing to them, which none but
themselves had distinguished, telling them of the —

" happy land

Far, far away,''

precisely as the piper of Hameln's notes seemed to
the lame lad to speak of a land —

" Where flowers put forth a fairer hue,
And every thing was strange and new.''

And I have heard of a death being accounted for
b}- a band of music playing in the neighbourhood.
" When t'music was agaite, her soul was forced to
be off."

A hymn by the late Dr. Faber, now very popu-
lar, is unquestionably founded on this ancient



The Piper of Hameln 161

superstition, and is probably an unconscious revival
of early dissenting reminiscences.

" Hark ! hark, my soul ! Angelic songs are swelling
O'er earth's green fields and ocean's wave-beat shore ;
How sweet the truth those blessed strains are teUing
Of that new life when sin shall be no more !

" Onward we go, for still we hear them singing,
Come, weary souls, for Jesus bids you come :
And through the dark, its echoes sweetly ringing,
The music of the Gospel leads us home.
Angels of Jesus, Angels of Light,
Singing to welcome the pilgrims of the night."

An idea which I have myself consciously adopted
in a hymn on the severing of Jordan (People's
Hymnal, 3), upon the principle which led the early
Christians to adopt the figure of Orpheus as a sym-
bol of Christ.

" Sweet angels are calling to me from yon shore.
Come over, come over, and wander no more."

The music which our English dissenters consider
as that of angels' singing, is attributed by the Ger-
mans to the Elves, and their song is called Alpleich
or Elfenreigen. Children are cautioned not to
listen to it, or believe in the promises made in the
weird spirit-song. If they hearken, then Frau
Holle, the ancient goddess Hulda, takes them to
wander with her in the forests.

A young man heard the music, and was filled with

[ll.j M



162 The Piper of Hatneln

in irresistible longing to be with Dame Holle. Three
days after he died, and it was said of him, " He
preferred the society of Frau Hulda to heaven, and
now till the judgment he must wander with her in
the forest'." In like manner, in Scandinavian ballads,
we are told of youths who were allured away by
the sweet strains of the Elf maidens ". Their music
is called ellfr-lek, in Icelandic liujlingslag, in Nor-
wegian Huldresldt.

The reader will have already become conscious
that these northern myths resemble the classic
fable of the Sirens, with their magic lay ; of Ulysses
with his ears open, bound to the mast, longing to
rush to their arms, and perish.

The root of the myth is this : the piper is no other
than the wind, and ancients held that in the wind
were the souls of the dead. All over England the
peasants believe still that the spirits of unbap-
tized children wander in it, and that the wail at
their doors and windows are the cries of the little
souls condemned to journey till the last day. The
ancient German goddess Hulda was ever accom-
panied by a crowd of children's souls, and Odin in
his wild hunt rushed over the tree-tops, accompa-

' Zeitschrift fiir Deutsche Myth. i. 27.

" Svenska fornsanger, 2. 308. Danske viser, i. 235 — 240.



The Piper of Hameln 163

nied by the scudding train of brave men's spirits. It
is because the soul is thought to travel on the wind,
that we open the window to let a dying person
breathe his last. Often have I had it repeated to
me that the person in extremis could not die, that
he struggled to die, but was unable till the case-
ment was thrown open, and then at once his spirit
escaped.

In one of the Icelandic sagas we have a strange
story of a man standing at his house-door, and see-
ing the souls go by in the air, and among the souls
was his own ; he told the tale and died.

In Greek mythology, Hermes Psychopompos
carries the spirits of the dead to Hades ; and in
Egyptian fable, Thoth performs the same office. I
am satisfied that we have in Hermes two entirely
distinct divinities run into one, through the confu-
sion of similar names, that the Pelasgic, Ithyphallic
Hermes is an entirely distinct god from the tricksy,
thievish youth with winged feet and fluttering
mantle. The Pelasgic Hermes (from ep/xa) is the
sun as generator of life, whilst the other Hermes
(from opfi^ri) is the impetuous wind, whose represen-
tative Sarami exists as the gale in Indian mytho-
logy. Hermes Psychopompos is therefore the wind,
bearing away the souls of the dead. He has other
M %



164 The Piper of Hanieln

atmospheric characteristics : the flying cloak, a sym-
bol of the drifting cloud, — as Odin, the rushing of
storm, is also Hekluberandi, the mantle-bearer ; the
winged Talaria, emblems of the swiftness of his
flight ; and the lyre, wherewith he closes the thou-
sand eyes of Argos, the starry firmament, signify-
ing the music of the blast.

The very names given to the soul, animus, ave/j.o<;
or spiritus, and atheni, signify wind or breath, and
point to the connexion which was supposed to
exist between them. Our word Ghost, the German
Geist, is from a root "gisan," to gush and blow, as
does the wind.

In the classic Sirens we cannot fail to detect the
wailing of the rising storm in the cordage, which is
likely to end in shipwrecks. The very name of
Siren is from avpiZa}, to pipe or whistle', just as their
representatives in Vedic mythology, the Ribhus,
draw their name from redk, to sound, to which the
Greek poijSSiw is akin. The Sirens are themselves
winged beings ', rushing over the earth, seeking
every where the lost Persephone.

But the piping wind does not merely carry with
it the souls of the dead, and give the mariner

' Cognate words, Lat. susurrus, Sanskrit svri, to sound.
' Eurip. Hel. 167.



The Piper of Hameln 165

warning of approaching wreck : it does something
besides. Let us He on a hill-side, and watch the
rising gale. All is still and motionless. Pre-
sently we hear the whistle in the grass, and then
every herb and tree is set in agitation. The trees
toss from side to side, and the flowers waver, and
rock their bells. All are set dancing, and cannot
stop till the piping has ceased. In this we have the
rudiment of another myth, that of the musical
instrument which, when played, sets every thing
a-capering.

Grimm has a story to this effect : a lad obtains a
bow which will bring down any thing he aims at,
and a fiddle which, when scraped, will make all who
hear it dance. He shoots a bird, and it falls into a
bush of thorns; a Jew goes into the bush to get the
bird, then the lad strikes up a tune on his instru-
ment, and makes the Jew dance in the bush till he
has paid him a large sum to obtain rest. In a
Walachian story it is the Almighty who gives the
lad a bagpipe. The tale runs thus : a boy runs
away from his brother with a quern ; on the approach
of night he hides in a tree. Some robbers come
beneath the tree, and spread out their spoils. The
lad drops the mill-stone, which puts the robbers to
flight, and he thus obtains the gold. Then the



166 The Piper of Hamcln

story runs on like that of Grimm, only the Jew is
replaced by a priest (Schott, xxii).

The same story is found among the modern
Greeks, and the hero has a pipe, and his name is
Bakala '.

We have a similar tale in England, published by
Wynkyn de Worde, entitled "A merry Geste of the
Frere and the Boye," in which the lad receives —

" a bowe



Byrdes to shete"

and a pipe of marvellous power —

" All that may the pype here
Shall not themselfe stere,
But laugh and lepe about '."

In the Icelandic Herauds ok Bosa Saga, which
rests on mythologic foundation, a harp occurs which
belonged to a certain Sigurd. Bosi slays Sigurd,
puts on his skin and clothes, and taking the harp,
goes in this disguise to the banquet-hall of king
Godmund, where his true-love is about to be wed
to another man. He plays the harp, and the
knives and plates, the tables and stools, then the
guests, and lastly the monarch himself, are set
dancing. He keeps them capering till they are too

' Von Hahn, Griechische Miihrchen, No. 34.
' Ritson, Pieces of Ancient Poetry.



The Piper of Hameln 167

exhausted to move a limb ; then he casts the
bride over his shoulder and makes off I

In the mediaeval romance of Huon de Bordeaux,
Oberon's horn has the same properties ; and in a
Spanish tale of the Fandango, at the strains of the
tune, the Pope and cardinals are made to dance
and jig about.

In that most charming collection of fairy tales,
made in Southern Ireland by Mr. Crofton Croker,
we meet with the same wonderful tune ; but the
fable relating to it has suffered in the telling, and
the parts have been inverted. Maurice Connor,
the blind piper, could play an air which could set
every thing, alive or dead, caperijig. In what way
he learned it is not known. At the very first note
of that tune the brogues began shaking upon the
feet of all who heard it, old or young ; then the
feet began going, going from under them, and at
last up and away with them, dancing like mad,
whisking here, there, and every where, like a straw
in a storm : — there was no halting while the music
lasted. One day Maurice piped this tune on the
sea-shore, and at once every inch of it was covered
with all manner of fish, jumping and plunging about

- Fornmanna Sogur, iii. p. 221.



168 The Piper of Hameln

to the music ; and every moment more and more

would tumble out of the water, charmed by the

wonderful tune. Crabs of monstrous size spun

round and round on one claw with the nimbleness

of a dancing-master, and twirled and tossed their

other claws about like limbs that did not belong to

them.

" John-dories came tripping ;
Dull hake by their skipping

To frisk it seem'd given ;
Bright mackrel came springing.
Like small rainbows winging

Their flight up to heaven ;
The whiting and haddock
Left salt-water paddock

This dance to be put in,
Where- skate with flat faces
Edged out some odd plaices ;

But soles kept their footing."

Then up came a mermaid, and whispered to Maurice
of the charms of the land beneath the sea, and the
blind piper danced after her into the salt sea, fol-
lowed by the fish, and was never seen more.

In Sclavonic tales the magical instrument has a
quite opposite effect — it sends to sleep. This sig-
nifies the whistling autumn wind, chilling the earth
and checking all signs of life and vegetation. But
another magical harp — that is, the spring breeze —
restores all to vigour. The sorcerer enchants with



The Piper of Hameln 169

the tones of his guzla, and all is hushed, — that is,
the winter god sends the earth to sleep at the sound
of his frozen gale ; but, with the notes of the spring
zephyr, the sun-god, golden-haired, revives creation,
overcoming the charm '.

It is this marvellous harp which was stolen by
Jack when he climbed the bean-stalk to the upper
world. In that story the ogre in the land above the
skies, who was once the All-father, till Christianity
made a monster of him, possessed three treasures :
a harp which played of itself enchanting music, bags
of gold and diamonds, and a hen which daily laid a
goldeh egg. The harp is the wind, the bags are
the clouds dropping the sparkling rain, and the
golden e.%%, laid every morning by the red hen, is
the dawn-produced sun. I have not space here
to establish these two latter points, but they are
repeated in so many cosmogonies, that there can be
little doubt as to my interpretation being correct.

Among the Quiches of Guatemala, not a little
to our surprise, the magic pipe which causes to
dance is to be found. In their sacred book, the
Popol-Vuh, the twins Hunahpu and Xbalanque
turn their half-brothers into apes. Then they go

^ Chodzko, Contes des Paysans Slaves, 1864.



170 The Piper of Hameln

to the mother, who asks where the lads are. The
twins reply that she shall have them again, if she
can behold them without laughing. Then they
begin to play on their pipes ; at the sound, the
transformed brothers, Hunbatz and Hunchouen,
are attracted from the forest to the house, they
enter it and begin to dance. Their mother laughs
at their comical gestures, and they vanish (Popol-
Vuh, b. ii. c. 5).

I very much fear that I am leading my readers
a sad dance, like one of these strange pipers ; I
only hope that I shall not, like the Sclavonic
daemon harper, send them to sleep. We must go
a little further.

It is curious that the lyre-god Apollo should be
called Smintheus, because he delivered Phrygia
from a plague of rats. How he performed this
feat we do not know ; probably it was, after the
manner of the Hameln piper, with his lyre, for we
find that in Greek fable that instrument has powers
attractive to the beasts attributed to it. The rats,
as animals loving darkness, may have been regarded
as symbols of night, and Apollo driving them from
the land may have typified the sun scattering
darkness.

Orpheus with his strains allured birds and beasts



The Piper of Hanicln 171

around him, and made the trees and herbs to grow.
The name Orpheus has been supposed to be iden-
tical with the Vedic Ribhus, which, no doubt, in its
original form, was Arbhus. This, however, is not
certain. Preller supposes Orpheus to come from
the same root as 6p<f)V7j, epe^o';, and to signify
gloom (Griechische Myth. ii. p. 486) ; but this is
' most improbable. He was a son of Apollo, and
therefore probably a solar god.

It was hardly to be expected that such a charm-
ing and innocent myth as that of Orpheus should
have been allowed to drop by the early Christians.
They made a legitimate and graceful use of it in
the catacombs, when they presented it as an alle-
gory of Christ, who, by the sweet strains of His
gospel, overcame brutish natures, making the wolf
to lie down with the lamb. Rut a less justifiable
adaptation of the figure was that of the mediaeval
hagiologists, when they took from Orpheus his lyre,
and robbed him of his song, and split him into S.
Francis and S. Anthony, the former with his preach-
ing attracting the birds, the latter learnedly pro-
pounding scriptural types to the fishes.

It is curious that this Orpheus myth should
be found scattered among Aryan and Turanian
peoples.



1 7 ;J The Piper of Hameln

In Sanskrit, it is told of Gunadhya, in connexion
with the Sibylline books story. The poet Guna-
dhya, an incarnation of Maljavan, writes with his
own blood, in the forest, a mighty book of tales, in
seven hundred thousand slokas. He then sends
, the book by his two pupils, Gunadeva and Nandi-
deva, to king Satavahana, but he rejects it as being
composed in the Pisacha dialect. Gunadhya then
ascends a mountain, and lights a great pile of fire-
wood. He reads aloud his tales, and as he finishes
each page, he casts it into the flames. Thus perish
one hundred thousand slokas. Whilst the poet
reads, stags, deer, bears, buffaloes, and roebucks,
in short all the beasts of the forest, assemble and
weep tears of delight at the beauty of the tales.
In the mean time, the king falls ill, and the doctors
order him game. But game is not to be found in
the forest, for every living creature of the woods is
listening to Gunadhya. The huntsmen report this
to the king, and the monarch hastens to the scene,
and offers to buy the wondrous book. But, alas !
by this time only one of the seven hundred thousand
slokas remains *.

But this is not the ancient form of the Indian
myth. The poet Gunadhya is the heavenly Mal-
■* Katha Sarit Sagara, i., c. 8.



The Piper of Hameln 173

javan incarnate, and the fable properly belongs to
some of the heavenly musicians, the Ribhus, Maruts,
or Gandharvas.

In the mythology of the Rig Veda, the Ribhus are
skilled artists, whose element is the summer's gently
stirring breeze. They are akin to the Maruts, the
rough winds, with whom they unite in singing a
magic song. The Arbhus became in Teutonic
mythology the Alben, Elben or Elfen, our Elfs, and
in Scandinavian the Alfar. The names are the
same : Arbhus became altered into Albhu, by the
change of the r into / ; the b in the old German
Elbe is replaced in modern German and Norse by
an/

The spring and summer breezes were deified
by the ancient Aryans. According to the Rig Veda,
they slumber in winter for twelve days, and when
they waken, the earth is decked with flowers, the
trees with foliage, and the floodgates of the streams
are unlocked. These Ribhus were the offspring of
Sudhanvan, the skilful archer, just as the classic
Orpheus was the son of the bow-bearing Apollo.
They are probably identical with the Gandharvas,
heavenly musicians attending on Indra (Mahabh.
i. 4806). The name Gandharva is derived from
gandh, to harass, injure, and was applied to them as



1 7 J< The Piper of Havicln

violent winds rending the clouds and scattering the
leaves. They were represented as horses, and, ac-
cording to some etymologists, are the originals of
the Centaurs.

I remember one summer evening ascending a
knoll in the district of the Landes in Southern
France — once a region of moving sand-hills, now a
vast tract of pine-forest. The air was fragrant with
the breath of the fir-woods and the luscious exhala-
tions of the flowery acacias. On all sides stretched
the pines, basking in the sun, and rolling, like a
green sea, to the snowy range of the Pyrenees,
which hung in vaporous blue on the horizon —

" Faintly-flush, phantom-fair —

A thousand shado\vy-pencill'd valleys
And snowy dells in a golden air."

Perfect stillness reigned : not a sound from bird
or beast was audible. Suddenly a strange, at first
inexplicable, music vibrated through the air. Tender
and distant, as though a thousand harp-strings were
set a-quivering by the most delicate fingers, it rose
up the scale by fractions of tones, and then de-
scended again. Weird harmonies broke in upon
and overflowed the melody, then ebbed away into
sobs of music, again to reunite into a continued
undulating chant. Not a breath stirred in my im-



The Piper of Hameln 175

mediate neighbourhood, but the music of the forest
was unquestionably brought out by a partial
breeze, at some little distance. Any thing more
solemn and beautiful could hardly be conceived : it
was not like earthly instrumental strains, nor like
what we deem the music of the spheres — it was
the voice of nature expressing its rapture. The
Apostle tells us that Creation groans and travails
in its pangs — it does so ; but it at times exchanges
these utterances of pain for an outburst of the joy
of its vitality.

This was the wandering harp of Orpheus seeking
the lost Eurydice, the song of the Ribhus, the tale-
chanting of Gunadhya, the lay of the sons of Kalew,
and the harping of Wainamoinen.

The Esthonian description of the charm of this
wood-music is very graphic,, and may be set beside
Ovid's account of the springing of the trees at the
playing of Orpheus.

" In the dusky pine-tree forest
Sat the eldest son of Kalew,

Singing 'neath a branching fir.
As from swelling throat he chanted.
Danced the fir-cones on the branches ;

Every leaflet was astir.
All the larches thrill'd, and budding,

Burst to tufts of silky green ;
Waved the pine-tops in the sunset,



176 The Piper of Hmneln

Steep'd in lustrous purple sheen.
Catkins dangled on the hazels,
On the oak the acorns sprouted,

And the black-thorn blossom'd white,
Sudden wreathed in snowy tresses.
Fragrant in the evening glory,

Scenting all the moonlit night."

Then the second son of Kalew goes to a birch-
wood, and sings there. Then the corn begins to
kern, the petals of the cherry to drop off, and the
luscious fruit to swell and redden, the ripening apple
to blush towards the sun, the cranberry and the
whortle to speckle the moor with scarlet and
purple.

Then the third son intones his lay in a forest of
oaks, and the beasts assemble, the birds give voice,
the lark sings shrill, the cuckoo calls, the doves coo,
and the magpies chatter, the swans utter their
trumpet-note, the sparrows twitter, and then as they
weary, with sweet flute-like note sad Philomel
begins his strain (Kalewpoeg. Rune iii.).

In the Finn mythology, these results follow the
playing of Wainamoinen's magic harp. The story
of this instrument is singular enough.

Wainamoinen went to a waterfall, and killed a
pike which swam below it. Of the bones of this
fish he constructed a harp, just as Hermes made



The Piper of Hametn 177

his lyre of the tortoise-shell. But he dropped this
instrument into the sea, and thus it fell into the
power of the sea-gods, which accounts for the
music of the ocean on the beach. The hero then
made another from the forest wood, and with it de-
scended to Pohjola, the realm of darkness, in quest
of the mystic Sampo ; just as in the classic myth
Orpheus went down to Hades, to bring thence
Eurydice. When in the realm of gloom perpetual,
the Finn demi-god struck his kantele, and sent
all the inhabitants of Pohjola to sleep ; as Hermes,
when about to steal lo, made the eyes of Argus
close at the sound of his lyre. Then he ran off
with the Sampo, and had nearly got it to the land
of light, when the dwellers in Pohjola awoke, and
pursued and fought him for the ravished treasure,
which, in the struggle, fell into the sea and was
lost ; again reminding us of the classic tale of
Orpheus.

The effects of the harping of Wainamoinen
remind one of those accompanying the playing of
the Greek lyrist.

" The ancient Wainamoinen began to sing ; he
raised his clear and limpid voice, and his light
fingers danced over the strings of the kantele, whilst
joy answered to joy, and song to song. Every

[II.] N



178 The Piper of Hameln

beast of the forest and fowl of the air came about
him, to listen to the sweet voice, and to taste the
music of his strains. The wolf deserted the swamp,
the bear forsook his forest lair ; they ascended the
hedge, and the hedge gave way. Then they climbed
the pine, and sat on the boughs, hearkening whilst
Wainamoinen intoned his joy. The old black-
bearded monarch of the forest, and all the host of
Tapio, hastened to listen. His wife, the brave lady
of Tapiola, put on her socks of blue, and her laces
of red, and ascended a hollow trunk to listen to the
god. The eagles came down from the cloud, the
falcon dropped through the air, the mew flitted
from the shore, the swan forsook the limpid waves,
the swift lark, the light swallow, the graceful finches
perched on the shoulders of the god. The fair vir-
gins of the air, the rich and gorgeous sun, the gentle
beaming moon, halted, the one on the luminous
vault of heaven, the other leaning on the edge of a
cloud. There they wove with the golden shuttle
and the silver comb. They heard the unknown
voice, the sweet song of the hero. And the silver
comb fell, the golden shuttle dropped, and the
threads of their tissue were broken. Then came
the salmon and the trout, the pike and the porpoise,
fish great and small, towards the shore, listening to



The Piper of Hameln 179

the sweet strains of the charmer " (Kalewala, Rune

xxii.).

In one of the heroic ballads of the Minussinchen

Tartars, the wind, which is represented as a foal

which courses round the world, finds that its master's

two children, Aidolei Mirgan and Alten Kuruptju,

which I take to be the morning and evening stars,

are dead and buried and watched by seven warriors.

The foal changes himself into a maiden, and

comes singing to the tomb such bewitching strains

that

" All the creatures of the forest,
All the wing'd fowl of the air,
Come and breathless to her listen ;"

and the watchers are charmed into letting her steal
away the children, as Hermes stole lo from Argiis,
and she revives them with the water of life, which is
the dew *.

In Scandinavian mythology, Odin was famous for
his Rune chanting ; and the power of bewitching
creation with these Runes obtained for him the
name of Galdner, from gala, to sing, a root retained
in our nightingale, the night-songster ; in gale, a
name applied to the wind from its singing powers ;

' Heldensagen der Minussischen Tataren, v. A. Schiefner.
S. Petersburg, 1859, p. 60.

N 2



1 ^" The Piper of Hameln

and in the \^2X\n gallits , the noisy chanticleer of the
farmyard.

A trace of the myth appears in the ancient
German heroic Gudrunlied, where the powers are
ascribed to Horant, Norse Hjarrandi, who is
described as singing a song which no one could
learn. " These strains he sang, and they were won-
drous. To none were they too long, who heard the
strains. The time it would take one to ride a thou-
sand miles passed, whilst listening to him, as a mo-
ment. The wild beast of the forest and the timid
deer hearkened, the little worms crept forth in the
green meadows, fishes swam up to listen, each for-
getting its nature, so long as he chanted his song."
(^n reading this, we are reminded of that sweet
German legend, so gracefully rendered by Long-
fellow, wherein the parts are changed, and it is no
more the birds listening to the song of man, but
proud man, with finger on lip and bated breath,
listening to the matchless warble of the bird.

" A thousand years in Thy sight are but as yes-
terday ! " mused Brother Felix ; " how may that
be "i " and full of doubt over God's word he went
forth to meditate in the forest.

" And lo ! he heard
The sudden singing of a bird,



The Piper of Hanuin 181

A snow-white bird, that from a cloud

Dropp'd down,

And among the branches brown

Sat singing

So sweet, and clear, and loud,

It seem'd a thousand harp-strings ringing.

And the Monk Felix closed his book,

And long, long

With rapturous look

He listen'd to the song,

And hardly breathed or stirr'd."

As he thus listened years rolled by, and on his
return to the convent he found all changed — new
faces in the refectory and in the choir.

Then the monastery roll was brought forth,
wherein were written the names of all who had be-
longed to that house of prayer, and therein it was
found —

" That on a certain day and date,
One thousand years before.
Had gone forth from the convent gate
The Monk Felix, and never more
Had enter'd that sacred door:
He had been counted among the dead.
And they knew at last.
That, such had been the power
Of that celestial and immortal song,
A thousand years had pass'd.
And had not seem'd so long
As a single hour.''



/"^F the many who yearly visit the Rhine, and
^-^ bring away with them reminiscences of totter-
ing castles and desecrated convents, whether they
take interest or not in the legends inseparably
attached to these ruins, none, probably, have failed
to learn and remember the famous story of God's
judgment on the wicked Bishop Hatto, in the
quaint Mausethurm, erected on a little rock in
midstream.

At the close of the tenth century lived Hatto,
once abbot of Fulda, where he ruled the monks
with great prudence for twelve years, and after-
wards Bishop of Mayence.

In the year 970, Germany suffered from famine.

" The summer and autumn had been so wet,
That in winter the corn was growing yet.
'Twas a piteous sight to see all around
The corn lie rotting on the ground.



Bishop Hatto 183

" Every day the starving poor
Crowded around Bishop Hatto's door,
For he had a plentiful last year's store ;
And all the neighbourhood could tell
His granaries were furnish'd well."

Wearied by the cries of the famishing people, the
Bishop appointed a day, whereon he undertook to
quiet them. He bade all who were without bread,
and the means to purchase it at its then high rate,
repair to his great barn. From all quarters, far
and near, the poor hungry folk flocked into Kaub,
and were admitted into the barn, till it was as full
of people as it could be made to contain.

" Then, when he saw it could hold no more.
Bishop Hatto he made fast the door.
And while for mercy on Christ they call.
He set fire to the barn, and burnt them all.

" ' I'faith, 'tis an excellent bonfire !' quoth he,
' And the country is greatly obliged to me
For ridding it,. in these times forlorn,
Of rats that only consume the corn.'

" So then to his palace returned he.
And he sat down to supper merrily.
And he slept that night like an innocent man ;
But Bishop Hatto never slept again.

" In the morning, as he enter'd the hall
Where his picture hung against the wall,
A sweat, like death, all over him came,
For the rats had eaten it out of the frame."

Then there came a man to him from his farm,



184 Bishop Hatto

with a countenance pale with fear, to tell him that

the rats had devoured all the corn in his granaries.

And presently there came another servant, to

inform him that a legion of rats was on its way to

his palace. The Bishop looked from his window,

and saw the road and fields dark with the moving

multitude ; neither hedge nor wall impeded their

progress, as they made .straight for his mansion.

Then, full of terror, the prelate fled by his postern,

and, taking a boat, was rowed out to his tower in

the river,

" and barr'd

All the gates secure and hard.

" He laid him down, and closed his eyes ;
But soon a scream made him arise.
He started, and saw two eyes of flame
On his pillow, from whence the screaming came.

" He listen'd and look'd — it was only the cat ;
But the Bishop he grew more fearful for that,
For she sat screaming, mad with fear,
At the army of rats that were drawing near.

" For they have swum over the river so deep,
And they have climb'd the shores so steep,
And now by thousands up they qx2,\\\
To the holes and windows in the wall.

" Down on his knees the Bishop fell,
And faster and faster his beads did tell.
As louder and louder, drawing near.
The saw of their teeth without he could hear.



Bishop Hatto 185

" And in at the windows, and in at the door,
And through tlie walls by thousands they pour,
And down from the ceiling, and up through the floor,
From the right and the left, from behind and before,
From within and without, from above and below.
And all at once to the Bishop they go.

" They have whetted their teeth against the stones.
And now they pick the Bishop's bones ;
They gnaw'd the flesh from every limb.
For they were sent to do judgment on him."

It is satisfactory to know that popular fiction has
maligned poor Bishop Hatto, who was not by any
means a hard-hearted and wicked prelate. Wol-
fius ', who tells the story on the authority of Hono-
rius Augustodunensis (d. 1152), Marianus Scotus
(d. 1086), and Grithemius (d. 1516), accompanying
it with the curious picture reproduced as frontis-
piece to this volume, says, " This is regarded by
many as a fable, yet the tower, taking its name
from the mice, exists to this day in the river
Rhine." But this is no evidence, as there is docu-
mentary proof that the tower was erected as a
station for collecting tolls on the vessels which
passed up and down the river.

The same story is told of other persons and
places. Indeed, Wolfius reproduces his picture of

' Wolfii Lect. Memorab. Centenarii xvi. Lavingas, 1600,
tom. i. p. 343.



186 Bishop Hatto

Hatto in the mouse-tower, to do service as an illus-
tration of the dreadful death of Widerolf, Bishop of
Strasburg (997), who, in the seventeenth year of
his episcopate, on July 17th, in punishment for
having suppressed the convent of Seltzen on the
Rhine, was attacked and devoured by mice or
rats^ The same fate is also attributed to Bishop
Adolf of Cologne, who died in iii:^''.

The story comes to us from Switzerland. A
Freiherr von Giittingen possessed three castles
between Constance and Arbon, in the Canton of
Thurgau, namely, Giittingen, Moosburg, and Ober-
burg. During a famine, he collected the poor of
his territory into a great barn, and there consumed
them, mocking their cries by exclamations of
" Hark ! how the rats and mice are squeaking."
Shortly after, he was attacked by an army of mice,
and fled to his castle of Giittingen in the waters of
the Lake of Constance ; but the vermin pursued
him to his retreat, and devoured him. The castle
then sank into the lake, and its ruins are distin-



'^ Id. torn. i. p. 270. See also Konigshofen's Chronik.
Konigshofen was priest of Strasbourg (b. 1360, d. 1420).
His German Chronicle contains the story of Bishop Widerolf
and the mice.

' San-Marte, Germania, viii. 77.



Bishop Hatto 187

guishable when the water is clear and unruffled''.
In Austria, a similar legend is related of the mouse-
tower at Holzolster, with this difference only, that
the hard-hearted nobleman casts the poor people
into a dungeon and starves them to death, instead
of burning them ^

Between Inning and Seefeld in Bavaria is the
Worthsee, called also the Mouse-lake. There was
once a Count of Seefeld, who in time of famine put
all his starving poor in a dungeon, jested at their
cries, which he called the squeaking of mice, and
was devoured by these animals in his tower in the
lake, to which he fled from them, although he
suspended his bed by iron chains from the roof ^.

A similar story is told of the Mauseschloss in the
Hirschberger lake. A Polish version occurs in old
historical writers.

Martinus Gallus, who wrote in mo, says that
King Popiel, having been driven from his kingdom,
was so tormented by mice, that he fled to an island
whereon was a wooden tower, in which he took
refuge ; but the host of mice and rats swam over
and ate him up. The story is told more fully by

•■ Zeitschrift f. Deut. Myth. iii. p. 307.
5 Vernaleken, Alpensagen, p. 328.
" Zeitschrift f. Deut. Myth. i. p. 452.



188 BisJwp Hatto

Majolus'. When the Poles murmured at the bad
government of the king, and sought redress, Popiel
summoned the chief murmurers to his palace,
where he pretended that he was ill, and then poi-
soned them. After this the corpses were flung
by his orders into the lake Gopolo. Then the king
held a banquet of rejoicing at having freed himself
from these troublesome complainers. But during
the feast, by a strange metamorphosis {mira qua-
dam metamorpJiosi), an enormous number of mice
issued from the bodies of his poisoned subjects, and
rushing on the palace, attacked the king and his
family. Popiel took refuge within a circle of fire,
but the mice broke through the flaming ring ; then
he fled with his wife and child to a castle in the
sea, but was followed by the animals and devoured.
A Scandinavian legend is to this effect*. King
Knut the Saint was murdered by the Earl Asbjorn,
in the church of S. Alban, in Odense, during an
insurrection of the Jutes, in 1086. Next year the
country suffered severely from famine, and this was
attributed to Divine vengeance for the murder of
the king. Asbjorn was fallen upon by rats, and
eaten up.

' Majolus, Dierum Canic. p. 793.

' Afzelius, Sagohafder (2nd ed.), ii. p. 132.



Bishop Hatto 189

William of Malmesbury tells this story ": " I
have heard a person of the utmost veracity relate,
that one of the adversaries of Henry IV. (of Ger-
many), a weak and factious man, while reclining at
a banquet, was on a sudden so completely sur-
rounded by mice as to be unable to escape. So
great was the number of these little animals, that
there could scarcely be imagined more in a whole
province. It was in vain that they were attacked
with clubs and fragments of the benches which were
at hand ; and though they were for a long time
assailed by all, yet they wreaked their deputed
curse on no one else ; pursuing him only with their
teeth, and with a kind of dreadful squeaking. And
although he was carried out to sea about a javelin's
cast by the servants, yet he could not by these
means escape their violence ; for immediately so.
great a multitude of mice took to the water, that
you would have sworn the sea was strewed with
chaff But when they began to gnaw the planks
of the ship, and the water, rushing through the
chinks, threatened inevitable shipwreck, the servants
turned the vessel to the shore. The animals, then
also swimming close to the ship, landed first.

' William of Malmesbury, book iii., Bohn's trans., p. 313.



190 Bishop Hatto

Thus the wretch, set on shore, and soon after
entirely gnawed in pieces, satiated the dreadful
hunger of the mice.

" I deem this the less wonderful, because it is well
known that in Asia, if a leopard bite any person, a

party of mice approach directly But if,

by the care of servants driving them off, the de-
struction can be avoided duririg nine days, then
medical assistance, if called in, may be of service.
My informant had seen a person wounded after
this manner, who, despairing of safety on shore,
proceeded to sea, and lay at anchor ; when, imme-
diately, more than a thousand mice swam out,
wonderful to relate, in the rinds of pomegranates,
the insides of which they had eaten ; but they
were drowned through the loud shouting of the
.sailors."

Albertus Trium-Fontium tells the same story
under the year 1083, quoting probably from
William of Malmesbury.

Giraldus Cambrensis (d. 1230), in his " Itinerary,"
relates a curious story of a youth named Siscillus
Esceir-hir, or Long-shanks, who was attacked in his
bed by multitudes of toads, and who fled from them
to the top of a tree, but was pursued by the reptiles,
and his flesh picked from his bones. " And in like



Bishop Hatto 191

manner," he adds, " we read of how by the secret,
but never unjust, counsel of God a certain man
was persecuted by the larger sort of mice which
are commonly called rati '."

And Thietmar of Merseburg (b. 976, d. 1018) says,
that there was once a certain knight who, having
appropriated the goods of S. Clement, and refused
to make restitution, was one day attacked by an
innumerable host of mice, as he lay in bed. At
first he defended himself with a club, then with his
sword, and, as he found himself unable to cope
with the multitude, he ordered his servants to
put him in a box, and suspend this by a rope from
the ceiling, and as soon as the mice were gone, to
liberate him. But the animals pursued him even
thus, and when he was taken down, it was found
that they had eaten the flesh and skin off his bones.
And it became manifest to all how obnoxious to
God is the sin of sacrilege ■.

Caesarius of Heisterbach (Dist. ii. c. 31) tells a
tale of a usurer in Cologne, who, moved with
compunction for his ■ sins, confessed to a priest,
who bade him fill a chest with bread, as alms for

' Girald. Cambr. Itin. Cambrise, lib. xi. c. 2.
^ Thietmar, Ep. Merseburg. Chronici libri viii., lib. vi
C 30.



193 Bishop Hatto

the poor attached to the church of S. Gerebn.
Next morning the loaves were found transformed
into toads and frogs. " Behold," said the priest,
" the value of your alms in the sight of God !" To
which the terrified usurer replied, " Lord, what shall
I do?" And the priest answered, "If you wish
to be saved, lie this night naked amidst these
reptiles." Wondrous contrition. He, though he
recoiled from such a couch, preferred to lie among
worms which perish, rather than those which are
eternal ; and he cast himself nude upon the crea-
tures. Then the priest went to the box, shut it,
and departed ; which, when he opened it on the
following day, he found to contain nothing save
human bones.

It will be seen from these versions of the Hatto
myth, how prevalent among the Northern nations
was the idea of men being devoured by vermin.
The manner of accounting for their death differs,
but all the stories agree in regarding that death
as mysterious.

I believe the origin of these stories to be a
heathen human sacrifice made in times of famine.
That such sacrifice took place among the Scandi-
navian and Teutonic peoples is certain. Tacitus
tells us that the Germans sacrificed men. Snorro



Bishop Hatto 193

Sturlesson (d. 1241) gives us an instance of the
Swedes offering their king to obtain abundant
crops ^.

" Donald took the heritage after his father Vis-
bur, and ruled over the land. As in his time there
was a great famine and distress, the Swedes made
great offerings of sacrifice at Upsala. The first
autumn they sacrificed oxen, but the succeeding
season was not improved by it. The following
autumn they sacrificed men, but the succeeding
year was rather worse. The third autumn, when
the offer of sacrifices should begin, a great multi-
tude of Swedes came to Upsala ; and now the chiefs
held consultations with each other, and all agreed
that the times of scarcity were on account of their
king Donald, and they resolved to offer him for
good seasons, and to assault and kill him, and
sprinkle the altar of the gods with his blood. And
they did so.'' So again with Olaf the Tree-feller :
" There came dear times and famine, which they
ascribed to their king, as the Swedes used always
to reckon good or bad crops for or against their
kings. The Swedes took it amiss that Olaf was
sparing in his sacrifices, and believed the dear times

^ Snorro Sturlesson, Heimskringla, Saga i. c. 18, 47.
[II.] O



194 Bishop Hatto

must proceed from this cause. The Swedes there-
fore gathered together troops, made an expedition
against King Olaf, surrounded his house, and burnt
him in it, giving him to Odin as a sacrifice for
good crops."

Saxo Grammaticus says that in the reign of King
Snio of Denmark there was a famine. The " Chro-
nicon Regum Danicorum " tells a curious story about
this Snio being devoured by vermin, sent to destroy
him by his former master the giant Lae. Probably
Snio was sacrificed, like Donald and Olaf, to obtain
good harvests.

The manner in which human sacrifices were
made was very different. Sometimes the victims
were precipitated off a rock, sometimes hung, at
other times they were sunk in a bog. It seems
probable to me that the manner in which' an offer-
ing was made for plenty, was by exposure to rats,
just as M. Du Chaillu tells us, an African tribe
place their criminals in the way of ants to be
devoured by them. The peculiar death of Ragnar
Lodbrog, who was sentenced by Ella of Northum-
berland to be stung to death by serpents in a
dungeon, was somewhat similar. Offerings to rats
and mice are still prevalent among the peasantry
in certain parts of Germany, if we may credit



Bishop Hatto 195

Grimm and Wolf; and this can only be a relic
of heathenism, for the significance of the act is
lost.

In Mark it is said that the Elves appear in Yule-
tide as mice, and cakes are laid out for them. In
Bohemia, on Christmas eve, the remainder of the
supper is given them with the words, " Mice ! eat
of these crumbs, and leave the wheat."

If I am correct in supposing that the Hatto
myth points to sacrifices of chieftains and princes
in times of famine, and that the manner of offering
the sacrifice was the exposure of the victim to rats,
then it is not to be wondered at, that, when the
reason of such a sacrifice was forgotten, the death
should be accounted as a judgment of God for
some crime committed by the sufferer, as hard-
heartedness, murder, or sacrilege. Both Giraldus
Cambrensis and William of Malmesbury are, how-
ever, sadly troubled to find a cause.

Rats and mice have generally been considered
sacred animals. Among the Scandinavian and
Teutonic peoples they were regarded as the souls
of the dead.

In the article on the Piper of Hameln, I men-
tioned that Prtetorius gives a story of a woman's
soul leaving her body in the shape of a red mouse.
O 2



196 Bishop Hatto

According to Bohemian belief, one must not go to
sleep thirsty, or the soul will leave the body in
search of drink. Three labourers once lost their
way in a wood. Parched with thirst, they sought,
but in vain, for a spring of water. At last one
of them lay down and fell asleep, but the others
continuing their search, discovered a fountain.
They drank, and then returned to their comrade.
He still slept, and they observed a little white
mou.se run out of his mouth, go to the spring,
drink, and return to his mouth. They woke him
and said, " You are such an idle fellow, that instead
of going yourself after water, you send your soul.
We will have nothing more to do with you."

A miller in the Black Forest, after having cut
wood, la)' down and slept. A servant saw a mouse
run out of him. He and his companions went in
pursuit. They scared the little creature away,
little thinking it was the soul of the miller, and
they A\crc never able to rouse him again. Paulus
Diaconus relates of King Gunthram that his soul
left his body in the shape of a serpent ; and Hugh
Miller, in his " Schools and Schoolmasters," tells a
Scottish story of two companions, one of whom
slept whilst the other watched. He who was awake
saw a bee come out of the mouth of the sleeper, cross



Bishop Hatto 197

a stream of water on a straw, run into a hole, and then
return and disappear into the mouth of his friend
These are similar stories, but the bee and the
serpent have taken the place of the mouse. The
idea that the soul is like a mouse, lies at the root of
several grotesque stories, as that told by Luther,
in his "Table-Talk,"of a woman giving birth to a rat,
and that of a mother harassed by the clamour of
her children, wishing they were mice, and finding
this inconsiderate wish literally fulfilled.

The same idea has passed into Christian icono-
graphy. According to the popular German belief,
the souls of the dead spend the first night after
they leave the body with S. Gertrude, the second
with S. Michael, and the third in their destined
habitation. S. Gertrude is regarded as the pa-
troness of fleeting souls, the saint who is the
first to shelter the spirits when they begin their
wandering. As the patroness of souls, her sym-
bol is a mouse. Various stories have been in-
vented to account for this symbol. Some relate
that a maiden span on her festival, and the mice
ate through her clew as a punishment. A prettier
story is that, when she prayed, she was so absorbed
that the mice ran about her, and up her pastoral
staff, without attracting her attention. Another



19S Bishop Hat to

explanation is that the mouse is a symbol of the
evil spirit, which S. Gertrude overcame ■*.

But S. Gertrude occupies the place of the ancient
Teutonic goddess Holda or Perchta, who was the
receiver of the souls of maidens and children, and
who still exists as the White Lady, not unfre-
quently, in German legends, transforming herself,
or those whom she decoys into her home, into
white mice.

It is not unlikely that the saying, " Rats desert
a falling house," applied originally to the crumbling
ruin. of the body from which the soul fled.

In the Hatto and Popiel legends it is evident
that the rats are the souls of those whom the Bishop
and the King murdered.

The rats of Bingen issue from the flames in
which the poor people are being consumed. The
same is said of the rats \\'hich devoured the Freiherr
oi Giittingen. The rats mira metamorphosi come
from the corpses of those poisoned by Popiel.

There is a curious Icelandic story, written in the
twelfth century, which bears a striking resemblance
to those of Hatto, Widerolf, &c., but in which the
rats make no appearance.

' Die Attribute der Heiligen. Hanover, 1843, p. 114.



Bishop Hatto 199

In the tenth century Iceland suffered severely
from a bad year, so that there was a large amount
of destitution throughout the country ; and, unless
something were done by the wealthy bonders to
relieve it, there was a certainty of many poor
householders perishing during the approaching
winter. Then Svathi, a heathen chief, stepped
forward and undertook to provide for a consider-
able number of sufferers. Accordingly, the poor
starving wretches assembled at his door, and were
ordered by him to dig a large pit in his tun, or
home meadow. They complied with alacrity, and
in the evening they were gathered into a barn, the
door was locked upon them, and it was explained
to them that on the following morning they were
to be buried alive in the pit of their own digging.

"You will at once perceive," said Svathi, "that if
a number of you be put out of your misery, the
number of mouths wanting food will be reduced,
and there will be more victuals for those who
remain."

There was truth in what Svathi said ; but the
poor wretches did not view the matter in the same
light as he, nor appreciate the force of his argu-
ment ; and they spent the night howling with de-
spair. Thorwald of Asi, a Christian, who happened



200 Bishop Hatto

to be riding by towards dawn, heard the outcries,
and went to the barn to inquire into their signi-
fication. When he learned the cause of their dis-
tress, he hberated the prisoners, and bade them
follow him to Asi. Before long, Svathi became
aware that his victims had escaped, and set off in
pursuit. However, he was unable to recover them,
as Thorwald's men were armed, and the poor
people were prepared to resist with the courage of
despair. Thus the golden opportunity was lost,
and he was obliged to return home, bewailing the
failure of his scheme. As he dashed up to his
house, blinded with rage, and regardless of what
was before him, the horse fell with him into the pit
which the poor folk had dug, and he was killed by
the fall. He was buried in it next day, along with
his horse and hound ^.

In all likelihood this Svathi was sacrificed in
time of famine, and the legend may describe cor-
rectly the manner in which he was offered to the
gods, viz. by burial alive.

In this story, as in Snorro's account of Donald,
we have a sacrifice of human beings, taken from a
low rank, offered first, and then the chief himself
sacrificed.

' Younger OlaPs Saga Trygvas., cap. 225.



Bishop Hatto EOl

The god to whom these human oblations were
made, seems to have been Odin. In the " Herverar
Saga" is an account of a famine in Jutland, to obtain
relief from which, the nobles and farmers consulted
whom to sacrifice, and they decided that the king's
son was the most illustrious person they could
present to Odin. But the king, to save his son,
fought with another king, and slew him and his
-son, and with their blood smeared the altar of
Odin, and thus appeased the god °.

Now, Odin was the receiver of the souls of men,
as Freya, or the German Holda, took charge of
those of women. Odin appears as the wild hunts-
man, followed by a multitude of souls-; or, as the
Piper of Hameln, leading them into the mountain
where he dwells.

Freya, or Holda, leads an army of mice, and
Odin a multitude of rats.

As a rat or soul god, it is not unlikely that sacri-
fices to him may have been made by the placing
of the victim on an island infested by water-rats,
there to be devoured. The manner in which sacri-
fices were made have generally some relation to
the nature of the god to whom they were made.

* Herverar Saga, cap. xi.



'lO-Z Bishop Hatto

Thus, as Odin was a wind-god, men were hung in
his honour. Most of the legends we are consi-
dering point to islands as the place where the
victim suffered, and islands, we know, were regarded
with special sanctity by the Northern nations.
Rijgen and Heligoland in the sea were sacred from
a remote antiquity, and probably lakes had as well
their sacred islets, to which the victim was rowed
out, his back broken, and on which he was left to
become the prey of the rats.

We find rats and mice regarded as sacred
animals in other Aryan mythologies. Thus the
mouse was the beast of the Indian Rudra.

" This portion belongs to thee, O Rudra, with thy
sister Ambika," is the wording of a prayer in the
Yajur-Veda ; " may it please you. This portion be-
longs to thee, O Rudra, whose animal is the mouse'."
In later mythology it became the attribute of
Gane9a, who was represented as riding upon a rat ;
but Ganecja is simply an hypostasis for Rudra.

Apollo was called Smintheus, as has been
stated already. On some of the coins of Argos,
in place of the god, is figured his symbol, the
mouse I In the temple at Chrisa was a statue of

" Yajur-Veda, iii. 57.

'* Otfr. Miiller, Dorier, i. p. 285.



BisJiop Hatto :J0;3

Apollo, with a mouse at his feet " ; and tame mice
were kept as sacred to the god. In the Smintheion
of Hamaxitus, white mice were fed as a solemn rite,
and had their holes under the altar ; and near the
tripod of Apollo was a representation of one of
these animals '.

Among Semitic nations the mouse was also
sacred.

Herodotus gives a curious legend relating to the
destruction of the host of Sennacherib before Jeru-
salem. Isaiah simply says, " Then the angel of the
Lord went forth, and smote in the camp of the
Assyrians a hundred and fourscore and five thou-
sand: and when they arose early in the morning,
behold, they were all dead corpses ^" How they
were slain he does not specify, but as the army
was threatened with a " hot blast," and a " destroy-
ing wind," it is rendered probable that they were
destroyed by a hot wind. But the story of Hero-
dotus is very different. He received it from the
Egyptian priests, who claimed the miracle, of which
they had but an imperfect knowledge, for one of
their gods, and transferred the entire event to their

' Strabo, xiii. i.

' yElian, Hist. Animal, xii. 15.

" Isa. xxxvii. ^6.



204 Bishop Hatto

own country. " After Amyrtsus reigned the
priest of Vulcan, whose name was Sethon ; he held
in no account and despised the military caste of
the Egyptians, as not having need of their services ;
and accordingly, among other indignities, he took
away their lands ; to each of whom, under former
kings, twelve chosen acres had been assigned.
After this, Sennacherib, king of the Arabians and
Assyrians, marched a large army again.st Egypt ;
whereupon the Egyptian warriors refused to assist
him ; and the priest being reduced to a strait,
entered the temple, and bewailed before the image
the calamities he was in danger of suffering. While
he was lamenting, sleep fell upon him ; and it
appeared to him in a vision that the god stood by
and encouraged him, assuring him that he should
suffer nothing disagreeable in meeting the Arabian
army, for he would himself send assistants to him.
Confiding in this vision, he took with him such
of the Egyptians as were willing to follow him, and
encamped in Pelusium, for there the entrance into
Egypt is ; but none of the military caste followed
him, but tradesmen, mechanics, and sutlers. When
they arrived there, a number of field-mice, pouring
in upon their enemies, devoured their quivers and
their bows, and, moreover, the handles of their



Bishop Hatto 205

shields ; so that on the next day, when they fled
bereft of their arms, many of them fell. And to
this day, a stone statue of this king stands in the
temple of Vulcan, with a mouse in his hand, and an
inscription to the following effect : ' Whoever looks
on me, let him revere the gods I' "

Among the Babylonians the mouse was sacrificed
and eaten as a religious rite, but in connexion with
what god does not transpire ■*. And the Philistines,
who, according to Hitzig, were a Pelasgic and
therefore Aryan race, after having suffered from
the retention of the ark, were told by their divines
to " make images of your mice that mar the land ;
and ye shall give glory unto the God of Israel."
Therefore they made five golden mice as an offering
to the Lord ^ This indicates the mouse as having
been the symbol among the Philistines of a deity
whom they identified with the God of Israel.

^ Herod. Euterpe, c. 141, Trans. Bohn.

* Movers, Phonizier, i. p. 219. Cf. Isa. Ixvi. 17.

' I Sam. vi. 4, 5.



JWdustna


; Church (Gircnde).



T^MMERICK, Count of Poitou, was a noble-
^ — ■' man of great wealth, and eminent for his
virtues. He had two children, a son named Ber-
tram, and a daughter Blaniferte. In the great
forest which stretclied away in all directions around
the knoll on which stood the town and castle of
Poictiers, lived a Count de la Foret, related to
Kmrncrick, but poor and with a large family. Out
of compassion for his kinsman, the Count of Poitou
adopted his youngest son Raj-mond, a beautiful



Mehisina 207

and amiable youth, and made him his constant
companion in hall and in the chase. One day the
Count and his retinue hunted a boar in the forest
of Colombiers, and distancing his servants, Emme-
rick found himself alone in the depths of the wood
with Raymond. The boar had escaped. Night
came on, and the two huntsmen lost their way.
They succeeded" in lighting a fire, and were warm-
ing themselves over the blaze, when suddenly the
boar plunged out of the forest upon the Count, and
Raymond, snatching up his sword, struck at the
beast, but the blade glanced off and slew the Count.
A second blow laid the boar at his side. Ray-
mond then with horror perceived that his friend
and piaster was dead. In despair he mounted his
horse and fled, not knowing whither he went.

Presently the boughs of the trees became less
interlaced, and the trunks fewer ; next moment his
horse, crashing through the shrubs, brought him out \
on a pleasant glade, white with rime, and illumined
by the new moon ; in the midst bubbled up a
limpid fountain, and flowed away over a pebbly
floor with a soothing murmur. Near the fountain-
head sat three maidens in glimmering white dresses,
with long waving golden hair, and faces of inex-
pressible beauty.



5508 Melnsina

Raymond was riveted to the spot with astonish-
ment. He believed that he saw a vision of angels,
and would have prostrated himself at their feet,
had not one of them advanced and stayed him.
The lady inquired the cause of his manifest terror,
and the young man, after a slight hesitation, told
her of his dreadful misfortune. She listened with
attention, and at the conclusion of his story, tecom-
mended him to remount his horse, and gallop out
of the forest, and return to Poictiers, as though
unconscious of what had taken place. All the
huntsmen had that day lost themselves in the
wood, and were returning singly, at intervals, to the
castle, so that no suspicion would attach to him.
The body of the count would be found, and from
the proximity of the dead boar, it would be con-
cluded that he had fallen before the tusk of the
animal, to which he had given its death-blow.

Relieved of his anxiety, Raymond was able to
devote his attention exclusively to the beauty of
the lady who addressed him, and found means to
prolong the conversation till daybreak. He had
never beheld charms equal to hers, and the suscep-
tible heart of the youth was completely capti-
vated by the fair unknown. Before he left her, he
obtained from her a promise to be his. She then



Mdusina 209

told him to ask of his kinsman Bertram, as a gift,
so much ground around the fountain where they
had met, as could be covered by a stag's hide :
upon this ground she undertook to erect a magni-
ficent palace. Her name, she told him, was Melu-
sina ; she was a water-fay of great power and
wealth. His she consented to be, but subject to
one condition, that her Saturdays might be spent in
a complete seclusion, upon which he should never
venture to intrude.

Raymond then left her, and followed her advice
to the letter. Bertram, who succeeded his father,
readily granted the land he asked for, but was not
a little vexed, when he found that, by cutting
the hide into threads, Raymond had succeeded
in making it include a considerable area.

Raymond then invited the young count to his
wedding, and the marriage festivities took place,
with unusual splendour, in the magnificent castle
erected by Melusina. On the evening of the mar-
riage, the bride, with tears in her beautiful eyes,
implored her husband on no account to attempt an
intrusion on her privacy upon Saturdays, for such
an intrusion must infallibly separate them for ever.
The enamoured Raymond readily swore to strictly
observe her wishes in this matter.

[II.] P



210 Melnsina

Melusina continued to extend the castle, and
strengthen its fortifications, till the like was not to
be seen in all the country round. On its com-
pletion she named it after herself Lusinia, a name
which has been corrupted into Lusignan, which
it bears to this day.

In course of time, the Lady of Lusignan gave
birth to a son, who was baptized Urian. He was
a strangely shaped child : his mouth was large, his
ears pendulous ; one of his eyes was red, the other
green.

A twelvemonth later she gave birth to another
son, whom she called Gedes ; he had a face which
was scarlet. In thank-offering for his birth she
erected and endowed the convent of Malliers ; and,
as a 'place of residence for her child, built the
strong castle of Favent.

Melusina then bore a third son, who was chris-
tened Gyot. He was a fine, handsome child, but
one of his eyes was higher up in his face than the
other. For him his mother built La Rochelle.

Her next son, Anthony, had long claws on his
fingers, and was covered with hair ; the next again
had but a single eye. The sixth was Geoffry with
the Tooth, so called from a boar's tusk which
protruded from his jaw. Other children she had,



Melusina 211

but all were in some way disfigured and mon-
strous.

Years passed, and the love of Raymond for his
beautiful wife never languished. Every Saturday
she left "him, and spent the twenty-four hours in
the strictest seclusion, without her husband think-
ing of intruding on her privac}^ The children '
grew up to be great heroes and illustrious warriors.
One, Freimund, entered the Church, and became a
pious monk, in the abbey of Malliers. The aged
Count de la Foret and the brothers of Raymond
shared in his good fortune, and the old man spent
his last years in the castle with his son, whilst the
brothers were furnished with money and servants
suitable to their rank.

One Saturday, the old father inquired at dinner
after his daughter-in-law. Raymond replied that
she was not visible on Saturdays. Thereupon one
of his brothers, drawing him aside, whispered that
strange gossiping tales were about relative to this
sabbath seclusion, and that it behoved him to in-
quire into it, and set the minds of people at rest.
Full of wrath and anxiety, the count rushed off to
the private apartments of the countess, but found
them empty. One door alone was locked, and that
opened into a bath. He looked through the key-
P 2



212 Melusina

hole, and to his dismay beheld her in the water,
her lower extremities changed into the tail of a
monstrous fish or serpent.

Silently he withdrew. No word of what he had
seen passed his lips ; it was not loathing that filled
his heart, but anguish at the thought that by his
fault he must lose the beautiful wife who had been
the charm and glory of his life. Some time passed
by, however, and Melusina gave no token of con-
sciousness that she had been observed during the
period of her transformation. But one day news
reached the castle that Geoffry with the Tooth had
attacked the monastery of Malliers, and burned it ;
and that in the flames had perished Freimund, with
the abbot and a hundred monks. On hearing of this
disaster, the poor father, in a paroxysm of misery,
exclaimed, as Melusina approached to comfort him,
" Away, odious serpent, contaminator of my honour-
able race !"

At these words she fainted ; and Raymond, full
of sorrow for having spoken thus intemperately,
strove to revive her. When she came to herself
again, with streaming tears she kissed and embraced
him for the last time. " O husband !" she said, " I
leave two little ones in their cradle ; look tenderly
after them, bereaved of their mother. And now



Melusina 213

farewell for ever ! yet know that thou, and those
who succeed thee, shall see me hover over this fair
castle of Lusignan, whenever a new lord is to come."
And with a long wail of agony she swept from the
window, leaving the impression of her foot on the
stone she last touched.

The children in arms she had left were Die-
trich and Raymond. At night, the nurses be-
held a glimmering figure appear near the cradle
of the babes, most like the vanished countess, but
from her waist downwards terminating in a scaly
fish-tail enamelled blue and white. At her approach
the little ones extended their arms and smiled, and
she took them to her breast and suckled them ;
but as the grey dawn stole in at the casement, she
vanished, and the children's cries told the nurses
that their mother was gone.

Long was it believed in France that the unfortu-^
nate Melusina appeared in the air, wailing over the
ramparts of Lusignan before the death of one of its
lords ; and that, on the extinction of the family, she
was seen whenever a king of France was to depart
this life. Mezeray informs us that he was assured
of the truth of the appearance of Melusina on the
old tower of Lusignan, previous to the death of
one of her descendants, or of a king of France, by



214 Melusina

people of reputation, and who were not by any
means credulous. She appeared in a mourning
dress, and continued for a long time to utter the
most heart-rending lamentations.

Brantome, in his eulogium on the Duke of Mont-
pensier, who in 1574' destroyed Lusignan, a Hugue-
not retreat, says :

" I heard, more than forty years ago, an old
veteran say, that when the Emperor Charles V. came
to France, they brought him by Lusignan for
the sake of the recreation of hunting the deer,
which were then in great abundance in the fine
old parks of France; that he was never tired of
admiring and praising the beauty, the size, and the
chef d'oeuvre of that house, built, which is more, by
such a lady, of whom he made them tell him several
fabulous tales, which are there quite common, even
to the good old women who washed their hnen at
the fountains, whom Queen Catherine de Medicis,
mother of the king, would also question and
listen to. Some told her that they used some-
times to see her come to the fountain, to bathe in it,
in the form of a most beautiful woman and in
the dress of a widow. Others said that they used
to see her, but very rarely, and that on Saturday
evening (for in that state she did not let herself be



Melusina 215

seen), bathing, half her body being that of a very-
beautiful lady, the other half ending in a snake ;
others, that she used to appear a-top of the great
tower in a very beautiful form, and as a snake. Some
said, that when any great disaster was to come on
the kingdom, or a change of reign, or a death, or
misfortune among her relatives, who were the great-
est people of France, and were kings, that three
days before she was heard to cry, with a cry most
shrill and terrible, three times.

" This is held to be perfectly true. Several persons
of that place, who have heard it, are positive of it,
and hand it from father to son ; and say that, even
when the siege came on, many soldiers and men of
honour, who were there, affirmed it. But it was
when order was given to throw down and destroy
her castles, that she uttered her loudest cries and
wails. Since then she has not been heard. Some
old wives, however, say she has appeared to them,
but very rarely '."

In 1387, Jean d' Arras, secretary to the Duke of
Berry, received orders from his master to collect all
information attainable with reference to Melusina,
probably for the entertainment of the sister of the

' Keightley's Fairy Mythology, i86o, pp. 483, 484.



216 Melusina

duke, the Countess de Bar. This he did, making con-
siderable use of a history of the mysterious lady,
written " by one of the race of Lusinia, William de
Portenach (qu. Partenope), in Italian." This history
if it ever existed, has not come down to us ; the
work of Jean d' Arras is a complete romance. Ac-
cording to him, Helmas, king of Albania (Scotland,
or, as the German popular versions have it, Nord-
land), married a fay named Pressina, whom he found
singing beside a fountain. She became his, after
having exacted from him an oath never to visit her
during her lying-in. She gave birth to three little
girls at once, Melusina, Melior, and Plantina. A
son of Helmas by a former wife hurried to his
father with the joyful news, and the king, oblivious
of his promise, rushed to his wife and found her
bathing her three children. Pressina, on seeing him,
exclaimed against his forgetfulness, and, taking her
babes in her arms, vanished. She brought up the
daughters until they were fifteen, when she unfolded
to them the story of their father's breach of promise,
and Melusina, the youngest, determined on revenge.
She, in concert with her sisters, caught King Helmas
and chained him in the heart of a mountain called
Avalon, or, in the German books, Brunbelois, in
Northubelon, i.e. Northumberland. At this unfilial



Melusina 217

act, the mother was so indignant, that she sentenced
her daughter Melusina to spend the sabbath in a
semi-fish form, till she should marry one who
would never inquire into what became of her on
that day. Jean d' Arras relates that Serville, who
defended Lusignan for the English against the
Duke de Berry, swore to that prince upon his faith
and honour, " that three days before the surrender
of the castle, there entered into his chamber, though
the doors were shut, a large serpent, enamelled blue
and white, which struck its tail several times against
the foot of the bed whereon he was lying with his
wife, who was not at all frightened at it, though
he was very considerably so ; and that when he
seized his sword, the serpent changed all at once
into a woman, and said to him : ' How, Serville,
you, who have been in so many battles and sieges,
are you afraid ? Know that I am the mistress of this
castle, which I erected, and that soon you will have
to surrender it !' When she had ended these words,
she resumed her serpent-shape, and glided away
so swiftly that he could not perceive her."

Stephan, a Dominican, of the house of Lusignan,
developed the work of Jean d'Arras, and made the
story so famous, that the families of Luxembourg,
Rohan, and Sassenaye altered their pedigrees so as



218 Meliisina

to be able to claim descent from the illustrious
Melusina'; and the Emperor Henry VII. felt no
little pride in being able to number the beautiful
and mysterious lady among his ancestors. " It
does not escape me," writes the chronicler Conrad
Vecerius, in his life of that emperor, " to report
what is related in a little work in the vernacular,
concerning the acts of a woman, Melyssina, on one
day of the week becoming a serpent from her
middle downwards, whom they reckon among the

ancestors of Henry VH But, as authors

relate, that in a certain island of the ocean, there
are nine Sirens endowed with various arts, such,
for instance, as changing themselves into any shape
they like, it is no absurd conjecture to suppose that
Melyssina came thence '."

The story became immensely popular in France,
in Germany, and in Spain, and was printed and
reprinted. The following are some of the principal
early editions of it.

Jean d'Arras, " Le liure de Melusine en fracoys ;"
Geneva, 1478. The same, Lyons and Paris, with-
out date ; Lyons, 4to, 1500, and again 1544 ;

- Bullet, Dissertat. sur la Mythologie Fran^aise. Paris,
1 771, pp. 1—32.
' Urstisius, Scriptores Germanias. Frankfort, 1670.



Melusina 219

Troyes, 4to, no date. " L'histoire de Melusine fiUe
du roy d'Albanie et de dame Pressine, revue et
mise en meilleur langage que par cy devant ;"
Lyons, 1597- " Le roman de Melusine, princesse de
Lusignan, avec l'histoire de Geoffry, surnomme &,
la Grand Dent," par Nodot ; Paris, 1700. An outline
of the story in the " Bibliotheque des Romans,"
1775, T. II. A Spanish version, "Historia de la
linda Melosyna ;" Tolosa, 1489. " La hystoria de
la linda Melosina ;" Sevilla, 1526. A Dutch trans-
lation, " Een san sonderlingke schone ende wonder-
like historie, die men warachtich kout te syne
ende autentick sprekende van eenre vrouwen
gheheeten Melusine ;" Tantwerpen, 1500. A Bohe-
mian version, probably translated from the German,
" Kronyke Kratochwilne, o ctne a slech netne Panne
Meluzijne ;" Prag, 1760, r764, 1805. A Danish ver-
sion, made about 1579, " Melusine ;" Copenhagen,
1667, 170a, 1739. One in Swedish, without date.
The original of these three last was the " History
of Melusina," by Thiiring von Ringoltingen, pub-
lished in 1456 ; Augsburg, 1474 ; Strasburg, 1478.
" Melosine-Geschicht," illustrated with woodcuts ;
Heidelberg, 1491. "Die Historia von Melusina;"
Strasburg, 1506. " Die Histori oder Geschicht
von der edle und schonen Melusina ;" Augsburg,



220 Melusina

1547; Strasburg, 1577, 1624. " Wunderbare Ge-
schichte von der edeln und schonen Melusina, welche
eine Tochter des Konigs Helmus und ein Meer-
wunder gewesen ist ;" Niirnberg, without date ; re-
printed in Marbach's " Volksbiicher." Leipzig, 1838.

In the fable of Melusina, there are several points
deserving of consideration, as — the framework of
the story, the half-serpent or fish-shape of Melu-
sina, and her appearances as warnings of impend-
ing misfortune or death. The minor details, as, for
instance, the trick with the hide, which is taken
from the story of Dido, shall not detain us.

The framework of the myth is the story-radical
corresponding with that of Lohengrin. The skeleton
of the romance is this —

1. A man falls in love with a woman of super-
natural race.

2. She consents to live with him, subject to one
condition.

3. He breaks the condition and loses her.

4. He seeks her, and — a. recovers her ; /S. never
recovers her.

In the story before us, the last item has dropped
out, but it exists in many other stories which have
sprung from the same root. The beautiful legend
of Undine is but another version of the same



Mehisina 221

story. A young knight marries a water-sprite,
and promises never to be false to her, and never
to bring her near a river. He breaks his engage-
ment, and loses her. Then she comes to him on
the eve of his second marriage and kisses him to
death. Fouque's inimitable romance is founded
on the story as told by Theophrastus Paracelsus in
his " Treatise on Elemental Sprites ;" but the bare
bones of the myth related by the philosopher have
been quickened into life and beauty by the heaven-
drawn spark of poetry wherewith Fouque has
endowed them.

In the French tale, Melusina seeks union with
a mortal solely that she may escape from her
enchantment ; but in the German more earnest
tale. Undine desires to become a bride that she
may obtain an immortal soul. The corresponding
Danish story is told by Hans Christian Andersen.
A little mermaid sees a prince as she floats on the
surface of the sea, and saves him in her arms from
drowning when the ship is wrecked. But from that
hour her heart is filled with yearning love for the
youth whose life she has preserved. She seeks
earth of her own free will, leaving her native
element, although the consequence is pain at every
step she takes.



222 Melusina

She becomes the constant attendant of the
prince, till he marries a princess, when her heart
breaks and she becomes a Light-Elf, with prospect
of immortality.

Belonging to the same family is the pretty
Indian tale of Urvaji. Urvapi was an "apsaras,"
or heavenly maiden ; she loved Puravaras, a martial
king, and became his wife, only, however, on con-
dition that she should never behold him without
his clothes. For some years they were together,
till the heavenly companions of Urvaji determined
to secure her return to her proper sphere. They
accordingly beguiled Puravaras into leaving his
bed in the darkness of night, and then, with a
lightning-flash, they disclosed him in his nudity
to the wife, who was thereupon constrained to
leave him. A somewhat similar story is told, in
the Katha Sarit Sagara (Book iii. c. i8), of Vidu-
shaka, who loves and marries a beautiful Bhadr^,
but after a while she vanishes, leaving behind her
a ring. The inconsolable husband wanders in
search of her, and reaching the heavenly land, drops
the ring in a goblet of water, which is taken to
her. By this she recognizes him, and they are
re-united.

The legend of Melusina, as it comes to us, is by



Mehisina 223

no means in its original condition. Jean d'Arras,
or other romancers, have considerably altered the
simple tale, so as to make it assume the propor-
tions of a romance. All that story of the fay
Pressina, and her marriage with King Helmas, is
but another version of the same story as Melusina.
Helmas finds Pressina near a fountain, and asks
her to be his ; she consents on condition that he
does not visit her during her lying-in ; he breaks
the condition and loses her. This is the same as
Raymond discovering Melusina near a spring, and
obtaining her hand subject to the condition that he
will not visit her one day of the week. Like
Helmas, he breaks his promise and loses his wife.
That both Pressina and Melusina are water-sprites,
or nymphs, is unquestionable ; both haunt a foun-
tain, and the transformation of the lady of
Lusignan indicates her aquatic origin. As Grimm
has observed *, this is a Gallic, and therefore a
Keltic myth, an opinion confirmed by the Banshee
part played by the unfortunate nymph. For the
Banshee superstition has no corresponding feature
jn Scandinavian, Teutonic, or Classic mythology,
and belongs entirely to the Kelts. Among others

* Deutsche Mythologie, i. 405. '



224 Mehisina

there are death portents, but not, that I am aware
of, spirits of women attached to famihes, by their
bitter cries at night announcing the approach of
the king of terrors.

The Irish Banshee is thus described : "We saw
the figure of a tall, thin woman with uncovered
head, and long hair that floated round her shoul-
ders, attired in something which seemed either a
loose white cloak or a sheet thrown hastily about
her, uttering piercing cries.

" The most remarkable instance (of the Banshee)
occurs in the MS. memoirs of Lady Fanshawe, so
exemplary for her conjugal affection. Her husband.
Sir Richard, and she chanced, during their abode
in Ireland, to visit a friend, the head of a sept,
who resided in an ancient baronial castle sur-
rounded with a moat. At midnight she was
awakened by a ghastly and supernatural scream,
and looking out of bed, beheld in the moonlight
a female face and part of the form hovering at the
window. The face was that of a young and rather
handsome woman, but pale, and the hair, which
was reddish, loose and dishevelled. The dress,
which Lady Fanshavve's terror did not prevent her
remarking accurately, was that of the ancient
Irish. This apparition continued to exhibit itself



Melusina 225

for some time, and then vanished, with two shrieks
similar to that which had first excited Lady
Fanshawe's attention. In the morning, witli infinite
terror, she communicated to her host what she
had witnessed, and found him prepared, not only
to credit, but to account for the apparition : —

" 'A near relation of my family,' said he, ' expired
last night in this castle. We disguised our certain
expectations of the event from you, lest it should
throw a cloud over the cheerful reception which
was your due *. Now, before such an event
happens in this family and castle, the female
spectre whom ye have seen always is visible : she
is believed to be the spirit of a woman of inferior
rank, whom one of my ancestors degraded himself
by marrying, and whom afterwards, to expiate the
dishonour done to his family, he caused to be
drowned in the castle moat.' "

A very remarkable story of the Banshee is given
by Mr. Crofton Croker. The Rev. Charles Bun-
worth was rector of Buttevant, in the county Cork,
about the middle of last century. He was famous
for his performance on the national instrument, the

' Like Admetus in the Alcestis of Euripides. This story
of Lady Fanshawe is from a note to " The Lady of the
Lake."

[IL] Q



226 Melnsina

Irish harp, and for his hospitable reception and
entertainment of the poor harpers who travelled
from house to house about the country ; and in
his granary were deposited fifteen harps, be-
queathed to him by the last members of a race
which has now ceased to exist.

The circumstances attending the death of Mr.
Bunworth were remarkable ; but, says Mr. Crofton
Croker, there are still living credible witnesses who
declare their authenticity, and who can be produced
to attest most, if not all, of the following particulars.
Shortly before his decease, a shepherd heard the
Banshee keening and clapping her hands under a
lightning-struck tree near the house. On the eve of his
death the night was serene and moonlit, and nothing
broke the stillness of the melancholy watch kept by
the bedside of the sick man, who lay in the drawing-
room, by his two daughters. The little party were
suddenly roused by a sound at the window near
the bed : a rose-tree grew outside the window, so
closely as to touch the glass ; this was forced aside
with some noise, and a low moaning was heard, ac-
companied by clapping of hands, as if of some
female in deep affliction. It seemed as if the
sound proceeded from a person holding her
mouth close to the window. The lady who



Melusina 227

sat by the bedside of Mr. Bunworth went into
the adjoining room, where sat some male rela-
tives, and asked, in a tone of alarm, if they had
heard the Banshee. Sceptical of supernatural
appearances, two of them rose hastily, and went
out to discover the cause of these sounds, which
they also distinctly heard. They walked all round
the house, examining every spot of ground,
particularly near the window from whence the
voice had proceeded ; the bed of earth beneath,
in which the rose-tree was planted, had been
recently dug, and the print of a footstep — if the
tree had been forced aside by mortal hand — would
have inevitably remained ; but they could perceive
no such impression, and an unbroken stillness
reigned without. Hoping to dispel the mystery,
they continued their search anxiously along the
road, from the straightness of which, and the light-
ness of the night, they were enabled to see some dis-
tance around them ; but all was silent and deserted,
and they returned surprised and disappointed.
How much more then were they astonished at
learning that, the whole time of their absence, those
who remained within the house had heard the
moaning and clapping of hands even louder and
more distinct than before they had gone out ; and
Q 2



228 Melusina

no sooner was the door of the room closed on
them, than they again heard the same mournful
sounds. Every succeeding hour the sick man be-
came worse, and when the first glimpse of the
morning appeared, Mr. Bunworth expired.

The Banshee is represented in Wales by the
Gwrach y Rhibyn, who is said to come after dusk,
and flap her leathern wings against the window,
giving warning of death, in a broken, howl-
ing tone, and calling on the one who is to quit
mortality by his or her name several times. In
Brittany, similar spirits are called Bandrhudes, and
are attached to several of the ancient families. In
other parts of France, they pass as Dames
Blanches, who, however, are not to be confused with
the Teutonic white ladies, which are spirits of a
different order.

But, putting the Banshee part of the story of
Melusina on one side, let us turn to the semi-fish or
serpent form of Melusina. Jean d' Arras attributes
this to a curse pronounced on her by the fay
Pressina, but this is an invention of his own ; the
true conception of Melusina he did not grasp, and
was therefore obliged to forge a legend which should
account for her peculiar appearance. Melusina was
a mermaid. Her presence beside the fountain, as



Mclusina 239

well as her fishy tail, indicate her nature ; she was
not, perhaps, a native of the sea, but a stream-
dweller, and therefore as closely related to the true
mermaid of the briny deep as are the fresh-water
fish to those of the salt sea.

The superstitious belief in mermaids is universal,
and I frankly confess my inability to account
for its origin in every case. In some particular
cases the origin of the myth is clear, in others it is
not so. Let me take one which can be explained
— the Oannes of the Chaldaeans, the Philistine
Dagon.

Oannes and Dag-on (the fish On) are identical.
According to an ancient fable preserved by Berosus,
a creature half man and half fish came out of " that
part of the Erythraean sea which borders upon
Babylonia," where he taught men the arts of life,
" to construct cities, to found temples, to compile
laws, and, in short, instructed them in all things
that tend to soften manners and humanize their
lives;" and he adds that a representation of this
animal Oannes was preserved in his day. A figure
of him sporting in the waves, and apparently bless-
ing a fleet of vessels, was discovered in a marine
piece of sculpture, by M. Botta, in the excavations
of Khorsabad.



2'30 Melusina


Oancea, from Eboreatad.



At Nimroud, a gigantic image was found by
Mr. Layard, representing him with the fish's head
as a cap and the body of the fish depending
over his shoulders, his legs those of a man, in
his left hand holding a richly decorated bag,
and his right hand upraised, as if in the act of pre-
senting the mystic Assyrian fir-cone (British
Museum, Nos. 29 and 30).

This Cannes is the Mizraimite On, and the
HebrewAon, with a Greek case-termination, derived
from a root signifying "to illumine." Aon was the
original name of the god reverenced in the temple
of Heliopolis, which in Scripture is called Beth-Aon,
the house of On, as well as by its translation Beth-
Shemesh, the house of the Sun. Not only does his
name indicate his solar origin, but his representa-
tion with horned head-dress testifies to his nature.
Ammon, Apis, Dionysos are sun-gods ; Isis, lo,



Melusina 231

Artemis are moon-goddesses, and are all horned.
Indeed, in ancient iconography horns invariably
connect the gods represented with the two great
sources of light. Apparent exceptions, such as the
Fauns, are not so in reality, when subjected to
close scrutiny. Civilizing gods, who diffuse intelli-
gence and instruct barbarians, are also solar deities,
as the Egyptian Osiris, the Nabathsean Tammuz,
the Greek Apollo, and the Mexican Quetzalcoatl '
beside these Oannes takes his place, as the sun-god,
giving knowledge and civilization. According to


A Babylomsb seal in the Bntieli Museum, from MuDLer'a Babylomer.

the fable related by Berosus, he came on earth each
morning, and at evening plunged into the sea ;
this is a mythical description of the rising and
setting of the sun. His semi-piscine form was an
expression of the idea that half his time was spent
above ground, and half below the waves.



232 Mclnsina

In precisely similar manner the Semitic moon-
goddess, who followed the course of the sun, at
times manifesting herself to the eyes of men, at
others seeking concealment in the western flood
was represented as half woman, half fish, with
characteristics which make her lunar origin in-
disputable. Her name was Derceto or Atergatis.
On the coins of Ascalon, where she was held in
great honour, is figured a goddess above whose
head is a half-moon, and at her feet a woman with
her lower extremities like a fish. This is Semi-
ramis, who, according to a popular legend, was the
child of Derceto. At Joppa she appears as a
mermaid. The story was, that she fled from
Typhon, and plunged into the sea, concealing
herself under the form of a fish. According to
Plutarch, the Syrian Tirgata, the Derceto of
Palestine, was the goddess of moisture ° ; and
Lucan (De dea Syra, c. 14) declares that she was
represented as a woman with a fish-tail from her
hips downward.

In every mythology, the different attributes of

" Plutarch, Crass, c. 17. According to Greek mythology,
this goddess, under the name of Ceto, " with comely cheeks,"
is the daughter of Sea and Earth, and wife of Phorcys
(Hesiod, Theog. v. 23.5. 270).



Mehisina 233

the deity in process of time became distinct gods,
yet with sufficient impress of their origin still upon
them to make that origin easy to be detected.

As On, the sun-god rising and setting in the sea,
was supplied with a corresponding moon-goddess,
Atergatis, and Bel or Baal, also a solar deity, had
his lunar Baalti, so the fiery Moloch, "the great
lord," was supplied with his Mylitta, "the birth-
producer.'' Moloch was the fierce flame-god, and
Mylitta the goddess of moisture. Their worship
was closely united. The priests of Moloch wore
female attire, the priestesses of Mylitta were
dressed like men. Human sacrifices characterized
the worship of the fire-god, prostitution that of
the goddess of water. From her came the names
of the hetars Melitta, Meleto, Milto, Milesia
(Athenaeus, lib. xiii.). Among the Carthaginians,
this goddess was worshipped, as appears from their
giving the name of Magasmelita (the tent of
Mylitta) to one of the African provinces. Mylitta
was identical with Atergatis ; she was regarded as
a universal mother, a source of life.

In Greece, the priestesses of Demeter were
called Melissae, the high-priest of Apollo was
entitled Kvpio<; t&v ixeKkLcrawv. A fable was in-
vented to account for this name, and to connect



334 Mdiisina

them with bees and honey ; but I have little doubt
that it was corrupted from the Semitic designation
of the servants of Mylitta. The Melisss are some-
times spoken of as nymphs, but are not to be
identified with the Meliadae, Dryads sprung from
the ash. Yet Melia, daughter of Oceanus, who
plunges into the Haliacmon, strongly resembles
the Syrian goddess. Selene, the moon, was also
known by the name Melissa. Kat ra<i Ar\^'i)Tpo<;
lepeiwi, a)9 t?}? ■y6ovia<; dea^ fivariSai;, fieXiaaa'i ol
•JToXaLoi iicdXovv, avT-qv re rrjv Koprjv fxeKioaiohr^,
XeKrjvriv Te, ovaav yevecrecof TrpoffraTiBa fiekiaaav
eKoXovv ^ .

When we remember the double character of
Mylitta, as a generative or all-mother, and as a
moon-goddess, we are able to account for her
name having passed into the Greek titles of
priestesses of their corresponding goddesses De-
meter and Selene.

The name Melissa was probably introduced into
Gaul by the Phocian colony at Massilia, the modern
Marseilles, and passed into the popular mythology
of the Gallic Kelts as the title of nymphs, till it was
finally appropriated by the Melusina of romance.

' Schol. Thcocr. xv. 94. Porphyr. de Antro Nymph,
c. 18.



Melusina 235

It may seem difficult at first sight to trace the
connexion between the moon, a water-goddess,
and a deity presiding over childbirth ;■ yet it is
certain that such a connexion does exist. The
classic Venus was born of the sea-foam, and was
unmistakably one with the moon. She was also
the goddess of love, and was resorted to by barren
women — as the Venus of Quimperle in Brittany
is, to this day, sought by those who have no
children.

On the Syrian coast, they told of their goddess
plunging into the sea, because they saw the moon
descend into the western waters ; but the Cretans,
who beheld her rise above the eastern horizon of
sea, fabled of a foam-born goddess.

In classic iconography the Tritons, and in
later art the Sirens, are represented half fish, half
human. Originally the Sirens were winged, but
after the fable had been accepted, which told of
their strife with the Muses, and their precipitation
into the sea, they were figured like mermaids ; the
fish-form was by them borrowed from Derceto. It
is curious how widely-spread is the belief in fish-
women. The prevalence of tales of mermaids
among Celtic populations indicates these water-
nymphs as having been originally deities of those



236 Melusina

peoples ; and I cannot but believe that the circular
mirror they are usually represented as holding is
a reminiscence of the moon-disk. Bothe, in his
" Kronecke der Sassen," in 1492, described a god,
Krodo, worshipped in the Hartz, who was repre-
sented with his feet on a fish, a wheel to symbolize
the moon in one hand, and a pail of water in the
other. As among the Northern nations the moon
is masculine, its deity was male. Probably the
Mexican Coxcox or Teocipactli (i. e. Fish-god) was
either a solar or lunar deity. He was entitled
Huehueton-acateo-cateo-cipatli, or Fish-god-of-our-
flesh, to give him his name in full ; he somewhat
resembled the Noah of Sacred Writ ; for the Mexi-
can fable related, that in a great time of flood,
when the earth was covered with water, he rescued
himself in a cypress trunk, and peopled the world
with wise and intelligent beings ". The Babylonish
Oannes was also identified with the flood.

The Peruvians had likewise their semi-fish gods,
but the legend connected with them has not
descended to our days.

The North-American Indians relate that they
were conducted from Northern Asia by a man-fish.

* Miiller, Geschichte der Amerikanischen Urreligionen.
Basel, 1855, p. 515.



Mehtsina 237

" Once upon a time, in the season of opening buds,
the people of our nation were much terrified at
seeing a strange creature, much resembhng a man,
riding upon the waves. He had upon his head
long green hair, much resembling the coarse weeds
which the mighty storms scatter along the margin
of the strand. Upon his face, which was shaped
like that of a porpoise, he had a beard of the same
colour. But if our people were frightened at
seeing a man who could live in the water like a
fish or a duck, how much more were they fright-
ened when they saw that from his breast down
he was actually a fish, or rather two fishes, for
each of his legs was a whole and distinct fish.
And there he would sit for hours singing to the
wondering ears of the Indians the beautiful things
he saw in the depths of the ocean, always closing
his strange stories with these words : — ' Follow me,
and see what I will show you.' For a great
many suns, they dared not venture upon the water •
but when they grew hungry, they at last put to
sea, and following the man-fish, who kept close to
the boat, reached the American coast "."

It is not impossible that the North-American

» Epitomized from Traditions of the North-American In-
dians, by J. A. Jones. 1830, pp. 47 — 58.



238 Melusina

Indians may have symbolized the sun in the same
manner as the Syrians, and that this legend may
signify that the early colonists, to reach the New
Land, followed the fish-CQwrsQ of the sun, which
as man goes from East to West, whereas when it
dives it swims from West to East, the course
taken by the Indians in their canoes. The wan-
derers in the Canadian forests have also their
fish-woman, of whom a tale is related which bears
a lively resemblance to that of Undine, and which
is not a little like that of Melusina.

One day an Ottawa chief, whilst sitting by the
water side, beheld a beautiful woman rise from the
flood, her face exquisitely lovely, her eyes blue,
her teeth white, and her locks floating over her
shoulders. From her waist downwards she was
fish, or rather two fishes. She entreated the
warrior to permit her to live on earth, as she
desired to win a human soul, which could only be
acquired by union with a mortal. He consented
and took her to his house, where she was to him
as a daughter. Some years after an Andirondack
youth beheld and loved her. He took her to wife,
and she obtained that which she had desired — a
human soul.

In the Undine story, a water-maiden, in like



Meliisma 239

manner and for a like object, is adopted by an old
fisherman, and becomes the bride of a youthful
German knight. But the Andirondack tribe was
ill-pleased at the marriage of their chief with the
mysterious damsel, and they tore her from his
arms, and drove her back to her original element.
Then all the water-spirits vowed revenge at the
insult offered to one of their race ; they stirred up
war between the Ottawas and Andirondacks, which
led to the extermination of the latter ; one only
was rescued, and he was grasped by the fish-wife,
and by her borne down to the watery depths
below the Falls of S. Anthony. In the German
story, the husband is weary with the taunts of
those around at having married a water-sprite, and
bids her return to her element. Then the spirits
of the flood vow his destruction, and send Undine
on earth to embrace her faithless lord, and kiss
him to death. The name of the fish-woman is in
German Meerfrau or Meriminni ; in Danish, the
Siren is Maremind ; and in Icelandic and old
Norse, Marmennill ; in Irish she is the Merrow ;
with the Breton peasantry she is Marie-Morgan.
In the legendary lore of all these people, there are
stories of the loves of a mortal man and a mer-
maid. According to Mr. Crofton Croker, O'Sullivan



240 Melusina

More, Lord of Dunkerron, lost his heart to one of
these beautiful water-sprites, and she agreed to be
his, but her parents resented the union and killed
her.

On the shore of Smerwick harbour, an Irishman,
Dick Fitzgerald, caught a Merrow with her cohuleen
driiitli, or enchanted cap, lying on a rock beside
her. He grasped the cap, and thereby possessed
himself of the nymph, who, however, seemed no-
thing loth to obtain a mortal husband. They
lived together happily for some years, and saw a
family of beautiful children grow up at their knees.
But one day the Lady of Gollerus, as she was
called, discovered her old cap in a corner. She
took it up and looked at it, and then thought of
her father the king and her mother the queen, and
felt a longing to go back to them. She kissed the
babies, and then went down to the strand with the
full intention of returning to Gollerus after a brief
visit to her home. However, no sooner was the
cohuleen driuth on her head, than all remembrance
of her life on earth was forgotten, and she plunged
into the sea, never to return. Similar tales are
related in Shetland, the Faroes, in Iceland, and
Norway.

Vadc, the father of the famous smith Velund,



Melnsina 241

was the son of King Vilkin and a mermaid whom
he met in a wood on the sea-shore in Russia '. In
the Saga of Half and his knights is an account of a
merman who was caught and kept a httle while on
land. He sang the following entreaty to be taken
back to his native element —

" Cold water to the eyes !
Flesh raw to the teeth !
A shroud to the dead !
Fht me back to the sea !
henceforward never
Men in ships sailing !
Draw me to dry land
From the depth of the sea ^ ! "

In the "Speculum Regale," an Icelandic work of
the twelfth century, is the following description of
a mermaid : —

" A monster is seen also near Greenland, which
people call the Margygr. This creature appears
like a woman as far down as her waist, with breast
and bosom like a woman, long hands, and soft
hair, the neck and head in all respects like those
of a human being. The hands seem to people to
be long, and the fingers not to be parted, but
united by a web like that on the feet of water-

1 Vilkina Saga, c. 18.

^ Halfs Saga ok rekum hans, c. 7.

[II.] R



242 Melusina

birds. From the waist downwards, this monster
resembles a fish, with scales, tail, and fins. This
prodigy is believed to show itself especially before
heavy storms. The habit of this creature is to dive
frequently and rise again to the surface with fishes
in its hands. When sailors see it playing with the
fish, or throwing them towards the ship, they fear
that they are doomed to lose several of the crew ;
but when it casts the fish, or, turning from the
vessel, flings them away from her, then the sailors
take it as a good omen that they will not sufier
loss in the impending storm. This monster has a
very horrible face, with broad brow and piercing
eyes, a wide mouth, and double chin '." The
Landnama, or Icelandic Doomsday book, speaks
of a Marmennill, or merman, having been caught
off" the island of Grimsey ; and the annals of the
same country relate the appearance of these beings
off" the coast in 1305 and in 1329.

Megasthenes reported that the sea which washed
Taprobane, the modern Ceylon, was inhabited by
a creature having the appearance of a woman ; and
/Elian improved this account, by stating that there
are whales having the form of Satyrs. In 1187, a

^ Quoted in " Iceland, its Scenes and Sagas," p. 349.



Melusina 243

merman was fished up off the coast of Suffolk. It
closely resembled a man, but was not gifted with
speech. One day, when it had the opportunity to
escape, it fled to the sea, plunged in, and was never
seen again. Pontoppidan records the appearance
of a merman, which was deposed to on oath by the
observers.

" About a mile from the coast of Denmark, near
Landscrona, three sailors, observing something like
a dead body floating in the water, rowed towards
it. When they came within seven or eight fathoms,
it still appeared as at first, for it had not stirred ;
but at that instant it sank, and came up almost
immediately in the same place. Upon this, out of
fear, they lay still, and then let the boat float, that
they might the better examine the monster, which,
by the help of the current, came nearer and nearer to
them. He turned his face and stared at them, which
gave them a good opportunity of examining him nar-
rowly. He stood in the same place for seven or eight
minutes, and was seen above the water breast-high.
At last they grew apprehensive of some danger,
and began to retire ; upon which the monster blew
up his cheeks and made a kind of lowing noise,
and then dived from their view. In regard to his
form, they declare in their affidavits, which were
R 2



21.-1. MeliLsina

regularly taken and recorded, that he appeared like
an old man, strong limbed, with broad shoulders,
but his arms they could not see. His head was
small in proportion to his body, and had short,
curled black hair, which did not reach below his
ears ; his eyes lay deep in his head, and he had a
meagre face, with a black beard ; about the body
downwards, this merman was quite pointed like a
fish '."

In the year 1430, after a violent tempest, which
broke down the d}'kes in Holland and flooded the
low lands, some girls of the town of Edam in West
Friesland, going in a boat to milk their cows,
observed a mermaid in shallow water and embar-
rassed in the mud.

They took it into their boat and brought it into
Edam, dressed it in female attire, and taught it to
spin. It fed with them, but never could be taught
to speak. It \\as afterwards brought to Haerlem,
where it lived for several years, though still show-
ing a strong inclination for water. Parival, in his
" Delices de Hollande," relates that it was instructed
in its duty to God, and that it made reverences
before a crucifix. Old Hudson, the navigator, in

* Pontoppidan's Nat. Hist, of Norway, p. 134.



Melusina 245

his dry and ponderous narrative, records the fol-
lowing-incident, when trying to force a passage to
the pole near Nova Zembla, lat. 75°, on the 15th
June. " This morning, one of our company looking
overboard saw a mermaid ; and calling up some of
the company to see her, one more came up, and
by that time she was come close to the ship's side,
looking earnestly at the men. A little after, a sea
came and overturned her. From the navel upward,
her back and breasts were like a woman's, as they
say that saw her ; her body as big as one of us,
her skin very white, and long hair hanging down
behind, of colour black. In her going down they
saw her tail, which was like the tail of a porpoise,
speckled like a mackerel. Their names that saw
her were Thomas Hilles and Robert Rayner."

In 1560, near the island of Mandar, on the west
of Ceylon, some fishermen entrapped in their net
seven mermen and mermaids, of which several
Jesuits, and Father Henriques, and Bosquez, phy-
sician to the Viceroy of Goa, were witnesses. The
physician examined them with a great deal of
care, and dissected them. He asserts that the
internal and external structure resembled that of
human beings. We have another account of a
merman seen near the great rock Diamon, on the



246 ■ Melusina

coast of Martinique. The persons who saw it gave
a precise description of it before a notary-; they
affirmed that they saw it wipe its hands over its
face, and even heard it blow its nose. Another
creature of the same species was captured in the
Baltic in 1531, and sent as a present to Sigismund,
King of Poland, with whom it lived three days,
and was seen by all the Court. Another was
taken near Rocca de Sintra, as related by Damian
Goes. The King of Portugal and the Grand-
Master of the Order of S. James are said to have
had a suit at law, to determine which party the
creature belonged to.

Captain Weddell, well known for his geo-
graphical discoveries in the extreme south of the
globe, relates the following story: — "A boat's
crew were employed on Hall's Island, when one of
the crew, left to take care of some produce, saw an
animal whose voice was even musical. The sailor
had lain down, and about ten o'clock he heard a
noise resembling human cries ; and as daylight in
these latitudes never disappears at this season, he
rose and looked around, but, on seeing no person,
returned to bed. Presently he heard the noise
again, rose a second time, but still saw nothing.
Conceiving, however, the possibility of a boat



Melusina 247

being upset, and that some of the crew might be
chnging to some detached rocks, he walked along
the beach a few steps, and heard the noise more
distinctly, but in a musical strain. Upon search-
ing round, he saw an object lying on a rock a
dozen yards from the shore, at which he was some-
what frightened. The face and shoulders appeared
of human form, and of a reddish. colour ; over the
shoulders hung long green hair ; the tail resembled
that of the seal, but the extremities of the arms he
could not see distinctly. The creature continued
to make a musical noise while he gazed about two
minutes, and on perceiving him it disappeared in
an instant. Immediately when the man saw his
officer, he told this wild tale, and to add weight to
his testimony (being a Romanist) he made a cross
on the sand, which he kissed, as making oath to
the truth of his statement. When I saw him, he
told the story in so clear and positive a manner,
making oath to its truth, that I concluded he must
really have seen the animal he described, or that
it must have been the effect of a disturbed ima-
gination *."

In a splendidly illustrated work with plates

* Voyage towards the South Pole, p. J43, quoted by Goss :
Romance of Nat. Hist, 2nd Series.



us



Melusina



coloured by hand, " Poissons, tcrevisses et crabes
de diverses couleurs et figures extraordinaires, que
Ton trouve autour des Isles Moluques," dedicated
to King George of England, and published by
Louis Renard at Amsterdam, in 17T7, is a curious
account of a mermaid. This book was the result
of thirty years' labour, in the Indian seas, by
Blatazar Coyett, Governor of the Islands of the


Province of Amboine and President of the Com-
missioners in Batavia, and by Adrien Van der Stell,
Governor Regent of the Province of Amboine. In
the and volume, p. 240, is the picture of a mermaid
here reproduced, and the subjoined description : —
" See-wyf A monster resembling a Siren, caught
near the island of Borne, or Boeren, in the Depart-
ment of Amboine. It was 59 inches long, and
in proportion as an eel. It lived on land, in a vat
full of water, during four days seven hours. From



Melusina 249

time to time it uttered little cries like those of a

mouse. It would not eat, though it was offered

small fish, shells, crabs, lobsters, &c. After its

death, some excrement was discovered in the vat,

like the secretion of a cat." The copy from which

I have taken the representation for this work is

thus coloured : hair, the hue of kelp ; body, olive

tint ; webbed olive between the fingers, which have

each four joints ; .the fringe round the waist orange,

with a blue border ; the fins green, face slate-grey ; a

delicate row of pink hairs runs the length of the tail.

With such a portrait we may well ask with

Tennyson —

" Who would be
A mermaid fair,
Singing alone,
Combing her hair
Under the sea
In a golden curl,
With a comb of pearl,
On a throne ?"

The introduction to the book contains additional
information.

The Averiissement de I'Editeur says : — " M. Bal-
tazar Coyett is the first to whom the great dis-
covery is due. Whilst governor, he encouraged the
fishery of these fishes ; and after having had
about two hundred painted of those which were



250 Melusina

brought to his home by the Indians of Amboine
and the neighbouring isles, as well as by the Dutch
there settled, he formed of them two collections,
the originals of which were brought by his son to
M. Scott the Elder, who was then chief advocate, or
prime minister, of the Company General of the
East Indies at Amsterdam. He had them copied
exactly. The second volume, less correct indeed
in the exactitude of the drawings, but very curious
on account of the novelties wherewith it is filled,
and of the remarks accompanying each fish, was
taken from the collection of M. Van der Stell,
Governor of the Moluccas, by a painter named
Gamael Fallours, who brought them to me from
the Indies, and of which I have selected about
250. Moreover, to check incredulity in certain per-
sons, I have thought fit to subjoin the following
certificates." Among them, the most curious are
those relating to the mermaid.

Letter from Renard, the publisher, to M.
Fran9ois Valentyn, minister of the Gospel at Dort,
late superintendent of the churches in the colonies,
dated Amsterdam, Dec. 17, 1716.

" Monsieur,

" His Majesty the Czar of Muscovy having



Mclnsina 351

done me the honour of visiting my house, and
having had occasion to show the prince the work
on the fishes of the Molucca islands, by the Sieur
Fallours, in which, among other drawings, is the
enclosed plate, representing a monster resembling
a Siren, which this painter says that he saw alive
for four days at Amboine, as you will be pleased to
see in the writing with his own hand, which accom-
panies this picture, and as he believes that M.
Van der Stell, the present Governor of Amboine,
may have sent it to you, I remarked that his
Majesty the Czar would be much gratified to have
this fact substantiated ; wherefore I shall be greatly
obliged if you will favour me with a reply.

"I remain, &c.''

REPLY.

" DoRT, Dec. i8, 1716.
" Monsieur,

" It is not impossible that, since my departure
from the Indies, Fallours may have seen at Am-
boine the monster whose picture you had the
courtesy to send me, and which I return enclosed ;
but up to the present moment I have neither seen
nor heard of the original. If I had the creature,
I would with all my heart make a present of it to



252 Melusina

his Majesty the Czar, whose apphcation in the re-
search of objects of curiosity deserves the praise of
all the world. But, sir, as evidence that there are
monsters in nature resembling this Siren, I may
say that I know for certain, that in the year 165a
or 1653 a lieutenant in the service of the Company
saw two of these beings in the gulf, near the village
of Hennetelo, near the islands of Ceram and Bcero,
in the Department of Amboine. They were swim-
ming side by side, which made him presume that
one was male, the other female. Six weeks after
they reappeared in the same spot, and were seen
by more than fifty persons. These monsters were
of a greenish grey colour, having precisely the
shape of human beings from the head to the waist,
with arms and hands, but their bodies tapered
away. One was larger than the other ; their hair
was moderately long. I may add that, on my way
back from the Indies, in which I resided thirty
years, I saw, on the ist May, 1714, long. 13° J 8',
and on the Meridian, during clear, calm weather, at
the distance of three or four ship-lengths off, a
monster, which was apparently a sort of marine-
man, of a bluish grey (gris de mer). It was raised
well above the surface, and seemed to have a sort
of fisher's cap of moss on its head. All the ship's



•Mdnsina 253

company saw it, as well as myself; but although
its back was turned towards us, the monster seemed
conscious that we were approaching too near, and
it dived suddenly under water, and we saw it no
more.

" I am, &c.,

" F. Valentyn."

Letter from M. Parent, Pastor of the church of
Amsterdam, written and exhibited before the
notary Jacob Lansman.

"Amsterdam, July 15, 1717.
" Monsieur,

" I have seen with mingled pleasure and

surprise the illuminated proofs of the beautiful

plates which you have had engraved, representing

the fishes of Molucca, which were painted from

nature by the Sieur Samuel Fallours, with whom

I was acquainted when at Amboine. . I own, sir,

that I was struck with astonishment at the sight of

this work, the engravings of which closely resemble

the fishes I have seen during my life, and which, or

some of which, I have had the pleasure of eating

during the thirteen years I resided at Amboine,

from which I returned with the fleet in 1716. . . .

Touching your inquiry, whether I ever saw a



254 Melusina

Siren in that country, I reply that, whilst making
the circuit of our churches in the Molucca Isles
(which is done twice in the year by the pastors
who understand the language of the country), and
navigating in an orambay, or species of galley, be-
tween the villages of Holilieuw and Karieuw, dis-
tant from one another about two leagues by water,
it happened, whilst I was dozing, that the negro
rowers uttered a shrill cry of astonishment, which
aroused me with a start ; and when I inquired the
cause of their outcry, they replied unanimously
that they had seen clearly and distinctly a monster
like a Siren, with a face resembling that of a man,
and long hair like that of a woman floating down
its back ; but at their cry it had replunged into
the sea, and all I could see was the agitation of
the water where this Siren had disturbed it by

diving.

" I am, sir, &c.,

"Parent."

One of the most remarkable accounts of a
mermaid is that in Dr. Robert Hamilton's " His-
tory of the Whales and Seals," in the " Naturalist's
Library," he himself vouching for its general truth,
from personal knowledge of some of the parties.
" It was reported that a fishing-boat off the island



Mehisina 355

of Yell, one of the Shetland group, had captured
a mermaid by its getting entangled in the lines."
The statement is, that the animal was about three
feet long, the upper part of the body resembling
the human, with protuberant mammae, like a
woman ; the face, the forehe&d, and neck were
short, and resembling those of a monkey ; the
arms, which were small, were kept folded across
the breast ; the fingers were distinct, not webbed ;
a few stiff, long bristles were orr the top of the head,
extending down to the shoulders, and these it could
erect and depress at pleasure, something like a
crest. The inferior part of the body was like a
fish. The skin was smooth, and of a grey colour.
It offered no resistance, nor attempted to bite, but
uttered a low, plaintive sound. The crew, six in
number, took it within their boat ; but superstition
getting the better of curiosity, they carefully dis-
entangled it from the lines and from a hook which
had accidentally fastened in its body, and returned
it to its native element. It instantly dived, de-
scending in a perpendicular direction.

" After writing the above, (we are informed) the
narrator had an interview with the skipper of the
boat and one of the crew, from whom he learned
the following additional particulars. They had



256 Mel us in a

the animal for three hours within the boat ; the
body was without scales or hair, was of a silver-
grey colour above and white below, like the human
skin ; no gills were observed, nor fins on the back
or belly ; the tail was like that of the dog-fish ; the
mammse were about as large as those of a woman ;
the mouth and lips were very distinct, and resem-
bled the human. This communication was from
Mr. Edmonton, a well-known and intelligent ob-
server, to the distinguished professor of natural his-
tory in the Edinburgh University ; and Mr. E. adds
a few reflections, which are so pertinent that we
shall avail ourselves of them. That a very peculiar
animal has been taken, no one can doubt. It was
seen and handled by six men on one occasion and
for some time, not one of whom dreams of a doubt
of its being a mermaid. If it were supposed that
their fears magnified its supposed resemblance to
the human form, it must at all events be admitted
that there was some ground for exciting these
fears. But no such fears were likely to be enter-
tained ; for the mermaid is not an object of terror
to the fisherman : it is rather a welcome guest, and
danger is to be apprehended only from its ex-
periencing bad treatment. The usual resources of
scepticism, that the seals and other sea-animals.



Melusina 257

appearing under certain circumstances, operating
on an excited imagination, and so producing ocular
illusion, cannot avail here. It is quite impossible
that, under the circumstances, six Shetland fisher-
men could commit such a mistake."

One of these creatures was found in the belly of
a shark, on the north-west coast of Iceland, and is
thus described by Wernhard Guthmund's son,
priest of Ottrardale : —

" The lower part of the animal was entirely
eaten away, whilst the upper part, from the
epigastric and hypogastric region, was in some
places partially eaten, in others completely de-
voured. The sternum, or breast-bone, was per-
fect. This animal appeared to be about the size
of a boy eight or nine years old, and its head was
formed like that of a man. The anterior surface
of the occiput was very protuberant, and the nape
of the neck had a considerable indentation or sink-
ing. The alse of the ears were very large, and
extended a good way back. It had front teeth,
which were long and poirited, as were also the
larger teeth. The eyes were lustreless, and re-
sembled those of a codfish. It had on its head
long black, coarse hair, very similar to the fucits
filiforinis ; this hair hung over the shoulders. Its

[II.] .s



2.jS Mehisifia

forehead was large and round. The skin above
the eyelids was much wrinkled, scanty, and of a
bright olive colour, which was indeed the hue of the
whole body. The chin was cloven, the shoulders
were high, and the neck uncommonly short. The
arms were of their natural size, and each hand had
a thumb and four fingers covered with flesh. Its
breast was formed exactly like that of a man, and
there was also to be seen something like nipples ;
the back was also like that of a man. It had very
cartilaginous ribs ; and in parts where the skin had
been rubbed off, a black, coarse flesh was per-
ceptible, very similar to that of the seal. This
animal, after having been exposed about a week
on the shore, was again thrown into the sea°."

To the manufactured mermaids which come from
Japan, and which arc exhibited at shows, it is not
ncces-ary to do more than allude ; they testify to
the Japanese conception of a sea-creature resem-
bling the Tritons of ancient Greece, the Syrian On
and Derceto, the Scandinavian Marraennill, and the
Mexican Coxcox.

' Quoted in my " Iceland, its Scenes and Sagas."



ilte dFortunatc islcg

T N my article on the " Terrestrial Paradise " I
-*- mentioned the principal mediaeval fables exist-
ing relative to that blessed spot, which was located,
according to popular belief, in the remote East
of Asia. The Ancients" had a floating tradition
relative to a vast continent called Atlantis, in the
far West, where lay Kronos asleep, guarded by
Briareus; a land of rivers, and woods, and soft
airs, occupying in their thoughts the position
assumed in Christian belief by the earthly para-
dise. The Fathers of the Church waged war
against this object of popular mythology, for
Scripture plainly indicated the position of the
garden land as " eastward in Eden " (Gen. ii. 8) ;
but, notwithstanding their attempts to drive the
western paradise from the minds of men, it
held its ground, and was believed in through-

S 3



260 The Fortunate Isles

out the middle ages, till Christopher Columbus
sought and found Atlantis and paradise in the
new world, a world in which the theories of
the Ancients and of the Mediaevals met, for it
was truly east of Asia and west of Europe. " The
saintly theologians and philosophers were right," are
the words of the great admiral in one of his
letters, "when they fixed the site of the terrestrial
paradise in the extreme Orient, because it is
a most temperate clime ; and the lands which I
have just discovered are the limits of the Orient ;"
an opinion he repeats in his letter of 1498 : " I
am convinced that there is the terrestrial paradise,"
namely that which had been located by SS. Ambrose,
Isidore, and the Venerable Bede in the East'.

The belief in a western land, or group of islands,
was prevalent among the Kelts as well as the Greek
and Latin geographers, and was with them an
article of religion, upon which were founded super-
stitious practices, which perpetuated themselves
after the introduction of Christianity.

This belief in a western land probably arose from
the discovery of objects, unfamiliar and foreign,
washed up on the European shores. In the life
of Columbus, Martin Vincent, pilot of the King of

' Navarrette, Coll. de Documents, i. p 244.



Tlie Fortunate Isles 261

Portugal, picked up ofif Cape S. Vincent a piece of
carved wood ; and a similar fragment was washed
ashore on the Island of Madeira, and found by Pedro
Correa, brother-in-law of the great navigator. The
inhabitants of the Azores said that when the wind
blew from the West, there were brought ashore great
bamboos and pines of a description wholly unknown
to them. On the sands of the Island of Flores
were found one day the bodies of two men
with large faces, and with features very different
from those of Europeans. On another occasion, two
canoes were driven on the coast filled with strange
men ". In 1682, a Greenland canoe appeared off the
Isle of Eda in the Orkneys, and in the church of
Burra was long preserved an Esquimaux boat
which had been washed ashore ^ On the stormy
coast of the Hebrides are often found nuts, which
are made by the fishermen into snuff-boxes or worn
as amulets. Martin, who wrote of the Western Isles
in 1703, calls them " Molluka beans." They are
seeds of the Mimosa scandens, washed by the gulf-
stream across the Atlantic to our shores. Great
logs of drift-wood of a strange character are

2 Herrera, Hist. General, Dec. i. lib. i. cap. 2.
' Wallace, An Account of the Islands of Orkney, 1700,
p. 60.



262 The Fortunate Isles

also carried to the same coasts, and are used by
the islanders in the construction of their hovels.

In 1508, a French vessel met with a boat full of
American Indians not far off the English coast,
as Bembo tells us in his history of Venice '. Other
instances have been cited by commentators on the
curious fragment of Cornelius Nepos, which gave
rise in the middle ages to a discussion of the
possibility of forcing a north-west passage to
India. Humboldt, in his remarks on this passage,
says: " Pomponius Mela, who lived at a period
sufficiently near that of Cornelius Nepos, relates,
and Pliny repeats it, that Metellus Celer, whilst
Proconsul of Gaul, received as a gift from a
king of'the Boii or Boeti (the name is some-
what uncertain, and Pliny calls him a king
of the Suevi) some Indians who, driven by the
tempests from the Indian seas, landed on the
coasts of Germany. It is of no importance dis-
cussing here whether Metellus Celer is the same
as the Przetor of Rome in the year of the con-
sulship of Cicero, and afterwards consul conjointly
with L. Africanus; or whether the German king was
Ariovistus, conquered by Julius Csesar. What is

•■ Bembo, Hist. Ven. vii. p. 257.



TIic Fortunate Isles 2(53

certain is, that from the chain of ideas which lead
Mela to cite this fact as indisputable, one may
conclude that in his time it was believed in Rome
that these swarthy men sent from Germany into
Gaul had come across the ocean which bathes the
East and North of Asia '."

The canoes, bodies, timber, and nuts, washed up
on the western coasts of Europe, may have origi-
nated the belief in there being a land beyond the
setting sun ; and this country, when once supposed
to exist, was variously designated as Meropis, the
continent of Kronos, Ogygia, Atlantis, the Fortu-
nate Isles, or the Garden of the Hesperides. Strabo
says distinctly that the only hindrance in the way
of passing west from Iberia to India is the vast-
ness of the Atlantic ocean, but that " in the same
temperate zone as we inhabit, and especially about
the parallel passing through Thinje and traversing
the Atlantic, there may exist two inhabited coun-
tries, and perhaps even more than two"." A
more distinct prophecy of America than the vague
expressions of Seneca — " Finitam cuique rei magni-
tudinem natura dederat, dedit et modum :^ nihil infi-

* Humboldt, Essai sur I'Hist. de la Geographie du N.
Continent, ii. p. 264, note 2.
" Strabo, Geog. libi



2 1- TIu Fortunate Isles

nitum est nisi Oceanus. Fertiles in Oceano jacere
terras, ultraque Oceanum rursus alia littora, alium
nasci orbem, nee usquam naturam rerum desinere,
sed semper inde ubi desiisse videatur, novam exsur-
gere, facile ista finguntur, quia Oceanus navigari
non potest" (Suasoria, I). Aristotle accepted the
notion of there being a new continent in the West,
and described it, from the accounts of the Cartha-
ginians, as a land opposite the Pillars of Hercules
(Str. of Gibraltar), fertile, well-watered, and covered
with forests '. Diodorus gives the Phoenicians the
credit of having discovered it, and adds that there
are lofty mountains in that country, and that the
temperature is not subject to violent changes '. He
however tries to distinguish between it and the Ely-
sium of Homer, the Fortunate Isles of Pindar, and
the Garden of the Hesperides. The Carthaginians
beg'an to found colonies there, but were forbidden
by law, as it was feared that the old mother settle-
ment would be deserted for the new and more at-
tractive country. Plutarch locates Homer's Island
of Ogygia five days' sail to the west of Brittia, and
he adds, the great continent, or terra firma, is five
thousand stadia from Ogygia. It stretches far

' Aristot. De JNIirab. Aucult. c. 84.

^ Diod. Hist., ed. Wessel, torn. i. p. 244.



The Fortunate J slcs 265

away towards the north, and the people inhabiting
this great land regard the old world as a small
island. This is an observation made also by Theo-
pompus, in his geographical mythof Meropis'.

The ancient theories of Atlantis shall detain us
no longer, as they have been carefully and ex-
haustively treated by Humboldt in the already
quoted work on the geography of the New World.
We shall therefore pass to the Kelts, and learn the
position occupied by America in their mythology.

Brittia, says Procopius, lies 300 stadia from the
coast between Britannia and Thule, opposite the
mouth of the Rhine, and is inhabited by Angles,
Frisians, and Britons '. By Britannia he means the
present Brittany, and Brittia is England. Tzetze
relates that on the ocean coast, opposite Britannia,
live fishermen subject to the Franks, but freed from
paying tribute, on account of their occupation, which
consists in rowing souls across to the opposite coast ^
Procopius tells the same story, and Sir Walter Scott
gives it from him in his " Count Robert of Paris.''
" I have read," says Agelastes, " in that brilliant
mirror which reflects the times of our fathers, the

5 ^lian, Van Hist. iii. 18.

' De Bello Gothico, lib. iv. 20.

^ Ad Lycophr. v. 1200.



266 The Fortunate Isles

volumes of the learned Procopius, that beyond Gaul,
and nearly opposite to it, but separated by an arm
of the sea, lies a ghastly region, on which clouds
and tempests for ever rest, and which is known to
its continental neighbours as the abode to which
departed spirits are sent after this life. On one side
of the strait dwell a few fishermen, men possessed
of a stra^ige character, and enjoying singular privi-
leges in consideration of thus being the living ferry-
men who, performing the office of the heathen
Charon, carry the spirits of the departed to the
island which is their residence after death. At
the dead of the night these fishermen are in
rotation summoned to perform the duty by which
they seem to hold permission to reside on this
strange coast. A knock is heard at the door of his
cottage, who holds the turn of this singular office,
founded by no mortal hand ; a whispering, as of
a decaying breeze, summons the ferryman to his
duty. He hastens to his bark on the sea-shore, and
has no sooner launched it, than he perceives its hull
sink sensibly in the water, so as to express the
weight of the dead with whom it is filled. No form
is seen ; and though voices are heard, yet the ac-
cents are undistinguishable, as of one who speaks
in his sleep." According to Villemarque, the place



The Fortunate Isles 367

whence the boat put off with its ghostly freight was
near Raz, a headland near the Bay of Souls, in the
extreme west of Finisterre. The bare, desolate val-
leys of this cape, opposite the Island of Seint, with
its tarn of Kleden, around which dance nightly the
skeletons of drowned mariners, the abyss of Plogofif,
and the wild moors studded with Druid monuments,
make it a scene most suitable for the assembly of
the souls previous to their ghastly voyage. Here
too, in Yawdet, the ruins of an ancient town near
Llannion, has been identified the 'YtiScrot of Strabo.

" On the great island of Brittia," continues Pro-
copius, "the men of olden time built a great wall
cutting off a great portion of the land. East of this
wall, there was a good climate and abundant crops,
but west of it, on the contrary, it was such that
no man could live there an hour ; it was the
haunt of myriads of serpents and other reptiles,
and if any one crossed the wall, he died at once,
poisoned by the noxious exhalations.'' This be-
lief, which acted as a second w^ll to the realm of
the dead, preserved strict privacy for the spirits.
Procopius declares that this tradition was widely
spread, and that it was reported to him by many
people.

Claudian also heard of the same mvth, but con-



268 The Fortunate Isles

fused it with that of the nether world of Odysseus.
"At the extreme coast of Gaul is a spot protected
from the tides of Ocean, where Odysseus by blood-
shed allured forth the silent folk. There are
heard wailing cries, and the light fluttering around
of the shadows. And the natives there see pale,
statue-like figures and dead corpses wandering ^."
According to Philemon in Pliny, the Cimbri called
the Northern Ocean Morimarusa, i.e. mare mortuum,
the sea of the dead.

In the old romance of Lancelot du Lac, the
Demoiselle d'Escalot directed that after death her
body should be placed richly adorned in a boat, and
allowed to float away before the wind ; a trace of
the ancient belief in the passage over sea to the
soul-land.

" There take the little bed on which I died
For Lancelot's love, and deck it like the Queen's
For richness, and me also hke the Queen
In all I have of rich, and lay me on it.
And let there be prepared a chariot-bier
To take me to the river, and a barge
Be ready on the river, clothed in black."

Tennyson's Elaine.

And the grave-digger in Hamlet sings of being
at death

' In Rufin. i. 123 — 133.



TJlc Fortunate Isles 269

"... shipp'd intill the land,
As if I had never been such."

Act V. Sc. I.

When King Arthur was about to die, with a
mortal wound in the head, he was brought by good
Sir Bedivere to the water's side.

" And when they were at the water's side, even
fast by the banke, hoved a little barge with many
faire ladies in it, and among them all was a queene,
and all they had blacke hoods, and they wept and
shriked when they saw King Arthur. ' Now put
mee into the barge,' said the king ; and so hee did
softly ; and there received him three queenes with
great mourning, and so these three queenes set
them downe, and in one of their laps King Arthur
laide his head. And then that queene said, ' Ah !
deer brother, why have ye tarried so long from
me .' Alas ! this wound on your head hath taken
over much cold.' And so then they rowed from
the land, and Sir Bedivere cried, 'Ah! my lord
Arthur, what shall become of mee now ye goe
from me, and leave me here alone among mine
enemies.'' 'Comfort thy selfe,' said King Arthur,
' and do as well as thou maiest, for in mee is no trust
for to trust in ; for I wil into the vale of Avilion
for to heale me of my greivous wound ; and if thou



370 The Fortunate Isles

never heere more of mee, pray for my soule.' But
evermore the queenes and the ladies wept and
shriked that it was pity for to heare them. And as
soone as Sir Bedivere had lost the sight of the barge,
he wept and wailed, and so tooke the forrest \"
This fair Avalon —

" Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow.
Nor ever wind blows loudly ; but — lies
Deep-meadow'd, happy, fair with orchard lawns
And bowery hollows crown'd with summer sea,''

is the Isle of the Blessed of the Kelts. Tzetze and
Procopius attempt to localize it, and suppose that
the Land of Souls is Britain ; but in this they are
mistaken ; as also are those who think to find
Avalon at Glastonbury. Avalon is the Isle of
Apples — a name reminding one of the' Garden of
the Hesperides in the far \\estern seas, with its tree
of golden apples in the midst. When we are told
that in the remote Ogygia sleeps Kronos gently,
\\atched by Briareus, till the time comes for his
awaking, we have a Graecized form of the myth
of Arthur in Avalon being cured of his grievous
wound. It need hardly be said that the Arthur
of romance is actually a demi-god, believed in

■• La Mort d'Arthure, by Sir Thomas Malory, ed. Wright,
vol. iii. c. 168.



The Fortunate Isles 271

long before the birth of the historic Arthur. This
Ogygia, says Plutarch, lies due west, beneath the
setting sun. According to an ancient poem pub-
lished by M. Villemarque, it is a place of enchant-
ing beauty. There youths and maidens dance
hand in hand on the dewy grass, green trees are
laden with apples, and behind the woods the
golden sun dips and rises. A murmuring rill flows
from a spring in the midst of the island, and thence
drink the spirits and obtain life with the draught.
Joy, song, and minstrelsy reign in that blessed
region °. There all is plenty, and the golden age
ever lasts ; cows give their milk in such abundance
that they fill large ponds at a milking ^ There,
too, is a palace all of glass, floating in air, and
receiving within its transparent walls the souls of
the blessed : it is to this house of glass that Merd-
din Emrys and his nine bards voyage '' To this
alludes Taliesin in his poem, " The Booty of the
Deep," where he says, that the valour of Arthur is
not retained in the glass enclosure. Into this
mansion three classes of men obtain no admission
— the tailors, of whom it takes nine to make a

5 Villemarque, Barz. Breiz, i. 193.

" Mem. de I'Acad. Celtique, v. p. 202.

~' Davies, Mythology of the Druids, p. 522.



272 The Fortunate Isles

man, spending their days sitting, and whose hands,
though they labour, are white ; the warlocks, and
the usurers *.

In popular opinion, this distant isle was far more
beautiful than paradise, and the rumours of its
splendour so excited the mind of the medisevals,
that the western land became the subject of satyre
and jest. It was nicknamed Cocaigne or Schlaraf-
fenland.

An English poem, " apparently written in the
latter part of the thirteenth century," says Mr.
Wright (S. Patrick's Purgatory), " which was printed
very inaccurately by Hickes, from a manuscript
which is now in the British Museum," describes
Cocaigne as far away out to sea, west of Spain.
Slightly modernized it runs thus ; —

" Thoagh Paradise be merry and bright,
Cokaygne is of fairer sight ;
What is there in Paradise ?
Both grass and flower and green ris (boughs).
Though there be joy and great dute (pleasure),
There is not meat, but fruit.
There is not hall, bower, nor bench.
But water mans thirst to quench."

In Paradise are only two men, Enoch and Elias ;
but Cocaigne is full of happy men and women.

^ Barz. Breiz, ii. 99.



The Fortunate Isles :273

There is no land like it under heaven ; it is there
always day and never night ; there quarrelling and
strife are unknown ; there no people die ; there falls
neither hail, rain, or snow, neither is thunder heard
there, nor blustering winds —

" There is a well fair abbaye
Of white monks and of grey ;
There both bowers and halls,
AH of pasties be the walls,
Of flesh, and fish, and rich meat,
The like fullest that men may eat.
Floweren cakes be the shingles all.
Of church, cloister, bower, and hall.
The pins be fat pudings.
Rich meat to princes and kings.''

The cloister is built of gems and spices, and all
about are birds merrily singing, ready roasted
flying into the hungry mouths ; and there are
buttered larks and "garlek gret plente."

A French poem on this land describes it as a
true cookery-land, as its nickname implies. All
down the streets go roasted geese turning them-
selves ; there is a river of wine ; the ladies are all
fair ; every month one has new clothes. There
bubbles up the fountain of perpetual youth, which
will restore to bloom and vigour all who bathe in
it, be they ever so old and ugly.

However much the burlesque poets of the Middle

[II.] T



374 The Fortunate Isles

Ages might laugh at this mysterious western
region of blissful souls, it held its own in the belief of
the people. Curiously enough, the same confusion
between Britain and Avalon, which was made by
Procopius, is still made by the German peasantry,
who have their Engel-land which, through a simi-
larity of name, they identify with England, to
which they say, the souls of the dead are trans-
ported. In this land, according to Teutonic
mythology, which in this point resembles the
Keltic, is a glass mountain. In like manner the
Slaves believe in a paradise for souls wherein is a
large apple-orchard, in the midst of which rises a
glass rock crowned with a golden palace ; and in
olden times they buried bear's claws with the dead,
to assist him in climbing the crystal mountain '.

The mysterious Western Land, in Irish, is called
Thierna na oge, or the Country of Youth ; and it
is identified with a city of palaces and minsters
sunk beneath the Atlantic, or at the bottom of
lakes.

" The ancient Greek authors," says M. de Latoc-
naye in his pleasant tour through Ireland, quoted
by Crofton Croker, " and Plato in particular, have

' Mannhardt, Germanische Mythen, 330 et seq.



The Fortunate Isles 375

recorded a tradition of an ancient world. They
pretend that an immense island, or rather a vast
continent, has been swallowed up by the sea to the
west of Europe. It is more than probable that
the inhabitants of Connemara have never heard of
Plato or of the Greeks ; nevertheless they have
also their ancient tradition. ' Our land will re-
appear some day,' say the old men to the young
folk, as they lead them on a certain day of the
year to a mountain-top, and point out over the sea
to them ; the fishers also on their coasts pretend
that they see towns and villages at the bottom of
the water. The descriptions which they give of
this imaginary country are as emphatic and ex-
aggerated as those of the promised land : milk
flows in some of the rivulets, others gush with
wine ; undoubtedly there are also streams of whisky
and porter'."

The subject of cities beneath the water, which
appear above the waves at dawn on Easter-day, or
which can be seen by moonlight in the still depths
of a lake, is too extensive to be considered here,
opening up as it does questions of mythology

' Crofton Croker, Fairy Legends of the South of Ireland.
1862, p. 165. See also Kennedy, Popular Fictions of the
Irish Celts. London, 1867.

T 2



276 The Fortunate Isles

which, to be fully discussed, would demand a
separate paper. Each myth of antiquity touches
other myth's with either hand, and it is difficult to
isolate one for consideration without being drawn
into the discussion of other articles of belief on
which it leans, and to which it is united. As in
the sacred symbol of the Church each member
predicates that which is to follow, and is a logical
consequence of that which goes before, so that the
excision of one article would destroy the complete-
ness, and dissolve the unity of the faith — so, with
the sacred beliefs of antiquity, one myth is linked
to another, and cannot be detached without break-
ing into and destroying the harmony of the
charmed circle.

But to confine ourselves to two points — the
phantom western land, and the passage to it.

"Those who have read the history of the
Canaries," writes Washington Irving, " may re-
member the wonders told of this enigmatical
island. Occasionally it would be visible from
their shores, stretching away in the clear bright
west, to all appearance substantial like themselves,
and still more beautiful. Expeditions would
launch forth from the Canaries to explore this land
of promise. For a time its sun-gilt peaks and long



The Fortunate Isles 277

shadowy promontories would remain distinctly
visible ; but in proportion as the voyagers ap-
proached, peak and promontory would gradually
fade away, until nothing would remain but blue
sky above and deep blue water below.

" Hence this mysterious isle was stigmatized by
ancient cosmographers with the name of Aprositus,
or the inaccessible ^" The natives of the Canaries
relate of this island, which they name after S.
Brandan, the following tale. In the early part of
the fifteenth century, there arrived in Lisbon an
old bewildered pilot of the seas, who had been
driven by the tempests he knew not whither, and
raved about an island in the far deep, upon which
he had landed, and which he had found peopled
with Christians and adorned with noble cities.
The inhabitants told him they were descendants
of a band of Christians who fled from Spain, when
that country was conquered by the Moslems. They
were curious about the state of their fatherland,
and grieved to hear that the Moslem still held
possession of the kingdom of Granada. The old
man, on his return to his ship, was caught by a
tempest, whirled out once more to sea, and saw

^ Washington Irving, Chronicles of Wolfert's Roost, and
other Papers. Edinburgh, 1855, p. 312,



278 The Fortunate Isles

no more of the unknown island. This strange
story caused no httle excitement in Portugal and
Spain. Those well versed in history remembered
to have read that in the time of the conquest of
Spain, in the eighth century, seven bishops, at the
head of seven bands of exiles, had fled across the
great ocean to some distant shores, where they
might found seven Christian cities, and enjoy their
faith unmolested. The fate of these wanderers
had hitherto remained a mystery, and their story
had faded from memory ; but the report of the
old pilot revived the long-forgotten theme, and it
was determined, by the pious and enthusiastic, that
this island thus accidentally discovered was the
identical place of refuge, whither the wandering
bishops had been guided with their flock by the
hand of Providence. No one, however, entered
into the matter with half the zeal of Don Fernando
de Alma, a young cavalier of high standing in the
Portuguese court, and of the meek, sanguine, and
romantic temperament. The Island of the Seven
Cities became now the constant subject of his
thoughts by day and of his dreams by night ; and
he determined to fit out an expedition, and set sail
in quest of the sainted island. Don loacos II. fur-
nished him with a commission, constituting him



The Fortunate Isles 279

Adalantado, or governor, of any country he might
discover, with the single proviso, that he should
bear all the expenses of the discovery, and pay a
tenth of the profits to the crown. With two vessels
he put out to sea and steered for the Canaries — in
those days the regions of nautical discovery and
romance, and the outposts of the known world ;
for as yet Columbus had not crossed the ocean.
Scarce had they reached those latitudes, than they
were separated by a violent tempest. For many
days the caravel of Don Fernando was driven
about at the mercy of the elements, and the crew
were in despair. All at once the storm subsided,
the ocean sank into a calm, the clouds which had
veiled the face of heaven were suddenly withdrawn,
and the tempest-tossed mariners beheld a fair and
mountainous island, emerging, as if by enchant-
ment, from the murky gloom. The caravel now
lay perfectly becalmed off the mouth of a river, on
the banks of which, about a league off, was de-
scried a noble city, with lofty walls and towers, and
a protecting castle. After a time, a stately barge
with sixteen oars was seen emerging from the river
and approaching the vessel. Under a silken canopy
in the stern sat a richly-clad cavalier, and over his
head was a banner bearing the sacred emblem of



280 The Fortunate Isles

the cross. When the barge reached the caravel,
the cavaher stepped on board and, in the old
Castilian language, welcomed the strangers to the
Island of the Seven Cities. Don Fernando could
scarce believe that this was not all a dream. He
made known his name and the object of his
voyage. The Grand Chamberlain — such was the
title of the cavalier from the island — assured him
that, as soon as his credentials were presented, he
would be acknowledged as the Adalantado of the
Seven Cities. In the mean time, the day was
waning ; the barge was ready to convey him to
land, and would assuredly bring him back. Don
Fernando leaped into it after the Grand Chamber-
lain, and was rowed ashore. Every thing there
bore the stamp of former ages, as if the world had
suddenly rolled back for several centuries ; and no
wonder, for the Island of the Seven Cities had been
cut off from the rest of the world for several
hundred years. On shore Don Fernando spent
an agreeable evening at the court-house, and late
at night with reluctance he re-entered the barge,
to return to his vessel. The barge sallied out to
sea, but no caravel was to be seen. The oarsmen
rowed on — their monotonous chant had a lulling
eflcct. A drowsy influence crept over Don Fer-



The Fortunate Isles 281

nando : objects swam before his eyes, and he lost
consciousness. On his recovery, he found himself
in a strange cabin, surrounded by strangers. Where
was he .' On board a Portuguese ship, bound for
Lisbon. How had he come there .'' He had been
taken senseless from a wreck drifting about the
ocean. The vessel arrived in the Tagus, and
anchored before the famous capital. Don Fer-
nando sprang joyfully on shore, and hastened to
his ancestral mansion. A strange porter opened
the door, who knew nothing of him or of his family :
no people of the name had inhabited the house
for many a year. He sought the house of his be-
trothed, the Donna Serafina. He beheld her on
the balcony ; then he raised his arms towards her
with an exclamation of rapture. She cast upon
him a look of indignation, and hastily retired. He
rang at the door ; as it was opened by the porter,
he rushed past, sought the well-known chamber,
and threw himself at the feet of Serafina. She
started back with affright, and took refuge in the
arms of a youthful cavalier.

"What mean you, Seiior .?" cried the latter.

"What right have you to ask that question V
demanded Don Fernando fiecely.

"The right of an affianced suitor!"



282 The Fo7'tunate Isles

" O Serafina ! is this your fidelity?" cried he in a
tone of agony.

" Serafina ! What mean you by Serafina, Sefior ?
This lady's name is Maria."

"What!" cried Don Fernando; "is not this
Serafina Alvarez, the original of yon portrait which
smiles on me from the wall .-'"

" Holy Virgin !" cried the young lady, casting
her eyes upon the portrait, " he is talking of my
great-grandmother ! "

With this Portuguese legend, which has been
charmingly told by Washington Irving, must be
compared the adventures of Porsenna, king of
Russia, in the sixth volume of Dodsley's " Poetical
Collection." Porsenna was carried off by Zephyr
to a distant region, where the scenery was en-
chanting, the flowers ever in bloom, and creation
put on her fairest guise. There he found a princess
with whom he spent a few agreeable weeks.
Being, however, anxious to return to his king-
dom, he took leave of her, saying that after
three months' absence his return would be neces-
sary.

" ' Three months !' rephed the fair, ' three months alone !
Know that three hundred years are roU'd away
Since at my feet my lovely PhcEnix lay.'



TIlc Fortunate Isles iSS

' Three hundred years ! ' re-echoed back the prince :
' A whole three hundred years completed since
1 landed here?'"

On his return to Russia, he was overtaken by
all-conquering time, and died. A precisely simi-
lar legend exists in Ireland.

In a similar manner Ogier-le-Danois found him-
self unconscious of the lapse of time in Avalon.
He was one day carried by his steed Papillon
along a track of light to the my.stic Vale of Apples ;
there he alighted beside a sparkling fountain, around
which waved bushes of fragrant flowering shrubs.
By the fountain stood a beautiful maiden, extending
to him a golden crown wreathed with blossoms.
He put it on his head, and at once forgot the past:
his battles, his love of glory, Charlemagne and his
preux, died from his memory like a dream. He saw
only Morgana, and felt no desire other than to sigh
through eternity at her feet. One day the crown
slipped from Ogier's head, and fell into the fountain :
immediately his memory returned, and the thoughts
of his friends and relatives, and military prowess,
troubled his peace of mind. He begged Morgana
to permit him to return to earth. She consented,
and he found that, in the few hours of rapture in
Avalon, two hundred years had elapsed. Charle-



284 The Fortunate Isles

magne, Roland, and Oliver were no more. Hugh
Capet sat on the throne of France, the dynasty of
the great Charles having come to an end. Ogier
found no rest in France, and he returned to Avalon,
nevermore to leave the fay Morgana.

In the Portuguese legend, the Island of the
Seven Cities is unquestionably the land of departed
spirits of the ancient Celtiberians ; the properties
of the old belief remain : the barge to conduct
the spirit to the shore, the gorgeous scenery, and
the splendid castle, but the significance of the
myth has been lost, and a story of a Spanish
colony having taken refuge in the far western sea
has been invented, to account for the Don meeting
with those of his own race in the phantom isle.

That the belief in this region was very strong
in Ireland, about the eleventh century, is certain
from its adoption into the popular mythology of
the Norsemen, under the name of Greater Ireland
(Ireland hit Mikla). Till the ruin of the Norse
kingdom in the east of Erin, in the great battle
of Clontarf (1114), the Norsemen were brought
much in contact with the Irish, and by this
means adopted Irish names, such as Nial and
Cormac, and Irish superstitions as well. The
name the}- ijavc to the Isle of the Blessed, in the



The Fortunate Isles 285

western seas, was either Great Ireland, because
there the Erse tongue was spoken, — it being a
colony of the souls of the Kelts, — or Hvitramanna-
land, because there the inhabitants were robed in
white. In the mediaeval vision of Owayne the
Knight, which is simply a fragment of Keltic
mythology in a Christian garb, the paradise is
enclosed by a fair wall, " whyte and brygth as glass,"
a reminiscence of the glass-palace in Avalon, and
the inhabitants of that land —

" Fayre vestymentes they hadde on.''

Some of these met him on his first starting on
his journey, and there were fifteen in long white
garments.

The following passages in the Icelandic chronicles
refer to this land of mystery and romance.

" Mar of Holum married Thorkatla, and their
son was Ari ; he was storm-cast on the White-man's
land, which some call Great Ireland ; this lies in the
Western Sea near Vinland the Good (America): it
is called six days' sail due west from Ireland. Ari
could never leave it, and there he was baptized.
Hrafn, who sailed to Limerick, was the first to tell
of this ; he had spent a long time in Limerick in
Ireland."



386 The Fortunate Isles

This passage is from the Landnamabok, a work
of the twelfth century. A turbulent Icelander,
named Bjorn of Bradwick, vanished from, his home.
Years after, a native of the same island, Gudlief by
name, was trading between Iceland and Dublin,
when, somewhere about the year looo, he was
caught by a furious gale from the east, and driven
further in the western seas than he had ever visited
before. Here he came upon a land well populated,
where the people spoke the Irish tongue. The
crew were taken before an assembly of the natives,
and would probably have been hardly dealt with,
had not a tall man ridden up, surrounded by an
armed band, to whom all bowed the knee. This man
spoke to Gudlief in the Norse tongue, and asked
him whence he came. On hearing that he was an
Icelander, he made particular inquiries about the
residents in the immediate neighbourhood of Brad-
wick, and gave Gudlief a ring and a sword, to be
taken to friends at home. Then he bade him re-
turn at once to Iceland, and warn his kindred not
to seek him in his new home. Gudlief put again
to sea, and, arriving safely in Iceland, related his
adventures, concluding that the man he had seen
was Bjorn of Bradwick ■'. Another Icelander
^ Eyrbyggja Saga, c. 64. Hafnice, 1787, p. 329.



The Fortunate Isles 287

brought away two children from Vinland, and
they related that near their home was a land,
where people walked about in flowing white robes,
singing processional psalms. Northern antiquarians
attempt to identify this White-man's land with
Florida, where they suppose was settled the Welsh
colony led beyond the sea by Madoc in 1169. I
have little doubt that it is simply an Icelandic re-
miniscence of the popular Irish superstition relative
to the Soul Island beneath the setting sun.

" In his crystal ark,
Whither sail'd Merhn with his band of bards,
Old Merlin, master of the mystic lore ;
Belike his crystal ark, instinct with life,
Obedient to the mighty Master, reach'd
The Land of the Departed ; there, belike,
They in the clime of immortality,
Themselves immortal, drink the gales of bliss
Which o'er Flathinnis breathe eternal spring,
Blending whatever odours make the gale
Of evening sweet, whatever melody
Charms the wood traveller."

Southey's Madoc, xi.

This Flath Innis, the Noble Island, is the Gaelic
name for the western paradise. Macpherson, in his
Introduction to the " History of Great Britain," re-
lates a legend which agrees with those prevalent
among other Keltic peoples. In former days there
lived in Skerr a Druid of renown. He sat with his



288 The Fortunate Isles

face to the west on the shore, his eye following the
dechning sun, and he blamed the careless billows
which tumbled between him and the distant Isle of
Green. One day, as he sat musing on a rock, a storm
arose on the sea ; a cloud, under whose squally skirts
the foaming waters tossed, rushed suddenly into the
bay, and from its dark womb emerged a boat with
white sails bent to the wind, and banks of gleam-
ing oars on either side. But it was destitute of
mariners, itself seeming to live and move. An un-
usual terror seized on the aged Druid ; he heard
a voice call, " Arise, and see the Green Isle of
those who have passed away!" Then he entered
the vessel. Immediately the wind shifted, the cloud
enveloped him, and in the bosom of the vapour
he sailed away. Seven days gleamed on him
through the mist ; on the eighth, the waves rolled
violently, the vessel pitched, and darkness thickened
around him, when suddenly he heard a cry, "The
Isle ! the Isle !" The clouds parted before him, the
waves abated, the wind died away, and the vessel
rushed into dazzling light. Before his eyes lay
the Isle of the Departed basking in golden light.
Its hills sloped green and tufted with beauteous
trees to the .shore, the mountain-tops were enve-
loped in bright and transparent clouds, from which



Tlie Fortunate Isles 2S'.)

gushed limpid streams, which, wandering down the
steep hill-sides with pleasant harp-like murmur,
emptied themselves into the twinkling blue bays.
The valleys were open and free to the ocean ; trees
loaded with leaves, which scarcely waved to the
light breeze, were scattered on the green declivities
and rising ground ; all was calm and bright ; the
pure sun of autumn shone from his blue sky on the
fields ; he hastened not to the west for repose, nor
was he seen to rise in the east, but hung as a golden
lamp, ever illumining the Fortunate Isle.

There, in radiant halls, dwelt the spirits of the
departed, ever blooming and beautiful, ever laugh-
ing and gay.

It is curious to note how retentive of ancient
mythologic doctrines relative to death are the memo-
ries of the people. This Keltic fable of the ' Land
beyond the Sea," to which the souls are borne after
death, has engrafted itself on popular religion in
England. The following hymn is from the collec-
tion of the Sunday School Union, and is founded
on this venerable Druidic tenet : —

•' Shall we meet beyond the river,
Where the surges cease to roll,
Where in all the bright For-ever
Sorrow ne'er shall press the soul ?

[II.]. U



290 The Fortunate Isles

" Shall we meet in that blest harbour,
When our stormy voyage is o'er ?
Shall we meet and cast the anchor
By the fair celestial shore ?

" Shall we meet with many loved ones,
Who were torn from our embrace ?
Shall we listen to their voices.
And behold them face to face ?"

So is a hymn from the Countess of Huntingdon's
collection : —

" I launch into the deep.

And leave my native land.

Where sin lulls all asleep :
For thee I fain would all resign.
And sail for heav'n with thee and thine.

" Come, heav'nly wind, and blow

A prosp'rous gale of grace,

To waft from all below

To heav'n, my destined place :
There in full sail my port I'll find,
And leave the world and sin behind."

Or I might quote a poem on " The Last Voyage,"
from the Lyra Messianica, which one would have
supposed to have been founded on the Gaelic
legend told by Macpherson : —

" On ! on ! through the storm and the billow.
By life's chequer'd troubles opprest.
The rude deck my home and my pillow,
I sail to the land of the Blest.



The Fortunate Isles :J91

The tempests of darkness confound me,

Above me the deep waters roll,
But the arms of sweet Pity surround me,

And bear up my foundering soul.

" With a wild and mysterious commotion

The torrent flows, rapid and strong ;
Towards a mournful and shadowy ocean

My vessel bounds fiercely along.
Ye waters of gloom and of sorrow,

How dread are your tumult and roar !
But, on ! for the brilliant to-morrow

That dawns upon yonder bright shore !

" O Pilot, the great and the glorious.

That sittest in garments so white.
O'er death and o'er hell ' The Victorious,'

The Way and the Truth and the Light,
Speak, speak to the darkness appalling,

And bid the mad turmoil to cease :
For, hark ! the good Angels are calling

My soul to the haven of Peace.

" Now, ended all sighing and sadness.
The waves of destruction all spent,
I sing with the children of gladness
The song of immortal content."

It would be a. study of no ordinary interest to
trace modern popular Protestantism back to the
mythologic systems of which it is the resultant.
The early Fathers erred in regarding the ancient
heresies as bastard forms of Christianity ; they
were distinct religions, feebly tinged by contact
with the religion of the Cross. In like manner, 1
u a



292 Tlie Fortunate Isles

am satisfied that we make a mistake in considering
the Dissent of England, especially as manifested
in greatest intensity in the wilds of Cornwall,
Wales, and the eastern moors of Yorkshire, where
the Keltic element is strong, as a form of Chris-
tianity. It is radically different : its framework
and nerve is of ancient British origin, passing itself
off as a spiritual Christianity.

In S. Peter's, Rome, is a statue of Jupiter, de-
prived of his thunderbolt, which is replaced by the
emblematic keys. In like manner, much of the
religion of the lower orders, which we regard as
essentially Christian, is ancient heathenism, refitted
with Christian symbols. The story of Jacob's
stratagem is reversed : the voice is the elder bro-
ther's voice, but the hands and the raiment are
those of the younger.

I have instanced the belief in angelic music
calling away the soul as one heathen item in
popular Protestant mythology —

" Hark ! they whisper ! Angels say,
' Sister spirit, come away ! ' "

Another is embodied in the tenet that the souls of
the departed become angels. In Judaic and Chris-
tian doctrine, the angel creation is distinct from
that of human beings, and a ]c\\ or a Catholic



Thi Fortunate Isles 293

would as little dream of confusing the diftinct
conception of angel and soul, as of believing in
metempsychosis. But not so dissenting religion.
According to Druidic dogma, the souls of the dead
were guardians of the living ; a belief shared with
the ancient Indians, who venerated the spirits of
their ancestry, the Pitris, as watching over and
protecting them. Thus, the hymn "I want to be
an Angel," so popular in dissenting schools, is
founded on the venerable Aryan myth, and there-
fore of exceeding interest ; but Christian it is not.

Another tenet which militates against Christian
doctrine, and has supplanted it in popular belief,
is that of the- transmigration of the soul to bliss
immediately on its departure from the body.

The article stantis vel cadentis Fidei, of the
Apostles, was the resurrection of the body. If we
read the Acts of the Apostles and their Epistles
with care, it is striking how great weight, we find,
is laid on this doctrine. They went every where
preaching — i. the rising of Christ ; 2. the con-
sequent restoration of the bodies of Christians. " If
the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised ; and
if Christ be not raised, your faith is vain. But
now is Christ risen from the dead, and becorne the
first fruits of them that slept. ' For as in Adam all



29i The Fortunate Isles

die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive \"
This was the key-note to the teaching of the
Apostles ; it runs through the New Testament, and
is reflected in the writings of the Fathers. It
occupies its legitimate position in the Creeds, and
the Church has never failed to insist upon it with
no faltering voice.

But the doctrine of the soul being transported
to heaven, and of its happiness being completed
at death, finds no place in the Bible or the Liturgies
of any branch — Greek, Roman, or Anglican — of
the Church Catholic. Yet this was the tenet of
our Keltic forefathers, and it has maintained itself
in English Protestantism, so as to divest the doctrine
of the resurrection of the body of its grasp on the
popular mind. Among the Kelts, again, reception
into the sacred inner circle of the illuminated was
precisely analogous to the received dissenting
doctrine of conversion. To it are applied, by the
bards, terms such as ' the second birth,' ' the
renewal,' which are to this day employed by
Methodists to designate the mysterious process of
conversion.

But to return to the subject of this article. It is
a singular fact, that only the other day I heard of

■■ I Cor. XV. 1 6, 17, 20, 2 r.



The Fortunate Isles 295

a man in Cleveland, being buried two years ago
with a candle, a penny, and a bottle of wine in his
coffin : the candle to light him along the road, the
penny to pay the ferry, and the wine to nourish
him, as he went to the New Jerusalem. I was told
this, and this explanation was given me, by some
rustics who professed to have attended the funeral.
This looks to me as though the shipping into the
other land were not regarded merely as a figure of
speech, but as a reality.



Stoan=JBlartens

T REMEMBER a long scramble in Iceland, over
-^ the ruins of tuff rock in a narrow gorge. My
little pony had toiled sturdily up a dusty slope
leading apparently to nothing, when, all at once,
the ravine terminated in an abrupt scarp, whence
was obtained a sudden peep of entrancing beauty.
Far away in front gleamed a snowy dome of silver,
doubly refined and burnished, resting upon a base-
ment of gentian blue.

" Some blue peaks in the distance rose.
And white against the cold-white sk)-
Shone out their crowning snows."

To the left started sheer precipices of ink-black
rock to icy pinnacles, from which fell a continuous
powder of white water into a lake, here black as
the rocks above it, yonder bluer than the over-
arching heavens. Not a sound of animated life



Swan-Maidens 297

broke the stillness, which would have been oppres-
sive, but for the patter of the falling streams. The
only living objects visible were two white swans
rippling proudly through the clear water.

I have never since felt surprise at superstition
attaching itself to these glorious birds, haunting
lone tarn.s, pure as new-fallen snow. The first
night I slept under my tent in the same island, I
was wakened with a start by a wild triumphant
strain as of clarions pealing from the sky. I crept
from under canvas to look up, and saw a flight of
the Hooper swans on their way to the lakes of the
interior, high up, lit by the sun, like flakes of gold-
leaf against the green sky of an arctic night.

Its solitary habits, the purity of its feathers, its
wondrous song, have given to the wild swan a
charm which has endeared it to poets, and ensured
its introduction into mythology.

The ancient Indians, looking up at the sky over
which coursed the white cirrus clouds, fabled of a
heavenly lake in which bathed the swan-like
Apsaras, impersonifications of these delicate light
cloud-flakes. What these white vapours were, the
ancient Aryans could not understand ; therefore,
because they bore a more or less remote resem-
blance to swans floating on blue waters, they sup-



•Z'.)S S'ix! an- Maidens

posed them to be divine beings partaking of the
nature and appearance of these beautiful birds.

The name Apsaras signifies those who go in the
water, from ap, water, and saras, from sr, to go.
Those who bear tiie name skim as swans over the
lotus-pond of heaven, or, laying aside their feather-
dresses, bathe, as beautiful females, in the limpid
flood. These swan-maidens are the houris of the
Vedic heaven ; receiving to their arms the souls of
the heroes. Sometimes they descend to earth, and
become the wives of mortals ; but soon their
celestial nature re-asserts itself, and they expand
their luminous wings, and soar away into the
heavenly deeps of tranquil azure. I have else-
where referred to the story of Urva9i, the Apsaras,
and her lover Puravaras. And Somadeva relates
the adventures of a certain Ni9cayadatta, who
caught one of these celestial maidens, and then
lost her, but, full of love, pursued her to the golden
city above '. He tells also of Sridatta, who beheld
one bathing in the Ganges, and, plunging after her,
found himself in a wondrous land beneath the
water, in the company of the beloved '

In the Kalmuk collection of tales called Siddhi-

' Katha Sarit Sagara, book vii. c. 37.
^ Ibid, book ii. c. 10.



Swan-Maidens 299

Kur •*, which is a translation from the Sanskrit, is a
story of a woman who had three daughters. The
girls took it in turn to keep the cattle. An ox
was lost, and the eldest, in search of it, entered a
cave, where she found an extensive lake of rippling
blue water, on which swam a stainless swan. She
asked for her ox, and the bird replied that she
should have it if she would become his wife. She
refused, and returned to her mother. Next day
the second sister lost an ox, traced it to the cave,
pursued it into the land of mysteries, and saw the
blue lake surrounded by flowery banks, on which
floated a silver swan. She refused to become his
wife, as did her sister. Next day the same
incidents were repeated with the third sister, who,
however, proved more compliant to the wishes of
the swan.

The Samojeds have a wild tale about swan-
maidens. Two Samojeds lived in a desolate moor,
where they caught foxes, sables, and bears. One
went on a journey, the other remained at home.
He who travelled, reached an old woman chopping
birch-trees. He cut down the trees for her, and
drew them to her tent. This gratified the old

■* Siddhi-Kur, Tale vii.



yOO Swan-Maidens

woman,'' and she bade him hide, and see what
would take place. He concealed himself; and
shortly after beheld seven maidens approach. They
asked the old woman whether she had cut the
wood herself, and then whether she was quite
alone. To both questions she replied in the affir-
mative ; then they went away. The old woman
then drew the Samojed from his hiding-place, and
bade him follow the traces of the damsels, and
steal the dress of one of them. He obeyed.
Emerging from a wood of gloomy pines, he came
upon a beautiful lake, in which swam the seven
maidens. Then the man took away the dress
which lay nearest to him. The seven swam to the
shore and sought their clothes. Those of one were
gone. She cried bitterly, and exclaimed, " I will
be the wife of him who has stolen my dress, if he
will restore it me." He replied, " No, I will not
give you back your feather dress, or you will
spread your wings, and fly away from me."
" Give me my clothes, I am freezing !"
" Not far from here are seven Samojeds, who
range the neighbourhood by day, and at night
hang their hearts on the tent-pegs. Procure for
me these hearts, and I will give you the clothes."
" In five da\'s I will bring them to \'ou.''



Swan-Maidens 301

Then he gave her the clothes, and returned to
his companion.

One day the maiden came to him out of the
sky, and asked him to accompany her to the
brothers, whose hearts he had set her to procure.
They came to the tent, and tlie man secreted
himself, but the damsel became invisible. At
night the seven Samojeds returned, ate their
supper, and then hitched up their hearts to the
tent-pegs. The swan-maiden stole them, and
brought them to her lover. He dashed all but one
upon the ground, and as they fell, the brothers
expired. But the heart of the eldest he did not
kill. Then the man without a heart awoke, and
entreated to have it returned to him.

"Once upon a time you killed my mother,"
said the Samojed ; " restore her to life, and you
shall have your heart."

Then the man without the heart said to his wife,
" Go to the place where the dead lie, there you
will find a purse, in that purse is her soul ; shake
the purse over the dead woman's bones, and she
will come to life." The woman did as she was
ordered, and the mother of the Samojed revived.
Then he dashed the heart to the ground, and the
last of the seven brothers died.



303 Sivan-Maidcns

But the swan-maiden took her own heart and
that of her husband, and threw them into the air.
The mother of the Samojed saw that they were
without hearts, so she went to the lake where
swam the six maidens ; she stole one dress, and
would not restore it till the maiden had promised
to recover the hearts which were in the air. This
she succeeded in doing, and her dress was restored \

Among the Minussinian Tatars these mysterious
ladies have lost their grace and beauty. They
dwell in the seventeenth region of the- earth in
raven-black rocks, and are fierce, raging demons of
the air. They scourge themselves into action with
a sword, lap the blood of the slain, and fly gorged
with blood for forty years. In number they are
forty, and yet they run together into one ; so that
at one time there is but a single swan-woman, at
another the sky is dark with their numerous wings ;
a description which makes it easy to identify them
with clouds. But there are not only evil swan-
women, there are also good ones as well.

Katai Khan lived on the coast of the White Sea,
at the foot of gloomy mountains. He had two
daughters, Kara Kuruptju (black thimble) and

■* Castren, Ethnologischc Vorlesungen iiber die Altaischen
Viilker. St. Petersburg, iK.'',7, pp. 172 — 176.



Swaii-Maidcns 303

Kesel Djibak (red silk) ; the elder evil disposed
and in league with the powers of darkness, a friend
of the raging swan-woman ; the younger beautiful
and good.

" Kesel Djibak often riseth,
In a dress of snowy swan,
To the realm where reign the Kudai.
There the Kudai's daughters seven
Fly on wings of snowy swan ;
With them sporteth Kesel Djibak,
Swimming on the golden lake *."

The seven Kudai, or gods of the Tatars, are the
planets. Kara Kuruptju is the evening twilight,
Kesel Djibak the morning dawn which ascends to
the heavens, and there lingers among the floating
feathery clouds. But Kara Kuruptju descends to
the gloomy realm of the evil-hearted swan-women,
where she marries their son Djidar Mos (bronzen),
the thunder-cloud. These grimly swanlike damsels
of the Tatars irresistibly remind us of the Phor-
cydae ; KVKvojlop^oi, as ^schylus calls them.

The classic swan myths must be considered in
greater detail. They are numerous, for each
Greek tribe had its own favourite myths, and ad-
ditional fables were being constantly imported into

^ Schiefner, Heldensagen der Minussinischen Tataren.
St. Petersburg, 1859, p. 201.



301 Swan-Maidens

religion from foreign sources. The swan was with

the Greeks the bird of the Muses, and therefore

also of Apollo. When the golden-haired deity was

born, swans came from the golden stream of Pacto-

lus, and seven times wheeled about Delos, uttering

songs of joy.

" Seven times, on snowy pinions, circle round
The Delian shores, and skim along the ground :
The vocal birds, the favourites of the Nine,
In strains melodious hail the birth divine.
Oft as they carol on resounding wings,
To soothe Latona's pangs, as many strings
Apollo fitted to the warbling lyre
In aftertimes ; but ere the sacred choir
Of circling swans another concert sung.
In melting notes, the power immortal sprung
To glorious birth '."

A picture, this, of the white cloudlets fleeting
around the rising sun.

The Muses were originally nymphs, and are the
representatives of the Indian Apsaras ; and it is on
this account that the swans are their symbols.
Beyond the Eridanus, in the land of the Lygii
{Air^vi'i, i.e. the clear-ringing), lived once a songful
(/Ltovcri/co?) king. Him Apollo transformed into a
swan' " Cycnus having left his kingdom, accom-

^ Callimachus, Hymn. Delos. Cf. also Euripides, Iphig.
in Tauris, nio.

' Paus. i. 30, 3 ; Lucian, dc Electro, 5.



Stvan-Maidens 305

panied by his sisters, was filling the verdant banks,
and the river Eridanus, and the forest, with his com-
plaints ; when th£ human voice becomes shrill, and
grey feathers conceal his hair. A long neck, too,
extends from his breast, and a membrane joins his
reddening toes ; plumage clothes his sides, and his
mouth becomes a pointless bill. Cycnus becomes a
new bird ; but he trusts himself neither to heavens
nor the air. He frequents the pools and wide
meers, and abhorring fires, choses the streams '."
This Cycnus was a son of Sthenelus ; he is the same
as the son of Pelopea by Ares, and the son of Thy-
ria by Poseidon. The son of Ares lived in southern
Thessaly, where he slew pilgrims till Apollo cut off
his head, and gave the skull to the temple of Ares.
According to another version of the story, he was
the son of Ares by Pyrene. When Herakles had
slain him, the father was so enraged that he fought
with the hero of many labours.

Cycnus, a son of Poseidon, was matched against
Achilles, who, stripping him of his armour, sud-
denly beheld him transformed into a swan ; or he
is the son of Hyrie, who springs from a rock and
becomes the bird from which he derives his name,

* Ovid, Metam. ii. Fab. 4.
[Q.] X



306 Swan-Maidens

whilst his mother dissolving into tears is transformed
into a lake whereon the stately bird can glide.

In the fable of Leda, Zeus, the heaven above,
clothed in swan's shape, — that is, enveloped in
white mist, — embraces the fair Leda, who is pro-
bably the earth-mother ", and by her becomes the
father of the Dioscuri, the morning and evening
twilights, and, according to some, of beautiful
Helen, that is, Selene, the moon. The husband of
Leda was Tyndareos, a name which identifies him
with the thunderer, and he is therefore the same as
Zeus.

According to the Cyprian legend. Nemesis, fly-
ing the pursuit of Zeus, took the form of a swan,
and dropped an egg, from which issued Helen.
Nemesis is a Norn, who, with Shame, "having
abandoned men, depart, when they have clad their
fair skin in white raiment, to the tribe of the
immortals '."

Swans were kept and fed as sacred birds on the
Eurotas, and were reverenced in Sparta as emblems

' A)j8a is probably from lada, i. e. woman. Leda, however,
bears a close resemblance to Leto, the dark-robed (icvavom
TrAor), who takes her name from \av66.va or Xijflm, lateo, and
signifies darkness, which Rives birth to Apollo, the sun, and
Artemis, the moon.

' Hesiod, W. and D., 200.



Sivan-Maideits -j07

of Aphrodite : this is not surprising, as Aphrodite
is identical with Helen, the moon, which swims at
night as a silver swan upon the deep dark sky-sea.
A late fable relates how that Achilles and Helen
were united on a spirit-isle in Northern Pontus,
where they were served by flights of white birds ^

In the North, however, is the home of the swan,
and there we find the fables about the mystic bird
in great profusion. There, as a Faroese ballad
says —

" Fly along, o'er the verdant ground,
Glimmering swans to the rippling sound ;''

or, as an Icelandic song has it —

" Sweetly swans are singing

In the summer time.
There a swan as silver white.

In the summer time,
Lay upon my bosom light.

Lily maiden,
Sweetly swans are singing ! "

The venerable Edda of Soemund relates how
that there were once three brothers, sons of a king
of the Finns ; one was called Slagfid, the second
Egil, the third Volund, the original of our Wayland
smith. They went on snow-shoes and hunted wild

"^ Pausan. iii. 19.
X 3



308 Swan-Maidens

beasts. They came to Ulfdal, and there made
themselves a house, where there is a water called
the Wolflake. Early one morning they found, on
the border of the lake, three maidens sitting and
spinning flax. Near them lay their swan plumages :
they were Valkyries. Two of them, Hladgud, the
Swan-white, and Hervor, the All-white, were daugh-
ters of King Hlodver ; the third was Olrun, a
daughter of Kifir of Valland. They took them
home with them to their dwelling : Egil had
Olrun, Slagfid had Swan-white, and Volund All-
white. They lived there seven years, and then
they flew away, seeking conflicts, and did not
return. Egil then went on snow-shoes in search
of Olrun, and Slagfid in search of Swan-white, but
Volund remained in Wolfdale. In the German
story of the mighty smith, as preserved in the
Wilkina Saga, this incident has disappeared ; but
that the myth was Teutonic as well as Scandi-
navian, appears from the poem on Frederick of
Suabia, a composition of the fourteenth century '',
wherein is related how the hero wanders in search
of his beloved Angelburga. By chance he arrives
at a fountain, in wliich arc bathing three maidens,

■* Bragur, Leipzig, 1800, vi. p. 204.



Szvan- Maidens 309

with their dresses, consisting of doves' feathers, lying
at the side. Wieland, armed with a root which
renders him invisible, approaches the bank and steals
the clothes. The maidens, on discovering their
loss, utter cries of distress. Wieland appears, and
promises to return their bird-skins if one of them
will consent to be his wife. They agree to the
terms, leaving the choice to Wieland, who selects
Angelburga, whom he had long loved without
having seen. Brunhild, who was won by Sigurd,
and who died for him, is said to " move on her seat
as a swan rocking on a wave";" and the three sea-
maids from whom Hagne stole a dress, which is
simply described as " wonderful " in the Nibelungen-
Lied, are said to —

" swim as birds before him on the flood *."
An old German story tells of a nobleman who
was hunting in a forest, when he emerged upon a
lake in which bathed an exquisitely beautiful
maiden. He stole up to her, and took from her
the gold necklace she wore ; then she lost her power
to fly, and she became his wife. At one birth she
bore seven sons, who had all of them gold chains
round their necks, and had the power, which their

• Fornaldur-Sogur, i. p. i86.

* Nibelungen-Lied, 1476.



3]0 Swan- Maidens

mother had possessed, of transforming themselves
into swans at pleasure. In the ancient Gudrun-Lied,
an angel approaches like a swimming wild-bird.

A Hessian forester once saw a beautiful swan
floating on a lonely lake. Charmed with its beauty,
he prepared to shoot it, when it exclaimed, " Shoot
not, or it will cost you your Hfe !" As he persisted
in taking aim, the swan was suddenly transformed
into a lovely girl, who swam towards him, and told
him that she was bewitched, but could be freed if
he would say an "Our Father " every Sunday for her
during a twelvemonth, and not allude to what he
had seen in conversation with his friends. He
promised, but failed to keep silence, and lost her.

A hunter in Southern Germany lost his wife, and
was in deep affliction. He went to a hermit and
asked his advice ; the aged man advised him to
seek a lonely pool, and wait there till he saw
three swans alight and despoil themselves of their
feathers, then he was to steal one of the dresses,
and never return it, but take the maiden whose was
the vesture of plumes to be his wife. This the
huntsman did, and he lived happily with the
beautiful damsel for fifteen years. But one day
he forgot to lock the cupboard in which he kept
the feather-dress ; the wife discovered it, put it on.



Swan-Maidens 311

spread her wings, and never returned. In some
household tales a wicked step-mother throws white
skirts over her step-children, and they are at once
transformed into swans. A similar story is that of
Hasan of Basra in the Arabian Nights.

The old fables of Valkyries were misunderstood,
when Christianity had cast these damsels from
heaven, and the stories were modified to account
for the transformation. The sweet maidens no
more swam of their own free will in the crystal
waves, but swam thus through the force of an
enchantment they were unable to break. Thus, in
the Irish legend of Fionmala, the daughter of
King Lir, on the death of the mother of Fingula
(Fionmala) and her brothers, their father marries
the wicked Aoife, who, through spite, transforms the
children of Lir into swans, which must float on the
waters for centuries, till th,e first mass-bell tingles.
Who does not remember Tom Moore's verses on
this legend .' —

" Silent, O Moyle, be the roar of thy water ;

Break not, ye breezes, your chain of repose,
While, murmuring mournfully, Lir's lovely daughter

Tells to the night-star the tale of her woes.
When shall the swan, her death-note singing.

Sleep with wings in darkness furl'd ?
When will heaven, its sweet bells ringing,

Call my spirit from this stormy world ?



31 Z Swati-Maidens

" Sadly, O Moyle, to thy winter-wave weeping,

Fate bids me languish long ages away ;
Yet still in her darkness doth Erin lie sleeping,

Still doth the pure light its dawning delay.
When will that day-star, mildly springing,

Warm our isle with peace and love ?
When will heaven, its sweet bells ringing,

Call my spirit to the fields above?"

In another version of the story there is no term
fixed for the breaking of the enchantment ; but
when the bells of Innis-gloria rang for the mass,
four white birds rose from the loch and flew to
church, where they occupied daily a bench, sitting
side by side and exhibiting the utmost reverence
and devotion. Charmed at the piety of the birds,
S. Brandan prayed for them, when they were trans-
formed into children, were baptized, and then died.

In a Sclavonian legend, a youth was reposing in
a forest. The wind sighed through the trees, filling
him with a tender melancholy which could find no
expression in words. Presently there fluttered
through the branches a snowy swan, which alighted
on his breast. The youth clasped the beautiful
bird to his heart, and resisted all its struggles to
escape. Then the swan changed into a beautiful
girl, who forthwith accompanied him to church,
where they were united.

A weird Icelandic saga tells of a battle fought



Sivan-Maidats 313

on the ice of Lake Vener, between two Swedish
kings, assisted by the chief Helgi and King Olaf
of Norway, supported by Hromund Greipsson, the
betrothed of the king's sister Swan-white. Above
the heads of the combatants flew a great swan ;
this was Kara, the mistress of Helgi, who had
transformed herself into a bird. She, by her in-
cantations, blunted the weapons of King Olaf's
men, so that they began to give way before the
Swedes. But accidentally Helgi, in raising his
sword, smote off the leg of the swan which floated
on expanded wings above his head. From that
moment the tide of battle turned, and the Nor-
wegians were victorious ".

It is a fair subject for inquiry, whether the
popular iconography of the angel-hosts is not in-
debted to the heathen myth for its most striking
features. Our delineations of angels in flowing
white robes, with large pinions, are derived from the
later Greek and Roman representations of victory ;
but were not these figures — half bird, half woman —
derived from the Apsaras of the Vedas, who were
but the ^c&cy clouds, supposed in the ages of man's
simplicity to be celestial swans .''

' Fornaldur Sogur, ii. p. 374.



Eitt iSntgfit of tfif Stoan

■'"VTT'E rede in the auncient and autentike
^ • cronicles that sometime ther was a noble
king in Lilefort, otherwise named the strong yle, a
muche riche lande, the which kinge had to name
Pieron. And he tooke to wife and spouse Mata-
brunne the doughter of an other king puissaunt
and riche mervailously." By his wife Matabrune,
the king became father of Oriant, " the which after
the dyscease of his father abode with his mother
as heir of the realme, whiche he succeded and
governed peasiabh without to be maricd.''

One day King Oriant chased a hart in the forest,
and lost his way; exhausted with his ride, he drew
rein near a fountain which bubbled out from under
a mossy rock.

" And there he sat downe under a tree, to the
which he reined his horse the better to solace and



The Knight of the Swan 315

sporte him at his owne pleasure. And thus as
he was in consolacion there came to him a yonge
damoysel moche grevous and of noble maintene,
named Beatrice, accompanied of a noble knight,
and two squires, with iiii damoyselles, the which
she held in her service and famyliarite."

This Beatrice became the wife of Oriant, much
to the chagrin of his mother, who had hitherto
held rule in the palace, and who at once hated
her daughter-in-law, and determined on her de-
struction.

The king had not been married many months
before war broke out, and he was called from
home to head his army. Before leaving, he con-
signed his wife to the care of his mother, who
promised to guard her with the utmost fidelity.
" Whan the time limited and ordeined of almighti
god approched that the noble and goodly quene
Beatrice should be delivered after the cours of
nature, the false matrone aforsaid went and
delibered in herselfe to execute and put in effecte
her malignus or moste wicked purpose. . . . But
she comen made maners of great welth to the said
noble quene Beatrice. And sodainly in great
paine and traivable of bodye, she childed vi sonnes
and a faire doughter, at whose birthe eche of them



316 The Knight of the Swan

brought a chaine of silver about their neckes
issuing out of their mothers wombe. And whan
Matabrune saw the vii litle children borne having
echone a chaine of silver at necke, she made them
lightli and secretli to be borne a side by her
chamberer of her teaching, and than toke vii litle
dogges that she had prepared, and all bloudy laide
them under the quene in maner as they had issued
of her bodye."

Then Matabrune ordered her squire Marks to
take the seven children to the river and drown
them ; but the man, moved by compassion, left
them in the forest on his cloak, where they were
found by a hermit who " toke and lapped them
tenderly in his mantel and with al their chaines at
their neckes he bare them into the litle hous of his
hermitage, and there he warmed and sustened
them of his poore goodnes as well as he coulde."
Of these children, one excelled the others in
beauty. The pious old man baptized the little
babes, and called the one who surpassed the others
by the name Helias. " And whan that they were
in the age of theyr pleasaunt and fresshe grene
yougth thei reane all about sporting and playinge
in the said forest about the trees and floures."

One day it fell out that a >'coman of Queen



The Knight of the Swan 317

Matabrune, whilst chasing in the forest, saw the
seven children sitting under a tree eating wild
apples, each with a silver chain about his neck.
Then he told Matabrune of the marvel he had
seen, and she at once concluded that these were
her grandchildren ; wherefore she bade the yeoman
take seven fellows with him and slay the children.
But by the grace of God these men's hearts were
softened, and, instead of murdering the little ones,
they robbed them of their silver chains. But they
only found six children, for the hermit had taken
Helias with him on a begging excursion. Now,
" as soone as their chaines were of, they were al
transmued in an instaunt in faire white swannes by
the divine grace, and began to flee in the ayre
through the forest, making a piteous and lament-
able crye."

Helias grew up with his godfather in the forest.
The story goes on to relate how that the hermit
was told by an angel in vision whose the children
were ; how a false charge was brought against
Beatrice, and she was about to be executed, when
Helias appeared in the lists, and by his valour
proclaimed her innocence ; and how Matabrune's
treachery was discovered.

" But for to returne to the subject of the crony-



318 The Knight of the Swan

kill of the noble Helias knight of the swanne. It
is to be noted that the said Helias knight of the
swanne demanded of Kyng Oriant his father that
it wolde please him to give him the chaines of
silver of his brethern and sister that the goldesmith
had brought. The which he delivered him with
good herte for to dispose them at his pleasure.
Than he made an othe and sware that he wolde
never rest tyll he had so longe sought by pondes
and stagnes that he had founde his v brethren and
his sister, which were transmued into swannes.
But our Lorde that consoleth his freendes in
exaltinge their good will shewed greatly his vertue.
For in the river that ranne about the kinges palays
appeared visibly the swannes before all the people.
— And incontinent the kynge and the queene de-
scended wyth many lordes, knightes, and gentilmen,
and came with great diligence upon the water
syde, for to see the above sayde swannes. The
king and the queene behelde them piteousli in
weeping for sorrow that they had to se theyr poore
children so transmued into swannes. And whan
they saw the good Helias come nere them they
began to make a mervaylous feast and rejoyced
them in the water. So he approched upon the
brinke : and whan they sawe him nere them, they



The Knight of the Swan 319

came lightli fawning and flickering about him
making him chere, and he playned lovingly their
fethers. After he shewed them the chaynes of
silver, whereby they set them in good ordre before
him. And to five of them he remised the chaynes
about their neckes, and sodeynlye they began to
retourne to theyr propre humayne forme as they
were before." But unfortunately the sixth chain
had been melted to form a silver goblet, and there-
fore one of the brothers was unable to regain his
human shape.

Helias spent some time with his father ; but a
voice within his breast called him to further ad-
ventures.

" After certayne tyme that the victoryous kynge
Helyas had posseded the Realme of Lyleforte in
good peace and tranquilite of justice, it happened
on a day as he was in his palais looking towarde
the river that he apperceived the swanne, one of his
brethren that was not yet tourned into his fourme
humayne, for that his chaine was molten for to
make Matabrune a cup. And the sayd swanne
was in the water before a ship, the which he had
led to the wharfe as abiding king Helias. And
when Helias saw him, he saide in himselfe : Here
is a signification that God sendeth to me for to



320 The Knight of the Swan

shew to me that I ought to go by the guyding of
this swanne into some countrey for to have honour
and consolacion.

"And when Helyas had mekelye taken his leave
of all his parentes and freendes, he made to bere his
armures and armes of honoure into the shyppe,
with hys target and his bright sheelde, of whiche as
it is written the felde was of sylver, and thereon a
double crosse of golde. So descended anon the
sayd Helyas with his parentes and freendes, the
which came to convey him unto the brinke of the
water."

About this time, Otho, Emperor of Germany,
held court at Neumagen, there to decide between
Clarissa, Duchess of Bouillon, and the Count of
Frankfort, who claimed her duchy. It was decided
that their right should be established by single
combat. The Count of Frankfort was to appear
in person in the lists, whilst the duchess was to
provide some doughty warrior who would do battle
for her.

" Than the good lady as al abasshed loked
aboute her if there were ony present that in her
need wolde helpe her. But none wolde medle
seynge the case to her imposed. Wherefore she
committed her to God, praying Him humbly to



The Knight of the Swan 321

succour her, and reprove the injury that wickedly
to her was imposed by the sayd erle.''

The council broke up, and lords and ladies were
scattered along the banks of the Meuse.

" So, as they stray'd, a swan they saw

Sail stately up and strong,
And by a silver chain she drew

A little boat along.
Whose streamer to the gentle breeze,

Long floating, flutter'd light,
Beneath whose crimson canopy

There lay reclined a knight.

" With arching crest and swelling breast
On sail'd the stately swan,
And lightly up the parting tide

The little boat came on.
And onward to the shore they drew,

And leapt to land the knight,
And down the stream the little boat
Fell soon beyond the sight."

Southey's Rudiger.

Of course this knight, who is Helias, fights the
Count of Frankfort, overcomes him, and wins the
heart of the daughter of the duchess. Thus Helias
became Duke of Bouillon.

But before marrying the lady, he warned her
that if she asked his name, he would have to leave
her.

At the end of nine months, the wife of Helias

[II.] Y



32JJ The Knight of the Swan

gave birth to a daughter, who was named Ydain at
the font, and who afterwards became the mother of
Godfrey de Bouillon, King of Jerusalem, and of his
brothers Baldwin and Eustace.

One night the wife forgot the injunction of her
husband, and began to ask him his name and
kindred. Then he rebuked her sorrowfully, and
leaving his bed, bade her farewell. Instantly the
swan reappeared on the river, drawing the little
shallop after it, and uttering loud cries to call
its brother. So Helias stepped into the boat, and
the swan swam with it from the sight of the
sorrowing lady.

The romance of Helias' continues the story to
the times of Godfrey de Bouillon, but I shall
leave it at this point, as it ceases to deal with
the myth which is the subject of this article. The
story is very ancient and popular. It is told of
Lohengrin, Loherangrin, Salvius, and Gerhard the
Swan, whilst the lady is Beatrice of Cleves, or Else
of Brabant. In the twelfth century it seems to
have localized itself about the Lower Rhine.

Probably the most ancient mention of the fable

' Helyas, the Knight of the Swanne. From the edition
of Copland, reprinted in Thorns : " Early Enghsh Prose
Romances," 1858, vol. iii.



TJw Knight of the Stvaii 323

is that of William of Tyre (i i8o), who says : "We
pass over, intentionally, the fable of the Swan,
although many people regard it as a fact, that
from it he (Godfrey de Bouillon) had his origin,
because this story seems destitute of truth." Next
to him to speak of the story is Helinandus (circ.
1220), quoted by Vincent de Beauvais*: "In the
diocese of Cologne, a famous and vast palace over-
hangs the Rhine, it is called Juvamen. Thither
when once many princes were assembled, suddenly
there came up a skiff, drawn by a swan attached
to it by a silver chain. Then a strange and un-
known knight leaped out before all, and the swan
returned with the boat. The knight afterwards
married, and had children. At length, when dwell-
ing in this palace, he saw the swan return again
with the boat and chain : he at once re-entered the
vessel, and was never seen again ; but his progeny
remain to this day."

A genealogy of the house of Flanders, in a MS.
of the thirteenth century, states : " Eustachius venit
ad Bullion ad domum ducissje, quse uxor erat
militis, qui vocabatur miles Cigni^." Jacob van

2 Specul. Nat. ii. 127.

2 Reiffenberg, Le Chevalier au Cygne. Bruxelles, 184C
p. viii

Y 2



324 The Knight of the Swan

Maerlant (b. 1335), in his " Spieghel Historiael \"

alludes to it —

" Logenaers niesdaet an doen,
Dat si hem willen tien ane,
Dat tie ridder metier swane
Siere moeder vader was.
No wijf no man, als ict vernam
Ne was noint swane, daer hi af quam
Als ist dat hem Brabanters beroemen
Dat si van der Swane sijn coemen.''

And Nicolaes de Klerc, who wrote in 1318, thus

refers to it in his " Brabantine Gests :'' " Formerly

the Dukes of Brabant have been much belied in

that it is said of them that they came with a

swan*." And Jan Veldenar (1480) says: "Now,

once upon a time, this noble Jungfrau of Cleves

was on the banks by Nymwegen, and it was clear

weather, and she gazed up the Rhine, and saw a

strange sight : for there came sailing down a white

swan with a gold chain about its neck, and by this

it drew a little skiff . ." — and so on.

There is an Icelandic saga of Helis, the Knight

of the Swan, translated from the French by the

Monk Robert, in 1326. In the Paris royal library

is a romance upon this subject, consisting of about

30,000 lines, begun by a Renax or Renant, and

•' Maerlant, Fig. i. 29.

' V->n Wyn, Avondstonden, p. 270.



The Knight of the Swan 325

finished by a Gandor de Douay. In the British
Museum is a volume of French romances, contain-
ing, among others, " L'Ystoire du Chevaher au
Signe," told in not less than 3000 lines.

The " Chevelere Assigne," a shorter poem on the
same subject, was reprinted by M. Utterson for the
Roxburghe Club, from a MS. in the Cottonian
library, which has been quoted by Percy and
Warton as an early specimen of alliterative ver-
sification. It is certainly not later than the reign
of Henry VI.

The next prose romance of Helias is that of
Pierre Desrey, entitled " Les faictz et gestes du
preux Godsffroy de Boulion, aussi plusieurs croni-
ques et histoires ;" Paris, without date. " La
Genealogie avecques les gestes et nobles faitz
darmes du tres preux et renomme prince Godefifroy
de Boulion : et de ses chevalereux freres Baudouin
et Eustace : yssus et descendus de la tres noble et
illustre lignee du vertueux Chevalier au Cyne ;"
Paris, Jean Petit, 1504 ; also Lyons, 1580. This
book was partly translated into English, and
printed by Wynkyn de Worde, "The hystory of
Hilyas Knight of the Swann, imprynted by
Wynkyn de Worde," &c., 1512 ; and in full by
Caxton, under the title, " The last Siege and Con-



326 The Knight of the Swan

queste of Jherusalem, with many histories therein
comprised ;" Westmester, fol. 1480.

It is from the first thirty-eight chapters of the
French "Faits et Gestes," that Robert Copland
translated his Helias, which he dedicated "to the
puyssant and illustrious prynce, lorde Edwarde,
duke of Buckynghame," because he was lineally
descended from the Knight of the Swan. This
duke was beheaded, May 17th, 1521.

We need hardly follow the story in other trans-
lations.

The romance, as we have it, is a compilation of
at least two distinct myths. The one is that of
the Swan-children, the other of the Swan-knight.
The compiler of the romance has pieced the first
legend to the second, in order to explain it. In its
original form, the knight who came to Neumagen,
or Cleves, in the swan-led boat, and went av/ay
again, was unaccounted for : who he was, no man
knew ; and Heywood, in his " Hierarchies of the
Blessed Angels," 1635, suggests that he was one
of the evil spirits called incubi; but the romancer
solved the mystery by prefixing to the story of his
marriage with the duchess a story of transforma-
tion, similar to that of Fionmala, referred to in the
previous article.



TIic Knight of the Swan 327

We shall put aside the story of the swan-children,
and confine our attention to the genuine myth.

The home of the fable was that border-land where
Germans and Kelts met, where the Nibelungen
legends were brought in contact with the romances
of Arthur and the Sangreal.

Lohengrin belongs to the round table ; the hero
who releases Beatrice of Cleves is called Elias
Grail. Pighius relates that in ancient annals it is
recorded that Elias came from the blessed land of
the earthly paradise, which is called Graele ^ And
the name Helias, Helius, Elis, or Salvius, is but a
corruption of the Keltic ala, eala, ealadh, a swan.
I believe the story of the Knight of the Swan to
be a myth of local Brabantine origin. That it is not
the invention of the romancer is evident from the
variations in the tale, some of which we must now
consider.

I. Lohengrin.

The Duke of Limburg and Brabant died leaving
an only daughter, Else or Elsam. On his death-
bed he committed her to the care of Frederick von
Telramund, a brave knight, who had overcome a
dragon in Sweden. After the duke's death, Frede-

'' Hercules Prodicus, Colon. 1609.



3£S The Knight of the Swan

rick claimed the hand of Else, on the plea that it
had been promised him ; but when she refused it,
he appealed to the emperor, Henry the Fowler,
asking permission to assert his right in the lists
against any champion Else might select.

Permission was granted, and the duchess looked
in vain for a knight who would fight in her cause
against the redoubted Frederick of Telramund.

Then, far away, in the sacred temple of the
Grail, at Montsalvatsch, tolled the bell, untouched
by human hands, a signal that help was needed.
At once Lohengrin, son of Percival, was sent to the
rescue, but whither to go he knew not. He stood
foot in stirrup, ready to mount, when a swan
appeared on the river drawing a ship along. No
sooner did Lohengrin behold this, than he ex-
claimed : " Take back the horse to its stable ; I
will go with the bird whither it shall lead!"

Trusting in God, he took no provision on board.
After he had been five days on the water, the swan
caught a fish, ate half, and gave the other half to
the knight.

In the mean while the day of ordeal approached,
and Else fell into despair. But at the hour when
the lists were opened, there appeared the boat
drawn by the silver swan ; and in the little vessel



Tlic Knight of the Szvan 339

lay Lohengrin asleep upon his shield. The swan
drew the boat to the landing, the knight awoke,
sprang ashore, and then the bird swam away with
the vessel.

Lohengrin, as soon as he heard the story of the
misfortunes of the Duchess Else, undertook to fight
for her. The knight of the Grail prevailed, and slew
Frederick. Then Else surrendered herself and her
duchy to him ; but he would only accept her hand
on condition that she should not ask his race. For
some time they lived together happily. One day,
in a tournament, he overthrew the Duke of CI eves
and broke his arm, whereat the Duchess of Cleves
exclaimed : " This Lohengrin may be a strong man
and a Christian, but who knows whence he has
sprung!" These words reached the ears of the
Duchess of Brabant ; she coloured and hung her
head.

At night, Lohengrin heard her sobbing. He
asked: "My love, what ails thee V

She replied : "The Duchess of Cleves has wounded
me."

Lohengrin asked no more.

Next night she wept again ; her husband again
asked the reason, and received the same answer.

On the thirdnight she burst forth with: "Husband,



330 The Knight of the Swan

be not angry, but I must know whence you have
sprung."

Then Lohengrin told her that his father was
Percival, and that God had sent him from the cus-
tody of the Grail. And he called his children to
him, and said, kissing them : "Here are my horn
and my sword, keep them carefully ; and here, my
wife, is the ring my mother gave me — never part
with it."

Now, at break of day, the swan reappeared on
the river, drawing the little shallop. Lohengrin
re-entered the boat, and departed never to return.

Such is the story in the ancient German poem of
Lohengrin, published by Gcirres from a MS. in the
Vatican ; and in the great Percival of Wolfram von
Eschenbach, verses 24,614—24,715.

2. The swan-knight of Conrad von Wiirzburg re-
sembles Lohengrin and Helias in the outline of the
story, but no name is given to the hero. He marries
the daughter of the deceased Duke Gottfried of
Brabant, and fights against the Duke of Saxony.
His children are the ancestors of the great houses of
Gelders and Cleves, which bear a swan as their arms.

3. Gerard Swan.

One day Charlemagne stood at his window
overlooking the Rhine. Then he was ware of a



The Knight of the Swan 331

swan floating on the water, drawing a boat by a
silken band fastened round its neck. When the
boat came alongside of the quay, the swan ceased
to row, and the emperor saw that a knight armed
cap-a-pie sat in the skiff, and round his neck hung
a ribbon to which was attached a note. Navilon
(Nibelung), one of the emperor's men, gave the
stranger his hand to help him out of the bark, and
conducted him to Charlemagne. The monarch in-
quired of the stranger his name ; for answer he
pointed to the letter on his breast. This the king
read. It stated that Gerard Swan sought a wife
and lands.

Navilon then unarmed the strange knight, and
the king gave him a costly mantle. So they went
to table. But when Roland observed the man, he
asked who he was. Charlemagne replied, " He is a
godsend ;" and Roland observed, " He seems to be
a man of courage."

Gerard proved to be a worthy knight ; he served
the monarch well. He soon learned to talk. The
king was very fond of him, and gave him his sister
Adalis in marriage, and made him Duke of
Ardennes '.

' Northern Chapbooks of the Emperor Charlemagne.
Nyerup, Morskabslasning, p. 90.



332 The Knight of the Swan

4. Helias.

In the year 711 lived Beatrice only daughter of
Dietrich, Duke of Cleves, at her castle of Nymwe-
gen. One bright day she sat at her window looking
down the Rhine, when she saw a swan drawing a
boat by a gold chain. In this vessel was Helias.
He came ashore, won her heart, became Duke of
Cleves, and lived happily with her for many years.
One thing alone interfered with her happiness : she
knew not whence her husband came, and he had
strictly forbidden her to ask. But once she broke
his command, and asked him whence he had come
to her. Then he gave his children his sword, his
horn, and his ring, bidding them never separate or
lose these legacies, and entering the boat which
returned for him, he vanished for ever *. One of
the towers of Cleves is called, after this event, the
Swan-tower, and is surmounted by a swan.

5. Salvius Brabo.

Gottfried-Carl was King of Tongres, and lived at
Megen on the Maas. He had a son named Carl-
Ynach, whom he banished for some misdemeanour.
Carl-Ynach fled to Rome, where he fell in love
with Germana, daughter of the Proconsul Lucius

* Grimm, Deutsche Sagen, 1866, ii. p. 267.



The Knight of the Sivan 333

Julius, and fled with her from the eternal
city. They took ship to Venice, whence they
travelled on horseback to Burgundy, and reached
Cambray. Thence they proceeded to a place called
Senes, and finding a beautiful valley, they dis-
mounted to repose. Here a swan, at which one of
the servants aimed an arrow, took refuge in the
arms of Germana, who, delighted at the incident,
asked Carl-Ynach the name of the bird in his
native tongue. He replied " Swana." "Then,"
said she, " let me be henceforth called by that
name, lest, if I keep my former name, I be re-
cognized and parted from thee."

The lady took the swan with her as they pro-
ceeded on their journey, and fed it from her hand.

They now reached Florimont, near Brussels, and
there Carl-Ynach heard that his father was dead.
He was therefore King of Tongres. Shortly after
his arrival at Megen, his wife gave birth to a son,
whom he named Octavian, and next year to a
daughter, whom they called Swan. Shortly after,
Ariovistus, King of the Saxones, waged war against
Julius Caesar. Carl-Ynach united his forces with
those of Ariovistus, and fell in the battle of
Besan^on. Swan, his widow, then fled with his
children and her husband's body to Megen, fearing



334 The Kniglit of the Swan

her brother Julius Caesar. There she buried Carl-
Ynach, and daily fed her swan upon his grave.

In the Roman army was a hero, Salvius Brabon
by name, descended from Frankus, son of Hector
of Troy. Caesar rested at Cleves, and Salvius
Brabon amused himself with shooting birds in the
neighbourhood. One day he wandered to the
banks of the Rhine. On its discoloured waters
swam a snow-white swan, playfully pulling at the
rope which bound a small skiff to the shore.
Salvius leaped into the boat, and cast it loose from
its mooring. Then the bird swam before him as a
guide, and he rowed after it. On reaching the
castle of Megen, the swan rose from the water, and
flew to the grave of Carl-Ynach, where its mistress
was wont to feed it. Salvius pursued it, bow in
hand, and was about to discharge an arrow, when
a window of the castle opened, and a lady cried to
him in Latin to spare the bird. Salvius consented ;
and casting aside his bow and arrow, entered the
castle. There he learned the story of the lady.
He hastened to Julius Csesar, and told him that
his sister was in the neighbourhood. The con-
queror accompanied Salvius to the castle, and
embraced Germana with joy. Salvius Brabon then
asked the emperor to give him the young damsel



The Knight of the Stvan 3^5

Swan in marriage, and he readily complied with
the request, creating him at the same time Duke
of Brabant ; Octavian took the name of Ger-
manicus, and became King of Cologne, and
Tongres exchanged its name for Germania, after
the sister of the emperor, its queen ".

It was in commemoration of the beautiful myth
of the Swan-knight, that Frederick II. of Branden-
burg instituted the Order of the Swan, in 1440.
The badge was a chain from which was suspended
an image of the Virgin, and underneath that a
swan. The badge of the Cleves order of knight-
hood was also a silver swan suspended from a gold
chain. In 1453, Duke Adolph of Cleves held a
tournament at Lille, "au nom du Chevalier au
Cygne, serviteur des dames."

On the :3th May, 1548, the Count of Cleves
presented the players with a silver swan of con-
siderable value. Charles, Duke of Cleves, attempted,
in 1615, to revive the order of the swan. When
Cleves fell to Prussia, the Count de Bar endea-
voured to persuade Frederick the Great to resusci-
tate the order, but in vain. With Anne of Cleves,
the white swan passed to our tavern signboards.

' Jehan le Maire, Illustrations de Gaule. Paris, 1348, iii.
pp. 20—23.



336 The Knight of the Swan

The myth is a Belgic religious myth. Just as
in the Keltic legends of the Fortunate Isles, we
hear of mortals who went by ship to the Avalon of'
Spirits, and then returned to their fellow-mortals ;
so in this Belgic fable we have a denizen of the
distant paradise coming by boat to this inhabited
land, and leaving it again.

In the former legends the happy mortal lives in
the embraces of a divine being in perpetual youth;
in the latter, a heavenly being unites himself, for
a while, to a woman of earth, and becomes the
ancestor of an aristocracy.

An Anglo-Saxon story bears some traces of the
same legend. A ship once arrived on the coast of
Scandia, without rudder or sail ; in it lay a boy
asleep upon his arms. The natives took and
educated him, calling him Scild, the son of Sceaf
(the skiff). In course of time he became their
king. In Beowulf, it is added that Scild reigned
long ; and when he saw that he was about to die,
he bade his men lay him fully armed in a boat,
and thrust him out to sea. Among the Norse
such a practice was not unknown. King Haki,
when he died, was laid in a ship, the vessel fired,
and sent out upon the waves. And the same is
told of Baldur. But the shipping of the dead had



The Knight of the S%van 337

no significance in Scandinavian mythology, whilst
it was full of meaning in that of the Kelts. The
Scandinavian Valhalla was not situated beyond
the Western Sea, but on the summit of a great
mountain ; whereas the Keltic Avalon lay over the
blue waters, beneath the setting sun. Conse-
quently, I believe the placing of the dead in ships
to have been a practice imported among the
Northern and Germanic nations, and not indi-
genous '.

The classic fable of Helios sailing in his golden
vessel deserves notice in connexion with the myth
of Helias. That the sun and moon travel in boats
of silver or gold is an idea common to many
mythologies. At first sight it seems probable that
Helias is identical with Helios ; but the difficulty
of explaining how this classic deity should have
become localized in Brabant is insurmountable,
and I prefer the derivation of the name Helias
from the Keltic appellation of the swan.

The necessity of the knight leaving his bride the
moment she inquired his race connects this story
with the Grail myth. According to the rules of
the order of the Sangreal, every knight was bound
to return to the temple of the order, immediately

' Appendix B.
[II.] z



338 The Knight of the Szvau

that any one asked his hneage and office. In the
popular legend this reason does not appear, because
the Grail was a genuine Keltic myth, with its roots
in the mysteries of Druidism.

Of the different editions of Lohengrin, Helias,
and the other Swan-knight legends, I will give no
list, as the principal are referred to in the notes of
this article.



Ci)c SangiEal

"\T THEN Sir Lancelot came to the palace of
* • King Pelles, in the words of Sir Thomas
Malory', "either of them made much of other, and
so they went into the castle for to take their repast.
And anon there came in a dove at the window, and
in her bill there seemed a little sencer of gold, and
therewith there was such a savour as though all
the spicery of the world had been there ; and forth-
with all there was upon the table all manner of
meates and drinkes that they could thinke upon.
So there came a damosell, passing faire and young,
and she beare a vessell of gold betweene her hands,
and thereto the king kneeled devoutly and said
his prayers, and so did all that were there : ' Oh,
Jesu !' said Sir Launcelot, 'what may this meane.^'

1 La Mort d'Arthure, compiled by Sir Thomas Malory ;
reprinted from the text of 1634 by Thomas Wright, iii., c. 2,
&c.

Z 2



;i-1.0 The Sangreal

' This is,' said King Pelles, ' the richest thing that
any man hath living; and when this thing goeth
about, the round-table shall bee broken. And wit
yee well,' said King Pelles, ' that this is the holy
Sancgreall which yee have heere seene.' "

The next to see the sacred vessel was the pious
Sir Bors. And after that he had seen it, "he was
led to bed into a faire large chamber, and many
doores were shut about that chamber. And when
Sir Bors espied all those doores, he made all the
people to avoide, for he might have no body with
him ; but in no wise Sir Bors would unarme him,
but so laid him upon the bed. And right so he
saw come in a light that he might wel see a
speare great and long which come straight upon
him pointlong. And so Sir Bors seemed that the
head of the speare brent like a taper ; and anon, or
Sir Bors wist, the speare head smote him into the
shoulder an hand breadth in deepriess, and that
wound grieved Sir Bors passing sore."

One day, when King Arthur and his court were
at Camelot, sitting at supper, " anon they heard
cracking and crying of thunder, that hem thought
the place should all to-rive ; in the midst of the
blast entred a sunne-beame more clear by seaven
times than ever they saw day, and all they were



Tlie Sangreal 341

alighted by the grace of the Holy Ghost. Then
began every knight to behold other, and either
saw other by their seeming fairer than ever they
saw afore, nor for then there was no knight that
might speake any word a great while ; and so they
looked every man on other as they had beene
dombe. Then there entred into the hall the holy
grale covered with white samite, but there was
none that might see it, nor who beare it, and there
was all the hall fulfilled with good odours, and
every knight had such meate and drinke as he
best loved in this world ; and when the holy grale
had beene borne through the hall, then the holy
vessel departed suddenly, and they wist not where
it became."

Then the knights stood up in their places one
after another, and vowed to go in quest of the
Sangreal, and not to return to the round-table till
they had obtained a full view of it.

We must leave the knights to start upon their
quest, and turn, for the history of the Grail, to the
romance of the San Greal, the Perceval of Chretien
de Troyes, written at the close of the twelfth cen-
tury, and the Titurel and Parcival of Wolfram- von
Eschenbach, translated into German from romances
older than that of Chretien de Troyes.



342 The Sangreal

When Christ was transfixed by the spear,
there flowed from His side blood and water. Joseph
of Arimathsea collected the blood in the vessel
from which the Saviour had eaten the last supper.
The enraged Jews cast Joseph into prison, and left
him to die of hunger. But for forty-two years he
lay in the dungeon nourished and invigorated by the
sacred vessel which was in his possession. Titus
released Joseph from prison, and received baptism
at his hands. Then Joseph started with the vessel
and the blood, or the Sangreal, for Britain. Before
he died, he confided the sacred treasure to his
nephew. But according to another version of the
legend, the Grail was preserved in heaven, till there
should appear on earth a race of heroes, worthy to
become its guardians. The chief of this line was
an Asiatic prince, named Perillus, who came to
Gaul, where his descendants allied themselves with
the family of a Breton prince. Titurel, who sprang
from this heroic lineage, was the one chosen of God
to found the worship of the Sangreal among the
Gauls. Angels brought the vessel to him, and in-
structed him in its mysteries. He erected, on the
model of the temple at Jerusalem, a magnificent
temple to the Grail. He organized a band of
guardians of the vessel, and elaborated the cere-



Tlie Sangreal 343

monial of its worship. The Grail, we are told, was
only visible to the baptized, and only partially if
they were tainted by sin. To the pure in heart
alone was it perfectly visible.

Every Good Friday a white dove descended
from heaven, bearing a white oblation which it laid
before the Grail. The holy vessel gave oracles, ex-
pressed miraculously in characters which appeared
on the surface of the bowl, and then vanished.
Spiritual blessings attended on the vision and cus-
tody of the sacred vessel ; the guardians, and those
who we're privileged to behold it, were conscious of a
mysterious internal joy, a foretaste of that of heaven.
The material blessings are easier to be described.
The Grail stood in the place of all food, it supplied
its worshippers with the meats they most desired
and the drinks most to their taste ; it maintained
them in perpetual youth. The day on which the
Grail had been seen, its guardians were incapable of
being wounded or suffering any hurt. If they
fought for eight days after the vision, they were
susceptible of wounds but not of death.

Every thing in the construction of the temple
was full of mystery. It was' erected on Montsal-
vatsch, of precious stones, gold, and aloe- wood. In
form it was circular ; there were three principal



344 The Sangreal

entrances. The knights who watched the Grail were
patterns of virtue. All sensual love, even within
the limits of marriage, was strictly forbidden. A
single thought of passion would obscure the eye
and conceal the mystic vessel. The chief of this
order of knights was entitled King. As his office
was hereditary, he was permitted to marry.

When the faith or the right was in jeopardy, a
bell rang in the chapel of the Grail, and a knight
was bound to go forth sword in hand to the defence.
Wherever he was, should a question be asked him
of his condition or office in the temple, he was to
refuse to answer, and at once to return to Montsal-
vatsch.

Titurel reigned four hundred years, and he, to all
appearances, seemed of the age of forty. He was
succeeded in his office by his son Frimutelle, who
transgressed, by loving a damsel, Floramie by name.
Consequently he lost the grace of the holy Grail,
and fell in a joust, engaged in to give pleasure
and do honour to his mistress.

He was succeeded by his son Amfortas, who fell
into grievous sin, and was given over by the Grail
to be wounded by a lance. Then it was announced
that he should not be healed of his wound till one
came, pure and young, to Montsalvatsch who would



The Sangreal 345

see the mysteries of the sacred vessel, and ask
their signification.

This Amfortas is the Pelles or Pellam of the
" Mort d'Arthure."

Years passed, and the king lay wounded in his
palace. The brotherhood of the Grail was dis-solved,
and the existence of the temple and its mystic rites
was almost forgotten. Sir Thomas Malory gives a
different account of the wounding of the king from
that in the Romans du San Greal, and makes his
healing depend on the arrival of a knight who is a
" clean maid," who shall apply to him the sacred
blood.

In the fulness of time, Galahad, the Good Knight,
came to king Arthur's court, and went forth, with
the other knights, to the quest of the holy Grail.

Let us follow Launcelot who was on a ship.

" The winde arose and drove Sir Launcelot more
than a moneth throughout the sea, where he slept
but little and prayed unto God that he might have
a sight of the Sancgreall. So it befell upon a
night at midnight hee arived afore a castle on the
backe side, which was rich and faire, and there
was a posterne that opened toward the sea, and
was open without any keeping, save two lions
kept the entrie, and the moone shined cleare.



-3-i6 The Sangreal

" Anon Sir Launcelot heard a voice that said,
' Launcelot, goe out of this ship, and enter into the
castle where thou shalt see a great part of thy de-
sire.' Then he ranne to his armes, and armed him,
and so hee went unto the gate, and saw the two
lions ; then hee set hands to his sword and drew it ;
then came there sudainly a dwarfe, that smote him
upon the arme so sone that the sword fell out of his
hand. Then he heard a voice that said, ' Oh man of
evill faith and poore beliefe, wherefore believest
thou more in thy harneis than in thy Maker .' for
Hee might more availe thee than thine armour, in
whose service thou art set' — Then Sir Launcelot
entered in so armed, and hee found no gate nor doore
but it was opened. And so at the last he found a
chamber whereof the doore was shut, and hee set
his hands thereto for to have opened it, but hee,
m.ight not. Then he enforced him much for to un-
doe the doore. Then he listened ; and heard a voice
which sung so sweetly, that it seemed none earthly
thing, and him thought that the voice said, 'Joy and
honour be to the Father of heaven.' Then Sir
Launcelot kneeled downe before the chamber, for
well he wist that there was the Sancgreall in that
chamber. Then said he, ' Faire sweete Father,
Jesu Christ, if ever I did thing that pleased the



The Sangreal 347

Lord, for thy pittie ne have me not in despite for
my foull sins done here before time, and that thou
shew me some thing of that which I seek.'

" And with that he saw the chamber doore
open, and there came out a great clearenesse,
that the house was as bright as though all the
torches of the world had beene there. So came
hee to the chamber doore, and would have entered,
and anon a voice said unto him, ' Flee, Sir
Launcelot, and enter not, for thou oughtest not
to doe it, and if thou enter thou shalt forethinke
it.' And hee withdrew him back, and was right
heavie in his mind.

" Then looked hee up in the midst of the chamber,
and saw a table of silver, and the holy vessell
covered with red samite, and many angels about it,
whereof one of them held a candell of waxe burn-
ing, and the other held a crosse, and the ornaments
of the altar. And before the holy vessell hee saw
a good man clothed like a priest, and it seemed
that hee was at the sakering of the masse ; and it
seemed unto Sir Launcelot that above the priest's
hands there were three men, whereof the two put
the youngest by likeness betweenethe priest's hands,
and so hee lift it up on high, and it seemed to shew
so to the people. And then Sir Launcelot mer-



348 The Sangreal

vailed not a little, for him thought that the priest
was so greatly charged of the figure, that him
seemed that heem should have fallen to the ground ;
and when hee saw none about him that would helpe
him, then hee came to the doore a great pace — and
entred into the chamber, and came toward the
table of silver ; and when he came nigh he felt a
breath, that him thought was intermedled with fire,
which smote him so sore in the visage that him
thought it all to-brent his visage, and therewith hee
fell to the ground, and had no power to arise.''

Sir Galahad, Sir Percival, and Sir Bors met in the
forest, and rode together to the castle of King Pelles.
There they supped, and after supper they beheld
a great light, and in the light were four
angels bearing up an ancient man in bishop's
vestments, and they set him down before a
table of silver, on which appeared the San-
greal. And this aged prelate was Joseph
of Arimathaea, " the first bishop of Christen-
dom." Then other angels appeared bearing
candles, and a spear from which fell drops
of blood, and these drops were collected
by an angel in a box. Then the angels
set the candles upon the table, and " the
fourth set the holy speare even upright



The Sangrcal 349

upon the vessel," as represented on an ancient
churchyard crucifix, in rude sculpture, at Sancreed,
in Cornwall.

Joseph next celebrated the sacred mysteries,
and, at the consecration, our Blessed Lord appeared
and said, " Galahad, sonne, wotest- thou what I
hold between My hands?" "Nay," replied the
maiden knight, "but if yee tell mee." "This is,"
He said, " the holy dish wherein I eate the lambe
on Sher-Thursday, and now hast thou seene that
thou desirest most to see, but yet hast thou not
seene it so openly as thou shalt see it in the citie
of Sarras, in the spirituall place. Therefore thou
must goe hence, and beare with thee this holy
vessell, for this night it shall depart from the
realme of Logris, that it shall never be seen more
heere."

So Galahad, after having anointed the wounded
king with the blood which dropped from the spear,
and made him whole, departed with his friends
Bors and Perceval to the mystic city of Sarras,
where he was made king.

The story is somewhat different in the Perceval
of Chretien de Troyes. This romance was com-
menced by Chretien at the request of Phillip of
Alsace, Count of Flanders ; it was continued by



350 The Sangreal

Gauthier de Denet, and finished by Manessier,
towards the close of the twelfth century. It is
the histoiy of the quest of the San Greal.

Perceval was the son of a poor widow in Wales,
brought up by her in a forest, far removed from all
warlike images. One day he saw a knight ride
past, and from that moment he had no rest, till his
mother gave him arms and let him ride to the
court of King Arthur. On his way he saw a tent
in which lay a beautiful damsel asleep. Perceval
took the ring from her finger, ate and drank at
the table which was spread in the tent, and then
pursued his course. As he entered the court at
Cardueil, a felon knight stole the goblet from the
king's table. Perceval went in pursuit. One
evening he entered a castle where lay a sick king
on a couch. The door of the hall opened, and
there came in a servant bearing a bleeding lance,
others with golden candlesticks, and finally the
holy Grail. Perceval asked no questions, and was
reproached on his leaving the castle for not making
inquiries into the mystery of the Grail. After-
wards he undertook the quest of this marvellous
vessel, but had great difficulty in finding again the
castle of the wounded king. When his search was
crowned with success, he asked the signification of



The Sangreal 351

the mystic rite which took place before his eyes,
and was told that the king was a Fisher, descended
from Joseph of Arimathaea, and uncle of Perceval ;
that the spear was that which had pierced the
Saviour's side, and that the Grail was the vessel in
which the sacred blood of Christ had been col-
lected. The king had been wounded in trying to
mend a sword which had been broken by a knight
named Pertinax, and which could only be welded
together by a knight without fear and reproach.
The Fisher-king would recover health only when
Pertinax died. On hearing this, Perceval sought
out and slew Pertinax, healed his uncle, obtained
in return the sacred vessel and the bleeding lance,
and retired to a hermitage. On his death —

" Fut au ciel remis sans doutance
Et le Saint-Graal et la Lance."

It is very certain that Chretien de Troyes was
not the inventor of this mystic tale, for there
exists in the " Red Book " a Welsh tale entitled
Pheredur, which is indisputably the original of
Perceval.

The " Red Book " is a volume of Welsh prose
and verse romances and tales, begun in the year
131 8, and finished in 1454. It is preserved in the



352 The Sangreal

library of Jesus College, Oxford. Although Phe-
redur was transcribed after Perceval was composed,
it bears evidence of a higher antiquity.

Pheredur is not a Christian. His habits are
barbarous. The Grail is not a sacred Christian
vessel, but a mysterious relic of a past heathen
rite. The same incidents occur in Perceval as in
Pheredur, but in the former they are modified and
softened, and various points indicative of barbarism
and paganism are omitted.

Pheredur enters a castle, and " Whilst he and
his uncle were discoursing together, they beheld
two young men entering the hall, bearing a lance
of unusual length, from the point of which dis-
tilled three gouts of gore ; and when the company
beheld this, they began to wail and lament. But
the old man continued to talk with Pheredur ; and
as he did not tell Pheredur the reason of what
took place, Pheredur did not venture to ask him.
And when the cries ceased, there entered two
damsels with a basin in which was the head of a
man swimming in blood. Then the company
uttered a piercing ^\'ail."

In the Perceval, and in the Mort dArthure, the
head is omitted, and to the lance and grail are
attributed a Christian \'al'.ie ; but in the Pheredur



The Sangreal 35.3

there is no trace whatever of these symbols having
any Christian signification.

Pheredur signifies, according to M. de la Ville-
marque ^, "The Companion of the Basin," and is a
synonym of Perceval ; Per being a basin, and Keval
and Kedur having alike the meaning of companion.

Pheredur is mentioned as well in the Annales
Cambrise, which extend from the year 444 to 1066.
Geoffrey of Monmouth also speaks of the reign of
Peredure, "who governed the people with gene-
rosity and mildness, so that he even excelled his
other brothers who had preceded him^;" and the
anonymous author of the " Life of Merlin" speaks of
him as the companion and consoler of the bard *.
Aneurin, the contemporary of Hengst and Horsa,
the author of the Gododin, terms him one of the
most illustrious princes of the Isle of Britain '.

Taliesin ben Beirdd, the famous poet of the same
age, speaks of the sacred vessel in a manner which
connects it with bardic mythology. " This vessel,"
he says, "inspires poetic genius, gives wisdom,
discovers the knowledge of futurity, the mysteries

"^ Les Romans de la Table-Ronde T86r.
' Geoffr. Monm., lib. iii. c. 18.
* Vita Merlini, pp. 2. 4.

' Villemarque, Poemes des Bardes Bretons du sixieme
siecle, p. 298.

[II.] A a



35 !• Tlic Sangreal

of the world, the whole treasure of human sciences."
And he describes it as adorned like the Grail, with a
beading of pearls and diamonds". One of his poems
contains the history of Bran the Blessed, in which
the mystic vessel occupies a prominent position.

One day, whilst hunting in Ireland, Bran arrived
on the banks of a lake, called the Lake of the
Basin. He saw there a black and hideous giant,
a witch, and a dwarf, rise from the water holding a
vessel in their hands. He persuaded them to
accompany him to Wales, where he lodged them
in his palace, and in return for his hospitality,
received the basin. This vase had the property of
healing all mortal ills, of staunching blood, of re-
suscitating the dead. But those who were restored
to life by it were not enabled to speak, lest they
should divulge the mysteries of the vessel. At a
banquet given by Bran to Martholone, King of Ire-
land, the Welsh prince presented the bowl to his
guest. He regretted that he had made this present,
when some years later war broke out between the
King of Ireland and himself Then he found him-
self unable to cope with his adversary, whose every
slain soldier recovered life by means of the sacred
vessel. But Bran smote off the head of a hostile

" Myvyrian, i. pp. 17, 18, 19, 20. 37, 45. 67.



The Sangreal 355

chief, and cast the bloody head into the bowl, when
it burst, and its virtues ceased.

This basin was reckoned as one of the thirteen
wonders of the Isle of Britain, brought by Merdhyn,
or Merlin, in his crystal ark. That it is the same
as Ceridwen's cauldron is not improbable. Cerid-
wen was the Keltic Great Mother, the Demeter,
the source of life, and the receptacle of the dead.
The story of her cauldron is told in the Pair
Ceridwen (vessel of Ceridwen), or Hanes Taliesin
(History of Taliesin).

In ancient times there was a man, Tegid Voel
by name, who had a wife called Ceridwen, by
whom he had a son Morvran ap Tegid, and a
daughter Creirwy, both very beautiful ; also
Aragddu, the most hideous of beings. Ceridwen,
knowing that the poor deformed child would have
little joy of life, determined to prepare for him
the Water of Inspiration. She placed a cauldron
on a fire, filled it with the requisite ingredients,
and left little Gwion to attend to its seething, and
blind Morda to keep up the fire for a year and a
day, without suff"ering the operation to cease for a
moment. One day, near the end of the twelve-
month, three drops spirted out of the bubbling
liquid, and Gwion caught them on his finger. As
A a a



356 The Sangreal

they scalded him, he put his finger into his mouth,'
and at once obtained the knowledge of futurity.
He saw that Ceridwen would attempt his death,
in consequence of his having tasted the precious
drops ; so he prudently took to flight. Then the
cauldron burst and extinguished the fire.

Ceridwen, in her rage, struck Morda on the head,
and rushed in pursuit of Gwion the Little. He
transformed himself into a hare ; then she took the
form of a hound. He sprang into a river and took
that of a fish ; instantly she became an otter.
Then he rose from the water as a little bird ; but
she soared after him as a hawk. Then he dropped
as a grain of wheat on a corn-heap ; but Ceridwen,
instantly taking the shape of a hen, swallowed him.
She became pregnant thereby, and in nine months
gave birth to a lovely child which she hid in a
leather coracle and committed to the waves, on the
39th of April.

In this bardic tale we have certainly a very ancient
Keltic myth. What the cauldron signifies it is
difficult to ascertain. Some suppose it to represent
the ocean, others the working of the vital force of
earth, which produces the three seasons which are
good, symbolized by the drops. But we know too
little of druidic mythology, and those legends which



The Sangreal 357

have come to us have descended in a too altered form,
for us to place much confidence in such conjectures.

But that this vessel of the liquor of Wisdom held
a prominent place in British mythology is certain
from the allusions made to it by the bards.
Taliesin, in the description of this initiation into
the mysteries of the basin, cries out, " I have lost
my speech !" because on all who had been admitted
to the privileges of full membership secrecy was im-
posed. This initiation was regarded as a new birth ;
and those who had once become joined members
were regarded as elect, regenerate, separate from the
rest of mankind, who lay in darkness and ignorance.

That originally the ceremonies of initiation in-
cluded human sacrifices is more than probable
from the vessel being represented as containing
human blood, and a lance forming part of the
paraphernalia, from which dropped blood. In the
story of Pheredur, the vessel contained a man's head
floating in gore. In that of Bran the Blessed, the
head is thrown into the basin to destroy its efficacy.
Taliesin also refers to Pheredur as " the hero of the
bleeding head T

The lance is also referred to by Welsh authors.
One of the predictions attributed to Taliesin holds
' Myvyrian, i, p. 86.



358 The Sangreal

out to the Britons the hope that "the Kingdom of

Logres (England) shall perish before the bleeding

lance ;" and five centuries later, Chretien de Troyes

quotes this saying —

" II est ecrit qu'il est une heure,
Oil tout le royaume de Logres,
Qui jadis fut la terre es Ogres,
Sera detruit par cette lance."

This lance was probably a symbol of war.

The first to adapt the druidic mystery to Chris-
tianity was a British hermit, who wrote a Latin
legend on the subject. Helinandus (d. 1227) says,
" At this time (A.D. 720), in Britain, a marvellous
vision was shown by an angel to a certain hermit :
it was of the basin or paropsis in which the Saviour
supped with His disciples ; concerning which the
history was written by the same hermit, which is
called the Gradal." And he adds, " In French
they give the name gradal, or graal, to a large,
rather deep vessel, in which rich meats with their
gravy are served to the wealthy '."

The date at which lived this anchorite is not
certain, for though Helinandus says he had his
vision in 720, Usher places him later than i]4o';

After the composition of this legend, the roman-

" Vincent. Belov. Speculum Hist., lib. xxiii. c. 147.
° Usserius, Primordia, p. 16.



The Sangreal 359

cers took possession of the myth and adapted it
to Christian chivalrous exigencies. The bardic
table of the elect became the round-table of
Arthur's knights, and the sacred vessel of mysteries
became the Grail. The head of the victim was
forgotten, and the sacrificial blood was supposed
to be that of Christ.

It is likely that the tradition of the ancient
druidic brotherhood lingered on and gained con-
sistency again among the Templars. Just as the
Miles Templi fought for the holy sepulchre, so did
the soldier of Montsalvatsch for the holy Grail.
Both orders were vowed to chastity and obedience,
both were subject to a head, who exercised regal
authority. The ancient temple of the Grail, like
Stonehenge, was circular ; so also were the churches
dedicated to S. Sepulchre, by the soldier-monks.
The charge of heresy was brought against the order
of the Templars, and it has been supposed that they
were imbued with gnosticism. That this Eastern
heresy should have influenced a mediaeval Western
society, I think very unlikely ; no other traces of
gnosticism are to be found in the religious history
of the Occident, which certainly would have been
the case had the heresy been sufSciently powerful to
have obtained mastery over an ecclesiastical society.



360 The Sangreal

I think the root of the false doctrine or practices of
the Templars must be looked for in the West.

The Templars were charged with having an idol
which the Chronicles of S. Denys (which terminate
1461) describe as "an old skin embalmed and
polished, in which the Templar places his very-
vile faith and trust, and in which he confidently
believes : and it has in the sockets eyes of car-
buncle shining with the brightness of the sky.''
Abraham Bzov, in his continuation of the " Church
History " of Baronius, quotes a charge brought by
the Italian bishops against the Templars, to this
effect : " They have a certain head, the face pale
like that of a man, with black curled hair, and
round the neck a gilded ornament, which indeed
belonged to no saint, and this they adored, making
prayers before it." And one of the questions asked
by the Pope of the witnesses was, "whether they
had not a skull or some sort of image, to which
they rendered divine homage V So also the Chro-
nicle of Meaux states, that on the first day of the
General Council of the Templars, a head with a
white beard, which had belonged to a former Grand
Master of the Order, was set at midnight before
the altar in a chapel, covered with silken robes and
precious stuffs. Mass was sung before daylight,



The Sangreal 361

and the head was then adored by the Master and
the other knights.

It seems to me probable that this head, if there
were truth in the charge, was revered because it
was part of an ancient druidic rite to produce a
head upon a vessel, though for what purposes we
do not know. Friar Bacon constructed a head
which gave oracles. Possibly some such property
was attributed to the Templar, and previously to
the druidic head. Livy tells us that a bloody
head of an enemy was a national Keltic .symbol
(xxiii. 24), and that the Boii brought the head into
their temples, where they cleansed it and adorned it
with gold, and then used it on festivals for a sacred
vessel, out of which to make drink-offerings.

To enter with any thing like completeness into
the most interesting and intricate subject of
druidic mythology and ceremonial would occupy
too much space. This paper will necessarily be
imperfect ; the religion of our British ancestors has
yet to be written. Those who have hitherto
approached the subject have so done with pre-
conceived theories which have caused them to read
wrong the sacred myths and rites they were
interpreting. Much is to be learned from the
Arthurian Romances, much from bardic remains.



362 The Sangreal

and much from Breton, Welsh, Gaelic, and Irish
folk-lore.

That all thus recovered will be in a corrupted
form I am well aware, but a practised eye will be
able to restore what is disintegrated, and will know
to detect antiquity, though disguised under the
newest robe.

A careful study of these sources, conducted by
the light of comparative mythology, will, I am
satisfied, lead to the discovery that, under the
name of Methodism, we have the old druidic
religion still alive, energetic, and possibly more
vigorous than it was when it exercised a spiritual
supremacy over the whole of Britain. With the
loss of the British tongue, much of the old ter-
minology has died out, and a series of adaptations
to Christianity has taken place, without radically
affecting the system'

' Exception has been taken to this remark by some of the
reviews ; but the writer behoves unjustly. Those who have
made the fragments of Bardic religious poems, and the
scheme of Druidic rites their study, cannot fail with astonish-
ment to note the remarkable coincidence which exists between
modern Wesleyanism and the religion of our British fore-
fathers.



Cteopi)tlu3

A FEW years before the Persian invasion in
538, there lived, in the town of Adana in
Cilicia, a priest named Theophilus, treasurer and
archdeacon. He hved in strict observance of all his
religious duties, was famous for his liberality to the
poor, his sympathy with the afflicted, his eloquence
in the pulpit, his private devotion, and severe asce-
ticism. On the decease of the bishop, by popular
acclamation he was summoned to the episcopal
oversight of the diocese, but his deep humility
urged him to refuse the office, even when it was
pressed upon him by the metropolitan. Seldom
has a nolo episcopari been carried out to such an
emphatic refusal as was given by Theophilus. A
stranger was raised to the vacant seat, and the trea-
surer resumed the course of life he had pursued for
so many years with credit to himself and advan-



361 Theophilus

tage to others, content in his own mind at having
refused the office, which might have aroused his
pride, and which certainly would have diminished
his opportunities of self-sacrifice. Virtue invariably
arouses the spirit of detraction, and Theophilus, by
his refusal of the bishopric, was thrust into public
notice, and attracted public attention. The conse-
quence was that the evil-minded and envious origi-
nated slanders, which, circulating widely, produced
a revulsion of feeling towards Theophilus and, from
being generally reported, were accepted as substan-
tially true. These stories reaching the ears of the
new bishop, he sent for the archdeacon, and with-
out properly investigating the charges, concluding
he was guilty, deprived him of his offices.

One would have supposed that the humility which
had required the holy man to refuse a mitre, would
have rendered him callous to the voice of slander,
and have sustained him under deprivation. But the
trial was too great for his virtue. He brooded over
the accusations raised against him, and the wrongs
inflicted upon him, till the whole object of his
labour was the clearing of his character. He
sought every available means of unmasking the
calumnies of his maligners, and exposing the falsity
of the charges raised against him. But he found



Tlicophilus 365

himself unable to effect his object: one man is
powerless against a multitude, and slander is a
hydra which, when maimed in one head, produces
others in the place of that struck off. Baffled,
despairing, and without a friend to sustain his
cause, the poor clerk sought redress in a manner
which a month ago would have filled him with
horror. He visited a necromancer, who led him at
midnight to a place where four cross-roads met, and
there conjured up Satan, who promised reinstate-
ment in all his offices to the unfortunate Theophilus,
and, what he valued more, a complete clearing of
his character. The priest, to obtain these boons,
signed away his soul with a pen dipped in his own
blood, and abjured for ever Jesus Christ and his
spotless mother.

On the morrow, the bishop discovering his error,
how we know not, sent for Theophilus, and ac-
knowledged publicly that he had been misled by
false reports, the utter valuelessness of which he
was ready frankly to acknowledge ; and he asked
pardon of the priest, for having unjustly deprived
him of his office. The populace enthusiastically
reversed their late opinion of the treasurer, and
greeted him as a saint and confessor. For some
days all went well, and in the excitement of a re-



366 Theophilns

turn to his former occupations the compact he had
made was forgotten. But after a while, as reason
and rehgion resumed their sway, the conscience of
Theophilus gave him no rest. He paced his room
at nights in an agony of terror, his face lost its
colour, his brow was seamed with wrinkles, an un-
utterable horror gleamed from his deep-set eye.s.
Hour by hour he prayed, but found no relief. At
length he resolved on a solemn fast of forty days.
This he accomplished, praying nightly in the church
of the Panhagia till the grey of morning stole in at
the little windows of the dome and obscured the
lamps. On the fortieth night, the Blessed Virgin
appeared to him, and sadly rebuked him for his sin.
He implored her pardon and all-prevailing inter-
cession, and this she promised him. The following
night she re-appeared and assured him that Christ
had, at her prayer, forgiven him. With a cry of
joy he awoke ; and on his breast lay the deed
which had made over his soul to Satan, obtained
from the evil one by the mercy of the sacred
Mother of God.

The next day was Sunday. He rose, spent some
time in acts of thanksgiving, and then went to
church where the divine liturgy was being cele-
brated. After the reading of the gospel, he flung



Theophilns 367

himself at the bishop's feet, and requested permis-
sion to make his confession in public. Then he
related the circumstances of his fall, and showed
the compact signed with his blood to the assembled
multitude. Having finished his confession, he
prostrated himself before the bishop and asked
for absolution. The deed was torn and burned
before the people, he was reconciled and received
the blessed sacrament, after which he returned to
his house in a fever, and died at the expiration
of three days. The Church honours him as a
penitent, on the 4th February.

The original account of this famous compact with
the devil is in the Greek of Eutychianus, disciple of
Theophilus, who declares that he relates what he
had seen with his own eyes, and heard from the
mouth of Theophilus himself. From the Greek of
Eutychianus, two early Latin versions are extant,
one by Paulus Diaconus, the other by Gentianus
Hervetus. The former of these is published in
the great work of the Bollandists, who fix the date
of the event in 538. The version of Gentianus
Hervetus purports to be a translation from Symeon
Metaphrastes, who flourished in the tenth century,
and who embodied the narrative of Eutychianus
in his great collection of the Lives of the Saints.



368 Theophilus

In the tenth century, Hrosvitha, the illustrious
nun of Gandersheim in Saxony, composed a Latin
poem on the story of Theophilus. In the eleventh
century the legend was versified by Marbodus,
Bishop of Rennes. There is a poem on the subject
by Gaultier de Coincy. Other rhymed versions
have been published by M. Achille Jubinal, and M.
Paulin Paris. One of the best of the ancient poems
is that of Rutebeuf, a trouvere of the thirteenth
century. There are several older miracle plays on
my.steries of Theophilus : one in French, published
by M. Francisque Michel ' ; another in low German,
published by M. Dasent^ The latter gentleman
has collected a great number of pieces on Theophi-
lus in various European languages, and quotes re-
ferences to the legend in early French, Anglo-Saxon,
Anglo-Norman, and German writers.

Archbishop ^Ifric (d. 1006) alludes to the story
in his " Homilies ;" S. Bernard also, in his " Depre-
catio ad gloriosam Virginem Mariam ;" Vincent of
Beauvais, in his wonderful " Speculum Historiale ;"
S. Bonaventura, as a passionate devotee to the
Virgin, could not omit it from his " Speculum

' Le Theatre FratKjais au moyen age. Paris, p. 137.
'^ Theophilus, in Icelandic, Low German, &c. London,
p. 23.



Theophiliis 369

Beate Marias ;" Jacques de Voragine inserts it in his
" Golden Legend," and Albertus Magnus includes
it in his " Biblia B. Marise Virginis." It is again
mentioned by the great German poet of the twelfth
century, Hartmann von der Aue, and by Konrad
von Wiirzburg, in the thirteenth century. A Flemish
Theophilus was published by M. Philipp Blom-
maert, from an old MS. of the fourteenth century,
in 1836. To the same century belongs one version
of the Theophilus legend in Icelandic, published
by M. Dasent ; the other is younger by a century.
An old Swedish Theophilus of 1350 exists in the
royal library at Stockholm.

In the cathedral of Notre-Dame, at Paris, are
two sculptured representations of the fable ; one is
on the north porch. In the cathedral of Laon it
is painted on a window in the choir, in eighteen
medallions. It is also to be seen in the church of
S. Peter, at Troyes, and in that of S. Julien at
Mans, in both instances on stained glass.

Further information as to the legend, with the
texts, caii be found in — " Theophilus, in Icelandic,
Low German, and other tongues, from MSS. in the
Royal Library, Stockholm, by G. Webbe Dasent,
M.A. Stockholm, 1845;" in "E. F. Sommer, De
Theophili cum Diabole foedere. Halle, 1844;" and

[II.] B b



370 Theophilus

in "Miracle de Theophile, mis en vers au com-
mencement du Xlllme siecle, par Gauthier de
Coincy, public par M. D. Maillet. Rennes, 1838."
I do not think it improbable that this famous
story may rest on a foundation of truth ; indeed
it bears on the face of it tokens of authenticity.
Theophilus is driven from his position by slanders :
this preys on his mind. By some means he is
reinstated. The revulsion of feeling upsets his
reason, he undertakes a prodigious fast, goes crazy,
tells a long rambling story about a compact with
the devil, and dies three days after in brain-fever.
His narrative is the only extraordinary item in the
tale. If we remember that this was told after a
forty-days' fast, and immediately before a mortal
fever, the only thing to be wonde«ed at in the
legend is that any sane persons believed his ravings
to have in them a foundation of truth.



APPENDIX A

Ptt=fflf)ti!5ttan ffitosscs

T HAVE said that the phalUc origin attributed to the cross
J- is destitute of evidence. In a work like this, which will
be in the hands of general readers, it is impossible to enter
into the subject.

I believe I have conscientiously examined the question. If
I saw that there was sufficient evidence to substantiate th
theory, I wolild adopt it without hesitation. But I thin^ a
better claim may be made for the lightning, and a better
still for the ancient instrument of two sticks used for pro-
ducing fire by friction.

An article on Sun worship in the '• English Leader," copied
into "Public Opinion" (.Sept. 14, 1867), assumes the identity
of the cross with the phallus. The article is full of assertions,
rather bold and reckless than well supported by evidence.

It asserts on the authority of the Abbe Pluche that the
crux ansata was the symbol of the annual inundation of the
Nile. The speculations of the learned on the signification
of the Egyptian hieroglyphics, previous to the discoveries of
Champollion, are, however, devoid of weight. " The crux
ansata," it .idds, "that is, the cross and circle, was the sign
of Venus or sensual love, — the goddess from whose name our
word ven/ry is derived, — and it is still the astronomical
P, b 2



372 Appendix A

symbol of the planet which bears her name." As we have
already seen, the crux ansata was not exclusively the symbol
of Astarte ; it was a sign of divinity and was placed near
every god to indicate him as being Divine. It appears beside
Baal as well as Astarte.

If used more frequently with her than with other deities,
it was because it symbolized her power over moisture, she
being the Moon. The cross did not belong to her as a
goddess of sensuality, but as presiding over the month and
its rains ; to Baal it belonged as a year-god guiding the
seasons.

The same article refers to the Indian cross as though it
were a phallus ; whereas the symbols are entirely and
radically distinct, as may be seen by reference to the plates
of Miiller's " Glauben, Wissen, und Kunst der Hindus."



APPENDIX B

SJjipptng Hft IBtaU

'"P'HE following curious passage from Gervase of Tilbury
-•- may not prove uninteresting when treating of the
transport of the dead by boats.

Otia Imperialia, Decisio iii. c. 90.

Insigne mirum ac ex divina virtute miraculum audi, Prin-
ceps Sacratissime. Caput regni Burgundionum, quod Are-
latense dicitur, civitas est Arelas, antiquissimis dotata pri-
vilegiis. Hanc ordinatus ab Apostolis Petro et Paulo,
Trophimus, qui .... deliberavit ccsmeterium solemne ad
meridianam urbis partem constituere, in quo omnium ortho-
doxorum corpora sepulture traderentur, ut, sicut ab Arela-
tensi ecclesia tota Gallia fidei sumsit exordium, ita et mortui
in Christo undecunque advecti sepulturae communis haberent
beneficium. Facta itaque consecratione solemni per manus
sanctissimorum antistitum ad Orientalem porta'm, ubi nunc
est ecclesia ab ipsis in honorem B. Virginis consecrata, illis
Christus, pridem in carne familiariter agnitus, apparuit, opus
eorum sua benedictione profundens, dato ccemeterio ac illis
sepeliendis munere, ut quicunque inibi sepelirentur, nuUas in
cadaveribus suis paterentur diabolicas illusiones. Ex hujus-
modi ergo Dominicae benedictionis munere, apud omnes



374 _ Appendix B

majoris auctoritatis Galliarum pi-incipes ac clericos inolevit,
quod maxima patentum pars illuc sepulturam habent, et
quidam in plaustris, alii in curribus, nonnulli in equis, plurimi
per dependulum fluentis Rhodani ad coemeterium Campi Elisit
deferebantur. Est ergo omni admiratione dignissimmn,
quod nuUus in thecis positus mortuus ultimos civitatis Arela-
tensis terminos, quos Rochetam nominant, quantalibet vi
ventorum aut tempestate compulsus praeterit, sed infra
semper subsistens in aqua rotatur, donee applicet, aut ad
ripam fluminis ductus coemeterio sacro inferatur. Mirandis
magis miranda succedunt, quae oculis conspeximus sub
innumera utriusque sexus hominum multitudine. Solent,
ergo praemisimus, mortui in doliis bituminatis ac in thecis
corpora mortuorum a longinquis regionibus fluminis Rhodani
dimitti cum pecunia sigillata, quae coemeterio tam sacro,
nomine eleemosynse, confertur. Uno aliquo die, nondum
decennio delapso, dolium cum mortuo sue descendit inter
illud angustum, quod ex alternis ripis castrum Tarasconense
et castrum Belliquadri prospectant. Exilientes adolescentes
Belliquadri dolium ad terram trahunt, et relicto mortuo
pecuniam reconditam rapiunt. Depulsum dolium inter im-
petuosi amnis fluctus subsistit, et nee vi fluminis praecipitis
nee juvenum impulsibus potuit descendere, verum rotans et

in se revolvens, eosdem circinabat fluminis fluctus

Tandem, restitute censu, confestim mortuus sine omni im-
pellentis adjutorio viam aggreditur, et infra modicam horam
apud civitatem Arelatensem applicans, sepulturae honorifice
traditur.



•J'HE END.



GlLIiKRT \MI RIVINCTON, I'KINTERS, ST. JOIIN's SQVAKE.



Just published, price ■]s. 6d.
A Second Edition, Revised and Enlarged of

Cl)t dTh-st Sn-tesi of

CURIOUS MYTHS OF THE
MIDDLE AGES

By S. BARING-GOULD, M.A.

CONTENTS

I. THE WANDERING JEW.
II. PRESTER JOHN.
III. THE DIVINING ROD.
IV. THE SEVEN SLEEPERS OK EPHESUS.
V. WILLIAM TELL.
VI. THE DOG GELLERT.
VII. TAILED MEN.
VIII. ANTICHRIST AND POPE JOAN.
IX. THE MAN IN THE MOON.
X. THE MOUNTAIN OF VENUS.
XI. S. PATRICK'S PURGATORY.
XII. THE TERRESTRIAL PARADISE.

APPENDIX A. THE WANDERING JEW. B. MOUN-
TAIN OF VENUS. C. FATALITY OF NUMBERS.

RIVINGTONS
